"98p JULY 1986 S$4.60 Dm6 285pta PYRACURSE Legless O'Donnell's Diary COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES PRICE OF MAGICK PREVIEWED/WARGAMES SPECIAL GREEN BERET CHALLENGE/DOMESDAY COMPETITION C+VG'S SEARCH FOR A CHAMPION/FREE BIG RED POSTER! TAKE A TOUR OF THE UNIVERSE/WIN REDHAWK & PROJECT THESIUS "


NA


"from the programming team that brought you the Sensational No. 1 Coming Soon NOW.ro comes GHOSTS'N GOBLUMS Officially Licenced Coin-op Classic from Access VISA Mail Order Just send a cheque or postal order payable to Elite, or quote your Access or Visa no. to get your copy of Ghost's 'n' Goblins Spectrum 48/128 .95 (cass) Amstrad .95 (cass) .95 (disc) Commodore 64/128 .95 (cass) -.95 (disc) BBC B/Electron -.95 (cass) .95 (disc) Commodore C16/+ 4.95 (cass) slite Elite Systems Ltd. Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, England. Tel : 0922 59165 Telex : 335622 "


"FEATURES ARCADE ACTION P941 CONTENTS 14 THE PYRACURSE STORY 19 PYRACURSE COMPETITION 4 WARGAMES 0 WORLD OF VENGEANCE 53 GAME MAKERS 6 HERBERT ON THE SLOPES/ SPECTRUM LISTING 58 BIG RED POSTER 4 DOMESDAY PROJECT 6 TOUR OF THE UNIVERSE 9 TEAM GOLA COMPETITION 0 JIM'S JOYSTICK JURY 72 REDHAWK COMPETITION 5 TOP 30 SOFTWARE CHARTS 77 ADVENTURE NEWS 78 ADVENTURE HELPLINE 2 THE PRICE OF MAGICK REVIEWED 8 PROJECT THESIUS COMPETITION 91 IDEAS CENTRAL 94 ARCADE ACTION 97 THE BUG HUNTERS 102 URIDIUM COMPETITION RESULTS 105 EXTRA BITS 110 MAILBAG 114 NEXT MONTH I VAM WGIAT Oyun 1983 King Features Syndicate, Inc NEWS & REVIEWS POPEYE/REVIEWS/P21 21 REVIEWS THIS ISSUE: GAME OF THE MONTH: The Planets. C+VG HITS! International Karate, Mermaid, Mantronix, Bug Eyes, Shogun. Other reviews: Biggles, Tantalus, Pentagram, Redhawk, Popeye, Kickstart plus more ... 73 ADVENTURE Keith looks at Ballyhoo, the latest from Infocom, the Fourmost Adventure compilation, plus Level 9's Price of Magick and a glimpse of life behind the scenes at the Austin's HQ down in deepest Somerset. And a special Adventure Creator offer. 8 NEWS C+VG's Programmer of the Year Steven Crow, has a new game on the way read all about it! Uridium on the Spectrum? Leaderboard US Gold's answer to Golf Construction Set in Hot Gossip. What do Zoids and the Channel 4 chart show have in common? Discover on page 8. TOUR OF THE UNIVERSE/P66 "


"INSIDE STORY Level:01 BONUS: 00 1500 SCORE: 075500 You'll curse yourself if you don't to be missed! Master Adventurer get your hands on this month's Keith Campbell has been hot on +VG. Why? Because we've got a the heels of Level 9's programmers preview of the best game to hit the and brings you news of their latest Spectrum for ages. It's called and greatest adventure The Pyracurse and it's the first game Price of Magick plus the one by a couple of new programmers and only Adventure called Mark Goodall and Helpline(tm). Extra Bits Keith Prosser. We've got a C+VG's round up of all the things special Pyracurse competition too you ever want to interface — could you win the C+VG returns this issue and Brendan explorers outfit? If you are Cavanagh tells you everything interested in ancient things like you wanted to know about Play C+VG's deputy editor Paul By Mail games but were afraid Boughton — then you'll want to to ask. All this and the FREE IDEAS get involved in our Domesday CENTRAL HANDBOOK stuck Project Time Capsule tastefully on the front AND the competition. Just what would you special pull out Big Red poster send back to the future? inside!! And you still get change More history from Stephen from the quid. Know what I mean, Badsey, our resident war games Harry? expert. He's been looking at the games of the battle and bringing. you his verdict. Into the future with C+VG's American ace reporter Marshall M. Rosenthal who has been on a Tour of the Universe an experience not @@@ SPLITTING IMAGES/P22 Bagles FORTE DEPLOYED EXP VETERAN EFF BO LOCAL COMMANDE TROR OTTACK BORN JUNE 9, 1999 OVERCAST LIBRORSOFT COPPIN BIGLESIREVIEWS DESICNEO PROLATE DALALIASOFTWARE zim OXXX ex Xe este You are in the Debris Room. t 15 H11 with bits and pieces washed in from th and has not been tidied in It iooks a lot ilke your bedroo with mud and debris here but an awk war 290 Passage becomes plugged THE BIG CAVE ADVENTURE/P76 WAR GAMES/P44 EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John DESIGN Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Paul Coppins Steve Donoghue Jim Douglas AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANT Tony Takoushi PUBLICITY Marcus Rich ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Louise Matthews ASSISTANT AD MANAGER Garry William AD PRODUCTION Debbie Pearson PUBLISHER Rita Lewis COVER Steve Brown lan Watson .. and the Bug Hunters  Jerry Paris EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222 July-December 98,258 PROFESSOR ABC PYRACURSE PREVIEW/P14 THE BUG HUNTERS/97 "


" THE ACTION BANK  THE ACTION BANK  THE ACTION BANK Now anyone over fourt can take their savings  THE ACTION BANK  THE ACTION BANK  THE ACTION BANK : THE ACTION BANK Have you noticed that most of the people who queue up at Servicetills are Account opening requirements and conditions must be complied with. Terms and conditions may vary. Seven days notice of withdrawal is required to avoid loss of interest. Registered office: 41 Lothbury. have a minimum of  in your account when applying for a Servicecard. You can apply when . THE ACTION BANK . THE ACTION BANK . THE ACTION BANK "


"THE ACTION BANK  THE A CTION BANK : THE ACTION BANK . e en  out. THE ACTION BANK. THE ACTION BANK  THE ACTION BANK  THE ACTION BANK .. NatWest Our queues are now being joined by the likes of you. Well look again. adults? ER V 1 Expires last day of APR 88 ) NR P ALEXANDER 609999 12345677 We reckon that by the time you're 14, you could a savings account with a Servicecard do with Like the NatWest On Line Account. At the mere press of a button you can withdraw up to  a week of your savingscheck your balance or even demand a statement. You'll also get a regular magazine, a folder and a wallet with everything you need to handle your account. So what are you waiting for? London EC2P2BP. Account is available to anyone under 19. A minimum of  opens an account, of which  goes towards the cost of the opening pack and the remainder is credited to your account. You must opening your account with a minimum of  of which  goes towards the account opening pack.  THE ACTION BANK .. THE ACTION BANK "


"home in Kent and he saw these nice old buildings which inspired him to write the game. Is this a first? Firelord will be released sometime in October. Will you please give a big hand to all the Zzap 64 readers who voted C+VG their most favourite mag-next to Zzap of course. The readers of the Activision Newsletter were voting in the Zzap 64 readers' survey. Funny,'cos Zzap came out number two in our own C+VG survey... Signpost Forget the American invasion. The French are coming. Thanks to PSS and their link with FRE, I US Gold is hoping to score a followed shortly by 64K and 48K Activision's tie-up with big success with World Cup versions. Loriciel and now the arrival of Carnival, the official World Cup Meanwhile, watch out for Republic Software, the UK computer football game. The Mastertronic's Molecule Man arm of top Gallic company packaging will feature the official on the Spectrum for .99. It's one Infograms the French World Cup 1986 Pique Mascot. of the most impressive budget titles Connection is growing fast. A team of programmers have for some time. Republic will launch been working on the game for six Molecule Man is the first game Mandragore on four machine months and US Gold is predicting 256, 3D maze screens, collecting formats; Amstrad, CBM 64, MSX the game will \"reach new 16 circuits to activate a teleporter and Spectrum (with disk versions standards in football simulation\". and escape. for Amstrad and CBM 64), at a But what makes the game extra cost of .95. All versions will be good value is the inclusion of a launched within two weeks of each maze designer. This enables you to other and NO delays are likely as U.S. GOLD construct your own maze, should the French/English translations are you complete the original game. already complete. Molecule Man is the first game Mandragore is a graphic from Robin Thompson. Robin, who adventure of epic proportions, has been unemployed for three own special style of graphic containing over 260K of program years, took up programming to presentation. You play the part of which has necessitated the use stop himself becoming bored. a medieval hero type out to free of a twin cassette pack for the tape It will feature a penalty mode, a = \"I started programming for his village from the clutches of the versions a detailed instruction choice of kit for this year's teams, a something to do,\" he said. evil Firelord or Firequeen — Steve book and a ten chapter booklet, playing skill option and results \"It was either that or sitting down hasn't quite made up his mind yet. the latter item revealing a great table. and listening to the radio all day.\" The village graphics are really The village graph number of hints on how to A full colour poster and a pretty. Steve does a lot of cycling surmount problems encountered in progress chart will be supplied with around the countryside near his the solving of this widely acclaimed the game. And that's not all. Also Stand by all you Monty fans. included will be a free US Gold S Gremlin Graphics will be releasing a new game about the Great News for Rogue issue! Design Design are sew on patch. Trooper fans! The new-style Mighty Mole later this year. working on anothe project for World Cup Carnival will be Macmillan Software outfit are Macmillan called Nosferatu available on the Commodore 64, The Monty game is just one of releasing a game based on the cult the busy schedule of releases from C16, Spectrum and Amstrad. It will the Vampyre based on the two character from the 2001 AD comic. Gremlin. Included are Jack the movies of the same name. The most cost .95 on cassette and .95 It's being programmed by those on disc. Nipper, in which you can create recent starred Klaus Kinski and a comic character to collect other cult personalities at Design loads of rats. Both Rogue Trooper naughty points. Design. Watch for C+VG's and Nosferatu will be arcade The legendary Flash Gordon Also in the pipeline is a game exclusive preview of the game adventures. News and pictures as coming your way in out September and when we get them. is set to explode onto the computer called Future Knight, a next month. C+VG has had a combination of space shoot-em-up sneak look at part of the and adventure, in which the hero Commodore version of the game must rescue a damsel in distress. and it's looking very impressive. There's also an as yet unamed Part of the Game includes a Commodore game being satisfying punch-up. produced. C+VG, under an oath of secrecy, has seen a bit of the game and verdict is: very interesting. In a way it's a little like that other Gremlin game Bounder it has plenty of bounce. A11 3255 Mastertronic, who has spent around seven months developing the game, says it should be released for the 128K Commodore and Spectrum first, C+VG's Programmer of the Year Steven Crow is joining Hewson's and his first game for the Oxfordshire based company will be Firelord a medieval arcade adventure featuring Steve's "


"Watch out — the monsters are coming! But never fear these monsters are quite cute and only appear on your TV. Berk, Boni, and Drutt are the stars of a new animated show called the The Trap Door. And Macmillan Software have persuaded Don Priestly of Popye and Minder fame to create the graphics for the game. Berk is a blue blobby monster, the overworked servant of the unseen and bad tempered being who lives upstairs in a mysterious mansion. Berk may have lots to do for the miserable being upstairs but he still finds it hard to resist opening The Trap Door which is the gateway to the maze of underground passages beneath the castle and home to all manner of strange and unusual creatures. Berk has many adventures with his mates Boni, an old skull who lives in a hole in the wall with his pet Drutt. Ye Olde Hypersportes comes at last to the screens of your Amstrad and 64 in early June. English Software have been battling away with their long awaited Knight Games medieval tournament game for some time now but head man Philip Morris told C+VG that both versions are now almost ready and will be ready in time for the summer holidays. The game features eight BY TONY TAKOUSHI Closing my eyes I let my senses drift as the needle hits groove. The music seemed to burst from the speaker and it was all I could do to stop myself singing the chorus \"Doo-be-de-do! I wan-naaaa be like you I wanna talk like you walk like you...\" The second verse was even more exciting, \"Now, I'm the king of the swingerswun\" SWINGERS! YEAH!. Ever since I played Leaderboard I haven't been the same. The words swing and stroke have taken on a whole new meaning. The last time a sports simulation had this effect on me was when Commodore released International Soccer for the C64. That was when I wore out my 333000 Yes, the two top scorers on the top two combat games could joint the C+VG Squad when we visit the Combat Zone again this summer. All you have to do is fill in the coupon below, tell us your score, send us proof in the shape of a screen shot or printed screen dump and you could be well on your way Handragore to the Combat Zone! If you don't know what the Comat Zone is just check out our role playing game. January issue. The program can be played by And remember Who Dyes Wins! up to four players, although one Closing date for this competition is person can control all four July 16th. So get those scores in characters which make up the today. The five best runners-up will 'team'. These characters can either get a Big Red t-shirt. be pre-selected or you can make Send the coupon below to your own choice. Computer and Video Games, Combat Zone Challenge, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, Blackstar and SAS Raid are London ECIR 3AU. to be released for the Amstrad 8256 by CRL. In Blackstar, a text adventure 32 ESTRCE 01 by the objective of your quest is to return the power orb to the Lady Artemis. In SAS Raid, a semi-graphic adventure, secret plans have been stolen which give precise details of your base and are now being held in a castle. Both programs will sell for .95. C+VG COMBAT ZONE CHALLENGE Name Fancy yourself as a bit of a hero-type? Always getting great Address scores on Green Beret or Commando? Think you could do as well in real life? Then why not enter the great C+VG Combat Zone Challenge. T-shirt size: Med/Large Age Computer owned MY HIGH SCORE ON GREEN BERET/ COMMANDO WAS I enclose screen shot/ screen dump COURSE 1 Shits SAP medieval events including sword fighting, archery and a vicious looking ball and chain battle. Here's some pretty pictures of the 64 version of this extremely attractive game for you to look at while you wait for it to arrive at your local store. The 64 version will cost .95 on tape, .95 on disc. Amstrad owners will have find .95 for the tape and .95 for the disc. Match of the Day record! All you golf buffs have an awkward choice facing you. Ariolasoft have released the Golf Construction Set for the C64. Leaderboard is not due "


"VIRGIN GAMES presents JAMES CLAVELL'S SHOGUN THE GAME... Set in 1600, in around 130 screens of beautiful Japanese landscape, you must live out the political struggles of the times in this innovative and sophisticated arcade adventure with icon driven commands. Name Address ****........ Amstrad 464/664/6128 Cassette (.95) Commodore 64/128 Cassette (.95) Amstrad 464/664/6128 Disc (.95) Commodore 64/128 Disc (.95) Please make cheques and postal orders to Virgin Games Limited and post to the address below. Please do not post money. Virgin Games Ltd, 2/4 Vernon Yard, 119 Portobello Road, London W11 2DX "


"for release until July 4th. Leaderboard is a true arcade version of a golf game. The graphics are super smooth and the emphasis is very much on picking up the joystick and playing. Leaderboard gives you four courses to choose from and up to four players can compete. There are three levels of difficulty, Amateur, Novice and Professional and a choice of the number of holes played (18,36 etc). To \"get into the groove, there is a practice option (not included in my review copy, but US Gold tells me there is one!) to help you learn to control the power and snap (breaks to left or right on the stroke). When you play there is a host of information facing you, hole number, par for the hole, course number (1-4), each player's stroke count for the hole, wind direction and yards to the hole. You start off at a tee (where else?) and have two guages, one for power the other for snap. Your club choice includes Woods, Irons and Putters. As in real golf the club strength has a clear effect on the type of shot played. Irons loft the ball and woods drive it further, with less bounce. The game is instantly playable and the presentation borders on arcade quality. After you have played the shot the screen is redrawn (a little tedious, but the Ariola game is much the same) and you play from your new location. When you reach the green you automatically go into putter mode. The courses have water and awkward fairways to contend with but there are no trees or bunkers. The Ariola version has both. At the end of each hole you are shown the leaderboard with your scores and your score against par. Leaderboard has instant appeal thanks to the quality of presentation but after a few good sessions it tends to lose that knack of pulling you back for one more game. Ariolasoft describe their golf game as \"The 3D simulator and course construction set\". It really is. This is the game for the enthusiast and true strategist. It's not quite as playable as Leaderboard and sorely lacks the arcade quality graphics. Both cost  on tape and it The Computer Championships really boils down to what you want will be fought out on Surf out of a game. An absorbing Champ, from the Irish software arcade class golf game or a quality house, New Concepts. golf simulation New Concepts says Surf Champ, which is now available on the Spectrum and Commodore 64, is Prepare to have your brains the ultimate sports simulation, as rattled! Hewson's are planning near the real thing as possible. The an assault on your senses. After game is also revolutionary in that it they've stunned you with Activision's UK chief Hugh abandons the use of a joystick or Pyracurse, previewed this issue, Reece-Parnell. the keyboard as a means of they'll be hitting you with The story submitted by Garrick, control. Andrew Braybrook's follow who comes from Edinburgh, is up to Uridium called Alleykat. about the adventures of mercenary This is a futuristic race game Jax Stardo and his quest for the Our spies tell us that U.S. Gold utilising Uridium type graphics starblade. It took him just three will be releasing the home with extra added enhancements. weeks to finish the storyboard for computer version of Gauntlet Starblade Quest. But it will be three as featured in The Edge's Arcade Then there's City Slicker, the months before Activision have Action pages way back in new offering from Technician completed the game. December. Gauntlet is a D&D Ted twosome Steve Marsden style adventure and features and David Cooke. This game is characters like Questor the Elf, set in London. You play the part of If you've been watching Thor the Warrior, Merlin the a private detective and your task is Channel 4's Chart Show on Magician and Wyra the Valkyrie to stop the villain called Abru Friday nights you'll have noticed a and the evil Grimreaper. The Cadabra -blowing up the nifty program on a BBC micro, arcade version features four Houses of Parliament. The game is containing info about the bands player action with simultaneous a deptarture from the appearing on the video if you play but a solo player can also Technician Ted platform style are quick enough to read them! enjoy Gauntlet. The characters as it features Back to Skool The software for this was have to find an exit from the type forced perspective graphics created by Benni Notarianni dungeon, kill Grimreaper and fight and utilises a novel and Anna Williams of the of legions of Grunk and Lobbers. \"screen-flipping\" techinque. Electric Penic Company. The Hectic stuff! people who brought you the classic Zoids game released on Fourteen-year-old Garrick the Martech label. Martial arts mania hasn't gone Stark proudly displays the game away since Fist exploded on the design which has won him a free scene last summer. Now prepare trip to San Francisco. Right now we're waxing down your self for Fist II: Return of And not only that. His game, our surfboards for British Surfing the Legend. This game Starblade Quest, will be Association/Computer + Video programmed by Gregg Barnett turned into a commercial computer Games Computer Surfing will hit the streets sometime in game by Activision. Championships 1986. August and will take the Fist legend Garrick was one of 10,000 And if you're good enough at one stage further. Our hero will people who submitted designs to riding the waves, you could win a have weapons and will fight the competition after it announced place in the final to be held in different characters in different on BBC TV's Saturday Newquay, Cornwall, in locations. Fist will have to grapple Superstore programme. September, which will coincide with his opponents as well as using C+VG's Editor Tim Metcalfe with the World Surfing his martial arts skills. Watch for was among the judges with Championships. C+VG's preview coming soon. Last issue we told you about Big Trouble in Little Shining, the latest game of the film from Activision/Electric Dreams stable. Well, in fact it's Little CHINA. Sorry! Anyway here's a look at the storyboard of the game which is being developed by the Focus team. The basic idea is that a Chinese villain called Lo Pan is trying to appease a demon in order to secure the gift of immortality. To do this Lo Pan has first to marry then sacrifice a Chinese girl with green eyes. Lo Pan has done the capturing bitin fact he's got two girls! — by the time you arrive on the scene. Now it's your job to help the three rescuers Wang Chi, Egg Shen and Jack Burton to save the ladies from Lo Pan's evil clutches. There's lots of martial arts action involved in the film. ARRASARANASAN SASARANASAN WARAN ID 4 HHHHH 97% 50% WARNIVAR VARSINSTASRASVAARAAVAANAN "


"LOAD-UP THE H Yie Ar KUNGFO. mov Kmml Konami DIERE BE ** Expect the unexpected and FIGHT for your LIFE in this all-action arcade chart=topper, Master the ten moves and you may just survive the deadly exponents of the martial arts only to meet them again in the Temple. You must beware of your enemies and their individual weapons , ., they're not immortal but then neither are you SPECTRUM Mikie=he enrages the teaches and enraptures the girls! His knock-out frantic fun loving plays havoc in the classroom, the locker room and the cafeteria. This high school high-jinx features \"Hip-Zap\", Door Attack' and crazy pie fights but can he hand his love letter to his girlfriend? If you think you talk your way ou trouble, beware, you may be talki you way into it Interactive bubk speech adds further dimensio the superb 3E graphics of thi arcade style thril adventure, Gangsters of th underworld an sizing you up to 'hit'. There is one who can help ifa) can find her SPECTRUM SPECTRUM 2795 COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 AMSTRAD AMSTRAD AMSTRAD FIRE YOUR Daelagime Imagine Software (1984) Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Tel:061 834 3939 Telex: 669977 "


"1OT SHOTS AND PINGPONG BEREZ Konami an tof ng n to Play head to head or against the computer in this, Konami's first and best table tennis simulation, Just like the arcade original the 3D graphics and playing features such as the Back-Spin, Forehand Smash, Top-Spin, Back-Hand Return and many more all help to test your lightning reflexes and skill of touch and timing  Play Green Beret and you'll get some idea of what this crack commando core is all about. You are a highly trained combat machine, you fear no man, You must succeed against immeasurable odds to infiltrate all four enemy strategic defence installations. You are a marked man ... Will your enemy feel your mark! ller girl SPECTRUM SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 $8.95 AMSTRAD AMSTRAD RIMAGINATION! Screen shots taken from various computer formats "


"B. 1? Meet Legless O'Donnell, ace reporter for the Saturday Post. Here we present O'Donnell's own untold story. The story of the murky deeds behind the legend of Pyracurse. Discover Daphne's dark secrets and O'Donnell's deadly dilemma ... \"No reason, except that I'd like to meet you.\" \"I don't think Roger would like me to see another man, we're engaged you know.\" \"Lucky man,\" sniffed O'Donnell enviously, eyeing the Professor who was busy swapping anecdotes with Pericles. Chapter Three ome months later when O'Donnell had all but forgotten his encounter with the Pemberton-Smythes his phone jangled in the office early one morning. \"Hello,\" he growled. Barely awake. \"That's not a very nice way to speak to me,\" said a woman's voice. \"Daphne!\" Totec, an ancient South American Sinu God. This was rapidly becoming worse than school. O'Donnell was just dropping off to sleep when Sir Chapter One Pericles paused and lifted his glasses onto his forehead. 'Donnell!»Patrick \"Perhaps you'd be interested in O'Donnell hastily took this inscription,\" he said. \"I copied his feet off his desk and it from over the entrance to the shoved the whisky bottle out of tomb.\" sight. He jumped to answer his \"My dear friend, Professor Kite Editor's bellow which echoed across here, has kindly translated the the Saturday Post's busy newsroom. symbols,\" Pemberton-Smythe \"Another waste of time,\" he added. muttered to himself. The old explorer handed the The Editor shouted at the phone, paper over to a nervous young slammed it down and then glared academic at his side. \"Err, balefully at him. Gentlemen of the Press,\" he began. \"O'Donnell,\" growled the Editor. \"The inscription is a curse. The \"That idiot Pemberton-Smythe has meaning is rather obscure, but a got back from South America and rough translation is that a hideous has discovered some funny tomb or death will befall the daughter of other. I want you to get me a story.\" whoever violates the tomb. I am \"Everyone's heard about it sure that Pemberton-Smythe would already!\" protested O'Donnell. It's have thought twice if he knew he a dead story.\" was risking his daughter by going \"Get me a story, and you better on. make it a good one. Lots of human All eyes immediately switched to interest. the attractive girl sitting at a desk in O'Donnell sighed, \"OK. You're the corner. She blushed delicately. the boss.\" \"That must be Daphne,\" thought O'Donnell Chapter Two After the lecture was over the he next day O'Donnell and journalists jostled to get at the bits several other reporters were and pieces the explorer had brought gathered at the mansion of back. Sir Pericles Pemberton-Smythe. O'Donnell was not interested in As he looked around the ornate broken pots and other rubbish. He house he was impressed. O'Donnell was interested in Daphne. He found felt he was a rich man at heart, he her still sitting at her desk. just didn't have any money. What O'Donnell introduced himself. money he had, he spent on drink. \"Aren't you interested in When the lecture started archaeology, Mr O'Donnell?\" she Pemberton-Smythe droned on asked. \"Of course,\" he lied \"I just about ancient civilisations. \"Boring don't like crowds,\" pointing at the idiot,\" muttered O'Donnell. He crush around the exibits. wanted human interest. The O'Donnell eyed the girl romantic angle. That's what sold appreciatively. She had everything, papers like the Saturday Post. youth, beauty, and money. The old man began to describe \"Do you ever go to London?\" he the background of his expedition to asked as casually as he could. the tomb of the daughter of Xipe \"Sometimes. Why?\" she replied. Patrick sat up in his chair. \"What can I do for you!\" \"I'm going to be in London today, and I was wondering if you'd still like to see me?\" she twittered. "


"RSE THE UNTOLD STORY RAS O'Donnell didn't need to be asked telling him this? Daphne leaned twice. forward. She looked coy and Daphne was already waiting alluring. \"You find me attractive, when O'Donnell arrived, don't you?\" she said. \"Of course, breathless, for their lunchtime date. but you're engaged to Roger.\" \"Hello!» he said, for once lost for O'Donnell swallowed hard. words. She looked up and \"He's only interested in old O'Donnell saw she had been crying. pots, I want some fun!» \"What's wrong?» he asked. Obviously there was still a chance \"It's Daddy,\" she said tearfully. for Patrick \"Shortly after the lecture he Daphne outlined her plan. She returned to South America. He would go in search of her father, as hasn't been heard of for months.\" befits a dutiful daughter. Roger and \"Don't worry\" soothed O'Donnell would go with her. O'Donnell. \"He'll be in O'Donnell's paper would pick up touch.\". the bill. You idiot!\" she said Once in Columbia they would suddenly, stamping her follow the Pemberton-Smythe's foot. \"I don't want to trail until they discovered him. If he hear from him, I was not already dead O'Donnell want the old fool would have to \"dispose\" of him. dead! I can't live Roger would be \"lost\" later. on a pittance \"I'm sure you know what to do you know. I about Daddy\" said Daphne in her want the sweet little voice, \"As for Rogerestate. I well, he's always liked jungles.\" O'Donnell saw Daphne in a different light. She was not a young helpless girl, but a hard and ruthless women prepared to go to any lengths for what she wanted. O'Donnell had doubts, and Daphne saw them in his eyes. She smiled softly at O'Donnell. want to be rich while I'm \"Of course, perhaps you don't young enough to enjoy it. I want me, or my money...\" want YOU to help him to STAY lost!\" Chapter Four O'Donnell was shocked. n Expedition to South Why was America!\" exploded the was she Editor. \"Why not a trip to the moon!?» \"This is a good idea. The human angle. The loving daughter and her devoted fiance go battling through the heat of the jungle in search of her father, and the Saturday Post there every step of the way,\" The Editor sat back to think, chewing his cigar. \"OK, O'Donnell I'll buy it, how much and how long?\" \"It's for the benefit of the paper,\" said O'Donnell disingenuously. Chapter Five The boat arrived in Quito a week later. The heat was almost unbearable, and there were flies everywhere. Roger and Patrick went in search of a guide who could lead them to the tomb, leaving Daphne to rest in the hotel. They were directed to a bar in the city where they found an old man who had lived in the Sinu jungle. \"Yes, I know the place you seek, but I will not take you there,\" he said slowly. \"Why not?» said Roger. \"We'll pay you well.\" The old man shook his head. \"You could not pay enough, Sénor. Not even if you offered me all the gold of El Dorado. The gods guard their rest, my friends. The do not like to be disturbed.\" \"Long ago the god Xipe Totec came to the Sinu, down from a night sky in his silver fire chariot. Over many years the people grew in the skills of war and peace. \"He was a cruel master, only the blood of his people could sustain him. When the renewal of his being was needed, he would rest for many months, until ready for his servants to wake him. Undeterred by the old man's grisly tale Roger explained their mission to find Pemberton-Smythe. The old man relented. \"I thought you to be mere treasure hunters. But I can see you have a real need to reach the lost tomb. I am too old to go on an expedition through the jungle but I do have this map which will help you...\" He pulled a crumpled and torn piece of parchment from among the rags which clothed his thin frame. O'Donnell thought it looked like a strip of human skin... "


"ACTION ACTION ACTION Dagles MIRRORUT Packed with all the action and atmosphere of the movie, Biggles is a multipart game that'll keep you on the edge of your seat right to the end of your mission, Spectrum Commodore 64. Amstrad CPC .95 tape Commodore disk.95  Amstrad disk .95 Biggles t-shirts pot's scarves, button badges and skersavailable o-ask your retailer or call us die SPSR2 81838 MYEMBE BRc81898 The Untolds DYNAMITE 09 DYNAMITE DANII Dynamite Dan's back-and how! There's 200 screens of challenging gameplay, simply crawling with intelligent aliens out to trap you, to keep you on your toes (which will be tapping like mad to the amazing music, too!) Spectrum .95 tape SCORE=DOOZS itens ELEGY little A REFLEX ACTION REFLEX The brand-new, all action, Medusa label launches out with a real smasher! It's a frantic, multilevel. Beat the clock ball game-and where did you see that red-and-white, chequered ball before...? Spectrum .95 tape 2222222222 <<<<<<< >>>>>>>>> MIRRORSOFT MORCED IRRORSOFT STRIKER MARRIED STRIKE FORCE HARRIER Fly by the seat of your pants at the controls of the Harrier, one of the world's most exciting combat aircraft. But beware of enemy ground and air attack as you battle your way to your ultimate target. Spectrum Amstrad CPC. BBC/Electron .95 tape BBC disk .95 Amstrad disk$14.95 Purnell Book Centre, Paulton, Bristol BS18 5LQ Tel: (0761)413301 "


"RELEASE cassette WEDODIJOD BE60 O PERODODIRUJU 10-0 NEW BALALE Mail Order-Send cheque/ posial order fo:\" SPECTRUM 48/128 AMSTRAD & COMMODORE 64. D PROBE SOFTWARE 155 Mitcham Road, London SW17 Tel: 01 672 9179 Available soon for the A "


"Mark Goodall and Keith Prosser are the people behind the latest \"adventure movie\" from Hewson. Pyracurse follows firmly in the footsteps of the \"adventure movie\" game theme pioneered by Steve Turner in Avalon and Dragontorc. But you haven't seen anything quite like Pyracurse. apoyo Set in South America in the 1930s, the expectantly at the entrance. game features three main characters. At the top of the screen is a window Patrick O'Donnell, reporter for the displaying your current mode of Saturday Post, Daphne operation. you start in mobile mode. To Pemberton-Smythe, Professor Roger the left, a coloured band indicates the Kite and Frozbie the dog go in search of archaeologist Sir Pericles energy status of your current character. If the energy level falls to zero your Pemberton-Smythe, who has disappeared Ted character will die. in the depths of the Sinu region. Their travels lead them to the tomb of At the bottom centre of the screen is an information and menu window. This the daughter of Xipe Totec, an ancient and supposedly immortal god. They have is similar to the Dragontorc scrolling to battle with the evil scorpions and menu. It allows you to select the different characters, call up an inventory, manipulate objects like the servant mode in Dragontorc and \"lead\" other characters. Initially this window displays the name of the character you are controlling and the location that this character finds him/herself in. As you play you'll discover that the different characters have different skills and uses. O'Donnell is the strongest member of the group. He's useful for breaking pots which you'll find inside the tomb and which contain useful items. Daphne is better at finding things than the others.  donnell Frozbie tends to enjoy digging through the dirt. Professor Kite is good at using the ancient objects left in the tomb. The monsters you'll find are not very clever but they are extremely single-minded. They will not stray far from their posts but they will chase you if you get too close to them. Fortunately there are ways of disposing of them! If one of your characters is killed his remains will lie where he fell. One of the other characters may be able to locate the molecular enzyme which gave Xipe Totec immortality. You can use it to revive your dead companion. There are many items for you to collect and use scattered around the tomb. To pick up an object, select mobile mode and walk up to the item you require. As you collect it the graphic window will flash and show you a picture of the item. Each character may carry up to three items at a time. If you wish to unlock a chest or activate a key plate with a key collected previously, select the character who has the correct key and place him adjacent to the chest or plate. Press fire to obtain the selection menu in the lower window and use the control keys or joystick to highlight the word \"Inventory\". Press fire again and the three items carried by the character appear in the information window. Scroll to the items required and press fire again. Use the main controls to manoeuvre the object over the chest or plate and observe the results. Whenyou have done so, press fire again to return you to mobile mode. To release the characters who are following you, press fire to obtain the selection menu and scroll to the word \"Solo\" and press fire again. The other characters will now wander off by themselves. Manipulating the characters and getting them to do all the right things for you will be crucial when playing the game. Watch out for the strange little droid. What's a droid doing in an ancient South American tomb? Well, you'll just have to play the game to find out. Pyracurse will be released on June 26th and is well worth the .95 price tag. It will run on the Spectrum, Spectrum Plus and 128-in 48K mode. You'll curse yourself if you miss it... odonnell undead guardians that roam the inner chambers. Only by helping each other can they ever hope to survive. The game features isometric 3D projection with full hidden object removal and high speed multi-directional scrolling. Once the game is loaded you see the imposing entrance to the tomb. The four members of the expedition are standing LA donnell 18 "


"the mission and about the ruins of an ancient city which you can only reach by travelling further upstream in native canoes. Do you: A) Decide to attempt to discover the lost cave in the jungle? B) Hire canoes to travel upriver to find the ruins of the ancient city? B) Go to the native village which is much closer? If you decide to return to the mission go to question 5. If you decide on a trip to the native village turn to question 6. 5. Back at the mission you come across an old woman who tells you about a strange temple and a mysterious \"smoking mountain\" in the jungle to the north of the town. To reach them would mean another long trek upriver to the only bridge a rickety wooden affair across a deep gorge. Do you: A) Decide to find the bridge! B) Visit the lost city/cave? through the jungle. You follow it until you find a crossroads. One road leads into the jungle. One leads towards the \"smoking mountain\" described by the old woman. Another leads off in the direction of the ancient temple which you can just see above the jungle canopy. Do you: A) Go to the \"smoking mountain\"? B) Go to the temple! C) Follow the path into the jungle? e've managed to get our hands on the map which the old man gave to O'Donnell and Professor Kite. Unfortunately the location of the tomb has been wiped mysteriously from the parchment! If you'd like to be the proud owner of the C+VG Pemberton-Smythe Explorer's Kit all you have to do is use the map and clues below to work out exactly where the tomb entrance is. Once you've worked out the location, and the route you have to take to get to the tomb, mark them on the map and send it to Computer and Video Games, Pyracurse Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date for the competition is July 16th. Normal C+VG rules apply and the Editor's decision is final. Got that O'Donnell! Twenty lucky runners up will get copies of Hewson's Pyracurse game if they own a Spectrum or a copy of the number one smash Uridium for the 64. So what are our waiting for, Tarzan?! Use the map to help you make your decisions. Well tell you if you managed to discover the tomb's entrance next issue. In the meantime just don't follow too many false trails. Don't forget to mark the route you take clearly on the map provided before you send it off to us and don't forget to include the coupon and \"decision sheet\" with your entry. May the ancient gods protect you you'll need all the help you can get! The old man tells you to go further up river to the missionary's encampment marked on the map. When you arrive to question the locals about the whereabout of the lost tomb. There are rumours about a cave hidden in the jungle to the west of If you decide to find the cave turn to question 2. If you want to travel to the ancient city turn to question 3. 2. After days of hacking through the thick jungle you come across a vine covered cliff and the dark entrance to a cave. You hack away the vines covering the entrance, light a torch and enter. In the flickering light from the torch you see a golden scorpion ornament hanging on the rock wall underneath the ornament there is an interesting looking pile of sand. Do you: A) Get Frozbie to dig in the sand? B) Try to take the golden scorpion ornament from the wall? 3. It's not an easy journey upriver to the lost city. But after a couple of days and many sets of rock strewn rapids your party reaches the ruins. On exploring them Professor Kite finds what looks like an entrance to an underground tunnel. Do you: A) Light a torch and enter? B) Decide that it looks too dangerous and keep exploring the ruins for clues? 4. After spending days in the jungle/ruins looking for a way across the river you dedice it would be nice to find some civilisation and get more supplies for the expedition. You notice on the map that there's a native village not far from the ruins/cave. Do you: A) Decide to return to the mission where you know you'll get a friendly reception but which is quite a long trek away? If you decide to visit the cave turn to question 2. If you decide to visit the ruins turn to question 3. If you decide to travel upriver to the bridge turn to question 7. 6. You discover the native village and the inhabitants seem friendly enough. The chief says that there's a feast planned for the evening and invites you to stay. Do you: A) Accept his invitation and allow yourself to be taken to a special hut prepared for visitors? B) Say you are behind schedule and ask for provisions to be brought to you so you can leave as soon as possible? 7. You find the bridge. It's made of wooden slats and held together with vines. It doesn't look very safe. Do you: A) Attempt to cross the bridge one at a time? B) Try to find some other way to cross the river? C) Cross the bridge together? If you go to the mountain turn to question 9. If you go to the temple turn to question 10. If you follow the path turn to question 11. 9. In the shadow of the \"smoking mountain\" you discover a deserted village. In one of the houses you find a large jar covered in odd markings. The only way to open it seems to be smash it. Do you: A) Smash the jar? B) Return to the crossroads? (Question 8) 10. You reach the temple and climb to the top where you find an entrance to the interior of the structure. Do you: A) Light a torch and enter the temple? B) Return to the crossroads? (Question 8) 11. You follow the path into the jungle which seems to close in around you. Suddenly you come across a small clearing. In the centre of the clearing there is a weather-beaten obelisk covered in strange markings. The path doesn't seem to go any further. Do you: A) Examine the obelisk? B) Give a heavy sigh and tramp back to the crossroads in an attempt to find something more interesting? If you decide to cross turn to question 8. If you decide to find some other way across turn to question 4. 8. You manage to cross the bridge and find a paved path way Smoking mountain Paved road 29 Deserted viHage 1. A 2. A 3. A 4. A 5. A 6. A 7. A 8. A 9. AB 10. A B 11. A B Rives Paved road Obelisk Native vilage Name Watertatt / Wooden bridge Address Rapids Roboto Ruined City Native village Cave Age Computer Owned 'Mark your choices on the decision sheet and send the map and completed coupon to Computer and Video Games, Pyracurse Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Mission "


"MANDRAGORE THE MAKING OF A LEGEND France's award winning, role playing epic now available in English Available for: Amstrad (Disk and Cassette) CBM 64 (Disk and Cassette) Apple II (Disk) MSX and Spectrum INFOGRMES "


"C+VG JUL software REVIEWS 1 THE PLANETS AMEO MON GAME OF THE MONTH This is C+VG's highest honour. It's granted to the game which, in our honest opinion, is the most playable, original and exciting game released during the month. We look for all the key points listed below but also that extra added ingredient which makes the game stand head and shoulders above the best of the rest. Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Martech Price: .95 Prepare yourself to boldly go where no computer game has gone before. Martech's Planets take you on a trip through our galaxy and actually down to the surface of these heavenly bodies. Created with the assistance of Heather Cooper, president of the British Astronomical Association, the game takes you on a trip across the galaxy in search of some alien capsules which contain clues to help you save the Earth from destruction. The scenario goes like this. Life on planet Earth is coming to an end. A series of monumental natural disasters has thrown the Earth's climate into a deadly spiral-a second Ice Age has already begun. A metal capsule plummets through the atmosphere. It contains a map of the Solar System and shows the position of eight similar capsules, one for each of the Earth's planetary neighbours. A radio signal is received from deep space. When decoded it is found to be a computer program. The program is loaded into a suitable microcomputer A strange game unfolds which appears to obey certain complex rules. TI You are on a routine mission within the solar system. For the past month the problems which beset Earth have intensified. As each day passes the news which reaches you worsens. Is life on Earth coming to an end? News of the signal from deep space and the mysterious capsule are communicated to you. The capsule has landed in a mountainous region of Switzerland. This is where you come in. The first task in this game is to land on Earth, decode the capsule's security device and get back to orbit around your home planet. Only then can you continue with the rest of the game. Planets is really four games in one. There's the landing and take-off sequence, the planetary search sequence, the separate \"weird\" or alien puzzle game, and the decoding the capsule game. Once you've landed you can send out your robot craft to retrieve the alien capsule. Once back in orbit you call up the interplanetary chart and decide which planet you wish to visit first. Notes of tape counter positions will be useful. There's no explanation of this on the instruction sheet, so beware. At your chosen destination it's back to the lunar lander routine after you've taken a few potshots at oncoming asteriods. The game is controlled by icons in an extremely effective fashion and features neat \"windowing\" techniques. It's not instantly addictive and won't appeal to arcade addicts currently into Commando/Uridium-BUT Planets does present a true challenge and will reward anyone who takes the time to REALLY play the game. Graphics Sound Value Playability C+VG HIT! C+VG HIT! This symbol is C+VG's way of telling you a game is the BUSINESS! GRAPHICS V DO Is the game graphically great or do the graphics grate? This mark puts you in the picture and lets you know if all things are sprite and beautiful. UGGOTINATI SOUND ESTE PER O O O Is the sound loud and proud-or does it sound like you've got your head stuck in a bucket of mud? VALUE Should you beg, borrow or even steal the cash to get your hands on the game and be the envy of your friends? Or will it be better to wait until the game appears in the bargain bin? Find out here. SHADOWHERE ends and you cannot escape. icons are very clear, apart from Torik: Avian, excellent with the odd one or two perhaps. explosives, makes a good And while you play, the scout. Shadowfire theme tune plays Mauls Powerful combat dreid, away in the background. strongest member of the team. Overall its a good game, one Your mission is to rescue for strategy fans, as well as Ambassador Kryxex, capture adventure freaks. I think it's a General Zoff and destroy the good buy. ship, Zoff V. You have a time Graphics limit of one hour and forty minutes. Sound The graphics on this game Value are pleasantly coloured, and the Playability PLAYABILITY Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Beyond Price: .95 Once again the Enigma team do battle against all odds, to resgue the Ambassador and capture General Zoff! This time the mission is on the Amstrad, but it's just as daring. You have the power to command the Engima team, by using icons, and must make the mission a success, at any cost! The Engima team is made up of the following characters: Zark Montor: Human, Commander of the Enigma team. Syylk: Insectoid, excellent fighter and second in command. Sevrina Maris: Human, excellent markswoman and locksmith Manto: Droid, he is priceless, lose him before the mission ON 0902 Will you be dragged screaming from the joystick after 24 hours continuous playor will the mere sight of the loading screen send you running to switch off the machine? S2 GOA  If you're one of those people who likes percentages instead of marks out of ten, the solution to your problem is simple just add a zero and a % sign to our marks. Easy, isn't it? 3 STARTS HERE us * "


"C+VG JUL sobtware REVIEWS 2 FISEERE 60% Machine: C64 and the bottles of stout she needs to swig to keep her Supplier: Electric going. Dreams She must also avoid the Price: .95 dangerous sea creatures like If we told you that the star of the squids and lobsters which drain e her energy on contact. latest Electric Dreams release Myrtle must use dynamite to was a tubby, stout swigging mermaid you wouldn't believe blast holes in the reef and discover the lamps which help us, would you? Well it's true. her to see in the dark undersea Her name is Myrtle and she'll caverns. She must also keep an soon be giving Sam Fox a run eye on Gordon's air-supplyfor her money in the sex appeal represented in icon form at the stakes! stakes! Se top of the screen. Myrtle is after a man Mermaid is a pretty Gormless Gordon the diver to be exact. The only problem is that Gordon isn't that keen on poor old Myrtle. At the start of the game you see Gordon leap off the end of a pier in order to escape Myrtle's romantic intentions. He swims off, hides under a wreck and gets himself trapped. Stupidly, forgetting that he won't be able to breathe underwater forever, Gordon goes to sleep. While Gormless is oblivious to the danger he's in, our heroine Myrtle is frantically trying to find a way to rescue him. And this is where you come in. Myrtle has to wend her way through an undersea maze solving problems discovering useful objects like dynamite FISEERE 68% DODODO straightforward maze-style arcade adventure. But it's lots of fun to play. The extremely colourful cartoon style graphics are fun to look at and well animated. It's a long time since a \"cute\" game like this appeared on the scene and a welcome change from all the terribly serious stuff around at the moment Graphics Sound Value Playability DONN 2010 BIGGLES Machine: CBM64 Supplier: Mirrorsoft Price: .95 Biggles. Ah, the memories. Those were the days when all the world's troubles could be sorted out with a stiff upper lip, a steely glint in the eye and a swift upper cut. Well now you can relive those days through Biggles The Untold Story The plot of both film and game is as follows. Biggles and his chums are caught up in a race against time to find and destroy a new German secret weapon which could alter the whole outcome of the First World War. But things are complicated because Biggles gets caught up in strange time warp which means he gets transported back and forth between 1917 and 1986. The Biggles game is divided up into two sections the Timewarp and the Sound Weapon. You can play the second part of the game without completing the first but it will be difficult. But first the Time Warp. This Warp. This is divided into three sections which you swap between as, in a flash of lightning, you move through time. Biggles in the Air (1917): Here Biggles flies over enemy territory to locate and photograph the German Sound weapon. Enemy planes and artillery continually attack him. Biggles on the Battlefield (1917): Armed with a gun and grenades, Biggles must battle past enemy positions to reach the weapon's test site. Biggles in London (1986): Here the action is set on the rooftops of London. The second part of the game, The Sound weapon, finds Biggles and Jim aboard a helicopter flying over enemy trenches. The one disappointment about Biggles the game at least in the first part-are the graphics. They're a bit chunky and basic. Graphics Sound Value Playability Machine: CBM64 Supplier: Macmillan Software Price: .95 Og-a-gug-gug! Crunch, splat, scrunge etc, etc. Yes, folks, everyone's favourite sailor has found his way onto a computer game. Popeye was around last year on the Spectrum, and now Macmillan have converted it for the Commodore. The storyline such as it is more you wake up just as they are goes like this. Olive Oyle passing, causing you to be Popeye's perennial girlfriend is decked for another few running short on love. To avoid seconds. the horrendous heartbreak he'd Although the screen is have to suffer if he lost this presented side-on, it's possible beauty, Pops will have to prove to play in semi-3D. As well as his affection. What better way moving left and right, you can to do this than to give her some move into\" the screen by hearts. He must travel around // ducking into doorways. It's the various screens, picking up / quite clever. these, and giving them to Olive. The doorways play a more Once the game has loaded. important part in the game than you are played a rather good you may imagine. By collecting version of the dreadful tune the keys which are dotted which always accompanies the around, you can open certain spinach-chewing hero. As it doors, allowing access to more tootles away, the game begins hearts. and a positive spectrum of Although the idea of the colour fills the screen! The game is pretty simple, it's fun to graphics are huge! Each play, and there are lots of character is fully animated. different items, such as the Sometimes the game is a witch and a fire-breathing little unfair; after you get dragon. \"killed\", a can of spinach will come across from the side of Graphics the screen, and revive you. Sound Unfortunately, other characters Value will go about their business while you're on the deck. Often Playability CONTINUES ON PAGE 24 "


"-95 THOR COMPUTER SOFTWARE LTD THOR COMPUTER SOFTWARE LTD. SALES 01-379 6755 01-240 9334 INTERNATIONAL 44-1-379 6755 SPECTRUM 48K:COMMODORE 64 IC.U.P.S.  1986 THOR Computer Software "


"C+VG JUL sobtware REVIEWS 0 Machine: CBM 64 System 3 had managed to get of punches and kicks. Supplier: System 3 the game out at the same time it But there are two extra would have been fascinating to sections in IK. You can boost Price: .50 see them fight it out in the your score with a bout of tile Was it only last August System charts. smashing with your fighter's 3 was promising the launch of In looks and concept head. For each tile smashed — International Karate across all International Karate is very there are 10 of them 100 machines at once? Doesn't time similar to Fist. The major points are added to your score. drag when you're waiting for a difference being in the There is also another stage game. 9 backgrounds. In Ik you where you must dodge stars, Well here, at last, is the progress through eight different spears and swords. Bonus Commodore 64 version. And international backdrops points are again scored if you very good it is as well. When the including New York, Rio and survive. Way of the Exploding Fist came Sydney. IK also has a nice touch of out it was considered brilliant. The combat is pretty much humour. If you leave the The truth is that international the same as Fist. Points are fighters facing each for any Karate is better than Fist. If only awarded for the various types length of time without any action, they take it in turns to look at you and mouth encouragement at you well, it could be encouragement. System 3 proudly announces its forthcoming games. \" Coming Soon are Twister The Last Ninja and American Gl. It should be interesting to see what System 3 means by \"soon' Graphics C+VG Sound O Value HIT! Playability 00 BEVES T grounds, until :::\"KWAH flashes into his mind!  What ean this mean? Hang on just a tiek; :: If we read \"KWAH baekwares, we get \"HAWK\" Pheweel Fight: Armed with this piece of infe, we can change inte superhero Redhawk with the simplest utteranee of saja were: Nothing particularly amazing as yet; eh talks? However, it you=asi=tife of fighting the ERRIERERERTEET TESTO Gees Fight eternally, the game allows you to become a SUBCr-Villain, and indulge in a life oferime=much more fun! Stumbling across a hapless polieeman: I preeeeded to metamorphose before him lguaranteed to unease even the mest hardened op!) and kiek him around the street: The sereen is adequately presented, with the lower half allowing space for text and eammanas to be typed, and some variable indieaters: These Machine: Amstrad show some Vital information Price: .95 uch as how streng Reahawk is Supplieri Melbourne House feeling: After their sybeess with Mugsy: the response and speech is Melbourne House are putting another comie-strip adventure strip itself. This is a little disturbing at first; it's easy to anto the market, in the form of Reahawk find yourseli staring at the In this Offering you alay the lewer half of the sereen When; in fact, the machine has already Fale et @fainary Kevin Oliver, a fesbanded with a \"<input> tyaieally typlel person: confuses Kevin' Things begin to veer from their typical eufse when Kevin It's an enjoyable game, and Bresents séape for exploration: wakes up in a hospital eerfider unable to remember why, @raphies how he get there. Still, net Sound being the ser to jump te Playability ephelysians, key starts pledding around the hospital Value CONTINUED FROM PAGE 22 Machine: Spectrum 48k Supplier: Ultimate Play The Game Price: 9.95 Well, Ultimate may play the game, but I suspect most Spectrum owners have become more than a little weary of this style of program. The storyline is peripheral and uninterestng. Yet again, you take the role of Sabreman. This time, though, he is dressed in a wizard's costume. The \"idea\" is to track down the Pentagram. Why Ultimate are unable to simply explain this looks like a mystery to baffle reviewers and gamers the world over. (Well, France and Germany in fact Ultimate have kindly translated the instructions). The title page is rather average, and the initial screen, offering joystick and keyboard options is only marginally more inspiring, Into the game proper, then, and what do we find? A 3D layout, \"cute\" graphics and single colour rooms. So many surprises! The bizarre lack of directional control (you just spin around and move forward) makes things ever-so difficult. Presumably, the idea is to allow the player to run, jump and fire without stretching out to the keyboard every few seconds. Whilst considerate, I found it rather self-defeating; the effort exerted to reach the keyboard would be considerably smaller than the frustration caused trying to control the manic character. Graphics are nothing special. They are high quality, though, and quite pleasing to look at. Occasionally, a fiend of some sort will descend from the sky and scuttle around your feet. Bearing in mind the amount of time Ultimate spend producing their games, and the money spent on packaging, am disappointed by this offering. Steer well clear. Ultimate are going down. Graphic Sound Value Playability     ONIC coccus "


"NGEN TV E. THE GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CRCATOR THE THE GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR BARCLAYARD The amazing, combined text and graphics adventure generator enables you to produce fast, compact adventure games with the minimum of effort and the maximum of creativity. Stunning graphics can be created quickly and easily with the powerful picture generator that has many features including:dot, circle, elastic line, ellipse, fast fill, shading, step by step review, easy editing and the ability to merge pictures. The comprehensive, intelligent command interpreter can handle complex sentences and multiple input commands. There is also an extensive text compression facility that allows you to produce far more detailed and numerous location descriptions. Plus a full function editor, automatic word formatting, a logical command interpreter and an abbreviated input acceptance facility. So unleash the power of your imagination now with The Graphic Adventure Creator, for your Spectrum, Commodore 64, BBC B or Amstrad. Available from all leading retailers or direct from Incentive on 0734 591678. INCENTIVE SOFTWARE LTD. 54 London Street, Reading RG1 4SQ. Please rush me, THE GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR WA Commodore 64 Spectrum BBCB Amstrad Cassette .95 Disc .95 (All formats except Spectrum) I enclose Cheque/PO for  or please debit my Credit Card No. Name 0 0 Address "


"Who is the INPURY ARCADE INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE BEST DICOUNTS IN BRITAIN THE ATARI AND 4 SMASH HIT MERCENARY MOVIE PING PONG COMMANDO ELITE RAMBO FAIRLIGHT COMPUTER HITS II GUN FRIGHT YIE AR KUNG FUL BATTLE OF THE PLANETS... COSMIC WARTOAD LEGEND AMAZON WOMEN B. McQUIGAMS BOXING WINTER GAMES HYPERSPORTS SABOTEUR 30 GAMES ROCK 'N WRESTLE .75 .75 .75 .75 .50 .95 27.25 .25 E7.25 .75 87.25 .95 .75 .75 .75 .75 .75 .25 EUTE LASER BASIC LASER COMPILER ZZAP ZIZZLERS FACUP SOLD A MILLION II BOMB JACK PING PONG HARD BALL KUNG FU MASTER HYPERSPORTS YIE AR KUNG FU TIME TUNNELL THIS MONTH NEW RELEASES SPECTRUM HEAVY ON THE MAGIK .25 SAM FOX 128K .25 QUAZATRON .75 BOUNDER ... BATMAN .75 PLANETS E7.25 INDOOR SOCCER .99 TOURNAMENT SNOOKER ... .99 CYBERUN 87.25 QUESTPROBE .25 SPINDIZZY .25 CORE .25 WHO DARES WINS I .75 YOUNG ONES .75 ALIEN HIGHWAY .75 GHOST'N' GOBLINS RED HAWK S. FOX .75 SKY FOX. .95 GREEN BERET .75 BOMBJACK .75 CRASH SMASHES STARSTRIKE I. .75 WAY OF THE TIGER E7.25 HOTSHOTS .25 BALLBLAZER .75 SUPERBOWL E7.25 TWISTER .75 V. 5.75 FA CUP .75 VECTRON 3D .75 BACK TO THE FUTURE .25 SOLD A MILLION II [7.25 COMET GAME ... .75 TURBO ESPRIT ........... MUGSY'S REVENGE ... SUPER TEST .25 C16/PLUS 4 KIKSTART. RETURN ROCKMAN  COMMANDO TOM THUMB S. DAVIES SNOOKER KUNG FU KID WINTER OLYMPICS RRRRR22  commodore .25 THIS MONTH'S NEW RELEASES COMMODORE 64 COMET GAME [5.75 SPINDIZZY .25 INT KARATE .99 BORED OF THE RINGS . 5.75 PILGRIM .75 CAVE ADVENTURE .75 LEGEND AMAZON WOMEN. .25 PRICE OF MAGIK .25 EMPIRE KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT ... .25 MAX HAWK ................. 17.25 WAR PLAY .75 SUPERBOWL .25 MUGSY'S REVENGE ...75 URIDIUM .75 RASPUTIN 25.75 P.S.1.5 TRADING 17.25 STARQUAKE .75 M.S.X HYPERSPORTS BILLIARDS NIGHTMARE Plus 4 AMSTRAD SAM FOX MOVIE TOMAHAWK ROCK'N WRESTLE REDHAWK WAY OF THE TIGER TURBO ESPRIT SABOTEUR COMMANDO BOMB JACK ALIEN HIGHWAY BOMBA .75 All prices shown above are also our shop prices. Give us a visit in East London. Overseas Orders Cheque only sterling: Europe add  per tape, elsewhere add  per tape. Send cheques postal orders to: ARCADE INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE (C&VG) 202 SHOPPING HALL, MYTRLE ROAD, EAST HAM, LONDON E6 Please do not send off for games not shown in our Ad. They may not have been released. We only advertrise games that are in stock. NOVAGEN CASSETTE .95 NOVAGEN SOFTWARE-SALES: 142 ALCESTER ROAD BIRMINGHAM B138HS 021-449 9516 "


"Post Haste Software GET DEXTER (PSS) C&VG Game Of The Month and highly praised by many other reviewers. Your Amstrad will dazzle you with this terrific arcade adventure! Amstrad (C) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 BATMAN (Ocean) Rated at 10 out of 10 for value and 10 out of 10 for playability by C&VG. \"A game that's destined to become an all-time classic\" Spectrum (C) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 Other computer versions imminent. The total postal software service! Post Haste is part of GB Microland, the South of England's unique computer shop. Thousands of software titles. Lots of experience. The place that gave new meaning to the word \"friendly\". But not everyone lives nearby. So Post Haste Software was born. To bring the best to your door. With top service. Here's how. No \"Club\" to join, no \"subscription\" to pay. You come in our shop for free. Why pay to buy by mail? Unique \"double-your-money\" voucher with the 40-page catalogue. Check the box in this advertisement! Software for other computers? No problem. QL, Apple and IBM. Ask for lists. Post Haste has the lot! Postage free in the UK. Europe? Add 95p. Elsewhere? Add .50. For the whole order, not each program. Order by post or phone, day or night. Check the coupon for details. Then relax. It's fast! Pay by cheque, bank draft, PO, Access, Visa, Mastercard, Eurocard. Post Haste is convenient! THE POST HASTE SERVICE We can supply any program you've seen advertised. If it's released, you'll usually get it by return. If it's not, you'll get it faster when it does come out. Simply order it and sit back. That's Post Haste service! POST HASTE: WHAT THEY SAY! It's only a few months since Post Haste was born. Now, thousands of customer orders later, we've a compliment collection to make us proud! Here are just a few. \"This time I'm not just surprised but completely amazed at the speed of your response expect plenty of orders from me!\" K.B., Haslingfield, Cambridgeshire. \"Thanks for a fast service please keep it up!\" F.R., Beisfjord, Norway. \"I'm amazed at the speed you work! I received the disk just 4 days after I sent off to you and that includes a Sunday! That's what I call service!\" R.H., Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands. «Congratulations on your excellent service! For BFPO addresses, you're the best way of obtaining up-to-date software. In my case, you're the only way! Keep up the good work!\" C.B., BFPO 36. «Many thanks for a superb service!\" J.G.. Andover, Hampshire. \"The last order I placed with you was received just over a week from the date I mailed it-two weeks faster than any other firm I've dealt with!\" R.E., Kleppe, Norway. \"I've just received your catalogue and I'm amazed at the quality!\" P.D., Torpoint, Cornwall. \"The programs I ordered arrived in 8 days. Considering this included Easter and an air strike in Australia, that's fantastic!\" A.K., Morphett Vale, South Australia. Our thanks to everyone who's written from everywhere in the UK and all over the world. We appreciate it and we'll go right on working poste haste at Post Haste! ALREADY SEEN SOMETHING YOU WANT ON THIS PAGE? GO RIGHT AHEAD AND ORDER NOW! Use the coupon or write on your own paper. Be sure to include all the details from the coupon. Cross cheques and POs for safety. Your software will be on its way by return. So will your catalogue. And your unique \"double-yourmoney\" voucher! Phone Orders (24 hrs) (0705) 269333 TO GET YOUR CATALOGUE WITH THE \"DOUBLE-YOUR-MONEY\" VOUCHER, OR TO ORDER SOFTWARE, USE THIS COUPON! * Send your catalogue. I've enclosed 90p. Don't forget my .80 \"Double Your Money\" voucher for me to use with my first order! Send your catalogue and I want to order software too. The details are below. I've I added 90p for the catalogue to the value of my order so don't forget my .80 \"Double Your Money\" voucher! My name is: I My address is ADVENTURERS! SPECIAL EXTRA SECTION! There are dozens of adventures in the Post Haste catalogue from virtually every major producer. Just about all the superb Infocom range is there and many others too! And Post Haste carries the Infocom Invisiclues, plus hint and guide books to other adventures too! Answers to the problems that keep you awake at night? The catalogue lists them all! Post code My computer is: Can we contact you by phone if there's a query? PAPERBOY (Elite) The top arcade game on your own computer screen! The eagerly awaited official\" version! Spectrum (C) .95 BBC/Electron (C) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 BBC (D) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 Comm C16/Pls 4 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (D) .95 STD/Exchange .............. Number ............ IF YOU'RE ORDERING SOFTWARE, PLEASE PRINT DETAILS OF THE PROGRAMS YOU WANT! PROGRAM NAME PRICE PERRY MASON (Telarium) A tremendous graphic adventure. The Case Of The Mandarin Murderer and you're the famous detective, Pery Mason. Zzap 64 says \"definitely recommended\". Comm 64/128 (D) .95 THE POST HASTE CATALOGUE The Post Haste catalogue is just 90p with a unique \"Double Your Money\" voucher tucked inside! Yes, the Post Haste catalogue contains a .80 voucher to use for your first order! How's that for value? Recreation, utility, strategy, adventure, arcade they're all there! And so is your .80 \"Double Your Money\" voucher! Programs for five micros Amstrad Atari, BBC, Commodore 64/128 and Spectrum. You're spoilt for choice with Post Haste! And your catalogue is the gateway to a huge program range from Post Haste. Over 4,000 titles spanning 10 major micros! Where else is there such a choice? MOVIEMAKER (Ariolasoft) A stunning program! Lets you quickly and easily create and save long and hugely impressive animated action sequences using your own creative talents. Comm 64/128 (D) .95 Atari (D) .95 GHOSTS'N'GOBLINS (Elite) Another officially licensed arcade smash-hit from the team that produced \"Commando\"! Spectrum (C) .95 BBC/Electron (C) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 BBC (D) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 Comm C16/Pls 4 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (D) .95 Catalogue with .80 voucher Add .90 Postage is totally free in the UK Add .00 Europe postage for whole order Add .95 Airmail elsewhere for whole order Add .50 TOTAL AMOUNT ENCLOSED  PAYING BY CHEQUE OR POSTAL ORDER? Please make it payable to Post Haste Software and cross it for safety's sake! Don't send cash! CHARGING IT TO YOUR VISA, ACCESS, MASTERCARD, EUROCARD? May we have your card number, expiry date and signature? IIIIIIIII Expiry date Signature Now mail your order to POST HASTE SOFTWARE \"GB MICROLAND, 7 QUEENS PARADE | LONDON ROAD, WATERLOOVILLE HAMPSHIRE PO7 7EB, UNITED KINGDOM | Orphone (24 hours) 0705 269333 BIGGER RANGE! The Post Haste range now includes programs for the Commodore C16 and the Atari ST. Send for lists! GAMEMAKER (Activision) One of the most astonishing programs we've seen! Create your own games and make them as complicated as you like. \"An excellent package\" Zzap 64. Comm 64/128 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (D) .95 "


"G+VG JUL sobtware REVIEWS O Machine: Commodore 16/ Plus 4 Supplier: Ariolasoft Price: .95 Oh, dear. Another game with piles of instructions and storyline to wade through before you can actually get anywhere! Well, no, that's not strictly true. You can try and play the game without browsing at the paperwork first, though it's not the most sensible way to go about things. Lord only knows what the story is all about. For some reason, some all-powerful being has become terribly miffed with life, and has decided to take it out on any poor soul he finds wandering around. Of course, you are one such soul. Casting this rather inadequate literature aside, loaded the game and was confusing. After prolonged play, though, things start to pick up. You learn that you can control the walls (which encroach from the edge of the screen inwards) by pushing and dragging them with your \"ship\", and how to collect the numerous pods which are dotted around the screen. As you collect the required number (which increases for each screen you reach) you will be transported to another zone, with a different wall layout. This makes the program much more interesting, and gives it lasting appeal. The graphics are bright and colourful-and, despite initial reservations, I would recommend the game to most people Graphics Sound Value Playability presented with a rather swish company by various other title page all swirling items which appear and vanish character-graphics and from time to time. Now the suchlike. game begins, and all on with the game, and your enthusiasm drains from the find yourself in the middle of a reviewer's mind. The graphics desperately confusing screen appear flickery, and gameplay surrounded on four sides by seems unimpressive, and colourful walls, and kept everything is thoroughly you can go back and change things if you wish. Once you've set up your play and committed yourself to play action you can control the players Match Day fashion. You can pass or run with the ball. Normal NFL rules apply to the gameTOUCHDOWN FOOTBALL O Machine: 064 Supplier: Ariolasoft/ Electronic Arts Price: .95 (tape) .95 (disc) If you're one of those people who have been waiting for an all action American Football simulation with proper animated players and fast scrolling action rather than a straight strategy game like Superbowl then take a look at Touchdown Football. At first glance the graphics aren't really up to much. The teams are represented by one colour, chunky graphics, but are quite well animated. The action is joystick controlled — except from the initial options screen which gives you the usual one player/two player/computer choices. Playing the computer is a tough option. It might be an idea to start by playing a friend so you can learn the ropes without getting thrashed. Defence and Offence plays are controlled via menu windows. There's an extensive choice of moves to make for the offensive team-not quite so many for the defence. Make a wrong choice which basically means you get four chances to move the ball 10 yards up the field at a time with the object of scoring a touchdown. The game is very playable despite the graphics and sound which let it down badly. And the price is hefty for a product of this quality. EA can do better. Graphics Sound Value Playability UT UT and 16A MILITUDII SAMANTHA FOX STRIP POKER OOOO Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Martech O Price: .95 Now you can play With Page 3 model Samantha Fox, but you will have to be chaparoned by your Amstrad. (Shame) Sam will play strip poker with you, and if you beat her, welll bet you can guess what happens! But Sam is no pushover and you will need a bit of skill to beat her, or so Martech say. When you start playing with Sam, she looks more like Max Headroom than the sparkling Page 3 beauty. She wears a hat, gloves, dark glasses, as well as all the other essentials. Anyway, when you play poker you can win with one of the following hands: Nothing! Yes if you both have nothing then the one with the highest cards win. A pair, two pairs, threes, straight, flush, full house, fours, striaght flush and lastly, the best hand you can get, a Royal, Straight Flush. Graphics Sound Value Playability CONTINUED FROM PAGE 28 "


"C+VG JUL software REVIEWS SEGRE SEDISO. MAUSE.. \"O\". Perlogo BOMBO5th AXIS E D001190 HAULE. HIGH OOOOOOO LIVES 2 Duran Front Machine: Amstrad Price: 9.95/14.95 (tapeldisc) Supplier: Activision OBU6120 HI CH. QODOUDO LIUES Machine: C64/128 Supplier: Rino Price: .99 Rino Software has released a new game entitled Bombo. And it's really good. Although at first glance you will think that it's Bombjack, when you get into the game you'll find it is much more fun. One of the amazing things about this game is the superb little tunes which play through the screens. As I said earlier, game play is like Bombjack, where you have to collect things by jumping on them and you can fly between the platforms. The thing which bothers me is that Elite, may kick up a fuss about Bombo and if they win, it may be taken off the market. This worries me because I may not be able to buy it, and I think it's a better buy than Bombjack. Graphics Sound Value Playability Dobog /O8 LignONS BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK! THING ON A SPRING Machine: Amstrad Traps must be avoided and Supplier: Gremlin puzzles overcome by the cute and somersaulting Thing on a Graphics Spring. Price: .95 If you like a platform and Bounce into action on the ladders games then this Amstrad with Thing on a superior example of the breed Spring. It's getting on for nearly will suit you down to the a year since the Spectrum ground. Excellent graphics and version of Gremlin's game good sound combined to make came out and time certain this an immensely playable hasn't dulled the fun. game. The thing has to infiltrate an O Graphics evil goblin's factory, collect nine Sound pieces of a jigsaw which will give him a clue as to how to kill  Value this wicked creature. Playability The 5th Axis is the first in a range of programs which will be appearing under the Activision label from France. A company called Loriciels write the programs, and Activision produce them. If the first offering is anything to go by, it should be a very productive partnership. The setting is the future; 15th September 2410 to be precise. For some reason, you're the only person who can save the world from disaster. The culprit for this sticky situation is Professor Chronos. He was beavering away on his new invention, a time machine, when suddely Kerzumph!\" it disintegrated. Now, screwing around with time is far from sensible. Bits of time machine were scattered through time, and artifacts from other time zones were also moved around. Your mission is to traverse the galaxy, returning the objects to their correct time. Once the game has loaded you can set up the various attributes of your character. Force, Agility, Life and Credit can all be altered. The first thing that you'll notice when you start playing (apart, perhaps, from the \"catchy\" tune) is the way the graphics operate. Your character remains in the middle of the screen, with the background scrolling around him. The layout of the early stages of the game looks a little like a standard \"run and jump\" game. Almost as soon as you appear on the screen, you'll be surrounded by a horde of ghastly looking creatures, which will proceed to beat the living daylights out of you without so much as an \"excuse me\"! The combat is very well staged. You can perform flying kicks and punches, as well as a stand-up fight. Game play is slick and fast. You can get the hang of the program quite quickly, and it's possible to save the game after a particularly successful mission. Machine: BBC Supplier: US Gold Price: .95 tape, .95 disk If you took a fancy to Bounty Bob in Miner 2049er, now's your chance to renew the acquaintance. Bounty Bob is back, with a vengeance. All he has to do is claim the mine and foil the evil plaris of Yukon Yohan. He does this by scurrying around each of the 20 levels of the mine, filling in sections of the framework as he does so. Once all the sections of framework are filled in, he can move on to the next cavern. + Needless to say, there are complications. The mine is full of mutants out to stop him, and he must eat various snacks on the way to get the strength to deal with them. There are, however, a number of ingenious pieces of equipment scattered about which help Bob in his frenzied progress-lifts, a grain elevator, suction tubes, even a utility hoist. It's familiar arcade action, but the graphics are only average and it's a bit pricey for what it is.  Graphics Sound Value  Playability N000 Graphics Sound Playability Value O CONTINUES ON PAGE 34 "


"MAIL-SOFT SOFTWARE SERVICE Disk 6.50 6.50 7.25 7.50 5.75 OV 5.95 7.40 7.25 en el HARDWARE Competition Pro 13.00 Quickshot II 6.25 Konix Speedking 9.50 ATARI Cass Disk CBM 64 Cass The Eidelon 11.00 The Eidelon 7.20 Spy Vs Spy 7.30 11.00 Rockfords Riot B.Dash... 7.20 Spy Vs Spy II 7.30 11.00 Bomb Jack 7.20 Rescue on Fractalus 7.30 11.00 Fairlight... 7.20 Mercenary 7.30 9.50 Superman... 7.20 Ball Blazer 7.30 11.00 Elite 11.00 Great American Road Race .... 7.30 11.00 They Sold a Million II 7.20 Seven Cities of Gold ........... 11.00 Starquake 6.40 Hacker 7.30 11.00 Rasputin ..... 5.70 Steve Davis Snooker 7.30 9.50 They Sold a Million 7.20 Red Moon 5.00 Quake Minus 1 ...... 7.20 Alternative Reality 16.00 6.40 Chimera 3.50 Iwo Jima ....... 7.00 Smash Hits 4 7.30 11.00 Hard Ball... 7.20 Kennedy Approach 11.00 14.50 The Never Ending Story 7.00 Zone X 7.30 Mercenary 7.20 Mr Robot 7.30 11.00 Superbowl... 7.20 Elektraglide 6.50 9.50 Zoids........... 6.40 Boulderdash II 7.30 11.00 Knight Games 6.40 Fighter Pilot 9.75 Now Games II. 6.40 Tail of Beta Lyrae 7.30 11.00 The Transformers 6.40 Arcade Classics 7.30 11.00 The Arc of Yesod. 7.20 Up 'n Down 7.30 Bounder .......... 7.20 King of the Ring 7.30 9.50 Uridium.... 6.40 Tigers in the Snow 1.00 Dragon Skulle 7.20 AMSTRAD SPECTRUM Get Dexter 7.20 Movie 5.70 Lord of the Rings 11.00 Gladiator.............. 6.40 Lords of Midnight 7.00 Max Headroom... 7.20 Spitfire 40. 5.70 Winter Games.. 7.20 Dun Darach 7.20 Saboteur... 7.20 Spy Vs Spy 7.20 The Way of the Tiger. 7.20 Tau Ceti..... Never Ending Story... 7.20 Sweevos World 5.70 Transformers 5.70 Exploding Fist Turbo Esprit.. 6.40 Spindizzy.... 7.20 Bladerunner..... 7.20 Saboteur 7.20 Gunfright.......... Frank Brunos Boxing 6.40 Enigma Force \"iD . 5.70 MSX Bomb Jack. 5.70 Nightshade 7.50 Tomahawk...... 7.20 Hyper Rally 11.80 Spy Vs Spy......... Hyper Sports 3 11.80 Fighting Warrior Soccer 12.30 Twister................. Alien 8... 7.50 Impossible Mission Boulderdash 5.95 N.O.M.A.D. 7.00 Roller Coaster... Gunfright 7.50 Batman. 5.70 Please state name, address, title and micro clearly with order. Overseas add  per item. Cheques/POs payable to: J.J.B. SOFTWARE SERVICES FREEPOST (no stamp UK) 14 Loraine Crescent (overseas) Darlington Darlington Co. Durham DL1 5XE Co. Durham DL1 5FT Tel: (0325) 288102 * COMMODORE 64 + YIE AR KUNG FU 6.50 KUNG FU MASTER 7.25 BOMB JACK 7.25 ELITE 11.25 WORLD CUP 7.25 CAULDRON 11 7.25 URIDIUM 6.50 ACROJET 7.50 BIGGLES 7.25 LORD OF THE RINGS 11.20 BATTLE OF MIDWAY 7.50 STARSHIP ANDROMEDA 7.25 SOLD A MILLION 2 7.25 DESERT FOX 7.25 SILENT FOX 7.25 FALKLANDS 82 WINTER GAMES 7.25 GLADIATOR 6.95 THE PRICE OF MAGICK 7.25 ROCKY HORROW SHOW 6.95 COMMANDO 7.25 ROCK N WRESTLE 7.25 HEAVY ON THE MAGICK 7.25 PARADROID 5.75 CRUSADE IN EUROPE 11.95 SUPERBOWL 7.25 LAW OF THE WEST 7.25 BOUNDER 7.25 EMPIRE 7.25 ALTER EGO-DISK 22.00 THE FORCE 7.25 THE WAY OF THE TIGE 7.25 PSI-5 TRADING 7.25 KNIGHT GAMES 7.25 FAIRLIGHT 7.25 HARD BALL DISK 11.25 SOUTHERN BELLE 6.95 SABOTEUR 6.50 GOLF CONS SET 10.50 CRITICAL MASS 6.50 RAMBO 6.50 COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0 7.25 LORD OF RINGS-D 14.95 MERCENARY 7.50 GHOST + GOBLIN 7.25 KUNG FU MASTER-DISK 11.25 SPITFIRE 40 7.25 LASER BASIC 11.25 F.A. CUP 5.75 RED HAWK 7.25 SPIN DIZZY 7.25 IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII ** SPECTRUM ** TURBO ESPRIT CRITICAL MASS SABATOUR QUAZATRON 6.50 WORM IN PARADISE 7.25 THE PLANETS 7.25 BATMAN 5.75 PYRACURSE 7.50 LORD OF RINGS 11.25 SWEEVOS WORLD WORLD CUP 7.50 SPITFIRE 40 7.25 WHO DARES WINS 11 5.95 EQUINOX 7.50 BOMB JACK 5.75 THEATRE EUROPE 7.50 RED HAWKS 7.25 ELITE 11.25 WINTER GAMES 5.75 COMMANDO 5.75 TRANSFORMERS 5.75 GUN FRIGHT 7.25 TAU CETI TOMAHAWK THE PRICE OF MAGICK REBEL PLANET FIGHTER PILOT BIGGLES MAX HEADROOM SOUTHERN BELLE 5.75 BLOCK-GOLD RUN 7.25 YIE AR KUNG FU DESERT RATS SOLD A MILLION 2 7.25 WAY OF TIGER 7.25 RAMBO 5.75 MUGSYS REVENGE 5.75 SUPERBOWL B. MCGUIGANS BOXING 5.75 ROLLER COASTER 5.50 HEAVY OF THE MAGICK 7.25 ROCK N WRESTLE GHOST + GOBLIN FAIRLIGHT IAN BOTHAMS DYNAMITE DAN 11 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION ARNEHAM THEIR FINEST HOUR 7.50 BEACH HEAD 11 5.75 STAR QUAKE 5.75 ****AMSTRAD **** THING ON STRING TOMAHAWKS 7.25 GREEN BERET ELITE-CASS 11.00 SPIN-DIZZY WORLD CUP CARNIVAL SOLD A MILLION 11 7.25 BATMAN 6.70 .PRICE OF MAGICK GHOST + GOBLIN TURBO ESPRIT SABATOUR TOMAHAWK-DISK MONOPOLY HEAVY ON THE MAGICK BOMB JACK 7.25 EQUINOX 7.25 ***** BBC *** STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 7.40 COMMANDO BRUCE LEE EXPLODING FIST 7.40 YIE AR KUNG FU 7.40 COMBAT LYNXS AIRWOLF JET SET WILLY TAN BOTHAMS BEACH HEAD ** ** ATARI *** MERCENARY MERCENARY-D SPY V SPY ALTERNATE REALITY-D 16.95 TALES OF BETA LYRA 7.25 PRICE OF MAGICK WORM OF PARADISE 7.25 SUMMER GAMES 1-0 11.50 ***** MSX ***** BOUNDER WAY OF TIGER ALIEN 8 7.25 GUNFRIGHT 7.50 THE PRICE OF MAGICK 7.50 MACADAMS BUMPER ***** C16 ***** JET SET WILLY 5.75 WORLD CUP CARNIVAL 7.50 FRANK BRUNO BOXING 5.95 IAN BOTHAM 5.75 COMMANDO 5.75 DIRTY DEN 5.50 7.25 NONNONO 11 7.20 7.20 IIIII 6.40 7.25 1.20 IIIIIIII Sorcery.... 7.25 Post & Packing included in U.K. Europe add  per tape. CHQ/P.O. To: MailSoft. P.O. Box 589 London N15 6JJ. Access and Visa accepted T T TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT T PRICE SOFTWARE THE TOP PEOPLES CHOICE 14 95 7,00 OUR OUR OUR SPECTRUM RRP PRICE COMMODORE RRP PRICE AMSTRAD RRP PRICE Quazatrone 8.95 6.25 9.95 7.25 Movie 8.95 6.50 Batman .. 7.95 5.50 Psi-5 Trading Co ..9.95 7.25 Rock & Wrestle.... 8.95 6.50 World Cup Carnival.... ..9.95 7.00 Rms Titanic..... 9.95 7.25 Zoids. 8.95 6.50 Elite... 14.95 11.00 Bomb Jack 9.95 7.25 Monopoly 9.95 7.45 Rambo.......... 7.95 5.90 Game Maker (O).... 19.99 14.95 Scrabble. .9.95 7.45 Shadowfire 2.. .95 7.45 Sold A Million 2. 7.45 Sorcery + (D) 13.95 10.20 Paperboy 7.95 5.95 Elite 11.00 Spin Dizzy 9.95 7.25 The Planet 9.95 7.00 World Cup Carnival ..... 7.00 Transact 29.95 9.95 Equinox..... 9.95 7.25 Paperboy...................9.95 Invosat... 29.95 9.95 Rock & Wrestle.. 8.95 6.50 Heavy on Magic ..... 7.00 Sold A Million 2. .9.95 7.45 Spin Dizzy.. 9.95 6.95 Price of Magick. 9.95 7.00 Spitfire 40... 9.95 7.25 Price of Magick.... 7.00 Bounces... 7.00 Skyfox.... 9.95 7.45 Superbowl .... 7.29 Silver Service... 7.00 Bomb Jack. 9.95 7.00 Ping Pong.. 5.40 Rock & Wrestle............9.95 7.25 Paperboy.. 9.95 7.00 Turbo Esprit. 6.50 Silent Service (D) ...... 14.95 10.95 Tau Ceti. 9.95 7.25 Bomb Jack 7.95 5.50 Superbowl.................9.95 6.95 Tau Ceti (D)........... 14.95 11.95 Heavy on Magic 9.95 7.00 Psi Trading (D) .......... 14.95 10.95 Winter Games ........... 14.95 11.00 Starstrike... ... 7.95 5.00 Uridium...... 8.95 6.25 Elite .. 14.95 11.00 Scooby doo... 7.95 5.50 Freeze Frame...... 39.95 35.95 Way Of The Tiger.......... 9.95 7.25 Way Of The Tiger..........9.95 .... 9.95 7.25 7.25 Way Of The Tiger..........9.95 7.25 Fairlight......... .9.95 7.25 Bounces 9.95 7.00 Sam Fox Strip ............. 8.95 6.25 Heavy on Magic ......... .9.95 7.00 Amstrad Blank Disks .95 per 10. This is just a small collection from our stock. Please ring for more details. Mail order prices only. LARCLAARD P&P included. Overseas orders please add 75p per tape. Make cheques payable to: VISA C.P.S Visa/Access orders welcome by phone. CUT PRICE SOFTWARE Unit 6, Stort House, Riverway, Harlow, Essex CM202DW Tel: (0279) 24433 (24 hour ansaphone) 7.95 8.95 TINTORTTITIETTIVITIM The Explosive Joystick from Cheetah  Compatible with ZX Spectrum, Commodore 64, Vic 20. Amstrad, Atari, MSX, etc.  Four extremely sensitive ONLY fire buttons.  Uniquely styled hand grip. L O .95  Auto fire switch. Value at .75  12 months warranty. THE LATEST ABC FIGURE 98,258 C+VG IS THE BIGGEST SELLING MAGAZINE IN THIS INDUSTRY MANY THANKS TO ALL OUR READERS Great Prices include VAT postage & De s Export orders and tacos Cheetah MINARS Sodod Marketing CHEETAH MARKETING LTD I WILLOWBROOK SCIENCE PARK CRICKHOWELL ROAD ST MELLONS CARDIFF TEL CARDIFF (O222) 777337 TELEX 497455 "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES Present the following special offers to C+VG readers Our Price 88888 NONNON 5.95     O NON 6.75 6.75 6.75 6.75 7.50 Nos os a DESERT RATS MELTDOWN THE PRICE OF MAGICK ARNHEIM GHOST AND GOBLIN HEAVY ON THE MAGICK EQUINOX TURBO ESPRIT SABATEUR CRITICAL MASS LAN BOTHAMS CRICKET TO BRUKE SHOGUN GREEN BERET SKYFOX LORD OF THE RINGS WINTER GAMES DAMBUSTERS COMMANDO MINI OFFICE 2 WAY OF THE TIGER KUNG FU MASTER BATMAN RED HAWK THING ON A STRING 9.95 9.95 8.95 9.95 15.95 9.95 7.50 7.50 7.50 12.95 7.50 7.50 7.50 5.96 6.75 5.95 11.95 5.95 12.95 7.50 7.95 7.50 11.95 7.50 7.50 11.95 7.50 10.95 7.50 7.50 7.50 9.95 14.95 9.95 7.50 12.95 9.95 8 8.95 8.95 &88888888888888 O O O NOGOONNNNOSNO O O O O O N 05 03 05 on 8888888888888888 N   *** DISKS *** HITCHHIKERS (6128 or 8256) TOMAHAWK DISK MONOPOLY DISK ELITE DISK MOVIE TAU CETI STRANGELOOP + SPECTRUM PYRACURSE WORLD CUP CARNIVAL SPITTING IMAGES EQUINOX MANTRONIC IWO JIMA THEATRE EUROPE LAN BOTHAMS CRICKET DYNAMITE DAN DI THEIR FINEST HOURS FALKLANDS 82 PENTERGRAM PUB GAMES ARNHEIM TREASURE HUNT QUAZATRON BOMB JACK ELITE 14.95 COMMANDO LORD OF THE RINGS FAIRLIGHT BACK TO SCHOOL TOMAHAWK SWORD AND SORCERY SWEEVOS WORLD ROCK AND WRESTLE WHO DARES WINS 2 CYBERRUN GUN FRIGHT STAR STRIKE IT SOUTHERN BELLE MUGSYS REVENGE ARTISTII FIGHTER PILOT BLOCKBUSTERS GOLD RUN PING PONG THE PLANETS SPITFIRE 40 WORM IN PARADISE THE PRICE OF MAGIC SOLD A MILLION 2 SKYFOX BATMAN SUPERBOWL RED HAWK BIGGLES TURBO ESPRIT ALIEN HIGHWAY ENIGMA FORCE SABOTEUR CRITICAL MASS WAY OF THE TIGER STRIKE FORCE HARRIER GHOST AND GOBLINS EMPIRE QUESTPROBE THE ART STUDIO (OCP) UIE AR KUNG FU YOUNG ONES MOVIE DESERT RATS WINTER GAMES BEACH HEAD II B. MCGUIGANS BOXING KUNG FU MASTER HEAVY ON THE MAGICK REBEL PLANET CAULDRON II BOUNCES *** SPECTRUM 128 TITLES INTERNATIONAL MATCH DAY GLADIATOR 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE KNIGHT TYME SAMANTHA FOX BALLBLAZER HACKER THE MUSIC BOX ROCK N WRESTLE NODES OF YESODS SWEEVOS WORLD ROBIN OF THE WOOD 888888  FALKLANDS 82 TIGERS IN THE SNOW CRUSADE IN EUROPE SOLO FLIGHT DECISION IN THE DESERT ACROJET BATTLE OF BRITAIN THEATRE EUROPE DESERT FOX IWO JIMA BATTLE OF MIDWAY THE PRICE OF MAGICK LAW OF THE WEST SILENT SERVICE KNIGHT GAMES BOMB JACK 9.95 GHOST AND GOBLINS 9.95 LORD OF THE RINGS 15.95 BIGGLES 9.95 SPINDIZZY 9.95 COMBAT LEADER 14.95 HEAVY ON THE MAGICK 9.95 GOLF CONS SET CASS 12.95 QUESTPROBE 9.95 ROCK AND WRESTLE 9.95 SUMMER GAMES 2 BOUNDER FAIRLIGHT URIDIUM RED HAWK DOOMDARK REVENGE STARSHIP ANDROMEDA GREEN BERET STAR QUAKE HARD BALL SOUTHERN BELLE CAULDRON II BORED OF THE RINGS ELITE INTER SOCCER 14.96 PS15 TRADING COMPANY 9.95 WORM IN PARADISE AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT 8.95 SUPERBOWL 9.95 WAY OF THE TIGER 8.95 WINTER GAMES SKYFOX 9.95 FIGHTER PILOT 9.95 SPITFIRE 40 9.95 SABOTEUR 8.95 ANY MASTRONIC TITLE ANY MAD RANGE TITLE QUICK SHOT II JOYSTICK ACE COMBAT LYNXS IMPOSSIBLE MISSION MERCENARY YIE AR KUNG FU F15 STRIKE EAGLE 14.95 COLOSSUS CHESS 9.95 *** DISK SOFTWARE +++ ALTERNATE REALITY GRAPHIC ADVENTURE GHOST AND GOBLINS ARCHON II 14.95 CRUSADE IN EUROPE 19.95 WORLD CUP CARNIVAL 14.96 ALTER EGO LORD OF THE RINGS 19.96 KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT DECISION IN THE DESERT HITCHHIKERS GUIDE PSI-S TRADING COMPANY 14.95 TEMPLE OF ASPHAI TRIOLOGY 14.95 ELITE 17.95 WINTER GAMES SUMMER GAMES II 14.95 EXODUS (ULTIMA III) 19.95 SILENT SERVICE 14.95 FLIGHT SIMULATOR II KNIGHT GAMES 12.95 BATTLE OF BRITAIN 14.95 6.75 5.95 7.50 *** BBC ELECTRON +++ COMPUTER HITS 2 COMMANDO BBC/ELECT BOMB JACK BBC JET SET WILLY YIE AR KING FU BBC/ELEC EXPLODING FIST BBC ELEC REBEL PLANET LAN BOTHAMS CRICKET BBC/ELEC THE PRICE OF MAGICK BRUCE LEE BBC AIRWOLF BBC 9.95 oi o o o o o 88888888888 o o os  7.50 9.95 7.50 6.75 5.95 6.75 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.95 6.75 7.50 &&&& 6.75 6.75 7.50 7.95 o   8888888    ONNONCE 88888888 *** ATARI TALES OF BETA LYRA THE PRICE OF MAGICK STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER WORM IN PARADISE MERCENARY SIDE WINDER SPY V SPY SPY HUNTER 95 do a 00 00 OONNNNNNN 5000 SES &&&&&&&&&&&&&&& as 19.98 14.95 14.95 NNNN 88888888888888888888 88888888 ttt DISKS TIGERS IN THE SNOW-D TALES OF BETA LYRA-D THE PAWN (ST ONLY)-D HITCHHIKERS GUIDED ALTERNATE REALITY KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT-D KORONIS RIFT-D SIDE WINDER-D SUMMER GAMES I-D 12.96 12.96 24.96 29.95 17.50 19.95 14.96 24.98 14.95 88888 19.98 Red os os os edo os osos o SSSSSSSS 12.95 17.50 29.96 12.95 12.96 14.96 11.95 11.95 14.95 12.95 45.00 10.95 12.95 888 8.95 7.96 6.75 THE WAY OF THE TIGER GUNFRIGHT KNIGHTSHADE MACADAM BUMPER BOUNDER THE PRICE OF MAGICK ZOIDS ANY KONAMI CARTRIDGE 9.95 798 9.95 8.95 17.95 7.50 7.95 os 7.95 COMMODORE 64 WORLD CUP CARNIVAL SHOGUN BOULDER DASH 3 GLADIATOR CORE GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR PUB GAMES 7.50 8888888 +++ AMSTRAD + BOUNDER SPINDIZZY WORLD CUP CARNIVAL MONOPOLY TOMAHAWK BOMB JACK ELITE # 00 Oso oi oi o 8888888 7.50 7.95 7.50 *** 016 *** COMMANDO BOMB JACK WORLD CUP CARNIVAL FRANK BRUNOS BOXING JET SET WILLY LAN BOTHAMS CRICKET DIRTY DEN 8888888 8888888 19.95 12.95 Access and Visa card hotline ring: 01-631 4627 For MAIL ORDER please send cheque/PO to: S.C.S. (Dept C+VG) PO Box 394 London N15 6JL Telephone: 01-800 3156 P&P included in UK. Europe add l per tape. Elsewhere at cost. SAE for list. If you would like to pick up your discount software please bring your copy of this advert to: Compucentre, Unit 5 221 Tottenham Court Road London W1 (near Goodge St tube station) Open six days a week 10.00am 18.00pm Credit card orders despatched same day subject to availability. * Please ring to confirm availablity. "


"C+VG JUL sobtware REVIEWSOI CORE 000000 In the past few weeks there has been a flood of game compilation tapes onto the market. Are they value for money? the bargain they seem? C+VG investigates and asks are the V.F.M. -that'r Goodies on the Spectrum include Beyond's Psytron, Blue Max from US gold, and Melbourne House's Mugsy. It also include's Elite's Fall Guy but we prefer not to talk about that. The automatic Beau-Jolly also has its response to Computer Hits Volume 2 out on getting anything up to the Commodore, Spectrum, 30 games for a few quid is Amstrad, BBC B and Electron, that they're a great bargain. But price .95. are they the big deal they at firstW e took a look at the BBCB appear? Or is it case of software collection and Amstrad. The houses desperate attempt to BBC tape includes make money on games that Micropower's Frenzy and Jet weren't successful first time Power Jack and Kissin' Kousins round? from English Software. First up is a gigantic offering Perhaps the best is Superior's guards who try to stop you checking out. Titles include The from Argus 30 games on two Starstriker, a version of the leaving. First you must find Chrysalis, arcade action in the cassettes. Titles on the arcade classic Moon Cresta. your way through the dozens of cabbage patch, Drain Mania, a Spectrum version include Jet Hewson's Technician Ted and wards. fairly standard platform game, Set Gerties, 3D Tunnel, Carpet Micromega's Codename Mat The Commodore 64 \"TRIO\" is and The Genesis Project, deep Capers, Meteor Storm and are the stars of the Amstrad equally testing with a choice of space action. Perhaps the most Blood and Guts. The list seems collection, ably supported by Chopper, Kayak or Merlin. interesting game is Flip. endless. Superpipeline 2, Tasket and The first game, \"Chopper\" Although it's not much fun to Perhaps the best known of Moon Buggy, Anirog. concerns a mighty helicopter look at, it's good fun to play. It's the bunch is Jeff Minter's Remember Creative Sparks? gunship which has set out to a two player graphical strategy Gridrunner, a game with plenty They've been a little quite anihilate the enemy base. It game in which hidden words of zip and a lot of zap. recently but now they've needs a combination of both must be uncovered. And Commodore owners bought out two compilations of courage and skill to reach it as And last, but by no means aren't left out. Argus has also the Sparklers range of budget both man and machine are least, Gremlin Graphics has put together another package of games, price .95. taxed to the limit. come up with probably the two 30 Games for them. Titles The Spectrum \"TRIO\" Kayak is a canoe simulation best quality compilations of the include many of those in the features: Desert Burner, which requires first class lot with 4 Zzap! Sizzlers and 4 Spectrum collection plus others Quackshot and St Crippens. presence of mind to negotiate Crash Smashes. As you may such as the Quicksilva's In Desert Burner, a fast the course ahead. have guessed all the games Schizofrenia, a fiendishly scrolling arcade game, the lader In the third game, Merlin have received high praise in a difficult game to play. of a group of freedom fighters needs assistance in conquering rival magazine. Both packages offer good travels through the night on the the powers of evil that he The Commodore 64 games value. It could be months before Desert Burner, a powerful gun encounters in this original are Who Dares Wins II you finish all these games. carrying 200 mph road bike. His arcade game. (Alligata), Wizard's Lair (Bubble Off the Hook, the charity aim is to deliver top secret plans Anybody still got a VIC 20? Bus), Drop Zone (US Gold) and package put together by Electric to the other resistance Well grab .50 and splash out Thing on a Spring (Gremlin). Dreams, offers even better members without getting on Llamsoft's Viva Vic The Spectrum games are Spy value for money ten games caught by his enemies. collection. Included are Hunter (US Gold), Night Gunner for .99. And at the same time Abductor, Gridrunner, Traxx, (Digital Integration), Dun you can ease your conscience \"Quackshot\" to survive in the Andes Attack, Laserzone, Darach (Gargoyle) and Alien 8 about the many hours spent next of the three games, where Matrix, Megagalactic Llamas, (Ultimate). hunched over your computer by a revolution of clockwork ducks Battle at the Edge of Time and Good fun, and excellent the fact that all money raised by gets out of hand. Hellgate. value at .95. All Off the Hook goes to the St Crippens is the world's Fancy a bit of arcade fun for are well worth Prince's Trust for the worst hospital. Escape is only .50? Then Astro Cade on the buying. rehabilitation of drug addicts. possible if you can beg, steal or Spectrum from DDS Software borrow new clothes to fool the could be for you. The six games on offer are Simeon, Caverns SCORE 1001490 MEN:1 MICH:035000 D'Or, Bomber, Zombier, Luna Rover and Alien. The Complete BBC from Audiogenic is also worth .95 .99 .95 .95 .50 .50 .95 .95 .95 C+VG VALUE FOR MONEY TABLE 30 Games, Argus Off the Hook, Electric Dreams Computer Hits Vol 2, Beau-Jolly Trio, Creative Sparks Viva Vic, Llamsoft Astro Cade, DDS The Complete BBC, Audiogenic 4 Zzap Sizzlers, Gremlin Graphics 4 Crash Smashes, Gremlin Graphics FREDDIE MEETS THE OYNAMIC QUO "


"FACULTY ENTERPRISES LTD. EMPIRE SOFTWARE Our RRP Price 9.95 7.50 RRP Price AMSTRAD Rambo They Sold a Million VoII Friday the 13th Ship of Doom Planet of Death Space Hawks 3D Invaders Hamer Attack A View to a kill 9.95 7.50 8.95 6.75 7.25 5.50 7.25 5.50 8.99 6.90 8.99 6.90 8.99 6.90 8.99 6.90 COMM 64 Superbowl They Sold a Million Vol II Flyer Fox (Speech) Friday the 13th Missile Comm. Plot 64 Automania A View to a Kill RRP Price SPECTRUM 9.95 7.50 They Sold a Million Vol II 9.95 7.50 World Cup Football Friday the 13th 7.99 5.50 Ship of Doom 8.95 6.75 3D Bat Attack 7.25 5.50 Flight of the Dark 7.25 2.99 Cosmic Cruiser 7.25 5.50 Black Hole 8.99 6.90 A View to a kill 9.95 7.50 7.00 5.50 8.95 6.75 6.50 3.99 6.50 3.99 6.50 3.99 6.50 3.99 6.50 3.99 8.99 6.99 P+P inc. Please make cheques + PO's payable to: FACULTY ENTERPRISES LTD. 29 Rutland Court, Ponders Court, Ponders End, Enfield, Middx. EN3 4BJ Telephone: 01-805 8054 SAE for list SPECTRUM RRP Price Superbowl 9.95 740 AMSTRAD Paper Boy 7.95 5.90 Paper Boy Barry McGuigan's Boxing 7.99 5.90 Alien Highway Tau Ceti 9.95 7.45 Equinox They Sold a Million II 9.95 7.45 World Cup Carnival Three Weeks in Paradise 9.95 7.45 Saboteur Saboteur 8.95 6.70 Bounder Commando 795 5.90 Computer Hits Rock 'n' Wrestle 8.25 6.70 Knight Games Streethawk 7.95 5.90 Rebel Planet Gladiator 7.95 5.90 Heavy on the Magick Skyfox 8.95 6.70 Tau Ceti Ping Pong 7.95 5.90 Movie Sir Fred 9.967 40 Zoids Superman 9.95 7.40 Sold a Million 11 Turbo Esprit 8.95 6.70 Fair Light Knight Rider Tomahawk 9.98 745 Bomb Jack 7.95 5.90 3D Boxing Alien Highway 7.95 5.90 Ping Pong Green Beret 7.95 5.90 Lord of the Rings Art Studio 14.95 11.00 Elite 14.95 11.20 Cyberun 9.95 7.40 The Goonies 7.95 5.90 Starstrike 1 Sai Combat Laser Basic 14.96 11.20 Commando Winter Games 7.95 5.90 Ace Spec Drum 29.95 28.70 Kung Fu Kadd Computer Hits 6 9.95 7.40 Thai Boxing Guntright 8.95 6.70 Steve Davies Snooker Pole Position 795 3.50 World Cup Camival Bomb Jack 7.96 5.90 Bomb Tack Roller Coaster 6.95 5.20 World Cup The Young Ones 7.95 5.95 C16 Classics 2 Surf Champ 11.95 8.25 Southern Belle 7.963 .90 They Sold a Million 9.95 7.40 Critical Mass 8.95 6.75 Sweevo's World BBC Battle of the Planets 9.95 7.40 Paperboy Hunchback the Computer H Adventure 7.96 5.90 Rebel Planet Quazatron 8.95 6.70 Commando Equinox 9.95 7.40 Bomb Jack World Cup Camival 9.95 7.40 Moon Cresta Comet Game 7.96 5.90 Lord of the Rings Hocus Focus 8.96 6.70 Bruce Lee Back to the Future 9.95 7.40 Hyper Sports (D) Scaletrix 9.96 7.40 Yle ar Kung Fu RRP Price COMMODORE 8.95 6.70 V 7.95 5.90 Inter. Soccer (Rom) 9.95 7.40 Ping Pong 9.95 7.40 Undium 8.95 6.70 Hard Ball 8.95 6.70 Eidolon 9.95 7.40 Knight Rider 8.95 6.70 Kung Fu Master 9.95 7.40 Desert Fox 9.95 7.40 Bomb Jack 9.95 7.40 Milcie 8.95 6.70 Mercenary 8.95 6.70 Yie Ar Kung Fu 9.95 7.40 Lord of the Rings 9.95 7.40 Back to the Future 8.96 6.70 Tigers in the Snow 8.95 6.70 Bounder RMS Titanic 8.95 6.70 Sci Fi Trader Co. 15.95 11.90 Quest Probe Way of the Tiger Superbowl Zoids Our Battle of Britain RRP Price Zapp Sizzlers 6.95 5.20 Computer Hits 1011 9 Game Killer (Rom) 9.95 745 Fairlight 7.95 5.90 Critical Mass 7.95 5.90 Green Beret 7.95 5.90 Hunchback Adventure 9.95 7.45 Little Comp. People 7.95 5.90 War Play 6.95 5.20 9.95 7.45 RRP Price 8.95 6.70 14.95 4.99 B.95 6.70 8.95 6.70 9.95 745 9.95 7.40 8.95 6.70 9.95 7.40 9.95 7.40 8.95 6.70 8.95 6.70 9.95 7.45 8.95 6.70 15.95 11.00 9.95 7.45 9.95 7.45 9.95 7.45 9.95 7.40 9.95 7.40 9.95 740 9.95 7.40 9.95 7.40 8.95 6.70 9.95 7.40 9.95 7.40 .95 7.40 14.95 11.20 9.95 7.40 8.95 6.70 8.95 6.70 8.96 6.70 9.95 7.40 7.95 6.50 7.95 5.90 C16 SUPA SOFT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE R.R.P. Price R.R.P. Price 6.50 650 RRP 9.95 14.95 Our Price 695 10.00 9.95 Our RRP Price 1305 900 Spectrum Bomb Jack Heavy on the Magick Cyberun Alien Highway Ping Pong Starstrike 2 Quazatron Sam Fox Turbo Esprit 8.95 8.95 500 5.00 6.00 5.00 SER Commodore Bomb Jack Empire Unidium Starstrike Ping Pong War of the Tiger Electra Guide Sabateur Green Beret Computer Hits 10 Sold a Million 2 Zap Smashes Silent Service PSI-S Trading 895 8.95 6.00 6.00 6.50 600 6.00 6.00 6.50 5.00 RRRRR Our MSX RRP Price All Konami Rom's 9.95 7.45 Manic Miner 9.95 745 Knightlore 9.95745 Coll (Konami) 9.95 7.45 Way of the Tiger 9.95 7.45 Alien 8 7.95 5.90 Computer Hits 6 15.95 11.90 Ping Pong (Konami) 9.95 7.45 Bounder 12.95 10.90 Zoids 9.95 7.45 Night Shade 9.95 9.95 9.95 995 14.05 10.00 905 695 14.95 10.00 9.95 6.95 14.95 10.00 9956.95 14 95 10.00 1495 10.00 19.95 14.95 9.95 6.95 7.95 9.95 17.96 9.95 9.95 7.99 17.95 8.95 8.95 9.95 6.50 Amstrad Spin Dizzy Spin Dizzy (disk) Alien Highway Alien Highway (disk) Tau Ceti Tau Ceb (disk) Way of the Tiger Way of the Tiger (disk) Monopoly Monopoly (dist) Surabour Surabour disk) Elite Idisk) Cyrius (2) Cues Cyrius (2) Cues (disk) Winter Games Winter Games (disk) Batman Sorcery + Idisk) Green Beret Price of Magik Heavy on the Magick Spitfire 40 (disk) 4.00 7.75 14.95 7.45 7.45 5.95 14.95 6.70 6.70 7.40 6.50 6.50 6.00 6.50 6.00 6.00 6.50 Batman Rock n Wrestle Sold a Million 2 Zoids Sabateur War of the Tiger Green Beret Superbowl Titanic Price of Magik Hotshots Crash Smash Empire Biggles Who Dares Wins II 6.50 650 8.95 8.95 14.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 7.95 9.95 995 6.00 6.50 10.00 6.50 6.50 6.50 5.00 6.50 6.50 9.95 1495 8.95 14.95 6.95 1000 6.00 1000 Superbowl Psi-S Trading (disk) Biggles Heavy on the Magick Knight Games War Play Teanic Price of Magic Sam Fox Fairlight 9.95 9.95 995 9.95 795 6.50 6.50 6.50 6.50 5.00 9.95 9.95 9.95 14.96 6.95 6.95 6.95 10.00 Please send SAE for a catalogue of games for Spectrum, Commodore and M.S.X. and all the other computers. Please make cheque's or postal order's payable to Empire Software. EMPIRE SOFTWARE 118A Palmers Road, New Southgate, London N11 ISL Telephone enquiries welcome. Phone: 01-361 1933 Spitfire 40 9.95 6.50 Cheque and PO (Sterling only) made payable to Discount Software, Dept 3, 210 Nicholls Tower, Harlow, Essex. RELEVANCE IS THE TOUCHSTONE OF ADVERTISING EFFECTIVENESS INGENIOUS JUSTIFICATION OF CONCEPT TO CLIENT Strutt, Whelk, Incorporated Practitioners in Advertising Poxer, Souse THE ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS: Pal STARTLING, OFFBEAT IMAGE BASED ON POLAROID SUPPLIEDS BY CLIENT Vicky Our creative boys have really cracked it this tame! We ditched the robot pics and went back to the dog with I think tremendously exciting results The copy s lucid, obliquely conveying an overt product come on over 85% the dog to the less user-friendly imales of robots battling acrons extraterrestrial landscapes dor pated by high-tech of adventure game enthusiasts preferred It researched tremendously well larvtalerasties and laser-carved ices an culture ressybolising CHALLENGE TO CONSUMER'S CRAVING FOR MEANINGFUL INTERACTION ...AND DONT FORGET THE PACKSHOT!! This dog would like you to buy THE SNOW QUEEN Why? Because whether you're a Golden Retrievela dogged adventure game freak, The Snow Queen is al unusually intriguing illustrated text adventure. Based on Hans Andersen's sinister fable, The Snow Queen challenges you to free a young boy from the forces of evil. But there's a catch: you're not directly in control of events. To succeed, you'll have to guide and advise Gerda -a headstrong young girl who's not easy to direct. The Snow Queen has been programmed by St Bride's, who have a use and a growing reputation for clever adventures of surprising ingenuity. Mosaic's dog, The Offog, who has His Master's degree strophysics, loved it. And down at the Tailwaggers' Club rreed it takes more than anat INVITATION TO SELF-ACTUALISATION THROUGH PRODUCT CONSUMPTION THE SNOW QUEEN HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN Adventure gate by ST BRIDE'S THE SNOW QUEEN An unusually intriguing illustrated text adventure Program by St Bride's Available for Spectrum and Commodore Release date: May 1986 Price: .95 (cassette pack) COMPUTER MOSAIC PUBLISHING Distributed by WHS Distributors, S Joho's House, East Street, Leicester LEI GNE (0533 551196), available seconde from stores of class and distinction, and soon to be the subject of a major advertisement "


"CHVG JUL software REVIEWS O KICKSTART Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Gremlin Graphics Price: .95 Keep on running, good old Monty Mole is back on the run bidding for freedom. This time it's on the Amstrad and a very creditable performance it is. The plot of the game should now be familiar to most people. After Monty's breakout from Scudmore Prison, Monty must make his way to freedom through hideouts and secret locations. To help him on his journey Monty has been given a \"freedom kit containing 21 useful items. These range from a compass and a bottle of rum to a floppy disk. But only the correct five items will get through to the end of the game. So pick wisely. Scattered throughout the 49 screens are gold coins which Monty must collect to make himself a comfortable nest egg. And, of course, there are various nasties lurking around to make sure Monty's freedom is cut short. Basically Monty on the Run is platform game in which he Thust cope with ropes, ladders ete to get to new locations. The graphics, as one would expect on the Amstrad, are very bright and colourful. In the sound stakes, the Commodore version still has the edge. Monty's success keeps on running for Gremlin. A hit. Graphics Sound C+VG Value HIT! Playability 000 Machine: Commodore left and you'll slow down, right 128 and you will speed up. Up will cause a wheelie, and pressing Supplier: Mastertronic the fire-but Price: .99 (disc only) jump. I must admit that the idea of At first, everything seemed reviewing a motorcycle game easy. Only a few jumps and didn't exactly fill me with hazards to negotiate. Rapidly, excitement. However, the though, life became much program didn't seem to take the trickier, and what with buses, usual age to load as other discs, gravel, spring-boards and and the first screen, offering mystery traps, I seemed to lots of options, was very spend more time on the deck professional. than on the bike! Some vaguely familiar music Each obstacle must be tackled plays in the background, as you in a different way. select the number of players It's possible to crash in a quite and joysticks, and the three spectacular way. A particular courses to attempt. In all there favourite is falling off the back are 27, and you can choose of the cycle, and letting it roll from three groups of eight, after away. I could repeat that one at trying your hand at the practice any time I wanted...! circuit. The game proved rather The basic idea is very simple. frustratinig after a time. If you You take you and your bike to fall off half-way through an the Kickstart trials, and have to obstacle, you may have to ride progress through the various quite a long way before courses in as little time as re-joining the course. possible. Obviously, going Graphics are good, and the flat-out won't get you very far. speed is acceptable. It's a good And you'll soon realise that if game, and is instantly you are going to finish in any enjoyably, as there's no need to half-decent time, it's necessary learn obscure joystick or to get some pretty fine control keyboard instructions. on the joystick! When you begin play, you are Graphics \"greeted\" by some pretty dire Sound music from the TV programme. Value Movement is quite straightforward; push the stick Playability 00000 22.00000 VOO L BLAZE Machine: Amstrad way. Oh well, I suppose its just Supplier: Activision one of those things. Basically the game goes like Price: .99 this: You are in the future and Ball Blazer the smash hit on the taking part in a sport that is so Atari and the C64, has jumped popular, that being champion is onto the Spectrum, but I think the greatest honour you could some of it got messed up on the ever get, I means this sport is CLASSIC INVADERS Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Bubble Bus Price: .99 Bubble Bus, who are famous for Starquake and Wizard's Lair, have jumped on to the budget software bandwagon and are releasing a 'Mini Bus' range. Classic Invaders is one of the first. Quite simply, Classic Invaders is Space Invaders, plain and simple. But what really makes a a difference is the colour, jingles, and playing speed. This game is much more fun to play than the original arcade game, don't ask why, it just is! At the price of .99 it's great value, and it may prove more fun than some of the more expensive releases. Graphics Sound Value Playability SCORE: 00000 HI-SCORE: 01000 big, man! All you do is control a special craft which can glide along at incredible speeds, pick up the ball and shoot it into the opponent's goal. Apart from the obvious distractions like your opponent, the goal posts move so you can't hang about to long on a shot. The maximum you can score is ten points, but as your opponent scores, so your score decreases. You win by getting more points than he does. The graphics seem to have gone a little off balance. There are screen glitches (lines which cut accross the screen), and the sound is also nowhere near as good as the original. In my opinion, unless you really loved the original, steer clear of it. Graphics Sound Value Playability vo vou THE HOUSE "


"C+VG JUL software REVIEWS   Machine: Amstrad/ Commodore 64 Supplier: Virgin Price: .95 Urgh! It had to happen eventually, didn't it? The extraordinarily thick book by James Clavell, featuring lots of ritual killing and men in skirts has been converted for \"lucky' Commodore and Amstrad users. Although one suspects that perhaps the TV serialisation provided more inspiration...) The Amstrad version was reluctant to load, and it was necessary to try the second side of the tape before the title page appeared. Continual attempts, though, produced the desired effect and the program was ready to go. The game is icon-driven, and by positioning the cursor over the appropriate picture you can manipulate objects and talk to people. The aim of the game is persuasion. Some of the more ignorant types will continue to fight though. The Commodore version is by far superior to the Amstrad, with better sound, steady graphics, and far nicer text. The 64 version has good music and sound effects. It's also easier to select an icon. Although the game is entertaining, it didn't hold my interest for long. If you had the time to sit down and plan your game activities properly, it would appeal more. SHOGUN.. 186 CHVG HIT! AMST CBM to move around the land and collect followers. Once you have achieved the necessary quota, you'll be informed of your mission (ie, the rest of the game). While you travel around, text will flash up on the bottom of the screen to inform you of events which have been going on in your absence (quite handy for keeping tabs on your friends and foes when you are doing something else! Should a character decide that he doesn't want to join your merry band, you can always try a little physical Graphics Sound Value Playability ON 00 00 10 e OO 00 Machine: Amstrad both events', what do you mean character) seems to appear as old Speccy. BOTH events? Quickly reading blocky as blocky can be; except Come on Epyx, pull your Supplier: EPYXUS Gold the instructions I found the for the graphics of the woman Amstrad programming finger Price: .95 (Cass). explanation ! who does the ice skating out. .95 (Disc) It would appear that you have Overall, if you've seen the to load in two events at a time C64 version and are going to Graphics When Winter Games came into what a pain for tape users. buy the Amstrad one because Sound the C+VG offices I grabbed it The graphics for each event you think it's the same, don't. quick, I love the C64 version of are excellent, well the Value Even the little ditties don't the game, and if my information backdrops anyway. The man (or match up to those on the good won lar matchnin to those on the good P lavability was right, I was in for a treat! Winter Games, is one of the best sport simulations because everything is timed movement. There's no smashing the joystick to pieces. Various controls are needed in different events, which makes a change, and each one requires skill and not just brute strength. When the game had loaded, I thought great, I'll be an American athlete, but oh no!!, you couldn't pick your country! Having got over this, I found out that you needed to redefine the keys in order to use the joystick. That seems a bit daft. Then I read the other options, the first one said \"Compete in 23.68 "


"UTER REPAIRS IMOW OPEN HOUR VideoVeui HOW TO GET YOUR NEW OPEN SPECTRUM REPAIRED FOR ONLY .95 VIUEO Vault \"INTERNATIONAL\" REPAIR CENTRE LATEST TEST EQUIPMENT WHILE YOU WAIT SERVICE CALL FOR APPOINTMENT ... WITH ALL THE THE NO. 1 REPAIR CENTRE IN THE U.K. OTHERS FOLLOW SPECTRUM (only) KEYBOARD REPAIRS .95 THE CHEAPEST AROUND When you send your computer to us we don't only repair it, we check the colour, sound, memory, keyboard, feet, in fact fully overhaul your computer for as little as .95. The price includes all costs including return post, packing and insurance, plus VAT, three months no quibble guarantee with each repair. TRADE REPAIRS MOST WELCOME WHY NOT COME AND VISIT US AT OUR NEW 2,500 SQ. FT. WORKSHOP, YOU CAN EVEN HAVE A CUP OF COFFEE WHILE YOU WAIT. TEN REPAIR SERVICE ARE YOU ANOTHER CUSTOMER fed up waiting weeks for your estimate? ORDERS WELCOME PLUS NOW 5 FREE EXCITING TOP GAMES WORTH OVER DON'T .00 (M.R.P.) WAIT WEEKS FOR YOUR QUOTE TO ARRIVE. We repair all computers within 24 hours, the quickest in the business, or a \"while you wait\" service. 20 minutes from Manchester. * While you wait service including * Five top games worth .00 for you to computer spare parts over the counter. enjoy and play with every Spectrum repair. * All computers fully overhauled and fully * We repair Commodore 64's, Vic 20's, COMMODORES tested before return. Commodore 16's and Pius 4's. * Fully insured for the return journey. * The most up to date test equipment * NOW REPAIRED * * Fixed low price of .95 including post, developed by us to fully test and find all Commodore 64, C16's, Vic 20, packing and VAT. (Nota between price faults within your computer. of really up to .00 which some of our * Keyboard repairs, Spectrum rubber key Same Day Service. competitors are quoting). boards only .95. Call us for details or purchase * Discounts for schools and colleges. * 3 month written guarantee on all repairs. VIDEOVAULT HEALTH WARNING!!! the I.C's from our D.I.Y. section Sending your computer to any other Repair Centre can seriously Damage its Health TRADE HOW TO SEND OFF YOUR COMPUTER Need your computer repaired fast? Then send it now to the Number Just parcel your computer in suitable packaging enclosing just .95 for your One Repair Company in the U.K., or call in and see us at our new fully Spectrum repair, or .00 for your equipped 2,500 square foot workshop, with all the latest test Commodore 64 repair. Enclose your name, equipment available. You are more than welcome. address and telephone number and a brief description of the fault. We will repair your computer while you wait and help you with any of your Remember you can also charge the repairs technical problems. Commodore computers repaired for only .00. to your Access card. Please note we give you a 100% low fixed price of .95 which includes return post and packing, VAT, not a between price like some other WHAT OUR CUSTOMERS THINK! Repair Companies offer. We don't shock you with repair bills .00 upwards. We don't just repair the fault and send your computer back, * Highly delighted, the best service around. (Mr. Adamson, Manchester) we give your computer a:I sent my computer to a competitor of your sin Manchester, what a mess they made of it. Iam glad FRED OVERHAUL WITH EVERY REPAIR WE DO:there are Companies like yours around, honest and highly skilled. I would recommend you to all my We correct colour, Sound, Keyboard, Check the loading and saving friends. An excellent job. (Mr. Warran, London) chip. Put new feet on the base if required, check for full memory, Check I visited your premises at Christmas. In a space of all sockets including ear/mike and replace where needed. one hour visited your workshop, saw my computer being repaired and tested and discussed All for an inclusive price of .95 including VAT, all parts, insurance my problems with your Technicians. I don't know and post and packing. No hidden extras whatsoever. We don't have to how you do it at the price. (Mr Gregory, Birmingham) boast too much about our service as we have thousands of customers * Amazing service. I received my computer back from all over the world highly delighted with our service. A first class within 48 hours of sending it to you. I couldn't believe it. reputation for speed and accuracy. Don't forget, we are only twenty (Mrs J. Walters, Scotland) minutes from Manchester City Centre so why not call in, have a coffee I would like to thank all your staff in the help they with us and see your computer being repaired. gave me in recommending to me the spare parts needed to repair my keyboard. (Mr. Peterson, Cardiff) GLOSSOP GOT 1st PRIZE FOR SPEEDY REPAIRS (Commodore User Magazine) BEST SERVICE BEST PRICES! || "


"Tand COMPUTER SPARES WELCOME ACCESS PURCHASE OF SURPLUS STOCK! SPARES FROM OUR D.I.Y. SECTION WHY NOT PURCHASE THE SPARES FOR YOUR COMPUTERS FROM US. THE ONLY MAIL ORDER COMPANY SELLING SPARES. Same day delivery service on receipt of orders. You can order by Access card or call at our Reception to collect. Due to a cancelled export order, we CANCELLED have available a EXPOR ORDER KEYBOARD MEMBRANES ORDER large selection of components at a special price for the L ORD Spectrum computer direct to the public Due to unlimited space we are not able to show all our spares available, so please call us and we will happily give you the current price on all your spares for the Spectrum/Commodore range. We also have some spares available for the ZX81 NOW! Spectrum keyboard membranes .50 plus .50 p&p Spectrum Plus keyboard membranes .90 plus .50 p&p ZX 81 membranes .00 plus .50 p&p NEW astranics KEYBOARD .50 TEMPLATES plus .50 p&p TRADE REPAIRS most welcome ZX81 SPARES NOW IN STOCK (2006Eeee LCCCCCCCCCC LEELELEECE ELECEME EXTENSION RIBBON SPECIAL OFFER! Gun Shot II Rapid Fire Joystick and Interface complete outfit. Normal recommended retail price .95. if purchased together. Special offer of only.50 including p&p Joystick available as separate item.95 plus Interface available as separate item .00 plus .50 p&p. Rom ZBOB CPU RUBBER MAT .50 plus .50 p&pe 56 Way ribbon cable to extend your ports for your peripherals .95 plus .50 p&p .50 POWER SUPPLY .00 plus .50 p&p Spectrum replacement power transformer suitable for all make of computer .95 plus .50 p&p plus .50 p&p ULA .50 plus .50 p&p ) 4116 rams .00 plus .50 p&ps COMMODORE POWER SUPPLY SPECIAL OFFER! Commodore replacement power transformer .00 plus .50 p&p Why not upgrade your ordinary Spectrum into the fantastic DK Tronics typewriter keyboard for only .50 including fitting. VAT and return post and packing. Normal recommended retail price .95. Replacement printed DK'Tronics key sets .50 including post & packing. ORDER NOW! mark Video Vault D.I.Y. CORNER SPECIAL OFFER! SPECTRUM SPARES COMMODORE SPARES Z8OB CPU 3.00 4116 Rams 1.00 6526-C.L.A. ZTX 650 0.60 6510-Processor ZTX 213 0.60 6581 Sid Chip Power Supply Transformers 9.95 906114-House Keeper ULA 6C001 16.50 901225 Graphic Room Rom 16.50 901226-Basic Rom Keyboard membrane 901227-Kernal Rom Spectrum 5.50 6569-VIC 23.00 Keyboard membrane We regret we cannot 4164 Rams-Memory 3.00 12.90 Spectrum Plus show all the components Metal Templates 5.50 Power Supply available. Just give us a 6.50 Keyboard Mats 29.00 Transformers call and we can quote you ZX81 membrane 5.00 All our prices include VAT but please add over the phone, delivery Spectrum Service Manuals only .00 .50 on each order to cover post, packing and handling charges. including Spectrum + model by 1st class post. VIDEOVAULT HEALTH WARNING!!! Sending your computer to any other Repair Centre can seriously Damage its Health8888888 Why not upgrade your 16K Spectrum to a 48K for as little as .95 including VAT post and packing. If you would like us to fit the kit for you, just send us .95 which is a fully inclusive price to cover all costs including return postage. Full fitting instructions supplied with every kit. Issue 2 and 3 only. FULLY REPAIRED AND TESTED ON MOST ADVANCED TEST EQUIPMENT IN EUROPE! Video Vault VIOEVau 140 High St. West, Glossop, Derbyshire, England Telephone: Glossop (STD 04574) 66555/67761\"  Copyright Videovault Ltd. No. 140586 Own NORMAL RECOMMENDED RETAIL PRICE SSPECIAL RECOMMENDED .00 OFFER 5 GREAT FREE GAMES YOURS FREE WITH EVERY SPECTRUM REPAIR "


"MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS ATTENTION AMERICANA SOFTWARE OWNERS DID YOU SPECTRUM Who Dares Wins II...... 5.95 Bounder D1 .... UT . 7.50 Fairlight... ................... 7.50 Rebel Planet............... 7.50 Back to the Future ...... 7.50 Elite 11.25 Equinox ... ........ 7.50 Uridium D3...... 6.75 Zoids...... ... 5.95 Grph. Ad. Creator ..... 19.50 Kunk Fu Master D1..... 7.50 Lord of the Rings ...... 12.50 Bounces. 7.50 Law of the West.. 7.50 Commando................. 7.50 Wid. Cup Carnival ...... 7.50 Bomb Jack D1 7.50 Back to Skool.............. 5.25 Core....... 6.75 Twister .................. 5.50 Rock 'n' Wrestle ....... .. 6.75 Time Trax 7.50 Way of the Tiger .......... Tomahawk 7.60 Pyracurse 7.50 FA Cup .......... 5.95 Saboteur.. 6.75 Dynamite Dan Il.. 5.95 PSI-5 Trading D1....... 7.50 Roller Coaster 5.25 Action Reflex 5.95 Fairlight D3 6.75 Mikie. 5.95 Kirel.. .6.75 Starship Andromeda .. 7.50 Yie Ar Kung Fu 5.95 Silent Service .7.50 Green Beret... 6.75 Spitfire 40 7.50 Cauldron II 6.75 Zzap Sizzlers. 7.50 Ping Pong 5.95 Spitting Image ....... .5.95 Tigers in the Snow...... 7.50 Gladiator 6.75 Terror of Tranoss.... 5.95 Off the Hook ............... 7.50 Desert Rat .7.50 Snow Queen. .. 7.50 Biggles... 7.50 Superbowl 7.50 Nexus 7.50 Tubular Bells 5.95 Art Studio 12.50 Toad Run..... 5.95 Archon II D3.. 7.50 Turbo Esprit... 6.75 Tantalus. .6.75 Golf Construction D1 9.95 Sky Fox.... 6.75 Laser Genius... 12.50 Hocus Focus 6.75 Movie.... 5.95 Bobby Bearing. ... 5.95 Red Hawk 7.50 Way of Tiger ...... 7.50 Killer Tomatoes .......... 5.95 Empire....... 7.50 Bomb Jack 5.95 Raise Titanic.......... 7.50 FA Cup 5.95 COMMODORE 64 Spindizzy D1 .... 7.50 Twister 5.50 Elite...... ............ 11.00 War Play........ 5.95 Heavy on Magick..... 7.50 Exploding Fist D1 ....... 7.50 Doomsdark Revenge 7.50 Sam Fox Striptease.... 5.95 Summer Games II D1 7.50 Price of Magick... 7.50 Batman...... 5.95 Sky Fox D3..... .. 7.50 Questprobe .......... 7.50 Comet Game... 5.95 Mercenary D3..... .. 7.50 Ghost'n' Goblins......... 7.50 Paper Boy....... 5.95 Terromolinos D3......... 7.50\"V\"...... .. 7.50 Crash Smashes. 7.50 Zoids D1 ....... .6.75 Silent Service D1 ....... 7.50 Sai Combat 5.50 Summer Games I D1 7.50 Core................... Green Beret 5.95 Winter Games D1 ....... 7.50 Grph. Adv. Creator... 19.50 Price of Magick 7.50 Sold a Million ... 7.50 Cauldron II........ 6.75 Quazatron. 6.75 Who Dares Wins......... 6.95 Cup Carnival D1 ......... 7.30 Bounder 7.50 Commando... ......... 7.50 Southern Belle............. 5.95 Hocus Focus 6.75 Skool Daze 5.25 Snow Queen... 7.50 Biggles.... 7.50 Enigmaf Force... 7.50 Laser Genius ....... Strike Force Harrier .... 7.50 Mugsy's Revenge ...... 6.75 Altered Ego Disk....... 19.95 Alien Highway............. 5.95 Rock & Wrestle D1 ..... 7.50 Shogun D3.... 7.50 Spindizzy 7.50 Roller Coaster ... .. 5.95 Nexus D3... 7.50 Red Hawk. 6.75 Ping Pong D3 5.95 Tau Ceti D3. 7.50 Core 7.50 Flintstones... 5.95 Knight Games D3 ...... 6.75 Kirel .. 6.75 Desert Fox D1 7.50 Spellbound. 2.99 Starstrike ll ... 5.95 Superbowl 7.50 Rebel Planet D1 ... 7.50 \"V\" ..5.95 Hardball D1 ... 7.50 Int. Karate.......... 5.95 Ghost'n' Goblins........ 5.95 Wild West.. 8.00 Samantha Fox...... 7.50 Empire ................. 7.50 Lords of the West....... 7.50 Batman. 7.50 Postage included UK. Please state which micro. Fast service. Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept CVG, 49H Sutherland Street, Victoria, London SW1. MAIL ORDER ONLY: Send for FREE list Amstrad, C16, MSX. D=Disks Available, D1 at .50, D3 at .50. ACCESS KEEP THIS! -7.50 If you did then you're the lucky winner of a free Americana product of your choice. If you didn't or your Americana game wasn't one of the many that included this outstanding offer then go out now and buy one there's a lot of them about. For those lucky winners simply indicate the Americana game of your choice in the space below and send it to Americana Software and we'll forward your free game by return. LICENSED TO THRILL U.S. Americana Software Unit 10. Parkway Industrial Centre Hencage Street Birmingham B7 4LY E GOLD MERICANA SOFTWARE Big Red has either stamped on my local newsagent or Mellissa has run off with him. Either way I'm having trouble getting hold of my monthly copy of C+VG. Please start me a subscription to Tick Box Computer & Video Games. U.K.  Europe  0 (Surface Mail) — Rest of World  (Airmail) Rest of World  01 lenclose a cheque/P.O. for . Please debit my Access/Visa A/C: Amount . Number Please help. Despurati Signed Expiry Date Signed Name Address Editor's Reply, I'm afraid Big Red can get a bit out of hand, and as for Mellissa well there's no accounting for taste. To ensure you don't miss a single copy of C+VG, why not take out a subscription. We guarantee that you'll receive 12 months' issues, posted direct to your door on the 15th of every month. Postcode Please make cheques payable to Computer & Video Games. Return to: Carl Dunne, C+VG, Magazine Services, EMAP, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Telephone: 01-251 6222. HISTROVE! COMPU +VDEO FREE INSIDE: BOOK OF ADVENTURE EXCLUSIVE WIN A METEOR PIN WEN EA.. THUNDERBI COMPUTER Pilot of the tu GAMES GAMES "


"C+VG JUL software REVIEWS 9 MU ALI? VOO Grahpics Sound Value Playability Spectrum Machine: Amstrad game isn't quite as hard to get Supplier: Digital to grips with. Well, not QUITE ... As with Fighter Pilot before Integration it, Tomahawk is amazingly Price: .95/.95 complex. (disc/tape) Taking off isn't too diffiult (it only took me twenty minutes to The new one from D.I. (hurrah!). work that out!) From that point It's 3D (whoopee!). It's by D.K. in, however, things become Marshall (cheer!). It's a much more difficult. You have helicopter combat game to take an awful lot of care (frenzied excitement!). Oh, and while flying. it features Lenslok. If you like simulations, (GuurrroooAAN! then you'll probably Dl are yet another company like this to invest in Lenslok. And here at too. C+VG we reckon that it's probably the most diabolically dreadful system ever invented. It's horrible, and we don't like it. We couldn't get it to work. And DI wouldn't give us an unprotected copy, which Den in protecting put this reviewer in an on the planet from absolutely FOUL invasion. mood. There are 32 doors on Happily, the planet and the activator though, locks were well disguised the and hidden. The Spike Punkoids, the best fighting mutoids ever developed, soon decided that they would need all the defences of their ship, their Machine: amazing instinctive cunning Spectrum and their six defensive weapons Supplier: systems. Quicksilva Your ultimate goal is the assassination of the deviant but Price: .95 in order to achieve this aim you Paul Hargreaves, the teenage will first need to open all 32 graphic genius who brought deadly doors by firing at and you Glass — the extremely hitting the lock activators pretty shoot'em up is back dead centre. Each time an with Tantalus a 1024 screen activator is opened, a door, epic starring Spike the Punkoid. somewhere in the Fortress, will Spike, as all those who have be removed. studied the History of the There are 48 different types of Universe will know, is a alien defenders with 16 genetically mutated creature different light patterns, produced by Punkoid randomly distributed around Development Corporation. the Fortress. Famed for their fighting Spike begins the game inside prowess the Punkoids are sent the Protonthrust craft but if on the most important mission you find an airlock you can exit of their, inhuman, lives—to the craft and Spike is revealed assassinate the last deviant in all his Punkoid glory. human being on this side of the There's no doubt that anti-matter curtain. Tantalus is a very pretty game A team of four Spike but like Glass once you've Punkoids have been sent to the enjoyed the graphics for a bit planet Tantalus to kill the you begin to realise that there's deviant but it isn't an easy task. not much to the actual game. A The planet is riddled with vast playing area is no caverns and hidden passages, substitute for addictive game known as the Fortress. The play. Ultimately like Glass deviant had used his time well the game gets a bit boring. Great graphics, nice hero but nothing that makes you want to come back for just one more go. ESO 32 Graphics Sound Value Playability Many Bounty Hunters have tried and many have failed to reap the rewards and each has suffered the same fate death. Equipped with a sophisticated pulse laser and a Mk.1 autoscan camera, your Mantronix can be controlled from your combat craft. While Machine: viewing the planet's landscape and transmitting the pictures Spectrum back to your craft, it can also Supplier: Probe collect valuable items and enter Software into combat. Price: .95 You must find and terminate the four criminals before their No, this isn't the game of the humanoids kill your Mantronix. group of the same name. However, the Mantronix must There's not even a hint of hipalso find eight power cubes hop in the music. But never which are necessary to reverse fear, Probe have still come up the direction of conveyor belts with an extremely playable and essential as fuel for your game. homeward flight. Mantronix looks very Death is never very far away Ultimate-ish. 3D diagonally on Zybor and you'll need a cool scrolling graphics with lots of head and a steady joystick to little bouncing, spinning deadly survive for very long when you alien creatures to avoid and first start playing. many objects to collect. Underneath the main play It might also remind you of screen you see your score, lives Gunfight just a bit. But so what? left, the number of power cubes The basic idea is this. You are activated and a status readout an interplanetary bounty hunter about the criminal you are and your job is simply to hunt currently hunting on the rightdown wanted criminals. To help hand side. This tells you his you do this you have a name, crime and how many Mantronix a well armed law credits you'll earn by bagging enforcement robot. A sort of him. Another similarity with Dirty Harrydroid. Anyway, at Gunfight. the start of the game you find If you yearn for the days yourself on the planet Zybor when Ultimate created GOOD the baddies' hideout. games then this will provide a Zybor is a sparse planet, good substitute. Very playable, populated by an advanced race of humaniods, who are Graphics programmed to protect four planetary criminals — called Sound XTRO II, Ariel Head, Max Porka Value and Yokohama. Playability SOVINYI TANTRONIX UUT 01 00 39 CREOSOO D01200 DO "


"CHIG SURVEY very month Computer + Video Games tries to bring you the most comprehensive, informative and fun-packed look at the world of computer games. Most of the time we're pretty pleased with the way things turn out. But we're not that big-headed to think everything is perfect. That's why we're asking you to tell us what you think of C+VG. Go on, tell the truth, we're tough enough to take it. What we want you to do is answer the following questions and send them to Computer + Video Games, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. The survey is divided up into sections based on the regular features in the magazine. Most will involve straightforward Yes/No answers with space for a brief comment. But there is also the chance for you to give your opinions on the magazine in general. So help us to help you by taking part in our survey. TOP 30 SOFTWARE CHARTS Are the charts of any interest? YES/NO Comment MAILBAG/PEN PALS Should more letters be printed? YES/NO Are those that are printed interesting? YES/NO Comment REVIEWS What do you think of the reviews? Comment HOT SHOTS/HALL OF FAME Could these two features be improved YES/NO Comment NEWS/HOT GOSSIP What do you think of the news and Hot Gossip? Comment FEATURES C+VG publishes a variety of different features, letters from America, films, videos etc. Do you enjoy these? YES/NO Do they have a place in a computer magazine? YES/NO What other sort of features would you like to read? BUGHUNTERS CARTOON Do you enjoy the comic strip? YES/NO Comment MAPS Are these useful? YES/NO Comment DEAR BUGHUNTERS Is the Dear Bughunters column and telephone service useful? YES/NO Comment GENERAL Do you prefer the new look C+VG to the old one? YES/NO Comment IDEAS CENTRAL Are the hints, tips and pokes useful? YES/NO Comment Is there anything you would like to see in the magazine that isn't in now? LISTINGS Are the program listings interesting to you? YES/NO Comment What other computer magazines do you read? Besides computer games, what other hobbies or interest do you have? ARCADE ACTION Do you like Arcade Action? YES/NO Should it be longer? YES/NO Comment Name Address ADVENTURE What do you think of the Adventure pages? Comment "


"MEMAD 3 \"... have you ever seen an arcade adventure in which the hero has to drink stout ...?\" Zzap 64 EFDEERE 88% COMMODORE 64 SCREEN Seirizar SOFTWARE In this arcade comedy a mild-mannered diver, Gormless Gordon is set upon by buxom bulging Myrtle, the Mermaid with a face that sank a thousand ships. Thrill to the music, quake at the terrors of the deep, boldly go where no man has gone before, and discover hidden wonders that will make your knees quake and have you reaching for your scuba gear. FEATURES An extensive underwater landscape including a wrecked ocean liner. submarine caverns and a sunken city. Numerous puzzles to solve and objects to collect and use. A \"nutty\" musical soundtrack which continually changes to accompany Myrtle through the varying locations. Detailed fully animated cartoon style graphics in full colour. Mail order: Electric Dreams Software 23 Pond Street, Hampstead London NW3 2PN Available for: Commodore 64 Cassette Commodore 64 Disk ZX Spectrum 48K Amstrad CPC Cassette Amstrad CPC Disk (.99) (.99) (.99 (.99) (.99) ELECTRIC DREAMS SOFTWARE, 31 CARLTON CRESCENT, SOUTHAMPTON, HAMPSHIRE S01 2EW. TEL: (0703) 229694 "


"se For 48k ZX Spectrum and 128k ZX Spectrum (in 48k mode) CASSETTE = .95 For mail order send a cheque/postal order to Hewson Consultants Ltd. Order by credit card by sending your Access/Barclaycard Number, and enclose a specimen signature. Don't forget to enclose your name and address. GSH Penetrate the Portals of Pyracurse Probe the evil of the Inca curse discover the lost tomb of Xipe Totec, the Sinu God. Adopt the characters to manoeuvre through the depths and darkness of tombs and crypts. Guide the tired and emotional Legless O'Donnell, the drunken reporter, archaeologist Professor Roger Kite, fiancee to the provocative Daphne, and the mischievous dog Frozbie, in their battle to save Daphne from the devastating curse of the ancient South American God Xipe Totec -Their success depends on you... Pyracurse is a unique development featuring an isometric 3-D projection with full hidden object removal and high speed multi-directional scrolling. Another fantastic adventure brought to you by Hewson. 56b Milton Trading Estate, Milton. Abingdon, Oxon. OX14 4RX Hewson Consultants Ltd As part of our continuing development of innovative software we are always happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication. HEW SON "


"Knight Games... ...bet you can't beat a good Knight! Knight Games brings medieval combat to life on Commodore and Amstrad computers, featuring One/Two player action, superb animation, brilliant hi-resolution graphics, eight specially composed medieval-rock tunes and selectable skill levels. Sunroton T. EIGHT DIFFERENT CHALLENGING EVENTS Michert grosswoitt Phalan an mustaff UL Doll PULLE Available on Disk and Fast Load cassette for Commodore 64/128 and Amstrad computers. Screenshots shown are from the Commodore 64 version of Knight Games. GAMES A ENGLISHA ENGLISH E.UNLALO COMMODORE AMSTRAD 64/128: 464/664/6128: Cassette $8.95 Cassette .95 Disk &12.95 3\" Disk $14.95 SOFTWARE 1 NORTH PARADE, PARSONAGE GARDENS, MANCHESTER M60 1BX TELEPHONE: 061-835 1358. TELEX: 8950511 ONEONE G. Ref: 14797001 DISTRIBUTED by U.S. GOLD 021-359 8881 I SOFTWARE ENGLISH SU: RE ENCUSH SOFTWARE EN STRE ENCLISH SOF I SOFTWARE ENCUSH BUT REENCUSH SOFTWARE EN TWARE ESTARE TSH SORU SOF RESTWARE ENGINEEN "


"TTT Wargaming has always attracted an enthusiastic following. Tactics, strategy and the romance of history are combined to create a fascinating pastime. But now a new ingredient is creeping in the computer. Dr Stephen Badsey, formerly of the Imperial War Museum and a researcher on the BBC's Soldiers series, ponders on the future of wargaming with computers. He also takes a look at the latest computer war games on the market. There's a story doing the rounds about a Russian diplomat who bought a space invaders game in Washington and discovered it had a more sophisticated guidance system than the one used in Soviet missiles ... It may even be true. Regardless, in the last five years it is not only real wars on which the computer has begun to make an impact. The computerised wargame has definitely arrived. Sadly, there have been fewer than three hundred years in the last three thousand when there has not been a war somewhere in the world. To ignore cars is to ignore about half of humans history. War \"games\" are a good way of showing what happens in war, and give full scope to amateur generals, without the misery and danger that all wars involve. No one ever got killed at a computer keyboard. What makes computers so useful in simulating modern war in particular, is that many computer games, even the arcade variety, come originally from concepts intended for weapons systems. In the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, for example, the Israeli tankmen knew all about the new generation of wire-guided anti-tank missiles such as the Russian \"Sagger\", but believed they were too complex for the Egyptian troops to use. But the Russians had simplified the Sagger's controls down to a screen, a joystick and a firing button. It was space invaders for real with the Israelis as the target. The computer wargamer often receives the same kind of information, in this way, as his real-life counterpart. Most of modern strategic command consists of sitting in a room or tent, or ship-at a desk and issuing orders by keyboard on the basis of written or spoken messages electronically communicated. The computer games fraternity has already established its own particular branch of wargaming, in flight simulators. These can now provide quite realistic handling characteristics for everything from a World War one biplane to a modern high-performance fighter. They will only improve as computers with larger memories continue to be more widely used. Air combat takes place in \"real-time\" encounters of only a few seconds, in which quick reflexes and a \"feel\" for the controls are vital. A continuous update, of the sort that the computer provides directly onto the screen, is by far the best way to represent this. The same is true of radar information to the attack centre of a warship or submarine. Land warare has been neglected in simulators so far. There has been a simplified tank simulator running in arcades now for years, but no one has developed the idea further. The main difference between a simulator and the real thing, apart from some simplification, is that you sometimes get less information than if you were really flying a plane. You can't feel the lurch which says you're in a power dive. In a really sophisticated program like the Microprose F-15 Strike Eagle the plane actually seems to handle slightly differently as its fuel tanks empty. Flying this simulator, I've taken a near-miss from a surface-to-air missile and the computerised blast has blown the plane upside-down! It's a pity Microprose have no writers for the Spectrum in this country. In terms of quantity, quality and availability they are the best producers of computer wargames around at the moment. The traditional wargame started over a hundred years ago as a form of training for European armies. But modern wargaming really started in English-speaking countries about twenty years ago, and has grown into a major hobby with its own books, magazines, conventions and figure-manufacturers. There are, broadly, two main types of game. First, tactical games played with model soldiers or ships, or aircraft on realistically modelled terrain, which can be very attractive indeed to look at and fight over Secondly, strategy games which involve, notionally, thousands or millions of people and are played on boards representing general maps. (There are other types of wargame, such as committee or role-playing games in which computers would not be much help — no program can tell you, for example, the attitude of a crusading knight towards religion.) The problem with the main types of game is that they usually have very elaborate rules, needed to cope with simulations many times more complex than chess. Every wargame-as any wargamer will tell you is a balance between realism and playability. As rules get more involved so more and more time is spent reading the rule-book and \"playing the rules\", rather than fighting the war. One solution is to throw away the rules altogether, and have instead an umpire or panel of experts making judgements on what is likely to happen. The trouble with this method is that it can become a ritual for re-inforcing an established view on which \"authority» is always right. Its adoption by armies at the end of the nineteenth century led, directly, to some of the better disasters of World War One. It looked, even a few years ago, as if the problem of playability could never be solved. Now, the computer may be on the way to solving it. If the rules are kept out of sight and under control by the program then the player is free to concentrate on the battle. This is particularly true of the strategy wargame. The dominance of the hexagonal-grid boardgame (rather more in the United States than here) has led to such games being stuck in a \"hex-shaped rut\", with immensely complex rules and playing times of more than a day. At an almost visible rate the computer game is now replacing these hex boardgames, scoring over its rival in several important respects. On a computer the game can be saved, if necessary several times, and picked up again at a later date. It is possible to play a challenging game solo against the machine. Most importantly, with a computer program, genuine hidden movement is possible. When chasing the Bismark in the North Sea or Rommel in the Western Desert, guessing where to look is the most important part of the game. In this country there are very large areas of computer use which have not been touched by the commercial firms, and it has been left to wargamers to write, and even market, their own programs. However good computers may be for twentieth century strategy games they cannot -so far-match the visual appeal of figure games in earlier periods. There is little contest between a coloured square on a computer map and Napoleon's Old Guard in all its glory on the wargames table. A number of \"games assistance programs\" have, however, been written for figure wargames on a table, with the software replacing the rule-book. As long as the computer knows how far formation has moved and from where it started the program can keep track of how much ammunition has been fired, how tired the troops are, and how well they think they are doing. The big advantage of the computer system is that the player will tell him only the Black Watch look unsteady\", not that they have just lost three morale points. Even very complex calculations of ballistics in artillery and naval gunfire engagements take only a few seconds using games assitance programs. One system, which plays with very cheap 5mm figures, is popularly known as «five hundred pounds of hardware and five pounds worth of troops\", but the cost of a program is often no more or less than that of a rule-book. If games assistance programs are the wave of the future, that wave has not yet broken. Even the most popular set of commercial wargames rules in existence, the Ancient Warfare rules of the Wargames Research Group, has no version for the "


"computer. Apparently they have been tried, but the program took longer to cycle through than using the rule-book! We will probably have to wait for 128K to become more generally used before more wargames rules are converted to software. As memories increase it will be possible to provide a map on the screen with better graphics, either as an overview or from the point of view of one location. At the moment it seems possible to get good graphics or a sophisticated rules-mechanism into 64K, but not both. Present programs cope well enough with the modern \"empty battlefield\" where the enemy, and even your own forces, are glimpsed occasionally, if at all. They should have no difficulty with battlefields before the twentieth century, where vision was often broken by random clouds of dust and smoke which are at the moment very difficult to represent by conventional wargaming methods. The best suggestion I have heard for a computer point-of-view simulation is for a general on a horse, with the horse's ears sticking up at the bottom of the screen as a reference point. The computer can also provide, not a general's viewpoint, but that of a common soldier. The shoot-em-up arcade games such as Commando and Rambo deserve their popularity, and are great fun to play, but no one thinks that they represent reality (any more than the film did, and I enjoyed that too). To give a soldier's experience it would easily be possible to adapt an adventure game program such as Melbourne House's Lord of the Rings. The under-armed, shy and often hungry hobbit, whose chief problem is avoiding danger and staying alive, is a more truthful version of the warrior than Commando. By the very nature of a computer wargame it is impossible to change the program. Commercial writers of rule-books insist that even quite small changes in their own rules can unbalance play quite badly, but if faced by an absolutely duplicate the features of the unreal situation you can always original battle, and the software ignore the rules for a moment writer then has to translate it into and sort it out. On the computer, program terms. As someone who if a crucial regiment suddenly frankly has trouble progamming attacks the wrong enemy, or his video recorder sympathise, heads in the wrong direction, but there's no other way to get a there is nothing you can do. good computer wargame. Arguably, this is good training for Fortunately, wargaming does the realities of war. Alternatively, attract a significant number of it is bad program writing. computer scientists. Software houses seem to be Professionals, people who use losing their notion that wargames as training exercises, wargamers will tolerate anything. try to make them as real as the Although I believe the firm real thing. The rest of us also mentioning no names — which need to enjoy playing the game. marketed exactly the same For this reason, a wargame will program for the Battle of Britain always contain more action, more and the Battle of Waterloo is still simulated danger, and more in business. The most dishonest targets than the realities of war excuse I have seen for a computer dictate. Not for the wargamer the wargame which bore no two hour standing patrol in the resemblance at all to the battle freezing cockpit of a Sopwith after which it was named was Camel, or the twenty months on a that it represented \"a simulation, cavalry post without seeing the not a duplication, of history\". By enemy, or the four years' training far the best of the recent to be killed on the first day of programs are written by action. Realism is the key to collaborations between wargaming, and the computer is conventional wargamers and now making a major contribution programmers, or by a to improving it. But don't ask for programmer who knows about too much realism. The people wargames. The game is designed, who enjoy a war are few indeed. within the limits of playability, to "


"TOTAL TO THEIR FINEST KOUR TYPE START 446 363 469 Machine: Spectrum early days of August 1940 Mer 11 He-111 445 Supplier: Century against computer-controlled 225 Communications German raids. As casualties 281 mount, depleted squadrons are Jur88 363 Price: .95 replaced by novices, who, if they The Battle of Britain looks like a survive, become veterans in their conjuring trick. A German force turn. Limited warnings, becoming of over two thousand aircraft more limited as the radar which had fought three victorious stations are hit, and a variable campaigns, including seven game speed which requires hundred excellent single-seat instant decisions in the midst of fighters, contested the skies of the battle recreate superbly the southern England with half that atmosphere of the time. number of British planes, of Each day of the game takes inferior design except for a few about forty five minutes to play, Spitfires, flown by mostly at the end of which the player is inexperienced pilots using summoned to meet Churchill, Swansea docks (with their obsolete tactics. And the British and either applauded, told to machine guns?). This is sad, won. carry on, or — more likely — because on the rare occasions Many factors, including luck, fired. The program is rather too that the game goes beyond its played a part in the victory, but ready, in fact, to tell the player he first few days it presents a real the key was the organisation of has lost, apparently on the basis challenge to strategic planning. Fighter Command through sector that if three German raids get The virtues of having an control stations, linked to radar, through the damage is too great. experienced wargamer like and it is these which are the Unfortunately there are exactly Nicholas Palmer design this focus of John Wilson and four types of raid which cannot game are apparent in its is undoubtedly one of the best Nicholas Palmer's excellent be stopped no matter what you subtleties and attention to detail. wargames I have ever played. game. The player controls the do to them, including the fifty The program also has a small Graphics squadrons of Ten and Eleven ME109s without bombers which I bug which means that some is Sound NA Group (Twelve Group in the north chased all the way to Wales (drop care is required when saving the being too distant to help) as tanks?) where the last surviving game. Value sector-sized units through the six caused \"crippling\" damage to Despite this, Their Finest Hour Playability IMAIS 7 CEVG WAR GAME REVIEWS 1 FALKLANDS 82 DECISION IN THE DESERT Machine: Spectrum/CBM64 Supplier: PSS Price: .95 (tape) Falklands 82 is the latest war game offering from PSS, a campaign game of the land forces in East Falkland from the forces in East Falkland from the Presumably in compensation, British landing to capture of Port there there are no supply rules at all Stanley. and the whole of East Falkland is The game was put out before treated as passable terrain for all much of the research on the units, including Argentine Falklands had been published, armour. and as a result some details, This complete disregard of notably the Argentine order of realism would not matter so battle, are slightly wrong. But much if the playing mechanism this is nothing compared to the was a good one. In fact it is slow errors in the overall conception moving and unimaginative, with of the game. In order, they say, to the battalions behaving like improve playability, the authors chess pieces. have \"intentionally understated\" I wish I could find something the poor fighting abilities of the Argentine troops, who will only years ago it would have been a start to surrender when all the remarkable programming major settlements on the island achievement. As it stands it is an have been occupied by the insult, not only to anyone who British. Once the British have buys it but to those who fought in landed they may not again use the Falklands War. sea transport or land in another location (making the Fitzroy Graphics landing impossible) nor have they Sound any helicopter lift capacity, which the game designers thought Value made things too easy for them. Playability 2 Machine: PREPORE FOR BATTLE CBM64/Atari/Apple IIBM Supplier: US B:30 AM DEC 9, 1940 OVERCAST Gold/Microprose Price: .95 (disk) From the same design team as Crusade in Europe this game uses the same playing mechanisms, this time very much more successfully. Again, the graphics, the briefing booklet and the range of interlinked PREPARE FOR BOTTLE! scenarios offered are all 5:15 AM DEC 9, 1940 OVERCAST excellent. The war in the westem desert from December 1940 to December 1942 still attracts considerable attention and controversy from old generals and new historians. In a virtually uninhabited wasteland, a handful of highly mobile units, each side short of supplies and with little c alled war in its purest form. chance of reinforcements, fought Decision in the Desert provides high speed encounter battles as the five most interesting battles if they were fleets at sea, with the of the war, including two which prize the oilfields of the Arabian deserve far more attention than Gulf. A single regiment of tanks, they usually get. a weapon now coming into its own, could mean the difference Graphics between victory and defeat. Sound Desert war encouraged the unorthodox, the enterprising, and Value even the foolhardly. It has been Playability NA OMO "


"DESERT RATS CRUSADE IN EUROPE GE REPARE FOOTTLE Machine: Spectrum/CBM64 Supplier: Cases Computer Simulations Price: .95 (tape) This is the best of the three desert war games reviewed this month. Written by R. T. Smith, it has the same graphics style and extremely straightforward playing mechanism as his earlier Arnhem. But as the author says, it is far from being just \"Arnhem in yellow\" and is in some ways a better game. Desert Rats' choice of battle sadly misses out O'Connor and starts with Rommel's first appearance in March 1941. It then offers the short, doomed, Battleaxe offensive (a good way to learn the game), Crusader, and Gazela. Oddly, it then jumps to Second Alamein, although its scale and mechanisms are not really suitable for this battle. Intelligence is limited to showing the position of enemy units but not their composition, but completely hidden movement is not possible. The order-thenmove system makes this a very good two player game, but as an opponent this program isn't even Montgomery. It defends well but is vulnerable to encirclement and will not initiate attacks. The British can win at Gazala, for instance, by doing absolutely nothing. What makes this game outstanding is an extremely realistic command and control system, which does not prevent stupid actions but simply serves the player up with their result. Orders can be given to a division either as a body or broken down into brigades and regiments, so both concentration and dispersion are possible. But anyone who disperses his forces too much will find them being over-run. Similarly, failure to keep the elements of one Corps together in a reasonable way results in their running out of supplies at embarrassing moments. Desert Rats gives a real command-in-chief's view of the desert war. It comes highly recommended by the Royal Tank Regiment. And by me, as well. Machine: The graphics are beautifully CBM64/Atari/Apple IV/IBM drawn, with the screen changing colour three times a day for Supplier: US dawn, half-light and dark, and Gold/Microprose supply trucks rushing down Price: .95 (disk) major roads to reach the front From the designers of highly line units. successful tactical simulators The playing mechanism has, comes a less successful attempt however, several shortcomings. at a strategy game, covering the The player, in the position of major campaigns in north-west commander-in-chief, issues Europe from D-Day to the end of orders directly to each division or 1944. brigade in continuous The program is extremely good accelerated real-time of thirty value, offering scenarios on minute segments. This is not very D-Day to the fall of Paris, on the realistic. Having no intermediate race to the Rhine, on command means that divisionsMarket-Garden and on the Battle often get very jumbled, while with of the Bulge, each with between up to forty units to control two and four variants including simultaneously it is easy to forget the historical option. (For a real something. Also, since it takes test, try defending against the about twelve hours from the \"Hitler's Dream\" variant of the ordering of an attack to its taking Bulge.) The player is offered place, most of the playing \"day\" choices on joystick or keyboard is spent doing nothing. From control, icons or symbols, total or D-Day I took Paris in two limited intelligence of enemy campaign months (one month forces and a handicapping faster than the real Allies), but it system against an unequal took eleven playing hours to do opponent. and was about as interesting as watching paint dry. A game for the military purist, backed by a good historical account in the booklet and suggestions for further reading. Graphics Sound Value Playability {$%$ 15G+VG WAR GAME REVIEWS 2 toide NTER TO ONO S E NA Graphics Sound Value Playability WO co ILENT SERVICE screen provides identification and location of targets. Fire your torpedoes, then don't stop to watch them hit but dive and turn away. You will hear the explosions if you are lucky, along with the Asdic of the approaching destroyers and the crunch of their depth charges. All that is missing is the smell. An excellent wargame for those who place realism and tactics above thrills and firepower. The booklet also provides a good summary of the history and technical details of the campaign. Graphics Sound Value Playability ON Machine: quite incredibly realistic. CBM64/Atari/Apple/IBM Commanding an attack Supplier: US submarine requires patience, stealth, good anticipation, and a Gold/Microprose knowledge of when to run away. Price: .95 (disk) Submerged, your submarine is no From Sid Meier, creator of F-15 faster than the convoys which are Strike Eagle, comes a tactical its prey, and soon drains its game of US submarines seeking batteries. But on the surface in out Japanese shipping in the daylight it is very easy to spot. Pacific in World War Two. This is, Any attack brings the escort in effect, an underwater flight destroyers down on your position. simulator, and it is not an easy and you must evade them to game to play. The player survive. A patrol takes about two becomes a one-man submarine playing hours with three or four crew, and switching between separate engagements. From engine gauges, maps, periscope your first patrol you will be lucky and bridge takes a little practice. to return at all. Thoughtfully, the program The heart of the simulation is a provides this, allowing you to plotting map, representing the graduate from mock combats sub's radar, sonar and lookout against hulks off Midway Island, reports. This enables the player through set piece tactical to \"zoom\" in and out from situations to your first combat smaller to larger scales and so patrol. plan his attack as he goes. Once On patrol the simulation is close to the target a periscope ELLE "


"TIGERS IN THE SNOW KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT | WAR GAME NEWS F-15 The player will be able to command either the Royal Navy or the Bismark in the simulation, and can either play the whole action or one of a section of \"set battles\" between specified ships. MIR SEARCH HAT US Machine: CBM64/Atari for an ordinary board game. The Supplier: US Gold player is told on each move the movement and combat value, in Price: .95 (tape) terms of points, of his own and .95 (disk) the enemy's units, and is Machine: CBM64/Atari required only to make yes/no Supplier: US Gold decisions as to which units are to attack and move. The whole Price: .95 (tape) program, on both games, cycles .95 (disk) at the slow pace of a board game These two games are reviewed as well. Tigers in the Snow can be together as they are a very played by one or two players, special case. One is based Knights of the Desert by two notionally on the Battle of the players, or by a single player as Bulge, the other on the Desert Axis forces only against the War. But neither is, or pretends computer as the Allies. to be, a wargame. Rather, they These are both by no means are computer reproductions of bad games, any more than board games about war, which is Monopoly is bad for failing to not the same thing. simulate realistic business and The board game mechanisms, property speculation. established by firms such as Graphics Avalon Hill and SPI, of hex-grids, Sound zones of control, combat points and movement phases, are here Value simply transferred to the Playability computer screen. Graphics The program moves the units Sound by hex, and rolls the dice, while the rule booklet provides the Value player with complete rules as if Playability OUI OUI OUT C+VG WAR GAME REVIEWS 3 OOOOX In an effort to promote international understanding and harmony, MicroProse, the US wargames and Simulation Software House, is to update the section of F-15 Strike Eagle which deals with a raid on Libya. The purpose, says MicroProse, is to document some of the key events in the April 14, 1986 US air Also due for release from PSS is strike against Libya. The factsheet Tobruk on the Amstrad, price will provide background .95 on cassette and .95 on information and an updated map, disc. along with suggestions on how to Tobruk is a simulation of the use various parts of the F-15 breaching of the Gazala line by program's seven missions to gain the Axis forces in June 1942. insight into the recent raid. The The port of Tobruk was crucial in software program itself remains the North African campaign as a unchanged. major supply route. If the Allies lost \"Ever since the US/Libya conflict control of the port all supplies heated up earlier this year, F-15 would have to come via Strike Eagle and its Libyan scenario Alexandria some 500 miles have aroused intense interest form eastwards in Egypt. By taking the public and the media,\" says Tobruk, Rommel effectively forced marketing director, Fred Schmidt. the Allies back into Egypt, the only Bill Stealey, MicroProse's country left in Allied control president, who also is a former jet throughout the Mediterranean. fighter pilot and a US Air Force The player can command either Academy graduate, adds: \"The the Allies (British, New Zealand, April 14th raid is historically Australians, South Africans and significant and coincidentally bears Free French) or the Axis forces an uncanny similarity to many (Germans and Italians); the components of F-15 Strike Eagle's computer commanding the Libyan mission. We felt it would be opposition. useful to pass along this If playing the Axis (attacking), information to our customers so the objective is to gain control of they can use the F-15 software to the six towns featured on the map, better understand the experience culminating with Tobruk itself. The of a US military pilot on that day.\" Allied commander will obviously Bismark, which deals with the be trying to keep control of the hunting and eventual sinking of the towns and force the enemy into German Battleship by the Royal Submission. Navy in May 1941, is due out soon form PSS on the Commodore 64, price .95 on cassette and .95 on disc. Alan Steel the senior Wargames designer at PSS, says: \"The action was essentially one of hide and seek, and illustrates perfectly the Fog of War where neither side is clear about its enemies position or forces. It also reflects problems not normally seen in conventional wargames of limited fuel supplies, weather forecasts, admiralty interference and both the advantages and disadvantages of air reconnaissance.\" T! Es FREFEBE, 33 31220-6033: (O* * 8982 2OForensiFE!!! OPPCT: I&PPLIED "


"Ocean They solda MILLION They sold a MONSTER HITS IN BRUCE LEE Dla C ECE PSION match point GIANT PACK The  SQUAD *STRIKES AGAIN * SQUAD ALL THESE BLOCKBUSTERS TOGETHER ON ONE GIANT COMPILATION SPECTRUM .95 AMSTRAD .95 COMMODORE 64 .95 DISC .95 [COMMODORE and AMSTRAD] Stocked at Selected Branches of: WH Smith, Boots, John Menzies Woolworth, Greens, Laskys and Rumbelows ENTOMBED REPLACES KNIGHT LORE ON THE COMMODORE 64 from... SQUAD MORE FOR LESS 6 CENTRAL STREET, MANCHESTER M2 SNS TELEPHONE: 061-832 6633 TELEX: 669977 "


"What is a play by mail game? Well, it's like an adventure Starglobe your *FRETOBLE 11.48 chance to explore a but played by loads of people at once. And you don't need three dimensional a computer just a pile of envelopes and some first class cluster of stamps. BRENDON KAVANAGH is a PBM addict and here he 2,000 stars. brings you the lowdown on the best games around. AMOIL10.15 Play By Mail game is a game in which you captain a starship multiplayer fantasy played by in a three dimensional cluster of post. The player sends his 2,000 random stars. It is an open orders for his game position to the ended game with no fixed KABBAN 18.59 Game Moderator (GM). deadlines for orders. Moves are PSS 12.24 The GM then processes those processed nearly every postal orders by hand, computer, or a day, so you can play as often or FRUGREE 11.11 mixture of the two and sends the rarely as you like. KLASCICKA 4.51 result back to the player who then The basic game scenario is SVAVO 7.47 decides his next orders, and so on. that your homestar, Monde, The main difference between this which is located at the centre of and a normal computer adventure is the spherical cluster-radius PREB, 9.88 that the player's results depend upon 50 light years — has acquired the actions of other players as well interstellar travel. The autocratic UMUB V2.73 as his own orders. government, The Company, led CHEASNA 7.96 In PBM gaming you not only play by the paranoid Lord of Monde, fears the game but also engage in a spot surprise alien invasion and thus Wazzuragi selost 18.33 *MOBAUB5 12.19 of diplomacy. Players exchange seeks to explore and claim the stars game related letters making or of the cluster. breaking alliances, and so on. In my To do this, an exploration opinion, the diplomacy going on programme has begun. Many behind the scenes is often as starships are being launched with enjoyable as the game itself! There orders to set up a base on the edge SOUSSAP 6.86 is quite an art in making alliances of the StarGlobe at a suitable star a nnoying added by the work, feeding people false and to construct a Communications people. The very information in exchange for true, Array for scanning space in search of Empire Builder finds imaginative and witty and generally manipulating the other aliens. himself a group of stars, GMs. players to suit yourself. You are launched from Monde onclaims them and colonises their The turn reports are very There are about 30 games a pre-programmed course to take planets and administers his Empire impressive, although sometimes available, all fitting roughly into one you to the rim. You do not have to while protecting it from footloose marred by bugs in the program. or more of five main categories: follow your orders. You can choose Pirates. Merchants trade in all sorts StarGlobe costs .60 per turn to Science Fiction, Strategic, Tribal, to fly to the nearby stars and start of goods ranging from drugs to play. Start-up costs  and the first Role Playing and Logistical. To give playing in any of the variety of roles. advanced weapon systems, printout is free. (Time Patterns, 97 you some idea of what each category The Explorer seeks out new stars depending on what is in demand and Devonshire Road, Handsworth, is about, I will look at five popular and planets. The disloyal Pirate flies what is available. Birmingham B20 2PG.) games that were represented at the from star to star plundering The Xenobiologist is an expert on First British PBM Convention held in colonies, destroying claims, firing alien life. He seeks out alien GLOBAL SUPREMACY London during February this year. on peaceful starships and generally artifacts, ruins, and often the aliens Global Supremacy is a game new to STARGLOBE themselves. Finally, the Bounty the UK. It has been imported from Hunter is a loyalist character who America and is being run by StarGlobe, run by a company called attempts to destroy pirate ships for Mitregames using Apple Macintosh. Time Patterns, is a science fiction payment. Global Supremacy is, at heart, a war You don't have to select a role game involving battle strategy, from the start, in fact you don't even diplomacy, trade, economics and have to follow any single role you forward planning. can, for example, be both a Pirate The game is set on post World and an Empire Builder. War III planet Earth. The StarGlobe runs on a Sirius I superpowers have gone, much of the computer, and the software and data world is radioactive wasteland, and takes up an amazing 672 mega-bytes human achievement has had to start of storage media! The software all over again. You join the game as obeys the law of relativity, one of the 150 remaining nations. All conservation of momentum, etc and have developed their economy, there are quite a few complex technology and industrial base to an mathematical problems to be solved early World War Il level. At the start if you wish. of the game there are 75 player StarGlobe is only computer nations the others begin as assisted and much atmosphere is neutral provinces. Since resources 333 > > > "


"and food supplies are finite, war personal goals, watched over by the soon breaks out as nations grasp for mysterious Dr Vengeance who was the surrounding neutral areas and once a biochemist but now records the riches that they contain. the progress of his \"beloved The object of the game is to gain childen\". Global Supremacy, to defeat the You, the player, are the leader of other players. To do this you must a group of your own design which manage your economy, protect your may herd, hunt, fish or farm for a provinces, allocate your limited living it's your choice. You resources wisely, develop your generally set your own aim, a quest technology level and be successful for power and knowledge runs in combat. parallel to it. Global Supremacy is played using World of Vengeance could be a current world atlas all terrain called a poor man's version of features exist, as do most of the Global Supremacy, indeed it is in smaller islands. Only the political many ways similar. World of map has altered. As you develop Vengeance is played using an your technology level you can Ordnance Survey map of Britain. You research more modern units, manipulate your warriors, civilians, provided you've done research into herds of animals, and artifacts as the older units from which the new you wish. are derived (eg a missile frigate can World of Vengeance is a very only be researched if a missile interesting game, played in real patrol boat was researched before time with the real world, and it is it). proving very popular. It suits Combat in Global Supremacy is imaginative players very well — the quite complex and can only occur at more you put in, the more you get cities or when a patrolling unit out. (World of Vengeance is run by comes across a potential aggressor. Vengeance Games, 6 Rose Farm Resolution of combat is done by the Fold, Altofts, Normanton, W. Yorks GM. He considers such things as unit WF6 2NE). The set up and first two types (eg a patrol boat has little turns are free. Each turn thereafter chance against a destroyer), costs .50. information available to each side (using radar and, if available, SATURNALIA satellite systems), combat Saturnalia is a human moderated preparation orders (the destroyer fantasy role playing game run by may have orders to ram the patrol Sloth Enterprises. It began in 1984 boat without using any weapons) and and has become popular with the so on. fantasy gamers. The game is played Global Supremacy appears to be in Saturnalia, a large land mass in an exciting game with a lot of scope the northern hemisphere of a strange for interesting play. Sadly, it is an world. expensive game that could cost The far north is bitterly cold, the between  and  per month to south extremely hot. The climate of play, depending on how active you the lands between the extremes are are. If you want to join Global more hospitable, but the local fauna Supremacy then write to is not. Saturnalia was once united by Mitregames, 189 Balham High the Great Empire but it is now broken Road, London SW12 and they will let into independent groups of states, you know when a vacancy appears. towns and villages. You are a The rulebook can be bought, without character from one of these regions. joining, for . The Saturnalians are a religious people. Most of them believe in a set WORLD OF VENGEANCE of 14 gods and goddesses such as World of Vengeance is a tribal type Sahmen, the Sun God, and Haquar, game. It is a fairly new, human Goddess of Science and Magic. You moderated creation, run by may decide to follow one of these Vengeance Games. World of gods, all of them or none at all. Your Vengeance is set in Britain in the choice alters certain conditions late twenty-first century, 100 years within game vents, such as types of after a man-made plague practically magic spells that you can learn. wiped out civilisation. On the now Your character has six greener land of Britain groups of characteristics. They are Combat humans struggle toward their Ability, Magical Power, Vitality, Scouting Ability, Perception and mine, atomic mine, base and city Fame. hexes produce a variety of resources When you begin a game you are on a set basis; sea, swamp, forests, given 250 points which you must agricultural undeveloped and distribute among the first five wasteland hexes are virtually characteristics. useless; missile silo and rocket site Fame is acquired as you play. The hexes are used to launch nuclear higher the figure the greater your missiles and spy satellites; ability at that characteristic. Each radioactive, fortified and mined move, you are given a further 50 hexes are generally too dangerous to points to distribute among the attack. characteristics to replenish those The game develops well and you points used up by actions, or to usually have about eight turns to improve your current level. establish your defences before Saturnalia is run by Sloth running into other players. Enterprises, PO Box 82, Vorcon Wars is a good Southampton S09 7FG. The startup introduction to PBMing. package, rule book and first five Vorcon Games, 59 Juniper, Birch turns costs . Turns cost  each Hill, Bracknell, Berks RG12 4ZG. thereafter. .50 pays for the start up package and the first three turns. Turns cost VORCON WARS  each thereafter. Orders are Vorcon Wars is one of the most processed once a fortnight. popular and well established PBM Play By Mail is an exciting and games. It is logistical wargame run novel form of interactive gaming. on an Apple lle by Vorcon Games. Much cheaper than Play By Modem Vorcon Wars is about the cheapest games like MUD and StarNet, they professional game around today. It offer people of all ages an is set on the planet Vorcon, a interesting and generally not too circumnavigable world slightly expensive fantasy related pastime. If developed and defended by its you join a game, don't be put off by inhabitants called, surprisingly, the initial complexity of the rules. Vorcons. GMs are usually very helpful and The aim of the game is to conquer friendly, and will gladly answer any the planet, defeating the other 20 or questions you may have. You will so players. The planet is split evenly find that the game becomes clearer into hexes. You have a commander as you play it, anyway. Also, bear in who can move on to any of your own mind that it takes a while to get hexes, and a variable number of anywhere in a PBM game. Early turn men who can only move about the reports are always a bit sparse and it area on your printout. sometimes takes over five turns for There are a number of types of things to become more exciting than hexes, summarised here. bemusing! I look forward to meeting Agricultural developed, mineral some of you on some far off land in the near future or distant past! VENGEANCE Cundor "


"DO YOU WANT TO BE A HERO2 The result of unique co-operation between three ace software developers and the Biggles film production company, Biggles The Untold Story will knock you right out of the air! It's a multi-part arcade strategy game in which each part must be completed to reach your final goal. In the air, on the rooftops, on the ground, or in the trenches YOU CAN BE A HERO! Coming in May Commodore 64 .95 tape, .95 disk Spectrum 48K .95 tape Coming in June Amstrad CPC .95 tape, .95 disk Purnell Book Centre, Paulton, Bristol BS18 5LQ "


"As CHRIS PALMER says, there have been programs which promise to turn you into programming genius overnight since the ZX81 first emerged blinking into the light. Here we look at a couple of games programming utilities which may well give you a new insight into creating your very own mega-game. Chris looks at Activision's Gamemaker while IAN DUERDENE looks at Ocean's Laser Basic. And so we reach the present day and window, you simply have to point at the Activision's Gamemaker. It won't command you want and press the fire automatically turn your bank balance button. into a telephone number, but it will give the command is then added to your you a lot of relatively painless fun program. Any variables used in the proving that your games are better than command needs the name of a file on the the ones you can buy in the shops. disc. It simply pulls the appropriate So what is Gamemaker? Basically, it is filenames off the disc and displays them an easy-to-use programming language in the correct place in the command. that is even closer to English than Basic. When you get to the one you want, What's more, it is enclosed in a neat you just select it with the fire button. In window environment in which all you fact, the only time you have to touch the have to do is point at what you want keyboard is if you want to type in a with a joystick controlled cursor. comment or name a file when saving it. As if this isn't enough, it incorporates This does make for a very relaxed four sub programs which enable you to attitude to programming as you can lean design sprites, draw backgrounds, back in your chair/bed bath and create a compose music and create sound effects. game by merely moving a few fingers on For good measure there is a library of one hand! goodies created using the above for Down the right side of the screen are those of us too lazy to push a pixel or a list of options which let you run, editor tweak a tone generator. store your game. It also lets you into the There are limits to what sort of main menu, so that you can load the programs you can write using other parts of Gamemaker. Gamemaker. For instance, if you want to Editing and debugging your game is write an adventure, or something that also made easy. You can set up a trace has a scrolling background, forget it. on a certain variable and alter the speed Apart from that, the only limits are your at which the program runs. Once you own ingenuity. hunt down the bug, all you have to do is Worth bearing in mind is that point at the errant part of the command Gamemaker is at heart a programming and press the fire button. Then wiggle system, although the author, Gary the joystick until it looks right. Kitchen, has tried to make using it as I must admit that the ease of editing simple as possible. does tend to make you sloppy in the way For the rest of this review, I will take you program. You find yourself throwing you through the different parts of any old value into a program and Gamemaker. tweaking it later, rather than thinking about the right value to start with. Editor Among the example programs supplied in the library are Pitfall and This is the business end of the program, Megamania. Both of which play where you create the list of instructions reasonably faithfully to the real thing. It for what will be your game. At the top of almost makes you wonder why you the screen is a message window where parted with your hard earned cash for Gamemaker talks to you and you can the originals, if they were that easy to keep track of how much memory you do! have free. One of the nicest things about the Directly below this you have a editor is its sprite handling. For instance, pull-down window in which is displayed if you wanted an animated sprite to fly all the available commands for you to across the screen at 45 degrees and use in your program. report if it bumped into another sprite, By using an up and down arrow, the you simply program the following: commands, which are listed The x and y position where it starts, alphabetically, can be brought into view the direction you want it to go in, the and used. To transfer a command to the speed at which you want it to travel, the program area below the command speed which it animates and what other LASER BASIC GAMEMAKER Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Activision Price: $14.95 Since the start of the home computing boom there have been programs which purported to turn innocent users into millionaire game writers overnight. Naturally, lots of people bought these packages, but unfortunately, we don't seem to be deluged by overnight millionaires. The reason most of these programs failed is two-fold. Firstly they were usually very restrictive in what they let you actually program. You would get the option of writing a shoot-em-up or a shoot-em-down and maybe, for variety, a shoot-em-sideways. Great if you like shoot-em-ups. Secondly and more commonly — the programs were just higher level programming languages which meant our would-be millionaires were left struggling long into the night trying to understand the logic behind reverse polish notation. Or even how an IF... THEN... PERHAPS ... MAYBE statement applies to the task of exploding a space invader. 668 VERSUS "


"IF MEGAS14 HIT BASE THEN EXPLO 2 X POSITION =(X) EXPLO 2 Y POSITION =(Y) CLEAR BASE 1 EXPLO 2 ANIMATES ONCE EXPLO 2 ANIMATION SPD 30 STOP PROGRAM END IF BASE 1X POSITION = (X) JUMP TO LABEL LOOI sprites to look out for along the way. When you've completed and debugged your program you can either file it away for your own amusement or make a self-running disc (or tape) to send to your friends or enemies, which they can play even if they haven't got Gamemaker themselves. You can get up to some quite complex program structures if you want, as Gamemaker will let you write subroutines and look-up tables, along with setting up IF... THEN... OTHERWISE conditions. In operation, Gamemaker held its own very well. Some of the sprite movements were sometimes a little jerky, but this could often be cleared up by paying a little bit more attention to how the program was running. A couple of points I didn't like about using the editor were that you can only have two backgrounds (one on the tape version) in our game. The other was that although you could print characters to the screen, you couldn't define them, which means you're stuck with a limited and rather boring selection. Conclusion I found I had a lot of fun using Gamemaker and was quite surprised at how quickly I could get something quite professional looking up and running on the screen. Like any package of this sort, it does take some time to get used to, so don't expect to have your own version of Elite running the first time you use it. I think that anyone with a Commodore and an interest in games will get a lot out of it, even hardened programmers who could use it to knock up demos quickly to see how they feel. In all, a well thought out and presented product. By the way, if it does make you a millionaire, remember who told you about it! LASER BASIC Machine: Amstrad CPC 464/664/6128; Commodore 64/128; Spectrum 48K/plus Supplier: Ocean Price: Spectrum (.95); C64/128 (.95 tape, .95 disc); Amstrad (.95) tape, .95 disc). EXAMPLE PROGRAM This is a very simple program which should give you an idea of how easy it is to write games using Gamemaker. In it a spaceship flies from left to right across the screen, gradually descending. The player can move a laser across the bottom and fire bolts up at the spaceship. For every bolt that is fired and misses, the spaceship speeds up. SpriteMaker A fairly standard sprite editor this. The edit square on the left of the screen blows a sprite up till every pixel is the size of a character square. Bottom right is a window which displays the sprite, proper size. Above that a window continuing the edit commands. Spritemaker will handle multicolour as well as single colour sprites and will also allow to stretch them on both the X and the Y axis should the fancy take you. Flipping the sprites and shifting it within its own boundaries are also catered for. When it comes to animating the sprite, you can use up to 31 frames and there is also a thoughtfully included copy command that saves you a lot of redrawing. You can run the animation from within Spritemaker and check that it looks all right. The advertising literature for Ocean's Laser Basic claims to \"turn your computer into a professional games writing machine for fun and profit.\" Quite a bold statement to make especially when you consider the number of games on the market for the machines it is written for; namely the Amstrad (464/664/6128), Commodore (64/128) and Spectrum (48K/plus). The program does come with a proven pedigree though, having been released through Ocean by the people who brought you the much acclaimed utility White Lightning. The package looks like an oversized ke an oversized video cassette case which contains the manual (which is an attempt to stop piracy has been published black on coloured paper, blue for the Amstrad, red for the Commodore and green for the Spectrum), the cassettes which contain the Laser Basic Extension program, sprite generator, demo program, and some already pre-defined sprites. The Amstrad and Commodore versions also have a Sound Generator and sound sprites which are sadly lacking on the Spectrum.\" The manuals are concise and have lots of small worked examples to follow. Mind you, in the Amstrad version you get over 200 new commands, over 250 on the Commodore and 100 on the Spectrum. But don't be put off. It's like any new language, you will find that some of the commands will be used often and for others you will need to refer to the manual. After all that, what can Laser Basic actually do!!? I'll take the Amstrad and Spectrum versions first. Laser Basic gives these two machines full sprite manipulation capabilities only dreamed of by the manufacturers. It is possible, of course, using machine code, to program and control sprites but, unless you are fully conversant with 280 mnemonics, this is not an easy task, especially if you wish to control a number of sprites such as those found in programs like Jet Set ZAP-EM BY CHRIS PALMER 1 SPRITE 1 IS BASE BASE 1 COLOR 1 =CYAN SPRITE 2 IS EXPLO SPRITE 3 15 LASER SPRITE 4 IS MEGAS 1 SCENE 1 BACKGROUND-BLACK CLEAR SCENE 1 MEGAS 14 ANIMATES ALLAYS MEGAS 14 ANIMATION SPD 38 MEGAS 14 X POSITION -250 MECAS 14 Y POSITION =858 MEGAS14 DIR =065 0910 SET I = 045 MEGAS 14 MOVEMENT SPEED=(!) SET X = 127 BASE 1 X POSITION = (X) BASE 1 Y POSITION =230 LASER 3 Y POSITION =230 LO01 START MAIN LOOP IF JOYSTICK 1 IS LEFT THEN SET X-X-002 END IF IF JOYSTICK 1 IS RIGHT THEN SET X = X + 202 END IF IF X 160 THEN SET Y. = 160 END IF IF X < 030 THEN SET X-e3e END IF IF BUTTON 1 IS ON THEN SET AX) SET B 230 LASER 3 DIR-800 UP LASER 3 MOVEMENT SPEED=120 LASER 3 X POSITION = (A) LASER 3 Y POSITION = (B) END IF TF LASER 3 HIT MEGAS14 THEN SET CLASER 3 X POSITION SET D=LASER 3 Y POSITION EXPLO 2 ANIMATES ONCE EXPLO 2 ANIMATION SPD -830 EXPLO 2 X POSITION =(C) EXPLO 2 Y POSITION = (D) CLEAR MEGAS14 END IF SET F =LASER 3 Y POSITION IF F 015 THEN LASER 3 X POSITION =001 LASER 3 Y POSITION =235 LASER 3 OVEMENT SPEED-900 SET 1+1+004 MEGAS 14 MOVEMENT SPEED= END IF Willy and Manic Miner. After loading the Laser Basic Extension the user can then do a multitude of things with sprites, these include moving them in any direction on the screen, up, down, forwards, backwards, behind or in front of other sprites, and you can move them along pre-determined paths. You can also detect collisions, expand, shrink, rotate, inverse and duplicate sprites without corrupting any other data. Other commands enable you to window or change the colours of the sprite of your choice, using up to 255 sprites at any one time. Mindboggling! Not only that, the program has its very own interrupt facility for even smoother graphics. The sound capability of the Amstrad is fairly well known but even here the capabilities of the machine are enhanced by the addition of commands not only to make the beeps and boops normally associated with games but the complex tunes you may have had difficulty with previously. You can even assign a particular sound to a particular sprite character. The Commodore version is a little different to the other two reviewed because of two main reasons — Commodore's poor basic and it already has a hardware sprite facility. So Laser Basic for the machine contains not just extended interpreter for sprite manipulation but an extended Basic as well which gives the 64 some of the capabilities of other machines. The program not only allows the user to control software sprites in a similar manner to those of the other two machines but also includes a variety of commands for manipulating the hardware sprites as well. When you consider the amount of time, space and effort needed using the poke statement, the package is nearly worth while for that alone. Again, the sound capabilities are dealt with in a similar vein to those of the Amstrad. The only real criticism of Laser Basic is the fact that it needs to be resident in the machine to run any programs written using it, although Ocean have released a Laser Basic Compiler for the Commodore and Spectrum (the Amstrad version is not completed yet) which allows you to compile your Laser Basic programs and run them without the main program. This is of course an extra program, but you can market any game without paying any royalties to Ocean. Nice idea. When you consider the cost of present day games for the above machines, Laser Basic must be real value for money. I've had as much, if not more, fun with it than many of the games I've come across lately. If you have any doubts about buying the package ask the shop to load the Demo program for you then stand back and enjoy the show, I'm sure you will be as impressed as I was. SceneMaker Here is where you create the backgrounds over which all the action in your game will take place. Things start getting a little restrictive here. Firstly, you are only allowed to use four colours, including the background colour. So anyone wanting to set a game against a Turner or Picasso background better think again. The drawing commands are simple, yet adequate. Lines, circles, fills and boxes. You also get a copy and a zoom command to help things along. The most irritating part about using the Scenemaker is that you can only see half of the screen at any one time. If you want to draw on the other half, you have to scroll it down into view, or use the view command to display the entire screen. "


"BARGAIN SOFTWARE: Dept. C+VG2, Unit 1; 1 Esmond Road; London W.4. 1BR PRICE PROMISE BUY BY * PHONE ORDERS OVER DEDUCT 10%  If you wish to purchase any product from our list and find that you can buy the same product cheaper from another mail order company, simply enclose the lower amount, stating the name of the other company and where you saw the advert. (It must be a current issue). Price Promise does not apply to other companies \"Special Offers\". RING 01-995 2763 REC. PRICE 9.95 6.95 7.95 7.95 7.95 9.95 9.95 COMPILATIONS REC. PRICE. THE PLANETS SAI COMBAT GREEN BERET BOMB JACK PAPER BOY EMPIRE THE PAWN SUPERBOWL SKYFOX BOUNCERS OUR PRICE REC. PRICE 8.95 9.95 OUR PRICE 7.45 5.20 5.90 5.90 5.90 7.40 7.40 7.40 6.70 7.40 5.90 5.90 7.40 7.40 7.40 7.40 5.90 5.95 11.90 THEY SOLD A MILLION | BRUCE LEE KNIGHTLORE MATCH POINT MATCH DAY OUR PRICE 6.70 6.70 5.90 7.45 7.45 7.45 5.90 7.45 7.45 5.90 8.95 9.95 7.95 7.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 -7.95 9.95 7.45 9.95 7.45 7.95 ARCADE HALL OF FAME RAID!! BLUE MAX ROCCO FLAK HUNCHBACK 11 RED HAWK QUAZATRON ALIEN HIGHWAY EQUINOX HEAVY ON THE MAGICK WORLD CUP CARNIVAL DYNAMITE DAN II BIGGLES REBEL PLANETS BATMAN SWORD & SORCERY NEVER ENDING STORY KIREL THEIR FINEST HOUR WORLD SERIES BASKETBALL SPY VS SPY F. BRUNO'S BOXING DAMBUSTERS SOUTHERN BELLE MONOPOLY CLUEDO SCALETRIX FAIRLIGHT 9.95 7.45 7.45 6.70 7.45 5.90 7.45 7.45 5.90 26.95 5.20 ohnen 7.95 15.95 7.95 7.95 8.95 7.95 6.95 7.95 8.95 7.95 9.95 9.95 7.95 8.95 7.95 7.95 7.95 7.50 RRR 7.45 SPORTS PACK SNOOKER ON THE OCHE WORLD CUP FOOTBALL OLYMPICS (14 events) GOLF DERBY DAY 36.00 5.99 9.95 9.95 9.95 7.45 3.99 3.99 8.95 PING PONG SHOWJUMPING ENIGMA FORCE SIR FRED BATTLE OF THE PLANETS COMMANDO BARRY MCGUIGAN'S BOXING LORD OF THE RINGS THINK THREE WEEKS IN PARADISE TURBO ESPIRIT YIE AR KUNG FU ROLLER COASTER SWEEVO'S WORLD SABOTEUR COSMIC WARTOAD GUNFRIGHT TOMAHAWK MOVIE ROCK 'N' WRESTLE TRANSFORMERS WINTER GAMES GLADIATOR TWISTER FRIDAY 13th MILKIE ELITE BACK TO THE FUTURE WEST BANK N.O.M.A.D. RAMBO TAU CETI BACK TO SKOOL ROBIN OF THE WOOD LEGEND OF THE AMAZON WOMEN CYBERUN ZOIDS BALL BLAZER BLADE RUNNER ZORRO THE GOONIES STARSTRIKE II HUNCHBACK THE ADVENTURE ARC OF YESOD RUNESTONE WAY OF THE TIGER BALLBLAZER PRICE OF MAGICK SPINDIZZY SPLITTING IMAGES BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK 3.99 3.49 SPECTRUM SPECIAL OFFERS VIEW TO A KILL 10.99 GREMLINS 9.95 CODE NAME MAT 11 8.95 ALIEN 9.95 GREAT SPACE RACE 14.95 VALHALLA 14.95 EUREKA 14.95 DEATH STAR 7.95 POLE POSITION 7.99 COMPUTER HITS II CODE NAME MAT WIZARDS LAIR TECHNICIAN TED MUTANT MONTY SNOOKER ANDROID II ON THE RUN COVENANT SUPER PIPELINE 2 CIRCUS 9.95 5.90 7.45 7.45 5.90 6.70 5.90 5.90 5.90 5.45 6.70 5.90 11.20 7.45 5.90 5.90 5.90 7.45 5.20 7.45 5.90 7.45 5.90 5.90 6.70 7.45 7.95 14.95 9.95 7.95 7.95 7.95 9.95 6.95 9.95 7.95 9.95 7.45 7.99 8.95 7.95 7.95 7.95 7.95 7.95 7.95 7.95 7.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 7.95 HOT SHOTS MINDSHADOW FIGHTING WARRIOR SHADOWFIRE GYRON occo di occidio di 9.95 7.45 CAULDRON II WORLD CUP CARNIVAL KNIGHT GAMES EMPIRE BOMB JACK PAPER BOY SUPERBOWL BIGGLES WAY OF THE TIGER REBEL PLANET SILENT SERVICE GREEN BERET URIDIUM ZOIDS HARDBALL SABOTEUR GAME KILLER (Cart.)  NOW GAMES 2 CHUCKIE EGG 2 AIRWOLF TIR NA NOG WORLD CUP CAULDRON 8.95 6.70 6.70 ---IBARGAIN SOFTWARE ORDER FORM Please send me the following titles. BLOCK capitals please! Type of computer Name Title:Amount Address Total Enclosed  Tel. No. ............ Please make cheques or postal orders payable to BARGAIN SOFTWARE. Prices include P&P within the U.K: Europe please add .75 per tape: Elsewhere please add .00 extra per tape London High Road 474A Chiswick VISIT OUR SHOP "


"starts here ON THE HERBET ESLOPES Keep your feet and wits about you unless you want to end up a right Herbert. Herbert on the Slopes is a nice combination of Frogger and Ski slope games. First Herbert must safely cross the busy road to buy his skis. If he gets hit by a car, he must pay  to pay for the cost of an ambulance. Once across the road — or rather if he gets across the road — Herbert must buy his skis for . Once onto the ski slopes he must ski between two flags while avoiding bushes and bumps. After every two screens there is a bonus screen in which Herbert must catch a ski lift. The program comes in two parts, the part one must be loaded and RUN first. The second part can then be loaded. Movement is by joystick in port two. 280 IF SU< >25748THENPRINT\"? DATA ERROR LINES 1500-1540\": STOP 290 PRINT \"CCLEAR][ DOWNDOWNDOWNJ CDOW N][DOWN] [ DOWN J CDOWN] DOWN[DOWN](RIGHT] RIGHT][RIGHT CRIGHTJCRIGHT][RIGHT) (RIGHT JCRIGHT CRIGHT] INITIALISING DATA.\" 300 SU=O: FORA=49152T049328: READS: POKEA, S : SU=SU+S: NEXTA 301 IF SU< >26597THENPRINT\"? DATA ERROR LINES 1600-1690\": STOP 310 SU=O:FORT=OTO2: FORX=OTO255: READA: IFA =-1 THEN330 320 POKE36864+T*256+X, A: SU=SU+A: NEXTX 330 NEXTT: IF SU< >10618THENPRINT\"? DATA E RROR LINES 1700-1760\": STOP 340 POKE37632,0: POKE37633, 0: T=0 350 READHF, LF, DU: SU=SU+HF+LF+DU: IF HF=-1 THEN370 360 POKE37888+T, HF: POKE38144+T,LF:POKE38 400+T, (3*DU): T=T+i: GOTO 350 370 POKE37380, T+1: POKE 54274, 255: POKE 54 275.4 375 IF SU< >25678 THENPRINT \"? DATA ERROR LINES 1765-1791\": STOP 380 SU=0: FORI=OTO15: READ HF, LF, DU: SU=SU+ HE+LE+DU 390 POKE 38003+1, HF:POKE 38259+1, LF:POKE 38515+1, (DU*2): NEXTI 395 IF SUO1514 THENPRINT\"? DATA ERROR L INES 1793-1795\": STOP 400 REM*INSTRUCTIONS* 410 POKE 53265, 91: POKE 53283, 14:POKE 532 81,15: POKE 53280, 12 420 PRINT\" CLEAR] [ DOWN] [DOWN] (BLUERIGH TICRIGHT][RIGHTJ RIGHT][RIGHT) CRVS ON) INSTRUCTIONS\" 430 PRINT\"[RIGHTJCRIGHTJCRIGHT][RIGHTIER IGHTJAS HERBERT YOU MUST FIRST CROSS\" 440 PRINT\"CRIGHT] [RIGHT][RIGHTJ (RIGHT][R IGHT] THE BUSY ROAD TO BUY YOUR SKIES\" 450 PRINT 460 PRINT\"CRIGHTCRIGHT][RIGHT][RIGHTJER IGHT] YOU CRVSON JPAY \CRVSOFF] FOR SKIS LISTING ONE 10 REM*HERBERT 1*INSTRUCTIONS 20 POKE 54296,15 30 POKE 54276.0 100 FORI=OTO25: READHF, LF, DU 110 POKE 37978+I, HF: POKE 38234+1, LF: POKE 38490+I, DU/2: NEXTI 115 POKE 53276,0: POKE53280,0: POKE53281,0 200 POKE 53280, 15:POKES3281, 15:PRINT\" CCL EAR]\" 205 PRINT\" CCLEAR]\": GOSUB2350: T=863 206 POKE 56334, PEEK (56334) AND254: POKE1, P EEK (1) AND251 207 FORI=1024102040: POKEI +13312, PEEK (I+5 3248): NEXTI 210 POKE 1, PEEK (1) OR4: POKE56334, PEEK (563 34) OR1 215 FORI=145921014600: POKEI, 0: NEXT 220 PRINT \"CHOME ] [BLACK ICDOWN] [DOWN][DOW N][DOWN] [ DOWN] [DOWNI (DOWN] [ DOWN][DOWN[D OWNJ CDOWN] CDOWN] [DOWNJE DOWNJCDOWN DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [ DOWN] CDOWN[DOWN] CDOWN]\": TA B(10); \"BY J.MOUNTAIN\" 230 PRINT TAB (7);\" ITEMS TO READ\":T; \"CLEFT] \" 240 FOR L=OTO (64*9)-1: READA: POKE 15680+L, A: SU=SU+A:T=T-1 250 PRINT \"CUP]\"; TAB (25); T 260 NEXT L:IF SU< >44919THENPRINT \"? DATA ERROR LINE 1000-1490\": STOP 270 I=O: SU=O 271 READA: IF A=-1 THEN280 272 POKE 14840+I, A: I=I+1: SU=SU+A 273 PRINT TAB (25); \"CUP]\":T;\"CLEFT]\" 275 T=T-1: GOTO 271 470 PRINT\"[RIGHT) CRIGHT][RIGHTJ (RIGHT][R IGHTJAND CRVSON)PAY \CRVSOFF] FOR EVER YTIME YOU\" 480 PRINTCRIGHT][RIGHT][RIGHTJCRIGHTJER IGHTGET KNOCKED DOWN FOR AMBULANCE\" 490 PRINT\"CRIGHT] (RIGHTICRIGHTJ (RIGHT][R IGHT SERVICE.\" 500 PRINT 510 PRINT\"[RIGHT CRIGHT][RIGHT][RIGHTER IGHT JON THE SLOPES YOU MUST SKI THROUGH\" 520 PRINT\"CRIGHTJCRIGHTRIGHT CRIGHTER IGHT THE TWO FLAGS.\" "


"530 PRINT\"[RIGHT][RIGHT) (RIGHT][RIGHT]CR IGHT HOWEVER THERE IS OBSTACLES SUCH\" 540 PRINT\"CRIGHT JCRIGHT][RIGHT]RIGHTCR IGHT JAS CRVSONJBUSHESCRVSOFF] AND CRVSON J BUMPS 550 PRINT 560 PRINT\"CRIGHT CRIGHT CRIGHTJCRIGHTJER IGHT JYOU MAY USE A JOYSTICK IN CRVSONJPO RT 2\" 580 PRINT 590 PRINT\"(BLACK) CRVSON) CRIGHT][RIGHTCR IGHT] CRIGHT][RIGHT) HIT A KEY 600 POKE 198, 0: WAIT 198, 1: POKE 198,0 610 PRINT \"CUP LOADING PART TWO PLEASE W ,96,-1 615 POKE 53265, PEEK (53265)-64 620 LOAD \"HERBERT 3\", 1:REM IF USING DISK CHANGE, 1 'TO, 630 RUN 970 DATAB, 147, 30, 9, 159, 30, 10, 60, 30, 11, 11 4, 30, 12, 216, 30, 10, 60, 30, 12, 216, 50 971 DATA12, 32, 30, 10,60, 30, 12, 32, 50, 11, 11 4,30, 9, 159, 30, 11, 114, 30 972 DATAB, 147, 30, 9, 159, 30, 10, 60, 30, 11, 11 4, 30, 12, 216, 30, 10, 60, 30 973 DATA12, 216, 20, 17, 37, 30, 15, 70, 30, 12,2 16, 30, 10,60, 30, 12, 216, 30, 15, 70,50 1000 DATAO, 42,0,0, 170, 128, 2, 170, 160, 10, 1 70, 168, 11, 171, 168, 11, 235, 232, 27, 107 1010 DATA105, 27, 107, 105, 26, 234, 233, 21, 15 0, 169, 2, 170, 161,0, 191, 129,0 1020 DATA170,0,2,0, 128,8, 128, 32, 10, 128,3 2,0,0, 136,0,0,168,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 1030 DATAO, 42,0,0, 170, 128, 2, 170, 160, 10,1 70, 168, 11, 171, 168, 11, 235, 232, 27, 107, 105 1040 DATA27. 107. 105.26.234.233.26. 150. BS , 18, 170, 160, 16, 191, 128,0, 42, 32,0, 128, 32 1050 DATA2,0, 136,2,0,168,8, 128, 0, 10, 128, 0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 1060 DATAO, 42,0,0, 170, 128, 2, 170, 160, 10, 1 70, 168, 11, 171, 168,11, 235, 232, 27, 107, 105 232.27. 107 105 1070 DATA27, 107, 105, 26, 234, 233, 26, 150, 16 9, 18, 170, 175, 252, 191, 131, 48, 42,3,48 1080 DATA128, 131, 50, 0, 35, 22, 1.96.5.0.80 1,64,20, 0, 80,5,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 1090 DATAO, 42,0,0, 170, 128, 2, 170, 160, 10,1 70, 168, 11, 171, 168, 11,235, 232, 27, 107, 105 1100 DATA27, 107, 105, 26, 234, 233, 26, 150, 16 9, 18, 170, 175, 252, 191, 131, 48, 42, 3, 48, 128 11 10 DATA131.50.6.35.2.64.36.5.0, 80, 20,1 , 64, 80,5, 0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 1120 DATA3, 192,0,7, 217,0, 21, 101, 144, 170, 150, 84, 170, 169, 85, 170, 150, 86 1130 DATA166, 149, 101, 149, 149, 101, 166, 170 , 165, 166, 150, 165, 166, 150, 165, 170, 170, 165 1140 DATA170, 170, 164, 170, 170, 160, 84,21,0 , 16,4,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 1145 DATAO, O 1150 DATAO, 36,0,255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 192,0, 3, 192,0,3, 192,0, 3, 192,0,3, 192,0,3 1160 DATA192,0,3, 192,0,3, 255, 255, 255, 255 255.255.255.255.255.255.255.227.255.255 1170 DATA227, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255 , 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255 1180 DATA255, 255, 0,36,0,0,36,0,0,36,0,0, 36,0,0,36,0,0,36,0,0,36,0,0, 36,0,0,36,0 1190 DATAO, 36,0,0,36,0,0,36,0,0, 36,0,0,3 6,0,0, 36,0,0, 36,0,0, 36,0,0, 36,0,0,36,0 1200 DATAO, 36,0,0, 36,0,0 1360 DATAO, 42,0,0, 170, 128, 2, 170, 160, 10,1 70, 168, 10, 170, 168, 10, 166, 180, 10, 166, 188 1370 DATA10, 166, 168, 10, 165, 108, 10, 175, 16 8, 2, 170, 160, 0, 170, 128,0, 42,0,0,8,0,0,0,0 1380 DATAO, 8,0,0, 10,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0, 0,0,0,0 1390 DATAO, 42,0,0, 170, 128, 2, 170, 160, 10,1 70, 168, 15, 170, 168, 7, 166, 168, 15, 166, 168 1400 DATA10, 166, 168, 14, 86, 168, 10, 170, 168 ,2, 170, 168,0, 170, 128, 0, 52,0,0,8,0,0,8,0 1410 DATAO, 8, 0, 0, 40,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0, 0,0,0,0 1499 REM*CHARACTER DATA* 1500 DATA60, 102, 110, 110, 96, 98, 60,0 1501 DATAO,0,0,0, 10, 43, 85, 85 1502 DATAO, 10, 60, 238, 238, 174, 85, 215 1503 DATAO, 48,236, 236, 238, 251, 90, 94 1504 DATAB5, 85, 29, 4,0,0,0,0 1505 DATA85, 85, 7,1,0,0,0,0 1506 DATABB, 80,64,0,0,0,0,0 1507 DATAO, 2, 10, 21, 105, 105, 105, 105 1508 DATAO, 154, 106, 149, 149, 149, 149, 149 1509 DATAO, 169, 166, 90, 90, 90, 90,90 1510 DATA105, 85, 85, 85, 85, 29,4,0 1511 DATA149, 149, 149, 149, 85, 7, 1,0 1512 DATA90, 91, 94, 90,88, 64,0,0 1513 DATAO, 42, 170, 85, 85, 85, 85, 85 GHT CRIGHTJCC 4] [ SEP] [S NICRIGHT CRIGHT) 1514 DATAO, 128, 48, 252, 127, 222, 214,85 [SEP S NJ [s NJ (SN] [S N] 1515 DATA0,0,0,0,0, 169, 166,90 [s N] [SN] [s N]\" 1516 DATAB5, 85, 85, 85, 116, 16,0,0 2352 PRINT \"CRIGHT JCRIGHT CRVSON] [CS] [ 1517 DATAB5, 117, 85, 85, 7,1,0,0 c4] CRIGHT(RIGHTJCC 5] [CM] [CM] 1518 DATA90, 91, 94,88,64,0,0,0 CCM] [CM] [CM] [CM] 1519 DATAO, 10, 42, 170, 85, 85, 85, 85 MCC 43 CRVSOFF) SEP]\" 1520 DATAO, 170, 170, 171, 86, 86, 86, 86 2353 PRINT \"CRIGHT CRIGHT CRVSONJCC 5] [ 1521 DATAO, 184,233, 166, 90, 90, 89,86 C4) [RIGHT][RIGHTJCC 510c MJ CC 4] CRIG 1522 DATAB5, 85, 85, 85, 85, 46,8,0 HT][RIGHT][RIGHT]CC 5] [c4] CRIGHT][RIG 1523 DATAB6, 86, 86, 86, 85,2,0,0 HT][CS][CM] [c4] CRIGHT][RIGHT]CC 5] 1524 DATA90, 91, 94, 88, 80, 224, 128,0 CM] CC 4] CRIGHT CRIGHTRIGHT][C 5] [C 1525 DATAO, 3, 55, 63, 127, 127, 63, 15 4) CRIGHT JCRIGHT][C5][CM]CC 4] CRIGHT 1526 DATA64, 231, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255 JCC 5] [ 4] \" 1527 DATA96, 248, 252, 254, 254, 252, 252, 248 2354 PRINT \"CRIGHT]RIGHT CRVSONJCC 5] [ 1528 DATA0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 c4][s N] [CS][CM] Ce 43s NCS NJERI 1529 DATA254, 254, 251, 251, 239, 239, 191, 170 GHT) CRIGHT CC 5] [ 4 ][s N] [CS][CM] 1530 DATA255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 170 [c4] [SN] [CS][CM] [c4][s NS NJER 1531 DATAO,0,3,4, 136, 10, 10, 16 IGHT CRIGHT CC 50 CC 4CS N[CS]CM] 1532 'DATAO, 0, 200, 32, 144, 18,0, 128 CC 4] CRIGHT ICC 5] [c4]\" 1535 DATAO,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 2355 PRINT \"CRIGHT][RIGHTJCRVSONIC 53 1540 DATAO, 9, 217, 217, 217, 208, 192, 192, 192 CCM] [c4] CRVSOFF CSEP CRVSONICRIGHT , 192, 192, 192,0, 0, 0, 0, -1 JCRIGHTJCC 5] [CM] [ 4][s NCC 5 1600 DATA169, 4, 133, 254, 169,79, 133, 253, 32 ] CRVSOFF ICC 4C SEP] CRVSONJ CRIGHT CRIGH , 125, 192, 169, 119, 133, 253, 32, 125, 192 TCC 5] [CM]CRVSOFFIC 4 ] [ SEP (RIGHT 1610 DATA169, 160, 133, 253, 32, 151, 192, 169, CRVSONJCC 5] [ 4] 200, 133, 253, 32, 151, 192, 169, 239,133 2356 PRINT \"CRIGHT][RIGHT) CRVSONJCC 5] [ 1620 DATA253, 32, 125, 192, 169,5, 133, 254,16 C4] CRIGHT CRIGHT Cc 5][CM] [C4] CRIG 9, 23, 133, 253, 32, 125, 192, 169,64, 133 HT][RIGHT (RIGHT]CC 5] [ 4] [s NCS NIC 1630 DATA253, 32, 151, 192, 169, 104, 133, 253, 253, RIGHTJCC 5] [c4] CRIGHT) CRIGHT CC 5][C 32, 151, 192, 169, 224, 133, 253, 32, 151 M] [ 4] [RIGHTJCRIGHT][RIGHT]CC 5] [c 1640 DATA192, 169,6,133, 254, 169,8, 133, 253 4][s NCS NJCRIGHT][RIGHTCRIGHT]CC 5] [ , 32, 151, 192, 169, 47,133,253, 32, 125, 192 C4] 1650 DATA169,87, 133, 253, 32, 125, 192, 169,1 2357 PRINT \"CRIGHT JCRIGHT CRVSONJEC 5] [ 28, 133,253, 32, 151, 192, 169, 168, 133, 253 28, c4] CRIGHT CRIGHT Cc 5][CM] [c4s N] 1655 DATA32, 151, 192, 169, 207, 133, 253, 32 CC 5] [ 4] [ 5] [ 4] [5 NCS NIC 5 1660 DATA125, 192.169, 247, 133, 253, 32, 125, JCC 430s N) cc 5][CM ] [c 4 N e 192, 96, 160, 40, 177, 253, 141, 132,3 5) CC 43 CC 5] [ 4] [s NCS NI CRIGHTJER 1670 DATA136, 177, 253, 200, 145, 253, 136, 136 IGHT] CC 5] [ 4] , 192,0, 208, 245, 173, 132,3, 200, 145, 253 2358 PRINT \"CRIGHTJRIGHT CRVSONIC 5] [ 1680 DATA96, 160,0, 177, 253, 141, 132, 3,200, C4] CRVSOFF) CSEP CRIGHT) CRIGHT][ 5] CRVS 177, 253, 136, 145, 253, 200, 200, 192, 40 ONJICM] [CM] CRVSOFF][c4] [SEP] CRVS 1690 DATA208, 245, 173, 132, 3, 136, 145, 253,9 ONJCRIGHT]CC 5] CRVSOFF][C4] CSEP CRVSON JCC 5] CC MJ Ce M] [C4] CRVSOFF][S 1700 REM EP CRVSONCRIGHT]CC 5] CRVSOFF]CC 4] [ SEP 1710 DATA169, 146, 141, 21, 3, 169,0, 141, 20,3 CRIGHT CRVSONJ(RIGHT CC 5] Cc 4] CRVSOFF CSEP)\" 1720 DATA169,234, 141, 21, 3, 169,49,141, 20, 2359 PRINT \"CBLACK (DOWN]\"; TAB (16); \"ON T 3,96,-1 HEC DOWN]\" 1730 DATA172,0, 147, 192, 17, 240, 57, 206,1,1 2360 PRINT \"CRIGHTJCRIGHT) CRIGHT CRIGHT) 47, 173, 1, 147, 201,0, 208, 44, 238,0, 147, 169 CRVSONJCC 4] CSEP] Cs NCS NJCRIGHTJER 1740 DATAO, 141, 4, 212, 169,9, 141,5, 212, 169 IGHT CRIGHT (SEP) (SN) CSN) , 196, 141,6, 212, 169, 65, 141, 4, 212, 185, 15 SN] [SN]\" 1750 DATA167, 185, 0, 148, 141, 1, 212, 185, 0,1 2361 PRINT \"CRIGHT][RIGHT] CRIGHT CRIGHT] 49, 141, 0, 212, 185, 0, 150 CRVSONIC 5] [CM] [C4] CRIGHT] CRIGH 1760 DATA141, 1, 147, 76, 49,234, 169, 0, 141,0 TICRIGHTJEC 5] [CM] [CM] Ce M , 147, 141, 4, 212, 24, 144, 242,-1 ] CC MCC 43 CRVSOFF ] [ SEP]\" 1765 REM 2362 PRINT \"CRIGHTJIRIGHT JORIGHTJCRIGHT) 1770 DATA25, 177,5, 25, 177,5, 25, 177,5, 21,1 CRVSONJCC 5] Cc 4] CRIGHT][RIGHT CRIGHT] 54,2, 21, 154,2, 25, 177,2, 25, 177,2 Cc 5] [ 4] CRIGHT CRIGHT][RIGHT][ 5] [ 1775 DATA28, 214,5, 25, 177,5, 21, 154,5,0,0, C4) CRIGHT JCRIGHT CC 500C M 5) Cc 4] CRIGHT][RIGHTJCC 50CC M] [ 4] CRIGHT) 1776 DATA21, 154,5, 19,63, 15, 21, 154, 5, 19,6 RIGHT JCRIGHT CC 51 cc 4] CRIGHT CRIGHT 3, 10, 25, 177, 5, 25, 177,5, 25, 177,5 RIGHT)\" 1780 DATA21, 154, 5,25, 177,2, 25, 177,2, 28, 2 2363 PRINT \"CRIGHTJ RIGHT] CRIGHT][RIGHT] 14,2, 28, 214, 2, 25, 177,5, 21, 154,5, 0, 0,5 CRVSONJCC 5] CC 4] Cs N] [CS] [c4] CR 1781 DATA 19,63, 10, 21, 154, 5, 19,63,5, 17,3 IGHT][RIGHT CRIGHT)c 5] [ 4] [RIGHTJER 7,15, 25, 177,5 IGHT][C5JCC M] [c4jts N) [c 5][c MJ C 1782 DATA25, 177,5, 25, 177,5, 21, 154,2, 21,1 c4][s NCS NICRIGHT CRIGHT]CC 5] [C43C 54, 2, 25, 177, 2, 25, 177,2 SN) Cs N]\" 2364 PRINT \"CRIGHTJCRIGHT] CRIGHT] CRIGHT) CRVSONJCC 5] [CM] [ 4] [RIGHT CRIGH 1784 DATA21, 154, 5, 19, 63, 15, 21, 154, 5, 19,6 TCRIGHT CC 5] [c4] CRIGHT RIGHTJCC 53 3, 10, 25, 177,5, 25, 177,5, 25, 177,5 CCM] [CM] CRVSOFF]CC 4] CSEP CRIGHT 1785 DATA21, 154, 5, 25, 177, 2, 25, 177, 2, 28, 2 JCRIGHTJ CRVSONIC 5] [C MCC 4] \" 14, 2, 28, 214, 2, 25, 177,5, 21, 154,5, 0, 0,5 2365 PRINT \"CRIGHT]CRIGHT]RIGHT][RIGHT] 1786 DATA 19, 63, 10, 21, 154, 5, 19, 63, 5, 17,3 CRVSONJCC 5JCRIGHT[RIGHT][RIGHT CRIGHT] 7, 15, 0, 0,5 Cc M] [c4] CRIGHT][RIGHT] CRIGHT] CC 5] [ 1787 DATA17, 37, 7, 17, 37,2, 21, 154, 5, 25, 177c4] CRIGHT CRIGHT 3 CC 5][CM] [c4] CRIG ,5, 34, 75, 15,0,0,5, 28, 214,7, 28, 214,2 HT]CRIGHTJCRIGHT CC 5] [c4] CRIGHTJERIG 1788 DATA34, 75, 5, 28, 214, 2, 25, 177, 15, 21,1 HTJCRIGHT JCRIGHT) (RIGHT][RIGHT CRIGHTJC 54, 2, 22, 227, 2, 25, 177,5, 25, 177,5 SJCC MCC 4] \" 1789 DATA21, 154,2, 21, 154, 2, 25, 177, 2, 25, 1 2366 PRINT \"CRIGHT CRIGHT CRIGHT CRIGHT) 77,2 CRVSONJEC 4 ] [ SEP] [CS][CM] [C][SN 1790 DATA28, 214, 5, 25, 177,5, 21, 154, 10, 19, ] [CS] [c 431s N] [CS][CM] [ 4] [ 63,5, 21, 154, 3, 22, 227, 3,21, 154,3 RIGHT CRIGHT I CRIGHT CC 5] [ 4] [5 N] [ 1791 DATA19,63,5, 19, 63, 5, 17, 37, 15,-1,-1, SN] [CS] CC MCC 4]\" 2367 PRINT \"CRIGHT CRIGHT CRIGHTJCRIGHT) 1792 REM*GOD SAVE THE QUEEN* CRVSONIC 5] [CM] [CM] [CM] 1793 DATA15, 70, 10, 15, 70, 10, 17, 37, 10, 14,1 C5] Cc 4] CRUSOFF CSEP CRVSON) CRIGHT CRI 15, 15, 70,5, 17, 37, 10, 19,63, 10, 19,63,10GHTJCRIGHT]CC 5] [CM] [c MJ CRVSOF 1794 DATA20, 100, 10, 19,63, 15, 17, 37, 5, 15,7 FCC 43 CSEP)\" 0, 10, 17, 37, 10, 15, 70, 10, 14, 107, 10 2368 PRINT \"CDOWN) [DOWN]\"; TAB(10);\"CC 2] 1795 DATA15, 70, 30 PLEASE WAIT.\" 2350 POKE 53280, 15: POKES3281, 15 2369 RETURN 2351 PRINT \"CHOME CRVSONIC DOWNJC DOWNJERI READY. "


"COMPUT R +VIDEO GAMES CE GOES "


"110L Mir zor00 "


"LISTING TWO II III UUUUU O POKE54296,1: POKE 55,0: POKE 56, 61: POKE 419 POKE2040, SP: K=PEEK (M): LEPEEK (M+2):K1 53249, T:FOR I=1 TO2: NEXTI, T 51,0: POKE 52, 53 =PEEK (M+40):L1=PEEK (M+42) 902 FORT=2 T06: POKE 53248+2*T, 0:POKE 5324 5 HI$=\"**CBM 64**\":HI=500 420 IF K=32ANDL=32ANDK1=32ANDL1=32 THEN50 9+2T, 0: NEXTT 7 GOSUB2350 909 PRINT \"CCLEAR]\":POKE53269, 1: POKE 532 10 T$=\"CC CCC DCC CCC DCC CCC DCC 430 IF K1=910RL 1=91 THENPOKES1-7, 34: SC-SC 48, 160: POKE 2040, 245 cic Duc Cuc Diec cuc Diec cuc Duc +5: POKEM, 32: POKEM+1, 32: GOTO500 910 POKE 37420, 115: POKE 37426, 115: POKE 3 C][CD][C CCC DCC CCC DCC CCC DCC 440 IF K=91 ORL=91 THENPOKES1-7, 34: SC=SC+5 7432, 115: POKE 37380, 17:POKE54296,15 tic Duc Cuc Diec cuc Duc C1\":LIES0: : POKEM, 32: POKEM+1, 32: GOTO500 911 POKE 37412, 33: POKE 37407, 0: POKE37402 LE=1: SC=O: SH=. 2:MC=1: MD=1: WR=17 450 IF K=940RL=940RL 1=940RK1=94THENRN=IN ,15: POKE 37632,0: SYS36864 20 PRINT CHR$ (14): POKE53275, O: POKES3271, T (RND (1) *3): X=X+(8+RN): M=M+RN: GOTO SOO 915 SP=O: A=0: B=127: FORI=1 TO2 O: POKE53277,0: POKE53276, 3: POKE53270,216 455 IF K1=950RL 1=950RL=950RK=95THENRN=IN 920 FORT=ATOB: POKE 53249, T: POKE2040, 245+ 30 POKE53280, 15: POKE53281, 15:POKE 53282, T (RND (1) *3): X=X-(8*RN): M=M-RN: GOTO 500 SP:IF T/2=INT (T/2) THENSP=SP+1 12: POKE53283, 11: POKE53285, 2: POKE53286,7 460 IF RND (1) >.5THENGOSUB 710: GOTO 30 925 IF SP >1 THENSP=0 70 POKE 53272, (PEEK (53272) AND240) +12: POK 470 PRINT \"CCLEARIC DOWN DOWNJ CDOWNJDOW 926 NEXT: FORT=1 T050: NEXTT E53250,0 N]DOWN][DOWN][DOWN][DOWN[DOWNJC DOWNJD 930 PRINT \"CHOME (BLACK) CDOWN][DOWN) CDOW 75 GOSUB 1800 OWN) DOWNJDOWNJCBLACK JYOU BROKE YOUR SK N][DOWNJ CDOWN 3 DOWNJDOWNIC DOWNJC DOWNJCD 80 POKE53287, 12 IS!\":LI=LI-10 OWN DOWN]\"; TAB(10);\"****BONUS 500 PTS** 81 POKE 37420,0: POKE 37426,0: POKE 37432, 480 IF LI=<OTHEN4000 O: POKE 37380, 91 490 GOTO 300 935 A=127:B=255: NEXT I 82 POKE 37412, 65: POKE 37407, 0:POKE 37402 500 POKES2, 100 940 BSO:CT=30: SC=SC+500: POKE53269, 3:GOT 9: POKE37632, 0:SYS 36864 510 PRINT \"CHOME ] [BLACK ] MONEY\":LI,\"TIME\" 0 20 85 POKE 54276,0: POKE54290,0: POKE54296, 15 TIS; \"SCORE\"; SC; \"CDOWNJDOWNJC DOWNJ CDOWN 970 DATA17,0,0,8, 147, 3, 9, 159, 1, 10,60, 1, 1 : J=56320: CT=30: Y=47: X=192 AND DOWN DOWN DOWN) [DO 1, 114, 1,33,0,0, 12, 216, 1, 10, 60,1,12,216,1 90 POKES3248, X: POKE53249, Y:POKE 2040, 245 WNJCDOWN] [DOWN][DOWNJCDOWNJ CDOWN) [DOWNJE 971 DATA17,0,0, 12, 32, 2, 10,60, 1, 12, 32,1,3 : POKE 53269, 255:M=1085 DOWN] CDOWN[DOWNJDOWN][DOWN[DOWN]\" 3,0,0, 11, 114, 2, 9, 159, 1, 11, 114, 1, 17,0,0 100 SP=SP+1 530 HEINT (RND (1) *39): R=INT (RND (1) *39): EF 972 DATAB, 147, 2, 9, 159, 1, 10,60, 1, 11, 114, 1 102 IF SP >1 THENSP=0 =INT (RND (1)*2) , 33, 0, 0, 12,216,1 105 POKE 2040, 245+SP 535 IF HERORH=R+1 ORH+1=RORH+1=R+1 THEN530 973 DATA10, 60, 1, 12, 216, 1, 17, 37, 1, 15, 70, 1 110 IF PEEK (J) =126ANDY>47THENMOM-80: Y=Y546 IF EF=1 THEN560 ,12, 216, 1, 10, 60,1,12, 216,1, 15, 70,1 16: SC-SC+5 550 POKE1984+H, 88: POKE 1985+H, 89: POKE5625 980 DATAO,0, 15,0,0,1,0,0,0,1, 8, 103, 0, 156 120 IF PEEK (J) =125THENM=M+80: Y=Y+16: SC=S 6+H, 5: POKE56257+H, 5: POKE1986+H,90 , 243, 197, 255, 249, 239, 255, 237, 127, 255, 239 C+5 555 POKE56258+H, 5: GOTO 590 981 DATA63, 255, 247,0,0,3, 63, 255, 253, 84,0 130 IF PEEK (J) =123THENM=M-1: X=X-8: SC=SC+ 560 POKE 1984+R, 94: POKE 1985+R, 95: POKE56 , 15, 168,0,7,0,0,3,0,0,1,0, 136, 132, 1, 225 5: POKE 2040, 253 256+R, 4: POKE56257+R, 4 982 DATA207,0, 12, 32, 1, 233, 236, 1,9, 72, 1,5 140 IF PEEK (J) =119THENM=M+1: X=X+8: SC=SC+ 590 H=RND (1): IF H>.5THENG=G+1: IFG>34 THEN 39,0 S: POKE 2040, 252 G=34 983 DATABO,0,0, 128,0,0, 128, 136,0, 129, 204 141 IF PEEK (J)=111 ANDMC=OTHENMC-1: POKE S 600 IF HC.STHENG=G-1: IFG 1 THENG=1 , 16, 55, 156, 58, 151, 63, 255, 55, 255, 255, 247 4295, 1:GOTO 145 605 IF C=OTHENPRINT TAB (G);\"CC 23 CC KC 984 DATA255, 254, 239, 255, 252,192,0,0,1 142 IF PEEK (J)=111ANDMC>OTHENMC=O: POKE 5 BLACK][S + ][s + ][s + ][c 2]c K]\" 255, 252, 240, 0, 42, 224,0, 21, 192,0,0, 128 4295,0 610 IF C=4THENPRINT TAB (G);\" CC 60 Cc K) 985 DATAO,0, 18, 32, 192, 120, 112, 64,83, 11, 1 145 IF X<24 THENX=X+8: M=M+1 CBLACKS + ][ + ][ + ][ 6 ] [CK]\" 92, 114, 122, 160, 90, 82, 32, 121,75, 192,0 147 IF X>320 THENX=X-8:M=M-1 620 PRINT TAB (G+1);\" \":C=C+1: IFC>THEN 1800 PRINT CHR$ (14); \"CCLEARIC 2015 30 150 IF X >255 THENPOKE53264,1: POKE53248, X C=0 Csc-Cs -]CC s c s -]c 255: GOTO 165 630 IF TI$< \"000060\"THEN400 [5 C s -][c s ][ ] Cs 160 POKE 53264,0: POKE53248, X 640 LE=LE+1:LIELI+20 Cs -]CC s -]s -]CC ] 165 IF Y>=200THENGOSUBB50: GOTO300 650 IF LE/2<>INT (LE/2) THENZO -][s c [c -][s ][c -] 170 IF Y<47THENY=Y+16: M=M+BO: SC=SC-5 660 POKE 54290,0 -Its c -Cs -[c s -][ ]\"; 171 IF Y<47THEN170 665 POKE 53269, 255 1810 PRINT \"Es -][ -]Cs c -]ts CC 175 POKE 53249, Y 670 VI-53252: VC=53253: C=200: FORI-2T06: PO Cs-Cc -Cs -][c -][s ] Cc Cs -][C 180 IF PEEK (53279) AND 1=1 THENGOSUB700 KEVI, 20: POKEVC, C:C=C-40: VI=VI+2 -Its ][c [s [c -][s -][c -its-][c 190 SYS 49152 680 VC=VC+2: POKE53288+1.2: POKE2041+1.251 -]Cs c -)Csc-jsc200 PRINT \"CHOME CDOWN JCDOWNJ CDOWN JCDOWN : NEXTI: POKE53271, 248: POKE53277, 248 sc -Cs c -][s -tc -][s ][c C DOWNDOWNJDOWNJDOWNJDOWN JC DOWN CDO 690 POKE2042, 250: POKE53252,31: POKE53253, JS C -33 WNJC DOWN[DOWNJ CDOWNJ CDOWNJ CDOWN] [DOWNJE 200: CT=14: BS=1: GOTO30 1820 PRINT \"CC 2][s LCS MIS NI Cs L DOWNIC DOWNJ CDOWNIC DOWNICREDISCORE\"; SC 700 IF PEEK (M)=32ANDPEEK (M+1) =32ANDPEEK ts MCs N] (s LCS MCS N] 205 PRINT \"CRED MONEY \";LI M+2) =32 THENRETURN S LCS MJCS N] [s Lits MCS N] 210 PRINT \"CUP CREDITIME\";MID$ (T$, 1, CT) 701 IF PEEK (M)=92ANDPEEK (M+1) =93ANDPEEK 1825 PRINT \"CC 210s OCS Pts QI ;\"[c 2][ ] [s -][c -]Cs -][C ][s -)\"; M+2) =92THENRETURN its PCS Q] [s Ots PCS Q] 211 CTECT-SH: IFCT<=OTHENGOSUB 710 702 IF PEEK (M)=93ANDPEEK (M+1) =92ANDPEEK(sots PCS QJ Cs Cs PCS Q] 230 GOTO 100 M+2) =93THENRETURN 1830 PRINT \"CC 6] CS Fots G][SH] 300 IF BS=1 THENGOTO 900 710 POKE2041, 249: POKE54283,0: POKE54280,0 FICS GIS H] (s FCS GIS H) 310 LIELI-10: F=O: F1=0 : POKE54279,0: POKE 54284,64: B=0: E=X: BS=0 Fts Gts H] [s Flcs Gts H) 311 POKES4290,0: POKE54278, 240 712 POKES4290,0: POKE54285, 240 1835 PRINT \"CC6] [s Is dits K] [ 320 TT=PEEK (53248+16): WAO: POKE53288, 1:P 720 POKE54280, 17:POKE54279, 34:TTEPEEK (53 S I s Jlts K) (s IJs Jlts K] OKE S3280, 15: POKE53281,15 248+16):WA=O: POKE53285, 2: POKE53288, 1 Its Jits K] [s Is Jlts K). 330 PRINT \"CCLEARICHOME DOWN JC DOWN DOW 730 FORI=OTO1: FORTEBTOESTEP4: POKE53251, Y 1840 PRINT \"CC 43 (s Lits MCs N] NJCDOWN] DOWN) DOWNJDOWNJ CDOWN JC DOWNJCD740 IF WA=OTHENPOKE54283,0: POKE54283, 33: Lots MCS NJ C s LCS MES N] OWN) DOWNJDOWNIC DOWN[DOWN][DOWN JC DOWN) POKE54280, 17: POKE53286,2 LICS MCS N] (s LS MCS N) CDOWNJC DOWNJ CDOWN) DOWNJDOWN DOWN JCDOW 750 IF WA=4 THENPOKE54283, 0: POKE54283, 17: 1845 PRINT \"CC 4] [S O S PCS Q3 N] [DOWN]\"; : POKE53288, 1: POKE2040, 248 POKE54280, 16: POKE53286,6 OCS PCS Q] (s Os Pts Q] 340 POKE 54292,240: POKES4291,32 755 WA=WA+1: IF WA>7 THENWA=0 (s Ots PCS Q] 350 POKE 54290, 0: POKE53269, 255 760 IF T>255 THENPOKE53264, TT+2: POKE53250 1850 PRINT \"CC 8 C s Fits GCS H) [s 351 POKE 37412, 17: POKE 37407,0: POKE 3740 , T-255: GOTO780 FICS GCS HCS FUCS GISH] Es F] 2,9: POKE 37632,0 770 POKE 53264, TT: POKE53250, T Cs GCS H] [s FCs G][SH] [sF][s G 355 POKE 37420, 90: POKE 37426, 90: POKE 374 780 NEXTT:WA=0: F=15: POKE53269, 2: B=X:E-32 H) 32, 90: POKE 37380, 27: SYS 36864 O: NEXTI:LIELI-10 1855 PRINT \"CC 8] [s Its Jlts K) [s 360 TI$=\"000000\":G=20: X=160: Y=150: M=1561 790 FORI=2TOT6: POKE 53248+2+1,0: POKE 532 Is Jits K] Cs Ils Jlls K] Cs 1) : C=O: SP=248: S1=54286:52=54287 49+2*1, 0: NEXTI:BS=0 CS JOCS K] Cs ICS JCS K] Is Its Jits 370 POKE53287, 12:POKE 53285, 2: POKE 53286 796 POKE54283, 0: POKE53251, 0: POKE53250,0: Kl \"; ,7: POKES2, 100: POKES1, 60 POKE53248, 192: CT=30 1860 PRINT \"CC 21CC 400 JEPEEK (56320) 797 IF LI<=OTHEN4000 s-je s -]Cc -Cs c -]s c 405 IF J=119 THENPOKES2, 104:F1=1:F8: SP-2 798 M1085: X=192: Y=47: 30: POKES3249, Y:P :-)Cs c Cs-CC 47 OKES3286, 7: POKE53285, 2: POKE53269,3 -jsc-Cs -]Cc Cs-CCs -][c 407 IF J=111 ANDMC=OTHENMC=1: POKE54295, 1: 799 POKE 53287, 12: POKE 54276,0: POKES4277 -]Cs c s Cc -][s GOTO410 , 34: POKE54278, 240: POKE54276, 17: RETURN -]Cs Cc Cs -]\"; 408 IF J=111 ANDMC=1 THENMC=O: POKE54295,0 850 C=17: FORI=INT (CT) TOOSTEP-1:C=C+1 1870 PRINT \"Cc -][s ][c s -][c -ts 410 IF J=123THENPOKES2, 104:F1=-1:F=-8: SP 860 POKE 54272,34: POKE54273, C -Cc Cs-Cc CS JCC s c -ts =248 870 SC=SC+10 CC s ][c s -]CC s ] 411 M=M+F1: X=X+F: POKE53249, Y 880 PRINT \"CHOME) DOWN]DOWN][ DOWNJDOWN -cs c -][s ][c ] 412 IF X<24 THENX=X+B: M=M+1 DOWN][DOWN DOWN CDOWN] [ DOWN] DOWN] CDO -]cs c-c -ts c -]ts 413 IF X<24THEN412 WNJDOWN DOWN] CDOWN] [DOWN] [DOWNJDOWNJE C s )\"; 414 IF X>296 THENX=X-8:M=M-1 DOWNJC DOWN][DOWN][DOWN][DOWNIC DOWNJ CRED) 1880 PRINT \"CC 4] (s *][s Ats B] 415 IF X296 THEN414 TIME\";MID$ (T$,1,1);\"1c 636s X)\"; *]CS ACS B] [s ][SACS B] 416 IF X>255THENPOKE53264,1: POKE53248, X 890 NEXT: RETURN s*]CS AJCS B] [s ]CS ACS B] [s ]ts 255: GOT0419 900 POKE 53248, 30: POKE 53252, 30 ACS B] \"; 417 POKE53264,0:POKE 53248, X 901 FORT=200TOOSTEP-1: POKE 53253, T: POKE 1885 PRINT \"CC 43 Cs Cats DIS E Cs   ts P ] [ s -CC UUUU in un IIIII UUUUU nnnnn in IIIII IIIIIIIIII un Uuu UUUUU 11111 "


"ends here C4) CCS D S EJ [s cits DCS E) [ 4] CRIGHTJ RIGHT][C 5][C MCC 43 CRIGHT 2364 PRINT \"CRIGHT] CRIGHT][RIGHT][RIGHT) s CCS D S E] (s cits DCS E] [s cits JCC 5] [ 4 ] CRUSONJCc 5] [CM] [ 4] [RIGHTJ CRIGH D][SE] \"; 2354 PRINT \"CRIGHTJCRIGHT CRVSONIC 5] [ T][RIGHT CC 5] [ 4] [RIGHTJIRIGHT]CC 5] 1890 PRINT \"Cc 21 Cs Rts Ses T] c 430s N] [CS][CM] [c 431s NES NJERI [CM] [CM] CRVSOFF]C 4] SEP (RIGHT Cs RCs Sits T] Cs RCS SCS T] GHTJ RIGHT JCC 5] [c 430S N) [c5][CM] RIGHT CRUSONJIC 5] CC MCC 43\" Cs RJCS SJCST] [s RS SCs T] : Cc4] CS N] [c 5][CM] [c4][s NCS NJER 2365 PRINT \"CRIGHTCRIGHT (RIGHT[RIGHT] 1895 PRINT \"Cc 2] Cs Uits V s W] IGHTJCRIGHTJEC 5) Cc 43s N) [c 5][CM] CRVSONICC 5][RIGHT][RIGHT[RIGHT CRIGHT] Is Us Vis W] [s Ults vies W] Cc4] CRIGHT]CC 5] [ 4] [CM] [ 4] CRIGHT] CRIGHT CRIGHTCS] C Cs UCS VCS W] Cs Uts VCS W] \"; 2355 PRINT \"CRIGHTJCRIGHT) CRVSONJCC 5] c4] CRIGHT][RIGHT][C 500C M] [ 4] CRIG 1900 PRINT \"cc 2] [s *][s Alts B] [S* CCM] [C43CRVSOFF] CSEP CRVSONJ(RIGHT HTCRIGHT) RIGHTJCc 5] [ 4] CRIGHT CRIG Its Alts B] ts *][s Ats B] Cs * S A RIGHT][C5] [CM] [c 430s NCC S HTJCRIGHTJCRIGHT CRIGHT][RIGHT]RIGHT][C Cs B] [s*]ts Alts B] [s *]ts Alls B] ] CRVSOFF]CC 43 SEP (RVSON (RIGHTIRIGH SCC MCC 43\" TCC 5] [CM]CRVSOFFICC 4] [ SEP (RIGHT 2366 PRINT \"CRIGHT CRIGHT][RIGHT][RIGHT] 1905 PRINT \"Cc 2] [s cits DCS El CS C CRVSONJCc 5] [c4] \" CRVSONJCC 4] [ SEP] Ce 5CCM] [C4][N Cs DCS E] [s Cus DCS E] Cs CCS D 2356 PRINT \"CRIGHT][RIGHTJCRVSONJCC 5] [ ] Cc 5] [c40S N [c 5][CM] [C4) [ uts El Cs Cits DCS E] [sc]cs DCS E] C4] CRIGHT CRIGHT][CS][CM] [C 43 CRIG RIGHT CRIGHT]CRIGHT][C5] [4] [s N C HT][RIGHTJCRIGHTJEC 5] [c4] [S NJES NJE S NJCC SCC MCC 4] \" 1910 PRINT \"CC 2) (s RCS SIST] RIGHT CS] Cc4] CRIGHT CRIGHT][CS]CC 2367 PRINT \"CRIGHT RIGHT RIGHT CRIGHT) Cs RCS SCS T] [s RCS SCS T] M] [C4) CRIGHT CRIGHT] CRIGHT CC 5) CC CRVSONICC 5] [CM] [CM] [c MJC SRJS SCS T] Cs RCS SCS T] Cs RC 43 Cs NCS NJCRIGHT CRIGHT CRIGHT] CS] [] Cc 4] CRVSOFF ICSEP CRVSONJCRIGHT CRI $ SICS TI\"; GHT][RIGHTJCC 5] [CM] [CM]CRVSOF 1915 PRINT \"CC 2] [s US VCS W] 2357 PRINT \"CRIGHTJERIGHT CRVSONICC 50 CFCC 43 CSEP]\" Cs Us Vis W] [s U S VCS W] [ 4] CRIGHT CRIGHTJCC 52CC MJ Cc 430s N) 2368 PRINT \"[DOWNJDOWN]\"; TAB (15); CC 2] s US Vits W] [s US Vits W] [SUJE CC 5] [C4] [C5] [C43CS NJES NJEC 5 HIT A KEY.\" S VIS W]\"; ] [c4][s N] [CS][CM] [C43CS N CC 2369 POKE198, O:WAIT198, 1: RETURN 1920 PRINT \"CC 200 s JCC Cs-CC 5) CC 43 CC 5] [ 4] [s N S NJERIGYTJCR 4000 POKE 54296,0: POKE54283,0: POKE54290, -Cs c -Cs ][ ][s ][ -][s ]c IGHTJEC 5] [c4] \" O: POKE53269,0: POKE53272, 21 -]Cs c -][s c -[s ][c s CC 2358 PRINT \"CRIGHT CRIGHT CRVSONJCC 5] [ 4010 POKE 53280, 9: POKES3281, 10 -]ts c -lcsc-js-c s -]c (4) CRVSOFF SEP (RIGHT JCRIGHT Cc 5JCRVS 4020 PRINT \"CCLEARJEDOWN JEDOWN JC DOWNJE DO -Cs c -ts c -][s -][c -ts CC ONJCCM] [CM] CRVSOFFCC 4][SEP CRVS WNJCDOWNJCDOWN]CRIGHT CRIGHTJC DOWN JCDOWN -Cs -]Cc -][s )\"; ON] CRIGHT][c5) CRVSOFF] CC 4] CSEP CRVSON ][DOWN] [DOWN) CRED CRIGHT JCRIGHT CRIGHT) 1930 PRINT \"Cc ][s-tc -[s-tc-ts Dc 5] [CM] [CM] [ 4 ] CRVSOFFICS RIGHT CRIGHT) CRIGHT HARD LUCK....\" -][cs c -]ts c Cs-Cc Cs EP CRVSON) CRIGHT] CC 5] CRVSOFF JCC 4C SEP 4030 PRINT \"CRIGHT JCRIGHT) CRIGHT CRIGHT) -[c [s ][c ][RED]c etc ecc @CC CRIGHT CRVSONJ(RIGHT]CC 5] [ 4 ] CRUSOFF CRIGHTJCRIGHT CRIGHTJ CRIGHT JYOU RAN OUT @JSKI-HIRECc @jcc @tc etc 231c-ts-) CSEP]\" OF MONEY.\" Cc -)Cs -][ ] (s ][c [s ][cs -2359 PRINT \"CBLACK (DOWN)\"; TAB (16); \"ON T 4035 PRINT \"CRIGHT][RIGHT CRIGHTJCRIGHT) HEC DOWN]\" CRIGHT CDOWN] CRIGHT][RIGHT][RIGHT] CRIGHT 1940 PRINT \"Cc 2cs -]CC -CC 2360 PRINT \"CRIGHT][RIGHT][RIGHT CRIGHT) (RIGHT] YOU SCORED\"; SC -]ts -]Cc ] (s -][ ][s -tc-][s CC CRVSON]CC 4] [ SEP] [s NCS NICRIGHTJR 4040 IF HI >SCTHEN4045 -)Cs -][c CRED]CC @cc @jcc ecc ecc IGHTJCRIGHT (SEP) Is N] Cs N] [ 4041 PRINT \"CRVSON CRIGHT][RIGHT CRIGHT] @JCc @tc @3\c etc etc etc etc @ S NJCs N]\" CRIGHT CRIGHT] YOU GOT THE HIGH SCORE!!!! CRVSOFFICC 2010 ) [s ][c ]ts -c -Jts 2361 PRINT \"CRIGHT][RIGHT][RIGHT[RIGHT] \"HIESC -][c -]Cs JCC )\"; CRVSONJCC 5] [CM] [C4] CRIGHTJCRIGH 4042 INPUT \"ENTER YOUR NAME ********** 1960 RETURN TICRIGHTJCC 5] [CM] [CM] CCM LEFT] CLEFT JCLEFT][LEFT] CLEFT]CLEFT J CLEFT 2350 POKE 53280, 15: POKE53281,15 CCM]CC 4] CRVSOFF] CSEP]\" JCLEFTLEFTCLEFT][LEFT][LEFT]\";HIS:HIS 2351 PRINT \"CCLEAR) CRVSONIC DOWN J CDOWNJCR 2362 PRINT \"CRIGHT][RIGHT CRIGHT) CRIGHT) LEFTS CHIS, 10) IGHT CRIGHTC 4] [ SEP][S NJCRIGHT][RIGHT CRVSONICC 5] [c4] CRIGHT JCRIGHT CRIGHT] 4045 PRINT \"CDOWNJCRIGHT][RIGHT CRIGHT) 3 SEPS N] [5 N] [s N) Es N] [CS] [c4] CRIGHTJCRIGHT JCRIGHTJCC 53 C RIGHT CRIGHTJCRIGHT CRIGHT CRIGHT CRIGHT [SN] [sn ] [s N]\" C4] CRIGHT CRIGHTJCC 5CC MJCC 53 CC 4] CRIGHTJCRIGHT CRIGHTJHI-SCORE=\";HI 2352 PRINT \"CRIGHT ICRIGHT] CRVSONICC 5] [ CRIGHTCRIGHTJCC 5CC M] [C 43 CRIGHTJE 4046 PRINT \"CDOWNICRIGHTJ CRIGHTJIRIGHTIC 64] [RIGHT][RIGHTJCC 5][CM] [CM] RIGHTJCRIGHT CC 53 CC 43 CRIGHT JCRIGHTIC RIGHT JCRIGHT RIGHT CRIGHT CRIGHT CRIGHT [CM] Cc RIGHT)\" JBY HIS MCC 43 CRUSOFF] [ SEP]\" 2363 PRINT CRIGHT CRIGHT CRIGHTJCRIGHT) 4048 PRINT \"CRIGHT CRIGHT CRIGHT DOWN 2353 PRINT \"CRIGHT][RIGHT] CRVSONJCC 5] [CRVSONIC 5] [c41s N) cc 5] [c4] CR DOWN]RIGHTRIGHT][RIGHT CRIGHT] CRIGHT) 4] [RIGHT][RIGHTC 50CCM] [c4] CRIG IGHT]RIGHT][RIGHTJC 5] [ 4] [RIGHT JCR CRIGHT] YOU WANT TO TRY AGAIN\" HTCRIGHTCRIGHTJCC 50 CC 4] CRIGHT CRIG IGHT CC 5] [CM] [4] [s N] [CS][CM]C 4050 PRINT \"CRIGHT CRIGHT CRIGHT RIGHT] HTC 50CM] [4] [RIGHT][RIGHT][CS] C43Cs NCS NJERIGHTJCRIGHT][c 50 Cc 431 CRIGHTRIGHTJCRIGHTJCRIGHT JCRIGHTJERIGH CM] [c4] CRIGHTCRIGHTJCRIGHTJCC 5] [ CSN] [s N]\" TJCRIGHTJCRIGHT CRIGHT][RIGHT][RIGHT CRI GHT) CRIGHT CRIGHT] (Y/N) 4060 GET AS: IF NOT (A$=\"Y\"ORAS=\"N\") THEN40 60 4070 IF A$=\"N\"THENPRINT\" CLEAR]\": END 4080 POKE 53270, 200 4100 GOTO 7 M] c M] c c]   FON THE SLOPES "


"Does your micro answer bacle.? Does your micro chat to 70,000 people across the UK? Can your micro interview pop stars, hackers and doyennes of the computer industry? Can your micro provide the answer to your technical and software problems? Could your micro send and receive telex's worldwide? Does your micro do your shopping for you-and have it delivered to your door? Is your micro an answering machine, delivering your private mail whenever you log-on? NO?. .Shame! Bring your micro to life! To: Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1 Please send me a brochure on Micronet 800 Micronet Name 800Address Telephone No_ Micronet 800 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5EJ Telephone: 01-278 3143 Age Micro CVG July '86 "


"YoURS | including FREE Watch and Post pcan run eye watch and tape will be despatched enclose a cheque ade payable or through any Post Office by TRANscASH (Giro No. 655 6655) For even faster ordering when charging to Access, Barclaycard and "


"DOMESDAY<< This year is the 900th COMPETITION anniversary of William the How would you like to Conqueror's Domesday Book, become a part of history? a survey of England carried Just imagine, your words, out in 1085-86. Coinciding with thoughts and views on your world in the summer of the celebrations will be the 1986 preserved for the creation of a new high-tech future. Domesday Book using Yes, that's the chance microcomputers and we're offering if you can videodiscs. It is one of the most win a place in the Computer+Video Games ambitious and exciting Time Vault, which will historical projects ever eventually be sealed with undertaken. strict instructions not to be C+VG decided to take a opened for 50 years. look at the new Domesday So what do you have to do? First we want you to Project and how the past, write about yourself and present, computers and the your life, hobbies, school, latest technology will be views on the world etc. The combined to provide a unique Brian Woods presenter of the BBC programme best ones will go into the document of present day Britain. the Domesday Project vault. Send a photograph of yourself as well. Picture this: a complete and detailed view of life in Britain captured on two We also want you to suggest some items which should interactive videodiscs. This vast amount of information is available at the touch of a go into the vault which will be of interest to future computer keyboard. You start with an Ordnance Survey map of the United Kingdom being called upon generations. For instance, your favourite computer a monitor. County boundaries and administrative areas can all be seen. game, or Lesly Walker's false teeth, or even Paul By moving a cursor you can concentrate on any part of the country and zoom in toa Boughton's old Toyota! larger scale map. Facts, figures and pictures relating to that specific area can be called And of course copies of Computer+Video Games will up instantly. go in the vault. Another zoom calls up 4 km by 3 km areas. Churches and farms become If you want to get a place in the C+VG Time Vault, distinguishable. Local information and photographs can be accessed. send your entry, together with the coupon printed below, This is the vision which will become a reality this autumn with the completion of to Computer+Video Games Time Vault, Priory Court, BBC Television's Domesday Project. 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The two Domesday discs will offer a million search displays including 60,000 photographs, more than 25,000 maps. Information has been collected from most national sources and a huge amount of local facts and figures has been amassed by more than 15,000 schools and organisations. The scope is breathtaking and the technical challenge is no less impressive. C+VG TIME VAULT When the BBC launched the Domesday Project it decided obviously to use the BBC micro. But there was no off-the-shelf information handling software which could have coped with the vast amount of information. There was also no videodisc NAME player available to cope with the proposed system of images and data. Specifications for a new type of videodisc player were agreed with Philips ADDRESS Electronics. The new player has the ability to store data using compact disc technology in the audio channel and can overlay graphics using video circuitry. The original Domesday Book consists of two volumes compiled in 1085-86 on the orders of William the Conqueror. One covers Essex, Norfolk and Suffolk, the other the rest of England. The aim was to register all taxable land. It assessed a holding's annual value to establish a true \"Geld\" or Tax. A by-product of this tax survey was a fascinating although by no means complete look at the life of England in the Middle Ages. Age. ***** "


"DTID) ALLIG AMINO ALLIGATA BITES BACK ALLIGATA BITES BACK AND THEY CALL THEMSELVES PUB ADULTS!!! O GAMES dliches LES BACK The times they've left you at home because 'you're not grown up' or 'not old enough to come to the pub' and look what they get up to when they get there! Here's your chance to find out what it's really like in those smoke filled haunts of adulthood. The opportunity to see how good you are at these ADULT?? games. Why let the mums and dads have all the fun. Pub Games can be a laugh for everyone. a compilation of BAR BILLIARDS DOMINOES DARTS TABLE FOOTBALL POKER & PONTOON BAR SKITTLES available on Commodore 64/128 Spectrum 48K Amstrad Available soon BBC MSX Alligata Software Ltd., 1 Orange Street, Sheffield S1 4DW. Tel: (0742) 755796 SITES BACK . ALLIGATA BITES BACK ALLIGATA BITES BACK . "


"The CN Tower in Toronto, Canada, is the largesf, free standing structure in the world. You look up at it and say, So what. Big deal. Who cares?.But there's more to 'this needle in the sky than meets the eye. Step inside and you can go on a Tour of The Universe! C+VG's Stateside correspondent Marshal. M. Rosenthal repor's on the trip ofa lifetime. TOUR OF THE purchasing a ticket to visit Jupiter seems a bargain, only $7.00! The STARTOUR IDENT is plastic, with holographic writing that seem to pop off the surface. There is also a magnetic strip which has been encoded with my name (talk about Big Brother). The attendant places the ticket in a into the glowing slot. An overhead light then comes on as the voice states that my height and weight are now being recorded. Additionally, my psycho-spiritual state is also being viewed A monitor glows, displaying my face swathed in a myriad of pastel colours. The voice returns and informs me that I may pass into the main concourse. The holding bar swings away and I walk through. Airports have come a long way since my time. There are a variety of exhibits that include, among others, Milestones in the Conquest of Space. There are also displays of computers, strange devices from other galaxies, as well as a hodgepodge of space paraphernalia. Most impressive of all is the Multivision screen. This occupies an entire wall and is made up of 64 colour monitors. They can work together as a grid to display a single  image, or segment a variety of visuals young woman in a lab coat positions me on a pedestal and inserts my ticket into a wall slot. I jerk a bit as three ruby lasers converge their beams painlessly on my body. At the same time a zap of ozone, as fine a mist as you could imagine, envelopes me from head to toe. That wasn't bad at all! I walk down the gangway and give another attendant my ticket. He .inserts it into a computer, and shortly hands me a paper document containing all of the information about me since I first signed up for the flight. The document also contains my offworld passport, earthport disembarkation card and Visa te Jupiter. I thank him and sit down to awart boarding. . At last it's time. The airlock doors open with a hydraulic burst of power, and we walk through a darkened corridor and onto the shuttle. I sit down in a heavily padded and cushioned flight seat and faster my seat harness. An attendant checks for any kind of problem and, seeing none, leaves. The shuttle doors rush together with a loud'thunk\". Escape hatchways are within easy sight, but let's hope they won't be needed. Multi-lit instrument panels and control devices go about their duties mysteriously as we fidget in out seats. Two video monitors, one at either edge of the closed front viewscreen, come to life. A representative for CP Air Interplanetary welcomes us aboard. A moment later, the Captain switches into the monitor and introduces himself. \"Ladies and Gentlemen, Cyborgs and Clones, we are about to launch, on our way to visit the planet Jupiter. \"You are flying on the new HERMES Class IV MBC Shuttle, which is fully equipped for deep space flight. It also has the revolutionary HELIX catapult mechanism. More about that later. \"Takeoff will be accomplished through the use of magnetic linear attraction, and we hope you enjoy your flight.\" The monitors switch to outside cameras as the protective covering over the front viewscreen rolls back. We now see the inside of the shuttle launching bay, and there is a lurch as our craft begins to move into position for takeoff. During this short process, we can see various other shuttles awaiting their turn, as well as the huge cavern that houses them. Our position is secured, and we tilt upward towards the open bay doors. | A second later we're rising with a \"swoosh\" akin to a supersonic soap bubble as we flash through the stratosphere and into a flawfiess earth orbit. Ahead of us, the stars twinkle and shine as thrusters fire to take us to GATEWAY, the first manned city in space. GATEWAY looms ahead of us, spinning gracefully as it maintains its position relative to the earth. Our craft is hailed by GATEWAY CONTROL, and we slow to position inside of the Catapult. The Captain comes on to tell us that we will soon be using the HELIX's faster-than-light, nearly CHECK IN plastic sleeve and loops it around my neck. I am then allowed to enter the Transition elevator along with a number of fellow passengers. The lights dim with each shake as we begin our 1500 foot descent below the surface. An invisible hand seems to give me a gentle push on the head as the elevator groans to a stop, and the doors open onto the year 2019. Aguard clad in black and silver greets us as we queue up before the turnstile of SECURITY SCAN. A digital voice instructs me to insert my ticket at the same time. Images are displayed about upcoming flights, interesting facts, even adverts. Our flight number is finally called over the PA system. Passport input prompts me to again insert my ticket and then answer various questions presented on a touch screen. This information is also sent down into the Central Scrutinizer computer. I then enter the tunnel that leads into the Inoculation area. Timagine hideous white-garbed fiends spraying me with foul liquids in their attempts to disinfect my body of earthly germs. Instead, a pleasant "


"UNIVERSE The machine rests upon a set of hydraulic lifts which move it in the various ways that the craft it is imitating would be like when up in the stomach doesn't think it's just a movie! CP Air Interplanetary plans other trips as well. A journey to GORANG CARGO instantaneous technique to transport us to lupiter. The GO signal is given and we pick up speed. The framework of spiral plates blur around us and seem to change into a crazed kalidoscope of rippling water. Like a roller coaster going down, we move faster and faster. Suddenly, amidst a rush of white noise, the Universe blanks out -and majestic Jupiter blossoms on the horizon. Our shuttle passes over the landscape from miles up, as we gaze down into the awesome red spectacle of the planet. We move off and skim amidst Callisto, fo and other Jovian moons. The return trip is uneventful. We once again leave normal space and appear at GATEWAY. Our Captain comes on the intercom and points out landmarks as we are drawn back into the earth's atmosphere, and towards the CN Tower. Landing once again, don't wish to have your fantasies shattered by the cold truth of high-tech. As you might have guessed, the shuttle trip was not real, burt a highly accurate and absorbing simulation that took four years and 10 million dollars to create. Showscan is the system that creates the illusion of space travel. It was developed by Douglas Trumbeil, film director and designer of special effects for such films as 2001: A Space Odyssey, Star Wars and Close Encounters of the Third Kind. A chillingly accurate film of space and space effects is rear-projected onto the shuttle's forward viewing screen at 60 frames a second. Which is two and a half times faster than normal. This speed has been found to be similar to that of the human eye as it observes the world. The 70mm large format is combined with a high level of AGO 13! Halley's Comet will be available soon and new planets and galaxies to explore are already under development They've even got another shuttie ready to go when the big off-world tourist season starts! Some of us get nervous just standing on a tall ladder. But if you want to set your sights high without taking a big chance, try Tour Of The Universe. When not operating his commercial photography studio in New York, Marshal M. Rosenthal is a journalist for a number of domestic and overseas publications dealing in computers, video and high technology. the shuttle is returned to the staging area and we disembark. Leaving the craft, we pass by a series of huge 3x5 foot holograms extolling the virtues of science and technology. But what would any spaceport be without a gift shop? The corridor exits into a glittering and exciting world of scientific gifts and gadgets. Not to mention an avalanche of souvenirs. Managing to escape with a few dollars left, I enter another transition elevator which returns me to 1986. WARNING: Read no further if you brightness, and an expanded view air. which creates the amazing feeling of Computers, of course, control the reality, movements, as well as duplicate the It's helped by a four channel digital many events which can occur. Flying soundtrack which eminates from a simulator is just like the real thing, speakers placed strategically around but you never leave the ground. and outside of the shuttle. TOUR's simulator is designed by The film images are interlinked by El Systems and seats 40-45 computer with the shuttle itself. The people. It's been specially adapted to shuttle is a motion picture house that react just like a real space craft. flies. Forward and lateral movements, as Pilots train on sophisticated well as such things as pitch, roll and devices that imitate actual aircraft. yaw, happen in conjunction with the These are called simulators. images onscreen. Simulators act and react just like the Believe me though, when you're aircraft does in flight. power diving towards the earth, your "


"DIT Heavy on the Magick 0 CONVERSATIONS WITH APEX THE DOUBT OF RABAK Magick Theory DREPTE MIRE OLD TROLL! BEFORE THE GATES OF WOLFDORP Magick Heavy on the Magick SCREEN SHOTS FROM THE SPECTRUM VERSION BEWARE OF THE WEREWOLF! MAGOT THE PRINCE From GARGOVLE -the GAMEMASTERS SPECTRUM 48/128K (AVAILABLE NOW) AMSTRAD (AVAILABLE MAY 1986) CBM 64/128 (AVAILABLE SOON) CBM 64/128 .95 GARGOYLE GAMES LTD., 74 KING STREET, DUDLEY, WEST MIDLANDS DY2 80B Telephone: (Sales) 0384 238777 (General) 0384 237222 "


"COMO COMPETITION coMPETITION Good day, sport. Meet Team Gola, three nameless space kids and their equally nameless robot. They're the stars of this simply sensational C+VG summer competition. And the prizes? Well, they're in the bag. We've got 25 metallic Team Gola sports bags to give away. Besides sports gear, they are ideal for school books or holiday gear. Team Gola will feature on a new range of sports gear this summer from Gola. There is even talk of the team featuring in a computer game. What we want you to do is create a comic strip adventure storyboard for Team Gola. This is your chance to give your imagination a good work out. You can even create names for the team. Right. Get ready, get set and go straight to your pencils, pens and paints for you to help create some new comic strip heroes. C+VG will also be printing a selection of the best strips in a future issue. Send your entries together with the printed coupon to C+VG/Team Gola Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, ECIR 3AU. The closing date for the competition is July 16th and the editor's decision is final. C+VG/TEAM GOLA COMPETITION Name Address Age "


"For most games players, the most important piece of extra equipment they will buy for their micro will be a joystick. In his search for the ultimate joysticks. C+VG's JIM DOUGLAS locked himself in a small, dark room with Uridium and Winter Games. This is his story ... E WIM'S T THE RATINGS EXPLAINED KEMPSTON PRO 5000 Performance on Winter Games: Well, it's a bit of an improvement! Movement is easier, and more precise. The firing lets the stick down. On long events, the shape causes considerable discomfort. Accuracy 6 Ergonomics 5 Strength 7 Overall 6 VULCAN The sticks featured here have all been graded on a scale of 1-10 in the following categories: Ergonomics: Design to you, stupid! Does the stick stay firmly in your hand, or does it wrench itself from your grip at the first sign of an approaching nasty? Do those buttons take the superhuman hammering dealt out when you're dealing with a squadron of Uridium fighters? Strength: At the end of your record-breaking effort, is the machinery still in working order? Accuracy: A pretty vital rating this. The last thing you want to happen as you try to match the rotation of the Elite space-stations is for your joystick to decide it only wants to turn one way. and fire at will! Overall: Does the stick do the job? ELECTRONICS GUNSHOT direction indicators but it's awkward to hold, unresponsive and a rather poor show overall! Performance on Uridium: I skimmed over the first Dreadnought's surface, unsuccessfully struggling to hold the blasted thing without partially paralyzing my hand. Firing is very hard work. You've got to push the button firmly home before you get any response. It's very strong but that's really all I could say for it. Performance on Winter Games: This stick seems to perform best when only minor accuracy is required. On the long events, such as speed skating, it works quite well, although it's hard work, owing to the power of the self-centring mechanism. The fire-button was barely adequate. Accuracy 4 Ergonomics 4 Strength 7 Overall 5 The Kempston has reigned as the top games-players' joystick since it first emerged from Coin Controls Limited all those years ago. Despite various gimmicks employed by other firms to make their sticks seem superior, the 5000 seems to have fought off all competition without much bother. Even with few alterations over its relatively long life span the Kempston still remains a favourite with most gamers. Performance on Uridium: It performed almost perfectly! The rapid fire needed in the game was admirably supported by the twin fire buttons, neither of which \"stuck\" or missed a shot. Although there is no definite \"switch\"ing sound when changing from one direction to another, no problems with accuracy arose at all. Performance on Winter Games: Owing to the lack of audible switching, some events became more difficult. In the figure and free skating for example, it is necessary to make a move with extreme precision. The \"click\" which some sticks produce makes this easier; although it's very easy to correct an error with the Pro 5000. It's also very easy to make a slip. Accurancy 8 Ergonomics 8 Strength 8 Overall 8 EUROM AX MICRO ACE Doesn't this look frightfully similar to the Pro Ace? Hang on! This has got a RED handle, and WHITE directional arrows! It has also got micro switches, which make life a whole lot easier. Performance on Uridium: It's still a bit of a nightmare to hold, but is better than the Pro Ace. The switches make play more accurate, and less tiring. Firing is still pretty awful, causing terminal cramp in the reviewer's thumb! The Gunshot looks like yet another variation on Spectravideo's Quickshot range. It has the same design style, with one fire button positioned on the base, and another on the shaft. Here, though, the latter sits on top of the handle. Although it offers an effective autofire option, the stick feels a little top-heavy and the rubber feet aren't any real use. Performance on Uridium: The autotire option really comes into its own in the game! It will produce a continual stream of fire while you deal with the tricky aspect of steering. Unfortunately, the stick doesn't really have the necessary accuracy to avoid all the meteor shields. Performance on Winter Games: The grip is very comfortable, especially when working your way through the tough Biathlon event. The firing wasn't particularly sensitive. It has smooth movement, though, making the long-distance events such as speed-skating quite easy. I'm not sure how much it would EUROMAX PRO ACE The Pro Ace looks utterly tremendous all black, with a bright red fire button and Euromax Euromax Wizard, Pro and Micro Ace Kempston and Cheetah ... PROBABLY THE MOST INTERESTING "


"ToysTICK JURY more force than is actually necessary on the stick. It's possible to be accurate enough to achieve a reasonable score. Performance on Winter Games: Still rather awful. The firing was slow and inaccurate, and movement followed suit. It felt strong, though, and held up reasonably well under prolonged play. Performance on Winter Games: It's certainly of a higher quality than the Quickshot 1. It's easier to use, and the firing is more accurate. Movement isn't much cop, and when you need speed and precision you may as well forget it. EUROMAX WIZ CARD Accuracy 5 Ergonomics 5 Strength 6 Overall 5 Accuracy 6 Ergonomics 6 Strength 6 Overall 6 QUICKSHOT 7 \"THE JOYCARD\" stand, before the switches became bent Accuracy 9 away from their contacts. Ergonomics 8 Accuracy 6 Strength 8 Ergonomics 7 Overall 9 Strength 6 Overall 7.5 QUICKSHOT 1 Many regard the Quickshot 1 as the turning point in joystick manufacture. It's cheap, simple to use and versatile. Unfortunately it's also a pretty awful \"Pah,\" thinks the standard reviewer as this joystick. little monstrosity falls from the packet. Well, Performance on yah-boo sucks to \"standard\" reviewers, Uridium: 'cos this is one of the best \"sticks\" in the entire universe. So there! Direction changes are ghastly. Firing is It's around the size of an individual Fruit cumbersome and stiff. To get any response 'n' Nut choc-bar, allowing obviously — you need to use a good deal of force. Quite some extra size for the two fire buttons and unbearable. Ugh! Take it away! directional thingy on top. Performance on Performance on Winter Games: Uridium: You can hardly call it \"performance\". It's It's wonderfully accurate, and easy to horrible. operate. The only problem with using the Accuracy 4 Wiz Card (so-called because it's a bit Ergonomics 5 like a card, and a \"wiz\" to use — geddit?) is if you've got used to a standard joystick. Strength 4 Once you've got the hang of the movement, Overall 4 it's a dream to use. You don't need to exert any force to change direction, and it fits easily into the hand. It's really quite good. Umpteen games players still swear by the Performance on Quickshot 2. It's lightweight, and efficient. It fits well into the hand, and is Winter Games: comfortable for long-term use. Wonderful! This one worked with hardly any problems at all. Firing was responsive Performance on and trouble-free. Direction changes were Uridium: precise, too. The only problem arose on long events, where continual direction This is a bit of an improvement! It's a lot changes are necessary, it was quite hard to better than the Q.Shot 1. The autofire works get a comfortable grip. You can't really use well, giving a nice, healthy stream of well, giving a nice, healthy one thumb, as you've got to press on bullets. Movement is still a little on the different areas of the pivoting button. Using unresponsive side, causing the user to exert two digits, though is rather awkward! QUICKSHOT 2 Yeh! Right on! This is the business! Not Yet another Quickshot clone! It's black, only do you get a dead swish black with red buttons, rubber feet and a rather card-like object, with an immensely smooth dodgy switch system. This stick has got fire direction-disc in the middle and two fire buttons all over it! There are two on the buttons. BUT ... Da-daa! Two red lights to show you when you're firing! base, a trigger, one on the very top of the shaft und an autofire. It's reasonably strong, More of these little wonders are but is very light, and feels as if it's suffering appearing on the market all the time, and if under the strain of multi-directional this one is anything to go by, they could soon be taking business away from zapping! conventional sticks. Performance on Performance on Uridium: Uridium: Urgh! These base-mounted buttons are You can hold the button down for autofire, dreadful! Let's try the trigger; not much use or use it as a normal button. And just watch either. How about autofire? Oh. That those red lights go! Movement takes a while doesn't work either. Not doing very well so to get used to, but is responsive, slick and far, is it, folks? requires minimal user strength! The design Playing a passive game of Uridium isn't means you can use it with one hand, the easiest or most sensible -thing in leaving the other free for slurping coffee the world. Still, the movement is pretty etc. good. There isn't much resistance to direction-changes, and it's not too hard to Accuracy 8 avoid the dreadnought's static delences. Ergonomics 8 Strength 8 END Overall 8 Kempston and Cheetah, again! Quickshot 1, 2 and 7 JOYSTICK ARTICLE ... IN THE WORLD.!! "


"Get yourself into a spin with this gem of a C+VG competition. Precious prizes are up for grabs thanks to our friends at Electric Dreams. What are the prizes? Just read on. We've got 50 copies of the dizzily delightful Spindizzy to give away. In Spindizzy you control a spinning top through a vast number of screens to collect jewels against the clock. Some appear in seemingly inaccessible places. At first it appears impossible to reach them. Great skill, good judgement and a delicate touch will be needed to conquer this game. So how can you get your hands on a copy? Printed below are the names of gems all jumbled up. All you have to do is sort out the names. But beware! Because we're a sneaky although very loveable bunch of people, some of the jumble words may just be jumble words. SPINDIZZ NOILIL. Here they are: RBYU AMONDID ZAPTO REBAM ZAMGOZ IRESAPPH ZAGUIRE 1123) C+VG Electric Dreams Spindizzy Competition Name ......... Address ..... Send your answers together with the printed coupon to Spindizzy Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU. The closing date is July 16th and the editor's decision is final. REDHAWK COMPETITION OILIIIIIIIIIIII IIIIIIIIIIIIIII Here's your chance to be a super-hero! Redhawk-as you probably already know — is the new graphic adventure from Melbourne House. You become Redhawk, and fight wrong-doers the world over. And we're offering you a chance to get your own spanking new copy of the game, without parting with a single penny! Yes. It's as easy as this. Just grab a biro, and answer these superbly simple questions on the form below. The first 50 C64 and Amstrad owners to get the answers right will win a copy. And the first 100 C+VG readers to send a SAE to Melbourne will get a poster, without answering ANY questions! Shazam! Closing date for the competition is July 16th. Normal C+VG rules apply and the editor's decision is final. Send your entries to Computer and Video Games, Redhawk Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. 1) What substance renders Superman powerless? 2) What is Spiderman's job in the real world? 3) Where does Judge Dredd live? 4) Which TV programme features the Mysterons? 5) Which TV programme featured K9? The first 100 readers to send an SAE to the following address will receive a FREE poster of Redhawk: C+VG Redhawk Competition, Melbourne House, 60 High Street, Hampton Wick, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, KTI 4DB. C+VG/MELBOURNE HOUSE REDHAWK COMPETITION Name: Address: Computer owned (tick box) C640 Amstrado My answers are: Fj ito "


"THE WAY OF THE TIGER Enter the world of Avenger, a Ninja warrior of unparalleled skills and deadly powers, as he battles the forces of evil in defence of his faith and protection of the weak. Be calm and stay silent as the outstanding animation and unrivalled combat routines take you to levels of action you'd never have thought possible Experience the stunning effects of triple scrolling action as you master the techniques of Hand to Hand combat, Pole Fighting and the skills of the Samuri Sword. And when you believe you've succeeded in overcoming all the odds, the next in this thrilling series of adventures will beckon you forward to a further challenge of death. .95 DISC Cassette .95 MSX 64K Spectrum 48K Amstrad CBM 64/128 Gremlin Graphics Software Limited, Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: 0742-753423 TPI Gelen TRIPLESSCROLL\" TORCE e masturidagi Torce mid g Screenshots from Spectrum 48K "


"Sixteen ways to a Golden Summer. SUMMER GAMES NE OPENING & AWARDS CEREMONY  POLE VAULT DIVING  4x400 METRE RELAY 100 METRE DASH SKEET SHOOTING GYMNASTICS 100 METRE FREESTYLE FREESTYLE RELAY SUMMER GAMES II OPENING & AWARDS CEREMONY & NATIONAL ANTHEMS CYCLING FENCING KAYAKING TRIPLE JUMP ROWING  HIGH-JUMP JAVELIN EQUESTRIAN EVENTS 1-8 PLAYERS 'The best sports simulation available for the 64 Commodore User Commodore 64 FDYX end all sports simulations' \"The sports simulation to Commodore 64 *** -Zzap 64 DISK CASSETTE 'The graphics are stunning' nestaComputer Gamer .95 .95 COMPUTER SOFTWARE THE WORLD'S BIGGEST SELLING OLYMPIC SIMULATION 02 37 66 "


"THE SOFTWARE CHART Hot off the presses is the latest C + VG Gallup Software Top 30. It's the most accurate and up to date chart currently published in Britain. Just one look through the latest C + VG charts will tell you which top name games are selling the quickest — making it easier for you to choose the shoot-em-up, karate game or boxing program you want. It's a knock-out. TOP 30 ALL FORMATS JULY MACHINE WEEKS IN CHART C16/SP/CO/BB CO 5 SP/CO/AM/BB/EL SP SP/AM/MS SP/AM/CO CO/AM NE 25 SP/CO/AM/BB/EL ASP/AM 1 30 5 3 THIS LAST MONTH MONTH GAME Bomb Jack Commando 28 Formula 1 Simulator Green Beret Way of the Tiger 7 They Sold (2) Last V8 Spindizzy Comp. Hits 10 (2) Batman NE Thrust 13 Spellbound 14 Superbowl 15 L 10 One Man and His Droid 1616 Turbo Espirit 17T17 Finders Keepers 1813 Action Biker 19 Starstrike 2 5 Yie Ar Kung Fu RE Kik Start 22 NE Off the Hook FA Cup Football 24 NE Heavy on the Magik 25 BMX Racers Vegas Jackpot 27 Incredible S. Fireman 28 Mr Puniverse 29 NET Sport of Kings 24 Winter Olympics MANUFACTURER Elite Elite Ocean Mastertronic Imagine Gremlin Ocean Mastertronic Electric Dreams Beau Jolly Ocean Firebird Mastertronic Ocean Mastertronic Durell Mastertronic 1 Mastertronic Real Time Imagine Mastertronic Off the Hook Virgin Games Gargoyle Games Mastertronic Mastertronic Mastertronic Mastertronic Mastertronic Tynesoft SP/CO/AM SP/CO/AM C16/AT SP SP/CO/AM/MS/C16 SP/CO/C16/AT SP/AM SP/CO/AM/BB/EL CO 16 \":----M88-1-1-1-1-3-1--36 36 NE 20 21 23 SP/CO/AM SP SP/CO/AM/C16 36 222222 26 SP CO/SP BB/EL/C16 30 AMSTRAD/TOP 10 SPECTRUMTOP 10 1 Spindizzy/Electric Dreams 2 Last V8/Mastertronics 3 Into Oblivion/Mastertronic 4 Get Dexter/PSS 5 They Sold (2)/Hit Squad 6 Commando/Elite 7 Way of the Tiger/Gremlin Graphics 8 Comp. Hits 10 Vol 2/Beau Jolly 9 Turbo Esprit/Durrell 10 Formula One Simulator/Mastertronic MACHINE KEY SP SPECTRUM BB = BBC CO = COMMODORE 64 AT = ATARI AM = AMSTRAD EL = ELECTRON C1 = C16 ENT = ENTERPRISE V20 = VIC 20 DR = DRAGON 1 Green Beret/Imagine 2 Bomb Jack/Elite 3 V/Ocean 4 Batman/Ocean 5 Way of the Tiger/Gremlin Graphics 6 Starstrike 2/Realtime 7 Heavy on the Magik/Gargoyle Gms 8 Incredible Shrinking Fireman/Mastertronic 9 Sport of Kings/Mastertronic 10 Turbo Esprit/Durell BBC/TOP 10 ATARVTOP 10 CBM 64/TOP 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Thrust/Firebird Bomb Jack/Elite V/Ocean Spindizzy/Electric Dreams International Karate/System 3 PSI-5 Trading Company/US Gold Uridium/Hewson Consultants They Sold (2)/Hit Squad Superbowl/Ocean Kane/Mastertronic 1 Last V8/Mastertronic 2 One Man and His Droid/Mastertronic 3 Action Biker/Mastertronic 4 Chimera/Firebird 5 Fighter Pilot/Digital Integratio 6 Football Manager/Addictive Games 7 Steve Davis' Snooker/CDS 8 Spy Vs Spy 2/Databyte 9Yie Ar Kung Fu/Imagine 10 Soul of a Robot/M'tronic 1 Commando/Elite 2 Winter Olympics/Tynesoft 3 Karate Combat/Superior 4 Tennis/Bug Byte 5 Phantom Combat/Doctorsoft 6 Comp. Hits 10 Vol 2/Beau Jolly E7 Citadel/Superior 8 Strike Force Harrier/Mirrorsoft 9 Yie Ar Kung Fu/Imagine 10 Bruce Lee/US Gold COMPILED BY GALLUP "


"The first REAL computer sport SurfChamp The game that teaches you to surf With its unique custom-built miniature surfboard which clips over the keyboard SurfChamp gets as close as possible to real surfing. Blasting, aerial cut-backs, going off-the-lip-all the stunts and manoeuvres of the professional surfer are within reach, as the breakers roll in across your TV screen. \"A true simulator. . . The only thing the package does not supply is 50 million tons of salt water» Sinclair User, January 1986. Awarded a Sinclair User Classic \"A unique challenge\" Computer & Video Games, February 1986 MIEI Come to the regional Surfing Championships See local and computer press for details Is ocents SPECTRUM 48K @ .95 COMMODORE 64 New Concepts Ltd, Dublin Street, Carlow, Ireland Tel: (010-353) 503 VACATION PROGRAMMERS WANTED! LEADING SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS MELBOURNE HOUSE are looking for highly talented programmers capable of producing programmes in their summer vacation, to the very high quality Melbourne House is famous for worldwide. This is an ideal opportunity to earn credibility for your programming skills with the Software House that produced the 'Programme of the Year 1985'. You will receive good support from our highly professional team and remuneration typical of a highly successful company. INTERESTED? UP TO THE CHALLENGE? For further details call Rachel Davies on (01) 943 3911 or write to Melbourne House, 60 High Street, Hampton Wick, Kingston-Upon-Thames, Surrey. KT1 4DB If you have already any completed programmes up to our standard, please send them too. "


"C+VG ZADZI NEWS In his penthouse COMMODORE USER apartment in the HELPLINE IDEAs Central building Keith Campbell, one of The Adventure Helpline (TM) is the few survivors to become a regular feature in of the corporate Commodore User magazine. CU Editor Eugene Lacey, has purges which reached an agreement with Tim swept through the Metcalfe and Keith Campbell, to software industry when the IDEAS monthly feature in Commodore User. This doesn't mean that Corp was C+VG and CU readers will get the establishing itself, same articles each month. (I've busies hmself seen to that! Ed). The CU Helpline with an intricate will have its own identity. However, all information will be and time pooled in the same database, consuming task. giving both sets of readers the His job is to collect benefit of the BIGGEST single and collate all the source of adventure clues in the UK. There are many C+VG data relevant to Adventure enthusiasts who write adventure games to beg for more pages devoted to and dispense Adventure, and complaining that words of wisdom they have to wait a whole month for their next \"fix\". As Commodore to people with User is published between problems. C+VG's monthly appearance, This month the here's your chance to get a Adventure Helpline \"booster\" mid-month! brings much needed help, VALKYRIE II advice and hints to the troubled ARRIVES and tormented adventure games Carpathia, where is it? player. That is the question asked by many players stuck in Valkyrie 17. The answer is: \"You can't get there in this game. It's in the way. Mike Woodroffe's sequel!\" Heavy sighs all round. Adventure Soft has signed a Three Days In Carpathia is contract to produce the games. now well under way, and due for The games will be released release any time between now and under the long winded title \"Isaac the end of the year. It will be the Asimov's Science Fiction first release from The Ram Jam Magazine Presents.\" The first will Corporation created using their be Kayleth, written by Stefan newly developed programming Ufnowski. aid The Biro. A modern version of The plot of Kayleth, due for a Quill? release during the summer, is Carpathia will play, and look, Stefan's own creation but further quite different to Valkyrie. titles WILL include games based Running in real time, the game will on Asimov novels. have more intelligence, allowing Meanwhile, future Fighting the player to have fairly intelligent Fantasy titles on the move, are conversations with the characters Demons of the Deep, Sword of he meets. the Samurai, and Trial of Versions for Spectrum, Champions. Commodore 64, and Amstrad are planned, with an Atari ST version following later. Meanwhile, Ram Jam have a ISAAC ASIMOV busy schedule, with some six or SOFTWARE more titles in the pipeline. Some will be released by other publishers, including The Amulet which will come from Mosaic, the Magnetic Scrolls, the team that Adrian Mole people. produced The Pawn, have signed Other adventures from Ram Jam a deal giving Rainbird Software will feature science fiction, the world marketing rights to six Chicago gansters, and Ninja future products. scenarios. I will be bringing you First of these will be another an in-depth report on Ram Jam's stunning adventure, The Guild of Thieves, due for release in the activities next issue. autumn. Meanwhile, The Pawn is really taking off in the USA. Because of a THE GUILD six month wait for reviews to get OF THIEVES into the US press every computer store selling The Pawn has been supplied with a copy of the C+VG's April issue — which As rumoured exclusively in this featured an exclusive review of column two months ago, the first the game. This is being displayed adventure based on the science alongside the game as information fiction of Isaac Asimov is on its to prospective customers. MAIL BAG Up till now I have only played arcade games, which, although enjoyable, quickly become boring. For instance, I can hardly be bothered playing Fist any more. I believe adventures will fill this gap-only, which ones to buy? I don't want to waste money on a batch of bad games, and to be immediately put off. I can guess your answer may be to keep buying C+VG (which I will do) but I am writing this after receiving the April issue (excellent) which means another month before my next fix! S. Hutchinson, Corby. Keith's reply: You are quite right! Ultimately, adventures are the only games that will justify your computer's existence! But be careful, do not try anything too advanced until you have been \"weaned\" into the adventure world! Try first, as I did, Adventureland! It is written with the first-time player in mind. I think your adventure section is mega-fab. The adventure books are extra-mega-fab. I even buy two copies of C+VG, so I don't have to ruin one with the continual looking up of clues. Please could you tell me when the next one is? Stephen Randall, Randalstown, Co Antrim. Keith's reply: Looks as if you will have to wait a little while, want to know how to cross the Stephen. The date being chasm in Tower of Despair. Not discussed for the next Book of the bridge guarded by tne angel Adventure is the March issue. of death, but the CHASM do you We found that the December hear me? issue, chosen for the last book, I am going crazy over this one, meant that much of the and that's not the worst of it! My preparation time fell into the youngest child says she knows holiday period and the week of how to do it, but she won't tell me! the PCW Show where the Please put me in the picture Helpline team put on a live before that pre-teen horror comes performance! We want to bring to torment me (and try to extort you the best, and that doesn't more pocket money) with happen if the job is rushed! incomprehensible references to What's more, there is usually flutes and things... more new software around at the Don Macleod, time a March book is being Dingwall, produced. Ross-shire. Keith's reply: She's bluffing, You promised to send me a Don! See the upside down postcard and you haven't! I still section this issue. "


"TIDUERCURE Another reader, Robert Gregg is trying to Save The World. have been made to the of Abingdon, confirms this Trouble is, Debra's having Mastertronic version? OF FOOD AND problem. OK, then BBC players. problems in operating the fixators, The forest of Deja Vu, and the DRINK Where Is it? And then there's the and hasn't yet got past the first two quicksand, are bogging down Amstrad version, as well... locations. John Manifold of Ulceby. When I Another perennial puzzler This is the very problem I had, wrote to Al-Strad's author, he was comes from Castle of Terror. when I played the game. very helpful with clues. The Ray Nurden of Newport is trying Nurden of Newport is trying Everyone knows that you must First you must get Coypu's trouble is, they were just about as to get the lid off a tomb, and has a break the spear to make a stake. fixator, and make a helix. GO helpful as many of mine...! bottle of wine he wants to get rid (don't they? mustn't you?). Well, HELIX is then the command that Problems of all sorts provide a of in Ashkeron. Perhaps this will for goodness sake, someone tell allows you to change the values of continual flow of letters on help Jason Langwith of us how you break it? Countless spin, phase, flux, and resonance, Sorceror of Claymorgue Castle. Barkingside to wash a meal down, adventurers are desperate to for which you will be prompted. John Nicholson is nine years-old should he find one? He tried eating know. Words of one syllable Different combinations of these and healthy right now, but soon cheese, but suffered a terminal please! parameters will transport you to a he'll die of young age! Seems he case of food poisoning, and is now Elton Ritchie of Berwick upon number of scenarios but I never needs to do a bit of icon pung: seeking something more Tweed brings to the Helpline a discovered how to get where I \"If you examine the staff, in See palatable. new crop of Kentilla problems. wanted with any degree of Kaa of Assiah, press the stud and Meanwhile there's a more beery How do you get past the certainty, nor what to do when I when you reach the guardian, flavour to Alan Maudlin's fireshield? Where is the Talisman got there! throw the staff in,\" says Maggie problem. Alan is up in and diamonds? And how can you Peter Cseh of Athelstone in Gregory, of BFPO 106. Now all she Peterborough trying to get past move the gargoyle to reveal a South Australia wants guidance. needs to know, is what the small some rats in Pub Quest. trapdoor? He is stuck at the stone monolith in hook is for! Ray's wine and Alan's beer will Elton has also requested that a Souls of Darkon, and feels the Ian Fleming is pressing on with be no use for Ian Fleming of page be devoted each month to blacksmith might be able to offer Denis Through the Drinking March, though. It is plain water explain the basics of writing an some help, but what should he say Glass, but now cannot pass Keith that he seeks, and he needs it for a adventure program. Older readers to him? Joseph, who is high on LSD. You bean that is crying out in thirst in will remember that this was a Can the coffin in the clearing be can try giving him back his Ring of Power. feature of the original column from opened? More important, where is marbles, Ian. Athos Vassiliov of Cyprus will the talisman mentioned in the There is a vicious dog on the settle for a recipe, rather than a who missed those issues can get scroll? Spiders and a demon are edge of the woods, and for some whole meal. What ingredients are hold of the whole series and more among other things bothering reason, David Mills of needed to turn him into a human? in book form. The Computer & James Laver in Token from Stourbridge cannot either kill it, or He is playing Witch's Cauldron, Video Games Book of Adventure Ghall. entice it away. He is playing and wants to know what to put into is published by Melbourne House, Aengus Stewart has an enternal Castle of Skull Lord. Is there a .95. flame, and no way can he give it to dog-handler out there who can Food, glorious food! Andreas Miss Cattalano lives in Monte Tigoroth. In general he has trouble help? Huller of Munich, wants to know Carlo, and is a regular subscriber interacting with any of the Another riddle comes from how to get information from the to C+VG. But whenever she goes characters in Sorderon's Shadow. Ridler's Den. David Stephens of food centre, and also, what he to Saigon, her hut blows up. The Who can help? Darlington is unsure how to use should say to the engraver to get a only means of escape is via a A cutting problem for Brendon the objects he has collected, and library permit, in Fahreneheit 451. stream with a deadly water snake. Roberts of Whangerei in New would welcome any tips in Has anyone survived Saigon, Zealand, is the whereabouts of the general. Final Day? knife in Colditz, the adventure PROBLEMS There's a native on the from Phipps that has become Invincible Island, watching something of a classic. VARIOUS Michael Tang of Leicester, with ADVENTURER great suspicion. Other natives OF THE YEAR seem to be intent on stabbing him. LUCIFER'S It is rather daunting to discover Are they really invincible. that different versions of the same We are losing readers fast. REALM The competition all adventure game, have different solutions. They are being incarcerated in the enthusiasts are impatient to enter This means that the game has to Zim Sala Bim dungeon. Who can is getting nearer! Full details of our be documented more than once, liberate these unfortunate souls, Allen and Mark Errington 1986 Adventurer of the Year and that incorrect information can and help us to keep the C+VG have killed a snake, and feel they competition will be announced in be inadvertantly passed on to circulation figures up? may have to do penance. Is there a players. Clare Ward of Barnsley wants way past the crystal door, in Bored of the Rings is just such a to know the password to get past Lucifer's Realm, they ask? game, and the BBC version causes the custodian of the ring, in Ring Where is the Green Knight and endless misery to players trying to of Power. What does the post the White Charger, often talked find the means to open the Morona mean, and why has she got just about in the Helpline? Gate. one piece of jigsaw from under an Christopher McGrath has Simon Woodruffe, son of the elephant? completed Quest for the Holy well-known Mike, was one such A rat is causing much frustration Grail, but is still worrying over this agonised adventurer, who swore to Debra Long of Cheam. Debra's problem. He has the original the pepper couldn't be found in fixation is with Time Fixators, and Dream Software version of the the place I had suggested. the rat is a Stainless Steel one, who game, and wonders if any changes "


"the September issue of C+VG. There will be a unique Adventure Trophy awarded to the winner, as well as the chance to get into print with a review of your favourite game, and to speak to fellow adventurers on radio. There will be plenty of time for overseas readers to enter the competition, too, for the finals will not be held until December. But to be eligible, you will need to prove you have read the C+VG Adventure column for at least three months. If you intend to enter, start now, by saving the first entry token, on this page ADVENTURE CLUES CHEAT'S CORNER Here's a way for Atari players of Mysterious Adventures to get some most revealing results! \"Restore a game from the same series, other than the one you are playing.\" suggests A. Duffy of Deeside. \"However,\" he warns, \"it does mean that the current game will have to be re-loaded, as it will become unplayable!\" catwalk. Pull the level and examine the CRYSTAL QUEST geiger counter, for droid repairs. code. Examine the straw with the seen! A spray reveals the barrier make visible that which cannot be Give Spiderman a newspaper to MORDON'S QUEST a guiding light. Put the crystal into the fountain, for DARKON SOULS OF CLIMB DOWN. At the cliff, LOWER ROPE and KNIGHT'S QUEST Eat the berries, and jump! DESPAIR TOWER OF the grenade at it! before approaching, and throw the narrow path. Learn about arms pedestal! Find the rabbit east of When you've got it, put it on the HOLY GRAIL QUEST FOR THE potion to pass the firegate. king's anteoom. Drink the white The falcon chamber is south of the HEREOS OF KARN the game. get and clean the picture, to end the glittering walls. If you survive, Down the hole and retrace steps to Open the trap door at your peril! HEWSON'S QUEST way! Give Arler's note, and on your Don't despair and don't delay, receives, When news from Venus he If Deebo seems to be displeased GRUDS IN SPACE Have faith to pass the guard dogs. The king's horse is worth a gem. MERRAVID QUEST OF Use a clip on the cabinet. tell them where Dr Foster went. hospital, and in the treatment room shop. Tell them you are sick at the padlock to get into the magic the doctor's desk. Heat the E53-54. Steal it! Chemindexer is in The knife is in the restaurant at FAHRENEHEIT 451 THE DANISH CONNECTION Erling Hansen wrote from Denmark to ask where Paul Copping got his bacon sandwiches from, while he was solving Lord of the Rings. \"He can't have solved it as quickly as you said, because of the time it takes to do things in the game.\" Erling says he prefers English computer magazines to the Danish ones, as in the first issue of COM puter, the whole Hulk and Hobbit solutions were printed. Shame on you Christian Martensen! Never give too much away, or Paul's sandwiches will contain English bacon in future! I dropped a line to Christian, with a stern ticking-off. Christian wrote back in a state of indignation! \"Tell me, why are Danish readers writing to you, telling (squealing!) about me?!\" Christian has his suspicions as to where the leak is coming from. Christian is currently struggling through Infocom's Spellbreaker, and writes: \"Please do not write and tell me that Paul solved Spellbreaker in a mere glimpse, glimpse. whilst eating a bacon sandwich! I am in the middle of it, and it is tearing my nerves apart!\" Fahreneheit 451 players! Frank ADVENTURE Herzel of the Netherlands, came to the rescue of Giancarlo CLUES Fantechi of Italy, who needed to Thanks this month to: Andreas get into the magic shop. Huller, Munich; Danny Dinnenn, He also sent in a list of Cork; Andrew Ingham, quotations, and what to do with Keighley; Stephen Randall, Co them. They're in the usual place. Antrim; Don MacLeod, The wait for The Fantastic Four Dingwall; Hugh Walker, has been a long one, but it's here Burpham; Paul and Glen Gibney, at last! I had to smile at a comment Carrickfergus; Mandy in a letter from Dave Teague of Rodrigues, Llandudno; Steven Caerleon: \"I think I saw a copy of Hammans, Balcombe; Frank Questprobe 3 in my local shop.\" Herzen, Netherlands; Bet Hall, Perhaps it arrived with the first Dartford; Lee Jenkinson, cuckoo... Rotherham ADVENTURE CHAT A truly international effort has helped two frustrated "


"REVIEWS/1 BALLYHOO 9% Machine: Disk only on wide range .. of computers Supplier: Infocom 19 Price: Varies with version Ballyhoo is the latest adventure from Infocom, set in the world of the circus, and is described as a beginners. The story unfolds as the curtain falls on the big top. As I followed the outflowing crowd, I was more than a little disappointed with the experience of the circus. All the ballyhoo promising wonderment, somehow fell a long way short of the mark. It was not just the outrageous prices, the shabbiness of the acts themselves, or even the fact that the audience were more savage than the lions. Deep down, I knew it was because of my secret desire to steal the spotlight, defy death, and bask in the thunder of applause. As I left the crowds and looked coming this way. If I didn't act fast, around the circus and its I'd be caught red-handed, so I sideshows for the last time, I came found myself a hiding place. across Colonel Thumb, one of the As the men entered the tent, midgets, who was having difficulty their conversation made it clear drinking from a fountain nearby. I that one was the circus owner, Mr helped him up, so that he could Munrab, and the other, a private have a drink, and he saluted me detective. Munrab's daughter for my kindness, before waddling Chelsea, it seemed, had been off into the darkness. Maybe kidnapped. Unconcerned, the somewhere else in this adventure detective appeared ready to he would return the favour, but for suspect anyone Munrab now, I would have to wait and see. suggested as the kidnapper. Moving on, I passed the white Clearly this detective lacked any wagon belonging to Mr Munrab kind of professionalism or the circus owner, which also passion. doubled as a ticket office. Now it Handing over a recent photo of was locked up, and all in his daughter, Munrab and the darkness. Eventually I stood detective left the tent and walked outside an old tent. out into the warm summer night. Once inside, I found there all the Since the detective seemed to props used by circus acts. I be doing little to find the real started looking around, but hadn't kidnapper, here was my chance to got very far before two ominous help, and, in so doing, maybe get shadows appeared against the an opportunity to do something in wall of the tent. Talking in the circus. whispers, they were clearly Those of you out there who have played Hitch Hiker's Guide will remember the scene in which you have an argument with the game while on the Heart of Gold, when you try to enter the drive chamber. This time, you'll have one over an Egress, What is an Egress? I'm not telling, suffice to say, if you follow the argument through, you'll find out! Once more Infocom have come up with the goods, to maintain their position as number one adventure creators. The wealth of information provided, and the almost human quality possessed by the computer when one of their games is loaaded, never ceases to amaze me. Steve Donoghue Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal  Value FOUR MOST ADVENTUR Machine: Spectrum 48K immediate vicinity. The idea, of rul tell you about the newspaper. I write an adventure. Supplier: Global Software course, is to allow you only to see wasn't allowed to pick it up, but I Galaxias: This was written by Price: .95 that which would be visible to you could read it, and thus discovered Fergus McNeill, who brought us in real life. The rest of the screen that it held a coupon. On typing Bored of the Rings and Robin of Fourmost Adventures is a shows information about your READ COUPON, the reply was 'It's Sherlock. four-game cassette with an current status. in the paper stupid.' Assuming, Beginning in a spaceport, once adventure theme. The four To describe the game fully that I had to remove the coupon you have found your space ship adventures which make up the would take quite some time, as before I could read it, I found the you can explore four different cassette have been chosen and nearly every course of action is necessary items to do so. But what planets, each with its own set of recommended by Tony Bridge, included. Indeed, a few hours happened was even more puzzles to solve. On my last count, the adventure writer for Popular could be spent just learning all the surprising. In response to my I'd discovered 80 different Computing Weekly. possible commands, and herein command to cut the coupon, I locations, ranging from the top of a Microman was originally lies the game's main weakness — found myself deposited outside 1000 storey building to a mud hut released as a single, and reviewed there are too many commands and the location I had just entered. in the middle of a jungle. I even by Paul Coppins in November, no PAUSE facility. By the time This was not an isolated managed to teleport myself to (Personal Rating 7), so it will not you've figured out which incident, either. Many times nowhere at all! be separately reviewed here. command to use, you are usually throughout the game my Galaxias makes good use of the Out of the Shadows: This is not a dead! commands were misinterpreted Spectrum's capabilities, and the true adventure, more a Apart from that, not a bad completely, resulting in instant locations are well described. role-playing dungeons and role-playing game. transportation to some other Definitely the best adventure of dragons type game, in which you The Mural: This is a text only location, sudden death, or being the four! must search for treasure in one of Quilled adventure. The objective told I couldn't move in a certain None of these adventures are six available quests, gaining is to erase some rather naughty direction. special, though, and some are experience as you go. graffiti written on a wall, and to this Finally, after every turn I was very poor. According to Tony The game reminded me of The end you find yourself inside a greeted with the words: 'Any more Bridge, who chose them, they are Valley, which appeared in cave, having been knocked out great ideas?' At first this wonderful all fine examples of the Adventure Computing Today back in 1982, as and placed there by two men prompt was amusing, gradually Writer's art. Sorry, Tony, but as a a Basic listing for the Commodore wearing suspender belts! being replaced with boredom, collection, I don't know how you pet, and was subsequently I hadn't been playing for long and eventually, pure irritation. All dared to put your name to them! converted for a variety of other before I realised just how much I in all, a fine example of how not to Steve Donoghue machines. was wasting my time. Considering There are plenty of options in the text is written in English, I had Out Of The Galaxias the game, ranging from which thought it quite reasonable to The Shadows Mural race of creature to be, to choosing assume that my commands should Vocabulary weapons, spells, and armour. be entered in English. Not so, the The display consists of a small parser of this adventure is the Atmosphere figure (you) manipulated through a worst I've ever seen. Personal small graphics area showing your To illustrtate just how bad it is, Value Da No ao ona "


"TOLKIEN'S BLOCKBUSTERS. CORD RINGS OF THE GAME ONE The great things they have said about THE LORD OF THE RINGS ...and about THE HOBBIT. 111e \"Promises to be one of the biggest games of 1986.\" Crash HOBBIT «A perfect blend of atmosphere, sophistication, graphics and classic adventure problems\". Popular Computing Weekly «Explore, experience and enjoy.\" Computer Video & Games «Brilliant, amusing and incurably addictive.\" Commodore User «Adventure game of the Year.\" Popular Computing Weekly Readers Award «Make new discoveries each time. Micro Adventurer \"Destined to appeal to all adventurers.\" \"More of an experience than a program.\" Computer Trade Weekly Popular Computing Weekly LORD OF THE RINGS Game 1 for Spectrum, C64, Amstrad, BBC at .95. THE HOBBIT now available for Spectrum, C64, Amstrad, BBC at the new price .95. MELBOURNE HOUSE.Lehto The Home of the Hits! Melbourne House (Publishers) Ltd. Melbourne House 60 High Street Hampton Wick Kingston upon Thames Surrey KT1 4DB. Telephone: (01)9433911 Telex: 935425 MELRSO "


"C+VG THADVENTURE PREVIEW: THE PRICE OF MAGICK Om OET YO EXi  3E1CT TIME JN *** . What are Level 9 up to? Worm in Paradise concluded the Silicon Dream trilogy. With the Price of Magick just about to be released, KEITH CAMPBELL visited Pete, Nick, and Mike Austin at their fantasy factory, Level 9 West, just outside Weston-super-Mare, to discover if their life's work was now complete. He found exactly the opposite! Pete Austin gets slightly indignant Mike have added! Putting the clue about bug-ridden adventures. sheet together can be quite a True, pretty nearly every nightmare, for people start adventure ever produced has screaming for them very soon some slight glitch, at least. But after the game is out!\" They some seem to thrive on players' scream in large numbers, too. Pete boasts about how many bugs they reckons about 2,000 requests a have found month are received Exits are nort Level 9 consistently produce a It is perhaps ironic that their program quality second to none. most successful creation to date, roo South to a MU Over the years, they have built up The Secret Diary of Adrian a first class reputation, having Mole, (published by Mosaic) Southwest to the pe created twelve best-selling titles which sold more than 150,000 and copies, was not actually a real st to be Lou a to date. Pete's indignation about bugged adventure game! However, the gal programs is well justified, for earnings of Mole, Pete Austin told when I arrived, Mike was working me, has at last given them a sound OU? SU at his development system, financial base on which to build a surrounded by keyboards, piles of major expansion. Even if the e in the pe notes, and goodness knows what family don't mind living frugally in else, looking rather harassed. the lean times, programmers have \"I'm just finishing off my part of to be paid, and Level 9 is poised to Landing an OUT THE GAME,\" he grinned. \"It was take on some additional just about to be duplicated when p rogramming help. Pane Lled corridor. we found a bug.\" This delayed the When I saw the detail of feeling of magik. release by a few days, and all, it research, game design, and 1. written by William Smethurst, now under a contract signed with running Crossroads, but for the Rainbird Software. As well as past ten years producers, and being available in the UK, the sometimes scriptwriter, of The trilogy will be Level 9's debut in Archers. Both Mole 2 and The the USA. Archers will have more choices \"We had been thinking about a and plot than the original Mole, but deal with Rainbird for some time,\" Pete described the difficulty in said Pete. \"We finally decided creating such a game. when Paula Byrne joined Rainbird, \"In multiple choice books, like as Marketing Manager. She had Fighting Fantasy, for example, done such a marvellous job with What now? EXAMINE WALL there are one or two choices on Melbourne House, that we have Ordinary every page,\" he explained. \"The every confidence in her ability to what notN trouble with the computer screen put us well and truly on the map in You're in a Solarium, Exits al is that it can't hold so much text as the States.\" South to a COLLAPSing Junction the printed page. Therefore the In September, a new adventure nofth test to laboratory intervals at which the player Knight Orc — is planned for What not > NUL interacts seem further apart. Rainbird, and this promises to be Te n a laboratory Where There tends to be a need for a few an adventure with a difference. SS screenfuls of text between each The player will start off seems, due to a missing full-stop! programming that they put into input.\" believing himself to be a Knight, \"It's not writing games that's each game, I marvelled at how If Mole made thousands of 13 only to find that he was merely difficult,\" complained Pete, they have managed to find time for and 3/4 year olds aware of Level 9 dreaming, and is, in reality, modestly. \"Anyone could do that! all they have achieved to date, on for the first time, then perhaps nothing better than a miserable Getting the hint-sheets written, their own. Archers will introduce Level 9, Orc. that is the headache!\" THE MOSAIC and interactive fiction, to a whole For once, you get the chance to Now I've had a sneaking new age range. play the baddie, and there will be suspicion for some time that Pete CONNECTION 200 locations in which to do so. deliberately leaves out a few vital During the coming year, Level 9's THE RAINBIRD \"Interaction with the other clues in each hint sheet, to keep connections with Mosaic CONTRACT characters encountered in the the player on his toes, and to fool Publishing will continue. First, Colossal, Adventure Quest, and game, will take it beyond Infocom Adventure Helplines... there will be The Growing Pains Dungeon Adventure, the first standard,\" promises Pete. \"Not at all,\" explained Pete. of Adrian Mole scheduled for a three text only adventures which \"After the game design has been July-ish release. A couple of established Level 9 as a leading LEVEL 9'S OWN finalised, we each go away and do months later, we can expect to see UK adventure house, are being Believe it or not, Level 9 also have 'our bit' on it. The trouble is, I'm The Archers, an everyday revamped with graphics and two adventures of their own in the never quite sure what cunning computer story, in a similar format. augmented text. They will be pipeline. But it seems they have new puzzles of their own, Nick and Pete showed me the text, released at The Colossal Trilogy been so busy they haven't yet got "


"England. anything he has done before.\" However, when Avalon does unforeseen snags! Never mind, arrive, it will be free for the first taking a risky move and ending up AVALON month. \"I don't think it is on to in trouble, is a forgivable offence Most ambitious of all, is a longer make a charge for something that in Price of Magick. term project a multi-user will probably suffer from a few Programmed by Nick Austin, a adventure to rival MUD. Entitled bugs to start with,\" he explained. new command, OOPS, has been Avalon, it will be set in the world \"We will need a bit of experience built in. If OOPS is your natural of King Arthur and Camelot, not a with it, before we can be sure reaction to a disastrous result of an million miles from Chez Austin! everything nasty has been ironed action, simple type it, and you'll Mounted on a wall was a large out.\" find yourself back in your and detailed goe-schematic map, THE PRICE OF previous location, intact! drawn in the Austin hand, and In fact, you can perform an covering the south west of MAGICK OOPS more than once on some machines, but the number of In Avalon, there will be more Machine: Commodore 64/128; backwards moves depends on the puzzles to solve than in MUD, and Spectrum 48K/128K; MSX; Amstrad machine's memory. chivalry will play a major part. The CPCs; Atari XL/XE, BBC Another new feature for Level 9 game will feature more than 1,000 is RAM SAVE, also written by Supplier: Level 9 characters of its own, and there Nick. This increasingly popular will be plenty of interaction with Price: .95 feature is certainly very useful for both them, and other players. It Myglar, once a noble magician, is those, like me, who cannot keep will be possible to recruit servants maintaining his life by sucking their blank cassettes well from the fields, for example, to magical power from the Crystal, of organised! raise an army and capture a castle. which he is the Guardian. Soon, Price of Magick uses a new Once experienced, there will be there will be no magick left in the adventure system, and is up to little incentive for a player to world. Your objective is to defeat Infocom standard. Complex continue to solve puzzles, so the Myglar and take his place before commands, including instructions game will then involve mainly it is too late. to other characters, can be strategy, and further points will be You'll start the game knowing entered. Having said that, I did awarded for being able to retain nothing about Magick, not even find one slight difficulty with possession of castles for a certain how to cast a lowly spell. As you words, when I had to use the exact length of time. progress, you'll soon recognise a expression in the reply to Eventually, a very successful spell when you see one, and learn EXAMINE (object) to perform a player will be able to manipulate how to use it, so that by the time particular action, despite my own the adventure world as perceived you've finished, you are an expert, words being very similar, and just by other, more lowly adventurers. and know everything. as obvious. Unlike MUD, which uses a VAX Your journey through the Level 9 have been appalled at computer, dated and unsuitable adventure takes you into all the the extent of piracy of their games, hardware that Pete reckons was secret nooks and crannies of a and the worst offenders, John mainly to blame for BT's troubles very large house, and its Austin told me, are BBC owners, with it, the electronic brain driving surroundings. But first you'll judging by the fact that MSX sales Avalon will consist of three or probably get cold comfort from are higher than BBC sales. Having four boards with 68020 processors, something nasty in the woodshed, many friends with Beebs, I tend to all linked together, with access which slithers about unseen, agree most of them go around through some 100 modems. It will protected by a pile of rotting wearing an eye patch, and have 10 times the power of the wood. carrying a parrot. MUD system, claims Pete, and will If you have a sensitive nature, So Beeb owners can, perhaps, be available directly by local call then be warnedmagick can be blamed for the debut of to players in the London telephone have quite a horrific side, and you Lenslok protection into Level 9 area, or relatively cheaply will come across some very adventures. But the Lenslok is elsewhere via PSS. macabre objects, like a knuckle used in an unusual way. It is called Once it is up and running, with a ring on it. Will you be too for at various stages DURING the anyone will be able to dial up and squeamish to remove the ring and game, rather than as a play, quoting a credit card number wear it yourself? How will you feel prerequisite for loading. table L OPUS OJ   nalec )  0 ID QO) . I  W SEDUCE StDo? EXAMINE PICTURE Smilho buih Re O.C $ Sha Re: MINE WOODPILE ire. Underneath 100,00 I DON mno ITEM .C CO 040 JE W 20W oma X TCD 110 3 bone 111 WOODFILE dge. OU? W onherbergen. An ex LES SESSIO 03shes, South F ree 10 thing around to sorting out names for to register. He will then have his them yet! own SAVE file created, which will Sue Gazzard, the woman who keep a log of his position every dreamed up Lords of Time, has minute or so, enabling him to been bending her mind to a new come back into the game at the scenario with a Wagnerian theme, point at which he logged off. This and this will be the next release on will also restore his status in the the Level 9 label. event of a system crash-a Fergus McNeil (of Bored of the feature which MUD lacks; when Rings fame) will be joining forces MUD fails, it's all back to square with the Austins, for what is bound one. to be another zany romp. \"I know when I hope it will be \"To date, Fergus has only used ready, but MUD got off to such a The Quill,\" commented Pete. \"We bad start by failing to appear when are very interested to see his work promised.\" So Pete wouldn't be using our Adventure system. It drawn as to whan all this will be should be very much bigger than available. about carrying a blood-sucking bat around? Talking of carrying things around, I couldn't seem to hit an inventory limit, and the list of objects I was carrying was sometimes enormous. Almost as enormous was the map I was drawing, which seemed to be forming in every decreasing circles until there was no room in the middle for any further exploration, without a complete re-draw! Soon I found I was able to recognise a spell when I saw one, but casting often revealed Price Of Magik has the usual special Austin brand of humour, and the unique Austin association of ideas in the puzzles. It is big, full of atmosphere, and entertaining. I'll be surprised if it isn't soon following in the footsteps of its predecessor, Red Moon, up there among the front runners for this year's C+VG Golden Joystick. Keith Campbell Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal Value  g "


"REVIEWS/4 THE VERY BIG CAVE ADVENTURE Machine: CBM64 Supplier: CRL Ltd/St Brides School Price: .95 I can honestly say I never laughed out loud so much while playing an adventure! Terrormolinos has its humour and satire, Bored of the Rings is an excellent spoof, but the jokes are many and varied in this one. If you've been there before, it adds to the hilarity no end. And of course, I have been there before in Tandy's Pyramid, in Abersoft Adventure, in Classic Adventure, and in Colossal. I've even played a mainframe version. I refer, of course, to the ORIGINAL ADVENTURE, and its many derivatives. I often wonder how Crowther and Woods view the people who recode their original work in faithful playing detail. However, they can hardly fail to smile at the latest example! This one is from those lovely ladies at St Bride's School, and school prefect Trixie Trinian is your guide. She knows her way CASTLE THADE co get a warning of what's to come. \"Green. Originally one of a set of ten.\" But if you've played the original, the game doesn't work out quite as you might expect. How do you get hold of the penny to open the door, to get the key, to open the grating? Hmm... not so simple, eh? You'll have to find someone gullible enough to help.... Fancy visiting the bog? Perhaps a quicksand bog wth a blue ox, spoofing another well known game? No, just a reminder that I EXON BUILDING had already spent my penny! Once in the cave, if you play by the old rules, the game tells you that it knows you've played it before! There are jokes, and around, so behave yourself, and to move from Part I to Part 2. unexpected happenings all the follow her. Believe it or not, you start in a way. Ever tried playing text space Very Big is a Patched and forest outside a brick building. It's invaders? You'll get the chance Illustrated Quill adventure, but had a Welly House, and to get in you'll here! I not been told on the inlay (which have to put a penny in a slot of a So how did I rate? I scored a itself has a dig at inlays!) I would brass mechanism that says measly two shillings and not have known. The graphics are 'Vacant'. fourpence three-farthings, out of a good and fast, and the appearance Once inside, you will find a possible top notch Spelunker's is not stereotyped. There are two spring of the coiled type, and a rating of ,000. And that's only parts, and although there is a RAM familiar, yet somehow different set in Part 1! SAVE option, you will need a tape of objects. There are the keys, of Get it you'll love it! course, else how would you hope Keith Campbell to open the inevitable grating? Vocab And there's food, and a bottle. But there never was a bomb in any Atmosphere C+VG version I played before! Personal HIT! downhill rather rapidly after that. Examine the bottle, and you will Value It's Quilled, so the most common response to a command is YOU CAN'T. I followed the recently discovered path beyond the boulder, and lying on the floor was a torch. Whenever you find a source of light, you can bet you'll soon be plunged into darkness. A fter a further thirty minutes, I still couldn't get it working. Had there been no battery or oil, I could have understood, but with no explanation as to WHY, my patience waned at an alarming rate. If you are the first to complete Esto this game, you win a Microvitec 1431 MZ STD RES colour monitor for your Spectrum. I can only recommend it to those in need of either that monitor or a dose of frustration! Castle Thade is produced by The Spectrum Adventure Exchange Club, which arranges monthly 'swaps' between members, for a .25 handling charge, and promises a monthly This is what the Terrors of Ithaca. Very nice they newsletter. Jim Douglas Trantoss REALLY looks were too — but we really Vocabulary 3 like. Last issue our late wanted you to see these Atmosphere 5 lamented typesetters very pretty pictures of Personal 4 decided to treat you to two Trantoss from the Ram Jam 4 pictures of Voyage to Corporation. TERRORS OF TRANTOSS Machine: Spectrum 48K Supplier: Spectrum Adventure Exchange Club. Available by mail-order from the above at: 4 Kilmartin Lane, Carluke, Lanarkshire, ML85RT. Price: $5.00 inc P&P The plot of Castle Thade is, shall we say, \"uncluttered.\" You have to reach the castle. Finding that the castle is in plain view from the first location, things look pretty easy. Wrong. Between you and your goal is a large black river, coming down from the mountains to the south, and going over a waterfall ahead. We probably aren't going to get over the river, so there's got to be another way. That large boulder there looks a bit suspicious let's try moving it. Hurruuurph! Ah ha! Eventually it rolls away disclosing a cave entrance. Well, this doesn't seem too bad, does it? Despite the dreadful white on blue text, the game seems friendly enough. The descriptions are quite long and well written (the punctuation is a little questionable) and there's a fast response, too. Unfortunately, the game goes Value "


".95 for AMSTRAD 464/664/6128, ATARI 64K, BBC 32K, CBM 64, MSX 64K, SPECTRUM 48/128K THE PRICE OF MAGIK INDEPENDENT CREATURES MANY POWERFUL SPELLS ABRIX INVENTIVE PUZZLES VIVID WITTY RESPONSES SOPHISTICATED WORD RECOGNITION 200+ LOCATIONS ALL ILLUSTRATED (not BBC) AS YOU RISE FROM SORCERER'S APPRENTICE TO SUPREME WIZARD THE PRICE OF MAGIK WILL KEEP YOU SPELLBOUND Send a large S.A.E. for FREE POSTER and mail order details to: Level 9 Computing, PO Box 39, Weston Super Mare, Avon, BS24 9UR "


"THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST WORLD POVERTY WOW ANT GAMES ALL PROCEEDS TO WAR ON WANT 14 FABULOUS TITLES FOR ANY 48K SPECTRUM FOR ONLY .95! ARTIC-SPECTRUMCHESS II AUDIOGENIC BUGEYES BEAU-JOLLY— PEDRO CDS-WINGED WARLORD FIREBIRD MR FREEZE LLAMASOFT -HEADBANGER'S HEAVEN MASTERTRONIC WIZARD'S WARRIOR War on Want supports long-term development projects in over 30 countries to provide selfsufficiency in food production, better health care and improved education for the world's poor. MELBOURNE HOUSEHELLFIRE OCEAN — HUNCHBACKII PSION-HORACE & THE SPIDERS PSS-XAVIOR QUICKSILVA RUPERT & THE ICE CASTLE STAR DREAMS-CYBERTANKS VIRGIN-DR FRANKY & THE MONSTER Please send me -copy(s) of WOW games Tenclose a cheque/PO made out to WOW (trading) Ltd for .. Name...... Address.. Town ......... ..Postcode .... Send form (with payments) to: WOW Games, Room 62A, 1, London Bridge St, London SE1 9SG or order by Access or Visa: Phone 01 403 2266 AND ASK FOR GAMES DEPARTMENT "


"Wh REVIEWS/5 MASTER CLASS Machine: Spectrum  Supplier: Trinity Software. Available by mail order from above, at: 117 Birchfield Road, Perry Barr, Birmingham, B19 ILL Price: .95 Dr Haversham, the principal and proprietor of the academy at which you have been working as a teacher, is nearing retirement. He has promised to leave the school to the teacher who can locate the deeds. I thought that sounded like an interesting plot a welcome change from saving the world, slaying dragons, having battles with wizards, and all the other things Keith thinks I do before breakfast each morning! Hmm, yes, a nice quiet walk around the grounds of the scirool, filled only with echoes of last term, would be quite relaxing. I was right, for after the initial mapping and puzzle solving, all the action ceased. There was nothing left to do except check out the whereabouts of the blackboards. The blackboards had some very strange questions chalked up on them: WHEN TIME IS SHOWN, WHO IS ON THE THRONE? However, having already spotted the answer in the history room, I boldly typed in: ANSWER XXXX XXXX — only to get the reply: SORRY CAN'T DO THAT! Things then got worse, for no matter what format I tried, the computer always gave the same answer. This was not altogether unexpected, for I had already come across a projector that would not project, and a microscope that no way was going to reveal the secret of a microdot! The screen layout looks normal at a glance, but if you type LOOK, the bottom half turns into a simple but effective line drawing of the location you are in. On examining the blackboards, a close up in graphics is displayed. Despite the adventure's somewhat strange vocabulary, it has in its favour some very good features. Paul Coppins  Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal NOO MURDER HUNT Machine: Spectrum 48K Supplier: Bodkin Software Price: .50 C+VG OFFER PIC LAST ru Sitle PICTURES This is a text only adventure, and the text is of a rather strange design, and not ever-so-easily legible. It has fairly lengthy location descriptions that convey the rustic atmopshere well, besides building up the tension in the game. Input is by verb-noun, and, unusually in an adventure, there is a PAUSE command. This implies that the game is played in real time. This is an interesting game, rather like exploring a detective story for yourself, and more adventures of the Rev. Murphy are promised. Keith Campbell Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal Value A murder is on the loose in the peaceful farming village of Keggly. Father Paddy Murphy (that's you) walks out of his church, into the graveyard, and finds his gravedigger stabbed to death, lying in a pool of blood. A trial of bloodstained footprints lead off, down the lane. Father Paddy's quest is to find the murderer, and secure him before carting him away. A tour of the neighbouring countryside uncovers the maniac's tracks. Ripped clothing is found in the woods, and an empty bottle in the disused mine. More startling is a grim discovery in a cottage in the village. LOW THE EXTRICATOR Change Dot 2llipse Fill Ink Picture Rectangle Shading DELete hole pi steps back/tud Stone HARTH Moves csr.CTRLR Have you found it difficult writing your own Adventures? The answer to your prayers has finally arrived. The Graphic Adventure Creator (G.A.C.) from Incentive Software. The thing that sets its aside from most other Adventure Creators is its ability to allow you to create stunning graphics easily. It also features an 'intelligent command interpreter,' and 'text compression.' What more can you ask for? Oh yes,  off the price! The Spectrum, C64, BBC and Amstrad cassette versions would cost you .95 and C64, BBC and Amstrad discs .95. BUT, Incentive Software are offering C+VG readers a discount on both versions. Cassettes will cost .95 — a saving of .00 and Disc versions .95 — saving .00. Interested!! Then write to: Incentive Software, 54 London Street, Reading RG1 4SQ, enclosing a cheque or postal order made payable to Incentive Software Ltd. Don't forget to include the special C+VG token with your order form. Please allow 28 days for delivery. Machine: Spectrum 48K sometimes require a bit of Supplier: Precision Games. Mail spotting. EXAMINE is a command used to good effect here, and this order (21p extra) from: 2 Fern Hill, adds a lot to the adventure. Langdon Hills, Basildon, Essex. Quilled, patched, and Price: .99 illustrated, The Extricator is described as a split screen text Professor Roberts is imprisoned at and graphics adventure. There are the Star Fleet Command HQ on the very few graphics, and you can planet Arg. Your job is to extricate even turn those off, although they him. The snag is, that the complex are pleasant enough not to want to. is split up into sectors, and to One word of warning! I nearly infiltrate the sector where the prof didn't get as far as reviewing this is languishing, involves passing game, as I got locked into four through three other sectors. locations. You must get hold of the Keith Campbell appropriate pass to move from  Vocabulary one sector to the next. Therein lie Atmosphere the puzzles. The puzzles are not overly Personal difficult, but the solutions do  Value C+VG/INCENTIVE SOFTWARE ADVENTURE CREATOR OFFER O Name. Address Computer owned (tick box) Amstrad C64 BBC O Spectrum Format (tick box) Cassette Disk O I enclose a cheque/postal order for  made payable I to Incentive Software Ltd "


"C+VG COMPETITION THESIUS The names are: Maclean Blunt Burgess Wynne Philby Metcalfe Kennedy Williams Perhaps the best known British spy and hero is James Bond. Name his creator. Answer Shhhhhsh!!! Don't say a word. This information is Top Secret. For your eyes only. This is Rick Hanson, the toughest agent in British Intelligence, calling. Remember me in Robico Software's Assassin ? Well now you can join me in my toughest assignment yet -Project Thesius. The enemy are up to their tricks again. A team of bad, mad boffins are working on an Advanced Weapons System on a remote island. My orders are as follows: Find the AWS development centre, gather as much information on the project and escape. It's a tough mission. But the question is: Are you tough enough to join me on this escapade? Robico, my controllers, have 20 copies of my adventure on the BBC B and Electron up for grabs. To stand a chance of joining me on my mission you'll have to answer these special C+VG spy questions ... Below are printed the names of several British spies and traitors. Some are genuine, some not. Can you circle the guilty people? Meanwhile, if you do not want to enter the competition but would like to buy Project Thesius, Robico is willing to do a  off deal with C+VG readers. All you have to do is cut out the special C+VG logo on this page and send it to Robico. This will entitle you to  off the normal retail price of .95 for the cassette and .95 for disk. Send the logo together with your money to Robico Software, 3 Fairland Close, Llantrisant, Mid-Glamorgan CF7 8QH. Send your answers together with the printed coupon to Project Thesius Competition, Computer+Video Games, Priory Court, 3032 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is July 16th and the Editor's decision is final. C+VG/ROBICO PROJECT THESIUS COMPETITION Name Address "


"Atari 400/600/800/XL 130XE Atari 520ST Commodore 64/Vic20/C16/Plus 4 Spectrum/BBC/Amstrad Hardware Software Peripherals Mediatech 544 Discs (SS/DD) 11.95 Mediatech 54/4 Discs (DS/SS) 12.95 LOCKABLE 100 DISC BOXES 9.95 PHONE OR WRITE FOR PRICES LIVINGSTON COMPUTER CENTRE 17 THE MALL, CRAIGSHILL LIVINGSTON. (0506) 36978 FREE POSTAGE AND PACKING ON ORDERS OVER  Callers Welcome LOOKING FOR KICKS IN 86? THEN DON'T MISS mita SUPER VALUF MAHA MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY A SUBSIDIARY OF PLATINUM GOLD Over 8,000 different titles available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, BBC, AMSTRAD. ATARI, MSX, ELECTRON, IBM and APRICOT  ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too.  HIRE PRICES from only 75p INC P&P.  20% DISCOUNT off all purchase software.  FREE HINTS AND TIPS. * FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given). . ALL GAMES manufactures ORIGINALS with full documentation. OVER 12,000 satisfied members. EUROPEAN members welcome. * Life Membership .00. Fully computerised system keeps track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with staff of 14 who know what the word service means. Backed by our own software company and programmers. MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY, 28 College Street, Worcester WR1 2LS Tel: 0905 611072 Please rush me my free catalogue stating machine. Name.... Address Britain's top soccer magazine brings you all the excitement of soccer every week  SUPER COLOUR POSTERS OF THE TOP STARS  MATCH FACTS THE WORLD'S GREATEST RESULTS SERVICE WITH RATINGS FOR EVERY PLAYER  FABULOUS FEATURES THAT ARE BANG UP-TO-DATE  UP-TO-THE-MINUTE NEWS AND VIEWS FROM YOUR FAVOURITE PLAYERS. AND ALL FOR 42p AVAILABLE AT YOUR NEWSAGENTS NOW! Check us out you'll find we're on the ball! Spike Sparkler's pick of to the hits. Six Super Games at only  eachITING Street Date 16 June. SNODGITS Fhite Viper LOOK OUT FOR MY SPARKLE DANGERMOUSE Test your sleuthing skills against world famous detectives They're all there hunting the slippery Snodgits-dreadful little creatures who wreak havoc in Lord and Lady Snodger's snobsville mansion A must for all bright sparks Amstrad CPC-464 and Spectrum 48K Sparkle rating **** A real snake of a game this! There are white horses to tame, ghostly henchmen to overcome and a nasty Wizard to out think But the rewards are high-the hand of a smashing princess and your very own kingdom. For only .99-they must be potty Commodore 64 Sparkle rating***** IN DOUBLE TROUBLE Help the super rodent overcome Baron Greenback's latest ploy The evil villain is building an android Dangermouse You must stop him and defuse the danger This game is not for the amateur! Commodore 64 and Spectrum 48K Sparkle rating ***** MAD DOCTOR KIDNAP Tower of Evil Here's a chance to create your own monster! No kiddingall you have to do is collect the bits. As Dr Franz Blockenspiel you grab unsuspecting passers-by and drag them back to your lab Gruesome and dangerous-the irate villagers are after you. Grab your gown and get scalpelling: Commodore 64 Sparkle rating **** Babes in space! Kkrudd an evil alien has kidnapped tiny Earthlings and frozen them in suspended animation You must rescue them from their fate. Bizarre, unknown creatures are on guard-you need all your skill to defeat them. Utterly captivating Spectrum 48K Sparkle rating **** Have you ever fought a Baphomet? Well, they are no pushover They guard where the Princess is imprisoned and have some equally horrendous friends. Poor old Princess Diana locked away in the clutches of the Necromancer You are her only hope Commodore 16 Sparkle rating **** AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE STORES Unit B1. Armstrong Mall Summit Centre Southwood. Farrborough Hants. GUI4 ONP Tel 0asa 522200 "


"WORLD PUBLISHER OF COMPUTER SOFTWARE OFFERS YOU A GREAT CHANCE TO Why pay repair bills when you can solve or prevent most of your 1541 and 1570 disk drive problems for only .95 SUCCESS MAGIC DISK KIT With tremendous opportunities for FIRST CLASS PROGRAMMERS in the fields of SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM TRANSLATION GAMES DESIGN Expansion in all the Group's activities requires constant HIGH QUALITY SOFTWARE and we now URGENTLY REQUIRE products for Autumn/Winter 1986. If you would like to work with the Best for Maximum Reward either Directly or on a Freelance Basis contact in confidence: Software Development Manager Every time you use your disk drive the protection on your software bangs your playing head, eventually knocking it out of place. Now with our very easy to use Magic Disk Kit with a clear book of tips you can remedy head alignment faults and give simply maintenance to your machine to give better performance and longer life. Available from good computer shops or:Ocean Robtek 6 Central Street, Manchester M2 5NS. Tel: 061 832 6633 Telex: 669977 Completed programs also wanted for: SPECTRUM AMSTRAD. COMMODORE 64. C16 ATARI. BBC and ELECTRON Micros Cash or Royalty Payments  Immediate Decision CONTACT US TODAY! Robtek Ltd, Unit 4, Isleworth Business Complex St. John's Road, Isleworth, Middx TW7 6NL Telephone: 01-847 4457 "


"DEAS CENTRAL (NERVE CENTRE OF IDEAS CORP) Welcome to IDEAS CENTRAL. My name is Melissa Ravenflame, 1.C. co-ordinator. IDEAS CENTRAL is where you'll find the Bug Hunters' HQ and the man who keeps those rogue robots in order Jackson T. Kalliber. Jackson makes sure OTISS, Big Red, X and B-Con get out there to find the hints, tips and pokes you all so desperately need for a happy existence. Don't tell them but I can't rely on them to make a good job of it. So the IDEAS CORPORATION and yours truly, Melissa R., need YOUR help. Remember, the IDEAS CORP will pay a large amount of credits to anyone assisting our enquiries. So, send your hints and cheats to Melissa Ravenflame, IDEAS CENTRAL, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU.  1985 JERRY FARIS MINDER STARQUAKE POKE FOR THE MSX!!! ZORRO method can be used to get out of a screen with the lifts. tricky situation. Climb up the ladders and hit Mark Cockayne heard the plea for These codes will let you teleport the boulder which will roll and help with 'Minder' and has written from one place to another. HELP place a lift next to you. Jump on in with this hint. To get Terry to 1 = Sigma 2 = Astra 3 = Hylis Matthew Drinkwater has the this and put the tree down. The mind you just say \"Minder\", Terry 4 = Kappa 5 = Femur 6 = Chasm Commodore version of Young lifts will move once more and will then reply \"OK, but it will cost 7 = Malis 8 = Metre 9 = Xenon Ones and has become you will find an open door. (This  a day\". Answer \"Yes\" and 10 = Cosin 11 = Plasm 12 = completely stuck. Anyone able is useful later on in the game). wherever you go Terry will follow Optic 13 = Polar 14 = Z.A.P. 15 to help Him? Rick? Neil? Return to the \"well\" screen you for that day. In return Mark = Meson Anyone! Who has pokes for the and go right and right again. would like some help with Elite for Amstrad 6128 version of Jet Set You will be on a screen with a the Spectrum he wants to know Willy 2 ?. Master Wilson of key, bottle and sofa. Collect the around which planet he will find Dropzone have you ever been Suffolk woud be very grateful if key, jump on the sofa and use it the Space Dredger? killed by a nasty volcanic eruption, you could write and let him like a trampoline, and bounce swamped by lava, or boiled by hot have them. right. rocks, well fret no more! Go to the top and jump leftWhen you start, collect all the taking you back on the screen men except for one and place Another regular contributor to you had just left. Walk into the Yes, I know all you MSX owners them on the dropzone. Now Ideas Central is Mark Hula. Here black door and the key will think that this must be a mis-print, collect the final man and hold on he offers you some help with unlock it. but we do have one poke for to him he is the key! Now battle the Amstrad version of Zorro Jump the gap and you will Ocean's Hunchback. Type the the aliens, and even if they are so he thinks that they will work just automatically pick up the bottle. program and Run. Then put nasty that they kill all the other as well on the C64 version. Go to the bottom of the screen Hunchback into the data recorder men in the zone, an earthquake At the start screen collect the and go left, where you will see a and press play. cannot happen because you are hanky which the fair maiden man sitting on the bar. 10 BLOAD \"CAS:\" holding on to the last man. If you has dropped. Go down the well Press fire button and you give 20 POKE --28370,0 die, pick up the man straight away and jump across the floating him the bottle and he becomes 30 DEFUSR = &H9000 as he must not die. balls and onto the next screen, drunk! 40 A = USR (0) which has various lift layouts. Line yourself up with his feet If this doesn't work, blame Brian Go down this screen and onto and push up on the joystick and Lafersonne of Merseyside. When you start moving move over the next. you will gain height which will to the side of the road and very Fall down to the bottom of the eventually lead you to a ledge. slowly push towards the grass. If screen and go right. Go up the ladder on the left Another regular to I.C. is E you are lucky your car will travel You will gradually gain and a guard will appear from a Nieland of Holland. This time he on the grass and not be attacked height. When you think you are door. Force him over the edge has sent in the codes for two by any of the enemies, but they high enough, push right and of the ledge towards the games. will run into the side of the road you will land on the ledge. Pick chandelier which in turn pulls The first one is 'A View to a Kill' and blow-up. up the tree in a pot and go left. up the crate leaving a hole in City Hall = CCPHJ Sometimes your points do not By using the trampolines you the ground. Go down this hole Silicon Valley = DB4CT go up when you are on the will make your way up the and you will be on the screen Finale = ILVCT hardshoulder, but the above screen, until you are on the with the boulder. COMMODORE "


"POKES 1.D.E.A.S CENTRAL SPECIAL REPORT 4) Emergency Battery if enabled and holds a charge. If the Demand graph exceeds the Supply graph some of the ships sub-systems will automatically be shut down. As power becomes available, the systems will be automatically restored. Scanners: There is a single information scanner indicator light on the console. The indicator light is on if the scanners are operational. Scanners are used for SCAN EXAMINE research to fill in Class, Enemy ships damage, and suggested weapon and NAV STATUS research to fill in Risks. The light can be off if Info The wreckage of a Psi 5 Trading Company Starfreighter has been Scanners become broken (Repair Item) or for lack of power (Item Don ENG recovered from near the Parvian Frontier. Evidence suggests it fell DISPLAY not ranked high enough or victim to space pirates and marauders who prey on space lanes, broken power reactors). reducing the settlers and entrepreneurs who exploit the rich mining i Compass: The ships compass indicator deposits in this wild frontier to panic. the ships current deviation from mission course. It can be used to verify course Among the debris was the captain's log. Although incomplete, the changes and evasive action. log contains information and advice which could help future Speed: The ships speed indicator displays starfreighter captains selected to try and get supplies through to this the current gross speed. It can differ from hazardous part of the universe. the requested speed because of lack of US Gold, partners in the Psi 5 Trading Company, has allowed Ideas power, damage to engines (repair needed), or acceleration changes. Central to print selections from the recovered log, in the interests of The net speed (actual speed towards inter-galactic safety. destination) is not directly available. Net Thermos and Cannons. speed can differ from gross speed when Each weapon system has a status light using evasive manoeuvring. on the console. Messages: There is one message If the weapon system is operational and indicator for each of the five departments. ready it is coloured. If the system is These indicators show the letter non-operational the light is removed. If the abreviation for the department if messages system has just fired, the light flashes are pending for that department. The ships white. computer can save up to eight pending Shields: There are four defensive force messages for each department. field shields that surround the Psi-5 ship. Joystick shortcuts: Shortcuts have been The console shield indicators show a bar added for joystick users to quickly perform for each shield. If the shield is operational \"Quick-Exit\" and \"Delete\" functions. it shows as a white bar. If the shield is Quick-Exit: Push joystick forward and damaged, but still providing protection it is press the button, this is equivalent to the shown as a red bar. If the shield is not C64 CLR/HOME key or Apple's +/-key. operational the bar is not displayed. Delete: Pull the joystick back and press The shield battery strength indicator is the button. This is equivalent to the shown as a dot in one of the shield keyboards DELETE key. indicators. If the dot is not present the Acknowledge Message Enhancements shield battery is completely discharged and CLR: CLR stands for CLEAR. The CLR the shields are useless. If the dot blinks command erases all pending messages. there is less than a 20 per cent charge. This is useful when you get behind in Power: The power section of the consol reading crew member messages and want Your mission: To survive as a Psi 5 Trading shows two bar graphs, Supply and Demand to start fresh. Company starfreighter captain will test and a battery active light, Emergency AUTO: AUTO stands for Automatic your management skills, nerve and Battery. messages. Auto messages can be leadership qualities to the very limit. The Demand graph (labelled D) shows ENABLED or DISABLED. When After choosing your cargo and course to the total amount of electrical power the ENABLED all crew messages immediately the Parvian Frontier, you must then select different ship subsystems are requesting. A interrupt the captain and are displayed. If the best crew possible. Standard breakdown of these sub-systems power DISABLED (the default) crew messages starfreighter instructions will help but this demand can be seen by using the DISPLAY are saved by the ships computer until the recovered log should add even more to your command in Engineering. There is a small command in Engineering. There is a small captain h captain has a chance to acknowledge skills. fixed amount of overhead demand that is (read) them. required by the ship that is not represented STRATEGY: by the subsystems. There is no one way or strategy to win at The Supply graph (labelled S) shows the Psi 5. In fact, strategies will change as total power being generated by the Psi 5 your performance increases. As you move ship. on to the next difficulty level-selecting a Power can be contributed from four more difficult destination you may have sources: 1) Bulky construction code to use a previously developed strategy. required Yhtak perpetual generator (reliably supplies power to ships core CONSOLE INDICATORS functions and equal to above fixed Weapons: The Psi-5 freighter has four demand). weapons systems Missiles, Blasters, 2 and 3) Main power reactors. Psic . Jackson has sent out the \"boys\" to collect pokes for some of your favourite games. So, eyes down and fingers set at the keyboards here we go with the first poke, which is for the Amstrad, from Paul Holdaway FINDERS KEEPS By pass the Basic Header, then type10 OPENOUT \"D\" 20 MEMORY 2047 30 LOAD \"FK\" 40 POKE 8398,0 50 CALL 2047 ANCIPITAL for the Commodore from Michael Vanslembrouck Type 'load' instead of SHIFT/RUN STOP When 'ready' appears enter the following: POKE 1011,248 POKE 1012,252. The type RUN. After loading, the computer will reset. Then enter POKE 18679,173 SYS 16384. You now have infinite lives. RASPUTIN — To cheat, freeze the game F5. Then type DJINN followed by 2 numbers for room. GERRY THE GERM -Reset then type POKE 2307,1 then sys 2304 + and keys to change screens. MONTY ON THE RUNwhen asked to input your name type 'I want to cheat' press return and then choose your freedom kit. You will need numbers 2,4,12,13,14 to complete the game. BOUNDER-Press keys Q.A,Z and space. Hold them down for a minute and part of the screen goes red, you are now ready to start the game. Thanks to John Knight for the last two Commodore tips. Now for the Spectrum, from J Belt. NIGHTSHADE-type in and run from start of tape. 10 for F=1 OT 5: LOAD \"CODE: NEXT F: POKE 53442,0: POKE 53443,12: RANDOMIZE USR 23424 GUNFRIGHT Type in and start tape at the beginning. 10 LOAD \"CODE:LOAD\" \"CODE:LOAD\" \"CODE:PRINT USR 24576: LOAD\" \"LOAD\" \"CODE: LOAD\"\"\" CODE:POKE 23445,201:PRINT USR 23424:POKE 23446,33 20 POKE 42335,0:POKE 46344,0: POKE 48464,0: POKE 48544,0:POKE 49745,0: PRINT USR 23446 SWEEVOS WORLD-Type MERGE\" and edit the line and enter in front of the randomize USR instruction POKE 37008,255 and don't forget to put: after it. Press enter and run for 255 lives. STARSTRIKE-Load and press Type I WANNA CHEAT (with the spaces) Gives you infinite shields. Press pause again to start playing. GYROSCOPE The MERGE\"\"and put in front of the Randomize USR instructions POKE 53992,0 for infinite lives and poke 52138,201 for infinite time. Here are a couple of quickies from Michael Lacey. On Rambo when the message 'Your presence has been relayed to enemy HQ -a gunship is now on course and in pursuit appears -select 'Rocket Launcher', press Return and Push Forward on the Joystick You now move twice as fast and see no enemy gunships. On Kung-Fu Master, face left and press 'shift' and 'G' together to obtain a handgun. Keep pressing 'shift' and 'G' together for rapid fire. (for level 1 only) Finally on Winter Games on the Figure Skating, keep facing left and falling over to obtain a maximum of 6.0 when the time is up. Rosahn Weerasinghe has infinite live pokes for the BBC MR EE-When the title page loads in, press BREAK Then \"LOAD'MR E' when load type: 91ECB=&EA. CALL& 4300 SNAPPER When SNAP2 finishes loading press ESCAPE 45?&FDD=&7F Run. ROCKET RAID-Play the game and when you crash press BREAK, CALL&E00. When you die after three lives, a long crash will happen. After this you will have infinite lives. "


"ON THE AMSTRAD. COMMODORE 64/128 Om 155 AVALABLE IN THE LONDON ARIA MAREDM GIRATE. Mile Sider BEYOND FEATURING ASPECIAL AUDIO CASSETTE WITH THE FULL STORY OF DOOMARKS REVENGE Doomdark's Revenge is more than adventure, mightier than a wargame 6,144 locations, 48,000 screen views. 128 characters and 128 objects to collect There are icelords, barbarians, dwarves, ley and giants to meet Bilter weather conditions and welcoming torches to guide you through caverns. is a game for one or more players whose skill alone will determine victory or delegi. Doomdar's Revenge is available now from software dealers everywhere in case of difficulty while to: Beyond, British Telecom, Wellington House, Upper St. Martin's Lane, LONDON WC2H 9DL "


"ARCAL EMPIRE CITY 1 UP O WONDER BOY 17250 C+VG's Arcade Spy, Clare Edgeley, enters the shawdowy underworld of Empire City and discovers that she's no It's April 10, 1931, in the mean match for the da Boss. She also takes a look at the arcades' and shadowy streets of downtown New York. Here there are furtive, latest nappy clad hero Wonder Boy. whispered conversations in doorways, blinds twitch at HISCORE windows and the spasmodic 800 40000 rat-a-tat of gunfire is heard in the Dressed to kill in nappies and a distance. Turned up collars and motorbike helmet, with a snap-brims pulled well down over skateboard as his trusty steed and foreheads set the scene in wielding a stone axe, Wonder Boy gangsterland is born ready to fight off the Suddenly a woman's scream nastiest of nasties, willing to leap shatters the silence. Now is the the widest chasm, and eager to risk moment, you've been waiting for. his life. Squinting through the gun sights Yes, if you've got problems, you scan the immediate area. Wonder Boy's your answer. And Nothing. Moving to the right in the judging from the sickly-sweet title direction of a large blue arrow the screen, it involves an equally sights rest on a mean-looking hood young lady at the far end of this pushing a trembling woman before mighty quest. No doubt, she too him at gunpoint. wears a matching nappy. There's no time to lose as a Wonder Boy reminds me of speech bubble starts a countdown Super Mario Brothers, though it's from five. Quick, you've got to kill him before zero is reached. Blam! 100 UNTUH not as complicated, but just as TANTA playable. Moving from left to right Blam! Bullets fly but the wrong one you've got to leap obstacles while reaches its target. The screen goes collecting pieces of fruit for extra slowly red as you hit the deck, they'll be hiding in second or third points. The first screen is very easy grovelling face down in the muck. storey windows, on rooftops or in and leads you nicely into the Like a cat with three lives, you try doorways. If you stray out of the game. Leap over snakes, bonfires, again. The woman screams once area an arrow will put you back on snails and bees and at the same more, but once again you're not the right track. There's not much time collect the fruit. quick enough and end up eating time to search the area, and if you Right at the very beginning is an dirt. For the third time you try it, the take too long the dreaded speech enormous egg. Crack it and a game's hardly started and it looks bubble appears with the stone axe is revealed. This can be as if they're going to cart you away countdown to death. thrown at any nasties in your path feet first. If you need help picturing eliminating them before they get This time you know where your Empire City: 1931, then think of foe is. The sights rest on his head M elbourne House's Mugsy. L 5000 and you fire a quick burst. The Although Empire City is very much bullet goes home and a splatter of an arcade game, it is graphically red is shown briefly amongst the very similar to Mugsy with stills of white marks of missed targets. the streets and characters and not Saved by the bullet. The girl goes much animation. That doesn't free and you continue your search detract from the game, all the but this time there are no screams action is done at your end of the to locate the gangsters. Only joystick, first while looking for the arrows, and you can't rely on them baddies and then by shooting too heavily. them. Having said that, in the The arrows show you the second level which is played on WITADA general direction in which you May 5: 1931 (another day, should be looking. However, it's up another killing) and gangsters dart then take out the moving target to you to search the area for the_out from behind buildings and before he disappears. gun-toting villains. Sometimes you'll find it harder to locate and Eventually you're bound to cop HI-SCORE it. It's a nice touch that when you eventually catch that bullet, the 5400\" screen pans over to the character who shot you — so the next time round you'll know where he's lurking. Once you've hit the ground the next screen shows you looking up into the face of your killerfabulous graphics — and then it reverts to a long shot showing you dead, lying amongst the trash cans. Fast moving, with lots of action it's all up to you. This unusual and addictive game is bound to be a winner. 40ODO GE 1999 WWWWWW "


"DE ACTION 30000 TROJAN 39230990 AVAILABLE ZUP you. You may also find a skateboard. Once on this, Wonder Boy literally charges forward he can still leap objects, but should he come into contact with, say, one of the numerous outcrops of rock, he'll lose his charger and will have to continue on foot. Next is a hill with boulders tumbling down it in sequence (it reminds me of BC's Quest for Tires from Software Projects — an idea which must originally have come from one of the early arcade games.) The boulders are easy to jump if you don't get carried away by all that tempting fruit. Jump for a piece of fruit and a boulder will roll down and catch you before you have time to leap again. Unlike Eve, leave well alone. Once over the hill, crack another egg and an angel appears. Whizzing around waving her wand to some revolting music she eventually settles on your shoulder bringing peace, happiness and bonus points. While she's in residence you can walk past all the nasties without fear, scoring extra points as they die. Next we get to the cliff edge — very like Super Mario Bros. here. Leap the chasms and jump from ledge to ledge using some as lifts to get you to a higher or lower ledge. There are still objects to avoid and you do have your axe for protection Whenever you see an egg, open it, as it always has something for you. In the top left-hand corner of the screen there's a picture of the axe, a pendant, a perfume bottle and a slipper. Presumably you have to collect these en route if you're to reach your childhood sweetheart. I didn't get that far. The second level is played in much the same way, though this time you have to use the clouds as levels to stop you tumbling into the sea — and the waiting arms of an octopus. It is a little harder and you'll have to time your jumps better. Once over the ocean and on to dry land, more surprises wait yo. If you want to break from wargaming, you can't go wrong with Wonder Boy, it requires skill, timing and is good, clean fun. HZSOOOO 2UP TIME 027 2LAYERI Following the success of Ghosts 'n' Goblins, Capcom has repeated the winning formula to produce Trojan a game so similar that at first glance it could be mistaken for its predecessor. Graphics and gameplay are very much the same, as is the loud rousing jingle which beats throughout. The only real difference is in the storyline and the series of obstacles and characters you have to overcome. The topic is futuristic, set in the ZUP K230000 2UP aftermath of a nuclear war you TIME 000 must defeat the army of thugs, and the brutal king who leads them. According to the blurb, you have mastered all the martial arts, and single handed you are going to lift the land from its reign of terror. In fact, far from using martial arts, you tend to rely heavily on your trusty sword and shield, and when you have lost those you tend to be pretty helpless. The graphics are detailed, colourful illustrations, and the post-nuclear mutant mohicans with EHZ 30000 ZUP their purple hairstyles are a sight to TZME OOO LAYER SE behold. They're also crafty fighters and are the first batch of thugs you come across in the mean city streets at the start of the game. Like Ghosts 'n' Goblins, the nasties tend to rush you in groups and you'll find them coming at you from behind as well as in front. Now's the time for a spot of action. Your sword snakes out and dispatches them with the greatest of ease, but watch out for the one under the manhole — the arrow he fires at you has to be jumped. And blocking your escape route. keep an eye on the chappie Other than c!ubs, some thugs throwing fire crackers from a carry knives and also a nasty little window above — they'll put you weapon which leaves you out of action for a while. defenceless on contact. Any time And now onto the skinheads. you see a red ball winging through Two of these loveable creatures the air, duck or jump it. jump down, one on either side, After many leagues, and even giving you very little chance to fight more scraps and fights, you'll enter back as they club you senseless. a forest. Remember, leaves aren't The skins seem more difficult than the only things which drop out of the mohicans, and so it goes on trees. The end of your quest is throughout the game. The trail marked when you near the evil eventually takes you into an king's castle. industrial area, to a warehouse full With its marvellous graphics and of pipes and levels connected by the many obstacles overcome, lifts. Travel up and down to the you'll have no complaints with various floors killing the baddies en Trojan, especially if you're a route. A difficult task, I warn you — newcomer to the Ghost'n' Goblins they tend to spring out of nowhere, type scenario. 56. NTUITITETIN I WWW "


"YOU AND THE ENEMY — ONLY ONE OF YOU WILL SURVIVE Your AWAT (All Weather-All Terrain) jet stands fully fuelled and fully armed. A vast invasion fleet is anchored just off your shores. Ground forces have come ashore and are advancing on your positions protected by massive air cover You are the last fighter pilot. Your country turns to you and asks ... \"Are you good enough to be called an ACE?\" (PLUS/4 DISK VERSION .95 SPECTRUM VERSION .95 OF THE YEAR' OUT NOW (FULL OAK PLUS VERSION) SIMULATOR 'FLIGHT ZZAP! 64 VERSION THE ULTIMATE  COMBAT  JET  SIMU FREE WITH EVERY COPY POSTER PIECIE FVEIBES B SESSE) SLER SEEEEE RSETE Featuring tanks, helicopters, hills, trees, ships and a totally unique refuelling sequence ACE is the fastest, most exciting air combat game available. With twin flying mode (using two joysticks) you Cascade Games Ltd., can fly and fight with your cascade Harrogate, friend as weapons man. HG13BG England ACE THERE IS CASCADE Telephone: NO OTHER GAME LIKE IT! (0423) 504663 GAMES COMMODORE 19990S (EZPO) O nas buwapio inoy Z-Posso Version orgabefce SPECTRUM 4 CASSETTE 2995 1295 DISK Screenshots are taken from the 4 version 16 and VIC20 do not have ground objects. Available from all good software suppliers or direct from "


"MAISOS SINUNTER HAVE STORMED IDEAS CENTRAL. THEY ARE ON THE 67TH FLOOR. IT IS THE EXPERIMENTAL WEAPONS SECTION...AND THEY'VE JUST MET... APART FROM THE ILLEGAL GAME OF GODT PARLOUR, GARIBALDI USED TO RUN ROBOT PRIZE FIGHTS! SHERMAN WAS HIS BEST BOY... NOT BECAUSE HE WAS GOOD.. NO SHERMAN HAD THIS GLASS JAW... COULDN'T TAKE A PUNCH. BUT GARIBALDI KEPT ON HIRING HIM FOR THE MAIN EVENTS... . $69 BRONCOL BALDI'S GARIBAL HE EVEN PROMOTED HIM AS SHERMAN THE INVINCIBLE! REALLY PULLED IN THE CROWDS... COURSE, GARIBALDI WAS PLACING SIDE BET ON SHERMAN LOSING... MUST HAVE MADE A FORTUNE! SHERMAN HERE, WAS MORE THAN A BIT PEEVED WHEN HE FINALLY FOUND OUT... SAID HE WAS GONNA MASH ANYONE WHO WAS INVOLVED... PERHAPS YOU FOLKS DONT HEAR SO GOOD!.. I SAID.. SHERMAN..? 5 YEA S WHO'S THAT..? ) THAT'S RIGHT! AND GUESS WHAT..?)  BEFORE1 MASHED GARIBALDI, HE TOLD ME YOU WERE IN ON THE SCAM TOO... 50 THIS IS GONNA BE A PLEASURE...SO IT'S ME... X. you GREAT BIG DIOT! REMEMBER, I USED TO BE A BOUNCER-BOT AT GARIBALDI'S... X!! SURE. I REMEMBER... HOW COULD I FORGET... EVERYONE AIM FOR HIS TAW... YOU KNOW HIM..?! YEAH... ALTHOUGH HE WAS ALOT SMALLER BACK THEN... he FIRE!! "


"I DON'T FEEL... THE BIG FOOL'S SQUASHING US... SKREEEEXX ? WOMUS No WHOMO POOLS 50 GOOD ALL OF A SUDDEN... RUN! . RUN!! V OTISS-VO I R WAY AHEAD OF YOU MR.KALLIBER... MAGNESIUM FLARES... IT'LL CONFUSE THEIR INFRA-RED TRACKING! GH NOW...LET ME SEE... AH... HINIHI TIT IT'S AN OLD SERVICE SHAFT. I ACCESSED THE CONSTRUCTION PLANS FOR THE WHOLE BUILDING-IT SHOULDN'T TAKE MORE THAN 15 MINUTES TO REACH TOP... HERE WE ARE... HA! JUST LIKE A HOT KNIFE THROUGH BUTTER..! THERE THEY ARE STOP THEM! U JACKSON!!! ... AND YOU FOUND THIS LITTLE BABY! O.K... MELISSA AND I WILL TAKE THIS ROUTE... YOU BOYS JUST KEEP THOSE DOG SOLDIERS OFF OUR HEELS AND WELL DO THE REST. "


"GOOD BYTE 10% OFF ANY ORDERS OVER  * NEW MANAGEMENT * NEW FAST FIRST CLASS SERVICE * NEW PRICE LIST AVAILABLE MONTHLY FREE ON REQUEST THE NEW LOOK GOP 70% OFF JULY ISSUE ON SALE JUNE 26th SOME OF THIS MONTH'S SPECIAL OFFERS! .45 .70 .70 .45 .45 .45  .99 .99 .45 .70 .70 .70 .70 .70 THE HOTTEST NEWS, REVIEWS, HINTS, TIPS AND GOSSIP IN THE COMMMODORE WORLD SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 AMSTRAD Back Packer .99 Amazon Women............ .99 Batman Ball Blazer .95 Biggles Blockbusters... Basket Ball World Series ......... .95 Bomb Jack ..70 Computer Hits 2......... Batman. .95 Commando .45 Commando. Bomb Jack ... .95 Computer Hits 2 .45 Doomsday Blues Bounder .95 Cauldron 2.. .70 Elite (New Issue). Cyberun .70 Combat Leader .99 Friday 13th Commando... .95 Dig Dug .99 Fighter Pilot........... Computer Hits .. .45 Electra Glide .45 Get Dexter Crash Smashes .45 30 Games .45 Hyper Sports .... Computer Hits 2 .45 Falklands '82 ... .45 Movie G. Capes, Strongman .99 The Force .45 Ping Pong Graham Gouch Cricket .............70 Golf Construction ...... ... .99 Rock 'n' Wrestle ... Green Beret....... .95 Hyper Sports ........... .70 Red Hawk. 40 Games.... .40 Herbert's Dummy Run ..... .99 Rambo Hyper Sports .................... .95 Hard Ball .45 Sky Fox Heavy on the Magick .45 International Karate .70 Saboteur Hows Focus .70 Koronis Rift .45 Sold a Million 2 Monty on the Run Monty on the Run .99 Turbo Esprit Movie .95 PSI-5 Trading .45 Tai Ceti...... Ping Pong.... .95 Red Hawk .70 View to a kill. Planets .45 Rock'n Wrestle..... .45 Way of the Tiger Price of Magik .45 Sold a Million 2 .70 Winter Games Quazatron .95 Superbowl .70 Yle Ar Kung Fu Rambo .95 Superman .95 Zoids Red Hawk .70 Saboteur ... .70 Rock'n'Wrestle Spindissy .45 All prices inc. p&p. Superbowl .70 Tigers in the Snow... .45 Overseas Orders please Samantha Fox .70 .99 add 75p per tape Sold a Million 11 .70 Undium .99 Super Test .99 World Cup Carnival. .45 25% Discount on any new Saboteur .70 War Play .95 advertised titles not listed Spin Dizzy E7.45 Yle Ar Kung Fu... .70 above. Subject to release Star Strike il .95 date. Twister 5.99 Turbo Esprit .70 GOODBYTE CVG7 .99 25 GROMWELL COURT Way of the Tiger .45 World Cup Carnival ............ EALING ROAD COMMODORE C16-4 .45 ALPERTON, WEMBLEY Yie Ar Kung Fu.... .95 Jet Set Willy .50 MIDX HAO 1JT ENGLAND TELEPHONE OUR HOTLINE NUMBER 8 (03744) 63161 & X88  .70 Soir COMMODORE USER GRAND SALE COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE SPECTRUM SOFTWARE .50 .50 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .50 T.L.L. BEACH HEAD SPANISH TUTOR AB SUBTERRANEAN STRYKER .95 .50 .95 .95 f395 395 .  ANCIPITAL ADVANCE OF MEGA CAMELSE WIZARD OF WOR PROGRAMMERS REF. GUIDES AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT INTRO TO BASIC PT. I INTRO TO BASIC PT. II INTRO TO BASIC PT. I DISC EASY FILE DISC LOGO DISC PILOT DISC ZORK I DISC ZORK II DISC ZORK III DISC STARCROSS DISC DEADLINE DISC SUSPENDED EASY SPELL DISC FUTURE FINANCE TONY HARTS ART MASTER .95 .95 4.95 3.95 .95 E4.95  .95 .50 .95 .95 .95 .95 .00 .00 .95 4.95 4.95 4.95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 LAZY JONES .50 SPELLUNKER .95 WHIRLNURD .95 DOUGHBOY .95 GROGS REVENGE BOUNTY BOB ROLANDS RAT RACE DUMMY RUN .95 I .50 BLACKWYTCH .50 GILLIGANS GOLD  2.95 ANDROID 11 .95 CHINESE JUGGLER .95 CAVELONE .95 SPIRIT OF STONES (CASS. .95 SPIRIT OF STONES (DISC. .95 B.J. BEARS GET READY TO READ .95 B.J. BEARS GET READY FOR NUMBERS .95 CODENAME MATT II E2.95 SPYS DEMISE SPY STRIKES BACK .95 UP & DOWN .95 GREMLINS .95 TALLEDEGA .95 VIEW TO KILL .95 WILD WEST .95 MANIC MINER .95 JET SET WILLY .95 COMMODORE MODEMS .95 CHUCKIE EGGS E 2.95 CHUCKIE EGG II .95 SCARABAUS .95 ARC OF YESOD FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD .95 BLAGGER GOES TO HOLLYWOOD .95 COMBAT LEADER .95 INTERNATIONAL SOCCERNE .95 TOUCH TYPE BY COMMODORE .95 FORT APOCALYPSE 12.50 SHEEP IN SPACE .50 EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE PHYSICS 'O' & 'A' LEVEL, CHEMISTRY '0' LEVEL, MATHS 'O' LEVEL, BIOLOGY 'O' LEVEL .95 or .00 each LONGMAN SOFTWARE 6-10 YEARS SUM SCRUNCHER, ROBOT RUNNER, WILD WORDS, ABC LIFT-OFF .95 GRIFFIN SOFTWARE PACK 6 YEARS UPWARDS WORD SPELL, FAIR SHARE, WORD GAMES .95 GRIFFIN SOFTWARE FOR 5 YEARS UPWARDS TABLESUMS, NUMBERFUN, GET SET .95    CHUCKIE EGG II WIZARD'S LAIR HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER WHEELIE QUICKSILVA WORD PROC M/CODER II CODENAME MAT ILMU GREMLINS TASWORD II MOON CRESTAU JASPER THE ROBIN OF SHERWOODE GT SPACE RACE THE ILLUSTRATOR SKOOLDAZE DECATHLON SABRE WULF DEVS EX MACHINA UNDERWORLD GIFT FROM THE GODS JET SET WILLY SELECT 1 (12 GAMES) PAC-MAN (ATARISOFT) GEOGRAPHY QUIZLET ROLANDS RAT RACE TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY HEATHROW A.T.C. ROBIN OF SHERLOCK VIEW TO KILL TECHNICIAN TED E AD ASTRA ES TIR NA NOG VALHALLA BLOCKBUSTERSE .95 .95 .50 .50 .95 .50 .50 .95 .95 .95 .95 GAMES PACKS ON THE OCHE, DERBY DAY, ST. ANDREWS GOLF, WORLD CUP FOOTBALL SNOOKER, OLYMPICS .00 PANZER ATTACK, DREADNOUGHTS, RED BARON, PARAS .00 COMMODORE 64 PACKS BMX NUMBER JUMP, 3D HYPER MATHS WORD WOBBLER .95 MR. T. PACK INC. MR. T'S SIMPLE SUMS, MR. T. MEETS HIS MATCH, MR. T'S ALPHABET GAMES .95 COLLINS SOFTWARE PACK 4-11 YEARS WHATS THE TIME, KNOW YOUR TABLES FIRST NUMBERS .95 COLLINS PADDINGTON PACK INC. PADDINGTONS EARLY VISIT PADDINGTONS GARDEN GAME, PADDINGTON AND THE DISAPPEARING INK .95 HILL MCGIBBON PACK INC. SPECIAL AGENT. CAR JOURNEY BALLOONING .95 IMAGINE PACK INC. ARCADIA, PEDRO. COSMIC CRUISER, BC BILL, INVADERS, 3D JUMPIN JACK .95 p&p 75p all orders Overseas 75p per tape .50 per pack .00 per peripherals .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .50 .95 24 hour ordering on (0733) 313870 LOGIC SALES LTD 6 Midgate  Peterborough  Cambs  PE1 1TN g9 "


"YA KNOW SOMETHING, BOYS... IT'S BEEN AGES SINCE I ENJOYED A REALLY GOOD FIST FIGHT... BUT 7 SUPPOSE RUST BUCKETS LIKE YOU JUST AIN'T GOT THE OIL FOR IT... THE HELL WE HAVEN'T... LET S DOIT.! w S SREEEEEE*3 De two bio To YO THE NEXT TIME U P THE NENDE TOPLAVE XHELING THE NEXT TIME YOU DECIDE TO HAVE AN ESCAPE PLAN... MAKE SURE I'VE ALREADY ESCAPED! MY NERVES CAN'T TAKE THIS..! MY NERVES CANTIME! HELE TUL THAT MUST BE THE MAN'S SUITE! WITHOUT OTISS IT COULD TAKE FOREVER TO ACCESS THE ENTRY CODE.. THEN WE'LL HAVE TO BE A LITTLE MLESS SUBTLE... O.K. YOU SO SHOW OFAUTSCH ALTHOUGH I SHOULD WARN YOU... I DON'T THINK YOU'RE GOING TO LIKE WHAT YOU FIND! mong BY ALL MEANS MS. RAVENFLAME... HOLY... CONTINUED--NEXT MONTH! 100 "


"MI CROS E LI MICROSELLS It costs only f1 to advertise in Microsell! . Sell . Phone Colin after 6pm on 0475 26554 for details. Atari games to sell or swap, cassette only. Games include Zorro, Kennedy Approach, Bruce Lee and many more. Please send list of offers to: Richard, 5 Barton Fields, Ecton, Northampton NN6 OQA. computer tables. Comes complete with games and magazines. Ideal for beginner!  ono. Tel: Derby 776050 and ask for Darren. more. Price -. Also a brand new addictive game of skill not in the shops: Crown Green Bowls . Ring Rotherham (0709) 546261 and ask for Mark. Prism VTX 5000 modem for sale or swap for mirage microdriver or Multiface one, Modem for use on Spectrums and you can get on to Micronet 800 only . Contact: R. Fawcett, Arthur's Seat, War Coppise Rd, Caterham, Surrey CR3 6AS. 48K Spectrum with manuals and leads, DK'Tronics keyboard, Comcon programmable Interface with quickshot 2+2 joystick, Spectrum Digital Drum Kit, Port Extension Interface, lots of magazines and software. Value + including many of the latest titles. All in excellent working order.  ono for quick sale. Tel: Watford 41109. Vectrex for sale. Plus 10 games eg, Solar Quest, Rip Off, Bedlam, Hypercase, Spike, Clean Sweep, Berzerk, Starship, Cosmic Chasm, Scramble. . Buyer collects. Tel: 0223 (Cambridge) 60141. Commodore 64 originals to sell. My games include Summer Games II, Mercenary, Frankie Goes to Hollywood, Robin of the Wood, Rambo and many more. Ring 0298 77641 and ask for Rob. Amstrad 464 with Green Screen, plus colour modulator, two joysticks  of software, including Elite, Rambo, plus mags all owrth over 1600 for only . Phone 0282 57801 after 5pm. CBM64 software to swap. Send your list for mine to Kenneth Taylor, 4 Masterick Hend, Aberdeen, Scotland AB2 5GF. Tel: 0224 690751. Disk only. Commodore 64 software to swap. I have many new games from USA, England and Holland. Write to Henrik Hansen, Rudolph Berghs Gade 37, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. CBM64 + C2N + competition pro + over  of tape software (Uridium, Mercenary etc) + Nearly new 1541 +Epyx fastload cartridge +  of disk games (LCP, Hitch Hiker's. Koronis Rift). Worth over . The lot for . Phone Great Missenden 3273 after 5pm. Amstrad pen pals wanted from all over the world to swap ideas and software. All letters answered. A. Kham, 142 Broadstone Way, Bradford, West Yorkshire, BD4 9BU. CBM 64 software. Fight Night, Ancipital, Dig Dug, Rocky Horror Show, World Series Baseball, Moon Cresta, Wizards Lair and Who Dares Wins  each, also cartridges. Pole position, Miss Pacman and Centipede  each. Tel: 0630 57129. New Spectrum + with quickshot 2 joystick. 7 games such as Monkey Business, Quickshot. Tel: 0827 896945 after 5pm. Will sell for  including datarecorder. Apple 11E. For sale Kage 12\" Green Screen Monitor. 2 disk drives: interface card: 80 column card: Micro Soft Soft card. . Tel: 096 274 208. Atari software for sale all originals. Disks-Dallas Quest, Bruce Lee, Mercenary, cassettes-all Level 9 adventures, some Scott Adams, some Arcade. Also selection of cartridges. All  each. Tel: 0968 78465 after 7pm or weekends. For Sale: Simons basic Currah Speech and Trojan Light Pen. All for CBM64.  for all 3. Write to M. Povey, 20 Vicar Road, Wath Upon Dearne, South Yorkshire S63 6QA. Also pen-pals wanted to swap tape games and ideas with. Swap:Brand new Amstrad 6128 eprom programmer (cost .95) for \"The Hitch-Hikers Guide to the Galaxy\" adventure game. It must be complete and original. Telephone: (0532) 537507 after 6pm. Ask for Robert Spectrum + in good condition with  worth of original software inc. Fist, Spitfire 40 and Winter Games. Also a Doodler lightpen, switchable interface, Quickshot 2 joystick, Fergason Data recorder and a Doubler Mk2 and many magazines. Cost . Sell for  or swap for Commodore 64 with tape deck and joystick. Phone Stocton, Cleveland (0642) 565141 after 4pm. Commodore 64 and Atari software to swap Disk only. All the latest titles. Send your list in return for mine to Andrew, 19 Herondale Avenue, Birkenhead, Merseyside, L43 7UH. Electron Computer, plus 1 interface, joystick (Quickshot). Leads, manuals, books, tons of games/cart. (inc Elite), and all but 2 Electron User to date and others.  ono/inc  Acorn data recorder. Perfect condition. Phone: Adam 01-904 4519 6pm-9pm. BBC Computer: 29 games including Elite, Knightlore, Way of the Exploding, first 2 books. Good condition. Altogether worth , selling for  ono. 142 St Albans Road, Arnold, Nottingham. Tel: 203088. Commodore 64/128 software: 100s of titles to swap or sell, some of which have been previously unreleased. All the latest software. If interested scribble to: M. Roberts, 64 Rectory Lane, Breadsall, Derby DE7 6AL. All letters answered. Commodore 64 software to swap on disk and tape. Many new titles. Please write soon. Send to S. Robbins, 9 Baytree Close, Backford Cross, S. Wirral, L66 2XZ or ring me on 051 339 5190. Commodore 64 with cassette unit, over  worth of software, dust cover, back up device, plus books. Worth , only . Phone: 0993 841182 after 6pm. Ask for Ken. VIC 20 for sale with C2N recorder, 16K switchable ram, 19 games, 2 cartridges.  ono. 3 Ryefield Rd, Sale, Cheshire M33 4WE. Tel: 061 962 3575 Will swap C64 music studio (D) for Activision Game maker (Disk) or Gilsoft's illustrator (Disk). Cash also considered. Originals only please. Phone (0742) 694046 after 5pm. Ask for Leigh or leave message. CBM 64. I'm looking for the newest stuff!! Send your list to M. Crucke, Durennemeers, 28,B-9600 Ronse. Have all the new things!! 48K Spectrum Kempston interface quickshot joystick, 65 games,  worth. Total value , swap for Amstrad (Colour Monitor). Contact Paul Turk, Bunaninver, Brinalack, Letterkenny, Co Donegal, Ireland (Distance no problem, delivery arranged). Bargain: 48K Spectrum Plus, boxed, with leads, manual and magazines. Over  of software, inc Elite, Bombjack Atari 2600 video consolte system with inc Pac Man and Space Invaders. Also Atari includes paddles, joystick and video touchpad. All worth over . Will sell for  for quick sale. Excellent condition. Phone: 01-435 1281. Will sell separately. Boxed MTX500, tape deck, over  software, books and mags. Worth over  new, will sell for  ono. Any offer or swap considered. Tel( 0325) 463966 after 6pm. CBM 64 games to swap, many titles. Please send your list for mine.Write to Neil, 7 Chichester Close, Gateshead, Tyne & Wear, England N38 1NN, or Tel: (091) 477 4725. Spectrum Plus, with Ferguson datacorder, joystick, plus interface, 100 magazines, 300 games (Bomb Jack, Green Beret, Ping Pong etc). Worth For Sale: complete computer outfit including: Dragon 32 computer, black and white portable TV, tape recorder, and BBC B Bargain software, all originals. Titles include: Elite, Hypersports, Yle Ar Kung Fu, Beach head, Alien 8 and many 20 BBC-B games. All originals, worth , will sell for . Titles include Speech, Castle Quest and Wizadare. Ring (0773) 763950 after 5pm and ask for Ben. "


"URIDIUM CON | SINCLAIR ELLIOT ow! That was B-Con's response to the amazing artwork which arrived in the Ideas Penthouse after our Hewson's Uridium art contest. We asked you to draw your own Uridium spaceship. And that's just what hundreds and hundreds of your did. Here are just a few of the incredible entries that B-Con had to judge wearing his dark glasses! GARY CHANDLER by the handle JONATHAN EGGELTON FOKKEMA "


"APETITION RESULTS JAN ROSE A. B. PHILLIPS DANNY THIE PHILIP VINE BILITATEA ESTE URIDIUM "


"EXTRA B AWKWARD ROMS the system's current settings in a connected by a cable to the main Will you please welcome back C+VG's ex-Bug Hunter memory which is not lost when u nit, and the TV sits on the top. ROBERT SCHIFREEN for the first in a new series of his the computer is turned off. So The result isn't a better machine, informative Extra Bits articles. Robert's been away function key definitions, printer but it does make it look a little doing terribly serious things in the world of business commands, baud rate settings like an IBM PC and keeps all the computers but now he's back and bringing you news and so on can be kept without various wires hidden out of the having to type a string of *FX about all the latest things you can add-on, plug in and way. commands every time you turn Slightly more useful, though generally interface with your home computer. on. pricey, is a hard disk drive for the This costs around , and Beeb model B, B+ and Master. It AMSTRAD LIGHT more details on both products holds 20Mbytes, which is about can be obtained from Vine Micros the same as 100 normal floppy PEN Vine Micros has just announced at Marshborough, Nr. Sandwich, disks, and costs .00. A light pen is now available for a write protect switch for Kent CT13 OPG or call Slightly cheaper is a cartridge the Amstrad 8256 and 8512 sideways RAM on a BBC MASTER. 0304-812276. Your local Beeb system for holding Eproms, Some ROMs write to themselves dealer should have all the details, making it easy to insert and machines. It plugs into the when you use them, in an attempt too. expansion port on the monitor, so remove Eprom software from a to increase copy protection. Master. The special connector you don't need a separate interface. Included in the Normally, trying to write to a NEW STORAGE for the micro comes with two ROM will have no effect, but if the package is a graphics program Eprom holders and costs .95, ROM has been copied into which lets you create and more holders cost .99 IDEAS masterpieces on the screen and sideways RAM, the copy will be No, it's not a brochure from each. Personally, I'd rather overwritten and will not work.. then save, edit or print them. spend the money on buying The write protect switch costs Habitat, but a couple of add-ons The software package is for the Beeb from Viglen. First, another Eprom. .95 and allows you to run even similar to Dr Draw and other art somewhere to store your Beeb's If you want to know more, the most awkward ROMs in programs. It has a number of write to Viglen at Unit 7, PCB's, keyboard and circuitry. different sized paint brushes, a sideways. The switch only Yes, I know that the Beeb Trumpers Way, Hanwell, London protects sideways W7 2QA or call 01-843 9903. spray can, line drawing facilities comes in a pretty creamand automatic filling, among memory, and not coloured case, but Viglen the normal RAM other features. want you to forget all that. of the Beeb. The pictures produced are Their console unit will take Also just DEAD! compatible with Mirrorsoft's your Beeb (once you've announced by Fleet Street Editor, which means removed the top half Vine is a The Commodore Plus 4 is not that you can edit and refine your of the case), and has dead yet. Trojan, who produce a creation using the Fleet Street battery room for a disk drive light pen and art package for the backed package as well as the package too. The micro's 64, are about to launch a version RAM and supplied with the light pen. keyboard goes into a for the Plus 4. It is fully clock board The pen, with software, costs for the Beeb. I', separate box, compatible with the .95 for the 8256 and 8512 This stores CadMaster machines. A light pen has been package, for available for the CPC machines the 64, and will for some time, and that is still cost .95. available at .95 on cassette It should be out or .95 on disk. at the end of this More details from The Electric month and your Studio, PO Box 96, Luton LU3 dealer has all 2JP or call them on the details. 0582-595222. PLUS 4 NOT "


"be P-40 PROBLEMS Epson's P-40 printer, a cheap 40-column model, is currently being sold through Boots as well as other retailers. It's certainly not the best printer around, but it is one of the cheapest and it comes with a choice of interfaces that will connect it to just about any micro. If you have a P-40, or you are thinking about buying one, Epson has produced a free booklet which explains how to link it to a variety of micros and contains some general advice on how to use it to produce program listings and screen dumps. Call Epson on 01-902 8892 and they'll send you a copy, or drop into your local branch of boots who have lots to give away. Fantasttek CONNECTIONS If you've ever tried connecting one computer to another, or one piece of equipment to another, you may have wondered whether there was a shop anywhere that specialised in cables, plugs, connectors and so on. Well, I have found one, and they certainly seem to have a good selection. What's more, everything is usually in stock. The company is called Connexions and is at 125 East Barnet Road, Barnet, Herts. Call them on 01-441 1282 and tell them that I sent you. the Commodore Many games on the 64 and show recently. 128 use sprites, and the Compatible with computer has a special command many micros, the that the programmer uses, to Quickshot Il Plus work out when two sprites have special collide. The player is usually suction pads made up of one or more sprites enabling you to use on the screen, and enemies are it with just one made up of another. What Game hand. The brochure Killer does is to stop the doesn't say what computer from registering when you're supposed to two sprites collide, so the game do with the free does not know when you've been hand though. The hit. This means that you can walk grip has been through gunfire and discover all be a built-in disk drive, and the improved, and an auto-fire button the screens of a game. machine will use the GEM will prove useful. Quickshot II I f you enjoy cheating then operating system, as seen on the Plus will sell at .95. Fantastic Game Killer may be what you're Atari ST range. Ill will be .95. looking for, but it doesn't work Commodore will also be on every game only those that bringing out 3.5-inch disk drives use sprites. Ask your Commodore soon, but no dates or prices have dealer for details. been announced. Game Killer is a cartridge for the That's about it for this month. If C64 and 128 that allows you to you have anything to say, drop NEW JOYSTICKS walk through most shooting me a line! Write to Extra Bits, games without being killed. You Computer and Video Games, The Fantastic III and Quickshot II may have seen it previewed on Priory Court, Farringdon Lane, Plus joysticks were launched at BBC's Micro Live a few weeks ago. London ECIR 3AV. NEW C64 SOON Commodore will be announcing a new version of the 64 soon. It will looks like a 128, but with the right hand side chopped off (ie, no numeric keypad). There may "


"THE CHVG GAMES CHAMPION; : WANTED — THE C+VG GAMES CHAMPION The search is on. Big Red, Otiss, X, B-Con, Melissa and the rest of the IDEAS CENTRAL crew are out scouring the country for the games player worthy of the title C+VG GAMES CHAMP 1986! This is no contest for wimps. Only the best need apply. Because once you've become the C+VG Champ we'll expect you to uphold the magazine's honour at the National Computer Games Championship against representatives from the other top computer magazines-like Crash and Zapp 64. So you know you've got to be good! The championship is being staged in conjunction with Mikro Gen and the qualifying heat will be fought out on Battle of the Planets last year's National Championship final game. To qualify for special entry tape all you have to do is complete the entry form on this page and rush it to Computer and Video Games, National Computer Games Championship, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Be quick because ONLY THE FIRST 100 people will get a qualifying tape. The special tapes include a special code which tells us that your hi-score is accurate. If you're lucky enough to get a tape from us then you have until July 5th to register your hi-score. Then the C+VG and Mikro-Gen judges will sort the space cadets from the arcade aces! The top scorer will go on to become C+VG's representative at the National Championship later in the year. Interested? Of course you are! So your first move is to post the coupon off at the speed of light. We're waiting for you Champ! 19 WM   STATUS PoHEF ROCKET SYSTEM LASER SYSTEM PLANET DATA THRUST TENP C+VG/MIKRO-GEN SEARCH FOR A CHAMPION Name | Address ....... Age......... Computer........ "


"Try beating our SpecDrum! .95 H D  8 DIGITALLY RECORDED REAL DRUM SOUNDS  SIMPLE TO USE-UP AND RUNNING IN ONLY MINUTES  A TRUE DIGITAL DRUM MACHINE  'REAL TIME' OR ON SCREEN PROGRAMMING COMPLETE WITH SOFTWARE  EXTRA SOUNDS CAN BE LOADED FROM TAPE COMPREHENSIVE MANUAL THE MOST EXCITING PERIPHERAL EVER DEVELOPED DYNAMIC FILING SYSTEM STORE OVER 1000 PROGRAMMED RHYTHMS  TAPE SYNC FACILITY SONGS CAN BE SAVED ON TAPE  POLYPHONIC  CREATIVE EDUCATIONAL AND FUN  JUST PLUGS IN TO MOST HIFI'S Spec Drum GTRUCTION Spec Drum As featured on \"Micro Live\" and \"Saturday Superstore\" NEW KITS AVAILABLE from .99 Available from our High St. Stores and all good computer shops or direct from Cheetah Marketing Cheetah COP Market Digital Drum System for the Spectrum Chetch Marketing Lid 1 Willowbrook Science Park Credhewel Rood. St Malons Tel Cord0272 777337 The 197455 JR SOFTWARE ADVERTISEMENT INDEX 5 Brookes Court, Baldwin Gardens, London EC1 Telephone: 01-242 5409 Alligata ... Arcade.. 65 26 Livingston... Logic Sales Bargain.. Beyond 93 Ping Pong FA Cup E140 989898 ...... 113 Cascade Charnwood. Cheetah ......... Creative Sparks .. Cut Price .63, 96 30, 107 Macmillan. Mailsoft Match ......... Megasave ........... Melbourne House ......... Midland Computers....... Midland Games ........... Micronet. Mirrorsoft. Mosaic ........... 30 ............. .60 Elite.... English .......... Electric Dreams Empire. Wow National Westminster Bank.. 67 New Concepts .. Novagen... Faculty ......... C16 Ocean... 49,90 SPECTRUM Koronis Rift .25 Sky Hawk... Barry McGuigan Boxing ...... .90 Kung Fu Master ....... .40 Two Kingdom Valley ... Back to the Future ............ .. E725 Laser Basic .50 Thai Boxing Critical Mall  60 Mercenary E7.40 World Cup Desert Rats E7.40 Mugsy's Revenge .50 Winter Olympics Bomb Jack E5.90 Max Headroom E7.40 Finest Hour E7.40 .50 ATARI .90 PSIS Trading 17.40 Gun Fright Boulder dash 17.40 \"Green Beret E6.60 Beta Lyrae Green Beret 25.90 Price of Magic Heavy on the Magick Electra Glide Quest Probe .40 --.90 .40 .50 Golf Construction Set......... Fighter Pilot..................... F15 Strike Eagle.. .40 Kung Fu Rock 'N' Wrestle .90 .  ... 57.40 Laser Basic... Jump Jet .50 Summer Games I... Movie .70 Sky Fox .40 King of the Ring .40 7.40 Sold A Million Mercenary Max Headroom 1725 .50 Movie Maker (disc) Nomad 27.40 Super Bowl 25.90 .70 Ping Pong Mr Robot  60 Star Quake .40 7.40 Starquake  60 Time Tunnel Red Moon .40 Sold A Million .20 Twister ...... Smash Hits 4 .40 Spitfire 40 .40 .40 .60 Spy vs Spy 11 Uridium ... Spitfire Ace .60 Super Bowl. .60 E7.40 Sai Combat .20 Winter Games .25 Technicolour Dream ........ .50 Star Strike il .90 30 Games Worm in Paradise .40 Sam Fox .60 War Play Zone X .95 Transformers .90 Zoids .60 30 Games E7.40 Young Ones E725 BBC .25 Block Busters Turbot Esprit .60 Bull's Eye E6.60 .90 Atlantis 55.25 Commando.. E7.20 Wartoad... .90 Ace .00 Count Down .. .70 Winter Games............ .70 Airwolf .70 Citidale... .40 Way of the Tiger E7.40 Berls Trilogy .25 Exploding Fist .70 Young Ones .40 Beach Head .95 Fleet Street Editor .00 Zoids Bongo .95 Lord of the Ring .00 International Soccer Cave Fight .95 Moon Cresta Classics 1 or Classics Repton il COMMODORE Commando .70 Speach Beach Head E7.40 Favourite Four .25 Strike Force Harrier ..... Bomb Jack E7.20 Gun Slinger ... ... .95 Southern Bell... Desert Fox E7.20 Hustler .95 Scrabble....... Empire E7.40 Jump Jet. .40 Treasure Hunt Electra Glide E6.60 Mount Vesuvius ... .25 The Quill Frank Bruno Boxing ES 90 Jet Set Willy .95 West Zone The Force Pogo Pet .25 Winter Olympic FA Cup .90 Space Pilot Ye Ar Kung Fu Hard Ball E7.40 Slippery Sid .95 These titles were not released at the time of going to press. Your cheque will not be banked until they are. Comp Pro E14.50, Konix Speed King 19.95; Hotshot Analog Joystick for Revs .50, C16 interface 13.00: Arcade .50 All payments in Sterling Europe add E1 per tape. Elsewhere overseas ass  per tape. Postage free in UK to: Send a self addressed, stamped envelope for list to: JR Software Dept CVG, 5 Brookes Court, Baldwins Gardens, EC1 Probe. Gargoyle Games ... GB Microland............ Good Byte... Gremlin Graphics .......  88888888888888 5 Hewson Robtek... Shekhana .. Supasoft Thor/Odin ......... US Gold ........ OBC, 26, 38, 74 Video Vault .......... Virgin Wow Games ... Imagine .. Incentive ...... Infogrames ...... 30 Video Vault w JJB JR........... 107 3 Level 9. ..... 85 "


"COMPETITION C+VG COMPETITION VG COMPETITION wygran; mummo TUBULAR BELLS TUBULAR BELLS TUBUL , \" : Hey everybody! Look at these really amazing lights — and just listen to the sounds. It's really tubular! Yup, that's right, it is tubular. Tubular Bells — the computer sound and light show from C+VG/CRL TUBULAR BELLS COMPETITION 1. Which famous horror film features music from Tubular Bells in the soundtrack? Name TWO other Mike Oldfield LPs 3. Oranges and Lemons say the bells of ........... Complete this line from a famous nursery song. 4. Name the famous hunchbacked hero who has been featured in a couple of computer games, a few movies and who kept shouting \"The Bells! The Bells!\"? CRL based around Mike Oldfield's now classic instrumental album. To celebrate the arrival of this interesting bit of interactive entertainment we've teamed up with CRL to bring you a brilliant prize. The first prize winner gets a trip to London's amazing Laserium — the place where you can see an incredible laser light show accompanied by some very loud mind-blowing music from all your favourite groups! You'll also be paying a visit to the studio's of the London Broadcasting Company and meeting Clive Bull — the DJ who runs LBC's computer show on Sunday afternoon. And just possibly you might get to see C+VG's Adventure Helpline team in action on the radio too! All that and CRL will pay your train fare as well. That's the first prize — but 25 runners-up will also get a copy of Tubular Bells for the 64. All you have to do is answer the simple Tubular Bells quiz and send your entry to Computer and Video Games, Tubular Bells Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date for entries is July 16th and normal C+VG rules apply. Name Address Age "


"OM I CRORE T A I LERS BERKSHIRE LOGIC SALES 19 The Broadway SURREY BRACKNELL COMPUTERS The Bourne SOFTWARE CITY 44 Broadway Southgate 14 Thames Street Bracknell 0344 427317 London N14 01 882 4942 Kingston Surrey KTI PE 01-541 4911 SOFTWARE CITY SHEKANA COMPUTERS 47 Cheap Street 221 Tottenham Court Road Newbury London W1 01-800 3156 STAFFORDSHIRE Berks RI 45BX 0635 31696 SOFTWARE CITY COMPUTER WORLD 382 Kings Road CHESHIRE 42 Marker Street London SW3 5UZ 01-352 9220 Longton NORTHWICH HOME COMPUTERS SOFTWARE STORE Stoke-on-Trent 79A Witton Street 35 London Road Staffs. 0782319144 Northwich London SW17 01-685 1476 Cheshire 0606 47883 SCOTLAND DERBYSHIRE LIVINGSTONE COMPUTER CENTRE 17 The Mall FIRST BYTE COMPUTERS Craigs Hill Shopping Centre MANCHESTER 10 Main Centre Livingstone London Road BUDGET SOFTWARE CENTRE West Lothian EH54 5DZ 0506 36978 Derby 0332 365 280 51 Fennel Street Manchester M4 3DY 061-834 2808 WEST MIDLANDS ESSEX MBC COMPUTER CENTRE 17-19 Lichfield Street MINNIE MICRO COMPUTER CENTRE Wolverhampton 0902 29907/29021 11/12 Eastern Esplanade Southend SCOTLAND YORKSHIRE Essex 0702 615809/62033 THE COMPUTER DEPOT JUST MICRO 205 Buchanana Street 22 Carver Street HEREFORDSHIRE Glasgow GI 2JZ 041 331 3944 Sheffield Si 4SS 0742 752732 LOOK & SEE HONEY SETT COMPUTERS 45 Belmont Bridge 17 Union Street Skipton Hereford HRI 2BT 0432 279404 0756 60078 MIDDLESEX MICRO BYTE INNOVATIONS, COMPUTER & VIDEO 36 County Arcade 9 Harmondsworth Road Leeds 0532 450 529 LONDON West Drayton RECORDMANIA ARCADE SOFTWARE Middlesex UB7 9JS 0895 420457 14 Davy Gate Centre Unit 202, Shopping Hall JENNINGS STORE York 0904 33993 Myrtle Road 248 Hertford Road RECORDMANIA East Ham Enfield Units 5/6, In-Shops London E6 01-471 8900 Middlesex 01-804 1767 Market Cross, Selby 0757 700988 DEALERS: If you would like to see your shop included in this new service, please call 01 251 6222 EXT 2461. UTILIK M I C R O S E L L Synthesiser, 22. Also Vic-Rel VIC-20 Adman speech synthesiser, . Also Vic-Rel relay system, . Write to Mr S.P. Wyatt, 10 Gordon Terrace, Mundesley, Norwich, Norfolk. MICROSELLS it costs only 1 to advertise in Microsell COMMODORE 64 +C2N t/recorder, 3 joysticks and over  worth of original games including Uridium, Elife, Frankie, Summer Ganes 1 & 2, Kung Fu, etc. Cost . Accept 350 ono. Tel: Maidenhead (0628) 38545. CBM 64 for sale with joystick and games. Titles include Rambo. Worth . Sell for  ono. Contact A. Deakins, 7 David Place, New Waltham, South Humberside or tel: Grimsby 824486. SPECTRUM DKTronics light pen, unwanted gift, only used once, still boxed.  ono. Write to Jon King, 9 Porthminster Terrace, St Ives, Cornwall TR26 2DQ SAGR ONE real professional keyboard for the spectrum. Perfect condition. Only one month old, cost , offers around . Ring Sheffield (0742) 331729, and ask for Richard. Many cheap Spectrum games for sale. Cyberun, . Way of the Triger, . Movie, . Hypersports, . Many more. Send sae for details to M. Turley, 20 Outram Street, Middlesbrough. TS1 4EL. ATARI hyper drive 1050 disk drive enhancement. Easily installed hardware/software package, enables true double density, faster operation and duplication facilities. Similar to Lazer, Happy etc. . Phone 01-508 2671. For Sale: Atari VCSA 2600 games console, with 4 games: Kangaroo, Donkey Kong, Robot Tank, Ramit. Plus joystick. As new, boxed. Only  ono. Tel: 0924 498248 evenings, ring David. Bargain time! Spectrum owners, how would you like to save pounds on computer games. I have over 100 titles at very cheap prices. Like Rambo, .99. If you would like to know more. John Stewart, 12 Fairlawn Court, Cherry Orchard Estate, Charlton, London SE7 7DR. For Sale. Cheapest softwares, latest titles, for your C64 and C28. Eg, International Hockey We have all sorts of software available for your machine. Send 50p now to get your full list to 75 Mile Street, Sparkbrook, Birmingham B11 1XA. COMMODORE 64 games for sale. Ballblazer, Mercenary, Pastfinder, Dropzone,  each. Theatre Europe, Combat Leader, McGuigans, Falklands 82, Battle of Britain, Snowball, Neverending Story, Bruce Lee, Combat Lynx,  each. Phone Damian. 091 4160643 after 5pm. Software to swap for the ZX Spectrum games like Minder, Ghostbusters, Decathlon and many more. If you're interested, send a sae to Ashley Bowman, 12 Dunsdale Rd, Holywell, Whitley Bay NE25 ONG. Spectrum games for sale. Include Hyper Sports, Supertest, Winter Games, Commando, Barry mcGuigan Boxing, Adrien Mole and many more. Also VIC20 games and tape cassette. Write to Richard Forrest, 22 Cloverdale, Cotgrave, South Notts, NG 12 3NJ. Spectrum hardware: Currah speech synthesiser (with tape & manual) . Datel electronics joystick interace & free computer dustcover . All boxed as new. Write to Chris Jackman, 3 Albion Terrace, Lexham Road, Litcham, Kings Lynn, Norfolk PE32 20. Please pay by PO or cheque. Commodore 64 games to swap. Over 800 titles on super turbo. Phone 0827 287886 and ask for Alex or write to 167 Reindeer Road, Fazeley, Tamworth, Staffs B78 3SR. CBM 64 software to sell, swap. Titles like Green Baret, 'V', Bomb Jack and Winter Games. Write or phone Frank Smit, Eikbosserweg 109 1213RX Mclversum Holland 035 48104. Tape only. CBM 64 games for sale. From 50p + P&P. Many games less than half price. eg, LCP . For full list sae to M. D. Bull, 2 Sara Close, Four Oaks, Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands. "


"COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU sloppy review when trash like Samantha Fox receives a better rating over all. Shame on you. Eamonn Cleary N Ireland Superbowl comp did have New York as one of the listed cities. The fact that New York has two teams makes it rather easier for the entrants! We have accepted either team. The Southern Belle comp, did contain an error, although we don't think that it made the competition impossible. If the entrants knew the answers to the questions, it would be easy for them to indicate this. We accept, though, that each train should have been numbered. We most certainly have heard of colour and presentation! The newer issues contain more colour and design work than ever before. The Mailbag, as we continually remind readers, is a representation of their views. We print the letters which we receive. You wouldn't want us to start making them up, now, would you? as movies, music and other entertainments are my favourite part of the magazine, too. Provided that we can persuade the Editor that other people think so too, we should be able to provide you with more of this sort. That is, of course, if the \"public\" think it's a good thing. Keith Campbell is out of the office at the time of writing, so I can't say what his reaction is to your comments about space. The sub-editor has been muttering to himself since he read your letter. I don't know whether it's pleasure or disgust, but he's a little mysterious anway. Do other readers think that the Adventure section is too large, too small or too prominent? For almost two years, since the July 1984 issue, I have been loyal to C+VG, but, lately there has been a lapse in the presentation of what used to be an excellent magazine. This drop in standards seems to co-incide with the introduction of the new C+VG. Can we wait for the return of what was the best magazine on the market. October 1985 seems to be the turning point on the scene of computer magazines, but, recently, your challenge has got worse. I am now talking about competitions, ie, the February issue Superbowl competition We were asked to complete the names of American Football teams from stated cities. One of your cities just happened to be New York, New York has two American football sides, the Jets and the Giants. That is the reason for the inclusion of a SAE, so you can explain your reasons and your answers (if you don't print your reply, ashamed of yourself). The next complaint on the competition front that springs to mind is the Southern Belle competition in May. The questions referred to three trains, but what three trains? I presume you mean the silhouettes printed above, but, in the WRONG ORDER! It hasn't past my notice that you now print competition winners and have improved the letters page, but, it's no competition for other mags. When I compare other magazines, I speak in the context of presentation and colour have you ever heard of these two words. So, buck up your ideas or I will withdraw my subscription from my newsagent. Derek Farquhar, Nottingham B-Con replies: Steady on! Poor old Otiss (for it was he who was responsible for the erroneous review) has just scuttled off into a corner, wailing \"I told them not to use the blasted review\". He really is quite upset. His story which we all reckon is a bit dodgy, but you can never tell with Otiss-goes like this .. \"Ariolasoft neglected to supply us with full instructions (boo hiss!) and so we had to plod on with the game without them. After finding myself completely stuck, the game was shelved, and a partial review was written, with the intention of re-writing when a proper copy of both game and instructions arrived. As time went on, nothing appeared, and the Editor missed the fact that the offending item and been included in the review pages.» Poor old Otiss has been trying to explain that it \"wasn't really\" his mistake ever since. Despite your rough treatment of poor old Otiss, your letter did make it easier for us to clarify the matter. As for your 10/10 for value, is anything worth 100 per cent of the price you pay? What do you, the C+VG readers think? You devote far too much space in the mag to Mr Campbell. I mean, I understand that a lot of people enjoy adventure games, but can so many pages each month be justified? Despite these complaints, I must congratulate you on your features. They are a welcome diversion for people who are not utterly obsessed with computers. Why don't you branch out further to cover some other areas from time to time? I'm sure the readers would be interested. I hope you consider these points, even if my letter isn't printed. With a little more thought, I think you'll be able to retain your position as one of the market leaders. Matt Dougherty, When I read a review I usually take it that the reviewer has made an indepth study of the game, therefore, giving it as fair a rating as possible (considering of course the short amount of time he can look at any one game). Well, I'm sorry but your review of 'Starship Andromeda' was the most incompetent I think I have ever read. Your reviewer says that the game is so impossible to get into that he gave up, well, if he'd taken the time to read the inlay card he would have seen that it actually tells you how to start. I won't bore you with the details, suffice to say that the game will then open up. I have only actually played the game once but, I have already finished the two planets containing Zynon and Trysst, manoeuvring through a deep canyon, dodging tanks and asteriods, all in the first scenario and in the second battled with a rotating space station and then attempted to manoeuvre my men through an airlock into the station. These are all in the first two scenarios and the entire game contains five. So, I think you will find that the actual game deserves a 10/10 for value unlike your reviewer's 5/10. To be honest the game is not a classic but its most certainly a good one deserving perhaps 8 or 9 in the other three categories. It's sad that such a worthy game was given such a Purley, Surrey B-Con replies: Oh dear! After all those nice things the last person said about the magazine, too! The designer has been walking around in a decidedly funny mood since he read your letter, muttering \"artistic impression» and «talentless fools\". We think he's a bit strange anyway. Still, we've noted your points, and will try to enlighten him, gradually. Now, onto your second point, the competitions. The B-Con replies: Hurrah! At last, someone who has got their head screwed on! Just between me and you, Matt, it isn't easy working in an office, surrounded by electronic wizards. It can be utterly depressing and very confusing when the entire conversation of a morning consists of hundreds of various technical worlds: Bit/Drive/Centronics/Coffee etc. The separate articles, such I just thought I'd write and tell you, that for the first time in my life, I saw your magazine. Where? Why here of course, in sunny Saudi. No, contrary to popular opinion I haven't been living in the Dark Ages, I just have not seen your mag in Scotland, where I normally live. But now that I have had a chance to read it, I shall continue to buy it whenever I see it. You have another convert to the cause. (What's that noise in the background? Why it's you guys cheering). Seriously though, it's the best of the breed as far as I'm concerned. So keep up the good work, and even if you can't get enough supplies up there to Bonnie Scotland, try to "


"conta crot dot keep your exports to Saudi coming through. I'll let you know when I get back home about supplies there. If you should send me a T-shirt, make it an X-L, and to save postage, send it to my Scottish address which follows. Anyway thanks for a few hours of entertainment out here, and I can assure you, the mag will be read by quite a few Ex-Pats, as I got the only copy in the store. John C Marshall, Name and Address Supplied them inand even longer writing and de-bugging them in the first place and if you expect the end result to be stunning then you may well be disappointed. However not all are bad. Although I agree with Robin Webb, that most lisings are ancient, I don't think it is a good idea to drop them. C+VG and a certain weekly mag are the only source of listings now. Besides, if you drop everything people suggest from time to time, you may as well produce a magazine of blank pages and supply a pen for them to fill it in as they like. Or, failing that, why not make it loose leaf, then any disliked pages can be removed and replaced by others which have been removed and left in the shop by people who dislike them etc — silly ain't it. Steve Summerscales West Yorks Well mucked up C+VG! In last month's edition of the Top Ten Gallup games, I think the C64 and the BBC ratings were the wrong way round and also in the second mailbag page, the C+VG Mailbag was upside down. Was this deliberate or accidental? Come on C+VG, you can do better! David Ince, Jersey B-Con says: Oops!! It looks like you're right on one account anyway, David. The Top Ten ratings were the wrong way round. You just can't trust humans can you? You never get robot error, do you? As for the Mailbag logo, apparently Otiss knocked it over during his short stay at the Mailbag! He's now banned from touching any pages. Our designer Craig has threatened to go for his circuits with a Scalpel and Let Die is available I shall be able to buy it for the Oric. Also, please stop printing listings. One percent of people type them in for hours. As for competitions, there are people out here who own other machines apart from Specs, Coms and Amstrads. One last thing, do you know of any Oric clubs. If so, how can I get in touch? Robert Cook Birmingham B-Con replies: Good grief! It seems that you can't satisfy all of the people all of the time! Whenever we write reports on diverse computers, the mighty wrath of the established lobby (Spec/CBM users) complain that it's all \"old hat\", and then we get hassled for NOT dealing with these machines! It's not fair!! B-Con replies: Gosh! Looking round the room I can truthfully say that every member of the team is blushing! Such kind words! What's all this about the magazine not being available in Bonnie Scotland, though? Knowing a large number of the Scottish community that funny scarlet-haired designer is a prime example) I can assure you that C+VG should be readily available up there. We'll be sending a team of, erm, «representatives» to the northern climes to explain the immense advantages of stocking C+VG regularly (lower medical bills, for example) Your request for a T-shirt caused a rather deathly silence to fall over the office. Our chief clothing distribution droid, Alvin, has been a bit over-worked of late, and as a result, we're running rather low on the infamous garments. Just as soon as we've got him loaded with some more 3 in 1, though, we'll be back in working order. If any other readers have had problems getting hold of a regular supply of the magazine, or have managed to pick up a copy in some bizarre locations, drop us a line and let us know. B-Con replies: Thanks for your comments. We'll certainly keep them in mind when it comes to the IDEAS Central Board Meeting. However, we feel that the continuation or otherwise of listings is a very important issue, and we'd like to hear other reader's opinions too. Get rid of the Mailbag pages? What? And who would you have to complain to when you feel the urge? Seriously, though, we find the Mailbag a vital source of information about our readers. It's the way you can air your views. Okay then, I give up. You, and all other computer magazines have finally defeated me after I have bravely travelled through many mags searching for a review for the Oric. Don't you selfish morons realise that people still do have Orics. Well done to Domark, they have brought out A View to a Kill for the Oric, but for .99 a little overpriced. .95 is the price that I shall be paying for it. I hope that when Live Why don't you get rid of the mailbag pages? I find them boring and most of the letters seem to be copies of ones seen before somewhere. Seriously, though, I think listings are an important aspect of computers and much can be learnt from them, and yes, people do spend hours typing "


"Mdbags fr COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU Well, we've had enough of it! We can't review non-existent software. If the companies decide to produce games, we'll do our level best to cover them. We haven't seen an Oric game for some considerable time now, have we, fellas (general murmurs of agreement from around the office). Perhaps your complaint should be directed toward those who should be producing games for the machine? The listings debate is a bit of an old chestnut, in fact. As I type, the Editor is trying to explain the merits of numbers on a page, instead of the Bug Hunters. Personally, I'd rather have the Bug Hunters, but in the end, the readers will decide or so He keeps telling us... If anyone would like to give Robert information about Oric clubs, why not drop us a line, and we'll forward the information. style created. The main points of error were the following: Reviews this used to be the best section of the magazine. It is now easily the worst. Each review used to be fairly long, and always had a colour screen shot to go with it. Now they are short, and in black and white. Letters Page this was also very good, until you introduced your new look. Now it fills up about two pages. You ought to realise that this is a very important section, as it gives the reader a chance to voice his opinions. Playing Tips -should be longer, much longer. Listings drop them! The Book of Games was the only good thing that ever came out of the change. It meant that I could throw them away without ripping up the mag. Artwork — who is your artist? Whoever he is, sack him! He is awful! Number of pages why has your mag shrunk over the past year? I have an old copy from 1984, which has about 150 pages in it. The Bug Hunters I have never seen such rubbish in my life. I suggest that you scrap them at once. My advice would be to totally remould the whole magazine starting from the next issue. It is vital, before you lose more readers than you already have. It is for your own good. Admit it C+VG, the space age look does not work. You have become a total copy of Computer Gamer, which is easily the worst magazine on the market. Don't sink to their depths! I don't expect you will print this letter, as it tells you the opposite of what you want to hear, but even so, you must act on it. Go back to the old style before it is too late! Jim MacDonald Staffs it's length you are talking about just look at last issue when we devoted an unprecedented page and a half to one game! The letters pages have also rarely been longer than two pages and we don't really want to fill them with letters like this anyway! Playing tips? We've done a game's players guide almost every issue since Christmas PLUS the normal IDEAS CENTRAL pages. Our survey says that people like our listings especially professionally written ones like the Wizard of Tallyron which came with the offer of a tape copy. And we'll be doing more of these in the future the Ed says. The size of the issue? Well it gets smaller during the summer and larger around the Autumn time and has always done this. In any event the number of editorial pages stays the same. Your comment about our artist. Well what do you actually mean? We use lots of different artists in C+VG unlike some other magazines. In any event you won't find better artwork in many other mags. And I think you'll find that many magzines have copied C+VG's new style not the other way around! And as for losing readers jeez Jim, where have you been hiding your head? We are now the best selling computer games magazine in the WORLD. We've increased our sales by around 10,000 on our last ABC figure. B-Con replies: Talk about living in the past! C+VG now has more reviews pages per issue than it ever did before. And despite what you say Jim, there's more colour too. And if Stretch your mind back to summer 1985. At that time C+VG was one of the best magazines available. Then you blew it! C+VG brought in its \"fabulous new look\", which destroyed everything the old IS IT TRUE THAT OTISS DOES THE ADVERTS FOR MICHELIN? "


"OM I CRO ADS 400/806 NOW ATARI 400/600/800/800XL/XE/ST LOOK ST XL/XE ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest, biggest and best Atari Club on the market. Now incorporating ST software into our stocks. MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who nearly 4 years ago first conceived the idea of a software library. Now over 1,400 titles on disc, cassette and Rom (games, business, education and utilities). Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Approaching 2,000 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany, Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast, efficient and friendly service operating a computerized system to keep track of all your records. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities. Important: Midland Games Library are in no way connected are in no way connected with or responsible for Midland Computers Ltd. of Worcester. SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway. Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos. Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programmes are originals with full documentation ATARI 400/600/800 XL XE OWNERS UTILITIES GAMES TEN PACKS All original arcade games software including the classic Spacewars 42 and the highly addictive Battle Boat Amstrad CPC464 Pack... .95 Sharp MZ700 Pack... .95 Spectrum Pack... .95 Please state which type computer your games pack is for when ordering. Make cheques/Postal Orders payable to: PACE SOFTWARE 40 Bainton Grove, Clifton, Nottingham NG11 BLG. HINTS-POKES-MAPS \"Stunning Value Tony Bridge, Popular Computing Weekly The monthly handbooks, packed with tips, pokes, hints, maps, solutions, gossip, latest reviews, competitions, plus much more. Adventurers Handbook (CBM/SPEC) .00 C16 Plus 4 Handbook $1.00 Amstrad Handbook $1.00 BBC Handbook .00 Commodore (64/128) Arcade Handbook .00 Spectrum (48/128) Arcade Handbook .00 Or for even better value take advantage of our reduced subscription rates. — 3 issues .75, 6 issues .00, 12 issues .00. Send cheque or P.O. to: H&D Services (CVG), 1338 Ashton Old Road, Higher Openshaw, Manchester, M11 1JG Tel: 061-370 5666 TAPE CRACKER REV 2 48K SIDE A. Will list m/cprogs to screen, you edit, download your personalised version with or without m/c knowledge. Hours of fun changing text to leave personal messages on screen. Stuck on an adventure, search for clues. SIDE B. For the advanced user contains a disassembler. All this for only  on T.D.K. Tape. Post free. SHARP MZ-700 GAMES Fantastic games at amazingly low prices. All original arcade style software with excellent graphics and boosting sounds. Vat and package & postage included in price. 1) Soccer Star Price: .49 2) Laser Blazer........ $0.99 3) Battle Boat............. .99 4) Sharpshooters...... .$0.99 5) The Champions.... .25 6) Nuron Bean........... ... 11.25 7) Spacewars 42.... $0.99 8) The Saviours Word $0.99 9) Crater Blaster............... $0.99 101 Karate Masters... .25 11) Ten Pack (Above 10 games on 1 cassette) .......... 52.95 Please make all cheques postal orders payable to pace software. Send your order to PACE SOFTWARE, 164, ABBOTSFORD DRIVE, ST. ALBANS, NOTTM, NG3 1NE UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64. Send s.a.e. for fast response and details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG), 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB DISK CRACKER-48K A fast and easy to use utility package of disk and manual. Which will help you to, repair filelinks, map disks, check drive speed, dissassasseble, edit sectors, 48K copier, 128K copier, true d/density copier comes on packaged double sided disk plus manual ONLY  POST FREE Diskdrive Enhancements I.E. 1050 duplactor, warpdrive now in stock. Games on disk from  Games on tape from  Full lists send SAE. Mail order only. Seven days delivery STOCKSOFT 15 WOODBROOKE ROAD BIRMINGHAM B30 1UE FREE MEMBERSHIP SOFTWARE HIRE . VIC-20  COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM Send an sae for your hirekit to: VSH (CV), PO Box 65, Nottingham NG 1 Please state which micro GIANT NEW ADVENTURES \"Love Tie\" \"Goddess\" CBM 64/128 Spectrum 48K ONLY  EACH Send to: PO BOX 15-20, Dublin 4 DISCOUNT SOFTWARE ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE We have an all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE. Apply now and hire your first four games free. Around 1,000 different original titles. For full details send large stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm 10pm or weekends. LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVE .90 post free 130 XEs .90 post free 130 XES+1050 Drive E257.90 post free Antic and Analog magazines available BEST QUALITY DISCS Unlabelled D.D./S.S. .95 for 10 post free .95 for 100 post free S.S. E14.95 for 10 post free. Double density Memorex 3X\" dises S.S.D.D. Boxes of 10 .92 1050 Happy Enhancements with full double density. warp speed and compaction .95 post free GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept. C&VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney close Sunderland SR3 4PD. Tel: 0783 286351 OUR OUR OUR SPECTRUM RRP PRICE COMMODORE RRP PRICE AMSTRAD RRP PRICE Batman 5.56 Very Big Cav Adv 8.95 6.50 Movie 8.95 6.40 Bomb Jack 7.95 5.40 Uridium 8.95 6.15 Way of the Tiger 9.95 7.15 Way of the Tiger 9.95 7.20 Fairlight 9.95 7.10 Fairlight 9.95 7.15 Turbo Esprit 8.95 6.50 R.M.S. Titanic 9.99 7.15 Turbo Esprit 8.95 6.45 Ping Pong 7.95 5.30 Bomb Jack 9.95 7.15 Heavy on the Magick 9.95 7.35 Heavy on the Magick 9.95 7.15 Sold a Million 2 9.95 7.25 Spin Dizzy 9.95 7.15 All Level 9 9.95 7.15 Ping Pong 8.95 6.50 Ping Pong 8.95 6.45 The Planet 9.95 7.15 Gamekiller 14.95 12.50 Elite 14.95 10.75 Red Hawk 8.95 6.50 Red Hawk 8.95 6.50 Bomb Jack 9.95 7.40 Quazatrone 8.95 6.40 Zoids 8.95 6.50 Frankie goes H'wood 9.95 7.15 Sold a Million 2 9.95 7.15 PS1-5 Trading 9.95 7.15 Zoids 8.95 6.40 Starstrike 2 7.95 5.65 Game Maker (disc) 19.95 14.60 Sky Fox 9.95 7.35 All US Gold 7.95 5.80 All US Gold 9.95 7.25 Rock 'n' Wrestle 9.95 6.40 Spin Dizzy 9.99 7.15 All Activision 9.99 7.30 All Ultimate 7.35 Rock'n Wrestle 8.95 6.40 All Ariolasoft 9.95 7.25 Sweevo's World 7.95 6.55 Sky Fox 8.95 6.40 All Beyond 9.95 7.25 Sold a Million 1&2 9.95 Movie 7.95 5.30 Alter Ego (disc) 24.99 19.99 Batman 8.95 Green Beret 795 5.65 All Level 9 9.95 7.50 All Level 9 9.95 Sweevo's World 7.95 5.65 Freeze Frame 2 39.95 35.50 All US Gold 9.95 Leg'd Amazon W men 7.95 5.65 Biggles 9.95 7.20 Red Hawk 8.95 Crash Smashes 9.95 7.25 Spin Dizzy 9.99 7.20 All Adventure Int 9.95 7.99 Please state name, address, title & micro clearly with order Mail order only. P&P included. Overseas add 75p per tape Make cheques payable to Discount Software. All new & old titles in stock, ring for details DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, 120 LORD STREET, HODDESDON, HERTS., EN11 8NP. TELEPHONE (0992) 441524 7.35 6.45 7.99 1.99 6.45 OM I CRO ADS "


"LOlor F SODODG: The Atari ST and Commodore Amiga are in the forefront of a whole new generation of super-computers. Next issue we take a look at the Picture shape of things to come in a special this! supplement. The machines, the Your very games, the future-all will be own revealed in just 28 days time. Polaroid Can you wait that long? camera to take embarrassing pictures of your friends and family with. And one of these nifty cameras could be yours if you enter our Splitting Image competition next issue. Domark are the people behind this entertaining new game and they want to put you in the picture. Every image conscious computer owner should grab a copy of C+VG in July. Cyborg is the first in a trilogy of exciting new games from CRL and we've got an exclusive preview of this new game from new programmers. Watch for the Cyborg on the cover! NEXT ONTH The Wizard of Tallyron returns next issue for another all-new adventure for you and your Spectrum. Called Tallyron 2: Beneath the Wold, this new listing takes the Tallyron team The French Connection. Find out into the realms of a what's happening over the dank dungeon full of evil Channel next issue when Tilt nasties. Created by magazine's Nathalie Infocom. The name that Mike Turner of Star Meistermann explains the adventurers speak in hushed tones Dreams the program reason behind the recent of reverence. And next issue our features 3D graphics. explosion of exciting Master Adventurer, Keith Campbell And if you don't want Gallic games. Brush up interviews Brian Moriarty and brings you a to type it all in then your French in time for S preview of the latest adventure from the there's a special tape August's C+VG, on sale Infocom team called Trinity. Then there's more offer exclusive to July 16th. on the search for the C+VG Adventurer of the Year C+VG readers. So plus a generous helping of the Adventure don't forget to Helpline(tm) and all the games fit to review. All in just conjure up a copy of 28 days time your favourite computer games PLUS: The free pull-out Cauldron II full colour map! magazine next month! "


" 1984 King Features Syndicate, Inc. Macmillan Software HOW DO YOU LIKE IT? Take a one-eyed, spinach-eating sailor with \"fisks\" at the ready. Add a sweet patootie who is all woman minus the curves. Mess it all up with pea-brained Bluto and what do you have? A roof-raisin' arcade adventure, featuring giant-sized Popeye and crew in multi-dimension action. The Crash Smash now available on Commodore 64/128K Spectrum 48K/128K coming this Autumn Amstrad .95 .95 .95 Available through your local retailer. Or in the case of difficulty write to: Macmillan Software, 4 Little Essex Street, LONDON WC2. Tel: (01) 836 6633 "


"GET YOUR NAME ON THE If you have ever bought another golf simulator shoot yourself! If you are ever considering it save yourself a bullet! ZZAP64 Quite honestly, leaderboard makes all other golf simulations look clumsy and antiquated in comparison. ZZAP64 This is the sports simulation of the year if not the decade! ZZAP64 TAPE Practice Driving Range .95 MEDP DISC .95 Multiple 18 hole got course Amazine sound 1111111111 The most realistic 3D golf simulation * America * GOLD All an Softing available And swing your way to a record round Now you can become a golf pro and experience the thrill of Features: having your name up on the \"Leaderboard\". Choice of club, distance, type of With this amazingly realistic simulation you get a true shot (hook, slice, putting) and more perspective view of your golf game. Realistic Sound As you play on different 18 hole courses on Practice Driving Range levels varying from amateur to touring professional you'll  Joystick Controlled need skill concentration and control to come in under par. Multiple 18 Hole Golf Courses Coming soon for Spectrum and Amstrad Automatic Scoring TEE SHOT APPROACH SHOT PUTTING ACCES Software incorporated LEADERBORE LEADER BOARD COURSE COURSE GOLF COURSE 2 CHRIS SELECT LASERER DOS RCCESS SOFTWARE THE WYBUCE RMD KOGEE ERROCE 19 ACCESS SOFTWARE INC. CREATED BY BRUCE AND ROCCA CARVER SAHESH POUER POWER sher U. S. Gold, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, BIRMINGHAM B7 4LY. Tel. No. 021 3593020 "

