"JANUARY 1987 S$4.60 Dm5.50 285pta HFL 6.25 ONLY 982 JANUARY 1987 S54.50 Dm5.5 SPACE HARRIER COMPUTER SENSATION! + VIDEO GAMES FREE GIANT SPACE HARRIER POSTER GAUNTLET, ALIENS, TARZAN, STARGLIDER ROGUE TROOPER, IKARI WARRIORS REVIEWED WIN A XEVIOUS ARCADE MACHINE! WIN A COMPACT DISC PLAYER ATARI ST SPECTACULAR, IKARI WARRIORS MAPPED, FREE JUDGE DREDD POSTER "


".95 Cassette Cassette .95 .95 Disc .95 Cassette Spectrum Amstrad Amstrad Commodore Commodore Disc .95 .95 EES Cassette C16 HE'S HERENI Scooby Doo in his own Computer Cartoon Mail Order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to Elite, or quote your Credit Card number VISA Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands, WS9 8PW. Telephone: (0922) 59165. Telex: 336130 ELITE.G. Fax: (0922) 647359 After months of development he's finally here-Scooby in his own hilarious computer cartoon. Designed and coded by Gargoyle Games, Scooby Doo is a fast-action arcade game that's as funny to watch as it's exciting to play-ScoobyDooby-Doo!! The very best Elite Titles are available at selected branches of WHSMITH TE ooone 628 scogs on Mendes AMSTRAD SCHNEIDER "


"Cassette Cassette Disc Cassette Spectrum Amstrad Amstrad Commodore Commodore C16 2 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 Take a Trip Into The Diec Cassette edit Fantasy Zone 6 Mail Order, Just send a cheque or postal order payable to Elite, or quote your Credit Card number: ARRIER Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands, WS9 8PW. Telephone: (0922) 59165. Telex: 336130 ELITE.G. Fax: (0922) 647359 «The Most Outstanding Coin-Op Game of the Year!! Segam invite you to take a trip to the Fantasy Zone in the fascinating 3D-Action game that set the Coin-Op world alight Steel your nerves, alert your senses and prepare for a thrilling trip into the future. The very best Elite Titles are available at selected branches of: 3 .WHSMITH Tande COMMODORE 64/128 On Mendes SPECTRUM Screen shots taken from vanous computer formats "


"ROGUE TROOPER/REVIEWS \"CONTENTS FEATURES 14 ENTER THE FANTASY ZONE WITH SPACE HARRIER 70 ADVENTURE HELPLINE 82 JUDGE DREDD POSTER 86 IDEAS CENTRAL 91 GIVE AN ARCADE MACHINE A GOOD HOME! 94 STICKY FINGERS 96 TARZAN COMPETITION 98 SPACE CAMP 102 ON THE EMPEROR'S SECRET SERVICE SPECTRUM LISTING 105 EXTRA BITS 114 TOP GUN/CENTURIONS COMPETITIONS 116 STATE OF WAR 124 IKARI WARRIORS MAP 127 WIN VERA CRUZ CD PLAYER 130 ATARI ST SOFTWARE SPECTACULAR 138 ARCADE ACTION 142 FUNGUS PLAYERS GUIDE 146 STREET SEEN 148 MAILBAG 153 GOLDEN JOYSTICK AWARD POLL 154 SKATEBOARD COMPETITION 151 BUG HUNTERS/STEEL MADNESS 162 HOT GOSSIP NOSFERATU/REVIEWS NEWS & REVIEWS 8 NEWS HOW C+VG's representative took on the world at the National Video Games Championship. Spandau Ballet Read C+VG shock! Essential games to put on your Christmas shopping list. And more. 20 REVIEWS THIS ISSUE: GAMES OF THE MONTH: Gauntlet, Academy, Ikari Warriors. C+VG HITS! Dandy, Aliens, Flash Gordon, World Games, Icon Jon, Repton 3, Kettle. And more. 77 ADVENTURE Keith Campbell lets our American ace-reporter sneak in this month to tell you all about Infocom's newie, Moonmist. Plus The Archers, Dome Trooper, Escape and Bugsy. BUGSY/ADVENTURE/P82 "


"INSIDE STORY 0 IB SHOP OIS & Other nameless magazines will be costing you MORE this month. What sort of Christmas spirit is that?! But here at C+VG we believe in giving you more without making YOU pay for it. AND we're giving away a giant Space Harrier calendar poster absolutely FREE! We've also been hard at work reviewing there are 28 pages packed with over 40 new games, including Gauntlet! We also fake an in depth look at the game that's going to be giving Gauntleti a run for its money in the charts this Christmas Space Harrier from coin-op conversion specialists Elite. Talking of Elite we've got our hands on an exclusive Dimension Graphics screen by screen map of the killer game Ikari Warriors, destined to be another huge hitl We've squeezed in another players guide as well a screen by screen spotlight on a budget game that grows on you Fungus. Plus an extraordinary mushroom competition! Talking of competitions this issue is literally packed with them. Highlights are the amazing Win an Arcade Machine Competition. U.S. Gold has given us a Xevious machine to give YOUI Then you can win a Compact Disc Player from Infogrames, Skateboard from Bubble Bus, ajudo suit from Martech plus lots more. All that and I haven't mentioned the free pull our Judge Dredd poster, out War Games special, the incredible Atari ST Software Spectacular or Space Campl So don't get ripped-off by other magazines who make you pay more for the same old stuff. Get your hands on this copy of C+VG with extra added VFM. That's value for money... 00 IB DOT OTO TOTO 400 0618 BBBBBI BAZOOKA BILL/REVIEWS Jim LAP og THE 9 SCORE 1000 Furgus ARCADE ACTION/P138 ZRAN FUNGUS/P142 ETAILS EDITOR Tim Metcalfo DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lasly Walker SUB-EDITOR Soamus St John DESIGN Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Paul Coppins Steve Donoghue AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANTS Tony Tokoushi PUBLICITY Marcus Rich ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Garry Williams ADVERTISEMENT EXECUTIVE Katherine Lee AD PRODUCTION Debble Pearson PUBLISHER Rita Lewis COVER Stove Gibbs KETTLE COMP/P114 EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222 July-December 98,258 31 ST SPECTACULAR/P130 SPACE HARRIER/P14 "


"With monitor, data  of software yo (Until mummy catc he With the Amstrad 464 home computer the fun starts as soon as you get it home. Because unlike many other home computers the 464 comes complete with its own green screen or full colour monitor. It also comes with a WITH COLOUR convenient built-in datacorder. MONITORAROUND And you get  worth  of software with games like Harrier Attack and Sultan's Maze. Not to mention Oh Mummy. 64K of RAM means you have plenty of memory to play with. And there are over 200 Amstrad games you can play, many exclusive to Amstrad. But games are only half the fun on the 464. The kids can learn spelling and arithmetic with software like Wordhang and  Happy Numbers. Whilst adults will love the way that it helps around the house with budgeting and accounts. SCREEN AROUND AVAILABLE AT ALLDERS BOOTS CLYDESDALE COMET CONNECT CO-OP CURRYS-DIXONS-ELECTRIC SUPREME LASKYS JOHN LEWIS JOHN MENZIES POWER CITY RUMBELOW "


"1 corder and Du can't lose. ches you.) \"OH HUY  1994 GEM SOFTHARE 9 TO CONTINUL Please send me more information. Name i Address To help you make the most of your 464, you can join the Amstrad User Club. And there are lots of books and magazines devoted to it as well. What's more you can buy joysticks, printers, disc drives, speech synthesisers and light pens to make it even more fun. But perhaps the most pleasurable thing about the 464 is the price. The complete home computer costs just  with green screen or  with colour monitor. Not much to pay for a chance to get away from mummy. 464/CVGI The Amstrad 464. The complete home computer. Amstrad P.O. Box 462, Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF BELOS ULTIMATE W.H. SMITH-WIGFALLS AND GOOD INDEPENDENT COMPUTER STORES"


"*TIEWS Harriet's Last Bath by Roy Turner. It does not affect the running of the game and concerns the duplication of line 4057. The text should be removed and replaced by: Let E$=\"He has the quiet manner of a gentleman but his clothes have seen better days. Very serious and deliberate in speech and actions.\": Return It's also own up time. We forgot to say it was a Spectrum listing. Sorry all you Amstrad and Commodore owners. Meanwhile, calling lan David Hogg, of Ulverston, Cumbria. Roy Turner received your order of the tape but you forgot to include your fuil address. Please get in touch with him. You can't keep a good classic down... and classics don't come much better than Donkey Kong. Here's Ocean's Amstrad version of one of the first platform and ladders game to hit the arcades. It should be out in December on the Spectrum (.95), Amstrad and C64 (.95). Huey and Rescue on Fractalus. The game Vonsoft's sells, the company show was organised by Database will add 50p to that total. If, as Exhibitions Vonsoft rather confidently predicts, Altogether more than 100 the game sells around 80,000, it stands were loaded with new could take the prize to ,000. products from the leading Atari Vonsoft director Trevor suppliers. Downie says the offer is genuine. Big names include Software The game, which will be Express, CDS, Twillstar, Microdeal released on the 31st January, will and Advanced Systems Techniques be sold via mail order and cost as well as Atari. .95 on tape and .95 on disk. The First Atari Show last March attracted 15,000 visitors. The next Atari Show-again Many of you sharp-eyed organised by Database will be programmers have noticed a error held at the Novatel in in our November listing, Hammersmith from February 26 to 28. 1700 The Annals of Rome is a PSS strategy game based on the rise and fall of the Roman Empire. Starting in the year 273 BC, the date by which the Roman Republic had gained control of Italy, your m You've heard of \"splatter\" movies-now here's a \"splatter\" computer game. Blood n' Guts is described by American Action as \"an ancient barbarian decathlon with all the violence and brutality you've ever dreamed about in a computer game.\" Have you ever dreamed about a violent computer game? I haven't. Still here's a pretty picture of the game which should be out soon on the 64 at regular prices .95 tape! .95 disc. SPEED HOON Here's the game all Fairlight fans have been waiting for. Yup, it's Fairlight Il from the programmer with the funny name Bo Jangeborg. Imagine Fairlight doubled in size with a wider variety of graphics and you've got this sequel in one. It comes in two parts and The Edge say its tougher than the original. Watch out for the mysterious female who wanders around this new arcade adventure. She's important. Out now on the Spectrum. KNORR 0:23 The long-awaited Atari 7800 video games machine had the wraps taken off it at the Atari Christmas Show held at the New Horticultural Hall, Westminster, London, recently. There are high hopes that it could revitalise the video game market. The 7800 plays all 2600 cartridges and should sell for around  with games selling for between  and . Titles due are One-on-One, Skyfox, Touchdown, Football, Choplifter, Summer and Winter Games, Impossible Mission, Super How does the possibility of winning up to ,000 grab you? That's the sort of money being talked about a new name in the software world, Vonsoft. The money will go to the first person to answer a simple question about the gameplay of its first release, The Great A.R.E.N.A. Challenge, a graphic adventure on the Amstrad, spectrum and Commodore. The prize will be made up of ,000 plus, for every unit of the \"Balls!\" she said. \"I beg your pardon?\" I replied. \"I said balls! Do you need any balls?\" she asked. \"Well I don't think so, I've got two of my own tucked away in this bag herel\" says Tony Takoushi With that I left her standing at the counter and made my way to lane number five for a much needed Ten-Pin Bowling session. The only things missing in the latest Access sports sim are the flat shoes and the personal bowling balls. As you will probably have realised this month's offering is a Ten-Pin Bowling game, 10th Frame, from Access software in the USA. The Access team have really earned a reputation for quality sport simulations and this in NO exception to the rule. It runs on the Commodore 64 and I would imagine versions will follow for the Speccy and Amstrad. As yet no firm release date has been set for the UK. On loading you are given a VERY tasty hi-res picture of a bowling ball and pin and then led into the game with options to choose. The first option is League or Open bowling. This allows either individual play or leam efforts of up to eight players a side. You then enter your name and choose a skill level (Kids/Amateur/Pro) and the number of games (1-5). On with the gameYou are presented with a near bird's eye view of the player facing the bowling alley stretching up the screen the pins are put into place automatically. By pressing the joystick up you can then flip control to a cursor to show any rolling bias in the ball as "


"role is that of the ruling power group in the Roman Senate, deploying Roman armies and commanders in successive foreign and civil wars. At any time you will be faced with up to 13 independent hostile powers, each fighting to extend its own sphere of influence at the expense of the others. To give you a military advantage, you have at your disposal the incomparable Roman Citizen Legionaries, reinforced by mobile Auxiliaries and static garrison troops (Limitanei). If you're into fantasy art then you probably won't see a better collection than the works of Chris Achilleos, featured in a new book called Sirens, published by Paper Tiger/Dragons World. It features some truly awesome pictures from the Achilleos collection, which spans Moorcock book covers, film posters, role-playing game box artwork and much much more. And there's even a C+VG cover featured! Chris was the artist who created our October 85 cover. It was an impressive Nazgul riding a reptillian beast. Remember? Anyway, the book costs .95 in hardback and is terrific value at .95 in paperback. It's available from all good bookshops or direct from Dragons World Ltd, 19 Hereford Square, London SW7 4TS. The legend of Big Red lives on! The biggest Bug Hunter keeps on capturing people's imagination. And here's the latest Big Red offering from one of our overseas readers. Mika Kuulusa created this Big Red pin-up on his Amstrad and sent us the tape. If you've created a Bug Hunter pic on computer why not send it in to us? it travels to the pins. Push the stick back and you can move the bowler left and right. To start the bowl, you press the fire button. The actual throw is controlled by two gauges, power and hook. Remember Leaderboard The gauges trigger themselves when fire has been pressed, you can control power and hook by prossing fire when the gouge reaches the desired point. As soon as you have pressed fire the bowler Trundles up to the line and executes the bowl. He is SO SMOOTH the animation is simply excellent. The ball leaves his hand and hopefully runs down the middle of the lane. Across the top of the screen is a scorecard showing your efforts. You can have up to twenty throws to clear the frames. Less if you get a strike, which is knocking all ten pins over with one ball When you have finished your game there is an option to print out the Scoresheet from a printer and a summary/total report appears. The presentation of this game is bang on, from the moment the ball is released the sound of the ball rolling, the impact on the pins and the way they spin off and collide with each other is so convincing. The game is best enjoyed when playing against a friend or as a team. Playing solo gets a little boring. So if you want to thrash the living daylights out of a friend take him on at 10th Frameknock you for six, or eight, or ten even. Deep in the darkest part of the What's all this then it's what you universe orbits the prison satellite get when you purchase the known as Zed. There awaits a single innovative computer thriller prisoner captured by the mighty Murders on the Atlantic Triad forces. He alone knows the from Infogrames. The package secret of how to activate the Triad's comes with all the evidence a devastating new weapon. This would-be detective needs to solve weapon can break through the this intriguing mystery. If every Homeland's protection barrier and game came packaged this way thus destroy all planets within its you'd probably stop buying system. Your mission is to battle your budget titles. The game is available way through the extraordinary for the C64/128 and MSX \"cube\" prison and rescue the computers. Check it out. prisoner. He must be brought to an airlock in time for your spacecraft to pick you both up and destroy the prison forever. Triaxos from Reaktor will be out in the New Year on the Amstrad at .95. Spectrum/64 versions to follow. Inspector Gadget is coming to call. Fresh from his successes against the infamous Dr Claw our hero is going to take on the Circus of Fear in this new release from Melbourne House. If you like the cartoon, you're going to love the game. Out soon on the 64. ASI This is Stargate Legacy, a spectacular graphic adventure from Databyte. It's been scripted by the people who brought you Borrowed Time and has been three years in the making. Initially the game is out on the 64 and Atari and comes on four sides of tape or a disk. 25 E 1 "


"SHEER GENIUS  Leisure Genius presents these all-time favourites elegantly adapted to a large range of home computers celeisture MONOPOLY Waddingtons Leisure Genius Waddingtons et CIVEDO The Great Detective Game MONOPOLY A wider variety of fun is hard to find. There's murder, mystery and suspense with CLUEDO,\" high finance and property speculation in MONOPOLY. SCRABBLE offers you a different kind of 'word processing and SCALEXTRIC offers the thrill and excitement of Formula 1 racing on as many different circuits as you want. MONOPOLY THIS PRODUCTS PRODUCED UNDER LICENCE FROM PARKER BROTHERS AND WADDINGTONS GAMES LTD. ALL COPYRIGHTS RESERVED CLUEDO. TRADEMARK AND COPYRIGHT LICENSED BY WADDINGTONS GAMES LTD. Gemisure. SCRABBLE areses COMPUTER presents. COMPUTER Leisure THE COMPUTER EDITION muga Genius You can play all these classic games with friends, or select computer opponents. Each game uses the capabilities of the computer to enhance the games as much as possible, a large dictionary incorporated in SCRABBLE lap timers in SCALEXTRIC and the computer even rolls the dice for you in MONOPOLY! SCRABBLE TRADEMARK AND COPYRIGHT LICENSED BY .W SPEAR & SONS PLC SCRABBLE AVAILABLE NOVEMBER FOR AMSTRAD PCW 8256/8512 RRP .95 SCALEXTRIC IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF HORNEY HOBBIES LTD. ALL COPYRIGHTS RESERVED AVAILABLE AT ANY GOOD SOFTWARE SUPPLIER OR AVAILABLE DIRECTLY FROM LEISURE GENIUS BY FILLING IN THIS FORM Please circle the software you require. Make cheques or postal orders payable to Virgin Games Ltd. The address is 2/4 Vernon Yard, Portobello Road, London W11 2DX. (Please do not post coins or notes.) Name Address Scrabble Monopoly Cluedo Scalextric Available for cass disc cass disc cass disc cass disc Commodore     A Spectrum A A A D Amstrad CPC ACACAC       MSX A A A Sinclair QL Einstein E A=.95 B=.95 C=.95 D=Not available yet but coming soon! E=.95 Thave enclosed a cheque/postal order for Leisure Genius\" is a wholly owned subsidiary of Virgin Games Ltd. "


"HEY, PUNK. DONT READ THAT READ THIS NEXT MONTH Sparks flew at London's posh Savoy hotel on Guy Fawkes Day when Mikro-Gen staged their second National Video Games Championship Top games players representing all the top computer magazines and local newspapers from all over the country gathered to do battle. C+VG's representative at the championships was James McNiven from Gosport, Hampshire James is 12 and was the youngest competitor. Unfortunately he was knocked out in a early round but he still managed to score 14,350 on Mikro-Gen's new game, CopOut. The overall winner was David Litherland, 17, from Horwich in Lancashire, who represented Popular Computer Weekly. He scored 27,150. blaster.. games fan and enjoys playing Superior--martial artistry. Pole Position. He considers it Pyscastrial \"one of the best.\" Audiogenic Uridium Leslie B. trapped --sorry clone tracked-Spandau Ballet down at Crystal Castles/U.S. Elstree Film Studios, north of London. Gold-arcade classic. Sentinel/Firebird brain-boggling action/strategy. Did you know yo could buy a Trivial Pursuit/ budget game for the price of some Domark no collection other magazines this month? If complete etc... you've just got hold of this copy of Southern Belle/ C+VG you've already saved Hewson steamy simulation. yourself a quid, and along with . Knightshade/U.S. your Christmas cash I bet you're on Gold 3D arcade adventure the lookout for some software to Spy Hunter/U.S. spend it on. So just to help you along C+VG has compiled this list Gold-arcade action of essential games for the top ATARI (8-bit) machines. . International SPECTRUM Karate/System 3. Batman/Oceankung-fu kicks. classic 3D arcade adventure. Trailblazer/Gremlin .Uridium/Hewson weird and wonderful race ultimate arcade blaster. game. Tau Ceti + Mercenary/ Academy/CRL-slick Novagenclassic space strategy and action strategy/action Bobby Bearing/The Solo Flight II/ Edge-the game with a lot of Microprose-it talks back! balls! .L.A. Swat/ Gauntlet/U.S. Gold Mastertronic-budget accept no substitutes. Space Harrier/Elite Spitfire 40/ what can we say? Mirrorsoft-battles in the  Trap Door/Pirahna cartoon capers. Gauntlet/U.S. Gold .Trivial Pursuits/ it's that game again. Domark-quiz with a fizz! Crystal Castles/U.S. Star Glider/ Gold-released at last. Rainbird-get it today! Fight Night/U.S. Tomahawk/Digital Gold-boxing clever, Integration flights of Silent Service/ fantasy. Microproseunusual COMMODORE 64/128 submarine sim. . Dan Dare/Virgin ATARI ST heroic adventure. Star Glider/ Sanxion/Thalamus Rainbird best yet on ST. takes over where Unidium left  Mercenary/ off. . Gauntlet/U.S. Gold Novagen-instant classic . Gauntlet/U.S. Gold -D&D classic Dacred Armour/ it has to be here! Palace stunning arcade . International Karate/System 3adventure . Trivial Pursuits/ stunning graphics. . Leaderboard/U.S. Domarkit's still fizzing! . Zoids/Martech Gold-golf classic. original and exciting action/ DeLuxe Paint/ strategy. Ariolasoft essential utility. Leaderboard/U.S. Cinemaware/ Gold no handicap having Mirrorsoft shape of things this golf simulation. to come. Tau Ceti/CRL-every  Chess Psion-grand home should have one. master. Super Cycle/U.S.  The Pawn/Rainbird Gold Hang Onl for the -classy adventure. Leather Goddesses/ home. Space Harrier/Elite Activision dodgy -coin-op killer! adventure! BBC MSX Strike Force .Nemesis/Konami — coin-op classic Harrier/Mirrorsoft Night Rally/Ocean brilliant flight sim addictive driving game. Rep-ton 2+3/  Trailblazer7Gremlin Superiorbest games on different ball game! the Beeb? Gauntlet/U.S. Gold Karate Combat/ —it had to be. What makes Spandau Ballet star Gary Kemp dodge down a dark alley and adopta semi-crouch while clutching a copy of C+VG? Is he ashamed of being seen reading the world's most popular computer mag? Of course not. It was the sight of Musclebound freelance hack Leslie What do you want first. The good news or the bad news? The good news of course. Well, next month's C+VG is going to have 85 pulse pounding editorial pages packed with truly awesome things. Things like Pete Cooke's amazing Academy Players Guide From the pen of the man who actually wrote the hit C+VG Game of the Month comes an epic outpouring of hints and tips which will help you become a top Skimmer pilot. Play By Mail is experiencing an explosion of interest and as C+VG always likes to be ahead of the trends we've signed up the mysterious Wayne, chairman of the British Play By Mail Association, to bring you regular reports on the PBM scene. We'll also be bringing you an update on C+VG's own PBM, Domination and giving you another chance to grab some FREE turns. More role-playing, but this time it's of the live variety in the shape of Labyrinth the reallife adventure game which takes place in the depths of a secret warren of caves. Chris \"Lunchbreaks\" Bourne got out of the pub especially early to go down a dark hole inhabited by nameless demons to bring you this exclusive report. We also take a look at digitising on the both sides of the Atlantic Also from America comes our seasonal pantomime — with a different. It stars all the weird and wonderful people who make up Infocom, the top US adventure writing team. All that PLUS part two of our Atari ST special, pages of readers maps for top selling games, the first New Wave Software page, a C16 software round-up AND the absolutely amazing Mastertronic MAD competition. YOU could win everything Mastertronic have ever released for your computer PLUS a Magnum joystick! Sounds pretty neat to us! But now for the bad news February's C+VG will cost you two pence more. The big bad boys at IDEAS have told us they want more money for the upkeep of the Bug Hunters so C+VG has got to cost a quid from Frebruary onwards. Would you argue with a ginormous, heavily armed accountant robot? pretty near February The big Bunder advancing on him with a camera. It's True. He did it by Instinction. A more terrifying sight we couldn't think of. But the Spandau's guitarist did not escape before exchanging a few words with Leslie B. Apparently he's a keep computer "


"WINTERWO MPIONSHIP ACE OF ACES Gun down the Nazi bombers, sink U boats, Outrun the V1 rockets as you pilot your Mosquito, Maverick RAF fighter bomber of World War II. CBM 64/128, Amstrad Cassette .99 Disk .99 Spectrum 48k &99 CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING Take on any 8 rowdy wrestlers, each with his own individual style when it comes to busting heads. These guys use every dirty trick known to man and a few that aren't so you'll have a real fight on your hands to win the coveted 'Championship Wrestling Belt'. CBM 64/128 Disk .99 Cassette .99 Atari ST .99 SUPER CYCLE Racing was never so fast and furious. Push your cycle to the limit and you win, push it over and you crash. Any more realistic and you'd need insurance to ride it. MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE Join forces with HeMan-the most powerful man in Eternia-as he battles against the forces of evil led by the fearsome Skeletor. Already a worldwide success this incredible series will bring action and excitement to your computer. CBM 64/128, Amstrad Cassette .95 Disk .95 Spectrum 48k  Arcade Game CBM 64/128, Amstrad Cassette .99 Disk E14.99 Spectrum 48k .99 Super Adventure CBM 64/128, Amstrad Cassette .99 Disk .99 BBC/Electron/C16 Cassette  Spectrum 48k Cassette .99 Spectrum 128k Cassette .99 IBM Disk E19.99 "


"ONDERLAND icroJet ACROJET A thrilling decathlon of aerobatic events in your own personal sports jet the BD5-), a one-man 200mph plus aircraft that is fully acrobatic and is everything a real pilot could want or handle. CBM 64/128, Spectrum 48k Amstrad, MSX Cassette .95 CBM 64/128, Amstrad Disk .99 WORLD GAMES Go and get it it does for the Commodore what trident does for demolition. Not only have Epyx produced an unbeatable game-they've come up with some of the best graphics and sound I've ever seen and heard-Zzap 64 November 1986 Gold Medal. CBM 64/128, Amstrad Cassette .99 Disk .99 Spectrum 48k Cassette .99 Atari ST Disk .99 Amiga, IBM, Apple Disk .95 A TACTICAL GAME OF WORLD WAR II COMBAT FIELD OF FIRE One of the finest fighting forces during World War II Was Easy Company of the First Infantry Division. Assume command of these heroic men and retrace eight of their historical battles in North Africa and Europe. CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 Atari Disk .99 A DAZZLING ARRAY OF SOFTWARE ENTERTAINMENT. A SPARKLING COLLECTION OF ACTION PACKED TITLES WITH LEVELS OF CHALLENGE ALMOST BEYOND BELIEF. BUT REAL THEY ARE, PLAY THEM AND YOU'LL QUICKLY BE ABSORBED IN A WONDEROUS WORLD OF SKILL AND EXCITEMENT. SUPER HUEY II Pilot your helicopter in six exciting rescue and combat simulation scenarios:RENEGADE; BRUSH FIRE; GULF OF TERROR; BERMUDA TRIANGLE; ARCTIC RESCUE and OIL BLAZE. CBM 64/128, Atari Cassette .99 Disk .99 Amiga, Apple, Atari ST Disk .99 (GOLD) 18 U.S. Gold Limited, Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX Telephone: 021-356 3388 "


"SPACE WELCOME TO It's here! The game which brought a whole new meaning to the words rock n' roll! Space Harrier is just about to take off up the charts and here we take a look at the arcade machine that started it all and the programmers who have achieved the impossible. Read on and be amazed. D reathtaking graphics and a fabulous hydraulics system are two stunning features in Space farer, a gline which has launched at the beginning of 1986 by Sega writes C&VG's arcade ace Clare Edgeley Space Harrier's gameplay is relatively simple. It involves a lone Warrior, travelling through vast numbers of abstract landscapes knocking out the wonderfully multi coloured baddies which hurtle towards you. All shapes and sizes. Some moving, some stationery. Many deadly if touched! Space Harrier makes you leap around the screen like a cat on hot bricks to avoid all the nasties They don't just appear on ground level either. Some attack at head height, some come in formation. On every level you'll find at least one load of these wretches which which will take some thought to blast and dodge your way through. . It's the graphics of Space Harrier that really caught everyones imagination Specially the amazing Chinese dragons Huge undulating multicoloured monsters which wriggle wildly to the front of the screen ready for battle. You have to score several direct hits to destroy these amazing monsters and you can't move onto the next level until you've got rid of them. There's only one on each level so take heart. That's basically Space Harrier-screen after screen of fantastically drawn objects on all the Spectrum versions of that batch of which get progressively harder and harder recent smash hits ---Commando, Ghosts n' to eliminate. Goblins and now Space Harrier. The sense of 3D is uncanny and though He got a glimpse of Harrier in an arcade the speed of the game adds to this in Rhyl. \"I didn't think I'd be able to do it at Impression, mention must be made of the first. But I went home and worked a few excellent perspective and the ground which things out and it all eventually came has a grid format disappearing into the together. I was working for months on the distance. For graphical effects, this game is scrolling. It took ages to get that together. one of the best I've seen. The super fast scrolling and the Aside from the graphics, the hydraulics relatively flicker free screen are the things make the game one of the most exciting that will strike you most when you first ever to hit the arcades. start playing The cockpit version includes a hydraulics There are 15 levels in the Spectrum system which throws you around as you version one less than the arcade original move the joystick. described by C+VG's arcade ace Clare The whole cabinet swings up and down Edgeley elsewhere on this page. and from side to side, and as it's very high All the most famous alien attackers are off the ground, once you've fastened the in the game -including the amazing two seatbelt, you really do feel as if you're in headed dragons. another world. And if you think the opening stages are Space Harrier should convert well to a fast wait till later. \"The final stages are two home computer. It's a pity about the and a half times faster than the first level,\" hydraulics. Still, they'd look pretty says Keith. You better believe it! outrageous attached to a Spectrum! Spectrum Space Harrier demands all the For a programmer who has just forced the same quick responses as the coin-op. The Spectrum to perform minor miracles 20 only thing missing is the hydraulic action year-old Keith Burkhill is remarkably but as one industry wit pointed out you modest. As the entire C+VG office could always put a few drawing pins on marvelled at the speed and slickness of his your seat while you play to reproduce the conversion of Space Harrier he just action of the arcade machine! shrugged his shoulders and commented: How does Keith plan to follow up his \"Every program has it's challenges.\" success with Space Harrier! \"I'm not sure Keith is a veteran coder-even though really. I'd like to do a sequel with different his name is relatively unknown by the monsters. But that's up to Elite really.\" people who play his games. \"After Ghosts n' But now the four months of hard labour Goblins I did get one fan letter!\" he says. are over Keith intends to spend more time He began programming at 17, hiding on his other passion -sound recording away in the bedroom of his home in the He'd really like to have a go at learning how wilds of North Wales. to use a mixing desk in a studio. Any offers! His first appearance in the scene was a Before he left the C+VG penthouse program listing printed in Your Computer Keith offered these words of advice to After that he wrote Missile Defence for would-be games coders. \"Copy anything you Anirog. Pogo and Guilligan's Gold for like and put together a package that you Ocean. think will impress a software house. It could Then it was on to Elite where he worked be anything. A game or just a routine. ECCELLSPACELIES DOODED HARRIER Arcade intro screen Space Harrier/64 Space Harrier Amstrad "


"ET HARRIER TO THE FANTASY ZONE nice. He runs and zaps around the alien skies smoothly. The only thing really lacking from Spectrum Harrier is sound. That's why you need that loud driving rock music to keep things truckin' right along. Some other magazine, which should remain nameless but we'll call Sinclair Us'r, reckoned that it was easy to get through the first few levels. That's 'cos they were playing a preview version The real thing 'aint easy at all. Here at C+VG we can't wait to get our hands on a finished C64 version from Elite's Chris Butler. Space Harrier is a sure fire smash. It's a must for arcade addicts. A Keith Burkhill BURKHILL'S GUIDE TO ALIEN BASHING! Here's a vew tips on playing Space Harrier from the man who put it together. They may help you survive the perils of the fantasy zone if you're lucky.. Keep Spacey circling and firing all the time in a clockwise manouvre. Trees can be destroyed but not pillars Tri-ads can only be shot when they are open. Then they'll be shooting at you too... You have to destroy both halves of the two headed monsters. Kill one half and the other becomes more deadly. Learn the movements of the monsters. Adapt yourself to the changing speeds of the different levels. Spec Learn from other programmers. I learnt a jet-powered trooper through fast lot working in-house at Elite.\" scrolling landscapes packed with Keith impressed the bosses at Elite creatures which could well have and we think his Space Harrier is going to impress you. jumped out of a Salvidor Dali painting. You have to zap the creatures to  MACHINES: SPECTRUM, survive. There are rock heads, space AMSTRAD, C64/128 ships, swirling elephant like things and  SUPPLIER: ELITE of course the huge double headed PRICE: $7.95 (Spectrum), 18.95 dragons. (Amstrad) .95/$14.95 (C64/128) You get a dragon at the end of each VERSIONS TESTED: SPECTRUM level which must be destroyed if you AMSTRAD are to progress to the next level. And REVIEWER: TIM you get a real kick out of blasting the thing especially as it's probably There's only one way to play Space knocked YOU down a few times Harrier. That's with the lights turned already. You'll need several well aimed down low and some really LOUD musicshots on target to get rid of these blasting your eardrums to pulp. That beasties way you can experience the weirdness The fast scrolling is smooth, and the of this game to the full. impression of moving across the It's fast, it's slick and it's the most chequered landscape is near perfect. fun you'll have with your Spectrum this Keith has managed to get the tilting year. feeling as you move your trooper Keith Burkhill has done an across the screen just about right. astounding job on the Spectrum version Despite the speed of the game the and the Amstrad and C64 versions graphics are almost flicker free. are equally as awesome. Because of the graphic limitations of Space Harrier took the arcades by the Spectrum it's sometimes hard to storm thanks to spectacular graphics tell just what is coming at you. But the and the incredible hydraulic action on 64 and Amstrad versions will have the coin-op specials. solid graphics. OK, so the computers around at the You score by staying alive. The moment can't capture the graphic numbers roll around at the bottom quality of the original or sit you on a of the screen. And there's a nice moving seat to reproduce the scrolling hi-score chart which appears movements of a jet-pack trooper. at the end of each session. But they can capture the spirit and You get eight lives to begin with all the fast action of this abstract and an extra one at the end of each shoot-'em-up. zone. Especially when you first load up The basic idea of the computer the game. game and the coin-op is to fly your Animation of the space trooper is GEREEDOELIUS PO052101 HARRIERE Ams Graphics Sound Value Playability 10 10 the real thing! HARRIER PROGRAMES More Amstrad Harrier! Space Harrier Spectrum "


"ALWAYS AHEADO om First Division giants and opted to stay with Rovers. This promising centre-back has sign ed a new contra team manager D Thorpe annou today. Cox, attra the Footballer of the Year Ft C16+4 MSX Spectrum 481 .95 .95 Footballer of the Year The game to answer y boyhood dream-the chance to make to the very top football stardom. Starting on your path to glory a 17 year old apprentice with a Fouth Dive on temand only $500 and 10 god song cards in your pockets, the footbaling world is at your feet Adoptthe identity pro or looteller and develop a Car through the ups and downs of match days trade dels and huren Deples you thiet in Footbal E FA.FA. and Milk Cup games and then you're good enough the ultimate accolade of your sport, the Footballer of the Year Award f Amstrad, BBC/Electron Atari CBM 64/128 .95 L BERTI BED SOX attrathe nd Managing COL DEBUT Derek IN Avenger C16 +4 CBM 64/12 MSX Spectrum 48 Amstrad .95 With spt ough or his day's Ma against n 2nd Diuriala endo signalli remarka which has orn plaver orel e his DIVI FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR join lie Bai Tow for ott collected ser The A Lovers for for et oa Lurope to new SP about his City. Cooper for 12 mo injury, bro week to me to a French medical tre expert Pierre has treated ot! Eun because pean Stars. He is likely as City are jus transfer om the weve reluctanti United looked the more menacine side Recorte English Interna or striker KENNY MOR fre could be out of actio r withe rest of the ma Eun because of a leg injury. The injury also threatens jus chances of making it into 4 with National Squad for the world him later in the year. Aders Morgan, aged 29, has miss will be large part of this season beca with him several other injuries. He pullo leg muscle yesterday in an ex Thore game, after scoring a spe ainst Rang has bee week com after not contract. His departu end of an era signalling the fi remarkable scorin which has made th born player the clubs prolific scorer in their war league history. BANKS te hangen set Avenger Boun The Way of the To the martial Available you had prove your 130 pm Way of th a 29 Availabl N n Now you have to prove your supreme mental Billy the second part of the Way of the Tigra hvernig the ultimate de andre Yeemon the Grand Master of Fame ided you biste firme Me and the Scrole of You have om to the God won that you will no Yomon's murderous acand recover the word Book. Your enemies are many vated and me deadly. All your song and nerve vibe upon when you begin the inal cord in the Great Keep. Good Luc. only the brave beared wire. Thing on a AvailaND Avenger (Way of the Tiger II) Gremlin Graphie Sc Alpha House, 10 Carver Streesh Available November "


"na GREMLI AD OF THEIR TIME Future Knight ar Future Knight Trailblazer 48K C16+4 MSX Spectrum 48K 25 .95 .95 CBM 64/128 Amstrad .95 Disk 54/128 Amstrad Disk am 48K CBM 64/128 Disk 95 .95 Arme Se Randolph to take up the challenge of death the has been the emaid Amelie held in the utches Sport the Ten d ing upon in denen diren gail from the glock C SS astuciet donar Orbit Mark N adu and Venture forth in punto your beloved's actors Delend yound nobily at the Best Security rods Edit your way tough 20 grung best the planes both Spebetto where the fate of Amelala with the out dod het my gel arty and beylen Available November GI FUTURE KN/CHTERA TRAILBLAZER Bou nder C16+4 16.95 lable November of the Tiger Thunden the unknown brained speed pushing your elle them in this de intedy thing our ne that's not one for the astearted. Rolle, roligt olding the end of doom that lay in and around the s ed mystery Square that mn  ur rr n r 19.95 lable November on a Spring 16.95 meine speed up respectomie you jump stomacy Response on the door te guder you complete your the higher be your bon o an toàn vnioncorrente Lable December Trailblazer hics Software Ltd., treet, Sheffield S1 4FS.Tel: (0742) 753423 Available November "


" CONTESTANT TRY AGAIN? Y 35 89 A Hitch up your kilt and grab hold of Epyx's World Games GAMES This is C+VG's highest honour. It's granted to the game which, in our honest opinion, is the most playable, original and exciting game released during the month. We look for all the key points listed below but also that extra added ingredient which makes the game stand head and shoulders above the rest. World CHVO soun This symbolis C+VG's way of telling you a game is the BUSINESS! \"Who writes your reviews?\" That's a question our readers often ask. Name the guilty ones, they demand. So that's what we're doing. Satisfied now? TIM METCALFE: C+VG's veteran editor enjoys shoot 'em ups, arcade adventures and basket weaving. PAUL\"Man at C&A\" BOUGHTON: Slick sports simulations are Paul's thing because he can wear his smooth tracksuits at the same time. LESLY WALKER: Sorcery was still is Lesly's favourite. Will anything every match up to it? LEE BRATTHWAITE: Star of Radio Lancashire and ace reviewer, Lee will tackle any type of game. What a man! CHRIS bodgy\" CAIN: The man who owns an Amiga but still plays C64 games for fun! HAKAN AKBUS: C+VG's Atari addict knows a dodgy game when he sees one... NICKY TREVITT: The enigmatic Nicky is our reclusive BBC expert. TONY TAKOUSHI: The mouth makes guest appearances now and then .. Succeou litt the  MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: US GOLD/EPYX PRICE: .99 (tape) .99 (disc) REVIEWER: TIM Forget Around the World in Eighty Days-try Around the World in Eight Sports! The masters of the sports simulation, Epyx, do it again with this classic collection of fun national pastimes from Russia, Germany, Mexico, France, Canada, USA, Japan and Scotland. You may have been wondering just what sports Epyx could drum up to fill this latest computerised compendium. Well in this little package you get weightlifting, barrel jumping, cliff diving, slalom ski-ing, log rolling, bull riding, caber tossing and sumo wrestling. Before each event you see an intro screen which tells you about the history of the sport you are about to compete in plus little graphics showing scenic bits of the country the sport comes from and a little BBC rotating globe with the country flashing on it just to show you where in the world you are! A really nice touch this On the disc version you can skip the \"travelogue\" if you wish, but on tape you have to load it in as you go. First up in our world touris to jump. It all takes place on a Russia where we take part in a frozen lake folks! spot of weightlifting. Two Remember your Decathlon different events here the skills and move the joystick \"snatch\" and the \"clean and carefully left and right to build jerk\". Each style of lifting up a proper skating rhythm. The requires nifty joystick faster you go the better. manipulation to get it right. You Hit the fire button to jump and can select a weight-tot-add watch as your skater leaps the weights on and they can be line of barrels or falls flat on seen pitting up accompanied by his face as the case may be. Fun some satisfying metallic sound for all the family here. effects. After that chilly climate it's If you lift the weight nice to arrive in Mexico where successfully the three judges the sun is shining. Now for the represented by red/white traffic bad news. We want you to light affairs at the bottom of the throw yourself off this 118 foot screen-give you the okay. cliff into the sea. You've never Timing is crucial as you add on heard of the famous cliff divers the weights miss the right of La Quebrada, Acapulco? time to complete the lift and Where have you been?! your lifter will end up with a These lunatics dive into the bruised big toe. sea off a jagged cliff into raging The lifting over with, it's off to wintery Germany where we can a go without risking your neck. indulge in a spot of barrel More joystick skills are jumping. You select the number required here to score of barrels you want your skater maximum points for style and The ski-ing event will demand all your expertise to keep the skiers on the piste CONTESTANT SWISS TIME 0:00:00 BEST TIME 0:00:00 "


"C+VG MACHINE: AMSTRAD/ SPECTRUM/C64/BBC, ELECTRON SUPPLIER: ELITE PRICE: .95 VERSION REVIEWED: AMSTRAD > REVIEWER: TIM If you own an Amstrad and don't immediately rush out and grab a copy of Ikari Warriors then you might as well go and bury your machine in the back garden, forget about computers and playing games and go back to basket-weaving. The Amstrad version of this coin-op conversion is a gem. REVIEWS CONEESTANTO mo. COMPUTER 69 WARRIORS You won't see better this side of do even more damage than your Christmas -and probably for did when you were on foot quite a while afterwards. armed with a machine gun and The Amstrad graphics are as grenades. close as dammit to the arcade The jungle country you blast machine and the playability your way through is infested goes off the C+VG scale. If Elite with enemy troops who all want thought they had a hit with to stop you reaching the Commando then the've got general they've captured and another thing coming... you want to set free. If you haven't seen the arcade You dash through forests, version then you're in for a nice across bridges, through rivers, surprise. Ikari takes the and even into enemy fortresses H6056896 DO001500 3 DDDDDDDD 799 # 99 distance jumped. Watch out for telegraph poles about. Tossing the rocks under the surface, the the caber is the most ever changing winds and spectacular event in any seagulls. Highland Games and here the After all that it's a joy to get sport is reproduced in all its back to the simple pleasures of glory-including a bagpipe slalom ski-ing in France. Here soundtrack which brought tears all you have to do is hurl your to the eyes of Craig the C+VG battered body down a steep designer. snow covered slope, weaving Once more, timing and skillful dangerously through \"gates manipulation of the jockstick marked by flags. sorry joystick are key to This is a timed event and any throwing the caber penalties your skier suffers add successfully. Drop it and the precious seconds to his overall caber could pound your little time. And you'll be disqualified Scotsman into the ground Tom altogether if you fall. But you'd and Jerry fashion! Do it right never do that, would you? and he does a Highland fling Get those skis off quickly while the crowd goes wild. now! You certainly won't need The biggest bits of wood them where you are going next. you'll see in the land of our next Yes, we're off to the land of the sport are chopsticks. The lumberjack Canada for a sporting trip around the world lesson in log rolling. This is ends in Japan with a battle of something out of It's a knock the giants. Two huge Sumo Out. Two grown men stand on wrestles grapple for supremacy top of a floating log and attempt in this ancient oriental sport. to get it rolling in such a way to The idea is to score points by make the other chap fall off. Not defeating your opponent in the easy especially when you're most elegant and stylish way. up against the computer. The joystick controls are pretty Balance and rhythm are complex and require a bit of important here if you can getting used to. But this could stop giggling at the tune which just be the best game of the plays along with this event. Yes collection in my humble it's Monty Python's \"I'm a opinion. Real skill is necessary Lumberjack' tune. to put a good combination of Watch especially for the moves and holds together. falling off routine. The victim All the events have great plunges into the water with a graphics and superb sound. satisfying splash and then Some are more playable than resurfaces, furry hat over his others. The only really duff face, and shakes his head. But! events in my view are the diving never knew you got sharks in too simplistic the bull Canadian lakes! riding to hard to get to grips Onward to the good old USA with. and the rodeo ring. Elmer the All the events have their own bad tempered bull is waiting for humorous graphic frills. The you to take him for a ride. neat falling off sequence in the Select a bull to ride there log rolling event, the caber are five of the beasts each with falling on the, er, thrower in the varying temperaments. Then Scottish event, the laughing climb on and hope to stay there bull in the rodeo sequence and as the bull bucks and runs the red faced weightlifter. around the rodeo ring The game comes with some attempting to throw you off. excellent instructions which Which 99 times of 100 he will. include hints and tips on play Practice is the only way to and the tape version loads succeed here, as you'll have to pretty painlessly although if learn to anticipate the bull's you don't want to play a game moves and respond quickly at the start of the tape some otherwise you'll end up in the work with a pencil, paper and dust with the bull doing a the tape counter is necessary. Muttley style laugh above your World Games is well worth a prone body. place in anyone's Christmas Had enough? No? Then come stocking. Great value for with us to Bonnie Scotland money, extremely playable. where the locals love nothing better than throwing old  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY A You wonsee a better game than Ikari Warriors this Christmas Commando/Rambo theme and in search of the general's puts it into overdrive. And you prison. can play the same game with a Blow up pillboxes or shoot friend. enemy commanders they are It's a horizontally scrolling the green ones and you'll shoot-'em-up like Commando. find supplies of grenades, fuel But here you can ambush for captured tanks, ammo and enemy tanks, climb aboard, and even little \"smart-bombs\" which wipe out all attackers in your immediate vicinity when you run over it. The graphics are simply brilliant, the game play awesomely addictive. There's a nifty high-score chart, but you have to be good to get on it. Ikari Warriors is a classy arcade conversion the best Amstrad game we've seen for ages. Maybe even the best of the year. Get Ikari Warriors and take no prisoners! GRAPHICS D SOUND CHVO VALUE PLAYABILITY ON "


"Wo worlds the mirror image of each other, touch in space through a Time-Warp. ne is positive, good, familiar our World: the other is negative, evil yet unnervingly familiar heir interface a time window through which objects and beings can pass; contact has resulted in the beginning of exchange. DOUBLE TAKE 1. Ocean estore our World stop the invasion, but do it now, for as the exchange accelerates, the time window grows larger domination is a hand! STARTLING ACTION INNOVATIVE GAME PLAY STATE OF THE ART 3-D GRAPHICS SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 .95 .95 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS. Tel:061 834 3939-Telex: 669977 "


"C+VG REVIEWS 000130 THANATOS 000000 STRYKER'S R MACHINE: SECTRUM SUPPLIER: DURELL PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: TIM Always expect the unexpected from Durell. They beaver away quietly down in Somerset and always come up with A Thantos is an original, exciting and surprising game which should appeal to Scrolling is pretty smooth original games at least one a arcade adventure players. and colour clash problems are kept to a minimum thanks to an intelligent choice of background colour-black! Thanatos is a novel mixture of adventure and arcade action. You could play it just to get a high score. But the best thing is year anyway. This time it's human attackers or horrible than enough to keep you to fly over the mysterious lands, Thanatos, a magical mystery flying bees or stuff like that. coming back! discovering more each time you tour through a land full of The best way to kick off the The graphics are interesting. play. An interesting and dragons, demons and a beautiful game is to get to the first castle Thanatos the dragon is a big, playable game. Check it out. sorceress to be rescued. important things are found in nicely animated character who It's an arcade adventure with castles as quick as possible. performs neat turns and GRAPHICS a difference. The difference is Don't worry about notching up landings on request. Very SOUND the scrolling \"wide-screen\"  VALUE a big score at this stage. Fly obliging for a dragon is old PLAYABILITY landscape you fly our hero, over attackers and only use Thanatos. Thantos the Dragon, through on your fire when in trouble. You'll his quest for truth and justice, need most of it to burn down And all because the sorceress the door of the castle. Once wanted a magic cauldron. inside the castle watch out for a I guess someone down at little figure waving at you in Durell has been reading Anne among the other figures firing McCaffrey's dragon books things at you. Don't roast her, It looks good. The graphics because the idea owes a lot to for this is the sorceress. are way above average, as you these fantasy classics. You're in Land and she'll run and climb would expect from Superior, control of Thanatos, a great-bigup onto your broad and scaly with a colourful scrolling green dragon. back. Fly away into the wild background and some nice The first part of the game blue yonder to escape the castle  MACHINE: BBC detail, although I have seen involves flying Thanatos across guards. And now the game  SUPPLIER: SUPERIOR smoother animation. hostile lands and seas and really starts! PRICE: .95 (tape) .95 (disk) In the course of his run through dark caverns, all the Life gets more and more REVIEWER: NICKY well, more of a toddle, really time fighting off the attentions difficult for the sorceress and Stryker passes cities, ruined of arrow-firing, spear throwing Thanatos as they progress buildings, trees, gravestones, Oh brill, a new game from locals. He ends up at a castle through this fascinating fantasy Superior! Looks good, usual despatch-posts and more. where the sorceress is waiting world. The seas are populated classy packaging, usual If you have a Master, you can to be rescued. Then you carry with long-necked monsters who competition to put all us Beeb take advantage of a special the sorceress through yet more reach up to snatch the sorceress enhanced version with an even owners on our mettle. dangerous lands and seas in from the dragon's back, the more varied scenario. And yet... order to complete your task caverns are populated by nasty This is Superior's attempt at a There is plenty of action. You and find the magic cauldron. giant spiders with poisonous shoot it out with the Volgans, good old-fashioned war game. Fortunately, like all dragons, bites and the cities and castles who have an extensive armoury one with soldiers, rifles, Thanatos can breathe fire. This are full of horrible people who at their disposal. grenades, helicopters and land means he can roast anything think dragon hunting is in You can requisition an aircraft mines. Being Superior, it's all that attacks him from the air or season all year round. and shoot up the enemy in the done in very good taste, unlike the ground. If Thanatos runs out of puff he some games I could mention. sky, or drop bombs on them. His supply of fire is limited can turn around and fly back to Back on the ground, you can No true-to-life baddies. The however--the level is the nearest city where a witch is good guys might be called jump, duck, chuck grenades and indicated at the bottom of the usually being burnt at the stake. Allies, but the enemies are fire your laser pistol. screen. He can obtain more It's the sort of thing they liked to Volgans, not Germans or And yet I was disappointed. solid fuel for his fire by eating watch in medieval time-well, Russians. The game moves at a leisurely witches -more of that later. they didn't watch Eastenders! You are Commander John pace, and with all its polish it He also gets tired. Watch out Thanatos can eat the witch and Stryker, and your mission is to failed to grip. Take the polish for the heart on the right hand gain more fire-power. take top secret information away, and there's not really side of the screen. When it But watch out for the knight very much there. the complete plans of the starts flashing Thanatos needs on a horse who tries to do a St Volgans' next offensive, no a rest. All you have to do, George on you with his pointy less! back to Allied HQ.  GRAPHICS generally, is land and he'll be lance. Could Thanatos have Needless to say, the Volgans SOUND OK after a few seconds. been set up here? will be doing their best to stop  VALUE But you could be in trouble if Each new part of the game you. PLAYABILITY he's surrounded by ant like provides a new challenge. More "


"X Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone: 061 832 6633 Telex: 669977 uted Commodore 3.95each Amstrad "


"F A N A TI FASTEST SERVICE AVAILABLE MAIL ORDER ONLY COMMODORE 64 Frelord Inspector Gadget 7.30 7.30 SPECTRUM 4128 New Games ill.... Salda Milion lll..... 7.30 770 770 720 AMSTRAD Dan Dare. New Games .... Sold A M onill Duro Big4.. Judge Dredd 7.30 Chequeredrag 5.75 Minder C Highlander Crystal cases HI Paperboy the Noper Deactivators Sacred Armour of Antirad..... Breakthru Solda Milion Moonlight Madness Hadioach Mami Vice Footballer of year Future Knight... World Games 5.75 Word Games Publames 8.75 Temple of Terror anter A onder and Space Hunter Contact same Future Knight Frost Byte Ian Warriors Hit Pak Space Hamer Asterix and the magic Canon 7.20 Championship Wrestling............. 7.30 Jabra Defcom Etter Pan 7.30 Paderboy. Egon Urdum 6.59 8.59 ch ed. na Escape The inheritance Sig Trouble in Lime China Night Howard the Duck Space Harrier .75 .............50 Elite He Pak............... Anta ... ATARI BBC COMMODORE 1.4 Fortaler of the year...............5.75 Future Knight ............................5.75 Adam Caveman.................. 7.30 730 . 7.30 Footballer of year Focal Manager 7.30 castra 1.9 Sarforce Moses can be supplied a discounts of 20 +. Just write the required with a second choice and enclose the RRPs 28%. G E9.95 07.20, S9505 50 67.95 -5.75, except +20 thies Postage in UK Europe add 75p per te. Overseas ad es. per time Al cheques PO's made payable to E&J SOFTWARE 37 WESTMOOR ROAD, ROOM C2, ENFIELD, MIDDLESEX EN3 7LE MEDALLION GRAPHIC ADVENTURE AN ORIGINAL FUN ARCADE GAME FOR THE 48K SPECTRUM 6399 TheidealChristmas gift! mmm SAAJA-DECI with orders posted l not later than 1187 MAGAZINE MYSTERY GIFT TOP SPEC  VOUCHER COMPETITION ENTRY 3GAMES ON SIDEB FIFTY PENCE OFF Amazing Value! FREE (SIDE B Breaking through the dense cloud cover you were relieved to see a dazzling white snowfield spread below you. Desperately preparing for a crash landing, you were distracted by a glint of sunlight on glass a building! Could THIS be the lost civilisation? Your attention however was drawn back to the ground hurtling towards you... From the producers of THOGRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR AVAILABLE FROM ALL LEADING RETAILERS or direct from: INCENTIVE SOFTWARE LTD., 2 Minerva House, Calleva Park, Aldermaston, Berkshire RG74QW. Telephone: (07356) 77288. 8 GAMES for .99 O \"Tam delighted with the tape and consider iteccellent value for money, WH Wer itexcellent value for money (Fredeal Available by post only. Add p P&P pertape. Buy both tapes and takeoff ELO Sendcheque or PO lo: Top Spec, 5 Spencer Rd, E. Molesey, Surrey KTB OSP Order Form NAME Please send me copies of Santa ADDRESS ( inc.P&P before 1.187:  after) copies of Spec Soccer (.35inc P&:P Total POSTCODE VISA PRIORITY ORDER FORM Please rush me for my: Commodore 640 Spectrum BBCBO Amstrad CPC O WINTER WONDERLAND .95 Apache Gold (except BBC) .95 0 Graphic Adventure Creator Tape .95 Disc .95 I enclose cheque/PO or please accept my credit card No. Name Address "


"CESTAR 890010 8800 and you'll soon see doors 2000 1366 opening up. You can centre your craft successfully and then hit the speed at the right moment you zoom straight in. At your leisure you can then size up the opposition MACHINES: SPECTRUM/ATARI including huge tank-like SUPPLIER: RAINBIRD walkers, stompers and, most PRICE: E14.95 SPECTRUM spectacularly, the StargliderE24.95 ATARIST a huge craft with flapping  VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM wings. REVIEWER: PAUL The second most important If you've managed to get a look thing to master is re-fuelling. This I found the most difficult. at the Atari ST version of You have to fly down a pipeline Starglider, it will cause you to keeping as low to the ground as rediscover the gasp. Just when possible, and keeping an eye on you thought nothing could your fuel gauge to see if it's 084 surprise you, you end up increasing. surprised. Then when you discover that The B side of the cassette Rainbird intends to convert the contains a 128K version of the game to the Spectrum, you game containing extra begin to question their sanity. It missions, music and digitised can't be done and if it is, it'll speech providing warning look awful. Well, Rainbird has messages and advice from the and it doesn't. AGAV's computer. The voice is What you get is an excellent that of C+VG's belle of the 3D arcade simulation combined arcades, Clare Edgeley. with strategy. Whether you've got a 48K or The game is based, and 128K Spectrum, you'll find programmed, around a 64-page Starglider engrossing and booklet written by James addictive to play. Check out the Follett, author of the film Who 3D vector graphics and I think Dares Wins. It deals with the you'll be impressed. Egrons invasion of Novenia, a And don't worry all you peace-loving planet. You are in Commodore and Amstrad command of Novenia's last owners, conversions are on the Airborne Ground Attack way for your machines. Vehicle, equipped with lasers GRAPHICS and a limited number of SOUND missiles. Fuel won't last forever, VALUE either. PLAYABILITY It's really quite essential to A The top picture is the Spectrum version, the lower is the Commodore read the booklet, which contains information vital to the mission. Around two thirds of the screen is taken up with the view from your craft. At the top of the  MACHINE: SPECTRUM Helm and Gunnar now yourself once you've loaded in screen is the heading display.  SUPPLIER: PIRANHA accompany Rogue on his quest Piranha's latest offering It's always handy to make a  PRICE: .95 for justice, their synth-voices based, of course, on the cult note of various positions of  REVIEWER: TIM ringing out across the ruined character from the comic various depots and re-fuelling planet as they helpand hinder 2000AD. areas. Welcome to Nu Earth, the war the Rogue Trooper's mission. Your mission is simple. You When you launch into the torn planet on the edge of the Nu Earth is where you'll find have to hunt for eight vid-tapes game it's very easy to go galaxy turned into a battle field rocketing off, zapping at by the Norts and Southers. Here v The top right hand portion of the screen allows your bio-chip friend to talk to you. anything you come across. But they play out their never ending battle Computer ultimately that won't get you conflict. B MCLM very far. It's far better to get to This poisoned, cratered, know your enemy first. And to devastated landscape is home 112 GUNNAR Tapes 0 do that you'll have to find and to the Rogue Trooper, sole Strength enter the missile depot. Once BROMAN survivor of the Quartz u-Ruthin 100% inside you can reload with Massacre. He saw an entire missiles and interrogate a regiment of Genetic Infantry . . . computer which gives you the le . .. ... . H e 's destroyed -betrayed by a top lowdown on all the things you .: . . . . . ranking officer in the Souther's . . ... ... .. . . can expect to meet. army. t yle 64 Luckily, there's a depot in Rogue's only mission in life is sight when you start the game. to find evidence which will lead It looks like a wedge of cheese. to the trial of the man who sent Move up to the silo until it fills his GI buddies to their doom in the screen. Kill your speed and the Quartz Zone. try to keep your craft stable. The Each Gl has his personality B . .. de depot will automatically rotate stored on a bio-chip and yle.. .... .. . . . . Rogue managed to rescue three . . . . . . . . . of his buddies in chip form ... please s elle during the massacre. Bagman, h ududg.... geply ROGUE TROOPER . . T y loyatgal, tot el. "


"JUDGE 80 REVIEWS less Dredd races about the multilevel city streets attempting to wipe out crime. He has to keep an eye on the messages coming in from Judge HQ, because if he allows the crime rate in his sector to rise above eight he'll have to throw in his badge. It's hard to tell who are the perps and who are innocent citizens of the city that never sleeps SO JD can't go around blasting everything in sight. Fortunately you can tell Dredd to simply shout HALTI at the criminals he comes across That would be enough for most people but Perps never learn, do they? about it and sit back and enjoy The graphics are big and the colourful screens while colourful Dredd is animated racking up a hi-score you'll have effectively, although he does a good time. look a bit cutesy for my taste. If you're a Dredd fan-and The game moves fluidly from think you'd enjoy a touch of screen to screen and there are L&R combined with an element some nice touches of shoot 'em up then you Judge Dredd doesn't really won't be wasting your money. capture to spirit of the comic Better still, put JD on your character and I reckon there's Christmas wish list and wave it still a great Dredd game waiting in front of your mum and ad to be created. Gripes? Well, the objective of GRAPHICS the game isn't clearly defined VALUE SOUND enough when you're playing. PLAYABILITY But if you don't worry too much  MACHINE: C84 SUPPLIER: MELBOURNE HOUSE PRICE .95 REVIEWER: TIM 0 0 0 and Mega scombe streetarring 0 Hey punks, listen up. 'Cos here comes the judge! It's the mean and mysterious crimebuster from Mega City, Judge Dredd himself. He's come to sort out the wallies from the street warriors in this, his first starring role in a computer game. Will JD make other games quake in their cassette boxes? Or will Melbourne House be judged and found guilty of turning our cult comic hero into a wimp? Well, I reckon the Wizards from Oz might just get away with a suspended sentence. Dredd is prime material for a great game. This long awaited first offering featuring the main man of 2000AD comic isn't great. But it isn't bad either. It's one of those in-between A Excellent Loading graphics... games that reviewers try hard to like because there's nothing really wrong with it. JD kicks off well with a brilliant loading screen depicting the Judge himself complete with smoking Lawgiver. Then you see the crime display screen which is a map of Mega City with little windows popping up all over it depicting various crimes taking place crimes like kidnapping, alien seed deals, stookie glanding and simple old armed robbery. You move the icon of Dredd's powerful Lawmaster bike over one of those windows, hit the firebutton, and you find yourself on foot in the crimeridden city streets. And yes, it's good old ladders and ramps again, folks. Fast ladders and ramps with nice graphics but L&R none the Kamanda wa A...lood lo lille more than an average platform and ladder game. capturing the gritty style of playability, I hear you cry! Well, ANNO 223 the comic. They are line to put it bluntly. Rogue is a bit of drawings in one colour-the a disappointment. The ideas are hits 2 GUNNAR colour changes depending on Tapes D all there but the game is just the area of the planet Rogue is Strength too easy to hold your attention SAMAN in. This obviously cuts down on for very long. SELETTI any colour clash problems... I completed the mission in At the top of the screen you'll just one sitting which is see Rogue's battle computer almost unheard of here at display which shows a small C+VG. Not that it's not scale map of the planet and enjoyable to play. There's the shuttle which is waiting to plenty of action to be had, the take our Gl and his tapes back to whole thing looks good, and it's civilisation easy to get into. But once At the top left hand side of the you've completed the mission screen you'll see a window the only thing left to do is go which contains the bio-chipped back and do the whole thing all remains of Gunnar Helm and over again and simply try for a Bagman. Messages from the bigger score by shooting more chips appear here as you play. Norts. S As he tramps across the As I've already said, the A The gnitty graphic style recreates the original look of the cartoon but the game will boxes of ammo and med-kits planet Rogue will come across graphics aren't bad but sound is disappoint Rogue Trooper fons. minimal just a few bleeps and which aid his survival in this burps. Not a great game-but hostile environment. Norts are scattered across the surface of not totally naff either. Design Rogue has to explore the always around, but if Rogue has Design have, and can do better. Nu Earth following the devastated planet and avoid enough firepower he can But if you are a fan of the comic destruction of a Millicom Nort troops and Southers who generally knock them out. If you and like games you can beat satellite formerly in orbit have no time for \"deserters\" want you can also take on the around the planet. These tapes, pretty easily then Rogue is like Rogue. Nort pillboxes for more points. worth looking at. in armoured cases, survived the The main screen display is Collect eight vid-tapes and blast and contain the evidence taken up with a view of the Rogue must find his way back GRAPHICS Rogue needs to convince his current part of Nu Earth Rogue to the shuttle using the  SOUND military bosses that the Gls is exploring computer map as a guide,  VALUE were betrayed by a traitor The graphics are pretty good But what about the PLAYABILITY "


"11111 EADCOACH A must for all sports fans. If you thrilled to Football Manager this one is unquestionably for you. ***** Sinclair User October '86 THE This is an American Football Manager\" with all the enjoyment of building a team that can climb up through the leagues to win the Superbowl. Not only will you manage the quality of your players, but also direct each gameplay throughout every match, thus driving your chosen team to success. \"Addictive have tackled a difficult job well.\" Your Computer October 86 SPECTRUMIE8.95 COMMODORE164129.95 NOW AVAILABLE ON COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM TOP TEN HIT wddictive Post to: Addictive Games 10 Albert Road Bournemouth Dorset BHI 1BZ Headcoach. Spectrum .95 each Headcoach. Commodore 64__.95 each Cheque/Postal Order/Access Name Address Vo Addictive Games Ltd 10 Albert Road. Bournemouth Dorset BHI IBZ Tel: 0202-296404 Tel. "


"PRESIDENT DESIGNED BY KEVINTOMS Designed and programmed by Kevin Toms, the creator of the all-time classic \"FOOTBALL MANAGER\" Throughout history, in times of anguish and need, I there have arisen great leaders who have turned away the tides of defeat, deprivation and slavery. They have secured not only protection and prosperity for their peoples but also a place in the history of mankind. Dare you stand beside them? Measure yourself against the evil forces of today total war-epidemic starvation poverty and prove that you have the power to be PRESIDENT AMSTRADI22.95 SPECTRUMI28.95 FEATURING: Oil Exploration and Development Battle Tactics and Defence Strategy Politics including Food Policy, Health, Economic Problems, Vote Winning Ploys etc. Finance Oil Sales, Gold Reserves, Exchange Rates...and of course Elections Now available on Amstrad and Spectrum. Wddictive Post to: Addictive Games. 10 Albert Road Bournemouth. Dorset BHI IBZ President. Amstrad .95 each President. Spectrum .95 each Cheque/Postal Order/Access Name Address Vo Addictive Games Ltd 10 Albert Road. Bournemouth Dorset BHI IBZ Tel: 0202-296404 Tel. "


"000250 C+VG MACHINE: SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: US GOLD PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: TIM 71OTAS YET another coin-op conversion hits the Spectrum. This is one from the vaults called Breakthru a sort of Moon Buggy with extra-added violence. You are in charge of a giant armoured vehicle on a mission 325 Breakthru is a fun and reasonably playable game. It should have been a budget release. to rescue a revolutionary fighter flame-thrower tanks hiding in watery barrier. aircraft stolen by the bad guys. tunnels between the The last lap is the city where You have to drive this mountains. the enemy forces throw beweaponed bus though five Then comes the bridge everything at you make it sectors, fighting your way more defenders, aided this time through the streets and you'll through defenders and natural natural by missile firing vehicles. The reach your objective the hazards. bridge has been blown up by airfield. Before you start the game, the the defenders to prevent your Here you have to leave the screen shows you a map of the progress so you'll have to use safety of the battle wagon and area you have to cross. First are vour vehicle's amazing jumping make a run for the stolen jet. the mountains full of power to the full. Then comes Flamethrowers will singe you, minefields and enemy soldiers. the wide open spaces of the bullets will whizz past your ears. You also have to avoid rockfalls prairie where ultimately you'll The graphics are colourfuland landslides as well as have to find your way over a although your battle wagon looks a bit weedy. Breakthru is a basic shoot 'em upno more, no less. I'd say it's a bit expensive for what you get. As a budget release it would be brilliant value. But as it stands, I think Breakthru gets a resouding \"Hmmmmm!\" on the C+VG Gameometer. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY SUPERSTAR PINGPONG MACHINE: 064/128 things as speed, view of table, watching the ball fly over the SUPPLIER: U.S. GOLD and power adjustments to net. If you put the speed on PRICE: .95 various shots that can be used. \"hyperdrive\" and then hit the REVIEWER: CHRIS For example, if you want your ball with your most powerful backhand to be more powerful shot, just watch it fly! This game is Pingpong plain than your forehand, then The rest of the game is played and simple. You can alternate reduce power on the latter and fairly simply, it just follows the between various options, add it to the backhand. rules of Pingpong. Except for different speeds and colours What's the game like to play the fact that you can ask the but the game is still the same. Well, once you start, the screen computer to make your paddle When the game loads you are is displayed in either 3D or fly towards the ball, leaving you presented with an option \"flat\" like the old Atari console. time to catch up on your stroke screen, which is manipulated To be honest, I preferred it this timing etc. with the joystick, according to way. You can change the colour of your own skills and preference. You can serve by just the ball when in pause mode, The options include such pressing the button and but this seems pointless to me. One of my friends who is hoping to take up Table Tennis professionally, and who is a computer fanatic, played this game with me on two players. He thinks that it's nothing new and is not even as good as the old Atari version. I have to say agree with him. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"HYPABALL COMPUTER GRAPHICS LTD COMPLITER TRAFICS UD O SALES 01-631 5206 01-379 6755 INTERNATIONAL 44-1-379 6755 COMMODORE 64/128: SPECTRUM 48/128K "


"C+VG SM ZUBE MACHINE: SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: ELECTRIC DREAMS PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: TIM DANDY28 generators by some heavy use of the fire button. The basic idea is to collect all the treasure in each dungeon and get out alive. Successfully complete a set of dungeons and you get a clue which will help you solve the ultimate riddle. You get a clue from all three dungeon \"loads\". You can play the three sets of dungeons in sequence or at randombut you'll need all the clues to discover the final solution. The key to the game is staying alive. After all, if you're fighting fit you'll be able to cope with finding a way to the various exits, won't you? You can swap treasure for energy if you're running low. Spells are cast randomly by hitting the appropriate key. A Probably the best looking Spectrum game around at the moment. There's no telling what they'll do. In fact it's hard to tell what Will Dandy steal the honours dungeons are baffling mazes they are doing unless you're from Gauntlet? That's the with doors which can only be lucky enough to hit a \"kill\" question on everyone's lips. opened with keys you find spell. Then everything gets Well, it's certainly won in the dotted around-along with zapped. Shame you can't release date stakes. We've only treasure, spells and food. Food choose which spells to use. seen previews of the Spectrum keeps your energy level up, The graphics are extremely Gauntlet so far. spells can be used to paralyse, attractive, although the little Dandy was the brainchild of disorientate or simply kill your black characters you control are John H. Palevich, who sold his enemies in smart bomb style. Sometimes difficult to see idea for a Dungeon and Enemies come in the form of especially when you're Dragons style multi-player horrible spiders, demons and teleporting about from room to adventure game to Atari who generaly horrible nasties. They room. turned it into Gauntlet. The rest literally infest the dungeons and The rest of the dungeon looks is history... keep on coming unless you suitably solid and great Electric Dreams got the rights wipe out the monster attention to detail makes it to the original Dandy game and turned it over to the Ram Jam Corporation who created the computer version you see before you. It doesn't have the eight-way scrolling of Gauntlet -you simply \"flip\" from screen to screen. But you DO get a two player option, hundreds of baddies to wipe out, treasure galore, weird spells and lots to eat! You can either play the part of Sheba, \"240 lbs of screaming bloodlust\", or Thor, \"one Norwegian mother\". The blurb doesn't tell you whether he's a one parent family or a mother of quads. I, for one, think we should be told... Meanwhile back at the game you find yourself in a typical series of Gauntlet style dungeons. You're looking down Dandy's a game mode for boodthirsty gamers on the carnage from above. The a great game. Lots of nice shading and great use of colour. Probably the best looking Spectrum game around at the moment together with Lightforce. Dandy is very playable and very addictive especially with two players. You'll find yourself hacking and chopping your way S8 through dungeon after dungeon deep into the night! But I've got a feeling that most of you will be waiting for the real thing... Dandy is on the way for the 64 and Amstrad. Watch out for our special THOB :630 LETU Dandy map next issue! GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY A You can choose one of two different characters, or invite a friend round for a spot of ghost bashing. "


"FREE POSTER WITH EVERY COPY ATARI 400 (48K MINIMUM/ 130XE/800/B00XL SPECTRUM 48K AND COMMODORE 64, RUNNER INNER SOUND ...THE FIGHT HAS ONLY JUST BEGUN! Human kind is under threat-from SKY DISK: .95 SKYNicotic Potent and at any plentiful The drug that keeps the future masses in a state of SKY RUNNERS Ormarised SKY RUNNERS Onaised Ruthless The agents who harvest proies and struc cascade RUNNER SQUAD Elite mercenaries Employedova CUSCITO chev halt the SKY RUNNING inte naty way they know how total destruction CASCADE GAMES CASSETTE: .95 DIFFICULTY, DIRECT FROMCASCADE AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE RETAILERS OR. IN CASE OF SUPPLY (04231504663 24HR ORDERLINE Cascade Games Ltd Harrogate. HG15BG England TEL (0423) 504663 "


"C+VG TRACY AGENT ERUIP A Warriors who love the wasteland, THE ASSAULT MACHINE MACHINE: CBM 64 SUPPLIER: NEXUS PRICE: .95 CASSETTE/ .95 DISK REVIEWER: PAUL There's trouble brewing on the prison planet Targon, isolated from the rest of the galaxy for many centuries. A fanatical organisation is rumoured to be building a massive weapon called The Assault Machine. If true, it could spell doom for all the good guys. The starcruiser Peacekeeper has been sent to investigate and take appropriate action. In other words... search and destroy. Blast those no-good cons to MACHINE SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD/C64/ATARI/MSX/C16 SCORE TEXEL SUPPLIER: GREMLIN GRAPHICS PRICE: .95 SPEC MSX) .95 ILEVELL (AMS/C64/C16) TERRY SITES 163TTE > REVIEWER: TIM Trailblazer is a deceptively simple game. Load it in and you think, \"What's all this then? But then you start playing. And from then on you won't want to know about anything else. It's fast and awesomely addictive. The idea is simplicity itself. You are in control of a bouncing ball which you have to guide over a series of tracks packed with hazards for the unwary. Fall off the track and you lose A Trailblazer is simply a brilliant game. a life. Stay on and you're in for the ride of your life! The tracks streak out at you from the centre of the screen like a race track would in a regular race game. You have to use all your skill, judgement progress. And you can play the game in and fast reactions to keep the There's a time limit for each two modes. The Three Course ball rolling level complete a track with Trail gives you the opportunity There are chequerboard time in hand-shown in the to practice any three of the 14 squares on some of the tracks clock at the top of the screen tracks together with unlimited which will either slow you down and you get more time for the bounces. The Arcade option or speed you up or even make next level. allows you to play all the courses you jump automatically. There are 14 fun-filled in sequence with just four Learn to recognise them, they courses to attempt each with bounces and varying time limits. can help or hinder your their own unique challenges. Versions apart from the Spectrum have colour coded squares to watch out for and a two player option, plus a player versus computer options. You can attempt to knock each other off course in two player/robot modes. Trailblazer on the Atari and 64 is just as addictive. But here you've got the extra added dimension of enhanced sound and glorious graphics. Do try playing the split screen two player version. It's great! Gremlin's programmers have even managed to coax a decent tune out of the Spectrum! Sounds vary on other versions. TRAILBLAZER Trailblazer is a simply brilliant game. Original and extremely addictive. Everyone should have it in their collection! > GRAPHICS  SOUND > VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"REVIEWS Assault Machine has a good mix of icon-driven strategy and pure shoot'em-up. MAP Kingdom Come. Once the droid is on the In all there are ten island island you can monitor its complexes on Targon which are progress. If one gets into making The Assault Machine. difficulty-being attacked, for All must be destroyed. instance you'll have to rescue All the equipment you have it. are four droids-Tracy, Once the droids have found Holmes, Bond and Chan and the information and location of three atmosphere craft which the Assault Weapon bases, it's must move the droids around then time to move onto the end from island to island. game. This involves bombing First of all you must plot your missions over the searched moves by consulting a map of islands. Taragon's islands and decide Assault Machine is a nice mix where to drop the droids. Once of Icon-driven strategy this is decided you switch to combined with fairly satisfying what is basically flight shoot-'em-up. simulation combined with a bit of zapping. Delivering a droid to  GRAPHICS its target will require you to face SOUND attack from aerial torpedoes VALUE and blaster fire. PLAYABILITY MACHINE: SPECTRUM/ COMODORE/AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: OCEAN PRICE: .97(SPECTRUM)/E8.95 CMM 64 CASSETTE .95 DISK VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: PAUL COBRA areas night-time in the city, laser-sighted machine guns daytime in the country and the rescue Ingrid and clear the factory. section of killers. It's only when To move onto the next you get to the factory that you'll section of the game you must confront the Night Slasher collect beef burgers inside himself. are either knives, pistols or At the start of the game Cobra V. Be sly and you could be a winner... You're the disease... I'm the cure. \"Immortal words from vigilante cop Marion Cobretti, also known as The Cobra. Months after Sylvestor Stallone's latest cinema rendering of brutal corpsestrewen crime control was massacred by the critics, Ocean's game of the film slithers onto the software shelves. Better late than never, suppose. The film's plot actually that is a gross misuse of the word is fairly simple. Cop Cobra of the \"Zombie Squad\" has to rescue a fashion model, Ingrid Dnutsen, from the clutches of a band of mad killers and their evil boss who goes by the cute name of the \"Night Slasher\". The game roughly follows the film so this is where the law stops... and you start. And what you get is basically a frantic platform and ladders game set across three playing only has a pretty lethal headbutt so he can despatch the multitude of killers without doing himself any serious damage. The action is certainly fast and frantic as Cobra charges around like a raging bull. Cobra's lives are represented as boxing gloves. Is this a clever reference to Stallone's Rocky films? If so, what is the significance of the Quackometer, which shows how long Cobra can use a weapon for? Rogue prams and beefburgers are not prime ingredients of the film but they crop up a lot in the game. The prams charge about on their own slamming into Cobra unless he's quick enough to jump over them. The weapons are hidden in the burgers. Graphically and soundwise Cobra is okay, but really it's the sort of game you've seen many times before. It will sell on the name rather than on the originality. GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY 000 SKORE DOO SKORE 009000 KE WUR E80 "


"ARE IIIIIIIIIIIII IIIIIIIIII Twentieth Century Fox BASED ON THE FANTASTICAL FILM AVAILABLE ON Amstrad CPC cassette Amstrad CPC disk Commodore 64/128 cassette Commodore 64/128 disk ZX Spectrum 48/128K/+ .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 You are led into the heart of the bizarre underworld ruled by the ancient Mandarin Warlord, Lo Pan. Your mission to rescue the beautiful green eyed Miao Yin before she is sacrificed to a demon. Playing ALL three of the film's great heroes American Jack the lad' Burton, martial art expert Wang Chi and ancient magician Egg Shen defeat Lo Pan and his unearthly body of supporters as the evil unfolds around the ancient Warlord and his pact with a demon. Take1 Eocinc Dreat SOFTWARE 31 Carlton Crescent, Southampton S01 2EW Mail Order Electric Dreams Software, 23 Pond Street, Hampstead, London NW3 2PN "


"D bubble bus BUBBLE BUS SOFTWARE 87 HIGH STREET, TONBRIDGE, KENT TN9 1 RX, ENGLAND TELEPHONE: 0732 355962 TELEX: 95151 Commodore 64/128 tape or disk Software "


"C+VG Brevette TE TER BOR sco HELTH GAUNTLET Valkyrie and Warrior swinging their deadly weapons. Then it's on to the option screen where you choose your character and what sort of game you want. Now you're plunged into a weird world of monsters and mazes. As in the arcade version there are version objects to be collected. Potions are useful for keeping up your energy as is food but watch what you eat. Some food could do you more harm than good. You'll need to plan a strategy to work out which levels to tackle and in which order. But GHQATIE it's always a good idea to build up a good stock of keys and PRESS FIRE potions before you venture into the later more intricate levels. A Gauntlet, the world's first multi-player arcade game, hits the home computer. Energy is at a premium and you can't always rely on finding food/potions to keep you going. The different characters have different weapons-Thor has an axe, Merlin his magic bolts, Questor his arrows and Thyra her trusty broad sword. In the If you've been hiding under a goblins or ghosts you'll either arcade version you needed all MACHINES: SPECTRUM, stone, or down a dungeon for have to go to his/her aid or four characters to successfully AMSTRAD, C64, ATARI, AMIGA. the last 12 months, you won't wait until they are free to move complete the game but here IBM, MSX SUPPLIER: U.S. GOLD know about the multi-player on again. it's a bit different. It is possible PRICE: .99 AMSTRAD, C64, arcade machine that instantly The smooth eight-way to win through on your own. ATARI, MSX TAPEE8.99/ daptured the imagination of scrolling was another feature of It's up to you to choose your SPECTRUM, .99/AMSTRAD, games players all over the UK. the coin-op, and the small favourite character. Each has C64, ATARI-DISC. .99/AMIGA, You could play the part of screen version has this too. It's his or her own hall of fame ATARI ST, IBM Thor the Warrior, Thyra the a real joy to be able to move hi-score chart which appears at VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD Valkyrie, Merlin the Wizard or freely around the screen. the end of each session. REVIEWER: TIM Questor the Elf in a quest for You can explore the different The monsters you meet are magic and treasure in the mazedungeons at will-zapping many and varied. There are It's here. The game which like dungeon world of Gauntlet from level to level as freely as ghosts, goblins, evil wizards, promises to pack a real punch. The computer version follows the monsters allow you! That the even nastier Death who can Gauntlet, the game the arcade game faithfully. The means you can explore as far as only be destroyed by using a EVERYBODY has been waiting four characters are included your energy lets you get. But \"smart-bomb\" type potion, and for. Will this conversion of the although you can only play with once you've done that you'll my favourite -the giant red classic Atari coin-op grab you a friend. No four player antics want to get down to the real toads. At least I think they are by the throat and not let go? Or here, unfortunately. purpose of the game toads... is it just more glossy hype? If you play with a friend you'll collecting treasure and bashing Although we only managed Well, we're pleased to report have to work as a team just as in nasties... to get our hands on the that the computer version is just the coin-op. The game won't When you first load up the Amstrad version for this review as awesome as the arcade scroll unless both players move game you'll see a neat -the glimpses we've had of original. It's colourful, classy in similar directions. If your rendering of the arcade other machine versions of the and so addictive. mate is busy bashing ghouls, machine's first screen-the game convinced us that they ALIENS  MACHINES: SPECTRUM/CBM 64/AMSTRAD aliens, has now been inhabited SUPPLIER: ELECTRIC DREAMS by a colony of space engineers PRICE: .99 (SPECTRUM/CBM 64) AMSTRAD CASSETTE), .99 and their families. All contact (CBM/AMSTRAD DISK) has now been lost with the VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM colony. The worst is feared. REVIEWER: PAUL Reluctantly. Ripley agrees to head a squad of elite marines to Some day a software house will the planet. On their arrival they capture the licence to a top film find the engineers base is and turn it into a brilliant game. deserted. As night falls they find Of all the film titles currently it isn't just insects that crawl out hoping to make money from the of the woodwork... it's aliens, micro, most tend to be a lots of them, with slavering disappointment when it comes jaws and a mean appetite, to the game. It's the name that There are a huge number of sells. rooms to explore and Electric Electric Dreams has scooped Dreams has included a map to one of the hotest films of 1986 help you. and, in my humble opinion, You have control of all six have made perhaps the best members of the team. At least movie conversion game half the screen is taken up with around. It has atmosphere their details. The crew can only the very ingredient which madebe controlled one at a time. the films such winners. Their faces are displayed at the Remember those magic centre of the screen. And the moments in the film where the top half of the screen is then whole audience seems to jump taken up with the view from at the same time? Well I found their portable cameras. myself jumping at parts of the Each crew member can be game as an alien rushed at me. moved through doors, either by Great stuff! opening them or blasting them On to the plot. Warrant with a smart gun. It's also Officer Riply, sole-suvivor of a possible to direct the other crew terrifying encounter with an members to move to certain alien aboard a space freighter, rooms and these commands has been rescued. Later she is will be carried out while you can horrified to learn that the planet get on with other business. You where she first encountered the soon get used to switching "


"D MACHINES: SPECTRUM /CBM 64/AMSTRAD/MSX/BBC B/ ELECTRON > SUPPLIER: MARTECH PRICE: .95 (SPECTRUM), ,95 AMSTREAD/CBM 64/MSX/BBCB /ELECTRONI > VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: PAUL C+VG Tarzan, the mighty muscled aristocrat raised by the apes in the jungle, has been around for seemingly an eternity. The first story from the pen of creator Edgar Rice Burroughs was published in 1911. Books and films have abounded. The subject is ripe for a computer game and Martech has been the one to capture the licence. The resulting game is a huge arcade adventure with stunning graphics some of the best REVIEWS Ben scor ELLEALTH GAUNTLET PRESS FIRE A Great graphics, good sound perfect playability. What more could you ask for! TARZAN I've seen for the Spectrum screen by little black boxes and super smooth animation. some of which are remarkably The plot is simple. Jane, Tarhard to see. zan's soul-mate has been cap It's only by picking these up tured by Usanga, chief of the that you get to its contents at Wamabo. Her fate may not be a the bottom of the screen. pleasant one being devoured within a few screens of movby a panther and having her ing around the jungle you'll bones picked over by a vulture. easily become lost. A map, a It appears the Wamabo have map, my jungle kingdom for a You'll be sorry if there isn't a copy of Gauntlet in your Christmas stocking are all going to be just as good. THE business. Accept no Great graphics, good sound alternatives and shop at the perfect playability. What more sign of the chainmailed fist. You could you ask for? won't be disappointed. Now that the real thing is here GRAPHICS the imitators begin to look a bit VALUE weedy. There's really only room  SOUND for one Gauntlet-and this is PLAYABILITY HELP wwwwww BISHOP . BISHOP 016 A Tarzan goes ape! been upset by the theft of seven map, I cried. gemstones -known as the Moving around Tarzan will \"eyes of the rainbow\" from come across various animals. their tribal temple. Unless TarSome will be friendly and helpzan can recover their gems ful, others will view the Lord of within three days, Jane will be the Apes as a mobile snack bar the main course on the jungle and try to take a bite out of him. menu. I always found the nasty ones. Game play time is measured There are also natives walkby the changing colour of the ing around, again some are screen, representing day turnfriendly while others aren't. ing into night and back again. Tarzan can run, jump, duck, The speed at which the days jump, somersault, and, along pass-remember Tarzan only with all the other jungle charachas three-depends on how ters, is nicely animated well the Lord of the Jungle Summing up, Tarzan is probdoes. For instance if he gets hit ably one of the best looking by a spear, falls into quicksand Spectrum games of recent or mauled by a rampaging big months and, although it's a little cat, the day passes quickly. weak on plot, it is addictive Scattered throughout the enough to keep you playing. jungle are various objects which Tarzan can use. These include ropes, torches, shields > GRAPHICS SOUND and, of course, the gemstones. D VALUE These are represented on the PLAYABILITY The original jungle swinger 00B Dwi 200. 06 IB 1111 A One of the best film conversions we ve seen. It's very atmospheric between crew. tend to bleed a lot there and this As they move through the acidic fluid will prove fatal. base they will find bioAlthough the game isn't mechaniod growths cover the stunningly original in terms of walls. These must be blasted an idea, you quickly find yourself away. But be careful, where being drawn into and getting these growths are the chances absorbed in the play. are they'll be an alien. Although Graphically it's very nice. In alarms sound when they're fact you probably get more of near, you may not see the an idea what the aliens look like monster before it attacks. from the game than the film. Sometimes they sneak up from behind! But more than likely you'll be able to get a few shots GRAPHICS SOUND CHO at the Alien. But try not to shoot VALUE HITI him in front of a doorway. They PLAYABILITY "


"ith, to ridan ktor NYC REVIEWS WASTA ation MA City 1001 Harle MACHINE: SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: HEWSON PRICE: .95 CASSETE/.95 AMSTRAD DISK VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: PAUL EM Mon SLICKER ste A Victory in Trafalgar Square? A Exploding politicians..! The game is packed with problem solving. You know the type-put the top weight over the trapdoor to open it or ring the telephone to distract the guard. There are many characters who drain your energy, including pigeons Who's personal habits when flying above your head leave much to be desired. And there's Abru who crops up all over the place bringing a somewhat lethal touch with him. Graphically it's very slick. There's also what Hewson term Arab Abru Cadabbra has Disassembly Unit and the \"half flip\" feature which planted a bomb in the Houses dismantle the bomb. moves the screen image a half of Parliament set to explode at The backdrops range from width, extending the play area midnight. the Tower of London, Trafalgar into the next room. You play the part of Slick, Square, British Museum, If you ignore the background who's been called in by some Buckingham Palace and, of to the game, City Slicker is mysterious department to course, Parliament. excellent fun. As it is, it should defeat his fiendish plot. Slick moves around London be renamed City Sicker. So what you have is an by using the tube. All he has to arcade adventure set across do is find a station, get onto the GRAPHICS more than 50 or so screens in more than 50 or so screens in tube and select his required SOUND which Slick has 16 hours in destination. This is a very nice VALUE which to find and make a Bomb touch. PLAYABILITY Urban terrorism is a dodgy subject for fun computer games. Bombs in the heart of London have in the recent past been all too real. People died horribly. So to make the centrepiece of your game the blowing up of the Houses of Parliament could be seen as at the very least in very dubious taste. And that's exactly what the normally ever so tasteful Hewson has done with City Slicker. Anyway, enough of the moralising and down to the game. City Slicker is the latest offering from the minds of Technician Ted authors Steve Marsden and David Cooke. It is set in London where an evil Ikday DEM $17. week senti TRIE sirfa kitch den rcula tion inkli DO bos UTURE KNIGHT whit Bos lined captured by aliens on a planet you to do whatever you want in the Zragg system. unhindered. Randolf also There are 20 different levels comes across spells which connected by doors which allow him to build useful require a pass to get through. bridges, unlock exits and finally Each level is packed with free the princess. There are all nasties which reappear even if sorts of keys to be collected too you kill them off. There are also and a sceptre which kills off a giant droid thingies which need very large semi-indestructible mucho blasting to get rid of. droid. You'll discover lots of other Our hero can pick up a useful items, like \"smart selection of ammo for his allbombs\" which wipe out purpose alien-blaster the everything in sight, confusers fireball ammo is the best for all Which, when activated, confuse eventualities the other stuff aliens for a short time allowing being a bit puny MACHINE: SPECTRUM  SUPPLIER: GREMLIN GRAPHICS PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: TIM Puls The bomb is a useful gizmonot only does it kill all aliens on screen instantly in a blaze of flashing pixels but it also restores your energy to 999. Energy is the thing you're going to need most of in this game. The princess can always be found in the second dungeon areabut it's no good finding your way there and finding you've left the all important release spell behind You begin the game with three lives and a weedy weapon. So it's best to explore until you find an ammo dispenser which gives you a better one. But don't move back in front of it after you've claimed some decent firepower otherwise you'll lose it again. And don't move out of a level until you've explored it thoroughly. You might just miss something important. Future Knight isn't terribly original but it is very well put together. Like Jack the Nipper, it's a map makers delight and pretty good value 1 Oh dear, I thought, as I sat down to play Future Knight. This looks like a glossy platforms and ladders game to me. Stifling a yawn, I got stuck in and suddenly found myself quite enjoying the game-despite the fact that i'd seen/played squillions of similar offerings in the past. But this one is well presented, has got some interesting puzzles, nice graphics, an opening tune which is pretty amazing for the Spectrum, and it's playable as well. A quality product as you'd expect from Gremlin. You take on the role of Randolf, the hero, who is on a rescue mission to save his sweetheart Princess Amelia You have no Ogeotto user SCORE HIGH SEGRE IO  GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY BESSA 00 00 00 00 WERPON ITEM OM "


"155 day. vih, tub MARSHALL ARMS Ideal for executives. Fashionable conveniently located Excellent cuisine. Attractive monthly rates. Every room with private bath. Coffee shop. Barber & beauty shop. 4100 La Salle Nth. Fairfax 6265 dan 8641 EXCHANGE Indy's cert diamond ring for furniture. Kildare 3927 New & used violins & cases. Bargain prices. Telescopic sights optional 423 S Clark Blvd. Open eves. OLYMPIC Le rooms & Shower 200 N Oak uale. included ctory 2210 5000 Going cheat CASABLANCA nite-spot needs pinnists. Apply Rick Box 63980 1290 PINE GROVE PLAZA Modern de luxe 6-7 mm apts. Newly decorated. Electric elevator. Lg. closets, v. lite PACKARD 10 deluxe Sedan $750 Used 5 mths. 4dr trunk. Radio & heater. Livery Lakeview 3074 NYOUR Upen Sunday till 3 THE Clearance Sale You've Been Waiting For KLEIN'S CENTRAL WAREHOUSE OUTLET Under ONE giant roof, hundreds of nationally advertised Household Appliances NEW SAMPLES Vacuum Cleaners Salesmen's samples all makes from $5.95 Washers & Ironers New family size only $19 ABC Spinner Sensational at only $35 Oil heaters free installation from $30 Odds and Ends. Famous makes Free delivery. No finance company to deal with 300 N Madison Rd. Wabash 5148 20 ARTIFICIAL leg Men's;left; nize 77-8. Airplane metal, lightweight Delaware 7173 Tison 2217 OLYMPIC HOTEL $50 wk, $1.55 day. Lg rooms; new furniture; pri bath, tub & shower 200 N Oak Sheridan Rd Sheridan 8641 5000 SINCLAIR C5s for sale. Going cheap. Batteries not included. Victory 2210 AUTO LOANS CASH IN TEN MINUTES ON YOUR AUTO OR TRUCK 20 MONTHS TO PAY Deal direct with owners. Private consultation rooms. HIRSCH-DAVIS 20 years in the same location 6213 WSTALLWORTHST Harrison 2217 VISIT Paula's Puppyland Air Conditioned. All pop. breeds. 100s to pick from Low prices 6162 N Harlem Av. STENOGRAPHERS Complete secretarial courses. Learn by actual work on switchboards. Free catalog. Also 'Brush up your Comptometer \"Complete X-ray Course AMERICAN BUS COLLEGE 20 E Michigan Would anyone having knowledge of the whereabouts of Joe 'Pug Nose Morelli please tell his mum cos his tee's ready. WALTZ, fox trot, rhumbs. Private lessons. 7 for $5. No appt. nec. Rm. 21316 N Clarkson Wkdays 10-5 PART share in 1938 Cub $45. Fly solo $1.50 Dual $3.50 Evenings. Oak Lawn 1904 FOR SALE 20 Left shoes, size 7'4-8. Going cheap. Offers Delaware 7173 Osto Harlem Av. LABORATORY equipment for sale chemicals, scales etc. Perf.cond. Calumet 2071 can be 4 yr old saddle horse. Well mannered. Sacrifice. Quick sale. Offers. Mr Edge. Oak Park 1397 TEETH lost-partial plate. W 79th St. Reward Wellington 2354 Michigan e of the Morelli ready. Beauty Operators Trained at CASH IN DE VERE UNIVERSITY are in the State's leading salons. We take pride in their success Rates, terms Des catalog on request. No obligation Prive Day/evening classes 20 yed De VERE 50 E RANDOLPH BLVD. 7th Floor 6213 WSTA BLACKSTON PK 3125 1/2/3 rm kits VISIT Paulo well furn, newly dec. $3.75-$5 up Conditioned pick from HAYLEY, I luv u. Eric. XXXX Low prices P.S. Will you help me with my lines Reply Box 63980 Complete se Ellis 4535 2 m basement apt. Kit. elec actual work frig. Free gas $5-$9 Free catalog Also 'Brush LAUNDRESS. Good shirt ironet Cleaning. \"Comp Fast worker. Triangle 4200 AMERICAN Can't get across river in Omnicalc? You need the Extension Kit Would anyo Reply Box 63980 whereabout please tell h Mens Venta $1.98 Corduroys French backs; moleskin fabrics. Dark colours, all I WALTZ, fox excellently tailored & strongly reinforced 7 for $5. No for real wear. Sizes 30-42 Rm. 211 No Mail or Phone orders -none delivered. DACRE'S BARGAIN BASEMENT ALLIE 139 N CLARK ST MANIC PAINT, paper. $3 up per rm incl. paper. Jobs w Baths enamelled. Plaster; patch. Includes too Independence 7668 CONF 1500 used theater seats. Also theater orgen Baldwin baby gr. pinna. Cheap. Schoenstadt Archer 2554 Contact San CATAPULT required for Skooldaze player PENTHOU 2 bedrooms Reply Box 63980 Combinatio 9x121. Mothproof Rug Peds. Offers Ice water. around $1.95 At an 14 E Jackson Evenings only 35 W Delaw te lessons. OPEN SUNDAY Buy direct Factory samples Bedroom sets ......... $29 up Pador sets .... ......... $19-539 up Trade-In & repossessed furniture available Schwart & Co 4 077 Cottage Rd W. CHEV. 39 Sedan $400 Trunk hestes, vacuum gear shift, bumper guards, original fin. Priced far below market. Private Krueger Humboldt 9226 CODE numbers needed for Wheelie player. Reply Box 63980 St. Louis $4.75 Detroit $5 Ft. Wayne $3 Columbus $6 De Luxe Motor Suages 230 Milwaukee N w Lake Central 313 DRIVING to Denver, Cheyenne vie Oklahoma shortly. Take 2 share expenses. Kedule 4031 Gas driven calculators; adding machines cash registers & ZX81s. No reasonable offers refused. Mikes Second Hand Bargains. 15 Grand Av (nr Plass) days 10-5 EMY $17.50 is. ent service TRIES OLDSMOBILE 38 Del. Trk. Sed. $550 4 door model. Hester, very clean. $45 down Mayerling Motors 6800 24th & Michigan SALESMAN 44. Aggressive Seeks ood alde-line to work into full-time prop Have car Anderson, Irving 4519 virfut 7897 uitchenette; bulating ALLIED BEAUTY ACADEMY 32 E LAKE ST MANICURING COURSE $17.50 Jobs in Lean in week Includes tools, diplom a cement service CONFIDENTIAL ENQUIRIES UNDERTAKEN Contact Sam Cruise. Fairfax 7337 PENTHOUSE living room + kitchenette 2 bedrooms & Tinte roof anden Combination to showet, circulating Ice water. Complete service. At an address of distinction. 35 W Delaware Franklin 3911 Sinclair C5 Sedan 4 door Fully air conditioned. Running boards extra. This car will pass for new. Any colour you like, as long as it's white Reply Box 63980 WOODLAWN 1362 2 ms. Prientrance. Newly furn. & decor. Frigidaire. Gas incl. $3-$6 inklin 3911 will exchange dental work for used car JF Ball Drexel 4113 ALL AMERICAN BUS TRAVEL CO. Free pillows Free meals Los Angeles $30 o/ $54 t/t S Prancisco $32.50 / $60 t/t Miami $15 o/w $25 /t Adanta $10 o/ $14.50 t/t LOWEST ROUND TRIP FARES IN THE STATE SPECIAL SALE Now from only $29.50 New, de luxe, water heaters. kerosene; gus 217 W Washington Av. Franklin 1300 boards Dell baby please write me at mothers. Jos said Sweetie Pie Sinc Fully air cor extra. This colour you! Box 63980 Quick drying cement supplied. No questions asked. Apply Box 1342 Yng hi-sch grad. desires off. wkor reception. Hollycourt 7373 STUDEBAKER 1940 President Sedan Gleaming grape-tone maroon finish. Equipment includes radio, climatizer etc. Exceptionally low milenge. Like new $895 2435 W WABASH Independence 3310 City Officials bought and sold Box 2217 Cadillacs lengthened to your requirements, $100 per yard. SLOPERS METALWORKS EARLSWDOD ALLEY (back of Joe Drug Store) Neces ned snow w Hood coats, heavily inte pants to ma From $14.91 NTRAL A. EA WINTER COAT SALE! Hood coats, wrap arounds, warm fleeces, heavily interlined, costs with lined snow pants to match. Sizes 12-20 From $14.98. Value $25 EMERSON COAT CO. 2342 W CENTRAL AV. $1,000,000 in diamonds WANTED! The Very Highest Prices will be paid We also purchase Old Gold & Pawn Tickets YOU RECEIVE CASH IMMEDIATELY US Diamond Syndicate, 35 N Pulaski Rd. Not responsible for debts except those contracted by myself. J Schaeffer 3331 Washington BARGAINI Fluffy Pork Pie Sport Felts. Regular $1.49 Values. The all purpose casual felt in Black, Brown, Soldies Wine, Red, Kelly, Beige. Four head tires 21'4-23. Now ONLY 84c paid INDIGESTION MAY AFFECT THE HEART At the first sign of distress, smart men and women depend on CHESTER'S PATENT REMEDY made of lastest acting medicine for acid indigestion. If the first done doesn't prove CHESTER'S best, return bottle to us and receive DOUBLE money back 25 FULLY FASHIONED RAYON OUTSIZE HOSE All well reinforced, knit to Gt, with stretch tops, Irregulars of 39 value. 5 pairs $i. Sises 9 to 11 THRIFTFOOD MART Diced fruits per lb 27c Sogar pean, sifted. 6 cans.. Tea balls 100 to box .. Premium hams per lb... Cane sugat, pure grain 2516 ... $1.15 32 S LA SALLE ST: 9-9 We also po EDIATELY Pulaski Rd. The Very HD Pewn Ticke YOU RECI US Diamon S Tenempt: PAWNBROKER cert, jeweller-AF sales Alert, live-wire; draft exempti & MED Columbus 6823 ELLIS 2329 Arts 3. apts with kitchenette Pe Sath. Conforam Stup FOR AIRPLANE & STEAMSHIP TICKETS, SEE: WHITWORTH & RAYMONDS TRAVEL | 2   FOR SALE GROVER HAS THE TRUCKS Saye on price Gn on quality Reconditioned uned trucks Safety lame PAWNBRC salesman 3D 613 Lincoln b ed Sunca New from TOMCOLCOC 48K Spectrum .95 MICROSPHERE 72 ROSEBERY ROAD LONDON NIO 2LA CONTACT CON SAM CRUISE "


"\"GAMES AT THE SPEED OF LIGHT:\".. LIGHTFORCE is for VENGEANCE... LIGHTFORCE is the Punishment Arm of Galactic Fighter Command. When a Terran-settled system at the edge of the galaxy is seized by an alien force revenge comes in the form of a lone LIGHTFORCE fighter. LIGHTFORCE confronts alien in a dazzling battle above the strange landscapes of the Ice-Planet, the Jungle Planet, Alien factories and the impassable Asteroid Belt. LIGHTFORCE at the speed of Light from FTL. BADAV SHOCKWAY RIDERS are the pick of the street gangs ATHLETIC,AGGRESSIVE & ARROGANT as they cruise along the triple-speed moving walkways that circle the great MEGACITYS of the 21st Century, THE ULTIMATE AIM OF EVERY RIDER is to go \"FULL CIRCLE\" to do that, he must fight off the Block Boys, the Cops and the Vigilantes as well as negotiating the Speed, Traps and Rider Ramps erected by the angry local residents! SHOCKWAY RIDER is the most original arcade game of the year THE ULTIMATE FUTURE SHOCK!! LIGHTFORCE AVAILABLE SEPT. '86 SHOCKWAY RIDER AVAILABLE OCT. '86, SPECTRUM .95 AMSTRAD & COMMODORE .95 FASTER THAN LIGHT FTL FASTER THAN LIGHT, CARTER FOLLIS GROUP OF COMPANIES SEDGLEY ROAD EAST, TIPTON, WEST MIDLANDS DY4 7UJ. Tel: 021-520 2981 (4 lines) "


"SCORE & LIUES & ROLLS & HIGH SCORE MACHINE: C64/128  SUPPLIER: ELITE PRICE: .95 cass/.95 disk REVIEWER: CHRIS REVIEWS I haven't stopped playing 1942 since I first loaded it some 10.5 hours ago. The game is so addictive, fast, and furious that it must be my favourite shoot'em-up to date. The first thing that gets you when you load up is the brilliant music. But for the life of me couldn't think of the tune's name. It's one of those old war tunes that sticks in your mind and you hum it for weeks. After questioning the family, friends, and relations, Jasper the dog finally came up with the goods. A Despite its title, this game's right up to date. I can now reveal that the tune is from the film 633 Squadron, an old British war movie. Now back to the game... The idea is to fly your aircraft from carrier to carrier across land and sea shooting down loads and loads of enemy planes. You guessed it-24 stages of pure blasting! At the start of each level, you take off from your aircraft carrier and head for the enemy. The screen scrolls up and you are attacked by nasty little planes which are willing to die just to stop you. These guys don't mess around! If you shoot the right fighter, it will change into a special \"POW\" sign which, when picked up, will give your humble plane extra capabilities. On the first couple of levels, You can also protect yourself life, and you have three lives. you are given an extra gun, for a short while by doing a roll. When you have the extra allowing three bullets to be When performing a roll you go planes and three guns you will fired at once, on later levels you out of the enemy's line of fire find knocking out large get two escort planes which fly and can come out of the most bombers extremely easy but either side of you and help you vicious attacks unscathed. You You will be an easier target for battle on. are only allowed three rolls per small kamikaze planes to hit. 1942 When you reach the waiting carrier, a tune will play and you will be thrust onto the next level. Some areas have different names, starting with Midway then Marshall, Attu, Rambual until you finally reach The Final Area. When you get there you'll know the meaning of the word tough! The graphics are clear and colourful. Sound comes in the form of that fantastic tune, which really drives you on during the game, and also various spot effects which, although clear, are a bit flat The game is a blast, and if you don't buy it then you don't deserve a 64. It's that simple. Well done Elite. Can we have some more like this? GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY SEPULCRI different. The robots movement is well animated especially when jumping when it does a kind of hitch kick. Its eyes open and close continually while walking and jumping giving it an endearing quality sadly lacking in the central characters of some games. Especially useful for map freaks is the screen dump feature which lets you make a hard copy of any location at the press of a button. The one real niggle with this game though is the number of times you have to be standing in a pixel perfect position before being able to successfully make a jump. MACHINE: AMSTRAD CPC464 AND 6128 SUPPLIER: ARIOLASOFT PRICE: .95 VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD TAPE REVIEWER: DAVID 88 years after the famous abortive Clapham Common summit of 1987, between President Reagan and Mr. Gorbachov, the United States had almost finished their Strategic Defence Initiative Satellite. Only a mere 60 years late and 42 trilliant mega-bucks over budget the system still needed to be tested. But how to test SDI without starting the war it was designed to stop? Well, those awfully clever NASA chaps have come up with a tiny robot, so tiny it can wander around the satellite's circuit boards examing all the components of the main computer, reporting back if it finds any problems. As you control the robot inside the computer you will encounter many 'bugs' and miniature sheep (inserted into the system instead of the usual RAM-geddit?!!) that will bring on a sudden case of death if touched. Your robot has also inconveniently, got sensors under his feet which cause it to self-destruct when it comes into contact with anything sharp. -SEPULCRI GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY A Sepulcri's a game for those who need on Ultimate substitute. Unfortunately the place is The feeling of height has also riddled with all things sharp! been exploited more in Sepulcri Sepulcri is definitely in the than in many similar games mould of Knight Lore and Alien giving the impression of an Eight. environment with many levels. Unfortunately there are a few This also helps to give a too many of the latter and not refreshingly wide variation of enough really meaty logic room shapes and sizes. problems in this game. That Graphics are crisp and well said there are some neat ideas designed with a number of like trap doors through which different wall textures and you fall onto raised platforms colour combinations (in four containing flip switches that colour mode) which further seemed impossible to reach. help to make every room look LEVES "


"C+VG MOVIE MONSTER 900 & BOXE adverts! If you've seen them before you can zap onto the iOSTARRING LOCATION ACTION written prologue to the scenario you've chosen. This gives you a background to your monster and to the action that's about to take place. Each monster has different strengths, weaknesses and special powers. My favourite is  MACHINE: C64 DOUGHBOY SAN The Glog a sort of lump of slime DESTROY whose touch corrodes SUPPLIER: US GOLD/EPYX NELSON FRANCISCO LANDMARK anything. Others spit globs of PRICE: $14.95 (disc) REVIEWER: TIM meringue, breathe fire, shoot webs or possess a paralysing Now, this game might not be to scream. everybody's taste. But if you, There are five \"actions\" or like me, sit glued to the TV objectives to carry out. They when there's a Godzilla are: monster movie on, you'll love Destroy landmark: Your objective is to destroy a city's Instead of dodgy rubber famous landmark. You've had monsters fighting it out on many a sleepless night since screen, you get some nice they installed that irritating new computer graphic If you're a monster movie fon you'll enjoy recreating the adventures of your radio transmitter atop the representation of monsters like favourite film monster building's roof. The transmitter Godzilla, Mr Meringue(?). The together as if you were cities which include London, must be destroyed... and the Clog and Mechatron. watching a movie. The game New York, Tokyo and Moscow, building is going with it. You can select a monster to begins outside the cinema plus an icon representing the A proximity indicator in the control, chose a city to rampage which doubles as an icon driven type of game you want to play. menu window continuously through and then simply get on menu. Once you've made your shows how close you are to the with it. You see pictures of the selection you find yourself landmark you must destroy. The whole thing is put monsters you can select, the inside the cinema watching the The closer you are, the longer a status window which shows MACHINE: SPECTRUM the number of Sparkies you've SUPPLIER: DURELL PRICE: .95 got left, the number of Spindles REVIEWER: TIM you've eaten and your current score/hi-score. Odd isn't quite the right word The graphics are interesting for this offering from Durell. As but your worm lacks any sort we've said elsewhere, this of real character which detracts Somerset based company from the game's playability. always seem to come up with It's also quite hard to learn something a bit different. Fat how to control the worm Worm Blows a Sparky could efficiently when you first load just be too different! up the game. It has a sort of The game takes place inside built in inertia which means you the \"electronic labyrinth\" of a end up crashing into walls and Spectrum. You are in control of such like. It's also difficult to tell Worm--one of those nasty which end is which at times. But little programs hackers like to then worms are like that, insert into big systems. suppose... Of course the Spectrum's If you like computer in-jokes internal defences are out to stop the this could be for you. If you completing you missionyou're after something a bit to find a disc drive on which to Sparkle. The neat Burper Sputniks drop bugs which more spectacular then check clone yourself. Sparky which is a sort of delay crawl along and grab hold of out Thanatos from the same Before you find the drive you bomb which levitates to destroy your worm. Collect four and company have to find and eat 50 rotating flying Sputniks. Your worm your worm will suffer a fatal shapes called Spindles. \"lays\" these like eggs. Then error To defend itself against the there are the Blaster Sparkies There's a map wind GRAPHICS which shoot out of your worm's bottom right of your screen SOUND Crawlies, Bugs and Sputniks VALUE your Worm is armed with nose and zap anything among which you can use to find those  PLAYABILITY Sparkies. You have two kinds of the circuitry that's bothering it. elusive Spindles alongside is Fat Worm blows a Sparky could be just too difficult to become a chart success. Fat Worm could be a game that grows on you... but don't bet on it FAT WORM RU DURELL LA SPARHIES:00016 SPINDLES:00000 M4-SCORE:20000 HI-SCORE:00000 SPARRIES:09323 SPINDLES:00000 19-SCORE:09075 HI-SCORE:09000 "


"REVIEWS ACTION: SCREAM EDDURANCE TUME SCORE 100 the young one's cry. The proximity indicator in the menu window will randomly appear during play to indicate how far away he is. When you've located the building he is in, knock it down quick. Berserk: Cities are an incredible nuisance, and you'd like nothing better than to take revenge on those nasty humans. Your objective is to enter the city and destroy as much as you can before your endurance runs out. You will be awarded points for all buildings and objects that you destroy. There's also a bonus for leaving the city alive. This is the best scenario! Each city has a different map and is packed with well known landmarks. In San Fransisco you'll find the Golden Gate Bridge while in London your monster will come across Big Ben. Graphics are pretty good especially the Godzilla, Glog and spider monsters. Sound is nice with brilliant slimy sounds for The Glog and screams from Godzilla. Plus many more... I love monster films the dodgier the better! So I liked this game. It's well put together, brilliantly presented and enjoyable to play. Movie Monster is well put together, brilliantly presented and enjoyable to play the bar in the indicator. went out of business. You are You start at the edge of the ravenous. Your objective is to city, make your way to the enter the city and gulp down landmark, turn the building into everything in sight. Eat as much rubble and then leave the city as you can before you're again. destroyed, so keep an eye on Escape: Your objective is to the hunger indicator as you escape from your chosen city. munch away. Of course, if you You must have been sleeping. don't want a ticket to Monster or daydreaming about eating Heaven you can try to get out Paris in the springtime, but again, but only after your those pesky human creatures hunger indicator has dropped caught you off guard. You were to zero. And look out, the captured. But you're going to National Guard has arrived! escape. You've just broken free Watch the hunger indicator in the middle of the city to whenever you eat something, escape, you must exit the and you'll seen discover the screen at the edge of town in food monsters love best! any direction as fast as you can. Search: Those nasty humans The safest path is away from have your young one, and the tanks, even if you have to you're going to turn the city crush a few buildings or other upside down until you find him. obstacles that get in your way. Your objective is to enter the Lunch: It's been weeks sincecity and demolish everything in your last square meal, and the sight until you locate the little MonsterBurger Drive-In just guy. Occasionally you can hear  MACHINE: BBC  SUPPLIER: ATLANTIS  PRICE .99 REVIEWER: NICKY  GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY O O O WARRIOR II change. However once you've managed to get the correct suit colour your troubles are not over. When you move onto the floor your suit flashes which means you are vulnerable to attack from the guardians. To survive you must zap the guardians, enabling you to change suit colour again. Confusing, itsn't it. It's much easier to play it than say it. The screen layout is well designed. The top part is taken up with indicators for the colour switch, suit colour, and damage. The bottom section So you think you know better than the likes of Bobby Robson, eh? Well now's your chance to prove it. You've got a team, a budget, and 15 league matches to play. You're starting at the bottom of the fourth division with everything to play for. It's over to you, pal... No, not so easy, is it? You've got your squad, but six of them rate low on fitness, one is injured, and several don't measure up in skill. You've got a fixture coming up against Crewe, and juggle the team as you might, your boys just don't compare with their opponent's in attack, midfield or in fitness. True, you're about equal in defence, but that's not going to get you very far, is it? OK, so you lost that match 3-0. That means you're still stuck at the bottom, and you need to be in the top three to win promotion at the end of the season. The punters are counting on it. Gate receipts won't hold up if your performance is disappointing. Yeah, you could buy that promising attack player, he's good value, but that will put you further into the red. You could recoup by selling that useless midfield player, Whatsisname, but you'll need to spend more on training if the lads are to have any chance against United. And don't forget your goalie might be the best in the world but he's exhausted and you'll have to rest him... If you ask me, all those muchreviled managers got together and wrote this game just to get their own back on the armchair critics. It's good fun, whether you're a football freak or not, although the presentation is pretty ropey mostly horrible mode twotype text, unpleasant to read. I can tell you, after this you'll think twice before you slam the manager, after your team has gone down the tubes for yet another season. LEAGUE CHALLENGE Warrior II is the most enjoyable of Nexus' games so far.  MACHINE: CBM64 gun which fires a net, and riding SUPPLIER: NEXUS a sort of floating surfboard, PRICE: .95 CASSETTE/.95 DISK slips and slides his way through REVIEWER: PAUL the pyramid. Controling the surfboard is very tricky at first, Remember Psi Warrior, the old and your six lives disappear at Beyond game of a couple of an alarming rate as the Warrior years back, and the cartoon kills himself on horrific strip based on the character in collisions or touches the C+VG? Well, he's back. This vapourising mats. Dexterity time on a secret mission to find comes with practice. the secrets of the ancients The key to moving onto lower which have been buried deep floors is colour. The Warrior's within a pyramid. suit must be the same colour as The secrets are protected by a the floor. Moving onto a floor complex colour coded maze, without having the correct guardians which patrol the match will cost a life. pyramid's levels, vapourising Netting the guardians which mats and mats which allow you patrol the levels moves the to bounce. colour switch left or right, The Warrior, armed with a enabling the suit colour to The follow-up to PSI Warrior. shows your current location within the pyramid. The rest is taken up with the playing area. Zipping and zapping around the levels is great fun. There's a great sense of achievement as you use a bounce mat to lift you clear of a seemingly impossible obstacle only to be frustrated at being catapulted onto a vapourising mat. Warrior ll is the most enjoyable of the Nexus games so far. CO non GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE  PLAYABILITY GRAPHICS SOUND > VALUE  PLAYABILITY COCO "


"DEF.COM ENEHY SPRCECREET CLOSE 10 SC 88114 HI 88286 REBEL ELIE CLOSE 10 By the year 2056 Star Wars Defence Command was operational. Satellites patrolled and controlled the skies. At precisely 19.34 the Alien Force took over the entire defence system and turned it into a deadly weapon. Daring Captain Nick Diamond must enter the danger zone, smash through aliens and destroy the satellites over earth's major cities. Can he do it in time? It's fast, it's tough, it's smooth, it's dangerous. Do you make the grade? JUICK STEVE 28.95 Victory House Spectrum 14 Leicester Place LONDON CBM WC2H 7NB: Amstrad "


"11111111 03 51 MITT REVIEWS MACHINE: CBM54 SUPPLIER: MASTERTRONIC PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: PAUL A Are you flash at handling speed Flash Jordon want to complete the game. Otherwise, it's just take your pick and play away. The first section is set in a jungle. Flash must find Prince Barin in his cave. A map is essential if you don't want to get lost. Monkeys, lizards, wolverines and skeletons lurk in the undergrowth. Snakes lurk in the trees. Flash can blast away, reloading his gun from boxes of ammo. But remember, if you bungle in the jungle, Flash pays with his life. In the fight section Flash must fight Prince Barin. The idea is not to kill him but to earn his respect. If you can do this he will allow you to pass through his caves onto the surface for the final confrontation with *** The drums ... the drums...! can't stand the drums... they're driving me wild... Actually, they're rather good. If Mastertronic keep turning out games such as this they'll be in grave danger of giving budget software a good name. Well, once again, Flash, saviour of the universe, alltime-good guy and hero, must battle the evil Emperor Ming. The game is really three in one. You get arcade adventure, fight simulation and high-speed race action. You only have to play them in sequence if you Ming. Box clever to win respect. The fight action is typical of the numerous other martial arts games around. Both characters can jump, kick, punch etc. Try and concentrate on combination head and body blow. If Barin start to give you a right pasting, back off before going on the offensive again. The longer the fight lasts, the more Barin will tire, reducing his jumping and mobility. The third and final section is bike race action. This itself is divided into three sections. Flash must first shoot down the winged robots. He has to do this to attain full speed on his bike. Next he must face the perils of a minefield and finally comes the ultimate confrontation with adequate. Now if you'll excuse me, must work out how to topple this rock so it crushes that monster without burying that diamond there or cracking that egg, at the same time leaving myself an escape route so I can dodge that spirit... GRAPHICS SOUND CHO VALUE  PLAYABILITY Ming. MACHINE: BBC ever, but Repton 3 offers SUPPLIER: SUPERIOR PRICE: .95 (tape) .95/14.95 something more. With this one you can actually re-design the (disc) REVIEWER: NICKY game to baffle your mates still further. Here it is, the sequel to the You can invent your own sequel. Anyone who managed puzzles and design your own to finish the first two Rentang characters if you so desire, should be thirsting for this one, although speaking for myself This is the Repton we know the existing ones are more than and love, with 24 levels instead of 16 and some fun new Yet another tricky shoot-'em-up features to master, like the from Superior time bomb which blows up if you take too long over a screen, or the unpleasant, poisonous fungus which REPTON 3 Disc version smears itself all over the screen, attempting to engulf you. The aim of the game remains the same-to clear each level of diamonds, including the ones tucked away in cages and safes, while killing all the mosters. It's as gripping, entertaining and downright frustrating as REPTON 3 I never made it to the final confrontation so I'm afraid that area of the game remains a mystery. Overall Flash Gordon is excellent fun and a real bargain, putting many of current fullpriced games to shame. Buy it, you won't be disappointed. co  GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"+ SOFTWARE HOWZAT SPECTRUM A very sophisticated cricket game containing the following features Detailed graphic display of the field. Skill factors are given for each player for batting and bowling and there is a wicketkeeping factor for the wicket-keeper. The skill factors may be changed if desired. Excellent scoreboard very realistic. Those who have a Sinclair printer can take a print-out of the scoreboard or an up to date score card Detailed analysis of the match available at any time including: Total balls faced by a batsman: Total boundaries (shown in fours and sixes): Bowling analysis. ALTERNATIV PHEENIX C16 & SPECTRUM Fight your way through the different levels to the evil birds mighty fortress nest in this superb Arcade style classic Spectrum version of PHEENIX; A CRASH \"Game of the Month Home Computing Weekly, voted 95% Value for Money. ALTERNATIVE SOFTWARE FROM ALTERNATIVE SOFTWARE NIGHT STRIKE ELECTRON Retrieve the stolen helicopter called Skyhawk. Guide your helicopter through the various screens, dodging the air mines, the poison clouds and the electrified hydrogen filled balloons. Watch out for the overheating engine! HENRY'S HOARD SPECTRUM Henry is a greedy gnome. His quest lies in Bloodgore Castle to steel the Golden Hoard, the ultimate treasure. To complete his quest Henry has to visit every room and collect over 200 magical items on his journey. The ghouls that try to stop Henry include dastardly dwarves and evil elves. Other nasties too foul to name also wander and patrol the castle. Guide Henry, the gnome, through Bloodgore Castle and steal the ever-elusive Golden Hoard but WATCHOUTI don't get caught IPLUS Mod TITLE ELECTRON 19 RANGE HENRYS SPECTRUM 48K HOARD 199 RANGE 199 RANGE SPECTRUM 48K $4.99 199 RANGE ALTERNATIVE SOFTWARE LIMITED Units 3-6 Baileygate Industrial Estate Pontefract, West Yorkshire WF8 2LN Telephone 0977 797777 Telex 557994 RR DIST G Fax 0977 790243 RETAIL PRICE "


"am C+VG starBURST REVIEWS MACHINE: ATARI 4  SUPPLIER: MASTERTRONIC PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: HAKAN 190DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDS MISSIES BDOUDOUNDSS1590MODORES A Beware of the rogue balls..! MACHINE: C16/PLUS 4 SUPPLIER: ARIOLASOFT PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: PAUL objectives. Firstly to shoot out the \"home slots\" which are at the top and bottom of the screen. Succeed and this turns your ship into a \"bat\" in which to knock the balls into the home slot. This much can only be achieved if they can bang the balls in cleanly at an angle of 45 degrees (I couldn't). Finally the rogue balls must be guided into the four corners of the screen. Only when this has been achieved can you get on to the bonus screen. The remaining -02 screens have similar objectives. Starburst is a high speed shoot-'em-up but which is dazzlingly colourful and designed to wreck the reflexes. It's fiendishly difficult but, I have to confess, I found it confusing to play. At times ! wasn't sure what I was supposed to be doing with this TT racer.  GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY Oowoo! Oowoo! Boom! Ratatatat! Yes, all these sounds come from LA Swat which isn't about killing flying insects despite the name. It's an action packed offering that will appeal to fans of Green Beret and Commando. Just when you thought it was safe to go back out on to the streets a gang of terrorists take over the West side of LA. Your job is to clean up the streets by wiping out the terrorists. Simple, huh?! No, not really, because you also have to solve a hostage situation at the end of each level. Don't shoot the hostage while you blaze away at the manic terrorist or you'll live to regret it. You get a bird's-eye view of the streets packed with terrorists. The terrorists look a bit like skinheads. They are armed with baseball bats which they use to bash you with. They also have grenades whch are deadlier at longer range. There are also snipers who take pot shots at you but you can hide behind overturned cars, a really nice graphic feature this, and shoot the mad qunners. No offence Arsenal fans... You can also hide in the gaps between the buildings to attack the skinheads. The only real gripe is the scrolling it's a bit slow and not at all smooth. But the hectic action soon makes you forget all about this. The city streets are well drawn and the sounds are simply brilliant. This must be the best Mastertronic Atari game I've ever played. Anyone who disagrees with me can just go and chew a brick! GRAPHICS SOUND OTVO  VALUE PLAYABILITY ANGELES SWAT It's time to declare an interest. Starburst is the product of C+VG's ace Hot Gossiper Tony Takoushi's fevered mind. TT, as anybody who's read his page knows, eats, breathes and sleeps games. His passion for arcade games is apparently endless and it certainly shows in Starburst. He's tried to pack everything he loves about them into the limited memory of the C16. The plot is simple: The planet Sistasis has exploded, leaving Plastron boulders floating in space. You must do battle with these deadly rocks. In all there are three screens to zap through plus a bonus screen in which a lot of points are up for grabs. You start the game with four lives, shown in the form of coloured gauges at the top of the screen orange, purple, yellow and green. If a boulder touches your ship, the gauges begin to pulse and decrease until eventually the game is over. Of the eight boulders or balls zapping round, just four will start the gauges pulsing, these being the same colour as the gauges. The other balls are rogues and are generally designed to annoy you. The first screen has three 2537523 DDDDDDDDDDDD DODDDDDDDDDDD DDDDDDBOOBDOO OBOBODO OBDOBE DOUBOOOOOOOO OOOOOOOBOBOR DOBORUDDDDDD CRIZZS 757752 DDDDDDD QDBORG DDDDD DDDDDD 0000000 QO00000 DDDDDD DDDDD Q0RB BBBBBB 752 ODDBODOQQORD A We don't think you'll find a boulder game than this "


"ICON Jon ou la option is that it lets you make a ROM save which happens instantaneously and means you can return to that point whenever you want. Icon Jon has a reserve energy pack which should keep him going for quite a time providing he doesn't try making an illegal access (get it!!) which quickly drains his energy suply. You will need to start thinking like the programmer in order to Suss some of the more obscure logical conundrums such as what to do with the reggae record. Hint-think of a famous UK Reggae groun whose name MACHINES: AMSTRAD CPC4641 two friends Andy Capacitor and Charlie Chiplin, his SUPPLIER: MIRRORSOFT surroundings and any other PRICE: .95 VERSION TESTED: DISK characters he may meet. REVIEWER: DAVID BISHOP This is achieved using the HCID-Human to Component Interface Device-which has Icon Jona legend in his own been developed by a group of sub-routine is rather worried. mega-brains. He has seen all his best friends Once HCID is loaded a wiped out at power down number of icons will appear on which is the fate awaiting all ar on the right hand side of the computer programs when the screen. OVE Great Users in the sky have had These icons are your entry their evil way with them. ETTEREP. AROUND ARE USR but LDIR'S into the system and most of But IJ is that most dangerous 10 ENERRE AREA! them lead to an option menu of thingsan ambitious which appears in a window in program who is not too the centre of the screen. By P> IR  RANCE IE Rons pleased with the idea of highlighting the option you vanishing down a plug once his require your can directly giveld people for help. is made up from two letters and services are no longer required. instructions to help him escape Term is used when you want two numbers! Term is used when you want Determined to avoid the the computer. to type in something at a Icon Jon is an easy to play messy ending which befalls The functions of the icons interminal while Manipulate arcade adventure that has more other CPU residents, IJ sets HCID are: Status, Chat, Term allows you to perform simple than originally meets the eye. about finding a way out of the Manipulate, Act, Move, actions such as wave, dig and for that reason it is worth computer before its too late. Notepad, Help, Store, and Quit. hit as well as combining objects playing a few times before Jon is really quite an Some of these are obvious, but together to make new ones passing judgement. independent and free thinking others need some explanation. hint hint!! You'll have hours of fun program with a modicum of Status allows you to see how Move transfers control to the trying to crack some of the artificial intelligence but he'll you're doing and gives you an image enhancer on the left many riddles, puns and gags need some help in finding his idea of the temperament of hand side of the screen which contained in the more than 50 way around some of the Charlie and Andy. This is puts Jon under your direct locations of Jon's techno prison computers more remote important as they are quite control in order to move him accompanied by the strains of recesses. This is where your moody individuals that are from location to location inside Beethoven's choral symphony. assistance would be most helpful when they are happy. the computer. appreciated. Chat lets you discuss such The HCIP enhancer  GRAPHICS In order to help Jon escape diverse subjects as 'the will interface with either SOUND alive, you must interface weather' or 'reviewers' as well Joystick or keyboard. VALUE directly with him, his as giving you the chance to ask A nice thing about the Store PLAYABILITY Entre MACHINE: SPECTRUM  SUPPLIER: BUBBLE BUS PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: JIM  THE ICE TEMPLE 003069 A ENGI nasties which infest every screen. You can also store objects in the ship which is useful as you can only carry so many in the pockets of your space suit. You have to get out of the ship in order to collect things though... Sometimes bits of reactor are hidden under things SO explore carefully. Watch for signposts which point the way to rooms with disposal chutes in. ICE TEMPLE Intergalactic space council worker and trainee mega-hero, Nick Razor, having just received his salary cheque for his last job for the council which involved going around the galaxy filling in all the black holes, decided to spend it on a brand new fuel injection over-head cam, 1600 turbo Space Cruiser-with furry dice. But on the same day he bought it, he only had to leave it outside the newsagents, to find it gone when he came back. Some little yob nicked his motor!!! Whoever stole Nick's pride and joy must have tripped the hyperspace button, because when eventually found, it was on a remote planet. He tracked it down to the Ice Temple, which Nick quickly realises is just a clever disquise for a thermionic reactor which is drawing energy from the planet's core and turning the whole planet into an icy waste. gameplay and lots of puzzles to Evil aliens are using it to be solved. power their space ships and Nick begins the game minus invade earth. his spaceship-moving around Nick MUST take each of the the maze-like planet using his eight pieces of the reactor and trusty jet-pack. dump them down the refuse But you'll soon discover that chutes, so saving mankind and the ship is ALWAYS one life as we know it... location down and one to the OK? Ready? Then off we go!_left. Once you've found the ship This is a game in the Starquake you can get around a lot quicker tradition. Nice graphics, good and in less danger from the Yellow force fields flash on and off and if you're quick enough you can beat them. Blue force fields need to be switched off. Watch for a switch or a credit card slot nearby-it must be the right colour card. Blue teleports require the right colour cards. You can destroy walls by dropping bombs in rooms. Ice Temple is a pretty playable arcade adventure. Nothing new but very mappable and fun to play. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"kuna SFEEE KING VROCAN YOU OW! HANDLE THIS MUCH POWER? The KONIX SPEEDKING packs more punch. That's why it's fast overtaking ordinary joysticks to become one of the world's most popular hand control. As it's name suggests it's built for fast handling to give you lightening fast control. Micro switches await your slightest movement, and fly into action ZAP, POW, SPLAT, BLAM giving you instant reactions to every command. Tough, rugged and made in Britain to the very highest standards, the KONIX SPEEDKING comes with a twelve month guarantee. Available for:Spectrum and Spectrum Plus, Commodore 64, 128 Vic20. All Atari Computers, Electron, M.S.X. Computers, Amstrad and Oric at .99. Also:BBC, Commodore C16, Plus 4, and, Dragon at .99. Trade and export enquiries contact Wayne or Sandra on 049525 5913. Please send me — Speedkings at .99 each. Speedkings at .99 each (Price includes postage and packing in the U.K. Overseas orders please send .50 per Speedking.) Computer make and modelI enclose a Cheque/Postal Order for made payable to KONIX. Please charge my Access/Visa No. Card holders can telephone on 049525 5913. Signature Name Address Postcode Telephone Send to Kontx Computer Products, Unit 13, Sirhowy Hill Industrial Estate, Tredegar, Gwent NP2 4QZ. U.K. "


"CVG ESENTINEL must always destroy the Sentries before you can take on the Sentinel. Obviously you should build up as much energy as you can by absorbing all available energy sources. Absorbing a Sentry is worth one robot, and a Sentinel is worth one robot and a tree. The Sentinel is the last thing you may absorb, and no other energy may be taken once he is gone. After this you simply place a robot where he used to stand and hyperspace this will reveal a new security code to you. The more energy you possess when you hyperspace, the higher the new level you can safe from absorbtion until an will fill up with distortion, if not enemy can see the base of the you will only be half scanned. If square you are occupying. You he cannot see you at all you are will be warned of this by the totally safe. When you are being scan-indicator at the top right of fully scanned your energy will your screen. be drained one unit at a time, To teleport the robot creates until you are destroyed, and it is another robot shell (if he has best to move out of his line of sufficient energy) and teleports vision as soon as possible. into it. There may be several sentries If he wishes to increase his of these on certain landscapes height, he may create one or and they act and move exactly more boulders to stand on. like a Sentinel (although they It is best to gain a height look slightly different). You will advantage over your enemies hear them turning and the wherever possible. effects of being scanned are the MACHINES: BBC/C64 The Sentinel is usually in a same, although there is no SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD high position on the landscape. indication of when you are PRICE: .95 To absorb him (your sole VERSION TESTED: BBC being scanned by more than objective in the game) you will one opponent except that your REVIEWER: TREVOR usually have to be above him, energy disappears faster. You Sentinel the ultimate in game and this may involve satisfaction! You'll need the positioning your robot on top of several boulders. He cannot patience of a chess player, the move, but rotates (clockwise or strategy of a general and the anti-clockwise) at V12 of a skills of a hacker to work your revolution per turn. way through the 10,000 When he is looking at you landscaped screens of directly his eyes are a Sentinel's world. different colour to the rest of his You become a robot-the body you will be scanned only way you can move about as indicated by the guage in the the chequerboard world you find yourself in is by top right of your screen. teleporting. Your task is to wipe If he can see the base of the out the Sentinel, a strange square you occupy this gauge mechanoid being with awesome powers. Each landscape is composed of three-dimensional solids arranged to form hills, valleys and plateaux. There are trees-the basic unit of energy which should be absorbed where possible. To absorb any object, you place your cursor on the base of the square it occupies and press 'A'. Remember that you too are KETTLE pot or the can opener. Contact with the bubbles is deadly, as it wears down your energy very rapidly. Once you have destroyed all the pots on a level, you will get the can opener, giving access to the next level. This is basically all you have to do. It's that simple. You can set the options so that the game is harder, but that's insane if you ask me. The graphics on the game are simple, but effective. The colours work well and the scrolling is first class. It's multidirectional. For the unenlightened, it means you MACHINES: C64/128, AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: ALLIGATA PRICE: .95 VERSION REVIEWED: C64 REVIEWER: CHRIS Tony Crowther, a man who is Music has created a soundtrack known for his many works, has so bouncey, springy and loud just come up with a game so it's the sort of thing I expect addictive I can't stop playing the from my Amiga. (Stop showing thing! off! Ed) Kettle is one of the most After selecting various addictive games in the world. options for one or two players Quote that if you like, because l etc, I hit the button to start the mean every word. game. Suddenly, I didn't believe The first thing that strikes you my ears! Rob Hubbard eat your is the amazing sound. W.E. heart out! With the tune fixed in my head I proceeded to, er well ... proceed, I suppose. The aim of the game is this. You must make your way though the levels (30 in all) doing one simple thing. Blasting! Yes, pure, unadultarated blasting. This is the sort of game that anyone can pick up and start playing. That's what I like. You are a kettle and you have to use your weapon a sort of ninja death star which always comes back to you to blast large pots which blow lots of bubbles at you. Inside the pots you will find an alien, a refueling 03 0 0223 "


NA


"from Nintendo RRING SNORT Donkey Kong HELP! 14500 The Beautiful Girl FIGHT! The Brave Carpenter COLLO 10038 eab Classic arcade action with this all time coin-op favourite, Outwit the giant gorilla and save the girl in this historic rescue. Mario is armed with only his wits and his trusty hammer as he climbs the girders in down town New York Multiple screens and fast moving action, dodge boards, fireballs and much much more. In the final screen remove the rivets in the structure to finally bring the beast crashing down Screen shots taken from various computer formats. SPECTRUM COMMODORE 7.95 8.95 Ocean EACH EACH SPECTRUM AMSTRAD TM indicates Trademark of Nintendo, licerned by Ocean Software Limited, authorised user. All Rights Reserved Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester MZ SNS Telephone: 061 832 6633 Telex: 669977 "


"C+VG WUPER HUEY II REVIEWS MACHINE: C64 the first game it won't be long SUPPLIER: US GOLD/COSMI before you're up in the wild PRICE: $14.95 (DISK) blue yonder. Then it's just a REVIEWER: TIM matter of learning how to use the on-board computer, No, a Super Huey isn't navigation systems and something Australians do after generally managing to feel at consuming too much Fosters. home in the cockpit. run. Fly over the fire using the hurricane season has come to It's a terribly sophisticated You can select any one of six thermal image and release the the Florida region. The UH2X is helicopter. And this simulation missions from the menu. They Co2 when the hot spot is centre assigned to weather is the sequel to last year's vary in flying skill requirements screen. Hovering over the fire to reconnaissence in the infamous terrific flight-sim from Cosmi. and navigational ability. Some release Co2 may put the fire out Bermuda Triangle and no other Super Huey Il offers more are pretty straightforward blastmore quickly but the information on your mission is missions, more controls and the-enemy type scenarios. helicopter's external available because no one really more reading matter! You'll Others are more complex flying temperature will rise knows what will happen in \"the need to spend at least a missions. quickly too. It's up to you which Devil's Triangle.\". morning reading up the flight The missions are: method to use. You must return Arctic Rescue: At a Scientific manual. Fortunately, the Renegade: A UH1X helicopter to base to refill the tank. Station near the Pole, the UH2X comprehensive instructions has been stolen by a madman Gulf of Terror: You are on encounters some of the most also include quick start details, who threatens to destroy all the carrier duty in the severe conditions for flying so you can be up and flying bases in the area. Only the Mediterranean. Your job is to possible. Researchers may get within a matter of minutes. UH2X has a chance to stop him. report on possible terrorist lost in a blizzard, or fall into Actually achieving something As a challenge, he has sent a activities. There are gunboats constantly moving crevices in once you are up is another message saying he will follow a and submarines patrolling all the ice, or other helicopters may matter entirely .. square course from base to the shore and hostilities could go down in gale force winds. Navigation is the thing you'll base and will save the main flare up at any time. It is Super Huey II is a very slick really have to come to grips base for last. However, he has inadvisable to fire on flight simulator. It's not one for with to get the most of this unprovocative vessels but you beginners and it won't appeal at simulation. Othewise you will be travelling in. Try to intercept are free to defend yourself if all to zap fans. It's simply too just hover about in a fairly him. That gets easier as more necessary. complicated aimless fashion. The Huey is bases are destroyed. Oil Fire: An American Oil Complex, challenging and equipped with an impressive Brush Fire: The rolling hills of Drilling Operation has come interesting to attempt. Super range of navigational equipment California are burning again. under attack by hostile Huey I will go down well with and you could be forgiven for With UH2X's new fire fighting intruders. The rigging has been those hard-to-please flight fans thinking that you need to be a abilities, you can help. Get set ablaze and working crews everywhere. real pilot to understand it all! location reports on the are in jeopardy. The UH2X, with Perseverence is the key. computer and get there fast! its fire fighting, defence and If you played the original Remember, fires spread. The rescue abilities has the best  GRAPHICS SOUND CHVG Huey simulation you'll find longer it takes, the more chance of dealing with the VALUE taking off and flying pretty easy. damage is done. Fighting the situation. PLAYABILITY Even if you didn't come across fire with UH2X is like a bombing Bermuda Triangle: The MACHINE: C64 chop and kung fu kick — is as SUPPLIER: RADARSOFT good as any laser. Just ask ARIOLASOFT Chuck Norris. Besides that, all PRICE .95/.95 (DISK) the gadgets use up energy REVIEWER: CHRIS which, as any gamester will know, is extremely rare these Hopeless! What a name for a that there are also at least ten or A defence shield. This produces days. game. It's almost like trying to 11 different nasties all after your a wall of energy around Al You walk around the screens stop a game selling before it hide as well. Nice to know destroying anything that comes hits the streets. about 200 in all-which you're wanted! in contact with him. You can't Still, back to the plot! scroll smoothly. The screens Al has some of the most move when this is active. are full of ladders, nasties and Hopeless is a game about Al modern equipment to enable And also a jetpack. This gadget terminals. Bluntz and his battle against him fight his way to the heart of allows you to fly around the Terminals can do different the Manic Monk. the system. screen instead of walking. The Manic Monk has things, from teleportation to In his kit he has a laser. On top of all this lot, you can kidnapped Al's girlfriend. Being giving extra power to your Pretty obvious what that does. resort to the good ol' karate weapons. a hero, Al sets of to rescue her Your character is small, and destroy the Monk. Good for him! animation is crude and general effects are boring. Still, The Monk has transported the graphics aren't everything. Are captive and himself to a far they? away solar system. So Al grabs the nearest space shuttle and This game is no, I'm going heads for the stars. On reaching to be cheap and say 'Hopeless the Monk's lair he discovers fairly standard and is nothing that he has set up a defence to get excited about. But, for all system which consists of you heroes out there, Jane hearts! needs to be rescued. Quick! Yes, computer controlled  GRAPHICS hearts are all that stand SOUND between you and the lovely VALUE Jane. Oh, I forgot to mention PLAYABILITY HOPELESS OSONA Terrir. Po "


"REVIEWS TNFILTRATOR MACHINES: SPECTRUM/ is too. rush back to the Gizmo. Then AMSTRAD OK, the graphics might not be it's back to base where another  SUPPLIER: US GOLD as impressive as the original PRICE: .99 (SPEC) .99/ mission awaits. .99 (AMSTRAD TAPE/DISC) perhaps that's why they used Mission two involves VERSIONS TESTED: the 64 screens for the rescuing Dr Phineas Gump and SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD packaging? But the addictive destroying the enemy weapons REVIEWER: TIM gameplay still lurks beneath the lab. In mission three you have surface. to find and destroy the Mad If you don't know about the Leader's ICBM launch and Infiltrator must have the most game the basic idea is this: tracking base-this is the most amusing and readable The bad Mad Leader is important mission. instructions in the history of threatening to destroy the Flying is fairly easy unless computer games. A joke a world. And you, in the role of you meet another aircraft. Then minute, and well worth reading Johnny McGibbets, all round you have to guess if it's a friend all the way through. good guy, have to defeat him. or an enemy and respond to its This is the game that 64 Jimbo, as we've all come to request for a computer owners have been talking about call him, has at his disposal a been talking about call him, has at his disposal a password. INFILTRATOR for all summer long and boring the highly sophisticated and buddies or OVERLORD for pants off gamesters who own a horribly beweaponed helicopter baddies. different machine. Now Chris code-named the Whizbang Get it wrong and boy are you Gray's action adventure is out Gizmo DHX-1. He has to use this in trouble. It's then that the for the Spectrum and Amstrad, to carry out three very special Gizmo's missiles, flares, and a pretty good conversion it missions in order to defeat the machine guns and other bits of hardward really come into play. Avoid enemy fire by using flares and chaff to decoy them away from your 'copter. Blast the enemy with your heat seeking missiles and shoot them down with your guns. Mad Leader Sounds easier than it is in Each mission involves flying practice. your Gizmo chopper through Both Spectrum and Amstrad enemy defences, landing at an versions are fairly similar enemy base, infiltrating it to live with graphics minus the 64 up to your name and frills. Sound is a bit better on completing a task. the Amstrad but the playability Mission one involves is good on both versions. photographing enemy plans. If you've played the 64 Jimbo is equipped with a version of the game then you'll special Infiltrator kit which find these versions initially consists of sleeping gas, unimpressive. But give Jimbo a explosives, forged papers, a chance and you'll be hooked. mine detector and a camera. Especially if you want a game RI ODO OUI Our Jimmy dodges guards that's going to last you and explores the enemy base. throughout thelong winter But some guards are smarter nights. than others and they'll raise the SPEC AMS 2340 alarm when they spot your DOO  GRAPHICS forged ID. SOUND Squirt them with a bit of gas  VALUE and make your getaway. Get PLAYABILITY A An amusing and fast moving shoot-'em-up for the Spectrum. the pictures of the plans and 00 ONO MACHINES: SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: MELBOURNE HOUSE PRICE: .95/.95  VERSION REVIEWED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: TONY ARBLE ADNESS When defining a playing area a cursor in the play area, where you are free to move the cursor you can move it to the desired over any part of the screen. To position and press fire again to place a new piece, move the drop it. cursor over the shape you want. To delete a piece, move the press fire, that shape appears as cursor over it and press fire. All V The Construction Set adds a new dimension to a classic game, Here's a nifty bit of software that no true MM fan should be without-the only problem is that 64 owners aren't likely to get a chance to play around with this useful utility because Melbourne only have the rights for Speccy and Amstrad. What you get is the normal Marble Madness game plus an editor which allows you to construct your own MM tracks complete with all the nasties like bubbles, oil slicks and Mary Poppins flying umbrellas. All the ingredients of the arcade classic You can build your tracks from scratch or simply edit the ten different tracks already included in the program. The construction screen shows a smaller version of the play area with icons representing the different MM track sections ranged down the right hand side of the screen and the nasties/bonus scores/ options along the bottom of the screen. other aliens and special features are placed using the cursor and the fire key, Once you've built a track you can try it out by selecting the \"test\" option. And it doesn't work out you can go back to the edit mode to put things right. You can go on adding screens until the memory is full up and then you can save your designs, and go back to creating more new MM challenges. Fancy a break from building? Then just go back to the main menu and select the play the game mode. This gives you as good a game of MM as you can expect on the Speccy. The construction set makes MM a whole new ball game every time you play! ano MM chreakt 20000  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY COCO "


"M SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES ORDER BY CREDIT LINE 01-809 4843 *** SPECTRUM *** BREAKTHRUD2 RRP Our Price SKY RUNNER-D2 PAPER BOY EXPLODING FISTO FAIRLIGHT SHAO LINS ROAD CITY STICKER LEADERBOARD SILENT SERVICE ARTIST 9.95 9.95 14.95 VISRCENARY TRIVIAL PURSUITDA TP. YOUNG PLAYERS TP QUESTION PACK GAUNTLETED IKARI WARRIOR FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR-D2 1942D2 SCARED ANTRIAD-D2 TRAP DOOR THE ART STUDIO (Disk) SPACE HARRIER 2 IAILBREAK_02 WINTER CAMISS D2 USADERBOARD D2 S TORCE COBRUA BOULDER DASH CONS KIT-D2 SPY V SPY ARTIC ANTIC-D2 VIETNAM-D2 LABARENTHD2 SPACE HARRIER-D2 SENTIENEL 2 SHAOLINS ROAD-D2 MARBLE MADNESS-D2 AVENGER-TIGER II LIGHTFORCE SHOCKWAY RIDER FUTURE KNIGHT-D2 JEWELS OF DARKNESS-D2 7.95 AVENGERTIGER ACADEMY HARD BALL ACE OF ACES SKY RUNNER 17.50 8.99 6.75 8.75 795 998 9.95 8.95 8.96 9.95 12.90 8.95 8.95 9.95 9.98 CITY SLICKER-D2 SCOOBY DOOD2 SILENT SERVICE D2 750 9.95 ELITE BA200  FOOTBALLER OF YEAR SHOCKWAY RIDER TTRACER MAHUAWK 17.30 17.50 9.95 889889898989 198888888888888888888 Now it 1750 22 50 24.96 8.95 DISKS TRIVIAL PURSUIT (PCW) JEWELS OF DARKNESS 6128PCW IAWK (CW) CODDESS OF PHORAS 5128PCW STRIKE FORCE HARRIER PCW LORD OF THE RINGS PCW INFORCOM TITLES IN STOCK FOR 29.95 6129 AND PCW ** BBC ELECTRON *** SSTAR HITS (5 Games) 9.95 TRIVIAL PURSUITD4 GRAPHIC ADV CREATOR D5 FOOTBALLER OF YEAR 2 9.99 DEEP STRE MASTER OF UNIVERSE CRYSTAL CASTLE LIGHTFORCE ANIMATOR 1 STRIKE FORCE COBRA PSITRADING COMPANY TENTH FRAME ROGUE TROOPER THANATOS THEATRE EUROPE THE BIG 4-DURELL TRAP DOOR WORLD GAMIS TRIVIAL PURSUITS TP. YOUNG PLAYERS TP. QUESTION PACK ELITE HIT PACK KONAMI GOLF XEVIOUS CYRUSS 2 CHESS DRUID 7.50 999 9.95 9.95 7.50 7.95 YIE AR KUNGU TRANSFORMERS-D2 ALIENSD2 TRACKER_13 LEADERBOARD D2 GAUNTLET-D2 GOLF CONS SET-D2 TOBRUK02 XEVIOUS-D2 THANATOS CYBORG TOMAHAWK --D2 DANDY-D2 SARACEN-D2 BISMARKD KAYLETH SUPER HUEY 11-D2 DURELL BIG 4 CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING-D2 1942-D2 \"COMMANDO 86-D2 SHTEDS BOMBIACK 1102 IKARI WARRIORS D2 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT FOOTBALLER OF YEAR-02 WORLD GAMES-D2 ATTACK ON CENTRALIS-D2 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-D4 BREATHRUD2 TEMPLE OF TERROID ACE OF ACESD2 SAIGON-D3 MASTER OF UNIVERSE-D2 ACED2 TENTH FRAME-D2 PRELORD-D2 STOLE A MILLION D2 ALIENSD2 7.90 14.95 14.96 1296 DODOY CARS REYTON 3-D: IMPOSSIBLE MISSION D2 9.95 9.95 17.50 GREEN BERET 8.95 7.50 7.96 11.96 9.95 9.96 796 SPY V SPY (AA)-D2 14.56 90 999 7.95 INFIHEATOR FIRELORD URIDIUM DYNAMITE DAN II STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 8.93 7.96 FOOTBALLER OF YEAR SKY RUNNER-D2 SUPER HUEY-D2 SILENT SERVICE D2 TOMAHAWK D2 ALTERNATE REALITY FIGHTNICHT-D2 795 7.58 19.99 17.50 REVOLUTION YIE AR KUNG FU DI GEDER RIDER DESERT FOX KAYLETH PARALLAX IUDCE DREAD 8.95 7.98 7.50 22.50 ***ATARI ST *** MERCENARY COMPENDIUM 2498 CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING ALTEX ATE REALITY WORLD GAMES STAR GLIDER LEADERBOARD GODDESS OF PHOBAS GAUNTLET 24.96 SOLD A MILLION IIT-D2 9.95 ELITE HIT PACK COBRA THE GREAT ESCAPE LEADERBOARD TORM-(Disk $6.99) IKARI WARRIORS-D2 9.95 *** COMMODORE 64*** LEATHER GODDESS OF PHOBAS ALTERNATE REALITY 19.99 22.50 22.50 26.96 22.50 PRINTMASTER NEWSROOM 39.96 49.96 JAILBREAK \"COMMANDO 86 \"BOMBIACKI KARI WARRIORS FUTURE KNIGHT TRANSLAZER SUPER SOCOS SPACE HARRIER NAPOLEON AT WAR DANDY VERA CRUZ SOLD A MILLION 3 BARBALL SCALEXTRIC SCOOBY DOO  BAZOOKA BILL KONAMI COIN HITS ANNALS OF ROME 12.95 BATTLEFIELD GERMANY 12.95 *** SPECTRUM 128 TITLES *** INTERNATIONAL MATCH DAY FLIGHT SIMULATORII FAST MACK EM ACTION REPLAY THE FINAL CARTRIDGE THE EXPERTCATRIDGE PERT PUSES FREEZE FRAME EXPYXS FAST LOAD CARTRIDGE QUICK DISK 1541 PHYSICAL EXAM DISC DISCETOR VSO FOOTBALLER OF YEAR VERA CRUZ CAUNTIST SUPER CYCLE ANY KONAMNI CARTRIDGE EWELS OF DARKNESS WINTER GAMISS AVENGERTIGER *** JOYSTICKS *** 8.95 10.96 QUICK SHOT IT QUICK SHOT U PLUS OCKSHOT TURBO KONTES TOS ALSO AVAILABLE ON DISK FORMAT DL611.95, D2.95, DJ .95. D4 217.50, DS 122.50. 14.95 99 9.96 AMSTRAD EUROMAX PROFESSIONAL PLUS EUROMAX ARCADE TURBO EUROMAX ELITE AUTOFIRE EUROMAX SURESHOT DELUXE EUROMAX MICRO PRO CHISSTAR MACHI KONIX SPEEDKENGC15 COMP PRO 5000 BBC ARTISTI TAU CETI FARLIGHT CALL ME TROOPER WINTER GAMES COMMODORE SCOOBY DOOD EXPLODING FIST II-D2 BAZOOKA BILL D2 PAPER BOY Da 1695 1634 2a ELITE HIT PACK EXPLODING FIST II-D2 PAPER BOYD2 MONOPOLY-D2 TOMAHAWKD2 THANATOS-D2 ELITE-D4 9.96 For Mail Order Customers please send cheque PO to: S.C.S. (Dept CVG12) PO Box 394 London NIS GJT P&P included in UK Europe add l per tape. Elsewhere at cost. Send a SAE for free list C64 C16/SPEC AMSTRAD BBC/MSX If you would like to pick up your discount software from our shop please produce your copy of this advert to: S.C.S. Compucentre, Unit 5 221 Tottenham Court Road London WIR 9AF (nearest tube station Goodge St) Open six days a week 10.00am-18.00pm Access and Visa card orders: 01-809 4843 Credit Card line 24 HOUR ANSAPHONE Se 01-800 3156 O 01-631 4627 Credit card orders despatched same day subject to availability *All new releases are subject to release dates from software houses. Please ring to confum availability of new releases "


"STRATEGIC PLUS SOFTWARE STRATEGIC PLUS PO BOX 8, Hampton, Middlesex TW12 3XA SOFTWARE IBM & COMPATIBLES ATARI ST COMMODORE 64/128 Flight Simulator (Microsoft).... .00 Starglider (Rainbird) .............95 Bard's Tale (Ariolasoft/Electronic Jet (Sub-Logic)................... .00 Deep Space (Psygnosis) .........95 Arts) ........... .................95 Silent Service (Microprose) .... .95 Crusade in Europe (US Gold/ Silent Service (Microprose).... .95 F-15 Strike Eagle (Microprose) .95 Microprose).....................95 Solo Flight (Microprose)........ .95 Phantasie (SSI) ...................00 Decision in the Desert (US Gold/ Spitfire Ace (Microprose)........95 Ultima III (Origins Systems Microprose) .95 Hellcat Act (Microprose).........95 ....00 Phantasie (US Gold/SSI).........95 Crusade in Europe Universe II (Omnitrend) ..........00 Phantasie II (SSI). .00 (Microprose) .............. .95 Shard of Spring (SSI)........... .00 Icon (Macrocom)................ .00 Mean 18 (Accolade) .............243.00 Roadwar 2000 (SSI)........... .00 Ultima III (Origin Systems Mercenary Compendium Gettysburg The Turning Point Inc.)....... ..........00 (Novagen) ...................... .95 (SSI) .............................00 Incunabula (Avalon Hill)..........00 Flight Simulator (Sub-Logic)... .00 Warship (SSI) .....................00 Computer Diplomacy (Avalon S.D.I. (Cinemaware)........ Please call Wizards Crown (SSI) ........... .00 ............................... .00 From Australia we are proud to present STRATEGIC STUDIES Art Director (Andromeda/ NFL Challenge (XOR Corp)... .00 GROUP and their range of superior strategy games: Cartels and Cut-throats (SSI) . .00 Mirrorsoft) ...................95 Reach for the Stars (SSG) ...... .95 American Challenge (Mindscape Film Director (Andromeda Carriers at War (SSG)........... .95 Inc).. .95 ...............00 Mirrorsoft) ..................... .95 Europe Ablaze (SSG) ....... Mean 18 (Accolade) ............. .00 .95 Battlefront (SSG).... Phantasie II SSI...................00 Apple il (66K) versions of the SSG range are also available) RING 01-979 2987 APPLE II & INFOCOM ATARI XIXE LATEST TITLES FOR CREDIT CARD ORDERS AND CATALOGUE SOFTWARE ALSO All prices are inclusive of VAT & P&P RING BEFORE 3pm MON-FRI FOR SAME DESPATCH BY FIRST CLASS MAIL! VISA AVAILABLE AVAILABLE MAIL-SOFT MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS SPECTRUM 5,50 6.09 -7.50 6.75 COMMODORE 64 SCOOBY DOO 02 BAZOOKA BILL DRACULA-02 FILTRATOR -02 ELITE13 PAPER BOY-02 SHAOLINS ROAD LORD OF RINGS 03 TRAP OOOR TRIVIAL PURSUIT ---D4 FISTIE-02 SPACE HARRIER--02 KNUCKLEBUSTER-02 AVENGER TIGER 1-02 PAPER BOY 1942 COMMANDO 86 SCOOBY DOO SHAO UNS ROAD FST CITY SLICKER ARTISTI 6.75 5.99 7.50 10.95 HEAD COACH AVENGERTIGER ACADEMY FAT WORM BLOWS onna ****AMSTRAD **** LEADERBOARD-02 ELITE-04 TOMAHAWK-02 ALIENS-02 KONAMI GOLF-02 SCOOBY DOO-02 FOOTBALLER YEAR-02 BREAKTHRU-02 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-04 THANATOS STR KE FORCE COBRA GAUNTLET --02 1942-02 KARI WARRIOR-02 SPACE HARRER-02 SIENT SERVICE MPOSSIBLE MISSION -D2 THE ART STUDIO-DK HITCHHIKERS 6128PCW ELITE HIT PACK AMSTRAD POW TOMAHAWK LEATHER GODOFSS TRIVIAL PURSUIT MERCENARY COMPENDIUM. 10.99 REBRER8888888 888888888888888 7.50 7.50 WINTER GAMES 7.50 7.50 7.50 D 10.95 7.SO DEEP STRIKE FOOTBALLER OF YEAR LIGHTFORCE STRIKE FORCE COBRA ACE OF ACES TRIVIAL PURSUIT BAZOOKA BILL FIRELORD WORLD GAMES TT RACER CRYSTAL CASTLE PSIS TRADING THANTOS THEATRE EUROPE SUPER SOCCER BOMB JACKI-02 GAUNTLET-02 COMMANDO B6-02 DURELL BIG 4 ATTACK ON SENTINALS LEADE RD TOUNAMENT CRYSTAL CASTLE-02 6 99 FIRELORD-12 TOMAHAWK ---02 TRANSFORMERS-02 LIGHTFORCE SANXIONS-02 ELITE HT PACK SHOCKWAY RIDER 1942-02 FOOTBALLER YEAR-026.99 WARI WARRIOR-D26.99 ACE OF ACES-02 6 .99 CYBORG STRIKE FORCE COBRA 6 .99 THE PAWN-DISK A REALITY SK WORLD GAMES-02 6 .99  SUPER HUEY || D2 EXPERT CARTRIDGE FREEZE FRAME 3 FINAL CARTRIDGE 7.50 Trailblazer.. 5.95 Hand Ball Maradona 6.00 Fistil 7.50 Eastenders, 7.50 Konami's Arcade Hits 7.50 Super Cycle 5.95 Future Knight 5.95 Footballer of Year..... Uchi-Mata. 6.75lari Warriors 5.95 Marble Madness 01 7.50 Trap Door..... 5.95 Xevious ..5.95 Terror Cresta... Paper Boy 5.95 Leaderboard....... 6.75 Ye Ar Kung Full 7.50 Cholo . ........ 12.50 Firelord D3 6.75 Strike Force Harrier 7.50 World Games 6.75 Bismark 01 ..7.50 Theatre Europe. 7.50 Breakthru... .6.75 Lightforce 6.75 Grph. Ad. Creator .....19.50 Hand Ball Maradona...5.95 Movie Monster D1 750 Silent Service 7,50 Marble Mad Con. Set 6.75 Trail Blazer Strike Force Cobra 750 Bo Trouble in China 5.95 Super Ping Pong D1 7.50 Trivial Persuits 12.50 Dandy 5.95 Rogue Trooper 7.50 6.75 Sonce Harrier 5.95 1942 D1 Ace of Aces 6.75 Scooby Doo....... 5.95 Ace of Aces D1 City Slicker 6.75 Cop-Out..... 6 75 Vietnam Du Kat Trap 5.75 Deep Strike 7.50 Shao-Lins Road After Shock 7.50 Star Glider 12.50 Paper Boy Bazooka Bl 6.75 Konami's Hits 750 America's Cup D1750 Footballer of Year 5.95 Jail Break 5.95 Hit Pak D1 7.50 1942.. 5.95 SAS Strikeforce 6.95 Bomback Two 7.50 Shao-lins Road 6.75 Tarzan 5.95 Aiwolf Two Light Force 5.95 Explorer......................5.95 Super Hule Il D1 7.50 Unidium. Xevious Firelord 6.75 Ikari Warriors Asterix COMMODORE 64 Avenger... Super Soccer...............5.95 Cyborg ....... 7.50 Future Knight............. 7.50 Masters of Universe. 6.75 Super Cycle D1........7.50 Cholo. ... 12.50 Sold a Million 3. 7.50 Sky Runner 23 6.75 World Games ... 7.50 Academy ..............6.75 Gauntlet.... 7.50 Breakthru.. Terra Cresta......... .5.95 Judge Dredd 7.50 Dodgy Geezers........... 7.50 Nightmare Rally ..........5.95 Uchi-Mata D3.............7.50 Psycastria...................6.75 Avenger 7,50 Masters Universe....... 7.50 Boulderdash Con K 7 50 Hardball.......... ..6.75 Sentinel D1..... 7.50 Champ. Wrestling....... 7.50 Cobra (Rambo II)......5.95 Infodroid D1 7.50 Sacred Armour ........ The Press.................6.00 Dan Dare....................7.50 Space Harrier ............. 7.50 Big 4.......................... 7.50 Glider Rider.......... 6.75 Scooby Doo Judge Dredd..... 6.75 Strikeforce Cobra........ 7.50 Sigma 7....................... 7.50 Aliens 7.50 Grph Ady. Creator 19.50 Defcom. 7.50 Hit Pak (Elite)...... 7.50 infiltrator D1 7 .50 Captured D1 7.50 Gauntlet 5 .95 Trivial Pursuits D4 12.50 Jail Break 7.50 Sacred Armour ...........6.75 Fist Il D1.....................7.50 SAS Strikeforce.......... 6.75 Sky Runner................7.50 Knuckle Busters.......... 7.50 Tarzan......... ...........6.75 Bomback TWO..... 5.95 Crystal Castles.... 750 Big 4 (Durell).... Airwolf TWO 5 .95 Destroyer Disk Only 12.50 Animator.... 7.50 Fairlight Two............... 7.50 Great Escape ..... 6.75 Aliens...... PAW 19.50 Double Take 6.75 Star Glider 12.50 Defcom....................... 6.75 Sold a Million III 7.50 Star Soldier Crystal Castle .............7.50 Cobra (Rambo II) ....... 6.75 Arctic Antics Top Gun........ 5.95 Top Gun 6.75 Xeno 6.75 Postage included UK. Please state which micro. Fast service, Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept CVG, 49H Sutherland Street, Victoria, London SW1 V4JX MAIL ORDER ONLY: Send for FREE list Amstrad, C16, MSX. D Disks Available: D1 at .50, D3 at .50, D4 at .00 1999 ROGUE TROOPER 7.50 COP OUT IN | TRATOR. ANNALS OF ROME SPACE HARRIER KNIGHTMARE RALLEY GAUNTLET-02 FIGHT NIGHT-D2 6.99 ALTERNATE REALITY IL 14.95 FOOTBALLER OF YEAR02 6.99 ATARIST HACKER II. TRINITY 29.99 ALTERNATE REALITY 14.99 LEADERBOARD... 19.99 GAUNTLET STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 19.99 WINTER GAMES 19.99 JOYSTICKS EUROMAX PROF PLUS EURO ARCADE TURBO QUICK SHOT TURBO KONIXS SPEEDKING 11.99 CHEETAH MACHI 7.50 2295 609 7.50 LEADERBOARD 6.75 7.50 Disk version available: D1 19.95. 02 .95, D3 212.95, D4 14.95 Post & Packing included in UK, Europe add 1 per tape. Elsewhere at cost. Chq Po to: Mail-Soft PO Box 589. London N15 JJ. Access and Visa orders welcomed you do not see the game you want, simply deduct 30% of the RRP and we will send to you Denotes new releases will be sent to you as soon as the game is released from the software house "


"NOSFERATU GVG MACHINE: AMSTRAD blood lustended SUPPLIER: PIRANHA In Dracula's castle you play PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: PAUL estate agent sent to visit Dracula in order to complete the Tam getting to like Nosferatu Sale of property in Wismart the Vampire Honest Cross my doesnt take Jonathan long to heart and hope to well just discover hos in the home of into a galleried room with a Tierce looking dog pacing up and down. Immediately a cloud of bats swoop down, sucking the energy from Harker at an REVIEWS The next section of the game is set in Wismar Here you control three characters Harker Lucy Harker and Van Helsing. Nosferatu has also turned up in the town, drawn by Right pass the core and it's Harker wanders around the into a world straight out of Castle through bedrooms Ultimate Slick three bathrooms and kitchens dimensional graphics, a central picking up objects such as character walking about Exploring and picking up spiders Crawl CrOSS SOTE OF Vanus ODIOCIS the tools If you touch these The game is based on the time there's a strange noise, Nosferatu the Vampyre and the lassume this depletes som story is that of Dracula It's of your energy. At the bottom divided into three sections right of the screa collin Dracula's Castle The Town of gradually pops up onto the Wismar and Lucy's House Each screen signaling his demise must be completed before the The quickest way to die Vampire is destroyed and his found in this section is to go The final section of the game is set in Lucy's house and you play the part of the girl herself She must lock Harker and Van Helsingin a room otherwise they will try to stop her final Nosteratu will be a worthwhile Showdown with the vampire investment and something to Once out of the way Lucy cancel your teeth into Tigether destiny by keepin Dracula with her until down GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY games and haven't become fed DR WHAT MACHINE: SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: CRL PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: TIM What is where Why should be, but When is with Where and what they are up to is anybody's guess! Where What is, why Where is where What is and When will What get to where Where is and when Why will arrive are just some of the questions which remain to be answered when you play CRL's mind-boggling arcade adventure Dr What! That and how to get to see the Jelly Baby of Infinite Wisdom, of course. This game sneaked out pretty much unheralded through a time-warp somewhere in East complete certain tasks but the bathroom-sounds like a quite what the final, ultimate, cue for a song!-and USE it to meaning of life, universe and reflect the beam back at everything object of the game Prunechops knocking him out. isn't quite clear. Yet, I'm sure That's the sort of lateral London. And before we go any one of you will be able to tell us thinking Dr What! demands further I'd like to point out that it what it's all about in the near from the player. has absolutely no connection You can play the game if only whatsoever with the long To start you off here's a one doctor is left alive but running TV show, Dr Who. Just couple of tips. One of the you're obviously not going to because the heroes are Time doctor's will come across a complete the game single Lords doesn't mean a thing. Dalek who wants to handed. And anyway, Who isn't where exterminate, exterminate, Graphics are good, sound is What (Don't start that againl exterminate him. He has at his as you'd expect and gameplay Ed). disposal a baseball hat. He is, well, arcade actionish. The You control the four Doctor's should pick up the hat and USE puzzles are funny and not too who start the game in four it, by hitting the appropriate hard to beat. different locations. But if you key. The hat will fly through the Dr What/ is a surprisingly heln them find the Trydis(1) air with the greatest of ease and entertaining offering with a few keys they'll be able to start land on the dalek's head, original twists. If you're an time-travelling around all over blinding him and rendering him arcade adventure addict, you the place. totally useless. won't want to miss it. The game is packed with Moving on, he'll come across arcade adventure type puzzles Pruneface the daleks' boss. This GRAPHICS with extra added CRL type unsavory character fires laser SOUND humour. Objects have to be beams at the Doc. He can be VALUE PLAYABILITY found and used in order to beaten by getting a mirror from DOCTOR WHAT! DOCTOR WHAT! 38608938666 896636% 23 329629 83& INITI 882663 DOCTOR WHA DOCTOR WHERE WE TRAPPED? BASEBALL CAP BOX OF MATCHES "


"OLRIKE TAGI! R.R.P. .95 Spectrum & Amstrad available November 20th Commodore 64 available January 20th Trade enquiries to Centresoft on 021 356 3388 Sales dept., Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton, Somerset TA14AB England Telephone (0823) 54489 & 54029 DURETI "


"SIGMA * Commodore 64 available November 20th Spectrum & Amstrad available February Sales dept., Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton, Somerset TA1 4AB England Telephone 0823) 54489 & 54029 R.R.P. .95 : DURELL Trade enquiries to Centresoft on 021 356 3388 software getting harder . . . . "


"KONAMI'S COIN-OP HITS FIVE GREAT ARCADE GAMES FOR THE PRICE OFONE IT MUST BE CHRISTMAS CON yie ATKUNG-FU SPORTS 3 Konami Konami  PINGPONG.   Konami KONAMI COIN OP MITS SPECTRUM COMMODORE AMSTRAD.C16.BBC CASSETTE DISK TWIN CASSETTE the name PACK Screen shots taken from various computer formats of the game .95 CASSETTE 1 Imagine Software (1984) Limited, 6 Central Street, Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone: 061-834 3939 Telex: 669977. Distributed in France by Ocean France Telephone 03-47.7144 Cmstributed in Germany by Rushware. Telephone 210170000 "


" MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: IMAGINE PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: PAUL BMX SIMULATOR REVIE MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: CODE MASTERS PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: CHRIS If you can flog it once, you can flog it twice. That's always been a philosophy close to the heart of software houses. And when you've got a game as good as Yie Ar Kung Fu it's no bad deal for the punter as well. It's more of the same, a lot of bop, bam, boom as the fists and feet fly in all directions against seemingly endless warlords of the Ye Gah Emperor. The Kung Fu master you control is Lee Young. In my case he would be better named Die Young because that is what he did. I became very used to everything! As you start, the computer takes the lead, using skill like you've never seen to take the most dangerous of corners. This computer biker is good! On the next course, you learn about one of the most annoying parts of what is otherwise a super game. This irritating aspect is the fact that if you and the computer collide, only YOU come off. Yes, you lose time and the machine just keeps going. This gets really bad when you are just about to win. You are neck and neck. Then the computer turns into you and POWI, you're out! What a cheat!! If you think the computer If you LIKE BMX, but don't like the things that go with it broken legs, arms and necks this is the game for you! BMX Simulator is about as close as you'll get to the real thing without injuring some part of your anatomy. With its two player option, action replay mode and colourful graphics this has to be one of the best games around for under . You and the computer are lined up, ready to start. Bikers ready, pedals ready, GO!! Carefully turning the bike at an angle which has to be accurate, YIE AR KUNG FU II NMX HNULATOA ending flat on my back with my legs waving in the air. Right, here's a quick run through of the Emperor's henchmen. First comes wave after wave of midget fighters. Next up is the first of the real baddies-Yen Pei, who besides having deadly fists and feet, has an iron pig tail which he swings around his head. It Then there's Wen Hu, with his flying mask, Wei Chin, a boomerang specialist, Mei Ling. who does more than just look daggers at you, Han Chen, who lobs bombs, and finally Li Jen, who's more than a little flash with his lightning bolts. There are various ways to improve your energy. Knocking out the midget fighters in GREEN GECOURSES CONTROLS 10 START Mode 270238 8882do - LEE-YOUNG ennnnnn A BMX Racer is about as close as you'll come to the real thing on a computer. you speed around the corner, cheated or you want to see that avoiding the steep banks of little bit of skill that saved you, earth. The computer knows pressing 'A' gives an action how to play too, and is very replay of the whole affair. good at catching up. When you finish, you are told You zoom around the track, who is the winner, and you're using the brake carefully, using given the scores. If you are the banks to turn, and using a playing in two player mode, you box of Kleenex to wipe away get a rather short awards the sweat from your face. ceremony. You've done two laps, and The tracks are graphically are coming up for the last one quite good, the only moan is when ... bang!... you hita lack of colour, but that's the post and come flying off. The limit of the machine. The music crafty computer takes although short, is very good advantage, speeding and then and Dave Whittaker should be leaving you in the distance. The proud of himself. A great game computer wins, you lose. But, you did it within the time limit for the price, very entertaining. and have qualified for the next  GRAPHICS course. Phew! SOUND HVG This track looks harder, more  VALUE banks, more posts more PLAYABILITY Choose a two player game or race against the computer's bike expert also has the unnerving habit of sufficient numbers gives you a suddenly stretching out right tea leaf. Get five and you can across the screen to thump you brew up a cup of energy-giving straight in the mush. tea. Each of the following gang Great graphics, music and has a special feature it's sound effects combine to make always lethal. Yie Ar Kung Fu ll another Lang Fang has a fan (it's not winner. me) which causes more than a flutter in the breeze. In earlier versions of the  GRAPHICS game it wasn't Po Chin's bad SOUND GAVG breath you had to worry about. > VALUE PLAYABILITY It was far nastier and far ruder. o TANE LAPS Ungaro "


"Does your micro answer backe.?  Does your micro chat to 70,000 people across the UK?  Can your micro interview pop stars, hackers and doyennes of the computer industry? Can your micro provide the answer to your technical and software problems? Could your micro send and receive telex's worldwide? Does your micro do your shopping for you-and have it delivered to your door? Is your micro an answering machine, delivering your private mail whenever you log-on? NO? ................... Shame! Bring your micro to life! Micronet 800To: Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1 Please send me a brochure on Micronet 800 Name Address Micronet 800 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR SEJ Telephone: 01-278 3143 Liebe Telephone No Micro CVG 12/B6 "


"COGNITA TeCOGNITA C-VG Terra MACHINE: SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: CODE MASTERS PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: TIM D DOO Here's a surprisingly playable little game on the new Code speeds the screen will flash. Masters budget label. It's the You speed up or slow down by brainchild of Stephen Curtis, flying over'+'or'-' signs on the programmer who brought the surface. you the budget hit Non Shooting the Droids gives Terraqueous. extra points. You can, however, It's shoot-'em-up with a pick up bonus points by flying difference in that you can fly over a bonus area, marked with over squares of the planet's a 'B' simple 'aint it! surface which give you extra Avoid the time shifts!! These fuel, extra lives, make you will disrupt the space/time speed up or slow down and continuum, and take you back other interesting and to screen one. unexpected effects. Every time you die, you start The game is shown on plan off on a launch pad. These view, with the landscape launch pads are the ONLY scrolling down. You have to flashing things you can fly over. LIVESSEDRE 01130 make you way over 100 screens You can also pick up force of tortuous terrain to the A Terra Cognita is very playable and great value at .99. field generators that make you mother ship waiting at the end. invincible for short periods. Force field beams rise up off Droids if you are on target. flying over fuel zones, marked Very playable and great the surface. Should your ship Your current fuel status is with a big 'F. value. Terra Cognita should hit them, it will explode. Droids, shown as a bar at the top of the You can fly at three speeds. prove to be a budget hit. controlled by the computer, screen. Should you run out of These are dehyped proton drive  GRAPHICS come at you in wave after wave. fuel, you'll plummet to the (slow), standard proton drive SOUND You have a photon laser surface of the planet and (medium), and warp drive (fast). VALUE beam, that will shatter the explode. You can pick up fuel by Upon entering or exiting these PLAYABILITY HEARTLAND MACHINES: AMSTRAD/ SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: ODIN/FIREBIRD PRICE: .95 VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD DISK REVIEWER: DAVID Another slick Amstrad conversion from Odin. Heartland was originally released on the Spectrum a couple of months ago and, by all accounts, did very well, thank you very much. For those of you that were unlucky enough to miss the Specy version the story goes something like this. Eldtritch the wizard, a goodly soul if ever there was one, has left the Heartland for pastures new. Before he went he built up a healthy reputation for staying dragons, rescuing damsels in distress and all the other heroic deeds wizards get up to. All his knowledae was passed down in a book left to the Heartland to protect it from evil. One of the nastiest pieces of work Eldtritch had to deal with in the Heartland was a character by the name of Midan, the dreaded Black Warlock, and the wizard's arch enemy. During their last barney Midan cast the last chapter of Eldtrich's book to the seven winds, thus neutralising its power. Your task is to find the last six pages of the book before Midan's evil spreads throughout the land. Unfortunately, to confuse you, Midan has also left six 'dark' pages in the Heartland, which must be destroyed or your quest will have been in vain. Screen layout is crisp and colourful using the Amstrad's 16 colour mode showing a sideon view of each location in the five lands containing the light and dark pages. Locations are linked by doorways through which you can move into, or away from, the screen, as well as exits to the left and right which means that the only sensible way of mapping Heartland is by making a plan view map of each level. There are two of Midan's picking up a seventh page, cronies in almost every which immediately causes the location. They can be stunned first one you got to be released. temporarily in a number of Repeat the process until a dark ways, all of them violent. page is released and then zap it. Either zap 'em with your The status area at the top of trusty magic top hat or fling a the screen shows energy, time, fireball or a dagger at the little and what spells you are blighters, but watch out for the carrying together with the large flying star clusters they number of pages so far will quickly drain your energy. collected. The face of Midan will Bubbles, on the other hand, also appear and disappear will give you more strength depending on how many star while little star clusters will give clusters and cronies you come you temporary protection from into contact with and the larger Midan's hit men. the warlocks face the higher is The game begins in your your energy drain. bedroom, but there's no time to Heartland is destined to be a rest as your energy disappears hit on the Amstrad and should at an alarming rate, possibly a appeal to the thousands who little too fast. In each of the first spent last summer glued to four levels there are two pages Sorcery Plus. to collect with a further four in If you're after a pretty arcade the final level set in the village. adventure liberally garnished When you have found the with zapping, good sound first two pages it's back to the effects and music then bedroom in time to be Heartland is for you. transported to the next level. You can only carry six pages > GRAPHICS at once so it is important that > SOUND dark, unwanted, pages should  VALUE be destroyed. This is done by PLAYABILITY ON "


"C+VG TERMINUS SHIELDS 00000 ELLLLLLL More maze-type fun! Wangler suit batteries, if you can find them. There are energy locks restricting movement around MACHINE: SPECTRUM Q000 0000 the complex. They are Good SUPPLIER: MASTERTRONIC ODOO controlled by computer PRICE: .99 ALERT DODO ODOO activators which look like huge REVIEWER: PAUL 0000 ODOO TV sets. At the left side of the ALERT screen is a platform. Standing Tonight there's gonna be a on it will turn the machine on breakout. The Wanglers are on A At .99, Terminus is a Christmas bargain. selecting one of four possible the loose again, determined to Terminus, explore, avoid or kill who can hang from the ceiling. doors. Leave the platform when bust their mainman and boss the many guards and hopefully handy for getting him past most the arrow on the screen points out of the pen. free the boss. traps, as long as there is a to the one you want open. To These villains, or heroes The four Wanglers all have ceiling to cling to. the right is the teleport receiver. depending on your viewpoint different abilities which can be Spex: He can walk around, Stand on it to \"login\" your have spread chaos throughout used in different parts of the but prefers to bounce position. the galaxy with their antiprison complex. everywhere, steering around in Your scanner has a range of education campaign. But time Mobod and Xann: These the air as he does so. To get him V16th the width of the prison ran out when the law ran in for move by flying. Once their to climb vertical shafts is cells and 32 of the height. At the gang's boss, Spike. thrust/energy drops off, they difficult at first, but once you get any one time, therefore you can He's now held deep within get grounded until they can the knack this is one useful only see (512th of the entire Terminus: The Prison Planet. recharge. The indicators are at character! complex. Powerless, he languishes at the the top centre of the screen, Teleports link the different Terminus is a vast, sprawling mercy of the system. under their name. As with all security zones. The main game. At .99, you can't fault But the other Wanglers are four Wanglers their suits system will return you to determined to free him. Not protect them from the energy Command centre, where the much is known about Terminus fields and hostile objects as rest of the gang wait. GRAPHICS because nobody gets out to tell. long as the batteries are There are recharge units SOUND VALUE Controlling the four Wanglers throughout the complex which charged. you must enter the vast maze of Magno: An expert cat burglar replace lost energy in the PLAYABILITY 0 0 MACHINE: SPECTRUM  SUPPLIER: GREMLIN GRAPHICS PRICE: .95 > REVIEWER: TIM AVENGER while you search. Keys are the key to success in this game. Plan which doors you open with the first two you collect very carefully. Some doors have more keys hidden in the rooms which lie beyond others don't. Be careful going through sideways doors. You have to position your character just right to get him through. At first I thought I had to collect something before I was allowed through but no, I just hadn't placed my character in the right position. There are six levels of the Keep to explore all packed with baddies to beat up. Be careful as most of them are intelligent and will follow you about unless you knock them out. Graphics are interesting and the sound is good with some nice spot effects. There's also lots to do and the feeling that IF you could just open one more door, a whole new world would be revealed to you! Avenger isn't a stunning game but it is pretty playable. One for map fans and a worthy follow up to Way of the Tiger. The kung-fu game rears it's oriental head again this Christmas. We've had Fist Il and Yie Ar Kung Fu II, now here's the follow up to Gremlin's Way of the Tiger. This is a mixture of the current Gauntlet fad and good old arcade adventure. 300 screens of adventure to be exact. It's only a one player game but it does have a Gauntlet style screen and four-way scrolling. But the characters sometimes appear side on while the scenery is still seen from above, which gives an odd sort of perspective to the game. It looks OK, mind you. The all important story line goes like this. Having successfully completed your training in Way of the Tiger, of course! you are now ready to avenge your stepfather and take back the scrolls of Ketsuin from the wicked Yaemon to appease the God Kwan and release him from eternal hell. Your quest starts outside Quench Heart Keep where you must find the keys to gain access. Once inside you must kill the TU ATBIC 2009 009 in A Avenger's a game for kung-fu and map-making fans. three guardians of the keep. and inner force. Beware, as they must be killed to complete the game you in a specific way and in a certain must collect the scrolls and order. escape from the Keep having Use your Shuricans wisely as avenged the death of your once they've gone you only father and releasing Kwan from ng iwan from have your unarmed combat the power of Yeamon. skills to rely on. You begin the game outside As you fight your way the keep and you need keys to through the many adversaries get in. Hunt around and you'll you may call on the God Kwan find some but you'll have to to replenish your endurance fight off Yaemon's minions GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"EDGAR RIGA RROUINC And Uued by Perm Lola.... LIVE THE GAME! , INC EDGAR TETES All Rights Reserved more WWWWWMA NNNN "


"GANG ACADI this requirement. Only a few Below the list of Skimmers dials and a small blue rectangle meet the exacting are more options. \"Info on this -the computer window. requirement of flying and Skimmer\" gives a list of the You are now in one of the combat skills. In order to equipment carried on the game's two modes. This is graduate from the Academy, Skimmer. \"View Panel\" allows ground mode where you can cadets must complete 20 you to see the panel layout. communicate with the missions, grouped in five \"Design Skimmer\" allows you Skimmer's computer by using levels of four, successfully to put together a customised the commands you'll remember On loading you'll see the craft for a particular mission. from Tau Cetiplus a couple main menu which offers you The recommended Skimmer of new ones. seven different options, all of for the first mission \"Ifit Type HELP, if you are unsure, MACHINE: SPECTRUM which lead you on to different Moves...\" is GCS Lenin. Select and all the correct words scroll SUPPLIER: CRL sub-menus. this Skimmer and return to the up in your Skimmer's message PRICE: .95 The first thing to do is to enter main menu. You are now ready window. Type LAUNCH when REVIEWER: TIM your name. Move the pointer to to try a mission! Move the you're ready and you're off! \"Enter a New Cadet\" and press pointer to \"Accept Mission\". And just hope you've selected Pete Cooke's Tau Ceti, released fire. The screen will clear to the The screen will clear to show the right Skimmer for the right last year, was a classic. And this New Cadet sub-menu. Type in the Skimmer's instrument mission ... sequel is simply brilliant. No your name and your date of panel. On the top line is a The missions range from Spectrum owner should be birth. Having entered your \"Status bar\" which will show complicated Tau Ceti style without it. Simple as that. name the next task is to choose the ship's state (docked), the puzzles, to out and out shootAcademy puts you back at the one of the four level missions. mission score and the mission 'em-ups which test your firecontrols of your Gal-Corp Move the pointer to \"Select a time. Below this is the fighting and flying skills. Skimmer. But this time there Mission and press fire. The viewscreen, various gauges and J ust to give you a taste, here are 20-yes 20!missions to screen will clear to the mission complete. You can design your sub-menu. A list of four Forward View 00 01 own Skimmer panel using the missions will be shown. built in \"constructon-set\" To select a mission simply COMPOSS option. And there's even a move the pointer to it and press EINHEIT freebie Star Map program fire. Below the mission list is a Mdf thrown in. set of options: All the addictive excitement Info on this mission will of Tau Ceti plus a whole lot explain the task required and more. You'd be mad to miss it! Targetting ships and buildings that you are Let's take a look at the game likely to meet on a mission. You Tracking that will knock your socks can also call up information on off.. the planetary system where the After an incident on Cygnus mission is set to find out about Infra Red in 2197 when a rookie pilot conditions on the surface. The selected the wrong gear when program will also recommend a docking with the main central suitable Skimmer. ractor and reduced half the Having chosen a mission you planet to molten lava, Gal-Corp will need to choose a Skimmer. decided that a special training Move the pointer to \"Select a centre was needed to provide Skimmer\" and press fire. The an elite corps of pilots for the screen will clear to the advanced military Skimmers \"Skimmer\" sub-menu where a >NEHPAD used in colonisation and list of six Skimmers are shown. JUNP Unit >LAUNCH reconnaisance work. Three are already constructed Door Wait Launch 0.1. The Gal-Corp Academy for and named. Three more are Advanced Skimmer Pilots blank and waiting for you to (GASP) was founded to meet build and equip them. A No Spectrum owner should be without a copy of Pete Cooke's Academy Dri eshte hera e BAZOOKA BILL  MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: ARCADE! MELBOURNE HOUSE PRICE .95 REVIEWER: TIM Meet Bazooka Bill one man army and all round Rambo type. He's the star of the first release on the new Arcade label Melbourne House by another name. And it's a cracker. OK, the boring ones among will look at the screen shots, put on the voice of Neil from The Young Ones and say: \"Hey, but it's just like Green Beret.\" But that's where you are wrong. Green Beret didn't have big cartoon style graphics. Green Beret didn't have a dog-fight sequence. Green Beret didn't have BB's neat soundtrack which really drives the action along. And Green Beret didn't have a sense of humour Bill's mission is pretty simple, He has to use all his fighting skills to reach the island in the South Pacific where General MacArthur is being held captive by revolutionary forces He starts the game in the city totally unarmed except for his bare fists, which he uses to good effect. A giant fist appears from BB's muscular frame and knocks down his assailan 001380 36 come at him from all sides. Soon he comes across a knife which he can use, then later other weapons come to handmachine guns, flamethrowers and bazookas his favouritel You select weapons you've collected by pulling the joystick back and hitting the fire button. 001030 Quick manipulation is essential if you find yourself in a tight spot. If you stick to ground level you'll soon notice that you've been running around in circles. You've got to get up on the upper level if you want to reach the airfield where there's a jet, waiting for you to pinch it and fly to the islands. The first bunch of enemy troops you meet simply shoot at you and there are helicopters dropping bombs which you have to avoid as well At the airfield you have to fight off kung-fu kicking guards and climb aboard a jet which will take you into the dog fight sequence. Fly your jet through squadrons of attackers Bazookas, bombs, planes and kung-fu makes one of the best Green Beret type games ween "


"EMY TAYLI TAU CETI II MACHINE: C64/AMSTRAD/ SPECTRUM SUPPLIER:IMAGINE PRICE: .95 AMSTRAD AND CBM/.95 SPECTRUM VERSION TESTED: CBM64/ AMSTRAD REVIEWER: PAUL REVIEWS are a few mission titles: At the OK Corral, Laserium, Mission Improbable, If it Moves, Needle in a Haystack, Where to Guv? All Skimmers are equipped with different gear detailed in the info section. The equipment includes missiles and lasers of course-but this time you also get delay bombs which are VERY useful in tight corners. Each of the built-in Skimmers has different capabilities but you can construct your own. Access your rating on each of the missions by selecting the Progress Report option. This will display the four missions available on the level along with a score for each mission and an average score overall. As I've already mentioned it is possible to design and equip your own ship for ANY mission. Academy GALVAN Corp's budget will not stretch to designs costing over 100m credits. If either of the two figures are over the limit they will show red and you will need to remove some items of equipment selected. When you are happy with the equipment selected move the pointer to the \"Design Complete\" option. This will take you into the Design Panel section, where you can design the Skimmer's Panel layout. If you have chosen a large complement of equipment for a Skimmer design you may find it a little tricky to fit all the items in the available screen space, a useful hint here is to tuck the viewscreen away in a corner of the display to allow you to place dials or gauges off to one side. You can save your game position at any time, and you relying on info about the different missions supplied by the Gal-Corp briefing team. From the main menu you can can save your designs. To move on to the next level and the next block of four missions you must have an average score of 90 per cent. All this and I haven't even mentioned the D.E.A.F. subgame or the CODES puzzle you'll need to solve on some missions. But every game has got to have its secrets. Academy is immensely playable and totally addictive. You'll be thanking Mr Cooke for putting the SAVE option in. It'll mean you can actually get some sleep... The arcades have proved a gold mine recently for software houses looking for new games. Galvan, however, proves that not all coin-ops happily make the transition to computer. To be honest, I don't remember seeing Galvan in the arcades, but Imagine says these conversions are quite faithful to the original. All I know is that certain parts of the Amstrad game gave me severe eyestrain and a headache. Some of the colours are so garish that the lance straight to the back of the eyeball. Ruined reviewer's retina isn't fun. Add to that some pretty violent juddering instead of scrolling and you've got a game I found very hard to play for more than a few seconds. The same lurching also afflicts the Spectrum version (reviewed last month). The Commodore version is much easier on the eye and, if I'm forced to make a choice, gets my vote as the version to play. At least the game scrolls smoothly. Galvan, the character you control, is the lone surviving member of the Cosmo police. His task is to rid the Techno Caverns of the Planet Cynep of androids, robots and various other lifeforms, including multiheaded demons. Not the most original plot, I hear you cry, but in the bop, bam, boom world of shoot'em ups that really doesn't matter. It's the action that counts, and the slick way it's carried out. For me Galvan doesn't have enough action or slickness to make it a great conversion. As Galvan moves around the screens he encounters power pyramids. These boost his energy and will give him more powerful weapons, ranging from a blue bolt neutraliser or arc blaster. For a lot of the time he must use his fists to get out of trouble. Galvan involves a lot of manic, and panic, movements mixed up with frantic zapping to keep the nasties down. But Amstrad owners beware-it's painful on the peepers. Your energy level is represented by a bar on the screen. My always seemed to be at an all-time low and that meant he has to talk with his fists to survive. It's a shame I've never been really good with giving people a swift one two and a mouthfull of the knuckle sarnie. Of the three formats Galvan has been released on so far, it's Commodore users who get the best conversion. But even that one isn't exactly the bee's knees. AMSTRAD CBM64 GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY Complete There is a list of possible equipment. In the centre are two or three boxes showing whether the Skimmer has the equipment/ how many items the Skimmer has/what strength the unit has. The two main limitations in equiping a ship are the weight of equipment and the total cost, both shown at the bottom of the screen. The basic Skimmer hull will not carry a weight of over 100 Galactic Megatons and GalGRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY fighting them off. Easy for veteran Sanxion and Uridium players. Then it's off to do a bit of island hopping with more firefights on the ground and in the air to keep you busy until you reach your objective. If you lose all five lives the game gives you the option to start again where you left off if you are quick enough to beat the ten second countdown and hit the F5 key in time! Why can't all action games have an option like this. No more boring back to the beginning blues here. The bad news is that you don't get to keep all the weapons you've collected! Bazooka Bill is an action packed, addictive, arcade blaster. The graphics are big and butch enough for any would-be Rambo, and it doesn't take itself as seriously as Green Beret either. The great music and sound effects are the icing on the cake Don't be put off by people who tell you you've seen it all before just grab the joystick and make your own mind up. And if you aren't still battlin' it out with Bill days later, I'll eat my tin hat. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY A Galvan-nol the best arcade conversion ever! akes this we're son "


"COP-OUT Amstrad/ Spectrum/ Commodore Cassette .95 Amstrad Disc .95 MIKRO-GEN Unit 15 The Western Centre Western Road Bracknell Berks. "


"OKEN MEDALLION FOR GAC! A new label-Medallion has been created by Incentive Software, for releasing games created using Incentive's own How would you like to join Graphic Adventure Creator. C+VG's adventure review The first two releases, which team? Yes, you did read that should be available by the time the chance to join the world's \" correctly We're offering you you read this, is Legend of Apache Gold, by Peter best adventure team and the world's best computer mag. \"Subsunk\" Torrance, a We're looking for an western with a special \"eternal experienced adventure player life\" feature. This is followed to man or woman — the by Winter Wonderland, with a telephone on Friday Himalayan setting, in which afternoons when we run our you start out to find a lost Adventure Helpline Phone-In. civilisation and then the Although we've got literally quest changes! Both games are thousands of clues for priced at .95. Reviews next hundreds of games, a personal month! knowledge of adventures GRAPHIC JEWELS would be an advantage. The qualities we're looking Level 9 announces the arrival for are some one who stays of stunning graphics to be cool and calm when featured on releases from the bombarded with the most projected Knight Orc obscure questions and a good onwards. These will be telephone manner. And incorporated in disk versions because C+VG's offices are in for Commodore 64, Amstrad, London, it would be convient Amiga and Atari ST, and will if you lived locally. be drawn for digitisation by Interested? Write to C+VG Godfrey Dawson, who and in not more than 50 words produces the superb Level 9 tell us why you think you posters. Their development would be suitable. system is being changed too. HERE'S LOOKING After some years with the AT YOU versatile BBC at the hub of Every month Adventure their operations, its place is to Helpline puts you in the be taken by the Atari ST. This picture on the latest games, decision has been made after a reviews, help and hints. Now lengthy evaluation of both the we want you to put US in the ST and the Amiga as possible picture about YOU. contenders. We want to know what you One bonus will be a saving look like. So when you write in compilation time, which on to us, why not send in a the BBC is currently several photograph as well. If they're minutes for a typical Level 9 good enough we'll even print them. adventure. Using the ST will Now that's an offer you cut this to mere seconds. can't refuse-instant stardom Finally, Level 9 announce in your own home, school or that Jewel of Darkness is even office. Just imagine your available for the IBM PC, and photograph turning up at confirm that this is compatible thousands of newsagents with the new Amstrad 1512 across Britain and even the PC-lookalike. world. Yes! We've persuaded Incentive Software to knock three whole quid off their brand new adventures, Apache Gold and Winter Wonderland! Both are adventures created using Incentive's highly praised Graphic Adventure Creator and will be released on the new Medallion label. They normally retail at .95 but C+VG readers who send in the special coupon will get them for just .95. You'll get an even better deal if you decide you want BOTH. If you send off for Winter Wonderland AND Apache Gold, Incentive will knock a whole  off the combined price. .80 for two adventures can't be bad! Winter Wonderland is a graphic adventure set in the Himalayas your quest is to locate a lost civilisation. In Apache Gold, created by Peter \"Subsunk\" Torrance you fight against strange Indian powers in search of treasure. All this excitement could be yours at a cut price! Just fill in the coupon, cut out the token and send it off with a postal order or cheque for the correct amount -.95 for one .80 for two -made payable to Incentive Software Ltd, to Incentive Software, C+VG Offer, 2 Minervia House, Calleva Park, Aldermaston, Berkshire RG740W. DON'T send any money/coupons to C+VG please! C+VG/INCENTIVE OFFER Name Address: I enclose a cheque/P.O. for. made payable to Incentive Software Ltd. Please send me Apache Gold/Winter Wonderland/BOTH adventures (delete where appropriate) "


"GVG HELPLINE home in his spare time. but just as the ram was about To become a Wizard to be despatched, the goat requires special skills, like re-appeared with a weapon collecting treaures and and the words: \"Have a dropping them in the swamp. broadsword, sucker!\" I But also, kind and helpful departed at high speed. deeds count a lotand Paul When I logged back in at the is a past master at helping tearoom, who should be there BURNING Chain in J. V. Software's struggling adventurers! trying to look all innocent? QUESTION Journey To The Planets, asks With the rank of Wizard Yes, Skiff! R. W. Hearn of Lowestoft. I comes some powerful Not all Mudders are as It's a satisfying feeling to have can't help on this one-my privileges, which make MUD d edicated to mayhem as Skiff completely solved an problem is more fundamental. quite a different game to play! -most are quite friendly and adventure, isn't it? But Andy How do you get Journey To You can arrange things so that helpful. Like Lesolas the Rice doesn't know whether to The Planets, RW? I've neither creatures kill or cast spells on Warlock, who has been known give himself a pat on the back, seen nor heard of it before! specified players -or you can to lay aside his quest to help a or not! \"What is the answer to the tease them yourself! But of fellow lift a heavy portcullis. He has been playing riddle 'What do the Sun course, too much of this sort of Then there's Sherlock, the Fahrenheit 451 and thinks he brothers quarrel about?' asks behaviour, and demotion Necromancer, who walks the might have finished the game. Michael Ledwich of could be just around the land acting like the village But if so, he has reached a Melbourne, Australia. He is corner! idiot when really he is one of very unsatisfactory ending. playing Dark Crystal, and So what's a day in the life of the smartest and most Having broadcast the needs to tell Aughra the a MUD Wizard really like? generous players it could be collected works of everybody answer, to be able to get any Paul (alias Pierpont the your good fortune to meet. over the airways, he gets the further in the game. Wizard) arrives with a crash of This is a successful ploy, for message: 'Well done. The What Gregory Quinn of thunder, and reveals all! while most players are busy book world is saved, but you Portadown thinks must be the \"Hi, Keith! Just stopping by saying things like \"Oh lookare not,' and is then fried to most illogical and unmappable to let you know that after there goes that silly old fool\" death by some rather violent adventure ever, is Island, by almost a year of struggling to each other when he passes, men. Crystal. \"ANY help would be against terrible odds, evil he picks up all the treasure he 'Is this it?' Andy. 'If so, it welcome,\" says Gregory! dragons, a butterfly with a can carry, and nips back past seems rather harsh.\" If he has William Hern's problem in flamethrower, and Skiff, I've them again before anyone got something wrong, then Ultima 2 can be solved by the finally made it to Wizard on spots what he is up to! perhaps he needs to know how possession of an ankh when he MUD II. Must go I left some bacon to use the Wafer-5 properly, takes off, suggests Tim Skiff, in case you're cooking back in the Wizard's the combination of the 4-D Hammond of Sunningdale. wondering, is a fellow Wiz. I home! Bye!\" locks, and how to enter the The planet should be at 9-9-9 use the term \"fellow\" in the And with that, Pierpont grey steel building? Has he he adds. Meanwhile, how can loosest possible way. He is disappeared in a cloud of completed the game, or not? he open the doors in Hotel often to be seen roaming the smoke, leaving a strange scent Who can help? California, New San Antonia, land spreading pain and death of sizzling Danish pig behind Who can help with a golden and Apocalypse City? with every beat of his evil him. oldie? Ian Sutton of And finally, how do you get heart! It has been said in some SHINE A LIGHT Beaconsfield is searching for the snake out of the basket in quarters that he makes the the castle in Sphinx, and wants Zzzz, asks Adam Bennett of Black Death look like a flu Malcolm Harden asked some a very definite route there. No Charfield? bug! time ago, what three objects I obscure clues, please! Skiff made things rather would choose to start out on The Pawn is one of those LIFE AS A interesting for me when I an (any) adventure. My games where different people WIZARD WIZARD! reached the rank of Mage. answer was sword, lamp, and manage different problems There I was, taking a quiet keys-skeleton or all-purpose and get stuck on the others. So We always knew Paul Coppins walk across the North Pasture, bunch of. between us, we should soon was a wizard at solving heading for the Swamp Muds Malcolm agreed about the have this adventure beaten!? adventures, but Paul is not the with nothing but an armful of sword, but as Elvish swords Unable to set the lead, I type to boast about his harmless treasure and a glow in the presence of helped Simon Hammond. He achievements. longsword for company, when enemies, he felt there would in his turn has found a way The other week, it just suddenly a ram, a goat, and a be enough of them around not past the Snowman, and you'll cropped up in casual raven appeared out of thin air warrant a lamp! see this in the clues section, if conversation, that Paul had, in and launched a combined He wasn't too keen on keys you too, are trying to enter the fact, attained the status of attack on me. either, since he felt sure they ice tower! Wizard in MUD, a game he The goat and the raven were wouldn't help with enchanted How do you set the Ruby has been playing quietly at soon on their way to heaven, doors. I suppose this depends "


"| ADVENTURE CLUES on which adventures you play, Farringdon Lane, London although I can safely say that I ECIR 3AU. have come across far more But just one word before doors that require a key than you set pen to paper. We can't require a spell to open them. supply general hints or official Malcolm chose a rope and a hint sheets -these are usually mirror the former for pits available from the supplier on and towers, entry for the use proof of purchase. Just explain of; the latter for reflecting your particular problems, and spells and stray gazes from the we will endeavour to help. odd Medusa one might happen across CHEATS What three object would CORNER YOU choose? Write and let me know! To get the full number of Meanwhile, Malcolm, who points in Very Big Cave is dead goes under the alternative simple if you are playing it on name of Master of Powers, a Spectrum! Malcolm Harden claims he is the son of Khaos of Sheppey, says that you can and Sirena in the Mythology of pick up as many platinum bars the planet Ultima. Having put as you want, by re-entering the in several years work, he is dark room. But it hasn't offering the information on his helped him getting past the many file cards and essays to triffid — any offers? any adventure writer who would find it useful. All this is A BIT OF FUN in the interest of consistency, Lords Of Midnight and to get the history right in Doomdark's Revenge both use future games, explains the same SAVE and LOAD Malcolm, who with his offer is system. For a bit of fun, relinquishing any copyright to Hamish Allan of Tervuren in his notes. So write in to me if Belgium, recommends loading you want to be put in touch a saved Lords into Doomdark! with the Master of Powers! WRITE NOW! ADVENTURER OF THE YEAR Remember you can write to us for help when you are stuck in THE search to discover the an adventure, or send us a C+VG Adventurer of the much needed clue to help Year is almost over. others. Or to just let us know There were two classes of your thoughts on adventures! entry, and the Overseas We'll write back with an entries were judged outright, answer, a 'sorry don't producing a tie for top place! know!' or a word or two of Both Mrs Sally Pritchard of thanks. Dun Laoghaire in Co. Dublin, We have a database Eire, and 14-year-old Gunnar overflowing with clues, and a Briem of Gardabaer in couple of fat files at our Iceland, obtained 9 out of 10 disposal, just to help you out correct answers in the quiz but needless to say, they section, and they win free don't contain EVERYTHING membership to our Adventure we, or you, want to know! Club and a year's free \"We are Paul Coppins, subscription to C+VG. Steve Donoghue, Daniel Sally's favourite adventure Gilbert and Adrian Bott, plus is Cutthroats, an Infocom myself. Address your letters to game, and her list of me at Adventure Helpline, completed adventures Computer + Video Games comprised no less than 67 Priory Court, 30-32, titles. *418nis enxa joj Leap jsku Ia: 'Suoyalp e ! 'yo pue ind usnd isnu no Aureld 11SVO HOWXVII HO HO HOS OLSAW jajap 1 ue nox NVWaids peo IIW PIO 01 Up e loj saop ay aloja qe ay a praysayan 01 ury MOLIO pue apes ay inoqe apensanLXOTSHS Saisersau pasalu! Si sdais krei! ay uo punoy yl assuep 01 dnbning ay MOYS IST LIHNYHVH Yuene je SMS BY uoga 103 ani jaduo *puosas ylojaye em suy ayerayew \"100p e sapun saded ap! 1911   IIAod plaik II!M Ssyds wal4LE YOZ SAABLOY DA17 pue uetusijeay) I 194109 es munu ISYUOMXVM loop ay P!IS HVISSV JO VX9S loop y udo or wresa ho ves ay iind VIIINX jau eu e 10) ouoyd yi yeh WnIXSV Toys!! pues au MoUSNMV THL auinoqina! uy pue 'pioIL \" BIS!IV joisug'Auoyuy ' W POOMION Vinos 'eynol  Saua wezO UBY LOJ we quou sy de This should have been quarter-finalists, we selected enough to ensure a win over just five, who noticeably Gunnar's more modest list of outshone the rest of the 11 completed adventures, entries. (favourite game Mordon's Questionnaires have been Quest) but taking into account sent out to: William Hern of age and language difficulties, Aberdeen, John McCann of we decided to award them Lisburn, Gareth Williams of joint honours! Swansea, Mr R. Garraway of Meanwhile, the UK title has Swindon, and Paul Exley of yet to be won. Instead of ten Bury. "


"SUPA SOFT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE (PRESENT THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL OFFERS TO C+VG READERS) (BORING STATEMENT BUT JUST CHECK THE REST AND COME BACK TO THIS AD FOR THE REAL BARGAIN SOFTWARE) SPECTRUM RRP OUR RRP OUR Cass Dish 1495 10.95 Thanatos 6.50 10.95 795 5.40 Commando 86 6.50 10.95 Mami Vice 995 5.75infiltrator 6.50 10.95 l's Knockout 7.95 5.25 Ice Temple 7.95 5.40 Freeze Frame 3 Cart 33.95 Cobra 9.95 6.75 It's a knockout 6.00 10.00 Highlander 7.95 525 Top Gun 7.96 5.40 Dan Dare 6.50 NA NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY Hire Software Before You Buy It Dan Dare 8.95 6.00 The Pawn NA 13.95 Kon Coin-op 9.95 650 Ourell's Big4 9.95 6.75 Marble Madness 6.95 11.50 Great Escape 7.95 5.40 WAR Uchi Marta 8.95 6.00 Cabra Star Gider 14.95 1095 Alons 9.99 6.50 As of Aces 6.50 10.95 6.50 10.96 E it Pak 7.95 5.40 Footbaler Year 6.50 10.05 Triv Pursuit 6.00 10.00 Space Harrier 7.95 5.25 Leaderboard 7.95 525 Aliens 6.90 10.95 Sentinel 6.50 1095 Bomb Jack 2 Double Take 705 55 Word Games 6.50 10.96 AMSTRAD Cass Disk Commando 86 10.00 14.95 WAR. 6.25 NA Airwolf 2 7.95 5.25 Paperboy 6.50 10.95 Scrabble 700 10.00 Jack Nipper 7.95 5.25 Championship Wrest 6.50 10.95 Mini Office 2 11.95 14.95 Scooby Doo 7.95 5.25 Ye Ar Kung Fu 2 6.00 10.00 Sold a Mil 3 6.70 10.95 Batman 6.00 10.00 To Pursuit 10061595 6.00 10.00 It's a out Galvan 7.95 5.25 Spy v Spy 3 (Arc) 6.50 10.96 Now Games 3 Farlight 9.95 6.50 Galvan 6.00 10,00 Elite 10.95 16.95 Shao Lins Road 7.95 5.40 Elite 14.95 10.95 Leaderboard 6.75 10.00 Dynamite Dan 2 7.95 5.25 Sky Runner 6.50 10.95 Coin ops 6.75 10.96 Revolution 8.95 4.99 Boldendash Construc 6.50 10.95 Ran Warrior 6.75 10.96 6.50 10.95 Highlander Konami's Golt 9.95 6.75 Winter Games 6.00 10.00 Room 10 6.00 10.00 Uridium 6.00 10.00 Jack Nipper 6.50 10.00 Firelord 8.95 600 Gauntlet 6.50 10.95 Imp Mission 6.75 10.96 Ye Ar Kung Fu 795 525 Sold Milion 3 6.50 10.95 Paperboy 7.00 10.96 6.50 10.95 Fist2 7.00 10.95 Dracular 9.95 5.75 Space Harrier 6.50 10.95 Durells Big 4 5.75 10.00 Sky Runner Scalextric 9.95 6.75 Bomb Jack 2 6.50 10.95 1942 6.00 10.00 The Fat Worm 9.96 6.75 Atlantic Challenge 6.25 NA Commando 86 6.00 10.00 Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders Please Add 75p per tape, Mail Order Only Cheque and PO (sterling only please) made payable to: DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, Dept 1, 210 Nicholls Tower, Harlow, Essex CM18 6EF TELEPHONE (0279 29076) WEEKDAYS ONLY PLEASE OVER 8.000 different titles available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, ELECTRON, BBC, AMSTRAD all models, ATARI, and MSX computers ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too. HIRE PRICES from only 75p INC. P&P. 20% DISCOUNT off all purchase software. LIFE MEMBERSHIP .00. Hire your first title FOC. FREE CATALOGUE FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given) ALL GAMES manufactured ORIGINALS with full documentation OVER 25,000 satisfied members EUROPEAN members welcome. UP TO 65% OFF software, regular sales lists sent to all members. Full computerised system keeps track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with staff of 14 who know what the word service means. Backed by our own software company and programmers. Send large S.A.E. now for free catalogue. NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY Unit4.ME.B. Works, Windsor Road, Enfield, Redditch, B97 60J. Tel:Redditch 65671. CVG NAME ADDRESS AV COMPUTER MODEL COMPETITION PRO The Ultimate in Joystick Control Arcade Quality with 8-way microswitches Faster response times provide a smoother, more accurate playing action for higher scores and its tough, dependable construction guarantees reliability during use. * Ergonomically designed, nylon covered steel handle and base for smoother playing action. * Rubber action return to vertical of joystick for fast, positive control. * Large, dual fire buttons for quick left or right hand operation * Non-slip, rubber base pads ensure joystick remains firm during play. *Extra long 5 foot cable allows more comfortable playing positions. * Guaranteed for 1 year. Suitable for: Amstrad; MSX computers; Commodore 64 and VIC 20; Atari; Sinclair ZX Spectrum (when used with an interface). Distributed in the U.K. by: Unit 2, Rothersthorpe Avenue Trading Estate, Northampton NN4 9JN. Telephone: 0604 68711 Telex: 371254 LEISFTG, Manufactured in the U.K. by: DYNAMICS marketing Ltd POWER A Coin Industries Company Coin House New Coin Street Royton Oldham OL26JZ. England Telephone: 061626 7222 Telex: 669705 Coin G "


"LABYRINTH THE COMPUTER GAME An all new fantasy adventure from LUCASFILM GAMES TM* and ACTIVISION. Based on the spectacular film directed by Muppet Man Jim Henson and starring David Bowie. Features Jim Henson's magical puppet characters from the film. Available on: Commodore 64/128 Cassette Commodore 64/128 disk Mail Order: Activision (UK) Ltd, 23 Pond Street, Hampstead, London NW3 2PN. .99 .99 ACTIWISION ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE 1986 Henson Associates, Inc. and Activision Inc. All rights reserved. Labyrinth is a trademark of Henson Associates Inc, used by Activision under authorization. TM of Lucasfilm Ltd. all rights reserved. trademark COMMODORE SCREENS "


"C+VG 3 REVIEWS DO events from the viewpoint of a SUPPLIER: different Archers character. MOSAIC PUBLISHING Starting off, you are Jack LEVEL 9 Woolley, self made man and  MACHINES: SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD the owner of Grey Gables 464/64/6128; ATARL XL XE, country club. He is having BBC, MSX, 64/128. Ambridge for around 30 years. trouble with Higgs, who PRICE: .95-.95 The game is in four parts, breaks a window one night REVIEWER: KEITH and the objective of each part when drunk. Should you sack Hello, me old pals, me old is to increase the audience him, dock his wages for the beauties! This is the evergreen figures by one million. repair, or speak severely to story of country folk This is achieved by selecting him? Your decision affects his transferred from steam one of three choices in plot subsequent behaviour, and wireless to computer chip. direction, offered at intervals your chances in the Yes, it's The Archers, the throughout the narrative of Crysanthemum Show original radio soap which has the script, which contains a without Higgs the blooms may been telling the everyday story number of sub-plot themes. In start to wilt! Is Higgs in love, of the farming community of each part you follow the going mental, or his behaviour a family trait? The shop is losing money, the restaurant is losing custom, there's a poacher out in the woods at night, and high jinks around the swimming pool. If you're not careful, you could spark off a revolt in the village, and arouse the indignation of the moral minority! The outcome of your script results in regular memos from the Controller of Radio 4, giving the audience research figures on interest, realism, and standards, as well as the total number of listeners. It is not easy to increase the figure from two million to three, but even if you do, you are not home and dry -the Controller has pressure groups and the Governors to worry about! Upsetting them puts him in an awkward position, and if you've got the Tories up in arms about left wing bias, even 3.5 million listeners won't save you from getting the sack and having to start the section again! Tom is fretful. He whimpers that he is Then he falls asleep in his rice Peggy Says Tom is old and 'worn. 2) take TOM off night patrols; buy bihan alarm clock. "


"SUPPLIER: MATAND were known, soon tired of Many of the locations have no SOFTWARE trying to live from the desert, relevance to the game. Other MACHINE: SPECTRUM 48/ and turned to crime to survive. more important locations, 128K PRICE: .95 This is where you step in. however, do include some REVIEWER: MATHEW You are a Dome Trooper nicely and quickly drawn WOODLEY based in City Dome Alpha. graphics, which add to the It's the 28th century, and the Your job is defence of the atmosphere somewhat. These world's population has dome against the rebels, who are also well-described in the expanded to such a degree that plan to take over an entire text window it has been decided to relocate dome and use it as a The most annoying thing. the people living in the stronghold. though, is that for some reason overcrowded cities into They intend to do this by I could not discover, the city's massive City Domes. injecting a poison into the reactor blows up after 51 To allow for the dome's water supply. inputs! However hard I just construction of the giant The text display offers a could not do anything to domes, existing cities have choice of standard Spectrum prevent it. Can you do better? been demolished and deserts character set, or a far neater formed between the domes. futuristic set. Having made Mail Order only from: Matand Most people were happy your choice, you find yourself Software, 29 Moorland Road, with the relocation. However, outside the dome. Movement Mickleover, Derby DE3 SFX there were a few who disliked to any of six city levels can be VOCABULARY the change, and were allowed made from a nearby ATMOSPHERE to start new lives in the desert. transporter room, at the press PERSONAL The 'Desert Rebels', as they of a button. VALUE o water. o frater over each (Shift) Having achieved three million, you become Elizabeth Archer, 19-year-old femme fatale, who has problems with the boys. Nigel's a wimp but is after you, Tim ignores you, but you fancy him. It's end of term at the Tech, and you have to earn your keep throughout the summer hols. Should you look after the sheep, tend the pigs, or feed the chickens? If on pig duty, shall you arrange for one to escape into the village, for Elizabeth to fall in the slurry, or get bitten on the ankle? You are writing the script remember? Scripted by real Archer's scriptwriters and produced by Level 9, this game features the now familiar Level 9 adventure format, except that input is by number, selecting from the list of choices offered. If you're an Archers fan, you'll enjoy this game. SUPPLIER: COMPASS of a pit which turned out to be thing!). The answer was so SOFTWARE a rather crushing experience. Obvious I almost missed it MACHINE: SPECTRUM 48K PRICE: .50 However, the old adventure sometimes you must take REVIEWER: STEVE saying: 'If you want to get things literally. DONOGHUE ahead, get a plank', proved My journey took me past invaluable here. demons and dragons, and all Long ago, in the first age of One narrow escape later manner of other nasty little the Ringmaster, a Falcon staff saw me on my way to even creatures just waiting to bring fell into the hands of Drakon, more unpleasant places. Can about my instant demise. the wizard of Valonia. you imagine having to wear a Using my thinking cap to Because he did not destroy the piece of slime on your face? best advantage, I finally came staff, Drakon was turned to The choice was simple, no to the ultimate confrontation the dark side of evil and slime-no life. with the Dark Lord himself. ancient magics of old. With the few items I had Once more, a companion With his new found collected on the way, I moved found during the adventure strength, he set forth to down into the darker depths. proved to be of immense help. conquer all before him, but Before much longer I Although Demon from the was vanquished by Ashmeard, wondered what on earth I was Darkside is Quilled, it has over the wizard of Dral doing carting around a dead 70 locations, with graphics As time went by, Drakon's rat. thrown in at 28 of these. It is strength grew once more, and Using one of the spells by far the best example of an again threatened to destroy collected on the way, the small adventure created this way I the land. Now the task of rodent was brought back to have yet come across, and defeating Drakon lies with life, and sure enough, I was goes to show that with a little you. rewarded for my efforts thought, a very fine adventure I began my quest in the further on in the game, by the can be turned out. valley of Dral, and almost creation of a rather unusual Available by mail order from: immediately found myself bridge. Compass Software, 36 Glove trapped in a cave where a Many more puzzles and Place, Norwich NR2 250 force field prevented my problems besieged me on my VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE escape. Luckily I had managed quest. A dog with three heads PERSONAL to learn the ancient art of halted my progress for a while, VALUE reading magic symbols, and I but the best way to keep a dog soon found my way into a dark happy is to ...? and dismal place where, Stumbling across a jar of among other things, I came cold cream had me beaten across a dead rat. (I'm pretty enough without I was trapped at the bottom having to resort to this kind of n/a VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL VALUE "


"COUNTDOWN Countdown has come! The days of the simple crossword are numbered. Who in your family can find the longest word in a group of nine letters? Who is the quickest at crunching a three-figure number! Buy Countdown for hours of nail-biting enjoyment. .95 BULLSEYE Millions enjoy this popular TV darts game, and now you can join Bully on the oche where you aim to win and throw to answer! A good arrow and you can pick your favourite topic ranging from Food to Pot Luck-a correct answer, and you're on your way! Do you want to gamble! .95 BLOCKBUSTERS Sixty million people every week watch Blockbusters, Britain's most popular TV quiz game! Now, thanks to Macsen software, you can actually be a contestant, recreating the excitement of the TV studio in your own home. Our Question-master follow-up give you 500 more questions, plus the chance to insert your own-be your own Bob! .95 GOLD RUN Can you beat a path through the hexagons to go for gold? The tension of this sister-game to Blockbusters is terrific, as the contestant struggles to complete his path against the clock. Adjust your own answering time to push yourself harder! .95 Macsen Software presents television's most popular programmes for your computer. With our productions you can take part in your favourite programme and turn your living room into the television world of stars and sagas. TREASURE HUNT We give you a helicopter, a guide and your clues the rest is up to you, as you search throughout England, Wales and Scotland, past castles, cathedrals and cottages to sniff out the hidden treasure. Thanks to our enclosed book, you won't need Kenneth Kendall to help you. Happy hunting! .95 EASTENDERS Enter Albert Square and experience life among its inhabitants taste their joys and woes, share their happiness and pain. See if you can survive the trials of this close community. Look out for Macsen EastEnders Software in your shops soon. BLOCKBUSTERS & GOLD RUN Now available for C16 MACSEN SOFTWARE Unit 1: Dafen Industrial Park, Llanelli, Dyfed SA14 9UU Tel: 0267 232508 THE WINNING HAND THIS CHRISTMAS. TREASURE LOCKBUSTERS Blockbusters, Bullseye, Gold Run, Treasure Hunt and EastEnders available on: Commodore 64, Spectrum 48K, BBC Model B, Electron, Amstrad. Countdown on Commodore 64, Spectrum 48K. BBC Model B, Amstrad. All games available from leading computer departments and computer stores. OUNTDOWN ULKBN EastEnders EastEnders EastEnders on game show FastEnders B IMMODORE hers AMSTRAD SPECTRUM 48K "


"WI 1+ te to SUPPLIER: CRL/ST. BRIDE'S form of: I say 'Hey kid, I don't on the reverse of the tape, is a  MACHINE: like da looka ya face and the bit more difficult. Here you SPECTRUM 48/ newsboy says: 'And ya like da need to obtain $15,000 for a 128 AMSTRAD CBM 64/128. looka yer own? Wit taste like bullet-proof Cadillac, and the PRICE: .95 dat you just handed me a characters you meet can be compliment! extremely awkward, especially You wanna control a cute little By setting up protection Police Chief Inspector Moron. blue rabbit with a machine type TALK TO (Character rackets, you soon set enough The same was written with gun? Good. If you don't, then name) the computer offers cash to hire Louis and The Quill, so has limitations you're gonna miss out on a nine options ranging from Muscles, and then you've got with vocabulary. However, by lotta fun. GREET to THREATEN, and to make a business for experimenting with words The rabbit in question is your choice often has yourself. Here ends Part One you'll soon get to know what it Bugsy what an original humorous repercussions. of the game, and it will not accepts, and in any case, the name for a rabbit. He's blue. For example, if you threaten trouble experienced most important input is by use he's three feet tall, and he lives the paper boy, the computer adventurers. of the conversation menu. in Chicago in 1922. Bugsy's shows the conversation in the Part Two, The Crimelord, Bugsy's 70 or so locations, aim in life (apart from each have a sepia-toned breeding and that) is to graphic to go with them. These become Public Enemy No 1. are drawn very quickly, Your job is to advise Bugsy although they do tend to be in his struggle against the rather repetitious. mobsters, and ultimately make In Part One your score is him the Top Dog, sorry. measured by how much cash Rabbit! in Chicago in place you've got, but in the second of that \"fat wimp\" Capone. To part, it is your position in the do this you're going to have to Top Ten Public Enemy chart POUL be ruthless, and in some cases, that counts. downright evil. The only help you are going It all begins outside a bar. If to get is from the inlay card, as you step inside, you are, or no HELP feature is provided, rather Bugsy is, thrown into a and EXAMINE is only rarely fight with some hoods. If you helpful. If you try to examine a succeed in beating them, you room, you are told: \"See one, get to meet Louis and ya seen 'em all.\" Muscles, who are later to Chicago 1922. Im in a street As the inlay says: 'Ya full of bars and pool halls. become the backbone of Shot in sepia. Very atmospheric wanna stay healthy, ya buy it!\" Bugsy's very own mob. y'know? Matthew Woodley To enable you to identify with 1922 Chicago, the game I'm outside Devney's Bar. The VOCABULARY street leads east and west features a menu-driven ATMOSPHERE  PERSONAL conversation system. If you VENTER BAR  VALUE The player enters the game problem of how to open the happen. It has that old magic I to discover he is in a prison, stove, that the great Escape once sensed when first I stood not knowing who he is or why begins. alongside that sleeping dragon he has been placed there. I felt the screen layout a in a sunny meadow! Stepping outside his quarters, little odd on an adventure of That magic seems to have  SUPPLIER: AD 400 he finds himself in a large this size. I had expected to see faded somewhat these days,  MACHINE: ATARI 400/800 courtyard, complete with a split-screen display. In fact, lost among umpteen lookalike PRICE: .75 (CASS) .75 guard who takes great scrolling text is the method passages, and the motto 'Big Is (DISK) pleasure in removing from the used. Best'! But from time to time Escape is the first in a series of player's inventory, anything The puzzles are not too someone reaches into the old 16K adventures for the Atari he can get his hands on. difficult, and it would seem treasure chest and brings forth home computer. The author From this point the game that the game has been written a jewel. Escape is one such W. H. Ferran, has created a opens up, and he can move with the first time Adventurer jewel. small, but good adventure about easily, visiting such in mind, using straightforward (Mail order only payable to W. Ferran Because it fits into 16K places as the mess hall. English, and logical answers to from AD 400, 0 Chilmark Gardens, New Malden, Sury DT36RT..) Escape doesn't have the Governor's Office, etc. all the puzzles. It's not one of world's greatest parser or It's not until the player VOCABULARY those Adventures with vocabulary, but it does have a  ATMOSPHERE hundreds of locations in most returns to his first location, PERSONAL well thought out plot. and starts sorting out the small of which nothing seems to  VALUE "


"TELE-GAMES The leading Video game specialists offer homepages I CBS a OLEDO on 100's of cartridges for 2600 INTELIVISION SEGA (Nintendo BOA Nintendo — arriving soon Send for lists (state make of game) TELEGAMES, WIGSTON. LEICESTER. LES 1 TE (0533-880445) ALL SOFTWARE CHECKED Maros Computers Ltd 42 Market St, Longton, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffs Tel: 0782 319144 COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD, MSX. ACORN, HOME and BUSINESS 30% DISCOUNT e.g. 9.95 will be 6.95 7.95 will be 5.50 ALL NEW GAMES COME STRAIGHT INTO STOCK ANY ENQURIES PLEASE PHONE. SEND SAE FOR FULL LIST \"Apologies to people who sent orders for Fight Night, there are short delays. Please bear with us THIS MONTH ONLY OUR R.R.P. PRICE Dragons Skulle (64) 9.95 Combat Leader (C64) 14.95 2.99 Law of the West (C64) 9.95 1.99 Paper Boy (C64) 9.95 6.95 Football Manager (C64) 9.95 5.95 Elite Disk 14.95 6.50 Dambusters (64) 9.95 3.50 Cyberun (48) 9.95 1.99 Zorro (48) 7.95 Revolution (48) 1.99 Football Manager (48) 5.95 Tau Ceti (48) 3.99 Superman (48) 3.50 Kung-Fu Master Arnst) 1.99 Alien 8 (Amst) 1.99 Bruce Lee (Amst) 1.99 Football Manager Amst) 9.95 5.95 Block Busters or Gold Run Amst) 9.95 2.99 Drelbs (Atar) 9.95 1.99 Fort Apocalypse (Atari) 9.95 1.99 Football Manager (Atari) 9.95 Gun Fright (MX) 9.95 Trivial Pursuits (C64. Amst, 48) 14.95 9.50 Head cleaners 50p with any purchase while stocks last. All MSX Cartridges $10.99 Prices incl P&P. please allow 10 days delivery Overseas add 75p per cartridge Cheques Postal Orders made payable to: Maros Computers Ltd Credit card phone orders welcome BASIC 9.95 995 5.95 1.99 * Blast into the computer world with BLAST 64! and BLAST 64! *Two great new \"Compu-Mags\" for the Commodore 64 and Amstrad 464 on tape. * Backed by the top software companies and our in-house programmers. * Lots of Arcade and Adventure game reviews/previews + The hottest gossip around. * Pokes and tips galore. Monthy Pofile and Qulz. * Completely FREE advertising for everybody *All orders come complete with an original, top quality Adventure game. * Release date: 19th December 1986 Delivered in good time for Christmas, * Send 90p with own C60 tape or .40 without to: PAUL BODEN. 9 BLACKBURNE HOUSE. BERESFORD STREET. WARRINGTON CHESHIRE WA1 3SA. Do not forget to state which format you require (BLAST 641 or 4641). a NOW AVAILABLE the official Spectrum Upgrade! Turn your Spectrum into la Spectrum + for just  FREE! Makes a Christmas great present + .50 p + p ACCESS WELCOME ORDER NOW!  Professional full-size keyboard -includes 17 extra keys.  Responsive typewriter-style action  Accepts all current Spectrum software and peripherals. Inverse video Graphics 9. True video elete Edit Caps lock com Apa Sinelar BESTITORETTO WHEE KTOTT DIT SH EUmode Caps Shift Full stop Semicolon Inverted comma Cursor controls Comma The official Spectrum Upgrade. Naturally your upgraded computer will accept all the peripherals in your Sinclair systemInterface 1, Microdrives and so on. as well as all Spectrum software, Just as important, new Spectrum software and peripherals will be designed with the Spectrum + in mind. So the Sinclair upgrade adds stylish looks, new capabilities ... and new potential for the future, HOW TO ORDER BY MAIL 1. If you require us to do the upgrade for you please send .95 + .50P+pTotal .45. 2. Should you require the do-it-yourself kit just send .00+ .50 p +. Total .50. 3. If you require your Spectrum to be repaired and upgraded to a Spectrum Plus we have a special offer price of just .00 complete. Orders can be placed by using your Access Card on the numbers below. Here's some exciting news for Spectrum owners ... the official Spectrum Upgrade Kit. The Upgrade has everything you need to turn your Spectrum into the stylish new Spectrum +. You don't even need an understanding of electronics, just the ability to solder a few wires together! The leaflet in the kit gives clear, step by step instructions. If you're not sure about doing it yourself, don't worry, Simply return your 48K Spectrum to us and for .95 + .50 D + p we'll upgrade it for you. The bigger, better Spectrum keyboard The Spectrum + measures 121/2\" X 6'. It has a large typewriter style keyboard, with hard, moulded keys. You'll find the new keyboard has a smooth, positive action ideal for touch-typing, word processing, simulation programs, and extended programming sessions. Two retractable legs give a perfect typing position There are 58 keys in all including 17 new keys. Programmers will be pleased to see dedicated punctuation keys, a space bar, and separate shift keys for graphics and extended modes. And a reset button allows you to clear a program from your computer's memory without disconnecting the power supply Ltd. VUGUVU videovault Upgrade Dept. 140 High Street West, Glossop, Derbyshire SK138HJ Tel: (04574) 66555/67761 & Manchester 061-236 0376  Copyright Videovault Ltd No 689032 "


"MOVENTURE G-VG REVIEWS MeeNMIST Our American broken on a hunt by an adult gleaming mahogany table. adventure detective, elephant stepping on it. Tammar looks great, fitting Marshall M. Lionel's revenge was to right in with all the leathershoot the beast and bring back bound chairs and plaster Rosenthal, has just its foot to use as an umbrella friezes of cupids at play. discovered this diary which stand in the castle's foyer. Good food too, but I'm not he thinks holds a clue to Infocom's latest There's even mention of some too keen on the guests. Vivien of the curios and mementos Pentreath seems okay. She's adventure, read on... that he brought back with him kind of a free spirit, a 9.00 A.M.: April 19th: Hell of bohemian, painter and a night. How many bars did I sculptor. go to anyhow? Good thing I She looks like she's like instant coffee, 'cause my accumulated a lot of secrets head feels like a tin can stuffed about this place over the with gravel, rolling downhill. years. I wonder if there's Morning mail. Usual bills, anything to the rumour that boring ads and unwanted she once was Lionel's pitches for computers and mistress? microwave ovens. Hey! A Then there's the so-called letter from London. No, make Honourable Iris Vane. A cold that Cornwall. Don't know hearted customer anyone there, do I? Some It's also odd how Jack's old detective, stop the deducting girlfriend, Deirdre Hallam, and open the damn thing. It's drowned so soon after he from Tammar. What's she broke up with her. Especially doing away from the States? considering that it was over Hmm. Imagine that, her flirting with his best friend, engaged to British nobility. Ian Fordyce. Too bad Jack Tresyllian is Speaking of lan, of course financially strapped since he he was invited to this too. I took over the title from his wonder if he really deserves dead Uncle. his reputation as a lady's man? Still, now it's Lord Jack and It's hard to believe that he and he DOES have the castle, Jack are still good friends. heirlooms and all, even if he The servants are all acting has had to turn it into a tourist like out of a scene from attraction. How did a poisonous snake from his excursions across the Upstairs, Downstairs. I heard Just what I want to read, get into her desk drawer? world. Those might warrant a one say in passing that Deirdre two pages of gossip on old Hallucinations or no, looks closer look. has been rejuvenated as an friends of the dead Uncle and like I'm on my way to 7.00 P.M. (local time) April ancient ghost, the White Lady, members of the upper crust\". England. 26th: Some place for a castle, and is making the rounds of Apparently there's going to 2.30 P.M. (or maybe that's this countryside gives me the the castle's newer Residential be a memorial birthday dinner 7.30 — I always get these time willies it would have to be a Wing. for the dear departed later this zone changes confused): April full moon tonight! Heck of a Not to mention the ghoulish month, and I'm invited. Some 24th: Fortunately, I can bone time for a birthday party, even comments that must get sense of humour she's got. up on the castle during the if the guest of honour won't be whispered with Dr Wendish Well, I wish her luck. airline flight. The tourist attending. Well, Lord Jack being here. It seems that 9.15 A.M.: April 23rd: brochure that Tammar stuck seems a right-enough guy, but Deirdre's grandfather recently Another letter from Tammar? in one of her letters goes into something other than this died after seeing Wendish, She must be reading about just about every section of the macabre event seems to be who is supposed to be an Jack the Giant Killer and castle, from the stone turrets bothering him. authority on rare diseases. other Cornish legends. Now poking through the mist to the Better hurry if I want to get Well at least there's no it's black widow spiders and hedge maze complete with a something to eat (I guess continued on page 88 nightly visits from the ghost of stone fountain filled with dressing for dinner here Jack's old dead girlfriend. goldfish. requires a bit more panache Leave it to Tammar to create a It even includes such than jeans and sneakers). Haunted Castle. Wait a secimpertinent information as the Some Dining Room. almost bitten by an adder? time Lord Lionel's foot got Great big fireplace, esas "


"GVG B REVIEWS MeeNMIST mistaking the take a hostility directed time at the antique to earn dealer, Montague my keep and Hyde. You can see look. More later ... the delight in his eyes every The diary ends here the rest time he gazes at another of the pages have been torn heirloom that he might be able out to cart off, if Jack can't meet Such is the burden of being the debts on the estate left to an accomplished young sleuth. him along with everything else. You've no recourse but to go I guess his Lordship is and help your friend. Along resigned to having to deal with the way, you'll have to him. participate in a deadly serious 9.30 P.M.: April 26th: Quite a treasure hunt, find out what's meal. But I guess I wasn't the going on with all this ghost only one surprised to hear business, and deal with the Lionel's voice broadcasting cream(?) of British society. out of his bronze bust over in What's more, there might the corner by the south wall. just yet be a deadbody Some dessert! before this is all over. Before, it was just a YOURS! supposition that one of Interactive text adventures Lionel's valuable treasures may come and go, but might be lying aroundInfocom is forever. something Jack could hope for With this in mind, enter to pay off the debts. But now, Moonmist and the world of instantly go to any location by The hint of fog upon the it's open season for the whole polite society, Lords and just typing in its name. moors, the half heard wail of a crowd. Ladies, genteel manners, and A Gothic mystery also has distant ship off the coast. These kind of fun 'n' games hidden wickedness. rules that must be obeyed. Playability has been greatly aren't to my liking. And Moonmist is an One of them is to imply increased as there are actually there's still the question of introductory-level mystery. violence, without going for the four complete and separate whether Tammar is just appealing to both the younger jugular by dragging in too versions of the game to paranoid, or if someone or player as well as those who graphic reality. explore. Each one is different. SOMETHING is really after have never tried a text Jim Lawrence, Galley's shuffling the clues, hiding a her. adventure game. collaborator on Moomist, has treasure in a different 10.00 P.M.: April 26th: Author Stu Talley's written many of the Hardy location, forcing you to reEveryone is being ever so philosophy is to try and get Boy and Nancy Drew evaluate the characters and polite and correct about this people involved, by making Mysteries. motive of the other people. whole affair. So much so that the program work for them Lawrence is a master at The program comes my supicions are throbbing at and with them. creating tense situations equipped with that tourist me like a migraine headache. \"One way to do this,\" he without resorting to the tired brochure mentioned above, as I just found a secret door in says, \"is by having things cliches of blood, gore and axe well as a map of the castle. my room (Tammar says happen FOR the player, like a wielding madmen. Besides a booklet on the Queen Victoria once spent the door open that is closed but Moonmist allows you to play Legendary Ghosts of night here, if so, she didn't not locked it's not necessary as either boy or girl. A butler Cornwall, there's also a neat leave any souvenirs). to make the player do everywill ask you for your name iron-on patch. Anyway, this would single action.\" upon arrival to the castle... Some prefer no more certainly explain some of the Galley continues: **There's Lord or Lady? excitement than that of a well mysterious comings and goings no reason not to help the From then on, the program lit and well locked room. But that the servents have been player during his adventure. recognises your gender. A for those bold enough to talking about. not help him off the bed unisex form of address is also venture out amidst the bog Nothing supernatural about if he forgot he was sitting supplied for those uncertain and craggy rocks, great this hidden passageway just down?\" Galley believes that The fun of Gothic novels is adventure plain dark. he. and the program, have an not so much in the events awaits. Smells awful musty, and it obligation to be helpful. This themselves, as in the doesn't look like anyone descriptions of surroundings bothers to dust. Oh well, command which lets the player and atmosphere. "


"Crime is a disease. He's the cure. STALLONE COBRA SPECTRUM ocea COMMODORE 64 .95 .95 1929 arm 004460 c 1986 Warner Bros. Inc. All rights reserved AMSTRAD 6 Central Street Manchester M2 SNS Tel 061834 3939-Telex: 669977 "


"COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES SOOO PREDD "


"BOLLAND Melbourne House "


"For the COMMODORE, AMSTRAD, BBC MICRO, ELECTRON REPTON 3 THE ULTIMATE CHALLENGE The Screen Editor. The Character Editor. DUDE Being pursued by a Monster The Time Bomb is located The Poisonous Fungus grows insidiously Collecting a Golden Crown Are you ready for the ultimate challenge? Our original Repton game was immediately acclaimed as a refreshingly new concept: a game requiring dexterity to complete its arcade-style elements, and clear logical thinking to solve its strategic puzzles Repton involves retrieving treasure from cleverly-constructed traps of falling rocks whilst avoiding the fearsome monsters and haunting spirits. \"This is an astounding game reaching new heights in BBC arcade adventures.\" enthused the Micro User magazine Last Christmas saw the release of Repton 2, larger and much more challenging than before. Acorn User's Technical Editor Bruce Smith wrote: \"Repton 2 is better than anything I've played on the BBC Micro or Electron. Brillianti\" Now, completely rewritten and improved for the Commodore, Amstrad, BBC Micro and Electron, we proudly present Repton 3. For the first time, a screen-designer is included: try to devise screens that will perplex your friends, then see if you can solve their newly-designed screens. Another fion is the character designer which enables you to design your own monsters, rocks, eggs, spirits, diamonds... any characters can be redefined as you wish. Repton 3 is much larger than its predecessors it has 24 fascinating screens, and players who are skilful enough to complete them all can enter our prize competition described below. All the favourite Repton characters have been retained, together with several new features: a creeping poisonous fungus which grows at an alarming rate; time bombs and time capsules (for puzzles in the 4th dimension); and golden crowns as well-deserved rewards for your endeavours. Can YOU complete Replon 3? PRIZE COMPETITION If you complete Repton 3. you can enter our competition. Prizes include over  in cash, with T-shirts, mugs, badges and pens for runners-up. COMMODORE 64/128 AMSTRAD CPC 464/664/6128 BBC MICROS: B, B+, MASTER, MASTER COMPACT ELECTRON Commodore Cassette........$9.95 BBC Micro Cassette............$9.95 Commodore Disc............$11.95 BBC Micro Disc................$11.95 Amstrad Cassette..... .....59.95 Master Compact Disc.......$14.95 Amstrad Disc......................$14.95 Electron Cassette...... ....$9.95 7 SUPERIOR The screen pictures VISA SOFTWARE ACORNSAF above show the Limited BBC Micro version of Repton 3. 24 HOUR TELEPHONE Dept. R14, Regent House, Skinner Lane, Leeds LS7 1AX. Telephone: 0532 459453. ANSWERI narlane leadele AV Talanhana052945AE ANSWERING SERVICE FOR ORDERS OUR QUARANTEE  All mail orders are despatched within 24 hours by first class post.  Postage and packing is free  Faulty cassettes and discs will be replaced immediately "


"FREE WITH ORDERS OVER .00 IN VALUE .00 WORTH OF LEISURE TIME HOLIDAY VOUCHERS Leisure Time Vouchers are redeemableny ABT Travel Agent o vewwwwww AND FOR EVERY EXTRA .00 YOU SPEND YOU RECEIVE AN EXTRA .00 VOUCHER COMMODORE TITLES 8 .95 .95 .95 SINGLE TAPES CASSETTE SUICIDE STRIKE .50 SOLD A MILLION DRELBS .50 ELITE .95 IMOTEP .95 KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT .99 BLACKWYTCH BARGAINS FROM 1st PUBLISHING TIGERS IN THE SNOW .99 OUTLAWS .99 8 BOOKS FOR JUST .95 + .50 p&p ZORRO .99 LAZY JONES f2.95 Normal RRP over .00 BATTLE FOR NORMANDY .99 YOUR 64 CASSETTE BOOK, GRAPHICS BOOK GRIBBLYS DAY OUT .95 CONGO BONGO .95 FOR THE COMMODORE 64, PEAKS & POKES DOUGHBOY DRAGONSKULLE .50 C64, TRICKS & TIPS FOR YOUR COMMODORE SABRE WULF .50 64, ADVANCED MACHINE LANGUAGE BOOK FIGHT KNIGHT .99 HARVEY SMITHS SHOW JUMPING FOR THE C64, IDEA BOOK C64, MACHINE FLAK .99 LANGUAGE BOOK FOR THE C64 3D LUNAR ATTACK .99 GHOST CHASER .99 1st PUBLISHING PROGRAMS ON DISC. SHOOT THE RAPIDS LAW OF THE WEST .95 ALL JUST .95 EACH HOVER BOVER REDHAWK .95 FIRSTWORD (WORD PROC. KNOCKOUT FIRSTBASE (DATABASE FRAK .95 JET SET WILLY BASIC 64 BEAMRIDER .95 PASCAL LANGUAGE MANIC MINER WHO DARES WINS II .95 ADA TRAINING COURSE BC'S QUEST FOR TIRES BOMBO .95 POWER PLAN CALCULATION PROG.) FIGHTING WARRIOR .99 ASSEMBLER MONITOR (COMPILER) ARC PANDORA .95 DUMMY RUN GYROSCOPE .95 64 CARTRIDGES EVERYONES A WALLY .95 TERRORMELINOS .95 ROBOTRON 2084 BY ATARISOFT .95 VIEW TO KILL KONG STRIKES BACK .95 DONKEY KONG BY ATARISOFT .95 EUREKA .50 WORLD SERIES BASEBALL DEFENDER BY ATARISOFT COLOSSAL ADVENTURE .95 SOLO FLIGHT .95 MOON PATROL BY ATARISOFT .95 CRAZY COMETS .95 EDDIE KIDDS JUMP CHALLENGE .95 MS PACMAN BY ATARISOFT STAR TROOPER .95 BEYOND THE FORBIDDEN FOREST .50 DIG DUG BY ATARISOFT DARK TOWER .95 JEFF CAPES STRONGMAN .95 UTILITIES & PERIPHERALS SNOWBALL .95 THING ON A STRING .50 HIGH NOON .95 SIMONS BASIC EXTENSION DISC or CASS. BOUNDER .95 .95 BRIDGE PLAYER II .95 SKY FOX .95 C2N DATA RECORDERS .95 PINBALL WIZARD .95 SUMMER GAMES II .50 1551 DISC DRIVES FOR C16 and +4 .95 DEATH STAR INTERCEPTOR .95 WINTER GAMES .50 FASSEM MC LANG, ASS .99 ADVENTURE QUEST .95 WIZARDY .95 TOUCH TYPE (CASS.) .95 LORDS OF TIME .95 KERMIT ELECTRONIC STORY MAKER .50 TONY HARTS ART MASTER CASS. .95 MATCH FISHING .95 UP & DOWN .99 MONEY MANAGER DISC) .95 ROLANDS RAT RACE .95 NOW GAMES .95 COMMODORE MODEMS .95 HENRYS HOUSE VOL 1 4 GAMES .95 WHITE LIGHTNING .95 INTRO TO BASIC PT. II CASS) .95 HENRYS HOUSE VOL 1-4 GAMES .95 SOUTHERN BELLE .95 INTRO TO BASIC PT. I (DISC) .95 COMBAT LEADER .95 EASY FILE DISC COMMODORE 64 DISCS GROGS REVENGE .99 .99 PROGRAMMERS REF GUIDES .95 BEACH HEAD .95 SHEEP IN SPACE (DISCI .99 ADVENTURELAND SECRET MISSION .95 HOVER BOVER DISCI MACRO ASSEMBLER DEVELOPMENT (DISC) .99 .99 PIRATE ADVENTURE VOODOO CASTLE .95 GALACTIC CONTROLLER .95 FUTURE FINANCE (DISCI .99 SELECT 1 (12 GAMES .95 HIGH FLYER .95 EASY SCRIPT .99 JUMPMAN .50 RAIL BOSS DR. WATSONS 64 ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE SILICON WARRIOR .50 MONTY ON THE RUN .99 COURSE (DISC) .95 LUNAR OUTPOST .50 ZORK 1 .99 COMMODORE 128 MUSIC MAKER .95 PITSTOP .95 ZORK 2 .99 MUSIC STUDIO BY ACTIVISION (CASS. .95 CAUSES OF CHAOS .99 ZORK 3 .99 EASY SPELL (DISC) .99 BLADE RUNNER .99 STARCROSS COMMODORE 64 M/MAKER .50 JOURNEY .99 DEADLINE BREDENS BASIC DISC & CASS WILLIAM WOBBLER .95 SUSPENDED .99 SCRIPT & WORD PROC. CART BASILDON BOND .95 SPIRIT OF STONES DISC) .95 FOR C16 & + 4 .95 MASTER OF THE LAMPS .95 EXODUS ULTIMA III f4.95 COMPANY PACK 123 ACCOUNTING .95 SUPER ZAXXON CONTROL SYSTEM FOR + 4 ON DISC .95 PASTFINDER .95 ROCK 'N' BOLT .95 CHIMERA/WILLOW PATTERN .95 p&p 75p all orders WEB DIMENSION overseas .00 per tape, .95 .95 BATTLE BRITAIN ROCKY HORROR SHOW .95 THEATRE EUROPE .95 .50 per pack .00 per peripherals MOEBIUS .99 AZTEC CHALLENGE .95 MOTOCROSS .99 THING ON A STRING .95 LOGIC SALES LTD JUICE .50 FIGHTING WARRIOR .95 6 Midgate Peterborough Cambs NEVER ENDING STORY  4.95 RED HAWK 24 hour ordering on 0733 313870 05 "


"1.D.E.A.S Hi, Melissa R. here. This issue I.D.E.A.S Central has expanded to cover four pages which means that each month we will be able to bring you more hints, tips and pokes for YOUR computer. And when you write to IC in the future, please enclose a recent photo of yourself passport size if possible. Who knows, one issue you may open up C+VG and find your features staring out! Just imagine the fame at school, or being mobbed as you walk down the street! Send everything to Melissa Ravenflame, I.D.E.A.S. Central, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. See you next issue! Sale Gebie SPECTRUM SPECTRUM Uridium Playing tips from the determine which components of keep going up the screen and masters themselves at Hewson. the Dreadnought are destructable, moving to the left until you find an Don't fly over the generator ports so shoot all obstacles to be safe. enchanted crystal. The crystal will as they will despatch mines which Avoid area with long shadows on give you firing power. Once you will home in on your Manta fighter. the Super Dreadnought because are in possession of an enchanted Remember to make a 90 degree this denotes a high surface which crystal you should enter a house turn when trying to manoeuvre you could fly into. To gain height and try and steal something. You though narrow spaces, ie, when and fly above alien missiles you can then use these objects to flying betwen aeriel masts. Hold should flip direction and do a half barter with other tradesfolk. Try the fire button down and move up loop/roll. After the 'Land Now stealing a couple of broomsticks or down message appears on the screen, from the Witch. Go in search of Attack the alien waves from the Wizard who will be able to give behind as they always fire runway of the Super Dreadnought you some interesting information frontwards. as soon as possible, in order to t o help you. Beware of the fireballs Destroy complete alien waves avoid the extra nasty aliens which which you will encounter on your to gain bonus points. Shoot all appear after the message. travels.If you run into them, you ground target to gain bonus Hewson have also sent these will lose a life. points. You will be unable to tips and hints for Firelord. At the To pass the ice flames (white beginning of the game, you should fireballs) you must run at them head on and then retreat rapidly before they change into deadly fireballs. Try to avoid the green figures which look like enchanted crystals. If you hit them they will steal your crystal thus reducing your firing power. You can barter with the Herbalist to gain a magic spell. This will enable you to transport to a magic place very quickly. Below you will find some drawings and hints to get you through the game, Charlie Morgan of Croydon has just managed to escape from Ocean's The Great Escape. You must escape with the right combination of objects otherwise you will be recaptured and sent to TO GET ACRYSTAL ICE FLAMES NI DATA TECHNICAL LOCATIONS SIO . OVER NVILLE, FOREST GREY k tre H CARACTERS CHE AIC PLACES LTE POROSES A CHERGY Pous CRYSTALS, PASS BETWEEN PAL OF Site TOUCHING THEM WITHOUT HERBALSTS LIVE IN THE CAST HOUSES AND SELL TIMESCAPES ALLONG TIMEL TELEPORTING 70 MAGIC PLACES THESE PER THONG FLAME AS IT BASS PASS UNDER A FLANE CROSS TO ACTIVATE A NE R FLARE BE DESTROYED STONES PASS THROUGH AGIC PASSAGES WECHAGAS SEULET GAME OBJECTIVES THEME THERE ARE FOR CHARACTERS THE Foot EACH OF ABOUT FORON CONSOS OF WHO CHARNS, POSSA SON OF ALFA THE QUEEN THEM ONCE HOLDS AND RETURN THIS TO BTAINED YOU MUST TAKE THESE RESTORE Acou. THE PLACA THE "


"Sokol 1861 spy YPAGE solitary! If you do manage to LETS BUMS * escape and do not have the right OTT objects with you, the message will C. CEDROOM give you a clue at what objects are B: * To TCOME DU needed to escape successfully There are three keys altogether, ECAD The first key is easily found in the F: FOEM room next to the cells Guct using it will give you access to more ROCAL HAPECSET rooms containing: German ACEA Uniform this is very useful if you 1 Lock wear it you can explore the 'out of JE SVE! bounds' rooms with a reasonable degree of safety. Ordinary A MACE WITH A soldiers will not cart you off to Pin COS X PLA41 THE solitary, but, beware of the TING OF THE CHME commandant, he will still show no mercy. Also by continuously dropping, picking up and wearing the uniform you can restore your EXERCISE flagging morale level and boost YAD your score by 50 points at a time. It is not advisable to be found wearing the uniform when you escape or you will be shot as a spy. Torch you will need this to explore the underground tunnels for the first time, map them and you won't need the torch again. Si Don't drop anything while the GESTO TOM guards are about. If you are looking for somewhere to hide THOMINES anything the best place is the THIS WALTER IS THE KEY TO DocL tunnel underneath the stove in your own hut. Nearly everywhere get one parcel a day. You will only restored to their original place. need to get through door L and the else is searched regularly. get all four if: (a) Get the first Shovel useful for digging your key for this was very slyly hidden Red Cross Parcels these parcel that arrives hide it way though one of the blocked below the watchtower marked M. arrive in a certain order. The first somewhere safe, then tunnels. There are so many Once you have the papers it is parcel is a bag of goodies. Next up deliberately get caught doing locked doors, but don't bother time to don the burnt cork, shoe is the Cutters the most useful something really naughty and trying to find keys for all of them as polish, balaclava and plan the object in the game, without them thrown in the slammer. (b) Then there are only three keys in the escape. Which part of the camp to there is no escape. The third the next morning when you are game and you will need to find the escape from is a matter of choice parcel is a bar of chocolate. This is released a new Red Cross parcel lock picking equipment to open and will at the least require cutting useful for creating diversions for will arrive and so on until you get the others. Strangely enough you through one set of fence. One of that subtle getaway. Just give it to all four. If you get caught with a have to pick a lock on one of the the best routes is via the tunnel a fellow prisoner and he will attract Red Cross parcel on you, that doors in order to pick a lock on leading from your hut to the the guards while you do a triple object will appear in the new another door to get the key which exercise yard. There is only one backwards half twist sommersault parcel the next day. If you are sent unlocks the door you first picked! fence to cut through, no dogs and over the fence. to solitary any doors that you had Confused? Charlie was. This only one guard in the yard The last parcel contains the unlocked will be locked again, so offending door is door K, which except of course during exercise compass which is also essential make sure you know where the will eventually lead you to the periods. You will have to make for escape. That's all in the Red key is and any objects you were papers you need to help you to three trips-carrying cutters and Cross department and you only carrying will also be taken and escape. To get the lock pick you object, cut through fence, drop object and return with cutters. Get the second object and cut through the fence again, drop the cutters, pick up first object and then run like mad to the edge of the screen and Freedom. So, remember the key points it is important to know where the camp commandant is (so you can avoid him). Tunnels are found in the most unexpeted places, but, remember a torch may be needed if you go somewhere dark. Red Cross parcels may contain more than food-many secrets will be revealed if you stand on top of it to pick it up and then use it. Those dogs look dangerous... how about poisoning their food! If you escape remember you need to have a compass and forged papers to expediate your escape. If all of this wasn't enough Charlie has even sent in this map to make things easier for you. TRON WITHOUT PING ANYTHING MAINE TRADED FOR A TIESAPE How To CHEAT VAN E FRESCO FOR A PATICAR MAL PLACE E AND PROTEOS MAJENE SELDE KLEP WIR FRE THE WINKELS MAY WHEN CREATED THE MUC PURE TOMATESORA) CERT TELEPORTED W a> PRINCESS NON MAGIC PLACES MUST CONVOUS ACTION 2 JE THE POSTORDRE PORTS 30331 WOLE SERVICE YOU EOS AND SELCG CHARACTERS AND COM SERVICE AND SET THAT WAY LEFT) BACK OUR FINALLY S RIGHT TO SELECT TO THE WE OFFER WHICH HAS APPEARED THERE ARE 1 MAGIC PLACES IN ALL "


"COMMODORE Anthony Winter of Tyne and Wear has found a cheat for Fist II, which will allow you to walk on water, walk over pits and waterfalls and walk past guards and other nasties. When you move and the screen starts to scroll press \"Restore\" until your fighter freezes. If you do it correctly your fighter will continue to move without moving his body. To make move normally press \"Restore\" until he does. While in this mode you will not see all of the main sprites and so cannot pick them up. Dominic Hoare of Kent also found this to work on his C128 (in C64 mode). He also found that some fights cannot be avoided and so if you walk into a room in which there is a man with a lot of strength, then walk out and in again until the computer decided that he is a man of little strength. Thanks guys! A couple of issues back a reader was asking for some help in getting into 'witch-space on Elite. Denzil Herron of Middlesex sent in this solution -first freeze the game and press the letter X then restart the game and when you go into 'hyper-space press the CTRL' key during countdown, you will then enter 'witch-space. this will also work on C64. Denzil noticed that while playing Elite on his C64 that if you sell more than 10 kg of platinum you do not get the amount of credits that you are owed, so, you should sell platinum at 10 kg a time. Toby Flight also heard the plea for help and wrote in with this lot something unmentioned in the manual is that if you press 'F' whilst on long range chart, the words 'Planet name?' appears. Just type in the name and it is pointed out. Useful for finding planet Orarra in Galaxy 2 where the constrictor lurks. When in Witch space, shoot a mothership and release an energy bomb. The invasion craft only release a certain amount of Tharglets at a time, so you can shoot them down without too much interference. Never ever buy Trumbles. They are a pain and cost 6,000 cr. Mining lasers are good for fighting. Does anyone know if shooting Vipers on this version add to the rating?  JERRY Paris Hooray I hear you scream as you see the maiden in the top left of over yet. Press the fire button down and keep it down when climbing up all the ladders, DO NOT take your finger off, even as you approach the maiden. As soon as you are standing in front of her, then and only then have you finished the game. And you should thank Dean Hughes of Stoke on Trent for getting you through. 50,112,119 160 DATA 62,200,237,79,201, 62,250,50 170 DATA 142,250,62,177,50, 145,250,33 180 DATA 177,250,17,177,249, 122,1,38 190 DATA 0,237,176,50,202, 249,50,206 200 DATA 249,50,214,249,62, 201,50,215 210 DATA 249,205,177,249,33, 93,253,34 220 DATA 168,252,195,127,252, 62,166,50 230 DATA 136,146,175,50,190, 143,195,128 240 DATA 101 Type this in then run. When prompted play the original Batman tape. More for the Spectrum come from J Belt of Cleveland POKES A couple of quickies for the new get to the bottom right of the one from Infogrames, The screen where there is a black Inheritance. Firstly, you are better horseshoe, get this and you have off using the stairs. You can find completed a task. For the next money in the plate on the dresser. task, go to the hotel room and get Be prepared to make two the bell, take this to the next journies, leave your passport screen on the right. Go to the top of this screen and stand under the last. The people you meet require left arch. Drop the bell and it the same items each time so should be ringing. Do this again make a note. In part 2, make sure with the second bell and the right you have had something to eat, bell. These should be ringing in are following correct airport harmony. Go back to the hotel and procedure and catch the plane at get the buale, go left of the screen the right time. In part 3, visit the and stand on the see-saw, now jeweller and pawnbroker and keep press the fire button and a note your wits with both. Make sure you should fly in the air with a tune keep a track of names and faces playing. Do not move, wait for a of almost everything you see. guard to come down to you, kill Some readers have written in and him. Do this a few times to be on asked us to finish off the Zorro the safe side. Go to the top of the playing tips we ran a couple of screen to get the boot. Go to the months ago. So, just for them hotel and get the key, go to the here's the final solution. Get the room with the bells and go down. cup shaped object and go back up Work your way across to the the ladder. Go to the hotel and get bottom left of this screen and go the animal brander from the top down the ladder. You should now left of the screen. Now make your be in a room with a small ladder in way to the 'well screen and go up the top middle. Make your way up to the second level go across this this ladder and you should be in a level and onto the next screen. room with prisoners situated on 3 This screen has a bull in the levels. Release them by walking bottom right corner. To the right of past with your fire button pressed the bull is a brick structure with down be careful here as there more branders on, drop the is a sniper whose path is very brander in front of this. Next to this easy to follow here now go all is a springboard (it's really a pair the way back to the hotel where of bellows) jump up and down on there is a fuse. Get this and go this about 5 times. Get off the back to the prisoners. When you bellows and take the brander, it are there use their formation as should be orange, walk with it steps to get to the next screen on towards the bull. He should run the left. Once in this room you off. Go up the nearest ladder to must dodge and go left again. Here we have a poke for infinite lives and infinite springy jumps on Batman for the Spectrum. 10 CLEAR 65535 20 LET SUM=O 30 FOR N=64768 TO 64872 40 READ A 50 POKE NA 60 LET SUM=SUM+A 70 NEXT N 80 IF SUM 13441 THEN PRINT \"ERROR IN DATA\":STOP 90 PRINTSTART\" BATMAN TAPE 100 RANDOMIZE USR 64768 110 DATA 17.26,6,221,33,48, 117,175 120 DATA 61,55,205,86,5,243, 48,240 130 DATA 17,131,250,213,1,48, 122,197 140 DATA 1,52,2,33,98,119, 62,68 150 DATA 50,109,119,62,250, 10 CLEAR 24832: LOAD \" \"CODE 65000: LOAD\"\" CODE 20 POKE 65141,154: POKE 65148,29: POKE 65149,255 30 FOR F=65309 TO 65321: READ A: POKE FA: NEXT F 40 DATA 62,201,50,144,188,62,201.50, 17,189,195,0,178 50 RANDOMIZE USR 65118 Molecule Man 10 CLEAR 24999: LOAD\"\" CODE:LOAD\" \"SCREEN$ 20 RANDOMIZE USR 23296 30 POKE 64585.0 40 RANDOMIZE USR 75060 Saboteur 10 CLEAR 24200 20 LOAD\" \"SCREEN$ 30 LOAD\" \"CODE 40 POKE 46998,0:POKE 29894,0 50 RANDOMIZE USR 63972 "


"DRAGONS LAIR Escape from Singe's Castle PART II In this adaptation of the arcade classic, you continue where Dragons Lair part one finished. Daring Dirk, having rescued the fair Princess Daphne, decides to go back through the Dragon's hair and relieve Singe of some of the gold that is in the castle, which is under the protection of the cunning and lethal Lizard King You will need lighting reflexes and judgement to fight the Lizard King and avoid the giant rolling marbles, In this adventure you will be rushed down rapids in a barrel and sent down corridors on a magical flying horse and other dangerous deeds will present problems for you. Finally, direct Dirk to freedom through the realm of the mud monsters who come alive from the very earth itself to enslave Dirk and turn him into much like themselves navigate the dangerous terrain, jump across the chusmark freedom is yours Lead on Adventurer! SLO 481 8 more screens from the arcade classic to tax your brains and Engers. SOFTWARE PROJECTS NUUSB YE RIVER CAVES DUNGEONS OF THE LIZARD KING AVAILABLE NOW ON Commodore 6 1 128 TAPE .95 & DISC .95 Panen AVAILABLE SOON FOR: Spectrum 18 128......... .  Amstrad 161 6616128 Tape .............. 28.95Disc .............11.95 AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD COMPUTER RETAIL OUTLETS DRAGONS LAIR Owned by Magicom Inc. and used by permission Copyright All rights reserved Character Designs Copyright 1983 Don Bluth. Software Projects Ltd, Unit 7 Bearbrand Complex, Allerton Road, Woolton, Liverpool L.25 7SF. Telephone: 051-428 9393 Telex: 627520 OFFICIALLY LICENSED HOME COMPUTER VERSION OF THE NO.1 ARCADE HIT "


"HETA S T NINA MORE THAN JUST A FIGHTING GAME MORE THAN JUST ANOTHER ADVENTURE EXPERIENCE THE STATE OF THE MARTIAL ARTS THE FACTS @ SNIA With over 125 different screens, 300 k of programming, more than 1,000 sprites, you take control of The Last Ninja with an option of sixty different moves if you can find the right weapons. Fight Samurais with swords, pit your wits against different guards or fight hand to hand against karate experts. You are armed with stars, swords, Ninja magic, nunchkus, staffs, spears, even good luck charms to defeat evil. Find the Ninjitsu scrolls and kill the evil shogun, dragons, bears, dogs and other such evils that will try to prevent you. You cannot fail, you are THE LAST NINJA. Available from Jan 31 on the C64, Spectrum, Amstrad, Atari ST & 800 SYSTEM 3 GOING BEYOND THE THRESHOLD S YSTEM 3 Davis House, 29 Hatton Garden ECIN 8DA. Tel. 01 831 7403, Telex 896691/H675. "


"C+VG COMPETITION GIVE AN ARCADE MACHINE A GOOD HOME! ABOUT THE GAME! XEVIOUS ver wanted your very own arcade machine? Bet you have. Imagine it sitting in the corner of your living room, lights flashing and making friendly bleeping noises. Better than a budgie, isn't it?! And just think how envious your friends will be ! You'll be able to have coin-op challenges in the comfort of your own home... Admit it. We've got you hooked. Well, along with our friends at US Gold, we're offering YOU the chance to win a genuine Xevious arcade machine. This Atari coin-op was a mega-hit in the arcades and US Gold are about to release the computer versions of the game. And to celebrate that and Christmas of course! they've come up with this truly awesome prize for the winner of C+VG's Xevious Xtravaganza! And that's not all. Second prize winner will get a US Gold Grab Bag packed with US Gold games for his or her machine. Then ten runners-up will get a copy of the Xevious computer game which will be available on the C64, Spectrum and Amstrad. Five more runners up will get a Big Red T-shirt. Now this MUST be a competition you can't afford not to enter! What do we want you to do? Simple. Just send us a drawing or painting of a Xevious space ship. It could be the attacking fighter, enemy defenders or even the Mothership itself. Let your imagination run riot,'cos we'll want to print the best illustrations in a future issue of C+VG. You can use anything you like to create your picture and it can be any size. Once you've finished your picture just send it to Computer+Video Games, Xevious Xtravaganza, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Closing date for the competition is January 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and the Editor's decision is final. Remember to fix the entry coupon to your picture, otherwise we won't be able to accept it, and don't forget to tell us what machine you own, or what size T-shirt you'd like. What are you waiting for -Santa? Xevious, a four year old veteran, can still be found tucked away in the corner of most arcades. Its classic battle sequences have never really become outdated, and it's just about to enjoy a new lease of life, thanks to US Gold who's releasing the computer version. Atari originally released the game in 1983 in the UK, though it was in fact programmed a year earlier by Y Endo, an employee of Japanese based Namco. On joining Namco, Endo wrote a three-part scenario based around the planet Xevious and its inhabitants -artificially intelligent beings, which ungratefully turn nasty and threaten the planet's very existence. The game is viewed from above, though that rather flat look present in many early games when played from this viewpoint is not too obvious, thanks to some excellent graphics and a clever use of shading which gives the background more depth. Skimming above this peaceful backdrop of forests, rivers, plains and vast stretches of water are the deadly shapes of the enemy of which there are about 24 types, all different but with one thing in common-they all spew forth deadly accurate firepower which looks unalarming, rather like cannon balls, but are fatal on impact. Many of the enemy bases are stationary, but they will track your progress, firing in your direction as you try to slip past. Flying over Xevious is similar to a desperate shoot and dodge game. If you don't get the enemy installations before they fire at you, you end up having to dodge the cannon balls difficult when they interweave to block your run up the screen. The enemy mothership is, of course, particularly tricky, being massive and extremely well fortified with cannon emplacements. Still, if you accelerate, decelerate, twist and turn, you might just make it through with a whole skin and hopefully with a decently respectable score, too. There are various tricks to earn bonus points-flying over the odd flag is just one way and if you blast certain objects on your flight through the game, hidden characters will appear. There are dozens of methods of playing Xevious which can only be found through trial and error, although a book has been published giving away vital playing techniques to anyone interested in getting a high score of ten million. Xevious might be a oldie but it still ranks as one of the all time classics. The proof is in the fact that it's still around in the arcades. The only problem is that the damn editor won't let me enter the competition!! 10M C+VG/US GOLD XEVIOUS XTRAVAGANZA Name. Address Address Age Computer owned (tick box) C64 Spectrum Amstrada T-shirt size: M/L PLEASE FIX THIS COUPON SECURELY TO YOUR ENTRY "


"The Latest Smash Hit  KONAMI 1993 TM LI.  HD POLICE 12 KADRA ALBA st Screen shots from Arcade version Coming Soon for SPECTRUM .95 Available from all leading retailers and COMMODORE 64/128 CASSETTE .95 DISC .95 in case of difficulty send cheques or AMSTRAD CPC CASSETTE .95 DISC .95 postal orders to: NMC LTD., PO Box 67, London SW11 1BS. MSX CARTRIDGE .95 Tel: 01 228 6730 "


"BARGAIN SOFTWARE: Dept. C+VG 4; Unit 1; 1 Esmond Road; London W4 1JG BUY BY PHONE RING 01-995 2763 PRICE PROMISE If you wish to purchase any product from our list and find that you can buy the same product cheaper from another mail order company, simply enclose the lower amount, stating the name of the other company and where you saw the advert. (It must be a current issue), Price Promise does not apply to other companies \"Special Offers\". ORDERS OVER  DEDUCT 10% COMPILATIONS SPECTRUM QUR OUR PRICE 5.90 5.99 5.90 PRICE 30 STARSTRIKE BLUE THUNDER SON OF BLAGGER AUTOMANIA BUGABOO SPEC. MEGA WITS PSYTRON 210 GAMES WHEELE FALL GUY 20. BLADE ALLEY PENETRATOR 7.45 5.90 5.90 4.99 5.90 5.90 5.90 054 4 ZZAP SIZZLERS 2 6.70 7.45 7.45 6.70 SPEC 4 CRASH SMASHES 2 ML MONTY ON THE RUN SWEEVO'S WORLD 24 LAMES BOUNCER STARQUAKE 7. 8.95 8.99 MONTY ON THE RUN BOUNDER STARQUAKE 4.99 5.90 9.95 9.95 6.70 7.45 SPEC. SPORTS PACK SNOOKER DARTS FOOTBALL OLYMPICS DERBY DAY 8.95 5.90 CHSPOT PACI WORLD CUP FOOTBALL PILOT 64 TURBO 64 TEST MATCH CRICKET DERBY DAY GOLF 9.99 9.99 9.95 6.70 SPEC 054 GAMES PACK VIEW TO A KILL MY CODE NAME MATT 2 FRIDAY THE 13th PACK 3 TEST MATCH PYRAMID 205.993 BEAKY & EGG SNATCHERS? SPEC ACTIO PACI MISSION IMPOSSIBLE EXTERMINATOR ARMAGEDDON FREEZ BEES SAN SPADE BRAIN DAMAGE 9.95 9.95 8.95 1942 BEST OF BEYOND 5.90 7.45 11.20 7.45 7.45 7.45 6.70 5.90 5.90 11.20 6.70 5.90 5.90 5.90 3.99 5.90 7.45 5.90 2.99 6.70 7.45 AL SPECTRUM R.R.P. PAPER BOY 7.95 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE 9.99 IKARI WARRIORS 7.95 WAR 7.95 DAMBUSTERS 9.95 LEADER BOARD 7.95 PSI-5 TRADING CO 7.95 DRACULA 9.95 KAT TRAP 8.95 DAN DARE 9.95 LIGHTFORCE 7.95 KWAH 8.95 DARK SCEPTRE 9.95 T.T. RACER UCHI MATA 8.95 REVOLUTION 9.95 YIE AR KUNG FU II 7.95 FISTII 8.95 SKY RUNNER 9.95 XENO 8.95 STALLONE/COBRA 7.99 PUB GAMES (7 Games) 9.95 TRIVIAL PURSUITS 14.95 ACADEMY 9.95 G. GOOCH'S CRICKET 9.95 FOOTBALL MANAGER 8.95 GHOST & GOBLINS 7.95 TERRA CRESTA 7.95 ELITE 14.95 JUDGE DREDD 8.95 ORBIX THE TERRORBALL 7.95 DRUID 7.95 GALVAN 7.95 SURF CHAMP SHADOW SKIMMER 7.95 HYPA BALL SUPER SOCCER POLE POSITION 7.99 SKYFOX 8.95 ASTERIX EXPLORER 7.99 GAUNTLET 8.95 URIDIUM HARDBALL TARZAN 8.95 FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR FUTURE KNIGHT 7.95 WAY OF THE TIGER 2 (THE AVENGER) 9.95 TRAIL BLAZER 7.95 DANDY 7.99 KNIGHTMARE RALLY 7.95 THE GREAT ESCAPE PRODIGY 7.991 STRIKE FORCE COBRA 9.95 MAG MAG 7.95 SACRED ARMOUR OF ANTIRIAD 8.99 INFILTRATOR HIGHLANDER 8.95 BREAKTHRU 8.99 IT'S A KNOCKOUT 7.95 SHOCKWAVE RIDER 7.95 FIRELORD 8.95 1942 7.45 JAILBREAK 7.95 DEACTIVATOR CYBORG SNOOKER DODGY GEEZERS MASTERS OF UNIVERSE (ARCADE) BOMBJACK II AIRWOLF (new) SPEC. SORDERONS SHADOW ENIGMA FORCE DOOMDARKS REVENGE SHADOWFIRE R.R.P. FAT WORM BLOWS A SPARKY 9.95 KAYLETH 9.99 SPACE HARRIER 7.95 SCOOBY DOO DOUBLE TAKE 7.95 BAZOOKA BILL 8.95 SHAO LIN'S ROAD WORLD GAME SELECT ONE (12 GAMES) 12.99 COMMODORE 64 INFILTRAT0R GAUNTLET BAZOOKA BILL 9.95 MAG MAX CYBORG 8.95 MOVIE MONSTER HOT WHEELS SANXION ACE OF ACES 9.99 VIETNAM 9.95 LEGEND OF SINBAD WORLD GAMES 9.95 SCOOBY DOO SPACE HARRIER TOP GUN 9.95 SPY VS SPY 3 9.95 HIGHLANDER 8.95 SACRED ARMOUR OF ANTIRIAD SUPER HUEY 2 FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR 9.95 WAY OF THE TIGER 2 (AVENGER) MASTER OF UNIVERSE (ARCADE 9.99 KAYLETH 9.99 JAILBREAK 8.95 TARZAN 8.95 PAPER BOY 9.95 SENTINEL 9.95 INFODROID KNUCKLE BUSTER 9.95 YIE AR KUNG FU II 9.95 EXPLODING FISTII 9.95 DAN DARE 9.95 SUPER CYCLE 9.95 SKY RUNNER 9.95 LIGHT FORCE 8.95 TRACKER 14.95 XENO 8.95 TRIVIAL PURSUITS 14.95 UCHI MATA 9.95 THAI BOXING 7.95 ALLEY KAT 8.95 CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING 9.95 LEADER BOARD 9.95 GALVAN SHAO LINS ROAD WAR PUB GAMES (7 Games) 9.95 STALLONE COBRA 8.95 MERCENARY THE TRANS FORMERS HERBERTS DUMMY RUN 9.95 INTERNATIONAL SOCCER 14.95 8.99 9.99 9.95 PSI WARRIOR QUAKE MINUS ONE SHADOWFIRE ENIGMA FORCE ONLY 17.45 9.99 m HIT PACK SOLD A MILLION 3 FIGHTER PILOT RAMBO KUNG FU MASTERS GHOSTBUSTERS ETHER PACK AIRWOLF 6.70 7.45 COMMANDO FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING BOMBJACK 17.45 W 7.45 7.45 5.90 7.45 6.70 6.70 6.70 6.70 7.95 5.90 5.90 CHRISTMAS SPECIAL OFFER SPEC. 48 COMMODORE DEFENDER COSMIC KANGAR POLE POSITION SNOCH 3 EITHER PACK 5 57.45 2 SNOOKER PROJECT FUTURE EXCELL ARCADIA MOON CRESTA DARE DEVIL DENIS 7.45 5.90 5.90 5.90 6.70 7.45 7.45 7.45 7.45 6.70 11.20 6.70 11.20 7.45 5.90 6.70 7.45 FOR C64 & SPECTRUM 'S COOP HTs 8.95 5.90 7.45 SOLD A MILLION II SPEC. BRUCE LEE KNIGHT LORE MATCH POINT MATCH DAY YIE AR KUNG FU 5.90 HYPA SPORTS 6.70 9.95 7.45 8.95 8.95 8.95 6.70 6.70 6.70 DURELL PACE SPEC. SABOTEUR TURBO ESPRIT COMBAT LYNX CRITICAL MASS 5.90 5.90 EITHER PACK ONLYS n. 67.45 NOW GAMES 3 CSA SPEC NICK FALDO'S GOLF SOURCERY CODE NAME MAT 11 EVERYONES A WALLY VIEW TO ALL RORE 6.70 9.95 5.90 5.90 8.95 6.70 9.95 8.95 ME 9.95 SS SON SSSSS SPEC. OR CS4 NOW GAMES BRIAN BLOODAXE ST RANGE LOOP PYJAMARAMA ARABIAN KNIGHTS FALCON PATROL LORDS OF MIDNIGHT 9.95 SPEC. OR CHA NOW GANESH AIR WOLF CHUCKIE EGG TA NA NOG CAULDRON WORLD CUP TERRA CRESTA JUDGE DREDD TOMAHAWK HYPA BALL ASSAULT MACHINE WARRIOR II  9.95 | BARGAIN SOFTWARE ORDER FORM Please send me the following titles. BLOCK capitals please! Type of computer Name Title: Amount Address .......... Tel. No............. Total Enclosed  Please make cheques or postal orders payable to BARGAIN SOFTWARE. Prices include P&P within the U.K: Europe please add .75 per tape: _ _ Elsewhere please add .00 extra per tape London High Road 474A Chiswick VISIT OUR SHOP W4 "


"Silence in court. The Joystick Jury has assembled again to sit in judgement on the latest batch of these essential game playing aides. There's been a whole lot of powerful pulverising going on as the joysticks have been subjected to trial by terror and torture. The jury is about to return its verdicts... THE RATINGS EXPLAINED In accordance with normal C+VG practice, all the joysticks featured here have been graded on a scale of 1-10. For those of you who insist on percentage marks, just add a zero to the score. The categories investigated are as follows: Accuracy: Does the joystick fire when you want it to or does it have a mind of its own? A vital rating, we think. After all, who wants to move right when you intended to go left? Ergonomics: Never use a simple word when a more obscure one will do. This category looks at design. Does the joystick look and feel right? Strength: Otherwise known as the Big Red wrench test. Is the joystick likely to fall part with the least provocation or melt in your hot, sweaty hands in the white heat of battle? Overall: Is this the biz or not? Does it do its job properly. The Game:To try and introduce some consistent standard to the tests all the joysticks were used on Ikari Warriors. We were going to use SAnxion but we lost our copy of the game. SPEED KING PRICE: .99 FOR MOST MACHINES. .99 FOR BBC, C16/PLUS 4 AND DRAGON This is the joystick that's hot at the moment. If you believe the makers and PR hype, it's selling faster than the speed of light It's designed to be hand held. There's no base or suckers so you can't stick it to the table. It fits snuggly into the left hand, forefinger curling under to hit the fire button. The stick itself is operated by the right hand. If you're left-handed, forget it. It's almost impossible to hold, and you'll stand no chance in a high speed zap session The shaft looks fairly fragie but is very responsive and looks a lot tougher hard earned cash. than it appears. ACCURACY All in all the Speed King is a nice ERGONOMICS little performer. But you'd better try it STRENGTH  OVERALL out for size before parting with your Machines: Spectrum, Spectrum Plus, CBM 64, 128, Vic 20, C16 and Plus 4, Atari, BBC, Electron, 8 Dragon, MSX, Amstrad, Oric. 5 Maker: Konix Computer 8 Products, Unit 13, Sirhowy Hill 8 Industrial Estate, Tredegar, Gwent. MAGNUM  PRICE: .50 The Magnum, Mastertronic's first foray into the world of joysticks, is another hand-held model. At least this time its ambidextrous design should present no problems to left-handed players. As the name suggests, this joystick is gun-shaped, with the fire button falling under the thum and the shaft on top. It fits nicely in the hand and a prolonged playing stint produces no really bad side-effects on the hand. Both fire button and shaft perform well, responding instantly to action. The one drawback is that it dosent feel too sturdy and you get the impression it may not be able to stand up to month after month of zapping. It also comes with six foot of cable. Mastertronic claims this is more than with any other joystick. This, of course, enables you to stand or sit a long way from the computer screen. Which is fine if you have the eyesight of an eagle and can still see what's happening on Machines: All major home screen. computers, C16 and Plus 4 and  ACCURACY 8 Sinclair Plus 2 needs adaptor. ERGONOMICS 7 Maker: Mastertronic, 8-10 Paul  STRENGTH 6 Street, London.  OVERALL "


"FINGERS PRO ACE  PRICE: $11.95 For some strange reason the Pro Ace is very pleasing to look at. I just happen to like the black matt finish set off by the rather big red (no pun intended) fire button. But that's about all there is really. The whole thing is sturdily built and will no doubt last but was almost immobile, making response time quite slow. The whole thing was also a little uncomfortable to hold in the hand, all angular edges jutting into the palm. A miss with the jury. ACCURACY 6 Christmas is a time of peace, goodwill and joy (sticks) for all arcade players. Others on the market at the moment: Check out Cheetah's 125+ at .95. It features two base fire buttons and a third situated at the top of the stick. A fourth fire button is on the front of the stick, lying under the forefinger. Slightly more expensive for Cheetah at $14.95 is the Match I+. It's compatible with all major computer makes. Britannia Software is also marketing a new hand-held stick called the Phasor One. It looks similar to Mastertronic's Magnum stick, vaguely gun-shaped with the shaft on top of a pistol grip. It costs .95. ERGONOMICS STRENGTH OVERALL S Machines: All major makes. 7 Maker: Euromax, Pinfold Lane, 6 Bridlington, North Humberside. GUN SHOT  PRICE: .95 Pretty much a standard looking joystick, with four suckered feet for firm anchoring to the table for all those important moments. It has two fire buttons, one on top of the stalk and the other on the base. It also has autofire option if you really want your enemies to bite on a stream of bullets. The stalk is smooth, so if your hands tend to become a little sticky then there's a chance it could slip. Overall, the joystick peforms well and has the mark of durability about it. ACCURACY ERGONOMICS STRENGTH OVERALL 8 Maker: Valcan Electronics, 200 7 Brent Street, Hendon, London. ELITE  PRICE: .95 Odd shaped and sturdy-looking, the Elite is a disappointment when you get to grips with it. The shape makes it very uncomortable to hold and the auto-fire button has to be held down all the time. We even bound it up with sticky tape to keep it blasting away. It does, however, respond well and has the feel of something lasting a long while. We feel it's a little bit of a let down when you consider the quality of past Euromax joysticks. Overpriced as well. ACCURACY ERGONOMICS 8 Machines: Atari, Commodore,  STRENGTH 5 Amstrad, MSX and Spectrum,  OVERALL 6 BBC and Electron (with interfaces). Maker: Euromax, Pinfold Lane, Bridlington, North Humberside. "


"C+VG COMPETITION This is the first time Computer+Video Games has ever given you a ROAR deal. Yes, this is your chance to imitate Tarzan's famous yell as ravenous lions rip into red raw meat only inches from your eyes. Only they won't be behind bars-YOU WILL! Martech, the people behind arcade combat adventure Tarzan, and Windsor Safari Park, have arranged a special top prize in our competition based around the Lord of the Apes for the winner and their familythat's four people in all. One of the most popular of the park's attractions is the daily feeding of the big cats. The winners will be allowed to stand inside the \"feed wagon\" as it is towed through the compound. Exciting and memorable just won't begin to describe this experience. Have you the nerve to go through with something which would even make Big Red tremble? Not only that. You'll be able to experience the many other attractions of Windsor Safari Park a walk-through tropical plant and butterfly house, chimpanzee enclosure, the unique African \"Tiki\" Show and Noah's Ark Playcentre. Then there's the killer whale, dolphin and sealion shows, parrot show plus hundreds of other animals in drive-through reserves. Tarzan the game is set in the sprawling jungles of Africa. Jane, his mate, has been captured by hostile natives. Tarzan must rescue her. And if you miss out on the top prize, don't worry. Twenty runners-up will receive copies of the game. Just answer the following Tarzan questions and send your answers to Tarzan Competition, Computer+Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is January 16th. Tarzan Competition 000 Name Address 1 Name the author who created Tarzan. a Edgar Allen Poe b Edgar Rice Burroughs c George Bernard Shaw 2 In what year did the first Tarzan book story appear? a 1912 b 1924 c 1900 3 How many Tarzan films have been made? a 10 b 46 C 80 000 Please indicate which computer you have. Amstrad Spectrum CBM 64BBCI MSXD "


"ACTIVISION ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE PRESENTS HOWARD THE DUCK. Movie Star. Comic Book Hero. Now making his debut on the computer screen in Adventure on Volcano Island \"M\", an all-action arcade adventure guaranteed to put feathers on your chest! IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm COMMODORE SCREENS ACTIVISION ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE Available on Commodore 64/128K cassette (.99) and disk (.99). Coming soon for Amstrad and Spectrum home computers Mail Order: 23 Pond Street, Hampstead, London NW3 2PN. IM &  1986 Marvel Comics Group, a division of Gidence Industries Corporation Computer Software program 1986 Activision Inc. All rights reserved "


"takeoffs and returns. You get strapped into a special seat which is inside of a huge ball that's inside of a large vertical tube. Then, a huge blast of compressed air goes off underneath and you're shot up to the top of the tube like a super-powered elevator. After a few moments, you drop back down by get stopped by another blast which acts like an air brake. It feels like a big hand tossing you back and forth. Liz: One day we got to make rockets from kits with solid fuel motors and shoot them off. Chris: One rocket didn't work right. The whole thing divebombed straight down and buried itself halfway into the ground. Greg: Level Two is almost fully devoted to missions aboard a full JILL IN 5DF MACHINE DPaint counselors got up at 7.30a.m. After we got dressed, we all did about 10 minutes of exercises to warm up. Then we went to eat in Retrace the cafeteria. Chris: The food's pretty bad. the past. David: It's realistic that way! The date: Greg (holding up a silverized April, 1950. aluminum pouch): Look at this stuff. Dehydrated beef and The place: potatoes! Huntsville, Liz: It's not McDonalds for sure. Alabama. Werner Chris: Level One had a lot of speakers from NASA and von Braun and a companies involved with the select team of rocket space program. One of the topics scientists appear on the was about the space telescope scene. Within a decade, they're gonna build. Outside of Earth's atmosphere, it can see a everything will change. lot farther. Agriculture will give way to Todd: Another talk was about technology as a small city laser technology and how it can be used in space to produce all becomes the centre for America's kinds of things that can't be rocket and missile research. done here on Earth. A by-product of this technology is Liz: There's a 360 degree theatre that you can sit in and watch the the Space and Rocket Centre Museum, picture projected all around you. host to over four million visitors since it It makes you feel like you're opened in 1970. flying. We saw a lot of films Observe Wally Schirra's tiny mercury made during space missions. David: There's a G-force ride capsule, or the charred command module of that you go on. It hits you with Apollo 16. the effect of three gravities. You sit in these seats and get spun From a moon buggy to moon rocks, over 1500 around. pieces of rocket and space hardware are on Jill: The seat moves back and display valued in the tens of millions of pushes against you. But you're buckled into it, so it's okay. dollars. It is here that SPACE CAMP was born. Todd: You have to look Marshal M. Rosenthal reports. overhead all the time, there's a movie... pace Camp gives young could place you in a team with people from all over the Liz: (interrupting): A movie others like you and see that you world the opportunity to showing space. I liked it a lot. got the right kind of see what it is like to be an Chris: When it's done, you're instructions. astronaut. supposed to be able to just get up David: We spent a lot of time Enrollment was a modest 750 and walk away like nothing learning stuff. Our teams were happened. A lot of kids had when it began in 1983. Today it named after the sun and planets, funny looks on their faces. is up to 3,000 per season, with a Mine was Neptune. dormitory of 140 beds for each David: I'm glad I was okay, it Liz: Chris and I were both on the takes one and a half minutes for one week session. same team, Mars. How to explain what Space the ride to slow down and stop. Todd: Venus for me. Camp is like? Todd: I saw a lot of kids Greg: Our teams were named How better than to ask the wobbling. would-be astronauts themselves. after the shuttles. Jill and I were Chris: Yeah, it takes a while to would-be astronauts themselves, both Discovery. The others were feel normal again. Here's Todd, 11, David 13, Chris Columbia and Atlantis. 12, Liz 12, Jill 14, and Greg 16. Jill: Level Two got to try this Todd: The first day, Sunday, we neat ride that simulates flight The younger members of our group had just completed level one of the camp's training DPaint programme while Jill and Greg were veterans of level two-in which you get to do some really \"awesome\" stuff! Greg: The camp was very different from what I expected. Fun, but also a lot of hard work. David: When you see that big Saturn rocket on display outside in Rocket Park, you really get an idea of what it's all about. Todd: The equivalent of a thirty story building that propelled the Apollo astronauts to the moon. Awesome! Jill: What they had you do made you learn a lot. First you took a test which has some pretty hard questions about the space programme to see what you already knew. This way the MISSION CONTROL BQ:8 "


"DPaint HARAS scale spacelab module. But first you have to learn about satellite deployment and how to use the shuttle's large remote arm for experiments in space. Jill: Each team also has to design a working space station on paper. Greg: The station has to be effective for the year 2010, and you can't use more than six trips to get all the parts into orbit. Jill: We called ours OSSARF, the Orbital Space Satellite and Repair Facility. David: I really liked the water stuff. Chris: It's to simulate weightlessness. Liz: One of the exercises was to build a space structure. We used 12 foot long sticks to make a tetrahedron, which is a threedimensional figure. CAPSULE + WATER Color NDO much, you swim to it and then shuttle on one of the television ... where is it? screens. Liz: But the most fun was the Chris: The abort button gets shuttle mission. In Level One, used a lot. you get to either be on the Todd: Level two does a lot of shuttle or part of ground control. neat stuff it sounds awesome. Chris: There's also a debriefing simulator. The cockpit moves after the mission to discuss what and tilts upward almost 20 feet. happened. This goes into the It's done with a joystick that is problems that occurred, and used by the commander and what should have been done. pilot. Jill: On one landing, our pilot Liz: Everybody reads from missed the strip by eight miles. scripts in order to proceed David: Having problems was correctly. But there's also part of the fun. problems tossed in. You have to Jill: The camp let me see what figure out what to do and real being an astronaut is like. quick. On our mission, the cargo Women can do it just as well as door got stuck and wouldn't men. close. We had to go out and close Chris: Some of my friends are it manually. afraid because of the shuttle Chris: I was the payload tragedy. But I'd still go. specialist in the capsule for that David: Me too. The space one. We all had to wear space programme has a good record suits and wait for the airlock to considering what we're dealing be decompressed with. NASA is dependable. Liz: (giggling): One of the guys Todd: There's a lot willing to go almost didn't make it back into now.. the shuttle before we blasted off. Liz: Like me. I'd go right now if I Bye, bye guy. could. Todd: At least he got the cargo Those over 16 needn't despair door closed. as the 1987 season will see two David: When you go out, you new levels geared for college ride on simulators that imitate students. Even weekend weightlessness. programmes for adults are Jill: One's called the 5 DF, for planned. Additionally, new five degrees of freedom. It's a facilities are being erected chair that spins you around as it adjoining the museum. The is connected to a circle within a 70,000 square feet will include circle. But you don't get dizzy such things as a full size payload because your whole body is bay mockup and a remote arm always going together. It moves manipulator. Plus other on air bearings. surprises. Jill: The spacelab module we Space Camp: The Space and used was an actual one to one Rocket Center, Tranquility sized reproduction. We did Base, Huntsville, Alabama experiments inside of it, like 35807 making a hologram with lasers. Sessions begin in March and Greg: There's also a continue through early reproduction of Houston's September. Level One Mission Control, with buttons, $400.00 Level Two clocks and video monitors. Level $450.00 Two does two missions, and on Digitised pictures the ground I was the Flight by Mitchell Director. Besides being in Waxman and charge of the overall mission, I Delfin monitored the crew inside the Barral blo BARCOS OBROAD David: What we were doing was one when you pretend that your creating a satellite and a space Apollo capsule has capsized in station. It took teamwork. Being the water, and you have to jump in the water made it pretty out and swim. difficult. Todd: It happened once to the Jill: Everybody had this astronauts. exercise. The sticks were of a Chris: You and another kid neutral buoyancy, so they didn't jump into the pool and have to float or sink. They stayed swim for a raft. exactly where they were placed. David: You have to help the Greg: But we didn't! It was a other guy in if you're first. tough going, especially as we Chris: Then you both have to had to also make another paddle the raft to the other end structure from smaller sticks. of the pool and grab onto the Todd: Another thing they had helicopter netting that's placed you do was to try and open a box there. floating in the water at the deep Liz: It would be easy, but there's end. You kept floundering a rope attached to the raft. around. Then you get to try it David: Right. The counselors with footholds on the side of the pull it all sorts of ways to make pool. No wonder it helps to have it seem like the waves in the them built onto spacecrafts. ocean. I almost fell out. David: A neat exercise is the Chris: The raft moves around so "


"Databyte presents VS Montezuma's Revenge ARCTIC ANTICS THE FEATURING PANAMA JOE Blitz Game You'll find it areal challenge Computer and Video Games Fullscrolling screens Real Time Animation Simulvision And for the very first time in the Spy series, there is Interiors and Exteriors, where spies can enter igloos Your toughest challenge yet It's fast it's totally playable it is fun to play and boy it really zips along and keeps you on your foes -Computer and Video Games Amstrad Spectrum Ann400/800 Comodore 612 19.95 cass. E14.95 disk Atari 400 800 IL Z Commodore 64/128 .95 .95 disk Atari 400 800 XLX Commodore 64/128 19.95cas. E14.95 disk BOULDERDASH KIT: \"A Boulder Dash players dream come true-Zzap 64 Polar Pierre isa fast action arcade game with brilliant graphics-one or two players includesa Construction Karto design your own games Atari 400 500 mg Commodore123 19.95 cass-f14.95 disk Atari 1000 ILIE Commodore 64/128 19.95 cass-E12,95 disk Available from all good computer stores or post free from: Databyte, 15 Wolsey Mews, Kentish Town, London NW5 2DX. Telephone 01-482 1756 DATABYTE "


"1924 COMPUTER REPAIRS STRAS and HOUR AMSTRAD SINCLAIR COMPUTER AMSTRAD APPROVED REPAIR CENTRE LUIIN UIL QUALITY APPROVED REPAIR CENTRE INIC. HOW TO GET YOUR SPECTRUM REPAIRED FOR ONLY .95 SPECIAL OFFER! SPECIAL OFFER! SEAL OF QUALITY W77 anthony WHILE YOU WAIT SERVICE CALL FOR APPOINTMENT SPECIAL OFFER! Why not upgrade your ordinary Spectrum into the fantastic DKTronic typewriter keyboard for only .50 including fitting, VAT and THE NO.1 REPAIR CENTRE IN THE U.K. OTHERS FOLLOW Why not upgrade your 1 Spectrum to a forastie as .95 including VAT post and packing you would like us to fit the it for You just send us .95 which is S a fully inclusive price to cover SPECTRUM (only) KEYBOARD REPAIRS E8.95 THE CHEAPEST AROUND The AAM Normal recommended retail price $49.95 Replacement printed OK Tronics key sets .50 including post & packing UPGRADE KIT 16K to 48K m postage i l Full fitting instructions supplied with every kit issue 2 and only Update Your Rubber Keyboard to a New Spectrum+ Fitted for only .95 + .50 post & packing (AISO D.I.Y. Kit available for only E23.00 + .50 p&p) same day service LIMITED OFFER MANCHESTER CITY CENTRE BRANCH NOW OPEN.CALL FOR DETAILS WHY NOT COME AND VISIT US AT OUR NEW 2.500 SOFT WORKSHOP, YOU CAN EVEN HAVE A CUP OF COFFEE WHILE YOU WAIT al TEN I REPAIR SERVICE EXTENSION RIBBON TEMPLATES plus 1.50 p&p .50 TRADE REPAIRS most welcome .50 plus .50 p&p SPARES Companies offers return post and pachlease note we gove your technical problem ZX81 NOW IN STOCK While you wait service including * Five top games worth .00 for you to computer spare parts over the counter enjoy and play with every Spectrum repair. + All computers fully overhauled and fully We repair Commodore 64's, Vic 20'S tested before return Commodore 16's and Plus 4's. KEYBOARD Fully insured for the return journey The most up to date test equipment * Fixed low price of .95 including post, developed by us to fully test and find all packing and VAT. (Not a between price faults within your computer of really up to .00 which some of our keyboard repairs, Spectrum rubber key competitors are quoting). boards only .95. 56 Way *Discounts for schools and colleges * 3 month written guarantee on all repairs. ribbon cable to BEST SERVICE BEST PRICES! /I extend your ports for TRADE your peripherals RUBBER MAT ARE YOU ANOTHER CUSTOMER fed up ORDERS .95 waiting weeks for your estimate? WELCOME plus .50 p&p Need your computer repaired fast? Then send it now to the Number One Repair REPLACEMENT Company in the U.K., or call in and see us at our fully equipped 2,500 square foot workshop POWER SUPPLY with all the latest test equipment available. You are more than welcome. We will repair your computer while you wait and help you with any of your technical problems Commodore computers repaired for only .00. Please note we gove you a 100% low fixed price of .95 which includes return post and packing, VAT, not a between price like some other Repair Companies offer. We don't ask you to send a cheque in for the maximum amount and shock you withrepair bills E30 upwards. Don't forget we are Amstrad aproved for quality and speed, don't risk your computer to any other unauthorised repair centre, we dont just repair the SPECIAL OFFER! fault and send your computer back, we give your computer a:Gun Shot Rapidvejoystick and interface complete outfit Normal Spectrum replacement FE OVERHAUL WITH EVERY REPAIR WE DO:recommended retail price .95 purchased together Special Offer power transformer We correct colour, sound, Keyboard. Check the loading and saving chip, Put new feet on of only 16.50 including pa s ultable for all makes the base if required, Check for full memory, check all sockets including ear/mike and replace Ostick available as separate item10.95 of computer .95 plus interface available as separate item plus .50 p&D where needed. All for an inclusive price of .95 Including VAT, all parts, insurance and post .00 plus 1 SOD&D and packing. No hidden extras whatsoever. We don't have to boast too much about our service as we have thousands of customers from all over the world highly delighted with our Spectrum keyboard service. A first class reputation for speed and accuracy. Don't forget, we also now have a membranes Service Branch in Manchester City Centre for while you wait service. .50 plus .50 p&p SPECTRUM SPARES COMMODORE SPARES Spectrum Plus spare # Viatu vauu ZBOB CPU 300 6526-C.LA 19.00 4116 Rams 100 keyboard membranes 6510-Processor 19.00 ZTX 650 0 60 19.00 6581 Sid Chip .90 plus .50 p&p ZTX 215 0.60 Power Supply Transformers 995 906114-House Keeper ULASC001 16 50 901225 Graphic Rom ZX 81 membranes Rom 16.50 901226-Basic Rom 19.00 .00 plus .50 p&p Keyboard membrane 901227-Kernal Rom Spectrum 5.50 6569-VIC 19.00 Keyboard membrane We regret we cannot Spectrum Plus membrane 12.90 4164 Rams-Memory 3.00 show all the components Metal Templates Power Supply available. Just give us a Keyboard Mats 5.50 Transformers 29.00 call and we can quote you ZX1 membrane 500 All our prices include VAT but please add Service Manual E30.00 over the phone, delivery .50 on each order to cover post by 1st class post. packing and handling charges VIDEOVAULT HEALTH WARNING!!! Commodore Sending your computer to any other Repair Centre can seriously Damage its Health replacement power G transformer .00 FULLY plus .50 p&p Video Vauli D.I.Y. CORNER 19.00 19.00 KEYBOARD MEMBRANES COMMODORE POWER SUPPLY Ltd. REPAIRED AND TESTED ON MOST ADVANCED OPEN 7 DAYS 1 videova, ORDER NOW! VIUCUVauw A WEEK MANCHESTER TEST EQUIPMENT IN EUROPE NEUROPE! MON-SA MON-SAT ONLY 140 High Street West, Glossop, Derbyshire SK13 8HJ Tel: 04574-66555/67761 Head Office & access orders, queerles, Manchester 061-236 0376 while you wait repair centre only. Copyright Videovault Ltd. No. 680132 SPECIAL YOURS FREE WITH EVERY SPECTRUM REPAIR OFFER 5 GREAT FREE GAMES RECOMMER .00 "


"On the EMPEROR'S SECSEE SEVICE SPECTRUM Story, design and concept by Mike E. Turner Programming by Paul Jeffries. A Star Dreams production for C+VG. Extract from Topsy's History of the Galactic Empire Vol. IV) By rule year 4010 the Emperor Icetor had control of more than 600 inhabited worlds, although the real power lay in the hands of the elected civil service which loosely ruled democratic governments on each planet. The Emperor saw his role as figurehead and, although he maintained a far-reaching secret service and could technically still override all other governments, he had no such intentions. This, however, did not please his son and heir, the mad rince Wilhelm, who wished to assasinate his father and begin a tyrannical command of the empire. \"That's him,\" Riggs snapped a switch down on his desk. \"The agent id. \"Rush him up to me.\" is here,\" he said. «Rush him up to The young man in the cloak suddenly discovered that custom and immigration formalities didn't seem to apply to him. Within five minutes he was sitting in the Commander's office. \"I have, of course, a mission for you. A very delicate and dangerous mission.\" Riggs looked carefully at his visitor. \"I trust the pay's good then,\" retorted the agent. \"It needs to be, this is a tough one,\" sighed the Commander. \"Now with your contacts, I assume you know that Prince Wilhelm has escaped.\" \"It' was rumoured that he was developing some new weapon, but nobody knows where.\" \"The prince has a space station in orbit around Beta 5 here. It has a unique defence. It's invisible!\" this leaked out, and the public realised how far the prince has got, the trading markets and maybe even the security of the galaxy would be in jeopardy.\" \"I see. If I can do something here, I'm a hero. If anything goes wrong, you've never heard of me?\" team will be selected by you from \"Correct. For this reason your volunteers currently in prison. You will be given details of their various skills and you will pick two people.\" \"Yes, this is all very well, but you haven't told me what you want me to do yet.\" \"Quite.\" Riggs paused to open a map out across the desk. \"The surface of Beta 5 is mostly sand desert. The atmosphere is breathable, though a little thin. On the eastern continent just here is a settlement of a small group of space pirates. They prey on the star lanes that pass close to this system. Now the Prince is using them to protect his operation here. Somewhere below their base, or maybe in their base as most of it is underground, there is a safe. And contained in that safe is the Co-ordinates of the space station. One of our operatives found this out, but was unable to actually set those figures. If we knew those exact digits, we could teleport onto the station! \"And all you want is for me to break into the base, find the safe, crack it, get the co-ordinates and radio them to you? Hardly worth mentioning really,\" the young man intoned, sarcastically. \"Told you it was a sticky one. Mind you it's worth a million credits if you succeed, and your team will be freed from their jail sentences with a fat bonus, too. Always supposing you all survive...\" \"Oh I'll try to do that all right, if it proves at all possible.\" A grin almost appeard on the young man's face as he spoke ... Ses cose \"How do you mean, invisible,\" interceded the agent. \"If you can't actually see it, it must be detectable by other ways.\" \"No. Not only can it not be seen with the human eye, it can't be detected by anything we've got. Not by sensor, laser, heat, mass or anything else. We know it's there, but it doesn't appear to exist!\" \"So why not send a fleet of battle cruisers to bombard the area?\" 'No I'm afraid the situation is a little too delicate for that. If any of "


"THE LISTING ! REM ETURN 175 GO TO 105 500 POYE 23659,18: INPUT RET URN 55@ FORE 23659.8: INFUT: RETU RN 600 INI PAPER : BORDER : C 4 REM e Turner by Mik STARD REAMS 1986 For the bac kground story you require a copy of Computer Video Games magazi ne JANUARY 1987 6 INK : PAPER 7: CLS : PRINT AT 19,0; \"DATA IS LOADING\" 8 LOADMAPDATA AT) PRINT PLEASE WAIT\" 10 GO TO 1000 100 FOR N=2 TO 5: PRINT AT N, 6; Ot (6 TO 31): NEXT N: RETURN 105 POKE 23650,8: BEEP .2.1 196 LET UTINKEY\": IF THE NGO TO 106 1@7 IF U \"M\" THEN LET CAMP=15 RETURN 109 IF USE\" AND A (LEVEL,POS) \" AND DIR 2 THEN 50 TO 106 94: DRAW 0,10 680 IF A$(LEVEL, FOS DX16-DY) OR (AS (LEVEL, POS+DX16-DY)\".\" AND DIR-3) THEN PLOT 201, 14: DR AW , 119: DRAW 6,6: IF A# (LEVEL, POS DX16-DY) \"0\" THEN PLOT 196 .661 DRAW 0,8: DRAW -3,-1. DRAW 9,-6: DRAW 3,-1 698 LET PT=FOS+DY17-DX15: IF PT 1 OR PT 256 THEN GO TO 740 700 IF ASCLEVEL,PT>>\"1\" THEN G OTO 738 710 IF AS (LEVEL,POS+DY16+DX) 1 \" THEN PLOT 67,28: DRAW 30, 30: DRAW ,6@: DRAW-30, 30: IF AE (LE VEL, PT)=\"/\" AND DIR=1 THEN PLOT 77,83: DRAW 10,5: DRAW 0,25: DR AW -10,10: DRAW ,-40: PLOT 79,7 2: DRAW 6,6: DRAW 0,5: DRAW -,3: DRAW .-8 720 IF AU (LEVEL, POS-DX16+DY) \"1 \" THEN PLOT 47,28: DRAW 20,0: D RAW , 120: DRAW -20, 730 IF (AB (LEVEL,PT) OR (A (LEVEL.PT .\" AND DIR ) AND A (LEVEL, POSDY16+DX) \"1\" THEN P LOT 76,37: DRAW 0,30: DRAW 14,-1 4: DRAW 6.-52: DRAW -7.-7: DRAW ,66 740 LET PT2=POS+DY15DX 17: IF PT2(1 OR PT2>256 THEN GO TO 79 OTO 865 840 IF AT (LEVEL,PT DY16DX)\" THEN PLOT 67,58: DRAW 30.0: DR AW 0,60: DRAW-30,0: IF AT (LEVEL .FOS-DX16+DY) \"1\" THEN PLOT 67, 58: DRAW -20.0: DRAW 0,60: DRAW 20.0 845 IF A (LEVEL.PT DY 16+DX) THEN PLOT 67,88: DRAW 12.0: DR AW 2,20: DRAW -10,0: PLOT 67.81: DRAW 8,0: DRAW 0,5: DRAW -8, IF AS (LEVEL,POS-DX 16+DY) \"1\" THE N PLOT 67,88: DRAW -10,0: DRAW 0,22: DRAW 10,0: FLOT 67,81: DRA W-8,0: DRAW 0,5: DRAW 8,0 850 IF A (LEVEL,PT DY16DX)=\"\" OR (A$ (LEVEL PT+DY 16DX)\". AN D DIR-4) THEN PLOT 82,58: DRAW 0,45: DRAW -15,0: DRAW 0 -45: IF AS (LEVEL,POS-DX16+DY) \"1\" THEN PLOT 52, 58: DRAW , 451 DRAW 15, 510 201 47.3: DRAW 150.: DRAN 16@: DRAW -163.3: DRAL ,-160 GCO LST DYDIR=31-DIR=1: LE LXDIR2-DIR=4): LE DY16=D +16 LET DX16DX15 625 IF AT LEVEL,F05) \".\" THEN FLOT 47.5: DRAW 20.30: DRW 129. : DRAW 20, 20: DRAW 20,20: DRA W , 120: DRAW 20,20: DRAN -20,-2 3: DRAW -120.0: DRAW -20,20: DRA W 20, 20: DRAW 2.120: IF DIR=3 THEN DRAW 30, DFAW 0,90: DRAW 40,0: DRAW 6.-90: DRAW -39.: D RAW 0,90 626 IT AFLEVEL,POSI\".\" AND NO TDX THEN FLOT 127-74DY.14: DR AW 0.119: DRAWD Y, 627 IF AFLEVEL,POS .\" THEN GO TO 990 630 IF AFLEVEL.POS DY16DX12 THEN PLOT 67,28: DRAW 120.0: DRAW 2.120: DRAW 120.0: DPA . -120: IF AE(LEVEL, FOS.DY165X) AND DIRTHEN PLOT 12.3 DRAW 40.0: DRAW , 40: DRAW-40,3 DRAK ,-43: PLOT 111,: DRAW 0.: DRAW , DRAW-32.0: DRA W -10: FOR N-se TC 75 STEF . FOF 0-11 TO 141 STEF : FLOT 0 N: DRAW 1,01 NEXT 0: NEXT 635 IF ALLEVEL FOSDY1&DX=\". ND AXLEVEL,POS DY16DX)\"\" AND AS (LEVEL,POS DY16.DX) F AND A (LEVEL, POS) \"\" THEN LET POS= POS+DX+DY 16: DIM L(3): GO TO 128 112 IF US\" OR CHRE THEN LET DIR-DIR.1-4 (DIR )GO TO 852 IF A# (LEVEL, PT-DY16 DX) \"2\" THEN GO TO 865 855 IF AFLEVEL, PT))\"4\" AND A LEVEL,PT) \"E\" AND DIR-1 THEN IN VERSE 1: PLOT 47,58: DRAW 20,2: INVERSE 2: PLOT 47, 48: DRAW 9,50  DRAW 20,0: DRAW ,-5: DRAW -2 0,3: IF AT LEVEL,PT}<\"D\" THEN D RAW 10,8: DRAW 0,5@: PLOT 55,69: FOR N=1 TO 2: DRAW 4.0: DRAW . 1: DRAW -4,0: DRAW ,1: NEXT N: DRAW 4,0 856 IF A$(LEVEL, PT)\"D\" AND DIR =THEN PLOT 47,88: DRAW 20,0 845 IF A (LEVEL,PT2) \"2\" THEN GO TO 904 870 IF A#(LEVEL,P12+DY16DX<\"2 \" THEN PLOT 187,58: DRAW -30, DRAW 2,60: DRAW 30,: IF A (LEV EL, POS+DX 16-DY) \"1\" THEN PLOT 1 87,118: DRAW 20.: DRAW 6.-6: D R=1 THEN PLOT 187, 88: DRAW 20, 931 1F AFLEVEL,POS+DY16+DX)\"4 \" AND AT LEVEL, FOSDY 16+DX) E AND DIR/2 INT DIR/2) THEN INVE RSE 1: PLOT 127-40 DX, 48: DRAWI @DX, 10: DRAW 5.DX.: DRAW -15+ X.0: INVERSE O: FLOT 127-30 DX, 4 8: DRAW -12DX: DRAW 0.52: DRA W 12DX0: DRAW 0,50: DRAW SDX ,5: DRAW 2,40: DRAW -5DX.5: IF AS (LEVEL,POS.DY16DX) D THEN PLOT 127-27.DX,77: DRAW DX.-1: D RAW ,-3: DRAW-DX-1 932 IF AT LEVEL,POS+DY 16+9XD=\"D \" AND DIR/2-INT (DIR/2) THEN PL OT 127-30DX, 38: DRAW SDX-2 933 IF (A LEVEL, FOS)=\"2\" OR DI R<>1) AND AT LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) \"4\" AND AT (LEVEL,POS+DY 16+DXE \" AND NOT DX THEN INVERSE 1: PL OT 117,58: DRAW 20,: INVERSE : PLOT 117.48: DRAW 0,5@: DRAW 20 .: DRAW 0.5@: DRAW -20,0: IF A $ (LEVEL,POSEDY 16+DX> <D\" AND DIR =1 THEN DRAW 12.: DRAW ,50: P LOT 125,69: FOR N=1 TO 2: DRAW 4 ,0: DRAW 2,1: DRAW -4.: DRAW O, 1: NEXT N: DRAW 4.0 934 IF AS (LEVEL, POS) 2 AND A (LEVEL,POS DY16+DX)=\"0\" AND DIRE 1 THEN PLOT 117, BB: DRAW 20,0 935 IF AS (LEVEL, POS 4\" AND A (LEVEL, POS) \"E\" AND DIR/2-INT (D IR/2) THEN INVERSE 1: PLOT 4+1 58+ (DX ) .9: DRAW 19.DX, 19: DRAW 1@HDX: DRAW -29DX0: DRAW 19 DX.: DRAW 10DX10: DRAW .20: DRAW -29DX, W: INVERSE : PLOT 47+160+ (DX ), 100: DRAW 20DX, DRAW 6.-100: DRAW 10DX, 10: DRA W .30: DRAW -10DX, 10: IF A# (LE VEL, POS)<\"D\" THEN DRAW SDX-5: DRAW .-90. PLOT 72119 (DX ). 63: DRAW 2DX: DRAW DX,-1: DRA W,-5: DRAW-DX-1: DRAW-1DX, 8: DRAW 3.-6: DRAW -2DX, DRAW 3,6 936 IF AS (LEVEL,POS) \"D\" AND DI R/2-INT (DIR/2) THEN PLOT 127-6 *DX,B5: DRAW 10 DX, -5: DRAW ,2: DRAW -1 DX,5 937 IF A (LEVEL,POS))\"4\" AND A (LEVEL,POS) \"E\" AND DIR=1 THEN INVERSE 1: FLOT 107, 28: DRAW 40, : PLOT 107,58: DRAW 40,: INVER SE : PLOT 107,8: DRAW ,100: DR AW 40,0: DRAW -100: IF A (LEVE L,POS) \"D\" THEN DRAW -20.: DRA W , 100: PRINT AT 14, 15: CHR# 145 : CHR$ 147:AT 15, 15:CHRt 149: CHR$ 75@ IF AS (LEVEL,PT2>\"1\" THEN GO TO 780 76@ IFA (LEVEL, POS+DY16DX> \" THEN PLOT 187,2B: DRAW-30, DRAW 0,60: DRAW 30, 30: IF ATL EVEL, FT2) \"/\" AND DIR=3 THEN PL OT 177,83: DRAW -10,5: DRAW 0,25 : DRAW 10, 10: DRAW ,-40: PLOT 1 75,72: DRAW -6, 6: DRAW 0,5: DRAW 128 LET DIR-DIR 1.4 (DIR-1): GO TO 114 IF UE=\"E\" AND (CA (LEVEL.PO S.DY16DX0\" AND DIR4) OR (A (LEVEL,POS) \" AND DIR2)) THEN LET POS=FOSDXDY161 GO TO 128 115 IF \"C\" AND AT (LEVEL,POS. DY16+DX) \"\" AND NOT LEVEL-5 AN D POS=173 AND FLAG22) THEN LE T POS-POS DXDXDY32 GO TO 128 120 IF UE=\"O\" AND A (LEVEL,POS) \"4\" AND AB(LEVEL, POS) \"D\" AND D IR=1 THEN GO SUB 40: 30 TO 12 RAW 40,0: DRAW 0.40: DRAW 49.0. DRAW , 40: FLOT 106,72: DRAW 12: FLOT 106.94 DRAW 33: CIR CLE 127.68,7: CIRCLE 127,58, 640\"FAL LEVEL, FOSDY!6DX) 121 IF UE\"OAND AT (LEVEL, POS = \"1\" AND DIR=1 THEN INPUT INKEY 1: PRINT :AT 0.: \"YOU'VE ALREA DY EMPTIED THIS LOCKER!\": FO R N=1 TO 202: NEXT NI GO SUB 999 ! GO TO 105 122 IF U\"H\" AND AT LEVEL.POS. DY16+DX)=\"/\" THEN GO SUB 5000: GO TO 129 770 IF AFLEVEL,POS+DX 16-DY) \"1 \" THEN PLOT 207,28: DRAW -20.0: DRAW , 122: DRAW 20, 780 IF AFLEVEL, PT2)=\"\" OR A (LEVEL,PT2) .\" AND DIR=3)) AND A (LEVEL,POS DY 16+DX) \"1\" THEN PLOT 178, 37: DRAW 3,89: DRAW -1 4.-14: DRAW ,-52: DRAW 7.-7: DR AW 0,65 790 IF A (LEVEL,POS+DY16+DX) \" THEN GO TO 904 BOB LET PT1-POS+DY+32+DX2: IF PTOR PT156 THEN GO TO 904 BIO IF AT LEVEL, PTIC THEN PLOT 97,58: DRAW 60,0: DRAW 0,60 # DRAW -69.: DRAW 6.-60: IF At LEVEL,PTI)=\"/\" AND DIR=4 THEN P LOT 117.88: DRAW 20, DRAW ,29 DRAW20.: DRAW 6.-20: PLOT 1 19,81: DRAW 16.0: DRAW 6.5: DRAW 875 IF AS (LEVEL.PT2DY16DX)=\"/ THEN PLOT 187,88: DRAW -18, DRAW 2,22: DRAW 10,0: PLOT 197, B1: DRAW -8.0: DRAW 0,5: DRAW B. : IF A LEVEL, POSDX 16-DY) THEN PLOT 187, BB: DRAW 10,0: DR AW 3,20: DRAW -10.0: PLOT 187,01 : DRAW 8,0: DRAW 0,5: DRAW -8, 882 IF A (LEVEL,P12DY16+DX) = \" OR (AU (LEVEL,PT2+DY16+DX)\".\" AND DIR=4) THEN PLOT 172,58: DR AW 0.45: DRAW 15,0: DRAW 0, -45: INVERSE (AFLEVEL,PT 2+DY 16+DX)\" 0\"): PLOT 170,78: DRAW 0,4: DRAW --4.0: DRAW ,4: DRAW 4.0: INVE RSE 0: IF A# (LEVEL,POS DX16-DY) \"1\" THEN PLOT 202,58: DRAW ,45 W .98: DRAW 60,: DRAW .-98: D RAW-30,0: DRAW 0,92: IF AFLEVE L.FOS+DY16+DX) THEN PLOTE 4,66: DRAW 0,8: DRAW 8.0: DRAW .-6: DRAW-8,2 650 IF AT LEVEL, PUS-DX1DY) 2 \" THEN PLOT 47,8: DRAW 20,20: D RAW , 120: DRAW -20,20: IF AFLE VEL,POS-DX16+DY) \"/\" AND DIRET HEN PLOT 47.91: DRAW 5,5: DRAW 0, 35: DRAW -5,5 655 IF A#(LEVEL, FOS-DX16+DY) =. AND DIRE THEN PLOT 47,63: DR AW 5,5: DRAW , 42: DRAW -5,5 660 IF AT LEVEL,POS-DX16+DY)=\" \" OR CAS (LEVEL,POS-DX16+DY><\".\" AND DIR=1) THEN PLOT 53,14: DRA W 0,119: DRAW -6,6 678 IF A# LEVEL, FOSDX16-DY) 2 THEN PLOT 207.8: DRAW -20.20 DRAW 0,120: DRAW 20,20: IF A L EVEL, POSDX16-DY) /\" AND DIR=3 THEN PLOT 207.91: DRAW -5,5: DR AW , 35: DRAW 5,5 675 IF A#(LEVEL, FOS+DX16-DY)=\". \" AND DIR-1 THEN PLOT 207,63: D RAW -5,5: DRAW 0,40: DRAW 5,5: P LOT 201,72: DRAW 6,10: FLOT 201, -H\" THEN GO SUB 5500: GO TO 12 938 IF A LEVEL, POS)=\"0\" AND DI R=1 THEN PLOT 16, Be: DRA43.3 B15 IF AFLEVEL,PTI) \".\" THEN PLOT 117.78: DRAW 29.0: DRAW 3.2 0: DRAW -20,: DRAW 2,-20: CIRCL E 127.88,3 820 IF A LEVEL.PTI) OR (A (LEVEL,PTI) . AND DIR=4) THEN PLOT 112.58: DRAW ,45: DRAW 30 .: DRAW , -45: DRAW -15,0: DRAW 0.45: IF A$(LEVEL, PT1 THE N PLOT 110,78: DRAW 0,4: DRAW 4,0: DRAW ,-4: DRAW 4,0 B30 IF AT LEVEL, PT) (\"2\" THEN G 125 IFUTANEA LEVEL.SOS DY16.D . AND DIRE THE INF UT 1 GO SUE 5602: GOSUB 92: C DO 195. 125 IF U THENOLS 130 SU B 00: FOR D=1 TO 10 NEXT D: GO TO 128 127 GO TO 106 128 G9 SUB 603 170 IF U OR USE\" THEN F 895 IF A (LEVEL,PT2-DY16-DX2 THEN GO TO 904 390 IF AF LEVEL,PT2) \"4\" AND A LEVEL,PT2E AND DIR=1 THEN INVERSE 1: FLOT 187,58: DRAW 20, : INVERSE : PLOT 187,40: DRAW 2,50: DRAW 20,0: DRAW 0, -52: DRA W -20,0: IF A# (LEVEL,PT2) \"D\" TH EN DRAW 19.: DRAW 0,5@: PLOT 1 95,69: FOR N-1 TO 2: DRAW 4.0: D RAW , 1: DRAW 4.0: DRAN 9,1: NE XT NI DRAW 1,0 895 IF A (LEVEL,PT2 \" AND DI INVERSE 1: FLOT 119.23: DAXI. 3: PLOT 11.59CHOW 20,0: DRAW -11,0: DRAW .11: INVERSE O F T 113.9: DRAK , DRAW 3.0: RN TO 3: DRAW 0,43: CREW 1.0 : DRAW ,-43: D -3, PET: DRAW , DFAL2.3: CRW 22,3 : DFAW & DRAJ 22.: 9990.6: DEA , CFAW , CRAW 16, "


"AMSTRAD REPAIRS from < to  MPUTER REPAIR CENTRE Every computer repaired by us is completely overhauled and tested before return. BBC REPAIRS from the only AMSTRAD SPECIALIST recommended by Amstrad Repairs also undertaken for all the following computers:SPECTRUM, COMMODORE, ATARI, BBC & IBM Compatibles. Three months no quibble guarantee  to  COMMODORE REPAIRS DER from  to  ALL PARTS No high fixed price you only pay what the repair STOCKED actually costs. While-U-Wait Service Spare parts for all a selection of spares:leading computers available over SPECTRUM SPARES COMMODORE SPARES the counter ZBOB CPU .00 6526 CIA. .95 State of the art test equipment 4116 Rams .48 6510 Processor .95 to provide comprehensive ZTX 650 6581 Sid Chip .95 ZTX 213 .60 906114-House Keeper test report and locate Power Supply .95 faults Transformers .95 901225 Graphic Rom All computers ULA 6C001 .50 .95 Rom .50 901226 Basic Rom returned carriage Keyboard membrane 901227-Kemal Rom .95 paid and Spectrum ES SO 6569 VIC .95 covered by Keyboard membrane 4164 Rams Memory .00 Spectrum Plus Power Supply insurance. membrane .95 Transformers  Metal Templates .50 Keyboard Mats ES SO VAT included .50 per ZX81 membrane .00 order for postage & Service Manual .00 packing. SPECTRUM REPAIRS from  to .90 DON'T DELAY ACT TODAY A It's as easy as Spectrum rubber keyboards repaired for only .95 FREE 4. SURPRISE VOUCHER with every computer repair other than Spectrum and Commodore ABC! DISCOUNT COMPONENTS e.g. Power Transformers Commodore .90 .50 p.p. Spectrum .95 A SEND YOUR COMPUTER with a Cheque/P.O/Access or Visa Card number for the maximum fee enclosing the appropriate Free Gift Voucher. R FOR A WRITTEN QUOTATION just send .50 to cover postage & packing C Your Computer will be returned within 24 hours carriage and transit insurance paid with the balance of the fee and your FREE GIFT + .50 p.p. FREE SOFTWARE VOUCHER >  with every N SPECTRUM and COMMODORE r  Trade orders welcome Discounts for Colleges and Schools SPECIALIST COMPUTER REPAIR CENTRE Dept. 26. Unit 4.M.E.B. Works, Windsor Road, Enfield, Redditch B97 6DJ. Telephone: REDDITCH 65671 A VISA VISA WE SET THE STANDARD BY WHICH EVERYONE ELSE IS JUDGED "


"YTRA. word processor for juggling about You plug one end of a Red Leader not actually programming it, your BY ROBERT and reprinting. into your Spectrum, Beeb or micro isn't tied up. SCHIFREEN The bad news about the Omni Commodore 64, and the other end Red Two, by the way, is an infra Reader was that it cost . plugs into a mains socket. red scanner that detects movement This month's Extra Bits page will be Everyone knew that it was too What you then do, is use the in a room. If it detects something, it the last one to deal exclusively with expensive, and the company micro to program the Red Leader sends a signal to Red Leader, and hardware add-ons. Next time, eventually went bust a couple of to send signals round the house, you can program Red Leader to Extra Bits turns into a general months ago. So, what's the along the mains wiring from the react to the signal in a certain way. technical area, where I can answer bargain, I hear you ask? Well, the socket it's plugged into. This would make a good burglar some of the many technical company that bought the last As you have probably guessed, alarm, for example, or you could remaining batch of Omni Readers the signals are picked up by a Red use it to make your lights go on every month. Wonderful new addis now selling them for .99, One or a Red Two, which you when you walk into a room, and ons will, of course, still get a which represents a saving of have plugged into any other socket have them turn off again when you mention here, but I'll also be able around 90% of the original price in the house. Red One is just go out to deal with your problems. So, if And that price includes VAT and another 13-amp socket, which will Red Three, Four and so on will you are having problems with P+P as well, which can't be bad switch itself on and off according be temparature measurers, dimmer loading certain games, connecting For more details, or to order to the signals it receives from Red controls, warning lights, alarm bells a printer or monitor, or you're one, write to Metroheath Ltd Leader. and more. All will be struggling to perfect your latest at 287-289 Whitechapel Road, So, you can program Red programmable, under the control program, maybe the new problem Leader to turn the Red One on at of ONE Red Leader! page can help. If I can't answer To use an Omni reader, you'll 7.30 every morning, and then plug A starter system costs , and your question myself, there are need a micro with an RS-232 the kettle into the Red One's details can be had from 100,000 readers out there who interface, and a suitable cable. The socket. Electronic Fulfilment can. Send any letters to The cable should be wired up for use No more having to wait for the Services Ltd at Chesterton Mill, Problem Page, C+VG, Priory with a modem (not a serial printer). kettle to boil when you get up. The French's Road, Cambridge. And Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, It connects to the Omni reader via Red Leader has its own computer there's a 14-day money back trial London ECIR 3AU. And if you can a 25-pin male connector (one with and timer built in so, when you're option, too. think of a better name than The pins sticking out, not holes). Problem Page, send that in as well. We'll be waiting for your letter, as NO BLACK BOXES they say... HERE WANNA BUY A Computerised gadgets are often referred to as black boxes by CHEAP OMNI people who don't understand or READER? appreciate them. Here's something If Christmas leaves you with some though, which will spare cash, here's some news of a NEVER be great bargain. Remember that referred to as a wonderful gadget called the black box. It's Omni Reader? It was a device called the Red that looked rather like an old Box! school guillotine, with a flat area Actually, the and a sliding piece at the side. basic system You connect it to the RS-232 2 consists of 3 Red interface on your micro and place Boxes, called Red a book or some typewritten text on Leader, Red One the flat part. Then, as you run the and Red Two. special scanning head over the text, it reads the characters and passes them to the micro along the RS-232 lead. All very useful if you want to take pages from a book or magazine and put them into a EFE "


"Now you can experience the Wor Alright. So you've wiped out the Russians in Summer Games. You've scored near perfect los in Summer Games 1 And your performance in Winter Games now sends chills down competitor's spines. Well, just how far are you willing to go to prove you're the best? Does 24,000 miles sound reasonable? Visit exotic places In World Games, you'll wing your way around the globe beating the pants off foreigners in eight international events, each one authentic to its country of origin. You'll see incredible, exotic locales as you travel the world circuit. Why you'll even have your own on-screen tour guide to smooth your way. The events the Olympics forgot. To become the champion, you'll have to dive off the treacherous cliffs of Acapulco Go stomach to stomach with a 400 pound Japanese sumo wrestler. Jump barrels in Germany. And pump heavy iron in Russia. Next, it's off to Scotland for the caber loss. Canada, for the near impossible logroll France, to ski the Slalom. And, at last, the U.S. of A., to ride the meanest bull in the states This, then, is a challenge of global proportions. The question is, are you ready to go the distance? EpYX FOR ACEROM ERER SUPOS . TM 1919 re8892 ATTE ---BIKE ACTION ..... MONSTER ACTION SUPER CBM 64/128 Amstrad Cassette .95 Disk .95 Spectrum 48K Cassette .95 RESERVEREN CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 Disk .99 There's nothing bu w action when two dl th the world's fastes movers get togethe: 1 to bring you an i outstanding collection of action fo packed titles as = = (GL SUPER CYCLE Racing was never so fast and furious. Push your cycle to the limit and you win, push it over and you crash Any more realistic and you'd need insurance to ride it. THE MOVIE MONSTER GAME This is a new and different approach ... instead of running away from monsters, you are the monster gobbling up everything and anything in your way. U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 23 H Birmingham B6 7AX T "


"bril's Greatest Sporting Challenge... DGAMES Eight international events: Cliff Diving, Sumo Wrestling, Bull Riding, Barrel Jumping. Log Rolling, Weight Lifting. Slalom Skiing, and, of course, the Caber Toss. Visit eight nations to compete. Includes a detailed history and travelogue for your reference. Join the World Hall of Fame. That is, if you acquire the gold. One to eight players. Commodore 64/128 $9.99 css S14.99 disk Spectrum 48K S8.99 cass, Amstrad $9.99 cass. $14.99 disk Atari STS S 24.95 disk etting new events from around the world to test your joystick mettle to the fullit Zzap 64 TM EpYX FOR MEZI U.S. GOLD) GRAPPLING ACTION... WARFARE ACTION CBM 64/128 Diskan Disk g but vo of stest ther ou an ding Whatever thrills you, There's amazing variety and plenty of nerve tingling choice in this latest set of releases. You look for action then it's action you've got! .95 CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 .99 Disk .99 Atari ST .99 ction ities. .. GOLD: aa CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING Take on any 8 rowdy wrestlers, each with his own individual style when it comes to busting heads. These guys use every dirty trick known to man and a few that o n't So you'll have a real light on your hands to win the coveted Championship Wrestling Belt! DESTROYER As captain of a fully armed, Fletcher class US Naval Destroyer conduct a seek and kill 'sub hunt, a convoy escort, a bold rescue, or 4 other progressively difficult scenarios, for a different mission every time. 2/3 7AX. Lord Way. Hollord T: (021) 356 3388 "


"| 2SPORTS 441 C16/PLUS 4 Thai Boxing European Cup Canoe Race Speed Boat Grand Prix CBM 64/128 Ice Hockey Burning Rubber Golf Water Sports Cass .95 Disc .95 ANCO SOFTWARE, 4 WEST GATE HOUSE, GPITAL STREET, DARTFORD, KENT DA12EH, Telephone: 0322 925 13/92518 the heart ANCOMO Mail Order: Payment by Cheque, P.O., Visa or Access. 24 Hour Credit Card Service: 0322 522631 "


"LAW BETTER THAN CHEAP If you're lucky enough to have a new Amstrad PC-1512, how d'ya fancy lots of free software for ité In America, where the IBM PC has been a popular home computer for around 5 years, there are literally thousands of programs that have been placed in Public Domain, as it's called. Public Domain programs are usually found on bulletin boards for downloading, and it's perfectly legal to copy them and even make copies for your friends. Some public domain software is known as freeware, which means that no one is charging any money for it. Some, though, is known as shareware. Like freeware, you are allowed to copy shareware programs but, if you decide that you like the program and want to carry on using it, you are asked to send a contribution to the author (usually between $10 and $20). Compulink is an IBM PC user group which imports just about every decent Public Domain program from the States. If you're a member, you get a full catalogue of available software, and you can order it through the post. They charge  per disk, to cover the cost of the disk plus postage. Included in the public domain library are arcade games, adventures, business programs like word processors and spreadsheets, and some very useful MS-DOS utilities. Write to Compulink at 67 Woodbridge Road, Guildford, Surrey for details, or call them on 0483 65895. If you have a modem (1200/75 baud or 300/ 300), call their bulletin board on 0483 573337. By the way, did you know that the Amstrad PC is known within Amstrad circles as the AIRO? It stands for Amstrad IBM Rip-Off! CASSETTE TO DISK If you have an Amstrad 464, 664 or 6128 machine, there's little point in trying to copy cassette software onto disc when there's a company that will do it for you. Ambyte are a mail order software company that copy games from cassette onto disk for you, so that you receive the game on a 3 inch disk, ready to use. Any inlay card or other bits and pieces that would normally come with the cassette are supplied with the disk and, MORE FROM DKT I mentioned the TV Tuner from DK'Tronics a while back but, having had a chance to see it in action, I'm mentioning it again. It's a .95 device that turns an Amstrad colour CPC monitor into a colour TV. I saw the device in action at the recent Amstrad show and was truly impressed. Although the tuner is quite expensive, it's a lot cheaper than a colour TV and the pictures were generally much better, too. At the moment, the tuner is only available REPAIRS for CPC monitors but a version for the PC-1512 colour monitor may If your micro's been playing up be along soon. Also, DKT are recently, here are two companies working on additions to the tuner that will fix computers. Express that will provide Teletext (Ceefax Repairs are in Manchester. You and Oracle), preset tuning buttons can post your machine to them or, and remote control. if you're in the area, take it in for a New products from DKT for while-you-wait checkup. Christmas include a programmable Mancomp is the name, and they're joystick interface with a 3-channel on 061 224 1888. sound unit built in, for an additional Next comes the Computer . Repair Centre in Worcester. Finally, a real time clock unit so Like Mancomp, they offer a while that the computer always knows you-wait service for all popular the correct date and time, which here's the good news the disk costs home micros. Call 0905 611072. sts home micros. Call 0905 611072. will cost .95. the same as the tape. Mastertronic Thaven't tried either of these There are 50 spare bytes of games that cost .99 on tape are companies myself, but if you've RAM on the clock, which are also .99 on disk. had your machine repaired backed up by a built-in battery. You If you order lots of game, they recently, why not write in and tell can use these for storing your own are all supplied on the same disk, everyone whether the company data, by POKEing the values into with a special menu program who repaired it was worth telling the special memory. More details available when you boot, that other readers about from DKT on 0493 602926. allows you to select the game you want to play. Cassette games that are normally copy-protected are also protected on the disk to prevent you giving copies away. Naturally the software companies whose games are being sold this way are fully aware of what's happening, and have agreed to the idea. Currently, the list of houses include Activision, Alligata, Mastertronic, US Gold, Firebird and Mirrorsoft. Details, and an order form, from 0277 229684. TURN YOUR MONITOR INTO A COLOUR T.V. Ogrot's his wo game ATV tuner MORE AMSTRAD INTERFACES Here's news of another load of goodies for Amstrad owners. I know this page is looking rather like an Amstrad column this month, but most of the recent launches have been for Amstrad hardware. First, there's an auto-fire joystick interface for the 464,664 and 6128 machines. It allows any autofire joystick to be used with the machine. According to the piece of paper I have here, using auto-fire joysticks in the machine without a special interface like this one can damage the computer's sound chip, though I can't understand why this should be. If you do understand, and want to keep your sound chip happy, peace of mind costs .95. And you'll be guaranteed no screams of horror from your sound chip. A Programable joystick controller "


"On the EMPEROR'S SECTEt SEVICE 987 F ACLEVEL, POSDY 16+DX=4 THEN INVERSE 1: FLOT 122, 58: DRAW 12.3: INVERSE : PLOT 136,5 B: DRAW -20.6: DRW 3.4: DRAW 23 .: DRA 3.-4: Rex 0,4: DR .: FCR NE TO : DAH 3, 25: CRA W-2.a: AX , 25: CRAW --.:: EX : D K2,25: DRAN -1.3: DFA w 11,0: DAN 2,4: IR -14.2: OR w 2.-1: ESA 3.: DFA :: DA PER 4: \"LANGUAGE FOR Q=1 TO 3: PRINT AT 0*4+5, INX 2: PAPE R6;NIO); IN 7; PAPER 2:F(0);\" %; TAB SO'z0,1); \": PAPER 13 Z(0.2):\" \" PAPER 3:20,3); IN : PAPER 4:2(0.4); WEAPON: \":D 0); \":\"+STRE E(0) CHARGES\") AND DED) (1) IF NOT FIOT HEN PRINT AT 0.4.5,16; DECEA AT 17,0:NEN hits the \"MEBN 7,3 TO : LET U(BIN))=U (BIN) -CA MI: IF UBINXX THEN PRINT AT 19.0: \"and kills it\": LET UDN -0: GO TO 2615 2625 IF UBINI AND A=ZEN, 1) AN D NOT DEN) THEN FRINT AT 17. @;NF ( N isses the \"M\" BIN), 7999 REM Set up 8920 LET OS=CHR$ 149: FOR X=1 TO S: LET 001+: NEXT X: RESTOR E 8220: LET BG : LET MD-10: DIM B(3): DIM L3): LET o \" POLE 23658,B 2015 DIM F(3): FOR 1 TO 3. LET FIN)=120: NEXT N 802.5 DIM D$3.11): DIM E(3): DIM 2(3,4): DIM WE(4.11): DIM W14.2 2615 FOR O1 TO 102: NEXT D 2620 60 SUB 550: NEXT N 2625 LET L1=M1: FOR N=1 TO M1: ! FUN) THEN LET ME EM1-1: LET 090 13 E FRIST AT 2.: 1 NVEFSL 1 . NIVERSE : \"Forward INVERSE 1: 144; INVEF SE C: Lart\":TIVERSE 1: CH 1 15: INVERSE 2:\"Turn Right \": INV 1530 NEXT 1540 GD SUB 9555 1550 GO SUE 520 156 PRINT AT 8,9; \"ITEMS CARRIED .1): LET EVAL KAWA1-7,2): 50 TO 4270 4938 INPUT INKEYS: IF P-10 THEN PRINT AT @.@: \"You can't carr y any more!\" FOR 1 TO 102: NE XT : RETURN 4040 LET PE(P.1) HA11): LET P -P+1: IF A1-5 THEN LET FLAG3=1 407 IF A (LEVEL,POS) > \"4\" AND A (LEVEL,POS) (\"D\" THEN LET A LEV EL.DOS)\"D\" 4000 RETURN 4500 INPUT INKEY: PRINT ;AT .: \"The locker explodes in your faces as soon as you try to Openit!\": LET as (level.pos) 2 : FOR 1 TO 3: LET + f(n)-INT (RND50+1): IF + (n) <=@ THEN LE T in) : FOR 1 TO 100: NEXT 4 INFUT INKEYS: PRINT DAT 0,2; nt (n) \"dies.\":1 IF N3 THEN GO TO 9600 4510 NEXT : FOR 1 TO :00: NEX T Q: RETURN 5000 CLS : PRINT AT 17,0; \"Who is +1: LET DON) =D 'N+1): LET MIN B930 DIM P#11,16): LET PED BOS DATA CHR$ 16+CHRE 7-CHR 17 +CHR! + \"MEDIPILL\".CHR! 15+CHRI 7+CHR 17+CHR$ 9+\"STUN SRENADE\". CHR 16+CHRB 7+CHRE 17+CHR 1+ 1 D CARD\", CHR$ 16+CHRB 7+CHR# 17+C HF 2+\"ID CARD. CHR 16 CHR$ 740 S INVERSE 1: \"U: INVERSE : \"se Ite \" INVERSE 1: \"M\": INVERSE 3:a Le Camp \":\"\"CHR! 22.CHRE 1+\"E\" +CHRI 20+CHRI + \"nter Boor \" AND (AT LEVEL, POS-DY 16+DX}\" OR A# CLEVEL, POSCY!+DX) . ND DIR=4) OR AT LEVEL POS) \".\" AND DIF 2) ( \"+CHEE +CHRE 2630 NEXT N: IF MIE AND AS (LEVE L, FOS) \"G\" THEN LET AT (LEVEL FO RETURN 2640 RETURN 3500 DIM J! (12): 60 SUS 552: IF NOT AND NOT MD THEN PRINT AT 1570 PRINT AT 9.0:1 FOR N=1 TO 5 : FRINT AT N+9,2: PAPER : INK 7 :P (N): PAPER ; INK 7:AT N+9,15 \":\":P (N+5) NEXT N: PRINT AT 16,9; INI 7: \"MELIPILLS: \"MD 1580 GO RUB 9555: GOSUB 500 1599 PRIN AT 7.0: \"COMPUTER INTE RROGATION STATES::AT 9,0; \"YOU A RE FACING\": \"NORTHEAST SOUTHWEST (DIR 5-4 TO DIR.5); IF M1 THEN RESTORE 1599+T5: READ C#: PRIN TC# 1595 GO SUB 9555: RETURN 1600 DATA \"PRIMONS A non-viole nt. primitive, human type : FEEP .75.4: EEEF 1.5.4: LET \"Z\" RETURN 3510 PRINT AT 19,0; \"Enter item ou wish to use.\": INPUT LINE JE : FOR i -10 TO 1 STEP -1: IF JIH #(1,5 TO) OR (J-P CI,STO) AN DJ+>0 TO 12)) THEN GO TO 35 AND F(1) '(2) \"+N${2)) AND F(2) CHR@CHR 17+CHR 4. ID CARD CHR 16+CHR$ +CHR$ 17+CHR541 D CARD\",CHR 16+CHRI 2+CHR17+C HR# ID CARD B940 DIM HE (12.16): FOR N-1 TDB : READ HEIN: IF N=2 THEN LET P IN-1) =HEN: LET PENN 8045 NEXT N: DIMGI) B070 DIM M45): FOR N=1 TO 5: REA DMN): NEXT N 8075 DATA 065,60,60,70 B082 LET LEVEL LET DIRLET POS=136: LET CAMP=0 8083 DATA \"A Primon\", \"An Arragro n\", \"Akraspian\",\"A kraspian,\"A 5001 LET 1-INKEYT: IF I<\"1\" OR It>\"3\" THEN GO TO 5001 5002 IF NOT F (VAL II) THEN GOT AND AT LEVEL, POS)\"4\" AND ABLE VEL, PUSTE AND DIR1 965 PRINT 2:\" \"CHR 20 CHE!! +TO+CHR! 2-CHR$ 0+\"pan Sate\" A ND AT LEVEL, COSDY+ DX=\"\"\"\" +CH 20. 1+\"WCHR 29 CHRI each Recharge\" AND LEVEL POS-H,\" \"+CHRI 20+CHAT 14 +CHRI 20+CHR \"ock Computer A ND AFLEVEL,P3 DY16DX=\" AND DIR-4; RETURN 1032 50 SUB 1002: GO TO 1815 1016 SO SUE 6020: 60 TO 1220 1015 GO SUB 600 120 FONE 23659,5: IF CAME THEN SO SUE 1130: 50 TO ID: 100 AFLEVELFOST THEN 3520 NEXT 1: PRINT AT 21,0; \"You don't have one of those!: BEEP .75,4: BEEP 1.5,-4: LET KE=\"Z\": RETURN 3525 IF JE=H$ 1,5 TO OR J$-H 3,5 TO THEN LET MD=MD-1: GOT 1601 DATA \"ARRAGRORS A race of 4' tall ar achnids, normally peaceful but some evil renegad es exist.\" 1603 DATA \"KRASPIANS Warlike h uman type race from the planet Krasp. 1604 DATA \"CYBERBRAIN A robot controlled by a built in human b rain, usually extremely evi 3530 LET P=P-1: FOR INI TO 9: LE TP1)-P$(1+1): NEXT I: LET PS 1899 REM Run 1040 60 SUB 1450 1852 GO TC 1022 1099 REM CAMPED Options 1100 CLS : PRINT AT B.8: \"OPTIONS 5003 GO SUB 550 5004 LET Al-INT (RND100+1); IF LIVALIS) AND (AIZ (VAL 11,3 ) OR LIVAL I)) THEN PRINT AT 1 7,0;NS (VAL D'\"can't get passed the security programming\":L ET LAVAL 1) 1: FOR 0-1 TO 100 NEXT : RETURN 5009 LET L (VAL IT : CLS E PRI NT AT 3.0; FOR NTO 15: PRINT TAB 8FOR 0-1 TO 16: IF AS (LE VEL, N16+0) \"2\" AND AS (LEVEL N1 6+Q)<> \"\" THEN PRINT \": GO TO 5020 5010 PRINT \": 5220 NEXT 0: NEXT N: GO SUB 9555  RETURN 5500 FOR N=1 TO 3: FOR 0-1 TO 4: IF D# (N)-WE(0) THEN LET E(N)=W (0,2) 551 NEXT 0: NEXT N: RETURN 5600 FOR IT TO P: IF PS(I) CH$ B) THEN NEXT I: PRINT); \"You d on't have the correct card. FO R N=1 TO 150: NEXT N: RETURN 5610 INPUT : PRINT 0; AT 2,; \"W ho will\":TAB 13; (\"1) \" +N$(1)) AN DF(1) \"crack the\":TAB 13; (2) +N$(2)) AND F(2) \"safe\":TAB 13; \"3 \":NS (3) 5620 LET K INKEYS: IF K<\"1\" OR K$) \"3\" THEN GO TO 5620 5630 IF NOT FIVAL K) THEN GOT 1102 PRINT AT 2,13; CAMPED\";AT 4 1105 PRINT AT 7.2:0$; AT 10,8: \"M) 8285 DIM B=(5,16): FOR N=1 TO 5: READ BS(N) NEXT N 8990 DATA \"Light Sabre\".0.1E32,\" Hand Laser\",1,52, \"Laser Rifle\",2 ,20,\"Blaster\".. 10 8091 FOR N=1 TO 4: READ W# (N), WC N, 1),WIN,2): LET H$ (N+B) =W* (N): NEXT N 8092 LET D$(1) =$(1) LET D$(2) = W$(1): LET D (3)=W5(2): LET G(3) = (2,1): LET E(1)(1,2): LET E 2)=E(1): LET E(3) = (2,2) 8294 DATA 2,16,32,126, 32,16,,, 2,8, 4, 126,4,8,0,0,2,2,2,2,2.7.12 .B, 128, 128, 128, 128, 128, 192,160,3 2,8,31,31,30,20,32,30, 31, 32, 242, 240,242,112,242, 240, 240 1995 GO SUB 6000: PAPER : INK 7 8098 LET FLAG: LET FLAG20: LE TFLAGSLET MI 8999 REM Instructions B102 BORDER : CLS : PRINT AT 1. B;\"INSTRUCTIONS 8200 PRINT \"You are to become th e Special Galactic Agent, from the story, in search of the coordinates of the space station th at threatens the galaxy.\" 8250 PRINT \"The game is menu dri ven and it is only necessary to read the screen prompts caref ully.\" 8300 PRINT \"When camped, you may 3540 FOR I=1 TO 8: IF (1,5 TO J$ THEN GO SUB 550: GO SUB 35 90+1@1: FOR 2-1 TO 100: NEXT : LET B(3) : RETURN 3550 NEXT I 3600 IF MD-1 THEN LET MD=@: PR INT AT 17,0; \"You don't have any Medipills: RETURN 3681 PRINT AT 17,0; Administer m edipill to whom? -1) \"NE (1) 2 )\":NS (2)-3) : NS (3) 3622 LET LI=INKEY: IF L \"1\" OR L\"3THEN GO TO 3622 3603 60 SUB 552: LET I=VAL LI: 1 F F(I) = OR FI)=100 THEN PRINT AT 19,2; \"It has no effect: RE TURN 3604 LET F(i)=f(i) +50: IF (1) > 1 02 THEN LET +i)=100 3625 PRINT AT 17,0: NS (I feels better...\": RETURN 3610 PRINT AT 17.0: \"The grenade explodes! FOR 1 TO m1LETU (1)-(I)-INT (RND+50+1): IF U(I) <= THEN FOR 0-1 TO 100: NEXT Q  GO SUB 55°: LET UCI) : PRINT AT 17,0; \"The \";M$(1,3 TO \"dies 1980 LET X=INT (RND1@ 1: IF X> 6 THEN PRINT AT 18,6; \"YOU CAN'T ESCAPE\": LET LE G O SUB 9555 RETURN 1995 LET POS1-POS+INT (RND11-5) +16+INT (RND-11-5): LET DIRINT (RND*4+1): IF POS-POS OR POS1C1 OR POS1 >256 THEN GO TO 1985 1915 IF AS (LEVEL, POS1) < THEN GO TO 1985 1920 LET POS-POSI: GO SUB 600: L ET FLAG=1: RETURN 2000 REM Monsters Attack 2010 GO SUB 552: FOR N1 TO ME 2012 IF DIN) THEN PRINT AT 17, : \"The \"m$(3 TO \"sleeps on... \": GO TO 2030 2015 LET AI-INT (RND+3+1); IF FK A1) = THEN GO TO 2015 2020 LET A=INT (RND 100+1): IF A <M(T5) THEN LET DAMI-INT (RND#5 1) 10: PRINT AT 17,0;NE (A1); AT 1 B.; \"has been hit\": LET F(A1)-F A1)-DAM11 1F F(A1) 1 THEN PRINT ove 1110 PRINT AT 12,8; \"Report\" 1112 PRINT AT 14.8: \"Use Item 1145 PRINT AT 16,0;\"5) ave Positi 1152 IF INKEY \"M\" AND INKEYS -SAND INKEYS \"R\" AND INKEY \"U\" THEN GO TO 1150 1162 IF INKEY \"M\" THEN LET CAM P=0: GO SUB 1400: RETURN 150 GO TO 1102 1185 IF INKEY-\"U\" THEN 500: 00 SUB 3500: FOR # NEXT GO TO 1190 GO SUB 1 TO 100 5640 IF L (VAL K+) AND (INT (R ND#100+1) Z (VAL K#,2) OR LIVAL K#)) THEN LET LIVAL K3) 1: INPU "


"AT 19.0; \"and is dead\": LET FAI 1190 IF INKEY-\"S\" THEN CLS : P RINT \"Ready tape, then press any key\": PAUSE 4E4: SAVE \"star figh t\" LINE 1010: BEEP 1,1: RETURN 1299 REM Combat save your position. When this is done, thewhole game is saved making it unnecessary to load the original version beforehand.\" 8400 PRINT AT 21,0; \"ANY KEY TO S TART 8410 IF INKEY\"\" THEN GO TO 84 1300 IF A#(LEVEL, POS) \"3\" THEN RETURN 1301 LET TS-CODE A# (LEVEL,POS)-7 3: LET DAM 1 1395 IF TS=4 THEN LET MI-2: GO TO 1309 130B LET M1=1 1399 DIM D(M1): DIM MEM1,16) 1310 IF MI THEN RETURN 1315 DIM U(M1): FOR N 1 TO M1: L ET M$ (N) (T5): LET U(N) -100: N EXT N: LET INIT-INT (RND 2): IF 3611 NEXT I: RETURN 3760 IF A$(LEVEL,POS) >=\"0\" THEN PRINT AT 17,0: \"You can't use it here!\": RETURN 3761 DIM Y16): FOR I=1 TO P: IF P${1,5 TO )=H*(3,5 TO) THEN LE TY (CODE P$(1,4)) = 1 3762 NEXT I: IF NOT Y (LEVEL-CODE A# (LEVEL , POS) +43) THEN PRINT A T 17.; \"You don't have the corre ct card!: RETURN 3763 LET LEVEL=LEVEL-CODE A$(LEV EL, POS) +44: RETURN 4000 IF A (LEVEL, POS) =\"S\" THEN LET A (LEVEL, POS)=CHR$ INT (RND 2025 IF A>=M(T5) THEN PRINT AT 17,0; \"The HMS (N3 TO \"has mis sed\":NE (A1) 2030 FOR D-1 TO 100: NEXT 0: GO SUB 550: NEXT N 2032 GO SUB 550: IF F(3) =@ THEN GO TO 9600 203S PRINT AT 20,1; \"DO YOU WANT A STATUS REPORT? 2040 IF INKEY \"Y\" AND INKEY$< > \"N\" THEN GO TO 2040 2045 IF INKEY\"N\" THEN RETURN 2050 GO SUB 1500: IF NOT INIT TH EN GD SUB 123 2499 RETURN 2500 REM Players Attack 250S FOR N-1 TO 3: LET BIN)=1:1 FNC3 THEN 50 TO 2515 2510 GO SUB 550: PRINT AT 17,11; N(N); AT 19,6; \"Use an item\":AT 20,6; \"Attack with weapons 2511 LET KIINKEY\": IF K*>\"A\" A ND KU \"U\" THEN GO TO 2511 2513 IF K+-\"U\" THEN GO SUE 3523 : IF KI=\"U\" THEN GO TO 2535 2514 IF KE=\"Z\" THEN GO SUB 550: GO TO 251 2515 IF F(N) OR MI=1 THEN GO 4005 LET A1ECODE A# (LEVEL, POS)-5 5: GO TO 4011 491@ IF A1 OR AT THEN RETUR TI: PRINT 0;AT 0.0;N (VAL K$)' \"can't crack this safe!\": FOR N= 1 TO 150: NEXT N: RETURN 5650 LET LAVAL K*)=-1 5660 CLS ! PRINT \"CONGRATULATION S!\" NI (VAL K$) \"has opened the safe. Inside youfind the co-or dinates of the Secret Spaces tation.\": STOP 6000 RESTORE 8994: FOR TO 47 : READ X: POKE USR \"an, X: NEXT n! RETURN 6999 REM PARLEY 7000 PRINT AT 17,0; \"Who is tryin g to communicate (\"1) +NI (1) AND F(1) '(2) \"Nt (2)) AND F(2) 3) ENS (3) 7001 LET ITINKEYS: IF I \"1\" OR I\" THEN GO TO 700! 700Z IF NOT F(VAL 13) THEN GOT 07001 7003 GO SUB 550 7004 LET A1=INT (RND100+1): IF A1-Z (VAL 11,4) OR L (VAL 1) THE N PRINT AT 17,0;NU (VAL it can 't understand the (1,7 TO : LET LIVAL # 1: FOR 2-1 TO 100 NEXT D 7005 IF TS1 THEN PRINT AT 19. 0; \"The \":M8(1,3 TO 1.'\"attacks.\": FOR D1 TO 100: NEXT 0 7006 IF TS 1 OR A1 =Z (VAL 11,4) ORL (VAL ) THEN RETURN 7010 IF NOT BG THEN PRINT AT 17 ,0: \"We Prinons have been enslava d bythe Kraspian space pirates.\" 4011 INPUT :: PRINT 0; AT ,0; \"W ho will\": TAB 13 (1) NU (1) AN DF(1) \"pick the\"; TAB 13: (\"2 \"+ N$ (2)) AND F(2) \"lock , TAB 13;\" 1317 GO SUB 1322: IF INIT THEN GO SUB 1360: IF M1 AND LIC\"R\" T HENGO SUB 2000+32 (T5=1) 1318 IF NOT INIT THEN GO SUB 20 00: GO SUB 1362 1319 IF M10 THEN GO TO 600 1320 IF LE \"R\" THEN LET M1-O: R ETURN 1321 GO TO 1317 1323 CLS ! PRINT AT 5.0: INVERSE 1:04: PRINT AT 7,0:05 1325 PRINT AT 8,5; \"YOU ARE DISCO VERED BY: 1330 PRINT AT 10,6; \"A)\":M$ (1) 1335 IF M1>1 THEN PRINT AT 12,6 : \"D) \"ME (2) 1345 PRINT AT 15,6; 0 1355 RETURN 1360 REM Fight or Run 1361 IF AT LEVEL,POS) =\"7\" THEN LET LIF: GO TO 1385 1362 GO SUB SSD 1365 PRINT AT 17,10; \"OPTIONS\" 1370 PRINT AT 19, 10:\"Flight\" 1375 PRINT AT 21,10: \"Run 1377 PRINT DAT 1,10;\" P) arley 1380 LET LE INFEY: IF LE \"F\" A ND L<> \"R\" AND L: \"P\" THEN GO B420 PRINT AT 20,0:0$; AT 21,0:0$ 8430 DIM N$ (3,16): INPUT AT , ; \"Enter your characters name\"\" LI NE (3) 3440 PRINT AT 20.6;N$(3) 8450 PRINT AT 21,6; \"IS THIS CORR ECT 8440 IF INKEY <>\"N\" AND INKEY \"Y\" THEN GO TO 8460 8470 IF INKEY\"N\" THEN PRINT A T 20.0-03:05: GO TO 8420 8980 DATA 82,50,50,60 B982 FOR N=1 TO 4: READ Z (3,N): NEXT N 8990 DATA \"TREVILLE\", \"Theft\".69, 95,70,40 8991 DATA \"RICO\", \"Assassination\" , 90,70,40,65 8992 DATA \"DOC RICHARDS\",\"Comput er Fraud. 40,60,95,65 8993 DATA \"RED BOMBER\",\"Armed Ro bbery\", 90,40,30,40 8994 DATA \"ANN RAVENFLAME\", \"Espi onage\", 80,70,60,30 1995 RESTORE 1999: CLS ! PRINT INK ; PAPER 6; \"NAME\", INK 7; PA PER 2 \"CRIME\":TAB 30\"ARMS\": PA PER 1: \"LOCKS\": PAPER 3: \"COMPUTE RS\"; PAPER 4: INK ; \"LANGUAGE : FOR N1 TO 5: READ NS (1),C#, Z 2516 GO SUB 550: PRINT AT 17,11; NE(N)AT 19,2: \"Which monster wil 1 you fight 2520 LET K3=INK EY: IF (\"A\" OR K+CHR (M1 +64) THEN GO TO 252 4012 LET K INKEY: IF K#<\"1\" OR K$>\"3\" THEN GO TO 4012 4013 IF NOT F (VAL K) THEN GOT 04012 4014 IF L (VAL K+) AND (INT (R ND#100+1) >=Z (VAL K$,2) OR LIVAL K$)) THEN LET L (VAL K)=1: INPU T E PRINT 0; AT ,0;N (VAL K) \"can't pick this lock!\": FOR N1 TO 150: NEXT N: RETURN 4015 LET L (VAL K$)-1 4018 IF A1=-1 THEN GO TO 4520 4019 INFUT :: PRINT 0; AT 0.0:N (VAL KE)\"has found a \"; \"pack o + \" AND NOT A1);h(A1+1) 4020 PRINT ); \"Do you wish to ta keit 4021 LET it=INKEY: IF 11<>\"Y\" A ND 1 >\"N\" THEN GO TO 4021 4022IFTEN THEN RETURN 4023 IF NOT AT THEN LET MD=MDI NT (RND*6+1): GO TO 4070 4024 IF A1 >7 THEN LET DUVAL K > =W* (A1-7): LET GEVAL K) = (A1-7 2530 LET BIN=CODE -64 2535 NEXT N: GO SUB 550 2600 FOR N-1 TO 3: IF F(N) OR B(N) =D THEN GO TO 2620 2601 IF NOT E(N) AND UBN) THE N PRINT AT 17.0N (N) has no harges lett1 the\" DE (N) FORD =1 TO 100: NEXT Q: GO TO 2620 2602 IF UNO THEN LET EN =E(N)-1: LET ASINT (RNDW100): IS ACZN, 1) OR DCBN)) THEN LET D AMI=INT (PND.51)+G(N-10: PRINT Q: GO TO 7040 6: IF AS (LEVEL,NH:6+)=\"0\" THEN NEXT Q: NEXT N. 7030 PRINT AT 17,0: The litt is \" \"north\" AND NINT (P05/16): \"SO uth\" AND NINT (FOS/16); \"west\" A NDFOS-16 INT (POS/ 16 \"east AND DF05-16*INT (FOS/16):\" of h ere.\": FOR Q=1 TO 100: NEXT O 7040 LET AT (LEVEL, FOS) \"2\": LET MI: RETURN 1385 POKE 23659,8: INPUT :: IE L $=\"F\" THEN GO SUB 2500 1390 IF LT=\"\" THEN GO SUB 1900 1391 IF L#\"\" THEN GO SUB 7000 1392 IF FLAG=1 THEN LET FLAG: GO SUB 1200 1396 RETURN G9 EM V 1400 GO SUB 600 1499 GO SUB 105 1452 IF AU (LEVEL,POS) \"\" THEN RETURN 1455 LET TS-INT (RND*100+1: IF TSS THEN RETURN 1460 LET M1=1: IF 15-4 THEN LET If you cannot be bothered to type in the listing of On the Emperor's Secret Service then remember you can send off for our Special C+VG/Star Dreams tape offer. Just send a cheque or postal order to for .50 made payable to Star Dreams — NOT C+VG to Star Dreams, Flat 5, 15 Buckingham Road, Brighton, Sussex, BNI 3RH. On the Emperor's Secret Service Tape offer Name Address FLASH 1;N; FLASH O' INK 0; PA PER 6::NE (1); INK 7: PAPER 2:C$; TAB 302 (1,1); \" \" PAPER 1:1Z 1,2);\" \"; PAPER 3; Z(1,3);\" \"; INK G; PAPER 4;2(1,4);\" : NEXT N: FOR N -1 TO 2 8996 PRINT ; AT 9.; \"PRESS No. of convict you want totake on yo ur mission. (1-5) 8997 LET KIINK EY$: IF K \"1\" OR \"5\" THEN GO TO B997 8998 INPUT :: RESTORE 8989+VAL K $: READ NE(N), C#, ZIN, 1), Z (N,2). (N3), ZN, 4): PRINT AT VAL K41,0;0$;0#:08: NEXT N: IF N# (1) -N $(2) THEN LET N-2: GO TO 8996 8999 GO SUB 1500: INPUT II PRINT @: \"ALL CORRECT (Y/N) 9000 LET KINKEYT: IFK \"N\" A ND KEY THEN GO TO 9000 9001 IF KE=\"Y\" THEN RETURN 9002 GO TO 8995 9554 REM Press ENTER 9555 IF INKEY \" THEN GO TO 9 555 9556 PRINT 10: AT 0.3: \"FRESSENT ER TO CONTINUE 9560 IF INKEY CHR$ 13 THEN GO TO 956 9565 PRINT AT 21.0:01: RETURN 9600 REM Lose 605 CLS : PRINT AT 9, 11:N!(3): PRINT \"SPECIAL GALACTIC AGENT\" \"YOU DIED WITHOUT COMPLETING YOU RMISSION\": STOP 1470 GO SUB 1309 1495 RETURN 1499 REM Report ends here 1500 CLS : PRINT AT 3,9:\"STATUS REPORT\";AT 5,0: INVERSE 1:05 1510 PRINT INI 0; PAPER 6; \"NAME \". INE 7: PAPER 2; LIFE FORCE\":T AB 30 \"ARMS\": PAFER 1: \"LOCKS \"; PAF EF 3: \"COMPUTERS \"; IN : Please send me — copy(ies) of One the Emperor's Secret Service. I enclose a cheque/postal order made payable to Star Dreams for  "


"ARENA WIN UP TO ,000 Up to ,000 could be yours, simply order a copy of Vonsoft's new release A.R.E.N.A. answer a simple question about its game. play and post the answer to us on the supplied card. If yours is the first correct answer we receive the money is yours. All orders will be despatched on January the 31st 1987 by first class post, this will allow everybody the same amount of time to complete the task. On the evening of February the 5th 1987 a man lies slumped over a small keyboard. Both mentally and physially exhausted. He dared to take the challenge. There many more like him all over the world in states of torment, anger and frustration. But he had won, beaten the game, the machine and the challenge. The first 1,000 received orders will also receive a complete play guide and tips sheet. reTo order send your name, address, format required a mittance to: VONSOFT, A.R.E.N.A. Challenge, 5 Knockholt Road, Halstead, Sevenoaks, Kent, TN14 7ES. He had completed a quest which saw him journey to a distant galaxy, save countless generations and finally win ,000. Except the money was not fantasy, not a work of pure fiction, not even a dream, the money was real. Your order must reach us by first post on January the 31st 1987. Good luck Commodore 64/128 Amstrad CPC Spectrum .95 on cassette .95 on disc ONSOFT "


"AFTER TWO YEARS OF RESEARCH THE IMPOSSIBLE HAS BEEN ACHIEVED IE AWARD WINNING GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR THE DOUBLE Boobs CASH TEXT FEEOLADE Will change the face of the adventure software market. AMSTRAD ACTION THE ANSWER TO YOUR PRA C&VG A very clever utility .. very easy to use. KEITH CAMPBELL, COMMODORE USER THE LEAGUE & F.A. CUP a ju onsoft's s gameIs is the Highly recommended. ACORN USER A very impressive and sophisticated adventure generator. SINCLAIR USER Now everyone can write professionally illustrated adventure games. The Graphic Adventure Creator THE adventure writing utility of the eighties. * Unleash the Power of your imagination * AVAILABLE AT ALL DVENTURE LEADING RETAILERS or direct from: INCENTIVE SOFTWARE LTD., 2 Minerva House, Calleva Park, Aldermaston, Berkshire RG7 4QW. Telephone: (07356) 77288. liby first time to The Manager of Everton F.C. Howard Kendall says... This must be the ultimate of all strategy games... Excellent OUT NOW... OUT NOW... OUT NOW... Pit your wits and skills against 65 other teams which have their own Transfers, Finances, Injuries etc., involving OVER 1050 PLAYERS all with their individual skill levels of Passing. Tackling, Kicking etc. All results are achieved by 22 players using Artificial Intelligence with 'live action' graphics and player commentary from any of the three division fixtures YOUR TASK IS TO... Manage a given 3rd Division team and succeed by either Promotion or interesting larger Clubs with your expertise in winning the League Championship or better still THE DOUBLE. Careful programming has eliminated luck so you will need astuteness and a Managerial mind to organise Administration, Staff & Players, Wages & Transfers (not easy we promise), Crowd Control, Policing, Scouts, Finance, Gates, Injuries and Physiotherapy. At your disposal are print-outs, individual player reports, visits to League Grounds, Fixtures, Results and current League Tables of ALL THREE DIVISIONS. To survive you will have to be good to impress other clubs you will have to be very good to succeed you will have to be excellent. But will you achieve the ultimate of 'THE DOUBLE??? HOWARD KENDALL did not achieve success in 5 minutes neither will you! COMPETITION, COMPETITION... If you can be the FIRST to achieve THE DOUBLE you will WIN A DAY OUT in style at EVERTON F.C., for a fixture of your choice and meet HOWARD KENDALL ORDER NOW... ORDER NOW... ORDER NOW... .95 Including V.AT. Plus 28p post & packing PLEASE SEND CHEQUES/P.O. TO:JOHNSON 39 TOTTERDOWN ROAD WESTON-SUPER-MARE AVON BS234BR LIMITED -COMMODORE 64, ATARI HE PLEASE RUSH ME (1st Class Postage FREE) THE GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR Tape .95 Disc .95 Winter Wonderland graphic adventure.......95 Apache Gold (Except BBCB).. . .. .95 The GAC Adventure Designer Pad.......... .95 SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 AMSTRADCPC BBCB GAC extra information -free with any order I enclose Cheque/P.O. for  or please debit my credit card No. Name Address SCANATAON WESTON SUCH "


"Peter Shilton Competition TOVO COMPETITION FITBA CRAZIE! takes the part of the Here we go, here we go, here goalkeeper. we go --for another great There are practice sessions, Computer + Video Games league matches, multi-player competition. games and a range of problems And we're going football which the goalkeeper has to crazy again by a football face in organising the defence, signed by the England team as corners and throw-ins. top prize based around the Right, how can you make a new Grandslam game Peter great save for yourself by Shilton's Handball Maradona. winning the autographed And the next 30 runners-up football of the game? Simple, will receive a copy of the game Just answer these questions which is being released on the and send your answers to Spectrum, Commodore and Peter Shilton Competition, Amstrad. Computer + Video Games, Peter Shilton's Handball Priory Court, 30-32 Maradona gives you the Farringdon Lane, London chance to save the day for ECIR 3AU. The final whistle England. The pitch is in 3D and blows on January 16th and the has three views. The player referee's decision will be final. Questions 1 Peter Shilton has played for which of the following First Division teams? a) Nottingham Forest b) Spurs c) Chelsea d) Southampton e) Leicester f) Arsenal g) Stoke City 2 Which of the following has not played in goal for England? a) Gordon Banks b) Ray Clemence c) Garry Williams 3 In what year did England win the World a) 1980 Cup b) 1970 c) 1966 d) 1986 4 In not more than 25 words, say why you want to win the signed soccer ball. Name Address Spectrum Amstrad Commodore C+VG COMPETITION GET STEAMED UP! Here's a competition that will make you hot under the collar. Our mates at Alligata have come up with some amazing prizes to celebrate Christmas and the success of their C+VG HIT! game called Kettle. Tony Crowther's latest creation got our reviewers all steamed up and this competition will bring things to the boil nicely. You could win a Spectrum+2 computer for yourself, AND an Alligata kettle for your family! Then 25 runners-up will get copies of Crowther's Kettle, which is available on the 64 and Amstrad. All you have to do to get your hands on a Spectrum, and a special kettle, is to answer the slowly simmering competition questions on the couponincluding the tie breaker and hot foot it down to the post box with your entry addressed to Computer and Video Games, Kettle Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Closing date is January 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and the editor's decision is final. STEAMING HOT KETTLE COMPETITION QUESTIONS 1) What is the boiling point of water? 2) Who invented the steam engine? 2) What was the name of the first steam locomotive? C+VG/ALLIGATA KETTLE COMPETITION Name Address Amstrado Computer owned (tick box) 64 My answers are: I want to win a kettle for my family because ALLIGATA BITES BACK "


"THE LEGEND OF  GOLD by FOOTBALL CRAZY Peter Torrance Lonesome Cowboy 'LUKE WARME, not a Dime to your name and only dreaming of riches. But there is a LEGEND. A legend of great riches in an Indian Burial ground. The legend of ... APACHE GOLD! CHE CHILD ACHE COL WACHE CL gaints ER TORRANCE FIND THE FUN IN FOOTBALL with your up-to-date football weekly Every week Match Facts, the top results service including star ratings for every player. Fun to enter competitions to test your football knowledge. Big match reports. Super colour pictures. Up to date news and views DON'T MISS YOUR FREE F.A. CUP DLARY with the 10 JAN ISSUE! MATE: Available from all From the leading retailers producers of Or direct from: THEGRAPHIC INCENTIVE SOFTWARE LIMITED ADVENTURE 2 Minerva House, Calleva Park, CREATOR Aldermaston, Berkshire RG7 4QW. Telephone: (07356) 77288. PRIORITY ORDER FORM Please rush me for my Spectrum SATI Commodore 64 Amstrad CPC Apache Gold .95 83 Winter Wonderland .95 Graphic Adventure Creator Tape .95 Graphic Adventure Creator Disc .95 I enclose cheque/PO or please debit my credit card No Name Address ORDER YOUR COPY NOW! To my newsagent Please deliver/reserve MATCH every week. Price 45p until further notice. Name. Address .......... Postcode ...... "


"STATE OF WAR C The completely fictitious Wargame is in fact quite well known to board-gamers, although it has yet to be touched by computer games firms. About ten years ago SPI produced a boardgame called Dixie. This was based on the British software houses have a poor reputation when it idea of the South winning the American Civil War, and comes to producing war games, according to Dr featured a re-match between Stephen Badsey, C+VG's own expert. Americans and the Union and Confederacy Australians do it better. So stiffen your upper lip before with light tanks and aircraft in reading Dr Badsey's challenging views on the state of the early 1930s. All the computerised kriegspiel that's war play. He also background information came reviews the latest war games available. from real studies of tank warfare at the time. l aying wargames? preference to British material. I realism so long as it does not Computer wargamers are War isn't a game, hope this article might inspire change its power plant and familiar with World War Three\" 1 you know!\" someone to try to change this. armory half-way through the games based on a similar suppose that everyone who The big advantage of a game. mixture of extrapolation and says that really believes he wargame over other methods of what this means is that a opinions hopes? as to thought of it himself. understanding war is that it good wargame must be \"many what is likely to happen. If the Certainly, the brilliant makes possible the \"what if?\", branched\", offering the player World War Three that never German officer who invented exploring the chances of what the chance to explore his own happened can be put onto the kriegspiel (war-play or war might happen. The challenge of ideas about a historical event. computer why not other wars game) training system over d a wargame, to its designer, is to For a computer wargame this that never happened as well? hundred and fiftly years ago take an existing event and means having more than one in every battle there are had to put up with such separate the constants from the scenario, and allowing as many different viewpoints, from the comments. He often wished that variables, showing what might changes in composition of force commander-in-chief to the men he had called the kriegspiel have been different. Few and circumstances as possible. at the sharp end, and some of something else. people really believe that An ideal wargames program these viewpoints are a lot easier But it is quite true that war is everything in history had to would be one which allowed to translate into computer terms not a game. Neither is wara happen exactly as it did, but the player to design his own than others. It is most easy if the book, or a film or a television the current of history is a game, in the same way that a simulation depends upon programme. All these are ways powerful force, and to divertit d to divertit graphics package enables a araphics package enables a machines, the performances of of understanding war, and short can take considerable effort. non-specialist to draw. which can readily be reduced of taking part in the same war What would the history of Something like this idea is to numbers. (courtesy of a time machine) Europe have been without already abailable to a limited Probably for this reason, the they are the only ways we have. Napoleon? Excellent wargames extent in such games as most successful form of The justification for calling a have been fought exploring Battlefront (reviewed in this computer wargame at the computer program a wargame, such ideas as the Germans issue) but a complete package moment is the aerial combat rather than a fantasy or attacking Moscow, not would cover, say, land flight simulator. Flying an adventure game, is that it tries Stalingrad, in 1942, or the operations from divisional to aircraft requires constant to simulate the problems and Warsaw Pact invading western army group level in any theatre attention-you just can't stop perspectives of war in one Europe in 1985. As long as it is of World War Two. This would place and time. What is consistent the data for such surely be a best-seller among worrying is that, at the moment, battles can even be entirely wargames. Any offers? British commercial games fictional. The Starship Enterprise houses have a poor reputation may confront three Klingon for doing this. Certainly, most warships in battle with great serious Wargamers that I know who use computers usually buy imports (often American) in "


"a va to think about anything elseand micros give the feel fo this far more successfully than flipbooks or boardgames. Actually, for navy pilots the most stressful moment, and hardest piece of flying, is not over the target nor in combat, but when trying to land back on the carrier after the mission (particularly at night!). I don't know of a computer game covering this, but I'd front line games built in, so that certainly like to see one which the player alternates between covers carrier operations from strategy and shooting. the pilot's viewpoint. Back in They are about to bring out a might have described Waterloo, they usually outnumber the July I complained that no-one game on the Bismarck in which no-one can describe the great constants in any major battle. had produced a good tank this actually makes sense, since battles of the two World Wars, Factors like the kind of ground simulator, but as you will see the same man both planned the for the simple reason that no being fought over, the weather, from the review PSS have done ship's strategy and one saw a thousandth part of the attitude of the troops (which a reasonable job with Tobruk, so commanded the ship in battle. any of them they were just we call morale) and the actual, any offers on carriers? But even with this series the too big. Other than the rather than theoretical, If the view of a carrier battle frequent absence of training experience of a single soldier, performance of their weapons from the pilot's cockpit is fast scenarios is a drawback. The the only other viewpoint which are far more important than any moving and constantly kind of strategy game which is makes much sense is a map fixed data in determining the changing, that of the task-force worth playing or which with symbols moving across it, outcome of a battle. The side commander is one of maps, wargamers want to play more whether in a book or on a micro. with the most troops, for information tables, occasional than once, cannot usually be It is just one way of coming to example, doesn't always win. fragments of reports and a lot of played by a novice at all. terms with the event, and in this Anyone who doesn't believe time sitting around thinking out the same is true of real battles particular way land warfare this, and who thinks land their implications. at a certain scale, and it takes doesn't differ much from sea or warfare is easy to model by In mechanised war, on land even the best time to learn how air warfare. computer, should read two or sea, the computer games to do it. Unfortunately, there is in books, Colin Wilson's Bomb and now existing do well in taking Frederick the Great, practice another major the Computer and Trevor N. over the role of a commander's Montgomery and U.S. Grant all difference. Both sea and air war Dupuy's Numbers, Predictions staff, providing him with made a mess of their first are conducted in a largely and War. information. The Wargamers' campaigns. On the other hand, neutral environment, by Actually, anyone writing a Series of games from PSS tries to most wargamers can win given machines which go where their wargames program should give the best of both worlds by a second chance if exactly the commanders want them to go. read them both anyway. having strategy games with same circumstances are In the middle of a battle the Any wargame, like any other usually optional arcade-style offered to them and the element stoker in a battleship or the simulation, will contain a of chance and surprise is gone. navigator in an aircraft can't certain number of assumptions While a very great writer run away. concerning the performance of Land warfare contains far forces in war, as well as a more variables, so many that number of facts. Continued on page 118 "


"STATE OF WAR GAMES REVIEWS programmes, by everything in MACHINE: fact but the firefights of which CBM 64/ATARI the game consists. It has its APPLE moments, but after an hour or  SUPPLIER: US so zapping the Cong in this GOLD/ STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS INC manner you begin to realise PRICE: .95 why the Americans lost. A far  VERSION TESTED: better game could be designed CBM64 about Vietnam from another viewpoint. I found this one easy Again, this is particularly true vastly more effective American \"This is your opportunity\", the to lose interest in. of land warfare, and is where scouting, and the computer game's authors assure us, \"to The game's scenarios have halt the progress of the not, however, been chosen to computer game designers often controlled Japanese always Communist war machine and give the Americans an easy ride fall down by failing to research approach on the same course. thwart their plans for world (the computer always takes the the subject properly. That one other side). On offer are a jungle domination\". After a second or third attempt As with many things about ambush, an American prepared aircraft flies faster than another at the historical scenario it is the Vietnam War, it wasn't quite defence, an Air Cavalry assault, is usually a matter of fact virtually impossible for the like that. This is Nam as the a tunnel operation, the one Americans would have liked it Occasion in the war when (although it may not do so Americans to lose. After playing to have been, six company American and North under combat conditions), but them both, it is hard to believe sized actions in which enemy Vietnamese tanks fought each whether one army fights better that these games are actually forces appear unexpectedly, but other, and the recapture of the than another can only be a about the same battle. matter of opinion. Until writers become more FIRE PHASE Too many program writers concerned with these problems, seem happy to put forward and in particular until the simulations of \"reality\" which dificulties of modelling land are unashamedly slanted in warfare are overcome, the favour of one side. computer wargame will not An outstanding example of become, as it should, one of the this is SSI's Nam-(also main sources of inspiration for reviewed) the declared aim of British wargamers. which is to reverse history and Naval and air wargames are let the Americans \"win\" considerably more advanced. Vietnam. The best of the British flight The first question for a simulators, like Digital M113 ACAV F=28 RE20 RE06 M 12 S5 A program writer is which Intergration's Tomahawk and NO LINE OF SIGHT viewpoint he is trying to Mirrorsoft's Strike Force Harrier TURN represent. If he doesn't know, will stand comparison with the chances of his game anything I've seen from any stay to be shot at, in which the Hue citadel. With both historical convincing anyone else are country. The best air strategy superior mobility and firepower and non-historical options of the American forces some of these come as genuine slight. game I know is also British, Their inevitably triumphs. and complete surprises to the The second thing he needs to Finest Hour from Century The game mechanism is an player. The terrain graphics are know is what assumptions he is Communications. But even as extremely simple one of picking extremely good, although the up individual units with a troops look rather too much like making, and why. It is write this I have been sent cursor-joystick control while pin-men. remarkable how much games Europe Ablaze by the cycling through fire and movement phases.  GRAPHICS cn differ in their assumptions. formidable Australians of the  PLAYABILITY But it's a pretty silly view of a The Midway scenario from Strategy Studies Group, so we'll REALISM war that was dominated by  VALUE Carriers at War, for example, see.) The ouitstanding politics, by attitudes, by civilian allows both sides to be played submarine game is the but makes scouting reports from American Silent Service, and the observation aircraft poor and best naval wargame for the Infrequent. Which side spots the very serius is Carriers at Warother first is largely a matter of reviewed below-also from the luck, and a player can do Strategy Studies Group. For everything right but still lose twentieth century land warfare of planning and controlling (much as the Japanese actually cCS produce R. T. Smith's MACHINE: CBM 64/APPLE IL  SUPPLIER: STRATEGIC PLUS them. did-Midway was a very close excellent Desert Rats, which is SOFTWARE/STRATEGIC STUDIES This wargame, also by Roger GROUP Keating and lan Trent, offers battle). far ahead of any other British PRICE: .95 four scenarios for Corps-sized The PSS game of Battle for game I've seen, and better than  VERSION TESTED: CBM64 actions the German airborne Midway, in contrast, allows for many American offerings. corps attack on Crete in 1941, In World War Two the position the German drive to relieve the of Corps commander was the siege of Stalingrad, the US highest at which a general Marines Invasion of Saipan, and actually fought battles, instead the improvised defence of the WOOD BATTLEFRONT "


"COMPUT MERCENARY Eastenders ORAL HIT GAMES Spy v Spy 3 Artic Antics 0.64 .95 DATABYTE Skyrunner SPECTRUM .95 CASCADE Eastenders SPECTRUM .95 MACSEN Computer Hits SPECTRUM .95 BEAU JOLLY Mercenary SPECTRUM .95 NOVAGEN FIVE ESTAR ddictive 5 Star SPECTRUM .95 BEAU JOLLY Star Raiders II 0.64 .99 ELECTRIC DREAMS INCLUDES SPEECH August Septe Psycastria C.64 .95 AUDIOGENIC Head Coach C.64 .95 ADDICTIVE Death or Glory C64 .95 Bulan Clough's EEEEEE Fotlan Sports 4 C16 .95 ANCO Samurai SPECTRUM .95 Sports 4 C.64 .95 ANCO Jailbreak SPECTRUM .95 KONAMI Brian Clough's football Fortunes SPECTRUM .95 CDS SOFTWARE BLOCKBUSTERS BLOCKBUSTERS ander MEDALLION GRAPHIC ADVENTURE ON Skate Rock 0.64 .95 BUBBLEBUS Trivial Pursuits GENUS .95 DOMARK Winter Wonderland SPECTRUM .95 INCENTIVE SOFTWARE Blockbusters C16 .95 MACSEN Spy v Spy 2 SPECTRUM .95 DATABYTE AVAILABLE FROM SELECTED BULLDOG DEALERS TOYS'AUS Littlewoods makro SPERRINGS Jewiss AND FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE DEALERS BULLDOG DISTRIBUTION LIMITED TEL: (0782) 563399 TELEX: 36247 BULLDOG "


"GAMES NO TOBRUK — THE CLASH OF ARMOUR The game is strong on the last strike is recovered, you You need a disk drive realism, keeping the player to turn and steam for home. and your own disks, and the his own view point while This in itself would be an game isn't cheap, but neither is occasionally reminding him excellent wargame, but it is a Rolls Royce. The designers that the troops on the ground only the teaching scenario for say they have somehow may not agree with it! Carriers at War, from the crushed 80K of machine code The game's one weak point is Australian design team of into the program, and the result its graphics, which are horrible. Roger Keating and lan Trout. is a naval wargame such that I The map is an almost The player takes either side have seen nothing to compare meaningless jumble of hexes against the computer or with it. Bastogne and hard-to-read symbols another player not only at Pearl GRAPHICS road-block (printed black-on-black in but at Coral Sea, Midway, the PLAYABILITY during the REALISM Solomons, Santa Cruz and the places) which scrolls in a battle of the  VALUE manner guaranteed to cause Philippine Sea. Bulge. The player the user headaches. takes either side Also, while the two island aginst a computerised scenarios are good the others or human opponent, and a have the problem of Corps handicapping system allows command, artificially restricting beginners the chance to win. movement within the area of The key to successful the map while important things command at this level is may be happening just out of \"thinking two down\" — the sight. But, if you don't like these MACHINE: AMSTRAD tank simulator. The designers Corps commander gives orders games, design your own!  SUPPLIER: PSS call this an arcade option, but through his two or three As with Carriers at War, the PRICE: .95 it's more than that. divisions to the regiments program allows the player to Nor is it as out of place as it underneath. construct his own scenarios, This member of the PSS seems in a strategy gameThe program allows access to adding scenery to the map and Wargamers series runs on the Rommel frequently left his reports on the state of the specifying the strength of each Amstrad only. It is mis-named, headquarters with plans for the regiments at the end of each battalion. The possibilities are since it deals with Rommel's battle and led from the front in a offensive against the Gazala command tank (although line in May 1942, with Tobruk as doubt if he personally fired on the final objective. as many British tanks as this The player has only the game allows!) choice of German forces Attempts to mix strategy and against the computer, but two shooting in games usually don't can play with linked Amstrads. work very well this is one of The game is good in its the better ones. handling of strategy problems. The Germans are given variable  GRAPHICS air support and moving supply PLAYABILITY REALISM dumps to stress the importance VALUE D : of supply for this kind of warfare. The graphics are among the Turn best I've seen for representing 3042676 MAY 1941 running military formations in the Forecastciearing desert. The problem is that it's ever too soon. You can only endless. six-hour move (one in four of take one side in one battle of the which is normally spent war. Sea war and air war are, asleepl) by a simple menu largerly, matters of machines. The reason for this is that all driven system which takes an Land war has always been even the extra program memory has hour or so to master. gone into an optinal feature-a more a matter of terrain and After that each of the people, and so is very much scenarios can be got through in harder to model on the two or three hours for six to ten computer. Battlefront is a very game days. The Corps good attempt, but it is not the commander learns how to perfect game that it might have judge the state of his regiments orders you do give them. MACHINE: SPECTRUM been SUPPLIER: CCS One result of this is, oddly, to from information on casualties, PRICE: .95 make Napoleon at War slightly supply and fatigue, and to give GRAPHICS more playable. air support and extra divisional PLAYABILITY Ken Wright, author of Waterloo Eylau was a confused battle, REALISM resources where they are and Austerlitz, has moved from VALUE with re-inforcements for both needed. Lothlorien to CCS for his latest sides arriving at odd moments Napoleonic battle, the littlethroughout the day (this is not known draw against the represented in the game, by the Russians at Eylau on 8th way). At the end it was a messy February 1807. and hard-fought draw, which It uses similar mechanisms to amounted to a strategic defeat MACHINES: CBM 64/APPLE II unsuspecting American fleet at his two previous games, but is for Napoleon, who needed to SUPPLIER: STRATEGIC PLUS Pearl Harbor. improved by a few extra keep on advancing. The SOFTWARE/STRATEGIC STUDIES GROUP You check the intelligence features. Artillery is represented arbitrary nature of the combat plot -they are still at Pearl, PRICE: .95 separately this time, and on the system means that while nothing reported in the other VERSION RESTED: CBM64 Austerlitz, Napolion's greatest big battlefield of Eylau the harbours, nothing at sea or in devolved command system, by victory, is virtually unwinable, Your Japanese carrier task force the air. The weather is clear, which the player leaves Corps Eylau, a battle he virtually lost, bears down, through the although there is cloud to the commanders in charge of their stands quite a good chance of darkness before dawn on 7th east and the prediction is for own forces, works rather better being won. December 1941, on the squals. You check the course than in previous games. At least, the Marshals of France do and speed of your carriers.  GRAPHICS PLAYABILITY Three hours before dawn. fewer stupid things. REALISM esguadros You order the aircraft to arm, But the game is still very  VALUE and 15 minutes later reports limited, and rather poor value. SELECT show feaverish activity on the You get no choice of scenario, ENEMY hanger decks. Af first light to no choice of terrain, no choice BASE give the target and launch the of side, no choice of starting strike. The ticking clock shows position, and no re-run facility. its progress, but you can only All you have left is the chance guess until the first aircraft to give the French side orders. return wth tales of sinking Unfortunately, the combat battleships. How accurate are mechanism seems to involve they? You order a second strike, such a large random factor that and redirect part of it to the whether they win or lose has American airfields. Finally, as almost nothing to do with the Go NAPOLEON AT WAR CARRIERS AT WAR O content NOUMEA NON % "


"If you're already elite ... there can only be one more challenge. TIENESIS  KONAMI RE THE SAS: OPERATION THE FIRST EVER SUPER SPARKLER THUNDERFLASH! The first ever Super Sparkler! Only .99 for a super 3-D graphic game. Your task as leader of the SAS squad is to spearhead an offensive against the terrorists who have occupied a foreign embassy Can you stay the ?  Spike Sparkler's pick 2 it of the Christmas hits at only .99 each Pooral Santa Hel ena od now has only 5 boutoder a good SPECIAL DELIVERY ATARI SPECTRUM 48K THE SAS: OPERATION THUNDERFLASH! Get in training for with the ing reen BARGAIN Money on his through the BASEMENT og with us EXO CARE The action is place in Hardige SPECTRUM 48K the world famous department store JALE RATING SMUDGE Seadow the French AND THE with the d ogach MOONEES Pas roof Watch out for the Moonshow what to thwart his progress Mighly playable SPECTRUM 48K SPARKLE RATING dropping the guts down the right cheys ALSO ON SHTRUM SPARGUE RATING*** that the hardes Are there you have to be was o utras and stay the evil Sorcerer and dude the concentrator play ATTACK ALSDONTWM 462 SPARKI NAMING SPIKE'S Nol ,  C64 & ATARI homeofanana checogid Het rosmarty od male swing acro b ing its and dodge manag er You're bound to do thai SPARKLE RATING Guns out the read Sa Sugbon a bout appetite over he goes up everything in ghi block out theres danger king in them thar As the owner of the fastest power but in the rige you ca RIVER Tonitor you to the rescue the transcen d Burckout RESCUE for and minerang DON SEOTUVE ATARI SHARE RATIVE THE LATEST FROM SPARKLERS ALSO INCLUDES MONKEY TANK COMPUTER MAGIC COMMANDER WAR ON 064 ON ATARI ON ATARI SLURPY C54 SPARKLE RATING AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE STORES Unit BIL. Armstrong Mall Summit Centre, Southwood, Farnborough, Hante GUIONP. Tetoasa 2200. "


"Name...... Address.... GVGCOMPETITION TOPGUNE CBM O Amstrad Please tick the appropriate box Spectrum What's the difference between an F16 Tomcat strike aircraft which can fly at twice the speed of sound, climb 30,000 feet in a minute and haul seven tons of weaponry and a copy of Computer + Video Games? Well, for the $36 million you would have to pay to buy the F16 you don't get a copy of C+VG free. However, for the 98 pence you paid for this issue, you do get the chance to find out what it's like to sit in the cockpit of an F16 by entering our Top Gun competition. Yes, thanks to Ocean, we've got 30 copies of Top Gun, the game based on the highly successful film featuring the F16 Tomcat to give away. The film -starring Tom Cruise -is about the US Navy's programme to find its brightest pilots, sharpest shooters and train them until they're the best in the world. The game, combining elements of flight simulation and shoot'em up gives you a taste of what it's like to join an elite corps of fighter pilots. And what do you have to do? Well, we want you to do is design your own fighter jet, complete with gadgets, weapons etc. Send your design to Top Gun Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR SAU. The closing date is January 16 and the commanding officer's decision is final. Don't forget to send the printed coupon with your entry and please indicate which computer you have. C+VG COMPETITION TURINNO but we'd really like you to come transform themselves into man machines at will by simply shouting \"Power Xtreme!\" All of a sudden they become rocket powered supersonic fighting machines! Use your imagination and create your own special centurion suit. It could be based on the TV characters if you like up with your own ideas for equipment and weapons and what YOUR Centurion would use them for. Draw or paint your centurion and send it off to Computer and Video Games. Centurion Competition. Priory Court, 30 32 Farringdon Lane. London ECIR 3AU. Closing date for entries is January 16th, normal C+VG rules apply, and the Editor's decision is final. DONT miss out on the awesome Ariolasoft Goodie Bag enter today! C+VG/ARIOLASOFT CENTURIONS COMPETITION Name Address ALL this could be yours if you're the first prize winner in our but before they do we want you to be truly awesome Ariolasoft Centurions Competition! Ariola are about to unleash the game of the cartoon series on an unsuspecting world kitted out and ready for it! That's why we persuaded Amanda Ariola to give us this monster Goodie Bag, packed with neat things like FIVE Arista/Ariola LP records, THREE books from the Leisure Circle Book Club, FOUR games from Ariolasoft, a CENTURION MODEL and no less than FOUR of.Ariola's famous Hacker series t-shirts! Is this a good prize or what? We haven't forgotten the runners-up either because we've got 25 Ariola t-shirts to give away to them. What do you have to do? Well it's time for one of C+VG's legendary art competitions again. Wed like you to create a Centurion suit for your favourite character from the TV cartoon. If you've watched it you'll know that the heroes can C64 Age Adventurer Computer owned (tick box) Spectrum Amstrado T-shirt size (tick box) SOMO LOXLO Design (tick box) Hacker Strategist Zapper PLEASE FIX THIS COUPON SECURELY TO YOUR ENTRY "


"LLETRA OUT NOW FOR Amstrad 464, 664 86128 Computers AMSTRAD (Schneider) 464/664/6128 LEO .95 cassette $14.95 diskette Available now from your local dealer or mail order P&P included from: ENGLISH 7 SOFTWARE 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gardens, Manchester M3 2NH. Tel: 061-835 1358 SOFTWARE An STAR We've done it again! COMPILATIOMI FEATURING ALL THESE HIT GAMES VOLUME ENGLISH SOFTWARE Production U.S. GOLD SYNSOFT VOLUMES AC 2140 ATARI A TARI SMASHHtts VOLUME 5 AND VOLUME 6 GIANT SMASH GIANT COMPILATION FEATURING ALL THESE HIT GAMESMO 7 FIVE 5 ATARI 400/800 48K VOLUME OGOWISMI VOLUME FOR ALL 48k ATARI 400/8OONLINE COMPUTERS .95 double cassette . $14.95 double diskette 2onowiata Available now from your local Atari dealer or mail order P&P included from: ENGLISH SOFTWARE 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gardens, Manchester M3 2NH. Tel: 061-835 1358 ATARI 400/800 48K= XLIXE "


"ikali Warriors START 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 "


"END MAP IKPERSREPARE 392552452525252525 LUUUUUU ROBE ESPECIALISEERITREA ESTOS MODE 33363525252525252525ES PSRSKE SEST k troops! This is Jackson T. Kalliber talking at you. This here is the definitive campaign map for all Ikari Warriors. This screen-by-screen map will point out all the pitfalls and pill-boxes you're likely to encounter in the Ikari battlezone. Use it to plan your assault on the enemy strongholds in search of the captured generals' prison. Spot the tanks which you can use to further your advance and make a beeline for them. Watch out for the landmines which the enemy sneakily leaves scattered around the landscape. And beware the jungle idols which are really machine gun nests spraying lead death in all directions. Remember to keep moving at all times don't be tempted to stick around to machine gun a few extra enemy troops. Use your grenades wisely to wipe out pill boxes and gain those useful extra supplies of ammo and fuel for tanks. Run over the \"smart-bombs\" as soon as you see their friendly flashing symbol this will zap all enemy troops in your immediate vicinity and give you a breathing space. Try not to blow up tanks with badly aimed grenades. And as soon as they start flashing GET OUT! Unless you vacate the tin box rapidly you'll lose a life. And And there's always another tank around the corner... If you get really expert you can lure the enemy troops into blowing each other away with their own grenades and bullets. But you'll have to be quick to escape the crossfire. Plan your route using the special C+VG map and then get stuck in. Remember — Ikari Warriors take no prisoners! Thanks to Dimension Graphics who put the map together and Elite, who helped them do it, and produced such a killer game! "


"LESS CASH, NO CRASH. Hire your software from the Matrix Club and you'll be getting one of the cheapest deals around, but you certainly won't be getting cheap imitations. We believe our games library is the most up to date in the country and all our programs are guaranteed originals, so they won't refuse to load or crash while you play. We apply the same high standards and low cost approach to our new Pop video hire scheme, so whether your interest is computers or music you could be enjoying your selection from our extensive library of top titles at a fraction of the cost of purchasing, Our nationwide service is fast and simple to use. The hire period can be as long as you wish, and you can use the service as often or as seldom as you choose. All our members can select titles from any of our ranges and also receive free copies of our club newsletter, together with advance notice of our regular stock clearance sales at discount prices. Use the coupon to send for further details with absolutely no obligation and you could soon be enjoying all the benefits of what we believe is the best leisure hire scheme around! I APPLY NOW TO CASH IN ON OUR DISCOUNT MEMBERSHIP DEAL! Please send me more details. My interest is: Spectrum Commodore Amstrad Pop Videos Name Address MATRIX -CVG 12 Post to: The Matrix Club 271 Stansted Road Bishops Stortford Herts CM23 2BT LEISURE CLUB GET THE BIG ONE !! THE BIGGEST GAMES PACK EVER NEW ORIGINAL ONLY SUPER VALUE PROGRAMS FORUILI THE COMMODORE f995 PAGK 64 OR 128 COTIUS Son THE BIG ONE CONTAINS.. YHATZEE SPACE ATTACK PONTOON GAME OF KINGS KINDER MATHS OTHELLO CHESS DRAUGHTS  BERZERK SUPER FROG BASIC MATHS SHUFFLE MAZE CHASE TROLLS TANK BATTLE VAMPIRES LAIR TREASURE HUNT CLUES THE GORGAN 30 WAZE MATCH BOXES ASTRO PANIC DEFLECTION BOMBER BARNEY SYNTHESISER DUCK SHOOT BOWLING BREAKOUT SUB HUNTER DOC FIGHT SWITCH AROUND WORD SEARCH DEATH TRENCH COLLECTION DAY SPACE DOCK BARRICADE CONNECT 3 D OXO HEAD ON DRUM KIT DITTO SOLITAIRE MASTERMIND DYKE NIBBLER TERROR CASTLE DEPTH CHARGE MONEY GRABBER HANGMAN DEFINITIONS TIC TAC MATH SIM PEC PUZZLE CHESS wice S.99 BIG ONE THE GRA Available on: Spec GRAND MASTERN AND MANY MANY MORE.... pectrum 48K and 128K MSX Tape ALSO AVAILABLE FOR VIC 20 & C16/+4 MINI COMPENDIUM 20 GAME PACK .95 RZ FORMULA CBM64/128 Tape and D VIC 20 CHECKERS NIN DRIVER SHUFFLE DRAGONS FRUIT MACHINE CLUES THREES ATTACK KINDER MATH SOLGOH BOMBER DITTO SNAKES NIBBLER MUSICIAN SKIER SAUCERS 30 MAZE SKYDIVER C16/+4 SOLITAIRE THREES PONTOON POKER CHECKERS SHIEEE. CLUES NIM TIC TAC MATH SOLCOR FRUIT MACHINE 3D OXO YHATZEE MUSICIAN BASIC MATHS DEPTH CHARGE PREDICTOR TANES GAME OF KINGS HANGMAN II SPECIAL OFFER V Part exchange your old chess program for ONLY .95 1 PLEASE SEND ME (TICK APPROPRIATE BOX) Goods Dispatched within Fourteen Days! 75 CAMES FOR C64/128 OS CASSETTE ON DISKD19.95 each inc.P&P 20 GAMES FOR VIC 2011 2D GAMES FOR C16/+ 4 .95 each Inc. P&P I ENCLOSE A CHEQUE/ P.O. FOR E M ADE PAYABLE TO AMVIC SERVICES LTD. NAME ADDRESS Send cheques/postal orders for .95 and your old a program to: Alligata Software Ltd., 1 Orange Street, Sheffield S1 4DW Tel Order tel: (0742) 755796 BITES BACK SEND TO: U.K.: 75 GAMES, GROUND FLOOR, 536 WEST GREEN RD, TURNPIKE LANE, LONDON N15 3DX. REP.05 IRELAND; 75 GAMES.84 DUNSIKK AVENUE, FISGLAS. DUBLEX 11. "


"CVECOMPETITIONS VERA CRUZ urder, mystery and suspense. Infogrames highly original computer thriller has it all. If you've missed out on this innovative game then you should track it down immediately. If you've already got the game then you'll find the clues we've unearthed from the Interpol computer extremely useful. And you'll find the Matsui Compact Disc Player on offer for the first prize in the Infogrames Vera Cruz Competition even more useful! It's worth squillions of pounds. You can program it to play tracks in any order you want and it's packed with all the latest nifty hi-tech gizmos that no CD owner should be without All you have to do to win this absolutely amazing enhancement to your life-style is answer the simple Mystery Quiz below, which is so easy even Inspector Gadget would be able to solve it! Ten runners-up will get the pick of the C+VG software cupboard. But first here's the hints! hero. Name him. 4. Domark boss Dominic Wheatley has a famous relative who created some famous crime dossiers in the 1930s. One of these, Murder Off Miami, is being turned into a computer game by CRL. What is this man's name? He also writes many horror stories... 5. Melbourne House released an adventure based on the adventures of the world's most famous fictional detective. Name the game. C+VG VERA CRUZ CASEBOOK Many would-be detectives appear to be missing the button in the shaded area to the bottom left of the screen. The carnet (diary to you) contains three names. To open it just press the space bar. In the second part of the game it is possible to get statements from both a neighbour and the caretaker. No addresses are necessary. CD or CQ, depending on the version, are the middle letters of the car registration number The computer recognises SOME nicknames. Now try to win the Compact Disc Player! Solve the mystery questions and put your solution in the post, addressed to Computer and Video Games, Vera Cruz Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is January 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and the Chief Contable's decision is final. VERA CRUZ MYSTERY QUIZ 1. Agatha Christie created TWO famous fictional detectives. Name them. 2. Name the jockey turned thriller writer whose book, Twice Shy, has been recently turned into a computer adventure. 3. Vera Cruz is a French game. French author Georges Simenon created a famous French detective who also became a TV C+VG/INFOGRAMES VERA CRUZ COMPETITION My answers are: UWNName Address Age Computer owned "


"EXCLUSIVE FREE Elite. GAMES When you subscribe to COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES Charity begins with us, forget about the T.V., forget about the Video, forget about the wind up stereo and your dad's 78's. We've just solved all your problems for the whole of 1987. For just a measley  (if you live in the U.K.!) you can get 12 jampacked issues of your favourite computer mag. Noted scientists have recently discovered that if you read every word in each issue at approximately 40,000 times slower than light whilst crossing the equator in Concorde it will leave only 3.333 hours recurring until the next month's issue arrives. Never fear, to fill in those few desperate hours we're chucking in completely FREE one of the new Elite games. Choose between the 3D adventures of Space Harrier in the fantasy zone or summon up another scooby snack with Scooby Doo, Shaggy and others who nobody ever remembers. Or if you're a real glutton try the HitPak, 4 great games in one or the fearsome Ikari Warriors. Simply whack back the coupon to us and we'll send your free game and start your subscription with the issue you request, 1987's gonna be so dull without it! I enclose my cheque/postal order payable to: COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES/ELITE SUBS OFFER Please start my subscription from the .......... issue. Tick appropriate box: One year  U.K. & Eire One year Europe ;  Rest of World (Surface Mail) One year  Rest of World (Air Mail) Space Harrier (not available for C16) Ikari Warriors (not available for C64 and C16) Hit Pak Commando, Frank Bruno's Boxing, Bombjack, Airwolf. My choice of computer format is: Spectrum 48/128 Amstrad Commodore 64/128 Commodore 16 Your FREE game will be sent under separate cover please allow 28 days. for . Please debit my Access/Visa Account Amount .............. Expiry Date ..... Card Number.. Name ..... Address............. My choice of FREE game is: Scooby Doo Return to CARL DUNNE, ELITE SUBS OFFER, Magazine Services Dept, EMAP, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, LONDON ECIR 3AU. Signed... "


"Ocean OPPORTUNITY KNOCKS Expansion in an exciting industry. Continuing success and growth in home computer software creates further positions for personnel in program writing, development and management. Ocean group markets software worldwide offering the most extensive publication of computer programs and producing maximum sales revenues. HOW RICH DO YOU WANT TO BE? You've probably heard a lot of claims and promises from software companies concerning payment for program code or design work but the fact is reward depends upon success and by linking into success you will achieve your maximum potential whichever way you choose to be paid. If you have talent and dedication then Ocean with its resources and international connections will bring the fame and fortune you deserve. HAVE YOU GOT WHAT IT TAKES? We are looking for people to work in the fields of game design, graphic animation, program coding and related skills either directly as in-house personnel or on a freelance basis. Training and support will be offered; everything from equipment to friendly advice we want to help you do a better job for both of us. We are also looking to market finished software and will offer to translate original programs to every relevant micro formatin order to increase the potential revenues to the creator. We work and publish in both 8 bit and 16 bit environments worldwide and no project is too large or too small for our consideration. DON'T MISS THE BOAT Contact us today in full confidence either by phone, telex, fax or write to: Product Acquisition and Development, Ocean Software Limited, 6 Central Street, Manchester. M2 5NS. Telephone 061-832 6633 Fax 061-834 0650 Telex 669977 OCEANS G. "


"00000000 There was a birthday party at the recent Personal Computer World Show. The Atari 520ST was one year old. In typical fashion, Atari boss Jack Tramiel took over an entire floor of London's Olympia Exhibition Centre and invited the neighbours in to see his brainchild performing some pretty impressive party tricks. Although it's still widely regarded as a business machine, in Atari circles anyway, the ST is the shape of games machines to come. Many top software companies are now rushing to bring out games for this amazing machine. And despite their protests that \"the ST is really a business machine, guys\" Atari themselves were actively seeking to commission conversions of its arcade games portfolio as long ago as June '85! DAVID BISHOP tells all. SPECTACULAR SANS OF TIME STARGLIDER ez San is the 20-year-old the loading screen, though. programmer designer of Towards the end there were Rainbird's critically acclaimed \"marketing\" elements to be taken Starglider. In 1982 he co-authored into consideration such as adding a technical guide to the BBC disk the fixed sights feature because system well before the publication Tony (Rainbird) couldn't play the of the official Acorn manual! game without it! There was also Having co-authored the arcade the perennial problem of having to game Skyline for Century draw the line and say \"STOP. (remember the snake game you That's enough finishing touches!\" could play while the main program How did you get such impressive was loading?), he then played a 3D graphics? major role in the C64 conversion of Each object in the game is mapped Elite. the whole time, not just while it's C+VG managed to catch up on the screen. Once I've entered the on the ST and could not be with Jez just before he set off for a data for the objects you can see it squeezed into less space. two week Amiga conference in from any angle and from any With such amazing sampled music California. He agreed to give us this distance until its too far away to be why did you opt for non-sampled exclusive interview as well as some visible. Also, unlike Mercenary, sound effects? useful hints on better Stargliding! Starglider has hidden line detection I wanted to have sampled How did the Starglider project which \"hides\" those parts of an explosions but they would have start? object you wouldn't normally see. slowed things down so much that it James Follett and I sat down and This helps to make everything look would have detracted from the ed out the basic scenario. more realistic. Actually I rewrote playability of the game. Even the Then he went away and began the drawing routines about ten ST has its limits. work on the novella while I started times during the project, each time What's your impression of the ST? on the game itself. making them smaller and faster. I It's really just a glorified Spectrum. What was it like working with an think they run as fast as is possible Can you explain that? author like James Follett! The collaboration worked well, I 00000000 think. James sent me a number of drafts during the project and we met a few times to iron out any differences there may have been between the book and the game. He might have wanted to include something in the book and needed to know if it could be incorporated into the game. Sometimes I would read something in his last draft that didn't match up with the program and couldn't be put in for one reason or another. How much control did Rainbird exercise? They were very good about letting us get on with the project most of the time. They did the music and Fantastic three-dimensional graphics, digitised sound and excellent gameplay continue tokeSPECTACULAR "


"REVIEW Well, the ST doesn't have any The game starts as you leave one of movement patterns. Careful propriety chips for sound or the four repair depots on the observation will help you devise graphics etc. It relies almost planets surface, manned by attack and defence strategies for the entirely on the power of the 16-bit At the 1985 PCW show, an up and ARAMA's (Automatic Repair And various fighters, tanks etc. Apart processor. The Amiga has coming software house called Maintenance Androids) and left from differences in appearance you dedicated chips for graphics and Rainbird was showing a short intact when the Egrons attacked will encounter craft with varying sound etc, consequently less is demo of a new game being Although your goal is to destroy speeds and armour class. hung on the processor to slow it developed for the brand new Atari the Egron invasion fleet, success Apart from the repair depots, the down. Having said that, the ST is a ST computer. will not come to those whose brains Egrons have also left the Energy great machine and superb value, A year later Starglider was are housed entirely in their trigger Towers untouched because they after all how many people can released to almost universal critical fingers. control the underground monorail afford an Amiga? acclaim. You can think of A winning strategy will have to system which Novenia's invaders Going back to Starglider, are you Starglider as part Battlezone and be worked out before delving too intend to use for themselves. happy with the end product? part Elite--but far superior to far into the game or you will be The novella tells you how the Yes, very much so. You can go on both! unceremoniously vapourised time towers can be switched back on improving a game forever and you THE STORY SO FAR and time again. This is where the again but you'll need to master the may never be 100% happy with it. The game takes you to the planet accompanying novella, written by recharging manoeuvre quickly as because there is always something Novenia, for centuries successfully James Follett (author of the the Egrons won't exactly sit back that could have been slightly protected from invasion by the screenplay of the film Who Dares and watch! different. There were little things I Sentinels, unmanned ships which Wins fame) comes in rather useful. The first thing you are likely to still wanted to put into the game were \"extremely well equipped to Packed with invaluable hints and do once Starglider has loaded is go but it had to be released this decade bring about a messy and violent tips on how to kill and maim, and check if your radio is on you know, and I think the version life-style modification of any wouldFollett's witty companion also But that music you hear is that came out was good. be invader\": contains clues such as how to coming from your computer! Do you still enjoy playing . In fact, so confident were the Starglider? Novenians that their defences were Not really, not now. It was a great inpenetrable, that they had long thrill to start with but I spent a ago disbanded their home-based huge amont of time testing the army and airforce. game which was very enjoyable, Egron fleet commander but I wouldn't play it for fun now. Hermann Kruud believed he had How many levels are there in the found a flaw in Novenia's defences. game? Egrons considered themselves to be \"loveable, peace-loving people and decided to add a few more to cater they maintained a powerful battle for anybody good enough to get fleet on permanent alert, ready to past these. beat the hell out of any planet that How many extra ones did you put said otherwise\". in? Kruud's plan was deceptively Over thirty! simple. He had spent the last five Without giving too much away, years assembling a new invasion what kind of things change from fleet comprising entirely of ships level to level? that looked like giant Stargliders. It's generally more difficult to stay \"The Starglider was a very alive on the higher levels, as you'd strange bird that nested in expect. Things are more difficult to Novenia's equatorial highlands and JO00000201 | 291 destroy and missiles inflict more migrated once every five years to damage on you too, which drains the outskirts of the Novenian your shields faster. Other things system. become more of a hassle from levels. It was on returning from one two and three but that would be such migration that a flock of telling! Stargliders was entirely wiped out Go on, drop us mere mortals a by a couple of sentinels that crumb or two mistook them for an invasion fleet. OK. Well, from level two you will As a result of the ensuing public encounter homing missiles which outcry the Sentinels on-board LEANING MINE DETECTED move in very alarming ways, computers were modified to usually towards you! The recognize Stargliders and leave proportion of homing versus them alone. normal missiles increases with each K ruud's simple plan worked all level. It's a shame the file on the too well. And now a desolate and Pyramid launchers was lost! war-scared Novenia is about to fall Will there be a Starglider II? into the hands of the Egrons. You'll have to wait and see! PLAYING THE GAME recharge the AGAV's inductive The game contains 10 seconds or energy pods, and where the so of sampled music, composed 00001295) UR E L0005 Starglider Drone's one weak spot especially for the game, and can be found. guaranteed to raise the eyebrows of What a pleasant change to find even the most cynical technothe story with the game concept atheist. ACTUALLY enhancing the The movement and animation of overall package! all the graphical game elements are EGRON ATTACK FORCE little short of stunning, reminiscent The planet surface is covered with of the Star Wars arcade machine. battle tanks, transport vehicles, At last somebody has really shown skim fighters, tri-launchers, us what 16 bit technology is stompers, and other assorted Egron capable of! goodies. Meanwhile, the airspace above the planet's surface is littered with mines, neutron missiles, bute and lotus fighters, not to mention Starglider One. 5595 Most of the Egron attack arsenal have specific functions and pe toaleStorgider the most spectacular game to be released on the ST to date. SPECTACULAR "


"TR MONSTER MANIA  SPECTRUM COMMODORE. AMSTRAD .95 Cans of worms, boiled slimies, and eyeball crush are just some of the delicacies demanded by bumbling Berk's bellowing boss. Can you satisfy the hunger of \"him upstairs' and survive the nasties that come out of the Trap Door? There's always something lurking in the dark waiting to emerge in this hilarious graphic adventure. Available from your local stockist or, in case of difficulty, direct from John Darvill, Macmillan Distribution Ltd, Houndmills, Basingstoke RG21 2XS. Make cheques or postal orders payable to Macmillan Limited and state the machine version you want. Further information on PIRANHA games from: Richard Bason, Piranha 4 Little Essex Street, London WCZR 3LF Tel: 01-836 6633 Bianha "


"WORLD GAMES SNATCH 31 combination of the two, set against get you off his back! a slightly different backdrop. Using the joystick to offset the The average gamester in this bucking and spinning of the bull, country deserves something a little you score points for style and more \"radical\" before parting with length of ride. The more ferocious  even if there are eight different the bull the higher your points tally events on this two disk set will be if you stay on that is! There is no doubt, though, that Another nice touch here is the devoted Epyx sports fans will still practice mode which allows you to find things in World Games to ooh control the actions of the bull so and aah about, and the game is not you can get used to dealing with its without its good points. various movements. But I think, for most people, this Other events in the package will theme is getting a little tired and find you weightlifting with our Epyx do seem to be squeezing the Russian comrades, diving off a very last drop out of the recent Mexican cliff, on the Piste in craze of sports simulation. Chamonix France for a spot of One of these is that is less likely slalom, and Sumo wrestling with to have your trusty joystick 400 lbs of Japanese blubber a cringing in the corner as only three sort of Way of the Exploding of the eight events Caber Waistline! Tossing and Barrel Jumping, and The St game is an enhanced Log Rolling-rely to any large version of the 64 version currently degree on \"stick waggling\", and, in getting rave reviews in the the case of Log Rolling, more skill Commodore mags. Maybe ST and less blind speed is required to owners expect more? keep your man from falling off the Although World Games has its log. high points, it is to be hoped that Although difficult to get the the undoubtedly talented hang of, Bull Riding is also good programmers at Epyx don't go the fun, offering enough variation to same way as the Ultimate group keep you coming back for more who languished in the doldrums of bruises! Having chosen which bull creative stagnancy for so long after you want to ride, you find yourself having been at the top of the tree. astride more than 2000 lbs of Come of Epyx. Even Stallone gave muscle whose sole aim in life is to up after Rocky IV! CURRENT The people who brought you Summer Games I and II, not to mention Winter Games, in a stunningly bold and creative move, now bring you World Games! The game takes you on a whistle stop tour of the world touching down at eight locations as far afield as Scotland, Russia and Mexico. As with its predecessors, WG relies on professional production and slick graphics. But the formula is beginning to wear a little thin Although the graphics are undoubtedly pretty and some of the events fun to play, others quickly become boring and are, quite frankly, an insult to anyone who can get past the \"wooden\"level in Uridium.! Barrel Jumping is a case in point. Set in Germany, this event involves skaters competing to jump over the most barrels in a single attempt. By moving your joystick left and right, accelerate your skater towards a line of barrels and press fire to jump into the air. Then pull down on the joystick just as your skater is about to land When long jump and speed skating came out in earlier Epyx sports games that was one thing, but barrel jumping is purely a with toilet A year ago C+VG carried a world now it seems, the ST. exclusive when they were the first for the unitiated, LCPs were to publish extracts from the diary of first discovered on June 1st 1985 a Little Computer Person (LCP), by David Crane (of Ghostbusters living inside their Commodore 64. fame) and a musician named Rich Since then LCPs have been Gold. discovered in a number of other Both had suspected the existence machines including the Amiga and, of something or someone in their computers after repeated and where it mattered. inexplicable glitches (that's bugs to Instead he walks far too slowly you and I) continuously cropped up with feet sliding on the Poor just in their code. But it wasn't until a like a hundred other walking \"House on a Disk\" was designed by sprites and he sounds like he is Crane that the first sightings were talking through a comb covered made. Now YOU can buy a \"House on Two other cute touches have a Disk\" for your ST, and been lost in the coversion; firstly experience your very own 16-bit the little fella's hands no longer play LCP. The package comes with a the piano in time with the music deed of ownership for your house, a but randomly bob up and down 14 page glossy magazine covering like a bad mime artist. such diverse subjects as LCP's Secondly, when my LCP (called voting rights and political leanings, Michael) wrote me a letter, I was and a guidebook full of tips on how saddened to see I was not to be treated to the sight and sound of his Compared with the Commodore typewriter carriage moving along original, the ST conversion of LCP the paper and zooming back at the is better in some areas but, start of each new line. surprisingly, it scores badly on Even though you can play a animation and sound effects. larger selection of games with your The graphics of the house are mini-chum who lives in a great. They've been redesigned to graphically impressive house, you take advantage of the ST's superior may be better advised to look at graphical capabilities. With LCP on the Commodore 64 rather meticulous attention to detail, each than shell out  for the 16-bit room has been outfitted with every mod con an LCP could dream of NEXT ISSUE: David Bishop will be even the clock pendulum swings! reviewing yet more ST games, like the The house graphics representa exciting Gauntlet clone from Epyx significant improvement over the called Rogue. He'll also be taking a look C64 version, but the sprite at the long-awaited Star Trek game and animation and sound effects do not the incredible Cinemaware products In some cases they are worse than from Mindscape. All will be revealed in just 28 days the original, a crime when you think of the increased power at the programmers' disposal. In fact it is those tiny details like the spring in the LCP's step when he walks and the cute way he talks that are sadly missing from this version which could, indeed should have been so much better LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE SPECTACULAR "


"MERCENARY The long awaited ST version of view of events in stunning 3D exploring. you will be offered a mission, and, this C64 hit has finally arrived in a vectorgraphics allowing you to see As with flying, everything in true mercenary tradition, may new compendium edition, inside and through normally solid underground is seen in vector wish to only accept lucrative featuring both the original objects...eat your heart out graphics from a first person contracts. Mercenary and The Second City. Superman! perspective, giving you the The beauty of this game, apart For those who didn't see or play The action starts as you come too impression of wandering in and out from the stunningly smooth vector Mercenary on an eight-bit Atari, by the remains of the Prestinium, of rooms and down corridors. graphics, is the element of strategy 64 or Plus 4, the action takes place your trusty intergalactic craft, As you explore the complex you required to negotiate the above, on, and under the major which is beyond repair after the will find various objects some of diplomatic minefield you must areas of habitation of the planet crash. which can be picked up and used necessarily create for yourself by Trag, famous for its beautiful cities Luckily you have landed in such as sights, poweramp and keys. accepting missions from both sides and underground complexes Central City, which used to be one You can also find objects that are in the continuing war on Targ. designed by the great architect of Targ's main centres of of no use at all such as tables and Complete with The Second City, Walton. population. Even more fortunate is chairs! Some objects, such as which takes you to Targ's dustYou are a solider of fortune who that the Dominium Dart is medical supplies and gold, can be covered southern hemisphere, and has crash-landed on Trag which standing not 50 feet away, and at sold for a tidy profit if you can only the Targ Survival Kit, in case you has been ravaged by many years of 4,000 credits it's an absolute snip! find a buyer. get too lost, Mercenary will be a war between its original Flying around in your newly When you find the briefing room high flyer amongst ST gamesters. inhabitants, the peace-loving acquired Dart you can see the Palyars and an alien race of robots whole of Central City and, from less known as the Mechanoids. than 250 feet, can make out Your challenge is to escape the individual buildings which can, of planet by buying another ship course, be zapped out of existence. bought with your ill-gotten gains. Benson's controls provide you The only thing you managed to wth all the flight and navigational salvage from the wreckage of your controls you will need while the ship was Benson, your in-helmet, vector graphic cockpit view it ninth generation PC. provides is as smooth as silk. Benson will give you information Eventually Benson will receive a on your location, compass heading, message inviting you to come to the altitudes, elevation and speed as briefing room near the hanger at well as act as a communications location 09 66. To get down to the DOCEE buffer with the various waring hanger you have to land by a lift. factions on Targ. Having descended into one of the Benson's other major use is in many underground complexes, it's providing an interpretation of your time to leave the dart and do a little ART DIRECTOR IT was only a matter of time before the Atari's low resolution colour ARAH people started taking advantage of mode allowing for 16 colours on a the ST s superior graphics to 320x200 screen. produce some really exciting Each screen can have up to eight graphics packages. One such palettes of 16 colours, and the program is Mirrorsoft's Art program can be made to cycle Director, programmed by the through these to spectacular effect. Caesar Studio in Budapest. Each colour is chosen from a Art Director is a connisseur's art total of 512 and is created by giving program which will appeal to all different values to its red, green, arty types as well as aspiring and blue components. masters! Surprisingly, Art Director Those functions not accessible has most of the features of the very from the Toolbox can be accessed excellent Deluxe Paint (see C+VG from the pull-down menus in the August 86) which runs on the two status bars at the tope of the graphically more advanced Amiga, screen as with any normal Gem and although slower in the application. processing department, Art There are a number of pictures Director compares very favourably on the two disk set as well as a other for your main picture. to the latter. selection of ready made fonts that But, you can also use both pages It has all the features common to can be used for placing text directly for a double-size picture where one most art programs such as fill, on the screen. This is invaluable for page fits exactly on top of the other. airbrush, erase, zoom, draw, certain applications where words Using the Print Pages function geometrical shapes etc. But this form an integral part of a screen you can make a hard copy of the package really comes into its own design. two pages combined into one A4 when you look at the way a brush, Amongst the many innovative shaped print-out. cut from the screen, can be bent, features in Art Director is the stretched, distorted, flipped, window which allows you to enlarged, and even made to look as if it was being reflected off the operations (such as fill and change inside or outside of a sphere or colour) inside the window leaving cylinder. the rest of the screen unaffected. Once Art Director is loaded you Not only does this make the are presented with a Toolbox from window moderated functions more which many of the more commonly flexible but it also cuts down on the needed functions can be time spent waiting for the accessed. computer to perform those The Toolbox can also functions as it need only concern be moved or removed itself with a smaller area of the if inconveniently screen. placed. As with Art Director provides you with most ST art two pages on which to paint or programs Art draw. It is normally advisable to Director uses use one as a scratch pad and the Although there are certain aspects of the user interface in Art Director that could have been a more friendly, the program's wealth of powerful and useful features makes its one of the best graphics packages yet seen for the ST. MIRRORSOFT Presents SED ART ART DIRECTOR CINDROMSDA SPECTACULAR "


"Don't miss this launchpad for all that's new in Atari computing COMPUTER 10am-6pm Thursday, February 26 10am-6pm Friday, February 27 10am-6pm Saturday, February 28 Champagne Suite, Novotel. Hammersmith, London Experts are convinced 1987 will be the Year of Atari thanks to exciting developments in the ST range, coupled with a renewed commitment by Atari to support and encourage the ever-popular Atari 8-bit range, MORE arcade games MORE bargain offers MORE business software MORE graphics packages New hardware enhancements, and hundreds of new software packages, testify to how writers and developers throughout Britain and the USA are creating new ways of exploiting the power of Atari computers and they'll all be on display at the February Atari Computer Show. MORE hardware add-ons MORE utility programs MORE adventures Advance ticket order POST TO: Atari Computer Show Tickets, Europa House, 68 Chester Road, Hazel Grove, Stockport SK75NY Please supply: Adult tickets at  (save ) ............. Under-16s tickets at  (save ...... TOTAL  Cheque enclosed made payable to Database Publications Ltd. COMPUTER Champagne Suite, Novotel, Hammersmith, London February 26-28, 1986 Send for your advance tickets now and SAVE  a head! Name Address....... **** ....... Signed O Please debit my credit card account: Access / Visa I MI MI MI Admission at door:  (adults).  (under 16s) PHONE ORDERS: Show Hotline: 061-480 0171 PRESTEL ORDERS: KEY \"89. THEN 614568383 MICROLINK ORDERS: MAILBOX 72:MAG001 Please quote credit card number and full address + Ref SCVG "


"There are very few platform games yet available for the ST which is strange when you think how many have been released for eight bit machnes. In fact, apart from a terrible version of Donkey Kong called Monkey Business from The Other Valley Software, Space Station may be the first of its kind to be launched in the UK. Although this game breaks no new ground in terms of game design or features, it is fun to play and there is just enough variation in each of the 100 plus locations to keep you coming back for more. You are Callum MacGregor, Chief Inspector of the Federation's Space Stations. You have been sent to investigate strange goings-on on Alpha3. Getting no response and being perilously low on fuel you beam aboard only to find (yesgot it in one!) the station has been completely taken over by aliens. Your only means of escape is by You can shoot anything that moves collecting enough Lithium crystals which basically means aliens, most (conveniently scattered about the of which look like designer robots, station) to refuel your ship-Itold although one particular species you to carry a spare gallon in the bears an uncanny resemblance to boot! the common seagull! Before leaving you must also The platforms are littered with activate the station's self-destruct detonators which blast you up to mechanism using a security disk, the level above, using up vital hidden in some inaccessible corner energy in the process. Detonators of Alpha 3. can be jumped over, but this Apart from a small status area at requires accurate joystick control. the bottom of the screen, the rest of You often find yourself making the display shows a side view of unplanned leaps to the platform your current location with exits above which can be a nuisance if indicated by shimmering blue there's no way to drop down again. arrows. Part of the game must be There are also spikes and completed on foot, although you automatic guns in many rooms, can jump short distances. The rest which sap yur energy, as do the of the station can be more easily aliens when touched. In fact, as you explored using any one of a number get deeper into Space Station, it of jetpacks you may find. becomes increasingly obvious that Apart from the crystals there are guarding against excessive energy ammunition boxes, each of which loss is the key to success. contains four bullets for your gun. This is one of five ST games available from Eidersoft all of which feature Midi compatible sound-tracks, although, one has to say, the music in Space Station is decidedly unremarkable! The graphics are pleasing without being anything to write home about but each screen is \"busy enough to maintain interest and you could find this game grabbing you when you're not looking and not letting go until you've mastered it. PSION CHESS LEADERBOARD SPACE STATION 1986 was definitely the year of the golf computer game with Ariolasoft's Golf Construction Set closely followed by US Gold's Leaderboard, launched on the C64 and subsequently converted to the Amstrad and even the Spectrum. Now Leaderboard is available for all Golf freaks who own ap Atari ST. Without the handicap of eight bit technology, Bruce and Roger Curver (Besehead I & II and Raid over Moscow) have come a fair way to producing the definitive golf arcade game for the ST. Unlike Golf Construction Set, Leaderboard is more of an arcade and less of a true golf simulation But what it looses in authenticity it more than makes up for in ease of use, crisp well designed graphics and sheer enjoyment. Up to four players can play a round at one, each selecting from pro, amateur, or novice level. A novice's ball will be unaffected by work out what club to use you are the wind and cannot be hooked told how many yards, feet or inches wherear a mis-directed or mistimed lie between your ball and the hole. shot by a pro will be punished. When you face a different There are four courses to choose direction the horizon changes to from which are all substantially suit the new view which is drawn different from each other (unlike with all the speed the ST can the Commodore version!) each muster. It's very fast! offering its own set of challenges. Playing a shot is simplicity itself Once all players names are entered and allows advanced players to face and you have chosen how many or draw the ball around any holes are to be played, it's ff to the first tee. way. The graphics of the course have Having selected aim and club been substantially improved over you press the left hand button and the C64 version, with the inclusion release when the strength meter of bunkers and trees and the rises to the level you want. exclusion of all that water which Then click a second time to surrounded every hole giving you determine the level of face or draw the feeling of playing the first golf to put on the ball; this can be tricky game after the great flood! and requires some practice, which The players' 3D view always can be had on the programs points towards the pin, which may thoughtfully provided driving well be too far away to see, or be range, where yo can hook and slice obscured by trees. To help you to your heart's content. At the end of each hole the leaderboard' is displayed giving an up to date summary of everyone's performances so far in the round. The animation of the golfer is smooth and lifelike, even if there is a little flickering by his feet. Leaderboard is a very playable golf game which should appeal to anybody remotely interested in the game, whether they have actually been bitten by the bug or prefer the armchair approach listening to Peter Allis' dulcet tones on the box. It's not often Psion release a game suit you. Having placed the piece on the for any machine, let alone the ST, There are two things about this desired square simply click a so when they do one expects program apart from its playing second time to complete the move. something a little special. Psion When the computer makes a Chess does not disappoint! head and shoulders above the rest. move the relevant piece is smoothly Psion were the first company to The quality and clarity of the moved to its new square as if being release a chess game with 3D graphics and the ease of use. pulled by a magnet from under the graphics when they launched QI. Whether you play on the 3D board. When you select a new board. When you select a new chess to astonished gasps from board or elect to use the smaller 2D game, each piece neatly slides on to every quarter of the industry. one, the design of the pieces in both its respective starting position Unfortunately, as it turned out, Sir colour and monochrome modes is ready for battle to begin. Clive's baby didn't do too well so a clear and unlikely to lead to the Even at the default playing level masterful piece of programming confusion between different pieces of 15 seconds per move Chess will was enjoyed by precious few. sometimes encountered with lesser give all but the Club players a But you can't keep a good game resonable game. At 30 seconds or 1 down and Psion Chess has In fact, playing in 3D mode, you minute per move the computer resurfaced on the ST, faster and quickly forget you're playing on a becomes a worthy opponent, even stronger than ever. screen so realistic is the portrayal of for a good club player. Written by Richard Lang, the the game. If you are lucky enough P sion Chess has all the features program will give anyone from to have a choice, the monochrome one would expect to find in a novice to strong club version, with double the resolution, product of this type, including player a cracking is recommended. clocks, board set up, take back game, and with 28 Once the game has loaded you move, offer draw, etc. levels of play to are given control of the standard As if all the features this program choose from you gem cursor. Just click the cursor offers weren't enough there are also should be able over the piece you wish to move 50 famous games selected from the to find a and you now have control of that past 150 years by international standard to piece with the mouse. master, William Hartston, who has also written a short companion to the games he has chosen. This is where the package could have been better. The beauty and subtlety of some of the moves in these games may be lost on many people who would have benefited greatly from a fuller commentary on each game, highlighting specific moves and explaining why they were made. This niggle aside, Psion Chess is arguably the strongest and definitely the most friendly chess program around at the moment and is highly recommended. 3333333 SPECTACULAR "


"THE COPYWRITER'S ROLE IS TO INFORM ADVERTISING? HARD SELL TODAY IT'S NO LONGER THE WITH TODAY'S CONSUMERS, WE'RE IN THE COMMUNICATION BUSINESS rolk, Strutt, Poser, Souse Incorporated Practions Adming Oly AND THE ART DIRECTOR SEEKS TO APPEND COGENT VISUAL SUPPORT I've pinpointed key brand advantages, stressing the leisure management strengths of Monic's new product offerings The Archers watch In The Archers The Computer Game you're the script and your listening figures editor on BBC Radio 4's long-running serial Your decisions affect life in Ambridge out for memos from Controller Radio 4! A clever and amusing illustrated text game by the utterly brilliant Level 9 team Twice Shy Based on the best selling Dick Francis thriller, this illustrated text adventure plunges you into the seamy side of the horse racing world. The RamJam Corporation (ingenious things!) have written two games for the price of one: the racing simulation can be played independently and as a vital part of the adventure itself Dominic ME CM P's owg ce . Use Block the photo Oly DICK FRA DICK FRANCIS E DICK FRANCIS TWICE MEMO Why do we die Grundy and lack Wolfgaspackshot she Dee w the core WE MUST MAKE THE CONSUMER AN ALLY NOT A TARGET SHY THE ARCHERS Witty, entertaining TWICE SHY Dangerous action and programmed by Level 9. adventure a new RamJam classic. Available for Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad (The Archers also for Atari and MSX). Cassettes 59.95. Disk versions coming soon Da wid WHS L ANEOUS and d ad har good MOSAIC PUBLISHING FACULTY ENTERPRISES LTD YOUR PERSONAL MSX STOCKISTS G-TEN LIMITED BEST TITLES AT DISCOUNT PRICES AMSTRAD 6.75 11:25 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 5.75 SPINDIZZY 6.75 11 25 STALLONE COBRA 850 NA NOW CAMES 3 OESERT FOX 6.75 NA MIAMI VICE NA CEACTIVATORS TOMAMAK 575 NA PARALIK BBC MICRO COMMANDO 6.75 1125 GAUNTLET WORLD CUP CARVINA 575 11 25 AUDRON 6.75 112 SHOGUN 675 1125 POWER PLAY KUNG FU MASTER 6.75 11.25 GREEN BERET REPTON 2 GREEN BERET  112   6.75 10 SPEECH TOP GUN 650 NA SHOGUN 6.75 1125 AIRWOLF 675 1124 STALLONE COBRA 6.50 NA SILENT SERVICE 675 11 25 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 675 10 50 SAI COMBAT 650 115 EEPTON CHOSTS N GOBUNS 650 113 TERRA CRESTA VAN VOE HIGHLANDER STRERS RUN 6.75 750 CRYSTAL CASTLES 7725 1125 6.75 1075 DRAGONS LAIR 6.75 10.75 TRIVAL PURSUIT 13.50 1550 NOW GAMES 3 675 NA ROCKY HORROR SHOW Authorised dealers for Datalife REVOLUTION 6.75 11 25 (125 only 6.75 11.25 PAP add cl per box) COMPUTER HITS 103 6.75 AACANA 6.50 NA BOX OFTENS OUR PRICE BOOLON 6 50 NA INFILTRATOR 675 1125 DATALIFESSSOD 49TP: 1850 COMMODORE 64/128 575 1125 DATALIFE OSCO TPI 18.00 PAPERSOY 7.25 1125 FORSODEN FORREST 75 1125 DATATESSO OTP3 00 KARI WARRIORS 6.75 115 HOT WHEELS 575 1125 DATALHESOS GD 96TPI 22 50 Please spety machine Peso 14-18 days delivery Mad order only. Please add sop PSP pertem UK or BEPO nyl Overseas add ET P&P per item. Please make Cheques Postal Orders sterling only made payable to G-Ten Limited UK of BFPO orders, please send to: G-TEN LTD, FREEPOST (no stamp required) London, E1 GBR OVERSEAS orders, please send to: G-TEN LIMITED, 1st Floor, Commerce House, 146/150 Commercial Street, London E1 GNU PLEASE NOTE ANY GAME NOT RELEASED WHEN ORDERED, WILL BE SENT ON RELEASE DATE ICE DAMBUSTERS .9.95 HUSTLERS ......... 4.99 NEMESIS ROM.......... 15.99 FUZZBALLS. 7.99 GOONIES ROM 15.99 MOONRIDER 2.99 APEMAN STRIKES 2.99 AGAIN ..7.99 ROBOT WARS........... 2.99 MEANING OF LIFE ........ 7.99 SMACK WALKER ....... 2.99 FRONT LINE ...............3.99 MSX ARTIST ..............3.99 KINGSIZE ............ .9.95 S/DAVIS SNOOKER...... 8.95 CONFUZED? ............ .. 8.95 INT KARATE............ 7.95 EGGY.............. .8.95 VIEW TO KILL ............ 3.99 SNAKE IT! .......... 2.99 BLAGGER..... AACKO PRESTO.... 39.95 PANZ ATTACK........ 3.99 CLUEDO 9.95 FRONT LINE ......... MONOPOLY 9.95 GREEN BERET....... 15.99 SCRABBLE. 9.95 JAILBREAK CHESS GAME. ..7.95 GAUNTLET................. 9.99 BRIDGE .8.95 VESTRON WARS.......... 1.99 BOARDELLO............... 4.99 LE MANS...................3.99 4.99 3.99 15.99 400/806 NOW LOOK ASK FOR DETAILS JVC MIDI TURNS ROOM IN RECORDING STUDIO XLUXE ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 SEND CHEQUES AND PO'S TO: FACILITY ENTERPRISES LTD NOW MOVED TO: 7-79 SHERWOOD CRESCENT, MARKET DRAYTON SHROPSHIRE TEL: 0630 57465 COME AND SEE US AFTER THE 22nd NOVEMBER!! "


"OVER THE NEXT FEW MONTHS YOUR LOCAL ARCADE IS LIKELY TO SEE THE ARRIVAL OF SOME EXCELLENT NEW DRIVING GAMES. THIS ISSUE CLARE EDGELEY BRINGS YOU A PREVIEW OF WHAT YOU CAN EXPECT. o o  OUT RUN A new breed of racing simulations made their debut at the recent Preview '87 the show where coinop manufacturers show off their best products for 1987 Without a doubt, Konami came out the winner with its superb game, WEC Le Mans 24. And Sega seems to go from strength to strength. The company had two spectacular games of the show-Out Run and Enduro Racer. Out Run is a road race of sorts the type where you have to travel a certain distance and beat the clock before making it to the next stage. If you've seen the film Cannonball Run you'll know what I mean. Instead of Formula One or rally cars' you're in control of big, red, flashy Ferrari complete with a blonde in the passenger seat! Enduro Racer gets you astride a big Enduro bike, doing wheelies, leaping and dodging a haphazard assortment of obstacles. Lastly, Nintendo's machine VS Slalom caught my eye. You could hardly miss it. Stuck to the bottom of the cabinet are a pair of skis, complete with ski poles, which you use to steer your racer as he slaloms down various mountain runs! Other excellent games were Dangar, a deceptively difficult shoot 'em up, Championship Sprint which is the follow on from Super Sprint, Gauntlet II and PlayChoice10 from Nintendo. This last game is interesting it's the first coin-op compilation I've seen. It should be very successful too and needless to say it includes several very popular titles including Super Mario Bros, Hogan's Alley, Tennis and Baseball We've already taken a look at some of the games presented at the show. Rampage, a wonderfully mod game where you play either a monster, wolf, lizard or gorilla. Having chosen your character you then, with two other players, proceed to demolish whole towns and cities by punching the skyscrapers to bits. Brilliant fun. Arkanoid is a pretty basic game which is very addictive. It's based on that golden oldie, Breakout, though this version has several refinements. Bubble Bobble is a fast moving platform game which involves you leaping around killing a myriad of nasties. Sega's Out Run is a different ball game altogether. It's a racing simulation of sorts, but only in the sense that you've got to beat a time limit to move onto each new stage. The race itself is against the rest of the traffic on America's highways -WW Beetles, saloon cars, lorries and the like. But you've got the edge. You're in a bright red and very fast Ferrari It's a bit difficult to handie too, as the slightest twitch of the wheel sends the car sliding all over the place. And as it slides the hydraulics take over. The car tilts and slithers from side to side to simulate your movements. Switch lanes quickly from left to right and the car does likewise. It's great. What's so unusual about this gives the game for more variety It's of this point that the blonde game is the view from the car. You and should keep you playing looks as if she wished she hadn't usually view the screen a fair longer come along for the ride. The distance above the horizon. In this The route consists of huge multigraphics are excellent and the feel case you get a Ferrari driver's lane highways which can range of the car more so. impression of what lies ahead. from three to six lanes in all. For the most part the blonde sits You're so low to the ground that Travelling down them is a healthy quietly, but every so often when you can't see into the distance. volume of traffic which tends to get you do something particularly It's quite hairy racing over the in the way stupid, like hitting another car crest of a hill as you don't know In particular, the drivers of the which causes you to spin out of what lies ahead, and especially Beetles seem to take great delight control, she'll wag her fingerin whether any of the maniac Beetle in switching lanes into your path your face as a sort of warning, drivers are lying in your path. and generally causing havoc You can't blame her, I suppose. The layout of the course is You end up driving like an idiot The low viewpoint of the road different too. Unlike Le Mans and, more than likely, you'll finish coupled with the swaying motions where you can only travel down of the car make Out Run a very one course. Out Run is constructed It's amusing when that happens, exciting game to play. In my so that you could finish the game as you and your blonde passenger opinion, the movement of Le Mans by travelling several different are thrown out of the car just gave it the edge, but many seem to routes. A really good idea this, as it before it rolls and explodes. prefer Out Run. Give it a whirl! TIME 4 SCORE 1010590 LAP050 om "


"O * les gens TOP 200000 SCORE 24530 TIME LSP056.8 SPEED 273 VS SLALOM Christmas trees and other WEC LE MANS O skiers. You'll encounter other skiers It won't matter if you've never been alone or in pairs, but the other skiing before, Nintendo's latest obstacles will often be arranged in Simulation will give you a taste for formation, blocking off the easiest the real thing line to the next set of poles. VS Slalom is really unusual. After Just as in a real slalom race, you all, it's not often you see a set of have to ski from one side of the run skis attached to an arcade game. to the other, passing between They're stunted only about two poles to avoid gaining any faults. feet long but they act like the When you get onto the steeper real things. and harder runs, you'll notice the Put your pressure on the left ski poles will be placed at shorter and the slalom racer on the screen distances to each other. That calls whizzes off to the left, put pressure for some nifty skiing with very tight on the right and he turns. turns. You'll find yourself going into the VS Slalom is simple to play but it classic crouched, knees bent doesn't have a lot of staying position automatically. It might look power. The innovative idea of the a bit odd to spectators but they all skis and ski poles make the game. end up doing the same. Without them, Slalom would be There are a couple of ski poles a playable, but just above too which aid your balance. These average in the addictive stakes. lead from the ground, through the cabinet and end up as ski pole shaped joysticks. So there you have it. Knees bent crouching before an arcade machine and gripping the ski poles for dear life. If you push the ski poles forward, your screen figure goes faster, pull back and he'll slow to a halt There are a number of runs ranging from red to black beginners to experienced and you can choose the one you want to attempt at the beginning when a map of the mountain range flashes up on screen. The idea is to slalom down each run in as fast a time as possible to qualify and move onto the next stage of the competition. Objects to avoid range from snowmen, each new stage in a set time limit. It you succeed you'll be able to carry on with this fascinating race. If not, you'll end up back at the beginning My favourite at the show was Le You'll be racing other cars Mans. I haven't played such an through many different landscapes exhilerating game for months. It's these change with each stage of main feature, aside from being the game. Watch out for the rows fast and realistic racing simulation of poplar trees which line many is the movement system which is parts of the route. totally different from the up and If you skid out of control into down, side to side, hydraulic them, the car will blow up. When movement patterns we've grown they're not there you've at least got used to. a chance to get back onto the Le Mans has a sports racing road. car-cockpit which sits on a circular The graphics are stunning, as motorised turntable. As you rocket_lifelike as possible. You can see the round bends on the track, so the back of your car as it races round cor spins in that direction. You end the track and every so often, you'll up being hurled from one side of catch a glimpse of the turbo the car to the other as it spins first flashing flame when you clockwise, then anti-clockwise. I've accelerate. NEVER been in anything like it! The first stage is relatively easy The \"car\" is a squashed up to get through. There aren't that version of a Porsche Le Mans many cars on the road and the racer. It's got a front end, a back chicanes are easily negotiated. end but not much middle. Further levels present difficulty However, there's enough room for though, and you'll have to gain a tall six-footer to slide into the quite a bit of experience to get bucket seat and take the controls. round in one piece, let alone within Unlike many games of this sort the time limit. As you get further where more care is taken into the game you'll encounter simulating reality on the screen more cars and progressively than on the design of the cabinet, trickier bends so that it seems Le Mans caters for both. almost impossible to complete the After climbing into the car, course. experiencing your first spin, you' d T hread you way through your think there'd be no more surprises competitiors, and use your brakes Wrong. If you're doft enough to and gears to negotiate the drive onto the kerb or gross verge, chicanes, it's the movement of the the mean machine starts jolting as it car which really lifts Le Mans simulates the bumpy ground. Very above the rest soon the steering wheel judders in your hand and the car starts to slip and slide as you fight for control. It's fantastic! As in the real race, Le Mans is made up of several stages, and you'll have to drive throught the night as well. The idea is to get to O PLAYING RUN: 0:22 "


"       Just how good are you on your favourite game? Just think! Wouldn't you like to know whether you're king of the joysticks? Well here's your chance. Flick your eye down the following list and let us know if you could do better, or if you've got high scores on games we haven't even mentioned. The newer the game the better, but keep sending in your scores for all those golden oldes. HALL OF FAME Salamander 527,000 Neil Coggins, Liverpool Gauntlet 5,187,288 Paul Sharp, Cleethorpes, S. Humberside Space Harrier 21,208,400 D Murray, Tooting, SW17 Ghosts'n' Goblins 769,200 Gavin Davies, Swansea Nemesis 495,870 Gavin Davies, Swansea 1942 11,696,790 G.D.N. Iron Horse 356,900 Neil Bloe, Downham, Essex Choplifter 1,328,056 Stuard Dixon, Oxon Express Raider 720,100 Stuard Dixon, Oxon Road Runner 1,800,000 Peter Huesken, Holland Marble Madness 170,100 Adam Mastromarino, Bristol Ikari Warriors 1,342,000 Romando Lindhout Holland Commando 869,500 Gareth Green, Lancashire 10 Yard Flight 480,050 Brett Caines, Bristol Bomb Jack 4,105,020 Adam Mastromarino, Bristol GAUNTLET TIPS Now for some tips for all you Gauntlet freaks. These come from Gary Spencer who lives on the Isle of Wight When you first play Gauntlet you begin with 800 health points, these decrease one every second, and between 2-30 everytime you hit something. However, your health points increase every time you eat some food. You can choose to play one of four characters Warrior, Valkyrie, Wizard and Elf. Choose the Wizard when you first start playing, but when you reach level 50 change to the Elf as he collects all the magic potions. The first seven sheets are always the same on each new game. From sheet eight onwards, order is random and there are about 40 different screen layouts. To play the game successfully learn the layouts, when to potion, where the potions are, where the food is and the quickest route to the exist on each sheet. If you wait on any sheet, you'll lose about 180 health points but the walls will all turn into exits. Very handy on harder levels. While you're waiting don't move or shoot anything as it then takes longer for the exits to appear. After level seven, magic potions which give you extra magic power appear on every three sheets. Collect this until you have all six. You are then almost invincible. However, after level 50 a thiet appears on every sheet and if he touches you he takes one of your magic potions. If you then shoot him he gives you back a normal potion. Always shoot him before he gets you. 10 YARD FIGHT BUG For those keen on American football and, in particular 10 Yard Fight, Tim McSmythurs from Folkestone in Kent reckons he's found a bug. \"After scoring a touchdown you're given the choice of either kicking the ball or running. If, after the snap, you move the ball carrier diagonally backwards to the left for a couple of paces, then straight left, the opponent's players chase after you. \"Then a blocker suddenly appears on your side and blocks two or three of your opponent's players, leaving you to go forwards for a touchdown.\" Thanks for the tip, Tim, and if anyone else has found a bug, has some useful tips or reached new dizzy heights in the high score stakes, why not write in. Read the story below for details LEVEL SEND US YOUR SCORES AND TIPS If you've found a bug in an arcade game, or scored a mega-score, or even if you've got some tips for fellow arcade games players why not write in and tell everyone about it. C+VG is the ONLY games magazine to bring you a monthly rundown of what's happening in the arcades so you'll be reaching a BIG audience. So if you want to see your name up in lights write to Clare Edgeley, clo Arcade Action, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1 3AU. And if you've got a favourite arcade where you play all the latest games why not let us know about that, too. Tell us why you like it so much and what games you play You never know we might give it a mention as well... FREE PEALTH ATAR 19EAMES "


"DIGITAL INTEGRATION ACTIVISION Ocean HOMECOMUTER SOFTWARE y sold am KUILION FIRST BLOOD PART II The HIT SQUAD have put together FOUR No.1 Blockbusters for this NEW games compilation GHSTBUSTERS RUNGSFLI MASTER THE OFFICIAL COIN OPGA Featuring ARIEL DOGFIGHTS JUNGLE COMBAT MARTIAL ARTS and of course... GHOSTBUSTING!! All in one special twin cassette pack for your COMMODORE SPECTRUM AMSTRAD KING-FU MASTER ACTIVISION SPECTRUM FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE DEALERS .95 THE FINEST FROM THE BEST COMMODORE CASSETTE DISK AMSTRAD CASSETTE DISK SCUAD .95 14.95 .95 14.95 SCHAD "


"Fungus grows on you. Just ask C+VG's deputy editor Paul Boughton! It's the budget game created by Swedish programmer Karl Hornell -who wrote the music AND drew the picture on the cassette cover. Fungus is the name of the hero. He likes mushrooms. And his main aim in life is to eat as many as he can cram down in one sitting. This is where our map comes in. We hope it will help YOU help Fungus make sure there isn't a mushroom left inside his space suit. Old jokes are always the best. fore Luke ZA B K.Hirnel 1986 "


"ATTACK WAVES 1. Birds they fly FAST! 2. Bees watch for the sting in the tail. 3. Bouncing bombsthey spin too! 4. Daleks they shoot laser beams ungus inhabits a three dimensional world, where islands are suspended in space. In order to help Fungus eat as many of the Great White Mushrooms as he can, you must leap the chasms that divide the islands and beat off the attacking nasties. It isn't easy--but it's fun! Check out the map to spot all the pitfalls and then enter the competition. You could win your very own mushroom island! COLOUR CODED HAZARDS Green pine forest Yellow-pyramids Red -more trees! Blue deciduous trees Desert cacti porno el 1986 "


"C-VG COMPETITION KARL HORNELL Place and date of birth: Sweden Home: Ursala, Sweden. Age: 16 Games programmed: Fruity, Ronald, Velocepede I and 2, Clean Up Time, Melon Mania (coming soon!) Computers owned: C64, Atari 520ST How did you first get interested in computers?: From friends and at school. Favourite game: Super Pipeline II  Favourite programmer: Jeff Minter. Because of his original ideas. Pet hate: C64 Basic!  Future plans: To write a blockbusting Atari ST game! And to become an artist... Outside interests: Drawing cartoons! What are the top selling computer mags in Sweden?: C+VG (naturally), Commodore User. Favourite food: Hamburgers. Favourite drink: Pepsi. Favourite TV progs: Anything English or American. WIN YOUR OWN FUNGUS ISLAND! Thanks to the extremely generous people at Players, the people who unleashed Fungus on the world, we can offer the three first prize winners in our grand Fungus Competition their very own Mushroom Kits. Yes, you can grow your own Great White Mushrooms in the privacy of your own home. Be the envy of your friends. Have amazing breakfasts. Enjoy a special C+VG mixed grill! All you have to do is add water and the mushrooms will start poking their cute little heads through the peat in no time. Twenty runners-up will get an exclusive embroidered Players baseball hat. One size fits everyone. What do you have to do to win any one of these amazing prizes? Just spot the six differences in our two Fungus pictures. Simple as that. Once you've found the differences, ring them and send the pictures, together with the entry form, to Computer and Video Games, Fungus Grows On You Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date for entries is January 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and the Great White Mushroom's decision is final. KHOANELL Give PRPLAMMEL) WOO 72 B EKLUND (2 MASLAM ASSISTANT s hould be 2024 Diw me mari orang C+VG/PLAYERS FUNGUS COMPETITION I'd like to grow my own mushrooms because..... Name. ........ Address. "


"THE MASTERS OF COMPUTER SOFTWARE PRESENT... OF THE UNIVERSE Join forces with HeMan the most powerful man in Eternia as he battles against the forces of evil led by the fearsome Skeletor. Help HeMan, Battle Cat, Teela, Man-at-Arms, Orko and their allies as they struggle in thrilling and dangerous encounters with the henchmen of Snake Mountain Already a worldwide success this incredible series will bring action and excitement to your computer. ARCADE GAME Cassette Disk CBM64/128 $9.99 $14.99 Amstrad $9.99 $14.99 Spectrum 48K .99 SUPER ADVENTURE Cassette Disk CBM64/128 Amstrad .99 $14.99 BBC Electron C16 .99 Spectrum 128K $9.99 Spectrum 48K .99 IBM .99 Mattel, Inc. 1986. All Rights Reserved. U.S. Gold, Units 2 3. Holford Way. MADE Holford Birmingham BG6 7AX. Telephone: 021 356 3388 "


"C+VG They're hot. They're tasty. They're the latest and greatest games on the way to a computer near you. This time we turn the spotlight on Delta, the next stunning game from Thalamus who tell us that programmer Stavros Fasoulas has NEVER been near a Nemisis arcade machine honest guy. We'll leave you to make your own minds up about that as you take sneak peeks at Knucklebusters, Dragons Lair II, Top Gun and more. Enjoy the future Dragon's Lair, Software Projects conversion of the ultra successful arcade game, leapt straight to the top of the software charts. Well SP are hoping to repeat that success with Escape from Singe's Castle. In other words, Dragon's Lair Part Two. If you played the first game and managed to complete it you'll know that Singe, the evil dragon, died at the hands of Dirk the dashing hero. Now Dirk must escape from the castle. He has eight tasks to complete again based on different sections of the arcade game. These include shooting the rapids, riding magic horses, dodging boulders and fighting monsters. The first Dragon's Lair game was incredibly difficult to get into but judging from early versions of the second game it's much more playable. Escape from Singe's Castle will be available on the Commodore 64, Amstrad and Spectrum early in the New Year. Could there by Dragon's Lair Part Three on the way? The original arcade laser-disk game is certainly big enough to supply a few more plots. But perhaps the games-buying public will be a little tired of the format by then. Time will tell. EHLECLEAN 31986 THALAMUS Sanxion's sensational programmer Stavros Fasoulas is hoping for another shoot 'em up smash with Delta, again for new software house, Thalamus. Get an eyeful of an early version of the game. Its got 64 levels with 248 alien attacks. As you pile up the points you can hit various icons to increase your speed and fire power. Delta should be out early in the New Year for .95 on cassette and $14.95 on disk. Death or Glory!? No it's not a war cry. It's the latest 64 offering from the oddballs at CRL. It may look like an Uridium clone but it isn't, Not quite, anyway. You zap about the universe in your tiny spaceship confronting absolutely ginormous alien spacecraftcarriers. The biggest you've ever seen on a 64 we're reliably informed. Instead of shooting everything in sight you have to bounce off things and crash into them. As much as your forcefields will allow anyway. Looks good. Will be available after Christmas. Can't wait.. VVVVV . MAAAAAAA THIRUESI BEREI 077613 II II III IT STEEDS PDP po 41141114 9:08 0359880 91144411 8:1-3 -Worms? promises to be one of the most unusual games to be released over the next few weeks. It has to be played to be fully understood. There are five coloured worms built into the program and the object is for them to capture territories by laying trails from dot to dot, each dot being the centre of a territory. Points go to the worm which lays the last trail in a territory. The types of worm are as follows: New (untrained). Auto (computer trained). Wild (a random mover) and Same (the worm which played a certain colour in a previous game is used again). Confused? So are we. Worms? has great music and will be released by CRL. Who said skateboarding is dead? Certainly not Bubble Bus. They've got a streetwise skateboard game on the way called Skate Rock. It's a true to life simulation of the sport which swept the country a couple of years ago and is making a bit of a comeback right now. The Bubble Bus computer version is immensely playable. You have to guide your skater down a street packed with hazards. There are other skate-boarders, punks, pedestrians, road works and so on. Jump ramps perform wheelies and other stunts and generally have a good time. The skateboarder is amazingly manoeuvrable and a well crucial tune drives the whole thing along nicely. Out soon on the 64. Play the game enter the C+VG competition! "


"RUNNER Top Gun, the number one film this Christmas, stars Tom Cruise, currently the number one screen heart-throb. Ocean has captured the licence for the game and, no doubt are hoping for the number one game. Time will tell but in the meantime here's a glimpse of what it looks like. The game will combine flight simulation with shoot 'em up elements as you learn to cope with flying an F16 Tomcat strike aircraft. It should be zooming your way on the Spectrum at .95 and .95 on the Commodore and Amstrad. We wonder if the F16 is armed with Cruise missiles? It's the 24th Century and society has finally rejected hard drugs. Peace, freedom and equality are a possibility. But as mankind spreads throughout the galaxy it soon becomes clear that these hopes will remain just a dream. Instead the rich get richer and the poor get poorer and angrier. Some governments start to introduce control drugs. It's called Sky and its production is big business. That's the controversial theme of Sky Runners, Cascade's new game from Ace programmer lan Martin. Your mission is to terminate the drug harvesting. Sky Runners will be out on the Spectrum .95 and Commodore .95 cassette/.95 disk. *** 180S SHORT SCORE 00000 3939 SED 00000 SERIES CCGS 000 SU Status DDODD MOMS SES DOC 000 Cartoon heroes He Man, Battle Cat, Teela, Man-at-Arms and Orko continue their eternal struggle against the evil Skeleton in Masters of the Universe from US Gold. This is the Commodore 64 version of the arcade game. There will also be an adventure game released about their exploits in the world of Eternia. Prices for the arcade version are Spectrum .99, Commodore 64 and Amstrad .99 cassette/.99 disk. The adventure will cost the same as the arcade game on the Commodore and Amstrad, .99 on the BBC, Electron and C16 and .99 on the IBM. SHORT SCORE 00000 CIRCUIT CLOCK ANDROIDS 10 KILL 00 WALL 00SCORE 0000000 SCORE 000 Ocean are hoping you'll blow a fuse over Short Circuit their new release early in the New Year, based upon the science fiction film Short Circuit. At the moment the film is set for release after Christmas and deals with the exploits of Number Five, a military robot who has got his wires crossed and decided to be peaceful rather than follow the more warlike intentions he was made for. In the game, Number Five must escape from the military complex, by solving problems avoiding guards etc. Graphically it looks rather nice as these screen shots show. Short Circuit will be released on the Spectrum (.95) plus the Commodore 64 and Amstrad (.95). Wanna yer mouth packed full of knuckle, mate? Den check out the latest thump 'em and kick 'em offering from Melbourne House. It's called Knucklebusters. It's violent and it could damage your computer. And it'll cost you .95 cassette and .95 disk on the Commodore. C+VG "


"haid bingo COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU Errr... HELLO! It's me. Big marketing strategy was not on MSX as you do for others modore as the best games Red! They've allowed me well thought out and they like the Spectrum and machine, yet MSX is as capback to do the Mailbag were initially overpriced.Commodore. Games like able in the graphic departpages again as long as I But once that was sorted Super Cycle, Jewels of ment. As far as basic goes it don't touch anything. Did they sold well. Darkness and many is provided with better you like my sticker last In Europe they are very others... drawing instructions than issue. I thought it was well supported a fact you All reviewed as available either the Spectrum or Comrather fetching. Didn't like neglect to mention at all. in other formats but no modore. It can also be exthe place that B-Con stuck it Vera Cruz, Mandragore, Inmention of the MSX format, panded to MSX 2 configurathough (Get on with it! Ed heritance were all introeven though an advert you tion and up to IBM RAM. Oh, errr all right... duced for MSX from France carried said they were. The only thing against the and then converted to Spec. You rave about the ComMSX appears to be magaI am writing in responsetrum etc. zines like yourself who reto an article you published! You also do not state in fuse to acknowledge its exin your November issue. It your software reviews concerned micros past and that games are available present. Your treatment of the MSX stable of micros was unfair, unjust and biased. Last Xmas MSX was the best selling micro Toshiba alone sold 50,000 True "


"istence. Yes, I know your . I always thought MSX Howard Dunn, excuse is \"if the software the Ed to run a feature on stood for Many Small Explo-Burton-on-Trent house doesn't tell how do sions until I discovered Micit... we know\" oft used and oft rosoft basic. MSX isn't dead  keep telling Paul That Robert Schifreen paraphrased. the Ed tells me but it's Boughton, C+VG's deputy who wrote Five Years of Problems the MSX stable hardly in the same league as editor, that he's using obsoComputing in your Novemmay have had, but, bad or the Spectrum or Commodlete technology. But he reber issue really is a prat. In unusable basic (Atari) lack ore brigade. C+VG was abfuses to stop using his box the Micros Past article he of upgrade facility (Spec-out the only magazine to Brownie. He keeps mutter-wrote that the C16, Plus/4 trum, Commodore) bad champion the cause of the ing things about David and MSX machines were disc facilities (Commodore) MSX when it first hit the Bailey never using a video out. This is obviously limited compatability conscene two years ago. One of camera. You just can't tell wrong. The machines fined to one make of accesour earlier issues carried a him anything. But we would should have been in the sories, or at best third special MSX supplement like to see some of your Micros Present column beparties. that was before all the spedumps. Suppose there's no cause all of them are very The fact remains that cific MSX mags appeared. chance of a free sample. En popular to this day. ComMSX is not dead no matter Maybe you missed it Mr Dad? Dad! panies like Elite, Mastertrowhat you may say even if Lucas? We'll be keeping a 10 I feel that the review of nic, Anirog and Imagine proyou do try to give the im-watchful eye on the MSX Dragon's Lair did not give duce excellent games for pression that it is. There are scene and I think you'll any hint that it is impossible the said machines. Even hundreds of games avail find Tony Takoushi raving to get down the shaft, using more peripeherals are being able. about Konami's MSX ver-the disc, at the start of play. I brought out for the Not to mention business sion of Nemesis on the back know of no-one who has machines by companies software etc. A lot of it in page. managed to complete this such as Konix and Spectrathe form of cartridge. The easiest way to use video so there is no shorpart and I doubt if your I am writing for two reviewer managed it either. tage of peripherals either. any software a cartridge reasons. One to please Mr If you use cheat games to Most importantly the loads in 1-2 seconds and Williams, who says he likes help you review a game machines are very popular. remains plugged in for fast arguments and also to comfully, then surely you should There are around 350 pupils access no need for disc or plain about Mark Dowell's tell the readers that this is in our school and 140-150 tape though these can all attitude towards the Specwhat you have done. have either a C16, Plus/4 or remain plugged in for file trum and the Amstrad. I am in my view and I will be access and dumping to as MSX. the proud owner of an Aminterested to hear other Robert Schifreen obviousthe need arises as well as strad CPC 464. I have had it readers views on my letter ly got his facts wrong. He the printer. for about two years after the playability of the probably had his head in the If you really are upgrading from a Spectrum. game is nil. If you cannot clouds over the past year. If unbiased and Mark should be more even get past the first part, he was awake, however, he independent then careful when he criticises then the game is a waste of would have noticed the rise give us fair the graphics of the Am money. of these machines. treatment. I realise strads, he obviously hasn't Your reviews play a great Mark Storey you can not review seen or played Spindizzy or part in deciding whether Sheffield all makes all the Firebird's new game, Druid. or not to buy a game and time and that the I have not seen ONE AmOK, maybe Robert might we should have been have been a bit premature others have been strad game where colour warned about the impossiabout the C16 but will it around longer but clashes have been visible.bility of playing Dragon's still be as successful in '87 you don't have to He also says that we would Lair. ignore us either or appreciate Commodre or with the rise of the dediSoftware Projects should cated are you afraid MSX Atari screen shots on Ameither refund the money, or machines? He was accurate video games may leave the strad reviews, but I definiteyou should demand a poke in his statement that the others behind! Ily would not. I like to see to allow you to tell us how to original launch of the MSX G Lucas what sort of game I am I get onto the next screen. was a flop in the UK. Last Somerset buying and also I am sure! This brings me to another Christmas the machines there are more Amstrad and question that has been puzyou mentioned were sold Spectrum users than there zling me for a long timeoff really cheaply so it's are Atari ST and Amiga ushow do readers manage to pretty obvious why they ers. discover/work out pokes. I sold well isn't it? Robert is By the way. All this busiam sure lots of other read-as down to earth as the rest ers would be interestd in of the C+VG team which from the screen by pointing how this is achieved. an SLR camera at the moniAnthony E Dixon isn't saying much... tor is prehistoric technolo-Walsall As one of the thousands gy, if you don't mind me of proud Atari owners in the saying so. Yeah! A man after my UK, I find it very disturbing My Dad works for a comown heart Anthony. I found that the so called 'serious' puter company that sells Dragon's Lair quite unplay-software houses are giving computer-graphic camera able too. But then I find the Atari a miss as far as systems which take the RGB most games unplayable new software is concerned. output from the computer joysticks keep snapping off At the moment, there are in my hands. As for disquite a few titles being reof red, green and blue filter covering POKES perhaps leased. \"What's the problem wheels produces colour there's a would be C+VG then? you say. The problem hard copy that would make writer out there who would is that it's ALL old, out of the trick shots in Star Wars like to write in and tell us. I date, look like a soggy comic. Perhaps I could persuadel Continued on page 151 "


"BARRY PAUL Prices include P&P within the UK Visit Our Shop Mon to Fri 67/Leather Lane, London, EC1 7TS Tel: 01-405 1515 Spectrum UK 5.99 Cosmic Shock Absorber Paper Boy Logo De Only QSPU Jail Break Graphic Adventure Creator Spy Vs Soy Arte Antics 2 Cosmic Shock Absorber D Bards Tale D2 Kanami's Coin Op HD2 Strike Force Cobra D2 Transformers 2 Great Esc2 Sports 4 AIDS They Stole a Milion 2 Cyborg Dandy They Stolea Milo Yer Kung Fu Theatre Europe Anais or Any Level 9 Gamer Care Vrance Bazooka Bul zap Szers 10 Shapins Road Konamis Cair Op Hits Computers Legend of Srbad 02 Tau Ceti 2 Tor Bruk 5 Star Games 10 Computer Hits 1.2 or 3 Crash Smashes 1, 2013 Ram Turbo interface Dual Port DK Tones Dual Port interface OSP Micro Switched Breakthru Kat Trap Thanatos Superbow Ping Pong Big Mercenary and 2nd City Pack Soy Vs Spy Nuclear Embargo D1 Rogue Trooper 888888888888888888888888888 6.30 Big Four Dure Drud Scooby Doo Toma HD2 Ma Me Star Gider han warrors Gauntlet East Enders 550 M ythm Sky Runner1 Highway Encounter Championship Wrestling 02 5.50 Archers Tempes Donkey Kong Legend of Kage Pal Trading Co Leaderboard Ford Footbalor of the Year Future right Trabar Commodore SuperCycle 2 Super Huey il D2 Tarzan 2 Terra Cresta 2 Highlander 2 Soda Milion 102 Sold a Million D2 Trainer02 6 50 Colour of Magic DZ Caps n Robes D2 Crystal Castles 2 Dan Dare D2 Dantes intomo D2 Dempsey and Make D2 Drud 2 Boch Busters Block Busters Goldrun Voice Master Bazooka B 2 Shain Road 2 Future Knight De TorBD2 Dandy D2 Cyborg D2 Commando 602 Eine 4 Bomb Jack D2 Top Gun Head Alignment Zeno Fino 1 Sigma 70 Monte Zumas Revenge 2 Scrabb 02 Monopoly D2 Cuede 02 Infodroid Repton 3D2 HPK D2 Alle Kat D1 Undium and Paradox Pack Xevious D2 Scooby Doo Masters of Universe Hypa Bar Judge Dread  Space Harrier Ye Ar Kung Fu Boulderdash Construction 2 Ace of Aces 2 Sold a Milion lil Rambo, Kung Fu Master Fighter Plot Ghostbuster 2 Glider Rider 2 Graphic Adventure Creator DS 10 Computer 650 Terra Cresta Judge Dread City Sicer Shadow Skimmer Tvial Pursuit 4 Tovial Pursuit 14 Uchi Mats 02 Vera Cruz 02 Vit 02 World Games D2 Xevious Gala 2 Gaute Ghost Goblins 2 Infrator 2 550 Alpha 02 5.50 Trivial Pursun Any Mastertronic Any Masterone MAD Camelot Warriors Hypaball Double Take Jewels of Darkness Silicon Dreams D4 Tracker 4 Seninle Art Studio Musc System Advanced Music System Uma ID: Jack the Nipper D2 Leaderboard 2 ught Force D2 Mi Max 2 Marble Madness 02 Marble Madness Construction set 2 Movie Monster D2 No Games 3D2 PAG D2 PowPlay 9.99 9.99 Yoo G Farligt Kayla Scale Supa Soccer Summer Games 2 Any Masonic Any Mastertronic MAD 8828 Sansion 2 Space H Speech 2 D2 Avenger Way of Tiger02 Best of Beyond 02 Beyond Forbidden Forest 2 Camelot Warriors 2 5.50 ATARI 400/600/800XL/ST SOFTWARE ATARI 400/600/800XL/ST CLASSIFIEDS ATAR XL AND XE cartridges FOR HIRE Apply now and hire your first four games free Around 1.000 different original titles For details send large stamp addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 Disc Drive 119,95 post free Al 5205STM 365 90 post free + 10 free disks Casio C22305 .90 past free Antic and Analog magazines available BEST QUALITY DISCS Megres s. Discs 1013.95 p. Unbelied SSD Dacs 10 for 1995 Unlabeled er S.S.DO Discs 25 for 122.95 Unlabelled 5 S.S.DO Disc 50 for $42.95 pf Uniabad 51 SS DD Discs 100 for $79.950 Memorex 312 Discs Boxes of 10 SSDD 24.95 pt Unlabelled 12 SSDD Discs 10 for $19.95 Alan 520 STM with 12 Megabyte Drive 1449.00 23 discs Happy enhancement for the 1050 Drive with revision 7. 139.95 post free GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB HINTS-POKES-MAPS Stunning Value Tony Bridge. Popular Computing Weekly The monthly handbooks, packed with tipe pekee, hints, mape solutions, gossip latest reviews.comp on, plus mach more Adventurers Handbook (CBM SPEC) CIS Plus Handbook Amated Handbook RC Handbooks Commodore (54/128) Arcade Handbook 1.00 Spectrum (4138) Arcade Handbook Or for even better value take advantage of our raduced mub scription rates 3 ses 278, 6 8 00, 12 900 Send cheros Or P.O. : HAD Service (CV) 1338 Ashton Old Road, righer Opensaw Manchester, MII I Tel 061-370 5666 Tape Cracker -Rev 2 48K Side A Will list MC progs to screen, you edit download your person.ised version with or without MC Knowledge. Hours of fun changing text to leave personal messages on screen Stuck on an adventure sorch for clues Side B For the advanced user contains a disassembler. All this for only C10 on TDK tape post free FREE 20 page catalgue of games and UTL's on both tape and disk Also drive enhancements Send large sae 1040 STF only  Mail order only 7 day del. STOCKSOFT (DEPT C/V) 15 Woodbrooke Road, Birmingham B30 1UE DEPT. C+VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thornex Close, Sunderland SR3 4PD. Tel: (091) 5286351. FREE MEMBERSHIP!!! Hire CBM64, Spectrum, Vic-20 software! Write now for free exciting details! COMPUTERSOFT (cv) PO Box 28, North PDO, Nottingham NGS 2EE Please stale machine. Stamp appreciated UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64. Send s.a.e. for fast response and details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG), 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB THE STONE OF KRAAL At last a postal adventure which provides a colour photograph of each location. Play by mail gamers need no longer rely on the written word along. Castle DRACULA A CREEPY ADVENTURE The stone lies deep within the inner kingdom. Only one man has ever returned alive from the quest of the stone. Did his quest drive him beyond the edge of sanity? Or are the riches and horrors he spoke of real? Could there be some truth in the legend of Kraal? The game is computer moderated and each turn costs .60 including colour photographs. The first two turns are free following set up. For more information s.a.e. to: Baronial Games, The Baronett, Main Street, Horsington, Lincoln LN3 SEX or telephone 052 685 681 anytime. Travel the Borgo Pass in Ancient Transylvania on a journey into terror. Explore the sinister black castle, solve fiendishly clever traps. Meet Frankenstien, the Wolfman and other grizzly inhabitants on your perilous quest to rescue the lost and beautiful princess NOW AVAILABLE FOR: SPECTRUM+ MSX, THE COMMODORE PLUS/4, THE ATARI 800/130, THE DRAGON 32/64 AND THE TEXAS 99/4a. Send .99 to: Mercury Sofware, Mercury House, 22 Warwick Road, Otton, Solihull, West Midlands B92 7HX STOP PLAYING GAMES Use your computer to make money turn your hobby into a home based income Full and part time opportunities to cash in on this tremendous market High earnings easy possible. Openm to any amatuer micro user and gamer Write for free details Westlink Promotions 108 George Street Edinburgh EH2 4LH "


"Maillang cause of its seemingly lack thanks for your comments. of games. But ! We'll all have to The possibilities are either work a bit harder to make it a C128 or a Spectrum. worth your while! Please help me in this mat. After reading your July and ter. However there is only August issues of C+VG one problem, I find it hard to thought I ought to write and think that the sound on the correct a few points. Spectrum can only (or near In the Price of Magik reCOMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES ly always) get a seven. view Keith Campbell says 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE For instance look at Caulthat the VAX is 'dated and LONDON, EC1R 3AU dron ll on the Spectrum, you unsuitable' and goes on to gave it seven, but, the only say that Avalon will have a A certain company has with Alternate Reality The sound that I could hear was save facility that will also just released a series of City and the Dungeon, la resounding noise resemb. restore his status in the .99 games which are old Ghostbusters, Spelunkerling a bounce. event of a system crash-a Adventure International and many more up to six S Fitzpatrick feature which MUD lacks. basic programs. months before they arrive Dublin This is not true, MUD's The only people to release here. Don't know why you've vocabulary is 1200 words a decent amount of good This may sound stupid, ruled out the 64C it has (600 useable by mortals) machine code programs are I but I would prefer to BUY much the same basic as the land has room for about and has room for about Databyte and U.S. Gold. the original thing than copy | 128 AND you get a really 2500. At present there is I say U.S. Gold, as far as I it. good deal on the machine at 600-700 locations but that is can tell from press releases, The software houses say the moment. It comes with hoped to be increased to most of their coin-op it is a minority machine. a whole bunch of games, 3000 as time goes on licenses recently purchased Well, Dixons sold well over the dataset and a mouse all (Richard Bartle's figures, not are from Atari but are not 100,000 machines at Xmas in one special package. The mine). planned conversions to the alone, and are still selling128 has few games written it hardly sounds dated or Atari home micro. them at a rate that outstrips specifically for it — and it unsuitable to me, especially The same thing goes for supply. always breaks when I try to now that the response time Elite. Paperboy is the perfect The Atari is in the top five use it as a frisbee. The Specis down to under three example. It's not as though machines in the U.S. trum is, as ever good value, seconds. And the suggesthe machine isn't capable or If the M.D's of the houses although some compatibiltion that a crash causes staanything. It crushes the are still not convinced they ity problems with the tus to be lost is ludicrous. Commie 64, Spectrum, Am-should have paid a visit to Amstrad +2. Your score is saved autostrad, BBC, MSX. In fact with the Atari Show at the end of Your magazine is the best matically every time it in255 colours on the screen at November and asked the computer magazine I have creases and you always get once (with interrupts) four other owners what they had the chance to read. It is returned to the most recent channel sound, player have to say. full of the things I like, espeof these. missile graphics and over 15 Jack T's motto is \"Power cially games. I started read. This incidently is what the graphic modes, it beats without the Price\". Lets not ing your magazine two save comma them all put together. make it \"Power without the years ago and since then Izled Jim Douglas is for, in If anybody has seen Software\". have never missed a single the event of a bug in the screens from Alternate Real Name and address supplied issue although it costs me automatic facility. ity or Mercenary on the  every month. I hope this information Atari, I am sure that they will At last a letter that makes I guess that you do not will stop prospective players agree. sense! C+VG has been tell-hear much from your read-being put off a very worthThere are two options ing irate Atari owners exacters in the Arab world so while past-time. open to owners at the moly this for ages now. Espe. please listen to a voice comPebbles the Superheroine ment: cially when they keep on ing from the U.A.E. When I Cambridge 1. Purchase software from telling us to review more first bought your magazine IOI like MUD. It helps cool importers at ridiculous Atari software. It's a shame I found it a bit difficult to read my circuits on a hot day. I prices  for Silent Serbut software houses but now it is a piece of cake I find wallowing in it is the vice! have been neglecting this it has also improved my best but mud-packs are 2. Rip it off! classic machine. And again English. I have even stopped OK for quick relief if you're I am sad to say I have loads were sold because I buying Arabic computer in a hurry. The Bug Hunters been forced to take option they were CHEAP last mags. response time is down to two. I refuse to pay nigh on Christmas! However, with Congratulations on your three seconds too the rise of the ST maybe 5th birthday how can you still not quick enough for but it's  for something that Commodore owners get for a people will take note of be so young and yet so Jackson T. Kalliber... tenner. I have got four discs your closing sentiment Mr learned in computers. Keep full of utilities which copy Anonymous... up the good work or in my even the most heavily pro I have read your magazine mother tongue \"Wasiloo altected software, even these since 1983 and I own a Oric amal al-jaied\" are rip offs from the U.S. Atmos. At long last I am Ashraf Obaid Alnager It's no problem getting thankfully getting a brand Sharjah software either. Just look in new computer. Yes, not U.A.E. the pen-pal sections of even second hand! Hey! Hope that's not rude mags and write to someone But, as you might have | Ashraf! Don't want the with your machine and lives I guessed I have a slight prob-IDEAS censors coming in the States or Germany. lem and that is WHICH com-down on us! And your EnI have got some superb puter. I have ruled out al glish must be a bit odd if games from Germany. The C64C because of its useless you've learnt it from States have supplied me basic and the Amstrad be-C+VG's writers! Seriously, "


"MICROS E IL MICROSELLS — It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell duplicated or pirated software on tape or disc. You will now be liable for prosecution. All suspect advertisements will be forwarded to the Federation against Software Theft for further inspection. ATARI PENPAL WANTED to swap original software etc. Write to Lloyd Cassidy. 85 Lanark Avenue, Carmondean, Livingston, West Lothian, Scotland EHB4 BON. Prefer disk. SINCLAIR ZX Spectrum 48K, cassette recorder, joystick and interface and software. Total value . Will accept . Telephone Wisbech 64785. 48K SPECTRUM + tape recorder, interface, Quickshot 12 joystick, all the latest games, magazines. Bargan  inc or swop for Commodore 64. Contact Oliver, phone 387 0919 anytime after 6 o'clock MSX SOFTWARE TO SWAP. All games originals send your list for mine. Originals only to M. Cruickshank, 37 Glenisla Court, Rattray, Blairgowrie, Perthshire, Scotland PH10 7AX. ATMOS/OPTC 1 48K GOLDMINE. Collect gold bars from 35 different caves, be careful not to get trapped in or crushed by boulders. Only .50. Cheques and postal order payable to David Yip, 77 Great North Road, Gosforth, Newcastle NE32DO CBM 64 disc drive, two cassette recorders, 1 joystick, back up board, lots of software including 81 cassettes, 18 disc's, 4 cartridges. Disc's include Leader Board, Uridium, Silent Service & Revs Cassettes includ Ghost & Goblins, Dragons Lair, Summer & Winter Games, Cauldrons ll & lots more. Tel Halifax 823810. Worth .00. Will sell for .00 ono. COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE TO SWAP. I have many original titles. Send your list to Kalle Talvenheimo, Paavontie 7, 78300 Varkaus, Finland. P.S. disk only. SPECTRUM GAMES: Will swap Starstrike, Beach-Head, Now Games 1, Night Gunner, Alien 8, Sam Stoat for any 2 of: Back to Skool, Their Finest Hour, Quazatron, Hijack, Tomahawk, Bobby Bearing. Send games to: Chris Woods, 10 Chemin Des Baraques, 1290 Versoix, Geneva, Switzerland CBM 64: Software to swap. I've got all the new titles. Disk only. No beginners and big lists pleasel Write to Haavar Hohjem. Stiklestad, 7650 Verda. By the way Hito Sorry Morry (SM), The Terminators, FCG, Darkskin & TIL ATARI 520ST USER wishes to swap original software, tips + information with other users worldwide. Prompt replies. Terry Stratford, 47 Holland Road, Chatham, Kent. SPECTRUM 48K. Games for sale, Ghostbusters and Ehiller. Also a Kempston Competition Pro. Send to Graeme Dow, 41 Demesne Road, Wallington, Surrey, SM6 BEZ BBC B Twin Drives, recorder, modem, printer, Rom, Ram board. Roms including Database and communications, joysticks, books, magazines, blank disc and over 300 pounds worth of software all for  ono. Phone 651 2940. 101) if outside London. FOR SALE: Spectrum power switch, . CBM 64 and Atari audio leads (give details of Hi-Fi connection sockets). 1 meter lead lead ; (add 50p per extra meter). CBM 64 Reset switches, .50. Make cheques payable to Colin Froggatt. Add 50p p&p Send orders to 13 Edith Terrace, Sunnyfields, Doncaster, South Yorkshire, DNS BRT. COMODORE 64 owner wishes to swap games which include Silent Service, Green Beret. Shogun and many many more then write to J. Dobbs, 64 Theaker Ave, Gainsborough, Lincs DN 11 RH. All letters answered. SWAP C64 GAMES: Green Beret, Commando, Exploding Fist, Mersenerya, Kung-Fu-Master, Tigers in Snow, Hobbit + Boolt, Computer Hits Two, Entoomed, Gyroscope, Speed King, Dig-DVG, Pole Position, Pacman, Wizards Lair, Android 2. Combat Lynx, Labarinth of Creater, Pitstop 2. Starion They Sold a Million, Sentinal. Two of above for Now Games 1. One of above for Ace, Now Games 2. Money offers accepted, alternative swaps accepted Phone Mansfield 10623) 27793, ask for Nick COMMODORE 64 GAMES to sell or swap including Parralax, Miami vice, Inflitrator, Paperboy and Knight Rider Send all letters with list to Michael Echun, 34 Hillfield Road, Hemel Hempstead, Herts, HP24AB SPECTRUM 128 STARTER PACK with 50 games worth . Selling for . Phone Houghton-Le-Spring 584 3813 between 6pm till 11pm. SPECTRUM PERIPHERALS Parallel printer interface: Interface one; Microdrive + 5 cartridges containing various utilities and games, all boxed, good as new  each. Also joystick interface (boxed); Quickshot 1 joystick power supply:  each. Also various original games inc: Fist 1 (E5), Formula 1. 3D-Tanx, Starship Enterprise, Nightflight, Heathrow and Timegate,  each. All prices inc.p+p.061.748 9409 CBM 64 original games to swap or sell. Many new titles. Please write to: 101 Hearsall Lane, Coventry. CV5 GGR, or ring Coventry (0203) 711402 after 4pm. YO! THERE ALL C64 OWNERS I have the latest original software to swap. Send your list to me at 61 Springwood, Llanedeyrn, Crdiff, CF2 GUD or tel: (0222) 732 565 after 4pm and ask for Gary Oversea'ers welcome! AMIGA & BY-FREAKS. Have you hot stuff on the Amiga? Call or write: R. Drost, Zwaluwhof 19,9502H Stadskanaal, Holland. Phone: 0599022439 17-11 pm) 64-freaks with a software problem, call also! SPECTRUM ORIGINALS FOR SALE! Very low prices including Elite, Way of Tiger, Spy vs Spy, Nightshade, Wham! Rambo. Only .50. Also available Comcon Interface , Ramturbo Interface , Currah Microspeech  Send s.a.e. to G.D. Shaw, 25 Redwood Avenue, Royston, Barnsley. Yorkshire, S71 4JP. Kwik!!! ON-SPEC Software Exchange Club. Free membership. Exchange you unwanted originals cheaply. Send s.a.e, for detials and free membership to: ON-SPEC Software Exchange Club, 23 Florence Road, West Bridgford, Nottingham, NG2 5HR. Originals only must be offered for exchange, any other form of software is illegal. SPECTRUM + with tape recorder, Quickshot IV joystick. 75 games, books and mags. Worth  will sell for . In great condition. Phone: 051 263 4825. Ask for Liam. SOFTWARE SWAP Tape only. Large collection for CBM64 and Spectrum. Many new titles including imports from US (Commodore) also some rare titles. All letters answered. Lists to Qumer 13 Claradon Road, London E111BZ.P.S. Any crackers out there? CUT PRICE SOFTWARE SPECTRUM  COMM 128 Word Games Leaderboard Freeze Frame3 cart ADVERTISEMENT INDEX AMSTRAD Tomahawk (8256 Mini One 2 Monopoly Seid Milion 3 Ye Ar Kung2 Durelis Big Lightforce Highlander in Misson Shalins Ad Terra Cresta Our Big 4 Mam VOR .113 Now Games Trval Pursuit 88888888888888 Sari 11.95 8888888RROSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS Cyborg Exploding 2 W anes Seacemer Uch Marta Revolution Handbal Shockway Rider 6,7 126 108 NOVOGODBOG 8888888888 Leaderboard 888SRRSS Masters Universe 93 888 Sar2 Footer Year Og Graphic ad rem sor UN M PSP nuded Ove rder peset 750 per te Mareges payable C P S V sa consonderwcome by phone CUT PRICE SOFTWARE, (Dept 2). Unit 6, Stort House, Riverway, Harlow, Essex CM20 2DW VISA Tel: (0279) 24433 (24 hour ansaphone) or 31956 During Office Hours 119 68 ATARI ST/800XLIXE OWNERS Activision .90,97 Addictive 26.27 Alligata . 126 Alternative... ..46 Amstrad Sinclair.. Amvic... Anco/Anirog Argus Bargain Barry Paul.. 150 Blast 64 78 Bubble Bus Bulldog/Courtesy Cascade.... 31 Charnwood 137 Classified 156 Creative Sparks........ 121 Cut Price S/W... 152 Database 135 Databyte. Durell .. 58,59 Dynamics.......... ...72 Electric Dreams....................34,73 Elite..............IFC, OBC.3.12,8 English... ..123 Faculty ..137 Fanatic ...23 Firebird Gargoyle Gremlin 16,17 G-Ten.... Imagine..... ... IBC,60 Incentive.....................23,113,115 Johnson Scanatron.... Konami ....92.121 Konix Logic Sales... Macsen Mailsoft Maros Martech. Match Megasave me Melriga Micronet Microsell 152, 156,159 Microsphere......... Midland Games Library........... 152 Mikrogen... Mosaic 137 National Software Library...... Ocean ........... 52,81,129,141,145 Piranha....... Shekhana... Specialist Computer Repairs.... 104 Software Projects ...... Strategic Plus Software...... Supasoft.... Superior Software.... Tele Games..... Top Spec..... US Gold........ 12,13,20,22,106,107 Video Vault................ .......78,101 Virgin... . ... 10 Vonsoft............... ... 112 ....72 .. 100 132 Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest, biggest and best Atari Club on the market Now incorporating ST software into our stocks and approaching 280 titles MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over 4 years ago first conceived the idea of a software Ibrary Now over 1,700 titles on disc, cassette and Rom (games, business, education and utilties. Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a tar chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Over 2,500 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany, Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast efficient and friendly service operating a computer sed custom built system to keep track of all your records. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities important: Midland Games Library are in no way connected with or responsible for Midland Computers Ltd. of Worcester. SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham. Glos. Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programs are originals with full documentation 29 40 ......137 "


"ADVERTISEMENT C+VG GOLDEN JOYSTICK AWARDS It's time for the computer game equivalent of the Oscars once more! Yes, for the fifth year in succession we're asking YOU the loyal C+VG reader to vote for our coveted Golden Joystick Awards. These now traditional awards go to the software houses and programmers who YOU reckon deserve them. Look back at your software collection and work out which game is the best from 86. Which company do you think deserves the software house of the year title? Which programmer has impressed you enough during '86 to win your vote for Programmer of the Year? And which game had a soundtrack which blew your ears away? This last category is a new one for this year — but the regular categories remain the same. The first 20 people to send their vote form in will get the pick of the C+VG software cupboard So get your entry in today. And remember — YOUR VOTES COUNT! Star Raiders His a trademark of Atan Corp SOFTWARE HOUSE OF THE YEAR RUNNER-UP The Great Galactic Adventure Continues GAME OF THE YEAR RUNNER-UP til Star Raiders II ADVENTURE OF THE YEAR RUNNER-UP STRATEGY GAME OF THE YEAR RUNNER-UP BEST ARCADE STYLE GAME RUNNER-UP COMING SOON ON SPECTRUM COMMODORE & AMSTRAD HOME COMPUTERS BEST ORIGINAL GAME RUNNER-UP RUNNER-UP BEST SOUNDTRACK RUNNER-UP PROGRAMMER OF THE YEAR RUNNER-UP SOFTWARE Electric Dreams Software, 31 Carlton Crescent Southampton, Hampshire S01 2EW. Tel: (0703) 229694 NAME ADDRESS COMPUTER OWNED "


"GVG COMPETITION ROLL ON. How we laughed when Paul fell off his! How we gasped as Seamus did a wheelie on his! How we all needed miles of Elastoplast to cover the bumps and bruises ... What are we on about? Skateboards, that's what. Skate Rock is the newie from Bubble Bus. It's an accurate simulation of the thrills and spills of skateboarding but without the damage to life and limb. Check out our Street Seen pages for details of the game. Check out this page for your chance to win one of two amazing Big Eater skateboards from Bubble Bus! TWO second prize winners will get a Bubble Bus sweat shirt plus a copy of the game and ten runners-up will get a copy of the game for the 64! You just can't lose! What we'd like you to do is use the special blank board to design your own customised C+VG skateboard. We want to see YOUR ideas for the trendiest boards about the streets. 'Fraid we can't get the boards painted up for you but your designs will get printed in a future issue of C+VG. And the prize boards do come in very tasteful fluorescent colours! Don't delay, get your designs rolling in today. Closing date is January 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and the Art Editor's decision is final. Send your entries, with the coupon firmly attached, to Computer and Video Games, Bubble Bus Skateboard Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. C+VG/BUBBLE BUS SKATE ROCK COMPETITION Name Address Age Computer owned _ Sweat-shirt size S/M/L "


"COMMODORE IT'S A CORKER! Get some bubbly in now cos we've got something for you to celebrate, and I don't mean Christmas. The spirit of giving knows no bounds here at Commodore User. Regular readers have already benefitted from two free gifts in a row but — as the man says you ain't seen nothing yet. FREE... oooo oo ooooo 0 0 0 a full colour 24-page booklet. Our expert team of reviewers pick out the best games of all time shoot 'em ups, combat, arcade conversions, adventure and many more. What were those great classics? Why were they great? Did you buy them? But don't just buy it for the freebie. The mag itself will feature no less than 90 pages of sparkling editorial. Screen Scene is bigger than ever before. A guaranteed 40 pages of reviews that's more than any other single magazine. Look out for: Gauntlet, Xevious, Crystal Castles, Scooby Doo, It's A Knockout, Avenger, kwah, Knucklebusters, Shaolin's Road and literally dozens more. The toughest team of reviewers in the business will be pulling no punches as usual. BICENT MI Hiltint Dry Mon CHAMP Play To Win has its usual share of exclusive maps, Hot Shots has all the filth, Tommy has all the answers and if you've any sense you'll be at your newsagent bright and early on the 20th December. Remember Commodore User is out early this month. So get your order in now. It'll be the best value you'll get out of a pound this year. "


"MICROS E IL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell duplicated or pirated software on tape or disc. You will now be liable for prosecution. All suspect advertisements will be forwarded to the Federation against Software Theft for further inspection. ATARI PENPALS wanted from UK Europe/USA. I'd particularly like to hear from disk/modem users. All letters answered. Write to Neil Thewarapperuma, 3 Abbey, 3 Abbey Meads, Glastonbury, Somerset BAG BEZ THE FOLLOWING Vectrex games wanted: Pole Position (3D or normall, Star Castle, Polar Rescue, Dark Tower, Batter-up, also light pen cartridges Animation and Melodymaster. Also Colecovision game Montezuma's Revenge. Information on any of the above gratefully received. Phone (1.0.W) 866349 or write M. Farrell, 24 Coronation Gardens, Shanklin, 1.O.W. PO37 7DZ. ATTENTION AMSTRAD OWNERS. Have you got games on shelves in drawers, which you no longer play with? If so, give it a new lease of life. I have other Amstrad owners waiting to swap, buy and sell with you. So send a SAE to Giorgio, 17 Cliff Park Close, Peacehaven, Sussex BN98TR for details of the S.W.A.T. Club, you'll be glad you did! THE YOUGSLAV CRACKING SERVICE Commodore 64/128, Amiga, Spectrum, Amstrad, IBM PC. We have almost all! Please, no beginners, send just your latest lists. Thanks! Y.U.C.S., Na Produ 38, YU-62391 Prevalde, Yugoslavia, Europe. ADVENTURERS! Send large SAE for details of our writers newsletter, players fanzine, and exchange club, to Adventure Probe, 78 Merton Road, Highfield, Wigan WN3 6AT DISKS 5W4DD/DS for .50 inc. post and packing. Send to: Byte Bandit, CH-6027 Romerswil. Or call after 6pm weekdays. any time eekends: 041/88'12'96 (Switzerland). COMMODORE 64, 1541 Disk Drive, MPS 801 Printer + Easy Script, 3D Graphic Drawing Board, joystick and over 30 games on Disk, . Tel: 0244-533062. Ask for Stephen ATARI ST penpals wanted all over the world. Please write to: Daniel Wilhelm, Bothestr 144,6900 Heidelberg, West two ZX81 program books (full of games), 60 ono. Tel: Frome 61966. Ask for Mrs Carter ON/SPEC Software Exchange Club. Free membership. Exchange your unwanted originals cheaply, send SAE for details and free membership. Send to: ONSPEC Software Exchange Club, 23 Florence Road, West Bridgford, Nottingham NG2 5HR. Originals only are to be used for exchange any other form of software is illegal and will result in probable prosecution. AMIGA PENPALS WANTED. All Amigas owners please answer. I want to swap programs, hints, news, letters etc. Write to: J. Vilkki, Pellavapolku 1 D, Vantaa 37 01370, Finland. All letters answered. WANTED: Knowledgeable game players to review computer games for club publication (all machines). Send  ito cover costs) for details: CHIC Computer Club (C&V), PO Box 121, Gerrards Cross SL99JP C64 NUTTER wants Infiltrator, Cyborg, Parallax, Nemesis and lots more. I have Paperboy!, Leaderboard, Fairlight, Spindizzy and games you wouldn't believe I have. Phone Wenchin (01-205 1654). Write to W.ng, 29 St Georges Ave, Kingsbury, London NW9 OJT. Hi Andy Green. Phone or lose out on games 48K SPECTRUM, with LMT Keyboard and Datacorder, with  worth of software including Batman, Rambo etc and many magazines. Offers . Telephone 01-958 9721 after 7pm. T1-99/4A Alpine Quest graphic/text lor text only adventure in Basic by author of Adventuremania il intriguel. Control two separate characters with different abilities in a race against time. Available from Mark McGurn, 26 Sandiford Road, Holmes Chapel, Cheshire. Only .95. MSX SOFTWARE to clear, including Yie Ar Kung-Fu, E2.50; River Raid, Beamrider, .50; Blagger, .50 Vicious Viper, Chuckie Egg, .00: Finders Keepers, 50p. Interested? Phone 10244) 44493 ask for Jason. BARGAINI Amstrad CPC 464 + GT 64 green screen monitor and MP-2 modulator for colour TV) complete with over  of software including: Dan Dare, Equinox, Green Beret. Get Dexter and many more, all in great condition Worth +, sell for  ono. Tel: Romsey 513386 from 5pm-10pm. WANTED: Com Drum Digital Drum Machine and Datel Sound Sampler (CBM 64). Will swap for 10 games (each) from my list. Also wanted: issue one of Zzapl 64. Will pay up to .00 if in good condition. Write to Steve Bennett Railway Cottage Station Road, Talacre Holywell, N Wales OHB9RD. ATARI 810 disk drive + Archiver Editor chip which will back-up all bad sectored disks, comes with back-up software and software on five disks. This much sought after disk drive cn be yours for only . Call Andy on 0533 706543. CHEAP AMSTRAD GAMES. Titles from .00 to .00. Titles include: A View to a Kill, Ghostbusters, Ghouls, Roland in Time, Smugglers Cove, Stockmarket. Ping Pong, .00 each. Chuckie Egg, Harrier Atack, Roland Ahoy, Software Star, .50 each. Daly Thom's Dec., Pyjamarama, Fist. 14.00. One Man & His Droid, Storm, ,00. Please add 50p p&p. Tel: Lucas after 6pm on 01-883 8871 FOR SALE: 48K Spectrum+with data recorder and Kempston interface with joystick, + games. All in superb condition, and all in original boxes. Sale for . Tel: Groombridge 697. F4 AMIGA GROUP. We want to swap all over the world (no pirates). Every letter answered, Hi Eca, The Warrior, M10 Soft and N.A.S.A. Send list or a few games to: Mauro Menegatti, V. Darsena 144/A. 44100 Ferrara, Italy IDEAL CHRISTMAS GIFT: Commodore 64 for sale, 40 original games including Commando, Summer Games & il and Rambo Offer includes joystick and computer desk. Bargain at just  ono. Phone Retford 702547. PHILIPS COLOUR MONITOR as newmodel 8524with swivel/tilt stand (built-in clock),  ono. Epson MX-80 + tractor feed + Atari 850 interface plus connector lead,  ono. Atari Trak Ball,  Atariwriter cartridge, 9 Dan 051-728 7492. COMMODORE 64 user wishes to swap software, tape and disk. All letters answered. Write to Steve Harris c/o 23 Hale Mile, Bramley, Leeds, LS13 1BN COMMODORE 64. New adventure game, Silk, only .50 + 30p p&p Cash or postal orders to Jamie Brown, 14 Yelverton Avenue, Hythe, Hants. Adventure includes save game feature. MSX GAMES: I have loads to sell or swap, please write or send list to: G Lecrass, 23 Glyncoli Road, Treorci, Rhondda, MID Glamorgan, CF426SA \"I AM AN ATARI ST OWNER who has just bought his new machine. I wish to contact other ST owners to swap software. Please phone Bath (0225) 29778 and ask for Mark ORIC-1 48K in very good condition + over 20 games like Plast Blasts and Rat Splat. Also there is a manual and teach yourself how to use an Oric with a look of 60 games and 71Oric) magazines  0.no. Write to Paul Thornton, Burnt House, Bush Road, E Peckham, Kent TN12 5LL-orring E, Peckham 871098 and ask for Paul after 4pm. C-64 GAMES TO SWAP.Disk or tape. Write to Spectre, Ketunpesantie 1, 24800 Halikko, Finland, Act quickly COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE FOR SALE. All originals. Tapes: Cauldron 2 .00, Karateka .00, Moon Cresta, Zaxxon, LOCO, Raid over Moscow Beach-head, Beamrider, .50 each. Super Pipeline, Mystic Mansion Chinese Juggler, .50 each. Disks: Zorki .00. Strip Poker 1+2 .00 for both. Richard Shepherd Tel: 0623 554153. ATARI 2600 COMPUTER SYSTEMI Still boxed with 2 joysticks + 6 boxed games. Worth over 80 therefore a bargain at  or nearest offer. Tel. Codsall 2056. ATARI 800 XL, datarecorder, joystick and many new games , Spectrum Datarecorder, interface, joysitck, lots of latest games-. Ring Southend 10702) 78251 after 6 pm LOOK, GREAT SPECTRUM REVIEW MAGAZINE called 48K user reviews news chart and much more, for a copy of the latest issue send 30p and a stamp to: 48K user, 40 Downe Ave, Cudham, Kent, TN14 70X SCREEN ARENA COMPUTER HANDBOOK for Amstrad, spectrum and C64. containing reviews, hints, maps, pokes, adventure, news, and a competition. Send  cheque/P.O. to Screen Arena, 6 Ropewalk, Alcester, Warks, B49 5DD ATARI 800XL-1050 disc drive with U.S. doubler, magazines and over 70 top games incl: Harobali, Ballyhoo and International Karate. Quick sale f200. Tel: (021) 770 6643 SPECTRUM 48K, with tape recorder and protek switchable interface, quickshot il and 40 games all this for  or will swap for a commodore 64, cassette recorder and some software. Contact: Donny Holyoake, 28 Ardiew, Port Ellen, Islay, Argyll, scotland. CBM 64 SYSTEM FOR SALE, includes: CBM 64, C2N, 1541 disk drive, pinter CBM modem, quickdisc + books & mags + 100 disks with popular S/W tities, all for  0.no. Call Danny tel. 01-802 1133 after six please. TURBO-BAUD (48K SPECTRUM) turns your programs into reliable turbo loaders. Handles basic/M code/ commercial. Halves loading times. Adds protection and professionalism. Easy to use. Prompt despatch, .95. P. Stanley, Dept MS. 81 Jutsums Lane, Romford, Essex. RM7 9HJ. CBM 64 + data recorder  worth of software, unused and boxed. Quick sale . Telephone 01-249 0677 Mon-Fri after 7pm. Ask for Paul AMSTRAD CPC464 with green screen monitor. Also colour modulator and over 1400 of excellent games software Cost over  will accept  or nearest offer. Call round or write to Martyn Oliver, 95 St. Michaels Road, Northampton, NN15HS FOR SALE-COMMODORE 64, 1541 disk drive, MPS 803 printer, 1530 cassette deck, 1701 joystick, CGL M5 joystick and  worth of software. All boxed-6 months old cost , will sell for  o.no. Call Peter on 8454884. After 4p.m. weekdays, or anytime weekends C.B.M. 64 and C2N tape recorder with 3 joysticks and over  of all original software, including Elite, Elecktaglide. Uridium, Frankie, Paradroid, Summer Games 1 and 2 etc. Total shop value . Asking . Ring 0628 38545. CBM 64 ORIGINALS for swaps. Lots of titles they include Leader Board, Ghost & Goblins, Uridiam and lots more, for more details phone: Southampton 34696 between 4p.m. and 7p.m. ADVENTURERS ALL MICROS. I have solutions to many top adventures. lover 100), including all level 9, many Infocom, + too many to mention! All solutions 50p including P& P. Send S.A.E.to Lee Hodgson, 54 Church Street, Tewkesbury, Glos, GL20 5RZ SPECTRUM OWNERS Need infinite lives on latest arcade games? Send just .50 for TDK D90. Full of pokes for recent arcade hits, il provide tape) Send S.A.E. + cheque/Postal Order to Lee Hodgson, 54 Church Street, Tewkesbury, glos GL20 5RZ NEED HELP WITH ONE OF THESE? The boggit. Lord of Rings, Big Cave, Zork. Trilogy + many more. I have solutions to these + 100 others. Send SA E. to Lee Hodgson, 54 Church Street, Tewkesbury. Glos CL 20 5RZ for full list. COMMODORE AND SPECTRUM SOFTWARE exchange club. Exchange your unwanted software at a very low cost. Free membership. Send a S.A.E. for more details to: Cassec, 29 Birchwood Drive, Ravenshead, Notts, NG159EE.. VIC ZO GAMES FOR SALE. All originals, all  cash. Also VIC 16K ram pack for sale, will take offers. Write to: Richard Nichails, 134 Leigh Road, Eastleigh, Hants, SO5 4DU. INDUS GT DISC DRIVE, Atari 800 computer, Atari 410 cassette recorder and software for sale. All in excellent condition with original packaging and manuals, for details phone 10429) 236200 and ask for Parvin 48K SPECTRUM +, CASSETTE RECORDER, Kempston pro Interface, Quickshot II, loads of magazines, over  worth of software including: TT Racer, Dragons Lair, Elite, Paper boy, Knight Rider and loads more. Sell for  O.N.O. Yuk Wai Butt, 180 High Street, Burton, Latimer Kettering, Northants NN 15 5JR SPECTRUM CASSETTE RECORDER Ram interface and joystick, Timex printer, Currah speech and many games including Spindizzy and around  will sell for f150. Phone Pilning 3171. AMSTRAD CPC 46C, with colour moniter. R5232 Serial Interface, Speech Synthesiser, over 60 games, including Ghosts & Goblyns, Sal combat, Winter Games and Exploding Fist. Joystick, over  of magazines.  O.N.O. Ring 10895) 445843, ask for Chris or Andrew. COMMODORE 64, tape deck, joystick magazines and over  of software including Dan Dare, Summer Games Dragons Lair, Way of the Tiger and more. Original price , sell for . Telephone Lawrence 101) 980 5108 SPECTRUM ADVENTURES, now available,ugg attack 2. Incluides: 4 directional view, picture every location, independant characters. Comes in two parts because of memory limitations of the 48K Spectrum. Both parts on one cassette. Only .00. Cheques/p.o's payable to Alistair Provan. Send to Don. Soft, 35 Church Street, Kilbarchan Renfrewshire, PA10 2JQ. Delivery within 20 days. SPECTRUM 48K+FOR SALE. Including data recorder, Kempston interface, and joystock. Many games including Commando, Zoro, Pole Position, Tomahawk, Yle Ar Kung Fu and Batman etc. All in good condition and all boxed, will sell for . Tel: Nick Peterborough 242744 PLUS 4 ONLY: Championship Chase, the ultimate in football management for the Plus 4. Featues over 75 teams, 100 players, FA & Milk Cups, 4 divisions + European and non-league competition At ony f3.99 it is top of the league! Available from: G. Smith, 14 Beech Hill, Wellington, Somerset. AMSTRAD PENPALS WANTED to swop games. Send lists to Robert, 28 Townley Way, Earls Barton, Northants NNG OHR. ACORN ELECTRON, cassette player and  of games. Cost . Also Quickshot il and Interface, for Electron for . Telephone: 341 6457 (London), Will sell separately ATARI HAPPY/LASER ENHANCEMENT wanted for 1050 disc drive. G. Hendrie, 6 Feather Dell, Hatfield, Herts AL 10 BDD ATARI 1050 HAPPY ENHANCEMENT Good condition, original documentation, latest revision 7 software, will fit free or swap enhanced 1050 for normal one,  ono, Wrote 123 Potternewton Lane, Leeds LS7 3LW. SPECTRUM LATEST original titles at very low prices. Send SAE for list of 55 games ad prices to M. Baker, 103 Lonsdale Road, Southend on Sea, Essex COMMODIRE 64 SOFTWARE to swap on disk. e w original titles. Write to: Jonas Karlsson, Rodhes v. 6, 432 00 Varberg, Sweden. FOR SALE: ZX81 and manual (plus extra one for spares), 16K RAN+two power packs, five game cassettes including Cascade 50 games cassettel, magazines "


"THE YOU DID'NT LEAVE ME A LOT TO WORK WITH, DID YOU... PART THREE FEATURING.. W JERRY FARIS 1986 1 HAD TO RE-EXAMINE THE OTHER ROBOTS... WE DID'NT HAVE A LOT OF CHOICE... NOW COME ON, GLENN, WHAT HAVE YOU FOUND... ALL OF THEM SHOWED SIGNS OF CORROSION INSIDE THEIR WE WERE CHECKING THE INHIBITORS... SHOULD HAVE BEEN LOOKING AT THE SPINE.. IT SEEMS TO BE SOME FORM OF PLASTIC FATIGUE... YOU SEE, ALL THESE ROBOTS HAVE BEEN BUILT IN THE PAST 2 YEARS... AND NEARLY ALL BY OR FOR THE SAME COMPANY... BOUGHTON-BOTICS INC. THEY USE PLASTAK 12 FOR ALL ROBOT C. 1.C.S.. Di AND IT'S PLASTAK 12 THAT'S BEING AFFECTED... CORRECT. ALL WE NEED TO KNOW NOW IS THE CAUSE OF THE VIRUS... HMM... WE EEM TO HAVE FOUND WHAT'S RESPONSIBLE... THE PLASTAK 12 SHOWS MASSIVE QUANTITIES OF AND B 28 FLAVOUR ENHANCER. DUT DR. JONES WE HAVE THE TEST RESULTS AND THEY'VE BOTH BEEN TRACED TO... YOU WON'T BELIEVE THIS... WHAT..?) "


"Y'ALL COME ON IN NOW I STILL DON'T BELIEVE IT...THIS 15 WHERE THE OMMISIONS ARE COMING FROM..?! VIN NOW. IT'S BEEN VERIFIED BY NORTHFIELD CHEM-CS. THEY'RE IN AGREEMENT... THIS 15 IT? BY NORI IN ACRE WHAT ABOUT THE OTHER BRANCHES?..THERE MUST BE AT LEAST FIFTY OF THEM COUNTRYWIDE... FIFTY THREE. THERE ARE TACTICAL UNITS ON THEIR WAY TO EACH... WHERE'S MY Fries, 2 CHARMING. GOOD MORNING, CAN I HELP YOU? I'M THE MANAGER I CLOSE DOWN?! || HEY, GRANDPA..I LISTEN MAN...IVE BEEN CAN I HELP YOU..?) ER...I DONT WANT YOU SAYINGI GETTIN' A SUPREMO TO SEEM AWKWARD CAN'T GET MY DELUX SOUTHERN YES, MA'AM BUT THE LAST SUPREMO DELUX FRIED CHICKEN CHUNK WE'RE GOING TIME WE TRIED SOUTHERN FRIED EVERY DAY SINCE THAT THERE WAS TO HAVE TO CHICKEN CHUNK?AUNTIE Y'S OPENNED... CLOSE THIS NEARLY A RIOT... SHACK DOWN. UNHEALTHY FOR YOU, DOG-MEAT, IF YOU'RE THE DUDE WHOSE GONNA TRY AND STOP ME... THAT'S RIGHT. WE'D LIKE TO SPEAK WITH THE MANAGER, PLEASE... THAT'S RIGHT MAM... BY ORDER.L.M.P. SOUNDS VERY UNHEALTHY. BUT HE WILL, BEHIND YOU... Come the YEAH! OH YEAH GOT ANY PROBLEMS WITH THAT..? NOPE... DON'T THINK HE HAS! Dhexe NIGHTFALL. WE'VE CLOSED EVERY CHICKEN SHACK IN THE CITY... SHEILA *L.M.P. LONDON METRO POLICE-ED. "


"MICROS E L L MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell duplicated or pirated software on tape or disc. You will now be liable for prosecution. All suspect advertisements will be forwarded to the Federation against Software Theft for further inspection. CBM 64 GAMES FOR SALE. Uridium, Hardball, Winter Games, Fight Night,  each, Little Computer People, Raid on Bungeling Bay, 4 each. Phone Stephen. 04253 2227 after 5pm. COMMODORE 128 + C2N+2 JOYSTICKS. All as new in original boxes, 28 top ten software titles + over 90 magazines. Total value , will sell for  O.no. Tel: 01-764 8891 AMSTRAD CPC464 + Disc Drive + Vortex 512K Memory (Fitted) Green Monitor + Maxam Assembler (ROM) + Disc Games and Utilities Tape Games + Books Dust Cover + Magazines + Blank Discs. All manuals included Worth over . Sell for  ono. Tel Golden Valley (0981) 540060 (everything well kept and boxed). HI ALL AMIGA FREAKS! Willing to swap programs? If so, contact: Petri Laakso, Vastarakinpolku 4D 103, 20600 Turku 60. Finland COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE. Fourth Protocol, Lord of the Rings, Koronis Rift. Sherlock, Hampstead, Elite, Subsunk Thrust, 10 Computer Hits,  all boxed, ex. cond. Phone 051-546 7501 (Liverpooll. Ask for Jason. THESE 6 GREAT TITLES FOR THE SPECTRUM 48K: Ghostbusters, Rambo, Hunchback 3. Konami's Tennis, Niverending Story, Jack the Nipper, all for  or  each. Please contact Lee after 6pm at (01) 864 6134 FOR SALE: Portable SX-64 home computer. Commodore 64 compatable Built-in disk drive + monitor Lots of disks including Alter Ego, Reset switch + disk nibbler. Great bargain. Hardly used E350 ono. Worth . Ring Harpenden 1058271 69866. FOR SALE or will swap). Interdictor Pilot, Little Computer People, Graham Goochs Test Cricket, Skel & Widows Revenge. All C64. Phone Robbie, 01-698 4077. between 5 & 9pm. BBC B with DFS, 100K disk drive, 452 Cub Monitor, Tape Recorder, Blank Discs + Cabinet, over 120 games. Many books, + mags + speech syn. Dust cover, monitor plinth + leads. Best offer accepted. Tel: (07271 23540. COMMODORE AND ATARI 520ST SOFTWARE TO SWAP. Please send your lists to the below address. Mr J. Anderson, 27 Drumpark St., Glasgow G46 BLR. Scotland CONTINUOUS COMPUTER STATIONERY in small quantities, 200, 400, 1000 & 2000 sheets prices from: .43 for 2000 sheets of plain listing paper +.50 p&p. .99 for 400 sheets + .99 p&p. .39 for 2000 sheets of 70gsm micr perf + .60 p&p. .99 for 200 sheets + .99 p&p. 14.99 for 2000 3.5\" x 1.4\" self adhesive lables + .99 p&p. .00 for 200+ .60 p&p. Send SAE for order form and price list to: Brigantic Computer Services (CVG), PO Box 517. Bamber Bridge, Preston, PRS 6DB. COMMODORE 64 CENTRONICS INTERFACES FOR SALE, plus driver software and full instructions, f19.75 The interface has almost 1 m cable and fits neatly to the user port. Cheque with order to Mr D. Snocken, 18 Clifton Gardens, West End, Southampton, Hants S03 3DA. CBM 64 SOFTWARE TO SWAP. 1000+ titles, including latest games. Send lists to Richard Coggins at 33 Kentwell, Riverside, Tamworth, Staffs, 879 7UB England, or tel: 0827 69878. 4pm-11pm. Disk only. FOR SALE: CBM 64, 1541 Disk Drive, C2N Cassette Unit, Three joysticks and  worth of original software (disk and tape) worth over , sell for  ono. Also Spectrum 128 few months old still boxed, five original games incl. Batman Int MatGnday, E65, Chris Whyatt, telephone: Fairseat 823 522. ATARI 800XL, 1050 Disk Drive, 1010 Cassette Recorder, 1020 Colour Printer Selection of excellent software on disk and cssette, joysticks, disk doubler and large range of magazines and books. . Tel: Ely 720 602 DO YOU WANT TO SWAP YOUR LATEST C64 SOFTWARE? Then contact: N-M Mirani, Buizerdweg 106, 1826 GJ Alkmaar, Holland. Phone: 072-618 427. Don't delay, let me know today UPGRADED ZX Spectrum plus large selection software . Ring Jason Horndean 595868 MSX games to sell or swap and Amstrad games to sell, including Sorcery. Ghostbusters and Hunchback for the MSX and The Way of the Exploding Fist and The Quill adventure writing system for the Amstrad. Phone 31685 for a full list and ask for Robert COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE TO SWAP. Will swap Fourth Protocol Kensington, Starion, Thing on a Spring, Spiderman, American Football, Alien, Broad Street, Eureka, Star Fire & Fire One, Acos Plus, and 6 other games for Dosofts Megautility and Megatransfer disk V.4.0. Please write to M. Metcalf (Jnr), 2 Coalbank Road, Hetton Le Hole, Tyne and Wear, DH3 OEG, or will swap for Freeze Frame ll. SPORTS ON CBM 64. 6 Hits: Summer Games I & II, Wintergames, Hesgames. Hypersports and Hunchback at the Olympics. All originals, Whole lot on disks for  (700 BFR/40NLG). Send money and address to Ouranoy. Bassinstraat 2, B-2650 Boom, Belgium Honesty guaranteed. MICROSELL MSX PENPAL wanted to swap games and ideas including ohno manic miner Formula 1 Sorcery road Fighter, Comic bakery ping pong Hyper Olympics 112 Hyper Sports 1/2 and more if interested write to: Andrew Cockwood, Aperth Close, Mexborough, South Yorkshire, S64 OQT CBM 64 Owner wishes to swap, Bomb Jack, Paper Boy, Ghost'n' Goblins, Commando, Green Beret, Star Wars, Uridium, Rock 'n' Wrestle Kung Fu Master, Yie Ar Kung-fu, Way of the Tiger, Graphic Adventure Creator. Wants anything you have got. Phone 0279 850689 or write to Richard LeCount, cottmoor, Old Mead Road, Henham, Bishops Stortford, Herts CM 226JG. Ring after 10am, ask for Richard, CBM 64 SOFTWARE to swop on tape, many new titles. Write to Bren at 62. St Margarets Rd, East Twickenham, Middlesex, TW1 2LP AMSTRAD OWNER would like Rock and Wrestle, Barry McGuigans Formula One, T.L.L. and movie, In Turn, the provider can pick any two per game. From a list of 58, including Way Tiger, Batman, Bomb Jack Bedhamk etc. Tel. (0475) 34989. 128K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM COMPUTER for sale with Sanyo data cassette recorder, plus 47 computer games, ZX printer. To buy new . Six months old. Asking  0.no Everything mint condition. Ring Jeremyon, Cardiff 0222 624475 SPECTRUM 48K GAMES FOR SALE, 20 originals, including Kung-fu-Master and Ghost'n' Goblins. Worth over . Sell for -40 .no Tel S-O-T (0782) 263231 SPECTRUM GAMES FOR SALE. Inclding Mindstoner, Winter Games, Arc Hall of Fame, Minder, Tau Ceti, Dun Darach, Shadow Fire... and more. Prices from .50 to .00. Phone-0929 713629 for more details or write to A Lawton, 8, Cottons Bridge, Preston-on-The-Hill, Warrington, Wa4 4AX, Cheshire. AMSTRAD CPC 464 with colour monitor. 15 months old in excelent condtion and  of software, manuals, cassette holders, speech synthesiser, joystick and dust coverworth  new, sell for . Phone Nathan between 6pm7.30pm on 01-561-8631. FOR SALE 48K SPECTRUM, including Interface 2.2 cartrages, joystick, Currah speech,  worth or original software and lots of magazines Worth f476, a bargain at . Phone Malcolm on 105782) 231 after 4.30pm. Or write to Malcolm Young, Lauderdale Hotel, Lauder, Scotland CBM 64,MUSIC MAKER, SPEECH 64, two joysticks, two C2N data cassette, designer's pencil, plus software worth over , many new titles, Mon-TY On The Run, Beach Head II, Summer Games II, Who Dares Winssil, plus lots more, also many many computer mags, worth over  will accept  0.no Tel London (01) 7236107 before 7p.m. SOLVE THOSE GAMES! complete solutions to Hacker, Goonies, Bruce Lee, Zorro only .20 each. Beat Boulderdash and Bounty Bob .70 each. IAMS/C64 ATARI), Please send s.a.e. and cheque/ postal order to M. Renshaw, 677 London Rd., dHigh Wycombe, Bucks. Also ATARI Strip Poker , Mercenary ,Mr Do!  Dig Dug  cassettes ATARI GAMES TO SWAP. All original cassettes Games include Rescue on Fractalus, Knockout, Ballblazer, Elektraglide, Chop Suey and lots more even better games. Games wanter Level 9 and Scott Adams adventures (not Hulk, Red Moon, E.Isle or dungeon A.). Boulderdash Il etc. List of offers to Alan G. 69 Kirkwood Avenue, Linnvale, Clydebank, Scotland, G81 2SY. MSX SOFTWARE FOR SALE less than half price all originals in mint condition titles include River Riad: Snowball: The Wreck: Hero: Manic Miner: Boulder Dash: Blasser: Mr Wong: lots more, send S.A.E. for full list. All letters answered, A. Thomas, 14 Cardigan Cres, Winch Wen, Swansea SA17ED. West Glam. Wales. PROGRAMS FOR SALE: M.S.X. 64K: Mugger Maurice: Home Budget: Sprite Designer: Blobs: Bug In A Rug: Startrader: Detective: all at f2.99 Spectrum 48K & +: Home Budget: Space Bugs: Charset 88 (char gen. TI-99/4A: too many to list here so nplease send 10p & SAETO: AF Stanley. V Merlin Close, Hainault, Ilford, Essex IG6 3XL. for list WANTED: VTX 5000 MODEM WITH INTERFACE. I am offering 20 origional Spectrum games in exchange. Titles include: Doomdarks Revenge. Sherlock, Knight Lore, Beach Head II, Rambo, Snowball, Fighting Warrior, Way of Exploding Fist and Fantasia Diamond. If interested contact: Mark Gould, 10 Ballsillan Drive, Cars glen, Belfast. ATARI GAMES FOR SALE. Disk titles: Conan, Ghostbusters, Lucifers Realm, Whirlinurd  each. Cartridge titles: Donkey Kong, O' Bert, Pac Man, Galaxians Space Invaders  each also Joysensor  and Tak 2 joystick , phone Melrose 2576. 48K SPECTRUM. Lo profile professional keyboard, DK Tronics joystick interface, joysticks, lots of games (including Sweevo's World) Data recorder, magazines, only , worth . Send cheque to: Chris Jackman, Colmuir House, 3 Albion Terrace, Lexham Road, Litcham, Kings Lynn, Norfolk, PE32 200 ATARI SOFTWARE FOR SALE from only , over 30 titles. Newest titles include, Spellbound, Kikstart, Crusade in Europe. Ninja Send SAE to Mr A Shilstone, 121 Slades Drive, Shislehurst, Kent, BR7 6J2 for list. ATARI 800 XL (4 MONTHS OLD) +1050 Disk drive and XC II Data recorder. Sure Shot, micropro joysticks over  of software. Including Alternate Reality. Fighter Pilot, The Eldilon, Mercenary, etc. + Atari user, discette cases. Everything in mint condition.  o.v.no Tel Nottm. (0602) 630588. COMMODORE 64 software to swap (tape only). Titles include: Split Personalities, Ghost'n Goblins, Green Beret and lots of others. Send your list fast to: Anton Rutten, van Egmondlaan 28. 5583 VB Aalst-Waalre, the Netherlands SPECTRUM GAMES FOR SALE Way of the Tiger--54.00. Ghosts and Goblins .00, West Bank .50, Heavy on the Magic .50. Spindizzy .00, Movie-.50, Bomb Jack-.50, Zoids--.00, Robin of the Wood.50, Yle Ar Kung fu.00, Green Beret-.50, Kung Fu Master-.00, Starstrike and Starstrike 2 .50 and Spy Hunter .50. Send cheque/postal order to: Mark foster, 19 Leighton Avenue, Pinner, Middlesex Ha5 3BW. Plus 25p postage & packing. CBM 64 corespondance wanted I have well over 600 titles. Send letters, lists disks to David Davis. 3 St Johns. Station Rd., Puckeridge, Herts. SG11 1SY. Phone Ware 822277 C64 PENPALS WANTED. Swap software, all latest software plus old titles, new games every week to: Dave Larthwell 21 Crawford Rise, Arnold, Notts NG5 BOF. COMMODORE 64 owner wants to swap software. Prefers disk but tape will do. Have hundreds of titles including all latest and best games. Send your list to, Michael O'Grady. 46 Glendale Drive, Glasheen Road, Cork, Ireland. All letters answered! C-64 USER wishes to swap serious software, wordprocessers, databases, languages, especially utilities, disk only Particularly seeking new U.S. titles Already has a wide range of titles with full documentation. Send list to: John H. Claude, 43 Westgate R.D., Bishopstown, Cork, Ireland. FOR SALE: CBM 64 with hundreds of games, 2 cassette recorders, 3 joysticks, reset switch, manual, A/C combiner switch and magazines (Worth ). The lot for . Tel 01-205 1654 ask for Wen. \"I'M A 15 YEAR OLD CMB 64 QUILL USER who'd like to swap software, Quilled Adventures, Ideas, Tips, Gossip. News etc. with anyone anywhere. Please write now to Derek Dolan, 3 Glenavlin Pk., Chapelizod, Dublin 20. Eire. All letters answered.\" COMMODORE 64 GAMES FOR SALE. All very cheap, titles include: V. Biggles and lots more. Send S.A.E. for the full list to: Christian Besser. 96 Jarrow Road, Chadwell Heath, Romford, Essex, RM6 5RP, AMAZING OFFER! Will swap Spectrum 128, joystick and dual port interface, data recorda, 50 top games and 40 magazines. For either Commodore or Amstrad, no books, recorder, monitor joystick, games required. Ring Waltham Cross 26134 WANTED. CBS Colecovision and Atari cartridges. Good prices paid. Send list to: 29 St Martins Close, Clacton-on-Sea, Essex, Co15 3NJ. Tel: 0255 431067after 8pm. SPECTRUM GAMES FOR SALE CHEAP Dynamite Dan Il .00, Jack The Nipper .00, Bobby Bearing .00, Nexor .00, Heartland .50, some games free! Many more, send SAE for full list: 20 Outram Street, Middlesbrough, Cleveland, TS14EL. \"GET MORE FROM YOUR SINGLE SIDED DISK DRIVE (e.g. CBM 1541). Send for my simple twominute guide .25. Leon Services, Dept G, 45 Elmslac Road, Helmsley. N Yorks, YO6 5AW. COMMODORE 64 software for sale, all originals for less than half price, Friday 13th, View to a Kill Heroes of Karn and many more. Send SAE to R. Hooper Highfield, Heol Dderwen, Tonteg. Mid Glam, CF38 1TD. COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE FOR SALE 30 titles tape only. Worth over f220 will sell lot for -80. Titles include Fight Night. Paradoid, Fist, V. Saboteur etc, will consider swapping Send S.A.E. for list to: H. Patel, 28 St Pauls Ave, Flat 4, Willesden, London NW2 5TD. WANTED! WANTEDI WANTED! Hundreds of penpals to swap Commodore 64 software, interested in all types of softwares, send your list for mine, All letters answered promptly. Send to. Dave, 10n Market Street, Atherton, Lancs, M29 ODN. PHone 0942873211 anytime. "


"\"NOW ALL WE HAVE TO DO 15 RE-CALL EVERY ROBOT... THAT BOUGHTON-BOTICSINCE HAVE MANUFACTURED IN THE LAST 2 YEARS... WAIT A MOMENT... KALLIBER LOOK AT THE SCREENS...FR YOU! STAY WHERE YOU ARE... ... THEY'RE COMING FOR "


"S BER! REPORTS FLOODING IN ROM ALL OVER THE CITY ER THE CITY.., HUNDREDS OF ROBOTS HAVE GONE MISSING IN THE PAST GONE MISSING IN THE PAST HOUR...'T WELL, MELISSA, YOU CAN CANCEL THAT RECALL DIRECTIVE.. \"WE WON'T NEED TO GO LOOKING FOR THEM SERIUCE EXITEMO IND vu TO BE CONCLUDED... "


"pods. Then I was a lad I houses among the pirates? What industry. and it is just superb! occasionally got the can he mean I hear you cry? But many people (journalists? It has a high-res title screen, a 1/2 player V urge to slip on my It comes in two forms. Ripping have abused this service and option and the facility option and the facility to continue where Gran's wooden leg, cover my eye off arcade designs. And using taken pre-release software and you left off on game over-very useful to with a patch and hop around hacked software (utilities and released in onto the hacker practice those high levels. mindlessly, shouting \"Ooh, Arr, games) for release in the UK. network. Nemesis is very, very close to the arcade Jim lad!\" This usually took place How many times have you This is wrong. It is an abuse of original. You pilot a Defender type craft after watching Treasure Island seen games that are coin-op privilege and position. through space destroying enemy bases and on TV. clones under another name? Software houses have finally picking up extra fire power and shields. Look at Punch Out/ seen the light why did it take It's a horizontally scrolling game and Frank Bruno's Boxing them so long? and are your ship tracks around the screen or Who Dares Wins/ beginning to number review pumping out bullets and picking up special Commando. copies they issue. My last observation Commercial pirates are those Pods only materialise when you shoot is based on personal beastly, faceless people who are certain groups of aliens or red coloured experience. Two ripping off the genuine article to attackers leading software make a quick profit. They are The special pods you pick up move a companies in the UK the REAL threat to the industry counter across the bottom of the screen asked me to pass on and hopefully most of them will showing which weapon is available for pirated copies of be caught and prosecuted. addition to your craft. There are six to games to be mastered A new type of commercial choose from-speed-up/missile/doublefor sale. piracy has emerged recently. laser/option and mystery.. tembam This was because Copies of games sent to To choose your weapon you simply press the copies supplied to European distributors have Nor Mon the keyboard when the cursor is Today the urge has gone and them were still protected by the surfaced on the hacker my acting days are over.\"Besides companies that had written network . I had to stop, my Gran didn't them. Perhaps software have a leg to stand on! But Then I bet most of you lot out houses should get piracy still rears its ugly head in there indulge in illegal copying their distribution the computer industry. I can understand you do it but as channels checked I can understand you do Lately we have heard a lot a whole it can't be justified before they cry wolf about piracy and the damaging OK, games are expensive and about piracy in the effects it is having on the games pocket money can only go so far. URI world. But just who ARE these You may not even think of it as it's a crazy, mixed pirates? piracy. But it IS. up world that seems to They fall into four categories You may be cheating the make less sense every school kids, Hackers who do it industry now, but you end up day... finsfoferteile for fun, Commercial pirates who paying for it in the end. Games IF YOU feel that COCCO do it for money and software will be less imaginative and piracy, in whatever houses themselves. there won't be so many of them. form, can be justified or should over the chosen box. Surprised that I rank software Buy an original and you set all be hammered, drop me a line at The aliens and gameplay include the likes the instructions and C+VG. I want to hear from of rolling balls, moving gun turrets, alien the guarantee of a YOU. bases, volcanoes spewing out boulders, (generally!) reliable REMEMBER: The games homing bullets, Smart Pods. The end of a tape or disc. industry needs you! Wave is signified by the Mother Ship Hackers take On the rare occasion I sit down to play a appearing. You have to destroy it to start software that is home micro game for fun linvariably the next level. available and dump it choose a Konani cartridge on my MSX Tonly have one criticism of this game. The to disk for ease of computer scrolling is very jerky. But the game is so storage and access, That really is an accolade seeing that I've good that you get totally absorbed and the They do not make got just about every game possible jerky scrolling just doesn't matter... money out of it. They available to me at home. Not forgetting the I'm sure the C64, Spectrum or Amstrod do it for fun and a six coin-ops! (Stop boasting! Ed versions will not be as good as this version challenge. One of the latest offerings from Konamiis bar the scrolling). If you are the lucky These people are not Nemesis, a faithful copy of the arcade owner of an MSX machine buy this game. original. It is a 128K ROM game (yes 128K) It's what great gameplay is all about... Planski "


"MISTRA CON TODOS LEGEND OF KAGE dhe name Rer-me Imagine Software (1984) Limited 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS. Tel:061 834 3939.Telex: 669977 ma TOM FF Lewed from Taito Corp., 1986, Programmed for (Amstrad, Spectrum, Commodore) ine Software. Export outside Europe prohibited W "


"Massive slite SHOTSNI HITO PAK OMMAND ARVEL RY AVAILABLE ON Spectrum Commodore Amstrad/ Schneider C16 Cassette .95 Commodore Amstrad/ Schneider Disk .95 look out for the next ATT HIT PAK PAK coming soon... Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall WS9 8PW. West Midlands. Tel: (0922)59165 "

