"THE WORLD'S ONLY MAGAZINE FOR HAND-HELDS!  COMPUTER FREE! FREE! ISSUE 16 FEB 1993 SHINOBI II ITS A GG SMASH! HAND-HELD MAG! GAMES DEO GAMES .95 HORDES OF HAND-HELDS! & OSPEEDBALL II O DIG DUG O DINO OLYMPICS O LOONEY TUNES HUNCHBACK ADVENTURE @SUPER SPACE INVADERS INSIDE ISSUE 135 FEB 1993 DM 11.00 S$11.70 $5.95 6000L 68.00 ASCH GAME BOY GAMECHAR LYNXGTI BKU MEGADRIVE SNES: ROAD-RUNNER! AMIGA NEO GEO PC ENGINE MEGA CD ST/PC  Boy GAME GEAR LYNX SUPER NES WHICH PACKS THE BIGGER PUNCH? WINA MASTER SYSTEM MEGADRIVE AND TONS OF GAMES! TREETS Master System I NINTENDO SUPER SHINOBI 2 INSIDE: MEGA CD PREVIEW LEMMINGS MICRO MACHINES PARASOL STARS POWERMONGER SHADOW OF THE BEAST 02 > 91770267\"369055\" "


"IF YOU CANTT STAN E U RO WorD IMS 1992 PARAMOUNT CRES AL G ESEVED Ocean Trademark of Titan Sports, Inc. Hulk Hogan, Hulkamania and Hulkster are trademarks of Marvel Entertainment Group, Int, licensed exclusively to Titan Sports, Inc. All other distinctive character names likenesses, files and logos are trademarks of TitanSports Inc. 1992 All rights reserved. ALACIO DE DEPORTE Once again, Rampage*T and many mo against tag Watch them Match at Mad and skill. Wol the European Whilst publishing his underground comic Jack Deebs has unwittingly created a parallel universe inhabited by cartoon characters known as DOODLES. You are transported into COOL WORLD and seduced, through engaging messages, by the Doodle vamp... HOLLI. Visual jokes and gags punctuate your adventure, as you hop to and fro between reality and COOL WORLD. But Holli's dream is to shed her Doodle indentity... to become a real woman with a real interest in Jack! Her dream could destroy both worlds. Kiss goodbye to Jack... and hello to oblivion! W HULK HOGAN TM &  1992 PARAMOUNT PICTURES ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. AMIGA ATARI ST IBM PC & COMPATIBLES OCEAN SOFTWARE LIMITED, 2 CASTLES TEL: 061 832 663 "


"DU LETHAL WEAPO LARME FAIALE W DUR ORLD WRESTLE FEDERATION LICENSED PRODUCT Ocean ware WWF* Superstars unite for the grand European Join your favourites, Hulk Hogan , Ultimate Warrior as they travel across Europe to square off in the ring is like the Natural Disasters\" and the Nasty Boys\". the squared circle. Follow them to the Grand Finale, on Square Garden in New York City. Test your strength, with your teammate to achieve the ultimate goal ampage Tag Team Tille. A multi-level shoot 'em up based on aspects of all three LETHAL WEAPON movies, You can choose to be either one of the two high fire-power cops... each having his individual strengths and weaknesses! There are many missions to complete including the rescue of a kidnapped girl, the persuit and arrest of drugs runners, finding and arresting a police murderer, plus many more. You choose the level to suit your objectives within the game play li's mean, fast and... LETHAL! LETHAL WLAPON, LETHAL WEAPON 2 and LEINAL WEAPON names characters and all related infila are trademarks of Warner Bros. In IN & 1997 Warner Bros. Inc. All Rights Reserved ea \"EET, CASTLEFIELD, MANCHESTER. MI SIN FAX: 061 834 0650 "


"FREE! THE WORLD'S BEST WEARINDHELDS! ENSS1ST IN FREE! STREETFIGHTER II ADVANCED STRATEGY GUIDE HAND. Please be seated, ladies and gentlemen, for the last installment of the only Streetfighter guide worth reading the CVG Guide to the Streets! To take us out with a bang, we bring you tips on how to handle Guile and Zangief, as well as the tricks you'll need to take out M Bison! VIDEO GA GAMES Sad lads just don't know how we do it, but here at CVG we give you a totally FREE hand-held mag each and every month! This time around, GO! brings you the definitive Review of Shinobi 2 on Game Gear, Lemmings on Game Boy and Dino Olympics on Lynx, to name just a selection of the goodies inside! FREE! INCREDIBLE SUPER MARIO KART 2 BADGE! AND SUPER SHINOBI 2! Don't you wish you could swan about with an EXCLUSIVE Super Mario Kart badge perched proudly on your T-shirt? Wish no longer! For this month, Lord EMAP has gone cash crazy and spent a fortune on the brilliant badge glued to the front of the mag! We've done the double! The biggest Sega sequels since Sonic 2 appear together both on the front cover and inside CVG! Axel's back, and so's Joe Mushashi who's going to win the battle of the follow-ups? You can find out in CVG this month! FREE! ALL-ACTION PULL-OUT POSTER! Great cover on this issue of CVG, isn't it! Don't you wish you could stick that very piccy on your bedroom wall and gaze longingly for days on end? Well now you can 'cos we're giving it away inside this very issue! CVG 004 "


"On a PGL Adventure Holiday You are now entering a parent free zone. BANISH BOREDOM over 70 activities from abseiling to white water rafting, 15 SUPER ADVENTURE BEYOND YOUR AVERAGE HOLIDAY STRETCH yourself Make friends not beds. YOU'VE SEEN THE AD. GET THE BROCHURE (0989) 763511 THE ORIGINAL AND BEST ADVENTURE 1993 Or write to PGL Adventure Holidays 319 Penyard Lane, Ross-on-Wye Herefordshire HR9 5NR |  46875 "


"MEGADRIVE 18 POWERMONGER Bullfrog's brilliant strategy sim makes the arduous trek from Amiga to Megadrive, losing none of its excellence in the move! This Populous-a-like gets the full CVG treatment don't miss it! 22 SUPER SHINOBI 2 The original Shinobi caused a storm, and the sequel on the Megadrive was a stunner! Now here's the 16-bit follow-up does it carry on the tradition? CONTENTS 26 STREETS OF RAGE 2 We were expecting big things from the sequel to Streets Of Rage but 8 WORD UP! nothing prepared us for this! The What's our man Rand got to tell you all about this ish, eh? Only the name of best Sega basher ever is here and CVG's all-singing, all-dancing, all-stripping new editor, that's what? Find out all now check it out! this and more in the finest CVG page called Word Up ever! 36 ROLO TO 11 NEWS THE RESCUE Lots of games, lots of names you'll find 'em all in CVG's fine and dandy News He may be cute 'n cuddly, but Rolo section you can also find out all about the recent Gamesmaster Live! show and the elephant is star of one of the the latest titles coming soon on the Mega CD! best platform romps we've seen! Level upon level of top graphics and 40 YOB'S MAILBAG fab gameplay await players of this The start of a brand new year, and YOB's already got stuck into his bulging bag of great game! wit, charm and sophistication. After which, he'll be taking a look through the dross sent to him by you and adding suitable replies. 47 STREETFIGHTER GUIDE PT 4 And now, the end is near and so we face the final curtain as it comes down on our fabulous four-part Guide to the Streets and what a line-up we've got for you! Guile and Zangief are the boys to watch this month, along with the ultimate tips on beating big boss M Bison! 74 MICRO MACHINES 58 CHEAT MODE The Codemasters driving game that Suave, sophisticated gadabout Paul Anglin's back with more of those things we was a hit on NES is now on tend to call tips'! This time around, he's compiled a cracking Desert Strike soluMegadrive and the game's even tion, as well as those snippets of sneaky cheats sent in by you! What a top boy, better than before! Control a variety eh? of shrunk-dow vehicles across crazy 66 HIGH SCORES landscapes it's great! Many people put on a few extra pounds over Christmas, but not our Sadie she's 76 SHADOW OF been sweating buckets, searching through your high-score entries to find only THE BEAST I the very best. And what has she come up with? Why not take a look and find out? It looks great! It sounds good! But how does this conversion of Psyg98 ARCADE ACTION nosis' sequel to the game that sold the Amiga fare in the gameplay SNK have just released their latest, and possibly greatest, Neo Geo coin-op! It's stakes? called Viewpoint, it's a massively addictive and incredibly good-looking blast and Paul Anglin's yer man to tell you all about it 78 RISKY WOODS 84 ROLO TO THE RESCUE COMP If you go down to the woods today, you're sure of a big surprise -'cos Electronic Arts' Rolo To The Rescue is not only reviewed in this very issue, it's you may just be clobbered by a big also the subject of a stunning compo that could net you not only a Megadrive, but bloke with a huge sword in this also every Megadrive game ever produced by EA! Amiga-to-Sega EA convert! "


"EDITOR GARTH SUMPTER Just what is so brill about working on CVG? It's obvious, isn't it? I mean, all these fab games, all these fab lads and lass and I get to lord it all over them! Come on what else could a lad want? DEPUTY EDITOR PAUL RAND Why on Earth have I been on CVG for so long? I really can't put my finger on it; it's just so...so...so. No, it's great, and you just couldn't find a better bunch of folk. Mind you, I've never been to Bosnia. ART EDITOR JON BILLINGTON CVG's great but why? 'Cos I get to work with the lovely Jenny she doesn't argue, no matter how bad / treat her. And I get to use these fine and groovy Apple Macs; they're great, they are! DESIGNER JENNY ABROOK At the end of the day, how could you not want to be surrounded by all the gorgeous fellers all day, every day! And, when it gets just too much, I can go to the world's finest market Leather Lane! NINTENDO SUPER NINTENDO 21 AMAZING TENNIS Serve and volley with the best of them in this great tennis sim, created by one of the best programmers around, David Crane! STAFF WRITER PAUL ANGLIN CVG's the bizz the TV and radio shows that I'm constantly asked to appear have made me a star! And I get to work with the most courteous Art Editor ever! 30 ROAD RUNNER IN DEATH VALLEY RALLY Meep! Meep! Take control of the Road Runner and make mincemeat out of arch-enemy Wile E Coyote in this graphically brill platform romp! STAFF WRITER STEVE KEEN I get to play all the top games before you lot! And in no other job do you get the chance to abuse your colleagues as much as on CVG! 34 LEMMINGS They're everywhere! The Lemmings take yet more time off from hurling themselves from high places to make an appearance on the Nintendo and how! 71 PARASOL STARS It was a hit on Game Boy in last month's GO!, but what do we think about Ocean's NES conversion of the third in the Taito Bubble Bobble trilogy? MANAGING EDITOR STEVE JAMES I love CVG me it's a top laugh-aminute hoot! Nothing's ever dull, and even though I've got to sit and shuffle invoices all day, just the sight of those happy faces makes it all worthwhile! ADVERTISING MANAGER: Jim Owens SALES Exec: Greg Watson PRODUCTION ASSISTANT: David Nye SECRETARY: Joanne Briar MARKETING MANAGER: Marc Swallow MARKETING EXECS: Sarah Ewing Sarah Hillard PUBLISHER: Garry Williams MANAGING DIRECTOR: Terry Pratt SUBSCRIPTION AND BACK ISSUE ENQUIRIES (INCLUDING GO!): CVG Subscriptions. PO Box 500, Leicester LE99 OAA TEL: 0858 410510 EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISING MADHOUSE: CVG Towers, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU TEL: 071 972 6700 FAX: 071 972 6710 PRINTED BY: Kingfisher Web Ltd, Fengate, Peterborough COLOUR BY: Colourtech, London E2 and PrePress, London EC1 COVER ART: Gary Ward DISTRIBUTED BY: BBC Frontline (c) COPYRIGHT: COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES 1992 ISBN No: 0261-3597 CVG DISCLAIMER: CVG cannot be held responsible for errors, ommisions, misprints, mistakes etc, and would probably deny all knoweldge of said errors were they to be. So there. PC 73 STRIKE GUNNER 80 LEGENDS OF What? Another Super Nintendo shoot VALOUR 'em up! So what's Strike Gunner got Want to see why this role-game from that all the rest haven't? Not a lot, really US Gold is causing a stir the world check out that Review and see for over? There's only one way to find out yourself! by checking out the CVG Review! "


"WORD UP! appy New Year! Here we all are, back after the Christmas break, and what a festive frollic of a time we've had! 1992 saw some massive changes in the computer and video games business, the consoles scene REALLY happened, the PC became widely regarded as 'The Next Big Thing', CD got a toe in the door and, of course, CVG became bigger and better than ever before! But what about '93? What are our predictions for the next twelve months? We reckon Sega and Nintendo will be fighting it out just as much, but with two new machines at the front line! Sega are all set to launch the Mega CD in this country and, if it does as well as we think it should, that might just force Nintendo's hand and hurry them along with the release of their own Super CD unit. The PC will continue to make big strides into the home leisure market, but it's got a real contender in the cut-price and just-as-powerful Amiga 1200 it'll be very interesting to see which machine wins that particular little skirmish! And don't forget the Colour Game Boy much-touted but not even officially in existence, the big N will probably give the hand-held an airing in 1993. And what about the world's best games mag? In the fast-moving market we're in, we can't afford to hang around so we're getting a new editor to kick off the New Year with. His name's Garth Sumpter, he's been in the computer games industry longer than any of us care to remember and he makes a full appearance from next issue, so we hope you wish him the best of luck he'll need it! And we'll be tweaking the pages of CVG in the near future too; so expect to see even more of what you already love very soon indeed! And with that, let me wish you an ultra-happy 1993! PAUL RAND THE NEW KID IN TOWNI WIN OVER  WORTH OF GAMES! Crikey oh blimey! There's a new editor in town next month and he'll be taking the controls of Britain's biggest all-format games flagship. We've not even met him yet but he'll certainly have to have some very special qualities (including a very wide bottom), in order to fit into ex-editor Tim's chair. All we've heard is that he's a long-haired rock and roller and a distant cousin of Blanka and will have more than a couple of shocks in store for us all. But, until he gets here we're just going to have to guess. Unless of course, you think you can help... Commit to paper what qualities the ideal CVG editor should possess. Perhaps he should have the reflexes of a cat so that he can beat Jon at Super Mario Kart, eyes like a hawk so that he can spot the boys as they try to sneak off to get on the Viewpoint arcade machine, or perhaps just a very loud voice so that he can get a word through the team's constant bickering about whose turn it is to go to the shop and score some grub. Just send your designs, pictures and blueprints to: NEW KID IN TOWN, COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. Closing date for entries is the 14th of February, at which time, some priceless Picasso will win its creator, four top games. Oh, and don't forget to tell us what format you want otherwise you'll probably get some Spectrum games... cVG 008 "


"TOO OLD? Are you 18 or over? If so don't waste what little energy you've got left reading this. This is a cashcard account that lets you make the most of your dosh while you're still young and fly enough to enjoy spending it. It has some wicked advantages, such as plastic that gives you 24 hour access to your funds and an interest rate that's totally awesome. So as long as you're 11-17 years old, get yourself (and a tenner) down to your local Britannia branch. Sharpish. Britannia Building Society HIGH INTEREST FOR 11-17 YEAR OLDS 023456 789102345 678 MR DR HUNT ONCE YOU'RE 18, YOU'RE PAST IT. Britannia Building Society, Newton House, Leek, Staffs. ST13 5RG. Interest will be payable net of basic rate income tax or gross, subject to the required registration. "


"> The Action Zone Sve Action Zone WIN F250 WORTH OF GAMES 0839 404047 AMIGA 600 AMGA 1200 CHOOSE BETWEEN THE NEW 36 BIT A1200 OR | THE TRUSTY A600 WIN!!! INFRA RED JOYSTICK OR STREETFIGHTER JOYSTICK Your choice! The control of the arcade machine or the cable free infra red. 0839 404044 0839 404048 WIN THE BEHAVEL MEGADRIVE + MEGA CD + CD GAMES 0839 404042 WIN ALL OF THESE!!! 0839 404041 WIN GAME GEAR MATEOGEMUS TV TUNER 0839 404045 ACTION REPLAY FOR YOUR MACHINE Infinite lives, infinite power, become invincible 0839 404043 WIN WIN WIN STAR TREK VIDEOS Every episode of the origional Series worth over  0839 404049 WIN!!! The mountain bike of your choice upto  0839 404046 | IMS Ltd. POBox 24 Northampion NNIDS C C01 36 (Chroup) 18p per oil (all other films) Forbit: Mulli choiceques lion wui dacid Max Cline 7.5 15: Competion; ind31 103. Pleast, bts sure that you have permision to make his call, "


"BIG NAME GAMES FROM ACCLAIM! NEWS STAR TREKKIN Ripley returns to the Amiga in Aliens 3, Acclaim's conversion of the smash-hit but rather poor final episode in the trilogy. As you can see, the game is moreor-less a straight convert from the excellent Megadrive version and, if programmers Probe get the gameplay right, Amiga owners have something special to look forward to in the New Year the 16-bit Sega version received a hearty CVG HIT!, after all! And while we're on the subject of Acclaim and the Amiga, keep your eyes peeled for the computer version of Krusty's Fun House! Again based on the console versions, the player takes control of Krusty The Clown who's got to rid his funhouse of cute purple rats, with the help of the Simpsons family and some quite bizarre killing machines! We've played the Amiga game and it's a spot-on conversion, with all the graphics and gameplay of the original in other words, you're onto a winner if you get it! Fancy a quick shufty at the latest from Interplay? Not content with cranking out marvellous conversions of French graphics adventures for the console market, they've also come up with their own original title! The Lost Vikings is the name, and it revolves around the fortunes of three Norsemen who've been nicked by aliens and travel through time, solving puzzles to get out of various scrapes. Featuring gameplay not-dissimilar to Mirage's Humans, The Lost Vikings should be with us in the next month or two. But if you're a SNES-owning fan of Kirk and his cronies aboard the Starship Enterprise, then Interplay have something coming in the latter part of '93 that's sure to make you go goggle-eyed and thank your lucky stars that you've got one of the best games machines around. Yup, they're converting the fabulous Star Trek The 25th Anniversary to cartridge! Originally a PC and available now on Amiga, Star Trek on SNES should be a spot-on version of the space-faring classic, mixing Lucasfilm-type adventure with apparently stunning 3D flight 'n fight sequences! It could be the business and we'll be keeping a watch on the game's progress! SAD MEN? NO MAD MEN! MY NAMETS BER You thought the CVG boys had an ounce of sense in them? You were WRONG! This month saw Paul Rand divert his attention from gamesplaying and City Pride shenanigans to help form the EMAP Images Dangerous Sports Club inaugural members Rand himself and ex-CVG Ad Manager Nigel \"Not Tall' Taylor! Off the pair trotted to Cobham in Surrey with a couple of well-dodgy geezers for a morning of madness and we've got the pictures to prove it! Now, bungee jumping isn't the safest pastime in the world, and these lads weren't happy about putting themselves between the wide blue yonder and a very hard concrete car park, but they'd forked out their forty quid a-piece, and there was no turning back. After a cry of *Three! Two! One! Bungee!', it was all over and the daring (or docile, whichever you prefer) duo both agreed that the experience was one worth repeating if you feel the same as this pair, you should seek professional psychiatric help as soon as possible! What next for the EMAP Images Dangerous Sports Club pirhanha juggling? COMPILATION CRAZY! Got a bit of Christmas cash left over and don't know what to spend it on? You could fork out the pennies and purchase this fine and dandy new compilation pack from US Gold! Called Raving Mad, the package contains three nifty little titles; Rodland which was originally from Sales Curve, Millennium's Robocod and Mega Twins from the Goldies themselves. Not only that though, buyers of the set also receive a free game from the Kixx budget label! The one we got in our box was Impossible Mission II not crap. You can get Raving Mad on Amiga and ST, for a reasonable .99 check it out! THE BUNGEE BOYS IN ORDER (L-R): NIGE THE NUTTER, PERILOUS PAUL RAND, GARRY THE FLYING PUNK AND PHEARLESS PHIL. THREE! TWO! ONEI BUNGEE!! CVG 011 "


"TOTALLY NUTA NEWS 10 Here's a game that you may not have heard much of, but we have! It's called Mr Nutz, and it's from Ocean. A platform-based romp, the player guides Mr Nutz the squirrel through the woodlands, getting up to all manner of crazy antics. And how do we know all of this? Basically, because Ken from Ocean can never resist showing us the bloody thing every time he comes to the EMAP office! There's no doubting that this is one seriously well-presented slice of action, with some terrific sprites and very colourful graphics generally. Trouble is, we still haven't got hold of a playable version of Mr Nutz! But don't worry when we do you'll be the first to know, in the form of a CVG Review! MAY BAT'S BACK! FORCE BE WITH YOU Can't wait to see the new Star Wars games X Wing on PC and Super Star Wars on Super Nintendo can you? just to keep your whistle even whetter, Lucasarts have just announced more games based on Luke, Darth and company and they're as hot as you could comfortably manage! Star Wars 3D is on its way to Mega CD and features, funnily enough, threedimensional dog-fighting on a grand scale! Defend Tatooine against Imperial Stormtroopers, take on massive AT-AT walkers on the ice world of Hoth even take on the infamous Death Star attack run! Featuring full-motion video (cripes!), Why can't Batman ever star in a good film? The first one was dark and bland, while the second was...practically the same, except this time round, non-ugly, Kim Basinger was replaced by fit Michelle Pfeiffer. 'So what is probably the question on everybody's lips; well, all this Bat-related nonsense revolves around the imminent release of Batman Returns on the NES and look, here's some hot-off-the-press pics of the game in action! It's a beat 'em up in which you control Batman through a variety of scrolling levels, using kicks, punches and more. The game seems a bit of a giggle, but to be perfectly honest, it didn't seem all that far removed from the conversion of the Turtles coin-op, but with different graphics. Still, we'll find out for sure when we review Batman Returns in an issue coming to you soon! ORIN DINO'S DONE A BUNK! Now here's something which may surprise you! Dino Dini, creator of one of the finest games ever seen Kick Off has left Anco and joined Virgin Games. No great shakes, you might think, but what of the supposedly imminent Kick Off 3? Did the great man manage to complete his latest creation before the big move? And what about the rumours flying around that Dino's first project for his new company is a soccer game? We're following this one could turn out very interesting indeed! CVN 012 "


"TWO OF A KIND THE WINNERS! LICENSED BY Nintendo POPULOUS You are a supreme being with the power to command the forces of nature Earthquake, floods, volcanos and oceans. Power to turn plains into barren rocks and oceans into fertile land with promise of plenty. Limit to your power is your followers, scattered on the worlds throughout the universe. They raise crops, build towns, and multiply thus increasing your power to smite your enemies, the followers of evil. Can you control and increase this power to eventually get rid of the evil. Fourteen different worlds await your conquest. Licensed to IMAGINEER Co., LTD Nintendo ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM PAL VEREIN Productions Lid Nintendo Blistering pace and superb tactical game play has made KICK OFF a legend in computer games world wide. Packed with options like game speed, KIT DESIGN, edit teams and player names, 4 different types of competitions, it provides a wide variety of game play. Action Replay facility lets you enjoy the glorious moments at leisure. Battery back up ensures that the competition results, kit design, team and player data is stored for instant recall. SUPER NINTENDO Original (Nintendo NT SYSTEM DEZE2092 Distributed in U.K. by Anco Software Ltd. Unit 7 Millside Industrial Estate, Lawson Road, Dartford, Kent DA1 5BH U.K. Tel: 0322 287782 Imagine e r SUPER NINTENDO ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM "


"GOING LIVE! or three days in December, the video games industry and its mum shuttled off to the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham and invited the public to experience the greatest games event ever seen! Gamesmaster Live was its name, around seventy-five thousand people packed into the hall overall, and everyone reckoned that the bash was a massive success! Read on and find out who was there and what was happening at the most ambitious video games show EVER! CAN YOU STAND THE EXCITEMENT? ocean ocean doen ocean Everybody who is anybody was in attendance at the show, and the stands they'd built there were impressive, to say the least. Ocean had constructed a gigantic video wall on which they showed snippets from a variety of top movies that they'd licensed over the years, as well as a whole host of games challenges. US Gold (Blend) not only had an arcade full of Streetfighter machines to promote the home computer versions of the cracking coin-op smash, as well as a sumo wrestling mat on which you could battle against a pal, dressed in a rubber sumo suit (!), they also brought along a massive Waltzer-type affair which kept the crowds amused for the duration of the show! Virgin's purpose-built Quazar Lazerdome pulled the punters, as did EA's Road Rash Challenge set-up (especially considering they were giving away  leather jackets to any, one who beat the challenge!). But perhaps the star of the show was the Sega stand which incorporated a six-hundred metre go-karting track! Lumme! GVG 014 "


"MYSTERI GAMES STER MEET THE GANG 'COS THE BOYS WERE THERE! LIE You couldn't have missed the fact that CVG was at the show in a BIG way giant posters proclaiming the fact were dotted all the way around the massive hall! Of course, the boys themselves were there too; for three whole days Rand's wrist was pushed to breaking point with autograph signings! In fact, all EMAP's mags made an appearance Mean Machines, Megatech. NMS, The One, CU Amiga, ST and PC Review all got in on the act! WHAT DO POINTS MAKE? CVG REPROBATE JON BILLINGTON MIXES IS WITH MEAN MACHINES' OZ AND A SMALL SCOUSER. IT'S BUSY STAND ACTION AHOY! LOADS OF YOU CAM AND CHATTED WITH US IT WERE GRAND! Gamesmaster Live saw winners galore walking away with stacks of prizes! Ocean gave one lucky ducky a copy of every single game the Manchester lads had ever produced together with every piece of hardware they'd ever written for! Virgin Games handed out a topof-the-range mountain bike to the successful finalist in the Mick And Mack Global Gladiators Challenge, compered by none other than CVG's very own Paul Rand! And speaking of CVG, we handed out the odd goodie or two as well; Scottish superstar Glen Urghart came all the way from Chilly Land to pick up his prize of a unique set of Streetfighter Il badges which he'd won in the compo which we ran with the help of Comet and The Sun, and the England team, led by ex-CVG Ed Tim Boone, sauntered off with an incredible trophy for beating the opposition in the CVG/Comet Streetfighter Championship! The spawny gets. IT'S THE GAMESMASTER STAGE! AND THERE'S DOM D, OVERSEEING THE STREETFIGHTER CHALLENGE! STACKS OF STARS! ExHIBITOR As well as the real stars the CVG boys a few minor celebrities found they just couldn't keep away from Gamesmaster Live! Gladiators large-person Shadow put in an appearance for a spot of muscle-flexing, while the Karaoke competition (which, sadly, Randy couldn't find time in his hectic schedule to attend he apologises profusely) was presided over by late-night TV unhappy person Nino Ferretto a free game to the first person who can tell us the name of the kids' TV show he made his name in. Both of these lads were totally overshadowed, however, by the appearance of none other than the big star of Gamesmaster Live Colin Curly! The jolly Quavers character showed his face to take on the public in the Pushover Challenge and lost! Oh yeah, Dominik Diamond was there as well, as well, along with his Patrick Moore-lookalike chum, the Gamesmaster, to commentate on the various gaming challenges on the Gamesmaster Live stand a huge reproduction of the TV show set! WHO'S THIS FAMOUS PERSONALITY, WITH A UNIQUE BOXED SET OF CVG STREETFIGHTER BADGES? WHY, IT'S GLEN URQHART OF COURSE, RECEIVING HIS PRIZE FROM CVG SLACKER PAUL RAND! SAD CELEBRITY SPECIAL! US GOLD Perhaps the saddest sight during the whole three days of Gamesmaster Live, apart from Paul Anglin, was the supposed appearance of Kim Basinger on the Ocean stand to promote their new Cool World game. Much interest was shown by the CVG boys, until they realised that 'Ms Basinger' was actually a look-a-like who bore more of a resemblance to Kim Wilde! Still, the kids didn't mind especially when she starting hurling out masses of freebies into the audience! A TRIO OF TOP CVG-READING BOYOS JAMIE, CARLTON AND TAFF FROM BIRMINGHAM, TAKE A BOW! 015 GVG "


"GVG FEATURE BLOW ME! IT'S THE MEGA CD!sega's new hardware creation, the Mega CD, is almost upon us after what seems like decades of waiting! Just how is this bulky box of tricks going to change the face of home entertainment as we know it? What are the games going to be ke   yo going to have to flog the deeds to your house to buy one? MEGACO MEGA CD SEGA HIGH QUALITY COMPUTER CD-ROM PLAYER FAB FEATURES AT A PRICE the last of the -40 game, for one. And obviously, because of the One of the biggest improvements is a new graphics chip which vast amounts of memory available on one compact disk, games are allows sprite rotation and expansion in much the same way as that going to be far bigger than you could ever hope to get from a seen on the Super Nintendo. One CD has the capacity of over 660 cartridge. Not only that, because it's a CD, you're going to be able to cartridges, so naturally most of the games are going to have massive hear music, sound effects and speech the like of which has never intros to fill that extra space! And it's not just going to be new games before been heard from a cartridge-based game. either; Sega are rumoured to be producing a range of re-releases on CD at a price of only twenty quid per disc! In Japan, the Mega CD comes bundled with a compilation disk of four games previously available only on cartridge form, which include Golden Axe, Streets READY disc ACCESS of Rage and Columns, so expect to see a similar package when the unit is released over here. One piece of information we can't give you at the moment is how much the whole kit-and-caboodle is going to cost-Sega haven't decided on a price yet, although their original estimates were between  and . VISIT FAST? HOW IT ALL FITS Six mega-bits of information can be loaded into a RAM buffer at any The Megadrive has an expansion port on its side which allows it to one time about as much code as that stored on a single Megadrive slot into the top of the Mega CD so no nasty wires trailing around to cart. As the information is presented it is deleted and replaced with confuse Mum and Dad. On top of that, Sega already have plans to new data, helping to slash waiting time. Minimum access time is 0.8 release new versions of the Megadrive and Mega CD! Don't expect of a second and the maximum is 1.8 secs not bad at all, compared any changes other than cosmetic though; it's being done so that the with some CD-ROM units around at present, CD will sit on the side of the console. But why go out WHAT ABOUT THE SOFTWARE? and buy the So that's a little rundown on' the machine; but what about the games? Mega CD when From what we've seen, Mega CD buyers are going to be in for a suryou've got prise in that department! Sega have access to all apparently spent something in the those lovely region of five million dollars building Megadrive their own studios in the States to procarts? CD's are duce the sort of live-action cheaper to mangob-smackers that everyone is ufacture than expecting from CD-ROM so these cartridges, so guys obviously mean business! we should see "


"FEATURE CVC SEWER SHARK A visually stunning full-motion video game, featuring real actors we even recognised one of them! It has to be said though, it didn't look as though there was much scope for interaction. BATMAN RETURNS Now here's a gme that's definitely got a lot of gameplay in it. Batman Returns has you in the driving seat of the Batmobile, hurtling through masses of locations blasting baddies-a-plenty. This game really shows off the Mega CD's sprite han dling capabilities, gone are the jerky, lumbering roadside objects seen in Megadrive cartridge-based titles, replaced instead with the smoothest expansion this side of the Super Nintendo's Mode 7! MAKE YOUR OWN VIDEO Technically very impressive. The title says it all; create your own music video using live action footage. Sega have licensed those wear-their-clothes-backwards rapping kids Kriss Kross, so unfortunately you'll have to put up with their music. 001010 nemecko Antoylar al Mil Ditresu Bedroom 2 NIGHT HUNTER Looking like a cross between Nightmare on Elm Street and Cluedo (?), the plot seems to revolve around a group of college girls in their underwear) trapped in a house infested with vampires. Each room contains hidden cameras that allow you to spy on the actresses hurrah! Rompien DeLNO LUOROOR DE Possible Captured COBRA COMMAND This one looks to be more the sort of thing gamers are after. Cobra Command looks like a Japanese cartoon, in which you pilot a futuristic helicopter through the streets of New York, blowing up other helicopters and tanks. Graphics are great if there's some gameplay in there this could be a real treat! 06906 MEGA And if that little lot isn't enough for you, Sierra are supporting the machine by converting a goodly amount of their PC software for it who needs a hard drive when you've got around 600 meg of memory free?. And if you're still not happy, Lucasfilm are producing the first Monkey Island game to Mega CD! They haven't announced any other conversions, but we've seen CD versions of Loom complete with stacks of reat speech and gorgeous music, so it'd be a fair bet that you'll be seeing more high-quality graphic adventures from George's boys on the Sega format! PLAYER AUDIO AND VISUAL INTELLIGENT TERMINAL HIGH GRADE MULTIPURPOSE USE "


"LIE REVIEW MEGADRIVE BATTLE SIM BY EA .99 Where does a general keep his armies? Up his sleevies, of course! Low-quality jokes aside, there's very little to keep the strategists happy on the Megadrive until now. EA's follow-up to Populous, which first appeared on the Amiga, has a slightly more down to earth feel than its deity-controlling forebear. Rather than the lofty position of God, you are merely the ruler of a race of war-hungry soldiers, out for a good time and a bit of sword play. Your job is to point them in the right direction, and guide them to total domination in a world of feuding generals and massive armies. There's a planet full of islands to conquer, and a host of baddies to bash and goodies to befriend. Go for it the power could be yours! THERE ARE SOME GREAT STATIC SCREENS IN POWERMONGER FOR YOUR DELECTATION, ALL IN KEEPING WITH THE THEME. THE VILLAGE PEOPLE The ferocity of your soldiers' attacks, pillages and how many locals they conscript is dependent on their commander's posture setting. This is controlled by clicking on the sword icons at the side of the screen. If it's set to low, the troops will be a bit soft, avoiding killing people wherever possible and leaving them plenty of food when they raid. The medium setting bypasses the men's discrimination circuits and, as far as they're concerned, anyone who gets in their way deserves death. Finally there's maximum posture, which basically instructs the boys to slaughter everything they come across, steal theire food and have a jolly good laugh at the same time. EUREKA! I found Powermonger very difficult to get into. The temptation is to send your men charging into battle, pillaging the villages and crushing anyone who objects to your presence. Unfortunately, the game doesn't work like this and there are many slow periods as you wait for new weapons to be developed or for the enemy to lower their guard. That said, this is far more involving and playable than its predecessor, Populous. Conquering the later levels requires plenty of planning and the occasional risk. Populous was a much more basic affair so this knocks the spots off of that with it's depth of play. It's a pity Populous 2 hasn't been converted yet. If you can handle squinting to see the tiny graphics, and fancy a spot of megalomaniacal sword grinding, this is well worth picking up. STEVE KEEN GVG 018 Often you start a level facing seemingly-insurmountable odds, with your twenty or so men facing hundreds of enemies. In this situation it pays to work slowly. Some villages contain workshops which can be used to develop better weapons, and finding one of these is essential. To begin with, every soldier on the island is armed with nothing more than a crappy little knife. So if you can beat them in the technology race and discover pikes and cannons, your men will capable of steaming through enemy ranks without picking up so much as a scratch. THE GRAPHICS DON'T LOOK MUCH COP ENLARGED BUT THEY'RE BRILLIANT REALLY, HONEST! KILL, DEATH, MAIM The game world is divided into loads of small areas which have to be conquered individually. To begin with they consist solely of small, unprotected villages that are all-too happy to switch loyalties to you in the face of several hundred armed soldiers. After a few easy conquests, rival armies start appearing with similar goals to yours. When two armies meet they completely forget about the embattled civilians and set upon each other. Once one side loses a few soldiers and the odds start stacking up against them, the best course of action is to run like hell. Fortunately there are commands to accommodate this, although once an army scatters the remaining soldiers tend to wander off to their home villages, so they have to be recruited all over again. "


"REVIEW CVG BaBy, Although Populous is an undoubted masterpiece, loved and admired by thousands, I've never been one to really get into it it all seemed just a little bit too detached from reality. Powermonger, on the other hand, is much more my cup of tea. It uses the same graphic style as its prequel, which works very well and allows a lot to happen on-screen at once. The icon control system employed in Powermonger is much more user-friendly than that seen in Populous, even though there are more icons there they're just so much more easy to figure out. Rather like the game overall, really whereas you had to wade through the Populous manual before you had a hope of working out what to do, I was able to just pick up Powermonger and go! What we're basically talking about here is death and glory on a grand scale and there are so many islands to conquer you're not going to complete the game in a hurry. Recommended to everyone who wants a bit more 'oomph' in their console games. PAUL RAND STRATEGY SKILL THIS ICON IS GET FOOD SEIS DESISSE GREAT PRESENTATION IS EVERYWHERE AND DETAIL IS OF GREAT IMPORTANCE. SILENCE OF THE LAMBS Someone, somewhere once said an army marches on its stomach, and that's true in Powermonger. Your troops have to be kept well fed, otherwise they nip off back to their villages. There are several ways to gain food to keep the lads happy; during autumn, just after the harvest, barns are usually stocked to bursting point, so it pays to send your troops to nearby villages to relieve them of their stores. Another good food source are the sheep which mill around most lands point your men towards one and they'll happily reduce it to so many doner kebabs. NOW THOSE LITTLE PEOPLE WILL PAY! GENERAL ACCIDENT ACTION REFLEXES you have GEEN SEFEATEC Commanding armies is a big job at the best of times, so it's fortunate that you can off-load some of your soldiers onto other generals. Although you start off on your tod, any enemy generals defeated in battle, faced with the alternative of execution, choose to join your ranks. When you've recruited one they can be given control of some troops then sent out on a conquering spree themselves. Alternatively they can be employed as spies; in this role they skulk off to an enemy village and relay vital information on troop movements. This is a risky business, as the penalty if caught is on-the-spot execution. GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE % 89 85 % 92 % 90 CVG HIL GVG 019 "


"WIN SUPER NINTENDO WIN SUPE MENU WIN A SUPER NINTENDO AND  WORTH OF GAMES JUST CALL 0839 99 44 95 HUNDREDS OF RUNNER UP PRZS GAME BOY WIN A GAMEBOY RIGHT NOW! CALL 0839 99 44 96 WIN A SEGA MEGA DRIVE PLUS  WORTH OF GAMES! CALL 0839 99 44 97 WIN YOUR TOP TEN SEGA or NINTENDO GAMES FAVOURITE For any System Call Now on 0839 99 44 98 Call Charges: Calls are charged at 36p per min cheap rate and 48p per min all other times. Make sure you ask your parents permission before you call. Maximum call cost .40, maximum call length 5 mins. Multiple choice competition. For further information & list of previous prize winners write to Awesome PO Box 1650 B1 1AA. Nintendo, Mario Brothers, Gameboy, Super Nintendo, Sega, Sega Megadrive are all registered trademarks of their respective companies. We are not related to or endorsed by them. "


"AG GIE REVIEWS ry SUPER NINTENDO SPORT SIM ABSOLUTE ENTERTAINMENT $39.99 A MAZING ENNIS!  emember Wimbledon? It's that delightful place in London where it rains for two weeks solid in the summer and some bloody Yank always takes that lovely cup away with him. Okay, so this isn't a Wimbledon game but it's all tennis, So what's the problem? Amazing Tennis puts you in the shoes of a young hopeful in the world of spongy balls and ninety-year old umpires. You start off as a sad man and have to move your way up the ranks as quickly as possible. So pull on yer shorts and remember the golden rule of tennis that nice umpire is always right GRAAPAVINGG There are three different types of surface to play on hard, clay and, of course, lawn. There is actually more of a difference between surfaces than you'd imagine; the main one being the amount that the ball bounces on each. On a hard surface the ball will come off the surface very fast, making it a real pain to hit. Clay is the exact opposite and will slow the ball down_hideously, which makes for a much more technical game. Lawn gives the best of both worlds; it's fast but not that fast. IT'S ALL PART OF THE GAME The most fun part of Amazing Tennis, as with most sports sims these days, is the two player option but that's not the only style of play by a long chalk. There's also the tournament and a head-to-head with any of the SNES-controlled opposition. The tournament pits you against better and better players until you get knocked out or win the championship, the only bummer being that there's no password feature to continue when you switch off. THANKS... ..to Shekhana Consoles (081340 8565) for the Review cartridge. F locker Amazing Tennis really had it's work cut out if it was ever going to beat the current Super Nintendo king of sport sims, Super Tennis. It gets an incredible head start, with some of the most realistic graphics seen on a game of this type, but hey kids, as Aswad once said, \"Beauty's only skin deep\". Amazing Tennis manages to keep up its impressive start by coming through with very realistic gameplay and a wealth of different shots to play the timing of your swing has been captured perfectly to give tons of scope to improve your game by changing when you swing. The game lacks that special something to take it to the dizzy heights of its fabulous forefather, but an excellent piece of raquet action nonetheless. REPLAYS  INSTANTLY Amazing Tennis is the latest in a long line of sports games that has made use of the action replay option. The one seen in Amazing Tennis works a little different to most the R and L buttons act as a rewind option, and it automatically replays at slow motion. To call up a replay at any point in the game, just push the appropriate button and hey presto! PAUL ANGLIN STRATEGY SKILL CVG GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE % oo % % 88 GVG 021 ACTION REFLEXES CVG "


"LUE 3 PAGE REVIEW MEGADRIVE PLATFORM 39 SHINOBITO BY SEGA .99 SUPER =999 22 89330 2-999 -3 2560 loe Mushashi isn't really the kind of guy you would like to cross swords with, as it were. He's been known to slice and dice the odd ninja at the drop of a hat and doesn't think twice about dishing out a fair sprinkling of Ninja magicrelated grief. Considering all this, it's a bit surprising that the Neo Zeed have put themselves in his firing line by invading the world. Silly people, eh? The Neo have taken over eight parts of the world, divided them all up into sub-levels and stuck a huge nasty boss at the end of each one. Well, our friendly sword-wielding ninja guy is having none of this, so he's took out his best sword, cleaned up his climbing boots and trotted off to kill some bad guys. Ain't war hell? BEEN AROUND THE WORLD Seeing as the Neo Zeed have taken over eight different parts of the world you can expect to see some pretty different scenarios. The action commences in an underground cave with lots of waterfalls and other such delights, then the action moves to a factory where Joe must dodge a few crushing machines and the odd conveyor belt. Later on you can expect to battle through such scenes as a huge airship, a genetic laboratory and later, the despicable temple of the Neo Zeed themselves. TOOLS OF DEATH CORROR ORODDARDOOR This must be one of the most eagerly awaited sequels in a long time. If this could go anywhere near matching the brilliance of the original Sega we're onto a winner. The question is does it? Errm no not really. As good as Super Shinobi 2 is it just doesn't have that awesome mix of action and graphical excellence that the first one was so full of. The graphics look a little better with some really topper backdrops and Joe himself has had a bit of a facelift and been given Ultimate War rior type arm-ties. Once again the music is absolutely superb with some really hard thumping rock tracks and some brilliant effects. Game play has been made a little more involving with some new moves and other treats but there's just something missing to make it a classic. As it stands Super Shinobi 2 is a very good game which is worth getting but you shouldn't expect to see the original beaten. Joe's main weapon is his ninja shurikens. These can be just thrown liberally around or, if you pull off a somersault and throw them at the same time, you can chuck a barrage of eight at a time. You can start the game with a maximum of ninety shurikens, but you'll have to go carefully with them and collect as many as you can, but if you're clever and can remember how you can use the cheat from the original you'll get yourself infinite shurikens. Good, eh? cvG 022 PAUL ANGLIN "


"REVIEW GUG ALL THE RIGHT MOVES Young Joseph has certainly been in training since his last outing, having managed to learn a stack of new moves to help him in his quest for, erm, killing people. Shinobi can now perform a double jump (a bit like that seen in Super Ghouls and Ghosts), cling to the wall so that you can climb up it, or you can swing from the ceiling in a Tarzan-esque manner. All these moves are very simple to pull off and are just a case of some nifty hand movements. The som ersault has remained unchanged from the first game, though. 6 LIFE: PUURI E999 -1 34810 LIFE: v=999 -3 72190 A MOST EXCELLENT GAME... There's no denying that Super Shinobi is a high-quality game with some incredible effects, especially when the ninja holds his sword up to the heavens and is drenched in purple ice, lightning, electrical US) energy and the like, but the back-drops, however well drawn, are very plain. Animation of the massive main sprite is also excellent, especially when he swings from the rooftops, and the guardians are awesome in size, detail and dangerousness. The tunes are tops too, so what's the problem? As platform adventures go, it's just so average. There's a real lack of baddies and, although the man is armed to the teeth, he seems to be all dressed up with no one to slice and dice. I'll stick to the recent Game Gear offering for my kicks! STEVE KEEN LIFE 1999 2 165 TAKE YOUR PICK -999 A-4 999 There are a stack of pick-ups to be had in Shinobi's land of wonderment and they're all of great use to your quest. All pick-ups are hidden in brown crates, and to get them you simply smash them with your sword and walk over them. The three most common collectibles you'l find are extra points, extra lives and the odd bit of magic lying around here and there. As in all his previous adventures, the boy Mushashi is well stocked up on his Ninja magic. This time he has five different types and here they are! 9999 = 4 14 Mijin: This sees Shinobi plant his sword in the ground and commit Hari Kiri! Although this takes away one life it causes huge damage to anything on-screen. 999 1-3 575, Fushin: Shinobi disperses his weight, which allows him to jump higher and faster. 999 -4 ikazuchi: When called upon, the magic of Ikazuchi creates a wall of lightning around Shinobi which protects him for up to four hits. Kariu: By calling upon the power of magma from deep in the earth. Shinobi can create walls of fire. Hakuriu: The power of the white dragon reduces the temperature, thus turning all the baddies to ice but the effect doesn't last long. GVG 023 "


"BUG REVIEW the Revenge of SHINOBI GUARDIAN GUYS PRESS START BUTTON 1992 SEGA Super Shinobi 2 carries on the trend set by the original by coming up with some massive bosses. The first endlevel baddy looks very reminiscent of the first one in the original game, but he's got more weapons and is dead hard, so who really cares? The second boss looks amazingly similar to Gazoo from the Flintstones, but he's a lot harder. From here the baddies go from difficult to nigh-on impossible and you'll be up against such things as a big mutated head and even the Neo Zeed themselves! Ninja antics in downtown city central WOW! Super Shinobi 2's been given a right boost with some extra moves, including gripping to the walls and ceilings, turning our master into a veritable Spiderman! The old ones have made a welcome return too, so there's no reason why this game shouldn't be a classic like the first! Well, to some extent that's not the case. The animation and sound are the dog's breakfast, but the game-play is not radically any different to the previous offering. Not that that's a bad thing, but you do come away from the game with the feeling that you've done it all before. If you've never had your mitts on the original Super Shinobi saga before, then this sequel is definitely the one for you this is a very good game. But if you're expecting a real stunna, wildly different from the first game, you could be left feeling a little flat. PAUL RAND SHINOBI KID IN SHADOW DANCE SHOCKER The Shinobi series has taken more twists and turns than possibly any other game before it. The saga began way back in '87 with the release of Shinobi the arcade game. This was a massive hit in the arcades and was then converted onto almost every home format known to man, with the PC Engine version being one of the best. The sequel came into being on the Megadrive; Revenge of Shinobi was an even bigger hit than the original and helped to sell many a 16-bit Sega. Then came a third Shadow Dancer. This appeared in British arcades at the turn of the decade and, unlike the previous two, was nothing very special. The inclusion of Joe's dog was a bit of a laugh, but that was about it. This was also later converted to the Megadrive and wasn't too hot on that, either. So now we have Super Shinobi 2 or should that be Shinobi 3? Or Revenge of Shinobi 3? Or Shadow Dancer 8? Does anyone know? Does anyone care? Fyyy 751 +999 54 STRATEGY SKILL CVG % 89 GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE % CVG 024. ACTION REFLEXES CVG "


"New. For your SUPER NINTENDO New. For your SUPER NINIENDO New. For your ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM TEENAGE MUTANT HERO 042 NAM. Gehen Sie mit auf Shredders grauenvolle Zeitreise. Direkt von dem zweiten Spielhallenhit nonstop zu Ihnen nach Hause. Dies ist Konamis heiestes Turtles Spiel aller Zeiten! Nintendo SUPER NINTENDO PAL VERSION IN ORIGINAL ORIGINAL The ever villainous Shredder has sent one of his evil androids to steal the Statue of Liberty. The turtles have to defeat Shredder and rescue Lady Liberty from his evil clutches in six huge levels of Arcade Action. As they attempt to put an end to Shredder he knocks everyone into an activated Matrix Translocation Beam sending everyone hurtling back through time. Can the turtles defeat the host of historic hooligans as they fight their way back to 1992, to the final showdown with Shredder. GAMELINK SAME BOM RPHC RAPIE 02 mm? KRITIS KONAMI MegaVideoGameFun CURSULLE F B PREUSSKARTE SLASH DDD GAME BOY GAME BOY Original Nintendo Seal of Quality Konami is a registered trademark of Konami Co. Ltd. Teenage Mutant Hero Turtles and the distinctive likeness thereof are registered trademarks and copyright 1991 by Mirage Studios Exclusively licensed by Surge Licensing Inc. Turtles in Time is a trademark of Konami. Distribution: Bandai UK Ltd. (UK). Unit 26/27. Fareham Industrial Park, Fareham, Hants PO 16 8XB "


"GVG cve 3 PAGE REVIEW MEGADRIVE SHOOT EM UP BY SEGA .99 STREETS O TOW! Get a load of this! Is this an arcade quality beat 'em up or what? When the words on everyone's lips seems to be Streetfighter 2, this one's kinda crept up on us. Sure, we knew it was coming and everyone thought that the original Streets Of Rage was an absolute monster, but nothing had prepared us for this! I mean this game deserves to come complete with its own arcade cabinet and monitor, it's just devastating! We won't bore the socks off you with plot and storylines, 'cos let's face it, when you've got a product this hot who the hell cares! Get down to it! PTASTIC, MAE! JE 2492 Streets of Rage 2 is without doubt the finest scrolling arcade beat 'em up on any format Neo Geo included! Imagine taking Streetfighter 2 and dumping the characters into a horizontally-shifting arcade extravaganza and that's basically the result you get with this game. Sega say that there are 20 moves for each character and I doubt that, but what is certain is that there are more moves than you've ever seen anywhere else on a Megadrive game. There are three difficulty settings on offer and I'd recommend you give Easy a wide berth or you'll spoil your enjoyment by finishing too quickly. There's so much to do and so many combinations of characters and fighting techniques, the game will grow on you more each time you play. Music and spot effects are stunning, the animation is bladder-breaking and the variety and presentation put everything else that's come before it so far in the shade they'll need a map to find their way out again! Make sure that this is the absolute next cartridge you buy or you'll be weeping into your pillow for months to come! VAMPIRIC OFFERINGS Let's go straight for the jugularStreets Of Rage 2 is not your every day, run-of-the-mill sequel this baby is almost an entirely new game. The hard-hitting street brawlers Axl and Blaze make a welcome return, along with two totally new characters! Max is ae massive wrestler type; he packs in more power than Motorhead on overdrive! And Skate, Adam's brother from the original, travels everywhere on roller skates which he uses to get into fights with lightning speed and zip out again unhurt! All the characters are available for selection, so as you can guess, you'll really be spoilt for choice TEACH A DOG NEW TRICKS The guys haven't been idle since the last adventure and they've all learned a series of special moves to delight and amaze. Each character has twenty, count 'em, forms of fisticuff attacks! Axl's managed to learn the Flaming Punch that transforms his fists into scorching torches, as well as an incredible five-hit combination ending in a fearsome upper-cut both straight out of Street Fighter 2! Blaze has her incredible back-flips and can shoot bolts of plasma, fire-bolt style, from her fists! Max has a charging run like a locomotive, that knocks everyone bandy, not to mention his double-handed spinning hammer-punch very deadly and Skates performs a flying roll and headbutt, along with a head-pummelling move whereby the young scamp jumps on a thug's shoulder and smashes him about the head! What a BOY! CVG 026 STEVE KEEN "


"REVIEW GVA GX53 t's sequel central this ish! Just like Super Shinobi 2, Streets Of Rage 2 has been hyped until breaking point but, unlike the ninja's second coming, the hack 'n' smack sequel has come out looking immensely better than the original! Streets Of Rage 2 packs a whopping sixteen megs of memory yes, as much as Streetfighter 2 and every little byte has been used to full effect. Sega have left nothing to chance with this cart everything about it has been polished until you can see your face in it! The hyper-violent gameplay grabs you by the throat from the very moment you pummel your first bad guy, and don't expect it to end there. Although the game's too simple on Easy setting, put it on Normal or Hard and you've got a hell of a challenge! The duel mode is a bit of a laugh and, although it provides no real challenge to Streetfighter ll, it certainly gives you a good chance to polish your sad scrapping skills. One of the funniest aspects of the game is Skate's special move; it's great to see a cheeky young shrimp leap onto someone's shoulder and whack seven bells out of them (watch out, Randy (Try itRandy))! After the slight disappointment that is Super Shinobi 2, this is just the kind of thing that Sega need! PAUL ANGLIN PALLET PARADISE WEAPON TASTIC MATE! The scrolling action takes place mainly from left to right, Final Fight-style but, on some stages, head-cracking takes place up and down diagonally across the screens too. The scenes change dramatically, the normal ghettos are Backdrops are brilliantly detailed and home to most of the action, but there are seedy pool halls, sawdust arenas, packed with plenty of interaction, dingy fog-filled warehouses and even a pirate ship to kick ass in! All these with objects such as vending! scenarios give rise to loads of different weapons that players can pounce machines, tables and barrels that upon for extra defence; dice opponents up with knives and swords and break shatter whenever anyone goes near skulls with lead pipes. All can be wielded by hand or chucked at opponents them. Simultaneous two-player great stuff action allows even more variety, as friends can grab and swing off each other for extra-lethal attacks! The screens are literally jam-packed with different enemy sprites, with punks, thugs, bikers, pirates and massive guardians all exquisitely drawn and boldly coloured. There's a huge Mohican bloke that comes at you on one stage who's even bigger than Max, and an electro whip-wielding pain mistress who lashes you into submis sion on the earlier levels! These are the chaps and chapesses that you should save your special moves for, as whenever you let loose, you eat up some of your own energy as you rob your opponents of theirs. SELECT PLAYER SKALEC7770 AXEL SLAZE GVG 027 "


"GVC REVIEW ONE ON ONE TWICE THE FUN As if packing in the action like sardines in a matchbox wasn't enough, the absolute crowning glory is the inclusion of a 'Duell round, that lets two players go head-to-head with any of the characters over all eight locations. You can use all your moves in a Streetfighter-type brawl to the death and even pick up the various weapons you'd find in the game, depending on the scenario you choose to fight in! Awesome! The 'Street Fighter 2 vs every other beat 'em up debate' is set to rage for months to come until the Megadrive version comes out any-road but in the realms of arcade scrolling fight fests the big Sega now has a real champion of champions! No messing Streets Of Rage 2 is the best fun you'll have knocking pixels about the screen outside of the Streetfighting arena. The whole package drips class, from its brilliant presentation and fantastic characters to the immense handling by the machine of the huge sprites and sheer weight of baddies and heroes onscreen at any one time. And does the game suffer from any loss of speed? Does it hell! The action never slows down for even a nanosecond, which is incredible considering the Megadrive's lack of custom chips. Sega have come up trumps with this beauty definitely one cart I'd sell my collection of used tomato ketchup bottles for. And that's saying something! PAUL RAND COME OUT FIGHTING There are six rounds for the heroic duo (or uno!) to fight their way across. The action starts off Downtown, before moving slowly towards the Bridge with a ton of bodies left behind. Things heat up further down at the Amusement Park and Stadium With all the moves you've got to master, you may think that the control systhen it's onto the Pirate Ship for tem is going to be as complicated as the Hubbel Telescope Users Manual!baddy.bashing ahoy, before jumping! But it's actually stupidly easy to figure out button A is reserved for the first into the Jungle and hitting the Enemy special move, whilst hitting A and double-pressing left or right activates the Headquarters to rescue Skate's second. B is reserved for the basic jabbing and kicking attacks that don't use brother. Why couldn't he just have up any energy and C makes you jump. Easy, huh! stayed at home, all safe and sound? PADDING IT OUT! OBSE ER AS STRATEGY CVG SKILL % 85 GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE % 90 CVG 028 ACTION REFLEXES "


"THE QT ProPad IT'S SO HOT... SEMI-AUTO AUTO OFF AUTO FIRE SELECT START SN ProPad It's COOL,,,! AVAILABLE FOR BOTH NINTENDO SNES AND SEGA MEGADRIVE  8-Direction thumb control  Multiple fire buttons Autofire  See-thru casing  Slow motion  Rapid fire mode SUGGESTED RETAIL PRICE .99 INC. VAT. Another winning product from ... SPECTRA -VIDEO TEL. 081-902 2211 Available from BEATTIES BOOTS. CURRY'S DIXONS  FUTURE ZONE . GAME. HMV  W.H.SMITH  TANDY. VIRGIN . and all the Best Computer Shops "


"SUPER NINTENDO CRETINUS CARNIVORI CAUTION MEEP! MEEP! Wile E rides the PLATFORM obligatory Acme Rocket... usually into a brick wall! BY SUNSOFT $54.99 Death Valley Rally features the smartest cartoon graphics you've ever seen! The huge rocky landscapes featured in the cartoons are perfectly recreated For years the carnivorous Wile E and the speedy bird tears along in a blur of speed, whilst his body remains Coyote has been pursuing the stationary, just like on the telly. Skidding to a halt, Road Runner can turn his heels up on rodents, scorpions, snakes and the like to squash them under Road Runner across scorching his feet. If you fancies the more direct approach he can peck the blighters deserts without so much as a with super-fast beak action too. Fierce! Don't worry it's only a 1000 ft drop! feather to chew on for all his efforts! The traps and devices that he buys to counter Road Runner's incredible speed get even more ridiculous you'd think he'd have the sense to invest his dosh in a fridge freezer and a couple of dozen frozen chickens! Caution never was one of the Coyote's strong points! A MOST Gobsmackerama! There EXCELLENT Most of the energy-robbing obstacles can be pecked out of your path. Cacti, are 20 levels of Road (GAME... spikes, scorpions, cake throwing monkeys and bats are easily disposed of if Runner antics to feast Not! you see them in time to stop! Wile's your main problem as he roams the levyour busting eyeballs on els with you in mind for his next meal, but he can be dodged pretty easily if and the graphics just get you turn on the speed. At the end of each stage Wile climbs aboard one of his huge contraptions and you get a few seconds to look over his shoulder at better and better! The the blueprints. They betray the machines' weaknesses and, by some swift sound was absolutely pecking action, you can turn them to scrap! spot on too, with the crazy Don't remember there being giant red scorpions in the cartoon...? ACME ROCKET PACK Merry Melodies theme tune  FIT COYOTECH springing out of the What game would be complete withspeakers. Honestly, com out a stack of pick-ups to grab and there's hardly anything use? Road Runner is no exception let's take a look at what's on offer! to tell the game apart from a real ( cartoon, especially when the Coyote BIRD SEED = = = BIRD and Road Runner do battle one-on-one Peck this lot to death to add extra energy to Road Runner's speed and the cheeky bird jumps up in the air gauge. to put on a extra bit of speed, shooting Wile E Coyote in losing mode...yet again! just out of Wile's clutches the predator You can never have too many lives even turns towards you and gives you not in this game! And this handy that famous disappearing look as he chappie sticks an extra one on yah! plummets 500 feet down a cliff face! However, there are so many niggles in No prizes for guessing that this icon the game-play. Road Runner has a real bumps up your score. problem jumping from platform to platCHIARE form and you have to get the bird's body Run over this to freeze all your eneperfectly positioned to stay on no mean Another plan doomed to failure! mies and the time counter. feat when some rocks are less than an HEART inch wide and the bird needs two inches Fills up Road Runner's health meter stopping distance to come to a halt! and makes him as good as new! There aren't enough long stretches in which to let loose your incredible speed Gives invincibility, but only for very either, and after all, that's what everyone short periods of time. wants to do with this game. If you race for too long you'll either miss everything These guys are as rare as purple nut on the level in a blink of an eye, speed off caramels in a box of Quality Street. They float down from the top of the the edge of a cliff to instant death or screen and could hold any one of the come to a grinding halt by hitting a spiky above items. Just peck them to obstacle. Don't write it off though it reveal what's inside. may be torturous to play, but it's still a laugh. MO BOULDER Ooo DOO CVG 030 STEVE KEEN "


"EVEN GUL CVG Don't remember any snakes either Watch out for that wall...doh! Never mind. BIRDICUS SPEEDICUS The idea's simple. The platforms are covered with multi-coloured flags just speed around the levels and pass the flags whilst avoiding Wile E. The flags come in four colours, worth 500, 1000, 5000 and 20,000 points depending! upon the hue. If you shoot off a cliff or are killed by any one of the dozens of traps or creepy crawlies you'll be returned to the level at the last flag you passed before dying. That's great, because it can be a real pain struggling with some of the trickier ledges and obstacles which took you ages to crack first time around. ROAD RUNNER'S Road Runner great! The 'Meep! Meep!' shouting bird is my all-time favourite-ever cartoon character of all time apart from Wile E Coyote, that is. And thought I was in for a real treat when the game started up; graphically it's brilliant, with character sprites that match the originals to a tee (even if the Road Runner's turned from blue to purple) and a whole array of animated sequences showing Wile E's various deaths! What brought me back down to earth faster than a coyote trying to run off the edge of a cliff was the gameplay; excuse me, but what the hell you doing turning this classic cartoon into a platform game?!Road Runner is all about speed, and although he can get up to some staggering miles per hour in the game, if he does he's going to miss all the goodies scattered around and basically finish each level straightaway. Graphics do not a game make, and although Road Runner is jolly enough, it has to be said that this is basically a waste of a potentially blockbusting license. PAUL RAND STRATEGY SKILL DATIVALE RALE FREE! BIRD SEED! ACTION REFLEXES Wile's no slouch either and on most of the levels he'll give you a fantastic chase for your money. It's not until the end of a stage though, that he starts to show his form and he begins to use his famous ACME paraphernalia. Climbing into balloons, throwing exploding planes, strapping himself to huge rockets and even dressing up as a pterodactyl to hound you across the platforms all go to make up Wile's repertoire! If you manage to avoid him 'til the end, you get treated to a great animation of the Coyote's fate. He'll fall off cliffs, blow himself up, get flattened by his most devastating creations and generally be crippled by anything from steamrollers to falling rocks! GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE CVG % 96 % 80 % 70 Road Runner looks on as Coyote makes another clumsy attempt to invite him to dinner! Thats all folks! THANKS.. to Shekhana Consoles (081 340 8565) for the review cartridge. CVG 100 CVG 031 "


"IF YOU WANT THE SONIC SOCCER MAGAZINE, GET INTO THE LAND OF THE GIANT ALL-ACTION POSTERS GET MATCH BIG SHOTS, FOOTBALL'S HOTTEST POSTER-PACKED MONTHLY! EXTRA! EXTRA! EXTRA! 4 GIANT, ACTIONPACKED, TOPTEAM CALENDARS WITH FILL-IN RESULTS CHARTS FOR EVERY MONTH AND FEATURING MAN. UNITED, LIVERPOOL, SPURS AND ASTON VILLA! 4 TOP-STAR ACTION POSTCARDS! fra! Celsberg SHARP OLSTEN MATCH MATCH MATCH SHOTS! MATCH SHOTS! PLUS... CRAMMED WITH ACTION POSTERS OF THE TOP STARS, PICTURE PROFILES, PUZZLES, PRIZES AND A WHOLE LOT MORE! SHUTS FEBRUARY ISSUE ON SALE NOW ONLY 990! "


"(MAIL ORDER ONLY) GIG elect consolec VISA F 22...... UNIT 4 MILL YARD, MILL STREET, BEDFORD MK40 3HD MANY USED TITLES IN STOCK PHONE FOR DETAILS *OPEN 9AM 7PM MON SAT * MEGA DRIVE UK Super Nintendo inc Mystical Ninja................95 UK Mega Drive LHX Attack Chopper..95 Streetfighter II..........99 NCAA Basketball .......95 Including Sonic ........99 Mercs ..95 Actraiser .....................95 Parodius ............ ...95 * FAST EFFICIENT + FRIENDLY SERVICE * Jap Mega Drive ..........95 NHL Hockey.......... Addams Family ..........95 Phalanx .... ....95 Alien 3 .........................95 Olympic Gold... ..95 Adventure Island ........95 Pilot Wings ............... ...95 Alisia Dragoon ...........95 Predator 2...................95 Arcarna ........... ...95 Prince of Persia .........95 Aquabatics .................95 Axelay.... ...95 Quackshot ............... * ALL GAMES SENT OUT FIRST CLASS Robocop 3............ ...95 ...95 Atomic Runner .... ....95 Barts Nightmare.......95 ....95 Rampart... ....95 Bulls Vs Lakers. Castlevania 4.............95 ......................95 Rampart Cadash.. Road Rash ............. ..95 ....95 Contra III................. ....95 Smash TV ........... ..95 Chuck Rock.................95 Rolling Thunder II.......95 Dinosaurs ............... * RECORDED DELIVERY * Sonic Blastman ...........95 ....95 Corporation ................95 Side Pocket ....95 Equinox.................. ...95 Streetfighter II ............95 Crude Busters ............95 Slime World......... ..95 Final Fight............... ...95 Super Aleste............ ...95 Crueball ......................95 F1 Exhaust Heat .........95 ..95 Smash TV ............. Super Off Road .............95 * NO CLUB TO JOIN * Desert Strike...............95 Ghouls N' Ghosts.......95 Sonic ......... ..95 Super Pang.............. ...95 Golden Fighter ...........95 Dragons Fury .............95 Thunderspirits........ ..95 ...95 Sonic II .... Gun Force ......... .....95 Dungeons & Dragons .95 Top Gear ..... ....95 Splatterhouse II..........95 Hook..................... ...95 ADVANCE ORDERS TAKEN * Euro Club Soccer.......95 Turtles 4......... ..95 Steel Empire ................95 Joe & Mac ................ ...95 Ultraman .............. ..95 Green Dog ..................95 King of the Monsters .95 Super High Impact .....95 Lemmings....................42.95 UN Squadron..............95 Gynoug ......................95 Tazmania ................95 Wheel of Fortune ......95 Magic Sword..............95 * ALL TITLES STOCKED * Hellfire.........................95 ..95 Terminator ........... Mario Kart ...... .95 Wings || Aces High ....95 Kid Chameleon..........95 Toki. ..95 Mario Paint (+mouse)...95 Zelda III .................. ....95 Lemmings....................95 Winter Challenge .......95 * PART EXCHANGE WELCOME NEW AND NEW AND FORTHCOMING FORTHCOMING TITLES * PHONE NOW GIVE US A TRY! * TITLES Batman Returns Batman Returns Bubsy (16 meg) Captain America Combat Tribes Chakan The Forever Man Please send me the following: Cool World Ecco The Dolphin Cybernator Flintstones Death Vally Rally at  each Gadget Twins Dragons Lair at  each Global Gladiators Equinox Post & Package  Indiana Jones Fatal Fury Total Out Of This World Gods Powermonger Mickeys Magical Quest Access/Visa. Road Rash II Out Of This World Shinobi II Expiry Date.... Spiderman & The X-Men Streets of Rage II (16 meg) Name. Super Star Wars Sunset Riders Terminator 2 Address.... Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Tiny Toons Thunder Force Tom & Jerry Tel... Tiny Toons Total Carnage T2 Arcade Game Wing Commander World Of Illusion 2020 Baseball WWF Wrestlemania WE ALSO STOCK NES. MASTER SYSTEM. LYNX & NEO GEO CONSOLES & GAMES ALL CONSOLES CARRY A 12 MONTH GUARENTEE. 0525 873573 PLEASE ADD .50 P&P ON GAMES .00 ON CONSOLES/HANDHELDS NEXT DAY DELIVERY AVAILABLE PLEASE MAKE CHEQUES/POSTAL ORDERS TO SELECT CONSOLES WE ALSO ACCEPT ALL MAJOR CREDIT CARDS, PHONE NOW!!! "


"NES WHOOPS APOCALYPSE! SRATEGY BY OCEAN .00 So you've had one too many Lemming killed off, there's no point continuing because you know you can't finish the level and you just want to start all over again. A chore? No, there is a simple answer Armageddon! This handy little device wipes out all those annoying little creatures in a flash actually, more like a bang. After a five second countdown and a cry of 'Oh no!', the Lemmings shake a little then spontaneously combust! Sick but satisfying. WHY ON EARTH IS HE BUILDING A BRIDGE THERE? DOH! LOOK AT WHAT THIS LOT CAN DO! STARTS DREVELFUN W hat's small, stupid and throws itself off tall things just because its mates are doing it? A lemming, of course! These pitiful little creatures don't have much going for them or at least, they didn't until Psygnosis made them stars in what became one of the most important games ever. After a string of conversions, the greenhaired goons come to the 8-bit Nintendo to amaze a whole new audience! You control the Lemmings, who must escape each level before time runs out. The number you get and the amount you must rescue changes with each level lose one two many of the little blighters and you might as well throw yourself off the top of a ciliff! Whoever said that Lemmings were thick! Not these boys they've devised a number of skills to make their lives so much easier! FLOATER: EXPLODER: BUILDER: Float down to Kills the select Constructs a earth using the ing Lemming bridge to pass umbrella. over ravines. TUNNELLER: Digs diagonally down using the pickaxe. PAWS: Pauses the game, of course! e pode como oo oo CLIMBER: Allows Lemmings to crawl up sheer faces. BLOCKER: Stops other Lemmings from passing. DIGGER: Scythes through impassable obstacles. BURROWER Hack straight down through the ground. ARMAGEDDON: Destroys all the Lemmings. KILLER KRUSHERS AND KNASTY KNIVES As if the ineptitude of the creatures themselves wasn't enough, there's a variety of traps littered throughout some of the levels, especially the more difficult ones. Crushers squash the Lemmings flat; whirling knives slash 'em to bits; hangman's nooses string them up there are more, but they're too ghastly to mention. Suffice to say that, if you run into them, it ain't going to be a pretty sight. DON'T FALL ONTO THE HANGING THING! You've got to be a sad man not to like Lemmings. And you've got to be even sadder not to have seen it before it's available on practically every machine under the sun! Add one more to the total now, 'cos the game's been converted to the NES and it's a cracka! You really can't go wrong with the graphics in Lemmings, and Ocean haven't they've been recreated excellently, even if they do tend to disappear at inopportune moments because the Nintendo's a bit crap at sprite handling. They're cute, cuddly and hilarious when they die the lads explode into masses of pixels; all very tasteful. Gameplay is spot-on; fast and furious, especially when there's a mass of Lemmings all heading toward their doom and you've got to somehow rescue them! You all know the game and the NES is more of the same; brilliantly addictive, great to look at and just totally brill. And who says the 8-bit Nintendo is on the way out? CVG 034 PAUL ANGLIN "


"REVIEW GUE HARD SQUAD Never played Lemmings on another system before? Bit of a low-quality player anyway? Don't despair; Lemmings caters for you by allowing access to a number of difficulty settings Fun, Taxing, Tricky and the hardest of the lot, Mayhem. With each more difficult setting there's a brand new set of levels to confuse, amaze and stuff like that that's, of course, if you've got time to be amazed while your furry friends are dying in all sorts of nasty ways! TUE 10 SAVED 00 TIME 2:46 00 00 00 00 00 00 BLIMEY, THAT'S GOOD! JUST DIE NLEIBER DE IDNINCS NERED TO BE SBUFETS PLEASE RATE 10 How many more Lemmings concool, Baby, versions can cool! there be? Who cares, so long as they're as goodlooking and playable as all the current versions have turned out to be! The NES incarnation is no exception graphiVcally the game is very slick, with those hilarious little Lemmings going about their barmy business in their own small but perfectly formed way. Mind you the Nintendo can, on occasions, through up a worrying flicker which obliterates the screen for a second slightly unnerving, especially if your lads are teetering on the edge of death only to disappear from view just at the crucial moment! This is a very playable conversion; the controls have been altered to make use of the extra buttons that ajoystick doesn't have, and while it takes a little while to get used to this new system, it soon becomes second nature. Ocean have done themselves proud with NES Lemmings if you have the machine, you can't miss this game! PAUL RAND STRATEGY SKILL AHH, ISN'T HE CUTE? REFLEXES % 85 OOH, CAREFUL! There aren't any cliffs to fall from in Lemmings but there are plenty of other hazards to get in the way of completing each stage! You could choose the wrong skill and dig straight through the floor to fall into firey pits beneath alternatively, you could forget to kit the lads out with umbrellas and watch them plummet to their dooms from atop the lofty heights. Just a couple of the variety of sad endings that could seal the fate of the moptopped morons! HURRAH FOR THE JOLLY BLOCKING LEMMINGS! ACTION GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE VALUE AVED 00 TIME 00 00 00 00 CLIMB, LADS, CLIMB!! % 89 CVG HIT GVG 035 "


"BUG REVIEW MEGADRIVE PLATFORM Elephant antics! Whatever next? Baboon Bananarium!! WHAT DO POINTS MAKE? BY ELECTRONIC ARTS .00 There are also a stack of things Rolo can pick up to help him in his quest for peace, justice and a nice family dinner on Sunday. There are stacks of bonus points all over the place, as well as extra lives and the odd special weapon (it's actually a hoover, but there you go). If you're lucky enough, you might also locate a piece of the map; these basically look like sections of puzzle which, when you pick them up, add to your map screen, making things a little easier on Rolo. 8000 That's it; Rolo's putting his foot down now. He's had enough of being called big ears and long nose and he's certainly had enough of having his mates and, most importantly of all, his momma taken prisoner. The evil McSmiley twins are going to pay dearly for this. But Rolo won't be able to manage this feat all by himself; he'll have to call upon his forest chums to help him out along the way. There's just one small snagette; they've all been pinched as well! But if he can rescue them then they'll all be eternally grateful and they can all live happily ever after. Hurrah! Tha:2:0 BOOD They're all queuing up for an elephant ride! Soortsoortgaad good gay It's not hard to tell that Rolo To The Rescue is programmed by the same people who created the James Pond series, but what is hard to tell is just how any game can be this good! Rolo screams excellence from start to finish in every department. Graphics are superbly cute, with the attention to detail at a max; / mean, no games character deserves to be as cute as that Bunny Rabbit! But Rolo's merits aren't purely cosmetic by any means. The deep and involving gameplay grabs you from the second you switch on, the first few levels easing you into the game before being chucked in with the real puzzlers. Some of the levels will have you sitting there for hours on end, trying to work out how to get him into the washing machine to shrink him down so he can get through the tiny gap. The only real problem is that there is no save option or even a password so all your hard work is gone when you switch off. Gumph! But Rolo is a great game that needs to be in you cart collection yesterday. A new Megadrive king has been crowned long live Rolo! I'M A SECRET LEMONADE DRINKER The special weapons that Rolo can pick up are all completely non-violent and a bit of a laugh. The first is the vacuum cleaner; if you pick up two of these, Rolo's trunk transforms into a hoover, allowing him to suck up baddies and spit then out again. Another good one is the lemonade found in the desert level. If you pick this up you'll be able to spit lemonade at the bad guys to kill them. See all completely non-violent, if a little unhygenic. There are loads of animals to help you. Use the rabbit for jumping and springing GVG 036 CVG 036 PAUL ANGLIN 100001 "


"OCTASTIC, ME EW FUL Woodland creatures in pretty settings. Have you seen anything cuter? and the sally smay Phant a DO YOU LOVE ANYONE ENOUGH? Now I know he's a mole, but be clean! Rolo's chums are many and varied and he'll need them all if he's to get his mumsie back. All of Rolo's chums can perform different tasks to help him out here's a quick rundown. BUNNY: OOOOOO BUNNY: As well as being immensely cute the floppy eared one can bounce like nobody's business which allows him to get to the higher parts of the levels. BEAVER: . . . . . . Thanks to his polka dot rubber ring the beaver can swim through water with ease which means he bring platforms back for the others to use as rafts. SQUIRREL: SQUIRREL: O O ONO This furry fellow can climb any wall or tree enabling you to get stacks of hidden bonuses. MOLE: MOLE: . . . . . . . . Although he can't see two feet in front of him Moley is invaluable for digging through certain platforms thus allowing Rolo entrance. Uggh! If this game gets any more cutesy I'm going to puke. At first I wasn't sure how much fun a game starring a cute elephant could be, but this is really smart. Rolo is such a cutey and the rest of the guys look like something from a Disney movie. Rolo is really involving and will keep you engrossed for many an hour until you manage to rescue all of Rolo's pals. The game is full of brilliant little touches like the way Rolo fills up with Helium in order to float up to the higher levels or the hilarious way he shrinks himself in the washing machine to get through small gaps. The only major drawback is that there's no battery saver! So you can play for hours and hours and lose all you efforts when you turn the machine off. Ea say that this is because it would have made the game more expensive which is commendable but I'm sure most people would have paid the extra fiver. As it is Rolo is a great effort that just missed out on being even better due to the lack of a password option and to be honest the elephant slips around a little for someone who's supposed to weigh the same as Jon's sad VW Polo. STEVE KEEN Now here's a crusty old geezer! STRATEGY SKILL TWO MILES AS THE CROW FLIES ACTION REFLEXES Rolo has to explore a massive area, so it's to his advantage to have a map handy. The map, however, only shows Rolo where he's been, but if you manage to collect some of the map pieces that are lying around you can reveal more of the surroundings and take the quick route through the fun. And, if you don't like walking, you can fly around the map to look at different parts by using the crow. There's no set route for each level it's just a case of getting to the end as easily as you can. GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE % 93 % 92 % 94 % 95 250DD CVG ca. 25000 SQ00 SHH IT'S A SECRET One thing that Rolo To The Rescue is not short of is secret rooms they're everywhere! Some are completely hidden and can only be accessed by just attempting to walk through walls. Others are indicated by a sparkling white light, but usually it's just a case of looking carefully for them. Some secret rooms can only be found by using certain characters, i.e. some levels can only be found by the high-jumping bunny. HIT GVG 037 "


"WINNintendo WIN Nintendo WIN Super Nintendo WIN Super Nintendo WIN Super Nintendo WIN Super Nintendo 0839 36 39 19 WIN GAMEBOY GAMES WIN GAMEBOY 0839 36 39 23 WIN GAMEBOY ACCESSORIES KICKOFF 0839 36 39 25 SPIDERMAN 0839 36 39 26 ROBOCOP 0839 36 39 27 BILL & TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE 0839 36 39 28 FORMULA 1 RACE 0839 36 39 29 HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER 0839 36 39 30 TERMINATOR 2 0839 36 39 31 CHOPLIFTER 2 0839 36 39 32 DR MARIO 0839 36 39 33 WORLD CUP 0839 36 39 34 GAME BAG 0839 36 39 21 EXCELLENT WIN NES GAMES GAME LIGHT 0839 36 39 20 CCESSORIZE 0839 36 39 35 0839 36 39 36 0839 36 39 37 0839 36 39 38 0839 36 39 39 TERMINATOR 2 BATMAN WORLD CUP STAR WARS SUPER MARIO 2 TOP GUN -THE 2ND MISSION WWF WRESTLING THE SIMPSONS CASTLEVANIA KICK OFF SOLAR PACK CARRY CASE 0839 36 39 22 0839 36 39 24 0839 36 39 40 0839 36 39 41 0839 36 39 42 0839 36 39 43 0839 36 39 44 CALL CHARGES: Calls cost 36p/min cheap rate and 48p/min all other times. Make sure you ask your parents' permission before you call. Maximum call length 5 mins, maximum call cost .40. Multiple Choice Competition, for further information and list of previous prize winners write to: Awesome PO Box 1650 B1 1AA. Nintendo Gameboy, Super Nintendo, Nintendo Entertainment System, Mario Bros are all registered trademarks. We are not related to or endorsed by these companies. "


"VAIL ORDED GUG SALES HOTLINE 081-471-4810 SUPER NINTENDO RECO DETIDED ZONLILC LTD . PRIN .. AMAZING TENNIS..... . GUNFORCE... . OUT OF THIS WORLD ......... SUPER SOCCER CHAMP....... BARTS NIGHTMARE............ HOME ALONE 2 PRINCE OF PERSIA.............. S. GHOULS & GHOSTS........... BATMAN (ROJ)..................CALL HOOK......... . PGA TOUR GOLF.............. STREETFIGHTER II........... BEST OF THE BEST ............. IREM SKINS.......................... ROAD RUNNER................... TERMINATOR ....................CALL CHUCK ROCK... .... JAMES BOND JNR.............. ....40 ROBOCOP 3 ......................... ROROCOD TOP GEAR ... .. CONTRA III ..... JOHN MADDEN '93 ........ SPIDERMAN & THE X-MEN.. TOXIC CRUSADERS.... DESERT STRIKE .. MARIO KART.......................... STREETFIGHTER II............... UN SQUADRON .. DUNGEON MASTER ............. MICKEY'S MAGICAL QUEST STRIKE GUNNER.................. WAIALAE GOLF. . EXTRA INNINGS.................... MYSTICAL NINJA................ SUPER ADVENTURE ISLAND.. WHEEL OF FORTUNE............ FINAL FIGHT .............. ........... NBA ALL STAR CHALLENGE.. SUPER BOWLING................ WING COMMANDER .... GEORGE FOREMAN BOXING.. NCAA BASKETBALL............ SUPER DOUBLE DRAGON........ WINGS 2 (ACES HIGH). ............... NHLPA HOCKEY 93............. SUPER STAR WARS ...........CALL ZELDA 3 ....... . ... . GOAL.. UNIVERSAL ADAPTOR UK/USAJAP E14 ACTION REPLAY ADAPTOR UK/USA/JAP  MEGADRIVE ...00 SONIC SALONS AQUATIC GAMES........ ATOMIC RUNNER... BATMAN RETURNS. CAPTAIN AMERICA CHAMPIONSHIP BOWLING 32.00 -.00 .00 SUPERMAN  HOPPER SUPER BATTLE TANK SUPER HIGH IMPACT SUPERMAN. ALL THE FOLLOWING GAMES ARE  EACH EA HOcKEY POPULOUS DECAP ATTACK JOE MONTANA FACKR SONIC THE HEDGEHOG JORDAN VS BIRD .00 ....00 ANOTHER WORLD....... ...CALL CHEERMAS TEORPORATION). GENDER HOLYFIELD B TAIL SPIN PRAS DOLPHIN-IELD BOXING \"BUCK ROGEREHOG JENNIFER CAPRIATI TENNIS...... KRUN MADE HOUSE LEMMINGS.............. MOHAMMED ALI BOXING MYSTICAL FIGHTER. NHL PA HOCKEY.... OUTLANDER POPULOUS POWERMONGER.. PREDATOR 1 ROLLO TO THE RESCUE RAMPART.. SHADOW OF THE BEAST 2 SIDE POCKET ........ TAZ MANIA... TEAM USA ..00 .00 .50 .50 ...00 ..00 .00 ...00 .00 ...CALL .... TERMINATOR 2. Wome ALIEN 3 V SPRE O NEOCCER AID CABGENTSIONES. HOME ALOETE GALAHAD.... HIT THEICE ARERITAH MERMAPORE .00 WWF WRESTLEMANIA .....CALL HUMANS ....... ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT ALL GAMES +  P&P ALL CONSOLES + .50 P&P ALL HANDHELDS +  P&P CALL ON 081 471 4810 (10 LINES) 125 ERSIC GAMEBOY + TETRIS + LINK LEAD + HEAD PHONES + BATTERIES SPECIAL PRICE.. ....... SUPER MARIO LAND 2........... Bare B GAMEBOY KE SNAGEROUS CHASE GEORGE FOREMAN BOXING. SPIRESHASH SUMMIES JOE & MAC.... SUER SEP ROAD BROUS por PARCADE GAMES  WWE SUPERSTARGLORY NNNNNNN ZIGILIGIGIGIGA NOZWEWOO Hespkercs SUNEN RICK OFF \"SPECIAL PRICE IF YOU DON'T SEE THE GAMES YOU WANT CALL!!! SUPER SPACE INVADERS.. ALIEN 3....... TERMINATOR.. .. SONIC 2... CHUCK ROCK.... LEMMINGS... SUPER SMASH TV... PRINCE OF PERSIA.. THE HUMANS.. GAME GEAR  BART Vs SPACE MUTANTS.  R.C. GRAND PRIX....  AXE BATTLER SPECIAL PRICE  EVANDER HOLYFIELD BOXING .... 524 PREDATOR 2.....  STREETS OF RAGE...  SUPER OFF ROAD  SHINOBI II.......  KLAX ..... $26  TRADE ENQURIES WELCOME TEL: 081 503 5875 FAX: 081 471 4537 ALL TITLES ARE USA UNLESS OTHERWISE STATED ORDER FORM EITHER 1....CALL ON 081-471 4810 (10 LINES) OR 2....FILL THIS IN GAME PRICE P&P TOTAL NAME Mr/Mrs/Miss. ADDRESS POSTCODE PHONE C/CARDOT EXPIRY DATE OD SIGNATURE GRAND TOTAL  ZON LIEC LTD Please make cheques & Postal Orders out to ZONETEC LTD Send order to: ZONETEC LTD, DEVER HOUSE, 764 BARKING ROAD, LONDON E13 9PJ CVG7 "


"YOB'S M That's why I think it's really realistic, but I need it to be more realistic and that's where you come in. Could you please send me  so that I can buy a sampling cartridge with a tape of you in pain so I can put those samples into my excellent game. With the new year comes yet another sack full of your sad questions and poor attempts at humour. It constantly amazes me how you dweebs manage to string sentences together considering writing is supposed to be too complicated for your average monkey. If any of you reckon you can match wits with your lord and master YOB, send your scrawlings to YOB'S SWEAT IN A FAT MAN'S ARMPIT MAILBAG, CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON, EC1R 3AU. Don't forget, there's  for the best letter we print and thick ear for the worst. WHAT I GOT Dear Yob Can you please tell me whether Blazing Skies on the Super Nintendo is the same as Wings (by Cinemaware) on the Amiga? Also can you settle an argument between me and my friend? He says that Super Nintendos are better than Megadrives? Could you please say which one is better. David Baker, Nowheresville 5 If so, when and how much will it cost? 6 Will PGA 2 come out on the Amiga? 7 Do you get your hair cut at the same place that the bloke on the Sega advert does? Evan Goodley, Essex Now for a couple of questions: 1 Is a Megadrive with a CD-Rom better than a SNES without a CDRom? 2 Why do your review hardly any ST or Amiga games when ST and Amiga Format review loads? 3 Why do Australians always send kicking beyond you? in stupid letters? 3 Who is your employer, as he 4 Will you review my game when it 'must have some mental disorder to comes out? give you a job? Mr X, Glasgow 4 Why are you still alive? There must be thousands of people out 1 Because of the lack of Mega-CD there wanting to put a bullet software it would be totally unfair to between your eyes. compare the two. Gary Weston, Southend 2 Doh! Are you thick or what? CVG is MULTI-FORMAT magazine, 1 'Course I am. Unlike you who still which means we review games on has trouble switching his SNES on. ALL FORMATS. ST and Amiga 21 am a master of every character and move, which includes such Formats only review ST and Amiga games, hence their names and devastating tactics as Guile's content, you sad sack. Sonic-Flash kick (a secret combi3 Because they do. nation which generates a 4 No because it's going to be crap. somersault kick and a sonic boom How about a new game where a simultaneously). puny scotsman who's too scared to 3 My employer, Gary Wodge Williams, has no mental disorder, give his real name gives up programming and gets a life. although he's quite fat and sweaty. 4 Because I'm still breathing (are you?) and there are probably a few ANGLIN'S people out looking for you now, you ULTRA-LUBE HAIR GEL poor, sad get. Yob I'm not putting 'Dear' in front of your A FUN-SIZED CAN OF name because you are sooo sad. I NAPALM have a few questions for you if you Dear Yob can understand them: I think that you and the people who 1 Are you any good at Street Fightwrite in to your page are stupid! er 2, because I reckon I can thrash They write in just to be insulted by your butt into the ground any day? you and seem surprised! With a 2 Are you capable of doing any name like Yob I would have thought special moves, or are punching and it was self explanatory! So all you sensible people out there across 'It's based around Wings, and as for you're other question the best console is (%$#$, damn, zcvasdf my adsfiz/../l.cz key//board is *&%^&$ goin... funnyyyy...y...y. 1 Not as far as I know (and that's pretty far). 2 What do you think I am, psychic? 3 No chance on the A600, but if it came on the A1200 it just might be. 4 No. 5 I told you, I'm not psychic. 6 Quite probably. 7 Nah, I go to the geezer who does the Lionel Blair cuts. FOR CHRISTMAS Dear Yob Your section of the mag is brill. I have a few questions to ask you: 1 Will X-wing come out on the Amiga? 2 Will Lemmings 2 be any good? 3 If X-wing does come out on the Amiga will it be as good as the PC version? 4 Will Super Star Wars come out on the Amiga? BY Y Yo Yob, Thave just learned how to program in C and I am already halfway through programming a game for the Amiga and ST. It's called Kicking Yob's Butt and it's really good. You see it's about a tiny, wimpy, speccy four eyes who goes up against Yob. Guess what! It's impossible for the wimp to lose! "


"AILBAG the globe unite and join the MDSY (the Murder, Decapitate and Strangle Yob club). This could be a revolution! So print this letter or people all over the world will send, you their Des O'Connor records! Jonathon Day, Kent 1 Is it true that there is going to be a Gigadrive? 2 I have a choice of an SNES or an Amiga. Which of the two items should I buy? 3 As you said, Sadie likes men who ask her straight, so, Sadie, will you go out with me or send me some pictures of yourself? ago, not many good quality games are being made for it. 4 Are there any good games coming out for the A1200? Andrew Martin, Preston out there can stop squabbling, about how good the graphics are, Sure, graphics need to be good, but to own a console with games that have amazing graphics and zero gameplay is ridiculous. Gareth Morgan, Cheshire 1 Don't know. 2 See above. 3 Now be honest, that's not much of question. 4 We'll tell you when we see them. Ayo, High Wycombe Right. Let me get this straight. People who write into me are sad cases who want to be insulted, and you've written into me and I'm going to insult you. That should doubtless lead you to the conclusion that you are a sad, talentless waste of space whose ideal job would be sucking the pus from blisters at Dr McProctal's Bottom Boil Removal Centre. Well thank you said in sarcastic, tones). Do you think nobody knows that? Wow Gareth Morgan's sparked a revolution. Guess what, he's also discovered the toaster and that his head is full of the worst kind of yellow pus from a boily pensioner's butt. I'm truly sorry you live in High Wycombe, but what do you want me to do about it? 1 There's going to be a new Sega console, probably 32-bit, sometime next year. 2 Whichever one you want. 3 Sadie's to busy being a top international model, playgirl and computer game goddess at the moment to reply, but I'll pass on your request when I see her tomorrow night. ROGER PROBOSCIS.... Dear Yob Tread CVG every month and think it's the best magazine around. It's just a shame that you're such a sad, sad case. Answer these questions please. A TUBE OF ZIT-AWAY Dear Yob I am writing in reply to that bum 'scrubbing, puke licking Jamie Dawson (issue 133). Gee boy, you're pathetic. You say, and I quote, \"Amigas are so crap', well what do you own, an Atari 2600 console? You probably sit in your living room, thinking no one is watching you while chewing on a freshly picked bogey and watching Playdays. Have you ever stopped to think, if that is possible, that Amiga games are cheaper simply because there, are far more of them sold. So the only thing crap around here is you! 1 Which do you think has better graphics, Streetfighter 2 on the Amiga or the SNES? 2 What's better, an Amiga 500+ or an Amiga with 1 Mb upgrade? 3 Is Zool better than Sonic 2? 4 Are there any plans for Streetfighter Championship edition on the SNES or Amiga? James Heal, Halesworth 1 As I write this (on the 1st of December), I haven't seen the finished Amiga version yet. 2 Does it matter now that both machines are no longer? 3 Different games, different machines but I prefer a quick burst of Sonic myself. 4 Not as yet, but it is coming out on the Megadrive. CLAUDIA SCHIFFER Dear Yob You pathetic globule of parrot puke! If you don't print this letter unspeakable things are going to happen to you. Now let's get down to business. Daren Buckle, Norwich Have you ever stopped to consider that the Atari 2600 was a good machine in its time, and that you must be as crap as Jamie Lawson for slagging it off? THE BONEY-M MEGA-MIX Dear Yob I am thinking about buying an Amiga 1200 and I want to ask you a few questions about it. 1 What do you think of the CDTV? 2 What do you think of the SNES? 3 Will any of the Monkey Island games come out for the CDTV? If So, when? 4 What do you think of Super Tennis on the SNES? Mark Powell, Doncaster NEW LEATHER BOOTS Dear Yob I live in High Wycombe and I own a Commodore 64. Here are a few questions I would like you to answer for me. 1 Will Streetfighter 2 come out on the A1200? 2 If so, will the graphics be as good as the arcade machine? 3 My friend owns an A600 and is worried that, compared to a year ...GAME OF NASAL EXPLORATION Dear Yob After reading some of the letters from people saying how the C64 (Trystan Nichols) would blow away a SNES, I decided to write in. For starters I'd just like to tell all the people out there that a game isn't made good by it's graphics, it's the gameplay. So all you petty people What unspeakable things? Such as having my butt-cheeks glued together while I'm being force-fed, Ex-Lax? Do you really think I'll answer your questions after such pathetic insults and threats? Well. "


"you're right. 1 Never met the bloke. 2 Don't know him either. 3 Nope. 4 Top game. Not very realistic, but very playable. the next two months or so. 4 Would you like me to list them for you as well? Get real will ya? By the way, where do you get these Spectrum to Megadrive upgrade kits? help it if there are more topper games on the Game Boy than Game Gear in a particular month. As for seeing to it personally, I've given the Go! crew a damn good kicking, although I doubt if it will make the simpering wimpos any better at their jobs. 2 Do you think the Amiga version of Streetfighter 2 is any good? 3 How much would an English SNES cost in Hong Kong, and how much would the games be? 4 Will there be a Streetfighter 3? 5 Why is CVG so good? 6 Why I am so cool? Adam Phillips, Horley AND HER SISTER Dear Yob Your magazine is great and this is the first time I've written to it. Could you answer my questions? 1 When will Flashback, the followup to Another World, be available on the Amiga? 2 How much will it cost? 3 Do you think a half-decent version of X-wing will ever be available for the Amiga? 4 Is Curse of Enchantia any good on the Amiga? Paul Jenkins, Norfolk FROM TIGHT-WAD RAND Dear Yob I would like to ask you a few questions. 1 Are all the consoles having CD upgrades? 2 With the Capcom Streetfighter joystick can all the moves be accessed at the touch of a button? 31 am getting a SNES with Streetfighter 2. I'll buy some other stuff but is Zelda any good? Lee Molineux, Liverpool 1 Not with two buttons that do different things. 2 Compared to what? 31 doubt if any place in Hong Kong would stock UK SNES's as they're incompatible with the TVs over there. 4 If you check the news section you'll find loads of information about a truck-load of different versions. 5 Because I'm in it. 6 You're not actually, you know. unit. 1 Very soon. 2 Haven't got a clue. 3 Why? Don't you want a decent version? 4 Yup! A PAIR OF SOCKS Dear Yob I have a Spectrum which I'm upgrading to a Megadrive, and was hoping you could answer a few questions for me. 1 I don't imagine there's going to be a Master System or NES CD-ROM NOT THE GIVING Dear Yob 2 What? You mean you press one, I'm writing in with some really button and your character does all important questions I want you to 20 or so moves? I suggest you get answer. your ass back in school and learn 1 Is Streetfighter 2 coming out for how to phrase questions properly. the Lynx? 3 Zelda is a top-notch arcade 2 If yes, when? adventure. 3 Is Smash TV going to come out for the Lynx? JUST REMEMBER 4 Is there going to be a TV adaptor for the Lynx? IT'S... 5 Who, in your opinion, is the best Dear Yob Streetfighter character? I want to make a complaint about Martin Richie, Glasgow issue 13 of GO! I waited in anticipation for this issue and what did I 1 It's pretty unlikely. see? Game Boy, Game Boy, Game 21 already said, it's not likely to Boy and only two measly Game come out. Gear reviews. Compared with the 3 No to that as well. Game Gear the Game Boy's 4 Another no I'm afraid. pathetic. 5 The Blanka/Chun Li cross with I hope this won't happen again and mid-air electrocution and super I trust that you will see to the matter cannon ball attack (nb, this only personally. applies to the super-hacked Action Jo, Wiltshire Replay version). ROLL ON Dear Yob I think that you are really brilliant and the most amazing person in the world. CVG is the best magazine ever and your section is the best thing in it. Without you the whole world would be a disgrace. If it wasn't for your section I would have topped myself ages ago. I have never know anyone as wonderful as you. Jonathan Kafton, Kensington 1 Is there going to be a light gun for the Megadrive? 2 Are there any art programs for the Megadrive? 3 When will Streets Of Rage 2 be released? 4 How many games are there for the Megadrive? Mark Taylor, North Humberside But you don't know me. Listen, here's a little game called Get A Life. Try putting down your copy of CVG (I know it's hard) and going outside. Perhaps play a game of football, or go to the cinema. 1 What do you think the Menacer is? A fart in the bath? 2 There's Art Alive, which should really be called Ass Alive as it's so crap. 3 If it isn't out yet it should appear in The games we review depend on the quality and quantity that are available at the time, so we can't BUT THE RECEIVING Hey YOB! When Streetfighter 2 is released on the ST, Amiga and PC will it be possible to use Capcom's Streetfighter joystick or similar controller? Chris Goodwin, Stockport Fat chance. If you take a good look at the plug on the joystick and the socket at the back of the Amiga you'll see they're totally incompatible. NEXT CHRISTMAS! Dear Yob I'm from Leeds and I own a Megadrive. Can you please answer me one simple question? Is Streetfighter 2 coming out on the Megadrive? Some magazines say it is yet others say it isn't. Simon Harrison, Moortown THAT COUNTS! Dear YOB Can you answer my questions? 1 Can you get a two button joystick for the Amiga? Keep an eye out for Megadrive Streetfighter '92 around about February or March "


"> Tel : 081 340 8565 TEKKAALA VISA Retail Store : 2 Gladstone House, High Road, London N22 OAA Tel : 081 889 9412 Fax: 081 889 9413 We also retail at: 257/258 Tottenham Court Road, London W1 9AB Tel : 071 631 4627 Wholesale & Export : 081 341 9110 SUPER NINTENDO SEGA MEGADRIVE UNVERSAL USA (SCART) USA SCART JAP SCART 60HZ MEGADRIVE MEGADRIVE MEGADRIVE JAP VERSION CONVERTOR P.O.A. PLUS +SONIC + RUNS UK/US/JAP USA PALI) RUNS UK/US/JAP STREETFIGHTERH BARE KNUCKLES PLUS SONIC + SONIC 1 & 2 SOFTWARE .99 P.O.A. EP.0.A. P.O.A. .99 .99 .99 299.99 APPAL 1 60 Hz SG clearance Cyberlal Sime World Brsert Strike Smash nouse Spiderman 88888888888 3483 Pitfighter 1.99 California San im cixy World .44.99 Monopoly WWE Wrestling 41.99 41.99 .44.99 Turtles ... ACCESSORIES ACCESSORIES PALI Booster... ..34.99 Stealth Joystick 29.99 SN Pro Clear Pad... .14.99 Arcade Power Stick 6 Button Turbo Pad.... Scart Lead ..14.99 Appollo Joystick ... 69.99 Action Replay.. 49.99 Control Pad... Clutch Joystick... Audio Lead ..9.99 S.F.11 Joystick 59.99 Supercon 2 Pad..... 14.99 Games Convertor. 29.99 Action Replay A400... USA/JAP Convertor ......................8.99 Cap. Com Joystick.. .... ....89.99 14.99 Scope Gun........ .............59.99 UK/US/JAP Joypad ...... ......... 14.99 SOFTWARE SOFTWARE Allens 3 ..34.99 James Pond Il........ Imperium... Side Pockets... ... Radio Flyer ...41.99 Aquatic Games J Madden 92 Actralser 41.99 James Bond Jnr...........41.99 Rampart. Atomic Runner 34.99 39.99 Kid Chameleon Amazing Tennis.... John Madden '93.... .44.99 Road Riot...... 41.99 A. Agassi Tennis Splatterhouse II Lemmings....... Dragon Fury 39.90 Axelay King of the Monsters...41.99 Road Runner Bare Knuckles 2 Dungeons & Dragons Battle Clash ......... 41.99 Lemmings Skins Game-Golf... Batman Euro Club Soccer 34.99 NHL Hockey 1993.. Chuck Rock... 4499 Magic Sword... Soul Blazer 44199 Batman Returns.. EA Hockey S Monaco GP 2 Clue. 41.99 Mario Kart............. 44.99 44.99 Space Megaforce.... 41.99 Bulls Vs Lakers Hollyfield Boxing Tazmanla Contra 11.99 39.99 Mario Paint..... 49.99 49.99 Spiderman & The X-Men.44.99 29.99 F22 Interceptor... Team USA Basketbal Dinasaurs 41.99 Mickey Mouse.. 49.99 ...49.99 .41.99 41.99 29 89 Galahad........... Terminator ...... Double Dragon..... 44.99 44.99 .41.99 39.99 Caparatti Tennis... 34.99 Gem Fire................. 4498 Rampart ....... twisted Flipper Dungeon Master..........49.99 NCAA Basketball .......41.99 Star Wars 44.99 44.99 Captain America ..... Green Dog Chuck Rock Streetfighter ...............59.99.........59.99 Faceball 2000...............41.99 99 34.99 NHL Hockey '93.........44.99 Home Alohe.. Shadow Beastic Fatal Fury................. ...64.99 Ninja Boy...................41.99 Out Of This World........44.99.........44.99 Super Soccer Champ..41.99.........41.99 TKO Super Champ.......41.99...... ..39.99 GAME GEAR Final Fight.....................44.99 Parodious ...44.99 41.99. 41.99 Gunforce.... ... 41.99 Pilot Wings .............44.99.........44.99 Warp Speed.... 41.99 .39.99 SOFTWARE G Foreman Boxing.......41.99 Prince of Persia.... ...44.99........44.99 Wings ....... GAME GEAR Home Alone II.............41.99 Pro Soccer Football. GAME GEAR WWF Wrestling ..........39.99.........39.99 29.99 Aliens 3 Pacman Spiderman Hook..... + SONIC ....41.99 Race Driving...... ......41.99 .99 .99 Bart Vs Mutants Smash TV Foreman Boxing GAME BO Batman Returns Sonic 1 or 2 Monaco GP 2 ACCESSORIES ACCESSORIES Chuck Rock Tazmania GAMEBOY, TETRIS AS OTHER Master Adaptor.. Action Replay ..................34.99 . 14.99 14.99 Replacement Lens.............4.99 Humans Wide Gear 8.99 Terminator BATTERIES, All Games OFFER PLUS AC/DC Mains PSU TV Tuner PALI...........59.99 Replacement Joystick..........4.99 14.99 Big Window II... ..6.99 HEADPHONES, FOU Kick off Wheel of Fortune Amplifier......... .........8.99 AC/DC Power Supply ........6.99 G. Gear Protector.. ANY GAME .799 2 PLAYER LEAD .99 Ballery Pack.LSTS 13 . 14.00 29.90 Car Adaptor -LG566..........5.99 G. Gear Traveller ...... ... 12.99 Olympic Gold Indiana Jones .99 284.99 Time Boy... .99 G. Boy Protector.... Deluxe Carry Case ...........19.99 Sonic Dolls...... Time Boy Watch...............9.99 Car Adaptor . L516.... 5.99 Outrun Europa Axe Battler Each SOFTWARE NEO GEO 4 In 1 Fun Pack Tennis Simpsons ! WWF 2 Ghostbusters Neo Geo Pall King of the Monsters 2 Mouse Tran 134.99 Fatal Fury...... 2020 Super Baseball... ...89.99 Adams Family Double Dragon 3 Mouse Trap Hotel Speedball 2 Xenon il Boxing UK System Inc Last Resort... ..139.99 Soccer Brawl.........119.99 Ninja Combat... ...89.99 Allens 3 Dr Frankin NBA Challenge 2 Star Wars Megaman 2 Controller & PSU........299.99 Ninja Commando.... ... 134.99 Barble ..89.99 Hm Hugggggggggggggggggggg699 Dragons Lair Ninja Gaiden Alpha Mission 2.......... Swamp Thing Loony Toons Bart Simpson G. Forman Ninja Taro T-2 Arcade Game Controller .129.99 ..49.99 Thrash Rally ......... King of the Monster .....89.99 Blues Journey..........64.99 Lazio Batman Joker Boxing Prince of Persia Terminator 2 Spy Vs Spy All .99 Each, Memory Card...... ... 19.99 World Heroes... .134.99 Burning Flight...........89.99 Baseball.. .. 64.99 Best of the Best Home Alone 2 Robocop 2 Tom & Jerry Oltima Charlie Art of Fighting............179.99 Robo Army .............. 89.99 .129.99 Cross Sword. Cyberlip....... ........64.99 Bionic Humans Rocky Bulliwinkle Track & Field Baseball 2................. 134.99 3 For .99 Sengoku... .129.99 Toxic Crusader Ghost Pilot.. .89.99 . League Bowling.........64.99 Commando Hunchback Roger Clements Track Meet Eight Man.................... 134.99 Andros Dunos... ...129.99 Super Spy... .89.99 Top Players Golf ..........64.99 Crash Dummies J. Conners Rolands Curse il Turtle 11 Nicholas Golf Football Frenzy...........134.99 Mutation Nation..........119.99 Magician Lord... .89.99 Above prices are mail order only. Cheques/PO's to SCS, (CVG) 655 Green Lanes, London N8 OQY Tel : 081 340 8565 P&P Add  per software title,  for machines 3-5 days. Next day delivery add . We reserve the right to change prices without prior notice. E&OE. ndy Boy... 39.99 119.99 2 For .99 SURFCLIFF LTD 24 HOUR ANSWERING SERVICE NINTENDO, SEGA. AMIGA, ATARI, NEO GEO, GAME GEAR, MEGA DRIVE. AMIGA, ATARI, 34 Norton Road, Southborough, Tunbridge Wells, Kent TN4 OHE 0892 517727 VISA NEO GEO ART OFEISENG POWEHERE! BEST BEST OFER! .189.99 WORLD HEROES ANDROS DUNOS KING OF THE MONSTERS 2 NINJA COMMANDO BASEBALL 2 FOOTBALL FRENZY EIGHT MAN LAST RESORT THRASH RALLY ROBO ARMY SENGOKU NOW .99 MUTATION NATION FATAL FURY SOCCER BRAWL NOW .99 MEGADRIVE SUPER NES US NEO GEO CONSOLE SUPER NES MEGA DRIVE + SONIC + 1 CONTROLLER + 1 CONTROLLER ACTRAISER ...99 688 ATTACK SUB..... ..99 + PSU + RF CABLE ADDAMS FAMILY...............99 AFTER BURNER 11... ..99 SCART.............99 AXELAY1 .99 ...99 ALEX KIDD ENCH CASTLE..... PSU NOT INCLUDED + 2 CONTROLLERS ALIENS III... .99 ..99 BASEBALL SIMULATOR......99 SUPER NES US + GAME BART SIMPSON...................99 JAMES POND. ..99 ARCH RIVALS... .133.99 .99 +200NIRCLERS. .99 BATTLE TANK. $39.99 BATMAN RETURNS ..50 NEO GEO CONSOLE BASES LOADED .................99 BUCK ROGERS, ..50 + 2 CONTROLLERS SUPER NES US CASTLEVANIA 4... ..99 CENTURIAN.... ..99 MEGADRIVE + SONIC CONTRA SPIRITS.... CHAKAN ...... + PSU + 2 PADS ...99 ..99 ..99 + 2 CONTROLLERS + RF CABLE DRAKHEN.. CORPORATION. .99 MEGA CD (OFFICIAL UK ..99 +MEMORY CARD DECAP ATTACK.... ..99 VERSION) .............99 + PAL BOOSTERSE 173.99 EXTRA INNINGS. ..99 DESSERT STRIKE. ..99 GAME GEAR + 1 GAME + PSU EXHAUST HEAT (JAP)... ..99 DEVIL CRASH.. ..99 + SONIC + PSU.....99 .99 HONEY BEE FINAL FANTASY II....... ..99 DOUBLE DRAGON. $25.99 GAME GEAR FINAL FIGHT.. CONVERTOR.......99 ..99 DOLPHIN... ..99 + COLUMNS............99 GEORGE FOREMAN....... ..99 EA HOCKEY.. ..99 GAME BUDDY PSU ...99 NEO GEO ACCESSORIES EVANDER HOLYFIELD GHOULS & GHOSTS ..99 GAME BOY .99 MEGADRIVE POWER FERRARI FI... ..99 HOOK (JAP) $44.99 GALAHAD BASE CONVERTOR ..99 CONTROLLER.....$49.99 264.99 HOOK JAP) .................. + TETRIS........99 + TETRIS. CONTROLLER......99 JACK NICHLAUS GOLF.......99 GOLDEN AXE ..... $34.99 (OFFICIAL SEGA) .....99 (OFFICIAL SEGA).....99 .99 BUSTER DOUGLAS JOHN MADDEN... ..99 SUPER SCOPE US REMOTE CONTROL JOE & MAC. .99 JOHN MADDEN 92. ..99 MEMORY CARD....99 JOYPADS JORDAN VS BIRD. ..99 INCLUDES REMOTE UNIT + 6 GAMES ........99 KING OF THE MONSTERS(JAP). .............99 KYES QUEST........ KID CHAMELEON. + 2 CONTROLLERS..99 ..99 ..99 ................99 CONSOLE NOT INCLUDED LEMMINGS. ..99 MEGA GAMES 1. ..99 MARIO PAINTWITH MARBLE MADNESS. ..99 MOUSE(JAP)... ..99 MONTANA FOOTBALL ..99 CALL US NOW! SEE WHAT WE'VE GOT PRINCE OF PERSIA (JAP)..99 NHL PA 93 HOCKEY .99 PARODIUS (JAP) ..99 PAPER BOY. ..99 IN OUR NEO GEO SWAP SHOP! PGA TOUR GOLF. PITFIGHTER ..99 ...99 PITFIGHTER. .99 SMASH TV... ..99 AS YOU WILL APPRECIATE. IT IS NOT POSSIBLE FOR US TO LIST ALL OUR STREETFIGHTER II ROAD RASH ..99 ..99 | ROBOCOD. ..99 SOFTWARE TITLES SO IF YOU DONT SEE WHAT YOU WANT PLEASE TOP GEAR. ..99 SIMPSONS .99 GIVE US A CALL WE ALSO STOCK ALL THE HARDWARE FOR THE ABOVE TURTLES IV .......................99 SMASH TV. ..99 SONIC II.... GAMES INCLUDING ATARI, NEO GEO AND AMIGA. WE RESERVE THE SUPER MARIO KART(JAP) .99 ..99 SPEEDBALL 2. 129.99 RIGHT TO CHANGE PRICES WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE E &OE. R-TYPE....... ...99 STEEL EMPIRE... ..99 RIVAL TURE.. ..99 SUPER OFF RACER .99 ROBOCOP 3.......... ...99 TAZMANIA ..99 ADD .50 PER GAME AND .00 PER CONSOLE FOR POSTAGE & ROCKETEER....... 242 99 TOE JAM & EARL. ..99 ROMANCE OF THE TURRICAN.. .99 PACKAGING. CHEQUES MADE PAYABLE TO \"SURFCLIFF LTD\". TOKI III KINGDOM.. ..99 ....99 WWF WRESTLEMANIA .99 NEXT DAY DELIVERY AVAILABLE AT EXTRA COST. SUPER OFF ROAD...............99 XENON 2.... ..99 ALL GAMES ARE US/JAP ZANY GOLF. ....99 ALPHA MISSION KING OF THE MONSTERS BURNING FIGHT CROSS SWORDS GHOST PILOT PUZZLED SUPER SPY MAGICIAN LORD 2020 SUPER BASEBALL NINJA COMBAT .99 NAM 75 BLUES JOURNEY BASEBALL CYBERLIP LEAGUE BOWLING TOP PLAYERS GOLF .99 MEGA CD (UK VERSION) PLEASE PHONE FOR DETAILS "


"CIM CITY COMPUTERS Unit 2. The Shopping Arcade, 96 George Lane, South Woodford, London E18 IAD, TEL: 081 532 9324 C C KONSOLS 0847 66949 AFTER 6PM: 0847 62946 26 PRINCESS STREET, THURSO, CAITHNESS KT14 7BQ UK SNES Strgetfighter I Pack Taman NHL PA Hockey House. Sim City.. PGA Tour Goll Jack Nicholas Golf Pebble Beach Golf Home Alone 2... Castlevania 4 Amazing Tennis... Desert Strike..... Mystic Quest Road Runner Skal Jager On The Ball Space Megaforce King of the Monsters Joe & Mac 2 UK MES Action Pack SESSION US & Jap Convertor for UK SNES SSSSSSSSSSSSS MEGADRIVE NEO GEO Quack Shot The Terminator......... Chuck Rock Splatter House ... Super Monaco GP II. Krustys Fun House. Bart Ys Space Mutants. Warriors of Rome..... Joe Montana Il. .. European Club Soccer E Holifield Boxing James Pond II John Madden 92 David Robinson Supreme Court Kid Chameleon... Immortal Double Dragon... EA Hockey Mario Lemiux Hockey Sonic 2 SNES Alice Ascii Pad SFC 69.99 Contrediturbo) trollad (UK Pal 16.99 UK MEGADRIVE + SONIC + 2 JOYPADS  NEO GEO, PSU, 2 JOYSTICKS, MEMORY CARD + ANY GAME  SNES (USA) + 1 JOYPAD + ALL LEADS  SFC Parodius... SFC Prince of Persia ..... . SECFE G Out Of This World Best of the Best Jimmt Conners Tennis Push Over NBA Basketball......... Wing Commander UK PAL SYSTEM Krusty's Fun House ...... Syper R-Type Super Tennis.... cal Que. 44.99 SES Mickey Mystical Quest SFC Power Athlete.... SFC Sonic Blastman.. .44.99 Fero Street Fighter II...... sure 59.99 your le Dragon Smash Ty wear Soccer LHX Attack Chopper Iniversal Soldier 199 Capt America... Ecco the Dolphin........ Castle of Illusion... Gadget Twins...... Championship Pro Am.. Indiana Jones LATEST GAMEBOY TITLES 44.99 Streetfighter ..... Spiderman X-Men Mario Kart Irem Skins Golf. Baseball 2000.... Axelay Barts Nightmare John Madden '93. Space Megaforce Amazing Tennis NCAA Basketball Desert Strike ....... Talespie GIGIGIGIIGIGIIGIGIGIGIC Am Sonic 2...... Terminator 2 + Gun Batman Returns NHL PA Hockey 93. Lemmings Cybercop.. Sde Pockets... LHX Chopper Atomic Runner John Madden '93 Bio Hazzard Battle. Shadow of the Beast 2. Universal Soldier....... Leaderboard ........ Dragons Fury... Tailspin... Skins Golf..... Roger Clements Ball Sinipsons Barts Nightmare Spankys Quest Faceball 2000 Race DrivinNCAA Basketball Super Bowling... Super Action Football Legend of Zelda Super Mario Land Blazing Skies Robocop Super Aleste Ghouls & Ghosts Street Fighter II KO Boxing 888888888888&&&&& Art of Fighting ........ World Heroes............ Viewpoint............. Last Resort ........... Ninja Commando..... Football Frenzy........ King of Monsters 2.. Baseball Stars 2 ...... Pioneer Range........... Senguko... Senguko 2 SOBAGO Giochi Swamp thing Battle Toads. Wank Commander Mickey Mouseoo.com Fatal Furypecial offer Fi Rocco bal Super Star Wars..... Saps Racing Call ...119.99 Special offers Top Gear PLAS Jap AS Area 88 or Top Racer 45.99 4 in 1 Fun Pack Spiderman 2 Toxic Crusaders Dr Franken The Flash All Star Challenge Spy Vs Spy......... WWF .......... SEGA Sega UK Megadrive + Sonic or Olympic Gold Jap Megadrive + Sonic UK PSU Super High Impact...... Side Pocket Predator 11 ....... Smash Ty... Corporation Desert Strike Dungeons & Dragons Phantasy Star II Joe & Mac Super Off Road... Battle Tank Super Ghouls & Ghosts Mario Kart Racing Robocop 3. L'urtles Barts Nightmare...... 45.99  VERY LARGE SECOND-HAND STOCKS FOR SALE AND EXCHANGE AT AFFORDABLE PRICES  ALL MACHINES CATERED FORI NHL PK HockeyGreen Dogz PLEASE CALL FOR TITLES NOT LISTED, OVER 1000 TITLES ALWAYS IN STOCK FOR 16 BIT, 8 BIT AND HAND HELD CONSOLES BLACK BUSHE SUNDAY MARKET BLACK BUSHE, SURREY WEMBLEY MARKET WEMBLEY STADIUM SUNDAY  THESE ARE JUST AN EXAMPLE OF SOME OF THE GAMES IN STOCK 4  PACKAGE DEALS AVAILABLE ON MACHINES  WANTED GAMES FOR CASH OR PART EXCHANGE  CALL FOR HONEST ADVICE ON GAMES  GAME EXCHANGE SERVICE NEO GEO, SNES, MEGADRIVE, 8-BIT CONSOLES & HAND HELDS  FAST SERVICE GUARANTEED FOR MAIL ORDER. FOR FURTHER DETAILS PLEASE CALL VIDEOO AMERICA 0403 752156 FIRST WITH THE LATEST GAMES NEW GAMES ARRIVING WEEKLY. CUG SEE OUR USED MEGADRIVE AND SUPER NES SECTION FOR SALE OR SWAP SUPER NES MEGADRIVE QUALITY SUPER NES NEW AND TOP TITLES USED GAMES FOR SALE OR SWAP QUALITY USED GAMES FOR SWAP ALIEN 3 JAN .99 TOP GEAR .99 SWAP CONDITIONS SWAP CONDITIONS .99 ULTRAMAN .99 1. Your game must be in good conditon BART'S NIGHTMARE.......... .99 WING COMMANDER .99 2. MUST have handbook and original box 1. Your game must be in good condition. BATMAN RETURN OF JOKER 3. Send with your cart your list of 1st, 2nd and 3rd choice game. ..........JAN 146.99 X-ZONE 943.99 2. It MUST have handbook and original box. BEST OF BEST .99 ZELDA 3.. ....99 4. Include your name, address and telephone number 3. Send with your cart your list of 1st, 2nd and 3rd choice game, CHESTER CHEATER 147.99 ALL THE ABOVE ARE USA GAMES GROUP A ALL GAMES FOR SALE AT JUST (or call). CHUCKROCK CONTRAIN (Propotedor) .99 MEGADRIVE .99 OR SWAP FOR  PLUS  P&P. 4. Include your name, address and telephone number. COOLWORLD AFTERBURNER AROUND PALMER GOLF NEW AND TOP TITLES ALTERED BEAST D FORCE CYBERBALL ALL GAMES FOR SWAP AT  ARROW FLASH ATOMIC ROBO KID DESERT STRIKE.. BUSTER DOUGLAS BOXING ARCAUSE CENTURION HOOK ALIEN 3.. GLOBAL GLADIATORS 34 99 DECAP ATTACK DICK TRACY XARDION AMERICAN GLADIATORS GODS PAPERBOY 2 ......JAN E. SWAT FATAL REWIND BATMAN JOKER... FAERY TALE . GREAT BATTLE ..DECIJAN FEB .99 SPANKY'S QUEST  F ZERO FATAL LABYRINTH CAPTAIN AMERICA FINAL ZONE FIRE SHARKYS III 37.99 PITFIGHTER GUN FORCE .99 DEADLY MOVES HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER FORGOTTEN WORLDS DEC GHOULS N GHOSTS GHOSTBUSTERS GOLDEN AXE HOME ALONE S. GHOULS 'N' GHOSTS KABLOOEY $34.99 ..$41.99 DESERT STRIKE. JOE MONTANA FOOTBALL MYSTIC DEFENDER S. CASTLEVANIA 4 GRADIUS III LEMMINGS ....99 DOLPHIN (ECHO)... ...DECIJAN JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL POPULOUS DOUBLE DRAGON. ....$29.99 ROCKETEER KINGS BOUNTY EARTH DEFENSE METAL JACKET ...CALL DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 141.99 LAKERS V CELTICS MUSHA BASEBALL SIMULATOR XARDION MICKEY MYSTICAL QUEST .99 HUMANS... MARIO LEMIEUX ICE HOCKEY DECIJAN MYSTICAL NINJA CRACKDOWN DRAKKEN MOONWALKER RASTAN SAGA II RAIDEN PAPERBOY . INDY JONES' LAST CRUSADE .99 .00 PAT RILEY BASKETBALL SHADOW DANCER DARIUS TWIN ULTRA MAN JOHN MADDEN '93 41.99 PITFIGHTER.......... REVENGE SHINOBI ...00 SHADOW OF THE BEAST BILL LAMBERT BASKETBALL POPULOUS LEMMINGS ..... $34.99 SPACE HARRIER II STAR FLIGHT PRINCE OF PERSIA MARBLE MADNESS ....$34.99 STAR CONTROL STRIDER S. R-TYPE S. R-TYPE S. SOCCER PUSHOVER... .99 SUPER HANG ON .99 N.H.L.P.A. HOCKEY SUPER HYOLIDE A.P.M. RACING... P.G.A. GOLF ...99 PREDATOR II. THUNDERFORCE 1 SUPER MONACO GP .99 RAMPART ..99 SUPER THUNDER BLADE SWORD OF SODAN SONIC 2 ...99 TECHNOCOP THUNDERFORCE RIVAL TURF ...99 SPIDERMAN X-MEN DECIJAN TRUXTON TOMMY LASORDA BASEBALL ROBO COPIII. .99 STREETS OF RAGE DECIJAN ARCHRIVALS TWIN COBRA ROCKEITER... .00 SUNSET RIDERS SONIC DECIJAN WORLD CUP SPANKY'S QUEST .99 SUPER BATTLE TANK ZOOM SUPER NES SCART SYSTEM 60Hz ........99 SPIDERMAN X-MEN. .99 SUPER SHINOBI 2 ...CALL GROUP B ALL GAMES FOR SALE AT .00 OR SUPER BASEBALL... .99 TAZMANIA.......... ...99 \"SWAP FOR 16 WITH TOP TITLES SUPER NES SCART SYSTEM 50/60Hz...00 SUPER MARIO KART .99 TERMINATOR II ARCADE .99 688 ATTACK SUB IMMORTAL SUPER STAR WARS $44.99 UNIVERSAL SOLDIER KID CHAMELEON .99 TURBO OUTRUN MEGADRIVE WITH SONIC 1 & 2 .............00 TERMINATOR JOE MONTANA JAN .99 KRUSTYS FUN HOUSE X-MEN THUNDER SPIRITS DECIJAN DESERT STRIKE ...99 MEGADRIVE WITHOUT GAME................00 CONSOLES VISA UNIVERSAL CONNECTOR Runs UK-JAPUSA games on any console...... .99 G SALES HOTLINE G 0403 752156 HOW TO ORDER CALL OUR HOTLINE GIVING YOUR SWITCH/VISA/ACCESS NUMBER AND THE TITLE YOU WANT, OR SEND ATTACHED ORDER FORM WITH YOUR CHEQUE OR POSTAL ORDER. P&P GAMES , CONSOLES .50 PLEASE SEND ME THE FOLLOWING: G/M2 ..AT .............EACH .............AT .............EACH TOTAL ENCLOSED INC P&P ..... ACCESS/VISA NO ...........EXPIRY DATE........ NAME ......... ADDRESS ..... JOYSTICKS SEGA PRO PAD.. .....99 SUPER NES PRO PAD .......... .......99 SEGA REMOTE CONTROL PAD (no wires) .....................00 VIDEO GAMES OF AMERICA (UK) LTD, HALE FARM EST, LOXWOOD ROAD, RUDGWICK, W. SUSSEX RH12 3BP FOR IRELAND PHONE DUBLIN 284 5098 "


"SUPER OFRADE "


"SWOP YOUR OLD VIDEO GAME FOR Swop a Game (UK) ONLY .45 (Incl. 1st Class Post) WE SWOP SEGA, NINTENDO, GAMEBOY, GAMEGEAR, LYNX : UK, US, JAPANESE : CARTRIDGES ONLY Name. .........................Address. GAME TO SWOP SWOP OPTION 1S S WOP OPTION 2 SWOP OPTION 3 .45 .45 .45 .45 .45 INSTRUCTION: Fill in order form for up to 4 games. Choose swops of same value. Send game to us with instructions and cheque/PO for .45/.45/.45/.45. Don't forget to tell us your name and address. SWOPAGAME (UK), 23 MELLOR ROAD, CHEADLE HULME, SK8 5AT FOR SWOPS AVAILABLE/TERMS OF TRADE CALL 061 485 3482 (1pm-8pm Mon-Fri. 10am-1pm Sat) (CVG) SOUTH COAST CONSOLES  100% VIDEO GAMES  NEO-GEO SEGA Nintendo PC-ENGINE  NEW AND USED GAMES. PART EXCHANGE WELCOME LATEST RELEASES SNES GOOD NAUGHTY_ CONFESSION SNOGGING LINE GUIDE JOKELINE 0828 800 242 SMUTTY JOKES 0898 800 207 0898 800 209 CHAT-UP 800 LINESA Your ideal ULTRA HORROR LOVE NAUGHTY PARTNER JOKELINE 0898 800 205 0898 800 208 0898 SOUNDS OF TORTURE 800 0898 212 800 213 0898 800 214 47.99 .49.99 47.99 AMAZING TENNIS.......... SPACE MEGA FORCE WING COMMANDER.... SPIDERMAN & THE X-MEN OUT OF THIS WORLD STAR WARS FATAL FURY MICKEY MOUSE 47.99 47.99 -CALL CALL CALL THE BLUES BROTHERS.... JOHN MADDEN 93. DEATH VALLEY RALLY... FIREPOWER 2000 NHL PA HOCKEY DESERT STRIKE UK ADAPTOR... ABOVE GAMES (USA) UNLESS STATED 47.99 47.99 47.99 CALL OUR MAIL-ORDER HOTLINE ON 0705 819269 OR IT OUR NEW PREMISES AT UNIT THE TRICORN CENTRE, PORTSMOUTH. PO 14 AN WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO CHANGE PRICES WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE. E&OE. C ode mon cheaprop t hermolowe kyow parente permission before calling, Buzz 77 bythe Red W14 H MICRO TRONICS VIJE Woc 27A MARKET STREET. TAMWORTH. STAFFS MAKE CHEQUES & OPEN MONDAY TO SATURDAY 9.30am TO 5.00pm WEDNESDAY CLOSED P.O'S PAYABLE TO TEL : 0827 66818 OR 082751480 FAX : 082766818 MICRO-TRONICS SEGA NINTENDO COMMODORE IBM COMPUTER AMIGA SOFTWARE SEGA MEGADRIVE OFFICIAL STREETFIGHTER II. 19.99 G WWF 2 NINTENDO SOFTWARE 17.99 SONIC 2.. ..35.00 ALIEN 3 20.99 ZOOL... MARIO KART WWF 15.00 .35.00 .37.99 DREAM TEAM PACK... BATMAN RETURNS BARTS NIGHTMARE .34.99 16.99 ..41.95 N INDY 4 THE ADVENTURE TOP GEAR ......... 28.00 PGA TOUR GOLF. .34.99 .............42.95 I DESERT STRIKE 17.99 .42.95 SUPER PROPROTECTOR .34.99 ROAD RASH 2 ...... 17.99 ROAD RASH. ZELDA 3..... .37.95 N TURTLES 2 COIN OP..... .8.00 JOHN MADDEN 93. .34.99 PILOT WINGS..... .42.95 T KICK OFF 2/PLAYER MANAGER 12.00 THUNDERFORCE 4 .... 34.99 SUPER KICK OFF .42.99  CHAOS ENGING .. 7.00 TERMINATOR 2 ARCADE.... .34.99 LEMMINGS ........ 48.99 N FLASH BACK.. 19.99 .33.99 SUPER ADVENTURE ISLAND. ..42.99 MANY MORE TITLES MICKEY & DONALD .34.99 TURTLES 4 ..... .......42.99 AVAILABLE PLEASE RING STREETS OF RAGE 2.............. .34.99 ROBOCOP 3 ......... ....48.99 LEMMINGS .... .35.99 ACTRAISER.. .48.99 HARDWARE LOTUS TURBO CHALLENGE. .34.99 MANY MORE OFFICIALTITLES AVAILABLE AMIGA 600... .299.99 EA HOCKEY 93....... .33.00 (WITH 4 GAMES AND ART PACKAGE) HOME ALONE........ .34.99 ALSO AVAILABLE SUPER NINTENDO SUPER MONACO GP 2. .34.99 WITH MARIO 4 .... .129.00 SEGA GAME GEAR GREEN DOG.. WITH STREETFIGHTER II. 29.99 159.00 DESERT STRIKE SEGA MEGADRIVE 34.99 SONIC 2. 25.00 LEMMINGS LHX ATTACK. D WITH SONIC.. .34.99 120.00 25.00 LEMMINGS .......................................... ALIEN 3.. TENNIS ............. WITH SONIC & ANY GAME... 25.00 ..149.00 .34.99 TERMINATOR............ SEGA GAME GEAR WITH ..25.00 MANY MORE TITLES COLUMNS, SONIC2 & PSU.. ..129.99 GAME BOY, C64, IBM COMPATIBLE, ATARI GAMEBOY PACK. ....69.99 AVAILABLE PLEASE RING ST, SOFTWARE & HARDWARE SEGA NINTENDO COMMODORE IBM COMPUTER ECCO .......... mobO3300 Ouzm-2-z Domu ABOVE PRICES ARE MAIL ORDER, SHOP PRICES MAY VARY. PLEASE NOTE WE ARE NOT JUST A MAIL ORDER COMPANY COME AND SEE US AT OUR ABOVE ADDRESS AND SEE OUR FULL RANGE OF CONSOLES AND COMPUTERS ON DESPLAY. P&P LI ON GAMES SEND FOR A FULL LIST OF OUR ITEMS "


"THE GUIDE TO THE STREETS ADVANCED O TM TM STRATEGY MANUAL PART 4 Here it is! The fourth and final part of our incredible Street Fighter 2 Strategy Guide. Over the last four months we've told you how to beat every single character in the game on the very highest level, LEVEL SEVEN. To round off this guide we give you the two most diverse characters in the tournament. In the red corner the battling brawler and most favoured character around, Guile. Rumoured to be the best character of the lot, Guile has few weaknesses and many devastating strengths. In the blue corner the sad wrestler from Russia, the most difficult character to use as his skills are severely limited by his bulk and lack of speed. And at the top of the pile the last boss, M.Bison, is given the once over, striped and taken apart by every character to lay the crown on and complete your comprehensive guide. Rest assured these tactics work! The only thing preventing you from mastering the machine now is your lack of practise! But beating the computer is only part of the story, after that you'll have to get to grips with the unpredictability of human advisories. And remember however good you become there's always someone better, not least of all... the CVG BOYS! Get CRACKING! cVG 047 "


"Zangief is a true, blue-blooded patriot and many believe he has only entered the competition to glorify his country's stature in the eyes of the world by beating all-comers. He may be getting on a bit but the huge Russian is not senile yet and although he really does love his country he loves cracking skulls even more! His power lies in his brute strength, his weaknesses lie in his lack of speed, but once he gets his huge arms wrapped around an opponent you can bet your life it'll mean a one way trip to pain central. Special Combat Moves are the Spinning Clothesline and the Spinning Pile-driver. 25% 50% PUNCHES ATTACK RATINGS 75% 100% PUSHING JOYPAD FIERCE 75% 100% o 25% 50% HARD 75% 100% 25% 50% NORMAL 25% 50% KICKS 75% 100% FIERCE 75% 100% 25% 50% HARD 75% 100% 25% 50% NORMAL SPINNING CLOTHESLINE 25% 50% 75% 100% SPINNING PILE-DRIVER 0 25% 50% 75% 100% STREET GUIDE 2 "


"KILLER COMBINATIONS WITH TDI RATINGS (Total Damage Inflicted) 1. Throw a hapless opponent and then walk up to them and perform a well timed scissor kick to catch the fop under the TDI:45% chin. 2. Walking backwards leads opponents on, quickly catch them with a punch and drop down for a low foot sweep. As they get up grab them for a throw to complete TDI:51% B. Zangief's pretty slow in the air and on the ground, but he has one of the longest leg spans of any of the characters. Fly in with a jumping kick then drop down for a low sweep and TDI:46% crouch for a punch. BDBULL Jump backwards away from oncoming competitors and kick. Then crouch down and wait for them to come TDI:40% towards you and toss them over your head. 5. Killer Attack: Crouch down and scoop up an opponent and dump them over your head as they walk towards you, crouch kick them as they saunter to their feet and then catch them will the devastating scissor kick. TDI:59% WINNING TACTICS DHALSIM: Use the Spinning Clothesline for temporary invincibility from all of Dhalsim's most ardent attacks. The closer the rubber bandit gets the easier he is to grab for a throw. A subtle combination of throwing and high jumping kicks will introduce the Indian guru to the incredible world of Stunorama! KENRYU: A great combination for the karate kids is a punch followed by a low sweep then another punch or sweep and the scissor kick. Ryu's a real sucker for foot sweeps and is easily thrown. Ken's a bit tougher to get on his back, but keep an eye out for his biggest weakHONDA: Believe it or not, the sumo sad ness, a failed Dragon Punch and then wade in with whatever you can muster! man is extremely easy to throw. Chuck him at the beginning and follow up with a scissor kick or low foot sweep then retreat quickly and wait for him to walk towards you. Now throw him again! Jump back fast and if he jumps at you block and wait for an opening for a throw. Never jump in unless Honda is really begging for it! CHUN LI: The only way to beat this chick is to keep your distance! As you know by now she'll jump into the most dangerous of situations so be ready to move slightly to one side of her landing spot and then punch. Eight times out of ten you'll catch her with no damage to yourself inflicted at all. Throws are great if you can hang onto her BLANKA: Probably Zangief's toughest long enough, but don't get stuck in the corners. opponent. They're equally matched in the air and on the ground, but Blanka has the added advantage of being incredibly fast with a huge variety of defences and attacks. The only way you'll get anywhere near him is to try and grab the beast and choke him. With Blanka Zangief's very vulnerable in the air so you can't even jump in at him. Block block and block again. You don't stand much of a chance on level seven, but keep at it. GUILE: Well this is the fight we've been avoiding for four months. Guile, viewed by many as the most dangerous and versatile of all the fighting characters, with more moves than Warren Betty, and Zangief, the slowest most ambling hulk of a man the competition has ever seen. The whole guide has been tested on level seven for the ultimate in difficulty and there the Russian doesn't stand an earthly! The best you can hope for are a few good hits/sweeps and to block until the timer runs out, but it's going to be the toughest fight of the tournament. "


"Jer, m) Mac Steet Preachors, o Richard from Right Said Fred, p) Kylie Minogue, g) Axl Rose, Beverty Hils 90210.sh Christain Slater, i Danni Minogue, ud East 17. Keanu Reeves. w Les Hill Tom Cruse  no vp SLIH HSVWS US3191 Us S06. EU HOM "


"answers:a) Betty Boo, b) Mr. C from the Shamen, c) Stephen Dorff, d) Take That, e) Madonna, f) Kris Kross, g) Melissa Bell, h) Jason Priestley, O) Shakespears Sister, 1) Nicole Kidman, k) 2 Unlimited, 0) Kristain Schmid, m) W doz ALUO 74! gnolog M WOMAN 79 735370 NO ldod sm "


"GUILE Guile is the most feared opponent out of the eight international contestants. With a staunch military background Guile is an actual Vietnam Veteran and was captured by the Viet Kong during his tour of duty. He managed to break out with a friend and escape, but his buddy died in the treacherous trek back to civilisation. After making it back to the States he learned to pilot aircraft and control sonic sound waves. Now he's fuelled with hatred, due to the rough hand that life has dealt him, and all he wants out of it before he dies is to be the Street Fighting Champion of the World. Special Combat Moves: Sonic Boom, Aerial Grab and Sonic Kick. 25% 50% PUNCHES ATTACK RATINGS 75% 100% PUSHING JOYPAD FIERCE 75% 100% 25% 50% HARD KICKS 75% 100% 0 25% 50% FIERCE 75% 100% 0 25% 50% HARD o 25% SONIG BOOM 50% 75% 100% SONIC KICK 50% 75% 100% DUELE 25% PERFECT AERIAL GRAB 50% 75% 100% 25% STREET GUIDE 2 "


"ZANGTE SIGUE KILLER COMBINATIONS WITH TDI RATINGS (Total Damage Inflicted) 1. Whistle up a Sonic Boom by pushing backwards then push towards your opponent and half way through press fierce punch. Now complete the move as normal with the simultaneous pushing right and fierce punch movement for a double TDI:35% Sonic Boom. 2. Because Guile has to charge up his attacks you can charge them whilst he's doing other things. Jump towards an opponent and start charging for a Sonic Kick, chuck in a middle punch for good measure and land. Keep down on the joypad pressed and you can still punch, but after that finish the Sonic Kick move by pressing up and TDI:45% any kick button. Total carnage! 3. If you're up against a jumping opponent catch them with the Aerial Grab and when they've thundered to the TDI:39% ground catch them with a reverse spinning punch, 4. Killer Attack: Throughout this move keep the Sonic Boom left joypad movement powered up. Jump towards an enemy and land a hard punch, start the charge. When you've got your feet on the ground use a fierce uppercut. Now release the Boom by pushing forward and pressing fierce punch. To add the icing on the gateaux pull back and press fierce for a spinning reverse TDI:65% punch! Awesome! WINNING TACTICS ZANGIEF: Once again the big bloke doesn't disappoint us with his ineptitude. Anything goes here. Set him up with big punches to the face, jumping and kicking and finishing off with Guile's back breaking throws. Easy stuff, but you knew that already, didn't you! BLANKA: Jump in on him and set up a series of flying kicks to the head. Get close for throws. When he's down use fast punches and crouching jabs whilst charging up the Sonic Kick and then let loose. Before you know it he'll be stunned to death leaving you ample time for another jabbing extravaganza and those extra special Sonics! HONDA: Easy as beating up a very fat person with no clothes on! If he jumps in uppercut him, use a combination of fast and slow Sonic Booms and some throws as often as you can Honda is also easily duped by quick jabs and roundhouse back handers to the face so make sure your not too shy with the man mountain! CHUN LI: Simple. Varying speeds of Sonic Booms from a distance and uppercuts when she gets too close for comfort. You can throw her but be careful. This goes without saying for the Sonic Kicks which can be spectacular if you catch her in mid jump. DHALSIM: Jump towards the spindly warrior with fierce kicks and get behind him by repeatedly jumping over his head for throws. Beating India's finest is a piece of cake once you get into the swing of things and once you've established an attack pattern keep high and make sure you get in first! KOL @euGGION NIBALL RYUKEN: Once again Ken's strengths prove to be his weaknesses. He'll come in with jumps and Hurricane Kicks that are easily dispatched with well timed uppercuts, Dragon Punches that you can dodge and sweep and Fire balls that you can leap over and land counter attacks with. Watch out for his quick combos though, they come out of nowhere. If he trundles towards you throw him with medium punch. Ryu's a lot easier to handle! "


"M.BISON al Bison is the bad boy who everyone's got a grudge against. He spent the earlier years of his life as the ruthless dictator of Thailand and now he runs the massive Shadoloo drug and smuggling cartel from his secret base buried in the mountains. His henchmen were responsible for the death of Chun Li's father in China and he personally killed Guile's army buddy in Vietnam whilst they were escaping from the Kong. He has lived in fear of reprisals all his life so he's entered the contest to rid himself of his most ardent enemies once and for all. Somehow he's managed to pick up some incredible powers along the way. He channels massive amounts of psychic energy through his hands allowing him to throw fists of fire and spiral across the screen in a flaming body torpedo. Bison is incredibly fast and no other character has as many devastating moves or inflicts more damage as the dictator. BEATING BISON KENRYU: Dragon Punches though, don't use the same attack are your best defence and experts in more than a few times and never use that arena will have no problems. the Sonic Boom. However, miss just once and you're history. Jumping on the spot and kicking is surprisingly effective for a while, as is defending and uppercutting. HONDA: Honda has some ZANGER Once you get great combinations that work over caught out defending you've had it, Bison a treat! Jumping kicks and Bison's attacks are relentless! standing chops work great until the Keep high and kick. Throw someFlaming Body Torpedo raises it's times but as soon as the move is head. Then it's time to change pace finished take to the skies again. and hit him with everything you've You'll never win by slouching! got. Variety is the key to success. Jump forwards and backwards swatting and kicking the square one into next week. Don't use the Sumo Torpedo unless you want a quick exit! 313 BLANKA: The Brazilian beast_DHALSIM: Dhalsim is very packs some awesome power moves similar to Bison in quite a few ways. so keep clawing kicking and jumpHis Yoda fire can catch the fascist ing. Don't give him a breather and completely unawares sometimes and you'll get there in the end. High, fierce jumping kicks mixed with you can dodge Bison's deadly Flammedium/hard punches are the best ing Body Torpedo by using forms of attack. Dhalsim's own Horizontal Torpedo. Trap your enemy_in the corner and head-butt him into submission. Never jump up and kick, if you must, use the diagonal spinning attack or punch. Yoda Flame works a treat and sliding will reduce Bisons energy considerably as he jumps and lands. CHUN LI: Don't even think Body Torpedo coming a mile off and about trying to get off any special it's easy to jump out of the way. attacks with Bison on your heels. Keep off the ground and retreat som Chun Li's fast, but not that fast. You ersaulting and kicking as you go, can use the girl's speed to good You should be able to stun him with advantage though and it's her most high kicks and when he's down keep valuable asset in bringing Bison to him there with throws. his knees. You can see the Flaming, GUILE: Try and catch Bison with Sonic Kicks, he hates them. He also likes to shoot all over the screen and is not confined by the laws of gravity. If you use the Aerial Grab that'll thwart him for a while as will jumping punches and the occasional back-breaker. Be warned STREET GUIDE 6 "


"SHERTON Ring The Hot Line NO Tel/Fax 081 766 0087 7 Days A Week Hours of Business All Games Listed Are Sat & Sun 12 Noon 7pm Mon Fri 9am 10 pm UK or US Call For Jap MAIL ORDER ONLY MECA COMES  31 BRISTOW ROAD. UPPER NORWOOD. LONDON. SE19 1SXEACH CONSOLE/GAME PURCHASED ENTERS YOU IN OUR  SOFTWARE COMPETITION. THE WINNER WILL BE NOTIFIED BY LETTER. LG We stock a wide seletion of used games! NO JOINING FEE PART EXCHANGE CASH FOR YOUR OLD GAMES SNES UK GAME GEAR + P.S.U .00 Aliens COOL WORLD, POWER MOVES, LETHAL WEAPON, COMBAT TRIBES, WARP, SPEED. GEMFIRE, SUPER VALIS IV. TOM & JERRY, HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, DUEL!, TEST DRIVE II, PUGSLEY'S SCAVENGER HUNT, CAL RIPSKIN BASEBALL, GODS. CALIFORNIA GAMES II, HARLEY'S HUMUNGOUS ADVENTURE UK MEGADRIVE + SONIC .99 CALL FOR OTHER PACKAGES ......34.99 American Gladiators ..Call AA Tennis ................38.99 Aquatic Games .......... 34.99 Capt America ............35.00 Streets of Rage II ........Call Sonic 2... ..38.99 Another World ....... ..38.99 Chuck Rock ..... 38.99 Desert Strike ..........38.00 E Hollyfield Boxing ..34.99 NHLPA Hockey '93...34.99 Tazmania 34.99 World of Illusion .... ..39.00 Splatterhouse II ........38.99 Terminator 2 ............38.99 .38.99 Rampart.................. ..38.99 LHX Attack Chopper 39.99 PLEASE CALL FOR GAMES NOT LISTED WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO CHANGE OUR PRICES WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE E&OE. ABOVE PRICES ARE MAIL ORDER ONLY MEGADRIVE GADGET TWINS, CHESTER CHEETAH, TECMO CUP SOCCER, RISKY WOODS, POWER MONGER, MIRACLE PIANO SYSTEM, OUTLANDER, CAL RIPSKIN BASEBALL, MICRO MACHINES Super Smash TV.......25.00 Prince of Persia ........24.99 The Humans...........24.99 Bart Vs Space Mutants.25.99 Spiderman... ..........24.99 G Foreman Boxing ...24.99 Sonic 2.....................29.00 Wheel of Fortune ......24.99 GAME BOY + TETRIS + LINK + LEAD .99 UK SUPER NES + STREET FIGHTER II .00 CALL FOR OTHER PACKAGES Streetfighter II ..........54.00 Spiderman/X-Men .....44.00 Amazing Tennis ........ ..44.99 Best of the Best.....44.00 Super Star Wars........69.00 Fatal Fury ................64.99 Dragons Lair ................Call Gods ................ ...48.95 Fist of the North Star 6..54.99 NCAA Basketball........Call Out Of This World.....44.99 Robocop III .. ...48.99 Sim Earth.. .49.99 Super Bowling Turtles IV ................44.99 Super Soccer Champ...44.95 Terminator 2 ................Call Super Double Dragon ..49.95 Tom & Jerry ......... .Call Wings II...... ..... ..44.99 ACCESSORIES SUPER SCOPE... UNIVERSAL ADAPTOR ..19.99 888 USA/JAP ADAPTOR ........CALL + MORE GAMEBOY MEGALIT, MEGAMAN 3, KRUSTY'S FUN HOUSE, ALIEN 3, BATTLESHIP, BUNKS ADVENTURE GAMEGEAR RC GRAN PRIX, ARIEL THE LITTLE MERMAID Battle Toads............... 19.99 Super Mario Land II. 24.99 Bart Vs Juggernaut ..22.95 Batman ROJ........... Super Star Wars .. WWF II ..... Tom & Jerry ....... Prince of Persia ... Terminator 2 Spiderman II. 23.99 LYNX 11 + BATMAN RETURNS .00 CALL FOR GAMES NOT LISTED WA NEW LATEST TITLES & ACCESSORIES FOR SEGA & NINTENDO SNES MEGADRIVE GAMES FROM .95 GAMES FROM .95 FREE Zool software pack worth over  when you buy an Amiga 500 or 600. Other Amiga packages available. Now available Amiga 1200  * PC's * Amiga 'ST. Sega Lynx * Neo Geo * Wonder Mega * Mega CD * Plus accessories, peripherals and software. Shareware titles available. P&P: .50 Consoles .00 Hand-helds .50 Games We reserve the right to change prices. E&OE Please make cheques & PO's payable to Sherton Computers SUPER NINTENDO TOP TEN SUPERSCOPE & GAMES STREETFIGHTER 2 FANTASTIC SEGA MEGADRIVE NEO GEO + MEGA CD PC ENGINE + CD ROM Wordtris, Bazoka Blitzkreia Lethal Weapon, Bull Vs Lakers Jeopardy, Super Combat tribes Ripken Baseball, Gun Force Pro Quaterback, Gemfire NBA All Star Challenge Jimmy Conners, Joe & Mac Pugstey's Scavenger Hunt Out Of This World, Game Genie Spiderman/X-Men, Gods. Prince of Persia, Super Star Wars Best of the Best, Cyberspin Chester Cheetah, Metal Jack NHLPA Hockey 93, Power Moves Imperium, Wing Commander Hunt For Red October, Biohazard Sim Earth, Fire Power Blaze On, Road Riot G Foreman Boxing, Ka Blooey NCAA Basketball, Race Drivin Chuck Rock, Skins Game Super Bowling, Super Mario Kart Turtles IV, Wheel of Fortune TKO Super Champ Boxing, Hook Super Batter Up, Skul Jagger Desert Strike, Amazing Tennis James Bond Jnr, Space Megaforce On The Ball, Faceball 2000 King of the Monsters, Phalanx Robocop 3, Barts Nightmare Streetfighter II, Super Double Dragon Death Valley Rally, Final Fantasy Super Play Action Football, Wings 2 Travelmster Case, Home alon 2 Super Buster Bros, John Madden 93 Turbo Touch 360 Controller Champion Pro Am, King Salmon Gadget Twins, Chester Cheetah Superman, Outlander Ex-Mutants, Micro Machines Toxic Crusader, Indana Jones Lotus Turbo Challenge, Rampart Leaderboard Golf, Unchated Waters TMNT Hyperstone Heist, Aliens 3 Capt America, Lightning Force Great Waldo Search, Terminator 2 Super Battle Tank, Tennis Power Monger, World Cup Soccer Risky Woods, Batman Returns Global Gladiators, Aquatic Games Death Dual, Capriati Tennis Gem Fire, Shadow of the Beast 2 Lemmings, Universal Soldier Team USA Basketball, Tazmania World Trophey Soccer, Steel Talons Home Alone, Cyber Cop Galahad, Joe montana III Super Smash TV, Crue Ball Turbo Touch Controller, Chuck Rock Where In World Is Carmen Sandiego LHX Attack Chopper, S Monaco 2 Menacer with 6 game cart Kid Chameleon LOADS OF MEU. PRIZS MUST BE WON! ALL YOU HAVE TO DO IS ANSWER O SIMPLE QUESTIONS TO WIN OUR TOP PRIZES GAME BOY GAMEGEAR GAMES FROM .95 GAMES FROM .95 STREETFIGHTER 2 ARCADE MACHINE AMIGA 500 CARTOON PACK TICKETS TO SEE THE GLADIATORS GAMEBOY + ACCESSORIES + GAMES OF YOUR CHOICE Humans, Mega Man Megalit, Terminator 2 Incredible Crash Dummies Battleship, Kingdom Crusade Bionic Battler, Best of the Best Ren & Stimpy, 4 in 1 Funpack Batman Returns, Dr Frankin Jeep Jambaree, Wordtris Roland's Curse II, Swamp Thing Track & Field, Barbie Bionic Commando, Speedball 2 Mousetrap Hotel, Hit the Ice Amazing Spiderman 2 Lazlos' Leap, The Jetsons Spy Vs Spy 2, Loony Toons Home Alone 2, Tom & Jerry Super Off Road, Miner 20-49er Chessmaster, Dig Dug Double Dragon 2&3, WWF 1&2 Final Fantasy, HAL Wrestling Mario Land 1 & 2 Battle toads, Addams Family Fortress of Fear Predator 2 Terminator 2 Arcade Prince of Persia Aliens III Super Space Invaders Bart Vs Space Mutants Ariel The Little Mermaid Sonic The Hedgehog 2 Klax R.C.Grand Prix Majors Pro Baseball Shinobi 2 Aerial Assault Marble Madness Super Smash TV Batman Returns Super Wide gear Columns chuck Rock Super Monaco GP 2 Taz Mania Indiana Jones Wimbledon Tennis 0891 876 816 Calls cost 36p a min cheap rate/48p a min al other times. ALX, Box 33. MS 4GY. Please ask the permission of the person who pay the phone bil before you ring Average length of calls 5 mins which will cost .80 cheap rate Callers are requested to answer 5 questions and leave a tiebreak answer al competitions close on the 31st April 1993 New shop now open! at 213 Belsize Road, London NW6 Please add  for games and accessories and  for consoles. Cheques/PO's/Access/Visa to: Mega Games, Merlin House, 122 126 Kilburn High Road, London NW6 4HY Tel : 071 372 4356 "


"COMPUTER AND VIDEO AVG GAMES DOUBLE BILL! "


"ZAP COMPUTER GAMES TECHNO HOUSE.LOW LANE HORSFORTH LEEDS LS18 4DF LS18 4DF MAIL ORDER SIZZLINGLY HOT LINE 0532 5.9.00-7:7 LOW LOW PRICES ALL THE LATEST GAMES & MACHINES SUPER QUICK DELIVERY NO SILLY MEMBERSHIP FEES REQUIRED TO BUY, OUR MOST FRIENDLY STAFF ARE WAITING FOR YOUR CALL. ZAP HOURS: 9am-7pm Mon-Fri 9am-1.30pm Sat, and Sun. FAX NO: 0532 586523 OPEN We're giving away 9 NEO GEOS, TM DAYS A WEEK NO PURCHASE NECESSARY JUST CHECK IT OUT BELOW! MEGADRIVE PAL+SONIC US SUPER NES + GAME OF YOUR CHOICE UP TO $42.99 $12.9.99 NEO-GEO PAL OR SCART .00 SINGO .99 (+P&P) (+P&P) (+P&P) MEGADRIVE USA WONDERBOY IN MONSTERLAND.......99 SMASH T.V..... .99 MARBLE MADNESS.. ....99 BONANZA BROS. .99 SUPER VOLLEYBALL. ...99 NEO-GEO UK WWF ..... ...99 SUPER NES USA SUPER NES USA MEGADRIVE USA STAR WARS. ..CALL CONTRA MI..... ..99 STREETS OF RAGE II...... ...99 MICKEY'S MYSTIC QUEST QUEST.................99 Q-BERT 3.... .99 MICKEY'S WORLD OF ILLUSION.........99 OUT OF THIS WORLD... .99 POPULONS ............. ...99 ROAD RASH II ..... ..99 FATAL FURY. .CALL HOOK.. .99 ECCO.... ..99 2020 BASEBALL.... .CALL SKULJAGGER .... ..99 FLASHBACK.. .99 STREET FIGHTER II. ..99 IREM SKINS GOLF... ..99 LOTUS TURBO CHALLENGE............ SPIDERMAN X-MEN ..99 CASTLEVANIA. ...99 TERMINATOR II The ARCADE..........99 MARIO KART ..... .99 EQUINOX.. ..CALL BATMAN RETURNS. .99 CHUCK ROCK. .99 ROAD RIOT...... ..99 SONIC II.... .99 KING OF THE MONSTERS .99 PHALANX ....... ..99 .99 BEST OF THE BEST. .99 DOUBLE DRAGON......................99 RISKY WOODS ............ .99 COMBAT TRIBES CALL FACEBALL 2000.. .99 BIO HAZARD BATTLE. .99 TERMINATOR II..... .CALL GRADIUS III....................... . ............99 SHADOW OF THE BEAST 2........... .99 DESERT STRIKE. .99 JIMMY CONNORS TENNIS. ..99 TOXIC CRUSADERS... .99 COOL WORLD... .99 STRIKE GUNNER ...... ..99 STEEL TALONS.... .99 TINY TOONS ...... .99 PRO QUARTERBACK.... ...99 LHX ATTACK CHOPPER .99 NHLPA 93. .99 BULL VS BLAZERS ...... ..99 CAPTAIN AMERICA .99 J MADDEN 93 .... .99 SOUL BLADER................ UNIVERSAL SOLDIER... .99 ROAD RUNNER. .99 NIGEL MANSELL GRAND PRIX...... ..CALL PREDATOR II.... .99 TOM & JERRY.... ..99 LEGEND OF THE MYSTICAL NINJA ....99 TEAM USA BASKETBALL .99 BLAZE ON........ ..99 GREEN DOG. .99 SUPER ALESTE. ..99 FAMICOM JAPAN GAME GENIE............... .99 TURTLES IV ... ..99 SUPER HIGH IMPACT.. ..99 ROBO COP .. .99 RUSHING BEAT RUN.. ....................99 SPORTS TALK 93.. ..99 ACTRAISER... ..99 FATAL FURY ...... ......99 J. MADDEN 93 ........ .99 WORLD LEAGUE SOCCER .99 STAR WARS...... ..99 CYBERCOP.. .99 ZELDA TII.. .99 2020 BASEBALL.. ..99 THUNDER FOX ........ ..99 LEMMINGS... .99 HUMAN RACING ......... ..99 ATOMIC RUNNER .... .99 PILOT WINGS.. .99 PARODIUS.... .99 SUPERMAN ..... ..99 SIM CITY........... .99 SUPER ADVENTURE ISLAND ..............99 ALIENS VS PREDATOR ..99 AXELAY ..99 BATTLE GRAND PRIX ... ..99 SIDE POCKET. .99 IMPERIUM ...... .99 SUPER SONIC BLASTMAN ..................99 AQUATIC GAMES. ..99 KA-BLOOEY.... .99 SUPER F1 CIRCUS.............................99 DRAGON'S FURY ... ..99 SUPER PLAY ACTION FOOTBALL..... ..99 AXELAY .......... ...99 TEST DRIVE II ............ .99 RACE DRIVE THQ...... .99 SUPER CUP SOCCER..........................99 ROAD RASH........ .99 RAMPART. .99 RANMA. .................99 ROLLING THUNDER II. .99 BART'S NIGHTMARE. .99 DRAGONS QUEST V.............................99 BART VS SPACE MUTANTS. .99 TOP GEAR.... .99 STREET FIGHTER II... ..99 TASK FORCE HARRIER.. .99 MAGIC SWORD ...... ..99 MICKEY MOUSE...... ..99 WINTER CHALLENGE.. .99 PRINCE OF PERSIA .99 SUPER OZUMO (Sumo).... ..CALL OLYMPIC GOLD... .99 GUN FORCE.. .99 KIKIKATKAI......... .......CALL YS III .99 WINGS. .99 BULLS VS LAKERS. .99 GHOULS & GHOSTI. .99 GALAHAD... ..99 AMAZING TENNIS... .99 MEGADRIVE USA TERMINATOR I...... ..99 NCAA BASKETBALL.. .99 LEMMINGS..... .99 SUPER BATTLE TANK.... ....99 OUT OF THIS WORLD .........................99 MEGA-LO-MANIA ... ..99 KRUSTY'S FUN HOUSE...................... ...99 PGA II... ..99 RAMPART ............ ..99 Our premises are bulging with games, so if you don't see what you want do not despair Just call! All Postal orders and credit card purchases will be whisked to you the same day. All prices subject to change and availability. Post and packaging Games &1 Handhelds 85 Consoles $7.50 SENGOKU II....(RESERVE YOUR COPY NOW) VIEWPOINT ...(RESERVE YOUR COPY NOW) ART OF FIGHTING.. ...99 WORLD HEROES ...............................99 KING OF THE MONSTERS II..............99 BASEBALL STARS II ....... ..........99 NINJA COMMANDO... .............99 SUPER EIGHTMAN... .......99 LAST RESORT ............. ...........99 THRASH RALLY.... .....99 ROBO ARMY................ ..............99 SENGOKU... .99 MUTATION NATION...........................99 SOCCER BRAWL.. ...99 ALPHA MISSION II.... ...00 KING OF THE MONSTERS ...00 BURNING FIGHT. ...00 MAGICIAN LORD. . .........00 2020 BASEBALL. ..00 75. ......99 BLUES JOURNEY............... ..99 BASEBALL. ....99 CYBERLIP.. . ..164.99 LEAGUE BOWLING .. .........99 TOP PLAYERS GOLF... ***...--...99 WHEN BUYING A UK SNES CONVERTOR FOR .50 AND A US/JAP NINTENDO GAME YOU CAN KNOCK A WHOLE  OFF ... THE PRICE OF THE GAME. NOW THAT'S WHAT I CALL AN OFFER!!! EXAMPLE IF YOU BUY THE CONVERTOR & AREA 88 THE TOTAL COST WOULD BE A MERE .50 (+P&P OUCH!!! SAID OUR BANK MANAGER. (ORDER FORM NAME CompetitioADVANCHIONED ABOVE WP Competition AS MENTIONED ABOVE, WE ARE GIVING AWAY 3 NEO GEOS THE MOST ADVANCED GAMING CONSOLE THE WORLD HAS SEEN AND YOU DON'T EVEN HAVE TO BUY ANYTHING TO ENTER. EVEN IF YOU'RE NOT ORDERING STILL COMPLETE THE ORDER FORM OPPOSITE WITH YOUR NAME & ADDRESS AND TELEPHONE NUMBER, TOGETHER WITH YOUR ANSWERS BELOW. BELOW ARE THREE PHOTOS OF NEO-GEO GAMES IN ACTION WITH CHOICES ABOVE. JUST INDICATE WHICH GAME YOU THINK THEY ARE, E.G., IF YOU THINK PHOTO 2 IS NAM 75 THEN PUT A' IN THE BOX BELOW THE PHOTO. SEND YOUR ANSWERS TO US AND THE SEXIEST CONSOLE IN THE UNIVERSE COULD BE YOURS. A NINJA COMBAT A NAM 75 A FATAL FURY B FOOTBALL FRENZY B KING of the MONSTERS B MAGICIAN LORD NAME Send to this address: ZAP ADDRESS TECHNO HOUSE LOW LANE, HORSFORTH LEEDS LS18 4DF Please rush me the following TELEPHONE NO. ITEM PRICE POST/P TOTAL POSTCODE Credit card number Expiry Date Cheque Credit Card Postal Order Visa DUE TO POPULAR DEMAND WE HAVE EXTENDED THE COMPETITION DATE TO 10TH FEB. AND THE WINNERS WILL NOTIFIED BY POST GOOD LUCK. GRAND TOTAL Please make cheques/PO's payable to ZAP Post and packaging Games  Handhelds 85 Consoles 27.50 "


"SEC. D = = . Campaign 1: Air Superiority Things to remember Before you try to take out an installation like the airfields it's worth destroying all the weapons in the area so you can work unhindered. There isn't really much that needs adding to the guide in the manual but to make things go that little bit smoother here's a few little handy hints: The item which speeds up the winch and allows you to pick up items without stopping is found in one of the grey hangars in the diamond road layout in the middle of the map (there should be armour there as well). Mission 1-1: Radar Sites The only thing I can really say is that if you position yourself right you can lay waste to the communications dishes without being hit. If you fly to where the secret agent is and then go left you should find Jake standing next to his F-15. Destroy the enemies then pick up Jake and destroy the plane for an extra life. Make sure that you've always got a few MIAs in your chopper so that if you get in trouble you can deliver the MIAs and get some armour back. Campaign 2: Scud Buster Mission 1-2: Power Station This will be your first run in with air-toground missiles. Try to sneak up on them from their blind side by coming in on them from the north and using the Power Station as cover. Once you're settled about three Hydras should be sufficient for the job. Mission 2-1: Radar Sites The radar sites are easy to deal with. Just make sure that you avoid the ground-to-air missile launchers and leave as soon as you have fired. CHEATMODE Mission 1-3: Air Fields Use the buildings around the airfields to try and sneak up on some of the Rapiers and take them out from long distance with a missile to be sure of safety. Use your cannon to destroy the buildings and the aircraft. But make sure that you're ready to tackle the new defences when thy arrive. Mission 2-2: Jail Break When you're performing a jail break make sure that you destroy all hostile forces before blasting a hole in the wall. Some of the buildings around the jails will have a flashing light on them. Blow these up carefully and rescue the MIAs that run out of them. Most of the buildings around the jail will have something hidden in them so it's worth blowing them up. Once they are exposed they will show on the map for future reference. Mission 2-3: Power Station This is very simple. Just take out all the weapons before you do anything and you'll have no problems you should be able to do this without losing too much damage. ze Mission 1-4: Command Centres When you take out the hangars on the eastern side of the base, APHIDS will appear so make sure your trigger finger is poised. Although on the map there are two command centres, you only need to take out the southern-most one to get the guy who knows where your secret agent is. Mission 2-4: Chemical Weapons The chemical weapons complexes are very heavily guarded so drop off any MIAs you may have to pep up your armour. It's best not to try and take out all at once but do one then fill up your armour and come back. There's a rock to the northwest of the chemical plants with a bad guy behind it shoot him and you'll reveal some fuel. Mission 1-5: Secret Agent Your secret agent will be marked on the map. When you get to the area you will notice three buildings. The secret agent is inside one of these. Blowing up the correct building will reveal a trap door. To get your agent out simply fly towards it and the chopper will land and your co-pilot will jump out to get him. The chopper will then take off again and you will have to destroy all the hostile forces around the area before the secret agent will come out. When he does come out he will be with your co-pilot make sure you pick them up quickly or they may get shot which isn't good. Once you have picked them up you can return to the frigate and put your feet up. Mission 2-5: Scud Launchers The scud commanders have decided to do a bunk so just fly to their HQ (metal buildings marked with a red and white flag) and blast the building down around their ears. When they run out, grab them and they will tell you the location of one scud launcher. These will appear as a red dot on your map. Simply fly to it and destroy it. Then repeat it until all the Scuds are gone. There are five in total. Mission 2-6:POW Camp This is the hard part. There are 16 POWs altogether and you only need to rescue 14 of them. Try to blast as much of the weaponry in the area, the watch towers are the things to get first. Be warned that whenever you return from the landing zone there will be new weapons in place so be prepared. Make sure you don't waste your Hydras on the huts. Things to remember There's another downed F-15 along the top right edge of the map. The pilot is Jake (he loves getting lost doesn't he?) and the plane contains yet another extra life. CVG 058 "


"STRIKE EE SNES Desert Strike Level 2: RZLH3JT Level 3: 932HBRH Level 4: W8PP92C Megadrive Desert Strike Level 2: AQJMMHW Level 3: TLOEOQA Level 4: JTKKOME Campaign 3 Campaign 4: Mission 3-1: UN Inspectors Enter the main city and use two hydras on the APHIDS that are causing the UN inspectors' grief. Pick the guys up and then take out the nearest small building to get some more MIAs. Mission 4-1: Oil Fields The Commandos are found by going straight to the coast and then North. They're just on the far side of the dunes. Now for the oil fields. Each field is protected by about three ZSUs, one in the centre, one at the top and one in the bottom left. The quick ladder is in the centre of the northern oil fields. Don't forget to drop off the commandos at the landing zone. Mission 3-2: Chemical Factories Destroy the ALA before turning to the factories. There is no real structure you can follow to do this best. They are all heavily defended by ZSUS so just get in, destroy the factories with Hydras and then pick up the scientists. They know where the missile silos are. Mission 4-2: Oil Spills There are three pipes along the coastline that are spilling into the Gulf. destroy the weapons from the left (you can sneak up on them you see). There is a weak point on each pipe it's just a case of using your cannon until you find it. Mission 3-3: Missile Silos Most of the silos you have to destroy have valuable supplies around them. The most easterly silo has an extra life which is guarded by an APHID, so be ready with a carefully placed Hydra. The northern one contains fuel and armour. The best way to destroy all the silos is a combination of all three weapons. Mission 4-3: Bomb Shelters There are four shelters with four civilians in each. You need to rescue fifteen of the sixteen to complete the mission. Three of the shelters are guarded by ZSUs buried in the sand. Once you've destroyed the defences use your cannon to blow up the shelter 'cos you're gonna need those missiles. Grab the four prisoners and go to the nearest landing zone and return for more of the same. Mission 3-4: Lost At Sea This one is dead easy. Fly towards one of the boats and fire off six hydras and then swing around and do the same on the way back and pick up the hostages. This way you take minimum damage. Mission 4-4: Bomb Parts The dump trucks are in the city at the bottom right of the map. Take out the defences then dump the trucks (not the decoys)then destroy all the small buildings to reveal two extra lives CHEATMODE Mission 3-5: Power Station One of the rescued prisoners tells you that you have to destroy the power station before you can attack the Yacht. Once you've blown up the power station you will find some fresh armour there, soit's all plain sailing from here. Mission 4-5: Nuclear Weapons The radar sites have to be taken out first. One is just south of the factory the other i just to the North East of the nearby landing zone. Mission 4-6: Power Station Don't forget you get extra points for taking out the pylons as well as the power station. Mission 3-6: Madman's Yacht Fly in carefully from the North and use two hellfires on the chopper and hydras on the motorboat. Use your cannon on the troops. Position yourself on the right side of the yacht and pump lead into it. Now, pick up six hostages at a time and drop them off. Don't worry about the madman escaping. Mission 4-7: Presidential Palace The Palace is extremely heavily guarded so you'll have to get yourself a few ammo crates in reserve. When you finally blow away the Palace a landing Zone will appear, you have to drop your co-pilot off here to get the madman unfortunately he gets taken hostage. Doh! Mission 3-7: Enemy Ambassador To the south of the command centre is a radar installation. You MUST take this out first or it's bye bye, sweet fly boy. Now return to the command centre area and destroy all the defences (easier said than done). The enemy ambassador is hiding in the command centre with the flag outside. Be careful not to shoot him as it's a SNAFU. It's worth destroying the surrounding buildings to see what you can Mission 4-8: Bomber Plane Before you begin this one make sure you are fully topped up and there are plenty of ammo crates you can pick up. Fly to the bomber and you'll see the General's plane. Don't destroy it let him run onto the plane with your co-pilot. The guard will be all on his own so waste him and then start attacking the plane. Once you have blasted a hole in the side of the plane stop shooting 'Cos your co-pilot will appear on the wing. Pick him up and you're back in business. Two ZSUS will appear to try and do away with you take these out using two Hydras and a Hellfire each and then the plane will start to move. Just fly behind it and a little to the left and pump all your ammo into it and si-anora madman. find. Mission 3-8: Embassy Rescue Enter the embassy building from the west to regain some fuel and ammo from all the buildings you'll have destroyed earlier. Take out all the defences and buildings watching out for those three helicopters. Land at the landing zone and drop off your Co-pilot. Destroy the fresh defences that will have arrived on the scene. Once everyone is in the bus, blast the gate away CAREFULLY. Move ahead of the bus and be ready with your Hydras in case anything comes along. When you make it to the seal post don't forget to pick up your co-pilot. MUADELE SEE THAT PERDICE CVG 059 "


"CHEAT MODE 6 reetings folks and welcome to this blisteringly bang-on edition of Cheat Mode. As you can seem we're packed to the gills up this month and fitter than a butcher's dog with a two page guide to Desert Strike on both the Megadrive and the SNES. Well I suppose I must be good at something eve though I proved that I'll never be able to drive last weekend by bringing all the traffic on Canvey Island to a complete standstill. Don't laugh though matey, driving a car on the road isn't quite as easy as Mario Kart although most of Canvey Island probably wished they could have just bumped me off the road... Next month will see the return of that by-gone wonder Question Corner! So any probs you've got with your gaming fun (provided it's not EA Hockey) stick 'em in an envelope and chuck'em off to: HURRAH QUESTION CORNER'S BACK AND THIS TIME IT'S FOR REAL, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, FARRINGDON, LONDON, EC1R 3AU. In the meantime make sure you don't let up on your cheats there's still  worth of games up for grabs to whoever sends me the best batch of tips. No-one won this month so if just one of you joystick junkies out there had sent slip send them all off to: PAUL ANGLIN'S CHEAT MODE SCHOOL FOR SAD DRIVERS, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, FARRINGDON, LONDON, EC1R 3AU. See you there! Bye. FINAL FIGHT GUY SUPER EDF SUPER NINTENDO Here's a spiffy little cheat for all of you that were sad enough to buy this very ropey sequel to Final Fight. On the fourth level you can regain pots of energy by walking up and down in front of the white dog. Be careful where you put your foot though! Joby Taylor manages to get Exmouth on the map this month with a great cheat for an average shooter. To get invincibility simply follow this: pause the game and press A,B,X,Y,L,R up, down, left and right, and that should be just enough to make you completely invincible to bullets... JENNIFER CAPRIAT'S TENNIS MI ABRAMS TANK BATTLE James Cannon from Crawley has found a great to help you blow up people in tanks. Wait for the demo screen then press B,B,C,B,C,C,C,B,C,B,B,C and then start, and your weapons should be more powerful MEGADRIVE Alison Eccles from Burnley Lancashire may not have quite the same sort of designer name as tennis star Jenny (shame eh?) but she could certainly blow her frilly tennis whites off when it comes to spotting a top tip. To create a new game type this code GRA ND. SLA M.. (and take care to type it in exactly as our stuperific staff writer has!) This will give you new players of both sexes, all of whom will have better attributes and give you a much harder game. THUNDERFORCE LU Doh! Yet another with no name enclosed. How you can expect to get any fame or even the  top prize I'll never know! Anyway, bad luck but thanks for the excellent extra for Thunderforce IV. So, to get a few extra tunes in this great game you need to complete it (good luck) and then go to the options screen and press A and start. cvG 060 "


"DIAL A TIP WIN! Win in 2 mins! W ,000 VN WITH in 2 SUPER NINTENDO mins TELEPHONE 0839 44 22 71 BINGO WIN! SEGA MEGA DRIVE 0839 03 03 36 in 2 mins 0839 44 22 67 21 25 27 28 WIN! NIKE AIR JORDANS 32 34 35 39 In 2 mins 0839 44 22 68 43 44 47 48 WIN  IN 2 MINUTES! CASHCADE 51 52 55 57 0839 03 03 20 Calls cost 36p per min cheap rate 48p all other times. Questel PO Box 3000 N20 9RB You will be advised of other games HINTS 'N' TIPS 'N' CHEATS 'N' POKES CHEATS GALORE (Say 'yes' for your format ...0891 101 234 NINTENDO CHEATS 'N' TIPS..............0891 445 913 AMIGA GAMESLINE ........................0891 445 786 SEGA CHEATS 'N' TIPS ........................0891 445 933 ST GAMESLINE............................0891 445 787 CONSOLE CHEATS 'N' TIPS .................0891 445 991 ALL CHEAT-LINES UPDATED EVERY WEEK COMING SOON ON ATLANTIC 252 THE DIAL-A-TIP VIDEO GAMES SHOW INTERACTIVE GAME SOLUTIONS SONIC 1 & 2 8 BIT & 16 BIT...............0891 866 001 SUPER MARIO WORLD..................0891 445 924 SHADOW OF THE BEAST 1,2 & 3.......0891 442 022 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER.................0891 442 030 FIRST SAMURAI.................................0891 445 926 MAGIC POCKETS/RODLAND...............0891 445 928 FOR INFORMATION ON ALL OUR GAMES DIAL 0891 445 904 GUIDING LIGHT COMPUTER SERVICES LTD PO BOX17 ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE OL7 WW Calls cost 36p/min cheap rate and 48p/min all other times. Mbius Games Sega & Nintendo Machines & Cartridges (UK, US, Japanese) Part Exchange, Repairs, Conversions, New & Used Board, Card & Role Playing Games 5 Leigham Court Road, Streatham HIII Opposite Streatham HITI BR Mail Order: 081 677 9657 Shop: 081 677 7228 Shop Open Sat 10am 8pm Sun 10am 6pm Weekdays 10 am 7.30 pm Tues 10am 6.30pm NINTENDO SUPER FAMICOM SWAP MEGADRIVE FOR SUPER NES NOW!! .CALL ..47.95 -36.95 NINTENDO GAMEBOY DOUBLE DRAGON 3... ..23.95 K.O. BOXING (GEORGE FOREMAN).........22.00 BART V'S JUGGERNAUTS ......... ..23.95 MARIO 2 .....................CALL SPEEDBALL 2..... .CALL STARWARS. ......... TINY TOONS.. ................23.00 WWF 2 (AMAZING).... ............... .CALL .. ... WACZY SEGA GAME GEAR .37.95 IWONR UNIVERSAL CONVERTOR.. UNIVERSAL JOYPAD. AMAZING TENNIS. AREA 88................ AXELAY......... ...44.95 CONTRA 3. .43.00 F1 ROC (USA).. .49.95 GOLDEN FIGHTER........ .49.95 IREM SKINS GOLF (USA)................... ..49.95 JOE & MAC 2.. ..CALL LEMMINGS... MARIO KART (SPECIAL PRICE)........... ..44.95 MARIO PAINT .... .54.95 MICKEY MOUSE. .49.95 OUT OF THIS WORLD. 49.95 PARODIOUS ..47.95 PRINCE OF PERSIA... .45.95 RANMA 2 1/2..... .55.00 SPIDERMAN (X-MEN) .49.95 STAR WARS ....... CALL STREET FIGHTER 2 .CALL SUPER DOUBLE DRAGON. .44.95 TINY TOONS....... CALL TOM AND JERRY..... .CALL TURTLES IV... ..45.95 WINGS 2... .47.95 ZELDA 3.. ..42.95 .......... ALIEN 3....... LEMMINGS. SONIC 2. STREETS OF RAGE............... TERMINATOR 2.............. ..............25.00 ..24.00 .CALL .24.00 25.00 NAME: .................... ADDRESS:... * MAIL ORDER HOTLINE!! VISA POSTCODE: TEL:.... * ZAP 081 295 0556 * ITEM COST    SEGA MEGADRIVE  Sub Total   Total Add .50 per order for P&P Credit Card Details * NEO GEO, PC ENGINE ETC & ACCESSORIES AVAILABLE NOW! * AWESOME SECOND HAND STOCK !! * PART EXCHANGE CONSOLES & GAMES REPAIR SPECIALISTS * TRADE ENQUIRES WELCOME OPEN FROM 9.30 TILL LATE, MON TO SAT, SUNDAY (AFTER 1PM) ZAPCO LTD 14 High Street Chislehurst Kent BR75AN BATMAN RETURNS..... ECCO THE DOLPHON..... ......39.95 JENNIFER CAPPRIATI TENNIS ................37.95 JOHN MADDEN 93.. .35.00 MICKEY & DONALD. 35.00 ROAD RASH 2 .38.95 SONIC 2.. .34.00 STREETS OF RAGE 2... .38.95 WINTER CHALLENGE....... ...28.00 WWF SUPERSTARS.. .....35.00 Exp. Date: Signature: Cheque/PO/Access/Visa/Mastercard Order dispatched within 24hrs. Cheques dispatched subject to clearence "


"JOHN MADDENS 92  Jason Cambridge from Leeds has managed to find a great level select cheat for Taz. On the title screen if you just press A,B,C and start together and do the same on joypad two then you can just select a level. MEGADRIVE Adrian Edwards from Roturoa New Zealand has taken time out from the All Blacks in order to send me all these game codes. Atlanta vs Oakland at Atlanta DCMYRLLJ Buffalo vs Chicago at Chicago BPS89YH4 Washington vs Oakland at Washington BOB6DCHR Tampa Bay vs Buffalo at Tampa Bay DGNW8TT5 Seattle vs New Orleans at New Orleans C29XVK31 San Francisco vs Oakland at San Francisco -DSFC2Y6T Los Angeles vs Buffalo at LA-D77VJWG1 Green Bay vs Buffalo at Green Bay CCOBOLH5 Miami vs Washington at Washingotn CS7SSJMD JARE ATTEMPT DUCK TALES Kerry Billingham from Romford has found a real money spinner for the game of my fave cartoon. Daring Duck Tales a wooh ooh... Here's how to get to the bonus stage in this game. Find Launchpad and if the fifth digit of your score is a seven you'll go to a bonus stage. Then, when you get a lift back with Launchpad, if the second digit of your score is a seven, you can drop onto some clouds where Giro will arrive and start throwing diamonds at you (stuuupid!). Do this on each level and you can quickly become a millionaire. NES JACKIE CHAN This game stars the nearest living thing to Bruce Lee (apart from the occasional lost mole) and gets the Ryan Honesdale treatment this month. He says that to get infinite continues and have the opportunity of carrying on through the whole game, when you die just press down and the number of continues should increase. LEGENDARY He's orange he's furry and he's not Two Tails. He's Kevin Walsh from Glasgow and he's got a strange accent and probably wears a tartan skirt form time to time. But you can forgive him his peculiarities because he knows something... At the top of the tower of springboards in Psycho Fox is a warp. Choose a tube and as you descend you will appear on a different level. AXE II MASTER SYSTEM DEAD ANGLE PC ENGINE The sequel to the greatest slash 'em up ever gets the treatment of my wonderful GT this month. With the turbo switches off as your last man collapses, hold down II and RUN. Tap left on the pad quickly until you get some credits. A bit of an oldie but still worth a go. Gavin Peacock from Surrey certainly thinks so and tells me that if you plug in two joypads and turn on the machine, when the title screen appears, move both pads left and right until you hear a sound effect. Now by pressing any button on joypad one you'll be magically transported to a later stage. CVG 062 "


"DUNGEON EXPLORER SPLATTERHOUSE Hey it's another one of my PC Engine cheats. This is getting ridiculous but if you're having trouble defeating Natas even though you're on level 14, then enter this code to give you a level 19 warrior AEPAJ-DPIAA At last you're listening to me. Thomas day has sent me my first Engine cheat all the way from Matson Gloucestershire. To select the hardest difficulty setting just hold down select and button Il and waggle the joypad a bit and then the word Hard should come up on the screen. GALAGA 90 It may be a Space Invaders clone but it's great and anyone who doesn't think so can try out my new cheat and then argue with me. To get extra fire-power during the title screen push up then press RUN. On the select mode, choose the single ship and the first pod will give you a triple ship. IIIIIIITT! PC ENGINE PAUSE CHAN AND CHAN Some rather suspect rear end retorts pepper this game but I've found another cheat for you all to enjoy. When the game is over on the screen press and hold 1 and 2 then press RUN to continue where you died. PAUSE SUPER MARIOLAND 2 A somewhat lengthy cheat from Kristian Speke of Ludlow Shropshire but a fine one for all that. Here's how to get 99 lives. After coming out of the mushroom house, go to the Hippo-Zone and enter the Hippo's soap bubble. Stay above the water and collect all the coins and blocks. Eventually you will come to the second Hippo. Just past this you will come to a row of fourteen question mark boxes next to which is a cloud shaped like an arrow. Just above this is a square-shaped cloud. Fly into the bottom right part of the square to reveal a money bag worth 50 coins. All together you should have about 219 coins. Exit this level and repeat the process until you have 999 coins. Carrying your hefty wad of coins, go into the cave and play the fruit machine using 999 coins each go. This way you get great prizes eg: 50 lives. Keep repeating the whole process until you have plenty of lives. GAME BOY 99% 063 CVG "


"PITFIGHTER I Jaunty Craig Randle from Hinckley Leicestershire has found this seafood related cheat for you all to use on Ataris' brilliant beat 'em up. Type in LOBSTERS and press 1-0 to select your level. Or press C to go straight to the championship match. DYNABLASETER AMIGA MEGA LO MANIA Richard Craig from Formby Liverpool has managed to tear himself away from the local footy ground (I hope it's Anfield) and write down all of these codes. And by the way don't you think Mark Walter's goal against Blackburn was the business? Level 2-3 UXGKSGVG 6-1 UXKVWIAT 2-5 ROVBLLZP 6-3 RORBNGEL 2-6 ROEBLLZP 7-1 ROABNQZV 3-1 UXKKHWST 7-2 UXCKHIUK 3-2 ROCBLOZP 8-3 UXCFWESG 3-6 ROELNOZN 8-5 UXRFWPSG 4-1 ROBEWNPL 8-6 ROXFLWZN 4-7 ROOCNWEV 8-7 MXHEPBEK 5-4 UXVVHOAG 8-8 MXNEPHYL 5-7 UXVVJVAT Joseph Hanna's best pal sent these in. Thanks to Paul Barbera from Adelaide Australia. Here are all the passwords for this great game: 2nd Epoche: QHPCXEWGIHH (170 men) 3rd Epoche: DRUBLWHGTBN (235 men) 4th Epoche: KTXADURTFCV (300 men) 5th Epoche: XGFCXMNQOOR (330 men) 6th Epoche: VLFCPOTQOOR (330 men) 7th Epoche: TKUCNFNSNON (325 men) 8th Epoche: UMKAXAMKLUD (305 men) THANKS TO 9th Epoche: OFBAXURKHIR (300 men) Datel Electronics for the loa Mother Battles: TJLBVSNNIGD (25 men the Action Replay codes and wait till next month when we you all the tricks you can pert with Streetfighter II and a rep Hey! Shini PRINCE OF PERSIA James Hadfield (who sounds suspiciously like an alias for Metallica's very own James Hetfield) from Whitchurch has a great follow-up cheat to last month's Princely effort. Type \"PRINCE MEGAHIT\" at the DOS prompt and then try the following keys: K to kill any enemy on the screen, Shift-B to surround yourself with darkness and Shift-W to float down chasms. EXIT PLAYER SU2000 SO3000 MONEY SOB0DDD IS 10000 $15000L SOOOOO MONEY I S EXIT EXIT 500 MONI S000 UN SQUADRON 7EOOD901: this gives you loads of cash 7EOODDOP2: this gives you unlimited mega crush weapons. PC Infinite lives: FFFE1 20009 99 rings all the time: FFFE2 10063 FFFEO 90001: this allows you to modify your own level. SUPER AXELAY Infinite lives: 7E005E03 It's Action Replay hilarity ahoy with a teenie taster of Replay cartridge cheats. SUPER GHOULS AND GHOSTS 7E02A402: this gives you infinite lives. CVG 064 "


"VASTLIGHT If you are in search of the latest wares at competitive prices; the road can only lead to one ultimate destination !!! MD Sonic 2....... .........DM58,5............. SFC Kikikuikui .......... ..........DM87,5 ............. SFC Tiny Toons............ ................DM87,5 ............. SFC Rushing Beat 2................. .................DM97,.......... .... SFC Fatal Fury .................. ..............DM97,............. SFC Jaki Crush: Naxat Super Pinball ............. .............DM87,5 ............. Venus Pal 1 Booster (best one for SFC). ..DM58,5.... . Hori Fighting Stick (best 6 button joystick for SFC)....DM110,5 ............. City Boy Joystick (for 4 systems)..... ...............DM104,............. MGH (Dual purpose version).............. .............DM510,5 ........... Twin SC Pro.5 .............................................................DM437,5 ........... UFO Pro.6 ............. ..............DM416,5 ........... Super Pro Fighter (New on market; contains DSP chip).......DM499,........... All prices include registered post; add DM24/ in you require Speedpost 3 day courier The above is a brief list of what we supply; DM2/ for a concise list or Fax/phone us. We can get hold of the latest SFC cartridges a couple of days before the official release date in Japan. If you want to see the latest products and some of the 22 versions of SFII then get our video. Refer to last months issue for full details. Knowledge is the key if you are to stop buying crap products. No bull. No lie. Just straight up facts. Over 100 minutes of action that will bring you up to the present day! Zahlungsmodalitten Alles was zu tun ist, ist das Geld auf das angegbene Bankkonto zu berweisen in Deutsche Mark. Schickt oder faxt uns danach die Durchschrift des berweisungsformulars mit Eurer Bestellung zu. Die Ware Wird Sptestens 2 Tage nach Bestelleingang verschickt und ist in der Regel nack einer Woche beim Empfnger. Bankkonto Nr. 8250912 bei der Deutshen Bank Munchen (BLZ 700 700 10). Empfnger : Lee, King Lok Method of Payment All yoo need to do is go to your nearest Barclays Bank and deposit the appropriate amount into our bank account. After completing this task, send a photocopy of your credit counterfoil or fax the slip to us with details of your order. All goods are sent out within 2 days of receipt of your order. Our bank details: Name Nicky Lee, A/C no 50573663, bank sorting code 20-70-04 NICKY LEE, VASTLIGHT INVESTMENTS LTD, SHOP B1A Mei WAH BUILDING, WAN TAU STREET, Tai Po, NT, HK TEL : HK 852 675 8751 Fax : HK 852 675 7919 OR 675 8021 "


"GVG OFFICIAL Dear Wimps... Take my hand and come with me as we dive headfirst into another sackful of Official High Scores! I've had more than the usual amount of weeds trying to spin my chin this month mi bocus scores; needless to say that they went straight in the bin, but not before I added them to my Rrer-orowing list of sad losers. When I reach the magic number of de itinated CHEATERS I'll publish them in one whole page of shame, so you'll all know houruterly despicable and pathetic at games they really are. One incredibly sad an even tried to pass off a High Score of 109 levels completed on Super Mario Land. Very very very sad indeed. Until next AMIGA I'm getting a bit tired of these Amiga scores the whole chart's been totally dominated by Pinball Dreams lately. No one's put out a decent Project X score yet either. So improvements needed all round, don't you think? PINBALL DREAMS NIGHTMARE 332,624,451 Neil Wright, Wirral PINBALL DREAMS BEAT BOX58,997,947 Neil Wright, Wirral PARASOL STARS 1,694,440 Joseph Oliver, Nottingham \\ADDAMS FAMILY 598,200 Paul Sutcliffe, Halifax PROJECT X 856,910 Raphael Ribeiro, Watford TEST DRIVE 2 244,808 Andrew George, Dyfed SILLY PUTTY 450,000 Scott Palmer, Dudley SUPERCARS II 38 Jamie Aldron, Swansea "


"K HIGH SCORES ARCADE MEGADRIVE MASTER SYSTEM Nothing to shout about this month, Megadrive owners. Have you all fallen asleep or are you suffering from post-Christmas nerves? Let's hope that you get something sorted out for the next issue or you'll be feeling the full force of my wrath. And that's not nice. Bit low on Master System Scores this time aroundwhat are you all doing out there? The NES owners have whipped your asses this month: if you don't improve I'll have to join them in your misery!! There's no denying the machine's immortal popularity, but haven't any of our champion arcade busters played anything else but Streetfighter in the last four months? Variety's the spice of life and I want some real High Scoring Vindaloos to be sent in before I go off the boil! STREETFIGHTER CHAMPIONSHIP EDITION 1,482,501 Ashlet Fullwood, Wolverhamton MORTAL COMBAT 6,537,000 Daniel Hassany, Hove ART OF FIGHTING 8th Round (the gym) Craig Smith, Swansea ALEX KIDD IN MIRACLE WORLD 117,600 Pete Neilson, Ilkeston SONIC THE HEDGEHOG 423,700 David Cree, Newbury MICKEY MOUSE 1,214,467 David Cree, Newbury ASTERIX 633,400 Christopher Fallon, Renfrewshire GLOBAL DEFENSE 105,970 Christopher Fallon, Renfrewshire CHUCK ROCK 198,400 Minesh Vohra, Willesdon GAMEBOY KLAX 4,613,005 Paul Smythe, Sunderland BULLS VS LAKERS Bulls 64 Celtics 9 Gary Treacy, Corby ALIEN 3 3,697,550 Lee Croft, Kent TAZ 1,535,275 Tony Phillips, Romford PITFIGHTER 1,984,640 Chris Keen, Chichester STRIDER 131,850 Randolph Wilcox, Willenhall MERCS 1,377,350 Rory Jones, Laindon THUNDERFORCE 3 6,652,500 Peter Ronaszeki, Australia PGA TOUR GOLF-53 James Horrocks, Halifax TOEJAM & EARL 1014 (Funklord) Russell Mills, Stonehouse SUPER NINTENDO Some new faces have appeared on the Game Boy scene, so I'll expect to see top scores on Xenon 2, Speedball 2 and Mario 2 very shortly. Until then this crop will just about tide me over, but next month want them through the roof! SUPER MARIO LAND 376,020 Paul Smythe, Sunderland R-TYPE 89,950 Bob Pullen, Doncaster THE AMAZING SPIDERMAN 142,160 John Pearson, Co Durham TETRIS 181 Lines Andrew Lobo, West Croydon CAESER'S PALACE $50,000 Robert Sims, Worcester WORLD CUP -52-0 vs Cameroon Oliver Pearson, Boston CASTLEVANIA 142,670 Harry Kruger, Greece TURRICAN 370,150 James Musselwhite, Bournemouth I knew it wouldn't be long before Axelay scores started to trickle through. Not a bad effort from Leigh Jackson, but I'll expect to see more from him later! Mat's score on Darius Twin is extremely respectable also, and it's been a bumper crop of SNES Scores this month all round. Keep it up! NES A veritable cornucopia of NES Scores this month! It's good to see the machine is still being run ragged by our incredible readers. Keep the Mario Scores coming in and get busting those aliens! BART'S NIGHTMARE -9,999,99 COMPLETED Leigh Jackson, Hull SUPER CASTLEVANIA 475,010 Leigh Jackson, Hull AXELAY 1,693,850 COMPLETED HARD LEVEL Leigh Jackson, Hull ACTRAISER 168,900 POPULATION OF 4186 Andrew Cake, Newport KING OF THE MONSTERS 334,170 COMPLETED Patrick Seaman, Manchester JOE AND MAC-510,400 Glenn Urquart. Edinburgh STREETFIGHTER 2 1,304,101 Adam Doy, Norwich DARIUS TWIN 4,882,200 Matt Oxley, Ripley AREA 88 -3,192,900 Miles Cadwllader, Brockley PRINCE OF PERSIA COMPLETED WITH 26 MINUTES LEFT Miles Cadwallader, Brockley SMASH TV 22,196,500 Daniel Martindale, Perth GAME GEAR Not the worst scores in the world, GG freaks, but they're in pretty short supply. With all these new fab carts on the way, there's definitely no excuse for not getting those scores in. So DO IT! SHINOBI 60,005 Allan Campbell, Faversham WONDERBOY 200,720 Allan Campbell, Faversham SONIC 165,440,450 Sharon Mitchell, Scotland DUCK TALES 57,277,100 James Fletcher, Aylesbury TETRIS 999,999 Ryan Murray, Glasgow TURTLES 753,760 Steven Robson, North Shields STEALTH ATF 1,691,700 Steven Robson, North Shields ROBOCOP 10,121 Garry Barker, Co Durham BOMBERMAN 800,783,400 Harry Krueger, Greece "


"Official UK High Scores Theres Dear Wimp's Here it is your chance to prove you're a great gamer and win the fame of your name in the Official High Scores and the chance to play against the CVG boys themselves! The CVG stars reckon they're the greatest when it comes to games and can beat the pants off any of you puny wimpos, so it's up to you to prove them wrong! I'll be picking the hottest players of the lot and invite them down to CVG Towers to play against the boys themselves and every month the hotshot who I reckon is the greatest gamer will win themselves an incredible framed and signed photo of yours truly! So if you want fame, fortune, a crack against the CVG boys and the greatest gaming trophy in the land just rack up those points, fill out this form and send it off to: OFFICIAL UK HIGH SCORES, COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. Remember, you've got to be in it to win it, so get to it wimpos! Sadie Official UK High Scores Entry Form SCORE GAME FORMAT SCORE GAME FORMAT SCORE GAME FORMAT NAME ADDRESS Dear Sadie, I reckon I'm the greatest gamer around and can beat those CVG boyos any day of the week. Here are my High Scores to prove it and I hope you pick me for some gaming glory: "


"When we do it, we do it BIG! Mario, the most famous plumber ever, just goes from strength to strength and to celebrate his huge star status, we're giving you the complete Mario story to coincide with the fantastic FREE Mario badge on the cover of this issue! So feast your eyes and rev up your consoles for the non-stop rollercoaster ride that has seen Mario become the world's largest-grossing video game character of all time! SECONDS OUT! A sequel was assured, but this time the tables were turned as Mario caged the wicked Kong and left the task of rescue up to the ape's young son! Donkey Kong Jnr. was another smash that was eventually to be released on one cartridge alongside Donkey Kong for the NES. It just goes to show how small and basic these games were compared to todays mammoth cart-busters THIRD HELPINGS The third in the series proved to be a radical departure from the platform/climbing theme. Donkey Kong 3 saw Mario swatting insects and eventually the big ape, in his attempts to chuck the hairy fiend off the top of the screen. At first people took to the change in style, but the longevity of gameplay just wasn't there and most thought that perhaps the plumber had had his finest hour. GETTING A LIFE Mario was the sole creation of Japanese video game programmer and designer Shigeru Miyamoto. Although he's now a household name in the Land of the Rising Sun, with his own daily cartoon series and his face plastered on more objects than the Queen, his humble beginnings were in arcade games way back in 1980. Donkey Kong was the first game ever to star the hat-wearing Brooklyn boy and at that time, he didn't even have a name! The idea was to guide Mario up a series of slopes and ladders to the top of the screen to rescue his girlfriend. While you jumped and climbed your way forward a large ape stood at the top and hurled barrels down at you. Graphically, Donkey Kong was nothing special and the only pick-up was a small mallet with which the character could break the barrels, making the whole experience as far from todays games as you could get. However, video gaming was in virgin territory and Donkey Kong became a massive hit. DODGY DAYS! Not to be put off the programmers gave it one last try at the end of 1984 with the fourth and final Donkey Kong game. Realising their mistakes, it was back to the drawing board and a return to the original style. However, video gaming had stepped up a notch and whilst it was still in the factory, Nintendo bosses decided that the game wasn't quite up to the scratch of the competition's releases and the machine was never shipped out internationally. "


"NEW BEGINNINGS 201 42'37 The Donkey Kong legacy now well and truly over, Mario was ready for his own personal assault on the arcade gaming world with the first of his now infamous platform adventure titles. Mario Bros introduced Luigi, Mario's twin, to the public with the first two-player game starring the pair. In this game the brothers had to clear the screen of cute animals, including snowmen and crabs, as they crawled out strategically-placed pipes. The guys had to first knock the baddies out from underneath platforms and then kick them off the play field with a mighty punt! 101 55'32 600 Og 01 5530 J'02 2802 CHOICES CHOICES Things get a little complicated now as Nintendo launched the Game Boy and Super Famicom machines in Japan. Up until now all these games had only been available on the NES and it was only logical that what worked on that format would work on their new machines as well. So, with a new Mario game for the NES, the incredible Super Mario 3, re-establishing the character as number one in the video gaming world, Nintendo decided to release a special Mario cart for its 16-bit flagship machine the incredible Super Mario World. The Famicom version contained no less than 96 levels even more if you're a top player and new characters, including Mario's guzzling dinosaur pal, Yoshi, and fantastic features such as a special flying cape for Mario and the super drill, which lets the hero tunnel through blocks to hidden levels. Mario could even jump on the back of his prehistoric friend and spit fireballs at the many enemies When the system was launched in the UK, now known as the Super Nintendo Entertainment System, the game was bundled with the machine; the SNES flew out of stores the length and breadth of the country. WHAT! MORE? By now Mario was well on his way to super-stardom, but it wasn't until 1985 and the release of Super Mario Bros that his true potential was realised. Up until now he'd been confined to one screen, but with the emergence of horizontal scrolling our hero could really start cooking. Eight massive levels were given over to the character as he trashed his way through surprise after surprise and enemy after enemy to get back his beloved Princess Daisy. Packed with imaginative gameplay features and scores of hidden rooms stuffed with treasures, the game sold over 43,000,000 units worldwide, shooting the plumber into the top flight and making him the highest money spinning performer in the world! 102' 28\"00 SEA lo THE NEVER ENDING STORY ALTERED IMAGES Super Mario Bros 2 was an odd one; rather than create the sequel from scratch, the programmers simply took an old game, tweaked the graphics and gameplay and launched the title as an original cart. This time around, players could choose from four characters Mario, Luigi, Princess Daisy and Toad. Generally regarded as the weakest in the series, Super Mario 2 was nevertheless another phenomenal hit. Other Mario titles include Dr Mario, a sort of Tetris-cum-Columns hybrid and Super Marioland, both for the Game Boy. But with the huge success of the Famicom's game other stars such as Yoshi have, and almost certainly will have, their own titles. Even as video gaming becomes ever more diverse, it seems that the Mario formula will just keep on trucking. He's already grossed over three times as much money as the biggest film in history; and speaking of films, the Super Mario Bros movie is in production, starring Bob Hoskins as the man himself and Dennis Hopper as Bowser, King Of The Koopas! It looks as though Mario Mania could go on forever he's beginning to appear in games other than platform-based check out the amazing Super Mario Kart and with T-shirts, cartoon shows and even records featuring the moustachioed maestro, we bet you wish it was you who doodled the rotund, cap-wearing pipe-fitter in a fit of boredom! LOE xes "


"FUE REVIEW B788 OCLEAR CREDITS NES A JOLLY BROLLY PLATFORM BY OCEAN .00 Bet you thought an umbrella was only any good for keeping the rain off you and poking peoples' eyes out with the ludicrously pointy bits as you saunter along the streets? Not if you were using it to take on Baron von Blubba and his cronies, for in Parasol Stars you have a magic brolly that not only lets you stun the meanies, it also allows you to pick up drops of water and hurl them at the enemies, destroying them in the process! MODULUI DABAR GOOD GOLLY! A LORRA LOLLY! As in Bubble Bobble and Rainbow Islands, one of the key features to be found in Parasol Stars is the absolute horde of secret bonus goodies, simply aching for collection! If you can wipe out all the baddies on-screen in the correct order, hidden doors open to let you in on those lovely extras. Other surprises include bags of dosh falling from the sky, big cakes (like those seen in Bubble Bobble) and other point-increasing chattles! s3493% 0 CREDIT SYDX 9 CREDITS ub is back! The once-dinosaurian star of Bubble Bobble and Rainbow Islands is still in human form, and still battling against the dastardly Baron von Blubba! The big boss baron is up to his usual being-not-nice antics, and it's up to the portly kid to grab his magic umbrella and take on all manner of weird and wonderful meanies before the Baron and his boys do something unspeakable to Bub's pals. I thought that I'd be getting just a little tired of these cute platform games by now after around three years of playing them, but to be perfectly honest, having had a good old crack at Parasol Stars on NES, it's reminded me of just how good they are when done well. Graphically the game's no great 06 shakes neither, for that matter, were the prequels but they're jolly and move around well. Sound isn't bad either, although just how long you can stand the tinkly tunes before you go completely off your trolley, I wouldn't like to guess. No, for me it's the gameplay which makes these titles stand out from the crowd, and there's no denying that Parasol Stars has that vital ingredient in abundance. You'll be instantly hooked from the beginning and will keep returning to the action time and time again. Loads of baddies, bonuses galore and a lasting challenge are what Parasol Stars has going for it give it a whirl and you'll agree! PAUL RAND GRAPHICS % 83 SOUND SOUND % 85 GAMEPLAY % VALUE % F   VELLY JOLLY! Bubble Bobble and Rainbow Islands weren't exactly known for their frightening end-of-level guardians, and Parasol Stars is no different. After all, who could be frightened by a large one man band? But don't be lulled into a false sense of security: like most end baddies, if you mess with these fellers you've got to be good, otherwise you'll just get got! CVG STRATEGY SKILL E088, 90 ACTION REFLEXES "


"WASSIVE 180 PAGE CHRISTMAS SPECIAL .95 US$8.00 DEC NO BAT EXCLUSIV MEGA-LO-MANI FULL REVIEW! MACHINES MEGADRIVE MEGADRI GAME OF TI NWF WRESTLEMANIA LOTUS CHALLENGE JOHN MADDEN '93 WORLD OF ILLUSION MEGA-CD OMEAN MACHINES SEGA MEAN MACHINES SEGA MEAN MACHINES SEGA O MEAN MACHINES SEGAO PGA TOUR GOLF II EXCLUSIVE REVIEW! OMEAN MACHINES SEGAO MEAN MACHINES SEGA MEAN MACHINES SEGA MEAN MACHINES SEGAO EXCLUSIVE! OFFICIAL EGA MEGA-CD REVIEWS ON VIDEO ASTER SYSTEM EMMINGS WONDERBOY 111 MASTER OF DARKNESS GAME GEAR INGREDIBLE! 63 PAGES.OF MEGA REVIEWS! KONIC 2 SUPER OFF-ROAD DERLEDENDA 19 1770967190198 EXCLUSIVE! STREETS OF RAGE I or the ultimate in Sega gaming, cop a load of the utterly excellent Christmas issue of MEAN MACHINES SEGA on the shelves now. GASP at the massive 180 page special issue, packed with a huge wodge of superb reviews, previews and the latest news updates. SWOON at the absolutely awesome Mega CD video exclusively previewing all Sega's forthcoming releases. DELIGHT in all the warped and twisted replies of the Mean Yob and the humungous tips section. SIGH with relief as Jaz deigns to answer your deepest console queries. But above all ENJOY. Do you dare miss it? "


"REVIEW BUG SELECT STADIUM SUPER NINTENDO SPORTS SIM STADIA GALORE WHICH TO CHOOSE? BY NAMCO .99 OB UUS HERE ARE THE LADS, ALL READY AND WAITING FOR USA'S ANSWER TO ROUNDERS! aseball? Oh yeah, it's a bit like rounders, innit? No, not really. For a start it's American, the bat is a lot larger, the ball is thrown a touch faster and you have to wear stupid caps to play it as well. The basic rules are quite simple someone chucks the ball at you and you hit it as hard as possible, then run. Meanwhile, the other guys have to try and run after the ball and get it to the base before you do, or catch it before it hits the ground. Great, eh? STRIKE TIME! GO ON, CATCH IT MAN! As with most sports sims lately, Super Batter Up uses real American League teams and real team stats. This basically means that there's a lot more strategy involved than just picking teams at random. There's no famous players in there (which means the absence of that get Roger Clemens) but the teams' skill levels change drastically from one end of the board to the other. The instruction book gives you a full rundown of all the teams' player stats; there's everything you need to know about every player in there, from throwing skills to height these come in very useful when selecting your starting line-up or calling a time out. If, when your batter gets to the plate, you realise that he can't even swing a cat in an empty room, you can always call a time-out and relieve him of his duties at any point during the match by pushing Start. You only get a limited amount of time-outs for each innings, so use them wisely a good tip is, just as the pitcher is winding up, call 'time' in order to put him out of his stride a little. THANKS...to Shekhana Consoles (081 340 8565) for the review cartridge. Super Batter Up is yet another in an NUFF Saio! unnecessarily long line of failed efforts. The problem with Baseball games is that you just cannot give any of the players an IQ above that of Steve Keen, which makes catching players out and preventing steals very hard. As well as all the standard problems of such titles, Super Batter Up suffers from its own as well it's complete crap! The game is so slow and the players so unresponsive that you won't want to bother playing past the first innings ever. Just to hammer the final nail in the coffin, the music is probably about the worst I've ever heard in my life; we're talking worse than Top of the Pops in 1976 here. Tunes are so repetitive and sad that you'll be likely to turn the volume right down and rip the knob off! HOME RUN COMING UP! BOTTOM OF THE NINTH As well as being able to choose from real teams, it's also possible to choose different styles of play. There's your standard one or two player mode which puts you up against either the computer or a mate over however many innings you decide to choose. A standard game consists of nine innings, but if you've only got a few minutes you can play just a couple. If you fancy something a little more challenging you can take part in a full Major League season only in one player mode, but you get to participate in a real season with league standings and such. There's also a password option so that all your hard work does not get wiped when you switch off. IT'S LONELY IN THE OUT-FIELD! CVG STRATEGY SKILL 360E PAUL RAND GRAPHICS % 78 SOUND % 24 GAMEPLAY % 48 VALUE % 31 olo CVG ACTION REFLEXES CVG 073 "


"AVG BUG REVIEW Se gundytice MEGADRIVE 121 RACEING BY CODEMASTERS .99 WHICH ONE WILL YOU CHOOSE? OPISNE Micro Machines t's amazing what kids keep in their pockets these days. In my time you'd be lucky to find three pence, a conker and a fluff-covered Murray Mint! But now you're likely to discover a half-dozen electronic games, a parent's credit card and more miniaturised cars than Elton John keeps in his garage! Micro Machines first saw the light of day as tiny, detailed vehicles that kids collected. The Codies saw their true potential and stuck the microscopic toys in a race and chase game on the NES which set the world alight! Now it's be en given the full 16-bit treatment and is shooting onto the Megadrive. MINIATURE MADNESS Rep erspect, verses ago Everything in Micro Machines is cut right down to size. All the racing takes place in our world on huge breakfast tables, floors, sideboards and even in the bathtub! They may be small, but these machines certainly pack some zip. It's not just a question of the fastest taking the chequered flag, though. The winner will have to guide his vehicle around tons of everyday obstacles that look as though they've been left behind by an extra from Valley Of The Out of all the different races one of the most fun is the head-to-head light Giants! There are nools of sticky challenge. On this course you must race to the finish line, keeping all the honey that have been dripped onto other cars behind you. If you get left behind and disappear off the screen you the track. glue pens and pencils. lose a life, but if you leave the other racers behind they'll disappear in a puff rubbers, nuts and bolts and loads of of smoke. Nice one! Sometimes the track's lines are a little difficult to make other gargantuan obstacles, spread out, but you can always cut a few corners. Be careful though too much time over 27 twisting courses and locaoff the track and you'll explode! UH-OH! MIND YOU DONN'T HIT THAT tions PENCIL SHARPENER! HEADING FOR A FALL SMASH AND BASH Beating the opposition requires cunning and tactical use of the nudge. Buffet opponents' cars out of the way if they take up too much space and exploit those huge tangerine seg. ments by subtly pushing other people into them! There are rivers, jumps and even cereal boxes that can be used to make you the undisputed champion. The Micro vehicles are incredibly nippy and move brilliantly with great sound effects as the tiny motors whir around the circuits in and out of the huge obstacles. They even have shadows whenever they leave the table and fly over a jump. Some of the other contestants are a bit of a push over and the screen could have done with showing more of the track, but the end result is great. There's not a lot to the game when it gets down to it, but what a lot of fun it is. There are 27 different courses and at least six tiny craft for you to master, so you won't be wanting for more events for quite a while. Each one handles realistically, although some are more delicate to the touch than others. This is highly recommended and one of the best race games on the Megadrive. CVG 074 STEVE KEEN UND o oo CHOPPERS "


"REVIEW FUG Fas 18*295 dr Wiero Machines Chatene B FREE THING INSINE! 0x720 CRUMBS! A RIGHT SMART PRESENTATION BOX!! Vom Micro Machines Challenge VEHICLES SELECT VEHICLE FOR ALL OCCASIONS Considering they're best known for the slightly tedious Dizzy series, I was very surprised when the Codies came up with the incredible Micro Machines on NES. It looked a bit tinky, but played like a charm. Now it's come to the Megadrive and the quality is on a par with the 8-bit Nintendo game that means it's very good. Graphically you'd expect it to be superior, and it is; small but perfectly formed sprites and a stack of greatlooking tracks are pleasing to the eye without being gaudy. Some of the opposition racers are verging on the sad side, but generally there's a meaty challenge in there, and the game really comes into its own when you grab a OVER LAD!: pal for two-player thrills and spills. One of the better racing games on the Megadrive, Micro Machines is a winner for Codemasters! Creme SLIIT lit11 HEY! IT'S THE KING! In true form, just as though you were collecting the real items, Micro Machines takes you through the whole series of toys. Slide into control of sports cars, power boats (watch out for the plug hole!), combat tanks, dune buggies and mini-helicopters that flutter through the garden. When you're racing in the challenge mode you get a nice wooden presentation case to put all your cars in when you've finished with them before moving on to the next race. You only get three credits and if you don't finish in one of the top two positions you'll lose your collection and must start again. HLS10115! BALSAINI SINDIT TWO PLAY PAUL RAND STRATEGY SKILL No racing game's complete without two player hilarity. And you can tear around the obstacle-ridden tracks in a single player game, choosing up to four opponents from a bank of computer contestants, or a two player challenge racing against a friend. You can even choose the tracks and vehicles with which to race. The Computer holds zillions of contestants all varying in ability from Ace to Paul Rand but no-one's THAT bad! HHO YOU HANT 101 A QUARTET OF LITTLE CHOPPERS... ACTION REFLEXES GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE CVG % 79 % 80 % 89 % 87 JOLLY BOATING WEATHER SOGO Oggo anaTUITIES 0000 TOPPIES SUGERT BITS KO MATURSE IN REDIENTS! Saddol ORLOOR CVG CVG 075 "


"PVC REVIEW FUEGO MEGADRIVE SPORT SIM BY ELECTRONIC ARTS .99 tricks and traps my nose. t was only a few months ago that you dispatched the evil Zelek from the world to regain your human form, and now the pest has returned to steal your sister. There's no peace for the deformed, and this time you've got to fight the Beast on his own turf. So, snatching up a heavy mace and donning a loin-cloth, it's time to traverse the treacherous land of Kara-Moon to Zelek's domain and enter the towering castle of darkness for the final battle. EA could have (I'd rather CURIOUSER ironed out Pick Beast Il is more than your average platform shoot 'em up there's quite a Beast's little nigand large puzzle aspect to the game as well. You'll come across many blocked gles to release the CURIOUSER corridors, traps and puzzles that are far from obvious to solve. It would be impossible to finish this monster in one sitting, even when you play on the huge potential that After defeating Zelek the last time easiest level it's one thing having the ability to change weapons, but to have the original game round, you managed to break the to do it in the thick of a fight, when every drop of elixir is vital, is another mathad; instead, spell that transformed you into a ter beast and have turned back into they've opted for a human form. You now look more like straight port-over a cross between a naked Jeremy from the Amiga A Beadle and David Bellamy! The curithat, if anything, has ous graphics, with their bold, richly-coloured backdrops and pale been toned down. The puzzle aspect has sprites, really do give the impression also been diluted in the computer ver of another world and work very well, sions, you could talk to and interact with even if they are extremely simple, characters and ask them questions; here it's all given to you on a plate. Another annoying aspect is every single task has to be performed in the right order or you COLLECTABLES can't finish. If you do something out of The beast can collect up to four turn the computer keeps it quiet and you objects which can be used at any can go on for hours before getting com time; however, only his standard pletely stuck and shoved back to the weapon, the mace, can be used more than once and armaments such beginning. When it boils down to it, as the flying battle-axe have to be Beast Il is supposed to be a thinking saved until the right moment as they man's platform beat 'em up, but the only only last for 10 seconds. Coins, keys real puzzle is how to stay alive long and potions can also be found and all must be used at the right moment. enough to make it past the next screen! You only get one chance in this After a while you won't care much if you game! do. delectable STRATEGY SKILL CVG STEVE KEEN GRAPHICS % 84 SOUND GAMEPLAY % 79 VALUE % 78 CVG 076 ACTION REFLEXES CVG "


"ULTIMATE SOFTWARE 4 Rylands Mews Leighton Buzzard, Beds LUZ 8SP Tel 0525 852934 Fax 0525 853618 Mon-Sat 9.30am-7pm * FREE MEMBERSHIP * FIRST CLASS DELIVERY * RECORDED DELIVERY CONSOLE MANILA!! * FAST EFFICIENT SERVICE PART EXCHANGE WELCOME SAME DAY DESPATCH THE GAMES ROOM Unit 17 In Shops, Epsom Market Hall, High Street, Epsom, Surrey KT19 8TX Tel: 0372 744465 Fax: 0372 749310 Tue-Sat 9am-5.30pm THE GAMES ROOM 2 9 The Arcade, High St, Sutton, Surrey SMI IET Tel/Fax 081 643 9500 Mon-Sat 9.30am-6pm MAIL ORDER HOTLINE 0525 852934 MAIL ORDER HOTLINE 0372 744465 or 081 643 9500 WIC 2 IMPORT MEGA DRIVE WITH SONIC (1 year guarantee .99 + p&p IMPORT MEGA DRIVE WITH SONIC & SONIC 2 .99 + p&p 34.99 19.99 19.99 MORE GREAT UK/USA MEGA DRIVE TITLES ALIEN 3 ATOMIC RUNNER 34.99 BUCK ROGERS 29.99 BULLS VS LAKERS 34.99 CHUCK ROCK 34.99 CORPORATION 34.99 DRAGONS FURY 34.99 EUROPEAN CLUB SOCCER 34,99 EVANDER HOLYFIELDS BOXING 34.99 JOE MONTANA 93 34.99 KRUSTYS FUN HOUSE 34.99 LEMMINGS 34.99 MARBLE MADNESS 29.99 OLYMPIC GOLD 34.99 PITFIGHTER 34.99 ROLLING THUNDER 2 36.99 SHINING IN DARKNESS 36.99 SMASH TV 34.99 SIMPSONS VS SPACE MUTANTS 32.99 SPEEDBALL 2 32.99 TAZ-MANIA 34.99 TERMINATOR 34.99 SHADOW BARE KNUCKLE 2 CALL BEAST WARRIORS 14.99 CASTLE OF ILLUSION 19.99 DONALD DUCK DOUBLE DRAGON 2 14.99 ESWAT 19.99 FANTASIA GOLDEN AXE 2 19.99 GYNOUG 14.99 HELLFIRE 16.99 MICKEY AND DONALD 34.99 NEW ZEALAND STORY 24.99 ROAD BUSTER 16.99 RUNARK 16.99 STEEL EMPIRE 14.99 SENNA SUPER MONACO GP 26.99 SONIC 2 (UK INSTRUCTIONS) 29.99 STORMLORD 14.99 TASK FORCE HARRIER 14.99 THUNDER PRO WRESTLING 14.99 WANI WANI WORLD 14.99 WONDERBOY 3 14.99 *** MEGA DRIVE UK/US SPECIAL OFFERS ALISIA DRAGOON 26.99 AQUATIC GAMES 26.99 BATMAN 29.99 BLOCKOUT 19.99 CROSSFIRE 19.99 DECAP ATTACK 24.99 DOUBLE DRAGON 24.99 FATAL REWIND 24.99 FAERY TALE ADVENTURE 19.99 GOLDEN AXE 24.99 JB DOUGLAS BOXING 24.99 DESERT STRIKE EA HOCKEY F22 INTERCEPTOR 29.99 IMMORTAL 29.99 JOHN MADDEN 92 26.99 JORDAN VS BIRD 24.99 MERCS 24.99 NHLPA 93 HOCKEY 34.99 PGA TOUR GOLF 29.99 POPULOUS 24.99 REVENGE OF SHINOBI 24.99 RINGS OF POWER 26.99 ROAD RASH 29.99 ROBOCOD 26.99 SYD OF VALIS 26.99 .. SUPER OFF ROAD 24.99 STARFLIGHT 29.99 TEAM USA BASKETBALL 34.99 TEST DRIVE2 24.99 YOUNG GALAHAD 34.99 TOKI 26.99 TWISTED FLIPPER 29.99 WARSONG 26.99 MEGA DRIVE UK/US NEW RELEASES AMERICAN GLADIATORS CALL GODS 34.99 JENNIFER CAPRIATI TENNIS 34.99 JOHN MADDEN 93 34.99 LHX ATTACK CHOPPER 34.99 LOTUS TURBO CHALLENGE 34.99 MUHAMMAD ALI BOXING CALL OUT OF THIS WORLD CALL POWERMONGER 34.99 ROAD RASH 2 34.99 SHADOW OF THE BEAST 2 34.99 SONIC 2 CALL STEEL TALONS 34.99 STREETS OF RAGE 2 CALL SUPERMAN CALL UNIVERSAL SOLDIER 29.99 WORLD OF ILLUSION CALL WWF WRESTLEMANIA 34.99 ....42.99 **** **** .39.99 EVANDER HOLYFIELD BOXING UK SUPER NES With Streetfighter 2 + free convertor .99+ p&p AMERICAN SUPER NES TITLES SPIDERMAN XMEN............................44.99 STREETFIGHTER........ ADDAMS FAMILY.................................39.99 ... ....54.99 ..54 AXELAY........ .........44.99 SUPER BATTLETANK..........................39.99 SUPER SMASH TV... AMAZING TENNIS..........................42.99 SUPER STAR WARS .... ARCANA........................................39.99 SUPER GHOULS AND GHOSTS............39.99 BATTLETOADS.... .... . . .. BEST OF THE BEST......... ..........42.99 TURTLES IN TIME BILL LAMBEERS..... CASTLEVANIA 4... CHUCK ROCK... CONTRA 3... .99 COOL WORLD DINO CITY.... SUPER SOCCER CHAMP .....................42.99 ........36.99 ....... SUPER BOWLING.......... LEMMINOS STREETFIGHTER T SIM CITY .... .... .. SOULBLAZER..... TOP GEAR ........... TOM AND JERRY....................................42.99 TURTLES IN TIME..... UN SQUADRON........ DESERT STRIKE ...................................42.99 WHEEL OF FORTUNE..... DEATH VALLEY RALLEY.......................42.99 FACEBALL 2000 ....................................36.99 WWF WRESTLEMANIA ......................39.99 FF MYSTIC QUEST ....... WINGS 2..........................................39.99 ................34.99 WING COMMANDER ..... FINAL FIGHT.......................................42.99 GODS................................. ...42.99 ...........42.99 ZELDA 3............. GUNFORCE.... JAPANESE FAMICOM TITLES HOOK...................... ...39.99 ...... JOHN MADDEN 93 ................................42.99 AXELAY..... 39.99 JAMES BOND JNR ................................39.99 AREA 88 ................. .29.99 JOE AND MAC....... CASTLEVANIA 4.... ..29.99 KRUSTYS FUN HOUSE.... DOUBLE DRAGON RETURNS...... ......34.99 LEMMINGS.... ..42.99 FATAL FURY..... ......CALL LETHAL WEAPON ..............................42.99 FIST OF NORTHSTAR. ..44.99 SUPE LEMMINGS......... 24.99 BATTLETANK MICKEY MOUSE..... ..44.99 PARODIUS. 39.99 PRINCE OF PERSIA... .99 ..39.99 SONIC BLASTMAN ...44.99 SUPER PANG..... .36.99 MARIO KART ...39.99 TOP RACER..... 29.99 MICKEYS MAGICAL QUEST ....44.99 WWF WRESTLEMANIA 29.99 MYSTICAL NINJA... ..42.99 NHLPA HOCKEY 93 ACCESSORIES NCAA BASKETBALL ..39.99 OUT OF THIS WORLD ..CALL SUPER GAME CONVERTER PGA TOUR GOLF ..42.99 HONEYBEE MAGIC CONVERTER.. PILOTWINGS ...39.99 SUPERCON 2 UK JOYPAD....... .12.99 ROBOCOP 3... 39.99 PRO PAD 2 UK JOYPAD .... SPACE MEGAFORCE.. ...42.99 JB SUPERKING... ..39.99 ACCESSORIES TURBO JOYPAD PRO 2 JOYPAD ARCADE POWERSTICK CLUSTER STICK UK JAP ADAPTOR . JAPANESE MEGA DRIVE OFFERS UK JAP ADAPTOR 8.99 ALIEN STORM 16.99 BARE KNUCKLE 19.99 ..39.99 9.99 12.99 29.99 29.99 8.99 VISA ORDER COUPON PLEASE MAKE CHEQUES AND POSTAL ORDERS PAYABLE TO INDEPENDENT PARTIES ABOVE Name Address WANTED CASH PAID FOR SEGA & NINTENDO TITLES Tel: Visa/Access No IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII Exp Date/ Cost P&P Item ...42.99 ......8.99 Part exchange your old titles for new games or cash now!!! .. 14.99 Please add  p&p for consoles Total SP P&P .00 ON GAMES, .00 ON CONSOLES. WE ALSO STOCK FULL RANGE OF GAME GEAR AND GAMEBOY TITLES ALSO SEE US AT MILTON KEYNES MARKET (SAT + TUES) & FINMERE MARKET (SUN). "


"GVO CVE REVIEW NISKA WODOS MEGADRIVE PLATFORM BY ELECTRONIC EAST .99 Joan armour-trading Occasionally when a creature is shot it drops a metal disk. Rohan, using his amazing iron-working talents, can construct a suit of armour from the disks he collects. Gathering thirty-two lets him a build a suit of silver armour which absorbs half the damage inflicted on him. Sixty-five disks are enough for him to build the rock-hard gold armour which affords 100% protection from damage. Being hit by one of Draxos' creatures costs Rohan one disk. regardless of the type of armour he's wearing, and should the number fall below that required to build the armour it comes apart, leaving Rohan with nothing more than a loin cloth and a smile. It's a dark day in the Risky Woods. Hit used to be that the only risky thing about walking through it was having a bird dump on your head. But now the undead servants of the evil lord Draxos trip through the undergrowth where fluffy bunnies once dwelled, and only Rohan, the wood's sole warrior, can get rid of Draxos and his walking corpses for good. Risky Woods marks something of a change of direction for EA; after concentrating almost solely on simulations they've decided to try their hand at good old-fashioned platform hack 'n slay action. 2:38 life: 2 084090 10000 Stage 1 1000000016 < Bang ON KEV What Risky Woods lacks is any sort of hook; there's no variation in the gameplay, which is painfully obvious when you start a new level. On the plus side it is surprisingly playable for something which offers nothing new to the field of platform gaming. You're given a plentiful supply of creatures to kill, a good variety of weapons and the temptation to hang around collecting disks often leaves to some close shaves with the time limit. If you fancy getting your hands on a cart which will last you longer than an afternoon you wouldn't go far wrong with this. On the other hand, you may find it too frustrating to be really worthwhile, which is why I suggest you give it a play before you pay. PAUL ANGLIN Not only does Rohan have to be a bit nifty with a sword, he also needs a good ear for music. Each level contains a number of gatekeepers (which look like pterodactyls riding unicycles) which have to be destroyed for him to pass. To do this he first has to collect a key, then throw it into the circle beneath the gatekeeper, before finally repeating a short tune that it will play. Luckily for Rohan, the gatekeepers have never learned more than four different notes, which are played by pushing the joypad in the four main directions. Carnifourous related capers down in the forest. LRISKY BONUSES There are plenty of bonuses in Risky Woods some good, some bad and some downright unpredictable. Collectibles that fall into the last category have one of a number of effects they'll either award Rohan ten thousand points, send him to sleep or kill him. Not what you'd call fair but hey, these are the Risky Woods, after all! STRATEGY SKILL CVG GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE CVG 078 % % % % 79 ACTION REFLEXES CVG "


"* KRAZY KONSOLES * GVG CONSOLE CONCEPTS V No 1 FOR SERVICE...No 1 FOR NEW GAMES PLEASE CALL FOR LATEST PRICE DUE TO EXCHANGE RATE FLUCTUATIONS  only: 12.00 THE SUPERGUN PLAY ARCADE PCB BOARDS ON SCART TV OR MONITOR INCLUDES BUILT IN POWER SUPPLY  2 X APOLLO 6 BUTTON JOYSTICKS 1X SCART LEAD NINTENDO SUPER FAMICOM SOFTWARE ARCADE BOARDS AVAILABLE INCLUDE STREETFIGHTER II 92, TRACK & FIELD, DRAGON NINJA, MIDNIGHT RESISTANCE RING FOR PRICES UNIVERSAL ADAPTER SUPER FAMICOM Nintendo Super Famicom 2 \"The universal adaptor will Joypads. All Leads allow you to play any game UK Power Supply Unit on any machine. Scart............................ * Play lap/American games on your UK SNES... SUPER NES(US)+MARIO \"Plays Mario Kart, Pilot Wings 2 Joypads. All Leads and other Scart games. Takes Jap & USA Carts PO BOX 200 \"The universal adaptor is a Scart HALIFAX Top Quality product, supplied Without Mario/1Pad..... WEST YORKSHIRE with full instructions. only: N.B. Scart Machines are 17% faster than PAL HX1 3L APPOLLO PRO JOYSTICK...25 SNES PAD... 15 TEL: 0422 342 901 CAPCOM STREET FIGHTER II STICK........ OFFICE HOURS: MON TO SAT 9-5.30PM SCART LEADS ALL TYPES ONLY  CLOSED THURSDAY AM (STOCKTAKING) TEL: 0422 367 730 EVENINGS 5.30 10PM & ALL DAY SUNDAY ACTRAISER ... ... ALIEN VS PREDATOR.... CALL SNES USA SOFTWARE AREA 88/UN SQUADRON .. AXELAY. CASTLEVANIA 4............ 529 || ADDAMS FAMILY .... .... CONTRA SPIRIT ............... .. AMAZING TENNIS ..... . DINOSAURS AMERICAN GLADIATORS . F1-EXHAUST HEAT .......... BART'S NIGHTMARE.  F1-EXHAUST HEAT..................... CALL BEST OF THE BEST (FIGHTING) .44 FATAL FURY (12 MEG) .................., .. BUSTER BROS........ CALL FINAL FIGHT GUY (Limited Edition) 149 BULLS VS LAKERS... .242 GOLDEN FIGHTER (12 Meg). .:42 CHESTER CHEETAH.  JOE & MAC... . CHUCK ROCK .242 KING OF THE MONSTERS MARIO KART .... COMBAT TRIBES . MARIO WORLD 4...... DEATH VALLEY RALLY... . MICKEYS MAGICAL QUEST .. DESERT STRIKE................ . NORTH STAR KEN 6.. ..549 FACEBALL 2000.................................. .. PARODIUS ................ . FINAL FANTASY MYSTIC QUEST...... PHALANX . GODS............. . ..  PRINCE OF PERSIA .......................... .... IREM SKINS GOLF..  RANMA NIBUNNOICHI 12(16 MEG). .CALL JIMMY CONNERS' PRO TENNIS TOUR  RIVAL TURF 2/RUSHING BEAT 2 (16 MEG) .CALL SKY MISSION WINGS II ACES HIGH JOHN MADDEN 93..  KRUSTYS SUPER FUN HOUSE 439 SMASH TV.. SONIC BLASTMAN.. MARIO KART .........  STREET FIGHTER II (16 meg).... MICKEYS MAGICAL QUEST......... SUPER NICHIBUTSU MAHJONG NCAA BASKETBALL SLAM DUNK .243 SUPER GHOULS & GHOSTS...... NHLPA HOCKEY '93..........  SUPER PANG........ ON THE BALLICAMELTRY 99 LEVELS!  SUPER PINBALL-JAKI CRASH.... TURTLES IN TIME (HARDER THAN USA VERSION) OUT OF THIS WORLD..    TINY TOONS ADVENTURES...... Q-BERT 3... $45 TOP RACER ............. RAMPART..  . SOUL BLAZER.............  WAIALAE COUNTRY CLUB GOLF..... SPACE MEGAFORCE SUPER ALESTE .:43 SPANKY'S QUEST..... SUPER SPECIALS SPIDERMAN & THE X-MEN SPINDIZZY WORLD  ASTRAL BOUT-KICK BOXING ..... STREET FIGHTER II ......  MAGICAL TROLLIGUYS ADVENTURE SUPERMAN...  METAL JACK CYBER POLICE... SUPER STAR WARS ..........  POPULOUS... TERMINATOR 2 JUDGEMENT DAY ROBOCOP 3 (USA) ................ TOM & JERRY  RUSHING BEAT (RIVAL TURF) .. SUPER BOWLING...... WING COMMANDER  ZELDA III ....... 239 SUPER BATTLETANK (USA) Mail Order/Shop address Console Concepts VISA The Village Newcastle-u-Lyme Staffs ST5 1QB Access (0782) 712759 SHOP HOURS Sat/Weekdays 9.00 -5.30pm Thursdays 9.00 1.00pm TURBO EXPRESS COLOUR HANDHELD (USA) CONSOLE INCLUDES HANDHELD CONSOLE, PLAYS ALL USA GAMES AND JAP PC ENGINE GAMES WITH CONVERTOR CARTRIDGE ONLY  P&P JAP CONVERTOR  TURBOCHIP GAMES IN STOCK INCLUDE: SPLATTERHOUSE, FALCON PARASOL STARS, JACKIE CHAN, DEVIL CRUSH, YO BRO. WE ALSO SELL EXTRA JOYPADS, MULTIPAD ADAPTOR AND CARRY CASES SNES SCART USA PACK SNES SCART CONSOLE  1 STANDARD JOYPAD 1 AUTOFIRE JOYPAD STREETFIGHTER 8 @1 SCART LEAD  1 UK POWER SUPPLY RUNS JAP/USA GAMES 39 942 ONLY  + P&P 149 32 AMAZING TURBO DUO CD ROM SYSTEM NEW TURBO DUO CD ROM (USA) SCART LEAD & POWER SUPPLY  3 GAMES ON CD (BONKS ADV, YS I & II, GATE THUNDER TWO GAMES ON TURBO CARD (BONKS REVENGE & NINJA SPIRIT) PLAYS USA CARDS + CD ROMS. ONLY  + P&P CALL  TOP RACER 2 CLUB GOLF......... TEAM USA B'BALL  CALL CALL  $42 SUPER HIGH IMPACT ALIEN *KRAZY CONSOLES * KRAZY PRICES CALL US NOW!* ALL PRODUCTS MEGA ARE NEW AND DESPATCHED ON DRIVE RECEIPT OF YOUR ORDER. CALL CALL SUPER BATTLETANK FIRE POWER 2000 (SWIV)... ....CALL F1 ROC... CALL GUNFORCE. GOAL CALL JIMMY CONNORS TENNIS....... JOE & MAC CALL IMPERIUM................................ KRUSTYS FUNHOUSE.... MYSTICAL NINJA.... CALL LEMMINGS CALL MICKEYS MYSTICAL QUEST...... CALL ON THE BALL CALL NCAA BASKETBALL OUT OF THIS WORLD... CALL NBA ALL STAR BASKETBALL..... CALL JOHN MADDEN 93... NHLPA ICE HOCKEY... CALL PRINCE OF PERSIA CALL PUSHOVER CALL PILOTWINGS... CALL AXELAY CALL CHESTER CHEETAH.. CALL STAR WARS Q BERT 3 CALL ROBOCOP 3............. CALL GHOULS & GHOSTS......... CALL SUPER SOCCER CHAMP.. CALL SUPER MARIOWORLD... CALL SIM CITY SKULL JAGGER. SUPER BOWLING .CALL SPIDERMAN & X MEN... CALL SPACE MEGAFORCE..... CALL SMASH TV..... CALL S. MARIOKART.......... CALL STREETFIGHTER L... TOP GEAR. CALL TURTLES IN TIME........ UN SQUADRON..... CALL TKO BOXING WORDTRIS. CALL WING COMMANDER. WRESTLEMANIA... WINGS IREM SKINS GOLF... ZELDA HOOK.. CALL KING OF MONSTERS.. FACEBALL 2000 CALL RAMPART FINAL FANTASY IL..... DINO CITY... FINAL FIGHT... PRO QUARTERBACK........... ..CALL CALL SUPER OFF ROAD.... ROLLING THUNDER 2.. CALL RISKY WOODS ROAD RASHI CALL SHADOW OF BEASTI. CALL TALESPIN... CALL STEEL TALONS. CALL SMASH TV..... CALL SONIC 2........ SIDE POCKET. SPLATTERHOUSE 2....... CALL PGA TOUR GOLF 2... SPEEDBALL 2. CALL THUNDERFORCE IV... CAPRIATI TENNIS CALL PRO QUARTERBACK.... CALL RBI 3 BASEBALL...... CALL RBI 4 BASEBALL.... CALL DESERT STRIKE.. CALL TERMINATOR 2 THE ARCADE...... TAZMANIA. UNIVERSAL SOLDIER..... ..CALL WRESTLEMANIA.... XENON 2... CALL WORLD TROPHY SOCCER.. CALL EUROPEAN CLUB SOCCER...........CALL US TURBO EXPRESS SOFTWARE AEROBLASTERS, ANDRE PANZA KICK BOXING, BLOODY WOLF. BOMBERMAN. BONKS REVENGE, DEVIL CRUSH, FINAL LAPTWIN. GALAGA 88. GUNBOAT, JACKIE CHAN, NIGHT CREATURES, PARASOL STARS. RAIDEN. SPLATTERHOUSE, SUPER STAR SOLDIER, TALESPIN, R TYPE (COMPLETE) SOLDIER BLADE, NEUTOPIAH, IMPOSSAMOLE GAMES FROM 35 TO  CALL FOR DETAILS GAME GEAR SONIC II. CALL PRINCE OF PERSIA CALL ALIENS II. SUPER OFF ROAD CALL SHINOBIL. CALL BATMAN RETURNS...... CALL INDIANA JONES.. CALL KLAX. CALL CALL BART VS SPACE MUTANTS CALL GAMEBOY MARIOWORLD I. CALL LEMMINGS CALL STAR WARS...... CALL T2 THE ARCADE....... .. CALL HUMANS... CALL WWE WRESTLING I..... CALL DRACULA.... MISSILE COMMAND DIRTY LARRY.. CALL JOUST... CALL US SUPER NINTENDO AMAZING TENNIS........ CALL BEST OF BEST KICK BOXING) CALL BULLS VS BLAZERS CALL BARTS NIGHTMARE CALL CHUCK ROCK.... CYBERSPIN.... CALL CONTRA DESERT STRIKE. DOUBLE DRAGON... ...CALL DEATH VALLEY RALLY ROAD RUNNER...CALL CALL SMASH TV PACKAGE DETAILS SNES SCART USA, 1 PAD.... SNES USA SCART, 2 PADS + MARIOWORLD....... ..CALL TURBOGRAFX USA SCART+GAME.....165 ATARILYNX II+ANY GAME..............99 GAME GEAR SONIC +PSU GALAGA 90... [140 MEGADRIVE CONSOLE + PSU + 1 JOYPADS, +SONIC HEDGEHOG.................. NEO GEO + 2X4 BUTTON JOYSTICKS PSU + ANY GAME UP TO 870...380 +P&P JAPANESE SUPER FAMICOM ASSAULT SUIT VALKEN CYBERNATOR). ...CALL STAR WARS............ CALL JAKI CRUSH PINBALL......... CALL COMBATRIBES... TINY TOONS... CALL RANMA 12 PART 2... KING OF RALLY CALL SUPER F1 HERO.. CALL FLYING HERO CALL SUPER VOLLEYBALL II.... CALL FATAL FURY. CALL MICKEY MOUSE. TETRIS 2 BUMBLISS RUSHING BEAT 2. CALL TURTLES IV. DRAGON QUEST V... CALL STREET FIGHTER II. CALL HUMAN GRAND PRIX CALL TOWER ATHLETE.. CALL SUPER SHANGHAL... COSMO GANG....... CALL MAGIC SWORD AXELAY SEGA MEGADRIVE US UK ECCO THE DOLPHIN ALIEN IL CALL AQUATIC GAMES..... . CALL BULLS & LAKERS... BATMAN RETURNS CYBERCOP CORPORATION..... CALL CAPTAIN AMERICA.... DUNGEONS & DRAGONS D ROBINSONS BASKETBALL...... DEVILISH... WORLD OF ILLUSION MICKEY DONALD CALL GALAHAD... GADGET TWINS.... CALL INDIANA JONES.. CALL JOE MONTANA 93. LEMMINGS LHX ATTACK CHOPPER... LOTUS TURBO CHALLENGE NHLPA ICE HOCKEY 93... JOHN MADDEN 93 CALL PIGSKIN FOOTBALL.. CALL 271 Lotus Tu Choppe235 NN LEMMINGS JAN TURTLES IN TIME DONN MEGA DRIVE MEGA DRIVE PAL TV VERSION TAKES ALL CARTS. ENGLISH INSTRUCTIONS, ALL LEADS POWER SUPPLY & JOYPAD ONLY. ..... PLUS SONIC... SONIC SOFT TOYS...--GALL Jordon Vs Bird...... JAP SOFTWARE UKUS SOFTWARE Krustys Fun House  Lemmings ..............  Alien Storm...............19 Alien 3.................... LHX Attack Choppper  Alisia Dragoon ......... JAPANESE ADAPTORS: Ariel the Little Mermaid.  Bad Omer Lotus Turbo Allows use of Jap' games on a Aquabatic Games ... Challenge ................ Bare Knuckle... 19 UK Mega Drive Am Gladiators......... Marble Madness ..... Bare Knuckle II (16M) Call TOP QUALITY ONLY...... Atomic Runner........ Crude Buster Batman Returns...... || Moonwalker IP Robinson S. Court ESWAT.... PGA Tour Golf .... Bart vs Mutants ......  E-1 Circus .. | PGA Tour Golf 2 ... MEGA ACCESSORIES Buck Rodgers ......... Fighting Masters.... Bulls Vs Lakers....... Pitfighter.. Golden Axe Il. TURBO/SLO-MO JOYPAD . California Games.... Populous. Grey Lancer POWER SUPPLY: Predator 2.. Capt America ..........|| Galaxy Force II.. For Mega Drive/Game gear  RBI Baseball 4 ...... Gynoug... Chuck Rock.............|| Hellfire EGM (USA) MAG.......25 Chakan-Forever Man. Cali | Risky Woods. ELECTRIC BRAIN Jewel Master .. Road Rash..... Chester Cheetah ..... HYPER FANZINE.......00 Kia Chameleon Corporation... Road Rash 2 ..........JAN .. MERCS ... MEGA-CD Crue ball.. Robocod (J Pond 1) .. Mickey Mouse CDL Dark Castle.......... PLUS 2 GAMES Side Pocket Pool .... . Ninja Gaiden . Desert Strike ........ Smash TV....... MEGA-CD ROM(PAL/SCART) Olympic Gold . Dragon's Fury ...... Splatterhouse 2 ONLY..- . Road Blasters Streets of Rage 2 .... Dungeons & Dragons.  Steel Empire  CD-SOFTWARE Super High Impact.. ECCO The Dolphin . Strider..... Tailspin... Euro Club Soccer ... SOL FEACE................. . Ex-Mutants Taz Mania  EARNEST EVANS ......... Sonic 2.... Stormlord......... PRINCE OF PERSIA...... Terminator... F-22 Interceptor ...... . Super Monaco GP229 BLACK HOLE ASSAUT . Gadget Twins..........|| Terminator 2.. Super Shinobille....... THUNDERSTORM FX .... Galahad ............... || Toxic Crusaders ...... Thunder Force IV RANMA 3..................... Green Dog...... ... ||T.M.N. Turtles.......... Trouble Shooter........27 || WONDERDOG...... . Hockey (EA/NHL).... | Top Gear 2 ..............C Twinkle Tale AFTERBURNER III ..... .. Hockey NHL '93 ...... Winter Challenge.... Wonder Boy 3............16 World of Illusion........Call NINJA ALESTE ... .. Immortal .......... ...... || Wonder Boy 5......... ROADBLASTERS FX..... J Capriati Tennis ....|World of Illusion ..... | OVER 100 TITLES IN AFTERBURNER Il ..... 943 John Madden '92 ....|| WWF Wrestlemania  STOCK ON THE FINAL FIGHT.... John Madden 93 ..... || X-Men ......................Call MEGADRIVE!!!! SUPER SONIC ...... MAX 330 MEGA PRO-GEAR SPEC Andro Dunos. OFFICIAL Alpha Mission 2.. ..285 Ninja Combat. UK VERSION Ninja Commando PAL, SCART, Baseball Stars 2 Blues Joyrney ........... Robo-Army ..... JOYSTICK, PSU Sengoko......... Sengoko 2... & LEADS... Cyber Lip........  Soccer Brawl.. Fatal Fury.  ONLY... Football Frenzy ............. Thrash Rally King of the Monsters. King of the Monsters 2. League Bowling ....... .. Memory Card .............. Joystick..... THUNDERSTORM FX ALL US GAMES NEED CONVERTOR FOR USE ON UK SNES, OUR CONVERTOR PLAYS ALL GAMES RELEASED SO FAR INC MARIO KART, ONLY  .. Sonic WE HAVE FAR MORE GAMES ON ALL CONSOLES THAN WE CAN PRINT IN THIS ADVERT.IF YOU CAN NOT SEE A TITLE YOU REQUIRE PLEASE CALL US NOW. .... PREDATORII CALL Teen bo NHL) CALL WE ALSO STOCK LYNX.GAMEBOY, PC ENGINE/TURBOGRAFX, SUPER NINTENDO SUPER FAMICOM CONSOLES AND GAMES. SHOP PRICES MAY VARY. ALL GOODS SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY 35 Monderfusion TERMINATOR 2 ORDER DETAILS: All consoles are despatched Parcel Force Next Day Delivery (Saturday delivery is extra .00) Cheques Please allow 5 working days for clearance. P+P: Consoles .00, Joysticks .50, Each game .50 Please state if you are a new customer or please quote your customer number. All machines and games are Japanese unless otherwise stated.  Muotian Kord NM 1975 1175 Robdarmy Burning words..... . Crosse 59 Super SX SEGA. GENESIS GAME GEAR, MEGA DRIVE, NEO GEO SUPER FAMICOM, PC ENGINE, NINTENDO GAME BOY, TURBO GRAFX LYNX & THEIR LOGOS ARE REGISTERED TRADEMARKS OF THEIR RESPECTIVE COMPANIES AND WE ARE NOT RELATED NOR ENDORSED BY THEM. WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO ALTER PRICES WITHOUT NOTIFICATION   Vop Players Golf Viewe Heroes...  ORDER HOTLINE 9AM TO 6.30PM TEL 0782 712759 PLEASE ADD .50 PER GAME FOR 1st CLASS RECORDED DELIVERY MACHINES  COURIER DELIVERY OVER 15,000 SATISFIED CUSTOMERS!!!. IF YOU CANT SEE WHAT YOU WANT CALL PLEASE CALL FOR AVAILABILTY BEFORE ORDERING!!! "


"0000 GVE REVIEW AVE PC Garth the basty RPG WHERE... WHAT IS... BY US GOLD .99 Show me the way to home. After a night on the town in the Hanged Man, the automapping feature can be very handy. Use this with the A2 map poster given with the game and you'll get back easy! You can interact with all the other characters in You can interact with all the other characters in the game through the dialogue menu. Garth the Hasty here looks a particularly shady character. LEGENDS T It's not often that you can look at a game and know immediately that it's something special. Legends of Valour is one such game that stinks of hard work and comes complete with a distict odour of success. It is one of the first of a new breed of virtual reality that will drag PC games kicking and screaming into the mid nineties. The action all takes place in a 'virtual world' where everyone reacts independently and gives you the freedom to interact with characters as you see fit. This means you can kill the nosey old bat from across the street but watch out for the militia. It also means that the local militia will be after your ass too. Yes, it's just like real life down on the farm. 0000 13 12 (15) as stay in the ca Ga CONTROLLING YOUR CHARACTER Role playing games can be too repetitive but LOV has no definate plot and has more twists and turns than a mongoose in a snake pit! This is not a game. It's more like dipping your toe into a strange new world and being sucked in up to your armpits!. The main problem with the game could lie within this fact. Life can be fairly humdrum at times and there are parts of the game that reflect real life to the point of domestic bordom. Book, ing into hotels, arguing with the neighbours, all these things add to a desperate reality.But life is only as sad as you make it. Once you've arrived in town, you can join one of the many guilds usually by making a small donation and taking on a task for them. Once you've completed t'initiation ceremony then you're in! Whether it's as a thief, mercenary, priest or magician, you can then increase your level and your abilities as you pile on the experience. Magic Items Box There are three items to collect which will be placed in these holes as you find them 2 Examine anything that appears in [3] can be examined by clicking here. A description appears in the Message Window 3 The Floor As you pass close enough to pick up things they will appear here. Clicking on the item will transfer it to your backpack (14) 4 Options Menu Including: Load/Save game. Sound, Auto Combat and more. 5 Status Your health. From left to right they are: General Health, Energy Combat Injuries, Appeal. Hunger. Thirst and Sleep. Try to keep all the bars as full as possible... Movement Although movement by mouse is excellent, you can use the movement icons if you prefer. The bottom right button actually gives you your present rank in each of Mitteldorfs guilds 7 Combat/Action The top three from left to right are: left punch/slash, two-handed punch/thrust and right punch/slash dependent on if whether you're caught with your weapon in hand or not. The middle three are: town plan, magic spell and religious spell 8 Compass Shows you your current heading. You can even click on it to turn your character to face that particular direction. 9 Drop Drops the object currently held in the right hand. (Okay, so how many left-handed dwarves do you know?) 10 Right Hand And the currently held object 11 Throw Chuck whatever's in your hand. Throwing knives and stones are handy missiles... 12 Backpack You can only carry up to six objects depending on how heavy they are. 13 Commodities Trading is big business in Mitteldorf and there are various ways of acquiring goods although buying and selling them isn't a bad way to earn cash. Clicking here opens a screen that tells you what quantities you have. The goods are (left to right) gems, spices, pigments, ore, hides and tar. 14 Money How many groats you are carrying. As with all items, you can leave some safely in your room in town. 15 Message Window This is where all dialogue with other characters is displayed. WHAT ARE YOUR OPTIONS? STEVE KEEN The option screen can be accessed at any time from where you can turn auto-combat on or off, change the game settings for sound and there's even a helpline number. The second row of icons all manipulate the speed of the game by reducing screen size, depth of view and floor mapping. The bottom row is straightforward but will only save in a tavern or hostel. GVG 080 "


"013 REVIEW GUE PVC zombie brains. Very appetising if you've a mind. price: 63 Order ? FEAST NOTICES GAMBLE EXIT. A HEALTHY DIET The first task that you should set yourself in Mitteldorf is to stay alive. To do this initially you need food, shelter and money. There are various ways of getting each but having money means you don't have to search for it. What you need to do is to build your character into a head-bustin' hard case by joining the guilds and improving your prowess in magic, murder, mass appeal and appropriating. Nobody can last without food or drink and whilst the variety of drink in the taverns of Mitteldorf is not extensive, the choice of food is far more cosmopolitan F VALOUR THAT'S FIGHTING TALK Legends of Valour has been a long time in the making but this could be explained by the game's immense depth. What US Gold have done is to give you a complete world to explore. The single most amazing thing about the game however is the speed. I played it on a lethargic 286 yet the VGA graphics were acceptably nippy, well defined and colourful. Combat is logical and easy and can even be set to automatic and the whole game has real feel that you can get lost in. In fact, getting lost was a bit of a problem to begin but seasoned adventurers should have no problems here. A masterly game that takes the next step from Dungeon Master PAUL ANGLIN As you walk around the streets in Legends of Valour, you get the opportunity to talk to the natives. Most are quite helpful but some think that they're some poor relative of Yob! If they decide to insult you, it's time to start thinking about shutting their big gobs for them permanently. Fighting can be switched to automatic using the options menu but there's nothing like being in control of a particularly nasty scrap especially when you've got three types of sword stroke and a myriad of magic ready to unlease on someone who's just called your mam something akin to 'A festing boil on the bum of humanity. Each time you get involved in a fight, you will sustain battle injuries which will show up on your health readout. Unfortunately, there're injuries that can sustained without your knowledge. Lycanthropy, poisoning and so on can be detected by certain priesthoods. They'll charge you too! Any town you visit, unless you're in Wales, will have a pub and Mitteldorf is no exception. Like many tavern, these do far more than just sell beer. STRATEGY SKILL Unlike many pubs, you can actually leave these with more money than you came with if you're lucky. The Hanged Man is known for its beetle racing. ACTION REFLEXES You can stand by whilst people insult you. Me? I'd rather cut them to little bits. A quick thrust and she's almost had it. A combination of blows does the best job. 01 so Sorry, I had to go There's something strange going on tour. Il meet you in the Trolls Hims. Svet NOTICES AE GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE % 88 % 85 % 92 % 90 All pubs run noticeboards which can tell you what's going on around town or even provide a place where your illusive cousin can get in touch! vou CVG Decor Core Snake P ent: 100 \"There I was. Minding my own business and just hanging around on the corner opposite the church and the local rozzer just wandered up and started hassling me.\" Only in this case it's absolutely bloody true! Honest. Seriously though, you don't have to have done anything wrong to get arrested. Then it's a fine and jail! When you're really skint, it could be time to look for some casual work. Here's what looks like a really crap job. I'd give it a miss and mug a body. HIT CVG 081 "


"ARCADE That's hot in the coin-op world this month? Only the latest Neo Geo blast! Viewpoint dropped into our office, plugged itself into our cabinet and proceeded to totally astound us! We've dragged PAUL ANGLIN away from the machine, wiped the dribble from his chin and sat him down in front of a Mac to give you all the gen! Why is it that we're all sat here wondering whether or not UFOs really exist, when we all know full well that they're alive and well and invading every solar system in the known cosmos. Seeing as we're all dead keen to make contact with other intelligent life forms and discover new cultures before blowing them all out of living existence, we've decided to send some lucky soul off in an advanced death wagon of the highest order to put a stop to the aliens' violent merriment. You've got all your hardest weapons with you and the whole world depending on your not being an Cheswick, so good luckand don't forget to get some pics of those life forms if you can. uivizo MZ 351565000 CREDITS WEAPON WONDERMENT The weapons in Viewpoint are very simply just a pod, on each side of your ship that fires extra bullets! There are no really hard extra armaments just your standard gun. But the pods do provide extra protection at the sides of your ship, acting like a shield. Also available to pick up are whirly force-fields which will protect your ship for three hits, which can make some of the levels a touch easier. YOU'LL HAVE TO WAIT YOUR TURN Unlike most two-player shooters these days, Viewpoint doesn't include a simultaneous dual player option. The two player game is a turn-by-turn affair which is a disappointment, as it would have been an absolute riot to play this game with two ships on screen. The one-by-one thing isn't a tragedy though, 'Cos you get the opportunity to learn by your pal's mistakes. 19380 297 CREDITS 09) A DEAD PARROT As you may well have noticed from the screenshots, the graphics in Viewpoint are nothing short of incredible. All sorts of words like vectors and isometric may come into your head when you look at these, but the real term is Polygonised Sprites. Sounds technical? It is, but can be explained very simply. Basically, the graphics have been drawn very cleverly so that they give the impressive effect of polygons but not the blocky look. Cor, the things they can do these days! 19270 IUB4550 00 GVG 682 "


"AVG Viewpoint has to be the most graphically impressive Neo game I have ever seen. The all-new viewpoint of the game is just the start of that forgotten concept in video games originality! The only cliched thing is those end-level baddies. Graphics are absolutely stunning. with some of the most awesomelooking bad guys ever seen in a video game or a sci-fi film for that matter! The music has to be heard, it's not a case of a Neo imitating rock hard thumping tracks they ARE rock hard thumping tracks, the likes of which you would be happy to shove in your Walkman, and the great James Brown samples are just sooo good. Many Neo games have suffered from being too easy, but not this one. It's rocks, sure but not frustrating. If you ever get the chance to play this...no, actually make sure you play Viewpoint, whatever the cost! PAUL ANGLIN VIEWPOINT BOMB THE BASE NEO GEO by SAMY 30P 50P PER PLAY STRATEGY SKILL Your main pieces of kit with which to dispatch some serious amounts of bad guys are your bombs. There are three different types: here's a rundown: FIREWALL: as it's name suggests this just sends a huge wall of fire across the screen wiping out everything WAVE BOMB: this just creates a huge circle of fire that will fry anything daft enough to get in it's path. HOMING MISSILE: this fires a plethora of missiles which will home in on anything on screen and destroy it. You start off with three bombs and there are a limited amount scattered throughout the levels but you can only carry three bombs at any one time. 54550 ... HIGH5850 CREDITS 208 ACTION REFLEXES BUT THAT'S NOT FAIR % So you like the look of Viewpoint, eh? Fancy a copy of it for your home-based Neo, would you? Well sorry, but you can't have it! Yeah, you heard right, for some reason Viewpoint is not down on the Neo Geo UK home release list. The only way us Brits will get to play is either in the arcades or on an American or Japanese Neo, and seeing as there's no converter available, you're well up the creek. Oh well, better drag TO ELECTROCOIN for the ten-pees out. the loan of the rteview cart GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE % 93 % 93 THANKS.. 17878 ... HIS13658 OVERALL 95 9500 083 CVG "


"COMPETITION COMPETITION O COMPETITION O COMPETITION COMPETITION WINA MEGADRIVE! AND EVERY MECADRME CAME EA HAVE EVER DONE: ELCTRONIC ARTS 16-BIT ightly chuffed with their CVG HIT! rating received for the fabulous Rolo To The Rescue in this very issue, Electronic Arts want to give ONE lucky reader a prize that'll not be grown tired of quickly. We racked our brains and hummed and haahed, until we came up with a cracker of a compo gift! A Sega Megadrive!! So what's so mindblowing about that, eh? Nothing much (except for the fact that it's a damned fine games machine) until you add to it EVERY SINGLE MEGADRIVE GAME EVER PUBLISHED BY ELECTRONIC ARTS! That's FORTY-FOUR games in all; from Populous to PGA Golf, Madden '93 to Marble Madness, all adding up to a bloody fortune in terms of cash value! So what do you do if you want a stab at picking up this fabulous free bie? You see Rolo the elephant in the picture on this page? Cute, isn't he. But can you come up with a cuter character? Drag out the crayons and use your noddle to come up with a games hero that'd have you smiling inanely at the sheer niceness of it! So no large guns, no pickaxes or chainsaws if your creation has any special weapons, make 'em sickly sweet! Once you've created your masterpiece, put it in a big envelope and post it off to: BLEUURGGHH! GRAB A SICK BUCKET BEFORE LOOKING AT MY ENTRY!, CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. Make sure those entries reach us by February 14th, 1993, or else you'll not stand an elephant in hell's chance of winning. Good luck! And here, in the very heart of weeny writing land, are the bits about EMAP Images or Electronic Arts' staff or relatives thereof not being allowed to enter the editor's decision being final and no correspondence being entered into. So read and learn. "


"RHINE GAMES RHNE SALES HOTLINE 071 723 5768 .... 13.00 44.99 42.99 CADE JOYSTICK USA JAP 37.99 BEREBU BERTAN 88888818 888IIIII SONIC I... . F-22 '&& 29.99 9999999 888888888888888888 88888 88888 88 99 % 88888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888 & BBQ&RBORES SMASH TV The name you can trust MAIL ORDER DETAILS: ALL PRICES ARE MAIL ORDER ONLY. CHEQUES OR POSTAL ORDERS TO: RHINE GAMES, (DEPT SP) 301 EDGEWARE ROAD, LONDON W2 1BN NINTENDO FAMICOM SEGA MEGADRIVE SUPER NINTENDO (SCART) + PSU + MARIO WORLD (USA) .....99 SEGA MEGA DRIVE + PSU + SONIC ......... $119.99 SUPER NINTENDO + PSU + SUPER MARIO WORLD (UK)........ $145.00 SEGA MEGA DRIVE + PSU + SONIC + 2 JOYPADS .99 SEGA MEGA DRIVE + PSU + 2 GAMES .... .....$129.99 SUPER FAMICOM (JAP) SCART + PSU. ..$149.99 SEGA MEGA DRIVE + PSU + SONIC + SONIC 2.. ...$129.99 SUPER NINTENDO (USA) SCART + PSU.. ....99 MEGA-CD ROM (PAL) + 1 GAME + PSU.. ..$330.00 SUPER GAME ADAPTOR (PLAYS UK + US + JAP) USA JAP MEGA PAD SG 3 WITH THREE BUTTONS & LED KING SALMON.... 36.99 GAMES 15.00 MYSTICAL NINJA 44.99 LIGHT........... KING OF THE MONSTERS 39.99 ASCII PAD... 20.00 MAGICAL SWORD POWER CLUTCH (ARCADE JOYSTICK) ..........30.00 KRUSTYS FUNHOUSE... CONTROL PAD.................. .15.00 METAL JACK 42.99 POWERBASE CONVERTOR (PLAY MASTER SYSTEM LEMMINGS.... STEALTH SUPER NES JOYSTICK 24.00 MONOPOLY GAME ON MEGA DRIVE)................................30.00 LHX ATTACK CHOPPER CITY/APOLLO PRO JOYSTICK 50.00 MUSYA..... MEGA DRIVE ADAPTOR... ...8.00 MARBLE MADNESS SFC PAL BOOSTER. 30.00 MARIO PAINT WITH MOUSE JAP MERCS........ RGB CABLE..... 14.00 MICKEY MOUSE.... ATOMIC RUNNER NHLPA HOCKEY 93. CAPCOM JOYSTICK (6 BUTTONS) .68.00 NBA CHALLENGE ALISIA DRAGOON OLYMPIC GOLD GAME CADDY ...10.00 NHLPA HOCKEY 93. ARCH RIVAL... PGA GOLF ........... OUT OF THIS WORLD ALIEN 3 PITFIGHER........... ACTRAISER........... PAPERBOY 2..... AMAZING TENNIS POPULUOS AMAZING TENNIS PGA TOUR GOLF.... ARCUS ODYSSEY PREDATOR ADDAMS FAMILY PEBBLE BEACH GOLF ATTACK SUB.......... PSYCHO BLADE. AREA 88 ......... PARODIUS... 44.99 AQUATIC GAMES QUACKSHOT.. ARCANA. PILOT WINGS... AFTERBURNER RAMPART ADVENTURE ISLAND... PITFIGHER... BART SIMPSON ROAD RIOT. AXELAY.............. 44.99 POPULOUS... BARE KNUCKLE ROAD RASH BASEBALL SIMULATOR PRINCE OF PERSIA BUCK ROGERS.... ROLLING THUNDER 2 BART SIMPSON...... PHALANX ...... CAPTAIN AMERICA. SAINT SWORD. BATTLE BLAZE........... Q-BERT CASTLE OF ILLUSION SIDE POCKET BOWLING... 38.99 R-TYPE..... CADASH. SLIMEWORLD..... BILL LAMBER BASKETBALL RANMA 1/2... CHUCK ROCK....... BATTLE CLASH... RIVAL TURF CRUDE DUDES.... SONIC BATTLETANK 41.99 ROAD RIDE. DAVID ROBINSON STEEL EMPIRE... BASES LOADED......... 39.99 ROBOCOP 3. DRAGONS FURY ...... STORMLORD............... CASTLEVANIA IV ......... R CLEMENS BASEBALL DOUBLE DRAGON.... STRIDER..... CHESS MASTER RAMPART EA HOCKEY SPORTSTALK BASEBALL. CONTRA SPIRIT... ROCKETEER.. SPORTSTALK FOOTBALL CYBER SPIN RPM RACING FANTASIA.. SUPER HIGH IMPACT DARIUS TWIN... ROMANCE OF THE KING FIGHTING MASTER SUPER SMASH TV ..... DEATH VALLEY RALLY SUPER OFF ROAD GADGET TWINS TAZ-MANIA..... DESERT STRIKE SIM CITY..... GALAHAD TEAM BASKETBALL.... DRAKHEN... STG... GALAXY FORCE II... TERMINATOR D-FORCE GHOULS N GHOSTS. TEST DRIVE....... DINOSAURS. SPIDERMAN & X-MEN. GOLDEN AXE II...... 99 TEL TEL BASEBALL.... DOUBLE DRAGON. STAR WARS GYNOUG... THUNDERFORCE I.. EARTH DEFENCE FORCE STREETFIGHER II..... HELLFIRE 19.99 TOKI EXTRA INNINGS... SMART BALL................ JAMES POND II UNIVERSAL SOLDIER EXHAUST HEAT........ SUPER SOCCER JOHN MADDEN.... WHEEL OF FORTUNE. F-ZERO.... SUPER CHAMP SOCCER JENNIFER CAPRIATI... WINTER CHALLENGE.... 34.99 FACEBALL 2000....... SUPER BUSTER UP... KID CHAMELEON... 34.99 29.99 WONDERBOY L... 19.99 FATAL FURY ...... SUPER BUSTER BROS FINAL FANTASY 2 SUPER TENNIS FINAL FIGHT.... SOUL BLADER........... NINTENDO GAMEBOY GEORGE FOREMAN BOXING SONIC BLAST MAN....... .... GHOULS N GHOSTS SUPER FORMATION SOCCER.... GRADIUS HI... SWAMP THING 44.99 NEO GEO PAL (1) (FREE MEMORY CARD). 279.99 GAMEBOY DELUXE PACK (CONSOLE. TETRIS. GOLDEN FIGHTER SUPER MARIO KART NEO GEO (SCART) (FREE MEMORY CARD) 279.99 GUN FORCE. EARPHONES, CABLE, FOUR AA BATTERIES)...66.99 SUPER PANG.. MEMORY CARD. 19.99 . HOME ALONE GAMELIGHT/MAGNIFIER COMBI.... 44.99 SPIDERMAN. MAGICIAN LORD MAGNIFIER ...... HOME ALONE 2..... ART OF FIGHTING 189.99 9.00 THUNDER SPIRITS. HOLE IN ONE GOLF... AMPLIFIER ............. 40.99 CYBERLIP... TKO TECH KNOCKOUT . . 9.00 HYPER ZONE 35.99 TOM & JERRY... ROBO ARMY . . BRITE BOY (LIGHT MAGNIFIER). TOP GEAR.......... HOOK..... 8-MAN....... 35.99 . ... GAME KEEPER/GB BOX 21.99 HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER... 41.99 TURTLES IV............ RIDING HEROES PORTABLE CARRY ALL.... JACK NICKLAUS GOLF.. .9.99 SUPER SPY....... 44.99 TRUE GOLF.... ATTACHE CASE (NUBY)..... JAMES POND JR........ 16.99 44.99 KING OF MONSTER UN SQUADRON 38.99 JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL... 41.99 ULTRA MAN 38.99 MINI JOYSTICK CROSS SWORDS JOE & MAC ..... WHEEL OF FORTUNE 44.99 2020 SUPER BASEBALL DOC'S LIGHT IT.... .14.00 KING OF MONSTERS. 44.99 42.99 WINGS II... 44.99 NINJA COMBAT GB ADAPTOR... ..8.99 KAGLOOI...... 41.99 WORLD LEAGUE SOCCER...............39.99 THRASH RALLY..... .89.99 UNIVERSAL BATTERY PACK 27.99 LAGOON. 40.99 WORLD CHAMPION 34.99 BLUES JOURNEY... 118.99 LEMMINGS..... LIGHT BOY........ FOOTBALL FRENZY .. 44.99 19.99 129.99 44.99 MUTATION NATION.. 139.99 HYPERBOY. 29.99 SNES WHILE STOCKS LAST ALL AT 32.00 WORLD HEROES 169.99 REPLACEMENT SCREEN. AREA 88. BILL LAMBER BASKETBALL, D-FORCE, POPULOUS, WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP BOXING, XARDION ALL STAR CHALLENGE # F1 RACER PRICE OF PERSIA TRACKN MEET ADDAMS FAMILY GEORGE FOREMAN RANMA 1/2 WWE 2 ADVENTURE ISLAND BOXING ROBOCOP 11 ROCKY BULLWINKLE BATMAN II AVAILABLE NOW GAME GEAR ADAPTOR $14.99 HUNT RED OCTOBER ROGER CLEMENS DIG DUG BARTS SIMPSON II HOOK BASEBALL THE JETS RUN MASTER SYSTEM GAMES ON YOUR GAME GEAR BEETLE JUICE MEGA MANII SIDE POCKET OUT OF GAS ALIEN 3.... 27.99 PSYCHIC WORLD 19.99 BLADES OF STEEL KID ICARUS SOLOMONS CLUB HOME ALONE 11 AX BATTLER 21.99 PAPERBOY 24.99 BUBBLE BOBBLE KIRBYS DREAMLAND SPUDS ADVENTURE ANY 1 FOR $24 AERIAL ASSAULT... .16.99 POPILS. 18.99 BUGS BUNNY II METEROIDS II SPIDERMAN ANY 2 FOR $44 25.99 BART SIMPSON BLUES BROTHERS SMASH TV.. MICKEYS DANGEROUS SPY V SPY ANY 3 FOR $60 BETTER UP .19.99 SHINOBI CEASARS PALACE CHASE SUPER HUNCH SUPER MARIOLAND 2.... $27.99 CASTLE OF ILLUSION. SHINOBI 2. CASTLEVANIA MONOPOLY SIMPSONS STAR WARS..............$27.99 CRYSTAL WARRIORS 24.99 SONIC 2... CHESSMASTER TURN N BURN NINJA GAIDEN SPEEDBALL 2.................$27.99 CHASE HQ...... SPACE HARRIER DOUBLE DRAGON I & II SHADOW TERMINATORI PLEASE ADD $1 FOR EACH CHESS MASTER... SUPER GOLF DUCK TALES NINJA TURTLES 11 TOXIC CRUSADERS GAME P&P (ACCESSORIES CHUCK ROCK TAZ-MANIA FERRARI GP PACMAN THE PUNISHER AND CONSOLES ADD  DEVILISH..... WOODY POP 16.99 FLIGHT SIMULATOR PAPERBOY II TINY TOONS FOR POSTAGE) DONALD DUCK SUPER MONACO GP 2 DRAGON CRYSTAL FACTORY PANIC 17.99 G-LOC.... ACCESSORIES INDIANA HONES GAME GEAR 94.99 JUNCTION... GAME GEAR + SONIC... 114.99 JOE MONTANA FOOTBALL 19.99 301 EDGEWARE ROAD, LONDON W2 1BN TEL: 071 723 2412 GAME GEAR + 2 GAMES. 124.99 FANTASY ZONE..... MASTER GEAR CONVERTOR GEORGE FOREMAN KO BOXING 19.99 WIDE GEAR...... 10.99 260 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, LONDON WIP 9AB TEL: 071 580 6397 MARBLE MADNESS CALL POWER SUPPLY NINJA GAIDEN 23.99 BATTERY PACK 32.99 OLYMPIC GOLD.. 24.99 TWO PLAYER CABLE ALLOW APPROXIMATELY 5 DAYS FOR CLEARING CHEQUES OR MONEY OUTRUN EUROPA. 24.99 GAME GEAR ATTACHE CASE. ORDERS. FOLLOWING DAY DELIVERY, P&P ADD $1 FOR GAMEBOY & GAME PREDATOR.... 27.99 TV TUNER........ GEAR GAMES, $1.50 FOR OTHERS. $3 FOR ACCESSORIES & $5 FOR CONSOLES (NEXT DAY DELIVERY $10). CONSOLES & GAMES PLEASE CALL FOR DETAILS WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO CHANGE PRICES WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE, E&OE. TRADE & EXPORT ENQUIRIES WELCOME. PLEASE CALL 071 724 3822 OR FAX 071 723 3117 BERRESERBEESBOERE **** 99 29.99 &&!!!!!!!! '888888!!! NEO GEO RSS 89.00 89.99 96.99 SRDERE ..7.99 ......3.99 99.99 .89.99 84.99 SEGA GAME GEAR 21.99 21.99 21.99  8888888 24.99 RETAIL STORES 17.99 14.99 9.99 9.99 67.99 PC ENGINE ATARI LYNX "


"GOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO MICROSELLS 0839 500 848 To place your classified ad ring this number calls cost 36p (Cheap rate) and 48p (All other times) per minute. If you don't pay the bill ask for permission oooooooaaaaa8888 8 888span8stoasaseadaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa888888888 SUPER NES FOR SALE 2 games games incl. apic, mid 29, Paul on 0753 423658 excellent condition working order COMMODORE 64 FOR SALE Lemmings plus joy sticks, mouse, call Adam on 0743 801412 with 5 joy sticks 2 tape decks, manuals  ono. Phone 0552 GAME BOY FOR SALE 5 games magazine with over 200 games. 316075 ask for Karen incl. Mario and Kick Off. Bargain SEGA MASTERSYSTEM FOR Worth over  sell for  or at only . Phone 081 641 0517 SALE, boxed with 2 control pads nearest offer. Call Gavin on 061 AMIGA WANTED with 1 meg ask for Graham and 5 excellent games incl. Sonic 499 1986 memory swap for Megadrive with and Alien 3, sell for phone 081 7 games. Call James on 081 595 SUPER FAMICOM FOR sale 304 0475 SWAP AMIGA 500+ WITH 5 4763 complete with high disk drive. GAMES for a Super NES with 6 Runs on any Super Famicom or SALE NEO GEO official UK games. One of those games has FOR SALE ATARI ST WITH 58 Super NES.  Call 0634 version with games, Last Resort, to be S-zero phone 0222 702275 games 23 demos incl. joy sticks, 670589 ask for John Fatal Fury etc boxed and as new after 4pm mouse, disk box and manuals. cost nearly  sell for  Sell for  call Craig on 0536 SUPER NES WITH EXCESS and phone Pete on 0823 279771 NINTENDO FOR SALE INCL. 2 771719 after 6pm a game for an amiga, plus a control pads 13 games with Commodore 64 for sale, 50 AMSTRAD CPC 464 FOR SALE extras. Sell for  or nearest MINT CONDITION MEGADRIVE games for  phone 071 268 with 100 games 2 joy sticks and a offer phone 0442 63482 boxed 4 games incl. Sonic 2 joy 4066 ask for Simon after 6pm green monitor Ssell for  call pads for  worth  call Adrian on 0705 266165 MASTER SYSTEM 2 for sale with Chris on 0233 732020 1 MEG FOR SALE Amiga A500 3 games for  or swap for . Games, 150 magazine SUPER FAMICOM FOR SALE 2 Gameboy with any amount of COMMODORE 64 FOR SALE Amiga 2 year warranty to run on joy pads and an adaptor. Games games. Call on 081 684 1993 ask with over  worth of games, 2 it.  or nearest offer. Call inc. Streetfighter 2, Super for George disk drive games plus a GX4000 David on 0204 373655 Marioworld and 2 more for  with all books and magazine all phone Jason on 0790 52024 FOR SALE JAPANESE PC for #100 or swap for the electric SWAP GAMEGEAR WITH 4 ENGINE PAL version incl. 3 guitar call 081 361 8426 GAMES for a British Super AMIGA 500 100 games, games for  or nearest offer. Nintendo with 1 or 2 games or sell modulator, mouse, joy sticks, Call Kevin on 0922 55745 AMIGA 500 with upgrade 70 for . Call Jamie on 0492 leads, manuals all boxed games with over a 100 demos 518896 magazine excellent condition sellAMIGA 500 WITH 1 megabyte + and TB software joy sticks mouse for  call 0909 487943 function music + lots of games, 2 and disk box for Super Nintendo MEGADRIVE FOR SALE mint joy sticks. Swap for Megadrive or with 5 or more games ring Chris condition. 13 games, 2 joy pads, MEGADRIVE AND MEGA CD Super Nintendo with games on 0980 622458 Master System converter. Sell for with 4 games for phone 0603 phone 0274 640004  phone Matthew 0865 644541 ask for Paul GAME GEAR FOR SALE with 7 510424 RADIO CONTROLLED CAR games incl.  carry case and ac AMIGA A500 FOR SALE with 40 FOR SALE very fast, good adaptor sale for  or nearest SEGA MASTERSYSTEM 2 for top ten games and over 150 condition sale for  phone 0942 offer. Phone 081 446 2331 sale. 5 games, 1 joy pad. Phone magazines this incl. joy sticks, 719283 ring after 6pm 0446 735038 ask for Alex mouse and all the manuals it also SUPER FAMICOM Japanese with has a travel warranty still on it 1 MEG AMIGA 500 for sale with a American converter 4 games. SUPER NINTENDO FOR SALE contact David on 0245 373655  of software, desk and Call 061 370 9062 with Street Fighter 2, pack 2 joy many extras. Sell for  phone sticks, pads. All for  quick COMMODORE 64 with over 30 0594 837568 OFFICIAL SUPER NINTENDO sale. Phone Tony on 041 339 games 2 joy sticks and over 40 FOR SALE with 7 games 2 1381 magazines for  or nearest AMIGA 500 FOR SALE lots of controllers, only few months old offer phone 0202 842089 and ask software, joy sticks, mouse, very good condition. Sell for  SPECTRUM ZX+2 WITH over 30 for Glen manuals etc...all for  phone phone 0256 330682 games sell for  phone 0296 Aaron on 0905 51455 748204 ask for Tom COMMODORE 64 FOR SALE SUPER NES FOR SALE with with over worth of software MASTERSYSTEM FOR SALE 2 over 10 games sale,  ono. AMIGA 1000 500 FOR SALE 1 call Gavin on 061 499 1986 controllers, 4 games incl. Sonic Contact Duncan after 6pm 0202 mega chip gram 1 year old, and Arcade, all boxed with 882440 perfect condition. Sell for  MASTERSYSTEM 2, 5 months instruction. Will sell for  0834 phone Phil on 0924 822676 after old 2 controllers 5 games incl. 860304 SEGA MASTERSYSTEM 2 FOR 4pm Sonic, Asterix, Moonwalker, and SALE with 3 games all boxed, joy more..all for  call 0742 365185 1 MEG AMIGA 500+ lots of sticks and 1 controller. Contact SUPER FAMICOM WITH 5 for all booksnes plus of a "


"SEGA GAMEGEAR WITH 6 top games, also ac adaptor and rechargeble battery pack. Original boxes. Sell for  phone 0983 882696 NES GAMES FOR SALE; Punch Out , Balloon Fight for .50 or both for  phone 081 341 3083 after 6pm ask for Lewis AMSTRAD CPC484 DX4000 game console all together over  worth of games, 2 joy sticks and 2 joy pads sell for  or nearest offer phone 0533 516678 JAPANESE MEGADRIVE WITH 5 games incl. Sonic, Streets of Rage, 2 joy pads, all boxed and in excellent condition sell for  ono. Call James on 0594 431697 NINTENDO FOR SALE with 2 controllers and 3 games all for  call 071 267 9209 ask for Christian SUPER NINTENDO GAME; World League Soccer (American version), swap for any good Uk polar version, or sell for  phone 071 731 4297 FOR SALE SUPER NINTENDO with 7 games for  phone Stuart on 0256 330682 GAMES incl. Street Fighter 2 and incl. Addams family, Populus 2, Super Tennis, Smash TV, Robocop 3, and others from  STE FOR SALE 9 months Supermario 4, Japanese with an  call on 0903 206045 guarantee. Business applications American converter phone 061 100s of games sell for  or 370 9662 GAMEBOY FOR SALE, carry nearest offer phone 0922 648583 case and 5 games incl. Super after 4pm ATARI LYNX FOR SALE, 2 Marioland. Sell for  phone GAMES, mains adaptor and carry 0923 234565 SUPER NINTENDO GAMES to case phone Simon on 0752 swap phone 0706 31157 before 225222 on Mondays 6 8pm SWAP GAMEGEAR for your 3 6pm Manchester area only Super Nintendo games call 0904 NEO GEO WITH 3 GAMES incl. 704938 GAME GEAR AND 2 GAMES for Fatal Fury, for sale  phone  It's a bargain. Phone 051 Richard on 0509 415055 OVER #120 worth of Amiga 555 1000 ask for John software for . Phone Matthew COMMODORE 64 FOR SALE in on 0274 632531 GAMEBOY CASED with 5 good condition with games, games. Will sell for . Phone cassette recorder, disk drive, PC ENGINE GT WITH 13 081 979 1289 after 4pm music maker,music expansion GAMES sell for, includes ac system, joy stick and magazine. adaptor and lots of good games GHOULS AND GHOSTS for the Justin 0279 655708 phone 0245 328995 Super NES. Sell for   offers open. Phone Ravi on 081 SEGA GAMEGEAR 7 games incl. AMIGA 500 WITH COLOR 570 9966 Sonic, 2 carry cases worth  MONITOR 2 joy sticks, 1 mouse, sell for  phone Lima on 0438 8 games will swap for Super SEGA MEGADRIVE WITH 7 861393 Nintendo with 2 or more games or GAMES and 2 joy pads for  sell for  call 0892 532299 ask phone 0844 352126 ask for GAMEBOY FOR SALE, perfect for David Russell condition 6 games incl. Super Marioland also battery pack. All PC ENGINE GRAPHICS 12 SEGA 500 INCL. 50 GAMES, 3 boxed for . Phone Steve on games incl. PC Kid 2, only  joy sticks, good condition. Sell for 0934 712770 or nearest offer phone 0932 . Phone Nick on 0554 352915 777543 ATARI STE with 40 software titles, joy stick and mouse phone AMSTRAD CPC6128 FOR SALE AMSTRAD CPC 464 FOR SALE 0636 86756 with printer 72 games colour 1 joy stick, 85 games, green monitor, joy stick and tape deck monitor, for . Willing to take GAMEBOY FOR SALE with 2 for . Phone 081 460 7079 other offers phone 0708 47441 games only . Call 0245 ask for Tom after 5pm ask for Robert 322308 GAMEBOY FOR SALE with NES FOR SALE good condition, NEO GEO FOR SALE with 3 WWF 2, incl. head phones, fully boxed, 4 games: Mario 1,2,3, games sell for  or swap for boxed all for . Phone 0256 Light phaser, 2 control pads for Mega CD +  phone on 0509 768503  phone Christian on 071 354 415055 0593 ZX SPECTRUM PLUS 2 228k for SPECTRUM ZX48 FOR SALE or sale good condition over 100 AMIGA 500 FOR SALE with 1 swap for Gameboy or sell for . games over 30 full price games meg upgrade, joy sticks, mouse, Call Adam on 0622 746635 joy sticks sell for #150 phone 051 about 10 magazines and 40 427 5137 games. Sell for  phone 0756 NES AND 7 GAMES, 2 joy pads, 700799 and Gamegear with 2 games and AMIGA 500 WANTED phone carrier case. Call Matt on 0442 Jonathan on 0902 342426 GAMES FOR SUPER 833221 NINTENDO, Megadrive, AMSTRAD CPC 6128 printer, 72 Gameboy, and Gamegear. I have MASTERSYSTEM WITH 1 games, colour monitor, joy sticks, got all games for under  call GAME,2 pads sell for . tape deck. Phone 081 460 7079 0844 352470 ask for Martin Contact 0928 581226 ask for Tom SEGA MEGADRIVE WITH 8 CONSOLE MAGAZINES FOR SWAP SEGA OR MEGADRIVE games incl. Sonic. Phone Yoric on SALE incl. CVG from   incl. with games phone on 081 551 081 539 8974 postage and packing contact 2969 Robert on 0709 877184 ATARI STSM with mouse and ATARI STSM one megabyte mat, 2 joy sticks, disk box,  AMIGA 500 WITH 100 GAMES 2 computer with manuals, mouse, worth of games for  call 0793 joy sticks call Nick on 0554 joy sticks, 28 original games. Sell 751462 777503 for  ono ask for James on NES FOR SALE with great 0925 763123 AMIGA A500 FOR SALE 1 year games incl. Mario 1 and 3. Ring old all original manuals and Adam on 0226 299421 SUPER NINTENDO AND SEGA boxed, plus 1 megabyte upgrade, MEGADRIVE games for sale 40 top games all boxed. Sell for GAMEGEAR FOR SALE with 5 phone 0736 711891 ask for  phone 0799 88414 ask for games inlc. Super Kick Off, and Tyrone Simon Double Dragon for  incl. ac adaptor. Contact Parvez on 021 FOR SALE COLOUR MONITOR NES FOR SALE mint condition, 773 9810 Phillips 8833 for  or swap for boxed with 2 joy pads, and more PC Engine GT. Phone 0753 things. Sell for  call Richard on ATARI ST GAMES FOR SALE 817492 0670 511427 SUPER SCOPE WITH 6 GAMES for sale, excellent condition for , or will swap for Street Fighter 2 and few other games. Phone 0902 335579 ask for David NINTENDO PLUS 8 games incl. Star Wars, Super Mario 3. Sell for  call James on 0214 54292 MEGADRIVE WITH CONTROLLER, ac adaptor, with use in French or anybody with French TV sell for  0483 31627 COMMODORE 64 night pad nine banders pack, key board, data cassette, music made for 2, power pack plus 125. All boxed as new for  or nearest offer call 0799 526570 SUPER SOCCER FOR SWAP will consider any games phone 0228 35220 AMSTRAD CPC 464 FOR SALE with colour monitor over 60 games very good condition for  call 0602 296694 after 5pm ask for Dalj WANTED SUPER NINTENDO or Famicom with games, Sap Atari ST SM with  worth of games and extras phone Stuart 0793 751462 "


"on ATARI 520 STSM with Atari Hedgehog, Sonic 2 and many SUPER NES FOR SALE mint phone 0923 22135 and ask for monitor over 40 games for  more sell for , not boxed. condition 5 games, incl. Mario 4, Allen phone 081 304 9641 Phone 081 840 5567 and more and a free adaptor for  ono. Call Amy on 081 993 SWAP NEO GEO PLUS 1 GAME SUPER NES 3 GAMES 2 pads AMSTRAD DISK FOR SALE 6682 with your Japanese Megadrive and USA jap converter sell for many great titles. Bargain of  with Sonic and 2 more games.  call Neil on 081 900 1306 upwards. Phone 0606 593124 ATTENTION ALL GAME GEAR Must collect. If interested call 081 OWNERS. Swap Lynx with car 200 0353 after 5pm AMIGA 500 BOXED, dust cover, FINAL FIGHT boxed as new, adaptor and 3 games incl. 2 joy sticks, plus  worth of superb condition, worth  sell California for a Gamegear with 5 NINTENDO GAMES FOR software. Sell for  the lot or for call after 4pm on 0608 Sonic the Hedgehog. Will accept SALE phone Henry on 0935 swap for megadrive and games 677491 ask for Andy any offer phone Scott on 0484 872534 after 5pm call 0638 666030 ask for Martin 845130 SEGA MASTERSYSTEM for PC ENGINE PAL converter SWAP SEGA MASTERSYSTEM and 2 control pads 1 light phaser NINTENDO FOR SALE plus 6 wanted for Japanese Engine. Will 2 with 4 games, 1 control all fully and 4 games or swap Super games incl. Mario 1 and 3, The pay or negotiate a swap. Phone boxed and my Nintendo NES with Nintendo call Lon on 081 312 Simpsons and Batman. Sell for Austin on 0532 773488 6 games and 2 controllers and 1380  phone 0474 358797 instruction for Super Nintendo NES FOR SALE WITH 4 games with Super Marioworld call Matt YAMAHA PSR 38 excellent GAMEBOY FOR SALE with 3 incl. Mario 2 and 3 with zapper condition cost  with power games. Very good condition. Sell guns and robot for  will swap 0727 866843 supply unit. Sell for  ono or for  phone 0823 698694 for Lynx with more than 3 games part exchange for Megadrive or phone 0628 665982 FOR SALE SEGA MASTER Super Nintendo. Phone 0962 C64 PLUS OVER 100 GAMES SYSTEM 2 control pads 5 games 773476 sell for  call James on 0306 SEGA MEGADRIVE FOR SALE incl. Sonic, Mickey Mouse only 627227 for #35 on its own, or  with 2  phone 0289 302837 SUPER NINTENDO, not boxed, 3 games call Charles on 081 745 games 2 joy pads games incl. AMSTRAD 464 for sale, colour 1193 ATARI LYNX 2 for sale with 6 WWF, Super Mario 4 and others monitor for with joy sticks and games sell for  or swap for with Japanese and American games, all for . Call Dean or NEO GEO FOR SALE UK version Super Nintendo with Mario 4 or converter. Swap for a Megadrive Daniel on 0624 835929 with 2 joy pad, memory card and Megadrive with Sonic. Phone with at least 4 games call Neil on 3 games for . Phone 0246 0992 586833 081 900 ATARI ST520SM boxed with 275302 after 6pm ask for Jay 1306 instructions and lots of games, joy RADIO CONTROLLED CAR stick and mouse, sell for  NINTENDO FOR SALE with 4 20mph. Spare controller which AMIGA 500 FOR SALE remote phone 081 851 8271 games, 2 control pads, boxed and needs aeriel, working order. Only control colour television, over 40 in good condition. Sell for  or . Call Mark on 0773 602035 games, Word Processor, joy stick, AMIGA GAMES FOR SALE call nearest offer phone John on 081 and mouse etc sell for  or James on 0306 627227 498 8034 after 6pm MASTERSYSTEM FOR SALE nearest offer phone on 0487 Sonic 2, Sonic the Hedgehog and 840152 ask for Adam CD TV PLUS MONITOR with cd AMIGA A500 1 meg for sale with Kick Off and many more. Sell for games and disks and other lots of games. New adaptor sell  call 081 840 5567 SEGA MASTERSYSTEM 1 + 6 accessories for  or nearest for  phone James on 081 777 games for  call Edd on 0452 offer call 0268 781096 9185 FOR SALE SPECTRUM +3 522117 excellent condition complete with PHILIPS SPECTRUM FOR SALE NEO GEO with 3 games, 1 2 joy sticks, light phaser, built in SWAP 6 AMIGA GAMES all plus over 70 games, tape recorder controller and power supply. Sell disk drive, over 200 brilliant boxed with instruction for a Sega and all leads plus 2 joy sticks for for  ono. Phone 081 452 games and a WP package. Sell Gamegear with 1 or 2 games.  phone 0279 725401 5366 for  or nearest offer call Dave Phone 0505 53752 GAMEGEAR WITH 5 GAMES FOR SALE 2 BETAMAX GAMES 0760 0760 721043 after 6pm NEO GEO GAMES CONTOUR incl. Super Kick Off, Mickey still boxed excellent condition plus 2 joy pad, 1 memory card Mouse and Donald Duck incl. AC phone 0603 504307 C & VG ISSUE FROM 100-130 and 6 games. Sell for  phone adaptor and fully boxed all for for  call 0772 673175 ask for 081 764 3931  call Parvez on 021 773 9810 COMMODORE 64 FOR SALE Paul with light gun and 2 joy sticks and PC ENGINE parodies offer #30 FOR SUPER MARIO 125 games for . Phone 0823 POPULUS 2 FOR AMIGA 500 for phone Andy on 0304 841705 after BROTHERS 2 and Gremlins 2, 283463 sale excellent condition call 0527 6pm sell for  each phone Ben on 424112 081 607 0982 NINTENDO FOR SALE 5 games, MEGADRIVE FOR SALE with 3 incl. 2 joy pads sell  no NINTENDO AND 2 games 2 joy pads for  ono. SWAP PC ENGINE and offers. Call Matthew on 061 439 CONTROLLERS with 6 games Phone Steve on 0609 774691 Gamegear for a Super Nintendo 3193 incl. Marioland 3 for sale. , phone 0245 72001 Telephone 0242 584894 AMIGA 1000 with Motormouth, OFFICIAL UK POWER SUPER joy sticks, mouse, dust cover and ATARI ST520 WITH 40 games, NINTENDO for sale with Mario 4, ATARI STEM FOR SALE mouse, 7 games for  phone 0257 word processor, spread sheet, Street Fighter 2, and Super WWF mouse mat, 2 joy sticks and word 424112 Epsom printer, all boxed and 2 joy sell for  or swap for power processor database spread sheet, sticks more accessories sell for neo geo with games call Rayman all manuals, double sided disk NINTENDO FOR SALE with 7  ring 081 340 2151 on 0354 694089 drive mail merge, spell checker, games and motor gun sell for virus killer, kid music,  or nearest offer or swap SEGA MASTERSYSTEM FOR AMIGA 500 FOR SALE 1 mega graph,puzzle and other things. Megadrive with 2 games phone SALE 3 games, light phaser for bite with games, joy sticks, mouse Sell for  or nearest offer 0269 860078  phone 081 882 7484 after and new adaptor sell for  ono phone Manjit on 0475 383322 4pm ask for Wisbey phone James on 081 777 9185 AMSTRAD GX4000 games SEGA MASTERSYSTEM FOR wanted ring 081 661 9028 WANTED NINTENDO or swap for 2R DEMO VIDEO showing over SALE games incl. Sonic the Sega Mastersystem with 4 games 50 megadrive paddels phone on "


"0232 844473 upgrade phone Rod on 0407 760516 THE DEALER DIRECTORY PC ENGINE GAMES on card, and cd sell and swap phone Stuart on 0225 762854 ATARI STEM FOR SALE with joy sticks, mouse and disk box and 27 games sell for  or nearest offer phone 0494 722321 ask for John SWAP MEGADRIVE in excellent condition with 5 games for Super Nes without games phone 051 228 6534 MARIO CUP plus American jap converter sell for  also game boy with 2 games sell for #50 ring Robert on 0543 370162 BEDFORDSHIRE FAXMINSTER LTD 18 church street, Dunstable, Bedfordshire LU5 4RU 0582 475474 SWAP NEO GEO GAMES call David on 0795 470029 FOR SALE MEGADRIVE with 4 games only  call 0245 77256 ATARI S20STE for sale mouse, 2 joysticks 3-4 games sell for  call Amy on 0923 254603 NINTENDO NES FOR SALE with 5 games all for  phone 0223 328354 SEGA GAMEGEAR 2 game, boxed with ac adaptor and strap all for  phone on 071 262 3869 ATARI ST 11 games for sale sell for  for all or nearest offer contact Amy on 0923 254603 SEGA MASTER SYSTEM for sale with 4 games call Alen on 0923 22135 AMERICAN SUPER NINTENDO with game boxed as new call Keith after 6pm on 0202 888090 CORNWALL TRURO MICRO LTD Bridge house, New bridge street Truro, Cornwall, TR1 2AA 0872 40043 SEGA GAME GEAR for sale with games and accessories phone on 0533 718818 MORE GEO GAMES TO SWAP incl. King of the Monster 2, Super Spy and more ring 0388 812480 SPECTRUM +2 128K FOR SALE 1 year old many games joy sticks included sell for  or nearest offer phone on 091 4880908 SUPER MAGICOM for sale with hd drive sell  phone John on 0634 670589 WANTED NEO GEO with 2 controllers and 3 games swap for 1 amiga 500 with meg up grade with over 30 top games 1 super nintendo with scope, boxed brand new plus 1 sega game gear with adaptor and 2 game all for Neo geo system phone 0484 429293 MEGADRIVE AND 5 great games sell for  phone 0782 632727 FOR SALE SEGA GAME GEAR boxed, and good condition with 2 games sell for  phone 081 980 0944 HERTFORDSHIRE FAXMINSTER LTD 25 market Square, Hemel Hempstead 0442 255044 BOXED JAPANESE FAMICOM FOR SALE 2 joy pads, carry case USA converter 6 games phone 081 524 1425 SUPER NINTENDO with 4 games, 2 pads sell for  or nearest offer phone on 0904 423727 SWAP CASTLE VANIA 4 for Street Fighter 2 phone 0466 780405 WANTED MEGADRIVE CONSOLE and games phone 0438 367406 MASTER SYSTEM WITH 14 games 3 computer games phone 0236 720068 LEICESTERSHIRE K.C. COMPUTERS EMP 3 High Street, Loughborough, Leics LE11 1py 0509 211799 Are you missing out on the VERY BEST user group????? Thousands of New Contact Free Help & Advice, Second hand Hardware Software and Cartridges BoughtSold Exhcanged. Exclusive massive Club Discounts. Latest product information and member reviews. Plus the best Fanzines. Diskines and Milions of PD Sharewarettes at unbelievable member only prices. Exclusive Newsletters, BBS and much, much more. Supporting al Sega and Nintendo games systems, Plus Amiga, ST and PC. Find out what you're missing by sending an SAE for our FREE intro pack to C.C.C. (CVG), PO Box 121. Gerrards Cross. Bucks SL9 9PJ: 0753 884473 Trade Desier Enouri Wicone Pas FREE publiclyfr Scharfsins Contadas no COMMODORE 64  worth of software new model only 6 months old swap for megadrive with any number of games or sell for  phone 061 437 0789 SWAP AMSTRAD GX2000 with sega master system with 4 games swap for megadrive with 3 games call 071 402 0971 for Ekles NEO GEO FOR SALE 2 controllers, 1 memory card and 3 games sell for  phone on 0272 679505 WANTED NEO GEO GAMES call Martin on 0528 78104 1 OR EWII BDRIVE n CASH MEG NINTENDO BOXED 2 pads, and 4 games sell for  phone 081 272 6346 & GAME BOY WITH 9 GAMES for sale all boxed sell for  ono phone 071 828 0680 DEAD OR EGTERMINATION ALIVE Survive PRIZES Win USE YOUR VOICE Game $ TO OUTDRAW JUST ANSWER FIVE THE SIMPLE QUESTIONS GUN 089K FIGHTER FIGHTER 2 = ( A UK SEGA MEGADRIVE for sale incl. 9 games sell for  or swap for commodore amiga 500 call Daniel on 0604 402651 reg w GAME BOY FOR SALE with 5 games and carrying case sell for [100 call 081 747 9924 after 4pm ask for Asim Gear PC ENGINE GT with 10 games swap for Neo Geo with 1 game or sell for  call on 0905 21641 ask for Paul PSnoop GUN ATARI ST for sale with 10 games sell for  call 0494 527007 50895 0891 313577313582 313581 AMSTRAD CPC464 colour monitor, joy stick, light fraser gun and 70 boxed games sell for  or nearest offer phone 0708 744918 SPECTRUM PLUS 3 some games sell for  phone Steve on 0708 345665 you cre under 18 yeas of oge please obtain permission of whoever poys the phone bil. Max cost of col 2.70 Cheap $3.60 Al Other mes. NFODIAL PO Box 36 LS1 ATN Colcharges 360 Per Me Cheap 480 Per Vin Al Other Times. SUPER NINTENDO GAMES buy, sale or exchange phone Brian after 6pm on 0463 221173 ATARI 520STFM double sided disk, 11 games incl. 8 top titles, zip stick, joy stick and mouse as new sell for  call Steve after 6pm on 0235 814146 ATARI 520 STSM over 60 games sell for  or nearest offer call Steve on 0732 359452 THOSE WHO SAW FIRST KNOW.. N. G. O. C. NEO SARWNERSELUB be T MENLERE 081 904 0088 SOFTSCAN WILL PAY CASH FOR YOUR UNWANTED GAMES AND CONSOLES!!! MEGADRIVE, MASTERSYSTEM, GAMEGEAR GAMEBOY, NES, SNES, LYNX SEND US A LIST OF YOUR UNWANTED GAMES CONSOLES, INDICATING WHICH ITEMS ARE UK OR JAP, ENCLOSING A SAE. FOR A PROMPT REPLY. WE WILL RESPOND WITH A FULL WRITTEN QUOTATION FOR ALL OF YOU UNWANTED EQUIPMENT NOTHING REFUSED AND BEST PRICES OFFERED! REMEMBER, WE OFFER CASH AND DO NOT REQUIRE YOU TO BUY GAMES IN PART EXCHANGE SOFTSCAN, PO BOX 84, STATION APPROACH, HEREFORD HR4 9YU Send a SAE for a list of our pre-owned Amiga, ST or Console games IT'S IN EVERY NEO GEO OWNERS INTEREST TO JOIN! ATARI LYNX WITH 4 GAMES for SEGA MEGADRIVE 2 joy pads super nintendo with 1 or 2 games plus cash swap for any amiga phone 0272 751921 ask for Daren dosenot need any software or "


"CE HOTSHOTS MICK AND MACK GLOBAL GLADIATORS MASTER SYSTEM It's not every day you see a Megadrive game converted over to the little Sega but that's exactly what Virgin are doing with their McDonalds license and the 16-bit version's not even finished yet! If you saw the Megadrive Hotshot a couple of issues ago, you'll already know the story, but if not, here's a potted version: Mick and Mack are two groovy. Big Mac-eating lads who get sucked into a comic book and have to escape by wiping out all the pollutants found on each level. Using special detergent-firing guns, scour the levels wiping out nasties and picking up bonuses as you go. The Megadrive version of the game looks excellent, and to be honest there doesn't seem to be a great deal of difference between that and the Master System version! Graphics, as you can see, here, look highly detailed, and gameplay should be similar to that of its multi-bitted relative! We'll bring you a CVG Review just as soon as we possibly can in the meantime, be friendly to the planet! TRIDER MEGADRIVE Both in coin-op form and on Sega Megadrive, Strider was a bit of a name when it hit the streets. Graphically the game was one of the most impressive around, but the home version was let down slightly due to the bane of many Megadrive carts it was just too easy. However, US Gold are well on the way to completing their sequel to the classic and if you look at these pics, you can hardly disagree with us when we say it's looking not-crap! US Gold tell us that the basic gameplay remains the same as before, but with much more emphasis put on making the game that bit more challenging. Sounds good to us! Keep your eyes on future issues of CVG we'll be reviewing Strider Il in the very near future! Man VVVVV kann und CVG 090 "


"VOU CAN SHAKE A veritable cornucopia of Megadrive tip delights are now yours for the asking. Marvel at the MEAN MACHINES Megatech Megadrive Megatips book, on sale at all good newsagents from December 15th, priced .95. "


"HOTSHOTS MIT COOL WORLD NESSNES Forget what the critics have said about Cool World. We can't wait to see it over here and from what we've seen of the film it looks pretty darn spunky, if you'll pardon the expression. The film stars the sultry Kim Bassinger both in the flesh (schwing) and in cartoon form and as ever, she has more curves than the river Thames and a figure that Claudia Schaefer would pluck her finger nails out for! The plot goes like this; Vegas Vinnie discovers a secret tunnel that connects the animated land Cool World, to our world. He also wipes and swipes The Golden Spike of Power which acts as a wedge between the two worlds and hides it on top of the Las Vegas Hotel. Now our Kim plays a stunning doodle called Holli Would who wants to become human and needs the Spike of Power to undergo the metamorphosis. Simple? Well it would be if not for the fact that if she makes the swap it could rip both worlds apart! Unashamed and undettered, she has stolen the map that shows the hole into our world and torn it into five pieces and given one piece to each of her henchmen. You must go up against Holli (oooer!) and recover all five pieces of the parchment and return to Ocean World. Cool world is coming out across all of Nintendo's games machines, including Gameboy, and will be with us shortly. ET TINY TOON ADVENTURES DASHODI 3co UK3 O SUPER NINTENDO O MEGADRIVE O They're tiny! They're toony! And in a couple of months time, Megadrive AND Super Nintendo owners will be able to get their hands on a game based on Steven Spielberg's little Looney Tunes creations! Both games star the main Tiny Toons character. Buster Bunny (no prizes for guessing who he's a relative of!) but each cart sports different levels and general gameplay alterations. In the Megadrive game, Buster's out on a treasure hunt after finding a note showing the positions of hidden map pieces. But Montana Max, the Toons' arch enemy, has kidnapped Buster's girly Babs and, with the help of all his pals including Plucky Duck, Hampton Pig and Calamity Coyote, he's got to find her before it's too late! The Super Nintendo antics see Buster starring in a series of different platform-based cartoon levels, from the Looniversity where our half-pint hero must dodge nasties and take on the big boss bully at the end, to Outer Space and the per M EITT 500 500 ils of the dastardly Duck Vader! Both games should be available during the first quarter of this year, and you can't deny that both Megadrive and SNES versions are looking hot! Hot! HOT! As soon as we can, we'll be bringing you the definitive Reviews of the games until then, THAT'S ALL FOLKS! GVG 092 "


"You don't have to be Einstein to get the most out of your Amiga with... @AMIGA CU Amiga offers you easy access to all the possibilities that your Amiga holds. Packed with a breadth of coverage beyond games, CU Amiga delivers The ultimate peripheral coverage. Extensive, clear guidelines on what's available, how you can use it and what's best to buy linnon 999999 Unsurpassed hardware coverage. CU Amiga was the first magazine to regularly feature CDTV. The best buyers guide. At least 33 pages packed each month with all the information about what's best -60 non entertainment products put under the microscope each month + games reviewed every month. Beyond games with... @AMIGA "


"HOTSHOTS LETHAL WEAPON NES SNES iggs and Murtaugh are back on the streets with Ocean's Mega license, Lethal Weapon. Their latest romp is a multi-levelled platform adventure in which the duo must duff up the bad guys and return order to the chaotic American streets. Although Mel Gibson is the bigger star, Danny Glover has worked his way firmly into fans affections as Riggs' pessimistic sidekick. Acknowledging his popularity, Ocean has given you the opportunity to chose which of the heroes you want to play. Riggs is an expert at martial arts and hand-to-hand combat, whilst Sargent Murtaugh packs more power with his regulation issue Smith and Western! Each level will require a varied approach and whilst Riggs can kick butt during one stage he might not be so tough when confronted with gun-toting hooligans. Go up against mercenaries, gun-runners, bombers and tons of hoods in the cops' biggest adventure yet! The full report will hit the streets next month! THRILL SUPER FROG BODY BLOWS SUPERFROG AMIGA eam 17 is following hard on the heels of its huge Amiga successes. Alien Breed 1992 and Project X, with two brand new games. The first will be Super Frog a fast scrolling cute platform adventure staring a 'lovable' Geordie frog with a few special powers. The slimy sucker bounds around scores of different locations including marshes, forests, spooky castles and wildernesses, collecting coins, rings and assorted pick-ups which all spawn further frolics for the funometer! Super Frog will be with us shortly! The most eagerly awaited product though has to be the massive arcade style beat 'em up Body Blows. Players can enter into Amiga Streetfighter type rumpuses in either Arcade or Tournament modes. In Arcade mode there are four main heroes to choose from before going toe to toe against one of seven deadly fighters found in locations spread all over the world. Beat these bozos and you'll end up doing battle against the king of the underworld, Max. Tournament mode has the choice of players extended to eight fighters each of which can be selected to square up to 10 super thugs from hell! Some of the toughs you'll be making brief acquaintance with are; Junior, a deadly heavyweight kick boxing champion with extraordinary kicking powers, Dan, a street fighter from the gutters who can let loose huge flames of energy from his body, Dug, just one of the game's fat-boy wrestlers who uses an awesome earthquake attack, Maria, the buxom Spanish lass with devastating lightning speed and Ninja, the terrifying Japanese warrior with razor sharp swords. This is just a small selection of the dastardly characters and the game will feature hundreds of frames of animation and oodles of digitised sound effects and speech! Watch out for a review in a few months time this will be FIERCE! Cv6 094 "


"FREE! ZOOL AMIGA 600 70 PINBASADOREANS SOFTWARE PACK WHEN YOU BUY AN AMIGA FROM SILICA Commodore MIGA 60,0 with FREE! hentamos PAINT IN AND DELUXE PLUS! 4 TOP TITLES PLUS! FREE! PAINT Joy PACK + MORE! SEE ABOVE GFA BASIC + PHOTON PAINT 2  TOTAL VALUE OVER The new Amiga 600 uses stateof-the-art surface mount technology, for maximum reliability and features a 3 floppy drive, mouse, TV modulator and smart card slot all as standard. The innovative smart card slot accepts games, ROM or RAM cards (from 1Mb up to 4Mb) and will take advantage of many future new developments. The very latest version of the operating system, Kickstart/Workbench V2.05 is used in the Amiga 600 and its enhanced chip set facilities include improved graphics resolution, increased genlock support and the facility for up to 2Mb of chip memory. The Amiga 600 is fully compatible with the A670 CD-ROM Drive and interface which will give it access to a full range of CDTV titles and audio CDs. The Amiga 600 is available from Silica in several configurations including a special 2Mb RAM upgrade optional extra see the chart below. Silica are pleased to offer THE Software Pack of the Year FREE with every Amiga | ZOOL PACK: purchased at normal Silica prices. It includes the sensational new title ZOOL which ZOOL-platform title of the year $25.99 has received rave reviews as the most original game ever seen on the Amiga. STRIKER soccer simulation 25.99 ZOOL Knocks the socks off Sonic. 97% Amiga Computing Nov 92 PINBALL DREAMS-pinball simulation... .99 STRIKER \"Footballer of the Year and no mistake ... -94% CU Amiga June '92 and no mistake . 949-CU AmigJune 92 TRANSWRITE word processor..... .96 PINBALL DREAMS \"It's quite simply superb 94%-AUI Sept '92 PLUS! TRANSWRITE Premier word processor (UK version) with a 90K spell checker GFA BASIC 135-programming language .00 Plus, with every Amiga from Silica, we will give you Photon Paint 2 paint package PHOTON PAINT 2-paint package. 289.95 and GFA Basic programming language. A total of over  worth of free gifts. A600 + LEMMINGS + DPAINT III INC VAT Ret: AMC 0666  NEW LOW PRICE! AMIGA 500 Plus CARTOON CLASSICS NEW! AMIGA 1200 Motorola 68020EC Processor FREE! PACK + MORE! SEE ABOVE G* Commodore  Motorola 68020EC Processor  14.19MHz Clock Speed 1. 32-bit Architecture  2Mb Chip RAM Standard  Amiga DOS V3.0  AA Chip Set for Enhanced Graphics  16 Million Colour palette  2-256 Colours on Screen  1 x32-Bit CPU/RAM Expansion Slot  PCMCIA Smart Card Slot takes 512K-4Mb PC Cards  Built-in TV Modulator 96 key keyboard with Numeric Keypad  2%\" Internal Hard Drive Optional Extra  1 Year On-site Maintenance PACK INCLUDES: AMIGA 500 PLUS... 2399,99  BUILT-IN DRIVE FREE 1620 TV MODULATOR FREE THE SUPSONS $24.99 CAPTAIN PLANET & THE PLANETEERS E25.99 LEMMINGS........ 125.99 DELUXE PAINT ... E79.99 PLUS! FREE FROM SILICA  ZOOL PACK..... E12792 PHOTON PAINT 120. 689.95 . GFA BASIC 135 50.00 PACK VALUE 024.62 PACK SAVING 6545.82 We are pleased to offer the original 1Mb Amiga 500 Plus (Kickstart/Workbench V2.04). including a built-in 18-key numeric keypad and Cartoon Classics software at a new low price of  (previous Silica Price ). The Amiga 500 Plus can be upgraded, using any of the hundreds of peripherals that are now available, which include the award winning range of GVP hard drives. GVP peripherals can also provide PC emulation, additional PAM expansion, processor acceleration and extra hard drive storage space. There is also a wide range of expansions which give the A500 Plus higher resolutions and more colour and genlocking capabilities mingle onerals aditional DPANTI A500 INCLUDES BUILT-IN 18-KEY NUMERIC KEYPAD (PLUS) MODEL  NEW! AMIGA 600 PACKS INC VAT Ref: AMC 1200 500 1, A500 PLUS CARTOON CLASSICS WILD, WEIRD & WICKED | EPIC 'HARD DRIVE' PACK FREE! ZOOL PACK + MORE! SEE ABOVE INCLUDES BUILT-IN 18-KEY NUMERIC KEYPAD INC VAT Ref: AMC 0592 AMIG AMIGA FIE PICOFT 800 WITH 20MB HARD DRIVE NO 20Mb HARD HARD DRIVE DRIVE AMIGA 600 COMPUTER OPTIONS LEMMINGS WWW PACK EPIC PACK  Te AMIGA 600 + MOUSE, 3 Disk Drive, TV Modulator, Smart Card Slot .99 .99 .99  20 HARD DISK Very fast, mass storage for programs and data $299.00  DELUXE PAINT MI-Award winning graphics and animation package .99 .99  LEMMINGS . Save the Lemmings as they drop into 100 screens of danger .99  MICROPROSE GRAND PRIX Racing Sim with all the thrills & spills of the track .99  SILLY PUTTY The pliable arcade game of immense playability .99  PUSH OVER A game of puzzles. Can G.I. Ant save Colin Curly's Quavers? .99  EPIC A Sci-fi adventure. Can you guide a space fleet across the solar system? .99  ROME Your goal is to become Emperor in this role playing adventure .99  MYTH Can you stop the spread of evil and question the judgements of the gods? .99  TRIVIAL PURSUIT in 3 languages) The great trivia quiz game for the Amiga .99  WORD PROCESSOR DICTIONARY in Sanguages) For creating documents  1 YEAR ON-SITE WARRANTY PLUS! FREE FROM SILICA  ZOOL PACK.Four top Amiga titles see panel above .92 .92 .92  PHOTON PAINT V2.0 An art package with numerous features & special effects .95 .95 $89.95  GFA BASIC INTERPRETER V3.5 Alanguage for programmers of all levels .00 .00 $50.00 TOTAL PACK VALUE: .84 .82 .82 LESS PACK SAVING: .84 .82 .82 SILICA PRICE:    2 RAM WITH BATTERY BACKED  2.RAM PRICE OF UPGRADE TO 2Mb RAM +T + + RAM 0510 RAM 0610 RAM 0610 FREE! FREE! PACK + MORE! SEE ABOVE PACK + MOREI SEE ABOVE The Wild, The Weird and The Wicked (WWW) is the For the more serious user, the  Epic Language title of Commodore's new Amiga 600 games pack. Pack is based around the A600HD, the A600 with Priced at , it comes complete with Amiga 600 20Mb hard drive. It includes challenging adventure computer and mouse, plus a range of high quality games and software for the linguistically minded! entertainment software. For pack Details are shown on the chart on contents, plus a list of the FREE the right along with a list of the gifts from Silica with every Amiga FREE gifts from Silica with every 600, see the chart on the right. inc VAT AMC 0649 | Amiga 600 purchased. rVU AIC WITH Extension: 3914 Fax No: 0702 452363 ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT DELIVERY IS FREE OF CHARGE IN THE UK MAINLAND 031292-1015 MAIL ORDER: 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 081-309 1111 Order Lines Open: Mon-Sat 9.00am-6.00pm No Late Night Opening Fax No: 081-308 0608 SILICA SYSTEMS OFFER YOU LONDON SHOP: 52 Tottenham Court Road, London, W1P OBA Tel: 071-580 4000 Opening Hours Mon-Sat 9.30am-6.00pm No Late Night Opening Fax No: 071-323 4737 FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY: On all hardware orders shipped in the UK mainland. LONDON SHOP: Selfridges (1st Floor), Oxford Street, London, W1A 1AB Tel: 071-629 1234 TECHNICAL SUPPORT HELPLINE: Team of technical experts at your service. Opening Hours: Mon-Fri 9.30am-7.00pm Sat close 6.30pm) Late Night: Thursday Bom  PRICE MATCH: We normally match competitors on a \"Same product Same price\" basis. SIDCUP SHOP: 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 081-302 8811 ESTABLISHED 14 YEARS: Proven track record in professional computer sales. Opening Hours: Mon-Sat 9.00am-5.30pm Late Night: Friday 7pm Fax No: 081-309 0017  MILLION TURNOVER (with 60 staff): Solid, reliable and profitable. ESSEX SHOP: Keddies (2nd Floor). High Street, Southend-on-Sea, Essex, SS1 1LA Tel: 0702 462426 BUSINESS + EDUCATION + GOVERNMENT: Volume discounts available 081-308 0888. Opening Hours: Mon-Fri 9.30am-5.30pm (Sat 9.00am-6.00pm) No Late Night Opening  SHOWROOMS: Demonstration and training facilities at our London & Sidcup branches.  THE FULL STOCK RANGE: All of your requirements from one supplier. To: Silica Systems, CVG-0293-80 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX  FREE CATALOGUES: Will be mailed to you with offers + software and peripheral details.  PAYMENT: Major credit cards, cash, cheque or monthly terms PLEASE SEND A 64 PAGE AMIGA COLOUR CATALOGUE Before you decide when to buy your new Amiga computer, we suggest you think very carefully about WHERE you buy it. Consider what it will be like a few months after buying your Amiga, when you may Mr/Mrs/Miss/Ms: ....... Initials:.................. Surname: ..... require additional peripherals or software, or help and advice with your new purchase. And, will the company you buy from contact you with details of new products? At Silica Systems, we ensure that you Company Name (if applicable): will have nothing to worry about. We have been established for almost 14 years and, with our unrivalled experience and expertise, we can now claim to meet our customers' requirements with an understanding Address: which is second to none. But don't just take our word for it. Complete and return the coupon now for our latest FREE literature and begin to experience the \"Silica Systems Service require additional por contact you with details of new prod almost 14 years and, with our un MAIL ORDER HOTLINE 49081-309 1111 SILICA SYSTEMS Postcode: Tel (Home): ... Tel (Work): ..... Which computer(s), if any, do you own?.... EBOE Advertised prices and specifications may change Please return the coupon for the latest information 80J "


"HE'S BACK AND HE'S MEANER THAN EVER! BUT HAVE YOU GOT WHAT IT TAKES? CVG WILL BE RIPPING THE TERMINATOR APART NEXT MONTH WILL YOU BE THERE? GET NEXT MONTH'S BIGGER THAN EVER ISSUE-PACKED WITH REVIEWS AND LOADED WITH TIPS! IT'S ON THE STREETS FEBRUARY 15TH IT'LL BE A MASSACRE!! Dear Newsagent, Right, I'm not mucking about any more. Please reserve my copy of Computer and Video Games every month because I'm tough enough to take it, honest. My name is My address is GVG 096 "


"WHEN YOU BUY AN ST FROM SILICA NEW ATARI ST PRICES PLUS! FREE GIFTS FROM SILICA! TENSTAR GAMES PACK KATARIN SEE PANEL TO LEFT 520ST-E DISCOVERY XTRA HARDWARE: XMb RAM 520ST-E COMPUTER............ .99 BMHz 16-Bit 68000 CPU, 512K RAM, Mouse, TV Modulator, Internal PSU, 1 Mb Disk Drive SOFTWARE ARCADE GAMES: Final Fight A superb street fighting game. .99 9 Lives Cartoon quality platform romp ..... .99 Robot Monsters Arcade Shoot 'em Up ... 19.99 Sim City Take control of your own city ... .95 SOFTWARE PRODUCTIVITY: Neochrome Art package .99 1st Word Word processor .99 FirST BASIC Programming language ..... .99 ST Tour Tutorial Disk....... FREE ANI ST Animation Package ...... .95 PLUS! FREE FROM SILICA: Silica Productivity Pack .... .98 TenStar Games Pack .. .78 Total Value: .59 Less Pack Saving: .59 *Does not include 1st Word SILICA PRICE: .00 icovery plus RA mor mante A When you buy your new Atari 520, 1040 or Mega TENSTAR PACK: ST-E computer from Silica Systems, we will give ASTERIX .99 you an additional .75 worth of software FREE CHESS PLAYER 2150 ...... .95 OF CHARGE, including some great entertainment DRIVIN' FORCE .95 and productivity programs. These free gifts will LIVE AND LET DIE... .99 introduce you to the world of ST computing and ONSLAUGHT .99 help you to get off to a flying start with your new ST. PIPE MANIA ....... .99 Plus, with every ST and TT, we will give you 16 RICK DANGEROUS .99 nights holiday hotel accommodation for you and ROCK 'N' ROLL .. .99 SKWEEK... .99 your family to enjoy a break at home or abroad. TRIVIAL PURSUIT ..... .95 16 NIGHTS HOLIDAY PRODUCTIVITY PACK: HOTEL ACCOMMODATION 1st WORD . ............99 Every Atari ST from Silica comes supplied with Word processing package from GST a free 72 page colour brochure with accom SPELL IT ............................ .99 modation vouchers. These entitle 2 people to Spelling checker to complement 1st Word stay up to a total of 16 nights in any of 250 ST BASIC. .99 hotels with accommodation FREE. All you Basic programming language with tutorial have to pay for are your meals (prices are TOTAL VALUE: .75 listed in the brochure). PLUS! 4 BONUS BATTLEZONE CRYSTAL CASTLES MISSILE COMMAND SUPER BREAKOUT ARCADE GAMES 520ST WORTH .96  Inc VAT Ref: STC 6300 UPGRADED MODEL WITH \"Not supplied with STS where Atari pack already includes 1st Word IMb INC VAT STC 6311 WORTH L325! NEARLY 1mb RAM  ATARI TT MEGA STE NATARI ST MORE THAN JUST GREAT GAMES! NEW! 1040ST-E FAMILY CURRICULUM II NATARIE ATARII 2150.00 NEW! PRICE 2209 The Falcon Has Landed! RRP SILICA PRICE |  SA NEW NEW LOW LOW 1040ST-E NOW WITH MUSIC MASTER I 32 PAGE PRICE PRICE MUSIC MASTER TUTORIAL The Music Master Pack features one of the most popular computers used by musicians combined with the renowned MIDI package PRO 24 ill to provide a perfect environment for novice and professional alike. The PAMILY CURRICULUM IL acclaimed MIDI Recording and Editing System from Steinberg, PRO 24 III is used by many top musicians including Dire Straits and PWL. Using any MIDI keyboard, PRO 24 offers the ability to write and compose HARDWARE: music to a very high standard. You can 2999 go record up to 24 tracks simultaneously, and MONITOR OPTIONAL EXTRA 1040ST-E COMPUTER.... BMHz 16-Bit 68000 CPU, 1 Mb RAM Mouse, then apply real time editing to remove TOR OPTIONAL EXTRA  16MHz 16-Bit 68000 processor TV Modulator Internal PSU, IMB Disk Drive mistakes.  3% 1.44Mb Double Sided Disk Drive  32MHz 32-Bit 68030 Processor SOFTWARE: LOW  2 RAM PRO 24 Ill...... .... .00  3X\" 1.4410 Double Sided Disk Drive ! PRICE PLUS! FREE FROM SILICA:  Hard Drive Options Available  2/4/8 Mb RAM Versions .97 Silica Productivity Pack ...  4096 Colour Palette  Stereo 8-Bit PCM Sound Output TenStar Games Pack...... $219.78  4096 Colour Palette . Stereo 8-Bit PCM Sound Output  Built-in 68882 Maths Co-Processor  FREE Silica Productivity Pack Total Value: .74 PLUSI NEWI REVISED PACK  Up to 1280 x 960 Resolution  FREE Tenstar Games Pack Less Pack Saving: .74 16 NIGHTS  VME+SCSI Expansion Ports  FREE 16 Nights Holiday Accommodation HOLIDAY ACCOM. SILICA PRICE: .00 Ina VAT Ref: STC 1281  Expandable to 36 RAM HARDWARE:  Hard Drive Expansion Options SPECIAL PROMO PRICE! 1040ST-E COMPUTER..... .99  FREE 16 Nights Holiday Accommodation 2Mb MEGA ST-E No hard drive) BMHz 16-Bit 68000 CPU, 1 Mb RAM, Mouse, TV Modulator, Internal PSU, 1Mb Disk Drive 2Mb RAM 4Mb RAM 8MB RAM SOFTWARE MODULES:  16MHz 32-bit 68030 Processor ATARI FALCON 030 PLAY AND LEARN A Game with Words and Sentences ...... .59 1 32-Bit 68030 CPU, RAM,  32MHz Motorola DSP and BLITTER 341.446 FDD JUNIOR SCHOOL Answer Back/General.. .54 WOWA STC 1925 NWT STC SONGWA STC EST Knowledge Quiz, Spelling and Primary Maths Inc VAT-RefSTC 8433 Co-processors HARDWARE: GCSE Micro Maths, French, and Geography Quiz .. .54  DSP capabilities for voice SOFTWARE: HYPER PAINT Full Colour Paint Package .99 The new Atari Falcon 030 is here! It is recognition, speech synthesis and CALAPPT. Personal Information Manager Enhanced MUSIC MAKER II Music Creation Software .99 a powerful, versatile, multipurpose numerous audio special effects version calendar allowing importiexport printing FIRST BASIC Powerful Programming Language $49.99 home computer, offering unmatched PROCALC Calculator 1st WORD Very easy-to-use Word Processor... .99 performance for its price. Included in  True colour display: 768 x 480 SYSTEM-AUDIO-MANAGER An Auto Folder Desk Accessory combination that allows the user to ANI ST Animation Package ... its advanced specification are multiple .95  65,000+ colours on screen at once record sounds from a microphone and assign various GAMES co-processors for sound and graphics, system functions true colour displays from a pallet of  Record 8 channel, 16-Bit stereo TALKING CLOCK Announces time at preset intervais 9 LIVES The ultimate in playability! help Bob Cat save Claudette .99 over a quarter of a million colours and sound and play back 4 channel, AUDIO FUN MACHINE A revolutionary audio PRINCE Do battle in this tenth century game of warfare.... .95 16-bit stereo sound input for speech 16-bit stereo simultaneously program using DSP PLUS! FREE FROM SILICA: recognition and sound sampling.  SCSI II, DMA, MIDI IN & MIDI LANOMINES & BREAKOUT. Two fully featured games Silica Productivity Pack..... .98 These all combine to provide a new OUT, Stereo audio & microphone TenStar Games Pack ..... ..... .78 computer capable of running unrivalled ports Total Value: .27 sound, graphics and multimedia Less Pack Saving: .27 applications. The Falcon is an ideal  1.44u Floppy Disk SILICA PRICE: .00 upgrade for Atari ST owners who are  1.4 or 14. RAM Configurations IMO RAM, OMS HD. Ref: STC 7000 looking for a more powerful model, as AVAILABLE FEBRUARY 193 PLUS! 16 NIGHTS HOLIDAY MONITOR OPTIONAL EXTRA it is compatible with the majority of ST  Optional 65 Hard Disk Ing VAT Fe; STC 1272 application software. HOTEL ACCOMMODATION GAMd Disk : STC 7048  Built-in ADC & DAC convertors \"Does not include 1st Word ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT FREE OVERNIGHT COURIER DELIVERY IN THE UK MAINLAND 131092-0845 MAIL ORDER: 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 081-309 1111 Order Lines Open: Mon-Sat 9.00am-6.00pm No Late Night Opening Fax No: 081-308 0608 LONDON SHOP: 52 Tottenham Court Road, London, W1P OBA Tel: 071-580 4000 Opening Hours: Mon-Sat 9.30am-8.00pm No Late Night Opening Fax No: 071-323 4737 FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY: On all hardware orders shipped in the UK mainland. LONDON SHOP: Selfridges (1st Floor), Oxford Street, London, W1A 1AB Tel: 071-629 1234 TECHNICAL SUPPORT HELPLINE: Team of technical experts at your service. Opening Hours Mon-Fri 9.30am-7.00pm (Sat Close 6.30pm) Late Night: Thursday 8pm Extension: 3914  PRICE MATCH: We normally match competitors on a \"Same product Same price basis SIDCUP SHOP. 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 081-302 8811 1-4 The Mowe Hatherler ESTABLISHED 14 YEARS: Proven track record in professional computer sales. Opening Hours Mon-Sat 9.00am-5.30pm Late Night: Friday 7pm Fax No: 061-309 0017  E12 MILLION TURNOVER (with 60 staff): Solid, reliable and profitable ESSEX SHOP: Keddies (2nd Floor), High Street, Southend-on-Sea, Essex, SS1 1LA Tel: 0702 462426  BUSINESS + EDUCATION + GOVERNMENT: Volume discounts available 081-308 0888. Opening Hours: Mon-Fri 9.30am-5.30pm (Sat 9.00am-6.00pm) No Late Night Opening Fax No: 0702462363 SHOWROOMS: Demonstration and training facilities at our London & Sidcup branches.  THE FULL STOCK RANGE: All of your requirements from one supplier. To: Silica Systems, CVG-0293-79. 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX FREE CATALOGUES: Will be mailed to you with offers + software and peripheral details. PLEASE SEND A BROCHURE ON THE ST RANGE PAYMENT: Major credit cards, cash, cheque or monthly terms. Before you decide when to buy your new computer, we suggest you think very carefully about WHERE you buy it. Consider what it will be like a few months after you have made your purchase, when you may Mr/Mrs/Miss/Ms: ....... Initials:.................. Surname: require additional peripherals and software, or help and advice with your new purchase. And, will the company you buy from contact you with details of new products? At Silica Systems, we ensure that you Company Name (if applicable): will have nothing to worry about. We have been established for almost 14 years and, with our unrivalled experience and expertise, we can now claim to meet our customers' requirements with an understanding Address: .... which is second to none. But don't just take our word for it. Complete and return the coupon now for our latest FREE literature and begin to experience the \"Silica Systems Service\".  Soo SILICA SYSTEMS OFFER YOU MAIL ORDER HOTLINE 081-309 1111 SILICA SYSTEMS Postcode: ........ Tel (Home): ........... ............... Tel (Work): .......... Which computer(s), if any, do you own? ............... E&OE Advertised prices and specifications may change Please return the coupon for the latest information "


"SUPERSONIC HEDGEHOG WITH ATTITUDE ON 7, 12, CASS & CD AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD RECORD STORES stan ISITERNAL AFFAIRS "


"BE FIRST ............. Win the latest goes SAVE s........ Wil Dost wedership scheune EXCHANGE CLUB PathExclenge your old games Siera WHIZZ-KID THE UK's NOI VIDEO GAME CLUB SUPER NES GAME BOY FREE TTLE NEW SECONDHAND TITLE NEW SECONDHAND BUY DUE OCT NEW NEW MEMBERSHIP SN OCT OCT NEW DEC NEW OCT OCT AFTER YOUR FIRST PURCHASE OF OVER . MEMBERSHIP ENTITLES YOU TO: NEW OLD PT GAMES FF GAMES OCT 22.00 WE WANT YOUR GAMES Why pay full price for older titles? Buy second-hand or part-exchange your old games. We also buy games. $1.00 handling charge per game. When you send us your games for part-exchange or sale we are acting as your agent until they are sold. OCT DEC OCT NOV ADVANCE ORDERS ALIEN IN ASTEROIDS BATMAN RETURN OF JOKER BIONIC COMMANDO .... CASTLEVANIA . CHOPLIFTER .... .. CRASH DUMMIES....... DARK WING DUCK DARKMAN DOUBLE DRAGON IN DR FRANKEN EMPIRE STIKES BACK.............. FACEBALL 2000 GRADIUS HIT THE ICE HOOK HUDSON HAWK JOE AND MAC....... LETHAL WEAPON LITTLE MERMAID LOONEY TOONS MEGAMAN II MINER 2049ER ......... MISSLE COMMAND NINJA TARO... PRINCE OF PERSIA.. RAMPART ROBOCOP 10 ROCKY AND BULLWINKLE SIMPSONS I... SNOW BROTHERS SPIDERMAN HI STAR TREK SUPER HUNCH BACK TALESPIN TERMINATOR II FUTURE TERMINATOR II ARCADE.... TINY TOONS TOM AND JERRY ......... TOP GUN GUTS N GLORY TOXIC CRUSADER TRACK AND FIELD TRACK MEET TURN ANO BURN......... TE 999999999999999999 22.00 Top selling titles are always in short supply. Place your order in advance, and it will be sent to you ON DAY OF ARRIVAL PLEASE NOTE Cheques will not be cashed and credit cards will not be debited until day of despatch. NEW NEW OCT POSTAGE & SHIPPING BEEBEECEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE 14.00 14.00... ... OCT NEW ADDAMS FAMILY 16.00 NEW ARCANIA AXELAY.... 21.00 OCT BATTLE BLAZE OCT BATTLE TOADS ..... OCT BLUES BROTHERS .... OCT BULLS V LAKERS .. .. CALIFORNIA GAMES... CASTLEVANIA I... CONTRA I CYBERNATOR OCT DESERT STRIKE 20.00 NOV DINO CITY ....... 17.00 DUNGEON MASTER ..... 27.00 DUNGEONS AND DRAGONS OCT F-1 RACE OF CHAMPIONS F-ZERO FACEBALL 2000 FINAL FANTASY LEGEND II FINAL FIGHT.. FOOTBALL FURY .... GODS ......... NOV GUN FORCE ...... HARLEYS HUMONGOUS ADVENTURE..... HIT THE ICE HOME ALONE O HOOK HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER 17.00 JOE AND MAC... 17.00 KAWASAKI CARRIBBEAN CHALLENGE 20.00 OCT LEGEND OF MYSTICAL NINJA LEMMINGS ...... NEW LETHAL WEAPON OCT MAGIC SWORD NEW METAL JACKET OCT MIGHT AND MAGIC OCT MUSYA .... ....... NCAA BASKETBALL .. OUT OF THIS WORLD PGA TOUR GOLF PILOT WINGS PRINCE OF PERSIA PUSHOVER RACE DRIVIN... RADIO FLYER NEW RAMPART NEW ROBOCOP 3. NOV SHADOW OF THE BEAST DEC SIMPSONS BARTS NIGHTMARE OCT SIMPSONS KRUSTYS FUNHOUSE NOY SPANKYS QUEST NEW SPELLCRAFT ... OCT SPIDERMAN XMEN......... OCT SPINDIZZY WORLD ... STAR WARS DEC STREET FIGHTER NEW SUPER ADVENTURE ISLAND SUPER BOWLING ___ SUPER DOUBLE DRAGON SUPER GHOULS N GHOSTS SUPER POWER PUNCH IN ....... SUPER R-TYPE..... SUPER SMASH TV SUPER SOCCER CHAMP SUPER WRESTLEMANIA NEW TERMINATOR II ARCADE.. NOV TERMINATOR II JUDGEMENT TINY TOONS DEC TOM AND JERRY TOP GEAR 16.00 NEW TOXIC CRUSADERS UN SQUADRON 16.00 WING COMMANDER WINGS .... 27.00 ....... 20.00... WORLD LEAGUE SOCCER 43.00 ZELDA III... ......... 13.00 31.00 24.00 NEW ALL USA SNES GAMES REQUIRE GAME ADAPTOR MEMBER PRICE .00 NEW OCT ESINESS INTERNATIONAL UK MAINLAND: .00 for each game .00 for accessories. OVERSEAS CUSTOMERS: Shipping quoted with each order. ULTIMA ULTRA GOLF ................ UNIVERSAL SOLDIER ... WWE FREE CATALOGUE OCT Send a S.A.E. for our FREE COLOUR CATALOGUE Free catalogue and release schedule with every order. 3331122 ALL PRICES QUOTED ARE FOR MEMBERS ONLY EEEEEEEEE WE ALSO STOCK MASTER SYSTEM MEGADRIVE GAME GEAR LYNX NES Non members add .00 new games .00 used games All prices subject to change. All games subject to availability. OCT OCT EEEEEEEE NEW 20.00 Name Address WHIZZ-KID GAMES LTD 22 STATION SQUARE PETTS WOOD KENT BR5 INA Tel: 0689 891000 Member No Cheque Postal Order Credit Card Town County Post Code Tel SALES HOTLINE 0689 891000 Game Machine Price am-7pm Weeks oon Weekends RETAIL SHOPS TERRI'S GROUP PLC Petts Wood 0689 827816 Beckenham 081-650 1205 Orpington 0689 821515 Walderslade 0634 862036 Rainham 0634 235641 WEWERS SHWE P U UR METUL SHOPS Expiry Date Postage Total All cheques must be supplied with a valid cheque card number. Please telephone to confirm before ordering. All games are UK or USA versions. Signature "


"New. For your SUPER NINTENDO New. For your SUPER NINTENDU New. For ve ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM GAME LINK GAME BOY. LLOIECTUK SUPER PROBOTECTOR KONAMI. Die bosartigen Machte der Allens sind zurckgekehrt. Sie sind strker denn je zuvor.hr Plan: Die Erde zu bedrohen. Benutzen Sie Ihre Superwaffen, um diese Oblen Kreaturen zu vernichten CENSED BY Nintendo SUPER NINTENDO ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM PAL VERSION The Battle is about to begin! The year is 2636 and Earth is faced with the threat of a massive invasion. The mad, mutant alien rebels are back with a vengeance, looking for their revenge the anihilation of the human race. Earth's only hope is the PROBOTECTOR, the strongest fighting robots in history, but will they be enough? Can they destroy these miserable mutants in time to save the world... KONAMI DDDDD THE TURN OF GAME BOY Original Nintendo Seal of Quality Distribution: Bandai UK Ltd. (UK), Unit 26/27 Fareham Industrial Park, Fareham, Hants PO 16 8XB "

