"Britain's best selling computer magazine still only VOV 87 COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES SPECTRO A BOSCONIAN COIN-OP! A NINTENDO GAMES MACHINE! A SLAINE SURVIVAL KIT SPITTING IMAGE VIDEOS! ENTER THE KNIGHTMARE!/DRUID II PLAYERS GUIDE FREE: GIANT JIGSAW POSTER! "


"THESlits COLLECTION Vol. 1 PEE DOMACK Bestlite COMMANDE Vol.2 RBOY clito HIT PAK AME   VOL 1 FRANK BRUNO The most succesibaigsition against  11  Copy System  Conversion of these con game, you are Super Joe the crack combat soldier Japan Cap Comarca d e   Collecting your bombs and delating the enemy as yo go make this coin-op conson one of the AWOLF helicopter signed aangerous mission. You will need at your skills at logical thinking 1984 Un City Studio Inc. All trademaran and by me Stine VOL 2 PAPER Boy Probably the most imputar yar the longest running number one GHOSTS'N'GOBLINS The technically excellent fighting tantas story which puts you as the brain guteuing bedtiful maidens from the cutes of dame overlord Chowk SPACE HARRIER A con parked adventure that you in mar combat with all of another planet Seca The gate has been man SPACE HAPHit A are awn of Rega SPACE HARRIER not available on tomat 1 includes AIRWOLF 21 Once again you pilot the ultimate combathelicopter when ne else 1984 All t anta otryno Shadow. The Bomblack returns armed and ready for cumbat Can you out with me and fight your way into outer space to collect E TECMOLTD t  Spectrum Cassette Amstrad Cassette Amstrad Disc Commodore 64 Cassette Commodore 64 Disc Commodore 16 Cassette HIT PAKT ELITE SYSTEMS LIMITED, Eastern Avenue, Lichfield, Staffs WS13 6RX Telex: 336130 ELITE G "


"NUDER 15 DU TM Spectrum 48k Cassette .95 Spectrum 128k Cassette .95 Spectrum 128k Disc .95 DA Commodore 64 Cassette .95 Commodore 64 Disc .95 Amstrad 64k Cassette .95 Amstrad 64k Disc .95 Amstrad 128k Disc .95 Coming soon: Atari ST/ Nintendo Screenshots taken from various computer formats Clite 1985 Telepictures Corporation, Leisure Concepts, Inc and Ted Wolt All rights reserved Elite Systems Limited, Eastern Avenue, Lichfield, Staffs WS136RX Telex: 336130 ELITEG "


"O Features 49 THUNDERCATS TAPE OFFER 52 BOSCONIAN ARCADE COMPETITION 56 IDEAS CENTRAL 60 ENLIGHTENMENT PLAYERS GUIDE 64 FLUNKY COMPETITION 70 FRAME-UP! 75 GAMES MACHINE COMPETITION 79 ROCK ON! 82 JACKAL POSTER 86 THUNDERCATS COMIC! 195 THUNDERCATS COMPETITION 99 NEXT MONTH 101 SLAINE COMPETITION 102 ADVENTURE NEWS 104 YES, PRIME MINISTER 108 ADVENTURE REVIEWS | 113 THE FIEND | 114 HELPLINE 116 NIGHT OF TERROR 119 BIG SCREEN 123 16 BIT NEWS 125 CALIFORNIA GAMES COMPETITION 126 ENTER KNIGHTMARE | 130 MEAN MACHINES | 142 PBM 148 COMIX 154 MAILBAG 154 MAILBAG 160 PEN PALS 162 HOT GOSSIP THUNDERCATS COMIC/P86 Contents BEA 331 is DRUID Il/P60 62-20 oNews & Reviervs18 NEWS 16 REVIEWS: GAMES OF THE MONTH: INTERNATIONAL KARATE II. C+VG HITS: HYSTERIA, SUPERSPRINT, MANIAC MANSION | | 134 ARCADE ACTION OCHVG team EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John ART EDITOR Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Steve Donoghue Matthew Woodley AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANT Tony Takoushi PUBLICITY Clive Pembridge ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Garry Williams SENIOR ADVERTISEMENT EXECUTIVE Katherine Lee AD PRODUCTION Lora Clarke PUBLISHER Terry Pratt COVER Lee Sullivan EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222. JulyDecember 106,571 int ARCADE ACTION/P134 "


"-Contents PIRATES MANIAC MANSION/P34 PIRATES!/P36 INTERNATIONAL KARATE 2/P16 INDIANA JONES/P27 Inside Story Thundercats Ho! Got your free tape? Got your free pull out poster? Are you sitting comfortably? Good, then I can begin! There's more than Thundercats and free gifts to this issue of C+VG. We've got reviews galore-reviews of 16-bit games as well as hot new releases for the 64, Spectrum and Amstrad. And games don't come much hotter than our Game of the Month, International Karate 2. Tony T. has been busting a gut to bring you the meanest of games for the Mean Machines, the Nintendo and the Sega. This time he looks at the long awaited Nemesis II. Talking Nintendo you can WIN one of the Deluxe sytems. Complete with R.O.B. your plastic pal who's fun to be with! And there's a mega-prize from Mastertronic in the shape of a genuine Bosconian arcade machine just waiting for you to get your hand on it! SPACE QUEST/P108 SCORE 0014500 RELO 12 im HYSTERIA/P24 ENTER KNIGHTMARE/P126 BIG SCREEN/P119 AFTERBURNER/P134 COMIX/P148 -Contents "


"TH/EUILTIMATE AE THE ULTIMATE AERIAL EXPERIENCE NOW AVAILABLE FOR YOUR COMPUTER All the thrills and skills of real skateboarding in this unique challenge to become champion of the skating world. Starting out from \"Skate City\" test your abilities amongst the numerous skateparks improving your techniques in both freestyle and competitive action as you attempt to complete the ultimate manoeuvre the 720 degree twist while soaring through the air. Spectrum -99 Tape ATARI GAMES "


"RIAL EXPERIENCE! 10.100 5240 CBM64/128 -99 Disk -99 Tape 1.300 2.300 AMATEUR PRO AMATEUR  Amstrad -99 Disk E9-99 Tape Screenshots from arcade version U.S. U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Halford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3368 GOLD AI "


"+ Mews Amstrad and Spectrum. Will it be a howling success for Viz Design? Stay tuned... Coining it Get Shirty. Melbourne House hopes to be back with a bang later this ye following Mastertronic's buyout of the label. The new releases lined up include computer conversions of Mastertronic's combat simulation that transports the player into a world of electronic air warfare. There are seven \"historic\" missions from the secret night bombing of North Vietnam to daylight raids into Iran. F-15 STRIKE EAGLE is currently available on C64/128 cassette and disk, Atari XL/XE cassette and disk and Spectrum cassette. We've got a very special offer just for YOU. Konami has produced this really neat t-shirt and it wants C+VG readers to have them at the give away price of .95 — they normally cost over ! To take advantage of this special C+VG offer all you have to do is cut out the special coupon and send it together with a cheque or postal order made payable to W+V Supplies, to W+V Supplies, Bank Buildings, Bank Street, Newton Abbot, Devon, TQ12 2JL. Overseas readers should add .05 postage and packing. Eagle Lands. A Howler! COUPON The long awaited F-15 Strike Eagle from MicroProse is due Here's a first look at for release on Atari ST about now. Werewolves of London, due F-15 Strike Eagle is a realistic out in November on Commodore out in November on Commodore, Arcadia coin-op games. They are Roadwars, a space race around a never-ending roadway circling the Moon of Armageddon, and Rockford, based on the Boulderdash character. Other games scheduled are Metropolis, Pulse Warrior, Street Hassle and Kelly X. That truly wonderful Lucasfilm adventure Maniac Mansion is reviewed this issue and we've got SEVEN awesomely huge posters featuring the neat artwork from the packaging to GIVE away to the first seven C+VG readers who write in, on a postcard only please, with the name of the Lucasfilm game based around a film starring David Bowie. Simplicity itself. Don't forget to print your name and address clearly on your card. Send your entry to Computer and A Winner Martin congratulated by Jeff. A Martin, Andrew, Darren and Jeff. A real battle of the giants took Martin Deem from Stubbington, place at the Personal Computer Hampshire. Each had 10 minutes World Show. Top scoring titans to clock up their high score on from arcades all over the country R-Type and win a ,000 arcade met in a no holds barred fight to machine donated by the finish on that mega-machine Electrocoin, the UK's top arcade R-Type. Three finalists from machine distributors. To make sure C+VG's search for an arcade star the whole thing was run fairly Jeff competition, staged in the Peters from the visiting US Video magazine and at the show, met on Games Championship Team was the last day of the show for the the timekeeper. So who came out final showdown. They were on top? None other than Martin Darren Parker from Deem who put together a new Doncaster, Andrew Hall machine high score of 210,000 in Davies from Redditch and his 10 minute slot. Wowie Bowie. "


"YOU'RE  12345 E 189012345 12345 Mais Boc! Here's a brief look at some of the Gremlin games about to blitz the Christmas market. First, there's more adventures of Matt Trakker in MASK II. The action is divided into two main challenges. Firstly the alert section and the selection of your team and vehicles followed by completion of the four main missions, during which the player must exercise expertise in choosing when to transform. Compendium is Gremlin's adaptation of the traditional board games compendiuml Hosts are the Winks, father Tiddly Wink and his wife, Mavis Wink. Up to four players can compete by taking the role of either one of the Wink children, the baby or the Wink dog. In Defletore, there are no heroes, or no foes, only pure skill and technology. You guide your lazer beams through a sea of danger, a pyramid of obstacles SERIES SITHER  reflect it from mirrors, bounce it off Venicell! walls and deflect it through lenses. After that, and if you can still The players must calculate the stand the pace, try your hand at angles, carefully judging the piling plates, jumping rivers, beam's path towards the home pogoing and pillow fighting. receiver. After that, another fifty Basil The Great Mouse nine levels of frustration and mind Detective is based on Walt boggling intrigue. Disney's latest film character. Alternative World Games The player must rescue his good is a sports simulation spoof. friend Dr Dawson from the evil Each game takes place at a clutches of the dastardly Ratigan. different location. You'll be sack Follow the clues which are strewn racing in Naples, boat throwing at all over the buildings in Baker the Colosseum, pole climbing in Street in order to achieve your Verona and running up walls in objective. Video Games, Maniac Mansion Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Don't delay, enter today! peace but that won't be easy when you see the outlaws and criminals attracted to New Texas by the precious metal Kerium. It's a game where you'll have to shoot to thrill. Soitting fire. LEBO Panther Tale. Spitfire 40, Mirrorsoft's classic combat flight-sim is due to take-off on the Atari ST this month. Enhanced graphics, great sound, improved packaging with maps and log books make this an attractive package even at .95. Laying down the law on the wild frontier planet of Nex Texas is Bravestarr, six foot of cult cartoon character, blasting up a Spectrum near you this Christmas. It is programmed by Probe Eugene's Island Sitting in a dingy backstreet café gangster period of US history. First seen on the Macs this Amiga somewhere in Paris is a small shady looking man. Yup, you version has truly awesome guessed it, it's the Ed on a secret graphics. It should be out now for the mission for C+VG. The collar of his stained raincoat is turned up, his Amiga from Mirrorsoft at .95. battered hat is pushed down low to hide his beady eyes. Another shady character sidles up to the Ed's table, sits down and says, in a fake French accent: \"Ello, Inspecteer Closeau 'ere. 'Ave you 'erd about Eugene Evans is alive and zat craftee 'Arry Ollersoft? l'ave well, and still living in Liverpool. bee watching heem verry clousley. The world's oldest whizz-kid is Ee ez hiding zomezing from me. working on the Bermuda Project, But I, ze great detecteeve, will find an exciting text/graphics out what it eez!\" But the Ed is way adventure for the ST, Amiga and in front of Clouseau. He already Apple Mac to be released by knows that 'Arry Ollersoft has signed up the Pink Panther for a big new computer caper coming to a software shop near YOU very soon. 33 ASSES S . Hi Chuck!! Here's Chuck Yeager's Advanced Flight Simulator from Electronic Arts-put together with the assistance of the main man himself. Who is Chuck Yeager? He's only the first pilot to shatter the sound barrier that's all. And he's flown every sort of jet you can think of. You might have seen his life story on film in The Right Stuff. Dirty Rat! Mirrorsoft this month. In the game Here's the long awaited new a reporter crashes on a desert island epic from Cinemaware. Called without his eight favourite records. King of Chicago, it's a superb, The only solution is to attempt an atmospheric game set in the escape to civilisation! Software for US Gold's new Go label. The sheriff must keep the "


"CALL IT A SEQUEL.. AND YOU'LL LAND UP FLAT ON YOUR BACK. "


"INTERNATIONAL They called International Karate the best beat-em-up so far. And who are we to argue? But System 3 have come up with a stunner: A Third Fighter. Some amazing backgrounds. New moves. Re-mixed music, And balls. Commodore 64/128 Cassette ($9.99) and Disk ($14.99) Coming soon for Spectrum and Amstrad home computers Mail Order: Activision (UK) Ltd, Units 3 & 4 Lloyds Close Finedon Road Industrial Estate, Wellingborough, Northampton NNS 4SR Tel: (0933) 78787 Distributed by Activision (UK) Ltd. "


"Mews The game simulates an ecosphere, a self-supporting natural environment which is depicted in 3D scrolling landscapes. The aim is survival. Beginning life as an amoeba, the player must evolve through fish and fauna stages, eventually achieving human status. During the search for vital elements such as food, water and light, a food chain starts which turns the player into a predator or prey. Ocean has also acquired the computer game rights to Madballs inspired by a gang of weird and wacky toy characters, featuring Dustbrain and Screeming Meemie. Also coming from Imagine on the Spectrum, Amstrad CPC and Commodore 64 is Freddie Harvest featuring an astral playboy's search for a spaceship. Sorry... Ballblazer, Koronis Rift and The Eidolon. Prices are .99 on Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad and .99 on CBM and Amstrad Disk. Action Pack 3 from Alligata contains Who Dares Wins II, Octagon, Trap and Indoor Bowling (Spectrum), Who Dares Wins II, Kettle, Trap and Indoor Bowling ICBM 64), Who Dares Wins, Kettle, Trap and Indoor tape for Commodore, Spectrum Bowling (Amstrad). and Amstrad owners stuck on the Epix Epics from US Gold front of this magazine we've got a contains Impossible Mission, special offer just for YOU.Top Summer Games, This here's Driller, the new Atari ST and Amiga software Breakdance and Pitstop II game developed using house Rainbird has agreed to on Commodore. Incentive's new Freescape s new Freescape knock  off two of its bestsolid 3D environment simulator. selling 16-bit games Tracker Driller puts you in charge of a rigand Guild of Thieves for the which has to locate dangerous Amiga. Yup, five whole pounds off gases beneath the surface of your the epic strategy game Tracker, moon as well as dealing with alien which was a C+VG 16-bit hita machinery and defence systems. while back, or five pounds off that Ooops! Dept: We made a boob It's a huge game which takes you over and underground with over awesome Magnetic Scrolls giving you the price of Electronic adventure Guild of Thieves. Arts' Paint Il last issue. The 20,000 billion screen possibilities. correct price is .95 NOT , Mind-boggling, eh? Incentive which makes it even more of a say the complete Driller bargain. \"experience will include a 30 page operations manual, a novella plus a 3D mapping model. Out first on the Spectrum with Commodore The ladies of St Bride's have and Amstrad versions to come. been rather quiet recently. But their Prices will be .95 on tape, latest game should put them back ECO, Ocean's first game ECO Ocean's fin .95 on disc. Review next issue, into the full glare of publicity. Jack designed and written for 16 bit hopefully the Ripper, due for release on the computers is scheduled for release Spectrum and CBM 64 in in December on the Amiga 500 November and Amstrad in and Atari ST machines at .95. December, should be controversial to say the least if the rather gory screen shots are anything to go by, which we, for reasons of good taste, refused to print. The gamewhich will be released by CRL-is a portrayal of one of the most brutal and macabre serious of crimes in British history. correct price is .95 NOTE 30, Kick Off. Watch out for Football Manager 2, the follow up to Kevin Toms' megasuccessful Football Manager. The game was launched at the PCW Show by Ron Atkinson, manager of West Brom. The game includes end to end action with one on one tactic and up-to-date match score with the fully animated scoreboard. COODOO Brits thrash Yanks. 16 bit Offer! Jingle Tills!! Just so all you 16-owners don't feel left out because there's a free RAINBIRD C+VG/RAINBIRD 16-BIT HITS OFFER Please rush me my copy of Tracker for the Atari ST/Guild of Thieves for the Amiga (delete where applicable) lenclose a cheque/PO for .99 made payable to Computer and Video Games. Name Address As Christmas looms on the horizon the software houses are raiding their back catalogues of games and putting together all sorts of game compilation tapes to tempt you. Some are good, some bad, some are actually great. Here's a round up of what's turned up in C+VG's offices, recently. First up is the Hit Pak release 6-Pak Volume 2 offering a selection of goodies from various companies. Games are Ace (Cascade), Shockway Rider (FTL), Into the Eagles Nest (Pandora), International Karate (System 3) Light Force (FTL) and a previously unreleased game called Batty. 6-Pak Volume Two is out for the Spectrum, CBM 64 and Amstrad at .95 on cassette and .95 CBM and Amstrad disk. Out from Activision is LucasFilm 4: The Prestige Collection, a two cassette package containing Fractalus, The Brits are the best arcade players in the world! And that's official. In a battle of the giants at the recent Personal Computer World Show the might of the U.S. National Video Game Team was humbled by the British boys! Mastertronic hosted this first international arcade championship event to celebrate the launch of their own Arcadia range of coin op machines. The US team was Donn Navert, Jeff Peters, Perry Rodgers and Steve Harris. The Brits included C+VG's lan Machin, Commodore User's Daniel Gilbert, former C+VG Arcade Champion and Zzap's Julian Rignal plus Tony Horgan from Sinclair User. The final was played out on Arcadia's new Rockford machine and like we said the British team came out on top-but US star Donn Navert took individual honours winning the International Player of The Year title and a Sega System. The US National Video Game Team consists of the nation's top arcade and computer game players. Players may qualify to become a member of the team by demonstrating top performances at the major national tournaments. 31 TOKENS 16 Bit Offer "


"Preview The Future! PROJECT: STEALTH FIGHTER MICROPROSE Stealth Fighter... the hottest topic of conversation in aviation PROJECT: STEALTH FIGHTER. Another brillant simulation circles today. Space Age technology and engineering make from MicroProse. Available for the Commodore 64/128K. these aircraft virtually undetectable by enemy radar. Cassette .95. Disk .95. Stealth Fighters are believed to be in operation, flying the most sensitive missions, flown by a superior class of pilot. You can experience that thrill of flying a revolutionary aircraft, previewing the edge of the future. SIMULATION SOFTWARE Please send copy/ies of Project: Stealth Fighter CBM 64/128 Cassette .95 Disk .95 Further details. Name (block capitals) Address Post Code I enclose  including 55p P+P. Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. PSFIC+VG/1187 or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date_ _No. O MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tlx: 43422 MPS/UKG. "


"THE NEW SINCLAIR HAS ONE BIG DISKZX Spect ENTERPS SHIFT FLOPPY DISC DRIVE SIDE 2 Transmission distribution or All rights of this work are re LOADING SE SUPERTEST 1 OCEAN SOFTY COSMIC WARTOAD SUPERTEST 2 Copying. Lending. Broadcasting, Haring bied without our express permission VCTION BOOKLET SED BY THE SINCLAIR ZX SPECTRUM + 3 WITH 6 FREE GAMES AND A JOYSTICK. "


"ADVANTAGE. ZX SPECTRUM +3.  * 3 The new Sinclair ZX Spectrum +3 is a real hero because it helps you to be one. While you're a daring motorbike rider or the all-conquering intergalactic warrior, you're gaining priceless experience in handling computers. Loading games is quick and easy with the built-in disk-drive. You'll be in the thick of the action in seconds. And the fantastic 128K memory gives you the power to outsmart the most sophisticated enemy. Get to grips with the latest high-tec graphics on the vast universe of games available (six of which come free). And there's a free joystick to give you ultimate control. But the real hero is the person who buys it. For the ZX Spectrum +3 is only , so they've really saved the earth. ZX SPECTRUM + 2.  The amazing ZX Spectrum +2 has a built-in datacorder-to save you the bother of tape recorders and leads. The advanced 128K memory helps you get the most from the vast universe of games available. Every model comes complete with six free games to start you off, and a free joystick to make you super agile. With the advanced Sinclair technology you can afford to let your imagination go wild. Because at , only your enemies pay heavily. BE WHO YOU WANT TO BE. Available at: Allders, Boots, Clydesdale, Comet, Connect, Currys, Dixons, John Lewis, John Menzies, Lasky's, Tandy.\" W.H. Smith, Visionhire, Wigfalls, and all good independent stores. \"ZX Spectrum +2 only Recommended retail price Sinclair ZX Spectrum +2  including VAT, Sinclair Spectrum +3  including VAT at 110 87. Prices subject to change without prior notice Sinclair Please tell me more about the SINCLAIR ZX Spectrum +20 ZX Spectrum +3 Name. Address SCVGI Amstrad plc, Brentwood House, 169 Kings Road, Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF. Tel: (0277) 262326 "


"C+VG D to Internation 0000090 Reviews this issue International Karate 2 Super Sprint Alpha Mission/ Hollywood Poker Quedex/Hysteria Joe Blade  MACHINE: CBM 64 SUPPLIER: SYSTEM 3/ ACTIVISION PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: PAUL Had enough of being kicked in the head, punched in the kidneys and smashed in the stomach? No? Good. Just get your bruised and battered body over to the computer and get ready for another bout of flesh-flaying body-swaying, cruel-punching, bone-wrenching, fist-flailing, high-kicking karate. So what's new? Let's face it, they've been some pretty excellent martial arts games over the past year or so-who needs another one? There's nothing new to be done, is there? WRONG! Sound the fanfares and get the flags out for System 3's International Karate 2, the sequel that's more than equal to the original. The man given the job of creating this masterpiece of macho mayhem is Archer Maclean, creator of the classic Drop Zone. C+VG has seen a very early copy of the game and there may be a number of changes added to the finished copy but, without any fear, we say this game is the BUSINESS The obvious innovation is that Archer has added an extra computer controlled character to spice up the action. This means that you can get thumped from two different directions at the same time! No wonder the fighters are always seeing stars. Obviously, in the one-player mode, the computer controls the other two fighters. But when there are two players it's quite good fun to gang up on the computer man. It won't take too long before you discover there are some new moves which you can make. My favourite is the backflip, an almost acrobatic movement which allows you to zip out of trouble. The other is more difficult to describe. Imagine your player is trapped between the other fighters. It's possible to get him to face out of the screen and jump with both legs moving out and upwards in what is a very balletic way. Get your timing right and it's possible to put your opponents flat on their backs very quickly. Indiana Jones Galax/Skull-Diggery XXXXXCEPCE Renegade Sidewalk/Anarchy Maniac Mansion Water Ski-ing Pirates! 15 Graham Gooch's Cricket 14 Moebius Barbarian/Backlash Evening Star  1 Red L.E.D. Yogi Bear Draughts Genius Blazer "


" C-VG al Karate 2 = a) 000 V 1680 31 TIME The other moves are fairly standard but I did miss the absence of the roundhouse kick. Still, you can't have everything! suppose. Archer has also added a touch of humour by making the fighter's karate suit bottoms fall down occasionally, turning the game briefly into a sort of Carry on Karate. At the end of the timed bout a mystical oriental appears on the screen to give the verdict on who came first or second or third. The bonus screen is also new. The player stands in the middle of the screen holding a round shield. From the other side bouncing balls fly towards him. By quick movements, first right. spiders coming down from the then left, it's possible to deflect odd structure in the the balls. Miss and they knock background, fish jumping out of him over. Very original and the water, and strange great fun. creatures appearing to slither Besides the fight action, the across the screen. game is full of nice little Try it, buy it, enjoy it. This will touches. In fact when I noticed be a number one game. them I was so distracted that I GRAPHICS ended up getting caught by the SOUND odd punch or kick.  VALUE These touches include PLAYABILITY 599  "


"Siane FROM 2000 AD A program by LEIL Featuring 'REFLEX Spectrum 48/128 Cassette .99 Amstrad CPC Cassette .99 Disc .99 Commodore 64/128 Cassette .99 Disc .99 Produced by Gach Martech is the registered trade mark of Martech Games Limited, Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME. PHONE (0323) 768456 TELEX: 878373 Martec G Available from all leading software retailers or order today by mail. Prices include postage and packing plus VAT. ihlications 1987 "


"SEPTEMBER YOU'LL STILL BE PLAYING IT NEXT SEPTEMBER. Stunningly simple to understand. Stunningly difficult to master. If you thought there was nowhere to go after chess get your brain round September. ACTIVISION ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE Activision Entertainment Software Activision House 23 Pond Street London NW32PN Tel: (01) 431 101 Commodore 64/128 Cassette (.99) and Disk (514.99) ZX Spectrum 48k/128k/+ ($7.99) Amstrad CPC Cassette ($9.99) and Disk (.99) Mail Order: Activision (UK) Ltd, Units 3 & 4 Lloyds Close, Finedon Road Industrial Estate Wellingborough Northampton NNB 4SR. Tel: (0933) 78787 Licensed from Paradigm Games Copyright 1987 Activision Inc Copyright 1986 Paradigm Games Lid. "


"LOG Super Sprint SOTS  SUPPLIER: ELECTRIC DREAMS  MACHINE: C64/SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD/ATARIST PRICE: .99 (SPEC) .99 (AMS) .99 (C64) .99 (DISCS  VERSION: SPECTRUM/64 REVIEWER: TIM Here's a real treat for arcade addicts. That all time classic, Super Sprint, converted for your computer will all the features of the Atari coin-op intact except maybe the steering wheel which you have to supply yourself. But don't borrow one from your Dad's car just as he's going off to work. That could spark off a few family arguments... If you've never seen the arcade machine you won't know that Super Sprint gives you a bird's eye view of a race track there are eight different tracks to choose from and challenges you to drive your super sprint machines as fast as you can to beat the rest to the finish line. Along the way you'll encounter hazards like oil-slicks, puddles, tornadoes ramps and underpasses. Not your ordinary race tracks these, as you'll discover. You can play alone or head to head with a friend the best way take part in a series of races or simply practice. You'll need plenty of practice even if you are an expert on the arcade machine. Its take sometime to come to grips with steering and accelerating at the right moment in time. When I first picked up the stick I found myself getting aquainted with the trackside walls quite frequently. Luckily Catalyst Coders have included the helicopter sequence which flies in a new totally undented car when you've damaged the first one beyond repair. All the time you are bouncing off the walls the drone computer controlled cars are racing away four laps isn't long you know and the race ends when the lead car crosses the finish line. Then the scene shifts to the winners circle -an accurate representation from the coin-op this and you see your finishing position, score and any bonuses while the crowd waves at you! Get a high score and you can enter you name in the Super Sprint Hall of Fame. If you manage to beat the drone cars or your opponent in two player mode you move onto the next track in the sequence. If you are playing alone, or come second, you can simply selct any track you want to race on. The C64 version is a multi-load game, so when tracks 1-4 are completed you have to load in the next four. The spectrum game also ads in all eight tracks at once. Each race consists of four laps -and as you race you'll see golden spanners and bonus scores appearing on the track. Drive over these to collect them. Pick up three or more golden spanners during a race and you'll be able to customise your race car by fitting extra features. Features like super traction, higher top speed, turbo acceleration or increased scoring. Apart from scoring each feature has five levels. It's up to you to work out what combination of features and levels you need to win. As a novice I'd go for the increased traction before anything else just to help get to grips with the tricky steering. The Spectrum version of Super Sprint is pretty basic the graphics are simple but adequate, as is the sound. The cars are small and the whole appearance of the game is a bit fiddly. You do get the winners circle and hall of fame features however. The 64 version is excellent. It looks good, plays pretty much like the arcade machine and has sto many nice touches that you'll want to keep comeing back for more. I found the music for the one-player 64 game terribly irritating after a while and turned the sound down. By the way, the two player option allows you to compete one-on-one or drive against a computer car as well. Once you get to grips with the fiddly steering you're in for a whole lot of fun so don't throw away your joystick in disgust after a couple of attempts. It will help you if you've played the coin-opand may be Super Sprint addicts will get more out of this offering, than the rest of you. But despite the initial frustrations I still came back for more and eventually got to grips with the game. So far the 64 version is the ultimate conversion. But I've had a sneak peek at the Atari ST version which looks even nicer. We've yet to have a look at the Amstrad game at time of going to press. Spec/C64 Graphics 6 9 Sound  Value  Playability DRONE 2268888 DROHE OLUE LAP 726 BB 1052 SO R SOTA "


"P FLOPPY DISCOUNTS. lynos, Amsoft -99 7 SOT SIPACT FLOPPY DISC ble Sided... For Single Sided Floppy Disc Drive If you're used to floppy discs with stiff prices, we have good news. Amstrad now sell 3\" compact floppy discs for $2.99. They're suitable for the Amstrad CPC6128, PCW 8256, PCW 8512 and the new PCW 9512 and all other computers that have 3\" disc drives. Each disc carries up to 360K of data (on the 8512 and the 9512 this doubles to 720K). Available through: ADL, Allders, Comet, Currys, Dixons, Eltec, Farnell, First Software, Laskys, John Lewis, Lightning, Norbain, Office International, O.S.T.A., Ryman, Northamber, P&P, Sandhurst, Wildings, and Hugh Symons. Price correct at 1.9.87 but may change without notice. Amstrad plc., PO Box 462 Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF. Telephone: (0277) 262326 "


"C-VGSHOLLYWOOD La Pojer A Straight the same valubiy, exchani. Each garm Diades, seven o on cards of the 0 And that's the beginning of each hand. Naturally, there are only two players in this game, you and one of four lovely girls. You get to choose your Four of a Kind: Speaks for one can press the fire button! opponent, and each girl has her itself. The best part of the game is, own style of play. The four girls A Straight Flush: The same as of course, the graphics. Each are Isabell, Lorence, Denise and a straight, but of all the same picture has been digitised, and Stephanie. suite. This is the highest hand. using the Amiga's 32 colour My favourite has got to be Once you've seen your hand, low-res screen mode, the Isabell, as she, in my opinion, is you can either keep it (STAY), pictures look stunning. the most attractive, and she's Bet on it (BET) or get rid of it The sound is of exceptional also the easiest to beat!! (DROP). After a player decides quality, and it comes in the form After choosing your what option is for them, player of two tunes, the title tune being opponent and placing five big two can either raise the pot the best. ones on the table, you are dealt (RAISE), drop out, or they can Any moans? Well, just two. MACHINE: AMIGA, ATARI ST, SPECTRUM, PLUS 4 five cards. Your cards are call (CALL). The girls seem to be far to easy SUPPLIER: DIAMOND displayed graphically at the If a player calls, all betting to beat and I, a mere novice SOFTWARE bottom of the screen, and you stops and you have the chance poker player, managed to beat PRICE: .95 (AMIGA DISK) must then decide what course to change some or all of your each girl first go. The second  VERSION TESTED: AMIGA of action you are going to take. cards to make a better hand. moan is the fact that there REVIEWER: CHRIS You must sort your cards, Then betting continues. When didn't seem to be an \"Over 16's called a hand, into one of the someone calls again, the hands only' able on the box. As the OK, Hollywood Poker is not a following: are compared and the winner girls actually go completely first, we've had strip poker starkers, many parents might A Pair: Quite obvious, i.e. two grabs the loot. games before, even ones with Aces. Should you run out of money wish there was one. Sam Fox. This one has to be the Two Pairs: Two sets of cards best. That aside, Hollywood Poker the game ends. But if your A extremely bold statement, with same face value, i.e., two is the best strip poker gamel opponent does, she will start to Kings and two Queens. strip off. Each garment is have ever seen, heard and but I believe you'll have to Three of a kind: Quite simply, exchanged for another , agree. Hollywood Poker plays played. three cards of the same value and the game continues. Well done Robtek. It's well, sounds good and looks A Straight: five cards which wonderful! fantastic. Should she win her money follow each other, regardless of back, you opponent will put her The game is based on Five suit, i.e. three of Hearts, four of clothes back on. Card Draw Poker, which in my Diamonds, five of Clubs, six of  GRAPHICS opinion is the simplest form of As the girls are only wearing SOUND CTVO Spades, seven of Clubs. five garments, if you win over poker. You start with , and VALUE A Flush: Any five cards of the , she will have no clothes then every player puts  in at PLAYABILITY same suite. left. And that's it, you've won. A Full House: A pair and three All that's left to do now is of a kind. remove the joystick so that no must increase altitude in order to break through to the next zone. Each zone has a unique aircraft you must defend yourself against helicopters, jets and killer satellites. Reach the space station and you must centre the station in your combat window and align the crosshairs to its centre. Here you are prompted to enter the secret access code given at the start of each game. The terrorists have strategically placed the space  MACHINE: C64 station in the path of a deadly SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION asteroid belt which must be PRICE: .99 (tape) passed through in order to land REVIEWER: TIM the module on the station's Excuse me while I abort this surface. mission. There, that's better. On landing, a fleet of remote Can I have another game to play control robots exit your ship. now please? And before you These robots are programmed ask, it is that dull! with various functions for Alpha Mission isn't quite a view from the X-15. airborne through the next three defence; including a selfflight simulation, not quite a Then you have to take off levels of the mission in order to destruct mode. Joystick shoot-em-up. In fact it falls which isn't as easy as it sounds. reach the space station. forward will release a robot. uncomfortably between the You must guide each robot You see a small box with two The joystick handle controls two. It reminds me of that other or that other white bars in the centre of the your aim as well as vour around the station, avoiding Activision game based on the game window. You have to heading and altitude. obstacles until it can connect Space Shuttle if you can match the computer controlled During combat, use the with a weapons system and remember that far back. bar at the top of the box with joystick to aim your missiles but self-destruct. The game puts you in charge your joystick controlled bar at be alert-move directly to the A mish-mash of game ideas of an X-15 space-jet. Your the bottom of the box. which doesn't come off. There's edges of the window and you mission is to terminate a If you don't the mission will alter your course as nothing about the early stages terrorist controlled space terminates then and there in a displayed on the N.T.C. Grid. of the game that encourages station using remote controlled big stall and crash. Boring after With the crosshair at the edge you to reach that elusive space robots. the first few times. AND you of the window, gain altitude by station. Load up the game and you have to go through it all over moving the joystick and lower GRAPHICS see a host of jet-style again if you blow out later in the altitude by pulling back. SOUND instrumentation surrounding a game. There are three zones you VALUE relatively small real-time front An unecessary edition to this must pass through. Once PLAYABILITY already fairly complicated boosters are engaged at each game. You must remain atmospheric boundary, you Alpha VISSION    4 "


"FREBRO TEIYIN ARY DR HOT FROM THE ARCADES, FLYING SHARK IS THE ULTIMATE SHOOT-EM-UP FROM TAITO. BOMB AND BLAST YOUR WAY INTO ARCADE HISTORY. Spectrum .95 Commodore & Amstrad .95 (.95 & .95 d) Atari ST .95 PUBLISHED BY FIREBIRD SOFTWARE A DIVISION OF BRITISH TELECOM PLC. FIRST FLOOR. 6476 NEW OXFORD ST. LONDON WCIA 1PS "


"et Quodex MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: THALAMUS PRICE: .95 (TAPE); .95 (DISC) REVIEWER: TIM Quite a departure for programmer Stavros Fasoulas and Thalamus. Not an alien to be zapped, nor any sign of a super-slick space craft. What's going on here? Certainly not Sanxion or Delta. Instead of mindless, but horribly enjoyable, blasting this newie from the fantastic Finn will boggle your brain. It's an addictive arcade puzzler which time and style of gameplay all If you leave the level before combine to give the whole completing it then when game more than just a hint of returning at a later stage in the will keep you glued to your strategy. game it will result in you screen. Level one consists of five sub-continuing at the beginning of The game does require a levels, each of them the current sub-level not at the considerable amount of concentrating on different skills beginning of the whole level. dexterity-both mental and required by you in order to Sub-level 1: Follow the lane with your jolly joystick. It calls complete QUEDEX. one square at a time otherwise on you to manoeuvre a small ball around ten different game areas solving various puzzles as SCORE DDD you go. Each area has a starting point and a goal but there the 191 11 similarity ends. Each has different problems and puzzles to be solved, and require different game skills. All these are tested in the first level of the game which is in reality a training zone for would-be QUEDEX recruits. The aim of the game is to complete all ten levels within a given time limit, but you can play each individual level in any order and at any time. Your biggest enemy in each different plane is time. Every plane has a time allowance, and any unused time gets carried over to the next plane. After a while you will notice that the difficulty levels, of law and order to defeat this evil and are transported by molecular disruption to combat the entity closer to our destiny. era. However the locals are not You only have a limited keen on time warriors and evil energy supply which is monsters popping up out of depleted each time you are hit, nowhere and they tend to get a but is restored each level. little bit upset. The lemons and worms are Destroying certain hostile collected by walking or flying characters and objects may over them, this will enable you leave behind a clue as to the to select a different weapon if identity of one of the you so desire. To activate the conspirators (symbolised by a current weapon type (indicated jigsaw piece) which must be by an arrow above the icons), collected. Once exposed the pull down and press fire. entity will be forced to make an When the entity finally appearance in that time zone in materialises, it will take all your order to destroy you and the fire power to destroy him. But evidence, you must weaken the when you defeat him he slips monstrosity and force it to through into another time zone. retreat whence it came and You follow and battle once continue your task in another again commences. Hysteria SCORE 0023300 ISLOT SCORE 0058500 lor MACHINES: CBM 64/SPECTRUM  SUPPLIER: SOFTWARE PROJECTS PRICE: .95 VERSION TESTED: CBM 64/ SPECTRUM REVIEWER: PAUL The Software Projects revival continues. Dragon's Lair (ok), Star Paws (getting better) and now Hysteria (great). And yet it's quite a strange game. Not particularly original in concept or execution but with a very high playability factor, excellent graphics and neat sound. Now for the plot. The future has been changed by altering the past. A previously extinct primeval entity has been summoned forward through time by a fanatical sect, whose aim is to disrupt the future balance of power. As a sole survivor of the once elite \"time corps\", you have been chosen by the federation REC ET TA ETZERT "


"C+VG you will be placed back on the start square. Fall off the end into the darkness to complete this sub-plane level. Sub-level 2: Follow the direction of the arrows and pick up the flashing white squares, then enter the hole of darkness. Sub 3: Avoid the electric sea and try to find flashing squares that are scattered around, again enter the hole of darkness to complete. Sub 4: Be quick and pick up squares, enter hole of darkness REVIEW to complete. four hidden amulets in this Sub 5: Slalom around the plane before the goal will even pillars in the direction of the appear. Use the teleports but arrows in order to pick up the avoid the skulls to find the goal. flashing squares that will Watch out for the invisible keys activate the goal. which only become visible when you move close to them. encounter the keys. Pick up the Level four: You can only keys which will open the doors. move left and right. Race down Use the teleports but avoid the the race track as fast as skulls to find the goal. Watch possible. Avoid blocks, use lifts out for the invisible keys which up and down to your advantage only become visible when you as you only have a limited move close to them. number of jumps available. Level three: You need to find Level five: Yellow squares will turn into patterned floor tiles and patterned floor tiles SLOPE DE will turn into plain yellow squares when touched. Try to fill in the whole area with patterned floor tiles. not last forever. Level six: Extra features Level ten: Jump from which are visible add extra platform to platform. There are jumps, other invisible features three different heights which affect you or the play area either can be recognised from the positively or negatively. different shades of grey. You Progress through the level by can only jump one unit of determining these effects and height either up or down using them to your advantage without a penalty. Try and get and to help you find the goal. to the 'GOAL' as quickly as Level seven: Once entered, possible. you have to complete this planeQuedex is pretty damn good before entering other planes. puzzling, frustrating and Level eight: Pick up four keys eight: Pick up four keys addictive all at once. Don't miss it. in order to open one of the two GRAPHICS doors which lead you to the SOUND CHVO ==:=rite goal. VALUE Level nine: Pick up extra PLAYABILITY speed so that you can destroy all the cubes, extra speed will Bloodfinger MACHINE: AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: PLAYERS is holding the PRICE: .99 leaders captive in semi-automatic gun, Joe has REVIEWER: PAUL infiltrated Bloodfinger's base. his fortified HQ, crawling with members of He must rescue the leaders and activate six booby-trapped Great! Another tough guy game his private army. explosive devices. Once these straight from the Rambo clone In a show of defiance, the lethal bombs have been set zone. But don't groan, Joe world has refused to pay the going, Joe has twenty minutes Blade is well worth checking out ransom even though the high before nasty boom doom. for all you trigger-happy pistol noon deadline is fast Joe moves around the packers. approaching. complex collecting keys to cells, I half-heartedly started Send for Joe Blade, mean, ammo, and food to keep up his playing and before long I was tough, fearless (hey, this guy strength. hooked. Gee, I wanted another ad another sounds as though he should be Getting the keys allows you to go, Joe. a C+VG reviewer). According to pa to pass through locked doors and The plot is simple. Crax the cassette notes, Joe Blade into new areas of the game. Bloodfinger a great name, has been trained in a Tibetan Nice and cheap with ace eh? the leader of an infamous monastery. Just what the graphics, Joe Blade certainly band of terrorists, has monks have taught Joe Blade kidnapped six world leaders. that will be useful on search, kill cuts it. A good buy. Unless their countries cough up and rescue mission is not  GRAPHICS a cool thirty billion dollars, its explained. Perhaps he learned a SOUND curtains for these heads of pretty lethal chant.  VALUE state. Anyway, armed with his PLAYABILITY There are three time zones. The first has a Greek feel to with temples, minotaurs, skeletons, flying things and statues that chuck rocks. The second is quite medieval and the third futuristic. The game was programmed for Software Projects by Special FX, set up by ex-Ocean man Paul Finnegan. Hopefully they'll be more good things to come from this partnership. Joe Blade SPECTRUM CBM 64 GRAPHICS 9 SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY 9 CHVG HIT!  FE  HOSTAGES OO KES OE "


"GAMES KRYPTON FACTOR TREASURE BULLSEYE 22 HARTFIELD ROAD, LONDON SW19 3TA. 01-9475622 "


"REV points. After a while you will come to the end of the line. This is the exit to the next stage. Scene Three: The Temple. This is probably the easiest of all the stages. Here you must collect the Sankara Stone, which is just above the statue of the evil god, Kali, You are attacked by some of Mola Ram's thuggee henchmen, as well as Mola Ram himself. As you come near to the statue you way is barred by a pit of molten lava. This can easily be swung across by using your whip. Once across you will notice that the floor just below the statue continually opens and closes.  MACHINES: C64/SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD/ATARI ST  SUPPLIER: US GOLD PRICE: .95 (C64/AMS) .99 (SPEC) .99 (ATARI ST) VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD/ATARI ST REVIEWER: IAN Remember Indiana Jones, the hero from Raiders, and the Temple of Doom films? He's back, not in a film, but in his own computer game. That's screen telling you how you could have avoided dying. For example, if you are killed by a thuggee guard, the message, \"Whip the thuggee guard, Indy\" will appear. Scene One: The Mine. This is where you begin your Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom about this game. I think that the sound could have been a lot better, though. A lot of the sound effects were not all that descriptive. There's one or two snags that I'd like to point out. Firstly, each level which is made up of three scenes has to be loaded in separately, and when you lose all of your lives the first level has to be reloaded. If you purchase the game on tape, you will find this both tedious and tiresome. Secondly, it will take you quite a lot of practice to eventually master the game as it is extremely hard. Whether you're a fan of the arcade original or you're just after some high adventure — with a few pitfalls thrown in this is the game for you. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY C+VG HIT! You must manoeuvre yourself very carefully to successfully retrieve the stone from the top of the statue. One false move and you'll fall into the molten lava what a quest. Equipped with your whip way to go! Once you do have it, you must protect yourself from two doors will open on either snakes, bats and constant side of the statue. These are the attacks from the thuggee right, US Gold has released the exits to the next level, and the guards. next Sankara Stone. long awaited computer The snakes and bats can be conversion of the arcade All three scenes are repeated destroyed with just one crack of classic, Indiana Jones and the over and over until every the whip. You can also use your Sankara stone has been Temple of Doom. whip to swing across chasms collected. I'm sure many of you have between the pathways. The already played the arcade Paragon has produced quite guards, on the other hand, have original, I know I certainly have an accurate and splendid to be thrown off the ledges. what a fab game! conversion, especially on the There are nine enslaved kids Atari ST version. The graphics Atari seem to be outdoing locked up in cages. Rescue themselves lately, especially are well drawn and are a good them for bonus points. You are reproduction or the original. with such hits as Gauntlet, also attacked by Mola Ram Playability is great. Control of Supersprint and Indiana Jones. himself, who magically appears Indiana Jones is one of those your character is smooth and on the screen and throws easy, which is what I like best games where the name of the fireball at you. game is skill, and plenty of it. To escape this stage, you You aim is to successfully must find the entrance to the retrieve the sacred Sankara railway tunnel. Enter it and you Stones from the temple of the will go on to the next scene. evil god, Kali. Scene Two: Mine-Cart Chase. They are guarded by the high This is the fun part. You are now priest Mola Ram and his evil sitting in a rail-cart, speeding thuggee henchman. There are down a series of railway tracks three stones to collect, each of which are linked by several these stones is situated in the junctions. temple. To get to the stones you You can go fast or slow, must first pass through three depending on whether you stages, or scenes. move your joystick up or down. All three have various As you proceed down the lines, hazards and dangers which other carts — full of thuggee must be overcome. The only guards approach both from way to avoid these, is by using in front and behind, intent on Indy's trusty whip. stopping you dead in your You begin with five lives and tracks, you might say! If they the game ends when all five catch you up, your cart will be lives are lost. It is incredibly overturned. easy to lose all five of your lives, You will also come across as you will discover. Each time oncoming guards who are you lose a life, a message waiting for you alongside the appears at the bottom of the tracks. Whip them for extra LEIE "


"REVIEWS treatment of smarter graphics missile goes off in the opposite and extra gameplay, Gremlin direction. has gone a stage further and I'm sure that, given a lot of turned the 2D blast from the practise, one could use this past, into a first person zapper 'feature' to one's advantage, that puts you in the cockpit of but I found it annoying and an experimental Astroblitz craft. frustrating. It would have been Your mission ... as always, the better to be able to manoeuvre utter destruction of a mere 99 my craft independently of the waves of Vectons... the most missile's trajectory. feared of all intergalactic However, when you do hit a warmongers. Vecton, you are greeted by a The major part of the screen is your cockpit window, through which can be seen the advancing ranks of the alien Vectons. Each alien is seen in filled 3D as it lines up for the kull. The Vectons come at you in any one of 25 different formations, and after every four the now obligatory bank of brightly coloured, though useless, instruments and dials, although the radar comes in handy if you mislay the odd wave of Vectons hell-bent on your destruction. As for playability, well the game has some serious flaws but is still fun to play. A little more game testing may have seen Galax evolve into a great arcade blaster. Nevertheless, all LIII  SUPPLIER: GREMLIN  MACHINE: ATARI ST  PRICE: .95  VERSION: ATARI ST REVIEWER: DAVID waves, you will be invited to brave an asteroid field just to keep you on your toes for the next four waves. Your Astroblitz craft is armed with two weapons, normal anticraft missiles, and anti-asteroid missiles a perfect cure for the makes all the hours, vou put in common asteroid! seem worthwhile. If, on the Each time you fire a missile at other hand, you let the enemy the approaching Vectons, it get too close to you, the screen rushes off into the distance in goes ga-ga and the average the general direction you musical soundtrack is replaced aimed. The problem is, that if by a suitably blood-curdling you start to steer your craft, to screamneat! keep the Vectons in view, your Below the cockpit window is In the wake of the phenomenal success of Arkanoid comes another 'revamped' version of a hit from days gone by. This time it's that old classic Galaxions that's been bought out of retirement, but this time they're coming straight at you kid! Not content to just give Galaxions the Arkanoid credit to Gremlin for joining the brave ranks of those prepared to develop games exclusively for 16 bit machines. Graphics  Sound Value Playability 104OVOOA VOAV VOOAO I 2000 ***   $$$$$$9999 $$$$$944446 JOOOOD WOOD  SUPPLIER: NEXUS crazy ghosts and creeping  MACHINE: ATARI ST PRICE: N/A vines.  VERSION: ATARI ST As a bouncy cave mite, your REVIEWER: DAVID staple diet consists, quite naturally, of diamonds, Ask anyone, who has been preferably in extremely large playing computer games for a quantities. To get your fill, you few years, to name their top ten must burrow your way through titles, and the name the caverns, avoiding anything Boulderdash will appear with that moves, and most things monotonous regularity. So it's that don't. Any bats or ghosts not surprising that this most that you accidentally set free addictive of arcade classics has will chase you along the tunnels been re-incarnated a number of you leave don't hang around times under various different names. The latest of these is Skulldiggery from Nexus. w The game, for anyone who really hasn't seen or played the original, puts you in a number AMBIENTE of caverns (100 in all), each full para of diamonds ripe for the 23 picking. But, not unexpectedly, 2 things aren't quite as simple as they sound, because the caverns are also full of bats, :32 05 AS ustarved of fun too look how e many games have been wun converted for the Amstrad 701616 Another welcome additional O Cereature in Skulldiggery is the two player option, which allows to players to concurrently to make friends either, because indulge in either co-operative, any contact is deadly. or competitive play. Skulldiggery runs on colour As in all, the game is or mono ST system allowing it proficiently produced, but lacks the widest possible audience. the excitement and addictive Although some companies like qualities of the original, which Rainbird already do it, it is good is available on the ST already. to see others like Nexus Watch out for Boulderdash on producing dual format ST the Amiga, it's truly wondrous! games, and hopeful others will follow suite. After all, just Graphics because someone bought an ST Sound primarily for word processing it Value N/A doesn't mean they should be Playability 1OVOO4OAVOA VOOAOVO "


"FOR AS LITTLE AS  YOU CAN BE THE HOME SECRETARY. There's more to home computers than fun and games. Just add a printer (and the necessary software) and your computer becomes a word processor. And you become a very efficient secretary. If the printer you add is the Amstrad DMP 2000 your efficiency will even extend to saving quite a lot of money. Because the DMP 2000 costs just $159 (incl. VAT). Yet it will print draft quality text at up to 105 characters per second. And Near Letter Quality at up to 26 characters per second. As you would expect it is compatible with all Amstrad home computers. But it is also compatible with Epson and any other make that has the same Centronics Parallel Interface. If you've already graduated to a PC there's the new Amstrad DMP 3160 printer It's compatible with all Amstrad PC's as well as Epson and all other IBM compatible PC's. It costs just $199 (plus VAT): Both printers have easy front loading and both will take ordinary A4 paper. One of them is bound to be right for your particular home office. AMSTRAD DMP3 COMPANY Please send me further information on the DMP 2000 and the DMP 31600 NAME TELEPHONE ADDRESS AVAILABLE AT: ALLDERS COMET CURRYS DIXONS LASKYS. JOHN LEWIS AND GOOD INDEPENDENT COMPUTER STORES *Recommended retail price including VAT, 4228.85. Prices correct at 1.9.87 but may change without notice. Amstrad plc., PO Box 462, Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF Telephone: (0277) 262326. "


"21st CENTURY WARRIOR APACHE UNSHIP FREE! GUNSHIP FLYING LESSONS WITH MAJOR \"WILD\" BILL STEALE Major Wild Bill Stealey, Microprose founder and President, ex-USAF Fighter Pilot Ace, Strategic adviser to the U.S. Military at the Pentagon, says: \"I'm gonna teach you how to fly like a real AH-64 Apache Gunship Pilot! And, because everyone's a winner with Major Bill, there's a prize for you with your flying lesson you could even come flying with me in my own fighter-trainer airplane, Ms Microprose-in America!\" FREE! www below And, as if that wan't enough, there's a prize for every \"Graduate\" of Major Bill's Flying Academy! On each tape Major Bill awards a gift, which, for one lucky winner, is a free trip to MicroProse Software's American Headquarters, for a flight in Ms. MicroProse, Major Bill's F28 Trojan Fighter-Trainer aircraft-with Major Bill at the joystick! For more information please write to the address below. mm IN 3 A free trip to MicroProse Software's INSIDE EVERY C64 GUNSHIP BOX! American Headquarters, for a flight in Every C64 Gunship box (disk and cassette) bearing a Ms. MicroProse, Major Bill's F28 \"Learn To Fly with 'Wild'Bill\" sticker contains a special Trojan Fighter-Trainer aircraft with flying lesson, recorded by Major \"Wild\" Bill Stealey Major Bill at the joystick! onto audio cassette. This easy to follow play-as-youlisten flying lesson enables trainee C64 Gunship Simulation Pilots to acquire basic helicopter flight, navigation and combat skills in double-quick time, over just one of the many realistic scenarios contained in C64 Gunship. SIMULATION SOFTWARE . Carrying Special Offer Sticker MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tlx: 43422 MPS/UKG. MICROPROSE "


" MACHINE: AMSTRAD  SUPPLIER: IMAGINE SOFTWARE PRICE: .95 (TAPE) .95 (DISC) REVIEWER: IAN ground approximately twice for them to be killed. Level 2: The Pier, Here, you are confronted with a gang of motorcycle thugs. You are immediately attacked by four Hell's Angels on Motorbikes who attempt to run you over. They must be knocked off their bikes by using a flying kick. Each time you are run over, you these nasty ladies are defeated, their leader, Big Bad Bertha', is brought onto the scene. Level 4: End Street. This and the next level have got to be the hardest levels of all. The level comprises of a number of razor wielding thugs. Be extremely careful with these guys, one caretu wa touch from their sharp blades is fatal. The thugs also REVIEWS RENEGADE $1987 IMAGINE 2 TATTO 1P 324203 AP HI FROEBE find It looks like Imagine has done it again and released another one of those arcade conversions we repeatedly keep seeing. All that ever seems to be written nowadays is either updated versions of old games or converted arcade games. More often than not, these are pretty appalling. But this is not the case with the conversion of Renegade. Although the actual arcade original was nothing much to rave about, Imagine has done a marvellous job at converting it. You plan the part of a street wise vigilante who is on his way through the squalid streets of an infamous city to meet his girlfriend, Lucy. The only problem is that she's on the 'bad' side of town. \"So what?\" hear you cry. So what indeed. But this guy has to defeat a series of attacks by the most vicious gangs in the city. There are five different levels: Subway, Pier, Sleezy Street Scene, End Street and interior You have to pass all these levels, until you are eventually united with your girlfriend. Each of these scenarios is infested with thugs and villains, brandishing a selation of harmful weapons. To attain tedious character control the game is superb value for money and will give your hours of knucklebusting fun. All of you ST and Amstrad users will be glad to hear that the versions for your computers are well above average and well worth spending all your hard earned pocket money on. Any of you who are Spectrum or C64 owners will, I'm afraid, have to see the game for yourself, just so you can make your own opinions about the game. Playability on all versions is excellent and animation on all characters is very smooth. The C64 version, I thought, could have been a lot better. The Imagine team has a lot to answer for Looking back at their earlier games, it makes me You havend Streerv Stredevels: RENEGADE 01987 IMAGINE 01956 TAITO IP 1:48 PAUSED Renegade IÉE DET R HHHHHHHHH 1P: Puu HT: completion of a level the gang 10se a small amount of your leader must first be defeated. energy. Once all four are This is done by repeatedly subdued, you are attacked by a hitting or kicking him. Each time bunch of unarmed Hell's you successfully deliver a blow Angels. As you gradually bump and knock him to the ground, off each of the Hell's Angels, his energy will greatly deplete. their leader appears, and he This is shown by an energy bar certainly takes a lot of beating. which is at the top of the screen, Level 3: Sleezy Street Scene. just beneath your own energy The fights that occur here take bar. place in the sleezy downtown Level Subway. This is the streets, where gangs of female first of the stages. Here you are maurauders hang out. These attacked by a number of armed crazed women are armed with and unarmed assailants. They extremely lethal looking clubs have to be knocked to the and whips. When a number of have a unique attack strategy, they come at you from behind so always watch your back. Level 5: Interior. Defeat of all the characters in the last level only results in more fighting with the same gang. Completion of this last level will ensure that you keep your date with Lucy. Graphics are excellent, colours are widely and wildly used. The sound, or should I say music, is very good, too. Apart from the loading procedures and also the wonder if Renegade was a rush job. The Spectrum version uses all its capabilities, and produces a pretty good conversion. Graphics and colour are well used throughout the game, it's a pity that the sound was not used the same way. The Amstrad version has been programmed well and looks as if quite a bit of time has been spent on its production. GRAPHICS SOUND C+VO VALUE PLAYABILITY ON "


"- JOYSTICKS ONE THING MAKES THEM BETTER THAN THE REST.... mance SPECTRAVIDEO LTD. 165 Garth Road, 165 Garth Road, Morden. Surrey SM4 4LH, England. Telephone 01-330 0101(10 lines) "


"3 Sidewalk REVIEWS lo!\" MACHINE: PC, AMSTRAD CPC bits thrown in for good ATARIST measure. The game screen is  SUPPLIER: INFOGRAMES split into six rectangles, three PRICE: PC .95; ST-.95 CPC .95 (TAPE), .95 (DISK) along the top and three along VERSION TESTED: ATARIST the bottom half of the screen. REVIEWER: DAVID The top half of the screen is where you see the comic A number of abortive attempts unfold. On the extreme left you have been made to convert a can see yourself in various comic strip into a successful states, ranging from good game. health to dead, via knocked At last, however, a game has almost senseless but still emerged with the graphical feel of a comic book, but with the added flexibility offered by bringing the characters to life on the screen. The game, called Sidewalk, is published by the French software house Infogrames, and features a scruffy little character-namely you. Unfortunately someone has stolen your pushbike, dismantled it, and hidden each of the parts in a different location in and around the back streets of Paris. Some parts are just lying around waiting to be THE PLACE found, others are now the prize FOR MY BIKE possessions of various characters you may meet on your travels kicking. The game starts in midThe right hand window afternoon, and you've only got shows any characters you may until 7.30pm to find all the bits meet, and is also used to show to your bike, re-assemble them, your health, represented by a and get to your girlfriends in pint glass containing an ever time to take her to the concert decreasing quantity of beer... this evening. If you're late, she'll regular visits to the bar are go with that wally, John, from highly recommended, round the corner... oh, and especially as the beer's free. don't forget to pick up a couple The central window is used of tickets for the concert or for movement and combat. In she'll be really peeved. each location you can move Sidewalk is essentially a across from left to right, or turn joystick/icon controlled to face and/or move in another adventure with arcade combat direction, all under joystick READING TERECHPAERAY control Ranged along the centre o the screen are three icons which allow you to interact with other characters. These let you ask questions, fight or run away. Underneath these icons is the message area, in which conversations are displayed At the bottom of the screen are your inventory (what bits of your bike you've already fact, a 19 stone, ex-Sumo wrestler! Certain individuals must be persuaded it's in their better interests to part with their parts, or they'll get their blocks knocked off! Although the control mechanism of Sidewalk takes a lot of getting used to, the single colour graphics are superb, perfectly capturing the spirit of the game. There are enough problems to keep the average adventurer happy, although this is by no means a game for the adventure purist... for example, the icon driven interaction system does away with the 1513 need for any text input. recovered), plus windows Sidewalk is a strange mixture showing cash, and any of adventure and arcade, with spanners (needed to restunning graphics, a novel, and assemble your bike), tickets, sometimes annoying, control etc, you may have picked up mechanism, and the kind of along the way humour and feel that will As the game unfolds, various appeal to comic buffs, who may other graphical or text windows finally be persuaded that are overlayed on the screen. comics and computer games These either show you running can be combined to provide a away, drinking, or give piece of genuine entertainment. information on the character you have just met. It's GRAPHICS important to know, for example, n/a that the guy you were  VALUE contemplating beating up is, in PLAYABILITY 10 ? Anarchy two minutes to complete the mission in each building otherwise the security system will detect your presence and drain all oxygen from the building Every fifth building within the complex contains the rebels'  MACHINE: 064/128 SUPPLIER: HEWSON/RACK-IT PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: TIM Commodore owners haven't been forgotten in Hewson's big budget drive. Anarchy is a tank based blaster which could prove to be a minor hit. Your mission is to break into the security complex where the rebels' weapons and explosives are stored and destroy the entire supply thus rendering the rebels without weapons and making them harmless. In the complex, drive your A.C.E. MK2 Interceptor unit to destroy all the weapons containers but at the same time, you must avoid the security guard droids as they are deadly to touch. When all of the containers have been destroyed the building's security system will collapse and the airlocked exit will open allowing you to escape deeper into the complex There is a time limit of about nuclear weapons. These buildings are guarded by a special droid which senses the presence of an intruder The key to success is learning the best route around the maze like buildings and being in the right location reveals the exit. The defending droids home in on the exit once it's opened -so it's well crucial to be near when it opens and be ready for a quick dash to the next level. You also have to be a squarewidth distance away from the stuff you want to blast and some buildings are seemingly impossible to destroy and remember time is running out all the time! Experience will soon help you beat up the mazes. Anarchy is a well put together game which would outlast the regular budget offerings in the playability stakes. SCORE 062091 PLAYERTEMIN EE SEC 1. ARS LIEL LED GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY Hold Dd "


"C+VG go doch REV doing in Dr Fred's basement? You use this line to construct Your goal is to direct a team sentences that tell the of three local teenagers characters what to do. A incuding Sandy's boyfriend sentence consists of a verb Dave-through the mansion to (action word) and one or two rescue Sandy. As you explore, nouns (objects). An example of you'll meet all the strange a sentence that you might inhabitants of the mansion, and construct on the Sentence Line you'll discover Dr Fred's is \"Unlock door with key\". ambition to control the world Connecting words like \"with\" one teenager at a time. will be put in automatically by You'll find that each of the the program. seven teenagers you can  Verbs must be selected from choose from has special skills, the groups of words in the talents and weaknesses. And columns below the Sentence each of the crazy occupants of Line. You will always be able to the mansion has goals and see all the verbs used in the desires that can help or hinder game -they will not change as your team, depending on how the game progresses. To select you handle them. a verb, position the cursor over The story and your the word and click approach to rescuing Sandy The Inventory is the area LUCASFILM GAMES That way you discover more about the location your rooms you enter will be darkso find a flashlight or \"feel around with the cursor to see if you can discover a light switch. N14 BIT SONONONO UNA OPOJOSON  MACHINES: C64 will be different depending on SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION/ which kids you choose and how LUCASFILM PRICE: .95 (tape) .99 (disk) you interact with the people and  VERSION TESTED: C64 disk things inside the mansion itself. REVIEWER: TIM Each of the possible stories in Maniac Mansion is really a large, complex puzzle made up This is simply brilliant. A teen of scores of smaller puzzles. schlock horror movie on From time to time, movie-like computer! Lucasfilm has taken \"outscenes\" reveal clues about the graphic adventure format the story and what's going on first seen in Labyrinth, tweaked elsewhere. it a bit and come up with an As you discover the smaller extremely entertaining and puzzles that make up each story easy to play adventure. line, you'll find that most will Not an adventure for purists have to be solved in a certain though, that's why we're order. reviewing it outside the regular You select your team at the adventure section. For a start it start of the game using the doesn't require any text input cursor. As you move it over from the player just simple their happy smiling faces a few icon selected actions. You words about them appear at the below the verbs. Each character Using the flashlight simply simply select actions from a text top of the screen. Once you've on your team has his or her own shows up a small area of the menu at the bottom of the got your team together a little inventory. It is empty at the room you're in a really nice screen. introduction \"scene\" is acted beginning of the game; the touch this. But enough of this technical out on screen before you get name of an object is added to a There's lots to do and the stuff on with the senario the chance to take control. character's inventory when the game IS different every time which comes right out of a And you take control by using character picks the object up you play you can depend on Hollywood B-movie. There's a the cursor to create commands the cursor to create commands during game play. the lastability of this one. weird mansion, a mad scientist, from the text menu at the Putting the commands A FUN adventure with strange monsters and a bunch bottom of the screen. But let's together is simplicity itself. original feel. Great graphics, of clean-cut, all-American high take a look at what you see on None of this \"You Can't Do good sound effects, nice school kids. screen. That business. Just move the animation and on top of all that There are strange people The Message Line is the line cursor on to the command you it's totally addictive! living in Maniac Mansion. a Dr at the very top of the screen. want in the menu and hit the So if you want to get into Fred, a mad scientist; Nurse Words spoken by any of the joystick firebutton. love, lust, purple slime, medical Edna, a former health care characters appear on this line. As you explore you'll come experiments, electric cattle professional whose hobbies . The Animation Window is across objects which your prods and radiation suits, pick would make a sailor blush; the largest part of the screen characters can collect. These up a copy of Maniac MansionWeird Ed, a teenage commando where the animated world of are added to the text menu as you won't regret it. with a hammer fetish, and then the mansion is displayed. It an inventory. You'll need all there's Dead Cousin Ted, and shows the \"camera's eye view\" sorts of odd things! the Tentacle, and somebody of the room that the currently You can select objects by GRAPHICS or something else.... And active character is in. placing the cursor over them in SOUND what's a sweet young The Sentence Line is directly the animation/ play area VALUE cheerleader named Sandy below the Animation Window. window or from the test menu. PLAYABILITY 90 you oooo $19. Paused, press SPACE to continu inue. Halk to Ney "


"DEWIE Sidewize.The ultimate shoot-em-up. Incredible weapon pick-up systems. awe-inspiring arcade action..\"Sidewize is the slickest, no messing shootout in a long, long time\" wrote Sinclair User..don't mess with the others, try messing with Sidewize, Firebird Mail Order PO Box 294 Telephone Hotline 01 348 8618 SINCLAIR USER CLASSIC CLASSIC FIREBIRD SPECTRUM CASSETTE .95 COMMODORE CASSETTE $8.95 COMMODORE DISK $12.95 SINCLAIR USER Firebird is a Registered trademark of British Telecommunications plc Hrebird Software First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St. London WCIA 1PS "


"Water Ski-in REVIEWS off. He must hit the ramp correctly, of course. This is fairly easy to do. Once airborne, the screen changes to a more distant view of the jump. The bubble shows a close-up of the skier. By using the joystick you can stop him putting your fingers on the skis Infogrames' Passengers on the you control the action on the Wind adventure but, for what is screen. I actually saw the skis, basically an action game, it can but as far as I know the game be a little confusing. never materialised. So what do you get? You a No such gimmicks with have choice of taking what is Championship Water Ski-ing. called The All-Round Test, Everything is joystick or which covers three events, the keyboard controlled. jump, freestyle and the slalom, The game looks good, sounds or you can undertake each good, but, unfortunately, event individually. doesn't play so well. It lacks that the firstand my favourite vital ingredient that keeps you is the jump. It's divided into coming back for more. the approach to the jump, the The graphics are very nice. I jump, and the landing. quite like the technique of The first screen shows a big overlaying different views of view of the ramp. Top left is the action on each other. It bubble which shows the skier. worked very well with Hitting the fire button sets him  MACHINE: AMSTRAD  SUPPLIER: INFOGRAMES PRICE: .95 (tape) .95 (disc) > REVIEWER: PAUL Sometime back, Irish software house New Concepts had a plan to bring out a water ski-ing game which would come with two small plastic skis. These would be placed over the computer's keyboard. By  MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: MICROPROSE nothing like Pirates of the treasure, searches for long-lost PRICE: .95 (TAPE), .95 Barbary Coast from Cascade relatives and so on. (DISC) for a start it's easier to get into, As you can see, there's lots to VERSION REVIEWED: C64 DISC and a whole lot more fun to this sprawling action-adventure REVIEWER: TIM play. game. Pirates! is a time-consuming You can choose to be a Shiver me timbers! Another game-So you'll have to set goodie-goodie, allying yourself pirate's game? Let's run out the aside a day or so to play it with one or other of the \"superfortunately there's a save game powers\" who ruled the the high seas with those old sea facility, so you can keep your Caribbean in the 16th and 17th dogs Microprose. It's tough to swashbuckling hero safely on centuries England, France, know where to start the tape or disc. Spain or Holland. Or, you can game is so large, but here goes You can keep your character simply become an out and out anyway... created by experiences battling buccaneer-attacking It has to be said straight off vicious pirate captains, sea everyone and anything for a that Pirates! is nothing, I repeat, battles, quests for pirate fast buck and a few thrills. Quite how historically accurate the game is I don't know but you get a fascinating handbook with the game package which outlines the background to the period, the ships that were sailing the waters around the West Indies between 1560 and 1700 That's yet another nice feature of the game, you can join one of the famous historical explorations or war campaigns and try your hand at repeating or altering events. The game itself consists of Pirates! Pirates! "


"CHVG falling backwards or degree turn (that's one and a forwards. Get the half turns). balance right and he The final event is the slalom. makes a successful The skier is towed over the landing. course and must ski round The freestyle event buoys. takes place over two Championship Water Skiing courses which both last is a nice try at capturing the 20 seconds. The view sport but more excitement is of the skier is far from the back needed. of the towing boat. Points are  GRAPHICS awarded for perfecting various SOUND turns, from 90 degree turn (a VALUE side-slip) right through to a 540 PLAYABILITY  MACHINE: C64/128 SUPPLIER: ASL PRICE: .95 (TAPE), .95 (DISC) REVIEWER: TIM If you think you could do better than the England Test side then try your luck with Audiogenic's revamped Graham Gooch cricket game. This new version of the only really GOOD cricket simulation features a few new tweaks but retains the graphic/game presentation of the original game. You can either play a genuine cricket simulation or simply go for a quick-fire arcade cricket game-bowling and batting. There's also a neat two player option -take on your mates and beat them soundly! There are nine different test sides featured in the game, Australia, New Zealand, Pakistan, India, Sri Lanka, a World XI, an All Star XI and England, of course. Each has updated teams. You can also input your own team if you want. You can play a Test Match proper, get into limited over games, or simply practice batting and bowling. There are Test Match Special TV style game statistics which appear after each over, or each innings and you can even call simulation you DO need to up an \"action replay\" of a know about the game even if spectacular catch or such like. it's just to be able to identify the I found myself getting out names of the players. much too quickly for my own Otherwise you might just get a likingmaybe this is like the bit bored with proceedings on real England test side though! the screen-bit like watching The animation and new Test Match Special. digitised speech cries of Graphics could be better howzati -are pretty goodand Audiogenic should have although I'd like a better taken the chance to add a few representation of the on-going more sound effects to improve score as you play rather than the presentation even further. the small white numerals at the How about an enhanced ST or bottom left hand side of the Amiga version Mr Audiogenic? screen. That could be pretty special... It's nice to be able to put GG's Cricket is still the best together the all-star teams with adaptation of the game for ace cricketers from the past and computer so if you're a present flannelled fool, or just a wouldThe blurb that comes with the be Botham, check out this game says that you don't need remixed version of the game. to be into cricket to enjoy the  GRAPHICS computer version but I reckon SOUND that the opposite is the case. To VALUE get the most out of this sportsPLAYABILITY Graham Gooch's Cricket several adventure style and arcade scenarious. There are screens where you can select various options from various menus which affect the action. The best way to get into the game is to simply select the pre-defined options and get stuck in at apprentice level. This way you get to learn the mechanics of the game while having a good time and not getting too frustrated each time you get thrown into jail. The arcade style section includes sea battles, attacks on ports from the sea and on land with bands of your pirate crew and the one on one swordfighting combat with pirate leaders or ship captains. Pirates! is an impressive and absorbing game-one for those of you who enjoy getting all wrapped up in a strategy. style role-playing game with enough action to appeal to the arcadester. GRAPHICS SOUND CHVO VALUE PLAYABILITY EMBUREY TO BOON INCOGNITO US. FRENCH CAPTAIR YAPON \"USE? CAPTAIN FORCE: 20 HEK HORALE: PANIC INCOGNIT0 59 HEX 0 FOR O Pirates! "


"The big event of 1987... Atari User Christmas Show Organised by Database Exhibitions Champagne Suite, Novotel, Hammersmith, London W6 10am-6pm Friday November 20 10am-6pm Saturday November 21 10am-4pm Sunday November 22 The record-breaking Atari User Show is back with three action-packed days devoted to the ever-expanding Atari market. *Try out the very latest UK and US 8-bit software * See the full ST range, including the new mega-ST * Snap up the never-to-be-repeated bargains * Expand your system with powerful new add-ons * Get helpful advice from Atari User's own experts * Experience the fascinating world of communications ... and much, much more! This is the one show you mustn't miss! Advance ticket order Post to: Atari User Christmas Show Tickets, Europa House, 68 Chester Road, Hazel Grove, Stockport SK7 SNY. ATARI USER CHRISTMAS SHOW Champagne Suite, Novotel, Hammersmith, London W6. November 20-22, 1987 Send for your advance tickets now and SAVE  a head! Please supply Adult tickets at  (save )..............  Under-16s tickets at  (save El)...  Total & Cheque enclosed made payable to Database Publications Ltd. Please debit my credit card account Access Visa Name Address Signed PHONE ORDERS: Ring Show Hotline: 061-480 0171 PRESTEL ORDERS: KEY *89, THEN 614568383 MICROLINK ORDERS: MAILBOX 72:MAG001 Please quote credit card number and full address + address A159 Admission at door  (adults), E2 (under 16s) "


"2 Moebius Moebiuso  MACHINE: C64  SUPPLIER: ORIGIN SYSTEMS/MICROPROSE PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: WAYNE speed, nine being real life. At any one time you can train up to as many as three characters, one after each other. These \"extras\" are very helpful in your progression through goody goodies who will either help you or follow you, to rebel palace guards who will confront you and attack without hesitation. I found this to be one of the low points of the game. You see, in certain places the guards turn up in abundance and it takes so long to actually jump from the adventure screen to the combat screen, you are left waiting about twiddling your thumbs for ages. Even for the Commodore, the jump is very slow indeed. Once you get into combat with the guards, you have to fight them barehanded until you obtain a weapon whilst they wield swords. I found them easy to defeat. All you had to do was keep was waining. kicking and punching low and For each guard you defeat they collapse. It got quite you may get an item you can repetitive and my enthusiasm use, be it a torch or a hammer REVIEWS training. Once over the training hurdle, you then set off on your mission. This is where the adventure/fantasy role-playing comes into it. You have to search around an island for the orb and this involves going through jungle and other vegetable-covered terrain. You meet various folk, from When I opened Moebius, I liked what I saw. There were two disks, a reference sheet and a free oriental headband! Some blurb on the box told me that the game was a combination of both an adventure and an arcade, with a healthy dose of fantasy role-playing thrown in. leagerly got involved and found out that you play the part of the newest disciple under instruction from Moebius, the Windwalker. He tells you that the Orb of Celestial Harmony has been stolen by the forces of evil and this has caused turmoil on the planet. Earthquakes, droughts and other natural disasters are now commonplace. It is your job to get it back and set the world to rights. However, before you go off merrily Bruce Lee-ing through the countryside, you have to prove yourself in all the three styles of combat: swordfighting, barehands and the mental prowess of Divination. The training mode is very easy indeed. Even an incompetent like me got through it without much trouble. I liked the choice of keys available for these tests, they made it that much easier to control your character's actions You can select up to nine speeds in training combat mode, one being freeze frame plus some experience points. These points enable you to get better at skills such as listening out for your opponents. These skills are measures in levels and the higher you get the better your skills are. The game continues on this basis as you plough through the levels of Earth, Air, Fire and Water, defeating ninjas, guards and other random encounters alike until you recover the orb. The game has lots of other gimmicks including the abilities to cast spells (two systems). read magic maps, throw shurikens and encounter wild animals. When I finished playing this game for the last time, I examined the blurb on the box once again. It claims 50-100 hours of playing time. I can believe it. The only trouble is that you are going to spend half of it hanging about waiting for something to happen when you should be in combat! Moebius is worth a look if you can afford it. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"an C+VG MACHINE: ATARI ST SUPPLIER: PALACE PRICE: .95  VERSION TESTED: REVIEWER: DAVID digitised effects, such as a metallic claang, when sword meets sword, which almost makes the joystick vibrate in your hand. The same batch of combat controls are here, including head butt, flying neck chop and the evil web of death. The blood runs freely, amidst grunts and groans and swishes as a sword flies just past your left ear. But, if you're not quite ready for the real thing, there's always the practice arena, where you can brush up on your swordsmanship without the inconvenience of an opponent trying to kill you. Miss it at your peril, and watch out for the football playing orc he's a star! REVIEWS c+VO GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY ON The ST conversion of Palace's successful hack'n' slash combat game, Barbarian, has just hit the streets, except those in Germany, that is where, we're told, the game glorifies violence and would constitute an undesirable influence on the country's youth. Personally, I just think German gamesters are missing out on a stonking good game and that's all there is to it! And what a good job programmer Gary Thomson, and sound wiz Richard Joseph have done, converting Steve Brown's original eight-bit hit, into a sure-fire winner for the ST, and soon for the Amiga. Barbarian ST has all the finesse and delicacy of the original. You know the kind of thing lots of hacking, and don't mean the software kind, spurting blood and decapitation. The soundtrack is superb with minerinnen Baronninns DEMONSTRATION PRACE ICE MURENA MACHINE: ATARI ST  SUPPLIER: NOVAGEN PRICE: .95  VERSION TESTED: REVIEWER: DAVID Backlash To date, Novagen have only released two games, Encounter in 1984 and Mercenary in November 1985. In July 1986, The Second City was released, programmed on the Atari ST giving Mercenary addicts and should be available early in another city to explore. the New Year. Such was the success of Luckily for us, Novagen's Mercenary and Second City, wizard programmer, Paul that there are now 56 foreign Woakes, has found time to language or machine versions produce Backlash, a fullof the two original products. blooded, no-nonsense blaster. It comes as no surprise to Obviously inspired by his learn that Mercenary Il is on the earlier game, Encounter, way. Known as Damocles, it is Woakes has decided to forsake set in an imaginary solar the complex strategy of system with nine planets and 11 Mercenary, to concentrate on moons, the game features filled moving as many solid objects in and shaded graphics showing free space, as the ST will allow, the light and dark sides of each purely and simply so you can planet. have the pleasure of blasting This space arena provides the them off the screen. backdrop to a scenario in which For once, a company has your task is to avert the comet had the guts to publish a game Damocles from collision with with no pretentious scenario on the system's fifth planet. the cover. Instead, this is Damocles is being printed: Backlash is a fast-action head-up Battlezone-type arcade game display. A simple radar display Objective is high score is overlayed in the centre of the Radar sights head up display screen. shows enemy locations On it can be seen the enemy Action is continuous with anything that moves in increasing difficulty white, and their fireanything Five lives to start. Extra life that moves even fasterawarded every 10,000 points. shown in red. And that pretty well sums up The only other things to the game, except to say that it is clutter up the screen are the one of the fatest, most playable score and high-score displays in arcade games EVER! the top left and right-hand Set on a flat grey plain, over corners respectively. which you can move in any If you have an ST and you like direction, Backlash puts you at shooting things, then buy the controls of whatever vehicle Backlash. It's that simple. you care to imagine. All you can do, in said vehicle, is move in any direction over the plane,  GRAPHICS and shoot straight ahead of SOUND you. VALUE Your view is a full screen, PLAYABILITY one "


"RED LED RED L.E.D. IS A CHALLENGE NOT TO BE MISSED. COMMODORE USER «GO OUT AND GET THIS GAME IT'S SOMETHING REALLY SPECIALP» -JULIAN RIGNALL: ZAPP 64 Screen Star REAL ARCADE ACTION AT ITS BEST! STARLIGHT SPECIAL FEATURES: The year is 2379: Earth's vast resources are finally running out (again). You must bridge the path to the much needed matter supplies, using three ZMX all-purpose bottle-droids to link up the vital cosmic-interlace grid.  Full 3D mooth scrolling action  27 diferent landscapes  Bonus level, teleport pads and enemy generator  Graphics by Pate James  Sound FX by Tony Crowther. C64/128 cass .99 C64/128 disk .99 AMSTRAD cass .99 AMSTRAD disk .99 SPECTRUM .99 "


"GET TO GRIPS WITH DEFLEKTOR CBM 64/128 .99  E14.99 D AMSTRAD .99 C E14.990 SPECTRUM E799 C ATARI ST .99 KIO 000 DEFLEKTOR No heroes. No Foe. Only pure skill and technology as you guide your lazer beams through a sea of danger, a pyramid of obstacles reflect it from mirrors, bounce it off walls deflect it through lenses, ever calculating the angles, carefully judging it's path towards the home receiver and then.....another 59 levels of frustration and mind boggling Intrigue. Addictive Compulsive. Only for those who can withstand defeat. BASILTHEGREAT MOUSE DETECTIVE BASIL THE GREAT MOUSE DETECTIVE From the basement of 22 1b Baker Street, Basil and his faithful bloodhound Toby venture forward in search of the dastardly Ratigans hideout where poor Dr. Dawson is held against his will. What clues do they uncover amongst London's famous landmarks? What disguises do they adopt in moving around the rodent underworld? It's elementary my dear enthusiast. the answers are in the game. The question is do you have the skill to unearth them! CBM 64/128 OBASIL .990 .99 D AMSTRAD $9.99 C .99 D S SPECTRUM  7.99 ITS A SHATTERING EN Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 "


"A GREMLIN GAME!! CBM 64/128 .99 .99 D AMSTRAD .99  .99 D SPECTRUM  7.990 .99  MSX E MASK MASK TWO TWO MASKI Action packed adventure of the heroic Mask team in more danger filled missions against the evil forces of Venom. Man and machine in valiant defence of the world and it's treasures. An exhilarating challenge to all gamers whatever their interests. TOUR DE FORCE From the instant the starter shouts \"Gentlemen start your pedals to the last gruelling moments, you'll be banging heads with five of the meanest, toughest bikers to ever pump pedals. And If that's not enough the course is something special too:Potholes, Manholes, Cakeholes, Aceholes, Bolders Skunks, Snakes, Chasms, Ollslicks, Icepatches, Bridges, Bear traps and much more. So climb aboard your Velo Mark IV and set off in pursuit of that coveted Yellow Jersey and experience the agony and ecstasy of international cycling as it really happens. CBM 64/128 .99 .99 D GUR AMSTRAD .99 .99 D SPECTRUM .99  ATARI ST .99 SED DUR-DE-FORC XPERIENCE GREMLI "


"REVII ening Star train which causes British Rail to make the going grate. Adding soot and steam to the misery of onto a nice little earner with its train travel would be too much. steam train simulations. But not for a vast number of Witness the success of people. And it's with these Southern Belle. people Hewson appears to be Now Hewson is trying its luck again with Evening Star which recreates the journey on the Somerset and Dorset line between Bournemouth and Bath. And, no doubt, it will be just as successful as Southern Belle. EVENING STAR BATH WWW  MILES COAL 8 MOU MILES MACHINES: AMSTRAD/ SPECTRUM/CBM 64/BBC B/ACORN ELECTRON PRICE: VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD/CBM 64 REVIEWER: PAUL 01:00:46 = O6 GRADIENT SIGNAL The mere mention of a steam train can have a curious effect on seemingly normal people. Their eyes glaze over and a tear of nostalgia can sometimes be glimpsed. I've never quite understood it myself. The same as I can't quite understand the strange urge which forces people to stand for hours on station platforms train spotting. Is it a healthy way to spend your time, I ask myself? For me, it's the age of the HIDO ALL ABOARD 20.OKOOOOKOONDOOKO Yogi Bear where Yogi, his little bear pal, Boo Boo, and of course, Ranger Smith, have lived a hectic existence for years. Well, things have never been this grim. Boo Boo has been bearnapped, kidnapped or stolen, by a hunter and is about to be sold to a circus. He's being held captive in the hunter's cabin somewhere in Jellystone Park. Yogi is not suprisingly a little MACHINES: CBM 64/ \"Hey, Yogi, how come you're SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD the star of a computer game?\"  SUPPLIER: PIRANHA \"That's easy, Boo Boo. It's PRICE: .95 cassette/E14.95 disk because I'm smarter than the VERSION TESTED: CBM 64 average bear.\" REVIEWER: PAUL Unfortunately, the resulting game isn't smarter than the average game. It's a simple left to right scrolling effort which lacked any immediate hookability to keep me playing. The setting is Jellystone Park TIL 100000 000000 "


"The Evening Star was stopping run to Bournemouth, section on the right contains apparently one of the most record attempt run and a messages about signals, speed powerful steam locomotives to chance to drive the \"Pines and information about coal and run in Britain. It was, according Express\" whatever that is water. to Hewson, one of the There's also a demo which The loco is controlled from \"legendary\" BR9F class. allows you to sit back and enjoy the keyboard and the number of Well this simulation allows the journey keys involved is great. Realistic you quite a few types of The screen layout is very but a little confusing. journeys over the same seventy much the same as Southern journeys over the same seventy Trains may seem a little tame miles of track. There's the Belle, the large part being taken in the simulation stakes when training run, local non-stop run, up with the view of the cab, you think of others around. local stopping run, full line controls and line ahead. A Don't you believe it. You can REVIEW EVENING STAR wwwwwwwwww BATH CATER 1624 SPEED OO SIGNAL ma GRADIENI LEVEL still come a cropper by derailing the train by going too fast or hitting the buffers. There's also the chance of colliding with other trains. So, to sum up. If you bought Southern Belle and liked it, then you'll need no urging to buy Evening Star. If you like trains or ever wanted to be a train driver, check this simulation out. Me? Well, I'll stick to the 8.05 from Enfield Chase. No simulation could ever truly recreate the horror of that journey! OB POSITION   00'2 mile B MOUTH 716 mile 00:16:20 Amstrad Spectrum CBM 64 EVENING STAR  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY KOOO OLKOOO OKO e Red LED SHARTBOME upset at losing his old chum, and sets out to rescue him. The ever-hungry Yogi must replenish his energy by finding food-expecially the nourishing picnic baskets left behind by forgetful campers. And as if you hadn't already guessed — there are lots of hazards for Yogi geysers, bees, birds, frogs, etc. At the bottom of the screen is the Boo-meter which shows how far Yogi is away from his pent up pal. Each part of Jellystone poses different problems rivers to jump, lakes to cross, sharpfanged snakes, angry campers, furious fat ladies, a meanminded moose, hot-tempered hunters and Ranger Smith who always chases Yogi. As well as being full of crazy critters, Jellystone has some strange caves. Yogi will have to use them from time to time. But when he goes in one he doesn't know where he's going to come out. It may be nearer to BooBocor it may be further away. When Yogi starts his mission of mercy, it is January. When December comes, Yogi has to hibernate and Boo-Boo will never be rescued. So Yogi has to free Boo-Boo as quickly as possible and as the seasons change and hibernation gets near, things start looking bad for Boo-Boo. The game looks all rightthe programmers have done quite a good job on Yogi, capturing the cartoon character well. But it falls down on playability. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY  MACHINE: CBM 64 SUPPLIER: STARLIGHT PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: PAUL Okay, despite the fact that Red L.E.D.'s plot is about as thin as our ad manager's hair, we've got a nifty little game on our hands here. Well done, Starlight. The best yet. Earth's resources are running out (even Starlight acknowledges this idea is a bit over-used) and using three battle droids you must form a continuous link across an intergalactic link across a grid. Each step on the way you must complete a landscape by collecting the energy pods there. Win and the link is yours. But if you are defeated it shows white on the grid and you must try for another link. You have three ZMX battle droids at the start of the game, each with its own strength and capabilities. Select which one to use and which grid link you wish to play for and the droid is plunged into the battlescape. In all there are 37 landscapes to explore. So you can go for the quick link win (hopefully) or travel the grid piling up the points. Lots of action in this very playable offering. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY nn00200 00 00 00 SEDIE SMARTBOMBA DBJECTS "


"I REVIEWS RN EXCEL 0008700 HIGH JO050000 LEVEL  MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: NEXUS PRICE: .95 (TAPE), .95 (DISC) REVIEWER: CHRIS Quite why Nexus released Blazer so closely after Hades Nebula is a bit of a mystery. The two games are pretty similar, although personally I prefer this excursion into the tried and tested shoot-'em-up format. Like Hades you fly your space fighter up the screen blasting on coming aliens and shooting up ground installations. Like Hades you can collect extra bits of firepower from pods on the surface of asteroids and space stations. Like Hades the game is initially very difficult to master. this game many times before Things move FAST! Like Hades It's nicely presented and there's a neat high-score table packaged with good sound with a gimmicky way of putting effects and pretty graphics but your name up in lights. it's still a standard shoot-'em-up Other than that you've seen without a big arcade name to give you a reason to rush out and get it. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY Draughts Genius E=mc 1695er 5161  MACHINE: SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: HEWSON/RACK-IT demanding checkerboard PRICE: .99 challenger happy. REVIEWER: TIM You can play the computer or another human opponent-or Hewson kicks off its new budget get the computer to play itself if range with a whole bunch of you feel like it! strong titles for all formats. Load in the game and you Draughts Genius is a nice find yourself facing a very Spectrum simulation of the famous person-it's a pixilated well-known board game. It Einstein, probably the most features nicely animated famous draughts player ever! graphics and enough skill levels You make the moves by using to keep even the most a simple cursor and the game all Move 3 / Gas Level 3 511 E= mc 579aa999 596163766 55 576 1991 YO 50529139956 1165955965 pas 561 1959 hihir A aaa Level 3 tells you when you're making a wrong move using a speech bubble from the Prof's mouth. He also makes comments throughout the game. The rules of the game are as the real thingand are simple enough to pick even if you've never played the game before. The animated Einstein really adds an element of fun to the game and gives you someone to challenge if you're playing alone. You get a real buzz if you manage to beat him at a high skill level. Great value, nicely presented and lots of fun to play. What more could you want from a budget game?  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 00 00 00 BAYO "


"| MAGNETRON @ MAGNETRON -AVAILABLE EVENING STAR NOV. 1987 KPL2 is Steve Turner's hero in this nailbiting 3D game. Test your skill against enemy robots and nuclear reactors. Are you willing to gamble? Available on Commodore and Spectrum. MMORPHEUS EVENING STAR -AVAILABLE SEPT. 1987 Drive this powerful Steam Locomotive between Bath & Bournemouth, recreating the return of a legend and a chance to test your skill on the footplate. NEBULUS-AVAILABLE DEC. The new Hewson 'BLOCKBUSTER: 1987 Amstrad (Disk & Cassette) BBC/Electron. Available on Spectrum, Commodore, Thenning he most Availetrum Stunning underwater graphics and possibly the most outstanding game from Hewson in 1987. Available on Commodore and Spectrum. Explore Andrew Braybrook's into a world which can be ripped apart at any second. This latest arcade style -shootMORPHEUS -AVAILABLE OCT. 1987 latest sub-atomic adventure em-up game will keep you charged for hours. Available on Commodore only. Four new smash hits from Hewson, following hot on the heels of Zynaps and Exolon. Connect your brain with Hewson's latest games. SPECTRUM  AMSTRAD . COMMODORE Cassette .95 Cassette .95 Cassette .95 Disc .95 Disc .95 HFWSONER Hewson, 56b Milton Trading Estate, Abingdon, Oxon OX 14 RX. For Mail Order send a cheque/P0. to Hewson Consultants Ltd. Order by Credit Card by sending your Access/Barclaycard number, and enclose a Specimen signature. Don't forget to enclose your name and address. Hewson Consultants Ltd As part of our continuing development of innovative software we are always happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication "


"Who's the most mischievous Playboy in the entire galaxy?.... FVEC FREDDY ...That's Who! and don't forget it! ICEP You may not believe it but he's a super-sharp counter espionage agent with a big appetite for entertainment and there's nothing he enjoys more than a full blown bruise-up! Now trouble is heading his way as you help Freddy recover, after yet another crash-landing, to steal a space-craft to freedom. Take on man-eating ants, reptiles, robots, mutants and genetic throw-backs with Dinamic's latest wonderman Freddy Hardest ae name SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE .95 AMSTRAD .95 MSX .95 TeGe Imagine Software, 6 Central Street, Manchester M2 5NS, Tel: 061 834 3939, Telex: 669977 "


"| YOUR FREE DE THUNDERCATS TALE! Strapped, stapled or simply stuck to the front of this issue, you'll have found our FREE Thundercats game tape. No demos, no adverts Just one helluva game for your Spectrum, Commodore or Amstrad. It's the first of 20 action packed levels from Elite's brand new game based on the Thundercats TV cartoon heroes. Mum-Ra has stolen the Eye of Thundera and only YOU and Lion-o can get it back! Hack 'n' slash your way through Mum-Ra's evil minions, collect mystery powers and extra lives, leap across bottomless caverns and generally have a good time! Gasp at the great graphics, be amazed by the radical animation, wonder how C+VG did it WITHOUT adding a penny to the price of the magazine! PLAYING THE GAME It's quite simple really. You control Lion-o and his awesome sword. The first level involves battling MumRa's minions with your sword. Watch-out! They come at you from in front and behind. As you dash through the landscape you'll come like across obstacles rocks and pits. Use you catlike jumping skills to leap over them. On pillars or old trees you'll see more interesting objects. Bash them with you sword and they turn into extra-lives or extra firepower. Reach the end of the level and you'll get a high-score plus time bonus. What's your top score going to be? HOW TO USE YOUR THUNDERCATS TAPE On side one you'll find the Amstsrad version of the game, Side two is inhabited by the Commodore 64/128 and Spectrum versions In that order. So if you've got a Spectrum, wind through the tape until you hear the distinctive tones of the Speccy code. Then check out your fape counted and write the number down clearly on the tape label so you won't have to mess around again. onage more eddy ke on amic's rdest. .95 69977 Elite will be releasing the complete game this month for the Commodore 64/128, Spectrum and Amstrad. Let us know what you thought about the C+VG Thundercats tape. "


".95 SHOOT A PATH TO THE STARS Phasor One E GOLD anson Reg des. Pat pending PRODUC 2 years unconditional guarantee for normal use. Extra long cable for additional mobility. Any problems in obtaining your \"Phasor One\" joysticks you can contact us at: Zap the opposition with the Phasor One Joystick. Microswitch mechanism gives swift response making play fast and accurate. With a two year guarantee, the Phasor One is Number One for winners. Pistol grip design for all ages. Left or right hand-it is as effective in either. Longlife micro switches give precision control. Hardwearing steel shaft and ball bearing pivot. Ultra sensitive control level for faster responses. Britannia Software Limited Cardiff Workshops, Lewis Road Cardiff CF1 5EB Telephone: 0222 481135 Trade enquiries welcome "


".95 .95 3333333 WARGAMES I ADVENTURE ROLE PLAYING SIMULATIONS I SPORTS MAGAZINES I C-64/128 * AMIGA + APPLE II * ATARI STAATARI XLXE = IBM PC + COMPATIBLES C64/128 STRATEGY Atari ST AMIGA Kampfgruppe ............................. ..$29.99 Phantasie I. II. III .99 The Faery Tale Adventure ....... .00 Battlegroup... .99 Colonial Conquest..... .99 Bard's Tale Mech Brigade .... .99 Great Battles 1789-1865 .00 Earl Weaver Baseball ............... .95 Gettysburg ............... .99 Balance of Power .95 Barbarian .95 Rebel Charge at Chickamauga... .99 Gridiron (U.S. Football) ........... .00 Flight Simulator II. .00 Battlecruiser .... ... .99 Micro-League Baseball II ....... .00 Scenery Disc #7/11 EACH .00 Imperium Galactum $35.00 \" General Managers ....... .00 Gridiron (U.S. Football) .00 Colonial Conquest .99 \" 1986 Teams Disc .00 Kampfgruppe ... .99 B-24 ....................NEW......... .99 Flight Simulator II $42.00 Ultima III .95 P.H.M. Pegasus .95 Scenery Discs #7/11 Each .. .00 Silent Service .. .95 War in the South Pacific .............. $24.99 F15 Strike Eagle (NEW) .......... $24.95 Chessmaster 2000 .95 Wargame Construction Set ............99 Autoduel.. $24.95 Balance of Power .95 Project Stealth Fighter .... NEW.....95 Tracker (NEW) ...95 Terrorpods .............. NEW......... $24.95 Airbourne Ranger ........NEW........95 Empire ................. NEW......... $43.00 OGRE.................. NEW $24.95 OGRE.................. NEW...................95 Breach ................. NEW.......... $35.00 Phantasie II .............. NEW .99 Ultima IV ................ NEW................ .95 Strategic Studies Group Knight Orc......... ... NEW .95 IBM PC & COMPATIBLES ALSO ON APPLE II COMPUTERS OGRE.................. NEW.............. .95 Flight Simulator .00 Reach for the Stars .95 Atan XLXE Scenery Disc #7 .00 Carriers at War .95 Scenery Disc #11 .00 Europe Ablaze Phantasie .99 Jet Simulator.. .00 Wizards Crown .99 Battlefront .... Computer Diplomacy ..... .00 Kampfgruppe ... Russia .99 Gettysburg .99 Battles in Normandy Mech Brigade ..... .99 Rebel Charge at Chickamauga.....99 Run 5 (magazine) each Antietam .99 Roadwar 2000 .99 Scenario Discs ............. Gettysburg .99 Wizards Crown .99 Rebel Charge at Chickamauga .. .99 Kampfgruppe .... .99 Adventure Warship .99 Balance of Power..... .95 Bard's Tale .95 Battlecruiser .99 Incunabula ...... .00 Imperium Galactum .00 Legacy of the Ancients ....... Ancient Art Of War .99 Phantasie II, III .................... each .99 Autoduel ............. .95 Wizardry I .00 Guderian ..... .00 Wizards Crown .99 . Wizardry II. .00 Gulf Strike ........ Shard of Spring .00 .99 Starflight .95 OGRE.................. NEW .95 Rings of Zilfin .99 Space Max.. $39.95 Darkhorn ........ .00 Apple II 64k Gunship $24.95 Autoduel.... .95 .95 Might & Magic .00 Pirates (NEW) Ultima I, III, IV each .95 3D Helicopter Simulation .............. .00 Blue Powder Grey Smoke ..............99 Moebius ........... .95 Under Fire ....... .00 Pirates ..95 U.F. Extended Capability ........... .00 The Eternal Dagger COMPUTER GAMING Bard's Tale II ...... .00 (Wizards Crown II) ............... .99 Flight Simulator II ...... .00 WORLD PHM Pegasus ....... .99 A must for both wargamers Phantasie III ..........NEW..............99 and adventure gamers giving Hardware Eternal Dagger ........ NEW...........99 reviews and hints. Strategic Studies Group Amiga A500 * MODULATOR (see C64/128 for details and prices) CGW is the serious gamers * Deluxe Paint . Free software handbook and should not  Apple GS be missed. Bard's Tale $43.00 ATARI 520STM 1 MEG DRIVE Back issues .50 Mean 18.... .00 MODULATOR + FREE SOFTWARE Deluxe Paint II ... .00 Current issue .00  Shanghai .95 Subscriptions 6 issues .00 ATARI 520STEM  Music Studio ......... ...95 Please ring for more details Tass Times... .95 Tel 01-979 2987 Send .00 for our latest catalogue (redeemable with lst order) ALL SOFTWARE IS ON DISC ONLY PLEASE SPECIFY COMPUTER WHEN ORDERING STRATEGIC FLUS DOFTWARE OVERSEAS ORDERS WELCOME ADD .00 EUROPE STRATEGIC PLUS SOFTWARE P.O. Box 8 C+VG & .00 OUTSIDE EUROPE PER ITEM. SOFTWARE ALL PRICES INCLUDE V.A.T. & P.P. HAMPTON MIDDX. TW12 3XA PLUS onage more eddy ke on amic's dest. .95 59977. "


"MASTERTRONI The best picture will get the arcade machine. Then 50 runners-up will get a copy of Mastertronic's Bosconian conversion. Your picture can be any size and drawn using anything you like-pencils, crayons, water-colours, Dulux emulsion you choose! Just make sure the coupon is fixed firmly to your entry so we can't misplace your name and address. You know it makes sense. Badoom! Blip! Braakk! And lots of other noises beginning with B! All this is in aid of announcing C+VG's awesomely exclusive arcade competition. Yup, you could be the lucky winner of a extra special Namco Bosconian arcade machine, as used by the programmers of Mastertronic's newest coin-op conversion. Imagine it. Your very own coin-up, happily humming to itself in your bedroom, just waiting for you to take the controls and save the world from zillions of trigger-happy aliens. Bosconian just happens to be one of the Ed's favourite arcade machines so you're really lucky we've managed to persuade him to give it away. Still, he's been locked away in a darkened room until the winner has been chosen-giving you time to get your entries in! What we want you to do is read the Bosconian game scenario and then come up with an illustration of a scene from the game. You can draw a space battle, an alien or even the Bosconian Starfighter itself. Your imagination is the only restriction. RUM 4 8 OIKIALNIMCO LICENSE C+VG/MASTERTRONIC BOSCONIAN COMPETITION Name Address Computer owned  MASTERTRONIC "


"THE SCENARIO The time had come at last. The domination of the Orbitals had to end, and this was the only chance. It was time for mankind to regain their place as the aliens had destroyed the old order in the disastrous \"Rock War\"--when they had rained meteoric destruction down on Earth from their orbiting Spacestationshad put aside their differences for one final effort to regain their independence. They had built a space-worthy Starfighter and equipped it with the best technology that they could acquire. Of course the aliens withheld their most sophisticated devices, that was how they kept the world enslaved. However, due to the secret nature of the project, only one such craft could be built. The aliens must not be allowed to let their dreaded missiles loose again. Your mission is to fly the only space craft available to destroy the orbital Spacestations. This is the last chance for the people of Earth, for their orbiting masters will never again allow them even this slim chance to regain their freedom. You must not fail! Be careful, space is full of debris and mines. The aliens have plenty of fighter craft, and they are faster then yours! Only a true hero can save the Earth! VICO "


"ATARIR COMMODORE SPECTRUM WOOLWORTHS TOP 30 NONA SPECTRUM AMSTRAD POSITION TITLE OCTOBER 1987 SOFTWARE HOUSE MACHINE PRICE TYPE COMMODORE 7.95 8.99 9.95 7.95 9.99 7.99 8.95 COMMODORE HEWSON MERCENARY NOUAGE MERCENARY 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. Renegade Indiana Jones Mercenary Bubble Bobble Last Ninja Exolon Renegade Tai Pan Mega Apocalypse : Epics Barbarians Bubble Bobble Solomon's Key Rood Runner World Class Leaderboard Taipan Summer Gold Road Runner Leaderboard Living Daylights 6 Pak Sidewize Summer Gold Living Daylights Ace2 Wizball Barbarian Renegade Enduro Racer 6 Pok Imagine U.S. Gold Novagen Firebird System 3 Hewson Imagine Ocean Martech U.S. Gold Palace Firebird U.S. Gold U.S. Gold U.S. Gold Ocean U.S. Gold U.S. Gold U.S. Gold Domark Elite Firebird U.S. Gold Domark Cascade Ocean Palace Imagine Activision Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum C64 Spectrum C64 Spectrum | C64 C64 Spectrum C64 C64 Spectrum C64 C64 Spectrum C64 Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum C64 C64 C64 Spectrum C64 Amstrad Spectrum Amstrad 8.95 9.99 9.99 8.95 9.99 8.99 9.99 8.95 9.99 9.99 9.95 9.95 9.95 AMSTRAD SPECTRUM 45-128 ATARI 7.95 Eulal 332 9.99 9.95 9.99 25. 26. 795 27. 28. 29. 30. 9.99 8.95 9.99 9.95 Elite ATARI WOOLWORTHS A Great Deal in Entertain SPECTRUM hems subject to availabilly Aselected larger stores. Mestertronie games e  99 and .99 COMMODORE SPECTRUM 5 AMSTRADE "


"The latest adventure in the award winning Ultima saga Quested the Avatar Ultima V. 'Warriors of Destiny An Adventure of Epic Proportions DENIS LOUBET 3 Origin Systems' Lord British, one of fantasi a desperate call to arms you are summoned gaming's most imaginative and respected at bak to Britannia to discover the fate of Lord brings you Ultima V: Warriors of Destiny, the island to defeat the self-righteous Tyranny latest in the award-winning Ultima series. that is founded in misgaided virtues, Over four man-vears have been spent developing The Ultima series of antasy role-playing games, Ultima V. making this labyrinth of mystéry and from Origin Systems Inc, is brought to you by intrigue your greatest challenge yet! Microprose Software Limited. The fantastic discovery of the new underworld entices Lord British from Britannia to explore the vast reaches of the unknown Mysteriously, all contact with the good king and his companions is SYSTEMS INC. lost. In Britannia, fear turns to panic when the group's sole survivor returns with dreadedicades of THE START OF SOMETHING NEW the expeditions ate. ORIGIN Ultima V Bus Det ULTIMA I: CBM 64/128 219,95; IBM, APPLE $24.95. ULTIMA III: CBM 64/128, ATARI XE XL ; MAC, IBM, APPLE, ATARI ST, AMIGA $24.95. ULTIMA IV: CBM 64/128, ATARI XEXL ,95; IBM, APPLE, ATARI SI, AMIGA .95. ULTIMA V CBM 64/128 .95; APPLE .95. Please send copy/ies of Format _Price Name (block capitals) Address Post Code I enclose & Lincluding .00 P&P. UK Only (Overseas .00) Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date No. For more information on the Origin range please tick box MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. TIX: 43422 MPS/UKG. Each Ultima game is a self-contained fantasy, requiring no experience of the other Ultima games. For your copy or a free catalogue, complete and post the coupon to the address shown. "


"DEASI CENTRAL Well, here I am again. Two weeks lying around the are, so don't move down a right past the gyrocopter and pool sipping Harvey Wallbangers comes to an end level if he is on screen. The doesn't use it. All the levels far too quickly for my liking. Something else that pogo-stick part is easy, just after this are just the first four doesn't last too long is the old tanwith the rain keep moving. repeated with mines, invisible Level 3the maze is hard paint, etc. and cold it didn't stand a chance. Never mind only but you'll soon learn the This is what I like continuity another 50 weeks to go 'til next year's summer correct route. To get past the first you get the hints and hols! By the way, what happened to the postcards cannon balls put your joystick then you get the first three from all those exotic places you all spent your hols on auto-fire as it is hard to time levels mapped by Paul in? the jumps right. Monger of Middlesex. Neat, Back to business and thanks for all the hints and Level 4-dodge the brown eh? tips that arrived in my absence. lumps (What are they??) as Paul gives you another hint they slow you down. Run for before loading the separate ROAD RUNNERE your life when he gets the levels on the cassette version gyrocopter. Jumping the reset the tape counter. Then Here are some Road Runner then you're in big trouble as crevasses is easy. take down the number at tips from Trevor Fox he will reappear on a rocket The gyrocopter is the which each level starts. So, Level 1 — when a van skateboard. So, try to keep hardest part of the game, as when you take the short cut to passes, quickly run in line with him on the screen at all times. Coyote nearly always gets a later level, just forward the it and the Coyote, if he is a fair Level 2 the rocket part is you. If before you get to the tape to the start of that level distance behind you, he'll get easy if you just remember that gyrocopter stage you run so and press play to load it. run over. On all levels if you when he appears on screen fast Coyote disappears off the What's this, yet another run too fast and Coyote on the rocket he always screen, he reappears on the cheat for Road Runner on the disappears off the screen, appears a level lower than you rocket skateboard and shoots Spectrum is this the only VIZITZZZZ ^^ ^ ^ KEY; A birdseed T 8 Coyotes gadgets "


"game getting played this mothership will come into X-line and dodge the bombs they have been killed. month? Craig Poland of Lancs view, firing bombs. With the without necessarily having to the next screen will reckons that on the title screen wings extension it should only fight the ship from below, definitely cause hassles. The you hold down the keys RTHB take 20 shots to destroy it. where you stand a good background consists of a at the same time then a Next comes another chance of getting shot. network of diagonal lines, and message will scroll along the metallic backdrop with plenty Once you are out of the another type of blue/grey ship bottom of the screen. Start the of gun emplacements. When red/blue zone you will find a travels down the line, firing as game and you have infinite you get past the first pair of backdrop the same as the one they go. Keep in the lower lives. Give it a try and see if bases, stay halfway up the before the tracks. Re-collect right half of the screen firing all it works!! screen on the right hand side homing missiles if you choose the time and also give yourself SLAPFIGHT until the alien that appears the second choice and then room to dodge. Once through there is killed. Then you can start collecting stars for a this it's back to open ground, Kenneth Henry appears yet resume your central position shield again. By now you where there are rolling silver again in I.C. and this month in the lower half of the screen. should be at a city-type tanks that travel downscreen Slapfight gets the treatment Now, with the stars you have landscape with a new type of in alternate sets of three and First thing to do is to make collected you have a choice to enemy-blue/grey circles two. The way to beat these is the first three start stars make as you go into the next which need two shots to be easy just stay at the bottom speed. You the have to get section. You can use the stars killed. These aliens are of the screen directly between every star until you get some prominent from now on-So the left and centre tank for homing missiles. You can only shield from bullets and do your watch out. But with the homing sets of two tanks, and for sets afford to miss one before the best to defend yourself with missiles they are no trouble. of two, just dart to centre. green grass and stone roads homing missiles, or, use the When you're through the city Take out the two grey landscape disappears. stars you have to get back backdrop it's out into open bombers at the end of this and Now that the grey/red top normal bullets and have an ground. its back to the railway again, hat' aliens have disappeared overall better chance of Here' the second mother with a stationary bomber at for a while, to be replaced by righting, but with no shield. ship will attack in the same the end. octagonal aliens of the same The next sheet consists of a way as the first. That means Once through the second colour, you will be attacked network of tracks. These are the strategy is basically the railway landscape, the music from nearly all sides. Before connected by a grey square same. The third mothership will restart and you will be the attack you should have as they intersect. Grey aliens looks like a giant insect and travelling into a new industrial obtained a wing extension to run up and along the tracks makes three passes at you. It looking landscape. Collect a speed up the homing missles, and when over a grey square doesn't fire bullets, so moving second wing extension and Once you've memorised the they will shoot six bullets. The down diagonally with it and from now on, just collect enemies which give out stars aliens can however be shot holding down the fire button shields. The landscape itself is during this particular attack, over red stretches in the blue kills them every time. They surrounded by a blue square it's best to stay near the network as well as while over leave a star when destroyed around the emplacements. bottom for the aliens that give the holes but otherwise are The stars should go towards Most of the time the blue/grey stars along the bottom roads. invulnerable. It's difficult to another shield. The next circle aliens use these to Once through this you will say which option is best, as aliens cause some trouble travel along. There is a new get to a dark backdrop with the you have a better chance to grey and yellow circular craft hazard-emplacements same aliens on the attack. kill aliens with bullets, but with that shoot bullets in all they fire bullets across the After getting rid of this homing missiles you can stay directions. Keep out of their lower half of the screen in five welcoming party the first grey alongside the aliens on the way and get the stars after directions. They take LEVEL 1 LEVEL 2 77 LEVEL 3 "


"approximately six shots to the old top hats. Get through pair of silvery-green railway destroy. If you don't get above this and you have another tracks which the fourth them within seconds, even challenge. The screen will mothership will travel down. It with a shield, it'll be very hard stop scrolling as the backdrop appears twice. Do not try to to stay alive. If you think that reflects a face with rather fight it like you did the others. you would do better with a large teeth. Those glowing This ship just fires bullets different weapon, use bombs. aliens will enter from the left straight down; so stay in the One tip is once you get and right hand corners of the middle and attack it from there above them, stay slightly right screen firing. with missiles. If you have of centre to anticipate other You have to concentrate bombs, attack it as it travels hazards. Once through this your fire on the red area above down the screen and then dart rather long section, you will the face. As it is damaged in and out of the bombs to get travel into a totally new cracks will appear across the a good hit. If you are lucky you landscape, made up of dark surface. When destroyed the should kill it before it starts grey pathways. Glowing aliens screen will start scrolling shooting appear, but behave just like again. The backdrop is now a Once through all that you will encounter a mass attack of those glowing aliens and stealth cannons. This attack goes on until the screen stops scrolling again. The object is exactly the same, except this time the screen is covered with hidden, indestructible bomb emplacements, and they are very accurate, so you'll have to do plenty of weaving and dodging to survive. I think that should be enough to keep you going. GAMES CONSOLE TIPS Could this be another first for you meet the princess. water and go down the third. world\" 1.C? The only magazine to Tim read our plea for help You should now be swimming. Do you know how to gain give you games console tips on how to finish the game and Once on dry land keep access to the hidden game in along with hints and tips for here is the final solution. walking until you get to the the Sega Master System? No! your computer On world eight ignore single hammer-thrower and Well, neither do I! But The Nintendo game Super the first and second pipes run underneath it when it someone who does is David Mario Bros gets the treatment you come to jump the jumps up and jump across the McConnell of Blackpool. All from Angus 'The Best of Co firey-looking water and go gap. Now stand as close to the you have to do is switch the Durham and Tim Sampson of down the third pipe. Now bydragon as possible and use console on with no game in it Suffolk. First up is Angus. pass the next three pipes the same method to run and you will see some On world 1-2 you can warp jump the water and before the underneath it. Pick up the instructions with enjoy at the to either world 2, 3, or 4. On two turtles can get you, jump flashing object on the right and end. On the control pad press world 4-2 try head-butting up for the hidden brick just dragon will fall to its doom and up and press the two fire some of the bricks and you will before the raised pipe. Then you've completed the game buttons. Keep them all find a beanstalk. Climb up to jump on top of this to get on At the end of the game the pressed down and the hidden warp to world 6, 7 or 8. There the pipe and go down. Ignore princess says \"thank you games comes on. are also beanstalks on the the next two pipes jump the Mario, your quest is over. We following worlds, 2-1,3-1,4-1, water and go down. Ignore the present you with a new quest. 6-1. At the end of the world 8-4 next two pipes. Jump the Push button B to select a DEFENDER OF THE CROWN C64 First of all allow 2-4 hours 50-60 knights and twice as will raid you and you will lose game time. Start off by placing many soldiers. half your gold. Buy two one man in your army, then keep your guard up and soldiers for one knight, so if take all free adjacent land, force the first man to the right you start off with forty men buy highest value first. Now move hand side of the screen, now twenty Knights first. Knights your army back to your castle move your joystick to 11 are a very powerful force and and place all the men into your o'clock and stab him three are the key to the game. Don't garrison. That's all the times as you move worry about your castle conquests for a while. Don't backwards. Repeat this getting attacked by this time worry if you lose your land, process until he is dead. Once there should be plenty of men you do not need it. inside the castle force the man to defend it. Now start raiding. Figure up two or three stairs and Once your garrison reaches which castles have the most move back stabbing him three 50-60 Knights and twice as income and raid these first times or so and repeat the many soldiers you are ready Then settle down and raid the process until his energy bar to claim England for yourself. south three castles three runs out, then walk to the top Buy a catapult and move it times more than the north. of the stairs where he will fall and all your men except This gives you lots of gold to dead and you can enter the twenty Knights buy your army and keeps room and steal the gold soldiers into your army. Now them low on gold and men. Keep spending the gold to take all the land around your Keep raiding until you have build up your garrison, or they castle, making a buffer zone to ENDURO RACER CHEAT To cheat just press CAPS shift on stages 1, 2 and 3. But on and go as fast as possible you and Q. You will now race Stage 4 your time is so high will not crash. around the course at a that it is almost impossible not tremendous speed. You may to complete. Then on stage 5 crash once or twice, if you do go to the righthand side of the just press Caps Shift + again. screen and stay there. This cheat mode only works If you stay tight into the side protect it. Move on the enemy main castle (there may only be one or two left at this time). Once it is yours all his land and income is yours, or if there only was one the game is over. When in battle use Stand and Fight or Ferocious Attack, Bombard is very effective if you have ten or so catapults. Jousting: Move the joystick to 9 o'clock and keep the lance centre at top of his shield, once in full range pull back on stick and press fire. "


"Werewolves OF LONDON WESTMINSTER STATION Viz "


"Enlicht irebird's Enlightenment-Druid II — was elsewhere. C+VG's Game of the Month last issue. Here we THE SWAMP present our exclusive player's guide to this This is the only place in which you can find the spellbinding game of good versus evil. Kraken. It is 103 years ago since the undead, monsters and evil THE DESERT evil Acamantor and his creatures. All the creatures here are demon princes were There are 15 landscapes fast--witness the spiders banished from the land of to be discovered and and the ones which look as Belorn by Hasrinaxx the explored on the path to though they have potatoes Druid. That famous battle Enlightenment. There is not for heads! Watch out for the was chronicled in Firebird's really a correct sequence to demon princes. Druid. Now Acamantor's explore them but with three LAND OF FIRE evil shadow has fallen upon essential items to collect to Zombies, fire demons and the land again. Will enable the game to be the demon princes are Hasrinaxx save the day again completed, you will probably guarding something in Firebird's Druid II, have to visit them all. The important here. If you're in otherwise known as Druid has cast a spell on our combat with the demon Enlightenment. lips to prevent us naming prince, you can tell when he RE casting the light spell, which throws a small circle of light around the Druid. Casting the Deathlight and Deathland spells will, besides killing evil creatures, allow you to see the screen for about ten seconds. Hopefully, in that amount of time, you should be able to glimpse the way out. This screen also contains something of interest. THE WEIRD WOOD This is the only place to find the Air Wisp. It is exceptionally fast-it can move at twice the speed of the Druid. Lots of food to eat N ETHER here. THE VILLAGE C+VG lured Firebird's Tony Beckwith into the tortue chamber -sorry, interview room and extracted the following hints and tips for those brave enough to undertake the battle to rid Belorn of Acamantor, the demon princes, and his legion of is A THE SWAMP A FIRE these objects. However, the is near to death because he following information changes from white to red. should provide some advance LAND OF ROCK help with these landscapes. Here you must find the THE VILLAGE Search this level for food in the Landscape under and keys. Zombies and darkness. skeletons are the main foes. LAND OF DARKNESS Golem is useful on this level. Everything is in darkness. He can also be found The only way to see is by THE WATER LEVEL Beware the slimey things. We're now getting close to Acamantor's castle. You should find the pierhead of interest. If you can summon the Grim Reaper you will find him of use. THE FUNGUS LEVEL As the Druid progresses through the 15 mystical levels of Enlightenment he will encounter various spells to help him on his quest. Conjure Earth Element: This will summon a clay Golem who will act as the Wall of Fire: Lethal for Druid's servant throughout fire-fearing foes, Lasts until its duration the Druids leaves the Conjure Air Elemental: landscape. This is the helpful Air Wisp. Wall of Water: Acts in the It's fast but weak. same way as the Wall of Fire Conjure Fire Elemental: A except it obstructs hot foes. fiery Pheonix which is hot Death Touch: Only a few stuff unless it gets caught in powerful creatures can damp conditions. survive the Druid's touch Conjure Water Elemental: when he casts this spell. A water Kraken Servant for Deathlight: Provides a the Druid. circle of destruction around the Druid. Deathland: Same as above but last longer. Finger of Lightning: Increases the power of the bolts of lightning shot from the Druid's fingertips by ten times. Recharge: Replenishes the Druid's electrical bolts. Slow: Makes creatures near Druid slow. Fireshield: When the heat players guide "


"TENMENT DRUJI demon prince. The statue will then come to life and can then be killed TOP OF THE CASTLE Almost there. There's an important spell to find here which is vital for the next level. The exit leads to the Inter-Warp. INTER-WARP If you found the correct guards. A demon prince spell you will able to use it guards the way into the main here to get to the final level. part of the castle. NIGHTMARE LEVEL THE CASTLE At last the final encounter At some stage you may with Acamantor. But first The red mushrooms will and ice statues which can poison the Druid. Wine and come to life. On the plus the Antidote spell will help. side, there are coins hidden So will the Resurrection spell. here. THE SNOW LEVEL CASTLE DUNGEON 3911 STO1411 A WATER A FUNGUS A SNOW III GRACIAS A CASTLE DUMP Lots of nasties here blinking eyes, water slime creatures, a demon prince A INTERWARP A NIGHTMARE Having the Resurrection find the Druid's path you must deal with evil eyes, spell with be handy. Find the blocked by a statue. The way killing skulls and the keys and keep clear of the round this is to kill the wandering hands! is on, this spell will make sure the Druid keeps cool. Invisibility: Hides the Druid from all creatures with normal sight. Armour: Turns Druid's robes to steel for a time. Turn Away: Makes creatures close to the Druid run away. Teleport: You must cast this spell within the correct magical symbol. Resurrection: Handy to have if the Druid dies when close to success. Doorblast. This causes a mighty explosion and opens all doors within its radius of power. The Seeing Eye: See what fate lies ahead. Sage: Provides a clue to the quest. Strengthen: Helps boosts the strength of your elementals. B anquet: The Druid feels better on a full stomach. Wine: Good for slaking the thirst -and for driving poison from the system. Create Light: All will be revealed when things get dark. Crucifix: The undead and unholy shrink before it. Antidote: Cures the Druid if poisoned. Horn of Baeon: Its effect is unknown. Coin of Chaton: Cast and a coin appears. White Orb: Cast at the right time and the Druid will have achieved Enlightenment. players guide "


"LET'S FIGHT!!! From the Dawn of Time comes a Legendary Warrior to thrill players everywhere.... 4.5 billion years have passed since the earth's creation. Many dominators have ruled in all their glory. But Time, their greatest enemy ultimately defeated their reign. And now a Dominator's reign begins.....Rygar, the Legendary Warrior! A Warrior who respects one code and one code alone, the code of combat Antagonistic gladiators, reptiles, mammals, monsters, creatures of magic...come one, come all, come to meet the might of the fearless Rygar and in the words of the immortal warrior LET'S FIGHT!! CBM 64/128 SPECTRUM AMSTRAD El GOLD .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 Cassette Disk Cassette Cassette Disk 10000 SCREEN SHOTS FROM ARCADE VERSION. U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 (TECMO "


"THE WORLD'S LEADING BRAND ASET EUROMAX MICRO ACE ---For the sophisticated games player Contact your nearest computer store for details on full range or clip the coupon. Prices from .95 — .95 Euromax Electronics Ltd., FREEPOST Bessingby Ind. Estate Bridlington. YO16 4SJ O 0262 602541 A Access Accepted CMG ... --Please send me full details.... Name ... Address........ o "


"i flunky Competition Flunky Competition Have you ever walked down the street and spotted someone who looks So get ready to strut your Flunky stuff with the following Piranha just like a famous person? For a moment you're confused. Is it? It can't Questions. be. It certainly looks like him doesn't it? But then you realise it's most unlikely to see Prince Charles buying 1 Who is the programmer behind Flunky and that other Piranha game fish and chips on the Blackpool seafront or the Queen taking her Trapdoor? Is it: washing into a Ponder's End laundry. A) Don Priestley And talking of the Royal family okay, we admit the link is B) John Neatley contrived-brings us neatly to Flunky's Piranha's right royal cartoon C) Fred Williams caper set in Buckingham Palace. Answer Thanks to Piranha's generosity, we've got copies of the game on Commodore, Spectrum and Amstrad to give way. PLUS ten copies 2 Yogi Bear, another Piranha release, has a little fat friend. Is it: of the outrageous Spitting Image videos for the winners, A) Wobbler Williams That means the first ten winners will get the game plus a video B) Boo Boo one of the following titles: A Floppy Mass of Blubber, Spit With Polish C Ranger Smith or Rubber Thingies. Answer FLUNKY COMPETITION NAME ADDRESS 3 What is a Piranha? Is it: A) A fish B) A type of car C) A snake Answer Please indicate which computer you have. Spectrum o CBM D Amstrad a Send your answers, together with the printed coupon, to Flunky Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR SAU. The closing date is November 16th and the editor's lookalike will have the final decision. "


"MIRROR Soft HIT THE BATTLETRACK TODAY! C 64 .95 / .95 01-377 4644 "


"GREAT GAME GARY GARY LINEKER PRESENTS TWO OF THE GREATEST SOCCER GAMES EVER DEVISED! Take the brain teasing 02 % 02 DE PETENCE IN BERBE demands of football WWW WWW.CAT management, the mysterious qualities of x 2K team coach and add the BEAUT\": \"Anda ? explosive talents of a star striking centre forward and you've got Superstar Soccer-an original and innovative approach to the game of football that's every bit as breathtaking, every bit as exciting as Gary Lineker, England's premier striker. NEKERS COMPUTER GAME GARY LINEKER'S FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR O Available from all good toy shops and sports shops. re BOARD *Checy allowance For 2 to 4 play GAME cident ards GARY LINEKER'S FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR Enjoy the world of a Football League Player, suffering the pain and winning the glory, starting at the bottom and becoming a legend... A Footballer of the Year GARY LINEKER'S SUPERSTAR SOCCER The most original computer football game of all time... Available on: CBM 64/128 Tape .99, Disk $14.99 Amstrad Tape .99, Disk .99 Spectrum Tape .99 Atari ST .99 14099 GRAMILIT Gremlin Board Games Ltd. Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield 51 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 "


"THE PHENOMENON CONTINUES GAUDTIE The mind blowing sequel to the No. 1 smash hit. Addictive, frantic and packed with so many new features it's a totally new gathe. Over 100 levels of pulsating action as you take on the powers of your favourite player, even if they're already in play. Discover the hidden gifts of the Secret Room, come face to face with the fearsome Dragon and watch out for the Death Curse of the evil \"IT Stuntiles acid puddles, forcefields and moving exits make your progress all the more difficult. But there are mystical amulets to be gained which will enhance your powers to repel the monsters, walk through walls or increase your fire power. You may even move some of the maze walls to your advantage. Gauntlet is not just a further episode in this enthralling crusade, Risa wlule new experience in action packed adventure, The mind blowing sequel to the No.1 smash hit! U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 23 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX Tel: 021 356 3388 ATARI GAMES GRUPPER SCREENSHOTS FROM ATARI ST VERSION SPECTRUM 48/128K .99 TAPE CBM 64/128 $9.99 Tape &11.99 DISKO ATARI ST .99 DISK AMSTRAD $9.99 Tape &14.99 DISK "


"Konami. ZAN ARCADE NIGHTMARE NOW FOR YOUR HOME-MICRON ocen SPECTRUM COMMODORE AMSTRAD Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS. Tel: 061832 6633 . Telex: 669977 "


"ACTION-EXCITEMENT-DESTRUCTION IT IS THE WAY OF THE TM  KONAMI 1986 KONAMI an Actual Jackal Arcade Machine See pack for details COMMODORE DISC .95 COMMODORECASSETTE .95 SPECTRUM CASSETTE .95 AMSTRAD DISC .95 AMSTRAD CASSETTE .95 ATARI DISC .95 ATARI CASSETTE .95 QUINT GREY DECKAR BOB KONAMI Another gripping Arcade Conversion DISTRIBUTED BY: N.M.C. LTD., 2 IFFLEY ROAD, LONDON W6 OPA. TEL: 01-846 9701 KONAMI For subscription details please send a S.A.E. to: KONAMI SOFTWARE CLUB KONAMI HELPLINE Bank Building, Bank Street, Newton Abbot, Devon TQ12 2JL. 0626 56789 SWAHEGUE MORAM HELPINE "


"Welcome to the heart of computer art. C+VG's intergalactic gallery of tomorrow proudly presents the awesome artists of today. And this issue we're joined by Rainbird Software who were so impressed by the quality of the work they've seen on these pages over the past few issues that they want to reward you for your efforts. So the best pictures on each of the formats we show here will be getting their very own copy of Rainbird's extremely special Advanced Art Studio Utility So on with the show. The ST prize this ish goes to Hideya from South London for his collection of Atari Art-he subtitled this from \"From beyond the grave terror strikes, but it reminded us of Paul after a night out Hideye used Neochrome to put his pics together. More ST art from Radical Systems' Bob Chewter, again from South London. His pics are the cute Bonzo and the really radical Nemesis and superhero strip. Kev Porter of Burton on Trent wins the C64 Art Studio package for his Commodore collection which included this neat study of 2000AD cult heroes D. R. & Quinch. He used Artist 64 and a Neos mouse. More comic book heroics of Dare Devil on the 64. Julian Smith from Sheffield sent us this action packed Road Runner portrait, while Stuart Collins from Folkstone adds this moody illustration titled the Interrogation Zone-both on the 64. Lee Armstrong from Leicester (Not Leeds, OK Lee?!) chips in which the exploding C+VG. Finally, Robert Smith from Bridgewater, winner of the Speccy prize, brings you the latest pic of living legend Lieut Laww. Dare BONZO.PC1 BONZO Mini "


"Nemesi THE WARLO NENESTS2.C Sin S REAL MEN DONT USE BLA M F ZOH DOOJAM-ZM O SHMI by DAN DARE "


"TEO IS AR que mere omse CHUCK YEAGER'S ADVANCED FLIGHT TRAINER "


"The instinct to survive. Out of control, screaming towards Earth at Mach 3, just 8 seconds and 20,000 ft left! Fly aileron rolls, Cuban 8's, even hammerhead stalls. Simulation so realistic you may just blackout. Remember test pilots are only wrong once. CLIMB INTO THE COCKPIT WITH THE GREATEST TEST PILOT EVER CHUCK YEAGER. FLY 14 DIFFERENT AIRCRAFT INCLUDING EXPERIMENTAL JETS, COMPETE AGAINST 6 ADVERSARIES EL CIRNIC DYNAMIC INSTRUMENTATION, BLACK BOX RECORDERS AND 10 VIEWPOINTS WITH ZOOM UP TO 256X CHUCK YEAGER'S Advanced Flight Trainer ELCTRONIC ARTS UNLEASH THE POWER OF YOUR IMAGINATION Electronic Arts software is available on a wide range of home computers including Commodore 054, Commodore Amiga, Atari ST, IBM PC and compatibles, Spectrum and Amstrad. Electronic Arts products are available from good software stockists and especially where you see this sign RTS ELCTRONIC ARTS AUTHORISED DEALER For a full broadsheet describing the complete range or information on your nearest stockist write to: Electronic Arts. 11-49 Station Road, Langley, Berkshire SL3 BYN, England. Or call our Customer Services Dept. on 0753 46465. "


"NINTENDO COMPETITION All this could be YOURS! A truly awesome Nintendo Entertainment System, complete with light gun AND your plastic pal who's fun to be with ROB the games playing droid. Plus four hot game cartridges Including C+VG's fave rave Super Mario Brothers! Picked yourself off the floor yet? Then get your brain in gear and identify the six arcade screen shots on this page. Why? 'Cos that's how you WIN stupid! Tell us what the six mystery coin-op classics are, fill in the entry coupon and mail it to Computer and Video Games, Nintendo Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU. Closing date is November 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and the Ed's decision is completely and utterly final. Five runners-up will get an amazing NEW design C+VG t-shirt as worn by the team at the recent PCW Show. Be smart, look cool, enter NOW! C+VG/NINTENDO COMPETITION Picture 1 is: a) Outrun b) WEC Le Mans c) Pole Position Picture 2 is: a) Excitabike b) Enduro Racer c) Hang On Picture 3 is: a) Rampage b) Donkey Kong c) Trojan Picture 4 is: a) Salamander b) Gryzor c) Nemesis Picture 5 is: a) Road Runner c) Super Sprintc) 720° C+VG/NINTENDO COMPETITION Name Address I think the arcade games are: "


"MORE FUN THAN HAVING A GOOD TIMES Tell the coach you can't make training tonight. Tell your girlfriend you're washing your hair. Tell your friends you've taken up karate. Because Electronic Arts, the number one computer games company in the USA are launching over 12 new games per month for the next year! These are just some of our new releases: WORLD TOUR Electronic Arts available from good software stockists! Where you see this sign. Baseball H GOLF ELECTRONIC ARTS AUTHORISED DEALER Electronic Arts software is available on a wide range of home computers including Commodore C64, Commodore Amiga, Atari ST, IBM PC and compatibles, Spectrum and Amstrad. ELCTRONIC ARTS ELECTRONIC ARTS EARL WEAVER BASEBALL WORLD TOUR GOLF STARELICUIT HI VOLTAGE 535 High St Croydon 01-686 6362 LAN COMPUTER SYSTEMS 1063 High Pd Chadwell Heath Homo 01-599 0961 MEGABYTE 12 Ettrick Square Cumberl Scan 0236 738398 MICRO ANVIKA 220A lot Court Land 01-636 2547 MICROBYTE 36 County Arcade : 0532 450529 MILES BETTER SOFTWARE 219 221 Camack Pd Chat Cock 05435 3577 MPC SOFTWARE 12 Julian Rd West Bridgton Nathigam 0602 820106 ONE STEP BEYOND Na Castle Meadow No 0603 663796 RSC 7 Ourens Pilatud 0923 243301 SILICA SHOP 14 The Mews Hatena St Kont 01-300 3399 SILICA SHOP Lo House (tor) 227 Tottenham Court Fes Do 101-580 4839 SILICA SHOP Sortides (town) Duford Standar 01-629 1234 SOFTCENTRE The Paratte: Cum Tun Centre Catal 06333 68131 SOFTWARE CITY 3 Lichfield Passige Wolverhampton 0902 25304 SOFTWARE EXPRESS 514 516 Alun Rock Alim Rick Here 0213283585 SOFTWARE PLUS 72 With St, Rimi Esse 0708 765271 SOFTWARE PLUS 335 Chartel 5 Vit C Sant 0702 610784 SOFTWARE PLUS The soulevais Ioward Centre Bedford 0234 66598 SOFTWARE PLUS 27 S1 Male Sinanich Suffolk 0473 54774 SOFTWARE PLUS 95 Highest Gravesend 0474 333162 SOFTWARE PLUS Lety Stig Hall, Eat ShBaldon 0268 27922 SOFTWARE PLUS The Boulevard, Wellington Centre, Aldershot 0252 29862 SOFTWARE PLUS 15 K wa Colchester 0206 760977 SOFTWARE PLUS 49 High St Gillingham 0634 579634 STRATEGIC PLUS SOFTWARE 188 Fulmer Dose Hampton. Midex 01-979 2987 THE COMPUTER SHOP Unt 250. Victor Centre. Nottingham 0602 410633 THOUGHTS & CROSSES 33 Market St. Hecmundike Works 0924 402337 TRICOMPUTER SOFTWARE 1619 Uhtige Rd, Elina London N401-874 3418 Y2 COMPUTING TII SI Altan Rd Watford 0923 50161 YORK COMPUTER CENTRE 9 avgat C lawgate Yory 0904 641862 ELECTRONIC ARTS ELECTRONIC ARTS MARBLE MADNESS ABC/CONSTRUCTION SOFTWARE 135 St Leonards R ucester 0533 700190 ADAMSWORLD OF SOFTWARE 19 High Rd, North Finchley London N 01-446 7170 BITS & BYTES COMPUTERS lil Central Station Handleih S e p 051-709 4486 CASTLE COMPUTERS S Frances Passage Lancaster 0524 61133 CAVENDISH COMMODORE CENTRE 15 London Rd, Leicester 0533 550993 CHIPS COMPUTER SHOP 151-153 Linthe Rd Middleston 0642 219139 COMCAN (SCOTLAND) 17 Bath St. Glasgow 041 3325147 COMPUTER MAJIC 24 CEWE SI wich Sufik 0473 50965 COMPUTER MAJIC 51 St Andrews St South Buy St Edmunds Suffolk 0284 702305. COMPUTER WORLD 22 Market St. Loom Stoben ren 0782 319144 COMSOFT 48 Doke St Doldsm Scottont 0890 28542979 COMTAZIA 204 High S. Dudlex W. Midlands 0384 239259 CWMBRAN COMPUTER CENTRE 349 Llanta Rita C 06333 60996 G&B COMPUTER ELECTRONICS 13 Tottenham Court Hd London W 01-580 3702 GAMER Y East St. Brighton Sussex 0273 728681 GAMES ROOM In shops Undt 15Market Hall. E m 0372 44465 GB MICROLAND 7 Ourens Paradelandon Relatonile 0705259911 GOEL COMPUTER SERVICES 45 Boston Rd, Hewlond 01-579 6133 GREENS PHARMACEUTICAL 22 Market Way County 0203 520464 GULTRONICS 223 Tottenham Court Rd London WI 01-323 4612 STARFLIGHT AIRST ARCTICFOX VY Bard's Tale ELCTRONIC ARTS ELECTRONIC ARTS ARCTIC FOX THE BARD'S TALE I EL CIRONIC ARTS Not all titles are available on every machine format. Please consult your stockist for availability. Electronic Arts products are available from good software stockists, For a full broadsheet describing the complete range of information on your nearest stockist write to Electronic Arts, 11.49 Station Rd Langley, Berkshire SL3 BYN, England. Or call our Customer Services Dept. on 0753 46465 "


"Sereens as seen on Commodore 64 BIL2+ FUNCTIE HALF PIPE RESULTS .99 O CASSETTE CBM64/1289 SETE 113 SPECTRUM SPECTRUM+3 .99 AMSTRAD MSX IBM AMIGA f .99 CASSETTE .99 J CASSETTE PRIZISTO  DISK ACK! 24 DISK Now the Summer will surely last "


"fornia The smell of the surf, the sun on your back, the sand between your toes... This isn't California Dreamin' this is for reall Six of the best West Coast sports designed to set your pulse racing! Wow your friends with your Incredible flying skateboard feats, or show your cool hacking at the sack. Skate down the boardwalk, flip the Prisbee and wheelse the BMX. And then the ultimate test-that King of Californian sports shooting the curl as you battle with those giant Pacific rollers to decide which surfer truly rules the waves! You'll be playing for big name sponsors like Pacer Skateboards, Ocean Pacific RAD Mag. Prisbee Hacky Sack. Morey Boogie\"! Burton\" Snowboards and Bluebird and contained in each pack you'll find a fun to enter competition to win quality products made by these companies too! California Games features superb graphics, all the atmosphere of the West Coast, and one to eight players can take part. All the quality you expect from a Egyx product is here and so much more. We could tell you more but instead let's hear what the critios have to say instead: \"California Games is quite simply the apex of computer sports faming. Even in purely technical terms Epyx have somehow managed to surpass their own high standards the platures and sounds gonerated by this program are atmospheric beyond belief. If you gather up all the superlatives from previous Epyx reviews and add them together, you just might go halfway towards describing California Games\" ZAP 64 \"California Gomes has to be the best release this year so far. Some of the individual fames are almost worth the asking price on their own\". COMMODORE COMPUTING INERNATIONAL Need we say more? *GAMES TM Hollywood AOD SUNSET BLV +0800STOP TRUGES ist forever! d er songs from Ezine. US. Gold Burgham TAX "


"INTERNATIONAL HEROES Gang of Five meet Action Force Virgin's Gang of Five have created the excitement of an Action Force adventure for your computer COBRA, the enemy, are attacking the military installation on the island of Botsneda. A.W.E striker has been enlisted for the dangerous mission of rescuing classified information from the war-torn eastern sector. Your part in the mission is to cover A.W.E striker from the air. In the Spectrum version you are Snake Eyes, air-borne with a helipack. In the Commodore version you control Dragonfly helicopter. Both feature smooth scrolling, excellent graphics and fast arcade action that Gang of Five are famous for. You must clear a safe path for A.W.E striker to successfully complete the mission 1987 Milton Bradley International Inc Action Force Commodore 64/128 cassette .95, Spectrum 48/128 cassette .95 PAUSE ON ACTION FORCE E102 -052 80:001200 ACTION4FORCE10063 0000 U Snake Eyes forges ahead to deara safe path for AWE Striker Dragonfly must qux kly avoid a joint attack from FANG and a land based missie: Spectrum Commodore Please send me ACTION FORCE Please make crossed cheques or postal orders payable to Virgin Games Ltd and send to Virgin Games Ltd, 2/4 Vernon Yard, Portobello Road, London W11 2DX. Commodore 64/128 .95 cassette Spectrum 48/128 .95 cassette Name Address: PLEASE DO NOT POST COINS OR MONEY! Total enclosed "


"HEY Rock On the album closes with Looking in Your Eyes and I can really believe that Rocky's fingers must have been worn down to the knuckles when he finished It's the heavy heavy monster sound of this track. et's start this month's C+VG's musical magician Wayne Bootleg All in all twelve tracks of column off with a reply bringing you the low down on the sounds that mayhem, held together by to all the people who abound in his wild and wonderful world. stixsman Ralph Herrera's have had letters printed in the Check out the world's most evil rock band and 's most evil rock band and Cohesive drumming and Mailbag over the last couple of shake off those suicidal tendencies. All on the bassist Louiche Mayorga's months. tenacious solid rythmn. C+VG is a progressive next couple of pages. Highly recommended. magazine and it is clearly Anyway onto this month's have always been steeped in shown from the mail that we competition. Yes, once again I controvery. They were once  SLADE recieve that 99% of the people have a copy of each album to considered the most violent YOU BOYZ MAKE BIG NOISE out there who write in do give away to anyone who let band in L.A. and their attitued RCA PL71260 other things with their spare me know the name of the towards life and death \"Twenty one years and still laving with singer that left Van Halen to outraged many. making more noize than computers. One of the most follow his own solo career and Join The Army is The anyone else.\" popular is listening to music. had a hit single with Tendency's first U.K. release This is the quotation from Therefore we decided to Californian Girls. If that is too and what an album to start the back of Slade's new album include a music page. hard for some of you, don't their U.K. career off with! The and if they believe it then they At most computer shows a fret because I will give away an opening number on the album, must be going senile!! large amount of people either album to the person who sends 'Suicidal Maniac', lets you Compared to some of the wear badges or patches me the worst postcard that know what you are in for all albums I've reviewed in the showing the bands that they they can find!!! the way through the album. past, this album is about as like or listen to and these are Mike Muir's vocals cuts loud as a pin dropping at a usually related to various types SUICIDAL TENDENCIES through Rocky George's Motorhead concert. of metal bands. We therefore JOIN THE ARMY wailing lead guitar like a To give them credit Slade started off reviewing Metal VIRGIN V2424 jackhammer through have tried to dig themselves based music. There is a hard concrete. The pace accelerates out from their rut, but core support out there for When I first saw a picture of until they reach A little Each listening to the album you metal, but we realise it is not the Tendency, they were Day', which surprisingly by would think that they have everybody's cup of tea. So dressed in baseball caps, their standards is a slow, soft only done so half heartedly. being a flexible magazine, we bandanas, checked shirts, ballard-ish number. However, The first track Love Is a Rock, are trying to cover all aspects jeans and sneakers. I thought by the time the \"War Inside had me sitting up and paying of music. For example, last to myself \"Oh no the first of My Head' is reached they are attention. It is a loud, issue featured Metal, rock and the Beastie Boy clones!\" back at full pelt. booming number with an indie bands. This month pop, Listening to the album Side two hurtles along nicely unusually different from rock and middle of the road however made me drastically with Possessed to Skate and Slade's normal style. have been covered as well as alter my opinion. These boys Born to be Cyco being the However, from here-on-in metal. However to find out play like they live their lives; most outstanding tracks. The things slide down hill rapidly. what you really want from this radical and fast! latter of the two tracks has Tracks like Fools go Crazy page we need YOU to drop a Since they were formed in classic lyrics that go \"Cyco and She's Heavy slip quickly line to Rock On and tell us L.A., in 1982, The Tendency Cyco Cyco Cyco\"!!! Finally into the Slade traditional what YOU want to see mould and when you listen to covered in the column. The the other side they are firmly most original letters will win a back in the niche. Tracks like couple of albums that we Ooh La La In L.A. and Me haven't had the space to And The Boys do nothing to review. grab your attention. Right, now I've got off mry The album also suffers from soap box, I can deal with the over production. Slade use Competition winners. The three different producers, answer to the last competition including their own Jim Lea, was that Joey Belladona is the to give the album some lead singer of Anthrax. The variation. However, the only lucky winners pulled from the thing that they all get right is mailing were: Mr A Gail (best Don Powell's deep, wall Postcard winner), Gt shaking drum sound. For my Yarmouth; Rakesh Patel, tastes Dave Hill's guitar and Stockport, Pamlea Hannan, Noddy Holder's vocals just Dublin; Phil Parkinson, aren't loud enough to do the Oldham and P Bibber of album justice. London. Their albums will be I remember Slade when they with them shortly. continued on page 132 "


"buy the album (it is well worth the ear. DRAGGED IN a listen) and like it, you will However, when you listen MFN 69 never see the guy play live. to the album a few more times, Like Suicidal Tendency, this Why? Well, Quorthon has got Tony Mills vocals creep up on band was also formed in L.A. himself the basis of a band you then realise that he really around 1982, but that is the together, but all attempts to has an individual voice which has an individual voice which only thing these two bands play live have been thwarted. complements the music to have in common. The reason is that he plans to perfectiona. I was impressed These guys and I use the first started off, many years slay a lamb on stage, breath with the stylish way it was all term loosely are glam ago, and they were raw, brash, fire with a smashed guitar and put together by producer Neilrockers and wear enough original and exciting. Then vomit blood and these little Kernon and the band really do make-up to keep Max Factor over the years they faded away tricks have failed to appeal to give him a classy performance in business for the next twenty because they become club owners. I wonder to help him put his obviously years. They even look more consumerised, commercial why?!!!! great talents to good use. like women than the guys in rock. They are now trying to So there you have Bathory. I found a lot of different Stryper-and that's not easy! change back, but are finding it Probably the most evil group sytles here from slow moody On the music front though, difficult because of their lack in the world. ballads to fast rocky this album shows that the band of youth. Now let me think,  SHY screamers. The songs are are a set of very accomplished where did I put the Slade Live EXCESS IN ALL AREAS largely based around love and and competent musicians, who album? RCA PL71221 the problems asociated around have a unique sound. From BATHORY it. There are two points that I the first track Cry Tough they THE RETURN A couple of my friends saw feel I must mention that did set out their stall, showing that . UNDER ONE FLAG this band on tour with both upset me about the album: the they have an energetic, clean Meatloaf and Gary Moore a first point is the excessive us of sound to offer the listener. In the May edition of C+VG couple of months ago and told Pat Mckenna's keyboard. I Guitarist C.C. Deville handles I reviewed a band called me to look out for them as l ike keyboards to be played in his guitar like a true master, Stryper, who were a heavey they were very good live. a manner to complement the pulling off small tricky, solos metal christian band that This album grows on you. rythmn of the band and not which blast out at you in constantly stuffed their When I first played it, I sound louder than the guitar, sporadic bursts. Bobby Dail is religion down your throat. noticed that it was very clean which is what happens on this a competent singer, who has a sounding, snappy A.O.R. type album. The second is that crystal clear voice and this their match in Bathory music. The album has a crisp Vocalist Tony Mills has makes the lyrics easy to because what Stryper does for quality about it with swift, EXACTLY the same hair cut understand. I found it a Jesus, Bathory does for the nippy drumming from Alan as me and wears the same pleasant change to sit back and Devil. You see Bathory are Kelly and harmonic guitar cloths!! actually listen to someone Scandinavian satanists from from Steve Harris. The one If you like Styx, Boston, singing, without having to Sweden who are thought by song that stood out from the Toto and the like you will like constantly strain my ears. many to be the world's rest first time round was the this album I believe that this band can premier Death Metal band. rocky Break Down The Walls, only get better and look The \"band\" on this album with Harris's guitar playing POISON forward to the next album with (if you can it that) consists of proving immensely pleasing to LOOK WHAT THE CAT great relish one man, named Quorthon, who plays all the instruments on the album because he couldn't find anyone who could play fast enough and who looked crazy enough to fit in with his weird ideas. The music itself if prime thrash metal and Quorthon shows that he is the master of the many instruments he plays. Tortured screaming guitar solos, possessed demented drumming and bedevilled bass abound. Also Quorthon has a voice that reeks evil and darkness with its deep assured self confidence. I have never heard anyone sing like this before in my life. However, like Stryper, the lyrics are abysmal. Constant reference to the devil, death, pain and evil, with the off four letter words thrown in does'nt appeal to me at all. Names of some of the tracks like Sadist (Tormentor), Possessed, The Rite of Darkness and Son of The Damned will give you some idea what you are letting yourself in for. The guys attitude leaves a lot to be desired, because if you don't ZON LOOK NI WHAT DRAGGED Ta THE CAT CAT LA "


"A MEDIEVAL SMASH 'EM UP. - OF DEMOLITION & DESTRUCTION CREENSHOTS FROM CBM64/128 VERSION 6900 Knights in shining armour you certainly are not, more like black hearted villains as your marauding trio run riot through countless medieval landscapes, laying to waste fortress after fortress, castle after castle. Obviously you can't expect to have it all your own way, there'll be resistance from the peasants and gentlefolk and Middle Age masters but let that not deter three evil minded rogues on a path of demolition and destruction, Compulsive, fast moving action that'll keep bringing you back time after time. CBM64/128 AMSTRAD SPECTRUM TOMORROWS SOFTWARE TODAY .99 CASS .99 CASS .99 GO/ Media Holdings Lid. Unis 23. Molton Way_ r nd. Birmingham 88 TRX. TEL 02/3583388 .99 DISK .99DISK -TAPE Pamats is an original development from Future Concepts. Copyright from Debat D ted worldwide by Gol Media Holding "


"KON-02 "


"COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES "


"GET TO GRIPS WITH CBM 64/128 .99 .99 D AMSTRAD .99 .99 D SPECTRUM .990 ATARI ST .99 * * :1 GARY GARY LINEKER'S SUPERSTAR SOCCER EKER'S Take the brain teasing demands of football management, the mysterious quallties of team coach and add the explosive talents of a star striking centre forward and you've got Superstar Soccer an original and Innovative approach to the game of football that's every bit as breathtaking, every bit as exciting as Gary Lineker, England's premier striker. Alternative ALTERNATIVE WORLD GAMES Why be serious when there's so much fun in taking an alternative view on things. Represent the country of your choice in such events as Sack Racing. Log Flogging, Running up wall's, Pole climbing and Bloot Throwing. This Ingenious but hilarious spoof will have you in stitches, not to mention Rivers, Sacks, Piles of sand..come to think of it. It may get serious after all CBM 64/128 .99 D AMSTRAD .99 .99 D SPECTRUM .99 ATARIST .99 IIS A SHAT ERING EX Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 "


"HA GREMLIN GAME! CBM 64/128 .99 C .99 D AMSTRAD .99 .99 D SPECTRUM .990 COMPENDIUM Wacky, Wacky, Wacky is the best way to describe this adaption of the traditional board games compendium. Your hosts are the Winks, father Tiddly Wink and his wife, Mavis Wink. Up to four players can compete by taking the role of either one of the Wink children, the baby or the Wink dog. Play Snakes and Hazards where real snakes wriggle across the board, or the pub game where a rather drunk Tiddly Wink flips his beer glasses in the air for the rest of his long suffering family to catch! Old favourites Ludo and Bingo are not forgotten in this hilarious game for one to four players. BLOOD VALLEY Archveult the hideous and mighty leader of the Firedrake has decreed that you must be hunted down like an animal and brought to sentence. Your only chance of survival is to escape the valley. Do you have the will and resourcefulness to succeed not only against your opponent but the creatures and eerie beings of the fantasy world of Orb as well Based on the Duelmaster series of fantasy books by Mark Smith and Jamie Thampson, authors of The Way of the Tiger. CBM 64/128 .99 .99 D AMSTRAD .99 .99 D SPECTRUM .990 ATARI ST .99 KPERIENCE LACINIAI "


"Part One of C+vgs CHubetescom THIRD EARTH NEW HOME TO THE THUNDERCATS! WE HAD TO LEAVE AND OUR SPACE SHIP BROUGHT US HERE -HEY, LOOK THIS IS USELESS TYORA. HUNT ING WAS MUCH EASIER BACK ON THUNDERA. LOTS OF THINGS WERE LION-O BUT WE BOTH KNOW THAT OUR HOME PLANET IS NO MORE... SEE SERA . THUNDEGIS GHOST IN THE MACHINE PART ONE LOOKS LIKE OURS HASN'T BEEN THE ONLY SPACESHIP TO CRASH ON THE THIRD EARTH..! HOLD IT A SECOND LIONO CURIOSITY AND CATS DONT MIX TOO WELL REMEMBER  , ET'S TAKE A LOOK... "


"conc.... CASTRO TYGRA. I AM LEADER OF THE THUNDERCATS.. .. AND YOU'RE ALSO YOUNG AND IMPETuous! WE'LL INVESTIGATE. BUT LET'S GO CAUTIOUSLY. HUH? YOU'RE...RIGHT TYGRA I HAVE TO LEARNWAIT! THE EYE OE THUNDERA IT ONLY GLOWS LIKE THAT WHEN THERE IS DANGER NEARBY.. THE YESING WHAT'S THAT BEAM? YIL HIT THE SWORD.. PULLING IT!... HOLD ON LION-O. WE'VE GOT TO FIGHT IT' WHA-17 BY JAGA'S BEARD THE EYE, THe sou OUR THUNDERCAT POWER... RCE OF ONLY ONE WAY TO FIND OUT, TYGRA NOW WE HAVE TO GO... ...PLUCKED FROM THE SWORD LIKE A CORK FROM A BOTTLE. WHAT KIND OF POWER IS THAT ? "


"When the Creators of PARALLAX and WIZBALL decide to give away their Trade Secrets it has to be Something Special... SENSIBLE SOFTWARE'S CONSTRUCTION KIT INCLUDES GAMES IT IS! BERG CHILE Available from all good computer game stockists or Send Cheque/Postal Order for .95 (Commodore 64/128 Cassette) .95 (Commodore 64/128 Disk) plus 80p P&P Access and Barclaycard Holders telephone 01-278-0751 Outlaw Productions, 275 Pentonville Road, London N1 9NL part of the PALACE Group of Companies. "


"FROM THE ARCADES-A TIGRESS! Shin Nihon Kigakuior  1985 SNK ELECTRONICS CORP. the name of the game SPECTRUM COMMODORE .95 .95 Imagine Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 SNC Tel: 041 024 202. Tanul "


"\"INSIDE\" EMPTY AND LOOK, EVERYTHING'S COVERED IN THICK DUST! IT CAN'T HAVE BEEN DISTURBED FOR YEARS... so JUST WHO GENERATED THAT BEAM... AND WHERE IS THE EYE NOW? LOOK AROUND SEE IF THERE'S ANY PLACE IT COULD BE HMMM... WHAT'S THIS..?\" ... SOME FORM OF OPERATOR AMUSEMENT PROGRAMME INTERESTING... SCREEN SUDDENLY LICKERS INTO LIFE... NS DISC DEMON COMPUTER GAMES CHOICES TYGRA MUST HAVE TRIGGERED A SWITCHTHE SCREEN'S SO COMING: HEY! IT'S THE EYE! AMAZING! IT'S JUST A FLAT SCREEN, BUT THE EYE... IT LOOKS SO REAL! LIKE I COULD ALMOST REACH OUT AND... WERAMELD! "


"E CREW NGA WATANABE SSNK ECTRUM .95 COMMODORE -95 AMSTRAD .95 OMMODORE DISK .95 AMSTRAD DISK .95 Che name Imone Software (1984). 6 Central street Dr Che Same Manchester M2 5NS Tel. 061-834 3939 Telex 669972 "


"CALES BY THUNDERA! LION-O'S SOMEHOW FALLING THROUGH THAT SCREEN! HANG ON! I'LL HAUL YOU BACK... QUICK, LION-ORAB THE END OF MY WHIP! LION-O! LIONO COULDN'T HOLD IT. THE PULL WA: TOO GREAT! / LOST HIM. av NO ANSWER. WHAT IS THIS SCREEN? H-HOW CAN IT JUST SWALLOW SOMEONE LIKE THAT... SO MANY QUESTIONS BUT NONE OF THEM CAN HELP LION-O! THE ONLY WAY TO DO THAT... TO FOLLOW HIM bouche NEXT: THE OTHER SIDE OF TERROR! WA U MEME "


"THE ACTION-SIMULATION AIRBORNE RANGER MICROPROSE You are one of the elite ... parachuting alone behind enemy AIRBORNE RANGER.Achallenging combination of danger lines. The enemy controls the terrain, hidden in bunkers and and suspense. Available for the Commodore 64/128K. machine gun nests ...you may be surrounded. The action is Cassette .95 Disk .95. fierce as you control one soldier's battle against overwhelming odds. You'll need skill and strategy to outmanoeuvre your enemy, plus courage and some luck to make your escape. Airborne Ranger is an exciting fastpaced simulation with 12 desperate missions in 3 different SIMULATION. SOFTWARE regions of the world. The possibilities are endless! Please send -copy/ies of Airborne Ranger CBM 64/128 Cassette .95 Disk .95 Further details. Name (block capitals) Address Post Code AR/C+VG/1187 I enclose . including 55p P+P. Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd, or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date No. IIIIIIIII MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tlx: 43422 MPS/UKG No. "


"10 HIT GAMES OVER 220 E EXCITING EVENTS AND VAILABLE FOR AMSTRADE COMMODORE SPECTRUM SPECTRUM CASSETTE $12.95 DISK 31795 HI WEIGHT LIFTING PING-PONG BASKETBALL SOCCER VAULT SWIMMING : SHOOTING ARCHERY TRIPLE JUMPH PISTOL SHOOTING CYCLING SPRING BOARD DIVING GIANT SLALOM ROWING PENALTIES SKI JUMP TUG OF WAR TENNIS. BASEBALL BOXING SQUASH | SNOOKER/POOLEH "


"Sumbangan competition Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is November 16th and normal C+VG rules apply. Thundercats Ho! C+VG/ELITE THUNDERCATS COMPETITION Name Address Welcome to the lair of the cats — Thundercats that is! You've played the FREE, game on the front of this issue, read the comic strip NOW win our special Thundercats competition. The first prize is a Thundercat figure together with the ginormous Thundarr tank! Fight your own battles with Mum-Ra from the safety of this amazing armoured vehicle from Rainbow Toys. The first prize winner also gets a copy of Elite's latest game.  Second prize winner will get two Thundercats character figures PLUS a copy of the Elite game. Then 20 runners-up will get copies of the game. What do you have to do? Just answer these simple Thundercats questions set by our resident cool cat lan Machin! Once you've done that fill in the coupon below and rush it to Computer and Video Games Thundercats Competition, Priory Age_Computer  ROWING. PENALTIES. SKI JUMP. TUG OF WAR TENNIS BASEBALL BOXING. SQUASH  SNOOKER/POOL Ocean Software Limited Ocean House : 6 Central Street: Manchester: M2 SNS Telephone 061.832.6633. Telex 669922cm 1) Name the evil sorcerer who is intent on the complete destruction of the Thundercats. 2) What is the evil stronghold where Slithe, Monkian and Vultureman hang out called? 3) Name the members of the Thundercats team. "


"TWO NEW SPORTS SIMULATIONS FROM EPYX IT'S TOUGH ON TURSTALETS STREET SPORTS BASEBALL The Pitcher winds, throws, cracklits a long fly ball to... bang... right into the catcher's mitt. To make a home run you'll have to cope with makeshift diamond bases, made from sparetyres and trashcans, bushes, rocks even Squealing cars. Not to mention 16 neighbourhood playerseach with their own personalities and skills in pitching, hitting and fielding. With the right combination you could be the champs. With the wrong combination the chumps. You'll pick the place, the team, the positions, the CBM64/128 strategy and then you'll be in the middle of it all. It won't be easy but it's right up your street! .99 cassette .99 disk ACRYSH 8 STREETS IT'S TO NEIGHBOURHOOD BACK LOTS. HERE'S YOUR CHANCE TO JOIN IN AND MAKE YOUR TEAM THE CHAMPIONS! SOME OF THE MOST THRILLING AND ACTION PACKED BASKETBALL AND BASEBALL GAMES TAKE PLACE ON AMERICA'S STREET CORNERS AND STREET SPORT BASKETBALL You'll shoot hoops in dingy alleys, playgrounds, parking lots, occasionally even the suburbs chave fun dribbling on the lawn). You'll pick your three-strong team from the 10 toughest players in the neighbourhood. There's hot shooters and slow dribbler. Team players and show offls. There's guys who can shoot the eye out of a needle at 20 feet and guys who couldn't sink one if they were sitting on the backboard. Pass on the run. popem in from the corners, take a hookshot, a tip in. But don't dribble through the oil slick and for heavens sake watch out for the windows CBM 64/128. AMSTRAD .99 Cassette .99 Disk SPECTRUM 48/128K .99 Cassette Coming U.S. GOLD Com Epyx Al U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2) Holford Way Holford, Birmingham TAX. Tel: (021) 356 338 canso "


"PIRATES! CHASE FAME & FORTUNE ON THE HIGH SEAS The Action Adventure Simulation Pirates! The world's first swashbuckling simulation. Nonstop uction and Raid treasure-laden I negottate tbe greatest profits. bistorical drama take place galleons and plunder rich Success will determine ou the Spanish Main during ports. Learn to navigate to your status in later life. Hon the century and you play fence and to avoid mutin will you end your day's? A the leduling role-Privateer Uniquely: Pirates! prosperous noble or common Captain, espirale in all but combines the excitement of scoundrel? . an adventure story with the Pirates will be landing in Leap into this era of challenge of simulation all good softuare store's soon turbulence and change decision-making. You must time when daring choose the most lucrative adventurers can gain power expeditions, forge the most and wealib. fruitful alliances and Commodore 64/128. Disk .95. Cassette  MicroProse Software Ltd, 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tix: 434222 MPS/UKG "


"Thrill to the action as the legend comes to life! TNPIANTONES and the TEMPLE OF DOOM\" The Home Computer Version of the Atari Coin-Op Masterpiece 1985 Lucastim L and an Games Corporation reserved. Trademarks of Lucasfilm Lid, sed do Licensed to US Gold M, 23 Moto Holbord. Bringan 36 Telephone U.S. GOLD AWON Software We're giving away 5000 games -one of them could be yours! Pick up your trilby and trusty bullwhip and don the mantle of the legendary Indiana Jones! Prepare yourself for your most dangerous adventure yet-to storm the evil Temple of Doom and rescue the imprisoned children and the magical stones of Sankara! Beware the foes and hazards that block your way. The Thuggee guards will fight to the finish and poisonous cobra snakes will rise up in front of you. You will traverse perilous ledges, ride underground railways, and cross the bottomless fiery pit in pursuit of your quest! ATAR! ourage strength G A M E S and skill, Push yourself to the limit, ride your luck and the magical stones may just be yours! Yes! To commemorate the sale of US Gold's 5 millionth game in April this year, we are including a fantastic opportunity to win a game of your choice with every copy of Indiana Jones which itself and the Temple of Doom is set to become a software milestone. Here's all you have to do: Simply make your choice of game on the voucher to be found in each copy of Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom Should yours be one of the first 5000 vouchers to be drewnt you will receive the game of your choice absolutely free! The draw will take place on November 30th All vouchers to be included in the draw should be returned by October 30th IMODORE 64 cassette .99 bis .99 AMSTRAD Cassette .99 nisk .99 SPECTRUM 48k cassette .99 ATARI ST osx .99 Screens from Arcade Version "


"REPROUI 1. P1 28 DOD VE boro ON THE 15th NOVEMBER So you thought this issue of C+VG was hot, hot, hot! Wait until you see December's edition of Britain's best selling computer games magazine. You'll burn your fingers trying to get it off the shelf! And here's why .. AMA FREE on the front of this thrill packed ish you'll find some special fantasy-role playing figures yours to use in C+VG's exclusive Battletech role-playing board game. YOU become a member of the mean team out to win their freedom by getting rich quick on a radioactive planet packed with mutant weirdlings. Sounds like your idea of fun? Then grab a copy of December's C+VG before it grabs you! FREE inside there's a special Fantasy Role Playing pull-out supplement hosted by none other than C+VG's Wayne Bootleg. He'll be giving you the lowdown on all aspects of fantasy gaming -from Dungeons and Dragons to It's a Crime, from computer fantasy to board game battles. So which ever way the dice fall you know your next move should be down tothe newsagents to order a copy of Computer and Video Games! Next Month D Burn rubber with Britain's fastest man Nigel Mansell, the would-be world champ in the latest Formula One racing simulation. Race games are IN this winter but Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix is the closest you'll come to driving a turbo-powered Grand Prix racer. Experience the thrill in December's C+VG next issue! Want to know what's going on at U.S. Gold? Then check out our special run down on the games coming your way from the Golden Guys from Birmingham in the next dazzling issue of Computer and Video Games. *All items corrct at time of going to press. Demand for this special issue is going to be high-SO why not make sure of your copy by reserving one with you local firendly newsagent by filling in this form and handing it over the counter TODAY! ----Dear Mr Newsagent, Avoid a visit from Lt. Laww and reserve me a copy of Computer + Video Games, December issue! PUR GAMES Name Address "


"MOEBIUS dventure through a complex and colourful Oriental world of magic, mysticism and intrigue. Moebius fabled deity of the island Kingdom of Khantun has chosen you, his disciple, to reclaim the stolen Orb of Celestial Harmony from the renegade warlord. Featuring superbly animated martial arts and sword-fighting combat. Moebius is far better than other Far Eastern adventures. Strategically and tactically more challenging. this odyssey takes you through the realms of Earth, Water, Air and Fire. The dynamic playfield changes constantly as you travel across 26 terrain types, encountering earthquakes, rockslides, heavy rains and heat waves. Graphics are top-notch and you can communicate with all the townspeople, There are 2 distinct magic systems, mixed combat modes and a fearsome array of enemies. Strategy planning and quick thinking are essential to reach the final confrontation in this engaging and unique fantasy. Moebius fills both sides of two disks and is available for the CBM 64. Amiga, Atari ST and Apple. Prices from .99. he Black Bella C HHORIGIN anal Arts Games WSYSTEMS INC. SYSTEMS INC MICROPROSE MicroProse Software Ltd. 2 Market Place Tetbury, Gloucestershire GLB BDA. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tix: 43422 MPS/UKG "


"SSSSS TISLAINE The Com petition Hey, Slaine fans, this is your chance to get hold of some truly barbarian goodies. Start filling in the form below or prepare to kiss my axe! First prize, thanks to Martech, is a framed copy of last month's fabulous artwork featured on the front of last month's C+VG. PLUS a Slaine T-shirt. PLUS three great Slaine books. PLUS a copy of the game. The next 25 runners-up will get a copy of the game, so don't forget to specify whether you've got a Spectrum, Commodore 64 or Amstrad. III. SLAINE/MARTECH COMPETITION All you've got to do is answer these three simple Slaine questions. 1 Name the comic author who created Slaine? CERTAIN YOU ARE THE HERO YOU ARE Answer..... 2 Which comic does he feature in? ANUNG ERIES claims 3 What is the name of Slaine's trusty axe? 220 Name Address............................ ............ cheking Please indicate which computer you own Spectrum Amstrad Commodore 64 My T-shirt size is SML Send you answers to Slaine Competition, Computer+Video Games, Priory Court, 3032 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is October 16 and the editor's decision is final. "


"ADVENTURE ZONE news Welcome to the Adventure Zone! Anything can the bar to ponder it all. happen within the next few pages and So what has all this to do probably will as Keith Campbell, C+VG's master with computers? Considering that computers are not only Each month the C+VG of the mystic arts, brings you news, reviews and the subject of many sci-fi Mailbag is bursting with helpful hints from the wacky world of yarns these days, but are letters from adventurers. adventuring. So please don't adjust your also, through games, vehicles We try to answer all thesemagazine-reality will be resumed as soon as by which sci-fi may be dispensing help and advice, expressed there was very whenever we can. possible... little in the way of In conjunction with the competition or software. Four Adventurer's Club, a free the more expensive disk of answering their own small rooms were devoted to one-year subscription is adventures. questions rather than the this important sector of the awarded each month to the Colin clinched his award ones posed. business, and the whole area C+VG reader who has come when writing about the In fact, the whole affair was was cut off from the main up with something a bit adventure he is currently so American, one wondered proceedings by two flights of special, adventurewise. programming in C on why it had been staged in this stairs and a long corridor, as So get writing-YOU could Amstrad 6128. Worried about country. Certainly, within the if computers were best be the lucky adventurer to the difficulties of marketing Worldcon, American was the forgotten. win the next award, and have the adventure when it is universal language-making Old faithfuls, Level 9 were all the facilities of the ACL complete, he asked who not only us Brightonians, but there, demo-ing their latest free for a whole year! This could help assess its all Britons, feel a minority Knight Orc, with Mike and includes a bi-monthly dossier potential, and advise him how group. Pete putting in an containing reviews, hints, and to go about selling it. Only a mere smattering of appearance on alternate This is one of the services at Italian and Spanish could be days. Bridge, Pete Austin, Fergus which ACL excels, and so heard above the grating Next door was a room McNeil, Richard Bartie, and Colin was judged to be not twang coming from the sponsored by Gamer, Keith Campbell only deserving of the award dealers' room the large Brighton's leading computer Plus a discount mail-order but likely to gain maximum exhibition hall at the games emporium. Here service for adventure benefit from being an ACL Metropole, where all mannercould be seen Nigel Brooks software, a game-author member. of things sci-fi were on sale to of Smart Egg Software, support service, and phonedevotees. introducing Rigel's Revenge, in Helpline The end of August saw 5 There you could buy a sci-fi adventure recently And if you are already an the return of the World anything from a cheap released by Mastertronic, to ACL member, don't worryScience Fiction secondhand paperback of the world. your existing subscription will Convention to the UK its first dubious literary value to the But nowhere were sci-fi be extended by one year! appearance here since 1979. latest overpriced glossy computer games being sold, Named Conspiracy '87, the hardback, anything from role nor were adventure authors The very first C+VG/ACL event was held in Brighton playing miniatures to involved in any of the award goes to Marco As well as round the clock fantastic garments in which to highbrow discussions. Surely Andreoli, of Turin, Italy. A film shows, the Hugo Awards role-play. Floyd has more to do with regular C+VG reader and ceremony, and other events, There were t-shirts, old sci-fi than miniature avid adventurer, Marco leading names from the comics, posters... you name unpainted figures of Orcs? begged Keith to tell him science fiction world, it, it was available, including Where were you Infocom? where in Italy he would be addressed their adoring a copy of Ade Edmondson's Where were you, adventure spending his holiday this public in talks, discussions, How To Be A Complete writers? year. and demonstrations Bastard. What connection this Marco was there to greet throughout the five day great work cold possibly Robico Software, whose Keith with an impressive scroll period, on the hour every have with science fiction still adventures have proved welcoming him to Tuscany on hour, in each of three had me baffled A popular with BBC behalf of himself and friends, meeting rooms. Perhaps it was a lesson in owners, has now released The a group of adventurers Harry Harrison addressed \"How To Be A Complete Rick Hanson Trilogy for the calling themselves The Guild an audience on the subject Dealer\" and shift as much old Amstrad. Whilst expanding of the Rising Star. \"Stainless Steel Rat Speaks stock as possible. the machine range they A well-deserved award, as Esperanto\", Brian Aldiss gaveM ind you, I couldn't resist support, Robico are sticking to deliver the Scroll, Marco away the secrets of how to picking up a handful of with the BBC for had to make a six hour train write a best seller, whilst other paperbacks at a snip of a development. journey from Turin to big names in the sci-fi world price-cheap only because Robert O'Leary is currently Viareggio included Terry \"Colour of had a Press pass, and hadn't re-writing the Robico parser Magic\" Pratchett, Gerry been caught for the  per on an Archimedes machine, Colin Joss of East Lothian \"Thunderbirds\" Anderson, day admission fee. and it is on the Archimedes wins the September Frederick Pohl and At the appointed hours, all that future development will e award, for an interesting filmmaker Ray Harryhausen. those aficionados who had be based. This paves the way discourse on the way The one discussion I called purchased books, queued for Archimedes versions of adventures are splitting into in on, was packed to devotedly to have their Robico adventures, although two main fields. The cheaper capacity with an array of treasured possession at present there are no budget titles on cassette, and authors, all American as far autographed at a series of definite plans to produce any the more in-depth quality of as I could tell, making a meal mass sign-ins. Me? I made for games in this format. "


"ADVANCE WARNING ring cies our to EXCITING NEW SOFTWARE IS READY TO GO! Tea of BE FIRST OFF THE MARK. ILABLE AT LAR LARGER AVAILAB TRANT DOOD AMSTRAD DISKS .99 CASSETTES .99 SPECTRUM .99 ATARI ST DISKS .99 CBM 64/128 DISKS .99 88 TRANTOR WIZARD WARZ CAPTAIN AMERICA BRAVE Go! Media Holdings Limited, Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX Tel: 021 356 3388 STARR LAZERTAGE I SIDEARMS "


"ADVENTURE preview YES, PRIME MINIS SUPPLER: MOSAIC PUBLISHING/ OXFORED DIGITAL ENTERPRISES MACHINE: SPECTRUM ($14.95)/ BBC B (CASS $14.95, DISK $19.95)/CBM 64/128 (CASS $14.95. DISK $19.95)/AMSTRAD (CASS $14.94, DISK $19.95) REVIEWER. KEITH 09 18 Now and again. It is refreshing to sit back and play through a game at a reasonable pace, without having to rack one brains at every step. Yes, Prime Minister is just such a game, and although there are no puzzles, there are some very tricky decisions to make, and plenty to think about during play. For a period of five days you become Jim Hacker, the country's best loved Prime Minster who never was. The game is based very closely on the very popular BBC comedy series -so closely, in fact, that the result is quite astonishing, and very entertaining. You operate from your office, which is represented graphically, viewed from your was the hallmark of my side of the desk. The objects premiership So I'll around the room are icons, probably win the next and selecting them using a election hand-shaped cursor, moved the real play comes during smoothly around by either the meetings, which take Joystick or control keys, allow place in dialogue form, desk drawers to be opened, throughout which you have to phones to be answered, and make decisions. other functions activated. How would you deal with Play is in real time, and such thomy issues as the your clock is a constant need for a new nuclear reminder of your power station? What are you appointments for the day, to do to avoid becoming a which are found written in laughing stock when your your diary you can bet ir daughter manges to get her Humphrey will not be car wheel-clamped outside pleased if you miss one! number 10? And how about As PM life is never dull, for reducing teachers' pay if during the odd few moments their pupils' exam results when you are not attending a don't come up to scratch? meeting you're kept on the The situations throughout go the whole time. the game are generated on Bernard keeps plonking a random basis. Not all topics urgent messages on your come up in every game, and desk, and if you're not It's unlikely that you will get dealing with one of these, the same combinations there are two phones and twice. Intercom to keep you busy, At the end of each day. as well as felex messages to data for the next day must be receive. loaded into the program Behind the Union Jack on before proceeding. the wall is hidden a safe, in If you haven't had which the latest opinion poll experience in making prime ratings are kept. The object is ministerial decisions, don't to increase these from the worry. Bernard and Sir initial 50%. Humphrey are always on Somehow, I managed hand to point you in the right never to register an increase direction--usually the one in a slippery slide into which they want you to go! unpopularity verging on hate, The cross talk between the two of them, and their Interaction with you, is extremely well implemented, and conveys the mood of the TV series and the facets of the characters in it more closely than any other game I have seen. SECRETARY OF THE CARNET YES PRIME MINISTER THE COMPUTER GAME IS. PRIME MINISTER Ser Humpy Apple.C.R. STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL COMPUTER USERS ONLY "


"STER The only difference here is Now for the questions. Answer them correctly that you are in the hot seat, and send your answers to Yes, Minister and feel that you have Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory actually taken on the characteristics of Jim Hackerl Coun, 30-32 Faringdon Lane, Le Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The dialogue is The closing date is November 16th. Impeccably written, and as might be expected, Sir Humphrey often comes out with sentences a whole screenful long, superficially profound, but absolutely Questions THE 1) What was Jim Hacker's position before he became Prime Minister? Was it A. Foreign Secretary. B. Secretary of State for Administrative Affairs. C. Chancellor of the Exchequer. Answer. 2) What is the name of the actor who plays the part of Jim Hacker? Is it A. Paul Eddington. B. Garry Williams. C. Richard Briers. meaningless in reality! All in all, a thoroughly enjoyable and untauding game, that is every bit as fun as watching the TV programme. Paul Eddington, Nigel Hawthom, and Derek Fowlds positively jump out of the screen. Answer 3) Who was Britain's youngest Prime Minister? Was it A. William PIH. B. William Tell. C. William of Orange. TEXT > ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL  VALUE COMPETITION Tie Break. In not more than 25 words say which computer game character you would like to see as Prime minister, and why? Answer: YES PRIME MINISTER COMPETITION Name A week is a long time in politics, or so a famous politician once said. But do you think you could survive five days? Well here's your chance to find out with C+VG/Mosaic's Yes, Prime Minister competition. Mosaic's game is based on the highly successful television comedy series. You play the part of Prime Minister Jim Hacker who, with the help of his faithful civil servants Sir Humphrey and Bernard, must survive a turbulent week of Westminster politics. You've probably read Keith Campbell's review of the game already. And now we're offering you the chance to get the game and some other Yes, Prime Minister goodies. But first the prizes. The winner will receive a copy of Yes, Prime Minister -The diaries of the Right Hon James Hacker Volume II, the 1988 Yes, Prime Minister Diary and a copy of Mosaic's game. The fifteen runners-up will get a copy of the game. Address Please indicate which computer you own. Spectrum CBM 64 BBCB Amstrad Amstrad PCW D PCs and compatibles. "


"TRANTOR THE LAST STORM TROOPER The order of the solar system as kept for thousands of years by the people of Zyber was coming apart. Growing dissatisfaction in outlying planet bodies increased as their technological achievements reached greater height Zyber reacted in the only way len to it whilst the technological advantage remained in its hands. And no Trantor was brought From out of the ranks of the wanions forces where a brutal treak and rebellious nature made sure his talenta never realised their full potential. His credentials were perfect his mission was simple, to lead aband of outlaw mercenaries and smash the growing power of the New World NEBULITHONE before Its atomic threat tumed into an awesome cataclysm of conflict. But the Nebithons were not unprepared and when on return from reconnaisance scouting. Trantor found the remains of his undercover force scattered amongst the allen landscape along with the last fragments of his battle cruiser, he felt the hate and mage surge through his body and within the ice cold compartment of his mind, he recognised the burden that now lay with him, that all now depended on he Trantor, the Last Stormtrooper. SPECTRUM +3 .99 SPECTRUM 48/128K .99 AMSTRAD TAPE .99 Disk .99 CBM 64/128 Tape .99 Disk .99 Coming soon on Atari ST .99 0.00 (003 GO Screenshot from Amstrad version Screenshots from Spectrum version TOMORROW'S SOFTWARE TODAY Units 2/3. Holford Way. Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX Tel: 021 356 3388 probe "


"De Castle Computers CASTLE HOUSE 11 NEWCASTLE STREET BURSLEM STOKE-ON-TRENT TEL: 0782 575043 (10 LINES) WE'RE GETTING READY FOR XMAS! SPECTRUM SPECIAL OFFERS EXPRESS RADER INTERNATIONAL KARATE 275 SPECTRUM SPECIAL OFFERS SCALEXTRIC 6.95 CATCH 23 VULCAN ARMY MOVES ARKANDID BISMARK C64 SPECIAL OFFERS A MADHALLS MATCHDAY OD STEALTH FIGHTER 6.25 8.25 10.95 . CA SPECIAL OFFERS . LEVIATHAN 395. . HOWER THE DUCK 299 054 SPECIAL OFFERS ALLEYCAT BOULDERDASH CON KIT C CLIDER RICER TRAP DOOR MUTANTS SPECTRUM SPECIAL OFFERS NO COMBAT SCHOOL 5.25 CONONI MAD BALLS 5.25 5.25 GAME SET & MATCH PHA L RASTAN NAVY MOVES MATCHDAY PSYCHO SOLDIER VICTORY ROAD THUNDERCATS BUGGY BOY OUTAUN These Prices Only Apply 2.99 THEATRE EUROPE BATTLE OF BRITAIN FOOTBALL MANAGER GHOSTS & GOBLINS 3.95 FA CUP FOOTBALL SAS STRIKEFORCE GROWING PA MOLE CITY SLICKER VIRGIN ATLANTIC CHALL 1.99 3.95 2.95 SYCHO SOLDER COMBAT SCHOOL VICTORY ROAD OUTRUN SUPER SPRINT RASTAN GRYZOR PHANTYS THUNDERCATS 675 6.25 A 525 SHORT CIRCUIT ASTERIX PSIS TRADING CD ASSAULT MACHINE PARALLAX 2.99 299 STARGLIDER 10.50 5.95 THE PAWN THE BOGGIT 2.99 DANTES INFERNO RESCUE ON FRATACUS 1.99 FOOTBALL MANAGER WELCOACH INTERNATIONAL KARATE 2.99 BREAKTHROUCH 2299. CRYSTAL CASTLES KUNG FU MASTER 2.99 SIGMA + TOMAHAWK 12.99 NOW GAMES 4 5.95 2.99 DOMARKS REVENGE 4.95.  WORLD GAMES MOVIE MONSTER HYDROFOOL KILEO UNTIL DEAD BARBARIAN MYSTERYARHAM MANOR SUPER SPRINT CALIFORNIA GAMES 6.96 6.95 $50 6.95 6.50 DEACTIVATORS TAG TEAM WRESTLING GOLF CONST SET NUCLEAR IMBARGO MISSION ELEVATOR BAZOOKA BILL EN CVA FORCE TRESTOR RENEGADE BUBBLE BORBLE LAST NINJA W CLASS L'HOARD TAIPAN   CENTURIONS RODE RUNNER HIT PACK O VOLI HIT PACK G VOL GUNSHIP EXELON SIDEWIE These Prices Only Apply If Games Ordered in Advance HIT PACK VOL 1 TAIPAN 8.50 RENEGADE 6.50 BUBBLE ROLE W CLASS LBOARD ORBEX THE TERRORBALL 2.99 7.50 2. BOBBY BEARING FALCON PATROL 1.99 + COBRA CUPS  STAINLESS STEEL 2.99 BREAKTHROUGH KUNG FU MASTER . CRYSTAL CASTLES RAMBO BANGKOK KNIGHTS FA CUP FOOTBALL 2 99 1.99 BATTALON COMMANDER COMIC BAKERY DURREL BIG 4 5.50 LAST MISSION MASK CALIFORNIA GAMES INDIANA JONES SOLOMONS KEY MASK 6.95 5.95 6.95 NODES DE YESO INFOOROID IC.U.P. S QUARTE 5.95 ESCAPE SINGE CASTLE ROCKY HORROR SHOW SPLIT PERSONALITIES TIGERS IN THE SNOW DEATH WISH : ARMAGEDOON MAN RED LEO 9.50 6.50 NINA HAMPSTER INDIANA JONES SLAP FIGHT 10th FRAME 6.95 695 KNIGHT GAMES . SILENT SERVICE VILTRATOR 5.50 2.99 3.95 MUST GO! SILLY PRICES! SURVIVOR PAPERBOY ATHENA CENTURIONS RYGAR RODE RUNNER SLAP FIGHT SURVIVOR ELITE GUNSHIP REVS5.95 6.95 GRIDRUNNER DEEP STRIKE THANATOS DAN DARE HIVE KINETIK E HOOK 3.95 X THE PER YEAR KUNG FUI AVENGER BISMARK CYARIS DEATH OR GLORY CONVOY RAIDER SPACE HARRER SENTINEL NOW GAMES 4 SIPERHUEY TIGER MISSION 5.95 10:50 HOT RUNESTONE SKY RUNNER SORCERY VARILE MAONESS CON KIT SOREDONS SHADOW HEARTLAND SENTINEL PEGASUS BRIDGE GAME OVER ENDURO RACER 1.99 2.99 1 99 2.99 2.99 2.99 STAR PAWS STAR GAMES SALE NOW ON! 054 DISCS BORED OF RINGS WOLRD TOUR GOLF W CLAS L BOARD THE INHERITANCE SHADNS AOAD BOBBY BEARING CAMELOT WARRIORS AMSTRAD SPECIAL OFFERS ST SPECIAL OFFERS 2.99 TOP GUN 305 BARBARIAN PALACE 11.95 XEVIOUS 1050 BATMAN EAGLES NEXT NOMAD BOULDERDASH 5.95 AUTO DUEL ROAD RUNNER DEATH STRIKE 4% ENEGADE DEGAS FLITE 495 ENDURO RACER 695 BUREAUCRACY 6.95W CLASS L BOARD 95 MOONMIST 299 SPACE HARRIER 95 KINGS QUESTI 4.95 AMTIX ACOLADES 95 GOLDEN PATH 5.95 BIG SLEEZE 95 HOLLYWOOD HIJINX 595 NODES OF YESOO STRATREX STARSTRIKE 2 BALANCE OF POWER DODGY GESZERS STAP POKER VERA CRUZ GANDALF THE SORCERER 1 CUPS MISSION ELEVATOR JUDGE DREDD || THDH DRAGONS LAIR SKYRUNNER ST CHAMP WRESTLING ROCK N WRESTLE RAMA BREAKTHROUGH THE BOGGIT WINTER CAUS STARGL DER TAIPAN RENEGADE ARMY MOVES FLIGHT SIMULATOR 1 PHANTASIE II AMIGA SPECIAL OFFERS 1095 FLIGHT SIMULATOR HARDWARE BARGAINS 13 GULD OF THIEVES SPECTRUM +2 .95 17.95 BARBARIAN 17.95 17.95 TERRORPODS 17.95 GOLD RINNER SPECTRUM +3 .95 17.95 AMSTRAD 464 MONO .95 FAERYTALE ADVENTURE AMSTRAD 464 COLOUR .95 22.95 MEAN 18 GOLF 21.95 22.95 SUPER HUEY ATARI 520 STM .00 14.50 WIZARDS CROWN 21.95 In UUSIM 22.95 ROADWAR 2000 14.50 SPACE BATTLE ATARI 520 STEM .00 22.95 PHALANX 14 50 DEVOTION S AMIGA 500 MOD .00 14. SO STATIONFALL AMIGA 500 SOFTWARE .00 14.75 BUREAUCRACY 14.75 STARGLIDER AMSTRAD 1512 FROM .00 14.75 ADVENTURE CON SET 21.95 42.50 UNINVITED 21.38 AMSTRAD 1640 FROM .00 17.95 TEMPLE OF APSHARTS) 12.95 17.95 SINBAD 21.95 ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT CARRIAGE  EXTRA 17.95 KARATE KIDIR 1795 6.95 STRIP POKER 17.95 FARL WEAVER BASEBALL SEGA MASTER SYSTEM .95 17.95 CHESSMASTER 2000 17.95 22.95 GFL FOOTBALL LIGHT PHASER .95 WINTER CAMS THE NINJA 19.95 SUPER TENNIS 14.95 14.95 ENDURO RACER 19.95 MY HERO 14.95 14.50 BORROWED TIME 17. WORLD SOCCER 19.95 TRANSBOT 14.95 22.95 DEADLINE 21.95 QUARTET 19.95 ROCKY 24.95 17.95 ENCHANGER 21.95 OUT RUN 24.95 SPACE HARRIER 24.95 17.95 ITNESS 21.95 POA STARCROSS CHOPLIFTER 19.95 WONDER BOY 19.95 14.95 DELUXE PAINTI 51,95 GANGSTERTOWN 19.95 ASTRO WARRIOR 19.95 17,95 DELUXE MUSIC KIT $1.95 BLACK BELT 19.95 WLD GRAND PRIX 19.95 AMIGA A500 470.00 INFOpoin TAIPAN RENEGADE EPICS EPYX 3.95 2.99 10.50 10 50 GRANGE HELL SPINDIZZY SHOCKWAY RIDER SHORT CIRCUIT FARLIGHT CITY SLICKER STRIKE FORCE COBRA DEFENDER OF CROWN TEMPLE OF APSHIT BISMARK RODE RUNNER CUILD OF THIEVES BAAAAAIAN NINJA MISSION SILENT SERVICE W CLASS L BOARD HITCHHIKERS GUIDE SILICON DREAMS 1050 NOW GAMES 3 10 50 14.95 AMSTRAD DISCS W CLASS L BOARD RENEGADE TAIPAN SLAP FONT 1095 THEY'RE ALL SSI DISCS TO CLEAR!  12.95 REBEL CHARGE OE CHICKAMAGA SHARD OF SPRING GEMSTONE HEALER PANZER GRENADIER LURKING HORROA THE BAROS TALE 4.95 3.95 WORLD GAMES 3.95 GOLD RUNNER THE SENTINEL 4.95 AIRBALL 495 TRACKER PING PONG MOVIE STAINLESS STEEL SHAOLINS ROAD 3.95 9.95 12.95 ANY GAME NOT RELEASED WILL BE SENT ON DAY OF RELEASE BEST SERVICE, BEST PRICES PHONE US NOW. WE WON'T BE BEATEN P.P. Free on order over . Under  add 50p. Overseas  per game "


"ADVENTURE reviews SPACE QUEST Oo CON comment about the saved position can be tagged to identify each of up to twelve save files. This is a big colourful game, full of sound and  SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION action. There's a lot of fun to  MACHINES: ATARI ST: this means you have to find each file must be be had exploring the paths (.99) AMIGA; APPLE II; an escape pod, and discover laboriously copied with and crevices on the planet MACINTOSH; IBM PC: (.99) how to fly off in it. manual intervention. that the pod eventually lands REVIEWER: KEITH This task contains all the And the copy protection on. pitfalls one would expect in a method used requires that Space Quest is an The noise of the alarm more conventional text the original disk be used to adventure that should satisfy awakens me from my illicit adventure, involving start loading the game up. arcade-adventure slumber in a janitor's operating the docking bay Presumably this has to be a enthusiasts, at the same time cupboard aboard the space doors, airlock, and the pod good disk-So why bother offering an interesting station. Lights are flashingitself. with the chore of copying? the station has been Then there's always the challenge with a difference Secondly, the SAVE feature, for enthusiasts of the programmed to self destruct! chance that you may have which requires a separate, left a crucial object behind, traditional adventure format. There's no time to lose... pre-formatted disk, takes a VOCABULARY As a lowly janitor there's no undiscovered. bit of getting used to. ATMOSPHERE way I have access to the At any stage in the game. However, once mastered. it PERSONAL docking bay and the escape text commands may be does have the advantage VALUE pod so I'd better try and find entered, and the responses that quite a lengthy someone with an authority card. Trouble is ... there's nobody around. Or rather, there are plenty of bodies around, but only dead ones! I resort to the grisly task of frisking the corpses to try and find what I need. A rather frantic hunt it is too, for as soon as the countdown has finished it's KABOOM!! This is an animated 3D adventure in the style of King's Quest, but with rather more adventure and puzzles. At the start of the game, two corridors are shown one above the other, with blocking walls, and are interconnecting lifts. shown in The player guides a spritely text windows little fellow around with superimposed joystick or mouse. on the graphic He can pass either side of screen. A touch obstructions, but will stop on the RETURN key when he collides with one returns the player unless manoeuvred around it. to mouse/joystick If this sounds a bit like an mode. arcade adventure, it is. But However, whilst the very little arcade skill is game can be required, and the puzzles recommended, there and text input are more are a couple of rather typical of a conventional clumsy features in the adventure. Most of the way the software operates. graphics occupy the full The owner is advised to screen, and many are make a backup copy of superbly animated. each disk before starting out The objective of the first always a sensible stage of the game is to precaution escape the space station But the ST disk will not back before it explodes, and to do up using the Diskcopy facility DA "


"THE HUNT COMPETITION Here's YOUR chance to win a free copy of The Hunt Search For Shauna! Robico are offering 10 cassettes plus 10 discs for the first correct answers opened on 16 November. ALL entrants will get FREE membership of the ROBICO SOFTWARE CLUB, normally costing , simply by ticking the box! Send your completed coupon to: Robico Adventure Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU, to reach us by November 16th. SUPPLIER: ROBICO MACHINES: BBC B CASSETTE: need a code before you can ($9.95); ELECTRON CASSETTE: do so. Spoilsports! (.95), BBC B 40 TRACK DISC: The graphics look as if they (.95. MASTER COMPATIBLE); have been done on the GAC, BBC B 80 TRACK DISC: ($12.95. although this is not MASTER) REVIEWER: JOHN YEATES mentioned. The tape version has graphics in every Beeb adventurers all know location, and the disk version and love Robico games, and loads up better graphics in now their latest is here the about 20 of them. Some gre first with graphics. rather nice, even if not up to The Hunt Search For Amiga standards. There are Shauna involves you, the pilot clues in the pictures. of a space craft, in the hunt The adventure has about for crewmember Shaung, who 100 locations, and uses a full has been kidnapped. sentence input system but Your first task is to escape pe you can only input one from the spaceship-no sentence per command. As great shakes, as it tells you usual, there are a few vocab how in the instructions. Once problems but for disk users in you have sneaked through trouble, .LOAD HUNT2 views Customs, you can explore the memory from &5100 onwards space station and start The HELP command just searching tells you not to be lazy-well No Klingons on the thanks a bunch, guys! starboard bow, although Currently I am having there are a load of tame problems negotiating the robots who trundle around maze maybe I should draw carrying things, and a map for once in my life? generally doing little else. Opening a door with a plate There is also a maze (heigh on it is also a problem, and ho, here we go again) and of course, getting past the some weird humour like the obligatory zaper which kills area marked BERTH you if you try to pass is just CONTROL Now if I could just impossible at the moment. get in there... You may have guessed by In the space taxi, you can now that I like this game. Nice go and visit other people's graphics, good text, logical spaceships-you DO puzzles, no sound (shame!) remember where and a good plot. But why did you parked they have to use a disk box yours? that disintegrates when the but you Post Office gets at it? VOCABULARY 8 ATMOSPHERE C+V010 PERSONAL HN! VALUE C+VG/ROBICO ADVENTURE COMPETITION NAME If I win I would like (tick ADDRESS box) Electron Cassette BBC Cassette BBC 40 Track Disk BBC 80 Track Disk 1. Name three actors who have played the part of Dr. Who. 2. Name the two robots in Star Wars. 3. Who wrote The Day Of The Triffids? I wish to receive FREE membership to the Robico Software Club (tick box) YES O No O Complete this coupon and post to C+VG/Robico Adventure Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. "


"Have you warned the neighbours you're getting a * MASTER SYSTEM Sega Cards [14.95 My Hero [14.95 Ghost House [14.95 Transbot E14.95 Super Tennis 14.95 F-16 Fighting Falcon .95 Teddy Boy Mega Cartridges [19.95 Action Fighters Choplifter Black Belt .95 Pro Wrestling Shooting Gallery .95 Wonder Boy $19.95 Quartet .95 Fantasezone .95 Great Golf World Soccer $19.95 Gangster Town .95 .95 Enduro Racer World Grand Prix .95 .95 Secret Command Alex Kidd in .95 Mirrical World Two-Mega Cartridges .95 Space Harrier $24.95 Enduro Racer The new Sega Master System games console puts an arcade into your home. Working from either card or cartridge the amazing games give screen after screen of almost arcade quality graphics. These machines will be in short supply and much sought after so ISM are giving you the chance to beat the rush and be the first in your neighbourhood to own one of these .95 remarkable systems. There is a terrific range of games available and some .95 almost unbelievable peripherals like the Light Phaser and 3D glasses!! Don't miss out, .95 but warn your neighbours. DZSTAN Zillon VOOR For just .95 you get * The games machine * A free game * 2 Sega control pads With your system you * A power pack including a 3 pin plug $24.95 will receive a 10% discount voucher * AT.V. aerial switcher box Rocky against your next software purchase, * A free built-in mystery game for you to find Outrun $24.95 and automatically be enrolled in the P. & P. Free in U.K. ISM—Sega club, which will keep you updated with future developments. Make cheque or postal order payable to ISM and send to: ISM, DEPT CVG, 1 RUSSLEY GREEN, WOKINGHAM, BERKSHIRE RG11 1BR TEL: 0734 774942 .95 Missial Defence Are you horrible enough to go on the "


"OPPORTUNITIES In-House and Free-Lance Technical Staff Having established the key elements of a well organised and equipped 'in-house' software development team, the company has the following opportunities to offer in Entertainment Software Development. Senior Programmers-O.T.E. K Having been responsible for at least one technically excellent (though not necessarily commercially successful entertainment software product you will be experienced in 280, 6502 and/or 68000 assembler. You will be looking for an opportunity to join an in-house' environment committed to the development of original products and conversions of the very highest quality and will expect to call on graphics, music and other support functions of the highest calibre. Programmers -O.T.E. K Though not necessarily able to show direct involvement in any commercially available entertainment software products, you will be able to demonstrate through specific routines and demo programs, a high degree of technical ability in 280, 6502 or 68000 assembler. You will be looking for an opportunity to realise your ambition to be responsible for the development of technically excellent entertainment software products and will expect to call on graphics, music and other support functions of the highest calibre. Graphic Artists/Musicians/Game Designer-O.T.E. -K with or without formal qualifications you will already be working in a freelance or in house capacity supporting programmers in your specialist discipline in the development of commercially available/to be published entertainment software products. You will be able to demonstrate a number of different examples of your work and will be looking to put your experience to use whilst developing it further in the production of commercially available products All appointees to the above positions will be offered an attractive working environment, substantial basic salary and an opportunity to develop their ambitions with the full support of the company's management and financial strength In addition to the above opportunities the company has a regular flow of program conversion contracts available at attractive rates to freelancers and is particularly keen to support proven programmers and development houses wishing to write and have published by a major brand name original games for all popular machines If you would like to arrange an interview to discuss any of the above opportunities please write, giving full details of your relevant experience to: Steve Wilcox-Director Elite Systems Ltd, Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall W$9 BPW TM LACE ACTIVISION You'll know soon enough! Rampage, coming to your home computer screen, December ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE TM &  1987 Bally Midway MFG.CO. All rights reserved. Activision Inc. Authorised User. "


"HITS! HITS! HITS ***GET KEYED UP** ** FOR THE GREAT * Autumn GOLD Push)) T LARGE RIGAR AILABLE AT LA ( OFIXIRILICE Joou BRANCHES CBM 64/128 614.99 SUBBATTI SIMULATOR CBM 64/128 14.99 TOP SEO GAME/S CBM 64/128 14.990 ATARI ST 624.99 SPECTRUM + 3 .99 SOTID GOLI GAUNTLET ACB OF ACES POSSIBLE MISS ONT HEADERBOARD WINTER GAMES SPECTRUM 19.99, SPECTRUM+3 614.99d CBM 64/128 14.990 U.S. uit Our GOLD ATARI ST .99 SPECTRUM .99 CBM 64/128 .99 .99d MSX .99c IBM AMIGA .99d AMSTRAD .99 $14.99d can sortu AMS U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 23 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"I ADVENTURE Fresh from foreign fields, The Fiend finds fun, frolics and frivolity in fermenting fear in a forceful fashion for Keith Campbell and the world of adventure. Fighting fit, he flails fools, follies and frippery. Phew! So that nice Mr. Campbell tried to escape The Fiend's wrath at being forced to play Inspector Flukeit, by skipping the country for a while, did he? Fiends, too, need a rest now and again, for groping out public nuisancing is demanding work, even for a FIEND mega-being like that of your very own Fiend. But now the moment you have all been dreading has arrived. I, too, have returned from holiday, and the break has done me a power of good. You are now faced with a Fiend that is rested, tanned, and even more Fiendish than before, if such is possible. The Fiend's holiday plan this year was to honour Florida with his presence. Then, tiptoeing into my consciousness came an idle thought. Scott Adams lives in Florida, doesn't he? YOUREEKAH! What a meeting that could be! The Fiend could report back to you, my faithful fans, and I could sting that nice Mr Metcalfe for my air fare! But oh, the best land plans of Fiend and men. Not only had Mr Adams quit the world of adventuring, but he had moved! HA! But then many quail before the wrath of the were of easier solution. But as revitalised, with head full of Fiend. for the Fantastic Four, the new ideas? The Fiend So. fellow adventurers, do Fiend can be in no doubt that sincerely hopes so. we rejoice that our formentor Mr Adams quit in time. The Some small measure of is finally to leave us in peace, spark has gone, and as I relief can be drawn from the or do we mourn the passing have been heard to growl on recent appearance of the of one of the greats? Were his many occasions, any fool missing Scott Adams games best games yet to come, or can make an adventure on the Spectrum. had he passed his peak, and impossible to play by use of About blooming' time too! quit while the going was multi-word inputs and The Fiend has carried his obscure vocabulary. Spectrum into battle for The Fiend thinks that Mr Yet I rue the passing of he nearly five years now. Adams peaked with who popularised adventure Together we have slain Claymorgue Castle, games and brought us many colossal dragons, escaped fiendishly difficult (praise hours of entertainment from goblins dungeons, and indeed!) but brain bendingly Will he really be able to blissfully traversed red hot logical. Tough, but fair. turn his back on adventure lava. Hulk and Spiderman were games, or might he reI have dared the deepest both worthy adventures, but emerge, refreshed and dungeons, travelled to the farthest stars, and even braved a holiday in Terrormolinos, always with my faithful Spectrum at my hip. And what reward do the software houses bestow upon such a worthy? They ignore it! The Fiend is very cross! Suddenly everyone else seems to be playing games that are not available for the old faithful. KC raves about The Pawn and Guild of Thieves. Is the Fiend alone in still wanting to play adventures on the humble Spectrum? Is mine the only working model left in the world? Or are my suspicions correct that there are yet more Spectra in use than all the others laid end to end? Tam aware that the old boy is memory limited, but superb digitised pictures have been seen. Sam Fox springs to mind for no apparent reason. So faced with the option of giving us all graphics, even if it takes several loads, or giving us a text only version, which do they give us? BAH! The Fiend is even more cross about the lack of Leather Goddesses of Phobos. Us Fiends know exactly what to do with a six foot rubber hose and a pair of cotton balls but will we ever get the chance? One final question for your poor feeble minds to contemplate. Will we ever see any of these whizz bang games on the 128 Spectrum? If not, is it because nobody is buying the beast? If so, is nobody buying the beast because there is no software for it? Beware software houses The Fiend is watching you! STOP PRESS: The Fiend came face to face with the cringing Campbell at the PCW Show recently. You should have seen the fear in his eyes. It was a joy to behold. good? "


"ADVENTURE helpline ADVENTURE Some Very Big problems ubiquitous unopenable door. Now Rick Hanson has him pit, and avoid being have been cropping up Could it be that she needs baffled who can tell him sacrificied in the cornfield? this month! To kick off, the two white objects found what to do next? Where is the tapestry room? Kevin Boyce of Co. Donegal next to the space suit, she Jonathan Marshall is On to Castle Blackstar. How keeps falling overl He can't wondered? She could not thoroughly enjoying the The can the dragon be killed, get past the gardens at the pick them up, as she didn't Big Sleaze. But now he has a how can the flaming lake be beginning of part 2 in Very know what they were! few questions crossed, and how can the Big Cave, Batman's belt is Having got a little further Do the letters carved on doorway high up in the also baffling himwhat now, I can say that I doubt the tree mean anything? chapel be reached? All number should he dial? whether they will help open What should he do in the these, from someone calling Meanwhile, Paul Ferris is at that door, Sandra. Try library? And can he save the himself The Lone Stranger. a dead loss for something to examining the closet, to dame from King Kong-a do in Gotham City. What, no discover what is within! Take question also posed by Kevin John McCann of decent arcades, Paul? Who it, and then examine it again, Murphy of Kirkaldy? Lisburn, reckons that can point him to the best for some more detail Well, I thought we had Worm In Paradise on the nightspots? Darren Sellwood is stuck in Heroes of Karn covered by Amstrad has more bugs than Sandra Linnecor got away a lot of games. Here are his now! But David Portman of he has seen since the days of to an early start with Space main problems: How can he Belbroughton can't find the Screaming Foul-Up! Quest (review this issue) and stop dying of starvation under crowbar. Nor can we! David is (Remember him?) But bugs as I had only just started to the gravestone in Matt really desperate because he sometimes prove useful, and play the game myself, when! Lucas? And how can he get still keeps trying to find it, and if you want to discover all the received her letter, I was started in The Serf's Tale? his girlfriend is getting objects in the game, try this. unable to help. With 32 points, Paul Meakin of madder and madder every Go to the police station, Sandra found herself in an Nottingham, has coaxed a time he loads the game! and type \"give me to the underground cave on bull, and managed to get a Leave it loaded, David, and fuzbot\". The fuzbot takes you another planet, facing the gun, some skis, and a photo. sneak in a few goes while and checks you out, and then she's not looking! comes back saying that he Who's been sending us duff can find no crimes. However, clues, then? Abed Janzir of he leaves you in a location Irbid in Jordan says that the from which there is no exit. clue for Labyrinth (\"Pay no Next type \"examine all\" attention to Alph and Ralph') and a description of every is wrong! Without them, says object will follow. \"Very Abed, it is not possible to useful,\" says John, adding reach Goblin Castle. Who that it didn't actually help him can help Abed into the at all! Goblin Castle? Here's how Les Brady \"Frankenstein is driving me cheats in Quest for The Holy nuts (or should I say bolts Grail, C64 version. First reset through the neck?)\" quips the C64, then: Mike Thomas. He's stuck at POKE 2050,8 Joj euid ,od 'NIELSNEXNVS: the ice crevice and found a SYS 42291 Bu||| oyun Dipxe eyd climber frozen in the wall. POKE 45, PEEK(174) bujulud IDEM ,uOg eupid   SAA ADs 'g How can he get him out POKE 46, PEEK(175) eul pidoqo obujeyi peds jeow pup k without burying himself under ving himself under eu eADEI'Z POKE 47, PEEK(174) of de ovanvang uod u OIOVW JO ano100 all the falling ice? POKE 48, PEEK(175) | |De ons ex seyo How do you kill the POKE 49, PEEK(174) selu Ayous SABIHI HO Gino eyl uedo ojejqo e pinoys creature in the bloodstained POKE 50, PEEK(175) iesn euo uby no pud lemoj eu u 10 room, in Temple of Terror, This should give you an lo   pod  pupi    up asks Gregory Quinn of entire listing of the game, VUONNOH ONIXUNTHI dys puy el sello nel Northern Ireland. says Lee. je uene pup'yois eul je jedwiele Peter Wall of Saffron To clear up any confusion scoop uedo djey upo upg SD HDIS 'NOLSANNA Walden, is going round in over the C64 bug affecting Appus epeul \"TIV:NOUVIS UiDjuno; circles, while A. Orton of giving money to the tramp, in 100| eyluo DM 1,op-pups eyl buuuoxe Jeyp OJOS Leicester, is simply stuck. Both Spytrels, M. Blackery of uo ppell og NVWAdidsel POHVdsaq HO HEMOI are at the entrance to Tower Basildon explains: \"After \"Siegno    up Doom in Custard's Quest, and finding the wallet, you should peiq Buju djey Ol' hepun peig Hedido eyl jepun el the nasty Time Beast won't let switch the graphics off before ind eq pinoys 5019 Pio ou Semes el Suazo Agod them through. Peter is sure examining it. You will then be Ho diyo vano OLLSVINV: Jeubpw eylloj 331 that he must give him a told you have ten coins. Fail itee 140le jo peq eu euoydeje, eu HWNTASY watch or clock, but cannot to turn off the graphics and find either. you are told that you have no And finally, here's a couple coins in fact, that is what of golden oldies! First, you really have!\" Strange way Kingdom of Hamil. How do some people write you avoid the furry arm in the adventure programs... clues "


"THE ORIGINAL CHALLENGE ategy Board When Origin Systems, creators of the brilliant Ultima Series, collaborate with Strategy Board ORIGIN Game Supremo Steve Jackson, you can M SYSTEMS INC. expect the most challenging, most original Strategy Role Playing games around! THE START OF SOMETHING NEW Based on the award-winning board games by Steve Jackson OGRE A strategy game for one or two players OGRE pits an array of infantry and armoured forces against a single cybernetic supertank, bristling with weapons the OGRE. Adapted from the classic Steve Jackson board game, Computer OGRE epitomises simplicity and play balance. Players can use standard game maps or design their own. AUTODUEL Drive the freeways of the future where the right of way goes to the biggest gun. Somewhere within the 16 cities and outlaw-infested highways are the clues you will need to complete the ultimate mission. Step into the arena on Amateur Night and earn the right to custom-build your combat vehicles. Are You Ready For The Ultimate Challenge? AUTODUEL IS AVAILABLE FOR COMMODORE 64/128 ATARI XE/XL DISK E19.95. APPLE, ATARI STDISK .95 OGRE IS AVAILABLE FOR: COMMODORE 64/128. ATARI XE/XL DISK .95. IBM, APPLE, ATARI ST, AMIGA AND MAC DISK .95, MICROPROSE SOFTWARE LTD. ORIGIN SYSTEM INC. JOINT VENTURERS IN EUROPE. Please send copy/ies of Format Price Name (block capitals) Address Post Code I enclose  Lincluding .00 P&P.UK Only. (Overseas .00) Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date For more information on the Origin range please tick box MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tix: 43422 MPS/UKG. No. "


"-night, hc story collection Books of Blood VI. The novella follows New York private eye Harry D'Amour as he investigates demonic occurances in The Big Apple. He's hired by the widow of a magician to find her husband (?) who's returned to life and is being hunted by a demon to whom he sold his soul. Not a cushy number by any stretch, and hopefully the movie will have a bigger budget than Hellraiser. And, if that's not enough, Clive Kark they were and bleary-eyed. The warped, the weird and the wonderful gathered under the cover of night in Birmingham recently for the British Fantasy Society's Fantasy Com, has just taken off in the States C+VG's very own fantasy figure, John! after a rapturous run in the UK and he's got more projects Gilbert, joined them to sample the planned. latest books, films and videos and lig! New World Pictures is it with Some Very Famous People. tempting Clive to make Hellraiser 2. The film won't share riotous weekend of scooped up everything of characters--or wanton debauchery importance before others got in Cenobite tenob among famous authors and on the act. artists is the lure used by The Once satisfied that I hadn't British Fantasy Society to attract missed any rarities I paid my its members and friends to compliments to the bar and FantasyCon. gathered hosts, rather than The annual convention, held watch the first video this year in Birmingham, presentation, Terror at contains a gory selection of bad London Bridge. videos, guest speakers who this Already bouyed year included M John Harrison up by a skinful with Americans George RR of vulgar-tasting Martin and artist JK Potter, and vino, drunk readings from soon to be during the launch of published novels and short The Writers of the stories. Future competition, First, though, on the Friday I sat mostly talking evening start-up, I had to sign in, rather than meet old friends, collect a chunk supping, to some of of info about forthcoming films the event's and publications, browse freshmen. through a mass of books and At midnight we left the recent film scripts in the comfort of over priced dealers' room and make Pepsi and filtered into sure that I'd the convention hall where Clive Barker, horror author and director of Hellraiser, read from Weaveworld, his mammoth novel demons-with the original, but published by Collins in late it will include that famous October. It's a brilliant Chinese puzzle box which will mixture of fantasy and open up visions of new hells for horror which takes in the protagonist. So keen is New Liverpool, Barker's World to produce something birthplace, and a world different that Cilve will take on woven into a carpet. the role of co-producer-with Weaveworld may Chris Figgand look for a new represent Clive's director. It all sounds very return to the literary professional and shooting starts scene after more than a next year. year but the boy's been After the sequel Clive intends busy in the movie world to write and direct a movie Hellraiser, the film in which he called The Last Illusion, again seems to have played every for New World and based production role except producer, around a novella from his short has been asked, yet again by New World, to develop a television series in the States negotiations are going on as you read C+VG. NW intends to get around the censorship problem the show will be Gooorryb y selling it to cable networks. So, we should see it in a few years when cable's been established in the UK. Clive couldn't stay long, he was off to London that very night, so at 1.15 on Saturday morning I drifted off to see Zombie 3, an incoherent, anticlimatical piece of video rubbish "


"orror which gave everyone a fit of had to be woken up. giggles. and Dennis Off to bed, for a sweltering, Etchinson, uneasy, night, because nobody American author had turned the heating off in the of Darkside, hotel, then up to be welcomed trying to by Douglas E Winter, American moderate Master of Ceremonies and close friend of Stephen King. The address was followed by two discussion panels; the first featuring publishers and editors about the writers of the future, while the latter brought authors such as Terry Pratchett Colour of Magic-out of their burrows to talk about creating fantasy worlds. After lunch, an afternoon of readings, panel discussions, and a slide show of artist JK Potter's impressive fantasy photography, all were invited to a launch the farce. party for Ramsey Campbell's After that, the bar collection of short horror stories, was open until three, when Dark Feasts, from Robinson most people went to bed. Press. Ramsey's been writing Not me, though. Snared BRITISH FANTASY AWARDS Other Side, by Ramsey Campbell horror for 25 years but, probably at the bar by Shaun The August Derleth Award for Best Small Press (fanzine): because he has more style than Hutson, I and a good friend spent Best Novel: IT, by Stephen King. Fantasy Tales, edited by Steve most writers in the genre, he's the night talking about Shaun's Runners' up Necroscope, by Jones and David Sutton. never had a best seller. Pick up first film, from his novel The Brian Lumley: Strangers, by Runners' up: Dagon, edited by his latest novel, Hungry Moon, Slugs, and heavy metal music, in Dean R Koontz. Carl Ford, The Horror Show, and I guarantee you'll be awed particular Iron Maiden. He also Best Film: Aliens, Dir: James edited by David Silva. by his genius. told us that the Slug film nearly Cameron. Runners up: The Fly, Best Artist: JK Potter. Runners The party over, I sat down didn't reach completion. Two of Dir: David Cronenberg; Peggy up: Dave Carson, Stephen E with 50 raffle tickets and a the female stars walked out Sue Got Married, Dir: Francis Fabian bunch of friends to see what when asked to lie half naked Coppola. Special Award for contributions could win during the and covered in blood while Best Short Fiction: The Olympic to the genre: Charles L Grant, Interminable Fantasy Raffle. stage hands shovelled live slugs Runner, by Dennis Etchison. author of The Pet and editor of Such gems as a valuable proof onto them. Runners' up The Hellbound the Shadows short story copy of Clive Barker's The night without sleep left us Heart, by Clive Barker, The anthology. Weaveworld, with author's dreading Sunday's big event. corrections, and a signed copy The British Fantasy Awards combines with the World of Stephen King's novel IT, Banquet. I made it, however, Fantasy Convention in London jostled with turkey prizes such only to find I was seated next to where James Herbert will be as cardboard hats, posters and Guy N Smith and his wife. He is guest of honour. Although badges from Mel Brooks' new a prolific writer, book seller, centrally based in Kensington movie Space Balls. Our table vegetarian and goat farmer. An there's a limit of 750 won the nickname The Book all round nice guy and quite a attendees so if you Table from host Steve Jones celeb. He kept us talking while fancy going book now. because of the piles of science we downed the paltry two It'll be held over the fiction and fantasy novels we course meal, without wine, and Hallowe'en weekend managed to win and stock pile. Some of the guests waited for and, if you're The Eirie Midnight Horror their vegetarian food which unlucky, I might Show Il took everyone's turned out to be not worth the see you there. attention once the raffle was out wait. More info of the way. As usual it turned The awards at the end, from Di into a slanging match with however, displaced our smarting Wathen, \"Slugs' author Shaun Hutson feelings and popping stomachs 15 Stanley cracking jokes, US author Karl and, if you come next year, the Road, Morden, Edward Wagner talking so meal promises to be a delight. Surrey, slowly that most of the audience Next year Fantasy Com SM45DE. 12 "


"BUG-BYTE GOES 16 BIT MISSING: ONE DROID ATARI ST .95 BUG-BYTE VICTORY HOUSE LEICESTER PLACE LONDON WC2H ZNB IKU "


"The Big Screen .99 w ALSO AVAILABLE ON CASSETTE FOR ATARI 400/800/XL/130X It's Hallowe'en and here with a haunted house full of horrors is the man who can ward off those evil spirits and those monstrous movies Ward R Street ... There are horrors of every kind this month, so decide what sort of witches brew you prefer and prepare to be scared. If you like the shivers spiced with smiles you could take a trip to a small American town and encounter The Witches of Eastwick (18). Not that Cher, Susan Sarandon and Michelle Pfeiffer are witches to begin with. They're just bored single women wishing that something would happen. The something that does happen is Jack Nicholson, sporting a small pony-tail and a considerable paunch, who breezes into town on the back of a thunderstorm to take up residence in the local manor house. Within hours of arriving he's busy meeting and seducing the three women. Which is where the witchcraft starts. Who is old Jack? Old Nick, maybe? Following the unlikely death of a local woman (choking on a thousand cherry pips when Eastwick: Every Witch Way But she wasn't even eating the the borderline of seedy. fruit! the women decide to When a mysterious bearded split from their corpulent man asks him to trace a host. But hell hath no fury thirties singer, Johnny like a devil spurned and he Favourite, who is missing turns his terrible trickery on from the private hospital the trio. where he's suffered from Witches is directed by amnesia, ever since the war, Mad Max's creator, George he's only too happy to take Miller, but it's far removed the case. from those rugged outback So Rourke walks those heroics. Don't go expecting mean streets straight into a an Evil Dead or a stylish thriller, with no real Ghostbusters... this is hint of the horrors to come. supernatural comedy of the It's only when the trail leads most sophisticated kind and to New Orleans and voodoo it's hysterically funny, which that things start to get is why I'm making it one of spooky. As the questions my two movies of the month.grow in Rourke's mind he Two movies of the month? realises that he's straying Well, I really couldn't decide into something way beyond whether I preferred shaking his understanding. with laughter or shivering Both Rourke and De Niro, with fear and Alan Parker's as his mysterious client, Angel Heart (18) made my prove once again that they're ticker race at a diabolical the best actors of their pace! generations. Angel Heart is New York in the 1950s not for the faint of heart... and Mickey Rourke is a but don't miss it, if you dare. private detective living on Our third chiller is a much sympathetic shrink Dr Goldman, are there to help, along with Kirsten Parker, who can create a psychic bond between the sleepers. Together they decide to take on old crispy face on his own territory There's a nice selection of nasty dreams, including a TV set which comes to life and puts one of the kids in the picture literally! plus a boy who gets tied to his bed with writhing tongues. And there's also the Dream Warrior plot, in which the teenagers use their dreams to adopt superhero identities. It's an interesting idea, but it's more Dungeons and Dragons than stalk and slash and seems out of place. Then there's the question of whether the tragic topic of teenage suicide is a fit subject for a lightweight horror fantasy, which led to protests in the States. Of course there are some people for whom foulmouthed, irreverent Eddie Murphy is horror enough, but that hasn't hindered his rise beyond superstardom.  Angel Heart: Not taking the Mickey. more traditional affair with spectacular special effects (plus one or two dodgy duds), some tongue in cheek cliches, and all the action you could hope for. Still, Freddy and the Dreamers. So 'Yo' to all Axel Foley fans of Freddy Krueger? as Eddie bursts forth in Yes, dream boy is back for Beverley Hills Cop II (15). A Nightmare on Elm Back in Detroit, after his Street Part 3: Dream brush with LA's smoothest, Warriors (18), and if the Axel seems to be treading long-winded title sends you the same path as the original to sleep the movie should as he sets up a phony deal to wake you up with a jolt. trap a criminal, but a phone This time long-dead call from California Freddy is terrifying sleeping dismisses the déjà vu. teenagers so badly they'd Captain Bogomil has been rather end it all than nod off. shot in the course of Luckily Nancy Thompson, investigating The Alphabet survivor of the first film, and Crimes and before Eddie can IDOLINI "


"00000000000000000000000000000000 mutter an obscenity he's on a about to bust open a drugs plane heading west to his old ring with a difference the pals Rosewood and Taggart. dealers are all senior Life in Beverley Hills is policemen! Unluckily, a much the same. Rosewood is detective hired by Joey's dad more self-assured and there's gets bumped off in the boy's a new, tough chief of police, but apart from that the millionaire's paradise seems Freddy's back and he's hungry to exist merely for Eddie to submerged by the inevitable pull off yet more amazing shots of aching feet and scams, such as occupying a sweating bodies, plus some house which is being decidedly modern-sounding redecorated while its owners songs. are away! The movie has been a It's not long before he's on smash hit in the States, and the trail of the would be will probably do well here assassins, led by an illegal with the dance fans. But I arms dealer and his sidekick, just couldn't swallow the the majestic Mrs Stallone, significance given to what is, Brigitte Nielsen. If you liked after all, just a bit of a bop. the original you're sure to From dance to prima enjoy the sequel. It's every The claws in Madonna's donnas for a bizarre thriller bit as unlikely, crude, noisy contract. set in two highly artiticial and fast moving as its detail to step up the suspense worlds — the opera house predecessor and it's all and a highly-secret held together by its star. until you're on the edge of transvestite club. Mascara your seat. Eddie Murphy In the good old days the (18) is a psychological drama undoubtedly has it. closest couples got to Madonna, on the other hand, possessing all the physical contact was on the gathers golden discs by the melodrama of the musical dance floor, but Dirty drama, as a police chief hundred but she's yet to Dancing (15) isn't just a murders a trans-sexual then prove herself on the silver tries to frame the costume screen. We all know the Eat the Rich: Fiona's Comic Strip. designer lover of his sister. answer to the question The film stars Charlotte Who's That Girl (PG) the Rampling, who proves once question is why? again what an undervalued There's a lot of talk about actress she is, along with the wannabes, who wannabe Michael Sarrazin as the like their heroine, but on policeman, who's feelings for this showing Madonna is a her overstep the bounds of wannabe herself. She'd like brotherly love. The film to be as cute, sexy and should appeal to anybody anarchic as Marilyn Monroe. who enjoyed that other Unluckily, she doesn't even operatic extravaganza, come close at least not in Diva this yuppie nightmare, reThe final horror for told for the teeny-bopper Hallowe'en is Eat the Rich market. (18), the new feature-length The yuppie in question is release from The Comic lawyer Griffin Dunne, and Dirty Dancing: Cleaning up the Strip. It's a total gross out the nightmare is Nikki Finn act. attack on everything that (Madonna), fresh from jail filthy foxtrot. Set in 1963 at anybody holds dear, and gunning for the hoods a snobbish holiday resort, featuring a gay head of MI5, who framed her. The story just north of New York, the a brutish Home Secretary rambles on at a lively pace dance symbolises the who head-butts terrorists (a but most of its virtues are simultaneous transition of great performance by exswamped by the ego of its America, and 17-year-old stunt man, Nosher Powell), star, who adopts an heroine, 'Baby' Houseman, and an unlikely quartet of irritatingly squeaky voice from innocence to heroes including transand acts like a spoilt sevenexperience. sexual Lanah Pellay (they're year-old. One for the hardIgnoring whether or not it cropping up everywhere this core wannabes only! PI: Shades of Danger. was such a crucial era, the month) and former Men With so many big movies flat, leaving a tape film is pleasant enough Only columnist, Fiona this month there's not much containing vital evidence in Richmond. space for the smaller the answering machine. period detail and baby's first By relying on a cast not releases, but there's at least Suddenly Joey is the centre love with the hotel's dance normally known for their one gem to be found, if you of some rather unwelcome instructor, who inevitably acting ability, such as follow your own Private attention. grew up on the wrong side of Motorhead's Lemmy and Investigations (18). Like classic Hitchcock, the tracks. But the film also stand-up comedian Jimmy Joey Bradley's father is a P.I. takes a slim plot but wants to be this year's Fagg, the film has taken a crusading newspaper editor, throws in enough quirky Flashdance, so 1963 is big risk which doesn't really pay off OUUIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII "


"VENTURE INTO THE MYSTICAL MEDIEVAL DARK AGES IN A game that takes fantasy role playing one step further. You will experience all the action as you do real battle with your opponents. To prove yourself worthy of becoming chief wizard you must do combat with horrific monsters and cleverly outwit devious wizards with your spells collected through time. Witness the superb graphics that WIZARD set Wizard Warz apart from other strategy games and view through a circular screen that diminishes as your health weakens and makes your goal harder to achieve. See the effect of your spells as they hurtle across the screen in Wizard Warz combining fast moving action with depth of gameplay in a true fantasy role playing game that's a real strategical challenge. WARZ V OJVV Eye of Newt 19 Blood of Rat ETBring Me The Powers of me Vision & Combat  an ne Le u s HDaar LO De Ay hus COPYRIGHT 1987 CANVAS SOFTWARE GO CBM 64/128 .99 DISK $9.99 TAPE AMSTRAD .99 DISK .99 TAPE SPECTRUM 48/128K .99 ATARI ST .99 TOMORROWLS SOFTLUARE TODAY GO/ Media Holdings 110. Units 23. Holford Way Holford Birmingham B6 TAX. TEL: 021 356 3388 "


"NEW LOW PRICE ST! ATARI 5205T ATARI TUVIVY ONLY FROM SILICA ONLY FROM SILICA FOCO +VAT = 299 MUCH FOR SO LITTLE llow you toon to the keybol and stylish un There is nothing that can compare with the incredible value for money offered by Atari's 520ST-FM. For only  (+VAT-), you can purchase a powerful 512K RAM computer, with a 95 key keyboard (including numeric keypad). MIDI Interface, GEM, a palette of 512 colours, mouse controller, and a 512K built-in disk drive. The 520ST-FM has a TV modulator built-in, and comes with a lead to allow you to plug it straight into any domestic colour television set. The mains transformer is also built-in to the keyboard, so there are no messy external boxes. You couldn't wish for a more compact, powerful and stylish unit. Atari ST computers are now firmly established in the UK, there are nearly 500 software titles already available for a wide variety of applications and the list is growing all the time. And that's not all. When you buy your new 520ST-FM (or any Atari ST computer) from Silica Shop, you will get a lot more, including a FREE Silica ST Starter Kit worth over . Read the ONLY FROM SILICA section on the left to see why you should buy your new high power, low price 520ST FM from Silica Shop, the UK's No1 Atari Specialists. For further details of the range of Atari ST computers and the FREE Silica ST Starter Kit, complete and return the reply coupon below. ATARI 520ST-FM NOW ONLY  (+VAT=) 520ST-FM with 512K RAM mono monitor tinc VAT) Upgrade from 512K RAM to 1024K RAM 100 (inc VATI UK's Not A you should buy onth over . ATARI 1040ST-F NEW PRICE the one problems that other computers have created Amor y , Silica Shop are pleased to present the ST range of personal business computers from At The ST designed ting the most recent brothrough in semiconductor technology, producing a personal computer that performs tasks with fewer parts which means it costs less to make and less to buy. The latest ST computers now include built in power supplies and built in disk drives The TOS operating system and GEMwindow environment are now on ROM Chips which are already installed in the ST keyboard. This enablessutomatic Instant booting when you switch on Silica Shop are pleased to offer the complete Atari ST range Our mail order department is situated in Sidcup and we have retail outlets at Sidcup, Lion House (Tottenham Court Rd) and Selfridges Oxford Street). We have eight years experience of Atari products, longer than any other UK company, and are well established as the UK's No. 1 Atari specialist with a group turnover of over 19 million and in cos of 0 stall, we offer you unbeatable service and support. We provide several tacities which you will find invaluable during your Alari computing life and most of the facilities are available ONLY FROM SILICA. We suggest that you read through what we have to offer, before you decide where to purchase your Atari ST. FREE STARTER KITOnly From Silica When you purchase any Alan ST keyboard, you will not only receive the best value for money computer on the market, but you will also receive the following from Atari Corporation as part of the package BASIC Language Disk \"BASIC Manual \"ST Owners Manual \"TOSDEM ON ROM If you buy your ST from Silica Shop, you will also receive NEOchrome Sampier-colour graphics program \"Par Word Word Process in addition, we at Silica would like to see you get off to a flying start with your new computer, so we have put together a special ST STARTER KIT worth over , which we are giving away FREE OF CHARGE with every ST computer purchased at our normal retail prices. This is available ONLY FROM SILICA and is aimed at providing users with a valuable introduction to the world of computing. We are continually upgrading the ST Starter Kit, which contains public domain and other licensed software, wo books, magazines and accessories All rent to ST computing Return the coupon below for M a is DEDICATED SERVICING Only From Silica This is dedicated to servicing Atan computer products. The wedges and experience makes the second to none in their field. You can be that any carried out by them is of the highest standard. A standard of servicing which we believe you find ONLY FROM SILICA i tion to providing servicing facts for Atari ST computers both in and out of warranty, our team is able to offer memory and modulator upgrades to ST computers 1Mb RAM UPGRADE: Our upgrade on the standard Atari SOSTM 520ST.FM keyboard will Increase the memory from $12K to a massive 4K. It has a tus 1 year warranty and available from Seca at an additional price of only 6.06 VAT . TV MODULATOR UPGRADE: Sillo can upgrade the 1040ST-F to include a TV modulators that you can then use it with your TV set. This is an internal upgrade and does not involve any untidy external boxes. A cable to connect your ST to any domestic V included in the price of the upgrade which is only 140 (in VAT). The upgrade is also available for early 5205T computers at the same price THE FULL STOCK RANGE Only From Silica We aim to keep stocks of all Atari related products and our warehouse carries stock of over million We import mary software tities direct from the USA and you will find that we have new releases in advance of many of our competitors. Unlike dealers who may only stock selected titles, we have the fun range. In addition, we carry a complete line of all books which have been written about the Atari ST. A range as wide as ours is something you will find is available ONLY FROM SILICA AFTER SALES SUPPORT Only From Silica Rest assured that when you buy your ST from Silica Shop, you w u supported. Our free mailings give news of r e s and development. This will help to keep you up to date with new software releases as well as what's happening in the Atari market and in addition, our sales are at the end of telephone line to service of your Atar requirements. If you purchase an ST from Silica and would like any technical advice, we have a full time technical support team to help you get the best from your computer. Because we have both the staff and the systems specifically dedicated to providing after sales service on Atari ST computer we are confident that our wens joy an exceptionally high level of support. This can be received ONLY FROM SILICA FREE CATALOGUES Only From Silica At S a Show cognise that serious berseguire an in-depth information Service, which is why we mare newsletters and prices to our ST owners. These are up to 48 pages long and are crammed with technical as special offers and product descriptions you have purchased an ST and would like to have your name added to our mailing list is complete the coupon & return it to This information service is available ONLY FROM SILICA FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY From Silica Most orders are processed through our computer within 24 hours of receiving them. Most hardware orders are sent by the overnight GROUP courier service FREE OF CHARGE 1o customers within the UK. This method helps to ensure minimum delay and maximum protection PRICE MATCH Only From Silica We hope that the combination of our low prices, FREE UK delivery service, FREE Starter Kit and FREE after sales support will be enough to make you buy your Atari equipment from a shop. If however, there is something you wish to purchase, and you find one of our competitors offering it at a lower price, then please contact our department, providing us with our competitor's name, address and telephone number of our competitor has the goods in stock, we will normally match the offer consumo product same price base) and still provide you with our normal free delivery. We realise that we are not the only company who will match a competitor's price. However, you come to a for a price match, you will also be entitled to our after sales service, including free newsletters and technical support. This makes our price match promise rather special something you will receive ONLY FROM SILICA We don't want you to go anywhere else for your Atari products, so shop at Silica, the UK's Not Atari Specialist ATARI We are pleased to announce a new reduced price point on the 10405T-F which is now available for only 1409 [ing VAT). The 1040 is a powerful computer with 1Mb of RAM and also includes a built-in 1Mb double sided 34\" disk drive The 1040 has been designed for use on business and professional applications most of which require a high resolution monochrome or colour monitor. It does not therefore have an RF modulator for use with a domestic TV set Modulons can be fitted for 140 (ind VAT) celine WAT DASTF Keyboard the Man If you would turn of the 10405T the pon below MEGA ST'S NOW IN STOCK For the user who requires aven more RAM than the 520 or 1040 STS offer the new MEGA ST computers are now available There are two MEGA ST', one with 2Mb of RAM and the other with a massive 4 . Both new computers are fully compatible with existing Stand run currently available ST software. The MEGA ST are styled at an expandable Central Processing Unit with open architecture and a detachable keyboard. They are supplied with GEM a free mouse controller and extras with the 520 of 1040 Prices are as follows MEGA STO board CPU MEGA STO Keyboard CPU MEGA STO Keyboard CPUs Mon Monor If you would like further dea the MEGAST, coupon below To: Silica Shop Ltd, Dept CVG 1087, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX PLEASE SEND ME FREE LITERATURE ON THE ATARI ST Mr/Mrs/Ms: ............ Initials: ........... Surname: Address: SIDCUP (& Mail Order) 01-309 1111 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX LONDON 01-580 4839 Lion House (Ist floor), 227 Tottenham Court Rd, London, WIP OHX LONDON 01-629 1234 ext 3914 Selfridgos (1st floor), Oxford Street, London, WTA TAB ... Postcode: Do you already own a computer If so, which one do you own? "


"16 bit News guise of Pandora, was showing releases include Mean Streak and early versions of two 16-bit Zig Zag, the latest game from projects, Satar and the graphically Mega-star-programmer and impressive Galdregion's Domin. erstwhile train fanatic Tony Judging by the screen shots and Crowther. the video demo, both should be Another famous name for those well worth looking out for in a few familiar with the old Imagine Saga, months time. is Eugene Evans, who is busy ST specialists Microdeal had a putting the finishing touches to his whole host of goodies on show, first game for Mirrorsoft entitled including a sneek preview of The Bermuda Project an Goldrunner II which looks like animated graphic adventure set in Goldrunner I only better, faster the infamous Bermuda Triangle. This year's Personal Computer Other goodies to look forward and with more digitised sounds. Mirrorsoft also announced, at World Show was dynamic proof to from the Phone Co. include Also being previewed was the show, that it would be that 16-bit entertainment is here to Carrier Command, which is being Tanglewood, an animated publishing two FTL games before stay. Almost all the major games programmed by Star Strikers adventure, Soccer, Fright Night, the end of the year. These are the companies had something to boast Realtime Games (also responsible based on the hit video of the same long-awaited Dungeon Master on the ST, and many had Amiga for the PC versions of Elite and name, and Airball Construction and Oids, both are for the ST only. products as well. Significantly, Starglider). Probably the most Set, with which potential game Mirrorsoft have a handful of there has been a marked increase impressive piece of programming designers can build and then play new 16-bit only projects in the in the number of new ST launches on view at the show, this strategic their very own isometric Airball production line, including the developed specially for 16-bit warfare game features 3D solid game. highly-addictive Obsession, so stay machines, with 8-bit conversions to filled graphics, mega-fast Another U.S. company tuned for more details before follow in some cases but by no animation and a vast playing exhibiting for the first time was Christmas. means all, arena. Micropose, products ready for Novagen, who recently For those of you who were not for all those wondering what launch include Stealth Fighter, launched the Spectrum version of able to get to the show, here's a Sandy'3D Ant Attack White has based on a jet fighter invisible to the evergreen Mercenary, has run-down of some of the new been up to for the past two years, radar, Warriors of Destiny, released Backlash, an incredibly 16-bit games that were released fast ST blaster (see separate or announced at Olympia last review). Due out in the early month. months of next year, is Damocles Activision was showing an (Mercenary II). Set in an imaginary early, but already impressive solar system with nine planets and version of ST Enduro racer. Other 11 moons, your task is to prevent titles from the U.S. giant and the asteroid Damocles from attendant companies Electric colliding with the fifth planet in the Dreams and System 3 system. included Rampage, Super Sprint, Ocean, never very far from Super Hang On and Firetrap, all where the action is, has announced coin-up licences. GEAR a number of coin-op licences, most Also announced was Predator, 3RAKE of which will find their way onto based on the latest Arnold the ST in the coming months. These Schwartzaneger box office smash include Gryzar, Combat School movie, and two from Infocom: and Rastan Saga. On the domestic Plundered Hearts, specifically front, Ocean is set to release the written to appeal to female brilliant Head Over Heals for the adventurers, and Beyond Zork, a ST. continuation of the megaFlushed with the success of their successful Zork trilogy. combat game Barbarian, the Coin-op freaks everywhere will Ultimate Warrior, London-based be delighted to hear that Star A Spitfire 40-taking off on the ST V Palace Software has now Wars, the arcade game, has finally he's been busy getting to grips with released the ST version. Plans are found its way onto the ST, and very the Amiga in order to produce an also afoot to launch a number of good it looks too. Domark was animated cartoon called 'Dick ST titles early in the New Year. confident it would be in the shops Special The Search For Spook, These include Rimrunner, \"a multisoon, as will their latest licensing which features a half screen tall plane scrolling shoot-em-up with a tie-up, Jeffrey Archer's 'Not a Dick Special moving through a full difference\", and Starship, in which Penny More, Not a Penny Less'. colour, landscape. \"you must pilot a massive starship American veteran Electronic Also on the way, for adventure through the uncharted depths of Arts was at the show for the first fans, are new releases from space\". time showing off some of its new Magnetic Scrolls, with Jinxter, The Edge is another company releases. One game not on show, and Level 9's, Time and Magik. Airborne Ranger and the ST moving into the ST arena with the was their Ferrari Grand Prix Both will be available on the ST conversion of the 1985 hit F15 release of Tonic Tiles. Programmed Simulator. and Amiga, before the end of the Strike Eagle. in France, this Breakout clone As always, the Firebird/ year. Mirrorsoft has long had a wipes the floor in the graphics and Rainbird stand was a hive of Sheffield-based Gremlin reputation as one of the country's animation departments, and has to activity, not least on the first day of Graphics certainly get the leading 16-bit publishers with such be seen to be believed. Others on the show when Telecomsoft award for the most press releases titles as Defender of the Crown, the way include Inside Out, gleefully announced the signing of during the run up to the show Sinbad, Fleet Street Publisher and Garfield the computer game, Risk Steve Turner and Andy Braybrook, 18 in total. On view, or on paper Déjà Vu. the board game and Warlock. responsible between them for such were variously: Alternative Games, Mirrorsoft is now busily Superior Software were classics as Avalon, Paradroid and, Blood Valley, Tour de Force, Duel converting a number of their putting the Acorn Archimedes of course, Uridium. The pair's first Master and Deflector. Gremlin successful 8-bit titles to the ST, PC through its paces with Zarch, two titles for BT will be Morpheus won the C+VG Blue and Yellow and the Amiga. These include the programmed by David Braben, and Magnatron, both of which will only .95 each) joystick award evergreen Spitfire 40 (ST and Co-author of Elite. be available on the ST \"at some for the flashest stand at Olympia! Amiga), Strike Force Harrier More news on this machine in time in the future\". Interceptor Micros, in the Amiga), both out this year. Future coming issues. ari's ter, 512 ator our ST ady not will OM STtari ow. 22 -"


"THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER THE ULTIMATE SUBMARINE COMBAT SIMULATION Argus Press Based on the Best Selling Book by Software Group TOM CLAY Available for Atari ST, Amiga, Amstrad 1512 pc, Amstrad CPC, Spectrum, Commodore Tape and Disk ALL 16 BIT PRODUCTS RRP ,95. BIT CASSETTES C11.55. DISC $19.95 "


"California Games 1 Competition Z Okay y'all, we can't promise you a trip to California Stateside but we can promise you a chance to take part in Epyx's California Game simulation. To find out how good you are at skateboarding, surfing, rollerskating, BMX trials or hackysacking (what!) just answer the questions below correctly. The overall champ will win a Jacket, World Games T-shirt and Sports Bag to keep that lot in. Oh, and of course, a copy of the game for your computer. 20 runners-up will win a copy of the game for the C64, Spectrum and Amstrad. Name Address 1. What's the name of the world's most famous Basketball Team? 2. Name two of the players and the Captain of the European team who won the Ryder Cup this year 3. Name the quarter back wih the New York Giants, is it: a. Phil Simms b. Joe Montana c. Timmy Metcalfe 4. Is 'The Fridge' a: a. Cinema b. American football superstar c. Garry Williams 5. Who was the first American to win eight gold medals for swimming at an Olympic Games? Spectrum Please send me C64 Amstrad version My answers are: is 8 "


"Knightmare was viable and would attract a devoted following. adventure game should never play the same twice. A lot of adventure games are based on mapping and solving a dungeon or some other sort of maze. This just wasn't good enough for a TV series. Once a good team worked out the correct route they would have cracked most of the problems. And worse still, so would the viewers. \"Contestants won't escape from the Knightmare dungeon that easily. For a start it's irrational-it keeps shifting and changing. And the perils and puzzles change with it.\" This constant change can only be realised by the use of the sophisticated computer trickery. Conventional studio sets would be \"too restrictive,\" says Tim. nightmare is the brilliant television Wood, 12, and the three advisers were Edward Halliwell, 13, Jonathon adventure game now stunning audiences Morley and Paul Knight, both 12. The with its technical effects and computer boys all attend Queen Elizabeth Grammar School in Wakefield. wizardry. C+VG's Deputy Editor, Paul They had survived the perils of the Boughton, visited the television studios first level of knightmare and had to see how the show is put together. embarked on the second level, having coped with huge scorpions, nervefraying skeletal monsters, solved The situation is pretty dire. Brave computers, drama and special riddles, collected food and cast a few adventurer Richard Wood faces a effects. spells. grim and sticky end trapped in the Anglia TV has made only eight Knightmare was devised and stomach of a monster. shows and these are now nearing the written by Tim Child whose full-time \"That will teach you to walk down a end of their run. Hopefully, the monster's throat,\" booms the deep, powers which control television will it was his interest in computer games resonant voice of the mysterious give the go-ahead for another series. from his spell as presenter of The Treguard, dungeon master of Those who have already seen the Soft Spot, a local computer Knightmare castle. show will probably be itching to get programme, which sowed the seeds The monster's stomach walls are their hands on the Activision Electric for Knightmare. It's taken him two pulsing. Time is running out for Dreams' computer version of the TV long years to convince the television Richard. Safe with Treguard, show which should be out soon. But companies that the Knightmare idea Richard's three advisers are wracking for those who haven't yet been their brains trying to save him. exposed to the magic of Knightmare, There are two ways out. One is too here is what all the fuss is about. ghastly to contemplate, the other is Teams of adventurers aged back up the monster's gullet. But between 12 and 14 take up the quest how? to explore and survive in a computerThen the solution! Get Richard to created world of fantasy. The aim is rub the monster's stomach with the to survive for as long as possible bar of soap he found earlier. Brilliant! and that may mean over several of The trick works. The monster feels the thirty minute shows. sick and Richard is ejected from the One player from each team of four stomach, ready to continue. the adventurer or DungeoneerThis is the world of Knightmare, goes into the dungeon to face the the brilliantly exciting fantasy perils and puzzles. He wears the adventure game now sparkling like a Helmet of Justice which severely gem among the dull and tedious limits what he can see. In fact, he can programmes being screened on only glimpse the floor. The others Children's ITV. stay behind with the Dungeon Master Miss it at your peril. This is to watch his progress on a television probably the only truly innovative monitor and relay instructions to him show on TV right now, involving the by a radio-link. problems of an adventure game When I visited Anglia Television in combined with the graphical and Norwich to see Knightmare being technical wizardry of hugely powerful filmed, the adventurer was Richard "


"-d dream come true The helmet he wears means he can only see the floor. He must rely on his He insists Knightmare owes more to computer adventure games rather than straight role-playing games such as Dungeons and Dragons. \"I'm a games player\" he says, \"but not Dungeons and Dragons. played it for half-an-hour once but I don't have five hours to spare. It doesn't fit into my life-style.\" He continued: \"I admire computer programmers, people such as Steve Turner (Dragontore, RanaRama) who do their research property.\" He rates Turner's RanaRama as far superior to Gauntlet. «My sons reckons I'm the only over-40s arcade champ going.\" It is really only possible for a show such as Knightmare to appear on television due to the technical advances in computer trickery. The man behind the graphics is Robert Harris, who spent hundreds of hours creating the mystical maze and special effects. In the control room next to the studio he uses two Spaceward Supernova computers to change scenes, control apparitions and the surprises which confront the adventurers. But before you rush out to try and buy a Supernova, you'd better know that they cost around ,000 each. The backgrounds were originally painted by artist Dave Rowe. The pictures were then digitised, ammended, relit and merged on the Supernova. Models of monsters were also made, photographed, digitised and then animated. When all this is combined with the live action, the effect is breathtaking. But it is all brilliantly executed illusion. The adventurers never see F RE EZ E R Treguard are filmed and these shots are later slotted in to the action. One false move or dodgy advice from the advisers can put the adventurer in deadly peril. One wrong wrong action and the game is over. And the game is for real. The adventurers can do what they like. They are not given any warning of what can happen. As Hugo Myatt, the actor who plays Treguard, says: \"My biggest problem is not knowing what the adventurers are going to say. It's not just a challenge for them, it's a challenge for the actors as well -we've got to advisers totally for help and be quick enough to react and respond directions. in the right way.\" In the control room he can be seen And that is Knightmare-a dream on a monitor. On another monitorare come true for games players. It's a the computer graphics, backgrounds. pity that everybody can't have a go. animations, etc. These two pictures There are already enough teams to are overlayed and it is this united compete in the first series but you image which is shown to the three could be lucky if the TV chlets give advisers. So for them the adventurer the go-ahead for another series. And actually appears to be in a monster's that will only happen if the stomatch, stone corridor, or dungeon programme is supported by you. with hideous monsters and strange Knightmare is screened creatures. Neat, eh? throughout the ITV network on In another studio the advisers and Mondays at 4.45pm. how the effects are done while playing the game because this would niin the atmosphere. A technique known as Chromakey allows all the different elements of Knightmare to be merged into what you, the viewer, and the adventurers It works roughly like this. Richard, or the other adventurer, is placed in a studio which is totally pale blue in colour, with various objects or actors, they are included that particular scene. "


"ANY HOLMESOFT FREEPOST (No Stamp Need In UK) SEDGLEY, DUDLEY WEST MIDLANDS DY3 3QY Tel: 0902-880971 CHEQUE/P.O.JE DRAFT TO: HOLMESOFT, C.O.D AVAILABLE (63 in advance) UK P&P INCL. (Add 50p for rec delivery EUROPE ADD 50p PER ITEM, ELSEWHERE 75p PHONE WRITE SAME DAY DESPATCH MAIL ORDER DIVISION OF ESTABLISHED RETAILER AND PUBLISHERS SPECTRUM OUR PRICE SPECTRUM OUR PRICE OUR PRICE OUR PRICE Each COMMODRE 64 OUR PRICE 09.05) 650 01095875 COMMODRE 64 Knight Orc Kahina Mas Maska OUR PRICE 1095) 10.95 10.95) 6.75 AMSTRAD A Complete Bastard 5-Pack ATARIST Arbal Constit Apache A Complete Bastard Mercenary Oy W oo L os com Lung Horror Magnetron DISC ONLY 1875 D 650 Bangkok Knights 0 1095) 6.75 ADV Tactical Fight Archie Fox Pushp +39.95) 675 Barbara Pagnosis Bubble Hobbie Chessma2000 Defender Of The Crown Enduro Race Backpack ALL Rabind Games CASS DISC 20% OFF HAP ALL SSI S egits.CASS/01SC 20% OFF RAP Addict 10 575 Arome Ranger 015 96 95 A Games (1095) 6.75 Auto-Duel Backpack s play 6.75 Bangkok (1995) 150 Barbara Road Runner 31195) 7.75 Big Vol Bobsleigh Bubble Bobble Buggy Boy S Scrabble De Luxe Side Arms Stent Service DISC ONLY 1 N Mansell Grand Prix O 10.95875 Nut Penny Mare 14951 1950 (3995 Head Over Heels indian Jones & TOO Catome Games Damar School Ele-Calon Enlight. Ond Exion Fairlight Legend Football Manager Ur's So Gane  Spitte Pegasus Pro Sim Fighter D 14.95) 10.95 Bosh vestr Bubble Bobole Charlie Chaplin Combat School D 10.95675 D 10 95 6.75 Double the Street Baseball D9 96650 Sobe De Red LED eeee EnlightDrud 39.95) 550 Through The Trap Door Thundercats Track & Field D 10 95) 65 Charlie Chan Dean Wish Defend Crown Roy of The Rovers KURS Stational Su Bae Simulation Super Sprint Guadal Canal Head Over Heels Hyster DISCONLY 10.95 8.95 Scrate DeLuxe Faight Legend Football Manager Fortress Arena on Al-Star 010 35 (+355) 650 3995) 75 G X-15 Apha Miss Xeortor Zaps ID 1096675 ALL OTHER CURRENT PRODUCTS U Soccer OF U Ord Et Epics Ekolon Farlight The Legend Foot Mail Fredy Made Solomon's Key Speed Rambler Star Games Knight Orc Game Set & Match +3 13.50 8.50 D 100515 0 10.95675 109.505 1095675 SPECTRUM BARGAINS HARDWARE ADD-ONS BLANKS ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT & POSTAGE Overseas Sencor ASE IS Atari 520 STEM 10.95673 D 10.956.75 ID 10 951 650 Head Over Heels Hige Frontier Hydera Ikan Warriors Indiana Jones Game Over Game Set & Match Gauntlet Summer Gold Super Saint To Pan Through Trae Door Road Roy Of The Rowers (+39.95 Boty beaning Ring H, Dandy Donkey Kong FM Galvas Gandright Pentagram 5.50 588  Sorabi Deu SMM 804,00 Dot Matra D 10.95 6.50 10 10.95 Jack the per Junge Death 099 650 10.95 6.75 Amiga 500, StartIndiana Jones Trastor Victory Road WC Leaderboard O 11.501795 ID 9951 850 10.951 595 int Kartell 10.986.75 Sand Gold Cam 34 IN C Krygten Factor D 10.9575 0 10.95675 ONLY 15800 Kung-Fu Master Wanders X. 15 Agha Mon 10.96875 Luca -Col 1 0.95) 575 Wagneron 100s of 1.102.99 GAMES BULK DISCOUNTS INVOICES Shadow Simmer Shain Road Sold A Mill SOFTWARE ADD-ONS FOR BBC'ELECTRON, C164 VCS SEGA. NINTENDO MSXOL IBM. SPECTRUM 3 Vic 20 et Through Trap Door The Feld BARGAIN PRICES BUSINESS SOFTWARE for ISM 04 AMSTRAD ST et (1095) 650 D 1095) 6.50 10 10 95 650 1095675 0109575 Creed ( 12) 28 Star NL-10 0 C Dot Mate Printer Atari VCS2000 Game System Com SEA Game System Com 500 WE GUARANTEE 2 DAY SERVICE Forthcoming Releases Send on Release Day PRODUET Forthcoming Releases Send on Release Day SAE for Software Hardware List UNLISTED NEW/OLD HARD/SOFT PRODUCT DEDUCT 20% From RRP CALLING ALL BURNERS .. SAMT Ano Is Ol SEGA Copyright 1987 SEGA Enterprises, Inc. (USA) "


"OFT. SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES Order by credit line 01-348 2907 (24 hrs) VISA SPECTRUM BARBARIAN IMPOSSABALL SPY V SPY CONFLICT 1 SAUNTLET RED LED 5.95 THEATRE EUROPE SABATOURI BATTLE OF BRITAIN GAME SET MATCH WORLD GAMES WORLD CLASS U BOARD FREDOY HARDEST SCALEXTRIC BANK Nots EUTE TRIO HIT PACK TL RACER ARKANOID CALIFORNIA GAMES JEWELS OF DARKNESS SILICON DREAMS STARGU DER EXPLODING PISTE 65 BUSSLE BOBBLE 01 WYSTER OFNILE-01 595 BUBBLE BORRE-02 CRAZY RIDER-01 STAR WARS 75 CAME SET MATCH-04 SIDE WIZE-01 6.70 SOLOMONS KEY-02 750 ARKANOU NOTA PENNY MORE FUTE 6 PACKS-02 TRIVIAL PURSUNTO 6.95 TRIVIAL PURSUIT 14 DELUXE SCRABBLE DRUID-01 6.95 WORLD CLASS L BOARD-02 BOB SLEIGH02 7.50 CODENAME DROID-01 *OUT RUN BATTLESHIP 02 SOLOMANS KEY MAGNETRON-02 6.95 ELITE 6 PAOK-D2 795 PAPERSOY SCELEC -02 REVS PLUS GAME SET + MATCH 01 10.95 EVS & TRACK MYSTERY OF THE NILE 03 BARBARIAN-02 ELITED 9.95 NINTENDO SYSTEM DELUXE SCRABBLE-DISK 1306 RENAGADE-02 SLAINE RYGAR-02 DELLE SET GUNSHIP_04  ORC-02 SATTLESHIPS 02 CONTROL DECK JEWELS OF DANS 01 NOLANA JONES-02 GRONETE ATHENA 32 FRIDOY HARDEST STRERER HEADCOACH FOOTBALL DIRECTOR 1 URIDIUM 299 EXCITEINE MEGA APOCALYPSE-02 DPP ART STUDIO DEATH WISH -02 7.50 WRECKING CREW DURRELL BIG 4 TAIPAN 02 IP | THA 16 | DR 7.50 TRANTOR-02 ATHENA 55 \"OUT RUN-02 WAR GAMES CONSDISK 145 TAIPAN-02 hs of Ap 695 SOCCER 1999 WORLD CLASS L BOARD-02750 CARRIER FORCE DISK 24.95 BUDGIE BOY ARILD OF THIEVES-DISKONLY 1435 TENNIS 19.99 ADVANCE ART STUDIO 05 1 9.95 DISKONLY DESTROYER 125 PENELADE02 GAME OVER SUPER MARIO BROS DURELL & VOL 11 GUILD OF THIEVES-DISKONLY 14.95 AIRBORNE RANGER04 12.95 KNIGHT ORC -03 LEADERBOARD 7.50 QUEDEX-02 DEFENDER OF CROWN-DISK 12.99 ADVANCE ART STUDIO-DISK 19.95 1905 \"GAUNTLETII-02 STEALTH ROTER-04 MINI CFRC -04 CLULU LAND 19.99 SATTLERELD GERMANY 1095 STAR WARS 02 SOS UTILITIES MEDLED-02 CONVOY RACER NOTA PENNY MORE 054C COMPENDIUM JEWELS OF DARKNESS 03 9.95 COVET GAME NOURA JONES-02 750 +EXCELERATOR DRVE 155 95 CALIFORNIA GAMES-02 7.50 STAR TREK AVL OCTOBER 13.95 PLUNKY -02 + 1511 DESK DRIVE 750 MERCENARY 159 95 SENTINAL GRAPHIC CREATOR HYBRID_02 15416D SK DRIVE T OUT RUN-D2 ADV ART STUDIO 120KL 18.95 TRACK+FELD-D2 + C2N DATA RECORDER SUPER SPRINT 02 BATTLE OF GUADAL CANAL02 750 NEOS MOUSE+CHEESE 29.95 SILICON DREAMS-03 ARMAGEDOON MAN D2 FREEZE MACHINE TANK-02 2705 6.95 KNIGHT ORC UCK THE NIPPER 1-02 FINAL CARTRIDGE 0CP MAT STUDIO SCENARY DISK SEDA MASTER SYSTEM 99 95 HIGH FRONTIER-D2 ACV MUSIC SYSTEM-DISK 2295 RENEGADE LIGHT PHASER + ACTION REPLAY CART DEATH WISH 3 19 AV ART STUDIO-DISK 02 PHANTOM OCTOSES THE LASTNNA02 GHOST HOUSE GAUNTLET OPERT CARTRIDGE SM 27.95 STAR GLIDER -09 ONE THE TES SLAP RIGHT-D2 TERRAPOOS SUPER TENNIS CALIFORNIA GAMES-02 BARBARIAN (PYGNOSIS FOOTBALL DIRECTOR F16 FIGHTER JSTICK EXT LEAD 14.95 IMPLOSION-02 HITCHIERS GUIDE ACTION FIGHTER + MIN OFFICE 11-04 JOYSTICKS CHOPLIFTER KNIGHT ORC ***ATARI 2500* * QUICK SHOT I BISMARK D2 OUT RUN DEFENDER OF CROWN 19.99 2000 CONSOLE 496 QUICK SHIT I TURBO 13.95 GAME OVER-02 PAWN 19.99 SUPER ZACION PRO WRESTLING RED LED-02 JEWELS OF DARKNES 14 0 cat GHT 24 DELUXE SCRABBLE CALIFORNIA LAMES 19.99 PN DOWN BUROMAX PROFESSIONAL PLUS 1896 WONDER BOW 1996 GAME SET MATCH04 0 .96 STEDER FUROMAX NON-AUTO PRE 155 19.95 ENDURO RACER-02 10X35 KS 1995 HUNTER 9.99 EETAH MAORI ATMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT QURD OF THEVES 1999 GHOSTBUSTERS 999 DE 125 SECRET CONVAND ELITE-05 10.95 TERRAPOOS 1995 GRAND PRIX 99 COMP PRO 5000 BBC SPACE HARRIER SILICON DREAMS995 DEFENDER OF THE CROWN 206 TENNIS 9.99 FANTASTIC STICK ALSO AVAILABLE ON DISK FORMAT D1 -.95, D2=.95, D3=.95, D4=.95, D5-.95 SOLE NOSALE 10.90 ANIMATORI Foortai orctos ROAD RUNNER ADVART STUDIO WIZRALL 5.95 GUNSHIP SENTINAL TAI-PAN  SLENT SERVICE VERCENARY FOR MAIL ORDER CUSTOMERS CALLERS. PLEASE SEND CHEO P.O. TO: S.C.S. (DEPT CVG. 655 GREEN LANES. LONDON NE QOY. P&P INCLUDED IN UK EUROPE ADD C1 PER ITEM. ELSEWHERE ADD C2 PER ITEM ADD ES FOR MACHINES FOR PSP (UK ONLY) SEND A SAE FOR FREE LIST 051 SPEC AMSTRAD BBC ATARIST AMIGA IBM PCW SEGA NINTENDO 2600 Please specily computer type PERSONAL CALLERS PLEASE PRODUCE THIS ADVERT AT EITHER SHOP FOR ABOVE DISCOUNTS TO SHEKHANA AT COMPUCENTRE UNIT 5 221 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, LONDON WIR SAF INEAREST TUBE STN GOODCE STOPEN 6 DAYS A WEEK 10 AM 18.00PM OR 655 GREEN LANES. LONDON NG OY IN TURNPIKE LANE STNI ITEMS ONLY AVAILABLE ON MAIL ORDER OR FROM 655 GREEN LANES NE DOY ACCESS AND VISA CARD ORDERS 01-348-2907 S 01-340-8565 01-631-4627 CREDIT CARD ORDERS DESPATCHED SAME DAY SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY \"ALL NEW RELEASES ARE SUBJECT TO RELEASE DATES FROM SOFTWARE HOUSES PLEASE RING TO CONFIRM AVAILABILITY ZANIN oncourse from ELECTRIC DREAMS SOFTWARE Commodore 64/128 Cassette (.99) and Disk ($14.99) ZX Spectrum 48k/128k/+ (.99) Amstrad CPC Cassette ($9.99) and Disk ($14.99) Mail Order: Activision (UK) Ltd, Units 3 & 4 Lloyds Close, Finedon Road Industrial Estate, Wellingborough, Northampton NN 4SR. Tel: (0933) 78787 Copyright 1987 Sega Enterprises Inc. (USA). All rights reserved. Electric Dreams Software, Authorised User. "


"OOO0000000000 REVIEWS Tony Takoushi will be pulling out all the stops to bring you all the latest, hottest news and reviews from the console scene-not only in the UK but worldwide. Just look at the gems in this issuean exclusive review of Nemesis plus a red-hot news on Nintendo games coming soon from the US/Japan. So stay with C+VG, it's where the NEWS is! Until now I thought that MSX Nemesis was the definitive version. Well it's been topped by the Nintendo version. The Nintendo version has all the elements of the MSX version BUT also has superior graphics and is actually more playable, as the controller has a second button allowing you to choose your weapon without a wild lunge for the keyboard. The music and sound effects are pretty much the same, but the Nintendo has the edge over MSX Konami is planning to release Nintendo carts in the UK from January 1988 onwards, and they will sell for around -25. Nemesis was the first game to follow in the Defender style and in many respects was an improvement. 1 000013100 HI 000013100 ME AN MACHINES SHITET 217-000092500 HI 000092500 The aim of Nemesis is to go from planet to planet, destroying aliens and taking on a mean mothership at the end of each planet. You can beef up your armaments by shooting complete alien patterns which turn into red pods, if you collect these pods an icon at the bottom of the screen shows which weapon can be chosen. There are six weapons to choose from, speed/missile/double fire/laser/ optional extra ship and force field. Your ship moves left to right against a very smooth scrolling backdrop, there are six planets to work through and the backdrops get ever more colourful and detailed 1P 000048100 HI 000048100 O........... "


"10000000000000000 They range from mountains to metallic mazes to stoneheads spitting polo rings these are vicious-at you. I also discovered an extra life hidden away on level one!! am not sure whether this is in the arcade version, but as with many Japanese games there are usually lots of hidden touches. The Nintendo version moves along at a hectic pace and is The Nintendo is the biggest selling games console in the world with around eight million units in use. In Japan it is called the Famicom Family Computer and has been around for several years. The time will come when UK software houses will start writing games for the machine at present Nintendo issues licences for third party software and initial shipouts are said to be around one million units for a new game. The reason for me spelling out the above is that there is a development system for the Nintendo currently in use. It's the Commodore 64 with an interface board --so those UK Nintendo games could be with Us sooner than you think. fill in the coupon and rush it to to level 7-4 (WITHOUT warps) Computer and Video Games, and having made 4 pages of Sega Joystick Quiz, Priory notes I finally cracked the Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, thing. London ECIR 3AU. Closing To get the firework bonus date is November 16th. So get you have to time your leap cracking! Here are the from the tower to the flagpole questions: so that the last digit on the 1. Which team won the TIME guage is either a 1,3 or International Arcade Championship at the Personal Computer World Show? TONY'S TOPSCORE 2. Name the manufacturer of the current arcade smash CHALLENGE Afterburner. Reckon you can beat my top 3. Name a member of the US scores? Well, here's your National Video Game Team. chance. I am throwing down the gauntlet to all you video All these answers can be found addicts and challenging YOU in THIS issue! to a head to head top score battle! TONY'S TIPS It doesn't matter what games lam absolutely hooked on system you own all I want to Super Mario Bros on the know is your top score on your Nintendo, but one thing that fave game, the level you've was really bugging me (as all reached and any tips or tricks you SMB fans will appreciate) you've discovered. . Each month I'll put the best is that at the end of certain scores together and pick the waves there is a mysterious winner -who I'll challenge to bonus given with either 1, 3 or a battle of the giants at IT'S 6 fireworks going off (each Games Tower in the heart of firework gives a 500 point London! bonus). Send your hi-scores in on the After having battled my way coupon below. Cors can be found to a head hot games Just when you thought it was safe to switch on your Nintendo along comes Jaws from the hit movie series! Yes, the monster shark is out to get you yet again! All you Ikari Warrior fans can sleep soundly at night as we can report that the game should be selling in the UK early next year. I love a good session on Spy Hunter. The Nintendo version is set for the Japanese market and hopefully we will get it soon after! WIN THE NEW SEGA JOYSTICK! The only thing wrong with the new Sega System is those fiddly control pads! Come on, you've been thinking that for some time haven't you? Don't try to fool me. Well, TAX can answer all you problems. Five C+VG readers' problems at least. Thanks to Mastertronic we can offer FIVE of these spiffy new Sega sticks to the winners of this month's neat mini-competition. To win, all you have to do is answer three simple questions, C+VG SEGA JOYSTICK COMPT.T.'S TOP SCORE CHALLENGE Name Name: Address Address: actually faster than its MSX counterpart. There are some dynamite games coming up for the Nintendo, and as good as it is, Nemesis is barely the tip of the iceberg!  T.T's Thrill Rating 9 My answers are: 1 Machine: Game: Score: 10605555555555. OO "


"000000000000001 Pinball Clu Clu Land Super Mario Bros Ballon Fight Urban Champion Donkey Kong Donkey Kong Jnr Donkey Kong 3 Mario Bros Popeye Gumshoe Trojan Donkey Kong Jnr Math Ninja Kid Chubby Cherub 1942 Commando Ghosts 'N' Goblins .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 May  ME AN MACHINE S SEGA RELEASE SCHEDULE TO NOVEMBER 1987 UK HARDWARE Master System Console Unit .95 August Light Phaser + Combo Cartridge .95 August 3-D Glasses + Adaptor .95 October SOFTWARE My Hero .95 August Ghost House .95 August Transbot .95 August Super Tennis .95 August Spy Vs Spy .95 August Choplifter .95 August Black Belt .95 August Action Fighter .95 August Pro Wrestling .95 August Shooting Gallery .95 August Fantasy Zone .95 August Space Harrier .95 August Rocky .95 August F-16 Fighter .95 October World Soccer .95 October Astro Warrior/Pit Pot .95 October World War 3-D .95 October Out Run .95 October Teddy Boy .95 November The Ninja .95 November World Grand Prix .95 November Zaxxon 3-D .95 November Enduro Racer .95 November Quartet .95 Unannounced Wonder Boy .95 Unannounced Ghostbusters Unannounced Alex Kidd in Miracle World Unannounced Rambo Unannounced Zillion Unannounced Woody Pop Unannounced Gangster Town Unannounced Great Baseball Unannounced Great Ice Hockey Unannounced Great Volleyball Unannounced SEGA JAPAN/US RELEASES Great Basketball August Great Golf August Missile Defence 3D August Out Run August Alien Syndrome September Fantasy Zone 2 September Monopoly November NINTENDO GAMES CATALOGUE UK Gyromite .50 Stack-Up .50 Duck Hunt .50 Hogan's Alley .50 Wild Gunman .50 Excitebike .50 Wrecking Crew .50 Mach Rider .50 Golf .99 Baseball .99 Tennis .99 Soccer .99 10-Yard Fight .99 Kung Fu .99 Ice Climber .99 NINTENDO RELEASE SCHEDULE MAY 1987 JANUARY 1988 (JAPAN/US) Castlevania May Ikari Warriors Family Fun Fitness June Athena July Double Dribble July Legend of Zelda Mighty Bomb Jack Rygar July Section Z Solomon's Key July Stadium Events July Arkanoid August Deadly Towers August Elevator Action August Kid Icarus August Legend of Kage August Loderunner August Metroid August Raid on Bungling Bay August Spelunker August Star Voyager August 3D Battles/World Runner August Goonies Two September Kid Niki September Makai Island September Psycho Soldier September Ring King September Side Arms September Sky Kid September Speed Rumbler September Spy Hunter September Sqoon September Star Force September Stinger September Victory Road September Winter Games September Breakthru October Karnov October Punch Out October Renegade October Adventure of Link November Aerobics November Gotcha November Gunsmoke November Jaws — The Revenge November Top Gun November Karate Kid December "


"ROX FORMERLY MUSIC BY MAIL NOVEMBER '87 P.O. BOX 1035, ENFIELD, MIDDLESEX, EN1 1PG .99 .99 .99 .99 99 .99 KNOCKOUT PRICES .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 SPECTRUM SPECTRUM COMMODORE AMSTRAD .99 1.65 99       3.50 3.50 99 987 TO an n và 2 n H 2 2 2 và 9 và 1 ng Rap 2\\ 22 \\\\\\\\\\ka v v 88888:::8886EEEEEEEEEEE8888888 DODO 1.96 888888822&RRRRRRR 5.25 PANLABAND 1.65 v S S 1.65 7.95 7.95 ALL OR NOTHING KNIGHT LOR 3.50 INDOOR SPORTS 3.50 MGT ARCADE ACTION 1.65 KRAKOUT KARATE CHAMP 3.50 TRAILBLAZER ARMAGEDDON LIGHTFORCE KAYLETH MICROVALUE (6 GAMES) BEAKEY & THE EGG SNATCHERS 1.65 MERMAID MADNESS LEVIATHON 3.50 WINTER SPORTS BRAIN DAMAGE 1.65 MIND SHADOW UTTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE DRAGONS LAIR BULLSEYE 1.65 NOW GAMES 1 MARBLE MADNESS FINAL MATRIX CASEY JONES NEXUS MISSION A.D. DEACTIVATORS CASINO ROYALE OFF THE HOOK MISSION ELEVATOR 3.50 MERMAID MADNESS CHEQUEREDFLAG PROHIBITION NEMESIS 3.50 IT'S A KNOCKOUT CHESS RIVER RAID NOSFERATU 350 XEVIOUS CHESS THE TURK SAM FOX STRIP POKER NUCLEAR EMBARGO AUF WIEDERSEHEN MONTY COMPUTER COOKBOOK (21ps) SHADOW SKIMMER ON COURT FOOTBALL 3.50 BACK TO THE FUTURE CONFUSION SHERLOCK PARANOID 3.50 BOMBJACK COSMIC DANCERS 1.65 STARFOX SAMURAI TRILOGY COMPUTER HITS 3 CYBER RATS THING BOUNCES BACK SCOOBY DOO 3.50 COMPUTER HITS 5 DIMENSION TOAD RUNNER SHANGHAI FIVE STAR GAMES DESTRUCTORS TUJAD STAR RAIDERS INTERN'L KARATE DISK THE YOUNG ONES VIKINGS LEADERBOARD DOOMSDAY CASTLE ZUNAPS WONDERBOY MAG MAX DRIVE IN 1.65 FIGHTING WARRIOR D THOMPSON DECATHLON SKYFOX ENIGMA FORCE 1.65 FRANKIE GOES HOLLYWOOD AVENGER SPACE HARRIER EXTERMINATOR PACMAN SHAOLINS ROAD TRIVIAL PURSUIT FA FOOTBALL 87 PITFALL 2 SUPER HUEY WORLD GAMES FREEZE BEES SKY FOX TAG TEAM WRESTLING ACE GOLF SPACE SHUTTLE PITFALL I BOMB JACK2 GREAT SPACE RACE MAX HEADROOM AUF WIDERSEHEN MONTY GAUNTLET CICLE WORKS 1.65 MICRO VALUE (6 GAMES) COMPUTER HITS 5 INFILTRATOR JOHNNY REB + BALLBLAZER ELITE HIT PACK KONAMI COIN OP HITS KILLER KONG DEACTIVATORS THING BOUNCES BACK LEADERBOARD KRAKATOA GHOSTBUSTERS XEVIOUS THEY SOLD A MILLION II MISSION IMPOSSIBLE GO TO HELL ACE 2 WORLD CLASS LEADERBOARD MONEY MANAGER HACKER FOOTBALLER FO THE YEAR MOTHER SHIP LIGHT FORCE INTERN'L KARATE DISK ON THE OCHE MATCH POINT MAG MAX ONE ON ONE THREE WEEKS IN PARADISE IBM QUARTET ORBITER TRAILBLAZER ROAD RUNNER WAR OF THE WORLDS TRIVIAL PURSUIT WINTER SPORTS WORLD CLASS LEADERBOARD AM/FM TRIVIA 1 5.75 PSI GAMES 1.65 BOBBY BEARING ARKANOID AM/FM TRIVIA 2 7.95 RAPSCALLION 1.66 AMFM TRIVIA 3 1942 BOMB JACK 2 795 REALM OF IMPOSSIBILITY 1.65 LASER BASIC ARCHON GAUNTLET 795 ROAD RACERS COMBAT LYNX BOULDERDASHI KONAMI COIN OP HITS RUPERT RESCUE ON FRACTALUS BOULDERDASHI LEADERBOARD 7.95 SOS AUF WIDERSEHEN MONTY FOOTBALL MANAGER PAPER BOY SAM SPADE COMPUTER HITS 5 MIND DANCE STARGLIDER SCHIZOFRENIA METROCROSS MUSIC CONSTRUCTION 10TH FRAME SLIPPERY SID NOW GAMES 4 THEY SOLD A MILLION II PINBALL CONSTRUCTION SNOOKER MAG MAX SUPER SUNDAY WORLD GAMES SPECTRUM CHESS QUARTET STAGE COACH BOMB JACK 2 STAR TRADER ROAD RUNNER STARSHIP ENTERPRISE EUTE SUPERMUTT AMSTRAD TIME TUNNELS BUG OFF TIR NA NOG COMMODORE CANNIBALS TITANIC FA FOOTBALL '87 1.65 DANGER RANGER UNDERWUALD ON THE OCHE (DARTS) 1.65 FIGHTER PILOT VALKYRIE 17 GOLF VIDEO POOL GOLF AMERICAN FOOTBALL MR DIG WORLD CUP FOOTBALL FA FOOTBALL \"87 BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK 2.99 PENGON 1.65 WORLD CUP FOOTBALL G CAPES STRONGMAN TUTTI FRUTTI BROAD STREET BOULDERDASH CHOPPER SQUAD 2.99 BOULDERDASH CODE NAME MATT BOULDERDASHII CODE NAME MATT II 2 99 BOULDERDASHI ENDURO CODE NAME MATTI ELECTRO FREDDY FOOTBALL MANAGER EUREKA FALCON PATROL 2 2.99 FIGHTING WARRIOR SUPERMAN EVIL CROWN FOOTBALL MANAGER FOOTBALL MANAGER 2.99 TRAILBLAZER FALCON PATROL 2 GROWING PAINS OF ADRIAN MOLE 2.99 FRIDAY THE 13TH PITFALL GROWING PAINS OF ADRIAN MOLE 2.99 HEADCOACH GLADIATORS SPACE SHUTTLE HEADCOACH INTERNATIONAL KARATE 2.99 HAUNTED HEDGES HERO 2.99 JET SET WILLIE 2.99 HERBERTS DUMMY RUN I OF THE MASK ON COURT BASKETBALL HOME RUNNER MS. PACMAN 2.99 PILOT 64 2.99 HUNCHBACK PRESIDENT 2.99 PRESIDENT INTERNATIONAL KARATE PSYTRON 2.99 SUPERMAN JET BOOT JACK SKY RUNNER 2.99 TRANS-ATLANTIC BALLOON CHALLENGE2.99 MANIC MINER GOLF SPLIT PERSONALITIES 2.99 TURBO 64 2.99 MASTER OF THE LAMPS 2.99 STARSHIP COMMAND TRANS-ATLANTIC VIEW TO A KILL PRESIDENT BLITZDRIEG BALLOON CHALLENGE ACE 2.99 BOZO THE BRAVE TWISTER ACROJET CATERPILLA SPLIT PERSONALITIES VIEW TO A KILL ALIENS STAR COMMANDO 2.99 CYCLON INVASION VIRGIN ATLANTIC CHALLENGE 2.99 BRUCE LEE STAR GAMES ONE FIVE-A-SIDE SOCCER WAR ON WANT COMBAT LYNX SUPERMAN FOOTBALL MANAGER ZOOS 2.99 DAN DARE VIEW TO A KILL 2.99 GUNSMOKE ACE DANDY ANIMATOR HYPER DRIVE AVENGER DECEPTOR ARKANOID INVADERS BACK TO THE FUTURE ELEVATOR ACTION BARBARIAN 3.50 SPACE CAVERS BATTLE OF THE PLANETS FUTURE KNIGHT DANDY STRATO BOMBER DRAGONS LAIR GRANGE HILL FUTURE KNIGHT SUPERMAN ENDURO GREAT ESCAPE GRANGE HILL SUPER POOL EVIL CROWN HOWARD THE DUCK IMPOSSABALL TALES OF ARABIAN NIGHTS THE FORCE HYPABALL 3.50 ITS A KNOCKOUT 3D BOMB ALLEY FRIDAY THE 13TH 3.50 TREK II FUTURE KNIGHT HEATHROW ATC GRANGE HILL 3.50 ALL PRICES INCLUDE V.A.T. & DELIVERY OVERDRIVE GREAT ESCAPE SMASH'N'GRAB KAYLETH WITHIN THE U.K. TEMPEST PLEASE PRINT YOUR NAME, ADDRESS, GAME(S) REQUIRED, AND FORMAT. ALLOW 21 DAYS FOR DELIVERY EXPORT CUSTOMERS, PLEASE ADD .50 TO COVER POSTAGE, PAYMENT MUST BE IN STERLING.  4 8 7 6 5 4 15N 6 ATARI 400/800  88888 888888888888888 2 99 2.99 299 299 2.99 299 2.99 299 ELECTRON 2.99 299 299 2 99 299 2.99 3.50 3.50 2.99 NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN 8 8888888888888888888 3.50 88888888 38833888 3.50 3.50 3.50 3.50 PLEASE MAKE CHEQUES/POSTAL ORDERS TO BOXERS MAIL OUT "


"** AREA Can you fight your way through ancient Rome, keep an American town free from crime and 41940 rescue a spaceship from the grip of an alien army? Clare Edgeley tries her best while managing to report on the most recent arcade sensation After Burner. It's a game that can quite literally cost you an arm and a leg!!! AFTER merely explodes into a ball of flame. However, if it's hit by BURNER sharpnell, smoke will pour from the engines and it'll go into a death dive, eventually hitting the ground Fasten your seatbelt for the ride of and ploughing a long furrow your life in Sega's After Burner. before juddering to a halt. There's Guide your plane through war torn absolutely nothing you can do to skies, loop the loop to avoid enemy save it, except hang onto your seat missiles, slip night and then hard left as the cabinet finishes shaking. to shoot down the enemy planes. Level three gives you your first The action is there but can you chance to relax as inflight cope with it? refuelling takes place. A large Following hot on the heels of plane hovers over your jet and a Out Run, Sega has definitely come hose snakes down to link into your up with the goods again. Stuffed fuel system. In no time at all it's over the enemy as they scream down on bit of a problem. And you'll find full of electronics, this fabulous and you're back on the beat. If you. game flings you in four directions After Burner really hits you where it possible the action starts to get It's just as well there's a continue hurts right in the pocket. At ,00 to simulate the movement of your more fierce and so much time is play option because dying is a hell jet aircraft, Forward and backward othrow, it's not a cheap way of taken with dodging missiles that of a lot easier than flying, and movements are combined with relaxing, if you can call this roller you have little time to shoot down keeping alive and in one piece is a stomach churning jolts to the right coaster ride relaxation. The and left as your plane dives and problem lies with the machine itself. wheels through the air, always With so much time and technology looking for a new target spent in designing the game, Shades of Lock-On creep in. cabinet and movement the actual Your sights will enlarge when machine costs a bomb causing the price per game to rise. It stings, locked onto enemy craft and this is the time to let loose a deadly especially when you want just one homing missile. These are limited, more go and then realise you haven't even got enough left for so trigger happy cowboys won't get very far. Your joystick contains the bus fare home. Obviously the a trigger in the handgrip for laser price per game depends on the cannons, and on top is the missile individual arcade owner, and perhaps in the seaside resorts it'll button. They are not easily confused, thank God! be cheaper Time will tell. Sitting in your bucket seat, the On with the flight. Level six is a view on screen is of the back of stunner. Having flipped quite happily from scene to scene with your plane with the enemy aircraft zooming straight towards it. Tiny no trouble, to find yourself in a black dots in the distance grow maze of rocks is a disaster. rapidly into squadrons of enemy Freedom of the skies is a phrase of jets. Clusters of missiles mushroom the past. There's only one way to at alarming speeds. Instant evasive go, and that's to follow the action must be taken to avoid passage. I felt the need for a brake these, and slipping sideways while pedal at this point! To hurtle down looping the loop is one such a passage, never knowing when G-050 Successful tactic. the next bend is going to appear, There's no time for a breather in or indeed how sharp it'll be, is a the early screens, the planes come terrifying experience. thick and fast, and your cannons Suddenly you're out in the open almost glow from the fire and the joy of being able to zoom discharged. Flying from one level up into the skies! More planes to another is instantaneous, the scramble into attack, enemy missile only difference being the change cover is even heavier and then the in the landscape. The ride is just as sirens start to wail. Red lights flash hair-raising. on inside the cabinet. I thought they were just there for decoration. Crashing can be almost as fun as flying, except for the knowledge The sound breaking out from all that your lives are ebbing away. If sides fills you with urgency. vour jet recieves a direct hit, it Words can't do After Burner justice you'll just have to give it a shot. Though the price is a real pain, stake a couple of quid on it and go for the flight of your life. "


"VE ACTION XENOPHOBE APB $645 131 k CUOTA: B down, the other lets him pick up obects. To pick something up. you've got to first crouch and then A Xenophobe, according to the press the other button. When dictionary, is a person with a you've got hoardes of disgusting morbid dislike of foreigners. ! aliens flinging themselves at your suppose that could include aliens throat, it's not always easy to too. remember which button does Bally Midway's Xenophobe iso what. three player game and is a straight. If you've seen the film, you'll fake-off of the movie Aliens. The remember the eggs in the screen is split horizontally into incubation rooms and how three and each narrow section tenacious the baby aliens are. And scrolls from left to right. As new you'll also remember how full size players join in their respective aliens just launch themselves at you sections burst into life. At ten pence with teeth bared. The same ago, it's got to be one of the happens in the game. Larger aliens cheapest games around. leap across the room at you and The idea of the split screen is the little monsters leap onto your nice, though it's not entirely legs for a good chew. successful the playing areas are Your gun is of some use against too narrow. In fact, I found the the eggs and younger monsters, whole game distasteful from the but the older ones are more squelching, slurping sound of the tenacious, and several shots will be aliens, the slime dripping off the needed to kill them. Unfortunately, walls, and the eggs which hatch as you rarely have time to fire several you pass through the incubating shots. By the time one's dived for rooms. Graphically, the artists have your throat, you'll have dropped done a good job, the aliens look your gun. If there isn't time to pick act and move as they do in the film. up again, you'll have to go Yuk! unarmed for a while until you find You can actually band up with another one. Luckily, there are lots your fellow players and blast away around and getting hold of a new in harmony. If you should end up in one isn't too much trouble. the same room as one of your Always stand up if you want to partners, both your characters will move quickly, crawling along the appear on your respective screens. ground is painfully slow. The only That way, if one of you should lose way to get through a room quickly your weapon, the other will be is to jump through it. At least this able to keep the aliens at bay. way you can jump over any lurking The whole idea of the game is to aliens as well rid the spaceship of aliens and pick I wouldn't recommend up valuable hardware to activate Xenophobe to anyone. It's not that the ship's computers. Or so it says I'm squeamish, in fact I enjoyed the in the instructions. I found lots of film, but I find the game hardware, but didn't even get a unenjoyable and distasteful. peek at a computer. Each time an alien grabs you, your life points decrease, though you can pick up objects to restore them to healthier levels. Watch out, though, for poisonous potions. Picking up objects can be a pain. Your joystick is equipped with a trigger for your gun and two thumb buttons. One button makes your character stand up or crouch STT APB All Points Bulletin -isa whacky and humorous cartoon style game from Atari. First, the practice run. Prove what a dob hand you are at playing the cop by'apprehending a load of traffic cones. To do this, whizz round a circuit and when a cone appears 'apprehend' it by touching it with your siren sights. These appear when you touch the siren button and sit some way in front of your patrol car. This way you avoid collisions with other cars. In fact, should you collide, you'll be given demerit points. So put yourself in the shoes of a bumbling American cop and see how much mayhem you can cause to the unsuspecting civilians of Yuppieville. Your first task on Day one is to dole out tickets to carloads of hippie litterbugs as, with not a care in the world, they whizz round in their pink cars. Using your siren sights, move up behind them and crease up at the verbal GBH they give you. The quality of speech in APB is excellent. And when the other characters aren't yelling at you, speech bubbles with unprintable (\"IS!) abuse appear. The hippies are fairly easy targets for the first day, though there are a set number to catch and there's not much time. Especially when you keep getting run over by trains on the level crossing Hunger pangs grab you around mid-day and it's time to pull over for a doughnut. These delicious morsels slide into the path of passing cars and you must time it to run over the doughnut as it makes litter louts to contend with, but on its brief appearance. Bonus time is top of that, there are loads more given for every doughnut you jobs to be done. And chomp. apprehending the villains is no You need the armour protection easy job. when you trifle with Freddy Freak APB grows on you. It can be on Day 2. Unfortunately, you can't hilarious and, at times, utterly pick up a gun until Day 4, but that frustrating. There's masses going doesn't stop Freddy throwing sticks on, the cartoon graphics are great of dynamite your way. Your brief is and the speech amongst the to ram him off the road and take clearest I've heard. So if you him to the station for interrogation. hanker after a spot on the beat, Easier said than done. turn on your siren and give it a Back at the station, they're not whirl. pleased. How the hell are you to arrest Sid Sniper, Hans Oop and Fake if you can't deal with an old snitch like Freddy Freak. The other cops aren't sympathetic and you're shown a great cartoon of them dragging you out of your car, giving you a couple of whacks and chucking you into a trash can. Nice friends you've got! Later scenes are crammed with jobs for the day. You've still got the but did sound lots Peek at GRIEVER HEALTH LEFT BUTTON RIGHT BUTTON 625 be LEFT BUTTON "


"G-TEN LIMITED THE Mail-Order Software House NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY SATARI NOW? Hire Software  AVAILABLE w Before You Buy It EXPRESS RADER ENDURO RACER STUUR LEVIATHAN VETROCROSS TRANTOR DESTROYER RENEGADE 725 11 25 325 1225 BUREAUCRACY NA 12.75 THE PAWN 475 10 50 WACKER STA GLIDER 750 12 25 SUPER HLEY  WORLD GAUS URRAREN ROAD RUNNER LAST NINJA SPY V SPY CONFLICTS II BLITZKRIEG DEATH WISH III STRIKE FORCE HARRER 1323 KARATE MASTER TRAIL BLAZER ARKANOIDS TURBO GT STERRADERS NA JONES 825 +2.25 650 NA 675 1225 MARBLE MADNESS AUNTLET DEATH WISH 8 25 1225 THEY SOLD A MILLION 725 1125 TRATOR 8 25 225 THEY STOLE A LIN325 1125 SUPER CYCLE 7.50 1225 RENEGADE HEAD OVER HEELS SHAOLINS ROAD 5.50 12.25 PAPERBOY 5 50 11.25 LIVING DAYUGHTS 1.15 STRWE EAGLE 1325 STAR RADERS MEGA APOCALYPSE LAST VISSON CALIFORNIA GAMES 25 1225 PAPERay TEMPLE OF TERROR HEPTON KONAMI COOP HIT STRWERS RUN ULTIMA BALANCE OF POWER WINTER GAVES BUREAUCRACY NOW UNDER new management OVER 8.000 different titles available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, ELECTRON, BBC, AMSTRAD all models, ATARI, and MSX computers and now ATARI ST. ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too. HIRE PRICES from only .00 INC. P&P 20% DISCOUNT off all purchase software, LIFE MEMBERSHIP .00. Hire your first title FOC FREE CATALOGUE FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given). ALL GAMES manufactured ORIGINALS with full documentation LARGE DISCOUNTS ON ALL PURCHASES for members. UP TO 65% OFF software, regular sales lists sent to all members. Full computerised system keeps track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with experienced staff who know what the word service means. 675 1125 6.75 1225 XOR 8 25 12 2SIMOGEN GRAND PRIX CON SET TARAN STARQUARE CHAMP WATERSKIING GRAPHICART TEXT CRAFT SILENT SERVICE WORLD GAMES STRIP POKER STAR GLIDER 7 25 10 50 6.50 10.50 725975 725 10 50 22575 COMMODORE 64128 INDIANA JONES GAUNTLET LEADERBOARD 525 1225 725 1125 6.75 1075 CRAZIE RIDER LIVING DAYLIGHTS SPY VS SPY 8 25 1225 P&P de pe 3 25 42.25 QUICKSHOT 8 25 225 QUICKSHOT TURBO Send .00 (inc P&P) for our catalogue-redeemable on your first order. Please specify computer. Add 75p P&P per item (inland/BFPO only). European (inc N.V/Eire) ADD .50 P&P per item. Elsewhere add .50 P&P per item. Make cheques or postal orders (sterling) payable to G-TEN LIMITED. Send large S.A.E. now for free catalogue. NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY 1 Walkers Road, North Moons Moat, Redditch 139B 9HE 0527 591450 CVG NAME .. ADDRESS Send your orders to: G-TEN LIMITED DEPT C+VG 11 FREEPOST (no stamp needed in UK/BFPO) 146/150 COMMERCIAL STREET LONDON E1 6BR ORDER CARD LINE TEL: 01-377 2630 (24hr Answerphone) COMPUTER MODEL Cass Disk AMIGA Barbara Bran Cough Frol Defender of the Crown ATARI ST Ad Art Studio A Really Dungeon 18.95 1895 2295 37 95 18.95 18.95 18.95 Barbara Flight Sim Guild of Threves... Indiana Jones Joystick Ext Lead Night Oro 18.95 FOR SOCCER FANS EVERYWHERE ... Britain's up-to-date football weekly is delighted to bring you the Football Yearbook 1988. 132 jam-packed, actionfilled pages to inform you, entertain you, amaze you and make you think! Goldrunner Guild of Thieves... Hardball Holywood Sirp Poker Karate Kid Night Ore Roadwar 2000 1495 Ady Art Studio 1995 19.95 Arbore Ranger 11 20 14 95 Armageddon Van 9.75 11 20 Athena Bangkok Knights 7 25 11 20 Battleships 725 11 20 Bismar 725 11.20 Black Magic 725 11 20 Bu Guadaca 725 11.20 Bubble Bobble 555 B24 11 20 14.95 California Games 725 11 20 Druid il Ente 6 Pack 725 11.20 Eryx Epics 725 11.20 6 55 9.75 F15 Str Eagle7 25 11 20 Game Set Match 9.75 13.50 Gry 5.95 14.95 1895 Road Runner 18.95 ... ...18.95 189 18.95 Silent Service Sinbad Starglider Stational Super Huey Uninvited Silent Service Solomons Key Subbattle Simulator TNT Toe Gun 1895 18.95 World Games 9 Princes in Amber...... 1495 FOOTBALL YEARBOOK OF DALGLISH MIDESD Mail Order Software service WORLDWIDE .SOFTWARE Europe, Middle East USA, Africa Australia and many other countries 1988 Britain 11 20 ATEH 1495 19.95 14.95 14 95 1995 1995 C64/128 Cass Disc 064/128 Cas disk 064/128 11 20 14.95 Solomons Key A7 25 11.20 Defender of the Crown High Frontier............7.25 11.20 Star Games il ...725 11.20 Faght Simil.. ......... implosion 7 25 11.20 Stealth Figher..... 11 20 14.95 Gettysburg Indiana Jones ...7 25 11 20 Str Baseball 725 11.20 Guild of Theves Sort Basketball7 25 11 20 Hitchhos Gude Kids Dead 725 11 20 Hollywood Knight Ore Super Sprint 7 25 11 20 Leather Goddess TaiPan Moetus Last Ninja 725 1120 Trantor 7.25 925 ........... 7.25 11 20 Wargame CstSet 11 20 14.95 Panzer Grenadier Mean Streak........725 11 20 Wargame Greats 11.20 14.95 Phantasolla Mega Apocalypse 656 975 World Clas Lood 725 11.20 XOR Realms of Darkness Morpheus X15 Agha Miss 725 11.20 RochchamgaPeates 11 20 14.95 DISK ONLY Stational Quedex Al Realty The Pawn Red LED .......725 9.95 Autodiel 14.95 Ultima TV Renegade Battle Cruiser 19.95 Up Periscope Scary Monsters5.95 975 Carters at War USAAF Shoot Const Set 11 20 14.95 Colonial Conquest 19.95 Warin S Pacific Silent Service 1051 Bank Disk All price include postage and packing in UK Overseas orders please add 1 00 per cassis for AIR MAIL divery Send SAE for Catalogue and new releases please state machine type Spectrum MSX BBC etc) Credit card orders welcome ty phone or letter Cheques and postal orders payable to TASSEN 14-page quiz special! 1495 28 95 23 95 In the shops NOW or order direct from MATCH SHOP Yearbook Offer: 14 Holkham Road, Orton Southgate, Peterborough PE2 OUF. (Please allow 21 days for delivery). Please send ... Football Yearbook (s) @ .95 each inc. P+p. I enclose a cheque/PO for f... made payable to Match Name... Address WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE 1 Bridge Street Galashiels TD1 15W Tel: 0896 57004 Postcode. "


"Makes a Christmas great i present NOW AVAILABLE the official Spectrum Upgrade! very Turn your Spectrum into la Spectrum + for just .95% + .50 p + p ORDER NOW! ACCESS WELCOME  Professional full size keyboard -includes 17 extra keys  Responsive typewriter style action Accepts all current Spectrum software and peripherals True video video Gtaphics Edit Caps lock EE Caps Shift Colon E S Inverted com Cursor controls Comma The official Spectrum Upgrade. Naturally your upgraded computer will accept all the peripherals in your Sinclair system Interface 1, Microdrives and so onas well as all Spectrum software, Just as important, new Spectrum software and peripherals will be designed with the Spectrum + in mind. So the Sinclair upgrade adds stylish looks, new capabilities and new potential for the future. Here's some exciting news for Spectrum owners .. HOW TO ORDER BY MAIL the official Spectrum Upgrade Kit. The Upgrade has everything you 1. If you require us to do the upgrade for you please send .90 +.50p+p. Total .40. need to turn your Spectrum into the stylish new Spectrum + You don't even k 2. Should you require the do it yourself kit just send .95 +1.50 +. Total .45 need an understanding of electronics just the ability to solder a few wires together! The 3. If you require your Spectrum to be repaired and upgraded to a Spectrum Plus we have a leaflet in the kit gives clear step by step instructions. If you're not sure about doing it special offer price of just .00 complete yourself, don't worry Simply return your 4K Spectrum to us and for .90 +  Orders can be placed by using your Access Card on the numbers below. D+ we'll upgrade it for you. The bigger, better Spectrum keyboard Ltd. The Spectrum + measures 1212 x 6'. It has a large typewriter-style keyboard with hard moulded keys. You'll find the new keyboard has a smooth, positive action ideal for touch typing word processing simulation programs and extended programming sessions. Two retractable legs give a perfect typing position. There are 58 keys in all including 17 new keys. Programmers will be pleased to see dedicated punctuation keys, a space bar, and separate shift keys for graphics Upgrade Dept. 140 High Street West, Glossop. Derbyshire SK13 8H), and extended modes. And a reset button allows you to clear a program from your Tel: 04574-66555/67761 Head Office & access orders. computer's memory without disconnecting the power supply Manchester 061-236 0376 while you wait repair centre only  Copyright Videovault Ltd. No. 789003 ve they are the ones they are han sammen, deretter og Vige o v auuu TELE-GAMES 400/806 NOW Europe's Largest Stock Of Video Games & Cartridges 100s of cartridges for LOOK ST CBS Case CBSW Nintendo THE ARCADE QUALITY VIDEO GAME SYSTEM ATARI XL/XE ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to:CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 INTENSION SEGA 2600 SPECIAL PRICE .95* with 2 FREE GAMES — DONKEY KONG and SMURF .....STOP PRESS..... 2 NEW COLECO GAMES ARRIVING SOON Plus .00 P&P HOLD ON A SEC JUST GOT TO FINISH THIS ROUND I WON'T BE LONG, HONEST WICO JOYSTICK FOR '| .95 PLUS Nintendo .00 IN STOCK NOW P&P (Trade welcome) JUST ONE MORE GO... PLEASE? Send for lists (state make of game) to TELEGAMES, WIGSTON, LEICESTER, LES 1TE (0533-880445) MIRRORSOFT 1987 What ARE they playing? "


"AKTALIANO exit. throws pulsating green balls UK COIN-OP HIGH SCORES HALL OF FAME TTLEFIELD which is a huge sprite blocking the Modern day space traveller versus at you which are fairly easy to Roman Centurions is the theme for dodge, but you've got to hang on SNK's Battle Field. And battle it is in there to kill it. Lots and lots of every step of the way. shots are needed before it too Battle Field is a straight shoot-out explodes, and if you've got a with tribes and armies from several super-weapon the job's made that historical eras. Equipped initially much easier. with a laser rifle, you must shoot Next you've got to shoot out a your way through each level, to block of palace wall to escape to rescue a lost time warrior. the outside and more skirmishes The Romans are first on the list with the Romans amongst boulders and advance towards you in and greenery. formation, shooting arrows with Had you stepped into the space haphazard frequency and using craft you would have found their shield to deflect your shots. yourself in a more modern era, up Dodge the rain of arrows, and try against a conventional army to nip round to the Romans equipped with ordinary guns and unguarded sides. Shooting straight just as lethal ordinary bullets. The at their shields wastes time and game play is much the same, as effort as several hits are needed you thread your way carefully before they explode with a through this smoothly scrolling satisfying thunk landscape. This first scene is inside a palace If it hadn't been for the continue of some sort with the Roman's play facility I'd have given up in running riot. Arrows fly from all disgust. That would have been a directions, and kill instantly. pity because Battle Field is Bumping into the skurrying armies entertaining and there must be an isn't much help either, one touch easier way to get rid of the and you're dead. Your best mode obstacles at the end of each level. of defence is to pick up a new Once the tank disintegrated in weapon when dropped by a dying on itself, a stunned and bemused Centurion. Why Roman guards lost time warrior emerged. One should be carrying space age down and lots more to go. weapons is anyone's guess, but You're instantly transported they're useful all the same, whether through time to another era-this they emit long range laser bolts, or time Primitive Age in which early a fan of machine gun fire. man is armed with guns and As you move on through the backed up by troops from this palace you'll notice a strange un century. All very amusing, but I Roman object glowing in a corner. think SNK has got its historical facts Hop into that and you'll be in a twist. .. transported instantly to another Battle Field isn't going to shake time and place. If you leave it you'll the world but it's no walkover and come up against an Egyptian God, offers quite a challenge. Nemesis TX-1 Road Runner Gauntlet 1942 Marble Madness Return of the Jedi Do Run Run Star Force Buggy Boy Super Mario Bros. Hang On Commando Choplifter Bomb Jack 10 Yard Fight Track & Field Tazzmania Robotron Pole Position Pac-Man Mr Do Mr Do's Castle Elevator Action Dragon's Lair Defender Flying Shark Flicky Arian Mission Haley's Comet Legendary Soldiers Sky Kid Pinball Action Soldier of Light Psycho Soldier Psychic 5 Turbo Side Pocket Dark Mist Top Secret Exeriser Rastan Saga WEC Le Mans Rush and Crash Karnov Alien Syndrome 1943 Shadowland Flak Attack Last Mission Fast Lane Cobra Command Combat School Defender Alien Syndrome Speed Rumbler Darius R-Type SDI Rock 'n' Rage 1,195,500 289,000 2,000,000 5,867,911 12,673,430 208,340 2,250,310 1,605,100 3,315,000 103,200 2,702,800 49,658,320 1,600,320 2,938,810 16,424,000 480,050 7,899,500 2,300,000 368,950,000 110,545 6,400,000 10,000,000 679,720 149,000 993,920 2,000,000 1,011,810 9,990,990 2,213,790 1,574,000 652,000 496,000 2,400,180 1,832,640 182,200 2,746,100 13,945 48,500 38,660 40,170 84,100 30,450,010 16,260,150 140,200 855,540 514,000 2,147,200 105,000 246,100 243,600 365,740 100,000 247,680 6,500,430 305,000 198,000 4,293,600 673,900 2,101,820 12,754,900 Paul Ashworth, Plymouth, Devon GWhittingham, Birmingham U.S., Bristol Jeremy Walt, Cornwall Bigs, Farnworth, Bolton Martin Deem, Hants Martin Deem, Hants Adam Mastromarino, Bristol R Jones, Star Games, Dyfed Peter Huesken, Holland Martin Deem, Hants Martin Deem, Hants Bev, Farnworth, Bolton Raz, Hove, Brighton Matti Javelin, Finland Brett Caines, Bristol Nick Roberts, London Gary Spencer, L.O.W. P Coles, Cardiff Matthew Bryden, Kent Darren Hall, Romney Marsh, Kent Peter Huesken, Holland Lee Taylor, Lancs Peter Huesken, Holland Lee Taylor, lancs Gary Spencer, L.O.W. Gavin Davies, Swansea, W Glam Neil & Steve, Farnworth, Bolton Phil, Farnworth, Bolton Paul Clare, Leicester Pete, Farnworth, Bolton Bev, Farnworth, Bolton Andy, Farnworth, Bolton Paul Benford, Kettering M Hylands, Starburst, Bridlington N Watson, Starburst, Bridlington S Morley, Starburst, Bridlington P Bolton, Starburst, Bridlington P Bolton, Starburst, Bridlington M Hylands, Starburst, Bridlington Zak, Starburst, Bridlington Manish Ragvarni, London E8 Keith Bradley, Blackburn, Lancs Simon Lennox, N Ireland R Hastings, Starburst, Bridlington Martin Deem, Hants Mel, Swansea, West Glamorgan S Hylands, Starburst, Bridlington S Coles, Starburst, Bridlington T Craggs, Starburst, Bridlington Rat, Starburst, Bridlington Alredo Garcia Rodriguez, Spain M Jennison Starburst, Bridlington Bev, Farnworth, Bolton Darren Hall, Romney Marsh, Kent Paul Clare, Leicester K Bradley, Blackburn, Lancs K Bradley, Blackburn, Lancs K Bradley, Blackburn, Lancs K Bradley, Blackburn, Lancs D-SENSER EOF ROME ON 5) 1942 Capcom 2) Wonder Boy Sega 3) Bubble Bobble Taito Arkanoid Taito Pacland Namco Rygar Techmo Ghosts 'n' Goblins Capcom 8) Terra Cresta Nichibutsu 9) Express Raiders Data East 10) Choplifter Sega The Top Ten is compiled by Euromax and shows the most popular games nationwide. "


"SET YOUR COMPUTER ALIGHT WITH Firetrap scorched its way through the arcode Now it's ready to burn its way onto your screen, If you've got cool hands, get ready to climb the burning skyscrapers, putting out fires as you go, to rescue the people trapped inside. Firetrap is hot! ELECTRIC DREAMS SOFTWARE Terminus House Terminus Terrace Southampton, SOI IFE Tel: (0703) 229694 Commodore 64/128 Cassette (.99) and Disk ($14.99) ZX Spectrum 48k/128k/+ ($9.99) Amstrad CPC Cassette ($9.99) and Disk 7914 99 Mail Order: Activision (UK) Ltd, Units 3 & 4 Lloyds Close. Finedon Road Industrial Estate, Wellingborough, TM &  1986 DATA EAST USA INC. All rights reserved. Electric Dreams Software. Authorised User. "


"LOGIC SUMMER SALE LOGIC SUMMER SALE MUGSYS REVENGE SPECTRUM SOFTWARE ON CASSETTE ALL .99 EACH MARTIANDIDS F.P DF BACK TO THE FUTURE KRAKOUT IT'S A KNOCKOUT HIGHLANDER HEARTLANDER MOONLIGHT MADNESS KAYLETH MAISTROV TEMPTE OF TERROR SPY HUNTER THE GOONES BUBBLER KONETIK SKOOLDATE 54 AMERICA S CUP CHALLENGE BEACHEAD 2 HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER ARK PANDORA WILLIAM WOBBLER MONTY ON THE RUN ROBIN OF THE WOOD SYSTEM 15 000 2nd ED DRAGONSKULLE BOULDERDASH BOULDERDASH 2 EMPIRE DRAGON'S LAIR COMPILATION DISCS $4.99 EACH DISC 1 TUDO 64. Derby Day Handicap Golf World Cup, Test Match DISC 2: View to Kill Friday the 13, Codename Mall The Pyramid, Test Match Beaty and the Ego Snatchas SPINNAKER EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE COMMODORE 64 .99 EACH Al Aegean, Voyage. Songmaker, Ranch, Sea Spiller, Number Tumblers, Fraction Fever. Make a Face, Story Machine, Alpha Build Dance Fantasy Logiciels ADRIAN MOLE SHERLOCK KRYSTALS OF ZONG MATCH FISHING .99 COMPILATIONS ON CASSETTE NOW GAMES 2 in Air Wolf Chuckie Egg 2 Tir Na Nog Cauldron World Cup INDOOR SPORT A Hocity STAR GAVES ONE. Way of Fractalus, Barry McGuigan's Boxing BEST OF BEYOND in Shadowfire, Doordar's Revenge, Enigma Force, Sorderon'Shadow SPECTRUM'S UTILITIES & PERIPHERALS Rotronics Watadrives 17.49 inc. PAP include 1 Free 4k wat Currahmicro-slots [2.99 ALSO INCLUDE ALL SPINNAKER EDUCATIONAL TITLES FROM PREVIOUS ADVERTS 30 Waterski, Gaurdian, Hypertrout ZAPOSLERS 2 intro Sur Bounder PLATFORM PERFECTION in Zorro Bruce Lee, Bounty Bob. Ghostchaser SCOTT ADAMS SCOOPS inc. Pirate Adventure. Voodoo Castle, Strange Odysiy, Bucharoo Banis BEST OF BEYOND Inc. Ps Warrior Quake Minus 1. Enigma Force Shadowe STAR GAMES ONE inc. Way of the McGuigan's Boxing. Rescue on UNBELIEVABLE ULTIMATE Inc. Entombed, Blackwytche, Staff of Karnath, Imhotep INDOOR SPORTS Inc. Air Hockey BIG NAME BONANZA inc. Stelar 7. Forbidden Forest Fight Night SHOOT EN UPS i Super Zaxon, Bur Max 2001. DeopZone, Fort Apocalypse COMMODORE 64 CARTRIDGES -.99 EACH Os Well, by Sierra Mr Cool by Sierra COMMODORE 64 DISCS .99 EACH SUPERMAN ZORKI ZORKI ARC OF YESOO SOUTHERN BELLE VISIONS SNOOKER MARIO BROTHERS DOUBLE TAKE THE ICE TEMPLE GALVAN PRODIG ESCAPE FROM PARADISE MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE ARCADE MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE ADVENTURE WAR FOOTBALL MANAGER ON COURT TENNIS MOON CRISIS 1999 MISSION AD WILLOW PATTERN OUT ON A LIMB THE EVIL CROWN HYPER KER EMPIRE LORD OF THERINGS KORONIS RIFT URIDIUM WAR THE ECOLON COMMODORE 64 CASSETTES ALL .99 EACH TEMPLE OF APSHA TRILOGY GT AMERICAN CROSS COUNTRY ROAD RACE GHOSTBUSTERS ADVENTURE QUEST KORONIS RIFT THE ELDOLON TRANSFORMERS Activision THE MUSIC STUDIO AVENGER MARIO BROTHERS KRAKOUT HEARTLAND TARZAN IMPOSSIBLE MISSION BEYOND THE FORBIDDEN FOREST FUTURE KNIGHT DECATHLON Activision JUMPIN JIMMY BATTANION COMMANOR DOUBLE TAXE IT SA KNOCKOUT COMIC BAKERY SHAO-LINS RO MIAMI VICE UOLIMATA THE COUET CAVE TARZAN TEMPEST HAMPSTEAD FOREST OF DOOM ook and tapel LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE BEARDER TOUCH TYPE (Commodore DEVS EX MACHINA COMMODORENA UTILITIES & PHERIPHERALS SCRABBLE, CLUEDO MONOPOLY FUTURE FINANCE CASS EASY FILE 14,95 C54 MUSIC MAKER KEYBOARDS PROGRAMME UTILITIES DISK ASSEMBLER TUTOR DISC 64.95 NEOS MOUSE 2000 NEO'S MOUSE Disc) 23.00 INTRD TO BASIC (P11) 2.99 BARGAIN BOOKS FROM 1st PUBLISHING, in as per Previous Adverts 09.95+ C2.50 P&P STAR PARAL KARATE HUACK GUNFRIGHT EXPLORER TAPPER EXPRESS RAIDER 10th FRAME SPECTRUM SOFTWARE ON CASSETEE ALL .99 EACH BALLBLAZER FRANKENSTEIN SORDERON'S SHADOW RESCUE ON FRACTALUS BATTLE OF THE PLANETS 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE BEZZICOM SMALL TRADER ROBIN OF SHERLOCK 2010S MUGSY S REVENGE EQUINOX COP OUT HURG GERRY THE GERM THE EVIL CROWN TAG TEAM WRESTLING SUPER STAR PING PONG SPEC-GRAF-GID SUSPENDED GHOSTBUSTERS PASTENDER TRACER SANCTION PITFALL RED ARROWS BEAMRIDER WEB DIMENSION THING ON A SPRING DECATHLON MURDER BY THE DOZEN PARK PATROL HEAD COACH HIGHLANDER MAX HEADROOM SUPERBOWL PARALLAX HYPERRALL BOULDERDASH CONSTRUCTION SUPER HEY2 SUPERBASIC BOULDERDASH 2 UCHI MATE COMMODORE 64 CASSETTES ALL .99 EACH SPIDERMAN HULK SIGMA SUR CHAMP RMS TITANIC PENTAGRAM PYRACURSE HARORALL COSTA CAPERS RASPUTIN MONTY ON THE RUN RETURN TO OZ FOOTBALL MANAGER FIRELORD PSI S-TRADING CO TRAILBLAZER VE. KINETIK JET-PAC SKOOLDAZE FIGHTER PILOT MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE REBEL PLANET WAY OF THE TIGER BUTCH HARD GUY WILLIAM WORRER FIGHTING WARRIOR MERMAID MADNESS MANIC MINER STAINLESS STEEL POLE POSITION GRANOMASTER CHESS OTHELLO PATVAN TYPING TUTOR CHUDGE EGZ 0 TFVEL MATHS JET SET WILLY 2 FIRELORO MASTER OF THE LANDS FIGHTING WARRIOR RED HAWK | SA P. GALACTIC CONTROLLER SPIRIT OF THE STONES WILLIAM WOBBLER COMMODORE 64 DISCS .99 EACH ALTER EGO MALE ALTER EGO FEMALE THE HOBBIT BARRY MCGUIGAN'S BOXING XEVIOUS CHAMELEON DRAGON'S LAIR EXPLOREA BACK TO THE FUTURE CLASSIC SNOOKER WAY OF THE TIGER KNIGHT GAMES THE COUET CALE JACK THE NIPPER p&p 1-3 titles 75p 3 or more 21.00 Overseas .20 per tape CHEQUES PAYABLE TO LOGIC SALES LTD Department 4 17 Leotric Square, Eastern Industry Peterborough, Cambs. Tel: 0733 313870 COMMODORE 64 COMPILATIONS ALL .99 EACH ACTION PACK Inc. Rocket Rodger CHIMERA THING ON A SPRING WHO DARES WINS 2 ENIGMA FORCE FRANK 54 IRIDIS ALPHA FOR IT'S RATHERI BUT A LOT, LT CARET Inter-galactic srt Pit your joysticp in a series of brr These events in metamorph mati "


"SEGA Astonishing? It's even more fun than running the country. PHONE 01-471 8900 NOW 24 Hour Secucore Delivery on Machines 3 Day delivery games and joysticks SEGA MASTER COMPUTER + HANG ON .95 SEGA GAMES JOYSTICKS 2 MEGA BYTE (The joysticks listed below do not ROCKY .95 work on SEGA) SPACE HARRIER 24.95 SUNCOM RANGE 1 MEGA BYTE TAC 2 .992 year warranty BLACK BELT .95 TAC 3 .99 2 year warranty WONDER BOY TAC5 .99Lifetime warranty ACTION FIGHTER .95 SLIK STICK .99 PRO WRESTLING ATARI STYLE JOYSTICK .99 ALEX KIDD .95 STAR FIGHTER .99 FANTASY ZONE .95 CHEETAH 125+ .99 QUARTET .95 SPEED KING .99 WLD GRAND PRIX .95 CHEETAH MACHI .99 SECRET COMMAND .95 COMP PRO 5000 .99 CHOPLIFTER .95 COMP PRO 500 Clear .99 MOON RAKER .99 SEGA CARDS PLUS 2 Adaptor .99 MY HERO .95 C16 Adaptor .99 GHOST HOUSE .95 DISK NOBBLER .99 TEDDY BOY .95 DISK CLEANER 5V4 .99 SUPER TENNIS .95 F-16 FIGHTER .95 VISIT OUR SHOP IN LONDON WE TRANSBOT .95 HAVE HUNDREDS OF SOFTWARE TITLES FOR SPECTRUM, C64, PHONE FOR NEW C16 AMSTRAD, ELECTRON, RELEASES ATARI. OUR PRICES ARE THE BEST IN THE UK TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME ON SOFTWARE SEND CHEQUES TO: A.I.S. DISTRIBUTION 202/203 SHOPPING HALL, MYRTLE ROAD EAST HAM, LONDON E6 UK only YES PRIME MINISTER A week is a long time in an interactive icon-driven environment, where every action can have unexpected consequences. But with Sir Humphrey and Bernard behind you. how can you go wrong? Only you can decide .... Britain's premier computer game! Program by Oxford Digital Enterprises Spectrum, Commodore, Amstrud and BBC Cassette .95Disk .95 Available from WH Smith Boots and other leading stockists Mosaic Publishing Ltd. Gorley Firs. South Gorley, Hants SP6 2PS Tel: 0425 57077 R IKE THE OLYMPICS, LOTSILLIER. stic sort. But this time the Competitors are bred for the events. stick speed and timing against other players on the computer of biare athletic events. hts include little numbers like headslinging, psychic judo, h moathon, space hockey and slither. ACTIVISION ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE Activision Entertainment Software Activision House, 23 Pond Street, London NW3 2PN Tel: (01) 431 1101 Commodore 64/128 Cassette ($9.99) and Disk ($14.99) ZX Spectrum 48k/128k/+ (97.99) Amstrad CPC Cassette ($9.99) and Disk ($14.99) Mail Order: Activision (UK) Ltd, Units 3 & 4 Lloyds Close Finedon Road Industrial Estate, Wellingborough, Northampton NNB 4SR. Tel: (0933) 78787 Design copyright 1987 Tigress Designs Copyright 1987 Activision Inc. All rights reserved 33 "


"himne up. Play in would like to start off by that you apply for. If you don't apologising to all the readers you will only receive the first offer for the state of my column in you have requested. the September issue of this mag. It The first bit of important news was cut more times than one of is that after a long wait, the Jack the Ripper's victims! All the B.P.B.M.A. Guide to P.B.M.is relevant info, about the game finally ready. It is packed with info reviewed, Hero Press, went on P.B.M.. plus hints, tips and the missing names and addresses of various To set the record straight the major P.B.M. companies. main game reviewed. Heropress, a There are articles on how to P.B.M. where you play the part as play different types of P.B.M.S. yourself as a super hero or super advice about starting up your own villain, usually costs .00 to start P.B.M. if you intend to, a glossary up, with further turns costing a of P.B.M. terms, as well as a run very reasonable 60p plus s.a.e. down of all the major companies. However, anyone who writes in to There are also full details on me, with the above logo not only how to join the P.B.M.P.A. gets to start up, but also: 10 Free (which is now a branch of the Turns, worth .00: The B.P.M.A.), it's aims and rules as HeroPress source book; The well as various offers from Gauntlet comic book AND the companies when joining it. latest copy of the HeroPress Now how much are we charging newsletter for all this. Absolutely nothing is For the record the source book how much! tells you everything you need to So if you are interested, please know about the campaign world, send me a large S.A.E. and I will superheros in general and how to forward you a copy immediately. create a new character. There are only approximately The comic book is a short comic 1.500 copies available, so they will book featuring some of the be issued on a first come first characters in the game and what served basis, and 250 are reserved happened to them. The newsletter for overseas players because their contains all the up-to-the-minute letters take longer to reach me. news and gossip from the game. Who says that I don't look after The artwork in all cases is foreign players? brilliant and well worth a look. l'he Third British P.B.M. For a further in depth review, see Convention is now a reality. I can the September issue of C+VG. confirm that it will take place at Interested in playing this game? the same venue as last year, Then please write in to me. namely the Porchester Centre, making all cheques and P/O's Queensway, London W.2. on the payable to Mr T. Knight. 20/2/88 between 10.00a.m. and Please note that if you intend to 5.00p.m. The entrance fee is apply for more than one offer on .00. this page you MUST send the C+VG readers can take appropriate number of S.A.E.S advantage of a money saving offer required ONE for EVERY offer by purchasing advance tickets for the convention via this column at a \"The leaders of the C+VG greatly reduced price. Tickets are Crime game at the moment are the available NOW to all C+VG Colburnites (gang number 102) readers in advance at the reduced with a notoriety of 219. However price of .50. All you have to do they are closely followed by the is send in to the mag an S.A.E. Satanfists and the Sons of Batman. and the above logo to this column who are both hot on their heels. plus a cheque/postal order for Don't fret if you are not on the .50 made payable to The British notoriety table yet, as there is still Play By Mail Association, and I'll a long, long way to go, so expect send you your ticket. There's the things to change shortly as there is distinct possibility of a sell-out. So a lot of action yet to take place. it could pay to get in early! After that meet. I was soon On with the news and gossip of zooming off to Southampton for the meets. Last month there were the Sloth Enteprises Saturnalia four P.B.M. meets and I managed meet. Once again, the amount of to get to three of them despite people that turned up was not as them being scattered all about the many as was expected, but all the country. The first one up was the famous faces were there and London monthly P.B.M. meet. despite some dismal weather that This was the usual combination put paid to some of the organised of organised chaos and drunken events, everyone had a pleasant banter. About 150 people turned time, with board games being the order of the day Next on the agenda is the A lot of the meet was spent in KJ.C. Games Ii's a Crime meet in various public houses and there Blackpool. KJ.C. hired a large were hundreds of rumours and marquee and placed it on the stories circulating as well as a load promenade and this acted as of old waffle. sleeping quarters and meeting Can the evil people invade the place for the people who turned Southern Isles with safety (I hope up so!) or can the White Isle raise an There was a constant supply of army from its cowardly population tea and coffee on tap. \"crime\" to effect some kind of defence? videos were shown i.e. The We shall see Godfather and Scarface, plus a Sloth have also hurdied over large selection of board games their G.M. problems by which were all there to help you employing two more new G.M's pass away the time. and they have almost immediately Oh yes, I almost forgot to cleared their backlog of work mention the free beer tokens as The only meet that I did not well! The meet went very well with attend was the A.E's meet in lots of chat, intrigue and double London and the reason I didn't dealing which all culminated in a attend was because I wasn't drunken game of \"Mad\", the invited! I heard on the grapevine board game, which is something I though that the meet was very well will remember for the rest of my attended with approx 150 people life! attending the meet in a pub, which While at the KJ.C. meet I was conveniently open all day. discovered that game one of Ii's A Crime has been won! Alan Crump. and his family. The Waltonswhat a wimpy name-named Godfather of the City for three weeks-winning the game. Lucky Alan, he could have ended up like the one time godfather of game three, Big Mickey Mouse, who was also at the meet? Micky confided in me that he was named Godfather in one turn and by the time he got his next turn back he had been completely obliterated. Such is the way of the mob!! I also told him that I would keep this a secret. Sorry Micky!! Remember that you still have the chance to get involved with the C+VG version of It's A Crime! All you need to do is write in to me and you will receive a FREE Rule book, FREE start up and TWO FREE turns. The person who becomes Godfather for three weeks gets to win the C+VG Crime Trophy as well as play in another game of It's a Crime FREE. plus various other K.J.C. Games. It's still not too late! "


"GET INTO CRIME! In the late 1990's the streets of New York are a jungle. You are the ice cool leader of a gang of drug crazed terrorists. Your main goal is to become the richest, toughest and most notorious gang in the city. DARE YOU FREE OFFER PLAY... AN FREE! SEND YOUR NAME AND ADDRESS TODAY FOR YOUR FREE TRIAL OF IT'S A CRIME THE WORLDS MOST POPULAR PLAY-BY-MAIL GAME Write to:KJC GAMES, PO BOX 11, CLEVELEYS, BLACKPOOL, LANCS FY5 2UL. "


"Wanne Play by Mail Apparently one of the highlights was the mass eating of a large cake, which was baked into the shape of the mountain on the cover of their rulebook! RHANN GAMES OFFER Rhann Postal Games has obtained the rights to run Epic III, The Kings Game, which is a game of politics, diplomacy and military conflicts. The player controls the ultimate destiny of their chosen . The game is completely computer moderated and in parts is quite technical. It gets more complex as you advance and develop your nation. It has six position types as well as six racial types plus a choice of 22 different troops to choose from. Also it is open ended and has no fixed deadlines. The minimum processing time between turns is claimed to be seven days. Rhann have also released unique and realistic mapping Eclipse which is an introductory system; 1000s of player armies and galactic warfare/conquest game, fleets involved in conquest; A which they claim is easy to play. highly developed class system of The rulebook is not that well squires, knights, Lords etc; 1000+ printed but it is easy to read. This power cards: Special powers and game is a game for between 12-20 options to control the deadlines of players lasting until a player or other players. players control of the galaxy The good news for you people Once again this game is out there is that the rulebook and completely computer moderated. set up is totally FREE to all Now onto the bit you have been C+VG readers, so if you want one waiting for. Rhann has offered six just write in and I will forward FREE playtesting positions for an your request on to Jade. unlimited period in Epic and an Jade has also signed up a game entire FREE game of Eclipse for from the States called New Order. 20 C+VG readers. That's what I A s I write, I have received a call a generous offer. How do you looselcaf version of the rulebook, get your grubby little hands on one which is quite bulky and complex. of these freebies? This is how: Another totally computerised Epic III Playtest game, this one is sci-fi based I require six P.B.Mers who are Scientists on your planet have experienced in computer suspected for some time that an moderated P.B.Ms as this game is intelligent lifeform exists out in quite difficult. You should write in space, and with the recent telling me what games you have development of a brand new, played, where you come in them sooper-dooper hyper jump engine and in no longer than 100 words you can go and find out. Will the why you like computer moderated aliens be the dominant species or games. No novices please. will it be your lot? You can find Eclipse out. I require twenty P.B.Mers who The rulebook costs .00 and have NEVER played any kind of further turns cost .50, with no computer moderated game extra charges what so ever. whatsoever to write in and tell me However, before you start out I what other games they play as well would advise you to do what Jade as telling me in less than 100 words suggests. Don't ask to join a game why you want to play a computer before you've read the rulebook moderated game when you have It looks very complicated and is never done so before. No definitely not the game for a experienced players please. novice or even a slightly When the playtests are over experienced P.B. Mer. will give the names the full review By the time you read this the they deserve. rulebooks should be printed up There you have it. Easy isn't it! and games should have started On the other hand if you want to running. If you are interested play either of the games regardless please make out all cheques to of the playtesting, please note that Jade Games and I will pass them the prices are as follows: on. Epic III: Start up costs .00. Jade has also purchased their which includes two free turns. first postal role playing game. I am Further turns cost .00 each. eagerly looking forward to how Eclipse: Start up costs .50, they do with this format of P.B.M. which includes 2 free turns. as, to date, all their P.B.M.'s have Further turns cost either .50 or been computerised nature. I will .50 depending how many orders keep you informed as information you issue. All Cheques made comes to hand. payable to Rhann Postal Games If you read the daily tabloid please. press you will probably have seen Jade Games has written into me that The Laboratory, who run informing me that it has started up Further into Fantasy, have come in two new games. The first is called for a bit of flack. If you haven't Chronicles of the Knights of seen what was written, I'm not Avalon which is an empire going to repeat it as most of it was building game. Set in the realm vastly inaccurate and wildly and time of fantasy, it is fully fictitious. But to set the record computer moderated with ten day straight The Laboratory has not fixed deadlines and contains a closed down. It is still running and maximum of 100 players. turn around is nearly back to It is run on an Atari 1040ST normal. None of the G.Ms have using 5 megabytes of memory!! been sacked from any of their They make various claims with jobs. regards to this game which I There is a possibility, because of cannot confirm the coverage it has received, that However I will soon be some of you may wish not to allocating a playtester, so you can continue in the game that's a pity read all about it in a future because it is an excellent one. column. To let you know just a If you have any enquiries to few of the claims that Jade make make with regards to this matter, about this game, read on: A please contact: The Laboratory Box 66, 19 Colbourne St. Swindon, Wiltshire, SN1 2EQ. Mitre Games is giving away FIVE copies of their excellent boxed P.B.M. Tribes of Crane Tribes is without a doubt THE best presented game in the UK. Each of these boxed sets are worth .95 so they are well worth winning You are a leader of a tribe attempting to survive on a hostile and barren planet. To win one of the five boxed games all you have to do is write in and tell me what a Mitre is, what it is used for and how is it used. I will pick the first five people out of a hat on October 16th. The winners will be printed in this column. Mitre has also asked me to tell you that if anyone wishes to join their excellent game Mitgard, they can have their first turn FREE Mitgard is a complete simulation of Military, Economic, Political and Cultural activity on a large scale in a fantasy world. As you work your way up you can control vast forces of wealth and political influence. There are graphics, depicting forts and deployment of your forces, sieges and strategic positions. It is computer moderated, but I believe there is a large G.M. involvement and participation for written reports. Start up costs .00 for a large rulebook and further rounds cost .00 a time. This game should seriously be considered by wargamers, or people who like a lot of diplomacy and tactics. Finally, Mitre would like to know that they are always on the lookout for new G.M.s, so if you have O' levels in English, good handwriting, experience of fantasy role playing and have a good imagination, drop me a line and I will pass all the details onto Mitre. Turnaround time in The Hunting is going to be increased because as I write the G.M. has just had a couple of weeks off. The word on the street is-be patient! Although we would like G.M.s to work 24 hours a day, 52 weeks a year they are only human (well some of them anyway) and they deserve a break. I suppose that as computers do not take holidays, computerized P.B.M.s can count this as some kind of advantage. Sloth Enterprises has decided to re-launch their game The Enchriddion. It's a great game, and if you win, you receive a cash prize, which is a fixed percentage of the turn fees. I have seen it first hand and even played in the playtest, so I feel qualified to tell you that it is a very enjoyable game. You need good powers of imagination though, for the game is set in a fantasy-medieval type world, where you have been asked to find the most powerful book in "


"the world, The Enchriddion. 44 strength on the print out, it can and it gets to eat the scraps of food As I mention it, the turn round You start above ground trying actually use up to 134 strength that you leave behind, the vulture is excellent. 4 days at the MOST is to find an entrance to the regardless. In fact you can use up will spy on up to ten holes for you the longest I've waited. It is dungeons. Once inside you are on to the limit of 134 strength at all each round. probably one of the quickest turn a wondrous tour of everything times. You should note that you around games on the P.B.M. from dungeons to islands. Furthermore you will also have automatically get a report on the market today, You can either play as a single to issue a weapons code with eight troll holes surrounding you, Also this game has one big character or a group of up to eight. the majority of orders. Weapons so there is no need to send it to spy advantage. All the players seem to I haven't obtained the details of range from hands and feet which on them. be playing it for the right attitude the prices yet, but if you are are pretty deadly to Dragons Also in certain holes you find and if you want any help just put a interested, forward an s.a.e. to me backbones which are very magic possessions such as different message out via your turn. and I will pass it on deadly. colour rings, guards, seeds and This will be printed on every The idea is to use a combination mushrooms. Each of these do other players turn sheet with your REVIEW of up to six weapons at once and different things to help or hinder name. I did this and I got about TROLLS BOTTOM you can also use food as a weapon. you as the case may be. The only ten replies, all wanting to help me What would you expect a game Don't laugh, how would you like a problem is that you have to learn or get me to join an alliance. called Trolls Bottom to be like? hard blow over the head with a how and when to use them!! Alliances play a big part in this Silly? Stupid? Mad? Well you'd be coconut. Also from time to time you get game and if I were you I'd join one absolutely right but you'd have If your troll only had hands and extracts from a diary printed on of them as soon as possible for a missed out the most important feet, bones and daggers to fight your turn sheet. Written by a poor bit of mutual protection. point. It's also a great deal of with the weapons code would be unfortunate, now dead, creature I'll only give you a few hints as it FUN! Project Basilisk, who runs as follows: Hands and feet = 1, marooned on the island. really would spoil the game for this P.B.M. seem to have got the Bones = 2, Daggers = 3. You are deemed to have found you if I told you all that I found aim of the game right first time. The weapons code you would the diary while adventuring. It out. You play the part of a very use would be 123000, as you have tells you some of the things the Keep on the move large, ugly, troll. You should all to put six digits in the weapons creature saw and what it did. Get into an alliance know the two things that give code box. Easy isn't it! The extracts are in fact clues to Think of really weird things to trolls pleasure. You've got it. ACTIONS some of the more weirder things do, they might work Eating and fighting. In this game There are 14 actions, but I do not that happen on the island. For Spy on someone before you you get to do a lot of both intend to go into all of them, as I example you get to meet Balrogs attack them The aim of the game is to think a few will suffice and give and Moonworms. In the future When you attack someone, do it become the last troll out of 70 you a flavour of the game. you will be able to meet wizards several times a round and then roaming the 400 troll holes on the HUNT and many other monsters. issue a Look Out order on them island that you are placed. When This enables you to hunt for food. You also get the chance to make the only bad thing I found in you have done this you have When you eat food you regain special brews which enhance your the game was the way the special deemed to have created a suitable your lost strength. Trolls are powers, plant seeds and grow items are dealt with. You really place to attract a mate. In real life magic trees and even make troll always hungry and I found that have to try everything to get the you are awarded a prize for jelly! best out of them. using this order every turn is a winning By the way, you also get a 5 by There are no clues telling you must Once you take on the body of a MAKE WEAPONS 2' map, which shows you all the what to do with them usually troll you gain the following When a troll eats, digs or robs trolls' holes on the island and it before you find out their full attributes-strength, build, someone, it is more than likely makes mapping simple. effects. morale, tale and sanity. These are that it will obtain some bones. Also you get the chance to issue Overall, I liked this game and the qualities by which you judge in With the correct amount of a 62 word message to all the other you have nothing to lose by giving what condition your troll is in. strength and bones your troll can players in the game by entering it it a go. It is quick, fast, simple and You lose or gain points in your make different degrees of vicious in a specified box on your turn enjoyable. main attributes depending on the weapon. The most feared Troll sheet. actions you take. The game also has a regular PLATOS For example, sanity ranges from made weapon is a spiked crusher, which is very mean. newsheet, which is full of hints and a melon to dangerously sane. It's tips as well as updates on which up to you to work out which rating ATTACK trolls have gone to the big troll's is good for your trolls. This gives you the option to attack rest in the sky. Just because some of your another players troll. You can For all you technical buffs out attributes are low doesn't mean attack a troll that is in one hole there, the game is run on an you'll do badly in everything you away if you attack underground Amstrad 8256, expanded to 512K. undertake in fact in some and two holes away if it goes At this time there are 42 separate attributes it is good to have a low overground programs making up a total of 271 rating If you win you may kill, badly K with a database of 30K for each You submit your orders by injure or wound your opponent. game. issuing a series of codes for the You may also gain some action orders that are described to equipment. However, if you lose WAYNE'S VERDICT you in the rulebook. You issue you will be the worse off for This game is not to be taken your orders by writing down a morale and strength. The attack seriously. It is wild, wacky and series of codes on a turn sheet. action should carry a government fun. If you want a serious P.B.M. health warning. Attack actions can At the present time you have then don't play this game. The the space to enter 14 actions on a seriously damage your health as attitude for this game should turn card. Therefore each turn you well as anybody else!! be: \"I'm going to play this fill in the action card with up to EAT game for the sheer hell of it and do fourteen orders for your troll, This order is the one order that some really stupid moves to see attach a stamp to the back and pop you MUST do every round. It is what happens\". Play it this way it in the post box to await for a not included in your 14 orders, so and you'll probably win!! print out, showing your troll's you have no excuse for not doing It is one of the easiest games I progress-or lack of it. it. Eating gives your troll strength, have come across and is ideal for a In nearly all the orders you use sanity and lots of very useful newcomer to P.B.M. who doesn't you have to state the amount of bones. want to get shown up by getting strength your troll will use in each OTHER FACTORS killed off in the first turn because action. The total amount of Your troll gets a life long of lack of experience. It's the kind strength a troll can use per turn is companion when he starts off on of game where you come home, 134. However it's wise to note that the island. A king vulture. spend five minutes doing the turn and that's that until the next turn. "


"SINCLAIR Jsn NEXT MONTH Which are you? A wiz-kid intergalactic super hero feared throughout the seven galaxies? a small green piece of jelly? BEAR / A A WIZ-KD ), INTERGALACTIC SUPER HERO A A SMALL GREEN JELLY December's Sinclair User features an astoWe do the same thing for Previews pages and nishing computer moderated board game free. pages of first-look screen shots. See them in SU It's all in colour and features some of the first. strangest characters you've ever seen. Designed to appeal to arcade freaks and strategy addicts You want Pokes we got 'em every month we alike. carry more Pokes than the opposition. Yet our And there's more: pokes have a special feature they work. Next month SU continues its record of more We're also reviewing some hot new joysticks in Spectrum games reviews than any other maga December's issue and don't miss our complete zine. Just count 'em. map and playing guide for Wizball. SU : Definitely not for jellies Out November 18th "


"EXPERIENCE THE REAL THING! WINA WINTER OLYMPIC HOLIDAY WORTH MORE THAN  WINTER OLYMPIADUT WIN A WINTER OLYMPIC HOLIDAY BASE WINTER OLYMPIAD'88 Winter Olympiad '88 is undoubtedly the best winter sports simulation to date. It features the classic winter olympic events; 'Ski Slalom, Giant Slalom, Two man bob, Ski-Jump, Biathalon and Speed 'Skating. These have been depicted in a way not seen on any home computer before. The result is a phenomenally realistic and spell-binding game. Available on the following formats: CBM64, BBC/ELECTRON, ATARI .95 SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD, C16/+4 .95 DISK BBC .95 MASTER COMPACT .95 ATARI 8 BIT .95 ST. .95 AMIGA .95 IBM .95 Am TIME SPEED RECORD There ADDISON INDUSTRIAL ESTATE BLAYDON TYNE & WEAR: NE21 4TE. TEL: 091 414 4611 "


"Who or what is Moebius? \"Who\" is easy. He's a real rarity: comic artist as opposed to a comic hero with a secret identity. By day, as it were, he's Jean Giraud, artist/co-creator of one of France's most popular western strips, Lieutenant Blueberry. By night (creatively speaking) he's probably the most off-the-wall genius in comics today. Giraud had already built a reputation as a fine \"mainstream\" comics artist under his own name, particularly on Blueberry, when he realised the need for other outlets for his creativity and for his interest in science fiction. His solution was to dream up a new identity for himself, enigmatically named Moebius after the German, mathematician who devised the \"endless loop\" of paper known as the Moebius strip. Since the early 70s Moebius (sometimes, just to add to the confusion, signing himself Jean Gir) has unleashed on the public a series of extraordinary fantasy/ science fiction stories. These, and his part in founding the revolutionary comic strip magazine Metal Hurland, marked a great leap forward in story-telling techniques, in public acceptance of comic strips ... and in sheer mindblowing story concepts. It didn't take long for American publishers to recognise the genius of Moebius (wouldn't that make a good title for a book?). One of them, in fact, provided what seemed like the ideal vehicle for Moebius to conquer the English-speaking world: an American edition of Metal Hurland called Heavy Metal. Unfortunately, the reality didn't live up to the promise. The translations of Moebius idiomatic French were stilted and sometimes inaccurate, and the colouring was not at all as Moebius had intended. Nevertheless, his fame spread, and a year or two later found Moebius in America doing design work on two films dear to C+VG's heart, Alen and Tron. This long preamble is all leading up to something something quite unlikely, in fact. Would you believe Marvel Comics to the rescue? To be more precise, the Epic Comics division of Marvel, which began as a sort of alternative to Heavy Metal, is now in the process of re-presenting all of Moebius' works, specially re-translated and recoloured under the supervision of the man himself. They're being published as a series of six deluxe volumes aimed at \"mature readers\". The first two have already appeared; the third should be out by the time you read this. All six are being imported by Titan Distributors and sold through comic shops at about .50 each. And they're highly recommended. Those are the facts. What's more difficult to define is: what is Moebius? You could say he's a true artist, constantly pushing himself to achieve something new and different. You could call him a master storyteller in the fantasy genre. Or you could choose simply to judge him by his works. What you discover is that here we're dealing with a man who's seriously weird. For instance, the first volume of \"Collected Fantasies of Jean Giraud\", as it's subtitled, contains: \"The Repairmen\" Our first meeting with Stel and Atan, who crop up again in the next story. They find a very strange way of fixing a damaged Waymaster, one of a \"mysterious race who drive endlessly across the incredible networks of road which covers their planet\". This, though, is just a prequel to... \"Upon a Star\" — A wonderful story originally commissioned by Citren, the car company, as an extra-special giveaway for their top sales people \"thereby\", as Moebius puts it in his introduction, \"frustrating all the traditional French comics collectors\"! It concerns a space-bound \"Marie Celeste\", a graveyard of abandoned spaceships whose 300,000 crew members are camping out in the shadow of a gigantic blue pyramid (which turns out ot be something else entirely)...and a 1938 Citren. We begin to get an idea of the cosmic scale on which this man works! \"Aedena\" has a similar theme humans lifted to a higher plane by alien civilisation but with a rather different focus and some beautiful colours. \"Celestial Venice\" — Did you know that there are 127 active Venices, over 4,000 having already sunk? This is the story of one that's saved in the nick of time... Volume two contains the stories that revolutionised French comics. \"Arzach\" is a series of wordless strips about a silent, pterodactyl* riding warrior, plus a brand-new Arzach tale which hasn't yet appeared in France. Each story is characterised by a final, cruelly humorous, twist. Enough words go directly to your nearest comic shop and experience Moebius for yourself! Philip Morton "


"we've do VIOENG COMPUTER  GAME. OR . REALITY? (eedCound Metropolis the game is an interactive experience, the like of digitised conversational abilities and has oyer $0,000,000 which you have not been through before! Only now, with the possible responses at its disposal. power of 16-bit has it become possible to take you into the streets of a city which exists somewhere on the dark side of FEATURES your own imagination. It allows you to walk, talk, exist and * REAL-TIME DIGITISED CONVERSATION WITH die within the confines of an enormous high tech city that 20,000 WORD VOCABULARY hides a macabre secret 60,000,000 INTELLIGENT RESPONSES MELBOURNE *STATE OF THE ART ANIMATION Metropolis the computer program pushes back the frontiers IHO U SE *UNIQUELY INTERACTIVE CONTROLS of the possible. It is without doubt an unparalleled * MULTI-PLAYER GAME STRUCTURE achievement in computer entertainment. Its Take on the challenge of the century and find out vocabulary exceeds that of the average human what your machine is really capable of in the being and the artifical intelligence programs are en heart of Metropolis as you hunt for the answers to the most advanced anywhere. It has fully IN COMPUTER SOFTWARE the fate of millions! 8-10 Paul Street, London EC2A 4JH . Telephone 01-377 8411 Telefax 01-377 5569 "


"MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS CUT PRICE SOFTWARE SPECTRUM RAPOUR SPECTRUM The Pawn 12 OUR y 1495 PRICE 11 95 Vore COMMODORE 64/128 CASSISK Jack No 725 11.95 Freeze Frame 3 Cart 35.95 Epyx Epics 7.25 11.95 _ Stars On 128 Starglide Mag Max . Hygar 725 11.95 Tank 9.95 5.95 14.95 11 95 7.95 5.50 7.95 5.50 99850 7.95 550 4.95 11.95 Enduro Racer 995725 Road Runner .8.99 6.50 9.95 6.95 Shockway Rider... 7.95 5.50 Renegade Ace 248 8.95 6.50 Ace 2 (128) 995 725 6.95 Triaxos Paperbay. Knight Ort Sald Tai-pen Battle Ships Expert Cart. Five Star Destroyer Hybrids ... 5.95 11.95 ... 7.25 11.95 NA 28.95 5.95 11.95 NA 11.95 1 Cat23 7.95 5.50 CASS DISK Athena Last Mission Triv Pursuit Hydrofool ..7.95 8.99 14.95 7.95 550 6.50 11.95 5.50 COMMODORE 64/128 CASS Mega-Apocalypse 6.50 Road Runner..... 7.25 The Pawn N A Durell's Big4 5.95 WC Leaderboard 7.25 DISK 11.95 11.95 16.95 11.95 11.95 AMSTRAD TOP 10  ... Triv Pursuit.... Min Omice 2 11.95 11 95 6.50 16.95 14.95 11.95 SPECTRUM Game Set & Match...... 10.95 Starship D1 7.95 Gnome Ranger.............. 7.95 Druidil..... 5.95 Buggy Bay D1 Archer's Not A Penny Gauntlet 8.95 Thundercats 01 12.95 ian Warriors 5.95 Jacka 01 Starwars 7.95 Last Nina 7.95 Roy of Rovers 01 Gary Lineker's Soccer 5.95 Tai-Pan 5.95 Gauntlet il D3 Alter World Games 5.95 Renegade 5.95 Sidearms 03 Slane. 5.95 Wild Class L Board.... 7.95 720 D3 Compendium (Gremlin) 5.95 Indiana Jones Salid Gold D1 Detektor 5.95 Mill 5.95 Outrun 03 Basic Detective 5.95 Super Sonnt 7.95 Bravesar 03 5.95 Captain Amer ca 03 Werewolves of London 7.95 Judge Death Peagasus Bridge 10.95 Gryzor.. 5.95 Platoon Sorcerer's Lord 10.95 Mean Streak 5.95 Combat School 5.95 Rampage.... 7.95 Yogi Bear 7.95 Rastan in Karate + 7.95 California Games 7.95 Psycho Soldier Airbourne Ranger 7.95 7.95 Adv Tactical Fighter 7.95 Victory Road 03 . 5.95 Stealth Fighter 7.95 The Double 8.95 Driler 12.95 Bobslech 7.95 Bubble Bobble 5.95 Hysteria 6.95 Action Force 7,95 Trantor 6.95 Freddy Hardest Scruples D1 .......... 7.95 Moon Strike 5.95 Rygar 01 Starship... 7.95 Be A complete B . 5.95 Executor Executor 6.95 Buggy Boy D1 5 .95 Guadal Canal 7.95 Gryzor 6.95 Thundercats 01 5.95 6 Hit Pack Volumell... 5.95 Game Set & Match 05. 10.95 Jackal ... 5.95 Bangkok Knights 5.95 Firezone 05 10.95 Roy of Rovers ........... 7.95 COMMODORE 64 Tobruk 01 7.95 Trap Door il 6.95 Gnome Ranger 7,95 Diplomacy 01 Gunbat ............ 6.95 J. Archer Not A Penny More Track & Field D1.. Sideams 5.95 04 12.95 Shoot Em Up Con Set 04 12.95 720 ....... 6.95 Starwars D1 7.95 Subbattle 01 Solid Gold D1 7.95 Gary Lineker S Soccer 1 795 Apache Gunship D4 12.95 Outrun 6.95 Alt. World Games 01 7.95 Barbarian 03 Bravestar 5.95 Slaine 01 7.95 Colonial Quest OK Only 17.50 Captain America 6.95 Compendium 01 7.95 World Cs. L'Board 1 7 .95 Wizard Warz 6.95 Detektor 01 7.95 Pirates D4 12.95 ........ 6.95 Basil Detective D1 ...... 7.95 Defender of Crown DK Platoon 5.95 Tour De France D1 7.95 Only 12.95 Combat School 5.95 Werewolves London D1 7 ,95 Street Basketbal Di. Rastan............ ..... 5.95 Pegasus Bridge DS ......10.95 Street Baseball D1... 7.95 Psycho Soldier 5.95 Sorcerer's Lord D5 10.95 Bangkok Knight D1 7.95 Victory Road 5.95 Rampage 01 7.95 6 Hit Pack Volume Il 01 7.95 5.95 at karate01 7.95 Indiana Jones 01 Phantase 5.95 Airbourne Ranger 04 12.95 8241 Driller. 12.95 Stealth Fighter D4 1 2.95 Guadal Canal 01........... 7.95 Hysteria...... 5.95 Bobsleigh 01 ... 7.95 Judge Death ... 6.95 Freddy Hardest.............5.95 Adv Tactical Fighter D1 6.95 California Games 1 795 Rygar 6.95 Acton Force 7.95 Super Sorint 01 Executor 5.95 Be A Complete 7.95 Renegade 03 Apache Gunship 7.95 Scruples 01 Postage Included UK. Please state which micro. Fast service. Send chogue/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept CVG, 4% Sutherland Street, Victoria, London SW1 V4JX MAIL ORDER ONLY: Send for FREE list Amstrad, C16, MSX, Atari ST Commodore, Spectrum. D-Disks Available: D1 at .95, DJ at 210.95, D4 at .50, D5 at .95 7.95 999 725 WC Leaderboard 6.50 10.95 Final Matrix Defender of Crown NA 11.95 Coin-op ...... Battie Ships 7.95 5.50 Triv Pursuit 11 95 14.95 Head D Heels. 6.50 10.95 Trio (Hit Pak) 9.95 7.25 Star Games II 7 25 11.95 Knight Ore.......... 11.95 14.95 Space Harrier 7.95 Moebius Protext NA 21.96 Five Star 2 Dean Win3 725 11.95 Slap Barbara 725 1195 ATARI ST TOP 10 7:25 11.95 Tai-Pan. 15.95 Gunrunner 795 5.50 Deathscape 7.25 1195 Barbaria Palace) . 11.95 Jack Nipp .. Survivor 7.25 11.95 Knight Orc 9.99725 .750 14.95 19.95 Explon 7.95 5.50 Last Ninja Silent Service 19.95 Game Over 6.50 10.95 Balance of Power 24.95 725 11.95 Barbara 1996 WC Leaderboard 9.95 725 11.95 1595 Road Runner 795 5.50 Guild of Thieves 15.95 Urdum Graphic Ad Creator 17.00 22.00 Star Trex PAW 22.95 17.95 Renegade ... 6.75 11.95 Survivor 8.99 6.50 Said Milion 3 6 .95 11.95 AMSTRAD P.C.W. 8256 8512 Barbaran Hit Pak 6 7.25 11.95 Knight Orc 14.95 7.95 5.50 Gurship 11.95 15.95 Scrabble 15.95 Living Daylight Ta Pan 6.95 11.96 Try Pursuit 16.95 995 725 Elon 1996 Army Moves 7.95 5.50 Knight Ore 11.95 11.95 Tomahawk 15.95 19.95 Head O Hees....... 7.25 5.50 Death or Glory ...... 6.50 1195 Pawn.... Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders please add  per tape Cheques/post orders (Sterling only please). Made payable to: Cut Price Software Unit 6, Stort House, Riverway, Harlow, Essex CM20 2DW 24 HOUR ANSWER PHONE (0279) 24433 OR (0279) 31956 (SEGA GAMES MACHINE NOW AVAILABLE ONLY .95 PLUS FULL RANGE OF SOFTWARE) 19.95 \"WE ARE OFFICIAL COMMODORE DEALERS\" SYSTEMS ARCHITECTS So World Games COMMERCIAL AND COMPUTER SERVICES LIMITED 01-549 3028 Amige Title Landerboard 20 00 Colourspace 24.00 Electronie Pool 20.00 Super Huey 20.00 Goldrunner Shanghai Lands Of Havoc 7 CRD Of Gold Atari ST Archon 2 Pinball Factory Adventure Cons Set Super Conductor 520 STEM Colour 565 06 Marble Madness Trivia Challenge 500 00 20.00 Hard Disk (204) 66 Crusade in Europe 2000 Mono Monitor 15 Strike Eagle Guld of Thieves F ry Tale Adventure Commodore Black Cauldron Amiga Hardware AMIGA A500  inc. VAT Modulator & Deluxe Paint ATARI ST  SOFTWARE SPECIALS Amiga 2000 Mercenary Impact..... .11.50 35 Dice Chess Leather Goddesses 18.50 Terrapods ............ 145p aach Football Fortunes Golden Pech Flight Simulator II ....... 35.00 Atari ST T Moon Mist Arena/Bratus GLF Football Defender of The Crown.. 22.00 Macadam Bumper Pintos ........... . 11.50 50.00 Games Compendium Fleet St Publisher 100 Check Mare Gold Runner .... ....... .18.50 AMIGA ONLY Fairy Tale Adventure... 37.50 Strip Poker Championship Wrest ST ONLY Barbarian (Palace).............. 11.50 Bridge Plever 2000 Barbarian DefenderCrown Tai-Tan.... 15.00 . Dejavu F15 Strike Eagle... ........ 18.50 45.00 Roadwar 2000 Uninvited 2400 War Zone Frister Indiana Jones .. . ..15.00 Trailer Typhoon Winter Games Above prices apply to mail order only with the exception of software specials and hardware prices. Subject to availability Swooper Phoenix Xevious Please make cheques payable to: Systems Architects Ltd. We also accept Access and Visa. Prices subject to availability. See Amiga Listing for Prices of ST Infocom Adventures Products not listed please phone for prices. All prices include VAT and delivery in the UK Callers are welcome to order through the shop. Allow up to 28 days delivery, items usually despatched within 10 days SYSTEMS ARCHITECTS Systems Architects, Dept. PCW1, Syndicate Dept. Store, 6.9 Market Place, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey KT1 4BR. Tel: 01-549 3028 24-hr ansaphone) 8888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888 Pound 8888888888888 olywood Poker "


"MICROS E L L MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! CBM 64 for sale with: 1541c disk drive, latest freeze cartridge, C2N cassette player, 100 disks, joysticks, 1000 games overall . Ring Basingstoke 0256WANTED: Second hand or discount price NO NEED TO WORRY everything's COMMODORE 128 C2N, Joystick, many Commodore 1541, disk drive. Please guaranteed Commodore 64 C2N data games, quick disk cartridge, sell for  telephone Marlow (06284) 73422 in recorder, disk drive, Action Replay Mk3. ono or swap for ST. Contact Mick: 560 evenings. 300 worth of software. All offers Rayleigh Road, Eastwood, Southend-On. COMMODORE 64, Data Recorder, Joystick, telephone 01-866 8094 Sea, Essex, SS9 5HX. Books, Magazines, 27 original games. SPECTRUM PLUS Ram Turbo joystick COMMODORE 64 DATASETTE  Worth . Selling for . Tel: 01-455 interface, 3 channel sound synthesisier worth of the latest games. Also micro 6296 evenings joystick C450 of quality software. As new switch joystick . Tel: Crowborough COMMODORE 64, 1541 Disc Drive, C2N Boxed. Offers! Tel. 01-886 8094 (08926) 62849. (Adrian) after 6pm. cassette deck, lockable Rexel disc boxes AMSTRAD 464 with green screen & Quickdisc + cartridge, Kempston Joystick, FOR  you get a BBC B in excellent modulator for CATV, ram music machine, dustcover, reset switsh. Various books sampling, echo chamber & drum M/C. condition,  worth of software, many  ono. Tel rob (0642)763171 Software & joysticks. [195 ono top titles, asi joystck and interface and cassette lead. Interested? Tel: Llanelli, ATARI 800XL, 1050 disk drive with AMSTRAD CPC 464, colour monitor, disk Dyfed (0;554) 752466. approximately 220+ disks including many drive, Multiface Two, 110 games, DK recent games; .1029 Printer . All 'tronics TU tuner, joystick, magazines. Tel FOR SALE: Atari 800XL, 1050 disk drive, boxed and in mint conditions Contact 01-671 2643 after 5pm () 1010 recorder, all inimaculate condition, Steve 10482 571088) BARGAIN 48K SPECTRUM & tape plus software on disk lockable disk box COMMODORE 64, C2N tape deck, joystick, recorder, Currah speech interface, old & dust covers . Tel: 0342 27072 paddles and trackball and over 90 original ATARI 800XL home computer for sale new software. Reasonably good condition games with new powerpack and slimline Plus Atari 1010 data recorder and joystick keyboard. Sell for , phone Royston SWAPI MSX 64K, monitor, Datacassette,  worth of software. Will sell for... (073 63) 46068 joystick, software. Want CBM 128, . Tel: Slough (71791) ask for Jason SPECTRUM PLUS 2, Sinclair joystick, 15 Datacassette, software. Write to: M. CBM 64 computer, C2N cassette recorder, top notch games, 8 months left to run on Morgan 54 Acacia Avenue, Gurnos Est, joystick, plus  worth of software. All the guarantee, exceptional condition, Merthyr Tydfil CF47 SRD boxed. Asking price: 200. Tel: James reason for sale going up market\", the lot I WANT AN ATARI 800XL, disk drive, Wickford (763776). for . Tel: 01-761 4939 software. Anyone with one to sell contact: AMSTRAD CPC 464 for sale. As new with AMSTRAD CPC 464 computer with colour Dominic Lamb, 12 Roman Road, Eastham E260 worth software. Complete with monitor. Also two joysticks, software London E6. manual, green monitor, 3 joysticks & worth including Elite. Gauntlet, ATARI 800XL, 1050 disk drive, 1010 data Mags. Will accept . Tel: (07421 887038 Leaderboard) and magazines, complete recorder, 1029 printer, Graphics Tablet and FOR SALE-CBM 64, C2N cassette unit, value E7500. Sell for  ono as new. joystick and software, sell . Tel: joystick, carrying case, music maker, E400 software. price: . Runcorn 716629. Telephone Medway 618701 level. 711244 Tel: Erith 34125 CBM 64, disk drive (1541C), tape recorder, CBM 128+ 1541 DRIVE, Freeze Frame Mk4, MIRACLE WS4000, great modem, brand freeze frame, two joysticks, etc, etc. Sell Simon's Basic Light Pen, joystick, cassette new, still in box never been opened. Wife  ono. Swap for Atari ST. Tel: (0582 unit, books, and games. All for: ... bought me one for my birthday present 605370) Steve Tel: 0904 792028 little did she know I had one coming  FOR SALE: COMMODORE 64, data ATARI 800XL COMPLETE, disk drive, data FOR SALE: Commodore 64 tape deck, 2 recorder, joystick, games, mags. Sell . recorder, joyball, books and software. Mint joysticks. Action Replay mk3, magazines, ticks Action Replay mk2 magazines Tel. 061 798 8241 condition . Also, prom programmer books and  worth of software. Price SPECTRUM 48k+ datarecorder, with operating software and blank proms,  ono, Near Sheffield, phone (0433) Kempston interface, Quickshott Il joystic, etc. . Tel: (0452) 303863 50375. mags, games worth , cassette racks C64, disk drive, MPS803 printer and paper ATARI BOOXL 64K computer four original all in good condition & boxed. Sell for modem, 4 cartridges, mouse, joystick, games, Joystick, manuals, suit beginner. 200. Tel: 061 205 4783 (Norman) cassette recorder, over 200 disks, games, f45 ono Phone Mark 624 8290. 48K SPECTRUM, Kempston joystick, books, magazines and disk boxes  ATARI 800XL computer for sale. Includes interface tape recorder, new style power ono. Tel: Martin 0639 884084 cassette recorder. Joystick and software. pack,  of games. All worth . Self 128 SPECTRUM, over  worth of VGC, worth over . Will sell for  for ,00 Tel 0222 592 2414 software, cassette recorder, 2 joysticks, ono. Phone Chris (0883) 722066. SINCLAIR SPECTRUM 128K+ 2 joysticks 128 only music keyboard with interface ATARI 800XL. Recorder, software, vgc 56 original games, books, excellent and program. Sell . Tel: (0845) 577320 worth over . Will swap for Spectrum conditions, worth over . Six months Anytime! 48k recorders joystick software. Phone old sell for . Tel: Buckley (244) 544804 UNIQUE XMAS OFFER! BBC-B with 128K Chris on (0883) 722066. CBM 64 second hand DPS, 1101 sideways ram, real time clock, dls 2.1, dual COMMODORE 64C, 1570 disk drive, daisywheel printer, hardley used with play joysticks, Quick Shot I and Harrier cassette decks, mouse, joysticks, Track extra ribbon Contact Gregory Slade, joystick. Over 200 games, cassette Ball, disk carry case, game cassettes, all Queens Hotel, Station Road, Crewkerne recorder. Sell  neg. Tel: Ayhan 01-529 latest games, Diskmatell, expert + ESM 72972 7412 good condition 2500 ono. Phone (021) 353 FOR QUICK SALE to a good home. Atari C-64 compedium & disk drive, printer, 1845 after 7pm. 130XE, 1050 drive, Trakball and 15 original freeze frame IIIB. expert with e.s.m. and all Commodore 64. cassette unit, two Quick disks. All immaculate condition. E210. Tel. software. 3 joysticks.  ono. Tel: 597 Shot Il joysticks, Freeze Frame cartridge (0604) 890621 evenings. and Back-up-Board, 300 worth software, FOR SALE: SPECTRUM 48K, Cub monitor, CBM-64 COMPUTER & C2N cassette, 2 books and magazines. $200. Tel 100-200 games, cassette recorder, joysticks, action replay, over  worth of Sunderland 540193 microdrive, cartridgs, books, light pen, games, mags. 300 for the lot interested? WANTED DMP-2000 AMSTRAD PRINTER interfaces. Worth ... . Contact Tel: Botley 2355 after 3.30pm (Paul). please contact 0202 825776. Ask for Ceri. CBM-64 one month old, joystick, games, FOR SALE: CMB 64, Datacorder, diskdrive, AMSTRAD CPC464, colour monitor, built tape recorder, full length keyboard, music joystick, expert with ESM, Music Maker in tape, joystick, games0200 onlyi Telmaker, all leads and instructions, Bargain and 40 blank disks. Worth , Sell for Farnworth 10204) 72100. , Tel: Ryan on (09112511377. (Fully [480 ono. Tel. 0443 204340 (Mike). MSX 64W & cassette units, joystick boxed). 48K ZX SPECTRUM, Data recorder, software, worth .00 Quick sale: COMMODORE 64, 1541 disk drive, C2N, Kempston joystick interface, leads & .00. Write to M. Morgan, 54 Aciacia  worth of software, magazines, total manuals,  worth software Worth , Avenue, Gurnos Estate, Merthyr Tydfil value-4846. Sell for f400, Exchange for will sell for  ono. Phone 940-0338 LF47 9RD. Atari STFM. Tel: Ricky 01.907 3398. rm pm CBM64 1541, disk drive, C2N FF3 expert ELECTRON COMPUTER, together with AMSTRAD CPC 464, Modulator, DK cartridge, joysticks, latest games, 1000 large number of games 685 ono. Also Tronics speech synthesizer, joystick & disks, books, mags. Worth ,000, sell for cassette recorder  and b&w monitor games, still boxed. Any offers, contct: . Tel. David 021 705 4252 . Tel: Rustington 776230 Derrick Corrigan, tel (0365) 25170 COMMODORE 128, 1571 disk drive, Data 48K SPECKY FOR SALE. Includes TV sound AMSTRAD CPC 464 with monitor, recorder, 040 worth games, mint amplifier. Ram turbo interface. Data instruction manual & joystick, Whole condition, still boxed. Quick sale  ono. recorder. Magazines. Total value . Sell package in excellent conditions.  ono. Tel. Newport (0633) 680538. Ask for Lee. . Tel: Alan Rich (0454) 311027 Tel 061-363-8207 after 12pm. CBM 64 data cassette, disk drive, Expert & 64 FOR SALE. 1541,803 printer, 1520 SPECTRUM PLUS, Discovery 1 disk drive, ESM. Joysticks, games and magazines plotter, plus much more, cost over  B/W television, printer, joystick, cable, .00 buyer collect. Tel. Hull 443057. accept . Ring Craig for full list of power packs, leads, books. Worth  sell FOR SALE: one-month-old MP 165 NLO accesories. 091 4781249 for $300 ono. Tel 01-202 4149 after 5pm printer. Perfect condition, superb quality ATARI DISK DRIVE (810), with Archiver. COMMODORE 64 FOR SALE, 2 data sets, print. Cost C230-offers! Also Graphix AT Only  ono. Phone Rochdale (07061 back-up-board, joystick, mouse, graphic Atari printer interface, cost . Deal for 342961 adventure creator, gamemaker, dustcover, both... Tel. Stewart on Portsmouth ATARI 800XL, 1050 drive, 1029 printer, 270 cassette cases. Worth .500! Sell for 823880 disks of software, tape deck, hyper drive . Tel Ashford 47977 Phil) board, 100 mags, manuals 450 0.no. Tel: COMMODORE 64, Euromax Pro joystick, COMMODORE 64 COMPUTER, 2 data 107031772452 ask for John Quickshot il joystick, Evesham MK4 Freeze recorders, back up board, magazines BBC B Disk Drives, Data Recorder, Joystick Frame. Perfect condition, still boxed. games. E240 ono... Tel. (0742) 468663 Adaptor AMX Mouse and Software. Many Worth  sell around . Tel Ed WANTED: Commmodore daisy wheel disks tapes, games, utilities, graphics 0306-888456. printerl Swap 2 CB. Model: Midland 4001, extra ROMS  ono. Tel: (04024) 44740. COMMODORE 64 1541, disk drive, MPS Unirce 100, all leads, power pack, SWR 48K SPECTRUM, in DK Tronics case, 801 printer & paper, C2N Datasette, meter, Mike. Antenna Contact Mick: 560 joystick interface and joystick, + printer + amplifier, joystick, disk box, B&W TV. Sell Rayleigh Road, Eastwood, Southend-On tape recorder, manuals and a few games. . Tel Glyn 0244 810165. Sea, Essex. SS95HX .Phone (061) 775-2428. WANTED: Commodore 64, must be in good condition. Lowest offer accepted. Write to: J.RDouglas, Craigmore, High St., Slamannan, Falkirk, FK 1 3EH. ATARI BOOXL 64K computer almost new, plus 1010 cassette recorder and 2 games. . Phone 01.778 6033 after 4.30 pm. CBM 64, Data Cassette, joystick, books/ magazines, and software. V.G.C. Only  Ono. Also 48K Spectrum only ; Spectrum Data Recorder . Tel. Harwich 10255) 507256 after 6pm. ACORN ELECTRON. Still under guarantee Joystick interface (first Byte), many games, in superb condition, in original boxes, all leads. Bargain at . Contact: 021-475 2025 anytime. COMMODORE 64 FOR SALE, with C2N Datasette unit, joysticks. .no. Write to: Andrew Collins, 80 Regent St., St. Thomas, Exeter, Devon, or phone 10392) 25347 AMSTRAD CPC 464. Green monitor, light pen, two joysticks and 72 original games Worth , sell for . P. Williams, 22 Briardene, Llanfoist, Abergauenny, Gwent, NP79 WHO WANTS A CHEAP ZX SPECTRUM 48K, rubber keyboard, joystick, ZX power supply, all leads, some software. Boxed for 145 ono Phone Derby 810773 ask for Paul TWO COMPUTERS: CBM 64, recorder, joystick,  worth of games-. Spectrum 48K+, recorder, joystick, games, 100. Both computers for  ono. Phone: 01.701 8209 after 7pm (Koonu). AMSTRAD CPC 6128, colour minitor, cassette player, joystick, leads, 70 games, utilities, discs, books, magas  ono. Also Atari 800XL + games, .9462272 Oliver AMSTRAD CPC 6128 COLOUR MONITOR Excellent condition, printer and lead, powerful word processing package, books + magazines cassette recorder Worth . Sell for : Phone 021 526 2826. AMSTRAD CPC 464,7 months old, immaculate condition, high resolution minitor, colour modulator, disc drive, multiface, joystick, dust covers, Worth , sell for  ono. Phone (0243) 263592 after 4.30pm. COMMODORE 64 + disk drive, cassette dec, 2 joysticks. Complete collection of input. Expert cartridge with all the software. Worth , Sell for . Ring 01-591 2108 (Rick). VTX 5000 MODEM FOR SALE. Still in box, with instructions, E40. Contact, Mark Gould, 10 Ballysillan Drive. Carrs Glen, Belfast, BT14 BHO. ATARI 800 LX COMPUTER + tape recorder, two joysticks and 75 original games worth over , will sell  ono Tel: 01-578 4549. 48K SPECTRUM + cassette recorder and joystick, worth , sell for  ono. Assembly language course, laser genius, DK graphics pack and books, Phone 031332 4938 6.7 pm (Monays only) ATTRACTIVELY CUSTOMISED AMSTRAD CPC 464 with 5 Va second drive. Speech synth light pen. Cirkit Modem, Mouse, many 5 VA\" discks, doubler digital copier interface. Tel David 057763393 CBM 128 1571 DISK DRIVE. 10 disks A1 condition, 50 mags, 10 games, datacassette  ono. Phone Ric 3286 Shoeburyness, Essex. COMMODORE 64, CN2 cassette recorder, 2 joysticks, mouse + art package, over  of games. Synthesiser, dust cover, user manual, intro tape. All this at a snatch of . Contact tel: 02-556 3996. WANTED Data recorder for Atari 800 XL for around . Or disk drive for around . Phone Jeremy on 04577 71486. ATARI 800 XL, 1010 data recorder, joystick Sensible offers please. Tel Adam on Cambridge (02231311329 COMMODORE 64, disk drive, two C2N tape decks, back-up board, expert cartridge, ,000+ software, 20 blank disks, just serviced, . Tel: (0421 76575 after 5pm. ATARI 800XL. 1050 disc drive with doubler chip fitted. 1010 cassette deck, rom, discs with games and utilities  o.n.o Phone Rochdale 10706) 32019 "


"SUPA SOFT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Present the Following Special Offers to C&VG Readers SPECTRUM Barbarian Head over Heels Enduro Racer Fue Paperboy Bubble Bobble Kon Coin op Arkanoid W.C. Leaderboard Hits Pack 6 Try Pursuit Ghost & Goblin Trio Edit) Bomb Jack 2 Knight Ore Road Runner Catch 23 Indoor Sports RAPOUR SPECTRUM RAPOUR CMMODORE 123 CASS DISKCOMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK ATARIST RRP OUR AMSTRAD PC1512 RAPOUR 1495 10 95 F-15 Eagle 9.95 700 Starglider 6.75 10.05 Ta Pan 19.99 15 95 Winter Games 795 5.25 Trap Door 8.50 10.95 Death Wish 3 6.75 10 95 Guild Thieves 2 495 19.95 Summer G (2) 19.95 16.95 9.95 5.75 Hyrdotal 7.95 5.25 Alons 6.50 10.05 Big 4 6.50 10.95 Leaderboard 24,95 19.99 Pitstop (2) 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.40 Death Wish 3 790 5.50 Renedade 6.50 10.95 Rebel 6.75 10.95 Knight Orc 19 95 14.95 D. Desert 24.95 22.95 9.95 6.75 Sold a million 3 9.95 8.75 Triv Pursuit 10.95 14.95 Sigma 7 6.50 NA Barbarian (Palace) 14.99 10.99 Silent Serv 19.95 16.05 9.95 7.00 Star Games il 7.99 5.50 Paperboy 6.50 10.05 Uving Daylights 6.75 10.95 Silent Ser 24,95 1999 Subbattle Sim 24.96 1995 7.95 5.25 Hardbal 8.95 5.90 Star Fox 7.00 11.00 Side Wize 6.75 1095 Road Runner 245 19.95 Destroyer 24 95 19.96 7.95 5.25 Rygar 8.99 8.00 World Leaderboard 6.50 10.95 Great escape 6.00 10.00 Subba 24.99 1999 Leaderboard 24 96 1995 9.95 6.75 Mask 29 95 2495 Guild Thieves 24.95 19.95 7.95 5.25 Side Wize 7.95 5.25 Delta 6.75 10.05 World games 8.50 10 95 Star Trex 24.95 19.95 Passenger on Wind 24.95 19.95 7.95 5.25 Silent Service 9.95 6.75 Spy Spy 3 6.50 10.95 Tank 6.25 10.00 Arkanoid 14.95 11.95 Balance Power 24.95 19.95 7.95 5.25 Allens 9.99 6.50 Leviathan 5.50 10.95 Epyx Epics 5.75 10.95 Barbarian 24.95 19.95 Orbiter 29.95 24.95 95 6.50 Foothaler Year 7.95 5.25 Elite 10.95 14.95 Five star 2 6.50 10.05 Gauntlet 24.95 19.99 F16 Falcon 9.95 8.50 Starfox 8.00 5.50 Re-Bounder 6.75 10 95 Ghost & gobling 6.50 10.95 Santinel 24.95 19.99 Space Max 39.95 34,95 14.95 10.95 Gun Runner 7.95 5.25 Bolderdash Cong 6.50 10.95 Wibell 6.25 10.00 Saloon Dream 24.99 19.99 Pasion Chess 24.95 1995 7.95 5.25 Silent Service 9.95 6.75 Coin-op 6.50 10.95 Subba NA 11.95 Jewels Dark 24.95 19.99 7.99 5.25 Xor 6.75 10 95 Rygar 6.75 10.95 (FULL INFOCOM RANGE IN STOCK PLEASE RING FOR DETAILS) 795 525 Barbara 6.75 10.95 (WE TAKE ACCESS OR VISA FOR ATARI ST. & AMSTRAD 15121495 11.95 Hybrid 8.995.50 Trio 6.75 10.95 Acro Jet 6.50 10.95 PRODUCT ONLY RING FOR DETAILS 1512 BUSINESS PRODUCT) 8.996.25 Leviathan 7.99 5.25 Gauntlet 6.50 10.95 Head Over Heels 6.25 10.00 ALSO IN STOCK RING FOR FULL LIST & PRICE) 7.95 5.25 Sul Lip & Co 9.00 6.75 Sold a million 3 6.50 10.96 Mario Brothers 6.25 10.00 AMSTRAD 6128/464 CASS DISK (SPECIAL OFFERS 8.95 8.50 Super Soccer 795 5.25 Road Runner 6.75 1095 Tai Pan 8.25 10.00 Mini Office 2 12.00 14.95 DOUBLE PACKS SPECTRUM 7.95 5.25 Eagle Nest 9.95 6.75 Space Harrier 6.50 10.95 Game Over 625 10.00 Trivial Pursuit 11.95 16.95 Butch Hard Guy + 8.99 8 25 Falcon 9.95 8.75 Catch 23 625 1095 Sold A Million 3 8.96 10.95 Sold a Million 3 6 .95 10.95 Handball 11.00 7.95 5.25 Winter Games 6.50 10.95 Show Rider 6.00 10.00 H Pak 8.50 10 95 Dracula 8.50 NA Konan Coin op 6.05 10.95 Super Soccer C10.00 7.95 5.25 Athens 7.95 5.50 Ace 2 700 10.95 Last Ninja 6.50 10.95 Acret 6.95 10.95 Space Harrier+ 7.95 5.25 Living Daylight 9.95 8.75 Pirates 11.95 15.05 Jack Nippl 6.75 10.95 Silent Service 6.95 10.95 Head Over Heels 110,00 7.95 5.25 Zynaps 7.95 5.25 Freeze Frame 3 (Cart) 33.95 Gunship 10.95 14.95 Starglider 11.95 16.95 Mag Max + 7.95 5.25 Shockway Rider 7.95 5.25 Export Cartride NA 25.95 Destroyer NA 10,05 Trivial Pursus (PCW) 18.95 Army Moves .00 9.95 700 Gauntlet 8.99 6.25 Death or Glory 6.25 10.95 Trap Door 5.50 NA Head Over Heels 6.50 10.00 8.95 6.25 SPECIAL OFFERS Shadow Mordor 7.95 525 Bubble Bobble 8.50 10.95 11 95 11.95 Amy Moves Knight Ore 8.50 10.00 9.95 700 7.95 Step Fight 525 DOUBLE PACKS COMMODORE Slap Fight 625 10.95 Noming 5.25 10.95 E 550 1095 lon 7.95 5.45 Game Over NA 1495 EHR Pak 6.50 10.95 Starglider (PCW) 7.95 5.25 Bubble 8.99 6.25 Last Ninja Ene 6 Pak 6.75 10.95 Trantie 5.75 10.95 Gauntlet 7.25 11.95 12.00 9.95 5.50 Arkanoid 6.00 10.00 Star Games 1 6 .75 11.95 Shadows Mordor 6.50 10.95 Ht Pak 6+ 9.95 8.75 C12.00 Army Moves 7.95 Wiz 5.25 Wiz 6.75 10.95 Graphic Ad Cre 17.85 22.95 Planit (PCW NA 20.95 9.95 8.50 8.90 Deathscape Gauntlet + 6.25 Defender Crown NA 11.95 Undium Paradroid 6.00 NA Sabaluer 2 6.25 10.00 9.99 8.50 Sigma 7 7.95 5.25 Army Moves 8.25 10.00 Mega Apocalypse 6.75 10.95 Ankanoid 12.00 9.95 8.75 Survivor 8.90 6.25 Zynaps 8.25 10.00 Silicon Dreams 10.95 14.95 Paperboy 6.50 10.95 All of the above on 9.996.75 Explon 795 5.50 Shadow Mordor 6.25 10.95 Jewels Darkness 10.95 14.95 Big Four 6.95 10.95 Cassete only! Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders Please Add 75p per tape, Mail Order only. Cheques/postal orders (Sterling only please) Made Payable to: DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, Dept 3.210 Nicholls Tower, Harlow, Essex, CM18 6EF TELEPHONE (0279 29076) WEEKDAYS ONLY PLEASE Trantor kard Warrior Stars on 128 Mario Brothers Short Circuit Renegade Ace 2 (128) Tal Pan Wurbal Dracula Sky Runner High Frontier Elite 8 Pak Samurai Trio 8.50 1195 Bombjack 2 PIRATE SOFTWARE THE GOLD AND SILVER THAT'S WELL WORTH THE HUNT!! Saaa Dama AS STOLADE GOLD AND SILVER BURIED HERE Youk LOCAL ComwTER STORE PIRATE THE NEW NAME LAGH'S LAKE IN BUDGET SOFTWARE CALL ME PSYCHO S1021/60987 Code name PSYCHO-a mega battle Droid pitched into battle with Professor Jalwerwocky to stop humanity being transformed to lumps of gun Spectrum +8138 Pirate Silver .99 HOLSONYI SUMARIA A nightmare journey of the last package tour to the planet Sumaria. Si mus face and Conquer the mighty Minotaur as he attempts to escape and return to Bogner. Spectrum 48/128 Pirate Gold 02.99 CEMETERY SMASHOUT Pilot your entombed spacecraft from the core of the planet Zoltan smashing through rock stratas and gravitational fields. Fast and Slow option and an ability to make your own planer using a full screen editor Spectrum 48/128 Pirate Silver .99 TRIVIAL FRUIT \"Probably the best budget trivia game ever.\" Hundreds of questions included and an opportunity through Questions Editor to add your own. 14 players and features individual or team options Commodore 64 Pirate Gold .99 Dr SOUTHWOOD BESA MAD MAX SITE OF LOST SUBMERCI   START LOOKING NOW! Pirate Software, Software Publishing Associates, Lower Ground Floor, 197-199 City Road, London ECIV IN "


"1722 COMPUTER REPAIRST HOUR SINCLAIR COMPUTERE STRAN AMSTRAD APPROVED REPAIR CENTRE QUALITY APPROVED REPAIR CENTRE OTRC: HOW TO GET YOUR SPECTRUM REPAIRED FOR ONLY .95 SPECIAL OFFER! SPECIAL OFFER! SEAL OF QUALITY ORDER NOW USING ACCESS l i 4, SPECTRUM (only KEYBOARD THE CHEAPEST why not upgrade your ordinary Spectrum into The tantas OK Tronic typewriter eboard for only  50 including firting VAT and return post and packing Normal recommended retas price E49 95 Regacement printed DK Trans key er 7 50 nung DOST Why not upgrade your spectrum to a 4 4 [17 95 oriuong VAT pet are gà 9 You wouide to the You just send us .95 which is CALLIN AT OUR MANCHESTER CITY CENTRE BRANCH FOR WHILE YOU WAIT REPAIRS AND SPARES REPAIRS .00 AROUND UPC RADEKID including return pavage structions Suidwevery update gen Update Your Rubber Keyboard to a WHILE YOU New Spectrum+ Fitted for only .95 +.50 WAIT SERVICE post & packing (ASO D.I.Y. Kit available for only CALL FOR APPOINTMENT same day service .95 + .50 p&p) LIMITED OFFER THE NO.1 REPAIR CENTRES IN THE UK OTHERS FOLLOW SPARES ZX81 NOW IN STOCK EXTENSION TEN REPAIR SERVICE RIBBON TRADE REPAIRS JOYSTICK & INTERFACE PACK SOUND THROUGH YOUR T.V. WITH MEGASOUND Want better sound through your TV Hear * While you wait Spectrum repairs .50.Six top games worth .00 for you to You need MEGA SOUND Play games with Also spare parts over the counter a enjoy and play with every Spectrum repair unbelievable mega sound 56 way All computers fully overhauled and fully .95 plus C1 508D We repair Commodore 64's Vic 20'S ribbon cable to tested before return Commodore 16's and Plus 4'S extend your ports for REPLACEMENT * Fully insured for the return journey. The most up to date test equipment Your peripherals POWER SUPPLY Fixed low price of .95 including post. developed by us to fully test and find all e .95 Spectrum replacement packing and VAT. (Not a between price faults within your computer plus 150 p&p power transformer of really up to .00 which some of our + Keyboard repairs, Spectrum rubber key suitable for all makes competitors are quoting).(Mail order only) boards only .00. of computer .95 Discounts for schools and colleges. 1676 + 3 month written guarantee on all repairs. plus ci 50 p&p BEST SERVICE BEST PRICES! JOYST KEYBOARD MEMBRANES ARE YOU ANOTHER CUSTOMER fed up ? waiting weeks for your estimate? The Cheetah 125. Rapid Fire Need your computer repaired fast? Then send it now to the Number One Repair 200 Dual Port interface normal Spectrum keyboard Company in the UK or call in and see us at our fully equipped 2.500 square foot workshop recommended retail price membranes E21 90 purchase together with all the latest test equipment available. You are more than welcome special offer price .25. .50 plus  p&p We will repair your computer while you wait and help you with any of your technical problems. Joystick valable as separate item Spectrum Plus spare commodore computers repaired for only .00. Please note we gove you a 100% low fixed E8 95 or interface available as separate price of .95 which includes return post and packing VAT not a between price like some Item .95 plus 1.500 V keyboard membranes S R E12.90 plus 150 p&p other Repair Companies offer. We don task you to send a cheque in for the maximum amount and shock you with repair bills E30 upwards Don't forget we are Amstrad aproved for quality and des Zx 81 membranes speed don trisk your computer to any other unauthorised repair centre We dont just repair the 6 E5 00 plus 150 p&p fault and send your computer back we give your computer a OVERHAUL WITH EVERY REPAIR WE DO:mos ON-OFF SWITCHES We correct colour, sound, Keyboard. Check the loading and saving chip. Put new feet on FOR THE SPECTRUM the base if required Check for full memory check all sockets including ear/mike and replace Commodore AND SPECTRUM + where needed. All for an inclusive price of .95 including VAT, all parts, Insurance and post replacement power ORDER NO and packing. No hidden extras whatsoever. We don't have to boast too much about our transformer (29 00 service as we have thousands of customers from all over the world highly delighted with our plus C1 SOLD 1067 SPECTRUM service. A first class reputation for speed and accuracy. Don't forget we also now have a 1067A SPECTRUM+ Service Branch in Manchester City Centre for while you wait service USE ANY .95 + 150 + P URGENT NOTICE Don't be misled by adverts showing between prices. A recent JOYSTICK WITH complaint against a Manchester repair firm, Mancomp, was upheld by the Advertising I YOUR SPECTRUM + 2 Standards Authority on two counts, \"It had stated BBC repairs between E14 and  SINCLAIR JOYSTICK ADAPTOR FOR then charged the customer . Their guarantee policy was misleading as it did not CONNECTING SPECTRUM +2 make clear that all repairs were not covered COMPUTERS TO MOST JOYSTICKS COMMODORE POWER SUPPLY ORDER No 1062 RRP   150 Videolar 9MNext NEW CW THE VIDEOVAULT COMPUTER COMPANION EDITION NOW HOT OFF THE PRESS New bigger catalogue now available containing over 2.500 items including software for all computers, joysticks, spare parts, business software, books, plus many more. Just send 2x 18p stamps for your free copy. Over 20 pages full of top quality products delivered to your door by return post. POST + PACKING CHARGES UK ONLY RietOVERSEAS POST + PACKING CHARGES PLEASE WRITE FOR QUOTE Skor eval :l 1. Ltd. FULLY REPAIRED AND TESTED ON MOST ADVANCED VUGUVauTEST OPEN 7 DAYS A WEEK MANCHESTER MON-SAT ONLY EQUIPMENT IN EUROPE 140 High Street West, Glossop Derbyshire SK13 8HJ Tel:04574-66555/67761 Head Office & Access orders, queries. MON Manchester 061 236 0376 while you wait repair centre only. C COPYRIGHT VIDEOVAULT LTD NO 789003 FAX NO. 04574 68946 YOURS FREE WITH EVERY SPECTRUM REPAIR SOFFERS GREAT FREE GAMES RECOMMER .00 "


"Mailbag. Computer + Video Games 30-32 Farringdon lame London ecir 394 For the past two years I have with their own personal part of the adventure. The main massive write in protest, or been an avid reader of your number, which will allow them aim in this part is to free the better don't buy any software mag. In this time I have seen to take advantage of Wizard, while the overall aim a bove  in price, unless it many changes in C+VG and merchandise discounts. in Dusk is to rescue the consists of a gold or platinum computers in general. Most of Membership has proved Wizards castle from the rule of disc. these changes have been popular with MSX owners, the Lizardmen and Colin Campbell although we will be reviewing consequently discover a means Belfast news and letters pages except and including news on other and including news on other of returning to your own time. for the replies from non micros. In addition to James E. Hooper & D. Harper I feel that the average age of entities. Spectrum, Commodore and Ammanford. your reader has started to The new 16 bit machines are Amstrad, we will be covering Editor's reply: Well, it IS a become younger. Why? Well, also impressive. In your April the MSX, C16, Einstein, and dodgy address... looking thru this months copy '86 issue the Amiga vs ST 16-bit machines, together with of C+VG everyone seems to challenge was held in which games consoles. I went through all this drivel be saying what I say is best and the Amiga came out on top by Any interested readers are about five years ago as a BBC everything else is crap. a mile. invited to send a 9 by 4 SAE for owner, and now, having It's a well known syndrome So what has changed in 18 an application form and details bought an Atari STFM, find the Narrow Minded months. In the September '87 Konami Software Club same old problem raising its Obnoxiousness and by looking issue the Editor told a reader to Bank Buildings extremely ugly head again. I at the replys to some of the get an ST because they are 17 Bank St. am referring to the price of letters I can see also that the cheap and he likes them! Newton Abbot games software. symptoms are showing in you The new A500 is a brilliant Devon Virtually all software houses machine at an amazing price, TQ12 2JL price their software on the A few views that I would like and, for Richard Monks, you Mark Smith, principal of the better hte to express are Jerry Paris CAN use an A500 with a T.V. Devon computer, the higher the price. needs a script editor. You also Taking all of this into Editor's reply: Sounds like a To a certain extent, this is fair need your style sorted out and consideration, I find it hard to good deal... enough, as it takes more time spelling mistakes. On the see why you are displaying a and skill to program a finer whole, Mark Bromley does the marked bias towards an We were really chuffed production on the more best artwork for your covers. inferior machine. when we read the review of powerful computers. You mention you did have a If Atari want their product our adventure, Dusk Over As regards the ST and strategy section, but I could not advertised they should pay for Elfinton, in our local John Amiga, it seems to be standard find it anywhere. I would a real ad like everyone else, Menzies. We were so over-thepolicy to price these versions at welcome it as I sick to death and not get the Ed to do it for moon about in fact that we nearly twice the price of the with killing aliens with plans on them. bought two copies of your mag already over priced Amstrad universal slavery available to Paul Colliss and Adrian Briers to treasure for the rest of our disc version, at around . everyone. I think Wayne also Leicester lives. Mastertronic, seemingly one deserves more than a page as Editor's reply: I speak as I find We were a bit disappointed, of the few honest software he seems to be getting more Paul and Adrian, and gave however, as a few bugs crept houses, have proved that followers every issue. Your Richard my opinion. We can into the review, namely our selling at .99-.99 brings heavy metal section is... well still have opinions, can't we? name & address. We know that massive sales, and has made it's there. You like the Amiga I like the we have a weird address as we them one of the richest houses. Although I don't read it ST-'nuff said?! ive in Wales, but we printed it Do Sub-Logic Wonderfully myself, I don't carp and moan enough times so you should appropriate name-really think about it. A quick word to Wim Konami Software Club, have got it right! that selling Flight Simulator I at de Gent, The Sisters split in produces a monthly newsletter For everyone who so  will bring in more profits 85/86, long live the Sisterhood. about Konami activities. desperately wants to buy a than they would get selling at Back to the point. Nipples! Each newsletter there are copy of Dusk, it costs .95 on -15? Surely they would sell Yes they were invented long reviews of new computer and cassette also on Microdrive ten to twenty as many copies at before computers and as the arcade titles being produced for .95 and our correct this price. average age of your readership by Konami, gaming hints, address once again is: For once, will the software is 16, everyone knows what features and a whole lot more. Video Games, 1 Glanmorfydd houses use their commonsense they are. The subscription price is just House, Cwmgarw Road, and price all of their excellent Out of the two computer .95 per year U.K., overseas Rhosamman, Ammanford titles as only Mastertronic mags I buy, one has an rates on application. With the SA18 1DP. Tel 95 824803. know how. inferiority complex. Why the newsletter members will Also, the quest for the Orb is So, there are two paths open constant bitching against each receive a membership card only one of the aims in the first to us games players have a other? What does it achieve. "


"Zzap is on a downer at the mothere is such a thing. Perhaps a Holland general music summary. so don't add injury to insults P.R. officer could be invited Editor's reply: Well, there's no 7. Cool Jazz just get on with your job, trying from each of the companies to accounting for taste-why Billinge to keep everyone happy, or me answer some queries from you want Norman Wisdom on Editor's reply: All our comps at least. On the whole, your people who've been ignored tape is beyond me! But there aren't painting ones but you mag seems the more by them. may be some other nutters out should see the response when intellectual of the two, It would certainly do their there who can help you out. we do hold one! The Bug although you do have your image no harm. I think I'd After purchasing an Amstrad Hunters have gone to that moments. better leave it at that until some DMP 2000 printer and an great comic graveyard in the Advice please. As I said sparks off my prose again, interface usable with a sky as Mr Paris moves on to earlier, I'm sick with the think I'll be writing again soon, Spectrum + computer, I am bigger and better things but current state of software for the so be prepared for another having a few problems. In the watch for a brand new strip C64, so dol-buy a disk drive onslaught. A quick message to back of the manual there is a starting soon. for it or flog it and all my games all Sisters fans burn! chapter about printing graphics and buy an STFM. Please Andy F but this section does not tell me I think that the judgements of make a serious attempt at Bristol how to print graphics from the the Barbarian and Xevious answering as my funds are Editor's reply: What an epic! computer. I have tried printing competition was a little bit short-of course you could Enough points in there to keep a program with graphics in it unfair, especially the Barbarian give me a job helping Wayne you all busy replying for at but where the characters one. People spent so much with his workload. least the next couple of issues. should be are question marks. time and effort drawing their Information please when! Can anyone help. pictues and at the end they get had my Speccy in the old days, We regularly read your Miss R. T. Monument beaten by fourand five-yearI had a great game for it called magazine here in Holland and magazine here in Holland and Norfolk Norfolk olds who I bet only spent one Rebel Star by Firebird. when a problem arose we Editor's reply: Well, can hour at the most to do theirs. Now I wrote to them asking naturally thought of you as anyone give Miss Monument a Why can't William Lee Wah if any plans for a conversion being the people to help. Here sensible answer. We can't! Kan be a winner for once? He's were in the line. The answer goes. been a runner-up quite a few received wasn't worth the At the moment there is a Why does it seem all your times! Could the artists have paper it was printed on. Norman Wisdom series on competitions are drawing their pictures back if they ask Please kick some ass up BBC2 on Monday evenings. ones. Can't you have essay for them? there and get it done, throw Might it be possible for you to comps or a competition trivia My kid spent quite a few your weight around, stick your give us an address of a video days on his and at the end he fingers down your throat, just club in Britain who can send us Hunters? get some intelligent response got nowt, not a sausage. Next a VHS video of these Norman Like the new articles, though time I'll get my three-year-old from them. I'm not a kid, so Wisdom movies especially the I'm not too sure of the music cousin to do the drawing. don't treat me like one. first one shown at the pages. Personally I like heavy Chun Wah Kong One more moan -not a beginning of July called The metal but I also like rap, indie, Cheshire month goes by without one Square Peg. soul and some chart stuff as Editor's reply: How do you company or another well. So why can't you cater We hope you can help us obliterating the pages of the with the above or inform us for these and other forms of know they only spent an hour? mags I read with their glossy what we can do to obtain the music. Like explaining all those Everyone-despite their age double page hype and this video. Thanks! forms of music as well as a gets a chance to win C+VG competitions. Steve Brown, months \"essential purchase\". J. M. Rost the man who designed It's funny how worked up Barbarian, judged the you can get, typing. Anyway, I competition for us so you have nothing but contempt for can argue with him if you're the companies who rely on handy with a broadsword. image rather And if you enclose than a well an SAE you'll thought out get your intelligent entry back game, if 8 "


"To order and receive up to date list of available stock please send cheque/Postal order payable to Software Supersavers. All orders will be sent by 1st class mail in high quality packaging. Please be careful to quote your full name and address, the make and model of your computer, and to use block capitals for your order to avoid confusion. P&P inc UK. Please add  per tape overseas SOFTWARE SUPERSAVERS PLEASE ORDER EARLY The prices shown in this advert are set at a special low level as an introductory offer and will be valid for ONE MONTH only from date of publication. 102 HIGH STREET, BRENTWOOD ESSEX CM14 4AP SPECTRUM Army Moves 5.20 Armageddon Man......... 9.00 5.20 Ace Prodigy Space Battle Space Pilot... ......... 7.00 Tau Ceti 16.00 Transtar 13.00 Taipan 10.00 Tee Up 7.00 Thai Boxing 7.00 Terrestrial Encounter.... 5.00 Tracker 18.00 Wizard War.. 12.00 720\" 12.00 13.00 SEGA Master System...... 95.00 Ligh Phaser with Cart. 42.00 3D Glasses 45.00 Control Stick 13.00 My Hero 13.00 Ghost House 13.00 Teddy Boy ..... 13.00 Transbot 13.00 Super Tennis ............. 13.00 F16 Fighter Action Fighter............ 13.00 Choplifter ....... 17.00 Fantasy Zone ............ 17.00 Block Belt 17.00 Pro Wrestling.... Alex Kiddin Miracle Wld 17.00 Wonder Boy ............. 17.00 Shooting Gallery ....... 17.00 Quartet World Games Prox...17.00 Secret Command..... 17.00 Astro Warrior Pitpot 17.00 Rocky 21.00 Out Run 21.00 Space Harrier.........21.00 World Soccer ..........17.00 The Ninja Gangster Town.......... 17.00 Zillion 17.00 Enduro Racer............ 17.00 Missile Defence 3D ....21.00 Zaxxon 3D 21.00 17.00 Acrojet. 2.50 Adv Art Studio (128).... 20.00 Arkanoid ..5.20 Art Studio (48) 10.00 Aviation 1.50 Athena 5.20 Ace Il 6.20 Barbarian 6.80 Battle of Planets. 2.00 Battleships 5.20 Butch Hard Guy .... 2.00 Bubble Bobble.............5.20 Classic Collection... 3.50 Comet Game 1.50 Crystal Castles 2.50 Catch 23 5.20 Contact Sam Cruise....... 2.50 City Slicker 1.50 Centurians 6.20 Dan Dare.. 3.50 Catch 23. 5.20 Death Wish III 5.20 Dragonslar 3.00 Dragontorc...... 1.50 Eidolon Elite 6 Pack ..... 6.80 Elite Trio Elite 6 Pack Il........ 6.80 Enduro Racer....... .6.80 Equinox 1.50 Exolon 5.20 Express Raider 6.20 Elite 6.80 Firelord 2.00 Fatworm 2.50 F15 Strike Eagle 6.80 Final Matrix 3.00 Five Star 2 Frost Byte 1.50 Future Knight 2.50 Five Comp Hits ...... 3.50 Game Over Gauntlet .6.20 Ghostbusters 2.50 Go to Hell 1.50 Grange Hill... 2.00 Guild of Thieves....... 10.00 Gunship 6.80 Hacker (128)... 2.50 Hardball 4.00 Head Over Heals 5.20 Hive 3.00 Hotshots Hybrid 6.80 Hydrofool 5.20 Implosion 6.20 Impossiball 2.00 Indian Jones... 6.20 Indoor Soccer ......... 2.00 Jewels of Darkness... 9.00 Jack the Nipper il ... 5.20 Krakout 5.20 Last Ninja 6.20 Living Daylights...... 6.80 Leaderboard 6.20 Last Mission 6.20 Lightforce ... 3.00 Little Comp People (128) 5.00 Legend of Kage... 2.50 Mario Bros 3.00 Mask .6.20 Metrocross 6.20 Now Games 4.............. 6.80 Nemesis 5.20 Nemesis the Warlock..... 6.00 Paperboy. Potty Pigeon............... 1.50 2.50 Pyracurse 1.50 Prohibition 6.80 Pawn (128) Road Runner ... 6.20 Rescue Fractulus. 2.00 Runestone ... 1.50 Riddlers Den....... 1.50 Starglider 10.00 Sentinel... 6.80 Starfox .6.80 Side Wize.. .5.20 Star Games Two .... 6.80 Silent Service 4.00 Short Circuit 4.00 Star Games Ones... 4.00 Shockway Rider... 3.00 Slapfight 5.20 Saboteur Il 5.20 Superbowl...... 2.50 Startrek... 1.50 Silicon Dreams...... 9.00 Stifflip & Co. 6.80 Solomons Key 6.20 Trantor 6.20 Trivial Pursuit 10.00 TP Baby Boomer.. .7.50 Twister 1.50 The Planets... 1.50 Tank 5.20 Tau Ceti 2.00 Thing Bounces Back 5.20 Tournament Snooker.... 2.00 Terra Cresta 2.50 Thanatos 2.50 Tai Pan (128) 5.20 Trailblazer... 2.50 Uridium 5.00 Wonderboy... 6.80 WC Leaderboard 6.20 Wizball 5.20 Xevious 2.50 Zynaps 5.20 Zoids 2.50 Renegade 5.20 Mercenary... ..... 6.80 Rebel 5.20 World Games 6.20 Flunky 6.80 Shadows of Mordor ......5.20 Konami Coin Ops 6.80 Big 4 6.80 Gauntlet +3 9.00 Solid Gold 6.00 Rygar 5.50 Gunslinger 6.00 Gauntlet il 5.50 Captain America........... 6.00 Streetsport Basketball... 6.00 Charlie Chaplin 5.50 5.50 Out Run 5.50 Impossible Mission II ....4.00 Wizard Wars..... 6.00 F'n' F Thunderceptor. 6.00 Lazer Tag 6.00 Side Arms..... 6.00 Bravestar. .6.00 Arctic Fox 7.00 Bards Tale 7.00 | PHIM Pegasus ...... Ballbreaker Mandroid ........... 7.00 CBM64 C D Adv Music Studio....... 29.00 Art Studio.......... 9.00 12.00 Ady Art Studio... 17.00 18.00 Appolo 18.......11.00 14.00 11.00 14.00 Arctic Fox...... 8.00 11.00 Airborne Rngr... 10.00 15.00 Autoduel...... 15.00 Bravestarr .......... 6.00 9.00 Bubble Bobble..... 6.00 10.00 Battleship.......... 6.50 10.00 Ball Breaker....... 8.00 12.00 Bangkok Nights... 6.50 10.00 Big 4 Vol 2......... 6.50 6.50 California Games 6.00 9.00 Captain America. 6.00 9.00 Charlie Chaplin... 6.00 9.00 Druid 2............. 6.00 9.00 Defender Crown........ 11.00 Elite 6 Pack Il...... 6.50 10.00 Elite Pack .......... 6.50 10.00 Elite.............10.00 14.00 Empire. .. 2.50 4.00 Fivestar 2... 5.00 Gunslinger linger............10.00 Gauntlet .... 6.00 9.00 Guild of Thieves....... 15.00 Gryzor............. 6.00 9.00 Gunship........... 10.00 14.00 Heartland ........ 2.00 4.00 Indian Jones....... 6.00 9.00 Infiltrator 2 .4,00 7.00 Imposs Mission... 6.00 9.00 Jwls of Darkness 9.00 9.00 Jack Nipper II.....6.50 9.00 Knigt Orc.........11.00 11.00 Lazer Tag ........... 6.00 9.00 Myst of Nile........5.00 8.00 Music System..... 9.00 12.00 Mask .......... 6.50 10.00 Mutants............ 3.00 Mutante Mega Apocalpyse 6.00 Max Headroom.... 2.00 Out Run... ......6.00 9.00 On the Tiles........5.00 8.00 Ogre 15.00 Pawn... 13 Prodigy 2.00 Quedex............. 6.50 10.00 Revs+ ............ 7.00 10.00 Rygar.. 6.00 9.00 Renegade .......... 6.00 9.00 Rogue Trooper...... 4.00 St Spt Baseball.... 6.00 9.00 Solid Gold ......... 6.00 9.00 St Spt Basketball 6.00 9.00 Side Arms....... 6.00 9.00 Scary Monsters ...5.00 8.00 Silica Dreams 9.00 9.00 Starglider .......... 9.00 12.00 Supersprint........ 6.50 10.00 SideWize...... 6.00 9.00 Stealth Fighter... 10.00 15.00 Sentinel.... 5.00 7.00 Trantor... ..6.00 9.00 Tenth Frame... 2.00 Tag Wrestling.. 2.50 Victory Road ..... 6.00 9.00 Wizard Warz...... 6.00 9.00 Wld Tourn Golf.... 8.00 11.00 720.. 6.00 9.00 AMIGA Adv Con Set. 17.00 Arctic Fox 17.00 Bards Tale 22.00 Barbarian 18.00 Balance of Power ... 24.00 Ches Master 2000.. 22.00 California Games ... 18.00 Defender of Crown... 24.00 Deja Vu .......... 24.00 Guild of Thieves......... 18.00 Gato. 24.00 Gauntlet.... Hitchiker ......... 24.00 Jewels of Darkness.... 13.00 Knight Orc 13.00 King of Chicago......... 24.00 Leather Goddess......24.00 Leadeboard..... 18.00 Marble Madness....... 17.00 Pawn 18.00 Road Runner ............ 18.00 SDI 24.00 Space Battle ..7.00 Silicon Dreams.... 17.00 Star Glider 17.00 Silent Service 18.00 18. Sky Fox 13.00 Terrorpods ........... 18.00 Tai Pan 11.00 Uninvited 24.00 Winter Games 18.00 World Games............ 18.00 ATARIST Ady Art Studio 18.00 Adictball 10.00 Atuoduel 18.00 Arctic Fox 16.00 Ace 2. 13.00 Airball 19.00 Blue War 12.00 Bangkok Nights 19.00 Bravestarr 12.00 Barbarian... 18.00 Bards Tale 20.00 Bubble Bobble 13.00 Charlie Chaplin 12.00 Chess Master 2000...20.00 Captain America 12.00 Defender of Crown... 19.00 Degas Elite 20.00 Gauntlet 2 12.00 Guild of Thieves......18.00 Golden Path 13.00 Gauntlet 18.00 Impossible Mission 3... 12.00 Indian Jones... 13.00 Impact 10.00 Jewels of Darkness... 13.00 Knight Orc.. . 13.00 Marble Madness........ 16.00 Music Conset 20.00 Out Run 12.00 Ogre 14.00 Pawn Road Runner 18.00 Solomans Key ........ 12.00 Starglider 18.00 Silican Dreams..... 13.00 Sentinel 13.00 Star Trek 13.00 Sky Fox 16.00 Skull Duggery 16.00 Strikeforce Harrier..... 19.00 Supersprint BLANK DISCS 10 x 5.25\" SS/SD 7.00 25 x 5.25\" SS/SD 13.00 100 x 5.25\" SS/SD 48.00 10 x5.25 DS/DD ..9.00 25x5.25 DS/DD 17.00 100 x 5.25\" DS/DD ..... 75.00 10 x 3.5\" DS/DD 12.00 25 x 3.5\" DS/DD 26.00 100 x 3.5\" DS/DD......90.00 10 x 3\". 18.00 25 x 3\"... 40.00 100 x 3\"... 140.00 720 DISC BOXES To hold 80 x 3.5\" Discs.7.00 To hold 100 x 5.25\" Discs... To hold 40 x 3 Discs... 8.00 9.00 7.00 JOYSTICKS Konix Speedking....... 10.00 Cheetah 125+ ............. 7.00 Cheetah Mack 1........ 12.00 Software is also available for the following machines. Please write in for lists C16 Plus 4 MSX Atari 8-Bit Atari VCS Nintendo BBC Electron "


"TIMESOFT 35 London Road, Tooting SW17 9JR. Tel: 01-685 9849 FREE Blank Disk with every game!!! SPEEDYSOFT The Fastest Mail Order Service Available COMMODORE 64/128 ATARI ST AMIGA Disks Disks Disks Silent Service 8.95 Terror Pods 18.95 Terror Pods 18.95 Enduro Racer 8.50 Starglider 14.95 Goldrunner 18.95 Toyshop 29.00 Crystal Catles 9.95 Faery Tale (Adv) 42.95 Printshop 25.00 Shuttle il 12.95 Flight Sim lli 42.95 Zynaps 8.50 221B Baker St. 14.95 Deluxe Paint II 64.95 Quartet 8.50 Mercenary Comp 12.95 SDI 25.95 Wonder Boy 8.50 Degas Elite 23.95 Defender of Crown 25.95 Baseball 8.95 SDI 22.95 Hardball 24.95 GFL Football 8.95 TNT 15.95 PAC Boy Breakers 14.95 Road Runner 18.95 Cruncher Factory 7.50 Brimestone 14.95 Super Tennis 14.95 Chessmaster 2000 20.95 Mag Max 7.50 Hardball 17.95 De-Luxe Print 20.95 Mario Bros 7.50 Star Raiders 12.00 Portal 14.95 Gato 21.95 Paperclip 19.95 Arena 17.95 Thing Bounces Back 7.50 Gambler 9.95 Space Harrier 24.95 Spy v Spy III 7.95 Pro-Sprite Design 29.95 Rocky 24.95 Moonmist 14.95 Sidewalk 15.95 Secret Command 19.95 Hollywood Hi-Jinx 14.95 B'dash Cons. Set 15.95 Wonderboy 19.95 Nemesis Warlock 7.95 Tai-Pan 1 5.95 Light Phaster 44.95 Leaderboard Exec. 8.95 Tee-Up Golf 5.95 Master System 99.95 Fantastic Offers for New Members Software for ONLY .00 & .00 Choose upto a maximum of 5 titles at the incredible prices below: Spectrum Commodore 64 Amstrad .00 .00 .00 River Rescue P.C. Fuzz Meltdown Stage coach Master of the Lamps Alien Tower of Evil Commando Beachead Attack of the Special Delivery Defend or die Killer Tomatoes Wing Commander World Cup '86 Supersleuth Snodgits Yie Ar Kung Fu Orc Attack Everyone's a Wally Superchess Braxx Bluff 3D Beachead Bounder +80 VAT Manager Zaxxon Red Arrows Special Delivery F.A. Cup Football Technician Ted Space Walk Frantic Freddie Air Traffic Control Formula 1 Simulator Grogs Revenge The Magic Sword Jasons Gem River Rescue Electric Freddie Sinbad and the Confuzion Nonterraqueous Golden Ship One Man & His Droid Locomotion Universal Hero Redhawk Cave of Doom Pippo Back to the Future Rad Zone Hyperbowl Se Ka of Assiah Feud Future Game Vegas Jackpot Colony Master Chess BMX Racer Jackle & Wilde Video Poker Holy Grail Xcell Bump. Set, Spike Ceasar the Cat Kopyashi Naru Jackle & Wilde Rastercan Galletron .00 Sky Fox Wotian Hypaball Robin of the Wood .00 2.00 America's Cup Mario Bros. Express Raiders Challenge Yie Ar Kung Fu Crystal Castle Prodigy Miami Vice Miami Vice The Eidolon Howard the Duck Xarg It's a Knockout Impossible Mission Kronis Rift Mario Bros 10th Frame Dandy Superstar Ping Pong World Series 10 Frame Arc of Yesod Baseball Arc of Yesod Uchi Mata Tarzan Tempest Explorer Contamination Kinetik Chameleon Rhunestone Gunfight Dandy The Great Escape Explorer Jumping Jimmy Shadowfire W.A.R. The Great Escape Heavy on the Magick Howard the Duck Highlander Nodes of Yesod 1.C.U.P.S. W.AR Genesis Revolution Infodroid Impossiball Butch Hard Guy Rambo Revolution Hardball Rock N' Wrestle Ping Pong The Comet Game Fighting Warrior Dandy Infiltrator Cheques/P. Orders payable to: TIMESOFT 24 HOURS ORDERING SERVICE, All Prices included P&P (overseas +.50) Attention All Adventurers! INFOCOM HILL Wargames Adventure Simulation AGUE ISION Specialists! MICROPROSE DATASOFT SSI AVALON MINDSCAPE SSG MICROLEAGUE SPORTS EPYX ORIGIN BRODERBUND + ACTIVISION SIMULATIONS SUBLOGIC Electronic CANADA ACCOLADE * Order despatch within 48 hours * We accept Access, Visa, Mastercard and Eurocard. * Orders accepted by telephone between 9.30am to 7.30pmMonday to Saturday. Just telephone: 056 45 5975. * Free membership if you order any of the above titles. * Overseas orders welcome. * Established 5 years. We also cater for BBC, Electron, AMS, PCW, & MSX * Members receive catalogues regularly. To order just fill in below. Please print clearly and do not forget to encolse either cheque or postal order made payable to Speedysoft, 15 Lady Byron Lane, Knowle, Solihull, West Midlands B93 9AT or fin in credit card details. IBLOGIO Run by Enthusiasts c for Enthusiasts ......................................... CompType.................. Arts ame... Address CSS We Stock: (DISC) Atari/ST Apple II Commodore/Amiga IBM/Amstrad PC  ARA ACCESS DKG SIERRA Visa/Access/Mastercard/Eurocard Card No TITTTTTTTIIIII Title Price Mail Order Anywhere or Visit Our Retail Store Send  for Catalogue (Refunded with 1st Order) Call in for a Coffee & a Chat! 11.00 COMPUTER ADVENTURE WORLD 1A Charing Cross, BIRKENHEAD L41 6EJ, England Telephone 051 666 1132 (Mon/Sat 10am-5pm) Post & Packing Grand Total Please remember only up to a maximum of 5 titles "


"DON'T MISS ''BIG FAT TAPE S SPECIAL à OCTOBER CESTA ON SALE OCTOBER 26th GET ONE... BEFORE WE GET YOU! Commodore User's Big Fat Preview Special features three playable demos of top coin-op converts Flying Shark, Buggy Boy and 720. No cover price hikes to pay for the tapes either. A gift from us to you. Inside you will find more games reviews than any other magazine by top writers Mike Pattenden, Gary Penn, Ken McMahon, Ferdy Hamilton, Bohdan Buciak, Bill Scolding and many more. Nick Kelly's Arcades keeps you posted on coin ops and there are stacks of compos. In fact there is so much in this issue you would be a total not to rush down to your news agent and place your order right now. "


"FOOTBALL R CRICKET SPORTS SIMULATIONS FROM E & J SOFTWARE (Established 3 Years) 4 Classic Swalecy games from E & J Software packed with GENUINE FEATURES to make them the most REALISTIC of her kind CRICKET MASTER A SUPERB SIMULATION OF ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL CRICKET Features dowe Types Batman Bang Bowing And Scoreboard Wide No Ball Mad Dropped Catches Cow c als 3 Sol Level STAR FEATURE Complete Match Overview including balby bal commentary PLUS MANY MORE FEATURES PRICE SPECTRUM 28/126K ONLY 67.95 including FREE SET OF SCORE SHEETS PREMIER II AN EXCITING FOOTBALL LEAGUE GAME Features Select Team Play all teams Home and Away Ful Squad Detais ALL TEAMS injuries Team styles, in-match subs Goalscorers recorded Transfermarket wows approach to any player in league Offers Team Morale Financial problems. Transfer Demands. 7 SI Love Manager Saray Ardances PRICE 48 126K Spectrum 5: Ame CPC 7.95 PREMIER LEAGUE 4128 Commodore. Includes many of w es of Pro PRICE 8.50 WORLD CHAMPIONS A COMPLETE WORLD CUP SIMULATION From the first trendies, quating stages, loul matches and on the FINALS Select from souad of 25 players. 2 in Match us Discipline table Ski Loves Select Friendlies & Tour Opponents COMPREHENSIVE TEXT MATCH SIMULATION includes Goal Tine Bookings Named Recorded Goal Scorers, Sending of Comers, Free kicks Penalties injury time Match Clock and MOREI PRICE 48/128K Spectrum 85:64/126K Commodore .95 EUROPEAN # CAPTURES THE FULL ATMOSPHERE OF EUROPEAN FOOTBALL Features Home & SUDOES DEATH Team Selechon D a y T SUPERB TEXT MATCH SIMULATION INCLUDES Time. Sending & MORE PRICE 48 126K Spectrum 6.25: 64/128K Commodore C7.95 FANTASTIC VALUE BUY ANY 2 GAMES DEDUCT C2 FROM TOTAL BUY ANY 3 GAMES DEDUCTES FROM TOTAL BUY ALL & GAMES DEDUCTS FROM TOTAL ALL GAMES AVAILABLE ON TAPE FOR IMMEDIATE DESPATCH BY FIRST CLASS POST From: E&J SOFTWARE, Room 5,37 Westmoor Road, ENFIELD, Middlesex EN3 7LE 20.00 COMPUTER ANGLE The leading 16 bit Software/Hardware dealer NOW IN STOCK AMIGA A500 With free Software including free modulator, mouse mat, Startkit and deluxe paint, all for the amazing price of .00 inc VAT ALSO IN STOCK ATARI STEM 520 with free software for .00 inc VAT Amiga Software Atari Software Our Price Our Price Marble Madness 24.00 Gold Runner 21.95 Karate Kidd 1 20.95 Karate Kid II 20.95 Indiana Jones 17.95 Indiana Jones 17.95 Pack Boy 9.95 TNT 18.00 Mindbreaker 9.95 Road Runner 19.95 Space Fighter 9.95 Int. Karate 17.50 Shooting Star 9.95 F15 Strike Eagle 20.95 Rocket Attack 9.95 Airball Con. Kit 20.95 Barbarian 20.00 Barbarian 20.00 Terrorpods 20.00 Terrorpods Ancient Mariner 19.00 Ancint Mariner Knight Orc 18.00 Tai-Pan Space Battle 7.00 Adictaball OGRE 17.00 Perfect Match Moebius 17.00 Gauntlet Tai-Pan 17.00 Hades Nebula Faery Tale 20.00 Star Trek 14.95 Road Runner 19.95 M.G.T 19.95 Gauntlet 18.95 Alternate Reality 20.00 Cinema Ware Software 26.00 Sinbad Throne of Falcon 26.00 Defender of the Crown 26.00 King of Chicago 26.00 All titles available on Amiga. SDI available on Atari Infocom adventures in stock. American Software available. Full range of business products backup utilities. Commodore 64s and software in stock For price lists and information ring. Harlow (0279) 369567 Cheques postal orders made payable to: COMPUTER ANGLE Unit A, 31 Amherst Lodge, Bramble Rise, Hodings Road Harlow, Essex CM20 1EE 19.00 17.00 20.00 17.00 DREZER 20.00 IN SDI THE NEW DIMENSION VISA MAIL-SOFT ****** SIMPLY THE CHEAPEST MAIL ORDER COMPANY ***** **SPECTRUM   BATTLESHIPS .99 BARBARIAN ROSSABALL SPY V SPY SPECTRUM 5.40 EXPLODING FIST 5.40 STAR WARS 609 NAPOLEAN AT WAR OUT RUN 699 WYSTERY OF THE NILE 9.99 GAUNTLET 5.75 ZULU WAR 5.99 ACE ACE 128K RINGWORLD STRIKE HARRIER 5.50 GRYOZ 660 THE FINAL MATRIX GAUNTLET SUPER SPRINT ATHENA ANNALS OF ROME 7.95 GAME OVER 5.50 LEADERBOARD NEVESIS RYCAR GRYZOT RED LED ELITE THEATRE EUROPE SABATOUR BATTLE OF BRITAIN GAME SET MATCH TOMAHAWK WORLD GAMES WORLD CLASS BOARD FREDDY HARDEST SCALEXTRIC  BANKOK KNIGHTS EUTE TRIO HIT PACK ARKANOID CALIFORNIA GAMES DRUID HYDROFOOL 6.99 6.99 BATTLEFIELD GERMANY COMET GAME SILENT SERVICE 550 GRAPHIC CREATOR 6.99 JACK NIPPER ***COMMODORE 64*** ***COMMODORE 64*** AMSTRAD *** 6.50 SEGA MASTER SYSTEM 6.40 ACE 1 02  CART OUT RUN 02 699 ELITE TRID PACK02 699 STAR WARS 10.95 MY HERD BUBBLE BOBBLE -01 14.95 SUPER SPRINT-02 6 BATTLESHIPS-02 5.99 ELITE-03 CAUNTLET02 599 ST TH FIGHTER 04 10 95 GRYZOR-D2 5.50 TRANSROT  EPSO 6.99 FREDDY HARDEST SUPER TENNIS TRIVIAL PURSUIT 14 9.99 A BORNE RANGER-D4 F15 FIGHTER 14 95 GUILD OF THIEVES 13.95 RYGAR-02 6.99 FREDDY HARDEST 725 ACTION FIGHTER 19.95 ELITE 6 PACK 2 5 .99 ON THE TELES01 CHOPLIFTER 19.95 REVS PLUS 02.. 5.99 SIDE WIZE 01 24.95 ROAD RUNNER-D2 6.99 EXPERT CART ESM 27 95 CAL GAMES 02 BACK BELT. 1995 JACK NIPPER II-02 PRO WRESTLING 19.95 WONDER BOY-02 699 FINAL CARTRIDGE 245 ENDURO RACER 02 6 9 POWER CARTRIDGE ELITE HIT PACKI-02 WONDER BOY 6.60 ACTION REPLAY MKII SOLOMANS KEY-02 19.95 AGEDDON MAN D2 9 .50 RESET SWITCH 19,95 TAI-PAN01 6.30 SLIMLINE KEYBOARD 16,95 WORLD L BOARD-02 9.99 WORLD GRAND PRIX 1 9.95 LAST NINIAD2 TAL-PAN-D2 SECRET COMMAND 19.95 CALNIA GAMES 02 CON DATA RECORDER 28.95 RENAGADE02 SPACE HARRIER 2 24.95 ARKANOID02 495 640 NEOS MOUSEDEESE 28.95 GLD OF THIEVESO 22.95 ART STUDIO DISK NINTENDO SYSTEM.. MYSTERY OF NIE-02 NISHT ORC04 DELUXE SET JEWELS DNESS-04 5.99E WEAVER BASEBALL SILICON DREAMS-04 GYROMITE 32.95 BARBARIAN02 6.99 CALIFORNIA GAMES 10.75 THE PAWN DISK STACK-UP 32 95 MEGA APOCD2 650 LEADER BOARD, 18.75 MIN OFFICE 04 DUCK HUNT ......29.95 WORLD LE BOARD 02 6 99 HITCHHIKERS GUIDE AUNTLET D2 GUM SHDE 29.95 QUEDEX02 6.99 BARBARIAN 18.75 10 BLANK DISKS HOGANS ALLEY 29.96 CONFLICT 1 04 MULTIFACE WILD GUNMAN ***VCR 2500*** MACH RIDER GAVE OVER-01 620 DEFENDER OF CROWN WRECKING CREW SABOTEUR 101 5.50 STARGLIDER AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGN RIVER RAID 9.95 BASEBALL BATTLE CRUISER-D 10 x 3 DISKS MEGAMANIA TENNIS DESTROYER DISK ** ATARI ST . KEYSTONE CAPERS 1999 RAMBO DISK SPORTS ASSORTMENT 1999 PIRATES 36 116 TRANTOR GHOSTBUSTERS SUPER MARIO BROS 1999 DURRELL 4 VOL -01 ENDURO STAR WARS 6.99 SUPER SPRINT 13.95 CHOPPER COMMAND NOT A PENNY MORE 10 95 STARGLIDER BOXING ICE CLIMBER 19.99 TRACKFIELD-02.... 640 BANKOK KNIGHTS * JOYSTICKS*** KUNG FU  99 KNIGHT ORC 13. TAC5... PINBALL 699 ADV ART STUDIO 189 TAC3 ACTION ASSORTMENT 1999 RING WORLD02 TAC Z *B KOKKNIGHTS 02 6 99 ALLS OF RON 18.96 EUROVANON-AUTO ATARIB BIT . SUPER SPRINT02 609 ROADRUNNER 1896 FUROMAX PROF PLUS LES GRYZOA 0 6 .99 FLIGHT SIMULATORI 33.95 MICRO HANDLER 14.99 RED LED-01............... 6.99 CUILD OF THIEVES 18.95 COMP PRO 5000 59.95 KNIGHT ORC02 9 1295 1495 GUILD OF THIEVES .95 STAR TREK (AMO) CHEETAH NACH 1 1206 GS MATCH04 SCAREY M'STERS 01 .40 BARBARIAN-PALACE 18.95 KONEXS SPEEDKING 4495 SILICON OREANS 12.95 QUICK SHOT 11 TURBO 27 95 PAWNOESK 14.95 N TRATOR 1-2-02 5 .99 JSTICK EXTLEAD 595 QUICK SHOT 11 AVAILABLE ON DISK FORMATD1-1995. 02-10.5 03-1295041495 888 5.50 6.50 3.99 DESERT RATS JEWELS OF DARKNESS SILICON OREAMS CONFLICT IN STARGLIDER TRIVIAL PURSUIT VETROCROSS 8888888 LAST NINJA ANNATOR 1 ENDURO RACER FOOTBALL DIRECTOR ROAD RUNNER ARTIST 11 ADV ART STUDIO WIZBALL RENAGADE 5.50 10.95 **ACCESSORIES 10 x 3'OISKS RAM TURBO... KEMPSTON INTERFACE SSSSSSS TAU PAN PAPER BOY THE PAWN 128K ARTISTI 128K IC KUP.S HYPERBALL HEARTLAND 13.95 MULTIFACE 128 RAVPRINT. RAMWRITE D.K. TRON SLIGHTPEN.. AMX MOUSE CENTE INTERFACE RAM MUSIC MACHINE SPEC DRUM 13.96 PRICES INCLUDE P PIN UK, EUROPE ADO CI PER TAPE, ELSEWHERE ADD C1.50. ADD CS FOR P P FOR MACHINES (UK ONLYCHO POPAYABLE TO MAIL SOFT (C VG) PO BOX 50 LONDON NISJJ. ACCESS AND VISA ORDERS WELCOME PLEASE SPECIFY COMPUTER TYPE IN YOUR ORDER PLEASE NOTE: DENOTES NEW RELEASES WHICH WILL BE SENT TO YOU AS SOON AS THEY ARE RELEASED BY THE SOFTWARE HOUSES CONCERNED PRICE MATCHING ..... IF YOU SEE ANY SOFTWARE YOU WANT ADVERTISED CHEAPER THAN OUR PHICE IN THIS MAGAZINE JUST ENCLOSE THE LOWER AMOUNT TO US AND TELL US WHICH COMPANY IT IS AND WE WILL MATCH THE PRICE THIS ONLY APPLIES TO CURRENT TITLES AND NOT TO OTHER COMPANIES SPECIAL OFFERS. IF YOU DO NOT SEE THE TAPE YOU WANT SIMPLY DEDUCT 30\". OFF THE RAP AND WE WILL SEND IT TO YOU. EXCEPT BUDGET. SEGA NINTENDO. 2500 SOFTWARE "


"Pori Pal Paint I am an Italian boy very interested in Hello out there. I am the owner of a Hi, my name is Samereen. I am a 15 the Amiga and C64. I am looking for C64+4 and I just LOVE computers. I year old girl who owns a C64. I would new friends in Britain, or any where also like horror films, 2000 AD, like a penpal (female) aged 18 and over else. Please write in English or Italian. adventure gamebooks, role playing from all over the world who has Umberto Valentino etc. I am 12 and I would like a pen experience in all computers and Viale della Alpi No 40 friend who loves having fun and who anything linked with them. 90144 Palermo would swap hints and tips. So, if you Also someone who can solve Italy want a psychotic, fun loving guy for a problems, have ideas for projects, pen friend, please write. You can be excellent in programming, word any age, preferably no younger than processing, know about modems, I am a 18 year old boy from Holland. prestel numbers viewdata system, etc. Besides designing computer graphics/ Steven Hern Anything, anywhere, everything about sprites, I am also a graffiti artist. I would Tyne & Wear computers. I am also interested in the like to get in touch with other graffiti BBC although I don't own one. So fans, artists in the world to exchange tips, why not contact me. tags, photos, etc. I have just bought at C128 over here Samereen Elout de Kok in Malaysia. However, it is very London Her oosterveld 9 frustrating to find out that there are very 7907 GE Hoogeveen few 64/128 users 'practising their Hi, my name is Keely and I am 12 Holland knowledge' here. I would like to get in years old and own a CPC 464. If you touch with any users in the UK to find want to be my pen pal, and like out more about this fantastic machine. American football, baseball and English I am interested in a 15-17 year old If anyone is interested in swapping football, write to me now. female, C64 owner who is addicted to hints, advice or just wants to exchange Keely Bergquist cassette version adventure games. Any \"eastern-western ideologies on the 64\" Liverpool race, country or height. Interested. the write to me. Please write. No Australians Calvin please. PO Box 1032 I am a 12 year old Chinese boy. I Hordak Penang 10840 own a Sega Master System and I would 4 George Cr Malaysia like to have a pen pal who owns a Port Macquarie Sega. Please write now, as I am feeling NSW 2444 lonely Australia I would like to advertise for a pen Peter pal. I have an MSX computer I would like a penfriend anywhere in the world. Ol would like to get in touch with other I would like it to be a boy around 15 or users of the Amiga. I have a A500 and over. My other hobbies are swimming, Hi, I am an Australian guy and I am promise that all letters will be horse riding and reading. I also like desperately searching for someone answered. music especially the Police. I am 14. who owns the same machine as myself Daniel Mostrom Helen Bray -C16. I am looking for people from all Betsley 6 Devon over the world to exchange letters and 552 59 Jonkoping pokes. Write to me now. Sweden Mark Demicoli Do not read this unless you are a 39 Balnarring Drive genuine pen pal who is prepared to St Albans 3021 Hi, my name is Mark and I own a write regularly. I am 22 years old and Victoria C64. I would like to exchange info on own an Amstrad CPC 464. I would Australia the 64 with anyone in the world and prefer pen pals from abroad, but will also write about other interests. I have a guarantee to reply to anyone who My name is Kay Dharbanga. I am 16 disk drive and datasette sends a photo. years old and have a CPC 464. I would Mark Cassella Write soon and give me a break like to have anyone with any type of 32 W. Forest Dr away from playing computer games computer who's 16 and lives abroad as Rochester non-stop!! a pen pal. N.Y. 14624 Dawn Lever Kay Dharbanga USA Sutton Coventry Luton "


"M IGHTSPEED SOFTWARE FREESCAPE IS THE NEW DIMENSION ver 60 HIGH STREET HANHAM BRISTOL BS15 3DR TEL: (0272) 604130 24 HOUR ANSWER PHONE FOR ALL QUERIES ATARI ST RETAIL OUR RETAIL OUR PRICE PRICE TRANSLATER ADVANCED ART STUDIO ULTIMA I 24.95 19.00 ARKANpp 14.96 12.50 TAI PAN BARBARIAN Psygnosisi 24.95 20.00 XEVIOUS 24.96 19.00 BOULDERDASH CON SET 2218 BAKER ST BRIDGE PLAYER 2000 TRACKER CHAMPION WRESTLING AUTO OUEL DEATHSTRIKE 14.95 12.50 OUTCAST 8.50 EDEN BULES LURKING HORROR 25.50 FLEET ST PUBLISHER FLIGHT SIM AMIGA FLIGHT SIM I SCENERY DISK 7 29.99 26.50 ALIEN FIRES 49.95 42.00 GAUNTLET 24.95 19 00 ARCTIC FOX 29.95 24.50 GOLDRUNNER 24.95 19 00 BARBARIAN 24.95 19.00 GUILD OF THIEVES 24.95 1900 BORROWED TIME HADES NEBULA 19.95 15.50 DEFENDER OF CROWN HI-SOFT 79.95 70.00 DEMOLITION 9.95 8.75 HOLLYWOOD HIJINX 2999 200 FAIRY TALE 49.99 44.00 JUPITER PROBE FLIGHT SIM LEADERBOARD GRAND SLAM TENNIS 49 35 42 50 LEADERBOARD TOURNAMENT GUILD OF THIEVES KNIGHT ORC 19.95 16.99 JEWELS OF DARKNESS 19.95 15.00 MEAN 18 24.95 19.00 KNIGHT ORC 19.95 16.99 MERCENARY COMPENDIUM 24.95 19.00 LEADERBOARD 2499 19 00 VETROCROSS LEADERBOARD TOURNAMENT PASSENGERS IN WIND LEATHER GODDESS 29.99 24.50 PHANTASIE 24,95 19.00 MARBLE MADNESS PIRATES OF THE BARBARY COAST 12.95 10.50 PHALANX 9.95 8.75 1496 12.00 PORTAL PROCOPY 141 SILENT SERVICE 24.99 1900 PRO SOUND DESIGNER 57.44 43 50 SINBAD 39.99 32.00 PROHIBITION 19.95 15.50 STARGLIDER 29.95 24 00 ROAD RUNNER 24.95 19.00 STATION FALL 29.99 25 50 SILENT SERVICE 24.96 19.00 SONEX 79.95 70.00 SILICON DREAMS 19.95 15 50 THE PAWN ST REPLAY ULTIMA 111 24.99 19.00 STARGLIDER 24.95 19.00 UNINVITED 29.95 24.00 STATIONFALL SPACE BATTLE 9.95 8.75 STREET WWE 19.95 1599 BRIAN CLOUGH'S FOOTBALL STRIKE FORCE HARRIER DELUX PAINT 2 109.95 120 00 SUB BATTLE SIM SENTINA 19.95 1700 MOST PRICES QUOTED IN THIS MAGAZINE THE PAWN 24.95 19.00 CAN BE MATCHED FOR TIVE RANDIT 29.95 24 50 SOFTWARE HARDWARE PLEASE CALL ATARI ST/800XLXE OWNERS Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest, biggest and best Atari Club on the market. out APPROX 600 ST TITLES NOW IN STOCK ans, MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who nearly 5 years ago first conceived the idea of Now approximately 2000 titles on disc, cassette and Rom (games, business, education and utilities. Olen purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a tair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Several thousand very satisfied members many as far away as Iceland Sweden West Germany. Holland Denmark and Elre. A fast efficient and friendly service operating a computerised custom butt system to keep track of all your records. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: glish All prices are inclusive of VAT and delivery inside the UK. Please make cheques, P/O payable to 'Lightspeed Software all orders despatched with 24 hours, please allow 7 days MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos. Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All Out D rams are als with documentation MATRIX HIRE The cheapest way to play them all Top games titles for Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad. Please state system. Details from Matrix Leisure Club 271 Stanstead Road, Bishop's Startford, Herts CM23 2BT CLASSIFIEDS or USED HARDWARE Spectrum 48K  Spectrum + Spectrum 128K 79 Spectrum2 Commodore 64  Others: Please phone A wide range of peripherals always in stock Please phone for prices etc. USED SOFTWARE BARGAIN PACKS (Spec & 64) 10 Different cio 20 Different  Please state machine when ordering State preferences Arcade Adventure M odi Send a of your own collections we know what not to send REPAIRS. SPECTRUM  OTHERS: PHONE All our used products are in good to excellent condition and include a 3 month warranty Send cheques/PO's to: Software City (CV) 173 Mansfield Road, Nottingham NG1 3FR Telephone (0602) 410493 Alow 10 days for delivery Overseas Add 5 FREE MEMBERSHIP!! Hire CBM64, Spectrum, Amstrad, C16, BBC Electron, Vix-20, Amstrad, Atari Software Send 2 x 18p stamps for your hire kit. Computersoft, PO Box 20, North PDO, Nottingham NG5 2EE (Please state which machine) MSX SOFTWARE For one of the widest selections of MSX products in the south of England Write, phone, or call in for our 400 title mailorder price list D.L. Chittenden Ltd. 59-61 The Broadway Chesham Bucks HPS IBX Tel: 0494 784441 m self n all nd ATARI 400/600/800XL/ST AMIGA SOFTWARE THE MAIL ORDER SOFTWARF SOCIETY 'THE BEST THING SINCE SLICED BREAD' 'Try Before You Buy' UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64 NOW ALSO FOR THE ATARIST Send s.a.e for fast response and details to UK Software Exchange Club (CVG) 15 Tunwell Greave. Sheffield $5 968 16 uld tas GAMES FOR SPECTRUM MSX AMSTRAD COMMODORE ATARI We have all all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE Apply now and hire your first four games free. Around 1,000 different original titles For full details send large stamp addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm 10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES Atari 5205STM 1299.90 post free + 15 free disks Antic and Analog magazines available BEST QUALITY DISCS Memorex 5W4S S./DD Discs 10 for .95 p.. Unlabelled 5 \" S S/DD Discs 10 for .95 p.. Unlabelled 32 S S/DD Discs 10 for $14.95 pt 25 for 35.50 50 for 167.50 Atari 520 STM with 2 Megabyte Drive .00 +23 discs Happy enhancement for the 1050 Drive with revision 7. .90 post free GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB DEPT. C+VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney Close, Sunderland SR3 4PD. Tel: (091) 5286351. CLASSIFIEDS Send your name, address and which computer(s) you have to: M.S.S. P.O. Box 57, Doncaster, South Yorkshire DN4 5HZ "


"Loud and proud and ready There are seven to shock. Yes, C+VG's very planets to work through own Mr T Tony Takoushi — statute,jungle, is back to rant and rave ancient, floating continent, fire, living about computer games. Love and fortress. or hate him, just read him. What deserves special attention is the sound in know it sounds peace and stability to all this game. For the first crazy, but recently the planets. time ever Konami has there have been The game is in the put a dedicated sound times that I felt like Defender vein, your chip in the game exploding in excitement ship moves left to right cartridge. at all the new 16-bit/ across the screen while A new custom sound console stuff, and there the landscape moves LISthat's what it says is still the odd few 8-bit above and below you. here—was specially games that gets the At the end of a wave developed which allows pulse racing.. you have to defeat a eight voice polyphonic This month's offering mothership to proceed sound effects. is a 128K MSX game to the next level. The bottom line is that called Nemesis 2. Yup, You start off with just this game has music and it's the follow up to the bullets at your disposal sound effects that make original arcade hit but can pick up, extra the industry standards Nemesis, which was speed, missiles, double of Rob Hubbard converted to all major cannon, laser, optional look like Noddy. I know formats. extra ships and a force it is a sweeping It comes from Konami field by shooting certain statement but it is that on cartridge and will set aliens which turn into good. you back . very juicy collectable The graphics are OK, you all knowi pods. excellent, well animated foam at the mouth at the There are other and coloured. My only very thought of a temporary weapons to qualm with the & D chocah reht < Konami MSX game — be collected (via pods) presentation is the but if you have ever that last a set amount of scrolling which like the been privileged to play time, and include vector original Nemesis, is one you will laser, option ring, jerky BUT the action is understand! enemy slow and rotary so hot you do not have Boy, where dol drill. the time to even notice begin? This game is On defeating a it. absolutely choc-a-bloc mothership you can go Again the game with wicked touches, for the big ones, here scores in its playability. gameplay and action. you go and sit in the hull Make no mistake, this In fact this game made of the dead mothership game is very hard in history for me, I have and you play a short places, but they are all played thousands of round which results in the right places. games and for the first you getting a new VERY There's a ten digit fime EVER I hit the pause lethal weapon (up laser, highscore you cannot key to rest as the action down laser, napalm be serious and a was just too much for missile, reflect ring, continuous option at the me! I had to calm down extended laser, back end of the game so you on getting to a beam or fire blaster). can practice the high mothership stage. The enemy attack levels. More of this later, now comes in the form of The game should be back to the game. It inertial alien patterns available by the time follows on from the first and bases on the you read this as the Nemesis in that you backdrop-these open launch date is midcontrol a ship and have up and let you have it October, all I can say is to clear assorted nasties also, mazes to Konami you have from a planet. The manoeuvre through, reaffirmed my faith in scenario tells you that rotating pillars to eight-bit games with a the evil Dr Venom has squeeze past, and worthy follow-up to the invaded your planetary Egyptian heads and original and greatsystem and you have to Dinosaurs very neat Nemesis. It is a followmake like Clint on the eye-to zap, or up in the true sense of Eastwood and bring avoid! the word... "


"VES RSTELLET ALL-ACTION COMPUTER HITS LIVE AMMO ARMY MOVES You are a member of the SOC Special Operations Corpla crack regiment of Specialist Commandos picked for the most dangerous missions. Locked in a safe at the emeny headquarters is information... Information so vital that the turning point of the conflict depends upon its discovery. To get to the headquarters means crossing jungles and deserts manipulating many forms of transportation and harnessing a variety of weapons systems. Only the best will succeed on this d y venture. Will you be one of them? Game Design Dinam RAMBO FIRST BLOOD PART II The box office smash converted for your home-micro that rocketed to the No. 1 spot now offered to you in this amazing LINE AMMO action pack, Ar Rambo you have formidable array of weapons which you will need against an equally formidable enemy. Rescue your friends and escape by helicopter-il you get that farl as Abas restments NV Allons reserved TM used y Ocean Software Limited under authorisationc Stephen Cannell Productions censing Agent GREEN BERET RESCUE THE CAPTIVES! You are the GREEN BERET. a highly trained combat machine. Your mission infiltrate a four enemy Strategic Defense insta n s-you are alone against immeasurable odds, have you the land stamina toxceed? A stick conversion of the arcade favourite displaying all the play features of the original. Dkonam SIUP GUNE The TOP GUN game puts you in the pilot's seat of an F-14 jet fighter. 3-D vector graphics and split screen display allow one or two players to combat head to head or against the computer. Your armaments in this nerve-tingling aerial duel are heat seeking missiles and 20mm rapid fire cannon. Many skills have to be brought in to play such as reflexes, manoeuvrigg ability and accuracy to become the best of the best.' Top Gun mavericks enter the danger zonel TOP GUN TMR 1986 1987 Paramount Pictures Corporation All Rights Reserved Ennen THE GREAT ESCAPE The year is 1942, the place Germany War has broken out and you have been captured and placed in a high security POW.camp. Victory may be far away so it is your duty to escape, but this will not be easy. It will take careful planning and much patience, culminating in a skilful and resourceful implementation in the camp you are closely guarded but while you follow the daily routine you will need to slip away unnoticed to reconnaitre the situation and collect tools and materials necessary for your chosen escape route. There are many avenues of escape, some difficult, all certainly dangerous and each one requiring different skills or equipment. Game Design Copynght Denton Designs 1986 Screen shots taken from various computer formats 14_VE AMMO ocean SIUP GUNE BIARMY MOVES AMSTRAD COMMODORE SPECTRUM AMSTRAD COMMODORE SPECTRUM CASSETTE ETOP GUNE DISK OCEN T ROARMY UVESE 5 ALL-ACTION COMPUTER HITS Ocean Software Limited. Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester. M2 SNS. Telephone 061 832 6633. Telex 669977 Oceans G! "


"ITS THE 4TH JULY AND THE NATION IS SET FOR AN ALMIGHTY CELEBRATION. INTO THE COMPARENT CALM OF THE WHITE HOUSE BURSTS THE MANIC DR. MEGALOMANN. \"STEP DOWN MR PRESIDENT, SUBMIT TO MY RULE OR TODAY AMERICA WILL KNOW A PLAGUE FROM WHICH DEATH WILL SEEM A HAPPY RELEASE\". SCREENSHOTS FROM COMMODORE VERSION. s SILT HI KIDS! NO TIME TO LOSE. C.L.A. SAY THERE'S AN UNIDENTIFIED MISSILE LOCATED IN AN UNDERGROUND SILO IN THE MIDDLE OF THE CALIFORNIAN DESERT MUST BE THE ONE! CLIMB ABOARD THE SKY CYCLE. TOGETHER WE CAN SAVE THE FREE WORLD. GOD SAVE AMERICA! CBM 64/128 .99 .99 TAPE DISK AMSTRAD .99 .99 TAPE DISK SPECTRUM .99 ATARI ST .99 THE UNO DOON TUBE OF DR MEGALOMANN GOI Media Holdings Lid. Units 213. Holford Way Halford Birmingham 88 TRX. TEL: 021 356 3388  1977 by Marvel Comics Group. All rights reserved.  1987 by Marvel Entertainments Group Inc. All rights reserved "

