"FEBRUARY 1982 75p COMPUTER MAGAZINE THE COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES COSMOS LANDING DR LIVINGSTONE GAMES AND PROGRAMS FOR THE SINCLAIR, PET, APPLE, TANDY AND MANY MORE DARK TOWER THE LATEST FANTASY CONCEPT IN ELECTRONIC GAMES WRITE YOUR OWN ADVENTURE WE TELL YOU HOW "


"-20 ONLY Commodore VIC-20 A fully-fledged, fully expandible, computer with large typewriter style keyboard, programmable function keys, PET compatible Gives 24 colours and sound. (to the degree that it can be used to compose music). High resolution graphics module available as extra Speaks BASIC. Easy-to-use, even for beginners. New VIC-20 material is available and more is on the way. Supplied with easy-to-read, easy-to-use manual, suitable for beginners and children. Programs can be stored on optional VIC tape recorder. Commodore approved supplier. Texas Instruments T-99/4 (PAL colour TV compatible) Usable literally within minutes of unpacking. Anyone can use it without previous computer experience or programming knowledge. Powerful 16K BASIC language. Special features: high resolution graphics let you create animated displays, charts, graphs, built-in music synthesizer allows you to build notes and chords, equation calculator for maths solutions Designed for home management, educational and entertainment use. Large amount of educational software available on modules for youngsters. Programs can also be stored using good quality tape recorder. Texas Instruments approved supplier. Trust the unique Computer Supermarket to be first with the unique new personal computrs. e Four new-technology computers bring you colour, sound, high resolution graphics. All with plug-in program modules. All at unique Computer Supermarket prices. ATARI Atari 400 Brings the family music, art, education, entertainment. A general purpose personal computer that's easy to operate and offers 16 colours, each with intensities, high resolution graphics 4 sound synthesizers: 57 key alphanumeric keyboard with upper lower case, inverse video full screen editing, four-way cursor control, 29 graphics keys. Programming languagesBASIC ASSEMBLER, PILOT. Programs can be stored on optional Atari tape recorder Atari approved supplier. Atari 800 Top-of-the-line personal computer. Advanced peripheral components, comprehensive software library, Modular design precludes obsolescence. 16 colours intensities). 4 sound synthesizers, 57 keys with upper/lower case, inverse video, full screen editing, four-way cursor control, 29 graphics keys Programming languages: BASIC, EXTENDED BASIC ASSEMBLER, PILOT PASCAL. Programs can be stored on optional Atari tape recorder Atari approved supplier THESE EXCITING NEW PERSONAL COMPUTERS CONNECT TO VIRTUALLY ANY COLOUR OR MONO TV. Full range of peripherals will be available for each computer All units are complete and ready to use. 13 amp plug fitted. Thorn colour TV's can be supplied for use with these computers. Details on application I enclose my cheque for  Ordebit my Access/Barclaycard/Diners Card No. A O To Computer Supermarket Ltd, Douglas House Queens Square, Corby, Northants. Please send me Commodore VIC-20 at 192.50 Texas Instruments T1-99/4 at .50 Atari 400 at .50 Atari 800 at .50 Hardware/Software list Atari tape recorder at  inc. VAT, p&p VIC tape recorder at  inc. VAT, p&p Signature Name DDDD Address Prices include VAT. p&p & insurance .50 Your remittance should be made payable to Computer Supermarket Ltd. and shall remain your money until the goods have been despatched to you at the address specified. All goods offered are subject to Computer Supermarket conditions of sale, copies available on request. Registered in England No. 2546589 PRESTEL SERVICE Prestel subscribers can obtain further details on these computers and place orders for them through the Prestel i service. PRESTEL No. 400400 (BLOCK CAPITALS PLEASE) CVG COMPUTER SUPERMARKET COMPUTER SUPERMARKET LTD, DOUGLAS HOUSE, QUEENS SQUARE, CORBY, NORTHANTS. TELEPHONE 05366 61587/8 AND 62571 "


"No. 4 FEBRUARY 1982 COMPUTER GAMES No. 4 FEBRUARY 1982 CONTENTS & VIDEO good chess positionepage 16 NEXT MONTH .....page 44 the Tandy racetrack MAILBAG Your views aired and your problems answered GAMES NEWS ... Fulfil Napoleon's dream or land a jumbo jet. A rundown of the latest games for your computer COMPETITIONS. Me and my Template. Or 10 ways to ill-treat a piece of plastic CHESS How do computers recognise good chess positions? Max Bramer explains VIDEO SCREENS Atari's Asteroids fills the Best Sellers spot and all the new cartridges for T.V. games centres T EISURE is a much bigger pastime in the U.S. and REVERSI .....page 20 the games which are successful over there tend Othello by any other name. Tom Napier offers some guidelines for a simple program to cross the Atlantic six-12 months later. In our next COMPUTER DOODLING.. issue we report back on the latest toys and games to Author David Langford starts an irregular column on how find their way onto the American scene. science fiction can serve computer gamers THE BUGS ..............................page 24 THE BUGS TARDCORE changes its format next issue when One changes its format next 15ue when Snag Inr, shows his expertise at Adventure Il we take an in-depth look at the Acorn Atom. ARCADE ACTION .....................page 40 With an exhaustive list of the companies which Puckman revisited. Two improved versions of the popular supply games software and peripherals for it. All maze-chase game you ever wanted to know about the Atom but didn't DOGFIGHT .... know who to ask, next month. Grab a joystick and do battle on the Apple airways ......page 30 POLDLY go where no man has gone before in our A challenge to shoot the last Nascom robot DStartrek game next month. Startrek 111.4 offers a ALIEN HUNT.. SA ...page 38 few extra features, on top of the usual Klingons, Track down and trap an alien on your Acorn Atom starbases and stars. Octadraw, Entomb and Yaht GRAND PRIX zee also feature in our games listing section. Thrills and spills on the Tandy racetrack DR LIVINGSTONE .......................page 96 The famous explorer is lost in the depths of your Sharp Editor Terry Pratt Assistant editor Elspeth Joiner COSMOS LANDING. Ten ships to land on a constantly moving ZX8l platform Editorial assistant Susan Cameron Design Linda Freeman BAD KING JOHN ... .....page 58 Rule over a Pet kingdom. But, be warned, the peasants are Advertisement manager Simon Teager in a revolting mood. Advertisement executives Rita Lewis, Neil Wood ADVENTURE .....page 62 Advertisement assistant Louise Flockhart Two pyramids to explore. Keith Publisher Tom Moloney KIT KORNER Peripherals in kit form. Keith Mott gives his views veshi ....page 64 Editorial and advertisement offices: Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill London SOUNDS.. ECIR SJB; Telephone Editorial 01-278 6556, Advertising 01-278 6552 David Annal POKEs some sounds out of the quieter micros COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE GRAPHICS.. By using the special Postal Subscription Service, copies of COMPUTER How to handle the high resolution graphics facility. AND VIDEO GAMES can be mailed direct from our offices each month to Garry Marshall has the details any address throughout the world. All subscription applications should be sent for processing to COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES (Subscription PRACTICAL PROGRAMMING ............page 72 Department). Competition House, Farmdon Road, Market Harborough, Converting games from one machine to another. Leicestershire. All orders should include the appropriate remittance made Ted Ball has some practical advice payable to COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES WHAT'S IN STORE ... Annual subscription rates (12 issues): ...page 14 We unravel the mysteries of Doel T el the mysteries of Dark Tower the UK and Eire .00 electronic/board game set to fill next Christmas' stockings Overseas surface mail .00 Airmail Europe .00 REVIEWS .. . ....page 75 Additional service information including individual overseas airmail Enter the Halls of Death but watch out for Mummy! Enter the Halls of Death-hut rates available upon request. DOWN TO BASICS ... Published and distributed by EMAP National Publications Ltd. ......page 80 Moira Norrie shows how Lady Luck can influence computers Printed by Eden Fisher (Southend) Limited.  Computer & Video Games Limited BRAINWARE .. ..page 83 ISSN 0261 3697. Two bottles of champagne and lots of kudos to be won in our regular competitions Other Illustrations by: Elphin Lloyd-Jones, Jon Davis, Dorian SOFTWARE GLOSSARY .. .......page 84 Cross and Terry Rogers. HARDCORE ..page 86 Cover: Illustration by Steve Weston AD INDEX.......... page 88 ADVENTURE ambell offers some more tip page 68 me sounds out of the graphics facility. Page 71 NEXT ISSUE ON SALE FEBRUARY 16th "


"Isn't it about time you took out a subscription to Computer and Video Games? Whether your idea of a worthwhile challenge is saving Europe in a war game, sharpening your chess strategy, or landing a 747 on a dark night, computers can make it possible. Computer games are reaching new levels of exhilaration, realism and imagination. They can already test your intellect and dexterity to its limits, in the not-too-distant future there will be no limits to the excitement they can simulate. Computer & Video Games is the monthly magazine designed to make sure you get the most out of your computer. It brings the best entertainment out of all types of computer, from personal Sinclairs, Ataris, Tandys, VICs, Apples and PETs to viewdata and arcade machines. Every issue's packed with FEBRUARY 1982 pages of games programs for you to key-in to your machine. And you don't have to be a computer expert. Each month there's reviews of new computer and video games, regular pages on chess, adventure and kit-building. Learn to program or improve your programming skills with our regular features on the art and find out how to add graphics and sounds to the games you invent yourself. There's also regular brain-teasers, prizes plus hints on how to beat arcade video machines. Computer and Video Games is packed with new ways for people to get fun out of computers. Make the most of your leisure time. Make sure of a copy of Computer & Video Games. Available at all leading newsagents COMPUTER GAMES & VIDEO COSMOS ANDING OR LIVINGSTONE GAMES AND PROGRAMS DV VE TELL TOU HOW I would like to take out an annual subscription. I enclose a cheque/P.O. for  ( overseas), for twelve issues. Computer & Video Games, Competition House, Farmdon Road, Market Harborough, Leicestershire. Name Address gegy E STEEL Computer & Video Games. The magazine that makes computers fun. 4 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"MAILBAG BBC GAMES NOVEMBER CAME EARLY dice. DODGE Dear Sir, Dear Sir, I am about to buy a BBC My main question is if I Microcomputer (ANB 01) could somehow get a copy and I would be pleased if of what I think must be you could let me have your November issue. sources of directly (or That's the one I first saw, a readily adaptable) friend had it. available games software I got down to the local suitable for 32K RAM. newsagents as fast as Colin Lindsay possible, but they already Chorley had the December issue, and thus had already sent Lancs back the others. After Editor's reply: At the searching all over I found moment the only firm the situation was the same Do you have any views or comments on Computer & Video known to be producing Games? If so we would love to hear from you. We will also do all over. So I tried games software for the convincing my friend to our best to find answers to any queries you may have or solve BBC Microcomputer is sell me his copy, but no problems you might be experiencing with your computer. Please Acorn, the firm making the drop us a line at: Computer & Video Games, EMAP, Durrant hardware. So as a last resort I'm House, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5JB. If you have already sent The latest word is that contacting you. Since I in a letter which has not yet been published, please bear with Acorn is in the process of don't know how much it us as we have been overwhelmed by mail after our early issues. converting some of the would cost for you to mail We will get around to your query as soon as possible. games currently on its me a copy, I couldn't send books to run on the BBC the money along. But if you machine, but these are not that if my computer can save me one and write expected to be readily decided to \"Shuffle off this and say so and how much available until March at mortal coil\", then Premier I would happily send the money. the very earliest. I'm afraid offers a computer repair you will just have to sit system. If I ever become I love your magazine and tight, or get to grips with lost within the ROMs, think it will do very well. I Dear Sir, programming and work on RAMs, address buses, Modifications to allow your only have one suggestion. some of your own games clock pulses or software Although you can't take the November Acorn Atom Colin. Good luck. listings, then a quick Dodgems program to run suggestion of B. A. Moore phone call, during office (December Mailbag). without floating point hours, or the use of the ROM: maybe you could put customer phone-in service A) 11125: remove comments beside the will put me on the right \"COLOUR 2;\" not-so-obvious parts of the track quickly and 11250: remove programs to explain efficiently. \"COLOUR 1;\" exactly what they do. Then Dear Sir, So, if on the very rare people could translate the I was surprised to read occasion that one of B) 20, 40, 60, 80: in each games into whatever your comments on the Premier's products fails to alter language they are working Premier Publications work correctly, then simply \"S = S + SGN (T-S);\" in. That way only one set software, Ship of The Line, contact Premier. You will to GOSj: S=S+K; and of comments would be page 83, issue 2 of your or find them the most helpful add needed, and in only one is it my) magazine. and friendly people and 30000; K=T-S; IFK=0 language, English! I hope I cannot speak easily Britain's, if not the RR you can get me that copy. personally of this game or World's, best software 30010 IFKO K=1;R Colin Garrett any other ZX8l software as company, without another 30020K=-1;R Northcourt Avenue, I own a U.K. 101, but I can company nearing the C) During debugging, Reading tell you of the service standard of their produce remove end of line offered by Premier. or service. 10000 from \"?16= ...\" Editor's reply: We have To date I have brought Stephen Wood (Inclusive) had several enquiries five games, up-rated to the Sth. Croydon, Tom Boyd about back issues. These excellent monitor, Surrey Holmbury St. Mary, can be obtained from \"Cegman\", added the new Dorking, Surrey. EMAP National Basic ROM, \"Basic 5\", and Editor's reply: We had P.S. D) 11125 should be Publications Limited, have joined the \"OSI/U.K. suspected that this may CLEAR Z, not 3 — Computer & Video Games User Group\", all thanks to have been an isolated Congratulations on an Circulation Department, Premier. I also receive a case, Stephen, but felt otherwise, high standard of Reader Service, Bretton free newsletter which there was no excuse for bug-free code! Court, Bretton, apart from describing the sending out a tape which Peterborough. PE3 8DZ. latest additions to the has people actually talking Dodgems author On your other point, range of games, ROMs and on it. The author of Ship of John Dyson replies: Colin, we are picking out a hardware, also offers hints the Line has since sent us Thankyou for your couple of programs each and tips on how to expand another copy of the game modifications for running issue and giving a and how to get the best and we look forward to Dodgems on a machine rundown on the variables from my machine. I am giving it another try in the without the floating point and which parts of the also comforted to know near future. ROM. program do what. PREMIER'S NO. 1 FAN COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 5 "


"SARGON FOR THE SHARP? MASTERING THE MACHINE Many of you may have tried to contact advertisers through our or has a copy of the book reader enquiry service. Unfortunately, due to the massive reader above, I would be more response we have not been able to process all of these. If you than grateful. filled in a card and still have not heard from our advertisers, we J. F. Baldock would suggest you contact the company concerned directly. We Ashford, Dear Sir are sorry for any inconvenience but nobody could have predicted Kent. I have a Sharp MZ-80K 48K the phenomenal response we received on our first two issues. computer and am Our expert replies: interested in obtaining a concerning you problem chess program for it ideally I am a keen computer coming onto the market all with the Acetronic MPU Sargon II. I have been games player, and writer, the time. The VIC-20 and 1000 Video Games Centre. unable to find this program although I only presently BBC Microcomputer will You rightly state that the for the Sharp and own a Sinclair ZX80. I am also give the Atari 400 a chip is a 2650 from wondered if you know of looking around to buy run for its money and Signetics, made by anyone producing it for my myself a new computer both are cheaper. You can Mullard. This is a general machine. and have heard that the see that it's more difficult purpose microprocessor could you Atari duo have by far the than you first thought. Atari duo have by far + with a 75 code instruction Alternatively could you let me know how the chess best graphics facilities Get friendly with your set. program that Newbear Ltd, although I have never seen local dealer, and find out I am afraid I can find no Newbury, Berks, have either of these machines in what support he'll give information on the book compares with Sargon II. action. you. Compare dealers, if Microprocessor Controlled I enjoyed your first Could you please tell me you have a choice, and Video Games by S. J. Op magazine, although I if the Atari 400 and 800 then look at software Het Veld and can only haven't managed to get graphics are more availability and cost. Only suggest you try the public \"Hangman\" working yet impressive than other you can evaluate all these library. If the book was on and look forward to your machines in a similar price factors yourself. sale in this country then next. range and if so why the Central Library will Hunter, aren't other manufacturers have a copy. Hove Edge, using a similar system? On the other hand, Brighouse, Joseph Sandridge, Mullard produce a data W. Yorks. Chells, sheet and Signetics a Stevenage, complete family booklet. Editor's reply: I'm sorry to Herts. Dear Sir, both available from have to report that chess Thank you for an Mullard at Torrington Place games for the Sharp Editor's reply: The Atari interesting new magazine, in London. Both include the MZ-BOK are few and far computers certainly have it seems to fit the gap complete instruction set between. There is no good graphics characters. between the but you may have to Sargon II available for the and the games ROM-packs semi-professional format of consult a separate book to machine although that plug into the system the home computer user understand how to use the Sharpsoft has written a use these to their best and the \"toy\" market. different addressing version but the copyright is advantage. However, the I have an Acetronic MPU modes. owned by Hayden Books highest resolution of the 1000 Video Games Centre who are unwilling for Atari system is 320 X 192 with a variety of Sharpsoft to market it. points or picture preprogrammed cartridges. Sharpsoft does market its elements (pixels). This is The one cartridge that is own chess game but it is quite acceptable for most programmable is the only for beginners. users. The Atari computers Hobby Module but, apart Experienced players would cost around  and  from the few programs they Dear Sir, soon find the game respectively. supply in their instruction I have entered your Mole unchallenging. Other manufacturers do manual, I cannot seem to program and it is a very Newbear's chess game is use high resolution master the machine code enjoyable game but I not as demanding as graphics in up to 16 that is needed to operate cannot get a score and feel Sargon II either, and colours. Notable among it, can anyone help? there is a mistake in line although it is not directly Atari's competitors are DAI The maker of the chip, a 25 which I cannot enter with the PC.1' costing . 2650 by Mullard, had aimed at beginners the successfully. bulk of sales is made up of made up of This has more memory his produced a book by S. J. Can you help? inexperienced players and Op Het Veld entitled I have entered the children. compared to 16K — and Microprocessor Controlled other two Sinclair games in has even more pixels Video Games but is now your January issue and 335 x 255. Unfortunately it out of print and no hope of found them most enjoyable. has only a small amount of it being reprinted so now Congratulations on an very good software. Texas you know why I need help. extremely impressive Instruments have recently I have solved your magazine. octagon puzzle the \"old D. Johnson 99/4a to around . This fashioned\" way in about 15 Croydon, Surrey Dear Sir, has a similar specification minutes. If I had a proper Congratulations on your to the Atari 800 and has computer I would Editor's reply: A bug first issue of Computer & the capability of superior somehow, work out a slipped into this program Video Games which graphics because of the program in order to enter which had to be typeset. certainly fits more into my use of a 16 bit processor, your competition for the Line 25 should read: own microcomputer compared to most other Vic-20 you are offering, I 25 LET R = PEEK (PEEK aspirations than any of the systems' 8 bit. think it's great. 16398 +256* PEEK 16399) other more business As you can see I have If any of your readers We apologise for the oriented publications only scratched the surface can help me find any mistake and hope you around. and more systems are programs for the 2650 chip. enjoy the game. ATARI'S FAME 6 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"GONE ON THE GREEN THINGS A SOFTWARE the shape is entered. interested in the following Applesoft permits it to be remarks on the drawn, erased, scaled and presentation of this kind of rotated with a minimum of material. At the moment the programming effort. Watch I presume you wish your Dear Sir, shapes for our games are the Graphics page for readers to get the Many thanks for a stored on disc, separate further details. programs in your magazine wonderfully different from the programs and are up and running with as magazine. I was loaded and addressed by little trouble as possible. A particularly impressed with essed with an exec. program which is clear and accurate printing the way you have tried to fine for me, but not for less is therefore required. I present the games listings knowledgeable people who know that many in an interesting and just run the program and microcomputers are imaginative way. The Bugs provided with poor expect it to work. are a marvellous invention We do have programs Dear Sir, printers, and that accuracy and almost worth a which will load the shapes To my mind, people are demands that you print by magazine on their own. attracted to arcade games some photographic process Among the other artwork, when asked but the subconsciously, for they from such output. I thought the most addressing causes often get out far more than I am not convinced, impressive were the interference with any they put into these however, that you are not strange creatures which inputs immediately computers. adding further difficulties were used to illustrate the afterwards. Take Atari's Battlezone. for your readers by the way Acom Atom's Green Things Naturally the direct It caught my eye in a the programs are printed. game. I look forward to POKE-ing of the shape fish'n'chip shop because of the dark grey on light grey seeing more work by your table into the Apple the XY monitor with vector technique of page 62 is artistic team in the future. memory in the first issue's scans, and the prodigious particularly troublesome, David Green, Nim program interested me amount of maths the the pictures on many of the Wolvercote, and I would be grateful if computer gets through in pages are also distracting. Oxford. you could tell me how the real time. In case you Fortunately I did not have author achieved this and haven't met it, it's a to contend with printing on how shape tables can be fighting tank simulator in the slant, or with a program made without all the which you drive around a printed over pictures, both messing around with valley dodging missiles of which occur elsewhere. binary numbers, plotting and rocks. Everything is A lively pictorial diagrams, vectors and portrayed in fuli presentation is of course hexadecimal numbers. perspective, right down to an admirable aim, but if I think your magazine is Dear Sir, you want your readers to the missiles flying longer to distant targets. enjoy the programs you For just over a year now just what the computer A kind man let me mend publish and buy further my friends and I have been industry needs and I hope one. There's a 6502 riding a copies of your magazine I making up a variety of to contribute some of my 12K program, plus four feel you must make arcade-style computer program listings in the custom bit-slice chips copying the program more games on the school near future. doing 16-bit trigonometry, easy computer (an Apple II 48K Neil Forsyth among the 150 other D. Bond Europlus). Naim support devices. She Kesgrove, The main problem with Naimshire certainly puts out more Ipswich these games is that the Scotland than you put in. At a guess more action, aliens and the software came out of Editor's reply: Thank you obstacles the more bogged Garry Marshall: The high the backdoor from NASA, for your comments Mr down and slower the resolution shape tables, Boeing and Lockhead. Bond. We do appreciate program gets. This causes available in Applesoft, are Thought your readers the difficulties of keying-in all moving shapes to precisely what you need. might be interested. programs, especially the flicker something terrible. As far as \"messing about Jonathan Pope long and complicated ones. Obviously what is with the binary numbers\" Chesterton Road, We do take great care to ensure that when coloured needed is machine is concerned, you have to Cambridge. tints and pictures are language routines, such as do it that way, because those used in Bill Budge's that is the way it works. ced over printout, that the symbols can still be Penny Arcade where the Actually, it isn't at all seen clearly ball does not flicker and difficult to do, once you If you find them a will bounce off anything have got the hang of it. I distraction I suggest you that is not black. The don't think that you would use a ruler (or, dare I information to make up expect to get rapid moving Dear Sir, suggest, a template) to similar routines is sadly graphics effects without have just copied a keep your place in the absent from the available expending a little effort. program for solving Rubik's listing. Our aim is to keep Apple manuals and so I The graphics effects can Cube from your magazine, the listings both readable must seek your help. be really spectacular: once and I think you may be and presentable. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 7 BOGGED DOWN IN ACTION TAINTED BY TINTS "


"NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTSN GAMES NEWS EAT AWAY A HIGH SCORE MUNCHIE MAN LUNAR RESCUE MISSION SPACE RESCUE SAVE DARTH'S EMPIRE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK A stranded tribe of lunar creatures in fear of their lives look to The Munchie Man's appetite is of you for an escape route. a kind common among readers of As commander of the motherslimming magazines. ship hovering over the surface of He digests without discomfort the moon, your brief in Space and travels around your Acorn Rescue is to save the moonies, Atom screen consuming dots as or pods, as they are usually fast as he can. But he has known. A special landing craft enemies, four ghosts, whose aim carried by the mothership is is to put a stop to the ravenous under your control and struggling creature by eating him up. against the relentless onslaught In this version of the arcade of a meteorite storm. game Puckman or Mazeman, you You have to land the craft on play the part of the Munchie Man the moon's surface and pick up and score points for every morsel five pods, at the same time blastyou eat. ing the rocks to smithereens. Bonus points are accumulated After each pod is rescued you by eating the evil meanies when must take him back to the the tables are reversed. This is mothership. achieved by gulping down one of Points are scored for pod pickthe flashing spots in the corners ing and meteorites destroyed. of the screen, which gives you Altogether you get four lives the energy to chase and eat the to play with and there are nine meanies for a few brief seconds. skill levels to try out and Program Power are the supsound effects too. Available now pliers of the game which runs on Join the forces of the tyrannical a tank and the Empire goes down from Pet software specialists a full memory Acorn Atom and Darth Vader, waging war against on numbers. Supersoft, it runs on an 8K will cost .95 for a cassette. the rebels who dare to oppose will cost .95 for a cassette. the rebels who dare to oppose Your five Walker T Your five Walker Tanks are in machine and costs  plus V.A.T. Perhaps it could be good averthe Empire. pursuit of the rebels and you sion therapy for a slimmer. In Empire Strikes Back you are must shoot down their aircraft, given command of a squadron of their troops and finally the rebel Walker Tanks, which look like base itself. If you lose a tank in U camels but are made of metal and combat, the one taking over carare equipped with lethal laser ries on where the other left off, guns. so you don't have to go back to You answer to the menacing the beginning of the game and STARSHIP COMMAND leader Darth Vader if you lose start again. The Walker Tanks are precari Combine Startrek with the warTHE GREAT BALLOON RACE ous in their movement and you game concept, add a dash of must be careful not to stop them Diplomacy and you'll end up with A  prize adds to the incentive when they are in an unstable Starship Command. of mastering the Great Balloon position. If you do the Walker will The game is set in a spacecraft Race and notching a top score. keel over and collapse into a which patrols the galaxy, seeking Manchester-based Mr Micro useless heap. out enemy spacecraft and keephave put up the money for the Throughout the game you can ing your allies on the right side. person who can best guide a check how far away the Walker in front of you is a three balloon around a course on the Tanks are from the rebel base dimensional view of the galaxy Pet or VIC-20 computers. Among and you can also spot enemy divided up into quadrants. You the lethal hazards on the course positions on your radar scanner. must shoot down enemy ships are: flowers, trees, and a fence. Incorporated on the screen is while avoiding their fire. You score points for the disa work cycle meter which, when But you are also in contact tance you manage to guide your completed, either generates with other planets, some of balloon more energy for the Walker, or which are hostile and others The maker has come up with carries out any repairs the tank friendly. Your job is to boost the an ingenious idea to verify each needs. morale of your supporters to entrant's score. Special charac Supplier of this game is Tandy stop them changing sides and ters flash up on the screen to software specialist Molimerx of going over to the enemy. represent a particular score. The Sussex. It can be yours for .06 It runs on the Nascom and race finishes on 14 October 1982 (including VAT) and runs on a 16K costs .95 available from Proand the cassette costs . Tandy TRS-80 Level II. gram Power of Leeds. TAKE A BALLOON TO THE TOP "


"VEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTS NEI BURIED AND DEAD ALIEN INVADERS NEW ONSLAUGHT INVADERS out of their potential coffin and SIZED JOB B WE HAVE TOUCHDOWN Blast away at a fleet of attacking up of three rows of seven creacreatures in defence of yourtures each. Extra points are Old fashioned pick and shovel home base while niftily avoiding gained by hitting the flying work is the only way to rid your the onslaught of laser beams. saucer at the top of the screen. planet of a strange new breed of With four protective shields to Invaders costs  from Bug alien creatures. protect your ship from the raging Byte of Liverpool, which has also In Alien, the action takes place torrent of enemy fire you manjust brought out a new chess in a maze, infiltrated by leggy oeuvre the base to the left and game for the Acorn Atom, beings, whose aim is to hunt you right of the screen. Keep up a Bug Byte says the game's down and eat you. constant stream of shots to des. strengths lie in its graphical repYour only escape is to dig troy each fleet, but don't expect resentation. It is clearer than holes in the labyrinths of the to end up on the winning side. most chess games. In some maze blocking the hungry creaThis 16K ZX81 version of space there is confusion over the black tures' way. When they fall into invaders has been written in and white pieces'. It runs on a the holes you have dug, you must machine code to achieve high 12K Atom and comes in cassette hover nearby and fill the hole in speed screen action with a fleet form with instructions, costing over their heads. A JUM of invaders numbering 21 made .00. The aliens are surprisingly agile and in a flash they can hop out of their potential coffin and eat your man up in one fell swoop. You get points for the 747 FLIGHT SUPERLANDER number of evil meanies you sucPa Passengers and crew of a 747 Landing a spacecraft on the craft, guiding it upwards, downcessfully bury, and if you wipe Jumbo Jet are in your hands on a craggy hazardous surface of a wards, to the right and to the one frame clean of them you get flie the chance to have another go at airport Heathrow flight to land at England's busiest strange planet is no easy task left. An extra feature is its power and you need a steady hand at thrust facility. If you want to a new frame. The huge aircraft is solely in the controls. Alien will run on a VIC-20, and build up speed the engines will your command as you fly in the In the first batch of games be boosted by pushing the conmakes use of the machine's high pilot's hot seat through the subbrought out by Commodore Busitrol joystick down. resolution graphics. It can be urbs of London. When you have ness Machines for the VIC-20 Points are awarded depending yours for .95 from Commodore located the position of two your task is to successfully land on the difficulty of the site you dealers. Heathrow runways you must your spaceship. There are three choose to land on. Superlander is start the descent and safely land safe landing sites to steer the available now from Commodore the aircraft. Just how good a ship towards. A safe landing dealers for .95. pilot you are will be revealed needs careful judgement and a once you have completed the steady slow approach. landing as you receive points You use the joysticks to conSUPER RACETRACK for airmanship trol the movement of the spaceBug Byte's 747 Flight runs on Driving round a race course at an Acorn Atom and was actually top speed is a test of concentra. written by a Jumbo Jet pilot for tion and skill to stay on the track the Liverpool software supplier, and take the chequered flag in so it earns top marks for its Super Racetrack. realism, This game is a race against the On the screen you are conclock with the object being to fronted with various figures repbreak lap and race records. There resenting altitude, the state of is plenty of variety in the course the undercarriage, a compass, selection so if you start to anticithe rate of climb in feet per pate the hairpin bends on one second, the speed of the aircraft track, try another. in knots and the angle of the Steer the car around the flaps in degrees, to name but a course keeping clear of other few. cars and the barriers bordering to help you on your flight, a both sides of the course. map of Heathrow's environs has At the start, the car appears been included with the game. On on the bottom of the screen but it are marked the 10 stations (six when the race is underway, the of which are close to the two track unrolls before you on the runways) and possible flight screen. paths. This Acorn Atom cartridge is All 12K memory is needed to reasonably priced at .95 from run this simulation game and it Program Power of Leeds. costs . COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 9 THE CLOCK "


"INGENIOUS Genie I Genie II All the features of the EG 3003 system plus: * Machine Language Monitor * Fitted Sound Renumber Command * Full Lower Case Screen Print The MacroComputer Offering all the advantages of the Genie I system, with the benefit of advanced design for the professional user. The most compact 80 column impact graphic-dot printer available at a very compact price 16K * 4 Defineable Function Keys * Full Upper & Lower Case * Terminal Routines * Facility to upload & Download Screen Print Includes T.V. Modulator % VAT seikosha GP80 printer  , VAT  VAT Acorn Atom The Second Generation Personal Computer Special features include *FULL SIZED KEYBOARD *ASSEMBLER AND BASIC *HIGH RESOLUTION COLOUR GRAPHICS Highest performance lowest price * 16 Colours * Multiple Resolution Graphics * Split screen modes from: DAI DAI   + VAT + VAT FOR DISKETTES PAPER BITS TANTEL 'PRESTEL' adaptor Converts any black and white or colour T.V. for 'PRESTEL' reception.  VAT RIBBONS for most printers BOOKS LABELS EG3023 Special adaptor to allow connection of TRS 80 to GENIE periferals EG3014 GENIE low cost 16K expander SOFTWARE Printers LATEST SECOND HAND PRICES Ring: 0225334659 MONITORS EPSON MX80 EPSON MX100 ANADEX PAPER TIGER T.E.C. SCRIPTA MICROLINE 80 all this and much much more... 29 Belvedere, Lansdown Road, Bath. Telephone: (0225) 334659. 10 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCT FULFIL L'EMPEROR'S EURO-DREAM VICS HELP YOU TUNE TUNESMITH NAPOLEON A ravaged continent awaits the main European countries and be You begin the wars in June MAODC tread of your armies' boots when lord and master from his beloved 1798, and have a time limit of 17 11 you try to recreate the conmother country, France. years imposed on you in which to quests of France's 19th Century to carry out your task there complete Napoleon's ambition. Emperor, Napoleon. are six French armies at your Troops take a long time to The computer organises the disposal. move being without fast means defence as the armies of Austria, The computer's armies start of transport. Weather conditions Britain, Spain, Portugal, Russia off from their respective counhave to be taken into account Gary Numan has brought elecand Prussia prepare to thwart tries except the British one when moving troops either into tronic music back into vogue and your ambitions. which begins its manoeuvres battle or to a new camp location. now the Commodore VIC-20 is The power-hungry Emperor from Iberia or Prussia, for ease of Historically Napoleon's big blunbringing similar sounds into your Napoleon, has since been hailed troop movement. der was to make an army march front room. as \"the first European.\" on Russia in winter, when the All you need is the latest His aim was to conquer the troops were ill-equipped to cope music pack called the VIC with the conditions. Tunesmith and you are ready to Napoleon is the appropriate rock. This piece of software will name of the game. It runs on a impress the musicians in the famTandy TRS-80 in 16K and is availily and make better use of the able from Molimerx. It is only out VIC-20's sounds facility. in tape form for the price of Study the manual that comes .97 with the machine there is a section listing musical notes complete with true notes, flat notes and sharps. Each has a number assigned to it which the computer understands and by typing that in via the keyboard you can write your own piece of music. Tunesmith has a capacity for 99 note melodies and you can add in a suitable drum beat and set the speed of the tune you create. If, when you play it back, there are a few notes that make rest of the family you wince don't worry there's Pinball incorporates all the a special editing facility which features of the classic arcade allows you to replace the out-ofgame, you have to judge the best tune notes or delete them angle to hit the ball in order to altogether. make the best improvement to From the VIC Centre, Tuneyour score. smith is a recent addition to the The game is for up to four VIC software range and costs players and you can try it out for .95 yourself at the Which Computer? Show in a competition which offers the Colour Computer as a Holler \"Four\" if you hit a way. The wind speed changes to prize. ward shot in the most recent golf make the game more challenging All the entry money collected game on the computer scene. as you have to judge the power ur own pinball machine will be donated to the Muscular And then cross your fingers behind your shot accordingly. It design to make the most of your Dystrophy Group and will be and hope none of the crowd have also effects the direction. spent on more electronic aids for wandered into the path of your Watch out for obstacles on the Pinball wizards are given their medical research. Hopes are high ball. course. There are awkward bunchance to improve on arcade for piles of cash as the show This is pne of the hazards in kers and clumps of trees border designs in the latest cassette for organiser Clapp & Poliak is to Program Power's Golf cassette, the fairway. the new Tandy TRS-80 Colour match the sum raised on which strives towards new fron. You even have rent-a-crowd Computer. competition entry fees. tiers of fairway realism. The on hand to bolster your confiA feature of the game is that if you fancy a go the show is player is invited to take part in a dence when you hit a good putt you can decide how many flipon from 19-22 January at championship golf tournament, but be careful not to knock them pers you want, where they Birmingham's National Exhibition he has an imposing selection of out. should be positioned and how Centre. The Pinball cassette clubs to choose from and a Golf is available for Nascom difficult or easy the finished costs .95 from your Tandy variety of wind and ground condimachines and has a price tag of game is and then try it out on the dealer. tions to overcome. .95. te lumbalno incorporates all the HAZARDS FLIPPER FLICKING FOR THE FAMILY The game is for up to tour FAIRWAY GOLF PINBALL "


"ELECTRONIC GAMES COLOUR CARTRIDGE A VT.V. GAME .V. GAME DATABASE T.V. GAME DATABASE T.V. GAME O: SPACE INVADERS ATARI T.V. GAME 1 Son SEMI PROGRAMMABLE TV GAME +4 Cartridges + Mains Adaptor FULLY PROGRAMMABLE CARTRIDGE TV GAME 14 Cartridges available The most popular TV. Game on the market with a range of over 40 cartridges including SPACE COC INVADERS with over 112 .45 games on one cartridge me VAT Hand hold Invaders Games available .95 Invaders Cartridges available to fit ATAI RADONACETRONIC PHILIPS G7000 Cartridges also available for MATTEL YELENG ROWTRON DATABASE INTERTON NOW REDUCED TO VAT NOW REDUCED TO VAT  CHESS COMPUTERS | TELETEXT  We carry a range of over 15 different Chess computers Electronic Chess .95 Chess Traveller 139.95 Chess Challenger 7 .00 Sensory 8 E119.00 Sensory Voice .00 SPECIAL OFFERS VOICE CHESS CHALLENGER Normal Price (245 NOW 135.00 SARGON 25 BORIS 25 Normal Price 273 70 NOW 199 95 Alles include VAT ADD-ON ADAPTORVAT THE RADOFIN TELETEXT ADD-ON ADAPTOR Plug the adaptor into the serial socker of your colour TV and receive the CEEFAX and ORACLE Television information services THIS NEW MODEL INCORPORATES: Double height character facility MANY UNITS ARE COVERED BY THE EXCLUSIVE SILICA SHOP 2 YEAR GUARANTEE  Push button channel change Unnecessary to remove then to watch mama TV programes Gold sd circuit b reat  New SUPERIMPOSE News Flash facility SPEAK & SPELL MATTEL T.V. GAME ADDING MACHINE OLYMPIA HHP 1010 24 TUNE ELECTRONIC DOOR BELL Normal Price .95 NOW REDUCED TO Normal Price 15721 NOW REDUCED TO 34 .50 Teach your child to spell properly with this unique learning Uses ordinary paper! No need to buy expensive thermal paper Fast add listing PRINTER CALCULATOR 2 lines per second 10 digit capacity Normal Price .70 NOW REDUCED TO: $12 4.70 inc. VAT Plays 24 different tunes with separate speed control and volume control Select the most appropriate tune for your Visitor with appropriate tunes for different times of features and scoring Additional word modules available to extend the range of words. machine rolls Battery of Size 9 2 The most advanced TV game in the world 20 cartridges available Add C100 on KEYBOARD com .951 MATTEL to a home computer with TEK RAM fully expandable and programmable in Microsoft Basic Other access will be available in the year HAND HELD GAMES EARTH INVADERS THE OLYMPIA POST OFFICE APPROVED TELEPHONE ANSWERING MACHINE PRESTEL VIEWDATA WITH REMOTE CALL-IN BLEEPER These aderare breed of creature hitherto unknown to man They cannot be killed by raditional methods they must be buried The batte conducted in mare where squads of eliminating them by A This telephone answering machine is manufactured by Olympia Business Machines, one of the largest Office Equipment manufacturers in the UK is fully POST OFFICE APPROVED and will answer and record messages for 24 hours a day. With your remote call in bleeper you can receive these messages by telephone wherever you are in the world. The remote call in bleeper activates the Answer/Record Unit which will at your command repeat messages keep or erase them, and is activated from anywhere in the world or on your return to your home or office The machine can also be used for message referral if you have an urgent appointment but are expecting an important call simply record the phone number and location where you can be reached with optional extra bleepers (13 wach) this facility can be extended to colleagues and members of the family Using a C90 standard cassette you can record as many as 45 messages The announcement can be up to 15 seconds long and the incoming message Sipoing homem .95 HAND HELD GAMES GALAXY 1000 Prestel The ACE TELCOM VDX1000 Prestel View data adaptor simply plugs into the serial socket of your television and enables you to receive the Prestel Viewdata service in colour or black & white Features Simplied controls for quick any operatan Special graphics feature for high resolution State of the art microSD Controller e telephone keypad with reste Auto dalle incorporated for Prezi The machines easy to install and comes with full instructions it is easily wired to your junction box with the spade connec lors provided or alternatively a jack plug can be provided to plug n a jack socket Most important of course is the fact that it is fully POST OFFICE APPROVED The price of 135 line VAT includes the machine an extralight remote call in Bleeper the microphone message tape. AC mains adaptor The unit 15 X6 22 and is fully guaranteed for 12 months The telephone can be placed directly on the unit no additional desk Space is required True PAL colour and using reliable cha ir and dela in corporated for DICe mortorence 9 includes convenient TV Preste b ok Easy connected to andand home or office The 2nd generation Galaxy invader The inades have regrouped and have seemingly endless supply of spacecraft whilst the player's arsenal limited to just 250 misses to be launched from 3 te stations. You have to prevent the invaders Full Post the approved entreprima pour home .95  defences .85 PRICE L220.05 VAI TO CHISLEHURST an d er CALLERS WELCOME De t ons Short rom samom FOR FREE BROCHURES -TEL: 01-301 1111 Silica Shop SILCA SHOP NONET of Nath Road CRE CARDS WELCOME Acces De C ancan Ex SILICA SHOP LIMITED DEPT. NO 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup. Kant DA14 4DX Telephone: 01-301 1111 or 01-309 1111 12 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"COMPETITION TEN WAYS TO USE A TEMPLATE When we gave away a free template with our second issue, we little realised what strange perverted uses the poor defenceless pieces of plastic would be put to. Trained only in the art of helping readers to key-in our games program listings, the templates may be hardpressed to fulfil some of the tasks you planned for them. Innocently we asked, \"What other uses could you find for a free template?\" And in implicit detail you told us! After we had thrown those out we were still left with a few bizarre suggestions and from these we picked our 10 lucky winners of Bugs T-shirts. The winning entries are presented below and should not be read by anyone who is feeling in a delicate state. Our judge has given up trying to explain her choice of T-shirt winners and is unavailable to anyone trying to contest the decision. \"A comb for Telly Savalas,\" said G. D. Ray of Merley, Wimborne in Dorset and on a judge's whim he was awarded a prize. To give Mr. Ray his due, this use of a template was more sensible than most of the ideas we received In a similar vein was Joe Hanley's suggestion that we paint a buckle on one end and use it as a fashion belt for Twiggy. But this was not topical enough for our judge, so instead she chose his second idea, that the template would make a great beer clarity tester. Puzzled? Well so were we, but Mr. Hanley elucidated with instructions: (1) place template in pint glass. (2) Read words in red letters. (3) Check against following chart: clearly visible, light ale; very vague, brown ale; impossible to see, Guinness. Yes it really works, impressed we despatched a T-shirt to Nelson in Lancs. The byte-ing cynicism prize went to Keith Parker of Crook, Co. Durham, whose entry read: \"(1) Take template. Fold twice down length to produce a strip 1\" x 2\". (2) Wedge this under Sinclair 16K RAM pack... presto! The dreaded RAM pack wobble is cured words fail me (sorry Uncle Clive, we all love you really.)\" Where does the cynicism come in? Well somewhere. The prize: one of our T-shirts. Anthony Hood of Kilburn, Derbyshire gave us a rhyme: \"This piece of plastic, 8\" x 1\"; A computer shall be stuck thereon; So when puzzle, curse and list; I think of C.&V.G., the DE BUGGING? greatest; And about the T-shirt I won; With those lovable Bugs displayed upon; Otherwise I'll probably use it to set the gap on my spark plugs.\" And you thought Keats was good! Anthony wins our Great McGonagall Poetry prize a T-shirt. We are currently investigating claims that Anthony is a part-time Vogan spaceship captain. No such doubt exists in the case of Kevin Etheridge who freely admits his alien origins. Apparently the template was the answer to his dreams mainly to get off this \"dungball of a world\" and back to his native planet. Kevin linked the template into his Bambletrundite Generator (mk. 4) via the automatic quark-influx module to reverse the polarity on the polychronic infundibulator and enabled him to disappear into hyperspace. Before he goes, Kevin will be hanging on for his T-shirt at Dalgety Bay, Dunfermline he is a \"large-size\" alien. D. R. Cowap of Letchworth, Herts came up with the artistic suggestion of using the template as a De-Bugging device (left). Robin Hill came up with several suggestions, the most sensible of which, was: \"Memorise this contour so you'll recognise a straight line when you see one.\" He claims his address as: The Stress Office, British Aerospace, Brough, N. Humberside. Removing the skin off old rice pudding, was the simple and practical idea put forward by Simon Hodgson of Gateshead, Tyne-and-Wear. Just to prove there is nothing sexist about this magazine (although all the Bugs are male) our penultimate winner was Linda Evans of Burgess Hill, West Sussex. Linda reckons the template is ideal for removing her pet parrot's little offerings from the carpet-leaving no trace! Linda assures us that the template is thoroughly wiped before being returned to keying-in duty. And finally, Simon Young of Clapton, London E5, reckons Adam Ant uses a template to draw the make-up lines across his face. And if you think these 10 were bad — at least they were printable. We hope we haven't given you too many ideas. BRAINWARE ANSWERS NAPPLEADAY   IDEAL TAPERED SLY E H BD SACORNATOMS The answer to our January Mind Routines is that the triangular pyramid has 4, 6 and 8 layers. which gives you 20, 56 and 120 balls. The square pyramid has 1,5 and 7 layers which gives you 1, 55 and 140 balls. The Nevera Crossword solution is printed right and we will publish the names of the winners next month. This month's Brainware problems can be found on page 83. TURALNUMBER G E O M R \"PASTMASTER A ETA ERCY TRACTOR IMAGE TI V C SD TEACHERS PET COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 13 "


"OMPUTER SYSTEMS FOR THE HOME & BUSINESS ENTHUSIAST SHARP MZ 80K ACORN ATOM NOW ATARI 400/800 A AO1400 AVAILABLE FROM  dogo mbOOD Sharp MZ-80K 48K , Twin Disk Unit for MZ-80 , 80Col. Printer for MZ-80 , A complete business system for less than .00. Now available Sharp MZ-80B SHARP MZ 80K P.O.A. ring for details of this 48K- outstanding system. (Plus 2 year Guarantee) Business computer 64 K Ram 32K Rom expandable to 112K Ram 72K Rom P.O.A. Software Packages now available Just compare against Apple and Pet. Atari 400. 16K Ram expandable to 32K. Amazing graphics amazing 3D games the game computer of the future must be seen to be believed . programs in \"Basic\" \"Assembler\" \"Pilot\" ATARI 400 P.O.A. ATARI 800 P.O.A. SHARP 320 PRICES INCLUDE GAME COMPUTERS VAT SHARP PC 1211 Pocket Comp Atari 2600 plus Combat .00 Game cartridges from $14.95, Atari 2600 Space Invader Package plus Combat, 139 games only , Atari 2600 Asteroids package plus Combat, 93 games, only , Asteroids Launched\" game cartridge only .95 Philips G7000 Computer Game of the Future only , Game cartridges from .50 Matel Intellivision the most advanced computer game (3D graphics) an unbelievable , Game cartridges only .49 limited period only Sharp PC1211 Pocket Computer Alphabetic Keyboard. 1.9k Ram Interface )  PC1211 .00 Printer for PC1211 .00 Programs in Basic  Qwerty Long battery life . (With Phone for more details now CREDIT FACILITIES SPECIAL DEALS FOR MAIL AVAILABLE CASH & CARRY CUSTOMERS ORDER AVAILABLE VIDEO SERVICES BROMLEY) TELEPHONE 01-460 4162/8833 8 SUNDRIDGE PARADE PLAISTOW LANE BROMLEY KENT Pnces include VAT near Sunandge Pork Stobony may change dunng month ZX-81 16K SOFTWARE The breakthrough you've waited for: PROGRAM THE ZX-81 IN ENGLISH!! with GAMAL 81, you can now write adventure programs in hours not weeks and with GAMAL 81 you'll have every adventure you'll ever want for the price of one. Comes on cassette with instruction book, .95. (requires 16K) (.00 see below) PACK 16/1 includes all of: AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL: Animated radar screen of busy airport shown, you must bring planes into land; INVADERS: INVADERS SELF PLAY: PHONEBOOK; keep friends and relatives numbers on cassette; DATE '81: computer dating program, who will it pick for you? ALL ONLY .95 PACK 16/2 includes all of: ADVENTURE ATLANTIC: You may become very rich or you may be marooned forever; BREAKOUT: SQUASH PRACTICE: TRANSLATOR: translates any European language to any other, vocab on cassette; COMPUTAPRINT: use this program to predict horse races, or football pools! ALL ONLY .95 Both packs come with full instructions, booklets and are saved on cassette ready to run. ZX-81 PACK 16/1 ONLY SAVE PAXK 16/2 .95 .95 TAPEBOOK 50 version 3 PACK 16/1 + ONLY SAVE PAXK 16/2+ Tapebooks 50.3 .95 .90 SPECIAL OFFER TO ZX-81 OWNERS GAMAL is .00 only if you order either offer 50 PROGRAMS for the IKRAM ZX-81. The latest version includes: SQUASH, INVADERS, COLUMBIA, SPLAT, INTEGRATION, BANK A/C, CREDIT CARD CALCULATOR AND LOTS MORE. All on cassette and ready to run now. With full instructions. Still amazing value at .96 the lot. CONTROL TECHNOLOGY 39 Gloucester Rd, Gee Cross, Hyde, Cheshire SK14 5JG 061-368 7558 ZX AUTOCODER — Converts Basic to Machine Code Automatically You enter your Basic program and Autocoder prints out the equivalent 280 assembly language program .95. C* tech Big ideas for small computer all software by return of post!! "


"PET SOFTWARE DIATRON ATTACK TRS-80, APPLE SOFTWARE vers holds swavy, a world in whry a whole new The Diatrons are a mean bunch of aliens. They have no use for what they are stealing from you (your diamonds), but nevertheless, their guiding principle is to 'steal first and ask questions later. This offends your moral standards so much that you have no hesitation in using your terrible spikes. See them beam down and squawk. Sharpen up your reflexes and beat back the waves of descending Diatrons. 16K (New Rom) .95 Sub Commander Are you fed up with games where you just shoot a few invaders or depend on your reactions, then try a whole new world of computer fantasy, a world in which Sorcery and Monsters holds sway, try: SORCERER OF SIVA A real-time GRAPHIC adventure Sorcerer of Siva is a game where you enter a different world where Amulets, rings, necklaces, sceptres-and-oh, yes, a pair of old boots await you in the magical mines of Siva. Enter the dark stillness of the mine, armed with just a dagger and relying on your magical abilities. But beware of the wandering soulless creatures that dwell in the magical mine, guarding every treasure and trap door. Use your magical powers to slay the bloodthirsty banshee, put an end to the deadly demon, or the goblin waiting to waylay you. Walk through walls and sealed entrances, cast a spell to heal your wounds, regain your strength or hurl bolts of lightning A wizard you are, yes, but watch out for the evil Sorcerer who is waiting to cast his favourite spell-forgetfulness to deprive you of your most valuable magic. But all is not lost you may regain a spell or two, or perhaps even one new to you if you can discover the wondrous touchstones, stone saturated with powers to restore your magical abilities. Be warned too, that not all treasures you might find are true. In experience lies wisdom. This is not an Arcade type game but it is a real time graphics simulation of the commander of a World War II sub. Your mission as commander is to seek out and destroy enemy shipping, both warship and merchantmen. The merchantmen are not always sitting ducks as Q ships are also encountered but radar, periscopes, hydrophone, etc., with a good visual display enable you to hunt effectively. Don't forget to contact your supply ship as running out of fuel or ammunition is rather embarrassing to a commander in line for the IRON CROSS. GOOD HUNTING 32K and 16K versions (New Rom) Please specify .95 CONQUEROR .95 TRS-80 & V.G. (level II, 16k) cassette .95 TRS-80 (32k TRSDOS), Apple (48k with Applesoft in ROM) A tyrant is sweeping through Europe unopposed. GORVAN THE TERRIBLE is well named. You have been put in command of the armies which control the few remaining countries of the alliance. Mere survival will be difficult but your task is to eradicate GORVAN from the face of Europe. The prize? fame and glory To fail? Gorvan is indeed terrible A game of tactics and strategy played with excellent graphical representation of Europe. 16K (New Rom) .95 The Upper Reaches of Apshai.. ... is the first in a series of expansion modules for \"The Temple\". Horrible monsters lurk in the innkeeper's backyard. Discover the secrets of Benedic's Monastery and the cottage of Merlis the Mage. Who knows what secrets the cellar of Olias holds. Over 150 new rooms for you to explore. AVALON HILL GAMES Nuke Ware Nuclear War between two countries, missiles, fighters, bombers, ABMs, etc. Planet Miners (1-4 Players) Compete to claim mining rights for Solar System. North Atlantic Convoy Raider Sink the Bismark or if you prefer) the British Convoy. All above TRS80 16k level il cassette at .95. The Keys of Acheron For those of you who have succeeded in rescuing Brynhild as the Hellfire Warrior, now have an even more difficult task; Four magical jewels, the keys, each in a different dimension, must be recovered from Kronus the Demon. Both The Upper Reaches of Apshai and The Keys of Acheron are expansion modules for the Temple and Hellfire, you must have these games to play them. ASTEROIDS. Fast action Pet version of popular arcade type game 'Asteroids'. All the facilites, Rotate, Fire, Hyperspace, Jump. (Old and New Rom) on one cassette 8k .95 .95 TRS-80 & V.G. (level II, 16k) cassette Temple of Apshai .95 Hellfire Warrior .95 SPECIAL OFFER: If you don't have Temple or Hellfire, then purchase both Temple and The Upper Reaches of Apshai or Hellfire Warrior and the Keys of Acheron for just .95 Cass. .95 disk. All prices include p&p and V.A.T. ALGRAY BESTE New Catalogue available. Send 60p value stamps. (Free with any order.) ALGRAY House, 33 Bradbury Street, Barnsley, South Yorkshire. Tel: Barnsley (0226) 83199 000000000 OOO....00 00.00.000 000000000 Oo.00.000 000...0.0 000000000 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 15 "


"By Max Bramer A common myth especially among non-players is that expert chessplayers and chessplaying programs somehow look at every possible variation in the game. A little analysis shows that this cannot possibly be so. In the initial starting position for chess, White has a choice of 20 moves (16 pawn moves and four knight moves). Whichever move he plays, Black has a choice of 20 replies, making a total of 20 x 20 = 400 possible combinations of one move on each side, including such unlikely combinations as 1.P-QR4, P-KR4 and 1.P-KB3, N-QR3. For subsequent moves each side is likely to have perhaps 30 alternative choices xo numerical value, e.g. + 100 for a large White advantage, -3 for a small Black advantage (it is convenient always to score from White's viewpoint). Of course, this is much less precise and requires a great deal of judgement to do even reasonably well (how does a weak pawn balance against a strongly centralised queen?) Just as in the noughts and crosses example, the score of the initial position being analysed can be computed by \"backingup\" values, level by level. Figure two shows an example, analysing just one move for each side. Note that all scores are taken from White's point of view, so negative scores are favourable to Black. 10 ified form, is used in virtually all programs to play chess, go, draughts and similar two-person games. It is easiest to illustrate the method by a simpler example than chess and I have taken the humble game of noughts and crosses as an example. In the position marked 1, it is X's move and he has three choices shown as positions 2, 3 and 4. Number 3 is terminal and a win for X. In numbers 2 and 4 it is O's move, to positions 5, 6, 7 or 8. Position 6 is also terminal and a win for O. Following every sequence of moves through to either a win for X, a win for O, or a draw gives the complete figure which is called a game tree. Notice that only terminal positions 3, 6, 9, 10, 11 are labelled as a win or draw. However, every other position can now be labelled (working from the bottom of the tree upwards) in a straightforward way. Numbers 5 and 8 must be draws and 7 is a win for X since there is only one legal move each time. Now look at position 2. It is O's move and he can either move to 5, a draw, or 6 a win for O. Since it is O's move he will choose the best alternative from his own viewpoint, in this case 6. So 2 is also a win for O. In the same way 4 is a draw, since will certainly avoid playing to 7 and losing. Finally consider position 1. Now it is X's move and the choice is between 2 (a win for O), 3 (a win for X) and 4 (a draw). He naturally will choose 3 and so the original position l is a winas is obvious at a glance with the best move being to 3. The same method would work equally well for any size of game tree, with any number of levels, provided the players move alternately, as they do in chess. The first step towards a solution is to extend the idea of a score. Instead of just win, draw or loss, every position is given a X00 O ** OOK OOOO Win for Draw on average until quite late in the game. Thus we can reasonably estimate the number of possible ways of playing just the first three moves for each side by 20 20 30 30 30 30 = 324 million! The so-called \"combinatorial explosion\" of variations is one of the greatest obstacles to writing almost all game-playing programs. Nevertheless, it is extremely helpful to start by thinking in terms of exhaustive analysis, stopping only when a position is a checkmate or a \"defined\" draw a stalemate of inadequate material for either side to checkmate), since this leads to an elegant method of move selection, known as the minimax algorithm. This, in mod The values -8, -3 etc. are scores assigned to the final position, i.e. those where analysis stops. In positions 2, 3 and 4 it is Black's move. In 2, he will play to 5 since a value of -8 is better than -3 or-2 from his viewpoint. Thus 2 has a score of -8 and similarly 3 and 4 should score +5 and -4, respectively, with Black always playing to minimise the score of the resulting position. From White's viewpoint, in position 1, it is best to maximise the score he can obtain, thus he chooses to play to 3, value +5, not 2, value -8 or 4, value 4. The same alternation of White maximising and Black minimising would again work with any number of levels and, not surprisingly, is called the minimax algorithm. Using the minimax algorithm does not solve the combinatorial explosion, since even looking two or three moves ahead for each side gives a vast number of positions, but it is an invaluable start. 16 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"PLAY FOR TODAY COMMODORE VIC VIDEO GENIE I Machine Language monitor Sound and Lower Case Renumber and Screen Print .00 Colour Sound Programmable Function keys 5K Memory Expandable to 32K Standard PETBASIC Full sized Typewriter Keyboard Graphics Character Set Plug-in Program Cartridges Low Priced Peripherals Self Teaching Materials .95 VIC Compatible Cassette .95 TRS80 MODEL III TEAC DISK DRIVES Interfaces with Video Genie, North Star Horizon Surrain Nas etc. JO Track Double Disk Drive 259.00 Disk Drive .00 8. Trw Single 0 Thick Double Disk Drive .00 Disk Drive  599.00 .40 Truck Single 259.00 Disk Drive ACORN ATOM 48 K User Ram Extended Microsoft Basic Parallel or RS232 Interfaces With 40 Track Single Density Disk Drives .00 With 80 Track Double Sided Disk Drives .00 With 80 Track Double Density Drives 1.4MB .00 NEW SHARP MZ8OK .8K User RAM Extended Basic Integral Cassette .00 THE COMPUTERSHACK .8K Rom + 4K Ram Sound 20 Introductory Programs  Built-in Colour .00 Computer Shack Ltd. 14. Pittville Street. Cheltenham.Glos. Telephone: (0242)584343 Ring or call in for details of our Credit Scheme. Access or Barclay Card Accepted, Mailorder Enquiries Welcomed. Prices include VAT WOODLAND SOFTWARE ESILVERSOFT personal computer software MAIL ORDER MICROCOMPUTER SUPPLIES FOR THE APPLE .50 Wizadry 48K P .90 Epoch 48KM .70 Galactic Attack 48K P .25 Copts & Robbers 48K M .70 Doom Cavern 48K VA .65 Outpost 48K M 17.25 Odyssey 48K 1 .25 Beer Run 48K M .25 Tank Attack Death Run 48K VA F12.65 Gorgon 4BK M .00 Wilderness Campaign 48K A .65 Sneakers 48KM .25 Wilderness & Dungeon 48K VA 120.70 Gamma Goblins 48K M .25 Mission Asteroid 4BK M Autobahn 48K M .25 Mystery House 48KM .95 Orbitron 48K M .25 Wizard & Princess 4BK M $20.70 Pulsar ll 4BK M 17.25 Cranston & Manor 48KM .85 Space Eggs 48K M .25 Hi-Res Football 48K M .00 Phantoms Five 48KM .25 Hi-Res Soccer 48K M .25 Cyber Strike 48KM .00 Hi-Res Cribbage 48KM .37 Star Cruiser 32K M .95 Missile Defense 48KM .25 Both Barrels 48K A .95 Sabotage 48KM ,37 E Z Draw 3.3 48K A .75 Gobbler 48KM .37 Higher Graphics II 48K 1/A E21.85 Threshold .00 Higher Text 32K VA 21.85 Soft Porn Adventure 17.25 *Superscribe 48K M .80 Ulysses & the Golden Fleece .85 Expediter II 48K A .25 *Revised Version AApplesoft I-Integer UK distributors for MIA-Integer & Applesoft Sir Tech Inc M-Runs on any Apple Trade enquiries invited P-Requires DOS 33 All software is disc based. All prices are inclusive. On multiple orders of 3 or more programs P&P is FREE: please add 50p P&P on orders less than 3. A list of our full range of software is free on request from: 16K/ZX81 SOFTWARE \"STARTREK\" All the usual features. \"SUPER-WUMPAS\" New Exciting adventure game. \"GRAPHIC GOLF\" A graphic implementation of computer golf. \"3D MYSTERY MAZE\" Three dimensional maze game in which you have to make your way to the treasure. \"GAMES PACKI\" Fantastic value, over 50K of program, including STARWARS (14K), HAMMURABI (10K), LUNAR LANDER (9K Real-time graphics), MASTERMIND (4.5K), MINEFIELD (10.5K). Prices .95 each cassette Send S.A.E. .95 any two for details SILVERSOFT (Dept CVG) 40 Empress Avenue, Ilford, Essex. WOODLAND SOFTWARE 103 Oxford Gardens, London W10 6NF. Telephone: 01-960 4877 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 17 "


"TVGAMES CENTRES TVGAMES CENTRES TVGAMES VIDEO SCREEN KEEP THIS VILLAIN'S BOMBS AT BAY ANOTHER BRICK IN THE WALL SUPER BREAKOUT PITCHING FOR WORLD CUP PLAY latest games for the Atari Video KABOOM THE MAD BOMBER Kaboom the Mad Bomber is an ond the blocks double in length evil character who lives up to his making your task easier. Being trapped in a small space name. Although the only skill in playmeans horror for the clausHe rules the roost at the top of ing the game is having a quick trophobic and Super Breakout a wall and has instant access to a hand to move the block across will have them crying out in cache of bombs which he drops the screen it is an extremely anguish from a great height. It's up to you compulsive reaction game. The only way to get out of the to thwart Kaboom and literally The points system is simple, dilemma is to dislodge the bricks wipe the smile off his face. For one point for each bomb, but the above you which are four layers each time you let a bomb hit the score can quickly mount up. deep. On either side of these ground it brings a wicked grin to Kaboom the Mad Bomber will layers the walls hem you in so his face. torment your life for .95 from you are truly trapped. This Activision cartridge fits Activision UK distributors. Super Breakout is one of the the Atari VCS and has an addic D tive quality making it hard to put Computer System following the down. At the bottom of the traditional version. Five different FOOTBALL AND ICE HOCKEY screen are three blocks which variations of play are included in you can move about with your Football fans are in for a good with the joystick and you use the the package, regular Breakout, paddle controllers. Double Breakout, Cavity Breaktime next year with the World fire or action button to shoot Kaboom moves erratically from Cup in full swing. You need a good eye for a bail out and Progressive Breakout. one side of the screen to the Games centres are well and an alert mind to check at an All for one or two players. other and drops a series of catered for on the football front, instant where members of the At the bottom of the screen is bombs with lighted fuses which a bat which you control, using the latest to add one to its range opposing team are. If you want to you catch with your block is Philips for the G7000. In this pass the ball to another player the Atari's compatible paddles. At first the bomber moves version the match is fought out just press the fire button, but be When the game kicks off a ball is slowly so there's no problem between two five man teams, careful not to let it be interserved into the play area which catching the bombs but as the each complete with a goalie. The cepted by the opposition. you have to bounce off your game progresses Kaboom really men are moved around the pitch The computer memory keeps block to make it rebound against does go mad making it a hard job track of the score and also clocks the coloured bricks at the top of for you to tackle. up the time left to play. When There are two options to vary the action gets a bit violent and Each brick you successfully the game. On the first the blocks players suffer a few blows, the knock out disappears from the are piled three high, on the secscreen and you are awarded time is added on. You get value for money on points. this cartridge with the added Bricks in the first two rows of game Ice Hockey included in the the regular game go for one point package. The principle of the each. The second and third rows game sticks closely to the real are worth three points each and one, but the speed of the puck's the fifth and sixth ones will net movement is not as fast as the you five per brick, and the real life game. seventh and eighth rows bricks An extra feature written into earn you seven points each. Ice Hockey is that you can hold Depending on the game variadown the action button and tion you play and certain stages watch the puck skim across the reached in the play the points are screen until it hits a player. sometimes doubled or tripled. On Double Breakout the maximum The match is again timed by score is infinite, so you can go on the computer and the score for both sides is marked up on the building up a high score indefiscreen too. Both games run on nitely the G7000 and can be bought Another feature is a children's now for the standard Videopac version making the game easier if you want to let the kids let rip. price of . The difference is that the speed of the game is slowed down so you have more time to react and judge the best place to position your bat to hit the ball. The cartridge sells for .95, from Atari distributors. Colts KOHO "


"CENTRES TV GAMES CENTRES TV GAMES CENTRES ROCKS FOR ALL AGES HELP THESE CHICKS CROSS THE ROAD ACTION IN THE AIR-WAYS BEST SELLERS Asteroids made the transition FREEWAY from arcade to home entertainment centre far more successWhy did the chicken cross the fully than its predecessor, Space road? goes the old children's Invaders. Atari came up with joke. the arcade game and were first If you found the answer to include a cartridge for the unconvincing as a child, then you video computer system which will find it totally implausible now outsells Space Invaders — when you plug the Freeway carand it resulted in an international tridge into your Atari Video Comcompetition last November to puter System. find the top scorer. Two chickens are in a race to The target is 142,910 points, get to the other side of a 10 lane which an American player motorway which is jam-packed achieved, to win the contest. TRIPLE ACTION with traffic. Every time you manThe asteroids hurtle through age to dodge the cars and lorries the cosmos, each hit splitting There's real skill when you take tank by destroying it with your and successfully cross the 10 them in half, each sized rock to the airways in Triple Action. own shells. On the screen are lanes you score a point. being worth a certain number of You are in command of one of positioned several walls differing There are two levels of diffipoints. The smallest ones net two planes engaged in battle in length as well as clumps of culty and eight different game 100, downwards to 10 for a giant aiming to score 15 points before trees. The walls can be used as a versions, in each one the traffic rock. With the difficulty button your opponent. To score points protective shield, from enemy speeds up slightly. You can't on a blue flying saucer whizzes you must shoot down the oppofire. But watch out if you let your judge when to leap out into the through the storm, firing on your sition or get a direct hit at the tank lurk behind the trees, roads because the cars and lorship balloon which begins its ascent because those can be blasted to ries' speeds are randomly gener The spacecraft can be rotated from a platform in the middle of smithereens. ated. The lower numbered game left or right to fire and moved out the screen. Opt for the third game, Car variations are only plagued by of position by use of the thrust Cloud formations are dotted in Racing, and you have to race cars rather than lorries which which propels it in the direction the sky for you to use as cover if against the clock it is pointing you want to hide from your of 100 miles. Not only do you On version eight the freeway is Other features incorporated opponent in the heat of a dog have to keep your car on the filled with heavy lorries. into different versions of the fight. Make the most of the cloud straight and narrow, but you also You use the joystick to game there are 66) include: cover during battles. have to dodge other traffic on manoeuvre your chicken across hyperspace, which transports Your armaments consist of the road. the road, but you can only move you instantly out of danger to either short or long range bulThis Triple Action cartridge is him up or down, not sideways. another area of the screen. lets. available from Intellivision's disFreeway is one of the latest In other versions you can have Battle Tanks is another of the tributors via Advanced Consumer cartridges out for use on the the hyperspace swapped for progames on the same Intellivision Electronics (ACE) of north LonAtari games centre and is made tective shields which enable you cartridge. don for the standard price of by the US firm Activision. It will to pass through asteroids, but The object is to beat an enemy .95. cost you .95 these are only effective for a brief second and then blow you up if over used. And finally a \"flip\" effect enables your ship to BITTARDS friend. Whoever is the first perspin 180° and fire at oncoming son to put the two dark balls in danger from both sides very Potting the coloured balls in the the pockets wins. quickly pockets of a snooker table is a Rotation is also played with 10 You are given five lives to start real test of your judgement of balls. But this time there are five off the game but extra ones are distance and angles. blue ones and five yellow, excludavailable every 5, 10, or 20 Line up your cue in one of two ing the cue ball. The aim is to thousand points, depending on snooker table games just pocket as many balls as possible. the difficulty you set yourself. In released for the Philips G7000 If you get bored with that you later walls the large blue saucer television games centre. Eight can design your own variation is replaced by a far more deadly Ball and Rotation are versions of Why not put a value on the small green one who homes in on two popular American games different balls, or try pocketing your ship much quicker. With translated for a British audience. alternating coloured balls, or how each cleared screen more rocks In Eight Ball the idea is to pot about each player opting to put are added to the game. the two dark balls which lie in a down a certain colour? The deciGuaranteed to hold your atten10 ball triangle. The option ission is yours. tion, it costs .50 from Atari's open for you to try and beat the Coming in one cartridge Eight U.K. distributors. computer or to challenge a Ball and Rotation costs . brief second and then blow you TAKE YOUR CUE FROM THE U.S. "


"REVERSI SCREENING YOUR PROGRAM There are plenty of practical problems which crop up when putting the game of Reversi on a computer screen. Leaving the actual programming of the machine to play a good game aside for a moment, in just representing Reversi on a screen there are several guidelines which can help in the presentation of the game. The problem arises when one tries to show a board and pieces on a screen, since almost every computer has its own unique way of doing this. The method I used was to draw the fixed information such as the board and its square numbering using Basic PRINT statements and then to POKE the pieces into the correct memory locations to make them appear on the board. This is much quicker than reprinting the whole display after each move. My board is pale blue with dark blue lines dividing the squares. The machine plays with blue pieces and the human player with red ones. One after thought that turned out to be essential was to make each newly placed piece flash for By Tom Napier tion that contains at least one Reversi is the old English name for opposing piece then the move is the board game which has recently legal. It's shorter in Basic than in become popular as Othello since English! being re-invented in Japan. To evaluate a move the routine As Othello is the trade name for adds twice the value of the the game we have decided to revert square played on to the sum of to calling our column \"Reversi\" as values of the pieces captured. this is the name frequently given to The values assigned, which computerised versions of the game. should be varied by anyone experimenting with the proover all the appropriate pieces gram, reflect such factors as the then wait for the human player's desirability of corner and edge response. Test that the human squares and the relative undeplayer's move is legal and dis sirability of squares that enable play the new board position if it one's opponent to make a corner is. Repeat until either both or edge move. players pass on successive Towards the end of the game, moves or move 65 is reached. positions are relatively Add up totals of both players and unimportant and only sheer announce winner. numbers matter, this is reflected I have glossed over the move by resetting all the values to 1 for evaluation routine. A simple the last few moves. program will use two Basic A more complicated program arrays, one 10 by 10 to represent could try resetting the values to the state of the board and reflect the position of the pieces, another that contains the for example: once a corner has desirability factors assigned to been taken, the squares next to each square. The board state the corners could have a higher array is 10 x 10 in size simply to value assigned to them. enable the edge of the board to Only legal moves should be be indicated to the legal move fully evaluated but even so the testing routine. computer will take 15 to 25 secThe same routine is used to onds to make up its mind. First check the legality of both attempts should not try to player's moves by changing the make the machine look at its value of the flag \"P\". Assuming opponent's possible responses, the square concerned is unit would just take too long. occupied it goes like this. For One compromise I have direction 1 to 8, keep stepping worked on but not yet completed out so long as only opposing is to write the move examination pieces are encountered. If a routines in machine code while space or the board edge is found, still using Basic for the rest of the try the next direction, if a program. This would speed friendly piece is found in a directhings up enormously. was difficult to spot where the computer had moved, particularly once it had started turning over the pieces. However, it's not impossible to write a Reversi program on a non-graphic monochrome computer, it's just a little slower and not so pretty. The strategy my program uses is: for every unoccupied square, test to see if a legal move is possible. If it is, evaluate the move and compare it with the best move found so far. Save the better move. After testing all the squares, play the best move found. Turn "


"GHRUME NIC electronics 48 JUNCTION ROAD, ARCHWAY LONDON N19 5RD 100 yds FROM ARCHWAY STATION & 9 BUS ROUTES TELEPHONE: 01-263 9493/01-263 9495 TELEX: 22568. DOWN IN PRICE MANY VIC 20 PERIPHERALS AVAILABLE SEND FOR LIST YOUR SOUNDEST CONNECTION IN THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS VIC 20 -UK101* 24 Colours, 8 for Characters, 8 for Border, UK 101 Kit inc 8K memory  16 for screen mixed as you wish. Ready Built inc 8K memory  *3 tone Generator for sound. Complete in case  *Uses Pet Basic Plugs into T.V. 4K Expansion 8x2114  \"Memory expandable to 32K Parallel Printer Interface .50 VIC complete with T.V. Modulator and Cases .95 Power Supply Chromasonics Sound Kit .50 ONLY .00 Colour Kit .95 NEW VIC Cassette Deck ONLY .00 32K Dynamic Memory Board only .95 Available soon P.I.O. and Eprom Programmer Kit VIC Dot Matrix Printer only .50 80 Column, 30 CPS, Tractor Feed ONLY .95 APPLE II PLUS-PETAUTOSTART \"EUROPLUS\" 4016 16K RAM 445.00 48K Apple Computer 649.00 4032 32K RAM 569.00 Disc Drive with Controller 8032 32K RAM 755.00 349.00 8096 96K RAM 960.00 Disc Drive without Controller 4040 Disk Drive 585.00 299.00 8050 Disk Drive 755.00 Colour Card 69.00 4022 Printer 80 Col 357.00 Silentype Printer 199.00 8024 Printer 132 Col 975.00 8026 Printer/Typewriter Graphics Tablet 425.00 835.00 TV Modulator 14.00 8027 Daisy Wheel 735.00 A range of A range of PET accessories Apple accessories and software and software are available are available -PRINTERS INTERFACES AND CABLES FOR APPLE II, PET, TRS80, RS232, UK101, SHARP SUPERBOARD ALL AVAILABLE EPSON MX80 FT/1  EPSON MX80  Dual single sheet friction and Dot-matrix printer with Pet tractor feed, 9 wire head, true graphics interfaceCentronics descenders parallel and serial. Pet and EPSON-MX FT/ 2 5440 Apple compatible. True bidirec An FT/1 with high resolution tional, 80 cps graphics EP80 MX82  SEIKOSHA GP80A  As MX80 plus high Resolution Dot matrix 5 x 7,80 columns, 30 Graphics cps graphics, double width characters JUST PHONE FOR FURTHER DETAILS -VIDEO GENIE EG3003 Utilises Z80, 12K level Il Basic, Integral Cassette Deck, UHF O/P, 16K RAM, all TRS80 features. Simply plugs into monitor or UHF TV. With V.U. Meter PARALLEL PRINTER INTERFACE INC CABLE .00 CHROMASONICS PROGRAMMABLE SOUND KIT 24.50 SOUND KIT (FITTING EXTRA) .20 LOWER CASE KIT (FITTING EXTRA) .80 COLOUR KIT (FITTING EXTRA) .00 EXPANSION BOX INC 16K RAM  16K/32K RAM BOARD / NEW GENIE II NOW AVAILABLE  MONITORS -TANTELPRESTEL BY TANTEL COMMUNICATIONS AT YOUR FINGERTIPS FOR BUSINESS & HOME. UP TO DATE INFO 180,000 pages of information on Travel, News, Investment, Holidays, Hotels Etc., Etc  TANTEL IS POST OFFICE APPROVED. SEND FOR DETAILS DEMONSTRATION AVAILABLE AT OUR SHOWROOM 9\" Green Screen .00 HITACHI PROFESSIONAL 12\" Green Screen .00 .95 12\" BMC Green Screen  .00 12\" KARCLAYCARD Please add VAT 15% to all prices. Postage on computers, printers and cassette decks charged at cost, all other items P&P 30p. Place your order using your Access or Barclaycard (Min. tel. order (). Export enquiries welcome. Official orders welcome. All items carry 1 years guarantee VISA COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 21 "


"COMPUTER BY DAVID LANGFORD Space craft and alien beings were the preserve of the science fiction enthusiast long before they began appearing on our computer screens. Sci-fi also has a long tradition for being the most innovative family in the literary clan. We thought we should tap this source of new ideas and invited author David Langford of the Science Fiction Foundation to lead us gently into the diverse futures imagined by the latest science fiction authors. David will sift through the latest ideas and reproduce the best of these and provide some greatly appreciated humour on the way. In his first column, David looks at one way for beginners to approach giving a game a science fiction feel and presents a simple example, Space Blockade. TRS-80 is to make up a long string by adding up CHR graphics: you PRINT this, and because it is such a long string it first prints the top halves of all these invaders and then wraps round to the next line to print the bot tom halves giving them a sinister wriggling motion when they move as described below. Repeat to give three spaced-out rows of looming invaders, each send up through that lot is a mere \"little moving blot\" steered by the arrow keys: easy to arrange on any machine, using a function like INKEY to read in the steering instructions. You'll know what comes next: the ship starts at horizontal position X and vertical (measured from the top) position Y somewhere near bottom centre of the screen, and New computer owners may well be alarmed by the awesome accuracy seemingly needed to prepare a lengthy Basic program. Ignoring the frowns of the purists (the ones who have no time for you unless you can write fluent machine code while standing on your head in a thunderstorm), let's look at how to cheat to work up a half-baked idea into a tiny but operational computer game without any vast planning. You might call it computer doodling. My wife, disgruntled by picketing at her office, suggested a game where you had to steer small unfortunate non-union people though immense and menacing picket lines. Thus, one non-sober evening, the game of \"Flying Pickets\" came into being. Let's not deal with such politically sensitive matters but with the almost indistinguishable game called \"Space Blockade\" which I've just invented out of sheer cowardice. A horde of evil extraterrestrials hangs over the Earth. Our planet is doomed and must be evacuated. One by one Earth's brave little ships boost into space, only to perish miserably by collision with the aliens invulnerable force screens... unless you steer between them. Obviously this is dead easy unless the fiendish baddies keep on the move. One simple minded way of doing this on my 22 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES row starting at the left-hand edge of the screen and reaching not all the way across. Repeat the PRINT again and again for all three, stepping up the TAB function or equivalent to overprint and have these blockade lines shuffle a space to the right each time. When they reach the right-hand edge you can start them moving back again. Three rows of monstrous Things sidling to and fro in the sky. The simplest \"Earth ship\" to moves depending on which arrow key was last pressed. If it was the up-arrow then the new Y must be made on less than the old one; the graphics blot at X, Y is turned off and that at X, Y-1 turned on... and so on in a loop until a different arrow key is pressed If you go straight up like that, the chances are that sooner or later you hit one of the Things in the sky, and are blown to smithereens. The program should test the new point X, Y on the display before turning it on "


"DOODLING to move the \"ship\" there: if it's already occupied, then blooie! You can set various levels of difficulty by letting your ship move twice, five times, 10 times for each move of the blockaders have an endless loop for the moving invaders, say, and an inner FOR-NEXT loop handling the movements of the ship. Finally, tidy the game up. Fanfares if you get through the blockade to the top of the screen. A counter giving the player (say) 10 ships. A score display in some handy corner: 4 ships escaped, 3 lost, 3 to launch. A trap to prevent people sneaking round the blockaders when they're at far left or right of the screen if the horizontal position X gets too small or too large the program blows line of hulking figures, then three lines, then three moving lines, then add the escaping ships and as many as you like of the frills above ... Take it slowly. And if you were nervous you up anyway for, er ... using about programming your own too much fuel. games, you should be a lot less A preliminary display of so when you've finished. instructions so those unfamiliar Here's one way of cobbling with the game can sit down and together Space Blockade on a play without a PhD in computer TRS-80 (Level II). Almost cerscience. \"Aerial minefields\" of tainly it's not the best way. The fixed graphics dots between lowest level of difficulty is very which players must thread their easy, the highest too hard way... More sadistic program though there's a deliberate bug mers can make the level of diffi included to ensure the author culty rise a la Space Invaders as can always win and amaze his the game goes on, until by the friends by sneaky use of the end the blockaders move faster space bar. than your ship and only a mira Don't just copy or adapt this cle can get you through. version if you're new to computBut you can think of your own ing: it's much more interesting to frills. The point of Space Block tackle the programming yourade is that it's reasonable fun self, along the lines suggested. and can be put together in a few The general approach should hours only, by a process of com work on any machine with a puter doodling: you produce that I memory-mapped display. 10 CLEAR350 : DEFINTA-Z! (C) DAVID LANGFORD 1981 20 CLS PRINT 406, \"SPACE BLOCKADE\"; FORI=1T02000: NEXT PRINT2640,\"USE ARROW KEYS TI O GUIDE EARTH'S EVACUATION SHIPS THROUGH THE BLOCKADING INVADERS!\" PRINT INPU T \"WHAT LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY DO YOU WANT TO 9)\";N 30 IFN>9THENN1ELSEIFNK THENN. 1 ELSEN10-N 40 INPUT\"DO YOU WANT TO RISK THE DREADED AERIAL MINEFIELDS\":B$ 50 P$=CHR$ 156 >+CHR$( 191 )+CHR$(172) 60 Q$=CHR$( 184 )+CHR$( 131 )+CHR$(180) 70 T$=\" \"FORI-1109 T$T$+P$+\" : NEXT 80 T$=T$+CHR$(202): FORI-1108: T$=T$+0$+\" \": NEXT: T$ T$+Q.\" 99 CLS:=:Q$=INKEY 100 P$=STRING$15.140) FORI=T0768STEP256 : PRINTCI.P$; PRINTCI+49.P$; IFLEFT$B$, 1 >>\"Y\"THEN110ELSEO-24-O PRINTCI+15. STRING$ 34,132+0); 110 NEXT 120 DP=1.P=0X=64.Y=44:A=32D%u0DY=D: SC=0 ST=10:K=0: PRINTC977.P$;$; 200 K=k+1 IFK<NTHEN21DELSEPRINT264+P, T$; PRINTC320+P, T$; PRINT0576+P, T$; P=P+DP K=O: IFP=11 ORP=OTHENDP-DP 210 SETCX,Y): Q8+INKEY: IFQ$=\"\" THENBODELSER=ASCCQ$ > 229 IFA=91 THENA 11 230 ONA-6GOTO250,260,270,280,290 240 IFAK >32 THEN300 250 DX=0.DY=0 GOT0300 260 DX=-1 DY=0. GOTO300 270 DX=1DYGOTO300 280 DX=0 DY-1. GOT0300 290 DX=0.DY=-1 300 XX=X : YY=Y:X=XDXY+Y+DY 310 IFKPOINTX,Y)ANDAK 32 ORX<290RX980RY>46THEN500 320 SET(X,Y) RESET(XX, YY> 330 IFY1 THEN400ELSEGOT0200 400 PRINT2896, CHR$(207); PRINT2960, CHR$(209); FORI=1 T050: PRINT2832,\"*** SUCCESS ***\"; : FORJ=1T020: NEXT:PRINT2832, CHR$(207); NEXT 410 RESETCXX.YY: RESET(X,Y): SC=SC+1ST=ST-1 PRINT2832, SC\"NOW IN ORBIT\"; PRINT289 6,10-(ST+SCSMITHEREENED\"; PRINT2960. ST\"NOT LAUNCHED \"P$;P$; IFST=OTHEN600 420 X=44+RNDC 40 ): Y-44: SET(X,Y): A=32:DX=0: DY=0: Q$=INKEY GOT0200 500 PRINT2896, CHR$(207); PRINT@960. CHR$(209); FORI=11050: PRINT2832, \"*** FAILED * **\"; FORJ-17020: NEXT PRINT2832, CHR$(207) NEXT: SCHSC-1 GOTO410 600 PRINTC945, \"PRESS SPACE BAR\"; PRINT@1909, \"TO RESTART...\", :Q$=INKEY 610 PRINT2881,\"** GAME OVER **\"; FORI=1 T040: NEXT PRINT0881, CHR$(207); FORI=1 T040 NEXT: IFINKEY$=\" \"THEN2OELSE610 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 23 "


"SNAG JNR KMAL FUNCTION GT. HITCH SCREAMING FOUL UP HE'S NEARLY THERE NOW! DEEP IN THE DARKEST RECESSES OF THE BUGS MICRO, SNAG INR JS HELPING OUT WITH A GAME!! DISDAN HE'S OFFERING THE VASE NOW! GOLDEN GLITTER! THE D.D.DRAGON. IT.T.T.TT'S AWARE! ALL BINARY SNAKES ARE ADDERS *11 I CANT WATCH HE'S GOING TO GET FRIED! 10111001 A CARE LESSLY SCATTERED GOLDEN GOODIES! HE'S DONE OO SOME DEAL WHEN IT COMES TO ADVENTURE NOBODY BARGAINS LIKE SNAG JUNIOR! GOLDEN (DEPLETE THE BINARY SNAKE JOKE WAS REPRINTED BY KIND PERMISSION OF ROBIN HILL "


"WWWWWWWWWWWWWWW TITLEITTEET AEG 3003 GENIE I MICROCOMPUTER SYSTEM  ingenious! New! Printer that's the only word to really describe the superb Genie Microcomputer system, the home computer which is compatible with the TRS 80, and ideal for all microenthusiasts, especially the committed hobbyist. Genie has now been upgraded to Genie I, incorporating all of the original, excellent features, but with the addition of Extended BASIC, including RENUMBER and SCREEN PRINT Full upper and lower case, flashing cursor and auto-repeat on all keys An internal SOUND UNIT to add a new dimension to your own programs A MACHINE LANGUAGE MONITOR with Display, modify, enter and execute with break points facilities Genie Ihas all of this, plus the built-in cassette deck, 16K RAM, 12K ROM with BASIC interpreter, full-size keyboard. an extremely wide range of new and updated peripherals and literally 1000s of pre-recorded programmes available. Yet, almost unbelievably, the price of Genie Tis even lower than that of the original Genie The EG 602 printer can be connected to the Genie either through the expander or directly into the computer using the Parallel Printer Interface. It is a compact unit, with an 80 columns x 7 matrix print out, operating quietly and efficiently at 30 characters per Second isk Drive Ingenious for business As well as the obvious advantage of mass storage, the addition of the disk system to the Genie means much faster access to other languages and full random access file handling. Up to 4 of these 40 track drives can be used on a system The Genie Il is a major breakthrough for small business computers Harnessing all the advantages of Genie including low price, Genie II adapts perfectly to commercial functions with the following features: SPECIAL TECHNICAL GENIE HOT-LINE ON 0629 4995 Numeric keyboard Four usable, definable function keys Extension to BASIC Basic business commands Fully expandable with the same peripherals for all your technical advice and service back-up on any aspect of the Cenie system direct from the experts New!...12\" Monitor For full details and demonstration of Genie I. Genie Il or advice on any aspect of the system, either call into your local dealer, or write directly to the sole importers at the address below Now a choice of 2 monitors giving a clear easy to read image. The updated Ediol has a new green phospher tube New!... Expander An updated Expansion Box (EG 3014) is a major feature of the new Genie I system, and unleashes all its possibilities, allowing for up to 4 disk drives with optional double density. It connects to a printer, or RS232 interface or SI00 cards. There is 16k RAM fitted and it has a new low price! e AHOMAS Chesterfield Road, Matlock, Derbyshire DE4 5LE. Telephone: 0629 4995. Telex: 377482 Lowlec G. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 25 "


"ARCADE TIPS MISSION (ALMOST) IMPOSSIBLE THE SUPER GALAXIANS GALAGA The Galaga race has arrived on the British arcade scene. In our December issue we warned of the coming invasion of a new improved Galaxian and now we Scramble was the first arcade can fill in a few more details of machine to send you on a misthis new foe. sion and quickly earned a big Like Galaxian the creatures fly following in formation above the firing Armed with a spaceship which spaceship under your command, fires bullets and drops bombs, and swoop down to attack, firing the player is given differing bullets as they come stretches of terrain to cross and Unlike their predecessors, the a variety of things to blow up. creatures first fly into formation The secret of the game is from the edges of the screen, screen position. Where you are giving the player an extra opporon the screen dictates how much tunity to shoot them. They also manoeuvreability the craft has swoop back up to join their comand how well it can avoid obrades after an unsuccessful dive stacles and hazards. disconcertingly appearing The screen background is rollunder your craft. ing constantly forwards and your TERRY ROGERS The Galagas themselves, are speed is regulated by a joystickthe leaders of the creatures and type lever which moves you up blowing up fuel dumps and on But it is the fifth wall, the must be hit twice to successfully and down and backwards and this first easy scenario the player maze, which causes the most kill them off. When they reach forwards. Pushing the lever back should take his time and bomb as problems, as it involves long verthe bottom of onget the bottom of the screen, they enables your craft to \"hover\" many dumps as possible. tical stretches which can only be generate an energy cone and against the background, until you Memorising screen positions negotiated by careful use of the capture your spaceship carrying come to the back of the screen. is a vital part of achieving a good joystick, moving as far forward as it to the top of the screen. If you The irst screen gives a moun score as in the same situations, possible and then drifting back have no reserve spare spacecraft tainous background with groundmissiles fire at the same time. with the screen. left, the game is over, if you do, to-air missiles, installations and The installations in the fourth The flag for the first series of then the challenge is to shoot fuel dumps. Fuel is the crucial wall can only be bombed (not screens successfully completed the Galaga without hitting your consideration in Scramble, as shot) and the screen closes up to can be earned by either shooting own ship and so rescue it. without it, you will plummet from leave a very narrow, vulnerable or crashing into the robot figure If you manage this, the second the sky. Extra fuel is obtained by space at the top of the screen. by the skyscraper after the maze. craft teams up with the first to fire in tandem, making a much more efficient defence force. The first and second stage are the same but then you enter the first challenge stage with the 40 How many arcade creatures did craft flying, without firing, across you get right? We put a Taito the screen hit them all for a space invaders table up for 10,000 bonus very useful when grabs for the person who could you consider that 20,000 brings a correctly name the machines new spacecraft. which these nine arcade The second challenge stage inhabitants come from. really needs a tandem ship to (A) Pheonix achieve this and the third chal(B) Galaxian lenge stage makes the creatures (C) Moon Cresta faster still, (D) Defender In later screens the droid (E) Galaxian ships flash red and split into (F) Space Invader three \"Scorpion\" craft which (G) Space Fury Swerve all over the screen. (H) Wizard of Wor Another feature of the game is (1) Mazeman, Puckman or Pacthat it is possible to develop a man technique for almost continuous The name of the winner will fire by flicking the fire button be announced in our March hard and fast. Plenty of scope for issue. the good player and a succession of new challenges. 26 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES KNOW YOUR CREATURES "


"CONFESSIONS OF AN ARCADE RODENT Qo oo se Take your cue from the U.S. Puckman with a Tom and Jerry MOLISETRAD theme is the essence of Mouse MUUSETRAP trap. In this maze-chase game, the nered mouse is to eat a bone. player takes on the role of the Bones are dotted around the mouse, and the villains are the screen like the flashing energy cats. dots in Puckman and have a simiThe mouse has to run around lar effect -they turn the player the maze eating pieces of cheese into a dog for a short time and with the cats chasing after him. during that period he can turn There are doors which our the tables on the cats, which do rodent hero can close behind him their best to escape to fend off the enemy. Up until here it all seems very The other recourse of the correminiscent of the Puckman VIDEO POOL game but there are a few extra features which add to the problems of being an arcade mouse. Birds fly around the screen and will eat the mouse if they The American pool table ousted This technique has already come across him. The mouse can the native bar billiards from been used in computer versions escape the birds by hiding in the numerous public bars, many of snooker. corners of the screen. years ago. It needs a good eye to line up It is an all-action affair which But with the necessity of find the cross so the cue ball is hit at builds logically on the success of ing cue space all around the the required angle. Puckman but requires the player bulky tables, many pubs found for those who have not tried to think further ahead. that they could not afford the their hands at the game AmeriAfter finding that frogs make space to incorporate a pool table. cans swear is better than very acceptable screen heroes But the video games industry snooker, the aim is to pocket the arcade industry is following came up with an electronic soluyour own balls while leaving your this theory to its logical conclution by fitting pool into arcade opponents' on the table. sion. games cabinet. The 15 balls are divided into The cartoon heroes seem ideal Video Pool is already proving a two groups of seven, spots and participants of this new arcade popular addition to the arcade stripes, and the black \"8\" ball game which features, cheese, scene. Instead of using a cue, which must be left to last. mice, cats and dogs -in short all players have to perfect the skill The winner is the first player the ingredients of a successful of lining up a cross on the cue to pocket his own seven balls cartoon adventure. ball. and then down the black. GLOSS OVER THESE GHOSTS Do-it-yourself addicts now have CRASH ROLLER an arcade game based on their activities. man counterparts and slightly footprints in the paintwork and Following the craze for more quicker than the painter. must be painted flat and his footdown-to-Earth themes on the To combat this, the painter can prints painted over. It is very arcade scene, comes Crash Rol run to one of two bridges which easy to find yourself cursing ler, which could as well be are incorporated on the roadway. these interruptions as a real named, \"Crazy decorator\". There he can grab a huge paint decorator would any feline crimiThe game is similar to the roller and turn the tables on his nal. Puckman/Mazeman type chase pursuers in an effort to paint Bonuses are offered for cleargame with ghost-like creatures over them. Bonus scores are col ing screens in a good time and a chasing our intrepid D.I.Y. lected for each ghost who is new screen appears to be filled enthusiast through a series of caught beneath the paint roller. in another bright colour. The first interlocking roadways. The game is further compliscreen for instance, in a lurid But while in the Mazeman cated by the random appeargreen. An optional feature is progame, the idea is to eat the ances of creatures who will mess vided in black holes that appear spots, here the player must paint up the decorator's handiwork. A randomly in the roadway and the over the roadways. cat, bird or motor car will appear decorator can disappear down It is more difficult than its — in much the same way as fruit these. predecessor although there are does on Puckman--but these do The bridges are an interesting only two ghosts in this version, not just offer bonuses. feature, in that you can run over They are faster than their Puck. The cat, for example leaves and under them. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 27 Boy A "


"RUNS ON AN APPLE BY MARK PELCZARSK Two World War I air aces are locked in an aerial duel in the skies above France. Discover the skills needed to loop-the-loop and come back on your opponent's tail. This is one of those two player shoot-'emdown games in which the screen is the sky and the paddles your controls, Each of two players has an aeroplane, presented on the Hi-Res Apple screen which can be directed with the paddle knob. The button allows you to 5 REM DOGFIGHT MARK PELCZARSK 1, 1980 10 GOSUB 6000 20 POKE 232,0. POKE 233,3 22 BA = OPC(1) = 3 23 PC(2) = 6 24 HONE 27 S = 2 28 R2 = 3 152 INPUT YOUR NAME? \"A$ 154 INPUT \"OPPONENT'S NAME? \"B$ 530 IF SW = 1 OR H(1) 5 OR H(2 ) = 5 THEN 4000 540 GOTO 500 1000 HCOLOR= BAI ROT= D(I) #4 1010 DRAW 1 AT X(I),Y(1) 1020 C = PDL (1 1) 1030 IF C < 20 THEN D(I) = D(I) 11 BOTO 1060 1040 IF C > 235 THEN D(I) Du) 1105 A = 2.B = 11 GOTO 1120 1106 A = 11B = 1: GOTO 1120 1107 A = B = 2: GOTO 1120 110B A = 01B = 2: GOTO 1120 1109 A = 11B = 21 GOTO 1120 1110 A = 11B = 1; GOTO 1120 1111 A = 21B = 11 GOTO 1120 1112 A = 2.B = 01 GOTO 1120 1113 A = 21B = 11 GOTO 1120 160 INPUT \"SPEED (1-10) ?\"K 170 R = 8:SW = 0 180 SCALE= S 190 HGR 195 HCOLOR= BAI HPLOT 0,01 CALL 62454 200 HONE VTAB 211 PRINT AS,\" BS 300 X(1) = 2017 (1) = 120 310 X(2) = 1601Y(2) = 120 320 D(1) = 161D(2) = 16 400 FOR I = 1 TO 21 ROT= D() + 41 HCOLOR= PC(I) 405 H(I) = 01M(I) = 16 410 DRAW 1 AT X(I),Y(I), NEXT I 420 VTAB 231 PRINT \"PRESS ANY KE Y TO START GET CS 500 FOR I = 1 TO 2 505 J = 3-1 510 GOSUB 1000 520 NEXT I 1060 IF D(1) = 0 THEN D(I) = 161 GOTO 1080 1070 IF D(I) = 17 THEN DI) = 1 1080 ON D(I) GOTO 1101, 1102, 1103 , 1104, 1105, 1106, 1107,1108,11 09, 1110, 1111, 1112, 1113, 1114, 1115, 1116 1101 A = 11B = 21 GOTO 1120 1102 A = 1:B = -1: GOTO 1120 1103 A = 21B = -11 BOTO 1120 1104 A = 21B = 0: GOTO 1120 1114 A = 11B = 11 GOTO 1120 1115 A 1.B 21 60T0 1120 1116 A = 0.B = -2 1120 X(I) = X(I) KIA 1130 IF X(1)  278 THEN X(I) = X (I) 278 1140 IF X(1) ( 1 THEN X(I) = XII ) + 278 1150 Y(I) = Y(I) +KIB 1200 DRAN 1 AT X(I),Y(I) 1250 IF ABS (X(I) X(J)) < R2 AND ABS (Y (I) Y(J)) < R2 THEN 2500 28 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"fire at your opponent but you only have 16 missiles so take care not to waste any. You must hit your opponent five times to win the game. To prevent you crashing into the side of the screen and to help conjour sneaky ambushes, when you go off one side, you reappear on the other in a wrap-around effect. The game can be played at 10 different speeds but five and six are recommended as the best for beginners. Be careful not to collide with one another as the computer will, register that as a crash. 1300 IF PEEK (1 16288) < 128 THEN RETURN 1305 IF M(I) = 0 THEN RETURN 1308 MI) = M(I) 1 1309 VTAB 231 PRINT H(1), HITS \"N(1) MISSLES \"H(2);\" H 1345 HCOLOR= BAI DRAW 3 AT XM, YN 1350 NEXT L 1400 IF M(1) = 0 AND M(2) = 0 THEN PRINT \"YOU'RE BOTH OUT OF N ISBLES. SW = 1 FIGHT 3020 NEXT L JOJO HCOLOR= BA 3040 FOR L = 1 TO 5 3050 SCALE= LI DRAN 2 AT X(J),Y J) 3060 NEXT L 3062 NEXT N 3065 SCALE=8 3070 RETURN 4000 IF SW = 1 THEN PRINT \"NON INNER... 11 GOTO 4100 4010 IF H11) 5 THEN PRINT AS; \" IS A WINNER!\" GOTO 4100 4020 PRINT B6, IS A WINNER!\", 4100 INPUT TRY AGAIN?\";C 4110 IF LEFTS (C5,1) = \"\" THEN 160 1160 IF YID) > 158 THEN Y(I) = Y (1) 158 1170 IF Y() < THEN Y(I) = Y(I ) + 158 1190 HCOLOR= PC(I), ROTH D(I) ITS ,M(2) MISSLES 1310 X = X(1) + A1YM = Y(I) + B 1315 FOR L = 1 TO 40 1320 XM XM + A1YM = YM + B 1325 IF XN > 278 OR XM < 1 OR YM > 158 OR YM < 1 THEN 1400 1330 HCOLOR= 51 DRAN 3 AT XM, YM 1340 IF ABS (XN X(J)) (R AND ABS (YN Y(J)) <R THEN 20 1410 RETURN 2000 HII) = HAI) + 1 2010 BOSUB 3000 2100 VTAB 23, PRINT H(1), HITS M(1), MISSLES \"H(2), H ITS ,N(2), MISSLES. 2200 IF H(I) < 5 THEN 1400 2210 RETURN 2500 GOSUB 3000 2510 PRINT \"YOU DUMMIES CRASHED INTO EACH OTHER!!! 2515 SW = 1 2520 RETURN 3000 FOR N = 1 TO 2 3005 FOR L = 1 TO 5 3010 HCOLOR= LI SCALE= L1 DRAW 2 AT X(J),Y(J) 4120 IF LEFTS (C$,1) < > 'N' THEN 4100 4125 TEXT 4130 STOP 6000 FOR L = 768 TO 819 1010 READ N1 POKE L,N 6020 NEXT 6025 RETURN 6030 DATA 3,0,8,0,21,0,48,0,36, 18,55,55, 9,9,60,60,54,62,9,7 6040 DATA 18,62,60,39,45,36,55, 63,44,44, 37, 39, 45, 46, 46, 44,5 4,39,55, 46, 46, 52, 62, 62, 36,55 , 0,63, 33, 36,0 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 29 "


"RUNS ON A NASCOM II The ancient game of Nim is brought in given a 20th Century feel by the addition of robots in place of matches. The robots are shot by the players and removed from the screen as the matchsticks are, in the game of Nim. Based on the Android Nim game which is popular on the Tandy machine in America, Nimbot should find a receptive audience in the U.K. Nimbot sets out the robots in the usual seven, five, three, formation, and challenges you to shoot 1-3 from any column. If more than one is taken, then those removed must be adjacent, either vertically or horizontally. The object of the game is to shoot the last robot, but the strategy involved, in this game for people who can think ahead, makes sure it is not as simple as it appears. Nim has already proved an ideal candidate for computerisation, Nimbot makes it visually exciting as well. The program will let you choose to go first or second and plays a tight game of Nim. Remember to give plenty of thought to your opening moves, because these can be just as crucial as those played when the last few robots are nervously waiting to see which of their number will be shot next. But don't feel too guilty if you shoot the last one, the Nascom will soon build up another three columns for you to tackle. BY TERRY BROWN AND KARL PARKER 10 REM *** 20 REM *** GO RI ** NIMBOT --ROBOTIC NIM No. DEMO 40 REM *** SO REM *** CONNECT SPEAKER TO BIT 0 PORT 4 60 EM *** TO GET AN AUD) SLE OUTPUT FROM GAME 70) REM\" ** 80 REM *** COFEM *** 100 CLS:WIDTH 255: DOKE 4100, 3200:CLEAR 1000 110 DEF FNX (N)=NOT CA ANI N) OR NOT ( A RN)) 120 SOUND=3200:KEY=3264: USER=4100:VDU=2058 130 OUT 6. 15:OUT 4,0 140 FOR A-3200 TO 3249. READ B:POKE AB:NEXT 150 DATA 62,15.211.6, 33, 0, 13,6 160 DATA 8, 197, 126, 183, 40, 25, 94,35 77 (CD1 FERRETTI LLLLILA 30 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"170 DATA B6.4367622255.16. 251 180 DATA 219,4,7,211,4, 21, 32, 242 190 DATA 193,16,230,35,35.24.224,193 200 DATA 201, 193, 16, 230,35.35,24,224 210 DATA 193.901 220 FOR A-3264 TO 3274:READ B: POKE A,B: NEXT 230 NATA 223,97,56,1,175,71,175, 42, 13, 224,233 240 D$=\"JJJJJ\": S$=\" 250 DATA \" THATN\". 260 DATA \" 33 TAN \" 270 DATA \"MIDSJJMID$POINT\" 280 DATA \"TANJPOINTTAN\" 290 IIATA\"rj-OV\" 300 DATA \" HATN\" 610 DATA \" TAN \" 320 DATA \" JJATN\" 330 IATA \" tfTAN\" 340 DATA \"hMjPOINT \" 350 DATA \" GSIN\" 360 DATA \" Ipl PATN\" 370 DATA \" fTAN \" 380 DATA\" ATN\" 390 DATA \" 99TAN \" 400 DATA \"hHATN\" 410 DATA \" TAN\" 120 FOR A=0 TO 4 430 FOR A=0 TO 4: READ A$(A): NEXT 440 FOR A=TO 5: FOR B=O TO 1: READ H$(A,B) 450 NEXT BA 460 FOR A=0 TO 3 470 READ A1 (AO), A1 (A, 1), AZ (AO), A2 (A, 1) 480 NEXT 490 DATA 8,7,9,6,8,8,10,6,8,9,11,6,8,10,12,6 500 LOKE USER, KEY 510 CLS: SCREEN 7,7 520 PRINT \"Do you want instructions ? (Y or N)\" 530 A=USR(0) IF A=0 THEN 530 540 IF A=ASC (\"Y\") THEN GOSUB 1870: GOTO 560 550 IF AC ASC (\"N\") THEN 530 560 N(1) = 7:N(2)=5:N(3)=3 570 CLS: A$=\" NIMBOT Copyright (C) South East\" 580 A$=A$+ \"London Software\": A=0 590 A=A+1: POKE 3017+A, ASC(MID$ (A$, A, 1)) 600 IF A(48 THEN 590 co DEL LLIMO LLLLLLLLLL COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 31 "


"THE SHARP MZ-80K HAS GOT ITALL STOP PRESS... NOW AVAILABLE BASIC COMPILER PASCAL (CASSETTE BASED) DOUBLE PRECISION DISC BASIC FDOS INCLUDES EDITOR AND Z-80 ASSEMBLER SHARPSHARP SHARP SHAN SHARPSHARP SHARP SHARE SHARP SHARP SHARP SHARF SHARP SHARPSHARPSHARP SHARPSHARP SHARPSHARP SHARP SHARP SHARP SHARP SHARF SHARP SHARP SHARP SHARI HARPSHARP SHARP SHAR CUADDCHARDCU AUT Since its introduction the Sharp MZ-80K has proved to be one of the most successful and versatile microcomputer systems around Sharp now have a comprehensive range of products ready to make the powerful MZ-80K with its Printer and Disc Drives even more adaptable. Products include Universal Interface Card, Machine Language and Z-80 Assembler packages, CP/M* plus a comprehensive range of software. You'll find all the help and advice you need about the MZ-80K at your Specialist Sharp Dealer in the list below. *Trade mark of Digital Research Ltd. If there is no dealer in your area, or if you require any further information write to:Computer Division, Sharp Electronics (UK) Ltd. Sharp House, Thorp Road, Newton Heath, Manchester M10 9BE SHARP First, and foremost Holdene Limited, SUSSEX HUMBERSIDE Commercial Systems Ltd Hul 048220022 Eastboume 032369 Newbear Computing Store Lid Stockport0614912290 Ors Group Lid Wantone 092561 Sumlock Software, Binghton 02734 MAHOWheetguipment Grimsby Tel: 07245353 KENT Technolink Europe Ltd Turbinde Wiel. 089232116 Video Services (Bromley) Ltd Bromley Tel 014603 BCG Computer Systems Ltd Bristol 227533 Decimal Business M/C Ltd. Bristol 0272294591 Target Electronics Bristol 0272421196 BERKSHIRE Computer 100 Bray tel. 0628 35619 Newbear Computing Store Lid Newbury Tel05050 BIRMINGHAM Camden Electronics Small Heath Tel: 021273 240 Electronic Business Systems Lid Burgham 021384 2513 Lex Rest Ltd Burmingham 0213504595 Newbear Computing Store Uld Bingham 26 Tel: 021 707 7170 BUCKINGHAMSHIRE Cumy's Microsystems CLEVELAND Hunting Computer Services Stockton on Tees Tel 0642769709 Intex Datalog Ltd. Stockton on les 4271193 DERBYSHIRE Maison Electronics Ltd Nelson Computer Services Rawtenstall 0706229125 Sumita Electronics Ltd Preston Tel. 077251686 LEICESTERSHIRE Gilbert Computers Luberham Tel 58 65994 GW Cowlinguid Henry's Radio Sharptet London W2 014026822 Tomorrows World Ltd London W1 01637 1601 D 0001776861 SCOTLAND London Hot793035 A&G Knight Sumlock Bondain Lid Aberdeen le 0224670526 London Ette 247 Business and Electronics MIC MANCHESTER Edinburgh To 0312265454 The Byte Shop Micro Centre Manchester MIT 061 2364717 Edinburgh 0315567354 Electrovalve, Micro Change Manchester le 06142045 G wT0415541462 Sumlock Electronic Services Ltd Microforth Manchester MTH 06180 Dunemine 0383 32071 MERSEYSIDE Microditat Pointer Business Equipment Uld NORFOLK Grow Tel: 013325621 Sumlock Bondinst Anglia) SOMERSET Norwich Tel 0603 26.259 Norset Office Supplies Ltd NORTHAMPTONSHIRE Computer Supermarket SUFFOLK CIR. Microtek Co Ltd HB Computers ww.ch 0473 50152 NORTHERN IRELAND Surton 013376517 Come 3394 Croydon Micro OSM Carto 016434790 NOTTINGHAMSHIRE Almar Business Systems Datalect, WALES Limrose Electronics Ltd Wrexham Tel 0735555 Morriston Computer Centre, Swansea 0792795817 Sigma Systems Ltd Cardult fel 022221515 Welsh Computer Centre Bridgende 065651481 WARWICKSHIRE Business & Leisure Microcomputers Kenilworth 0926512127 WILTSHIRE Everyman Computer Westbury Tet 0732764 DEVON Plymouth Computers Plymouth Tel 075223042 Leicester Computing Centre ter Tel. 0633 936268 Mays Hi-FL Bits PCS LINCOLNSHIRE Howes Flet & Autom. Serv Datron Micro-Centre Lid CAMBRIDGE The Avery Computing Co Ltd CHESHIRE Bellard Electronics Ltd Chester Daringtone 012569540 ESSEX Prorolle Lid Westdiffon Seal 0702335298 Hond1514125 GLOUCESTERSHIRE Equipment The Computer Shack Cheltenham H042543 HAMPSHIRE Advanced Business Concepts New Muthon El OA2561BB Xitan Systems Led Southampton 070338740 ZR Business Consultants Linco05223161 LONDON Budewater Accounting Whetstone 16.06.20 Butel-Comco Ltd Xinestone 1546 99, Crew027056342 Chandos Products New Me New M44344 CR Technical Services Chester Tel 00-4417549 Fletcher Worthington Lid. He 061 9288928 Mansfield Business M/C Ltd  Oxford Computer Centre, and 565172 REPUBLIC OF IRELAND O'Connor Computers Lid Sheffield Central Calculators Lid tando el 01 729558 Deans London WR 019327896 Digital Design and Development London Week 013877388 Fur Calc Ltd London EC27017294555 0742798005 Croydon 0161134 Saradan Electronic Services Wallington Tel 01669 9483 Market Logic Uld LittleDewchurch 002 70279 Also a selected Lasky and was Office Equipment Branches 32 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"| Fast b10 FUR A TO 15 STEP 5;FOR B-00 TO 4 C2C SCREEN 1. A+E: FRINT A(E); : NEXTB 630 RESET(5(A-1)+7): NEXTA 640 TOKE USER/KEY; SCREEN 107 650 PRINT \"Clo you lant fist shot 7(Yor N}\" b) ALISS(0); IF Amo THEN Abo 670 IF Am ASC{\"M\") THEN GOSIE 1820: GOTO 870 80 IF A{}ASC(\"Y\") THEN 660 690 GOSUB 1820 70 FORE (11:42: [IORE USER KEY 710 A-LER(0); IF AG HEN CITSUE 1000 : GOTO 710 720 RA-19:1PRO ORRY THEN 710 730 POKEYUU+5+R+20+: 740) AUSER(0); IF A-O THEN ECSUE 1000; GOT740 750 IF A THEN POKE VU+5+K#320+644:32: COTO 710 760 N= 48:IF HK1 CIR N7 THEN 740 770 FORE YU+5+R320+172;A 78) A-LISS(C); IF Ard THEN GUSUE 1000; GOTO 780 790 IF = THEN FORE VEU+320+197:32: GOTO 740 BO IF A{}13 THEN 780 810 GoSLIE 1300; REN : LOOK AT LINE 820 FDRY VEL + F 204 67,3: FREVIL+R*3204197132 830 IF F=0 THEN 710 840 GOSUB 1440:REM *** TAKE SHOTS 850 IF N(1)+N(2)+(3)=0 THEN 1210 860 POKE 3018,32 670 A N (1);-FNX(N(2));A-FNX(N(3) 80 IF A THEN 900 490 FORC-1 TD 200; CUSLID 1000 : NEXT; GOTO 1130 700S ): FOR Ep1 TO G; FOR Lian 1 TO (B) 810 X = (i):Y=N (2) + ZEN (3) 9) IF B1 THEN X = X-T 930 IF B2 THEN Y=Y-D 940 IF B-3 THEN Z-Z-L 950 A=X;A=FNX(Y):A=FMX(Z) 960 IF AC THEN SPS+1; $(S30) = B;S(S+1)=D 970 NEXT [ 980 s= INT(*NET(1) S+1); K+ (S O )-1,N=S( S I ) 990 FORC-1 TD 200;13: JB 1000 : NEXT; COTO 1160 100C) V-V+1 AN 7; IFY THEN SETLIEN 1010 YINT(NU(1)3+1); X-TMT((1)Y)+1) j02C TP NY) THEN 1000 1030 HINT(RA(1)+1) 1040) FOR A-To i;SCREE 52-5X-5*Y 5Y+4-4 1050 FRINT H(HA)::HEXT 1060 IF HK THEN TICE USE,KEY:EFTLIEN 1070 LP INT(RND(1) +1): POKE 2013 106) TOKE USE,SOLINE: BF 13*75c:FOR =1 TO L 1090 POKE BF, END(1)0+20; FORE BF+1.2 LLLLLL CITI HALAT COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 33 "


"ve 1100 POKERF+2,0: Z=USR(0) 1110 FOR A=1 TO RND (1) *20+15: NEXT 1120 NEXT: H=O: POKE 3220.2: GOTO 1040 1130 X=0: FOR A=1 TO 3: IF N(A) > X THEN X=A 1140 IF N(A)= X AND RND(1)).5 THEN X=A 1150 NEXT:R= X1 N=1 1160 GOSUB 1300: GOSUB 1440 1170 IF N(1)+N(2)+N(3) THEN 700 1180 SCREEN 15,7: PRINT \"I'VE BEATEN YOU!!!!\" 1190 FOR A=1 TO 8: Z=USR(O): NEXT 1200 GOTO 1250 1210 SCREEN 15,7: PRINT \"YOU'VE BEATEN ME!!!!\" 1220 FOR A=1 TO 256: OUT 4, A AND 1: NEXT 1230 DOKE USER, KEY 1240 A=USR(0)IF A=ASC(\"Y\") THEN GOTO 1250 SCREEN 15, 9:PRINT \"Another game ? (Y or N)\" 1260 DOKE USER, KEY 1270 A=USR(0);IF A=ASC (\"Y\") THEN 560 1280 IF A<> ASC(\"N\") THEN 1270 1290 GOTO 2070 1300 H=2: GOSUB 1410: FOR A=1 TO 300: NEXT 1310 H=O: GOSUB 1410:FOR A=1 TO 300: NEXT 1320 IF N(R+1) IN THEN 1370 1330 RESTORE 1360 1340 FOR B=1 TO 8: READ H: GOSUB 1410: NEXT 1350 F=1: RETURN 1360 DATA 4,0,3,0, 4,0,3,0 1370 RESTORE 1400 1380 FOR B=1 TO 8: READ H: GOSUB 1410: NEXT 1390 F=O: RETURN 1400 DATA 1.0, 2.0, 1.0.2.0 1410 FOR A=0 TO 1.SCREEN 1.R*5+A+1 1420 PRINT H$ (H, A) ; : NEXT A 1430 FOR A=1 TO 75: NEXT: RETURN 1440 H=2: GOSUB 1410: FOR A=1 TO 1000: NEXT 1450 FOR A=O TO 3:X1=A1 (AO): Y1 =A1 (A, 1) +R*15 1460 X2=A2 (A, 0): Y2=A2 (A. 1) +R*15 1470 SET (X2, Y2): RESET (X1,Y1) 1480 NEXT:SP=VDU+7+320*R+128: POKE GP, ASC(\"#\") 1490 FOR A=1 TO 1000: NEXT 1500 FOR Y=3 TO 1 STEP-1: IF N(Y) THEN 1520 1510 NEXT Y: GOTO 1580 1520 FOR X=1 TO N(Y) 1530 FOR A=0 TO 1: SCREEN 52-5*X-5*Y, 5*Y-5+A+1 1540 IF Y>R+1 THEN H=3 1550 IF Y=R+1 THEN H=1 1560 IF Y R+1 THEN H=4 1570 PRINT H$ (H. A);:NEXT A, X, Y 1580 DOKE USER, SOUND: BF=13*256 1590 POKE BF+2, 0:FOR A=32 TO 4 STEP 1 34 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"CONSTELLATION Sinclair ZX81 * NEW RELEASES * DICTATOR Turn your ZX81 into a telescope! The program will produce a simulation of the night sky as seen from any chosen position on Earth at any chosen time this century. You can point your \"telescope\" in any chosen direction, move it up, down, left or right; zoom in or pull out and display the stars by magnitude or constellation. PRICE .00 Another great adventure game from Bugbyte for the 16K ZX81. This time, you are the President of a small state. The object of the game is to avoid revolution, escape from RENUM assassination attempts, and maintain your complete renumbering program for the popularity, while managing the secret police ZX81. Renumbers line numbers, GOTOs and and army, and maintaining a secure GOSUBs. Very fast. A must for the serious economy. This is a very complex simulation, programmer. utilising the whole 16K, and the cassette PRICE .00 comes with an eight page booklet giving full instructions and hints on how to survive. Can you stand up to the pressures of life as a ALL OUR PRICES INCLUDE VAT & dictator and prevent unrest from spreading? POSTAGE Place an order today and find out. Access and Barclaycard orders accepted on PRICE .00 051 227 2642 (24 hour service) VIC-20 software now available VICMEN Fantastic arcade-type game for the unexpanded VIC based on the popular \"Puckman\" game. Makes full use of the VIC's colour, sound and graphics capabilities. Written completely in machine.code. SUPPLIED ON CASSETTE FOR ONLY .00 inclusive. BUG BYTE SOFTWARE 98-100 THE ALBANY OLD HALL STREET LIVERPOOL L3 SEP Acorn Atom NEW GALAXIANS Sinclair ZX81 **** Fantastic arcade-type game 12K graphics mode 4, fast swooping aliens, sound effects, high score etc. PRICE F8.00 graphi The Damsel and The Beast (16K) .50 Startrek (16K) .00 ZXAS assembler (16K) .00 ZXDB disassembler/debugger (16K) .50 * MULTIFILE filing system (16K) .50 VIEWTEXT paged information (16K) .00 BREAKOUT (1K) .50 PROGRAM PACK 1 (8 1K games) .50 PROGRAM PACK 4 (asteroid belt and surround) .50 PROGRAM PACK 6 (mars rescue and 3D oxo) .50 INVADERS CHESS . UCOILO > DDDDDDDD DDODODD IZDI21 CREDIT CARD ORDERS ACCEPTED ON 051-227 2642 * Note: Multifile may be used with more than 16K RAM by simply changing one line of the program. The best t o ut Atom THE PROGRAM YOU'VE BEEN WAITING FOR Fantasmachine de chegame for the 12 ONLY DO MORE ATOM CASSETTES FROM OUR RANGE 15.00 BACKGAMMON BREAKOUTKO! 15.00 LABYRINTH AFP GOLF IFP NEW BASIC STOOKMARKET SKAP es pharmaris many levels of play: casting and bo y s black or we can och promet Suplied on e with instructions PRICE ONLY DONT FORGET OUR PRICES NCLUDE VAT POSTAGE 747 FLIGHT SIMULATION PROGRAM FOR THE 12K ATOM ALL PRICES INCLUSIVE! VIC 20 SOFTWARE  NOW AVAILABLE Send SAE for latest list DISASSEMBLER BUG-BYTE H 98 100 THE ALBANY OLD HALL STREET LIVERPOOL L3 SEP COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 35 "


"ve 1600 POKE BF, A: POKE BF+1, 128/A AND 255 1610 POKE GP, ASC(\"-\"): ZEUSR(O) POKE GP.ASC(\"E\") 1620 FOR B-1 TO 20: NEXT BA 1630 FOR S=1 TO N:BF=13*256 1640 POKE BF+1,50: POKE BF, 2:FOKE BF+2,0 1650 FOR A=1 TO 40: IF PEEK (GPA)) 32 THEN 1670 1660 POKE GP+A, ASC(\"-\"): Z=USR(O): NEXT: STOP 1670 FOR B=O TO 4: X=47-5*N(R+1)-5*R: Y=R*5+B+1 1680 SCREEN X, Y: PRINT D$: : NEXT B 1690 BF=13*256: FOR C= 20 TO 1 STEP 1: 1700 POKE BF,C:POKE BF+1, 50/C:BF=BF+2. NEXT 1710 DOKE BF,0: Z=USR(O) 1720 FOR B=0 TO 4: X= 47-5*N (R+1)-5*R: Y=R*5+B+1 1730 SCREEN X, Y:PRINT S$; : NEXT B 1740 FOR B=1 TO A: POKE GP+B, 32: NEXT 1750 N(R+1 ) EN (R+1)-1: NEXT SPOKE GP, 32 1760 FOR A=1 TO 1000: NEXT 1770 FOR A=3 TO O STEP -1:X1=A1 (AO) 1780 Y1=A1 (A,1)+R*15: X2=A2(AO):Y2=A2 (A, 1) +R*15 1790 RESET(X2, Y2): SET (X1, Y1 ) : NEXT 1800 H=O: GOTO 1410 1810 GOTO 1810 1820 SCREEN 10,7 1830 PRINT\" 1840 FOR Y=3 TO 1 STEP -1: FOR X=1 TO N(Y) 1850 FOR A=0 TO 4: SCREEN 52-5*X-5*Y, S*Y-5+A+1 1860 PRINT A$(A): : NEXT A, X, Y: RETURN 1870 CLS:PRINT \"This is like the 7,5, 3 match\"; 1880 PRINT \"sticks game.\" 1890 PRINT \"It consists of 3 rows of robots.\" 1900 PRINT \"The object is to shoot the last \"; 1910 PRINT \"robot.\" 1920 PRINT \"You choose how many to shoot from\"; 1930 PRINT \"any row by\" 1940 PRINT\"typing the row number (1, 2 or 3)\" 1950 PRINT\"then how many to shoot from that \"; 1960 PRINT\"row.\" 1970 PRINT 1980 PRINT \"There is a test tone on bit 0, \"; 1990 PRINT \"port 4 \" 2000 PRINT 2010 SCREEN 1,10 2020 PRINT\" Press space to continue\" 2030 A=USR(O): IF A=32 THEN RETURN 2040 B=B+1 AND 63: IF BAND 32 THEN 2060 2050 OUT 4,1-INP(4): GOTO 2010 2060 SCREEN 1.10: PRINT CHR$(27) : : GOTO 2030 2070 CLS: END OK Catherine CUTITETT IDOL LLLLLL 36 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"MICROCOMPUTERS 10 Shops Nationwide Birmingham MASKS WORLD BEATING MICRO'S 19/21 Corporation Street, Birmingham, B2 4LP. Tel: 021-632 6303. Manager Peter Stallard. 300 yards from Bullring Centre. Bristol 16/20 Penn Street, Bristol, BS1 3AN. Tel: 0272 20421. Between Holiday Inn and C&A Chester HATARIX The Forum, Northgate Street, Chester, CH1 2BZ. Tel: 0244 317667 Manager: Jeremy Ashcroft. Next to the Town Hall. NEW Now in stock the powerful Apple ill and the exciting new Osbornei Edinburgh G.00 4 St. James Centre, Edinburgh, EH1 3SR Tel: 031-556 6217. Manager: Colin Draper. East end of Prices Street, St. James Centre, WN Preston 1/4 Guildhall Arcade, Preston, PRI IHR Tel: 0772 59264 Manager: Jim Comisky. Directly under Guild Hall. Manchester 12/14 St. Mary's Gate, Market Street, Manchester, MI 1PX. Tel: 061.832 6087 Manager. Lesly Jacobs Corner of Deansgate Glasgow 22/24 West Nile Street, Glasgow, G7 2PF. Tel: 041 226 3349 Manager: David Livingstone. Between Buchannan Street and Central Station THO Sheffield 58 Leopold Street, Sheffield, S1 2GZ. Tel: 0742 750971. Manager: Justin Rowles. Top of the Moor, opposite Town Hall Liverpool Atari 800 33 Dale Street, Liverpool, L2 2HF. Tel: 051-236 2828. Manager Mark Butler Between the Town Hall and Magistrates Courts. The big brother of the 400 shares all the stor features and has much more as well 800 16K Computer Nett: 560.87 Vat 8413 Total: 645.00 810 Disk Drive Nett 300,00 Vat: 45.00 Total: 345.00 822 Thermal Printer Nett: 230.43 Vat: 34.57 Total265.00 London Apple II The worlds best selling micro offers unmatched Flexibility At our special prices Apple 11 + 48K Nell 675.00 Vot 101.25 Total: 776.25 Disk Drive Plus Controller (3.3) Nett 375.00 Vat: 56 25 Total 431.25 Disk Drive Nett 295.00 Val 4425 Total 339.25 MZ 80K Deservedly popular the MZ BOK comes with 48K of RAM, built in screen and cassette superb value MZ BOK Computer 48K Nett: 34700 Vat: 5200 Total: 399.00 Atari 400 Ideal for the home witn excellent games and education packages. This computer features colour and sound and is built tough to last. 400 16K Computer Nett: 300.00 Vat: 45.00 Total: 345.00 410 Tape Recorder Nett 43.48 Vat 6,52 Total: 50.00 42 Tottenham Court Road, London, WI 9RD. Tel: 01-636 0845. Manager: Vass Demosthenis. Official Orders over  are welcome with normal 30 days credit extended to bona fide commercial and government organisations Laskys, the retail division of the Ladbroke Group of Companies Hewlett Packard HP 85 Scientific and technical professionals favour the HP 85, they are being joined by increasing numbers of business professionals. HP 85 Computer Nett: 2146.95 Vat 32204 Total 2468.99 16K Memory Module Nett: 194.88 Vat: 29 23 Total 22411 ROM Drawer Nett: 2973 Vat: 4.46 Total: 34.19 MICROCOMPUTERS AT CRA) EAS COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 37 "


"If you have grown tired of forever running and dodging from the many tribes of aliens who make an honest crust by guesting in computer games, Alien Hunt will l t u. In the game you are the dominant life-form and the poor alien is on the run. It makes a nice change for the humans to be able to win so make the most of it. The aim of this Acorn Atom game is to trap the alien in the top left hand corner of the screen by cutting his escape routes off by drawing lines around him. If you miss your objective and mistakenly trap him elsewhere, penalty points are accrued. The aim is to get as low a score as possible. Your efforts are scored, commented upon and a new game is automatically restarted. The alien emits a squeal through the Atom speaker when trapped or crushed. Due to the printer used not having a hash (#) symbol, a \"\" sign has been substituted. This should be turned into a hash sign wherever it crops up. No graphic modes are used and the game is written, mainly in machine code, so it only takes up 4.3K on the computer. Line 17 will be of interest to Atom users as it is a routine which waits for the frame sync pulse to go low, before POKE-ing to the screen, thus avoiding the usual Atom screen noise. ames 38 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"4-10 --1GOS. 1@DIM FF, KK9, MMO, PPO.ZZ15,SS5 11P. $12;M=24;MMO=-1;PPO=-1; KK8--1: T=BB02 12F.N=1 TO 2;DIM P-1;P. $21 16C 17:FF0 LDRC128;BITEB002;BNE FFO; LDA; RTS 20:KKO LDAC3,STAB000; LDAB001; CMPCEFE:BNE KK1 22LDRR 6 CHPR135 BEN 222LDRE87 STR LDR STR 24LDY@0; LDX@, STX; JSR MMO; LDYCO; LDAC ), Y, CMPC24; BEQ 222 26LDR) STR; LDA; STA; LDAC127) STAE82; JSR FF 27STAC ), Y 28LDXLAR, INX, STXLAA; RTS 30. ZZ2 JMP KK8 70 KK1 LDAC3: STAB000; LDAB991CMP@E:BNE KK2 72LDALAR; CMPC13: BEQ ZZ2 74LDA: STA; LDA; STA, LDXC, STX; JSR MN49 76LDYCO, LDAC ), Y;CMPC24; BEQ Z24; LDA: STALDA, STA 78LDAC64; STA; JSR FFO; STA(), Y; LDXRA, INX: STXEAARTS 80:ZZ4 JMP KK8 120 KK2 LDAC2: STAB000: LDAB001; CMP@FE:BNE KK3 122LDAAA; CMPCO,BEQ ZZ6; LDA; STA) LDA STA;LDX@ 124LDYCO, STX) JSR PPO, LDAC ), Y.CMPC24, BEQ Z26 126LDA; STA; LDA; STA; LDAC127; STA; JSR FFD 127STAC ), Y; LDXAA, DEX: STXEAA, RTS S 5 SEO you Runs on an Acorn Atom in 4.5K By John Kirk COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 39 "


"130 ZZ6 JMP KK8 170 KK3 LDAC2 STAB000;LDA. CMPCEBNE KK4 172LDALAR, CMPCB; BEQ ZZ6; LDA: STA: LDA STA;LDX@ 174STX; JSR PPO, LDAC ), Y; CMP224 BEQ ZZ8 176LDA:81: STA: LDA; STA, LDAC64; STR; JSR FFO 177LDY@9: STAC ), Y. LOXEAA, DEXSTXERA; RTS 178 ZZ8 JMP KK8 220 KK4 LDAC6; STAB000; LDRB001; CMPRFEBNE KK5 222LDA; CMPCI, BEQ Z210, LDA; STA; LDAE86: STAE80;LDXC1 224STX; JSR MMO; LDYCO, LDAK ), Y, CMP224;BEQ ZZ10 226LDR; STA: LDA: STA LDAC127: STA; JSR FFO 228LDYBD: STR), Y;LDX,DEX: STX; RTS 230 ZZI@ JMP KK8 270: KKS LDAC6 STA;LDAB001; CMPCE7EBNE KK6 272LDA, CMPC1: BEQ ZZ12: LDA: STA; LDA: STAE80;LDXC1 274STX; JSR MMO; LDYBO; LDAC ), Y CMP@24: BEQ ZZ12LDA 275STA 276LDA, STALDAP64; STR; JSR FFQ; STRC ), Y; LDX 278DEX; STX; RTS 300 ZZ12 JMP KK8 329KK6 LDAC6; STA: LDAB801; CMPCEFD;BNE KK7 321LDYCO 322LDA, CMP30; BEQ ZZ13 LDA: STA: LDA: STA; LDXC1 324STX; JSR PPO LDAC ), Y; CMP224; BEQ ZZ13;LDA; STA 330LDR; STA; LDAC127 STA; JSR FFO; STAC ), Y 335LDX, INX: STX, RTS 340 :ZZ13 JMP KK8 379 KK7 LDAC6; STR; LDAB001; CMP@D;BNE KK8 372LDA, CMP230; BEQ KK8; LDA; STA;LDA; STA 373LDYCO: LDXC1 374STX; JSR PPO, LDAC ), Y: CMP@24; BEQ KK8: LDA STA 376L DA; STA LDAC64; STA; JSR FFO; STAC ), Y 378LDX, INX: STX, RTS 420 KK8 RTS 1300 MM@ SEC LDA; SBC: STAE80;LDA; SBCCD; STA: RTS 1310 PPO CLC: LDA; ADC, STRESOLDA; ADCEO: STA: RTS 1311 SSO STY 1312 881 LDA T:LDY 1313: SS2 LDX 1314 SS3 DEX:BNE SS3: EOR P4, STA T; DEY:BNE SS2: LDY : RTS 1318) 1319N.N;P.$6 1320CLEAR S= 1321F.N=32768T032799; LINK FF9, ?N=127 N.N 1322F.N=332481033279; LINK FF@;?N=127;N.N 1323F.N=32800T033216 STEP32 LINK FF: ?N=127;N.N. 1324F.N=32831T033247 STEP 32:LINK FFO; ?N=127:N.N 1330?=F;?= 13327EAA=2;?=15 1333F. N=1T026;?F=; LINK FF0;?=C;?=D;LINKFFD 1334?=D;?=;?=;?#;?= 1335LINK FFQ;?F=127;WAIT;?F=; F.G=T0; ?G=64 1336N.G LINK FFON.N?F=127 1339X=R.R.X(33278-33088 +33988 13401F?X<> G.1339 40 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"thevic centre Adda Computers Ltd., a major supplier of computer systems to industry and business, have opened the Vic Centre in West London. Here you can see, discuss and buy everything to do with the new VIC 20 personal computer-in person or by mail. Hardware, software, technical advice and information is available from an experienced staff. Even if you already own a VIC 20, get on our mailing list to know about new developments. Remember-everything has the backing of Adda's reputation, and there's a full 12 month warranty on all hardware. The Vic Centre is easy to reach-Just off the A40, close to North Acton tube station Not just a computer but a whole expandable system Ten AT ONLY .95 inc. VAT. Special cassette deck .95 inc. VAT. The VIC-20 is a fully fledged, easy-to-use computer. It's the core of a great expandable system * EXPANDABLE MEMORY-UP TO 32K, USING PLUG-IN MODULES * DISK DRIVE/CASSETTE-FOR EXTERNAL STORAGE * PRINTER-80 COLUMN, 30 CHARACTERS-PER-SECOND First time users can operate it immediately with plug-in program cartridges, and using your own colour T.V. to get up to 24 colours on screen, four different sound tones and even write your own programs in BASIC: The VIC-20 lets you build a system as needs and budget dictate, so that your VIC 20 can be more than just a personal computer. VIC-MEMORY 3K .85 VIC-20 DOT MATRIX PRINTER .95 Small size-low cost memory expansion Tractor feed, 80 character perline, 30 Plugs into Vic and reproduces memory-port. characters-per-second Can be used with other expansions gives a VIC SINGLE FLOPPY DISK DRIVE EP.O.A. total of 6k user static ramon Vic 3K RAM CARTRIDGE .95 FEATURE This board allows Vic to move 8K RAM CARTRIDGE .95 Basic to begin at 1024 ($0400) as in Pet. 16K RAM CARTRIDGE .95 and enables the use of HIGH RESOLUTION PROGRAMMERS AID CARTRIDGE .95 COLOUR GRAPHICS -an extension of BASIC to aid programming VIC-LIGHT PEN .75 and de-bugging. This high quality light pen works in both MACHINE CODE MONITOR CARTRIDGE .95 normal and Hi-Res modes on the Vic -includes assembler and dis-assembler allowing simple interaction with the Vic capabilities. without keyboard entry SUPER EXPANDER HIGH RESOLUT. CARTRIDGE .95 Easy to program and easy to use. -permits use of high resolution graphics e.g. Menu selection. Non keyboard entry Teaching Games. FEATURE touch sensitive \"Enter\" contacts to eliminate accidental entry VIC software Each of these tapes .95 Codebreaker Codemaker VIC-RS232 INTERFACE .35 You play the VIC or the VIC plays you in this computerised Fully implemented (true levels) RS232C V24 version of Mastermind BI-DIRECTIONAL INTERFACE VIC Seawolf, VIC Trap and Bounce-out Allows Vic to work as Mainframe Terminal 3 fun games, a submarine shoot out, a beat the Vic and an Drive a Qume Daisywheel or a Paper Tape old favourite pub game Good games with different skill levels Punch etc. etc. Monster Maze and Maths Hurdler FEATURE This unit contains master power A fun game with good colour and sound and a mental arithmetic supply which supports Vic's own supply learning game. Highly rated by everyone we have shown it to when carrying Memory Expansions, Harder than you think Cassette Drives, Light Pens Printers etc Canyon Fighter, Tunesmith, Star Wolf at .95 VIC JOYSTICK Single .95 each Hand-Held joystick units for games use VIC GAMES CARTRIDGES at .95 available in Pair or Single configuration each NB 2 Singles will not work as a pair Fruit Machine, Lander, Road Rally, Alien, Avengers, Poker unless modified) TERMS AND CONDITIONS: All goods sold subject to Adda VIC-Games Port Adaptor Cable terms and conditions of sale. Full details available on A two into one adaptor for use with both request, but include: 7 day money back guarantee, Adda joysticks and light pens. A must for those 12 month hardware warranty. Please allow 21 days who require full control of games with for delivery. Allow 7 days for personal cheques to be graphics cleared. Quoted prices are inclusive of VAT. FEATURE low-cost High quality. Robust Goods Required Price MAIL ORDER to: Adda Computers Limited, FREEPOST. London, W13 OBR or telephone your order 24 hours a day) to 01-992 9904 quoting your BARCLAYCARD OR ACCESS number I enclose achegue, made payable to Adda Computers Add .00 p. & p. for orders under .00 Total Please charge my Barclay Access Name: account My account number is Address: mailing list SHOP ADDRESS: Adda Home Computers Ltd Delete as applicable 154, Victoria Road, Acton, London, W3. Tel 01.992 9904 Date OPEN: 10 am-6pm (Tuesday-Friday, 10am-5pm Saturday COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 41 "


".95  MAIL ORDER SOFTWARE ATARI HARDWARE ATARI SOFTWARE 400 16K  Star Raiders 800 16K .50 each  Missile Command .50 410 (Recorder)  Asteroids .50 810 Disk Drive  Chess (Rom) .50 80 Col. Printer  Basket Ball .50 16K Ram Pack .95 .95 .50 .50 16KIC .50 12.50 ATARI SOFTWARE FROM ADVENTURE INTERNATIONAL Adventures 1-12 24K(C) Star Trek 3.5 24KC Sunday Golf Angle Worms Mountain Shout Deflections Lunar Lander Galactic Empire Galactic Trilogy 24K(C) ATARI SOFTWARE FROM DYNACOMP Stud-Poker 16K(C) Moon Probe 16K(C) Alpha Fighter Intruder Alert Giant Slalom Monarch Crystals Dominoes Chomp-Reversi Management Simulator Space Tilt Moving Maze Rings of the Empire Triple Blockade Space Trap Forest GALACTIC EXPEDITION From Earth to Moon Mists of Venus Planet Herman The Asteroid Belt Uranus World of Ice. Jupiter World of Dwarves The Crystal Planet OOOOOOO .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 BURBEREDELSEASE .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 16K(C) 24K(C) CRYSTALWARE House of Usher Galactic Quest Sumer Laser Wars World War 3 Beneath the Pyramids Sands of Mars Little Crystal Fantasy land 2041 Waterloo Quest for Power DODODDDDDDD .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 ATARI PROGRAM EXCHANGE Data Management System Blackjack Tutor Video Math Flashcards 747 Landing Simulator Eastern Front (1941) Code Cracker Domination Terry Bumper Pool Tact Trek Space Trek Anthill Centaurian Minotaur Outlaw/Howitzer Lookahead Babel Avalanche Graphics Sound Demo Sound Editor Extended wsfn Disk Fixer Basic Utility for Renum. Basic Program Compressor .50 .75 .25 .75 .25 .25 .75 .25 .25 .50 .50 .25 .50 .25 .75 .25 .75 .75 .75 .75 .00 .50 .75 .75 32KD) 16K(C) 24K(D) 16K(C) 32K(C) .95 .95 Ba Ba Black THORN EMI SOFTWARE NOW IN STOCK Home Financial Management Humpty Dumpty & Jack and Jill Hickerey Dickerey Dock & British Heritage Jigsaw Puzzles European Scene Jigsaw Puzzles Darts Cribbage & Dominoes Snooker & Billiards Tournament Pool & 8 Ball Pool Jumbo Jet Lander Submarine Commander Rotate & Gilt (cube) @@@@@@2200 do? .50 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 AVALON HILL B-1 Nuclear Bomber Midway Campaign North Atlantic Convoy Raider Planet Miners Lords of Karma Conflict 2500 Empire of the Overmind Tanktics 16K(C) 32K(C) 16K(C) 40K(C) 32K(C) 40K(C) 24K(C) 24K(C) .50 .50 .50 junimamo Billianinoes .50 .50 .95 .95 NEW GALACTIC CHASE 16K cassette .95. A fast real time galaxian type game. Employing to the fullest ability the graphics and sound capability of the Atari computer. NE Le STICK  The latest joystick type control employing mercury switches. We also carry a large range of software for TRS-80 and Apple computers send 50p for catalogues (C) Cassette All prices include VAT Trade enquiries for software welcome. Mail order available all prices include P&P SPECIALISTS IN MICROCOMPUTER HARDWARE & SOFTWARE CALISIO COMPUTERS LIMITED 119 John Bright Street BIRMINGHAM B1 1BE Phone: 021-637 6458 42 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"-46-A 137978=M 1375GOS. 1377IF ?(X+D XX G.1375 1379?X=64:LINK FFO; ?(X+D=MX=X+D); S=S+1 1380LINK KKO 13901F X= AND ?=127 AND ? =127 G. 10900 1480IF?(X+1)=127AND?(X-1 )=127AND?CX- =127AND?(X+ )=1276.1 2905G. 1375 3900r A=(A.R.%4)+1 30011F A=! D=-32; R. 30021F R=2 D=32; R. 3903IF A=3 D=-1, R. 3994IF A=4 D=1; R. 19900F.N=1T040: ?=66;?-66 LINK SSO 19929? =32;?=32; LINK SSO N.N 11909P. $12;P. \"THE ALIEN IS IN THE TRAP!!!\" 15030F. N=1 T080:WAITEN.N 18948P.$12P. \"YOUR SCORE IS...\"SE 290911F. A=1T039;LINK FFQ, ?X=63:LINK FFB:?x=24; N. A 20092P. $12:P. \"YOUR SCORE IS \"S+2985 \"!!!\" 20093F=100: D=199 20004F.0=1 T044;?=D;?=F: LINK SS:DD-2 F=F-1;N.O 20095F. I=1T044;?=D;?=F LINK SSO, D=D+2; F=F+1N.IP.57 29006P. \"YOU'VE CRUSHED\": 20007P. \"THE ALIEN !!!?= 20019F. N=1T0993 WAIT:N.N.G.1329 32000CP. $12 P.\"*******alien trap ******* 32101P.\"TRAP THE TALIEN IN THE TOP\" 32182P. \"L.H. CORNER OF THE SCREEN 32193P. \"USING THE FOLLOWING KEYS\" ..............IS FOR LEFT 32105P. \"RETURN ........ IS FOR RIGHT\") 32:06P. \"UP/DOWN ARROW..IS FOR DOWN\" 32107P. \"AND LR ARROW.....IS FOR UP\" ;F. J=1TOS:GOS.b.N. 32105P. \"CUSE \"SHIFTED KEYS TO ERASE)\"F.=1T010:COS.b:N.N 32109P. \"Press shift to continue\" 3211000 WAIT:U.?<FF 32111F.N=T0FF: ?N=32:N.NR. 321125F. N=1 TO 60:WRIT.N.NR. 32128v?E1=0; IF S<=190 P.\" EXCELLENT\":6.32139 32121 IF SK =175 P. \"VERY GOOD\":G.32130 32122IF SK=219 P. \"GOOD\";G. 32130 32123IF S<=245P. \"AVERAGE\", G. 32130 32124IF S<=399 P. \"POOR\" G. 32139 32125IF S<=499P. \"BAD\":6.32132 32126IF S<=509 P. \"VERY BAD\":6.32139 32130GOS.bir. Y COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 43 "


"RUNS ON A TANDY TRS-80 IN 16K BY MAX CHAUVET 10000 GRAND PRIX RACING 10010' 1980. M.CHAUVET 10020 CLEAR500: DEFINTA-Y: CLS 10025 RPS=O: RO=0: RD=0: EC=0: B=0:KB=0:LC=0: RC=0: TW=2:2=0:T=0:02=17 UN=1: NL=128 10026 SN=0:LP=0:DX=10: SC=600:T1=0:12=0 10040 MS=STRINGS (255,0): MOSESTRINGS (75,0) 10050 ADDR=VARPTR (MOS): IFPEEK (16396) =201 THENPOKE 16526, PEEK (AD+1 ): POKE 16527, PEEK (AD+2) 10052 FST-AD 10054 ZD=PEEK (AD+1) +PEEK (AD+2)1256 10056 IF ZD>32767 ZD=ZD-65536 10058 AD-ZD 10060 IFPEEK (16396) (>201THEN DEFUSRO=AD:CMD\"T\" 10070 CAR-ADDR+182 10080 EC=16: DIM LAP (50) 10090 KBOARD=14400 : TWO=2 : BL=32 10100 B$=STRINGS (8,24) : CS=CHRS (26) 10110 ASESTRINGS (2,176) +LEFTS (B$, 4)+C5+\" \"+STRINGS (2,191)+\"-\" + LEFTS (B$, 5) +CS+CHR$ (170) +CHRS (93) +CHR$ (94)+CHRS (149)+LEFTS (B5, 6) +CS+\"40-\"+STRINGS (2,191)+\"-1\"+LEFTS(BS, 5) +CS+CHRS (34)+CHRS (34) 10200\" SCROLLING ROUTINE 10210 DATA CD7F0A700001BE40C5FD21BDOOFD090D21B60000092600006E000 To reach the final of a Grand Prix race you must first experience a gruelling qualifying round in which speed alone counts. You control a Formula One car, aiming to complete one lap of the international race track in the shortest possible time. The car travels at top speed on the straight sections of the circuit, but you must steer it round the comers, some of them sharp bends. When the car is steered to the right or left it automatically slows down so a good tactic to employ is to manoeuvre the car as little as possible to keep at the highest speed you can with out crashing. If your steering fails you then you end up off the track and crash into the rails. Don't despair if that happens, you find the seconds will tick quickly away building up your final lap time, but you don't have to start the lap again. You will need a TRS-80 Level II with 16K memory to run this program To control the car you use the arrow keys to turn the steering wheel to right or left, but those are all you can use. There is no accelerator or brake for you to take advantage of, you have to rely on your steering to see you through. Be careful not to keep one of the arrow keys depressed because if you do the car will continue turning. An extra feature written into this program comes near the end of the lap. When you near the finish line the lap record (time for you to beat) is displayed on the left of the screen, while on the right hand side of the screen your own lap time is shown to see if an extra spurt of speed is needed 10220 DATA 003C09C1B72802FDE9114003E519E5D101400009EBOE10ED 10230 DATA B0110003E1E519E50101400009EBOE 38EDBO11BF02E1E519E501 10240 DATA 01400009EBOE39EDB0117F02E1E519E50101400009EBOE 3AEDBO 10250 DATA 113D02E1E519E5D101400009EBOE 3CEDB011 EE02FDE1FDE5FD19 10260 DATA FD7E00FD7710FD7E01FD7711F07E18FD7708FD7E19FD7709113A 10270 DATA 022600DD6E0019E5FDE1E119E5D101400009EBFDE5C1EDB83E00 10280 DATA C900000000000000 10290' MOVE CAR 10300 DATA DD213101DD093D20313E05117C0219E5D11313E50600DD4E00EDB 823E5FDE1FD4610 10310 DATA FD7000FD4611F07001E 13DC80600DD4E0109DD230D2318D53E051 10A00DD19117B02 10320 DATA 19E5D11B1BE50600DD4E00EDB0011200ED42E5FDE1FD4600FD701 OFD 10330 DATA 4601F07011E130C80600DD4E0109DD230D231801 10340 DATA 0242063F044208400500 10350 DATA 023E0641043E08400500 10360 DATA END 10370 READ DS : IF DS=\"END\" THEN 10440 ELSE GOSUB 15000 10380 FORI=1 TOLEN (DS) STEP2 10390 D=ASC(MIDS (D$,1,1)): D1=ASC(MIDS (D$, I +1,1)) 10400 IFD>57THENDED-7 10410 IFD1357THEND1=D1-7 10420 D= (D-48) 116+D1-48 : POKE ADDR,D : AD=AD+1 10430 NEXT I : GOTO 10370 10440 DATA 0,1,1,2,3,3,2,1,1,0 10450 FORI=1T010: READC (I): NEXTI 10460 POKE ZD+6, PEEK (FST+1) 10470 POKE ZD+7, PEEK (FST+2) 10500! CIRCUIT SET UP 10510 TH=30+RND (20): TB-T110.1: TK=TW-5: TL-IN-1 CN=0 10520 FR I=2 10 TH-2: DIR=RND (3) -2: CN=CN+DIR: IFBBS (CN) 21THENCN = CN-21DIR:DIR=-DIR 10524 IF PRV=O PRVEDIR 10526 IF DIR THEN IF DIR=PRV THEN TB=TB+14:PRVODIR ELSE TBETB+6: PRVEDIR 10530 LAP (I) =DIR: NEXTI 10540 LAP (1) =0: LAP (TH) = 0: LBP (TH-1=0 CLS 10542 PRINT3466, \"THE CIRCUIT IS \"; :PRINTUSING\"#.## MILES LONG';T M/20; 10545 PRINTO530,\"THE LAP RECORD IS ': T1=TB/600:T2-TB-T11600:PRI 44 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"NTUSING\"H:10.1';T1, T2/10: TB$=\"\" 10547 FORI=548T0554: TB$=TB$+CHRS (PEEK (15360+1)): NEXT 10548 MES=TB$: M=548:GOSUB 21000:FORI=1T0200: NEXTI:CLS 10550 CHS=CHR$ (28)+CHR$ (255) 10570 CLS: PRINTa671, AS; 10580 POKE CAR, 361 RCRASH=15360+733+EC+1: LCRASH-RC+5-21EC-1 10590 RPS 15384: ROAD=132: RD=13 10600 FOR LP=1 TO TH 10610 SN-LAP (LP): IF SN THEN RO=132: RD=0 ELSE RD=13 10620 FORI=1T010: RPSERPS+C(I) ISN: ZEUSR(O): PRINTCHS; : POKE RPS, RO: POKE RPS+EC, RO: RO=RO+RD: RD=-RD: BI=B: B=PEEK (KB): IF SN POKE RPS-U N, NL:POKE RPS+QZ, NL 10625 IFB=OTHEN10800 10630 T-T+2 IFB=32THEN10700 10650 Z=USR (1): POKE CAR, PEEK (CAR) +TWO:LC-LC+TWO: RC=RC+TWO:60T010 710 10700 Z=USR (2):POKE CAR, PEEK (CAR)-TWO:LC-LC-TWO: RC=RC-TWO 10710 IFB1>OTHENIFB1( >BTHEN1 2000 10800 IFPEEK (LC)=BLANDPEEK (LC-1)=BL AND PEEK (RC)=BLANDPEEK (RC+1) =BL 60T011000 10810 T=T+20: IF PEEK (LC)(>BLORPEEK (LC-1)(BLTHEN LEFT:0 ELSE LE FT3-1 10812 L1=PEEK (CAR) +640: IF LEFT THEN L1=L1-17 10815 PRINTOL1,\" ICRASHI\" 10820 IF NOT (LEFT) THEN GOSUB20000:60SUB20010: GOSUB20000:60SUB20 000 ELSE GOSUB20010: GOSUB20000: GOSUB20010: GOSUB20010 10830 FORL=1T050: NEXTL 10850 PRINTOL1, CHRS (201) 11000 NEXTI 11010 T-T+DX: IFLPCTKTHEN11200 11020 T1=T/SC:T2=T-T11SC:PRINT2965, TB$;:PRINT01010,;PRINTUSING 16:10.1\";T1, T2/DX; 11030 IFLP-TL THENPRINTORPS-15360, STRINGS (5,153) \"FINISH\"STRINGS (5 ,166); 11200 NEXT LP 11205 FORI=1T010:PRINTWO, CHRS (255);: Z=USR (O): NEXTI 11210 IFTCTB THEN MES=\"YOU BROKE THE LAP RECORD !':M-470:60SUB21 000:GOT011280 11220 IFT-TB>200 PRINT2464, \"YOUR DRIVER'S LICENCE HAS BEEN CANCE LLED!\":80T011280 11230 IFT-TB>100 PRINT0464, \"PERHAPS YOU NEED A WIDER TRACK\" : GOTO 11280 11240 PRINT2464, \"YOU'VE QUALIFIED IN '; 11250 PLACE=INT (IT-TB)/5)+1: IFPL=1THENPRINTEIST\"; ELSE IFPL=2THENP RINT 2ND\"; ELSEIFPL=3THENPRINT\"3RD'; ELSEPRINTPLACE\"TH\"; 11260 PRINT\" PLACE\"; 11280 T=0 11290 FORI=1T01000: NEXTI 11300 PRINT3528, CHR$ (31); \"HIT ENTER TO TRY AGAIN OR 11305 PRINT0592, 'Y TO MOVE TO ANOTHER CIRCUIT\"; 11310 YS=INKEYS:IFYS=CHRS (13) THEN10570EL SEIFY$=\"Y\"THEN10500EL SE1 1310 12000 IF B=32 THEN LI=LC-15360-6:LEFT:-1 ELSE LI=RC-15360+1:LEFT 12005 L1=570+PEEK (CAR) 12010 PRINTOL1,000PS!*: FORL=1T050: NEXTL: PRINTOL1, CHR$(198); 12020 IF LEFT THEN12500 12030 IFPEEK (LC) (>BLORPEEK (LC-1)(BL THEN12600 12040 GOSUB20010:GOT012030 12500 IFPEEK (RC) (>BLORPEEK (RC+1)(BLTHEN12600 12510 GOSUB20000:60T012500 12600 T=T+10 12620 GOT010812 15000 PART=PART+1:IFINT IPART/2)12 >PART RETURN 15050 ONPART/260T016000,16025, 16030,16040,16050,16070 15060 RETURN 16000 PRINTO25, *** GRAND PRIX 11\" 16010 PRINT0192, \"YOU ARE ABOUT TO TAKE PART IN THE QUALIFYING SE SSION 16020 PRINT OF AN INTERNATIONAL GRAND PRIX RACE.\" 16022 RETURN 16025 PRINT YOUR 'FORMULA ONE' CAR IS CONTROLLED BY THE ARRON KE YS \"CHRS (93)\" AND \"CHRS (94) 16027 RETURN 16030 PRINT YOU WILL TRY TO TURN IN THE FASTEST LAP KEEPING IN M IND THAT : 16035 RETURN 16040 PRINT EVERY TIME YOU STEER YOU LOOSE 2/10 OF A SECO ND SO YOU SHOULD DRIVE CLOSE TO EDGE OF THE TRAC IF YOU LEAVE THE TRACK YOU'LL BOUNCE BACK IN 16042 PRINT\" K. 16045 RETURN 16050 PRINT\" AND 16060 PRINT 16065 RETURN 16070 PRINT YOU\" 16080 PRINT\" LOOSE 2 SECONDS IF YOU CHANGE STEERING DIRECTION TOO SUDDENLY WILL SKID, LEAVE THE TRACK AND LOOSE 1 SECOND 17000 RETURN 20000 Z=USR (2): POKE CAR, PEEK (CAR) -TWO:LC-LC-TWO:RC RC-TWO 20008 RETURN 20010 Z-USR (1): POKE CAR, PEEK (CAR) +TWO:LC-LC+TNO: RC=RC+TWO 20020 RETURN 21000 FORK=1T010:PRINTOM, CHR$ (192+LEN (MES) FORI=1T050: NEXTI: PR INTOM, MES ; : FORI=1T025: NEXTI,K: RETURN COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 45 "


"RUNS ON A SHARP MZ-80K IN 22K BY TONY WINDIBANK (Dr Livingstone. te worden moment cm mann momommy The words. \"Dr Livingstone, I presume\", immortalised reporter Stanley's search for the missing African explorer. Dr Livingstone is lost in darkest Africa again in this Sharp game but no message has been heard from him for five years. His rescue is your objective in Dr Livingstone, but the African jungle holds many dangers and the porters are a notoriously fickle bunch. You take the part of journalist Henry Morton Stanley, charged with the job of equipping an expedition to find the great man. To cover expenses you have 150,000 annas which should be used to purchase food, medicine, beads, guns, ammunition and for the hiring of porters. The dangers include: wild animals, diseases, unfriendly tribes and treacherous rivers. The variables used in the game are: D = number of porters; F = the number of medical boxes; C = number of annas (an African coin); G = number of boxes of beads; E = food packs; H = number of guns; K = boxes of ammunition. The main subroutines are shown by REMs and are: Native tribe routine lines 1300-1620. Disease routine lines 1620-1920.  Wild animal routine lines 1920-2180.  River delay routine — lines 2180-2860. Witch doctor routine lines 2860-3490. Perfect week routine lines 3490-3580. The game can be made harder by making the minimum number of porters 150 and altering lines 900 and 930. 46 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES hennamma "


"woman Mars 2 2002 10 REM ** MAKING BOX FOR TITLE 20 PRINT 130 C150000 OBD20A53851A=538272 40 B3=53775 SO FOR A=53574 TO 5:3602 60 POKE A.163 70 NEXT 80 FOR A=53642 TO 5580 STEP 401 90 POKE A163 110 FOR A-53802 TO 3774 STEP120 POKE A, 1634 130 NEXT 140 FOR A=$3734 TO 53614 STEP 40 150 POKE A.163 160 NEXT 170 POKE 4456.10: PRINTERS 180 AUDr. Livingstone, I presume 190 FOR AL TO LENAS) 200 PRINT MIDAS, A, 1) 210 FOR B=TO SO. NEXT B 220 NEXT A 230 FOR A TO 1000 NEXT 240 REM ** INSTRUCTIONS * 250 PRINT 260 PRINT TAB (14 INSTRUCTIONS 270 PRINT TAB(14\" 280 PRINT \"In this game. Our t ournalist 290 PRINT \"Henry Morton Stanley. The object of the 300 PRINT\"game is to find the African explorer 310 PRINT \"Dr. Livingstone, who has been using 320 PRINT for five years.\" 330 PRINT You are given 150000 annas(the currency 340 PRINT \"Bof Zanzibar) to it out an expedition 350 PRINT to find Dir Livingstone E 360 PRINT TAD (3) ANY NEY FOR FURTHER INSTRUCTIONS 370 GET BIF B6THEN 370 380 PRINT \"\" 390 PRINT \"With this money you must be medicine, 400 PRINT \"food, guns, ammunition and beads for the 410 PRINT \"native chiefs on your route. You must 420 PRINT \"also PR for the hire of porters. The 430 PRINT game last for sit rounds.\" 440 PRINT TAR (12) BANY KEY TO START 450 GET BIF BETHEN 450 460 REM ** MAP OF AFRICA ** 470 PRINT\" 480 DIM X (203), 7(203) 490 DIMV (150).W(150) 500 FOR JE TO 203 510 READ X(J).Y(J 520 SET X(J). Y (J) SO NEXT 540 FOR J=1 TO 150: READ VJ).(J) NEXT 550 DATA 11.0, 16,0,29,0. 10. 1. 16.1 0 1 560 DATA 31,1,2,1, 34,1.35, 1.20.2, 33, 2.34.2. 11.2.15.4.18.412,3 570 DATA 13, 2, 14.2. 15.2.173.18.3.19.3.21.3.35, 3. 14.4.21.4.35.4.12.5.13.5.22.5 580 DATA 27,5, 34.5.12.6.24,6,25,6,26,6,27.6.19.6.0.6, 31.6.28.5. 23.5 590 DATA 32.5, 33,6 34.6.40.6.41.6.11.7.41.7.44.7.9.0.34.8.35.8, 10.7 600 DATA 41,, 42.8. 44.8.45,8, 46, a. 9.9.34.9.36.9.43.9.46.9.47.9 610 DATA 8, 10, 35, 10, 37, 10, 47, 10.7.11.35, 11.37.11.48.11.6.12.36, 12, 38, 12 620 DATA 47.12.5.13, 36, 13, 38.13.47.13.5, 14.30, 14, 39, 14.45.14.46.14.5.15.37. 15 630 DATA 38,15.40, 15.44.15.6.16.39.16.41.16, 42.16.43.16.7.17.40,17 640 DATA 7.18.40.18.41.18.42.18.43.18.8.19.44.19.9.20, 45.20.2.21.10.21.17.21 650 DATA 43,21.11.22. 12. 22,15.22, 16, 22, 18, 22, 19.22.42.22.20.23.21.23.42.23 660 DATA 13.23.14.23 670 DATA 22.24, 41.24.21.25.33.25, 54, 25, 39, 25.40.25.21.26.33.26.35.261 39.26 680 DATA 21.27.32.27.35.27.38.27.22.28.33.28, 34, 28, 38, 28. 22.29, 38,29 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 47 "


"o EMA Suter wewe 3 Sam moment 690 DATA 23, 30, 38, 30, 24, 31, 38, 31, 24, 32, 39, 32, 24, 33, 39, 33, 43, 33, 23, 34, 39, 34 700 DATA 42, 34, 44, 34, 22, 35, 38, 35, 42, 35, 44, 35, 22, 36, 37, 36, 41, 36, 44, 36 710 DATA 23, 37, 36, 37, 40, 37, 43, 37, 23, 38, 36, 38, 40, 38, 43, 38, 24, 39, 35, 39, 40, 39 720 DATA 43, 39, 24, 40, 36, 40, 40, 40, 42, 40, 24, 41, 35, 41, 36, 41, 41, 41, 42, 41, 24,42 730 DATA 35, 42, 41, 42, 25, 43, 34, 43, 25, 44, 33, 44, 26, 45, 32, 45, 26, 46, 30, 46, 31, 46 740 DATA 27.47, 29, 47, 30, 47, 28, 48 750 POKE 53868, 107 760 POKE 53863, 152 770 POKE 4466,1 780 PRINTTAB(23) \"*-The island of\" 790 PRINT TAB(26) \"Zanzibar where\" 800 PRINT TAB(27), Byou start.\" 810 POKE 4466, 10 820 PRINT TAB (24); \"x-Livingstone\" 830 PRINT TAB (26); \"thought to be\" 340 PRINT TAR (27) in this area.\" 850 PRINT TAB (26) \"3333PRESS ANY KEY 860 GET BS: IF BS=\"# THEN 860 870 REM & FITTING EXPEDITION ** BB0 PRINT 890 GOSUB4780 900 PRINT:PRINT \"How many porters (minimum one hundred) do\" 910 PRINT \"you wish to hire at a cost of 100 annas\" 920 INPUT \"per week ?\":D 930 IF D< 100 THEN PRINT \"33\":GOT0920 940 PRINT:PRINT 950 PRINT \"Each porter consumes two packs of food\" 960 PRINT\" (costing 30 annas) per week. How many.\" 970 INPUT\"packs of food do you wish to buy?\":E 980 IF ECO THEN PRINT \"3\":GOTO 970 990 CC-303E 1000 IF CLOTHEN PRINT\"You have spent all the expedition funds\":GOTO 4450 1010 PRINT: PRINT 1020 PRINT \"How many boxes of medicine at 1500 annas\" 1030 INPUT \"do you wish to buy?\":F 1040 IF FCOTHEN PRINT \"23\":GOTO 1030 1050 CC-1500SF 1060 IF CO THEN 1000 1070 PRINT\"6\":GOSUB4780 1080 PRINT \"SHow many boxes of beads (at 160 annas a 1090 PRINT\"box do you wish to buy for native 1100 INPUT\"3chiefs on the route ?\":G 1110 IF GCO THEN PRINT \"330\":GOTO 1100 1120 C-C-G81601 1130 IF CCO THEN 1000 1140 PRINT\"How many guns at 2000 annnas each do 1150 INPUT\" Byou wish to buy ? H . 1160 IF HCO THEN PRINT\"533\":GOTO 1150 1170 CC-HX2000 1180 IF CCO THEN 1000 1190 PRINT\"30How much ammunition at 500 annas a box\" 1200 INPUT \"Sdo you wish to buy?:K 1210 IF KCO THEN PRINT\"533\":GOTO 1200 1220 C C-K3500 1230 IF CCO THEN 1000 1240 FOR I = 1 TO 500: NEXT:GOTO 3740 1250 PRINT \"E\" 1260 PRINT TAB (17); \"WEEK\":Z+1 1270 ZS-STRS (Z) PRINT:FOR I=1 TO (LEN (ZS)+5) 1280 PRINT TAB(16+1); \"3\":NEXT 1290 FORA-1 T0800: NEXT 1300 REM ** NATIVE TRIBE ROUTINE ** 1310 L=RND (1) 1320 IF L0.5THEND2=D2+1:GOTO1630 1330 MINT (RND (1) *350)+100 1340 NOINT (M/8.7) 1350 PRINT\"Your expedition has met a native tribe\" 1360 PRINT\"SofM: men. The chief demands\":N;\" boxes\" 1370 PRINT \"Sof beads or he will fight you. Do you\" 1380 INPUT \"Bwish to give him the beads ?\":PS 1390 IF PONTHEN1470 1400 IF PS=\"Y\"THEN1420 1410 PRINT\"333\": GOTO 1380 1420 G=G-N: IFGCOTHENPRINT\"33YOU HAVEN'T ENOUGH BEADS, YOU MUST FIGHT 1430 IF GCO THEN FOR I 1T015001 NEXT: GOTO1470 1440 PRINT \"33 The chief thanks you and allows you toSpass.\" 1450 FOR A=1 TO 3500: NEXT 1460 GOTO 1610 1470 IF H< THEN S-1: GOT04730 48 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"1480 IF K O THEN S=2 GOTO 4730 1490 IF 650 THENPRINT\"383 You have only\":D porters left and 1500 IFDC5OTHENPRINT our expedition has been overwhelmed bu\" 1510 IFD 50 THEN PRINT\"the enemy tribe. \"FORA1 TOSOOO NEXT PRINT\":GOT04450 1530 POINT (M ) D /1.3) 4XH)) D=D-P 1540 O=INT (H/4) + (M/100) > IF DOK THENOKK=k1550 R1+INT (RND1*4): IF RH THENRHEHH-R 1560 PRINT\"tribe but you have lost\"P\" porters. You\" 1570 PRINT have also used::\" boxes of ammunition\" 1580 PRINT\" Band\":R\" guns have been stolen.\": FORA 1T01000: NEXT 1590 PRINTSESESPRESS ANY KEY TO CONTINUE 1610 PRINTE 1620 REM** DISEASE ROUTINE ** 165) TRND (1) 1640 IF T0.3 THEN D2D2+11 GOT01920 1650 VINT (RND (1) *4+1 1660 IF THEN CS= cholera\"A25 1670 IF THEN C malaria\"A28 1690 IF V4 THEN C=\" typhoid\":A22 1200 PRINT\" Your expedition ffering from an\" 1720 IF FROTHEN PRINT 38 You have no medicine left. Your entire 1730 IF FROTHEN PRINT \"Hexpedition is wiped out :FOR A-1 TOSOOO NEXT 1740 IF FEO THEN PRINT \"E\":GOT04450 1750 PRINT \"SHow many boxes 1760 INPUT \"of medicine do WOU Wish to use : 1770 IFUFTHENPRINT\"9You have only\":F;\" boxes of medicine\" 1780 IF USF THEN FOR AITO3000: NEXT 1790 IF USE THEN PRINT \"E\":GOTD 1700 1800 IF U 2 THEN PRINT \" Because you refused to give out medicine 1810 IF 2 THEN PRINT \"to our porters they have all died\":FOR A TO3000 1820 IFC 2 THEN NEXTA:PRINTE GOTO 4450 1830 F=F-U 1840 ASINT (D/ (AZN) 1850 IF ASO THEN PRINT \" You are a good doctor!! None of your 1860 TF AS THEN PRINT \"Sporters died \"ECO\".:GOTO 1900 1870 PRINT \" DAS a result of the outbreak of \" 180 PRINT \"39:08\" your expedition has lost\": A3 1890 PRINT \"Sporters.\" 1900 D-D-A3 1920 REM ** WILD ANIMAL ROUTINE ** 1930 PRINT :A4ERND (1) 1940 IF A4%0.6 THEND2-D2+1: GOTO2190 1950 ASINTERND (1) *S)+1 1960 IF A5=1 THEN DS-11 ons 1970 IE AS 2 THEN DS=\"leopards 1980 FASTHEN D=\"elephants 1990 TFA THEN \"tigers 2000 IFAS 5 THEN DS=\"arhinoceros 2010 PRINT Your expeditionis being attacked by 2020 PRINT :D: D Vou wish to runs or 2030 PRINT do ou want the porter to their 20550 GET ET ESTHEN 050 2070 IFK=OTHEN PRINT You have no ammunition left. The 2080 TF ROTHEN PRINT\"portere must at their spear.\" GOTO2110 2090 PRINT\" Very good. But you used 1 tot 2100 PRINT ammunition. FOR A TO 4000 NEXT KE-1130102190 2110 Ab=INT (RND (17) 2120 D -AS 2130 IF DO THEN PRINT Your Last porter has been killed by 2140 IF D OTHEN FRINT\" :$; FOR TO 4000: NEXT PRINT F 04450 2150 PRINT\" You callous bean You Sacrificed 2160 PRINT porters in order to s t ron 2170 FOR TOUSOO NEXT 2180 REMS RIVER DELAY ** 2190 PRINT : RND(I):5=0:06 2200 IF 340.2 THEND2=0 3+1 GO TO2830 2210 PRINT \" Unfortunatele our expedition has 2220 PRINT \"Boone a bit of course and in front of 2230 PRINT \"Sou is river ruilot hundr Croc2240 PRINT \"Bodils. You have to build a boat but 2250 PRINT this means feeding the porters while 2260 PRINT \"Sis being built. So the choice is a shown 2270 PRINT TAB (1) 1 Time to Build PRINT TA (23) Strength of Boat 2280 PRINT TAB (1) PRINT TAB 23): 27290 PRINT TAB(3):31 week\":PRINT TAB(28) \"325 turdy 2300 PRINT TAB(3):33 daysPRINT TABS: Rather Films 2310 PRINT \"SKEY 1 FOR FIRST CHOICE OTHERWISE 2 2320 GET BAIE BETHEN 1720 2330 IFBS=\"1\" THEN 2360 2340 IFB \"2THEN 2440 2360 REM* ** 2370 EE-(D*2) 2380 IF ECOTHEN PRINTPOKE4466.5 2390 IFEO THEN PRINT\"Your food supply has run out. The 2400 IFEO THEN PRINT\"porters have rebelled and thrown You\" 2410 IFECOTHENPRINT'Sto the crocodiles.\":FORA-LT04500: NEXTAPRINT\":GOT04450 2420 BSRND D 2430 GOTO 2490 2440 REM ** ** 2460 IF ECO THEN 2380 2470 BORND (1) 2480 GOTO 2490 2490 REM ** THE CROSSING ** 2500 B7-22BB=1 2510 PRINT \"E\" COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 49 "


"lick for Full Catalogue Interest ...     R R R R R KUMA MZ-80B SOFTWARE CP/M Applications & utility software Basic-80, Basic compiler, Fortran-80 CIS Cobol, Wordstar, Mailmerge, minimodel, Pro-Pascal, CBasic, Macro-80, etc. etc PHONE US FIRST FOR FULL CATALOGUE GAMES FOR THE MZ-80K ANIMATE  LUNAR LANDER BLOCKADE .50 MAP OF ENGLAND BOMBER   MASTERMIND BREAKOUT  50 MIZ MAZE CAMELOT  MONKEY CLIMB CAROLS  MORTAR ATTACK CATCH 2000/INVADER .50 PATIENCE CHESS .50 POKER COMBAT E5 50 PONTOON CONCENTRATION  PRINCESS MAZE COSMIAD E800 30 CRIBBAGE  QUADRAX DONKEY DERBY .50 RACING ELECTRONIC ORGAN .50 RACETRACK ENIGMA ,50 RAIDER EVASION  REACTOR EXECUTIVE .00 ROAD HUNTER EXPLORING AFRICA ,50 RHYMES FALL OUT  SHAPEMATCH FIREBALLS ,50 SHARP DEMO 4 IN A ROW .50 (GRAPHICS) FRUIT MACHINE .50 SHOW JUMPING GRAPHICS/ SNAKES & LADDERS MUSIC PACK .50 SPACE BATTLE TYCOON .50 SPACE INVADERS GUESS WORD  SPACE PURSUIT GUN .50 STAR TREK HANGMAN  STOMPER HEAD ON .50 SUBMARINE HOME BUDGET  SUPER FIRE HUNTER KILLER .50 SUPER SIMON INTRUDER .50 SWORDMAN J.S. LINE 4 .50 TANK WARP/WALL LARGE DISPY ES50 TEN PIN BOWLING LIFE E800 TRADER SMITH E8.00 LUNAR  UFO        MZ80-B & MZ80-K HARDWARE MZ80B 64K WITH GRAPHICS PHONE PHONE TWIN FLOPPY DISCS P5 PRINTER NOW CPM EXPANSION UNIT FOR UNIVERSAL 1/0 CARD LATEST MZ80-K 48K COMPUTER MZ80-K-FO DUAL DISC UNIT MZ80-K-P3 PRINTER PRICES MZ80-K 5 SLOT 1/0 BOX BI-DIRECT V24/RS232 CARD UNIVERSAL 1/0 CARD UTILITY PACKAGES FOR MZ-BOK APPOLLO WORD PROCESSOR .95 MEMORY TEST .50 CASSETTE DATABASE .50 BASIC EXTENSIONS .00 ARDENSOFT TOOLKIT .00 CP/M KIT .00 ZEN EDITOR/ASSEMBLER .50 SHARP EDITOR/ASSEMBLER .00 ZEN-DOS DISSASSEMBLER .50 SHARP MACHINE CODE TAPE & MANUAL CRYSTAL BASIC .00 SUPER COPY .50 PROGRAMME FILING INDEX .50 MUSIC COMPOSER-EDITOR .......... .50 DOUBLE PRECISION BASIC FOR THE MZ8OK DISC SYSTEM .00 PASCAL (CASSETTE) .00 MZ80-K CALC CII (FINANCIAL MODELLING) .50 MZ80-K MANUALS & ACCESSORIES MZ80-K DUST COVER ... .95 BASIC 5025 MANUAL .00 SERVICE MANUALS MZ80-K .50 MZ80-1/0 .00 MZ80-P3 . .50 MZ80-FD..... .00 Software authors contact us     8888888888888888888888888888888888 R R            The Point of this Ad. is SHARP Kuma Computers EDUCATIONAL PACKAGES MUSIC COMPOSER EDITOR .50 TIMETABLING AID  CHILDRENS MATHS E550 ELECTRONS E10.50 WAVES E10.50 CESIL E14.95 FRONT PANEL Elba AS THE CROW FLIES Etba BROWNIAN MOTION .50 AND MUCH MORE COMING! Trade enquires welcome ) Kuma computers: 11 York Road, Maidenhead Berks. phone: Maidenhead (0628) 71778/9 Telex: 849462 TEL FAC.KUM 50 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"2550 POKE4466,8: PRINTTAB (B8) X5 2560 POKE44bb.9PRINTTAR (B8: Y 2570 PRINT 25BO POKE4466.19 PRINT 2590 PRINT \" 2500 PRINTTAB(30): 2510 PRINTTAB (30 2620 PRINTTAB (30): \"2 \" 2630 PRINTTAB (30) 2640 PRINTTAR (30) 2650 US 2680 POKE 4466, 16: PRINTTAB (B7): U$ 2690 POKE 4466, 17:PRINTTAB (B7); V$ 2700 POKE 4466.18: PRINTTAB (B7) W 2710 IFB5.9THENPOKE4466.211 PRINTEUnlucky. A crocodile has sunk your boat.\" 2720 IFBS > GOTO 4820 2730 IFB6>. 4 THENPOKE 4466, 21:PRINT SYour boat was to fly. It has surk. 2740 IFB6). 6GOTO 4820 2750 FOR I=B8T026 2760 POKE 4466.8 2770 PRINTTAB (I) X$ 2780 PRINTTABY 2790 FORA=1 TO90: NEXTA: NEXTI 2800 POKE4466,211 PRINT\"You are lucky to escape the crocodiles.\" 2810 POKE4466, 23:PRINTTAB (13) \"PRESS ANY KEY\" 2820 GETBS: IFBS=\"THEN 2820 2830 PRINT \"5\" 2840 BERND (1) 2850 IF B8%0.35 THEND2=D2+1: GOTO3480 2860 REM ** WITCH DOCTOR ROUTINE ** 2970 CS=INT (RND (1) *200):C4=0 2880 CS=INTCRND (1) *3)+1 2990 IF C5=1 THEN Q$=\"Tahata\" 2900 IF C5-2 THEN \"Mganga 2910 IF C5=3THEN \"Ubongo\" 2920 PRINTTAB (7): 2930 PRINTTAB (7) 2940 PRINTTAB (7)\" 2950 PRINTTAR (7) 2960 PRINTTAD (7) 2970 PRINTTAB (7)\" 2980 PRINTTAB (7) 2990 PRINTTAR (7) 3000 PRINTTAB (7) 3010 PRINTTAR (7) 3020 PRINTTAB (7) JOJO PRINTTAB (7) 3040 PRINTTAB 7);\" 81181 3050 PRINTTAB (7) \" 111 3060 PRINTTAR (7) 3070 PRINT 3080 POKE4466, 3090 PRINTTAB (20);\"3 // 3100 PRINTTAB (20): \"EY / XXS 3110 PRINTTAB(20) \"31 / 111 3120 PRINTTAB (20): 3 /1 / 11 3130 PRINTTAB (20): \"3I\\ V S 7 3140 PRINTTAB (20): \"3I V 3150 PRINTTAB 20);\" 3 N X / V/ 3160 PRINTTAB (20): \"3 IV 3170 PRINTTAR (20) 3180 PRINTTAB (20) \" 3 1 3190 PRINTTAB (20); 3200 PRINTTAB (20) 3210 PRINTTAB (20) 3220 PRINTTAR (20) 3230 PRINTTAB 2013 3240 PRINTTAB (2013 3250 POKE 4466, 10: PRINTTAB (23) : CHR(104) 3260 POKE 4466,9: PRINTTAB(25) CHRS (104) 3270 POKE 4466, 10:PRINTTAB(27) CHRS (104) 3280 POKE 4466,9: PRINTTAB(36):CHR$(104) 3290 IFC4=2 THENPOKE 4466.7PRINTTAB(21) CHR(103) POKE 4466.17 3300 IFC42THENPRINTSA new head has been added to the tree. \"FORAT099 NEXTA 3310 IFC42THENPRINTTAB (17): BYOURS\":FORO3000: NEXT PRINT : GOTOA 450 3320 POKE 4466, 17 3330 PRINT \"The Great and Magical Witch Doctor 3340 PRINT 05:\" has threatened to lay a curse On 3360 PRINT superstitious will run away this 3370 PRINT \"happens.\"0 \" demands some beads.\" 380 INPUT \"How many do you wh t gi ve hiine B9 3390 IF G-B90 THEN PRINT YOU have only\" :\"beads left : GO TO 3400 GWG-19:IF B93 THEN PRINT \" The Witch Doctor thank you and with 3410 IF 29-03 THEN PRINT\" good luck+PRINT TAR T RESS ANY KEY 3420 IF B C THEN GETAIFA THEN 54-20 3430 IF 19=C3 THEN 3480 3440 PRINT \"Only\":89\" box of beads. T witt 3450 PRINT \"Doctor lays a curse and all your me 3460 PRINT \"Shave run away.\" 3470 FORA= 1 TO 30001 NEXTA: 04=21FRINT GOTO 2900 3480 IF D2<5 THEN 3590 3490 REM PERFECT WEEK * 3500 D4 INT (RND 200+ 3520 PRINT \" Well done. You have made a good 3530 PRINT \"uninterrupted week's march.ALOrndl 3540 PRINT \"natives have boosted your food Supply 3550 PRINT by giving WOL\":14,\" Packs. 3560 PRINT TAB (13) SUPRESS ANY KEY 3570 GET AS: IF AS=\"THEN 3570 3580 D2=0:GOTO 3590 3590 G1 INT (D*100): CC-61 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 51 > "


" Dokumenter word 3600 G2-INTD*2):EE-G2 10 IF CO THEN PRINT You haven't enough annas to pay the 626 IF CAD THEN PRINT\"porters. They have left you without any 3630 IFCCOTHENPRINT\"food to die in the jungle.\":FORI=1T04000: NEXT: PRINTE 040 IF CHO THEN 4450 3690 IFE OTHENPRINT You haven't enough food packs to g1 ve 3560 IFE OTHENFRIN the Porters to eat. They have murdered 3670 IFESTHENPRINT\"you for leaving them in the jungle to 3680 IFE OTHENPRINT Bdie.\":FOR 11T04000: NEXT:PRINT\" :GOT04450 3690 PRINT \"This weekYOU Paid your porters\":G1 3700 PRINT \"Sannas and they ate\":G2;\" food packs.\" 3710 PRINT TAE.13) SOPRESS ANY KEY\" 3720 GET B IF BE THEN 3720 3730 D2=0Z= 11 TO 3740 3740 PRINT \" 3250 REM ** EXPEDITION CONDITION ** 5760 IF 0 THEN PRINT \"At the beginning of your expedition you have:3770 IF Z) THEN PRINT \"The state of your expedition after\": 3780 IF ZSO THEN PRINT \"weeks is: -\" 3790 POKE 4466,30 BOO FOR 1 TO 7 210 PRINT\" 303 PRINT\" 5830 PRINT 3830 POKE 4466.45PRINT ::\" PORTERS\" SB50 POKE 4466, PRINT FOOD PACKS 3970 POKE 4466.0: PRINTS\":F:\" BOXES OF MEDICINE\" 3880 POKE 4466.13: PRINT\"9\":6:\" BOXES OF BEADS\" 8890 POKE 4466,161 PRINTE\": \" GUNS (RIFLES) 3900 POKE 4466, 19: PRINT\" :K:\" BOXES OF AMMUNITION 3910 POKE 4466, 22: PRINT \":C: ANNAS REMAINING\" 3920 POKE 4466, 22:PRINT TAB (26): \"PRESS ANY KEY 3930 GETB$: IFB$ THEN 3930 3940. REM ** DETAILED MAP OF AFRICA ** 3950 PRINT 3960 FOR J-1 TO 150 3970 SET VJWJ 3980 NEXT 3990 DATA 63.0.82, 1.51.1.61.2, 59,3,60, 3, 14, 3, 13.4, 15,4,59,4,58,5 4000 DATA 12.5.14.5.11.6, 13, 6.57.6.12,7. 13,7,57,7, 23, 8, 55, 8, 56,8 4010 DATA 20.9.21.9.22.9, 24.9.25. 955, 9,24,8,18,10,19 4020 DATA 10,2510, 26. 10.54, 10,19.11.25. 11.27. 11.53, 11, 10, 12, 17. 12, 25, 12 4030 DATA 52,12.16, 13, 26, 13, 52, 13, 17. 14.25, 14.50, 14.51, 14 4040 DATA 13, 15, 24.15.25, 15, 49, 15, 17, 16, 23.16, 24, 16.49,16,18.17 4050 DATA 23. 17. 48.17.17, 18, 19, 19, 20, 18, 24.18, 47, 18, 19, 19.9.22 4060 DATA 21.19.23.19.48, 19.22, 20.46, 20, 47, 20, 46, 21, 46,22,8,23,10,23.45,23 4070, DATA 7. 24. 10. 24, 45, 24.8.25, 10, 25, 44, 25,8, 26, 11,26, 44.26, 9.27 4080 DATA 11, 27, 44,27, 9, 20, 11,29.44, 28.10.29. 12,29,43, 29, 10, 30 4090 DATA 13, 30, 43, 30.10, 31, 12, 31,43.31.44.31.9, 32, 12,32. 4100 DATA 45.32.10,33. 12, 33, 46, 33, 10, 34, 13, 34, 14.34, 46, 34, 11, 35, 15.35 4110 DATA 45.35.12, 36, 13, 36, 16, 36, 15.46, 45, 36, 14, 37, 16, 37.44.37, 13, 38, 16, 38 4120 DATA 13.43.16.43.14.44.16.44.14, 45, 16.45, 13.42 4130 DATA 45, 58.14.39.16.39.45.39, 14.40, 17. 40, 46, 40, 14, 41.10, 41, 47.41, 17, 42 4140 DATA 47.42, 47, 43, 47, 44.48.44.49.45, 49,46, 50. 47.49.48,49,49 4150 POKE 4466, 14:PRINT TAB (7): 4160 POKE 4466, 15:PRINT TAB (23):* 4170 POKE 4466, 10:PRINT TAB (26): \"Indian Ocean\" 4180 POKE 4466,5 4190 PRINT TAR ) 4200 PRINT TAB (31) 4210 PRINT TAB (29);\" I 4220 PRINT TAB(26); 4230 POKE 4466, 4: PRINT TAB (13); \"L. Victoria\" 4240 POKE 4466.16: PRINT TAB (7): \"L. Tanganyika\" 4250 POKE4466, 17:PRINTTAB (25) CHRS (99) -Your Position\" 4260 FORI=1 TO300: NEXT 4270 IF ZOOTHENPOKEA 7. 202. MUSIC DO 4280 IFZ=1 THENFORT (A7-3) TOASSTEP-1: POKE 1, 202: MUSIC \"DO :FORA-1 T0120: NEXTA 14290 IFZ=1 THEN POKEL. 0: NEXTI: POKEAB, 202 4300 IFZ=2 THENFORI=ASTOA9STEP-1: POKE 1,202 : MUSIC\"DO :FORA-1T01 20: NEXTA 4310 IF 2 THEN POKE 1.0: NEXTI: POKEA9, 202 4320 IFZSTHENFORIWATOBOSTEP-1: POKEI. 202: MUSIC DO FORA-1T01 201 NEXTA 4330 IF Z3 THEN POKE 1, 0: NEXTI: POKEBO, 202 4340 IFZ4 THENFORT-BOTOBISTEP-1.POKEI, 202: MUSIC\"DO FORA 1 T0120: NEXTA De 52 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"4350 IF Z=4 THEN POKET.0: NEXTI:POKE B1.202 4360 IFZ-S THENFORI-1 TOB2STEP-40, POKEI. 202: MUSIC\"DOFORA1 TO120: NEXTA 4370 IF ZESTHENPOKE1.0: NEXTI: POKEB2-1, 202: MUSIC DO FORA 1 T0120: NEXTA 4380 IF ZWS THENPOKEB2-1.0: MUSIC\"DO\": POKEB2-2,202 4390 IFZ-6 THENFORI (2-2) TOBUSTEP-1 : POKE1, 2021 MUSIC\"DO\": FORA-1 T0120: NEXTA 4400 IF Z=6 THENPOKE1, 0: NEXTI: POKER3. 202 4410 POKE 4466, 22:PRINT TAB(26): \"PRESS ANY KEY 4420 GET B IF BTHEN 4420 4430 IFZ-6 THEN 4990 4440 RESTORE: GOTO1250 4450 FRINTSSEE 4460 PRINTS 44B0 PRINTSEE 4490 PRINTS 4500 PRINTSESE 4510 PRINT 4520 PRINTSESSE 49O PRINTERS 4540 PRINTMEDIS 4550 PRINTUSSESSED 4560 PRINTESSERE 4570 PRINTRESSES 4580 PRINT 4600 PRINT 4610 PRINT\" GOTO 4710 4650 FOR AMI TO 5000 NEXT 4660 PRINT 4670 POKE4466.10 4680 PRINT \"REDO YOU WANT P ER GAME/N) 4690 GET B IF B-\"THEN 4690 4700 IF MY\" THEN RESTORES1020 4710 IFBSNTHENPRINT\" PONE466, 12:PRINTTAB(16), \"Thank you 4720 GOTO 4690 4730 PRINT\":F S 1 THEN AS guns 4740 TFS THEN A$= ammunition 4750 PRINT 833885 You have no t . The natives 4760 PRINT \"Shave killed you and your hen. 4770 FORAI TOS000NEXT: PRINT\":GOTO4450 4780 FRINT TAB (5); \"FUNDS REMAINING T ANNAS 4790 CSESTRA (C) PRINT: FORA 1 TOLEN 4800 PRINT TAB 21+A NEXT 4910 RETURN 4820 POKE 4466,8: PRINTA 4830 POKE 4466, 9: PRINT 4940 CO=11 4850 POKE 4466.CO 4860 PRINTTAB (B9) IS 4870 PRINTTAB (B8) : 4880 PRINTTAB (B9): Y 4890 IF COM 16 THEN 400 4900 CO=C0+1=FORI=1 TORO: NEXT: T0495 4910 C1=22 4920 POKE 4466, 16 4930 PRINTTAB (CI) U$ 4940 PRINTTAB (CIVS 4950 PRINTTAB (1) WS 4960 IFC1=OTHENFORI=1T0400 NEXTSPRIN G T04450 4970 C1=C1-1: MUSIC\"EOFORT 1 BX112920 4980 PRINT \"E\":GQSUB 5250 4990 FOR T1=1 T018.$=N: POKE 4466 5000 PRINTTAB(S) PRINTER 5010 PRINTTAD(S) SPRINT MAR 5020 PRINTTAB (S);\"C E RRIRTTAP 26: PRINTTAB (2) 5040 PRINTTAB (S) PRINTTAB (26) 5050 PRINTTAE(S) PRINTER 5070 PRINTTAB(5) PRINT TAB 25) 5080 PRINTTAB(5) P RINTTAB : CAPRINTTABI26) 5100 PRINT TAB (S): PRINETAB (2) 5110 PRINTTAB (S) NI PRINTYAB (26 5120 PRINTTAR(S)I R RINTAB 2 5130 PRINTTAB(S); \":PRINTTAD PRINTTAR 2619 5150 NEXT T1 5160 GOSUB 5270 5170 POKE 4466, 19:PRINT TAB ( G i nestone presume 5130 FORI=1 TO 3500: NEXT 5190 PRINT\" POKE 4466.8 5200 PRINT\"Congratulations, wou empleted out 5210 PRINT Bobjective. You renowner Hency 5220 PRINTTAB (26) 5250 PRINT\"Morton Stanley. \"FORT TO DO NEXT 5250 POKE4466, 17:PRINTI 5260 RETURN 270 POKE4466.b 5280 PRINT 5290 PRINT 5300 PRINT 5310 PRINT S120 PRINT I WELCOME 5330 PRINT 5340 PRINT I TO UJIJI 5350 PRINT 5360 PRINT 5570 PRINT 5290 PRINT 5390 RETURN COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 53 "


"COSMOS EANBNE The Terran enemy is keeping your planet under constant observation but the drone supply ships must get through Ten drone ships have to be landed in secret on the planet's surface, but because of the Terran threat the landing site is constantly moving. You must land as many of your robot fleet as possible on the planet, using a radio control guidance system. Don't forget that you are operating the descending drone and not the moving base. A choice of descent speeds ranges from hard to easy (1-3) and when you finish you receive a score and an assessment of your performance. The game runs quicker than most Sinclair ZX8l programs as the main part of the game is tightly packed from line 180. Be prepared for some criticism if your drones crash on the planet's surface instead of the base. RUNS ON A SINCLAIR ZX81 WITH 16K RAM PACK BY JAMES WILKINSON AND JOHN STANTON UMU Sa "


"LET PEJ 3 LET Q=0 6 PRINT \"DO YOU WANT INSTRUCTIONS 7 IF INKEY=\"1\" THEN GOTO 7 8 IF INKEY=\"Y\" THEN GOSUB 2000 10 LET B=(RNI.5) --CRNIK.5) 15 IF B=0 THEN GOTO 10 20 LET A = INT (RND*23)+2 25 LET E=0 48 LET S=0 50 LET TEINT (RND*28) 59 PRINT AT 3,5; \"INPUT DIFFICULTY.\" TO PRINT AT 10.8;\" 1 =HARD\" 80 PRINT AT 11.8;\" 2=MEDIUM\" 90 PRINT AT 12.8; 3=EASY 100 IF Q0 THEN PRINT AT 14.0, \"IF YOU WANT YOUR SCORE AND RATING THEN PRESS G.\" 110 IF INKEY=\"\" THEN GOTO 110 120 IF INKEY$=\"G\" THEN GOTO 450 130 IF INKEY=\"1\" THEN LET I=0.25 140 IF INKEY$=\"2\" THEN LET I=0.5 150 IF INKEY=\"3\" THEN LET I=1 160 FAST 170 CLS 180 FOR U=1 TO 50 190 LET U1=INT (RND*31) 200 LET U2=INT (RND17) 210 PRINT AT U2U1\".\" 220 NEXT U "


"ICOMPUTER PLUS WATFORD (SHARP MZ-SUB A smart new computer store with a very wide range of products. Staff experienced in computers and in business systems are available to discuss your requirements for a stock-control system, a word-processor, a file-retrieval system, a home computer or just a book. Among the systems on display: COMMODORE as full commercial systems dealers for CBM, we handle the 4000 and 8000 series machines with a vast range of business, scientific & engineering software. We have the VIC-20, too. SHARP MZ-80K (at a special low price) and the super new MZ-80B, with CP/M, high res. graphics, etc. The PC1211 pocket computer is also in stock ISOLADOGODB one a AUTOTT ADTATET SAGIMMIESTE JUTTU COMMODORE the amazing Atom-over 20,000 installed the ideal first computer for the home. Ring to hear about our low prices. TEXAS the new TI-99/4A home computer, faster, new keyboard, 16 colours, 5 octaves music, over 400 software modules. We also have a wide range of software, computer books and supplies. We're situated in the Queen's Road, opposite Trewins department store and we're near the car parks! WORLD BEATING VERSATIUS COMPUTER PLUS 47 Queens Rd., Watford, Herts WD1 2LH Telephone 0923 33927 Take a look at the MZ 808, it is an incredibly good machine. Probably the best graphics of any microcomputer. Very fast operation 4 Megahertz 280 Double sided, double density disk drives (optional) 560K of store. User friendly pleasant and easy to use. Superb build quality if anything it is over engineered . 3 available disk operating systems Sharp DOS, FDOS & CP/M Plenty of languages BASIC, Double Precision BASIC BASIC Compiler, PASCAL Interpreter Single unit-screen, keyboard, fast cassette interface (1800 bits/sec) See the MZ 80B at your nearest Microcomputers of Laskys MZ BOB Computer 64K Nett 1095.00 Vot 16425 Total 1259 25 ACORN ATOM SPECIAL OFFERS 10 Shops Nationwide Birmingham Manchester 19/21 Corporation Street, Birmingham, B2 4LP Tel 021-632 6303. Manager Peter Stallard 300 yards from Buiring Centre Bristol 16/20 Porn Street, Bristol BS13AN Tel 0272 20421 Between Holiday Inn and C&A Chester The forum, Northgate Street, Chester, CH1 28Z Tel 0244 317667 Manager Jeremy Ashcroft Next to the Town Hall Edinburgh 4 St James Centre Edinburgh EH! 3SR Tel 031-556 6217 Manager Colin Droper East and of Prices Street St. James Centre Preston 1/4 Guildhall Arcade, Preston, PR IHR Tel 0772 59264 Manager: Jim Comisky, Directly under Guild Holl 12/14 St Mary's Gate Market Street Manchester Ml 1PX Tel. 061.832 6087 Manager Lesly Jacobs. Comer of Deonsgate Glasgow 22/24 West Nile Street, Glasgow, G7 2PF Tel 041 226 3349. Manager David Livingstone Between Buchonnon Street and Central Station Sheffield 58 Leopold Street, Sheffield, 512GZ Tel 0742 750971 Manager Justin Rowles Top of the Moor opposite Town Holl Liverpool 33 Dole Street, Liverpool L2 2HF Tel 051 236 2828. Manager Mark Butler Between the Town Hall and Magistrates Courts London 42 Tottenham Court Rood, London, WI ORD Tel 01-636 0845 Manager Vass Demosthenis ATM 1 ATM 2 ATM 10 ATM 11 ATM 22 ATM 23 ATM 24 ATM 25 ATM 26 Atom ass. 2Kram 8Krom Atom ass. 12Kram 8Krom Atom Kit 2Kram 8Krom Atom Kit 12Kram 8Krom Atom 4k Floating Point Atom 6522 (ports & clk) Atom LS244 Printer Buff Atom Colour Encoder Atom Mains Power Supply 172.50 197.00 138.00 162.50 23.00 10.35 2.88 21.85 10.01 Prices inclusive of postage and VAT charges Laskys, the retail division of the Ladbroke Group of Companies MICROCOMPUTERS ELECTRONIQUIP 128 West Street, Portchester, Hants., PO16 9XE Tel: 0705-373455 56 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"230 PRINT AT 21.0;\"31#GRAPHICS SHIFT S\" 240 SLOW 250 LET B=(A=2)-A=25) +B*<A2 AND A<25) 260 LET A=A+B 279 LET T=T+CINKEY=\"9\")-(INKEY=\"1\"> 280 LET T=T+<T=0)-(T=28) 290 PRINT AT ST: \"C\" 300 PRINT AT 29, A; \"SPACE (3*(SHIFT (SHIFT YSPACE\" 310 PRINT AT 20.0\" 320 LET S=S+1 330 IF 3=20 THEN GOTO 350 340 GOTO 250 350 IF T=A+2 THEN GOTO 380 360 PRINT AT 5,5; YOU HAVE CRASHED\" 370 GOTO 400 380 PRINT AT 5,7; \"SAFE LANDING\" 390 LET P=P+1 400 LET Q=Q+1 410 IF Q=10 THEN GOTO 450 420 PRINT AT ST\"2\" 425 PAUSE 200 430 CLS 440 GOTO 20 450 CLS 460 PRINT \"YOU LANDED SAFELY \"P\" TIMES OUT OF \"sa 479 LET WEP/Q)*10 480 IF W=10 THEN LET D$=\"SUPREME COMMANDER OF THE WORLI PILOTS ASSOCIATION\" 490 IF W7 AND WC10 THEN LET D$=\"SUPREME AIR FLEET COMMANDER\" 500 IF WD5 AND WC8 THEN LET DE=\"PROFFESSIONAL AIRCRAFT LANDER\" 510 IF W3 AND WC6 THEN LET D#=\"AMATEUR AIRCRAFT LANDER 520 IF W1 AND WK4 THEN LET D$=\"I AM GLAD THIS IS ONLY A COMPUTER SIMULATION\" 530 IF WC2 THEN LET 1$=\"DANGEROUS UNCOORDINATED IDIOT\" 525 IF WD1 AND WK4 THEN GOTO PRINTD$ 540 IF W1 AND WC4 THEN GOT0560 550 PRINT \"YOUR RATING IS :-\", D3 560 PRINT AT 8.6; \"ANOTHER GO?\" 570 IF INKEY $=\"THEN570 580 RUN 585 CLS 590 PRINT AT 1.8; \"COSMOS LANDING\" 610 PRINT AT 3.0; \"YOU ARE IN CHARGE OF THE STARSHIP ASTRON\": 611 PRINT\"YOU HAVE JUST SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETED YOUR MISSION IN THE OUTER\", 629 PRINT \"LIMITS THE GALAXY 630 PRINT AT 6.0; \"HAVING ALREADY LANDED SAFELY YOURSELF YOU MUST LAND YOUR 640 PRINT\"RADIO CONTROLLED DRONES ONTO THE CONSTANTLY MOVING LANDING\" 650 PRINT\"PLATFORM 660 PRINT\" TO OPERATE THE RADIO SIGNAL PRESS 1 FOR\" 665 PRINT\" LEFT AND FOR RIGHT\" 670 PRINT\" THERE ARE THREE DIFFERENT LANDING SPEEDS\" 680 PRINT\" DEPENDING ON HOW SKILLED YOU ARE 690 PRINT\"YOU HAVE TEN DRONES TO LAND\" 710 PAUSE 40000 720 RETURN READY. "


"BID KINE JOHN We live in an era of living room economists, expounding their views on what's going wrong with the country and how they would put it right. Bad King John is a game which will give you a chance to put your economic theories to the test on a computer model of a simple agricultural society. Bad King John is the medieval lord of a small island with a population of just a few thousand. To win the trust of the people he must stay on the throne for 10 years. The task is made more complicated by the need to keep the population under 3,500 for this period, for rebellion is in the air and if the population rises above this figure the peasants will revolt and overthrow you. But weighed against this, you must remember that should more than 30% starve the remaining populace will revolt and bring the monarchy down. So keep a careful eye on the harvest and the livestock which are prone to rot and plague respectively. The variables are: Y = years on throne; TT and TS = date; P = population; C = corn; L = livestock; S = corn to sow; F = tons of corn to feed people; FL = tons of corn to feed livestock; SL = livestock to slaughter; NP = compare with P; H = harvest com; I = looping. 58 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"RUNS ON A 32 Column Pet in 8K By JOHN MYATT TTEINT (RND(1*390+.5) TS=1000 + P=1300 C=109 L=50 5 PRINT\" INSTUCTIONS \"N\" 5 DETAIFA$=\"\"THEN6 IFAI=\"Y\" THENGOSUB5000 20 FRINT \"THE YEAR 18\": TS+TT) 22 POINTS 24 CEINTO 3D PRINT\" POPULATION\":F 35 PRINT\" LIVESTOCK:\"/L 40 PRINT\" TONS CORN:\"/C PRINT\"X\" 41 FOR I = 1 TOXF.'10 PRINT\"#\" NEXT 12 PRINT\"#\" PRINT\" +3 FORI=1 TOCL. 18 PRINT\"7\", NEXT 45 PRINT\",\"PRINT\"\" 16 FORI=1 TOCC.'10) 47 PRINT\"#\" 18 NEXT 54 FRINT\"]\" 55 INPUT\" UTONS CORN TO SOW\": 3 60 C=C-5 TO INPUT\" UTONS TO FEED\":F 80 C=C-F 85 INPUT\" STONS TO FEED LIVESTOCK\":FL 38 C=C-FL 35 IFC-1 THEN135 100 PRINT\" WOU HAVEN'T GOT THAT MUCH!\":GOT054 102 C=C+F+FL+S GOT055 135 INPUT\" LIVESTOCK TO SLAGHTER\", SL 107 L=L-GL 115 NA=P 17 IFF C=3 THENP=10 128 P=P*(F/(P*.1))*(RND(1)+.5%+ SL#10) 125 IFCX1800 THENC=C-799 126 IFLC=8THENL=10 27 LEL#CFLX (L*.1)) #CEND(1)+.5) 130 H=6*RNDC1)*78 135 IFHCSTHENH=542 137 HEINTCH) 140 PRINT\" HARVEST:\";H;\" TONS\" 141 IFH=(3+2 ORHCS#10ANDNOTHC=BANDSC=0 THENPRINT\" 142 IFH S#18ANDH<S*40 THENPRINT\" AN AVERAGE YEAR\" 143 IFH8*40 THENPRINT\" GOOD YEAR!\" DAD YEAR!!!\" COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 59 "


"INNOVATIVE TRS 80-GENIE SOFTWARE from the professionals Defend! First there was Invaders, then came Asteroids, and now DEFEND!!! Carrying on in the same tradition, Defend is a fast arcade type action game, complete with sound effects. Enemy spaceships come at you fast and furiously. If you succeed in shooting them down before they get your ships, you must still get yourself through a meteor shower (but at least they don't shoot at you) and finally, if you emerge unscathed, you must navigate a tunnel in order to get yourself completely out of danger. An enthralling game with excellent graphics, personalisation of highest scores and points bonuses. One of its best features is the crisp and immediate control the player has over the manoeuvreability of his ship which includes diagonal movement Machine language, of course, for speed. A matter of taste, but we think it beats Invaders and Asteroids. Suitable for TRS-80 Models I and III and all Genie models. Tape (16K).......... .00 + VAT. = .95 Disk ...........00 + V.A.T. = .40 MOLIMERX LTD AJ HARDING (MOLIMERX) 1 BUCKHURST ROAD, TOWN HALL SQUARE, BEXHILL-ON-SEA, EAST SUSSEX. AMERICAN NAS VISA TEL: (0424) 220391/223636 TELEX 86736 SOTEX G TRS-80 & VIDEO GENIE SOFTWARE CATALOGUE .00 [refundable) plus  postage. 60 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"144 IFS=OTHENFRINT\"YOU SOW NOTHING; YOU GET NOTHING\" 145 IFC)1000 THENPRINT\"OROT HITS CORN; LOSE 700 TONS!!\":C=C-700 146 IFL1000 THENPRINT\" PLAGUE!LOSE700 ANIMALS!N\" L=L-700 147 IFH>4000RS=OTHEN159 148 FORI=1 TOH 149 PRINT\"#\"; 155 NEXT 159 C=C+H 160 GETY$: IFY$=\"\" THEN160 170 IFPC=(NP.65) THENPRINT\" SRTHE PEASANTS ARE REVOLTING!!\": GOT0200 175 IFP> 3500 THENPRINT\" RYOU HAVE BEEN OVERTHROWN!!\":GOT0200 178 IFY>9THENPRINT\" LONG LIVE THE KING!!\":GOTO200 180 NP=P 185 TT=TT+1 189 Y=Y+1 190 GOTO20 200 PRINT\" POPULATION IS\";P 205 PRINT\" LIVESTOCK:\"iL 210 PRINT\" UTONS CORN\":C:PRINT\",\" 220 FORI=1TOCP/10) 230 PRINT\"#\": 240 NEXT 250 PRINT\",\"IFL=OTHEN255 251 FORI=1TOCL/10) 252 PRINT\"\"; 253 NEXT 254 PRINT\"T\":PRINT\"X\" 255 FORI=1 TOCC/10) 260 PRINT\"#\"; 270 NEXT 271 PRINT\"#\" 275 PRINT \"ANOTHER GO?\" 280 GETS$: IFS$=\"\"THEN280 285 IFS$ \"N\"ANDSO\"Y\"THEN280 290 IFS$=\"\" THENRUN 300 END 5000 PRINT\" DIRBAD KING JOHNE\" 5005 PRINT\"=10PEOPLE: f=10ANIMALS #=1@TONS OF CORN\" 5010 PRINT\" TON OF CORN FEEDS 13 FEOPLE\" 5020 PRINT\" TON OF CORN FEEDS 13 ANIMALS\" 5030 PRINT\"25 TONS OF CORN SHOULD MAKE 150 TONS\" 5040 PRINT \"AFTER HARVEST PRESS A KEY\" 5050 PRINT\" AT THE START YOU HAVE 50 ANIMALS.\" 5060 PRINT\"130 TONS OF CORN AND A POPULATION OF 5070 PRINT\"X1000. YOU CAN SLAGHTER ANIMALS, 1-10 TONS\" 5080 PRINT\"OF CORN.\" 5085 PRINT\"ODDIDDIEPRESS KEY\" 5990 GETYY$: IFYY!= \"\" THEN5090 6000 PRINT\" TOYOU CAN LOSE IN TWO WAYS\" 6010 PRINT\" (1) IF YOU STARVE 30% OF THE\" 6020 PRINT\" POPULATION COR MORE?\" 8030 PRINT\"W(2) IF THE POPULATION GROWS ABOVE 5500\" 5048. PRINT\"OTO WIN YOU MUST STAY ON THE THRONE FOR\" 6050 PRINT 10 YEARS\" 6060 PRINT\" GOOD LUCK!\" 6070 PRINT\"2 D PRESS KEY\" 6080 GETYYYIFYYY$= \"\" THEN6080 609A RETURN COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 61 "


"Adventure WHAT'S IN A PYRAMID RAS Value in the Variable Description Example Name (where relevant) Input string GO COTTAGE R28 1st word input GO Ras 2nd word input COTTAGE 1st 3 letters of ES COTRSS ditto RS GOT counter LN current location no. 1 K1 No. of current valid R25 No. of current valid R25 No. of found word in search temp variable for string to be searched temp variable for element being sought W15 Verb string GO TAKDRO W28 Noun string W3S Direction string NORSOUEASWESCOT WAS Direction code string NSEWX OSS Seen objects for screen display Os in) Object description Pin) Object location LS (m) Location description Exits from location DS (m) Destinations Search subroutine returns J-13 for COTTAGE K2 = (( -1)/3) + 1) 5 and code MID$ (W4$ K2,1) FIGURE 1. List of variable names used so far and their uses in example described Cottage Lane Fig. 2: Simplified net( Knife) work of locations showing initial positions 2 Forest 3 Meadow of objects in brackets (3 Axel 2 Cowl Note: objects and locations independently 4 Lake numbered. (1 Fish) So far we have seen how to create a network, fill it with objects, and decode the player's response. Movement was by typing \"N\" for \"GO NORTH\" etc. Now we will progress so that we can use a two word response. The first problem is that the main, if not only 'moving' verb is \"GO\", length 2. Our standard sub-string length is to be 3. This can be padded out, so: IF LEN (R2$) = 2 THEN LET R2$ = R2$ + \"\" and must be done before R4$ is set or an error will result. How can verbs be categorised? \"GO\" will change a location, \"TAKE\" or \"DROP\" will change the inventory and location number of an object, whilst other verbs may have varying and less standard effects. Therefore, for the purposes of Adventure programming, verbs can be placed into one of three categories: Moving verbs: Possession verbs; Others. Of these (moving verbs) is fundamentally different in that the word following, will be a direction and not necessarily a noun. To speed up the string searches it will pay to have a separate direction string from the noun string and only search the directions if a moving verbis detected. So: LET W3$ = \"NORSOUEASWESCOT\" Referring to the simple network in Figure 2, we previously entered the cottage from the forest by typing \"N\" which was found in exit string E$(2) = \"NE\", i.e. using a compass bearing. It would provide variety and add elegance to be able to reply \"GO COTTAGE\" (even if not fantastic English). The player would have to be supplied information or a clue to the existance of such a cottage, either in the location descriptions L$(1) and L$(2) or by a \"help\" clue. \"COTTAGE\" must now be assigned a direction code: north = N south = S cottage = X I have used X for the cottage rather than C to demonstrate flexibility, since more than one exit with the same first letter may occur. Exit strings read: LET E$)l) = \"XS\" : LET E$(2) = \"XE\" Next establish a direction code string that aligns arithmetically with the direction string W3$: LET W4$ = \"NSEWX\" With these strings together with the string search subroutine previously explained, it all fits together as shown below. \"Go\" verb logic What's in a pyramid? Quite a lot if you compare Scott Adams' Pyramid of Doom with the Tandy version of Adventure Pyramid The former follows the usual Scott Adams split screen format while the latter has a continuously scrolling display with a rather verbose narrative style. When the player moves to a new location a response like \"... your are standing at the west end of a large chamber. A rough stone staircase leads up behind you...\" is apt to leave him rather confused, especially if he has just re-entered the chamber from the opposite direction. Has he turned around, or, is there a staircase behind him and in front? It was all too much for me after a while, but it seems you either like it or you don't. My wife sat up for hours making maps and notes she even took the bird-statue and statue-box in her stride! Some heavy typing is required in this game, as unlike most Adventures nearly all instructions must be entered in full. (\"Inventory\" seems such a long word after a while!) Pyramid of Doom has some difficult parts, but on the whole is easy enough to give the novice sufficient encouragement to persevere once he has got inside! The player isn't left with quite the same feeling of lofty galleries and vast chambers that \"Pyramid\" conveys, because the display is more \"compartmentalised\". Nevertheless the layout of the interior is both credible and interesting. Nervous tension is created by the unexpected appearance of a small nomad, who proceeds to follow the player around. Is he as sinister as he seems? There is humour to be found in the Throne Room — but don't hang around too long! And don't be fooled by an apparently incorrect score eliminate the culprit. (Scott Adams can count even if he can't spell!) Pyramid is published by Tandy Machines and runs on the TRS-80 and Video Genie Pyramid of Doom by Scott Adams is published by Adventure International and runs on the TRS-80, Models 1 & II, Video Genie, Apple and Pet. No Search noun string Moving verb? Yes Search direction string Valid direction? Yes Set standard reply \"I can't go there Find direction code from value returned in search No Valid for this location? | Yes Find corresponding destination and set current location No. to new one. Set standard reply \"OK\" Figure 3 BY KEITH CAMPBELL "


"ZX 80/81 HARDWARE/SOFTWARE ZX KEYBOARD A full size keyboard for the 80/81. The keyboard has all the 80/81 functions on the keys, and will greatly increase your programming speed. It is fitted with push type keys as in larger computers. The keyboard has been specially designed for the Sinclair computer and is supplied readybuilt. It also has facilities for 4 extra buttons which could be used for on/off switch, reset, etc. .95 ga elle02210 222002 4K GRAPHICS ROM The dk Graphic module is our latest ZX81 accessory. This module, unlike most other accessories fits neatly inside your computer under the keyboard. The module comes ready built, fully tested and complete with a 4K graphic ROM. This will give you 448 extra pre-programmed graphics, your normal graphic set contains 64. This means that you now have 512 graphics and with there inverse 1024. This now turns the 81 into a very powerful computer, with a graphic set rarely found on larger more expensive machines. In the ROM are lower case letters, bombs, bullets, rockets, tanks, a complete set of invaders graphics and that only accounts for about 50 of them, there are still about 400 left (that may give you an idea as to the scope of the new ROM). However, the module does not finish there; it also has a spare holder on the board which will accept a further 4K of ROM/RAM. IT NEEDS NO EXTRA POWER AND WORKS FROM YOUR NORMAL POWER SUPPLY. .95 RAM 80/81 16K RAM Massive add-on memory for 80/81. 16K KIT-A-KIT VERSION of a 16K Ram. Full instructions included. All memory expansions plug into the user port at the rear of the computer. 16K RAM .95 16K KIT .95 2K & 4K RAM Static Ram memory expansion for the 80/81. They both work with onboard Ram i.e. 4K plus onboard = 5K. This is the cheapest small memory expansion available anywhere. 2K RAM .95. 4K RAM .95 16K 81 SOFTWARE As seen at the ZX Microfair. DEFLEX This totally new and very addictive game, which was highly acclaimed at the Microfair, uses fast moving graphics to provide a challenge requiring not only quick reaction, but also clever thinking. One and two player versions on same cassette. .95 3D/3D LABYRINTH You have all seen 3D Labyrinth games, but this goes one stage beyond; you must manoeuvre within a cubic maze and contend with corridors which may go left/right/up/down. Full size 3D graphical representation. .95. CENTIPEDE. This is the first implementation of the popular arcade game on any micro anywhere. Never mind your invaders, etc., this is positively shining, the speed at which this runs makes ZX invaders look like a game of simple snap. .95. Please add  p&p for all hardware, Software p&p free. Specify ZX80/81 on order. ALL OUR PRODUCTS ARE COVERED BY A MONEY BACK GUARANTEE dK'tronics 23 Sussex Road, Gorleston, Great Yarmouth, Norfolk Telephone: Yarmouth (0493) 602453 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 63 "


"ing, bending up the wire and FIT FOR FILE 13 then stripping you can ensure as with resistors, that the comOver the past couple of weeks a ponent fits neatly in. Be very number of people have come to careful that you do not crimp the me with home-built kits which wire too much or accidentally cut should really have been consi it if you are stripping with cutdered fit for file 13, i.e. the bin. ters or a knife. Again, double These kits are not necessarily check that the link is good, either computers but can be the add by a physical test by trying ons, such as video boards, to lift the wire off the board P.I.A.'s, extra memory boards or by a continuity test. and the like which can either be As a general rule, the neater supplied by the computer man the board appears, the more ufacturers or by a separate firm. reliable it is. This may be only They are often badly designed or because it requires more care are so complex that a good deal and attention to produce one. of hard wiring is required. It is Wires which meander about the this exercise that can be the board are unsightly and are downfall of many-a-good compu prone to physical stresses and ter constructor. strains, whereas a connection The boards that I have seen made tight on the top of the have been coated with a solder board looks good and is difficult mask to prevent shorts on the to interfere with. It must be remembered that * * * any links that must be made, unless otherwise specified, must be made after completed construction. As well as using all of the available colours, I try to put in the shortest links first, gradually building up to the longest, which on some boards may be from one end to the other. Take care not to hide any of the shorter leads by laying them all, if possible, flat on the board. Not only does it look pretty but also it is easy to follow. If you are not able to use single-stranded wire I can sugcircuit. This, unfortunately, can gest a few points that will help to be counter-productive as it is dif ensure similarly good results as ficult to see whether or not there if you had. When measuring the are any open-circuit tracks spacing of the holes allow about around the pads. On the other an extra 3 or 4mm after striphand it does help considerablyping. Tin the twisted strands as the heavy-handed constructor usual and insert the ends into who is liable to splash solder the holes. If the length is not about the place. quite right strip a little more off When making hard-wired or start again, depending on links on the board I prefer to use whether you are long or short. single core, P.V.C. insulated con The wire should be slightly ductor as this can be easily loose in between the holes now. straightened and can be bent at When you come to solder the first right-angles, unlike the multiend, hold it still in the hole and stranded types. I use 1/0.7mm secure in position. At the other gauge. I also make use of as end grab the tinned end and, as many colours as possible and you solder, pull it through gently. take note of where I have used The insulation should soften and them. This helps tremendously fold back against the top of the in tracing out the circuit later on. board. The wire should now be By measuring the hole spactaut. The procedure in all the other aspects of construction are the same though. When lines, such as those for power and external devices and control, are required to be taken off the board the most professional way is by an edge connector. However, many kits do not come supplied with these and they are sometimes expensive options. The alternative to soldering directly into the board is to put singleor double-sided pins in the board and solder to these. This means that, so long as the job has been done neatly enough, the wires can be removed without moving the board if it has been screwed down. This, I have found, is the most cost-effective of all the options. It may also be improved by sleeving the connections with P.V.C. or silicon. Last, but not least, our February gripe goes to a number of companies who modify computer boards. I must congratulate them for such a difficult job well done. The boards I have seen have mostly been U.K. 101's but there are other conversions on the market for other makes. The worst one had been modified for increased memory for the screen in order to attach a highresolution graphics board. The bottom of this board looked like a plate of Italian spaghetti. The wires were very light gauge enamelled. By very light I mean 35 or 40 gauge. Somehow the board did work. However, there was no way of protecting the bottom of the board while in use and eventually there was one wire which came adrift. If only the company had sprayed the board with a P.C.B. laquer all would have been well. Despite this setback the machine works perfectly now, with no problems except those of the programmer. He keeps forgetting that he now has 4K of screen memory so that his graphics just take up a quarter of the display! BY KEITH MOTI "


"DK S on 2 Make the most of your Sinclair ZX Computer... Sinclair ZX software on cassette. .95 per cassette. SOFTWAFIE The unprecedented popularity of the ZX Series of Sinclair Personal Computers has generated a large volume of programs written by users. Sinclair has undertaken to publish the most elegant of these on pre-recorded cassettes. Each program is carefully vetted for interest and quality, and then grouped with other programs to form a single-subject cassette. Each cassette costs .95 (including VAT and p&p) and comes complete with full instructions. Although primarily designed for the Sinclair ZX81, many of the cassettes are suitable for running on a Sinclair ZX80-if fitted with a replacement 8K BASIC ROM. Some of the more elaborate programs can be run only on a Sinclair ZX Personal Computer augmented by a 16K-byte add-on RAM pack. This RAM pack and the replacement ROM are described below. And the description of each cassette makes it clear what hardware is required. 8K BASIC ROM The 8K BASIC ROM used in the ZX81 is available to ZX80 owners as a drop-in replacement chip. With the exception of animated graphics, all the advanced features of the ZX81 are now available on a ZX80-including the ability to run much of the Sinclair ZX Software. The ROM chip comes with a new keyboard template, which can be overlaid on the existing keyboard in minutes, and a new operating manual. 16K-BYTE RAM pack The 16K-byte RAM pack provides 16-times more memory in one complete module. Compatible with the Zx81 and the ZX80, it can beused for program storage or as a database. The RAM pack simply plugs into the existing expansion port on the rear of a Sinclair ZX Personal Computer. Cassette 1-Games For ZX 81 (and ZX80 with 8K BASIC ROM) ORBIT-your space craft's mission is to pick up a very valuable cargo that's in orbit around a star. SNIPER you're surrounded by 40 of the enemy. How quickly can you spot and shoot them when they appear? METEORS your starship is cruising through space when you meet a meteor storm. How long can you dodge the deadly danger? LIFE-J.H. Conway's \"Game of Life' has achieved tremendous popularity in the computing world. Study the life, death and evolution patterns of cells. WOLFPACK-your naval destroyer is on a submarine hunt. The depth charges are armed, but must be fired with precision. GOLF-what's your handicap? It's a tricky course but you control the strength of your shots. Cassette 2-Junior Education: 7-11-year-olds For ZX81 with 16K RAM pack CRASH-simple addition-with the added attraction of a car crash if you get it wrong. MULTIPLY-long multiplication with five levels of difficulty. If the answer's wrongthe solution is explained. TRAIN-multiplication tests against the computer. The winner's train reaches the station first. FRACTIONS fractions explained at three levels of difficulty. A ten-question test completes the program. ADDSUB-addition and subtraction with three levels of difficulty. Again, wrong answers are followed by an explanation. DIVISION-with five levels of difficulty. Mistakes are explained graphically, and a running score is retrieving everyday information. Cassette 5 Junior Use it as a diary, a catalogue, a reminder system, or a directory. Education: 9-11-year-olds BANK ACCOUNT-a For ZX81 (and ZX80 with 8K sophisticated financial recording BASIC ROM) system with comprehensive MATHS-tests arithmetic with documentation. Use it at home to three levels of difficulty, and gives keep track of where the money your score out of 10. goes, and at work for expenses, BALANCE-tests understanding departmental budgets, etc. of levers/fulcrum theory with a series of graphic examples. Cassette 4-Games VOLUMES -\"yes' or 'no' For ZX81 (and ZX80 with 8K answers from the computer to a BASIC ROM) and 16K RAM pack series of cube volume calculations. LUNAR LANDING-bring the AVERAGES -what's the average lunar module down from orbit to a height of your class? The average soft landing. You control attitude shoe size of your family? The average and orbital direction-but watch the pocket money of your friends? The fuel gauge! The screen displays your computer plots a bar chart, and flight status-digitally and graphically. distinguishes MEAN from MEDIAN. TWENTYNE-a dice version BASES-convert from decimal of Blackjack. (base 10) to other bases of your COMBAT-You're on a suicide choice in the range 2 to 9. space mission. You have only 12 TEMP-Volumes, temperatures missiles but the aliens have --and their combinations. unlimited strength. Can you take How to order 12 of them with you? SUBSTRIKE-on patrol, your Simply use the order form below, frigate detects a pack of 10 enemy and either enclose a cheque or give subs. Can you depth-charge them us the number of your Access, before they torpedo you? Barclaycard or Trustcard account. CODEBREAKER-the Please allow 28 days for delivery. computer thinks of a 4-digit number 14-day money-back option. which you have to guess in up to 10 tries. The logical approach is best! MAYDAY -in answer to a distress call, you've narrowed down the search area to 343 cubic kilometers of deep space. Can you find the Sinclair Research Led, astronaut before his life-support6 Kings Parade, Cambridge, system fails in 10 hours time? Cambs., CB21SN. Tel: 0276 66104. SNCBir ZX SOFTWARE Please print Total 22 To: Sinclair Research, FREEPOST 7. Cambridge, CB2 1YY Please send me the items I have indicated below. Qty Code Item Cassette -Games Cassette 2-Junior Education Cassette 3-Business and Household Cassette 4-Games Cassette 5 Junior Education *8K BASIC ROM for ZX80 *16K RAM pack for ZX8I and ZX80 *Post and packing (if applicable) Item price 3.95 .95 .95 63.95 .95 (19.95 $49.95 C2.95 Total SPELLING-up to 500 words over five levels of difficulty. You can even change the words yourself. Cassette 3-Business and Household For ZX81 (and ZX80 with 8K BASIC ROM) with 16K RAM pack TELEPHONE-set up your own computerised telephone directory and address book. Changes, additions and deletions of up to 50 entries are easy. NOTE PAD-a powerful, easyto-run system for storing and * Please add .95 to total order value only if ordering ROM and/or RAM I enclose a cheque/PO to Sinclair Research Ltd for Please charge my Access/Barclaycard/Trustcard no. *Please delete as applicable. |Address: LLLLLLLLCVGO2 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 65 "


"Sinclair ZX81 Personal Com) the heart of a system that grows with you. DD Kit: 500  95 DIGHEM Built: .95 1980 saw a genuine breakthrough the Sinclair ZX80, world's first complete personal computer for under . Not surprisingly, over 50,000 were sold. In March 1981, the Sinclair lead increased dramatically. For just .95 the Sinclair ZX81 offers even more advanced facilities at an even lower price. Initially, even we were surprised by the demand over Higher specification, lower price 50,000 in the first 3 months! how's it done? Today, the Sinclair ZX81 is the Quite simply, by design. The ZX80 heart of a computer system. You can reduced the chips in a working add 16-times more memory with the computer from 40 or so, to 21. The ZX RAM pack. The ZX Printer offers ZX81 reduces the 21 to 4! an unbeatable combination of The secret lies in a totally new performance and price. And the ZX master chip. Designed by Sinclair Software library is growing every day. and custom-built in Britain, this Lower price: higher capability unique chip replaces 18 chips from With the ZX81, it's still very simple to the ZX80! teach yourself computing, but the New, improved specification ZX81 packs even greater working Z80A micro-processor new capability than the ZX80. faster version of the famous Z80 It uses the same micro-processor, chip, widely recognised as the best but incorporates a new, more powerever made. ful 8K BASIC ROM the 'trained  Unique 'one-touch' key word Kit or built-it's up to you! intelligence of the computer. This entry: the ZX81 eliminates a great You'll be surprised how easy the chip works in decimals, handles logs deal of tiresome typing. Key words ZX81 kit is to build: just four chips to and trig, allows you to plot graphs, (RUN, LIST, PRINT, etc.) have their assemble (plus, of course the other and builds up animated displays. own single-key entry. discrete components) a few hours' And the ZX81 incorporates other Unique syntax-check and report work with a fine-tipped soldering iron. operation refinements the facility codes identify programming errors And you may already have a suitable to load and save named programs immediately. mains adaptor-600 mA at 9V DC on cassette, for example, and to Full range of mathematical and nominal unregulated (supplied with drive the new ZX Printer. scientific functions accurate to eight built version). Kit and built versions come comdecimal places. Graph-drawing and animatedplete with all leads to connect to display facilities. your TV (colour or black and white)  Multi-dimensional string and and cassette recorder. numerical arrays.  Up to 26 FOR/NEXT loops. Randomise function useful for games as well as serious applications.  Cassette LOAD and SAVE with named programs. . 1K-byte RAM expandable to 16K bytes with Sinclair RAM pack. Able to drive the new Sinclair printer. Advanced 4-chip design: microNew BASIC manual processor, ROM, RAM, plus master Every ZX81 comes with a comprehensive, specially written chip unique, custom-built chip manual a complete course in BASIC programming, from replacing 18 ZX80 chips. first principles to complex programs "


"puter10000 ANDROID  PRINT AT 10, 50 FORIOSASTOPI). 990? RET I NOVOGO 6000 29 ado Available nowthe ZX Printer for only .95 16K-byte RAM pack for massive add-on memory. At last you can have a hard copy of your program listings -particularly useful when writing or editing programs. And of course you can print out your results for permanent records or sending to a friend. Designed exclusively for use with Printing speed is 50 characters the ZX81 (and ZX80 with 8K BASIC per second, with 32 characters per ROM), the printer offers full alpha line and 9 lines per vertical inch numerics and highly sophisticated The ZX Printer connects to the rear graphics. of your computer using a stackable A special feature is COPY, which connector so you can plug in a RAM prints out exactly what is on the pack as well. A roll of paper (65 ft whole TV screen without the need long x 4 in wide) is supplied, along for further intructions. with full instructions. How to order your ZX81 by cheque, postal order, Access, BY PHONE Access, Barclaycard or Barclaycard or Trustcard. Trustcard holders can call EITHER WAY please allow up to 01-200 0200 for personal attention 28 days for delivery. And there's a 24 hours a day, every day. 14-day money-back option. We want BY FREEPOST-use the no-stampyou to be satisfied beyond doubt needed coupon below. You can pay and we have no doubt that you will be. on. To: Sinclair Research Ltd, FREEPOST 7, Cambridge, CB21YY. Item Order Total Qty Code Item price Designed as a complete module to fit your Sinclair ZX80 or ZX81, the RAM pack simply plugs into the existing expansion port at the rear of the computer to multiply your data/program storage by 16! Use it for long and complex programs or as a personal database. Yet it costs as little as half the price of competitive additional memory. With the RAM pack, you can also run some of the more sophisticated ZX Software the Business & Household management systems for example. Sinclair ZX81 Personal Computer kit(s). Price includes ZX81 BASIC manual, excludes mains adaptor. 12 49.95 Ready-assembled Sinclair ZX81 Personal Computer(s). Price includes ZX81 BASIC manual and mains adaptor 69.95 Mains Adaptor(s) (600 mA at 9V DC nominal unregulated). 8.95 16K-BYTE RAM pack. 49.95 Sinclair ZX Printer 49.95 8K BASIC ROM to fit ZX80. 19.95 Post and Packing Please tick if you require a VAT receipt TOTAL  *l enclose a cheque/postal order payable to Sinclair Research Ltd, for  *Please charge to my Access/Barclaycard/Trustcard account no. *Please delete/complete as applicable. LL LLLL 2.95 SINCleir Please print ZX81 Name: Mr/Mrs/Miss Name: Mr/Mrs/Miss LLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLL Address: LLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLL Address: LLLL 6 Kings Parade, Cambridge, Cambs., CB2 1SN. Tel: (0276) 66104 & 21282. | FREEPOST -no stamp needed. CVG02 "


"BY DAVID ANNAL 10 REM PROGRAM 1-SINGLE NOTE 20 POKE 59467, 16 30 POKE 59466, 15 40 POKE 59464, 177 50 FOR D=1 TO 1000: NEXT D 60 POKE 59467, 0 READY. 10 REM PROGRAM 2 ?? 20 A =59467: B=59466: C =59464: N=250 30 POKE A, 16: POKE B, 37 40 FOR R=1 TO 8 50 FOR T=1 TO 200 STEP 3 60 POKE C, N-T 70 NEXT T 80 NEXT R 90 POKE A, O READY Address Function 59467 Register Mode. 16-Free running under timer control 59466 Main Shift Register 59464 Delay No. for timer countdown Sound is an important selling feature of many of the new generation of microcomputers but it has not always been taken for granted Producing sound from a Pet, for example, is a simple process but many readers will not have realised, for example, that the Nibblers Pet game in the November issue, incorporated sound. This method of generating sound was seen on several of the first and second generation microcomputers. Computers now mostly use dedicated chips producing 3 or 4 notes at the same time, controlled by specially invented Basic words such as \"Music\",\"Tempo\" and the like. Examples include the Dai, Atari, Sharp, and the new BBC computer. Note production is simple, eg. to play the note middle C one might simply enter a Basic line 10 MUSIC C. Many computers exist with no such refined system and it is these to which we direct our attention this month. Most, such as the Pet, have the necessary tors (PIA), or versatile interface adaptors (VIA), built in. If not, they can be added quite simply and memory addressed. To make matters clear, addresses given below are those used in the Pet but the principle involved is the same with any computer. A Basic POKE statement puts the number after the comma into the memory before the comma. Information to be turned to sound and amplified comes down a single wire in the form of a series of \"l\"s and \"O's. The waveform and \"tone\" can be altered by the ratio of the number of \"l\"s to \"O's and their distribution. The frequency of the sound heard is governed by the speed of their production. A simple way of achieving this, and the method employed in the Pet, is shown in diagram 1. The eight bit register is filled with a pattern of \"O's and \"l's, in the example shown, it would be the decimal No. 15. A control location is set so that the register is now shifted one place to the right under the influence of a timing circuit. Each bit on reaching the end of the register is returned and inserted back at the beginning again but it also passes down the output line at the same time. In simple terms, each \"l\" represents a voltage of 5V and each \"0\" a drop to Ov, so in our example, the output would be high for four shifts and then low for four shifts. This pattern is repeated as the register goes round and round and results in a square wave output (figure 2). The frequency of sound output Diagram 1: Shift register at address 59466 00001111 E.. Set at Dec. 15 is made to vary by introducing a time delay before each shift takes place. In the case of musical sounds, the delays are very short and are set on the chip itself, which counts down from a preset number in one of its timing registers. Each time the loop reaches zero, the main register is shifted by one bit and the process is then repeated. We now have control of the pitch of the note produced by varying this delay number. The higher the number, the longer the delay in counting down, the slower the rate of stepping and thus the lower the note produced To obtain sound, the output line (CB2 from pin M of User Port on Pet) is simply connected to an amplifer such as that described in issue two and an earth return made to digital ground (pin N). It can be taken direct to your Hi-Fi but, in order to protect your computer from any short circuits or surges, it is always advisable to insert a resistance in series with the output line one of 100K will suffice here. Program 1 should now be easy to follow. First, in line 20, the VIA shift register is made free running under timer control as discussed above (several options exist but this is the most useful). Next, the shift register is filled with a pattern of \"00001111\" = 15dec. Finally the delay loop countdown is set at 117 to give a note of C. The delay in line 50 is a Basic one and governs how long the note will sound before it is turned off again in line 60. Note that the control of the shift register is built into the VIA chip (in this case a 6522) and so any computer can control it only the memory locations allocated to the various control registers will be different. What does Program 2 do? All kinds of effects are possible by using Basic to alter the byte in the shift register and the delay number. A flick back to the Nibblers game on page 47 of the November issue. Note lines 10, 350, 430, 545 and 690. Their function should now be crystal clear! Output port (CB2) Diagram 2: Result of 16 shifts "


"FROM THE PUBLISHERS OF THE BEST SELLING BOOKS FOR THE SINCLAIR COMES: Not Only Understanding Burt Also.. the LARG Your ZX81 ROM PROGRAMS FOR THE of ZX SINCLAIR ZX81...IK 2 in the the LARGEST range DERSTANDING OR THE YOUR $7...lk Zof ZX 81 Software 2 in the WORLD ZX84 ROW ORLAN LOGAN Not Only Y...does this book contain over 30 fully debugged and exciting programs, every one of which will fit into the basic IK memory of your Sinclair ZX81-including programs such as STAR WARS, LUNAR LANDER, BLACKJACK, MINI ADVENTURE, DRAUGHTS, BREAKOUT. But Also ALUSSREICH SECTION NOT ONLY Plus special section: How to use machine code routines in your BASIC programs. by DR. I. LOGAN Dr Logan was the first person to dissassemble the Sinclair ZX80 Monitor and was the co-author of the ZX80 COMPANION. In UNDERSTANDING YOUR ZX81 ROM Dr. Logan illustrates all the facilities of the ZX81 Monitor, how it works and how you can use it in your own programs. A special section shows you how you can squeeze more power into your ZX81, by using machine language and machine language subroutines. An essential book for those who really want to understand the full working of the SINCLAIR ZX81. Published by MELBOURNE HOUSE PUBLISHERS LTD. Send Stamped, self-addressed envelope for FREE catalogue. THE ESSENTIAL SOFTWARE COMPANY (Visconti Ltd) 47 Brunswick Centre, London W1CN 1 AF (01-837 3154) Please rush me NOT ONLY 30 PROGRAMS FOR THE SINCLAIR ZX81 1K at .95 each Please also rush UNDERSTANDING YOUR ZX81 ROM I by Dr. I. Logan at .95 I enclose a cheque/postal order for ......+50p post and pack. 1 Name 22222222222 FOR THE SINCLAIR Detailed explanation of how these programs were written. Lots of hints on how you can write exciting programs for your ZX81. Numerous space saving techniques obviously invaluable to the ZX81 owner. PEEKS and POKES and all the other 'complicated' functions are clearly explained MUCH, MUCH MORE... ZX81... Address THE ACORN ATOM NOW AT A PRICE EVERYONE CAN AFFORD  + VAT (For 8K ROM + 2K RAM + 1.8 p.s.u.) New price for 12K RAM + 12K ROM, incl. P.S.U. | 199.00+ VAT Also available, ALL Acornsoft + Bug Byte Software (Phone for prices) WE ALSO STOCK THE ATARI 400 + 800, VIC-20, + BBC MICROCOMPUTER, TOGETHER WITH THEIR RANGES OF ACCESSORIES + SOFTWARE. Computers for 211 72 North Street, Romford, Essex. Tel: Romford 60725 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 69 "


"VI$20 ZX80 and ZX81 ARCADE GAMES FROM QUICKSILVA ALL PROGRAMS WRITTEN IN MACHINE CODE TO ENSURE FAST FLICKER-FREE GRAPHICS QS DEFENDER Generally considered to be the best arcade type game available for the ZX-Computers Up-Down Thrust Fire First and only full screen display Software to drive OS sound board Moving planet ary surface Up to 84 fast moving charac THE FIRST FULL FEATURED COLOUR COMPUTER AT UNDER  !! Ten missiles at once increasing attack patterns as the game progresses QS ASTEROIDS Quicksilvas new arcade game Left-Right-Thrust Fire Software to drive OS sound board Multiple missiles firing in 8 directions on screen scoring increasing number of asteroids Full mobility of ship to all areas of the display Asteroids break up into smaller asteroids when hit Wrap around screen All programs are recorded twice on high quality cassettes to ensure reliability Cassette inserts are full colour reproductions of original artworks by STEINAR LUND' Full instructions sent with order OS-DEFENDER 4K For ZX-80 with 4K ROM and minimum of 3K of RAM QS-DEFENDER SK For ALL machines with BK ROM and minimum of 3K of RAM QS ASTEROIDS For ZX-81 (or ZX-80 with BK ROM and FAST/SLOW mod) 4K RAM All at the fully inclusive price of .50 each For complete arcade realism Quicksilva also produce a range of high quality hardware OS SOUND BD For 3 channel sound effects or tunes OS CHRS BD Program your own characters for use with any program Enables display of real SPACE INVADERS characters on your machine Also OS MOTHER BD and OS 3K RAM BD Send S.A.E. for data sheets on our complete range of products. Orders and enquiries should be sent to the following address QUICKSILVA, 95 UPPER BROWNHILL ROAD MAYBUSH, SOUTHAMPTON, HANTS REBRILLERIEURSREIRROR IUBIRIREBIRRRRRRIBLIBRIS ON CENTRE YOU AND YOUR FAMILY CAN ALL ENJOY THIS TERRIFIC NEW MACHINE . EDINBURGH LOOK AT THESE FEATURES * Sound * Colour * Programmable function keys * 15K memory, expandable to 32K * Uses standard 'Pet' Basic * Full size typewriter keyboard * Graphics character set * Plug-in memory cartridge * Low priced peripherals MAIL ORDER Price List, order form on request ATARI 400 16K) }32K Version Available   ACORN ATOM Kit) Call for  ACORN ATOM (Ready Built) Slatest prices .50 VIDEO GENIE (16)  GENIE II (16)  VIC 20 E189.95 EPSOM AND SEIKOSHA PRINTERS Mattel Intellivision, Electronic Games, Chess. Software, Books, Accessories, etc. Get hold of yours from us EK SILICON CENTRE 21 Comely Bank Road, Edinburgh 4 Tel: 332 5277 BARCI ARCARD VISA 437 Stoney Stanton Road, Coventry, CV6 SEA West Midlands Tel: (0203) 86449 ELECTRONICS FOR THE 80s SYSTEMS IBLISERIIRIDIUIIIRIIIII 70 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"BY GARRY MARSHALL Good graphics add playability to games which are hung around a theme. And the more detail which can be included in a drawing, the more believable the game will be. High resolution displays can be achieved with several microcomputers. These include Apple II and the Acorn Atom. The Apple II with Applesoft gives a resolution of 280 dots horizontally and 192 vertically, while the Acorn Atom with a full complement of RAM provides a resolution of 256 by 192. The high resolution graphics commands available on these micros include commands for moving the \"drawing head\" to any position on the screen, and for drawing a line from the current position to a position specified in the command. 40 DATA 50 READ X, Y 60 HPLOT X, Y 70 FOR I = 1 TON 80 READ X, Y 90 HPLOT TO X Y 100 NEXT I 110 DATA 120 END A broadly equivalent program for the Atom is given below. Since Atom Basic does not possess READ and DATA statements, the program uses INPUT commands so that the number of points and the points themselves must be entered when the programe is run. 10 INPUT N 20 DIM XX (N),   (N) 30 FOR I = 0 TON TBO Good graphics are so often the mark of a good game. So many computer games are given life by being hung around a theme whether a destructive, you against the aliens struggle, or a tactical wargame scenario. The more detail you can put into a graphical representation of the theme the more accurate the final result can be. High-resolution graphics is a popular option with computer games players. In this column we look at this facility on the Apple and Acorn Atom. rectangle to be drawn. The location of the rectangle on the screen is shown in Figure 1. In similar fashion, an Atom will draw a rectangle with this program. 10 CLEAR 4 30 MOVE 60, 60 40 DRAW 60, 160 50 DRAW 180, 160 60 DRAW 180, 60 70 DRAW 60, 60 80 END Each line of this program is broadly equivalent to the line with the same number in the Apple program. There is no need to specify the plotting colour as the DRAW command automatically produces a white line. The point in row 0 and column 0 is at the bottom left of the screen with the Atom as opposed to the top left with the Apple. Now, just as we have drawn a rectangle by joining four points together, we can draw any shape by joining a sufficiently large number of points. The more points we use, the more accurate the drawing will be. Outline programs for drawing any shape are given below. The Apple program requires the number of points to be joined to be given in the first data statement (in line 40) while the points themselves must be specified in the data statement at line 110. Other data statements can be included if necessary. 10 HGR2 20 HCOLOR = 3 30 READ N The following program causes a rectangle to be drawn near the centre of the screen with an Apple. 10 HGR2 20 HCOLOR = 3 30 HPLOT 60, 60 40 HPLOT TO 60, 160 50 HPLOT TO 180, 160 60 HPLOT TO 180, 60 70 HPLOT TO 60, 60 80 END Line 10 sets the high resolution graphics mode, line 20 sets the plotting colour to white, and line 30 plots a dot at the position in column 60 and row 60. Lines 40 to 70 cause the sides of the 40 INPUT A B 50 X X (I) = A; Y Y (I) = B 60 NEXT I 70 CLEAR 4 80 MOVE X X (O), Y Y (0) 90 FOR I = 1 TON 100 DRAW X X (I), Y Y (I) 110 NEXT I 120 END Figure 2 shows a drawing produced in the way described by these programs. It can be tedious to find all the points which have to be joined. A digitiser is useful to obtain the points in as painless a way as possible. There is a digitiser for the Apple. "


"By TED BALL PRACTICAL PRACTICAL PRACTICAL PROGRAMMING BY TED BALL CONVERTING PROGRAMS There is little more frustrating than reading about a marvellous game which is unavailable on your particular microcomputer. And, unless you are familiar with the other machine's Basic, modifying the game to suit your computer is a daunting task. Hardware and software vary so much that there are no general rules for converting programs; the conversion process may require anything from minor changes in syntax up to almost a complete rewrite, and the documentation provided may be anything from a bare program listing to a full explanation of the purpose of every section. Manuals are usually available separately from the dealers who sell the machines, and if you intend to convert a lot of programs you will find it very useful to have many computer manuals. In many cases the only changes needed, will be to the display on the screen. These changes will be needed because the memory addresses, the graphics characters, and the number of rows and columns on the screen differ among the various models of computer avail able. If you have the machinedependent information on graphics and screen formats, which can be obtained from the manuals, and understand the techniques of memory-mapped screens explained in Garry Marshall's Graphics series you should have little difficulty in converting most programs. Hardware differences, such as input from a joystick or light pen, or sound output, can cause difficulties. If you do not have these features on your computer, sound output can be omitted and joystick or light pen input replaced by input from the keyboard, but such changes may destroy the point of a game. If you do have similar hardware features the conversion is often straightforward, although you may sometimes have a lot of work to do because of the different software features available for controlling these peripherals. Most dialects of Basic have a common core which varies little from machine to machine. Most of the differences are in the instructions for controlling special features, such as joysticks and colour graphics, There are few differences in the syntax and operation of the most frequently used Basic statements and it is usually quite easy to make any changes that are necessary. Apart from special-purpose instructions used for controlling peripherals the only instructions likely to cause any difficulty are PEEK, POKE and USR. The commonest use of PEEK and POKE is in memory-mapped graphics. Other uses may be concerned with the computer's firmware (the built-in machine code programs in ROM that control the operation of the computer). In this case you will have to find out what the instructions are MICRO GEN QUALITY PROGRAMS ZX 81 CHESS ZX NEW YORK LOOK AT THESE FEATURES CAN YOU BOMB AND BLOW UP YOUR TARGETS * Graphic display of positions on chess board BEFORE YOUR PLANE LOSES ALTITUDE AND * Displays separate record of your move and the CRASHES computers * Superb graphics * Written in superfast machine code * Superfast machine code * Plays all legal moves including castling and * Score continuously incremented enpassant but if an illegal move is entered will * Displays highest score of previous games answer illegal move * Simulated bombs and rockets * Six levels of play * Random weighting computer doesn't always play + ZX reflex the same move in an identical situation Are you as fast as you thought? * Board can be set up to any configuration and you Find out with this game! can even alter or exchange sides in midgame Only .50 plus 40p p+p * Amazing power in 10K of memory PLUS CHESS CLOCK! * Records and display time taken per player * Resetable function * Single key entry .50 + 40p p&p Please note we also supply Hilderbay Professional Business Software. Details on application CHEQUES AND POSTAL ORDERS PAYABLE TO MICRO GEN DEPT VG, 24 AGAR CRESCENT, BRACKNELL, BERKS. 72 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"doing and replace them with instructions to perform the same task on your own computer. Some programs include machine code subroutines that are POKEd into memory and accessed by the USR or CALL instructions. Unless you are familiar with machine code or assembly language you are unlikely to be able to use such machine code subroutines, even if your computer contains the same microprocessor as the machine the routine was written for. Machine code subroutines often use the ROM routines, and even if they do not may use areas of memory that are not free on a different model of computer. Although I have concentrated on the difficulties that can arise in converting programs, most of these difficulties occur only occasionally. Once you have got used to converting graphics from one screen format to another you will be able to convert many programs that you would otherwise not be able to use. However, you should be aware of the difficulties, particularly those features that you cannot convert. as this will save you much time. NUMBER CRUNCHING Many mathematical problems and puzzles appear at first sight to be suitable for computer solutions as they seem to be solvable by massive amounts of simple calculations even if you don't know the mathematical methods for solving the problems directly. However, Basic works very slowly; although the result of a simple addition or multiplication may appear to be printed instantly, hundreds of thousands of such calculations will take hours. Thus it is usually necessary to reduce the amount of calculation needed, and it is often possible to do this with only elementary mathematics. Let us look at the problem of finding whole number solutions of the equation: A? = BP + C? There are, in fact, an infinite number of solutions, so we need to fix an upper limit to the solutions we are considering say A=100. The obvious way to start is to test all triplets A,B,C less than 100, using something like the following: 10 FOR A = 1 TO 100 20 FOR B = 1 TO 100 30 FOR C = 1 TO 100 40 IF A A B *B + C*C THE N 60 50 PRINT A:B:C 60 NEXT C 70 NEXT B 80 NEXT A However, this took six-and-ahalf minutes to find the smallest solution, A=5, B=3, C-4, and would take almost three hours to run to completion. It will also produce each solution twice; e.g. as well as A=5, B =3, C =4, it gives A =5, B4, C =3, which is not really distinct. We can make the program much faster, and eliminate the redundant solutions, by noting that A must be greater than B or Cand we can arbitrarily chose to have BC. Thus we need only test those cases where AB and B>C. This could be done by inserting two extra tests be. tween lines 30 and 40, but it can be done more efficiently by modifying the limits in the FOR... NEXT loops. If lines 10-30 are replaced by: 10 FOR A =3 TO 100 20 FOR B=2 TO A-1 30 FOR C=1 TO B-1 the running time will be reduced to 27 minutes, which is over six times as fast as the first version. The problem does have a mathematical solution which can be derived very simply. although the details of the derivation make it too long to include here. The details of the solution can be found in almost any book on elementary number theory, and does not require any special mathematical knowledge for its understanding. The solution is that all values of A,B,C satisfying A? = BP + C can be found from the equations A = P2 + Q B = 2*P*Q C = P2 -Q It is easy to see that this does give solutions, since A2 = (P2 +Q) -= P / 2*P2*Q + Q* while BP + C2 = (2*P*Q) + (P2 Q?)2 =4*P2*Q? + P4 2*p*Q+ Q = P + 2*P2*Q+ Q The less straightforward part of the derivation is in the proof that these formulae do actually give all solutions. It is a simple matter to write a program to produce solutions from the formulae above: 10 FOR P = 2 TO 1000 20 FOR Q = 1 TOP-1 30 LET A = P P + Q*Q 40 LET B = 2*P*Q 50 LET C =P*P Q*Q 60 PRINT A;B;C; 70 NEXT Q 80 NEXT P When this program is run the solutions shoot up the screen too fast to read; values less than 100 come out in a few seconds, and within half an hour the program is giving solutions with six digits. This shows the enormous advantage that can be gained by using a little simple mathematics to solve a problem, rather than relying on the \"brute force and ignorance\" method of the first program above, which will produce the answer but may tie up your computer for hours or even days. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 73 "


"CHRISTMAS THINK THINGS OUT IN 3-D SOUPED-UP SPACE INVADERS CORE Alien Allack me in the second game your task MINUTE MUNCHMEN Sixth Sense is a misleading name for a game which requires you to think in three dimensions. From the Milton Bradley A sophisticated space invaders stable, Sixth Sense is a double hand held game will grace shop game. Firstly there is a 3-D vershelves later in the year keeping sion of the Connect Four game the craze lingering on and secondly a \"maze\" game. Called Alien Attack, the object The object of the former is to is to shoot down as many aliens place four of your counters in a as you can. You have three firing row on one level of the frame, or ships fitted with lasers to blast at to place four counters in a row your attackers. At the start of the on different levels. game the aliens move onto the Altogether there are four corners of the L.C.D. screen and layers of the frame in which to home in on your space ships, place your counters with a total firing beams as they fly. The of 16 spaces. The counters you play with are actually square shaped cubes which slot into each space. Remember to check the counThe British toy industry spends January and early February ters on the bottom level of the unveiling its plans for the coming year. Here we present a centre section which are difficult selection of electronic games and toys which will be to see when they have been built competing for our attentions next Christmas. upon. When one of you finally wins a victory tune plays. In the second game your task is to follow a pre-programmed \"maze\" pattern which is formed Last year's arcade successes are should filter into the shops in on each level of the frame. The this year's toys. The Puckman March retailing for about . computer controlled display tells type game seems to be following in the same series, is a golf you when you have made an in the trend set by Space In-game which will also cost . \"meanies\" come in waves of six, incorrect move and you can only vaders and appearing in every This game again is unique for but once you destroy those there continue your turn if you have conceivable format. the range. You control a golfer is no let upanother batch will moved into the correct space. From Adam Imports comes who has to swing his way be instantly sent on the rampage. You can take consolation in Mini-Munchman which can be through a nine hole course. It has There are two skill levels and the knowledge that the maze played on the tiny screen that little features incorporated into many different speeds to master. only follows a vertical and horialso doubles up as a watch the game to give the player more Alien Attack is one of Peter zontal path, it won't go diagonally About the same size as an averinformation, like figures display. Pan Plaything's new toys for and once it has reached one level age calculator the clock has fulling the distance the ball is away 1982. It was originally released in it will not descend again. functions, including a stop watch, from the hole he is playing. America and is made by US toy The winner of the game is the an alarm, lap timer, day and date. Adam Imports says that the skill firm Coleco. The game does first person to reach the end of There has been a plethora of of the game is pressing the but however fall at the top end of the the maze. Sometimes you might hand-held Munchman type ton at the correct time when the price range retailing at around have to use your opponent's games but this is the first to be golf club is on the back swing. the  mark counters as a scaffold to climb to used in the pocket watch format. A the right level in the maze. Each The game itself sticks closely L plaver is given the same number to the original version with the A treat for children with a taste played. At the top of the eight of moves to complete the maze.player in control of a munchman for music will be in store mid columns the letter of the note is Sixth Sense is scheduled to be who rushes around the screen year year. stamped in large letters making it on sale in most large toy shops eating dots as he goes. On a touch sensory surface, easy for the child to read. from July of this year and will Mini Munchman's makers children can learn to play and With the actual toy comes a cost .59. Adam Imports anticipate supplies sing along to sing their favourite selection of cards on which the stories with this new electronic stories are written. To play the toy. The microprocessor hidden tune the child reads the card inside the toy memorises the following a \"road\" map consist tunes and when the correcting of lines linked up by circles coloured button is pressed the containing the correct musical corresponding note is emitted. note. Called the Musical Story Book, Included in the list of musical the toy has two different octaves stories are Happy Birthday and and an automatic shut-down Ba Ba Blacksheep. device, acting as a power saver Peter Pan Playthings is the in case of forgetful children firm behind this toy and has who leave it on. assigned it a price of . It is Coming in a square shaped due in the shops in July and runs case, the board consists of 64 off one nine volt battery which is keys which represent the noter not included in the package. 74 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"LEARN THE SECRETS OF THE DARK TOWER A GAME TO MAGNUS' MICRO RIVAL Leading a band of warriors to hidden in each of the citadels overthrow the forces of the (but none in your own) so you brigand king who has stolen a have to move around each citadel people's precious sceptre is the in a clockwise direction to obtain theme of a new concept in the treasures. games. You use plastic models to repDark Tower is a unique idea resent the characters involved in combining a traditional board the game and move them around game with an electronic game. the board. The centrepiece is the tower At the beginning of the game. You can replenish your supitself which is mounted in the each of the four players is alloplies in the bazaars using your middle of the playing board. That cated 10 warriors, 30 bags of gold gold, and you can even haggle to is the microprocessor controlled and 25 food rations. Anything can bring the price down if it's too part of the game. At the front of happen to you on your travels high. the tower is a large \"window\" and you must watch out for hid. To make a move in the game which acts as a screen and den dangers which might befall you must press one of the but shows each player what is hapyou and your soldiers. Like the tons on the tower's control con Your blood will start to curdle pening to his troops. fire-breathing dragon which you sole there are 12 in all to when you sink your teeth into On the board are marked four could run into, or the fatal plague indicate where you want to move Dracula. citadels containing a tomb, a that can kill off half your army. to. After you have pressed a When your fingers touch the sanctuary, a bazaar and ruins Sometimes you will inevitably button a response and further chilly casing of the electronic which each player occupies for have to set to battle with some directions will flash up on the game Dracula, you are conthe duration of the game. The of the other brigands in pursuit screen for you to follow. The fronted by the plan of a haunted ultimate aim is to attack the Dark of their keys. tower swivels round so that only house. You have to find your way Tower and oust the evil brigand Throughout your military cam the player whose turn it is can through the house avoiding the king paign you must keep an eve on see what the window reveals obvious dangers of coffins (which But to do that you must find how many food rations you have Once you have found the keys could contain cousins of Dracula), three keys made of brass, silver left for your warriors. Hungry you still can't rush in and storm and that particularly poisonous and gold and solve the riddle of soldiers aren't much good in an the Tower. First you have to type of bat which flies in heavy the keys. These vital objects are exhausting battle. solve the riddle of the keys for numbers through haunted only then will the portcullis open houses. allowing you to lay seige. If you Dracula is an extension of the win the tower plays a victory range which Adam Imports tune and the retrieved sceptre is brought out last year. It will be Practise snapping back answers A booklet of new questions for held high in triumph. Before available in a plastic casing, con to general knowledge questions Master Challenge is also new marching into battle make sure sisting of a flat console where from a know-all toy which out. Altogether there are 1,001 you have enough troops to stand the control push buttons are would give Magnus Magnusson a questions based on popular telea good chance of success. located and a screen for the run for his money. vision quiz programmes like Ask This Milton Bradley game has player to look at displaying the Joining in the Mastermind the Family, Mastermind and A the potential to be one of the action of the game. test of general knowledge, this Question of Sport All for .75. most sought-after of 1982, and is the object of Dracula is to new toy is designed for the The booklet contains quiz certainly one of the most steer clear of the dracula symbol, entire family. Altogether there questions and can be used with imaginative of this year's batch of for obvious reasons. If you get are 19 different subjects for you the new game. Family Challenge new launches. It will be on sale too close to his fangs... to answer questions on when is battery run, but they are not later in the year for  from Unfortunately, it won't be in you play Family Challenge. This supplied with the toy. most large toy shops. the shops until July at the microchip controlled game poses earliest and is due to retail at just a total of 1,001 questions and under the  mark contains a number of special feaAstroblaster is the new, tures. Family improved version of Adam You can begin the game's play Imports' Astro Wars. It is in the on any question you choose by same vein as that game but folpressing the selection button, so lows the arcade game Scramble. if you don't fancy your chances On the horizontal display you see on the one first posed you can an undulating lunar surface pick another. which constantly changes as If there are several difficult your aeroplane flies above. questions in a row you can use Various alien space craft and the fast forward button to creatures fly towards you at advance the process quickly intermittent periods. You score Lights and sound help brighten it. points by successfully shooting The U.K. distributor is Peter down the enemy ships and by Pan Playthings of Peterborough blasting the ground bases. and the game will retail at around Astroblaster is also expected the  mark. Family Challenge is to sell for just under  and the big brother of Master Chalshould be on shop shelves at lenge also made by Peter Pan. about the same time as Dracula. Oot wo m e hallenge COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 75 "


"DFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOF CRACKING GRAPHICS QUEST FOR HIDDEN PLUNDER PIRATE ISLAND SPACE EGGS & SPACE WARRIORS The space theme lingers on in A three part space ship splits two Apple discs, Space Eggs and up, giving you three attempts at Space Warriors. destroying the eggs. Unlike the The two discs represent all usual games, when you destroy Pirates are common inhabitants that's good and all that's bad, in an egg a space-thing appears out of adventure games and as every games software. They concenof it with a number on it. The schoolboy knows where there trate on needless destruction, number indicates the points are pirates, treasure is never far awarded if you hit it. away. Unfortunately the space-thing Supplied on a C12 cassette, moves very erratically, usually in Pirate Island loads in two parts the direction of your space ship. corresponding to the two memIf it touches you then that's it. ory blocks of the Atom and durSpace Warrior involves the ing the second load instructions rotating joystick to move a static are presented on the screen. spaceship that is surrounded by This gives you something to a force field. Attacking space look at while waiting for the cascraft are destroyed by lining up sette to finish the load. the space ship and pushing the The object of this fast and fire button. Again the space craft exciting game, is to collect varifollow erratic paths making ous items of treasure and transdefence difficult. port them back to your ship while Useful things to pick up are a but use fantastic graphics. Marvellous graphics and a avoiding many obstacles and tinder box, pieces of eight, a Space Eggs can be found in familiar space battle theme, the hazards placed in your path. knife and a green eyed golden the arcades under the name games rely purely on speed and In common with other adven-idol. Moon Cresta reactions but they seem to give ture games, the computer recog Pirate Island is an easy and The game is a variation of the hours of enjoyment to those in nises commands typed in English compulsive game to play, but usual space invaders theme early teens and younger. such as \"North\", \"Up\", \"Eat the requires skill and a certain whereby the player has a joystick Both are available from Pete Sandwich\" and so on. amount of luck to get the best type control to move the space and Pam Computers for .95 The machine replies with \"I score which is shown at the end ship from left to right, and a fire each, to run on an Apple II. For can't\" or \"I don't understand\" if of the game. Yes, the best score, button. Three levels of difficulty Space Eggs you need 48K memthe command is not recognised 16 out of 16, is possible! are present. ory and 32K for Space Warrior. or incorrectly phrased, and the program is written in allows another attempt. machine code and uses up the There is a small screen flash whole 12K RAM of the expanded after each input, but it is of very Acorn Atom, it is available from short duration and after a short Hopesoft of Newbury in Berks. ARCADE SCRAMBLE while becomes unnoticable. An excellent piece of software it Altogether there are over 30 is well worth the .75 price tag. There's plenty of action when your plane flies across the locations and more than 25 your craft takes to the skies in screen whilst the ground unfolds Arcade Scramble. And the good beneath you from right to le objects which will be required during your hunt for treasure. graphics make this arcade spinUsing the controls, bomb the This is achieved by using only off a cut above most others. enemy posts without flying into five bits per character instead of The mission theme which gave the landscape. Further hazards Scramble a big arcade following include, enemy missiles, clus the usual eight, thus making the program appear larger than the is recreated with plenty of of blimbs in the air which you 12K. Watch out for poisonous hazards for the player's piane. must avoid) and ack-ack from darts, crocodiles, gorillas and of You have six controls which enemy gun posts. Without warncourse, pirates use the arrow keys (or lettering, enemy aircraft appear to keys if you wish to alter your intercept you and you either altitude, give forward and have to dodge or shoot them reverse movement, drop bombs down. and fire your guns. The game is not difficult to The game is written in learn but does take some pracmachine language, and after load. tice to achieve a satisfactory ing it via the system command score. Should you have a suitable and seeing the title page you are amplifier connected the game given a cross section representa provides arcade type sound tion of the enemy territory with effects. mountains, valleys, rocketThe game runs on a TRS-80 launching pads, ack-ack pads, Model 1 and a Video Genie and forts, munition dumps and fuel the cassette costs .50 from dumps. Kansas City Systems. WHISKED INTO ACTION "


"TEAM 4 SOFTWARE ZX81 Atom NEW ADVENTURES Video Genie TRS-80 UP 201 SHAPEMAKER/SCREENSWAP (2k) : draw your own graphical shapes and store them in your programs. Demo program included....... ...7.95 UP 2001 INVADERS/HEDGEHOG (6+6k) : 'classic' addictive games ...6.95 UP 301 XBAS: add eleven new BASIC commands in TRS-80 level Il non-disc BASIC (also Video Genie) + instructions + free BREAKOUT program to demonstrate the commands ......... 4.95 Atari GP 3001 LUNAR LANDER/3D MAZE/ DOMINOES : 'three of the best' for the home arcade games addict.......7.95 GP 3002 — CATHEDRAL ADVENTURE GAME: Can you find the thirteen treasures before the mad monk finds you. 16k .................... 11.50 GP 1005 TWENTY GAMES FOR ZX81, including Codebreak, Adventure, Motor Cars, 3 Pile Nim, Pontoon. 16K . .. 4.95 UP 101 ZX80/81 CONVERTER: allows you to load ZX80 (old RDM) programs onto ZX81 (new RDM). Full instructions included.............. .7.95 UP 102 DATABAS: write to or read from cassette up to 14k of data + REMKILL: gets rid of unwanted REM statements .... ............4.95 GP 1001 TREK 81 : exciting version of the classic 'Star Trek' game with computer assisted attacks! (16k) ..7.95 GP 1002 BATTLECHESS (2 players): ZX81 version of 'Star Chess' with full screen graphics (16k) ..........5.95 GP 1003 STARSHOOT/ACEY DEUCY/ JUPITER LANDER : three great games for the 1k ZX81.. GP 1004 — CATHEDRAL ADVENTURE GAME: Can you find the thirteen treasures before the mad monk finds you. 16k .................... 11.50 GP 4001 3D MICROMAZE: wander around the insides of your Atari! Frustration guaranteed.........4.95 GP 4002RATTRAP: 2-player game of skill and daring..............4.95 GP 3003 CASTLE OF LONDON: Thirteen more treasures for you to find, a little harder than you may think. 16k ...... 11.50 All programs supplied on high-quality cassettes. Orders to:TEAM 4 SOFTWARE Dept. TM 12 Taunton House, Redcar Road, Harold Hill, Romford, Essex. GP 3004 -LONDON TOWN: Learn about the geography of London whilst playing this wonderful new adventure. 16k ...... ... 11.50 LIMITED COMPUTER 100 SHARP ARP SHARP SHARPS SHARP SHARP SHARPSHARI SHARP SHARP SHARP SHARE SHARP SHARP SHARPSHARE SHARP SHARP SHARP SHARP SHARP SHARP SHARP SHARP SHARI HARP SHARP SHARP SHARI HARP SHARP SHARP SHAR  MZ/80K SPECIAL OFFER! INCLUDING BASIC TAPE AND PROGRAMMING MANUAL A proper full size microcomputer for less than the real cost of a toy microcomputer. The Sharp comes with 48k of RAM and the screen and cassette are built in, instead of being expensive extras. INC VAT Computer 100 Limited 7 Southcote Parade, Southcote Farm Lane, ! I COMPUTER 100 LIMITED MAIL ORDER FORM Southcote, Name: Reading, RG3 3D7. Address: Reading (0734) 584545 Full range of all Sharp Post Code: peripherals stocked at highly competitive prices. Ring for Tel.: further details. Card No: Mail to: Computer 100 Limited, Price is inclusive of VAT at current rate of 15%. Add CVG 0282 7 Southcote Parade, Southcote, .50 carriage/insurance to Mail Orders. Reading, Berks, RG3 3D7. ALL UNITS ARE FULLY UPGRADED AND TESTED BEFORE LEAVING OUR WORKSHOPS Mann the 30 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 77 "


"a must for your ZX87 SHIVA Authors: lan Stewart & Robin Jones The reader-friendly guide to getting started with the Sinclair ZX81. Includes an introduction to looping and branching, graphics, subroutines, and debugging techniques, with over 50 programs designed to run on the standard 1K memory. BASIC PROGRAMMING FOR THE ENW Approx. 130 pages Paperback .95 Publication: 4 January 1982 ISBN O 906812 178 Guaranteed Reader Friendly By Ian Stewart Robin Jones z Published by: Shiva Publishing Ltd., 4 Church Lane, Nantwich, Cheshire CW5 5RQ Telephone: (0270) 628272 Please supply me with copy copies of: PEEK, POKE, BYTE & RAM Price .95 per copy. Cheques should be made payable to Shiva Publishing Ltd. For payment by Access/American Express: NAME (Capitals please) Full postal address Card No. Signature Order from your Bookseller, or fill in the coupon PERSONAL COMPUTER SISTEMS ATARI ATAR MAGRONIES 400 & 800 ZX81 ZX80 MICROCOMPUTERS ATARI IK Space Invaders (IN MANCHESTER 26 Spiers Close Knowle, Solihull West Midlands B93 9ES England A superb version of the famous arcade game in fast interactive graphs. A 4x2 array of aliens descend moving right & left and they con detect your Laser Bose so keep it on the move. Previous and current game On screen scoring Destructable protective shields and keyboard control of the Loser Base & Laser Bolt firing using()& and the Rubout key. An interactive graphs ball game, as Invaders written in mic for good graphs Try your skill and patience at knocking all bricks from the wall Use & to control the paddle, BARCLACARD IK Breakout VISA N A TAN BEST ATARI DEALER VIDEO COMPUTER SYSTEM IK Music * SOFTWARE * PERIPHERALS * COMPUTER CHESS GAMES wwwwwwme NN MANCHESTER'S mu NATARI SPECIAL NAK ORDER ACTIVISION SERVICE WRITE OR PHONE FOR PULL DETAILS (Gil banmwa Commodore VIC due GEMINI ELECTRONICS Dept.cvG, 50 Newton St.,Off Piccadilly, Manchester M1 2EA. Tel: 061-236 3083. WE ARE AT THE CORNER NEWTON ST. HILTON ST. From a range of 8 notes you can use your ZX as a toy piono Your selected notes are written to cassette-continous prompt for new selection of notes-play back your cassette and just listen to it sing. Example lunes, \"3 CASSETTES & PROGRAM LISTINGS FOR ONLY .95!! Startrek 16K — All the usual features .95 Life 16K Fast full screen M/C version .95 Mission of 16K A dangerous recovery, mission in the murky depths. 3 play levels. .95 Pontoon/Fruit Machine 16K Good graphics .95 16K Ram Pack (ZX81) .50 78 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"JFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOF DANGER IN THE DEPTHS HALLS OF DEATH FENCING WITH ALIENS bowlers must be nominated. The computer tosses a coin and tells you if you are batting or bowling. The main display, a scorecard, is then printed up on the screen. You are asked to nominate a bowler for the first over, or if Down into the depths to face you are batting whether, you danger and earn your rewards, want to attack or defend. the standard adventure game This happens every over and format is relived in Halls of there are 20 in each innings. Death Bowlers nomination is necessary The object of the game is to as some bowlers are better than explore the various cave levels of others. Those two choices are the Halls of Death, collecting the only ones you are allowed to treasures and slaughtering montake and make the program sters before you are killed. slightly disappointing in that If you do manage to get out respect. you are given a rating based on After making your decision the the treasures you have been able scorecard will alter every ball to to retrieve and the monsters you tell you who is batting, how many runs were scored off that ball have killed. The deeper you go, the nastier the monsters (watch alter the team total and update out for that Mummy) and the the bowlers' figures. If it is the greater the treasures that can be second innings, you are told SPACE INVADERS AND PINBALL found. I liked the Dragon! what the opposition had scored Movement around the levels is Spacewar brings the alien invadat the same point in the first becomes very fast moving and a innings a nice touch that adds a via the number pad in the usual ers back to your screen but puts great amount of skill and conbit of excitement. If the manner; other commands are them behind a wall. centration is required to get a scorecard flashes \"Owzat\" you prompted on the screen -usuThis cross between Space good score. You are allowed up have to wait for the umpire the ally requesting the pushing of Invaders and Breakout has to nine balls with which to try to ZX81 to make a decision. one letter or another. The prokamikaze alien spaceships trying get up to 999,990 (you'll never do Unless you are a cricket buff gram generates a player for you to knock bricks out of a wall it) although a score of about this is a game that will only be with certain characteristics. which it is up to you to defend. 100,000 is quite reasonable. played now and again. It is not There is an option of saving Every 1,500 points a new barNeither of these games need a enough of a simulation to replay characters at the end if they rier magically appears to replace floating point ROM. Un the same actual games and is therefore survive) and reading them back the old battered one. cassette but more disappointing slightly disappointing. The into the game, to continue play. Your resources amount to five are, Drive and Letters which documentation is excellent and ing next time. laser bases, which seem pretty make up the four games. Still at stands as a target for other softOne of the best features of the meager when compared to the only  from Timedata I would ware suppliers. Mini-Cricket is game is the combat, which has a alien commander, who has 400 strongly recommend this casavailable from Emvee Softrealistic points system. If you craft at his disposal. sette to all Acorn Atom users. ware of Lytham in Lancs, remain undecided on what to do. If you manage to destroy all and is priced .95 and your opponent carries on fighting the aliens a message appears needs 16K of memory. usually with nasty results. telling you what a hero you are. Watch out for some special But there is one small bug in the effects from some of the monprogram, when the last base has sters it pays to run from some been destroyed the firing sound of them. \"effect still continues whenever You can try out spells too, but you press the fire key. you don't know what they do On the same Acorn Atom casMINI-CRICKET until you try them. They turn out sette is Pinball, a version which to be sleep, teleport, lightning is the best I have yet seen on a If there is a statistical game that bolt, fireball woe betide you if computer. The game uses low the ZX81 would be good at, it you don't have enough spell resolution graphics and needs 5K must be cricket. Unfortunately points when you start using of text space memory, so it will Mini-Cricket only makes a fair them! run on a semi-expanded Atom. effort at simulating the one day One fault the game has is that in this version of Pinball, the game. it is possible to ruin the map on table has been put on its side so Mini-Cricket is a game for two the screen if you push the wrong that the flippers are on the left players against each other or one key in spell use, but this is a hand side of the screen rather player against the computer. On minor fault in a game that I found than at the bottom. This makes loading the program the ZX81 quite compulsive, expecially as the game slightly more difficult asks you what type of game you tended to get killed at the most to master if you are used to want to play, one or two players? interesting point! It runs on a Pet playing on normal pinball The computer then goes on to in 16K and costs  from Supermachines but you should soon ask you to name your team and soft of Middlesex. get used to it. The game the 11 players in it, of these, four "


"DOWN TO BASIC DOWN BY MOIRA NORRIE GIVE LUCK A CHANCE range, however, we are only interested in the \"integer part of these numbers i.e. the part before the decimal point. in Basic, there is a function INT that provides the \"integer part of a given number. computer system to another. On many systems you have to include a value in brackets after \"RND\" for example, RND(1). The operation of the RND function will depend upon the value given in brackets. Later, I will give some examples of the effects of different values for some of the popular personal computers that adopt this format. For the moment, it suffices to say that on most of these systems replacing line 20 of the previous program with INT(3.25) is 3 as 3.25 can be expressed as 3+0.25 INT (-2.6) is -3 as -2.6 can be expressed as 3+0.4 20 PRINT RND(1) should give a program that will generate a list of random numberseach lying between 0 and Most games involve some element of \"chance\" or \"luck\". This element of chance is introduced into a game by actions such as rolling dice, shuffling cards or spinning a wheel. For any such action, we know that each of the possible outcomes is equally likely to occur. When you roll a dice, you may get a 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6. The chance of getting a \"l\" is no different from that of getting any other of the numbers. By the action of rolling the dice, you are selecting one of the numbers at random. I will now show you how you can introduce this idea of chance in your programs. In Basic, there is a function RND which selects numbers in the range of 0 to 1 (not including 1) at random. Every time the computer encounters (\"RND\" in a basic program, it will select another number between 0 and 1. To illustrate this, try running the following program 10 FOR I = 1 TO 20 20 PRINT RND 30 NEXT I 40 END A list of 20 numbers, each in the range of 0 to 1, will be printed. They will appear to be selected randomly in that they will not follow any obvious pattern. In fact, these numbers have been generated by the computer using a mathematical rule which produces a list of numbers with this property of \"randomness\". This mathematical rule is called a \"Pseudo-Random Number Generator\" meaning that it generates numbers that appear to be random Different computers use different Pseudo-Random Number Generators. As a result, the operation and format of the RND function varies slightly from one From the second of the examples above, you can see that the function INT is not quite so straightforward when dealing with negative numbers. However, in our case, we are only interested in positive numbers. When the value is positive, the operation of INT can be described as returning the part of the number before the decimal point and ignoring the rest. The following program will simulate rolling a die 20 times and print a list of outcomes. THE ROLE OF THE DIE 10 FOR I = 1 TO 20 20 PRINT INT (6* RND +1) 30 NEXT I 40 END How can you use this function RND to simulate rolling a die in a game? The function RND provides us with a number in the range o to l. We require some way of converting this to one of the digits 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6. Let's examine the conversion process step by step. If RND gives a number in the range 0 to 1 (not including 1). then 6*RND will give a number in the range 0 to 6 (not including 6). By adding on 1, we would then have a number in the range 1 to 7 (not including 7). For example: if RND would give 0.217873; then 6*RND would give 1.30724; and 6* RND +1 would give 2.30724. By using 6*RND +1 we can generate numbers in the desired A similar program could be produced to simulate a roulette wheel by using INT(37*RND) remember, the possible outcomes are 0, 1, 2,... 36. Clearly, these programs are not of much interest on their own. Later in the series I will show how they can be included in a games-playing program. If you try running the previous programs more than once, you will find that they always produce the same output. A computer game would soon become very boring if it always used the same random numbers each 80 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"sequence of random numbers, RNDO) returns the value of the most recently generated random number. It is a great pity that all the systems are so inconsistent! There are situations when you will wish to select alternative sections of your program depending upon the data input or, perhaps, the value of a random number. Such selections can be made by using an IF statement to test whether a specified condition is true. If the condition is true, then a \"jump\" is made to a particular section of the program. To illustrate the use of an IF statement I will consider a very simple example. time it ran. We need to be able to adapt the Pseudo-Random Number Generator so that it will generate a different sequence of random numbers each time we use it. It is this aspect of PseudoRandom Number Generators that tends to vary greatly from one system to another. I will describe the most common alternatives. In those systems where the function is simply expressed as \"RND\", there will be a keyword RANDOMIZE or RAND that can be included in a program before the first RND function. The inclusion of a line containing the appropriate keyword will result in a different set of random numbers being generated each time the program is run. On the Sinclair ZX81, my program for \"rolling a die\" could be adapted to: 10 RAND 20 FOR I = 1 TO 20 30 PRINT INT (6*RND +1) 40 NEXT I 50 END When I introduced systems that used the format RND (1), I stated that the operation of the Pseudo-Random Number Generator depended upon the value inside the brackets On the Commodore Pet, a program using RND(1) will produce the same random number sequence each time the program is run, whereas RNDO) will result in a different sequence each time the program is run. On the Atari, the use of RND(1) will produce a different sequence of random numbers each time the program is run, Rather than being used to generate a otherwise print \"HEADS\" end We therefore have two alternative sections in the program either we print the message \"TAILS\" or we print the message \"HEADS\". If the condition that RND <0.5 is true, then we print \"TAILS\". 10 IF RND <0.5 THEN 40 20 PRINT \"HEADS\" 30 GOTO 50 40 PRINT \"TAILS\" 50 END If the condition RND <0.5 is true, then the computer will \"jump\" ahead to line 40. If the condition is not true, then the jump will be ignored and the computer will continue, as normal, with the following line-in the above example it will go to line 20. In the case where \"HEADS\" is printed, the computer must \"jump\" over line 40 — otherwise the message \"TAILS\" would also be printed. This is achieved by using a 'GOTO' statement. A GOTO statement simply specifies the line number the computer will \"jump\" to. The IF statement is sometimes referred to as a \"conditional jump\" while the GOTO statement is sometimes referred to as an \"unconditional jump\". TOSSING A COIN How can we write a program to simulate tossing a coin — the possible outcomes being a \"tail\" or a \"head\"? The function RND selects a number between 0 and 1 at random. It is equally likely that the number will lie in the lower half of the range or the upper half of the range. Similarly, when you toss a coin, it is equally likely that the outcome will be a \"tail\" or a \"head\". We may therefore decide that if the random number is in the lower half of the range, it represents a \"tail\"; and if it is in the upper half of the range, it represents a \"head\". Our program would therefore take the form if RND 0.5 then print \"TAILS\" NEXT ISSUE SOLVING PROBLEMS CRID I have briefly introduced the IF and GOTO statements. Next month, I will describe the use and format of these statements in more detail. The programs discussed so far have been very simple. You have the knowledge to write reasonably complex programs it is now just a matter of gaining experience in using that knowledge. I will work through the steps involved in developing a program for a specified problem next issue. STRUGGLE! STRUGGLE! ADDRESS BUS NEXT ISSUE COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 81 "


"ZX81 Basic Book Coming shortly... / Learning Microprocessors BASIC for Hobbyists with your Ray Coles Sinclair ZX80 Adapted from a popular series of articles in Practical Electronics this Robin Norman book takes the reader step by step through the mysteries of the This book will be of great value to all microprocessor Chip and its instruction ZX80 owners. It tells you how to get set the support components such as The ZX80 working how to programit memories and communication interfaces and how to get the best out of it and the use of the microprocessor in Contains all the information necessary home computers to use the Sinclair ZX80 to the full 0408 00414 2 92 pages plus 14 specially wnitten programs unavailable elsewhere .25 0408 01101 7 160 pages Robin Norman .95 26 BASIC Programs If you have a ZX81, or are thinking of Q&A on for your Micro buying one, this book will tell you all Personal need to know to get the best from it. Derrick Daines Computing Here is a collection of 26 new and varied games The ZX81 Basic book covers the programs from spelling tests to Submarines Basic 1K version, the additional Peter Lafferty hunting. They are graded from the most elementary, usable on the simplest home facilities offered by the 16K This book will help anyone who computer to longer and more complex programs expansion RAM and how to use the wishes to learn about personal Suitable for more advanced machines Sinclair ZX printer. There are 14 computers and the uses to which original programs for you to run on Derick Daines has written the games in an easy they can be put it describes the development of the personal Subset of BASIC so that the reader will have no the machine (for 1K and 16K versions). computer explains its operation and difficulty in translating them for any microcomputer and for those confused by computer outlines the principles of Each program is described in a lively and informative programming A chapter an Style with a list of variables and memory size required jargon (and who isn't?) there is applications surveys the many uses a glossary of technical terms. plus a program listing and sample run of these remarkable machines The book is ideal for hobbyists since it helps improve Robin Norman assumes no initial techniques for writing successful programs whilst 0408 00555 6 96 pages also providing plenty of entertainment knowledge of computing and his undemanding writing style is a .95 perfect beginner's introduction 0 408 001178 5 176 pages In case of difficulty send cash with order to Patricia Davies Marketing Manager at the ICVG 2/82) / address shown Borough Green Sevenoaks, Kent TNIS SPH ORDER NOWfrom your local bookseller of Butterworth vision .95 Tewnes Technical Books ZX81 WORKSTATION.. FOOTBALL MANAGER Els INC.VAT A GREAT NEW GAME FROM Addictive Games for ZX81, ZX80, TRS80, VIDEO GENIE «JUST LOOK AT THESE FEATURES *4 Divisions Promotion & Relegation* *F.A. Cup * Full League Tables *Transfer Market (Buy and Sell Players)* *Pick your Team for each Match (but watch out for Injuries!)* *As many Seasons as you like *7 levels of Play (from Beginner to Genius!)* Managerial Rating (tells you how good you REALLY are!)* *Save Game Facility (continue again another time) -All this and much much more packed tightly into 16K RAM \"IF YOU LIKE FOOTBALL YOU'LL LOVE THIS GAME\" HARDWARE REQUIRED:TO ORDER SEND CHEQUE/PO FOR .95 MADE PAYABLE TO ZX81/ TRS80/ ADDICTIVE GAMES at ZX80 Video Genie 267B, Conniburrow Boulevard, MILTON KEYNES, 8K ROM LEVEL II MK14 7AF 16K RAM 16K RAM (Please allow 28 days for Delivery) ... is a stylish and ergonomic plinth for the ZX81. It raises and tilts the TV to avoid eyestrain, holds the 16KRAM in place and hides the wiring and power supply. This very professional unit costs , a built-in power switch is , plus postage at .50, inc. VAT. Peter Furlong Products, 125Catford Hill, London SE6 4PR. Callers by appointment, please. Tel 016907799. Visa, Access. 82 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"SUPERMARKET COMPUTER CHESS MAIL ORDER EXTRA LOW PRICES! MIND ROUTINES The factorial of a number is given by the formula n factorial (denoted as n!) = n x (n-1) x... x2xl Example 3! = 3x2xl = 6 4! = 4x3x2x1 = 24 What are the lowest 3 consecutive whole numbers whose factorials each have the property that they contain the digits 0-9 in order.  Bottles of champagne go to G. Kitchen of Deepcar, Sheffield and E. M. Weston of Tadley, Hants, winners of December issue's Mind Routines and Nevera Crossword puzzles. More champagne is up for grabs this issue. Hand hold Chess Traveller complete with board men etc.) 34.75 Boris Diplomat flightweight portable -ideal for beginners and travel .50 Mini Chess Master 1 low priced port able sensory! 15.00 Challenger Mini Sensory the mini ver sion of the Challenger Sensory ideal for travel) .50 Challenger \" ideal all-round Chess Computer) 53.50 Challenger Sensory \"B\" (sensory chess to club standard Challenger Sensory Champion Fastest and strongest game yet produced by Fidelity Electronics, Winner of the World Microcomputer Championships. Out right! 0258.00 * Murphy Encore (top level chess with fast playi E128.50  Great Game Machine (mainframegames centre for games cartridges, including Murphy Chess, Borchek Draughts, Las Vegas Blackjack. Revers .00 COMPUTER GAMES Backgammon Challenger 69 50 Omar Backgammon 5750 Advanced Bridge Challenger 4174-00 COMPUTERS Texas T1994 16K Computer which plugs direct into any TV for full colour ideal learning aid for every member of the family including pre-school children Ideal for learning chess. It will give you a good game or you can program your own or other Masters on to cassette floppy disc. Many pre-programmed games modules available just plug-in and play 25600  FREE-Mains Adaptor included GOODS NEW & FULLY GUARANTEED PRICES EXCLUDE VAT & P.P Club/School Company orders accepted by phone Diners Barclaycard Access Visa accepted by phone FOR IMMEDIATE DELIVERY Tel.: 01-455 9823 EXPORT ORDERS WELCOMED 1 Air Post Delivery Quotations on request MOUNTAINDENE 22 Cowper Street London EC2 PET ACCESSORIES VERBATIM double-density 4-track VERBATIM double density 77-track ACCUTRACK double density 40-track Ribbons for CBM 3022/Epson TX80 Cartridge for CBM 4022/Epson MX80 10.00 NEVERA CROSSWORD Lockable disk boxes hold 90 disks) Lockable disk boxes hold 40 disks) Disk Library cases hold 10 disks Dusk storage pages (hold 2 disks) Dustcover for small screen PET/CBM Dust Cover for large screen PET/CBM Dustcover for 3022/4022/3040/4040/8050 PET TO IEEE 2-metre cable IEEE TO IEEE 2-metre cable Perspex green screen for PET As above, for large screen models Cassette cleaner & demagnetiser Basic 40 Commodore Users Manual PETMASTER SUPERCHIP state model) MIKRO ASSEMBLER chip state model) ,50 50.00 2. CDC operating system with potential (5) 3. True comic romp around the hardware (13) 4. Deletion of Basic comment on a cricket ground (7) 5. Guy Fawkes peripheral (7) 7. Gas Panels turned around might cover the front of an arcade machine (5,4) 10. Failsafe not needed by video circus player (6,3) 11. Criminal prelude to 9 (5,2) 12. Working hard in confining a peripheral to a dedicated task (7) 13. A quick burst of fire in reprisal volley from the asteroid player (5) 14. Writer on the church. 10 of them are usually required to play 9 (5) ACROSS 6. Wiring the equipment again while saving the program (9) 8. Character lost from the front of the tape is fishy (3) 9. Video version of Escape from Colditz? (5,8) 11. Graduate with such company Margaret Thatcher, 49 from Rome and the Queen proves more efficient than an interpreter (5,8) 15. Fantastic dream gave tune played on a micro (9,4) 16. Fashionable point to play a fruit machine (3) 17. Theatrical second-hand computer (3,3,3) DOWN 1. Machine failure loses a life in Grand Prix (5) TOP PET GAMES SPACE DEBRIS, GIDDY GHOULS & SUPER GLOOPER METEORITES R e ach 00 ASTEROIDS, SPACE RESCUE Bk HITCH-HIKERS GUIDE TO THE GALAXY 32k CRACKS OF DOOM Lord of the Rings) 32% HALLS OF DEATH 16 1400 ADD 15% VAT TO ALL PRICES-POST FREE IN UK SUPERSOFT First Floor, 10-14 Canning Road, Wealdstone, Harrow, Middlesex, HA3 7SJ, England Telephone: 01-861 1166 "


"SUPERMARKET ZX81-1K starter pack Twelve programs on cassette written for the new user to demonstrate the versatility of the ZX81. Seven exciting moving graphic games including, Invaders, Tank-Shoot Subsearch and Road Race: A sound generation program is also included. Orders despatched on high quality casserte by return, .90 with order to: EQETWARE A beginner's guide to plain jargon Secondtion za rande, Belga tient 22 Bramber, Belgrave Tamworth Stats 877 2LL ZX81 16K RAM Cassette Games to Test Your Skill and Tactics NASTY INVADERS .95 A 20min plus Action-packed Game. You are on duty in the Defence Radar Centre An invasion starts. Your task is to prevent the Enemy from landing. But you have problems: not only do you have to stop the Invaders making repairs to their craft, but there could be personnel trouble too! Good control is rewarded, but errors are penalised. Don't despair Rank Has Its Privileges!! NASTY MOUNTAIN .95 VERY NASTY MOUNTAIN .95 You are leading an expedition and come to an impassable mountain range. It looks like a long detour until an old goat-herd announces that there is an opening in the rocks into which the occasional animal wanders, but they never reappear See if you can solve the mysteries of Nasty Mountain and continue on your travels! Whether you succeed or fail, you can always try again but somehow it's not quite the same as before!! Very Nasty Game: an advanced version of the Nasty Mountain Game with 16 levels of play. Practice Makes Perfect but the more mysteries you solve, the more your tactics are tested!!  all programs are recorded twice check-loaded before despatch user program test facility \"prices include VAT and P&P Cheques P.O.S to: GILTROLE LTD., DEPT. CVG. P.O. BOX 50, RUGBY, WARKS, CV21 4DH. DO YOU PLAY TV GAMES? It could cost anything up to  to own your own comprehensive library of cartridges for your TV games console. We have such a comprehensive library for most systems, and are prepared to offer this facility to you at low daily rentals, with the option of purchasing at Special Discount Prices those cartridges which give you most pleasure. For further details please send a large S.A.E. to E&E ENTERPRISES, P.O. BOX 8, SALTASH, CORNWALL PL12 6 YU. ADVENTURE A type of game in which the player has to take a character role and retrieve a number of treasures or objects by a trial and error process giving instructions to the computer. The \"hero\" (or player) encounters a variety of hazards often taking the form of dangerous monsters, wizards and animals. Some adventure games are so complex that they take weeks, or months, to solve. ALGORITHM A process or set of rules to carry out a task or solve a mathematical problem. ARRAY A series of items (data or information) arranged to form a meaningful pattern. ARROW KEYS The keys on a computer keyboard marked with arrows. Used for moving the cursor across, or up and down the V.D.U. screen. ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE A language built up with memory codes designed to make programming easier. BASIC The most widespread computer language, which is one of the easiest to learn and is used on all microcomputers. BUG A slang term given to a mistake in a computer program which prevents it from working. It can refer to a mechanical, electrical or electronic defect in a computer. CHIP A tiny piece of silicon which holds all the components that make up a microprocessor. CHR$ A Basic function which codes a computer's graphic symbols. It is followed by a number in brackets, e.g. CHR$ (68), which is the coded number of the symbol you want the computer to produce. COMPUTER LANGUAGES Languages are used to make the computer perform operations. They consist of computer instructions or commands. There are different types of languages for carrying out different tasks, e.g. business, scientific. DEBUG The process of locating and correcting errors in a computer program. DEDICATED CHIP A chip (microprocessor) which has been specially programmed to perform a single or special group of applicatons, e.g. computer games. ROMs are usually the means by which dedicated chips are developed DISC A magnetic storage device. It can be either a hard or floppy disc. Hard discs can usually store more information than floppy discs and are used with mainframe computers. DISC DRIVE A unit which is connected to the computer used for loading the information stored on discs into the computer. DOLLAR SIGN See \"String\" FIRMWARE A program which is stored in a permanent ROM. GOSUB A Basic command instructing the computer to go to a subroutine in a computer program. GRAPHICS The name given to pictorial representation of data such as plotted graphs, engineering drawing and, of course, computer games. HARDWARE The general term given to all pieces of electronic and mechanical devices which make up a computer system, i.e. the actual machines. HIGH RESOLUTION GRAPHICS A method of using Basic commands to move a drawing head to any position on the screen and drawing a line between two specified points. This facility is available on several makes of microcomputer. INPUT Information/data which is fed into the computer. INTEGER A number which does not contain a decimal point, i.e. a whole number. K Abbreviation for Kilobyte. Nelson Computer Services Ltd SHARP MZ BOK MZ 80B Thuca PC 3201 Personal and Business SP Computers Special Offer MZ BOK cash and carry Price  Inc. VAT Delivery .00 Inc. VAT Computers, Peripherals, Software Maintenance on Sharp, Apple, etc. Call in for a demonstration in our showroom ROSSENDALE 229125 (STD CODE 0706) TELEX 635615 St Johns Court, Bacup Road Rawtenstall, Lancs BB4 7PA 84 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"SUPERMARKET SOFTWARE GLOSSARY BRIDGE SOFTWARE QUALITY SOFTWARE FOR YOUR 22242 XXX881! zzzzz XX 888 11111 1K GAMES Duck Shoot Mooniander, Hangman Crossword Latter Square Cassette and instructions 3.00 16K GALAXY INVADERS in machine code. Cassette and instruc tions (16 RAM pack needed Also T STATISTICS 3.50 1 GRAPHICS 3.00 162 MULTIGRAPHICS 13.50 Sand sae for details. Mail order only. BADGE SOFTWARE IG) 36 FERNWOOD, MARPLE BRIDGE STOCKPOT, CHEAPHIRE SKo see A beginner's guide to plain jargon CASSETTE ONE PROGRAMS FOR ZX81 \"1 had your Invaders React cassette... I was delighted with this first cassette -P. Rubython, London NW10 *Thanks for your Cassette One you sent me some excellent games at a very cheap price!\" P. Rushton, Leeds \" have been intending to write to you for some days to say how much I enjoy the games on 'Cassette One' which you supplied me with earlier this month. Please let into the secret of your first time load every time!\" EH, London SW4 CASSETTE ONE SIDE ONE 1K MACHINE CODE PROGRAMS React, Invaders, Phantom aliens, Maze of Death, Planet lander, Bug splat, Bouncing letters CASSETTE ONE SIDE ONE 1K BASIC PROGRAMS I Ching, Mastermind, Basic hangman, Robots CASSETTE ONE SIDE TWO has large screen versions of Invaders and Maze of Death, ready for when you get 16K (Previous customers who did not get the large screen versions can get free upgrade instructions by sending me an sae.) CASSETTE ONE costs .80 from Michael Orwin, 26 Brownlow Rd., Willesden, London NW10 9QL. KILOBYTE A measurement of memory capacity. 1024 bytes of memory. So 8K is equivalent to 8192 bytes. LANGUAGE See \"Computer Language\". L.C.D. (Liquid Crystal Display) A display containing liquid crystals which light up when electric ity touches them. Used in calculators and watches. L.E.D. (Light Emitting Diode) Provides a simple display and consists of an electron tube which lights up when electricity is passed through it. Used as an alternative to liquid crystal. LINE NUMBER Refers to the number assigned to a line or row of characters contained in a computer program. LOAD Putting information from auxiliary storage into internal storage of a computer. It can be either a complete program or any data. When you load a program you put the contents of the program into the computer's memory from storage either on a disc or a cassette. LOOP A Basic function referring to the repeated execution of a series of instructions for a fixed number of times. MACHINE CODE The term used to refer to symbols or numbers assigned to parts of a machine. It is the same as operation code which is the symbol telling the computer which operation to perform. When a game is written in machine code it makes everything move much more quickly. MAINFRAME COMPUTER The jargon word used to describe a very large computer. MICROCOMPUTER A tiny computer (as the name suggests) consisting of hardware and software. The main processing blocks are made of semiconductor integrated circuits. MICROPROCESSOR Another name for a chip. NUMBER CRUNCHING The operation in computing which carries out the arithmetic and logical processes which information has to go through. PEEK A statement used in Basic which allows you to read the contents of a specified memory address. PERIPHERAL INTERFACE ADAPTOR (P.I.A.) An adaptor which is incorporated in the chip and makes peripheral equipment interfacing easier. PERIPHERALS Equipment which is used with a computer, e.g. printers V.D.U.s and disc drives. POKE An instruction used in most versions of Basic allowing you to store integers in a specific place in memory. R.A.M. (Random Access Memory) This is a memory chip which you can load programs and data to and from RANDOM NUMBER A number selected at random from an ordered set of numbers. R.O.M. (Read Only Memory) A memory chip which can only be read from and not written into. ROUTINE A set of coded computer instructions used for a particular function in a program. SOFTWARE Another name for computer programs. It can also refer to computer documentation. STATEMENT An instruction in a computer program. STRING A connected sequence of characters, words or other elements usually symbolised with the (dollar) sign. SUBROUTINE A computer program routine that is translated separately. SYNTAX The name used to refer to sentence structure rules of a programming language. USER PORT The entry channel to which a data set (set of similar data) is attached. CROYDON COMPUTER CENTRE 29a Bridgstock Road, Thornton Heath, Surrey CR4 7JJ Everything for the micro-computer user Phone 01-689-1280 for free catalogue TRS 80 and GENIE Owners Still Paying High Software Prices? You should be taking CLOAD MAGAZINE America's monthly cassette of at least 6 programs Cload caters for all tastes, Arcade Games, Adventures. Utilities. Tutorials and even Business programs Over 5,000 copies sold each month Trial cassette .95 6 month subscription .00 12 month subscription .50 Over 40 back issues available Send for lists from the sole agents in the UK MICRODEAL, Deal House, Luxulyan, Bodmin, Cornwall. Tel: 0726 850821 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 85 "


"SUPERMARKET TRS80 ModelsI+III and VIDEO GENIE A GUIDE TO THE LOW-COST COMPUTERS / Action games in BASIC? It can be bought in kit form and off the shelf complete. The kit is  for 1K RAM and  for the finished 1K product.  will secure an 8K kit. Nascoms are available from Warwick-based Lucas Logic. ACORN ATOM Cambridge based Acorn Computers manufactures the Atom machine which has a memory capacity of 2K, but it can be upgraded to 12K. It must be plugged into a television and is available in either kit form or ready built. As a kit it costs  for the 2K computer or  for the finished product. For a more powerful system, 12K, the price stands at  (in kit) and  completed. Acorn also makes the Systems 1, 2 and 3 which cost between  and . Not likely It's too slow. You've tried writing in BASIC and you know the results are rarely realistic or enjoyable. You need a compiler ACCEL or ACCEL2 will convert your BASIC programs to machine code. Spectacular speed-ups are possible 20 or 30 times for games constrained by display or logic, Write for details ACCEL Level 2 BASIC only .95 ACCEL2 Full DISK BASIC .95 southern software/ PO Box 39, Eastleigh Hants, SOS 5WQ NEWBRAIN This is a hand-held computer unit which is at the low end of the price bracket. For 2K RAM you pay  upwards and it is expandable to 20K of memory. Hobbyists often opt for this machine because of its low cost and it is used for general business and for playing games. An expansion unit is available which supports floppy disc drives, a printer and a visual display unit. It is available from the Grundy Group. APPLE The Apple has a solid software base for both business and entertainment applications. The machine comes with a memory capacity ranging from 8-48K. You can buy joysticks and paddles to plug in for use with computer games. Colour graphics can be used with a colour television. The 48K machine costs  and is obtainable from Apple Computer U.K., for merly Microsense which is based in Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire. OHIO SCIENTIFIC Ohio Scientific (OSI) makes the Superboard which is aimed at the hobbyist market. Its memory capacity starts at 4K RAM and is expandable to 32K if you buy the add-on board. Other machines in this family include the Challenger 1 and 4. These are essentially, cased versions of Superboard. The Challenger 4 is the cheapest of these at  and includes colour and sound options. ZX81 GAMES HIGH QUALITY, LOW COST SOFTWARE (ABSOLUTELY NO RUBBISH) GAMESTAPE 1, for 1K, only .95 10 Games incl. Asteroids, UFO, etc GAMESTAPE 2, for 16K, only .95 Starfighter, Pyramid, Artist. GAMESTAPE 3, for 16K, only .95 Catacombs... A Graphics Adventure. GAMESTAPE 4, for 16K, only .95 3D Monster Maze... Unbelievable Graphics. Cheque/P.O.s to J.K. GREYE SOFTWARE, 16 PARK ST., BATH, AVON BA1 2TE. ATARI 400/800 Most of the software for the Atari microcomputers are games or educational, with business applications only recently being introduced. The basic 400 with 16K RAM costs  direct from Atari's UK distributors, via London-based Ingersoll Electronics. The 32K version sells for . Peripherals for the machines, like disc drive units and cassette recorders can also be obtained from Ingersoll for  and  respectively. The 800 is expandable to 48K and the 16K machine sells for . PET Made by Commodore Business Machines, the Pet ranges from 8K RAM to 32K RAM. It is used mostly by small businesses for general applications but has a hefty hobbyist following. It is available from Commodore of Slough at a starting price of . Compatible peripherals are available for the Pet, including disc drives, cassettes for loading tapes and printers. SHARP MZ-BOK Popular with both business and home users, the Sharp's memory capacity starts at 16K and has a top limit of 48K. It comes with a monitor and a cassette recorder built onto the keyboard unit. Disk drives are also available. Manchesterbased Sharp Electronics have a recommended retail price of  for the 48K unit. * BIG EARS *COM BBC COMPUTER The computer adopted by the BBC to sell in conjunction with its forthcoming series is based on the Acorn Proton. The BBC has developed its own Basic to be used on the machine. Minimum memory is 16K RAM, maximum being 32K. Present plans for the machine are dual purpose, both business and games. Optional extras include joysticks, paddles, disc drives and a cassette for tape loading. Price is put at  for the 16K computer and  for the 32K version.  ONLY  SHARP PC-1211 The smallest computer in the Sharp range. Sharp classifies it as a pocket computer and it is programmable in Basic. It also has a cassette interface for loading and costs upwards of . SPEECH INPUT FOR ANY COMPUTER Hugely successful Speech Recognition System complete with microphone software and to instructions BUILT TESTED & GUARANTEED PLEASE STATE COMPUTER UK101. SUPERBOARD NASCOM    , Apet ZX80 ZX81 MUSIC SYNTHESISER +16 LINE CONTROL PORT Pwy part music sound effects drums Full control of ac decay and frequency outOutput isprovide Control and monitor sacity for Home Security. Robot Control Model Railway cat works with or without K RAM Add keyboard to make a performance polyphonie thesisert Full instructions included AMAZING VALUE AT ONLY .50 .00 BUILT COLOUR MODULATOR KIT C12 RGB PALUME UK101/NASCOM COLOUR GRAPHICS KIT 645 ne Modulator Still the best se Please add VAT 159 to all pics Barclay Access des accepted by telephone WILLIAM Dower House, Bericay Road CD IV Herogat, Brentwood STUART Esse CMS 3D SYSTEMS Ltd Telephone Brentwo10270 DAI This is a personal computer made by Data Applications for both business use and home entertainment. The U.K. system (it is made in Belgium) has 48K RAM as well as full colour and sound commands. Data Applications is based in Cirencester, Gloucestershire. The 48K system now costs . SINCLAIR There are two types of Sinclair's microcomputer available for under . Sinclair really brought the microcomputer into the home. The machines are ideal for learning the rudiments of computing but are limiting graphically. The ZX80 has 1K of memory and is expandable up to 8K, but is no longer in production. The ZX81 sells for .95 for 1K in kit form or .95 ready assembled. The 16K RAM packs cost .95 NASCOM There are two Nascoms available at the moment, both can be used for business and games. The Nascom 2 is the more powerful of the two with 8K RAM and with a Basic interpreter. 86 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"SUPERMARKET TORES ADULT ONLY S NAILABLE IN THE UK VIDEO CLUB! SORCERER The Exidy Sorcerer is a home computer with a sizeable games following but it is one of the more expensive of the microcomputers, costing upwards of . Memory amount ranges from 48K to 55K and there is a plug-in ROM pack for extra capacity. Disc drives and visual display unit are an additional cost. Sorcerer's can be obtained from a Cornish firm, Liveport of St Ives. TANGERINE Tangerine Computer Systems produce the Microtan 65, a microcomputer for games and personal use, like household accounts. It comes in kit form and is expandable from an initial 1K memory up to 48K of RAM. The Microtan 65 costs .35 for the 1K kit, or .85 assembled. Tangerine is based in Ely, Cambridgeshire. day or evenings cheap rate) Ring: 0373: 830563 or send coupon to: VIDEO CLUB 1.DREWSTEAD RD. LONDON S.W.16 TI-99/4A This computer has recently been re-launched by Texas Instruments. It consists of a separate keyboard with graphics facilities in full colour and now plugs in to a U.K. television. Software available for it from Texas Instruments is mostly business and educational but the firm has recently introduced a bundle of games to run on the computer. It has 16K RAM and uses tapes, discs or plug-in games cartridges. You can buy one of these from Bedford-based T.I. for  or from your local dealers. TANDY TRS-80 Tandy's TRS-80 Model 1 is a machine which is often used for games and is well-supplied with software for both entertainment and business applications. Its memory capacity goes from 4K to 16K but there is an expansion unit available upgrading it to 48K if you want the extra memory. The Model 1 is the cheapest of the Tandy range. The Model 1 costs  but comes complete with a monitor to use as a V.D.U. and a cassette. The Model Ill is an integral unit made up of a keyboard, 12\" screen and two slots for 51\" discs. It costs from . Please send FREE details, I am over 18 NAME ADDRESS PHONE Please be to fill in your telephone number VIC-20 The VIC is the much-publicised baby of the range of microcomputers from Commodore of Slough. At  it is one of the cheapest. Deliveries to dealers have just started. The VIC has full colour graphics on a colour T.V. and there are joysticks available. Although Commodore are plugging the business use of the machine it is tipped to be a hot games computer because of its colour graphics and low cost. JOYSTICK TAMARISK JOYSTICK .50 inclusive GAME EXTENSION SOCKET .50 inclusive. from TAMARISK DESIGN SERVICES 290 Brooklands Rd, Manchester M23 061-969 8729 O PROGRAMS ON CASSETTE VIDEO GENIE The Genie is made by E.A.C.A. and is a popular games machine. It is compatible with the Tandy TRS-80 Model 1. With 16K to 48K RAM there are disc drives available. The basic unit costs from  and is available from Lowe Electronics of Matlock in Derbyshire. TAPE 1 Startrek BKI, Robot Cha (4K) Mare (6K) Golf (4K), Space Invaders (4K), Chessboard (4K), Graphics (GK) Fouter Series 18K)Battut Polynomial (GK). Hangan BK) Docka Space Ship (4K) TAPE 2 Adventure (BK), King (BK), Moon Landing (6K), Simultaneous Equations (GK) Gunfight (4K) Hewan (6K), Dagtigh (AK The Tower of Brahma (AK) Nim GK) Life (BK TAPE 3 Real Time Startrek ) Mastermind (4K) Tank Battle (AKI, Surround 14K). Integrim tion (SK). Biorhythm (AK), Astead Shoot (4K) Breakout (GK). Graph Plotter 16K), Graphic Aid 14K Space Wor l. GENIE 1 The replacement computer for the Video Genie is now available. The Genie 1 is an upgraded version of the Video Genie and has full upper and lower case, a machine language monitor, additional Basic, has a sound unit and is cassette based. It is being aimed at the serious hobbyist market and costs . A disc version is available, called the Genie II and sells for  for the unit,  for the expansion box needed, and  for each disc drive. One tape 16.00 two for .50, three for .00 Machine Code Programs Space Invaders, Asteroids (9 speeds 5 difficulty levels) Life (128x128 board, 12sec per generation) .00 each, Two for .00 three for , all four for .00 All programs are available for or with standard ( 4 16) or enhanced 148x321 VDU display M.MWARD 9 ST ANDREWS AVENUE CRF WE CHESHIRE CW2 6/J. TANDY TRS-80 COLOUR COMPUTER Tandy's latest addition to its range of computers is the Extended Basic Micro Colour Computer, for TRS-80 Colour Computer for Short). It is available with either 16 or 32K of memory and costs . The actual computer unit consists of a keyboard which can be plugged into any television set. It is aimed at both business and games users and Tandy has bought out a variety of instant loading games program packages for the machine. Joysticks needed to play some of the games are extra and cost .95 a pair. The colour computer can be obtained from Tandy stores nationwide. U.K.101 This machine comes in either kit form or ready built with memory capacity of 4K to 40K with an expansion board). It contains television and cassette interfaces so you don't need a V.D.U. The U.K.101 is a popular computer for playing games and there is a lot of software around for it. The kit costs  for 4K, ready built it sells for  ATARI 400 COMPUTER 16K PLUS TAPE RECOR DER, LE STICK, STAR RAIDERS CARTRIDGE, SOFTWARE ON TAPE  O.N.O PET 2001-8 PLUS SOUND GENERATOR, TOOL KIT SUPERCHIP, LOTS OF SOFTWARE  O.N.O. UK101 HARDWARE VO PORT, MOTHER BOARD. RAMCARD, ROMCARD, P.O.A Mr M Bywater, 170 Durham Road, St Nicholas Stevenage. Herts. Stevenage 69612 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 87 "


"THE LOW COST ZX81 MEMORY EXPANSION S4 MEMORY PACK BUFFER  inc, vat MICRO SHOP (NEXT TO STREATHAM STATION) * * * NEW SOFTWARE SHOP EXCLUSIVELY FOR 18 pence 20 pence ZX81 COMPONENTS 133 at 28 pence 7420 04 at 18 pence 7425 107 at 32 pence 257 at 40 pence 7427 374 at 77 pence 7432 393 at 41 pence 7474 19 pence 7486 18 pence 74153 18 pence 74165 74LS 74LS 74LS 74LS 74LS 74LS 7405 7408 7410 PROGRAMS, GAMES, \"ADD/ONS\" 20 pence 20 pence 24 pence 24 pence 27 pence 39 pence * Increase your ZX81's memory to 4K. Runs most programmes designed for 16K expansion at a fraction of the price. All prices include VAT and P&P MOST OF THE MAIL ORDER ITEMS ADVERTISED IN THIS MAGAZINE AVAILABLE OVER THE COUNTER * LOADING PROBLEMS? TRY OUR INTERFACE BUSINESS & TECHNICAL DATA HANDLING PROGS. PROPER KEYBOARDS; CONSOLES; VDUS * * * 374A STREATHAM HIGH ROAD, LONDON SW16 Tel: 01-274 6674 S.A.E. APPRECIATED FOR CATALOGUE CEEDATA Ltd Glebe House, Armfield Close, West Mosely Trading Estate, Surrey KT8 OUP 01-941 4889 AD INDEX CREATE YOUR ZX81* GAMES IN MACHINE CODE. IT CAN GIVE YOU Flicker Free Graphics Faster Running Programs Larger and more Complex Games Faster Responses 15 THE MCIS Z80 M/C LOAD/EDIT V3 PROGRAM AIDS YOUR MACHINE CODE PROGRAMMING WITH Hex Code Input Decimal Augument Input 3-Byte Break-Points (BP) (Vital for fast de-bugging) Re-Enter Machine Code at BP Automatic Insertion Deletion VP's. A, F, BC, DE, HL and PC Registers Reported at each BP The Binary State of each Flag is Reported. Adda 41 Laskys 37/56 Addictive Games 82 Lowe Electronics 25 Algray Software Macronics 78 Buffer Micro Shop 88 Maplin Electronics OBC Bug Byte 35 Michael Cox Information Services 88 Calisto 42 Microgen Ceedata 88 Microstyle Chromasonic 21 Molimerx Compshop 90/91 Computer 100 77 Newnes Technical Books 82 Computer Plus Computers For All 69 Peter Furlong Products 82 Computer Shack Quicksilva Computer Supermarket 2 Control Technology 14 Sharp Electronics (UK) Shiva Publishing DK'tronics 63 Silica Shop Electronequip 56. Silicon Centre Essential Software Co 69 Silversoft Sinclair Research Gemini 78 Ltd 65/66/67 Ibek 70 Team 4 Software Video Services (Bromley) 14 Kansas City Systems 89 Kuma 50 Woodland Software 17 Z80 M/C LOAD/EDIT V3 Basic and Machine Code Listings Together with Flow Charts and Full Instructions .80 (Inclusive) Cheques with order please to MICHAEL COX INFORMATION SERVICES, 62 HIGH ROAD, NORTH WEALD, ESSEX CM16 6BY \"We thank Sinclair Research Ltd for permission to use their product name. The Companies are in no other way related 88 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"Can you save Middle Earth by rescuing Frodo from Shelob's lair ...? Tolkien's LORD OF THE RINGS Lord of the Rings is an entirely new type of game, combining a little of the principle of the Adventure type of game, using words as spells, etc; a little of the Quest' principle of moving around the rooms': plus actual graphics showing the various levels, walls, doors, nasties and yourself, Frodo. The appeal of the game is that it combines skill and chance, so that though developing strategies are important, there is no guarantee that having learnt a strategy it will work twice! The game is an adaption of Tolkien's book 'The Lord of the Rings', spell words actually being taken from the book as are the characters. Tolkien enthusiasts will not need convincing of the necessity of saving Middle Earth by escaping from Shelob's Lair; those without this background knowledge will have to play a few games before they become addicted! In your quest to cast the ring into the Crack of Doom to destroy its evil power you will travel a long and dangerous road. The Lair is on many levels, so you must find the stairs, and beware of the clever nasties, monsters and dwarfs which can detect you from a distance and rush for your gold, which you need to bribe. There are secret tunnels, monsters' tombs and the like. During your travels you can meet Shelob herself, a Fiery Balrog, Lord of the Nazgul, a Hideous Hill-Troll Chief, a Numakil from the Far Harrad, Hissing Gollum, a Howling Warg, a Barrow-Wight and all those characters of the spell words The game, though easy to actually play is complicated in itself with many and varied happenings along the way. But its advantage is that all the time you can see and manipulate yourself in eight different directions. Peter and argaret Hutt have developed and produced a most absorbing, and certainly addictive game... .50 Or you can battle through the Enchanted Forest to rescue the Princess ...? SWORDS AND SORCERY Swords and Sorcery sets you out on a quest to rescue the princess held by the wicked Necromancer, taking through many separate adventures and meeting many strange beings on the way to the castle if you ever get there. This program is randomly based, so it is not the same old thing time after time. Off you go through the Old Forest with just a sword and a few provisions, and if you are lucky, assistance from a Dryad as well as counsel from the Great Oracle. If you meet up with the Nymph, hang on to her, as she is a great guide through the forest as well as helping to fight the dreaded Trolls. But be careful not to upset her as she can easily turn her magical power onto you with a curse. From time to time you will meet wolves, lizards and snakes. Sometimes you will be bitten but other times you will get away. Food is most important to you, but you could be lucky in finding some in the forest and also be lucky in finding the magic talisman which will ward off the wicked Necromancer. The Satyrs are nasties, to be avoided, but the real nasty is the spider, for if you don't run from him and fast, it's the end for you! The Dragon is most important, and you can either run or fight. But to get a decent fighting ability rating, to enable you to fight your way back after rescuing the Princess, you have to fight. Run from the Goblins, or you will be enslaved, to be sold or freed only on payment of a ransom. More baddies in the form of the Trolls, which come in two versions including the warrior trolls which are your big risk all the time, and an enchanted sword. All the way through are degrees of your ability, which is either diminished or increased depending on the action you are taking at the time. Eventually you could make it to the castle and even rescue the princess, but then you've guessed, you have to fight your way back again! It's a fantastic game, which can be played over and over again, such is its variation, and so do not confuse it with others. .50 These programs are entirely different from each other in play and format. Both full 16K for Video Cenie and TRS-80. The two for .50. Programs for the TRS-80 and Video Genie. All prices are Vat paid and post free. Same-day first class return post service. All software in stock and fully guaranteed as we are the actual publishers. Free catalogue upon request. Kansas City Systems, Unit 3, Sutton Springs Wood, Chesterfield, S44 5XF. Tel. 0246 850357 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 89 "


"NOW IN STOCK THE NEW & EXCITING TRS80 MODEL III WE ARE NOW STOCKING THE APPLE IL AT REDUCED PRICES AUTOSTART EURO PLUS 48K  APPLE DISC II 3.3 Dos Disc with Controller GUARANTEE BY VAT Additional Drives 99 VAI Powerful Disk Operating Software Supports up to 6 drives Name Access to Files for Ease of Use .BASIC Program Chaining to Link Software Together Random or Sequential File Access to Simplity Programming Dynamic Disk Space Allocation for Efficient Storage Individual File Write-Protection Eliminates Accidental File Alterations Loads an BK Byte Binary Image in 6.5 sec (1.2 sec. in Pascal) Storage Capacity of 116 Kilobytes (143K Bytes with Pascal) on Standard 5% Diskettes Powered Directly from the APPLE (Up to 6 Drives for convenience and High Reliability Packaged in Heavy Duty, Colour Coordinated Steel Cabinet Colour Monitors for Apple 296 +VAT Getting Started APPLE I is faster, smaller, and more powerful than its predecessors. And it's more fun to use too because of built in features : .BASIC The Language that Makes Programming Fun High Resolution Graphics in a 54.000 Point Array) for Finely Detailed Displays Sound Capability that Brings Programs to Life Hand Controls for Games and Other Human Input Applications Internal Memory Capacity of 48K Bytes of RAM, 12K Bytes of ROM for Big System Per formance in a Small Package. Eight Accessory Expansion Slots to let the System Grow With Your Needs You don't need to be an expert to enjoy APPLE II It is a complete, ready-to-run computer. Just connect it to a video display and start using programs for writing your own the first day. You'll find that its tutorial manuals help you make it your own personal problem solver 48K  +VAT NEW The PEDIGREE PETS 32K The Radio Shack TRS ROTM Model llisROM-based computer system consisting of:  A 12-inch screen to display results and other information A 65 key console keyboard for inputting programs and data to the Computer AZ 80 Microprocessor, the brains of the system A Real Time Clock Read Only Memory ROM) containing the Model III BASIC Language fully compatible with most Model I BASIC programs Random Access Memory RAM for storage of programs and data while the Computer is an amount is expandable from \"16K to \" optional extral A Cassette interface for long term storage of programs and data requires a separate cassette recorder optional/extral. A Printer Interface for hard copy output of programs and data requires a separate line printer optional/extral Expansion area for upgrading to a disk based system loptional/extral Expansion area for an RS 232-C serial communications interface (optional extral All these components are contained in a single moulded case and all are powered via one power cord Disc Drives Kit with 2x 40 Track Drives 599 + VAT Disc Drives Kit with 2x80 Track Drives E729 +VAT Add 25 for Installation  VAT RRP  for 32K GET YOURSELF A NEW MX70 PRINTER AND SAVE A FORTUNE only  VAT .80 Column, Upper & lower case Apple dot Graphics  Centronics Parallel Uni-directional TX 90 D9% VAT. STOCK Very popular for home business us BK Microsoft Basic in ROM 32K with new improved keyboard. 12screen Cassette Deck 056 extra BO 8032 80 COLUMN PET ONLY  +VAT NEW CASIO VL TONE GEN .25 VAT ACORN ATOM UNIQUE IN CONCEPT THE HOME COMPUTER THAT GROWS AS YOU DO Fully Assembled  VAT THI The reliable value for money system with after sales support instruction and training facilities and a wide range of programmes It's a new kind of musical instrument. A computer controlled Synthesiser that helps you create play and arrange composi tions that normally take years of musical training NOBODY CAN GET NEAR OUR PRICES EXCEPT OUR CUSTOMERS Special features include Full Sized Keyboard Assembler and Basic . Top Quality Moulded Case  High Resolution Colour Graphics 6502 Microprocessor LE MEMORY UPGRADES s 16K (8 x 4116) .90 + VAT 4K Compukit (8 x 2114) .90 + VAT COMMODORE ONLY VIC-20  CENTRONICS 737 DOT MATRIX PRINTER only  VAT including cables TV GAME BREAK OUT 442 VAT Has got to be one of the Standard Features featured in ETE Hasta 4 other pinball games and lots of options Good kit for upgrading old amusement Spaced Mode 50 CPS Monospaced Mode Proportional Spacing Plus 10 CP1 and 167 CPION 9 Proportional or 78 Monospaced) Dot Matrix .7 X 8 Dot Matrix 3 Way Paper Handling System 9 Character ASC11 plus 6 European character sets Microprocessor Electronics Expanded Print Right Margin Justification Print Underlining 9 Wire Free Flight Print Head Bidirectional Stepper Motor Paper Drive Full One Line Buffer 21 LPM With 80 Columns Printed .58 LPM With 20 Columns Printed  6 Lines Per inch Vertical Spacing Paper Tear Bar  Centronic Colours and Logo  foreground colours  8 background colours  Real typewriter keyboard with full graphics . Music in three voices and three octaves  Language and sound effects MINI KIT-PCB sound & Vision modulator, memory chip and de-code chip Very simple to construct (14.90 + VAT OR PCB .90 MAIN LSI .50 Both plus VAT GLUARANTEE NEW TANTEL ONLY  VAI Microline STOCK Demonstation available at our showroom PRESTEL BY TANTEL The greatest thing since television telephones Communications at your fingertips for business home. 180.000 pages of up-to-date information on travel news, investment, holidays, hotels etc etc. Ask Prestela question and you have your answer in seconds in full colour on your own TV Only requires a telephone jack socket available from the PO THE VIDEO GENIE SYSTEM Ideal for small businesses, schools, colleges, homes, etc Suitable for the experienced, inexperienced, hobbyist teacher etc EG3000 Series WITH NEW EXTRA KEYSI 16K 16K user RAM  is extended 12K Microsoft BASIC in ROM Fully TRS 80 Level it software compatible Huge range of software already available Self contained, PSU UHF modulator and cassette Simply plugs into video monitor or UHF TV Full expansion to disks and printer . Absolutely complete just fit into mais plug The Video Genie is a complete computer system requiring only connection to a domestic 525 line TV set to be fully operational or if required a video monitor can be connected to provide the best quality display 51 key Typewriter style keyboard, which features a 10 key rollover Supplied with the following accessories BASIC demonstration tape NEW MICROLINE 80  + VAT) .80 cps Uni-directional Small size: 342 (W x 254 D) X 108 Himm 160 Characters, 96 ASCII and 64 graphics 3 and Pin Feed Low noise: 65 dB Low weight: 6.5 kg MICROLINE 82 f449 + VAT .80 cps Bi directional logic seeking Small size: 360 W) * 328 (D1 X 130 (H) mm 160 characters, 6 ASC and 64 graphics, with 10 National character set Variants..4 Character size: 40, 66, 80 or 132 chars/line. Built-in parallel and serial interfaces  Friction and Pin Feed Low noise: 65dB  Low weight: 8kg MICROLINE 83  + VAT  120 cps bi-directional logic seeking 136 column printing on up to 15in forms Small size: 512 W x 328 D X 130 (H) mm 160 characters, 96 ASCII and 64 graphics with 10 National character set variants 3 Character spacings: 5, 10 and 16.5 Chars/in. Built-in parallel and serial Interfaces  Friction and Pin Feed Low noise 65dB Low weight: 13 kg HITACHI PROFESSIONAL MONITORS 9''  .95 12\" E199   Reliability Solid state circuitry using an IC and silicon transistors ensures high reliability 500 lines horizontal resolution Horizontal resolution in excess of 500 lines is achieved in picture center Stable picture Even played back pictures of VTR can be displayed without jittering  Looping video Input Video input can be looped through with built in termination switch . External sync opere tion available as option for U and types  Compact construction Two monitors are mountable side by side in a standard 19 inch rack -OBASIC manual Beginners programming manual Write useful programs in the BASIC computer language yourself VIDEO GENIE EXPANSION BOX Complete with RS232 interface and floppy disc controller. O memory 225 VAT Memory ekpansion card IS 1001 16K 6110 32K 6159 VAT 90 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"EUROPE'S FASTEST SELLING ONE BOARD COMPUTER YOUR ZX80 IS NOW NO LONGER REDUNDANT COMPUKIT UK101 STOCKTAKE SALE NEVER TO BE REPEATED AT THIS PRICE UNTIL STOCKS LAST Upgrade your ZX80 to the full animated graphics of the ZX81. (No screen flicker), FOR ONLY .95 + VAT IN KIT FORM Works only in conjunction with NEW SK ROM from Sinclair (Not Included). ZX81 part-exchanges acceptedGOOD PRICES OFFERED *6502 based systembest value for money on the market Powerful BK Basic Fastest around Full Qwerty Keyboard 1K RAM Expandable to 8K on board Power supply and RF Modulator on board No Extras needed Plug-in and go Kansas City Tape Interface on board Free Sampler Tape including powerful Dissassembler and Monitor with each Kit If you want to learn about Micros, but didn't know which machine to buy then this is the machine for you COMPUKIT WITH ALL THE FEATURES THAT MADE IT THE MOST PROFESSIONAL COMPUTER KIT ON THE MARKET. Now WITH FREE NEW MONITOR (a saving). which includes Flashing Cursor, Screen Editing & Save Data on Tape. ATARI CARTRIDGES IN STOCK Phone for availability Build, Understand and Program your own Computer for only a small outlay. KIT ONLY .95 VAT Fully Assembled  + VAT NEW MONITOR IN ROM available separately at 67.90 + VAT Improved Basic function revised GARBAGE routine. Allows correct use of STRING ARRAYS .90 This chip can be sold separately to existing Compukit and Super board users 4K Upgrade Kit E5 RO + VAT V FOR THE COMPUKIT Assembler Editor E14.90 GAME PACKS 11. Four Games (5.00 21. Four Games .003) Three Games BK only .00 Super Space Invaders (BK 16.50 Chequers .00 Realtime Clock .00 Case for Compukit .50 40 pin Expansion Jumper Cable .50 All Prices exclusive VAT COMP PRO MIXER Professional audio mixer that you can build yourself and save over . Only .90 plus VAT for complete kit Plus FREE power supply valued at .00  TTL SALE Minimum Order 15 ZRO 74LSOO .10 74LSB6 .30 0.30 6502 74LS04E0.10 74LS93 .50 ACIA 650 .90 74LSO5 0.15 74LS 157 .60 OP.AMP 74LS 10 00.15 74LS 165 .90 CA3130 0.45 74LS32 0.20 74LS 365 0.40 BEG 74LS74 E0.25 74LS373 .20 7805 5V 0.75 Low Profile Sockets 14 PIN .06 1 8 PIN .10 24 PIN .20 16 PIN EO.06 20 PIN 0.15 0 PIN 60 m PANASONIC KX-T1520 AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE ANSWERING SYSTEM NOW AVAILABLE TEAC DISK DRIVES OUR NEW SUPER LOCATION IN IRELAND 19 Herbert Street, Dublin 2. Telephone: Dublin 604165 HEAR OUR ADS ON RADIO NOVA 88.1 VHF Stereo IF IT WASN'T FOR THE LOWEST PRICES, THE BIGGEST CHOICE AND THE BEST AFTER SALES SERVICE, WE JUST WOULDN'T BE COMP SHOP  + VI One of the most technically advanced telephone answering units available, the KX T1520 features a double Cassette system, a C60 cassette for incoming calls, which can be limited to 30 secs each or recorded in their entirety and a 20 sec continuous loop Cassette for your outgoing messages which are recorded through the built in microphone. Your telephone conversations can also be recorded after a bleep tone has notified your caller they are being taped Incoming calls can be monitored and the ring control is adjustable The remote call in pick up with Playback/Reset/Repeat and Skip controls, activates the system to play back your messages to you Over the phone wherever you are in the TEAC FD-50A has 40 tracks giving 125K Bytes unformatted single density capacity The FD 50A can be used in double density recording mode The FD 50A is Shugart SA400 interface compatible Directly compatible with Tandy TRS80 expansion interface Also interfaces with Video Genie, SWTP TRSBO North Star Horizon, Superbrain, Nascom, etc etc Address selection for Daisy chaining up to 4 Disks Disks plus power supply housed in an attractive grey NEC SPINWRITER only 28  WE HAVE ONE OF THE LARGEST COLLECTIONS OF COMPUTER BOOKS UNDER ONE ROOF, ALONG WITH RACKS OF SOFTWARE FOR THE GENIE AND TRS80. 4 VI i in nnirES EYCERT OUR CUSTOMERS NEC's high quality printer uses a print \"thimble\" that has less diameter and inertia than a daisy wheel, giving a quieter faster, more reliable printer that can cope with plotting and printing (128 ASCII characters) with up to five copies, fric tion or tractor fed. The ribbon and thimble can be changed in seconds. 56 characters per second bidirectional printing with red/black, bold, subscript, superscript, proportional spacing, tabbing, and much, much more. SHARP PC1211 .90 + VAT COMPUTER POWER THAT ONCE FILLED A ROOM CAN NOW BE CARRIED IN YOUR POCKET  Programs in BASIC \"QWERTY\" Alphabetic Keyboard .9K Random Access Memory  Long Battery Life. FEEL. EEGO EFEL EEEE FER .90 40 TRACK 225 + VAT. Double -VAT Disk Drive Disk Drive 77 TRACK Single Double  VAT -VAT Disk Drive 2 FANTASTIC FOR FILE HANDLING ACULAB FLOPPY TAPE The tape that behaves like a disc, for TRS-80 LEVEL 2. only  + VAT The Aculab Floppy Tape for the TRS-80 and Video Genie is a highly reliable digital storage system that provides many of the advantages of floppy disks at less cost Automatic debounce routine for the Level 2 keyboard Connects directly to TRS 80 Level 2 Keyboard, Operating and file handling software in ROM 8 commands add 12 powerful functions to Level 2 BASIC .90 BMHz Super Quality Modulators 6MHz Standard Modulators C12 Computer Grade Cassettes Anadex Printer Paper 2000 sheets Floppy Discs 5%\" Hard and Soft Sectored Floppy Disc Library Case 5%\" Ribbons DPB000 DP9500/9501 All Prices exclusive VAT 10 for .00 .00 .90 SC We give a full one year's guarantee on all our products, which normally only carry 3 months guarantee. CONECAS 63.50 .50 A SELECTION OF APPLE INTERFACES ARE NOW AVAILABLE AT OUR EDGWARE ROAD SHOWROOM Delivery is added at cost. Please make cheques and postal orders payable to COMPSHOP LTD., or phone your order quoting BARCLAYCARD, ACCESS, DINERS CLUB OF AMERICAN EXPRESS number CREDIT FACILITIES ARRANGED send SAE for application form MAIL ORDER AND SHOP: 14 Station Road, New Barnet, Hertfordshire, EN5 1QW (Close to New Barner BR Station Moorgate Line) Telephone: 01-441 2922 (Sales) 01-449 6596 Telex: 298755 TELCOM G TELEPHONE SALES OPEN (BARNET) 10am 7pm Monday to Saturday OPEN 24 hrs. 7 days a week NEW WEST END SHOWROOM: 311 Edgware Road, London W2. Telephone: 01-262 0387 01-449 6596 OPEN (LONDON) 10am 6pm Monday to Saturday IRELAND: 19 Herbert Street, Dublin 2. Telephone: Dublin 804156 COMPSHOP USA, 1348 East Edinger, Santa Ana, California, Zip Code 92705 Telephone: 0101 714 5422526 MARCLAYCARD \"Europes Largest Discount Personal Computer Stores\" 9A "


"Adventure into ATARI With Maplin... Through a thousand galaxies of time and space... From across the ravaged oceans... From dungeons of fantasies... After battles with enchanted dragons... Come the fabulous Atari computers... the ultimate creative game computer! Command a space-ship through the dangers of deep Spanish Italian and TouchTyping. Or just use the Atari 10 space where alien contact is inevitable or take your create your own programs the Atari makes it so easy to chances as you adventure through forbidden lands in generate really incredible graphics. It's all part of the search of secret treasures or play Space Invaders, magic of Atari. Asteroids, Missile Command, Super Break-out, Shooting When you decide to buy Atari, you're choosing one of the Gallery. Jawbreaker etc, etc, just like they are in the most advanced personal computers there is. arcades, but in the comfort of your own home. When you decide to buy Atari from Maplin, you've made Or discover the superb Atari teach-yourself programs that the best choice of all... because Maplin support will help you learn: Programming, French, German, Atari...totally! Write or phone for your Maplin/Atari information pack NOW! M16PLIN Demonstrations at our shops NOW See Atari at 284 London Road, Westclifl-on Sea, Essex. Tel: (0702) 554000 and at 159-161 King Street, Hammersmith, W6 Tel: 01-748 0926 Maplin Electronic Supplies Ltd P.O. Box 3, Rayleigh, Essex. Tel: Southend (0702) 552911/554155 "

