"95p NOVEMBER 1965 SS EXCLUSIVE PREVIEW: DAN DARE Pilot of the Future Pilot of the Future COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES WIN: A COMMODORE 128 WITH ANIROG WINXA NEXUS SURVIVAL KWIN FIGHTING WARRIOR WIN: TOUR DE FRANCE RACING BIKES/NIGHTSHADE MAPPED FREE BLADE RUNNER POSTER/ FIND THE YOUNG COOPERMAN "


"There's never been a better reaso WINTER You've captured the gold in Summer Games and Summer Games now it's on to the Winter Games! And what an incredible setting -a completely realistic winter wonderland featuring six action-packed events. You can compete against your friends or the computer First choose the country you want to represent. Then it's practice, training and learning a winning strategy for each event. Now the Opening Ceremony and the competition begins. Will you be the one who takes the gold at the Awards Ceremony? The quest for the gold continues. . . And it's all here the strategy, the challenge, the competition, the art and pageantry of Winter Games! Six Winter Events: Bobsled, Ski Jump, Figure Skating, Free-Style Skating, Hot Dog Aerials and the Biathlon Opening, Closing and Awards Ceremonies complete with National Anthems Compete Against the Computer or Your Friends and Family Unique Joystick Control Requires Timing and Skill One to Eight Players dk ma politiken. 02 SUMMER GAMES SUMMER GAMES II IMPOSSIBLE MISSION PITSTOP II BREAKDANCE "


"son for looking forward to Winter! GANES *Screens from Commodore 64 version HESSERTATIONERAL TOTAL U.S. GREA BRITAIN GOLD! EpYX DISK .95 CASSETTE .95 COMMODORE 64/128 COMPUTER SOFTWARE DANCE "


"FEATURES 30 C+VG SOFTWARE CHARTS 32 NEXUS COMPETITION 38 IDEAS CENTRAL 42 DAN DARE PILOT OF THE FUTURE 47 WANTED: YOUNG COOPER-MAN! 54 BUGHUNTERS 58 FREE BLADE RUNNER POSTER 85 DEAR BUGHUNTERS 90 TOUR DE FRANCE 93 HOTSHOTS 98 ZORRO COMPETITION 102 ADVENTURE HELPLINE 115 VIDEO-TECH 120 READERS' ROBOTS 125 MAILBAG 128 JUMP JET COMPETITION 130 NEXT MONTH THUNDERBIRDS/NEXT MONTH COLOURING IN THE PAST/118 NEWS + REVIEWS 8 NEWS  Robot Messiah is the latest from the talented Christian Urqhart, read about it here. Meet the Eureka winner ,000 better off! 14 REVIEWS  Can YOU help BLOB save the universe? Find out in Starquake our Game of the Month. Plus the Ultimate reviews. 80 ARCADE ACTION 102 ADVENTURE REVIEWS COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE By using the special Postol Subscription Service copies of COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES con be mailed direct from our offices each month to any address throughout the world. All subscription applications should be sent for processing to COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES (Subscription Department). Competition House Fordon Road, Market Harborough, Leicestershire All orders should include the appropriate remittance made payable to COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES. Annual subscription totes (12 issues): UK and Eine . Additional service information, including individual overseas airmail rates, available upon request. Circulation Department: EMAP National Publications Published and distributed by EMAP National Publications Ltd. Printed by Severn Valley Press Typeset by In Step Lid. GAMES BOOK 60 POKER/Spectrum 48K  Deal yourself in for a neat game of cards. It's ace. 64 HEEBIE JEEBIE/Commodore 64  Steer clear of the Heebie Jeebies and maybe you'll be amazed. 68 QUAKE ALERT/Atari 32K  Keep your nerve as you try to rescue 12 trapped scientists. 72 INJUN JOE/Spectrum 48K  Join this intrepid archaeologist on the expedition of a lifetime. + LG TOP 30 CHARTS PAGE 30 "


"NTS B04670 THIS ISSUE  Have we got a great package for you or what? Dan Dare is our hero of the month. We've got an exclusive sneak preview of the game based on the first ever space hero direct from the pages of Eagle comic. And, as you can see from Brian Talbot's brilliant front cover illustration, Dan's still thwarting the evil Mekon's plans for domination of the universe. Find out how Dan kept a stiff upper lip throughout the difficulties of programming on page 42. Rock stars Dire Straits hit the computer keyboard for their latest video to go with their latest hit record. Discover why they spent lots of credits on creating the most advanced computer animation sequences seen so far on the small screen. And as you've already discovered there's a mega-Book of Maps stuck somewhere on the front cover packed with maps of all your favourite games. We've even managed to squeeze in a map of Ultimate's latest hit, Nightshade, in our Ultimate review section! We've even got one of Commodore's brand new supercomputers (sorry not an Amiga!) to give away. A CI28 could be your thanks to Anirog and C+VG! Turn to page 128 where else? And we're revealing the winner of our great Readers' Robot Competition. Don't miss it! Plus tons of competitions, lots of your letters about the new look, and, of course, the Bug Hunters! Turn the page and enter a whole new world ... look, and, of course the bus Hunternet teren ho prope and enter a STARQUAKE REVIEWS/14 waar SCOOBIE>NEWS/8 004856 NORTH EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John DESIGN Craig Kennedy DESIGN/EDITORIAL CONSULTANTS Steve Bush Viel MacDonald ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Paul Coppins Simon Marsh Jim Douglas AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgalay READER SERVICES Marcus Jeffery SOFTWARE CONSULTANT Tony Tokoushi PUBLICITY Marcus Rich ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Louise Matthews DEPUTY ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Bernard Dugdale PRODUCTION ASSISTANT Melanle Paulo PUBLISHER Rita Lewis GAMES BOOK 36.62 uss SWORD and the Bug Hunters!  Jerry Paris EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR SAU Tel: 01-251 6222 THE ULTIMATE REVIEWS + MAPS AND PLAYING TIPS/22 GAMES BOOK/55 "


"GET EVEN MORE ATTACE AMSTRAD T.V. Modulator for CPC 6128 Joystick with additional joystick adaptor AMSTRAD Disc Drive with Interface and CPM for CPC 464 Speech Synthesiser and stereo amplifier .95 AMSTRAD AMSTRAD RS232C Serial Interface Light Pen complete with graphics software RS232C Interface Inc ROM Software .95 AVAILABLE AT BOOTS. CURRYS. DIXONS. RUMBELOWS. LASKYS. W.H. SMITH  TANDY. "


"SHED TO YOUR AMSTRAD. AMSTRAD TV. Modulator for CPC 464 Amstrad owners start out happy, and get even happier as time goes on. The first delightful discovery is that both the CPC 6128 and the CPC 464 are complete and ready to use as soon as you get them home. The CPC 464 comes with built-in datacorder, and the CPC 6128 with builtin disc drive. And both have either a full colour monitor or a green screen. But Amstrad owners can become even more attached to their computers with the simple addition of the peripherals featured here. They'll make your Amstrad faster, harder working and more entertaining. And they're very easy to attach. Simply plug in, and away you go, there's no need for extra interfaces. You may of course wish to get into some even more serious computing, for which you will need the Amstrad RS232C specialist interface. This opens the door to modems, networks, and serial printing. But whichever additions to your Amstrad you care to make you'll find their low prices an additional pleasure. Additional Disc Drive .95 Tell me more about the Amstrad range of | peripherals. Name Address AMSTRADORS | Amstrad peripherals i DMP 2000 Printer DMP 2000 Printer .95 Amstrad, P.O. Box 462, Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF SUPREME DISCOUNT STORES  COMET AND GOOD INDEPENDENT COMPUTER STORES "


"couple of Hawiaan programmers. The first is called The City and should be available from October. It will be available for the Atari, C64 and Apple priced at .95. We can tell you that the graphics are terrific lots of truly brilliant 3D images. As for game play — well old KC hasn't got his hands on a copy yet. But watch our Adventure pages for his review. Wowery Scooby-Do, who loves you? Lots of people will when they get their hands on Elite's latest, Scooby-Doo in the Castle Mystery. Now, we've all heard a lot about computer cartoons in the past. This is the first real attempt at doing just that. Like the arcade laser disc games you jump from scene to scene of cartoon style graphics as the mystery unfolds! Talking of graphics these are some of the best we've seen on the good old Speccy. Really big and cartoon like. Scooby-Doo will be out soon for the Spectrum, C64 and Amstrad. Watch out for a full review in C+VG next ish! that's what. It's the creation of programmer Peter Cooke who brought you Juggernaut. Tau Ceti is all about a weird planet inhabited by robots. Expeditions have travelled to the planet following a meteor strike which hit Tau Cetibut none have returned ... Tau Ceti will be released by CRL before Christmas. Watch this space for more details. in the far future when megabusiness corporations dominate the world like IDEAS CORP dominates us now territorial disputes won't be settled on the battlefield but in the BOUNCES arena. Skilled and deadly gladiators compete to hurla sfeel ball around a BOUNCES court and wipe out their opponent. BOUNCES, the latest game from the Beyond/Denton Designs collaboration, combines the action of martial arts games with an original scifi theme. The game is very fast, players will be able to select from a range of eight different BOUNCES champs drown in giant graphics on the C64 and Spectrum BOUNCES will be available in October priced at .95. And there could be a special BOUNCES championship. Read C+VG next issue for more details first release. Robot Messiah takes place on a planet controlled by androids. No human has set foot on it for centuries. The androids are super-intelligent and like all intelligent beings they have become stupid! They created a race of menial droids to carry out mining and other naff jobs so that they could sit about having a good time! But there was one android who hit out at this state of affairs. His name was Socrates and he was deprogrammed and turned into a droid for his rebellious thoughts! But he still continued fighting for his belief that all androids are equal and on his dying day transferred his rebellious thoughts to a receptive droid. This droid then sets off on a quest to find three envelopes which contain the necessary data to enable him to reprogram himself at the central computer and save the world! As you can see from our screen shots the graphics are pretty neat! NuWave isn't some kind of shampoo it's a new software label. And its first release will be Darkness at Dawn on adventure with a REAL difference. There's no text, or graphics just SOUND. Weird, huh? You have to work out what's going on by the sounds your computer makes. We'll be listening out for developments! The third in New Generation's Trashman series will be released in the New Year on the Spectrum and Amstrad. Called Trashman Goes Moonlighting it puts our dustman hero in the sorry state of having to work overtime doing anything from grass. cutting to window cleaning. Meanwhile the classic original Trashman game is being converted for the Amstrad. Questprobe Three, the long awaited Fantastic Four adventure in the Scott Adams/ Marvel Comics series is nearly complete. Conversion work is being carried out by Roger Taylor and James Burn, the programmers who also converted Terrormolinos and brought Dennis Through the Drinking Glass. Questprobe Four yes there will be one will feature Marvel superboddie Doctor Doom. And YOU get to play the villain for a change! As if you hadn't had enough of the movies, Friday 13th is being turned into a game by the people who brought James Bond to the small screen, Domark. It will feature the From the programmer who brought you Daley Thompson's Decathlon, Covelon and Hunchback-to name but a few comes Robot Messiah. Christian Urqhart has achieved one of his lifelong ambitions and set up his own software company and Messiah is the Heeyyyy everybody let's get into an Alternate Reality! No, it's not Neil's latest hippyhit record. It's simply a stunning graphic role playing adventure from Datasoft, released here by U.S. Gold. Alternate Reality is the overall title for a series of seven adventures created by a What game is a cross between Impossible Mission, Confusion, Quake Minus One and any Ultimate game you care to mention? Tau Ceti :: :: SECRE The DUCK FROM U.N.C.L.E. IT "


"crazed knife-wielding maniac Jason who is currently carving people up in the latest Friday 13th movie part 999,999,000 ..... Horror fans watch out! Show at London's Olympia. And once again Keith Campbell's Adventure Helpline was besieged with people wanting help, advice and guidance. And we're proud to say all the back issues of C+VG brought along to show were all snapped up along with T-shirts, A new organisation for youngsters interested in wanting to find out more about computing has been launched by the British Computer Society. The Association of Young Computer Enthusiasts (AYCE) is aimed at people aged 11 to 18 and will cost  a year. Among the benefits of AYCE to members will be a monthly 16 page magazine: discounts on computer products; competitions and computer advice. For full details of AYCE ring 01-637 0471. World Karate champion Jeoff Thompson tries out the new C+VG T-shirt and bags of goodies. C+VG's new Big Red T-shirt also caused quite a stir and looks like being a big, big hit. You can see how it packs a punch from our photograph of the T-shirt and World Karate champion Jeoff Thompson, who was at the show promoting Melbourne House's Way of the Exploding Fist. Champagne Corks popped when bank clerk Nigel Parsons received a JVC MSX micro for winning a competition based on Electric Software's The Wreck game run in the June issue of Computer + Video Games. Nigel, from Cardiff, received the micro at Electric Software's stand at the Personal Computer World Show held in September at Olympia, London. With him were Electric Software's Mike Hall and MSX's Pieter Glas. Some people make you really sick don't they! Especially when they win vast sums of crinkly brown folding stuff money to you! One of those people is 15-year-old Matthew Woodley who will down in computer gaming history as the person who actually SOLVED Domark's Eureka! Matthew picked up his giant ,000 cheque of the Personal Computer World Show. Domark supremos Mark Strachan and Dominic Wheatley even managed to smile as they handed over the cash! Matthew was just one of the 100,000s of people who have been getting up to strange things in an attempt to solve the fiveadventure riddle. Now many of them have been reduced to tears by the news that Matthew from Middlesex discovered the secret phone number. Matthew spent much of his spare time working on Eureka! which his brother purchased soon after the game was released last year. \"My brother Mark bought the game originally,\" Matthew told C+VG, \"But he went away to Reading University so I got my hands on it! He's really sick now! But I'll give him a share..\" What is he going to do with all the pennies? 'Well I think I'll get a Commodore 128 and all the peripherals and then invest the rest.\" Matthew didn't win the big prize without a few false alarms however. He once rang someone up and asked for the Prime Minister because he thought that was the answer. \"The lady at the end got very confused!\" said Matthew When he's not playing computer games he owns up to being more of an arcade game fon than an adventurer Matthew enjoys playing all sorts of sport. Perhaps that's why his favourite C64 game right now is Summer Games II. Motthew finally solved the game on August 29th the day that he gave up his paper round. Fortunately he won't be needing the pocket money any more! Anyway, C+VG would like to add our congratulations the prize couldn't have been won by a nicer gamester! Perhaps he'll be able to afford a subscription to C+VG now... Adventure International are producing games based on the famous Fighting Fantasy series of adventure books by lan Livingstone and Steve Jackson. The first adventure will be Seas of Blood and it will feature combat and adventure sequences in 240 different locations. A trend for Christmas Games Collections! Several companies are rushing out collections of greatest hits for various machines. Virgin have a mega-collection called Now Games which features six games including Lords of Midnight and Pyjamarama. Ocean are releasing a collection called They Sold a Million with games like Sabre Wulf and JSW. locations will be changed every two weeks. The idea for the Round Britain Race was developed by husband and wife Mike and Lindsay Brown. Micronet 800 has launched a new on-screen game, Round Britain Race, which offers regular  prizes. Thousands of players will be able to play the game simultaneously. The game is played using a map grid of Britain. Players have to travel around the map by keying 2, 4,6 or 8 enabling them to move north, east, south and west in search of four secret locations. Clues are flashed onto the screen as the race progresses. The theme of the four Rothman's Football Year Book, the soccer \"Bible\", consists of 18 categories containing, 1,000 questions. It can be played by up to four people. Each is assigned an individual key with which to claim the right to answer a question. A question will appear onscreen in the following format: Who was the first British Fantastic that's the only description of the people who visited Computer + Video Games on the EMAP stand at the Personal Computer World Quiz games are set to be the latest craze and Rothman's Football Quick Quiz will be among the pacemakers. The quiz based on continued page 11 Ni STHAT LAST BOMB WAS 10 MINUTES FAST "


"FLIGHT SIMULATOR SPECIAL! IS TRIKE FORCEI STRIKE FORCE HARRIER Full flight and battle simulation Designed in co-operation with British Aerospace Practice or combat level Pilot, commander or ace skill level  Detailed manual and key card Special in-pack offers . Posters and flight pattern charts BBC B/Electron back-to-back tape .95 BBC B disk .95 Stwe SPITFIRE 40  Faithful simulation of 1940 Spitfire Produced in co-operation with the Battle of Britain Museum . Practice, practice combat and combat levels  Save your flight log as you go Manual, key guide, and checklist Detailed instrument panel graphics Posters available Commodore 64 .95 tape, .95 disk Amstrad .95 tape Spectrum 48K .95 tape Available from good software stockists everywhere. In case of difficulty or for a copy of our latest catalogue, write to Mirrorsoft at the London address below MIRRORSOFT Maxwell House, 74 Worship Street, London EC2A 2EN Tel: 01-377 4644 Trade orders to: Mirrorsoft Ltd, Purnell Book Centre, Paulton, Bristol BS18 5LQ "


"* MPL ST. continued from page 9 footballer to be involved in a  million pound transfer? 1) Kevin Reeves 2) Garry Birtles 3) Trevor Francis 4) Andy Gray The first player to press their claim key will be able to answer by pressing the number corresponding to the correct answer. If the answer is incorrect, other players can claim the question for a bonus point. Finally, an explanation is displayed on screen: Trevor Francis was transferred from Birmingham City to Nottingham Forest in Feb 1979. The price will be .95 including VAT. collection standing at Tempest and Radarscope. If anyone out there knows any tricks/tips on Atari's I Robot arcade machine do drop me a line as I have just started zapping into the early hours of the morning with my new toy... Talking of which has anyone out there beaten my record on Tempest (the Atari arcade machine) 676,705 level 67? pumping. It's spot on and places the game in a niche of its own when it comes to presentation. The graphics for the comets, ship and satellites are crisp and sharply detailed, coupled with three excellent tunes, makes the game a hot property! The music for this game was written by the same person who did the music for Thing on a Spring and Monty on the Run. Need I say more? You have three ships to start with and extra ships awarded for every 10,000 points. There are three high score tables (Points, Ultra and Galactic!) and a total of 255 levels (higher waves featuring more comets at a faster pace pulsing different colours). My only real gripe with this game is that the player cannot turn his ship around (arcade officienados may just miss this one...) to fire in all eight directions. This aside the action is fast, frenetic, colourful and down-right addictive. Crazy Comets will not stun you with its variety of screens but it is an exciting, compulsive and polished product all you zapper fans will appreciate. Now, if you will excuse me, I have some serious zapping to do SILENCE. My world is filled with darkness — yet a sliver of light streaks towards me. It approaches. Suddenly the ground trembles beneath me ...A full deep rhythmic beat fills my senses and the sky is filled with flaming comets.. Crazy Comets from Martech is here, so get into the groove because this one's for you! Martech is not well known for its arcade titles but this is about to change. Crazy Comets is a stunning reproduction of the arcade game Mad Planets. The game involves the shameless annihilation of hundreds of Crazy Comets that are spinning out of control. At your disposal is a zapper ship that can move all around the screen and your fire power is restricted to the vertical (up the screen). The comets enter the fray from all sides of the screen and slowly grow in size. You must try to destroy them before they reach supernovae condition. The comets spin around you as they grow in size and if contact is made you lose a ship. The comets are restricted in as much as they can only destroy your ship if they touch its base (the ship being in the form of a pyramid). As you zap the comets they change colour and flames leap from the planet surface. As if that is not enough the comets rotate as they spin around you and as they grow weak they spin faster and home in mercilessly on your ship. When you clear a sequence of rounds there are bonus waves where you can rescue space capsules for bonus points. Throughout the game there is a backing rhythm beat that really gets the adrenalin All you Marble Madness freaks can now sleep easy. An American software house is currently writing the official licensed versions for both the Commodore 64 and the Amiga. I will be previewing it exclusively for you as soon as it lands in my sweaty little mits! So tell your friends. Throwing your spacecraft into a 90 degree turn can cause havoc with your joystick. And making your supersports hero pound along the athletics track by waggling the joystick from side to side subjects it to great wear and tear. But now comes a baseless joystick which should solve all those problems. \"The Stick\" is from the Merseyside company Lightwave Leisure. It consists simply of a shaft, with no console, trigger switches or micro switches, just tilt switches. These are glass tubes about 1cm long, set at an angle, into which two contacts protrude at one end. A small drop of mercury is sealed into the tube. There are two fire buttons for the thumb and index finger and a standard ninehole Atari type connector. \"The Stick\" costs .99. Has anyone been bitten by the Monty on the Run bug yet? Isn't the music good? Not to mention the game! If you should be having problems with the game its author told me that a cheat mode is built in. Simply type: 1 want to ... on the high score table. What can the last word be? Have you always suspected somebody or something is living inside your computer? Who or what causes all those program errors, bugs and glitches? Well, thanks to an amazing scientific breakthrough in the United States, the existence of a life form inside your computer has been proved beyond all doubt. Officially they are known as a Little Computer Person or LCP for short. This fantastic discovery was made by David Crane, one of the leaders of the Activision Research Group Now Activision is making its amazing program available to Commodore 64 owners who will be invited to join in the vital research into LCPs. The Activision Little People Discovery Kit will be available soon in Great Britain. It includes a replica of the \"computer house\" which was first used to lure the LCPs out into the open. There is also an LCP owners guide. All owners must be responsible for providing food and water But Activision warns that ownership of a LCP is a very serious business. They need lots of care, affection and attention. Watch out for what will probably be the hottest game yet from System 3 Software. A sequel to Deathstar Interceptor is being written by none other than Tony Crowther based on the Trench scene from Star Wars. A new software house, Sabre Technology and Software, is releasing two games in time for Christmas. The first is The Crystal Step, Amstrad .95. A 3D animated arcade adventure, And U-Boat, a strategy game for the BBC, selling at .95. Christmas has come early and I have treated myself to a new arcade machine! My "


"SILVER RANGE... Seeing SCERE LIVESELICHOFFER THE HELM Adventure An amusing, stylish text adventure HELICHOPPER Arcade Fast and smooth multi-screen action MR FREEZE Arcade/Strategy Six compartments, each tougher to de-ice LORES 27310 CHICKIN CHASE Arcade Ruling the roost can be a hard life SUPER RIDER Arcade Equestrian extravaganza-will you go the course? DUCK! Arcade Comedy and music in this novel duck shoot SCORECA SMIES SUR LES FUEL COSTOYCHOY 10058 CYLU Arcade/Strategy Can you complete this supreme test of logic and skill? CAVERNS OF ERIBAN Arcade Supply the mines against terrible odds SUBSUNK Adventure with Graphics Trapped on the sea bed in a scippered submarine VIKING RAIDERS War Game RUN BABY RUN Arcade A test of strategy against the computer or Multi-car cop chase and shoot-out friends SPIKE Arcade/Strategy Help Spike to find the golden Dream-Sphere DONT PANIC Arcade/Strategy Amusing and challenging, a game with a difference DONT BUY THIS! Compilation Five of the worst games you have ever seen THE HACKER Arcade/Strategy Terminal to modem, telephone network to mainframe Firebird and the Firebird logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications pic "


"ALL GAMES NOW is believing .99 EACH 1 . 5 SERVEDELE INTERESSERE of the USL UTE VALUES LEFT 62 RADIATION CORE: +## 00009200 ROOMINUMBER: 005 FAHRENHEIT 3000 Arcade/Strategy Sixty four screens to meltdown GOGO THE GHOST Arcade/Adventure 150 different haunted castle chambers CIRCUS CIRCUS Arcade Twenty circus rings to escape T9600 SCREEN NESCORE 000050 N. AMOREN NERDRCHE mm R. LURILIN HEADACHE Arcade Nervous Ned's quest to serve the Brain BIRD STRIKE Arcade Wing the planes and shoot the pigeons THE WILD BUNCH Strategy/Adventure Accused of murder, hunt the real killer BONUS 306 FIREBIRD SILVER CATALOGUE AMSTRAD CPC 464 COMMODORE 64 026 MR. FREEZE 015 MR. FREEZE 029 THE WILD BUNCH 017 BOOTY 042 SHORTS FUSE 019 HEADACHE 044 SUBSUNK 024 GOGO BBC MODEL B 028 ESTRA 003 BIRD STRIKE 032 SUBSUNK 005 DUCK! 034 THE HELM 041 CIRCUS CIRCUS 022 ESTRA 046 CYLU 023 THE HACKER 025 MR. FREEZE 048 CAVERNS OF ERIBAN 049 SUPER RIDER ELECTRON 027 BIRD STRIKE VIC 20 (UNEXPANDED) 030 THE HACKER 002 MICKEY THE BRICKY SPECTRUM 16K/48K 006 RUN BABY RUN 035 DONT PANIC SPECTRUM 48K 008 VIKING RAIDERS 012 THE WILD BUNCH 014 MR. FREEZE 016 BOOTY 031 SUBSUNK 033 THE HELM 036 SHORTS FUSE 037 HELICHOPPER 040 DONT BUY THIS! 043 FAHRENHEIT 047 SPIKE MICKEY THE BRICKY Arcade Four screens packed with fun El MAIL ORDER Please state name of game (and machine) and numbers required. Enclose crossed cheque/PO made payable to FIREBIRD SOFTWARE. All offers are subject to availability. Orders are despatched promptly. All prices inclusive of VAT and postage MAIL ORDER: *FREEPOST FIREBIRD, WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H 9BR CU BOOTSTREASURE 120 \"No stamos required BOOTY Arcade/Adventure Twenty holds full of pirate loot SHORT'S FUSE Arcade/Strategy Sam Short secret agent versus Boris and his bombs FIREBIRD (1) FIREBIRD SOFTWARE, WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H 9DL. TEL: 01-379 6755/5626 "


"G+VG NOV sobtware REVIEHS1 STARQUAKE GRAPHICS Are they really mind-blowing 3D technicolour visions like the adverts tell you or does it look like someone has simply scribbled on the screen with a magic marker? SOUND Does the game sound like a Duran Duran LP played at half speed? Or does the noise from your micro knock you half way across the room? The C+VG review team don't play games with their ears blocked up you know! GAME OF THE MONTH VALUE Is the game really worth all those pennies? Will the novelty last? Is it worth going without C+VG for a month because your parents won't come up with the extra pocket money? Or could YOU write a better game? PLAYABILITY Will you be playing until the early hours of the morning as you attempt to complete just one more screen? Or do you fall asleep the minute the intro screen appears? DL3600 BLITZ GAME Machine: Spectrum Amstrad/C64  Supplier: Bubble Bus Price: .95 When was the last time you really had fun playing a game? And we mean F.U.N.I Well, here's the answer to every jaded games player's prayer -just the thing to lift the spirits in the dark winter days to come. Starquake is the brainchild of Stephen \"Wizard's Lair Crow and features an odd little character called BLOB or Bio-Logically Operated Being. Despite his name, BLOB will soon find a place in your heart. But what about the game you cry! Well it goes like this. Earth has just received news of an unstable planet emerging from a black hole somewhere at the edge of the galaxy. If the core of this planet is not quickly rebuilt it will explode. BLITZ GAME C+VG's way of telling you that the game must not be missed! SUEY 00250 0:52 00200 Machine Atari The amount of pain suffered by Supplier: English Software each player is indicated by the Price: .95 cassette/.95 \"pow gauge\" at the bottom of the screen. When it starts to disk flash, watch out. One more Get your teeth into another punch and you'll end up flat on helping of Kung Fu action with your back Chop Suey from English Software. There are also other hazards to There are eight levels of watch out for including scorpions crashing, banging and smashing running across the fighting arena. action with a fast or slow game With nice, smooth graphics. option. Chop Suey is a good game for Joystick control gives both Atari readers to get their teeth players good control over their into fighters and enables them to perform a wide variety of kicks, punches and somersaults. Graphics The score is based on how well. Sound you fight, the accuracy of moves and whether a move is offensive Value or defensive.  Playability ** Fox! ****  STARTS HERE "


"C+VG NOV sobtware REVIEWS 2 MONTY ON THE RUN SCORE_0015001 HI-SCORE: 00500  BLOB has been chosen for this deadly mission. Why? Because all the other droids are bigger than him! Ho, hum. So BLOB sets off in his spacecraft with just an A-Z to the Galaxy for company. His spacecraft comes down with a bit of a bump leaving BLOB high and dry on a planet, which is about to explode and with only a short time to rebuid the core. Still, with your help he'll soon be zapping around the underground caverns collecting objects, discovering secrets and solving puzzles meanwhile you'll be having a great time! The planet is inhabited by alien creatures who drain poor old BLOB's energy on contact. But he can zap them if he's quick enough! To help him get about, BLOB has platforms which he can drop and stand on. Useful for getting over tall obstacles when you haven't got one of the space-hoppers which you can use to fly about on. You'll find Hoppers dotted about in the cavernsalong with teleports, weapons packs, key codes and cards. Lots of puzzles, great graphics over 400 screens, some of the best sound ever from the Spectrum and a cute hero. What more could you ask for? The money to buy the game of course! Whatever you do, DON'T miss out on Starquake. Rush out and beg, borrow or steal a copy now! BLITZ GAME  Machine: Spectrum/C64  Supplier: Gremlin Graphics  Price: .95 (Spec) .95 (64 cass) .95 (64 disc) Justice put Monty Mole in prison but he escaped! Can YOU do justice in his bid for freedom? The plot sets him in a safe house complete with an escape tunnel that leads into the sewers, other houses and onward to his final destination. Gold coins along with both vital and deadly items are scattered about the locations. Monty must collect these taking care not to kill himself off should he pick up the wrong things. Jumping from platform to platform he can collect some of the objects and coins. Some are perched high above him or beyond brick walls you must plan his route to them carefully, The abundance of nasty floating masks, bodyless hands, balloons, dogs and machines capable of flattering him further complicate his route. He has five lives and, each time he gets knocked off, the game continues from whichever location he was last in. Shinning up and down ropes and ladders gain him entry to new locations, but there are other ways! The Spectrum and Commodore versions have been released almost together which presents us with a chance to dissect them both. Well, the plot is the same. The graphics are virtually the same quality, though there are more flower pots and a C5 in the Commodore one! The House However there is a big difference in the games the sound. The Spectrum is not noted for its sound. The Commodore game explodes into life with the best sound we have yet encountered. It has a strong beat that draws even Monty to sway in time to the tune. The game is a great test of timing requiring lots of thought to work your way through the locations without getting stuck All the locations contain some of the hazards but they also have unique touches added like telephone box lookalikes, lifts or beam-me-up-Scotty machines and fighting off the nasties is impossible fun! Monty on the Run is a worthy successor to the excellent Monty is Innocent. If you're a climbing game fanatic then this is the game should get it's what Jet Set Willy Il should have been. Don't let your best friend borrow it You will never get it back!  Graphics Sound Value . Playability Graphics  Sound 9 Value 8 (Spec) 10 (C64)  Playability 10 10 SPEED KING Machine: CBM64 Supplier: Digital Integration Price: .95 (cass) .95 (disk) Vrooom! Slip into your leathers, grab your skid lid and prepare for a real blast! Speed King does for the Commodore what Full Throttle did for the Spectrum. Which is not surprising as Mervyn Escourt wrote both games! It brings the thrills of promotorcycle racing to the small screen. You have all the power of a 500cc racing bike at your fingertips in a Pole Position style race game. You can choose to race on any one of ten world famous circuits and there are three skill levels too. The animation of your bike racer is really nice. He leans into corners and crouches over the tank of his machine in true racing fashion. Like many racing games, you can't really tell if the tracks are any different but at least in this one the scenery does change slightly when you choose a different track to compete on. The other riders are prone to bumping you from behind. That's if you manage to overtake many of them that is! It's essential to learn the circuit before you start racing so you know the right line to ride in order to get a good finishing position. It's also essential to learn how to use the gears efficiently. There are six on your highpowered bike. You have to take your finger off the accelerator to change up or down which often causes problems, especially if you are being chased by a bunch of other bikes. Overtaking is very tricky but not impossible. It just takes practice! But even if you don't win there's always the joy of setting a new lap record. At the finish of each race which can last anything from just two to six laps you get a nice display which details your race performance Speed King is well presented fun to play. Recommended. Graphics Sound Value Playability  CONTINUES ON PAGE 17 "


"SET TO STUN... READY TO RUN WILLOW PATTERN THUNDERBIRDS MICROCOSM CYLU FAT MAN SAM CHIMERA STAR DRIFTER AMSTRAD 301 CYLU 302 DON'T PANIC 303 BOOTY 306 CHIMERA 310 WILLOW PATTERN 313 THUNDERBIRDS SPECTRUM 304 CHIMERA _311 THUNDERBIRDS 315 CHICKIN CHASE COMMODORE BBC 317 MICROCOSM 309 WILLOW PATTERN 319 STAR DRIFTER_308 WILLOW PATTERN 312 THUNDERBIRDS 321 FAT MAN SAM 316 CHICKIN CHASE ATARI 318 MICROCOSM 307 CHIMERA 314 THUNDERBIRDS 305 CHIMERA ELECTRON 320 STAR DRIFTER SUPER SILVER RANGE MAIL ORDER Please state name of game, code number and quantity required. Enclose crossed cheque/PO made payable to FIREBIRD SOFTWARE. All offers are subject to avail ability. Orders are despatched promptly. All prices inclusive of VAT and postage, MAIL ORDER: *FREEPOST FIREBIRD, WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H 9BR. \"No stamps required FIREBIRD SOFTWARE, WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H 9DL. TEL: 01-379 6755/5626 Firebird and the Firebird logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications plc FIREBIRD "


"C+VG NOV Software REVIEHS 3 2 PROJECT FUTURE BLITZ GAME w BE Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Gremlin Graphics Price: .95 If this is the future, give me the past. Or at least a copy without bugs. The SS Future is a vast fivedeck space ship, covering 256 screens. Hidden among them are eight destruct codes which must be collected before the Self Destruct System is activated. Once it has, you must escape before the big bang. Original, eh? Our review copy appeared to be a pre-production copy and contained several bugs. So it's unfair to pass final judgement. But on the present showing the scores are: HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER 888887758630 Graphics Sound  Value  Playability  Machine: Amstrad Spectrum style droids who have to man handle the deadly Lasertron  Supplier: Vortex along the last highway in the . Price: .95 world not controlled by the Look, I know we've already aliens to reach Cone Zero reviewed the Spectrum version. If you succeed the world is of this game but this saved! The screen display Amstrad conversion is just so shows a smooth scrolling 3D good we can't ignore it! Along_highway with your vortons with Sorcery and Knight Lore lined up in a neat crocodile this must rate as one of the top ready to take the Laserton to three games for the Amstrad! Zone Zero. There are 30 zones Big words? We can justify or screens to complete each them by telling you that with its particular hazards. Highway Encounter is simply so Highway is a terrific mixture addictive that this review had to of action and strategy with be written after the Ed sent Bia neat wall animated graphics and Red to sit on the Amstrad it sound. A must must for every was the only way to get people Amstrad addict! away from the screen long Watch out for our Highway enough to get this written! Encounter map next issue! The basic idea of the game is this. Aliens have taken over the Graphics earth and you have been given the task of preventing them  Value taking over completely. You control five Vortons Alien & Playability RESCUE ON FRACTALUS BooTY e BEACH-HEAD  Machine: BBCAmstrad ensuing naval battle are  Supplier: US Gold superbly depicted. There is a lot of skill involved in elevating your Price: ?.?? guns to just the right angle in Another bloodthirsty game order to hit a plane or enemy imported into the UK by US ship. You can choose one of Gold remember Raid Over three skill levels. Moscow and Nato Commander? If you win the naval battle, This one, from Access Software, you next have to manoeuvre is more innocuously titled and is your fleet probably sadly set on and around a safely depleted! into the enemy fictitious island. harbour. Each ship carries two Your task is, eventually, to tanks, and these must be landed capture the fortress of Kuhn-Lin, before you fight your way but first, there is an aerial through to the fortress reconnaissance, an attack by It's carnage all the way, and enemy aircraft, a naval battle in real life the beach-head would and a tank battle to be got by the end be littered with through. This is the sort of bodies. But if that doesn't game you can be playing for bother you, you'll find a skilful weeks. and challenging outlet here for Right from screen one, you all that pent-up aggression. have to make strategic decisions whether to take your fleet Graphics straight into attack, or navigate Sound the hazardous hidden passage Value and take the enemy by surprise.  Playability The enemy air attack and  Machine CBM 64 Atari Price: .99  Supplier: Activision Fractalus, alias Behind Jaggi Lines, was a real blockbuster on the Atari. Lots of fast and furious action. But things have slowed down on the 64 and the game has suffered. The basic idea of Fractalus is to pilot your Valkyrie fighter over a hostile planet rescuing fellow pilots who have fallen victim to the laser towers and enemy ships which patrol the skies. You have to monitor your instruments to spot the fallen pilots' homing beacons, watch out for enemy ships and blast the mountain top laser towers all the while zapping along between jagged peaks and down into deadly rock filled valleys. You must land near the pilots watch for their flashing beacons among the rocks and they come trudging wearily over to your ship. They bang on your airlock door, you open it and they climb in. This is accompanied by some neat sound effects! Then it's off to find more pilots or if the mothership is around back to base to drop off the rescued fliers. Initially Rescue is a fun game but it does get a bit boring after a lengthy session with your 64. The Atari version is completely the reverse it'll keep you hooked for hours. Must be something to do with the speed! Rescue comes with a comprehensive instruction sheet, complete with tips on flying your Valkyrie craft. There are many skill levels — including a night flying instruments only sequence which is fairly difficult. Conclusion: If you've got an Atari, get this game. if you're a Commodore owner well, play your friend's copy before making up your mind.  is a lot of dosh! Graphics Sound 7 8 Value . Playability  CONTINUED FROM PAGE 15  CONTINUES ON PAGE 20 "


"Program Techniques XCEL Amongst 300 worlds lie 30 Sentinel Bases. Legend has, they are impossible to reach... XCEL. A stunning new game from Program Techniques, featuring state of the art hi-res graphics and movement. Available from all good software retailers for the 48K Spectrum, coming soon for the C64 and Amstrad. PE R .R.P.  DISTRIBUTED BY ACTIVISION (U.K.) Ltd. DEFY THE LEGEND! "


"per 00 Ega FIGHTING WARRIOR \"Use all your powers of combat in this thrilling Egyptian Arcade game. Featuring sensational scrolling graphics, large animated sprites and ferocious fighting action.\" Available for Spectrum at .95 and Commodore 64 at .95. Coming soon for the Amstrad. Screen shot details from Spectrum version. from MELBOURNE HOUSE M Melbourne House (Publishers) Ltd., Castle Yard House, Castle Yard, Richmond, TW10 6TF. Trade enquiries call 01.940 6064 Available from selected branches of BDO WHSMITH,Son Merries, WOOLIVORTIN, LASKYS, Rumbelows.Greens, Spectrum Shops, and all good software dealers "


"C+VG NOV Software REVIENS 4 Print MCGUIGAN'S BOXING SERE 000000 REW LEVEL 1 SCHIZOFRENIA  Machine: CBM 64/128 the title bout itself. decide how many weeks to Supplier. Activision Once you've selected the name, allocate to each type of training race and style of your boxer to build up the weak areas of Price: .99 he can be anything from a your boxer. The latest contender in the slugger to a dancer you get a After the training comes the big battle for world championship chance to determine his fight you've already selected boxing honours is Activision's character. He can be a nice guy your opponent by the way from World Championship Boxing, or a loudmouth, have a hot the list of title contenders. sponsored by World Lightweight temper or be erratic. This gives Remember to practice your champ Barry McGuigan your boxer a sort of artificial joystick controls before you get And the game is no easy \"character seriously into the game. They are pushover! You begin by creating Then you must get into quite complex and you don't your very own little contender, training. You see a screen with want to be caught with your training him so he can stand up icons representing various sorts guard down at a crucial moment, to the worst sort of punishment of training ran ging from road do you? in the ring and then take him into work to weight training. You must If you win you get prize money and a chance to have a bash at other title pretenders. If CANNONBALL COAD B you loose it's back to the drawing board or menu screen to create another boxer! Well you can always stick with your loser but who wants to do that! The sound effects crowd noise, punches etc are great and the graphics are nice too. Barry McGuigan's World Championship Boxing is quite simply an excellent game. Great fun. Great value for money. Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Quicksilva Price: .99 Schizofrenia, or as Quicksilva says, how to be in two minds about paranoia, is indeed a very frustrating game. It concerns the state of mind of Alphonse T Nurd, a cleaner in the laboratory of Bogdan Schtunk. Schtunk has found a way to split people into two. And while messing about in the lab one night Alphonse splits himself in two. To regain his other half Alphonse must work his way through five areas. And that's where the frustration starts. It's very difficult to play. Graphics  Sound  Value . Playability . Graphics Sound  Value  Playability BLITZ ethit PARADROID Machine CBM 64 Supplier: Hewson Consultants  Price: .95 Bzzzztttl Beep! Burble, burble. Zapppl Phew, that was a close one! This is ace reporter Rik Link reporting, There's quite a battle going on up here in the far distant reaches of the galaxy as droid battles droid in a desperate fight to the finish. It seems that ship-loads of battle-droids sent to reinforce the defence systems have gone space-crazy. If the enemy get their hands on them they could use them against Earth. But KARATEKA luckily we've got this new gizzmo called an Influence Device which can temporarily take control of a rogue droid and use it to destroy the rest of the crazed metal men. Your droid must use the various lifts on board to beam from deck to deck but don't get brave and go down too far before you've built up enough strength to tackle the tougher droids on lower decks. The transfer screenwhen you take over another droid is very difficult. But not impossible. You don't get much time to think though! The idea is to attempt a take over by zapping the opposing droids circuitry using your twin activators. Paradroid will keep zappers and thinkers happy an unusual combination. One of the best 64 games out right now. Check it out. Graphics Sound Value  Playability  Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Ariolasoft  Price: .95 With Karateka, Ariolasoft releases what has to be one of its best games. Yes, it's another martial arts extravaganza. But Karateka is graphically brilliant. The scrolling is slick and silky smooth. The plot is simple. Your bride to be, Princess Mariko, is captured by an oppressive warlord called Akuma and has been imprisoned in his mountain fortress. You have to rescue her. There you are confronted by the first of a series of guards, each one with a different fighting style. You must defeat each one. The release of Karateka probably comes to late to challenge the supremacy of The Way of the Exploding Fist on the Commodore. But if you're still making up your mind whether to buy a martial arts game, it's certainly worthwhile considering Karateka.  Graphics 10 Value  Sound 9 Playability pouse Car 328 CO CO CO CT CONTINUED FROM PAGE 17  CONTINUES ON PAGE 22 "


"THE COUNTDOWN HAS BEGUN CHASSE From DURELL Commodore 64 will five ALL THE Spectrum R.R.P. .95 DURELL sales dept., Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton TA14AB "


"C+VGNOV Software REVIEUSO THE DETIEWS Well, what do you expect from the Ultimate computer games magazine? Here we present the two latest Ultimate blockbusters. One for the Spectrum and one for the 64. Plus a special Nightshade map and tips from C+VG readers Paul and Rebecca Harding from Bromley in Kent Read the reviews, check out the map then get the games. We make life simple for you, don't we? NORTH 0028500 NIGHTSHADE Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Ultimate  Price: .95 Well, they've done it again! Just when you thought Ultimate had squeezed the last out of their famous 3D maze/puzzle games, the C+VG Golden Joystick award winners pull something new out of the bag. Ultimate's latest is set in a strange plague ridden Village called Nightshade The village has been blighted by an evil force which has transformed the villagers into a bunch of demons, vampires and other foul creatures. Your job is to lift the curse on the village. Simple, eh? No, not really! In true Ultimate style the solution to the cursed village is left entirely up to the player. The graphics mysterious deserted half timbered houses and odd assorted demons are great. Sound effects are up to standard for the virtually dumb Spectrum and game play is just great fun. Actually a brief spin among the monsters and I've discovered that your brave adventurer can pick up antibodies from within the haunted houses to protect himself. You can use them to zap a few monsters. Contact with the minor monsters drains your strength but should you come into contact with the nasty Mr Grimreaper you're done for. Another nice touch is that you can switch your angle of view with a touch of a key Useful to prevent monsters creeping up behind you. Nightshade is another instant classic from Ultimate it'll keep you quessing for some time. But how long can they keep using a similar format for their games? O O  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability O CONTINUED FROM PAGE 20 "


"CVGNOV sobtware REVIEHSO Backuncher BOUDOR Machine: CBM64 Supplier: Ultimate Price: .95 Yo-ho-hol Have C64 owners got a treat in store? Ultimate have done it again. They've created an entertaining and enthralling game which will have you super-glued to your joystick for hours! Blackwyche is the second Ultimate game for the 64 and is a distinct improvement on Entombed. It stars good old ace explorer Arthur Pendragon the Indiana Jones of the computer gaming world. This time he's in big trouble aboard a haunted pirate ship. Old Arthur couldn't keep his curiosity under control when a mysteriously deserted phantom galleon came up at him out of the mist. Unlike other normal people, who would just run away. Arthur has to climb aboard and nose around. That's how he finds the captain's log. And there's not a stardate in sight! The log tells of a doomed expedition. The captain, one Richard Cavendish, spent days searching underground caverns on a mysterious island which had, as its best feature, a mountain in the shape of a skull. The skipper and his men were looking for the lost Crystal Skull of Souls. They found it and brought it back on board their ship the Blackwyche. The last words the captain wrote were in rhyme and told of the dreadful fate which befell him. His soul was taken by the dark, evil forces of the skull. Arthur sets out to free the captain's lost soul and that's where you come in. You find yourself on the deck of the Blackwyche graphically quite similar to the original Entombed game. You soon discover that you're not quite alone on the ship as nasty green and white Harpies start attacking draining your energy. You must immediately make a dash to your left, rush through the first door you come to and grab the captain's sword which will help you fight these horrible creatures. But the room is already inhabited by skeletons well you can't have it too easy, can you? These skeletons attack as soon as you enter -so be prepared to make a run for it. Blackwyche is miles better than Entombed the graphics for the Arthur character could be slightly better but that's a minor quibble. If you liked Entombed you're going to go ape over Blackwyche. Just like we did at FVG Graphics Sound Value Playability 1. Always try to find a collonade. It will help you work out where you are 2. Try to build up a good supply of antibodies before you set out. 3. Never travel very far without an antibody. 4. Try to keep weapons hammer, bible, cross and egg timer at the bottom of your weapons rack with several antibodies above. 5. NEVER shoot a weapon unless you are sure you've got the right target! 6. Weapons in your rack will flash when the monsters they will kill are near. The hammer kills the Skeleton, the Bible kills the Ghost. the Cross kills the Monk and the Egg-Timer kills Mr Grimreaper. 7. Winged boots make you move faster! 8. First the bad news. The baddies are horrible disease ridden things. Touch them and you'll catch something. From white you turn yellow, then green one more touch and you're DEAD. 9. Now the good news potions make you well again. 10. Potions and boots are often found near collonades. 11. Antibodies can be found in every room. But not corridors. 12. If a fire spirit appears, DON'T stick around. It will head straight for you. 13. Some antibodies will kill some baddies outright. Others will just change their form (See IDEAS CENTRAL). 14. For each monster you kill with a weapon, you get a huge 250,000 points. 15. Pressing Z or Shift will reverse your view. 16. You'll find more hints and tips and a Nightshade monster chart on the IDEAS CENTRAL on page  CONTINUES ON PAGE 24 "


"C+VGNOV sobtware REVIENST DALEY THOMPSON'S MATCH DAY SUPER TEST SCORE 003721 WORLD RL ORDS BLITZ GAME Machine: BBC Supplier: Ocean  Price: .95 For those of you who are starved of soccer on TV this year, Match Day could be some compensation. It even kicks off with in my humble opinion the excrutiatingly awful Match of the Day theme tune. The game is viewed from a TV camera angle which scans the pitch nicely. Each team consists of goalkeeper, defenders, midfield and attacking players. Control is by either keyboard or joystick. You control the player who is in possession of the ball or a player in the best position to tackle or intercept. Football games always seem popular and Match Day, should do well for Ocean. Machine: Spectrum/CBM 641 the slope and through the air, Amstrad while on the right hand side of the screen you see a plan view Supplier: Ocean of the jump and an expanded Price: .95 (Spectrum) .95 side view in little windows. (CBM 64) .95 (Amtrad) There's a power meter at the And you thought there were bottom of the screen view in enough sports games on the little windows shelves of your local computer Penalty kicking is also a fun store already! Well, make room event. And the goalkeeper for one more for despite the certainly isn't slow on his feet. fact that you've probably played You get an overhead view of the Hypersports, Decathlon, goal and goalie plus a readout Superstar Challenge, and of the angle of your kick Summer Games II and Daley The Tug o'War is another new Thompson's Super Test is great event you can pick a variety of opponents depending on the No, this isn't a throwaway score you want to achieve. The selection of games that didn't tougher the opponent the more get into the original Decathlon points you get for beating him. It's a neat new game in its own There's a high score feature right despite the sports and a really nice end screen. If overkill. you win, you see yourself I'll pick a couple of the newer standing on the rostrum and the events to talk about here crowd behind you shout things after all you've probably already after all you've probably already like \"Far Out\" and \"Great\" had a go at cycling, rowing. words which appear in little shooting etc. bubbles. Ski-jump is great fun. You DT's Super Test is a fine have to build up speed on the sequel to Decathlon and will downward slope and time your wreck many more joysticks! jump and landing just right. Difficult at first but soon . Graphics mastered. You'll enjoy going for Sound that mega-jump! The screen Value display shows a close up view Playability of your skier as he hurtles down fun! COCO Graphics Sound Value  Playability BRN) LOC OOOO BLITZ GAME MARSPORT BLITZ GAME ASTRO-CLONE Machine. Spectrum Amstrad  Supplier: Gargoyle Games Price: .95 It's the year 2494. Earth has been under siege for seventy years by the Sept, a hive-culture from the Galactic centre. Since the siege began, the Sept have been kept at bay by a huge sphere of force which surrounds the Earth and its moon. But the Sept, like all good, evil aliens, have been beavering away and working out a method of breaching the Earth's defences and unless the force field is improved they will succeed! What Earth scientists need are the original plans for the defence sphere. But unfortunately some careless person left them behind on — you guessed it Marsport. Marsport is an extremely clever game. There are loads of puzzles to be solved and a huge area to be explored. You'll need to take a close look at the instructions and the map which come with this nicely packaged game before taking off to Marsport. The graphics are good although some of the colours chosen for some of the screens could lead to a few sore eyes! The Commander can pick up and use objects he finds around the city mostly in the various supply lockers dotted about on the walls. I loved teh way the locker doors slide open as you approach. Other messages warning you of approaching danger flash up below the main display. Marsport is quite simply a great game. Get it! above the planet and you'll be able to beam down to the ground installation where the third phase of the game begins. Like all Steve's previous games, Astro-Clone is packed with puzzles and problems. It'll take quite some time to crack even if you're an expert gamester. The graphics are terrific especially the explosions! Astro-Clone is great fun, great value and a great challenge. Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Hewson Consultants Price: .95 Steve Turner's fascination with his Seiddab creations continues in his latest blockbuster for the Spectrum. It's a combination of arcade action and arcade adventure with a big element of strategy thrown in. A team of crack warriors, known as the Clone Warriors, have been assembled for a secret mission to gain control of the mysterious Stargate sectors which the Sieddab are threatening to use to invade earth. There are three phases to the game. The strategy phase in which you move your 15 spacecraft around a map of the universe Star Raiders-style. Then there is a space combat phase in which you zap around Defender-style over the surface of the various planets wiping out Sieddab forces. Locate a Seiddab satellite Graphics Sound  Value . Playability co HARI Graphics Sound  Value  Playability With power un ATAREST SORO CONTINUED FROM PAGE 23  CONTINUES ON PAGE 27 "


"LIVE OUT YOUR DREAMS ON THE UTHERN BELI BELLE SOUTHE NO NO 79 ) 48K OUTWARD NOW AVAILABLE ON RETURN AMSTRAD | SPECTRUM 464 -95 CPC 664 CPC -95 SOUTHERN BELLE RAILWAY Now we have just the ticket to stoke up your Amstrad as the best selling Southern Belle is now available for all Amstrad computers. Hop abroad the footplate of the powerful King Arthur Class locomotive and journey back to the glorious days of steam during the 1930's. You can almost feel the heat from the firebox and smell the billowing steam as you thunder along the famous London to Brighton run. Using the footplate controls and gauges, you have 60 minutes to tow the Pullman carriages from Victoria to Brighton. Any delays could ruin your timetable, so keep an eye on your stocks of water and coal-check the efficiency of your coal burn by the density of the smoke. Your present speed, time and the position of the next signal for guidance are also displayed. Wipe the soot from your eyes and peer out of the cab to pick out the 24 stations as they rush by. Look out for other well known landmarks such as Battersea Power Station and the Clayton Tunnel. Take the option as the driver with your Spectrum guiding you along the right track, or harder levels where you are the driver and the fireman, perhaps facing adverse conditions that could make you disastrously latel Realistic controls such as a regulator controlling the flow of steam to the cylinders, the damper controlling air flow to the fire, vaccum brakes and the fire doors, plus authentic sound and graphics make Southern Belle second only to the real experience. These programs are supplied on cassette and are compatible with the 664 and 6128 when used with cassette player and suitable leads. (GSH MD DRAGON Now you can develop professional quality machine code software on your Amstrad using this fast and versatile assembly language programming package Includes Editor Assembler, Monitor and Disassembler HEWSON CONSULTANTS crowns of Dumnovia and free Merlyn to save Saxon Britain from a century of darkness? 3D Sensory Animation across hundreds of locations add up to an adventure that could take a lifetime to complete! For all Amstrad computers. .95 Also available for all 48K Spectrums .95 56b Milton Trading Estate, Milton, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RX T ELAND ZAPP-280 Assembly Programming Package For mail order send cheque/postal order made payable to Hewson Consultants. For credit card sales state your Access/ Barclaycard number and enclose a specimen signature. Don't forget to include your own name and address. AND Dragontor As Maroc the Mage, can you beat Morag the Shapeshifter to the lost For all Amstrad computers. .95 As part of our continuing development of innovative software we are always happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication "


"SCOOBY httiecasie Muster \"Scooby Doo\" The First Ever Computer Cartoon! Whether he's being hotly pursued at midnight over an eerie castle rooftop, or scrabbling around in the darkness of a creepy old dungeon the hapless Scooby is always at the centre of the action in his first computer cartoon Scooby goes hurting through underground caverns in a run-away coal truck and finds that even a leisurely paddle with Shaggy in a rickety old rowing boat can turn out to be an unofficial attempt at the waterspeed record when hes pursued by an angry Shark Scooby Doo the conter cartoon contains over 109 sometimes creepy often crazy scenes of startling animated action. We think It's gobag to start a whole new craze in computer games. What do you Say Scooby Scooby Dooby-Door DB LISBEE SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE .95 AMSTRAD .95 Elite Systems, Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, England. Tel:(0922) 59165 \"Consumer Hotline\" "


"C+VGNOV sobtware REVIEWS FIGHTING WARRIOR 000000, ON ON THE RUN  Machine: Spectrum/ Amstrad  Supplier: Design Design . Price.90 Design Design have built up a cult following with games like Dark Star which contained some rude comments about C+VG but we won't hold that against them. With On the Run the DD team have come up with a more mainstream maze type arcade adventure set on a planet where the vegetation has gone wild! You play the part of Rick Swift, a Defence Department troubleshooter. Your mission is to find six deadly flasks filled with the chemical which created the mutant blooms before they become active! Within the maze you'll find other items. Some are obviously helpful like the smart bombs and the energy giving magic mushrooms. But others offer other strange powers which you have to work out for yourselves. The graphics on both Amstrad and Spectrum versions are excellent and the game is extremely playable. Machine: Spectrum/CBM B4 Supplier: Melbourne House Price: .95 (Spectrum) .95 (CBM 64) Just when you thought it was safe to pick up your joystick without fear of getting kicked in the goolies or socked in the jaw, yet another all action combat game explodes onto your screen! Yes, the Exploding Fist people, Melbourne House, are out to give you a few more bruises with Fighting Warrior Although the game follows in the footsteps of the current trend for martial arts mayhem, Fighting Warrior has a strong fantasy feel to it. It's set in the sand dunes of ancient Egypt and you play the part of Fighting Warrior Champion Of All Egypt. You're on a quest to free a beautiful princess who has been imprisoned by the evil forces of darkness in a dank, dark tomb. The evil forces are out to stop you dead in your tracks literally. Monsters and demons of the most awful kind materialize in front of you as you trudge across the burning sands! You've read the review now win You must fight them off using the game! We've got 50 copies your trusty staff. But they are of this new Melbourne House tricky and tough creatures and game for the Spectrum and 64. they'll duff you up really badly All you have to do is look at given half a chance. the pictures of the creatures Fight them off Fist style Fighting Warrior encounters on keeping an eye on your strength his quest and give them a rating at the bottom of the suitable name. Easy eh? screen. The person who, in the As you battle the various opinion of C+VG and Melbourne monsters, you'll come across House, thinks up the best some strange vases resting in names will get a copy of the the dunes try to smash them game, a free Big Red t-shirt as they contain various spells AND the chance to name and forces which can help your characters in a brand new quest. Some kill monsters secret game soon to be released outright, some give you more by MH. energy and some well that's Once you've thought up your up to you to find out. narnes, fill in the coupon not The graphics are big. bold and forgetting to tell us which superbly animated even, dare computer you own and rush I say it, better than the it to Computer and Video Spectrum Fist. Games, Fighting Warrior Fighting Warrior is an action Competition, Priory Court. adventure packed with surprises 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London a worthy successor to Fist. ECIR 3AU. Closing date is November 16th, normal C+VG rules apply.  Graphics Sound C+VG/MELBOURNE HOUSE  Value FIGHTING WARRIOR  Playability 3 COMPETITION My names for the monsters are: GO + Name Address. Graphics Sound  Value . Playability COCO Computerown (tick box) Spectrum C64 T-shirt Med/Large WIZARD'S LAIR rooms, caves and tunnels. To escape he must find the four pieces of the Golden Lion. The Lair is inhabited by many creatures. Some will help, others will hinder him as he tries to find the Lion. The graphics on both the Amstrad and Commodore are great, especially the Commodore. The animation on both is excellent. Obviously Wizard's Lair is heavily influenced by Ultimate's Atic Atac. But that's more a comment on its excellence rather than a complaint. on the same tape. But first, the plot. Pothole Pete is trapped in an underground cave. He stumbles on the Wizard's Lair, a massive network of 019850 COCO  Machine: Amstrad and CBM 64 Supplier: Bubble Bus Price: .95 The lure of the Wizard's Lair is still as addictive as ever. And this time it's Amstrad and Commodore 64 owners who will fall under its spell. The Spectrum version of this Bubble Bus classic got almost top marks when reviewed in C+VG in May. And now Bubble Bus has taken the unusual step of selling the Amstrad and CBM 64 conversions back-to-back Amstrad Graphics Sound Value Playability CBM 64 Graphics Sound Value Playability COCO en ENDS HERE we "


"EpXX goes GOLD NOW ON THESPECTRUM TOO! IMPOSSIBLE MISSION Epyx IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 170 All the critics agree... Impossible Mission has a unique place amongst today's software classics. Superb graphics, synthesized voice and original game concept will keep you coming back for more. Already voted «Game of the Year\" by British Micro Awards 1985, it is surely destined to become an all time great. Are YOU ready to face the most impossible mission yet devised??? **Outstanding graphics, sound and amazing digitized speech ZZAPI 64 Epyx Products are available at good computer stores and selected branches of JOHN MENIES-W.H. SMITH-BOOTSWILDINGS-WOOLWORTH. GOLD SOON FOR USEDYX SPECTRUM 148k-.95 u.s. cold Limites, Unit 10Tha parang merance way COMPUTER SOFTWARE U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 8881. Telex: 337268. SCREENS AS SEEN ON COMMODORE 64 "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES OUR RRP 9.95 6.75 4.99 5.95 5.95 5.90 5.75 13.95 9.95 5.99 595 7.50 995 9.95 POSITION US GOLDI 750 5.90 595 7.50 6.50 8.50 7.95 URUNUN 5.50 QUR OUR OUR SPECTRUM+++ RRP PRICE +++SPECTRUM+++ RRP PRICE ***COMMODORE*** RRP PRICE ***COMMODORE*** PRICE FLITE 14.95 11.95 ANY MASTERTRONIC TITLE FUTE 14.95 11.00 HOBBIT 14.95 STAR QUAKE HORRITT WAY OF EXPLODING FIST 9.95 750 STRIP POKER 7.50 SOWRDERONS IELINDORI ARNHEM EXPLODING FIST IDISK) 14.95 11.25 PACMAN WAY OF EXPLODING FIST MONOPOLY 9.95 QUAKE MINUS 1 COMBAT LYNX FAIRLIGHT 9.95 CLUEDO 9.95 7.95 WIZARDRY PARAOROID 7.95 5.95 DUN DARACH 9.95 STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER 795 6.50 SUMMER GAMES II CASS THE FOURTH PROTOCOL 12.95 10.99 SHADOWFIRE TUNER 3.99 THAT'S THE SPIRIT 795 595 SUMMER GAMES I DISK) 14.95 11.25 SHADOWFIRE SPY HUNTER 7.95 5.90 DAMBUSTERS 9.95 7.50 BEACH HEAD II 9.95 WIZARD.PRINCESS (DISK) 19.93 12.50 JUMP JET 7.95 6.45 DALEY TOMS SUPERTEST 5.50 BEACH HEAD SKI 14.95 11.25 5-A-SIDE FOOTBALL FIVE A SIDE SOCCER FIGHTING WARRIOR 7.95 BLACKWYTCH ULTIMATEI 9.95 7.50 RACING DESTRUCTION SET 12.95 10.99 *SUPERMAN ROCKY HORROR SHOW CODE NAME MATT II 6.75 THING ON A SPRING 7.95 5.95 KNIGHTSHADES Ultimate TERRORMOLINOS EXODUS ULTIMA 3 IDISK 19.99 17.50 ARCHON 11.959.99 SHADOWFIRE ++AMSTRAD *t *SUPERMAN IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 9.95 750 FRANKIE GOES TO H'W000 FIGHTER PILOT DISK 11.95 F. BAUNO'S BOXING 295 CASTLE OF TERROR 9.95 STAR STRIKE HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER GAC.C. ROAD RACE MERCENARY 9.95 AN MATED STRIP POKER \"SUPERMAN FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD MINI OFFICE 5.95 4.99 KNIGHT LORE INTER BASKETBALL SHADOWFIRE WIZARD 795 NOW GAMES CODENAME MATT II 8.95 6,75 SHIN F15 STRIKE EAGLE 14.95 AIRWOLF RAID OVER MOSCOW 7.50 BOUNCES CRISES 30001 STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER DYNAMITE DAN ARNHEM 2.95 SUPER ZAXXON RESCUE ON FRACTILUS RUPERT TOYMAKERS PARTY GREMUNS 7.50 RED ARROWS COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0 SPY V SPY BLUE MAX 2001 SCOOBY DOO RAID OVER MOSCOW SHADOWFIRE 7.50 INTERNATIONAL SOCCER SPEED KING F. BRUNO'S BOXING MARSPORT 9.95 THE ROCKY HORROR SHOW ASTRO CLONE WAY OF EXPLODING FIST 7.50 DAM BUSTERS SOUTHERN BELLE CYRUSS II CHESS 9.95 HYPERSPORTS 8.95 ***COMMODORE C16*** SCHIZOFRENIA THE DEVIL'S CROWN SABREWULF 9.95 THE BOSS CAULDRON 5.99 SORCERY+ DISK) 12.50 LUCIFERS REALM DISK) AIRWOLF HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER BEACH-HEAD 7.50 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT DALEY TOMS STAR EVENT FIGHTER PILOT 7.95 5.90 5-A SIDE SOCCER 7.50 NODES OF YESOD ZARGONS REVENGE WORLD SERIES BASKETBALL 6.95 SCOOBY 000 8.95 6.75 UNDERWURLDE OLYMPIAD INTER KARATE .50 DILINOARACH 750 SHADOWFIRE TUNER REACH-HEAD COMBAT LYNXS 750 KENNEDY APPROACH CASSI HYPERSPORTS 7.95 ROCCO ROCKY KENNEDY APPROACH DISK) MONTY ON THE RUN ROBIN OF SHERWOOD RED MOON SHADOW OF THE UNICORN FIGHTING WARRIOR SPACE SHUTTLE 10.95 9.99 PROJECT FUTURE DONALD DUCK THE HOBBITT STER ICs 7.95 5.90 SLAP SHOT ZORRO LE MANS MARSPORT 9.95 7.50 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENTI SPY V SPY BRIAN JACKS CHALLENGE GEOFF CAPES STRONG MAN 7.95 5.95 JUMP JET 750 SKY FOX CASSI SPY V SPY 9.95 750 STATION 7.50 SKY FOX DISKI RED ARROWS INTER KARATE 4.99 FIGHTER PILOT ***ATARI+++ WORLD SERIES BASEBALL 7.95 5.50 ORAGONTORC PITSTOP 10 INTER KARATE CASS JET SET WILLY I 6.95 5.25 RED ARROWS 7.50 WINNER THE POOH DISK 12.95 BOUNTY BOB CASS) INTERNATIONAL BASKETBALL MINI OFFICE 4.90 INTER, KARATE AIRWOLF CASSI \"IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 7.95 6.95 LORDS OF MIONIGHT STARINH 7.50 BRUCE LEE CASSIDISK) \"SHADOWFIRE 7.50 MONTY ON THE RUN MONTY ON THE RUN TAPPER \"BOUNCES ICRISES 30001 9.95 7.50 SCRABBLE TERROMOLINAS 5.95 DROPZONE CASSI CRITICAL MASS 8.95 ***BBC/ELECTRON +++ TOUR DE FRANCE POLE POSITION (CASS) 9.95 BRUCE LEE BEACH HEAD ELECTRONI 7.50 SPY HUNTER WHIRLY NUROS (CASS) ALIEN BEACH HEAD BBC) WORLD SERIES BASEBALL 5.90 STRIP POKER ARTIST 12.95 10.50 MATCH DAY 7.50 FLIGHT SIMULATOR CASSI SOCCER COOENAME MAT BOFFIN BBC ELECTRON 9.95 BARRY MCGUIGAN BOXING 9.99 750 SUPER ZAXXON BOUNTY BOB 795 KNIGHTLORE ANY MASTERTRONIC TITLE SUMMER GAMES DISK) 14.95 11.50 MINI OFFICE 5.95 ALIEN 8 9.95 7.50 QUICK SHOT JOYSTICK MERCENARY 9.95 7.50 RAMBO 7.95 5.95 DEATH STAR 9.95 7.95 ELITE DISKI 17.95 ONE ON ONE CASS 9.95 795 YIE AR KUNG FU ELITE 14.95 11.95 CRITICAL MASS 8.95 CHOP SUEY DISK) 12.95 10.99 SCOBRY DOO 5.25 TERRORMOLINOS BBC ELECTRON 7.95 5.95 AIRWULF 6.50 CHOP SUEY ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P IN U.K. EUROPE ADD 1.00 PER TAPE. ELSEWHERE AT COST CHEQUES/POS PAYABLE TO: S.C.S. DEPT. CVG 3, PO BOX 394 LONDON N 15 6JL. TEL: 01-800 3156 SAE FOR LIST, PLEASE STATE MACHINE IN YOUR ORDER. PLEASE BRING COPY OF THIS ADVERT TO OUR SHOP FOR ABOVE DISCOUNTS TO MARBLES SHOPPING CENTRE, UNIT 11, 527-531, OXFORD STREET, WIR 1DD. (1 MIN FROM MARBLE ARCH TUBE STATIONI OPEN 7 DAYS A WEEK 10AM-7PM SUNDAYS 10AM-6PM. BARCLAYCARD AND ACCESS ORDERS TAKEN. 17.95 NIGHLY FUTURE S8888 750 5.95 6.50 499 4.99 750 BAS 995 995 6.75 9.95 995 150 42.00 9.95 9,95 9.95 795 250 5.95 4 90 795 5.95 6.75 6.95 8.95 ATARI 400/600/800/800XLUXE CUT PRICE SOFTWARE Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY The greatest, biggest and best Atari library on the market. An ideal present for old and new Atari owners. MIDLANDS GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over two years ago first conceived the idea of a software library Now over 1,000 titles on disc, cassette and Rom (games, business, educational and utilities. Often purchasing popular programmers in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programmes monthly Over 1,000 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany. Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast, efficient and friendly service. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities. Now introducing original software written by existing members. Send large s.a.e. to: OUR SPECTRUM RRP PRICE COMMODORE RRP PRICE AMSTRAD RRP PRICE Elite 14.95 11.00 Elite 14 95 11.00 Exploding Fist 9.95 7.45 Shadow of the Superman 9 95 15 Staion. 995 7.45 Unicorn 14.95 11.20 Spy vs Spy 11 9.95 7.45 Boulderdash 9.95 7.45 Impossible Mission 7.95 5.90 Nextus 9.95 7.45 Dragontorc 8.95 6.70 Scooby Doo 6.95 5.20 Winter Games 9.95 7.45 Scrabble 9.95 7.45 Starquake 7.95 5.90 Summer Games 9.95 7.45 Superman 9.95 7.45 Monty on the Run 7.95 5.90 Monty on the Run 9.95 7.45 Frank Bruna Boxing 8.95 6.70 7.95 5.90 All Ultimate 9.95 7.45 Sorcery + Marsport 9.95 7.45 AN U.SGold 9.95 7.45 disk only) 13.95 10.20 Fairlight 9.95 7.45 Frank Bruno's 7.95 5.90 Beach-head 9.95 7.45 Bounces 9.95 7.45 All Activision 999 7.50 Marsports 9.95 7.45 Superman 9.95 7.45 All Ariolasoft 9.95 7.45 Amstrad Disks 12.95 10.00 Shadow fire #1 9.95 7.45 All U.S. Gold 14.95 11.20 Warlord 9.95 6.70 AH U.S. Gold 7.95 5.90 All Beyond 9.95 7.45 Raid over Moscow 9.95 7.45 All Ultimate 9.95 7.45 Shadow fire il 9.95 7.45 Al Ultimate Daley's Supertest 6.95 5.20 Rambo 9.95 6.70 Devils Crown 9.99 7.50 8.95 6.70 Blue Max 2001 20 May 2001 9 .95 7.45 Trivia UK 9.95 5.70 Fighting Warrior 8.95 6.70 Daley's Supertest 7.95 5.90 Sorcery Robin of the Wood 9.95 7.45 Quake Minus One 9.95 7.45 Transact 29.95 5.99 Sorderons Shadow 9.95 7.45 Summer Gil disk 14.95 11.00 invasat 29.95 5.99 Yie Ar Kung Fu 795 5.90 Starion 9.95 7.45 Codename Mat 11 8.95 6.70 Free game with every order over .00 P&P included. Overseas orders add 750 per tape Make cheques payable to C.P.S Visa/Access orders welcome by phone CUT PRICE SOFTWARE, 4 Slacksbury Hatch, Harlow, Essex CM19 4ET Tel: (0279) 24433 (24 hr ansaphone) 55.00 MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos. Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programmes are originals with full documentation Fancy yourself asa FLEET STREET Forget the rest, wait for the best from CITY OF LONDON EC4 Editor MIRRORSOFT Mirrorsoft Ltd, Tel: 01-377 4837 "


"THE SOFTWARE CHART . NOVEMBER  Compiled by Gallup Hot off the presses is the latest C+ VG Gallop Software Top 30. It's the most accurate and up to date chart currently published in Britain. Just one look through the latest C+ VG charts will tell you which top name games are selling the quickest making it easier to you to choose the shoot-em-up, karate game or boxing program you want. It's a knock-out. TOP 30 / ALL FORMATS THIS MONTH LAST MONTH MANUFACTURER  WEEKS IN CHART EO  MACHINE SP, C64, AMS SP, C64 SP, C64, AMS C64 C64 SP, C64, AMS SP SP, C64 SP, C64, AMS SP, C64 C64 Melbourne House Virgin Ocean Epyx/US Gold Ariolasoft Imagine Ultimate Elite Mastertronic Ocean 13 Mastertronic Mastertronic GAME Way of the Exploding Fist Now Games Daley Thompson's Super Test Summer Games 2 Sky Fox Hypersports Nighshade Frank Bruno's Boxing Finders Keepers Frankie Goes To Hollywood Beach-head 2 Action Biker BMX Racers Beach-head Chiller Formula One Simulator Dambusters Highway Encounter Barry McGuigan World Champ Red Moon Karateka Elite Cylu Jet Set Willy 2 Soft Aid Spy vs Spy Southern Belle Kik Start Red Arrows ---NUN-00 SP, C64 SP, C64, AMS C64 SP C64 SP C64, AT SP, C64 SP SP, C64 SP. C64 SP, C64 SP C64 SP, C64 Mastertronic Mastertronic US Gold Vortex Activision Level 9 Ariolasoft Acornsoft Firebird Software Projects Various Beyond Hewson Consultants Mastertronic Database Mastertronic 26 C64/TOP 20 SPECTRUM/TOP 20 AMSTRAD/TOP 10 1 2 3 2 Summer Games 2/Epyx/US Gold Sky Fox Ariolasoft Beach-head 2/US Gold Way of the Exploding Fist/MH Now Games/Virgin B. McGuigan Wrd Cmp/Activision Karateka Ariolasoft Kik Start/Mastertronic Hypersports/Imagine Elite/Firebird Frankie goes to H'ywood/Ocean Action Biker/Mastertronic Finders Keepers/Mastertronic Rescue on Fractalus Activision Hunter Patrol/US Gold Pitstop 2/Epyx/US Gold Blackwych/Ultimate Impossible Mission/Epyx/US Gold Summer Games/Quicksilva Nodes of Yesod Odin Way of the Exploding Fist/MH Frank Bruno's Boxing/Elite Finders Keepers/Mastertronic Nonterraqueous/Mastertronic Chiller/Mastertronic Beach-head/US Gold Scrabble/Leisure Genius Red Arrows/Database Locomotion/Mastertronic Starion/MH 9 10 1 Way of the Exploding Fist/MH D. Thompson's Super Test/Ocean Nightshade/Ultimate Now Games/Virgin F. Bruno's Boxing/Elite 6 Hypersports/Imagine Highway Encounter/Vortex Frankie goes to H'ywood Ocean Southern Belle/Hewson Con. Dambusters/US Gold 11 Soft Aid/Various 12Jet Set Willy 2/S'ware Projects 13 Spy vs Spy/Beyond Finders Keepers.Mastertronic 15 Dynamite Dan/Mirrorsoft 16 Action Biker/Mastertronic 17 Spy Hunter/US Gold Cylu /Firebird 19 Red Arrows/Database 20 Fairlight The Edge 7 8 9 0 10 12 MACHINE KEY SP = SPECTRUM C64 = COMMODORE 64 AT = ATARI AMS AMSTRAD ELEC ELECTRON ENT ENTERPRISE 18 19 20 "


"Post Haste Software for KARATEKA/(Ariolasoft) The Number 1 Hit from the USA and the most stunning karate program around. Unbelievable movie-like graphics as you fight your way through hazard after hazard. See it to believe it and even then you'll doubt your eyes! \"This must surely be the ultimate in animation on the C64. Superb. The best karate simulation Home Computing Wkly. Comm 64/128 [C] .95 STEALTH/(Ariolasoft) The definitive 3-D low-flying space-age super-action game from the American software house of Broderbund. Never before will you have experienced action and speed like this. Not for the faint-hearted but overpoweringly compulsive, \"I've seen many 3-D arcade games before but not one as exciting. It's knocked me into the 21st century\" HCW. C64/128 [C] .95 The total postal software service! Post Haste is part of GB Microland, the South of England's unique computer shop. Thousands of software titles. Lots of experience. The place that gave new meaning to the word \"friendly\". But not everyone lives nearby. So Post Haste Software was born. To bring the best to your door. With top service. Here's how. No \"Club\" to join, no \"subscription\" to pay. You come in our shop for free. Why pay to buy by mail? Unique \"double-your-money\" voucher with the 40-page catalogue. Check the box in this advertisement! Software for other computers? No problem. QL, Apple and IBM. Ask for lists. Post Haste has the lot! Postage free in the UK. Europe? Add 95p. Elsewhere? Add .50. For the whole order, not each program. Everything mailed in special cartons. No used boxes or padded bags. Who needs squashed software? Order by post or phone, day or night. Check the coupon for details. Then relax. It's fast! Pay by cheque, bank draft, PO, Access, Visa, Mastercard, Eurocard. Post Haste is convenient! INTERNATIONAL KARATE/ (System 3) We're certainly in a period when kung-fu and karate are the favourite computer pastimes. And each new program to appear brings its own special treatment. CRL's long awaited offering is no exception. Dazzling graphics, excellent effects! \"If you're into karate and kung-fu, this is for you!\". PCS. Spectrum [C] .50 C64 [C] .50 Amstrad [C].50 Atari [C] .50 THE POST HASTE CATALOGUE The Post Haste catalogue is just 90p with a unique \"double-your-money voucher tucked inside! Yes, the Post Haste catalogue contains a .80 voucher to use for your first order! How's that for value? You get 40 big pages crammed with over 100 program descriptions. Recreation, utility, strategy, adventure, arcade they're all there! And so is your .80\"double-yourmoney\" voucher! Pack pictures, screen shots, review quotes, and much more. Programs for five micros: Amstrad, Atari, BBC, Commodore 64/128 and Spectrum. You're spoilt for choice with Post Haste! And your catalogue is the gateway to a huge program range from Post Haste: over 4.000 titles spanning 10 major micros! Where else is there such a choice? Phone Orders (24 hrs) (0705) 269333 TO GET YOUR CATALOGUE WITH THE \"DOUBLE-YOUR-MONEY\" VOUCHER, ORDER TO ORDER SOFTWARE, USE THIS COUPON! Send your catalogue. I've enclosed 90p. Don't forget my .80 \"Double-YourMoney\" voucher for me to use with my first order! I want to order software right away and the details are below. I want the catalogue too so I've added 90p. Don't forget my .80 \"Double-YourMoney\" voucher! My name is: I My address is: FAIRLIGHT/(The Edge) Produced with \"Worldmaker\", the advanced graphics system, \"Fairlight is one of the most brilliant and testing arcade adventures produced for the Spectrum. We found it hard to believe the graphic quality. Very highly rated indeed. \"Pushes the arcade adventure into the realm of true graphic adventuring. Should make a very big smash!\"Crash Spectrum [C] .95 ... Post code ............ My computer is: ..... Can we contact you by phone if there's a query? ALREADY SEEN SOMETHING YOU WANT ON THIS PAGE? GO RIGHT AHEAD AND ORDER NOW! Use the coupon or write on your own paper. Be sure to include all the details from the coupon. Cross cheques and POs for safety. Your software will be on its way by retum. So will your catalogue. And your unique \"double-yourmoney\" voucher! YIE AR KUNG FU/Imaginel Konami) At last! One of the biggest programs of the year! The current arcade hit brought into your own home, with all the dazzling action you'd expect! Fight your way through screen after screen! A smash-hitif ever there was one! \"Konami's arcade hit brought home. Just Great!\" Games. Amstrad [C] .95 Comm 64[C].95 Spectrum [C] .95 MERCENARY/(Novagen) The wait's been worth it! Another total winner! Incredible 3-D vector graphics, changing with amazing speed. And the game's different each time you play! You'll really feel as if you're flying above the planet Targ! Believe us! \"We couldn't believe the speed. Smashing!\". Zzap 64. Comm 64 [C] .95 Comm 64 [D] .95 Atari (C) .95 Atari [D] .95 DALEY THOMPSON'S SUPER TEST/(Ocean) Another eagerly awaited program and we've an offer you can't refuse! How'd you like nearly 15% off normal shop prices for this great sports program? While stocks last that's the super Post Haste price. Hurry before they're all gone! Spectrum [C] .95 (usually .95) Comm 64 [C] .75 (usually .95) Amstrad [C] .60 (usually .95) STD/Exchange .............. Number .... IF YOU'RE ORDERING SOFTWARE, PLEASE PRINT DETAILS OF THE PROGRAMS YOU WANT! PROGRAM NAME _ PRICE SIX SMASH-HITS FROM ARIOLASOFT/ELECTRONIC ARTS! Racing Destruction Set: Slot race to the finish! Design your own tracks and vehicles! Astonishing graphics! Pinball Construction Set: The ultimate do-it-yourself outfit for every pinball fanatic and lots who aren't! Music Construction Set: Really lets you compose using icons. Very advanced work easily achieved without knowledge! Mail Order Monsters: Make your own monster. Put it in the arena. If you win you can afford a bigger and better one! Seven Cities of Gold: Graphics adventuring beyond compare. Create your own world to explore. Earn riches and renown! Adventure Construction Set: The ultimate 3-D graphic adventure maker. Feature-packed! Includes 7 adventures! This great set of releases has been having rave reviews! Each is that rarest of things a program you can buy with virtually no fear of disappointment! ALL AVAILABLE NOW ON DISK FOR THE C64/128 AT .95 EACH. PINBALL CONSTRUCTION, MUSIC CONSTRUCTION AND SEVEN CITIES AVAILABLE IMMINENTLY ON DISK FOR THE ATARI AT .95 EACH RACING DESTRUCTION, PINBALL CONSTRUCTION, MUSIC CONSTRUCTION AND MAIL ORDER MONSTERS AVAILABLE IMMINENTLY ON CASSETTE FOR THE C64 AT .95 EACH. Catalogue with .80 voucher Add .90 Postage is totally free in the UK Add .00 Europe postage for whole order Add .90 Airmail elsewhere for whole order Add .50 TOTAL AMOUNT ENCLOSED  PAYING BY CHEQUE OR POSTAL ORDER? Please make it payable to Post Haste Software and cross it for safety's sake! CHARGING IT TO YOUR VISA, ACCESS. MASTERCARD, EUROCARD? May we have your card number, expiry date and signature? IIIIIIIIIIIMIT Expiry date Signature I Now mail your order to POST HASTE SOFTWARE GB MICROLAND, 7 QUEENS PARADE | LONDON ROAD, WATERLOOVILLE HAMPSHIRE PO7 7EB, UNITED KINGDOM Orphone (24 hours) 0705 269333 THE POST HASTE SERVICE Getting your Post Haste catalogue with its unique double-your-money voucher is just a beginning! From then on you'll receive regular updates on new program releases for your micro, details of super special offers, advance information on top titles soon to appear, and much more! You'll often have the most wanted new programs days before they reach the shops! Everyone will want to know how you get software so quickly. Post Haste "


"NEXUS MISSION Your task should you choose to accept it is to infiltrate the HG of an evil drugs smuggling organisation. To succeed you need to make contact with a resistance group called The Nexus ... So starts Beyond's exciting new action adventure called Nexus. And to celebrate the launch of this original new game, we've come up with an exciting competition with some truly amazing prizes! You could win one of THREE top secret briefcases packed with everything a good secret agent needs -like a Walkman personal stereo, a disc camera, a (water) pistol, an invisible ink pen and much, much more! (Why are we giving these away. I want one! Ed) So how do you get your hands on one of these extremely exclusive Beyond briefcases? Check this out ... In our picture a Nexus agent has been ambushed by the drug smugglers just as he was going to reveal the name of his contact to you. Hidden in the picture is that all important name. All you have to do is study the picture and find the name. Once you've done that fill in the coupon and rush it to Computer and Video Games, Nexus Mission, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date for the competition is November 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and the Editor's decision is absolutely and utterly final. OK? Get busy! Oh yes, 50 runners-up will get copies of the Nexus game for their Commodore 64, Spectrum or Amstrad. Don't forget to tell us which one YOU own. C+VG/BEYOND/NEXUS MISSION Name............ Address.... THE NAME OF THE NEXUS AGENT IS TIE-BREAKER: Think of an original name for the evil drugs organisation. In the event of a tie we'll choose the most imaginative title. MY NAME FOR THE ORGANISATION IS Computer I own tick box]: Spectrum Commodore Amstrad "


"SIXIN LDULNOJ AGENT NAMED..... THE COMPETITION "


"Weather you like adventure, intrigue, sports or arcade, this month's mystery Microgamer has the game for you! 'Hid COOBY AMSTRAD DARKON Ongelo \"My two sun spots' «Press the magic button and the picture changes\" GEOFF CAPES ( TRUNG STRIKE | FORCE MAN 1. Souls of Darkon by Taskset Sorry about the summer a wee bit disappointing I'm afraid, but here's something to cheer you up. A super game sizzling with excitement! 2. Scooby Doo by Elite This game is full of ghosties and ghoulies and mysterious happenings. Good old Scooby is back and so is my dear friend Mrs McUrioch. (Her name is almost as difficult as mine!) by Martech Let's hear it for Geoff Capes. The World's strongest man. Did you know he is World Highland Games Champion too? Can you beat that? Well, with this game you can try. Six major challenges in all, and always a blue sky above so no chance of rain stopping play. Versions for most machines. Cassette .95 and .95 Disk .95 by Mirrorsoft What's faster than a hurricane and more devastating than a tornado? You've got it in one. Strike Force Harrier the flight simulator that streaks through the skies like lightning. You are loaded with bombs to destroy the enemy but watch out for the clouds of enemy fighters on the horizon. BBC B and Electron ARNHEM .95 MARSPORT by CCS 1944 all over again, and what's this a strong front advancing over Holland? Um, yes, of course it's the by Gargoyle Games Allies attacking the Germans and they need your This large dome on your screens is a force sphere help. With bridges to capture and strategy to work protecting the Earth from attack by Sept Warriors. out, it's as complicated as weather forecasting It's a wee bit scary as the sphere is weakening and but much more fun! (Sorry Michael). the strengthening plans are in an occupied town. Spectrum 48K .95 All in all a gloomy outlook. Can you change that? Amstrad .95 | Spectrum 48K and Amstrad .95 A THORN EMI Computer Software International Micro Software Division "


"WORLD CUP \"Look what my charts are showing\" HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER by Vortex Temperatures are rising fast. But it's not a heatwave, I'm afraid. The Aliens have landed. To save the globe from domination you have to activate the 5 Vortons and the deadly Lasertron. Dodging hailstorms of bullets you must boldly go forth to save the planet. (I think I'd rather stay at the Met office.) Spectrum 48K and Amstrad .95 SCOOBY DOTT by Arctic Computing This league table reads MUCH better than my round the world temperature chart. But then top teams are involved, and you get the chance to pick the players and score the goals. Och, what could be fairer than that, ref? Spectrum and C16 .95 Commodore 64 and Amstrad .95 by Elite The team of top sleuths is back. This lot could sniff out a sunbeam! Stunning graphics and super smooth action give this game a touch of class. Spectrum 48K .95 Commodore 64 .95 Amstrad .95 Screen Shot GRAPHICS your kinders in ghs for Autumn by Dorling Kindersley Are you interested in really good value? I am too, and this books plus software pack has loads of routines for creating lovely graphics. There are over 200 sprite designs alone! Gosh, it's um well unbelievable-top class graphics, super fast speeds and hi-res reults. Spectrum, Commodore 64 and Spectrum+ .95 --W in -\\COMPU XER by Beau Jolly by Beau Jolly Graham Gooch's TEST CRICKET by Audiogenic A super game for all seasons. Complete with googlies, silly mid-offs, authentic scoreboards and starplayers relive the highlights of summer! Commodore 64 (Cassette) .95 Commodore 64 (Disk) .95 A summary chart of all that's the best in computer games. But on this chart not a depression in sight! Every one is guaranteed to keep you smiling rain or shine. There are sports, simulations, arcade and adventures. Oh, and yes, I almost forgot, a version for most machines. 10 games .95 6 games .95 SPOT THIS MONTH'S MYSTERY MICROGAMER AND WIN A FANTASTIC PRIZE. TEN 2-PACK PROGRAM PRIZES MUST BE WON PLUS SINGLE GAME PRIZES FOR THE FIRST 100 RUNNERS UP. Jaintbox GANDALF by Tymac Two great games now on Spectrum. Gandalf -a man after my own heart-throws thunderbolts from his fingertips. by Audiogenic The graphics package which gives you much more than squiggly lines and cloud shapes. It has everything you need to produce high resolution pictures. Do you think the beeb would be interested? Spectrum, Commodore 64 and 16 .95 If you think you know the answer, send this coupon to us, no later than 14 November 1985. The first ten correct entries will each receive SCOOBY DOO and SOULS OF DARKON. 100 runners up will each receive a super game for their machine type. I say the Mystery Microgamer is: FLYER FOX by Tymac It's not raindrops falling on your head but fireballs from a Mig fighter. Spectrum 48K Each game .95 Send me your latest full list of software programs The Secret DKARY OF ADRIAN MOLE cged 136 I t's no fun being me. What with the sun turning to Name Machine \"Super plays for rainy days\" e NADVo by Mosaic Address S Souls of DARD by Taskset Not for the faint of heart this one. You must venture beyond the sun and through the gof-oops sorry fog (no, not to Lanzarote) to Megron, where the trick is to free the people from the curse of Darkon. Oh dear, quite a challange, but YOU can succeed. Amstrad .90 snow overnight and always having to look on the bright side. Now if I was a budding intellectual and poet like Adrian all my problems could be turned into great fun. And maybe they'd make me into a game too. (Well, I can dream.) Versions for most machines. Cassette .95 Disk .95 _Postcode CVG3 Send to: THORN EMI Computer Software Mystery Microgamer Competition Thomson House, 296 Famborough Road, Famborough, Hants GU14 7NU E9.95 Old Scores \"Games to bring you Winter cheer\" DLADE HUNNEN here Hors. and in by Global Software Solving this is like finding a snowflake in July (or deciphering one of my maps). Private Investigators will love it, and if you have never been lost around London's South Bank, here's your chance. Solve the mystery, explore the theatres, and become famous! Spectrum 48K .95 Amstrad and Commodore 64 .95 by CRL Gosh, here's a chance to be a bounty hunter and save the world. Scattered showers of Replidroids have run amok. These human look-alikes have to be pinpointed, tracked down and 'retired if the outlook is to be at all sunny. Commodore 64 .95 Prizewinners David Cook, London M Patel Manchester Lee Gardner Norbury Mike Davies, Llandello Sarah Tansley Uxbridge Billy Marshall, Leeds William Clark, Kingsthorpe David Morris, Weston Super Mare Mary Dolan, Preston Amil K Seth, Wantage .95 Last month's mystery Microgamer was Tracy Ullman. 10 prizes are on the way All games featured are available from Laskys, WH Smith and other good software stores. "


"FIRST CLAS SPECIAL OFFER! o TEAM TEAMO & Orth For all g of the ca fire 12\" X 16\" glowy power order c 1985 Poster Calendar omes we are Pure Collectors liens s ert plus ou CE AND ALL FREE Hocvey Smith Showjumper In this game there are twelve different courses available for you to tackle, each presenting its own problems. You might fall off, refuse a jump, knock a fence down or even be eliminated for jumping a wrong fence. It's all up to you. Tell the horse to walk, canter, gallop, turn or jump when you want him to. All the thrills (and spills) straight from Hickstead! That's not all, if you want to try some new obstacles you can simply and easily design new courses for yourself, without any programming knowledge needed. You can decide where you want the walls, gates or any of the different types of fences available. Up to six riders may compete, each representing a different country with the scores being updated on the \"Master Scoreboard\" as each round is completed. All faults are recorded automatically, not forgetting that the clock is ticking away all the time as well. There is also a \"Hi-Score Scoreboard\" for each course. We would like to thank Team Sanyo nd Harvey Smith for their encouragement and inspiration. 17.95 Comokudoro 64 AIMS Computers Availabrom solected babes of t. John Mo , Lasky's Special Rumbelow Wool and good store here. GAME MACHINE PRICE Please add .00 for all orders outside U.K. ACCESS CARD No.: NAME: ADDRESS: FORWARE SOFT Software Projects Ltd., Bear Brand Complex, Allerton Road, Woolton, Liverpool L23 7SF Telephone: 051-428 9393 (4 Lines) Telex: 627520 "


"NEW RELEASES TIME SANCTUARY SPECTRUM 48K .95 WATERLOO SPECTRUM 48K .95 Futuristic Adventure game Fast, full colour surrealistic landscape graphics to capture the mood of the unworldly time sanctuary Communication facility to address and bargain with the 18 characters Exploration of map, houses and maze The Challenge  locate the 6 crystals to power your time machine  Make enough money by trading with the natives to buy the crystals Find the time machine before your presence in the sanctuary becomes unstable  1 Player wargame against Wellington  All graphic map representation of the Waterloo Battlefield 3 Levels of play French army has ''intelligent\" corps commanders you can give them full command of a corps or you can give corps or unit orders  Detailed Booklet  Full details of terrain feature and realistic strongpoints LOOK OUT FOR AUSTERLITZ launch date Nov 1985 (Spectrum only) BBC OWNERS WATERLOO BBC B Cassette .95 BBC B Disc .95 CREATE YOUR OWN WARGAMES WITH  1 or 2 Player wargame  Joystick or keyboard options  Simultaneous movement etc by both players Artillery bombardment with target selection LOTHLORIEN Send to MC Loonie Lid 56 Park Lane Poynton Cheshire SK12 TRE Tel Payton 10625876642 NAME................... NAME .......... Computer......... BATTLE BUILDER VOLUME 1 WORLD WAR 2 1950's AMSTRAD 464 .95 COMMODORE 64 cassette .95 disc .95  1 or 2 PLAYER with AIR and LAND FORCES  MODERN WARFARE 1 PLAYER GAME INCLUDED WITH THE PACK WITH A FULL EDIT FACILITY FOR MAP AND FORCES  4 SCREEN BATTLEFIELD CREATOR FOR 2 PLAYER GAMES  Easy to use: create and save battlefields for repeated use with copy facility to create balanced battlefields  Superb graphic characters represent planes, airfields, army units, river sections, bridges, towns, forts hills etc. ULIUIIS, Uruyus, IUWIIS, Toris nis IC. All graphic movement at both order and combat stages  Detailed Booklet  Save to Disc option (CBM 64) ADDRESS .. ......Post Code.... WATERLOO-SPECTURM BBC Disc BBC Tape D BATTLE BUILDER-AMSTRAD CBM64 Disc CBM64 Tape TIME SANCTUARY SPECTRUMD DETAILS OF WAR MASTER CLUB DI enclose cheque/P Order for Debit Access Barclaycard A/c No........ Payable to MC Lothlorien Lid. 56a Park Lane, Poynton, Cheshire SK12 1RE "


"IDÉAS \"ICODE.BIN\"5120. 80 POKE 9792,0:POKE 9793,0. 90 CALL 10140 This will replenish your energy after each successful attack on the Death Star. Knight Lore/Amstrad Richard Alpin of Bristol gave us some Pokes for Amstrad Knight Lore. Rewind the tape, and type MEMORY &1999. LOAD \"0\",82000 when it has loaded type 10 FOR T=&A000 TO &AOOE:READ A:POKE TA:NEXT:POKE 849c9,0 20 DATA 243,33,0,32,17,0,0,1,0, 128,237,176,195,0,0 30 MODE 1:CALL &A000 RUN This will give you infinite lives.  BBC BBC Lovers will be glad to know we have a few for them also. A. Finn of Stroud has a Poke for Castle Quest and Wizadore. To stop the bowmen firing in Wizadore, \"LOAD the main machine code program and then ?837AA = 800 and CALL the execution address (this can be found by *INFO for a disk based system and OPT 1.2 for a tape based system). To get more lives than normal on Castle Quest, \"LOAD the main machine program then ?8433E = & the number of lives you want in Hex) up to FF (256 in base 10). Next CALL the execution address. Simon Bond of Malvern gives his pokes for Son of Blogger. Type LOAD and when found stop the tape and press RUN/STOP. Now enter POKE 913,237:POKE 924,126:POKE 925,227 Return. Then type SYS but DO NOT press return. Press Play and Return at the same time. Once loaded type NEW. Then type FOR A = 9024 TO 14783 Return POKE AO:NEXT. Now type SYS 33792 to start the program. This will destroy all sprites. Welcome to IDEAS CENTRAL. My name is Melissa Ravenflame, 1.C. co-ordinator. IDEAS CENTRAL is where you'll find the Bug Hunters' HQ and the man who keeps those rogue robots in order Jackson T. Kalliber. Jackson makes sure OTISS, Big Red, X and B-Con got out there to find the hints, tips and pokes you all so desperately need for a happy existence. Don't tell them but I can't rely on them to make a good job of it. So the IDEAS CORPORATION and yours truly, Melissa R., nood YOUR help. Remember, the IDEAS CORP will pay a large amount of credits to anyone assisting our enquiries. So send your game hints and cheats to Melissa Ravenflame, IDEAS CENTRAL, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lano, London ECIR 3AU. Now let's take a look at what the BH squad have come up with ...  TEXAS What's happened to all you Texas and Dragon supporters? X + B.Con could only find one poke for each! Anyway let's see what they have come up with. This one for the Texas works on Alpiner, Hopper, Munchman, Munchmobile and Moonmine. When you use it you can choose the number of lives etc at the start of the games. Select the game you want and when the title screen come up, quickly hold down the shift key and press the keys 838. For instance on Munchman first type a number one less than the screen you want to start on then the speed and then the number of lives you want. Thanks to J. Setzer of Cumbria for that one. POKES I mentioned that we would be sending software to the person who sent in the Stor Tip of the Month. That first honour goes to Barry Unwin of Sunderland. I shall be looking out some games for you personally, Barry Who knows what you would end up with if I let the Bug Hunters deal with it! Speaking of the BH Squad they have been out and about collecting hints, tips and pokes for your favourite games. So read on and see what info they've discovered...  AMSTRAD STAR POKES for the AMSTRAD come from Barry Unwin of Sunderland. Defend or Die 10 MEMORY 16383. 20 LOAD \"DEFEND OR DIE\". 30 POKE 25828,255, 40 POKE 25833,255. 50 CALL 16421. This will give you 99 lives and 99 smart bombs. Starstrike 10 MEMORY 5119. 20 MODE O: BORDER O. 30 FOR G=0 TO 15: READ P: INK GP: NEXT G 40 Data 0,2,6,8,18,20,24 26,26,26,26,26,26,26,26,15. 50 LOAD \"SETUP.BIN\"32768. 60 CALL 36506. 70 LOAD  DRAGON Jan van Siuis of South Wirral sent in the following pokes for the Dragon Manic Miner. To get onto any screen: Type \"p\" the game will pause. Now type Penguins. A boot will appear in the right bottom corner. Press break and the game will pause, press A.V to go on to any screen. Donkey King For 255 lives. Before \"Exec'ing type POKE 12914,n n=1-255 lives. Dungeon Raid — press \"C\" after your go and you will start where you left off.  SPECTRUM Starion: Rewind tape to beginning and type in CLEAR 65535:LOAD \" \" CODE: RANDOMIZE USR 23303. If your tape came in the normal cassette box, type POKE 46526,0. If it come in a different box, type POKE 46600,0 Then all type GOTO 30 to start the game and you have infinite lives. Dragontore: You will need a specialised loader program for this one. Type LOAD\" \" and start game tape. Once Dragonforc has been printed up stop the tape and press the BREAK key, type in and Run the following program. 10 FOR F= 23296 TO 23037:READ A:POKE FA:NEXT F:RANDOMIZE USR 23296 20 DATA 49,122,96,221,33,16,189, "


"Kus  JERRY PARIS. 17,73,0,62,255,55,205,86,5,33,25, 91,34,62,189,195,48,189,33,3491 34,207,189,195,16,189,62,200,50, 197,227,195,124,96 Start the game tape and the game will now load as normal. You will now have infinite energy. With this you can do a few interesting tricks like putting on a background spell permanently. With a continuous BANE spell you will have no more trouble from Wisps. These tips came from Jason Smith of Caithness. marked F. To activitate the seal you need Calum's Hammer. Go to the Celtic cross and go to the cave opposite where you will find a spade, take it to the cross and count ten paces north, drop the spade and the hammer will appear. When you have all four parts in the starting room, drop them in a heap on the floor and drop Calum's Hammer next to them. A message will appear signifying the end of the game. When you have an item, always carry it around with you in case you are attacked by stones. Different stones can give you mesages from Cnoc Suil the Oracle. The Library. A trap for the weak. Don't enter without a key. And NEVER enter Tir Falank. The hammer from the Celtic cross is a must if you want to complete the game. and hit him! Antipodean Andy: Keep hitting him with the right head blow until you get the chance to block him and he goes down easily. Duck when he gives you the double hand punch. Peter Perfect: Keep hitting him with your left until his stamina runs out. This is the only way to win. If your K.O. flashes he always dodges your punches. HELP! Christopher Donkin of WestonSuper-Mare is having trouble locating the Control Room in Strangleloop. Does anyone know how to reach it and what he should do once he is there?  COMMODORE From Chris Cobb, of Northants we have Pokes for the following C64 games. Revenge of the Mutant Camels: When you start playing type \"GOATS\". This makes the game go into CHEAT mode. To skip screens press space bar. Dropzone: Before loading type POKE 2311,100 gives 100 lives. Before loading type POKE 2316,100 gives Strata bombs. Matrix: Press the Commodore key, Shift, Run/Stop & Control all at the same time to go to the next grid. Finally, to keep Spectrum and C64 owners happy, here are a couple for you. Nick Fraser of Lincoln has sent in this Poke for Dun Darach, which will make all items in the shops cost o iridi! MERGE the basic header. Enter directly before the RAN USR POKE 34999,255 press RUN then start tape. Just take the object and select \"iridi?\" and you buy the object for nothing. on Tir No Nog. To get Nuada's sword you need the feather from the storm cave at Storm Base. Then get some bones from a cave in the plain of Lies. These will admit you into King Dhomnuil's room in Dun Dhomnuil. You have to get the honeycomb from this room to allow you to get in to Badrig's Shrine in Badhelm. Once in the shrine drop the feather at the block with a feather drawn on it and an oak leaf will appear. Drop the oak leaf in King Dhomniol's room and he will give you Nuada's sword. To get Dagda's Cauldron, get the book from the water cave at Glasmarsh and take it to the ice cave at Tir Clacham and you will gain entrance to the cave. There you will find ice and a half-torc. Take both. Then find a spade and take it to a place between two brick buildings in Lon Liath. Drop the spade and the and the other half-torc will appear. Put the torc together. When you wear it, it will make you invisible. Then find the daisy which enables you to get out of the back door of Caerdach Calum. Got to the front door of Caerdach Colum. Enter and find Nathair the dragon. Walk back until he is out of sight, then put on the torc. Walk back up to Nathair. If his eyes are still open do not attempt to pass him. Repeat this process until his eyes are closed. You will then be able to pass and get the cauldron and escape. To get the Stone of Fal you will need the ice. Take it to a door marked * in the slige warrens and go through the door, pick up the sting and take to a door marked \"C\" in Tir Clachan. Go through the door and you will be in An Lin the net. There find an axe called Halberd and take it to the little peak and drop it. The stone of Fal will appear. To leave An Lin look for the door PROFANATION Tony Milburn completed this game after 5 days of play. Was that continuous, Tony? Tony says try jumping over the rain drops instead of walking under them. On Screen 10 make sure you notice something about the Diamond you need it if you want to get further in the game. On Screen 28, to jump the small volcano, position yourself towards the end of the small ditch in the floor before the FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING Shaun William of Merseyside is going to show us how to finish off the rest of those prizefighters. Trible Trouble: To beat him you must be fast. As in the first fight, you must quickly hit him in the stomach and then quickly in the face. If you do this successfully he won't last long. Frenchie: Fighting Frenchie takes a lot of time and often ends in a draw. So, to beat him, you must get your K.O. going and then it is easy. To do this you must wait until he drops his guard then hit him a few times. Repeat this procedure. You must duck when he does his windmill punch. Ravioli Mafiosi: He may prove to be the hardest boxer to defeat. He has a habit of dropping his right arm, so you must keep blocking his punches until this happens. Then go in Not bad kalliber, not bad..... but, can the Bug Hunters keep this standard up each month? But don't forget that the Bughunters need your hints. Now for some game playing tips. TIR NA NOG Stephen Green of Surrey has come to the help of Miles Dorrington who asked for help "


"Medical Security and tell them his name. The clue to the reason is to do with the devil not his mind. NIGHTSHADE volcano. Wait till the rain drop hits the floor then walk and jump at the same time. This takes practice to perfect. Sometimes the blue squares you touch are not activated. To activate them you must touch other blocks first. FOURTH PROTOCOL Although C64 owner Alex Prior of Doncaster has only got 35% on the first part of the game, what he has found out so far might be of help to other novices. Firstly, unless you check the security at Building 17. you will be told off and your prestige will decrease. The trick is to close off the basement, computer rooms, data rooms, security door, both offices, main entrances, photocopy room, key desk and the tea room. A clue. Check the \"Nato Docs file and transfer all the files that are named in the Nato Docs' file. These files are available from Blenheim. The number is listed under \"telephone in your filing system. When Johnston is suspected, follow him with 25 men, and then wait and see. By doing this you will gain at least 22% in prestige. Follow Abbs and her companion with 25 watchers each. When asked for a course of action, select \"Other suggestion! Then type the word 'DEFECT: The computer will then ask WHO: Next type in Ms Abb's companion's name. When the memo about the list of houses arrives, put 25 men to watch the subject, then to watch his wife's lodger. When the memo about burying a package arrives ring the number at once. Then dig it up, and hand it over to Special Branch. Follow Bracton with 25 men — NOT Thorn. You can check this by asking for their files from Blenheim. After a while you may discover something interesting about Bracton. If you do, phone Hot off the presses comes these tips for Ultimate's Nightshade from Jeremy Youngman of Norfolk. Take a look at the table and you will see four antibodies along the top and four highlevel monsters down the left hand side. Unlike low-level monsters acid pools, germs etc the high-level monsters cannot always be killed with a single antibody When hit by an antibody a high level monster may turn into a low level moster, turn into a different high level monster or multiply into two monsters of the same type. If you shoot one of the pair again it will die. On the table an arrow () indicates the new monster formed, and a x2 indicates the monster doubling. There are never more than four antibodies waiting to be collected in a room. Whilst normal high and low level monsters progress your plague by one colour, a guardian monster (one of the four to be killed) will totally consume an elife. Jeremy reckons that sectors of the map are totally devoted to one type of high level monster. Always be prepared and carry a large quantity of the correct antibody. If you come across a potion you may as well collect a set of antibodies nearby Always put your guardian killers at the bottom of the weapon stack — even if you have to clear it of antibodies. That way you carry maximum antibodies without having to fire your gaurdiankillers which do not kill normal monsters. ELITE Richard Shaw of Sutton Coldfield has sent some clues for the Beeb version of Elite. As the controls can be difficult for a beginner it is best to decide whether to use the keyboard or joystick Richard's advice is to go for a self-centring joystick as using the keys can make the Cobra do some funny things. Spend as much time flying around practicing using missiles on asteroids. Tactics: Computers, furs and narcotics are the best items to trade with. Gold and platinum can also be used. DO NOT carry 35 tone of narcotics as this will rouse the vipers. Only take a few tons along with other cargo and the Vipers will only come to look. Once you have gained enough credits, the first thing to buy is a docking computer. Keep trading between an agricultural and an industrial planets for as long as you can but watch which governments you trade with If attacked by three or more ships in a bunch, knock one out with a missile, while at long range and follow one of the rest. This means one less attacking you and you are not a sitting target. When a ship is seen on your scanner, face it and manoeuvre it into the centre of your targeting cross. Target a missile. When it locks on your lasers will be in range and ready to use on that ship. Don't attack ships in the safety area as this will bring the Vipers out and your docking computers won't work. Try ramming ships instead. When Thargoids attack, try to detroy the mothership first. This will disarm the fighters and you can scoop them up as alien times. Don't use the fuel scoops to pick up cargo cannisters if your cargo hold is full, or else they will explode and destroy your shields. Alien items can be picked up as an exception to this rule. When trying to cool down your lasers, hyperspacing or approaching the planet, look through one of the side views as this will speed the process up. Richard has also found a bug in the game when you are galactic hyperspacing on the countdown press docking computers, this will take you back to the same space station but in the next galaxy. This is useful because most galactic hyperspaces will land you on an Anarchy planet in the next galaxy FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD To start with if you pick the flok jacket and go to the ZTT room and use it, you will be immune from the bullets that come from the wall. Then press the yellow button for the puzzle. When it shows you six buttons move the cursor onto them in this order: top right, top left, bottom middle, bottom right, bottom left and top middle, pressing fire each time. The wedding ring can be used in the War and the Cybernetic breakout rooms to save you from pain. The security card can be used in the terminal room with disks to activate the computers which will give you access to games. When the murder has been committed, if you go back into the room with the body in, a window will appear. Do not waste anything as the difficulty of finishing the game will be greater. On the Talking Heads screen, shoot the hole at the very top of the screen, Lure him down to the middle of the screen and get him interested in your barricade. Now move to the top of the screen and open fire on him continuously until his bullets reach you. Then repeat the process. -BOC NASTY kills +4x2  5 kills  11 X 2 x 216kills 2  31 216 kills "


"COMMODORE SOFTWARE THROUGH THE POST. (WITHOUT PAYING THROUGH THE NOSE.) PLUS ONE OF THESE PROGRAMS FREE. OR, IF YOU INTRODUCE A FRIEND. Simply send off this page PLUS ONE OF THESE PROGRAMS FRE Tick the box against the software of your choice. Fill in your name and address and your friend's below. and you'll get: COMMODORE 64 VIC 20 Now you can choose one item from either list, just tick a box. Robert Carrier's Menu Sargon II Chess (cart.) A VIC 20 COMMODORE 64 Planner (cass.) Omega Race (cart.) SOFT POST MAGAZINE FREE. Programmer's Reference Programmer's Reference Know your Own IQ (cass.) Road Race (cart.) Guide (book) Guide (book) No more traipsing around the Patrick Moore's COMMODORE 16/Plus 4 Introduction to BASIC II Fantasy Five (cassette) shops trying to find the software Astronomy (cass.) O Harbour Attack (cass.) (cassette) COMMODORE 16/Plus 4 you want. Let Commodore Space Sweep (cass.) Jack Attack (cartridge) I would like to receive a regular issue of Soft Post. Town Twould like to introduce my friend who owns a post it to you. Simply make your a Commodore (delete as applicable): VIC 20/64/16/Plus 4. Commodore (delete as applicable): VIC 20/64/16/Plus 4. selection from our Soft Post Title (tick): Initials Title (tick): Initials magazines which we'll send you Mr. Mrs. Miss SOCVG 1110 Mr. Mrs. Miss every few months (they're Surname Surname packed full of software information) but there's no obligation to buy anything, if you Address Address don't want to WIDEST CHOICE OF COMMODORE SOFTWARE ANYWHERE. In every magazinethere'll be special offers: Postcode Postcode STD. Code Telephone STD. Code Telephone an enormous selection of great software ONLY ONE APPLICATION PER HOUSEHOLD. at amazing prices-and not just games, but PLEASE ALLOW 28 DAYS FOR DELIVERY educational, business and home use, too. (Sometimes you'll even find peripherals at Post to: SOFT POST, FREEPOST,Commodore Business special prices.) Machines (UK) Ltd., Corby, Northamptonshire NN17 1BR. commodore HARD SOFT TO BEAT "


"Before Luke Skywalker and Han Solo there was another great space hero DAN DARE. Dan blazed across the spaceways long before the Star Wars crew had even stepped out of their anti-grav nappies! Now Virgin Games are recreating the adventures of Dan Dare and his faithful partner Digby in a soon to be released arcade adventure. C+VG stepped aboard Dan's spacecraft, the Anastasia, to get a sneak preview. Meanwhile good old Digby contacted us on the sub-ether waveband to inform the uninitiated all about his great chum Dan Dare! DAN PILOT OF THE Tallo? Is that the Dan entered Rossall School. By paper called Editor of all accounts he was a bright lad, Eagle, by Computer and but, a bit of a tearaway. He got court. Video Games? It's Digby here, six of the best the time he esy of Sir Albert Fitzwilliam Digby, climbed the school clock tower! a brilliant Spaceman Class 1, But he was Captain of the writer and artist Interplanetary Space Fleet. I've school when he left to go to called Frank Hampson. got those details you wanted Cambridge and it wasn't I'm sorry to have to tell you about Colonel Dare. Are you long before he had his degree that Mr Hampson died recently, ready to take this down? but you should see the work he Righto, then here we go: Now, this is where the story left behind. A lot of his tales Colonel Daniel MacGregor really starts. In 1987, at the age of Colonel Dare are available in Dare. Born February 5, 1967. of 20, he joined the Space book form. Manchester, England. Mother: Fleet as a Cadet Navigator. By I expect what you most want Jean MacGregor, younger the time he was 24, he was a to hear about is all the times daughter of the MacGregors of Pilot Major and was sent for we've battled and beaten Culloden. Father: \"Mad Billy an Interplanetary Exploration that evil, green refugee from a Dare, explorer and space pilot. Course on the Moon. At reptile house, the Mekon. Colonel Dare's father was the 29 he was Chief Pilot Without Colonel Dare, Sondar first man to explore the and was under the and the rest of the Treens of dreaded Matto Grosso direct command of Sir Venus would still be suffering Hubert Guest, Controller under his mad, despotic rule. of the Fleet. I've lost count of the number of Brazil Most probably you know a of times we've foiled his fully and find bit about what happened after dastardly schemes. the fabulous El that. A lot of our adventures What d'you mean, there's Dorado. Colonel Dare's and mine somebody on the other line? At the age of 12, young that is appeared in a weekly Just hold you horses, lad 1 haven't had time to tell you about all the other weird beasties we've come up against. It makes me space-sick just thinking about some of them! what about old Xel? He was a nasty piece of work, right enough. And then there were the Phants Colonel Dan and I journeyed to the other side of the Universe to stop them conquering the peace loving Crypts. What's that? You think you've got enough? Enough my Aunt Anastasia! I haven't told you yet what kind of man he is. You see, what makes the Colonel so special is that he's a Hero in the real sense of the word. He gets by on intelligence, commonsense, determination ... and a good old British stiff upper lip! Anyway, you haven't told me why you want all this. A new computer game, you say? Palpitating Planets! What will DRK DARE THE SUNKEN CRVE... DAN DARE PILOT OF THE FUTURE POINTS..-12300 CHAPTER..! DAN DARE PILOT OF THE FUTURE POINTS...12300 CHAPTER..1 "


"DARE A FUTURE game! they think of next? Colonel constructed a giant bomb next part of the Treen within Dan'll be tickled pink! inside a hollowed out asteroid Before he boxing distance and aimed it at the Earth. Dan disappears how Dan will start some THE GAME has to stop the asteroid and ever, Digby fisticuffs!\" Virgin's Dan Dare game has capture the Mekon. helps Andy has developed a been masterminded by The planetoid is being unique four way scrolling programmer Andy Wilson controlled by six satellites. Dan Dan find method to capture the comic who admits to being a DD fan. must first knock out the the deactivators book flavour. Each screen looks «We've attempted to keep satellites and then dive into the by pointing the way for our like a frame from a comic the game as close to the spirit caverns of the planetoid, save hero. and Digby \"talks\" to you via of the original comic as Digby and Professor Peabody Once he's destroyed all the speech bubbles. Captions also possible,\" he says. \"For and capture the Mekon. satellites, Dan now in his appear at the top of the screen, instance, Dan doesn't kill The first half of the game smart Interplanetary Space Fleet comic style. people. His ray gun is always takes place above the uniform has to find an The graphics are big and set to stun. And he'd rather planetoid's surface. Dan entrance to the underground bold. Ian Mathias is the man use his fists than a gun dressed in his space caverns where his friends are responsible for the C64 and anyway.\" Punch-ups are built gear has to find the being held captive. Here the Amstrad versions' graphics and into the game but more of gadgets which game becomes an action arcade has produced some really that later! deactivate the satellites and adventure as Dan has to solve impressive visuals for the game. But first here's Dan's stick them in the right place lots of problems and puzzles as We confidently predict that while fighting off attacks from well as having the odd punch Dan's computer game debut is deadly the Treens, the Mekon's up with a Treen or two. going to go down well with his mission. He specially trained bodyguards. \"We had this feature in long fans new and old. But I've a has to save the He also has to stop dear old before the boxing and karate sneaking suspicion that the real worldof Digby getting captured by the games came along.\" said Andy, smash hit character from the course. This time Treens. Which isn't easy as they \"I've included an intelligent game is going to be Stripey the Mekon, Dan's melonwill get him in the end anyway fire button which means that if a cute mini-elephant creature. headed arch-enemy, has because that leads on to the you hit it when there's a Watch out for him! GOSH DIGGERS OLD CHAP DAN DAP70 BE CONTINUED... PILOT OF THE FUTURE CHAPTER 1 T DAN DARE PILOT OF THE FUTURE POINTS.--12300 CHAPTER.. 21 "


"BEYOND CHALLENGING SOFTWARE Wat will keep you upafter Midnight 400 Locations More than 32000 Screenviews Beyond's first Landscaping and Text Adventure! Game Specification: Characters intelligence hare artificial Character graphics by Denton Designs Landscaping after Mike Singleton's Lords of Midnight Full text Editor, 3sentence  750word vocabulary Sarderons Shadow... recall Rurs ont Spectrum and and MARE! Spectrum Mail Order: Beyond 3rd Floor, Lector Court, 151 Farringdon Road, London EC1R 3AD. Price .95 inc. P&P. Cheques/POs payable to Beyond. Credit cards call 01-837 2899. "


"C+VG COMPETITION ARTIST OF THE FUTURE THE INTERNATIONAL BOOK OF COMPO Denis Gifford W TALES CALCULATED TO DRIVE YO Beano ESPECIAL CORONATION NONSER DAN DARI FOXXYGER EAGLE TL le Film Fup 2 ADIAN MICKEY MOUSE dinley WHSMITH pace heroes don't come much tougher than Don't forget to attach the coupon to your entry and good old DD and his faithful sidekick Digby. give us all the details about your age and which But maybe you know better? To help celebrate computer you own. We know lots of our readers are the launch of Virgin's Dan Dare game we're offering gifted artists so get cracking, we can't wait to see some very special prizes to the top prize winners in our your strips! exclusive DD competition. THE PRIZES What we'd like you to do is create your OWN Dan There are three age groups Under 9. Under 15 and Dare comic strip — or if you don't want to feature Dan, 15 and over. Three first prize winners in each category why not invent your own comic hero? We'd like you will get a copy of Dennis Gifford's International Book to tell your comic story in no less than eight comic style of Comics, packed full of information and details about panels and in no more than 16. You can use colour or comics from the year dot. They'll also win a special Big black and white and any materials you wish to, your Red t-shirt and a copy of the Dan Dare game for the strip can be in black and white or colour, in pencils, Spectrum or Commodore 64. 20 runners-up will get ink or any other medium. Just take your pick. Your story a copy of the game from Virgin. Don't forget to include can be about anything but it must have some sort a stamped addressed envelope if you want your of space/sci-fi theme. We'll print some of the best strips illustration back! in a future issue, so you can boast to all your friends that you've had something featured in C+VG! . C+VG/VIRGIN DAN DARE COMPETITION Once you've drawn your strip, package it up carefully Name and send it to Computer + Video Games, Dan Dare Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, Address London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is November 16th, normal C+VG competition rules apply and the editor's Age_ _Computer owned: Spectrum C64 decision is final. Anyone who argues will have Big Red tick box to deal with! PLEASE ATTACH THIS COUPON TO YOUR ENTRY "


"GEOFF CAPES * Endorsed by Geoff Capes, * TRUCK PULL Olympic shot putter, World OR TUG OF WAR. and European Strongman and * CAR ROLLING World Highland Games * BARREL LOADING. Champion. * On-screen training on weights or * FAIRGROUND BELL. iron bars. * LOG CHOPPING * Continuous individual muscle fitness display * WRESTLING * Skill Levels and Hall of Fame. Available from all leading software retailers OR order today by mail * SIX exciting and demanding challenges 48K Spectrum .95. ALL OTHERS .95 to be overcome. CBM 64 disc .95 tech is the registered trade mark of Software Communications Limited Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME. PHONE: (0323) 768456 TELEX: 87465 EXIM Brighton 48K SPECTRUM  COMMODORE 64 BBC'B' ELECTRON  AMSTRAD  MSX SKILL, STRATEGY, TIMING... NOT JUST ANOTHER JOYSTICK BASH! "


"WANTED: COOPER-MAN ETION Are YOU game for a laugh? We reckon you just might be if you buy Computer + Video Games every month! Seriously though do you reckon you could be the funniest thing since Russ Abbot? Do you think you've got what it takes to be the Young Cooper-Man? And would you like a free game? Along with our mates at Probe Software, the people behind the new Russ Abbot game, we've come up with a neat competition exclusively aimed at C+VG readers. We want to find the person who could play the Young Cooper-Man. The right person will get to meet Russ and appear on one of his shows! Interested? Well, all you have to do is fill in the special C+VG coupon and send it to Probe Software, 155 Mitcham Road, London, SW17 3LN, together with a photograph of yourself. We also want to have your best jokes to print in C+VG! Probe will give the 10 best jokers a copy of their latest game Devil's Crown, which is available for the Amstrad and Spectrum. So even if you don't get to be Cooper-Man you could well get a free game and see your joke printed in C+VG. So don't delay, fill in the Cooper-Man Coupon today. REMEMBER don't send it to us at C+VG. Mail your entry direct to Probe Software. Probe will be arranging auditions for the young superCooper in the near future and C+VG will be announcing the winner in the soonest possible issue. C+VG/PROBE/RUSS ABBOT COMPETITION Name... Address....... Age................... Tel no:...... Interests .. Why do you think you'd make a good Young Cooper-Man? My joke goes like this:........ O I'd like Devil's Crown for the Amstrad Spectrum 0 (tick box) "


"SCORE: OLSSOOS HISCORE OSSO Spectrum 48K 48K Spectrum Das Boat SCORE 21SSO RODRI O NESCORE OSS From the beginning of October Spectrum 48K .95 CBM 64 .95 Also available: Amstrad .95 NT-SCORE O MOTY MOLE CBM64 Gremlin Graphics Gremlin Graphics, Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423. "


"SCURE: 0165003 HI-SLUR OUDU 22222222 Bar CBM64 he Tree Sture Spectrum SCORE: 00590 OS HISCORE: 04SSE 48K RUNI Escape Tunnel SCORE: 0095003 NT-SCORE: 00500 Car sama CBM64   SCORE: ease nons OS HISCORE: 845se Spectrum 48K may 2003 The House 1212 TTTTTTTTTTT BEL 204 HI-SCORE: 00500 Super fit and desperate for freedom, Monty makes his daring escape from Scudmore Prison. Hounded by the bastions of law and order, our frightened hero finds refuge with the criminal underworld who offer him his chance to breathe fresh air and bask in the sunlight once again. The Hall Or Jovan Moving from safe house to hideout SCORE: 0190003 NT-SCORE: to underground lair, Monty must select the correct five elements of his freedom kit from the many he's offered and not miss out on the hidden gold coins that will make him a mole of leisure. At last he's free but can he make the cross-channel ferry on time? Drive Sir Cusve's cs CBM6. CBM64 "


"M I N D S H A D 0 W  WHO ARE YOU? WHERE ARE YOU? WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO DO? desetbeach with QUICKSMS YAHEAD Saat Themen ACTIVISION HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE An Intriguing text graphic adventure! You remember nothing. You're on a deserted beach. But which beach? You're going to find your lost identity no matter what price you have to pay. Your perilous journey of discovery takes you around the world as it leads you ever closer to the truth about your missing past. With a little help from the mysterious Condor, you move, closer to the faceless betrayer who left you to perish. \"... superb graphics, in fact the best I've seen\" Home Computing Weekly TM Mindshadow is a trademark of Activision Inc. TM Ballblazer is a trademark of Lucasfilm Games Avalable on Sinclair Zx Sectrum Commodore 64 128 cassette and disk, Amstrad 454 cassette and Atari 100, XE XL disk. From selected branches of Boots WH Smith, John Menes Laskys. Spectrum. Green Woolworth Littlewoods and good computer software stores everywhere Mailorder Activision (UK) Lid 15 Harley House Marylebone Road, London NW1 SHE TE 01-935 1428 COMING SOON ballblazer "


"The Magician's Ball We Make 'em Good Here's a couple of challenging new games to lock your brain cells into over-drive. First, there's Magician's Ball. Enigmatic, enchanting and totally captivating, it's a weird and wonderful adventure story set to the haunting music of Tubular Bells. Sheer magic. With graphics to match. SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE $7.95 AMSTRAD .95 A Spellbinding adventure that transcends all. Withic from TUBULAR BELLS An adventure of mystery and suspense based around the London South Bank Then you can settle Old Scores. Cryptic from the start, Old Scores is a mystery to everyone. Even I haven't got a clue what it's about So it sounds as if you'll have to play it by ear. When that little lot's got your brain in a flat spin and your knickers in a twist, you'd better get yourself straightened out... SPECTRUM $6.95 COMMODORE $7.95 AMSTRAD 17.95 & We Make M_'em Better Old SCOPES essential purchase OLAR COM L VPERATION Operation Caretaker is a computer care kit complete with a cleaning tape and built-in demagnetiser, a tape to check azimuth alignment and a specially designed screwdriver to adjust the head alignment. And all instructions are displayed clearly on screen.! Now, isn't that better? I'd like to get the right games AND get my games right. Please rush me................ .................copies of OPERATION CARETAKER THE MAGICIAN'S BALLO OLD SCORES (Tick appropriate boxes) for my ...computer Tenclose a cheque/PO for Access Barclaycard No. (includes p&p) NAME... ADDRESS ....................... CARETAKER ............ Delivery within 14 days SEND TO GLOBAL SOFTWARE, PO BOX 67. LONDON SWII IBS or phone us on 01-228 1360 (24hr) SPECTRUM. AMSTRAD. COMMODORE .95 BBC/ELECTRON -95 that has The core and deaning por computer operating smoothly "


"Could YOUwin the FA.Cup? Over 100,000 Computer Game Fanatics are trying! FOOTBALL MANAGER FOOTBALL MANAGER Football Manager \"Absorbing and realistic Highly recommended\" Sunday Times February, 1984 \"Completely fantastic I want one!\" Charlie Nicholas, Arsenal Striker in Big K, April 1984 This all-time classic is now available for the following computers Amstrad CPC 464 .95... Commodore 64 .95... Spectrum 48K .95... Electron .95... BBC Model B .95... Dragon .95 ...ZX81 16K .95... Vic 20 .95 SO AVAILABLE STRATEGY GAME OF THE GOLDEN JOYSTICE AWARD STRINGER Stringer is an arcade adventure game in which you are a press photographer set the task of snatching a shot of a Film Star in an hotel The game is fantaisingly playable graphically excellent and, of course Addictive Available... Commodore 64 18.95 Software Star \"I carries the Kevin Toms hallmarks of attention to detail and carefully tuned M y Popular Computing Weekly, February 1985 \"The game can be incredibly subce Pok of the Week Popular Compung Woky February 1985 Available Spectrum 4K 68.95 Commodore 64E8.95 Amstrad CPC 64 .95 When you openan Addictive Game, there's new world of discovery Waiting for you. To: Addictive Games Ltd, 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth. Dorset BH2 GHE Please send me: cassette(s) of Football Manager for......... ........ (computer cassette(s) of Stringer for . .... ...............(computer) cassette(s) of Software Star for.. . computer lenclose cheque postal order for .......... Please debit my Access card No. Delete as applicable Name Address Postcode........... Tel ddictive Accessorders can be telephoned through on (02021296404 For overseas orders, please add .50.  Addictive Games 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth BH2 6HE Telephone: 0202 296404. "


"_Shacon of THE UNICORN THE FIRST EVER MIKRO-PLUS GAME Nearly 50%bigger and better game for the Spectrum Shadow of the Unicorn -a 120 page illustrated book, 64K of programme, and Mikro-Plus interface all for .95 Built-in joystick port Back-up facility to Microdrive Back-up facility to Tape  Tape alignment routine for trouble free loading "


"WELL, THERE THEY GO, KALLIBER... OFF ON THEIR FIRST MISSION... AN ASTRO-VID EMPORIUM OWNED BY LARRY BETELGEUSE... ALL THE GAMES ARE RIDOLED WITH BUGS... HMM... HUNTERS TICE CREW.. SCRIPT:PEDRO HENRY ART JERRY PARIS CAN'T WE GO FASTER, B-CON? MR. BETELGEUSE IS AN IMPORTANT CLIENT..! OT155 WANTS MORE SPEED X GOT ANY IDEAS SOH, OKAY...) SWE'LL TRY) THIS...) MAGNO-CLAMPS {HUH.. IT'S THURSDAY. You DO THE THINKING ON THURSDAYS... THERE... HOW'S THAT FOR ACCELERATION ? "


"WE DON'T? OH..... > HM, MUCH BETTER! STILL I WONDER... WOULD WE HAVE BEEN QUICKER IF WE'D LEFT BIG RED BEHIND? WE DON'T NEED HIM FOR THIS JOB... \"WELL, THAT'S OKAY THEN.. . I DON'T THINK... I'M GOING SCRIPT:PEDRO HENRY ART:JERRY PARIS TO LIKE THIS! \" WITH SD. 000F!!), les BVO RED... HE'S HIT... A CHILDREN'S HOME... THE BUG HUNTERS COPYRIGHT 1985 JERRY PARIS. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED OS HOME FOR _l. ... AGAIN? "


"COMPUTER GAMES A NEW EXCITING ADVENTURE GAME By Tony Crowther (to be available for Amstrad)  Treasure to be won & a free disk with every game Available for Commodore 64, Spectrum 48 (from October 85) WILLIAM WOBBLER The quest youll find is long and hard, The caverns dark and dire. With many dangers but great reward, To fulfill your hearts desire Into the cave which has no guard, Seek and ye shall find, The shining hall to lead you to the hoard, 76 continue William Wobbler is the latest game from Tony Crowthera most exciting adventure game. Through the underworld of dark powers in search of golden treasure William struggles against allodds to vanquish foes and reach his goal. A game of skill and excitement. tax thymud. Wizard Computer Games, Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield SI 4FS. Telephone: (0742) 752912 "


"THE GAME OF A LIFETIME\" EHTE Available for Commodore 64. Spectrum 48K and Spectrum +. Coming soon: Amstrad and MSX. FIREBIRD FIREBIRD SOFTWARE WELLINGTON HOUSE UPPERSTMARTIN SLANE LONDON WC2H9DL (G1109 rebro is a Tase Mark of British Telecom_cosse WE MIASTACOMBO 19545 58 *Zzap 54 Magazine EDITION "


"A VIDEO GAME INTRATATION OF THE FILM SCOT WELTS COMPUTER +VIDEO mmmm OT INONDON:05:52 ALI "


"No.2 NOVEMBER 1985 GAMES BOOK POKER/ HEEBIE JEEBIE/QUAKE ALERT/INJIN JIM "


"c+vg/games book/Poker/1 POKER  SPECTRUM 48K Okay, card-sharps, here's a chance for you to be flushed with success. The game is for two players each of whom is dealt five cards each. Player One's cards appear at the top of the screen, face up. Player Two's appear below, face down. The computer will ask if you want to bet, or require help finding a winning hand. If you want help (press 0), the computer will print each winning hand and examples from the best and worst in the middle of the screen. Each player begins with ,000. The minimum bet is  and the maximum . Go under  and your opponent wins. The first player to break the computer's bank of ,000 wins the match. Although a little Poker knowledge is required to play the game properly, the beginner should have fun as well.  Russell Ould REM Russell outd 20 PAPER 1: BORDER 1 INK 9: G 0 SUB 8500 GO SUB 350 CLS 30 LET X=1: LET Y=0: IF PC=2 T HEN LET Y=13 40 FOR U=1 TO 5: LET Z=C(C): G 0 SUB 370 LET HUPC) EZ 45 GO SUB 100 LET EU, PC) =SY: LET JIU, PC) EVA: GO SUB 400 50 LET X=X+6: NEXT U 55 IF PO=1 THEN GO SUB 140 50 PRINT AT 9,0; \"PLAYER 1-\"; AT 12,0; \"PLAYER 2-\" AT 94, 9; 70 PRINT \"CASH: R17 AT 9.24 ; \"GO: ;B(1) AT 12,9 80 PRINT \"CASH: ;R (2) ; AT 12,2 ; \"GO: \";B(2): GO TO 200 100 REA FE TH B 105 FOR NEY TO Y+8: PRINT PAPE 7; AT NX; \" NEXT N 110 LET SU=INT IZ-1) /13) 115 LET SY = 144 +5U LET VAEZ (13 *SU) IF SU <2 THEN INK 2 120 LET NU=147+VA 125 PRINT PAPER 7; AT Y,X; CHR$ N U; AT Y. X+4; CHR$ NU, AT Y+8, X; CHR$ NU: AT Y+S X+4 CHR$ NU 130 FOR N=1 TO VA IF AVAN,11 <> 0 THEN PRINT PAPER 7; AT Y+ATUA .N.11 , X+R (VA, N, 2); CHR$ SY 135 NEXT N INR 9 RETURN 140 LET Y = 13: LET X=1: FOR U=1 TO 5: FOR N=Y TO Y + 3 145 PRINT PAPER 7; AT NIX; INK 2 ; : NEXT N: LET X=X+6: NEX TU: LET Y=: RETURN 150 GO SUB CL: REM EL CHANGE 152 PRINT AT 10.1 PAPER 2 ENT ER CARD NUMBERS TO CHANGE 155 PRINT AT 11,3; PAPER 4; \"OR PRESS (6) TO CONTINUE INPUT\",\"; LINE H IF H$= THEN GO TO 160 165 IF LEN H$ > 5 THEN GO TO 150 170 IF6 \" THEN GO SUB CL: G 185: LET SWEVAL H$ 135 FR Z=1 TO 5: IF ZLEN. HT HEN RETURN (Z) (\"1\" OR H Z ) \"5\" T HEN BEEP.2, 10: GO TO 150 RETURN L! REM EETS = LET RE=9 LET THEN LET RE=12 PC=2 THEN LET II= 210 PRINT AT II, PA C;\" HOW MUCH DO YOU BE PUT \"OR PRESS FOR CARD \" LINE H$: IF H$=\" THEN H$=\"0\" THEN GO SUB 5000: B 270 LET BE=VAL H$ (PC) THEN GO TO 210 3999 THEN PRINT AT II ER 2 \"THE MAXIMUM BET LIM : LET BL = 1 BE <10 THEN PRINT AT II 0 27 SORRY MINIMUM BET LIM \" LET BL=1 IF BL = 1 THEN BEEP.2, 10: GO SUB PS: GO TO 205 250 LET B (PC) =BE LET RIPO) ERIP 01-B (PC) PRINT AT RE 15: RIPO) \"; AT RE 28; BIPOI: GO TO 150 270 FOR Z=1 TO LEN H$ I ZLEN H$ THEN RETURN OZ GONE ME RESSOUSPL "


"0 N COHO 00N 000 -NO33 II IES!!\": GO TO 900 720 NEXT Z: LET PC=1: LET WBE FOR Z=1 TO 2: LET BIZ= NEXT Z: CLS : GO TO 30 750 REM WORREET 760 LET WI=INT O (PC) *B (PC): LET R(PC) OR (PC) +B (PO) +WI: RETURN 800 PRINT AT 10.2 PAPER 2; \"BOT # HANDS HAVE EQUAL HIGH-CARDSTHE REFORE ALL BETS ARE RETURNED.\" 310 GO SUB PS: GO TO 720 900 REM PREPAGAIN BEM 10 GO SUB CL: IF R (1) <10 ORRI 25E4 THEN PRINT AT 13:43 IF R(2) 10 OR R(1) 2564 THE N PRINT AT 8.4; 920 PRINT FLASH 1; \"YOU HAVE WON MATCH!\": FOR Z=1 TO 2 25 IF RIZ) 25E4 THEN PRINT FLA SH 1; \"YOU'VE BROKE THE COMPUTER S BANK\" GO TO 935 930 NEXT Z 935 PRINT AT 9,9; FLASH 1; CA :;R(1); AT 12,9 CASHER21 940 PRINT AT 11,3; FLASH 1; PAP ER 2; \"DO YOU WANT ANOTHER GAME? 950 INPUT \"SY> OR <N>?; LINE G $: IF G$=\"\" THEN GO TO 950 960 IF G$=\"Y\" OR G$=\"y\" THEN RU 999 GO TO 9999 2000 LET PP=1: REM SRB 2020 GO SUB 3000: LET CC=2820: L ET CHE=1: LET FI=2: GO TO 2300 2030 IF FI=3 THEN LET F${PC) =\"A STRAIGHT FLUSH\"LET OD =30: GOT 2100 REM 49 2110 LET CHE=0: FOR Z=1 TO 2 2120 IF JIZ, PC) =J (Z+1, PC) AND Z, PC) EJ IZ+2, PC) AND JIZ, PC) = (Z+ THEN LET OD =25 IF OD=25 THEN LET F$ (PC) = S\" LET L (PC) = 14, PC): GO TO N TO QIZLOCUDN E 280 IFH$(Z) \"0\" OR HE(Z) \"9\" T HEN BEEP2 10_GO TO 210 290 NEXT Z RETURN 300 GOSUB CL: REM SWAP CARDS 305 PRINT AT II, FLASH 1; PAP ER 2 \"PLAYER\", PC, PLEASE RANG ON SECOND 310 GO SUB 350 LET Y=0 IF PO = 2 THEN LET Y=13 315 LET X=1: FOR P=1 TO 5: IF P LEN H$_THEN GO TO 50 320 LET SHEVAL HSP IF Ow) = SW THEN LET XEK (SW): LET 335 GO SUB 370 LET H 340 IF (SW) = SW THEN LET E15W, PC) ESY: LET VA: GO SUB 400 NEXT 345 GO TO 500 350 REM BEDELE 355 FOR N=1 TO 52: LET X=INT ND+52) +1: LET Z =COLET CX) EZ LET C(N) =Z: NEXT N: RETURN REM EEEE FOR Q=1 TO 5: IF ZEH ( PC) HEN LET Z=INT (RND +52) +1: GO TO 380 NEXT O IF PC=1 THEN RETURN FOR R=1 TO 5: IF ZEHIR 1) T LET Z=INT (RND+52) +1: GO TO 395 NEXT R: RETURN 400 LET CEC +1: REM CARD SLOW 10 IF C >=53 THEN LET D = 1 RETURN REM PERBE PRINT AT 0,31; FLASH 1: \"\"; 31; : PAUSE BEEP.2.10 70 PRINT \": RETURN 02 REM DEEDE GENES FOR LEO TO 800 STEP 100 GO LESLAND PO=2 THEN GO L=SL AND PO=1 THEN LET FH=@ LET PP = TO 2: PRIN ER\", Z;\" HAS OZ) =3 AND JOSE N PRINT J 15,Z); $(Z) GO 560 PRINT FIZI 570 NEXT Z: GO SUB PS 600 LET P=2: REM LJHO LIONS 610 FOR Z=1 TO 2IF OZ) =O (P THEN IF LIZI LP) THEN LET OP) = Z: GO TO 630 620 LET POP-1: NE 630 IF (1) >0 (2) THEN LET PO=1: GO SUB 750 LET RE=13 640 IF 0 (1) <0 (2) THEN GO SUB 75 ] =0(2) THEN FOR P=1 T ER (P) + BP: NEXT GO SUB CL: GO TO 800 560 GO SUB CL: PRINT AT 100F LASH 1. PAPER 2 PLAYER POFL ASH HAS WON: BET=\"B (POTT IMES LET WB=1 670 IF WB=1 THEN PRINT AT 11,0 PAPER 2: \"ODDS OF ; (PC);\" 1 WI NS YOU\" FLASH 1: \"E\" WIGO SUB PS 700 LET VIE: FOR Z=1 TO 2: IF R(Z) 25E4 THEN GO TO 900 710 IF RIZ) <10 THEN LET VI=1: P RINT AT RE 11 715 IF VI=1 THEN PRINT FLASH 1; PAPER 2; \"YOU ARE SKINT. TOUGH NU A 30 Z DIDO ON JOU 0 DIE En + EN JN TO XT Z S-1001 Uw 9 NEXT Z: RETURN 00 LET PP=1: REM FUHA 10 GO SUB 3000 FOR P=1 TO 3 IF JIP, PC) = (P+1, PC) AND JE =J (P+2, PC) THEN LET FH=2 260 IF FH 2 THEN NEXT P RETUR 2270 FOR Z=1 TO 4: FOR P=1 TO 3: IF JIZ, PC) EJ (Z+1, PC) AND JIZ PO J( PPC) THEN NEXT P: LET OD =2 2280 IF OD=22 THEN LET F$PC) = A FULL HAND\": LET L (PC) =(3, PC): GO TO CC 2299 NEXT P: NEXT Z: RETURN 2300 LET PP=1: REM FLE 2310 GO SUB 3000 FOR O=1 TO 4 FOR Z=1 TO 5 LET TE=143+0 2320 IF TE=E (Z, PC) THEN NEXT Z: ET OD=20: LET L (PC) =J (5PO $(PO) =\"A FLUSH: LET IPC) OD=20 THEN LET L=SL FI=4 IF CHE=1 THEN GO TO 24 2340 IF OD=20 THEN GO TO 00 2399 NEXT O RETURN 2400 REM SIBERICA 2420 FOR Z=1 TO 4: IF IZ PC) + 1 = JiZ+1, PC) THEN NEXT Z LET OD = 13 GO TO 24.4.0 2430 FOR Z=1 TO 5: IF JIZ,PC) = 36 Z) THEN NEXT Z LET OD =18 2440 IF OD = 18 THEN LET F$ (PC) = 'A STRAIGHT\" LET LESL: LET LIPC) = 115, PC) N wa Mor. 1 Poker continues p71 "


"c+vg/games book/Poker/2 U.... 30 TODO = 20 DHM 2450 IF OD = 18 AND FI=4 AND CHE = 1 THEN LET FI=3: GO TO 2030 2460 IF OD = 18 OR OD =20 THEN GOT 2499 NEXT P: RETURN 2500 LET PP=1: REM 38 2510 GO SUB 3000 FOR Z=1 TO 3 IF JEZ, PC) EJ (Z+1, PC) AND JE =J IZ+2 PC) THEN LET F$ (PO) = EES\": LET OD = 14 IF OD = 14 THEN LET LIPC) = (3 POT: GO TO CC 99 NEXT RETURN 2600 REM BE 2620 LET Z=1: FOR P=1 TO 4: IF J (PPC)=J (P+1, PC) THEN LET Z EZ + 1 2630 NEXT P: IF Z=3 THEN LET F$1 PC) TWO PAIRS\" LET OD = 10 LET L (PC) = 14, PC): GO TO CO 2699 RETURN 2700 REM A BE 2730 FOR Z=1 TO 4IF JIZ, PC) = ,PC) THEN LET F$ (PC) = 'ONE PAI ET OD =6 2740 IF D=8 AND FH=1 THEN GO TO 2750 IF OD=6 THEN LET L(PC) = (Z; PC) GO TO CC 2799 NEXT Z: RETURN 2803 REME 2805 GO SUB 4000: LET F$ (PC) =\" H IGH\": LET OD=3: IF J15, PC) > 10 TH EN GO SUB 3100 2810 IF OD=3 THEN LET L(PC) =j (5, 2320 LET LESL: LET O(PC) EOD: LET OD=D: RETURN 388 REH EH EH :: A . 3010 FOR P=1 TO 5 LET D(P) = (P PC): NEXT P: GO SUB 4000 3020 FOR P=1 TO 5: LET JIP, PC) =D (P): NEXT P: IF PP=1 THEN RETURN 3030 NEXT P: RETURN 3100 REM FE 3110 IF J15, PC) =11 THEN LET F# (P C) =\" JACK HIGH\" 3120 IF J15, PC) = 12 THEN LET F${P C) =\" QUEEN HIGH 3130 IF (5, PC) -13 THEN LET F$IP C) =\"KING HIGH\" 3140 RETURN 4000 LET 50-5: REM BEBELE 4010 LET ZZ=1: LET 50 =INT (50/21 IF 30= THEN RETURN 4020 LET YY=5-50 4030 LET XX=ZZ 4040 LET XXX =XX +50: IF D XX) < =D XXX) THEN GO TO 4090 4050 LET WED (XX). LET D (XX) =D (XX X): LET D (XXX) = LET XX=XX-Z 4060 IF XX) = 1 THEN GO TO 4040 4090 LET ZZ =ZZ +1: IF ZZ <=YY THEN GO TO 4030 4110 GO TO 4010 6010 PRINT AT 10,0 PAPER 2; AB BE B UBE IS 5 CARDS OF THE SAME SUIT AND IN SEQUENDE. 5020 GO SUB GO PRINT PETER 2 454647484 IS A STRAIGHT LU CLUBS & 4,5,6,7 & 8. 6030 GO SUB GO PRINT PAPER IS 4 CARDS OF THE SAME IND: 4 TENS 4 KINGS, 4 FIVES E 6040 GO SUB GO: PRINT PAPER F ! IS 3 CARDS & 2 C F THE SAME RIND: 3 ACES & 2 6050 GO SUB GO PRINT PAPER 3 IS 5 CARDS OF THE SAME UIT: 4 :5 HEARTS, 5_CLUBS etc 6060 GO SUB GO: PRINT PAPER_2 SEEGHT IS 5 CARDS IN ORDE 5678 OF SAME OR MIXED SUITS etc 6070 GO SUB GO: PRINT PAPER_2; FBEES IS 3 CARDS OF THE SAM IND: 3 FOURS, 3 JACKS, 3 NINES 6080 GO SUB GOPRTNDONES BET ARE 2 PAIRS O IND: 2 FOURS END 2 SEVENS 6090 GO SUB GO PRINT PAPER DER IS ANY 2 CARDS OF THE AME KIND: 2 TWOS E 2 FIVES 6100 GO SUB GO: PRINT PAPER GO TERB IS YOUR BEST VALUED O ARD: ACES ARE LOW, KINGS ARE HIGH 6500 GO SUB PS: GO SUB CL: PRINT AT 10,0: RETURN 6530 LET O=1: FOR P=0 TO 30: PR INT AT 0,P; \" \";AT 0+1. P:\" \"; : NEXT P: RETURN 8500 CLS : REM D143 THNOS 8510 LET CL=6530 LET PS =450: LE T SL =1000: LET GO=6500: LET C=1 8520 PRINT AT 21,12; PAPER 2: FL ASH 1; \"PLEASE HANG ON A SEC\" 8525 DIM A 13, 1321: DIM 0 (52) DIM F$ 12, 16): DIM 5 (5) 8530 DIM B12): DIM E15.2): DIM H (5.2): DIM J15,2): DIM (5) 8540 DIM K (5): DIM L(2): DIM 012 8550 FOR 2-1 POMR2 LET OD=0 DONOR 2-1 TO 2 LET RIZ) =1000 NEXT Z: LET PC=1: LET BE= 8560 FOR Z=1 TO 5: READ KZ): T (Z) EZ: NEXT Z LET T=28 8570 FOR Z=1 TO 5: READ S(Z) LE T SIZ) =S (Z): NEXT Z 9000 REM BOA NO EITB 9005 DATA 1, 7, 13, 19, 25, 1, 10, 11, 1 9010 FOR N=1 TO 52: LET ON) EN: NEXT N 9015 FOR ZEUSR \"A\" TO USR \"R\" +7 READ A: POKE ZA: NEXT 9020 FOR N=1 TO 52 LET (N) EN NEXT N: FOR N=1 TO 10 9025 FOR M=1 TO NE READ ANM, 17 ANM,2): NEXT M: NEXT N 9030 FOR N=11 TO 13: LET N. 1.1 1 = 4: LET AIN,1,2)=2NEXT URN 9500 DATA 0,54, 127, 127, 12 213 8,00 1.62-137+ 0 109: 127 PI UN 000 3,50 9510 DATA 0,8,20,34,34 5234.34, 2 2,34,2,4 24 384 3,12,2,34 TD 9522 PAT86624,14,6 62 32 32.60 ***SET 62,34,2,4,8, 15, 16,0,1.34.34 1.34 ,30 2,3 1.34.34,30 2:34:12 12.82 76232162 30 ada 5010000000 -CUD --+ cu 0+ u --+ In ++ CUM U FUE 00-EU EEEE A SONO +. 0000 und HUINo 00 NMDUMUN cum 90 DU HUN 0 000 CODPODDASD AWDD 0.00 MHZ OPA DO DEPOROWE 00 como VAPAUSADO U OVOM w OW00w PPWUPO VODIAA 000 HUO cu O HD . . ID * * * og 9 N        ht P GAN         H Poker ends "


"THE GREATEST SALE EVER SPECTRUM TAPES PACK 11. POOL, DUNGEON MASTER, TIMEBOMB THE MAGIC ROUNDABOUT, TRANSYLVANIAN TOWER, INVINCIBLE ISLAND...... .95 PACK 12. MURDER AT THE MANOR, GALACTIC COMMANDER, HANDY ANDY, WILD WEST CORRUPTION, GALACTIC PATROL ...... ......95 PERIPHERALS & COMPUTERS: OK LIGHT PEN.... 17.95 QUICK SHOT II JOYSTICKS.. .95 SINGLE PORT INTERFACE .95 CURRAH SPEECH & SOUND SYNTH DK TRONICS KEYBOARDS ...... KEMPSTON CENTRONICS INT'E.......... INTERFACE 39.95 TIMEX 2040 THERMAL PRINTER INTER ....39.95 EPSON RX BOFT L C 249.95 add 5.00 p&p SHARP MZ711 (48K). ... 55.001.50 p&p SPECTRUM + DATA RECORDER CURRAH SPEECH SYN QUICKSHOT II INTERFACE, SOFTWARE PACK.. [139.95 + .00 p&p SAGA EMPEROR Keyboard.......... ......... 39,95 WICO COMMAND CONTROL TRACK BOARD E24.95 PACK 13SPECTRUM SAFARI WINGED WARLORDS, CATERPILLER, LEAPFROG, OTHELLO. GERMAN IS FUN................... . ............... 5.95 PACK 14. 12 TITLES INC. HEXAGONAL MUSEUM TANGLED WEBB, WIZARDS SCROLL, DRAGON SLAYER, ORC ISLAND, THE SWAMP, MURDER HUNT LAST WILL & TESTAMENT, COMMANDO OPERATION TURTLE, EARTH BOUND, ALTER EARTH ..........95 Ring us for a quote on any item not listed PACK 15. 12 TITLES INC. HIDDEN CITY. THE SEALED CITY RIFTS OF TIME THE TRAVELLER TIME QUEST CRYSTAL QUEST. URQUAHART CASTLE, THE GOLDEN ROSE, SEA OF ZIRUN, EYE OF VARTAN, THE MOREBY JEWELS, TO THE MANOR BOURNE .. ..95 PACK 1. BEYOND BASIC, FORTH, PRINT UTILITIES SMALL BUSINESS ACCOUNTS, CATTEL IQ TEST ...E10.95 PACK 2. SET OF FIVE SINCLAIR LEARN TO READ SERIES (5.95 PACK 3. VU CALC, VU FILE, VU 3D ..............95 SOFTWARE ROM CARTRIDGES CHESS, PSSST, COOKIE, PLANETOIDS, JETPAC, BACKGAMMON ..............00 each or 4 for .00 ANDROID ONE ..95 ANDROID TWO .95 2.95 CYCLONE 2.95 or 4 for .50  ...C1.95 BRAXX BLUFF ...(1 95 SUBTERRANEAN STRYKER... [2.45 or 3 for 5.00 CHEQUERED FLAG ....00 HORACE GOES SKIING........... 1.00 SINCLAIR CHESS... ....... .(1.20 or 3 for .50 1.2 JASPER....... STOP THE EXPRESS RUNES OF ZENDOS BACKPACKERS GUIDE ..........[2.95 or 4 for .00 ICICLE'S WORKS (Statesoft .45 BEAKY & THE EGG SNATCHERS PSYTRAXX .95 TOY BIZZARE.... .95 ROBOT RIOT [2.45 A DAY IN THE LIFE. CLUEDO .75 MONOPOLY .75 GYRON .95 CONFUZION E295 VALHALLA .95 PSYTRON DOOMDARK'S REVENGE .4.95 EUREKA THE ARTIST .75 TURMOIL.. 1.95 MICROBUG Educational)... ...95 BRIDGE PLAYER II .75 ARNHEM ....75 THE BULGE ........ .. . 8.75 HISOFT 'C' COMPILER...... .95 HISOFT DEVPAC 3...... 13.75 PAINT PLUS .75 SUPERCODE II. 11.75 SCREEN MACHINE OMNICALC 2 .50 JONATHAN MILLERS BODY WORKS 13 75 ASTRONOMER (CP SOFTWARE)... HISOFT PASCAL 22 95 TRANS EXPRESS CASS) .95 POPEYE 5.75 FARLIGHT .75 BLACKWITCH ....... 8.75 MERCENARY 8.75 SCRABBLE ... 3.95 SYSTEM 15000.............. (3.95 Plus all the latest titles. Just send us your order with .50 off the RAP and we will send you the goods. PACK 16. COSMIC CRUISER, BC BILL, PEDRO. ZZOOM, ZIP ZAP, ALCHEMIST ....95 PACK 4. SHIP OF DOOM, PLANET OF DEATH ESPIONAGE ISLAND, INCA CURSE, EMBASSY ASSAULT, TRANSYLVANIAN TOWER................95 PACK 5 ALPHABET GAMES, SPEECH MARKS CASTLE SPELLEROUS THE APOSTROPHE CAPITAL LETTERS, EARLY PUNCTUATION......................15.95 PACK 17. HORACE GOES SKING, CHEQUERED FLAG, CHESS, MAKE A CHIP, SURVIVAL, SCRABBLE .95 PACK 18. SPELLBOUND BEYOND), SPACE STATION ZEBRA, TIME TUNNELS, FIVE DICE, DEVILS OF THE DEEP, TRANSYLVANIAN TOWER......................95 PACK 19. DOOMDARK'S REVENGE BEYONDI. PSYTRON (BEYOND), VALHALLA LEGENDI...... 8.95 PACK 20. ALL LOTHORIEN TITLES, INC DREADNOUGHTS, PANZER ATTACK, RED BARON PARAS .95 PACK 6. BACKGAMMON, 4D ARCADE ADVENTURE BIORYTHMS, REVERS, DEVILS OF THE DEEP MANIC MINER. 15.95 PACK 7. SMALL BUSINESS ACCOUNTS COLLECTORS PACK, CLUB RECORD CONTROLLER...... ....95 PACK 8. MAGNETS. GLIDER, FLIPPIT, CARGO, CHESS TUTOR 05.95 PACK 9 SPACE RAIDERS TRAXX PLANETOIDS HUNGRY HORACE & THE SPIDERS, INVINCIBLE ISLAND .....5.95 PACK 10. ROMMELS REVENGE, TRANSYLVANIAN TOWER RACING MANAGER, LOST, DUNGEON MASTER, DEVILS OF THE DEEP.......... ........5.95 PACK 21. LOTHLORIEN ACTION GAMES, INC. BILLYBONG, TWO GUN TURTLE, MICRO MOUSE BEETLEMANIA, BEDLAM BLASTER, GRID PATROL .95 PACK 22. SPORTS PACK INC. SNOOKER, ON THE OCHE DARTS), OLYMPICS, ST. ANDREWS GOLF DERBY DAY, WORLD CUP FOOTBALL..... .95 THE GREATEST SALE EVER COMMODORE 64 TITLES INDIVIDUAL SOFTWARE TITLES VIC 20 PROGRAMS: PACK 7. ANY TEN OF THE FOLLOWING JINN GENNIE..... 1.95 ALIEN cartridge) .50 COMMODORE EDUCATIONAL TITLES FOR TOWER OF DESPAIR .95 PROGRAMMERS AID cartridge............ .50 PLUMB CRAZY JUST .95!! ..E 1.95 SARGONI CHESS (cartridgel... E300 SHEEP IN SPACE .95 SIMPLICALC disc... 6.95 GYROPOD 2.45 p&p 5Op on above items! 'O' LEVEL GERMAN BOOGABOO THE FLEA [2.45 INTRO TO BASIC 'O' LEVEL FRENCH THE PYRAMID ..........  PT 1 and PT. 2 ..95 'O' LEVEL COMPUTER STUDIES BEAKY & THE EGG SNATCHERS .25 add 1.00 p&p for the two) GEOGRAPHY PERCY POTTY PIDGEON [2.45 WIZARD OF WOR comm... HISTORY 2.95 EUREKA!! .95 PATRICK MOORE'S ASTRONOMY WORLD CUP .45 PACK 1. CARTRIDGE GAMES ISOME REQUIRE ROBERT CARRIERS MENU PLANNER WHEELIN WHALLIE [2.45 PADDLES), PINBALL SPECTACULAR, LE-MANS, SEA ASK THE FAMILY .. [2.45 WOLF, JUPITER LANDING, RAT RACE, CLOWNS HUMPTY DUMPTY BATTLE THROUGH TIME......... .45 AVENGER, OMEGA RACE... .....95 GET READY TO READ ROLF HARRIS PICTURE BUILDER .45 (add .50 p&p or .50 each. 25p p&p) BRIAN BLOODAXE .95 FACE MAKER FALCON PATROL II...... BBC MASTERMIND .95 KENSINGTON .95 MATCHMAKER SPY VS SPY 14.95 PACK 2 BINGO, MURPHY, TAXMAN, ZETA 7. KNOW YOUR OWN 10 VALHALLA..... 395 STARFORCE, CAMERON..............95 or .00 each PATHFINDER EASY FILE disc .95 SPIRATES & SNOWMEN EASY SCRIPT disc .95 LETS COUNT SIMONS BASIC .95 SKY FOX Cass... PACK 3 SNOKIE, TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY, 7.75 WORDS WORDS WORDS SKY FOX disc ....95 or .50 each KONG..... .75 NUMBER PUZZLER DATEX MOUSE E70.95 MUSIC COMPOSER CURRAH SPEECH & SOUND SYNTH ..95 DEPTH CHARGE ALPHACOM 42, PRINTER INC 64 INTERFACE .95 PACK 4. PSYTRON BEYONDI, PSI-WARRIOR Add .50 for p&p or .50 each QUICK SHOT 1 JOYSTICK .95 BEYOND).... ......95 or .95 each INTRO TO BASIC PT. 1... ..95 SELECT 1 (12 games tape). .95 PACK 8. ANIROG TITLES, ICE HUNTER, SPIRIT OF THE STONES....... . . GALAXY, CYPOTRON.........4.95 (add 50p p&p) PITSTOP EPYX)............................ .... .95 PACK 5. AZTEC IBEYOND), ANKH (BEYOND). PILOT (Language disc) .. .. .95 MR ROBOT (BEYOND.........................95 or .25 PACK 9. SPY V SPY, LOGO Language disc)... ...16.95 VALHALLA...... ..........95 (add 50p p&pl PINBAL CONSTRUCTION SET (Ariola disc).. .75 MUSIC CONSTRUCTION SET Ariola disc)...... ..75 PACK 6. ANCIPITAL, ENCOUNTER RACING DESTRUCTION SET Ariola disc)....... 12.75 PACK 10. PARAS LOTH). JOHNNY REB ILOTH). SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD (disc)........... ...... .75 LAZER ZONE ........95 or .95 each SKULL, EGBERT, AAARCHI, CONDOR MAIL ORDER OF MONSTERS (disc)............. 12.75 Packs No. 2 to No. 6 are 50 p&p THE FABULOUS WANDA............95 or .50 each Add 50p for p&p add 50p p&p P&P 60p for any Software order. .50 for Keyboard + Printer. 60p for Peripherals. Overseas 75p per tape or .50 per pack LOGIC SALES LTD 6 MIDGATE, PETERBOROUGH, CAMBS PE1 1TN Telephone: (0733) 49696 6 "


"c+vg/games book/Heebie Jeebie/1 HEEBIE  COMMODORE 64 Guide your cute little moron out of the maze by using the joystick to get him to start drinking the glass of warm milk on the other side of the screen. But avoid the walls and the Heebie Jeebies. Loading instructions: Load and Run part one of the program. Type New and Load part two. New parts are added to the maze as you improve and there are three speed levels.  Paul Hammond 5 REM*****DATA FOR M/C AND SPRITES***** 100 AD=12800X=9 110 READAIFA=-1 THEN130 120 POKEAD+X, AX=X+1 : GOT0119 130 AD=49152: X=0 140 READAIFA=-1 THEN160 150 POKEAD+X, A X=X+1: GOT0149 160 END 1000 DATA1, 252,6,7,255,0.12, 249, 128,24112,192,51,38,96,51 1001 DATA38.96.120,112,240, 124,249,240, 127, 255, 249, 119,255,112,115,254 1002 DATA112.56.32224.63,7,224,31.255.192,15,259, 128,7,255,9 1003 DATA1, 252,0.1.220.01.297.9.3.199.128.7. 128.99 1004 DATA1, 252,6,7,255,0.15, 255, 128:31.255. 192.59.118.224,51 1005 DATA38,96, 120.112.249. 124, 249, 240, 127, 255, 249, 119.255, 112, 115,254 1006 DATA112.59, 254, 224,57, 252, 224, 28, 113, 192, 15, 7, 128,7,255.9 1007 DATA1, 252,0.1.229.0,7,156,915. 15.0.0.7. 128, 132 1998 DATAG,0.0.0.0.9. 192.0.48: 192,9.48,96,9, 96, 100 1909 DATA68, 96, 110. 238.224,63,255, 192,63,255, 192,53.90, 192.17.89 1019 DATA128, 21:74, 128, 31.255128, 15.255.9.15,255,9,15,255,0 1011 DATA7,254,07,254, 0.7,254.03.252.0.0.0.0.0 1012 DATAO, 9,9.9.0.9.192.9.48192.0.48.96.9.96, 113 1013 DATA1796. 123, 187,224,63,255,192,63,255, 192,53, 90, 192, 1789 1014 DATA128, 21,74, 128,31.255, 128, 15,255,0.15,255,0. 15.255.0 1015 DATA7,254.9. 7. 254.0.7. 254,0,3,252,0.9.9.9.181 1916 DATAG, 48.9.0.129.9.3.252.9.1.254,0,3,255,0.6 1017 DATA121,128,13,182,192,13,182,192,30, 121,224,31,255,224,31, 135 1018 DATA224,31.51.224,14,121, 192, 12,252.192.7.255. 128, 3,255, 1019 DATA7, 123, 128, 14,205.192.28,204,224,57,206,112,115,13556,255 1920 DATAO, 48,0,0, 120,0.9.252.0, 1.254,0,3,255,0.7 1021 DATA255, 128, 13, 254,192,13,182,192,30.121.224.31.255,224.31.255 1922 DATA224, 31, 3, 224,14,1, 192,12,140,192,7255, 128,3,255.0 1023 DATA7, 123, 128,14295,192,12,204,192,28,294,224,61,206,240, 123 1024 DATA2, 16, 128, 3.17, 128, 25.255.4813,255, 96,7,57,192,6 1025 DATA214, 192, 126,214.252, 15.57.224.31.255.249.63, 255: 248, 110.36 926 DATA236.79.131.228,31,255, 240,51, 255, 152,33,255, 8.3, 131. 128 1927 DATA6.0.192, 12.0, 96, 24.9.48, 24., 48.60.9, 120.255 1928 DATA2:16, 128, 3, 17, 128, 25,255,48,13,255, 96,7,255,192,6 1929 DATA254, 192, 126:214,252, 15:57 224, 31. 255, 240, 63,199,248, 110, 1030 DATA236.79.1.228,31. 131.240.51,255, 152,33, 255.8.3.131. 128 1031 DATA6.9.1925.9. 192.3, 1.128, 1,131,0.3, 131, 128, 106 1932 DATAO. 252.9.3,255,0.6, 121, 12, 13, 182, 192, 13, 182,192,14 1033 DATA121, 192,7.255, 128.3.255.0.1.254.0.0.252.9.1.206 1034 DATAO: 3,135,0.3.135.6.7.3.128.7.3. 128, 14.1.192 1935 DATA142.1.196.220.0.236.248,0, 124, 112,0.56.0.0.0.0 1936 DATAO, 252,0,3,255,0.6, 121, 128,13,182,192, 15, 183, 192, 15 1937 DATA255. 192,7.255, 128,3,255,0.1.254.9.9.252.9.1.206 1938 DATAG, 1.206.9.3, 135.9.3.135.9.3: 135.0.7.3, 128 1939 DATA7.3.128, 39.3.144,62 1.240.28 0.224,0,0,0,4,-1 "


"JEEBIE 2009 DATA173,9, 220, 201, 126,208,3,296,1,208,201, 125, 208,3,238,1 2001 DATA208, 201,119, 208, 15,24.56.173.9.208.195,0, 141,0, 208, 144 2002 DATA3, 238. 16,208, 173,9, 220, 201, 123,282, 24,206,0,208234, 234 2003 DATA173,0,293, 291, 255,298,12,173, 16,208,41,1,201,1,208,3 2004 DATA206.16.208. 238.9.203,173.0.203.291, 18,208,22,173, 248,7 2005 DATA201, 200208,5, 169,201,76.91 192 169,200, 141, 248, 7.169,0 2006 DATA141.9.203,96. 169,0, 162,0. 189.5.208. 291.58,208,5. 169 2007 DATA2, 157,1,203,201,200.208.5. 169,1,157,1,203, 189, 1.203 2008 DATA201 1.298.6.222.5.208.76.141, 192,254,5,208,232232224 2009 DATAS, 208, 213,238,11,203, 173,11,203,201, 10, 208,53, 162,, 189 2010 DATA250,7,201,204,208.5,169,205,76, 173, 192, 169,204,157,250,7 2011 DATA232,224,2, 208, 234, 162,0, 189, 252.7.201, 206, 208.5.169.207 2012 DATA76, 197, 192, 169,296, 157,252,7,232.224.2.298, 234,169,9,141 2013 DATA11203,96,162018912. 208, 201.30. 208,5. 169.2, 157,1 2014 DATA294,291.244.298.5.169.1. 157.1.294, 189, 1.204.201.1.208 2015 DATA6, 222, 12, 208, 75,250, 192,254, 12.208, 232, 232,224,4, 208, 213 2016 DATA162.9.189.254.7.201. 208. 208.5. 169.209.76.16.193, 169,298 2017 DATA157.254.7:232, 224.2.208, 234.96.173,249,7,201, 202,298.5 2018 DATA169,203, 76, 39, 193, 169,202141.249.7.96.88. 169,56, 14120 2019 DATA3,169.193.141.21.3, 120.96.173.8.294, 291,1,208 3.76 2020 DATA49,234,32,0.192, 32, 100, 192,32,211, 192,32:25, 193, 173, 31 2021 DATA208, 41. 1. 201, 1.208.9. 169, 1. 141.8, 204, 141.9.204,234 2022 DATA173, 30, 208,141., 205, 2013, 209, 14, 159, 1. 141.8.294, 141 2023 DATA10.204, 173,,295, 76,49,234.173.0.265.41.1.201,1,208 2024 DATA8, 169,1.141.8.294,141.9.204.76.43.234, 169, 15.141.24 2025 DATA212.169. 128, 141.6.212,169,9,141.5.212. 169. 17. 141.4,212 2026 DATA160.0, 162.9.238.9.212.232,298,259,209 238.1.212, 192, 123 2027 DATA208.249.169.6.141,4,212,96, 169, 15.141.24,212, 169, 128, 141 2028 DATA6, 212,159,9, 141.5,212,169,33, 141.4,212) 160,0,162,0 2029 DATA238,9, 212.238.33.298, 232, 208, 247, 209. 206,1,212,192, 254, 298 2039 DATA239.159.9. 141.4.212.141.33.208.96.255.255.0.9.255, 255, -1 5 H$=\"900409\":HI=496 10 PRINTCHR$(147): POKE53281.0 POKE53289.9 12 V=53248 15 SYS49451 : GOT04009 20 SC=0LE=1 LI=3 60 POKE53265, PEEK(53265) AND 239 62 GOSUB2000: REM*******DRAW MAZE******* 70 GOSUB3000 REM*******DRAW SCORE****** 80 GOSUB 1009 85 POKEV+31.9: POKEV+39.9 90 FORI=52232T052234 POKEI, NEXT 95 A=8000 : POKE53265, PEEK (53265) OR16 100 REM*********THE GAME LOOP********** 110 IFPEEK(52233)=1 THENSYS49592 LIELI-1: GOSUB3025: IFLIOTHEN69 120 IFLI=OTHEN4999 130 IFPEEK(52234)=1THENPOKE54273, SYS495485 SC=SC+ALE=LE+1: GOT059 140 A=A-2 200 GOTO110 999 END 1000 V=53248 POKEV+21.255 POKEV+16,50 : POKEV+27.255 1001 POKEV, 32: POKEW+1,299: POKEV+39.8: POKE2040.200 1002 POKEV+2,54: POKEV+3.200 : POKEV+49, 1.POKE2041, 202 1003 POKEV+4,32 POKEV+5,199 POKEV+41.4: POKE2042,204 1004 POKEV+6,56 POKEV+7,200 : POKEV-42,7: POKE2043, 205 1005 POKEV+8, 34 POKEV +9.209: POKEV+43,2 POKE2044, 296 1096 POKEW+10.58: POKEY+11, 190: POKEV+44.5: POKE2045.207 1007 POKEV+12, 109: POKEV+13,92 POKEV+45,6 POKE2G46208 Heebie Jeebie continues p75 "


"41 Matiniaimana mammarine The Secret Diary of Adrion lude aged 133 Sue ToumSend 2 W Program by Level 9 SPECTRUM.CBM 64. AMSTRAD.ATARI.MSX.BBC CASSETTES .95.DISCS (BBC & CBM 64 ONLY) E12.95 ALSO AVAILABLE THE ADRIAN MOLE SECRET DIARY KIT The Computer game +1986 Diary in one pack Casselte versions .95 Disc versions .95 Berat lamar the worlamadhan the WWMWAAAAA MOSAIC BOOHLJARE Distributed by WHS Distributors, St Johns House, East Street, Leicester Tel. (0533) 551196 Another great new game from Bubble Bus NIIN OMNIUTAWOWA WANAR After 29 rounds with Frank Bruno, I was starting to feel weary. EVIKSLAS That's the problem with most computer games. However thrilling they are at first, eventually you master the tactics and the attraction begins to wane. You need a fresh challenge, but with games costing  plus, most of us can't afford to buy new titles every week. Renting your software from the Matrix Club provides the solution. Our members enjoy a wide selection of games which includes the very latest titles. Life membership of the club costs only  and hire fees start from as little as 60p a game per week. Complete the form below or write for full details of our service without obligation, and very soon you'll be playing your favourite games at a fraction of the normal cost. By Stephen Crow uthor ar Wizard's Lan Spectrum 48K MINNINI NI MATRIX Name: Address: bubble bus software 87 High Street, Tonbridge Kent TNS 1RX Telephone: 0732 355962 Telex: 95151 System: Spectrum Commodore Post to The Matrix Club, 271 Stansted Road, Bishops Stortford Herts. "


"c+vg/games book/Heebie Jeebie/2 HEEBIE JEEBIE 1998 POKEV+14,200: POKEV+15, 164: POKEV+46,3: POKE2047,209 1949 RETURN 200 REIEW WHEE 2020 PRINT\" ; 2936 W#\"300 MIRI : FORINTO2: WE=\"$+W$: NEXT 2038 PRINT\"5\"; 2040 PRINTTABC7); W: PRINT\":\"SPC(31) W$ 2042 PRINT \" AMDAMANT\" TAB(7) W$ PRINT\" TIITTITI\"SPC(31);$ 2044 W$=\"30.09.08.02 .\":W1$=\"300\" 2046 PRINT\" \"; 2048 PRINTTAB(12): W\" g\":FORI=9T05: PRINTTAB(12);W1$ NEXT PRINT\" TITI\"; 2050 FORI=OTOS: PRINTTAB(26); W1$: NEXT PRINT\" \"TAB(12); W$ 2051 IFLEX 1 THENPRINT\"0\"TAB(19) \"30 \" 2052 IFLEX 2 THENPRINT\" . \"TAB(19) \"300 0 . \" 2053 IFLE 3THENPRINT\" INIMERINTAB(18)\" .. ...MARIN... . .\" 2054 IFLE 4 THENPRINT\"TI\"TAB(14) BARN :PRINTSPC(22)\" . 2055 IFLESTHENPRINT \"TAB (7) PRINTTAB(31) \"T 2057 IFLEX6ANDPEEK(56325)>30THENPOKE56325, PEEK(96325)-10 2058 PRINT\"\"; 2060 PRINT\" INVITER15 2062 FORI=GT020: PRINT\". OPPDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD \"NEXT 2064 PRINT\" RU H UNUNUHR \"; 2100 RETURN 3000 REM**********DRAW SCORE*********** 3010 PRINT\" D E SCORE HI-SCORE\" 3020 PRINT\" LEVEL LIVES\": 3025 PRINT\" S A MEINUTUL STRADA 3030 A$=MID(STR$(SC),2. LENCSTR$(SC))) SCE=LEFT$(\"999999\", 7-LEN STR$(SC))) 3935 SCISC$+A$ PRINTSPC(7) ;SC$; SPC(20) ;H$; 3949 PRINTSPC07); LE SPC(20) ;LI; 3199 PRINT\"2\" 3200 RETURN 40 REFIENT F GAME 4010 FORT=0T01990: NEXT: PRINT\" :POKEV+21.9: IFSCHITHENH$=$C$ 4015 A$=\" 4029 A$=R$+\"USE A JOYSTICK IN PORT TWO TO GUIDE YOUR CUTE LITTLE MORON OUT OF 4039 R$A$+.\" THE NIGHTMARE MAZE BY DRINKING THE GLASS OF NICE WARM MILK ON THE\" 4040 A$A$+\"OTHER SIDE OF THE SCREEN. AVOID THE WALLS AND THE HEEBIE JEEBIES\" 4050 A$A$+\". GOOD LUCK! 4060 PRINT\":7* **** ***** *** 4062 PRINT\"* * * * * * * \" 4064 PRINT\"**** *** *** *** 4066 PRINT\"* * * * * * * * \" 4068 PRINT\"* ***** **** ** *** ***\" 4069 PRINT\":\"SPC(12) 4070 PRINT\"********** ** *** ***\" 4971 PRINTSPC(12) 4072 PRINT\" * * * 4073 PRINTSPC(12) 4074 PRINTS * *** *** *** ***\" 4075 PRINTSPC(12) 4076 PRINT\" * * * * * * \" 4077 PRINTSPC (12) 4078 PRINT\"** *** *** ** *** *** 4080 FORI 1 T0254: PRINT I MITETULLUT TUMIMOC!\" MID$(A$ 1.39) 4082 FORT=0T0100 NEXTT GETB$IFE=\" \"THENI=254:GOT04999 4984 NEXT GOT04989 4099 FORT=0T0400: NEXT PRINT\" 4100 PRINT\" BUT CHOOSE A SPEED LEVEL\" 4102 PRINT\"H.VERY FAST\" 4104 PRINT\" . MEDIUM\" 4106 PRINTE.VERY SLOW\" 4108 PRINT\" CHOICE ?\", 4119 GETAE AEVAL CA$): IFR 10RA? 3THEN4119 4112 POKE56325, A*25 4114 PRINTA FORT=0T0899 NEXT GOTO29 Heebie Jeebie ends "


"c+vg/games book/Quake Alert/1 QUAKE Atari 32K Twelve scientists working underground face death as a massive earthquake threatens. Your mission is to take a helicopter underground and rescue them. Points are gained for each man rescued. But steer clear of the tunnel walls and keep an eye on the clock. Time is vital.  Mike White 1 REM **QUAKE ALERT** 2 REM **BY M.WHITE** 3 REM ** 1/8/85 ** 5 DIM A(8):GOTO 4000 10 SCO:LIV=3:DRO=6:GOSUB 1000:GOSUB 2000 13 X=56: Y=30:0B=4:TIM=999 15 X1=70:X2=125:X3=182:Y1=30 20 A=USR(1568,0,X,Y,2) 30 A=USR(1568,1,xi, 41,3):A=USR(1568,2,X2,81,3):A=USR(1568,3,3,71,3) 35 POKE 53278,0 40 JESTICK(O):REM **READ JOYSTICK** 50 IF J=14 THEN Y=Y-2:IF Y<=26 THEN Y-26 60 IF J=13 THEN YOY+2 70 IF J=11 THEN XOX-2:IF X<=50 THEN X=52 80 IF J=7 THEN X=X+2 82 IF J=5 THEN X=X+2:Y=Y+2 84 IF J=6 THEN X=X+2:Y=Y-2 86 IF 3=9 THEN X=X-2:Y=Y+2 88 IF J-10 THEN XOX-2:Y=Y-2 90 IF PEEK(53252)=1 THEN GOTO 200 94 IF =7 OR J=5 OR J=6 THEN AUSR(1568,0,X,Y,0) 98 IF J=11 OR J=9 OR J=10 THEN AUSR(1568.0,X,Y,1) 99 IF J>12 THEN A=USR(1568,0,X,Y,2) 100 IF PEEK(53260) >1 THEN GOTO 200 110 IF PEEK(53252)=2 THEN GOSUB 300:SC-SC+60 112 IF OB<=0 AND X>190 AND Y<35 THEN GOTO 350 115 POKE 53278,0 120 Y1=Y1+DRO:IF Y1 >=200 THEN Y1=30 130 TIM=TIM-1:IF TIM<=O THEN GOTO 230 140 POSITION 0,22:? #6;\"SCORE;\";SC;\" LIVES;\";LIV;\" TIME;\":TIM;\" 150 SOUND 1,20,4,3: SOUND 2,41/2,10,2 160 GOTO 30 200 SOUND 2,0,0,0:A=USR(1568,0,X,Y,4) 210 FOR W=160 TO O STEP -1: SOUND 1,77,8,W/10:NEXT W 215 FOR DEO TO 50:NEXT D 218 LIVELIV-1:IF LIV<=0 THEN 250 220 X=55:Y=30:TIM=999:GOTO 15 230 DPPEEK(560) +256 PEEK(561) 235 FOR H=6 TO 28:POKE DP+H. 38:NEXT H 240 FOR L=0 TO 20:FOR Y=0 TO 14:POKE 54277,Y:SOUND 1,Y*10,0,Y:NEXT Y: SOUND 2,50, 8, Y-2 "


"E ALERT 245 FOR Y=14 TO O STEP -1:POKE 54277,Y:SOUND 1,Y*10,0,Y:NEXT Y:NEXT L 250 SOUND 1,0,0,0:SOUND 2,0,0,0:POSITION 5, 11:? #6;\"game over\" 260 IF PEEK(53279)< >6 THEN 260 270 GOSUB 1000:SCO:LIV=3:GOTO 13 300 IF Y<=70 THEN POSITION 17,1:? #6;\" \":0B=0B-1: SOUND 1,50,10,5 310 IF Y>90 AND Y<110 THEN POSITION 13,9:? #6;\" \":0B=0B-1: SOUND 1,50,10,5 320 IF Y>115 AND Y<125 THEN POSITION 1,12:? #6;\" \":0B0B-1:SOUND 1,50, 10,5 330 IF Y>125 AND Y<140 THEN POSITION 6.13:? #6;\" \":0B-OB-1: SOUND 1,50 10,5 340 FOR D=0 TO 10:NEXT D:RETURN 350 POSITION 3,12:? #6;\"CONGRATULATIONS\" 360 LIVELIV+1:DRO=DRO+2:COLECOL+16:IF COL>=210 THEN COL=0 365 FOR D=0 TO 150:NEXT D 370 GOSUB 1000:GOTO 13 1000 POKE 708, COL+8:POKE 709, COL+40 1005 POSITION 0,0:? #6;\" IZDDDDDDDZZZDDDQ[\" 1010 POSITION 0,1:? #6;\" YH BZX WQ[\" 1020 POSITION 0,2:? #6;\"zzi FFFFI PIZZQ[\" 1030 POSITION 0,3:? #6;\"ZXY\\]FXUDZD YDZQI\" 1040 POSITION 0.4:? #6;\"X YZH (X YF YO[\" 1050 POSITION 0,5:? #6;\"Q P (Q1Q Z [Q[\" 1060 POSITION 0,6:? #6;\"Q[ [Q[Q[Q[\\ zx [Q[\" 1070 POSITION 0,7:? #6;\" YQIQIQIQIZDZZQ [Q[\" 1080 POSITION 0,8:? #6;\"Q Q (Q (X YH (QI\" 1090 POSITION 0,9:? #6;\"Q [Q JFZFFX WQ IZQ[\" 1100 POSITION 0,10:? #6;\"H Q FZ\\ YZQ[\" 1110 POSITION 0,11:? #6;\"Q BZFFFFFFFZDDX IX [\" 1120 POSITION 0,12:? #6;\"Qw YZDDZZDDX Q ]\" 1130 POSITION 0,13:? #6:\"zz [Q WZX Z Q JZ\" 1140 POSITION 0,14:? #6:\"2x 10 ZH FFFZZI Y\" 1150 POSITION 0,15:? #6;\"X IX ZDDDDDD [\" 1160 POSITION 0,16:? #6;\"[ZQ (FFFDX YQI\" 1170 POSITION 0,17:? #6;\" YQ FF QI\" 1180 POSITION 0,18:? #6;\"Z ZFFFFFFFZZZH Q[\" 1190 POSITION 0,19:? #6;\"x BDDDDDDDDDH (Z [\" 1200 POSITION 0,20:? #6;\" IZ ]\" 1210 POSITION 0,21:? #6;\"ZFFFFFFFFFFFFFFZZFFZ\" 1500 RETURN 1990 REM **SET UP SPRITES** 2000 POKE 106,144:POKE 710,0:PMSTARTEPEEK(106):F=PMSTART*256 2010 RESTORE 2100:FOR Q=1536 TO 1758: READ D:POKE Q, D:NEXT Q 2020 POKE 559,62:POKE 54279, PMSTART:FOR Q=0 TO 3: POKE 53248+Q,0:NEXT Q:POKE 704, 30:POKE 705,53:POKE 706,53 2030 POKE 707,53: POKE 53277,3:POKE 623, 8:X=USR(1536, PMSTART) 2040 RESTORE 2050:FOR QOTO 79: READ D:POKE F+Q, D:NEXT Q: RETURN 2045 REM **SPRITE SHAPE DATA** 2050 DATA 0,0,0,0,0,127,136,252, 250, 31, 10,31,0,0,0,0 2060 DATA 0,0,0,0,0,254, 17,63,95,248,80,248,0,0,0,0 2065 DATA 0,0,0,0,0,127,8,28,34,62,20,34,0,0,0,0 2070 DATA 0,0,0,0,24,126,126,255,255, 126, 126,24,0,0,0,0 2080 DATA 0,0,8,10,20,9,36,0, 8,52,82,37,20,82,16,0 Quake Alert continues p79 "


"SEE MICRONET 800 IN ACTION At selected Boots, Laskys, John Lewis & your local computer store care. Tel 029609.70 Friars AVON | Dorchester. The Paper Shop Bath. Boots 1 Marchants Passage, Kings Road Tel: 0305 64564. Tunbridge Wells. Modala Nottingham. Boots, 11-19 Victoria Southgate. TeL: 0225 64402. Computer Centre, 28-30 St. Johns Bognor Regis Bits & Bytes, High Poole. Lansdowne Computer Centre. Tek 0602 470676 Bristol Boots 59 Broadmead. Road. Tel: 0892 41555. Centre, 14 Amdale Centre Street. Tet 0243 867143. Nottingham Tostar, 280 Huntington Eastbourne Boots, 15 Eastbourne Tek 0272 3631. Tel: 0202 670901. LANCASHIRE Street. Tet 0602 505585. Ardale Centre Tel 0323 27742 Weston Super Mare. Peter ESSEX Blackpool Boots, 28-38 Bank Hey Worksop. Computer Graphix Horsham Boots, 1 Swan Walk Castell Ltd, 28 Orchard Street St & Victoria St Tet 0253 22276. Basildon. Basildon Software 32 Bridge Street. Tel: 0909 472248 Tel 0403 53053. Tel: 0934 24778. Centre 78-80 Liberty Shopping Blackpool Blackpool Computer NORTHAMPTONSHIRE Store, 179 Church Street Horsham. Orchard Computer BEDFORDSHIRE Hall, East Square Tel: 0268 27922. Kettering Boots 35 Gold Bedford. Boots The Harpur Centre, Centre, 34 East Street Tel: 0253 20239. Braintree. Mirage Micros Street. Tel 0536 $14675. Tel 0403 64884 Harpur Street. Tet 0234 56231. Bolton Computer World UK 24 Bank Street Tet 0376 48321. Northampton. Boots, 9 The Bedford. Software Centre, Worthing Boots 48-52 Montague Chelmsford. Maxton Hayman, 208 Chorley Old Road. Parade. Tel 0604 22573 Street. Tek 0903 207106. 52a Bromham Road, Tel: 0204 494304 5 Broomfield Road Tel 0245 354595 Burnley. IMO Computer Centre, NORTHUMBERLAND TYNE & WEAR Tel: 0234 44733. Colchester. Boots, 5-6 Lion 39-43 Standish Street Morpeth. Telerents (Northem) Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Boots, Leighton Buzzard. DJ Computers, Walk Tel: 0206 577303. Lid, 31 New Gate Street Tel 0282 54299 17 Bridge Street, Tel: 0$25 383929. 1 Colchester. Colchester Computer Eldon Square. Tet 0632 329844 Tel 0607 513537 Lancaster. Northern Lights, Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Luton. Boots, 82-86 Amdale Centre, Centre, 3a Short Wyre Street Tel: 0582 20592. Tel: 0206 47242. 89 Scotforth Road Tel: 052462634. OXFORDSHIRE RE Computing Parkview House, Preston. 4Mat Computing Grays. H. Reynolds, 79 Orsett Abingdon, Ivor Fields BERKSHIRE Front Street, 4 Lane Ends 67 Friargate, tel: 0777561932 Computers, 21 Stert Street, Road. Tel: 0375 5948 Tel: 091 2701740. Slough. Boots, 178-184 High Rochdale. Boots 50 Market Tek 223 2127. Sunderland. Business Micro Harlow. Harlow Computer Centre Way. Tet 0706 53225. Street, TeL: 0753 27267. 17 Staple Tye Tel 0279 22846. Banbury. Computer Plus, Maidenhead. Boots, 54-58 High Communications Ltd, Refuge LEICESTERSHIRE Hornchurch. Comptel Computer 2 Church lane. Tel: 0295 55890 Street. Tel0628 27892. Assurance Buildings, Saint Thomas Oxford. Science Studio 7 Little Leicester. Boots, 30-36 Gallowtree Street, West Sunniside BUCKINGHAMSHIRE Systems 112a North Street Gate. TeL: 0533 21641. Milton Keynes. Boots, Tel: 0783 654916. Clarenden Street. Tel: 0865 54022 Tel 02 446741, Ilford. Boots, 177-185 High Road Leicester. DA Computers Odford. Absolute Sound and Video, 18 Crown Walk, Secklow Gate West Tel 01-553 2116 WALES 104 London Road Tel: 0533 549407 19 Old High Street, Headington, Aberdare. Inkey Computer Tel: 0908 607327. Market Harborough. Harborough Tel 0869 6361. Romford. Software Plus, Services, 70 Mill Street, The Square, Milton Keynes. Depson Business 72 North Street. Tel 70 65271. Home Computers. 7 Church Street SCOTLAND Systems, 65 Aylesbury Street, Trecynon. Tet 0685 881828. Southend-on-Sea. Computerama, Tek 0858 63056. Aberdeen. Boots, 133-141 Union Bletchley. TeL: 0908 367446. Aberystwyth. Aberdata at 88 London Road Tel: 0702 335443. Aylesbury. Boots, 69-70 Friars Street. Tet 0224 585349. LONDON Galloways, 23 Pier Street Tel 0970 615522 Dundee Boots 49-53 High Street, wi. Computers of Wigmore Southend-on-Sea Computer Street, 104 Wigmore Street Cardiff. Boots, 36 Queens Street Tel 0382 21756. Centre 336 London Road Chesham. Reed Photo & Tel 01 486 0873. Tel 0702 337161. Edinburgh. Boots, 101-103 Princes & 105 Frederick Street Computers, 113 High Street. Street. Tel 031-225 8331. W1. Galaxy. 230 Tottenham TcE Tel 0494 783373 Southend-on-Sea. Estuary D318i. Personal Computers, 318 Chartwell Court Road. Tel 01-636 6500 Edinburgh. Microworld Computer Cardiff. The Computer Shops CAMBRIDGESHIRE North, Victoria Circus Shopping W1. Sonic Foto Micro Center, Group 12 Leven Street 41 The Hayes. Tet: 6222 26666. Cambridge. Boots, 65-67 Sidney Centre. Tel: 0702 614131. 256 Tottenham Court Road, Tel 031 228 1111 Cardiff. Cardiff Microcomputers Street and 28 Petty Curry Street Tel 01-580 5826 Edinburgh Edinburgh Computers, 46 Charles Street. Tet 0272 373072 Tel: 0223 350213 GLOUCESTER W1. Tomorrows World Today, Cheltenham. Screen Scene, 144 S4 51-57 Lothian Road Cambridge. Cambridge Computer Georges Road Tet 0242 528979. Newport. Gwent Computers S4 27 Oxford Street. Tet 01-439 7799. Tel 031 9 18. 92 Chepstow Road Store, 4 Emmanuel Street Gloucester. Boots, 38-46 Eastgate WC1. Transam Micro Systems, Edinburgh. Silicon Centre, Tel: 0633 841760. Tet 223 358264 59-61 Theobalds Road Newport Boots, 155-156 7 Antigua Street Tet 031 557 4546. Street. TeL: 0452 423501. Peterborough. Boots, 40-42 Bridge Tel 01-405 5240. Glasgow. Boots 200 Sauchiehall Commercial Street. Tet 0633 51212. Street. Tel: 0733 65352 HAMPSHIRE W8. Boots 127a Kensington High Street. Tet 041 332 1925. Swansea Boots, 17 SL Marys Peterborough. Logic Sales, Basingstoke. Boots, 15 Old Glasgow. Microworld Computer Arcade, The Quadrant Shopping Unit 6 Midgate Parade Street. Tet 01-937 6882. Basing Mall. Tel 0256 51611. SE7. Vic Oddens Micros Group 11 Bath Street Centre. Tel: 0792 43461. Tel 073349696 Bournemouth. Boots, 18-20 Tel 041 332 1116. 6 London Bridge Walk Swansea. The Micro Store, 35-36 Commercial Road Tel: 0202 21713. St Neots. Compute, 3 Cross Tet 01-403 1983 Glasgow. Boots, Union Street and Singleton Street Tet 0792 46980 Keys. Tel: 0480 72013 Fareham. Electronequip 36-38 SE15. Castlehurst Ltd, 152 Rye Argyle Street. Tel 041 248 7387. West Street Tel 0329 230670. WARWICKSHIRE CHESHIRE Glasgow. Tom Dixon Cameras, Lane, Peckham. Tet 01-639 2205. Coventry. Boots, 38-42 Corporation Fareham. Boots, 21 Westbury Chester. Boots, 47-55 Foregate EC2. Devron Computer Centre, 15-17 Queen Street Street. Te 0203 26561 Street Tel: 0244 28421 Mall Tel: 0329 232011 155 Moorgate. Tel: 61-638 3339 Tel 041-2040826. Portsmouth. Micro Choice, Chester, Computer Link, 21 St. Leamington Spa. Boots, Glasgow. Commscot Lid N14. Logic Sales, 19 The Boume, 159 Havant Road, Drayton 31 Parade. Tel 0926 24945. 30 Gordon Street Tet 041 226 4878. Werburgh Street Tet 0244 316516. The Broadway, Southgate, Crewe. Midshires Computer Leamington Spa. Leamington Tel 0705 327591. Tel 01-882 4942. East Kilbride. Boots, 33-37 The Hobby Centre 121 Regent Street Centre, 57 Earle Street Portsmouth. RDS Electrical N22. Boots, 38-40 High Road, Plaza Tel: 035 52 20629 Te: 0926 9211. Tel 0270 589191 (Portsmouth) Lid 157-161 Falkirk Boots, 79-91 High Wood Green. Tel 01-881 0101 Nuneaton. Micro City, 1a Queens Kingston Road. Tel 0705 812478 Macclesfield. Computer Centre, N W4. Davinci Computer Store, Street. Tel 0324 20535 Road. Tet 0203 382049 68 Chestergate. Tel 0625 618827 Portsmouth, Boots, 194/204 Hamilton Tom Dixon Cameras 112 Brent Street, Hendon Rugby. O.E.M, 9-11 Regent Street Commercial Road, Tel: 0705 825248 Warrington, Boots, 39-45 Bridge Tel 01-202 2272 8 Cadzou Street. Tel 0698 283193. Te 0788 70522 Street Tel: 0925 574825. Southampton. Boots, 23-29 Above Bar Street. Tel 0703 333983. Shopping Centre Tet 01-202 5256/7. NW4. Boots, Brent Cross Peterhead. North East WEST MIDLANDS Computers. 1 Ellis Street CLEVELAND Middlesborough Boots Waterlooville GB Microland, Birmingham, Boots, City Centre Tel 0779 79900 NW11. Computers Inc, 86 Golders 7 Queens Parade, London Rd. 88-90 Linthorpe Road, The House, 16-17 New Street Tel 0705 259911 Green Tet 01209 0401. SHROPSHIRE Tel: 021-643 7582. Cleveland Centre. Tel 0642249616. Shrewsbury. Computerima GREATER MANCHESTER HERTFORDSHIRE Darlington, Darlington Computer Potters Bar. The Computer Shop Dudley. Central Computers, Altrincham. Boots, 13-17 13 Castlegate. Tel 0743 60528 35 Churchill Precinct. Shop 75 Bondgate George Sreet. Tel 061-928 4471 Telford. Computer Village, Tel 0384 238169. 197 High Street. Tel: 0767 44417. Tel 0325 487478 2/3 Hazeldine House, Central Hyde. C Tech Computers, 184 Stevenage. DJ Computers, Stourbridge. Walters Computer Square. Tel 0952 506771 CORNWALL Market Street. TeL061-366 8223 Systems 12 Hagley Road St. Austell AB&C Computers, 11 Town Square Te 0438 65501. Telford. Telford Electronics Manchester. Boots, 32 Market Tel 0384 370811. Duchy House, 6 Lower Aylmer Watford. SRS Microsystems Street. Tel 061-8326533 38 Mall 4. Tel: 0952 504911. 94 The Parade, High Street Walsall New Horizon, 1 Goodall Square, Tel 0726 64463 Manchester. Mighty Micro SOMERSET Street. Tel: 0922 24821. Bodmin. Microtest, Tel 0923 26602 Welwyn Garden City. DJ Sherwood Centrs, 268 Wilmslow Taunton. Boots, 64-65 High WILTSHIRE 18 Normandy Way Computers. 40 Fretherne Road Road, Fallowfield Tel: 061-224 8117. Street. Tet 082376061. Trowbridge West Wiltshire Tel: 0208 3171/3182 Tel: 9628444 Manchester, NSC Computer Micros, Whiteheart Yard CUMBRIA Shops, 29 Hanging Ditch STAFFORDSHIRE Tel 02214 67259. Kendal The Kendal Computer HUMBERSIDE Tel: 061-8322769 Newcastle-under-Lyme. Centre, Stramongate. Beverley. Computing World, Marple. Marple Computer Centre Computer Cabin, 24 The Parade YORKSHIRE 10 Swabys Yard, Dyer Lane 106 Church Lane Tet 661-449 99332 Silverdale. TeL: 0782 636911 Bradford. Boots, 11 Darley Street Tel 0482 881831. Whitehaven. PD Hendren, 15 King Grimsby. RC. Johnson Ltd, Oldham. Home & Business Stoke on Trent Town Computer Tel 0274 390891. Street Tel: 0946 2063. Store, 30 Town Road, Hanley. Computers, 54 Yorkshire Street. 122 Friargate, River Head Centre, Workington. Technology Store, Doncaster. Boots, 13-15 French | Tel 078228754) Tel: 0472 42031 Tel 061-633 1608 Gate, Tet 0302 62238. 12 Finkle Street Oldham Boots, 1 Town Square Stoke on Trent Boots, 3-5 Market Hull Boots, 48-58 Prospect Barnsley. Boots, 34-40 Cheapside Tel 090 66972 Shopping Centre. Tel: 061-624 2525 Square, Hanley. Tet 0782 23271. Tel 026 02616. Penrith. Penrith Communications. Hull Computer Centre, 26 Analby Centre. Tel: 0482 22334 Stockport. National Micro SUFFOLK Huddersfield Micro World 14 Castlegate. TeL: 0768 67146 Centres, 36 St Peters Gate. Road. Tel: 0482 26297 Bury St Edmunds Boots Computers, 1006-1010 Manchester Tek 061429 8080 DERBYSHIRE 11-13 Comhill Tel: 0284 701516. Road, Linthwaite Tel 0484 846117. Alfreton. Gordon Harwood, ISLE OF MAN MERSEYSIDE Bury St Edmunds. The Suffolk Huddersfield. Boots, 22 King 69-71 High Street. TeL: 0773 836781. 57-61 Victoria Street Douglas. T.H. Coleboum, Liverpool Hargreaves, 31-37 Computer Centre, 1-3 Garland Street. Tel 0484 21756 Chesterfield, Boots, 35-37 Low Warbreck Moor, Walton Street. Tel: 0284 705503. Leeds. Boots, 19 Albion Arcade, Tel 0624 73482 Pavement Market Place Tel 051-525 1782 Ipswich. Computer Magic Bond Street Centre. Tel 0532 33551. Tel 0246 203591. KENT St Helens. Microman Computers, 24 Crown Street Tel 0473 50965. Leeds. Micro Power, Northwood Derby. Boots 1 Devonshire Ashford. DGH, 10 North Street Rainford Industrial Estate, Mill SURREY House, North Street Tel: 0233 32597. Walk Tel: 0332 45886. Lanc, Rainford. Tel 0744 885242 South Croydon. Concise Tel 032 458800 Derby. First Byte Computers, Beckenham. Supa Computers Southport. Boots 31-39 Chapel Computer Consultants 1 Carlton Sheffield. PIP Micro 10 Main Centre, London Road. 425 Croydon Road Street. Tet 0704 33907 Road Tel: 01-681 6842 Communications 9 Taptown Tel 0332 365286. Tel: 01-650 3569. St Helens Boots, 8 Church Croydon. The Vision Store, Crescent Broomhill Bromley. Boots, 148-154 High Street, 24 La Grange Arcade 53-59 High Street. Tel: 01-686 6362 Tel 0742 661096 Street. Tel: 01-460 6688 Tel 04 25488. DEVON Sheffield. Boots, 4-6 High Croydon. Boots, The Mall Chatham. Boots, 30-34 Wilmott MIDDLESEX 12-18 Whitgift Centre Street. Tel 074278333. Exeter. Boots, 251 High Street, Square, Pentagon Centre. Harrow. Camera Arts, 42 St Te+ 01-688 6021 Wakefield Boots, 26-28 Upper Tel: 0392 32244 Tel: 0634 405471. Anns Road, Tek 01-427 5469. Kirkgate. Tet 0924 376181. Epsom. The Micro Workshop Gravesend. Gravesend Home Exeter. Open Channel, Central Hounslow. Boots, 193-199 High York York Computer Centre, 12 Station Approach Computers, 39 The Terrace Station, Queen Street Street. Tel 01-5700156 Tel: 0372 721333, 7 Stonegate Arcade Tel: 0392 218187. Tel 047428871 Tel: 0904641862 Southall Twillstar Computers Ltd Centre, 5 The Quadrant, Bridge Guildford. Guildford Computer Folkstone. Boots, 24-26 Sandgate Paignton, Computer Systems Lidl Road Tel 0303 54007 35 Hyde Road. Tel 0803 524284 7 Regina Road Tel: 01-574 5271. Teddington Andrews, Broad Maidstone Boots, 56-62 King Street. Tel 0483 578848 Plymouth. Syntax, 76 Cornwall, Wallington Surrey Micro Street. TeL: 0732 28705. Street. Tel 01-977 4716 Street. Tel 0622 53912 Systems, 53 Woodcote Road Plymouth. Computer Base, Twickenham. Productive Maidstone. Kent Micros, 52 Union Computers Ltd, 72 Heath Road 21 Market Avenue Tel 0752 672128 Street. Tel: 0622 52784 Tel 01-647 5636 Plymouth. Boots, 2-6 New George 39 I Rainham. Microway Computers Tet 01-891 4991. Woking Harpers, 71-73 Street. TeL: 0752 266271. h Street Tet 0634 376702 Commercial Way. Tel: 0486 225657. Uxbridge. JKL Computers 7 Windsor Street. Tel 0895 $1815. Seaton. Curtis Computer Services, Sevenoaks. Emest Fielder SUSSEX Seaton Computer Shop Computers, Dorset Street. Brighton. Boots, 129 North Street. NORFOLK 51c Harbour Road Tel 0297 22347. TeL: 0732 456800 Norwich. Adams 125-129 King Tel 0273 27088 Tiverton. Actron Microcomputers Shortlands The Village House Street. Tet 0603 22129. Brighton. Gamer, 71 East Street. om Tel 0273 728681 37 Bampton Street. Tet 0884 252854 Thetford. Thetford CB & Micros of Computers, 87 Beckenham Lane 21 Guildhall Street Tet 0842 61645 DORSET Tel: 01-4607122 Bournemouth. Lansdowne Sittingbourne. Computer Plus, NOTTINGHAMSHIRE Computer Centre, 1 Lansdowne 65 High Street Tel: 0795 25677 Mansfield Boots, 39 Four Crescent. Lansdowne. 0202 20165 Tunbridge Wells. Boots, 7-11 Seasons Shopping Centre, TA 3 39. Calverley Red Tet 0892 25486 Tel 0539 23orate porthall Tiwa700152199 High micronet 800 Phone 01-278 3143 for your free information pack now! Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1. "


"c+vg/games book/Quake Alert/1 QUAKE ALERT 2090 REM **SPRITE SETUP DATA** 2100 DATA 104,104,104,141,218,6,24,105,4,141,219,6,169,0,162,3,157,200,6,202,16, 250, 169,7,162,6,160, 67,32 2110 DATA 92,228,96,169,1,141,220,6,104,104,104,170,104,104,157,208,6,104,104,15 7,212,6,104,104,157,204 2120 DATA 6,169,1,157,200,6,169,0,141,220,6,96,173,220,6,240,3,76,98,228,162,3,1 89,200,6,208, 6, 202,16 2130 DATA 248, 76,98,228,142,216,6,169,0,157,200,6,141,221,6,189,204,6,201,16,16, 21,189,204,6,10,10,10,10 2140 DATA 133,205,173,221,6,24,109,218,6,133,206,76,152,6,173,221,6,24,105,1, 141 .221.6.189,204,6,56,233 2150 DATA 16, 157,204,6,201,16,48,213,76,127,6,173,219,6,24,109,216,6,133,204,169 ,0,133,203, 160, 255, 145 2160 DATA 203, 136,208,251,189,212,6,133,203,160,0,177,205,145,203,200,192,16,208 .247,174,216,6, 189, 208 2170 DATA 6,157,0,208,24,144,131,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1 92,208,224,240 2180 DATA 0,0,0,0,0,0,0 2990 REM **REDEFINE CHARACTER SET** 3000 RESTORE 3042:MT-PEEK(106):GT=MT-4:POKE 106, GT 3010 GRAPHICS 1+16:? #6:\"BACK IN A MO!\":CROEPEEK(756) *256 3020 CRA-GT 256: POKE 756,GT:FOR N=0 TO 1023:POKE CRA+N, PEEK(CRO+N):NEXT N 3030 FOR K=1 TO 15:READ R:R=R-32 3040 FOR I=0 TO 7:READ A:A(I)=A:B=I+R*8+256*GT: POKE BA:NEXT I:NEXT K:GOTO 10 3041 REM **NEW CHARACTER DATA** 3042 DATA 93,3,3,15,31,31,63,127,127 3045 DATA 66, 127, 127,63,63,31,15,3,0 3050 DATA 68,255,255,255,255,207,134,4,0 3060 DATA 70,0,17,157,255,255,255,255,255 3070 DATA 92,192,192,240,248, 252, 252, 254,254 3080 DATA 72,254, 254, 252, 252, 248,224, 128,0 3090 DATA 74,15,31,63,63,63,63,31,15 3110 DATA 90,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255 3120 DATA 64,0,0,8,28,62,127,255,255 3130 DATA 80,255,255, 126,60,24,0,0,0 3140 DATA 81,224,240,240,224,192,192,224,240 3150 DATA 91,1,3,7,7,3,3,1,1 3160 DATA 87,0,0,60,126,255, 126,90,126 3170 DATA 88,255,252,248,224,192,192,128,128 3180 DATA 89,255,63,15,7,7,3,3,1 4000 COL=0:POKE 53277.COL:POKE 53768,32:GRAPHICS 1:POSITION 5,6:? #6:\"quake alert\" 4005 POSITION 6,8:? #6:\"BY\" 4007 POSITION 5, 10:? #6;\"mike white\" 4010 POKE 710,0:?\" PRESS START TO PLAY\" 4015 ?\" PRESS HELP FOR INSTRUCTIONS\" 4020 IF PEEK(53279)<7 THEN GOTO 3000 4022 IF PEEK(732)17 THEN GOTO 4030 4024 GOTO 4020 4030 GRAPHICS 0:POKE 710,0 4040 ?\" INSTRUCTIONS\" 4050 ? :? \"YOU HAVE BEEN CHOSEN TO PILOT YOUR HELICOPTER IN AN UNDERGROUND MISSION\" 4060 ? \"TO RESCUE 12 SCIENTISTS. YOU MUST DO THIS BEFORE AN IMMINENT EARTHQUAKE DESTROYS THE TUNNELS.\" 4070 ? \" THERE ARE 3 MEN IN EACH HUT, TO RESCUETHEM TOUCH THE HUTS. YOU SCORE 20\" 4075 ? \"POINTS FOR EACH MAN. IF YOU GET ALL THEMEN EXIT ON THE RIGHT OF THE SCREEN.\" 4080 ?\" USE THE JOYSTICK TO CONTROL THE CHOPPER, IT HAS FULL 8-WAY CONTROL. 4095 ?\" TOU DIE BY TOUCHING THE TUNNEL WALL, HITTING A FALLING BALL OR RUNNING OUT\" 4097 ? \"OF TIME, WHEN THE EARTHQUAKE STRIKES. AN EXTRA LIFE IS GAINED FOR EACH COMPLETED LEVEL.\" 4100 ? :? \"ALL TUNNELS CAN BE NEGOTIATED, WITH SKILL AND PRECISION.....GOOD LUCK\" 4110 ? :?\" PRESS START TO PLAY\" 4120 IF PEEK(53279)<7 THEN GOTO 3000:GOTO 4120 4130 GOTO 4120 9999 FOR H=6 TO 28: POKE DP+H. 38:NEXT H 10000 FOR LEO TO 20:FOR Y=0 TO 14:PCKE 54277,Y:SOUND 1,80,8,Y:NEXT Y:SOUND 2,200 Quake Alert ends "


"F nonin O n n ID nin M \" + 0 U 0 ILOIHOH 10 l 1 2 HO 0 OUER STEP 24 10: NEXT 197 a EU Injun Jim, an intrepid archaeologist, is searching for the fabulous Star of India a priceless gemstone. Jim has found where the gem is hidden. But it has been broken up into 50 parts and distributed throughout the Your task of finding them is made more difficult by the perils of the The controls are A jump, N left  Eamon and Kieran Tighe ten caves. and M right. moving holes. \"oh! JOU  SPECTRUM 48K 1000000000000 0 10 0 O 0 9 OSOS. 100 0 0 100 0 mm M ZIEI + mm O 0 mm 0 in HD o n + 0 04-10-10 M IL IV in one 00S O LT 0 -00 0 -IL9 . SSD 0 10M ODTISIND + Ch 01 FICO N N in Me 9. 00 INOO ISUN MINI in 333HH..!! INZE ONWUDOT U OLOOD COCOU MIUINO00 ONENO 0 0 0 N OO Inc E Y33X COZHOHEN . HOWO E O Maa Onna N ZIIZOCO xin 1 00 LHL HOLYOL 0 0 MOSO 90099099 INIW9TOSHOO! SUO N000000000+ O OM 0 . 00 OM HZ90000. OM 90 + . H O + + X EIN . INK PAPER 7): FOR AT ZX FAPER 6 LET !fan NE T ti =310-le+10: LET DE AT Z-1.X; INK 2 ESTORE 180: DIM DATA 1644816544 184.321852 7: READ 582 283 284 592812 c+vg/games book/Injun Jim/1 72 "


"8. 136242 200 DIM p=1 TO 5 LET 10 I    ODOZDOO = INT ( 3 +1 LET X=IN TRX 55 X; PAPER 7: INK INK O: DO LILA . ON HOI EDDODHUXOP F: RUN 4000 PRINT INK IN CTION6 AT 10 A-JUMP AT 10: \"N-LEFT\", AT 4,10: \"M-RIGHT!! 4010 PRINT AT 1: Pass through 10 Caverns by Collecting he scattered fragments O the STAR OF INDIA. Watch your t ime and the spikes\" 4015 PRINT AT 21 10: PRESS KEY 4020 FOR F=1 TO 5 NEXT PAUSE O: RETURN 6000 RESTORE 50 10 FOR F=1 TO READ Z.X: BEEP .043 BEEP 6010 DATA 0..9 a .8.0.25 01 2:25 .8.0 .25 0 .8 -1 .5.0 1005 IF d= AND = 1 AND 50/60 = IN T(SC/60) THEN LET SCEs +12GO IN IF PEEK ia tid/3) +1) + = TH SUB 8000 NK : RANDOM VER 23317 EK laid/3 + = 0 THEN G H N + I Z  4 IIII + IOU HILJADUH LU HZHHE HET CUTZZZ ZN-OXEXU QE ZEEL  E  +  ,  US 0 ,   0.01 O H 19HOWO OLOMOU IN OH OOOH 99 00 + 0 .  III OH HUUHDH9DHINUL 99 999009909Z DEXOHI FI OZ OZOD ZN YTHOZ..   1   .  ZISJAZOZI WA LuggaOYU. II S . IEW 9UOD .. 10: 9H US X SHERS HULL II . . INT AT + a INK 17 (INREY $ = AND ATTR HEN LET = +1 L ATTE ESC +10 BEEP .01,0 > THEN LET ded: I AND PEE lid-3 TEO AND ATFER 10-231 >50 T D ATT 1890 49 INREYSED AND ETTE -11=56) THEN LET Tool COHHUHUHU 19 BEEB | C ILOVE = \"\" TTE Dr. Elm+ H SEESC+10 BEE 0 1070 LET tisti-1: PRINT #1: A ORE \";SC\" TIME : ti: ile\" \" IF ti= 0 THEN 90 FC < THEN PRINT AT R 0,\" AT 1 C INH 0 : RINT AT 1 1 1 PAPER 7; INN ASH 1, \"DEATH TO ALL TREASU RINT AT 21 10 PRESS A KEY 6025 FOR = 1 TO 10: NEXT F 6030 PAUSE O: RUN 7000 FOR E1 TO 3: BEEP01. : LET d=d-1: IF ATTR Ida = 60 EN LET SS=SC +10: BEEP 01,60 EP 01,0 7012 PRINT AT dia: INKO +1, a INK 1, 7 AT 8+2a \"I NEXT INK : RANDOMI SR 23317: RETURN FOR 1=1 TO 3: BEEP 01 ded+1: IF ATTR id SC+10: BEEP 60 BEEP 10.0 IF ATTR id + 1 a: =58 THEN S To 6000 PRINT AT 0-1 & INK A a: INK D AT 1+1, at I 20 THEN GO TO 6000 8030 NEXT FINK RANDOMIZE US R23317: RETURN 9000 RESTORE 9000: FOR =USRB TO USR \"F\" +7: RED POKEP 9010 DATA 50.95,100,66.0.24.504 9020 DATA 44,44,50.24 24.24.2+ = 030 DATA 44.35.50.28,44 118 102 9040 DATA 60.66, 189, 65. 66.35.35, DATA 223,223 223,0,251,251, DATA 3.8.28 28.52.52288 9070 RETURN 1090 IFC < THEN PRINT AT INK 0;\" \"AT +1 , a: INK 1; 1100 GO TO 1000 2000 I Fle = 10 THEN GO TO 3000 2004 FOR F=0 TO 45 BEEP 01 BEEP.01 12NEXT CLS PRINT AT 10:1; \"THAT WAS EASY NOW TR THIS 2005 PRINT AT 15.10; FLASH 1:2 ESS A KEY\": LET F= 2008 LET le=ie + 1 2010 PRINT AT 10.1; INK = 5 ET F=F+1 020 IF INKEY $< THEN OLS 0107 2025 IF FE THEN LET FED 2030 GO TO 2010 3000 CLS: PRINT AT 10.0: FLASH 1 INK 0:\"YOU'VE GOT ALL PARTS O 3020 RESTORE 3010: FOR READ BEEP 1.5 OR 00+ 11 A 10 DI 0-0 ODTUTO TIDUDDHA I TID CO... PE OLOT NI E -000 DO 000 OX+ Ho . ZO. OUDOT AND O ADORA DI AME NA LI TT II 3055 PLOT 95,56 DRAW 64.0 3060: FOR E-32 TO 32 STEP 16 LOT 127 16: DRAW 1,40: NEXT 3070 PRINT #1; AT 0.3: INK : PRE 55 A KEY-PRESS A KEY FOR = 1 TO 5: PAUSE O NEXT DO Injun Jim ends "


"DO YOU FIND CHOOSING SOFTWARE Software. Por Spect HARD? At the VIRGIN GAMES CENTRES, we've worked long and hard to put together the UK'S BIGGEST RANGE of COMPUTER SOFTWARE GAMES. We've got an unrivalled selection of... Arcade Games, Adventure Games, War Games, Classic Games, Family Games, Sports Games, Business and Educational Software. For Spectrum, QL, Atari, BBC, Electron, Commodore 64, Commodore C16, Enterprise, MSX and Amstrad machines. Plus a large stock of utilities, peripherals, chess computers, books and magazines and a range of Sinclair Commodore and Amstrad hardware. And if you find choosing software hard, we have a team of knowledgeable staff to help you. BAG GAMES CENTRE 172 Union Street, Aberdeen  94/96 Briggate, Leeds 100 Oxford Street, London W1 ... with the Multi-Viewterm/Datatari modem serial interface plus software package from Miracle Technology. GOOD BYTE SPECTRUM FULL PRESTEL FOR ATARI USERS! BATTLE OF BRITAIN THING ON A SPRING SKY FOX RUPERT BEAR BLACKWYCHE PSI WARRIOR INTERNATIONAL KARATE WIZARD'S LAIR This unique comms package gives ATARI* users full Prestel* facilities, including graphics, and allows access to Micronet\"Viewdata systems, telex, electronic mail, bulletin boards and databases. Datatari handles baud rates of 1200/75, 75/1200, 1200/1200, 300/300. 850 interface not required. SORDERONS SHADOW HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER MONTY ON THE RUN KNIGHTLORE LAW HYPERSPORTS TERRORMOUNOS FANTASTIC FOUR RED MOON GIA RE DALEYS SUPER-TEST SHADOWFIRE NODES OF VESCOL. FRANK BRUNO BOXING DYNAMITE DAN RAM TURBO INTERFACE NIGHTSHADE ROBN OF SHERWOOD PROFANATION WAY OF THE EX. FIST ROCKFORD'S RIOT JUOGERNAUT WIZARORY CODE NAME MATE RACING DESTRUCTION SET For models 400, 800, 600XL, BOOXL, 65XE, 65XEM and 130XE used with suitable modems. THEATRE EUROPE MERCENARY AMSTRAD THAT'S THE SPIRIT GAME To get your ATARI on-line, all the way, clip the coupon today. INT BASKETBALL INT KARATE BORED OF THE RINGS COMBAT LYNX DUN DARACH DALEY THOMPSON DECATHLON FRANK BRUNO EXPLODING FIST A VIEW TO A KILL STARQUAKE Please send me Multi-Viewterm/Datatari packages @ .95 inc VAT + .15 UK P/P. I enclose cheque/postal order charge my Access/Visa card no: MARSPORT FIGHTING WARRIORS THEATRE EUROPE DRAGONTORC BRIAN BLOCOAXE. SLAP SHOT... COMMODORE 64 expiry date............. SORCERYO DEVILS CROWN    Address............ WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST G. GOOCH TEST CHICKET SHADOWFIRE SHADOWFIRE Disc Postcode.... send to: Atari Support 5. Miracle Technology (UK) Ltd. St Peters Street, Ipswich IP11XB Tel 0473-50304 \"regd trademarks of the companies concemed Goodbyte offers some of the most competitive prices for software wall. If you don't see the the game you require listed, please ring for the most up-to-date news on seda sages 01 404 424 PLEASE NOTE OUR ORDER EXCEEDS YOU GET 1 FURTHER DISCOUNT SEND CHEQUE O TO MIRACLE TECHNOLOGY DALEY TSUPERTEST  FRANK BRUNO ROBIN OF SHERWOOD NODES OF YESOD IMPERIAL STUDIOS, IMPERIAL ROAD LONDON SWB (TEL: 01731400) "


"OK COMSUTEA   "


"1. OF THE MASK Featuring a new generation of advanced 3D graphic techniques by Sandy White. Available on the 48K Spectrum from Electric Dreams Software. 31 Carlton Crescent, Southampton. Tel: (0703) 225282 "


"Puckat. Shoot to win! Winning is all that matters when playing video games. SVI \"QuickShot\" joysticks give you a better grip on games which are getting tougher each day. That's why over 4.5 million have been sold since 1982 SVI \"QuickShot\" is the original, award-winning joystick that offers true one-hand control with features like a hand-contoured controller, thumb/trigger fire button and Suction cups that give the thrill of arcade game play. SVI \"QuickShot\" joysticks are getting better each day. They have more winning features than ever. There are models with auto-fire switch, touch-firing pad, interchangeable controllers and for the latest MSX computers. Go with the winner and see the wide range of SVI \"QuickShot\" joysticks at your nearest dealer. SVI «QuickShot» Joysticks. 4,500,000 Sold Worldwide. \" INNOVATIVE COMPUTING FOR TODAY AND TOMORROW SOLE AGENT: Spectravideo Ltd. 165 Garth Road Morden, Surrey SM4 4LH U.K. Tel.: 01-3300101 Tix: 28704 MMHVANG SPECTRAVIDEO MSX is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation BHL-024/5 "


"WHILST TRYING TO DESTROY THE MISSILES APPROACHING EARTH, PSI WARRIOR IS ATTACKED BY A THUNDER MOUNTAIN SECURITY DROID CONTROLLED BY VON STROHEM, A PSI PUPAE... WARRIOR PBZZZT. MY GUN'S OUT OF RANGE! I'M A DEAD DUCK, UNLESS... * THOUGHT ACTIVATED COMMAND... LAUNCHES THE H-BOARD INTO A FURY OF DESTRUCTION! H-BOARD ATA.C S091 TOO VON STROHEIM, COME OUT, YOU SLUG! O.K. LET'S PLAY BY MY RULES! IF IT MOVES, SHOOT IT SUDDENLY... BYE, BYE, TIN MAN! 9 VON STROHEIM LUNGED FORWARD, BUT... MEDDLING FOOL, YOU HAVE INTERFERED IN MY PLANS FOR THE LAST TIME! SNINA MADE IT.. DESTRUCT ACTIVATED! TYR, YOU'VE DONE IT. BUT WHAT OF VON STROHEIM? DESTRICT MEIN GOTT... VOT HAS HAPPENED: NEXT TIKAS IN SPACE, THE MISSILES PESTRUCT HARMLESSLY ON THE EDGE OF EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE... MY ABSORBTION SUIT BURNT THE FSI CREATURE OUT! VON STROHEIM'S BACK ON OUR TEAM. ROUND ONE TO US! BEFORE CHRISIMAS "


"ZES Zoidstar is gripped by war. Blue Zoid fights Red Zoid in a merciless battle for supremacy. Mighty Zoidzilla, Blue Zoid combat leader, lies dormant in the hold of your craft, ready for you to climb into its command capsule to merge minds with the powerful machine and take control of this bitter confrontation. Somewhere in the desolate landscape, the Red Zoids lie in wait! Landing preparations are complete. The descent begins. The task which follows will take you to the very limits of your capabilities and imagination. LIVE THE GAME. BECOME THE MACHINE! Cassette: SPECTRUM 48K .95 ALL OTHERS .95 Disk: CBM 64 .95 Available from all leading software retailers OR order today by mail. Prices include postage and packing plus VAT. modach Martech is the registered trade mark of Software Communications Limited, Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME PHONE: (0323) 768456 TELEX: 87465 EXIM Brighton 48K SPECTRUM  COMMODORE 64 BBC'B'  AMSTRAD  MSX O ATARI "


"15+ ARCA LAYER 1 BUBBLES A game based on the kitchen sink is a pretty weird setting. but Williams has seen fit to base their new game Bubbles in just such a location. The idea is to rush round the sink swallowing up such tasty morsels as ants, crumbs and other floating garbage. All highly palatable to your average bubble ! As you whiz round it feels like controlling someone on an ice skating rink the bubble gets larger and larger until it eventually grows a face and starts to smile. At that stage it means business and nothing is safe from its predotory jaws. The life of a bubble is a temporary one. After all, razor blades don't do them much good and neither do sponges One burst and the other absorbs, and that's the end of you if you happen to touch one of those lurking nasties. On the other hand, you do have some protection. On every level a broom appears which must be swallowed instantly. That gives protection against sponges and roaches which look like huge hairy spiders crowling out of the plug hole. It's curtains for your bubble if you skid too near a plug hole unless the centre is flashing green. I'm not sure what happens then as I kept running into razor blades and was getting rather bored anyway. Once the greasies have been cleared away the tap is turned on and you are washed into another level over again. Bubbles is neither addictive nor colourful each screen is shaded in blue, the colour of water I suppose. Williams must have been desperate to have concocted such a silly game. Once again CLARE EDGELEY, IDEAS CORP's arcade spy has been venturing out into the game booths to bring you news of the hottest and naffest arcade games around. Here she reports on two wo your hard earned coinage ... stumble or hang around too long. Perching on top of the tombstones doesn't help either as you can only kill them on level ground. A lance thrown in this position will fly over their heads. Let those ghastly creatures touch you once and you are unclothed and flicker a bit to show your weakened state. If touched again, you turn instantly into a skeleton and collapse into a pile of musty old bones. And then what will become of the beautiful maiden? Bonus points are scored for runing over objects and the game has a continuous play facility which enable you to loin cloth the next you're insert more money and equipped for war. continue from your last And then comes the spooky position. That's a nice touch as bit. The walk through the there is nothing as frustrating graveyard. The undead rise as having to start from the from the ground and like beginning each time you die. A chase through a graveyard in every good horror movie, start Ghosts n Goblins is fast and the dead of night isn't closing in on you with blood intriguing. Well worth playing if everyones cup of tea, but there shot eyes, fang like teeth and only to see what other horrors are some who like being arms outstretched. You can stop lie in store. I'm afraid the scared out of their wits and them temporarily by throwing ghoulies got me every time — they will probably love Ghosts lances, though they do rise I didn't even get to see the 'n Goblins. again goblins which I presume lie The walking dead, Some tomb stones have to further on. graveyards and droning funeral be jumped and those are The only thing that might put music are the main ingredients particularly dangerous. Three you off is the music. Dreary to the game a rather or four zombies will rise on stuff enough to give anyone macabre story from the either side to trap you if you sleepless nights! Japanese company Capcom the Commando people. It all starts at the edge of a graveyard where a beautiful young maiden is tending your wounds. Suddenly, an evil, satonic creature swoops down from his mountain eyrie and tears her from your grasp. Leaping up you fotter forwards — exposed in your undies. The spirits are on your side this dreadful night as you immediately stumble into a suit of armour. One minute you re standing there clothed only in a GHOSTS 'N' GOBLINS SEX CREpiro SEEDURDUSJILE DOUBLE "


"DE ACTION PAC RAT The huge success of Roland Rot must have set the Atari boys thinking. Peter Pac Rat is their answer to Roland a cute little creature who is a kleptomaniac. The way he goes about it makes a magpie look like an amateur. The game starts off above ground with Peter in his tree house. The screen is the platform and ladders type with three shiny objects scattered throughout. The hazards in the game are the animals which range from a bulldog and dragonfly in the first screen to crocodiles, bats, snakes, cats ws. And they all do their Pat's activities. the animals and so inake off with the goodies as he jumps around each screen. When stunned, some can be used to carry him round for a short period. The flying creatures are used for this purpose as they can get him to the top of a screen far quicker than he could climb. Each level takes place in a different location. The second screen finds Peter underground in a larger screen with more levels land objects. Bats and large rats must be avoided as he scurries up and down ladders. The bats are especially important as the time limit is tight, and towards the end of the game you should stun o bat and use it to carry Peter to the top of the screen to collect the last few objects. Once the objects are back at the start he can go on the next collecting trip. That takes place in a tree where much the same thing happens. And then its back to the start where the first screen has been combined with the second to create a large and varied playing area, with few added extras like a large spider's web. Each level is larger than its predeecessor, has more objects and is much harder to complete in the specified time limit. Movement is smooth and the game presents a real challenge. The music is fast and there are several different jingles in fact they all sound very much like the type of music found in American Sit-coms. Play it if you can find one near you O WELCOME A MACHINE! Watch out for next month's great arcade double competition. We're not giving too much away except for a real live arcade machine and a genuine pintable. That's all! If you've got space at home for a mega-prize then pick up a copy of December's special C+VG. You could end up with a real Christmas bonus! BARADUKE BaroDuke from Namco is one of those classic arcade shoot em-ups which don't have a story line, not much in the way of graphics, but there's plenty of blasting material, The screen is dull, mostly blues. blacks, browns with the occasional touch of pink, Appropriate when you think thot the whole thing takes place in the bowels of the earth, in some deep underground cavern. The idea seems to be to travel as deep underground as is humanly possible to defeat the monster's boss. Anyway, cavern one Descent in your lunar jet suit to confront the squidgy blue Octy. Octy is really the mother octopus rather like a mother-ship and she crops up on each level, spewing out her dull coloured offspring to attack you. Not very nice at all. They are fairly slow moving and are easy to shoot down, As their numbers grow in each successive cavern, you'll have more trouble coping with them. Add the baby octopuses to lots of lethal bubbles and you get the picture Once you're rid of the octopuses, you can have a bash at their mum, Shoot her a couple of times and she turns into a metallic ball with a yellow square in the middle. Run over that and a Paccet is revealed. Could this be a baby pac.creature? It is in fact a yellow splodge sometimes with a face and ears. Run over the Paccet to pick it up and down the shaft to the next cavern It is possible to earn extra shields by rescuing enough Poccets to win a bonus screen That involves pressing the fire button at the right moment and you will either win a shield, lose a shield or gain nothing Why the game is called BaraDuke is anybody's quess. Perhaps that is the name of the monster's boss. BaraDuke is reasonably fast, mildly addictive, but hasn't got the qualities to take it into the top ten arcade games METRO CROSS Namco has used an old idea that of running from one point to another and has come up with an unusual and playable game. Metro Cross is all about running through a scrolling screen, jumping some objects and kicking others and all within a time limit, Limber up and get ready ther are some sticky patches ahead of you. Your slightly pot bellied character chugs off slowly and then gathers speed, Not for long though. Some oil drums hurtle towards you in formation and must be jumped. Easier said than done. It happens quickly and you are more likely to end up flattened. Pick yourself up and continue, must not waste time as once that's run out you'll be electrified and disappear in a puff of smoke. The area to run through is marked in blue and white tiles and as you charge from left to right be sure to avoid the green patches. These are slippery areas on which your player will quickly slide out of control. It is vital to move him off as quickly as possible and the best way is to jump him into the air and move him across in mid-leap. To make life harder, oil drums aren't the only hazards. A continuous stream of objects lie or move into your path and it is in your best interests to time your jumps os tripping up can only slow your progress. The running area zig zags up ond down and at full pelt it is difficult to slow down in time to change direction. When you reach the finishing posts on each leg. your runner collapses and has to bend over in a struggle to catch his breath. Anyone would think you had made him runa marathon! Metro Cross is fun and strangely addictive for such a simple concept. However, it is often the simple games which do better than the really complex ones TUITE OBJECTS NEEDED 2 TEASER HILIALE "


"Who's?) 3 =ChAos weapon. The Master reports proming results. (LIVE ALIEN cortical preparation.) o Mine/Factory S Machine skill VITAL. Doctor: ultimate risk scenario. Your in, vention urgently requested.???ELDA ??? Disable TIRI ntial lobo Heatonite Regain a FORM Time Instant Replay Unit + brain Force futile. Weapon Skills NA TySWOJ ARE NIVdS YOU OL READY NIVIS FOR IN ASSOCIATION WITH THE BBC DE MODODD0W -robotics + techno trickery = Jse invisible car+code: string Zi (Ur. (A»CHEN), O,FI) OH, 16H,O etc. Full cerebral combat status needed 2nd Moon Rijar. 00.00 AMSTRAD (CASSETTE SPECTRUM COMMODORE E14.95 OF TERROR AND THE MINES (WHO _DOCTOR Who would think of a Police box? Pgramme concealed in game Pack Halt Heatonite prod. Access via all times. Madrag (genetically boosted saurian] + psycho MEGA SECURE !!! Blue print (part) supplied. Ky-Al-Nargath construct g o BBC ROM CASSETTE .9 "


"MacGibbon HD MacGill RUN FOR GOLD Sports simulations that leave the rest standing! The ultimate challenge in athletics simulations. Test skills of strategy and control. «This definitely has to 0 be the most realisticlooking running game ever... The graphics are huge, beautifully animated...\" CRASH, February '85 53 <LA 84 SOMALIA 13594 0:20 250 Cassette .95 Specim commodore 64, Amstrad Rally Driver \"..surely this must be the best racing-car type game.. CRASH, February 85 Car rally needing skilful driving and map-reading  you choose the route. 6 Biswa $19.95 (ROM/DISK 00:00 01:51 0021 Cassette + map/chart Spectrum .95 Commodore 64/Amstrad .95 HILL MACGIBBON, 8 GRAFTON STREET, LONDON W1X 3LA 01-493 7070 AMSTRAD, NOW AVAILABLE FOR COMMODORE 64 & SPECTRUM "


"From the black and white pages of a dusty book emerges the colourfull and gripping adventure of NEVERENDING STORY Save the world of \"Fantasia\" in this thrilling adventure. Cast as the hero Atreyu and aided by Falcor, the Luck Dragon, you face the trials and terrors of the ever consuming \"Nothing\". Enter the quest in this richly illustrated and highly imaginative computer movie. 9.95 ATARI COMM. 64 ATARI SPECTRUM 48K AMSTRAD Ocean Software Limited Telephone: 061-832 6633 6 Central Street, Manchester M2 SNS Telex: 669977 Oceans G  Neue Constantin Filmproduktion GmbH 1984 COMM. 64 9.95 995 ocean 9.95 "


"Got a problem? Feel in need of a bit of help and assistance? Then why not write to the Bug Hunters at Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. ... DEARE GIORS ow what's the point in having a team of heroic Bug Hunters, if they won't tell you what the bugs are? Oh, they searched out and destroyed all the bugs from the listings in the previous issue, but refused to tell us what they were so that we could pass on the information to you. The reason they gave was 'security, but personally think they're after more money. Obviously some intrepid reporter was going to have to volunteer to infiltrate the group and get the low-down on what went wrong. Guess who drew the short straw? Yes, Rik Link Wearing dull clothes, dark glasses and a dirty raincoat, I tried to appear inconspicuous as I crept into the Bug Hunter Recreation Room (out of bounds to all organic life forms) and crouched down behind a sofa, just inside the door. Peering over the top of the thick cushion backs, got my first glimpse of the extravagantly furnished room, complete with drinks machine, oil bath and a whole host of microcomputers. Big Red was just relaxing into the bath, whilst in the far corner, B-Con was projecting a film onto a white patch of wall. He and the others were watching some robot (presumably female) removing various outer casings to some electronic music. Suddenly the whole room began to vibrate as Big Red started humming to himself. A chorus of shouts immediately erupted from the far corner. \"Can it, you mechanised moron!\" screeched OTISS, straining to make himself heard above the reverberations. \"Can't you see we're trying to watch a movie here?\" \"But I always sing in the bath. I've been told ! have a very nice singing voice,\" protested Big Red. A floodlight swept past me as B-Con turned round, all interest in the film lost. \"You! A nice singing voice. I've heard better sounding pneumatic drills. I've also heard you singing bass with that Commodore 64 of yours. Terrible.\" \"Well, it's got better sound than that Spectrum you keep fiddling with, and I didn't think much to the music in that Rockfall game that was published in the Book of Games,\" roared Big Red. \"That's okay\" said BCon, cheerfully. \"I had a call recently from Sean Swift in Shipley, who's improved the tune data. Have a look at this.\" B-Con swung around to project a program line on the far wall. They all hummed quietly to themselves for a moment as they checked out the new tune against the original. OTISS was the first to finish. \"Well, I suppose it's all right if you like that sort of thing, but ! think I'll stick to my BBC and Atari any day of the week. Anyway, why didn't you tell that bunch from the magazine about this new line of yours. It's not like you not to try and show off in that petty little way of yours.\" \"I didn't tell them because you refused to let them in.\" \"You can't blame me just because the Incredible Lump was sitting in front of the door,\" said OTISS. Meanwhile, Big Red had been splashing oil over all and sundry in a desperate effort to scrub his back. \"I was only sitting in front of the continued on page 86 "


"DEARUH symbol, looking remarkably like an upsidedown, back-to-front question mark, should really be the right-hand square bracket (1). \"Now, the symbol in the middle, which looks very much like a capital 'N is the backslash key you'll find this just below the square bracket keys on the keyboard.\" \"Who cares where you find it on the keyboard?\" shouted OTISS. \"Look, is this going to go on much longer?\" \"You did ask him.\" chimed in Big Red, cleaning his feet with a bit of wire wool he'd found lying about. \"Yes, shut-up and listen!\" agreed B-Con. \"These three symbols crop up yet again in lines 860, 865 and 870,\" continued X. \"More importantly, you'll find that funny looking 'N' in lines 890, 1290 and twice in each of lines 1275 and 1525. There may be more, but I can't find any. \"Lines 1015, 1125, and probably others, contain a symbol like '*. This is the up-arrow key on your keyboard — the same key as the pound sign. This isn't a real error, as most printers print the symbol this way. \"Finally, there are a couple more unusual symbols in lines 3020 and 3028. The first of these, which is only just distinguishable as two dots at the top of the character space, should be the left hand curly bracket. You get this using SHIFT+'t Lastly the character looking like two vertical lines with a squiggle at the top should be the vertical bar line. This is obtained with SHIFT+'@ \"By the way, I'm not sure if I should mention this, but is anybody going to do anything about that guy hiding behind the sofa.\" \"WHAT!\" Four pairs of eyes and a rather bright light turned my way... door because you told me to. You said it was a matter of security. And then, when I asked what we were keeping secure, you told me to stop trying to change the subject. Then I said I wasn't, and you told me that I'm extremely stupid at times. Then I...\" \"Okay, okay!,\" said OTISS. \"You do go on at times. Anyway, if we refuse to speak to them, maybe they'll change that drinks machine over there. What do they think we are? Fancy putting coffee, tea and chicken soup into it. Urgh! What's more, none of us had anything to say in any case.\" \"I did.\" OTISS turned and glared at the previously silent X. \"Don't tell me you've been having more trouble with that Amstrad of yours. Not that I'd be a bit surprised,\" sneered Otiss. \"Well I did have some trouble with the printing. Unfortunately, the printer produced a number of weird symbols which confused all the Amstrad owners who tried to type it in,\" said OTISS, in a very matter-of-fact manner. \"I know I'm going to regret this, but why don't you tell us all about it. Get it off your chest, so to speak\", said OTISS, in that annoying imperious manner of his. \"Very well then. Most people were able to handle the hash symbols, which appear as a sort of compressed Pt,\" began X. \"However, on reaching line 855 things started to get awkward. There are three very unusual symbols at the end of this particular line the type you wouldn't credit a printer being able to handle. \"The first of these resembles an inverted exclamation mark. Believe it or not, this should be the left-hand square bracket (1). Having said this, it might not seem quite so unusual if I were to tell you that the third Don't forget you can call the Bug Hunters on 01-251 6222, ext 2470 every TUESDAY. They'll be around to deal with your problems. But please remember to call only on a Tuesday otherwise you might just annoy Big Red... "


"Commodore... Atari... Sinclair... Does YOUR computer speak ENGLISH, yet? SOFTWAR TOLY TOPPER   II    SOFT 50FT SOFTI 105 NOS Atar 400/800/600XL/800XL/ 130XE -48K .95 Cassette VAV/A .95 Diskette W IMUL Sinclair QL Microdrive VVIA CBM 64/128 .95 Cassette Cartridge .95 .95 Diskette P rime VOLUME ONE FLIP C16/ HENRIOUS and trends/ 4 LUUDUTTU Seo TY HEPTONETERS DAUGHTER STRAMDED 12233&are NGUISH SOT NGUISH SUT NGUSH SOFTWAR CUSH SOFTWARE OCTIWARI NGUSH SOFTWAR ICH SOFTWAR WISHLATINAR C16/plus 4 CBM 64/128 .95 Cassette Atari 400/800/600XL/800XL CBM 64/128 .95 Cassette .95 Cassette 150XE -48K .95 Cassette NC .95 Diskette OFW SO STW PROGRAMMERS REQUIRED NOW TO WORK TO EXACTING ENGLISH STANDARDS CONTACT US NOW — Juie O Selected titles available at branches of: BOOTS . W.H. SMITH LASKYS or available POST FREE from: OFTWARE...ENGLISH SOFTWARE EN 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gardens, Manchester M60 1BX. Tel: 061-835 1358 "


"ETIK "


"Nice Password. Shame about the Identity. It's a unique combination. Your Special Identity Number and Personal Password. The valuable key to huge databases teeming with activity, set on our Mainframes across the nation. On Micronet 800, you're a valued individual, adding your own special flavour and personality to the database. Take our exciting new \"Gallery» You control your personal screens for all to see. The intriguing \"Chatline\" public conversation service gives you freedom to express your views and meet some remarkable people. All part of a tremendous Communications section that networks you to 60,000 Micronet and Prestel users across the country. Try Teleshopping, or interview celebrities live on \"Celebrity Chatline\" every Wednesday night. And there's FREE (& instant) National Electronic Mail, plus International Telex, and the Contact and SwapShop bulletin boards. Get computer news first on Micronet's daily and controversial) \"Newsflashes\" and read up on the latest reviews and courses. Feast from our regularly changing menu of programs to download straight into your microabsolutely free. You also get access to Educational Computing's \"School Link\" and Prestel's huge 300,000 page database, including world news, business & share bulletins and optional homebanking. For only .50 per quarter, that's less than the price of a daily paper! Micronet is unique amongst networks and bulletin boards as it keeps your phone costs very low with special local* rate calls whenever you connect up that's around 40p for a whole hours entertainment each evening. The only accessory you need is a Modem, to get the best value for money around in micro communications. Fill in the coupon for the full facts and send to Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIRSEJ. But be warned, Micronet 800 is a 'living service with ever-expanding features. So maybe you'd be better to call in at your local Micronet 800 Action Station. There are thousands of Micronetters waiting to meet you! Micronet Toc MICRONET 800, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR SEJ. Telephone 01-278 3143. Please send me the full facts about Micronet 800. Name Age Make/Model of Micro Address Telephone -C&VG11 For telephone use Prestel is a trademark of British Telecommunications ple On Prestel SEE PAGE 70 FOR DEALERS "


"C+VG COMPETITION w 10373 et on yer bike All you have to do to for another enter the competition great Computer is answer the three + Video Games comquestions printed petition based on the below. world's greatest bi1) In what year was cycle race, the Tour de the first Tour de France France. Thanks to our friends 2) What title is given at Activision and Peuto the rider who is geot our competition is most successful in the a tour de force mountain sections of THREE first prize the Tour de France ? winners will receive a 3) What colour fantastic Peugeot BMX jersey is worn by the bike plus a copy of race leader? Activision's Tour de Send your answers, France sports simula with the printed tion game for the Com coupon, to Tour de modore 64. France Competition, 50 runners-up will Computer + Video receive a copy of the Games, Priory Court, game, which was dev30-32 Farringdon Lane, eloped in close consult. London, ECI 3AU. Closation with the race's ing date is November controlling body, the 16th and the editor's Society of the Tour de decision is final. France. XXX-10-23 held? C+VG/ACTIVISION/TOUR DE FRANCE COMPETITION Name... Address..... Answers: X "


"48 K Spectrum experience SURECHAMP The Ultimate Surfing Simulation Game. FISTRAL SURF MASTER THE MOST REALISTIC SPORTS SIMULATION EVER! THIS IS SURFING! THE MOST REVOLUTIONARY CONCEPT YET IN HOME COMPUTING NO JOYSTICK NEEDED! * NEW KEY 'SURF-BOARD' CONCEPT — JUST PLACE IT OVER YOUR SPECTRUM KEYBOARD TO CONTROL THE SURFER AS YOU WOULD CONTROL A SURF-BOARD YOURSELF! AVAILABLE FROM: NEW CONCEPTS, 37 DUBLIN STREET, CARLOW, EIRE FOR A NEW WAY OF GAMES PLAYING... Is Your Spectrum Waterproof? Order: "


"WINTER SPORTS Ice Hockey, Speed Skating, Ski Jumping, Down Hill, Slalom, Giant Slalom, Bob Sleigh, Biathlon, SOFTWARE SE= = OR Available on the 48K Spectrum from Electric Dreams Software. 31 Carlton Crescent, Southampton. Tel: (0703) 225282. "


"HAL OF FAME HI-SCORES SHOTSHOTS BRUCE LEE 1 Steven Mitchell, Buckie, Banffshire 4,506,475 2 Philip Harris, Banbury, Oxon 4,049,750 3 Seddon Acaster, East Grinstead, Sussex 3,120,500 4 Smari Einarsson, Reykjavik, Iceland 2,667,375 5 Paul White, Wirral, Merseyside -1,432,475 TPhilip Haris Fraser Jamieson Seddan Acaster They came to the mystic City, two mighty warriors well skilled in the arcane secrets of the martial arts. Both were intent on winning a prize beyond money, a prize which would bring both pride and honour. And so they met in a deadly duel at the fabled fortress of Farringdon, home of Computer + Video Games, to win the title of August Hot Shot of the Month on The Way of the Exploding Fist. The warriors were dynamite Daniel Gilbert, 16, of Heathfield, East Sussex, already with a record 3,064,000 points to his credit, and mighty Matthew Stunt, 15, of Hemel Hempstead, Herts, with a high score of 1,126,700. The atmosphere was electric as the titans met at the computer to battle through five 10 minute bouts each. Would Deadly Dan become Desperate Dan under the pressure? Would mighty Mat have the rug pulled from under him? Only time would tell Daniel was first to the joystick and scored a very respectable 103,100. Matthew, forsaking the joystick to use the keyboard, could only respond with 42,300. Big fight nerves seemed to be affecting Matthew more than Daniel Round two: Daniel, confident and assured, smashed his way to another sizzling score, 108,900. Matthew could only respond with 65,200. Round three: Was Daniel slipping? His score was down to 91,800. But Matthew was unable to take advantage, scoring only 63,700. Round four: Daniel, let off the hook, recovered to knotch up 116,900. Matthew managed just 45,200. Round five: Daniel slumped to a low of just 58,000. But it was too late for Matthew to win even though he took the last round with a fine 75,400, And so Daniel took the title of August Hot Shot of the Month. Both the victor and vanquished received a package of Commodore games and a bag of C+ VG goodies. Daniel later admitted to being \"very nervous\" before the contest but put his success down to lots of practice and \"a reliable method of play\" The Hot Shot game for December is Monty on the Run for the Commodore 64. Send your score on the printed coupon below to Hot Shot of the Month, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, ECIR 3AU. The games that we have picked for previous Hotshot competitions have proved extremely popular with you, our readers. But not oven C+VG gets it right all the time and we'd like to know which DALEY THOMPSON'S DECATHLON 1 Jason Clew, Chandlers Ford, Hants 1,191,092 2 Ricky Cowlard, Dunstable, Beds 699,639 3 Roger Jones, Farnham, Surrey 473,315 4 Steven Leeman, Portadown, Northern Ireland 177,352 5 Lee Trout, Cossall, Nottingham 171,706 3D STARSTRIKE 1 Peter Wilson, Londonderry, Northern Ireland 7,504,800 2 Stephen Thomas, Didcot, Oxon 7,462,100 KONG STRIKES BACK 1 Fraser Jamieson, Locharbriggs, Dumfries 377,760 the Hotshot Challenge. So, don't delay get your nomination in the post now. NOVEMBER HI-SCORES Name: Address: NOVEMBER HI-SCORES Name: Address: Nome of game: My score on MONTY ON THE RUN was: scored: Date: Machine: T-shirt size (S.M.L): Witnessed by: Witnessed by: "


"OM I CRO ADS FAST COMPUTER REPAIRS FREE MEMBERSHIP SPECTRUM-ORIC-ATMOS SOFTWARE LIBRARY Over 150 Oric and 200 Spectrum titles. SAE for details to Mire-Soft (Dept. CVG. 113 Broomfield Road Marsh, Huddersfield Please State Micro VIDEO VAULT INTERNATIONAL 10% REPAIR SERVICE A Adult Literacy -the first decade Spectrums repaired for .95 inc. Parts, Insurance and P & P No Hidden Extras. BBC, Commodore 64, Vic 20. Atari. Quoted for Are you fed up with waiting weeks for your Home Computer to be repaired!!! Why not try the Experts, we offer a full repair service on any Home Computer. All repairs carry a full 3 months guarantee, plus on every Spectrum repaired we send you a free game worth .95 for your enjoyment and pleasure. * While you wait Service by Professional Computer Engineers. * 3 Months written guarantee on all repairs. + International repair company. All computers sent by mail order turned around in 24 hrs. * Most Spectrums repaired within 45 minutes. * All Micros insured for return journey. * Open 7 days a week./Keyboard faults only .95 AN \"AVERAGE PRICE + School repairs undertaken-discounts available. Free software with each Spectrum repaired worth .95. * Over 8 years experience working with computers. ONLY GENUINE SINCLAIR PARTS USED. Phone today for your free estimate or send your computer to us with .75 (UK EIREL.O.M.C.I.) or .40 (Europe/Scandinavia) we will contact you the same day by phone or 1st class Mail should you require quotation first. TRADE ENQUIRIES MOST WELCOME ACCESS WELCOMED VIDEO VAULT LTD THE LOGICAL CHOICE WE DO NOT CHARGE i Videolau Adult Literacy & Basic Skills Unit PO Box 213 London WCIV ZET For help with Reading and Writing D01-405 4017 VIUEovali Telephone Glossop (STD 04574) 66555/67761 140 High St. West, Glossop, Derbyshire, England. FREE GAME WORTH $5.95 WITH REPAIR EACH SPECTRUM BOOKS, BOOKS, BOOKS FOR ALL COMPUTERS SAE for lists. Mail order or personal callers PEARCES, 8 York Road, Kings Heath, Birmingham B14 7RZ FREE MEMBERSHIP SOFTWARE HIRE  VIC-20  COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM Send an sae for your hirekit to: VSH (CV), PO Box 65, Nottingham NG1 Please state which micro ATARI 400/600/800 XL XE OWNERS UTILITIES SINCLAIR COMPUTER REPAIRS All machines despatched within 72 hours of receipt. Spectrum .00 ZX81 .50 16-48K RAM Upgrade .00 (includes parts, VAT and return postage) For a fast and reliable service, send machine, brief description of fault and cheque or postal order to the experts. CAPITAL COMPUTER SERVICES 44 Rich's Road, Cardiff CF4 4AA Tel: (0222) 614401 SPECIAL DEAL FOR ATARI 400/800/XL/XE 0WNERS BOUGHT A DISK DRIVE? Stuck with programs on tape. TRANS-PAC solves it. TRANS-PAC, REV 2 Now released! Six disks with more progs, more up-dates, including multi-tape to auto boot disk multi-tape to menu, disk to tape, tape to tape. disk to disk Multi-move of files comes packaged on three double-sided Memorex disks.  post free SNOWY SOFTWARE Sensational bargains on Commodore 64, Commodore 16, Spectrum, Amstrad, Atari, MSX, Dragon, Electron, BBC, Oric and Vic 20. For list state which computer. No sae needed within Britain. 48 hour despatch of orders. 36 Curzon Street, London W1Y 7AF. No. 1. Hire your first two games FREE from our extensive range of software. Up to the minute releases available. No. 2. Buy all the latest software titles at best possible prices (new releases available direct from US). Atari hardware and modems now available at discount prices. For further details send s.a.e. to: TAPE CRACKER REV 2 SIDE A Will list M/C progs to screen, you edit download your personalised version with or without M/C knowledge. Hours of fund changing text to leave personal messages on screen. Stuck on an adventure search for clues. Also acts to back-up your Atari tapes SIDE B For the advanced user contains a disassembler. All this for only  on T.D.K tape, post free ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE CHARNWOOD GAMES 30a Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Leicestershire Tel: 0509 412604 130xe DISK DUPLICATOR Uses 128K will copy whole disk in one pass \"no more changing disk 2 or 3 times!!  post free N.B. Will not copy commercial disks. DISK UTILITY PAC No. 1 Four-disk pack with over 60 progs for beginners or advanced works out at less than 5Op program Power without the price. Comes on two double sided disks  post free We have an all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE Apply now and hire your first four games free. Around 1,000 different original titles For full details send large stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm 10pm or weekends. LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVE E173.90 post free 800 XLs .90 post free ABOVE TWO ITEMS TOGETHER 245.90 post free 130 X 1920 pgs free Antic and Analog magazines available BEST QUALITY DISCS Valabelled SD SS. 11.95 for 10 post free 100 for 100 post free Memorex S. US.S. 1650 for 10 post free DDSS (18 for 10 post free Memorex 3% discs S.S.D.D. Boxes of 10 37.95 TRADE ENQUIRIES INVITED FOR ALL THE ABOVE GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept C&VG 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney close Sunderland SR3 4PD. Tot 0782 286251 HINTS, POKES, MAPS, COMPETITIONS! AMSTRAD/BBC, COMMODORE, SPECTRUM Monthly handbooks packed with hundreds of hints, tips, pokes, competitions, etc. on todays games, choose the brochures that interests you. Amstrad/BBC Handbook .25 Spectrum Arcade Handbook .00 Spectrum Game Review Handbook .75 Spectrum Commodore Adventurer .00 Commodore Arcade Handbook 11.00 Commodore Game Review Handbook .75 For our latest issues send cheque PO made payable to: H&D SERVICES (C&VG), 1338 Ashton Old Road, Higher Openshaw, Manchester M11 1JG. Tel: 061-370 5666 MUSIC DISK No. 1 Just released four disks packed with Electronic Music, and graphic demo, also a program to turn your computer into a complete electric organunlease the power of your Atari today Packed on two double-sided disks  post free Games on disk from 2 Games on tape from 3 Full lists send SAE Mail order only. Seven days delivery. STOCKSOFT 15 WOODBROOKE ROAD BIRMINGHAM B30 1UE "


"OM I CRO ADS SNOWY SOFTWARE. Sensational bargains on Commodore 64, Amstrad, Atari, Spectrum, MSX, Dragon, Electron, BBC, Commodore 16, Oric and Vic 20. For list state which computer. No sae needed within Britain, 36 Curzon Street, London W1Y 7AF AMSTRAD SHARP MZ700 SPECTRUM software. Prices from 75p to .75. Send sae to Pacetapes, 40 Bainton Grove, Clifton, Nottingham NG 11 BLG. TO ADVERTISE IN C&VG MICROADS TEL: 01-251 6222 DOGS THE 5 MAGAZINE FOR ALL ATARI COMPUTER OWNERS ATARI ROXI THE BEST NEWS PROGRAM LISTINGS REVIEWS from USA TUTORIALS UK AUSTRALIA UTTI PUBLIC HINTS & DOMAIN SOFTWARE LIBRARY plus mote SPECIAL OFFERS PAGE 6 is published bi-monthly Annual Subscription is .00. Send TODAY to: PAGE 6, P.O. BOX 54, STAFFORD, ST16 1DR Tel. 0785 41153 ATOMIC STRUCTURE A COMPUTER VIEW Award winning 48k Spectrum program illustrated, 13 important physics experiment with high-res graphics and text. Suitable for 'A' level. Price .50.  Send cheque/PO to: NEW CONCEPTS SOFTWARE, C&VG, ROSENYTHON, ST. KEVERNE, HELSTON, CORNWALL TR12 6QR MICROS E L I .BBC SOFTWARE for sale: Includes Killer Gorilla, Elite, Battle Tank, Ghouls, Beeb Art, Music Processor and many more. Phone Mark on (0703) 845371 after 5pm weekdays, all day weekends etc...  48K SPECTRUM,  worth of original games, + worth of books and mags, ram turbo interface, joystick. Worth  in total. Will sell for . Phone 508 5419 after 4pm.  ATARI AND C64 software, to swap or sell, contact lan Jess, 42 Drumeil Road, Aghadowey Coleraine, Co. Derry, Northern Ireland BT51 4AG.  APPLE II Europlus. Two disk drives, language cards (64K total), 80 column card, serial interfaces, word processor, pascal, games.  (offers considered) Telephone Maidstone (0622) 77777 Ext 4273 (office hours). ATARI 800 + recorder + joystick + manuals +  of software. Cassettes + cartridges. All American including Boulderdash, Spy Hunter, Blue Max I + II, Jaggilines, Track N Field, Solo Flight. All for  ono, Ring John on 01 359 4670. ATARI 400. Program Recorder, Basic Programmer's Kit, including Basic Cartridge and manuals. All boxed with instructions and in excellent condition. Sell for  ono. Phone (Southampton) 0703 732947. .AMSTRAD USER (male) wishes to communicate with females using Mini-Office Word Processor send tape giving file name and your address and I will reply in strictest confidence. Get typing girls.  ATARI GAMES to swap, over 200 titles, including Ghost Chasers, Stealth, Spy Hunter, Pastfinder, Colourspace, Dropzone, Drol, Flak, H.E.R.O, Ollies Follies, Tapper. Disk only. Tel (0506) 31702, ask for Christopher  FOR SALE Spectrum 48K, Kempston Interface, VTX 5000 Modem, WH Smith Data Recorder, over 50 original titles. Total cost over , sell for  ono or swap for CBM 64 system. Wanted Atari disk software eg. Alternate Reality, Zorro, Goonies. Telephone Birmingham (021) 747 3618 ask for Nigel. .ZX SPECTRUM, Kempston Interface with over  worth of software and titles including Matchday, Hypersports, Bruce Lee, Gremlins and many more. Worth + selling for  ono. Telephone Tadworth 2430 for quick sale. ATARI AND Commodore 64 gapes. Tapes Preppie, Sea Dragon, Desmonds Dungeon, Jaw Breaker, Aztec Tomb Adventure, Hungry Horace, Disks Saga 2, Dallas Quest, Race in Space, Canyon Climber. Roms Simons Basic, Centipede, Carnival Massacre also magazines. VCS Tennis Black tapes. Phone 01 776 0760 anytime  BBC DISK software to swap. I have 40/80 drives. Plus original cassettes. (Alien 8 etc) Thinking of getting modem. Any advice? Lists to Antony Jackson, 5 Denbigh Avenue, Cleveleys, Lancashire, FY5 3PT.  TOSHIBA HX10 MSX for sale with six games including Yie Ar King Fu, Antarctic Adventure and Comic Bakery also manuals, introductory tapes and fifteen magazines . Telephone Inverkeilor, Angus (02413) 391.  CBM 64 Owner wants to swap, over 200 games on cassette Phone Coventry 711402 — ask for Taraq or write to 101 Hearsall Lane, Earlsdon, Coventry CV5 6Gr. BBC B SOFTWARE to swap, over 100 titles available recent games, eg Elite, Frak, K. Kousins, Pole Position, Overdrive, Zaxxon, Fistfull Fun, Wongo. Send list to K. Thomas, Firle Road, Pilgrims School, Seaford, Sussex.  ATARI SOFTWARE six programs for home developing and printing of photographs. 16K .99 for any Atari computer. Send sae (or stamp) for details to: C. V. Howard, 6 Florence Road, West Bridgford, Notts NG2 5HR.  INTELLIVISION PLUS Intellivoice with Space Spartons plus Lock 'n' chase, Poker and Blackjack, Astromash, Tennis, Ice Hockey Burgertime, Soccer, American Football. Only  for quick sale. Phone Watford 40995.  ACORN ELECTRON cassette deck over  software very good condition  also for sale BBC Blagger , Beebugsoft Astrotracker  (both incompatible with Electron) Telephone Waterlooville 257424  BBC B O.S. 1.2 cassette recorder, BBC joysticks and Quickshot type joystick over 50 software titles including Revs, Combat Lynx etc, good condition still boxed  ono. Tel Northwick (0606) 77521. .WANTED A Commodore 64 + Data Recorder Unit will offer anything up to , ring Crewe 60769.  BARGAIN SPECTRUM software for sale over 20 titles no more than  including Broad Street, Pitfall II, Technician Ted, Chuckie Egg II. Send sae for list to Julian Thomson, 50 Woodlands Drive, Morley, Near Leeds, West Yorkshire LS27 9GZ.  SPECTRUM SOFTWARE for sale includes Games Designer, Zaxxon, Baseball, Combat Lynx, 3D Starstrike, Beachhead, Jet Set Willy, Zoom, New Cyclon, Attack and many more worth  asking  will sell separately. All originals write to Jonathan King, 9 Porthminster Terrace, St Ives, Cornwall, TR26 200. "


"UnitSoft | UNIT 6 (DEPT. A) 136 INGRAM STREET GLASGOW G1 9EJ COMMOOORE 64 UNDERWURDE SABRE WULF . AMSTRAD SPECTRUM FARLIGHT EXPLODING FIST NODES OF YESOD STAP DA SOUTHERN BELLE POLE POSITION... ELITE SKYFOX SKYFOX dis..... TOUR FRANCE . 30 STARSTRIKE VIA MORDONS QUEST THE WOBBIT SIR LANCELOT ROBIN SHERWOOD MASTER LAMPS GHOSTBUSTERS SORCERY TERROPMOLINOS RESCUESRACTULAS ON FIELD FOOTBALL BARRY MEGUIGAN MUSIC STUDIO FRANK BRUNO PT. SUPER TEST HYPERSPORTS WISERIES BRALL KNIGHT LORE JUMP JET COCE MAT ALL ULTIMATE PROJECT FUTURE ID MOON VIEW TOA KILL TANK BUSTERS 8.00 HYPERSPORTS RINGOARENESS FIL CROWN MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS Release date say Ocean Oct/Nov/Dec CBM64: .75 SPECTRUM: .95 Yie Ar Kung Fu, Knight Rider, Rambo, Streethawk: Never Ending Story .50 SPECTRUM Popeye...................5.25 Mercenary...............7.50 Shadow Fire...........6.95 Robin of the Wood. 7.50 Terromolinos.........5.50 World Baseball... ..5.25 Geoff Capes...........5.95 Blue Max 2001...... 7.50 Beach-head..............5.95 Superman............ 7.50 Super Zaxxon......... 7.50 Emerald Isle.... ....5.50 11.25 Speed King............. 7.50 Tapper........... ..5.50 Marsport...............7.50 Now Games .6.75 Spy Hunter.............5.50 Eye of the Mask 7.50 Wurley Nurd.........7.50 Bruce Lee...............5.95 Blade Runner..........6.95 Code Name Mat li...6.75 SI | | | .......5.95 Fighting Warrior.....5.95 Donald Duck7 .50 Frankie Hollywood...7.50 Shadow of Unicorn 11.25 F15 Strike Eagle... 12.00 Rocky Horror Show 6.50 Schizophrenia 5.95 Zorro .................... 7.50 Nodes of Yesod 7.50 Winter Sports 7.50 Hacker 7.50 Daley's Supertest....5.85 Riddler's Den..........5.95 Zoids................... 6.75 Soft Aid 4.99 Sorderon's Shadow 7.50 Sabre Wull 7.50 Rockfords Riot.......... 7.50 Bounce...... 7.50 Batalyx 7.50 Jet Set Willy 5.50 Zoids...... 5.95 Scooby Doo..............5.95 Dun Darach 7.50 Impossible Mission 5.95 Crazy Comets 5.95 Spy vs Soy 6.95 Macadam Bumper 5.95 Karateka. Bulge 7.50 Starquake 5 .95 Stealth 8.00 Dambusters............ 7.50 Astro Clone 5.95 D Creep.. 8.00 Pole Position. .......6.85 Endurance................ 5.95 Journey 5.95 5.95 Wizard's Lair...........6.75 Hyper Sports 5.95 COMMODORE SH 7.50 FB Boxing..................5.25 Impossible Mission 7.75 Monty on the Run.7.50 NF Open Golf 7.50 Soft Aid..... 4.99 S. Davis Snooker..... 7.50 Karate ........5.50 Frankie Hollywood... 7.50 Paradroid... Dynamic Dan.... .. 5.50 Shadowfire.... . 6.95 Geoff Capes............6.75 The Artist 10.50 Elite 11.00 Schizophrenia........5.95 Exploding Fist.......6.95 Basketball 4.95 Spy's Demise.... ... 7.50 Nightshade............. 7.50 Pitstop 1...............7.85 Robin of the Wood.. 7.50 Roland Rat .50 and Ral5 Quake: 1 7.50 ...... 7.50 Superman... Southern Belle.........6.85 Daley's Supertest... 5.95 Battle of Britain....... 7.50 Highway Encounter 5.95 F.B. Boxing . .. 5.95 Bladerunner............ 6.75 Metabolis............... 5.50 Ghost Chase.... 7.50 Underwuride... 7.50 Basketball Int Elite) 4.95 Exploding Fist. 7.50 Fighting Warrior...5.95 Rupert Bear...........6.75 Rockfords Riot 7.50 Mindshadow ........... 8.50 Red Moon5 .85 Spy vs Spy Il..............7.50 That's the Spirit 6.50 Five-a-Side....... 4.95 Nexus......... ... 7.50 Code Name Matil 6.75 Black wyche 2.50 Bounce..................... 7.50 Terromolinos 5.95 Karate.... 5.50 Racing Destruction..9.75 Now Games Beach-head 7.50 Tinball Construction. 8.95 Bounty Bob 6.75 Summer Games 7.50 Summer Games L 7.50 6.75 Winter Games............7.50 Scooby Doo 5.25 Wizardry. 750 Mail Order Monster. 9.75 Monty on the Run...5.95 McGuigan Boxing 8.00 Night Fights (Nov 117.50 Talos 5.95 Rupert Bear 5 .95 Goonies Nov 8th) 7.50 5.95 Fractalus 7.50 Harvey Smith 6.85 Red Moon...............5.25 Kennedy Approach 12.00 William Wobbler... 8.50 Postage included U.K. Please state which micro. Fast Service. Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept. CVG, 76 Westbourne Terrace, London W2 ES OF TESO STARON TERRORMOLINOS KERREDY APPROACH SUMMER GAMES GHOST CHASER HISTOP IMPOSSESSION HARD HAT MACK DYNAMITE DA PROFANATION BOULDER DASH GRAND NATIONAL RED MOON RED ARROWS SPIES DE MISE DOUGHBOY BEACH HEAD FIPROTOCOL THING ON A SPRING..... NICK FALDO OPEN THEATRE EUROPE ENTOMBED BLACKWYCHE CODEMATE RUPERT TOYMAKER CHOP SUEY disk  QUASIMODO NATO COMMANDER ROBIN SHERWOOD ROCKFOR'S RIOT OR CREEP CASTLES STEALTH PINBALL COND MUSIC COND NICK FALDO DAMBUSTERS SUPER ZAXION CALORON SHADOWFIRE GHENCOUNTER RACE DESTRUCT SET Tube ROOF WOODS MUSIC CONST SET RUARDS LAR 7/CITIES di BUCK ROGERS JOYCARD ROCKY HORROR DATEX MISTICK SPY V SPY TIR NA NOG JY STICK AMS EXPLODING FIST... STAR QUAKE PROTEK INT Please stateme, address and order clearly Postage included UK Overseas orders add 1.00 per game All cheques made to UNITSOFT MILES BETTER SOFTWARE FREE!!! TO ATARI with a 130XE Computer TOUCH TABLET Ert Mena Deals 221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffs WA11 2DD Tel: 05435 3577 Best Price for ATARI HARDWARE In the U.K. .00 NA ATARI ATARI SPECTRUM Cass Tapper 16.00 Spy Hunter...................16.00 Pole Position..................00 Bounty Bob II.......... .00 Impossible Mission..... 16.00 Disk N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A .95 + p&p Atari 130XE Computer (with a FREE ATARI TOUCH TABLET! Atari 1050 Disk Drive (with FREE Home File Manager, Payoff Adventure & Demo Disks) 160 DIO + p&p Atari 800XL & 1050 Disk Drive (with FREE Home File Manager, Payoff Adventure & Demo Disks) COMMODORE 64 Beach-head h-head. .95 .95 Mr Do...... ........... 7.95 N/A Dropzone... ............ 7.95 N/A Super Huey [7.95 10.95 F15 Strike Eagle...........95 .95 Spy Hunter 7.95 .95 Bounty Bob 7.95 .95 Dough Boy .95 10.95 Impossible Mission...........95 .95 Pitstop il...... ................95 .95 Ulysss............. NIA (10.95 Summer Games II............95 .95 Mig Alley Ace.... ....95 .95 Ghost Chaser..............95 .95 .95 .95 Wurley Nurds. ..... 7.95 [10.95 Super Zaxxon................ 7.95 .95 Blue Max 2001.............95 .95 Kennedy Approach........10.95 E14.95 Zorro........................ .. 7.95 .95 Winter Games.. . 7.95 .95 Masquerade.... .....95 .95 ATARI Beach head.. NA 10.95 Conan... ....... . . NIA (10.95 Pole Position...................7.95 E10.95 Mr Do... .95 N/A Dropzone C 7.95 [10.95 Bruce Lee ......... 10.95 (10.95 F15 Strike Eagle....... 10.95 .95 Bounty Bob........... . 7.95 NIA Blue Max.... . ....95 .95 Zaxxon.............. (10.95 N/A Fort Apocalypse...........95 .95 Miner 2049er ROM............N/A 10.95 Ultima Ill........................NA 16.95 Ulysess N IA 10.95 Mig Alley Ace............7.95 .95 Ghost Chaser...............7.95 .95 Strip Poker............ ......95 .95 Wurley Nurds.............95 .95 Super Zaxxon..... .7.95 .95 Blue Max 2001 .. .95 .95 Spy Hunter .. .7.95 [10.95 Up & Down (AT)...... .95 .95  Zorro.. .95 [10.95 Tapper .95 .95 Summer Games...............NIA .95 AMSTRAD Bruce Lee.......... ..... 7.95 N/A Raid over Moscow..........95 N/A .95 Atari 130XE & 1050 Disk Drive (with FREE Home File Manager, Payoff Adventure & Demo Disks) . SE Goods despatched: SAME DAY-PARCEL POST 19 Month Warranty ANY PRODUCT FOUND TO BE DEFECTIME WITHIN 19 MONTHS OF PURCHASE WILL BE REPLACED FREE OF CHARGE Pease send e postadens to Com CVGI 71 Grecediu Road, Lobo Leics, Tel SEE OUR AMAZING DEALS ON BLANK DISKS IN THIS ISSUE Access/Visa welcome. Please telephone for software availability and software lists for 64, Atari and Spectrum. Add .00 for overseas orders. * Phone for new range of music CDs at discount prices "


"THEIR ONLY HOPE WAS YOUR PROMISE TO BRING THEM BACK ALIVE... BEACH-HIBAIIII BELCHILD IT INCREDIBLY REALISTIC VOICE SIMULATION ONE PLAYER PLUS TRUE HEAD-TO-HEAD TWO PLAYER FACILITY CHE VIVERY . von HIGH RESOLUTION ANIMATED GRAPHIC SCREENS OVER 100,000 PEOPLE CAPTURED THE BEACH-HEAD IN 1984! DARE YOU RETURN IN 1985??!! NOW AVAILABLE FOR SPECTRUM 48K.95 U.S. GOLDI \"Beach-Headf must be one of the best games to make its way across the Atlantic ZZAP 68 can Softwaz All screens on this advertisement as se on Commodore 64 ACCESS 1 ,195 C64 CASSETTE 9 The continuing saga pits allied forces against the cruel dictator who escaped the destruction of the fortress with remnants of his army and prisoners captured during the land battle. Produced for the COMMODORE 64 and coming to a computer store near you! Written by Roger & Bruce Carver . Directed by Bruce Carver . Produced by Chris J. Jones . Distributed by David L: Ashby Illustration by Oliver Frey (Newsfield Publications)  Manufactured in the U.K. by U.S. Gold "


"C+VG COMPETITION Ono ZORRO'S QUESTIONS * 1. The Lone Ranger, Robin Hood, Buffalo Bill, Hopalong Cassidy. Which one is the odd one out, and why? 2. The programmers of the new Zorro game created another smash hit game based on a very famous martial arts hero. Name the hero and the game — they are one and the same! 3. Where did Zorro's adventures take place? Spain, America or Mexico? C+VG/DATASOFT/ZORRO COMPETITION eroes come and heroes ings, or maybe even seen the go but Zorro goes new cartoon adventures of our on forever! This hero. What you haven't seen is masked and caped crusader the brand new Datasoft game has been around since 1946 in for the C64 and Atari. And comic book form and has we've got 50 of these new been featured in movies and adventures of Zorro to give TV series and animated caraway to those of you who can toons ever since. answer our simple Zorro quiz! If you've never ever come Once you've worked out the across him before, Zorro is a questions, fill in the form and sort of cross between Robin rush it to Computer and Video Hood and the Lone Ranger. Games, Zorro Competition, He rushes around righting Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon wrongs and saving damsels in Lane, London ECIR 3AU. distress in the good old Wild Don't forget to tell us which West. computer you own. His trade mark is a deadly Closing date for the rapier which he uses to slash competition is November great big Z's everywhere, just 16th, C+VG competition rules to show he's been around. apply and the Editor's decision Makes a terrible mess of the is final. furniture I can tell you! And please enter quickly You've probably seen those old Zed is making a terrible flickery black and white TV mess of the office furniture... adventures on Saturday mornRrippp! There he goes again! My answers are: Name Name Address Computer owned: 064 0 Atari I Disco Cassette (tick box) Format wanted: "


"BARGAIN SOFTWARE Dept. CVG 11, Unit 1, 1 Esmond Road, London W4 1JG Phone orders welcome. Ring 01-995 2763 HIRE SPECTRUM SOFTWARE 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 9.95 8.95 7.50 9.95 9.95 9.95 12.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 8.95 6.70 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.95 9.95 6.95 6.95 5 20 9.95 7.50 9.95 5.25 5.95 7.95 5.95 570 8.95 795 7.95 5.95 7.50 11.20 9.95 14.95 9.95 790 520 750  OVER 500 different titles available for hire including ARCADE ADVENTURE BUSINESS, EDUCATIONAL etc. * OVER 10,000 tapes in stock. All publisher's originals * LOWEST HIRE CHARGES -hire up to 3 tapes at a time, from only 63p (plus P&P and VAT) for 2 weeks hire. * FREE printed CATALOGUE * FREE newsletter with hints, tips, reviews, etc. * TAPES for sale at DISCOUNT prices, (eg MANIC MINER 12.00) * FAST, FAST SERVICE. All tapes sent by 1st class postage * HALF-PRICE OFFER-LIFE membership ONLY .00 (normally .00). * FREE first hire tape. (For limited period). * EUROPEAN MEMBERS WELCOME (Payment in Sterling) Have you ever been disappointed with software you've purchased? Now you can hire it first. If you like it, buy it at .00 off our already discounted prices If you don't, send it back and it will only cost you the hire fee. NSL is the best SPECTRUM library, with over 8,000 delighted members, the largest range of tapes and controlled by our computer with 22 mb hard disc JOIN TODAY, or, if you don't believe our claims write or phone 01-661 9240 for a catalogue, and check our competitors. We're confident you'll join NSL 6.95 9.95 COMMODORE 64 SUMMER GAMES I CASSI BEACH-HEAD KENNEDY APPROACH RACING DESTRUCTION SET SPY VS SPY MERCENARY WIZARDRY RAMBO NEVER ENDING STORY SKY FOX TERROMOLINOS SUPER ZAXXON F. BRUNO'S BOXING DROPZONE ELITE EXPLODING FIST G. GOOCH'S CRICKET IMPOSSIBLE MISSION MEGAHITS 10 TOP TITLESI PITSTOP THING ON A SPRING SHADOWFIRE NOW GAMES 16 TOP TITLES WIRLEY NURD FIVE A SIDE SOCCER BLACKWITCH INTERNATIONAL SOCCER KARAETKA STRONG MAN YIE AR KUNG FU COMPUTER HITS 10 THEY SOLO A MILLION PARADROID Zamra 7.50 5.20 9.99 7.50 7.50 SPECTRUM NIGHTSHADE DAMBUSTERS FARLIGHT ROBIN OF SHERWOOD NOW GAMES 16 TOP TITLESI QUAKE MINUS 1 RAMBO NEVER ENDING STORY STREET HAWK DALEY'S SUPERTEST ABU SIMBEL PROFANATIONI EXPLODING FIST SOUTHERN BELLE SATA SHADOWFIRE RED MOON NODES OF YESOO MORDEN'S QUEST MEGAHITS (10 TOP TITLESI JET SET WILLY INTERNATIONAL KARATE INTERNATIONAL BASKETBALL HYPERSPORTS HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER HERBERT'S DUMMY RUN FRANKIE HOLLYWOOD EMERALD ISLE DYNAMITE DAN DUN DARACH THE BULGE FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING THE ARTIST ALIEN TERRORMOLINOS STARQUAKE FIGHTING WARRIOR MACADAM BUMPER LORD OF THE RINGS STRONG MAN YE ARKUNG FU MARSPORT COMPUTER HITS 10 THEY SOLD A MILLION 6.95 6.50 1995 9.95 8.95 9.95 9.99 6.50 450 5.95 7.95 7.50 6.70 7.50 4.50 7.50 9.95 7.50 5.95 9.95 750 5.99 6.95 14.95 9.95 5.20 750 5.70 8.95 8.95 7.50 9.95 9.95 5.95 12.95 9.95 750 750 9.99 750 9.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 750 NATIONAL SOFTWARE LIBRARY 42 Harefield Avenue, Cheam, Surrey SM2 7NE. I enclose .00 for LIFE MEMBERSHIP. Please rush my membership kit to me. If, within 28 days, I'm not delighted with your service you'll refund my membership fee. 7.50 5.95 5.95 5.20 595 7.95 AMSTRAD DEVIL'S CROWN EXPLODING FIST HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER YIE AR KUNG FU VARSPORT DALEY'S SUPERTEST SIRIT 9.99 9.95 9.95 8.95 Name 7.50 7.50 7.50 6.70 7.50 6.70 6.70 Address 7.50 8.95 CVG10 ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P. OVERSEAS ORDERS PLEASE ADD 1 PER TAPE SEND S.A.E. FOR FULL LIST: PLEASE STATE MACHINE MICROSELL Compumart Natal Best Prices for BLANK DISKS in the UK. Top Quality 5Bulk Packed Disks (Hub Ringed and in White Envelopes with a lifetime Warranty) FREE!!! Plastic Library Case worth  when you buy 10 Disks  VIC 20 Downsway 16K Switchable Rampack C2N Tape Recorder and Joystick PLUS over  worth of software Including Mastermind, Tomb of Drewan, Jetpack, Fire Galaxy, Snooker, Computer War. Will sell for  ono phone Epsom 21811. .48K SPECTRUM, boxed with manual, all leads, Sharp Tape Recorder, Ram Joystick Interface (Kemston compatible) Light Pen, Tape and Interface over  of software, good games. All for . Telephone Bognor Regis 0142 811301. .WANTED ATARI 800 not XL must have at least 48K memory and be in good condition. Phone between 2pm-6pm Peterborough 61416.  CBM 64 TAPE originals for sale including Exploding Fist, View to a Kill, International Tennis and many others, half price, hardly used also Doubler . Wanted Commodore disk games telephone Michael 022 029 830.  ATARI 2600 VCS, six games including Keystone Kapers, Centipede, River Raid. Two joysticks and cartridge cabinet. Excellent condition . Telephone Castle Combe 782000. ATARI OWNER wants a happy or archiver for his 1050 disk drive. Also interested in software swaps (disk only). Tel 0793 724390 and ask for Steven.  C.B.S. COLECOVISION pluls 8 games cost  will sell for . Excellent condition phone Scotland 485016 after six.  BBC B GAMES for sale to swap, Elite, Frak, BMX on the Moon, Wallaby, etc. All at half price. Telephone Southampton 472502 and ask for Oliver after 6pm. All originals.  SPECTRUM +, DATA Data Recorder, Light Pen, Currah Speech, Turbo Interface, Joystick, 35 original games plus books. Excellent condition cost  sale price  ono. Contact Allan 381 3018 (01). .95 FREE!!! Perspex Disk Storage Box worth  when you buy 50 Disks 10-51 SINGLE SIDED DOUBLE DENSITY BLANK DISKS (with FREE case) D 51 pop 10-5 DOUBLE SIDED DOUR BLANK DISKS (with FREE case) . cipap 50-5 SINGLE SIDED DOUBLE DENSITY BLANK DISKS (with FREE Storage Box) . be 50-5/DOUBLE SIDED DOUBLE DENSITY BLANK DISKS (with FREE Storage Box) + C2 p&p LE SIDED DOUBLE DENSITY 95 .. GOODS DESPATCHED: Same day tot Class Post MONEY BACK GUARANTEE: If you are not completely satisfied with your purchase we will the exchange your disks or give a FULL REFUND that's the CompumartGuarantee SWAP ATARI VCS plus 24 top cartridges including Q Bert, Popeye, Spiderman, Donkey Kong, Phoenix and E.T. together with Video Touch Pad for Commodore 64 computer. Tel Slough (75) 42917.  48K SPECTRUM with software value .  ono genuine reason for selling. Tel 453 7315. Please send the post e rs 71 Gracedo Lobo Tel 0309 See Our Great Deals on Atari's in this issue "


"Top Games fames AT ROCK BOTTOM PRICES TAKE UP TO FIVE TITLES FROM JUST JUP BISND BUSTERS UNDER WRAPS! SPOTRE Frank Bruno Finders Keepers St PHP Spectrum .95 Spectrum 0.95 Spectrum .95 Com 64 .95 Com .95 Com 64 .95 Amstrad .95 Amstrad .95 Dam Busters Spectrum 67.75 Commodore 64 .75 Dun Daragh Spectrum .75 Amstrad .75 Red Arrows Spectrum .50 Com 64 .95 Amstrad .96 Nodes of Yesod Spectrum .95 Com 64 .95 Superman Spectrum 07.45 Commodore 64 .45 Amstrad .45 PLUS ONE OF THESE FREE! Shadowfire Spectrum .95 Commodore 64 .95 Spy Hunter Spectrum .95 Com 64 .95 Hypersports Spectrum .15 Com 64 .95 Way of the Fist Spectrum .95 Com 64 .95 Amstrad .95 Spy v Spy Spectrum .95 Commodore 64 .95 Amstrad .95 Alien 8 Spectrum .95 Com 64 .95 Amstrad .95 Arcadia Cosmic Cruiser Spectrum Spectrum Com 64 Com 64 Amstrad owners deduct E1 from your order instead INTRODUCTORY OFFER EXCELLENT VALUE reviewers sums up his personal favourites of Place an order for one of our Mr Software's magazine the month. Club magazines and you can is excellent value. Each take up to five of the titles listed issue contains twenty or HOW TO ORDER above at the introductory thirty reviews of the Choose up to five titles from the \"Bonus Price\" plus one of the latest software releases selection shown. Enter them on two Imagine titles illustrated absolutely free. and on first joining you the order form below, choose A subscription to the magazine costs just also receive a twenty-four your free game, then fill in the .00 per annum and brings you six issues a page supplement reviewpayment details and your name year through the post. As a subscriber you ing a range of hardware and address and post the form to us. By will automatically be enrolled in our discount and utility products (C-64 return you will receive your copy of \"48K\" or Software Club giving you the opportunity to and Spectrum only at pre\"64K\" (depending which computer you have), make many more purchases at prices similar sent). In every issue there is a com followed shortly by the games you ordered, to the ones shown above. In addition to these petition to enter, a summary of how other Hurry, though, the introductory offer expires top selling games, we stock over 200 titles for magazines rate the new releases, game play60 days from the publication date of this Spectrum. Commodore 64 and Amstrad coming tips from our members, and one of our magazine. puters. All titles are offered at a discount you'll find many on which you can save -5. Note, however, that even though you belong to the club we don't make you buy anything. ORDER FORM CVG1185 There are no minimum purchase reMy computer is a: Spectrum Commodore 64 Amstrad quirements, so your only commitment is the annual subscription to the Magazine. Hurry I wish to subscribe to your Magazine and take advantage of your \"Introductory Bonus Price Offer.\" The titles I would like to buy are as follows:now and join over 10,000 members who are already enjoying Mr Software's low, low TITLE PRICE prices. I would like as my free game: 75\" TOTAL: Post & Packing: Subscription: GRAND TOTAL E .00 I enclose a cheque/postal order no. please charge my Access/Visa Card No 0000000000000000 I understand that if I am not fully satisfied with the goods, I may return them within fourteen days for a full refund of the cost of the games and the Magazine subscription. Name (BLOCK CAPS) Address KELVIN HOUSE, TOTTERIDGE AVENUE, HIGH WYCOMBE, BUCKS HP13 6XG (0494) 450751  Export Customers:We welcome orders from all parts of the world, please note the following subscrip tion and postage rates outside UK: Europe Subscription .00. Post : U.S.A. and Middle East Subscription 19, Post E3; Australia, Far East and South Africa Subscription .00, Post 4. Please note that all Magazines are despatched by Air Mail postage to keep you right up to date. "


"C+VG ADVENTURE MAILBAG another Book of Adventure, we hope to include a double page. By the way, youll soon be in trouble over your treatment of that horse read on... Dear Keith I'm afraid most of this letter will be devoted to grumbles. I won't sign myself \"Disgusted of Poole\" though I am sorely tempted to do so. herlock Id review Dear Keith, Contrapositive! Contrapositive? Produced or characterised by a type of mode of conversion in which from a given proposition we infer another, having the contradictory meaning of the original predicate of the subject. So says my dictionary! Yes, you've probably guessed it I'm currently playing Ghost Town on my Beeb! My hypothesis is therefore that by inverting the proposition of the ghostly voice I WILL collect $200! But it seems that right now I can't do either! Scott Adams' Ghost Town is very, very good indeed, more than living up to your old review which I dug out and re-read before buying it! Playing at 1.30 yesterday morning I finally worked out how to break into the jail and, in a further fit of brilliance, made some gunpowder. The main problem remains shoeing the blasted horse. Armed with gunpowder I've been trying to blow open the safe without success, and being particularly evil, I've also been igniting it under the horse in an attempt to shock him into movement! I am thinking that it would be a very good idea if you included a separate letters page for the Helpline, in view of how many people are writing about adventures in general and not just their problems. Might be useful to give space for people to air their opinions, give praise, suggestions or hurl a few brickbats. What do you think? John English Northfield, Birmingham Keith replies: A few brickbats coming right up! We are planning to have a regular page devoted to readers letters and adventure news from now on. John! Next month, with First grumble: I see you made great play of the fact that 8th Day Software couldn't spell BROOCH. I find spelling errors annoying myself, but why pick on this small firm? My copy of Sherlock (CBM64) not only includes a GRAMAPHONE in one location, but Melbourne House has used this very screen as an illustration on the box as if they were proud of it. I have yet to see a reviewer refuse to review Sherlock! Fair's fair! Cuddles costs .50, Sherlock .95. Nuff said. Second grumble: What is this rubbish I see on page ll of the July issue? I always knew most computer games mags were aimed squarely at silly little boys, but I thought your adventure section was different. Adventures are played by many adults, and many females who, like me, prefer to flex their brains rather than their fingers. The term master adventurer will now have a new significance when used in C+VG. Shame on you for being so sexist! Third Grumble: I must confess I find the C+VG Adventure Club offers very poor value to anyone who isn't thrilled by a tacky plastic badge. The news sheets seem concerned with not very special special offers. Also a couple of hours per week for the Helpline phone-in seems derisory. And any caller has to waste money hanging on to the switchboard. It's OK if you live locally, but not even cheap rate time for members who live further afield. Going back to the July issue. Fourth Grumble: I would not it would seem pretty silly to have brought this up at all for have adults putting themselves fear of seeming ultra-squeamish in the position of Adrian Mole but a friend of mine was so (aged 13 and 4) to test how disgusted he refuses to buy realistic the game is, wouldn't C+VG any more, so I was not it? Read all about it next the only one who found your month! review of Gremlins sick. I Grumble Three: I accept the don't think there is anything problem of phoning in from funny in the idea of a frog being long distnce, which is why we caught in a mower. Gremlins are settled on an afternoon, when imaginary creatures and frogs calls are a little cheaper than are not. In case you think I am a in the morning. Unfortunately, hypocrite I must add that I am a an evening phone-in would vegetarian, so I practice what I require special arrangements preach. for manning the switchboard After this catalogue of and for office security, not to complaints I must close with a mention the hard-pressed thank you. I wrote to you as I editorial staff. was stuck in Hulk, and you Dear C+VG, kindly supplied the info to allow To the discerning readers of the me to finish the game. world's greatest adventure After your kind assistance you magazine. Are you always killed may think it ungrateful of me to by everything? Are you always write with grumbles, but unless trapped everywhere, never able your readership give you their to get past the serpent, door, honest opinions, nothing can etc? Can't find anything ever? ever be changed for the better. Take heart, buy Red Margaret Griffiths, Moon, you may never beat it Poole, but you can roam endlessly, Dorset. learning how to laugh at Keith replies: Phew! Insideproblems causing insanity in back-cover for Keith when Tim ordinary games! reads this letter! Here, briefly. Equally triffic is Erik the are my observations. Viking. Repair the boat and Grumble One: BROOCH had to sail, and you can roam the North be spelled incorrectly By the Sea pillaging and plundering player as a command in order forever. You may never rescue to progress in the game. your family, but you need never Sherlock had much more be stuck in the same place pre-publicity and was a full twice! price game and therefore I speak as one who can't get demanded a review, in which I Graunch to speak in Return made some other fundamental to Eden, can't get off the criticisms. beach in Emerald Isle. Grumble Two: Firstly, I would impotently face the man-eating strongly deny that the young plant in Mordon's Quest. men who read C+VG are can't pass the crocodile in \"silly\" typically they are of Jewels of Babylon or the high intelligence and are well scaly thing in Message educated. I reach this from Andromeda, and conclusion from the hundreds can't kill the pirate in Heroes of letters I and the C+VG of Karn. team read each month. Some KEITH: Here's a clue, just for of them are quite big, too, judging by the size of the tyou. Blow your troubles away. Now youll have to work out shirts they try to cadge! which of those adventures it applies to! "


"C+VG ADVENTURE HELPLINE HELP! PLACED BLOW YOU CLEAVE ITS SKULL. THE CHEST IS DEAD. Yeah! Pretty useful information, eh guys! For another laugh, try DIE in Spiderman, and DRINK WINE in Hobbit, says Justin Brown of Bicester. Continuing with our series of worthless clues, here are two of the best this month, sent in by John McConnachie of Argyll: To start Gremlins type LOAD. To stop Sherlock type PI-DAY — THE DAY AFTER! Got a problem? Don't suffer in silence. Write to Keith Campbell's Adventure Helpline, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The Adventure Helpline (tm) is a service provided by the IDEAs Corp. In his penthouse GIVE US A CLUE apartment in the IDEAs Central building Keith Campbell, one of lues on Adventure problems make the few survivors interesting reading, I of the corporate suspect, even to people who purges which haven't played the game in swept through the question There is something intriguing software industry in a clue which says something when the IDEAs like: \"Operate the gold machine Corp was by turning the dial to take you establishing itself, back in time. A push in the right direction first will make life busies himself easier...\" with an intricate It's almost enough to tempt and time someone to buy the game, consuming task. compared with clues on 'arcade adventures' where the answers His job is to collect will probably be a list of which and collate all the keys to press, and how to move data relevant to from screen to screen. The Adventure adventure games Helpline isn't really designed and dispense to cover this sort of game, for words of wisdom such solutions don't lend to people with themselves to guarded or cryptic hints, they are lengthy to explain problems. Using and difficult to classify. his vast database For the subject of what and his IDEAS constitutes an adventure game, Corp mainframe Kerry Savage of Beaconsfield feels that: \"Games like Castle Keith supplies Quest and Wizardore adventure addicts should be termed Graphic with instant cures Quests.\" for insomnia and Although they involve solving problems, they do not contain other related text, and are about as akin to diseases. Here is adventures as games such as the latest print-out Sabre Wulf, says Kerry. from the top Sean Kenny of Bridlington points out that I was wrong in floor ... stating that Pirate Adventure was available for the Spectrum, and asks when it will be. The version was advertised well over a year ago I spoke to Adventure International recently and they were not sure if the early games in the Scott Adams series would undergo further conversions, they seem to feel that many people now consider them outdated. This is a great pity, for they are still a lot better than many current releases and the logic in the problems is second to none! On a lighter note, Adam writes from Watford with a hitherto undocumented Hobbit bug ... \"I have found a small bug in The Hobbit. At the beginning, if you type: SMASH CHEST, it says: WITH ONE WELL The two ladies who were at the correct location to collect the Pimania were by no means the only people getting soaking wet in their quest for the Golden Sundial on 22nd July. One reader wrote from Telford the day before to say he was heading for Stonehenge. \"I think I've solved it!\" he exclaimed, tieing in the fact that Stonehenge is a giant sundial, with pillars in the shape of giant 'PIs. \"Please keep my name out of it unless I'm right of course.\" John Davidson of Gosport wrote after the event, thoroughly disappointed and soaked to the skin. He had been to the Westbury White Horse, and was not alone. There he met someone from Essex, and heard of a boy and a girl who has also been at the location earlier but had left. \"Noon came and went, nothing happened, and we went our separate ways.\" Disappointing indeed! Another reader who made the annual pilgrimage was Mr Willis of Nottingham. He went to a white horse at Pusey, and was absolutely convinced that he had the right place when he saw it. There was even a white gate he had to enter, shaped as a Pi. He became quite excited when he saw the site, as everything seemed to fit. Well, almost...! The last word on Pimania from our famous original loony Pimaniac, John Yeates. John lives in Jersey, you will remember, and he received the news during one of his more serious moments. \"Those who knew of the existence of the Hindover Hill horse would have had a head start,\" he said, \"but it would have been unheard of by non-English players.\" I suspect that the horse in question is unknown by most English players as well. But would knowledge of it have given anyone a head start? HELLO SAILOR! One of my favourite occupations is to grab a pile of your letters, catch a mid-evening train home from London when the rush has subsided and find a seat strategically situated near the buffet car. Feeling a bit peckish I arm myself with a British Rail pork pie and lashings of mustard, and enhance this feast with its perfect complement a bottle of best train wine. 102 "


"I am now ready to settle down and open the mail. As the wine and pie disappear, so the letters grow more amusing, and all too soon I realise that British Rail are quite right we are getting there! It is the quickest way of passing the journey that I have discovered! After a few of these journeys, enormous piles of used envelopes started to make going North, South, East or West around my house a very tricky manoeuvre. So my wife began to tear off the stamps, put them into carrier bags and dispose of the remaining The solution was only temporary, for before long the carrier bags, too, became a hazard and so we started looking around for someone to take them off our hands. There are a number of charities that can turn used stamps into cash by selling them to dealers for export as foreign stamps. So we recently passed on some two or three thousand of your old stamps to RNLI surely the favourite charity of Zork players? ADVENTURE CLUES STRANGLED SCREAMS Some people have difficulty getting into the palace in Zim Sala Bim, but not John Kulyk of Prestwich. He can't get out, nor can he get the harp out of the sack in the Arthurian adventure in Eureka. S.J. Birch badly wants a bone for his dog but cannot pick it up. Does he need gloves for the job? And how does he get through the locked door in Greedy Dwarf? a magic word! game during the hurricane? Try So you think you can't save the PART 1: SAVAGE ISLAND N, E, U, N. U. To return from the hill: S, N, in the red room: E, D, E, D, D, take the following route, starting To pass through the iron maze SPHINX: to stop the clips retaining. the reactor room wood and use it Fix the screwdriver blade with PULSAR 7: ESCAPE FROM wear a uniform! To avoid the guard's attentions ZIM SALA BIM: the object of your wishes. Dynasty, and is written clear on password. The name is that of a The tower door requires a ISLAND OF XAAN: beast in you! Firing a ruby will release the EYE OF BAIN: there is a Sidhe about! picture. Time your exit carefully, To get out of the library, carry a TIR NA NOG: door and say DRAKENFIELD. and get the pass. Insert it in kill the guard on the landing To get through the steel door, VALKYRIE 17: coin... a slot and you should have a Inspect the statue closely, it has MUNROE MANOR: MYSTERY OF return book to shelf. candle, examine bookcase and the book. To get out, light candle, depress skull and take Have the flint, unlight the TERROR: CASTLE OF bayonet between each movement. To cross the minefield, use your EUREKA GERMAN: NUDGE NUDGE! ille Warning: Turning the page upside down may damage your game! With help this month from Alf Baldwin of Tuffley; L. Jones of Myatt's Field, London, Andy Li of Pontypridd; John English of Birmingham; Reiner Wald of Bonn; Rainer Fuchs of Frankfurt; Matthew Read of Yardley, B'ham and Ellen Budden of Woomer. You don't get past the robbers at ARTHURIAN: EUREKA the mists! provide the means to penetrate An unsuccessful climb will QUEST: MORDON'S "


"SOFTWARE SERVICE + VIDEO MITIMIIIIIIIIIIIIII Seen a game you'd like in this issue? DON'T MISS OUT You can order today from Computer + Video Games super new SOFTWARE SERVICE. It's the easiest way yet of buying all your favourite games and every month there's a unique offer or competition open to everyone who uses the Software Service. This month, three lucky readers will win  of free software the choice of software is left up to you. But that's not all for every game over  we give you 50p off (just deduct it from your cheque/P.O. if the game costs over , deduct ). All YOU have to do is fill in the coupon below and send it off to C+VG *ALL POST AND PACKING IS ABSOLUTELY FREE!! So send away today and you could win yourself  of the games of your choice. DON'T FORGET TO STATE THE MAKE OF COMPUTER. RING OUR HOTLINE TO CHECK ON AVAILABILITY OF LATEST GAMES 731 4607 TITLE SUPPLIER PRICE NAME ADDRESS Please send your orders together with a cheque/P.O. payable to the Computer + Video Games Software Service to: Computer + Video Games, FREEPOST, London  1. All prices are as quoted in C+VG remember to deduct 50p off the RRP for each game costing over . minimum order . COMPUTER TOTAL COST "


"C+VG ADVENTURE REVIEWS/1 The Rats is a game based on the book by James Herbert, in which giant killer rats threaten London. The book isn't supplied with the game. And although the background of the story might make the game more enjoyable, having read it beforehand I can assure you that it is not essential. Play alternates between strategy sessions and adventure \"interludes\", the objective is to organise your strategy in such a way that the Research and Development establishment comes up with superweapons capable of destroying the rat population In the adventure episodes you take the part of various characters in the story, The greater area of the screen comprises a text window, to the left of which is a vertical column. Below these runs a strip offering a choice of COMMAND, INVENTORY, or REDESCRIBE.. The mini adventure starts off by telling you where you are and what objects can be seen. By moving a highlighting cursor you can select one of the three options. The most frequently used option, of course, is COMMAND, which causes a list of verbs to be displayed in the column to the left of the text window. Only verbs which can currently be used appear in the list. Next the cursor must be moved over the verb required and selected by pressing the fire button. Options for the next command word will be displayed following this. In other words, the game is controlled by text icons, either through the keyboard or joystick. Thus a command sentence is built up by selecting a combination from the London area, for once they get required, as the computer is left lists. out into the country at large the locked solid and has to be To a certain extent you are game is lost. turned off before it is any further playing blind. Supposing you As with the adventure sections, use. had selected OPEN from the the strategies are executed by It takes a little experimentation verb list you would not know moving the highlighting cursor. and practice to get the hang of what things could be opened The presentation of graphics playing the game, and to until after committing yourself to and sound effects was rather understand what is going on. the verb, but then you would disappointing as the semiThe Rats is a novel and know exactly what was openable, animated pictures didn't come up entertaining game, and should This is a novel way of entering to the standard I had expected of be enjoyed by those to whom the commands in an adventure but the C64 version. I felt there was format I have described appeals. gives the feeling that the options scope for them to have been far On the other hand, I would not are more limited than in a more dramatic recommend it to someone conventional adventure and that The text, white on grey, called looking for a mainstream you are being led by the hand for a lot of fiddling with the adventure. A mini adventure may end in colour, brightness and contrast The Rats is published by success or failure, (usually a on the TV set before it became Hodder and Stoughton and is grizzly death being chewed to easily legible. Even then it available for the 48k Spectrum pieces by rats) and although the lacked enough contrast to make and Commodore 64. outcome affects the progress in a comfortable read. Keith Campbell the overall strategy, it is not fatal My other criticism is that once to the game as a whole. ended, no option for replay is  Personal The adventures, played in real given, and a complete reload is Rating: 6 time, rely on strategy in dealing with an urgent situation rather than solving problems. During play, parts of the text window are overlaid with graphics, to the accompaniment of sound. These depict attacks by the rats, and their horror-stricken victims. Even successful strategies in the adventures can lead to failure as there is a random element built in, and sometimes the rats are just too powerful, whatever action the player takes. Between the adventures come the 'real' strategy parts of the game, during which the player can allocate his research resources to different aspects dealing with the menace, and as more information becomes available, deploy and equip his forces to defend the population and eventually annihilate the deadly creatures The strategy must be directed at containing the rats in the next call is the house by the park. You are on a quiet side street h rk. Yod You dow theb the sto bedr you cats som busheta, Sata T \"The "


"Exciting Speech & Graphic Air Traffic Control Action AG KENNEDY GOLD from MicroProse TE I Screen as seen on Commodore 64 URN MIG ALLEY ACE See and hear all the action. Here is the first simulation to include realistic high quality speech from your computer. Bad weather, in-flight emergencies and instrument failures provide an ever-changing environment. Twenty aircraft could be calling you, all vying for one runway! Hear their radio calls and your broadcasts in high quality speech! The safety of passengers is in your hands as you guide jet airliners and Concorde to their destinations! DON'T FORGET THESE OTHER SIMULATIONS FROM MICROPROSE:      U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage St, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 8881. Telex: 337268. "


"COMMODORE 64/128 COMMODORE 64/128 GOLD tware HALL OF FAME SPY HUNTER TAPPER * Entered UK Charts 21st February 1985 Weeks in Charts -16 \"Superb Arcade Game Zzap! 64 * Entered UK Charts 10th January 1985 Weeks in Charts 9 \"Great Sound and graphics, fast and addictive' Your Computer UP 'N' DOWN AZTEC CHALLENGE BLUE MAX Entered UK Charts \"Entered UK Charts Entered UK Charts 2nd May 1985 5th April 1984 24th January 1985 Weeks in Charts 7 Weeks in Charts-16 Weeks in Charts 10 'A curious, cute and \"It's gripping music and 'A great game highly addictive car imaginative setting highly enjoyable' game makes this seven Your Commodore Computer Trade Weekly screen thriller a cut above the rest Zzap! 64 A CHARTBUSTING COMPILATION FOR COMMODORE THAT EXPLODES WITH ACTION TER .95 TAPE U.S. Gold I U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 8881 eneage Street, Disk.95 * Based on compiled data (64/Spectrum) from Ram/C/Micro Dealer Charts "


"SOFTWARE locean sorers PROJECTS ARE THE SAME Trieu solda MILLION They gold a DALEY THOMPSONS The Best Group of \"HITS\" Game History DECATHLON Ist NOVEMBE 1985 RELEASE DATE BEACH-HEAD SCUAD ALL TOGETHER ON ONE GIANT COMPILATION SPECTRUM AMSTRAD COMMODORE 64 SPECIAL DOUBLE CASSETTE ONLY .95 DISC .95 Stocked at Selected Branches of: WH Smith, Boots, John Menzies Woolworth, Greens, Laskys and Rumbelows HIVIO AVIS REPLACES SABRE WULF 19OOOWWODNO from SQUAD MORE FOR LESS 6 CENTRAL STREET. MANCHESTERM25NS TELEPHONE: 061-832 6633 TELEX: 66997 "


"C+VG ADVENTURE PROJECT 'X': THE MICRO MAN Ian Sitting on the front seat exits inone visible. I await your instructions. i have with me: await your instructions. On coming to you find you mentioned in the location text have shrunk to about one inch in and to try all the possible exits. eight and you are on what seems But seasoned adventurers do that to be a giant's car seat. You try as a matter of course anywayto make your way to a friend's don't we? house hoping he may help or Having said that, there is one suggest a cute. point that lets the game down The game was written by slightly. After carrying out an C+VG reader Tim Kemp using action, the location description is the Quill and Illustrator, not always redisplayed. This but as seems to have become means that it is possible to miss customary now, the screen format an object that might have has been changed and machine appeared as a result of that code sound effects have been actioneasy enough if you added. rush off before typing LOOK. Thirty or so of the illustrations Project X Micro have been given graphics, and Man is a game I can are some of the best I've seen recommend to all, and a must at using this method. just .99. It's for the 48k There is a new feature that I Spectrum — with versions due really like: STORE and RECALL for the Amstrad and DBM464 this enables the same position to and is available by mail order be stored in memory and from Compass Software, 63 recalled at any time so you Cozens Road, Norwich, Norfolk can get back from a fatal move NRI IJP. without all that mucking about Paul Coppins with tapes. While playing the game, it is  Personal vital to examaine all the objects Rating: 7 which they were intended. 1 await your instructions. AT .99 Project X looks too accident in your lab you suffer a good to be true. Not only is it large dose of radiation and, good it's great! The final realising the danger, you jump screen of this adventure is a real into your car and race off for killer. To keep a straight face help. Unfortunately, as you are when you see it for the first time, speeding along a large object you would need to be suffering decides to step out in front of from rigor mortis! you and in the resulting pile-up The storyline tells that in an you black out. THE AVAUNTING BER A TANGLED WEB If you have a spare 99p in the untie all the knots in a piece of back pocket of your jeans, and string by answering various are getting desperate for a new puzzles of the sort you would adventuer, then these games find on the back of a comic from Pocket Money Software may anhual. be worth a look. Each person: Humpty This was meant to be a Dumptyu, The Mad Hatter, combined review of two titles in White Rabbit, Caterpillar and the series, but Crystal the White Knight needs to be Quest which looked the given a password before you can more interesting refused to move to the next stage. After load, so I was left with A each password has been found Tangled Tale. you progress to two more riddles, The cassette inlay explains that each untying one knot. you can use commands such as Depending on your train of N, SE, U and D. The slight snag thought, you will either find the is that the compass directions riddles very easy or nearly aren't actually recognised and impossible! you have to use LEFT and Many people will probably RIGHT to move around. There say: \"What do you expect for isn't even a FORWARD! 99p?\" But no matter how cheap a The game is based on Lewis game is, it must hold some Carroll characters and is written interest. This really isn't an on the Quill with some large adventure. block graphics. The total number Jim Douglas of locations looks to be about 30, which makes the game seem  Personal pretty simple. The idea is to Rating: 2 It is unusual to come across a and ... I'll leave you to read the text adventure with very short book and find out! descriptions these days, and Locations abound in the game many critics decry abupt text. and it is very difficult at first to That is no reason to condemn an run out of new places to go. adventure, providing the prob The problems build up as lems are well thought out and more and more objects are integrated. discovered and you find you can There is also a positive advan carry only four at a time! It is tage in short text, since on therefore a matter of listing them retracing your footsteps, there is and then trying to decide which no need to wade through masses may be used where and how to of text to make sure that nothing help you find the segments. has changed since you were last There are a couple of things there! about the game that niggled a The Avaunting is bit. There are a few locations just such a game. It is available which are lethal to enter, but for the BBC B and Amstrad give no prior hint or warning. CPC464. The BBC version I The lack of an EXAMINE played had an easy to read split command always leaves me screen layout and a crisp slightly dissatisfied. And there response. Thanks to the effective seems to be a bit of a multipleuse of colour and text layout, it digging bug up there in the is possible to see at a glance allotment. Other than that, not where you are and what is bad! happening with very little effort The Avaunting is from or eye strain. Ixion Softare, who promise 50% Starting off in the company of of the profits to Ethiopia. Some a frog at the village pond, your of your money will be going to a first task is to find the book that very good cause so there's an contains the secret to killing added incentive to buy it! Grotty Betty, a local witch of ill repute. Keith Campbell This turns out to involve the use of \"segments\", thirteen of  Personal which must be assembled Rating: 7 Stare strain,'h very li cheap "


"REVIEWS/3 ROBIN OF SHERWOOD As the Outlaw of Sherwood Forest your task is to find the six touchstones of Rhiannon and return them to the stone circle they should be in. No problem, as long as you stay alive and that's not easy as practically every location which isn't a tree is booby trapped. This graphic adventure moves satisfyingly quickly from one death to the next in my case only slowing up in the forest. It's crucial to map the forest as one big vegetable looks very much like another; it is possible to bash into the edge of the forest repeatedly before it finally twigging that you have been in the same place for the last ten You are in the Great Hain. You see The Sheriff of Nottingham. Door. EXITS: UP WHATSHILLIT DO NOH ? GO LEFT The Sheriff Cal 15 the guards, far too many soldiers, you are soidiens guards. There Sherwood is over. key presses, and that the forest can only be left through proper exits. Once a way has been found to an interesting location, save the game. The chances are that sudden death will follow a wrong decision and send you back to the beginning of the game an exceedingly boring dungeon from which there is only one escape routine. The other locations are more interesting, castles, courtyards and caves with objects to find and hidden places to explore. The adventure includes short re-runs of Robin's most famous legends including the treacherous archery contest set up by the Sheriff of Nottingham to trap him and the fight with Little John. Unfortunately, neither of these events seem as romantic or exciting as the stories. Maybe that's to do with trying to fit complicated scenes into a few words and a small illustration. The programmers, Mike Woodroffe and Brian Howarth, have gone to some length with subtle detail where they can. The waterfall is animated (try going under it for a surprise) TIME SEARCH and Siward the Thief is so light fingered that he steals not only from the Sheriff, but also from you. It's a fair bet that you won't realise how much he's taken until you try to bribe someone and find your slush fund is all gone. There's a free hint sheet available. It's a good idea to get it and to read the instruction sheet carefully as the game is very particular about input. Remember to talk to every character in the game. Of course, stopping to talk to a bunch of furious guards is a good way to get killed, but with everyone else it's worth a try. Not that all of them say anything very interesting, especially the downright boring Herne the Hunter, who looks impressive with his stag's head and robes, but never says much more than repeating his prophesy about the return of the stones. Cheeky maid Marion is more fun! Robin of Sherwood is a competent and clean adventure game. Denise Shemuel  Personal Rating: 8 BOOKS After playing Time Search for a short while, I became thoroughly bored and amazed that games like this are actually produced. It is a text adventure with an inane line in replies. The objective should you care to know is to find a time machine. Starting off outside your own front door, after a lengthy and clumsy loading routine that demands a reload of data should you need to restart, GO IN elicits the reply THAT MAKES NO SENSE. Open front door WHAT DO YOU MEAN BY THAT? In the pub you can get a tankard of beer but you must drink the tankard because the program cannot see the beer. GULP! CRUNCH! Up the road, you find one of those long obsolete outdoor cigarette machines and, should you be sharp enough to think of inserting a coin, the machine magically swings away to reveal a hidden exit. The adventure map is a nightmare, with logical exits blocked for no apparent reason. For example, it seems you can move around inside the pub only in a certain direction, and you can't seem to go back and forth from one bar to another. Personally I found Time Search so poor that to describe it as mediocre would be to overrate it. It failed to hold my interest at all. Keith Campbell  Personal Rating: 2 Price. WRITING the program. ADVENTURE The inevitable debugging and GAMES ON THE modification following the initial implementation is made simpler AMSTRAD as it is instantly readable and CPC464/CPC664 editable from within the By Mike Lewis and Simon program. Before the details of the AKS Melbourne House .95. itself there is a short background The objective of this adventure to adventure, followed by a programming book is to teach general explanation on the the reader techniques to write structure of an adventure game games without the chore of and the handling of vocabulary. coding a completed program The vocabulary parsing method each time around. It sets about expounded makes interesting this task by explaining and reading because the program is presenting 'AKS' what the designed so that certain words authors call the Adventue Kernal are location specific. This avoids System. the need to scan the entire AKS is an adventure creating vocab in the game, thereby system in which the program — keeping the response times down which is written in Basic — need to a minimum. not vary from game to game. This means, of course, that a Different plots and scenarios are word necessary to overcome a supplied to it in the form of particular problem in one data. location, may not be recognised However, rather than data in others, and leads to the reply being stored on and reloaded YOU CAN'T DO THAT, from a separate data tape, using rather than I DON'T this system, the data is actually UNDERSTAND. The program typed into data statements within only knows that it doesn't understand the word here, and not whether it might understand it elsewhere. The YOU CAN'T DO THAT reply is one that adventurers tend to find very frustrating and unhelpful. For speed, I would have preferred to have seen a machine code subroutine (entered in Basic) scanning the whole vocab and giving a more intelligent reply. This is a very well planned and written professional approach to adventure game programming. It introduces such concepts as linked lists and text compression, so a potential reader will need to be computer literate. A good knowledge of Basic is essential and familiarity with other aspects of computers and computing, such as knowledge of binary arithmetic. If you are interested in writing an adventure game on your Amstrad then you will enjoy this book and probably learn a great deal from it. Keith Campbell "


"C+VG ADVENTURE REVIEWS/4 THE SECRET OF ST. BRIDE'S St. Bride's is a real school for WORD that ended it to St. Some of the problems fit variations of rooms and corridors young ladies, says the Bride's and you'll receive a nicely in the historic setting with windows and doors, in what prospectus. It is situated on the \"genuine St. Bride's certificate of i.e. they are well-loved problems can only be described as west coast of Ireland and offers merit.\" Finding the hidden of yesteryear. The newspaper \"monochrome in colour\". short courses for women wishing Amulet will win you a coveted under the door gets you the key Time and patience prevented to live the way a girl used to live A-level in Adventuring from the (Asylumand Zork II) and me from getting very far, battling at boarding school some 50 years St. Bride's Examining Board. the elephant doesn't like mice against words and a peculiar aga. After a warning about (Sphinx). bug concerning relighting and That means wearing gymslips cribbing, you are up with the What makes at least the key retaking the lamp, which made and if you're lucky you'll get a lark and probably disturb your problem hard to crack is the me want to QUIT but I had, bottle of sarsparilla from the dorm-mates Fiona and Cynthia. wording: USE instead, to EXEAT. Rather a nice Tuck Shop and a chance to play Strange things are indeed NEWSPAPER followed by touch, I thought! the gramophone in the common afoot, since you soon discover UNDER DOOR. USE Lovely idea, not too sure about room (providing you don't that although the mistresses PENCIL and ON KEY. The the game! The Secret of overwind it). claim the year is 1931, solution is easy but you tend to St. Bride's is available for the The Secret of St. everything else points to it being have to grope endlessly for the Spectrum and Commodore 64 Brides is an adventure game 1929. Other strange things are right words is that what from St. Bride's School, set in the infamous school. You the north exits apparently going adventure is all about? Burtonport, Co. Donegal, play the part of Trixie Trinian south and an adventure map 50 The game is written using the Ireland. and must unravel some strange illogical in its directions that it is Quill and Illustrator. The Keith Campbell goings on there. almost impossible to draw. Or is graphics are fairly mundane and  Personal Rating: 5 Finish the game and send the that a bug? slow to draw. There are a lot of ANTAGONISTS COMPETITION, TAKE A TRIP TO ENTHAR SEVEN! COMPETITION Some games are good and others are well ... just \"others\". Antagonists falls firmly into the camp of \"others\". I was amazed to find that this game had no loader, so when the header program loaded I had to type RUN to get it started! Programming like this always gives me a feeling of unease! Once running, text scrolls up the screen. A few words describe the location and a line is devoted to the exits. The location descriptions lack any sense of atmosphere and, as far as I can tell, the game does not contain any prose likely to inspire the imagination of the player. For example, the sort of conversation you have with the computer goes something like: \"You're in a room. Exits North, South, East, West. You see a gold bar.\" EXAMINE GOLD BAR \"It isn't here.\" Although pages of text do not automatically make good adventure, I do feel an effort is needed in the direction of improving the contents of the text in many games, especially this one. I did not play very far into the game, so I feel that it would be unfair for me to comment any further. I will not give a personal rating because I have not completed enough of the game I was just too bored to continue! Antagonists is from Addison Wesley for the 48k Spectrum Simon Marsh Here's your chance to win one of 10 copies of Robico's brilliant Beeb disc-based Adventure, Enthar Seven! C+VG adventure reviewer Jim Douglas gave this game a personal rating of 10 last issue the highest mark ever in these pages! He also said this: \"BBC cassette owners go out and buy a disk drive now. Disk drive owners go and buy the game!\" High praise indeed. And now, thanks to our mates at Robico, you can win a copy of this excellent game which normally sells for around ! All you have to do is answer the simple questions below, fill in the coupon and rush it to Computer and Video Games, Enthar Seven Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is November 16th. Normal C+VG competition rules apply and the Ed's decision is final. What's more, Robico is offering a  discount exclusively for C+VG readers who don't fancy their chances in the competition. Yes, C+VG readers who order Enthar Seven direct from Robico will get a whole  off the game! All you have to do is cut out the STAR on the coupon and send it together with your cheque to Robico Software, 3 Fairland Close, Llantrisant, MidGlamorgan CF7 8QH and your game will be sent by return of post. This text adventure normally costs .95 for the 80-track disc or .95 for the 40-track. But it's 12 less for C+VG readers. Aren't we good to you? THE QUESTIONS 1. Which planet is nearest the sun? 2. Name the author of 2001: A Space Odyssey. 3. Who is first officer on the Starship Enterprise? C+VG/ROBICO ENTHAR SEVEN COMPETITION My answers are: Address I have a 40/80 track disc drive. (Delete as appropriate) da "


"48K SINCLAIR ZX SPECTRUM \"NIGHTSHADE\" recommended retail price .95 inc VAT. Available from W.H.SMITHS, BOOTS, J.MENZIES, WOOLWORTHS, and all good software retail outlets. Also available from ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME, The Green, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire LE6 5JU (P&P are included) Tel: 0530 411485 "


"NEW COMMODORE 64 CASSETTES OUT NOW FROM ARIOLASOFT karateka KARATEKA from Broderbund A Karateka is one trained in the Way of Karate, the centuries old martial art of Japan. In this classic story of one man's battle against insurmountable odds, your mission is to rescue a beautiful princess from a dungeon deep inside the palace of the evil warlord Akuma. Brderbund have created an arcade action game as close to an interactive movie as computer game players are likely to see. Extremely large and realistically animated figures come alive against beautifully detailed scrolling backgrounds. You are in full control of the hero's every movement. Walking, running, bowing and all fighting movements including the strategic timing and placement of kicks, thrusts, jabs and punches are an integral part of the gameplay. The story progresses through a series of increasingly more challenging encounters with the enemy, until you finally meet the ultimate opponent. Built-in surprises make trying to rescue the princess difficult and addictive. Suspenseful, move-like story Run, Punch & Kick ability Smoothly animated characters 3D scrolling backgrounds Realistic Karate fights to the death STEALET Fast Lood Chrome Tape 128 Co. from Broderbund The Incredible 3D ka U.S. No. .HIT ogm A FABULOUS 3D MARTIAL STEALTH ARTS KARATE PROGRAM STEALTH has everything the arcade action player dreams of. You are right at the heart of the action as you pilot a powerful Stealth arfighter on a mission of utmost importance to destroy the Dark Tower and with it the Merciless Council of Nine. The sky is alive with warp-fighters closing in from all directions. The landscape bristles with automated radar towers firing heat-seeking projectiles of doom. Robot-controlled photon tanks ... high energy laser artillery ... all of this and more await players of STEALTH Stunning 3D effects Deadly Enemy Attack Planes 5 Levels of Skill Vicious Heat-Seeking Missiles Ominous Dormant Active Volcanoes Positive/Negative Energy Fields the Castles of Broderbund DOCTOR CREEP. from Broderbund Fast Load Chrome Tape COMMODORE 64 128 Compatible A Stunning Visual Action Program U.S. CHART HIT A LONE FIGHTER AGAINST DEADLY ALIENS Broderbund THE CASTLES OF DOCTOR CREEP Thirteen castles containing over 200 rooms await inspection. You will find each room filled with challenging puzzles and sinister surprises. Force fields, electrostatic generators, death rays and wandering mummies are only a few of the treats in store. THE CASTLES OF DOCTOR CREEP is a very challenging arcade strategy game, full of surprises and the Doctor's rather weird sense of humour. There's no turning back on a tour of the good Doctor's home. You will want to keep coming back for more of the Creepy hospitality 2 Player interactive action Deadly Lightning Machines 13 Separate Castles and Trapdoors Over 200 Rooms Perilous Moving Ray Gun Mummies and Frankensteins 1 or 2 Players. Fast Load STOR COMMODORE 64 A Chilling Action Strategy Program 128 Compatible U.S. CHART HIT Chrome lape ariola snim A CHILLING ACTION STRATEGY PROGRAM Available from all good software retailers if its not there, please order it or in case of difficulty send your crossed cheque/P.0, made out to Ariolasoft U.K. Ltd., including your own name and address, to Ariolasoft UK Ltd. Suite 105/106. Asphalte House, Palace Street, London SW1E 5HS. KARATEKA STEALTH CASTLES OF DOCTOR CREEP Commodore 64 cassettes -19.95 each. (Please allow 28 days from release for delivery) arola sult HIGH PERFORMANCE PROGRAMS "


"FIRST CLASS SPECIAL OFFER! a le w posle e rs were order Tot all offering fre 12 plesa of the cast 1995 Power Calendar Pore Collectors bem AND ALL FREE Can Thor save Cute Chick from the hungry dinosaur? Only you can help. At first he only has to jump rocks and holes. Then he must jump and duck almost simultaneously, to avoid the logs and low hanging tree limbs in the Petrified Forest. The only way Thor can get across the river is to hop on the turtles' backs. These turtles sometimes get tired and submerge at the wrong moment, much to Thor's dismay. To add to Thor's difficulties, his arch-enemy Fat Broad is waiting on the other side to ambush him. If Thor's timing is good, the Dooky Bird will help him over the lava pit. If he jumps the pit just when Dooky Bird is overhead, the prehistoric bird will pick him up and carry him across! Thor must build up plenty of speed during his downhill run before the cliff. Timing is crucial, too. If Thor's balance is off or he is too slow he will crash into the ravine or the face of the cliff. Once over the cliff, Thor faces his most difficult challenge: the volcanic eruption. In addition to the obstacles on the ground, he is showered with boulders from the sky. Once again Thor must cross the river on the turtles' backs. Then, at last, he must face the dinosaur! If Thor can get past the dinosaur and into the cave, he has only a short way to go to rescue Cute Chick. On his way Thor must duck under stalagtites and jump over stalagmites to avoid crashing. If Thor does crash, don't worry: he has five wheels. But True Love is calling him, so use all your agility and cunning to help him rescue Cute Chick! .95 Spectrum Commodore 64 .95 Available from selected branches of Boots, John Menzies, Lasky's, Spectrum, Rumbelows, Woolworth and good computer software stores everywhere. GAME MACHINE PRICE Please add $1.00 for all orders outside U.K. ACCESS CARD No.: NAME ADDRESS: là Sydney \"H SOFTWARE PRCLECTS Sierra VON-LINE Software Projects Ltd., Bear Brand Complex, Allerton Road, Woolton, Liverpool L2S 7SF Telephone: 051-428 9393 (4 Lines) Telex: 627520 "


"This is the only warning you'll get. They're coming soon. FIREBIRO NEW FROM FIREBIRD. THE HOT RANGE, F ranco Britoritats "


"VIDEO-TECH/1 Computers can do wonderful things we all know that. But sometimes they do it so well that you don't realise that they were involved in the first place. Here we look at what you can do when you mix computers with video. First up are the amazing computer generated graphics featured in the latest Dire Straits video. Then Marshal M. Rosenthal, our U.S. correspondent, tells us how computers are putting the colour back into Laurel and Hardy's cheeks! ROCK BAND'S VIDEO MAGIC! Have you seen the latest Dire Straits video? Did you know that it features some of the most advanced computer graphics ever seen on the small screen or the big one for that matter? Want to know how it was done? C+VG editor TIM METCALFE investigates. nce upon a time the world's best known rock band, Dire Straits, were working on ideas for a video promo for their latest single Money for Nothing The song is all about someone watching pop stars on video and complaining how they don't really have to work for a living. Pop promo producer Steve Barron looked at the lyrics of the song and said: \"Why not make the person complaining about the videos a video-creation himself?\" And so an idea was born. But how to put it into action? That's where the people at Rushes, a video production company in Old Compton Street, London, came in. Steve knew that Rushes had a wonder-computer called the Bosh FGS 4000 which could produce some amazing computer graphics. But could it do the job for Dire Straits? The man who drives the Bosh is Ian Pearson. \"I said I didn't know. It had never been done before. Once Steve knew that he really wanted to do it!\" The Bosh FGS 4000 is a German machine made under licence in Salt Lake City U.S.A. It's dedicated to producing stunning computer graphics, but — until the Straits video came along had only been used for adverts doing weird and wonderful things for adverts and TV company logos. The joy of using this machine is that all the graphic capabilities are built into the hardware — you don't need to keep loading information into the machine. Unless you're doing something really complicated like the Dire Straits animation! For the most part the Bosh is menu driven. Ian simply calls up the various commands/controls he wants at a given time and the computer executes them. The graphics can be treated in one of two ways. Either using the \"mouse\" like digitiser which is moved painstakingly over a one dimensional drawing or using a graphics programming language called ROL. Read Only Language is a kind of special code which helps lan get the Bosh to produce complicated graphics. \"It's sort of a mass of x/y co-ordinates,\" he says. Ian and Gavin Blair used ROL to create the three minutes of animation included in the Money for Nothing video. It took Ian and Gavin about four weeks including several 24 hour stints to complete the sequence. Before Ian even sat down at the Bosh, a lot of planning had to be done. \"Steve and I sat down and thrashed out what he wanted — literally putting ideas down on the back of cigarette packets!\" Steve acquired the services of illustrator Micky Finn who designed the characters of Sal and Harve. "


"animation and fitting the live action in with the computer generated graphics. The great thing about computer graphics is that once you've set up the basic \"picture\" you can play around with it. View it from any angle from the back or the front, top or bottom. Even turn it inside out if you want! And, unlike live action, you don't have to move cameras around in between shots. And you get perfect continuity at all times. Once Adam had done his bit Ian and Gavin set about animating the sequence, two frames at a time. Meanwhile the live bits of Dire Straits were getting the Quantel Paintbox treatment in the room behind the Bosh. Vivian Scott was the person who put those nice flourescent colours on Mark Knopfler's guitar! Then Dave Yardley, ace pop promo video editor, went to work and stuck the whole lot together producing a simply stunning finished product as seen on Top of the Pops, Max Headroom and other rock music shows. So that's how the world's first computer generated pop video came to be. Will there be more? Well, right now lan isn't working on one and they are extremely expensive to produce SO only the few top bands will be able to afford to do it. Computer generated graphics and special effects will still be seen in blockbuster movies and more mundane TV adverts however. And the things the computer will be able to create will be getting more sophisticated too. Ian told us that in Japan graphics experts have created realistic looking \"skin\" which stretches and moves just like the real thing! The Japanese have also created a stunning animated Chrome Tiger which looks so real you think it's going to take a bite out of you! The only trouble is that this technique takes an age to produce a finished graphic. It took 18 hours per frame to complete the tiger which means you get a second of film every 30 days! Ian's current favourite piece of computer generated animation comes in Star Trek II The Wrath of Khan movie. It's the sequence where the Genesis Bomb explodes on a asteroid transforming it from a dead planet to one teeming with new life. Will the computer eventually take over from the normal methods of film and cartoon animation? Ian thinks not but he does says that the time it takes to generate computer graphics will get less as the hardware improves. \"The computer is just another production tool,\" he says, \"It won't take over completely.\" But what about the future? What wonders has the computer got in store? \"So far we've stuck pretty much to reality,\" says Ian, \"If we move away there's no end of things that could be done.\" If you want to see some of the things Ian has created on the Bosch just look out for the new Reporting London logo on Thames TV, or the S4C logo in Wales or the Yorkshire TV logo. He also did the Wembley FA Cup Final title sequence if you can remember that far back! If you are interested in computer graphics there's a big show being held at the Wembley Conference Centre in London from October 16-18th. Harve's the fat one who does all the moaning! Micky also worked on a storyboard for the video while Ian designed things like lampshades and the factory backgrounds to slot into the finished animated product at a later date. Things like the lampshade can be stored away on hard disc to be used later. Ian has a library of hundreds of items which could be used in other graphic works of art. \"But we don't really use them. People don't really want to use something that's already been seen.\" Meanwhile back at the video lan was having problems visualising Harve's face and so a model had to be made which now occupies pride of place on the top of the Bosh's control panel. \"I just couldn't get a good idea from the drawings,\" said lan, \"So I needed the model just to give me a better idea.\" Once the characters and the backgrounds had been worked out, director Adam Whittaker began his side of the operation. Selecting camera angles for the CONTINUED ON PAGE 118 "


"VIDEO-TECH/2 ANOTHER FINE MESS Laurel and Hardy have delighted thousands of cinema and television audiences over the years with their slap-stick antics. Now, thanks to a new American process, Vidcolor, new life can be breathed into these comic classics. Stunning colour brings a startling new aspect to many black and white movies. Marshal M. Rosenthal donned his bowler hat and went out to discover how to paint the past. There's an old argument among shows, the most recent being a movie buffs on black and white remake of The Alfred Hitchcock versus colour. A lot of them feel Hour. The master director's that black and white typifies a introductions were changed into timelessness, a feeling of depth colour from their previous black and space which colour can't and white incarnation. There are match. The other side contends even plans to put the ever-durable that only colour creates a true I Love Lucy through the colour reality that envelopes the person mill as well. But how does Vid. watching color work? Of course, there wasn't much Vidcolor is a computerized one could do besides argue. After system utilising advanced comall, an old film or serial of the 30s puter graphics tracking. The prowas black and white and that was prietary software is fed a black and that. Until now. Computers are white frame of film and di again shattering old boundaries. it on a colour monitor. An art Today a classic like John Huston's director views and determines the Stagecoach (1939) can be viewed colour scheme for this particular as it was originally made, in scene. This is similar to a \"master pristine black and white, or in full shot\" on film, one containing all dynamic colour. the elements. Hal Roach was an innovator and As an example, we might have movie giant of the early 20th Cena street setting which has a man tury. He introduced The Three leaning against a brick wall. The Stooges, The Little Rascals and colours of the bricks, the man's new elements now appear. When Documentations and low-budget Laurel and Hardy to the public. face and clothing are all chosen finished, these new frames are productions can be presented in This library of films, as well as and recorded as data. An elecread out of memory onto a colour as their final form regardother shorts and features of the tronic palette is used which has a videotape to make a new colour less of situation or circumstance. past, were purchased in 1970 by range of 128 colours and 64 lumimaster. While some purists will never the present owners of Hal Roach nance (brightness) values. The Vidcolor is superior in many accept Casablanca in anything but studios. HRS has plans for these computer then divides the video ways to the hand colouring used pristine shades of grey, now there acquisitions that go far beyond frame into a grid of 1,024 horipreviously. A 30-minute black and is room for a choice. leasing them out as has been done zontal by 512 vertical pixels (pixels white film can be \"colourized\" before. are the \"atoms\" of a video image). within a day, as compared to, Working in conjunction with Each pixel is assigned the given months of hand labour. Plus hand Author's bio: Mobile Image Lab of Toronto, values as to the data desired. The colouring costs hundreds of thou. When not operating his photoCanada, they have developed a film is then advanced sands of dollars to accomplish. graphic studio in New York City, new process called Vidcolor. A Each successive frame is auto Vidcolor's cost for 30 minutes is Marshal M. Rosenthal is a number of Laurel and Hardy matically monitored through an under $20,000. computer columnist for a number shorts have undergone \"colourizintricate tracking system, the The applications include more of publications dealing in comation\" and will soon be seen in a computer transferring the values than just reworking old films. This puters, video and high technology. syndicated half hour series in the for each pixel to its new location system allows high quality hand Hal Roach Studios are located at States. Other examples of Vidcolor in step with the moving image. animations to be produced, the 1600 N. Fairfax Avenue, Los have turned up on numerous tele. Every new scene requires this procolouring done automatically for Angeles, California. vision talk and entertainment cess to be repeated, of course, as a savings in both time and money "


"IS YOUR SOFTWARE RETAILER SWITCHED ON? If so, you can See highlights of the latest games betore you buy them.. Enter competitions to win computers, monitors, peripherals and loads of software .. Become a national high score celebrity and get your face on video screens across the country Lots, lots more and it's FREE. Ask your specialist software retailer about BULLETIN 1000 or contact Sandy on (01) 221 3592 The first 5 names drawn on the 25th November 1985 will win a software voucher worth . To enter the draw, correctly name # 1) 5 of our featured 'classics' # 2) Your local Bulletin 1000 retail store ------------------1 COMPETITION ENTRY FORM. Classic 1 NO KO Name Address Phone No. Computer owned Name of your BULLETIN 1000 retail store Send to: BULLETIN 1000 SOFTWARE COMPETITION, EARDLEY HOUSE, 182/184 CAMPDEN HILL ROAD LONDON W8 7AS. 1.0.0.0 "


"READERS' ROBOTS TOMY COMPETITION RESULTS Then we asked you to design an office robot for C+VG little did we know how many budding android builders there were in the big, wide world. First prize went to John Woodriff from Hampton on Thames who got a Tomy Omnibot for his neat model pictured left. Second prize, a Chatbot, went to Ronald Talma from the Netherlands who created robot F below. Runners-up included — Robot A from six-year-old Damien Holme. Robot B from Jonathan Hart. A neat cartoon from Clifford Robinson, picture C. Robot D from Chris Wilkes, and robot E from Carl Sullivan. FIXED Gaze FOR READING MAIL Post Box la Joy STICK BUILT IN FOR TRYING GAMES is for \"60\" LICENCE FOR SPYING FOR NEW Games forma "


"RECEPTIONAL A HIGH FREQUENCY ALL CHANNE. RADIO AN AUTOMAT STAMP COMMUNICATIONS ECURATE FULLY ARTICULATED INDSENDEN , CE DISPENCER Ho Aarti RUBBER HANDS PROVIDE EXCELLENT . CAN AND ROTILE opes. (USEFULT OFFICE VA OUR CLEANER CHARENTES COSTA 000 de "


"C&VG SOFTWARE SERVICE PHONE 01-731 4607 (see p.22) FOR AVAILABILITY OF YOUR SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS OMICRORE TA I LE RS ASK YOUR LOCAL EXPERT Every month selected computer specialist shops will be listed in your favourite magazine. If you want to buy anything you've seen in the magazine, go and see your nearest specialist. AVON KENT MICRO COMPUTERS MIDDLESEX 57 Union Street SOFTWARE PLUS Maidstone INNOVATIONS, COMPUTER & VIDEO 12 York Street Kent 0622 52784 9 Harmondsworth Road Bath 0225 61676 West Drayton MICROWAY COMPUTERS Middlesex UB7 9JS 39 High Street BERKSHIRE 0895 420457 Rainham STAFFORDSHIRE BRACKNELL COMPUTERS Kent 0634 376702 44 Broadway MICROTRONICS Bracknell 0344 427317 MODATA COMPUTERS LTD 30 St John's Road 27a Market Street SOFTWARE CITY Tamworth Tunbridge Wells 0892 41555 47 Cheap Street Staffs 0827 51480 Newbury Tatung Einstein Specialist Berks RGI 45BX 0635 31696 LEICESTERSHIRE SUFFOLK DORSET DIMENSION COMPUTERS LTD 27-29 High Street COMPUTER MAGIC DENSHAM COMPUTERS Leicester 0533 57479 24 Crown Street 329 Ashley Road Ipswich Parkstone LINCOLNSHIRE Suffolk MBX 91999 2473 Poole 0202 737493 SURREY MKD COMPUTERS ESSEX 24 Newlands SOFTWARE CITY Lincoln 0522 25907 14 Thames Street ESTUARY PERSONAL COMPUTERS Kingston 318 Chartwell North Surrey KTI IPE LONDON 01-541 4911 Victoria Circus Shopping Centre Southend on Sea 0702 614131 CHROMASONIC COMPUTERS WARWICKSHIRE H. REYNOLDS 48 Junction Road OEM COMPUTER CENTRE 79 Orsett Road Archway Rugby Micro Centre Grays 0375 5948 London N19 01 263 9493 9-11 Regents Street MINNIE MICRO COMPUTER CENTRE GAMES WORLD Rugby 0788 70522 11/12 Eastern Esplanade 129 King Street Southend Hammersmith WEST MIDLANDS Essex 0702 615809/62033 London W6 01-741 4467 MBC COMPUTER CENTRE HAMPSHIRE LOGIC SALES 17-19 Lichfield Street 19 The Broadway Wolverhampton 0902 29907/29021 RAM ELECTRONICS The Bourne 106 Fleet Road YORKSHIRE Southgate Fleet 02514 5858 London N14 01 882 4942 THE COMPUTER CENTRE HEREFORDSHIRE 26 Anlaby Road SHEKANA COMPUTERS Hull Marbles Shopping Centre North Humberside 0482 26297 HONEYSETT COMPUTERS Unit 11, 12 LOOK & SEE 36 Widemarsh Street 527-531 Oxford Street 45 Belmont Bridge Hereford London WIR IDD 01-800 3156 Skipton 0756 60078 HR4 9EP 0432 279404 SOFTWARE CITY MICRO FUN KENT 382 Kings Road 11 Sheffield Road London SW3 5UZ 01-352 9220 Barnsley 0226 207063 ANIROG COMPUTERS VIC ODDENS MICRO FUN 29 West Hill 6 London Bridge Walk Unit 12 Dartford London SE1 01 403 1988 The Guardian Centre Kent 0322 91649 VIDEO WORLD Rotherham 0709 60000 CANTERBURY SOFTWARE CENTRE Rentals YORK COMPUTER CENTRE 9 The Friars 282 Harrow Road 7 Stonegate Arcade Canterbury 0227 453531 London W2 01-289 3102 York 0904 641862 DEALERS: If you would like to see your shop included in this new service, please call 01 251 6222 EXT 2461. OM I CRO RETA I LERS "


"MICROS E II MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! VIC 20 Chess, Mole  SPECTRUM 48K originals: Battlecars, Brian Jacks, Sabre Wulf, View To A Kill. Each .50. Bruce Lee, American Football, Chess, Survival, Chequered Flag, Starstrike. Each .50 telephone Edward on (0228) 75264. CBM 64 SOFTWARE to swap. Disk only. Please send your list to Petri Tanhuanp, Voudink, 27AS13, 21200 Raisio, Finland. I have new American and English titles such as Summer Games II, Exploding Fist, Hot Wheels, Beach-head II, Elite. .ATARI WAR games and adventures for sale. All originals very reasonable prices. Send sae for list. T.K. Hepburn, 4 Cardinal Avenue, Kingston, Surrey KT9 5SB.  SPECTRUM 48K, DK Keyboard . Buda Programmable Joystick Interface  or swap Sinclair Interface 2. Lots of software swap/sell. SAE to 95 Howard Avenue, Slough, Berks, Slough 26831. Micronet 919993366.  COMMODORE 64, we swap software, more than 2000 top games including Wintergames and other hot stuff. Send list in return for mine. To: Connection 4133, Postlagerkarte, NR. 089718A, 5090 Leverkusen 1. West Germany. .CBM 64 SOFTWARE to swap. We got all, but we want more! Best connections! Send your list in return for mine. O.M. Postfach 1666 2160 State, West Germany. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE Club first tape hire free over 300 tapes including latest releases please enclose sae for details to Arthur Owen, 1 Cae Ymryson, Caernarfon, Gwynedd LL55 2LR. .48K SPECTRUM,  of software, Mini Recorder,  of magazines, Joystick and Interface, Cheetah Sweetalker and other things, altogether worth  selling for . Tel: Tim on 01 508 3845 between 4.30pm and 5.30pm.  SPECTRUM FOR sale with Datarecorder and the latest games including Glass, Hyper Sports, Ghostbusters and Archon. Offers to Duncan Ayers, Flat 7, San Salvador Flats, Depiro Str, Sliema, Malta.  SPECTRUM SOFTWARE for sale. 23 original games worth over , sell for . Titles include Starstrike, Trashman, Android 2, Kong, Deathcase etc. Will sell separately at .50 each. If interested phone (0623) 793641 and ask for Peter.  FOR SALE Spectrum, Cassette Recorder, Joystick and Interface, Speech Synth and still under guarantee.  for the lot. Tell 01 692 2957 ask for Ben. After 5.00pm.  VIC 20 CARTRIDGES for sale. Sargon Chess, Road Race, Raid on Knox, Mole Attack and The Count. Only  ono. Free game. Write to 8 Springfield Drive, Newport, Gwent NP9 9EY.  AMSTRAD CPC664 (colour monitor and disc drive) nearly new,  of software, books and magazines, quick sale . Phone 01 863 8681 (late evenings). SWAPING AND Buying C-64 games (disk). Searching The Goonies, Street Hawk, Hultima 4, Wintergames, F.B. Boxing. I have Tour de France, Frankie goes to Hollywood, Super Test. Write to C. Rothenhfen, Hongarlen 1, 3N8N Grafhorst, West Germany.  ATARI ORIGINALS on cassette .00 each: Temple of Ashai, Starfire Warrior, Combat Leader, .00: Upper Reaches Apshae, Colossus Chess. Prices include P&P 061 764 0229 BBC GAMES for sale half price or less including Manic Miner, Sabre Wulf, The Hobbit, and Twin Kingdom Valley. Send sae to Steven Holloway, 31 Westminster Croft, Brackley, Northants NN13 5ED.  C64 GAMES for sale. Games include Impossible Mission, Beach-head, Raid over Moscow, Bruce Lee, Ghostbusters, Rocky Horror Show, Staff of Karnath, Frankie, plus many more.  each. I will consider swapping. Phone Ditcheat 479 after 5.30pm. .ZX SPECTRUM 48K Data Recorder, Protek Joystick Interface,  games. Total cost . All reasonable offers considered. Telephone 01 377 9366 Mr Haji.  FOR SALE: Spectrum 48K, Microdrive, Interface 1, Cartridges, ZX Printer, Fuller Box, Quickshot, Kempston, Data Recorder, Games including Spy vs Spy, Way of Exploding Fist, Wizards Lair, Moon Cresta. Bargain at .00 (worth over ) In excellent condition ring 051 531 7885 ask for Jon. .SOCCER BRAINI Run Quiz game on soccer! Great sounds, graphics. Runs on a 48K Spectrum only .95! Send cheques/P.O's to Matt Gray, 125 Maidstone Road, Borough Green, Kent TN15 8HE.  ATARI USER wants to swap software with same in European countries, USA and the UK. Send your disk or tape list or a sae to S. Burns, 32 St Margaret's Road, New Moston, Manchester M10 OJE.  SPECTRUM SOFTWARE: Quill .50, Doomsday Castle .50, Tripods , Adastra , Tir Na Nog ., Twin Kingdom Valley , Mugsy .50 Wheelie .50. T. Williams, 91 Brittain Drive, Grantham, Lincs NG31 932 ATARI COMPUTER 600XL, plus data recorder and selection of games of your choice! Also mags if desired! Worth well over  will sell for  a bargain not to be missed! Phone Terry after 4pm any day 01-520 7036.  ATARI 48K, recorder, 1050 disc drive, 850 interface, modem, Seikosha printer, books, magazines, software, worth over .  ono. Telephone Peter 0483 503211 after 6pm.  ORIC 1 48K for sale, with three books and over . software, including Zenon, Zorgons, Wimpy, Hopper, Galaxians, Harrier Invaders, for . Telephone Hitchin, Herts 57301.  SPECTRUM GAMES for sale, Wheelie, Vagan Attack, Alien Kill, Zzoom, 3-D Tunnel, Spectipede, Potty Planter, and Killer Kong. Also selling CBM 64 games, Skramble, Burger Time. Tel. Pilton 0749 89 589.  TANDY COLOUR computer 16K, extended basic, data recorder, two joysticks, three cartridges, eight cassettes all a year old worth  new will accept . telephone 0271 814481.  ACORN ELECTRON with plus 1 and analogue joysticks also 20 games on cassettes including Elite, Gauntlet, Snapper, Chuckie Egg etc. All as new.  for the lot. Phone 01-777 2197.  AMSTRAD GAMES,  each. Super Pipeline, Decathlon, Technician Ted, Flight Path, Jet Set Willy, Jack Beanstalk, Mutant Money, Loopy Laundry, Fantasia Diamond, Hard Hat Max, Super Ted, Frank Bruno's Boxing, Blagger. Send order to K. L. Lee, 53 High Street, Banbury, Oxon. . ATARI 1010 program recorder for sale. Only  ono. Telephone Bognor 821090 after 6pm. VIC 20 + 16K expansion.  of software with titles such as Jet Pac, Skyhawk Star Defence and Flight Path 737.  ono. Tel 0757 82 294 ATARI CASSETTES  each. Bounty Bob, Mr Do, Colour Space, Smash Hits Vol 1, Slinky. Also Batty Builders and Steeple Jack .50 each. Phone 01 851 5942 after 7pm. .48K SPECTRUM, Quickshot, Interface, Tape Recorder, 17 cassettes and one rom cartridge Cassettes include D.T's Decathlon, Space Shuttle ec.  ono. Phone 0632 603291  GAMES FOR SALE from 50p to . Titles include: Falcon Patrol, Cosmic Cruiser, Robin Rescue, Stunt Bike, Stranded, Gold, BMX Racers and many more for the CBM 64. Phone 044 284 2356. ATARI USERSI C.MOS. The monthly newsletter for Atari owners. News, Reviews, Adventure.  yearly or 50p each issue. Issues 1 and 2 out now. Send cheque/PO to Alan Wheatley, 48 Cameron Crescent, Buckle, Banffshire, Scotland ABS 1AD. .WANTED computer set-up or collection of software or hardware for Spectrum. Swap for my Sony Pocket TV which cost over . Similar Sinclair but better or consider anything please telephone Simon Coventry 463425 or write to 36 Station Avenue, Coventry CV4 9HS. .48K SPECTRUM with Kempston Interface, Vulcan Joystick and  of software including Caldron, Jet Set Willy Il, Everyone's a Wally, The Witches, Cauldron, Alien 8, etc  ono. Phone Swaffham 23641.  TOTAL BBC SYSTEM 1 BBC B, Green Monitor, over  worth of software, Data Recorder, Joystick, Books, Magazines. Value +. Selling for just . Top condition. Phone Sutton (02605) 2243 .I WILL SWAP or sell American and British games on disk and tape. Phone (061) 748 3307 and ask for Robert. All games for Commodore 64 only. .FRENCH AMSTRAD User looks for correspondents in England and United States who are Amstrad owners to exchange software. Please write to Alain Corbiere, 18 rue de Gascogne, 31830 Plaisance, Dutouch, France.  SPECTRUM 48K.  worth of games including Starion, Frank Bruno's, View to kill, Dragontorc, Everyone's A Wally. Ten books, mags, two cassete recorders, worth  will sell for  ring 021 705 8173 More on Page 95 "


"M'LORDS LADIES,& GENTLEMEN... FRESH FROM AMERICA U.S. GOLD PROUDLY PRESENTS... THE UNDISPUTED CHAMPION... WAKELI U.S. (GOLD) FIGHT NIGHT to time a software title is released, so innovative that it breaks new ground in graphical and technical achievement Fight Night, the first animated simulation on the C64 is more than a game, more than a simulation it is a revelation! \"It has class, it has style forget the rest, Fight Night is quite simply the absolute best.\" Tony Takoushi Computer & Video Games/Computer Trade Weekly. \"It's like watching and playing a cartoon computer version of Rocky. Fight Night has pushed the graphical capabilities of the C64 to its utmost limits\" Zzap 64 November. Sydney PS .. Available for Commodore 64 Cassette .95 Disk .95 "


"COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU interesting to hear from other readers on this how many of you agree with Roddy's view? reviews for all kinds of computers. All sorts of extras like film reviews etc, etc, etc. And if you are an Adventure fan, you could almost buy the mag just for the Adventure part. Then there are the ads, they tell you what kind of products are available and they keep the price of the mag low. Why do you complain about a magazine that has so much to offer? We in Holland, Germany and several other countries in Europe have to pay twice as much as you do you hear us complain? Darius Heydarpour, Holland increasingly boring. I find it really frustrating to own a game with 50 stages knowing that I will never see more than a dozen of them. I am even not certain that the cheat tricks in some games are really found by users or are given to them by the programmers themselves, especially the tricks that were obviously incorporated in the game to ease its design. I don't think that adventure games and their sales suffer from the issuing of clue sheets, such as Level 9's, as I doubt that Adventures such as Snowball and Retum to Edent can be solved without any help. So, please give us more Pokes  After being hacked to pieces by the evil forces of Doomdark, from the fantastic game Lords of Midnight, I decided to settle down with a cup of tea and my copy of C+VG. I flicked through until I came to Mailbag. A chance to have a good laugh I thought. No such luck! 99% of the letters were from people complaining about features in the magazine. I mean, a little creative criticism here and there is OK but last issue was going a bit far. . There is a wide spectrum (forgive the pun) of home computers each with its own particular strengths and weaknesses, yet Spectrum owners seem to make fun of every computer on the face of the earth, bar of course the Spectrum. Certain mags (not this one) don't help matters, for example a Commodore mag comments that the Spectrum is a simple calculator not a computer, then a Sinclair mag comments on the C64 being a simple calculator. Now be honest, which of these two computers resembles a calculator more than a computer? You're probably now thinking that I am a biased Commodore owner, well you're wrong. Okay, I did once own a C64 and a Vic 20 and a Dragon 32 and a ZX81. Now I own an Amstrad 664. Each of the above computers does have its strong and weak spots. Take for example that old (virtually extinct) favourite the ZX81. You can't moan about pathetic inaudible sound (Spectrum) as it has none. How often have you bought a game and on the box it states \"superb, unbelievable hi-res graphics\", on a ZX81 you wouldn't have to worry about comments like that as it has no hi-res graphics! Spectrum owners are really a modern example of this. All you anti-Spectrumers, do you agree with these comments about a typical Spectrum game? Flickery graphics, merging colours, single coloured graphics, music let's face it, my dead gerbil God rest his soul makes better music than a Spectrum. So, all you readers who don't own Spectrums let's unite and fight this continual wave of evilness, the Spectrum. I have included my address but, please don't print it as I don't like letter bombs. That's how my gerbil died! Mark Hula Bristol  I haven't written to a magazine before, but in this case I felt strongly enough to do so. I have read the letters in C+VG for some time now and I have found that a large proportion of them have said something about how good or bad a certain micro is, or how little it's mentioned If everyone would stop being biased and realise that every computer has something going for it, the Mailbag page would be a brighter place. Apart from this minor gripe, which isn't your fault anyway, I find your magazine is excellent. I can't imagine it being any better than it is, but, when it is it will be superb! Nic Herring Cleveland Editor's reply: If we get any more letters like this, my head will soon be as big as Big Red's! houses to include skill levels or demo routines in their games, allowing the customer to satisfy his curiosity and see what the 255th screen looks like. Patrick Montier France. Editor's reply: OK Patrick, we'll make your wish come true. From now on Melissa and the Bug Hunters will be bringing you MORE hints, tips and cheat modes for your favourite games. Three pages this issue! So, I thought I would write to creep, err sorry, cheer you up. Well here goes. Arcade Action is amazingly amazing (even in black and white). The reviews are fantastic The listings are fun to type in and play. The Hot Gossip and the games news really keep you in touch with the computer world. The competitions are generous and the Mailbag, well what more can I say. Now that I have crept, crawled and got deep down in the slime can I have a t-shirt? Please... pretty please. Greg Schofield, Cheshire. Editor's reply: Sheeesh Greg! You're making us blush. The lengths some people will go to get a C+VG I-shirt eh? But since you've messed up your good clothes grovelling about in the slime we can't refuse you can we? . I have just subscribed to your excellent magazine and I noticed in the September issue a letter from Keith Blomerly, who feels that Professor Video does not give pokes for infinite lives for arcade games. In your answer, you argue that software houses don't like such information to be issued as they prefer customers to spend more time on one game. My opinion is that there is a real need for easier ways to perform a game as many of them are really too hard and fast and can only be achieved by players with very great skill I believe that many games would need several skill levels, or at least to restart the game at the latest stage reached, so as to avoid doing again and again the first stages, which becomes  As you are bringing about a new look C+VG, I thought that I would drop you a tip. So many people have recently written in complaining about the amount of advertisements that you publish. I don't really mind them as they keep me informed of new and exciting games, and keep both you and the companies themselves in business. They also make great posters, But, one of the main problems is that they get in the way of features and reviews. A good idea would be to keep the adverts separate. That way they could be read at leisure. Does your ad, manager, Louise Matthews, agree? Roddy Havaression, Middlesex Editor's reply: Thanks for your interest Roddy, but I think you'll find that our advertisers reckon that having their ads dotted around among our features, news and reviews makes people like you take more notice of them and therefore fulfill their prime function, making our readers take an interest in the products. But it would be  Many moons ago there was a young Dungeons and Dragons fanatic who bought a ZX Spectrum, thinking he may be able to play computerized D&D. Years have passed since that time and his hopes for finding a true D&D style adventure on the computer had almost vanished, Suddenly, his seemingly helpless quest was completed when he bought Mastertronics Joumey's End which contains many of the features of D&D adventures including hiring a party of men, finding treasure, gambling, using spells, graphical battles, hunting for food, magic items, gaining experience, traps, puzzles etc, etc The amazing thing is that the price of his discovery was a mere .99 and that for a 3  This, letter is meant for UK readers who are complaining about too many adverts and not enough computer news in your wonderful magazine. You only have to pay 95p and look what you get in return! Every month several competitions with excellent prizes to be won. Colourful CONTINUED OVER PAGE "


"Milling COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU program totally graphic adventure. Thank you Mastertronic, it was well worth waiting for. Peter Craig London. Editor's reply: Hey Red! Get over to Mastertronic and ask them why we haven't seen a copy into the C+VG office will you. Like most computer fanatics I enjoy playing games and also reading reviews about them, but where have all the Amstrad reviews gone? The first C+VG I bought was the July issue, wow what a mag. Knight Lore game of the month, and plenty of other Amstrad reviews. (I won't go into detail about the unfair review of the game compared with the Beeb version, because it would take up too much room.) A month later, I decided to buy the August issue. Only two Amstrad reviews and one didn't even have a screen shot. PATHETIC. What is happening??? Now I have just bought the September issue, and there's only one review of a game which is also available on the CBM and Spectrum. Aggggh....I felt like ripping the magazine up! Instead of Amstrad reviews, there're four T199/4a reviews, (Midnite Mason springs to mind, how can a game costing $24.95, receive a factor of 8 for value for money?) and a few MSX (boo, hiss) reviews. Why don't you cut down on Spectrum and CBM reviews? I realise that a high percentage of your readers are CBM and Spectrum owners, but aren't you over doing it a bit?? Apart from the magazine's lack of AMSTRAD reviews, the rest of the mag's O.K. With reference to Mr R. McClenaghan's letter in the September issue he says that the Pontoon program in the book Sensational Games For The Amstrad, doesn't work because the program lacks line 11100 this is true, I advise him to change GOSUB 11100, to GOSUB 11000. I haven't tried this so it may not work! Paul McGuire, Holsworthy, Devon.  I have just read Mailbag in your September issue and I was enraged by David Sayers' comments on your excellent magazine. For one thing if David wants a mag with lots of articles on CBM64 I suggest he buys a magazine catering only for the 64 and not a well balanced mag like yours. Another thing, Ultimate deserved to be named Software House of the Year as it continually releases excellent games that put other games in the shade. As for not knowing the programmer's names, who remembers names anyway? My last point concerns the insulting way David put down British software houses. I for one would not buy a U.S. Gold game as they rely on propoganda to sell their games ie Raid Over Moscow I believe home-grown houses like Ultimate, Ocean and Software Projects are far better at producing top quality games. In fact the only overseas company worth mentioning is Melbourne House. Now I have got that off my chest, I can continue reading your first class magazine. Steven Hargadon, Strathclyde. run of the mill computer publication (like some mags I could mention). It is nice to see news of how computers are being used around the world. I don't doubt that many adventure game fans will be interested in establishments like the one called Treasure Trap that Keith Campbell and Co. visited If enough mags did the same as you did with Dr. Who then it would be back on the air again. New and better programs? You mean like Eastenders or Allo Allo? Don't make me laugh, the BBC's days of making good programmes is long gone. Scott Adams only wrote the first home computer adventure, so I don't see why he should be so important on the Adventure page. Well, Mr Mitchell, why don't you just stop buying C+VG if you don't like it, and then we wouldn't have to suffer little ***ers like you writing in and complaining about unimportant little gripes that nobody else agrees with anyway. By the way, Marcus Groan, thanks for doing what I mean to do — shoot an obnoxious little *!$* down in flames. But remember, everyone is entitled to their own taste in music, but it really annoys me when someone like Michael Steinmets forces his bands onto those that don't like them. As for record shops, they rarely have a section for specific types of music anymore, showing that they are becoming like everybody else, ignore the minority just make a fast buck. I'm sure Sir Clive knows what I am talking about. Tan Birch, Birmingham argument, preferably in my favour. I would like to say I agree with Stewart Wood's comments, from the July issue, that the adverts are a good idea, showing the reader which games/utilities are currently on the market. Also I agree with Marcus Groan, from the August issue, by saying that Frankie Goes to Hollywood, Duran Duran, Howard Jones etc, are all teenybopper nerds. David Wild, Attenborough, Notts. Editor's reply: Look, I know it's going to come as a big shock David, it did to me, but Max IS a real person. The actor's name is Matt Frewer who should be shot for revealing the secret! Still, maybe his alter-ego will do something about this little sneak in his next series. I for one can't wait for the return of Mr Headroom. TV isn't the same without him, is it? . I have bought your magazine ever since I got my CBM64, about 9 months ago. In this time I have not noticed a listing for a \"Turbo\" program. Surely you should include such a program that would at least speed up the time that we wait for games to load? Michael J. Lee, New South Wales Australia. Editor's reply: Great idea, Michael. Has anyone out there got a fast loader for the 64 they'd like to pass on to C+VG readers? I live in the United States, and recently while in London, I picked up a copy of Computer + Video Games. It's excellent. In the August issue a person wrote in and was complaining about the price of CBM64 software. I would love to be able to buy software for .95. In the USA the average price for software is around $35 (). Some of the better software sells for more than $60 (440). So, whoever you are, I just cannot sympathize with you. The software in the UK is good and inexpensive. Pirates like you will probably make the price of software go up, just like it did in the U.S. You people over there have a good thing going, don't spoil it! Karen Middaugh, U.S.A  I thought I would send you my little artistic outburst which took me all of 2 days to complete. Of course if you like it, you have my full permission to print it, in your wonderful magazine. As I am writing I must say how good C+VG is, especially the games reviews. Also I don't mind how many adverts are in it, your magazine is the best there is. Keep it up. Jonathan Howard, Bristol  Will somebody please tell D. Mitchell to shut up!!! Nobody asks him to buy your mag, but all he can do is moan. There are some people who use their computers as computers not as games machines like he obviously does and we like to hear news of how mainframes are being used in the film industry etc. It is the general interest articles that stop your mag becoming just another boring  There is a big argument in our family between my brother and myself because my brother, Matthew, read an article in one of the papers, with small pages and big print, about Max Headroom being an actor. I told him this could not be true. But he said it would cost thousands of pounds to program every expression and synchronise it with speech, and only a few computers in the world could do it, and the Pentagon has one. So that's what the President does in his spare time. Please could you settle this . With the weather being terrible outside I decided to purchase your magazine to help cheer me up. Like hell it did. 126 END "


"MARED2 THE FIRST PART OF THE EPIC SPACE ACTION ADVENTURE TRILOGY THE SIEGE OF EARTH GARGOYLE GAMES SPECTRUM 48K AMSTRAD 464 .95 GARGOYLE GAMES LTD., 74 KING STREET, DUDLEY, WEST MIDLANDS DY2 8QB Telephone: (Sales) 0384 238777 (General) 0384 237222 Merea "


"CHVG COMPETITION The Commodore 128 could be described as three computers in one There is the 128 mode which offers the most sophisticated Commodore Basic to date, plus extra commands, huge memory and good keyboard styling. Then there is the 64 mode which enables all exist ing Commodore 64 software to run on it. Thirdly, there is the capability to run any of the enormous range of CP/M business software. then the ing Thirdly any of cP/Mb Win Commodore's fantastic new computer — the C128 in this great competition brought to you by Anirog Software and Computer . + Video Games magazine. The 50 runners-up will receive copies of Jump Jet, Anirog's chart-busting flight simulation game which combines the thrill of combat with real flight control. The C128, which is 100 per cent compatible with the Commodore 64, looks set to be a hit when it becomes available this autumn. Here's how you can win. Hidden in the word puzzle printed on this page are the names of nine Anirog games. All you have to do is identify and circle the names. Send your entry with the printed coupon to Anirog/Computer Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECI 3AU. The closing date is October 16th and the editor's decision is final. C+VG/ANIROG COMPUTER COMPETITION Name Address Jump Jet is available for a wide range of computers. Please tick one of the boxes below to indicate your machine. ABSAFAFGWTUVV GALAXY GIHUR00 CDA EDEHIJTJUT BSPACEPILOTTC z csWVLRS KS KOE BRHYMELANDS NM O COOPQIRIVIAA XD TYNMNQRLJLS JUMPJETGXMP IT FIVEASIDEHIME EPY QZ FMNLO KBR CBM 64, VIC 20, C16 (combined tape) Amstrad Spectrum BBC, Electron (combined tape) Einstein MSX "


"KNIGHT RIDER S002 THE Soon ON pond Ocean Ocean House 6 Central Street  Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone 061 832 6633 . Telex 669977 Oceans G "


"NEXT MONTH INVG ON SALE NOV 16 What happened to turn this clean-cut young man into the raving strangely dressed heavy metal freak you see below? Keith Campbell's Book of Adventure that's what!!! So beware, If you don't want to end up like him DON'T rush out and grab a copy of the new look C&VG next month. If you do, here's what you'll have to suffer. An extra big helping of the Adventure Helpline, tons of Adventure reviews, features, news and competitions. Yes, every copy of December's special C+V6 will carry a Government Health Warning about our FREE 24-page Book of Adventure! But because you are all such sensible people you won't want to stampede down to your local newsagent and demand a copy will you? Remember what happened to this poor deluded soul. You want BIG prizes? Well we've got BBIIIGGG prizes waiting for you next issue. Want to win your very own Commando arcade machine? Want to win your very own pinball machine? Well, tough. 'Cos the Editor has refused to let anyone have them! Ha! But we might be able to drag the machines away from him in time for December's amazing arcade competitions. Find out by getting a copy of our explosive Christmas issue! X and B-Con have been playing Highway Encounter nonstop since it arrived at IDEAS CENTRAL. And X has used his amazing Xerox powers to produce an amazing map of this extremely addictive game. Meanwhile, we managed to shut B-Con up for long enough to make him get together some hints on how to get the best out of your battling Vorton droids. We'll help you save the world next issue! Thunderbirds Are Gol And they are heading for the pages of C+VG. Watch the skies for December's dangerous issue F.A.BI? PLUS PLUS PLUS: A sports star looks at star sports games, boxers get into the ring with boxing games, boxers get into the ring with boxing games, C+VG reviewers get stuck into games collections and get a kick out yet more martial arts mayhem. PLUS: A special Melbourne House Fighting Warrior competition. PLUS: A look at the amazing interactive computer games they are playing in the U.S.A. and another chance to become CFVG's M.U.D. Champion. DILIS "


"A family game for 2 to 4 players in which mum is just as much at home as the sports crazy son. Over 2000 questions on six subjects like Entertainment Sports History. C64 Amstrad Atari BBC Spectrum .95 FILTE-ASIDE A soccer game with real pace in which passing skills are as essential as speed. Penalty shoot out truly tests your anticipation One or two player option. C64 .95 Spectrum Amstrad Atari BBC MSX SOON SLAP SH01 A fast and furious game which requires skill and fast reactions. Ice Hockey is a tough game but persistent rough game is punished by roughing penalties. One player or two player option. C64 Amstrad MSX .95 Assume control of this unique fighting machine. Take care that you practice take off and landing thoroughly before you embark on a combat mission to seek and destroy the enemy aircrafts. Use your radar to locate the carrier and land in worsening weather conditions as you progress through the ranks. C64 Amstrad BBC .95. Atari Spect Electron SOON VOICE MASTER SPEECH HEUTRON VOICE HARP .95 VOICE MASTER A unique three in one package. Speech Reproduction Speaks in your own voice. Easy to incorporate speech in your own programmes. Recorded speech does not require Voice Master for reproduction. Speech Recognition Imagine your computer actually understanding what you say. Voice Harp Just whistle or hum to produce music CHE ULTIMATE HUMAN TO COMPUTER INTERFACE TRADE ENQUIRIES ANIROG Unit 10 Victoria Industrial Estate Dartford Kent 0322-92513/18 MAIL ORDER 8 High Street, Horley, Surrey. 029 378 6083 24 Hour Credit Card Service or pay by Cheque, P.O., Visa or Access OR DISC ANIROG "


"TAKE A TRIP PLEASUREGAME FRANKIE HOLLYWOOD GOES TO FREE! SPECIAL LIVE RECORDING OF »RELAX ocean EXTRAORDINARY EXPERIENCE 9.95 SPECTRUM 48K COMMODORE 64 In exclusive data lune twin cassette pack. Ocean Software is available from selected branches of Bons.WHSMITH.John Menzies WOOLWORTH.LASKYS, Rumbelows.Greens. Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries welcome. Ocean House 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS Telephone 061 832 6633 Telex 66 "

