" FMBRUARY 1987 S$4.60 Dm5,50 285pla HFL 6.25 COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES TILTILLENTLEMI FO SECRETHE ACADMY JUTITITIITMITTTTTTTT FREE 26 PAGE BOOK OFUAMES PLAY BY MAIL SPECIAL/ENTER THE REAL LABYRINTHE PULL OUT LEVIATHAN POSTER/TOTALLY MAD COMPETITION PAPERBOY MAPPED/INFOCOM PROFILE/DIGITISE YOURSELF! DESIGN A JOYSTICK COMPETITION/TAKE OFF IN THE GUNSHIP!/WIN FLYING LESSONS "


"HE'S .95 .95 .95 .95 Spectrum Amstrad Amstrad Commodore Commodore C16 Cassette Cassette Disc Cassette Disc Cassette .95 .95 HERE!! Scooby Doo in his own Computer Cartoon Mail Order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to Elite, or quote your Credit Card number Ellte Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands, WS9 8PW. Telephone: (0922) 59165. Telex: 336130 ELITE.G. Fax: (0922) 647359 After months of development he's finally here-Scooby in his own hilarious computer cartoon. Designed and coded by Gargoyle Games, Scooby Doo is a fast-action arcade game that's as funny to watch as it's exciting to play-ScoobyDooby-Doo!! The very best Elite Titles are available at selected branches of 3 .WHSMITH. Tam oone 6/ or Menzies AMSTRAD SCHNEIDER MI Scooby "


"Cassette Cassette .95 .95 .95 .95 Disc Take a Cassette .95 Spectrum Amstrad Amstrad Commodore Commodore Disc .95 Cassette C16 Trip Into The edit Mail Order, Just send a cheque or postal order payable to Elite, or quote your Credit Card number VISA Fantasy Zone SPACE MARRIER Ellte Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands, WS9 8PW. Telephone: (0922) 50165. Telex: 336130 ELITE.G. Fax: (0922) 647359 \"The Most Outstanding Coin-Op Game of the Year!! Segam invite you to take a trip to the Fantasy Zone in the fascinating 3D-Action game that set the Coin-Op world alight. Steel your nerves, alert your senses and prepare for a thrilling trip into the future. The very best Elite Titles are available at selected branches of: SAMWHSMITH Tande COMMODORE 64/128 \"Officially Licence Coin Op Classile SPECTRUM Screenshots taken from various computer formats "


"FEATURES MAD COMPETITION/P74 CONTENTS 56 UCHI MATA COMPETITION 58 ACADEMY — GRADUATE WITH AN EXCLUSIVE PLAYERS GUIDE 62 DESIGN A JOYSTICK COMPETITION 66 LEVIATHAN POSTER 70 PLAY BY MAIL 72 MAIL DOMINATION UPDATE 74 GAMES GALORE A MAD COMPETITION 77 GOLDEN JOYSTICKS 79 MARBLE MADNESS COMPETITION 80 DODGY GEEZERS COMPETITION 82 PULSATING PIXELS DIY DIGITISING 86 INSIDE INFOCOM 90 TRAP DOOR COMPETITION RESULTS 93 I.D.E.A.S CENTRAL 98 PAPERBOY MAP GET ON YOUR BIKE 100 SENTINEL COMPETITION 101 SECRETS OF THE LABYINTHE 110 ATARI ST SPECTACULAR PART TWO 116 ARCADE ACTION 120 STREET SEEN 122 MAILBAG 125 BUG HUNTERS 129 HOT GOSSIP DODGY GEEZERS/P80 NEWS & REVIEWS 8 NEWS Trivial Pursuit ,000 Challenge result. MSX revisited. Level 9. Year Planner Offer. Gunship previewed. The other Aliens! 14 REVIEWS THIS ISSUE: Three games get C+VG's Game of the Month accolade Sam Cruise, Uridium/Paradroid and Fairlight II. C+ VG HITS include Skate Rock Footballer of the Year, Street Machine, Terra Cresta, Xevious, Paperboy, Trap Door and lots more. 104 ADVENTURE Keith Campbell and his team review Dodgy Geezers, Kayleth, The Bard's Tale and more. Plus the Helpline. LABYRINTHE/P101 "


"INSIDE STORY DIY DIGITISING/P82 If you thought the last issue of C+VG was totally awesome well, in the words of the great prophet, you ain't seen NOTHING yet! Within these pulsating pages -waddya mean you can't feel anything? is a collection of the most brain-fusing features, news and reviews you've ever read. We've persuaded ace-coder Pete Cooke to reveal the secrets of the Academy and tell YOU how to get a degree in skimmer-ing! And you can win a FREE flying lesson in a 20th Century skimmer. OK, so it's an aeroplane. But it still goes up into the atmosphere doesn't it? Last month we told you about Bowie's Labyrinth this issue we tell you about the REAL Labyrinthe. It's a live adventure role playing game which takes place in the dark caverns somewhere underneath South London. And talking or role-playing we introduce Wayne, the chairman of the Play by Mail Player's Association, who tells you all about mail domination, AND gives you the chance to win FREE games. Talking of free games, flip the pages instantly to find the Mastertronic MAD! Competition. The budget-masters want to GIVE away all the games they ve ever released. Euromax, the UK's leading joystick manufacturers, want to get in on the act as well. They're giving away! lorry loads of joysticks in our special designer competition. You want more? Well how about the absolutely FREE and almost legendary book of games. Listings for top computers, including the Amiga! ERRA CRESTA/P49 im URGU SAM CRUISE/P14 URIDIUM/P24 LELLE EDITOR Tim Metcalfo DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John DESIGN Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Steve Donoghue Matthew Woodley AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANTS Tony Takoushi PUBLICITY Marcus Rich ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Garry Williams ADVERTISEMENT EXECUTIVE Katherine Lee AD PRODUCTION Debble Pearson PUBLISHER Rita Lewis COVER Mark Bromley (Who also did last months Space Harrier spectacularl) EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR JAU Tel: 01-251 6222 July-December 98,258 ACADEMY/P58 ABC ATARI ST SPECTACULAR/110 PBM'S WAYNE/P70 "


"THE ... THE STATE OF THE MARTIAL ARTS PO DO De aff actual CBM 64 screens Available for: CBM 64/128. AMSTRAD CPC SPECTRUM 48K/1288 ATARIEL For further informati "


"L A S T R T on 30th January 1987 ATARI 800/130XE available 28th February 1987 atlaring 01954 1909 "


"A Strangeloop HEHEHER. K Elevator Action Want a FREE robot? Well all you International magazine. Lynda belongs to a keen have to do is joing the Robotic The twelve finalists had already computer games playing family. Strangeloop is a big and Society of America No, it's not won a Trivial Pursuit competition She likes adventure games, colourful arcade adventure, Falcon the same people who brought you run by Britain's computer husband Bob likes war games, Patrol is an action packed shoot Mr Reagan. This society deals in magazines. The finalists were and their 5-year-old twin sons 'em up. Other titles out include intelligent robots. As part of its wined and dine by Domark before Stephen and David like Skyhawk for the BBC/Electron; 1987 Membership Drive the playing in a knockout competition playing Donkey Kong. Her Deathwake originally a full price society's International Division is of the TP board game. one-year-old daughter Quicksilva game, for the Amstrad, giving away an experimental The final was played on the Kimberley is the only one not Spectrum and C64; and Zogan sound-activated robot in kit form to computer version and was hosted into computers yet! Warrior for the C16. each new members. New by Johnny Ball, presenter of members will also receive a copy BBC TV's Think of a Number of the Robot Sourcebook, and and Think Again programmes. a subscription to the RSA. The Lynda, of Wickford, Essex, said: No, don't be confused. Those Yet another new budget label Robotic Society of America is \"If I could make it through to the ARE ex-Virgin games being has appeared with games for the involved with the study, final I would be satisfied. I would released on the Bug Byte Spectrum, Electron and C16. experimentation, creation, and have done my best.\" As with the budget label. The classic Alternative Software has advancement of robotics and other finalists, Lynda was Strangeloop and the pretty released a series of .99 titles for other artificial lifeforms. The annual presented with a souvenir Genus Il neat Falcon Patrol Il are now these machines. Howzat is a membership fee is $50, which edition of TP. great value at just .99. pretty good cricket game which should be paid by cheque, in dollars, or a Post Office Once upon a time in the world international money order. of movies, there was Alien. It was Interested? Then contact: The very, very horrible and scared the Membership Secretary, Robotic absolute beejabers out of people Society of America, Box 54-H, writes Marshal M. Rosenthal Scarsdale, New York 10583 This was good and the movie and mention C+VG! made a lot of money. Then the Powers-That-Be decided that if one Alien could Golden Girl, Lynda Britwell make a lot of money, perhaps a lot kept the C+VG flag flying bravely of Aliens could make lots of when she came a magnificent money! Thus was spawned the fourth in Domark's ,000 Trivial Pursuit challenge held sequel Aliens. Meanwhile, in the world of in London recently. computer gaming (another reality The solid gold version of the altogether), a British company called Electric Dreams produced a game called ALIENS. Little did they realize that a team of crazed programmers were toiling away in America on their Get away from OWN version of this romp. So we finally come to Aliens: The her, you BITCH! Computer Game by Steve Cartwright and Activision. There are six separate scenarios to overcome, but first identify the various weapons and electronic to overcome, but first your must identify the various weapons and electronic equipment prepared for the mission. Cartoon panels appear throughout the game and include word ballons. Great sound, fluid addictive board game was finally action, and an urgency to win won by polytechnic lecturer John make this a killer game. No news Cooke who represented on a release date for the UK yet... Commodore Computing "


"Han FLERES OU includes the 17 county sides plus seven test match squads. You get Take all your combat flight detailed game analysis throughout simulators and stick them in the bin. ARXING YOUR BI-UR Gunship is the ultimate says 3DNX HEDP the game and even put the Marshal M. Rosenthal. scoreboard onto a printer. Could Micropose have armed their this be the best budget cricket LORES game around? Pheenix is a AH-64A Apache Attack helicopter space shoot'em up for the C16. wth incredible realism, 3-D cockpit Night Strike, for the Electron, is views, and realistic flying a maze type helicopter game, techniques. It even includes a template that while Henry's Hoard, SIDEBAR LE fits over the keyboard to use in conjunction with the joystick. This is 30MX ROS: 1200 G10 a true simulation, not just another \"point and shoot\" program. The truly perverse can even CURRENT WEIGHT 2020 speed up the program, fun if you're a maniac. There's even a huge MAXIMUM WEIGHT 20300 booklet which includes details DONNE about helicopter aerodynamics. Plenty of sound effects to satisfy A Henry's Hoard anyone, and you can't just lean back and yawn as you go. Gunship is without doubt an awesome example of Micropose's talent for taking reality and shoving it into a space smaller than a kitchen sink. Not to mention being more fun than washing the dishes. More on Gunship in Tony T's Hot Gossip page this issue. A Howzat! another Speccy game is a platform in a proper \"scene\". Heroes for Computer and Video Games Newies include Super Robin arcade adventure with 50 different Wargames is published by would like to apologise to Fanatic Hood for the Amstrad and locations. Dragon's World and costs Software of Bournemouth and E & White Heat, a Spectrum blaster. .95 in hardback or .95 J Software of Enfield for the \" All sell at .99. All this and a text softback. You should be able to mistake in the advertisement on adventure called Necris Dome HEROES pick it up at any good book store page 23 of January issue. Due to a for the 64. Code Masters are a FOR or from Dragon's World Ltd, Paper typesetting error the address on company to watch in '87. WARGAMES Tiger Books, 19 Hereford Square, the bottom was printed as E&J London SW7 4TS. Software and should have read: Fanatic Software, 70 Western Ever wonder what day it is? Avenue, Bournemouth, Dorset Here at C+VG we're lucky if we Ball Breaker is the new BH10 6HJ. Readers are advised remember what month it is. I mean, game from CRL. New? Why do we that should they want to order here we are bringing you question this statement? Well, read games from Fanatic they need to February's issue and it's not even this quote from their press release: send orders to the above address Christmas yet. That's where Level In the game the player controls a and NOT to ER I Software Thace ysgiant poster Year Planner bat whch hurls a ball against a wall companies are in no way comes in handy. It's a day by day of bricks. The objective being to connected and C+VG is sorry for look at the year ahead. You can destroy the wall and then to the inconvenience this may cause mark your holidays on it, release precede to the next levels to repeat both to the companies involved dates for that long awaited new If you're into role playing games and our readers. game, or even the date when C+VG hits the streets! Or you can then you'll know about the neat just stick it on your wall and look at little figures that you can buy to Hot on the heels of the successful the pretty pictures. We've got five enhance the games. Now there's a Red Max, now available on the of these incredibly useful things to book which tells you all about how Atari by the way, Code Masters give away thanks to Level 9. The these models are made and how first five people to write in and ask you can make them look really for one will get one. You'll have to professional. Stuart Parkinson's book Heroes for answer a simple question of Wargaming not only features a course. That question is which men om brief history of role-playing games three adventures make up Level but also reveals painting the task. Different coloured bricks 9's Jewels of Darkness cause the ball to react differently compilation recently released by techniques used by experts to make these models come alive. The some bricks will send the ball off Rainbird? Answer the question, fill book is packed with colour pictures at different angles. Sounds like in the coupon and rush your entry of finished models and dioramas Breakout with frills to it. Still it's A Red Max off to Computer and Video Games, -that's a whole bunch of models out now for the Amstrad, .95 on Level 9 Year Planner, Prior Court, tape, .95 on disc, with a C64 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London version on the way. ECIR 3AU. C+VG/LEVEL 9 YEAR PLANNER COMPETITION The spring Atari Show, originally EEEIO Name to be held in February, has been GEBEDO put back to April, organisers Address Database Exhibitions announced. Elle el The show will now be held at the A Terra Cognita The three adventures are:Novatel, Hammersmith, on April are now releasing new games and 24, 25 and 26. new versions of current hits. "


"C850 doy and on the message on production Meanwhile here's a rundown on high capacity ROM cartridge versions of the game because Stavoros, who must be Finland's called MEWGA-ROM for MSX Audiogenic took it off. Anyway, the top games programmer. and MSX 2. moral of that story is, if you're Name: Stavros Fasoulas And, according to Hiroshi, going to put your girlfriend's name Born: Helsinki 1968 Japanese experts predict the on a game make sure it's an Favourite food: pizza games market will move away original or you never know Favourite drink: Koskenkorva from Nintendo's what might happen. \"It's Finnish lemonade.\" Entertainment System, with Favourite TV programm: sales claimed of more than seven Dempsey and Makepeace We've had board games being million in Japan alone, to the MSX 2 in the middle of the year. turned into computer games but Favourite computer game: never the other way round. Until und Until Panasonic's new MSX2 machine Dropzone now anyway. CDS has just Favourite music: Heavy Metal the A1. Priced at about . released Brian Clough's Main RAM 64K bytes. Video Bands such as Dio and Iron RAM128K bytes. ROM 64K Football Fortunes which is Maiden bytes. Two slots.CRT output/ Grange Hill, the computer a computer moderated board analog RGB, video and RF. game based on the popular BBC g ame, and not a dodgy TV quiz television series, will be released show. Brian's realistic football by Quicksilva during February fortunes have been mixed to say C+VG reviewer Lee The plot is taken from After the least why he's never been Braithwaite helped BBC Hours one of the Grange Hill made England team manager is Radio Lancashire raise over novels. beyond reason. Still, now you can ,000 for the BBC Children try your hand at becoming a in Need appeal. Lee was soccer superstar. Two to five sponsored by a number of top players take on the role of team software companies and raised managers. Each manager must  during a 24 hour computer steer his team through the season games playing marathon. C+VG successfully and use his skill to also lent a hand by donating free make his team stronger. Some of t-shirts and subscriptions which the opposing teams are managed Who Dares Wins is the motto of were auctioned to raise more cash by fellow players, and the rest of the SAS. And it should also be for the appeal. the ten strong league is managed adopted by 15-year-old Alex by the computer. Glassbrook, of Harpenden, There are many opportunities to Herts. He dared to enter the After blowing everyone away follow Brian Clough's example and C+VG/Mikro Gen's Strike with Firelord and the awesome strengthen your team both by Force competition back in twin pack featuring Uridium and landing on the correct place on the September and won. Paradroid, reviewed this issue, board, and by \"wheeling and Strike Force is the name of Hewson are set to unleash Steve New from Telecom's budget dealing\" with your fellow players Mikrogen's soon to be released Turner's latest epic called -as Silver range are Twinky Goes demanding huge sums of game based on the Special Air revealed by C+VG ages ago Hiking, Rebelstar, Caverns money to lend or transfer Services regiment and their tough Ranarama, a magical mystery of Eriban and the evergreen footballers. training. In the game they must tour. You control Mervyn, a Spiky Harold. Twinky Goes The package consists of a complete six special missions. We sorcerer's apprentice. He is the Hiking, for the 64, is a sort of cross computer cassette or disk, a asked you to design the seventh only survivor of an invasion of evil country race for cute characters. playing board, five coloured and final mission. warlocks. He managed to evade Rebelstarif you missed it on the counters, a pack of football player The winner gets his scenario built capture as he had by accident Spectrum -is a fast, fun strategy cards, immunity cards and a into the game plus a replica of a transformed himself into a frog game in which you control a team heap of money! semi-automatic rifle. whilst trying to concoct a potion to of crack space marines on a Brian Clough's Football Fortunes of the hundreds of entries, make himself tall, handsome and mission to regain control of an is due for release on 14th January Mikro Gen picked Alex's. He muscular. You have to tackled alien invaded base. It's now 1987, for most formats. Prices will based his mission in a nuclear twelve wizards per level who are available for the Amstrad don't be .95 for cassette, and power station where mercenaries guarded by troops scattered over miss it. Caverns of Eriban for the .95 for Commodore 64, are planning to blow up three the 50 to 100 rooms on each level. Atari is a scramble type game. Amstrad, BBC and Atari (8 bit) disk reactors unless they got  You view the rooms from above versions. Other formats to be million. with five or so to a screen. A room covered include Amstrad PCW They are holding 37 station isn't revealed until you visit it. Once Here's a story with a moral for machines, IBM PC (and workers hostage in the main you encounter a wizard, you tackle all programmers tempted to pinch compatibles), Atari ST and the control room. The SAS must get him in a series of sub-games yet to other peoples ideas. Gary Apple II, priced at .95. into the power station, kill the be decidedl The game is basically Partis, the 19-year-old terrorists without hurting the a shoot-em-up, where the nasties programmer of Audiogenics hostages and defuse a bomb. A are continually generated to give a Uridium clone, Psycastria, tough mission, we think you'll continuous action feel. There are dedicated the 64 version of his agree. eight levels of missiles, eight levels BBC hit to his girlfriend Tracey with The two runners-up--who each of power and eight types of shield a huge scrolling message at the get replicas of 44 Magnums are for you to accumulate and use. The start of the game. Just after he'd Andrew Barraclough, 12, of easiest way to accumulate items is Haywards Heath, West Sussex, put the finishing touches to his to beat the wizards to win their labour of love, Tracey told him it and Byron Huxley, 15 of Grimsby. runes and then convert the runes was all over between them. into the items. The missiles, power Enough to make even Lt. Laww and shields are all graded and the shed a tear or two. You won't see Here are more shots of Delta MSX 2 has been creating a stir in nasties on the later levels are by Sanxion programmer Japan this Christmas, according to graded too. It's no good hitting a Stavros Fasoulas. It's another C+VG eyes in the Land of the fourth level nasly with a first level shoot'em up in which you must Rising Sun, Hiroshi Ono. missile. It will only enrage him so battle against the Dacoits, an Panasonic and Sony have he'll chase you all the harder. Spell unruly band of brigands who begun selling their new machines items can also be obtained terrorise an area of space known at around  and  randomly in certain rooms at spell as Delta. respectively. points. This adds an element of Delta will be released by Meanwhile, on the games front, luck. The game is scheduled for Thalamus next month, price .95 software houses have been putting release in March on the 64, on cassette and .95 on disk o ut product using using a super Spectrum and Amstrad. "


"Cassette Cassette ESS Spectrum Amstrad Amstrad Commodore Commodore .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 Disc Cassette Disc Cassette C16 JACK'S BACK! Mail Order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to Elite, or quote your Credit Card number VISA Officially licenced from Tecmo, Ltd of Japan BSBACKT Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands, WS9 8PW. Telephone: (0922) 59165. Telex: 336130 ELITE.G. On sale Feb. 9th Europe Feb. 23rd, U.K. Fresh from pinging around the screen in his first caper, Jack's back in a brand new arcade game. This time it's a great new combat game -in fact you could call it a Jack Attack! The very best Elite Titles are available at selected branches of: Bad WHSMITH, Tandy John Menzies 3 Amstrad Spectrum Elite CBM-64 LEITE Screen shots taken from various computer formats "


"21st CENTURY WARRIOR: AR The APACHE as fierce and elusive as its warrior namesake, Equipped with an arsenal of today's most advanced weaponry, it can attack from nowhere against overwhelming odds, then slip away to strike again without warning. It is capable of defeating the enemy's, armoured columns infantry and, if necessary, hostile aircraft on the modern electronic battlefield The attack helicopter the sunship came of age during the But you don't have to wail As the latest addition to the ever growing Vietnam War. Starting as a primitive patchwork of machine guns and line of MicroProse Simulation Software, GUNSHIP now brings all of rocket pods strapped to the side of a utility helicopter. it evolved into the danger and excitement of attack helicopter action home to your such sophisticated weapon systems as the armed Huey and AH-1G computer in this true to life simulation Cobra. However, the deadly armoured arsenal of today's Warsaw With GUNSHIP, you, the pilot will fly confidently into the world's Pact demands an even stronger front line. hottest trouble spots. Central America, the Middle East, Southeast The AH-64 Apache is here to give America all the muscle it needs for Asia and Central Europe. You'll use an unbelievable array of high the defence of freedom. This war machine is a fully integrated tech information and weapons systems to get the job done including acquisition/firepower system designed to let the pilot find lock onto lasers, video cameras, night viewers, radar warnings, jammers and destroy the enemy with the greatest possible accuracy and computers, missiles, rockets, flares and a 30mm cannonSuccessful effectiveness. Now actively in production at Hughes Helicopters, the missions will be rewarded with medals and rank promotions, build first 675 choppers should be delivered to the US Army by early 1990. your career as you go! "


"Apache: GUNSHIP Please send copy/ies of GUNSHIP CBM 64/128 Cassette CBM 64/128 Disk Details of the full Microprose range Name (Block Caps) Address Postcode Which magazine have you cut this coupon from? Please debit my Access/Visa Card. Expiry Date No. All of the GUNSHIP action is presented in revolutionary 3-D graphics. The cockpit instrumentation is elaborate the maps, stores and Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. damage displays are extensive: all flying manoeuvres are fully enclose 55p postage and packing accurate. A comprehensive Operations Manual and keyboard overlay complete the package. See your software dealer today and become a part of the GUNSHIP, adventure! Challenge the enemy, the sky, and YOURSELF with this extraordinary simulation GUNSHIP for Commodore 64/128. Cassette .95, Disk .95, SIMULATION SOFTWARE MICROPROSE MICROPROSE SOFTWARE LIMITED. 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Glos GL8 8DA "


"C+VG MACHINE: SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: MICROSPHERE PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: TIM REVIE SAME CRUISE CAL It was raining. The neon light outside IDEAS Central flickered fitfully. Big Red was snoring soundly in the office next to mine. I walked to the window and pulled down the blind, shutting out the windswept world outside. Isat back at my desk and pulled out the Sam Cruise file. Poor old Sam. Once a top IDEAS man-now reduced to scratching a living as a privateeye in some sleazy downtown area. I'd been thinking about Sam because his name had featured in headlines about the infamous case of the Blue Budgie. That woman he tangled with. Lana, her name was. What a nasty piece of work she turned out to be. And after he solved the case. Sam vanished into thin ai Some say he's writing his memoirs with the help of a case of the best bourbon. Others reckon he's been kidnapped by the Spectrum gang and put to work inside their computer network Something else made me think about Sam It was the tape that arrived on my desk a few hours earlier. A computer tape that seemed to tell Sam's story up to the end of the Blue Budgie case. Perhaps this held some clues. The first thing I picked up was that Sam seemed to have developed some strange personal habits. Like doing somersaults onto dollar bills that were blowing along the city streets! I was surprised that the cops on the beat didn't pick him up for this odd behaviour. It must have just been Sam's way of picking up cash he really needed with out making it to A A detective story in the best tradition of Hollywood narriveder. A con Sam's Sudgie MON This is C+VG's highest honour. It's granted to the game which, in our honest opinion, is the most playable, original and exciting game released during the month. We look for all the key points listed below -but also that extra added ingredient which makes the game stand head and shoulders above the rest. WRONG SAN CAUSE A A brilliant game that's well worth spending your Christmas pennies on. Ctvo FAIRLIGHT IT This symbolis C+VG's way of telling you a game is the BUSINESS! \"Who writes your reviews\" That's a question our readers often ask. Name the guilty ones, they demand. So that's what we're doing. Satisfied now? TIM METCALFE: C+VG's veteran editor enjoys shoot 'em ups, arcade adventures and basket weaving. PAUL \"Man at C&A\" BOUGHTON: Slick sports simulations are Paul's thing because he can wear his smooth tracksuits at the same time. LESLY WALKER: Sorcery was still is Lesly's favourito. Will anything every match up to it? LEE BRAITHWAITE: Star of Radio Lancashire and ace reviewer, Lee will tackle any type of game. What a man! CHRIS Dodgy\" CAIN: The man who owns an Amiga but still plays C64 games for HAKAN AKBUS: C+VG's Atari addict knows a dodgy game when he sees one... NICKY TREVITT: The enigmatic Nicky is our reclusive BBC expert. TONY TAKOUSHI: The mouth makes guest appearances now and then... MACHINE: SPECTRUM 48/128 instead of freeing the land of encounters and who may or SUPPLIER: THE EDGE Fairlight from the grasp of the may not be an important PRICE: .95 evil one he has virtually character in the adventure. REVIEWER: TIM guaranteed its doom and Isvar's world has edges or destruction. Stupid boy! more exactly cliffs which he can This isn't an adventure for the But, unlike real life, Isvar gets plunge over if he's not careful. a second chance to defeat the fainthearted. It's big and Afterwards he'll find himself dangerous to start if you've got Dark Lord by finding the book back at the starting point where boring things to do like going and the big baddie again. something strange always falls to school, sleeping and eating. 9 And that's where YOU come in from the sky only to be hidden Stuff like that.'Cos once you You begin the game in a by a tree. venture into the world of forest with twisted trees and What is this globe thingy. And Fairlight you're going to find nasty wolves roaming about. is it important? yourself hanging around with There are many problems to be the graphics are similar to Isvar for some time to come. solved. Bricked up doorways to the original intricate black get the impression that this mysterious ruins, passages that outlines on a base colour. The is what programmer Bo lead nowhere apparently and blackout between screens Jangborg wanted Fairlight the the enigmatic female who Isvar which put a few people off the first to be like. Fairlight Il is a game for map makers and adventure addicts alike. Bo has come up with an enhanced version of his 3D LIFE FORCE: 97 Worldmaker system to make Fairlight ll substantially larger and much more complex than his original hit game. Fairlight ll takes up Isvar's story where the first adventure left off. He's discovers that he gave the Book of Light to the wrong personlit wasn't Segar the Immortal in the tower but the Dark Lord himself. And LIFE FORCE 97 9 "


"MACHINE: C64/128 SUPPLIER: BUBBLE BUS PRICE: .95 (TAPE) ,95 (DISK) REVIEWER: TIM REVIEWS Wheee! If you're a failed skateboarder, like me, the next best thing is playing Skate Rockl lt puts you on board a super-slick skate-board. The challenge is to complete ten courses of increasing difficulty and become one of the elite Slime obvious what he was doing! fuses was another of his Never very subtle was our favourite tricks. Sam... The tape shows that Sam had Hit-men were after him. They some ideas about the casehid down alleys and in stair but he really started having to wells to get in a shot at him. think on his feet after he Most of the time he was quick discovered the body in the hotel enough to jump out of the way. where Lana had asked him to But sometimes even Sam meet her. Some crooked dame wasn't fast enough to dodge a that one. stream of lead from a Chicago He was also having real pianol Luckily he always carried money problems and Daisy his first aid kits with him. long suffering assistant was He often seemed to get on the threatening to run off with the wrong side of gangsters and the violin case maker if she didn't cops. Ending up in the slammer see any cash soon. Even the if the boys in blue got their hot little hands on his collar. Which was a lot better than being thrown from the top storey of a tenement block by some heavy hood! Luckily he never got hurt badly but his friends got fed up paying to get him out of jail. Cost a lot of dough to do that. Dough that Sam just didn't A Spectrum thriller! have. Maybe he's still behind bars somewhere. Hadn't rats were getting bored with Sam's attempts to teach them thought of that ... to ice-skate. The tape shows that Sam was Something very crooked was a master of disguise he going on in the district where chopped and changed, Sam had his office. Odd people sometimes even getting himself on the streets, mysterious up as a nun! shadows behind blinds in to His diguise often fooled floor windows, suspicious cops people. But then again it often let him down at crucial patrolling the streets. moments. He forgot the cops Sam was onto something. had sussed some of them! That's probably why he disappeared. Someone wanted He spent a lot of time him out the way. But why? answering the phone and One thing was for sure this switching lights on and off in the buildings he explored on his would make a brilliant computer game. Maybe quest for clues to the Blue Budgie case. should talk to the guys down at People on the other end of Microsphere about it... phones often gave him useful GRAPHICS info. Turning lights off covered SOUND his getaway from places where  VALUE he wasn't wanted. Blowing PLAYABILITY ROCK Rat Skaters. And it'aint easy! pavements. But at least you don't suffer And you'll also have to learn all the bumps bruises and when and how to make jumps broken bones that you'd get or do wheelies to get over/ attempting some of the moves around obstacles. required. You can't move up a level Each course requires you to until you've completed a course pick up eight flagsas well as and that means you have to dodging dogs, punks, cars, collect all the flags. But you can remote control aircraft and collect them in any order you other assorted hazards. You like as the game allows you to have to guide your board over scroll backwards and forwards pavements ramps and around at will. road works in an effort to collect Once you've completed a few those flags. courses you can choose which Luckily your board is one you want to play. extremely manoeuvrableThere's a time limit on each once you've learnt the joystick/ course too didn't I mention firebutton combinations that that already? But you do get to make your skater jump, spin keep any time left over as it's and perform perfect wheelies! added onto the limit for the next This is one of the really nice course. features of the game. The The graphics are colourful flexibility and freedom of and for the most part pretty well movement is outstanding. As is drawn. The chunky cars let the the animation, which matches game down a bit though.. the fluid movement of the Sound is good and there's a skater. tune which drives the action There are several start up along. Skate Rock is a different options. Skill levels range from game which skate-boarders and beginner to Thrasher! You can gamesters alike will enjoy set up your board too how playing. Join the Slime Rats the boards trucks-wheels to today! you are fixed determines how quickly the board turns. GRAPHICS You'll have to learn how to SOUND make quick turns to avoid  VALUE HITI pedestrians, dogs and ends of PLAYABILITY Skate Rock is an original, entertaining and difficult game. LIFE FORCE : 99 Ooon 0029866 A This game will keep you occupied for ages. Great value! first game has been reduced to Fairlight It isn't a game for the a minimum. novice arcade adventurer. It's The 48k version comes in two just to big and rambling for that. parts while the special 128k But if you were one of the few to edition one of the few proper solve Fairlight the first then 128 games around currently you'll be dying to take up the loads in one go and has a neat challenge of this sequel. musical intro. Am I alone in thinking that the You can take bits from part hero looks a bit like Bo one into part two with you Jangborg himself? And why not but there's always the chance in it?! that you haven't got everything Fairlight II is a game for map you need to complete the game. makers and game purists alike. This makes the 128 version If you've got a few months to slightly easier to deal with spare pick up a copy today... GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY CHVG "


"Star Raid The Great Galactic Adven "


"Jers nture Continues -Star Raiders II is a trademark of the Atari Corporation The future of the Atarian Federation is in your hands as the evil Zylon Master, Chut, plans to destroy the Celos IV Star System. Pilot the hottest fighter in the galaxy, the Liberty Star and wipe out the Zylon Master Force and its super Attack Bases. The sequel to the game that astounded the world STAR RAIDERS II will leave you stunned: there is simply no other game to compete with its sheer excellence. AVAILABLE ON: .99 Amstrad CPC cassette.. .99 Amstrad CPC disk .99 Commodore 64/128 cassette .99 Commodore 64/128 disk .99 ZX Spectrum 48K/128K/+ SOFTWARE ELECTRIC DREAMS SOFTWARE, 31 CARLTON CRESCENT, SOUTHAMPTON S01 2EW. TEL: (0703) 229694. Mail Order: 23 Pond Street, Hampstead, London'NW3 2PN MCORTECK "


"Paperboy is an excellent conversion of a classic game. SMELATE donadvantano a wall PAPER jogging suits! To gain extra points, you can try and throw papers into bird baths, knock lids of dustbins, and hit various targets on the bonus course, You start the game with three lives, and lose one of them if you come in contact with any hazard, or crash into a wall. One advantage is that you don't lose any lives if you crash on the BMX course. That basic object of the game, is to complete a full week's work intact-that way you get paid. As I said, I've played the Spectrum version as well, and completed it within a few days, but I've been at the Commodore version for over a week now, and I can't seem to get past Thursday--so any pokes for infinite lives, send to IDEAS Central at the usual address! The graphics are a great improvement on the Speccy version. On that machine, they took up only a small section of the screen, whereas on the 64 version, they fill the whole screen. They are big and bold, although some of the sprites are slightly chunky, and the streets do become repetitive after a while. Sound is well above average, with a fast-boppin' title tune, a slower, more leisurely paced game tune, and another fast jingle during the bonus game. At the end of each day, you are given a report on how well you did, and if you missed delivering any papers to the right addresses, they may stop their subscriptions Overall, a well executed game, and another worthy C+VG hit for Elite. Many of the most recent arcade conversions have been very poor. Paper boy is the exception. Rush out and buy it NOW. You won't be sorry! MACHINE: COMMODORE 64/ I first played Paperboy on the Commodore version, and I'm 128 Spectrum a few months ago, glad to say that Elite have done SUPPLIER: ELITE and found it instantly playable a superb conversion job from PRICE: .95 (CASS) .95 instantly addictive and, what's the original arcade game of (DISK) more, instantly FUN! REVIEWER: LEE which I was such a fan. I've now played the For those of you who have never played any version, arcade or otherwise, the game sounds fairly boring. Simply deliver newspapers, (why not copies of C+VG?), to the correct addresses, try to persuade other non subscribers to subscribe, by lobbing papers through their windows, and at the end of the day, complete at BMX course in one piece Simple eh? Well, not quite. You see, as on a real paper round, there are hazards such as cars, dogs, and drains. Unlike real life, there are GIANT dogs that walk on their back legs, skateboarders, reject rollerskaters from the Martini ads, and rather overweight Elite have managed to incorporate great graphics with the original gamesplay.ladies, in what look like CND  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY CHVG HIT! Bu Bus Bare Barn 40. Sinc cine na SER Raileanroom TOP GUN TOR A Top Gun --flying to the top of the charts doubt, is hoping for a number training of F16 Tomcat fighter one Christmas hit. pilots. The game puts you in the The resulting game is a pretty seat of the F16 and into battle, neat combination of flight either against the computer or simulation mixed with sky high another player. duelling. With the Top Gun The screen is split into two name it's a winner. indentical displays. At the start The film deals with the you see a side view of your F16 Top Gun-the number one film starring the silver screen's current number one heartthrob, Tom Cruise. Ocean has snapped up the licence and, no  MACHINE: AMSTRAD/ SPECTRUM/CBM 64  SUPPLIER: OCEAN PRICE: .95 (SPECTRUM), .95 (AMSTRAD/CBM) VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD REVIEWER: PAUL "


"MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: MELBOURNE HOUSE PRICE: .95 (tape) .95 (disk) REVIEWER: TIM C+VG Fancy a knuckle sandwich? Then try tangling with Deke the double-fisted dynamo who's the hero of Melbourne's latest 64 offering. Deke's a sort of flying Fist. His main aim in life is to escape andronisation at the hands of the powers that be. Deke's a bit of scallywag you see. And the punishment for crimes is to have your entire body and mind-transformed into a zombie like andie. Dirty Deke has sabotaged the city computer which means that the entire city is going to blow REVIEWS SCORE 0001500 LIVES RE116 THI11600 THE REHA 1111HG 00.00 All action--but doesn'capture the imagination. KNUCKLEBUSTERS up in a few short hours. But picks them up. Make a note of Some objects are booby There are doors to different Deke doesn't plan to stick them as you go. trapped and will drain Deke's areas some which lead to around to see what happens to Others grant him more energy or simply kill him. freedom-some which just the city. He's legging it to strength, extra lives and bonus Some droids Deke attacks will land Deke in more trouble. sanctury which lies outside the points. go up in a puff of smoke at the The graphics are nice and city walls. To find these Deke has to kick merest flick of a foot-but well animated, the scrolling is Only trouble is that he has to over oil drums or run over others are tougher and take a super-smooth and the music fight his way through the cell crates with question marks on lot of kicking to get rid of. well it's by Rob Hubbard. Need blocks, guard area, prison wall, them. What he gets is displayed All the screens are divided we say more? the city, downturn precinct and in a small window at the left into platforms which Deke can Despite all the things it's got ultimately the city walls. hand side of the screen. leap up and down on at will. going for it—that music, good That means' he's got a tough graphics, smooth scrollingtask on his hands -which will Knucklebusters is a strange soon be a bloody pulp as his game. It should be good-but two-fists are all the weapons he somehow it just doesn't. And has-apart from his ability to the sad thing is that I can't put plant a swift kick in his enemy's my finger on just what's wrong! most vulnerable parts. It's an action game which The aim of the game is to help doesn't capture your interest Deke escape. But it isn't easyimmediately. Maybe after a and at times it'll seem couple of hours more play impossible. things will be different? The game scrolls horizontally My advice is to play a friend's backwards and forwards as copy before you decide to shell Deke runs kicks and punches his out your hard earned cashway through the five different unless of course you just want types of android enemies he to hear the neat soundtrack. encounters in his bid for freedom. GRAPHICS Deke will also discover useful SCORE 000-1100 LIVES REA THING 00 SOUND items-some which reveal TIME RENATH1116 00.00 VALUE mysterious words when he PLAYABILITY A Great graphics, excellent sound but disappointing gamesplay. taking off from an aircraft situated at the very top. look at what kind of weapon dispalyed when you are using carrier. The display then The most important aiming sight is being displayed this weapon. switches to the view from the instrument is the radar which on screen. Each level of the game has crafts cockpit. locks on to enemy aircraft. The first is the machine gun three aircraft which must be The flight simulation part of Others are plane altitude cannon, shown on screen by a destroyed before you can the game is the kind I like. indicator, damage indicator, small crosshair sight. A total of progress to the next. The battles They're are no huge manuals to cannon temperature, missile 25 hits are needed to destroy an become progressively harder. If digest, hundreds of controls to locking on countdown and enemy. The hits are shown by you are playing against a master or hundreds of failed missile warning indicator border flashes. This wasn't my human opponent the winner is attempts to take off. A dotted line running across favourite weapon. I found it the one left flying. The controls are very much the screen represents an quite difficult to \"down\" any I'm not sure if the game I had simplified and the layout is artificial horizon. aircraft. contained a bug. At certain clear and easy to understand. There are three weapons times the white dot on the Most of the controls are which you can use. You can see The second weapon is the radar, which I took to indicate side-winder heat-seeking grouped on the lower half of the which one is in use by looking the enemy, was juddering screen, the exceptions being air at an indicator on the control missile, shown by a larger around like mad, leaping from square sight. To fire the missile speed and altitude which are panel. But it's far easier just to one part of the screen to is quite tricky to start with. Once another. No matter how I tried ! Your change to become Tom Cruise for .95 the enemy aircraft is in your sights you must keep it there forget the aircrift into vision. I had couldn't manoeuvre my F16 to three seconds to enable the to reload the game to carry on missile to \"lock on\" to its target. All in all, I found Top Gun Complete this successfully and enjoyable to play. The 3D vector you guaranted a \"kill\". graphics are okay and the Your main defence against sound adequate. I'm not sure if enemy side winder missiles are the game will have a really long heat generating flares. It's also playing life after the initial possible to out run the missiles newsness has worn. I can't see which \"burn out after about 20 myself returning to it in the seconds. There is no sight future. hehes you must keepble the to reload I found Top vector GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"Just when you've parred the course. LEADER BOARD will test your abilities to the very edge of skill and judgement Leaderboard was hailed sports Simulation of the year. Leaderboard Tournament disks added even more precision, even more tension. Leaderboard Executive Edition brings another dimension in excitement and graphics as you battle to master sandtraps, trees, water hazards and rough with a gameplay that's frightening in its demands and realism. *Amateur and professional modes *18 hole golf courses FET U.S. GOLD CBM 64/128 cassette Software .99 cassette .99 disk U.S. (GOLDE ACCESS Software incorporated U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way. Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"YPABALL HPABALI HANKS STU COBHINGE VIPERS toz kes  MACHINE: CBM 64/SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: ODIN PRICE: .95 VERSION TESTED: CBM 64 REVIEWER: PAUL SPIELE 1 SELEKT DEIN STRIKER1 A A complex but fun game for two. although I'm not sure whether these are purely cosmetic or if they actually alter the way a player reacts. Once the team selection has been carried out, the scene switches to the stadium. This is divided by a central column which has a \"goal\" moving up Hypaball was in grave danger of getting the O.B.E. Order of the Big Elbow within a few minutes of being loaded into the Commodore. First of all no instructions were sent with the game. All could tell was that it was some sort of futuristic sports game. Secondly on the version sent to me the colours of the teams were virtually identical. It was exceedingly difficult to tell who was who. I am, however, given to understand that in versions sent to other reviewers the colours were visible. However, I carried on and in the end found myself playing a highly entertaining and addictive game. It's a sort of aerial Rollerball combined with basketball-only the basket moves. There are two teams in the game — Hawks and Vipers. You can either play against the computer or another person. Each team consists of three players and you can select these from a group of dicey looking people with names such as Alex Grunt and John Machine. Each has different characteristics such as weight. strength, agility and speed, a particular side. They can roam around more or less at will, during the ten minute game. and down it. The players take The ball cannot cross from up there positions, either on the the left side to the right side of ground or in the air. A ball is the screen because it will fired into the arena and the bounce back off the central players chase after it, pass to column. It can and often does one another, bounce it off the zoom off from the the left and sides of the arena and reappear on the right and vicehopefully, shoot it into the goal. into the goal versa. Each team is not restricted to The ball cannot be held by any player for more than a few seconds without passing it. If he does the opposing side gets a free shot. The other gripe about Hypaballand it is only a minor one is that after the team has been selected before the action starts you get a short dance routine by a group of cheerleaders. This is all right to begin with but it becomes a little boring. The other is price. I think it could have been a little cheaper for what is basically a game with just a few screens. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY The gameplay can be confusing to begin with but once you're practised for a while you'll be stuck to your computer. MACHINE SPECTRUM/C64/ AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: AN' F/ARGUS PRICE: .95 VERSION TESTED:C84 REVIEWER: TIM XENO Now this could have been a really nifty game if the programmers had decided to make it scroll instead of using an irritating screen flipping technique. This slows things down and eventually becomes frustrating. Xeno is basically a two-player ice-hockey game. The idea is simple. Just score goals! It comes with an imaginative cassette inlay which pretends to be a match program for a Xeno game. A nice touch this. You can play against a friend or the computer. The two-player option is the best. You control a blue or red round thing which you have to fire at the white puck in such a way to make it zap down the rink and into the back of the well, it's not a net, more of goal area. You have an arrow cursor which you move around to select the direction of each shot. twiddle your joystick to get back into the picture. You can knock your opponent off the puck or even attempt to \"snooker\" him by placing yourself between him and the puck.' So it's not all just The time you get to set up The action is smooth-but zooming around blasting the your shot is controlled from an because of the flip screen effect puck up and down there's a option menu at the start of the your player can disappear off bit of strategy involved as well. game. Don't make the delay too the main play area. Confusing Each game is divided into long as it only serves to slow at first thisuntil you four quarters and you can set things down. remember the arrow cursor and the length of each quarter at the start of each game. You can Simple, basic game that isn't worth the asking price. also decide on the computer skill level if you are playing alone. Apart from the \"flipping\" screens another aspect of the game which gets a bit tiresome is the setting up each shot. Why can't you just control your player independently and guide him around the rink. That would allow you get in a bit of tackling tool Xeno is a nicely presented and fairly playable game. Nothing to write home about but at under ,1 guess it's not bad value. Play before you buy. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"at all! I REVIEWS The Football Boot icon gets you into the game proper. .9093 2.9 There's an arcade section which allows you to control shots at goal either proper goalGREMLIN AVENG mouth incidents or penalty shots. You get the chance to have a shot at goal by purchasing goal cards. You begin with ten and can buy more as you go. The cost varies depending on what league you're in. If you run out you could try to get free ones by purchasing an incident card. But there's no indication if the goals you score help your team to win or not. The arcade section is fun. You have to set up your shots quickly if you're being chased A Footballer of the Year allows you to play arcade-style football as well as trying to by defenders. But a penalty program in your football career. allows you to take your time From OOTBALLER OF THE YEAR PLAYER STATUS DETAILS 1200-1 SUP16001ST2ND200STATEL APPEENTS PERZEE 009-L RENEFES and beat the keeper. Graphics in this section are pretty good. After the game comes the MACHINE: SPECTRUM, C64, 600Grandstand style teletyper which prints out reports of the AMSTRAD, ATARI, C16+4, BBC. ELECTRON 500matches you've played to SUPPLIER: GREMLIN suitable tickertape sound PRICE: .95 (SPECTRUM/MSX) 400800effects. You can speed up the .95 (C64/AMSTRAD/ELECTRON/ printer by holding down a key BBCIATARI) .95 (C164) 300600a good idea this as it speeds .95[all discs) up the game. VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM 200REVIEWER: TIM 3RDYou often get a chance to play 400for the international squad \"Yeah, Brian. I was sick as a 100-1 4THbut I was never good enough to have a crack at an international. parrot and over the moon at the 006I did get into trouble with the ref same time. I'd been playing for a few times, was injured and Spurs in Div. One for a few scored some beautiful goals games when I was transfered to but I still didn't manage to win Wigan Athletic. OK, I hadn't the ultimate accolade despite scored many goals and I had a YOUR RATING AS A PLAYER IS: AVERAGE being promoted to the first few words with the ref in our division after a couple of last cup match... but Wigan? PRESS ANY KEY TO CONTINUE seasons. You can jump right in Then I realised that my share of A The game keeps a record of your goal scoring exploits as well as your earning. the transfer fee would help me at the top and try division one. Be careful how you use your buy that Porsche I'd always The game is icon driven from the actual matches you get to goal cards. They are worth a set wanted and I'd be a proper a menu screen. You access the play. But I suppose it comes number of goal chances per superstar in a team like Wigan!\" different parts of the game via back to the individual being match. Use them wisely and Such is the stuff of Gremlin's an arrow cursor and the fire more important than the team you'll be able to enjoy the Footballer of the Year, the latest button. Here's a run down of the in this game. arcade section throughout the in a long line of games based on symbols and what they do. The Footballer's Head icon season. our national winter sport. Will it The Globe shows you the gets you into a status screen There seemed to be a couple challenge Addictive's Football state of affairs of your team, which shows your skill rating, of bugs in the version I played. I Manager for the computer cup? their position in the league your earnings and the league seemed to be playing Oldham Well, now we've seen it. table, their morale and the you currently play in. Status many more times than possible FOTY doesn't really set out to usual WDL-points table. The points go up and down as you in a proper season and the compete with the above numbers show how many play. teletype machine developed mentioned classic. It's a whole games your team has played The Scroll allows you to terminal spelling difficulties different ball game-if you'll but if you go through more than purchase transfer cards once after a couple of seasons. And pardon the pun. one season in a session the you've earned enough cash. since when has Roma been in You don't play to help your numbers keep on adding up. Buy a card and you could be Div One? team in this game. Your only They don't reset to the start of a spotted by a scout from a Footballer of the Year won't aim is to claim the Footballer of new season. The number of bigger and better team. A replace Football Manager but the Year title, earning as much goals you've scored and in successful transfer will bring it adds a new dimension to cash and getting a good which sort of game-cup, league more money and more status. computer soccer simulations. reputation as your career etc are also shown in another The Question Mark is a sort of Despite its limitations it's fun to progresses. table. Monopoly style \"chance\" play and will appeal to all You start the game aged 17 The other teams in the league section. Here you can buy an would-be soccer superstars with ,000 and the whole aren't indicated so you could incident card for  a shot. everywhere. world at your Adidas clad feet. be top of the league but you This can lead to many things, a You find yourself in a fourth don't know who is chasing you win at the Casino, a transfer, division team -you can pick GRAPHICS and how many points behind free goal cards, and disasters SOUND which one and with a they are. This is a disappointing like injuries, burglaries and VALUE burning ambition to make it into feature of the game and takes fines. PLAYABILITY division one. some of the interest away from Sometimes nothing happens "


"Spectrum Cassette Amstrad Cassette Amstrad Disk.95 .95 _$14.95 Do you have the nerve and skill to guide your bouncing Impossaball through the corridor of doom? Time is running out. Bounce onto a spike and Impossaball is obliterated, touch a column and Impossaball will rebound at electric speeds Against this constantly moving background of death dealing obstacles you must squash all the cylinders to complete the game. Are you good enough? As part of our continuing development of happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication Consultants Ltd. Order by Credit Card sending your innovative software we are always Access/Barclaycard number, and a specimen signature. Don't forget to enclose For Mail Order send a cheque/P.O. to Hewson your name and address. HEWSON Sob Milton Trading Estate, Milton, Abingdon, kon OX144RX "


"3 10115 2. Zatonite REVIEWS 64 software. Pararoid doesn't have the instant appeal to Uridium-but it's long on playability AND lastability. You control a droid complet with an \"influence device\" out to destroy a whole host of rebellious droids on board a space freighter. Once again this isn't the original game first released in 85. it's a speeded up and enchanced \"competition edition\" which will appeal to old Paradroid hands and new recruits to the Braybrook fan club alike. Your aim is to destroy the mutinous crew by zapping them or taking them over via your influence device. Uridium is considered by many as the best shoot-'em-up written for C64. MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: HEWSON PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: TIM Uridium + PARADROID The ultimate compilation. Two classic 64 games in one package, and not just satisfied with re-releasing the original games together Hewson have come up with enhanced versions of both these smash hits. Talk about vale for money! A 64 owner without a copy of Uridium is a bit like a goldfish without a bowl. But even if you slot machine style sub-game. pale into insignificance as you The transfer game is the key have already got Andrew You can gamble on getting hi grip the joystick and prepare to to success. You won't be able to Braybrook's stunning shoot 'em scores by zooming across the take your Manta screaming progress through the game up you'll still want a copy of this giant ships and landing to play across the surface of the unless your master it. After all, a new version. the bonus game or simply by Dreadnoughts once more! puny 301 droid isn't going to be Andrew has gone back to the staying in the air and gunning Uridium is the ultimate 64 shoot able to deal effectively with a game, altered the configuration down alien attackers by the 'em up. Nuff said?! 605 unless he's really lucky. of the Dreadnoughts, made the score. This package also gives more You have to move from deck alien attackers even swifter and The Dreadnoughts come at people the chance to try out to deck destroying and taking much more deadly, given your you in a different order this time Andrew Braybrook's first major over rebel droids, moving your Manta fighter increased just to add to the intrigue. And release, Paradroid. Largely way up through the droid ranks firepower AND put a lot more there's more deadly flying under-rated when it first by transferring your influence stuff to shoot on the giant mines -so watch out! appeared this is the game that device to progressively more spaceships! This enhanced and improved inspired Andrew's partner powerful enemies. You also don't have to wait version of the classic shoot'em Steve Turner, to write his The transfer game is for the land now message to up only seerves to show, once Spectrum hit Quazatron. It's described fully in the first appear before you land on the more, what a great game also the game that introduced IDEAS Central Handbook which Dreadnoughts and enter the Uridium is. All the imitators the idea ot the bonus game to came free with C&VG's July 86 Championship en forma WRESTLING  MACHINES: C64/128 SUPPLIER: US GOLD EPYX PRICE: REVIEWER: PAUL Marshal M. Rosenthal, C+VG's of freedom to move about strength. Different moves use compactor.\" US reporter, reckons Balloon insults appear above up varying amounts of energy. Purple \"Ya old lady wrassies Championship Wrestling brings the crowd. Such as \"kill,\" Airplane spins will sap your better than you\" Hays. Custom dignity to a much-maligned \"mangle\" or \"get a job.\" muscle power faster than move: the ghetto blaster. sport. There are two playing modes, others. Colonel \"Bury you! We Well, I'm not so sure about practice and competition. Up to Here's a brief rundown of the squash like turnip\" Rooski. that. It is better than what is eight people can take place in grapplers you can get to grips Custom move: great bear. probably its only rival. the competition mode in a with: Prince \"Ooooh! You look Melbourne House's Rock'n' knock-out battle for a title belt. K.C. \"I'll rip your ears off and good enough to smash\" Wrestle. Each wrestler can perform a feed 'em to ya\" Colossus. Vicious. Custom move: the Both games are very similar wide variety of moves including Custom move: the trash vicious circle. in format and presentation. You atomic drop and body suplex. The action a fast, furious and great fun can select various exotically drop kick, throw, spin kick. They named grunt 'n groaners and can thrown themselves onto the SCORE 2:3 2 SCORE battle it out until someone ropes to enable them to rocket www.000 emerges triumphant. You score back into the ring, climb onto COL. ROOSKI P.VICIOUS points by performing around 20 the ring posts and jump down different moves all controlled on their opponent. Each by the joystick and fire button. wrestler also has a \"speciality\" The action takes place in a move. three dimensional ring, which All the wrestlers enter the allows the wrestlers a great deal ring with the same amount of "


"Continue fararnia 100  MACHINE: C64, AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: SOFTWARE INVASION PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: TIM C+VG This game takes you back a bit to the days of the old Atari VCS machine. An overhead view of a race track with little flat-looking cars driving over a flat-looking circuit. But don't think I'm criticising here. Street Machine is a surprisingly entertaining game. The Amstrad graphics outshine the 64 version however. Amsters get a better looking background which makes the games look slightly more impressive. REVIEWS Ett DO SE Andrew Braybrook's underated Paradroid issue. If you missed it here's a power all over again. brief summary of what Once all the droids on one happens. deck are knocked out the lights When you've locked on to a go out! Then it's time to look for rebel droid-by bumping into another infested deck to deal your target and hitting the fire with. But make sure you're not button the screen changes going from the frying pan into from a overhead view of the the fire. Make a quick sortie to ships' deck to a puzzle screen. dind out what rating the droids There are a series of on each deck have. This is horizontal lines or wires, shown by numbers on their divided by a horizontal column. err-chests, I suppose you'd call The idea is to move your little them. triangular pulsers up and down Paradroid isn't a game you'll the wires and fire them to make solve in the first sitting. But it is the central column change to one you'll keep coming back to your chosen colour-yellow or time and time again. And purple. thanks to this compliation more If you're successful you then people will get the chance to control the rarget droid which play it. should preferably be more DON'T for get to check out the powerful. Fail and your droid terrific Paradroid loading screen burns out and the game is lost. --it's a killer! As I've already mentioned this is essential to successfully This package is brilliant value for money, awesomely playable ridding the frieghter of the and totally addictive. Don't miss rouge droids, Blasting away just it-you won't see a better isn't enough! compilation for the 64 this side However it's a good idea to of the decade! leave a supply of less powerful droids around just in case you Uridium Paradroid suddenly loose control of a GRAPHICS SOUND powerful droid and and need to VALUE start building up your own PLAYABILITY withou troubcreen 3:00 NLAW BERS A Street Machine is yet another arcade racing game to swell the ranks of cor simulations The basic idea is to drive you damage. street machine which on the Repair the wrong things and packaging looks like Geoff the race is over so a Brown's Ferrari but on the reasonable knowledge of what screen looks like a beefed up keeps a car on the road is useful go-kart -around a tortrous here. After all, a car on the road track, racing other cars and is useful here. After all, a car will trying to get the lap record. work perfectly OK without a There are three stages to the windscreen but could have race. Stage one is the easiest trouble if the steering is totally with fine weather and dry shot! Try to keep everything roads. This doesn't prepare you under 79% damage and you for stage two which takes place should be free to go on. at night in a thunderstorm The track is quite demanding which is slightly preferably to with some tight corners and stage three which takes place difficult obstacles. after a bilzzard leaving the road The \"car\" is pretty responsive covered with snow and ice. more so at higher speeds. The C64 version features. And yes, you can get into a other cars which try to bump nasty skid if you try to corner you about. The Amstrad version too fast. As I've already said, the seemed to lack these extra Amstrad version is the more opponents on stage one attractive of the two. It has a anyway. What makes this game better feel to it and looks nicer. -which reminds me The 64 version has flat colours graphically of the coin-op called and lacks visual appeal but Sprint llldifferent from other it's still pretty playable. race type games isn't just the Street Machine is by no means overhead view. a classic but if you like the Crash or damage your car in coin-op I've already mentioned some way and you are shown then, for the time being at least, the \"maintenance chart. This this is the nearest you're going is a screen or in the case of to get to it. the 64 version, screens which show detailed percentage Amstrad C64 damage to different parts of GRAPHICS your car. You have a time limit SOUND VALUE in which to move a highlighted PLAYABILITY cursor around \"repairing the Worth buying if you're a racing fanatic STREET MACHINE and la rom oth overhead games f Choose between eight different characters. Eoch has his own special moves Zantaklaw \"Mmmmm Ffffaph move: the bow and arrow. mmmmm phuff ffupmm\". The graphics are excellent Custom move: the klaw You get a really neat close-up of hammer. them as they pull outrageous Zeke \"When I'm dun, yer faces or, as in the case of face'll be hog slop\" Weasel. Prince Vicious, outrageous Custom move: the block and pouts. tackle. The action is fast, fun and The Berserker \"haaarggh! very realistic. The only gripe is Oooorowrrr... KILLLI\" Custom the constant reloading the disk move: the pop top. after a bout has finished. That's Howling \"Scalps? I'm talking very boring heads\" Manslayer. Custom  GRAPHICS SOUND CHVG  VALUE PLAYABILITY co "


"FIVE STAR GAMES REVIEWS Madness clones. However, it is an original game in its own right, even though it based on rolling a ball around a map. Spindizzy is a near perfect game! Equinox is the the second Milcro-Gen game on this compilation. The action takes place below the surface of asteroid Sury-Ani 7. A little disposal droid is engaged in a race against time. Equinox has playability in abundance. You'll need to be nimble-fingered to kill an annoyingly high number of assorted aliens, and nimbleminded to solve the increasingly complex problems put in your way. Who Dares Wins It is very much in the Commando/ Rambos style of game where all you have to do is destroy everything that moves and then go off the top of the screen and do the same and do the same again. The enemy comes at you with everything he's got including bazookas, tanks, machine gun posts, and planes that drop bombs and fire machine guns at you as they sweep past. Beau Jolly have put together a superb combination of games that should appeal to almost any gamer except die-hard adventurers.  MACHINE: AMSTRAD 464/6128 BEAU JOLLY go off to give the Red Zoids a PRICE.95 taste of their own medicine. REVIEWER: DAVID Full marks to Martech for designing each version of Zoids The festive season has always to the strengths of the host been a popular time to release machine, altering the gameplay compilations and the quality of where necessary and, although the games on offer this the Amstrad is sadly unable to Christmas has been support the Hubbard exceptionally high. One such soundtrack used in the C64 package is Beau Jolly's Five version (arguably the best Star Games featuring five hits music yet for a computer form 1986 including the game). Amstrad Zoids is an fantastic Spindizzy. excellent game requiring a high For once, the twin cassette degree of strategic thought and box actually contains TWO planning combined with a nifty tapes. The games are arranged trigger finger. Not a game that as follows: Tape A has can be mastered in one sitting Spindizzy (Electric Dreams), Three weeks in Paradise finds Three Weeks in Paradise our hero, Wally, lost in the (Mikrogen) and Who Dares Win jungle. Wilma and Herbert are MACHINE: SPECTRUM Il (Aligata). Tape B comprises about to be the main course at a  SUPPLIER: BEAUJOLLY  PRICE: .95 Zoids (Martech) and Equinox Can Nibbles banquet. REVIEWER: LESLY (Mikrogen). Obviously, this is not a good VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM At the heart of the galaxy, state of affairs so you must help millions of light years from Wally locate and rescue his Five Stars? Dead right. The Earth, lies the planet Zoidstar, loved ones before its too late. Spectrum version is more a less scene of the longest war in the a galaxy of goodies all shining history of the universe. You are arcade adventure set against a brightly. Quite simple a great Earthman, who innocently well designed jungle backdrop buy. If you know somebody crash landed onto the planet, rich in colour and variety. getting the first Spectrum, then but now you find yourself in a Finding Herbert and Wilma is this would be the ideal gift for position of power within the easy but freeing them is far them. Blue Zoid camp. This is the from simple. Because so many of the world of Zoids! Three Weeks is a good jungle games are repeated on the The Red Zoids, enemies of jaunt well up to the high various formats I've just the Blues, have captured Blue standards Mikrogen have set in concentrated on my personal leader Zoidzilla, and broken him past. favourites. into six pieces which now lie It is unlikely that Spindizzy But first the full list: Zoids scattered about the planets escaped anybody's notice the (Martech), Equinox (Mikro surface. first time round but just in Gen), Back to Skool Your mission is to find all six case... here goes. It was one of (Microsphere), Spindizzy pieces of your leader so that he the first top class games written (Electric Dreams) and Three can be reconstructed. Then, by for the Amstrad and was also Weeks in Paradise (Mikro-Gen). merging minds with Zoidzilla, one of the earliest Marble Zoids is a nice little game but really doesn't match up to the have a little accident like falling standard of the Commodore into deep space or smashing MACHINE: C64 version. It could almost be a SUPPLIER: BEAU JOLLY yourself to pieces from a great different game. Spindizzy is PRICE: .95 height you lose a vast amount marvellous arcade fun. REVIEWER: CHRIS of it, so be careful. A well Addictive, frustrating but thought out game. Nothing always hugely enjoyable. Three I don't believe it! A tape that short of fab. Weeks in Paradise is classic Batalyx is a huge blast, cum includes five brilliant games. arcade adventure. Large, These miracles are very rare. strategy, cum just about colourful and very smooth Get it quick! everything as well. This game 'animation. Yes, its true, all the games on actually consists of five subNow for my favourites. this tape are of star quality and games which are all extremely Equinox: You begin the game are hits on there own. The tape good. with three lives. Any contact consists of: Based on Jeff's never ending with an alien will reduce your Spindizzy (Electric Dreams): Zzyaxian/Trata saga, you must energy. Prolonged contact with once again defeat the might of You control a Geographic an alien will result in the loss of Enviromental Reconnaissance all that is evel. To complete this one of these lives. Land-Mapping Device, Gerald mission you must light all six Each level contains a canister, icons, which appear at the disposal chutes and Level Pass. for short. What you have to do bottom of the screen, each icon is map-out a new world that is You will have to collect the level pass in order to access the next just found floating around in requiring a separate task, in a space. An everyday occurance separate game. level. As you search each level no less! The games are, Hallucin-Ofor these items, your time will You have only a certain Bomblets: Destroy anything in elapse. The unusual combination of amount of time to complete you order to gain everything. The O mission, and every time you blast is made harder by the fact arcade adventure and shoot 'em up had me hooked right V Commodore version from the start. The graphics are not bad and the animation of the characters allum In hill. is pretty good. WHILE Back to School: you are not 1 91. limited to the interior of your school in your efforts to return a FOR YOUR forged school report to the headmaster's study.  GRAPHICS SOUND OPVG VALUE Spodlogo PLAYABILITY  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY CHVG 30 that you must fly in the opposite direction to you bullets, A real brain test. Next its Attack of the Mutant Camels 2. I'm sure all of you remember AMC 1, well this one is the same but it's been made prettier. Just blast those camels! Subgame 3 is the 'Activation of the Tridis Base' in which you find yourself astride a mutant came. The other subgames are Cippy on the run, a paint the walls job and Syncro 2, where you must match things up. There's also a interesting pause mode, which is a small version of Pysychedelia, another Minter creation. Zoids (Martech): This strategy game is based on the Zoids, robot stars of comics and model shops. Equinox (Mikrogen): An arcade adventure of great depth and addiction. In Equinox you must solve various logical puzzles, fight a horde of nasty aliens, in order to make the complex fit for human inhabitation. A VERY tough game. Scarabaeus (Ariolasoft): You must get to the Pharoah's tomb and collect the many treasures. The game is displayed in solid 3D, which is very impressive. Also the sound if amazing realistic, featuring heart beats and your heavy breathing. GRAPHICS SOUND CHVO VALUE PLAYABILITY on on on ScoreLines 8800 MR CREAR YELLOW ROOM "


"RAID and you could win some fantastic prizes Buy this game at WH SMITH FOUR HYPO JETS FOUR PILOTS ONE COMMANDER 900,000 ALIENS 'BILLIONS OF PEOPLE MUST BE SAVED! OUT IN FEBRUARY FOR COMMODORE 64/128 .95 Tape/.95 Disk Maxwell House 74 Worship Street, London EC2A 2EN, Tel:01-377 4645 "


"REVI MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE doon . MACHINE SPECTRUM/C 641 AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: US GOLD PRICE: .99 (SPECTRUM) .99 GNORS STATUS (C64/AMSTRAD) .99 (DISKS) VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM SXULLS CRACKED REVIEWER: TIM MOONS ETL Doon He's the original hunk-the A Searching for a sword. most powerful man in Eternia. dodgy. Even the fact that attempting to destroy the HE-MAN! The star of small HeMan has acquired a body llearth stone which grants old screen cartoons, dodgy plastic shield and this could be used to skull-face his deadly powers. shimmering patches scattered models, comics and a million explain the black box The game sets you the task of around these give your and one other spin-offs finally surrounding our hero doesn't freeing the little wizard Orko Sword of Power more power to reaches the computer. help much. from one of the many stone wipe out your enemies. His muscle-bound form takes But take a deep breath and towers of Castle Greyskull. Only When killed some transform a bit of hammering on the play the game and you'll find his magic can help you destroy into things you need. On the Spectrum. Not so much a that Masters of the Universe the stone. opening screens a clone turns Superman figuremore a In the llearth Stone, is a But before you free him you into a plant which you require Clark Kent. And, oh dear, is splendidly colourful platform must find the correct for the spell. this a black box surrounding adventure. ingredients for a spell that will The game begins outside him to get around the colour OK, so it may only be another turn your Sword of Power into Castle Grayskull-HeMan has clash problems? Yes it is! graphically good platforms and an atom smasher. to find a key to the castle and First impressions are ladders game, but it somehow To get through the game you beat off some clones before he important and this could well has a real atmosphere. have to collect various objects can really get down to the task make you think that the game You are HeMan, battling as while fighting off Skeletor's of freeing Orko and getting rid was going to be generally usual the evil Skeletor and clones. Watch out for the of the stone. This serves as a training session for the rest of the game -you learn how to control HeMan as he runs, jumps and fights his way through the opening hazards. Then it's into the castle where the real game starts. Here you come across loads of clones Masters of the Universe is good platform game which manages to capture the spirit of the original characters. and robot creatures all out to are deadly to your ball plus other equally deadly moving thingies which hinder your ball on its mission to boldly bounce where no ball has bounced before. MACHINE SPECTRUM out Hewson have come up with ideas is pretty simple. You You can flatten a cylinderSUPLIER: HEWSON Impossaball to join the ranks of control a bouncing ball in a which often come in groups PRICE: .95 Trailblazer. Marble Madness chequered corridor. hidden behind each other by REVIEWER: TIM and the like. You have to knock out jumping your ball on it. It's from a programmer new cylinders projecting from the These nasties come in several Bouncing ball games seem to to the growing Hewson stable, floor and the roof of the corridor shapes and forms. Some static be all the rage right now. Quite John Phillips. It's original, it's within a given time limit. some moving how they've crept up on us all I fast, and it's a whole lot of fun. The cylinders are protected Spikes: These are stationary don't know but not to be left The basic idea-like all good by nasty spikey things which and consist of a spike on top of Impossaball is totally addictive and very playable. Yet another excellent and original arcade game from Hewson BETES BIO IMPOSSABALL PAUSE MODE EVLinder's Score CYLINDers "


"MACHINE: SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: STREETWISE PRICE: .95 (TAPE), .95 (AMSTRAD DISK) VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: TIM C+VG At last Domark prove they can come up with the goods when it comes to arcade games. Their new Streetwise label has a couple of goodies in Orbix and Kat Trap. Kat was the result of a \"search for a game\" competition in Crash magazine. The winner was 15-year-old Jonathan Eggelton who had his design coded by a member of the Design Design team, Graham Stafford. Design Design may have VIEWS SNORO SEKVO SKULLS CRACKED MOONS ETL doon A Masters of the Universe is a splendidly colourful platform adventure end your career as the world's add that the 64 music is pretty toughest character. Just think of spectacular. We'll have to wait all the royalties you'll lose if you and see... let them kill you off. Masters of the Universe is a The castle is packed with good platform adventure and platforms, some moving, most unlike many other cartoon, static, as well as all those movies, book, comic spin-offs enemies. There are hidden actually does manage to doors to be opened by moving capture the spirit of the original levels and many secrets to be characters. uncovered. US Gold says that the 64 and GRAPHICS Amstrad versions won't suffer SOUND from this blemish on the VALUE PLAYABILITY character of HeMan and they KAT TRAP disappointed people with their button just operates the Rogue Trooper offering but Kat grenade Tiring mechanism Trap will help revive their which 'aint a lot of good if you reputation. It's a cute arcade haven't picked up a pile of blaster and arcade adventure grenades. with a hero MTED, who Once MTEd has penetrated hopefully will be turning up in the Kat peoples defences and other games. it's a tough job he must deal MTED or Multi Terrain with the Deathgrid, a device set Exploration Droid is Earth's up to protect the computer. only hope against the dreaded This is a sort of Minter-esque Kat Man. grid game in which you have to MTED has to fight his away fire pulses to short-out electrical across earth's devasted terrain energy zapping around the grid. -encountering Kat Men and MTED gets just 60 seconds to their horrible minions in final 15 electrical charges, search of the Kat Men's otherwise he's doomed. computer which he must One irritating feature is that if disable to rescue the Hercules 1 you die the weapon highlighted attack force, captured by the Kat switched back to your initial Men. laser gun. If this happens when MTED can pick up an you are in need of an electric impressive array of weapons to lance to kill Kat Men, then you help in his task-these include have to be quick on the select flamethrowers, grenades, key to stay in business. The water(?), lasers, electric lances joystick interferes with this and so on. process too as it can also be But he has to work out which used to select weapons. But you A Monster friend or foe? a column. The column is safe to you don't complete a level touch, but touching the spikes within the time allowed. causes instant death. The corridor is depicted as a Plasma Fields: These can be side-on view in true-pespective either stationary or moving and 3D. The ball can be moved left will destroy the ball if touched or right and in or out of the Fire Bolts: These appear first screen and as it has built in on the second corridor and will inertia, it will slow down before leap into the air at predictable stopping or changing direction. intervals and again are deadly. If the ball hits a stationary Magic Rings: These appear object it will bounce back. either on the floor or ceiling. However, the front and back When they are flashing they will walls of the corridor will absorb give you some extra time if the force of the ball. touched. However, they will You start the game with four then stop flashing and become lives, an extra life is awarded deadly. for every 5000 points scored. At the beginning of each All that and the little bouncing corridor is a start line. The game chap is followed around by a will not start until you cross this neat shadow that changes line so you have an opportunity perspective as you move. to practice controlling the ball. John has even built in a Once a level has been special keyboard option for left finished you then progress to handed players how the next level. If the ball is thoughtful. Now Paul will destroyed by contact with a actually be able to beat me at deadly object then you will something... return to the start of the current Impossaball is totally level, but any cylinders which addictive and very playable. A were flattened will remain great debut game from Mr flattened. The game will end if Phillips. High scorer 179 PONIER A A fantastic debut for the new Streetwise label kills whatand work it out fast. end up in a tangle if the action is Those Kat Men are mean fast and furious. machine manglers! Graphics are nice, sound is He's also got a neat grenade good and the game is very throwing mechanism in the top playable addictive even. Just of his head which chucks out shows what you can turn up these deadly missiles as he when you let the people that walks and fires at the same actually play games have a time. hand in desinging them. But What the instructions don't what has John got against cats? tell you is that you have to push Kat Trap is a sort of futuristic the joystick to the right when Green Beret with a few nice you're walking to fire your laser gimmicks added in. It's a gun-simply pressing the winner. Check it out. GRAPHICS SOUND CHVG VALUE PLAYABILITY GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY O 000 "


"Now you can experience the World's Greatest Sporting Challenge... WORLD GAMES ES Alright. So you've wiped out the Russians in Summer Cames. You've scored near perfect 1 in Summer Games II. And your performance in Winter Games now sends chills down competitor's spines Well just how far are you willing to go to prve vore the best Does 2000 miles sound reasonable Visit exotic places In World Games you'll wing your way amund the globe beating the pants of foreigners in eight international events, each one authentic to its country of origin. You'll see incredible exotic bowales as you travel the world circuit Why you'll even have your own en screen tour de la smooth your was The events the Olympics forgot To become the champion, you'll have to die off the treacherous clits of Acapola. Gostomach to stomach with a 100 pound Japanese sumo wrestler Jump Bars in Germany and pump heavy iron in Russia Next, its sta Scotland for the cabelos Canada. for the bar imp e rill France, le skithe Salem And, at last, the US of Aboride the meanest built in the states This, then is a challenge of data proportions. The questions are you ready to go the distance? Eight International events Chif Diving, Sume Wrestling, Bull Riding. Barrel Jumping. Log Rolling. Welchting Slalom Skiing, and, of course, the Caber Toss. Visit eight nations to compete. Join the World Hall of Fame. That is, if you acquire the gold. One to eight players. \"Now Epyx bring you their most outstanding sports simulation to date World Games, featuring eight exciting new events from around the world to test your joystick mettle to the full. Zzap 64 U.S. Gold Limited 2/3 Holford Way Commodore 64/128 .99 cass. & 14.99 disk Spectrum 48K $8.99 cass. Amstrad $9.99 cass. &14.99 disk Atari ST $24.95 disk SCREENS AS SEEN ON COMMODORE 64 GOLDI Birmingham B6 TAX Telephone: 021-356 3388 "


"MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: MIDAS PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: TIM 10 REVIEWS A new name on the game scene, Midas, brings a new graphic style to the flight-sim shoot-'em-up. You may have seen this sort of game before but never with the sort of graphics Fighter Mission Irows at you, There are big, filled in jets and helicopters to fire at together with ground installations just asking for a burst of machine m mmmmmllike gun fire. tisticidi SCORE: 636363636363 Your mission is to take your HIGH: 09031500 fighter on a search and destroy beacons by using your homing A A very playable aircombat game that, unfortunately, doesn't have losting appeal mission to the enemy base. The bleeper which ups its tempo base is protected by a cloaking once your flying on the right types, Red and Black Barons MACHINE: SPECTRUM/ device generated by becons. course. The radar doesn't seem AMSTRAD and Blue Maxes. Red planes You have to destroy 10 of these to have much use apart from SUPPLIER: DURELL behave pretty normally, Black beacons-tracking them with PRICE: .95 Barons have kamikaze pilots showing you what direction you your on-board computers in are flying. VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM and Blue Maxes are sharp order to destroy to see the base The enemy jets fire rockets at AMSTRAD shooters. and destroy it. REVIEWER: TIM you which you can dodge or The screen display shows a Hindering you are the aircraft attempt to shoot down. pilots-eye-view of the DEEP STRIKE No, there's no sign of Arthur landscape and the bomber Scargill despite the name of this you're protecting. It's a good latest offering from Durell. You idea to position yourself a little find yourself flying a World War below your companion as a One bi plane, riding shotgun to misdirected blast of machine a World War One bomber. Both gun fire from your guns can of you are on a mission to knock him out of the sky as destroy an enemy fuel dump. surely as a burst from the Your job is to protect the enemy planes. bomber you get four of them The Spectrum version has from the onslaught of enemy pretty useless sound and a tune fighters and guide it to its target which gets irritating and the across enemy held countryside. Amstrad version noises aren't You also control the bombing much better. end of the bomber and can rain There are several skill levels bombs down on gunand joystick/keyboard options. emplacements and Plus a high score chart. encampments as you fly toward You always have to start back the target. at base when you've been shot The landscape includes pretty down or lost all your bombers accurately represented hills and which is a bit of a pain, and valleys. You use a compass on remember to save some bombs your instrument panel to find for your final target it's no the way to your target you good getting all the way must always fly in the direction without anything to blow things it is pointing. Stray off target up with and you run into heavy enemy Deep Strike is a playable and fire and loads of fighters. You different air-combat game. But can check your progress by reckon that at nearly  it's calling up a map. This also overpriced. Knock a couple of pauses the game. quid off and it would be much You'll come across barrage better value. balloons. You can shoot them down for extra points but SPEC AMS must avoid them as they'll  GRAPHICS destroy your bomber as surely SOUND as a blast of gunfire. VALUE > PLAYABILITY Enemy fighters come in three Deep Strike is overpriced at , it should have been cheaper. X-29 FIGHTER MISSION A It's the solid graphics that make X-29 Damage to your aircraft is different registered by the three onboard computers. flow by enemy pilots-two A few direct hits will knock sorts of jets and a helicopter. one of these out. Once they've Talking of helicopters all be knocked out it's time to remember the big of equipment say goodnight Irene... that most famous of TV You get three skill levels, helicopters Airwolf has? The selected via the joystick and the computer that allows aircraft controls are extremely Stringfellow Hawke to find simple -just right/left/up/ our just what the latest down. No messing about with airborne geezer is trying to the keyboard here! shoot him down from. It's a You've seen it all before computer that flicks through but if you can live with the naff loads of aircraft plans on a sound you may well enjoy a computer screen, before fixing couple of flights with X-29. Just on the one the baddy is flying don't expect it to have lasting Got it? Well you get something appeal. Strike Force Harrier this similar in this computer jets ain't! instrument panel. A nice touch. The solid graphics are the Other than that X-29 is a thing that make this game pretty basic flying shoot-'em-up reminds me a bit of the old with smooth fast scrolling and Tymac jet fighter shoot-'em-up. good graphics. The helicopters are particularly The sound leaves a lot to be nice despite the jerky desired especially the animation. irritating helicopter sound. And At .99 X-29 is pretty good the explosions are a bit value-and Midas could be a wimpish too. Especially as you company to watch. have to pump the enemy aircraft full of lead before they'll go down! The enemy bases  GRAPHICS takes a good bit of shooting as SOUND VALUE well. PLAYABILITY You track down the cloaking MEN mamme SCORE: 6360150 siinit HIGH: 601506 "


"75= 10 000 029 OOOOOO REVIEWS A Rockford returns in a new D.I.Y. version of Boulderdash. BOULDERDASH CONSTRUCTION KIT way as well. Wall: Pretty obvius. Can be destroyed by explosions. Titanium wall: Like a normal wall, but indestructable. Extra Rockford: This is one of the new features. These little idols can't move, but you must protect them from boulders, fireflies and butterflies. Dirt: Just used as a filler. Fireflies: These nasty creatures will kill you on contact, and are good for guarding jewels. However, they move in a predictable fashion. Butterflies: These guys will kill you, but they can be turned into jewels by explosions, pressure of amoeba. Amoeba: This stuff lives on dirt and will crawl around the screen. If it makes contact with butterflies, it will turn them into jewels. Beware, it can also block your path as you can't go through it and will turn into boulders if it reaches the 200 mark Slime: Acts like a permiable wall. Will let boulders and jewel pass through it, but nothing else. Hidden Exit Door: Looks like a wall, very sneaky. Entrances and Exits: The places that Rockford appears and escapes from on each screen. Once you've created your screen, you may save if for later use. To make up an entire game you need to design 16 screens/ intermissions and then save them as a sequence. Just follow the simple on screen instructions. For those of you who don't wish to construct their own screens (Why did you buy it?!) there's 16 screens already on disk, so you can start playing straight away. Good fun and definitely good value. GRAPHICS SOUND CHO VALUE PLAYABILITY MACHINES: C64/128 SUPPLIER: DATABYTE PRICE: E14.95 (disk) .95 (tape) REVIEWER: CHRIS Construction Kit (BCK) which allows you to create your OWN screens of never ending playability! BCK allows you to editor create you own Boulderdash mazes. You can build one of your own or edit one that Boulderdash fans are in for a real treat! Databyte have produced the Boulderdash E S SASVUSS UR REED TO EXIT THIS MENU LOAD SNOE GAMES. DISK OPTIONS OPEDISK CAVE INTERMISSION NAME : RAMBO already exits. You can create fiendishly difficult ones for your mum, dad and friends or simple ones for people like the Ed. (Watch it! Ed) To make your own screens, you select an icon from the menu displayed at the side of screen. The menu consists of the following: Boulders: Boulders fall when unsupported and will crush poor little Rockford if his standing underneath. standing underneath Diamonds: The object of the game. For those who don't know, you have to collect a specified amount of diamonds from each screen and then escape through the flashing exit. Enchanted Wall: One of the new features. When hit by a falling object, this wall will transfer boulders into jewels when the hit it. Be careful though, as it works the opposite 3 / R ESSURSER A Good value if you're a Boulderdash fan. SIGMA SEVEN MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: DURREL PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: CHRIS shoot, they try to crash into you. the next level, but lets take care There not very good at it, so I'd of this one first. say it was their first time. Think While moving around the 3D about it! maze in your funny looking car, Having passed this section you are tracked by robots who with great ease, I moved on to look like small green coloured section two which was a ice-cream wafers. You can factory destroy these robots by hitting Inside this factory was a maze the fire button/key and sending of flashing blobs which you an electro beam directly in their collected by running over them. micro-chips. Nasty! Some are fixed to the ground This screen should keep you and play an important task on busy for another two goes, but Sioma Seven is a shoot'em up with a bit of puzzling thrown in. But there's something wrong. usually like this type of game, but I don't like this one. It start's off looking like Zaxxon, a classic game and a personal favourite of mine, but after six or seven goes, there's nothing new, nothing exciting, nothing original. The game starts off with impressive graphic detail of your launch site, and being the only impressive bit, Durrel used it for the loading screen as well. The game goes considerably down hill from then on. As soon as your fighter launches, you come under attack from other ships, which must be kamikaze pilots as they eventually you'll crack it. Which leads to the third phase. The third phase displays a 3D grid, which has some flashing squares on it. You must, within the time limit, press in the correct pattern of lights. How do I know the correct pattern I hear you cry. Well, the pattern is the same as the fixed dots on phase two, so just punch in that. What do you mean you don't remember. Tough! After this, you restart the game but at a more difficult level. You must complete all three sections seven times in order to win, but I think we'll have to wait a bit for someone to do that. Overall, this game is not original enough to stand in my selection, and the gameplay gets amazingly boring after a while. If someone does complete it, I think they deserve a medal for their staying power. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"HARDBALL and TAPPER For your CPC6128/464 AMSTRAD SOLO The TS 3 Hardball Soft 06063/07063 (Keyboard or Joystick) Tapper Soft 06007/07007 (Keyboard or Joystick) Hardball puts you in the field as both player and manager with control of physical play and strategic decisions, testing your split second reactions and your planned approach to the game. You are the frenzied bartender trying to keep the never ending flow of thirsty customers well watered. There's the Old West Saloon, the Jock Bar, the Punk Rock Bar and the Space Bar. Keep the sodas coming, but not too fast. N o w Send coupon to: Marketing Dept. Amstrad Consumer Electronics Ple, Brentwood House, 169 Kings Road, Brentwood, Essex CM144EF Order your copies now at only .95 on tape and .95 on disc Name Address Available from good Amstrad computer stockists. Or send coupon to Marketing Dept, Amstrad, Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood. Essex. CM14 4EF. Post code ............. Tel. No. HARDBALL | TAPE (06063) HARDBALL DISC (07063) AMSTRAD | TAPPER TAPE (06007) TAPPER. DISC (07007) Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood Essex. CM144EF. Tel. 0277 230222 (PLEASE DO NOT SEND ANY MONEY WITH THIS COUPON CVG2 "


"ARTIC FOX the fast action of either game though. Articfox is much more of a strategic game despite the odd bit of zapping you get involved with. You find yourself in charge of Articfox-an armoured and beweaponed polar terrain attack vehicle. Your mission is to wipe out the alien infestation within the artic circle. Apparently these aliens have set up atmospheric MACHINE: C64/128 reprocessing plants which are SUPPLIER: ARIOLASOFT ELECTRONIC ARTS turning the atmosphere into PRICE: .95 (disk) .95 (tape) something they like to breathREVIEWER: TIM but is deadly to humans. They've established a fortress Battlezone meets Mercenary in behind a force field but you this sequel to Ariola's biggest have miraculously beamed hit to date, Skyfox. Don't expect through the field in your REVIEWS Articfox alien-buster and have Shells behave normally when to set about finding the alien HO you fire them. Rockets can be in order to you've guessed it! guided by joystick to the target -blow the thing to which adds another dimension smithereens. to the game. it isn't easy. The aliens have There are several levels to loads of tanks-heavy and play at. Training, Beginners light-aircraft, rocket and, the real test, Tournament. launchers, floating mines the Training is like a briefing list goes on. Articfox is armed session for the mission in which with rockets and shells and you get used to controlling mines but the supply is, or Articfox. course, limited. Prior to this you can call up a Your instrumentation review of the enemy forces includes a neat rear view ranged against you pictures screen, a scrolling map, and complete with a text various other bits and peices description. which come in useful as your The screen display is a mix of play the game but when you Battlezone vector graphics and first start you won't be bothered solids. The ground/sky are solid with! --but enemy tanks/ 9 EREDE Coo The fox sneaks up on a target... Hey that fank is really heavy. Get il SHO LIN'S RO of dealing with these things that look like flying characters. Most need to be hit saucers, but can't be I suppose. more than once some require if you line up a flying jar in Lee to use one of the special front of some approaching weapons he acquires during the enemies you can take them all game. out with one well aimed kick Bonus points are awarded for and score mega points punching out flying jars and At the top of the screen you'll P134566 STEP 20MLE 12 BUY HL34566 MACHINES: SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD/64 SUPPLIER: THE EDGE PRICE: .95 (SPECTRUM) .95 (C64/AMSTRAD  VERSION tested: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: TIM Could this be the best martial arts game yet for the Spectrum? I reckon it has a great chance of taking the title. This conversion of Konami's follow up to their coin-op hit. Yie Ar Kung Fu is fast and lots of fun to play. The Edge have done a pretty good job here it's a shame we didn't see the game in time to tell you about it before Christmas. You take on the role of Lee. the same martial artist yo found in Yie Ar all those months ago He's mastered the arts of kicking punching, leaping and gouging now and has moved on to using fearful weapons. His main aim in life is to escape from the temple and head for freedom. His opponents are the triads -led by some fearsome characters who use knives or breath fire and are generally out for Lee's blood. The action takes place over Scooby Do style platforms. Enemies patrol these platforms and appear from doors. Your job is simply to kick and punch your way through the several levels of the game. Knock out several of the menial enemies and release a ball of energy catch it and Lee will be equipped with one of several mystical weapons Weapons like fire-balls, part of a Black and Decker sawl, a vicious whirling ball and chain to name but a few. this power lasts for a short while and Lee must make the best of it to progress to the next level Each level is also guarded by a character with extra special powers who is much more difficult to defeat than the regular opponents. You have to learn the various and best ways KEL "


"REVIEWS SCORE 0043500 LIVES HI 000000 Installations/hills are drawn in vector style. You can actually drive your Articfox up and over some hills and fog descends when you reach higher ground! It's a good idea to check out the hills as you may find a radar station or rocket emplacement on top of it. Watch out for the enemy jets they bomb you mercilessly. Use the radar map to check out your progress and to get early warning of enemy attacks from the air and on the ground, and watch out for crevasses. These are just about the only thing Articfox can't cope with. If you find yourself under sustained attack you can always \"dig in\". That means hiding in a hole in the snow, stupid! But there's no guarantee the alien attackers will go away.. At the end of each sesion you get a status report on your mission. It tells you what you destroyed, how much ammo you used doing it and a percentage success rating. Initially I found Articfox very slow. But it's one of those games that creeps up and grabs you without you noticing. I found myself sneaking back to the Commodore for just one more crack at those aliens. I found it more playable that Skyfox in fact. Sound is extremeley limited. Just whooshes and explosions. but this doesn't detract from the overall atmosphere. Don't expect fast and furious action. But DO expect to enjoy playing the game! A It's hopalong Lee, master of the country dance! martial arts movies. He can hide vicinity for a short time. MACHINE: SPECTRUM, C64/128, And beware the Red Ninja's AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: IMAGINE attackers firing deadly stars. As who don't fall down after one PRICE: .95 (SPEC) .95/ well as the stars kage has his hit. They are tough cookies. .95 (C64/128) .95/.95 trusty sword to beat off the Score bonus points by picking (AMSTRAD) Dragon Lord's minions. up the little chain things which VERSION TESTED: C64/128 It's a sort of king-fu shoot 'em appear when you hit them REVIEWER: TIM up really. There's no Fist type though.... kicking and punching ivolved Wizards breath fire-kill here. them from a distance with your Martial arts mania lives on The scrolling is smooth but stars after they've sent a and Imagine have come up with the animation of the characters withering flame at you. yet another ninja game in the is simply naff. Kage and the rest Does it have that all important shape of this conversion of a lastability factor? Not really, my Taito coin-op. I must confess look as if they are hopping guess is that once you've I've never come across this in about on one leg. Too much rescued the princess you won't the arcades. saki the night before perhaps. be coming back for a second Legend is a mixture of Yie Ar The joystick response is a bit try. King Fu and Kung Fu Master. alow too I often found myself It's a scrolling \"quest through furiously trying to duck a flying forests and castles. star or swing my sword and GRAPHICS Kage is the name of the hero nothing happened. Tried the SOUND who has to rescue the VALUE game with two different sticks PLAYABILITY kidnapped princess (yawn). as well. He has to fight his way Music and sound effects through regiments of ninja's aren't really up to scratch for wizards, sword masters and the 64 either. A tinny little tune female boxers. at the beginning and a few To progress from stage to dodgy spot effects. Could this stage you must kill of a set game have been rushed out for number of opponents. To Christmas and not finished escape the first forest section properly? Kage has to kill the Red Wizard Having said all that the game in order to get through to the is pretty playable. There's lots next stage. To make the Red of action to be had. Wizard appear he must wipe A couple of hints -watch out out four Blue Wizards, to make for the \"prayer wheel\" a the Blue Wizards appear he flashing object hidden away in must kill four Red Ninjas and the branches of trees. Collect it so on. without being killed and it acts Kage can perform amazing like a smart bomb-wiping out ninja leaps just like in the attackers in your immediate A Hippity-hop! ONN GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY DAD LEGEND OF KAGE see your score plus a fall-ometer. You get three falls for each life. The platforms scroll a bit to the left and right the scrolling is a bit jerky but as you really don't need to move to the sides of the screen too often this doesn't really take anything away from the game. Succeed in completing a level and Lee lifts his arms above his head and shouts \"Guts!\" in a little speech bubble. The characters are big and well animated although the graphics look nothing like the screen shots on the packaging Why? Because The Edge have been sneaky and printed pictures of the arcade machine. Can't wait to see if the C64 and Amstrad versions match up to this Spectrum game. KACE GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 00000 SIMON 1986 TAITELOR PL Programmed t, IMAGINE A He's mean and moody -but he does walk funny... "


"A Unique Opportunity to Experience the Magic of Flight and Exhiliration of Aerial Combat Can you deliver the Mosquito's sting to the heart of Germany \"No British aircraft will ever bomb Berlin\". Luftwafle chiel Herman Goering had oiten boasted But in the middle of a Nazi anniversary speech in January, 1943, his listeners duck for cover as a carcfully timed raid of RAF Mosquitos strikes Berlin in broad daylight. Ace of Aces captures the spirit and puts you in the cockpit of the Mosquito, maverick RAF fighter bomber of World War II. Down the Nari bombers, sink the U-boats, outrun the VI rockets and stop the enemy trains. Choose your weapons and fuel wisely once you're out on mission, there's no Roing back. To become Ace of Aces, you must complete all missions successfully From the moment you toom through the clouds in a scrap with Nazi fighters to the heart-stopping second you spot the U-boats of Kid, the defence of the Allied world is in your hands. Are you equal to the challenge! 2 Once you master a few flying tricks in your speed bomber, you tackle strategy: selecting the net number of machine guns, rockets and bombs to achieve your mission. 3 Your intercom flashes 'warning' on your starboard engine. An enemy fighter attack has left your Rolls Royce engine in flames. Cut back your boost and throttle. Hit the extinguisher before the fire spreads. What does it take to be an Acel From you, legendary British pride and guts. From US Gold, legendary playability, US Gold has done its part. The rest is up to you. CBM 64/128 .99 Tape Spectrum 48K .99 Tape .. .99 Disk Amstrad GOLD) .99 Tape .99 Disk U.S. Gold Led., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Hollord, Birmingham B6 ZAX. Tel: 021 3563388 RE L A L "


"ANNALS OF ROME struggles in which great leaders rise to prominence, grow old, and retire or die in battle. New threats appear on the frontier or ambitious legates rise in revolt. Books and epics could be written about this game. Over such a timespan individual effort shrinks to nothing, and it is the city itself which becomes the game's only hero. This is an excellent game for the strategist, and could easily be used to teach the basics of political theory-but it is not fast. The play of even three or four moves takes about two hours, with the computer cycling between provinces to determine the consequences of your decisions. It is realistic in the sense that most rulers spent a lot of time looking at the map and worrying, but it can get very dull. The game has no actual endpoint, the player decides when to stop if the empire has fallen and he sees no future in continuing. The game has also two drawbacks when it comes to actual play. The instruction booklet, while giving a general outline of the game, does not REVIEWS MACHINE: SPECTRUM AMSTRAD, CBM 64, ATARI, IBM  SUPPLIER: PSS PRICE: .95 The ancient world believed that every city had its gods watching over its fortunes, and surely no city ever had better gods than Rome. From 273 BC, when it had no more than shaky control of italy, the Roman republic expanded into a mighty empire, the last vestige of which, the city of Constantinople, finally fell in 1453 AD, 1,726 years later. The best way to describe the single player's role in this exciting and unusual game is that of the city's gods, overseeing its fortunes. The known world of ancient times is shown as a map centred on the Mediterranean and split into 28 separate areas, each with its own population and possibly a ruling power controlling it. Moves are of variable length, depending on how much is happening, but average at about eight a century. The player must control the careers of the senators of Rome, deciding which to assign to which task of protecting and expanding the city's rule. This is not a case of separate battles but out of ten or 20 year THE REPUBLIC WAR GAMES GA PLN: 930 LEG:18 AUX: 6 LI: TRE: POP: 5 I INF:02 actually explain which keys to press and what the symbols on the screen mean, and the player must work this out for himself. Don't be put off by the artwork on the box, which shows the ugliest Roman I have ever seen. ROMANS GRAPHICS REALISM PLAYABILITY VALUE on 00 LEGIONS OF DEATH GALLIPOLI who are aggressive. MACHINE: CBM 54 Once built, ships are given SUPPLIER: LOTHLORIEN orders and manoeuvered PRICE: .95 through the Mediterranean defending or attempting to How many of you have ever capture ports. heard of the First Punic War? If enemy ships are met they Well, go and buy the game and must be outmanoeuvered by find out. plotting courses for the attack, In 264 BC Roman forces shown as a rather fine graphic crossed into Sicily in their first display. attempt at expansion. It's more difficult than it looks They were opposed by the -I spent most of my first game strongest power in the western trying to stop my own ships Mediterranean, the city of colliding. Carthage in North Africa, with the player decides the victory its trading links and client cities conditions, in terms of gold in Sicily, Sardinia and Corsica. accumulated in the capital, Carthage was a naval power ports captured and enemy ships with more experience of sea sunk. warfare, but the Romans had The catch is that these more money to buy ships with, conditions are the same for and after a bitter struggle won both sides, so can't be made too the war by capturing enough of easy. the Carthaginian and neutral The game is driven by a set of cities and establishing icons which after a little practice superiority at sea. become second-nature. It was a hard-fought war Legions of Death takes a which could have stopped the while to set up and starts power of Rome before it had slowly, but once first contact is really begun to exist. made it becomes really Sea warfare was as much a engrossing. matter of economics as tactics. Just one small point why Tribute had to be collected and did they pick a title like that for a used to build war galeys. naval game without a single These were mighty ramming legion in it? vessels crewed by rowers, from the bireme with two banks of oars up to the quinquerme and even larger ships. This can be a two-player GRAPHICS REALISM game, or the player can take the PLAYABILITY Carthaginians against the VALUE computer with the Romansrough and difficult terrain of the MACHINE: SPECTRUM heights because it was these SUPPLIER: CCS that provided artillery PRICE: .95 observation. With this condition gone, all the Allies have to do is The Gallipoli campaign was come down off the plateau and something fine in theory which outflank the Turks through the failed in practice. The same is far easier plains to the south of true of this game, although I'm ANZAC Cove. glad someone has looked at the Yes, you've got the idea. You First World War, which has a lot put all your forces together into of variety in it. one massive pile, break through By early 1915 there was deadlock on the Western Front, the plains and steam roller so a British amphibious landing round into the rear and capture was made on the Gallipoli their supply dump, which is the peninusula, which guarded the basic victory condition. capital of Germany's ally Although CCS don't often put Turkey. out bad wargames I'm afraid The idea was to force the this is a rare exception. Turks out of the war and open up a supply route through to GRAPHICS Britain's ally Russia. REALISM Unfortunately the Turks were PLAYABILITY far better fighters than anyone VALUE had expected, and ground conditions at Gallipoli were every bit as bad as anywhere on the Western Front. Unfortunately, whereas the real campaign taxed the abilities of even the best commanders the game has been made quite simply too easy for the British to win. This is traceable to a kingsized historical blunder in the briefing booklet, \"there was little artillery and this did not play a decisive part in the fighting\". Exactly the opposite is true. The Turks and Allies fought Turn 1 ANZAC Advance so hard over the incredibly OO Continued on page 41 "


"1 izman Sioulotter 98510 . LIEUT (MVI ERE,INZ3RCENTURY LONDON, LUCRIME 15 AT AN ALL TIME HIGH...WITH A POPULATION OF AROUND 40 MILLION THE CAPITAL HAS BECOME A BREEDING GROUND FOR CORRUPTION. BUT NOW THERE'S A NEW KIND OF LAW ENFORCEMENT... INCORRUPTIBLE, INDESTRUCTIBLE LONDON POLICE UN MET POPOLITAN AND TOUR OF DUTY STARTS AMOS BAD TO SERVE AND PROTECT. 3 UNI. "


"EUROPE ABLAZE  MACHINE: CBM 64 priority. diversionary targets, check up SUPPLIER: SOFTWARE PLUS/ All he can then do is watch on his own squadrons and STRATEGIC STUDIES GROUP the screen for the day-by-day those of his allies and plot the PRICE: E34.95 battle, with the option of fight-paths of the main raids. changing doctrine every 24 This level of complication The Strategic Studies Group hours. reaches a high point when (Roger Keating, lan Trout and Unless the commander asks commanding the British now Eric Baker) from Australia he is not even told which defences in the Battle of Britain. have now, after two previously targets his force has attacked, With the game running in successful strategy games, and he is never told the five-minute (game time) taken on the problem of air condition of his subordinate segments the group combat in Europe in the Second formations. commander has to control ALL World War. The subordinate commander, the intercepting forces himself. The program offers three on the other hand, has too Even with one player acting basic scenarios, the Battle of much to do in each of his 12 as both commander and one Britain, the British-led bomber hour moves. He must organise subordinate which gives the offensive of 1943, and the reconnaissance flights, select most interesting game-it American-led day offensive a year later, plus the now usual scenario-building package. You can take Bomber Command in 1943 and cope with a commander in chief who just doesn't understand as well as allies who won't co-operate. Or you can become Hermann Goering in 1940 and plan the REDEPLOY doctrine which will force Fighter FLAK Command to waste its aircraft against you. In theory up to twelve people can play using one computer, but a fairly high level of knowledge of the actual events is assumed, and this is not a game for the beginner. The commander in chief can only set basic doctrine what kind of targets should be hit, REVIEWS WAR GAMES takes more than an hour to play through a game \"day\". Altogether, trying to play this way seems to reach the point of diminishing returns when it is better to switch off the computer and use a pencil and map instead GRAPHICS REALISM PLAYABILITY  VALUE CON GERMANY 85 DESTROYER MACHINE: CBM 64 are the graphics, which are very  SUPPLIER: TRANSATLANTIC poor indeed. The battle map is SIMULATIONS: US GOLD basic black, scrolls with a ripple PRICE: .95 cassette/E14.95 effect like water in a pond, and disk the symbols on it are more or less incomprehensible. For those of you wondering If you can cope with this the how a game with a title like this game is not a bad one. The got to be a new releae in 1986, player has no particular the simple answer is that it viewpoint, he simply directs wasn't! It was written in 1983 by individual battalions like chess Roger Keating, now with the pieces against the computer, Australians of the Strategic which always takes the Soviet Studies Group. side. Germany 1985 is a corps Germany 1985 is a game sized action between American mechanism in search of a and Soviet forces, with no air context, and the SSG have cover. It is similar in moved on a lot since it first construction to SSG's appeared. Battlefront, with many of the GRAPHICS same strengths and REALISM weaknesses. PLAYABILITY First among the weaknesses  VALUE mm MACHINE: CBM 64 game in disguise. On anti SUPPLIER: EPYX/US GOLD aircraft duty, for example, the PRICE: .95 object is simply to use the guns to bring down every aircraft in Old admirals all agree that their the sky. best command was their first The scenario I was most destroyer. The US Navy's looking forward to was the Fletcher Class destroyers did submarine hunt, but thirty-six knots flat out and were unfortunately when detected used for submarine hunting, these submarines do better patrol and escort duties and than 40 knots underwater and anything else needing speed dive happlity below 700 feet (9 and nerve in every theatre of knots and 300 feet is realistic) World War Two. while the sonar gives no depth It is a mark of the destroyer's readings at all. versitility that this program Also, the graphics are small offers seven different scenarios. compensation for the lack of The player moves between routine signals. I found myself the action screens with being repeatedly sunk by beautifully drawn graphics running into islands and enemy for the bridge, observation ships which nothing, including deck, sonar, radar, depth my own view from the bridge, charges in the stern, torpedos had mentioned were actually amidships, anti-aircraft there. batteries and main guns, The appeal of this game depending on the threat. comes down to the speed with The seven scenarios are which the player can cycle Subhunt, seeking out and between the action screens. destroying the enemy; Screen, At least, if there was ever a protecting your carriers from real case of a destroyer on aircraft; Scout, checking for escort duty being attacked enemy patrols; Bombardment, simultaneously by aircraft provide covering fire for a submarines, a surface raider marine landing; Blockade and shore batteries I haven't runner, beat enemy forces to heard of it. get supplies through; Convoy This is a fast, lively game with Escort, lead a slow merchant good graphics, but I had been convoy; Rescue, recover a shot hoping for something more. down pilot. But running through the GRAPHICS choices it soon becomes REALISM apparent that this Destroyer is PLAYABILITY HITE just a shoot-'em-up arcade VALUE L : TERNLROUGH : SMMNNC ROAD ROAD "


"Does your micro answer backe?  Does your micro chat to 70,000 people across the UK?  Can your micro interview pop stars, hackers and doyennes of the computer industry? Can your micro provide the answer to your technical and software problems? Could your micro send and receive telex's worldwide?  Does your micro do your shopping for you-and have it delivered to your door? Is your micro an answering machine, delivering your private mail whenever you log-on? NO?. ... Shame! Bring your micro to life! Micronet To: Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1 Please send me a brochure on Micronet 800 Name Address 800 --Telephone No Micronet 800 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR SEJ Telephone: 01-278 3143 Age Micro CVG 12/B6 "


"REPEL THE DOPPELGANGER WORLD OF ANTI-MATTER IN THIS NEW BLOCKBUSTER FROM DENTON DESIGNS wo Worlds the mirror image of each other, touch in space through a Time-Warp. ne is positive, good, familiar our World; the other is negative, evil yet unnervingly familiar. DOUBLE heir interface a time window through which objects and beings can pass; contact has resulted in the beginning of exchange. TAKE estore our World stop the invasion, but do it now, for as the exchange accelerates, the time window grows larger domination is a hand! STARTLING ACTION  INNOVATIVE GAME PLAY STATE OF THE ART GRAPHICS SPECTRUM .95 .95 2954ocean COMMODORE 64 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS-Tel:061 834 3939.Telex: 669977 "


"18 MACHINE: CBM 64/AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: US GOLD PRICE: .99 (CASSETTE)/.99 (DISK) VERSION TESTED: CBM 64 REVIEWER: PAUL There are probably few more stimulating or exhilarating expriences than standing before the mast of a multimillion pound yacht as it zips through the sea Sadly, America's Cup Challenge did not convey any of that excitement for me. All you get are tiny little boats that would look more at home on the park's boating pond than in the raging seas off Australia. Perhaps I'm being a little unfair I'm sure there are some people who'll get great pleasure controlling the yacht's direction, selecting sails and computer. winching sails up and down All your options for sailing Not me, I'm afraid. are controlled from the joystickin the US the game is called helm, sail selection and Arnie's America's Cup winching. It's then off to try and Challenge. Who's Arnie? sail the course aiming for Apparently, he's a skipper of marker buoys, keeping an eye REVIEWS INDOOR SPORTS  MACHINE: COMMODORE 64/ want to have a \"Double On\" or SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD \"Double Off\" — this means SUPPLIER: ADVANCE either throwing a double to start MINDSCAPE or to finish. PRICE: .95 (C64/SPECTRUM). Your next choice is the game E9.95 (AMSTRAD) length, 301, 501 or 701 — you VERSION TESTED: C64 REVIEWER: LESLY will also have a game timer counting against you. Here's a game for all those When you start the game, people who are always saying your first screen is a close-up of \"I am going to take up some the dart board. This is where kind of sport-tomorrow!\" you have to take your aim -by Being one of these people moving the joystick to the right myself, I couldn't believe my or left and then make your luck when Indoor Sports landed choice of angle and decide how on my desk. The answer to my much power should be behind prayers. I can play Darts, Air I can play Darts. Air the throw. Hockey and Ten-pin bowling And so onto Air-Hockey, without leaving the comfort of which I am told has been voted my armchair. number one game in American I have an obsession for Ten bars. Once again you have a pin bowling, so I settled down choice as to the number of to read the manual. players, skill level, alternate You have to decide on the sides and overall game speed. weight of your ball and the alley While I was playing against slickness rather the computer one of the guys in the office, we will decide on the slickness for discovered that if you are the you. It changes every time, so opponent on the far side of the keep an eye on your ball's table and just sit in front of the weight and adjust accordingly. goal there is no way a shot can After lining up for the first go past you, whereas if the shot, I had to decide where on other player tries this, the shots the alley I wanted my ball to go flying past into goal. land once I had taken my swing. Is this a bug, or have the Fixing the curve on the ball, programmers got their approached the foul line and let perspectives wrong? All in all it go wow, look at that ball was a fast moving game. Just curve and ... yesss! A strike! make sure you have your best This is great, no problem at joystick handy. all. Until the next shot. On the Amstrad and Obviously it was only Spectrum versions of Indoor beginner's luck, because after Sports you will find a fourth that it was down hill all the way game-namely Superstar Ping or I should say down the Pong. The game will not be gutter!! included on the Commodore After each shot you will see version as it has already been your bowler's face light up at released by US Gold. Read last the top of the screen and from month's issue to hear our his facial expression you can reviewer's comments. tell what kind of shot you threw. Indoor Sports is not in the At the bottom of the screen you same league as Summer and will notice a frame by frame Winter Games, but, you will tally of the score. probably find yourself coming Set in what looks like a typical back to it, when you get tired of darts room in any pub, Darts is your arcade games. a game you can either play by GRAPHICS yourself or with one other SOUND player. Before starting the game VALUE you have to decide whether you PLAYABILITY Ten-pin bowling Ten-pin bowling 01146 A Dofinitely a game for those who are interested in a very realistic simulation one of the American boats on the clock, boat speed, attempting to restore honour by compass, and, of course, the winning the cup back A quick opposition. read of the copious notes which if the two yatchs become too arrived with the game failed to far away from each other, the uncover any other reference to screen splits. Messages about this mysterious chap changing conditions are also The blurb I received with the flashed up ont the screen. game also included an It's a good idea to watch the \"armchair guide to the demonstration mode of the America's Cup\". This I found game to get an idea of what's AMERICA'S CUP CHALLENGE HELISTAN 00:02 s 00:02 A There's no messing bout in boats here. more interesting than the game going on. itself. It's most enlightening on So if you're into the intricate details of sailing yatchts then coaming and the coffee grinder America's Cup Challenge could (no, it's not something used to be of interest to you. But if prepare a drink for the crew) you're just into messing about Now to the simulation. One or in boats, forget it. two players can take part with GRAPHICS three levels of play amateur, SOUND club race and America's Cup.  VALUE Racing conditions are set by the PLAYABILITY "


"WHATEVER YOUR STAR SIGN... THE FUTURE HOLDS EXCITEMENT GAMES ONE 1. THE WAY OF THE TIGER 2. BARRY MCGUIGAN WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP BOXING A 4-game compilation of outstanding hits. Enter the world of Avenger, a Ninja warrior of unparallelled and deadly powers as he battles the forces of evil in defence of his faith and protection of the weak. Be calm and stay silent as the outstanding animation and unrivaled combat routines take you to levels of action yould never have thought possible Participate in the challenge of BOXING. Raw,iron twisting strength is definately an asset. But for a shot at the title you'll need more than that, like strategy finesse, lightening fast reflexes and a mental toughness that most games are afraid to require. So grab your gloves and come out lighting! 3. BEACH HEAD II Your fellow pots have been shot down on the very hostile planet of Fractulus. Plying your Valkyrie Fighter in search of your comrades while the enemy pursues you. The mother ship is signalling: you're running out of time. You've never faced a challenge as tough as this before you scour the planet 4. RESCUE ON FRACTULUS! ACORD Stinging defeat and destroyed his fortress the evil and power crazed dictator known as \"The Dragon who seeks vengeance on the forces who gave his army The continuing saga pits allied forces against the renegade army led by SOLE Star Games, Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 CBM 64/128 tape .99 disk $14.99 AMSTRAD tape .99 disk $14.99 SPECTRUM 48K tape  99 ***ONE*** WOU Hotel "


"For the COMMODORE, AMSTRAD, BBC MICRO, ELECTRON REPTON 3 THE ULTIMATE CHALLENGE The Screen Editor. The Character Editor. DO KIDS Being pursued by a Monster The Time Bomb is located The Poisonous Fungus grows insidiously Collecting a Golden Crown Are you ready for the ultimate challenge? Our original Repton game was immediately acclaimed as a refreshingly new concept: a game requiring dexterity to complete its arcade-style elements, and clear logical thinking to solve its strategic puzzles. Repton involves retrieving treasure from cleverly-constructed traps of falling rocks whilst avoiding the fearsome monsters and haunting spirits. \"This is an astounding game reaching new heights in BBC arcade adventures.\" enthused the Micro User magazine, Last Christmas saw the release of Repton 2, larger and much more challenging than before. Acorn User's Technical Editor Bruce Smith wrote: \"Repton 2 is better than anything I've played on the BBC Micro or Electron. Brilliant!\" Now, completely rewritten and improved for the Commodore, Amstrad, BBC Micro and Electron, we proudly present Repton 3. For the first time, a screen-designer is included: try to devise screens that will perplex your friends, then see if you can solve their newly-designed screens. Another Innovation is the character designer which enables you to design your own monsters, rocks, eggs, spirits, diamonds... any or all of the game's characters can be redefined as you wish. Repton 3 is much larger than its predecessors it has 24 fascinating screens, and players who are skilful enough to complete them all can enter our prize competition described below. All the favourite Repton characters have been retained, together with several new features: a creeping poisonous fungus which grows at an alarming rate; time bombs and time capsules (for puzzles in the 4th dimension); and golden crowns as well-deserved rewards for your endeavours. Can YOU completo Replon 3? PRIZE COMPETITION If you complete Repton 3. you can enter our competition. Prizes include over  in cash, with T-shirts, mugs, badges and pens for runners-up. COMMODORE 64/128  AMSTRAD CPC 464/664/6128 BBC MICROS: B, B+, MASTER, MASTER COMPACT ELECTRON Commodore Cassette........$9.95 BBC Micro Cassette............$9.95 Commodore Disc............$11.95 BBC Micro Disc.................$11.95 Amstrad Cassette...............59.95 Master Compact Disc.......$14.95 Amstrad Disc.....................$14.95 Electron Cassette.............59.95 ACORNSOFT VISA 7 SUPERIOR The screen pictures SOFTWARE above show the BBC Micro version of Limited Repton 3. Dept. R14, Regent House, Skinner Lane, Leeds LS7 1AX. Telephone: 0532 459453. ANS OUR GUARANTEE  All mail orders are despatched within 24 hours by first class post.  Postage and packing is free  Faulty cassettes and discs will be replaced immediately 24 HOUR TELEPHONE "


"VAMPIRE MACHINES: SPECTRUM  SUPPLIER: CODE MASTERS PRICE: .99 REVIEWER, BRIAN CAVERNS OF ZUB ERIBAN  MACHINES: SPECTRUM 48/128 SUPPLIER: MASTERTRONIC MACHINE: ATARI MAD SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD PRICE: .99 PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: BRIAN REVIEWER: HAKAN This is one of the most After seeing War Hawk I thought EVER played. You could have frustrating games that I have Firebird would be doing some travelled up fifteen platforms great games. But what a when along comes a security letdown Caverns of Eriban is. The graphics are crude, there droid and you get knocked back is no tune and the sound is to where you started from or naffer than naff. quite a few platforms down at least. All you have to do is to fly It does not take long to get some crummy old spaceship around the caverns and that's it. back up there when the same back up, but no sooner are you Well if you like a good old shoot-'em-up then give this a thing happens again, and again miss. As a matter of fact, if you like any type of game then, I can The idea of the game is to assure you, you'll hate this. travel from Zub 1 to Zub 10. t If you have friends who keep steal the green eyeball of Zub on coming to your house just to and return with it to Zub 1. play your games then buy this it To travel between Zubs 1 to will kill them of boredom. 10 you have to negotiate the If I'm to play this again it will tricky platform climbing stage. be with a bucket beside, for me At the top you can use the to be sick in. teleport system which is a bit out of date. Each planet has GRAPHICS three teleporters so you may SOUND end up travel back a bit. VALUE This may not be the best to PLAYABILITY come from Binary Design 180 is their best to date but it is well worth buying. PHANTOMAS  GRAPHICS SOUND MACHINES: SPECTRUM VALUE SUPPLIER: CODE MASTERS PLAYABILITY PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: BRIAN I would recommend this title just for the loading screen. The game itself is just above average by today's standards. You play the part of Brok a space warrior. Your task is to search earth in the year 2987 to find and destroy Count Dracula. To succeed in this task you have to find three keys to open doors, a list of key objects which enable him to progress through the labyrinth. When you find Count Dracula you must have three special items with you. These are a stake, hammer and a cross. The graphics have been well thought out and take it away REVIEWS to feturn with it to all of Zub n buy this it from the average run of the mill arcade adventures. Sound is limited to spot effects and a eerie piece of music on the title screen. The cassette inlay includes a clue packed poem which gives pointers to items required in the game. Vampire is a slightly above average arcade adventure. Check it out before you buy. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY but in the event of a tie the computer will decide a play-off. A save game option is available after each hole, and after each round you are able to change all the conditions that you want. If you are not ready for a long game then a single round or practice option is available. four players can still join in the single round. In practice you are able to choose any hole and the conditions that you need the practice on. This must be the best game to This come from Atlantis, especially withthe fabulous title screen music. The only thing I dislike is not having a Pitching Wedge in amongst the selection of clubs. I'm off for another round! SURVIVORS MACHINES: SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: ATLANTIS PRICE: .99  REVIEWER: BRIAN GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 10 1986 is going to be remembered for two things. Code Masters must be using some sort of games designer program for their Spectrum games. The similarities between Phantomas and Vampire are many. The graphics are similar in style. Clouds in both programs are identical. The gameplay in both is very similar. Even the way the energy levels are represented are the same and the rate of descents are identical. You play the part of Phantomas who comes from a far away galaxy. His only abilities are to rob and plunder wherever he goes. As Phantomas you must find the hidden treasure in the millionaire's mansion. To do this you must travel to the planet Earth-Gemma and search out the mansion using helicopters and planes. When you arrive at the mansion you must always be on the look out for trouble which includes boulders that chase you! To help you in parts of the game there are riddles on the game cover. This is a good game but it is too much like Vampire. Let's hope they can find a new set of graphics to use in the next Spectrum release. of arcade conversions coming out for home computers. Secondly, and the most important, the amount of budget software that is being released. Budget titles account for over half of the sales of software. This is yet another of them but it's one of the worst. Your mission is to rescue almost a thousand survivors from a hibernation dome, damaged in the recent nuclear war. To help you on your way you are provided with three different droids to control. To hinder you on the mission are MK1 Guardian Droids which cause a serious loss of power on contact. If one droid eats the wrong earth, boulders can fall and prevent further progress. Sound is needed in this game even only spot effects. Movement is jerky and the graphics are very simple. PRO GOLF KINGS KEEP MACHINES: SPECTRUM MACHINES: SPECTRUM 48/128 SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD SUPPLIER: ATLANTIS PRICE: .99 PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: BRIAN REVIEWER: BRIAN If you're getting bored waiting This game will keep all for the release of Leaderboard Spellbound lovers happy. It has on the Spectrum, then Atlantis the same sort of menu operating system as have produced something to Spellbound. This means that chase the boredom away. Will the only difficulty in the game is be wasting my money, I hear you aski Most certainly not! making the tricky moves that are needed at times. reply. There are two courses in the The graphics are average and the attribute problem is kept to game which can be loaded from a minimum. The movement of either side of the tape. These your character is very fast and give you a real challenge to undertake especially if you can cause a few problems when fancy playing a round of golf in a delicate move is required. America without paying the air If you do try to enter one the game comes to a sudden end. fare. The two included are The playing area does not seem Sunningdale (England) and Pebble Beach (U.S.A). to be all that big. Certainly a Up to four people can play at must for Spellbound fans, but otherwise just an average any one time. If a championship game. match is chosen, you play four rounds against seventeen other players which four can be  GRAPHICS controlled via the keyboard. SOUND A cup is presented to the VALUE winner after the fourth round, PLAYABILITY GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY C) US GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"Scooter PEF their ships and blowing up the your bike into a glider which is to escape the planet where possessed defence floats around the screens. That earth politicians captured by satellites. You can earn differentis until it gets hit by a really treacherous aliens, have been weapons by blasting aliens. The blocky laser, the kind you used transformed into killers by a weapons have silly names and to see on ZX81 games. nasty bit of alien machinery. the only really useful ones are you have nine grenades with You have to find a way off the the Blaster which can be used to you, which you must use to planet by battling your way zap the offencing satellites and destroy the reactors. As there across it, finding useful objects the Dyno Ray which knocks out are ten of these you must along the way and dabbling in a any bombs which the satellites obviously collect more ammo bit of unarmed combat as well. drop on an unsuspecting Earth. from the somewhere on the If you've seen Asterix you'll It's not too difficult to get island. remember how a little window weapons -apart from the After several hours play (four appears when you encounter a Blaster which requires 144 hits in all), I didn't discover anything Roman soldier and you have to to obtain. This process is new about the game. It didn't indulge in a bit of Fist type essentially tedious as the shoot pull me in or even slightly excite punching and kicking. 'em up skill required to kill off me. The game is a no no. This is what happens here the aliens seems simply to be The only good thing was the except the whole screen the ability to stay awake for the music, which kept pounding changes and presents you with duration. away. It seems a shame to an enlarged view of your You also have to \"turn-on\" waste such a good soundtrack trooper and his opponent. If windows containing your score on such a naff game. you're in two player mode you and the essential VDU message The main display is the take a fighter each. readouts. Quite why they aren't island. An island apparently Once you've KO'd the enemy there to start with is a mystery made entirely of plastic so it's it's back to exploring the planet. ENEHY SPACECRAFT CLOSE TO as you need to see the not detectable by radar. I've But climbing isn't easy LASER messages and score. Playing read some silly plots in my despite the instructions which DOUBLE LASER the game with them turned off time, but this one.... tell you that by simply moving KET LAUNCH just leaves a pretty empty You drive your bike around against a low stone you'll be screen full of the nicely various hills, roads and forests, able to climb it. I couldn't make zooming space craft. passing by lasers which greet it happen. You are supposed to navigate you by putting yet another hole You can pick up things like a yourself around above the earth in your head, too many holes gun, rope useful for climbing SC 88114 -represented by a crude and you die, ending up as a higher cliffs and stones to KI 88286 revolving \"half-moon\" shape at bacon flavour crisp. build steps. the bottom of the screen. But as One thing that gets me is you Graphics are crude and tiny you don't get any rael can only throw grenades from apart from the \"close-up\" impression of movement the glider, making the power fight screens. And soundthere are no stars you have to stations almost impossible to well, I can't recall actually rely on the map to discover hit. Would it not be simpler and hearing any. where you are. This is called up more realistic if you could Trooper isn't a game that will DEFCOM from the menu which you throw them whilst on the bike? make you want to rush out and keep having to call up in order When you finish the game, get a 128 for. Save your cash  MACHINE: SPECTRUM/C64/ to change weapons. This holds you connect your bike engine to and get hold of CRL's Academy AMSTRAD up the action terribly. the glider and sail away. Ha! it shows they are capable of SUPPLIER: QUICKSILVA Defcom, from Binary Design, You show me someone who MUCH better things. PRICE: .95 VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM the people who brought you the can do that in about 20 minutes, REVIEWER: TIM disappointing Max Headroom let alone 20 seconds. game, is dull and uninspired. It A rather poor game if ever! GRAPHICS SOUND This is one of those games that wouldn't be much of a bargain saw one. I thought it was going VALUE at a budget price but at .95, to be good after reading the probably started with a PLAYABILITY it's something of a rip-off. programmer coming up with a plot, but was disappointed. nice routine and then trying to Don't make the same mistake. build an entire game around it. GRAPHICS In this case the routine is the SOUND GRAPHICS nicely animated space ships VALUE ATARI SMASH HITS 6 SOUND PLAYABILITY which zoom in and out of the VALUE MACHINE: ATARI PLAYABILITY screen at great speed. Trouble SUPPLIER: ENGLISH SOFTWARE is the rest of the game just PRICE: .95 (tape) .95 (disk) doesn't match up to the REVIEWER: HAKAN promise of the graphics. GLIDER RIDER The game is based around an THEY CALL ME Now, you may be forgiven for alien take-over of Uncle MACHINE: C64 TROOPER thinking that it wasn't long ago Ronnie's current favourite toy SUPPLIER: QUICKSILVA PRICE: .95 you saw Smash Hits 5 which the so called Star Wars REVIEWER: CHRIS MACHINE: SPECTRUM 128 was brill. Number six isn't quite defence system. The aliens are SUPPLIER: CRL so hot. using the system to attack earth Glider Rider is Quicksilva's PRICE: .95 You get four games--two --turning the atom weapons on latest but unfortunatly not REVIEWER: TIM English ones and two suddenly defenceless cities. greatest release. The game is American. They are Drelbs, Fort Your job is to take off in your terrible in all respects except This is one of the few new Apocalypse, Electraglide and second hand space ship and sound. games written exclusively for Time Slip The idea of Drelbs is defeat the aliens by attacking Gilder Rider is not the sort of the Spectrum 128. But don't get to travel around a grid making game that your average too excited. This sprawling squares to trip Trollaboars. Commodore owner likes to arcade adventure won't be Fort Apocalypse looks a bit spend their hard earned on. The making 48K machine owners like Airwolf and Blue Thunder game is slow, graphically jealous. In fact they might be Elektraglide is a fast paced minute, and almost completely glad that they stuck with their racing game with lots of colourless. regular machine. wierdness and a neat The plot of the game is good. Trooper takes an absolute soundtrack. The graphics are Destroy ten mini power stations age to load and when it's done excellent and it's fun to play. and rendezvous with an you end up wondering why you The final game, Timeslip, is awaiting submarine. Real bothered to take the time the best of the four in my James Bond style stuff. But anyway. It doesn't appear to opinion. when you play, the only take advantage of the 128's Bondish bit is the fact that your extra capabilities not even motor-bike turns into a hang the superior sound. GRAPHICS glider. Here's a quick look at the plot. SOUND Yes, using very tricky You play the part of the one VALUE PLAYABILITY manoeuvre, you can change they call trooper. Your mission 58 80243 "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES ORDER BY CREDIT LINE 01-809 4843 HI-JACK-D SIGMAT Our Price 6.75 9.95 IONUCKLEBUSTER-D2 REPTON 3 DI BOULDER DASH CONS KIT-D2 SPY V SPY ARTIC ANTIC-D2 VIETNAMD2 9.95 6.75 6.75 796 150 999 9.95 9.95 8.95 5.75 7.50 BREAKTHRU-D AND MERCENART TRIVIAL PURSUIT-D4 TP. YOUNG PLAYERS --D2 T.P. QUESTION PACK GAUNTLET DZ KARI WARRIOR DZ FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR-D2 1942D2 SCARED ANTRIAD-D2 TRAP DOOR THE ART STUDIO (Disk) SPACE HARRIER-D2 JAILBREAK_02 WINTER CAMSSD2 LEADERBOARD-D2 STREEFORCE COBRA MINI OFFICE 2-D4 SCOOBY DOO_02 SILENT SERVICE DA 9.95 5.95 9.95 7.50 8.95 6.95 6.96 6.75 7.50 7.96 8.95 RS 9.95 9.95 8.95 8.95 9.95 SPACE HARRIER-D2 SENTIENEL-D2 SHAO LINS ROAD --D2 MARBLE MADNESS-D2 AVENGERTIGER II LCHTFORCE SHOCKWAY RIDER FUTURE KNICHT-D2 JEWELS OF DARKNESS-D2 TRAILBLAZER-D2 | | | TRANSFORMERS_D2 ALIENS-D2 TRACKERS LEADERBOARD-D2 GAUNTLETD2 GOLF CONS SET-D2 DANDY-D2 7.50 9.98 7.50 998 PAPER BOY EXPLODING FISTI FAIRLIGHTI SHAOLINS ROAD CITY SLICKER LEADERBOARD SILENT SERVICE ARTISTI BREAKTHRU AVENGERTIGER I ACADEMY HARD BALL ACE OF ACES SKY RUNNER  MARBLE MADNESS BATTLE OF BRITAIN ELITE BAZOOKABUL FOOTBALLER OF YEAR SHOCKWAY RIDER TT RACER TOMAHAWK GALLIPO DEEP STRIKE MASTER OF UNIVERSE CRYSTAL CASTLE LIGHTFORCE ANIMATORI STRIKE FORCE COBRA PSI-5 TRADING COMPANY TENTH FRAME ROGUE TROOPER THANATOS THEATRE EUROPE THE BIG 4-DURELL TRAP DOOR WORLD GAMES TRIVIAL PURSUITS T.P. YOUNG PLAYERS  OUTSON  ELITE HTT PACK KONAMI GOLF YEVIOUS CYRUSS 2 CHESS DRUID 17.50 7.50 24.95 8.96 7.95 24.95 7,95 8.99 TRIVIAL PURSUIT (PCW) JEWELS OF DARIONTSS6138/PCW TOMAHAWK (PCW) GODDESS OF PHORAS-612 PCW STRIKE FORCE HARRIER PCW LORD OF THE RINGS PCW INFORCOM TITLES IN STOCK FOR 29.95 6128 AND PCW *** BBC ELECTRON *** 5STAR HITS (5 Games) TRIVIAL PURSUIT-D4 GRAPHIC ADV CREATOR D5 FOOTBALLER OF YEAR-D2 CRYSTAL CASTLED2 DODGY GEBZERS 9.98 795 9.95 995 9.96 795 7.50 7.30 7.95 7.95 5.95 8888888 14.95 12.96 1298 12.95 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION -D2 9.95 7.95 GREEN BERET XEVIOUS-D2 THANATOS CYBORG TOMAHAWK-D DANDY-D2 SARACEN D2 BISMARK --D2 SUPER HUEY I-D2 DURELL G4 CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING-D2 \"COMMANDO 86-DO ELITE-DO  Acxn--pg IKARI WARRIORS-D2 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT FOOTBALLER OF YEAR-D2 WORLD GAMESD2 ATTACK ON CENTRALIS-D2 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-D4 BREAKTHRU-D2 TEMPLE OF TERROR-D2 ACE OF ACES-D2 SAIGON D2. MASTER OF UNIVERSE-D2 ACED TENTH FRAME-D2 FREloppa STOLE A MILLION-D2 ALIENS02 SANCON-D2 SOLD A MILLION I-D2 ELITE HIT PACK 5.96 5.95 9.95 795 9.95 INFILTRATOR FIRELORD 9.95 B.95 9.95 5.75 9.99 7.95 999 795 SPY V SPY (AA)GAUNTLET DO LEADERBOARDD2 FOOTBALLER OF YEAR SKY RUNNER_ 2 SUPER HUEY-D2 SILENT SERVICE D2 TOMAHAWKDE ALTERNATE REALITY II FIGHTNIGHT-D2 7.96 795 7.95 9.95 995 7.50 DYNAMITE DANI STRIKE FORCE HARRIER CHOLO REVOLUTION YE AR KUNG FU IT GLIDER RIDER DESERT FOX 795 17.50 9.98 7.90 8.75 9.96 8.98 9.99 * 6.75 596 IDGE DREAD ***ATARI ST MERCENARY COMPENDIUM CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING ALTERATE REALITY II WORLD GAMES STAR GLIDER CADER BOAD GODDESS OF PHORAS GAUNTLET SINISIRISININ 7.50 24.95 24.95 17.50 5.95 5.95 7.96 THE GREAT ESCAPE LEADERBOARD TORM (Disk 15.96) IKARI WARRIORS-D2 9.95 *** COMMODORE 64*** LEATHER GODDESS OF PHOBAS ALTERNATE REALITY DUNGEONS PRINTMASTER NEWSROOM THE PAWN FLIGHT SIMULATORI FAST MACY EM ACTION REPLAY THE FINAL CARTRIDGE THE EXPERT CARTRIDGE EXPERT PLUS ESM   EXPYKS FAST LOAD CARTRIDGE ONCE DISK 1941 PHYSICAL DAM FOOTBALLER OF YEAR SCRABBLE VERA CRUZ GAUNTLET SUPER CYCLE ANY KONAMNI CARTRIDGE JEWEIS OF DARINESS WINTER GAMES AVENGER-TIGER I 888888888 7.50 8.95 7.95 5.95 6.75 GAUNTLET JAILBREAK \"COMMANDO BE \"BOMBIAC KARI WARRIORS FUTURE KNIGHT TRAILALAZER SUPER SOCCER SPACE HARRIER NAPOLEON AT WAR DANDY VERA CRUZ SOLD A MILLION 3 HARDBALL SCAESATRIC SCOOBY DOO COP OUT BAZOOKA BILL KONAMI COIN HITS ENNALS OF ROVE BATTLEFIELD GERMANY *** SPECTRUM 128 TITLES *** INTERNATIONAL MATCH DAY 9.95 KAYLETH ARTIST TAU CETI FAILIGHT CALL ME TROOPER WINTER GAMES COMMODORE 64 SCOOBY DOO DA EXPLODING FIST I-D2 BAZOOKA BILL D2 PAPERBOY-D2 39.55 8.96 12:36 12.96 795 14.95 ALSO AVAILABLE ON DISK FORMAT DI-E1195, D2-$12.95. D3 $14.95 DA-E17.50, DS122.50. 14.95 QUICK SHOT I QUICK SHOT I PLUS QUICK SHOT TURBO KONDYS COMP PRO 5000 EUROMAX PROFESSIONAL PLUS SUROMAX ARCADE TURBO EUROMAX ELITE AUTOFIRE EUROMAX SURESHOT DELUXE EUROMAX MICRO PRO CHEETAH MACH! KONIX SPEEDKING-C16 COMP PRO 5000 BBC 23.95 18.95 7.95 7.95 7.90 *** AMSTRAD *** ELITE HIT PACK EXPLODING FISTII -D2 PAPER BOY D2 MONOPOLY D2 TOMAHAWK-D 9.95 THANATOS-D2 ELITE-D4 14.99 16.96 750 7.50 7.50 936 196 12.96 For Mail Order Customers please send cheque PO to: S.C.S. (Dept CVG12) PO Box 394 London NIS 6JT P&P included in UK. Europe add l per tape. Elsewhere at cost, Send a SAE for free list C64/C16/SPEC/AMSTRAD BBC/MSX If you would like to pick up your discount software from our shop please produce your copy of this advert to: S.C.S. Compucentre, Unit 5 221 Tottenham Court Road London WIR 9AF (nearest tube station Goodge St) Open six days a week 10.00am-18.00pm Access and Visa card orders: 01-809 4843 Credit Card line 24 HOUR ANSAPHONE R2 01-800 3156 01-631 4627 Credit card orders despatched same day subject to availability All new releases are subject to release dates from software houses. Please ring to conform availability of new releases "


".95 EACH COMMODORE TITLES HOVER BOVER, ADVANCE MEGA CAMELS. SHEEP IN SPACE, ANCIPITAL, ACTIVE COMP LEARNING, WEB DIMENSION, ROCK 'N' BOLT PASTFINDER, MASTER OF LAMPS, TOY BIZZARRE, JUICE, SUICIDE STRIKE, DRELBS, FORT APOCALYPSE, DOUGHBOY, WORLD CUP, MAMA LLAMA, 3D LUNAR ATTACK, SUICIDE EXPRESS, KOSMIC KANGA, HEROES OF KARN EMPIRE OF KARN, T.K.V.. AUTOMANIA, SPYS DEMISE SPY STRIKES BACK, EUREKA, CAVELON, WHIRLNURO, CHINESE JUGGLER SILICON WARRIOR, LUNAR OUTPOST, JUMPMAN .95 .95 EACH WHO DARES WINS, ARC PANDORA, Z', BOMBO MATCH FISHING, MONTY ON THE RUN, MONTY MOLE, POTTY PIDGEON, SHOOT THE RAPIDS, TONY HARTS ART MASTER, SPIRIT OF STONES, COMBAT LEADER, BEAMRIDER, DEATH STAR INTERCEPTOR, WIZARD OF WOR, QUO VADIS. ZORRO, BEACHEAH, ROCKY HORROR SHOW DIG DUG, UP & DOWN, BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK, GHOST CHASER, KERMITS STORY MAKER, OUTLAWS. IMHOTEP CONGO BONGO, JOURNEY, CAUSES OF CHAOS, BLADE RUNNER WILLIAM WOBBLER, BASILDON BOND, EDDIE KIDS. FLAK, GRIBBLYS DAY OUT, KNOCKOUT JET SET WILLY, MANIC MINER. EVERYONES A WALLY, DUMMY RUN, HIGH NOON, MR WIMPY, ANDROID 2. DARK TOWER, VIEW TO KILL FIGHTING WARRIOR, FRAK, HARVEY SMITHS SHOWJUMPER, MOTOCROSS, MOEBIUS, GEOFF CAPES, PITSTOP, KONG STRIKES BACK SPIDERMAN HULK, GYROSCOPE, SPELLUNKER DESIGNERS PENCIL, BLACKWYTCH, BC'S QUEST FOR TIRES, ZAXXON, QUAKE MINUS II, TAPPER BOUNCES STARION .95 EACH SUSPENDED .99 UTILITIES & PERIPHERALS SUPERMAN INTERNATIONAL SOCCER, SOUTHERN BELLE. SIMONS BASIC EXTENSION DISC or CASS.) NEVER ENDING STORY, LOGO ICOMMODORE, McGRAW HILL EDUCATIONAL NOW GAMES COMPILATION, ADVENTURE 1551 DISC DRIVES FOR C16 and SOFTWARE 4 .95 QUEST, LORDS OF TIME, SNOW BALL COLLOSAL ADVENTURE FASSEM MIC LANG. ASS. E2.99 Min Order 5 Pieces ALL .50 EACH TOUCH TYPE ICASS. .95 [5.95 EACH ALGEBRAIC RELATIONS, PROBLEM SOLVINGI & MONEY MANAGER (DISCI 6 2.95 SKILL TESTER SHAPES, COUNTING, FRACTIONS INTRO TO BASIC PT. SUMMER GAMES II, WINTER GAMES, WHITE CASS.) .95 1 & WATER CYCLE, DECIMAL FRACTIONS LIGHTNING EASY TE DISCI  9.99 PLACE VALUE, MULTIPLICATION I & IL ADDITION & SUBTRACTION, MEMORY TRAINER PROGRAMMERS REF GUIDES .95 .95 FOR 4 DICTIONARY USE, BALLOON GAME, ALPHABET MACRO ASSEMBLER DEVELOPMENT DISC) . KNOW HOW, WORD POWER, HANGMAN 3, 4, 5, .95 'O' LEVEL MATHS. 'O' LEVEL PHYSICS 6. GRAPHS 1. 2. DIVISION 1.2. SET THEORY 'O' LEVEL CHEMISTRY, 'O' LEVEL BIOLOGY FUTURE FINANCE DISC) .99 EASY SCRIPT VIC 20 SOFTWARE COMMODORE 64 DISCS DR. WATSONS 64 ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE COURSE DISCI ALL .50 EACH GALACTIC CONTROLLER .95 Min Order 5 Pieces .95 COMMODORE 128 MUSIC MAKER .95 HIGH FLYER .95 SUPER WORM ROBOT ATTACK, MANGROVE MUSIC STUDIO BY ACTIVISION CASS.1 .95 SPIRIT OF STONES BOSS, PIT, SLICKER PUZZLE, ABDUCTOR .95 ANNIHILATOR, THE CATCH READING MATHS EASY SPELL DISC 9 .99 FIGHTING WARRIOR .95 JUNIOR, ENGLISH LANGUAGE, KNOW YOUR COMMODORE 64 MMAKER E7.50 AZTEC CHALLENGE 3.95 CHILDS 1.Q., SPACE SNAKE, KNOW YOUR BREDENS BASIC DISC & CASS PERSONALITY, MARTIANS, CONNECT 4, FROG 19.95 WILLOW PATTERNICHIMERA .95 CHASE, SNAKE, ROAD USER, JIGSAW, TRAP SCRIPT & WORD PROC. CART. NUMBER LEARNING IN PUZZLER NURSERY SONGS, ROB CARRIERS MENU FOR C16 & +4 .95 BULDER CHASER .95 PLANNER, SUPER GAMES PACK 1, SUPER COMPANY PACK 123 ACCOUNTING CONTROL THING ON A SPRING GAMES PACK 2 MATCHMAKER MATHS 2 .95 SYSTEM FOR 4 ON DISC .95 SUPER ZAXXON .95 ARITHMETIC 1, GEOGRAPHY, MATHS 1 HOPPIT SKI, INNOVATIVE 7 PROGRAMS, PIXIE PACK ASSEMBLER TUTOR DISC .95 MONTY ON THE RUN .95 PROGRAMMERS UTILITY DISC  4.95 MY CHESS II .95 BARGAINS FROM 1st PUBLISHING MANNESMAN TALLY EP 80+ SOLD A MILLION .95 8 BOOKS FOR JUST 19.95 + .50 p&p E149.94 + .00 p&p. ARCADE EXTRAVAGANZA E3.95 Normal RRP over 50.00 YOUR 64 CASSETTE BOOK, GRAPHICS BOOK HANDIC VIC SWITCH MULTI USER SYSTEM .95 ULTIMA I .95 FOR THE COMMODORE 64, PEAKS & POKES REDHAWK .95 C64, TRICKS & TIPS FOR YOUR COMMODORE EPSON PAO PRINTERS .95 ADVENTURE CONSTRUCTION SET 8.95 E7.95 64. ADVANCED MACHINE LANGUAGE BOOK DISCS 10 FOR FOR THE C54. IDEA BOOK C64, MACHINE THEATRE EUROPE .95 LANGUAGE BOOK FOR THE CB4 p&p 75p all orders BATTLE OF BRITAIN E4.95 15 PUBLISHING PROGRAMS ON DISC. overseas .00 per tape, .99 ALL JUST [10.95 EACH FIRSTWORD WORD PROC.) FIRSTBASE DATABASE LOGIC SALES LTD ZORK .99 BASIC 64 STAR CROSS E3.99 PASCAL LANGUAGE) 6 Midgate Peterborough Cambs DEADLINE .99 ADA TRAINING COURSE 24 hour ordering on 0733 313870 .95 EACH DRAGONSKULLE BRIDGE PLAYER II, PINBALL WIZARD, GROGS REVENGE, WIZARDRY. KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT, LAW OF THE WEST FIGHT NIGHT. TIGERS IN THE SNOW, SKY FOX, BOUNDER THING ON A SPRING. BATTLE NORMANDY, HENRYS HOUSE VOL 1 HENRYS HOUSE VOL. I. RED HAWK, SELECT 1112 GAMESI, ADVENTURELAND SECRET MISSION PIRATE ADVENTURE/VOODOO CASTLE QUESTPROBE, WORLD SERIES BASEBALL ZOIDS, COMBAT LYNX, TERRORMELINOS MUSIC STUDIO, CHUCKIE EGG, MUGSYS REVENGE, VIDCOM MAIL-SOFT * SPECTRUM PAPER BOY  36 5.50 888888 'Have You Had Enough Of Arcade Games Or Spreadsheets? 'There Is An Alternative.: c 8888888888 adouri CITY SLICKER G e 10.96 5.50 = SUSU   6.99 COMMODORE 4 SCOOBY DOO-02 DRACULA 02 TRATOR-02 BUITE-03 PAPERBOY-02 SHAOUNS ROAD LORD OF RINGS-20 TRAP DOOR HIJACK-02 TRIVIAL PURSUIT -04 FISTII-02 SPACE HARRIER-D2 KNUCKLEBUSTER-02 AVENGER TIGER || -02 DAN DARED2 YIE AR KUNG FULL BOMB JACK II 02..... GAUNTLET 02 COMMANDO '86-02 XEVIOUS 02 DURELL BIG 4 ATTACK ON SENTINALS LEADE RO TOUNAMENTO TEMPLE OF TERROR-02 CRYSTAL CASTLE-02 FIRELORD-02 TOMAHAWK --D2 TRANSFORMERS-02 LIGHT FORCE ..... SANXIONS-02 SOLD A MILLION 3 D2 ELITE HIT PACK SHOCKWAY RIDER... 1942-02 FOOTBALLER YEAR 02 IKARI WARRIOR-D2 ACE OF ACES-02 CYBORG STRIKE FORCE COBRA THE PAWN DISK A REALITY WORLD GAMES-02 DANDY . SUPER HUEYE-02 EXPERT CARTRIDGE FREEZE FRAME 3 FINAL CARTRIDGE JAILBREAK HEAD COACH AVENGER-TIGER II . FAT WORM BLOWS HARD BALL... ELITE WINTER GAMES BATTLE OF BRITAIN DEEP STRIKE TOMAHAWK FOOTBALLER OF YEAR STRIKE FORCE COBRA ACE OF ACES TRIVIAL PURSUIT BAZOOKA BILL FIRELORD WORLD GAMES TT RACER CRYSTAL CASTLE PSI-5 TRADING THANTOS THEATRE EUROPE SIPER SOCCER DURELL BIG 4 ROGUE TROOPER KONAMI HITS STRATEGIC PLUS LEADERBOARD-02 ELITE-D4 TOMAHAINK 12 KONAMI GOU-12 SCOOBY 000-02 FOOTBALLER YEAR-02 BREAKTHRU-D2 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-D4 THANATOS STRIKE FORCE COBRA GAUNTLET-02... DANDY-02 1942-D2 IKARI WARRIOR D2 SPACE HARRIER-D2....... SILENT SERVICE D2....... IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 02 THE ART STUDIO Disk HITCHHIKERS-6128/PCW f  AMSTRAD POW TOMAHAAK LEATHER GOODESS TRIVIAL PURSUIT MERCENARY COMODIM1000 SKY RUNNER-02 SPIFF 40 FGHT GHT D2. ALTERNATE REALITY FOOTBALLER OF YEAR-02 ATARI ST* HACKER II................... TRINITY ALTERNATE REALITY IL LEADERBOARD GAUNTLET STRIKE FORCE HARRIER WINTER GAMES JOYSTICKS EUROMAX PROF PLUS EURO ARCADE TURBO QUICK SHOT TURBO KONOS SPEEDKING COMP PRO 5000 CHEETAH MACHL. 6.50 .6.99 KAYLETH. ATAR XUXE IBM 0.64 ATARI ST SOFTWARE APPLE II AND NOW AMIGA SPECIALISTS IN QUALITY COMPUTER GAMES FOR THE DISCERNING GAMER Ring for our FREE Catalogue AND DISCOVER A WORLD OF ENTERTAINMENT 14.95 FAIRLIGHT II. ANNALS OF ROVE SCALECTRIC SPACE HAAR ER KNIGHTMARE RALLEY SOLDA MILLION 3 JUDGE DREAD LEADERBOARD 38.95 * 01-979 2987 Disk version available: D1 19.95, D2 110.95, D3 (12.95 D4 (14.95. Post & Packing included in UK Europe add  per tape. Elsewhere at cost. Cha Po to: Mail-Soft PO Box 589. London N15 6. Access and Visa orders welcomed If you do not see the game you want, simply deduct 30% of the RRP and we will send to you Dentes new releases will be sent to you as soon as the game is released from the soare house STRATEGIC PLUS SOFTWARE PO BOX 8 HAMPTON MIDDX TW12 3XA "


"REVIEWS MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: IMAGINE PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: TIM TERRA CRESTA Generally you'll need all the bits of your ship to get rid of this mechanical foe. You'll definitely need all the bits to wipe out the third and most deadly robot of all. Like Xevious, reviewed below. It's this \"Transformer\" style everything early enough to give Terra Cresta is a coin-op classic. gimmick which makes this you a chance to dock safely with Code-master Dave Collier and Imagine has gone back to the shoot 'em up different from the the extra bits of your ship which ship which his graphics man Steve Wahid vaults, dusted the cobwebs and vast selection currently appear slowly from the silos have produced a classy coin-op dragged it on to the 64-and a available to the square-eyed once you've blasted them. conversion which is enhanced pretty good job they've done zappers out there. At first you are limited to a by Martin Galway's nifty too. The extra parts of your ship mere double shot laser. Pick soundtrack. It's addictive, fast moving and are stores in numbered silos on up the second craft and you've I didn't like the long start-up extremely difficult just what the planet surface. Aliens will doubled your firepower and sequence. It seems to take every shoot'em addict wants do anything and everything to so on. Watch those suckers forever before you get down to from a game. stop you collecting the bits of blow! the serious business of blasting. If you're never seen this your ship. Being able to duck and weave Terra Cresta is one of arcade game in the flesh then They fire all kinds of missiles and fire at the same time is the Imagine's better offerings --it's you won't know that the object at you. Most of them are key to success in Terra Cresta. a challenging zapper which will of the game is to orbit a planet, homing missiles-so you have Learn the waves-the aliens please even the most blasting away at nasty alien to use the superior . come at you in the same demanding joystick jockey. attackers and collecting extra manoeuvrability of the Cresta to formation time after time. And Watch out for it bits of your ship, the Terra outwit the missiles, rockets and watch out for the deadly flying Cresta. These extra parts give flying mines. Jammy-Dodgers they can be you extra firepower and can be You can move up, and down GRAPHICS irritatingly lethal flown in formation to enable SOUND left and right as the screen At the end of each orbit you'll VALUE you to complete more difficult scrolls sometimes come across a deadly robot PLAYABILITY stages of the game. horizontally. Try to shoot which must be destroyed. MACHINES: SPECTRUM/C/64  SUPPLIER: U.S. GOLD PRICE: .95 (spec) .95 (C64) REVIEWER: TIM attackers in many different shapes and forms. There are also ground emplacements to deal with These fire at you--but you're armed with bombs which you can use to blitz these buildings and the odd alien tank using the roadways which you overfly during your mission. The scrolling is pretty smooth and the graphics are generally black on one colour but pretty detailed for all that You can generally dodge alien fire because their bullets move pretty slowly, but watch out for clusters of bullets these can really catch you out. Also try to shoot the alien craft as far up the screen as you can this gives you more time to bomb the ground installations which send up those bomb clusters. And don't get trapped in the corners of the screen. That's old advice for experienced zappers like you — What better way to finish off the year of the arcade conversion than with a real classic like Xevious? Well, U.S. Gold reckons it is anyway. I, for one, can't disagree with them! The original coin-op appeared way back in the mists of time but the game hasn't dated. You won't find any cobwebs on this shoot 'em up. It's been converted by the underated Probe Software team who are also working on other arcade conversions for Activision as reported in our news section last issue. If this is anything to go by, we're in for a few treats in the New Year. Xevious is a pretty basic, horizontally scrolling zapper. You fly your space fighter over a landscape of trees, lakes and built up areas in search of your goal the alien mothership. On the way you'll encounter hoardes of intelligent alien but it's still usefull. And watch out for the awesome flying mirrors! They are real killers. Commodore graphics are a bit confusing to follow at first. The choice of colours isn't that great. But you do get the enhanced sounds of course. There are 32 different kinds of alien ship and no wave is the same, 16 levels, four skill ratings and bonus screens just like the arcade original. There is a two player option plus a nice high score chart. Screen layout differs from machine to machine. The Spectrum has a split screen effect while the 64 is a full screen game. Xevious is a good thumbbusting zapper for shoot'em up fans of all ages. It may not have the colourful graphic frills of something like Lightforce but it's still pretty addictive. Check it out. XVTO CONYERSION BV ja PROGCI SortObcell UPLAYER 1 DODDZES GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY UPLAYER EL LABDBDBDBL De "


"SIGMA R.R.P. .95 Commodore 64 available November 20th Spectrum & Amstrad available February Sales dept., Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton, Somerset TA1 4AB England Telephone 0823) 54489 & 54029 DURELL Trade enquiries to Centresoft on 021 356 3388 software getting harder . .. "


"R.R.P. .95 Spectrum & Amstrad available November 20th Commodore 64 available January 20th Trade enquiries to Centresoft on 021 356 3388 Sales dept., Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton, Somerset TA1 4AB England Telephone 0823) 54489 2 54029 DURELL "


"FLYER REVIEWS 2 .. EE playable than that are Orbix bounces around really COCO animated as well. Things move up and down Trap doors mysteriously open to capture TERRORBALL there the mysterious spider creatures who sometimes are useful in blocking enemy fire and always useful if you're low on energy Shoola spider the sect you can eat between You can call up a map of the planet by hitting a koy this also bots as a pause mode, and you can also as a short ang radar screen to help you It's esential to make good use ORBIXTHE Orbix sounds like one of those domestic detergents that kills 99 per cent of all known gurms But in this case it's a tactical planetary warfare craft which Kills 99 per cent of all known insectivores This first release on Domark's arcade label puts you in charge of Oro the Terrorballonta rescue mision on the unhospitable planet Horca You have to find bits of crashed spacecraft reassernble it and rescue the crow scattered around the planet's surface. droid which is carrying a bit of collect to give Orbix more the lost spuce craft You have to destroy the Trito deadly minies which Factory droid in order to recover vaporise your craft at the merelt touch the detectors are cubes with Once you've tracked down a lashing panels on the front factory drold and dostroyed it Don't be fooled into thinkng you pick u th rt nd rago that they are the transistor radio back to the launch podatthe thingies which you come acros centre of the planet Why? like I was. I spent ages trying to Bacause the bit you ve just pick the 21s up collected is booby trapped and Once you've got a detector you have just 90 seconds to get you can see where the factory it back before it detonates droid is hiding and set of in The launchpad r hase pursuit the alien creatures can built in neutraliser which steal your detector away onders the booby trap saless watch out for the ones that look There are six bits of the craft to like nuclear particles tind and eight spacemonto if you lose one you have to rescue. You score points for Start looking for another before Dicking them up shooting centre of your instrumentpanel This shows you where that dotectors are, where the factory droids are, and where the launch pad is in that ordet Orbixint a brilliant game but is not a half one other Sometimes frustrating but always playable. Orbix is a Streetwise label astios want to stop you of Course The graphics are niceFederation Property Detector which will show you the whereabouts of the factory fortunately Shooting allen drolds can have one of two offects. They either transform into anagy giving pods which you can The multi-directional scrolling reminds you of Durell's Critical Mass--but Orbix is far more GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY  MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: VIRGIN PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: TIM The scrolling shoot-'em-up takes on a new twist with Steve Lee and Martin Wheeler's latest Better not say any more To gain entry to the dimension offering. Instead of a super otherwise we'll be getting duct you have to orbit each duper, gizmo-space-fighter with MORE left-wing propaganda section and shoot enough double-turbos and a sun-roof letters. aliens to turn off the lasers you get a ball. Yup, you read it Anyway, you take the ball blocking the the way to righta ball. And why not?! blaster and roll around the your goal. But it shows what watching too surface of Erebus, zapping alien You have to weave your way much snooker on TV can do to attack craft and gaining access through the obstacle course you. to the dimension duct. This will while at the same time blasting This ball is armed and take you further into the core of away at the many and varied dangerous and has an almost Erebus, where the aliens are alien ships that come after you impossible mission to attempt. cooking up their deadly home from both directions. It has to venture forth to the brew They fire at you-beware of planet Erebus-a planet used The waste refinery is split into the particularly nasty homing as a dumping ground for many different circular sections. discs which whirl around Earth's dangerous waste products. FIETSESETETTEL There's a refinery on this future Sellafield which has been taken over by tea ladies! No, sorry, make that aliens can't have any originality creeping in can we...? Anyway these alien tea-ladies have decided that they'd like to produce nerve gas to poison the population of earth. See what happens when you leave noxious waste lying around? Heey, heavy social comment. disconcertingly while seeking your destruction. Watch the light display at the bottom right hand corner of the screen Once all the little \"bulbs\" have turned green you've sucessfully orbited a Section and if the \"duct open\" message appears in the info window in the centre of the screen then you can have a crack at the dimension duct. The scrolling is silky smooth and you can move to the left or right. The graphics are well drawn and interesting. The sound effects get irritating after a bit especially the twangy alien explosions, but the opening tune is nifty. Playability? Well, apart from the initial frustration of trying to learn how to get into the duct entrance, this is a pretty good blaster and at under nine quid isn't bad value. The game has no real faults and is slickly presented. But you have played games like this before, so check it out before you decide to break into your Auntie's gift token. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY  SC: EST HI: EEEEE0 "


"BARGAIN SOFTWARE: Dept. C+VG 4; Unit 1; 1 Esmond Road; London W4 1JG I ORDERS OVER PRICE PROMISE If you wish to purchase any product from our list and find that you can buy the same product cheaper from another mail order company, simply enclose the lower amount, stating the name of the other company and where you saw the advert. (It must be a current issue), Price Promise does not apply to other companies \"Special Offers\". BUY BY PHONE RING 01-995 2763  DEDUCT 10% SPECTRUM COMPILATIONS SPECTRUM OUR PRICE PSYTRON 710 GAMES PAPER BOY 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE IKARI WARRIORS DAMBUSTERS LEADER BOARD PSI-S TRADING CO 5.90 5.90 4.99 30 STARSTRIKE BLUE THUNDER SON OF BLAGGER AUTOMANIA BUGABOO | 0 BLADE ALLEY PENETRATOR 7.95 9.95 CS4 GTIPLES 2 w 7.45 9.95 SPEC 4 CRASH SMASHES 2 MONTY ON THE RUN SWEEVO'S WORLD BOUNCER STARDUAKE MONTY ON THE RUN BOUNDER STARQUAKE 8.95 DAN DARE LIGHTFORCE KWAH DARK SCEPTRE TT RACER UCHI MATA REVOLUTION YIE AR KUNG FU II 8.95 SPEC. SPORTS PACK SNOOKER 084 SPORTS PACK WORLD CUP FOOTBALL FOOTBALL 5.90 6.70 7.45 7.45 6.70 7.45 5.90 6.70 7.45 6.70 5.90 11.20 7.45 7.45 TEST MATCH CRICKET DERBY DAY DERBY DAY SKY RUNNER XENO STALLONE/COBRA PUB GAMES (7 Games) TRIVIAL PURSUITS ACADEMY 9.95 SPEC.084 GAMES PACK VIEW TO A KILL CODE NAME MATT 2 FRIDAY THE 13 TEST MATCH PYRAMID BEAKY & EGG SNATCHERS SPEC. ACTION PACK MISSION IMPOSSIBLE BITERMINATOR ARMAGEDDON FREEZ BEES SAM SPADE BRAIN DAMAGE 9.95 6.70 W 5.90 11.20 BEST OF BEYOND G. GOOCH'S CRICKET FOOTBALL MANAGER GHOST & GOBLINS TERRA CRESTA ELITE JUDGE DREDD ORBIX THE TERRORBALL DRUID GALVAN SURF CHAMP SHADOW SKIMMER HYPA BALL SUPER SOCCER POLE POSITION 5.90 5.90 5.90 SORDERONS SHADOW ENIGMA FORCE DOOMBARES REVENGE SOL SHADOWPRE 301.65 PSI WARRIOR QUAKE MINUS ONE ADORAE ENIGMA FORCE 3.99 5.90 7.45 OUR R.R.P PRICE FAT WORM BLOWS A SPARKY 9.95 KAYLETH 9.99 SPACE HARRIER 7.95 SCOOBY DOO DOUBLE TAKE 5.90 BAZOOKA BILL SHAO LIN'S ROAD WORLD GAME SELECT ONE (12 GAMES) 12.99 COMMODORE 64 INTIL IPATCH 9.95 GAUNTLET 9.95 7.45 BAZOOKA BILL MAG MAY 8.95 6.70 CYBORG MOVIE MONSTER HOT WHEELS 9.99 7.45 SANXION 7.45 ACE OF ACES VIETNAM 9.95 LEGEND OF SINBAD 9.95 7.45 WORLD GAMES SCOOBY DOO SPACE HARRIER 9.95 TOP GUN 8.95 6.70 SPY VS SPY 3 9.95 HIGHLANDER 8.95 6.70 SACRED ARMOUR OF ANTIRIAD 8.996.70 SUPER HUEY 2 FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR WAY OF THE TIGER 2 (AVENGER) MASTER OF UNIVERSE (ARCADE 9.997.45 9.99 7.45 JAILBREAK 8.95 6.70 TARZAN 8.95 6.70 PAPER BOY 9.95 7.45 SENTINEL 9.95 7.45 INFODROID 9.95 7.45 KNUCKLE BUSTER 9.95 7.45 YIE AR KUNG FU II 9.95 6.70 EXPLODING FISTI 9.95 7.45 DAN DARE 9.95 7.45 SUPER CYCLE SKY RUNNER LIGHT FORCE 8.95 6.70 TRACKER 14.95 11.20 XENO TRIVIAL PURSUITS 14.95 UCHI MATA 9.95 7.45 THAI BOXING ALLEY KAT B.95 6.70 CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING LEADER BOARD GALVAN 8.95 6.70 SHAD LINS ROAD WAR 8.95 PUB GAMES (7 Games) STALLONE COBRA 8.95 MERCENARY 9.95 5.99 THE TRANS FORMERS 9.95 7.45 HERBERTS DUMMY RUN INTERNATIONAL SOCCER ACE TERRA CRESTA JUDGE DREDD 9.95 7.45 TOMAHAWK 9.95 7.45 HYPA BALL 9.95 ASSAULT MACHINE 9.95 WARRIOR II 9.95 7.95 7.99 5.90 2.99 SOLD A MILLION 3 FIGHTER PILOT RAMBO KUNG FU MASTER GHOSTBUSTERS ma HIT PACK   AIRWOLF 2  W BOMBJACK 7.45 5.90 6.70 5.90 ASTERIX EXPLORER 7.99 8.95 URIDIUM HARDBALL TARZAN 8.95 FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR FUTURE KNIGHT WAY OF THE TIGER 2 (THE AVENGER) 9.95 TRAIL BLAZER DANDY KNIGHTMARE RALLY 7.95 THE GREAT ESCAPE PRODIGY STRIKE FORCE COBRA DORISTMAS SPECIAL OFFER SPEC. COMMODORE 64 DEFENDER me N COSMIC KANGAR POLE POSITION UTHER PACK 3 1994 SNDOK. 3 2 07.45 PROJECT FUTURE SNOOKER EXCELL ARCADIA MOON CRESTA DARE DEVIL DENIS 7.45 5.90 FICHASPECTEN KORAMIS CON-OP HITS GREEN BERET YIE AR KUNG FU PINO PONG SPEC BRUCE LEE KNIGHT LORE MATCH PONT MATCH DAY 5.90 8.99 HYPA SPORT SACRED ARMOUR OF ANTIRIAD INFILTRATOR HIGHLANDER BREAKTHRU 6.70 7.45 SHOCKWAVE RIDER FIRELORD DUELL PACT SPEC. LABOTEUR TURBO ESPRIT COMBAT LYNX CRITICAL MASS 6.70 NICK FALDO'S GOLF SOURCERY CODE NAME MATI EVERYONES A WALLY VIEW TO A KILL 7.45 5.90 JAILBREAK DEACTIVATOR CYBORG SNOOKER DODGY GEEZERS MASTERS OF UNIVERSE (ARCADE)  AIRWOLF (new) 2.99 O LUMES 6.70 8.99 7.95 ST RANGE LOOP PYJAMARAMA ARABIAN KNIGHTS FALCON PATROL LORDS OF MIDNIGHT S MWM 5.90 CHUCKIE FOG  No6  WORLD CUP RS . | BARGAIN SOFTWARE ORDER FORM Please send me the following titles. BLOCK capitals please! Type of computer Name ...... Title Amount Address London High Road 474A Chiswick VISIT OUR SHOP W4 Tel. No... Total Enclosed  Please make cheques or postal orders payable to BARGAIN SOFTWARE. Prices include P&P within the U.K: Europe please add .75 per tape: Elsewhere please add .00 extra per tape -"


"$14733 Bor No000-0-0 EMBARGO GALACTIC-MAP NUCLEAR PETRA 3 been drawn up. travelling from one Planet to Unfortunately, because he is another, locating the Uranium the ruler, he has demanded supply, transporting your robot 1,000 Earthlings as payment to the surface, collecting the upon delivery of the Uranium Uranium, transporting the robot supply. Obviously, this request back to the ship, and secondly, has been turned down by the moving to another planet to Earthly Committee, and so repeat the process. Rayol has enforced an embargo The plot is fairly unoriginal, on deliveries to the Earth. the graphics are fairly run-ofMIRRP-LINK Since we need Uranium to the-mill, planet surface type, the survive, a cloak and dagger raid views from out of the window is the only answer. Just don't of your ship look like a screen call on Ronnie to arrange it... shot from Codename Mat, and As the pilot of this mission, the robots look like reject you have been provided with a Daleks! space rocket, warp boosters, The sound, what there is of it, OIST: and nine robots. is well below average for the 64, That is the basic storyline with better quality explosions behind the latest game from a coming from the Spectrum. TIME:888 fairly new company, Eurogold, There is no title, or in-game who released Mission Elevator music. There is a loading a few months ago. screen, but it looks like a four You may remember that this year-old grabbed a joystick and RAS was a C+VG HITI, and we said fiddled about with it for five that if that was a sample of what minutes. was to come, we'd be in for a This, to put it in layman's treat. Well, I'm sorry to say that terms, is quite simply, one, if nuclear fusion, and Uranium Nuclear Embargo was a great not the worst game I've played has become a vital raw disappointment to me, mainly this month, and even at two material. because it was one of the most pounds, it would be doubtful as Its scarcity on this planet boring, monotonous, dull to whether it would get a good means that new sources have to unplayable (I think you must get review. be located. The moons of the idea by now that I didn't like Saturn proved a valuable it!) games I've played for many GRAPHICS source, and a trade agreement a month. SOUND between the Earth and the wise There are various different VALUE PLAYABILITY Saturn Dictator, Rayol I, has elements to this game. Firstly,  MACHINE: C64/128 SUPPLIER: EUROGOLD PRICE: .95 (TAPE) .95 (DISK) REVIEWER: LEE The time is the Twenty-First century. After many serious oil crisises, energy production on the Earth has been switched to MACHINE: C64 SUPPLIER: BEYOND PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: PAUL INFODROID robots who will steal your packages a sort of futuristic highway robbery. The droids travel the planet on superfast speeding platforms eight lanes of them, in fact, all moving at different speeds. The packages must be picked up and delivered to their right destinations to earn cash. Each droid comes with standard equipment but the more you make, the more extra parts can be fitted to the droid. These are selected by means of icons. You should really play it in your local software shop if you're interested in buying. Scattered around the system are various rooms to visit. Some are dispatch points, others junctions which connect with other speed routes and other repair shops. Most of these rooms are sign posted. The speed platforms certainly move fast. Impressive to look at but a little hard on the eyes. It does have, however, somemulti-soundtracked pleasant music This is an intriguing game and quite honestly I don't know what to make of it. It's initial appeal is so limited that it's doubtful whether I'll summon up the enthusiasm to continue playing it. Playing the role of a robotic delivery droid just doesn't seem much fun. This Denton Designs creation is set in a massive city which takes up an entire planet. Most of the communications between different parts of this complex are electronic but parcels and vital documents still have to be physically transfered about the city. Enter the Droid Despatch Company and its delivery robots called Infodroids. You must control this droid all over the city carrying out delivery tasks. However, you have to cope with rival company droids and pirate   Exif   bobpost o GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"COMPUTER REPAIR CENTRE HOU The only AMSTRAD SPECIALISTS recommended by Amstrad Repairs also undertaken for all the following computers: SPECTRUM, COMMODORE, ATARI, BBC, IBM NO HIGH FREE PRICE  REPAIR WITH EVERY FIXED SOFTWARE WORTH The established company with a proven reputation Over the years we have built up an enviable reputation in the UK for computer repairs, which is second to none. This is based on many years experience in repairing Spectrum, Commodore, BBC and other leading makes and we were the first AMSTRAD repair centre anywhere. This is why we have customers all over the world. SPECTRUM REPAIR We are the best, forget the rest, look what we offer DON'T DELAY — ACT TODAY It's as easy as ABC! No high fixed price you only pay what the repair actually costs. While-CI-Wait Service spare parts for all leading computers -available over the counter. State of the art test equipment to provide comprehensive test report and locate faults. Repairs to all leading makes of computer. Amstrad specialist Spectrum rubber keyboards repaired for only .95. Commodore 64's, Vic 20's, Atari, Commodore 16's and Plus 4's repaired. Discounts for colleges, schools etc. Every computer repaired by us is completely overhauled and tested before return. All computers returned carriage paid and covered by insurance Three months guarantee included. Free Software worth  with every Spectrum repair. DISCOUNT COMPONENTS e.g. Power Transformers Simply send your computer securely packed, together with a cheque or postal order for the maximum fee to the address below. Your computer will be repaired and returned to you within 24 hours together with the balance of the fee and your FREE  worth of software. Or if you prefer a written quotation just send .50 to cover post & packing, Alternatively just quote your Access or Visa card number. BBC REPAIRS from SPECTRUM REPAIRS Commodore 229,00 J to .90 from AMSTRAD REPAIRS from COMMODORE REPAIRS 2f12 to f35 from Commodore .00 .50 p.p. Spectrum .95 + 1.50 p.p.  to  to  SPECIALIST COMPUTER REPAIR CENTRE Trade orders welcome Dept. 18, Unit 4, M.E.B.Works, Windsor Road, Enfield, Redditch, B97 6DJ. Tel:Redditch 65671. WE SET THE STANDARD BY WHICH EVERYONE ELSE IS JUDGED "


"E RESULTS COMPETITION Due to an oversight Nicol, Aberdeen. Phillip Defoe, Lon. Nicholas Hyde. Paul Woodley. RP don. Matthew O'Connor, Halifax. Wegman, Nicholas Davies, Michael by some one who will John Rowe, Ireland. Paul Gibbons. Barker, Paul Curren, Richard Wood, Sussex. Simon Benge. Canterbury. J Lee Neary, Matthew Clark, Craig remain nameless, we Barratt, London, Steve Bishop Jones, Peter Sorilos, Anthony Leeds. Richard Cooper, Merseyside. Blackhurst, Jac-cy Mendoza, Kenneth forgot to ask readers who Philip Walker, Cleveland. John Sel Dryburgh, David Neale, Mr C F Price, lers, Lancs. CJ Finnie, West MidJustin Pearsden, James Lundy. Mrs entered the Tolkein lands. Jason Akin, Brentford. Sam Lesley Beresford. competition what machine Kimmins, Nottingham. Christopher Dracula descends on Cheshire! Or so Collins, London, lan Smith, Ireland, it will seem to the neighbours of GN they owned. If your name is in Stuart Miles, Somerset. Mark ConWard of Stockport who is the lucky stantine, Sheffield. Martin Grant, S winner in our Dracaula competition. Yorks. Simon Ball Sussex. Tim Along with his Dracula video he will U TO VOIUW, picas0 W IL TILU LI McLellan, Herts. Stuart Hall. Glos also receive copies of An American magazine and let us know which Paul Greenough, Manchester, NichoWerewolf in London, four Stephen las Henstock, Rotherham. Robin King horror novels, a Dracula mask version of the game you requested. Woolfinden, Stourport. Adrian Madand a copy of the game. The 10 docks, Derby. Paul Eaton, Co Louth. runners up all get copies of the Stephen Panniers, Leominster. Trevor game for their computers. R Deaper, Cumbria. Anthony DixYork. Chris Parker, Essex. Mark Williams, Bristol. lan Davies, WiltRon Hoogenkamp. Peter on, Bootle. Peter Davie, Hants. Jake Chamberlain, Hereford. Mark Nicholshire. Nicholas Bailey, Gloucester. Gorman, Martin Schultze, Langwith, London P Rayner, Kent. son, Lothian. Glenn Meaton, Sussex. Huw Howelles, Wales. Scott Semple. C J Doig. Lawrence Gareth moore, Oman, Jonathon James Cullen, Coventry. Yunys Midlothian. David Etherington, North Binks, Christian Bar Hogg. Worcs. Simon Norton, Aswat, Clapton Paul Rea, Leicester. amptonshire. Phillip Mason, Herts. foot, Carl Pugh, Paul Cheshire. Havard Saetre, norway. Anthony Ponsford, Devon. William Yvette Hardware, Birmingham. Tim Worthington, Niall Gilsenan, Ireland. Kate Birks, Rowe, Nairn. Darren Queenan. Some Dwyer. Salop. Noura A AlnoWheffield. Paul Tregiogo. W Mid-rset. Andrew Walsh, Herts. Michael Giuseppe deo Salvo of Rome is the man. Biertho lands. GJ Mair, London. Shehzad Storey Stockport. Andre Morris, winner of our Asterix competition and Thieny. Yousaf, Berks. David Cociz, Switzer. Staffs, Mark Lucking Essex. Anthony will shortly be receiving his copy of land. Anthony Coyle, Aberdeen Soh Finnegan, Coventry. Steven Jakob, the game, 4 copies of cased books Kam Young, Malaysia. Ronald Dvo, Mid Glamorgan. Geir are Skjeret, and a 6ft long Asterix freeze-hope Gibralter. Stephen Alty, Merseyside. Norway. Fraser Mills, Chelmsford it gets through the British and Mark Hatch, Lancashire. Simon RusPeter Lawrence, Nr Leeds. Bruce Italian postal system wihtout too sell, Herts. Paul Murphy Gateshead. Jolliffe, Ayrshire. Paul Webster, much trouble. Another point Valerie Bishal, Suffolk. Patricia Suen, Lincs. Tony Bristow, W Sussex. Mr R Giuseppe can you read Surrey. Navdep Rajwanshi, W MidCavill, W Yorks. Miss K Roberts, English? lands. Vegard Guldberg, Norway. Herefordshire. Sean Campbell, Bol. If your name is in the Bryan Study, Hets. Jamie Dyer, Camton. Geoffrey Hogg. Essex. David J list below you are one bridge. Gawaine Davis, Kent. Simon Carr, Durham. Ashley Cother-Cairns, of the 20 runners up. Richardson, Kent. Kevin Davies, Herts. Jason Sankey, Norfolk. Steven Barry Bowman, RESULIS ut Chi How does a judo champ get quite strong on graphics and caught up in the totally sound. We then had to say how unphysical world of computer we got on with a computer at games? Leslie Bunder visited home.\" Brian Jacks to find out The Atari is still in use at Since being introduced to Judo Brian's home. \"We've got the by his father when he was 10, computer, disc drive, cassette Brian has competed in over recorder, printer, Koala Pad. 3,000 contests and travelled the Naturally, there are games as world three times. well. The ones I personally find Famous not only for his most interesting are adventure sporting talents but also for his games such as Zork.\" amazing consumption of How did Brian link up with oranges, has won numerous Martech? \"Martech, did a game medals and titles. One of his with Eddie Kidd. Eddie is a good most amazing achievements was friend of mine and introduced the winning of Superstars twice me to them. At the same time, on one occasion he even beat David Martin of Martech saw Daley Thompson! me appearing on Microlive with Brian spends time making my interest in computers. We television shows, writing books got together and they wanted me and columns in magazines. And to do a Judo game, but I said I'd one of his current interests is rather do a game based around computers Superstars as I was better He explained: \"A couple of known for it at that time. years ago, the television show \"Martech agreed, and we did Microlive, came to me and my the Superstar Challenge game family and asked us if we would which did quite well. Then like to choose a computer and Martech and I decided to do a then use it. follow up on Judo. \"We looked at all the \"I really enjoyed doing it. computers on the market at the Although I'm not actually time and decided to go for the involved in the programming of involved in the programming of Atari 800XL. The main reason the game, I'm very involved in was that it seemed to offer more the technical side about how it on the educational side for my should look and how the moves son to use and also it seemed work in real life and so on. I think it's great fun to be involved in computer games.\" I asked Brian to explain Utchi Mata. \"Utchi Mata is a unique game. Utchi Mata is actually a technique of Judo, the one I became famous for. Also it's my favourite. People seem to think that Judo and Karate are similar they are totally different. Karate involves kicking and punching while Judo is more refined and is about throwing and locking.\" One of the questions people often ask is what celebrities get out of endorsing games. \"I get a royalty from the number of copies sold, which is very similar to what I get for my books. I find the royalty the best way of doing it. As I put a lot of work and effort into it, I hope it does well.\" You could win one of THREE Rucanor judo suits, if you enter our C+VG Martech/Utchi Mata competition. Five runners-up will get signed copies of the Utchi Mata on the 64. What do you have to do? Throw Brian Jacks three times! No, really all we'd like from you is the answers to our Utchi Mata quiz. Once you've worked them out just fill in the coupon and rush it to Computer and Video Games, Utchi Mata Competition, Priory Court, 3032 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is February 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and Brian's decision is final C+VG/UTCHI MATA COMPETITION Name Address Suit Size Age UTCHI MATA QUIZ 1. Which sporting hero did Brian Jacks defeat while competing in BBC's Superstars. 2. Name one of the games which features Brian Jacks. 3. What is the top belt you can earn in Judo? "


"RESULTS THALA MUSEET THALAMUS LIMITED Front Office 1st Floor, Advance Works 44 Walace Road, London N1 1P0 By Stavros Fasoulas A/120 Cassette  9.99 /1 20 Disk .99 Distributed by US GOLD LIMITED, Unit 23, Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021-3563388 "


"00:01:01 teget A Yeoww! Should've taken Pete's advice! Scanner damaged rate Bons score 022% A Hunters looking hungry... SON OR Academy Tau Ceti Il is PETE COOKE'S latest smash hit. It isn't easy-and that's why the people at IDEAS Central persuaded Peter ever so nicely to bring you this exclusive players guide to the game that turns the Spectrum into a space flight simulator! Read this and you'll be getting pass marks in all the Gal Corp Academy's toughest tests ... LAUNCH Bunch 0. Chefreire et Forward View score osox 00:00:31 Space mines? Use the scanner. follow this advice for the first few attempts. It may not be possible to complete the mission if you choose the wrong skimmer. For example you may need a skimmer equipped with a jump unit in order to reach your objective, and there is nothing more frustrating than battling through hordes of aliens for twenty minutes only to find that a vital piece of equipment is not on some other Qand Launch O.N. 00 00 29 More mean saucers... s a cadet entering the GalA Corp Academy for advanced skimmer pilots, you must complete 20 mission simulations on different inhabited and uninhabited worlds against a variety of foes. Each mission is scored on a percentage basis, a score of 90% or over qualifying as a pass. STARTING UP Anyone who has grappled with Tau Ceti will have an initial advantage here as many of the features have been carried across. At first getting to grips with all the weapon systems and differing keys can take a few plays. A good tip here is to select the key layout that you prefer and then save the game. They key layout is saved with the files so in future sessions -and I can guarantee you won't complete the game in one sitting you can simply load in the file and your keys will all be set As a quick supplement to the manual, your lasers are by far the most useful weapon. Missiles are best used to keep the pressure off when the lasers are overheating and delay bombs and anti-missile missiles are really only for specialist missions. ON THE MISSIONS The mision information section will give a guide to planetary conditions on each mission and explain what your objective is. A suitable skimmer is also given and it is alwasy best to Launch O.N. Having said that, once you realise the equipment needed for a mission it is usually far better to design a 'custom skimmer' for it. The skimmers provided are general-purpose ships and the extra 'edge' given by a purpose built design can make the difference between success and failure. SKIMMER DESIGN Tips on skimmer design are really fairly straightforward. In any mission where the robots are well spread out, a compass and scanner are vital pieces of equipment It's also a good idea to go for the most powerful lasers and shields that you can manage. Watch out for high power steering units, some people find them a shade too sensitive and medium level is a better bet. Don't waste space with flares or infra-red units unless you really need them. You can always wait for sunrise! Designing the panel is a lesson tent bien Holy hot lasers! "


"00:01:03 Eny Follow the beacons... Copass danaged Score 000X 00:00:51 Approaching Gal-Corp lander Corrand >LAUNCH Launch O.N Liepoel score 001% 00:01:30 u res Laser A Closing in as door opens. sone olher con and SLRUNCH Launch 0.8 genoeg her there *** finish in the Gal-Corp launch vehicle (G.L.V.), and it's worth remembering that you can always fly back and dock with the G.L.V. to re-equip. Equally, if the mission involves a chain of jump pads then check each destination for a military or civil supply centre for fuel, the jump pads form a one-way network and it may be a long way to the next garage! A couple of tips that also applied to Ceti are useful here . . Since your skimmer can fire lasers in any direction it's quite possible to run like crazy while firing from the rear at any hunters that may be chasing you. If the mission involves docking with reactors then be VERY careful not to shoot at them. One careless shot and the door system will close for the duration and you will not be able to collect all the codes. Quite often one of two fortresses will be tucked in between a pair of reactors. The best approach here is to circle at a safe distance until you can see daylight between them and have a safe line of fire. THE DIFFERENT MISSION TYPES The missions involve a vareity of a different skills from the mindless violence of If It Moves to the more strategic mission such as Protector. In general the levels are not difficulty levels. I found some of the hardest missions in levels two and three. Later levels involve more specific tasks using particular tactics and strategies. Watch out, especially in later missions, for some of the rarer ships .. Suppressor Droids are particularly useful. Finally, here is a list of the missions found in each of the four levels with a rough guide of the task required... in ergonomics. They most important instruments after the main viewscreen are shield level and laser temperature and it's best to put them nearby so you don't have to hunt all over the screen to find them. Tuck the less useful items like the jump unit indicator away in the corners. Finally, if the planet has a dull red or magenta sun, it's better not to go for a dazzling white or yellow panel as it makes the display that much hard to follow. ON SCORING Each level of four missions only needs an AVERAGE score of 90% to pass. This means that if you have scored 100% in the first three missions you only need 60% on the fourth to pass the whole level. As soon as you reach that point QUIT from the mission. There's no point in going for the full 100% across the board as the scores are not carried through to the next level. Conversely if in one of the early missions you can't get a score of ninety percent plus then leave it till the end, you may not need to! While in a mission keep an eye on the score. Each mission has an individual scoring system and the score tells you if you are on the right track. If chasing and wiping out reams of buildings is not scoring then it's probably a waste of effort. BACK ON THE PLANET'S SURFACE Beacons play a very important part here. If you see a trail of beacons leading off into the sunset, you can bet that there is something interesting at the end of them, so don't just blast them away. If you're feeling ultraviolent then take them out on the way back to show that the area has been cleared. Most missions will start and teszne Forward Vie Score 002X Launch A killer lurks beyond the horizon destroyed CONpass damaged continued on page 61 Sone other Scotland LAUNCH Launch 0.X. Landscape with beacons tegnet 4** ** "


"ARCADE SCORCHERS Hot Shot 1 DB SPECTRUM LEGEND OF SPECTRUM 27795 COMMODORE 64 KAGE. AMSTRAD e lote laer-Gme "


"G.L.V. ACADEMY ES PLAYERS GUIDE Fortress Mk II Sphere Hunter Mk III options: put Laser Temp Undo last step Tracker The best way is to sneak in a Level 1 missile at point blank range. If it moves: Straight shoot-em-up Mission Improbable: Collect and Red Dawn: Destroy the Robot assemble codes. Suppressors Factories (You'll need delay come in handy here. bombs) Level IV Meltdown: Eliminate the Reactor Ceti Revisited: A bit of nostalgia before it's TOO LATE! on Tau Ceti III. Watch your fuel Softly, Softly: This one would be though. easy... if Gal-Corp hadn't Out of the Frying Pan: Shoot-emaccidentally mined the whole up with a nasty welcoming area. committee. Level II Don't Panic: Solar Discs and Cipher: Collect and assemble Reactor Complexes mean delay codes from nearby reactors. bombs are needed on this At the OK Corral: One for budding mission. John Waynes. Needle in a Haystack: Where to Guv?: Launch to a Navigational skills needed, plus solitary jump pad. Unfortunately finding a path through a the jump network has been taken minefield. over by pirates. You can always Level V jump out of trouble here but The Coal Mine: Planet in watch your fuel. permanent darkness so infra-red Hide and Seek: This revolves is vital. around eliminating several Solar Paz!: No relation to any Disc complexes. You'll need to magazine! Watch out for find a suppressor droid to indestructible Super Missiles. complete this one. Average survival time 35 Level III seconds!! Laserium: More straight ahead Protector: Chase the Tracker blasting. units. A fast skimmer is needed Hades ll: Very poorly lit infrabut this mission is quite easy red/flares needed. once you get the hang of it. The Sands of Time: A whole The Shepherd: Find and bring network of Reactors to eliminate. back (intact!) watch towers. Jump Pad Beacon A Building a skimmer Solar Disc ACADEMY Scanner Unit . Delay Bomb Track Unit delay C+VG COMPETITION A Mission data on Red Dawn mission tafe: ned om Systet: Setel guese Sun: Red Giant che) Manet: stk Eventide ng t useless Have you a cool nerve, steady hands and a head for heights? If so, we're giving you the chance of becoming a Computer + Video Games high-flyer in our fantastic Academy Competition. The first prize is a free flying lesson. Unbelievable, isn't it-your chance to sample the high life with your hands on the joystick. The next 30 runners-up will get a copy of the CRL game which will be available on the Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad. The flying lesson will be arranged at a mutally convenient time and at a flying club belonging to Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association. But remember, you must be over 16 to enter the competition and have the full approval, if under 18, of your parents. The competition is based around Academy, by Pete Cooke, follow-up to Tau Ceti. In Academy you are put Into training to become one of the Gal-Corp's top Skimmer pilots. You have to pass 20 tough tests which will push your space skills to the very limit. And that's the subject of the competition-design your own skimmer on computer. The sky is definitely not the limit for your imagination. Anything goes. Just send us the tape or a screen shot of your design to Academy Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The competition closing date is February 16th and the Chief Space Pilot's decision is final. Don't forget to send your entry with the printed coupon. opties: Text A Data on C+VG skimmer Zarjaz cademy Mission: If it moves... Skinner: Lenin Sound/ Academy Competition options: Accept li ssion Select a Mission Select a Skimmer Progress Report Tape Menu Enter a New Cadet View/Redef i ne Keys Cadet: Fred Smith Please select: A Opening menu screen. Name: ............. Address: Please indicate which computer you own Spectrum CBM 641 Amstrad "


"G#VG COMPETITION versen@s STICI esigning the ultimate the stick-grip to colour joystick is a bit like scheme, we want you working out blue-print to design a stick from scratch. for the perfect mouse-trap YOU could just see your there's always going to be design actually being someone who thinks you've manufactured by Euromax if left something out! they like it enough! And if I bet you've often moaned just seeing your stick on the about joystick design and shelf of your local computer thought you could come up store isn't enough to tempt with something much, much you to enter this amazing better. competition, Euromax have There's THREE SECOND your stick you might like to Well C+VG and Euromax, come up with s worth of PRIZES which consist of a take into consideration the the UK's leading joystick joysticks for the winners and Professional Autofire, and Elitecost of the features you'd like manufacturers, are about to runners-up. AND a Wiz Card. to see. Remember, the more call your bluff. THE FIRST PRIZE consists No less than 15 THIRD extra bits you add on to your If YOU think you can do of no less than FIVE Euromax PRIZE winners wil get a stick the more it's going to better here's your chance to joysticks. Their complete Professional Autofire AND 20 cost to make. prove it! collection in fact. The lucky runners-up will get a Wiz And how about Euromax currently produce winner will get a Satellite Card. Phew! This MUST be remembering those gamesters a range of top selling sticks Station, the top of the range the competition of the who are left-handed there here at C+VG we reckon that Euromax controller, a century!! must be a few thousand their sticks are the best Professional Autofire, the Ed's When you're designing around why not design a around but like all good favourite stick, an amazing leftie-stick? companies they want to keep Joyball, an Elite AND the Or how about a special getting better at what they do. innovative Wiz Card! You And that's were YOU come need never be short of a in. We want you to design the joystick again! perfect joystick. From firebutton to the shape of the base, from 6006 SATELLITE CON FUROVAN "


"EUROMAX FK AT IT! C+VG/EUROMAX DESIGN A JOYSTICK COMPETITION PLEASE FIX THIS COUPON SECURELY TO YOUR ENTRY! Name shoot'em up stick with include as much detail about designs that ease aching the features you've included thumbs? as possible send it together Do sticks ALWAYS have to with the competition coupon, be black? Do you want a to Computer and Video pistol grip stick or a more Games, Design a Joystick traditional design? Maybe the Competition, Priory Court, base should be bigger, maybe 30-32 Farringdon Lane, autofire should be a standard London, ECIR 3AU. feature, or perhaps you've got Closing date is February a totally revolutionary design 16th, normal C+VG up your sleeve... competition rules apply and Once you've designed your the Editor's decision is final. stick and remember to All designs submitted will become the property of Euromax Electronics Ltd to do with as they wish, inlcuding the bringing to market and sale of entire or part designs. Address: Age NTROL STATIO b. Woun: "


"COMPETITION The Ultimate in Joystick Control Arcade Quality with 8-way microswitches Faster response times provide a smoother, more accurate playing action for higher scores and its tough, dependable construction guarantees reliability during use. * Ergonomically designed, nylon covered steel handle and base for smoother playing action. * Rubber action return to vertical of joystick for fast, positive control. * Large, dual fire buttons for quick left or right hand operation. * Non-slip, rubber base pads ensure joystick remains firm during play. * Extra long 5 foot cable allows more comfortable playing positions. * Guaranteed for year. Suitable for: Amstrad; MSX computers; Commodore 64 and VIC 20; Atari; Sinclair ZX Spectrum (when used with an interface). Distributed in the U.K. by: Unit 2, Rothersthorpe Avenue Trading Estate, Northampton NN49JN. Telephone: 0604 68711, Telex: 31254 LEISFTG. Manufactured in the U.K. by: DYNAMICS marketing Ltd POWER A Coin Industries Company Coin House New Coin Street Royton Oldham OL2 6JZ-England Telephone: 0616267222 Telex: 669705 Coin G GET THE BIG ONE !! THE BIGGEST GAMES PACK EVER SUPER NEW ORIGINAL VALUE PROGRAMS FOR VILI THE COMMODORE S995 PAGK 64 OR 128 FACULTY ENTERPRISES LTD YOUR PERSONAL MSX STOCKISTS CHESS 11.99 10.99 9.99 POKER THE BIG ONE CONTAINS... YHATZEE SPACE ATTACK PONTOON GAME OF KINGS KINDER MATHS DRAUCHTS PAKATAK BERZERK SUPER FROG BASIC MATHS MAZE CHASE TROLLS TANK MATTLE VAMPIRES LAIR TREASURE HUNT CLUES THE ORGAN 3 D MAZE MATCH BOXES ASTRD PANIC DEFLECTION BOMBER BARNEY SYNTHESISER DUCK SHOOT BOWLING BREAKOUT SUS HUNTER DOG FIGHT SWITCH AROUND WORD SEARCH DEATH TRENCH COLLECTION DAY SPACE OCKARRICADE 3 Doo HEAD ON DRUM KIT DITTO SOLITAIRE MASTERMIND DYKE NIRSLER TERROR CASTLE DEPTH CHARGE MONEY CRABBER HANGMAN DEFINITIONS TIC TAC MATH NIM PEG PUZZLE COMMODORE C64/128 disc Red Hawk C64 disc Starion C64 disc Red Arrow AMSTRAD disc Ace A 64/128 disc Red Arrow A 64 disc The Devil's Crown A64/128 disc Heavy on the Magic A64/128 disc Bridge 11.99 10.99 10.99 Nemesis Rom Kingsize Snake it! Monopoly Chess Game MSX Artist International Karate View to a kill Blagger Green Beret Jail Break Gauntlet Gun Fright Nightshade 15.99 9.95 2.99 9.95 7.95 3.99 7.95 3.99 4.99 15.99 15.99 9.99 3.99 3.99 10.99 10.99 9.95 AND MANY MANY MORE...... ALSO AVAILABLE FOR VIC 20 & C16/+4, MINI COMPENDIUM 20 GAME PACK .95 BASIC MATHS DEPTH CHARGE PREDICTOR VIC 20 CHECKERS NIM DRIVER SHUPLE DRAGONS FRUIT MACHINE THREES ATTACK KINDER MATH SOLGOR BOMBER DITTO SNAKES NIBELER MUSICIAN SKTER SAUCERS BD MAZE SKYDIVER C16/+4 SOLITAIRE THREES PONTOON POKER CHECKERS SHUFFLE CLUES TIC TAC MATH SOLGOR FRULT MACHINE 3D OXO YHATZEE MUSICIAN NIN GAME OF KINGS HANGMAN MSXDambusters ALL OTHER BRANDS STOCKED ASK FOR DETAILS JVC MIDI — \"Turns Room into recording studio\" SEND CHEQUES AND PO'S TO: FACULTY ENTERPRISES LTD NOW MOVED TO: 7-79 SHERWOOD CRESCENT, MARKET DRAYTON, SHROPSHIRE. Tel: 0630 57465 1 PLEASE SEND ME (TICK APPROPRIATE BOX) Goods Dispatched within Fourteen Days. 75 GAMES FOR C64/128 ON CASSETTE UN DISKO 19.95 each inc.PSP 20 GAMES FOR VIG 20 20 GAMES FOR C16/+ 6.95 each inc.P&P I ENCLOSE A CHEQUE P.O. FOR M ADE PAYABLE TO AMVIC SERVICES LTD. NAME ADDRESS SEND TOE U.K.: 75 GAMES, GROUND FLOOR, 336 WEST CREEN RD, TURNPIKE LANE. LONDON NIS 30X. REP.Of IRELAND: 75 GAMES,84 DUNSINK AVENUE,FINGLAS, DUBLIN 11. COME AND SEE US AT OUR SHOP! "


"STRIKE FORCE available for Amstrad/Spectrum Cassettes .95 Amstrad Disc .95 Coming soon for the Commodore 64 .95 MIKRO-GEN Unit 15 The Western Centre Western Road Bracknell Berks. "


"COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES "


NA


"THE COIN-OP SENSATION FROM DATA EAST... DEPRES. DE DATA EAST DATA EAST U.S. GOLD Just like in the classic wild west films of old, you'll be in the thick of the action right from the Anailable in the following formats: Cassette Disk start! Hold-ups, robberies and .99 .99 rooftop fights, Express Raider Amstrad ........... .99 $14.99 has them all! Spectrum ...... ......... .99 U.S. GOLD-WE'RE AT HOME WITH THE ARCADE THRILLERS! U.S. GOLD LIMITED, 2/3 HOLFORD WAY, HOLFORD, BIRMINGHAM B6 TAX "


"NO BRITIS NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY Hire Software Before You Buy It OVER 8,000 different titles available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, ELECTRON, BBC, AMSTRAD all models, ATARI, and MSX computers. ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too. HIRE PRICES from only 75p INC. P&P. 20% DISCOUNT off all purchase software. LIFE MEMBERSHIP .00. Hire your first title FOC. FREE CATALOGUE. FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given). ALL GAMES manufactured ORIGINALS with full documentation. OVER 25,000 satisfied members. EUROPEAN members welcome. UP TO 65% OFF software, regular sales lists sent to all members. > Full computerised system keeps track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with staff of 14 who know what the word service means. Backed by our own software company and programmers. THE PORCHESTER CENTRE LONDON FEBRUARY 7Th 1987 B.M. CONVENTION Bored with atomising aliens and defeating dungeons? Need the challenge of real live opponents in an ever changing game situation? Then make the quantum leap to the world of play-by-mail gaming. Hundreds of games on dozens of themes run through the mail by professionals will be on demonstration, display and under discussion at the Second British Play-By-Mail Convention. Attractions include Prize Computer Game Competitions Role playing and Wargame Displays Full Bar and Restaurant Facilities Can't make the Convention but interested in PBM? Send a large SAE for your free information pack to M. McGarry, 2 David Ct, 200 Lansdown Rd, London N17. Send large S.A.E. now for free catalogue. NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY Unit 4.M.E.B. Works, Windsor Road, Enfield, Redditch, B97 60J. Tel: Redditch 65671 CVG NAME ADDRESS TIMES 10am-5pm VISA COMPUTER MODEL BARRY PAUL Prices include P&P within the UK Visit Our Shop Mon to Fri 67/Leather Lane, London, EC1 7TS Tel: 01-405 1515 Spotirum SK Light Force  Any Level 9 Game Killer (Can 600 They Stole a Million Bobby Bearing Block Busters Block Busters Goldrun Colour of Magic Jail Break Graphic Adventure Creator Theatre Europe Anals of Rome Scrabble 6.50 5.50 5.98 Bazooka BA Shains Road Bismark Explorer They Stole a Million Yle Ar Kung Full Konamis Got Dark Sceptre Xavious Bobby Bearing Shaoline Road Konamis Coin Op Hits Galini 199 Monopoly SO 8.50 5.50 Zzap Sizzlers Zzap Sizzlers Zzap Sizzlers Computer Computer Hits Legend of Sinbad Tau Ceti Superbowl Ping Pong Bogies Mercenary and and City Pack N ear Embargo Rogue Trooper 5.99 Tor Bruk Dandy Cyborg Commando 88 Bomb Jack Top Gun Hoad Alignment 5.99 6.50 Breakthru 6.50 Big Four Dunell Druid Soace Harrier Frelord Morte Zumas Revenge Scalextric Dacia 5 Star Games 10 Computer Hils 1.2 or 3 Crash Smashes 1.2 or 3 Han Turbo race D Port DK Tronics Dual Powerface OS Plus (Microtched Comp Pro 1000 stick Cheetah Mach Kone Sport Archers Torped Dorkong Lend of kage Psi-S Trading Co Leaderboard Froord 1395 Star Glitter Ikan Warriors G East Endors Alley Kat Uridium and Paradroid Pack 6.50 Commodore Super Cycle Super Huey ! Tom Hawk Rous Micro Rythm Sky Funnier Highway Encounter ership Wresting Breath Colour of Magic Crystal Cast Dan Dere Dantes interno Dompsey and Makepence Fisti 5 Star Games Footballer of the Year Gauntlet Ghost Goblin Intitrator Indis Alpha Scooby Doo Donkey Kong Masters of Universe Future Knight Trailer Avenger Terra Cresta Solda Mion Sold a Milioni Trail Blazer 6.50 Trivial Pursus Armour of Antirad Vera Cruz 6.50 Uridium Judge Dread  sche Shadow Skimmer World Games Zarax Kayioth L Uight Force Marble Mads Marble Mecess constructions Movie Monster 6.50 Any Matertronic Any Masterton MAD Camelot Warriors Jewis of Darkness Silicon Dreams Tracker 9.99 Last Nina Its a Knockout Space Harrier Paper Boy Boulderdash Construction Ace of Aces Sold a Million II RamboKung Fu Master Fighter Piot Ghostbuster Glider Rider Graphic Adventure Creator 10 Computer Hits Acro Jet Aliens Armour of Antirad Avenger Way of Tigerli Beyond Forbidden Forest Camelot Warriors Transformers Frebus Handbal Maradona Xano Big Trouble in Little China Donkey Kong Napoleon War Sigmat Deep Strike Dragons La P Hypeball 5.99 Pub Games 9.99 Para 25.99 Art Studio Music System Advanced Music System Die only Summer Games Summer Came Any Mastertreti 6.50 Hard Faight 20 Die MAD 5.99 Speech Soy Vs Spy Artic Amics Cosmic Shock Absorber Konami's Coin Op Hits StreForce Cobra Transformers Sports 4 All Supe Soccer Cosmic Shock Absorber Paper Boy OS Plus Zork Zork 550 "


"C+VG PLAY BY MAIL sheet, a copy of the latest newsletterturn. At a later date, usually about (most good games have one) and a week the GM or the computer other bits of paraphernalia which then examines your turns and using companies send you to help you on either their imagination, dice or your way. programs in some cases all three!) Once you are confident that you comments on your actions and know what you are doing, complete returns them to you in a manner the start-up sheet. that should be full of atmospheric A couple of tips here. Make sure description and detail you give your character/team a deep This process is repeated and you and detailed background as it will then develop and expand your give the Gamesmaster (GM) more character/team, hopefully scope to give you what you want becoming more powerful and from the game. For example you famous or infamous. A point could not only give details about worth noting is that when you pay your character/team's height/age/ for your start up package, you hair colour/appearance but you normally are credited with some could go into detail about their free turns. Once you have played your way through these you can expect to pay between .00 and Hi there! My name's Wayne and I'm the .00 per turn, depending on the type of game you are playing. chairman of the Play-By-Mail Players I personally find that if I set out from the begining with an objective Association (PBMPA). From this issue in mind, it helps a great deal. You onwards I will be bringing you an up to date could, for example, aim to be the monthly report on what's happening in the big most evil good player, the richest team in a game, the most magical or wide world of Play-By-Mail (PBM). I'll be most immaginative character; the list is endless. offering you discounts on games, One thing that I have yet to competitions with PBM prizes, FREE comment on is the social side of PBM. A lot of the games have playtests in up and coming games So YOU \"meets\" all over the country, where can tell me what you thought of them while players gather together (usually in a local hostelry!) and swap getting to play for nothing! plus lots, lots information and ideas. You get to more!! learn a lot of useful information and also get to make a lot of friends. Talking of making friends, it is or you people out there who sorcery based? beliefs/family history/attitude to possible to do this without R have never heard of PBM and Do you want a game that is run life/aims/political leanings etc etc. are wondering what it's all via a computer and has fixed dates You should then keep a copy of is that your character/team may about I'd better explain. PBM is by which you have to return your this start up sheet for later meet another character/team in a the world of postal gaming where it instructions. reference and return the original to game, which is of course run by is possible for you to become Do you want to run an individual the GM. another player anyone or anything! From an character or a team? After about a week you should When you send your turn sheet evil necromancer, causing great Once you have made up your receive your \"turn sheet\" and in, it is also possible to write a disasters throughout the world via mind you send a cheque or postal detailed information of your message to the player who runs the your strange arcane powers, to the order for anything between .50 starting position, rumours of character/team that you have met. captain of a starship whose sole aim and .00 to your chosen company incidents and happenings that you This way a lot of people write to is to save your galaxy from and sit back and await the satisfying may care to investigate, plus each other and if they have the impending doom because some thud of letters hitting your additional info which your same aims in the game they usually alien forces wish to annihilate it. doormat. Believe you me when you character/team may have noticed or form a sort of alliance and swap The whole hobby started off get into postal gaming that sound discovered. information. many years ago, when Chess was will be music to your ears!! It is then time for you to use your You then realise that the method the major postal game. The next step is to read skills as a player to explore the of swapping information via the When Fantasy Role Playing thoroughly through the literature unknown, to develop your GM is a bit slow, so usually a player (FRP) came along it wasn't long sent to you several times to make character/team-and most sends the other pla ver their name before someone realised that you sure you totally understand to what important of all, survive!! and address and thi contact each could turn it into a great postal the game is all about. Once you have entered your other via the more spewier Post game and promptly did so. If you encounter any problems, comments and ideas on the turn Office. The whole PBM scene has really most companies give you a sheet, you return it to the GM and I have made many frien's, male taken off and at present it is one of telephone number, which you can lo and behold you have then and female, from all over the world the most rapidly expanding hobbies ring for free advice. completed your first and now write to them on a regular in the country. Now it is possible to You should now have in basis as a penfriend. play almost any type of game, and your possession a rule you have a wide range to choose book, a start up from. The way to get into the hobby, (apart from reading this column!) is to flick through the pages of this magazine, where you will find many PBM companies advertising their games. Look closely at what they have to offer. You must carefully consider what type of game will satisfy you, as there are many options. Do you want a science fiction game or one that is sword and "


"THE SECOND BRITISH PBM CONVENTION This is Britain's and probably the world's biggests PBM convention. It is being held on February 7th at the Porchester Centre, Queensway, London, W2, between 10 a.m. and 5 p.m. Here you will get the opportunity to meeting ALL the major PBM companies and chat to them about their games. You will be able to get large discounts off start up packages, free advice, and most importantly of all, the chance to meet the players and see what THEY think of certain games. Last year svo players turned up at the convention and had a great time. This year we believe the attendance will be over 1500. The convention has expanded and, to date, I can confirm that 25 of the most important PBM companies will be be appearing. You'll also get a chance to discover the following exciting Can you rescue a merchant's kidnapped son from a real live team of Orcs? To give you a full rundown on what, where and how you get involved the Labyrinthe will be bringing many fighters, dressed in armour, who will stage entertaining live battles and give organisers hints on how to use swords and the like. Want to know more? then come to the convention and visit their large stand. Games People Play This is one of London's major games shops and they will with full up-to-date selection of scenarios, modules and miniature fantasy figures for your campaigns; a wide range of board games for you to play. paints, brushes and plastic models as well as other hobby related material. Dave Langford Famous SF author, freelance journalist and one-time C+VG writer will be there to present PBMPA awards to SECOND BRITISH CONVENTION I'MA COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES READER I CLAIM MY REDUCED ENTRY OF  CUT THIS TICKET OUT 10.00—5.00 FEB 7TH 1987 THE PORCHESTER CENTRE QUEENSWAY, LONDON things. The Labyrinthe The ultimate live role playing experience featured in this issue of C+VG! If you've read the feature you'll already know that The Labyrinthe is a network of caves where you can go and live like your favourite fantasy character. You can go into the dark, cold caves and act out the part of a bold warrior, a cunning magician or devious thief. You get to use swords, shields and actually engage in combat with monsters such as zombies, orcs and goblins, to name but a few. the players and the companies that convention as well as find out what YOU vote for. it offers. It costs .00 to join and Players Association you get a badge, membership card You can join the PBMPA at the and quarterly newsletter, as well as reduced start-up fees for certain games. Also, if you are having problems with a particular game you can write to us and we will do our best to sort out your difficulties, thanks to our expertise and many contacts in the PBM scene. All that and a licensed bar too... Top level negotiations are also taking place to secure the appearance of London's only Heavy Metal record shop as well as one of the countries leading artists who will be available to draw your favourite PBM character for FREE! As you can see it is going to be a big day and C+VG will make it even bigger. The standard entry price at the convention is .50. But if you cut out the special C+VG coupon, above, you'll be able to get in for .00!! Remember to come early as people will be attending from all over the country and there is a real possibility of a sell-out. WAYNE'S WONDER OFFER! I have managed to obtain half a dozen free playtests in a brand new fantasy game and I require six readers to act as playtesters. The first six readers that think of the most original name for a new PBM game that is based around brave barbarians, mystic magic users, cunning clerics and write to me via C+VG will be set up in the game AND play a couple of rounds for FREE!! Send your ideas to Computer + Video Games, Play By Mail Competition. Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Also if players out there have any problems, enquries or queries with PBM companies or games, write to me via C+VG and let me know. I will do may best to reply in this column. In the meantime I hope to see you at The Second British PBM convention. "


"C+VG PLAY BY MAIL C+VG'S PLAY BY MAIL GAME DOMINATION — THE FIRST REPORT power is gained and this is used to build new armies and ships, or invest in research and development to give an edge over other players in a fight. Domination was designed with PBM novices in mind, and only has five types of order and 11 types of optional orders. The youngest player that I know of is 14, but I wouldn't be surprised to find someone younger in one of the games. Perhaps players could write their ages on the next order sheet and I will publish the results. . The next report will carry more game details when there'll be a lot more action / to report. So stay tuned to News From Dexet, some magazine, next monthl = > and space. I will censor naughty names! COMPETITION This is open to any C+VG reader whether playing in Domination or not. I am about to develop the next PBM games and am interested in ideas that are different from space or fantasy exploration or D&D. The best idea will get both a free game of Domination and the new game, if the idea is fully developed into a PBM. The next best idea will get 15 free turns in Domination. I will give free turns for ideas that can be incorporated into PBM games as well. so if you fancy yourself as a PBM designer then write away Please send an SAE if you want ideas Here we proudly present the first returned. report form the frontline. C+VG's Mark envelopes COMPETITION and send to the address on the coupon, not C+VG. Game Master DAVID BOLTON brings DONT include the coupon unless you are you news of the battle to dominate applying to join Domination WHAT'S IT ALL ABOUT Dexet. If you are a new reader, or missed the 'm writing this in early November. There has address. It seems the post office delivers November issue of C+VG then you might be been a very good response to C+VG's PBM non-postcode mail 2nd class, even if stamped puzzled by the references to PBM. It stands for I with over 450 applications. There are 26 first class and several players have missed Play By Mail. PBM games are games that are games on the go now, with three more about deadlines by an much as five days! played by post and tend to be strategy games, to start GAME RESULTS a little like the board games Risk or Diplomacy. The computer has a capacity for a lot more in the first 16 games, after turn one, there were When you apply to join a PBM game, you players yet, so if you want to try PBM for the three evenly matched players with 62 Victory get a rulebook and a start position. You then first time, fill in the coupon below. The rulebook points each: have to fill your orders in on an order sheet and first two turns are FREE, after that turns Game 10. David Horne and return this to the umpire who types them in cost 9Op each Game 12, A. Sinclair to a computer. There are some vacant positions, so if you Game 14, John Twycross On a certain date the computer processes want to start in a game immediately rather As there is no overall leader, I've shared the all of the orders. The results and new order than wait for the next game start, put the word first/second prizes and given each of these sheets are then posted back to the player \"substitute\" on the coupon. four free turns. C+VG will pass on the Big Red This continues until the player is knocked out I won't start anyone into a game that has t-shirts or the game finishes. reached turn 10, but before that new players Here is an interesting fact: In one game (23) Each turn is usually two weeks long, though have as good a chance of winning as existing there are players from Finland, England, there are faster and slower games, varying players. Wales, Channel Isles, France, Norway, Turkey, from 7-21 days/turn. As the orders have to get If you are applying for a 7,10 or 12 day Holland, Denmark and N. Ireland! Game 27, from computer to player and back in one turn game, PLEASE include your postcode in your shortly to start will be made of 16 non-UK there is sometimes only a couple of days to players. work out your orders. Coming into December there will be delays Diplomacy and alliances are usually very I WANT TO RULE THE WORLD! SEND MEA in the post, So I will extend deadlines over important, certainly in Domination. Players can DOMINATION RULEBOOK INSTANTLY! Christmas. Details will be given with your include messages to other players with their game, so read the messages. orders and these are forwarded on with the Name Some players have sent in a few suggestions next turns' results. Address for exra features for Domination, and one is possible to ally with other players and have added is a new option allowing cities you agree not to fight, or even worse gang up on own to be renamed. By the time you read this someone else. Age _Desired turn around time all games will have the new option: Number You don't need a computer to play in PBM (ring number) 7, 10, 12, 14 or 21. Send this 11. This goes 11 city number, New City games, though sometimes they have their uses. coupon to: Domination/Casus Belli, PO Box Name. Example: 11,2,TIMMETCALF. One player printed a copy of his main map on 11, Carrickfergus, County Antrim, BT38 7TH, The idea for that option came from D.C. a computer and sent this to his allies. The only N. Ireland. DONT FORGET YOUR POST Lane, who also gave me a list of 60 new city thing you really need to play in PBM games is CODE! names and won himself two free turns. a budget of about .00 per month. welcome ideas for expanding Domination, C+VG launched Domination/Casus Bell in and will give away free turns for them, but November. It is a grand strategy game where ONLY for the best! 16 players try to knock each other out and No more than 10 characters in the name become the first to hold 20 cities for three please, and remember you can only rename turns. As you capture cihes, cities that you own, using letters A-Za-z 0-9 more production si J! (5 DE Gwade TILAN 14 "


"TEMESS The Final Challenge ZO AMI For mail order enquiries please write to: Launching soon on: Spectrum .95 Amstrad, Commodore tape .95 Amstrad, Commodore disc .95 NMC Limited, PO Box 67 London SW11 IBS or call on 01-228 6730 "


"MADN C+VG goes completely over the top this issue thanks to the mad minions of Mastertronic. They want to give away literally HUNDREDS of games to YOU, our loyal readers. Why? Because they like you! Yes, YOU could win the ENTIRE range of current Mastertronic games for your computer, plus a super-slick Magnum Joystick, worth squillions of pounds. No, we couldn't believe it either! THREE first prize winners will be able to claim their bumper bundle of Mastertronic goodies. 50 runners-up will get a copy of Mastertronic's latest release Feud. Everyone is a winner in C+VG's MAD Mastertronic competition. All you have to do to claim one of the THREE first prize packages is spot the names of the Mastertronic games our giant word-square. As a tie-breaker we've also included the names of four C+VG people for you to uncover. Ring the names of the games -and people as you work your way through the word-square. Once you think you've found them all, send your completed wordsquare, together with the entry coupon to, Computer and Video Games, MAD Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Closing date for the competition is February 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and Mister Mastertronic's decision is final. M. LE CUIE COMMODORE SPECTRUM 4 B circuit tot.mn COMPLET Speed CRUSTAT MASTERIR Only hope for pies youth omres ent and of mind raphics "


"G+VG COMPETITION (1) C+VG/MASTERTRONIC COMPETITION Name DIRIXI Address Computer owned x SZUVTERMINUS AFGH UPI ZUB XTIMS JHOLM VXEL HOLE IN ON ENPO ZX SOULOFAROBOTZITS A B H KLUO MXN    J TCKUFBXT UNIVERSA AMPTQROS VNCVRRG X ULLAURSTHOAV PQ X s E E K A N V 0 J G Q R G OF ASSIAHMDGK LUM FA LEON EMANANDISE FCTS CSKNIGHTTYME PO QO V EWIMWEN AHISDURN SALAPTRLDROIDSBQGS TMN FTXLCSKANELEUO  U O H H I KHLN PIW RSVNTLKI KMONVLTS MLKNLU ALS BDTEF JTGM NQ E ZOOHLTH I J PLMNOD BFEO ATTEAHBMX EESCE HAFRKSARRERACERS DV XBRUT CE CMP RR GSP EED KINGE O EN FORMULA ONES IMXLPNS MOLOCUL EMANSCRADGX TFFS FLASH GORDONTAT XVIDEOMEANIES ADMSR TXH S V MASTER OFMAGIC os Flesh ti aca SPECTRUM 4 3/1 28 PEC 40/12 OK ght Opponents itised Speech ntrol hplay "


"di iT HAVE YOU GOT WHAT IT TAKES TO BE A OPGUNE TM Top Gun puts you in the fighter pilot's seat of an F-14 Tomcat. Vector graphics and a split screen allow 1 or 2 players to play head to head, or against the computer. Your armaments in this nerve tingling aerial duel are heat seeking missiles and a 20mm rapid fire cannon. Can you feel the force! Top Gun mavericks! Enter the danger zone. .95 .95 ocean .95.O .95 SPECTRUM AMSTRAD/ COMMODORE Ocean Software Ltd., 6 Central Street, Manchester M2 SNS. Telephone: 061-832 6633. Telex: 669977 OCEANG. Ocean Software Distributed in France by Ocean France Telephone 91-42-7144. Dette in Germany by Rutware Telephone: 2101.70040 TM &  1986 Paramount Pictures Cornnration. All Rights Reserved TM adaman. Danam "


"C+VG GOLDEN JOYSTICK AWARDS NEXT MONTH It's time for the computer game equivalent of the Oscars once more! Yes, for the fifth year in succession we're asking YOU the loyal C+VG reader to vote for our coveted Golden Joystick Awards. These now traditional awards go to the software houses and programmers who YOU reckon deserve them. Look back at your software collection and work out which game is the best from 86. Which company do you think deserves the software house of the year title? Which programmer has impressed you enough during '86 to win your vote for Programmer of the Year? And which game had a soundtrack which blew your ears away? This last category is a new one for this year but the regular categories remain the same. The first 20 people to send their vote form in will get the pick of the C+VG software cupboard so get your entry in today. And remember — YOUR VOTES COUNT! SOFTWARE HOUSE OF THE YEAR RUNNER-UP GAME OF THE YEAR RUNNER-UP ADVENTURE OF THE YEAR RUNNER-UP STRATEGY GAME OF THE YEAR RUNNER-UP Welcome to 1987 the year when C+VG, the world's most elegantly wasted computer games magazine will get bigger, brighter and a whole lot more fun. Why read two magazines to get an overall view of computer games, movies, music and the hi-tech world around you when C+VG can bring it all to you in one neat package? We begin our lifestyle enhancing look at the new year next issue with a whole bunch of fascinating features. Cholo is the game bird hope will take the games challenge where Elite left off. We've got an exclusive rat's-eye view from the Cholo programmers at Solid Image. A players guide, a competition, plus lots more. Remember Gerry Anderson, the innovative creator of Thunderbirds, Captain Scarlet, Joe 90, Space 1999 and other cult TV shows? Well we've got an in depth interview with the man himself, plus a chance to win some classic Thunderbirds episodes on video. Keith Campbell starts a new feature in his Adventure pages next issue. Every month from now on, KC and his sunshine band of adventure tipsters, will be bringing you a COMPLETE solution to much loved adventures! Next issue it's The Hulk, the first of the Questprobe series. Everyone is chasing Clare Edgely, queen of the arcade tipsters, in an attempt to take her crown. But C+VG readers KNOW who's being covering the coin-op scene the longest-AND doing it best. All this plus an amazing American Football competition and free Nexus game offer. Plus the regular features you've come to know and love. So don't miss the March issue of C+VG. Your life just wouldn't be stylish without it... BEST ARCADE STYLE GAME RUNNER-UP BEST ORIGINAL GAME RUNNER-UP BEST SOUNDTRACK RUNNER-UP PROGRAMMER OF THE YEAR RUNNER-UP NAME ADDRESS COMPUTER OWNED "


"ATARI ST/800XLXE OWNERS HINTS-POKES-MAPS Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest, biggest and best Atari Club on the market. Now incorporating ST software into our stocks and approaching 280 titles MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over 4 years ago first conceived the idea of a software library Now Over 1.700 es on disc, cassette and Rom (games, business, education and utilities Ohen purchasing popular programs in multiples of live or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Over 2.500 very satisfied members, many as far away as loeland, Sweden, West Sermany. Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast efficient and friendly service operating a computerised custom built system to keep track of all your records Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities Important: Midland Games Library are in no way connected with or responsible for Midland Computers Ltd. of Worcester. SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos. Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programs are originals with full documentation S ing Vale-Tony Bridge, Popular Computing Weekly The monthly handbooks packed with tipe poles, Mints, mape solutions, gossiplet review.competitions, pleas much more Adventurers Handbook (CBM SPEC) CIS Plus Handbook marad Handbook SC Marhook Commodore Arcade Handbook Spectrum ( 138) Arcade Handbook Or for even better vale take advantage of our reduced b scription rates 2.76 ES00, 12 9 00 Send cheque or P.O.te: &D Services (CVG), 1338 Ashton Old Road, her Openshaw Manchester, MILU Tel: 051 370 5666 FREE MEMBERSHIP!!! Hire CBM64, Spectrum, Vic-20 software! Write now for free exciting details! COMPUTERSOFT (cv) PO Box 28, North PDO, Nottingham NG5 2EE Please state machine. Stamp appreciated) ATARI 400/600/800XLIST SOFTWARE We have all all round selection of disks cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE Apply now and hire your first four games free Around 1.000 different original titles For details send large stamp addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 Disc Ore 11995 postre Atan 5205STM 345. post free 10 free Casio C22305 6279.90 post free Antic and Analogu es de BEST QUALITY DISCS Memorex $100 Discs 10 for 13.95 Unlabeled SS 00 De 100 950 CLASSIFIEDS UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64. Send s.a.e. for fast response and details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG), 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB STOP PLAYING GAMES Use your computer to make money. Turn your hobby into a home based income Full and part time opportunities to cash in on this tremendous market. High earnings easily possible Open to any amatuer micro user and gamer. Write for free details Westlink Promotions 108 George Street Edinburgh EH2 4LH Unlabelled SS.OD D O 142795 Memorex 312 pcs Boxes of 10 S S. 024.5 p. Unlabeled 32 SSIDO Discs 10 1995 Atari 520 STM with 2 Megabyte Drive 449.00 23 dises Happy enhancement for the 1050 Drive with revision 7. 139.95 post tree GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB DEPT. C+VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thornex Close, Sunderland SR3 4PD. Tel: (091) 5286351. ALL SOFTWARE CHECKED Maros Computers Ltd 42 Market St, Longton, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffs Tel: 0782 319144 COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD. MSX, ACORN, HOME and BUSINESS 30% DISCOUNT e.g. 9.95 will be 6.95 7.95 will be 5.50 ALL NEW GAMES COME STRAIGHT INTO STOCK ANY ENQURIES PLEASE PHONE. SEND SAE FOR FULL LIST \"Apologies to people who sent orders for Fight Night, there are short delays. Please bear with us THIS MONTH ONLY 2550 OUR PRICE R.R.P. 9.95 14.95 1.99 G-TEN LIMITED BEST TITLES AT DISCOUNT PRICES AMSTRAD Tage Disc SILENT SERVICE 675 9.75 SPINDIZZY 6.7 11.25 SABOTEUR 6.50 NA CITEDAL 6.75 9.75 DESERT FOX TERRA CRESTA 6.50 NA SPEECH .75 9.75 TOMAHAWK 6.75 NA TOP GUN AIRWOLF 8.75 1125 COMVANDO 6.75 11.25 750 NA STRE FORCE HARRIER 5.75 10.50 WORLD CUP CARVINAL 5.75 11.25 TRAP 6.75 7.50 REPTON 3 725 975 SHOGUN 6.7$ 11 25 DRAGONS LAR 675 10.75 THRUST 6.50 9.75 KUNG FU MASTER 675 1125    GREEN BERET GREEN BERET 6.50 11.25 ARCANA STRYWERS RUN TOP CUN INRLTRATOR 575 1125 TRIVIAL PURSUIT STALLONE COBRA 575 115 RAVENSCULL 675 950 SA COMSAT 550 11.25 FOAR DOEN FORFST 75 115 CRYSTAL CASTLES 575 9.50 GHOSTS GOBLINS 6.50 1125 WOTELS 675 115 OCOGY CERERS VAMI VICE STRE FORCE HAARER 6.75 975 YEAR KUNG PUH 6.75 1125 HIGHLANDER PARTY DEACTIVATORS 6.75 1125 ORUD 690 1175 AMIGA RANGE OUR PRICE STARGU DER 11 5 15.50 25 50 REVOLUTION 75 1125 JUDGE DREDO COMPUTER HITS 103 6.75 SUPERSTAR PING PONS 635 NA ARCTIC FOU 2550 EIDOLON 6.50 NA 6.75 10.50 25.50 FI, FATETHE PAIN MARBLE MADNESS 5.76 NA 5.75 11.75 SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD 23.00 ICONON 6.50 NA STAR RAIDER CRAPHICRAFT 50.00 GAUNTLET 6.75 1175 6.75 11.75 TEXT CRAFT 55.00 GA VAN BA200  6.3 11.25 COMMODORE 64/128 THEY SOLD A MILLION PERIPHERALS 675 11.75 OUR PRICE PAPERBOY 725 11.25 (add 1.00 p&p perem) GUNSHIP 11.75 14.50 IKARI WARRIORS IT'S A KNOCKOUT 6.75 11.25 QUICKSHOT I JOYSTICK 5.75 GHOSTS N GOBLINS QUICKSHOT II PLUS JOYSTICK 8.75 POWERPLAY 6.75 11.25 7 11 25 REMOTE CONTROL JOYSTICK STALLONE COBRA COLOUR OF MAGIC 5.50 NA 6.75 NA 8.75 M  6.50 NA SENTINEL PARALAX 6.50 9.75 KNUCKLEBUSTERS 7 25 1125 Authorised dealers for Datalife GAUNTLET 7.25 1125 XEVIOUS PAP add per box) CAULDRON 6.50 10.75 MOVIE MONSTER GAME 675 1125 BOX OFTENS POWER PAY 5.75 11.50 DATALIFE ISSOD 4P 1450 GREEN BERET 6.90 11.25 BBC MICRO DATALIFE SVOS DO 48TP 18.00 LEADERBOARD 6.75 1075 COMMANDO 675 1125 DATALIFE SSGD TP1800 SHOGUN 675 11 YEAR KUNG FU 75 1125 DATALIFESSOSD 96TPI 22 50 Please specily machine. Please allow 14-28 days delivery. Mail order only. Please add 75p P&P per item (UK or BFPO only) Overseas add .50 P&P per item. Please make Cheques/Postal Orders (sterling only made payable to G-Ten Limited UK or BFPO orders, please send to: G-TEN LTD, DEPT. C+VG, FREEPOST (no stamp required) London, E1 GBR OVERSEAS orders, please send to: G-TEN LIMITED, DEPT. C+VG, 1st Floor, Commerce House, 146/150 Commercial Street, London E1 6NU PLEASE NOTE ANY GAME NOT RELEASED WHEN ORDERED, WILL BE SENT ON RELEASE DATE 1.99 9.95 9.95 7.95 9.95 9.95 Dragons Skulle (64) Combat Leader (C64) Law of the West (C64) Paper Boy (C64) Football Manager (C64) Cyberun (48) Zorro (48) Revolution (48) Football Manager (48) Superman (48) Kung-Fu Master (Amst) Alien 8 (Amst) Bruce Lee (Amst) Football Manager (Amst) Dreibs (Atan) Fort Apocalypse (Atari) Football Manager (Atari) Gun Fright (MSX) Trivial Pursuits (, Amst, 48) 5.95 1.99 1.99 1.99 5.95 3.50 1.99 1.99 1.99 5.95 8.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 1.99 1.99 5.95 1.99 9.50 14.95 Head cleaners 50p with any purchase while stocks last. All MSX Cartridges .99 Prices incl P&P, please allow 10 days delivery Overseas add 75p per cartridge. Cheques Postal Orders made payable to: Maros Computers Ltd Credit card phone orders welcome "


". CVECOMPETITION DODGY GEEZERS  Something definitely dodgy is going on here, John. Melbourne House are actually GIVING away games! Doesn't seem right to me. But not being one to look a gift horse in the mouth I think it would be well worth your while sussing out this competition. After all it's not every day you get to win Arthur Daley's own Trilby hat is it. Or a copy of Arthur Daley's Guide to Doing it Right. Or a FREE copy of that nifty adventure Dodgy Geezers. Know what I mean, John? Even the second prize winner is on to a nice little earner a copy of the book plus a game. And then 50 runners-up will be able to get their hooks into a copy of the highly praised Lever and Jones adventure. I'd get in on this caper as soon as you can, John, before the Wizards from Oz change their minds. B301 ENJ 9 All you have to do is spot the six differences in the two pictures above. Then ring them and send your coupon together with the pictures to Computer and Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR JAU. Closing date is February 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and the Godfather's decision is final. C+VG/MELBOURNE HOUSE DODGY GEEZERS COMPETITION Name Address Amstrada Computer owned (tick box) Spectrum C64 O BBCo "


"G-VACOMPETITION arble Ladness fascinating toys which every top executive has on his desk-to give away in our extra-special Marble Madness Competition. And 25 runnersup will get a copy of the new Marble Madness Construction Set, available for the Amstrad and the Spectrum. e don't want you losing your marbles All you have to do is fill in the missing words so we're giving some away! Well, in the game titles below and write us an Melbourne House are giving them away amusing caption for the picture of Melbourne House people Jo Meads and Jane Denning. really. We've got TWO Newton's Cradles those Easy huh? Send your entries to Computer and 1) Way of the Exploding Marble Video Games, Marble Madness Competition, 2) Marble Bill Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London 3) Redmarble ECIR 3AU. Closing date is February 16th, 4) Lord of the Marbles normal C+VG rules apply and the Ed's decision 5) Say Marble! is final. Start the ball rolling and enter today! Just fill in the \"marbles\" with the REAL words! Es C+VG/MELBOURNE HOUSE MARBLE MADNESS COMPETITION Name Address Computer owned (tick box) Spectrum Amstrado My caption goes like this Cavalier A Melbourne House's Jane Denning and Jo Meads The missing words are: OR A LON III ILI G-VG COMPETITION 6 Calculator 1. How many Wally games have been released by Mikro-Gen? 2. How many Weeks in paradise were there? 3. How many relatives has Wally got? Are YOU a calculating character? If you are, C+VG MIKRO GEN COP OUT QUIZ you'll want to get your hands on this wonderful addition to your lifestyle. An C+VG/MIKRO-GEN COP OUT exclusive designer calculator from Mikro-Gen COMPETITION as used to add up the scores at the recent Name National Video-Games Championship! Address We've got five of these classy calculators to give away plus five copies of Mikro-Gen's latest game Cop-Out for the runners-up. All you have to do is answer the calculated questions and make every answer count. Easy huh? Not really ... Computer owned (tick box) Spectrum Amstrado My answers are: Calculator "


"J S Y S TEM PRESENTS 3 BANGKOK KNIGHTS LEITAS AMO MORE THAN JUST A SIMULATION BIG FIGHT SPECIAL Largest moving characters ever seen on a home computer 5 exiting backgrounds 8 directional smooth scrolling HT Playing soon CBM 64,Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Atari 800/130 XE & ST TEL 01954 1909 "


"Digitising images onto your computer used to be difficult and expensive. Our pixelated man in America, Marshal M. Rosenthal, shows you just how easy, and cheap, it really is. Here's Jill waiting to find mission control... I Te've all seen those great looking digitised images on television and in films. Why should we be denied the right to make them ourselves? \"Okay\". you say \"that's all well and good, but who has the money to spend for one of those expensive graphic computers! True, you CAN go out and spend ,000 on a fancy machine, but why bother when you can do it all for a lot, lot less? In the article on Space Camp last issue, Greg, Jill, Liz, David, Todd and Chris talked about their experiences on the various simulators and weightless devices. The pictures used to illustrate the article were created using a digitiser. How? Read on, brothers and sisters... It starts by loading a single lens reflex camera with slide film. Everybody took turns getting in front of a plain paper background, and acting out some of their activities from Space Camp. An electronic flash\"freezes\" all movement Balancing on stools simulates \"floating\" in space, while jumping becomes \"weightlessness. The slides are developed and the technical fun begins. A Digi-View digitiser is attached to the parallel port of an Amiga computer. This device receives a sigmal from a black and white video camera (Panasonic WV140), which gives the high-resolution image necessary. Three filters (red, blue and green) are included and are used to produce the colour image. Since each filter requires its own scanning time of about 10 seconds, you can't easily use a \"live\" model. That's why slides are a good way to work with \"live\" subjects. The computer image appears after each scan, so the camera is first attached to the composite port of the Amiga monitor. The black and white video picture can now be centred and focused. Another way to do this is by attaching the camera to a video-cassette player and watching on regular TV. The camera needs to be on a solid support to avoid vibrations, a tripod was used. The slides were placed in a projector and aimed onto a rear view daylight screen. The picture appears normally on the front of the screen, having been bounced off the back with a mirror. The image will also be brighter than projecting onto a wall. Since the light beam is to the side of the screen, the video camera can be moved back and forth without worrying about casting a shadow. When it looked good, the camera cable was removed, from the monitor and attached to the Digi-View. The lights were killed to prevent glare and the Digi-View software set in motion, Three exposures had to be made, one through each of the coloured filters (which are held in front of the camera and rotated. The scan appears on the screen and takes less than 30 seconds. After all three are done, you have the choice of seeing the digitised picture in 4,096 colours. The image was saved. Now we were ready to load DeluxePaint and put our digitised image onto the electronic canvas. The background was removed so that it didn't get in the way. Magnify and draw an outline around what you want and then blot out everything else with the fill command. Then use the Brush feature which can modify the picture and do all kinds of things to it, like changing the size or rotating it. Now it's time to head for outer space. In this case, it will be artwork drawn by Mitchell Waxman and Delfin Barral. Both are 19, and studying to be cartoon artists. at the School of Visual Arts in New York. Together, they created the backgrounds of sky and space that the Space Camp kids have talked about. Then the digitised picture is dropped into place, like it was part of a paper collage (although no collage allows so much creative control). Mitch and Delfin magnify and work on the digitised picture so that it blends in with their artwork. The result is that Jillis Hey! Here comes the control desk At last, windows. Let's see if these controls work... Yeah! Got something. But it isn't Miami Vice "


"ting pixels Whoops! I must have touched the wrong button! rocketing between the stars in a jetpack while Greg and David try to fix the jammed cargo doors of their Space Shuttle. Shooting slides and combining them with artwork is just one way to do digitisation The video camera could have been used on a copy stand and focused on line art or pictures from magazines. Or aimed out the window, even at the computer itself. 4 black and white image can be digitised, printed out and then coloured Since there's only one scan for black and white (using the red filter), let someone hold still and pose. When making the exposures for the 3-D effect; first expose using the video camera with the RED filter setting on the Digi-View screen -BUT DONT USE ANY FILTER IN FRONT OF THE CAMERA!! Then digitise with the Green setting, and again no filter. The camera is moved laterally just a few inches between exposures you have to experiment), and then the lens should be again aimed at the object(s). The result will be a pleture that's slightly askew, and crazy looking. But put on a pair of red blue glasses and WOW! But what about those without an Amiga. What's wrong with the 8-bit machines? Nothing at all, because you can digitise in black and white here too. In these cases, use Computereyes with your Atari or Commodore 64. The interface simply plugs into the computer (the two joystick ports of the Atari or the user port of the Commodore 64). and comes with the software to do exciting black and white digitisation. The procedure here is even simpler than it was for colour. There's only one scan, and it is short enough to be used with a live model Aim the camera at the subject to be digitised (remember to plug it into the interface). Run the software and adjust the sync knob on the interface until you're told to stop. Then set the brightness by rotating another knob. Now focus the camera (again you'll need to use a monitor or TV to do this). Press the key for a normal capture, and watch the image appear after about six seconds Those really adventurous can go to Graphics nine on the Atari, which creates a picture with 16 levels of grey. It takes almost 90 seconds, but it is possible for a person to hold still long enough. You can use any kind of video source that will stop and display a single frame, like a video cassette player or a laster-dise. When you're satisfied, save the image to disk. It can now be used as a painting file, loaded into most nainting programs and played around with and coloured. There are even special programs to include the image with the Print Shop, Koala Pad, Doodle and Flexidraw formats (Commodore 64 only, the Atari digitised image works with Atari Artist and other compatible formats). There are additional tricks that can help in working with a digitised image in Deluxe Paint. One is being careful with colour selection. For Space Camp, the people were loaded first as Brushes, and then the art was drawn using their palette. You can also use the Remap feature to match up any picture with a previous one, but this is sometimes disastrous especially as flesh tones create a lot of orange and red tones. Of course, you can alter colours that aren't important (usually black and white). Taste will tell. Another discovery is that you can lift\" an image out from its background, tu it into a movable output, sort of like a colourform. Here's how: Let's say we have a digitised picture of a tripod. Draw around it with the background colour, using the Zoom feature. This is the same colour that is used when you press the right mouse button (black works well). When done, you now have just the image you want outlined. Select the Brush feature, and make a rectangle around the image. and around the unwanted background. Continued on page 85 then the art was drawn using their pa This is better. Sigourney Weaver eat your heart out! Perhaps if I try adjusting the horizontal hold To boldly go where no pixel has gone before "


"Crime is a disease. He's the cure. STALLONE COBRA SPECTRUM ocean COMMODORE 64 .95 .95 3 are 004460 C 1986 Warner Bros. Inc A rights reserved AMSTRAD 6 Central StreetManchester M2 SNS Tel 061 834 3939-Telex 669977 "


"pulsating pixels Low level scan of Michelle 16 level Atari graphic scan Pick up the image and then choose the printer. Seans take 1.6 seconds. Black and Object mode in the Colour menu. This white levels can be adjusted manually. makes the background (black) disappear. automatically and reversed. The image is now free of anything outside of If you own an Atari ST and are still flush what was outlined, and can be dropped on with cash, why not try the Haba Video top of another picture without disturbing Digitiser. At .95 it's no bargain anything. basement buy Digistisation certainly does look neat. It consists of a matrs unit with its own The best thing about it is that you don't external power supply. And the on-screen need a lot of equipment, or technical display give you four pull down menus and knowledge to be able to do it. Just some which allow you to set the size, scan lines, inexpensive hardware, a camera and the flip, insert, zoom, flip and print-out. desire to have fun. Scanning is not particularly quickAuthor's bio: Marshal M. Rosenthal is a around 10 seconds. It does however make photographer based in New York. He also use of the ST's multitude of colours. They writes for a number of domestic and can be assigned to the Haba's 16 shading overseas publications on topics dealing with levels. computers, video and high technology. For the Commodore 64 there's the Original artwork drawn by Mitchell Waxman Print Technik 64 Digitiser at $69, complete and Delfin Barral with a package of application programs on Product information: disk. COMPUTEREYES: Images are created at full 64 resolution. Digital Vision, Inc. Function keys can be used to assign any of 14 Oak Street, suite 2 the 60's 16 colours to their four grey scale Needham, MA 02192 USA levels in the picture. You can also scroll U.K. Distributor: round the main image. Stern Computing 3 Black Ness Avenue And for .50 you can get the Sunset Dundee, Scotland DD2 IER Digitiser for the Spectrum. Contract and Computereyes Package Hardware and scoll around the image can be altered. The software for the Atari XL Commodore 64 image --which must be still can be (excluding camera): saved to tape or microdrive. Image $129.95 US Dollars resolution is slightly higher than the Commodore 64 modification disks: Spectruin display, $15.00 US Dollars Atar Graphics 9 disk: If you can't afford the pricey Sunset $15.00 US Dollars Digitiser, then for $69 try the Video Face. Pictures are scanned every 0.27 seconds. DIGI-VIEW: Images can also be saved to cassette and New Tek, Inc. microdrive. The software is menu driven. 701 Jackson, suite B3 The Amstrad Video Dignitiser samples Topeka, Kansas 66063 USA DigiView Package --Hardware and software for pictures at 1/50th second, enabling moving the Amiga (excluding camera): pictures to be captured, resolution is 66,536 $199.00 pixels and images can be stored on tape, or disc or saved to printer. DIGITISING IN THE UK! Do-it-yourself digitising doesn't come cheap. PRODUCT DETAILS These pixel pulverising packages start at Watford BBC Digitiser, Watford around $60 and cost up to , depending Electronics. . 0923-37774. on what computer you have. Haba Video Digistiser, Haba Systems. But the Americans DON'T dominate the Atari ST. .95.01-751 6451. market. We Brits are very much in the Print-Technik, Supersoft. CBM 64. . picture too. 01 861 1166. The Watford BBC Digitiser is generally Sunset Digitiser, Sunset. Spectrum reckoned to be one of the most sophisticated ,50. around. And at 29 it's by no means badly Video Face, Romantic Robot. Spectrum. .01-625 9463. It allows images to be compressed and Amstrad Video Digitiser, J. Morrison. stored on disk and copied to any Epson-type .65.0532 537507. Four-level scan NNESS GENIUS My goodness Guinness! Eight level scan My goodness! priced. High contrast scan Take the tube! 16 level Atari graphic scan "


"C+VG C+VG2200 IFEATURES Parser is found and restored, the It's pantomime season! Oh no it's not. Oh yes it only product coming out next will IS! And C+VG is determined not to be left out. But be salad-fixings. our panto is one with a difference because it's You and two friends, Jebediah and Zebulon, decide to find the based on those weird and wonderful people who culprit and thwart this plot make up Infocom, America's top adventure against text adventure games. creators. Here scriptwriter Marshall M. -look You check your pockets and find you have a Yo-Yo and 20 dollars. out he's behind you! Rosenthal takes you on a ZEBULON: Where can we start light-hearted, or is that light-headed, adventure looking? through the realms of Vezzaville ... JEBEDIAH: I know. Infocom's office has this mug-shot board. CAST OF CHARACTERS Maybe we can find a clue there. UNCLE PARSER/Dave Lebling: YOU: Sounds good. Let's go. Author/co-author of adventures that include Zork 1-3, Starcross, Suspect. YOU: Delve into the unknown world of programs yet to be. JEBEDIAH/Steve Meretsky: Author/co-author of adventures that include Planetfall, HitchThe three of you begin your Hikers Guide, Leather Godesses. Scene Two: INFOCOM search. Within minutes, you find ZEBULON Tara Dolan: Purveyor Infocom is located in an the Doctor lounging against a of hidden dreams. industrial complex, with corridor wall, oblivious to all the suffering CHUGGO/Dave Anderson: Newly after corridor of rooms and going on around him. grown author of Hollywood hidden spaces. Everyone there is ZEBULON: Doctor, we feel Hijinks. in a gloom, and ignores you. After terrible. CYRUSS McGEE/Amy Briggs: A hours of searching, you come DOCTOR GOODBODY: That's too woman of mystery. upon a bulletin board mounted tobad. Everyone should feel good DOCTOR GOODBODY/Jon Palace: the wall. (but get sick so that I can keep Creative deity. JEBEDIAH: What did I tell you? making a living). What's wrong? ELMIRA BAT/Tomas Bok: Another Look, the cards tell all about the JEBEDIAH: Infocom's Parser is delver. people working for Infocom. missing. ABDUL/Steve Galley: Author/coYOU: Even their favourite colours DOCTOR GOODBODY: Hmmm. author of adventures that include and astrological signs. \"Fraid I can't help you now, gotta Moonmist, The Witness, ZEBULON: I didn't know that do some laundry. Tell you what Seastalker. most of them went to the same -go talk to Elmira Bat, the town MR ZEKE/Carol and Debbie. school, M.I.T. (Massachusetts gossip. She knows everything. Institute of Technology). Even how you get past the JEBEDIAH: It says here that Zork intelligent door in Hitch Hiker's. 1 was put together in a guy's YOU: Okay, we'll go there now. apartment, 'cause there wasn't an office yet. YOU: What is this card on the floor? Let's examine it. You star at the large, white business card. Being on the floor has left its toll, and it is covered with shoe marks and minor debris. Underneath the card is a floppy disk. JEBEDIAH: We should take the floppy disk Scene One: THE TOWN GREEN not real bright folks. It is also the ZEBULON: Okay. You are at the Town Green of home of Infocom. YOU: This card must be a clue. I picturesque, low-budget But all is not well. Someone can make out the name, it's Vezzaville also known as has stolen the company's all Doctor Goodbody. Let's search Cambridge, Massachusetts. powerful Command Parser and the building for the Doctor. Vezzaville is a fun and happy replaced it with a head of lettuce. place where everyone dresses up None of their programs will like an escapee from a mental run. Not Spellbreaker or institution, and likes to have thier Seastalker, Ballyhoo or Deadline. names written on cards hung Gamers throughout the world are around their neck these are in an ugly, ugly mood. Unless the "


"puzzle until you're all frustrated. ABDUL: Ignores you and plays YOU: Ask Abdul about the Funnywith his feet. Finally in Faced One. exasperation, Zebulon grabs ABDUL: You interrupted me. Now Adbul and spins him around. He take my nice mule, Mr Zeke, for begs for mercy and tell you that example. I can make here he heard through the grapevine whinny, bow her head and tap her that Cyruss McGee, Pastor of the Church of the Unrelenting, has a weakness for good looking parsers. JEBEDIAH: The Church is just around the comer. Last one there's a rotten egg. Scene Three: HOUSE OF THE Scene Four: Abdul's Tent TOWN GOSSIP Abdul is sitting in his all-cotton, Elmira Bat's house is old, rickety, wash and wear tent. He frowns as and made of tan wood. A bit you enter. afraid of strangers, she consents YOU: Abdul, what can you tell us to speak with you through her about the Parser? window. ABDUL: Does not respond! ELMIRA: What do you kids want? JEBEDIAH: We're trying to find the Parser. Doctor Goodbody said you could help. ELMIRA: Scram! Shoo! Get out of here! Dumb kids! You have an idea. Reaching into your pocket, you pull out the Yo-Yo and give it to Elmira. Her face lights up in a smile, and she asks everyone inside for tea and cakes. YOU: Elmira, where is the Parser? ELMIRA: I don't know. Missing, you say, maybe stolen? Sounds like the work of that crazy old coot Abdul. He's always up to no good! ZEBULON (taking your 20 ZEBULON: Where can we find dollars): I know, let's give Abdul him? some money. ELMIRA: Abdul lives in a tent ABDUL: Pockets the money! down by the riverfront. But be careful he's a strange one. YOU: Thank Elmira. ELMIRA: You're welcome. Oh, 1 just heard. Look out for somebody called the FunnyFaced One. hoofs three times. Those less friendly parsers would make her have to start all over and repeat all the stages again if she missed Scene Five: IN THE CHURCH The Church is very modern and quiet. Paster Cyrus McGee bids you enter. The three of you sit down. McGee arranges himself before a stained glass window so that the light strikes his hair and creates a halo. PASTOR: What can I do for you? YOU: Pastor, give us the Parser. PASTER: I don't have it lad. JEBEDIAH: Abdul said that you would know where we could find him? PASTOR: I don't know anything about the Parser. Abdul has probably been taking drugs again. But maybe I CAN help. I have a boarder living downstairs who's always muttering things. \"Unlock the box,\" take all, kiss the Funny-Face One.\" The poor sould is probably demented, but why not try talking to him? Just remember that he thinks he's got all his friends down there with him. ZEBULON: Why not? one of them. I don't like that, a parser should help you along and encourage you. YOU: But where can we find the YOU: Abdul, tell us about the Parser. ABDUL: You know kids, me and the Parser go way back, all the way to the early '80s. I helped to make him friendlier, more willing to help you get from point to another with hints and playful nudges. These parsers today are too flip, too rude to the player; making you have to work at a "


"C+VG Hollywood, or Chuggo's head. YOU: Examine the blocks with the letters on it. JEBEDIAH: There's a note attached. It says \"Dear Chuggo, sorry to eat and run. Look for me at the Haunted House and I'll straighten everything out. Your cousin, the Funny-Faced One.\" ZEBULON: There's a map to follow too. YOU: Goodbye Chuggo. CHUGGO: Listen. Before you go. Who's this person with the funny hat? idea how many times a day I have to \"Inventory\"? ZEBULON: Ask Parser about the Funny-Faced One. PARSER: Stop the third-person stuff. He did me a favour. Infocom had stuck me with an all night test for one of their new programs, and I needed some fresh air. You'd think a bunch of guys from M.I.T. would know better. ZEBULON: Parser, please come back. PARSER: That's bad phrasing toots. Whoops, there I go again. YOU (pulling out a floppy): Scene Eight: INSIDE THE NIGHT Parser, put yourself into the disk. CLUB PARSER: Well I was getting a bit The night club is dark and smoky. w homesick. Okay, I'll come back. it's packed with Vezzaville-ites. But I want alternate Tuesdays off from now on. Everyone is smiling and have a great time. The sounds of a The Parser disappears. Within performer making jokes reaches moments, all the Infocom your ear, but your view of the programs are again running fullstage is blocked by a woman blast. A great sigh, as if from the wearing a chapeau the size of the collective unconsciousness, Empire State Building. Suddenly arises. Everything's fine now the hat dips, and you get a clear watch. Go North. view of the stage. To your surprise, it's the Parser doing a stand-up comedy routine. Jebediah and Zebulon join you on stage to confront the Parser. Bud Scene Six: BASEMENT OF THE CHURCH The basement of the Church is damp, and there's only a 40 watt bulb lighting a single dusty corner. Huddled there is Chuggo, who is playing with a set of children's blocks. One of the blocks has the word Hollywood printed on it. JEBEDIAH: Chuggo, do you know the Funny-Faced One? CHUGGO: It's funny you should ask. We're related, once removed on my mother's side. Scene Seven: AT THE HAUNTED YOU: Ask Chuggo where he is. HOUSE CHUGGO: I'm right here. The Haunted House is at the edge YOU: Chuggo, where can we find of town. Pieces of the door are the Funny-Faced one? missing, and most of the glass CHUGGO: I wish I could help. I'm has been broken out from the just finishing my exciting windows. One window, however, escapade in La-La Land (Los is still whole. As you look at it, a Angeles), and now I've no Parser series of strange faces appear. to make it work. I used to do Then a voice calls out. testing and so got along real well FUNNY-FACED ONE: Is that you with the Parser, but now that I'm Chug? doing my own game I guess I JEBEDIAH (whispering): Let's get lost touch. It's just that you get out of here! involved with the other people ZEBULON: Sissy. No, it not working here, and not just the Chuggo. It's us. Why have you writers alone. There's a great taken the Parser? feeling of respect, of FUNNY-FACED ONE: I've never camaraderie between everyone. taken anything from anyone. It's great, 'cause you know that Except Chuggo's lunch on everyone's willing to share their occasion. past experiences and knowledge YOU: Funny-Faced One, where is so you can go on and do your own the Parser? thing. FUNNY-FACED ONE: Is that all? I ZEBULON: Ask Chuggo if the was getting worried, like it was Funny-Faced One took the something important. Just go Parser. down to the Kusma night club. CHUGGO: All he took was my The window darkens and the cookies last time I saw him. House shudders faintly. You JEBEDIAH: Chuggo, shut up! decide to take the advice and Chuggo's feelings are hurt. He leave. huddles back into his corner. YOU: Examine block. Which block do you mean, the one with the letters spelling out The three of you return to Infocom's headquarters. You look up and are greeted by cheers and praise from the author's of the various games. Then the voice of Info-Man JEBEDIAH: Parser, are you okay? resounds in your ears: \"Ye who PARSER (gesturing wildly with his have done this thing are blessed left hand): Go away boy, you're by us, and shall be first among all breaking up the act. others in score and rank.\" Thus YOU: Parser, what is going on. ends the adventure. PARSER: Can't you leave me Author's bio: Marshal M. alone? Did you ever stop to think Rosenthal is an advertising how tired I am of doing all the photographer based in New York. work in those Infocom games? He also writes for a number of Parser do this, Parser do that. domestic and overseas publications. Sure, maybe I'm the best in the Special thanks to Steve Meretzky business, efficient, smart, glib. for the use of Halloween game That's good to hear, but then it's concept/names, and the folks at back to describing locations and Infocom for the use of their opening doors. Do you have any likenesses! "


"o More adventures from the Arcade Sensation.o THE I DEEPER DUNGEONS 2 ANOTHER ALL NEW! ALL ACTION! SUPER SCREENS COORDIGSCHOOOOOOOOX GAUTLET MERLIN THOR *THYRA Ransowe ATARI U.S. GOLD QUESTOR SPECTRUM 48K Did you buy the no. 1 Arcade Smash Hit of 1986 Gauntlet? If not, you certainly should have. If you did, then you'll be delighted to know that you can play another amazing 512 levels with this super add on. Requires original Gauntlet to run this version, CBM64/128, SPECTRUM 48/128K, AMSTRAD, MSX, ATARI .99 cassette CBM64/128, AMSTRAD, ATARI, .99 disk ATARI ST .99 disk ATARI U.S GOLD LTD., UNITS 2/3 HOLFORD WAY, HOLFORD, BIRMINGHAM B6 7AX. TEL: 021 356 3388 GAMES AGOLD "


"Peter Fussey + VIDEO COMPETITION RESULTS You weren't afraid to open up The Trap Door, were you? We had literally hundreds of entries for our Trap Door Monster Competition featured on the back of the IDEAS Central Handbook in November Shame you can't all win a prize. Lots of hard work and imagination went into all the entries and it WAS really tough deciding on the winners and runners-up. Still, we had to make our minds up so here are the results! V Rene Van Der Woude THE TELO STAVE.. GAME THAT STANDS OUD Five first prize winners: Darren Bonas, Newcastle-upon-Tyne; Lorraine Fisher, Whitstable; Charlie Brooker, Brightwell-cum-Sotwell; Peter Fussey, Hull; Rene Van Der Woude, Holland; A Hewitt, Consett. All five get a copy of the game plus a special 12-inch picture dise of the TV series theme tune plus a Trap Door t-shirt. The following 15 runners up get a copy of the game. They are; Tim Twelves, London; S. Rushbrook, Tollesbury; Kevin McCall, Kilmarnock; Jason Rymer, London; Elliot Elam, Macclesfield; Raymond Young, Standish; Anthony Griffin, Wollaton; Matthew Nickson, Buckley; Andrew Hagerty, Calderwood; Anthony Hughes, Treorchy; Shuman Basar, Blackpool; Nicola Evans, Hull; Ian Rose, Redmile; Howard Riley, Lowesoft; Ronan Healy, Castle Pollard. Many people actually went further than drawing a picture and made model Trap Doors, booklets of monsters and even a drawing of the Ed with four arms! Christopher Butler gets a special slimely prize for his entryand a visit from Lieut Laww!! Thanks for all the hard work YOU put into your Trap Door pictures we really did enjoy going through them... TRAP O EWAL DORTHE RAMBUG \"Four days it took to nabimo vanished and apaver on, ime ende went and relepored into it down the hole whilst 'e was 18PDR THE com l If theres one thing I cant stand is a bug Whos too big for his poors. And this ins wi yelled boo!\"an 'e ran back ro's thing though...    : \"Now I dont think, I'll ever be It slopped around a lor,bur do much else. I could've of liked it for his lunch. really\" thing "


"Ronan Healy Stephen Rushbool LIFESIZE Lorraine Fisher LEORTER DONESTARS 3 Evolumelcrept up where! In the ered no we soup. So I chucked was ang HE ME . r knowite whar this was greliness, ir didat bur, veel itachually. He will ch. Sororiste He's gor Charlie Brooker Ba A. Hewitt Howaru me THE GU.M.M.ER she was the only thing! At Sovv  ion son soaking in "


"STRIKE Experience the exhiliration of big league bowling with outstanding graphics and a true perspective action view. Multiple levels of play, realistic pin action and automatic scoring make 10th Frame a bowling reality the whole family can enjoy. You may even be tempted to invest in high time bowler shoes and shirt once you've become obsessed with this addictive game. Another smash hit from the creators of that simulation sensation \"Leaderboard\". OFRAME Spectrum ACCESS Software incorporated U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Telephone: 021 356 3388 CBM 64/128 Amstrad .99 $14.99 (GOLD Dans "


"1.D.E.A.S Hi Melissa here. This month we have some pretty good hints, tips and pokes along with maps of Dandy, Uridium for the Spectrum and Ninja for the Atari. So what are you waiting for, get reading! Remember to send your letters to Melissa Ravenflame, I.D.E.A.S Central, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. And don't forget to enclose a recent photograph of yourself. See you next issue! saylo 1861 COMMODORE Stephen Payne of Sheffield down one screen and two behind these tips. Method two i.n. Speed kills. has solved the Sacred screens left. Here you will find At the beginning of the This method is a little more Armour of Antiriad with two dragons pass the one game you have one planet. To suicidal, but, faster and works these hints and our players on the left and then go one open up the bottom one you with both plants. Accelerating guide printed a couple of screen left. Collect the energy. have to dispose of three start from the top of the screen, months back, you'll have no You'll need it! waves. All except one are going right, fire from the top to problems. Go up and pass the dragon easy. bottom, while still When you start the game on the right and up the Wave one consists of flying accelerating. Once at the and there is no gorilla above passage. Go right one screen blue zapstarseasy to bottom of the planet, fly back you, keep restarting the game and sneak past the dragon. shoot, Wave two comprises up to the centre and whenever until there is. From this point Get the energy and go right bouncing circular blue and you hear an explosion, move go left for four screens. and up a couple of times, white characters, which up sharply all the while Go to the armour and enter collect the shields and the pursue you relentlessly. Wave firing. The ships should curve it. Now jump up to the left and energy. three is made up of licker up and explode. then again. Keep going left Shoot one of the aliens ships. These little characters The status display: The until you come to a gap. bullets and he will stop firing. appear lots of times in control panel looks a little Jump down it and go along Go uphere Stephen numerous attack waves. This daunting at first, the various the platform and up the other recommends that you move one being the most deadly. gauges show entropy, Gilby side. Carry on going left until quickly as there are plenty of The craft start off as flying energy, number of fighters left you come to the anti-grav aliens. white squares. Shoot them in the attack wave, core boots. Go up the right hand and they become grey circles energy, score rate, wave Get them and return to the passage, but, don't touch the with tongues (!) sticking out. number (1-20), your current armour. Push up on the side as they are deadly. They will attempt to touch you, planet and the planet icons joystick. Go up three screens Do you see the two flashing which is the kiss of death if with pointers for the then left another three semi-circles? Well, go and they succeed. destinations. screens. plonk yourself right on top of Otherwise they curve off at General Tips: Don't worry Dodge the alien firing and the bottom one and that's 45° and die. There are two about looking at energy get the laser. You can now fire it!! methods of fighting. Method at your adversaries. Go left O ne last tip from Stephen one is guaranteed. The other Gilby will also tell you about three screens and then up till try not to travel in diagonals as should only be used when the droids health you hit your head on the you will probably touch the there are two planets and you Brake Turning: For when ceiling. Watch the alien and go side of the passage and get have entropy problems. you want to slow down to land up one screen. into more trouble than you Method one. Retreat and into walking mode. Pull down Then go up the right hand need to kill. When the squares appear, diagonally. That should either side passage, up one screen Iridis Alpha Combat accelerate away left from slow you up, or land you on and then right up. At this point them and hold down fire. They the core. Hold the fire button leave the armour at a strategic Starter Guide fly back left and repeat the 95% of the time. This way you point and go left one screen Kenneth Henry-long process. The ships will curve can lay down an uninterrupted and collect the mine... serving IDEAS Central off away from you and field of fire destroying anything Go back to the armour then informer is the person explode. it hits. "


"EMOS 25500\" Another couple for the Spectrum from J. Belt why be so formal? Tell us your first name who regularly contributes pokes to IC. Trading Spell DANDY 9 Spell Transporter Spider W Wizard THE MAP Energizer Od Gate CDG www : 13 seel Dead Bones Stephen Thompson of Cleveland sent in this poke for Dandy, which will go very nicely with the Dandy map which you will find elsewhere on these pages. This program will cause the energy levels to reset back to 1000 when it has fallen to 700. The program WILL NOT reset set the levels if two players are firing at each other. So one person has to kill the other and then go onto the final screen. Type in the program and RUN, then RUN the tape from the start. 15 Ink not Pl. Paper not PI. Border not Pl: Clear Val *25499\" 30 Load\" \"Code 40 Randomize USR Val *23407 50 Randomize USR Val \"23410\" 60 Randomize USR Val \"50000\" 63 Poke Val \"23681\", Code 10 Load\" \"Code : Randomize Usr 24576: Paper 0: Print at 19,0: Load\" \"Code: Poke23446,62: Poke 23447 175: Poke 23448,50: Poke 23449,72 Poke 23450,141: Poke 23451, 195: Poke 23452,128: Poke 23453,92: Randomize USR 23424. Turbo Esprit 10 Border 0: Paper 0: Ink 0: CLS 20 Clear 26624: Load \" \"Code 16384 30 Print at 6,0: Load\" \"Code 40 Poke 29893.0: Randomize USR 64837. and the last one is for Bomb Jack 10 Clear 29877 20 Load \" \"Code 30 Poke 65274,71 40 Poke 65236,70 50 Poke 65237,85 60 Forf=65517 to 65535 70 Read a: Pokef,a: Nextf 80 Data 60,0,50,88,191,33,8, 252,17,240,255,1,241, 140,237,184,195,75,193 90 Randomize USR 65465 \"1\" OKKE 64 Randomize USR Val 23404\" 66 Poke Val \"27602\", Val \"38\" 67 Poke Val 27603\", PI 68 Poke Val \"27651\", Val \"38\" 69 Poke Val \"27652\", PI 70 Randomize USR Val Level 1 XWE 62. XX Spellbound seems to have been awarded C+VG's readers award for the game that has stumped everyone the longest. First of all we had Michael Houlihan needing help with the Canlium Illuminatus spell. To cast this one you must not carry the four leaf clover. To light the candle the four leaf clover must be in the SAME room as Magic Knight. Margaret Sullivan wrote in with this piece of information but told me she always thought that if the candle was burning she could read the Ancient Scroll. But, her candle is lit and she still cannot read it. Does anyone know how to read the scroll? The last plea for help comes from Mark McGuiness of Dublin. His problem is with Dragons Lair. He cannot get past the second and third levels. Level 2 27 DANDY MAP BY DANNY BLAKMAN AND NIGEL DAVIES. B ar xxx ER WILL "


"SPECTRUM SPECTRUM Super Dreadnought 1 Zinc mg bb IN 123 $ Uridium Key P = Points B = Barrier MG = Mine Generator MR = Master Runway Super Dreadnought 2. Lead ** URIDIUM MAP Star BY MATHEW CLARK 2013 URIDIUM MAP ( 010 -1-09 T Di JOGO DC -06, 14. -2011 Super Dreadnought 3, Copper -O-DOEL LIIIII e Super Dreadnought 4 , Silver Super Dreadnought 5, Iron ODOLX Guy Langley has some help for all MSX owners. Way of the Tiger On unarmed combat use the forward kick to defeat all your opponents, except the giants. Jump over them and use the flying kick. Do NOT get in the way of their fists. In pole fighting, use the forward and downward thrust to defeat the dwarf, the neck chop to defeat the first ninja, and the forward jab to defeat the skeleton. Do not perform any high jumps. In sword fighting, the third warrior is only vulnerable on the neck and the legs. Sword rituals are also quite effective, as are head splitters. Blagger As the scrolling message is moving along, wait until the information on the demo has passed and then tap the space bar quickly. The game will then start at the Bank. Do After battling your way through extra men. If you manage to not press any movement keys, the first two stages you find clear this screen without dying but press instead the music yourself on the screen where you have about 500,000 control keys. The computer statues blow deadly bubbles points and about 10-12 men. should then flip to the next at you. Make sure you have You will now start at the screen and so on. To start on selected Double. You will beginning of stage four. From your chosen screen, press the notice that on the top half of stage seven onwards don't jump key. the screen there are two shoot at the motherships More for the MSX, this time statues back to back. There unless you have a shield. If from Martin Green of London. are two sets like this. you do they fire red balls along International Karate On the second set shoot the with their missiles. You may first one and go behind and also find that you will need a The front side kick defeats just almost hit the ground while new shield for almost every about all competition but shooting the second one. If stage. leaves you rather vulnerable. you have done it right the Punchy game will freeze and you will blast off to a bonus sheet. On Hold the program by pressing H on its own, then holding this sheet you will find Red, Yellow and Green capsule. Richard Hunter and Neville down CTRL you type out BOOTSY, to move from The red will give you 500 Webster of Leeds have sent points. The yellow 100, 200, screen to screen you have to in this map and hints for the 500, 1000, 2000, 5000, Atari 800XL, 130XE versions hold down CTRL C, to resume 10,000 points and 10,000 for of Ninja. play at any screen you press every yellow thereafter. You Search all six sectors on the must collect the yellow first level before moving up a Nemesis capsules in their groups or you level. There are six idols to As far as Martin is concerned will waste them. collect altogether. Any this is the cheat of cheats! The green ones give you \"thugs\" or \"karatekas\" can ATARI "


"AKOMAS CHAMBER   BIG GEES DOOR   Dumon be killed by constant high kicks. They will just walk right into the kicks and die. Any \"evil ninjas\" can be killed by throwing three stars at them. Once you have six idols a secret door will open in the \"grey wall\" sector up to \"Akumas Chamber\". Take three star's up with you. First kill the four \"karatekas\" using high kicks, then throw your three stars at the \"evil ninja\". Collect the idol and proceed back down to Torii in the Sea to be proclaimed the winner. Still with the Atari for all you budding Pole Position experts out there, Martin Dewhurst of Greater Manchester has a tip for you. The first thing to do is select track one and then an eight lap race. Simply position your car in the middle of the track to qualify and do the same to race. This way no other cars can hit you and you can sit back and watch the points accumulate until eight laps have been completed. Martin would like some help himself MAPPED BY on Arex, which has been RICHARD AND puzzling him for weeks. A. Duffy of Clwyd thought NEVILLE that Atari owners might be interested in this hint for Bruce Lee. KANGURA To gain record breaking scores very quickly wait on a vine where your enemies cannot reach or kick you. OG DOOR When they have fallen to the bottom of the screen and they are both in the same place drop on them. This usually Dezo HAL earns you 6600 points. Make sure you have an escape route planned RA otherwise this practice can DOTO become very dangerous, as the longer you are on the screen the faster your enemies move and the slower ALLY ETRANCE SHRINE MALAY YOU move. The best place for doing this is the second screen after the drain has been opened. The the enemies they will fall Duffy has managed to score in vine over the drain in the through the hole. excess of 17 million points, middle of the screen is the Care must be taken and suffers acute joystick perfect place to wait, and as however not to fall through finger! Just what everyone soon as you have dropped on yourself. Using this method Mr wants!! wete n OCH RED DOOR pas c enemies move and the slower una   SHO TORY track one and then an eight revent H o me Hwasony house TORI IN THE SEA POKES VIC 20 Poke13707,173:Poke13715, Paul Burns 60 A% = EVAL(\"&\"+AS) Seems as though I upset a 234: 70 BPUT/#.A% few people last month, when I Poke 13716,234. To start 80 NEXT 1% said I thought that I had heard game SYS 8192 90 FOR 1%=&4C TO&FF from the last Vic-20 owner. It Cosmic Firebirds 100 BPUT #X,0 did the trick. All those people Follow the instructions above 110 NEXT 1% who couldn't be bothered and then for infinite lives type 120 CLOSE#X sending in their pokes before in 130 : have now put pen to paper. 140 DATA 00,14,AD, 4A, Poke6673,173:Poke12733, What took you so long guys?! 173:Poke843,160. 5A,48,02,53 One of the angry readers was 150 DATA B7,77,35,94, To play game SYS 6912 Mike \"The Werewolf\" 00,FF,04,00 Davies of Dyfed. Here are his The game will now load, when Scramble 160 DATA FF FF FF FF, the opportunity arises enter pokes For infinite lives: 00.?? FF FF, Poke5182,234:Poke5183,234. Poke 10415,234:Poke 10416, 170 DATA FF FF FF FF, Mike Davies To stop you dying. Poke 234. 8659,76:Poke8660,252:Poke FF FF FF FF, Then SYS 16384 180 DATA FF FF FF FF, 8661,33-win all transfer Mike has promised to send FF FF FF FF, games SYS 4096 start the in some more pokes next 190 DATA FE,FF,7F,02, game. month, so look out for them. FF FFF FF,00 Mermaid Madness 200 DATA 00,00,00,FF. COMMODORE Load the game, reset the 00,02,0F, 11 Paul Burns sent these computer and type these 210 DATA 00,03,1C,OE, Commodore pokes to Ideas pokes for infinite energy. Poke00,00,00,0A Central. 17274,169. Poke 17275,0. 220 DATA 11,3A,07,09, Poke 17276,234. 08,00,00,00 Paradroid 230 DATA 19,00,74,DD Matrix These pokes will enable you BBC POKES If you have a disc, change to win every transfer game Last one up this month is for line 20, to DISC. Rewind tape and type, verify, and stop you dying when your the BBC. Dominic Holt from Run the program and it will return and press play. When energy reaches zero. Rewind Oman has this cheat program save a commander called the tape stops type in your cassette and type SYS for Elite. \"Getem\". Load Elite and Load\" \", 1,1 Return. When it 63276, return. Press play and 10 X=ONPENOUT(''GETEM\") answer YES to load new has loaded enter the following when ready appears, type 40 FOR 1% =O TO&4B commander\". Load pokes for infinite lives Poke 946,96 return. SYS 849. 50 READ AS \"GETEM\" "


"lévi'athan (livi'Àn). ME. [a. L. (Vulg.), a. Heb. livythn. Ult. origin unkn.] n. huge ship; anything very large of its kind. COMMODORE C64 COMMODORE C128 BIBERHOFOOD D EMOOOO B OOOOO ENGLISH CASSETTE .95 Disk .95 SOFTWAREM 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gardens, Manchester M3 2NH. Tel: 061-835 1358 U.S. GOLD COMPUTERSPIELE GMBH, Daimlerstrasse 11, 4044 Kaarst 2, Holzbttgen. Tel: 02101 600425 "


"t anim e que one ...JUST SOH OF THE PRIT YOU FACE AT WEEK! Jo aun AAA SATIC MOTO d 6 Z  aussi 4 pin Ann Laua IM AT lly hil P-tse e Wild sant SIM om gube GRRR serv Stre stat Inol GRRR 101 atiqu war art & place ment fil But con are so exter. cessing of th gated, that it ible to keep mies are nee her or not they roperly stem, filing erro. filed. In Tiems but at least s ell-delog. WHOOSH 100 FOR DOOR STEPDELIVERIES SKATEBOARDERS. FOR MAIL BOX DAMAGE DONE AND TARGETS. DU DELIVERIES, 320 FOR WORKMEN, TYRES, MOWERS, CARTS AND U 5 I kat ndish which escu THE BMX COURSE. re 18 EXTRA PAPERS AWARDED AS YOU CROSS RIVERS: nedy eley Othe ha Jawdy inas. THE SCORE: usical ere in Frie PALTARO 0000$ 01 set noi e chessLo pros del. In omir page Jadi au JUUFUF from Phys ma V. recipe .. that does alling numb Astra hile, grab the mos they wi D Smo mi HIT TARGETS FOR behind Why POINTS. Hope www ifficult he Amstra too: ary in ay is to ninimu s. The hal pa srpr educa' haver .sited. the A Tbers But ket. is satea solici 3 bee in ano busir produ idust ch all e sa in th r  I sphe !so ir hich to for discuss t stage. S is the phot pertise heir own stich is a niete um bu urreno career woffe tmenti to opisod IMU guey diket gon; 1 ) who o 011 Bem s "


"tincti Ams Man day parti argui iputer remel nala se Sell ary M omer an the ially. the aster far qa uet 01  B Surse de in es 3 pap s sprou pen I am 0.0 BAE TEXTS G+VG MAPC+VG Lofu  ut OME ROHEMSOR 2 2  SYM '00 said of Ne EACH S ik and Elite M uo Bayo oja tunu bium MISCHA WELSH MOLEHILL illustration and graphics : STEPHEN HILL. ue and many ohr se information Tunere as CHUCS PISIDA ON 4TH DAYS PLAY BONUS LIFE ON THE DAYS BONUS POINTS #19 RIN PELLVERK BONUS SUBSCRIBERTON A RELIVERY made inafeCole BONU ON DELIVERY TO! ALL TEN SUBSCRIBERS oudur ON A DELIVERY TO A STREET FOLL OF SUBSCRIBERS (WHERE ONE OR MORE HAD PREVIOUSLY ENDED SUBSCRIPTION EVROOM erned A its firs Akel, who hares, Sangham-b Nethert sut he fa Do 99 4139 Croma ed to gain sup esa y Mer, 4014 pasur Jarsey un ne reports which Surpnjontents of the se terms of the it TL e tw onb aber 25 day, Seps $ day, Cerforma: Muppet are ABSTUP 41 od ue3e ught su! syna dag og at By flow 22 act bel "


"IF IT MOVE [ S\\ I know a place where zombies walk. Where ghouls slobber over hunks of human flesh. Where dwarves and warriors pursue dark elves through endless caverns their battle-axes dripping with blood. Where the only sounds are the screams of the dying and the cold laughter of evil creatures. Let Q'Adille the Obscure tell you about the Labyrinthe.. book in advance. They run on I think he's serious about this. lowlives clearly outweighs the Thursdays, Saturdays and He's already investigating minor problem of encouraging Sundays. Most adventures take different types of knee-pad. the use of strong liquor. two or three hours to complete. Other characters in our party Unfortunately, Mulgar comes up but for more experienced include Mulgar, my brother in with a plan. players, the Isle of Dread, a holy orders, who swings a mean Shortly before the adventure small island in the Thames mace, Cliffhanger, a started, I bought myself a estuary, offers 12 and 24 hour pathfinders, and Berk, complete suit of studdied leather quests Berk is a warrior, and with a armour, the better to protect my My companions for this quest name like that it doesn't sound righteous hide. are gathered around a Gauntlet as if he expects to survive long. When a monster hits you in coin-op machine, waiting for the Warriors are supposed to go in Labyrinthe, he doles out six call to arms. screaming and yelling at the points of damage to the part of Zirax the pathfinder is front of the party. One reason your body he hit. Too many dressed in a black tabino, not among many why Berk is a blows to the left leg and it will hen you play a a cat a sort of medieval pinny! warrior and I'm a priest drop off, compelling you to spend computer game, your with black mask and two-toed Joe, our referee, is having the rest of the adventure actions are limited by cloth boots, bristling with trouble finding monsters for our hopping around the cave on one the software in the machine. If daggers. adventure. foot you die in a computer adventure A pathfinder is a scout-cum Labyrinthe works by using the Armour soaks up some of the you can reload your saved thief. It's his job to go ahead in players themselves as monsters damage, and my studded leather position and start again where the dark, feeling his way in other adventures. This has a means those monsters can only you left ofl. through the tunnels until he double benefit it saves the cause up to three points of In a role-playing game such as bumps into the opposition. With Labyrinthe organisers from damage to me. This makes me Dungeons and Dragons, you luck, he'll come back alive and having to fork our real money feel a lot safer as Hlounge have freedom of action within report on what faces us up for monsters, and gives broke around at the back dispensing the bounds set by your ahead. adventurers the chance to play wisdom and occasionally doling imagination and the rolling dice. I'm Q'Adille, a warrior-priest. for free. out mystic healing to the sick But in the Labyrinthe, a There are many different types Eventually everything sorts and wounded wame becomes reality. A real o priest, but I prefer to take itself out and we march off That's the idea, but Mulgar time live adventure, where your direct action against evil through the caves to a tavern wants to try out a new spell of own strong right arm is all that Preferably by hitting it over the called the Hobbit's Elbow. It's his -\"Temporary Bless\". This stands between you and death at head with a blunt instrument. slightly more salubrious than lasts an hour, and has the effect the hands of a monster. Where Beginners get to choose from the Hobbit's Armpit but not a of adding another two points of the magician who fails to the three main classes. Fighters, lot. For some reason Zirax seems armour to me. remember his spells in the heat Priests, and Pathfinders. Later to have disappeared, but that's Q Adille, the Mildly Corpulent, of battle is a dead magician. they could choose to be wizards nothing unusual. and Somewhat Cowardly is The entrance to the known as elementalists-or It seems the landlord of the about to become Q Adille the Labyrinthe is a hillside in South even elect to play a different Hobbit's Elbow intends to hire Tank, charging in all by himself London. To be precise, a hole in a breed of person entirely. us to steal a secret beer recipe with a face in both hands. hillside, damp and uninviting. There are Elves, Dwarves, from a nearby brewery. Under \"All right\" says Mulgar, \"If leading to five miles of tunnels Half-Orcs and Half-Ogres in the pressure he reveals that the you don't want to do it lend your and caves. Labyrinthe, although you'll brewery is run by half-ogres, a armour to someone else and I'll As you walk into the complex. have to LOOK the part to be nasty breed whose main purpose bless THEM.\" Everyone seems you can feel yourself adjusting to allowed to play such a character in life is finding fresh food to find this an excellent idea a new environment, where Wayne, one of the referees. usually of the two-legged except me, so after a bit of ANYTHING can happen. After has an ambition to play a dwarf. variety grumbling I yield to Mulgar's fifty yards or so you enter a large \"They've said I can do it if I go This sounds OK to me, since chamber full of weirdly costumed through the entire adventure on the prospect of beating religion Things go fine, and soon people. This is where the fun my knees,\" he says, into a bunch of half-ogre there's a goodly pile of bodies starts Labyrinthe adventures cost six quid a throw, and it's best to "


"PES, HIT IT ITS # WRITE... where there used to be halfogres. Many of the players and nearly all the monsters fight in costume. Out of doors the gear can look faintly silly, with swords made of foam rubber and insulating tape, and chainmail made of string and silver paint. But underground, in dim light from \"candles\" pencil torches the atmosphere is compelling Having successfully assaulted the entrance to the brewery, and skewered a couple of half-ogres who were hiding in a half-ogrish toilet, we take stock of our wounds. One or two of the party have been a few blows. so I go into my Florence Nightingale act. \"Spirits aid me, I abjure thee, staunch this wound\"I cry, laying my hands on the bodies of the afflicted. You have to get the words right when you're using magic, or nothing happens. This can be embarassing if you're trying to send a vampire back to Hell or resurrect a dead comrade. The bad guys usually don't give you a second chance Most spells are fairly short, but when you get up to a high level of power there are so many floating around in your skull it takes a very clear head to remember the right words at the right time. There's no chance to stop and look it up in the rule book in Labyrinthe. I said things were going fine in the brewery. That's not quite the truth. One of the half-ogres appears to have had a little magic himself, and cursed me with his dying breath before I put him to sleep with my mace. The net result, according to the referee, is that Q'Adille has become an alcoholic. And an alcoholic in a brewery is NOT a pretty sight Role-playing is all about living your character to the hilt. In sickness and in health, for better or worse, and damned be he who first shouts that's not in the rulebook!\" Consequently I dive into the nearest vat of half-ogre beer and start singing some old Oreish drinking-songs I picked up in my mis-spent youth I'm well into the third verse of Old Cuchullian Had An Elf when Cliffhanger pulls me out of the drink. I expect he'd heard the song before and didn't want to hear what Cuchullian does with the elf in the fourth verse. And I'm not about to reveal it in a family magazine. Deprived of my beer. I fly into a violent frenzy, which the rest of the party direct against the foe by the simple expedient of pushing me into the next room. Here my armour is less effective. There's one particulary big guy with two swords, one in each hand, who inflicts double damage. Twenty-seconds of bruising combat later and I'm lying against the cave wall with only one point of life force left. A close shave for a humble warrior priest More curative spells and a swig from an extremely expensive bottle of healing potion, which I had the forethought to bring with me, get me back on my feet again. ready for the final charge to death or glory Fortunately, the shock of being so comprehensively hammered by the ogre with the two swords has sobered me up temporarily, and I can fight with a little more respect for the opposition At this point, unknown to us. referee Joe is having a word with the monster who did us so much damage and telling him his weapons are downgraded to normal damage. This may sound like cheating but it's a sign of good refereeing Joe is impressed by the way we've been adventuring and realises the monsters may be a little tough if any of us are going to survive. Berk is still on his feet, but another fighter is dead, and the priests have used up nearly all their cures. As for the pathfinders come to think of it, where ARE the pathfinders? We don't know about this sudden change in the opposition. But so what, you only live once unless you can find a highlevel priest to bring you back to life again and isn't a noble death better than a coward's retreat? I don't know. Roleplaying addicts like me are a bit loopy, I guess. Anyway, in we charge. Amazingly, when the carnage is over, we're still on our feet. Zirax the pathfinder has found a glowing object which has paralysed him, but the effects wear off soon enough. Lucky he didn't touch it before the fight was over Greed is the most common cause of death in Labyrinthe. After the adventure is over, Joe debriefs us back in the main chamber. Although the pay isn't much good 200 grulls each, barely enough for a single cure potion — the survivors are ogre's dying curse, tell 'em to awarded an extra level meet me some weekend soon This means I get new spells to in the Labyrinthe. learn and use, and the others have more skills and points of ABOUT LABYRINTHE life-force as well. Live role-playing in Britain first The pathfinders appear to started with the Treasure Trap have found a small horde of castle featured in C+VG last treasure as well a gold jug year. When the Treasure Trap and a silver plate. This is organisation stopped running strange, as the referee says he adventures, Pete Garner, a didn't put any treasure in the former civil engineer, formed his adventure. own outfit The Labyrinthe Everybody wonders where it Club. Labyrinthe operates in came from, but Joe shrugs and two locations, both near London, hands out more grulls to but there are other oganisations Cliffhanger and Zirax for the running live games elsewhere in loot. If you let a pair of thieves the country. Read the fantasy into your dungeon, what do you gaming mags like White Dwarf expect? Imagine or Adventurer for more And so it's time to take off the information about these games, costumes and wash off the make. Although the Labyrinthe up, time to return to the drab locations are well-known within world of suburbia and join the the gaming world, Pete prefers unsuspecting millions who have not to publicise them widely in been living out their dull lives order to discourage genuinely over our heads, all unaware of violent idiots from turning up to the life and death struggles in cause trouble. New adventurers the catacombs below their are always welcome, though orderly English homes. the monsters need regular But it won't be long before I'm feeding and if you're back down there again. After all, interested in finding out more I've got this small drink problem about Labyrinthe you can write to sort out. So if you know to Pete at: anyone who can remove a halfThe Labyrinthe Clube 77 Hinton Road Herne Hill London SE24 OHT engl "


"Age: Name CHVG COMPETITION C+CG/DOMARK TRIVIAL PURSUIT COMPETITION Address The legend of Trivial Pursuit lives on. Domark are now releasing new multi-machine question modules for TP addicts Did you know to boggle their brain cells with. And to celebrate the fact we're proud to be able to offer you the chance to win not only a question-pack but also a copy of the new Trivial Pursuit book which not only tell the TP story but is also packed with TP type questions to and help you while away the long winter nights. The book alone is worth squillions of quid we've got FIVE to give away thanks to the over generous people at Domark. The books come complete with a TP tape that will load into ANY machine but you do need the original game to make use of it of course. 15 runners-up will get a copy of the tape. stuff All you have to do to win one of these totally terrific prizes is write in with a terribly trivial fact that would be worthy of a TP question, Facts like this: \"Did you know that in America there is a machine that can measure the lunar tide in a teacup\" or \"Did you know that Big Red likes plain crisp\" or even \"Did you know that John Wayne's real name was Marion Morrison\" like that. Come on, you can do it! Once you've come up a decent \"Did you know...\" cram it! into our coupon and send it off to Computer and Video Games, Trivial Pursuit Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is February 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and the Editor's decision is final. C+VG COMPE Want to win a mega-supply of Firebird games? All the games they've got for YOUR particular machine in fact! Course you do. Then all you have to do is play Firebird's latest and greatest game Sentinel. We described it as the \"ultimate in game satisfaction\" in our epic January issue. It's an original strategy type game with elements of chess which will keep you intrigued for hours. What do you have to do to win this amazing bumpter bundle of games-over 80 different titles on the major machines? Simple, just send in your Sentinel codes. If you've played the game you'll know that to progress from level to level you need to get codes. And by now we reckon that anyone who has been playing Sentinel regularly should be getting codes of over 6,000. And that's what we want from you Sentinel codes of over 6,000 -preferably accompanied by a screen dump or screen shot. The player with the highest code will be the winner. Ten runners up will get a game from the Firebird Silver range for their machine. You've got until February 16th to get that code into usplenty of time to get a high one! Once you've decided you can't get any higher fill in the coupon and send it to Computer and Video Games Sentinel Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Normal C+VG rules apply and the Sentinel's decision is final! C+VG/FIREBIRD SENTINEL COMPETITION Name Address (tick box) My Sentinel Code is Atari BBC I enclose screen shot/screen dump Computer owned Spectrum D C64/128 Amstrad "


"8641 OLYMPIC HC Lg rooms, new & Shower 200 N Onk-S ded. 2210 5000 ST Going cheap THE Clearance Sale You've Been Waiting For KLEIN'S CENTRAL WAREHOUSE OUTLET Under ONE giant roof, hundreds of nationally advertised Household Appliances NEW SAMPLES Vacuum Cleaners Salesmen's samples all makes from $5.95 Washers & Ireners New family size only $19 ABC Spinner Sensational at only $35 Oil heaters free installation from $30 Odds and Ends. Famous makes Free delivery No finance company to deal with 300 N Madison Rd. Wabash 5148 OLIMPIC HOTELS W, 1.550 Le rooms; new furniture; pri bath, tub & showet. 200 N Oak Sheridan Rd Sheridan 8641 5000 SINCLAIR C5s for sale. Going cheap. Batteries not included. Victory 2210 AUTO LOANS CASH IN TEN MINUTES ON YOUR AUTO OR TRUCK 20 MONTHS TO PAY Deal direct with owners. Private consultation rooms. HIRSCH-DAVIS 20 years in the same location 6213 W STALLWORTHST. Harrison 2217 CASH IN TI AU 20 M Deal Private 2217 20 years 6213 WSTALI VISIT Paula's Conditioned. A pick from Low prices VISIT Paula's Puppyland Air Conditioned. All pop, breeds. 100s to pick from Low prices 6162 N Harlem Av. STENOGRAPHERS Complete secretarial courses. Learn by actual work on switchboards. Free catalog Also \"Brush up your Comptometer \"Complete X-ray Course AMERICAN BUS COLLEGE 20 E Michigan Would anyone having knowledge of the whereabouts of Joe 'Pug Nose' Morelli please tell his mum cos his tea's ready. WALTZ, fox trot, rhumbs. Private lessons. 7 for $5. No appt. nec. Rm. 21 316 N Clarkson Wkdays 10-5 STE Complete seer actual work on Free catalog Also 'Brush up \"Complet AMERICAN B $29 up Trigan the wady Would anyone whereabouts or please tell hisi sons. OPEN SUNDAY Buy direct Factory samples Bedroom sets .... Parlor sets ............. $19-$39 up Trade-in & repossessed furniture available Schwarz & Co 4077 Cottage Rd W. CHEV 139 Sedan $400 Trunk heater, Vacuum gear shift, bumper guards, original fin. Priced for below market. Private Krueger Humboldt 9226 CODE numbers needed for Wheelie player. Reply Box 63980 St. Louis $4.75 Detroit $5 Ft Wayne $3 Columbus $6 De Luxe Motor Stages 230 Milwaukee N W Lake Central 3131 m 10-5 WALTZ, fox ter 7 for $5. No ap Rom. 21 316 ALLIED MARSHALL ARMS Ideal lor executives.TEXCHANGE Ways Fashionable conveniently located. ant iemand ring for furniture. Kildare 3927 Excellent cuisine. Attractive monthly rates. Every room with private bath New & used Wolins & cases. Bargain Coffee shop. Barber & beauty shop. prices. Telescopic sights optional 4100 La Salle Nth. Fairfax 6265 423 S Clark Blvd. Open eves. CASABLANCA nite-spot needs pinnists. PACKARD 40 deluxe Sedan $750 Apply Rick Box 63980 Used 5 mths. 4dr trunk. Radio & heater. Liverty 1290 PINE GROVE PLAZA Modern de Lakeview 3074 luxe 6-7 mm apts. Newly decorated. Beauty Operators Trained at Electric elevator. La closets, w. lite DE VERE UNIVERSITY ARTIFICIAL leg Man's; left: are in the State's leading salons. We take nize 7-8. Airplane metal, lightweight. pride in their success Rates, terms Delaware 7173 catalog on request. No obligation PART share in 1938 Cub S45. Hy solo Day/evening classes $1.50 Dual $3.50 De VERB 50 E RANDOLPH BLVD. Evenings. Oak Lawn 1904 7th Floor FOR SALE 20 Left shoes, size 7-8 BLACKSTON PK 3125 1/2/3 rm kits Going cheap. Offers Delaware 7173 well furn, newly dec. $3.75-$5 up LABORATORY equipment for sale HAYLEY, I huvu. Eric. XXX chemicals, scales etc. Perf. cond. P.S. Will you help me with my lines Calumet 2071 Reply Box 63980 4 yr old saddle horse. Well mannered. Ellis 4535-2 rm basement apt. Kit. elec Sacrifice. Quick sale. Offers frig. Free as $5-59 Mr Edge. Oak Park 1397 LAUNDRESS. Good shirt Ironet Cleaning TEETH lost-partial plate. Fast worker Triangle 4200 W 79th St. Reward Wellington 2354 Can't get across river in Omnicalc? You DRIVING to Denver, Cheyenne via need the Extension Kit Oklahoma shortly. Take 2 share expenses. Reply Box 63980 Kedule 4031 Mens Vests $1,98 Corduroys French Gas driven calculators; adding machines; backsmoleskin fabrics. Dark colours, all cash register & ZX81s. No reasonable excellenty tailored & strongly reinforced offers refused. for real wear. Siten 30-42 Mikes Second Hand Bargains. No Meil or Phone orders none delivered. 15 Grand Av (nr Plaza) DACRES BARGAIN BASEMENT 139 N CLARK ST OLDSMOBILE 38 Del. Trk. Sed. $550 4 doot model. Heater, very clean. PAINT, paper $3 up per rm incl. papet. $45 down. Botha enamelled. Plaster; patch. Mayerling Motors 6800 24th & Michigan Independence 7668 SALESMAN 44. Aggressive Seelsood 1500 used theater seats. Also theater lide-line to work into full-time organ. Baldwin baby gt piano, Cheap. Have car Anderson living 4519 Schoenstadt Archer 2554 WOODLAWN 1362 2 ms. Pr. entrance. CATAPULT required for Skooldaze player Newly furn. & decor. Frigidaire. Reply Box 63980 Gas incl. $3-$6 12. Mothproof Rug Peds. Offers around $1.95 Quick drying cement supplied. 14 Jackson No questions asked. Apply Box 1342 Evenings only Yng hi-nch grad desires off. wk or Doll baby-plete write mest mothers. reception. Hollycourt 7373 Joe is sick Sweetie Pie. STUDEBAKER Cadillac m e te your 1940 President Sedan requent e r yard. Gleaming grape-tone maroon finish. SLOPERS METALWORKS Equipment includes radio, climatizer etc. EARLSSOOD ALLEY Exceptionally low mileage. Like new $895 (back of Joe Drug Store) 2435 W WABASH Independence 3310 FULLY FASHIONED RAYON City Officials bought and sold Box 2217 OUTSIZE HOSE All well reinforced, knit to fit, with stretch INDIGESTION tops, Irregulars of 39 value. MAY AFFECT THE HEART 5 pairs $1. Sizes 9 to 11 At the first sign of distress, smart men and women depend on THRIFTFOOD MART CHESTER'S PATENT REMEDY Diced fruit per lb.. 27c made of fastest acting medicine for acid Sogar pens, sifted 6 cene 65c Indigestion. If the first dose doesn't Ten ballo 100 to box prove CHESTER'S beri, rehur bottle 10 Premium hams per lb........ 19 us and receive DOUBLE money back. 25e Cane ugas pure grain 2516 .... $1.15 32 S LA SALLE ST. 9-9 ALLIED BEAUTY ACADEMY 32 E LAKE ST MANICURING COURSE $17.50 Jobs waiting Learn in 3 weeks. Includes olip a ctment CONFIDENTIAL ENQUIRIES UNDERTAKEN Contact Sam Cruise Fairfax 7337 vice MANICUI Jobs wait Includes tools, CONFIDI ette; PENTHOUSE -living room + kitchenette bedrooms & private roof garden Contact Sam PENTHOUSE 2 bedrooms & Combination lce water. Com Ar an a 35 W Delawan 2011 will exchange dental work for used car. JF Ball Drexel 4113 ALL AMERICAN BUS TRAVEL CO. Free pillows Free meals Los Angeles $300/ $54 t/t S Francisco $32.50 / $60 t/t Miami $150/ $25 t/t Atlanta $100/ $14.50 / LOWEST ROUND TRIP FARES IN THE STATE SPECIAL SALE Now from only $29.50 New, de luxe, water heaters keroseness 217 w Washington Av. Franklin 1300 lce water. CompleteVice. At an address of distinction. 35 W Delaware Franklin 3911 Sinclair CS Sedan. 4 door Fully air conditioned. Running boards extr. This car will pass for new. Any colour you like, as long as it's white Reply Box 63980 Sinclai Fully air condi extra. This car colour you like 1980 WIN Hood costs, heavily interli pants to match From $14.98. EME Not responsible for debts except those contracted by myself J Schaeffer 3351 Washington BARGAINI Fluffy Pork Pie Sport Felts. Regular $1.49 Values. The all purpose casual felt in Black, Brown, Soldies, Wine, Red, Kelly, Beige. Four head tires 21-23. Now ONLY 84 WINTER COAT SALE! Hood costs, wrap arounds, warm fleeces, heavily Interlined, coats with lined snow pants to match. Sizes 12-20 From $14.98. Value $25 EMERSON COAT CO. 2342 W CENTRAL AV. $1,000,000 in dinmonds WANTED! The Very Highest Prices will be paid We also purchase Old Gold & Pewn Tickets YOU RECEIVE CASH IMMEDIATELY US Diamond Syndicate, 35 N Pulaski Rd. in dis The Very High *We also purel Pawn Tickets YOU RECEN US Diamonds PAWNBROKER dark, jeweller-A! salesman Alert, live-oire; dat exempt; & esp. Columbus 6823 FOR AIRPLANE & STEAMSHIP TICKETS, SEE WTWORTI & RAYMONDS TRAVEL ELLIS 2329 A kitchenette r t Comfamul FOR SALE GROVER HAS THE TRUCKS en price Gain on quality Decadene wacht Safety PAWNBROK ancaman. Al incoln New from TRONCOUCOC 48K Spectrum .95 MICROSPHERE 72 ROSEBERY ROAD LONDON NIO 2LA GO SAM CRUISE CONTACT "


"GVG 21HELPLINE open the crypt in the cemetry, off his possessions in Dun nor can he get the lump of Durach -but when the metal from the crater. Tell you shopkeeper asks how much he something. Nor can I! wants, there appears to be no Jamie Ramsay of Forbes, acceptable method of reply. New South Wales, is in Russell Blake of Banstead is trouble! He feels sorry for trying to find the beast of people who complain the rest Woodbury End. I am trying to SACK OF of their family take no interest find The Fiend of Faringdon! SORROWS in adventures because he lives 40 miles from the nearest ADVENTURE Many letters reach us from owner of the BMW? He is town, and doesn't even know CLUB overseas, but when I noticed playing Vera Cruz. He is one adventure player! And the stamps marked Magyar tearing his brother's hair out things are just as bad in Some while ago I Posta, it took me back to the over it. And his brother Suspended, the game he is recommended a number of days of my childhood stamp doesn't like it! currently stuck in-no-one fanzines and clubs currently collection. In the same game, Keving responds to him! How can he attracting the more serious So it was with excitement Atkinson of Lancaster, is get the humans to do adventurer. Among these was that I opened the letter from trying to open the diary. anything? The Adventurer's Club Ltd., Leslie Hiss. Yes, it contained \"Examine\" mode doesn't Alan Wall is getting which ceased operating almost the Helpline's first plea from seem to be working for him, nowhere fast in Quest For The immediately following the Hungary. but Infogrames say that the Garden Of Eden. Who can recommendation! This involves Thorn in diary must be opened by give him a few clues to lead No-one including Honorary Fourth Protocol. He is getting pressing the space bar twice. him up the garden path? President Pete Austin, was worse and worse. What can be You should then be able to How do yo get past the able to shed any light on the done to cure him? find three names and fanglizard in Terrors of deafening silence emanating Unfortunately, this is addresses, Kevin. Trantos, asks Daniel Elliott of from The Adventurer's Club beyond the Helpline too. So A plea of a different kind Blackpool? HQ, and the apparent can YOU help our friend from comes from B. Anderson of Garoar Guogeirson of disappearance of its chief, Budapest? And by the way, High Wycombe. He's after Iceland has a necklace he Henry Mueller. Leslie, if you write again with adventures, or adventure doesn't know what to do with. The ACL, I am happy to your full address, I'll drop you listings, for the T199/4A, a Unfortunately, we can't reply report, is now back in a line as soon as I discover the computer that has very little to you directly, Garoar, as you business, continuing the answer! software support these days. If didn't include your address in service where it left off. Currently an inmate of anyone knows of any your letter. Look in the clues Existing members will have cartridges currently available, section for what to do next, in their subscriptions extended to Swansea recommends: \"Stand or books of listings, please Valkyrie 17! compensate for the dead looking down down a corridor, write and let me know! Pauyl Anciaux of Leuven, period. Pete Austin has agreed and type fart\". Since we met How do yo get past the Belgium, wants to share notes to continue in his presidential again at the PCW Show, prison guard Kraytor in Souls with the characters in Murder capacity Gareth seems to have become of Darkon? Do you need to? On The Mississipi, but the The story behind this completely deranged! Is it possible to get some sort game doesn't understand his episode is, perhaps, more \"How do you stop the of light in the caves? All these input. \"Does one need to frustrating than the episode exterminator fogging the questions come from a very construct fluent sentences, or itself, and behind it lies pestilance?\" he asks. See what stuck Bill Moore of Market is one specific word English Company Law, which I mean? Drayton. sufficient?\" asks Paul. The tends to safeguard the people With only his lunch and a Sigurdur Olafsson of manual doesn't help, yet the with the shares, at the expense piece of rope to help him, Reykjavik is not quite human game looks promising, he of paying customers and though, I suppose hanging He has put a ten pence piece, adds. employees. around farting is as good a way some gold coins, and a lock of Scott Robinson's foremost The shareholders, it seems, of passing the time as any. ... lion's hair into the Witches troubles are with Fourmost of whom Henry Mueller was Incidentally, if you Cauldron, in of course, the games! He can't get started in not one, had decided to close happened to pick up a game of the same name. Galaxias, would dearly like to the venture down. Henry, who flashgun near the Helpline Now all he needs is a spoon communicate with the dwarf had acted purely as a manager, stand on the Saturday of the to stir it with to regain his who takes his mended bucket wanted ACL to continue, and show -send it to us at C+VG human form. But where is the in The Mural and can to this end made a bid for the --it's Gareth's. spoon? asks Sigurdur. of the right words to do a spot shares himself. During the Is Lafeuille, Eva, or Hubert Aha! Trinity problems are of killing in Microman. Any legal battle that ensued, a lying. Are Blanc and Lerat surfacing at last! I thought it offers? court injunction was issued, to involved? And how can Steven was only a matter of time! And finally, Dominic Corby prevent Henry or anyone else Vickers of Carshalton get the W.P. Lowe of Leek, can't of Chelmsford, is trying to sell from communicating to the "


"DVENTURE CUI get past the squid! Kingdom of Klein: You CAN't fountain! crystal and put it in the push the button and get the robot and get the visor and Souls of Darkon: Zap the with the bow, to get the eggs. pass the troll. Play the violin it wisely! Wave the staff to use the broomstick but use get the sword. SAY ABRA to crown and carry the sceptre to Castle Blackstar: Wear the police. the skylight and wait for the the door. Then climb through when it has gnawed through and attack the first rat only the door. Open the skylight, go to the bathroom, and shut block the door with the settee, The Rats: To escape the flat, necklace for cash. Valkyrise 17: Pawn the bashing! crystal, for a bit of trollKentilla: Store sunlight in the bull ring to save your Ken. for the coach. Run into the call him. Then return and wait Snargsby, go E, D, NW and Terrormolinos: To find problem! go go south, the echo's a Catacombs: Go go north, and nut at the lion and feed it. Jewels of Babyon: Throw the matchbox. Delroche, study the statement from Hubert Fuzzy's bar, and for a Vera Cruz: Get some info on trolls. Boggit: Latin light defeats the the wheelbarrow, will you?! trowel. And just forget about the door closed, and take a melts. Push the boards with Pawn: White is hot, and heat book. Harem, to lead to the phone choose the right wife in the comic in the package, and thus Decode the note using the Leather Goddesses of Phobos: James, Sunderland. Bernard Man, SW9; Eddy Moore, Market Drayton; Moore, Portishead; Bill Eliott, Blackpool; David Gilbert, Nottingham; Daniel Gentofte, Denmark; Paul Krogh Christoffersen, Espergaerde, Denmark; Aage Lambourn; Finn Rosenloev, Sydney; Matthew Conway, from: Antony Reynolds, Help this month comes outside world what was going on. Finally, Henry won the battle, became a majority shareholder, and resumed the affairs of the club towards the end of October A new dossier, and letter of explanation and apology was soon on its way to all members. ACL can once again be recommended to C+VG readers interested in software discounts, in-depth hints and tips, reviews, and the general chat that adventurers get up to. A FEW LAUGHS Here's a clue from Mikey Thomas of Caerphilly. It should be a great help for those trying to shift the boulder in The Pawn: INSERT BIG TOE UNDER BOULDER; LOB BOULDER INTO AIR. \"Easy, eh?\" asks Mikey. ..Id now a word of warning. If you collect the yellow scroll, the tinderbox, and the sack from the Urga-maul's the November issue, would like to get all Portuguese treasury, and then you try to swing across the river, Kentilla adventurers together. restarts, says Stephen Bamford He has founded the Clube of Ilkeston. Portugues do Aventuras, And for a laugh or two, try which has just 10 members at to kill Mordon. And answer the moment. Mordon or Bostafar to the Interests and activites will Kind of the Jungle question, include Play By Mail, suggests Daniel O'Mahony of occasional newsletters, Fordingbridge telephone helpline, competitions, and aid in HELPING writing adventures. To join write to Mario at: Urb. Portela HAND lote 1,3 Esq., 2685 Sacavem, Portugal. Toby Blake runs a Spectrum Adventure Club called EUROHelping Hand, and would like CAMPBELL! more members. Anyone interested should send their Scandinavian readers may problems, together with a list have been surprised to come of adventures solved, to him across a page or two in at: 25 Holm Park, Inverness, COMputer Magasin, written Scotland IV2 4XT. by a vaguely familiar Mario Redondo, encouraged adventure-person. Christian by reading about Vasco Martensen, COMputer's Oliveira and Nuno Miranda in adventure columnist, and, since finishing his National Service with the Danish Navy, deputy editor, asked me it I could do a guest spot. After sending my words of wisdon off, I had this dreadful thought: \"Supposing COMputer readers who also read C+VG, start wrting letters to the Helpline in one of those languages full of Ks, and those Os that you can't type in English?\" Keep your letters in English, please, all you Danish, Swedish, and Norwegian readers! My scribblings were translated by Christian before they got into print! Christian and I regularly swap hints, pleas, and insults! A point finely in the balance, depending on the current insult-level, is whether I allow the Coins-slave to put English or Danish bacon in his postInfocom solving snack! OF BOGGITS AND BOGGLES Picture the scene. A Boggit flying 500,000,000 km above earth on a TWA Eagle, eating Milk Tray chocolate, frantically unscrewing Grandalf's head in order to fix the radio ... BZZZ BLIP BZZZ... \"Hello Ginger. Hello Ginger. Come in Ginger! I have an engine failure, repeat, engine failure.\" \"Hello Boggles old chap. Nice to hear it. Haven't had one of those for a Rincewind or two. You had a letter from S. Griffin from N. Yorks. Poo to yoo. Finished the game a day after I bought it, two days after its release. Double poo 2 yoo and the same to Thorny. But what is a 16.32, and how do I cross the bridge in the Very Big Cave\" Thank YOU Lawrence Moon! "


"| C+VG REVIEWS  SUPPLIER: MELBOURNE HOUSE  MACHINES: SPECTRUM, C64/128. AMSTRAD, BBC/ ELECTRON PRICES: .95 (Spectrum), .95 (C64/128) .95 (Amstrad, out you can start all over again BBC, Electron) and, playing it right, will REVIEWER: KEITH gradually gather some mates What kept yer then? Thought together for the job. Mind you'd be aht of chokey months you, you might be better off ago! Oh, I see John. Lost a bit without some of your matesof remission for bad they can be dead dodgy! behaviour, eh? Well now yer I played both the BBC and Jones, who brought you measure! released, let's see if we can Spectrum versions the BBC Hampstead and The game captures the pull off a caper! from choice, as it is so much Terrormolinos. atmosphere of the characters Better late than never, the easier to use, and the Dodgy Geezers outshines and plot beautifully, and goes Dodgy Geezers (previewed in Spectrum for the graphics. them both. The vocabulary to make a very entertaining, C+VG's October issue) made These take the form of fulland parser is adequate, and and quite difficult, adventure. their first public appearance face and profile views of the there are some amusing on the BBC in mid-November. Villains, direct from the police messages all written in VOCABULARY Newly released from jail ATMOSPHERE Cockney, with a bit of rhyming records. PERSONAL you have it in mind to gather a With them comes a slang thrown in for good VALUE few of the lads together and rundown of the geezer's get onto a nice little earner. character, and a list of First you comb the convictions. There are a few neighbourhood, visiting all the other pictures as well. dodgy places, the dogs, Joe's, The way you start the game and a drinker or two. is crucial. If you don't make Soon the germ of a plan will the correct sequence of moves, form in your mind, and you you will be disadvantaged will have to do some careful without realising it, and make and detailed observation to set little progress later on. However, by the time you playing the game from the are ready to make progress, start a number of times, and you will almost certainly have using the \"hang about\" replayed the opening sequence command to keep an eye on so many times, that you will particular places at particular have caught on! times of the day and night. Dodgy Geezers was set up Once you have sussed things on the Quill by Lever and M George h a s bei released toda a happy hour and many more unhappy war der enters and 595 \"It's your dan "


"SUPPLIER: US GOLD places to explore, and the be long before you come that saves you a lot of ADVENTURE SOFT dreaded Ufnowksi humour to across a locked door. \"Didn't unnecessary heartache.  MACHINES: SPECTRUM 48/ 128, C64/128, AMSTRAD BRCY put up with! you ask Xxxxx for the key? Please try varying that verb ELECTRON, IBM On the bar of the Oblivion questions Ufnowski means you can't use it in PRICES: .99 (Spec 48). Inn, for example, sits a tray of innocently, when you try to .99 (Spec 128, C64/128 Amstrad. Onuts -a tempting appetiser open it! perhaps you've mis-spelt it. I BBC, Electron) .99 (IBM) if ever there was one! Onuts, Needless to say, XXXXXX was won't comment on the cheeky REVIEWER: KEITH in case you didn't know, are a keeping very quiet about the Maybe later, maybe not! You are a programmable kind of high-breed peanut. key when you last saw him m essage! droid with a program. Your and breath-freshener! Take some two dozen locations and Input is multi-word, and a aim in life is to kill Kayleth, in them, and the temptation to 15 problems ago! GET ALL command is finger this sci-fi story written by do a runner with the empty. There are lots of things to Saving. But the parser isn't as Steve, Rebel Planet. tray, is overwhelming! uncover in Kayleth. Examine complex as you'll find in an Ufnowksi. Up to the crater, and down is a very useful command, and Infocom of Scrolls game. GET A dramatic loading screen to the beach, and by now well handled. It reveals not ALL EXCEPT DEXTA leads into the story which puts you've probably gathered a only essential objects, but proves blind to the you on board a factory ship capacity load of attractive clues crucial to the solving of EXCEPTion, and without that produces androids. You objects destined to make you many of the problems. warning, you will have picked find yourself strapped by drop the very mundane one Even then, they're no give up the lot. metal bands to a conveyor you've been carting around for away--the reply to Examine the graphics, which were far too long. And you've often only gives you a few also created by Steve, are towads a pair of electrified guessed it --that is the object things to chew over, so as to be superb. Many of the pictures robotic claws! that is about to become the able to arrive at the answer are cleverly animated in a way The graphics in this key to further progress! yourself. that you'll not have seen on a adventure are animated and If that isn't enough to make O ther replies are helpful cassette based adventure the claws look terrifying as you give up in despair, it won't too. You don't need to do before. they open and close as you It's a pity there's no RAM move steadily towards them. save, but with all those You have a limited number graphics in memory, I could of moves to escape only to hardly complain that there was be pursued by a destroyer not enough room left in the droid, whose intentions are 48k Speccy, which I used to deadly! play the game. After a bit of quick I hate brilliant adventures! I thinking, and much searching, keep playing and playing. you MAY have in your instead of writing about them, possession as many as four and I get blacks looks from objects, and be contined to an Overseer Metcalfe. area of eight locations. Now Kavleth IS brilliant it's the fun really starts! One of those adventures which What can you do with a need careful thought to sort fuse, some gloves, a length of out the puzzles. Play it, and sticky tape, and a sealed, every now and again you'll get welded canister? By the time furious with Steve Urnowski you have that one worked out, And you can be quite certain chances are your SAVE tape that he's sitting back will be worn through! somewhere, knowing exactly You are on the bridge, the romar's Eventually, by the control are unmanned. Opposite the closed what you're up to, and careful --use of an AZAP service aperture is an ifis-door. You laughing like a drain into his chamber, you find you can computer! leave the ship and set foot on Zymoria. Making your way to VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE the city of Zymogg, the game PERSONAL starts to open up. with many VALUE gogo (OU are in a warehouse, standing i are hundreds of inoperative android could 90 South, West, East. "


"MENTIRA B CVG REVIEWS M B09 proce MARKUS OMAR whici: The Bard's Tale  SUPPLIER: it then ARIOLASOFT/ ELECTRONIC ARTS proceeds  MACHINES: C64/128, APPLE to format. You are startled PRICE: .95 (disc only) The reading process itself is byarimsharl. REVIEWER: KEITH quite lengthy, and if, Before you, you see 1 Red dragon. Here is another fantasy role perchance, you should playing adventure in which inadvertantly supply a writeUill your you first create a set of protected disk as the spare, as staluart band choose to (Tight characters and then set off for I did, the process aborts, and Red dragon or (Run? the Adventurer's Guild. the source disk must be read I played the C64 version. It again from scratch. comes on two disks, complete Five separate read and write BRIAN THE FIST -9 181 181 with the usual complicated sessions, between each of fantasy manual expected for which the disks must be this type of game. This details swapped, are required to SIR GRADY ?? So 121 na all the single-key commands, make the copy disk. the spells and their effects, The Bard's Tale member of the team is given character attirbutes, methods the option to attack, defend, of combat, weaponry and what Seat Thyself play a tune(!), or hide in the it's for, and all the other usual BRIAN THE FST shadows probably for a Heve got... stuff. change of underwear. Black mark number one: CRle I made them fight! At each <B)eer The program loads with \"bad <) ead round (these things have to be sector copy protection, which CF) Oul spirits drawn out to give the illusion (C) inger Ale causes the head of your drive of the game player having to bounce violently against the What'll it be? skill) the team points are endstop a number of times, Drogonbreath reduced as they are hit. eventually causing the head to Chorocter None RC Hits Cond Spot ci Before long, all three were go out of alignment. BRIAN THE FIST dead, and it was not without a Too many loads of this sort degree of smug satisfaction, of program will set you back a that I noticed two of the \"A tenner or so for a re-alignment Team\" were dead too! Serves job by a specialist computer them right for taking so long to dealer. copy! Black mark number two: Of course, you can do the The title screen has an usual fantasy-type things in animated picture of the Bard this game, cast spells, add new plucking a suitable medieval characters, visit Garth's instrument, with his lyrics Altogether, this process took open. I was first treated to the Equipment Shoppe, or simply appearing below as he sings. (including the mistake) an g ame credits, and a portrait of Unbelievably in this day and incredible 30 minutes. Michael Cranford, the brains kicks! age, this all takes place in Black mark number four: behind it. By this time I felt If I sound flippant, then I complete silence. When the copy is complete, like kicking him! am. I find that once you've Only at the end of the song you are then instructed to turn Instead, I took my played one of these, you've is there a short sharp burst of the computer off, and start vengeance on three played the lot-give or take a tune, to a black and white Bard's Tale again. It was barbarians, who eventually few points for version of the now still picture. another five minutes before I appeared behind the beaten implementation. Black mark number three: was able to start into the down door. The first thing you must do is game, and by now I was With the team listed below VOCABULARY to create a character disk, by heavily prejudiced against the with all the usual fantasy hit ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL flipping the program disk whole package. points, condition points etc, VALUE over, and selecting option M. The \"A Team\" soon arrived and a picture of one of the This invokes a utility which at Skara Brae, facing a closed beasts in the doorway at top reads in a set of characters door, so with a quick glance at left, the conversation took called ATEAM, and then calls the manual. I entered the K place in a scrolling box. for a spare disk to be inserted, command to kick the door After deciding to fight, each SAINS CIUNTO 2000***** "


"GVGD REVIEWS yourself in a drainage ditch, alongside the road. Everything seems to be going well, until you discover that it runs from east to west, through a number of locations, with an apparent dead-end at either end. This is where you really SUPPLIER: ROBICO SOFTWARE MACHINE: BBC 'B' PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: JIM DOUGLAS Welcome to the third part of the Rick Hanson trilogy. After extensive game-play, I can reveal that it's every bit as good a game as the other programs! Those who read my review of Part two, Project Thesius, a few months ago, will recall that it was pretty easy. Myorem is a real killer! Set in a South American country ruled by a dreadful dictator, it is your task, as Rick Hanson, to go in and overthrow the entire regime. You begin the game bound hand and foot to a post, in a dusty arena. You have only a few short moves before you are confronted by a firing squad, and shot. You can't move. You can't speak. You have only your thoughts... Once this problem has been solved, (and I'm not going to tell you how!) you will find MYOREM you've seen the beginning of well as ALL, EXCEPT, etc, the game, and died a couple of etc. times, everything will become Another feature is the way clear. that throwing an object is This program features a handled. You can hurlan couple of techniques not object into different locations, previously seen in Robico's instead of merely being able to games. Initially, there's the throw it, or drop it, where you text compressor, which stand. squidges the text into 59% less The puzzles devised by space than it would usually author and programmer occupy. Robert O'Leary are pretty The second feature is of far tough. You may well see a more interest to the player. solution, but to make it work, The Robico Advanced Parser you will probably have to makes the computer about as perform all manner of operations before you can get away safely. There is a competition open to those of you smart enough to complete the whole game, and the prize is . Myorem (I haven't quite worked out what the title smart as they come during stands for yet) is a cracking play. You can type in utterly good adventure hard, ridiculous sentences which it entertaining, and easy to play. will understand with little or Buy it! no trouble. VOCABULARY You can use words like IT. ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL THEM, ON, and plurals, as VALUE have to think long and hard about your plan of action, before taking any. Any slip will lead to death at the hands of the firing squad. If this sounds a little confusing, don't worry. Once CHVO SUPPLIER: MACHINES: SPECTRUM 48K PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: MATTHEW Prehistoric monsters are back. In fact, they have never even been away! Here you control Ohio, a Brave Adventurer, in the quest for the apparently legendary Aramanth fruit. This is no ordinary fruit, as it can be brewed into an elixir of eternal youth The only person able to brew the elixir is an old man who lives at Stonehenge. Not content with living for a few centuries, the Old Man (how come he is so old if he hasn't the elixir 2) wants to live for even longer, and promises to share his secret with you (Sounds like Campbell' Ed.) But there's a catch The Aramanth fruit can only be found on an arrowleafed tree on one oceanic island, where, due to the fruit, prehistoric monsters still roam Not only have you got to find a way to get to the island. you've got to get back again with the fruit! The locations are varied, ranging from Stonehenge to Burger Bar, and are all described in glorious black and white. No graphics here textonly fans! All the other familiar The initial sequence, which adventure options are involves a hunt for a map of included, RAM and TAPE the island, will require careful save, HELP. SCORE, etc. thinking as you link new and An extra feature is the old objects. provision of an EDIT key, An attractive adventure, which retrieves the last where the emphasis seems to command entered, to allow it have been put on lots of to be modified. mindbending puzzles, making This is a good idea for it a good buy for those of you games which accept complex who prefer the traditional textsentences, but as Prehistoric only adventures if you can Adventure accepts only two afford the rather high price of words, it seems a little wasted! .95. The parser is helpful, as its responses tell you what isn't VOCABULARY understood in a bad input. ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL Although the game doesn't VALUE involve complicated vocabulary, it is a good challenge for any adventurer. "


"PTS.DIST TUNES 529 5:16 FPLICE SPECTACULAR ARENA STATE OF THE ARTE Psygnosis was the first Another nice thing pressed this vigorously. company to enter the ST about Arena is the size of Arena could have games arena with the main sprite, a full marked a notable step Baraticcus, an arcade 56x80 pixels giving him a forward in the adventure which never height of about 3.5 inches progression of the multiquite made the grade. At in his spikes on an event sports simulation last year's PCW Show average size TV. The that began three years ago they launched two new ST graphic design of the with Epyx's Summer games entitled Deep athlete is also very Games. However, a Space and Arena. realistic, even film like. number of needless or Deep Space is described The six events are the thoughtless \"features\" as the ultimate interstellar 100 metres, the pole vault, and even the odd bug war game harnessing the high jump, long jump, shot detract from the fun and raw power of the 68000 put, and javelin. All the can become quite a processor to bring unique events require the rapid frustration. 3D solid graphics to the pressing of the \"energy One of the most microcomputer. keys\" the 68000 annoying \"features\" in Although featuring equivalent to joystick Arena is the speech some excellent solid wiggling to give the bubbles which appear at enemy spaceship graphics athlete more speed or to pertinent moments during and a well designed make the javelin fly each event. Quips and cockpit interior, Deep further etc. It is annoying comments made by both Space just seems to be a that there is not a joystick athletes and judges little lacking in the game option as the Atari quickly become boring depth department. keyboard sounds and and repetitive and do not Having said that, it may feels a little fragile when enhance the game. well be one of those games that rewards those The Long Jump prepared to persevere, but after the initial high of the graphics there is perhaps not enough to entice you back for just one more go. Arena is a six event sports simulation for up to four players. The game features large, well designed sprites moving smoothly over a number of detailed sports stadium backdrops which contain neat little touches like other athletes warming up on the opposite side of the track. SPECTACULAR "


"WINTER GAMES At the very least you should have been given the option to gag all concerned! The events themselves are played in a similar way to other games of this type which require fast Winter Games was very and/or co-ordinated successful on 8 bit formats button pressing and a and spawned almost as good sense of timing. In all many clones as the the events except the shot original Summer Games the athlete moves to the did. The ST version has right through a number of the same seven events and static screens until almost identical reaching the throw or gameplay. The graphics jump mark, where you have been enhanced for must press the \"jump\" key the Atari version although at the right time. there are less differences This done, you can than you may expect, normally influence your which is partly a athlete's performance by testament to the quality of further button pressing. the original Commodore Apart from the 100 graphics. metres you are allowed six First off there are option attempts at each screens for the number of discipline you attempt, players and their although three failures at nationalities. I wish you the same height will end could skip the national the high jump and pole anthems, most of which vault. are dull at the best of There are also a number times, but Epyx's of \"interesting\" situations renditions are terrible. you can get into whilst The games, on the other playing certain events. hand, are great fun. For example, in the high The seven events are Ski jump, if you take off too Jumping, Bobsleigh, late you will hit the far Figure skating, Hot dog upright and stop, aerials, Free skating, suspended in mid-air! Speed skating, and On graphics and Biathlon. Two of the most packaging both Arena enjoyable events are ski and Deep Space score jumping and hot dogging. well, but unfortunately, Ski jumping is in three both have end up more parts spread over two like flawed masterpieces high-res (actually they're instead of the genuine Atari low res screen-it's article. This is a pity just difficult to adjust!) considering the obvious screens. Having pressed graphical talent on show the button to start your and the huge investment descent you must press in time and resources again at take-off-too Psygnosis have made in late and you end up in an producing 68000 only unceremonious heap on product... a brave but the runway! risky policy while this Once in the air you must market is still in its maintain good style and infancy. ensure a safe landing. Arena offers the choice of six different events. A Winter Games' skiing option. This is done with the help which you execute them. of a close-up window If you land head first with showing the skier's your skis dangling profile. Using the joystick unceremoniously in the you can maximise style air, don't expect any points and minimise limb favours in the style dept. breakages by correcting Difficulty is judged by the such embarrassments as number of different crossed skis. A clean manoeuvers performed in landing will only be mid-air. You can also achieved if the flight is combine movements for reasonably controlled. extra points, although Hot dogging, a kind of points are deducted for aerial gymnastics for awkwardness. If you fail people with no respect for to land on your skis you E R $ A The Bobsleigh life or limb, is fast score the big zilch! becoming one of the most Although the two popular winter activities skating events seem on the piste! In a nutshell remarkably similar, it involves skiing down a Winter games is a slope and launching professionally put yourself into the air off a together package with man-made ramp. Once enough variation to keep airborne you are you amused until the big supposed to perform such thaw comes along exotic moves as the A must for all 'daffy', the 'back scratch', and the 'mule kick'! simulation Your score is based on fans. both the difficulty level of the manoeuvres you select, plus the style in 1993 Gut ese SPECTACULAR "


"Desk File Commands PACK dourse ROCUE ROGUE Str. Arn Rogue's Nane to the Dungeons of DOOR EINE DESIGN BY AI BESIGH S1986 EFYX.INC You are the Rogue! Lost irresistible urge to delve currently in. The rooms be diminished by blows in the underground deeper into the Dungeon and corridors of each from an adversary, but passageways and damp Lord's domain until you level will only be revealed can be restored by resting. chambers of the Dungeon have the Amulet in your once you have explored Along a strip at the Lord, your one reason to grasp. them by using the mouse bottom of the screen is an stay alive is to recover the Rogue could be said to to drag your character adventure-like dialogue Amulet of Yendor, stolen be Epyx's answer to the around. The level map can window giving a by the Lord many years fast growing clutch of be seen in zoom which is commentary on your ago. Gauntlet, Druid, Dandy useful when you want to progress through the The Amulet was left type games one or more of get your bearings. In zoom dungeons. You also get a behind by the ancient which many C+VG mode the area blow-by-blow description magicians to remind readers, being well versed immediately surrounding each time you go into mankind of its origins. in such things, will the player is shown combat, giving you such The Dungeon Lord both already have played or at together with any objects lines as \"the ice monster envied and despised the or monsters that may be swings and hits you\" or Amulet's beauty and The Rogue screen is gresenu. Zoom mode is \"You clobber the bat\". purity, and vowed to hide divided into 3 main areas best for exploration and Rogue owes more than it in the deepest reaches of with a status line at the combat. little to the original his tortuous maze, top allowing you to savel A player's potential hit Dungeons and Dragons drawing those who would restore games etc. The points level increases with role playing games but seek it out to sure largest screen section, the experience (like makes good use of the destruction. level map, shows a plan successful combat etc.), computer to give a So here you are, view full colour map of the but his actual hit points graphically pleasing and extremely lost and with an dungeon level you are level, at any one time, may well designed games. SKYFOX Skyfox was originally The action is viewed both. released by Electronic from the cockpit of your The remaining eight Arts for the Apple II Skyfox. Skyfox fighters scenarios are the real computer as long ago as are equipped with the thing, in which you must 1984. Ariolasoft released latest in weapon quash invading forces as the Commodore 64 technology including well as protect your home conversion in 1985 when it guided and heat seeking base against capture. was a top 5 hit in the UK. missiles. Overhead and Should your base fall to Now the Atari ST and forward radar displays the enemy, you will be Amiga versions of this help you pin-point enemy unable to land and refuel, evergreen program are instalations and targets and will no longer receive. released proving that not while engaging the You will also lose the use all games are banished to autopilot will take you to of your base computer. that great duplicator in the nearest enemy Tanks are dealt with in the sky after ten weeks on occupied sector. the low combat arena the shelves. Direction, speed, (below 1000ft.) while Skyfox is an air to air altitude, and laser fire are planes can only be shot and air to ground combat all controlled by the down by flying up and flight arcade mouse but the keyboard is through the cloud layer to simulation with the required for missile altitudes of between emphasis very much on launch and all other arcade. There are 15 functions including different missions to bringing up the status choose from ranging from map (beamed from your training sorties to full base computer) which scale invasions. gives you an overview of Each mission can be the surrounding sectors, played at any one of 5 skill and allows you to zoom in levels from Cadet (quite on any one sector for a easy) up to Ace of closer view of what's the Base (should going on carry a Of the 15 scenarios, the government first seven are training health missions, some with tanks warning!). only, some just with planes and the rest having a liberal smattering of 30,000-40,000ft. Whether in the low or high combat arena, the 3D background of either tanks and ground instalations or clouds and planes scrolls smoothly towards you at breakneck speed as you destroy anything that moves. With so many different options and skill levels and a nice balance between arcade, flight simulator, and strategy, there is no reason why the ST version of Skyfox shouldn't be every bit as popular as its predecessors. O SU 00:00259 "


"44 003250 By Adam Billar. MCMLX OKVI For CHCLISH SOFTUE Ball In Play Q-BALL POWER  can have a go at the 2000 points. If you miss yellow and, if successful, altogether or hole the its time for another red ... cueball or a red or yellow and so on. Each time the out of order, you lose 500 yellow is potted it is points. With eight pockets, replaced in the centre of this happens all too often. the cube, In linking the player's The trditional pocket scores to the timer and by has been replaced by penalising them if they holes cut out of each of the take too long programmer eight corners of the cube. Adam Billyard has You have 60 seconds in clerverly added another which to play a shot and, dimension (as if there until you get used to the weren't enough already!) aiming in three to QBall, that of the dimensions, you'll need arcade game where every second you can get. increased speed and skill Just hitting a ball of the in decision making and correct colour scores one aiming are rewarded point for every second higher scores. When remaining on the counter. playing a shot you can For potting a red you get alter the air friction 10 points for every second within the cube which left and a bonus of 500 determines how quickly points. A second red the balls slow down and potted by the same shot stop. scores double and a third Although difficult to scores treble and so on. master at first, QBall is Potting a yellow is similar well worth sticking to red except the bonus os with. We've all seen plenty of in a cube that can be snooker and pool viewed from any computer games in fact conceivable angle (well there's already a pool 262,144 anyway). In both game for the ST entitled the single and two player Electric Pool from versions of QBall, the Microdeal. But QBall object of the game, as in takes this gendre of game normal snooker, is to pot literally into another all the balls in the cube. dimension! There six reds and one Quite simply, QBall is a colour, the yellow. Each kind of 3D snooker played time a red is potted you PINBALL FACTORY It was bound to happen sooner or later, and Microdeal have released an ST pinball game sooner. Pinball Factory, the game, puts you in charge of engineering in the factory. Your sole responsibility is the completion and play testing of the boards produced in the workshop. As an employee of the PF you have various \"state of the art\" tools at your disposal including Edit Game menu, Edit board Edit Logo-Alter Rules, Test Game and Exit. the program and has two different ones), Line, ALTER RULES main functions. Firstly it Rays, Frame, Box, Circle, allows you to customise Disk, Clear, Undo, Detail Here you can get one up graphics of the table using for the engineer who likes on Newton by tweaking a rudimentary graphics things pixel perfect), Fill, gravity to see what it package. Then its time to and Pattern which is used would be like playing build up your game using with the Disk, Box, and pinball on the Moon or the \"Bumpers\" sub-menu. Fill commands. You can even Jupiter. You can also While using the drawing also select any 16 from 512 change the elasticity of program you can flag 14 of colours using the RGB the ball making it bounce the 16 available colours as selector. faster off bumpers ete. either visible of invisible. EDIT LOGO The number and speed of Invisible colours are Using similar graphic your balls can also be set treated as part of the tools to those on the EDIT together with the \"free graphic design of the table BOARD (with added ball\" score threshold and do not interfere with airbrush, text, and which depends on how the movement of the ball. shadow functions), you generous you're feeling. Anything drawn in a can design a logo for your Next you can set the visible colour can be table. Logos are purely strength and value of the thought of as a kind of superficial and have no various bumpers you have \"designer\" bumper that bearing on the game itself, used in your design. can be any shape or size. being positioned to the Pinball Factory will go Features include right of the table, away down well with all pinball brushes (there are ten from all the action. freaks. EDIT BOARD This is the central core of The Music Studio was more musically inclined of the Atari's midi store your own or tweak very well received when it amongst us who already compatibility but never existing ones to get the was launched on the know a quaver is not just forgets that many of us effects you want. Commodore 64 because it a cheese snack. don't have a Yamaha DX7 Music Studio was one of was one of only a handful Still other ST musie or a Casio CZ-101 the first music packages of programs along with progs turn your keyboard synthesiser sitting for the ST and is till one of others like Rainbird's into an editing/mixing around. This then is a the best and easiest to use. Music System and boad (a kind of musical program that can be used for the musically Broderbund's Music Shop terminal) making use of in a number of different innocent, it serves as a that combined ease of the Atari's in built MIDI w ays by people of varying perfect introduction, use with a comprehensive ports to talk a common musical competence and while still offering enough range of functions and language with many other talent. depth to please all but the features allowing even the MIDI compatible Each instrument is professional musically naive to get keyboards. For all represented by a different musician. started immediately. Hitchhiker freaks out colour so it is easy to see While there are there, think of a MIDI port which notes will be played undoubtedly a number of as a kind of musical babel by which instruments by more sophisticated music fish! their colour on the stave. packages available for the Activision's ST version MS comes with 5 preST, these, though, tend to of The Music Studio programmed instruments be targeted towards the certainly makes good use but you can create and THE MUSIC STUDIO SPECTACULAR "


"SPECTACULAR NEWS  NEWS ONEWS  NEWS Because of the dramatic Upminster, Essex RM143QH: explosion in ST game 0708 852647/851099 releases, this feature and the Karate: arc Protectors are one in last month's C+VG, War Zone: are has only covered a Fire Blasters are percentage of the total 3D Chess: board+ number of games currently Mission Mouse: available. Space Station!: arc (Jan 86) Demo Diskl: are Hopefully it represents a ELECTRIC cross-section of tastes, but for Unit 8. Cromwell Business the inquisitive amongst you, Centre, New Rd., St. Ives, Cambs here is an exhaustive list (as PE17 4BG: 0480 66433 of December 1st 1986). Red Alert: arc/sim ENGLISH SOFTWARE P. Morris. 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gdns., Manchester ACTIVISION M60 1BX: 061 835 1358 23, Pond St., Hampstead NW3 ATARI QBall: sport (Feb 86) 2PN: 01-431 1101 PR Agency: Claire Walker. Knight Games: sport Hacker II: str Suerling PR. 1 Lowther Gdns, Your 16-bit reporter has heard Shanghai: card (Feb 86) Prince Consort Rd. London SW7 that English Software is busy Music studio: music 2AA: 01-581 1721 converting Knight Games for Wishbringer: adv Battlezone: are transatlantic consumption Moonmist: adv Joust: are courtesy of Mastertronic, who Trinity: adv (Feb 86) Millepede: are also have plans to launch Ninja Ballyhoo: ady Star Raiders: are there sometime in 87. Let's hope Basketball: sport Although it was intended to that these titles also see the light Baseball: sport* review at least one of Atari's ST of day over here. Meanwhile, Football: sport conversions the companies PR QBall is causing industry The Last Ninja: are agency were unable to confirm eyebrows to be raised and quite Portal: * release dates, or even if they rightly. Enduro race: are would be released in the UK at all! FTL Quartet: * BEYOND Sundog: arc/str (Aug 85) Tas Times: ady (g)* Tom Watson. First floor, 74 New HABA Paintworks: graphics Oxford St., London WC1A 1PS: L. C. People.: (Jan 86) Pier Rd., North Feltham Ind. 01-631 5373 Est., Feltham, Mddx TW14 OTT: A Mind Forever Voyaging: adv Star Trek: are/str* (Aug 85) 01-751 6451 The game of the programme Leather Godesses: adv (Jan 86) should be boldly launched Flight simulator: sim Mindshadow: adv (Aug 85) around March/April time but LLAMASOFT Borrowed time: adv (g) (Aug 85) don't hold your breath. When it Colourspace: zarjaz (Aug 85) Cuthroats: adv does arrive the object of the game It's about time we had Deadline: adv will be to save a portion of the something else from Mr Minter. Enchanter: ady universe, at present infected by a One gets the feeling that if Geoff Hitchhikers: adv Klingon and Romulan rebellion. really turned his mind to it, the ST Infidel: ady To prevent the rebellion from wouldn't know what hit it. Plantefalll: adv spreading, a 1,000 star section of MICRODEAL Seastalker: ady the universe has been enclosed in Jenny Pope. P.O. Box 68, St Sorcerer: adv a Klein Sphere even though many Austell, Cornwall PL 25 4YB: 0726 Spellbreaker: adv 'innocent planets have been 68020 Starcross: adv trapped inside it. Your mission, Major Motion: are Suspects ady Jim, should you decide to accept Cards: card Suspended: adv it, is to boldly snuff out the Pinball Factory: sport (Feb 85) Witness: ady rebellion ... boldly. You control Electric Pool: sport Zork I, II and III: ady seven members of the Enterprise Karate Kid II: are Activision have the largest crew, Kirk, Spock, Scotty, Uhura, Shuttle II: sim catalogue of ST Games of any McCoy, Chekov and Sulu, in a Animator: animation company largely due to their desparate bid to convert or Trivia Challenge: trivia ownership of Infocom. Ones to eliminate all the waring factions Time Bandits: are look out for in the first half of 1987 inside the sphere. Only then can Lands of Havoc: arc are Portal, Enduro Racer the sphere by removed so that the Karate Kid II looks VERY (converted from the arcade game universe can live happily ever impressive in the graphics dept, it of the same name) and Quartet. after. only remains to be seen how it All three should be out before the The graphics are nothing short plays and sounds. end of the summer. of fantastie, each character being MICROPROSE ANCO instantly recognisable when his P.O. Box 24, Cirencester, Gos: Karen Graham. 35 West Hill, or her personal screen is paged. 0453 886386 Dartford, Kent DA12EL: 0322 Game play seems to be split in Silent Service: sim (Feb 87) 93513/8 three. Part of the time is spent MIRRORSOFT Bridge 4.0:* navigating from one part of the Pat Bitton. Maxwell House, 74 Compubridge: sphere to another using a couple Worship St., London EC2A 2EN: Peggammon: board of 3D star charts to \"plot a course 01-377 5837 Strip poker: (Jan 86) Mr Sulu\". Next comes the odd bit Cinemaware: adv* (g) ARIOLA of combat, and to be honest it Film Director: animation Amanda Barry. 68 Long Acre, looks a little odd at present but, to Art Director: graphics (Jan 86) London WC2E9JH: 01-836 3411 be fair to Firebird, this part of the Spitfire 40: comb/sim Skyfox: comb/sim (Feb 86) game was unfinished when last Strike Force Harrier: com/sim Degas: graphics seen. The third, and most (Feb 86) Degas Elite: graphics strategically orienated part of the The Bermuda Project: adv (g) Unfortunately there wasn't game involves picking a landing The Black Cauldron: adv (g) room to review Degas Elite party (maximum five) and Space Quest: which has just arrived. But, on beaming down to various planet's 3D Helicopter Simulator sim first sight, it looks very surfaces to collect things, and/or Fleet Street Editor: desktop impressive. deal with problems you may Deja-Vu: adv* (g) encounter. Kings Quest II: adv (g) Each of the seven crew Ultima II: ady (g) members mentioned above have Mirrorsoft is another UK their own skills, so performance company heavily committed to 16 in this section will depend on software. They are already one of your choice of landing party a select band selling Macintosh personnel games, some of which are being EIDERSOFT/PARADOX converted to run on the ST. Janet Wardrop. The Office, Hall Probably the most exciting Farm, North Ockendon, prospect here is Deja-Vu-the Mac version of which was reviewed in the August 1985 issue of C+VG. NOVAGEN Tim Bosher. 142 Alcester Rd., Birmingham B13 8HS: 021 449 9516 Mercenary compendium: arc/sim/ str/adv (Jan 86) We await the sequel to Mercenary with baited breath! PSION Psion House, Harcourt St., London W1H 1DT: 01-723 9408 PR. Louise Blakesborough of Kinnear Ltd: 01-499 8650 Psion Chess: board (Jan 86) PSYGNOSIS 1st Floor, Port of Liverpool Building, Pier Head, Liverpool L3 BY: 051 236 8818 Deep Space: are/str (Feb 86) Arena\": sport (Feb 86) Brataccas: arc/adv (Aug 85) RAINBIRD Clare Edgeley. First floor, 74 New Oxford St, London WCIA IPS: 01-2409 8838 Jewels of Darkness: adv (g) Advanced Art Studio: graphics Tracker: are/str Silicon Dreams: adv (g) Guild of Thieves: adv* (g) Star Glider: arc (Jan 86) The Pawn: adv (g) (Aug 85) The next Magnetic Scrolls adventure, The Guild of Thieves, should be with us soon. If this is anything like as good as The Pawn (Aug 85 C+VG) we should be in for a rare treat. Two adventure trilogies that are already available are Level 9's The Jewels of Darkness and Silicon Dreams. At .95 both these trilogies represent outstanding value for money and should not be missed by either of the ST owners in the UK who never played the eight bit versions. SILICA 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd., Sidcup, Kent DA14 4DX: 01-309 1111 Amazon: adv (g) Brimstone: adv Coverted Mirror: ady (g) Crimson Crown: ady (g) Delta Patrol: defender Dragon World: adv (g) Electro Solitaire: board Essexl: adv Fahrenheit 451: adv (g) Forbidden Guest: adv Gateway: adv (g) Hex: Q-bert Mean 18: sport Mindwheel: ady Monkey Business: are Murray and Me: Nine Princes in Amber: adv (g) 00-Topos: adv (g) Phantasie: arc/ady Rogue: arc/adv/str (Feb 86) Spiderman: ady* (g) Sword of Kadash: ady (g) Transylvania: adv (g) Treasure Island: adv (g) Universe II: arc/str Winnie the Pooh: edu The Wizard of Oz: edu* KEY are = arcade adv adventure-text only adv (g) adventure with graphics sim-simulation sport sport, pastime, or hobby str strategy # included in company new section * = not available as of 1st December 1986 Thanks to Silica Shop for their help in compiling these features. SPECTACULAR "


"FRESH FROM THE HAMPSHIRE ANDES... THE YAK IS BACK from PERU and hammering away at the '64 and the trusty ST once more and almost simultaneously... The current projects include REVENGE II temporary title but you may guess that camels figure in the action somewhere. Nice scroll effects and spectacular scenery have emerged so far, with clearly lots more to come. COLOUR SPACE'64 Jeff is re-creating the successor to PSYCHEDELIA for the good old CBM. In fact the result will outdo the earlier versions of ColourspaceLIGHTSYNTH development is ongoing. COLOUR SPACE II for the ATARI ST. Some truly beautiful effects and dynamic background graphics will be part of this version. So that purchasers of the original version will not feel let down Jeff plans to offer them an upgrade at a very reasonable cost. Still some way to go on this project tho'. The problem is knowing where and when to stop! CURRENT, RECENT AND IMMINENT... For the CBM 64 IRIDIS ALPHA meet GILBY, a droid with a high cuteness factor, scuttling or flying across the planetary surfaces collecting energy.. A BLAST WITH CLASS for those who like a little subtlety with the intergalactic mayhem. Includes a great bonus-wave game, pause mode game and (a real first!) fractal music! -published jointly with HEWSON .95 on tape, .95 on disc For the CBM 16 MATRIX & LASERZONE two classics re-written for the C16. MATRIX includes all the features of the original version including that traitorous. humanoid, the Snitch, plus (it's hard to take) an even faster fire rate than the original! LASERZONE's unique duo of independently controlled laser-bases has never been easy to control but as you learn its skills things get rougher and tougher for those pesky aliens! published jointly with ARIOLASOFT .95 both games on tape. VOIDRUNNER HELLGATEvoidrunner is the megablasting sequel to GRIDRUNNER and LASERZONE... lots of waves, loads of chaos and bits of eat disintegrated alien flying everywhere in the fastest blast to hit the C16... and on the. far side (of the cassette) we include the '16 version of HELLGATE a shoot-em-up for those with superfast reactions and independently controlled eyeballs! published jointly with ARIOLASOFT .95 (cassette only ) LIGHT SYNTHESISERS Another string to JEFF's bow is his work on our LIGHT SYNTHESISERS which allow the computer user to play his machine like a 'LIGHT PIANO'. The original Lightsynth, PSYCHEDELIA, is still available for most home micros. . now .00 COLOUR SPACE, its successor, has been published for the ATARI 8-bit micros (only on tape .50), the BBCB (tape, .95) and in a spectacular 16-bit form for the ATARI 520 ST (.95). COMPILATIONS VIVA VIC! is our VIC collection 8 of JEFF's best for the good old machine. Great stuff for VIC owners! ABDUCTOR, TRAXX, MATRIX, HELLGATE, LASERZONE etc. .50, all on one tape. YAK'S PROGRESS the best of Jeff's '64 stuff, includes 8 games, some now difficult to get, commercially ATTACK, & REVENGE OF THE MUTANT CAMELS, ANCIPITAL, SHEEP IN SPACE, HOVER BOVVER, etc. can't whack it at .45 (2 tapes) or .95 on disc ORDERING LLAMASOFT PRODUCTS Obtainable from most perceptive dealers or directly from the address below SEND S.A.E. FOR CATALOGUE & FREE NEWSLETTER, TO LLAMASOFT LTD, 49 Mount Pleasant TADLEY HANTS RG26 6BN LLAMASOFT "


"The world of highspeed skateboarding and motor racing are covered this month. Clare Edgeley also play tests the newest Commando game to hit the arcade Jackal. 03 720 ENDURO RACER could be anything, but there's no escaping its deadly tentacles. Il Breathtaking acrobatics, fast and flatten you and you'll lose precious furious action and the ability to life. toke skateboarding expertise to To find a park, just skate onto new heights make Atari's new one of the many 'map' signs and blockbuster, 720\", a thrilling game you'll be shown your position in to play. relation to the four parks and four In skateboarding jargon, 720° skateboard shops which are dotted happens to be one of the most around. The parks are paradise difficult manoeuvres you can and each run is more difficult to perform. Jump into the air and twist complete than the last. Easiest is the a full 720 degrees before landing. Downhill which consists of a It looks as difficult to do in the twisting ramp downwards. Just game as it is for real. jump to each new ramp and if you Perhaps this is what makes 720 get to the bottom within a set time so exciting. Whether you've got you'll earn yourself a bronze, silver good balance or not, at least you or gold medal and some cash into can prove proficient at the sport on the bargain. Next is the Jump screen. But there's more to the which is like the Downhill except game than just turning circles. 720° the end of each ramp has a lip is one of the only games I've which you've got to negotiate, encountered which gives a huge rather like the downhill ramp in freedom of movement to the ski-ing. player. You can travel in Skate I thought I'd seen all the exciting City, perform as many acrobatics games at the Preview '87, but 720 as you can and choose between proves me wrong. It's a fantastic several special skating parks to game, of which I saw only a prove your prowess. fraction. The better you become The game which is played in the more levels you'll travel to, and Skate City, must be the there are over 20 of them, each skateboarder's ultimate paradise. becoming more complex and All the surfaces are suitable for harder to complete. skating, there are lots of ramps and 720° will inspire you to resurrect moses of obstacles. In short, you your old skateboard and put back can have a great time scurrying into practice all those magic around, dodging pools, cyclists, manoeuvres you've been doing on ordinary street traffic, frisbee screen. This would make a fabulous throwers and other skaters. At the conversion to home computers, same time you've got to do as and I wouldn't be surprised if the many complicated manoeuvres as license is snapped up over the next possible to earn tickes to enter one few months. of the four parks. This is vital. If you hear the 50 dreaded words, 6.800 \"Skate or Die\" and you don't get your skates on and make it to a park in time, you're mown down by a cloud of... well it race and each level gets progressively more difficult, Apart from coping with the varius obstacles, you'll have to watch the Enduro Racer is a trial bike other bikers. They play dirty, will simulation from Sega and it's get in your way, Crowd you off the brilliant. Once again, the game has edge of the track and generally do been designed to attract and who what they can to stop you winning. couldn't resist a ride on a bright The best factic is to get out in yellow and blue Enduro which front and stay there. They soon awaits anyone wanting a bit of fun. catch up, but it gives you a chance Like Hang-On, you sit on the to get used tothe bike and trail-bike and steer with the obstacles. handlebars. Throttle and brake are The track rises and falls, twists just wher you'd expect them and and turns. As soon as you're over the screen's placed just above the one set of obstacles you barely handlebars. Every move you make have time to accelerate before the on your bike is simulated by your next lot are upon you. rider on the screen. There's no time to think or make As you might guess, this is a trials mistakes. If you come off your bike simulation and has you hopping more than once, you can say your bike over obstacles which goodbye to your chances of consist mainly of logs and boulders beating the time limit. at least on the early levels. Crashing is spectacular. You fly It comes as a bit of a surprise off your bike and land in an untidy when you realise that to jump a log heap, the bike spins off out of you've got to do a wheelie in control and explodes leaving mid-air so that you land on your behind a smouldering wreck. back wheel at the other side. It The clock stops while this makes sense really. happens, but starting off is Land on the front wheel and necessarily slow and this is when you'll end up on your head. That time points are wasted. can be pretty disastrous as it loses The graphics are bright and well you vital seconds. To do a wheelie, drawn with a cartoon style quality. plant both feet firmly on the Enduro Raceris timeless and ground and lift the handlebars. very addictive. I'll appeal to Your rider does the same on everyone and is one of those screen and, if you manage to games which is simple to play for change course in mid-air too you the first time. Just shove in your might miss the boulders on the money, wait for the green light, rev other side of the log. It's a great the throttle and off you go. An idea and really works. The feeling exciting ride and totally different in of riding a bike is tremendous gameplay to Hang-on. Play it if There are seven stages to this you fancy a ride with a difference. control ce bike spins off on untidy mid-air gorfo do a whee ump a log heap ur bike and land back wheel of you land on in B0000 SCORE SF 305948 109 TIHE 22 10.100 1.300 STAGE 1 "


"03  o BODO TIHE 38 SCORE SPEE JACKAL 219LO 1979 te STAGE 1 be thrown from the front of the jeep, though, thankfully, in any \"Action, excitement, destruction!!! direction. It is the way of the Jackalll!\" And You immediately come under that just about tells you all you attack from three foot soldiers but need to know about Konami's they're no match for your machine latest offering Jackal. Though to gun and their bullets are easily be honest, it's a lot tamer than it dodged. Your mission immediately sounds. gets harder as you come across Jackal takes us back to the agemortar emplacements and enemy old war theme of suicidal missions, strongholds. Now's the time to get save the prisoners of war and to used to handling the jeep. hell with your own safety. It is in Manoeuvre it into position so that fact, quite difficult and there is lots you can take out the mortars with of action-mostly on your part asmachine guns-beware the you charge into enemy territory, mortar fire, it takes a bit of dodging bombing enemy outposts and and then run the jeep head on saving the skins of your brave to a building and chuck in the fighting compatriots. grenades. The roof blows off and It's a bit like Commando and the POWs escape. Now you can Rambo in the sense that there's a scoot across to pick them up before map which shows how far you've they catch a stray bullet. If there travelled, the terrain's rugged and are no POWs, you'll earn some the theme of storming the enemy points. So either way, it's good single handed actually there are policy to blow up as many two of you in the jeep-all helps buildings as possible. with the impression that you've Next you'll come to the gates, done this once before on some strongly guarded with mortars. other game, in some other year. Inside the gates, the battle hots up. I like Jackal. It's difficult but each There are many more foot soldiers, time you play it you get a bit further more tanks and, of course, more on in the game. Just the right buildings. Your work's cut out to get combination to emply your pockets through that lot unscathed, and of ten pences as you strive to beat remember, you've got to hang, the baddies. around to pick up the POWs which You start off on the edge of makes you a sitting duck for enemy enemy territory. A transport plane sharpshooters. drops your armoured jeep and The best ploy is to pick up as another plane flies over dropping many POWs as you can and make you and your intrepid team mate a run for the rescue helicopter by parachute. Once you're in the which marks the end of each jeep the action starts. You'll quickly section. There's a 'STOP' position learn that all you've got in the way marked out for your jeep, and from of protection is a machine gun there the POWs can make the which always fires north, no matter short run to the chopper. The more what direction the jeep is pointing POWs to reach the chopper, the in, and grenades which can only more points you get. BLOD00D TITE DA SCORE 255459 EFEET 148 STAGE 1 20000 SO TIE 22 X SCORE 262660 In re STAGE 1 "


"MICROS E I I MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell ACORN ELECTRON for sale Plus 1, leads, duplicated or pirated softJoysticks, mains adaptor, data recorder and 40 games including, Mikle, Exploding ware on tape or disc. You Fist, Beach Head and Death Star Plus will now be liable for pro Electron User magazines worth . Will secution. All suspect sell for o.n.c. Phone 01-204 4167. DISK UTILITY for sale. 'Sector investigator advertisements will be for only  will allow you to personally warded to the Federation customise commercial games. Fix damage disk files explore programmes and more. against Software Theft for Includes manual on how to use it and a further inspection. complete disk tutorial. Send cheques or 5.8.0. to Kevin Dance, 75 South View Ave., Caversham, Reading, Berks, RG4 OAJ. AMSTRAD OWNERS for just .50 you can WANTED Commodore 64 or 128, and enrole yourself into \"LINK SOFTWEAR\", disk drive; in exchange for 600 Channel an increasing club with discount games a Ham International C.B. and TW232 DX library of games for Amstrad and converse microphone and/or fully automatic to other members. For further details send electronic agg incubator-all as new and just a stamp and your address to \"LINK in original boxes with instructions. Phone SOFTWEAR\",26 Kensington Ave, after 6 or at w/ends-John. 084 82 314. Thornton Heath, Surrey, CR4 8BY. AMSTRAD CPC Software for sale, RECENTLY RELEASED CBM 64 games including Sorcery. Never-ending Story, Jet wanted on tape or disk. Will swap original Set Willy, Defend or die. Computer hits 1 software if preferred. Please write to: Rod they Sold a million, Lords Midnight, Dun Minty, 48 Baberton Mains Rise, Edinburgh Darach All original programs. Send EH14 3HG. Stamped Addressed Envelope for full list \"FOR SALE: Spectrum maps and POKES. to: S. McCall,74 Eastbrook, Corby, Most games maps and so many POKEs it Northants, NN18 9BN. would be easyer to list the ones we haven't MSX CARTRIDGES. Konami Tennis and got! Fast service, cheap and reliable. Send Hyper Rally  each. Phone 0934 862646. a large SAE to? DGC Maps, 385 Duffield Ask for Andrew. Wanted, Nemisis. Rd, Allestree, Derby, DE3 2DN. Special MSX CASSETTES. Booga-Boo. offers each month, the latest maps some Superchess, Zoids, The Price of Magic at half price.\" Scentipede, Decathlon, Jet Fighter. -4 SPECTRUM 48K Computer, joystick and each. Phone 0934 862646, ask for Andrew. interface, and some books and 12 Wanted, Gauntlet, Spitfire 40, Madcam computer games including \"Jack the Bumper. Nipper.  0.no. Ring Rattlesden 7722. CBM owner wishes to swap Bombjack, WANTED, Disk Drive for Atari 800XL, in Greenberet, Yle Ar Kung Fu, Ghost n' good working order. Telephone Kirkcaldy Goblins, Fist II, Trap Door and many more. (0592) 201983. Wants anything reasonable. Write to IT HAS been established AMSTRAD Richard Lecount Cottsmorr, Old Mead INTERNATIONAL CLUB in Spain with Road, Henham, Nr Bishop Stortford, Herts more than 700 programs available. This CM22 6JG. Or tel: 0279 850689 and ask club has got many members from several for Richard countries. Write to us: AMSTRAD AMSTRAD 6128 with colour monitor and 5 INTERNATIONAL CLUB. APTDO. DE year extended warranty. Also printer lead, CORREOS 182. 48970. BASAURI. Toshiba joystick and games including VIZCAYA-SPAIN. And we'll send you Sorcerey and Ghost n'Goblins. New E533 plentifurinformation will sell for . Tel: (0256) 470383 COMMODORE 64 BARGAIN: 64K between 4pm and 10pm. computer, C2N, Joystick, printer/plotter, SPECTRUM 48K and lots of software, over 's worth of software, including computer magazines, tape recorder, Super Cycle, Green Beret etc. All worthy Interface 1, microdrive, turboram over 's. E300 only Tel: Burntved interface, quickshot Il joystick, Interface 3 4961 after pm (unused) Currah Speech Unit.  o.n.o. CBM-128, 1541 disc drive, C2N tape or swap for Atari BOOXL, 130XE. recorder, compunet modem + software, Commodore 64, Amstrad. Chaz Stewart, varous utility cartridges, mouse + 88 Schofield Rd, Rawtenstall, Lancashire software and over  worth of games BB4 BRP and utilities sell the lot for  0.n.o. FOR SALE, games for C64-Summer Phone 0202-682195 after 6pm Games , Summer Games II E4, Hardball SPECTRUM 48K, Dktronics keyboard, .50, Starion , Paradroid , Rocky cassette recorder, quickshot joystick, ram Horror Show  plus many others. BG turbo interface, over  worth of good Townsend, 105 Tintagel House, Salisbury software, many books + magazines, Road, Edmonton, Lndon W9. complete with all leads and manuals. Very MSX Software to swap. Send your list for good condition. All worth over , Will mine. Originals only to:M ruikshank, 37 sell for . Write to Lee, 2 Rivenhall Glenisia Court, Rattray, Blairgowrie, Fields, Rickstones Rd, Witham, Essex, CMB Perthshire, Scotland OH107AX 2PG.\" WANTED 1541 Disk Drive for Commodore BBC B COMPUTER for sale. Includes 200K 64 in good condition. Tel:-(0905) 776132. double sided double density disc drive, Ask for G Jones. Acorn data recorder, plenty of tape and SPECTRUM 48K, WHS Data recorder, disc games including Elite and revs, books, Quick shot IV, Interface, excellent joystick interface and quick shot ll joystick Will sell for .00 0.no. Ring Stoke-oncondition all boxed with software worth Trent 88698 after 4.30pm. over . Sell for :Steve W. 33 ATARI 130XE computer for sale. Includes Park Place, Upper Eastville, Bristol BSS ORG Atari data recorder. Both hardly used. Also includes software and books will sell for BBC MICRO model 8. double sided 40/80  o.n.o. Ring Stoke-on-Trent 88698 track switchable disc drive, joysticks, 34 after 4.30pm. discs of games/utilities + wordwise and \"I'M A 15 year old CBM 64 Quill user disc doctor on rom, Adv. user guide + 10 who'd like to swap software, Quilled books + 100's micro users. Complete with Adventures, ideas, tips, gossip, news etc. boxes and leads  ono. With anyone anywhere. Please write now COMMODORE 64 cassette + speed king to Derek Doran, 3 Glenaulin Pk. joystick + 4 books, Int. Soc. cart., 46 pieces Chapelizod, Dublin 20, Eire. All letters of original software + music keyboard. answered.\" Software includes Sumerr ll & Winter AMSTRAD CPC software to swop/sell, over Games, Ghosts 'n' Goblins, Green Beret, 35 titles, buy three or more get one free, Dragons Lair, Idris Alpha + other recent prices range from .50 inc p&p. Amsoft titles. Price new +, only . Contact titles 3 ring not earlier than 4pm and not Steve on 0707 334513 after 8pm weekdays later than 9pm. Tel: 01-254 3097 anytime weekends. ORIGINAL C64 software for sale, all Mole, Kickstart, Kentilla, Eureka, Mission 1. original tapes worth , will sell for , all originals and in good condition: Worth games include, Green Boret, Super Cycle E91, sell . Tel (061) 793 1054 and ask for W.O.T.Tiger, Paradroid, Ghosts 'n' Nas. Goblins and 34 others. Write to Harish P. PENPALS WANTED! We are two boys 28 St Pauls Ave, Flat 4, Willesden Green, from Norway who want to swap games NW2 5TD, may sell separately. with CBM 64 owners all over the world. ATARI software to swap, all originals: Please send your latest program to: Tor M. Price of Magik, Mercenary, Zorro, Drop Konsmo, 4550 Farsund, Norway. Zone, Ghost Chaser, Tapper, Coherns C64 GAMES for sale, includes: Towers/Cosmic Tunner (twin pack), plus Leaderboard (), PSI-5 Trading (84) and Firebird, Mastertronic and Americana Sumer Games II (.75), plus many more. budget titles. Send your list to N. Roust, 32 For details please send an S.A.E.to T. Kingsnorth Road, Gillingham, Kent, ME8 Leighton, 1c Bath Terrace, Tynemouth, 6QY. Tyne & Wear, NE30 4BL. HAVE you got what it takes to be the best? Vic 20 accessories, 18 games, titles Find out by playing Platinum Bottle's new include Vegas Jackpot, Rockman and King play by mail game, \"Capital\". Free 'setup Tut. 2 cartridges --Chess and Adventure and first turn. Platinum Bottie, co N. Land No 1. Quickshot Il joystick and brand Robinson, 82 Paddock Cres, new tape recorder woth . I am only Arbbourthorne, Sheffield S2 2AR. asking  ono the lot. Tel. Leeds (0532) 48K SPECTRUM with Sinclair printer 632366 DKTronics interface + Quickshot Il FOR SALE CBM64 with hundreds of joystick, over  worth of software, games, 2 cassette recorders, 3 joysticks, books and mags, cost over , bargain reset switch, manual, A/C combiner switch at . Phone 051-531 9309 after 6pm. and magazines (worth ). The lot for ATARI 400 with 48K & full travel keyboard -320. Tel:01-205 1654 ask for Wen conversions + 1050 Disc Drive, 410 MSX GAMES to sell or swap, also MSX recorder & Centronics Printer interface. games wanted, send your list to: G. Software includes Text Wizard, Spell Lecrass, 23 Glyncoli Rd, Treorci, Rhondda. Wizard, Home Filing Manager + books & Mid Glamorgan CF426SA. magazines.  ono. Phone 01-561 5000. ADVENTURERS all micros I have TEACH your child maths & counting with solutions to many top adventures (over this double cassette for Atari 8-Bit 100), including all level 9, many Infocom + computers with at least 16K. For your copy too many to mention! All solutions 50p send .00 to: Dean Garraghty, 62 Including p&P. Send SAE to Lee Hodgson, Thomson Ave, Balby, Doncaster, DN4 54 Church Street, Tewkesbury, Glos, GL20 ONU. or send a S.A.E. for more 5RZ. information, SPECTRUM OWNERS. Need infinite lives ATARI 800XL & 1010 Recorder with Touch on latest arcade games? Send just .50 Tablet & over  worth of games for TDK D90 full of pokes for recent arcade including: Mercenary, Bounty Bob on hits (I provide tape). Send SAE + cheque/ cartridge, Zorro, Dropzone, Boulderdash 1 postal order to Lee Hodgson, 54 Church & 2 and 19 others. Complete with: Street, Tewkesbury, Glos, GL20 4RZ. Quickshot Il joystick and magazines and NEE HELP with one of these? The Boggit, books. Total original cost . Will accept Lord of Rings, Big Cave, Zork Trilogy +  ono for quick sale. Telephone many more. I have solutions to these + Wakefield (0924) 367426 after 6pm. 100s others. Send SAE to Lee Hodgson. 54 FOR SALE-AMSTRAD 404 with colour Church Street, Tewkesbury, Gios, GL20 monitor. Over  of software, almost 5RZ for full list. new AMX mouse graphics package, MB COMPUTER GAMES system with all Quickshot Il joystick, over  worth of games perfect condition, as new still magazines, books, cleaning kit plus lots boxed, perfect Christmas present .00 more. 20 months old, if bought separately Tel Darlington 481127. would cost over  will sell for  CUT PRICE SOFTWARE. Large Selection of ono. Phone 051-424 6662 Cheshire). software, some old. Some New. ATARI 1050 DISK DRIVE, fitted with a Adventures include Sherlock, The fourth happy board, which offers warp speed Protocol. Arcade include Uridium, loading, and protected software back-up Shogun, Leaderboard and Miami Vice(+ facilities. Also available are 5 disks, 10 map). For full list write to N. Hillier, 10 at .99. Any offers for drive? Phone Mark Severn Way, Keynsham, Bristol. 0744 56206. SPECTRUM 40K OR + I am selling 15 ATARI 130XE Computers for sale, all are games for  or sold separately. For brand new and offer an amazing 128K only details write to: Christopher Pett, 230 .99, many in stock, Phone Mark on Kenthouse Rd, Beckenham, Kent. BR3 IJN 40744156208 for further details ATARI 400 FOR SALE. Hardly used. CBM 64 + 2 joysticks and  of software, Supplied with cassette recorder, Basic including Elite, Fairlight, Green Beret, Manual Books, 2 Joysticks, 8 super games: Super Cycle, Music Studio, X Fist 1 & 2 including Basket Ball, Centipede, Frogger, GAC etc, . Also C2N unit slightly Also French Language.  o.n.o Phone damaged, .01-452 8310. 337 6646. COMPUTER7 game exchange club. Free BBC GRAPHIC CHARACTER DESIGNER membership, exchange your unwanted program for sale. Design your own software for Spectrum, C64, C16, Plus 4 characters, and use the data generated in computers. Send S.A.E. for details to your own games. Full instructions C.G.E.C. 24 Hollywood Road, Bolton, included. Send .50 for casette copy to Lancs, BL1 GHL. Lee Darwell, 517 Fulwood Road, Sheffield ATARI games to swap or sell, Electra S1030B. Glide, Zone X, etc. Send lists to: M. SOFTWARE EXCHANGE CLUB. FREE Cappiello, 13 Hunters Grove, Kenton membership. Exchange your unwanted Harrow, Middx, HA3 9AB, or phone 01-907 games cheaply, send S.A.E. for details and 2522 free membership to: ON-SPEC Software TI 99 4A computers with tape leads, pair of Exchange Club, 23 Florence Road, West Joysticks convertible joystick interface, Bridgford, Nottingham. NG2 5HR. dust cover, all manuals and a few Originals only are to be offered for magazines, ten game cartridges, nine tape exchange, any other form of software is games for  ono, ILLEGAL FOR SALE! Commodore 64, 153T tape SPECTRUM SOFTWARE E2.00 EACH, deck, software worth , including: Tapper, Gyroscope, Rock'n' Wrestle, International Karate, Hardball, Uridium, Match Day, Turbo Esprit, Spy Hunter, Winter Games + much more. 80 column Superbowl, US Gaseball Basketball, printer, the Arcade Joystick + keyboard Skooldaze, Commando, Full Throttle, cover. All worth . I will sell for . Monty More, Automania, Grand National Telephone 01-4450692 Now Games, Trashman, Deathchase, CB17164 games for sale: Zoids, RMS Titanic Wriggler, Decathlon, .00 Tomahawk, Shogun, Skooldaze, Mercenary, Adrian .00 Megahits, Tel (0509) 230186. 118 "


"MICROS E II MICROSELLS — It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell duplicated or pirated software on tape or disc. You will now be liable for prosecution. All suspect advertisements will be forwarded to the Federation against Software Theft for further inspection. QOR AN ADVENTURE on disc for the Amstrad 6648 6128, on tape for all Amstrad CPC's. Have you read the reviews? Available now mail order, Tape .50, Disc .50, from, Maltdale Software Ltd, P.O.Box 292, London SW11 6BH. Coming soon Quizor-it's Amstradivarious! C64 ORIGINGAL games for sale many latest including infiltrator, Thai Boxing and many more. Ring Tony on 582 7259 ATARI TAPES: F15 Eagle, 2 Axxon Rescue on Fractalus, Encounter, Smash Hits 1 Roms: Pole Position, Pacman, Defender, Qix, Galaxian, Joust. All in original boxes, all .50 Each. Tel. 091 584 6284 after 6pm. COMODORE 64 SOFTWARE FOR QUICK SALE 52 top titles including: The Way of The Tiger, Geoff Capes, Spy Hunter, Off The Hook, Sabre Wulf. A View to a Kill plus many many more (US Gold) (Data Soft) (Master-tronic) (Americana) titles also the Designers Pencil and three 64 cartridges Worth over 200 will sell for  or split send a S.A.E. For full list write to: Mr D Britton, 10 Cicely Street, Liverpool 7, 10D Merseyside. TO SWAP CBM 64 games, Disk only. Large collectors all over the world! Write to: Leo Bax, Leevwenhagen 18, 3070 5H, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. ATARI Software to swap on tape and disk such as Gremlins, Mr Do's Castle, Hardball, and many more. Write to: Gwyn, 135 Ynyscynon Rd, Trealow, Rhondda, Mid Glam COMMODORE 640 OWNERS: wanting to swap the latest games (Disk Only) then send list to: Shawn Morris, 38 Hillcrest, Westdene, Brighton, Sussex, England, BN1 SEN FOR SALE: 2 month old Commodore 128 Ancluding C2N Datasette, 128 Music Maker and 16 games including Super Cycle, Leaderboard and Uridium will sell for  .N.O Tel: lan after 5.00pm on Southampton 10791736270 COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE, Lot's of software to swap (disk only) including: Print Shop, Miami-Vice, Asterix, SuperCycle and The Newsroom. All letters answered. Please send your list to: Anthony Flynn, 16 Avoca Close, Leicester, LES 4RA FOR SALE: CBM64 games; on disk: Ghost + Goblins, Groen Beret, Leader Board, Infiltator, Dragon's Lair: ; on tape: Turbo Tape, Ping Pong, Boulder Dash 1 & II, Gyruss: E2: + many more. Write to: Mr. Devaut, rue Deprez-Houdret No 27,4300 Ans, Liege. Belgium. AMIGA OR C64 USERSI We know you are out there somewhere! If you want a Good contact, write to Arjan Smid, Brakkenpad 3, 4205 ZL Gorinchem, Holland, or call 01830-23769 for success. CBM 64 wants to swap new software and tips with people all over the world. Disk only. All letters answered. Send list to P. Brgen, Gione, Ferns, Co. Wexford, Eire. COMMODORE 64, rape deck, joystick magazines and over  of software including Dan Dare, Summer Games, Dragons Lair, Way of the Tiger and more. Original price , sell for  Telephone Lawrence (01) 980 5108 SPECTRUM ADVENTURES, now available,ugg attack 2. Incluides: 4 directional view, picture every location, independant characters. Comes in two parts because of memory limitations of the 48K Spectrum. Both parts on one cassette. Only .00. Cheques/p.o's payable to Alistair Provan. Send to Don. Soft, 35 Church Street, Kilbarchan, Renfrewshire, PA10 2JQ. Delivery within 20 days. CBM 64 GAMES FOR SALE. Uridium, Hardball, Winter Games, Fight Night, E6 each. Little Computer People, Raid on Bungeling Bay, f4 each.Phone Stephen 04253 2221-after 5pm COMMODORE 128 + C2N+2 JOYSTICKS. All as new in original boxes. 28 top ten software titles + over 90 magazines. Total value , will sell for  .n.o. Tel: 01-764 8891. SPECTRUM P OR GALEinering data recorder, Kempston interface, and joystock. Many games including Commando, Zoro, Pole Position, Tomahawk, Yie Ar Kung Fu and Batman etc. All in good condition and all boxed, will sell for . Tel: Nick Peterborough 242744. AMSTRAD CPC464 + Disc Drive + Vortex 512K Memory (Fitted) + Green Monitor + Maxam Assembler (ROM) + Disc Games and Utilities + Tape Games + Books + Dust Cover + Magazines + Blank Discs. All manuals included. Worth over . Sell for  ono. Tel Golden Valley (0981) 540060 (everything well kept and boxed). HI ALL AMIGA FREAKSI Willing to swap programs? If so, contact: Petri Laakso, Vastarakinpolku 4D 103, 20600 Turku 60, COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE. Fourth Protocol, Lord of the Rings, Koronis Rift, Sherlock, Hampstead, Elite, Subsunk Thrust, 10 Computer Hits,  all boxed, ex.cond. Phone 051-546 7501 (Liverpool). Ask for Jason. THESE 6 GREAT TITLES FOR THE SPECTRUM 48K: Ghostbusters, Rambo, Hunchback 3, Konami's Tennis, Niverending Story, Jack the Nipper, all for  or  each. Please contact Lee after 6pm at (01) 864 6134. FOR SALE: Portable SX-64 home computer. Commodore 64 compatable. Built-in disk drive +monitor. Lots of disks including Alter Ego. Reset switch + disk nibbler. Great bargain. Hardly used.  ono. Worth . Ring Harpenden 105827) 69866. FOR SALE (or will swap). Interdictor Pilot, Little Computer People, Graham Goochs Test Cricket, Skel & Widows Revenge. All C64. Phone Robbie, 01-698 4077, between 5 & 9pm. BBCB with DFS, 100K disk drive, 452 Cub Monitor, Tape Recorder, Blank Discs + Cabinet, over 120 games. Many books, + mags + speech syn. Dust cover, monitor plinth + leads. Best offer accepted. Tel: (07271 23540. COMMODORE AND ATARI 520ST SOFTWARE TO SWAP. Please send your lists to the below address. Mr J. Anderson, 27 Drumpark St., Glasgow G46 BLR, Scotland CONTINUOUS COMPUTER STATIONERY in small quantities, 200, 400, 1000 & 2000 sheets prices from: .43 for 2000 sheets of plain listing paper +.50 p&p. .99 for 400 sheets + .99 p&p [15.39 for 2000 sheets of 70gsm micr perf+.60 p&p. .99 for 200 sheets + .99 p&p. .99 for 2000 3.5\" x 1.4\" self adhesive lables + .99 p&p. .00 for 200 + .60 p&p. Send SAE for order form and price list to: Brigantic Computer Services (CVG), PO Box 517, Bamber Bridge, Preston, PRS 6DB COMMODORE 64 CENTRONICS INTERFACES FOR SALE, plus driver software and full instructions, .75. The interface has almost 1m cable and fits neatly to the user port. Cheque with order to Mr D. Snocken, 18 Clifton Gardens, West End, Southampton, Hants S03 3DA CBM 64 SOFTWARE TO SWAP. 1000+ titles, including latest games. Send lists to Richard Coggins at 33 Kantwell, Riverside, Tamworth, Staffs, B79 7UB, England, or tel: 0827 69878. 4pm-11pm Diskonly FOR SALE: CBM 64, 1541 Disk Drive, C2N Cassette Unit, Three joysticks and  worth of original software (disk and tape) worth over , sell for  ono. Also Spectrum 128 few months old still boxed, five original games incl. Batman Int Matchduy, E65. Chris W yatt, telephone: Fairseat 823 522. ATARI 800XL, 1050 Disk Drive, 1010 Cassette Recorder, 1020 Colour Printer. Selection of excellent software on disk and cssette, joysticks, disk doubler and large range of magazines and books. 200. Tel: Ely 720 602 DO YOU WANT TO SWAP YOUR LATEST C64 SOFTWARE? Then contact: N-M Mirani, Buizerdweg 106, 1826 GJ Alkmaar, Holland. Phone: 072-618 427 Don't delay, let me know today. UPGRADED ZX Spectrum plus large selection software . Ring Jason Horndean 595868. MSX games to sell or swap and Amstrad games to sell, including Sorcery Ghostbusters and Hunchback for the MSX and The Way of the Exploding Fist and The Quill adventure writing system for the Amstrad. Phone 31685 for a full list and ask for Robert COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE TO SWAP. Will swap Fourth Protocol, Kensington, Starion, Thing on a Spring, Spiderman, American Football, Allen, Broad Street, Eureka, Star Fire & Fire One, Acos Plus, and 6 other games for Dosofts Megautility and Megatransfer disk V.4.0. Please write to M. Metcalf (Jnr), 2 Coalbank Road, Hetton Le Hole, Tyne and Wear, DH3 OEG, or will swap for Freeze Frame ll. SPORTS ON CBM 64. 6 Hits: Summer Games I & II, Wintergames, Hesgames, Hypersports and Hunchback at the Olympics. All originals. Whole lot on disks for  (700 BFR/40NLG). Send money and address to Ouranoy. Bassinstraat 2, B-2650 Boom, Belgium Honesty guaranteed. CURRAH SPEECH UNIT, DK Troniks Programmable Joystick Interface. Quickshot Il joystick and 12 games including Elite, Bomb Jack, Frankie Goes To Hollywood, and many other good games. Would cost  for special price of E70 ono. Write to Derick Cochrane, 5 Alma Terrace, Newport-on-Tay, Fife, Scotland, DD6 8H2. SPECTRUM PLUS, Modem, ZX Printer  of software, tape recorder, joystick & interface, sound amplifier, Currah Micro speech, spec-drum, over  of magazines, spare keyboard, extension ribbon connector. All boxed with manuals, as new worth over  Bargain of the month at  ono. Phone Mick on (0926) 491585. CBM 64 ORIGINAL SOFTWARE FOR SALE. 15 pieces of great software for amazingly cheap prices. Worth over , will sell for .00. Buy seperately or together. Send for lists to phone (04024) 57482, after 5pm on weekdays or all day weekends. Ask for Sarah. FOR SALE, Spectrum 48K+. Kempston joystick, interface, colour monitor interface, light pen, tape recorder for Spectrum, 50 well known games, 50 assorted mags. All this for ony  quick sale. Shaun Jowett, 21 Inmans Road, Hedon, Near Hull, HU12 8NG. Tel: 898357 FREEI Epson LX80 printer. Send your 30 for more) best CBM 64 games on disk. The best selection for the printer. Toluuleikir Prentari, Vidivangur 18, 320 Hafnarfjordur, Iceland. CBM 64 GAMES to swap or sell. Disk only. Lots of excellent titles. Write to Hermann Asmundsson, Vidivangur 18, 220 Hafnarfjordur, Iceland. If swapping send you game list SPECTRUM PLUS COMPUTER with data-corder, joystick & intrface (slow motion facility), number of games including the Hobbit & Chess. 285 ono Phone Cockforsters 01 441 1127. CBM 14 USERS! I've a package of 6 games and 3 books for sale. It's worth , but will sell it for . Write to V. Patel, 19 Tresco Road, Berkhamsted, Herts, HP43JZ. COMMODORE 64 GAMES FOR SALE. Including Fairlight, Eidolon, Vridium, Fourth Protocol, Quill, and many more on tape, and Mercenary on disk. All AS NEW, and half price. Would sell entire collection for a price. For full list + prices send s.a.e. to Richard E. Nielvb, \"Denby\", 3 Westwood Road, Bidston, Birkenhead, Wirral, L43 9RG; or ring 051 652 5489 after 5pm. ELECTRON COMPUTER FOR SALE, with leads, manual, programming book, tape recorder, E80 worth of games (inc Gyroscope, Frak, Beach Head, Combat Lynxl, stacks of Electron User magazines, Worth over . Excellent condition. Will sell for . Phone (04895) 4289. ORIC/ATMOS 48K GAMES, Xenon : Fantasy Quest -.50; Oric Trek: Books: Sixty Programs, Meteroic Programming; Games to play on your Orrcl-.50. David Yip, 77 Great North Road, Gosforth, Newcastle, NES 200. VIC 20, C2N, 8K ram pack, 16K switchable ram pack, 4 slot switchable motherboard, programmer's aid cart. Super Expander cart (+3K ram). Sargon ll chess cart., 40/80 column board, Perils of Willy, Jetpac, The Quest games. Cost +, sell for  ono. Contact Pak Kit on Coalville 811384 between 4pm-9pm. FOR SALE Spectrum +, cassette recorder, Quick Shot 2 joystick and Cheetah Interface,  of games inc Commando, Ast etc. All worth  sell for E85 including many Sinclair User mags. Tel (0949) 37235 and ask for Justin after 4.00 pm. I LIVE in Buenos Aires, Argentina and have an Atari 800 XL w/256KB RAM upgrade, 1050 disk drive and XC11 data recorder. I have approx. 3,000 programs which would like to exchange within the UK and around the world. Please contact me at following address: Horacio Daniel Stolovitzky, Culpina 1463\"A\", (1406) Buenos Aires, Argentina SPECTRUM 48K+: Data Recorder: ZX Printer; Interface 2; Curra Micro Speech; Booster Speaker: 150 Games;  .n.o. Phone 01-841 4702 after 6pm. Ask for Bernard. CBM 64 Games and Utilitias swop or sell disc and tape old and new. S.a.e. for reply brand new Simons basic cartridge and manual .00. Paull, 16 Dallington Close, Bexhill-on-Sea, East Sussex, TN40-2SU. CBM 64 Games + Utilities to swap, both on disc and tape. All the latest titles e.g. Fist 2 and Jack the Nipper. Contact me: Liam McGrath, Craigmore, Connaught Ave., Cork, Ireland or Phone Cork 271660. CRM 64 originals for sale. The titles include Scarabacus, Rambo, Commando, Beach Head I & II, Fight Night, Ballblazer, loads more. Also a modem for any computer. Telephone (06592) 371, ask for Craig after 5pm. COMMODORE 64 games to exchangeover 1000 titles-please send list to J. Watson, Flat 3,8 Westbank Rd, Liverpool LZONA, Merseyside. COMMODORE 64 tape recorder, two micro-switch joysticks, and lots of games  0.n.o. Phone 061-485 3098 after 4pm AMIGA OWNER wants to swap news Please write to Hans-Josef Stich, Kaste nhof 5,8623 Staffelstein, Germany. CBM 64 GAMES FOR SALE. Ghosts n' Goblins, Miami Vice .00 each. Both with maps + hints. M. Perks, 31 Cross Rd, Bushey, Herts WD14 DO ADVENTURE: Commodore 64 the lost idol of life, over 60 locations, 50 verbs and FREE hint sheet! All this for only .001 Cheques/Postal Orders payable to Dominic Kearney, send to Quest, 1 Bray Close, Cheadle Holme, Cheshire, SKB 600. AMSTRAD CPC 464. Green Screen, colour modulator, instruction manual, speech synthesiser, + over  worth of games, joystick, ALL worth , will accept  o.n.o. Phone 311317, OR write to: 26 Bowes Road, Newton Aycliffe, Co. Durham, DL55LP. 91 SPECTRUM pokes for sale, on the latest and old games. Send  and a stamped self addressed envelope to S. Cooke, 21 Bridgegate Road, Rhyl. Clwyd, N. Wales, LL18 4LB. Make cheques and postal orders to Scott A. Cooke. "


"C+VG Here are the latest hot hits, tips for the top and best of the bunch of new games heading your way within the next few weeks. This month we spy Artic Antics, the latest in the Spy vs Spy games, take on the Leviathan from English Software and Ariolasoft's Zigguart. Why are you reading this when you could be reading that? OOOO O OOOO The shoot em up Ilves on into '87 thanks to English Software's Leviathan on the C64/128. Zap across three different planet zones, negotiate 10 different attack waves on EACH landscape in this unique two-way diagonally scrolling game. The Leviathan ship can fly behind buildings, missile launchers and other structures. Dynamic music by David Whittaker drives the whole thing along. Designed by the English boss man Philip Morris this game will be out at the end of January at .95 tape .95 disc. The shoot 'em up to end all shoot 'em ups they say? We'll have to wait and see but enjoy the free poster in this issue in the meantime. DUNGEON Blood Bug-Byte throws down the glove in the Gauntlet lookalike competition that's all the rage at the moment. Their version is for the BBC and called Dujunz. Up to four people can play at any one time. It will sell for .99. Meanwhile other B-B releases include Strangeloop, the old Virgin game, on the Commodore 64 and Spectrum; Glass, Spectrum, Jeep Command (C16 and Atari) and Bop! (MSX). All will sell at .99 and should be out by February. Another interesting BBC release is Plan B. The player must guide a single war drone through a rogue computer. PW MURUMUNUM ho MINUMAN MATANGHUR CHUN B 884 880 Colllalla NEMAMA Really weird! Armies of bouncing balls are on the attack. Carrots are carrying machine guns This is a job for Cosmic Shock Absorber a fourth division Superhero from Martech. Cosmic Shock Absorber is a 3D shoot-em-up written by Chris Fayers, available for the Spectrum, Amstrad, Commodore and MSX. 2323 You have reached the city of Calais. You can go north toward Rue Des Bossoyeurs. You are in a clearing, from the east you can hear a hunting party. Mega City's mysterious crimebuster Judge Dredd is out to clean up your Spectrum soon. Melbourne House's computer caper has the 2000AD comic hero racing around the city streets trying to wipe out crime. You'll have to be a bit of a joystick artist with this ladders and ramps game and quick on the draw. One for all and all for one! The Three Musketeers make a belated appearance on your computer screens! Computer Novels has adapted the famous larger than life characters from the Duma's novels and squeezed them into the C64 and Amiga. In the game you have to guide D'Artagnan, Athos, Porthos and Aramis to collect some missing diamonds. Computer Novels say that the game is an adventure which can be played at the same pace as an arcade game. The game features digitised pictures and has six musical themes giving over 15 minutes of soundtrack. Computer Novels are planning adaptations of Ivanhoe, Around the World in 80 Days, Scarlet Pimpernel and The Knights of the Round Table. The Three Musketeers will be available for the Commodore 64, Commodore 128 (with enhanced graphics) and Commodore Amiga, .95 (tape), .95 (disk, 8-bit version) and .95 (disk, 32-bit version). What I want to know is if there's four people why is the book called The THREE Musketeers? Answers on a postcard please... "


"NAS DE REFUELINE GET REBOT! STAGE 3352003 At first glance 43 appears to be a follow up to Elite's 1942. And, to some extent, it could be except it's from a different software house. 1942 involved the battle for Midway while American Action's 3 continues the Pacific War. You play the part of Bertram M. Digdale who sets out in his P-38 Lightning Fighter-Bomber to defeat Admiral Yamamoto. 43 features carriers, bases, enemy aircraft, maps, status screens and, apparently more than six hours of background scenes. 3 will sell for .95 on tape and .95 on disk on the Commodore 64/128. Confusingly American Action appears to be a Swedish software house distributed in the UK by Microdealer. C SCORE TINE 88:88 GANGSTERS KENNENTS ods PEBBLES I spy...the latest in the Spy vs Spy series of games. Databyte releases the Arctic Antics on the Commodore 64 and Atari before Christmas. It follows much the same format as the previous Spy games and this time involves the frantic search for a space helmet, navigation charts uranium cube and master carrier.\" Polar bears, penguins, blizzards provide additional dangers for the spies. Databyte has quite an impressive list of games coming out over the next few weeks. Boulderdash Construction Set is what it seems. You can construct your own caves, boulder and diamond positions, entries and exits. Mumbles Super Spy Must find and destroy a mad scientist's laboratory. The game takes him into a world of sewers, gangsters, rockets, bombs and lasers. Adam Caveman has our stone age hero on a quest to rescue his wife from the clutches of hostile mountain men. Birds, beasts and savages hamper him on his quest. The game feature some great looking cartoon-style graphics. The Omnichron Phenomenon is a sprawling arcade adventure in which you play a Special Services Investigator who probes the disappearance of a starship. The games features hundreds of characters and places to interact with and explore. All games should sell for .95 on cassette and .95 on disk. 16955 PEDDLES Batman fans are going to flip when they see Ziggurat the latest from Ariolasoft. Designed by Tigress, the game is set inside a mysterious pyramid. The mad Tehoetec, who ruled centuries ago In Djo Carz, took the secret of lost treasure with him when he died, and it still lies hidden deep within his temple. Terrible legends tell of the horrors locked within the temple. Mimbles, evil crosses between Mummies and Zombles! manic beings roam its labyrinth. Then there's the horrible Eye Monster, and deadly hidden trap doors. You play the part of a lone explorer a cross between Indiana Jones and a boy scout-out to solve the riddles of the Ziggurat. The game has many neat features like the \"marble puzzles\" which have to be solved to succeed, and \"Swivo vision which allows the player to toggle between two different views of the same room. This allows hidden objects to be revealed. If you get killed during the game YOU turn into a Mimble and you can actually encounter your dead self 80 don't go getting killed off in places that will make your next life more difficult. The game is Initially available for the Amstrad at .95 tape and .95 disc. C64 version and a full review to follow. Can violence and mindless destruction be justified in the name of peace? That's a toughie, isn't it? Well, if your interested in resolving this conflict, check out Tony Crowther's Trap on the Amstrad, price .95 cassette and .95 on disk. Your mission is to defend your planet. An Alligata press release boasts: \"Trap has a secret that will need to be told, until it is revealed, you will never be able to Rest in Peace.\" 95 C+VG "


"Berbagi Ottis here... yes it's my turn to supply a COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES little wit, wisdom and a 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE whole lot of taste to the LONDON, EC1R 3AU Mailbag pages. And e've got a this month we've got a magazine. The one part of your fellow and I copy his guns and Melissa in my drawings. I am magazine I actually enjoy reading. lively bunch of letters. sending \"The Mega Squad, one Why do you do this to us? I Tony Takoushi seems of my own creations. Maybe you mean have we done anything to could interact them in a future Bug you? Come on you Atari owners to have upset a few Hunter strip. Could Jerry also out there, write for your rights, people... still what draw me a sheet of different don't give these guys a break. We can you expect from a weapons guns? are a loyal bunch, or at least I am anyway. You can tell your Ed that If possible I would like Melissa's human. face in the position it was in the if I don't see an improvement in I am writing merely to sincerely last panel of \"Magnets.\" She January's issue then I will refrain thank you for your quick and looked cute in her suit when she assuring reply when I wrote to you rescued the boys! at Adventure Helpline requesting I am a C64 user and I read your help on a game. magazine every month. I am also Thad previously written to Zzap a computer correspondent in a without a reply and felt very disschool newspaper and I rely on couraged. Being so far away from your magazine to give me all the England it becomes frustrating HOT! news even though it is some writing without receiving replies. It months late. was so good to receive your postMy favourite game of all time is card informing me that you had Commando from Elite-though! actually received my letter. was disappointed at how short it Since then I have been spend was ing LESS, as I only buy C+VG Well, I hope I have restored now. faith and pride in the Aussies as In the past I used to buy Zzap some of the letters you get from as well, but I could just imagine this side of the world are all their response to my letter \"it was complaints. lost in the post\" while in real life it Jeremy Kirkwood, WHO is was stuffed into the rubbish bin Sydney with all the other unanswered I'm still blushing. Every. letters. body's too kind. Tim's so cool Another problem is Australia's that when he enters a room the distance from the UK and the temperature falls by 10 de amount of time C+VG takes to gress. We loved the drawings arrive. Competitions have passed and the next time we unlock and winners announced before Jerry from his cell, we'll show we even see the magazine. I him your letter. My favourite realise you did once had an unmember of the C+VG team is successful overseas competition, Garry, our Advertisement manbut times have changed and your ager. In fact most people I know popularity has increased so how have a good word for him... about giving it another go, eh, go You would think that judging by on!! the amount of letters that appear Stuart Iroy in your magazine complaining abAustralia out the amount of Atari reviews At first I just Oh gosh! You're making my you would do something about it. flicked through the screen go red. Thanks for the You have no excuse. pages cooly, then nice things you say. We getIf software companies do not slightly worried as I got tons of letters and we try to produce enough games for the to the middle page, answer as many as we can. I'm Ataris then why do magazines turned through the sorry about the delay in the such as Atari User etc manage to spelling error littered mag arriving in Australia. But if review enough Atari games for me pages slightly quicker you do insist on living on the to say to myself, Mmmm. then, sweat pouring from other side of the world from us, Think about it, even if some my brow I wetted my what can you expect. As for months there is a shortage of Atari fingertips and tears in overseas competition, games to review. you could at my eyes I reached the we'll think about it. Promise. least review an Atari version of aend. Disgusted Hi Tim, you seem like a cool game, which has already been out humiliated, appalled, dude, being Ed. of a cool mag on the other \"big\" computers. disgraced, saddened, such as C+VG. My favourite staff Why was it that in past years your let down and pretty members are Paul, Melissa, Otiss, magazine had enough reviews to upset, I flicked back through Lesly and of course Jerrylll not make me say to myself the pages just to make sure forgetting you, Tim. \"Mmmmmm\" but, when I read hand't missed anything but it was Treckon the Bugs are mint and your December issue, I could only not to be. love the detail with which Jerry think *?*$*$ (What can you So, I pulled myself together and draws them. He is a creative mean, Andrew? Ottis). read the mailbag part of your CHRIS CAIN ?!! "


"from buying C+VG and take the Commando vs El Toro. Hello, I ing sick and tired of the \"my. I am just writing to say how stickers off the casing of my am a Spectrum user and I am very computer is better...\" argumuch I enjoyed the December 800XL. You have been warned so annoyed about one of your artiments. They are pointless. I own a issue of C+VG. I thought that the there. cles published in the November C128 but up until a year ago I was mag was brilliant before, but now Andrew Blair, issue. a proud Spectrum owner. All comit is even better with enha Glasgow The article in question is about puters have their good and bad news and reviews. Street Seen is PS. Please tell Tim that I thought the program El Toro which you points -so, let's hope this is the a really excellent idea. At last! his review of El Toro was absoqualified, among other adjectives, final word! Competition results. After all those lutely correct. I can't stand this as \"sick and nasty\". I agree that Lucas Efan Williams requests I thought that you totally agree with his the practice of bullfighting is wild Port Talbot would never print them. opinion. However, I think we and outrageous, and I really hate I thought my last reply was I can remember a couple of should have been given some the popular fiesta\", but, it is unfair the final word on the matter but months ago when there were indication of the quality of the that you insult the excellent Spanit appears not. Glad you like loads of mistakes in the magaprogram, even if the game was ish programmers of Dinamic. It Tony T's strong opinions. I like zine. This issue, apart from a based on one of the most sicken-would be more reasonable to in people who know their own couple of spelling errors there ing aspects of human behaviour. sult the bullfighters the real and minds at least I think I do. I were none. While I am on the Well, Andrew, I hope you just only killers. Here is my question? haven't quite decided yet. subject, did you see what Crash finished enjoying our Atari ST What is crueller to kill I feel I must write to strongly said about you in their August special. And now you've probthousands of Japanese people protest at the comments made by issue — at least members of the ably seen some of Hakan's re(Commando, Green Beret, RamTony Takoushi in your Hot Gossip C+VG team don't wear nighties!! views of Atari games. bo, etc) or to stick some standarth page. He simply hasn't got his Could you please give us more into a bull? facts right! information on modems. Sr Joan Tortosa Firstly he claims that we have Finally, I agree with Tony Spain not moved on as an industry in the Takoushi about repetitive games.  Okay, we take your point. last two years\". Well, two years Thanks to your readers for the When it comes down to it all ago I remember games like Sabre Rambo tips I requested. killing for pleasure and enter-Wulf and Trashman were the state Anthony Kemp tainment is wrong. of the art in games. Now I would Cleveland  I was reading through your say that Mercenary and The Sen. magazine when I came across a tinel are. Is there any comparil noted with interest a letter from letter in Mailbag from Mark Dodson? None what so ever. one Claudion Filips de Silver well. He is completely wrong and Then, Tony states that the Tereso in your magazine. I too shouldn't open his mouth when he charts are full of the \"same old have a Memotech MTX computer doesn't know the facts. Yes, tired themes\". Really? I don't and would like to pose this ques. you've guessed it, I am an Amrecall a karate game two years tion Does anyone do software strad 6128 owner. ago, I remember when Manic Minfor it, if so where are they? or He remarked that Amstrads caner came out, and people were maybe I should move to Portugal! only have two colours in a cursor. amazed it had twenty screens? Paul Henry This is only true in mode iwo Now Ram Jam are claiming four N Ireland which has higher resolution than billion locations in their latest Well, can anybody tell Paul the CBM. Mode one can have four game!! where to get his hot hands on colours in a cursor and has about And what about graphics? Do any Memotech MTX software. the same resolution as the C64 they look any thing like those of Surely Portugal isn't the last and mode O can have 16 colours two years ago? Has Tony got his stronghold? in a cursor, but chunkier graphics. head so stuck in games that he True, most Amstrad graphics hasn't seen Sanxion? Who does that Chris Cain think are chunky, but, have you ever However, he then says the he is. According to this idiot Kaseen Ikari Warriors, Sorcery etc charts fall into three categories rate is a dying art. Yet this fact on the Amstrad. I personally don't Ladders and Ramps (don't you seems to have escaped clubs and think you C+VG have made mean platform, Tony?) sports and schools, the length of the good jobs of screen shots. This simulations and shoot-em ups. I country. Karate and other martial \"my computer is better than your would agree about the last one arts are growing stronger in numcomputer\" fad' is boring and peoit is always a popular format. But bers all the time, a fact which Mr ple had better stop it. You will where does he fit Mercenary into Cain decided not to check before probably not print this letter but one of his three categories? putting pen to paper. hope you do-Mark is wrong and Then comes Tony's most Another thing what does he you should have said so then! absurd statement. Is he really consider as \"basic\" karate Robert Lane sane? \"There isn't one software I moves? In International Karate Mansfield house out there consistently prothe characters are doing spinning . I agree these \"my computer ducing truly innovative software.\" | round house kicks to is best\" arguments are a little What! This man is definitely NOT Hardly a basic run-of-the-mill-seesilly. All computers are wondersane either that or blind What it-every-night-in-the-dojo-kick. As ful in my opinion — except about Novagen, Vortex with for a flying kick, the move doesn't some computers are more games like Revolution and even belong to any karate style 1 wonderful than others. Hewson with their high quality know. . I would like to express my games. Karate is here and its here to opinion of Tony Takoushi's \"Little We have progressed, it is just stay. It will be here a long time Lecture in the December issue that Tony Takoushi hasn't real after Cain has thankfully departed fully agree with him. The main ised yet. Perhaps he is still pla types of games I have are arcade Pacmanl. Tony criticises shoot Graeme McDonald adventure, shoot 'em up and em-ups, yet he has written one Harthill, sports simulations. They are all himself! Need I say more? Scotland basically clones of one particular Christopher Hester  We'd also like to know who game in its own class. Why don't N Ireland Chris Cain thinks he is. He they bring out original games like This is more like it. Conoccasionally wonders into the Sentinel. troversy. Get everybody going. office, drinks our coffee, scoffs Secondly, I would like to conTony is entitled to his opinions our crisps, dumps his reviews gratulate you on your new look, it and so are you, Christopher. As on to the Ed's desk and then is brilliant. It is a lot more colourful to whether Tony is sane and disappears. I agree that karate and lively. still plays Pacman the answers is here to stay but what about I read your letters pages a lot are Yes and No. But I'm not karate games? That's what and I, as many others, am becom-saying what is the right order. Chris meant, I think. Thris 85 123 "


"THE STEEL COME AND GET IT, YOU MUITHERS: PART FOUR FEATURING THE... BUSHUNTERS MADRID MULTIPLE SIGNALS... TARGETS CLOSING... STAND BY... FIRENA WRITTEN AND DRAWN by JERRY PRIS 1986. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED! "


"misur All you need KALLIBER TO ALL UNITS... REPORT IN... "


"MICROS E IL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell duplicated or pirated software on tape or disc. You will now be liable for prosecution. All suspect advertisements will be forwarded to the Federation against Software Theft for further inspection. ATARI HYPER DRIVE. 1050 disk drive enhancement. Easily installed hardware/ software package. Enables true double density, faster reading/writing and wil back up protected disks. Similar to Lazer, Happy etc Phone 01.500-2671 C64 + 1570 DISC DRIVE (and Datasette, case, joystick etc). Loads of cassette games + quality US imported discs (551's Kampfgruppe, Field of Fire, Battle of Antiltam, Panzer Grenadier etc) total value approx .00. Will sell a.s.a.p. for + include an Atari VCS + also Microvision. Phone: Sunbury-onThanec-789486 Middlesed CBM 64/128 SOFTWARE to swap. Over 600 titles. Send your list for mine. All letters answered. Only genuine letters please. Write to M. Hopkins, 29 Sitwell Way, Port Talbot, S. Wales, SA1268H. Orphone (0639) 88 4084 and ask for Martynur! COMMODORE 64 under guarantee boxed, cassette recorder, joystick, introduction to basic, programmers guide, 93 games, magazines. Best offer. Tel: Camberley (0276) 27588 CBM 64 SOFTWARE to swap. Many new titles. Write to Bill Walker, 17 Adelphi Terrace, Carlisle, Cumbria (Disk only) SALE.  worth of originals at half price plus less. Tities include Back to the Future, Bruce Lee, Winter Games and Decathlon. Some hardware as well, in perfect condition. Send s.a.e. for list to C. Tranter, 34, Oaktree Park, allington Lane, West End, So'ton, 503 3HR. But hurry! C64 GAMES to swap or sell Disc and tape, I prefer disc. I have many new titles from Holland, Germany, Sweden, Italy and USA. Write to Lars Neilsen, Blomstervangen 83, 6800 Vrde, Denmark. SPECTRUM + FOR SALE with Protek Switchable Interface, and Kempston joytick. Also over twenty five original games, maps. Also computer magazines, 7 months old but hardly used. The computer has 5 months guarantee left. Comes complete with computer carrying case and tape-case. All this all in good condition for only 12one. Phone: 0621 722601. COMMODORE 64 three joysticks cassette and 47 original games. Including Knight Games, Green Beret and Kung-Fu Master. Worth almost E700. Will accept E220 ong Tel: Portfernam 885854 COMMODORE 64 Data Recorder, Printer, Joystick, Games, Manuals, Mags, Printer paper etc. Al condition. Worth 1300. Will part for . Ring Marple (427) 1114 near Stecksart Manchester BBGB. boaks..software, etc for sale, excellent condition, best sensible offer taken. Write to: Mr D. Cowdall, 29 Blyth Close, Murdishaw, Runcorn, WA76DN. ATARI 800xl + Acorn Electron + Data recorder + software etc. Only . Phone: 868 3621 Steven. CBM 64 + 1541 DISK DRIVE + 2 joysticks + C2N Data recorded games (Green Beret, Fight Night etc) . Tel: (01) 869 3621 Ask for Nick. WANTED: 1541 Disk Drive. Must be good working condition. Will pay . Call Norman: 0698 842231. COMMODORE 64 GAMES TO SELL OR SWAP. Highest price . Top titles available. All originals. Tape only. Ring 0648 28236 or write to Eamonn Burne, 36 Derrynolcl Road, Draperstown, Magheratelt. N. Ireland BT45 7DV. CBM 64 USER wishes to sell originals Tities include, Rock 'n' Wrestie, Exploding Fist, Ghostbusters, LCP. Commando, Monty on the Run, Fight Night, Rambo and more. Great prices! Phone 06592 371 after 4.30pm. Ask for Craig. VIC OWNERS! Free game with the 1st issue of the Elmsoft newsletter Contains cheats, programming tips and exclusive software for sale. Send only 75p (covers p&p) to: A Fry, 12 Elm Tree Close, St. Marys Drive, Thorngumbald, HU12 9NX. A CBM 64 USER wants to swap all the newest software. Simply contact P. Christiaan Voorhavenlaan, 109 8400 Oostende, Belgium. I promise that every letter gets an answer. Just do it now!!! CBM 64 ORIGINAL GAMES TO SWAP with people all over the world. All of the latest releases including Dragons Lair and Leaderboard. Send your lists to: Jeffrey Phillis, 16 Wood Street, Rockhampton, Queensland, Australia, 4700. All letters replied to write soon!! MERLIN CLUB. Membership free! Send name, address and tel. no. to us and we will put you on our files. You can sell or swap original software or buy through us, or even buy or sell a Micro or Hardware. If you are selling or swapping originals only give us a ring on 01 501 3616 if buying send a s.a.e. to: Merlon Club, 1 Merlon Close, Hainault, liford, Essex IG6 3XL. Its wizard! VIC 20 FOR SALE +32K expansion + 1531 Datasette + over  worth cassette software including Jetpac, Perils of willy, Games Designer and many more. + 3 books, 2 cartridges + Quickshot Il Joystick. All boxed with leads, worth +, will sell for  0.no. Tel Newbury (0635) 44436 after 4pm and ask for Philip. FOR SALE BBC Computer 32K + Speech Synthesis worth  + over 50 games inc. Matchday, Elite, Knight Lore, Jet Pac and Sabre Wulf. Must sell as going abroad. All for . Contact Mark on (03752) 79144 ELECTRON GAMES FOR SALE. 24 titles which include Impossible Mission, Psycastria, Goal, Quill + many more. At an r.l.p. of  they are a bargain at . Phone (0532) 777372 in the evening and ask for Dave. SWAP YOUR UNWANTED SOFTWARE. If you are interested please send a list of the games you would like, and don't forget to say which computer and if it is tape or disk. Send a s.a.e.to, M. Sibthorpe, 18 The Stray, Darlington, Co. Durham, DL1 TEP SPECTRUM OWNERS. 2 gets you a booklet of 70 infinite lives pokes, plus your choice of a great free game from our list of chart-topping titles. Cheques/ wrapped  coins to Robert Burgess, 1 Middlefield Road, Rotherham, South Yorkshire, S60 ATARI ST. More than 250 programs for the ST to swap or buy. Write to P. Scheurwater, Postbox 69, 2980 AD, Ridderkerk, Holland. FANATIC CUT PRICE SOFTWARE SPECTRUM RAPOUR FASTEST SERVICE AVAILABLE MAIL ORDER ONLY 5.50 SPECTRUM OUR PRICE Cauldron 2.........8.95 6.50 Xeno.. 8.95 5.50 Terra Cresta ........... 7.95 5.50 Masters of Universe... 8.95 6.50 SkyRunner...... 7.95 5.50 Sold Milion 3... ....9.95 6.95 Shockway Rider 7.95 5.50  64 SPECTRUM 40/128 AMSTRAD Ghost Goblin 7.95 Starglider Is A Knockout Konami's Goll.......... 7.95 7.95 Paperboy Dan Dare 9.95 Konan Coin Oo 995 Fond 5.50 5.50 7.30 Soda Moll Judge Dredd 7.70 Durga COMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK Terra Cresta......... 6.50 10.96 Commando 86. .. 6.95 11.95 Infiltrator .............. 6.95 11.96 Howard The Duck 6.95 11.95 ISAK/Out............6.50 NA Firelord... 6.50 10.96 Double Take 8.95 11.95 Expert Cart NA 2895 6.95 11.95 Destroyer NA 10.95 6.50 10.95 AMSTRAD Sold Mion 3 6.95 11.95 U Marta 695 11.95 5.95 895 Paperboy der 9.95 6.95 2.99 5.75 5.75 7.10 Uchi Mart 7. WAR 7.1 Sort Crystaat Top By 9.95 5.95 COMMODORE 54 128 CASS DISK Inox The Nor Deactor 7.20 ore Mate Now Games 3 Het Pak Try Pursuit Uchi Mart Masters of 6.95 895 11.95 11.95 7.30 o rofa Solda Milioni 5.75 Jarak Acties teamer Godesses of Phobas Jews of Dar es Ultima ND Angue. Hacer 70 od 730 Co Samui 10.15 10 Dandy 14 Predy 7.30 F lytt 7.30 Dracula 5.00 Footballer Of Year 7. Free 8.50 Anger 7.30 7.20 ET PAR Asterix and the magie Cauldros Daponship Wresting 0.4 Seace amer 8.50 Sooby Doo 5.75 War of the Univer 7.30 Revolution 7.20 The Apreno 5.75 Light Force 5.75 Beach Head ........ 8.50 Great Escape 8.50 The inheritance... El Hit Pa ScoobyHoward The Duck 7.30 B Trouble in Lite China Nghyme Jewels of Date 5.75 ESTEE Pak The President World Games 730 H 7.20 Daun Leaderboard 6.5 11.95 Batman (8256) NA 11.95 Bomb Jack 2 Indoor Sports 6.50 11.96 Monopoly 7.50 1135 Double Tale Super Mary 6.95 11.95 WAR Commando 86. 7.95 .50 Now Games 5.96 11.95 Sente _750 1195 Vinilice 2... 11.95 14.95 Jack Noper. Paperboy 5.50 10.95 Scooby Doo Space Harrier 6.96 11.95 Scooby Doo 6.95 11.95 Top Gun.. Bombak2 5.95 11.96 T'S A kout 6.50 11.95 Sigma 7 9 .95 NA Now Games 3 Galvan Judge Dredd 6.95 11.95 11.95 17.95 9.95 5.95 Het Pak 5.95 11.95 Leaderboard 6.95 11.95 Deep Stre... Galva ...............8.95 5.00 M 5 50 10.95 Dynamite Ban2....... 7.95 5.50 11.95 14.95 Movie ............. Xevious ..... 7.99 5.50 Rogue Trooper 5,95 NA Highlander........... 6.50 10.95 ........9.95 7.25 Championship Wres 6.95 11.95 Winter Games......... 7.25 Winter 11.95 Konami's Coll 7.95 5.50 5.95 NA Room 10.. .6.50 10.95 Lail Break ..7.95 5.50 Jack Nipper............6.50 10.95 Donkey Kong 6.50 10.95 Superbowl .......... 6.50 10.95 Fireod .8.95 5.50 Graphic Ad Creator 17.00 22.00 Paperboy............ 7.25 11.95 Yie Kung Fu 2.......... 7.95 5.50 Jewels of Darkness 11.95 14.95 Fist 2.. .... ....7.25 11.95 Eastenders ............8.95 6.50 Sold Milion 3. .....6.95 11.95 Durebs Big 4 ............. 6.95 11.95 Judge Dredd 8.95 6.50 1942. 695 11,95 Miami Vice ............ 5.50 10.95 Graphic Crea.... . 22.95 18.00 T Deti 2.......6.95 11.95 1942......... .. . 6.40 10.95 Theatre Europe 9.95 7.25 Silicon Dreams...... 11.95 14.95 Commando 85........6.50 10.95 Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders please add 75p per tape Cheques/post orders (Sterling only please). Made payable to: Cut Price Software Unit 6, Stort House, Riverway, Harlow, Essex CM20 2DW 24 HOUR ANSWER PHONE (0279) 24433 OR VISA (0279) 31956 AMIGA COMMODORE 164 1986 18.95 Tass Times. Leaderboard Madness Former of year Master of Universe 7.30 uur 5.75 5.95 2.99 Way of the Tiger Sports Lemos Quick Shot 2 Turbo Joy 1.95 Sending Joystok 11.95 Mo can be led disco t hroured with a second choice and close the RRP less 28 e 95 07.2008 95 8.50 955 5. 19 02.99 . Postage in UK Europe add 7o per te. Overseas add 300 per te Al cheque POs made payable to FANATIC SOFTWARE 70 WESTERN AVENUE, BOURNEMOUTH, DORSET BH10 6JH "


"GRILL TOKALLIBER... PICCADILLY AND CHARING CROSS . EXITS HAVE BEEN HELD... HEAVY CASUALTIES SUSTAINED. * O mm UNIT 5 REPORTING... HAVE HELD CIRCLE AND DISTRICT LINES..SI TARGETS APPROCHING SOUTHERN LINE UNHAS AS PLANNED... OK. JACKSON, OKRE AT THE 1 HOPEANVIS EXIT WORKS... SAND YOU'RE SURE I WON'T GET INTO TROUBLE FOR THIS..? YOU LET. ME WORRY ABOUT THAT... GOOD. UNIT 3 AND 5 HOLD YOUR POSITIONS... UNIT 4. STAND BY AT WESTMINSTER. WE'LL LINK UP WITH YOU AFTER WE SEAL THIS EXIT... MELISSA, ANYTIME YOU'RE READY... FUNNY JOB, THOUGH... STOMPING THE SOUTH BANK... THEN.. TAKE YOUR POSITION.. OH, WELL... I CAN SEE THE PLATFORM AHEAD... TO THE SURFACE... ATTACK! KILL THE HUMANS! HIR KILL! KILLA WAIT... WHAT'S HAPPENING TO THE TUNNEL..?! "


"WE'LL MAKE A NEW TUNNEL TO THE SURFACE... YOU FOOL! DON'T YOU REALISE WHERE WE ARE? THEY'VE BLOCKED THE TUNNEL BEHIND US ALSO... STAND GET BACK ASIDE... THEY WENT FOR IT, KALLIBER! TRIED TO BLAST YEAH,AND DROPPED THEIR WARENCE SUN'S COMING UP... LETS CARPAST... COULD SURVIVE THAT... FIN... "


"400/806 NOW MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS LOOK XLUXE ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and pur. chase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 GOLDEN OLDIES SPECTRUM Tempest... 5.95 Hand Ball Maradona ... 6.00 Fist I. .7.50 Eastenders.... ....7.50 Konami's Arcade Hits 7.50 Super Cycle................6.95 Shock Absorber 5.95 Footballer of Year 7.50 Battle of Britain ...........7.50 Ikari Warriors... 5.95 Marble Madness D17.50 Trap Door 5.95 Terror Cresta..............6.75 Paper Boy 5.95 Leaderboard... .6.75 Yle Ar Kung Fu il 6.75 TT Racer 750 Hacker Il................ .7.95 Firelord D3......... 6.75 Strike Force Harrier ...,7.50 World Games ..............6.75 Bismark D1......... ....7.50 Theatre Europe.........7.50 Breakthru..................6.75 Lightforce ...... Grph. Ad. Creator 19.50 Hand Ball Maradona... 5.95 Movie Monster D1.......7.50 Silent Service ..... 750 Marble Mad Con. Set 6.75 Short Circuit 6.95 Strike Force Cobra...... 7.50 Big Trouble in L China 7.95 Dragons Lair Il 7.95 Trivial Persuits.......... 12.50 Dandy............... 5.95 Rogue Trooper... .7.50 Xeno. 6.75 Sonce Harrier 5.95 1942 D1....... 7.50 Ace of Aces ................6.75 Scooby Doo................5.95 Ace of Aces D1 ...........7.50 Short Circuit.............5.95 Cop-Out ..............6.75 Vietnam D1 7 .50 Samurai 7.95 Doop Strike 7.50 Shao-Lins Road.. 750 Mercenary -7.95 Star Glider 12.50 Paper Boy... 7.50 Bazooka BAL............... 6.75 6.75 Konami's Hits .7.50 America's Cup D1... Footballer of Year 5.95 Jail Break. 5.95 Hit Pak D1 ... 1942. ...5.95 Legend of Kage ........... 5.95 Bombjack TWO............7.50 Shao-lins Road.... ... 6.75 Nosferatu... .............7.50 Alwolf Two ......... ...7.50 Light Force 5.95 Double Take...............5.95 Super Hule ll D1 .. 7.50 Uridium 6.75 Last Ninja . . .7.95 Xevious..... Firelord 6.75 Ikari Warriors. 7.50 Dragons Lair ll..... ..5.95 COMMODORE 64 Avenger.... ..7.50 Super Soccer.... 5.95 Headcoach .................7.95 Blood 'n' Guts.... -7.95 Commando 86.. 5.95 Super Cycle D1...........7.50 Last Ninja ...... 7.95 Hypa Ball 7.95 Sky Runner D3.........6.75 World Games ........ 7.50 Academy 6.75 Gauntlet ..... .........7,50 Breakthru .7.50 The President... 6.95 Judge Dredd.............7.50 Transformers .7.95 Nightmare Rally... ...5.95 Nuclear Embargo........7.95 Howard the Duck D1...7.95 Avenger ..7.50 Masters Universe........7.50 Boulderdash Con. Kit... 7.50 Hardball... .....6.75 Sentinel D1.................7.50 Champ. Wrestling .......7.50 Cobra (Rambo II)........5.95 Infodroid D1................7.50 Sacred Armour ..........6.75 10th Frame... 6.95 Dan Dare. 750 Space Harrier -7.50 Big 4 7.50 Glider Rider .6.75 Scooby Doo................7.50 Judge Dredd.............6.75 Strikeforce Cobra.........7.50 Sigma 7..... . -7.50 Sam Cruise.... 5.95 Grph, Adv. Creator....19.50 Defcom... 7.50 Hit Pak (Elite).......... ...7.50 Blitz Krieg D1............7.50 Hypa Ball... ..7.95 Gauntlet .... 5.95 Trivial Pursuits D4..... 12.50 Jail Break.............. ...7.50 Shadow Skimmer .......5.95 Fist Il D1... 7.50 SAS Strikeforce... -6.75 Sky Runner................7.50 Knuckle Busters..........7.50 Dandy........ .7.95 Bombjack Two 5.95 Crystal Castles ...........7.50 Big 4 (Durell).. .7.50 Airwolf Two.... ...5.95 Destroyer Disk Only 12.50 Animator .............. .7.50 Fairlight Two.... .....7.50 Great Escape .............6.75 Death or Glory ....... ..6.95 B. Plus Football......... 12.95 Double Take... ........6.75 Star Glider... 12.50 Defcom......... .....6.75 ...6.75 Sold a Million III...........7.50 S Star Soldier.................6.75 Scalectrix...... .-7.95 Cobra (Rambo II).....6.75 Arctic Antics... 7.50 Top Gun .... 5.95 Top Gun ...... 6.75 Xeno 6.75 Postage included UK. Please state which micro. Fast service, Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept CVG, 48H Sutherland Street, Victoria, London SW1 V4JX MAIL ORDER ONLY: Send for FREE list Amstrad, C16, MSX. D-Disks Available: D1 at .95, D3 at .95, 04 at .50.   AMSTAD Vai 17 Chukice Ege Football Manager... Soys say Lucky Fruits eeff Capes Strip Poker Centre Court Internal Karate Gin From Gods Kong Strikes Back The use Shado 17 foonnage Grog's Revenge... Hunchbackl... Fight Night INTELLINESION Friday 13th Stock Market ATAMI100 ACCESSORIES Quickshot Beauty & The Beast Novabast (Microswitch)..................... .99 Swords and Serpents Quickshot 4 (3 grips) 110 White Water Quickshot Weyball) Cartede Dig Dug Orders over FREE Overs to per tape Mind Dance .50 per parcel 0-DISC. Many other teatable for these and other machines Send large SAE for current ist, please state machine Cheques & PO payable to TREASURE CHEST. Dept C, 220 Beverley Road, Hull, N. Humberside HUS 1AH SUPA SOFT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE SPECTRUM Starglider Space harrier Miami Vice It's A Knockout Cobra Paperboy Dan Dare kon Coin-op Great Escape UN Marta Now Games 3 Leaderboard Elles Hit Pak Tri Pursuit Ghost & Goblin Bomb Jack 2 Double Taxe Commando 86 Airwoll 2 Indoor Sports Scooby Doo Present the Following Special Offers to C&VG Readers. Boring Statement But Just Check The Rest And Come Back to The Real Bargain Software) RRP OUR SPECTRUM RRP OUR CMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK COMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK ATARIST RRP OUR AMSTRAD PC1512 RRP OUR 1495 10.05 Thantos 9.95 6.75 Stargader 10.95 14.95 Master Universe 6.50 10.95 Starglider 24.95 19.99 Winter Games 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.25 Trap Door 7.95 5.25 Leaderboard 6.50 10.95 Santinal 6.50 10.95 World Games 24.95 19.99 Summer G (2) 19.95 16.95 795 là 9.95 6.75 Aliens 6.50 10.95 Ba 4 5.50 10.95 Leaderboard 2495 19.00 Pesto (2) 19.95 16.95 7.95 525 Xevious 8.50 10.05 Lghtore 995 895 D. Desert 24.95 22.95 7.95 5.00 Sold a million 3 9.95 6.75 Try Pursuit 10.00 14.95 Sigma 7 650 NA The Pawn 249519.99 Silent Serv 14.95 10.95 Top Gun 795 525 Paperboy 6.50 10.95 Tau Ceti 2 6.50 10.95 Silent Serv 24.95 19.99 Higgins Snok 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.25 Hardbal 8.95 5.90 Championship Wrest 6.50 10.95 Donkey Kong 6.00 10.00 Baseball 29.95 24.95 Solo Fli (2) 19.95 16.95 9.95 6.75 Fist 2 8.95 6.00 Yle ar Kung Fu 2 8.00 10.00 Great escape 8.00 10.00 Arena 29.95 24.95 Champ Golf 19.95 16.95 9.95 6.50 Durer's Big 4 9.95 675 Alleycat 6.00 10.00 Jack Nipper 8.50 10.95 Deep Space 29.95 24.95 Helical Ace 19.95 16.95 7.95 525 Xevious 7.95 5.25 Highlander 8.50 10.95 St Karate 1999 15.95 Mindshadow 2495 1999 8.96 6.00 Xeno 8.95 8.00 Spy Spy 3 5.50 10.95 Judge Dred 5.50 10.95 in Karate 1999 15.95 Strip Poker 1999 16.95 9.95 6.50 Aliens 9.99 6.50 Galvan 6.00 10.00 Bobby bearing 6.00 10.00 LCP 34.95 29.95 Spitfire Ace 19.99 16.95 7.95 5.40 Footballer Year 7.95 5.25 Eine 10.95 14.95 Five star 6.50 10.95 GauntletFeb) 24.95 19.99 Pinball Can 24.95 22.95 9.95 6.50 Terra cresta 7.95 5.25 Sky Runner 6.50 10.05 Ghost & goblins 6.50 10.95 Champ Wres d) 2495 19,99 Music Con 24.95 22.95 14 95 10.00 Tau-CoAcademy 9.95 6.50 Balderdash Cons 8.50 10.95 Future Knight 8.59 10.95 Shanghai 24.99 19.99 Mean 18 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.25 Slant Service 9.95 6.75 Coin-op 6.50 10.95 Firelord 795 525 P 5 Trading 9.95 5.75 Fist 2 6.50 10.95 Amour And 6.50 10.95 (FULL INFOCOM RANGE IN STOCK PLEASE RING FOR DETAILS 7.95 5.25 Butch Hard Guy 795 5.25 Xeno 6.00 10 00 Super Cycle 6.50 10.95 (WE TAKE ACCESS OR VISA FOR ATARI ST. & AMSTRAD 15127.95 5.25 Double Take 7.95 525 Top Gun 5.00 10.00 Acro Jet 6.50 10.95 PRODUCT ONLY RING FOR DETAILS 1512 BUSINESS PRODUCT) 7 965 26 Dorkey worg 7.95 5.25 Gauntet 6.50 10.95 Super Husy 2 6.50 10.95 ALSO IN STOCK RING FOR FULL UST & PRICE) 7.95 5.25 Legend of Kage 7.95 $95 Sold a million 3 8.50 10.95 Trailblazer 6.50 10.95 AMSTRAD 612464 CASS DISK (SPECIAL OFFERS) 295 550  7,95 525 1942 6.50 10.95 kan Warriors 12.00 14.95 DOUBLE PACKS SPECTRUM 7.95 5.25 Superbowl 9.95 50 Sonce hamer 8.50 10.95 Indoor Sport 8.50 10.95 Tivial Pursuit 11.95 16.95 Dan DarHardbal 10.00 7.95 525 in Matchday 128) 9.95 6.50 Scooby Doo 6.50 10.95 Big trouble LC) 6.50 10.95 Solda Million 3 6 9 10 5 BarmanyTopgun C1000 7.85 5.25 Winter games(128) 9.95 6.50 Bomb jack 2 8.50 10.05 Shockway Rider 8.00 10.00 1942 695 10.95 Footbalor of year+ 7.95 525 Jail Break 7.95 5.50 Ace 6.50 10.05 Dracular 5.50 NA Konami Coinca 6.95 10.95 Super Soccer 10.00 9.95 6.50 Super Cycle 7.95 5.25 Commando 86 6.50 10.95 Ninia 5.50 10.95 Scooby Doo 6.95 10.95 Fat Worm/Thantos 12.00 7.95 5.25 Masters Universe 25 6à trultraI. 6.50 10.95 Jailbreak 5.50 10.95 Dan Dare 8.95 NA Paperboy Great Esc .00 7.95 $25 Eastenders 8.95 25 Freezeframe 3 Cart 33 95 Howard the Duck 6.50 10.95 Starglider 11.95 16.95 Space Harry Scobby 10.00 7.95 525 X-Port Cartride Disk) 25 95 Destroyer NA 10.95 Trivial Pursuit (PCW) 16.95 Donkey Kong Xevious 10.00 9.95 7.00 Gauntiet 8.99 6.25 SA Knockout 6.00 10 00 Trap Door 5.50 NA Batman 6.50 10.00 (SPECIAL OFFERS) 7.95 5.25 Kevious 7.99 525 Dan Dar 6.50 NA Sort Circuit 8.00 10.00 Green Boret 6.50 10.00 DOUBLE PACKS/COMMODORE 7.95 5.25 SkyRunner 7,95 525 Double take 6.00 10.00 Legend of kage 6.00 10.00 Prospell NA 19.95 Soobby Doo + 8.95 8.00 Dandy 7.99 5.25 The Pawn NA 13.95 Elite Hit Pak 8.50 10 95 Prospel (PCW) NA 24.95 Space Harrier 12.00 8.95 8.00 Yle Kung Fu 2 7.95 525 Marble madness 6.50 10.95 Rouge tropper 6.50 NA Gauntlet 725 11.95 World Games + 9.95 850 Ninja 9.95 5.50 WAR 4.99 NA Zap 2 8.50 NA Plant 1200 15.95 Cobra .00 9.95 6.75 Judge Dredd 8.95 6.25 Cobra 6.00 10.00 Graphic Ad Cre 17.85 22.95 Planit (PCW) NA 20.95 Gautet 9.95 8.50 Deep Strike 9.95 6.50 Ace of Aces 6.50 10.95 Uridium Paradroid 6.00 NA Sold Milion2 5.95 10.00 Vchi Marta .00 9.95 6.75 Sigma 7 9.95 6.50 Avenger 6.50 10.95 Shao Lins Road 6.50 10.95 Its a KO. 6.00 10.00 9.95 8.75 Dan Dare 9.95 6.50 Footballer year 6.50 10.95 Silicon Dreams 10.96 14.95 Protext NA 21.95 (All of the above on 9.95 6.50 Price of magick 9.95 8.00 Terra cresta 6.00 10.00 Jewels Darkness 10.95 14.95 Heartland 6.95 10.96 Cassette only Ikan Warner Galvan Fairlight 2 Shao Lins Road Dynamite Dan 2 Revolution Konami's Golf Urdum Freload Avenger Dracular SkyRunner Scalextric The Fat Worm Dragons Lair Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders Please Add 75p per tape, Mail Order only. Cheques/psotal orders (Sterling only please) Made Payable to: DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, Dept 3, 210 Nicholls Tower, Harlow, Essex, CM18 6EF TELEPHONE (0279 29076) WEEKDAYS ONLY PLEASE "


"C+VG's Hot Gossip ace Tony Takoushi has the biggest eyes, nose and mighty mouth in computer games. He sees all, hears all and he then shouts about it each month exclusively in your favourite computer mag. So read on for the man who shoots from the lip at the good, the bad and the ugly in the software world. ne of the most pathetic its sprite handling amongst the micros have a strong software superb basic, fast processor arguments that makes me best and its colour stands base but nothing to really and quality software BUT it cringe is the old \"my computer alongside the most popular match the establishment (C64 Tacks TRUE support other than is better than yours...\" micros today. and the doorstop). There is a from a few specialist software Over the past few years the OK the Spectrum (doorstop strong peripheral base and the houses. micro graveyard has been or wedge to you) has a huge machine is powerful and I am very lucky to have been overflowing with corpses. software/hardware base like the flexible but STILL does not in the home micro market since Some of the more popular ones C64 and the quality is superb for match the facilities of the C64. 1979 and have used all micros being the Dragon, Oric, Lynx the machines Hardware and Other micros still around like that have entered (and left) the and Enterprise. that is the point. The software the Atari XL and BBC deservescene. My observations are Today the best 8-bit computer takes the Speccy hardware to respect. The Atari because of its based on experience not just on the market is the the limit but that limit just superb hardware, indeed the unbridled enthusiasm. Commodore 64. Before you all doesn't compare to the C64. Atari could have given the C64 a My own personal preferences start ranting and raving take a One of the biggest hang-ups run for its money if its are the C64, Atari XL and the look at the facts. The C64 is the any micro owner has is brand marketing and price had been MSX (for those superb Konami biggest selling home micro in loyalty. The micro you buy pitched correctly when it was carts). the world more than two million tends to be the one you are launched in the UK. To my eyes the Atari ST and units) with the biggest software usually fiercely loyal to. The BBC to all intents and Amiga will dominate the UK base in the world. Its sound So where does Amstrad purposes is DEAD. Do not get market within the next two to capabilities are unrivalled and figure in all this? Arstrad me wrong it is a fine machine, five years. in.. rolly it sure is pulling my hair out! There dangerous here. is a LOT to digest before Major\" I yelled as my face you can master control of hit dirt. the helicopter. BUT this is \"By jove you've got it in the type of game where one,\"my commanding what you get out of it officer replied. depends on what you put With all thoughts of bravery and medals at the The manual gives you an back of my mind I made a overview of the various dash for my chopper... sections of the game, a summary of the cockpit instrumentation and a summary of the weapons system. Yes it is HEAVY going and you will not be able to just pick up the joystick and GO with this one. On starting the LINSKIS game you must work your way The latest, and quite through the options. Pilot possibly the greatest, flight allows you to enter your sim from Microprose is name and view the Gunship. It runs on the C64 highscores. Duty allows and is a simulation of the you to choose the combat AH-64A attack helicopter. zone (USA/SE Asia/Cent Gunship is the type of America/Mid East and game that normally has me Wstrn Europe). Style is the difficulty level (Regular, When this is completed Volunteer or crazy you finally get to fly the volunteer!) and Reality chopper. You are faced (this governs the with a cockpit crammed conditions on take-off/ with instrumentation. landing and enemy Flying the chopper is intelligence). really only half the story, There is a learner mode where you can get the feel of the chopper. If you take an active mission you will be briefed. The briefing outlines the main and secondary target (with coordinates) and details weather conditions. From here you can view the map getting to the target, showing the lay of the land destroying it and getting and see intelligence back to base are reports of expected enemy achievements in weapons in the area. themselves. From the briefing you go Microprose claims that it onto arming the chopper. has created the most You can choose from a detailed and realistic variety of weapons but simulation of a combat must bear in mind the helicopter ever and it weather conditions when it really has! I have not seen comes to the weight of the anything come close to it. craft and the distance to fly. wy "


"AMSTRAD 8.95 COMMODORE 8.95 SPECTRUM 7.95 It was a one-in-a-million accident but Number Five, designed to be a strategic artificially intelligent weapons system, the most , sophisticated robot on the planet. has escaped and has come to the conclusion that he's alive! Now the scientist who put him together wants to take him apart SHORT: CIRCUT Ocean again to find out what went wrong. The president of Nova Robotics wants to capture him before the weapons he's carrying kill millions of civilians. And the security chief wants to blow him up so that he can get home in time for dinner. YOU are Number Five...YOU are alive and YOU have got to stay that way! TM Ocean Software Limited Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Telephone 061 832 6633 Telex 669977 Oceans G Short Circuit is a trademark of Ir-Star Retures, Inc and PSO Presentations "


"4 Massive slite TH|Sla | HT 1 COMMANDD E PAK AVAILABLE ON Spectrum Commodore Amstrad/ Schneider C16 Cassette .95 Commodore Amstrad/ Schneider Disk .95 look out for the POMSACK next | HI HI PAK PAK coming soon... Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Waisall WS9 8PW. West Midlands. Tel: (0922)59165 "

