"98p AUGUST 1986 S$4.60 Dm6 285pta CYBORG SECRETS REVEALED COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES ITILILILLLILIT SUPERCOMPUTER SPECIAL/ATARI + AMIGA GAMES THE FRENCH CONNECTION/PULL OUT CAULDRON II MAP INFOCOM'S TRINITY REVIEWED/GET STUCK INTO M.U.D. HACK INTO MICRONET FREE!/WIN A GOLDEN TURKEY! SPELLBOUND/KNIGHT TYME PLAYERS GUIDES/ TOLKIEN COMPETITION "


"\"More Arcade Classics fr PEERBOY G New excitement from Atari System II, the industry's first true High-Resolution game system COMING SOON L'eili 4:1 IHM ATARI GAMES A Warner Comm and C7 From Atari, the worlds foremost coin-op manufacturer, comes the worlds foremost arcade game, \"Paperboy». «Licenced to thrill all summer long get it». From sensi class CAF "


"om the Arcade Masters\" OSIS N GOBLINS AVAILABLE FOR: .95 Spectrum (Cass) .95 Amstrad (Cass) .95 Amstrad (Disc) .95 Commodore 64 (Cass) Commodore 64 (Disc) .95 Commodore C16 (Cass) .95 Access VISA Mail Order Just send a cheque or postal order payable to Elite, or quote your Access or Visa no, to get your copy of Ghosts 'n' Goblins or Paperboy. clits the programming team that brought you the Fational No. 1 ''Commando\", comes the next coin-op sic officially licenced from the top coin-op house \"COM«Already receiving rave reviews everywhere\". Elite Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, England. Telex: 336130 ELITE G "


"FEATURES 14 CYBORG PREVIEW 34 GLORIOUS M.U.D! 40 IDEAS CENTRAL 2 MANTRONIX HI-FI COMPETITION 44 THE FRENCH CONNECTION 49 HACK INTO MICRONET 50 CAULDRON II THE MAP 51 TALLYRON 2 — BENEATH THE WOLD/ SPECTRUM LISTING 61 TOLKEIN COMP 62 TAKE OFF WITH ACE! 64 SPELLBOUND/KNIGHT TYME PLAYERS GUIDE 68 KILLER TOMATOES 71 ADVENTURE NEWS 72 ADVENTURE HELPLINE 83 SPLIT PERSONALITIES 85 SUPER-COMPUTERS 96 ARCADE ACTION 98 BUG HUNTERS 103 MAILBAG/PEN PALS 106 NEXT MONTH FRENCH CONNECTION/P44 CONTENTS SALON NEWS & REVIEWS 18 REVIEWS THIS ISSUE: GAME OF THE MONTH: Pyracurse. C+VG HITS! H: Pyracurse. C+VG HITS! Acro Jet, Room 10, Solo Flight II, Snodgets, Load Runner, Tau Ceti, Split Personalities, Molecule Man, Tubular Bells, Bobby Bearing, Trap, plus lots more. SUPER-COMPUTERS/P85 75 ADVENTURE Our very own Keith Campbell looks at the game of the adventure movie Black Cauldron, plus Kings Quest, the budget Seabase Quest. And there's your very own copy of the Froboss Daily Grues, journal of the Great Underground Empire, complete with an interview with Infocom's Brian Moriarty and a review of his latest piece of interactive fiction, Trinity. JK) 8 NEWS Tony Takoushi brings you a Hot Gossip special on arcade conversions for the Atari ST, plus a quick glimpse of Domark's latest release, the official computer version of Trivial Persuits. And a look at a new mega-game from the States called Infiltrator. MICRONET/COMP/P49 "


"INSIDE STORY . Will super-computers like the Atari ST and the Amiga change the face of computer games? Go on a voyage of discovery with David Bishop as he takes a look at the stunning games software for these mean machines in C+VG's Super-Computer Special. Cyborg is another mean machine. He's the subject of our exclusive preview this issue. Tony Takoushi keeps up the super-computer theme with a Hot Gossip special devoted to the excellent arcade conversions soon to be seen on the ST-like Joust and Battlezone. Brush up your French as Natalie Meistermann from Tilt magazine — the French equivalent of C+VGbrings you a rundown of Gallic games. And if you thought you'd seen something special when Get Dexter! appeared, well there's more to come from over the Channel. C+VG's ace adventurer Keith Campbell has been out meeting one of his all time heroes Brian Moriarty an Infocom storyteller. Keith has been given a sneak preview of Brian's new Trinity adventure. And he's been looking at more ST adventures including the game of Disney's Black Cauldron. The creator of Magic Knight, David Jones, brings you an exclusive games players quide to his two smash hit budget games, Spellbound and Knight Tyme. And there's our giant full colour pull-out Cauldron Il map created by the graphic genius Steve Brown from Palace Software. All this plus competitions and all your favourite regular features crammed in between. A bargain at just 98p, guv! CYBORG/PREVIEW/P14 Koora tan flessure complex lim 198 ROOM 10/REVIEWS/P17 player 1 to serve CHARACTER ANALY515 HOLE SCHNER cama STATIS URLHER The rocks are too slippery to CYBORG PREVIEW/P14 KING'S QUEST/ ADVENTURE/P74 KILLER TOMATOES/COMPETITION P68 EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John DESIGN Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Paul Coppins Steve Donoghue Jim Douglas AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANT Tony Takoushi Chris Cain PUBLICITY Marcus Rich ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Louise Matthews ASSISTANT AD MANAGER Gary William AD PRODUCTION Debbie Pearson PUBLISHER Rita Lewis COVER Mark Bromley ... and the Bug Hunters  Jerry Paris EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222 July-December 98,258 DRAGONS LAIR/PREVIEW/P94 BUG HUNTERS/P98 ABC "


"FD RAMBO * * * * * * * * * FIRST BLOOD\"PARTHI WAK ELIN  1985 Anabosis investment N.V. All rights reserved. TM used by Ocean Software Limited under authorisation of Stephen J. Cannell Productions. Licensing Agent SUPER BOWL og VILL .95 EACH  REPLAY REPLAY Ocean Software Limited  Ocean House 6 Central Street. Manch "


"BAT MAN WOW C WARNER BROS. INC 1984 All Rights Reserved  DC 1986 A s Reserved. RAMBO BATMAN COMMODORE 64 AINS .95 AM SI RAD SPECTRUM 48K .95 EACH za to 60 EN BD >> EED teresse ang ester. M2 5NS Telephone 061 8326633. Telex 669977 Oceans G Screen shots taken from various computer formats "


"* NEWS game includes all the great features of the original game. Trivial Pursuit will be released on the Spectrum, Commodore, Amstrad and the BBC in time for the PCW Show in September. C+VG's editor has been privileged enough to get a sneak preview of the game and he reckon's it's just as much fun to play as the original. Hopefully we'll be bringing you a full preview of the official Trivial Pursuit computer game next issue. In the meantime here's a Trivial question for you to answer. Which world famous computer magazine is five years old in November? Domark has changed the A couple of issues ago we name of its latest game Splitting announced that ace coder Tony Images to Split Crowther was back with Personalities following a Alligata. This issue we review his potential row with the makers of latest game on the reptilian label, the satirical television show called Trap. But more good news Spitting Image. from Crowther fans is that Alligata Mark Stachan, Domark's are planning to release The Umur GARES SETENE joint managing director, says it was Complete Crowther. A 1 RELIGIER LETRARE FLA PRENS BUTTON TO THROW DIEE not their intention to \"confuse compilation of all his greatest It's nearly here. The long anyone with the name.\" games right back to stuff like world famous board game is awaited Mike Split Personalities, out first participation. Sitting around with a Loco, the underated Gryphon Singleton/Beyond game on the Spectrum for .95, will be and much more. Minter has few mates and having a good time out soon on the Commodore 64. Dark Sceptre. And here you already released a compilation of answering silly questions and can see some of the neat graphics his greatest hits on the Vic, now generally enjoying a bit of a laugh. from this animated \"adventure Can all that be transfered to the another game hero does the same. Football Manager in movie\". Dark Sceptre is a bit Could this be the start of a trend? cold computer screen? The answer Arabic!! Yes, after four and a half like Tir Na Nog in that it features And is there a programmer YOU is a definite YES! The Oxford years and being released on every large animated characters which would like to see produce a based ODE programming team format in this country, Addictive move against a colourful Greatest Hits compilation? Why who recently brought you the Games has converted their best background. The game is set on a don't you write to Mailbag and let C+VG HIT! Titanic and who selling game into Arabic and at this were also responsible for the mysterious island in medieval times. us know who you think should moment are having talks with You have to recruit a team of release a compilation? Macbeth adventure have been representatives from Kuwait and warriors to help you on your quest up to their necks in Trivial questions Jordan. If any of our Arabic to find the Dark Sceptre and working on the official Trivial readers have any thoughts on this, Can you imagine playing defeat the Shadowlords. The game Pursuit computer game soon to John Picking at Addictive Trivial Pursuit on a computer? be released by Domark. The control is a bit like Gargoyle's Games would like to hear your Heavy on the Magick in that After all the main thing about the computer version of the classic quiz comments. This is Infiltrator, the game ITT from Boulderdash designer Chris Gray. The game has been causing quite a sensation in the States. At C+VG we predict that 64 owners will be drooling over the game here too! At first glance e life it looks a bit like a helicopter flight simulator except you can see the \"pilots\" hands on the control you tell the characters what to do sticks. And they MOVE when you and then sit back and watch them fly. The thumb even flips over onto do it. You can jump in at any time the fire button when you fire and override your initial orders if machine guns or missiles. things start looking a bit dodgy. But enough of this on with the You tell your characters what plot. You play the part of someone routes to take, who to fight and called Johnny. Your mission is to who to befriend and which infiltrate an enemy base, take monsters to attack or avoid. Mike is pictures of their war plans and also putting together a Play by return to base. All a bit Rambo Mail version of the game based on like. You have to fly your chopper TULI LUCK JIBU-B1321 microdrive. I'll cost you .95 for over enemy lines fighting off the game microdrive and .50 attacks from rampant jets along per turn. The PBM version also the way. features foresight/hindsight options Those hands reflect all your which enable you to look back at moves and add much to the previous moves. realism of the game. Dark Sceptre will be Infiltrator will be released by released at the end of July on the US Gold later this summer. Spectrum and will cost .95. Watch for it. EEEEHHHH Timur A un "


"By Tony Takoushi StarGlider. I hope to be bringing you a full review of Mercenary and StarGlider within the next couple of months. A new game just released for the ST is Major Motion from a US company called Michtron (whose games are released under licence by Microdeal in the UK). It is a Spyhunter lookalike and the weakest game in terms of presentation. It plays very well but for various technical reasons the ST is not an ideal machine to do smooth scrolling on and this shows when the road is scrolling with the cars in battle. The game does have good ENEH BANGE HIGH 000000 Thang Lo sie wieso ASE SURROUNDED BEB969 27 START GAME F ONE PLAYER SKILL LEVEL 1 USE KEYBOARD PROCE E CINDROMEDO have spent the past seven years looking for the ultimate game experience. Along the way! have played around 3,500 home micro games across fourteen computer formats. And yet I still long for that special game... It got to the stage where micro games just weren't enough!! progressed to arcade machines and here I found my match with an refuelling sequence are ever increasing collection, mind-boggling) and can Temptest, Radarscope, I hyper-drive to sectors to engage Robot, Space Ace, Dragon's the enemy. The presentation and playability are of the highest standard, my only quibble would be with the sound. It is quite close to the original but still needs a whole lot more work (still, maybe in the finished version...) Battlezone is BATTLEZONE, barring the colour difference you would be hard pushed to tell the difference between the arcade Lair and finally MACH 3... original and the cover version. The 3-D graphics are perfect A new challenge also took the and the sound identical to the form of writing my own games, the original as is the playing speed and first of which has just been tactics. released, it is called Hyperface and is for the C16 (plug, plug!). Just when I had almost given up hope on the micro front along comes Atari with its ST computer. The ST is the first in a new generation of 16-bit microcomputers. It can operate at around four times the speed of current home micros and it offers more colours, better graphics and more programmable memory. The lower levels are quite easy if For the first time in seven years a you were hot in the arcades, but home micro offers TRUE arcade give a reasonable taste of things to quality graphics to the home user. come. I have looked at around a dozen Millipede delivers the goods games, many will make your palms with a strong dose of super fast ooze sweat in anticipation, four of zapping. The graphics and sound these are due for imminent release work well here and again are of the others are available now. the highest arcade standard. The four games due for release You can choose your starting are from Atari. Perhaps the real level (15000 to 90000), the higher classic among them is Star you start the larger your end of Raiders. wave bonus. All the arcade My review copy was around 95 elements are there in good per cent complete and boy was measure, spiders, DDT sacks, snails that enough! Star Raiders puts and bugs. you behind the controls of a As you progress to the higher spaceship and you have fly around levels movement does get jerky on the galaxy doing your bit of Star the characters and this is the only Raiding. flaw in a near perfect shoot-em up. The control panel is gorgeous, it The final Atari game is Joust is full of instrumentation and maps (from the Williams original). in a stunning metallic cyan colour. What can I say? It is JOUST! You have both forward and aft Graphics, colours, animation scanners to view the action as the and playability are identical to the aliens home in on you. With battle arcade original. Even down to the computer and shields to help. bouncing eggs, gripping hand, You also have to defend your bonus round and platform eating star bases (the graphics in the flames. 00 One of the highlights of doing depth and will prove challenging this feature was visiting Paul over a long period so the pros and Woakes at Novagen. This is cons do have to be weighed up... the programming genius who Another game from Michtron bought you the 3D masterpiece is Time Bandit and here we are Mercenary on the Commodore talking business. This is a 64 and Atari (and soon for the Gauntlet derivative with either Amstrad and Speccy!). one or two players running around a huge playground picking up keys, treasure and anything else along the way. Seeing is believing, the graphics are arcade standard (although sound could do with more...) and the play area is huge with many different scenarios. A Paceman maze, Forests, underground mines in fact just about anything from 3033. TIME He is in the midst of converting BANDIT Mercenary to the ST. I just cannot believe what he has done Hannes Bence with the game! It is totally awesome, it just blew me away... CUSTO It is like watching an aeroplane fly around on TV. Honestly, that is NO EXAGGERATION. It is very fast (the C64 version of Mercenary drew around 10 any time. frames a second, the ST version The only real negative point goes up to 50 frames a second!). about the ST is the price of Novagen hopes to have it software, this goes from  to completed within the next month . Although ST games are or so, when it will be bundled with produced to a very high standard. the dataset for the second city. Thad been wondering what the Another 3D offering comes from ST stood for in the name Atari ST, Rainbird Software (they of well now I know, it stands for Telecom connection), it is called Atari's Sure Thing! UPRING 1337 GAIDUILLE IB) PRESS SPACESAR "


"Bug-Byte designer clothes! A brand new line in clothes is about to hit the streets and it's all thanks to 12V/2 year old Mark Taylor. Mark had been sending letters to Bug-Byte covered in obscene bugs and finally the right person caught sight of them and thought: \"Wouldn't they make a great t-shirt!\" And, that's what's happened. Bug Clothes are only out in two designs at the moment Knight Rider has become a bit of a joke, hasn't it? For over a year now, Ocean has been putting the odd advert in C+VG, telling the readers that the game is available. Well, this time, it actually seems to be finished! 3D graphics are promised and with any luck, reviewers will not simply dismiss the game as hype. Rumours abound that this game is going to be big. It \"should be out by the beginning of July, for the Spectrum at .95. More details when we get them. Inside this issue you'll find a rundown of the currently available software for the Atari ST but here's some stop press details of some new ST games for this new machine. Tracker and Starglider will be coming your way from Rainbird very soon. HAR DHE Starglider is an all action combat simulation featuring fast every time one of the various moving, animated 3D vector objects zap you. graphics. It looks a bit like the When C+VG visited The scenario places you in the Addictive's office's in role of a pilot of the only surviving Bournemouth a couple of weeks ground attack vehicle left to ago, they had a pre-production oppose the alien invaders of the copy loaded and waiting. The planet Novenia. The mission is to game is very simple to get into and destroy the aliens' powerful once you do it IS addictive! flagship the Starglider. To reach No release date or price have the final conflict you'll need flying been decided but we'd advise you skills and a battle strategy. The to start saving your pennies. book accompanying the product Before you turn to the incorporates survival tips. incredibly interesting MUD article Tracker is a unique blend of on pages 34 and 35, we've got a strategy wargaming and arcade rather important announcement... action. The gameplay is set in an All the prices are wrong! In a extensive maze of trenches linking frantic call to the Newsdesk, Mr communication centres defended MUD told us that all the prices had by intelligently controlled enemy been cut by 50%. The starter pack units. now costs , and all the credit Good news for C64/128 prices have been halved too. More owners is that Starglider will be details next issue. converted for this machine. honey yellow Bug t-shirts and y-fronts!!! So fashion setters, watch this space for the new winter collection! Good news for BBC owners! If Mercenary Escape Thrust, that absolutely whizzo from Targ reduced you to a game which has been around for a gibbering, demented wreck how while on the Commodore from will you cope with The Second Mastertronic has now been City? released on the BBC and Electron No, it's not a sequel in the strict by Superior Software. Ken sense of the word but an add-on Campbell told C+VG all about the which has to be used with game and the super things which Novagen's original game. You those players lucky enough to get simply load The Second City a long way into it will receive. The into the main program as you person who completes the game would a saved game. first will be entered for a prize Novagen has created a draw, with a prize of . He or whole new challenge set on the she will also win the new book by other side of the planet. This time Patrick Moore, called The New the familiar green of Targ has been Atlas of the Universe. The next replaced by the ghostly red glow bunch of gamers to achieve level of the twighlight world of the 24 in the game will receive the Second City. book, and . The Second City will be Superior has been expanding available on the Commodore 64, recently, and have also been Plus/4, Atari at .95 on cassette recruiting new programmers. If and .95 on disk. Thrust is an example of what is to come, BBC owners will be back on the market for games. Thrust After lying low for the past year, costs .95 on tape, or .95 for Addictive Games has come a BBC disc. back with avengeance. They hope Gremlin Graphics' boss lan Stuart holds the to be releasing a new game every 1-2 months and if their latest winner of The Way of the Tiger poster competition release is anything to go by — they run in the May issue of Computer + Video Games. are going to have a very good The bells! Ocean have summer. Arac for the The winner is Card Pugh, 22, of Oldham, followed up the recent spate of Commodore 64 is a platform-style Lancashire. His prize will be a professional artist's ladders 'n' jumping games with game with around 100 screens, another Hunchback program. copy of the design. The next 20 runners-up will and was created by Paul But wait for it... it's an adventure! O'Malley, the man who brought receive copies of The Way of the Tiger martial arts Crumbs. Yes, folks, News was you Boffin. The object of the game pretty baffled with this story itself! appears very simple to begin game, which is based on the series of fighting No one willing to talk knows with. You start by going around fantasy books published by Hodder and anything much about the game, and picking up different pieces of a Stoughton. except it's a graphic adventure, in robot, which when put together the true sense of the word. forms the Aracadroid. Once he is lan visited C+VG's offices recently to select the \"Sources\" tell us that it's a rather formed you make your way winning posters. He chose Carl's poster because standard plot. So what's new? through the screens in your quest For some considerably more to attack the Citadel, but working of its exciting and original idea. More than 300 interesting adventure reading, turn against you is the clock and an entries were received for the competition. to page 71. energy gauge, which is depleted "


"Cake up the Challenge IN ATT XIRGI NTIC CHALLENGE CAME 1986 THE BLUE IURIBAR In the summer of 1986 the crew of VIRGIN I ATLANTIC CHALLENGER once again attempt to win the coveted BLUE RIBAND title for Britain by crossing the ATLANTIC OCEAN in the record time of 3 days and 10 hours. Virgin Games brings you the VIRGIN ATLANTIC CHALLENGE GAME. This arcade game is a fun simulation of RICHARD BRANSON'S part in this exciting and dangerous event. You must guide Richard at BREAK-NECK SPEED from one piece of equipment to another to keep the boat ON-COURSE and in good time and take vital MONEY-MAKING (or breaking) decisions that are telexed to him from all parts of the VIRGIN EMPIRE. SPECTRUM 48/128 AMSTRAD CPC 464/664/6128 COMMODORE 64/128 .co..95 to .95 to .95 r.r.p. r.r.p. r.r.p. Available from all good Software Retailers or directly from Virgin with the tear-off slip below Please rush me my copy of the Virgin Atlantic Challenge Game! NAME ADDRESS Spectrum 48/128 .95 Amstrad CPC 464/664/6128 .95 Commodore 64/128 .95 Tick appropriate box Please make cheques and postal orders to VIRGIN GAMES LTD and post to the address below. Please do not post cash. VIRGIN GAMES MAIL ORDER, 2/4 Vemon Yard, Portobello Road, London W11 2DX. "


"DESIGN TAKING... DESIGN ...TIGER MOUNTAIN THE ODDS ARE AGAINST YOU! You'll have to plan for the future and use your tactical skills to take the attack-tank through to «TIGER MOUNTAIN'? \"TAKING TIGER MOUNTAIN» is in 3D colour, set in a real-time battle environment, which makes it the most advanced battle simulation available. For the AMSTRAD CPC Range. (Price includes P&P) AMSTRAD 3\" DISC .95 R.R.P. AMSTRAD CASSETTE .95 R.R.P. NEMESIS THE COUNTDOWN HAS BEGUN... One man stands alone to defend the ultimate weapon «NEMESIS\" from the Andromedan robot forces. He has to escape with the \"NEMESIS» intact, or start the countdown to self-destruct. Time is running out, every second counts... For the SPECTRUM and AMSTRAD CPC Range. AMSTRAD 3\" DISC .95 R.R.P. SPECTRUM CASSETTE .95 R.R.P. AMSTRAD .95 R.R.P. Selected «Design Design» titles are available from:Papa WOOLWORTH WHSMITH Jonn Menzies COMET and all leading software stockists, or direct from:Design Design Software, 125, Smedley Road, Cheetham Hill, MANCHESTER M8 ZRS. Trade enquiries: 061-205 6603 Design Design "


"DRAGONS Laik OWNED BY MAGICOM INC. AND USED BY PERMISSION ADDS NEW CHALLENGE TO THE MAGICAL ARCADE ADVENTURE! ..On the Quest to rescue the fair Princess from the clutches of an evil Dragon. You control the action of our daring adventurer finding his way through the castle of the dark wizard who has enchanted it with treacherous monsters and obstacles. In the mysterious caverns below the castle your odyssey continues against the awesome forces that oppose your efforts to reach the Dragons Lair. Lead on adventurer, your quest awaits. SOFTWARE AVAILABLE NOW ON DDY ON JEST 35 Commodore 64/128 .95 AVAILABLE SOON FOR: Spectrum 48/128 .95 Amstrad Tape 464/664/6128 Disc .95 .95 Software Projects Ltd., Bearbrand Complex, Allerton Road, Woolton, Liverpool L25 7SF. Telephone: 051-428 9393 Telex: 627520 DRAGONS LAIR Owned by Magicoming and use it permission Copyright Magicom Inc. All rights reserved Character Designs Copyright 1983 Don Bluth AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD COMPUTER RETAIL OUTLETS OFFICIALLY LICENSED HOME COMPUTER VERSION OF THE NO. 1 ARCADE HIT "


"Who is Cyborg? What have programmer IAN FOSTER and graphic genius JON LAW got to do with the mysterious Mandroid? None of these questions are really answered in the following sneak preview of CRL's newest arcade adventure. CYBORG e e wanted this to But he still secretly wants to really like you to know about nasty breed of alien. They come be an arcade find the partner who ran out on their new adventure. But in many different guises. adventure in the him after that almost fatal fortunately due to advanced. There are Trackers, who do TRUE sense of the word.\" lan space disaster. interrogation techniques , just that, Walkers who do that Foster and Jon Law are talking But right now there's an even developed jointly by IDEAS and a bit more, and the deadly about Cyborg. And they aren't more pressing problem facing giving much away simply Cyborg and the planet earth. because they want the first That's where lan, Jon and result of their partnership to YOU enter the weird world of truly be a REAL adventure. the mysterious Mandroid. \"After all, when you play an An asteroid is hurtling adventure you don't get toward Earth on a collision s instructions telling you how to course. A group of scientists do everything and why! Do have already ventured out to you?' Jon adds. the onrushing chunk of rock to RIPRO HUTH And that, dear reader, is why find out what they can do to small things like actual facts prevent doomsday coming to LLLLL about Cyborg, will be a bit thine their home planet a little earlier 5CBNER on the ground throughout the than they had predicted. next couple of pages. But never Problem is that as soon as they fear, normal service will be lânded all communication links resumed by the time you reach with the exploration party went our review section. In the meantime come with us on a If you think this sounds like a magical mystery tour through job for Cyborg, then you're Corp and Jackson T. Kalliberthe world of Cyborg the first dead right. Our plasti-steel5 CVG has managed to prise a black computer game hero. superman soon finds himself few more details from the This next bit we know to be on the surface of the asteroid. tight-lipped duo. true. Cyborg was once a regular His mission to discover just As you'll see from our series guy with normal fleshy bits like what happened to the of screen shots, Cyborg everyone else. Until that fateful scientists and what, if anything, discovers an underground PUPTURE RESISTANT out. last mission somewhere in the is going down on the deadly complex beneath the surface of outer reaches of the universe asteroid. the asteroid. These corridors when his sleek spacecraft was That's all lan and Jon would are inhabited by a particularly involved in a terrifying incident which left it almost totally destroyed. The man who was to become Cyborg was terribly injured and left for dead by his selfish partner. A few days later the wreck was discovered by a Gal-Corp patrol. The man still had a glimmer of life left in his wrecked body MILITARY COMPUTER TERMINAL READY. And yes, they had the technology to rebuild him! Ang so Cyborg was born. A nuclear E powered, armoured, heavily armed, extremely strong, possibly invincible Mandroid! Half-man, halt machine, Cyborg became a top security agent working for the military. CHARACTER ANALYSE BETROGET PO SEAMMEN HULLE EMAGUNE STATIS E CONTROL PANEL DIRECT IHOM THE SECONCIOUS HUMAN FAN INCLUDING STYLEN GENERATION POWER INCREASE OVER STANDARD "


", C+VG PREVIEW UDE Assassins a floating one armed with a heavy duty lan and Jon refused to tell us If he zaps an alien he can eyed globe affair who just hates particle beam disruptor clipped about even under examine the remains and retain to have his corridors infested to a special unit on his right interrogation. information gathered about with uninvited guests. arm It's while messing about with that particular type of alien in Fortunately for Cyborg he is On his left arm he has an the alien computer system that his forearm unit. ee you'll discover if aliens really lan and Jon are particularly DO like to play Human Invaders vague when you ask them the when they've got a spare Object of Cyborg's mission anii moment away from chasing the asteroid. That's for the Cyborgs about the place player to discover they say Cyborg's information M all the above sounds a bit forearm unit is pictured in like Ocean's Vgame to you graphic form in the bottom halt then lan and Yan would be the of the game screen. You access first to agree. But we were each of the functions via the thinking about this long before HAHADTER HRLE joystick. Any information which we heard about V. When we did HO e results is seen in the view we thought 'Oh no!' it's going screen to the left to kill Cyborg! Now we've seen 6:11 Ed For example, it Cyborg hacks V we reckon Cyborg is much TOUT into a computer you'll see the better. Easier to play and with screens appear in the viewer. more depth,\" said Jon. You can also see a plan of Cyborg will be released on TELPFUEL nearby corridors and check out the Commodore 64 during if an alien is after you. August with an Amstrad Tequally useful built in display Unlike many icon controlled conversion following on. It and information unit which games, the speed with which promises to be well worth allows him access to you can use Cyborg's computer waiting for. information about the security unit is only limited by how systems in the complex. quick your own reactions are. He can also hack into the Cyborg's real time world is alien computer systems to shown at the top of the screen. ABOUT THE access special codewords The corridors scroll along nice PROGRAMMERS useful for getting through and smoothly as Cyborg prowls doors and other things which along. lan Foster joined CRL on a job creation scheme a couple of years ago and his first game for the company was Blade Runner. \"I like to think of Blade Runner as my apprenticeship,\" he says. There were a lot of things I'd of liked to have got into that game but in the end there just wasn't time. I learned a lot of things from that gamela His partnership with Jon CHARADTEH BRAUGS Law, who is still at art college, HELDADE REPIT blossomed when they met at EENDER HULLE CRL: Jon has just finished creating the graphics for the Commodore 128 version of the STATUE Rocky Horror Show and is BENERELL FENEL currently working full time with lan on Cyborg. SYNTHETICALLY LUBRICATED DISPLAY AND INFORMATION FOREARM UNIT. ACCESS CODED WITH LINKED MEMORY AND ANALYSIS RANKS UMBILICAL EXTENDABLE COMPUTER P HP PALM LOCATED SENSOR 22 AVAILABLE. COTTACT ACTIVATION LINKED DIRECT TO ANALYSIS BANKS CONVERTING TO VISUAL DISPLAY HEATHAHLE AND PADIATION AND HOSTILE RETAINS ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE HOSTILE PRESSURES. GEN. STATISTICS HE GHT 2 01m. WEIGHT 102 kg. 1.Q. 198 PREVIOUS ID CLASSIFIED un "


"DARK Crepted by Mike Bingleton You are playing in a vast contest. All over the country hundreds of others strive like you to seize the Dark Sceptre. On microdrive cartridge you send us your commands and we return to you the latest news of your warriors one episode in your struggle to power. Each episode keeps you thinking for days, maybe weeks, as you scheme and plot against a legion of enemies. Your opponents aren't just dumb subroutines — they're real living, breathing people — and most of them are after your blood! An episode of Dark Sceptre is like a game in itself. Using our unique foresight-hindsight system, you watch action replays of events past, and then simulate the futures at your fingertips in «preplays\" of events to come all with stunning animation. There are no deadlines but your own eagerness. You start a new episode, give fresh commands to your warriors. You rush to the door as the letter-box rattles a few days later. What's the news from the Western Isles? Have you won famous victories or have your warriors met their doom? You break open the seal.. All you need to play is access to a Spectrum microdrive (you don't have to own one). All you need to win are lashings of flair, nerve and audacity. The Dark Sceptre Play-By-Mail package includes:* Master Cartridge * Episode Cartridge * Play-By-Mail Program * Solo Game Program * Start-up Position * Instructions Booklet * Coupon for 3 Free Episodes STAND ALONE COMPUTER GAME AVAILABLE ON CASSETTE FROM BEYOND AVANAGLONE COMPUTER GAME PLAY-BY-MAIL ONE CONTEST A THOUSAND GAMES MEESTI To play DARK SCEPTRE by mail, just fill in this coupon and post it to Maelstrom Games Ltd.. 42 Wellington Road, Wallasey, Merseyside, L45 2NG. Please make cheque payable to Maelstrom Games Ltd. The whole package is .95 and each extra episode you play costs just .50 (1st class postage included). Please send me one DARK SCEPTRE Play-By-Mail Package. I enclose a cheque/postal order for .95. Please debit my Access/Visa Account No. NAME ADDRESS for .95 -------------------"


"Bullets FIST II -The Legend Continues Knight CUOSTS'VE PUIN SomePOT NH OSLE GAMIS MELBOURNE MOUSE COA me Fist 2 C64 .95 Mindstone Spectrum Knight-Tyme Spectrum .99 GRUL 2 The Boggitt C64 .95 Ghosts & Goblins Amstrad .95 .95 FMCUYSE SE GAJ COMBAT alios arcade SOFTWARE WITH MAGNUM FORCE Gray CANO Pub Games C64 .95 Pyracurse Spectrum Sai Combat Amstrad .95 Hijack Spectrum .95 .99 HIGH CALIBRE SOFTWARE SOFTSPOT ROUND ONE Room 10 Amstrad Split Personalities C64 Stainless Steel Spectrum .95 .95 .95 C16 CAULDRON TL GREATEST HITS EDE SOFTWARE AVAILABLE FROM STOCKISTS LISTED BELOW WATCH THIS SPOT FOR NEXT MONTH'S NEW RELEASES 45WASTIC GAMES MELBOURME MOUSE C16 Greatest Hits 016 C16 .95 Ninja C64 Cauldron 2 Spectrum .99 .95 TOYS AUS Littleweeds makro SPERRINGS BULLDOG DISTRIBUTION LIMITED TEL:(0782)563399 TELEX:36247 BULLDOG "


"C+VG AUG Software REVIEWS 1 BOBBY BEARING GAME Ultimate type, in fact I dare to say it's BETTER. Then Bobby trots out, and wow, does he roll brilliantly, yes folks, Bobby actually rolls. Perfect animation is definitely one of the good things about this game. Now what do you have to do? Well it goes like this. Bobby and his family, live in Technofear, a metal world which is a nice sort of place. But there were parts of the world MON GAME OF THE MONTH This is C+VG's highest honour. It's granted to the game which, in our honest opinion, is the most playable, original and exciting game released during the month. We look for all the key points listed below but also that extra added ingredient which makes the game stand head and shoulders above the best of the Machine Spectrum 48/128 Supplier: The Edge Price: .95 Here it is! Bobby Bearing, the game that we've all heard so much about. It has a feature called 'Curvispace 3D' which is supposed to be revolutionary. It is!!! Bobby Bearing is fab, even its loading is weird and wonderful. First of all the computer finds \"Bobby' instead of 'Program: Bobby'. This is an old trick, but then the title page comes on, it is drawn in colour and in a sort of spiral fashion. Weird. Then a scrolling message comes up and a counter counts down. Great stuff. Now to the actual game! First of all a nice ball bounces up and down as you select your method of control. As you do this picture scrolls left to right of the various joysticks/keyboard. What a nice touch. Now you press 'O' and you're away. The next thing you notice is the 3D seems different to the old rest. 9964 C+VG HIT! C+VG HIT! This symbol is C+VG's way of telling you a game is the BUSINESS! GRAPHICS ROOM 10 Is the game graphically greator do the graphics grate? This mark puts you in the picture and lets you know if all things are sprite and beautiful. The game screen is split into two player one at the top player two at the bottom. Each \"sees\" a 3D view of the glyding cell drawn vector graphic style SOUND oomt ressure com Machine: Amstrad Created by Tau Ceti Supplier: CRL programmer Pete Cooke, Room Price: .95 10 will keep grabbing you back for just one more game time Every once in a while a game and time again. Pete tells us that's so simple but totally that the game, called Glyding, addictive takes C+VG by storm. was developed by the Galcorp Room 10 is one of those games. Leisure Corporation and It looks a bit like Ballblazer at designed to be played in the first glance but when you very low gravity found on start playing you'll realise that asteroids and outposts. this is a different ballgame It's played in a room or \"cell\" altogether. 60 X 80 X 20. Each player controls Room 10 the rather a \"bat\" and the only objective is obscure title comes from the to stop that ball hitting the wall name of the \"cell\" or court behind you! You score five where the game is played is a points if you make your sort of 3D ping-pong with extra opponent miss, first player to 35 added addictiveness. points wins. Is the sound loud and proud — or does it sound like you've got your head stuck in a bucket of mud? VALUE Should you beg, borrow or even steal the cash to get your hands on the game and be the envy of your friends? Or will it be better to wait until the game appears in the bargain bin? Find out here. PLAYABILITY Will you be dragged screaming from the joystick after 24 hours continuous play — or will the mere sight of the loading screen send you running to switch off the machine? No, you're not seeing double or even triple. There are three C+VG Games of the Month for August. Why? It's simple. We thought Bobby Bearing, Room 10 and Pyracurse all deserved our top accolade. with see-through bats and solid ball. Just watch the shadow! Down the right hand side of the screen is the score display -drawn LCD fashion. Sound effects are a sort of metallic \"boing\" and extremely effective. You can play the game at several different speeds, skill levels and you can change the colour of the screen at will to choose your favourite glyding cell colour scheme. You can play the computer or a human opponent and use STARTS HERE player to ser "


"C+VG AUG Software REVIEWS 2 PYRACURSE which Bobby and his brothers were told never to go into, as this is where all the bad bearings went. They had all been good until the arrival of their cousin. He dared the brothers to go out to the forbidden zones, and like complete mugs they accepted. (Well boys will be boys you Bobby, being the brave and handsome type, has to go in and rescue his brothers from the baddies, and if he feels like it, he might rescue his cousin as well! Another great feature on Bobby is the fact that you don't fall off the edges of the screen, unlike Spindizzy, which gets annoying. Bobby Bearing features great: graphics, weird sound and brilliant game play. The Edge say it's going to be their biggest game yet. I believe them. I love this game, it's so playable, if you don't buy this, throw your Spectrum away. donnell Graphics Sound Value Playability Machine: Spectrum 48/128 Supplier: Hewson Price: .95 So, you thought you'd seen it all did you? When it comes to 3D arcade adventures, that is. Well, think again, because Pyracurse is here. This latest release from Hewson will not only enhance their already considerable reputation for producing quality games, it will also make \"room based' arcade adventures look a bit silly. Pyracurse allows you to move freely about a huge scrolling area exploring mysterious rooms and chambers, opening chests and discovering the contents of huge ancient vases. If you picked up the last issue of C+VG you'll already know tomb and which some of the background to this contain useful South American adventure. For items. Daphne is the unfortunate few who better at finding couldn't get their hands on anthings than the issue here's a brief synopsis of others. Frozbie tends the plot. to enjoy digging Patrick \"Legless\" O'Donnell, through the dirt. Professor Roger Kite, Daphne Professor Kite is good Pemberton-Smythe and Frozbie at using the ancient the dog set out to explore the objects left in the tomb. tomb of the daugher of Xipe At the top of the screen Totec an ancient and is a window displaying supposedly immortal god. They your current mode of hope to find Daphne's father, operation you start in mobile ace explorer and archeologist mode. To the left, a coloured Sir Pemberton-Smythe, who band indicates the energy has unaccountably gone status of your current character. missing in the Sinu region of If the energy level falls to zero Columbia your character will die. At the start of the game the Manipulating the characters four characters are found at the and getting them to do all the entrance to the tomb which is right things for you will be teeming with headless crucial when playing the game. guardians, poisonous scorpions The monsters you'll find are and deadly skulking skulls. not very clever but they are Each of the characters has extremely single-minded. They his/her its own particular skill. will not stray far from their And you'll need to keep all four posts but they will chase you if of the explorers alive if you you get too close to them. want to succeed. Fortunately Fortunately there are ways of Pyracurse really there are flasks of the extremely disposing of them! IS something useful genetic enzyme dotted There are many items for you completely different. It has around the tomb. These can be to collect and use scattered atmosphere and addictiveness used to resurrect \"dead\" around the tomb. To pick up an in equally enormous quantities. characters if necessary. It's a object, select mobile mode and it's the first \"adventure movie' good idea to make sure that at walk up to the item you require. from programmers Mark least one of your characters has As you collect it the graphic Goodall and Keith Prosser a flask of this enzyme. They can window will flash and show you hopefully the first of many. be found quite close to the a picture of the item. Each entrance! character may carry up to three Graphics O'Donnell is the strongest items at a time. Sound member of the group. He's If O'Donnell or the Prof are a useful for breaking pots which bit low on life-force, a cuddle Value you'll find inside the with Daphne will help! Playability dowell klase SERIES professo keys or joystick. Here at C+VG we found the keys easier to control. You can achieve some really neat shots — bouncing them off the walls and putting a bit of spin on the ball by swiftly moving the bat when you strike the ball. Lots of skill involved here at higher levels. The bats have built in inertia they move when you strike the ball and bounce off the floor and walls, There's also a score chart which can be accessed from the comprehensive menu screen at the end of each glyding session. Room 10 is simple, addictive fun with a capital F. Well put together, with neat graphics, terrific sounds and totally absorbing gameplay. Graphics Sound Value Playability 000 000 "


"Knight Games... ...bet you can't beat a good Knight! Knight Games brings medieval combat to life on Commodore and Amstrad computers, featuring One/Two player action, superb animation, brilliant hi-resolution graphics, eight specially composed medieval-rock tunes and selectable skill levels. Suardiah 1 EIGHT DIFFERENT CHALLENGING EVENTS  toms GLOSSW 2. ge Quarta caff Muun SWUUTTULA HULLE Available on Disk and Fast Load cassette for Commodore 64/128 and Amstrad computers. Screenshots shown are from the Commodore 64 version of Knight Games. AVES ENGLISH gamete REUNLAR REUNLARNINGLISH SUT COMMODORE AMSTRAD 64/128: 464/664/6128: Cassette .95 Cassette .95 Disk .95 3\" Disk $14.95 SOFTWARE, 1 NORTH PARADE, PARSONAGE GARDENS, MANCHESTER M60 1BX. TELEPHONE: 061-835 1358. TELEX: 8950511 ONEONE G. Ref: 14797001 DISTRIBUTED by U.S. GOLD 021-359 8881 I SOFTWARE ENGLISH SU REENCLISH SOFTWARE. EN SOFTWARE ENCUSH SOF R ARE EN I SOFTWARE ENGLISH RE. ENCUSH SOFTWARE. EN ICOFTWARE ENGLISH SOF TAARE EN "


"SATCOMBAT \"One of the best\" Popular Computing Weekly \"It is good, no-nonsense material arts stuff with some really good animation\" — Your Computer \"Good fun, graphically excellent, and if you've so far steered clear of martial arts games, this could be the one to get you hooked\" Computer + Video Games SPECTRUM .95, AMSTRAD CPC TAPE .95, DISK .95 OUT NOW FROM Purnell Book Centre, Paulton, Bristol BS 18 5LQ "


"G+VG AUG Software REVIEWS Kung-Fu TIME Master TRAX 64 Nick Faldo Plays the Open Machine: Amstrad CPC Machine: CBM 64 464/6128 Supplier: Anco Supplier: Mind Games Price: .95 Price: .95 cassette/.95 disc Here's the latest blast and bomb Do you want to play a round 'em game to turn your with Nick Faldo? Sounds Commodore 64 into a slightly dubious, eh? But not a battlefield. Machine: Amstrad Machine: Commodore bit of it. This is the Royal St A strategic island has fallen Supplier: US George's Club in Sandwich and into enemy hands and must be everything's above board and recaptured at all costs. Victory Gold/Data East Supplier: Argus Press O Price: .95 very respectable. can only be achieved when the Software Nick Faldo Plays The Open enemy headquarters have been cassette/.95 disk has been around for some time Price: .95 destroyed. Two people can play And another one bites the dust! on other formats but the the game one taking the role of Weapon-wielding warriors are We had a lot of trouble getting Amstrad is probably the best. defender and the other the knocked for six as I, the Kung Fu hold of this game. When we did Good size graphics, bright and invader. You can swap between Master, face the perils of the eventually get one, it wouldn't colourful, and a uncluttered a tank and aeroplane for the wizard's temple. work. It will come as no surprise screen lay out. conflict. The majority of the Well that's the way it should to you that having to make a The lower half of the screen is screen is taken up with an have been but more often than raid on the software company taken up with the icons for angled view down onto the not it was me who fell victim to just to get a working copy, in 81 controlling the game-choice battlefield, showing, buildings, some vicious kicks and degree heat, is no picnic. Still. of club, direction and strength tanks, trees and airstrips etc. A punches. We're the courageous sort at of shot, weather and score card. strip across the bottom of the And that's not all which C+VG and after only a whole In the centre is the animation screen contains details of the stands between you and day's effort, we got the dashed of the golfer. In the Spectrum present status of both Defender rescuing a captive maiden. thing to work. version of the game the and Invader. Dragons, killer bees and strange Time Trax is, according to annimation also included the There are three levels of play, globes which burst over your Argus, \"incredibly deep\". caddy who would pass you the ranging from easy to hard. head showering deadly Hmm. Dense maybe. The plot selected club. \"Are you sure,\" Definitely not in the fragments around also pose goes a little like this... There he would say, \"Yes,\" you reply Commando, Rambo league. problems. was a nuclear war. You which prompts an \"OK\" from Kung Fu Master was survived. Your sole companion him. All this is missing, but not Graphics wonderful in the arcades and in your shelter was a disturbed missed from the Amstrad Sound 5 US Gold's computer version old lunatic called Uriah version. The lack of this verbal O Value captures all of the original Winterbottom M.Sc. He was a interplay speeds up the game. Playability excitement. mad professor in the classic Nick Faldo Plays the Open is It's fast paced, graphically style. A few days before the good fun and instantly playable. excellent and very addictive. end, he began to babble about But to be honest, Ariolasoft's There are only five levels to the time zones and suchlike... Get Golf Construction Set on the game but there's enough in the picture? Yup? The game Commodore 64 has the edge. them to test your joystick. plan is remarkably similar to 5th Graphics O Graphics Axis (reviewed last issue). It involves travelling through time Sound Sound zones and returning lost pieces O Value DECENDERUAR Value of history to their correct eras. Playability MELA TELA O Playability The screen is presented in a very orderly fashion, the top half being an \"action window\", showing — surprisingly — the action. In the lower half a series of boxes show all sorts of interesting, and utterly vital, information. Time elapsed, tiles stored, energy left, object storage boxes and the menu. The menu is quite Machine: Commodore must try to shoot, dodge and fly speed. Cargo is collected by competently assembled. By 64 your way as far into enemy flying over it. There are three moving the joystick back and territory as possible, bombing requisites which need to be forth, you can select options Supplier: Alligata fuel cannisters and picking up satisfied before you can move with which you can manipulate Price: .95/.95 cargo. onto the next phase. These are objects. (tape/disc) The screen is presented in as follows: Aliens left to kill, And that's really all there is to much the same way as, um, boats left to bomb, and Police it. The graphics are nice, but too Trap is impressive. It has (Millions of other games Ed) Craft remaining. small to contain any detail. neither fast 'n' furious action, er, right. It's a simple plan view, Something which will please There are an awful lot of nor any great extent of strategy, scrolling from top to bottom, all hackers is that a demo mode places to go, from the current but it holds a player's interest revealing new areas of has been included. Try typing era obviously through the for a considerable amount of landscape as you progress. \"demo\" into the high-score ice age, wilderness, golden age, time. Your mission is made more table and see what happens! Gothic period and many more. An attractive title page difficult by the numerous And that's just about it. What To find an object, you need to appears while the game is defences which bar your way. we have, then, is a fast and LOOK in a likely place. loading, showing a 3D Some take the form of gun furious zapping game, in the Unfortunately, there are an representation of your ship, installations, dotted around the classic style. Not too awful lot of likely places, and it flying down a narrow canyon. walls of the canyon, while complicated, easy to get the takes a considerable amount of Sounds familiar, doesn't it? others are fiendish police hang of — and, most time to check them. Well Alligata make no attempt squadrons, who fly straight at importantly, fun to play. And that, dear readers, is it. to confuse prospective you, guns blazing! Nothing marvelous, but purchasers with a lengthy Control of your ship is far Graphics reasonably reasonable. Oh, yes, storyline. It's a game involving from complicated — left and Sound the music is very nice too. a lot of zapping, and is no less right, fire, Zappo (equivalent to accomplished for that. Graphics a Defender smart-bomb) drop Value The idea is simple you cargo, and increase/decrease Playability Sound Value O Playability 00 00 UT OO NO 00 "


"Jf you go down to the woods today... youre sure ofaswift demise... \"Cauldron I looks good, sounds good, and plays even better. Miss it and you'll regret it? --Zzap! 64 THE No. 1 GAME NOW AVAILABLE FOR THE SPECTRUM AND AMSTRAD \"Don't delay, buy it today» C+VG GAME OF C+VG HIT! THE MONTH CAULDIRON.I THE PUMPKIN STRIKES BACK C NACICs Actual screen shots from the Commodore Available from all good computer game stockistsorby mali order from Palace Software. 275 Pentonville Road. London N1 9NL Send cheque or postal order for .99 plus 80p pap, Access and Barclaycard holders phone 01-2780751, PALACE software "


"C+VG AUG Software REVIEWS C+VG HIT! FLP:00 ENGINE EGT: 0598\" PHP: 0952 205 FUEL: 035 01:22:21 Fl-HERTB Machine: 064/128 Supplier: Sublogic/Centresoft Price: .95 If you can find the incredible price tag and enjoy complex flight simulations then this offering from Sublogic could be for you. But here at C+VG we reckon that any Microprose flight simulation knocks the socks of this alternative American offering. And Wild Bill's flight sims come at half the price! Like all flight games you begin at the menu screen which offers you a choice of five different scenarios, dogfight, target strike, free flight or demo. You also get the option to load in \"scenery discs'' which are an optional extra. Then you get a chance to select practice or difficulty levels before going onto the next selection screen which allows you to fly either an F16 Fighting Falcon or an F18 Hornet. It's best to sort out the controls before you blast offand here Jet is amazingly difficult for the beginner or first time player. Lots of shift/key combinations to deal with which make flying the thing a difficult job indeed. About the only thing you can do via the joystick is to control the jet's altitude and fire the selected missiles. And the response time to your control instructions is much too slow. You'll find yourself making use of the eject mode quite a bit a nice touch, probably the best thing about the whole game! Jet isn't a simulation for the novice fighter pilot and frankly the huge price tag just isn't justified by the product. C+VG's test pilot would go for Solo Flight or Acro Jet instead. Graphics Sound  Value Playability Am 300100 abo ACRO JET 00:05:46 000 Machine: C64 events you wish to play at game Supplier: start from four options. Single Event, Pentathlon, Decathlon Microprose/US Gold and Unlimited. Price: .95 (tape) The ten events all require a .95 (disc) good mix of skill, timing and The first of this issue's flight concentration, but they are simulations is the instant classic beautifully interactive, and you Acro Jet which our very own feel you are in control. Hot Gossiper Tony Takoushi This isn't really a simulator for beginners although it is raved about in our June issue. extremely easy to get into. The This is probably the fastest simulator you'll ever fly game comes with Microprose's usual comprehensive based as it is on an acrobatic jet. documentation complete with The screen layout is similar to Solo Flight's I/II but there the quick start instructions. similarity ends. This Is a jet Acro Jet is an action packed flight package lots of fun, plane after all! The player is faced with even for those among you who aren't immediately grabbed by numerous play options at game start. Four players can compete games of this kind. with a choice of ten events. As you dive and weave The events are Pylon Race, around the skies you can see Slalom Race, Ribbon Cut, the underside and top of your Inverted Ribbon Cut, Under Acro Jet a nice graphic detail. Ribbon Roll, Loop Under Graphics Ribbon, Under Ribbon Race, Sound Spot landing, Cuban Eight and Value Simulated Flameout. You can pick and choose the Playability 0 0 0 0 SOLO FLIGHT II a micro. Solo Fight is the closest thing to flying short of going up in an aircraft. And the price isn't sky high either. Great product great value. Graphics Sound C+VG Value HIT! Playability 00 OOO Machine C64/128/Atari Supplier: Microprose/U.S. Gold Price: .95 (cass) .95 (disc) The original Solo Flight was about the easiest flight simulation to get into. Now here's Solo Flight II — a special remix of the original. And it's simply brilliant. It's got all the neat features of the first game with a revamped instrument console and terrific speech synthesis. Try the flight practice option and a soothing American voice talks you through your first flight from take-off to landing. A great way to learn how to fly. There's even a soothing American female voice that gives you messages from the 'control tower\" — about weather and such like. The soothing American voice doesn't even panic when you simulations from ex-fighter go into a power dive! It tells you pilot \"Wild» Bill Stealey's when you're too low, too high, Microprose outfit. In fact it was travelling too fast but doesn't play tested by \"real\" pilots shout \"Mind the trees!\" or during development. \"You're a maniac, I'm bailing Graphics are simple but out!\" or even \"Argghhhhh!\" extremely effective. Sound is It seems a bit churlish to call great and the speech! Well, this piece of software a game you won't believe it's coming it's probaly the nearest most of from your 64. Must be the most us will get to flying a real plane accurate synthesis yet heard on But there is a challenge element in the mail run option you have to deliver five bags of mail to different destinations battling against deteriorating weather conditions and coping with night flying. The instrumentation is easier to decipher in this revamped version and the game — unusually for a simulation of this kind is amazingly easy to get started. The synthesized instructor really helps to get you started. Solo Flight II continues the long line of accurate flight 225 35B HIND: 180 CD CEZLD 10000 V15: 5 "


"MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS 7.50 ......... 5.95 SPECTRUM Who Dares Wins II...... 5.95 Bounder D1 ................ Fairlight... 7.50 Iwo Jima. 5.95 Boulder Dash III.... 7.50 Elite. 11.25 Equinox ... 7.50 Uridium D3..... 6.75 Zoids. 5.95 Grph. Ad. Creator ..... 19.50 Kunk Fu Master D1..... 7.50 .. 7.50 Bounces. 7.50 Law of the West..... 7.50 Commando... .7.50 Wid. Cup Carnival ...... 7.50 Bomb Jack D1 ....... 7.50 Back to Skool. ..5.25 Core.... .. 6.75 Twister... 5.50 Rock 'n' Wrestle. 6.75 Time Trax. . 7.50 Way of the Tiger ........ 7.50 Tomahawk.. 7.60 Pyracurse 7.50 FA Cup ....... 5.95 Saboteur... 6.75 Dynamite Dan II...... PSI-5 Trading D1. 7.50 Roller Coaster ..... ... 5.25 Action Reflex............ 5.95 Fairlight D3..... 6.75 Pub Games 7.50 Kirel ......... .6.75 Starship Andromeda .. 7.50 Yie Ar Kung Fu 5.95 Silent Service ... 7.50 Green Beret 6.75 Spitfire 40 7.50 Cauldron II.... .6.75 Zzap Sizzlers. 7.50 Ping Pong..... 5.95 Spitting Image ............ 5.95 Tigers in the Snow...... 7.50 Gladiator 6.75 Terror of Tranoss..... 5.95 Off the Hook. 7.50 Desert Rat 7.50 Snow Queen........ 7.50 Biggles............ 7.50 Superbowl 7.50 Nexus .... 7.50 Tubular Bells ......... 5.95 Mermaid Madness...... 7.50 Toad Run.... 5.95 Dcsion in the Desert 12.50 Turbo Esprit. 6.75 Tantalus 6.75 Golf Construction D1 9.95 Sky Fox......... 6.75 Laser Genius ............ 12.50 Mermaid Madness... 12.50 Mermaid Madness...... 7.50 Movie. 5.95 Bobby Bearing ............ 5.95 Red Hawk... 7.50 Way of Tiger . 7.50 Dark sceptre............... 7.50 Touchdown D1 ........... 7.50 Bomb Jack 5.95 Hartland...................... 7.50 Raise Titanic 7.50 FA Cup ........ COMMODORE 64 Spindizzy D1 .. 7.50 Twister... 5.50 Elite........... ....... 11.00 War Play.... 5.95 Heavy on Magick........ 7.50 Exploding Fist D1 ....... 7.50 Doomsdark Revenge 7.50 Sam Fox Striptease.... 5.95 Summer Games II D1 7.50 Price of Magick......... 7.50 Batman .............. 5.95 Sky Fox D3.. 5.95 Mantronics... 5.95 Mercenary D3.. .......... 7.50 Ghost 'n' Goblins........ 7.50 Paper Boy. 5.95 Terromolinos D3......... 7.50 \"V\" Mandragore.. 7.50 Zoids D1 ............... .. 6.75 Silent Service D1........ 7.50 Cliff Hanger 5.50 Summer Games 1 D1 7.50 Core. 7.50 Green Beret. .5.95 Winter Games D1.. .. 7.50 Grph. Adv. Creator ... 19.50 Price of Magick........... 7.50 Acrojet D1............ 7.50 Cauldron II.................. 6.75 Quazatron. 6.75 Who Dares Wins.. 6.95 Cup Carnival D1 .. 7.30 Bounder... .7.50 Commando. 7.50 Southern Belle... 5.95 Bothams Cricket...... .5.50 Skool Daze.. 5.25 Snow Queen.... ..... 7.50 Biggles.. 7.50 Enigmaf Force.. 7.50 Laser Genius....... 12.50 Strike Force Harrier .... 7.50 Mugsy's Revenge ...... 6.75 Altered Ego Disk.... 19.95 Alien Highway..... .5.95 Rock & Wrestle D1.... .7.50 Shogun D3. 7.50 Spindizzy...... .7.50 Solo Flight II D1. .7.50 Nexus D3.... 7.50 Red Hawk 6.75 Ping Pong D3 5.95 Tau Ceti D3 ......... 7.50 Core. 7.50 Flintstones...... 5.95 Knight Games D3... 6.75 6.75 Desert Fox D1 ... 7.50 Time Trax ....... 7.50 Starstrike II .. ... 5.95 Superbowl .. 7.50 Rebel Planet D1 ..... 7.50 \"V\"' .5.95 Hardball D1 7.50 Leaderboard D1 .. 7.50 Ghost 'n' Goblins....... 5.95 Wild West .. 8.00 Samantha Fox...... 7.50 Theatre Europe .......... 7.50 Crusade in Europe ... 12.50 Batman.... 7.50 Postage included UK. Please state which micro. Fast service. Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept CVG, 49H Sutherland Street, Victoria, London SW1 V4HX MAIL ORDER ONLY: Send for FREE list Amstrad, C16, MSX. D=Disks Available, D1 at .50, D3 at .50. ACCESS ........... 7.50 Kirel ...... the legend continues MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY A SUBSIDIARY OF PLATINUM GOLD * Over 8,000 different titles available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, BBC, AMSTRAD. ATARI, MSX, ELECTRON, IBM and APRICOT.  ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too.  HIRE PRICES from only 75p INC P&P.  20% DISCOUNT off all purchase software. * FREE HINTS AND TIPS FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given). ALL GAMES manufactures ORIGINALS with full documentation.  OVER 12,000 satisfied members.  EUROPEAN members welcome. Life Membership .00. Fully computerised system keeps track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with staff of 14 who know what the word service means. Backed by our own software company and programmers. MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY, 28 College Street, Worcester WR1 2LS Tel: 0905 611072 Please rush me my free catalogue stating machine. Name Address Atari 400/600/800/XL 130XE Atari 520ST Commodore 64/Vic20/C16/Plus 4 Spectrum/BBC/Amstrad Hardware Software Peripherals Mediatech 544 Discs (SS/DD) 11.95 Mediatech 5/4 Discs (DS/SS) 12.95 LOCKABLE 100 DISC BOXES 9.95 PHONE OR WRITE FOR PRICES LIVINGSTON COMPUTER CENTRE 17 THE MALL, CRAIGSHILL LIVINGSTON (0506) 36978 POSTAGE .00 FREE POSTAGE AND PACKING ON ORDERS OVER  Callers Welcome DISCOUNT SOFTWARE 400/806 NOW LOOK XL/XE ST ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 OUR OUR OUR SPECTRUM RRP PRICE COMMODORE RRP PRICE AMSTRAD RRP PRICE Batman 7.95 5.56 Very Big Cav Adv 8.95 6.50 Movie 8.95 6.40 Bomb Jack 7.95 5.40 Uridium 8.95 6.15 Way of the Tiger 9.95 7.15 Way of the Tiger 9.95 7.20 Fairlight 9.95 7.10 Fairlight 9.95 7.15 Turbo Esprit 8.95 6.50 R.M.S. Titanic 9.99 7.15 Turbo Esprit 8.95 6.45 Ping Pong 7.95 5.30 Bomb Jack 9.95 7.15 Heavy on the Magick 9.95 7.35 Heavy on the Magick 9.95 7.15 Sold a Million 2 9.95 7.25 Spin Dizzy 9.95 7.15 All Level 9 9.95 7.15 Ping Pong 8.95 6.50 Ping Pong 8.95 6.45 The Planet 9.95 7.15 Gamekiller 14.95 12.50 Elite 14.95 10.75 Red Hawk 8.95 6.50 Red Hawk 8.95 6.50 Bomb Jack 9.95 7.40 Quazatrone 8.95 6.40 Zoids 8.95 6.50 Frankie goes H'wood 9.95 7.15 Sold a Million 2 9.95 7.15 PSI-5 Trading 9.95 7.15 Zoids 8.95 6.40 Starstrike 2 7.95 5.65 Game Maker (disc) 19.95 14.60 Sky Fox 9.95 7.35 All US Gold 5.80 All US Gold 9.95 7.25 Rock 'n' Wrestle 9.95 6.40 Spin Dizzy 9.99 7.15 All Activision 9.99 7.30 All Ultimate 9.95 7.35 Rock 'n' Wrestle 8.95 6.40 All Ariolasoft 9.95 7.25 Sweevo's World 7.95 6.55 Sky Fox 8.95 6.40 All Beyond 9.95 7.25 Sold a Million 1&2 9.95 7.35 Movie 7.95 5.30 Alter Ego (disc) 24.99 19.99 Batman 8.95 6.45 Green Beret 7.95 5.65 All Level 9 9.95 7.50 All Level 9 9.95 7.99 Sweevo's World 7.95 5.65 Freeze Frame 2 39.95 35.50 All US Gold 9.95 7.99 Leg'd Amazon W'men 7.95 5.65 Biggles 9.95 7.20 Red Hawk 8.95 6.45 Crash Smashes 9.95 7.25 Spin Dizzy 9.99 7.20 All Adventure Int 9.95 7.99 Please state name, address, title & micro clearly with order Mail order only. P&P included. Overseas add 75p per tape Make cheques payable to Discount Software. All new & old titles in stock, ring for details DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, 120 LORD STREET, HODDESDON, HERTS., EN11 8NP. TELEPHONE (0992) 441524 "


"C+VG AUG Software REVIEWS Value Playability WHITE VIPER oo BRUCE O Machine: Spectrum 48K Supplier: Firebird Price: .99 lady of your dreams away. Being put in a less-than cheery mood at such events, you vow to get her back, and revenge on whatever it was that took her. Before you can go about this task, you'll have to find transport. That is the second part of the game. You are in a field with a horse. You'll have to work out how to trap him. After this you progress to various other stages, involving collecting pieces of armour etc. It's all pretty dreadful. Graphics Sound Machine: Commodore 64 As he progresses through the many levels and secret chambers of the fortress, the going gets really rough — there are electrical charges, exploding bushes, and finally the awesome powers of the Y wizard himself. Apart from moving left, right, up and down, jumping and ducking, he has only two moves with which to defend himself, a chop and a kick. A paltry Machine: BBC armoury for a master like Bruce, Supplier: US Gold you would think, but it's enough to make the Green Yamo stop Price: .95 and think. It's finally available on the BBC. The graphics are colourful, if Bruce Lee is a lively rather crude, but don't let that up-and-at-'em martial arts put you off, even if the price adventure which has our Bruce does. Bruce Lee neatly kicking and chopping his way combines arcade action with through a perilous fortress in martial arts in a very search of infinite wealth and the entertaining package. secret of immortality. He's not left to do so in peace, O Graphics needless to say. The fortress is Sound full of dangers, including the Value dreaded Green Yamo and the fiendish, stick-wielding Ninja. Playability What's this? A budget Fist? No, not quite. But Ninja Master isn't a bad warm up for a session with the real thing. This game, from the Swedish Tron Software team, is a sort of Ninja Supertest. You have to compete in four tests of skill. You begin as a lowly white belt and must qualify in each of the four events or tests before you are awarded another pretty coloured belt to hold your ceremonial trousers up with for the next attempt. Event one is a test of your reactions. You have to fend off flying arrows by kicking and punching at the right time. Each of your three attempts at qualifying is timed and if you don't get the required score it's back to the start of the game again. If you do qualify it's on to the karate chop challenge in which your Ninja has to smash a block of wood which looks big Supplier: Creative Sparks Price: .99 After being more than slightly surprised by the high quality of Snodgits, I was looking forward to having a bash at this game. They are completely different. Snodgits was worth the money. There is some reasonable music to accompany your quest. As the scene opens, you are presented with a colourful, though not particularly artistic, screen. There are two characters walking side by side. It's you and your girlfriend a princess. Suddenly, out of the trees comes a rather revolting black thingy, which proceeds to whisk the 000 BRUCE SAI COMBAT SPY HU Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Mirrorsoft Price: .95 cassette/.95 Disk It looks good and it sounds good -that's Mirrorsoft's Sai Warrior on the Amstrad. Bascially, it's a sort of Way of the Exploding Fist with sticks. And good fun it is. Sai Kararte is a martial art in which the fighters use a Sai Weapon a big pole, in other words. Add to this a variety of karate kicks and you've got the ingredients of a violent punch up. The idea, as with most of the seemingly millions of martial arts games on the market, is to fight your way through eight levels, from white to black belt and then through the eight dan levels until you reach Sai Master. At various stages in the game there are extra hazards to face—such as Ninja stars hurtling by. Points are scored for successfully landed blows. A total of 600 points are needed for a knockdown. Energy levels are shown on the dragon's head on the scoreborad. Three knockdowns are required to progress to the next level. The Sai Warriors are big, bright and very colourful. The sound is quite funny. The supposed whoosh of the Sai weapon through the air sounds a little like a jet engine starting up. Graphics Sound Value Playability Machine: BBC Supplier: US Gold Price: .95 Spy hunter? Smiley would turn in his grave. The hero of this game is a cross between James Bond in Casino Royale and that character in Death Race 2000 whose main aim in life is to run everyone else off the road, as violently as possible. Because that's what Spy Hunter is all about. A van rolls up and disgorges your ultra-equipped turbo-charged spy mobile. You evidently haven't been very subtle in whatever investigations you've been conducting, because all the enemy's master spies are out to get you. With a screech of scorched rubber you're off, controlling your car via joystick or keyboard, choosing your own speed. The road unrolls before you, but careful, it's icy in places. An enemy appears, and must be dodged or obliterated it might be the Road Lord, Switchblade, Barrel Dumper, SA COMBAT 1986 MIRRORSOFT LTD OON sce683330 "


"C+VG AUG Software REVIEWS 6 HELICHOPPER JA MASTER Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Firebird O Price: .99 OF Ovo enough to be a kerbstone. This relevant details along the doesn't really lose anything is just a two key \"decathlon\" bottom of the screen, is good because of the lack of a joystick game. Hammer away to get the too. option. powermeter into the red and Each event is preceeded by Ninja Master is a good value you'll break the block. Not much an intro screen which usefully budget game-but might not of a challenge this. tells you the right controls, be long on lasting appeal after Which is something that which the player can define if he you've wacked through it a few cannot be said about the next or she so wishes at the start of times. test which pits your Ninja — the game. armed with a sword Graphics against This is a keyboard only game the deadly Ninja stars. This is and we experienced some Sound another -tougher reaction difficulty loading with a joystick O Value test. The stars come at you thick interface plugged in. The game Playability and fast and at different levels. Once again you get three timed chances to beat the qualifying score. Manage this one and you find yourself armed with a blowpipe attempting to shoot down cannisters thrown from the right hand side of the screen Japanese duck shoot! The best thing about the game are the sound effects. Horrible screams when your Ninja gets hit, nice oriental cries of triumph when you get something right, and huge cheers from the crowd when you qualify for an event. The graphics are nicely done 485 COE and the screen presentation, NTC hi-scores in a little window on WHITE SUE the right hand side, with other We Airwolf this isn't. But it still involves a super-helicopter on a mission to rescue not scientists or maidens in distress or prisoners of war — but clones. There's a new twist for you. Unfortunately the game is pretty uninspiring even for a budget title. You have to fly your chopper around a cramped screen full of blobby aliens, pick up the clones and land them safely on a series of platforms on the left hand side of the screen. There are four screens to this gameeach with varying difficulty levels more, nastier, quicker aliens. You can bomb the nasties as you dodge about if you really want to. Frills like a joystick option, an instruction screens, comprehensive menu screen and a hi-score table don't stop this efffort registering a high mark on the old boredometer. Save your two quid and put them towards a full price game! Graphics Sound Value Playability WOU ONO Om INTER REBEL PLANET The Enforcer, Doctor Torpedo. On the other hand, it might be a civilian vehicle, so watch that itchy trigger finger ... Your only weapon at the start is a machine gun, but as the game goes on the weapons van (surely with Q at the wheel?) shows up from time to time to equip you with more gadgets, like an oil squirter, a smokescreen, and anti-copter rockets. This happens to the accompaniment of a tune which is based, loosely, on the classic James bond theme. In best Bond tradition, your car can even turn into a hydrofoil, which gives you the chance to confront a whole new set of villains and obstacles on water. It's an amusing variation on the old arcade zap 'em theme, but that's basically all it is. Though, personally, I would buy it for that theme tune alone Graphics Sound  Value  Playability Machine: BBC \"You can't do that\"-type levels, then disembark on to Supplier: US Gold messages. planet Tropos to make your first contact with the underground There are one or two Price: .95 home-made touches which resistance. really shouldn't appear in a Simple enough, you might You are Tarann, last of the Earth commercial product: sentences think — only it wasn't. I never heroes, engaged in one last, occasionally get duplicated, or did get to grips with the desperate attempt to break the words wrap round badly, with tortuous workings of the stranglehold of the loathsome single characters being taken author's mind. I died of Arcadian empire on the galaxy. over on to the next line. On at starvation six times before I Your quest, to destroy the least one occasion the program gave up trying to find the card Arcadian queen computer. Your told me an object was in view, that operated the sustenance weapon, a forbidden laser then proceeded to deny it when machine, and turned to sword. Your opponents, many. I tried to pick it up. chewing the carpet instead.. Your chances, pretty remote That's what I don't like about That's what it's all about, of as far as I can see. Rebel Planet. What I do like course. A good adventure Rebel Planet is a text about Rebel Planet is the should grip, and Rebel Planet is adventure which may not have ingenuity of the puzzles and the certainly gripping. I just wish been Quilled, but it certainly has liveliness of the scenario. You something could be done about that feel, with all the clumsiness start on the flight deck of the the constraints of the of response you get from merchant ship Caydia, framework within which so adventures written according to disguised as a travellng many adventures these days a preset formula. You are merchant. The ship seems to be seem to be written, confronted with \"Sorry, I'm deserted except for domestic confused\" frustratingly often droids which scurry around O Vocabulary when the program doesn't cleaning the place. You must recognize your input, but at explore, pick up what's going, Atmosphere | least there's a fair variety of top up your protein and energy Personal vo00 00 000 "


"SUPA SOFT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE ARCADE INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE The only software house that guarantees games shown in this issue are released BEST DISCOUNTS IN BRITAIN 5.25  8888 SPECTRUM OUR COMM 64/128 RRP OUR AMSTRAD RRP OUR Ghost & Goblins Ghost & Goblins 9.95 6.50 Spin Dizzy 9.95 6.95 Heavy on Magick 6.50 Leaderboard 9.95 6.50 Spin Dizzy (D) 14.95 10.00 Pyracurse 6.00 Leaderboard (D) 14.95 10.00 Kung Fu Master 9.95 6.50 Equinox 6.50 Starquake 8.95 6.00 Kung Fu Master (D) 14.95 10.00 Biggles 6.50 Paperboy 9.95 6.50 Tau Ceti 9.95 6.95 Starstrike 2 5.00 Way of the Tiger 9.95 6.50 Tau Ceti (D) 14.95 10.00 Quazatron 6.00 Nexus 9.95 6.50 Way of the Tiger 9.95 6.95 Sam Fox 5.00 Sabatour 8.95 6.00 Way of Tiger (0) 14.95 10.00 Turbo Esprit 6.00 Green Beret 8.95 6.00 Monopoly 9.95 6.95 Time Trax 6.50 Tau Ceti 9.95 6.50 Monopoly (D) 14.95 10.00 Batman 5.25 Cauldron 2 8.95 6.25 Sabatour 9.95 6.95 Rock & Wrestle 6.00 Silent Service (D) 14.95 10.00 Sabatour (D) 14.95 10.00 Rebel Planet 6.50 Silent Service 9.95 6.50 Elite 14.95 10.00 Pentagram 6.50 PSi 5 Trading 9.95 6.50 Elite (D) 19.95 14.95 Theatre Europe 6.75 Southern Belle 7.95 5.00 Equinox 9.95 6.50 Way of the Tiger 6.50 Acrojet 14.95 10.00 Equinox 14.95 Green Beret 5.00 Boulderdash 3 9.95 6.50 Winter Games Mantronics 5.25 Biggles 9.95 6.50 Winter Games (D) Titanic 6.50 Heavy on Magick 6.50 Batman Price of Magick 6.50 Knight Games 6.50 Shogun Paperboy Mermaid Madness 9.95 6.50 Green Beret Crash Smashes 6.50 Titanic 9.95 6.50 Price of Magick 9.95 6.95 Empire 9.95 6.50 Price of Magick 9.95 6.50 Heavy on Magick 9.95 6.95 Big Cave Advent 7.95 5.25 Sam Fox 8.95 6.00 Shogun (D) 14.95 10.00 Bobby Bearing 7.95 5.00 Fairlight 9.95 6.50 G/Gooch Cricket 9.95 6.50 Cheque and PO (Sterling Only please) Made Payable to: DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, Dept 3, 210 Nicholls Tower, Harlow Essex, Overseas Orders Please Add 75p per Tape. ENGONONOONG GONNGOING &88888888888888888 .95 88888 5.25 .75   61.25 .25 .50 65.75 .25 CUT PRICE SOFTWARE TOM THUMB... S. DAVIS SNOOKER THIS MONTHS NEW THIS MONTHS NEW KUNG FU KID... RELEASES RELEASES WINTER OLYMPICS SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 GHOST & GOBLINS .. SAM FOX... .75 M.S.X. PENTAGRAM.. GREEN BERET HYPERSPORTS III... .95 CAVE ADVENTURE. BIGGLES...... BILLIARDS .95 REBEL PLANET GOLF CONSTRUCTION NIGHTMARE .95 MANTRONICS LASER GENIUS .95  EQUINOX SABOTEUR AMSTRAD (Cass) BOUNCES TAU CETI... GREEN BERET.... GHOST & GOBLINS KUNG FU MASTER WAY OF THE TIGER EQUINOX .... STARSTRIKE II SPINDIZZY WINTER GAMES BALLBLAZER SILENT SERVICE SPINDIZZY BOUNDER.. CAULDRON II .. MOVIE GREEN BERET CORE .25 SAM FOX QUAZATRON NEXUS .25 SHADOW FIRE ROCK & WRESTLE SOUTHERN BELLE .75 BATMAN SPINDIZZY TUBULAR BELLS. .75 GET DEXTER BATMAN LAW OF THE WEST... DOOMSDAY BLUES .25 CYBERUN .25 BOMB JACK .25 MOVIE .75 TOMAHAKW .25 SUPERTEST.. LASER BASIC... .25 GUNFRIGHT. . .25 INDOOR SOCCER LASER COMPILER .25 ELITE... .95 BOMB JACK... BOMB JACK. WAY OF THE TIGER ELITE... .25 .50 COMMANDO .25 HOCUS FOCUS .75 WINTER GAMES .25 AMSTRAD (Disks) CORE. .25 GRAHAM GOOCH .25 GREEN BERET.. .95 HYPERSPORTS .75 SOLD MILLION II .25 WINTER GAMES .95 TOMAHAWK SOLD MILLION .25 MOVIE SAM FOX 48K SCRABBLE BATMAN GRAHAM GOOCH TAU CETI.. .75 SUPERBOWL .25 SAM FOX .. .95 SUPERBOWL .25 RASPUTIN .75 TOMAHAWK WAY OF TIGER HARDBALL. .25 EQUINOX .95 PLANETS... TIME TUNNEL .25 HEAVY ON MAGIK INT KARATE.... .99 ZOIDS .75 RED ARROWS HYPERSPORTS .75 C16/PLUS 4 WAY OF THE TIGER .95 ELITE.... .50 KIKSTART DOOMSDAY BLUES PRICE OF MAGIK .25 RETURN ROCKMAN .99 MUSIC SYSTEM .95 PSI TRADING CO .25 .. .99 MINI OFFICE II.... .95 PING PONG .75 COMMANDO.. WHO DARE WINS II. .. .95 TRADE COUNTER MON-FRI. 9.30-5.00 @ 45% DISCOUNT ON NEW RELEASES All prices shown above are also our shop prices. Give us a visit in East London to receive these discounts plus other savings. C16/+4, Atari, MSX, Electron, also stocked in our shop. Overseas Orders Cheque only sterling: Europe add  per tape, elsewhere add  per tape. Send cheques/postal orders to: ARCADE INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE (C&VG) 202 SHOPPING HALL, MYTRLE ROAD, EAST HAM, LONDON E6 Please do not send off for games not shown in our Ad. They may not have been released. We only advertise games that are in stock. .25 .95 47.25 .75 $7.25 .95 8.95 VOROWL .75 5.50 VRBOWL .95 $10.95 Wide 10.95 27.25 2828 .95 ..7.95 5.50 .95 .99 con 9.95 7.95 SPECTRUM RRP OUR COMM 64/128 Cass Disk AMSTRAD Disk Quazatrone. 6.25 Ghost & Goblins....... 6.95 10.95 Kung Fu Master 10.95 Batman 7.95 Leaderboard..... ..6.95 10.95 Nick Faldo Golf.. NA Theatre Europe .... 9.95 7.25 .6.50 NA Biggles 10.95 Elite.... ....... 14.95 11.00 Graphic Ad Cr........ 17.95 22.95 Monopoly. Ghosts & Goblins.. .7.95 5.50 Game Maker... .. 11.95 14.95 Scrabble 10.95 Dynamite Dan 2.. Boulderdash 3.. ..6.95 10.95 Equinox 10.00 Paperboy 7.95 5.95 Knight Games... ... 6.50 9.95 Spin Dizzy 10.00 The Planets 9.95 7.00 Solo Flight + 10.95 15.95 Transact Equinox 9.95 7.25 Paperboy 7.00 10.95 Invosat NA Pyracurse...... 8.95 6.50 Heavy on Magic .7.00 N/A Sold A Million 2 6.95 10.00 Mantronics 7.95 5.50 Price of Magick.. ..7.00 NA Robin Of Wood 6.95 10.95 Price of Magick... 7.00 Acrojet 10.95 15.95 G/Gooch Cricket 6.95 10.00 Bobby Bearing .... 5.50 Silent Service... 6.95 10.95 Glass 6.50 9.95 Ping Pong... 7.95 5.40 Tau Ceti.... 6.95 10.95 Paperboy 6.95 N/A Turbo Esprit... ..8.95 6.50 Green Beret..... .6.50 9.95 Tau Ceti 6.95 10.00 Bomb Jack 7.95 5.50 Hes Games ...... 2.50 5.00 Price of Magick N/A Heavy on Magic. 9.95 7.00 Nexus .. .6.95 N/A Winter Games... .7.25 10.95 Starstrike 2. 7.95 5.00 Shogun 6.96 9.95 Elite.. 11.00 15.95 Scooby doo ..7.95 5.50 Freeze Frame 2 cart. ... 35,95 Way Of The Tiger .7.25 10.95 Way Of The Tiger ......9.95 7.25 Way Of The Tiger ...... 9.95 7.25 Nodes Of Yesod. .6.95 10.95 Bounces 9.95 7.00 Sam Fox Strip..........8.95 6.25 Heavy on Magic........9.95 7.00 Amstrad Blank Disks .95 per 10. This is just a small collection from our stock. Please ring for more details. Mail order prices only. P&P included. Overseas orders please add 75p per tape. Make cheques payable to: C.P.S Visa/Access orders welcome by phone. CUT PRICE SOFTWARE Unit 6, Stort House, ACCESS Riverway, Harlow, Essex CM20 2DW VISA Tel: (0279) 24433 (24 hour ansaphone) or 31956 During Office Hours SALE O GRAND SALES GRA COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE SPECTRUM SOFTWARE EUREKA .50 EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE .00 PHYSICS 'O' & 'A' LEVEL, CHEMISTRY '0' LEVEL, MATHS 'O' LEVEL, BIOLOGY O' LEVEL .95 or .00 each LONGMAN SOFTWARE 6-10 YEARS SUM SCRUNCHER, ROBOT RUNNER, WILD WORDS, ABC LIFT-OFF .95 GRIFFIN SOFTWARE PACK 6 YEARS UPWARDS WORD SPELL, FAIR SHARE, WORD GAMES .95 GRIFFIN SOFTWARE FOR 5 YEARS UPWARDS TABLESUMS, NUMBERFUN, GET SET .95 .95 GAMES PACKS LAZY JONES .50 SPELLUNKER .95 SPACE PILOT II .50 JONAH BARRINGTONS SQUASH .50 GROGS REVENGE .95 GRIBBLEYS DAY OUT .95 ROLANDS RAT RACE .95 DUMMY RUN .95 IMHOTEP .50 BLACKWYTCH .50 GILLIGANS GOLD .95 ANDROID 11 .95 CHINESE JUGGLER .95 CAVELON .95 SPIRIT OF STONES (CASS) .95 SPIRIT OF STONES (DISC.) .95 B.J. BEARS GET READY TO READ .95 B.J. BEARS GET READY FOR NUMBERS .95 WHO DARES WINS II .95 HIGH NOON .50 SABRE WULF .50 BLOCKBUSTERS .95 TALLEDEGA .95 UNDERWORLD .50 MOON CRESTA .95 MANIC MINER .95 JET SET WILLY .95 COMMODORE MODEMS .95 CHUCKIE EGG .95 FRAK .95 SCARABAUS .95 ARC OF YESOD .95 FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD .95 BLAGGER GOES TO HOLLYWOOD .95 B.C.'s QUEST FOR TIRES .95 INTERNATIONAL SOCCER .95 TOUCH TYPE BY COMMODORE .95 MASTERMIND BY LEISURE GENIUS .50 SHEEP IN SPACE .50 ANCIPITAL .50 ADVANCE OF MEGA CAMELS .50 WIZARD OF WOR .95 PROGRAMMERS REF. GUIDES .95 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT .50 INTRO TO BASIC PT. I .95 INTRO TO BASIC PT. II .95 INTRO TO BASIC PT. I DISC .95 EASY FILE DISC .95 LOGO DISC MUSIC STUDIO BY ACTIVISION .95 ZORK I DISC .95 ZORK II DISC .95 ZORK III DISC STARCROSS DISC .95 DEADLINE DISC .95 SUSPENDED .95 EASY SPELL DISC .95 FUTURE FINANCE .95 TONY HARTS ART MASTER .95 COMMODORE 64 PACKS BMX NUMBER JUMP, 3D HYPER MATHS WORD WOBBLER .95 O HENRYS HOUSE VOL. I HENRYS HOUSE, JACKBOOT JACK, NEPTUNES DAUGHTER, STRANDED .95 HENRYS HOUSE VOL. 11 HENRYS HOUSE, WITCH SWITCH SOLDIER OF FORTUNE, LEGEND OF THE KNOCKER-HOLE .95 O COLLINS SOFTWARE PACK 4-11 YEARS WHATS THE TIME, KNOW YOUR TABLES, FIRST NUMBERS .95 O COLLINS PADDINGTON PACK INC. PADDINGTONS EARLY VISIT, PADDINGTONS GARDEN GAME, PADDINGTON AND THE DISAPPEARING INK .95 HILL McGIBBON PACK INC. SPECIAL AGENT, CAR JOURNEY, BALLOONING .95 IMAGINE PACK INC. ARCADIA, PEDRO, COSMIC CRUISER, BC BILL, INVADERS, 3D JUMPIN JACK .95 CHUCKIE EGG 11 WIZARD'S LAIR HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER WHEELIE QUICKSILVA WORD PROC M/CODER 11 CODENAME MAT II GREMLINS TASWORD 11 MOON CRESTA ROBIN OF SHERWOOD THE ILLUSTRATOR SKOOLDAZE DECATHLON SABRE WULF DEVS EX MACHINA UNDERWORLD GIFT FROM THE GODS JET SET WILLY SELECT 1 (12 GAMES) PAC-MAN (ATARISOFT) ROLANDS RAT RACE TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY HEATHROW A.T.C. ROBIN OF SHERLOCK VIEW TO KILL TECHNICIAN TED AD ASTRA TIR NA NOG VALHALLA BLOCKBUSTERS .95 .95 .95 .95 .50 .50 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .50 .50 .95 .50 .50 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .50 .95 .95 .50 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 ON THE OCHE, DERBY DAY, ST. ANDREWS GOLF, WORLD CUP FOOTBALL SNOOKER, OLYMPICS .00 SOFTWARE PACK 8 TITLES INC. ZIGGAURAT, FREEX, MOONLIGHTER, LOONY LANDER, FLIP FLAP, SHUTTLE SHOLK, SUPER CHOPPER, FRED'S FAN FACTORY .95 or .00 each p&p 75p all orders Overseas 75p per tape  2 50 per pack 500 per peripherals 24 hour ordering on (0733) 313870 T.L.L. BEACH HEAD SUBTERRANEAN STRYKER SCRABBLE ASTROCLONE KNOCKOUT MATCH FISHING TAU CETI LOGIC SALES LTD 6 Midgate  Peterborough Cambs  PE1 1TN "


"C+VG AUG Software REVIEWS O ACTION REFLEX Machine: Spectrum 48K Supplier: Mirrorsoft Price: .95 Good grief. We've had pre-production copies. We've had preview copies, we've even had botched-up demo copies. This, however, is a first. It's a penultimate version of Action Reflex. Why companies won't just admit that the ruddy product isn't ready is beyond me! Hurumph!! Having got that off my chest, I can get on with the important issue; what the game is actually like. It's been written by C. F. Urghart. Name rings a bell, doesn't it? Unfortunately, there's nothing that I could find which makes this game stand out from the run-of-the-mill offerings which flood the C+VG offices. The \"aim\" of the game is exploration. It's nicely presented, with very colourfull graphics and reasonable sound, You take control of \"bounce\", a sphere. Hardly the most charismatic character. Still, he's certainly got some energy; rushing around the screen like nobody's business. You control him simply by pushing the joystick left and right, and pressing fire to make him bounce. (Keyboard control is included as well). It's humiliatingly frustrating. The C+VG swear-box was filled to overflowing after only a few seconds play. Mirrorsoft says that they will be making some alterations, which may affect game play\". With any luck, it will make the thing slightly more easy. As it stands, the game is just too tough. Your progress through the various screens is hampered by an assortment of nasties-some stationary, others mobile, There are a number of traps. Crossing a suspect pad in the floor may well result in you being sprung into the air. If there is a magnet above the pad, you're in serious trouble as a dart will fly across the screen and effectively burst your ball, while you are hanging helplessly from the magnet. Water troughs and plain-old holes provide more bail-breaking problems. You can take some transport short-cuts too. Chutes and tubes will whizz you from place to place. The main problem with the program is that bounce is so bloody hard to control! Once he's started his frenetic bouncing routine it's nigh-on impossible to stop him from careering into something deadly. That's just about it. Nothing particularly special Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Melbourne House Price: .95 There's not a lot you can say after suffering two \"atomicdrops'', a \"piledriver\" and \"turnbuckle fly' at the hands of a bunch of unsavoury characters with the names of Flying Eagle, Vicious Vivian and Molotov Mick Yes, Amstrad freaks, it's your turn for a bour of grappling, with Rock 'n' Wrestle. There are a total of 25 moves, which says Melbourne House are all easily controllable with a joystick. This is open to doubt. The colours are very bright but the animated figures tend to be very chunky. Rock 'n Wrestle is okay, but it's nowhere near The Way of the Exploding Fist in the fun stakes. O Graphics Sound Value Playability Graphics Sound Value Playability AUTO CORE www.OP ROCK 'N' WRESTLE Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Mastertronic Price: .99 Bite the bullet and fork out .99 for Kane . You probably won't regret it. The game, in which you play the part of the sheriff trying to make peace with the indians, is in several parts. in the first part you must eam peace tokens by shooting down birds with a bow and arrow. Each token gives an extra lite. Stage two involves a gallop across the desert, jumping bushes and racks until you reach the town of Kante. The third stage is set in the town. The sheriff is ambushed and must shoot the sneaky citizens as they pop out of doors, windows and side streets. Kane was good fun on the Commodore and is equally fun on the Amstrad. We like it. Honest, njun Graphics Sound Value 8 Playability Machine: Amstrad/C64 Supplier: A'n'F loc:01:09 B Price: .95 Cor, it's Core! Yes, well. Here comes Core, a new type of ARE YOU TRYITIG TO GET BILLED?+ arcade adventure. This one incorporates icons (new?) and has some rather nice graphics. The graphics are sort of Nodes of Yesod type although there isn't that much colour in them and they are fairly fast. Anyway back to the plot. You, as Andrew Angello, a weird type of astronaut, have received a message from your HQ to go and find out who or what is wiping out your asteroid colonies. On arrival, you find that all personnel are dead, some 720 does that mean? Then, if you then you can get into the game of them! Your only hope is to are unfortunate enough to get providing you're not too collect and reassemble the hit again, the game tries to worn out after all that lot. biological memory cells that accuse you of getting killed Without doubt, Core is a good were left on the asteriod to deliberately!! To top it all off, idea, but the game doesn't hold create the colony's memory, when you die it says \"Mission your interest that much due to and find out why they died. aborted, due to death!\" Pretty the method of control. This all sounds simple, obvious really. It says on the box that this doesn't it? Well it's not. First of All the screens seem to be the game will require \"speed, skill all you discover that the icons same with doors and aliens and and brains.\" Yes it does need are very hard to use if you are things on the floor, just these, but it also requires playing with a joystick. You occasionally it may be a A-level maths to figure out the have to do all sorts of strange different colour. Still, once you icons! moves just to drop something have mastered the icons, got Graphics that you have picked up. used to dodging all the aliens, Sound When you get hit by an alien, and have played the game so O Value you get the message \"Oh, That many times the stupid Value smarts\". Oh, that smarts? What messages don't bother you, Playability UA "


"C+VG AUG Software REVIEWS 8 TAU CETI EVOU OS UD UNCH Machine: C64 reactor in Centralis that fueled Supplier: CRL the planet in order to shut down Price: .95 (tape) the malfunctioning defence TABGETTED systems. .95 (disc) The defenders come in the TRACKED There's no excuse for any shape of flying saucer craft computer gamer being without called Hunters of varying this classic strategic shoot 'em MIS : 1 firepower and vulnerability. up now the 64 version is out on There are also things called FLRF:8 the streets. spheres like the Rovers in Pete Cooke's original game The Prisoner TV series. All are Height: has been translated to the 64 by MMer extremely unfriendly and docked with Shield :--Corp Lander Fuel one John Twiddy -and he's potentially lethal. Laser : done a brilliant job! On loading you see a view of sile Launched Speed: Tau Ceti, one of our G-type the skimmer's instrument stars colonised by Earthlings in panel. The screen is divided into the year 2050, has been three areas. The large window modes, flight mode and ground to city. The map shows you decimated by a vicious plague on the left is your viewscreen, mode. In flight mode control of these routes. Moving a cursor called Encke's Syndrome. The below that is a long blue area. the program is via single keys over the name of the city and few remaining colonists have This is your contact with the or a joystick hitting the fire button enables fled. Skimmer's powerful computer. In ground mode you are in you to get a readout of the city's When a cure is discovered, At the right of the screen is an direct communication with the status. the decision is taken to information screen which skimmer's computer via the Unlike the Amstrad and recolonize Tau Ceti. The first includes a compass and computer window. You see the Spectrum versions the 64 game expedition, however, finds a real-time clock along with a message \"TYPE HELP OR has a few graphic frills-like malfunctioning defence system, message showing the direction SOME OTHER COMMAND\" in different buildings, flashing different buildings, flashing damaged by a huge meteor and of the view selected, the city the computer window. \"lights\" and solid looking is destroyed. you are in and the ship's flight Type HELP and the structures. You volunteer to go alone in status. Below that is the scanner commands you can use are Tau Ceti is simply brilliant in an armed ground skimmer to which gives a plan view of your listed. all its incarnations buy it! return the defence system to surroundings, some smaller The MAP command enables normal operation. Your task is windows give other info. you to see where you are and Graphics to search the devasted cities of One shows, speed, shield where you can travel to. Each Sounds C+VG Tau Ceti and collect the energy, fuel remaining, laser city is connected by a series of Value necessary hardware to shut HIT! temperature and height. \"jump pads\" which enable you down the massive fusion The Skimmer operates in two to take your Skimmer from city Playability OOOO Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: US Gold O Price: .95 From the steamy jungles of Birmingham comes the Legend of the Amazon Women. Or the Leg-End of the Amazon Women as it is affectionately known. First the \"plot\". Lady Wilde and her daughter are the only survivors of a plane which has crashed in the Amazon jungle. But, on regaining consciousness, Lady Wilde finds her daughter has disappeared. Bravely she sets out to rescue her child who has fallen into the clutches of the Amazon women. Against a scrolling jungle background there are ten zones Lady Wilde plods on SOGON with her club, duffing up the Amazons or, depending on your skill, getting duffed up. Points are scored for hitting and defeating your opponents, dodging arrows etc. Weapons available to the fighters at various stages of the game include clubs, swords and axes. One intriguing thing is that Lady Wilde looks exactly the same as the Amazons except for a different coloured dress and lighter skin. The combat action is extremly slow and the game becomes somewhat tedious very quickly. O Graphics Sound Value Playability Level:01 BONUS: 001500 SCORE: 1 1 1 OOO Machine: Spectrum fragmented picture. Well, this is 48k the basis for the game. You pull Supplier: Domark the pieces of pictures from the top left hand corner of the Price: .95 screen, and shuffle them In my opinion, Split Personalities is absolutely Movement is a bit tricky, topping! It's fast, furious and because everything moves so extremely enjoyable. fast, it's tough to get to grips The basic idea, as Domark with the cursor. says, is very simple. Remember Split Personalities is great. the strange little hand-held puzzles which preceeded Graphics Rubik's cube? Yes? You know, Sound C+VG where you had to slide tiny Value plastics blocks left, right, up and HIT! down in order to make up a Playability FOTO OO WAAROM O O O "


"C+VG AUG Software REVIEWS O DISK 50 C » » But, when all is said and done, .95 for 50 games is extremely good value. There's no real point in marking every game individually so the following marks apply to the overall package. Value 9 Playability 7 TLETS. 000000000 SECURITY CHECK S29 LUER Alle Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Cascade Price: .95 The trouble with releasing vast amounts of games for a relatively cheap sum of money is that everybody thinks they must be a load of rubbish. So what do you make of 50 games on an Amstrad disk for just .95? Well, the truth is that most of these games are not exactly gems. It's doubtful if any of them would ever see the light of day individually. However, when they are all lumped together in one package, they don't seem too bad. Cascade has done the sensible thing and highlighted what it believes to be the best games in the collection. These include Backgammon ,3D Maze and 3 Card Brag. Perhaps the best is Nemesis IV, a counter and board game. The basic aim is to fill up most of the squares with your counter 'rather than your opponent'. It's simple, straightforward and quite good fun to play. 88888 Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Ocean Price: .95 cassette/.95 disk If you don't like code cracking then V, based on the sci-fi television series, could prove more than a little infuriating to you. The earth has been invaded by a race who call themselves \"The Visitors'', a pretty bland name for lizard-like aliens who disguise their revolting reptilian features behind a false human skin. Their eating habits also leave much to be desired. They think nothing of a tasty rodent for starters and human flesh for the main meal. What they like for pudding, goodness only knows. Resistance to the aliens is led by Michael Donavan, the part you play. To defeat the Visitors, he must place explosives in five strategic areas of the ship — and blow it up. Two thirds of the screen is taken up with side views of the space ship. The bottom third is filled by the Communiputer, divided into three windows, displaying various information. Vis fairly entertaining, but it's a pity it wasn't easier to get into. Graphics Sound  Value Playability OOOO NEXUS character arriving through an underground river at the baddies' HQ on a jet ski. After you leave the shore, and progress in-land, you will be greeted by a friendly character called Tony. He will help you to get started Game-play is rather similar to Impossible Mission. You control an animated character which runs left and right across the screen He can also enter Machine Commodore obvious objective is to rescue 64/128 your friend. Of course, any hack worth his salt would realise that Supplier Nexus there is the possibility of a very Price  95 good story in such events. This Coo' This looks like a rather is your second task-to report in k ige The snoozey old all the information you discover d it Overs that we have to your editor, back at the Denuntored to over the newspaper. Now, the story yea Weleveunuch to look would be Pulitzer Prize winning went they? Well Nexus have material if you could actually taken a differeni approach crack the drugs-ring too.... Instead of the normal style box The opening scene is of your Outhose hom ble video cases they vehad a re design The tap incomes in a rigid piast container which looks very set and module like Hang tadily broken the box DDDD ned the tape onto the Gidd wa ted And wated. in Commodore loading has been famous for its speed and even with turbo 1080 this game seeins to tuke afrightfully long time to Toad tventually finished and the screen flickered if not exactly burst into life In Nexus you take the role of a newspaper reporter, whose friend has been kidnapped by a tiendish diug baron and whisked away to his hideout in Columbia South America Your doorways by pushing the joystick up If you make this move when a door isn't in sight, you will be taken to a menu of options, regarding greeting people, taking a photo of important locations for your story, launching into unarmed combat, or using the stun gun or hand grenade. The selection of these options is quite clever. Instead of having to cycle through the options. you can move the joystick to a particular position to select for example moving the joystick in one direction would make you take a photo and moving it another way brings the a stun gun into action. It's okay if you have a good joystick but easy to make a mistake it your stick is a bit battered Game play isn't particularly fast The graphics are a little flickery. There's nothing really wrong with the game though and it is fun to play, as well as being challenging. There's music, too But it's ghastly Graphics Sound Value Playability 13.1:. : :.K.: "


"MISSION A.D. USA No. 321-54-CIN COMPLITER GRAPHICS LTD. SALES 01-379 6755 01-240 9334 INTERNATIONAL 44-1-379 6755 COMMODORE 64/128 "


"Software REVIEWS 10 to fire up my jetpac and head on up, but I couldn't'!! Even though I had a mighty jetpac strapped onto my back, couldn't fly straight up. How stupid can you get? I quickly discoverd that you could only move left and right when in the air, and that you still had to climb up stupid little ladders to get to the next platform. And then as if that wasn't bad enough, I found ! had a limited supply of fuel for my jetpac. After collecting the three silver keys, which was quite easy, you progress onto the next screen, supposedly harder, which looks much the same, just more nasty things. In the end I cleared so many sheets just gave up. Runner is too simple by half for a computer game. Even noughts and crosses has got some challenge to it. Even though this game is only .99 feel you are still being robbed, take a look at other budget games and you'll see why. O Graphics  Sound O Value Playability  Machine: C16 Supplier: Mastertronic Price: .99 Do you remember an old electron advert were it shows mum and dad playing a strange sort of 'dig-a-hole-and-smasha-monster-over-the-head' type of game? You do? Well then you'll recognise this game. In case you don't, this game features little red monsters which look like tomatoes chasing your poor man all about the screen on various levels. To avoid these nasty types, you must run up and down ladders and dig holes for them to fall into. Once they have \"fallen' for it you must bash their tiny brains out with your shovel until they drop through the ground and splat on the next level. Quite amusing. Don't let the cuteness of the monsters and the thought that you have to bash them stop you though. These creatures will munch on your bones, so to speak. When you have killed all the monsters on one level you go on to the next one which is harder. To make life difficult you also have a air limit and when it runs out you croak, so you must clear screens quite quickly. On later levels, the monsters will vary in colour, getting nastier and you must dig holes, on various platforms in a straight line so when the monster falls, it will go through about three holes before snuffing it. This gives lots of nice points. This game was good on the Electron all those centuries ago and C16 owners may think it's a bit dated, but the challenge is still there. Go on, bash a monster today! Graphics Sound  Value Playability NAA 007 1 +919 +919+919 +919 +919 +919 +918 BABY BERKS Machine: C16/+4 Supplier: Alpha Price: .99 Once upon a time, Commodore User published a machine code listing of a game for the C16 Now it's on tape, so those lazy people who wouldn't type it in can play it too. As you may have guessed, this listing was called Baby Berks, and it's quite good. All you have to do is avoid the berks and shoot at their little babies. Nasty, eh? No, because when they grow into big berks, they are mean and nasty so you must exterminate them quickly. You control a sort of 'X' shaped tank which can blast at an incredible rate, but the bullets only affect babies, not big berks. There are sixteen different levels but they look all the same to me. Game play is fairly slow and it's quite annoying when you run into a baby that has been shot — because they take a hell of a time to die!! Baby Berks is fun to play, but! don't know how long it will hold you. O Graphics Sound Value Playability THE RETURN OF ROCKMAN Machine: C16 Supplier: Mastertronic Price: .99 Quick everybody, Rockman's back. Hurrah!!! Wait a minute, who the hell is Rockman? Well, he is a little character who looks slightly like Rockford, of Boulder Dash. Yes, Rockman looks like Rockford, and the game looks like Boulder Dash. Now for those who are not familiar with the scenario and why not here is a quick rundown. You, as Rockman, must complete each level of the game, collecting precious jewels. You must quickly plan the safest route to collect them and lead you to the exit. It all sounds too easy but there are other things to contend with such as falling rocks, holes, bows and radioactive waste. On the whole this game is too much like Boulder Dash. It tries to copy it and falls flat on its face, after all Rockman's not nearly as cute as old Rockford. Graphics Sound Value Playability SHARK Machine: C16  Supplier: Firebird Price: .99 Another new entry to the silver range lands on my desk, and see this time the famous motto on the back reads \"Grab your harpoon and rid the seven seas of the man-eating sharks.\" Looking at the back of the packaging, I thought this game looked like the old arcade great Sea Wolf. But I was definitely mistaken on loading the game. This game looks set to make C16 owners fall straight to sleep. Yes, it's really boring and is a disgrace to the computer games market. Even though hate this game I'll tell you what to do in it. Basically, you must shoot the shark. Surprise, surprise, and that's it, on to the next screen. The only difficulty being you have to shoot it on the cross which is amazingly tattooed on the shark's belly. When you complete a level your diver will swim up to collect his/her air bonus and you will start all over again. When I walked into the computer lab, and I saw someone reviewing a game called Runner, I thought this game couldn't be worse, I was wrong... Graphics Sound Value Playability e C16+-C16+616-+-C16+C16+-C16+-C16+C16+ NAU RUNNER Machine: C16 Suppler: Firebird Price: .99 Fire up your jetpac, and head for the silver keys says this new entry into the Firebird silver range. Come to think of it, the bloke in this game does look rather familiar. Runner is a new title, but it's a pretty old game. It's a platform game with the same boring routine, they collect objects. Keys in this case. But of course your task is hassled by the enemy a weird lumpy thing just to make it interesting... On the first screen, I decided   N "


"M.U.D in .U.D. has been described as the to safety, I lay on the steps for disperse my fears and stepped several minutes, realising that into the gloom. Of course it greatest adventure in the world. each breath I drew may be my was too dark to see anything. Here, C+VG's reluctant hero, JIM last. Darkness is a fact of life in DOUGLAS, explains what goes on, and why Using a handy trick I picked MUD, but you will soon learn the game holds such long-lasting appeal for up earlier in the day, I checked that only the toughest -or its devotees. who was nearby. From what most foolhardy players will could make out, Zia the walk carelessly down poorly lit I regained consciousness and the tea-room. I was lying on a Necromancer was responsible. corridors. As the saying goes: my eyes grew accustomed to badly paved road, which lead \"Some day, my friend...\" deaths lurk around every the light. A brief look at my from east to west. At my feet thought. Then, suddenly, corner. surroundings showed that I lay a few shillings and a penny. regained both the use of my Further exploration of the was in an Elizabethan Having collected these, I shook vocal chords, and my limbs. rolling hills and pastureland led tea-room, \"watching the world my nauseous head, and started Whether I had been patched me to a clifftop, looking go by\" and staring at a cup of to explore. up by the repentant Zia, or the downward onto the raging tea. Eager to get on with the Time passed, and the shape spell had worn off is still a white water. By this time I had business in hand — killing of the Admiral Bombow Inn mystery. managed to collect a stick. It things I looked for an exit, loomed in the distance. Shortly, I left the inn, and was may sound silly now, but at the and tried it. No luck. A feeling larrived, and made a rather relieved to see the daylight time I was honestly excited to of dread swept over me, ungainly entrance. The inn was again. Some distance to the find something new. Some preventing my escape. After long abandoned, and a thick south was a small cottage, set investigation of the sipping the tea and watching layer of dust covered most of on a flat concrete patch. surrounding area revealed a the world go by a little longer, the room. There appeared little Situated near the graveyard, cave entrance. I walked in. my fears seemed to subside, here that had not already been the cottage belonged to the I was standing in a huge and I was allowed out, into the looted or wrecked by the gravedigger. I suspect he had cavern. The roof was so high it world. countless other travellers who long since joined the ranks of made my head spin. The walls There followed a rather had made their way through his previous customers in their were slashed with veins of uncomfortable sensation of the deserted watering-hole in eerie resting place. sparkling gemstones, making being blinded and thrown search of sustenance. Moving The graveyard bore a the scene almost surreal. On upside down, before I found through the creaking wooden number of unmarked tombs. the floor lay a burning myself iying on the ground timbers, I headed up a flight of One, however, was of fire-brand; distincta such are the disadvantages of spiral steps. particular interest \"Richard only from magical transport. Immediately, a vacuum-like the Wizard». Richard Bartle is a No sign sensation enveloped my body, very famous man in MUD of and I was told circles. Inside the the object I was holding by its warmth. The centrepiece of the location was a touchstone which illuminated the otherwise shadowy cave. The cottage there stone obviously held immense were signs that the owner had power, and seemed unwilling led a comfortable life. It was to be moved, broken, stolen or that I had been well fitted, with kitchen, lounge attacked. struck dumb. and study. The lounge was Having stood for some More magic. A fitted in some comfort. moments, transfixed by the high-ranking Exploration of an enchanted surroundings, I left and player was using bookcase found in the study progressed downward onto me for target practice! proved fruitless. Moving to the the hills. A few minutes later Helpless, I fumbled around, hut next to the cottage was was in a valley. Moving east, I looking for means of more interesting. A cursory was shaken back into reality; protection. Useless. The second examination of the exits \"Reset in progress. Exitting ...\" spell rendered me crippled. revealed a shaft leading down Another day's excursion into Unable to cry for help or move into the earth. I tried to MUD had ended. This time, it "


"your eye talk with your fellow gamers. A feature which has still to, be implemented, is the existence of \"mobiles». These are computergenerated creatures which pretend to be human players. Personally, found it quite difficult was a bug, or a \"hazard\" as Unfortunately, I'm not quite Muddies call them. Usually, sure where Sleet is these days. though, you will leave the The last time I saw him, the system by your own will. rather sad message \"Sleet the Occasionally you get killed. Warrior has passed away\" When I played, there didn't appeared on the screen. A lot seem much in the way of of time in the game is spent straightforward puzzles. It's wandering around, apparently possible to wander around for aimlessly; going from place to quite a while without place. In fact, this is part of the encountering anything at all. essential learning process That's why I was so please to through which all players must find an object when I did. pass if they hope to get There is only one stick, one anywhere near the ranking of shilling, one fire-brand etc, and Wizard in the world of MUD. in the early stages of the game, many players will rush around to the spots where they know about certain items lie, collecting M.U.D. stands for Multi them as they go. This makes User Dungeon. things a little tricky for You play beginners, who are from bewildered by the lack of landmarks! and first batch of time credits, dealing with real people. you receive a plastic Conversation is the most folder/wallet containing a entertaining part of the game. map, some instructions, your There are three ways to get password an ID card, and a your message to another booklet. player. You can either shout The starter pack costs  (not particularly private, and and you receive 30 credits of rather irritating for other playing time. When playing, players), talk to your friend, or credits are used at the rate of use telepathy — the most ten per hour. 30 credits would secure method. give you three hours playing There are a number of time. After your initial supply problems with the program at runs out, you can buy new the time of writing. The time credits at the following rate: taken for the game to reply Credits Cost in  varies a great deal. Sometimes 50 10 the system will \"lock-up\" too. 100 20 According to the instructions, 200 the players accept these as 300 50 minor hazards. I find this a little 750 100 hard to believe, but the system 1500 150 seems more polished than a For information and number of cassette games. credit-card ordering, call the MUDline on 608 1173. What you With more games of this sort need what you appearing, even as you read this article, MUD is going get through continual changes, To play MUD, you will need a developments and computer with modem, and progressions. BT are constantly some scrolling software. The looking for ways to make the software can be downloaded game more enjoyable for the from Prestel without too much players. After all, they are bother. When you buy your ID paying for the privilege. home, on your computer. At the start of a session, players dial up BT's computer and From enter their password. From time to time then on, they assume the role during play, l of their \"persona\", an found the interpreter alter-ego. After logging on, extremely tiresome. It seemed news and information about impossible to examine any developments and the state of objects, and the SAVE routine play appear. Following this is was most confusing; you are the main menu, where you can told — on entering this choose to enter the game, command that the program check your account, or the does this automatically. mailbox and similar features. Personally, I found this baffling; The aim of the game is quite as whenever I logged on, I different from other found myself back in the adventures. MUD operates on Elizabethan tea-room. Still, I'm a kind of castle system, your sure there was a logical aim is to attain the level of explanation ... Wizard. This requires 204,800 I must extend my thanks to points, and is no mean feat. Sleet the Warrior, who helped You could count the number of me incredibly during my points I amassed on one hand; difficult initiation period. He with a couple of fingers showed me around the missing! cottage. He introduced me to As well as the standard the wondrous properties of adventure commands, you can coal, and helped me through follow another character, steal dark and foreboding areas their items, assist them if a fight when I needed help the most. breaks out, check your mail or 35 "


"You're looking to do more with your computer... Epyx. Programmers' BASIC Toolkit Assembly Language Graphics with BASIC Convenience Programmer's Basic Tool Kit Tradi? FEATURES-Fast Graphics: Sprite Animation, Text Windows, and Background Scrolling at Assembly Language Speed. Graphic Sprite and Font Editors: Move, Copy, Paste and Paint Fonts and Sprites. Drawing Tools: Circle, Box, Line, Fill, Scaling, Copying and Clipping. Complete Sound Kit: Volume, Play, Tone, Wave. Applications Utilities: Printer Commands and Graphics Tablet Drivers for Commodore 64 and 128. Program Editor: Find, Replace, Undo, Renumber Plus Error-Handling. Built-in Vorpal Fast Loader. Fully Documented Users' Manual. Available for the Commodore 64/128 Epyx. Vorpal. Vorpal Utility Kit Utility Kit For Commodore 64/128 1541 Head Alignment program that could save you a trip to the repair shop. File recovery routine that finds and recovers files you may have erased by mistake. Super-fast Format, File Back-up and Disc Back-up utilities that let you format and back-up in seconds instead of minutes. Vorpal SavelLoad utilities to let you load programs you've written up to 25 219,92 times faster than normal. Works with the Fast Load Cartridge T from Epyx. Available for the Commodore 64/128 Includes 1541 head alignment program File recovery utility finds and recovers erased files Featuring super fast format and disk backup Creates Vorpal files that load up to 25 times Epyx faster Fast Load Cartridge FOR 64 COMMODORE Fast Load CARTRIDGE With all this new power and uses for your Commodore you don't want to waste time waiting for your programs to load. That's why we developed the Fast LoadTM cartridge. Fast Load transforms your 1541 disk drive from a lumbering hippo to a leaping gazelle. Some programs load up to ten times faster with the Toms Fast Load Cartridge! Available for the Commodore 64 .95 If you want to do more with your computer-make it powerful, make it work, and make if fast-look for the new Epyx software at your local computer retailer. U.S., GOLDI  LOADS DISKS 5 TIMES FASTER  WORKS WITH MOST POPULAR PROGRAMS  EASY TO USE EpxSo are we! Distributed in the U.K. by U.S Gold Limited Unit 2/3 Holford Way Holford Birmingham B6 7AX Epyx Registered Trademark No. 1195270. "


"MANDRAGORE THE MAKING OF A LEGEND France's award winning, role playing epic now available in English BE Available for: Amstrad (Disk and Cassette) CBM 64 (Disk and Cassette) Apple II (Disk) MSX and Spectrum INFOGRAMES thuhe "


"games inside these dens of drunkeness and Alligata has come up with what it calls a \"compendium of pub games for the home computer.\" The games include darts, bar billiards, pontoon and poker, table football, dominoes and skittles. Pub Games is released on the Spectrum, Commodore 64 and Amstrad, price .95, and Commodore disk, .95, and Amstrad disk, .95. THE SOFTWARE CHART ATARI/TOP 10 STEVE B ACE, the combat flight simulator from Cascade Games, is to be marketed in America. Spinnaker Software, of Cambridge, Massachusets, will release the game on its UXB label in September. 1 Last V8/Mastertronic 2 One Man and His Droid/Mastertronic 3 Action Biker/Mastertronic 4 Chimera/Firebird 5 Fighter Pilot/Digital Integration 6 Football Manager/Addictive Games 7 Steve Davis' Snooker/CDS 8 Spy Vs Spy 2/Databyte 9 Yie Ar Kung Fu/Imagine 10 Soul of a Robot/M'tronic 442 442 442 SAPO DAT TEC DAVID 431 AMSTRAD/TOP 10 Paperclip with Spellpack, a comprehensive word processing program, has been released for the Commodore 64 by Ariolasoft, price .95. Paperclip is the word processor part of the package while Spellpack is a computerised dictionary containing more than 15,000 words. A personal dictionary of words to suit specific areas of expertise can be added. 1 Winter Games/Epyx/US Gold 2 Batman/Ocean 3 Commando/Elite 4 The Sold (2)/Hit Squad 5 Get Dexter/PSS 6 Last V8/Mastertronic 7 Tomahawk/Digital Int. 8 Formula One Simulator/Mastertronic 9 Spindizzy/Electric Dreams 10 Into Oblivion/Mastertronic CBM 64/TOP 10 1 2 3 4 15 6 7 8 9 10 Thrust/Firebird International Karate/System 3 World Cup Carnival/US Gold Spindizzy/Electric Dreams Formula One Simulator/Mastertronic Cauldron 2/Palace Biggles/Mirrorsoft Saboteur/Durell Golf Construction Set/Ariolasoft PSI-5 Trading Company/US Gold The Dutch programming team behind Domark's new game Split Personalities is planning to move to Britain next year. Erniesoft-run by brothers Ruud and Ernest Peske want to hit the big time and that means selling games in Britain. The brothers, who teach computer studies at school, have had several games published in the Netherlands but Split Personalities is their first here. In Split Personalities you have to assemble pictures of well known people against the clock. The pieces of the picture are bounced around the screen until the image is complete. Of course, there are many distractions to overcome such as bombs. The characters who appear in the game include Margaret Thatcher, President Reagan, Sir Clive Sinclair and Alan Sugar. SPECTRUM/TOP 10 First it was the game of the book. Now it's the book of the game. The Fourth Protocol, the game based on Frederick Forsyth's bestselling novel, has given rise to another book, The Fourth Protocol playing the game. The game's designers John Lambshead and Gordon Paterson have written a book which explains the philosophy behind the strategy adventure game and provides helpful advice and solutions to the game. The Fourth Protocol — Playing the game is published by Century Communications, price .95. The now infamous Sigue Sigue Sputnik are attempting to break into computer games with as much hype as they brought to promoting their F1-11 (Love Missile) single. Consultant Entrepreneurs are the people creating the Sigue Sigue Sputnick Shoot Em Up games for the Commodore, Amstrad and Spectrum. Consultant Entreprenuers are currently hawking their game around looking for publishers — rumours that Domark are interested are \"totally unfounded\" according to Domark boss Mark Strachan. And our spies tell us that the band themselves don't know about the game. The plot thickens. In any event we've got hold of a document which tells us the games have already been written — and it sounds like they follow the now tried and trusted combat game format. Weapons featured include Chainsaws and a Space Guitar? You'll able to choose personalities and clothes to suit the action and fight people like Julian Rignall?!! C+VG's ex-arcade champion and Zzap 64 writer. If the game is anything like the Spasnicks single there will be a lot of sound and fury signifying nothing. Release date should coincide with the band's new single 21st Century Boy. 1 Batman/Ocean 2 World Cup Carnival/US Gold 3 Knight Tyme/Mastertronic 4 Green Beret/Imagine 5 Rock 'n' Wrestle/Melbourne Hse 16 Heavy on the Magick/Gargoyle Gms 7 Ninja Master/Firebird 8 Incredible Shrinking Fireman/Mastertroni 9 Quazatron/Hewson Consultants 10 Starstrike 2/Realtime BBC/TOP 10 Graham Gooch's Test Cricket is to be released on the Amstrad by Audiogenic. It will cost .95 on cassette and .95 on disk. The Amstrad version is very similar to the earlier game. Audiogenic says the game will be virtually identical to the Commodore 64 version released last year. The names in the England and Australian teams are to be updated. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Commando/Elite Tennis/Bugbyte Winter Olympics/Tynesoft Bruce Lee/US Gold Karate Combat/Superior Jack Attack/Bugbyte Galactic Patrol/Mastertronic Citadel/Superior Comp. Hits 10 Vol 2/Beau Jolly Speech/Superior We're a sober lot at C+VG so Alligata's latest offering, Pub Games, is a mystery to us. Apparently, people actually play COMPILED BY GALLUP "


"cascade CASSETTE SPECIAL FREE WATCH OFFER... cascado THE NATIONAL NEWSPAPER 50 i ssssss MAIL ORDER PROTECTION SCHEME COMPUTER GAMES ON ONE CASSETTE YOURS FOR 20 KEY, MULTIFUNCTION CALCULATOR WATCH .95 with every order for a Cassette 50 including FREE Watch and Postage 3-59 33 TU MATV WITHFA 14 Normal 12 and 24 hour time mode Calendar mode  Calculator mode Alarm mode WORTH OVER  101010 156. 12OOC XO-OROM COMMODORE 64 Only you can save Europe from destruction! It's ROCKET LAUNCH, the thrilling war game that reproduces a European map More ambitious ? Try rescuing your crew under an ultrafast GALACTIC ATTACK and escaping back to your spaceship! Just two of the great games on your Cassette 50, featuring high resolution and user defined graphics, sprites, sound and music 1 Mare Eater 13 Boggles 26 Overtake 3 8 Black Hole 2 Galactic Attack 14 Pontoon 27 Sitting Target 39 Dynamite 3 Space Mission 15 Ski Jump 28 Smash the 40 Do Your Sums 4 Lunar Landing 16 Hangman Window 41 Derby Dash 5 Plasma Bolt 17 Old Bones 29 Space Ship 42 Space Search 6 Startrek 18 Thin Ice 30 Jer Flight 43 Universe 1 Radar Landing 19 Orbitter 31 Phaser 44 Rats 8 Attacker 20 Motorway 9 Galactic Dog Fight21 Force Field 33 Interno 46 Parachute 10 Psion Attack 22 Nim 34 Ghosts 47 Jet Mobile 11 Evasive Action 23 Tunnel Escape 35 Submarines 48 High Rise 12 Noughts 6 24 Barrel Jump 36 Rocket Launch 49 The Force 36 Rocket launch a Crosses 25 Cannonball Battle 37 Planets 50 Exchange ELECTRON Can your FORCE FIELD protect the city from Alien Attack or maybe you have the skill to DYNAMITE the dam and flood enemy headquarters! Fifty different games with high speed, high resolution colour graphics, user defined graphics and excellent sound and music. Not to mention full use of screen modes Fifty fast paced, fascinating games. ORIC ATMOS Have a go at GALACTIC ATTACK You'll need tast reactions to beat the invaders in this all time favourite or if you prefer you can travel through space at warp factor 9 in SPACE MISSION, a realistic 3 D version of space warfare as seen from the cockpit of a spacecraft. Everyone has a favourite game on Cassette 50 With fifty classic and original games featuring user defined graphics, sound effects and increasing levels of play. VIC-20 Will it be BALLOON DODGERS, or the prizewinning DUSTMAN DAN? Play these and 40 other fabulous games including many automatic double loaders on your unexpanded 3.5K VIC 20 And with an 8K or 16K expansion cartridge you can choose from 8 additional games like STARTREK or SKULL CASTLE Special efrects user defined graphics, super sound and music ORIC 1 Cassette 50 includes PLASMA BOLTS, a superb high speed version of the classic arcade Centipede game. Watch out it's really tough! DRAGON 32 If you like the light cycles of TRON, you'll love JETMOBILE a thrilling 2-player game featuring high speed graphics. | APPLE Cassette 50 gives you 50 great games to choose from including a classic STARTREK and BLAZING INFERNO. X31 Even a small computer gets more from Cassette 50! You can run 39 games on just the basic 1K ZX81. while 11 more will play with the addition of a 16K expansion pack. Where else could You watch your radar instruments and judge your final approach in games like RADAR LANDING a realtime flight simulator, or enjoy the thrills of PSIUN ATTACK. Logical, tactical, maze, arcade all kinds of games on just one tape! BBCA/B An advanced computer like the BBC demands a sophisticated games cassette That's why Cassette 50 gives you full use of screen modes with high resolution colour graphics, user defined graphics excellent sound and music. joystick compatibility and many high speed games. HIGH RISE gives you the chance to beat a realistic rouletta wheel, with all the extras, and you'll need the fastest reactions of all to beat EVASIVE ACTION as you trail across the screen in a frantic search for oxygen. With multi levels and superb graphics this game is totally addictive. ATARI Munch. Munch it's the MAZE EATER! Can you eat he ghosts before they eat you? Or would you rather chance it on the MOTORWAY? Your Cassette 50 is compatible with the 400 800 and 600XL 800XL series ATARI computers, Advanced features include high resolution graphics, sound, music and mixed mode screens Many games are joystick compatible SPECTRUM 16k/48k or + Incredibly frustrating that's the verdict on Cassette-50's FROGGER. Satisfied users tell us it's one of the most challenging you'll find it's almost as good as the arcade version! CARGO has you trying desperately to complete your helicopter mission under attack. Plus 48 other tacticallogical and adventure games featuring multi coloured and user defined graphics, scrolling and full use of the Spectrum sound capabilities 1 Muncher 13 Microtrap 26 Laser 39 Num 2 Ski Jump 14 Motorway 27 Ahen 40 Voyager 3 Basketball 15 Labyrinth 15 Labyrinth 28 Cargo 41 Sketch Pad 4 frogger 16 Skittles 29 The Race 42 Blitz 5 Breakout 17 Race Track 30 The Skull 43 Fishing Mission 5 Crusher 18 Ski Run 31 Orbit 44 Mystical 32 Munch Diamonds 8 Martian 20 Solar Ship 33 Bowls 45 Galaxy Defence Knockout 21 Ten Pins 34 Raiders 46 Cypher 9 Boggles 22 Cars 35 Field 47 Jetmobile 10 Alien Attack 23 Stomper 36 Draggold 48 Barrel Jump 11 Lunar Landing 24 Pinball 37 Space Search 49 Attacker 12 Mare Eater 25 Cavern 38 Inferno 50 Space Mission calculator watch with every Cassette 50 EXPRESS DELIVERY-ORDER NOW! ONLY .95 Delivery FREE to U.K. only, add .00 for overseas orders. Free watch and tape will be despatched within 28 days. I enclose a chequel made payable to postal order for Cascade Games Ltd. or through any Post Office by TRANSCASH (Giro No. 655 6555) For even faster ordering when charging to Access, Barclaycard and Trustcard Visa use our 24 hour service. (0423) 504663. VISA No No Name Address ATARI ORIC 1 BBC AB COMMODORE 64 VIC 20 X 81 APPLE SPECTRUM ATMOS O DRAGON O ELECTRON Cascade Games Ltd., 1.3 Haywra Crescent, Harrogate, North Yorkshire, HG1 5BG, England. Telephone: (0423) 504663. Registered Number 1755554 Post Code Country CVG/7/86 Con=----"


"1.D.E.A.S CENTRAL (NERVE CENTRE OF IDEAS CORP) Welcome to IDEAS CENTRAL. My name is Melissa Ravenflame, 1.c. co-ordinator. IDEAS CENTRAL is where you'll find the Bug Hunters' HQ and the man who keeps those rogue robots in order Jackson T. Kalliber. Jackson makes sure OTISS, Big Red, X and B-Con get out there to find the hints, tips and pokes you all so desperately need for a happy existence. Don't tell them — but I can't rely on them to make a good job of it. So the IDEAS CORPORATION and yours truly, Melissa R., need YOUR help. Remember, the IDEAS CORP will pay. a large amount of credits to anyone assisting our enquiries. So, send your hints and cheats to Melissa Ravenflame, IDEAS CENTRAL, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. 1995 Tunes Over the past couple of months Jackson has been getting a lot of letters complaining about the lack of hints and tips for the Atari and the BBC. Well, this issue we shall try and put the record straight but, remember, we do need YOU to send in hints. We also pay .00 for every letter printed. ATARI Only four for the Atari this time and they all come from Hugo Lumsdon, of St Albans. Chop Suey: While playing against the computer, start off with a high kick and then keep following and jabbing the computer's man. This normally works on the early levels or when your opponent's \"Pow\" is high. Airwolf: For some extra points hold down fire when the game starts. Fire Chief: On the road, follow a vehicle in the fast lane closely. Be ready to slow down if the vehicle in front slows or the fast lane changes. Try to follow motorbikes as they are easy to jump over and do not use up much burn. Slow down quickly after overtaking a vehicle othewise you will run into the next one. Don't go too slow or the vehicle behind will crash into you. Wait till the fireballs move away from the safe and choose ENTER LISTING B the shortest route there. Do not allow you to enter the pokes with After *Loading \"Main Prog\" enter waste your water and only use it ease. ENTER LISTING A these: when you have to. And so, onto the pokes. Elite Frak: ?&304D=0:?&305B= no of commander listing which will give lives you 255 tonnes of all the Legal CALL &468A cargo. All possible weaponary, Castle Quest: After loading the 100,000,000 credits. 'Clean' main machine code program enter At the bottom of the 11th screen, climb up the first of the three Listing A particle beams. At the bottom of 10P%=&70 this screen there are two orange 20[OPT2 masks. To get to the bottom of this 3OLDA &3CA screen, climb up the third particle 40AND #254 beam, on the 11th screen, and fall 50STA &3CA down to the bottom of this screen. 60JMP &DC93 Collect the lantern and walk 70] through the next screen to the one 80?8204=&70:?&205=0 after. 90*TAPE On this screen walk into the 100*OPT 1,2 orange masks. This will give you an extra life. Walk off the screen and walk back on — the masks Listing B reappear and you get another life. 10J%=OPENOUT (\"E.ZAPP\") Beware though, after about five 20REM For tape version, change to ZAPP new lives the masks will disappear 30M%=O:FOR G%=O TO &4B:READ A$:A%=EVAL(\"&\" +A$ for good. Try using the masks 40BPUT #J%,A% when you haven't many lives left. 50M%=M%+A%:NEXT They can be a great help. 51FOR G%=&4C TO&FF:BPUT #J%,O:NEXT 60CLOSE #J%:END 70DATA 00, 14,AD,4A,5A,48,02,53 8ODATA B7,3B,9A,CA,00, FF,20,0 9ODATA FF FF FF FF 00.00.FF.FF Simon Bond of Worcestershire 100DATA FF FF,00,FF.FF,00 FF FF was so pleased with the amount of 110DATA FF,00 FF FF FF FF FF FF pokes we had in the June issue for 120DATA FF FF,01,32,FF FF FF,00 the BBC that he thought he would 130DATA 00,00,00, FF,00,10,0F, 11 write in and tell readers of more. 140DATA 00,03,1C,0,00,00,0A,00 First of all though, he has sent in 150DATA 11,3A,07,09,08,00,00,00 an unlocking program which will 160DATA 02,40,65,CC BBC "


"these ?&5996= no. of lives ?&3342=0 — removes the troll ?&3375=0— removes the first spider ?&3374=0 — removes the second spider CALL &4340 After loading main machine code program enter these ?&3682=0— switch off collision detection with the baddies ?&30CE=0-infinite lives ?&307B = no of lives DSpanner has come up with a few tips which will have some interesting effects on your BBC games ?&FE45=14 ?&FE46=14 These will act as a speed control. If you make the values lower it will put the game into slow motion. The sound will also be affected on most games, giving interesting effects. To get infinite lives on Rocket Raid, load the game normally, press BREAK, then type CALL & E00. Wait until the game resumes normal play and you will have unlimited lives. left arrow-key first. So, the program should have read: L = Load ES= Save V = Verify Luc has also sent in a few pokes for Eureka. After the 'blocks to load\" counter on the screen has come to 000, quickly set the counter on the tape-recorder to zero. Let the game load for another three or four seconds, then press the stop key. Now rewind the tape to 000 and press play again. After a while the screen should stop flickering and show the message \"Load error in 1\". Now type the following: Poke 2560,100: Poke 2561,157 prehistoric adventure Poke 2560,100: Poke 2561,158 Roman adventure Poke 2560,100: Poke 2561,159 Arthurian/British adventure Poke 2560,100: Poke 2561,160 Colditz adventure Poke 2560,100: Poke 2561,161 Caribbean adventure After typing in all these pokes, rewind the tape again to 000, and type RUN. The game should now finish loading, and while playing the adventure you will be very strong 830,34:POKE 832,48:SYS protection + 2 a further quaff will 62828:POKE crash the game. Also when you 53265,PEEK(53265) AND 239 buy six or more rounds in the 11 FOR 1=0 TO 12:READ tavern, the lower half of the screen X:POKE 1280+1,X:NEXT crashes and a jumble of symbols 12 POKE 8941,0:POKE appear for a split second before 8942,5:POKE 8945,76:POKE resorting back to normal. 8946,0:POKE 8947,5 Another from the typewriter of 13 POKE 8950,76:POKE Chris Cain are these hints for 8951,0:POKE 8952,5:POKE Green Beret. The four levels are a 8953,76:POKE 8954,0:POKE missile base, harbour, the bridge 8955,5 and the captives. On each level, 27 FOR K=679 TO 779:POKE when you kill a commando you will K,PEEK(8192+K) get a different weapon. Flame 28 A=A+1:1F A=99 THEN 30 Thrower, Rocket Launcher, Flame 29 NEXT Thrower and Rockets. On the last 30  you get Grenades and Flame 778, PEEK(8192+99):poke Thrower. You will need to keep 779(8192+100):STOP different weapons for certain jobs, 100 DATA but, Chris won't tell us which do 169,27,141,17,208,169 which! At the end of level one you 110 DATA will be attacked by a truck full of 85,141,98,242,76,160,15 soldiers. At the end of the second Thanks lads. you will have to tackle a pack of hungry dogs. Level three sees the Gyro-copters trying to hit you and on level four a guy with a flame thrower tries to roast you alive. These tips apply to the three formats — but the Amstrad Malcolm Harnden of Stamford version also has men who throw bought this game a couple of grenades at you!! weeks ago and discovered quite a few bugs. At first he thought he just had a duff copy, but after exchanging it a couple of times, he came to the conclusion that Gremlin's alias Richard Aplin there were \"bugs\" in an otherwise (hope I've got the spelling right brilliant game. The bugs he found this time, Richard) -poke for this were: The sun turns into a big month is Spellbound. Just type in flashing square. the listing carefully and run it, The description line below your having pressed play on the tape. experience line often gets a white There is a checksum to find any cursor on it which blanks out some typing error. of the description words. The 7 inch version is short but A white square forms beside the not very good. The 12 inch lets picture while playing. When you you use all spells, all lift floors and have filled up with potions l'E is much better. ALTERNATE REALITY C16+4 AMSTRAD HELP GIVEN Andy and Martin Ratcliffe of Stoke-on-Trent have been wading through their C16+4 games to come up with these pokes: BANDITS AT ZERO SPELLBOUND LISTING Load the game and reset using the reset button. Poke 11100, 96 and start the game with SYS 1384. Your plane will now be bulletproof. Rockman: Load and reset. Poke 7409, 173 and run with SYS 7367. This disables all monsters. Xargan Wars: Poke 7302,255: SYS 7296 for 255 lives. Tutti Frutti: Poke 10534,255: SYS 8192 for 255 lives Big Mac: Poke 12691,255: SYS 7000 for 255 lives Cuthbert Enters Tombs of Doom: Poke 4561,173 — Disables Aliens. Poke 4552, 173 Freezes timer. Start with SYS 4352 Stephen Coventry and his friends of the Wirral, Merseyside, saw pleas for help in the June issue and have sent in solutions to the problems. For Leon Mooney here are the four codes you asked for in Frank Bruno's Boxing. Frenchie -CE9IN9817. Ravioli IHCN96A8. A. Andy MLGION4B6 and P. Perfect BFAINN2L5 (Name used was AND) For something special try CGAIN5CA. Leon also wanted to find out how to get the frog into the cup in Back To School get the code for the bike, write it on the blackboard. Get the frog from the store room and ride the bike to the girl's school and stand underneath the cups. Jump up and the frog is now on the shelf. When Miss Take is under the shelf, knock the cup onto her head and she will drop the keys. Return to the boy's school. Follow Mr Wacker into his office, jump on the safe and you've completed the game. For the Commodore reader from Kent who wanted a poke to fix the bug in the wine cellar of Jet Set Willy, here it is: 1 SYS63276:PRINT CHR$(147) 10 POKE 783,1:POKE 16 LEM ** 12\" version of SpellBound cheat program by GREMLIN ** 20 MODE 1: WINDOW 1,40,8, 25:1 in=50 30, FOR LC000 TO LC1C4 STEP 60:ck-O:FOR yt TO + +59: READ XS: VAL(\"\"*X$):POKE Y,xick-ck+x: NEXT READ v: IF vc>ck AND 255) THEN PRINT\"error in \";lin:END ELSE lin=lin10:NEXT 40 READ a:POKE y. a: CALL &COOO 50 DATA 3E,FF, CD, 6B, BC, 6,0,11,0,1,CD, 77, BC, DO, 21,0, C, CD, 83, BC,DO, CD, 7A, BC, 3A,3, C,FE,C3, 20. E6, 21 D6, CO, CD, 89,CO,CD, BD, CO, CD, 5A, BB, FE, 31, 38, F6, 28, 17, FE, 36, 30, FO,FE, 32,28, 14,FE, 33, 26, 227 60 DATA 15,FE, 34, 28, 1D,FE,35, 20, E0, C3, 92, D. 21,67,2D, 13, 14,21.0,20, 18, F, AF, 32, A5,31,32, A6, 31, 32 A7, 31,18, C1, 21, AO, 2B, DD, 21, 14, 10,1,EC, 7F, 7D, DD, BE, 0, 20, 12, 7C, DD, BE,1,20,C,DD, 36, FF, 0, 51 70 DATA DD, 36,0,0, DD, 36,1,0, DD, 23, B, 78,B1, 20, E1, 18,96, 7E, 23,FE, 23,ce,FE, 7C, 28,D,FE,3C, 28, 15,FE, 3E, 28, 1A, CD, SA, BB, 18, EA, 3E, D, CD, SA, BB, 3E, A, CD, SA, BB, 18, DE, 3E, 2, ES,CD, 90, BB, E1, 18, DS, 116 80 DATA 3E,1,ES, CD, 90, BB, E1, 18, CC, 1,2, 7F, ED, 49, 14, 7A, E6, 1F,F6, 40, ED, 79, CD, 9, 18, 30, EE, ED. 49. E, ED, 49,09,1A, 0, 28, A, 19, C, 7, 10, 0, 0, 1C,0,0,0, 1C, 1, 1A, 1A, 53, 70,65, 6C,6C, 42, 6F, 75, 2 90 DATA 6E, 64,20, 40, 65, 67, 61,20,43,68,65, 61, 74, 20, 70, 72, 6F, 67, 72,61, 6D, 7C, 28,31,32,22, 20, 72, 65, 6D, 69, 70, 20,76,65, 72, 73, 69, 6F, 6E, 21, 29, 7C, 43, 72, 61, 63, 68, 65, 64,20,31, 39, 38, 36,20,62,79,20,30, 23 100 DATA 47,52,45,40, 4C, 49, 45.3E, 20, 66, 6F, 72, 20, 40, 65, 6C,69,73,73,61,2E, 70, 7C, 30, 53, 65, 6C,65,63 ,74,3B, 3E, 7C, 7C, 3C, 31, 3E, 29, 20, 47, 52, 45, 40, 4C, 49, 45, 27,73,20, 6C, 69, 56, 65, 20, 69, 6E, 73, 75, 72,61, 2 26 110 DATA 6E, 63,65, 7C, 30, 32, 3E, 29, 20, 41, 63, 6D, 65, 20, 6C,69, 66, 74, 20, 62, 6F, 78, 20, 72, 65, 70,61.69.72 7C, 3C, 33, 3E, 29, 20, 47, 52, 45, 4D, 4C, 49, 45, 20, 73, 74,72,65, 6E, 67, 74,68, 20,62, 75, 69, 60, 64,69, 6E, 67, 1 17 120 DATA 20, 6C,65,73, 73, 6F, 6E, 73, 70, 30, 34, 3E, 29, 20, 43, 72,61, 73, 68, 20, 63, 6F, 75, 72, 73,65,20, 69, 6E ,20, 73, 70, 65, 6C,6C, 20,63,61, 73, 74,69, 6, 67, 70, 30, 35, 3E, 29, 20, 53, 74,61, 72,74,20,67,61,60,65.7C. S COMMODORE 130 DATA 35 k Cast your mind back to February of this year, when we printed a fast-loader which proved not to work. Well, the writer of that program Luc Pyke of Belgium has been in touch again and it seems as though you have to type in the 10 REM ** 7\" Sweet Simple cheat for SpellBoundno death from running out of Strengti ** 20 MODE 1: WINDOW 1,40,2, 25:FOR CO00 TO SC02B: READ : VAL(\"&\"+as):ckuck+a:POKE ta. NEXT:IT 4972 THEN PRINT\"Error . \":END ELSE CALL &COOO 30 DATA 3e, ff.cd, 6b, bc, 6.0.11.0.C.CD, 77. BC,Do, 21.0, C, CD, 83, BC, DO, CD, 7A, BC, 3A, 3.C,FE,C3, 27.26. A .32, a5, 31, 32, 6, 31, 32, 7, 31,C3, 92,D "


"COMPETITION MANTRONIX COMPETITION Get down and get with it with an amazing Aiwa personal stereo! Thanks to Probe Software the first prize winner in our great Mantronix competition will be able to bop to the street beat while strolling to the newsagents to pick up a copy of C+VG or while playing Probe's latest arcade adventure. The main prize is an Aiwa personal stereo which comes complete with a special remote control unit, feather touch controls, auto reverse and lots more special features. This prize worth squillions of pounds could be yours if you can answer the simple Mantronix Quiz. 25 runners-up will be able to choose one of the Probe range of games. These are: Basildon Bond on the 64, Mantronix on the Spectrum, Devil's Crown on the Amstrad and Dirty Den or Defence 16 on the C16. If you win tell us which game you'd like on the coupon. Once you've solved the quiz send your entry coupon to Computer and Video Games, Mantronix Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date for the competition is August 16th and normal C+VG rules apply. PIELIIIIIIIIIIIIII MANTRONIX MINDBENDERS 1. Name the tunes at the beginning and end of i Mantronix. 2. Name the crimes committed by the four most dangerous criminals the universe has ever seen — featured in Mantronix._ MANTRONIX COMPETITION 13. Name two previous Probe games. COMPETITION NE Name AIWA AIWA Address Game wanted Machine "


"ON SPECTRUM 48K NOW AND AMSTRAD CASSETTE OR DISK OUT An Action Strategy game for the fearless RUNNER Can YOU free me from the curse? I am the Toadrunner and must not fail in my quest, if I am to regain my human form. -OJKOLE Available from all good software retailers If it's not there, please order it or in case of difficulty send your crossed chequel P.O. made out to Ariolasoft U.K. Ltd., including your own name and address, to Ariolasoft, P.O. Box 461, London NW1 2ND. Toadrunner Amstrad Disk .95 Amstrad or Spectrum Cassette .95 "


"1850-DY. 75 THE FRENECTION 1650-DY-75 French software houses are increasingly turning their the name of Grafton and Xunc in actual ship reports, love notes, France its Game of the Month in attention to the British market. Get Dexter and letters, braille messages, coded April and Doomsday Blues was a information, photographs, a bullet Doomsday Blues were just a taste of things to come. C+VG Hit. case, button, length of string and So what's going on over the Channel? C+VG asked In the middle of France's wine and lots more. Nathalie Meistermann, a writer with the French gourmet region, Burgundy, is the There are 40 people to home of Cobra Soft, noted for their cross-examine, ranging from computer magazine Tilt, to tell us. Meanwhile C+VG, humorous detective adventures glamorous movie stars, jazz Deputy Editor Paul Boughton visited Europe's Number which are expensively and lavishly musicians and One software house, Infogrames, to look at the games packaged and come with a file chambermaids. containing clues. These new and original they'll be releasing in Britain this year. Meurtres sur L'Atlantique settings for computer Murder on the Atlantic takes games make a Computers are a matter of feeling them to schools. This, in turn, has place in the thrilling 1930s refreshing change and passion in France. Each year lead to a lot of dull educational the French have \"rushes\" of software being produced to satisfy ss BOURGOGNE 1932 affection for one machine. demand from schools. In 1984 it was the Oric with around Although these figures are 200,000 machines sold. It was the unofficial there is no way to really Amstrad's turn in 1985 (150,000) and confirm themit is estimated there Compagnie Francaise De Transport 1986 will probably be the year of the are about one million computers in Atari 520 ST. France. LCHUTTT! Ne dites pas PONIC And you must add to this 200,000 There is also a difference in the que je suis la... Je suis le passager clanCommodore 64s, the ZX 81, type of games which are popular in destin (obligatoire !) Spectrum, Atari 800, Phillips VG France. In England arcade-type Je pars aux USA car on m'a parle d'une place. 5000, and MSX (50,000). games have the higher sales than de representant pour la compagnie IBM... There is also a flourishing adventures. But in France business with French made adventures are just as popular as the computers. The Exelvision, with its shoot 'em ups which accounts for infra red commands for joysticks an amazing growth of medieval and keyboard and integrated speech English vocabulary of French atmosphere of Le Bourgogne, a synthesiser, has sold 30,000 units schoolboys. luxurious transatlantic liner. You and is seen as very innovative. The The rising star of French software play the part of the detective who Thomson series of computers has companies is Ere Informatique. finds himself mixed up in murder sold 380,000 units. Their games keep getting better. against a background of pre-war But these \"second rate\" machines Their 1986 hits Get Dexter and tensions, transatlantic speed owe a lot of their popularity to the Doomsday Blues have been released records, spies, champagne and government policy of supplying in England by PSS. masked balls. In fact, Computer+Video Games Besides the computer game, made Get Dexter-released under program, the game comes with "


"from the seemingly endless procession The first two are dedicated to the At its headquarters in of games involving knights, professional and hardware side of Villeurbanne, Lyon, it employs 84 magicians and lost beauties. micromputing. Tilt is really the people, nearly half of them Infogrames, the biggest software French equivalent of Computer+ programmers working in new company in France, also Video Games. That is to say it's a games, conversions and developing makes good adventure games. reference for games and leisure new product for what the company But you can read more about computing. Each month it reviews believes will be the technology of the those later on. about 40 games and also examines future MSX II. In France, as in the new computers which come onto And now Infogrames is preparing Britain, there are lots the market. Any British reader to take on the British market. This of computer would instantly recognise many of summer will see the first of its games magazines on the the games it covers. released in Britain Mandragore, newstands. But Another computer related area an arcade adventure which has there are which has seen massive growth in already proved a massive hit on the dominant France is Videotex, which is similar continent. L'Ordinateur to Prestel. In fact it has been Infogrames was started three Individuel, predicted that the equivalent of a years ago by two men, Bruno SVM and Tilt. year's growth in Prestel will be Bonnell and Christophe Sapet. Last installed in France every 25 days for year Infogrames together with its the next few years. distribution business Cadre had a In the past five months its chatline turnover of 45 million francs. This distinctly naughty when year, predicted turnover is 96 million compared to British versions — has francs. Its business record is more than doubled. impressive. You don't get to be More than just a new means of Europe's number one without being communication, Videotex is a real good. society phenomenon. So why has it taken Infrogrames The Chatline moto is: Think dirty, so long to try it's luck with the if not original. Messages and British market? graphics are pretty explicit. Thomas Schmider, Inforgrames export sales manager, says: \"It's MANDRAGORE mainly because we have been concentrating on the Thompson The name of Infogrames means machines. Until December 1984 we nothing in Britain. Yet this French were only thinking in terms of company is probably the biggest Thompson product. Then we started software house in Europe. on MSX. We decided to turn to the ENERGY 78%, CO ---SCORE 906000 export market only when we became leader in France. Even if the English market is not increasing, it's still the most important in Europe. \"We have a lot of product which we could have released before but we wanted to start with a full catalogue. Now we continued "


"GET YOUR NAME ON THE LEADER EOARD If you have ever bought another golf simulator shoot yourself! If you are ever considering it save yourself a bullet! ZZAP64 Quite honestly, leaderboard makes T his is the sports simulation of the all other golf simulations look clumsy year if not the decade! and antiquated in comparison. ZZAP64 ZZAP64 AWARD TAPE .95 DISC Practice Drivino Range MEDAY Multiple 18 hole goli course Amazing sound E' U.S. #GOLD The most realistic 3D golf simulation canso available And swing your way to a record round ACCES Now you can become a golf pro and experience the thrill of Features: having your name up on the \"Leaderboard\". Choice of club, distance, type of With this amazingly realistic simulation you get a true shot (hook, slice, putting) and more perspective view of your golf game. Realistic Sound As you play on different 18 hole courses on  Practice Driving Range levels varying from amateur to touring professional you'll Joystick Controlled need skill concentration and control to come in under par. Multiple 18 Hole Golf Courses Coming soon for Spectrum and Amstrad Automatic Scoring TEE SHOT APPROACH SHOT PUTTING LEADERBOARD GOLF Software incorpora PAR LEADER BOARD 4. COURSE COURSE CHRIS COURSE CHRIS CHRIS 11.1. 12 KOISE RECESS SerTMARE INC SELECT LOCURIER 122 OR UINES UINOS PUITES 10 ACCESS SOFTWARE EAC. CREATED av BRUCE AND ROGER CARVER les of POWER POMER SARP Skibs POWER SNAP U. S. Gold, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, BIRMINGHAM B7 4LY. Tel. No. 021 3593020 "


"650-DY-75 are working towards simultaneous releases in France and the UK.\" The games lined up for British release are mainly graphic adventures. In Britain arcade games are the real super sellers. But in France adventures are just as important. \"I think all things produced by English software houses are very impressive but we're getting a little bored. It's all arcade games,\" says Thomas.» If we make arcade The cassette game, with accompanying booklet, will be released on a wide range of computers and sell for around $14.95. It is set in the peaceful land under the benevolent rule of King Jorian of Mandragore who, tragically, is killed when a shower of shooting stars falls on the countryside. The king's rule is replaced by the tyrannical Lord Yarod Nor. To free Mandragore from his rule, character's race dwarf, elf, simple when you see it on the screen. mi-orc, hobbit or human. Each is The next Infogrames game, Vera then given an occupation warrior, Cruz, is due for release in August. It ranger, wizard, wiseman, thief or takes the player into the sordid minstrel. underworld of detectives, pimps and Further options are the prostitutes. character's name -up to six letters. The game opens at the scene of a Sex just two, male or female murder. Prostitute Vera Cruz lies and the colour of the graphics on sprawled on the floor. Playing the screen. This helps if, for example, part of the detective you must collect you have selected two dwarfs for clues, interview suspects, witnesses your team. and finally identify the murderer. The team is shown on screen as Vera Cruz is written by a French rather chunky graphics. The island policeman and it appears to be a very of Mandragore scrolls beneath them. faithful reconstruction of how a real More than a dozen villages can be murder investigation would be visited where it is possible to buy carried out. Although it was in or steal torches, weapons, food French, Vera Cruz looks absolutely and boats. It is also possible to sell fascinating. things found elsewhere in the game. Due out in September is the There are ten chateaux, each with Infogrames game sold in France as around 30 rooms and dungeons. Las Vegas. But in Britain it will Each dungeon has a theme running probably be called The Inheritance. through it. For example, the zodiac, You play the part of a man, chess and even bees. Each has a presumably French, who receives a mystery to be solved, treasure to be telegram from Las Vegas saying his found and monsters to be fought. aunt has died leaving him a vast amount of money. The adventure involves our hero's progress as he overcomes problem after problem M** before he can claim his money. Guns, blackmail, loan sharks, RENTS FINESE ECT OCKSMITH TAS CSS 21 Lersities products it's because we've found MANDRAGORE something new.\" Infogrames releases games over a you must form a team of four wide range of computers. This year characters and eventually confront the Atari 520 ST is being tipped as the evil lord is his own chateau and \"the machine\" for France. destroy him. But for the future, Infogrames is To do this you must travel the land pinning a lot of hope on MSX II. «We of Mandragore, visiting plains, believe this is the technology of the forests, mountains, villages, future, says Thomas. «But it doesn't chateaux, swamps and dungeons, mean we won't develop for other solving riddles and puzzles and machines.\" defeating monsters. MSX machines have always been At the start of the game you are more popular in France than Britain presented with three menu choices. and Infogrames have found it very T he first is Syrella's Adventure, profitable releasing product for it. It which allows you to play with a has built up a lot of expertise with previously selected team. The second the machine and is hoping to put it choice is for you to select your own to use with the new MSX machines. team and the third is to resume a The first Infogrames game to be previous game. released in Britiain will be When you choose your own team Mandragore, a sprawling arcade of four, a questionnaire concerning adventure which has already sold each one appears on the screen. around 70,000 copies since it was Each is allotted 80 points which released in France. It still hasn't must be divided on characteristics been solved. such as constitution, strength, intelligence, wisdom and dexterity. You then have to choose the Depending on how you play the game, points are added or subtracted from the each character. Lose too many and it's death. Controlling the characters first appears confusing but practice makes it a very simple process. Each character is given a number 1, 2, 3, or 4, displayed on the right of the screen. Objects visible in a particular room are given the letters A, B, C and D. There are then 29 verbs at your disposal which can be selected by pressing the first two letters of the word. So if you wanted one of your team to attack a monster you would press the character's number (1), then the first two letters of ATtack and finally the letter attributed to the monster (C). The screen will display SYRELA ATTACKS MONSTER. Confused? Don't worry, it's really robbery, violence, clubs and gambling are the ingredients of this adventure. Although both the versions of Vera Cruz and Las Vegas were both in French and we'll have to wait for English versions before final iudgement is passed, both look fun to play. The ingredients in these two Infogrames games are far more adult than in English adventures. So if you are fed up with knights, wizards, fairies and spells, but are still thirsting for different, invigorating and challenging adventures, these could be games to renew your interest. "


"664 VERSION ZZAP! 64 FLIGHT SIMULATOR OF THE YEAR' OUT NOW SPECTRUM VERSION .95 (FULL 64K PLUS/4 VERSION) 6 PLUS/4 DISK VERSION .95 FREE POSTER WITH EVERY COPY SMI5SILE RUO I BED DOEDD BOBOBO EC ( 0 ) L CoGaon \"AT LAST YOU CAN REALLY FLY! RAF PILOT cascade Pe CASCADE GAMES LTD \"I JUST COULDN'T BELIEVE HOW MUCH THERE WAS IN IT\" ZZAP! 64 \"ACE IS ONE OF THE BEST SIMULATORS I HAVE EVER PLAYED\" CCI \"'THERE ARE FLIGHT SIMULATORS AND THERE ARE FLIGHT SIMULATORS — AND THEN THERE'S ACE\" COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES CASSETTE .95 CASCADE GAMES LTD., HARROGATE, HG1 5BG, ENGLAND. TEL: (0423) 504663 Screen shots are taken from the 64 version 16, VIC20, PLUS/4, 64/128, Versions available for: SPECTRUM 48k, Available from all good software suppliers or direct from Cascade-24 hour ordering service on (0423) 504663 COMMODORE Disk .95 (6 64/128, Plus/4 only) "


"COMPETITION COMPETITION 13. According to the DEMONSTRATION database, how many frames are there on the real MICRONET database? Once you've worked out the answers, fill in the coupon below and sent it to; Peter Probert, Consumo Micronet/C+VG Treasure Hunt, Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1R 5EJ. Closing date for entries is August 16th, normal C+VG competition rules apply, and the judges' decision is final. If you want more information about Micronet 800 simply write to the address above, and a brochure will be on its way to you in an instant. C+VG/MICRONET TREASURE HUNT My answers are: hack into micronet free free free You could win a FREE three month subscription to Micronet and Prestel, plus a FREE 12 month subscription to Computer and Video Games in our sensational summer Treasure Hunt! You need a modem and a 64, Spectrum or BBC to take part. All you have to do is log into Micronet's free demonstration database for the answers. If you've never come across Micronet before then you won't know about all the incredibly interesting services it offers subscribers. Micronet is a viewdata system for home micro users a totally new concept in home entertainment and information services. There's more to Micronet than just computers — you can talk direct to celebrities on the live Chatline, make use of the electronic mailbox service, read record reviews and even download free software! All that and there are interactive games to play — like Starnet, Micronet's answer to MUD. A free three month subscription allowing you access to all this could be yours if you enter C+VG's treasure hunt. Ten runners up will get a C+VG Big Red t-shirt — so there's something to go for even if you don't win the big prize. Micronet's free demonstration database simply shows what the service can offer you — but we're using it to set you a few mindboggling puzzles. You didn't think it was going to be easy did you? Once you've dialled up the Prestel system via your modem enter this dummy ID number 4444444444 (Ten 4's) then enter this dummy password number 4444 (Four 4's). This gets you into the Micronet demo area. Once on line we want you to search for the answers to the following clues: 1. What baud rate modem do you need to access Micronet? 2. How many stars are there in the STARNET galaxy? 3. Up to how many GALLERY frames can be allocated to Micronet members? 4. What is Bizznet? 5. How many FREE Spectrum programs are described in the Sinclair Microbase? 6. Who is the guest celebrity on the demonstration of CELEBRITY CHATLINE? 7. Who is selling a brand new ZX printer for ? 8. What is the first sign of a \"wally\"? 9. What is the name of John Bye's Headmaster? 10. How much should you pay the Milkman? 11. What do you press to download telesoftware on a BBC? 12. What is the ordinary subscription charge for Micronet and Prestel per quarter? co woo w Na Name Address Age Computer owned Modem owned Send this coupon to: Peter Probert, Micronet/C+VG Treasure Hunt, Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5EJ. micronet cronet "


"BOOK OF SPELLS CHILDRON-IT THE PUMPKIN STRIKES BACK COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES C+VG MAP THE WITCH ASLEEP 11. 1 STARTING POSITION Am I energia memenany INTIMIT UDU E THE SHIELD THE CROWN "


"O SPECTRUM 48K the old name for the Southlands, the area just below where your friend Karl has his farm. A hare is the old southern word for a bell, so presumably the prophecy must refer to some magic bell with the power to negate the effect of the mace. I should think the Keeper of the Moontower on the southern plains could tell you all about it.\" \"Then I must travel south.\" The Court Wizard turned to Marc. \"Would you care to join me?\" The soldier smiled. \"Why not? The army could manage very well without me for a day or two. And it gives us a chance to look up an old friend!\" Chapter Two The Wizard of Tallyron told the story of how a magic mace kept the kingdom of Tallyron from invasion. Tallyron was bordered by sea on the west coast, on the north by the lands of the dreaded Black Knight, on the east by the country of Krull the Merciless and to the south lay the empire of Grekh the Evil. These three rulers together wished to destroy the land of Tallyron forever. The Black Knight stole the mace and hid it on the Island of the Lost and a young acolyte from the Grand Meeting of Wizards was selected to recover it. Together with his two friends, Marc, from the Kiings yeoman and Karl, a southern farmer, he recovered the mace and destroyed the Black Knight. Marc has since become Commander in Chief of Tallyron's armies and our interpid hero has become Court Wizard to the king of Tallyron. NOW READ ON! ore wine for my guests\", called the young wizard. Roget, the old leader lof the Grand Meeting of Wizards watched him, warily. The third member of the dinner party, Marc sat back in his chair, knowing what was afoot, but saying nothing. \"Now, just what are you up to, you young rascal?\" asked the old' wizard. \"Surely an acolyte can treat his master to a good meal?\" enquired his host, genially. \"The days when you were a junior Meeting member and I was your master are now long past,\" said Roget evenly. \"You are no acolyte now, but the Court Wizard of Tallyron and quite outside any jurisdiction of mine. Now what exactly are you after?\" \"Too wise by half, as usual,\" grinned the Court Wizard. \"Quite right, I need your help. Tell me, what do you make of this?\" Clearing a space in the centre of the table, he spread out a scroll of parchment. It looked extremely old but the assembled company could clearly read the following stanzas. From wizard's lair in darkest Wold Was spawned a hare of crystal, cold. When Mace is lost, and Mace is found feel bell's reposte, deep underground. For Hare be found with ill intent and Mace be drowned to great extent. \"Where did you get this?\" asked Roget. \"From the king. This is part of the prophecies of Karleem.\" The old man gasped. Karleem was a legendary seer who lived many years previously, had made many predictions and had never been wrong. \"Now I think I understand. The king is concerned about the reference to the loss and recovery of the mace?\", said Roget. \"Quite. So any help would be appreciated.\" \"Let us see then.\" Roget examined the parchment. At length he said: \"Well the Wold is hope this will take no longer than a week or two,\" complained Karl. 'I have a harvest to worry about.\" \"Stop winging. You know you hate the quiet life!\" Marc chided. The three of them approached a bluff overlooking the southern plains of Tallyron as dusk feel. Suddenly they were surrounded by a group of armed men who moved forward to attack them. The Court Wizard had a sleep spell ready. The two fighters drew their swords.\" \"Wait Marc,\" called the magician. \"They don't look like Grekh's people.\" The Court Wizard gravely gave his name. \"And who am I addressing? Why do you prepare to attack us?\" he asked indignantly. \"Our humble apologies, my lord. We defend the Moontower and these are troubled times, for Grekh's armies are abroad.\" Mark and Karl exchanged glances. \"Looks like there may be something to the poem, after all,\" said Karl. «Take us to your Keeper, please.\" Within half an hour the Keeper of the Moontower, who was an ancient gnarled character with a long beard and flowing grey hair, was reading the history of the Crystal Bell of the Wold from an old manuscript. The visitors soon determined that if the bell should be rung by an attacking army, the mace would become powerless. \"But there is worse news, I'm afraid,\" said the old man gloomily. \"The bell's last known position was in the old underground complex at Woldcrest, just five miles southwest of here. All the surface buildings have long since fallen into ruin. Very little is lett. But it is said that the underground walkways and rooms are still there. They are only accessible by an old stone ladder beneath a trap door, but I have a map which will direct you to there.\" The ancient figure leant forward and lowered his voice. \"But it is rumoured that Grekh is already inside the complex, with a bodyguard of gargoyles. And that he has populated it with the living dead. The Court Wizard looked at his men. Well gentlemen. This time we start with the best equipment available, and I know many spells. Are you with me..?\" continued on page 52 "


"THE PROGRAM 5 DEF EN AA (LEVEL 1 AND ( 170 IF A$ (LEVEL.pos)<>\"B\" AND ( 770 IF A$ (LEVEL.POS+DX16-DY) \"1 AS104 AND A108) OR (A>120 AND A U$=\"7\" OR U$=\"E\") THEN RETURN \" THEN PLOT 207, 28: DRAW -20.0: (124) OR (AX130 AND AC141) OR (A 175 IF A$ (LEVEL,pos)<>\"B\" THEN DRAW 0,120: DRAW 20,0 >146 AND AX 157) OR (A>162 AND AK GO TO 105 780 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT2) -\"O\" AND A$ 173) OR (A>178 AND AC189))) -(LEV 230 INPUT INKEY$: PRINT #O; AT O (LEVEL, POS+DY 16+DX) >\"1\" THEN PL EL=2 AND (A=29 OR A=30 OR A=45 0 ,0;\"YOU STEP ON THE TRANSPORTER OT 178, 37: DRAW 0,80: DRAW -14, R a=46)). GRIDAND ARE WHISKED AWAY IN A PU 14: DRAW 0, -52: PLOT 173, 77: DRA 6 INK O: PAPER 7: CLS : PRINT FF OF SMOKE!\": FOR N=21 TO 60: W-2,2: DRAW 0,1: DRAW 2,2: DRAW AT 10,0; \"DATA IS LOADING\" BEEP.01, N+2: BEEP .01, N-2: BEEP 1.-2: DRAW 0, -2: DRAW -1,-1 8 LOAD \"MAP\" DATA A$() .001,N: NEXT N 790 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX)<\"2 9 PRINT : PRINT \"PLEASE WAIT\" 235 IF LEVEL=2 AND POS=216 THEN \"THEN GO TO 904 10 GO TO 1000 LET POS=29: GO TO 128 800 LET PT1=POS+DY*32+DX*2: IF 100 FOR N=2 TO 5: PRINT AT N,6; 236 IF LEVEL=2 AND POS=46 THEN PT1<1 OR PT1 >256 THEN GO TO 904 0$ (6 TO 31): NEXT N: RETURN LET POS=103: GO TO 128 810 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT1) <\"2\" THEN 105 POKE 23658,8: BEEP.2,1 240 LET POS1=INT (RND*223+17): PLOT 97,58: DRAW 60,0: DRAW 0,60 106 LET 1$=INKEY$: IF $=\"\" THE IF A$ (LEVEL, POS1) <\"2\" OR A$ (LEVE : DRAW -60,0: DRAW 0,-60. N GO TO 106 L, POS1)=\"B\" OR FN A (POS)<>FN A(P 820 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT1)=\"0\" THEN 110 IF (U$=\"7\" OR $=CHR$ 11) A OS1) THEN GO TO 240 PLOT 112,58: DRAW 0,45: DRAW 30, ND A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) \"1\" AND 250 LET POS=POS1: GO TO 128 O: DRAW 0, -45: PLOT 118,77: DRAW A$ (LEVEL.POS+DY16+DX) <>\"F\" THEN 500 FOR N=5 TO 20: PRINT AT NO 1 ,1: DRAW -1,1: DRAW -1,-1: DRA LET POS=POS+DX+DY 16: GO TO 128 0$;: NEXT N: RETURN W 1,-1 112 IF U$=\"8\" OR LS=CHR$ 9 THEN 550 INPUT INKEY $: FOR X == 16 TO 2 830 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT)<\"2\" THEN G LET DIR=DIR+1-4* (DIR=4): GO TO 1: PRINT AT X,0;0$: NEXT X: RETUO TO 865 128 RN 840 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT+DY16+DX) <\"2\" 114 IF U$=\"5\" OR L1$=CHR$ 8 THEN 600 INK 6: PAPER O: BORDER 0: C T HEN PLOT 67,58: DRAW 30,0: DR LET DIR=DIR-1+4* (DIR=1): GO TO LS AW 0,60: DRAW -30,0: IF A$ (LEVEL 128 610 PLOT 47,8: DRAW 160,0: DRAW , POS-DX 16+DY) \"1\" THEN PLOT 67, 115 IF $=\"E\" AND A$ (LEVEL, POS+ 0,160: DRAW -160,0: DRAW 0,-160 58: DRAW -20,0: DRAW 0,60: DRAW DY16+DX) \"O\" AND NOT (LEVEL=5 AN6 20 LET DY (DIR=3) (DIR=1): LET 20,0 D POS=173 AND FLAG2<>>2) THEN LE D X (DIR=2) (DIR=4): LET DY16=DY 850 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT-DY16+DX) \"\" T POS=POS+DX+ DX+DY*32: GO TO 128 *16: LET DX16=DX*16 THEN PLOT 82,58: DRAW 0,45: DR 116 IF Li$=\"C\" AND ((A$ (LEVEL, PO 630 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) <\"2 AW -15,0: IF A$ (LEVEL, POS-DX16+D S=\"3\" AND LEVEL >1) OR A$ (LEVEL, THEN PLOT 67,28: DRAW 120,0: Y) \"1\" THEN PLOT 52,58: DRAW O, POS) =\"4\") THEN LET level=level + DRAW 0, 120: DRAW -120,0: DRAW 0, 45: DRAW 15,0: PLOT 58, 77: DRAW (A$ (LEVEL,pos) =\"4\" AND level<5) -120 1,1: DRAW -1,1: DRAW -1,-1: DRAW (a$ (level, pos) =\"3\" AND level >1): 640 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) =\"O 1,-1 GO TO 128 \" THEN PLOT 97,28: DRAW 0,90: D 852 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT-DY16-DX)<\"2\" 117 IF $=\"C\" AND A$ (LEVEL, POS) RAW 60,0: DRAW O, -90: PLOT 109.6 THEN GO TO 865 =\"3\" AND LEVEL=1 AND NOT FLAGS T 5: DRAW 2.0: DRAW 2.2: DRAW 0,2: 855 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT) >\"4\" AND A$ HEN INPUT INKEYS: PRINT #O; AT O DRAW 2.2: DRAW -2.0: DRAW -2,LEVEL, PT)<\"B\" THEN PLOT 52.40: ,0;\" THIS LADDER LEADS OUT OF THE 2: DRAW 0, -2: DRAW 2,-2 DRAW 0,12: DRAW 20,0: DRAW 0,--12 LABYRINTH AND YOU HAVN'T 650 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS-DX16+DY)<\"2 : DRAW -20,0: DRAW 0,12: DRAW 4, COMPLETED YOUR QUEST YET!\" \" THEN PLOT 47,8: DRAW 20,20: D 4: DRAW 12,0: DRAW 4,-4: DRAW -1 FOR N=1 TO 200: NEXT N: GOSUB 9 RAW 0, 120: DRAW -20, 20 1,0: DRAW 0,-3: DRAW 3,0: DRAW O 90: GO TO 105 660 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS-DX16+DY) =\"O 118 IF $=\"C\" AND A$ (LEVEL, POS) \" THEN PLOT 53,14: DRAW 0,119: 856 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT) =\"A\" THEN D =\"3\" AND LEVEL=1 AND FLAG3 THEN DRAW -6,6 RAW 7,0: DRAW 0,6: INVERSE 1: DR CLS : PRINT \"YOU TAKE THE CRYST670 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DX16-DY)<\"2 AW -18,0: DRAW 18,0: INVERSE O: AL HARE OF WOLD TO THE TOWER \" THEN PLOT 207,8: DRAW -20, 20: DRAW 0,-1: DRAW 0,5: DRAW -18.0: OF THE MOON, WHERE THE KEEPER D DRAW 0, 120: DRAW 20,20 DRAW 0,9: DRAW 3,3: DRAW 0,3: ISABLES IT FOREVER.\"\"'\"TOTAL 680 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DX 16-DY) =\"0 DRAW -3,3: DRAW 3,-3: DRAW 12,0: SUCCESS!\": \"ONCE MORE TALLYRON 0 \" THEN PLOT 201, 14: DRAW 0,119: DRAW 3,3: DRAW -3,-3: DRAW 0,-3 WES YOU ITS PEACE.\": STOP DRAW 6,6 857 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT) \"C\" AND A$( 119 IF U$=\"D\" AND (A$ (LEVEL, POS 690 LET PT=POS+DY* 17-DX*15: IF LEVEL, PT)<\"F\" THEN PLOT 47, 45: ) =\"D\" OR A$ (LEVEL, POS) =\"E\") THEN PT<1 OR PT>256 THEN GO TO 740 DRAW 31,0: DRAW 0,-1: DRAW -4,-4 GO SUB 5000: FOR N=1 TO 200: N 700 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT) \"1\" THENG DRAW 0.-2: DRAW -27,0: PLOT 47 EXT N: GO SUB 990: GO TO 105 OTO 730 ,50: DRAW 6,0: DRAW -2,-2: DRAW 120 IF U$=\"O\" AND A$ (LEVEL, POS) 710 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) \"1 0-2: FOR N=0 TO 5: PLOT 47,51: > \"4\" AND A$ (LEVEL, POS)<\"A\" THEN \"THEN PLOT 67,28: DRAW 30, 30: DRAW O, ABS N*2: DRAW N*2,0, (PI+A GO SUB 4000: GO TO 128 DRAW 0,60: DRAW -30, 30 BS N/180) #-SGN N: NEXT N 121 IF U$=\"0\" AND A$ (LEVEL, POS) 720 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS-DX16+DY) \" 1 858 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT) =\"B\" THEN P \"A\" THEN INPUT INKEY$: PRINT # THEN PLOT 47, 28: DRAW 20,0: D LOT 47,50: FOR NO TO 10 STEP 2: O;AT 0,0;\"YOU'VE ALREADY EMPTIED RAW 0, 120: DRAW -20,0 DRAW 28-N*2,0: DRAW N*2-20, N*2THIS CHEST!\": FOR N=1 TO 20 730 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT)=\"O\" AND A$( 20: DRAW -8,0: DRAW 0,18--N*2: NE O: NEXT N: GOSUB 920: GO TO 105 LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) >\"1\" THEN PLO XT N 122 IF U$-\"M\" THEN LET CAMP=1: T 76.37: DRAW 0,80: DRAW 14, -14: 859 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT) \"C\" THEN P GO TO 1100 DRAW 0, -52: PLOT 86,77: DRAW 2, LOT 47,50: DRAW 28,0: DRAW -20,124 IF U$=\"R\" THEN GO SUB 1500 2: DRAW 0,1: DRAW -2,2: DRAW -1, 20: DRAW -8,0 : GO TO 128 -2: DRAW 0,-2: DRAW 1,-1 860 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT) =\"4\" AND DX 125 IF U$=\"I\" THEN CLS : GO SU 740 LET PT2=POS+DY*15+DX*17: IF THEN PLOT 52,40: DRAW 0, 30: DRA B3000: FOR Q=1 TO 100: NEXT Q: PT2<1 OR PT2>256 THEN GO TO 79 W 1,0: DRAW 0, -30: DRAW 3,0: DRA GO TO 128 W 0,30: DRAW -1,0: DRAW 0, -30: D 126 IF U$=\"U\" THEN CLS : GO SU 750 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT2) >\"1\" THEN RAW 0,2: DRAW -2,0: DRAW 0,1: DR B 3500: FOR Q=1 TO 100: NEXT Q: GO TO 780 AW 2,0: FOR N=1 TO 2: DRAW 0,11: GO TO 128 760 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) >\" 1 DRAW -2,0: DRAW O, 1: DRAW 2,0: 127 GO TO 106 \" THEN PLOT 187, 28: DRAW-30, 30 NEXT N: DRAW 0,27: DRAW 13,0: D 128 GO SUB 600 : DRAW 0,60: DRAW 30, 30 RAW 7,7: DRAW -29,0: DRAW O, -7: "


"DRAW 14,0 861 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT) =\"4\" AND NOT DX THEN PLOT 60,40: DRAW 0, 30: DRAW -1,0: DRAW 0, -30: DRAW -12 ,0: DRAW 0,30: DRAW 1,0: DRAW O, --30: DRAW 0,2: DRAW 12,0: DRAW O ,1: DRAW -12,0: FOR N=1 TO 2: DR AW 0,11: DRAW 12,0: DRAW 0,1: DR AW -12,0: NEXT N: DRAW 0.27: DR AW 0,7: DRAW 28,0: DRAW -7,-7: D RAW -14,0 865 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT2)<\"2\" THEN GO TO 904 870 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT2+DY16+DX)<\"2 \" THEN PLOT 187,58: DRAW --30,0: DRAW 0,60: DRAW 30,0: IF A$ (LEV EL, POS+DX16-DY) \"1\" THEN PLOT 1 87,58: DRAW 20,0: DRAW 0,60: DRA W -20,0 880 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT2+DY 16+DX) = \"O \" THEN PLOT 172,58: DRAW 0,45: DRAW 15,0: PLOT 178, 77: DRAW 1,1 : DRAW -1,1: DRAW -1,-1: DRAW 1, -1: IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DX16-DY) \"1\" THEN PLOT 202,58: DRAW 0, 45: D RAW -15,0 885 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT2-DY16-DX)<\"2 \" THEN GO TO 904 890 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT2) >\"4\" AND A$ (LEVEL, PT2) <\"B\" THEN PLOT 182,4 O: DRAW 0,12: DRAW 20,0: DRAW O, -12: DRAW -20,0: DRAW 0,12: DRAW 4,4: DRAW 12,0: DRAW 4,-4: DRAW -11,0: DRAW 0, -3: DRAW 3,0: DRA W 0,3 895 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT2) = \"A\" THEN DRAW 7,0: DRAW 0,6: INVERSE 1: D RAW -18,0: DRAW 18,0: INVERSE 0: DRAW 0,-1: DRAW 0,5: DRAW -18,0 : DRAW 0,-: DRAW 3,3: DRAW 0,3: DRAW -3,3: DRAW 3,-3: DRAW 12,0 : DRAW 3, 3: DRAW -3, -3: DRAW 0,O: NEXT N: DRAW 0,-27: DRAW -13, O: DRAW -7,7: DRAW 28,0: DRAW O, -7: DRAW -14,0 904 IF A$ (LEVEL,POS) =\"3\" AND NO TDX THEN PLOT 116,8: DRAW 0,16 O: DRAW 2,0: DRAW 0,-160: DRAW 2 0,0: DRAW 0, 160: DRAW -2,0: DRAW 0,-160: DRAW 0,13: FOR N=1 TO 7 : DRAW -18,0: DRAW 0,2: DRAW 18, O: DRAW 0,19: NEXT N: DRAW 27,0: DRAW -10,-10: DRAW -50, 0: DRAW -10,10 905 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS) =\"3\" AND DX THEN PLOT 127, 168: DRAW 0,-160 : DRAW 2,0: DRAW 0, 160: DRAW 34, O: DRAW -10,-10: DRAW -50,0: DRA W -10,10 910 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) =\"3 \" AND NOT DX THEN PLOT 120, 43: DRAW 0,93: DRAW 1,0: DRAW 0, -93: DRAW 0,9: DRAW 12,0: DRAW 0,-9: DRAW 0,93: DRAW -1,0: DRAW 0,3: DRAW 0,9: FOR N=1 TO 7: DRAW --12,0: DRAW 0,1: DRAW 12,0: DRAW 0,11: NEXT N: DRAW 17,0: DRAW -7,-7: DRAW -30,0: DRAW -7,7: DRA W 40,0 915 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) =\"3 \" AND DX THEN PLOT 127, 136: DRA W 0.-93; DRAW 1,0: DRAW 0,93: DR AW 21, 0: DRAW -7,7: DRAW -30,0: DRAW -7,7: DRAW 40,0 920 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS) =\"4\" AND NO TDX THEN PLOT 116,8: DRAW 0,60 : DRAW 2,0: DRAW 0, -60: DRAW 20, O: DRAW 0,60: DRAW -2,0: DRAW O, -60: DRAW 0,4: DRAW -18,0: DRAW 0,2: DRAW 18,0: FOR N=1 TO 2: DR AW 0, 19: DRAW -18,0: DRAW 0,2: D RAW 18,0: NEXT N: DRAW O, -48: DR AW 27.0: DRAW -10,10: DRAW -50,0  DRAW -10,-10 925 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS) =\"4\" AND DX THEN PLOT 127,8: DRAW 0,60: DR AW 2,0: DRAW 0,-60: DRAW 34,0: D RAW -10, 10: DRAW -50,0: DRAW --10 ,-10 930 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) =\"4 A ND NOT DX THEN PLOT 120, 40: DRAW 0.30: DRAW 1,0: DRAW 0,-30: DRAW 12,0: DRAW 0, 30: DRAW -1,0 : DRAW 0, -30: DRAW 0,2: DRAW -12 ,0: DRAW 0,1: DRAW 12,0: FOR N=1 TO 2: DRAW 0,11: DRAW -12,0: DR AW 0,1: DRAW 12,0: NEXT N: DRAW 0,-27: DRAW 17,0: DRAW -7,7: DRA W-30,0: DRAW -7,-7: DRAW 40,0 932 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) =\"4 \" AND DX THEN PLOT 127, 40: DRAW 0,30: DRAW 1,0: DRAW 0, -30: DRA W 21,0: DRAW -7,7: DRAW -30,0: D RAW -7, -7: DRAW 40,0 933 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY 16+DX) =\"B \" THEN PLOT 82,30: DRAW 20, 20: FOR N=OTO 10 STEP 2: DRAW SO-N, O: DRAW 20-N*2, N*2-20: DRAW N*587,0: DRAW 18-N*2, 18-N*2: NEXT N 9 34 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) =\"C \" THEN PLOT 82, 30: DRAW 20, 20: DRAW 50,0: DRAW 20,-20: DRAW -89 ,0: DRAW 20, 20 936 IF A$ (LEVEL, POSUDY 16+DX) >\"4 \" AND A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX)<\"B\" THEN PLOT 118, 40: DRAW 0,12: DR AW 20,0: DRAW 0,-12: DRAW -20,0: DRAW 0,12: DRAW 4,4: DRAW 12,0: DRAW 4,-4: DRAW -11,0: DRAW 0,896 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT2) >\"C\" AND A$ (LEVEL, PT2)<\"F\" THEN PLOT 180,3 8: DRAW 0,2: DRAW -4,4: DRAW 0,1 : DRAW 31,0: DRAW 0,-7: DRAW -27 ,0: PLOT 203,46: DRAW 0,2: DRAW 2,2: DRAW 6,0: FOR N=-5 TO O: P LOT 207,51: DRAW O, ABS N*2: DRAW N*2,0, (PI+ABS N/180) *-SGN N: NE XT N 897 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT2) =\"B\" THEN PLOT 197,30: DRAW -20, 20: FOR N= OTO 10 STEP 2: DRAW 30-N*2,0 D RAW O, N*2-20: DRAW -8,0: DRAW N* 2-18, 18-N*2: NEXT N 898 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT2)=\"C\" THEN PLOT 207,50: DRAW -28,0: DRAW 20 , -20: DRAW 8,0 899 IF A$ (LEVEL, PT2) =\"4\" AND NO TDX THEN PLOT 194,40: DRAW 0,3 O: DRAW 1,0: DRAW 0, -30: DRAW 12 ,0: DRAW 0,30: DRAW -1,0: DRAW O ,-30: DRAW 0,2: DRAW -12,0: DRAW 0,1: DRAW 12,0: FOR N=1 TO 2: D RAW 0,11: DRAW -12,0: DRAW 0,1: DRAW 12.0: NEXT N: DRAW 0, -27: D RAW 0,7: DRAW -28,0: DRAW 7, -7: DRAW 14,0 900 IF A$ (LEVEL,PT2)=\"4\" AND DX THEN PLOT 202,40: DRAW 0,30: D RAW -1,0: DRAW 0,-30: DRAW -3,0: DRAW 0,30: DRAW 1,0: DRAW 0, -30 : DRAW 0,2: DRAW 2,0: DRAW 0,1: DRAW. -2,0: FOR N=1 TO 2: DRAW O, 11: DRAW 2,0: DRAW 0,1: DRAW .-2, continued "


"1 NOUKTITLE 3: DRAW 3,0: DRAW 0,3  DRAW -3,0: DRAW O,-2: DRAW 0,1 937 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY 16+DX) =\"A 2 \" THEN DRAW 7,0: DRAW 0,6: INVE 9 84 IF A$ (LEVEL,POS+DY16-DX) =\"G RSE 1: DRAW -18,0: DRAW 18,0: IN \" THEN FOR N=78 TO 152 STEP 74: VERSE 0: DRAW 0,-1: DRAW 0,5: DR PLOT N, 39: DRAW 0,98: DRAW 24,0 AW -18,0: DRAW 0,9: DRAW 3,3: D : DRAW 0, -.98: DRAW -24,0: FOR Q RAW 0,3: DRAW -3,3: DRAW 3,-3: D 1 TO 2: DRAW 4,0: DRAW 0,98: DRA RAW 12,0: DRAW 3,3: DRAW -3, -3: W 4.0: DRAW 0,98: NEXT 0: DRAW DRAW 0,-3 4,0: DRAW 0,98: DRAW 4,0: FOR Q= 938 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS)>\"4\" AND A$ OTO 26 STEP 26: DRAW O, -Q: FOR (LEVEL, POS)<\"B\" THEN INVERSE 1: X=0 TO 12 STEP 4: DRAW -X, X*3: D FOR N=28 TO 30 STEP 2: PLOT 108 RAW -12,-36: DRAW X-12,36-X*3: D ,N: DRAW 40,0: NEXT N: FOR N=OT RAW X, X*3: DRAW 12, -36: DRAW 12. O 8 STEP 2: PLOT 108+N, 32-N: DRA X, 36-X*3: DRAW 0,-12* (X<12): NEX W 40-N*2,0: NEXT N: INVERSE O: P TX: NEXT 0: NEXT N LOT 108,8: DRAW 0,24: DRAW 40,0: 985 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16DX) =\"F DRAW 0, -24: DRAW -40,0: DRAW O, \" THEN FOR N=78 TO 128 STEP 50: 24: DRAW 8,8: DRAW 24,0: DRAW 8, PLOT N, 39: DRAW 0,98: DRAW 48,0 -8: DRAW -22,0: DRAW 0,-6: DRAW : DRAW 0,-98: DRAW -48,0: FOR Q= 6,0: DRAW 0,6 1 TO 2: DRAW 8,0: DRAW 0,98: DRA 939 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS) -\"A\" THEN W 8,0: DRAW 0,98: NEXT 0: DRAW INVERSE 1: PLOT 109, 34: FOR N=1 8,0: DRAW 0,98: DRAW 8,0: FOR Q= TO 9:: DRAW 38,0: DRAW 0,1: DRAW O TO 50 STEP 50: DRAWL0,-: FOR -38,0: DRAW 0,1: NEXT N: INVERS X=0 TO 24 STEP 8: DRAW --X, X: DRA EO: PLOT 147,32: DRAW 0,20: DRA W-24,-24: DRAW X-24, 24-X: DRAW W -38,0: DRAW 0,-19: DRAW 7,7: D X, X: DRAW 24,-24: DRAW 24-X, 24-X RAW 0,5: DRAW -7, 7: DRAW 7,-7: D  DRAW 0,-8* (X<24): NEXT X: NEXT RAW 24,0: DRAW 7, 7: DRAW -7, -7: Q: NEXT N: PRINT AT 11,15;\" DRAW 0,5: DRAW 7,-7: DRAW -7,7: \";AT 12, 15:\" \" DRAW -24,0 986 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS) =\"H\" OR A$( 955 IF A$ (LEVEL,POS) == \"B\" THEN LEVEL,POS) =\"I\" THEN PLOT 119,28 PRINT AT 20,9;\" : DRAW INVERSE 1; 18,0: PLOT 113 ,8: DRAW 0,6: DRAW 30,0: DRAW 0, 965 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS) =\"C\" THEN -6: DRAW 0,6: DRAW -6,0: FOR N=1 PLOT 71,8: DRAW 8,8: DRAW 96,0: TO 3: DRAW 0,43: DRAW -3,0: DRA DRAW 8,-8 W 0,-43: DRAW -3,0: NEXT N: DRAW 975 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS) \"D\" OR A$( 0,43: DRAW -2,0: DRAW 22,0: DRA LEVEL, POS) =\"E\" THEN PLOT 87,8: W 0,6: DRAW --22,0: DRAW 0,-6: IF DRAW 0,3: DRAW -6,6: DRAW 0,2: D A $ (LEVEL, POS) \"I\" THEN PRINT A RAW 92,0: DRAW 0, -2: DRAW -6, -6: T 12,16;\" \";AT 13, 14;\" DRAW 0,-3: PLOT 120, 19: DRAW O, 4: DRAW -3,3: DRAW 22,0: DRAW -3 987 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) =\"H ,-3: DRAW 0, -4: FOR N=-5 TO 5: P \" OR A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY 16+DX) =\"I\" T LOT 128, 26: DRAW O, ABS N*4: DRAW HEN PLOT 122,58: DRAW INVERSE N*4,0, (PI+ABS N/180) * -SGN N: NE 1 ; 12,0: PLOT 138,38: DRAW -20,0: XT N DRAW 0,4: DRAW 20,0: DRAW 0, -4: 980 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) =\"D DRAW 0,4: DRAW -4,0: FOR N=1 TO \" OR A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY 16+DX) =\"E\" T 3: DRAW 0,25: DRAW -2,0: DRAW 0 HEN PLOT 100,38: DRAW 0,2: DRAW -25: DRAW -2,0: NEXT N: DRAW O, -4,4: DRAW 0,1: DRAW 62,0: DRAW 25: DRAW -1,0: DRAW 14,0: DRAW O 0,-1: DRAW -4,-4: DRAW 0, -2: DR ..4: DRAW -14,0: DRAW 0,--4: IF A$ AW -54,0: PLOT 124, 46: DRAW 0,2: (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) =\"I\" THEN PR DRAW -2,2: DRAW 12,0: DRAW -2,INT AT 12,15;\" \" 2: DRAW 0,-2: FOR N=-5 TO 5: PLO 990 INPUT INKEY$: PRINT #0; AT O T 128,51: DRAW O, ABS N*2: DRAW N ,0;\"Forward Turn Left Turn *2,0, (PI+ABS N/180) * -SGN N: NEXT Right Report Incant Spell Use It em Make Camp\"; (\" Cl.imb Ladder 982 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS) =\"G\" AND A$ \" AND A$ (LEVEL, POS) \"2\" AND A$ (L. (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX)<>\"1\" THEN F EVEL, POS)<\"5\"); (\"Enter Door\" AN OR N=47 TO 171 STEP 124: PLOT N, DA$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) =\"0\") (\" 8: DRAW 0, 160: DRAW 36,0: DRAW O Open Chest\" AND A$ (LEVEL, POS) \"4 ,-160: DRAW -36,0: FOR Q=1 TO 2: \" AND A$ (LEVEL, POS)<\"B\"); (\" Drin DRAW 6,0: DRAW 0,160: DRAW 6,0: K\" AND A$ (LEVEL, POS) >\"C\" AND A$ DRAW 0,-160: NEXT 0.: DRAW 6,0: LEVEL, POS) \"F\");: RETURN DRAW 0, 160: DRAW 6,0: FOR Q=O TO 1000 GO SUB 8000: GO TO 1015 52 STEP 52: DRAW 0, 0: FOR X=0 1010 GO SUB 6000: GO TO 1020 TO 18 STEP 6: DRAW-X, X*3: DRAW 1015 GO SUB 600 -18, -54: DRAW X-18,54-X*3: DRAW 1020 POKE 23658,8: IF CAMP THEN X, X*3: DRAW 18, -54: DRAW 18-X, 54 GO SUB 1100: GO TO 1015 -X*3: DRAW 0,-18* (X<18): NEXT X: 1030 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS) \"I\" THEN NEXT Q: NEXT N GO SUB 1300 983 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS) =\"G\" AND A$ 1040 GO SUB 1450 (LEVEL,POS+DY16+DX) =\"1\" THEN PL1050 GO TO 1020 OT 128,62: DRAW 0, -54: DRAW 1.0: 1099 REM CAMPED Options DRAW 0,160: DRAW -1,0: DRAW 0, 54: DRAW 0,54: DRAW -1,0: DRAW O 1100 CLS : PRINT AT 8,8; \"OPTIONS .-160: DRAW 0,76: DRAW -2,0: DRA W 0,8, -2: DRAW 6,0: DRAW 0,-8, -2 1102 PRINT AT 2,13;\"CAMPED\";AT 4 395) 1 "


",0;\" 1105 PRINT AT 7,0; 0$; AT 10,8; \"M) ove\" 1110 PRINT AT 12,8; \"Report\" 1112 PRINT AT 14,8; \"U) se Item\" 1114 PRINT AT 16,8; \"Incant Spel 1\" 1145 PRINT AT 18,8; \"S) ave Positi TRID on\" 1150 IF INKEY $\"M\" AND INKEY$> \"S\" AND INKEY$ \"R\" AND INKEY$<> \"U\" AND INKEY$< \"I\" THEN GO TO 1150 1160 IF INKEY $=\"M\" THEN LET CAM P=O: GO SUB 1400: RETURN 1170 IF INKEY $=\"R\" THEN GO SUB 1500: GO TO 1100 1180 IF INKEY $=\"I\" THEN GO SUB 500: GO SUB 3000: FOR q=1 TO 100 : NEXT q: GO TO 1100 1185 IF INKEY $=\"U\" THEN GO SUB 500: GO SUB 3500: FOR Q=1 TO 100 : NEXT 9: GO TO 1100 1190 IF INKEYS=\"S\" THEN CLS : P RINT \"Ready tape, then press any key\": PAUSE 4E4: SAVE \"tallyron\" LINE 1010: BEEP 1,1: RETURN 1299 REM Combat 1370 PRINT AT 19,10;\"F)ight\" 1375 PRINT AT 21,10; \"Run\" 1380 LET LEINKEY $: IF L$<>\"F\" A ND L$<>\"R\" THEN GO TO 1380 1385 IF L$=\"F\" THEN FOR N=16 TO 21: PRINT AT N, O; $ : NEXT N: GO SUB 2500 1390 IF L$=\"R\" THEN FOR N=16 TO 21: PRINT AT N, 0;0$: NEXT N: GO SUB 1900 1392 IF FLAG=1 THEN LET FLAGRO: GO SUB 1300 1396 RETURN 1399 REM Move 1400 GO SUB 600 1450 GO SUB 105 1452 IF A$ (LEVEL,POS) >\"2\" THEN RETURN 1455 LET TS=INT (RND*200) +1: IF TSX4 OR (LEVEL=S AND FN A (POS) = 1 ) THEN RETURN 1460 LET AC=M(1,T5+8): LET DAMEM (2, T5+8): LET M1=1: IF T5>2 THEN LET M1 = 2: IF TS=4 THEN LET M1 1470 LET TS=T58: GOSUB 1309 1495 RETURN 1499 REM Report 1500 CLS : PRINT AT 2,9; \"STATUS REPORT\"; AT 4,0;\" 1300 IF A$(LEVEL, POS)<\"J\" THEN RETURN 1301 LET TS=CODE A$ (LEVEL, POS) -7 3: LET AC=M(1,75): LET DAM=M(2,T 5) 1305 IF T5<3 OR TS=6 THEN LET M 1=2: GO TO 1309 1306 IF TS=8 THEN LET M1=3: GO TO 1309 1308 LET M1=1 1309 DIM D(M1): DIM M$ (M1, 16) 1310 IF M1=0 THEN RETURN 1315 LET INIT=INT (RND*2): DIM U (M1): FOR N=1 TO M1: LET M$ (N)=B $ (TS( N1 AND T58)): LET U(N) = 1 00: NEXT N 1317 GO SUB 1322: IF INIT THEN GO SUB 1360: IF M1 AND L$<>\"R\" T HENGO SUB 2000 1318 IF NOT INIT THEN GO SUB 20 00: GOSUB 1360 1319 IF M1=0 THEN LET PRO=0: LE TA1=INT (RND*M(3, TS)): GO SUB 4 010: GO TO 600 1320 IF L$=\"R\" THEN LET M1=O: R ETURN 1321 GO TO 1317 1323 CLS : PRINT AT 6,0;\" \" PRIN T AT 7,0;0$ 1325 PRINT AT 8,6; \"YOU ARE ATTAC KED BY:\" 1330 PRINT AT 10,6; \"A) \" ; M$ (1) 1335 IF M1>1 THEN PRINT AT 12,6 ; \"B) \";M$ (2) 1340 IF M1>2 THEN PRINT AT 14,6 ;\"C) \";M$ (3) 1345 PRINT AT 15,0;\" 1520 FOR Q=1 TO 3: PRINT AT Q*4+ 4,0; \"Name \":N$ (Q) ; TAB 20; \"L.FO rce\":F();\"%\"'\"Weapon \";D$ (0) ;T AB 24: \"A/C\";Z (0) \"Armour \"; E$ (Q ): IF NOT F(0) THEN PRINT AT Q* 4+4, 20;\" DECEASED \" 1530 NEXT Q 1560 GO SUB 9555 1570 GO SUB 500 1580 PRINT AT 8,2; \"SPELLS KNOWN 1 OTHER ITEMS\" 1585 PRINT AT 9,0;: FOR N=1 TO 6 : PRINT TAB 1;N; \" \"; T$ (N) ; TAB 1 5;\" \";P$ (N): NEXT N 1590 GO SUB 9555: GO SUB 500: RE TURN 1899 REM Run YETI NUKTIKA 1900 LET X=INT (RND*10) +1: IF X> 6 THEN PRINT AT 18,6; \"YOU CAN'T ESCAPE\": LET L$=\"\"; GO SUB 9555 : RETURN 1905 LET POS1 =POS+INT (RND*11-5) +16*INT (RND*11-5): LET DIR=INT (RND*4+1): IF POS1=POS OR POS1<1 OR POS1>256 THEN GO TO 1905 1915 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS1) <\"2\" OR A$ (LEVEL, POS1 ) =\"B\" OR EN A(POS)<>F NA (POS1) THEN GO TO 1905 1920 LET POS=POS1: GOSUB 600: L ET FLAG=1: RETURN 2000 REM Monsters Attack 2010 GO SUB 550: FOR N=1 TO M1 2012 IF D (N) THEN PRINT AT 17,0 ; \"The \";m$ (3 TO )\" sleeps on... \"; GO TO 2030 2015 LET A1=INT (RND* (3-PRO) +1): IF F(A1) =O THEN GO TO 2015 2020 LET A=INT (RND*20+1): IF AX =19-Z (A1) THEN LET DAM1=INT (RN D*M(2, T5) +1): PRINT AT 17,0; N$ (A 1); AT 18,0; \"has been hit\": LET F (A1) F (A1) -DAM1: IF F(A1) <1 THEN PRINT AT 19,0; \"and is dead\":L 1355 RETURN 1360 REM Fight or Run 1361 IF A$ (LEVEL,POS) =\"7\" THEN LET L.$=\"F\": GO TO 1385 1362 GO SUB 550 1365 PRINT AT 17, 10: \"OPTIONS\". continued 55 "


"RN ET F (A1) =O: IF NOT F(1) AND NOT don't know that spell!\": BEEP .7 F(2) THEN LET PRO=0 5,4: BEEP 1.5,-4: LET K$=\"Z\", RE 3164 GO SUB 550: LET (CODE L$-6 2025 IF AX 19-Z (A1) THEN PRINT A TURN 4) =O: PRINT AT 17,0; \"The \"; M$ (CO T 17,0; \"The \"; M$ (N, 3 TO) \"has m 3030 FOR I = I TO 5: LET T$ (I) ==T${ DE L.$-64,3 TO ) \"dies.\": RETURN i ssed\":N$ (A1) I +1): NEXT I: LET T$ (6)=\"\". 3165 PRINT AT 17,0; \"The spell ha 2030 FOR D=1 TO 100: NEXT 0: GO 3040 FOR I=1 TO 8: IF Y$ (I) =IS T S no effect!\"; RETURN SUB 550: NEXT N HENGO SUB 550: GO SUB 3090+10* 3170 LET S2=S2-1: PRINT AT 17,0; 2032 IF F(3)=0 THEN GO TO 9600 I: FOR Q=1 TO 100: NEXT Q: LET B \"The fireball explodes!\"; FOR i= 2035 PRINT AT 20,1; \"DO YOU WANT (3) =O: RETURN 1 TO 1: IF TS< >19 THEN LET (i A STATUS REPORT?\" 3050 NEXT I )=U (I)-INT (RND*100+1): IF U (I)< 2040 IF INKEY$< \"Y\" AND INKEY$<> 3100 PRINT AT 17,0; \"Who do you w =O THEN FOR Q=1 TO 100: NEXT 0: \"N\" THEN GO TO 2040 ish to cure?\",,\"1) \";N$ (1),,\"2) GO SUB 550: LET U(I) =O: PRINT A 2045 IF INKEY=\"N\" THEN RETURN \"; N$ (2),,\"3) \";N$ (3) T 17,0; \"The \"; M$ (1,3 TO) \"dies. 2050 GO SUB 1500: IF NOT INIT TH 3101 LET L$=INKEY $: IF L$(\"1\" OR EN GO SUB 1323 L$>\"3\" THEN GO TO 3101 3171 NEXT I: RETURN 2499 RETURN 3102 GO SUB 550: LET I=VAL L$: I 3500 DIM J$ (14): GO SUB 550: IF 2500 REM Players Attack F F(I) =O OR F(I)=100 THEN PRINT NOT P THEN PRINT AT 19,0; \"You d 2505 FOR N=1 TO 3: LET B(N)=1: I AT 19,0;\"You cast the spell but on't have any items!\": BEEP 75, F N<>3 THEN GO TO 2515 it has noeffect!\": RETURN 4: BEEP 1.5,-4: LET K$=\"Z\": RETU 2510 GO SUB 550: PRINT AT 17,11; 3103 LET f(i)=f (i ) +INT (RND*50+1 N$ (N); AT 19,6; \"U) se an item\";AT ): IF f (i) >100 THEN LET f (i) =10 3510 PRINT AT 19,0; \"Enter item y 20,5;\"Incant a spell\";AT 21,6;\" ou wish to use.\": INPUT LINE J$ Attack with weapons\" 3104 PRINT AT 17,0;N$ (I)'\"feels : FOR 1-6 TO 1 STEP-1: IF J$=P$ 2511 LET K$=INKEY$: IF K$< \"A\" A better...\"; RETURN (1) AND J$<>0$(TO 14) THEN LET ND K$<>\"I\" AND K$<>\"U\" THEN GO 3110 PRINT AT 17,0: \"You cast the P=P-1: LET P$ (I)=\"\": GO TO 3530 TO 2511 spell...\": IF NOT M1 THEN RETU 3520 NEXT i: PRINT AT 21,0;\"You 2512 IF K$=\"I\" THEN GO SUB 3000 RN don't have one of those!\": BEEP : IF K$=\"I\" THEN GO TO 2535 3111 FOR I=1 TO M1: FOR Q=1 TO 1 .75,4: BEEP 1.5, -4: LET K$=\"Z\": 2513 IF K$=\"U\" THEN GO SUB 3500 00: NEXT 0: GOSUB 550: IF INT ( RETURN : IF K$=\"U\" THEN GO TO 2535 RND*4+1)=1 AND T5>2 AND T5<>7 AN 3530 FOR IOI TO 5: LET P$ (I) =P$ ( 2514 IF K$=\"Z\" THEN GO SUB 550: DTS<>8 AND TSK 11 THEN LET D(I) I+1): NEXT I: LET P$ (6)=\"\" GO TO 2510 =1: PRINT AT 18,0; \"The \";M$ (1,3 3540 FOR I=1 TO 5: IF $ (I)=J$ T 2515 IF F(N) =O OR M1=1 THEN GO TO) \"falls asleep.\": GO TO 3113 HENGO SUB 550: GO SUB 3590+10* TO 2535 3112 PRINT AT 18,0; \"The \"; M$ (I, 3 I: FOR Q=1 TO 100: NEXT 0: LET B 2516 GO SUB 550: PRINT AT 17,11; TO)' is linaffected.\" (3)=O: RETURN N$ (N); AT 19,0; \"Which monster wil 3113 NEXT I: RETURN 3550 NEXT I 1 you fight? 3120 IF NOT M1 OR TSX4 OR T5=70 3600 PRINT AT 17,0; \"Administer P 2520 LET K$=INKEY$: IF K$<\"A\" OR RT5=8 THEN PRINT AT 19,0: \"You otion to whom?\",,\"1) \";N$ (1),,\"2 K$>CHR$ (M1+64) THEN GO TO 252 cast the spell but it has noeffe ) \"; N$ (2), , \"3) \";N$ (3) ct!\": RETURN 3601 LET LSINKEY$: IF L${\"1\" OR 2530 LET B(N) =CODE K$-64 3121 LET M10: PRINT AT 17,0; \"Th L$>\"3\" THEN GO TO 3601 2535 NEXT N: GOSUB 550 e enemy runs away!\"; RETURN 3602 GO SUB 550: LET IEVAL L$: I 2600 FOR N=1 TO 3: IF F (N) O OR 3130 IF NOT M1 THEN GO TO 3135 F F(I) =O OR F(I) =100 THEN PRINT B(N) =0 THEN GO TO 2620 3131 IF M1==1 THEN LET L$ \"A\": G A T 19,0;\"It has no effect!\": RE 2602 IF U(B(N)) >O THEN LET A=IN 0 TO 3134 TURN T (RND*20+3): IF A>=19-AC OR D(B 3132 PRINT AT 17, 11:N$( AT 19, 3603 LET f(i) = f (i) +50: IF f(i) >1 (N)) THEN LET DAM1=INT (RND*G( N O: \"Against which monster? 00 THEN LET f(i) =100 > +1): PRINT AT 17,0; N$ (N) \"hits 3133 LET L$=INKEY$: IF L$<\"A\" OR 3604 PRINT AT 17,0: N$ (I)\"feels the \";M$ (B(N), 3 TO ): LET U (B(N) L$>CHR$ (M1+64) THEN GO TO 313 better...\": RETURN ) =U (B(N)) --DAM1; IF U(B(N)) <1 THE 3610 PRINT AT 17.0: \"The vial exp N PRINT AT 19,0; \"and kills it\": 3134 GO SUB 550: IF T5<>7 AND T5 lodes!\": FOR i=1 TO m1: LET (i) LET U(B (N) ) =0:. GO TO 2615 <>8 AND INT (RND*4+1)=1 THEN LE =U (I) --INT (RND*50+1): IF (I)<=0 2605 IF U (BN) AND AX 19-AC AND TU (CODE L$-64) O: PRINT AT 17.0 THEN FOR Q=1 TO 100: NEXT 0: G NOT D (B(N)) THEN PRINT AT 17,0; ; \"The \";M$ (CODE L$-64,3 TO \"di OSUB 550: LET U(I) =O: PRINT AT N$ (N)\"misses the \"; M$ (B(N), 3 TO 'es.\": RETURN 17,0; \"The \";M$ (1,3 TO )'\"dies.\" 3135 PRINT AT 17,0:\"The spell ha 3611 NEXT I: RETURN 2615 FOR Q=1 TO 100: NEXT D s no effect.\": RETURN 3620 IF NOT CAMP OR 5=6 THEN PR 2620 GO SUB 550: NEXT N. 3140 IF F(1) OR F(2) THEN LET P INT AT 17,0; \"You can't use it at 2625 LET L1=M1: FOR N=1 TO M1: I RO=1 present.\": LET P$ (P41) H$ (3): L FU(N) <1 THEN LET M1-M1-1: LET 3141 PRINT AT 17,0: \"You cast the ET P=P+1: RETURN U ( N O: IF N<L1 THEN LET U (N) =U spell...\": RETURN 3621 LET T8=INT (RND*8+1): LETt (N+1): LET D (N) =D (N+1): LET M$ (N 3150 LET S2=S2-1: IF A$ (LEVEL, PO $(5+1) =y$ (8): PRINT AT 17,0; \"Th >=M$ (N+1) S4-DY16WDX)<>\"B\" THEN PRINT #0:A e spell on the scroll is\"'x$ (t8) 2630 NEXT N: IF M1=O AND A$ (LEVE T 0,0; \"The spell has no effect!\" \"\"The command word for this spe L, POS) \"G\" THEN LET A$ (LEVEL, PO : RETURN 11 is\":t$ (5+1): LET S=5+1: IF t S) =\"2\": RETURN 3151 PRINT #0;AT 0,0; \"The transp 85 THEN LET 52=52+1 2640 RETURN orter grid is deactivate 3622 RETURN 3000 IF NOT S THEN GO SUB 550: d!\": LET A$ (LEVEL, pos+DY16+DX) = \" 3630 LET P$ (P+1) =H$ (4): LET P=P+ PRINT AT 19,0; \"You don't have an C\": RETURN y spells!\": BEEP.75,4: BEEP 1.5 3160 LET S2=S2-1: IF NOT M1 THEN3631 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) , -4: LET K$=\"Z\"; RETURN GO TO 3165 F\" AND A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY16+DX) <>\"G 3010 GO SUB 550: PRINT AT 19,0;\" 3161 IF M1=1 THEN LET L$=\"A\": G \" THEN PRINT AT 17,0;\"You can't Enter Spell Command word\": INPUT 0 TO 3164 use it at present.\": RETURN LINE : FOR 6 TO 1 STEP-1: 3162 PRINT AT 17, 11; N$ (3); AT 19, 3632 PRINT #O; AT 0, 0:\"The key fi IF I$T$ (I) THEN LET SHS-1: GO O: \"Against which monster? \" ts the lock!\": IF A$ (LEVEL, POS+D TO 3030 3163 LET L INKEY $: IF L$<\"A\" OR Y16+DX) =\"F\" THEN LET A$ (LEVEL, 3020 NEXT I: PRINT AT 21,0;\"You L$ >CHR$ (M1+64) THEN GO TO 316 OS+DY 16+DX) =\"G\": RETURN 3 1 "


"3633 LET A$ (LEVEL, POS+DY 16+DX) =\" LET P=4 F\"; RETURN 8035 DATA \"HEALING POTION\",\"VIAL 3640 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS)<>\"H\" THEN OF FIRE\", \"SCROLL\",\"KEY\", \"STATUE PRINT AT 17,0; \"You can't use it TTE\", \"CRYSTAL BELL\" at present.\": LET P=P+1: LET P$ 8040 DIM H$ (6, 14): FOR N=1 TO 6: (P) =H$ (5): RETURN READ H$ (N): IF N<3 THEN LET P$ 3641 LET A$ (LEVEL, POS) =\"I\": PRIN (N*2-1) =H$ (N): LET P$ (N*2)=H$ (N) T AT 17,0; \"You place the \";h $ (5) 8045 NEXT N: DIM G(3) \"\"on the pedestal.\": LET FLAG2F 8050 LET S2=1: LET S=6: RESTORE LAG2+1 : RETURN 8055: DIM X$ (8, 14): DI $18, 4): 3650 PRINT AT 17,0; \"You can't us FOR N=1 TO 8: READ X $ (N), Y$ (N): e it at present.\": LET PP+1: LE IF NK THEN LET T$ (N) =Y$ (N) TP$ (P) =H$ (6): RETURN 8055 DATA \"Heal\", \"SOTH\",\"Sleep\", 4000 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS) = \"5\" THEN \"TSUD\", \"Fear\", \"GERT\", \"Stun\", \"KRA LET A$ (LEVEL, POS) =CHR$ INT (RND C\", \"Protection\", \"SHEE\", \"Dispel M *3+55) agic\", \"KEAR\", \"Kill\", \"MORT\", \"Ligh 4005 LET A1 CODE A$ (LEVEL,POS) . S tning Ball\", \"BOOM\" S: GO TO 4011 8056 NEXT N 4010 IF A1=0 OR A1 >6 THEN RETURN 8070 DIM M(3, 12): FOR X=1 TO 3: 4011 IF A1=-1 THEN GO TO 4500 FOR N=1 TO 12: READ MX,N): NEXT 4012 INPUT INKEY$: PRINT #O;AT O N: NEXT X ,0; \"You have found a \";h$ (A1+1) 8075 DATA 7,7,5,3,2,2,5,5,2,4,4, 4020 PRINT #0; \"Do you wish to ta 4, 20, 20, 30, 35, 50, 50, 100, 100, 110, ke it? 40,35, 30,0,0,3,3,3,3,0,0,3,0,0,0 4021 LET i$=INKEY$: IF i$<>\"Y\" A 8082 LET LEVEL=1: LET DIR=1: LET ND i $<>\"N\" THEN GO TO 4021 POS=153: LET CAMP=O 4022 IF i$=\"N\" THEN RETURN 8083 DATA \"A Skeleton\",\"A Zombie 4030 INPUT INKEY $: IF p=6 THEN \", \"A Wight\", \"A Spectre\", \"A Wrait PRINT #O; AT 0,0; \"You can't carry h\", \"A Wraith\",\"A Gargoyle\",\" GR any more!\": FOR Q=1 TO 100: NEX EKH the EVIL.\" T 0: RETURN 8084 DATA \"A Balrog\", \"A Ghoul\", \" 4040 LET P$ (P+1) =H$ (A1+1): LET P A Ghoul\", \"A Ghoul\" P+1: IF A15 THEN LET FLAG3=1 8085 DIM B$ (12, 16): FOR N=1 TO 1 4070 IF A$ (LEVEL, POS) >\"4\" AND A$ 2: READ B$ (N): NEXT N (LEVEL, POS)<\"A\" THEN LET A$ (LEV 8086 LET E$ (3) =\"Heavy Cloak\": LE EL, pos)=\"A\" TE$ (2) =\"Plate Mail\": LET E$ (1) = 4080 RETURN E$ (2) 4500 INPUT INKEY$: PRINT #0; AT O 8088 DIM Z (3): LET Z (3)=9: LET Z , O; \"The chest explodes in your f (2) -2: LET Z (1)=2 acesas soon as you try to open i 8090 LET D$ (3)=\"Dagger\": LET D$ t!\": LET a $(level, pos) =\"2\": FOR 2)=\"2 Handed Sword\": LET D$ ( 1 ) =D n=1 TO 3: LET f(n) = f (n)-INT (RND $ (2) *50+1): IF f(n) <=O THEN LET f (n 8092 LET G(3) =20: LET G(2)=150: ) ==0: FOR Q=1 TO 100: NEXT 9: INP LET G(1) = 150 UT INKEY $: PRINT #O; AT 0,0; $(n) 8094 DATA 0, 16, 32, 126, 32, 16,0,0, \"dies.\";: IF N=3 THEN GO TO 96 0,8,4, 126,4,8,0,0,1,3,6, 12, 25, 51 00 , 102, 255, 255, 255,0,0, 255, 255.0.2 4510 NEXT n: FOR Q=1 TO 100: NEX 55, 128, 192,96, 48, 152, 204, 102, 255 T 0: RETURN , 2, 7, 10, 10, 10, 31, 31, 30, 128, 192, 1 5000 INPUT INKEY$: IF A$ (LEVEL,P 60, 160, 160, 240, 240, 240, 28, 30, 30, OS) =\"E\" THEN GO TO 5100 31,2,2,2,2, 112, 240, 240, 240, 128, 1 5010 PRINT #O; AT 0,0; \"Who will d 28, 128, 128,0,0,73, 127, 127,51,6,1 rink?\",\"1) \";N$ (1),,\"2 \"; N$ (2), 0,248,4, 244, 252, 248, 248, 40,80,0, ,\"3) \"; N$ (3) 0,0,0, 128, 127,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,12 5020 LET L$=INKEY$: IF L$<\"1\" OR 8, 128,2,3,2,3,1,0,0,0, 16, 255, 223 L$>\"3\" THEN GO TO 5020 , 255, 227, 197, 9, 17, 252, 255, 255, 25 S025 INPUT INKEY$: LET I=VAL L$ 5, 255, 9, 9, 18, 128, 128,0,0,0,0,0,0 S027 LET A$ (LEVEL, POS) =\"E\" 8095 GO SUB 6000: PAPER O: INK 7 5030 IF F(I) =O OR F (I)=100 THEN 8098 LET FLAG=O: LET FLAG2=O: LE GO TO 5100 T FLAG3=O:: LET M1=0 5040 LET f (i)=100 8099 REM Instructions 5045 PRINT #0; AT 0,0; N$ (I)\"feel 8100 BORDER O: CLS : PRINT AT 1, s better...\"; RETURN 8:\"INSTRUCTIONS\", 5100 INPUT INKEY$: PRINT #0; AT O 8200 PRINT \"You are to become th ,0; \"The water is very refreshing e Tallyron Court Wizard, from t !\": RETURN he story, in search of the mag 6000 RESTORE 8094: FOR n=0 TO 13 ic crystal bell that threatens 5: READ X: POKE USR \"a\"+n, X: NEX the kingdom.\" Tn: RETURN 8220 PRINT \"As a wizard, you are 7999 REM Set up not allowedto wear much armour 8000 DIM B(3): LET PRO=O: LET o$ or carry large weapons, but y ou will be able to find and use \": POKE 23658,8 magic!\" 8015 DIM F(3): FOR N=1 TO 3: LET 8230 PRINT \"The game is menu dri F(N) = 100: NEXT N ven and it is only necessary to 8025 DIM D$ (3,14): DIM E$ (3, 14) read the screen prompts caref 8030 DIM P$ (6, 14): DIM T$ (6,4): ully.\" TALLYRON II continued "


"575 8300 PRINT \"When camped, you may save your position. When this is done, thewhole game is saved making it unnecessary to load the original version beforehand.\" 8870 PRINT AT 21,0; \"ANY KEY TO S TART\" 8880 IF INKEY$=\"THEN GO TO 88 80 8890 IF INKEY$=\"Y\" THEN GO TO 8 100 8895 PRINT AT 20,0:0$; AT 21,0:0$ 8900 DIM N$ (3, 10): INPUT AT 0,0; \"Enter your characters name\"! LI 8999 RETURN en NE $ (3) 9554 REM Press ENTER 8965 PRINT AT 20,6; N$ (3) 9555 PRINT AT 21,3; \"PRESS KENTER 8970 PRINT AT 21,6;\"IS THIS CORR > TO CONTINUE\" ECT?\" 9560 IF INKEY$< >CHR$ 13 THEN GO 8975 IF INKEY $KX\"N\" AND INKEY$<> TO 9555 \"Y\" THEN GO TO 8975 9565 PRINT AT 21,0;0$: RETURN 8980 IF INKEY $=\"N\" THEN PRINT A 9600 REM Lose T 20,0:0$; 0$: GO TO 8900 9605 CLS : PRINT AT 9, 11 ; N$ (3): 8982 LET N$ ( 1 ) =\"KARL\": LET N$ (2) PRINT \"COURT WIZARD OF TALLYRON\" \"MARC\" \"YOU DIED WITHOUT COMPLETING Y 8996 CLS OURQUEST!\": STOP 5 CLS : PRINT AT 10,7; FLASH 1;\" SETTING UP DATA \": FLASH O 190 DATA \"21021\",\"25122\",\"22215 10 DIM A$(5,256): RESTORE \",\"11121\" 20 FOR X=1 TO 5: ET A$(X, TO 200 DATA \"01215\",\"11221\",\"JO2L6 16)=\"1111111111111 11\": LET A$(X \",\"21101\" ,241 TO )=A$(X, TO 16): NEXT X 210 DATA \"11121\",\"11222\",\"11155 30 FOR X17 TO 240: READ B$: F \",\"11111\" OR Y=1 TO 5: LET A$(Y, X) =B$ (Y): 220 DATA \"11111\",\"22605\",\"12211 NEXT Y: NEXT X \",\"12015\" 35 CLS 230 DATA \"10211\",\"12221\", \"KK221 40 SAVE \"MAP\" DATA A$() \",\"12021\" SO PRINT \"REWIND TAPE AND 240 DATA \"22212\",\"12012\",\"22212 PLAY BACK FOR VERIFICATION\" \",\"22012\" 60 VERIFY \"MAP\" DATA A$() 250 DATA \"22211\",\"21211\",\"11101 70 PRINT \"VERIFICATION O.K.\" \",\"11111\" 100 DATA \"11111\",\"52436\",\"22222 260 DATA \"11111\",\"20122\",\"212LM \",\"22225\" \",\"21101\" 110 DATA \"20K22\",\"22122\",\"12212 270 DATA \"21112\",\"2111D\", \"20111 ,\"52K22\" \",\"11111\" 120 DATA \"22225\",\"21222\",\"11222 280 DATA \"21211\",\"11211\",\"11211 \",\"11222 ,\"11112 130 DATA \"12222\",\"143L2\",\"11115 290 DATA \"12OLO\",\"21122\",\"11122 \",\"11111\" \",\"11111\" 140 DATA \"11111\",\"1D21M\",\"1JB11 300 DATA \"11111\",\"22;22\",\"11KL1 \",\"02211\" \",\"11261\" 150 DATA \"11211\",\"1112M\",\"11211310 DATA \"21212\", \"J1211\",\"12211 \",\"21121\" \",\"11512\" 160 DATA \"J2111\",\"20001\",\"1K11M 320 DATA \"25143\",\"12112\",\"55111 \",\"11111\" \",\"21212\" 170 DATA \"1:111\",\"1B21M\",\"11111 330 DATA \"12221\",\"22K22\",\"111B2 330 DATA \",\"11111\" \",\"11111\" 180 DATA \"11111\",\"2K122\",\"22122 340 DATA \"11111\",\"221B2\",\"11152 \",\"251L2\" \",\"111;2\" 510 DATA \"12212\",\"12112\",\"10211 350 DATA \"11112\",\"21115\",\"43111 \",\"1P212\" \",\"11112\" 520 DATA \"21212\",\"12112\",\"12211 360 DATA \"22152\",\"14312\",\"22111 \",\"22511\" \",\"21B12\" 530 DATA \"2112H\",\"22211\",\"11112 370 DATA \"11205\",\"22211\",\"1111G\",\"11111\" \",\"11111\" 540 DATA \"11111\",\"22522\",\"21121 380 DATA \"11111\",\"22112\",\"11211 .J1121 \",\"21211\" 550 DATA \"11111\",\"11111\",\"11111 390 DATA \"21211\",\"112N1\",\"11221\",\"11111\" \",\"11501\" 560 DATA \"01111\",\"11111\",\"11111 400 DATA \"25120\",\"12611\",\"12111 \",\"11111\" \",\"22111\" 570 DATA \"11101\",\"12211\",\"11111 410 DATA \"11121\",\"22021\",\"11122 \",\"11111\" \",\"11111\" 580 DATA \"11111\",\"22243\",\"22212 420 DATA \"11111\",\"2J112\",\"21011 \",\"22222\" \",\"J2122\" 590 DATA \"22222\",\"22222\",\"22222 430 DATA \"22122\",\"22122\", \"20211\", \"OBK22\" \",\"2P112\" 600 DATA \"62222\",\"12222\",\"12221 440 DATA \"31212\",\"21012\",\"21211\",\"122L1\" \",\"20211\" 610 DATA \"12221\",\"12225\",\"11162 450 DATA \"1112H\",\"22221\",\"11152 \",\"11111\" 620 DATA \"11111\",\"11111\",\"11111 460 DATA \"11111\",\"22112\",\"11211\",\"11116\" \", \"2432\" 630 DATA \"11111\", \"11111\",\"11115 470 DATA \"20216\",\"1P112\",\"1D210\",\"11111\" \",\"12112\" 640 DATA \"11111\", \"11112\",\"11112 480 DATA \"2F01D\",\"12112\",\"12212\",\"11112 \",\"22210\" 650 DATA \"11112\",\"1111M\",\"11112 490 DATA \"11102\",\"22212\",\"11112\",\"11111\" \"11111\" 9995 STOP 500 DATA \"11111\",\"22112\",\"11211 9998 SAVE *\"m\"; 1; \"t2 setup\" \",\"12212\" 9999 VERIFY *\"m\"; 1; \"t2 setup\" HOW TO COPE WITH TALLYRON Please allow 28 days for delivery and don't forget to include your coupon with the order. All you have to do is program in the main listing, SAVE it to tape, then type in the SET-UP program. You can SAVE this on the same tape AFTER the main listing, OR on a separate tape, and then RUN the SET-UP program so that it saves the data after the main program. If you can't be bothered with all that typing remember that you can send off for our special C+VG/STAR DREAMS Tallyron Il tape. Just send a cheque or postal order for .50, made payable to STAR DREAMS, (not C+VG) to Star Dreams, 17 Barn Close, Seaford, E. Sussex BN25 3EW. Ic+VG/TALLYRON II OFFER Name Address ends here Please send me copy(ies) of Tallyron II. I enclose a cheque/postal order made payable to STAR DREAMS for  BRUNHNIE I "


"STARTING POSITION STARTING POSITION THE AXE THE GOBLET W STARTING POSITION 10 . mememm mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm emmenempel hemommet internetim LL NSO 2014 THE SCISSORS THE CAULDRON "


"The first REAL computer sport The game that teaches you to surf ISH With its unique custom-built miniature surfboard — which clips over the keyboard SurfChamp gets as close as possible to real surfing. Blasting, aerial cut-backs, going off-the-lipall the stunts and manoeuvres of the professional surfer are within reach, as the breakers roll in across your TV screen. \"A true simulator... The only thing the package does not supply is 50 million tons of salt water\" Sinclair User, January 1986. Awarded a Sinclair User Classic \"A unique challenge\" Computer & Video Games, February 1986 HUL Come to the regional Surfing Championships See local and computer press for details Concepts *SPECTRUM Ask $9.95 O COMMODORE 64 New Concepts Ltd, Dublin Street, Carlow, Ireland Tel: (010-353) 50 Who is the PURAOK he "


"EMNYCPAPRIMAB:AMHARA 1-4BANNERA UP, TOLKIEN COMPETITION TOLKIEN COMPETITION to Computer and Video Games, Tolkien Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Closing date for the competition is August 16th and normal C+VG rules apply. And Gandalf's decision is final — unless you want to end up looking remarkably like a frog... C+VG/MELBOURNE HOUSE TOLKIEN COMPETITION dventuring is Hobbit-forming! That's why Melbourne House are staging a mammoth Tolkien Month during July with special Hobbit events taking place in computer shops all over the country. They've even repackaged and revamped the adventure that started it all — Phillip Mitchell's original Hobbit adventure which was released an amazing three years ago! To help celebrate Tolkien Month we've got a very special competition with a very special bunch of prizes. First prize winner in this grand Tolkien Competition is an exclusive Lord of the Rings Hologram, plus the Lord of the Rings adventure package, plus the new revamped Hobbit game, plus a selection of Tolkien's books! Six second prize winners will get a special Tolkien 1987 Calendar plus a remixed version of the new Hobbit. Then 100 runners-up will get copies of the new Hobbit adventure. To get your hands on one of these prizes all you have to do is identify as many of the characters you can in the C+VG Tolkien gallery. Heroes and villains all mixed up for you to identify. Once you've indentified all the characters simply write them down on the coupon and rush it NAME ADDRESS The characters I've identified are: EMNYCPNPRIMABAMANERA MNYCPMAFINA BAKTHARA "


"COMPETITION W Ace it's the game that sets the pace when it comes to air combat flight simulators on the Commodore 64. And now all you Spectrum owners can get a taste of the action as Cascade's conversion of the game takes off at your local software airstrip. C+VG travelled to Cascade's Harrogate headquarters for a preview of the game. And, except for the sound, it's looking every bit as good as the Commodore version. The graphics are super slick and super fast. The scenario is as follows: An enemy fleet has landed tanks, helicopter gunships and mobile surface to air missles. Enemy fighter squadrons are giving air cover. Your homeland is at risk. Your mission is to destroy the invader using an A.C.E. Mark 2.1 Multi-Role, All Weather, All Terrain combat aircraft. From the remaining three allied bases you must attack and destroy the enemy on land, in the air and at sea. It's a tough task. There are nine skill levels from training mode to one which is so hard it's difficult to believe anybody could cope with it one or two player game, summer, winter or night flying. Weapons range from missiles air to air, air to sea and airto ground cannon and flares. Enemy forces can be traced by referring to the aircraft's satellite intelligence map. You can then head for them and try to engange them in combat. But watch out. They're inclined to fight back. There's no doubt you'll need quick wits, a cool head and fast reactions if you take on ACE. And thanks to our friends at Cascade we're giving all you would-be air aces a chance to get your hands on a copy of the game by answering the questions printed below. ACE is released on the following formats Commodore 64, Spectrum Plus, C16 and VIC20. We've got five copies of ACE for each of the formats for the winners. The next ten people will get a digital watch with a calculator. Can't be bad, can it? COMPETITION THRUST CREW IN TRAINING Questions 1) The United States Aircraft Carrier Protection Interceptor, the F14 is better known as: A The Phantom B The Hornet The Tomcat 2) The Royal Navy Sea Harrier has a maximum speed of A 500 mph B 770 mph C 1550 mph 3) The RAF flying helmet is known as A Hard Hat B Skidlid C Bonedome 4) The Tornado is the fastest low level attack aircraft in the world. Its free top speed capability is A 900 mph B 1200 mph C 1600 mph @366 Send your answers with the printed coupon to ACE competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. C+VG/Cascade ACE Competition Name Address Please indicate which computer you own CBM 64 Spectrum Plus 64 C16 a Vic 20 "


"Pyracurse For 48k 21 SCHUM and 128k ZX Spectrum in 48k mcde CASSETTE = 29.95 For mail order send a cheque postal order to Hewson Consultants Ltd. Order by Credit card by sending you! Access Barclaycard Number, and enclose a specimen signature. Don't forget to enclose your name and address. (GSH Penetrate the Portals of Pyracurse Probe the evil of the Inca curse discover the lost tomb of Xipe Totec, the Sinu God. Adopt the characters to manoeuvre through the depths and darkness of tombs and crypts. Guide the tired and emotional Legless O'Donnell, the drunken reporter, archaeologist Professor Roger Kite, fiancee to the provocative Daphne, and the mischievous dog Frozbie, in their battle to, save Daphne from the devastating curse of the ancient South American God Xipe Totec -Their success depends on you ... Pyracurse is a unique development featuring an isometric 3-D projection with full hidden object removal and high speed multi-directional scrolling. Another fantastic adventure brought to you by Hewson. 56b Milton Trading Estate, Milton, Abingdon, Oxon. OX14 4RX Hewson Consultants Ltd As part of our continuing development of innovative software we are always happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication. HEW SO "


"ITG THE ROOF GARDENTOWER BEYOND FURTHER THE THE BEYOND BALI TOWER THE TOWER Spellbinding that's the only way to describe Mastertronic's trilogy of games about the adventures of Magic Knight. The eccentric knights adventures have quite a following. IDEAS Central sent Big Red to visit ace programmer David Jones to force him sorry, persuade him — that it would be a great idea for him to provide all his fans with hints, help and general advice on Spellbound and Knight Tyme. Spellbound involves Magic Knight in Roof Garden). a mission to rescue his friend and Once Magic Knight has dropped tutor Gimbal the Wizard from the the Glowing Bottle and released the Mythical Castle of Karn. Banshee it is useful to command her Gimbal got into trouble while to help. Banshee has a series of clues trying out some old spells to make that will change in a similar fashion his rice pudding taste even nicer. But to the Crystal Ball. because the spells had been badly Thor must be told to go to sleep or translated from Very Ancient he will die of exhaustion. It will also English to Slightly Ancient English, ensure that he is fit and well to help everything went wrong. you once you have found his The result is that Gimbal and seven hammer. other people are now trapped in the Lady Rosmar will help you later if castle. you give her something to go with Magic Knight promptly used his what she is carrying. She will help favourite teleport spell to arrive at you in the room that you find that the castle and try to resuce them. object. (Laser to go with fuse. It will Read the Crystal Ball every few then blast through the wall at the minutes there are a lot of clues to entrance to the secret passageway. be had there and they will change as Samsun is a sporting chap and time passes. would like to have something decent When Magic Knight is not in the to throw before he can help you with lift the Crystal Ball can also be used the object that he has. This requires to locate characters. the Javelin before he will help by It is useful to keep the Transporter throwing the lump of platform into Pad in the lift since Magic Knight the pit to act as a stepping stone. will then be able to get to different Elrand Halfelven does not want or floors quickly from almost need the Saxaphone. There is some anywhere. other instrument that he would like if Magic Knight is dying fast to use in connection with one of the through lack of energy then use the clues in the Crystal Ball. bottle of restorative fluid from the Elrand will not be able to help left most room of the roof garden. properly until Thor has done Give this to Florin the Dwarf then something to the tower regarding a take it back for full energy. It is clue in the Crystal Ball. useful to give it back to Florin again Stand in the Pool of Liquid to cast so that you will only need to take it the Armouris Photonicus spell. It from him when you need energy will then be safe to drop the Glowing again later. bottle since all the light you need will Before Magic Knight can be supplied by your glowing armour. command anybody he must fetch one The Broken Glass caused by of the objects shown on the cassette dropping the Glowing Bottle can be cover from the roof garden. (Wand of usefully employed with something command right most room of the that cannot otherwise be read. It acts   DARK ROOM THE LITTLE BOTTLE THE ODD BALL LIBRARY THE LIFT THE THE MUSH GAS ROOM ROOM SECRET GIMBAL'S THE TUNNEL SECRET ENTRANCE STUDY TUN THE BASEMENT PLAYING AREAS 1= I 2 = 1 3 THE MUSH ROOM 000 LI TRENGT gato SONIC 1935 "


"HT TUME THE ROOM THE TREE OF STALAGKARN MITES THE BIG BOTTLE THE START ROOM THE THE L-SHAPED PLANT ROOM ROOM MORE PLANT ROOM THE WALL THE GALLERY THE SPARE BALL ROOM THE TROPHY ROOM MORE SECRET TUNNEL THE PIT THE MOST MAGIC ROOM EL 4= 0 5= 1 6=1 7= 8 = THE MOST HAGIO ROOM OK Lagangar 1935 CONTINUED "


"64 BEYOND 64 FORBIDDEN WIADAS Casmi CASSETTE 2.9.95 DISK .95 U.S GOLDI America All Can Softwa oftware icholas Day "


"To get the USS Starship to move Gordon must have the Starmap which is in Cargo Hold Two. First get the advert which is on top of a piece of cargo, just out of reach. Jump from the chair to get it. You can stand on the advert to reach the 2588*9&R YSH REBAREL TFC or After freeing Gimbal the Wizard from the Castle of Karn he is catapulted through time into the future and finds himself on a spaceship called the USS Pisces. His mission now is to find his way back to his own time. To do this he must find the Tyme Guardians and a Tyme machine. But with 50 different planets to explore in the Spectrum 128K version of the game, it could take Magic Knight some time. The following clues will help you get into the game and point the way to how it should be completed. Magic Knight will encounter three types of characters in the game. There are the droids/electronic beings, which are friendly and happy to obey; crew members will help but only if Magic Knight outranks them; the eccentric as a magnifying glass on small writing on an engraved candle. Magic Knight will need the Book Of Runes before you can understand the runes scratched on the RuneStone. Before he can release Gimbal the Wizard he will need to find him! He is past the Secret Tunnel and on the other side of The Pit. To release Gimbal cast the Crystallium Spectralis Spell. Details of which are included in the Ancient Scroll on the far side of The Tower. Just for fun try taking Thor's Hammer away from him after Magic Knight has given it to him! Thor will need his hammer before he can help fix the lift. There is a smelly object in the Basement that should prove interesting. The pictures on the walls are very important if you want to get a full 100 per cent. A good luck charm must be in the same room as Magic Knight if he uses the Candellium Illuminatus spell to light the candle. The Project Physical Body Spell is one of the most powerful spells that Magic Knight can cast in this game. For it to work he must have something very magical that was broken and is now mended plus the Crystal Ball for location of the target. The Crystallium Spectralis Spell must be carried out in the pressence of Gimbal the Wizard. The Trumpet is very useful and so is the Laser. Magic Knight will need to light the candle if he wants to read all of the ancient scroll. . The wall must be weakened before it can be knocked down. Lady Rosmar can help you get past a wall. Some of the Background graphics are VERY important after you have cast the release spell, but you must take notice of what the Banshee has to say. Georg Azhatsy Starmap. Give the map to Gordon and command the ship to move. Before Magic Knight can use the Transporter he must mend it, have some valid Transporter Coordinates to enter and be standing on the characters are unpredictable. Magic Knight starts the game in the Transporter Pad of the USS Pisces. If Magic Knight asks Darby IV for help he will find out that he needs a valid identity card. Remember to take off the cloak of invisibility first. A blank ID card is on the floor. Now go to The Bridge. Take the McTablets from Sarab. This will give Magic Knight strength. If characters will not obey, try giving them a couple of tablets. Get the instant film from Gordon. Now go to the Recreation Room and get the camera by jumping on the table. Find a droid-S3,E3 or Klink and give it the film, ID card and camera. Command it to help and FLASH your picture has been taken. The Advert is useful in this game. Take care not to run out of fuel. Certain planetary locations will supply you with a full tank, others may still be waiting for their fuel delivery, and others may just not want to help you anyway. For working out your planetary destinations you will need to construct a map of the game. Useful objects at Starbase 1 are as follows: Boots useful for getting past some security systems. Bag of Runes good for casting spells. Bag of Potatoes not really useful but try giving them to Murphy. Mirror — shows the objects Magic Knight is carrying. Quark Bomb good for destroying planets. Stand on advert to get it. Now go to the Planet Reef and blow it up using the bomb to give Magic Knight access to the next galactic sector. Remember the droids can be very helpful and unbelievably self-sacrificing. That's important if you don't want to blow Magic Knight up! Without giving too much away, you might find it useful to visit Spica and Fermous. Plinkit is handy for fuel. fuel. You'll find the Tyme Guardians at Outpost. They will have the time machine. But first you must find the Golden Sundial of Alpha, which is their symbol of authority. It's split into three pieces. Try visiting Murphy's Moon and Hooper's Asteroid to find the pieces. POKES Infinite strength Pokes. These are POKE 36133,0 and POKE 27871,0 After adding these pokes to the BASIC loader you must also change the RANDOMIZE USR command in the loader to read RANDOMIZE USR 26627 instead of RANDOMIZE USR 26624. To fix the Transporter you must move the Starship to Starbase 1 (via Polaris) and Communicate to Request Overhaul Starship. The Transporter will be fixed by the Overhaul Crew. Or request Gordon to help in the 48K version and he will re-route the control circuits under the guidance of the Overhaul Transporter on Starbase 1. If you then request help using the Communicate command when at Starbase 1 you will see some Transporter Coordinates to use. Note that you can't beam down to every planet you come across and you can only beam down to the one that you are orbiting at any time due to the distance limitations of the Transporter Beam. what they are carrying. When you find a pot of glue use it to stick the photograph to the identity card. Don't forget to wear the ID. Crew members will now take notice of you. ENDS HERE "


"c+ve colow Salads will never seem the same agg ictonestling in the letuce really romete at it seems to be as the son of guest on you should be asking ou've played Global Softwere's tasty new game ofthe Killer fomatoes, which chronicles the trials and tribulations of wimp Plastboff trapped in the Purafon es title is faken i e of All-Time\" Address  My nomination for the worst film is nfrom a film which was on Worst Vegetable Movie ofAll-I And Globalis planning to release more games based on o watch out for Curse of the oom People pmen of Wondo/ vd is able to give youthe ence of reading abou worst movies of all time Teeon opies of The Golden Turkey Awards to petition prizes. This hilarious book covers more than vhich are quite rightly bed as the worst achievements ofHollywood, To stand a chance of winning is simple. What we want you to do is tellus what itIm you would award theC+VG Golden Turkey Award and, innot more than 30 words, 400 fil reasonic send your nomination to Global software Competition, Computer +Video Games, Priory Cour, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EciR3AU. The closing date is August 15th and the editor's decision is final. Don't forget to send the oupon printed "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES Present the following special offers to C+VG readers Our Price 7.95 6.50 7.50 RRP 9.95 9.95 7.95 9.95 7.95 9.95 14.95 9.95 14.95 8.95 9.95 9.95 8.95 9.95 9.95 8.95 8.95 9.95 8.95 15.95 9.95 1.95   33333  7.95 12.95 8.50 12.95 7.95 7.95 7.95 7.50 7.50 7.95 7.50 7.50 7.50 11.95 7.50 7.50  7.50 7.50 7.50 6.75 7.50 7.50 6.75 6.75 7.50 7.50 12.95 7.50 7.95 12.95 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.95 6.75 9.95 9.95 8.95 7.95 14.95 7.95 15.95 9.95 6.95 9.95 9.95 95 MELTDOWN THE PRICE OF MAGICK ARNHEIM GHOST AND GOBLIN HEAVY ON THE MAGICK EQUINOX TURBO ESPRIT IAN BOTHAMS CRICKET SHOGUN GREEN BERET LORD OF THE RINGS WINTER GAMES DAMBUSTERS MINI OFFICE 2 KUNG FU MASTER BATMAN THING ON A STRING PRO TENNIS \" SAI COMBAT DOOMSDARKS REVENGE NODES OF YESOD SOCCER 86 NICK FALDO'S GOLF BIGGLES 9.95 9.95 15.95 9.95 14.95 8.95 9.95 8.95 11.95 9.95 14.95 9.95 12.95 8.95 7.50 10.95 7.50 6.75 7.95 o 8.96 8.95 9.95 7.95 7.95 7.95   9.95 9.95 7.95 7.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 g 7.95  7.95 5.95 7.50 5.95 7.95 5.95 5.95 7.50 7.50 6.75 5.95 11.95 5.95 12.95 7.50 5.50 7.50 7.50 5.95 6.75 6.75 7.50 7.50 5.95 5.95 5.95 12.96 5.95 7.50 5.95 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 6.75 5.95 7.50 7.50 7.50 6.75 5.95 7.50 6.75 6.75 7.50 7.95 5.95 7.50 * 7.95 14.95 7.95  6.95  7.95 FALKLANDS 82 TIGERS IN THE SNOW CRUSADE IN EUROPE SOLO FLIGHT II DECISION IN THE DESERT ACROJET BATTLE OF BRITAIN THEATRE EUROPE THE PRICE OF MAGICK LAW OF THE WEST SILENT SERVICE KNIGHT GAMES BOMB JACK GHOST AND GOBLINS LORD OF THE RINGS BIGGLES SPINDIZZY COMBAT LEADER HEAVY ON THE MAGICK GOLF CONS SET CASS ROCK AND WRESTLE SUMMER GAMES 2 BOUNDER FAIRLIGHT URIDIUM RED HAWK DOOMDARK REVENGE STARSHIP ANDROMEDA GREEN BERET STAR QUAKE HARD BALL SOUTHERN BELLE CAULDRON II ELITE INTER SOCCER PS15 TRADING COMPANY AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT V WINTER GAMES SKYFOX FIGHTER PILOT SPITFIRE 40 SABOTEUR ANY MASTRONIC TITLE ANY MAD RANGE TITLE QUICK SHOT II JOYSTICK ACE IMPOSSIBLE MISSION MERCENARY YIE AR KUNG FU F15 STRIKE EAGLE EXPLODING FIST II THE SECOND CITY (Mercenary II) TAU CETI TUBULAR BELLS CYBORG IC.K.U.PS MUGSYS REVENGE SUMMER GAMES I LEADER BOARD WAY OF THE TIGER 7.50 5.95 6.95 *** DISKS *** HITCHHIKERS (6128 or 8256) TOMAHAWK DISK MONOPOLY DISK ELITE-DISK TAU CETI STRANGELOOP + CASSETTE 50 14.95 14.95 17.95 4.95 14.95 14.95 9.95 7.95 8.95 14.95 14.95 9.95 8.95 24.95 12.95 12.95 14.95 12.95 12.95 12.95 9.95 SPECTRUM PYRACURSE WORLD CUP CARNIVAL SPLITTING PERSONALITIES EQUINOX MANTRONIC THEATRE EUROPE IAN BOTHAMS CRICKET DYNAMITE DAN II PUB GAMES ARNHEIM QUAZATRON BOMB JACK ELITE COMMANDO LORD OF THE RINGS FAIRLIGHT BACK TO SCHOOL TOMAHAWK SWORD AND SORCERY SWEEVOS WORLD ROCK AND WRESTLE WHO DARES WINS 2 CYBERRUN GUN FRIGHT STAR STRIKE IT SOUTHERN BELLE MUGSY'S REVENGE ARTISTII FIGHTER PILOT BLOCKBUSTERS GOLD RUN PING PONG THE PLANETS SPITFIRE 40 THE PRICE OF MAGIC SOLD A MILLION 2 SKYFOX BATMAN SUPERBOWL RED HAWK BIGGLES TURBO ESPRIT ALIEN HIGHWAY ENIGMA FORCE SABOTEUR CRITICAL MASS WAY OF THE TIGER STRIKE FORCE HARRIER GHOST AND GOBLINS EMPIRE QUESTPROBE THE ART STUDIO (OCP) YIE AR KUNG FU YOUNG ONES MOVIE DESERT RATS WINTER GAMES BEACH HEAD II B. MCGUIGANS BOXING KUNG FU MASTER HEAVY ON THE MAGICK REBEL PLANET CAULDRON II BOUNCES EXPLODING FIST II MINDSTONE BOBBY BEARING I.C.K.U.PS TOAD RUNNER ACTION REFLEX 12.95 9.95 11.95 8.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 8.95 7.95  88888888888 *** BBC/ELECTRON *** COMMANDO BBC/ELECT 9.95 BOMB JACK BBC 9.95 JET SET WILLY 7.95 YIE AR KING FU BBC/ELEC 9.95 EXPLODING FIST BBC/ELEC 9.95 REBEL PLANET 9.95 IAN BOTHAMS CRICKET 7.95 BBC/ELEC THE PRICE OF MAGICK 9.95 BRUCE LEE BBC 9.95 AIRWOLF BBC 9.95 SPY HUNTER 7.95 7.95 6.50 7.95 7.95 7.50 6.50 7.95 9.95 9.95 7.50 7.95 9.95 7.95 8.95 8.95 9.95 9.95 7.95 9.95 9.95 14.95 7.95 7.95 7.95 9.95 7.95 7.95 3338 9.95 9.95 8.95 14.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 7.95 8.95 8.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 7.95 6.75 12.95 7.95 7.95 7.50 6.50 7.50 7.50 7.95 *** ATARI *** TALES OF BETA LYRA 9.95 THE PRICE OF MAGICK 9.95 MERCENARY SIDE WINDER 9.95 MERCENARY (ST ONLY) 24.95 SECOND CITY (Mercenary II) 9.95 TIME BANDITS (ST ONLY) 29.95 9.95 7.95 5.50 7.95 »  «  > > 7.95 7.95 7.50 22.50 27.50 7.95 9.95 9.95 8.95 9.95 9.95 8.95 14.95 14.95 7.50 7.50 7.95 5.95 6.95 *DISKS *** TIGERS IN THE SNOW-D TALES OF BETA LYRA-D THE PAWN (ST ONLY)-D HITCHHIKERS GUIDED ALTERNATE REALITY-D KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT-D KORONIS RIFT-D SIDE WINDER-D SUMMER GAMES 1-D SECOND CITY (Mercenary II) 8.95 9.95 7.95 12.95 12.95 24.95 29.95 17.50 12.95 12.95 12.95 12.95 10.95 1.50 19.95 19.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 12.95 5.95 7.95 *** DISK SOFTWARE *** GRAPHIC ADVENTURE 27.95 GHOST AND GOBLINS 14.95 CRUSADE IN EUROPE 19.95 WORLD CUP CARNIVAL 14.95 ALTER EGO 24.95 LORD OF THE RINGS KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT 14.95 DECISION IN THE DESERT 19.95 HITCHHIKERS GUIDE PSI-5 TRADING COMPANY 14.95 TEMPLE OF ASPHAI TRIOLOGY 14.95 ELITE 17.95 WINTER GAMES 14.95 SUMMER GAMES II 14.95 EXODUS (ULTIMA III) 19.95 SILENT SERVICE 14.95 FLIGHT SIMULATOR II KNIGHT GAMES 12.95 SECOND CITY (Mercenary II) 12.95 MURDER ON THE MISSISSIPPI 14.99 LEADER BOARD 14.95 24.95 11.95 17.50 12.95 22.50 17.50 12.95 17.50 29.95 12.95 12.95 14.95 11.95 11.95 14.95 12.95 45.00 10.95 10.95 12.95 12.95 *** SPECTRUM 128 TITLES *** INTERNATIONAL MATCH DAY 9.95 GLADIATOR 9.95 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE 9.95 KNIGHT TYME 2.99 SAMANTHA FOX 8.95 BALLBLAZER HACKER THE MUSIC BOX ROCK N WRESTLE NODES OF YESODS SWEEVOS WORLD ROBIN OF THE WOOD 2.99 7.95 7.95 9.95 9.95 8.95 9.95 7.95 *** MSX *** THE WAY OF THE TIGER GUNFRIGHT MACADAM BUMPER BOUNDER THE PRICE OF MAGICK ZOIDS ANY KONAMI CARTRIDGE WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST 7.95 7.50 7.95 7.95 7.95 6.75 7.95 7.50 7.95  9.95 338 8.95 17.95 9.95 7.95 7.50 14.95 7.95 5.95 COMMODORE 64 WORLD CUP CARNIVAL 9.95 SHOGUN 9.95 BOULDER DASH 3 9.95 GLADIATOR CORE 9.95 GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR 22.95 PUB GAMES 9.95 7.95 7.95 7.50 *** AMSTRAD *** SPINDIZZY WORLD CUP CARNIVAL MONOPOLY 9.95 TOMAHAWK BOMB JACK ELITE 14.95 DESERT RATS 9.95 *** C16 *** BOMB JACK WORLD CUP CARNIVAL FRANK BRUNOS BOXING EXPLODING FIST II SABOTEUR C16/+4 MERCENARY +4 ONLY GREATEST HITS (4 GAMES) 8.95 7.50 7.95 7.50 7.50 7.50 12.95 7.50 6.95 9.95 7.95 9.95 7.95 7.95 8.95 9.95 7.95 250 7.50 19.95 7.50 7.95 6.95 VISA For MAIL ORDER please send cheque/PO to: S.C.S. (Dept C+VG) PO Box 394 London N15 6JL Telephone: 01-800 3156 P&P included in UK. Europe add l per tape. Elsewhere at cost. SAE for list. If you would like to pick up your discount software please bring your copy of this advert to: Compucentre, Unit 5 221 Tottenham Court Road London W1 (near Goodge St tube station) Open six days a week 10.00am 18.00pm Access and Visa card hotline ring: 01-800 3156 01-631 4627 0 Credit card orders despatched same day subject to availability. * Please ring to confirm availablity. "


"Does your micro answer backe?  Does your micro chat to 70,000 people across the UK? Can your micro interview pop stars, hackers and doyennes of the computer industry? Can your micro provide the answer to your technical and software problems?  Could your micro send and receive telex's worldwide? Does your micro do your shopping for you-and have it delivered to your door? Is your micro an answering machine, delivering your private mail whenever you log-on? NO?. . Shame! Bring your micro to life! ------------To: Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1 Please send me a brochure on Micronet 800 Name Micronet 800Address: Telephone No Micronet 800 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5EJ Telephone: 01-278 3143 Age Micro CVG Aug '86 70 "


"C+VG THADUERCURE NEWS MAILBAG Ram Jam. This will be a two game While rummaging package, consisting of about among the adventure and a betting game. Separate games, playable debris in his independently and not requiring IDEAS Central completion of one to proceed to penthouse, the next, each will hold subtle clues that give help in the other. C+VG's ace adventurer Keith Campbell SAVAGE uncovered a copy of The Frobozz ISLAND Daily Grues. CONVERSIONS Through the miracle of timewarp Conversion of the original Scott transference the Adams series is continuing, with Savage Island parts 1 and 2 paper included a currently in production for big feature on Spectrum, Commodore 64, and Infocom and Brian Amstrad. The conversions are Moriarty and by Adventure Soft. strangely enough his newest bit of interactive fiction. EAST ENDERS called Trinity. And COMPUTER as Keith fancied a GAME bit of a holiday in IC's special staff leisure complex Another Lever-Jones spoof is on we decided to the way from Melbourne House. reprint the entire Already in the Quill stage, this one will involve an East End issue this month. bank robbery, in which the Your free Frobozz player gets mixed up with a Daily Grues starts bunch of small time crooks. on page 78. Being a person of discerning Then I came all the way from my taste and great wisdom, I have just little village west of Swansea, to read the June issue of C+VG. the concrete metropolis of There are two points I would like London, especially to see YOU at to put to you: the PCW Show. You were not only (1) Couldn't you quietly shove very tall — I'm about 6 foot and I the comic strip out of the mag to had to look up! — but you spent make the adventure section minutes of your valuable time to longer? talk to me about Sorceror of (2) Why don't you give John Claymorgue Castle, and you were Yeates a job? He's been round a very, very, very, friendly since the beginning (more or less) likeable bloke, not a snotty nosed surely he could shove in a journalist earning about a squillion couple of reviews? pounds. Ian Urquhart, I found the adventures awarded Edmonton at the Golden Joysticks very Keith's reply: The editor won't strange. I rushed out and bought have any of it! Seems he has a Red Moon when Simon Marsh personal need of those comic reviewed it, and I was severely pages, although I would have disappointed. The game was not thought the paper was too shiny! enjoyable to play, the graphics (You're fired Campbell! Anyway lousy, and the point off for every I always use little labradors ... saved position a mistake. Ed) And talking of John Yeates It was as if the plot and enjoyment of the game was thrown out of the window to make room for one zillion word vocabulary, two squillion locations, and technical perfection. I also bought Worm in Paradise, Instructions are frequently which turned out to be more totally inadequate in adventures. disappointing than Red Moon. They should have complete verb Nowhere near as good as Lord of lists, including synonyms. The Time, let alone Snowball, which is nouns should not be listed, as this the best cassette based adventure gives the game away. ever. The best solution to the noun I know I sound like someone problem goes like this: \"Lying on who just likes a good moan, it's just the ground is a suit of armour that I don't want to see such a good (ARMO\" Note the bit in brackets company as Level 9 go down the —that's what the program dumper. recognises it as. It doesn't take Gareth William, much RAM to add a routine to Dunvant, Swansea print data that's already there, and Ka Keith's reply: It's only the you know it's \"armour\" and not a squillions we earn that keep us \"suit\". journalists so likeable, Gareth! Instructions should give hints on The joysticks go to the choice of getting started, a good idea of the game made by the readers, and plot, and ideally an offer of a help that's the one they voted for! Get sheet. They should have a ready to crane you neck again background story, rough maps — see you at PCW, in your new (like the one in Bored of the Rings) t-shirt! and should be humorous if the plot demands this. Larry Writesloonyletters (alias John Yeates). Jersey I read your so-called 'review of Keith's reply: Hear hear! Here? Ultima IV — what a What's up? This letter was quite disappointment. It was under sensible! You're losing your rated by at least 3 marks! The looneyness! screen shots all showed the opening sequence, misleading the casual reader into thinking it is just another graphic adventure. Paul Exley, I first wrote to you about 18 Bury months ago. Then again about six Keith's reply: I played into the months later, with clues, and an game proper, and found it quite interesting point that people reasonable! But \"Personal should vote on their \"favourite Rating\" means what it says. As endings\". I hoped I might get an Excellent game as it is it almost legendary t-shirt. It didn't simply is not my personal happen. favourite type of adventure. MASTER OF THE UNIVERSE ROBIN OF SHERWOOD Watch out for a block-buster release from US Gold/Adventure Soft, in time for Christmas. Five Master of the Universe adventures are on the way. Four of the titles will be on a budget label at .99, while a \"very special\", highly animated adventure, will be a \"full-price\" game. Artwork will be by Stefan Ufnowski, and book by Mike Woodroffe. There WILL be another Robin of Sherwood adventure, promises Mike Woodroffe. Recent technical difficulties with the licence, originally held by Adventure International UK, have been resolved. The licencing deal has now been taken up by U.S. Gold. VALKYRIE II A NOVEL IDEA Mosaic Publishing has announced a Dick Francis game, Twice Shy, due in the autumn, and currently being written by Ram Jam announce that the long-awaited Three Days in Carpathia will NOT be the sequel to Valkyrie 17, as adventurers had originally been led to believe. Instead, Valkyrie 2 will take the player from where he left off in the Glitz Hotel. "


"IELPLINE PLEAS FROM NIC NIC NIC! OK — it's the Earthbound again, in case there is shrubbery that's required, but how more foul language in it. do you go about it, without ending Now, I'm no disciple of the THE EART! up as bathsalts? A few clues on Whitehouse philosophy, but I do Pub Quest wouldn't come amiss, think it's one thing for a game to either, to help Daveid Stinson, give you a wink and a nod that it who's just passed the rats in the understands a naughty word that Martin Ward of Farnborough, is sewers, but his torch keeps going YOU have entered, but quite desperate. He's not a bad chap. He out! another matter for a game to use earns a living (just), helps old A bullet in the back is not a nice foul language to abuse its ladies across roads, and listens to way to finish an adventure, but that customer. Earthbound is now Heavy Metal. Not only that, he has is all Jim Boyle of Hamilton seems blacked by this column. got a decent computer a TRS-80 to get every time he tries to pass Remember Gunnlaugur Briem, Model 1 that has outlived many a the motorway roadblock in the Icelander with no address? younger burnt-out Spectrum Ground Zero. Well, he really does have one, and The trouble is Asylum 2! What Carl Young wants an axe! The wrote to apologise for forgetting to use is the hypochondriac, and the Souls of Darkon woodman include it. Now we will be able to stethoscope? Is the anomaly in his wouldn't take any notice of him, so write back to him! map real, because he can't get it to he killed him, and the axe Just for good measure, fit? Surely someone out there has disappeared! AH! Here's a clue Gunnlaugur sent a photo to show this insane game licked? just come in-look in the upside what effect Robin of Sherwood Calling Castle of Terror addicts down section, Carl! had on him! Gunnlaugur who is ten who can't kill Drac! You should be I t may sound a trifle kinky, but sent an immaculately typed letter, in for a treat next month. A special John Norris of Altrincham is in perfect English. That deserves a plea has gone out to Steve King, seeking a female Gelfling. 'And t-shirt. of Poole, who has completed the are the landstriders the key to Isn't it surprising how many game. . . Meanwhile, Steve, in his finding the castle?\" asks John, people get stuck in an adventure turn, is anxious to discover the because at present, he can't get and blame it on the program? «Is significance of the fire station, how near to them, in Dark Crystal my tape faulty?\" is a common cry! to turn off the electric fence, and Mark Barnfield of Chelmsford Nine times out of ten, a bit of how to talk to the gypsy. He is is living on Borrowed Time. He lateral thinking is all that is stuck, Upper Gumtree. Who can wants to see the doctor, but the needed. But this month, the help him out? nurse ignores his requests, and question takes a new twist! Same game, but this time, how orders him to leave. Naturally he \"Thank you for the t-shirt,' writes do you put out a bomb, and how would dearly love to know the Andreas Schnodewind, \"But why do you get gloves from Wally? combination of the lock on the don't I look like the man in the Jason Etherington of Harlow shed in the park. What's the advert when I wear it? Is my t-shirt wants to know, but I suspect the betting that THAT is where all the faulty?\" gloves could be useful to Steve lady Gelflings are hiding! James Carter of Leyland is not too. happy about Twin Kingdom MORE gold? A bit greedy, isn't Valley! He found the absence of a it? Most adventurers would give SAVE option totally unexpected, their right arm for just SOME gold. SIGNING OFF and due to the ease with which it is Yet here's Paul Gray, up in possible to get killed in the Chester-le-Street, playing Souls of adventure, feels it will be Darkon, and after a second extremely difficult to complete. helping! He's also plotting the Of course, at .99 it is easy to demise of the skeleton in Sinbad, \"WHY do you always sign argue it is a cheapie. However, with little success. yourself Yours Firebird are knocking out Mr. West of Holdbeach (first Adventurously'?\" asks Geoff Seabase Delta for .99, with a Names please!) joined the party, Hale of Barcombe a frequent tape AND a RAM save. Surely a but they won't let him inside some writer to the Helpline. re-release of a popular oldie is of the rooms down at HQ. Who can Because it's printed on the worth bringing up to date, Bug help this Worm find his Paradise? cards, Geoff that's why! For a Byte? And when you've done that, he's short season only (due to a also after some ideas as to what to purchasing error! I have taken to do about Robin of Sherlock's tax using blue instead of black ink for QUESTION collector! I'll bet there's plenty of my replies. So while stocks last suggestions about that one! you will be able to clearly see the TIME Andrew Brittain of difference! Stoke-sub-Hamdon is slipping! He Jason Nicholls recently bought is on some slimy steps, and Earthbound, a quilled adventure Your letters, and with them, urgently needs to get a grip of marketed by Doubleplay. Whilst problems and clues, have been things! Adam Mawdesley is stuck playing; he got his fingers in a coming at us thick and fast. We in jail, without rum. Dale Turpin twist, and accidently typed in a love reading them, and and his mates are going round and rude word. sometimes even get a feeling of round in circles in a forest. No \"To my disgust, the message smug satisfaction when we get a wonder the game is called Causes \"and you, you foul mouthed pat on the back! of Chaos! ba***rd' came on the screen. My But as well as the huge Entering the tower to exchange Mum was watching, and was numbers of letters, Steve a real diamond for a fake one, totally shocked. She couldn't Donoghue was amazed when he hardly a cause worth dying for, believe that this was allowed.\" started writing Helpline replies. one would think, is costing Mr R. Jason goes on to describe \"You know, it never ceases to Batham his life. He's on the another insulting message, and amaze me what adventurers can Diamond Trail is anyone else? says his Mum won't let him play cram into a letter. There they lie, innocent letters, about two notepad pages long, but contained within them are pleas for answers to 167201 different questions. That's just ONE letter!\" says Steve. Therein lies a problem for us. We don't mind the lone letters they are interesting! But if you include TOO many questions, and spread them across a wide range of games, your letters take much longer to answer. So to get a reply off to as many people as possible, in the shortest time, we tend to leave the complicated ones till last, and get on with replying to the more modest pleas first. The coming few weeks are a particulary difficult time of the year for us. During the holiday period, it seems, people lay on the beach lapping up the sun, and daydreaming about all the past year's outstanding problems. As a result, our mailbag almost doubles overnight for a month or so. We've been known to get letters postmarked USA, with home addresses in the West Midlands, and postmarked Ilfracombe from residents of Scotland! The trouble is — we like to take our holidays in July and August, too, and immediately afterwards comes the PCW Show, with the 'live' Helpline. So we have less time available in which to get an increased number of replies out. What all this is leading up to is this special plea from the Helpline team. Please bear with us if you write during the next couple of months. And try to help us out, by not combining too many different games into one letter! HELPLINE PHONE-IN No not the Adventure Club phone service, but Clive Bull's Sunday afternoon show on LBCthe London commercial radio station. Back in March I was invited to T.O.K.E.N "


"nano 79 NYI ADVENTURE CLUES take the Helpline along to the studios of LBC, to see how a live phone-in would work. Armed with the database and Jim Douglas, I struggled through a network of twisty passages and dead ends, just off Fleet Street, twisting an A-Z guide to align with the compass, while Jim did the LOOK AROUND bit. It was an adventure in itself, but eventually we made it with just a minute to spare! Down in the studio, we nervously donned earphones, and waited to see if any listeners would phone, and what they might throw at us. Ring they did! The switchboards were jammed with calls! So heavy was the response, that we were invited back in May. This time, however, I felt rather redundant I took the dreaded Coppings along! Paul took over completely at one stage, with all the answers to Lord of the Rings, and a Savage Island clue or two for good measure. He confessed afterwards: \"I was terrified!\" We could be back now and again. So if you can receive LBC the time to tune in is 3.30pm on a Sunday. Give him the axe! DARKON SOULS OF other way! Try killing Booth, and then go the LUCIFER'S REALM private, and the floor is yours! heavier ground work. A push in Two tools together, help with the THE PAWN rockfall. Operate the drill to get through the LOST CITY the key from the stream. tent, and unlock what you find with camp until nightfall. Enter unlit Wait on the road by the army EUREKA ROMAN the bar. For more power, 'count the hay in MORDON'S QUEST warm! temperatures. Be sure to wrap up thermometers help with rocks help with gravity, Dr. Courtney's Office. Falling Examine the Pen before visiting DARK THE PEN & THE To get into the air vent JUMP! PULSAR 7 ESCAPE FROM will simply fall back! Make your throw a hard one, or it FANTASTIC FOUR bit of leverage. Your first hero can open this with a HEROES OF KARN purposes only! Permeate the crate for information CLAMORGUE SORCEROR OF helps to reach it! A spray stops the noise, a stool THE PAYOFF have spoken to your doctor. tackle the egg or ring, until you You won't have the knowledge to HULK can't! welding will make sure others kitchen. If you can't drive, then and return with a weapon from the Leave the bedroom immediately, GREMLINS doctor's desk. Burned your hands? Try the BORROWED TIME Ireland. Garrison; Chris Gunning, N. Matthiew Wilkie, Catterick Dunvant; G. Ellard, Leigh-on-Sea; comes from: Gareth Williams, Help with the clues this month, ADVENTURE CLUES STAMPS FOR CHARITY Once again, the stamps from all the Helpline mail envelopes have been carefully saved. Recently, a bulging C+VG carrier bag was deposited with the Anglia Building Society, who donate them to raise money for the Save The Children Fund. So you'll know, when you write to the Adventure Helpline, that you will also be helping a good cause. The next bag is filling up fast. Melbourne House came up with his promised copy of Lord of the Rings. Needless to say, Paul has completed the game, polishing off part 1 in four days, and part 2 in three. THE FIEND agree?\" corrected. If you have a Spectrum PROMISE So at last we know one striking copy of the game, check it for the fact about the Fiend, at least! He SAVE GAME command. If it has GREEN hair! Fear not, readers doesn't work, you should ask your \"Send me a t-shirt, and I'll send he WILL be unmasked one day! dealer for a replacement, or, you a picture of myself wearing it,\" failing that, return the tape to US promised the Fiend of Faringdon. Gold. I was aware of the obvious FANTASTIC pitfall, but I sent one, nevertheless. And Fiend replied: \"Well, the BUG SUPER-SLEUTH waiting is over! You must have RETURNS been a bag of nerves, wondering when and if I would keep my Early Spectrum copies of promise. Questprobe 3, The Fantastic \"Well, I am nothing if not honest, Four, have a bug which prevents a Remember Paul Cunningham, and the picture is enclosed. It was game position from being saved. who with his brother, was the first drawn by my Fiendette. She has a Subsequent copies, now in the to solve the murders in Sherlock? way with colours, don't you shops, have had this problem Well, after a few reminders, Now's the time to start bashing away at all those unsolved adventure problems! Why? Because it's time to enter C+VG's Adventurer of the Year Competition. Full details next issue! Don't forget the token. "


"SO ee REVIEWS/1 BLACK CAULDRON CN ERY The puzzles are not quite adventure-type puzzles; nevertheless, quite a bit of thinking is needed to work out what to do. The package, illustrated with original Disney artwork, has an illustrated glossy handbook built-in, giving you the background story, and playing hints. Supplier: Sierra On Line/Mirrorsoft Machine: Atari ST Price: .95 Black Cauldron is based on the Walt Disney film of the same name. There are seventy screens in sixteen colours, with built in arcade sequences and mazes. Music from the origninal score also crops up throughout the game, as well as many sound effects. As Taran, an assistant pig keeper, you start off by your cottage. A goose honks about the yard, and a goat proves troublesome, approaching you his forbidding and insisting on playing tag. Hen Hagatha, the wicked old hag. The entrance Puan Skulls on stakes at the Wen, your favourite pig, is grubbing around in its sty. The yard is alive with animated although text input is supported, creatures, running around and no words seem to be recognised. making noises. Instead, commands are limited to Your first job is to feed Hen DO, LOOK and USE, selected from Wen, and to find the food some an icon menu. looking around inside the cottage A s well as joystick or keyboard, is necessary. Once fed, make sure the ST's mouse may be used to you follow the pig, and something control the game. By dragging the magic will happen, setting you into cursor in the direction of the game proper. movement required, and clicking Without this early action, further the left button, Taran can be made exploration will not lead to much. to change direction. Your journey takes you through Clicking the right button pauses forest and swamp to a castle wall, the game, and displays the where the guards are throwing command-icon window. TO USE boulders down. Unless, of course, an item, its icon must be selected something nasty happens to you from the STATUS screen, before before you get there! issuing a USE command in the There is a text commentary, and command window. Altogether a very clever and varied game, with some outstanding Disney style graphics. Vocabulary n/a Atmosphere Personal Value Keith Campbell refragrémesRukometris GS QUEST II Supplier: Sierra On Line/Mirrorsoft Machine: Atari ST Price: .95 You play the part of King Graham, and are charged (by the magical appearance of your predecessor, King Edward) to find a wife to bear you an heir to the throne of Daventry. In your journey, Graham is moved around with the aid of a joystick or control keys, over a bright and colourful cartoon style landscape. A little difficult to control, sometimes, Graham has the ability to move behind or in front of objects such as trees and rocks. Each time Graham reaches any edge of the screen, a new picture loads from disk, and he moves on to the next \"location\". There are plenty of them too — it is a big game. What takes it out of the usual run As well as Graham himself, of arcade adventures, is that it also there are many other pieces of accepts text input. Thus, when you animation in the graphics. Fish get to Grandma's house, you type leap in and out of the sea, the OPEN DOOR, and the picture Witch Hagatha stirs her cauldron responds accordingly. If you push over the fire ... All this, and sound poor old Graham into the sea, effects too! For example, the SWIM is advisable, if you would church bell can not only be seen prefer him not to drown. swinging, you can hear it ringing The parser accepts multiple too! word commands, and there is a Running on an Atari ST, it is not text commentary which scrolls necessary to have a hi-res below the picture. Many other monitor. The game displays quite characters appear in the course of clearly on a TV set, using the STM the game, and you can talk to version of the computer, and the them. text, which scrolls below the However, TALK TO... is about picture, is in a comfortable to read the limit of your own 40 character mode. conversational powers. The TAB Sierra describe King's Quest as key takes you to a text SCORE and 3D animated adventure, and INVENTORY screen. The potential certainly their claim that it top score is 185, with points being represents a totally new approach awarded fairly sparingly in ones to computer adventuring — is true. and twos, for performing certain Well, almost, for a similar deeds. technique was used in Zim Sala Bim, from Melbourne House. The Sierra implementation runs on more advanced hardware, and is streets ahead of Bim and its genre. so it ought to be, too, at .95! The plot, and cartoony style graphics, make King's Quest very suitable for the 8-11 age range. Vocab Atmosphere Personal Value Keith Campbell MANN "


"MAIL-SOFT 5.75 * COMMODORE 64 MERCENARY 11 7.95 KUNG FU MASTER 7.25 BOMB JACK 7.25 ELITE 11.25 WORLD CUP CARNIVAL 7.25 CAULDRON 11 7.25 URIDIUM 6.50 ACROJET 7.50 BIGGLES 7.25 LORD OF THE RINGS 10.95 BATTLE OF MIDWAY 7.50 STARSHIP ANDROMEDA 7.25 SOLD A MILLION 2 7.25 DESERT FOX 7.25 SILENT SERVICE 7.25 MUGSYS REVENGE 5.25 WINTER GAMES 7.25 GLADIATOR 6.95 THE PRICE OF MAGICK 7.25 TAU-CETI 7.45 COMMANDO 7.25 ROCK N WRESTLE 7.25 HEAVY ON THE MAGICK 7.25 PARADROID 5.75 CRUSADE IN EUROPE 11.95 LEADER BOARD 7.40 LAW OF THE WEST 7.25 BOUNDER 7.25 SUMMER GAMES 1 7.40 ALTER EGO-DISK 22.00 THE FORCE 7.25 THE WAY OF THE TIGER 7.25 PSI-5 TRADING 7.25 KNIGHT GAMES 7.25 FAIRLIGHT 7.25 TIME TREX 7.50 SOUTHERN BELLE 6.95 SABOTEUR 6.50 GOLF CONS SET 10.50 CRITICAL MASS SOLO FLIGHT 11 7.50 COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0 7.25 LORD OF RINGS-D 14.95 MERCENARY 7.50 GHOST + GOBLIN 7.25 MISSISSIPPI-DISK 11.90 SPITFIRE 40 7.25 LASER BASIC 11.25 CYBORG 6.95 TUBULAR BELLS 5.95 SPIN DIZZY 7.25 ** SPECTRUM ** JACK THE NIPPER CRITICAL MASS 6.50 SABATOUR QUAZATRON 6.50 WORM IN PARADISE 7.25 THE PLANETS 7.25 BATMAN PYRACURSE 7.45 LORD OF RINGS 11.25 SWEEVOS WORLD 5.75 WORLD CUP CARNIVAL 7.50 SPITFIRE 40 7.25 WHO DARES WINS 11 5.95 EQUINOX BOMB JACK THEATRE EUROPE RED HAWKS ELITE WINTER GAMES COMMANDO TRANSFORMERS 4.99 GUN FRIGHT 7.25 TAU CETI 7.25 TOMAHAWK 7.25 THE PRICE OF MAGICK REBEL PLANET 7.25 FIGHTER PILOT 5.75 BIGGLES 7.25 MAX HEADROOM 7.25 SOUTHERN BELLE BLOCK-GOLD RUN 7.25 YIE AR KUNG FU DESERT RATS 7.25 ACE WAY OF TIGER 7.25 RAMBO 5.75 MUGSYS REVENGE 5.75 TURBO ESPRIT THE WRITTER 10.95 ROLLER COASTER HEAVY OF THE MAGICK ROCK N WRESTLE GHOST + GOBLIN FAIRLIGHT IAN BOTHAMS 5.95 DYNAMITE DAN 11 5.75 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 5.75 ARNEHAM 1.C.K.U.P.S TOAD RUNNER 6.75 STAR QUAKE 5.75 7.25 ****AMSTRAD**** DOOMSDARK REVENGE 7.45 TOMAHAWKS 7.25 GREEN BERET 6.50 ELITE-CASS 11.00 ELITE-DISK 15.95 WORLD CUP CARNIVAL NODES OF YESODS 7.25 SAI COMBAT 6.70 PRICE OF MAGICK 7.25 GHOST + GOBLIN 6.75 TURBO ESPRIT 6.50 SABATOUR 6.50 PRO TENNIS 7.45 NIGHT GUNNER 5.95 HEAVY ON THE MAGICK 7.25 SOCCER 86 7.45 EQUINOX 7.25 ***** BBC ***** STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 7.40 COMMANDO 7.40 BRUCE LEE 7.40 BOMB JACK 7.40 YIE AR KUNG FU 7.40 PRICE OF MAGICK 7.45 AIRWOLF 7.95 JET SET WILLY 5.75 IAN BOTHAMS 5.75 BEACH HEAD **** ATARI ***** MERCENARY 7.25 MERCENARY 11 7.50 MERCENARY (ST ONLY) 22.50 ALTERNATE REALITY-D 16.95 TALES OF BETA LYRA 7.25 PRICE OF MAGICK 7 .25 SOLO FLIGHT 11-D 11.95 SUMMER GAMES 1-D 11.50 ***** MSX ***** BOUNDER 7.25 WAY OF TIGER 7.25 EXPLODING FIST 7.95 GUNFRIGHT 7.50 THE PRICE OF MAGICK 7.50 MACADAMS BUMPER 6.95 ***** 016 ***** JET SET WILLY 5.75 WORLD CUP CARNIVAL 7.50 FRANK BRUNO BOXING 5.95 IAN BOTHAM 5.75 COMMANDO 5.75 EXPLODING FIST 6.50 4.99 5.75 7.45 6.50  5.75 7.25 7.25 6.50 the legend continues Post & Packing included in U.K. Europe add  per tape. CHQ/P.O. To: Mail Soft. P.O. Box 589 London N156JJ. Access and Visa accepted RELEVANCE IS THE TOUCHSTONE OF ADVERTISING EFTECTTYENESS THE ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS: INGENIOUS JUSTIFICATION OF CONCEPT O CONCEPT 0 CLIENT Strutt, Whelk, Incorporated Practitioners in Advertising Poxer, Sousé A / Vicky Our creative boys have really cracked it this time! We ditched the robot pics and went back to the dog, with I think tremendously exciting results STARTLING, OFFBEAT IMAGE BASED ON POLAROID SUPPLIED BY CLIENT dog, with I thi tobot pies and ked at this The copy is lucid, obliquely conveying an overt product come on. It researched tremendously well: over 85% of adventure game enthusiasts preferred the dog to the less user-friendly makes of robots battling across extraterrestnal landscapes dor bated by righ-tech fairytale castles and laser-carved ice scul fures sy bolising man cultus oved on to the less.iniai landscapadlicesc i d ende landen die menthusiendously over! CHALLENGE TO CHALLENGE TO D CONSUMER'S CRAVING FOR MEANINGFUL INTERACTION A AND DONT FORGET THE PACKSHOT!! This dog would like you to buy THE SNOW QUEEN Why? Because whether you're a Golden Retrievela dogged adventure game freak, The Snow Queen is an unusually intriguing illustrated text adventure. Based on Hans Andersen's sinister fable, The Snow Queen challenges you to free a young boy from the forces of evil. But there's a catch: you're not directly in control of events. To succeed, you'll have to guide and advise Gerda -a headstrong young girl who's not easy to direct. The Snow Queen has been programmed by St Bride's, who have a use and a growing reputation for clever adventures of surprising ingenuity. Mosaic's dog, The Offog, who has His Master's degree strophysics, loved it. And down at the Tailwaggers' Club creed it takes more than INVITATION TO SELF-ACTUALISATION THROUGH PRODUCT CONSUMPTION THE SNOW QUEEN HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN Adventure game by ST BRIDE'S THE SNOW QUEEN An unusually intriguing illustrated text adventure Program by St Bride's Available for Spectrum and Commodore Release date: May 1986. Price: .95 (cassette pack) MOSAIC PUBLISHING COMPUTER GAME Distributed by WHS Distributors, St John's House, East Street, Leicester LEI 6NE (0533 551196), available nationwide from stores of class and distinction, and soon to be the subject of a major advertisement. "


"OOOO BUY SEA BASE DELT. Supplier: Firebird Machine: Commodore 64, Amstrad, Spectrum 48K Price: .99 Impossible! No tape recorder here, though, but a quick frisk does no harm, and soon you learn of a plot involving a missile to be fired from the base. Time to explore, now, and you soon discover how to operate a railway linking different parts of the base. Travelling is a rather laborious affair, involving fastening and unfastening your seatbelt, with an enforced delay whilst a commentary on the journey is displayed. This is a time waster, and as visits to a number of stations are involved, becomes very tedious. The technique of delayed response is used quite often, and is even more annoying when you You're Ed Lines again, that punny reporter, who having completed Subsunk by sending the message, had it intercepted by enemy agents. Using a mysterious magnetic force, they have dragged the sub into an undersea base. You must locate a mini-sub to escape, but also unravel the secrets down below. Will you ever get back to file your story? Right at the start you are standing by a corpse with a briefcase shades of Mission are trying to reach a table over a This is a graphic adventure. slippery floor. This problem calls Most locations are preceded by a for many attempts, both by way of full screen picture, quite detailed vocabulary and ideas, and and colourful, and reasonably fast becomes very frustrating. to draw. These are only displayed The vocabulary is sparse and, in at the first entry to a location, particular, I had great problems in unless you LOOK. operating a switch, positioned to Quite a reasonable little the right, and clearly marked adventure, a bit of fun, albeit LEFT and RIGHT. Eventually PUSH rather lacking in atmosphere SWITCH turned out to be the clue appropriate to the situation. A snip to operating it. at .99 There is plenty to explore, for apart from station platforms that Vocabulary have no exits, and seem to exist solely for the purpose of housing Atmosphere an object, there is a complex of Personal passages and rooms on a number Value of levels, at the end of the journey. But can you get back! Keith Campbell M Lo otor DEHUS A NEW RATING A good game will generally parsing, and of the hardware on achieve a high personal rating, which it runs. It might be that the irrespective of its price. However, really top games are vastly advanced games, such as Infocom overpriced, the really bad ones a adventures, and Magnetic Scroll' s snip. So to reflect the inescapable Pawn, may rate 10 alongside a differences in size, technique, and good cheapie. This does not technology, and to take account of reflect the overall quality of the price, we have introduced a package, taking into consideration VALUE rating, whose appearance the advanced techniques of you may have noticed in the last issue. Withili THE SLAVE Supplier: Gregory Software small map, and added a few requires a lot of careful thought. O Machine: Atar. disk, .95 objects and problems. Now the adventure must be The next task is to enter text given a vocabulary by creating Available by mail order only from. messages. These cover location two Basic program files, one for Gregory Software, 8 Agard Street, and object descriptions, replies to verbs, the other for nouns. All you Derby DEI IDZ examining an object, and have to do is to type the words in messages resulting from an action as Basic DATA statements. Each The Slave claim to fame, apart in the game. As you create each line holds a group of words of from being British, is that the description, you have a whole similar meaning. resulting adventure is not limited screen to work on. Now some code in SAL must be by the memory size of the machine As you save each description to written. SAL (Slave Adventure it runs in. The bulk of the data disk, a status line keeps track of Language) is what interprets the remains on disk, and is accessed how many sectors you have used, commands, and acts accordingly. as needed by the program and information about the contents It moves the player from place to The Slave comes on one double of each of the files are displayed, place, checks to see what's been sided disk. Side one contains the so you can tell where you're up to. done, and issues messages as play creator itself, and side two, the Next the locations are linked progresses. now extinct Atari DOS 3, and with the Exits editor. As the name Because SAL is a language, it without them your masterpiece suggests, here you inform the has its own commands, cannot be compiled into the editor of the legal exits, and where resembling a cross between Basic finished article. they lead to. and 6502 Assembly Language. On booting up the disk, you're The process now becomes This is by far the hardest part of presented with a menu, from harder, in the flags editor. Flags the adventure creating sequence. which you go on to the various are used to keep track of what is All that remains is to arranged sub-programs which take some of happening while you play the your files on to a fresh blank disk, the hard slog out of creating your game. and use The Slave once more to adventure. For instance, if you've found a compile them into machine code. I say 'some' because no utility key and unlocked a door, the flag Slave is a good program. As far can hope to create an adventure assigned to the door would be as creating an adventure is without a little application of brain changed, so you won't have to concerned, it has its own power. unlock it every time you go commands, resembling a cross First and foremost comes the through. between Basic and 6502 Assembly writing down on paper of the Setting the flags correctly, and Language. This is by far the concept which will eventually making sure they are updated hardest part of the adventure become an adventure. I drew up a properly during the game, creating sequence. All that remains is to arrange your files on to a fresh blank disk, and use The Slave once more to compile them into machine code. How good is The Slave? As far as creating an adventure is concerned, it does remarkably well. Just about every possibility and option likely is covered, including adding sound a title screen, and game save and restore. Unfortunately, it does fall down in two areas. Firstly, if you can't program in Basic to begin with, the The Slave is not for you. SAL is not an ideal way to learn. This brings me to my second gripe — the documentation. The manual supplied with my copy was not the final version; even so, there were some glaring ommissions which cost me a lot of time in trying to figure out where I was going wrong. Even so, if you can live with that, and have plenty of imagination and time, then the Slave is for you. Ease of use Documentation Personal Value Steve Donoghue CON "


"AHH. WHAT A LUVERLY DAY... FOR A WALK TO THE SHOPS... EA ...& HERE WE ARE! JUS MICRO And you'd better behave yourself 5 NOW IN... JACK NIPART Course / Will Mum! CAN YOU PUT A STOP TO THIS LITTLE MENACE'S EXPLOITS? ces OH NO! NOT HIM AGAIN Oi-l load in Jack the Wipper for meor else! MONIA RUNNING OFPT THE NIPPER... ROTOCITYONET OR SO THE STORY GOES-WE THINK! AND SO... A STAR IS BORN... FREE badge with every program! GUTERRES I luv scaredycats And I always DIE Me's a star (have a smashing time do FRS12=2245 Just look what I can do! PRUSU IGBTINE is HET JUISTE Ha Ha! I'm a monster maker Bet ya can't stop me freeing prisoners TE Ugh teddies, they must think i'm a baby! Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 Telex No: 547274 SPECTRUM 48K MSX AMSTRADMOI ARE YOU TOO MUCH OF A WIMP TO PLAY THIS GAME "


"C+VG THODISHA YA 1* The Frobozz Daily Grues GY PRICE 63 Zrkmids MORIARTY ATTAINS HAMPSTEAD! ISSUE 2948897 Zorks, are considered \"small\" at Infocom! Z-CODE KEY TO The ZIL source code for Wishbringer, one of the largest, occuINFOCOM MACHINE pies 450K of memory. This, of course, contains comments and SUPPORT RANGE spaces, but add to this the 30K Infocom software is available for a routines, and it becomes apparent you mount the hill and look back staggering range of machines, and Infocom parser, and the support why a disk drive is essential to run Infocom Storyteller «Professor\" apart from the screen format, it is any of the games. execution, identical on every machine in the program Brian Moriarty visited the Hampat the view. You notice a little During peers at its wrist, and then shakes range. stead offices of software giants, figure outside the Post Office. It This is achieved by producing Activision, yesterday. Brian's initiation into adventure Just 29, Moriarty already has a little fist in your direction! one version in a totally transportwhilst the parser and support most of the text data is read in as Incame in the late 70's, with Scott able machine code, Z-code. Say it routines are resident in memory, two impressive works of fiction ZEE-CODE! behind him, Wishbringer, The story doesn't end there, Z-code can run on any procesthe game progresses. 32k focom's fastest selling title over Adams', Strange Odyssey played sor, after it has been converted Plus, with a the last year, and the newly reon an Atari. He was hooked intive Fiction run on leased Trinity. These are no ordinstantly and began playing his way using a machine-specific interprehowever. A new system, InteracAlthough Adventure Internaparser, is designed to ter. Each computer for which the ary stories, but interactive fiction, right through the series. \"read\" on a computer. finished program is required must this Moriarty, an English Literature tional has a low profile in the have its own interpreter program, machines with a minimum memavailable in are currently but once written, all Infocom softory of 128k, plus drive. Two titles graduate, is not short of computer States these days, Brian gives full «He was the very first person to ware can be made immediately know-how. He was technical edicredit to Adams as a pioneer. ing, and the newly released Trintor of Analog Computing, a US available, by simply processing the series A Mind Forever Voyagity. Trinity has a ZIL source code ture game on a micro. He laid the original Z-code. Atari magazine, before joining actually do it -to put an advenStarting at the other end of the Infocom of a staggering 1.3 megabytes! Infocom as a programmer. The \"Plus\" software is available His big chance came with a foundation on which ALL others creative process, the Just as Scott's games contain only on a more restricted range of appreciated by storyteller doesn't sit at a terminal vacancy for a Storyteller in 1984. have built,' he says. situations only He got the job, and already had and fill in text messages and condithose who have played other tions in response to prompts. Nor machines, currently covering IBM the Trinity scenario all worked and IIc; Macintosh 512 and Plus; adventures in his series (try saying does he write his stories in EnPCs and compatibles; Apple Ile out. But the big chiefs at Infocom advised him to start with some glish, Basic, or Assembler, but in 128 (in 128 mode). thing less complex — at the same BUNYON in Pirate, damming the a language called ZIL (Zork ImAmiga; Atari ST and Commodore games have a background theme. time becoming familiar with ZIL, lava in Claymorgue) so Infocom plementation Language). Every Zork player will recogNo Quill-type menu driven sysand the Infocom system. Moriarty was glad he followed tem this, but a very high level their advice. Wishbringer was the nise a device as magic if it bears computer language, closer to En\"simple' game, and took him nine the Frobozz label, and will be glish even than Basic, allowing the have ground months to complete. Trinity took a wary of venturing into dark places, story to flow as it is being written. Does Infocom Infocom's Brian Moriarty exwhole year to complete. It would lest attacked by a fearsome Grue. plained how the creation process have taken a lot longer without the «There is nothing laid down, no experience of Wishbringer behind rules about these «trademarks\"? works. Sitting in the background is official lore,\" explained Brian. the famous Infocom parser, and him, Moriarty says. \"In Wishbringer I introduced Brian Moriarty is classed as a support routines. If the story has a the concept of the Grue's nest, put With the Activision/Infocom conrequirement that the parser is Storyteller rather than a Games tract wrapped up, it was revealed unable to handle, then the story. Designer, and quite rightly so. that without the capital injection Infocom's brand of fiction ala bottle of Frobozz Grue's Milk in Grue, complete with teller can make minor modificasuch a deal will bring, Infocom tions to the parser, but is more ways has humour, and Brian uses the ice box, and brought in a would have crashed. Interactive reit skillfully in ways impossible in mother likely to call upon a parser specialWishbringer also has a delightful Fiction, for which Infocom book form. At the same time he apron!\" ist to make the necessary enhancepiece of satire based on Zork 1 ments. maintains an atmosphere of sus highly successful business. The Run on two \"rather old now, nowned the world over, was a pense and excitement. three titles released last year sold In Wishbringer, for example, a boarded up house, worn out by but still useful\" Dec 20 mainmore units alone than were sold your boss, the Postmaster of Festhe feet of countless adventurers, frames, the ZIL source code is ing a leaflet about an obsolete during the whole of the previous teron, chastises you for slacking, complete with a mailbox containcompiled, and combined with the five years. and demands you deliver an enparser and support routines, to However all this was in danger What is Brian's next project? produce the Z-code. velope to Magick Shoppe, on a hill computer game! of disappearing at the hands of All that is now required for it to at the other side of town. Naturally, you explore the town \"After taking it easy for a month run on any machine around, (proness software market. vided it has sufficient memory) is misjudged venture into the busi on your way through, and all the or two, I shall decide. Whatever I Cornerstone, the IBM PC dat time you are straying, there are choose, I'll be spending the next the interpreting process. right.» adventures all seem Infocom nagging reminders that the shop year or so on it, so I want to get it A licensing deal for a film title is focom, sold well on its init closes at 5 pm. huge to the end user, but, in fact, base package developed by I When you visit the Police Stavary considerably in size from one tion, a sharp message comes currently brewing, or some research carried out in Germany to another. Some, such as the before his arrival in the UK, may through on the radio Mr Crisp form the basis of his next story. is watching your progress! The crunch finally comes when GIANT RESCUES INFOCOM "


"BO NO SUPPORT FOR BEEB NEWS IN BRIEF lease. It was a good product of ware comany in the world. They is kind but what hadn't been would complement each other, at oreseen was the very conservative the same time providing much nature of the US business software needed cash with which Infocom Owners of BBC micros are a recently expressed by Level 9's world. may experiment with new ideas. bunch of pirates, according to John Austin, he added that piracy To break into that market reActivision's intention is to leave Infocom's Brian Moriarty! among BBC owners was discoquired a multi-million dollar Infocom free to get on with what Infocom titles in the CPM ververed to be so rife that it would be spending programme, with masthey are best at. There will be nosion, can be run on a BBC with commercial suicide to produce the sive advertising in business glospressure to jazz up their products, second processor on board. But software. Therefore the whole sies, and hosting of expensive parno compulsion to introduce there is no chance of straight 6502 project had been abandoned. ties, and seminars, to promote the graphics. versions. Brian Moriarty admitted \"You can tell BBC owners they product. For the customer, Activision's that an Acorn BBC 6502 Interpreonly have themselves to blame,\" Infocom simply ran out of cash arrival should be an advantage. ter had been written, but had added Moriarty bluntly. in the process. Some 50 or 60 Already, UK press contact with deliberately been withheld from Meanwhile, it seems that in employees involved with Cornerthe Infocom side of the business commercial use. theory, even without a drive, a stone had to go, leaving the comhas improved, with an Infocom's, \"We could only set out smaller Spectrum 128 could run the \"smalpany with little but its hardware, Allisson Hale, resident in Activi titles, such as Zork, Planetfall, and ler\" games such as Zork, and the talent of its remaining sion's new Hampstead offices. Deadline, to run on the limited Planetfall, Suspended, Deadline, staff. Activision is still in the process 32k memory of the standard BBC and there is already a Z-80 interA rescue bid was essential if the of getting its act together over its micro,\" he explained. \"Neverthpreter. However, the cassette team that produced the legendary UK marketing strategy, but it less, we developed an interloading time would probably Zork, and other classics, was to seems before long, the enthusiast preter.\" prove unacceptable. Will they be remain intact. will find the software not only Echoing the same sentiments as produced? Time alone will tell! A number of bids were re much easier to get hold of via many ceived, and of these, Infocom more retail outlets, but hopefully, chose Activision. The strength of at a price more suited to the pocket. Activision was in its marketing in Activision are working on a the toy stores. three-tier pricing structure, with a Reginald «Corky\" Crisp, of The Potholers were reported to be Together the two will combine bottom price of .95 a distinct Tower, Cemetary Hill, Festeron, mounting a rescue operation in the to make the biggest games softpossibility. was sued for divorce earlier today, Frigid River area, in the early by his estranged wife \"Queenie\" hours of this morning. Sources at Alexis. Town librarian and dogthe scene say that three adventurbreeder, Miss Voss, was cited as ers, inexperienced in cave work, co-respondent, and a violet colwere resting on a ledge in the oured note written in her hand, hollow interior of an extinct volcawas placed before the court in no, when a massive landslip evidence. occurred. Granting a decree-nisi on Work to clear the rubble con\"Professor» Brian Moriarty spent considered a failure. None have. grounds of adultery, Lord Justice tinues, but has so far uncovered a day with Anita Sinclair and the Most have sold far in excess of that Belboz summed up by telling the only a collection of coloured Magnetic Scrolls team. figure. Hitch Hiker's Guide, curdefendant: \"I don't for one mobooks, a rare stamp, and a pricement believe that your regular less coin lying in a pool of midrently holds the sales record, but Your special investigator put it visits to the shapely Miss Voss night oil. to him, that at last Infocom had a no-one is saying exactly how real rival in the UK in the shape many. were solely for the purpose of sampling her homemade oat Infocom's reputation for high form of Magnetic Scrolls. Police were called to the Witchvilcookies.» quality is assured by the fact that \"Magnetic Scrolls doesn't even quanty is le Pleasure Wharf late last night, when a fight broke out among a come close,\" asserted the Prof in a each game gets a minimum of controversial statement. \"Sure, 4,000 hours play testing more group of sub-humanoids in the time than it takes to actually write. they have a good parser. Anyone nearby video arcade. Among Six full time in-house testers can demonstrate a parser to show those arrested, were two Mailoff its strong points, and make it (\"The most experienced games boxes, who, according to eyelook clever. players in the world\") are comwitnesses, started the brawl. plemented by 100 outside testers, \"But it IS good, I would say it's to ensure each game is as perfect about as good as ours, but in a as that rose found in Zork 2 — if different way. Ours has strengths FROTZ & you are lucky! in other directions. But graphics. \"We listen to what they say,\" The popular belief that the originPARTNERS — Who wants graphics in Interactive says Moriarty. \"Often a tester will al Zork was the Fortran version, Fiction? Pictures may sell a game, come back to us with a puzzle commonly known as The Decus ESTATE AGENTS but in the long term, it is the solved, but complain it is too Dungeon, and found on DEC quality of the adventure itself that AND CHARTERED mind-staggeringly difficult. PDP and VAX computers, is inwill count.\" So test purists have no need to correct. The original Zork was SURVEYORS \"Infocom has built up a reputafear a changeover to graphics in written in a language called Mudtion of quality, and with 20 titles the future? dle, and is much bigger than the In much sought after behind us, we have a big lead in \"I didn't say that,\" asserted the DEC version. Accardi-by-Sea area, close shops, terms of experience. No games are Prof. \"Naturally, we are looking The Zork Trilogy, arranged as school, 5 mins walk to sea. Solidly tested to the same extent. That very carefully into the subject, three separate games, contains the built 6-bedroom detached shows in the fact that all our titles with the advanced graphics, they whole of the original Zork, plus property in own 10-acre grounds. have had a very high profile in the won't be the ordinary adventure many additions and enhance-Upstairs kitchen, large lounge, US charts.\" graphics people have become used ments, making it, viewed as a and extensive dry-cellarage If an Infocom game doesn't sell to. They will be an integral and whole, the biggest and most comhousing art studio and gallery. a minimum of 30,000 copies, it is necessary part of the game.\" plete version of the game there is. Storage for coal by external chute. MAGNETIC SCROLLS NO RIVAL SAYS INFOCOM PROF ZORK HISTORY CORRECTED "


"-95 THOR COMPUTER SOFTWARE LTD. SALES 01-379 6755 01-240 9334 INTERNATIONAL 44-1-379 6755 SPECTRUM 48K.COMMODORE 64 IC.LIF.S.  1986 THOR Computer Software "


". TRINITY EXCLUSIVE 1 EAN ELLERY he little Japanese girl's of all these, claims author Brian mouth opens into a small 'o' Here begins a transcript of interaction with Moriarty, is the museum at Los at the magnificence of the Alamos, where he spent a umbrella you have just given her, TRINITY considerable time to get an awful and descends into the shelter An Interactive Fantasy lot of detail. below the school. You follow her. Copyright (C) 1986 Infocon, Inc. All rights reserved. Trinity is a trademark of Infocon, Inc. The game is puzzle oriented, You wouldn't want to spend much Interpreter 5 Version B and discovering how to enter the time in this damp and filthy hole, Release 11 / Serial Number 860509 toadstool doors is one of the key smelling of urine. puzzles. Some of the doors lead to You are suddenly aware of the inescapable death; some prevent faint sound of aircraft overhead, Lancaster Gate you from getting back into the unnoticed by the girl who is A crooked old tree shades the peranbulators as they roll south down the fantasy world unless you have admiring her umbrella. The drone Lancaster Valk. Shady paths lead west along an iron fence, and southwest between worked it out. outside increases, it sounds as if the trees. Some of the doors are difficult they're in a power dive. The girl There's an old woman under the tree, struggling to open an umbrella. The stift even to find — either open or covers her ears with her hands east wind isn't saking it easy for her. closed. Solving the problems and whimpers. gives a great deal of satisfaction. All at once, the shelter is lit by a Shelp old monan Being an Interactive Fiction Plus terrifying flash of light, and you You begin to approach the old woman, but stop in your tracks. game means that Trinity will only dive to cover the screaming girl, Her face is wrong. be available for computers with at feeling the earth shudder beneath least 128k of memory. a crushing blast wave. Years later, You look a little closer and shudder to yourself. The entire left side of her Brian Moriarty has warned me she recalls to her grandchildren head is scarred with deep red lesions, twisting her oriental features into a that I would need a true 80-column the tale of the mysterious stranger hideous mask. She must have been in an accident or something. screen to be able to play the who shielded her life from the A strong gust of wind snatches the umbrella out of the old woman's hands and game. Sure enough, when the deadly radiation at Nagasaki... sweeps it into the branches of the tree. program started, the screen A pleasant walk through announced, in 40-column mode, Kensington Gardens is the The wosan circles the tree a few times, gazing helplessly upward. That unbrella that it's resolution wasn't high prologue to what can only be obviously means a lot to her, for a wistful tear is running down her cheek. But nobody except you seens to notice her loss. enough to proceed. described as a magnificent However, changing the interactive story from Brian After a few moments, the old woman dries her eyes, gives the tree a vicious resolution to Medium from the Set Moriarty. The atmosphere of the little kick and shuffles away down the Lancaster Valk. Preferences option on the Gem strolling tourists, the Desktop permitted the program to continue. pram-pushing nannies, and the Response on the ST is fast, and children sailing boats on the very little disk access is made Round Pond, convey the very during play. SAVE and RESTORE mood of the place on a sunny commands call up a window in the afternoon. centre of the screen. Suddenly, the wind changes. 'It's An effective and unusual feature time!\" screeches the old woman of the display, is the Abbreviations: I = Introductory level selling bird food. As if in slow superimposition of boxes in S = Standard level motion, a nuclear missile drops reverse video, over the text, when from the sky, directly above the certain actions call up a quotation A = Advanced level Long Water. from the likes of Lewis Carroll and E = Expert level If you can escape the inevitable Alexander Pope. horror, you will be taken back into Unlike most from Infocom, don't MYSTERY Witness (S) by Stu Galley a world where time stands still, expect a bundle of laughs. There Suspect (A) by Dave Lebling save for the movement across the is humour in the game, but it is of Deadline (E) land of a shadow cast by a gigantic the smile-along variety. A magpie, FANTASY Wishbringer (1) by Brian Moriarty vertical triangle. very reminiscent of the parrot in Zork 1 by Dave Lebling and Mark Blank A bizarre world, a no-hope Scott Adams' Pirate, will often Enchanter by Dave Lebling and Mark Blank world. Down by the river, an repeat your previous commands, Zork 2 ) by Dave Lebling and Mark Blank oarsman, half-hidden in the mist, or say things like: IT GO BOOM! silently plies his boat back and He'll give you a clue or two mixed Zork 3 (A) by Dave Lebling and Mark Blank forth across unnaturally dark up with his chatter, so listen Sorceror (A) by Steve Meretsky waters, ferrying skeletal figures carefully to what he has to say. Spellbreaker (E) by Dave Lebling from nowhere to nowhere. A serious game, but not a In this fantasy world, the solemn one, is how Brian SCI-FI Hitch Hiker's Guide (S) by relentlessly moving shadow is the describes it. Not political, it is Steve Meretsky and Doug Adams key to a tour of all past atomic philosophical, and very, very Planetfall (S) by Steve Meretsky explosions. The site of every thought provoking. Futility, A Mind Forever Voyaging nuclear bomb ever exploded is foreboding, and hope, are moods (A) by Steve Meretsky here, reached through a toadstool beautifully conveyed by a very Starcross (E) by Dave Lebling door. You visit, you observe, sensitive writing style. Suspended (E) by Michael Berlyn unable to change the course of Trinity was the code word for events. Or can you? the testing of the world's first ever ADVENTURE Seastalker (I) by Stu Galley and Jim Lawrence This is the first story from Atomic Bomb, at Jornada del Cutthroats (S) by Infocom that recreates actual Muerto, in the Nevada Desert. This Michael Berlyn and Jerry Wolper places and real events. The is where you will finally arrive in Infidel (A) by Michael Berlyn historic and geographic the game; «The fulcrum of history\" background has all been is how Brian Moriarty describes it. thoroughly researched, to give a Will you be able to change its NEW RELEASES Ballyhoo (S) by Jeff O'Neill startlingly true to life course? Trinity (S) by Brian Moriarty representation. The most realistic Keith Campbell INFOCOM-INTERACTIVE FICTION FILE (S) "


"MI CROS E L I MIGROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Tewkesbury, Glos, GL20 SRS (please enclose SAE if possible). Commodore 64 software to swap on disk and tape, have the newest games, send your list for mine. All letters answered. Send to: E. De Vent, Rembrantd V. Rijnstr. 17, 4507 BS Schoondijke, Holland. to, S. Parker, 41 BVennett Road, Chadwell Heath, Romford, Essex, RM6 6ER. Atari software on tape for swaps. Mr Robvot, Montezuma, Mr Do's Castle, Gremlins, plus lots more. Lists to Mark, 5 Waverely Street, Derker, Oldham OL1 4HB. Spectrum 16K with 32k exapansion, includes Quickshot II, Protek, switchable interface, light pen, books, games, software, graphics software, worth over , will sell for . Phone 041 649 5986. Nightingale Modem & Comstar Rom Only , comes complete with manuals & leads for the BBC Micro. Bought at Christmas & has been hardly used since. Phone 0843 62566 but preferably write to P. Cook, Manor House, Shipbourne Road, Tonbridge, Kent. As this address has no phone. Spectrum software for sale, many titles, all originals. 75 Bristol Drive, Battle Hill, Wallsend, Tyne and Wear, NE 29 9RG. Tel: 081 26351265. Many solutions to adventures completed, e.g. Scott Adams and Infocom's. Write to Asif Din, 37 Deeplish Road, Rochadale, GMC OL11 1PH, England. Disk and cassette swappers needs as well. Commodore 64. MSX Programs for sale. Mugger Maurice, Home Budget, Sprite Editor, Bug in a Rug, Blobs. By Aware Software. .99 each. 1 Merlin Close, Hainault, Ilford, Essex IG6 3XL. Texas T199/4a games for sale, including Munchman, Donkey Kong and Amazing, also 20 cassette games + Teach yourself Basic software, cassette leads all for  ono. Phone (021) 472 2870. Commodore 64 games to swap. 800 + titles, including the latest British games and new US imports. Send list to: Mark Collins, 24 Beech Close, Gillway, Tamworth, Staffs, B79 8QH, England (disk only). Commodore 64/128 software to swap, very large collection available. Pleanse send your last list to Bjarte Norheim Rene, Trollsteinveien 2, Kaupangruta, N-3250 Larvik, Norway. Hurry up! All letters answered. By the way, greetings to Hellmates, SCC, Terminators and SCS. MSX software for sale or to swap. Lots of new titles, including Way of the Tiger, Knight Lore, and Konamis Tennis. Contact me for full list, all games are originals. Phone Andrew on (0934) 862646. Glasgow CBM 64 owner (21) wishes to swap disk software with people preferably in same city but will accept others. If interested, send list or letter to; Neil McInnes Jnr., 29 Greenside Street, Provanmill, Glasgow G33 1ES. Phone 041-770 6047. Prestel: 417706047. Mattell Intelevision for sale with 7 games in good condiction, . and CBM 64 games: on cassette; Tigers in the Snow, ; Battle of the Bulge, ; Colossus Chess 2.0 ; Battle for Normandy ; Combat Leader , or the lot for . Write to: Mr M. D. Wiliams 45a Averill Street, London W6 8ED. CBM 64 acoustic modem, complete with all leads, interface and a large selection of database numbers, all in original boxes. Telephone (0602) 226881 after 4 pm. Cost  new sell for . Atari penpal wanted to swap software etc. Write to Andrew Lapping 17, Wentwood Close, West Pontnewydd, Cwmbran, Gwent. Disc only. Norwegian CBM 64 owner would lke to swap games. All letters answers. Send your latest slist to: Jim Skaar, Bryneheia, 4560 Vanse, Norway. Phone: (043) 93676. Disk only. Atari 600XL 64K (memory module) 1010 tape deck, (under guarantee), Quickshot Il joystick, and games. Reasonable offers For Sale Atari 130XE and 1050 disck drive with happy and US Doubler plus over 600 disk games. Genuine offers telephone 022028 830 (West Wratting, Cambridgeshire). Top CBM 64 games to swap. We have hundreds of new titles, but you might have something we don't. So don't waste your opportunity and send us your latest list. M. Korpela, Ylnnekatu 16 L 103, 20520 Turku, Finland. Atari 800 48K + Atari 810 disc drive with Happy enhancement and some software . Atari 130XE . Atari 850 interface . Phone Dorking 711279. 64 Games freak wants toswap. I have most of the new titles from US and Britain. Disk users preferred. Send list to: allan Elebeert, 13 leperstraat 8400, Oostende, Belgium. GT 64 monitor for the Amstrad, ! Also software  each! Electro Fredy, Roland on the Ropes, Roland Goes Digging, Mutant Monty, Spanerman, Danger Mouse in Double Trouble! Ring 856 1943 now!! CBM 64 disks Hobbit, Zork One, Planet Fall, Hitchikers Guide to Galaxy. Cost , sell  or split. Fourth Protocol tape, . Phone (037186) 668, evenings/weekends, ask for Norman. Commodore 64 data recorder, joystick and well over  of software, including Summer Games II, worth over , sell for  ono. Tel: 0394 411023 after 7pm. Amiga. I've got this incredible machine, and want to swap ideas and programs. Many news. Write to: Ivar Frolich, Alle gaten 11,5000 Bergen, Norway. Write soon. Adventure Commodore 64. Lost Idol of Life, .00 cheques/postal orders to Dominic Kearney, 1 Bray Close, Cheadle Hulme, Cheshire. Lord of the Rings — need help? Just send  for complete solution and map (7 pages of A4). Also Heavy on Magik, 80p. Send orders to Lee Hodgson, 54 Church Street, CBM 64 user wishes to swap Bomb Jack, V, Ace, Fairlight, Bounder, Yie Ar kung-fu, Ping Pong, Uridium, Rock n Wrestle, Now games one & tow and Computer hits. Wants Robin of the wood, Spindizzy, Green Beret, Paperboy, Batman, Flight and Dropzone. Or sawp 4 games for a Freeze Frame.. Or will sell for  each. Write to W. Ng, 29 St George Avenue, Kingsbury, London NW9 OJT phone 01-205 1654 after pm ask for Wenchin. CBM 64 software to swap, over 1,000 titles including all the latest, disk only. Send your list for mine to Walter Gray 14 Earlbank Avenue, Scotstown, Glasgow C14 9HE. Phone 041-954 7391. Continuous Computer stationery in small quanities, 200, 400, 1,000 & 2,000 sheets prices from: .43 for 200 sheets of plain listing paper + .50 p&p; .99 for 400 sheets + .99 p&p; .39 for 2,000 sheets of 70gsm mcr perf + .60 p&p; .99 for 200 sheets + .99 p&p; .99 for 2,000 3.5\" 1.4\" self adhesive labels + .99 p&p; .00 for 200 + .60 p&p. Send SAE for order form and price list to: Brigantic Computer Services (:CVG), PO Box 517, Bamber Bridge, Preston, OR5 6DB. "


"SPLIT PERSONALITIES Everyone knows that computer gamesters have split personalities. On the outside they appear perfectly normal, sane, reasonable people. But underneath they are seething with repressed fantasies and strange violent urges. But you can never actually catch one of them changing. Unless of course you've got one of C+VG's special Polaroid cameras specially modified by IDEAS CENTRAL and Domark to catch games players in the act of metamorphosis. There's a long word for you! We've got FIVE of these Polaroid instant picture cameras to give away thanks to Domark, who want to celebrate the release of their C+VG HIT! game Split Personalities. All you have to do is put an apt and amusing caption to the special Split Personalities cartoon on this page. Just what game is Maggie playing? And what are Ronnie and Sir Clive talking about? What has Mick Jagger got to do with all of this? Not to mention Michael Heseltine and Neil Kinnock! It's over to YOU, dear reader, for the explanation. Just fill in the competition coupon with your caption and send it to Computer and Video Games, Split Personalities Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR BAU. Closing date for the competition is August 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and the editor's decision is final. And if you'd like to capture your own Split Personality on film and send it to us, please feel free. We'd like to see them! SPLIT PERSONALITIES\" C+VG/DOMARK SPLIT PERSONALITIES COMPETITION Name. Address Age My Split Personalities cartoon caption is: "


"M I CROS E L L MICROSELLS — It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Atari ST owners look, Degas, Pawn, Sundog, Brataccas for sale + many others, originals 1/2 price or less. Tel 0322 330411. Software Exchange Club. Fee membership. Exchange your unwanted games cheaply, send SAE for details and membership. Send to: ON-SPEC Software Exchange Club, 23 Florence Road, West Bridgford, Nottingham NG2 5HR. Over 30 to sell. Phone Rob on 8920453 for details & full list. Spectrum owners. I can help you complete over 100 top titles (adventures & arcade including Lord of the Rings, Heavy on Magick, etc). Send SAE to Lee Hodgson, 54 Church Street, Tewkesbury, Glos, GL20 5RZ. For complete list, hurry! 48K Specturm, W. H. Smiths data recorder, printer, datel digital sound, Currah speech and Microslot, two Kempston joysticks and interfaces, over 70 games, etc, all as new, offers around . Telephone 070681. Commodore 64 software to swap. I have all the lastest, send your list to Gary Biasillo, 41 Dublin Croft, Great Sutton, South Wirral, L66 2TD or telephone 051 339 8512. Hurry, disk only. Great Bargain! For sale Spectrum 48K with Sinclair Interface 1, a Microdrive, Decca tape recorder, over  worth of software including Green Beret, Yie Ar kung fu, Sabre Wulf and many others. Also Kempston joystick interface, Quickshot II joystick and many computer books and mags. All you need when buying a computer. Worth around , selling for  ono. Tel Rayleigh 781076. Swap CBM 64 games. Games include Bomb Jack, Superbowl, Starquake, V, Ping Pong, Hardball, Uridium and Fairlight. If interest write to Clarke Colquhoun, Loch Monzievaird, Crieff, Tayside, Scotland, PH7 4JR. ON-SPEC, a great fanzine with reviews, tips, maps, charts, features, competitions, strategy and adventure features, penpals and the only FREE membership software exchange club run by a fanzine and also a free tape, containing at least four great games. Fanzine with tape only .00, without tape only 50p. Send cheque/P.O. to: ON-SPEC, c/o David Lane, 23 Florence Road, West Bridgford, Nottingham, GN2 5HR. letters answered. Tel 050/825502 after 7pm at Weekend. CBS Colleco Vision with Atari module and turbo module. 3 Atari and 4 CBS cartridges. Good condition selling for  ono. Tel Keynsham (Bristol) 67346 Ask for Nick. Commodore 64 software for sale. Includes Ballblazer, Zorro, Thing on a spring Tir na nog and others. Prices between -. Phone 0543 — 74382 after 6pm. U.S. Imports for CBM64, Popeye, Mr Dos'Castle, Montzuma's Revenge, Archon III, Mancopter. Ms Paceman, Rainbow Walker, Juno First, Frogger II, Q-Bert, Night Mission Pinball, Crystal Castles and OLO.  cassette,  Disk. U.S. Imports, 26 Hillside Road, Marlow, Bucks. SL7 3JE. BBC Computer games for sale or swap,  each, all originals. Includes top titles like Gyroscope, Commando, Cavey Ring Uxbridge 59491 or send S.A.E. to 44 Harefield Road, Uxbridge, Middx for list. 48K Spectrum, Stonechip Keyboard, VTX 5000 Modem, Joystick + Interface, Light pen, Currah Speech +  of original Software, All no1 games, Total cost, , sell for . Tel: — 0304 373617. MSX games for sale: Sail Break: graphic adv, with 60 + locations, also Treasur Isle: Adv. Both of them are only .95 each. Send cheque/PO to P. Jess, 58 Legacurry Road, Lisburn NI. Commodore 64 plus cassette recorder, joystick, Simons basic, 30-40 games, three volumes Input mags, and users manual,  ono. (worth over ). Phone 06267 4110. Amstrad CPC 464 with colour monitor, 8 months old + over  of games, including Spindizzy, Tau Ceti, Highway Encounter, Who Dares Wins II. Perfect condition, with Quickshot + arcade joysticks, dust covers, worth , sell for  ono. Phone Chris 0468 41305. MSX penpal wanted to swap ideas and software, incuding Way of the Tiger, many Euoprean games, Alien 8, Flight Deck, all Konami games. Write to: P. Jess, 58 Legacurry Road, Lisburn, Co Antrim, N.I. Atari picture disk packed with brilliant screens, includes auto picture fader, also amaging digitised music disc, you won't believe your ears! This disc includes two extra amazing graphics demos. Both disc double-sided, four sides full for .95 post free. P. Cunningham, 11 Berwyn Avenue, Penyffordd, Chester, CH4 OHS. Attention MTX 500 users! | would like a penpal to swap news, games etc, can you write machine code? Send letter + list to 47 Gladstone Street, Leven, Fife KY8 4QG. Amiga/Commodore 64 users!! Contact: Robert Drost, Zwaluwhof 19, Stadskanaal, 9502tt, Netherlands. Phone: 05990 22439. I've got lots of new games I want to swap or sell. If you are also heavy in the software call right now. Spectrum adventures for sale. Over 20 titles - each inc. Lord of the Rings, Redhawk, Red Moon, Fantastic 4, Seas of Blood etc. Many more recent titles. Please phone Robert on 8920453. Can sell all together or swap. Latest Spectrum games for sale, inc Bomb Jack, Heavy on the Magick, Superbowl, Green Beret, V CORE, Zoids, Quazatron, Twister plus more. Less than half price per game. Continuous Computer stationery in small quanities, 200, 400, 1,000 & 2,000 sheets prices from: .43 for 200 sheets of plain listing paper + .50 p&p; .99 for 400 sheets + .99 p&p; .39 for 2,000 sheets of 70gsm mcr perf + .60 p&p; .99 for 200 sheets + .99 p&p; .99 for 2,000 3.5\"21.4\" self adhesive labels + .99 p&p; .00 for 200 + .60 p&p. Send SAE for order form and price list to: Brigantic Computer Services (:CVG), PO Box 517, Bamber Bridge, Preston, OR5 6DB. Amiga and C64/128 software to swap. (Disk only) Send your newest list to Kurt Vandorpe Guldensporenstr. 27 8020 Oostrkamp (Belgium) All Commodore 64 owner wishes to swap titles including all the latest (disk and tape) send your list in return for mine to: Mike, 19 Kelso Walk, Darlington, Co Durham DL3 9UZ or phone D/ton 57994 after 6pm. Blank disks for sale. Complete with labels, wirte-protect tabs. Sealed on boxes of 10.1 box, ; 5 boxes ; 10 boxes . Phone (05827) 5232 ask for lan. Commodore 64 software for sale, all originals at half price. Titles include Summer Games II, Elite, Zoids, Fractulus, Uridium, Scarabaeus, Raid on Bungeling Bay, Stellar 7, Rocky Horror. Send S.A.E. for list to L. Brigdem, 395 Norris Rd, Sale Moor, Cheshire. 84 "


"SUPER COMPUTERS For the first time games ters can get their hands 0. 16-bit computers wat it costing them anar and a leg So sit back while David Bishop takes you ona whistlestop tour of the goodies available for the Super-Computers the shape of things to come. "


"AMIGA DPaint Color Comm Jack's tribe was called In the beginning was darkness and Clive said \"Let there be ZX80» and there was. And Clive saw that it was good, and chuckled. It came to pass that ZX80 begat ZX81 which begat ZX Spectrum which began begatting a whole multitude. Clive was laughing. And the new star was called Jack ... And Jack's tribe was called Commodore. And the Commodores started spreading Jack's word throughout all nations. Verily, Clive tried not to look concerned. But there was weeping and gnashing of teeth between the elders of the tribe of Commodore and the sons of Jack. And it came to pass that Jack and sons, the tribe of Commodore left to wander in the wilderness for 40 days and 40 nights. And Jack chanced upon a dried up oasis in the wilderness called Atari, home of a strange but wondrous tribe called the Amigas. \"Forsooth the Amigas left this very day for a tribe called the Commodores» said one of the elders of the Atari tribe \"Most of my tribe left with them!» Jack looked visibly peaved! Meanwhile ZX Spectrum had begat one tribe called the QLs, who worshipped a god called 68000. But the QLs were hit by plague which left the children of QL still born. And it came to pass that Clive came down off his hill to see the multitudes worshipping a sugar idol. But before Clive could break his tablet, Sugar had bought them, but, did not take Clive's wafers, nor verily his strange chariot! Whether you believe this version of where 68000 came from or prefer the more scientifically based «The Origin of the Chip» by Sir Clive Darwin there can be little doubt that 16-bit machines are here to stay and recent trends would suggest the market is about to innundated with 68000 based games, simulations and utilities. This feature concentrates on software for three contrasting 68000 based computers. The Apple Macintosh, The Amiga from Commodore and Atari's 520 ST. The Mac, as it is known, is a self contained system similar in shape to the late Vectrex video game machine. It has an inbuilt disk drive and black and white monitor of very high resolution. Indeed it is the almost photographic quality of Mac graphis that is one of the characteristic qualities of software written for this computer. The Commodore Amiga has been the computer on everybodies lips lately — not least Atari's lawyers! Replete with every feature you could dream of the Amiga's 68000 chip has three others, the Agnes, Denise and Paula chips, to help it run through its repertoire of party tricks, which include inbuilt software speech and four channel digitised stereo sound. A computer with a realistic and affordable price tag is Atari's 520 ST (or STM), soon to be superceeded by the 1040 ST. For the first time gamers have the chance to get their sweaty palms on a 16-bit computer without spending thousands of pounds. DELUXE PAINT It isn't until you sit down with Electronic Art's Deluxe Paint for a couple of years that you begin to realise just how awesome a machine the Amiga really is. This package is an open door into a new generation of potentially 'dangerous' graphical effects that one would normally expect to see on a Quantel Paintbox used by the big boys at the Beeb. Unlike drawing programs on mortal computers where you are presented with a preset palette of say 16 colours, Delux Paint gives you a colour set window with slider controls for red, green and blue intensity. By moving these sliders up and down it is possible to choose from a palette of 4,096 colours. TABLE OF TECHNICAL COMPARISONS Microprocessor 520ST Amiga 68000 motorola 68000 motorola 16/32 bit 16/32 bit 8 MHZ 7.8 MHZ 512K Ram 256 Ram Speed Memory (ram) Mac 68000 motorola 16/32 bit 7.8 MHZ Ram 128,256 512 & IBM ROM 64K up to Imb 400k 31/2\" Monochrome Expansion Disk Capacity 192 ROM Up to Imb 360k or 720k 31/2\" 64 ROM up to 512k 880k 31/2\" RGB, Col. TV Composite Video Display RGB, Monochrome, Col Tv 512 colours Colour 4096 colours Black & White only Highest Resolution Keyboard Yes Speech Synth Music 1/10 Ports 640x400 mono 640x400 16 cols 512x342 640x200 4 cols 95 keys 89 keys 58 keys Numeric pad Numeric pad No No 3 channel 4 channel stereo 1 channel Midi RS 232 RS 232 VT 52 Terminal Parallel Parallel Serial Serial "


"AMIGA ENTER GET DROP LOOK ARREST SHOH TALK SEARCH FOLLOH OPEN WOMAN DESK PHONE ROOM DOOR HINDOW KILL AMIGA RETURN DASH958 Apart from setting up a palette, various other presets can be defined in the colour window. Two of the most spectacular are 'shade' and 'colour cycle'. Any sequence of colours from the palette can be flagged as your shade palette. Now pick 'shade' from one of the pull down menus across the top of the screen and start to draw. The effect your brush has as it is moved over the screen is similar to the colour changes seen on a strip of metal when an oxyacetylene torch is moved over its surface. Colour cycle allows you to flag a sequence of colours from the palette and then cause all areas on the screen with any of these colours to run through the cycle changing from one colour to the next and so on... if you ever wondered what LSD was like then this is probably not far off the mark! Cycle can also be used to simulate animation in your design. Another wondrous option is the 'smear' function. Imagine your picture was drawn with coloured chalks on a blackboard instead of pixels on a screen. Drawing with smear 'on' is like moving your finger over the blackboard but a lot less messy! ! The phone is ringing.. You see a couple of thugs walking up the ley toward you. When they see you, they draw their guns, the alley, the two RSS Make short work of you. Borrowed Time, an adventure where however, exceptions to this trend you play a detective called Sam. most notable of which is Archon, a Unfortunately somebody wants to strategy board game based on the kill Sam but which one of the 20 or so struggle between the forces of dark suspects is behind the threats on his and light. life and WHY are they so hellbent on Archon is played on a 9x9 board his demise? of squares, five of which are power The game begins with you sitting points. The winner is the first player behind your desk one sunny to occupy all five points or to kill the afternoon when the phone rings... entire opposing force. Unlike chess 'Sam, you're a dead man.\"...nice, where a piece is captured by landing eh! on the square it is occupying, when All you have to go on are your old you land on an occupied square in case notes in the filing cabinet and Archon the games goes into an your detective's nose for sniffing out arcade sequence where the two the truth. The case notes offer some opposing pieces fight it out on a help but beg as many questions as blown up representation of the they answer. disputed square. You hear murmers wafting up At the start of the game each force from the alley below. It's those goons is 18 strong made up of seven ... they tailed you back to your office different pieces. One of the twists in but who the hell sent them? Anyway Archon is that the seven dark force time for quick exit stage right! creatures differ from the seven light Every location is graphically ones so there are 14 different types of illustrated some better than others piece on the board at the start of the although overall Borrowed Time game. Each different piece has makes reasonable use of the Amiga's characteristic properties reflected in graphics without actually setting the the way it moves on the board, its world on fire. speed and potency during the arcade A limited number of the more sequences and the sound it makes useful words are shown on screen to while moving. save you having to enter them with Electronic Art has used the stereo the keyboard. The Parser, while not sound capabilities of the Amiga very up to Pawn, or Infocom standards, is effectively in Archon. Imagine comprehensive and forgiving. microphones placed on the left and A carefully woven plot together right hand edges of the board so that with some nice animated touches when a piece moves from left to right make Borrowed Time an intriguing the digitised sound effects of its and enjoyable adventure of movement fade from the left speaker above-average quality. and get louder in the right... this adds a new dimension to the game ARCHON that the eight bit version didn't have. One of the companies spearheading Archon is an unusual marriage of the development of Amiga game arcade and strategy and should software is Electronic Arts who have appeal to devotees from both camps. appeal to devotees from both camps. committed substantial resources to creating games and utilities KALEIDOspecifically for it as well as SCOPE converting many of their existing titles. One of the Amiga's outstanding Regrettably most of the features is the blitter chip which can conversions that have so far been take something from one part of the released have not really been screen and reproduce it elsewhere enhanced to take advantage of the almost instantaneously. The net Amiga's superior graphics and effect of having a blitter on board is sound capabilities. There are, continued Three more sliders-hue, shade and DP does also come with all the video allow further tweaking of normal functions you would expect the chosen colours... If you can't get to see in a graphics package the colour you want, it doesn't exist! including 8 brushes/circle/elipseHaving created a palette it's time to /rectangle/line/fill... the list is explore the multitude of features on endless. offer and what better way to start Deluxe Paint allows the power of than to load one of the new ready the Amiga to be harnessed into uses made pictures that come with the never before dreamed of by the home program. Pick Tutankhamun from micro owner... the definitive the menu, wait three seconds for it software trip! load, pick yourself off the floor and begin to play. BORROWED By selecting the 'make brush'icon TIME you can make any rectangular portion of the screen into a brush and Another major company already then the fun starts. You can now publishing Amiga software is stretch, flip, shear, invert, bend and Activision who, like Electronic Arts, rotate the brush just like they do on are developing a mix of conversions the Kenny Everett Video Show and and original material. Top of the Pops! One conversion from the 64 is AMIGA "


"JR SOFTWARE 5 Brookes Court, Baldwin Gardens, London EC1 Telephone: 01-242 5409 EMPIRE SOFTWARE .95 .95 .95 .25 .25 .95 .50 SPECTRUM Barry McGuigan Boxing ..... .50 Critical Mall .60 Bomb Jack. .90 FA Cup .90 Gun Fright .40 Green Beret .90 Heavy on the Magick .40 Kung Fu .90 Laser Basic .50 Movie .70 Max Headroom .40 Nomad .90 Ping Pong .70 Starquake .60 Sold A Million .20 Spitfire 40 .40 Star Strike 11 .90 Sam Fox. .60 Transformers .90 30 Games .40 Twister .25 Turbo Esprit .60 V. .90 Wartoad. .90 Winter Games.. . .70 Way of the Tiger ... .40 Young Ones .40 Zoids .60 Bothams Cricket .95 Ghost 'n' Goblins .95 Mantronics .95 Theatre Europe .40 Bobby Bearing .95 The Writer .. .50 The Code Machine.. .90 Kung Fu Master .40 Laser Basic ... .50 Mercenary .40 Max Headroom .40 Ping Pong .50 PS15 Trading .40 Green Beret.. .60 Price of Magic .40 Quest Probe .40 Golf Construction Set.. ..50 Rock 'N' Wrestle. .25 Summer Games .40 Sold A Million Il.. .25 Super Bowl .40 Star Quake... .60 Twister. .40 Uridium .60 .60 Winter Games .25 30 Games .40 Zoids .60 Young Ones... .25 Tau Ceti .40 Summer Games II. .40 Chost 'n' Goblins .40 Mermaid Madness. .40 Solo Flight II.. .40 Murder Mississippi...........50 Sky Hawk Two Kingdom Valley ... Thai Boxing World Cup Winter Olympics Bothams Cricket Hyper Force ATARI Boulder Dash Beta Lyrae Electra Glide Fighter Pilot F15 Strike Eagle Jump Jet... King of the Ring. Mercenary .... Movie Maker (disc)... Mr Robot Red Moon Smash Hits 4 Spy vs Spy II Spitfire Ace Worm in Paradise ... Zone X.. .40 .40 .60 .40 .40 .40 .40 .. .40 .50 .40 .40 .60 .40 .60 .40 .40 Our SPECTRUM RRP Price AMSTRAD Superbowl 9.95 7.40 Paper Boy Paper Boy 7.95 5.90 Alien Highway Barry McGuigan's Boxing 7.99 5.90 Equinox Tau Ceti 9.95 7.45 World Cup Carnival They Sold a Million II 9.95 7.45 Saboteur Three Weeks in Paradise 9.95 7.45 Bounder Saboteur 8.95 6.70 Computer Hits II Commando 7.95 5.90 Knight Games Rock 'n' Wrestle 8.95 6.70 Rebel Planet Streethawk 7.95 5.90 Heavy on the Magick Gladiator 7.95 5.90 Tau Ceti Skyfox 8.95 6.70 Movie Ping Pong 7.95 5.90 Zoids Sir Fred 9.95 7.40 Sold a Million II Superman 9.95 7.40 Fair Light Turbo Esprit 8.95 6.70 Batman Knight Rider 7.95 5.90 Bomb Jack Tomahawk 9.95 7.45 3D Boxing Batman 7.95 5.90 Ping Pong Alien Highway 7.95 5.90 Lord of the Rings Green Beret 7.95 5.90 Elite Art Studio 14.95 11.00 Battle of Planets Elite 14.95 11.20 Cyberun 9.95 7.40 The Goonies 7.95 5.90 c16 Starstrike II 7.95 5.90 Airwolf Sai Combat 6.95 5.20 Commando Laser Basic 14.95 11.20 Ace Winter Games 7.95 5.90 Kung Fu Kidd Spec Drum 29.95 26.70 Thai Boxing Computer Hits 6 9.95 7.40 Steve Davies Snooker Gunfright 8.95 6.70 World Cup Carnival Pole Position 7.95 3.50 Bomb Jack Bomb Jack 7.95 5.90 World Cup Roller Coaster 6.95 5.20 C16 Classics 2 The Young Ones 7.95 5.95 Mantronix 7.95 5.90 Southern Belle 7.95 5.90 BBC They Sold a Million 9.95 7.40 Paperboy Critical Mass 8.95 6.75 Computer Hits II Sweevo's World 7.95 5.90 Rebel Planet Battle of the Planets 9.95 7.40 Commando Biggles 9.95 7.40 Bomb Jack Ghost 'n Goblins 7.95 5.90 Moon Cresta Quazatron 8.95 6.70 Lord of the Rings Equinox 9.95 7.40 Bruce Lee World Cup Carnival 9.95 7.40 Hyper Sports (D) Comet Game 7.95 5.90 Yle ar Kung Fu Hocus Focus 8.95 6.70 Hobbit Back to the Future 9.95 7.40 Monopoly Scaletrix 9.95 7.40 Way of Ex. Fist RRP Price COMMODORE 8.95 6.70 V 7.95 5.90 Inter. Soccer (Rom) 9.95 7.40 Ping Pong 9.95 7.40 Uridium 8.95 6.70 Hard Ball 8.95 6.70 Eidolon 9.95 7.40 Knight Rider 8.95 6.70 Kung Fu Master 9.95 7.40 Desert Fox 9.95 7.40 Bomb Jack 985 740 Me 8.95 6.70 Mercenary 8.95 6.70 Yie Ar Kung Fu 9.95 7.40 Lord of the Rings 9.95 7.40 Back to the Future 8.95 6.70 Tigers in the Snow 8.95 6.70 Bounder 9.95 7.40 RM.S, Titanic 8.95 6.70 Sci Fi Trader Co. 15.95 11.90 Quest Probe 14.95 11.20 Way of the Tiger 9.95 7.45 Superbowl Zoids Our Battle of Britain RRP Price Zapp Sizzlers 6.95 5.20 Computer Hits 10 II 7.95 5.90 Game Killer (Rom) 9.95 245 7.45 Fairlight 7.95 5.90 Critical Mass 7.95 5.90 Green Beret 7.95 5.90 Hunchback Adventure 9.95 7.45 Little Comp. People 7.95 5.90 War Play 6.95 5.20 Heavy on the Magick 9.95 7.45 Spindizzy Zorro Our Empire RRP Price 9.95 7.45 9.95 7.45 M.S.X 9.95 7.45 All Konami Rom's 9.95 7.45 Gunfight 9.95 7.45 Knightlore 7.95 5.90 Golf (Konami) 15.95 11.90 Way of the Tiger 9.95 7.45 Alien 8 12.95 10.90 Computer Hits 6 9.95 7.45 Ping Pong (Konami) 14.95 11.20 Bounder 12.95 11.95 Zoids 9.95 7.45 Night Shade Our RRP Price 8.95 6.70 14.95 4.99 8.95 6.70 8.95 6.70 9.95 7.45 9.95 7.40 8.95 6.70 9.95 7.40 9.95 7.40 8.95 6.70 8.95 6.70 9.957.45 8.95 6.70 15.95 11.90 9.95 7.45 9.95 7.45 9.95 7.45 9.95 7.40 9.95 7.40 9.95 7.40 9.957 .40 9.95 7.40 8.95 6.70 9.99 7.40 9.95 7.40 9.95 7.40 14.95 11.20 9.95 7.40 8.95 6.70 8.95 6.70 8.95 6.70 9.95 7.40 7.95 6.50 9.95 7.40 9.95 7.40 9.95 7.40 9.95 7.40 C16 Atlantis ... Ace Airwolf Berks Trilogy Bongo.. Classics I or Classics II . Commando... Favourite Four. Gun Slinger. Hustler Jump Jet. Mount Vesuvius Jet Set Willy 11 Pogo Pet Space Pilot Slippery Sid BBC Block Busters Bull's Eye .. Commando Count Down Citidal.. Exploding Fist Fleet Street Editor Lord of the Rings ... Moon Cresta Repton II.. Speach... Strike Force Harrier Southern Belle Treasure Hunt The Quill Winter Olympic Yie Ar Kung Fu Bothams Cricket Air Wolf .. COMMODORE Bomb Jack. Desert Fox Empire Electra Glide Frank Bruno Boxing ... The Force FA Cup Hard Ball .60 .60 .20 .70 .40 .70 .00 .00 .95 .60 .40 .40 .95 .40 .00 .95 .60 .95 .40 .25 .00 .70 .25 .95 .40 .70 .25 .95 $3.95 .40 .25 .95 .25 .95 .95 .20 .20 .40 .60 .90 .40 .90 .40 Our RRP Price 17.95 14.95 9.95 7.45 9.95 7.75 17.95 14.95 9.957.45 9.95 7.45 7.95 5.95 17.95 14.95 8.95 6.70 8.95 6.70 9.95 7.40 All of these titles are released and awaiting despatch Comp Pro .50; Konix Speed King .95; Hotshot Analog Joystick for Revs .50; C 16 interface .00; Arcade .50 All payments in Sterling. Europe add  per tape. Elsewhere overseas add  per tape. Postage free in UK to: Send a self addressed, stamped envelope for list to: JR Software Dept CVG6, 5 Brookes Court, Baldwins Gardens, EC1 Please send SAE for a catalogue of games for Spectrum, Commodore and M.S.X. and all the other computers. Please make cheque's or postal order's payable to Empire Software. EMPIRE SOFTWARE 118A Palmers Road, New Southgate, London N11 ISL Telephone enquiries welcome. Phone: 01-361 1933    Plastic Library Case Free with Ten Disks +2 FREE Disks Quality 3 Blank Disks Jorn-03 With every Obought Buy 10 GET 12 BUY 50GET60 Compumart aboratori Elp. . Perspex Storage Box Free with Fifty Disks + 10 FREE Disks 1 Double Sided I Double Density laa2 UGYG?? Double Sided Double Density .25. Quality 377 Microdisks BOXED IN 10's-LABELS etc.... LIFETIMET WARRANTY Hub Rings, Envelopes, Labels etc | SINGLE SIDED DOUBLE SIDED 135 T.RI. 135 T.P.I. 10-AMSOFT 3\"CF2 Microdisks .00 . 00 +  p&p oo +p&p +t32.99 GUARANTEED Orders 24 Hour Credit Card same pokia Same Day. watch on ALL Before 4pm Order Line _Despatch on 0509-233893 VISA Please send cheques/postal orders to: Compumart, (Dept CVG) Unit 8, Falcon Street, Loughborough, Leics, LE11 IEH Access Compumart 0509-262259= HOTLINE "


"ATARI ST BUY CLIMB DIG DROP ENTER FOLLOW GET GIVE LOOK OPEN SEARCH STRIKE TALK ALL BEACH BOAT BOX MAN OCEAN TREE HUT ATARI ST RETURN A trail Marked by an OMinous warning sign, leads into a forest and some high Mountains. Command > GO NORTH You are lost in the Mountains COMMand > effect of having a blitter on board is years, there were machines into that the Amiga's already impressive which The Snatch'could be graphics can be visually massaged to crammed. The ageing megagame produce visions of yet greater was, once more, brought out of stunability! retirement and work began on Aware of the potential of the converting it to the Mac, the new blitter, Electronic Arts has Atari ST and the soon to be launched produced a little ditty entitled Amiga. Kaleidoscope. Think back into your Psygnosis had a great chance of distant past and imagine you're establishing themselves as a major looking through your traditional player in the new 16 bit arena kaleidoscope as you turn the barrel to because they were almost the first generate an almost infinite number company to release a piece of of patterns. entertainment software onto a market Well the EA version uses exactly which still had a definite 'wait and the same principle except that is see' attitude towards the ST and the doesn't use a mirror to create the Amiga. The one flaw in all this was snowflake' symmetry it uses our the game itself. Even after all this friend the blitter. time Barataccas, as it was now If left unmolested Kaleidoscope known, still bore all the scars of its will put on a two hour display of unenviable pedigree. swirling colours, shapes and patterns Very briefly, the game is a side that would leave you goggle-eyed. view, room-to-room, multi-character At any time pressing one of the and object, all-singing, all-dancing function keys will start the pattern arcade adventure set in a small generator going at one of ten entry mining asteriod called Barataccas points spread throughout the two situated in the outer solar system.., hour display. Other functions allow (well nobody could have made up a you to wipe the screen and you can name like that!) even freeze any view that You play the part of Kyne who has particularly takes your fancy and fled to the asteriod in search of a then save it. The saved file can be sanctuary and proof of his innocence loaded into Deluxe Paint and having been wrongly accused on 'tampered' with. Earth of genetic fraud. Kaleidoscope is the kind of thing Unfortunately the game is not fun that would look ultra-cool on a to play due to numerous bugs (most projection TV at a party. It doesn't small in themselves but should they actually DO anything but it possesses still be there after all this time?) and a a kind of hypnotic quality which horrendously unfriendly control prevents you from looking away and configuration for mouse, joystick it certainly shows off one aspect of and keyboard. OK you can make the Amiga's power to great effect. Kyne do lots of different things but wouldn't it have been better to limit these in the laudable name of playability. Barataccas is definitely a game BARATACCAS whose origins are far more interesting than the end product! Not everything was completely destroyed in the original Imagine funeral pyre. One of the most touted yet evasive titles of that era was Bandersnatch, the 'megagame' which Mindshadow is another of was to be released for the Spectrum Activision's Amiga conversions. together with a hardware add-on Formerly available on various eight needed to contain the 'game of the bits including the 64 and Amstrad it decade'. Along with Bandersnatch is another adventure designed by various ex-Imagine bods narrowly Interplay.Mindshadow uses the managed to avoid being repossessed same screen configuration as along with the Ferraris. Three of Borrowed Time (see above) but the these, including one-time director plot and setting are somewhat Eugene Evans, left to form a new different. I can do no better than to company called Psygnosis (without quote the first few lines on the box any help from Bruce Everiss) in which, as with Borrowed Time, set order to finally drag Bandersnatch the scene perfectly. screaming and kicking to market, \"You find yourself lost in the this time on the new super doopa QL! middle of nowhere. In the middle of ... enough said. a mystery. Who are you? Where will Then came those rumours from you go? What will you do?... You afar of the new great byte hope struggle for answers. For your '68000'! At last, after almost three identity. And for the faceless betrayer who left you to perish.\" getting worse. The game starts on the beach of a Enter Senator Richard Ryder, who, deserted island from where you can together with leaders from move in traditional adventure government, the universities and fashion through locations, all nicely business, announces the plan for tarted up for the Amiga. Renewed National Purpose. «Only Commenting on the quality of the one thing stands between the Plan plot in this one is tricky as I've never and it's adoption: a test of its got very far into it. But those bits validity.\" already seen suggestMindshadow is Enter PRISM the world's first every bit as fun as Borrowed Time, sentient machine. The theory behind both of which are available on all PRISM's development was to make three systems dealt with in this its programming as similar to the feature... nice one Activision! programming' of the human mind as possible ... the human experience A MIND would be simulated from the very first day of life! FOREVER This soliptic programming VOYAGING process, as it is known, takes almost as long as the events it simulates. Infocom have long been famous for After 11 years PRISM, within the their disk-based, text-only context of the simulation, is now adventures such as theZork trilogy about 20 years old, but how will this and the more recent Hitchikers 20-year-old react when he's told that Guide to the Galaxy. he's a computer? To date all Infocom's games have You play the part of PRISM been converted to a multitude of 'awakened' from your simulated life, different computers (normally in you have your true nature revealed to excess of 18 or 20) including eight bit you several years ahead of schedule. systems like the 64, TRS80 and now You have been chosen to use your the Amstrad. This has meant that all unique abilities to enter a simulation their games (which are identical on of the future based on the tenets of every system) have been restricted in the plan. scope by the most limiting of the AS PRISM there are five modes' eventual target machines. that you can enter. These are A Mind Forever Voyaging (AMFV) communications, library, interface, represents a departure from this sleep and simulations. Space policy as it is designed to run on 16 prohibits detailed blurbs on each but bit systems only, meaning the palette suffice is to say that comm's and from which it has been fashioned is sleep are self explanatory, while far richer and more varied than all library mode allows you to sift Infocom's previous adventures. through reams of pertinent data and The years is 2031. The world is on background info concerning life in the brink of chaos. Crime and urban 2031, you, the Plan and many other decay are rampant. The use of related subjects. The shear volume of «joybooths' to tune-out' is becoming text here is a direct consequence of more widespread every day. The the increased memory in which superpower race to develop the AMFV has to run. ultimate missile defence system has After 20 or so hours looking at ended in a draw sparking off an even AMFV I get the feeling that I have more ominous race to develop done little more than scratch the miniature nuclear weapons small surface of what looks like another enough to be smuggled past security fascinating piece of interactive systems in a jacket pocket. Yes, fiction. things are not good and they look like continued ATARI ST "


"ATARI ST EUX ? INCERCBEATION ATARI ST AIARI ST SUNDOG A relative newcomer to the game software scene is FTL, a San Diego based outfit who have recently released their first game for the ST entitled Sundog. Sundog is a science fiction adventure game set in the Jebal Imperial Protectorate, a loosely-knit federation of planets. The main action takes place in the Drahew region, a cluster of 12 systems incorporating 18 inhabited planets. You can move between systems planets and cities as well as wander about inside each city. The story has it that your uncle has recently died under suspicious circumstances leaving you three things: some money, a one-man star fighter the Sundog and a contract he signed to help in the building of a colony for a religious group. You have three tasks. First locate the colony, which is called Banville. All you know is that it's somewhere on the planet Jondd. Second, with the money from your uncle, find, buy and deliver all the goods necessary to finish building the colony. Third, find the cryogenically-frozen colonists, who are located in warehouses scattered all over the Drahew region, and take them back to the colony as required. The game is played in different modes from the control deck of your fighter to driving and walking around the cities. The graphics change between modes to show you in different environments from different views. Unfortunately, despite a nice idea and some lovely graphical moments, the overriding task of locating and trading various commodities in order to build a colony becomes repetitive after a while and it becomes apparent that the game, for all its nice little touches, is far too shallow to be considered a standard-bearer for ST entertainment. functions and presets which allow you to create complex pattern sequences and then draw with them by moving a joystick or, in the ST's case, a mouse. The results even a novice 'spacer' can achieve are quite staggering and really put the ST's graphics chip through its paces. \"It's not a game» says Minter \"it does not fit into any category. It is the video equivalent of a guitar; a Files TechText *105 * Graphics Colour guitar has no intrinsically useful Test all opposite a large bed. function, but the playing of it There !! 3 four poster bed bere. A princess is bere. provides pleasure...Colourspace allows the same creative pleasure to choose your own balance between sentences reveal a few niggles which be applied to light shows.\" text and graphics. Incidentally the mar an otherwise excellent parser. It is true to say you get out of opening screen is a graphical delight An example of this is the Colourspace what you put in and which defies every rule in Atari's discrimination made between the those not into making pretty patterns handbook and rumour has it that an singular and plural of certain nouns, on the screen should look for their equally outrageous pickie awaits especially door(s), open the door' I kicks elsewhere. Those of us, those smart enough to finish The typed only to be told there is no door however, who fancy the idea of Pawn with a maximum score of 350. here. The same sentence using the playing around with pattern The parser developed by Scrolls is word 'doors' has the desired reaction expansion modes, starfield effects, clever, although sometimes one gets ... somewhat pedantic! rotating colour flows, auto-strobe, the impression that is has been Quite the best thing about The streak cluster lengths and key designed to impress with party Pawn is the dry, cynical humour that triggered colour events not to pieces like: creeps into many of the location and mention about 100 other controls, \"Get all except the cases but not character descriptions used to such will thrill to the special effects the ST the violin case then kill the man great effect to parody many other and Colourspace between them make eating shrew with the contents of the 'lesser' adventures. possible. violin case. Remove the shrew's tail Overall The Pawn is a most and use it to tie the pole and the professionally produced, packaged THE PAWN noose together.' and marketed product. Magnetic About a year ago an adventure game Impressive stuff but hardly the Scrolls and Rainbird Software have called The Pawn was released for the kind of sentence mere humans would alot to be proud of. QL with little more than a ripple of use. And yet much more simple public reaction or praise. Now that The Pawn has been released for a range of sensible machines, notably the ST, it is, quite rightly, attracting attention from all quarters. Enamine 1 Open Close Speak Operate Go Written and programmed by Hit (SELF Consume Magnetic Scrolls, The Pawn is set in Back of the Car the magical world of Kerovnia during a period of great social upheaval. King Eric is having a hard time of it! Public opinion has been turning against him ever since he banished the Roobikyoub dwarfs following the assassination of his beloved Queen Jendah II although the real facts behind her death were never released. 1060 peoria You arrive on the scene just as The key fits! You turn the key opening the trunk. Inside the trunk you can't help but notice a very large object taking up a lot of space. everything is starting to come to a head. Everybody seems to want you for one reason or another, you are a may yet prove to be a landmark in pawn that they all want to manipulate game design, although one could be for their own ends. Most CESS (Consumer Electronics forgiven for missing it as it was Three main things make The Pawn Shows) in the States are remembered hidden from view most of the time by stand out from the crowd; they are for one or two products, hardware or enthusiastic buyers. the graphics, the parser and the software, that were really something The program causing all the fuss is detail and humour of the text special. One remembers with called Deja Vu and has just been descriptions. nostalgia the first fleeting glances of release in this country by the There are 35 full colour pictures to a real live Commodore 64 (albeit entertaining Mirrorsoft. lend atmospheric support to the connected to half a ton of circuitry Deja Vu is an adventure game that location descriptions (not that they under the stand), or the excitement can be played almost entirely with a need it). These 'works of art' far with which the Colecovision system mouse! There is no need to work oui exceed anything else seen on the ST. was greeted (Amen)! The 1985 what to say' to the program as For added cheek Scrolls have summer CES in Chicago also communication is done using eight emulated the Amiga's operating provided us with something which icons: Examine, open, close, speak, system by allowing you to pull each picture up and down the screen like a venetian blind thus allowing you to inventory Exits MAC COLOURSPACE Jeff Minter has launched some zany products in the past but in Colourspace he has put together a box of retina benders with which you can create visually outrageous patterns of infinite shape, colour and movement... a do-it-yourself lasarium in the comfort of your own computer den. Described by Minter as a 'light synthesiser, Colourspace is a third generation derivative of Psychedelia which appeared on the 64 about 18 months ago. All Minter's synthesisers are jam packed with "


"MAC erorizam 495 MAC BY DAVE MUARY ANO BARRY MUARY Copyright 192 Dave Murry and Barry Murrus operate, go, hit and consume. Because these can be used with each other, and with objects a player is carrying a surprisingly large number of actions can be instigated using this very simple method of input. Deja Vu takes full advantage of the Mac's windowing capabilities by effectively assinging a separate window (or graphical inventory) for almost every object that can physically contain something else (including you). An example of this can be seen at the very start of the game when you find yourself on the floor of a men's washroom having Khan based his own thinking on received a severe blow on the head TAW and created one of the most which has left you with anmesia. On awesome armies the world has ever the door of the loo is a raincoat which known. It is widely held that the can be picked up simply by moving young Napoleon was inspired by the the cursor over it and, while keeping 1782 translation of TAW while Mao the button pressed, moving the coat Tse Tung was greatly influenced by into the window marked inventory. the work when writing his Little Red You now have the coat and can look Book. The Art of War is as valid inside it by pressing 'open' then today as it was 25 centuries ago when fraincoat. it was written. Once the cursor is pressed over the Broderbund's The Ancient Art of coat, a separate window appears War is inspired by Sun Tzu's showing all the items contained in philosophy and pits you against eight the coat. One of these is a wallet and contrasting generals including this too can be opened to reveal yet Genghis Khan, Julius Caesar, another window showing the wallet's Alexander the Great, Athena and Sun contents each of which in turn, can Tzu himself. There are eleven be examined. campaigns from which to choose The adventure itself drops the ranging from a straight race to player in a situation where he has capture two flags abandoned in the virtually nothing and remembers north to the Islands of Doom'. Each even less. Everyone else, however, campaign requires different skills to seems to know exactly what's going succeed and each of the generals on... those that are still alive that is! exhibit different characteristics And why is everyone trying to kill which reflect the principles of you? The textual descriptions of all warfare prevalent in their lifetime. the locations and people you may In each of the campaigns you start meet are humorous and off with a certain number of troops atmospheric, really making you feel (normally a combination of archers, you're back in Gangsterville in the knights and barbarians) although you 20s or 30s. can create your own campaigns with But the thing that sets Deja Vu the comprehensive construction kit streets ahead of anything else is the which comes with the package. way the player can interact with most Invariably you are outnumbered parts of each of the 60 or more by the enemy! Each group of your location pictures simply by moving troops have their own condition and the cursor over the required screen food levels which must be constantly element. A graphical example of this monitored to prevent them from can be found in a bedroom where you dying of starvation or exhaustion. stumble across a lady in a bed asleep. Groups can also be given different Only her head can be seen above the formations which are critical in bedclothes; however you can actually combat situations where, for pick her up and carry her across the example, you would never have room. archers at the front as enemy knights If you can get remotely close to a or barbarians could get to them too Mac you have to see Deja Vu... it's a quickly. revelation. Troops are moved over a scrolling THE ART OF map and the computer allows you to WAR zoom'in on specific skirmishes to orchestrate proceedings personally, In 400 BC a Chinese philosopher although battles will be fought called Sun Tzu wrote The Art of War, automatically in your absence. in which he outlined planning and Various displays give information strategy at war. The Art of War as to the relative fortunes of both (TAW) has been studied by some of sides at any time during the the most brilliant military minds in campaign and time can be speeded history. The Mongol leader Genghis up during periods of little contact and bounce, game logic and scoring can all be 'tweaked' to suit individual taste. Mac PCS uses authentic digitised sound effects sampled from real pinball machines which together with the realistic ball movement and the 'hands on' sculpting set make The Pinball Construction Set far and away the best of its ilk. BALANCE OF POWER Another impressive package, from the same stable as Deja Vu, is with the enemy. Balance of Power, a game (if this Even if you have no interest in, or subject can ever be described in such empathy with, the concept of war this light terms) of geopolitics in the superbly-designed program is a nuclear age. As either the President fascinating study in tactics, planning of the United States or the General and patience. Secretary of the USSR the fate of your nationand of the world rests in your hands! Unlike most games, success in CONSTRUCT Balance of Power (BOP) comes to SET those who know when to back down in an international fracas as well as One of the original construction when to stick to your guns. sets' was Bill Budge's Pinball On loading Balance of Power you Construction Set (PCS) which was are presented with a detailed map of launched back in 1982 on the Apple the world over which the cursor can II series machines. It has since been be moved to highlight specific converted to various machines countries for more information. And including the Commodore 64 and it's on the information side that the Atari 800. By far the best version of increased memory and speed of 16 the game so far is the conversion for bit technology really comes into its the Mac which takes full advantage own because at the core of the of the graphical and sound program is a database which capabilities of the machine to give a simulates the political profile of the pinball program so authentic it'll globe and which can be interrogated have you 'tilting your Mac before for such esoteric information as you know it! 'physicians per million', 'calorific oc20 9000 * * OOOO Wnere, for The program's features could fill a intake' or 'school enrollment for book but some of the more almost any country you care to name! interesting include a palette of some Although the aim of the game is to 40 parts from which the basic table enhance your country's prestige at can be designed plus the facility to the expense of the opposition the interface with Macpaint which number of different ways in which allows you to paint the boards and this can be achieved is back drops of your games. A toolbox comprehensive to say the least. enables you to nail, wire, edit and Imagine yourself reclining in the change the shape of many of the Oval office mulling over a piece of primitives used in the PCS which news just in from the CIA: \"Soviet allows for an almost limitless government sends large military number of designs. forces to assist Syrian regime\". Physical characteristics, such as The kinds of things that you, as the gravity, bumper power, ball speed continued MAC "


"MAC MAC displays all of which help to pass the time as you stalk your prey and prepare for the final assault with all torpedo tubes open and primed. Gato is well researched and presented on screen but somehow lacks the bite of some of the other Mac packages around ... definitely 'sub' standard unless you are into this kind of thing. POUND ! SUMMARY 10 shuttle simulation which deserves to do well in spite of public disillusionment with the real thing. US's Mr Big, may be contemplating taking the advice depends on how Orbiter puts you in command of a would include intervention and/or tired he is and the soundness of space shuttle which you must take on economic aid for the rebels, the what you're saying. Certain other a series of missions ranging from the making or breaking of treaties keys can be used to change his repair of previously-launched financial or otherwise and many general strategy in between rounds. satellites to MMU (Manned others besides. You can even reassess In arcade mode it's up to you to Manoeuvring Unit) walks to the your country's diplomatic stance in control your boxer's every move launch of new satellites in specific the light of this new information and choosing from jab, hook and orbits. may wish to carry out quiet diplomacy, public posturing, moderate pressure, intense pressure or even a diplomatic offensive. Of course the effectiveness of any Clive is breathing heavy. of the above in pursuading the Clive is breathing heavy. Soviets to reconsider their actions will depend on many factors including how important a piece of Syria is in the Soviet's global jigsaw and how much of a song and dance you make over the issue. Of course, if Clive neither side backs down the situation Ciuc may escalate into nuclear war in which case NOBODY WINS. As with many 16 bit programs it uppercut... exciting stuff where the instruction manual intimates would take an entire magazine to timing and correct choice of punch is that after experience is gained, by even briefly touch on all the vital. successfully completing a number of mathematical models and research The program comes with four missions, you will be asked to build that has gone into Balance of Power. booklets entitled 'History of Boxing', space stations and a skylab. Some 20 books are cited in the Program Guide', 'How to Play' and Browsing through the 75-page bibliography of quite the most Boxing Clinic'. The latter is a manual one gets an idea of how much comprehensive, well written and humorously written blow-by-blow is in this program. From the readable instruction account of the dos and don'ts of excellent software speech as mission manual/companion that this reviewer boxing, control beams up' prompts and has seen in more than ten years of \"All body shots are painful... instructions to the clever way in playing computer and video games even if a boxer gets back up, he may which the many screen displays are ... the scale and authenticity of collapse from the pain. Chin and configured to the useful time temple shots are not painful, but can compression feature for those boring believed. send the recipient to a whole other moments in space. Orbiter has it all, planet! and is dedicated to the seven BOXING Should be a knock out! astronauts who lost their lives. ORBITER GATO If you thought Barry's, Frank's or anybody else's boxing games was One of the new product releases at One of the best chart performers in good a couple of rounds with Sierra's this year's Mac Show in San the States during the past twelve Championship Boxing would put Fransisco was Orbiter, a shuttle months has been a world war two them in their place. Again the simulation of great depth and GATO-class simulation simply advantages of 16 bit technology are realism, which generated ripples of entitled Gato. Although it has done there for all to see. Not only can you excitement amongst those visiting for Billboard's software charts what recreate many of the greatest the show. So much so, in fact, that Simon and Garfunkel's greatest hits matches of all time but you can also Mirrorsoft boss Jim Mackonochie did for their record charts. 'custom build your own boxer snapped up the UK distribution At the start of the game you will be specifying many of his rights for this and one other given a mission in the form of a characteristics such as age, weight, Spectrum Holobyte product, Gato. coded message and will be judged on reach, best punch, accuracy, Coming in the wake of the your ability to operate and navigate aggressiveness, killer instinct and Challenger accident the release of your sub as you attempt to achieve even his past record of cuts and Orbiter could have come at a better your mission objectives. injuries. Your boxer's fighting time for Mirrorsoft, nevertheless this There are the obligatory million ability is also likely to be affected by is a serious attempt at THE definitive and one buttons, levers, pulleys and is a serious attempt at THE the way you answer questions on how hard he hits, his ability to take a punch and when he starts to get tired. The bouts themselves take various forms both in the number and length of each round, the method of scoring used and, best of all, the way in which you control your boxer. For those of you whose hands get CURRENT ORBITAL LAUNCH INFO tied in knots just thinking about a joystick there is a strategy mode NONE IN PROGRESS which allows you to manage your boxer without throwing his punches for him. You can use action keys to shout instructions from the corner and the likelihood of your man The above are just a few of the wealth of new and converted games being released on 16 bit machines. Many more were not included because some space in C+VG has to be devoted to 8 bit software.. oh, well. The emergence of the Atari ST as an affordable entry into the world of the 68000 chip has acted as a catalyst which has stimulated many publishers of the 'wait and see' club to invest in the development of entertainment software for this and other 16 bit machines The game software market can only survive in a climate of change and innovation. This innovation cannot only come from designers and programers (who have already eked about as much out of the Spectrum as possible) but must also come from the hardware manufacturers who continue to be too embarrassed to admit that their That aside, the future for 16 bit Tha games looks assured with many publishers on both sides of the Atlantic coming down off the fence on the side of progress. The next few months should see the release of a number of new titles for the ST and the Amiga from companies such as Anirog, Rainbird, Activision, Microdeal, Precision, The Edge, English, Ariolasoft, Talent, Mirrorsoft and and of course US Gold. From the US itself we can expect more from Infocom. With support like this it is difficult to see the ST not becoming the Commodore 64 of the late 80's. The Amiga, on the other hand, while appearing to be aimed squarely at the games market from a features point of view, certainly does not have a price tag to back this up. Commodore are undoubtably trying to milk the more lucrative business marketing opportunities open to them before considering 'cheapening' (in more senses than one) the Amiga. With the increased memory and processing power of the 16 bit machines designers, programmers and, most importantly, you the games playing public look set to have a field day! ends here Left Display Clock Time Event LOX CRT 11 CRT 2 CBT 3 CONFIGURE "


"MICROS E IL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Edgbaston, Birmingham B16 OEW. Enclose SAE for list and telephone number. Amstrad CPC 464 plus TV modulator and games. Never used, five months old, . Also Atari 600 XL, bargain  postage free in GB. Offers. Tel: (061) 707 3965 after 5pm. Spectrum, lightpen, data recorder and 36 top games including Movie, 'V, and Gunfright, all . Will sell separately. Waltham Cross 26134. For sale: Five sets of 10 Amstrad games, each set . Send cheque or postal order to Mr M. Laing, 27 Cornhill Terrace, Aberdeen AB25YP, Scotland. For sale: Intellivision, video games system, still boxed, excellent condition with 10 games including Soccer, Burgertime, Boxing and other great games. Includes box to hold games. Worth  will sell for  ono. Phone 664 2841, outside London 0689-42841. Wanted: Latest Atari disk software. For sale: Atari thermal printer,  ono; US Doubler,  ono; Spectrum data recorder, VTX modem, Kempston interface, 40 original games,  ono; CBM16, recorder, software,  ono. Will consider exchange for CBM64 or anything Atari. Phone Birmingham (021) 747 3618, Nigel Spectrum 48K software, all originals, for sale: Alien 8, The Planets, Hotshots, Knight Lore, .50 each. Bored of the Rings, Avalon, Dragon Torc and Kokotoni Wilf,  each. Action Biker, Cosmic Cruiser and Survival,  each. Reply to C. Hopper, 13 Cornwall Gardens, Brighton BN1 6PH. Amstrad owner would like to swap Supertest, Fighting Warrior, Snooker and would like Sam Fox, Get Dexter or Alien Highway. Tape originals only. Phone Richard on 0602 394281 after 4pm. For Sale: Commodore MPS 803 printer, two months old and used only twice. Was .99. Sell for  or willing to swap for Commodore modem. Phone Ben 01-692 2957 after 5pm. Amstrad 464 plus colour monitor. Only six months old and in excellent condition. Also including over 80 games with cassette holders, magazines, manual, computer care kit. Boxed as new. Sell for . Ring Simon on 0943 75608 (4pm to 10pm). All BBC users out there! Pen Pals wanted to swap games, information etc. Please include your lists of games, all letters answered. Write to Christopher Brooks at 'Seawards', Lydcott Lane, Widegates, Nr Looe, Cornwall PL13 1QJ. Acorn Electron games to sell, 47 in all. Mineshaft, Repton, Sim Football Manager and many more. Prices range from  to . Write to J. Paka Jnr, 75 Summerfield Crescent, USpeach only . Send SAE to K. Burnham, 63 Sandhurst Avenue, Hodge Hill, Birmingham. Complete computer system. BBC B, Acorn DS 800K dual drive, Microvitec M.Res colour monitor, Star D.M. printer — tractor or friction feed plus over  of software. Replay and Disc Doctor Roms. New over ,750. Sell for only . Tel: 064-385-204 after 7pm. Commodore 64 with fitted reset button, complete with leads, user manual, transformer and box. Commodore CZN cassette recorder with box. Over 40 titles of software, computer dust cover, manuals and magazines. Will sell for  ono. Tel: Holyhead (0407) 4725. BBC B games for sale. Many top titles on cassette. All originals in mint condition. Most less than half price. For list send an SAE to: Mark Rendle, 72 Ashby Avenue, Chessington, Surrey KT9 2BU. For sale: Commodore 64 games on tape and disk at give away prices. For details send SAE to G. McGibbon, 58 Church Street, Coatbridge, Scotland ML5 3DP. Commodore 64 owner wants to swap software with people everywhere. Have hundreds of games on disk and cassette. Every letter answered. Send lists to Peter Goodyear, 10 Ilynton Avenue, Winterslow, Salisbury, Wilts, England. C64 owner wants to swap disk software anywhere in the world. I have 700+ titles. I promise every letter will get a reply. Write to P. B. McNichol, 12 Yearlsley Grove, Huntingdon, York YO3 9BX now. Your programs to microdrive. Send one cassette with two programmes (no originals) plus one formatted m/drive cartridge, plus .50 inc p&p, to Jim Brown, 8 Harris Court, Dreghorn, Ayrshire KA11 4JR. Commodore 64 games to sell or swap on disc/cassette. All the latest titles. Please write to R. Mansfield, 117 Westrow Drive, Barking, Essex IG11 9BW, or phone (01) 591 6996 any time Saturday or Sunday morning. Yugoslav cracking service. Commodore C64 & PC128. We want to swap all over the world. Overseas specially. Almost new things, please no beginners, disk and tape. Just send your new lists. Thanks! YU.C.S., Na Produ 38, YU-62391 Prevalje, Yugoslavia, Europe. Corean excellent adventure game for CBM 64, tape only, . Over 75 locations. Send  now to Derek Doran, 3 Glenavlin Park, Chapelizod, Dublin 20, Eire. Atari 800XL and 1050 disk drive with Lazer Enhasment will copy protected disks plus lots of software on disks including latest games, . Will split. Ring 01-597 7787. Plus 4 computerised magazine plus benefits of user group. For details send SAE to G. Smith, 14 Beach Hill, Wellington, Somerset. Also software (64K) for sale. Commodore 64 games to swap. Have over 1,200 games on disk and tape. Send list for prompt reply to A. Hall, 33 Fransham Road, Pallister Park, Middlesbrough, Cleveland TS3 8PY. CBM 64, CZN, Wico 3-way, joystick,  of games including Uridium, Paradroid, Wiz. Lair, Dropzone Arc, Yesod and others. Also Adventures, Level 9, LOR etc. Many magazines, worth +. Worth , the lot for . Tel: Soton (0703) 766486 evenings. For sale: Commodore 8250, two megabyte dual disk drive, leads etc. Works with all Commodores. Excellent condition, worth . Must sell for  ono. Tel: 021-771 1383 and ask for Anje. Spectrum games for sale. Over 100 games for sale at very low prices. Commando, Bomb Jack, Winter Games,  each. Moon Cresta, Frankie, Baseball, .50 and many more. Also Prism modem,  brand new. Currah For sale: Spectrum+, VTX 5000 modem, Kempston joystick interface, dust cover, software. Excellent condition,  ono. Phone: Newquay 872902 evenings. Atari 800XL, data recorder, Quickshot Il joystick, manuals, books and over 80 top quality games, . Write to Jason McKewon, 21 Frederick St, Nth Meadowfield, Durham OH7 8NB. Also interested in software swaps. Phone: Durham 781326. CBM 64 software to swop, tape or disk, many new titles. Phone: Peter on (0707) 874336 or write my list for yours. P. Hrouda, 2 Farm Close, Cuffley, Herts EN6 4RQ. "


"C+VG PREVIEW C+VG PREVIEW DRACONS RAGON'S LAIR QUOD Singe's scorching breath. Dirk must seize the magic sword at the edge of the cliff and kill the dragon. Princess Daphne is then freed. Dragon Lair was a winner in the arcades and should just be as big a hit on the computer. It's fun, challenging and infuriating addictive We bet you won't be able to resist the lure of the lair. Dragon's Lair will cost .95 for the Commodore 64/128, Spectrum 48/128 and Amstrad. On disc for the Amstrad it will be .95. Fa.. Programmers Profile Name: John Darnell Game: Dragon's Lair Favourite food: Steak Favourite TV programme: Horizon Favourite drink: \"I don't.\" The thing most hated about the computer industry: \"The thing that gets me the most is all the hype when there is nothing to back it up.\" Other games: Jet Set Willy II and Kane. are you enter the lair of the But it's hard work there are seven of time your jumps. Watch out for the dragon and face the ultimate them! weapons. They have lives of their own. peril to rescue Princess Daphne? Yes, Dragon's Lair, Magicom's arcade SKULL HALLWAY RAMPS AND GIDDY smash and one of the first laser-disc Look before you leap as skeletal hands GOONS games to reach the UK, is now available clutch at you out of the darkness, bats for your computer. swoop and you get stuck in goo. Sword Dirk has to jump from ramp to ramp, C+VG braved the wrath of the fire play and quick moves are vital. But killing the goons. Again if you wait too breathing monster the wonderfully don't move to quicklyor too late. long Dirk will find himself standing in named Singeto bring you this thin air before plunging into a void. exclusive preview of Software Projects' THE BURNING new game. ROPES THE TENTACLE The game's main programmer, John ROOM Parnell, has been working on the game Here it's a touch of the Tarazans. Dirk This is Singe's laboratory where evil mutants lurk unseen until they strike. Danger can come from above and below. THE SECOND DISK This disk takes Dirk to the lowest level's of the Dragon's lair. Air genies again cause problems. THE DEADLY CHECKERBOARD Dirk must defeat the Phantom Knight. Not that this evil phantom plays fair. He suddenly disappears only to reappear elsewhere. When he lands on a square the ones near change colour. Touch one of these and it will cost Dirk his life. Dirk must defeat the Phantom Knight for the past six months. The action closely follows that of the arcade original. There are eight levels of play in which you, playing the part of Dirk the Daring, must react to situations dictated by the computer. Points are scored for vanquishing the various foes found in Singe's lair, overcoming obstacles, finding treasure and conquering the various rooms. It's interesting to note that the next level is loaded into the computer as you play. \"As far as I know that's never been done before,\" says John. THE FALLING DISK The game opens with Dirk standing on must swing from rope to rope. Time is with his sword. Watch for the knight to a ledge. He must leap on a large disk all important but don't wait too long. A change colour-he then becomes which is plunging towards a bubbling raging inferno will errupt and turn you vulnerable. inferno of lava. The idea is then to jump into a crisp. off at a lower level to get access to other SLAYING THE THE WEAPONS parts of the lair. Simple? Don't believe DRAGON it. It's fairly easy to get on the disk but ROOM air genies materialise around you and Face to face at last with Singe in his try to blow you off the disk. The only This is another screen which requires lair. Dirk must cross in front of the way to defeat them is to run at them. skilfull sword play and the ability to dragon using boulders as shields from Name: Steve Birtles Born: Manchester Game: Dragon's Lair (the final screen) Favourite food: Steak Favourite drink: Guinness Favourite TV programme: None The thing most hated about the computer industry. The price of games they're too expensive.\" Other games: Jet Set Willy II and Manie Miner on the C16 LU CFVG PREVIEW The Eva C+VG PREVIEW "


"WATCH THIS SPACE FOR FIST II — THE LEGEND CONTINUES "


"* ARCAI QUARTET This month Clare Edgeley lets you have a sneak preview of the sequel to Atari's revolutionary Gauntlet-enter Quartet. She also catches a ride on a rally bike in the arcade's latest racing game, Super Cross II POW Esu 386 WCE Yet another cry rings out: Save the space colony from total annihilation. Beat off the aliens and ensure the continuation of your race. You've heard it all before, but this time the presentation, graphics and playability make up for the deficient story line. Quartet is a spin-off from Atari's successful four-player game Gauntlet. It is played in much the same manner too, with four characters to control, one for each player. You can join in or leave the running battle whenever you please without disturbing the game for your team mates. And you can play just as well on your own though the maxim of 'The more the merrier' is certainly true. So choose your character — Mary, Joe, Lee or Edger and get zapping. The plot's simple. Blast your way through each level, fight it out with the boss — a huge mechanical monster-grab the key he drops and go through the door to the next level. However, it's not as easy SUPER CROSS II You'd think that motorcross would be an exiting sport to stimulate, but you'll probably change your mind after you've seen Super Cross II. This appalling attempt to create a motorbike scramble course nearly drove me round the bend, possibly because I couldn't get to grips with my supercharged steed. At full throttle it seemed to travel at less than walking pace and was pretty sluggish to control. It's like driving through a bowl of custard. The idea is to get round the obstacle course within a set time to get on the next level which is, of course, a harder obstacle course. The first level is dead easy. Ride up and down sandy slopes, jump a couple of huge ditches the bike does that automatically — hop across sleeping policemen and logs and you're almost home and  Gia Lai Tuc thg 3 2 13 1111 *3888232 1: 0:5 1223 100 TOUT 599 LOC DOO QoS as it sounds. The first section leads the aliens, especially if you all you gently into the game, but from manage to increase your weapon then on the levels become trickier strength. to negotiate and the aliens more I found it easy to play deep into cunning in their attack. The the game, not through skill but graphics are clearer and better because of the continuous play defined than those in Gauntlet. For facility. Each time your energy is one thing the sprites are larger and drained by contact with the nasties, the background less cluttered. That you're given the opportunity to all leads to an impression of space. shovel in more money and And boy do you need it as you continue play from the point you leap skywards to avoid headless d ied. Very useful, and very robots flying missiles and the like. expensive! There are also objects to collect The graphics are very colourful a spring, jet boots and a power and in a cartoon style and pack are just a few. Pick these up movement is fluid, especially from and your leaps increase in heightone screen to another. In the first vital for your well being -or two levels you'll be playing against you'll be able to fly for short a space backdrop, full of pipes, periods. However, if you happen lunaresque buildings and lots of to collide with a headless 'bot or levels and platforms. On occasion one of its equally deadly associates you may even have to crawl under you'll fall to the ground low slung pipes to escape from the stunned and the power pack will aliens. be ripped from your back, all too The third level and the last likely to drop in a horribly one I got to before my money ran inaccessible place. Perhaps on top out takes you underground of a platform where its impossible through a long tunnel. It's totally to reach as you can no longer different from the preceeding two jump that high. Anyway, it all adds screens and consists of a maze of to the challenge. ladders, levels and blocked off For protection you also carry a walls. Travelling up and down weapon and that can be changed through the twisting labyrinth is a to a more powerful type if you pretty dodgy business. The aliens happen across the bouncing ball. let fly at close quarters and often This bounds through the screen at there's not even room to jump and fairly regular intervals and escape from them. Watch out for changes colour to match those of the trapdoors. These flip open and the characters. If you catch it while discharge their deadly load it's wearing your colour your whenever you happen to be in the weapon will automatically gain in vicinity. fire power. No matter, if not, you'll Quartet is extremely addictive get bonus points instead. You can't and highly playable, and with the lose. Obviously with four playing, option of four playing at once it you stand a better chance against generates a keen team spirit. LUNCIO TOTO ALPARARE 13: Pow 1828 For  For "


"DE ACTION 2006658 II: :6 W2299 PIOLWER POWER Powered Well the Americans haven't beaten us yet when it boils down to the nitty-gritty of who's got the highest score. We've received a number of challengers to the high scores table printed in the July issue and it just goes to prove that we can run rings round The Yanks! To kick off, Andrew Moore from the Republic of Ireland puts me right on Iron Horse which refers to the train you're riding on as it chugs through the Wild West. In this battle against a gang of masked thugs you're given a choice of weapons: flame throwers, bombs, lassoes and bolas. And here are Andrew's tips: 1) Duck when you're fighting to reduce the chance of being stabbed or shot in the back. 2) Save the special weapons for the Mexicans who duck down and fire bombs or flames at you. 3) When you get the last carriage usually an open cattle truck get in front of the barrels and duck. Stay low and keep firing. Now the only way the gangsters can get you is either by running into your line of fire or by chucking bombs or flames. In any case you known what's coming. 4) Choose the punch option as it's more devastating. 5) Dive into the alcoves in the carriages as the baddies hardly ever follow you in. And use the passageways between the carriages as they have to string out and you can knock them off easier. 6) In the second and subsequent stages keep a watchful eye on the background and dodge the cannon fire. Duck when you see the bald guys as they throw knives at you. And from Lee Taylor of Blackpool, Lancs, comes a tip for infinite lives on Dragon's Lair. Play a two player game and let player one lose a life. Then on player two's first man complete the game. Lose player one's remaining men and the machine should go into unlimited lives on player one. This trick will not work with American versions of the game. sry. Oh, I forgot, don't collide with the other riders, all computer controlled, or run off the track onto The grass verge. In either case ou'll come a cropper and will op off your bike. Do that too often and you won't get round in me time allowed. To jump the logs, you have to Press the jump button and time it ght as your are only able to make De smallest of hops. In further evels you'll come across stray tyres which roll towards you in ormation. They're fairly easy to sodge or you could try jumping over them. Occasionally, a 'power up' symbol flashes above your rider's head and you'll need to give extra throttle to get over that obstacle. A grid at the bottom of the screen lets you know how you're doing in that area. The graphics are basic cartoon style and not that impressive. However, a lot of work has gone into the background scenery and, as you chug round corners, you'll notice TV camera men swinging round to follow your course. It seems that more effort has gone into presenting a pretty and realistic background than has gone into game play. One feature which Shoji, the manufacturers, have got right is the way you to slide out of control if you take a bend too fast. You really do have to throttle down and ride a careful line through the corner. It's all too easy to skid on to the grass and knock a cameraman flying. Actually it's quite amusing when that happens. The next level introduces more logs, more slopes and loose tyres and a river. Drive through this sluggish stream avoiding the sandbanks, each of which have a strategically placed rock which will knock you into the drink. When you compare this with something like Sega's marvellous Hang-On a motorbike racing simulation you'll see there's no competition. Super Cross II wouldn't even make it to the starting line. Hall of Fame Mr Do's Castle 679,720 Lee Taylor, Blackpool 10 Yard Fight 123,950 Tim McSmythurs, Kent Pole Position 110,545 Matthew Bryden, Kent Elevator Action 106,500 Sukvinder Leader, Leicester Bomb Jack 2,408,610 Martin Deem, Hampshire Choplifter 592,030 Commando 726,570 Hang-On 49,658,320 Super Mario Bros. 2,053,250 Buggy Boy 81,590 Romano Lindhout, Holland Beat those if you can. If you have reached new heights and beaten the impossible, why not write into High Scores, Arcade Action, C+VG, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC12R 3AU and enter the Hall of Fame. "


"TERO REACHING HUNTERS REACHING THE TOP FLOOR OF IDEASCE MELISSA AND JACKSON HAVE FORCED A FACE TO FACE CONFRONTATION WITH THE MAN AT THE TOP THEY ARE ABOUT TO WISH THEY HADN'T... YOU SEEM TO BE ATA AFTER ALL, IT'S NOT SURELY YOU REMEMBER SO LET'S DISPENSE LOSS FOR WORDS MS. AS THOUGH WE'RE OL'FATS...YOU BLEW WITH THE PLEASANTRIES RAVENFLAME... MOST STRANGERS, YOU AND I... HIS HEAD OFF! NOTA VERY SOCIABLE ACT... BAREN ESAME Sinan BUT THEN YOU DON'T SEEM VERY SOCIABLE... WE METu5A SHORT WHILE AGO.. Ouw M 3 ... LAS AS I U TRULY ) B AM... ch Estores . ) 2 Ne YOU'VE BOTH GONE EXTREMELY PALE... I DO HOPE YOU Bu BETTER THAN YOU LOOK... HA HA HA HA CA Wor vir jou TT do salonas aula. KILL IT, KILL IT, OH MY GOD!!! S ezt po MANTE I WRITTEN & DRAWN by JERRY PARIS 1985 "


"BARGAIN SOFTWARE: Dept. C+VG, Unit 1; 1 Esmond Road; London W.4. 1BR SO BUY BY OPHONE RING 01-995 2763  DEDUCT 10% 9.95 9.95 9.95 6.70 6.70 7.95 7.99 9.95 PRICE PROMISE If you wish to purchase any product from our list and find that you can buy the same product cheaper from ORDERS OVER another mail order company, simply enclose the lower amount, stating the name of the other company and where you saw the advert. (It must be a current issue). Price Promise does not apply to other companies \"Special Offers\". SPECTRUM CBM 64 AMSTRAD REC OUR REC OUR PAPER BOY 8.95 6.70 PRICE PRICE PRICE PRICE GLEN HODDLE SOCCER 9.95 4.99 PYRACURSE 9.95 7.45 SHOGUN 9.95 7.45 HYPER SPORTS 8.95 4.99 DYNAMITE DAN II 7.95 5.90 LEADER BOARD 9.95 7.45 RAID 8.95 4.99 KUNG FU MASTER 7.95 5.90 BOULDER DASH III 9.95 7.45 STARI0N 8.95 4.99 PUB GAMES (7 games) 9.95 7.45 KNIGHT GAMES 8.95 6.70 FU KUNG IN LAS VEGAS 8.95 3.99 THEATRE EUROPE 9.95 7.45 MERMAID MADNESS 9.99 7.45 ALIEN 8 9.95 4.99 HI-JACK 9.95 7.45 SUMMER GAMES I 9.95 7.45 VIEW TO A KILL 10.99 3.99 BOBBY BEARING 7.95 5.90 SOUTHERN BELLE 7.95 5.90 GHOST & GOBLINS 8.95 6.70 CAULDRON II 8.99 6.70 TAU CETI 9.95 7.45 SHIP OF DOOM 8.95 2.99 MERMAD MADNESS 9.95 7.45 RED HAWK 8.95 6.70 INCA CURSE 8.95 2.99 JACK THE NIPPER 7.95 5.90 WAY OF THE TIGER 9.95 7.45 PLANET OF DEATH 8.95 2.99 PAPER BOY 7.95 5.90 BEYOND FORBIDDEN FOREST 9.95 7.45 ESPIONAGE ISLAND 8.95 2.99 ACE 9.95 7.45 GHOSTS & GOBLINS 9.95 7.45 ON THE OCHE (DARTS) 8.95 2.99 ACTION REFLEX 7.95 5.90 PUB GAMES 9.95 7.45 AMERICAN FOOTBALL MANTRONIX 7.95 5.90 TOUCH FOOTBALL 9.99 7.45 AMS GOLF 35.00 7.99 BIGGLES 9.95 7.45 CAULDRON II 8.99 6.70 STOCKMARKET IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 7.95 5.90 EMPIRE 9.95 6.99 SPACE HAWKS EQUINOX 9.95 6.99 BOMB JACK 9.95 7.45 CODENAME MAT ATTACK OF THE KILLER TOMATOES 7.95 5.90 PAPER BOY 9.95 7.45 LASER WARP 35.00 7.99 SPLITTING IMAGES 7.95 5.90 BIGGLES 9.95 7.45 SPLAT MEGA HITS (10 games) 7.45 SILENT SERVICE 9.95 7.45 3D INVADERS ENIGMA FORCE 6.99 SOLO FLIGHT II 7.45 HUNTER KILLER GLADIATOR 8.95 GREEN BERET 8.95 7.45 GRAND PRIX DRIVER 35.00 8.95 QUAZATRON 7.99 URIDIUM 8.95 6.70 CHUCKIE EGG SWEEVO'S WORLD 5.90 GAME KILLER (Cart) 15.95 11.90 MASTER CHESS NIGHT SHADES 9.95 6.99 NEXUS 9.95 7.45 SABRE WULF 9.95 4.99 G. GOOCHS CRICKET 9.95 7.45 M.S.X. NODES OF YESOD 9.95 4.99 INTERNATIONAL SOCCER 14.99 4.99 SPORTS PACK (6 sports games) 5.99 SOLD A MILLION (4 Top Games 9.95 7.45 INTERNATIONAL KARATE 6.50 4.99 POLE POSITION 2.99 SOLD A MILLION II (4 Top Games) 7.45 ANY KONAMI (Cart.) 17.95 13.50 RAID OVER MOSCOW 7.95 5.90 REVS 14.95 11.20 MAYHEM 8.95 3.99 BEACH HEAT II 7.95 5.90 ROCK 'N' WRESTLE 9.95 6.50 ZAKIL WOOD 8.95 3.99 GHOST & GOBLINS 5.90 INTERNATIONAL KARATE 6.50 4.99 CUBIT 7.95 3.99 TANTALUS 6.70 SPITFIRE 40 9.95 7.45 HUMPHREY 7.95 3.99 TOAD RUNNER 6.70 SABOTEUR 8.95 6.70 CRAZY GOLF 7.95 3.99 THE PLANETS 7.45 MASTER OF THE LAMPS 9.99 3.99 PUNCHY 7.95 3.99 SAI COMBAT 5.20 MUSIC STUDIO 12.99 4.99 CHUCKIE EGG 8.95 3.99 REBEL PLANET 7.45 ENIGMA FORCE 9.95 5.99 VACUUM MANIA 3.99 GREEN BERET 5.90 NOW GAMES (6 Titles) 8.95 5.99 SPECIAL OPERATIONS 3.99 BOMB JACK 5.90 NOW GAMES II (6 Titles 8.95 5.99 PANZER ATTACK 8.95 3.99 LORD OF THE RINGS 11.90 FIGHT NIGHT 9.95 5.99 LAZY JONES 8.95 3.99 ELITE 11.20 WINTER GAMES 9.95 6.50 BUZZ OFF 8.95 3.99 WAY OF THE TIGER 7.45 PSYTRON 19.90 6.99 VIEW TO A KILL 8.99 3.99 BAT MAN 5.90 PSI WARRIOR LAZER BYKES 8.99 3.99 INTERNATIONAL KARATE 5.20 FAME QUEST MORDEN'S QUEST 4.99 PARATROOPERS 19.00 5.99 ELECTRON SUPERBOWL 7.45 ELECTION TRAIL TAU CETI 7.45 POOL CHALLENGE EMPIRE 7.95 2.99 SOLD A MILLION II (4 Top Games) 9.95 7.45 THE PIT 29.00 5.99 SNAPPER 8.95 2.99 ARCADE HALL OF FAME (5 Top Games 9.95 7.45 GHOST MANOR & SPIRES PEAK STARSHIP COMMAND 8.95 COMPUTER HITS II (10 Top Games) 9.95 7.45 WORLD CUP FOOTBALL 7.99 2.99 PLANETOID 8.95 HOT SHOTS (4 Top Games) 7.45 ON COURT BASEBALL 10.99 4.99 TIME MACHINE 8.95 NOW GAMES II (5 Games) 6.70 ON COURT FOOTBALL 10.99 4.99 ARROW OF DEATH 8.95 NOW GAMES (6 Games) 6.70 FRIDAY 13TH 8.99 3.99 GOLDEN BATON 8.95 TURBO ESPRIT VIEW TO A KILL 8.99 3.99 TEN LITTLE INDIANS 8.95 MONOPOLY 9.95 7.45 50 GAMES CASSETTE 10.99 3.99 WIZARD OF AKYRZ 8.95 2.99 CLUEDO 7.45 SPIRIT OF THE STONE 14.95 4.99 ARCADIANS 8.95 2.99 STARSTRIKE II 5.90 BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK 9.95 4.99 HOPPER 8.95 WINTER GAMES 5.90 COMBAT LEADER 14.95 4.99 CHESS 8.95 2.99 BACK TO SKOOL 5.20 MUSIC SYSTEM 14.95 7.99 CYBERTRON MISSION 8.95 3.99 SWORD & SORCERY 7.45 POPEYE 9.95 4.99 ELECTRON INVADERS 8.95 3.99 BOUNCES 7.45 CAMELS 9.95 FIVE A SIDE SOCCER 8.95 3.99 G. GOOCH'S CRICKET 7.45 HELL GATE JET POWER JACK 8.95 VIEW TO A KILL 3.99 HOVVER BOVVER 9.95 FELIX IN THE FACTORY 8.95 3.99 THREE WEEKS IN PARADISE 6.99 HEROES OF KARN 9.95 SNOOKER 9.95 3.99 ALIEN HIGHWAY 5.90 BREAK FEVER 9.95 STOCK CAR 8.95 3.99 ART STUDIO ADVENTURES OF BASILDON BOND 2.99 CHUCKIE EGG 8.95 3.99 WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST DEFENDER 64 9.95 2.99 GOLF 8.95 GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR 22.95 20.95 GANDOLF THE SORCERER 8.99 KAMIKAZE 8.95 3.99 TOMAHAWK 7.45 LAZER ZONE 9.95 2.99 KILLER GORILLA 8.95 3.99 BOUNDER 5.90 PYJAMARAMA 9.95 2.99 R0B0TRON 9.95 4.99 PENTAGRAM 9.95 7.45 AUTOMANIA 9.95 2.99 TALES OF ARABIAN NIGHTS 8.95 3.99 HEARTLAND 7.45 CYCLONE ATTACK 8.95 3.99 ----------------BARGAIN SOFTWARE ORDER FORM Please send me the following titles. BLOCK capitals please! Type of computer Name. 8.95 8.95 ONNISONONO  NNNNNN So 6.70 2.99 GONNNGONO 2.99 9.95 2.99 3.99  2.99 2.99 11.20 6.50 9.95 3.99 2.99 9.95 XX Title: Amount Address Tel. No. Total Enclosed  Please make cheques or postal orders payable to BARGAIN SOFTWARE. Prices include P&P within the U.K: Europe please add .75 per tape: Elsewhere please add .00 extra per tape W4 High Road London 474A Chiswick VISIT OUR SHOP "


"PAMANA) LIL I DON'T THINK YOU'LL BE NEEDING THESE ANYMORE... JACKSON!! TWAND I DON'T WANT ANY MORE Y INTERFERENCE FROM HIM... IF YOU'VE -UGH... LET ME GOES WHAT HAVE YOU DONE TO HIM?! JACKSON! OH NO. I THINK, MY DEAR... is: 2 , THAT MR.KALLIBER 15 BEYOND HELP NOW... AND SOON YOU'LL WISH YOU WERE TOO. BECAUSE I'M GOING TO MAKE YOU SUFFER) MS. RAVENFLAME... m itte muy i hop HA HA HA HA HAK WHY 50 DESPERATE? THERE'S PLENTY OF TIME TO TALK... I WANT TO SAVOUR YOUR DSAZ EVERY AGONIZING SECOND... WHAT You?!!! YOU'VE CAUSED MEA GREAT DEAL OF TROUBLE.. BUT I'M BEING REMISS IN MY DUTIES... You MUST STILL BE CURIOUS AS TO MY APPEARANCE... MORE IN IT HAD CROSSED MY MIND PIG! CRUNCH! 28 THREE YEARS AGO,L.C. WERE INVOLVED IN GENETIC EXPERIMENTATION, ILLEGAL OF COURSE AND HIGHLY DANGEROUS. I WAS THE RESULT OF THEIR RANDOM THEORIES...BLIND FOR SIX MONTHS, THEY THOUGHT ME STUPID AS WELL! I GATHERED INFORMATION, BECOMING STRONGER EACH DAY... UNTIL FINALLY I AS READY TO ACT... A SIMPLE TASK REALLY.., WITH NO RESISTANCE, I TOOK OVER THE ENTIRE COMPANY WITHIN DAYS... IMITATING KEY EXECUTIVES, DESTROYING ANYONE OR ANYTHING IN MY PATH.. JUST AS YOU WILL BE DESTROYED DIGESTED SLOWLY 50 THAT I CAN ABSORB ALL YOUR MEMORIES, MIMICKING YOU PERFECTLY MAHA NOT EVEN YOUR CHILDREN WILL NOTICE...UNTIL IT'S TOO LATE!     SEE... I TOLD YOU WE'D BE MR. KALLIBER! OH, DEAR ...HE y LOOKS DEAD... OUDO COME ON... OVER HERE! 100 "


"DON'T WORRY MS. RAVENFLAME... I'LL HIT THIS SUCKER 50 HARD... 29.-3 wire M an mind, HE'LL THINK IT'S-OOPS!.. ?? GOOD GRIEF! IT'SMS MELISSA CHOMPLET AND SHE'S BEING ATTACKED BY SOME KIND OF CREATURE!! 2!? Bi van .se . AW NO. 71002 ca ) CITTACEACOL OO filii, WWW VS HE ATE MY BUDDY! IT HELP! IT'S GOT ME NOW! 06H! IT'S HORRIBLE! MR.KALLIBER... YOU'RE ALRIGHT! IF YOU HADN'T USED THAT SHUT UP AND HELP ME CUT THIS THING... IT NEEDS TIME TO REGENERATE... LET'S NOT GIVE IT ANY.. T ECNICI EU IT WAS GONNA EAT ME... AGH!.. THAT HURT! YOU SHOULDN'T HAVE DONE THAT, KALLIBER... NOW I'LL HAVE TO TEAS HER IN HAL SECARA HURRY, KALLIBER... KILLING MED TO BE CONTINUED--NEXT MONTH... "


"OMICRO ADS ATARI 400/600/800/800XL/XE/ST. ATARI 400/600/800 XL XE OWNERS UTILITIES ON TAPE AND DISK. ALSO DISK DRIVE ENHANCEMENTS. FOR FULL LISTS OF UTILITIES AND GAMES SEND LARGE SAE Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest, biggest and best Atari Club on the market. Now incorporating ST software into our stocks. MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who nearly 4 years ago first conceived the idea of a software library. Now over 1,400 titles on disc, cassette and Rom (games, business, education and utilities). Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Approaching 2,000 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany, Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast, efficient and friendly service operating a computerized system to keep track of all your records. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities. Important: Midland Games Library are in no way connected with or responsible for Midland Computers Ltd. of Worcester. SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos, Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programmes are originals with full clocumentation Mail order only. Seven days delivery UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64. Send s.a.e. for fast response and details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG), 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB STOCKSOFT 15 WOODBROOKE ROAD BIRMINGHAM B30 1UE ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE We have an all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE. Apply now and hire your first four ames free. Around 1,000 different original titles. For full details send large stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm 10pm or weekends. IOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVE .90 post free 130 XEs .90 post free 130 XES+1050 Drive .90 post free Antic and Analog magazines available BEST QUALITY DISCS Unlabellad D.D.JS.S. E11.95 for 10 post free .95 for 100 post free S.S. E14.95 for 10 post free. Double density Memorex 3%\" discs S.S.D.D. Boxes of 10 .92 1050 Happy Enhancements with full double density, warp speed and compaction E149.95 post free GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept. C&VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney close Sunderland SR3 4PD. Tel: 0783 286351 ATARI 400 OWNERS Have you always wanted to try all this adventuring that you read about but been frustrated by your 16K? New adventures are now available which have been specially written to squeeze into the ATARI 400 but retain the feature of fulllength adventures. Send SAE for full information to: AD 400, 40, Chilmark Gdns, New Malden, Surrey, KT3 GRT FREE MEMBERSHIP SOFTWARE HIRE  VIC-20 COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM Send an sae for your hirekit to: VSH (CV), PO Box 65, Nottingham NG 1 Please state which micro MERCENARY ANEW DATASET FOR COMMODORE 64 & ATARI ADVERTISEMENT INDEX ESCAPE FROM TARG .28 Arcade Ariolasoft.. 43 ......25 SECONDO Bargain ... Beyond ..... Bulldog ... ........99 ........ 16 THE TOUGHEST CHALLEN TOR MERCENARY ENTHUS Mailsoft. | Megasave ........... Melbourne House ........ 25, 75, Midland Computers ... .....25 Midland Games ............. Micronet. Mirrorsoft. Microsell .................. 82, 84, 93 Mosaic............ ......75 Cascade Charnwood. Cut Price .39, 48 ........25 ...... New Concepts .... Novagen ......... Design Design Discount 12 102 Ocean. 3 Odin ..................... Odin OBC, 6, 7 32, 80 Elite ........ Empire .. English. ........88 & Palace.... Gremlin. E . 8 Tere Hewson.. SJB Disks Shekhana Software Projects Supasoft. Superior Infogrames IBC JR.. US Gold................34, 46, 60, 66 NOVAGEN CASSETTE .95 DISK .95 NOVAGEN SOFTWARE-SALES:142 ALCESTER ROAD BIRMINGHAM B 138HS 021-449 9516 Livingston. Logic Sales Virgin Games. "


"Pen Pauls Pane would like to hear from other readers. Monika Kochanska ul. Sienkiewicza 11/42 24-100 Putawy woj. lubelskie Poland someone who would like to swap software, hints, tips and pokes. If you write to me, please enclose a list of your games. James A Stroebel Hrisholt 3 210 Gardabaer Iceland Another reader, also from Norway, is looking for a penpal who owns an Amstrad. He is: Brogar Waade Oskar Braatensvei 26 N-7000 Trondheim Norway I own a Commodore 64 and live in America and was wondering if anyone out there is interested in trading games. If so, please write. Andrew Borelli 1354 85th Street Brooklyn New York 11228 USA If you would like to get in touch with any of the following British readers, please write to them c/o C+VG and I shall pass your letters on. Otherwise, if the reader is from overseas just write to them direct, at the address which follows their letter. I am a 15-year-old Atari owner and would like to have a penpal from anywhere. I also have a cassette deck and many cassette/cartridge based software. Please get in touch with me. Andrew Lfejika Glasgow I have a Sharp MZ700. I like arcade and adventures. I would be quite happy if anyone in the world with the same computer would contact me. Seosamb O'Longaigh Co Cork I an an addicted 14-year-old BBC owner and would be pleased to hear from any fellow Beeb owners who have a modem and would freely like to swap hints, tips or games using either the modem or post. Stuart Ager Kent I own an Amstrad 464 and would like to have penpals from all over the world. I have nearly 200 titles and would like to swap software. Torgrim Sandvoll 8523 Elvegard Norway My name is Monika Kochanska and I live in the city of Putawy in Poland and have access to a Spectrum ZX. Unfortunately I do not have many programs and I thought that I would drop you a line and let you know about MSXtra, an amateur magazine run. The magazine comes out ever two months and it is totally devoted to MSX owners. If you would like to find out more, why not drop me a line c/o C+VG. M. Smith Somerset Two friends from Spain have written in and would like penpals who own either a Dragon or Amstrad. Juan Carlos owns the Dragon 32 and his address is: Juan Carlos Hernandez Jenaro Oraa 32, 5 Izq Santurce Vizcaya Spain I have had my Amstrad CPC 464 for a few months and already have quite a few games for it, so, I would like to get in touch with other Amstrad readers. Christina Smith Dyfed S Wales My name is Imran Iftikhar and I am a student. I have a Spectrum computer, printer, joystick and microdrive. I like adventure games and would like to swap hints etc with other readers. Imran Iftikhar 36-D Peoples Colony Faisalabad Pakistan I am a 13-year-old Spectrum owner and I collect games. would like to get in touch with and Agustin owns an Amstrad Agustin Sanabria Jenaro Oraa 32, 7 Dcha Santurce Vizcaya Spain I am a 15-year-old girl and own a C64. I would like to hear from other C64 owners interested in computer studies as well as games. I am interested in hearing from people abroad as well as this country. Alison Hotchkes Nr Chorley more next month "


"Malbog COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU Never let a robot do a readers would be tempted to try catalogue would be continually \"bumper issue' consisted of a man's job! Why don't lever it. You could have a different out of date. My advice is to NatWest Online magazine. theme each month, and the best keep all your C+VGs. It's the While appreciating that all listen to my own advice. listings could be published best reference work you could magazines carry inserts for Over the past few months together with screen shots and have. other causes, I think that this Big Red, Otiss and B-Con reviews. This would also give was a bit much. Especially as it have been wrecking the readers a better idea of the entailed a careful removal of game before keying it in. I am writing to you for advice. Mailbag pages. Now it's my said magazine in order to avoid Back in 1984 C+VG typically Which software service do you damaging C+VG. turn — not to wreck them consisted of 20 per cent listings, recommend? I have looked at I am sure that a lot of people but to restore order. No most colourfully illustrated. In so many but they all seem alike. would rather have a games slick or silly replies from me. April 1986 this figure was down As you can see from my supplement than a bank to under seven per cent black address, I live in Australia, advertisement. I for one do not Just no nonsense, straight and white. I would grieve the which is somewhat of a wish to see another «Bank from the shoulder, no demise of C+VG listings. Who disadvantage when it comes to Job!\" and would prefer a beating about the bush, knows how many of today's top your fantastic competitions. listings book instead. hard hitting and pithy programmers started by typing The newsagent from which All grumbles aside, keep up in a short magazine listing? answers. Understood? buy your magazine has just got the good work in your magazine Besides the Bugs would then be the April edition in and today is pages. Jackson T. Kalliber. free to cause havoc in other May 23rd. So you can see my Stephen F Webb, parts of the magazine! predicament -I buy your Stoke-on-Trent Mark Tuck, magazine after the date of whch C+VG Star Letter. Rugby the competition has finished! Is there any way of getting around After the incident involving Editor's reply: Every month this awful situation? If not, what the spelling of Editorial we're going to give  for I would like to draw to your do you suggest? Assistant Lesly Walker's the best letter printed on the readers' attention the excellent I really enjoyed your review Christian name, confidence in service I received from Silica on The Pawn. How can a Mailbag pages. So keep on the editorial was reaching new Shop in Kent. My 130XE computer generate such lows and jewelled daggers were writing to Mailbag, became faulty on a Monday graphics? being drawn everywhere, Computer+Video Games, morning at 11.30. I called Silica Matthew Beeby, particularly since I have Priory Court, 30-32 Shop at 11.45, explaining the South Australia received no token peace Farringdon Lane, London situation and they said they offering to buy off my anger. would arrange for collection the Jackson replies: We can airmail Anyway time is a great healer ECTR3AU. next day. One hour later you copies of C+VG and they and somehow intergalactic war lam writing in reply to those received a telephone call asking should reach you within 12 to was averted, but now this is just letters which criticise program if it would be possible to collect 14 days. But it will cost you  too much... why in the listings. Many are very playable my computer. Two hours later it for a year for a subscription. As Adventure reviews was there and addictive, but, it is still was on its way to Kent. for competitions, Matthew, last the same screen shot for unfair to compare them with I then phoned Mike Savage, year we ran an oversea's Terrors of Trantoss and Return commercial programs. the despatch manager, readers competition and only of Ithaca? Apart from being a source of thanking him for prompt one person from Australasia Once again how did such a free games, I think listings serve collection. Little did I know that entered he came from New glaring error slip through the another purpose which their within three days I would have a Zealand. editorial staff? And this time no critics overlook. Believe it or brand new replacement. using Big Red as a scapegoathot, readers, inside that small If all computer shops gave sat on Lesly's typewriter this sort of service there would games machine there lurks ...a How do you get your pictures of arcade games in Arcade indeed! computer Yes, and you can use be less problems like my friend Mark Watson it for things other than just encountered — he had to wait Action? Do you use a flash or a special expensive camera? Lancaster three months for his C64 to be playing games Some people actually enjoy repaired. tried to take some pictures but Jackson replies: Okay, Mark, Mr MG Batey, they did not turn out. Do you could dream up some trying to program it and C+VG Norfolk have any spare old posters gives them something to aim far-fetched excuse about the could have? for. I myself started off by picure mix-up but you probably Darren Mears, typing in listings, seeing their wouldn't believe me. This, Suffolk structure, correcting bugs, however, is what happened. Lesly was leading the C+VG improving them and eventually Would you be kind enough to Jackson replies: The cameras send me a catalogue of the writing my own games. I have team in our daily 6.30am we use are not special just since had several published in computer games you have. If aerobics workout when Big Red C+VG, all of which my friends it's possible just for the Atari ordinary SLRs — that's Single decided to go for the \"burn.\" still like to play. 800XL. Although I live in Poland Lens Reflex. The art is in getting Such were his exercisions that So the point is, C+VG listings the right shutter speed and lens his circuits overheated and he and you can buy computers, the gives all'amateurs\" an aperture. Sorry, but we don't programs for them are very went into a robotic faint, difficult to get hold. That's the have any posters. Try writing to incentive, in much the same crashed onto the adventure way as your competitions do. reason I am writing to you as I software houses. page layouts and caused The enjoyment is in the doing, wish to enlarge my collection of absolute havoc. The result: a whether its map drawing, games. Ol feel the need to write to you screen shot was printed twice poster designing, caption K Moezka, and we've now given up once more concerning the June writing, or programming. Poland 1986 issue. I collected my aerobics for the less hectic Getting something published is reserved copy from my local pleasures of the editor's a bonus and it means someone Jackson replies: Sorry, friend, formation basket-weaving newsagent and thought to recognises all your hard work. we just don't have a catalogue myself: \"This is a bumper issue, classes. Satisfied, Mark? So how about turning of computer games. New nice and thick.\" On closer programming into a regular games are coming onto the examination at home I found Regarding the letter which competition? Then maybe more market every day so any that 32 pages of my supposed appeared in last month's 104 "


"Son bago COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, ECIR 3AU queston, will Marble Madness 10 Dear suave, sophisticated, have a CBM version or just an good looking dude, usually Amiga version? known as the Ed. (Not another Michel Crucke, one after a free T-Shirt! — Ed.) Belgium Up to now I have not been able to put pen to paper because Jackson replies: Not sure about have been too busy reading Marble Madness, Michel, but your mega mag, but, I would we understand Batman will be like to make a few comments. released on the Commodore. About that listings problem, why don't you, every other month, convert one really good WARNING!! I have recently game, sent in by a reader for the purchased US Gold's new BBC, Spec etc. football game, World Cup In between listing months do Carnival. I was much looking special features similar to the forward to this simulation. But, Elite one, review more to my horror, as the game adventure and arcade games proceeded I recognised the for the BBC and Electron, game as an almost exact copy PLEASE. Could we also have of Artic's World Cup. Prof Video back? For people like me, who have Does any one know of a already got Artic's game, this software library to cater for the came as an immense shock. I BBC. felt conned and cheated and my Robin Charlton, respect for this software house Hexham. has greatly decreased. Tam just warning other football fanatics about this and I Jackson replies: Off hand we would suggest to buy a copy of don't know of a BBC software Ocean's Matchday. library. And as for Professor Paul and Keith, Video, he's been wiped for Avon. good. Jackson replies: I think your reaction is fairly typical. 'Mailbag' concerning a secondly, what if a prize you proposed version of Elite for the sent out is lost in the post? As Atari. I would be grateful if the the recipient has no idea that person who wrote the letter they are to get a prize they can could contact me at the address do nothing about getting below. I am very interested to compensation or an find out where his/her facts explanation form you or the come from. post office. As far as Firebird are Maybe that is the crux of the concerned, there will NOT be an matter, you aren't really Atari version of Elite and I am bothered about how your astounded to learn from your readers might feel. I notice that correspondent that such a in the last few issues there has version may exist. I, for one, been a \"discussion\" about would be intrigued to see it! which is better, Crash or C+VG, Phil Pratt, I wasn't intending to be drawn Marketing Manager, into this rather puerile Firebird Software, argument, but I feel that I have Wellington House, just one comment to make on Upper St Martins Lane, the matter, at least Crash (and WC2H 9DL Sinclair User and Your Sinclair for that matter), CARES about it's readers, not dishing up poor With reference to your excuses to cover its answer to Mr Donnelly's letter inadequacies. (C+VG June) — what a load of Thank you for Costa Capers, it rubbish. You suffer from lack of is great despite what most of the reviews have said. space in the same way that your Jon Rose, competitors do and yet they can still find the space to print ALL Bognor Regis their competition winners — WHY???? Jackson replies: Beats me why I have suffered in much the we should send you a copy of same way as Mr Donnelly, but Costa Capers, Jon. Guess was sent a prize without you're born lucky. knowing what it was forBut surely you know which Costa Capers, and as you competitions you've entered? haven't run a competition with In any event if you reckon it is this game as a prize, the so easy putting together a mag mystery deepens even further. like C+VG why don't you call By not printing results you are the Ed and arrange to come condemning many readers to along and see how it is done. months of frantic and frustrating scanning of your pages for the results. Did you know that there isn't I, too, entered both the one software house in Belgium Commando competition and that I know of which the Fighting Warrior produces programs for the competition, and the only way CBM64? But, in Holland there that I knew that I hadn't been are some very good software successful in the Commando houses. One of them is competition was by looking at Radarsoft who produce very the charts and watching it rise good games their latest past the number five position being Kapriolen and the that I had predicted for it (sorry graphics are terrific. The best of Elite, I will know better next their games is Eindellos, which time!). was awarded game of the year As for the Fighting Warrior in Holland. It's a helicopter competition, the lack of results game with 500 screens. has been a disgrace, and as I saw your review of Batman, about the longest running do you think Ocean will make a computer magazine, I would CBM conversion? One last have thought that you would set an example for others to follow, but no, good old C+VG still insists on assuming that all it's readers are telepathic. Besides, your not printing results can cause confusion on two counts. Firstly, there is the problem that I illustrated earlier with Costa Capers where a game is sent out with only a compliments slip leaving the recepient in the dark, and XH IM "


". Trivial Pursuit has sold over 60 million copies worldwide. Now the game is coming to computers with all the added extras the machines can offer. Domark and the ODE programming team are the people taking this daunting task of converting the Oh Bogworld's best known board game git! Delta And in September's C+VG we 4's latest tell you how it's been done spoof and if the game manages to adventure is capture all the spirit of the soon to be released and to original. celebrate the fact we're bringing you a special Boggit competition next issue. You could be the proud owner of Bimbo Faggin's very own midi hi-fi system as stolen from his little round hole by a greedy dwarf. Don't miss this amazing adventure event coming your way on August 16th. C UTE GAMES RELIGION O LETRTURE O PRESS BUTTON TO THROH DICE You've read about M.U.D. — now learn about all the other interactive modem-linked games you can use to bring whole world of fantasy and adventure into your front room. BIMBO FAGGINS BOGGIT HOLE...   EXT. VIVA VIC! THE VIC 20 COLLECTION ONTH If you want to be a cool customer as you sizzle slowly in the summer heat then you've just GOT to have a copy of C+VG PLUS: Kirel Addictive's gripnext issue. Why? Because we're ping game starring the cute bringing you a special preview little blob is the subject of a of Design Design's first C+VG map special next mega-game based on the cult month. comic character Rogue PLUS: Vic owner's don't Trooper. Rogue is a Genetic despair. There's a speYou could win all the Jewels of Infantryman, aided by three cial Viva Vic software Darkness if you're brave enough to useful biochips, Gunner competition for you enter our Level 9/Rainbird Glittering Helm and Bagman. Watch to enter! Prizes competition.  worth of for the cool blue hero in PLUS: The best extremely priceless items from top jewellers, C+VG next issue. adventure pages H. Samuels could belong to some lucky C+VG in the world feaadventurers. If you want to get your hands on some ture an in depth hidden treasure you know what to do! look at Delta 4 and their zany adventures. "


"TOWALREADY A NUMBER I BEST SELLER UTATUD SZLELE COMPATIBLE WITH THE BBC B, B+ AND MASTER SERIES The first mission destroy the reactor for a bonus score. Retrieve the Pod and make your escape. Collect the fuel and steer clear of the limpet guns. Shoot the activator to open the sliding entrance door. REVIEWS OF THRUST ALREADY PUBLISHED Zzap! 64: \"The most enjoyable game we've played for ages... AZZAP! SIZZLER. BBC Computer & Video Games: \"Thrust is a simple but totally addictive game...\" A C+VG HIT! MICRO Now available for the BBC Micro and Electron ELECTRON The Commodore-64 version of Thrust (published by Firebird Software) shot immediately to No. 1 in the software charts and was greeted with rave reviews throughout the computer press. Equally addictive and just as enjoyable, the BBC Micro and Electron versions of the game are set to emulate this performance. Thrust is simple, fun-to-play, yet totally realistic and intensely challenging. Your mission is to visit 24 planets in turn collecting the klystron Pods and, if possible, destroying each planet's reactor system. Your spaceship and the pods, which are heavier than the spaceship, move authentically subject to the laws of gravity, inertia and momentum indeed the game's author, Jeremy Smith holds a First-Class Honours degree in Physics! Careful planning of your manoeuvres is essential in order to prevent the pods swinging out of control and dragging your spaceship to destruction. To add to the challenge, the planets have different gravity rates and, as you progress through the game, some have \"reverse gravity\" or \"invisible landscapes\". They are defended by automatic limpet guns strategically placed to protect the pods and fuel tanks the only source of replenishment for your limited fuel supply. The smooth screen-scrolling, which is exemplary, and the realistic action gives the player a fascinating feeling of floating through space. PRICE: $7.95 (cassette), $11.95 (BBC disc) COMPETITION COMPETITION COMPETITION COMPETITION Access  All mail orders are If you complete the mission by collecting the pods from all 24 planets, you can enter our competition. The prizes include the beautiful trophy (pictured on the right),  cash, and 3 copies of the captivating book \"The New Atlas of the Universe\" by Patrick Moore. Closing date: 31st January, 1987. OUR GUARANTEE Dept. TH1, Regent House, despatched within 24 VISA Skinner Lane, Leeds LS7 1AX. SOFTUARE Leeds LS7 1AX. 24 HOUR TELEPHONE discs will be replaced Telephone: 0532 459453. ANSWERING SERVICE FOR ORDERS immediately. hours by first-class post.  Postage and packing is free Faulty cassettes and Limited WE PAY TOP ROYALTIES FOR HIGH QUALITY SOFTWARE "


"Suasimodo's ding-dong derring dos rattle the rafters in... UNCHBACK THERS ADVENTURE!! ... a text-teaser world where no 'modo has lept before! Go on... take a swing at it! SPECTRUM ASK .95 28.95 MBORE 64 AMSTRAD SPECTRUM 48K COMMODORE 64 Ocean Software is available from selected branches of: (BOB) WHSMITH John Menzies WOOLWORTH LASKYS Rumbelows Greens Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries welcome. Ocean Software Limited Ocean House 6 Central Street  Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone 061 832 6633. Telex 669977 Oceans G "

