"MARCH 1985 95p S$4.70 Dm6 GIFT FROM THE GODS map contest! EXPLORE PLANET PHOTON COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 32 PAGES 3 BOOK OF ADVENTURE FEW SURPRISES, PACKED WITH REVIEWS, NEWS,FEATURES, THE HELPLINECINSIDE GAMES for the SPECTRUM, COMMODORE, VIC-20, ATARI... "


"COMMODORE 64 BEYOND YOUR WILDEST DREAMS Krachomet Steve Fox 84 ROMIK .99 Order Out now from all good stockists. Or write to Romik Software, P.O. Box 478, Slough. Hotline (0753) 39610 "


"FEATURES 21 MAILBAG........ Commodore Jet Set Willy gives one 64 owner the screaming horrors, plus Ghostbusters have you reached the temple? PROBLEM PAGE. GIFT FROM THE GODS. .31 Our exclusive map competition could win you a very special prize! DOOMDARK MAP... PLANET PHOTON.......... ...............46 Boldly go where no games player has ventured before! ....50 52 Cover: Jef Riddle Turn to page 31 for details of our exclusive Gift from The Gods map competition. ..57 WILL THE NET WORK?..... Bug Hunter delves into the world of Micronet and Compunet and gets tangled in a weird and wonderful network! PROF. VIDEO'S WORKSHOP. BUG HUNTER.. C&VG TOP 30 CHARTS........ PUZZLING.............. Just when you thought it was safe to let your mind slip out of gear, Trevor Truran is back with some mind bending puzzles! STAR WARS COMPETITION...................91 If you've got an Atari VCS you won't want to miss out on this! 62 NEXT ISSUE ON SALE 16th MARCH FIGHTING FANTASY MONSTERS.........98 Arrghhhh! Urrrrgh! Kersplat! Horrors galore from our readers! CAMELID TOUR '84.. ............. 100 Heyyy everybody! Read all about what the Hairy One did on his holidays. HALL OF FAME.. If you've beaten the best then you'll see your name here! JOYSTICK JURY. Want to know which joystick is the best around? Then read on! COMPETITION RESULTS... ..117 Who won what. An exclusive report. ....103 .110 58 Editor Tim Metcalfe Deputy Editor Wendie Pearson Editorial Assistant Lesley Walker Staff WriterReader Services Seamus St. John Art Editor Linda Freeman Designer Sylvia Wells Production Editor Mary Morton Advertisement Manager Louise Matthews Advertising Executives Bernard Dugdale, Sean Brennan Phil Godsell Production Assistant Melanie Paulo Publisher Rita Lewis Editorial and Advertisement Offices: Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE. By using the special Postal Subscription Service, copies of COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES can be mailed direct from our offices each month to any address throughout the world. All subscription applications should be sent to processing to COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES Subscription Department Competition House Fanndon Road, Market Harborough, Leicestershire. All orders should include the appropriate remittance, made payable to COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES. Annual subscription rates (12 issues): UK and Eire (15. Additional service information, including individual overseas airmail rates, available upon request. Circulation Department: EMAP National Publications Published and distributed by EMAP National Publications LISTINGS SUPER CLOWNIATARI............ Dodo the clown is in big trouble with the circus owner. Will you be able to help him run away from the circus? SPIDER FIGHTER/SPECTRUM......... Hordes of man-eating spiders are advancing towards you and you are armed with only a single laser pistol to defend yourself. HEROIVIC 20.. .65 The beautiful princess has been kidnapped by the wicked Baron. Can you save her from a fate worse than death? CRACKPOT CLIMBER/ SPECTRUM.......74 Get on your climbing boots and join in the wackiest climbing game of the year. BRUCEICBM 64....... No one can hear you scream in space. 118 NEWS AND REVIEWS ***....13 GAMES NEWS.... Backpacker's for the Amstrad, games for the Enterprise, the Atari comeback read all about it here! REVIEWS. .................. 23/105 Realtime's Starstrike, a great 3D space shoot-out, is our Game of the Month this issue, closely followed by School Daze from Microsphere and a host of new hot games tried and tested by our review team. ARCADE ACTION. ..86 Clare Edgeley looks at some brand new games destined for the arcades in her report from the London arcade show. NEXT MONTH. Ltd Printed by Severn Valley Press. Typeset by In-Step Ltd. Game of the Month Starstrike ...... 120 "


"hallenge 2 ) \"Winning's not the most important thing it's the only thing\" Brian Jacks, world famous Judo and TV Superstars champion made it very clear. \"It better be good,\" he said. We didn't feel like arguing the point, so we just got to work. The result is one of the most exciting, addictive and challenging games you will ever have attempted. We feel it only fair to wam you though-challenge Brian Jacks to anything and YOU'D better be good! Brian Jacks challenges you to these eight events: * ARM DIPS SQUAT THRUSTS * CANOEING * CYCLING * FOOTBALL * SWIMMING * ARCHERY * 100 METRES Available from all leading software retailers OR order today by mail. CBM-64  95 fast load cassette .95 disc 48K Spectrum BBC-B/Electron/Amstrad .95 prices include VAT & p/p LG Martech is the registered trade mark of Software Communications Limited Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME. PHONE: (0323) 768456 TELEX: 87465 EXIM Brighton 48K SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64. BBC 'B'. ELECTRON. AMSTRAD "


"Zato smo PROGRAMMING FULL OF HIGH some tips. Don't worry I SCORING HIGH return them to base, but about Roamers too much at the instructions fail to say SPIRITS! the start, they are very ON ARCADIA where base is. Later I Dear Sir, slow. Always set a 1963 Dear Sir, found base to be the place I am writing to inform you Hearse with Ghostbait, A day or two ago I was where the character you that I have won the image intensifier, three reading my way through control first starts off, but Activision game traps and a Ghost Vacuum. my old copies of C&VG. again the colours are such Ghostbusters, after just a When PLC energy sets to As I read the mailbag of that when the game starts around 5000, keep your day of continuous play. your September issue, I you are left frantically When you win the game finger on the B key as the found that Alan Webster of trying to locate your it congratulates you on Marshmallow Man may Gullane had scored 203 character while it happily closing the Portal of the begin to form. points on the first sheet of wanders off, careering into Spirit World and gives you Here's how to get into Arcadia. He also stated: the other characters and a reward and you hear 2002. Move your \"How about letting losing energy due to the ghosts scream. I wish to Ghostbuster to nudge up everyone hear about this fact that the character is compliment Activision on the screen and position challenge? constantly moving. When bringing out a game which him at the centre of the Well, I looked into the the game starts, you lose was sure to be a Christmas door. As the Marshmallow far corners of my video track of where he starts, so hit. Man is on his way back games cupboard and you lose the base. The graphics in the from the right, go in. found a certain game Another annoying feature game are superb, as is the James Mitchell named Arcadia. I loaded it is that when you pick up Lindfield sound, and the speech is into my ZX Spectrum and an object by moving next amazingly human. I would W. Sussex started to practise zapping to it and pressing the fire suggest that anyone with the green meanies. I found button (assuming you have .95 to spend should that it was a very difficult a Kempston), the character rush down to their local task to get a high score on pauses for around three HINTS FOR THE TI? computer dealer and the first sheet, but I seconds but the other purchase a copy of the managed to get a score of characters keep moving. Dear Sir, But the one thing that 213 on that number one game. Incidentally with my On behalf of all the Texas sheet. How about letting really shows the IQ of the reward I ended up with owners in Australia I would everyone hear about THIS designer is the lack of a 23,000 dollars in the bank. like to congratulate you on challenge? save game feature during S. Merryweather your fabulous magazine. Danny Lewis your Adventure. This Your support for the TI Ware reduces the game's appeal Stoke Gifford continues undaunted and Herts. by making it a challenge of Bristol PS Could you tell me the quality of your patience instead of puzzlewhether I am one of your magazine never falters. solving and logical thinking which are the essence of One suggestion -how first readers to complete about putting in some TI A LET DOWN Adventuring. Being made Ghostbusters? programming hints? to restart an Adventure Editor's reply: You are the Also, one thing that really Dear Sir, from scratch after half an first we've heard from, Mr cheeses me off is that the After reading the review hour of play is not my idea Merryweather! variety of software for the on Eureka from Domark of fun. Two features would TI and other computers is Ltd, I decided to buy it have made the game a lot not constant throughout the well actually the ,000 more playable and these world. Why? I really reward had a more than are: become annoyed when I partial influence in my A) A save game feature for read software reviews for decision. However, I can the Adventures. Dear Sir, TI games which I have only describe the game as B) A better joystick/ I do not know if I am the never seen or heard of in disappointing for reasons keyboard routine for the first to do so, but I have Australia. which I will now explain. arcade section, by which I completed Ghostbusters, In this age, when one First, the arcade game mean, instead of the by Activision. I achieved can travel from England to that preludes each character constantly this on 26 December at Australia in less than 24 Adventure is of poor moving, you should have 6.40pm. hours, why is it that it design. The colours are him move only when you My total amount of sometimes takes software such that it is very hard to keep the joystick pushed money was $29,600 with an six months to travel the see the character you are in the direction you wish to account number of (if you same distance? controlling and the go, and when the joystick wish to print it) 26425600. Keep up the good work characters you are is released or the keyboard I will send a photo of the and support for the TI. avoiding. Also the is inactive, the player will final screen to you as soon Antony Reynolds instructions say that the be motionless. as it is developed, but in Sydney object of the game is to I can understand the the meantime here are Australia collect flashing objects and author's reluctance to dish EUREKA! WHAT GHOSTBUSTERS GETS BUSTED Please drop us a line at: Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. "


"out 25,000 quid by adding the stores. One thing I type NEW. Then type in that CBM64 programs are these problems, but when I don't like about the game the following program: faultless, but what bought Eureka I expected is that there are not more 10 CLEAR 32767: LOAD happens? You've guessed the riddles to give me the game varieties. There is CODE it. Software Projects release problems, not poor design. only the hard game and the 20 FOR A = 43780 TO Jet Set Willy on my One more point before I very easy game. Another 45823: POKE A,O: machine and I find, to my bid you farewell is that the thing is that on the easy NEXT A sheer horror and disbelief, graphics are described as game you don't get a 30 FOR A = 46080 TO that the CBM64 version is \"innovative\" in the review, bonus even after getting 49151: POKE A.): also impossible to finish. but careful examination past saving the world three NEXT A Not because of the attic reveals that when the times. 40 POKE 36477, 1: POKE this time, but the wine graphics are drawn Robert Kliman 35899, 0 cellar. Yes that's right, you halfway across the top of Bradford 50 RANDOMIZE USR 33792 can't get to all of the the screen, the next half is Editor's reply: Can anyone Once completed, RUN objects. either a mirror image or help Robert in his quest to the program and start the Someone should do exact copy. Now this is \"save the world\"'? cassette recorder. Once something about these excellent in saving memory the machine code has fiends! I've wasted my but is disappointing to look HIT LIST FOR THE loaded, there will be a breath but, most of all, my at. The \"cameos\" therefore fairly lengthy pause as the hard earned cash. are so called because it is I SPECIBUM program above is carried Yours Angrily not possible to draw a out. Once it has finished, Steven Cranston \"wide screen\" Dear Sir, carry out the game in the London presentation using the I think it is a great idea to usual way. If, during a mirror image of itself. have a top ten worst games game, you get into the PIRATES MAY WALK Anyway, after getting that and here is my list for ZX endless loop in which you off my chest, I think it will Spectrum: keep losing lives then THE PLANK be a long time before the 1. Mad Martha Mikro press CAPS SHIFT and prize is won. If, however, it Gen BREAK and the game will Dear Sir, is completed before the 2. Jumping Jackreset. I write on the well-worn closing date of 31st Imagine I'm sure your readers subject of computer December 1985, I think it 3. Mr Wimpy Ocean will find this program very program piracy. I do not will be by an unemployed 4. Nightflite II Hewson useful. wear an eye patch or have insomniac. 5. Nightflite Hewson Bryan Edwards a parrot. Neither do I Darren Evans 6. 3D Space Wars Southampton indulge myself in 'yo ho Worsely Hewson ho\" and \"shiver me Manchester 7. Space Raiders Psion timbers\" or other such 8. Gobble A Ghost pirate-type phrases, but I CDS am unashamedly a pirate. 9. Tank DK Tronics In my possession I have DANGERMOUSE 10. Centipede DK captive a humble Acorn Tronics Electron which I feed Dear Sir, Martin Cooper various pirated programs. Having just bought Eastbourne To be sure, I do, somewhat Dangermouse, I have found regrettably, own some that it is impossible! original, uncopied, dare I On the easy game, I have say it, Purchased Software, saved the world about three times, but on the BITES THE DUST amongst which one may find the legendary Elite fourth time it is impossible. Dear Sir, which is not practically The game only gives you As Jet Set Willy has been As Jet Set Willy has b BUT THE BUGS about 32 minutes (which is solved, I thought your copyable. Downheartedly I forked actually only about 1% readers would be IN THE CEILADI out the exorbitant sum of minutes) to do the three interested in the following .95 for the chapters in. When I got to program for the Spectrum Dear Sir, aforementioned program. the fourth time of saving version. It gets rid of all Who do Software Projects This seems like Blue Beard the world, I didn't get off think they are? Here I am, actually paying for a gold the first chapter. I still had arrows), allows you to fall a proud owner of a CBM64, sovereign, but one must 1982m to go when the time from any height and gives | laughing at puny little lower oneself occasionally, ran out. The game graphicyou unlimited lives. Spectrum owners because even if it is to the benefit of wise is good and I liked First, rewind your tape their programs are so bug some megalomaniacal the little questions which and type: MERGE and ridden, laughing mostly at organisation. All the they gave you to fill in. start the recorder. Once the notorious Jet Set Willy remainder of my unpirated I can't wait till more the first program has and its attic bug. I tell my software has not robbed Dangermouse games are in Iloaded, stop the tape and Spectrum-owning friends my pocket (treasure chest?) DIFFICULTIES WITH MAMA SAGOAS JET SET WILLY Please drop us a line at: Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. "


"...AND WHAT WILL because it was donated by Nuclear war is horrific Tin which your sole choose the best games. various fellow-seamen. but quite a few other objective is to destroy the Mark Hayden These have, of course, games have been made on Canary Isles' missile Dunfermline been copied and the subject. A prime systems or some other distributed to those of my example of this is Missile equally unrealistic A QUESTION OF associates who also own an Command which, although objective. Perhaps we Acorn Electron it says that you are should put the political COPYRIGHT Yes, sir, I am a pirate. defending another planet, questions aside and enjoy Hang me from the gallows Dear Sir, it is quite obviously what is a superb game. if you will, imprison me I know that if a copyright is American vs Russia or Finally Raid Over within the walls of on a game, by law you NATO vs Warsaw Pact. Moscow is a game a Copyright Laws and leave can't copy it. But if a firm Another example is Avalon simulation if you like. It the software houses goes out of business does Hill's game called B-1 does not say that nuclear laughing (all the way to the copyright still exist? Nuclear Bomber in which war is pleasant. This game bank, I have no doubt at Mark Rayson you have to pilot a B-1 doesn't make nuclear war all), cutting me off in my Cumnor through Russia's defences prime. Sink my merry ship Oxford and then destroy your preit already is or any more of crime. Yet with my last Editor's reply: Yes, Mark, selected target. Avalon Hill imminent. dying breath I would sing also make a game called the copyright belongs to the praises of Mastertronic the author of the program. Nuke War in which you Surbiton who, next to C-Tech, write decide what strategy of Surrey A MEASLY HANDFUL some of the worst defence to take, such as commercially available build ICBMs or build OF ACORNS! software, at a price which shelters. There is an Artic makes it superb and Dear Sir, game for the Spectrum in wonderful to behold, and You are doing it again which you have to survive even a word or two of severely neglecting the after a nuclear war. And praise to Firebird, good poor old Acorn Electron! what about Creative old BT's spin-off, who Sparks computer version You have reviewed a appear to be producing of the film Wargames measly handful of the the software at an almost dozens of decent Electron which is entitled reasonable price. Computer War? In this you games. Even the BBC It is these, sir, that will games you review have have to stop America's bring about the death of missiles being launched flaws, the major one being piracy. Threats and laws accidently against Russia. that your reviewers do not have no such effect upon As well as these games, seem to check if that BBC hardened pirates such as there are about a dozen game has an Electron myself, but lowered prices more games involving version (eg Elite). Charts are a definite threat to the nuclear war. I didn't see THE CHILDREN are also biased, with future of my beloved life. any criticisms about them. I THINK 2 games such as Elite and And so, I sail away into the The whole object of Raid Blagger unmentioned in troubled sea of piracy, Over Moscow is to stop Dear Sir, the Electron column when armed with my supply of America being obliterated I have been a regular they really should be!!! Any blank C-90s and tape-toby Russian nuclear Electron owner would reader of your excellent tape recorder, wondering missiles. Nothing wrong think that there was no magazine since issue one if my days may be yet with that, surely? in November 1981, wlien I software for his machine numbered by dreaded Destroying the Russian owned a sharp MZ-BOK. when there was really a lowered prices. Will it no game at number four for it! defence centre at the end Since very few commercial longer be profitable for me of the game is done only to programs were available, Please, please mention Electron software. ensure that Russia cannot_typed in all of your games. houses, to rip off the hardlaunch any more missiles. Magazines such as yours In July I traded my Sharp working authors, to It's not as if the Americans in for a Commodore 64 and the could take a machine like deprive them of their much stop Russia launching her the Electron off the market continued to purchase your earned royalties? by reviewing only the bad missiles and then obliterate magazine for reviews. ! Alas, fellow pirates, the games and mentioning Russia with their missiles saw your exclusive review pirate's life may soon be nothing of the others. because they, as the of Raid Over Moscow and over, so make the most of instructions explain, were M. Latham bought the game. It was our (possible) last few days dismantled in accordance Stoke-on-Trent better than I had dreamed of law breaking. Staffs. with the SALT treaty. much better than the Black Bill The tone of the game is excellent Beach Head THOMPSON TWINS (alias Graham Peel) more defensive than which was my favourite Leeds offensive. Protect America ARE GREAT! game. by destroying installations Anyway, I would like to Hi there everybody at WHAT ABOUT ALL vital to the Russian say that I cannot agree with C&VG! missiles. If the game was the editorial comment as I would like to thank you more on a \"nuke Russia to the nuclear weaponry very much for your great hell\" idea then I certainly involved in this game is Dear Sir, Thompson Twins wouldn't have bought the being stopped and this Adventure program. Today I am just writing to give my game and would agree views on your comments must be good as children it arrived, after I had given with you. will think that nuclear about the game Raid Over up hoping it would ever The game is marketed by weapons are evil. reach me. It's great and I Moscow in the December US Gold which is, as is I would also like to point enjoy playing it. I regularly issue of C&VG. suggested by the name, an out that only three levels read your fantastic games Having recently bought | American company. The exist and not the five you magazine and I think it's it for my Commodore 64,1 fact that the two countries stated. the best in the world. I have to agree with you on involved are super powers Please keep up the good particularly enjoy the very the point that it is a superb is quite important. You reviews as it is these that interesting games reviews I game. could hardly have a game help my friends and I with the clear valuation. THE OTHERS...? Please drop us a line at: Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. "


"AM I also want to thank you Commodore 64 and recent past. Your point at half-price for their own for your great Yearbook Spectrum. Your magazine about Atari versions of profit. 1985 especially Treachery should now be called Commodore games being Mark Dowds for the 64. Commodore 64, Spectrum available is a good one. Cumbernauld I have a question. and Video Games. We'll try to include those Most Commodore 64 Is it possible to details in our reviews. BRING BACK order your good looking games are available for the Christmas Adventure after THE BUGS! THESE ARE THE Atari, but you only ever 30th November? I would print the Commodore 64 Dear Sir, like to order it, but your version. WHY? REAL PIRATES! I am complaining about December issue arrived so In your November issue something that was missed all but two reviews were late here that the date was Dear Sir, in December's edition. The over. for the Commodore and I have over 20 copied thing is that I looked down Jan Kahmann Spectrum and the other games which I wouldn't the contents and didn't find Schwerte two were for the BBC. Also have thought twice about what I was looking for. No West Germany when are you going to put buying. If I had bought the prizes for guessing. Still games I have copied I some more listings in for Editor's reply: wondering? Here's the would have had to pay a Unfortunately we can't the Atari, as there have answer to the brain sum of  or more. I been none for a few carry the offer on after boggling question: THE can't afford things like this. BUGS. months? Apart from that, November, Jan. Maybe C&VG is one of the best I'm sure many people next year! What ever happened? magazines available. Thank would agree with me about You shall be shot at dawn! you. this. COMMODORE AND Gareth Jones Carl Masetti I have also dished out Portsmouth VIDEO GAMES? Powys over  on original tapes. Hants. Editor's reply: If you look People like me aren't the Editor's reply: We're Dear Sir, through your back copies pirates, so don't get on at giving the Bugs a rest for I am writing about your Carl, you'll see that we us, but at the real pirates a while, Gareth, but watch software reviews because devoted three whole pages who are copying them to out for something new most of them are for the Ito Atari games in the flog them off to someone coming your way! CALLING ALL think this computer I have been playing magazine is the best on Dallas Quest and have PEN PALS! the market today. The best struck a halting problem, I part of the mag is the cannot get past The image most people have of a real computer nut software reviews. \"chugalug\" Jones's trading is of a haggard figure who spends hour after lonely Thank you for a great post, ie. I can't find the hour hunched in front of a TV set attempting to be magazine. Continue with flashlight to search the the first to solve the latest hit game. Now your this excellent work. basement of the store, so favourite computer games magazine is offering a Arild Bjrk, any tips on this would unique chance for all those people to get in touch really be appreciated. \"Norway. with each other. I would also like to tell If you see a letter from someone you'd like to get Dear Sir. all those Kung-Fu champions of a flaw in in touch with, write to us and we'll forward your I am interested in how Bruce Lee. Make sure that note. people are fareing with you are well clear of walls Mail it to us at Computer & Video Games, Pen their Atari computers when jumping off a ledge Pal Page, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, overseas. I would like to or you may end up stuck London EC1R 3AU. make contact with Atari in mid-air. clubs in England to swap I have several favourite Dear Sir, me, using the address programs and ideas. Any programs that I play I have a little problem. listed later in this letter. interested people or clubs regularly to improve my Everyone probably knows I own a 48k Spectrum can contact me through scores, so let me know Thor's game Jack and the and I would like to write C&VG. I am a student in how you other readers of Beanstalk. My problem is Ito an English Spectrum the Royal Australian Air C&VG fare on games like can't get through the user. Anyone who wants Force, currently studying Decathlon, Summer second screen. I have to write to me should use electronics with emphasis Games, Trains and tried nearly everything, this address: on microprocessors, and Bannercatch. but I just can't climb any Arild Bjd rk have done several I hope to hear from of the bricks at the bottom. 5840 HERMANSVERK modifications to my 1050 British Atari Clubs soon! If anyone knows what I NORWAY disc drive and 800XL Steven Lomas, should do to get through At last I want to say computer which I would Victoria, that screen, please write to something about C&VG. I like to share with others. Australia. hoso noonle to get in touch Hermansverk, Please drop us a line at: Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. "


"MOON CRESTA  The Classic  MOON CRESTA, manufactured under exclusive licence from Nichibutsu INCENTIVE (0734)591678 "


"3 IF YO TGREMI WH ELSAM STOA SAFEBREAKER O MONTY IS PINNOCENT SWAG At the dead of night Sam leaves his lair and makes for the large houses where, with the aid of some everyday tools and a good measure of cunning, there are wealth and riches for his delight (not to mention his pocket). It couldn't be easier... sneak into the house, find the safe; light the blue touch paper and stand well back. Then out into the night with the ill-gotten gains! But Sam has reckoned without one or two adversaries who are more than a little determined to get the better of him... A cry of national outrage! Poor Monty banished for life amongst murderers, arsonists, the lowest of the low. Fear not, this Mole is innocent, and plans are in hand to rescue your Superhero. Who is the mysterious masked rodent willing to challenge death for his lifelong friend? What are the evil forces working in Scudmore Prison? OTHER GREAT TITLES FROM GREMLIN: Suicide Express CBM 64 $7.95 Monty Mole CBM 64 $7.95 Spectrum 48k .95 Potty Pigeon CBM 64 .95 Spectrum 48k .95 "


"YOU'VE NOT GOT THE ILINS, YOU DON'T KNOW JAT YOU'RE MISSING! BEAVER BOB Ex serviceman Gilbert Gumphrey, drummed out of the Army in 1946 because of his acute short-sightedness has been struggling to hold down his job as a store detective for the last thirty nine years. But things are hotting up for Gilbert, known to all as \"Grumpy\". Now that times are becoming harder and staff made redundant, he has to perform all kinds of tasks; not only catching thieves, but caging the gorilla and tidying the warehouse, otherwise he might find himself surplus to requirements too! Can Gilbert hang onto his job? You can help him, but be warned--this is no ordinary department store! 1 TROUBLEI -GRUMPY GUMPHREY SUPERSTELT BEAVER I BOB 6:01 Poor Bob! All he wants is to lead a quiet life and build his dams. But the peace is soon shattered when the local townsfolk find their taps running dry. Bob's dams are plainly to blame so as soon as he completes one, the locals blow it up! And that isn't the end of Bob's troubles either, for there are sharks, crocodiles and all manner of underwater hazards for him to negotiate. Help Bob in his never ending struggle to build his dams and avoid the predators that lurk in the deep. Io Canal All titles available for Spectrum 48k .95 For amazing graphics and outstanding sound effects run a gremlin through your micro. Gremlin Gremlin Graphics, Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Telephone: (0742) 753423 Graphics "


"THERE'S SOMETHING NASTY LURKING INSIDE YOUR 64 CIRCUIT TAPES A chance to get to the heart of the computer-enter the world of the microchip and find it to be all that you'd imagined and then a bit more-the wierdest fantasy that the human mind and hi-technology could combine to create. Engage in an amazing battle encounter with the evilest creatures of the circultworld, as you patrol the full size microprocessor board, .95 protecting your home areas from the micronasties. An allen round every corner, a horror under every byte. Travel the wires, finger on the button in a line 'em up, shoot 'em down extravaganza as you not only attempt to outmatch your computer but its wierd collection of Inhabitants as well. Alligata Software Ltd 1 Orange Street, Sheffield 51 40W Tel: (0742) 755796 Send for full colour product brochure (enclose a stamp) Software Ltd "


"G.A.M.ES NEWS to CHIPS COMPLETE ELAN MENU ETHIOPIA APPEAL! Now that Enterprise's graphics Nightmare Night will be their chip is working, the long-awaited first Adventure game, with the Elan games computer should be sound offering clues as to what's making its appearance in your going on, while Space Convoy local shops now. entails acting as master of the The  machine was fleet, searching planets for originally announced in various materials. Heart Attack September 1983 and, after subsepromises to be a good laugh quent announcements in April you are supposed to shrink to the and September of 1984, Entersize of a microbe before being prise admitted at the Personal attacked by various things in the Computer World show in bloodstream. September that the machine As if this weren't enough, you wouldn't be ready until after are also responsible for repairing Christmas. the heart and controlling other The finished result should be a diseases in the body, too. main competitor to MSX Once you've recovered from all machines, with most of the initial this exhaustion, you could try out software coming from Quicksilva. Quicksilva's bestsellers, which By March, Intelligent Software they are converting for use on the will have launched a dozen Elan (otherwise rudely known as programs and a further 18 will \"The Flan\"). appear from other companies, The Basic for the machine will with prices expected to be come on a 16k cartridge and is around  a go. said to be faster than that of the One such game is Intelligent's CBM64 and Spectrum, although a Jungle Jim, a maze game (all little slower than the BBC's. Also, Intelligent's games are written in the ROM has been increased to machine code). 48k. Based around a macho Tarzan The fact that the Elan has type, whose ladyfriend is networking capability should be captured by headhunters, the a great source of fun and games. game is said to be quite grue Already, a dungeons and dragons some. \"People who like tasteless game is being developed that can things would really enjoy it,\" said network up to 32 different players Keith Elliot, Intelligent's software in various parts of the country editor. watch this spot. C&VG is appealing to all those with a social conscience to think about the crisis in central Africa, where famine continues to threaten many thousands of people. The famine is spreading in large numbers — not just in Ethiopia, but in surrounding countries too. We're asking you, our readers, to send us any (unpirated) software you no longer want which we can use to raise money for those people. We're also looking for cash donations, as well as your ideas on raising further money. So look through your cupboards and under the bed. Take a scrabble through the dust and see what you can find. FACELIFT FOR ATARI Having set up shop at Atari, where 10% of head office employees are ex-Commodore people formerly caught up in the notorious 1984 shake-up, owner Jack Tramiel is making soothing noises to the British home market. In the process of raising a cool $150,000 to rejuvenate Atari, Tramiel founder and former head of Commodore says he will do for Atari what he did for the latter. As you'll no doubt remember, he slashed the price of the 800XL from  to  in time for Christmas, declaring: \"We're producing for the masses, not for the classes. A re-launch of the XL range is planned for next month, and this will be followed by Atari's first business machines. A , 16 bit offering will be unleashed in the summer with a 32 bit version following on in the autumn. Despite this, Tramiel remains adamant that he will be faithful to the games market and intends much of the new Atari software to be written in the UK. On the subject of Atarisoft, though, he wasn't so convincing. "


"G:AM:E:S N:E:W:S SPECTRUM GOES FOR A HIKE! Statesoft freeze-up: The highly successful Backpacker's Guide to the Universe, a three part graphical Adventure, is to be followed up by a new and improved version for the Amstrad computer. snowball avalanches, which come Backpacker's has already sold almost 30,000 copies in rushing out of nowhere to bury you its first month on sale for the Spectrum. Fantasy alive. Software are confident that the Amstrad game will be a Statesoft, the company that Statesoft are also releasing al great improvement. Paul Dyer, director of Fantasy launched the best selling American Commodore 64 version of the Software, said of the Spectrum, \"We couldn't display game Boulderdash, have a chilly Fantastie BBC game Frak, written everything we wanted on the screen and added. more advanced facilities will give us lots of W summer in store for computer by Aardvark Software. Other Amstrad's more advanced Tac addicts with their newest game Statesoft conversions are Bristles scope for improving and changing Backpacker's.\" leicle Works. for the Spectrum and Icicle Works Unfortunately, the game won't be available for the Yeah ... I know, yet another for the MSX computers and the Commodore 64 in the foreseeable future. \"The competi. damn Pengo game. But, apparently, * Spectrum. tion is too tough. You have to give everything you have to Icicle Works promises to be an ses to be an Amherrams should be succeed in the Commodore market, Somey were all the programs should original and successful game in the available from the beginning of willing to do,\" claimed Dyer. The first part of the Backpacker's Guide to the mould of its forerunner BoulderFebruary, costing .95 for the dash. Spectrum and .95 for the Universe will be on sale towards the beginning of March and will cost .50. Your task in the game is to Commodore. burrow through ice floes in search of the pieces of a dismantled machine. On your travels, you'll have to keep an eye out for DESIGNER OF THE MONTH NAME: Hanan Samara BORN: Bagdad, 1955 GOOD CLEAN FUN! At last an Adventure game that entails running off with somebody's clothes! But things aren't as kinky as they sound and this book/software package promises a good (clean) laugh for those with a wicked sense of humour. Written by author and playwright, Marc Peirson, The White Feather Cloak is based around a poem involving the cloak's theft. The story involves two gnomes, Borin the Bold and Grimble. Grimble runs off with the king's white feather cloak while beastly Borin gives chase. He does get kidnapped en route, but, undeterred, he finally retrieves the thing and runs off, thinking he's killed Grimble. Not a chance! Grimble isn't dead and he comes back to seek revenge. He kidnaps Borin, holds him to ransom for the cloak and then the quest to release poor Borin begins. Produced by London publishers Dorling Kindersley. this package should be around , initially for the Spectrum 48k and later the CBM 64 and Amstrad. GAMES: Special Delivery, Jinn Jenie and Spectrum Boulder Dash conversion Female games programmers are thinner on the ground than female games players. Apart from Carol Shaw at Activision, the only active female programmer we've discovered is Hanan Samara, the brains behind such games as Special Delivery and the recently released Jinn Jenie for the CBM 64. Hanan's background is in maths and operations research but now she runs her own software company called Dalali Software. Hanan came to England from Bagdad in It's gradually becoming more like the 1970 and her most recent job was with movie business. You need a graphic Thorn EMI where she worked for over artist, sound experts and a couple of two years before leaving to start her own programmers to create a game these business. days. You've really got to get your act As well as bringing out Jinn Jenie, together in order to succeed.\" which is being marketed by Micromega, Favourite Food: Anything Arabic, Hanan has worked on the Spectrum Favourite Drink: Scotch and coke. Boulder Dash conversion which we've Favourite TV Programme: I don't really already raved about in earlier issues. get much time to watch TV. But I really Hanan is an Atari fan and likes to like cartoons! program on that machine Jinn Jenie Favourite Computer Game: Boulder was originally written for the Atari. Dash. She is quietly confident about the next Countries Visited: Middle East, USA, year. \"The games industry is growing up. Europe. 14 "


"ATARI ATARI 400, 600, 800, 800 XL DID YOU GET AN ATARI FOR XMAS? | RECORDMANIA 12.99 Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY The greatest biggest and best Atari library on the market. An ideal present for old and new Atari owners MIDLANDS GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over 2 years ago, first conceived the idea of a software library Now boasting over 900 titles on disc, cassette and Ram games, business, educational and utilities. Often purchasing popular programmers in multiples of 5 or 6 to give all our members a fair change. Always adding approximately 40 new programmes monthly Over 1,000 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany. Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast, efficient and friendly service. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities. [2.99 (2.99 12.99 [2.99 13.99 39 13.99 MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos, Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programmes are originals with full documentation LE3.99 1399 15.99 [5.99 12.99 [2.99 DAVYGATE CENTRE YORK Tel: (0904) 33993 SCOOP PURCHASE!!! Cybertron Mission Micro Power Software at amazing prices! Ghouls Micro Power Minimum order 2 games. Post & Felix Infactory Micro Power Packing FREE! Please state BBC alternatives. Send cheque or P.O. Asteroid Storm Program Power payable to 'RECORDMANIA'. Birdie Barrage Computasolve Nemesis Program Power Allow 7 days for delivery. Physics Porgram Power Space Jailer Program Power SPECTRUM Tablesums Griff Numberfun-Griff The Pyramid Fantasy........... Get Set Griffin Beaky & The Egg Snatchers Fantasy Fairshare Griffin Manic Miner Buy Byte... (2.99 Wordspel Griffit . Trader-Paal.......... Mathskills il Grill The Island Crystal Word Games Griffin Bug Blaster Crystal Beeb Art Quicksilve... Hall of Things Crystal.... ..[299 BBC Music Processor Quicksilva... Rommels Revenge Crystal Demon Decorator Program Power... The Dungeon Master Crystal 12.99 The W ard Guicksilve ..... ...... It's The Woolurl Crystal Caveman Adventure Program Power Bugaboo The Fles Quicksilve...... Pool Buy Byte...... Zarm Program Powe... Nemesis Program Power Invincible Island Richard Shepard Filer Program Power Transylvanian Tower Richard Sheperd Al five Constellation Micro Power Super Spy Richard Sheperd for 15 Cosmic Combat Micro Power.. Ship of the Line Richard Sheperd or [1.50 Draughts Micro Power... Everest Ascent Richard Sheperd Ogles Games Machine Mined Out Guicksilva The Generators Quicksilva Super Sail-Games Machine The Stolen Lamp Lothar 30 Strategy Quicksilve.. 12.49 Protector Quicki Games Designer-Software 16.99 Mind Out Quicki The Ward Quicksilva COMMODORE 64 Su-Games Machine 12.99 VIC 20 Fb WandMachine Fly Catcher-Abra On Warriors Purple Turtles Quicksilva 12.99 Nosfera -Terma Sting 54 Quicksi. Android Attack Abasco Aarh Condor Games Machine 12.99 Meter Blaster Terminal Swoop Micro Power 12.99 Terminal invaders Terminal Triple Tournament Terminal [2.99 Get Lost Terminal Colossus Chess 20 COS.... Chess Bug Byte Ring of Power Quick Scramble Bog Byte The Evil Dead Palace Trader Goodness Gracious Beyond ..[2.99 Patel Power Pia.... Beaky & Egg Snatchers Fantasy ..[2.99 Magic Mirror Terminal The Pyramid Fantasy............ (2.99 Squish Palace.. . Transylvanian Town Richard Shepard (2.09 Bricks Palace Super Spy Richard Sheperd. . 12.99 Vu Plode Abrasca. TEXAS TI-99/4A 12.99 12 99 [2.99 1 UK TI SOYSTICK 10 .95 12.99 12.99 [299 12.99 12.99 12.99 12:49 INTRIGUE, your No. 1 UK TI Software House, now offer you the: QUICKSHOT I JOYSTICK to plug into your TI and play (no interface needed). .95 plus 75p P&P per joystick NEW RELEASES INTRIGUE PENTATHLON (ext basic) .95 QUASIMODO HELP (ext basic) .95 SNOUT OF SPOUT text basic) .95 COMING SOON SHUTTLE ATTAK (ext basic) .95 Space Flight Simulation with Take Off From Earth and Docking in Space. PANIC next fully animated basic adventure. INTRIGUE PENTATHLON in basic. We mail order first class same day. Phone your Access orders now. Send cheque/P.O. to: VINTRIGUE S.A.E. + 5Op for 12 page catalogue with 1 SOFTWARE screen pictures, Trade enquiries welcome. Cranbrook Road, Tenterden, Kent TN3060 Tel: 05806 4726 299 12.99 ..(2.49 1249 ZOOMSOFT COMPUTER SOFTWARE SPECIALISTS ATARI 400/800/XL ATARI 400/800/XL COMMODORE 64 ROM disk COSS 24.95 79.95 COMMODORE 64 Pacman Pole Position Zork Zark L Zark Starcross 14.95 11.95 Talelink Frogger Bert Rally Speedway Centipede Jungle Home Lode Runner Mask of the Sun Star Bowl Football Star League Baseball 1425 11.95 11.95 9.95 29.95 1595 28.75 38319 Dendine 11.95 Mask of the Sun 28.95 Donkey Kong Graphics Art Department Donkey Kong Arcade Construction Set 29.95 Boulder Dash 47.95 Flip Flop Pole Position Dancing Feats music will 21.55 Ate Challenge Roberto 14.95 Combat Leader 14.95 Forbidden Forest 50 Mission Crush 33.95 Dig Dug Fooyan Mier 0429er Rails West 18.95 Flight Simulator 37.95 Tigers in the Snow 14.95 SAM Ispeechi BC's Ouest for Tyres 41.95 Battle for Normandy 14.95 PM Animator 25 95 Pitfall Combat Leader 14.95 Decathlon Dark Crystal 24.95 Knights of the Desert 14.95 Space Shuttle 9.99 24.95 Night Mission Pinball Shams US Double 19.75 disk Spelunker Jetboot Jack... 7.95 Sparta Dos 39.95 Lode Runner.... 12.95 Basic Debugger... Davids Midnight Magic ACE Enhance 25.95 Basic Commander... 7.95 Operation Whirlwind 11.95 Fort Apocalypse 8.45 12.55 Data Manager 34.95 Raid on Bungaling Bay. 9.95 12.95 10.95 39.95 Choplifter ..12.95 Drebs 8.45 12 55 Data Perfect ..73.75 Hard Hat Mack Claim Jumger... 9.95 39.95 Realm of Impossibility 12.95 Protector Home Word 48.95 Archon.. 14.95 Shadow World 9.95 Basic XL... ..66.95 Murder on the Zindereul 11.95 Slime 995 12.95 ACTION 66.95 One on One 9.95 12.95 Zeppelin 10.95 72.90 MULE 14.95 Pharoahs Curse 10.95 Mac 55 with OSAL ..57.95 Pitstop 11 95 Bruce Lee 12.55 Atari 850 Interface Dragon Riders of Pern Dallas Ouest The Protect write to both sides of diski 9.95 Jumpman 8.95 Solo Flight 1260 Disk Collector Catalogue disks Imgossible Mission 8.95 11.95 Spitfire Ace Flyer For 14.95 Nate Commander ATARI AND COMMODORE Jetboot Jack PROGRAMMERS Superbase 64 84.95 Me Rabat Flight Simulator L Original games and programs Boulder Dash 1495 wanted for the Atari and Commodore 64 Attack of the Mutant Camel 8.25 home computers. Top royalties paid. We M er Type ROM Computer War Master Type 32.75 For further information please write or All activision and U.S. Gold disk cassies in stock Chostbusters 1495 telephone ZOOMSOFT Plus 100's more titles available. Send S.A.E. for free catalogue or telephone 01-723 0562 between 10am and 7pm. All cheques. 46 HUNTSWORTH MEWS, LONDON NW1 DR P/O made payable to Zoomsoft. 12.55 15 "


"G.A.M.ES NEWS go I.N.B.R.L.E.F PSYCHEDELIC FREAK OUT, MAN! Creating moving patterns on You can create the most your telly screen to match your beautiful patterns in 121 colours favourite music is the latest that are guaranteed to win over brainwave from Jeff Minter, Pink all those micro-hating people Floyd fan and owner of out there. Basically, you Llamasoft. program the shapes to match Psychedelia, as it has been your favourite music and the end christened, is a light synthesiser result reminds you of a once for the CBM64, Vic 20 and much-used phrase \"hearing CBM 16. The CBM64 version is colours and seeing sounds\". more expensive at .50, while Just store the shapes and their the other two are . It consists colours and, if your habits are of a set of instructions that you similar to Minter's, you can even use with your micro, but if this get flashing llamas and CND sounds like a lot, don't be signs. deceived. The program looks like Minter himself sees it as the being one of the greatest best way to get your own light entertainment programs ever show off the ground. \"A flippin' and it must be only a matter of baby could sit there with a time before hordes of people joystick and still make copy Minter's idea. something nice out of it,\" he Even born cynics will be says. impressed I was. In fact, I went Conversions for the Amstrad, off and raved about it for Spectrum and Atari will be out WEEKS... any day now. As usual, lots of new games are out for the Commodore 64, with some being available on other machines too. Knightmare and Captain Starlight, both .99, are out from Romik, with Knightmare featuring Sir Legless, the court alcoholic, and the evil Anthrax (a wizard, not an asthma cure). Tymac's Gandalf the Sorcerer comes on disc for .95 or tape for .95, and Supersoft's Kami-Kaze, centred around a public loo in Cleethorpes, is .95. The makers promise it isn't obscene. On an entirely different note, for the disco freaks among you, is Break Fever from Interceptor Micros, based around a disco dancing competition, as well as Big Ben, a complicated Adventure game. Both are . Spectrum offerings this month include Pitfall II at .99 and Beamrider at .99, both from Activision, while Lazy Jones, a great success on the CBM64, has been made available for the Spectrum by Terminal Software. PLAY FOR LIFE COLECO ARE LEAVING Traditional playthings that encourage creativity and love for all life\" are the name of the game as far as Play for Life is concerned. If this sounds rather twee, why not stand back and ask yourself if you really feel fulfilled zapping aliens all the time. Play for Life is an organisation which numbers the Peace Pledge Union and Ecology Party among its members. It offers computer games among its wares but, unlike the norm, these are based on co-operation rather than competition. Mostly for the CBM64, Spectrum and BBC, some let you create pictures or music and titles include Musicmaker and The Snowman, by Raymond Briggs. The company's catalogue, pitched at people aged between five and 12, makes great reading with lots of original and old fashioned things like paper aeroplane pads that give instructions for eight paper planes. Other things include an origami pad, tiddlywinks, Fun with Magnets, Stilts and even the Fish and Bead Puzzle. Contact Play for Life at 31B Ipswich Road, Norwich NR2 2LN (Tel: 0603 505947). The gradual demise of the dedicated video-game machine continues with the announcement that Coleco manufacturers of the ColecoVision video-game machine and the Coleco Adam computer have decided to pull out of this country. There should still be some software about as the Hyde Park Clothing Company is reported to have taken delivery of 160,000 games cartridges and 40,000 consoles. Presumably they will be able to supply off the peg games! But never fear. Those of you with Atari VCS machines languishing under your beds will be able to enter a very special software competition in this issue of C&VG. Just turn to page 91. Lazy's behaviour is pretty terminal too. The laziest shirker in the hotel business, he plays games in the 18 hotel rooms instead of cleaning them. Neat, eh? The game will set you back .95 and will soon be released on Amstrad and MSX machines too. At last! Software for the QL continues to trickle out, this time in the form of OL Chess on microdrive for .95. Psion have also been busy, getting out Saloon Sally, this time for the BBC, a cowboy-style saloon brawl, and Statix. Both are .95. CBM16 games now out include Flight Zero One Five, .95 from Craig Communications (their follow-up to Flight 015 for the Vic 20). and Anirog's Skramble, a space game also available for the Plus 4, for .95. MSX fans take note Toshiba's HX10 micro has dropped from.95 to .95, and a three-year extended guarantee is being offered on all purchases until the end of March. MSX games from Quicksilva include Games Designer, Ant Attack, The Snowman, Bugaboo and Fred, all conversions from the CBM64 and Spectrum STOP PRESS Despite Christmas rumours that Sinclair's Sir Clive Sinclair and Acorn's Chris Curry have been beating the stuffing out of each other in Cambridge wine bars, trusted C&VG spies report that the pair have since been jollying it up together at one or two parties and generally behaving like the best of friends. Aaaaah! 16 "


"SuPeriencethe thrill of ForLC One T120LorRacing POLE. ATARI POSUUN! EAT AT 5 SPEED This genuine reproduction of one of the worlds most popular arcade classics gives you the chance to experience the thrill of Formula One motor racing! Enter the practice ** sessions. Race against the clock to quality. Dice with other drivers for the lead. Only your skill and endurance see you to the chequered flag first! U.S. CASSETTE .95 DISK .95 GOLD: Premier Arcades from Pa answer "


"Now Amstrad gives you over  to play with. Ansoft AnsOfL Ansoft Thus EASI-AMSWORD FOZ ANIMAL VEGETABLE MINERAL HANG Computer word processor Software over  value Roland out BRIDGE-IT SOFT the Ropes Y Aren uru mot OH MUMMY Ansoft AMOR The. ASO AMO SULTAN'S MAZE Galactiche Which Way Now 88888888DEERE when purchasing an AMSTRAD CPC464 Roland in the Caves GEM SOFTWARE E DUST SOFTWARE Bourne Educational software "


"complete with green screen VDU (GT64) $349 complete with colour monitor (CTM640) SCORE 7 LIVES Join in the fun. Our CPC 464 User Club is a must for all owners. As a member, you'll be the first to know about the additions to the CPC4641 range. Hardware and software. complete We'll provide you with your own with privilege card and send you free, a monitor year's subscription to the Amstrad datacorder User magazine packed with programs, features and information. You can enter competitions for valuable prizes and keep up with all the latest Amstrad developments. And with the free software pack, we think that's pretty good for starters. OP The OFFICIAL Mer Magazine First issue 464 sale on general S AMSTRAD user CPC 464 MEMBERSHIP NUMBER REGISTERED NAME Free software worth over  is revision for exams, cataloguing and the name of the game. budgeting. PC484 Along with your new CPC 464 And it comes complete and ready(colour monitor or green screen to-go. VDU) you'll receive a software starter pack of 12 (yes, twelve) Amsoft. A ton of software. cassettes absolutely free. There's something for everyone. Yes. Now there are over 100 titles From Roland-on-the-Ropes to Easi from Amsoft and independent pubAmsword word processing. lishers. And the list is still growing. That's one good reason for making Arcade games, educational proAmstrad's CPC 464 your new home grams and business applications computer they're all designed to make the most of the CPC 464's impressive graphics, stereo sound and processing abilities. And with Amstrad's speedloading User club capability, even complex programs can be loaded quickly. The optional disc system will load a game in around 6 seconds. When you feel the need to upgrade EXPIRY DATE your Amstrad system to disc drive, just send your favourite Amsoft cassettes to us and we'll send you back CPC 464 green screen VDU (GT64) the same Amsoft proHere are the others. grams on Amsoft disc for just .95 The CPC 464 comes complete with per cassette, the price of a blank disc. ONE GREAT IDEA AFTER ANOTHER per cassette, the price on its own colour monitor or green BOOTS COMET Currys Dlxons screen VDU and built-in cassette data recorder. (Optional disc drives Greens John Menzies RUMBELOWS spectrum are now available with CP/M* and AND OTHER DR. LOGO* supplied as standard.) WHSMITH WIGFALLS WOOLWORTH COMPUTER It has a typewriter-style keyboard STORES and numeric keypad. 64K of RAM, *CP/M and DR LOGO are Trade Marks of Digital Research 32K of ROM and a very fast extended I'd like to know more about the exciting CPC 464 complete computer system. BASIC with real time features. Please send me literature right away. NAME And it costs a great deal less than ADDRESS the price of a comparable system. The CPC 464 can handle the trickiest computer games (if you can), To: Amstrad Consumer Electronics PLC, Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF. PRICES CORRECT AT TIME OF GOING TO PRESS. NOT ALL STORES STOCK ALL PRODUCTS. CVG 385 NOT TRANSFERANS SE MEMBERSHIP CONDITIONS FOR TERMS OF USE POSTCODE "


"WITAT "


"Dear B Welcome to the second instal gently with a dry cotton bud. Also, get a fresh cartridge and see if you ment of C&VG a very own have any joy. If not, there's obviously something wrong and agona col. goat you are entitled to a replacement POKEs are painful or your or a refund from the place you bought your drive. program wants to RUN. If you went through a shop, take before &t can walk, you need back the drive and explain the situation. If you ordered through advice from Bug Hunter. mail order straight from Sir Clive then there's no alternative you'll Write now, before a's too late. just have to pack it up and send it to Cambridge with a letter S Ward from Sheffield has around explaining what's happened. Then, 100 Spectrum games on cassette and just wait. And wait. would like to make back-up copies. Dear BH, He wants to know the best program to buy which will let him do this. Could you help me? I have written a There's nothing wrong in making a game and want to get it published back-up of a tape, Mr Ward. It's yours but I don't know whether I need to you've paid for that cassette and have copyright on the game before submitting it. If I do, how do I go you can do what you want with it. Except, of course, make a profit from about getting it? G Thompson someone else's hard work by giving away or selling any back-ups that you You already have copyright. It's make. your game so you have the right to Because of this, most software commake copies of it which is what panies protect their games with copyright means. routines in the program that make If someone looks at your game them hard to copy. No method is and then copies the idea, though, 100% secure, though, and in the it's not the same as them copying classified ads of most micro mags the actual program that you wrote. you'll find programs advertised that The whole area of copyright law allow you to make copies of your softis rather complicated, so the best ware or convert it to run on disc or thing to do before you send off microdrive, depending on what your pride and joy to a software micro you have company is to get some advice There are lots of ways of protecting from your local Citizens' Advice programs, so I suggest that you call a Bureau. couple of these advertisers and ask Dear BH, specifically whether their product I have an old Vic cassette recorder will copy the games that you have. As for your question of storing an which I use with my new index to all your games in the comCommodore 64. puter and being able to search that I have recently bought Beach list for a particular game, you'll need Head, Son of Blagger and Trallie either microdrives or discs to do this. Wallie but they don't load. I heard Cassette based storage and indexing on a TV programme that some old is just too slow. cassette recorders may not work, so can I get a refund on the software or will I have to buy a new cassette Dear BH, recorder? Recently I purchased an Interface 1 Robert Russell and microdrive for my Spectrum. At It's not the fault of the software first programs loaded quickly and companies that these games won't smoothly. Nothing has been load, so I'm afraid that there's tampered with and no coffee has nothing to make them give you a been spilt into the slot but I can no refund on the games. longer save/load/verify programs. If you've only had the recorder Usually, the drive just spins for for around a year or two, you could about five minutes and then stops. complain to Commodore that this is What can I do? an unreasonable time for one of David Frost their products to last. Failing this, Problems with early versions of the it looks like you're going to have to Microdrive are quite common. Try ask Santa for a new cassette I cleaning the head of your drive recorder next year. Here's the last of our batch of legal letters, which should cover some of the problems that you may be having with that Christmas micro. KM Brown bought a Vic starter pack at Christmas 1983. There was a problem with the screen, so he returned it to his local Lasky's, where it was bought. Three months later the motor drive gave in. The micro was exchanged again but the wrong leads were in the box. Then, the cassette recorder failed and the power pack didn't work. Mr Brown has now returned his micro four times. Can I exchange it. he asks, for a different make? The shop is only willing to do a straight exchange. It's useful to remember that if you buy something in a shop and that product goes wrong, it is the shop's responsibility and not the manufacturer's. So any shop that tells you \"it's not our problem\" is mistaken. Meanwhile, what can Mr Brown do? Well, if you take a faulty micro back to the shop for the first time, you are entitled by law to a new micro (the same model) or your money back. You do NOT have to have it repaired or be given a credit note. If you choose to have a replacement machine and this, too goes wrong. you are only entitled to replacements from then on. You have given up your right to a refund. Therefore, the shop is correct in offering to replace the faulty machines. You could always try writing to the boss of Commodore, asking whether the average Vic needs replacing four times before a good one is found! Dear BH, Is it possible to get Mode 7 on an Electron so that I can run a modem? John Whitson The Electron doesn't have the necessary chips to give a Mode 7 teletext display like the BBC micro. At the last PCW show, Sir Computers of Cardiff had a prototype Mode 7 adaptor for the Elk which, coupled with an RS232 interface, would let you drive a modem. If you're mainly interested in communicating, it may be cheaper to get a 16k Spectrum and a VTX5000 modem which will get you into Prestel, Micronet and more, including my own VISA bulletin board on 01-958 7098. 21 "


"A PERFECT COUPLE COMMODORE New Commodore Machines Just like ham and eggs and peaches and cream, Commodore User is the perfect companion for your 64 or Vic 20. Every month Commodore User is packed full of the latest new games reviews, special projects and business computing, plus the latest software charts, Tommy's Tips for your tricky computer problems, and much much more. Commodore User, the perfect magazine for Commodore owners, at your newsagent on the first of every month. All for only 85p. THE SX DISK GAMES COMMODORE user Nothing will affect you (and your school or college) more than... A TAX ON THE PRESS IS A TAX ON YOU computers We'll send you a sample copy of EDUCATIONAL COMPUTING for just .00 — write to Valerie Day EDUCATIONAL COMPUTING Durrant House 8 Herbal Hill London ECI SEJ There are strong reasons to believe the Chancellor of the Exchequer is planning to impose VAT on your magazine. Such a move would se turn the clock back 130 years the last tax on the Press was repealed in 1855. Since then 'No tax on knowledge has been a principle agreed by all Governments, even in the darkest days of war. A free Press is a tax-free Press. No Government should be given the power to impose financial pressure on a Press it may not like. Write to your MP insisting that he says 'NO' to any tax on reading. EDUCATIONAL Checues made payable to EDUCATIONAL COMPUTING) "


"sofbeve R-E.V.I.E.W.S Graphics: Are they really as mind-blowing as the adverts say they are? Does the screen scroll effectively? Do those aliens really leap out of the screen at you? This is how this category is judged? REALTIME 7-SOFTWARE STARSTRIKE ame o ZX SPECTRUM 48K SINCLAIR KEMPSTON AND CURSOH JOYSTICK COMPATIBLE STARSTRIKE MACHINE: Spectrum/ keyboard or joystick SUPPLIER: Realtime PRICE: .95 Realtime's Starstrike is simply the best translation of the Star Warsstyle arcade game seen on the Spectrum with some new twists. It's a no-holds-barred CORE 0000100 space shoot out with GREEN excellent graphics and a playability rating that goes off C&VG's scale — well it does if you're a fan of the arcade machine like me! The scenario for the game goes like this. You are the pilot of a Starstrike spacefighter on a do-or-die mission to destroy the massive bases of an alien race known only as The Outsiders. These bases inside hollowed out moons are protected by squadrons of Outsider fighters — and the surface of the huge moons are covered in laser towers and other defence systems. The only way to destroy the bases is to fly down the equatorial trench and fire a well-aimed shot into the SCORE 0007100 SCORE 0007100 reactor chamber. Your Starstrike fighter is 01 SELLOM 01 SELLOW armed with lasers and protected by force shields — but these are depleted by enemy fire or collisions with the catwalks which span the trench. A read-out on screen the game. You get a brief where he is being cooked and tells you the condition of pause in the action between FATTY HENRY dropping them on the raging these shields — if it reaches screens as a battle-computer flames below. red, then you're in big trouble. read-out flashes up telling you MACHINE: Vic 20/ joystick There are other hazards — If you manage to dodge what's going to happen next. SUPPLIER: Software such as spinning food, oven through the catwalks and A pause that you need at the Projects foam and the restaurant's pet avoid enemy laser fire without higher levels! PRICE: .95 dog, Fat Henry, who is partial being wiped out then you get If you've ever wanted one Software Projects to a bit of squid. Survive 10 a crack at the reactor. This is of those Star Wars arcade continue to support the ovens and you escape being actually more difficult than games at home then you'll ageing Vic-20 with a eaten! the arcade machine version, love Starstrike. It's a brilliant range of newies which An original theme and fairly believe me! game destined to become a includes Fatty Henry. playable although the If you destroy the base, you classic — and a C&VG Hall of You play the part of an graphics could be slightly progress to the next difficulty Fame game! octopus destined to become better. level where different a tasty dish for some features, like the big laser  Graphics executive diner in a top  Graphics towers, appear. Sound restaurant. You have to help  Sound Starstrike's 3D vector-style Value 10 him avoid that fate by collect Value line graphics are excellent Playability 10 ing drips of condensation  Playability and so is the presentation of from the roof of the pan 10 "


"FVIEWS DO OOO and how he does this is up to school safe before it comes cartoon-style voice bubbles 2 CADCAM WARRIOR him. to the attention of the which appear as the various MACHINE: CBM 64 He must somehow remove headmaster. characters \"speak\". SUPPLIER: Taskset everything, with some routes The combination of the Poor old Eric really has a being short cuts and others a safe consists of four letters hard time at school. And you PRICE: .95/.95 total disaster. Interestingly, known to the headmaster and really get into the character This brilliant game from he has a habit of disapnearing the masters. To get the as you play. Each of the IS on OM down holes, but you can combination, Eric has to first masters, and Eric's school64 and is based around a always find him, as he is the hit all the school shields friends, have their own Computer Aided Design only obiect to look like a bia hanging around on the walls characteristics too. You learn (CAD) exhibition which teddy bear of various rooms and set about them as you play! goes wrong. If he isn't careful, he lies them flashing. This is more A nice touch is the feature TOU I have to beat 8,192 down and gets shot at. but difficult than it sounds. You which enables you to change hostile screens to win the day he's quite a good shot himself have to work out different the names of Eric's mates and this could take some if you get a decent joystick strategies for different and the teachers to suit time. So you'll have to be All in all, Cadcam Warrior is shields. yourself. You can populate dedicated but it's fun and fast, very playable and even Once you've got all the the game with all your least very addictive. In fact, for moreish rare qualities for shields flashing, the masters favourite teachers and your .95 (cassette) or .95 games these days. become strangely disbest mates. You can also (disc), you could have orientated knock them make yourself the hero! yourself quite a bargain.  Graphics over and they'll reveal their The graphics and The graphics are extremely  Sound part of the code. All except animation are terrific and the good and very clear.  Value the history master that is who sound isn't bad either. reminding you a bit of the  Playability has to be persuaded in a Overall, School Daze is an drawings architects are entertaining and amusing supposed to do all day. The game. Well worth the asking sound is also unusual and price — but don't let it stop convincing a real change you doing your homework! from the run-of-the-mill, zapbang-blast style sound effects.  Graphics The idea is that our  Sound  Value environment is increasingly  Playability planned and constructed with and by machines, and so it is up to the software and operating systems of those LABYRINTH same machines to interpret different fashion which you'll the rules by which we want to SCHOOL DAZE have to find out for yourself. MACHINE: BBC live. Once you've got all the SUPPLIER: Acornsoft Once you've loaded the MACHINE: Spectrum/key letters, you still have to work PRICE: .99 tape, you press FIRE to start, board or joystick out the combination — and Several companies in the before getting pursued by SUPPLIER: Microsphere get to the safe in the staff software market have what look like giant sponges PRICE: .95 room! consistently produced and Sony Walkman head They say school days While Eric attempts to get first class software over phones. are the happiest of his school report, the life of the past few years. The action always give you your life. Well, that the school continues Acornsoft at one time something different and you may be so but what independently. Eric has to go could be included in this elite can use the keyboards or a I know for sure is that to lessons too — which intergroup. Then, inexplicably, the joystick School Daze is the most rupts his quest. If he isn't in quality of their games went The story itself centres original and entertaining the right place at the right downhill. around the 25th CADCAM game to be released for any time he gets lines! Over But Acornsoft seem to be International Show, where the age. Just watching the demo 10,000 lines and Eric is back to their old winning ways guys from a company called is like viewing a whole series expelled. with their newest release of Enviro UK have booked most of Grange Hill at one sitting! The other characters in the games. Their most recent, of the first floor's space. And that should give you a game like The Swot, The Labyrinth, is no exception. The game pitches you clue to what the game is all Bully and Angelface also Although it's a maze game, directly against the design about. It's set in a typical give Eric a hard time. They with a strong influence of machine, and you control the school, with typical pupils and attempt to hinder the school with typical pupils and attempt to hinder his quest for Berzerk, it loses none of its droid MAD-2, whose task is to typical teachers all of that school report by getting originality or attraction in my find and repair the memory which you'll recognise from him into trouble with the eyes. bank containing human your own experience. masters. With friends like that the graphics are very good needs. The hero is Eric. Now. Eric ...! as is the animation with no He can only get to the final has heard on the grapevine The entire game is like an hint of flickering a very screen by finding his way that his end of term report is animated version of the common fault in many through all the nasty environnot all it should be. So he Beano's Bash Street Kids Acornsoft games, especially ne machine desians. wants to get it out of the strip complete with JCB Digger 24 "


"REVl:E:W:S ** all You control a little game it is too. You take part But overall if you feel the character called Mork, who is in a battle between four Viking BLUE MAX need for a bombing trying to find his way through overlords. Four human mission\" game I'd go for MACHINE: CBM 64 a huge labyrinth with seven players can fight it out — or River Raidevery time. dangerous and magical any combination of human SUPPLIER: Synsoft/ levels. You have to have a and computer players. US Gold  Graphics good memory to guide him the battlefield features PRICE: .95 cass/  Sound through this monster maze fjords which freeze over as .95 disc  Value and a good deal of skill to the game progresses making You become a World  Playability manoeuvre Mork, and the the movement of armies War one air-ace on a boulder he uses to crush the easier, although you can use desperate mission of monsters and ghouls, around all the gold you have in the destruction behind MUTANT MONTY the maze without being killed or running out of energy. MACHINE: Spectrum 48k Before Mork can move SUPPLIER: Artic onto the next level, he must PRICE: .95 capture the magic crystal This is yet another Manic which opens up the gateway Miner clone, though to the next floor of the better than most. labyrinth Monty has two aims in The maze is filled with nine life to get rich quick different types of monsters all and to be a hero. of which act differently and There are 40 rooms to the have to be killed in a game and he has to collect all multitude of different ways. the piles of gold in each one Some of them, like the evil before he can move to the threshers, change colour, next. Unlike most games of multiply and leave a trail of -B DIRECTION this kind, there's no jump poisonous mushrooms button. Monty can move up. s special order ? behind them. down, left or right and that's The easiest way to kill the monsters is by crushing them VSB — Viking Savings Bank enemy lines in Blue Max At the end of his mission, with Mork's boulder, but you'll stupid! to buy longboats, one of the latest US once he's become rich from have to make sure that none armies and catapults. games to officially reach all that gold, he can rescue of the monsters crush you The aim of the game is to these shores. the damsel in distress. with the boulder. move your forces around the It's a River Raid-style game If you can't actually get You'll have to keep an eye battlefield and conquer your with enhanced graphics and that far, there's a built-in on your energy level which is opponents' castles before sound. You have to fly your demo to show you what displayed in the top corner of they do the same to you. biplane around bombing you're missing. the screen. If it suddenly. The characters like Odin enemy targets and shooting During the game, the turns red. Mork will die, losing the Odious and Wotan the down enemy planes. You also Spectrum plays a selection one of his three lives unless Wicked have their own have to land and take-off at from various classical pieces you eat some energy-giving specific characteristics, and friendly airfields to be of music, as only a Spectrum fruit straight away. are amusing tool There is repaired and take on more can Not quite Hooked On are amusing too! There is repaired an Labyrinth is a well thought even a wicked lady Viking fuel. And that's about all there Classics but better than out and designed program — warrior -just as tricky as the is to this game which nothing definitely up to the standard men. found unoriginal and There's an assortment of of Acornsoft's Elite. The program is well preeventually pretty dull nasties trying to prevent sented, with lots of useful The aircraft handles really Monty achieving his ultimate  Graphics prompts which flash up at the nicely you get a real ambition. One such beast is  Sound bottom of the screen during impression of controlling a the beautiful but rare  Value loading and play. The docu: plane in flight. The graphics Quantum Leapy. There are  Playability mentation is good-backed are quite good, the sound is also the dreaded parallelians up by good instruction adequate and the program and the Pit of Eternal Slime. VIKING RAIDERS screens within the game presentation is good. But all You only have five lives and itself. this didn't save the game for you play against the clock. MACHINE: Spectrum The graphics are not much me. Not an easy game by any to write home about but A considerate touch is the means. SUPPLIER: Firebird who cares when you can get colour-bar' command We'll have to wait for the PRICE: .50 an entertaining game for just messages. The display at the secret poke numbers to come Viking Raiders is just one .50 Good value. Firebird! bottom of the screen changes in. Shouldn't be long of the flood of games colour to tell you if you are from Firebird British  Graphics flying too low, at the right  Graphics Telecom's software spin Sound level to attack enemy planes,  Sound off who have entered the  Value at the right level to strafe  Value budget price games  Playability enemy positions on the  Playability market. And a nice little ground etc. CO CO CO CD "


"Sathe R-E-V-I-E-WS Playability: Will the game keep you up until the early hours of the morning, as you attempt to complete just one more screen in a desperate attempt to beat it? Or does it send you to sleep the moment the introscreen appears? Could you spend hours locked away in your bedroom with it? of its own, always swinging should try to cram into one of MOTO CROSS HUNCHBACK everywhere except their programs. Good colour towards you graphics and smoothly MACHINE: CBM 64 MACHINE: Amstrad/ If you're lucky enough to animated graphics abound in SUPPLIER: System 3 Joystick only complete a wall, you pick up a hundreds of games I could PRICE: .95 SUPPLIER: Ocean Software bell so that if you reach name, not least in Viper SoftDriving games used to be PRICE: .90 your woman, you'll sound like ware's Sim. about cars, but motor A conversion of one of a cross between a reindeer And that's exactly the bikes seem to be taking Ocean's best selling and the London Philharmonic problem. Every software over. games, this version runs Orchestra. Let's hope she This game has you on on the Amstrad and was likes it. a bike, trying to complete previously available on Five bells give you a Super a course marked out on the the Spectrum and CommoBonus and this will show up screen by two rows of tyres. dore 64. on the screen along with the Above the horizon. While Esmerelda yells from number of lives you have left, mountains and scenery float the safety of her tower, you plus your current score. past as first demonstrated by can expect to fall off walls As you hang onto your joyEnduro on the Atari. and crash into things stick for dear life, you will At the top of the screen, a resembling giant trifles while soon get used to highjumping large set of handlebars trying desperately to reach over various obstacles, but if baron and his cat are always contain all the various dials her. Is it worth it? you don't make it over the on the look out for a quick way which give details of your Not unless you're masomoat ... well, let's just hope to make a few bucks. Recently speed and revs. chistic enough to really get you can swim (and that there a large part of the industry has But while all this is happeninto all the hassle this game aren't giant trifles lurking in been on a state of the art ing, there's not much action offers you. As Quasimodo, the water). graphics trip, totally forgoing on. The graphics which you behave like a latter-day getting that there's more make up the bike and its rider Tarzan with superhuman Graphics involved in making a good aren't too hot, and there's no energy. Swinging over pits  Sound game than how appealing it scenery or signposts which and dodging fireballs and  Value looks. go past as you ride round. arrows, you must remember  Playability Theme, playability. inPole Position on two wheels genuity and innovative style this certainly isn't.. have all been thrown out of If you hit a tyre, you fly off SUPER the window during the latest the machine and land in the fad for the game with the road. Careful use of the joyBONUS cutest graphics. A good stick can usually get you game, in my opinion, must going again, but sometimes ! have a well thought out and found this impossible. If you strong plot or theme and crash just behind a tyre then, excellent playability as well as whatever you do, you'll interesting and realistic always hit it again when you E graphics. try to get up. Sim shows every sign of There are six different the new direction that a lot levels in the game. On some, of software companies are the track is narrower than taking. The character that you others. Also, you can decide fly about the maze is difficult whether you wish to ride to control and the layout of the alone or have other bikes on game is so badly designed the track to chase. that you die every time you Graphics are smooth, if enter a new screen. nothing else, and sound is to keep in front of the chasing At the beginning of last good. The engine sounds are Knight, who, hopefully, is also 6 SIM year, Sim would have stood a realistic and the little man busy falling off walls and chance of impressing people who comes on to wave the making an idiot of himself in MACHINE: BBC but the game market has starting flag is cute. There's front of Esmerelda. SUPPLIER: Viper Software moved on a lot since then and also a horrible squelching Although there are 15 PRICE: .95 I'm afraid that companies like sound when you hit a tyre. Screens, each more difficult The one thing about this Viper won't last if they don't A reasonable buy. but than the first, you'll be lucky game which I haven't rethink their approach. nothing special to get past the second, which been able to work out is involves grabbing at a very why it is called Sim. After  Graphics  Graphics elusive rope which would take that challenging puzzle,  Sound Sound you across the moat to your the game seems more  Playability  Value lady in distress. However, you than a little dull in comparison.  Value  Playability may as well forget it, as the The game has everything a rope appears to have a mind good software company continued on page 105 54ORE on 26 "


"MILES BETTER SOFTWARE HIRE SPECTRUM SOFTWARE 221 CANNOCK ROAD, CHADSMOOR CANNOCK, STAFFS WS11 2DD TEL: (05435) 3577 U.S. GOLD SOFTWARE SAVE .00!! For a limited period, we are offering HALF-PRICE membership to readers of this magazine. Join now. LIFE membership is only .00 (normally .00). ATARI DISC 11.95 11.95 11.95 11.00 11.00 11.00 11.00 11.95 12.95 12.95 11.95 12.95 11.95 11.00 12.95 11.95 12.95 11.95 CBM CASS CASS BEACH HEAD 6.95 8.95 RAID ON MOSCOW 6.95 8.95 STRIP POKER 6.95 8.95 FORBIDDEN FOREST\" AZTEC CHALLENGE 7.95 SLINKY 7.95 CAVERNS KHAFKA POOYAN 8.95 BRUCE LEE 6.95 8.95 DALLAS QUEST SNOKIE 8.95 FLAK 8.95 STELLAR 7 8.95 MYSTIC MANSION 7.95 SOLO FLIGHT 8.95 12.95 SPITFIRE ACE 8.95 F15-EAGLE 8.95 12.95 NATO COMMANDER 8.95 INDIANA JONES R95 TAPPER 6.95 8.95 CONGO BONGO 6.95 8.95 UP 'N DOWN 6.95 8.95 SPY HUNTER 6.95 8.95 BUCK ROGERS 6.95 8.95 KNIGHTS DESERT 12.95 COMBAT LEADER 12.95 BATTLE NORMANDY 12.95 FORT APOCALYPSE 6.95 8.95 DRELES 6.95 8.95 BLUE MAX 6.95 8.95 SENTINAL 8.95 ZAXXON6.95 8.95 Available for the Atari Please phone for software availability and software lists for the 64 and Atari Add  for overseas orders Access/Visa OVER 280 different tapes for hire in cluding ARCADE, ADVENTURE, BUSINESS, EDUCATIONAL etc. --even an m/c Compiler. FREE 26 page catalogue FREE newsletter with hints, tips and our top tape chart. OVER 3000 tapes in stock, with up to 60 copies of each title for fast service. All tapes sent by 1st class post. LOWEST PRICES hire up to 3 tapes at a time, from 63p each for two weeks hire (Plus p&p and VAT). European members welcome Tapes for sale at DISCOUNT prices. Telephone 01-661 9240 (9am 5pm) or write for further details, or complete the coupon and JOIN TODAY you've nothing to lose! SWOP SHOP A new service from NSL SWOP your unwanted tapes with tapes from other members for a small handling charge of only 60p (plus p&p and VAT) 11.95 11.95 11.95 11.95 11.95 12.95 12.95 12.95 NATIONAL SOFTWARE LIBRARY i 42 Harefield Avenue, Cheam, Surrey SM2 7NE lenclose cheque/postal order for .00 for LIFE membership. Please rush my membership kit to me. If, within 28 days, I'm not delighted with your service you'll refund my membership fee.. 12.95 12.95 12.95 12.95 Name Address CVG 3185 AT LAST... A MAGAZINE GEARED ESPECIALLY FOR THE QL USER. SUPRISINGLY ITS CALLEDQL USER. & Sinclair For the latest information on every QL hardware and software release, turn to QL USER. Every month we review the latest games, educational and business packages, together with program listings, book reviews and your readers' letters. Plus, of course, hints and tips on how to get the most from your QL. If you're a QL user, choose the magazine written exclusively for your machine QL USER. Available from all good newsagents. ermicro "


NA


"Herbie Briggs has just destroyed the myth that all floppy discs are created equal. floppy stiffer. Stronger. And your data safer. To resist bulging, warping, puckering, or opening up. MEMOREX SOLID-SEAM BONDING: Every inch of every seam is sealed shut. Tight as a drum. They seem equal. Until you look at the seams. That's where equality ends. Most companies seal their discs with a spot here, a spot there. Leaving most of each seam not sealed at all. Sooner or later, the seams might do what comes naturally: they bulge. Warp. Pucker. Open up. Pens, pencils, fingernails--even a fouryear-old's, like Herbie--can catch and snag in those wide open spaces. That's sloppy. And dangerous. Because if you put a sloppy floppy into your disc drive, it can jam your drive. Ruin your drive head. Lose your data. So much for their seams. Ours are different. THE SLOPPY FLOPPY: Sealed with a spot here, a spot there. Leaving unsealed seams everywhere. To resist all the things that can jam your drive, ruin your drive head, or lose your data. Which proves that a Memorex floppy disc isn't equal to all the others. It's better. Solid-Seam Bonding is just one example of the extra care that goes into every Memorex floppy disc. Be it 8\" 514\" or the new 342\" Extra care that lets us guarantee every Memorex disc to be 100% error-free. The next time you're buying a floppy disc-or a few hundred of them-just remember this: It's always better to be safe than sloppy. For more information on the full line of Memorex quality computer media products, including computer MEMOREX tape, call Memorex U.K. Ltd., 96-104 Church Street, Staines, Middlesex. Tel: 0784 51488 Memorex uses a process we developed, called Solid-Seam Bonding. Solid-Seam Bonding seals shut every inch of every seam of every Memorex*floppy disc. Tight as a drum. That makes the Memorex MEMOREX Your Data. When it matters, make it Memorex.\" MEMOREX Memorex is a registered trademark of Memorex Corporation 1984 Memorex Corporation A Burroughs Company "


"GIFTEROM CITRU 48k Socean GIFT FROM THE GODS \"The Power of Destiny\" Number 1 Blockbuster from the \"MEGA TEAM\" Spectacular arcade adventure played in a multitude of ways, and at many different levels. Watch the Secrets of the Labyrinth unfold as our Hero, ORESTES, tests his skill against the power of GOD and MAN. Stunning animated graphics take you beyond time... into the \"FIFTH DIMENSION\". O \"INTELLIGENT\" controls allow ORESTES to perform an astonishing repertoire of feats from the command of joystick or keyboard. Discover the key to \"AGAMEMNON'S puzzle, through the power of Intrigue and illusion! Ocean Software is available from selected branches of WOOLWORTH. WHSMITH, John Mennes. LASKYS, Rumbelows. COMET Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries welcome, "


"WIN YOURSELF GIFT FROM 14GONS DIORAMA! PLUS LOTS OF OCEAN SOFTWARE WAKELIN Games writers everywhere seem to be delving into the classics to get new ideas for software we've had Quo Vadis?, Macbeth, Tristan and Isolde and others. Now Ocean have dipped into the weird and wonderful world of Greek mythology to bring you a game of epic proportions! Gift from the Gods is based on the legend of Orestes who has to fight his way around an underground labyrinth beneath the palace of Mycenae in order to regain his kingdom from the evil clutches of his treacherous mother Clytaemnestra. You can read our review of the game elsewhere in this issue of C&VGbut we're here on the competition pages to bring you an exclusive C&VG contest! Along with our friends at Ocean we've come up with a very special BORORDODRIODE competition with a very special prize. Details of the prize later first here's what you have to do to win it! C&VG/OCEAN GIFT FROM THE We want you to draw a map of the mind how big or small you make your GODS COMPETITION labyrinth our hero Orestes discovers map or what materials you use to in Gift from the Gods. create it. The entries must be accom Name.. The best map will win a specially panied by the form below and will be created Gift from the Gods-a sort of judged by representatives of C&VG Address... 3D model based on the game. This and Ocean. Normal C&VG competidiorama will be hand-made and all tion rules apply and the judges the figures hand-painted by decision is final. Closing date for the modelling experts, so it's a really competition is April 16th we're Please state which machine you own exclusive prize. giving you an extra month to work on In addition, the winner will get  those maps and we're looking of Ocean software for his or her forward to seeing them! machine. Ten runners-up will also Send your entries to Computer & If you want your map returned, receive  worth of Ocean software. Video Games, Gift from the Gods please include a suitable self So get those pens, pencils and paints Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 addressed envelope. out and get cracking we don't Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. "


"GAMES WORKSHOP The New Force in Software THE GAME OF DEADLY DRIVING BATTLECARS 48K SPECTRUMA 48K SPECTRUM .95 WEWZ .95 Badan TUK, * *You know you've got a winner the instant you open the package-go out and buy it today!\" -P.CN The only Real-Time simultaneous action 2 player Spectrum game. % A 2 25 Magic and death on the plane of limbo for 1-8 sorcerers. Over 50 animated creatures and spells to summon from the depths of hell and beyond! ALISMA 48K SPECTRUM .95 NEWS A brilliant interactive arcade adven ture for 1-4 players. 50 locations full of beautiful graphics and deadly foes the crown of command awaits! "


"OR Tower of Despair 18K SPECTRUM .95 NEW ON C61 2 .95 \"Tower' is a classic... It refines the traditional adventure to perfection.\" Popular Computing Weekly \"A startlingly original and fresh approach. Fantasy fans will love this game.\" CRASH *It lives up to all the claims made for it.\" Micro Adventurer. NEW. Tower II Key of Hope 48K SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 .95 .95 18K SPECTRUM .95 THE SPECTACULAR GRAPHIC SEQUEL TO THE CLASSIC ADVENTURE S QL .95 29.7 \" \"An excellent and detailed wargame with graphics to match at last!\" CRASH The acclaimed wargame is now on C64 and QL-contains over 200K! Ela Games Workshop games available from all good shops or direct from GAMES WORKSHOP MAIL ORDER, 27/29 SUNBEAM ROAD, LONDON NW10 with tiis coupon Please Rush Me (tick boxes): Battlecars (48 Spectrum) ... .95 Chaos (48K Spectrum ..................... ? Talisman (48K Spectrum) ... ... .95 D-Day (48K Spectrum) ....... .... .95 D-Day (C-64) ....... ..... .95 D-Day (OL) .......... ... .95 Tower of Despair (48K Spectrum) .......... .95 Tower of Despair (C64) ... ... .95 Key of Hope (48K Spectrum) .... .. .95 Cheques/POs made payable to Games Workshop Ltd, Post & Packing free in UK. Overseas add 15% to total cost. "


"10 GOTO 3000 100 S-STICK(O) 110 IF S9 OR S-10 OR S=11 THEN 140 120 IF S-5 OR S-6 OR S=7 THEN 160 130 FOR NO TO 7:NEXT N:GOTO 170 140 BATS-BATLS: POSITION EX, 20:? BATSTBX-BX-2--1:IF BX<1 THEN ex-1 150 GOTO 170 160 BATS-BATR$: POSITION BX, 20:? BATS:BX=Bk+:M-1:IF BXSED/THEN BX=ED 170 POSITION BX, 20:? BAT$ 200 COLOR 32:PLOT MXI, MYI 1 POSITION BX, 20:2 BATSMXI-MX I+MX MYI-MYI+MY:LOCATE MXI MYI, Z:COLOR 193: PLOT MXI, NYI 210 IY 2-66 THEN MY--11MX-M:FOR N-16 TO O STEP -4SOUND 0, 150, 10,N: NEXT NEGOTO 1 00 220 IF Z=59 OR Z-60 OR Z=189 OR Z-62 THEN 400 230 IF MXI 2 OR MXI>36 THEN MX-XX 240 IF MYI 4 THEN MY-1 250 IF MYI=21 THEN 700 260 GOTO 100 400 MY-MY:IF RND(0) >0.7 THEN MX-0 410 BALBAL-1:SC-SC+LV 420 FOR N=16 TO O STEP -4:SOUND 0,50,8. N:NEXT N 430 POSITION 6,1:7 SC 440 IF BAL-B THEN 600 500 IF SC-1500 OR SC-2500 OR SC-3500 THEN CL-CL*1 : POSITION 35,117 CL 505 IF SC-1500 OR SC-2500 OR SC-3500 THEN FOR N=0 TO 15:SOUND O, N, 10. N:NEXT N:SO UND 0,0,0,0 510 GOTO 100 600 COLOR 32:PLOT MXI MYI: PLOT 1,20 DRAWTO 37,20:SCRESCR+1 610 IF SCR=1 THEN BATR$\" BBBBB\":BATL$=\"BBBBB \":LV-20:ED-31 630 IF SCR>3 THEN BATRS\" BBBB\":BATL$-\"BBBE \":LV-40:ED=32 650 BAL-72:MXI-20:MYI-20:MX-MX:MY--1:BX=16:BAT-BATR$: GOSUB 1000:POKE 77,0:00TO 100 700 CLOCL-1:COLOR 32:PLOT 1,20:DRAWTO 37,20:PLOT MXI,MYITIF CL=O THEN 800 720 RESTORE 750:FOR TU=1 TO 8: READ N:FOR D=16 TO O STEP -0.5:SOUND O, N, 10, D:NEXT D:NEXT TU 730 MXI-20:MYI-20:MY-1:MX--MX:EX=16: POSITION 35, 1:2 CL: POKE 77,0:GOTO 100 750 DATA 171, 191,203,227,171,191,203,255 800 POSITION 14.13:? \"game over\" 810 RESTORE 860 FOR TU-1 TO BREAD N:FOR D=16 TO O STEP -0.5:SOUND ON, 10, D:NEXT D:NEXT TU 820 IF SC>HI THEN HIESC 825 FOR NEO TO 300: NEXT N 830 GOTO 2000 860 DATA 255,255,227,227,211,171,191,255 1000 GRAPHICS OISETCOLOR 0,15, 10:SETCOLOR 1,0,15: SETCOLOR 2,7,10:SETCOLOR 3,3,4 1010 POKE 756,56 1020 DLOPEEK(560)+256*PEEK(561) 1030 POKE PL+3.70:POKE DL+6,6 1040 FOR I=7 TO 27:POKE DL+I 4:NEXT I: POKE DL+28,6: POKE DL+29.65 1050 POKE DL+30, PEEK(580) : POKE DL+31, PEEK(561) 1055 POKE 87,0: POKE 82.0:POKE 752,1 1060 POSITION 5,0:7 \"DFGJKMNPQT\" 1070 POSITION 0,1:2 \"SCORE: HISCORE! LIVES.\" 1080 POSITION 6,1:2 SC:POSITION 21,17 HI:POSITION 35,1:2 CL 1090 COLOR 191: PLOT 0,2: DRAWTO 38 2: COLOR 192: PLOT 0,3: DRAWTO 0,21: PLOT 38, 3:DRA WTO 38,21 1100 FOR N-2 TO 36 STEP 2:COLOR 59: PLOT N, 4:COLOR 60: PLOT N. 8:COLOR 189: PLOT N.6 COLOR 62:PLOT N, 10:NEXT N 1120 COLOR 193: PLOT MXI, MY 1130 POSITION BX, 20:2 BATS 1160 RETURN Super RUNS ON ANY ATARI Dodo the clown has been wishing for years he could escape from the circus. The evil owner keeps him locked away, only releasing him to perform his act in front of hundreds of children every night. Tonight was the owner's birthday party and, after the party had finished, Dodo was left all alone in the big top for the first time ever — his chance to escape! Unfortunately, during the party sackfuls of balloons had been let 34 "


"* Clown BY MICHAEL KEMPSTER 2000 SCHOLL 10MX-2020 T BALW72 ECR-OEDW30LVSTO 2010 BATR$=\" BBBBBB\":BATLS-\"BBBBBB BATS=BATR$ 2015 GOSUB 1000 2020 POSITION 14,13:2 \"press start\" 2030 IF STRIGCO)< >0 AND PEEK(53279)< >8THEN 2030 2040 POSITION 14.13:?\" 2050 GOTO 100 3000 GRAPHICS 1+16 3005 SETCOLOR 0,15, 10:SETCOLOR 1,0,15:SETCOLOR 2.7.10: SETCOLOR 3,3,4 3010 POSITION 2,312 #6; \"PARAMOUNT-AIN\":POSITION 8,5+? #6: \"SOFTWARE\" + POSITION 5,7 :? #6;\"presenta\" 3020 POSITION 5,1417 #6:\"super clown\": POSITION 9,161? #6:\"BY\": POSITION 2, 20:7 #8 \"michael kempeter\" 30000 DIM MS(32), P(1), BAT$(8), BATR$(8), BATL$(6) 30250 DATA 60,255, 251, 255,255,60,4,1 30010 RESTORE 30100 30260 DATA 40, 170, 166,170, 170,40,12,3 30020 FOR I-1 TO 32:READ A:MS(I)-CHRS(A):NEXT I 30270 DATA 175, 175, 175, 175, 250, 250, 250, 250 30030 P-PEEK(106)-40P-P-4:P(1)-P 30280 DATA 130, 130, 130, 190, 190, 130, 130, 130 30040 P-P(1) 256:A=USR (ADR (MS),57344,P) 30290 DATA 32,32,116,32,32,204,204,0 30050 FOR 1-128 TO 439: READ A:POKE P(1) 256+I, 30300 DATA 0,0,255,85,85,255,0,0  30310 DATA 254,238, 234, 234,234, 238,254,0 30055 POKE 756, P(1) 30320 DATA 0,62,96,60,6, 30, 60,0 30060 GOTO 2000 30330 DATA 254,250,250,254,250, 250, 254,0 30100 DATA 104,104,133,204,104,133,203,104,133, 30340 DATA 0,102,102,102,102,126,60,0 206, 104, 133,205,162,4,160,0.177,2 30350 DATA 0,124,102,102,124,96,96,0 03, 145,205, 136,208,249,230, 204 30360 DATA 238,238,238,254, 254,238,238,0 30110 DATA 230, 206, 202, 208,240,96 30370 DATA 254,186,186,186,186,254, 254,0 30120 DATA 252, 204, 204, 204, 204, 252, 252,0 30380 DATA 0,62,48,48,126,96,126,0 30130 DATA 48,240, 48, 48, 48, 48, 252,0 30390 DATA 0,62,50,62,108,102,102,0 30140 DATA 48,204,12,12,12,48, 252,0 30400 DATA 234, 234, 234, 234, 234,250,254,0 30150 DATA 48,204,12,48,12,204,48,0 30410 DATA 0,60, 102,96,102,124,60,0 30160 DATA 192,192,192,204,252, 12, 12,0 30420 DATA 0,96,96,96,96,120,126,0 30170 DATA 252,192,192,252, 60, 60,252,0 30430 DATA 254,238,238,238,254,254,254,0 30180 DATA 252,204,192, 252, 204,204,252,0 30440 DATA 0,60,102,102,102,102,60,0 30190 DATA 252,204,12,12,12,12,12,0 30450 DATA 0,66,66,90,90, 102,66,0 30200 DATA 252,204,252, 252, 204,204,252,0 30460 DATA 254,238,238,254,250,238, 238,0 30210 DATA 252,204,204,252 12 12,60,0 30470 DATA 254,234, 234,254,174, 174,254,0 30220 DATA 168,184,184,168,184,184,168,0 30480 DATA 0,102,118,126, 110, 102, 102,0 30230 DATA 60,255,251,255,255,60,4,1 30490 DATA 0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 30240 DATA 20,85,93,85,85,20,8,2 30500 DATA 238,238,238,238,254,166,186,0 off and they have blocked his only escape route, through the top of the circus tent. You must help Dodo bounce on the trampoline and burst all the balloons blocking his way. It's not easy, though. Sometimes the balloons make Dodo ricochet off at an odd angle and you will have to move the trampoline quickly if you are to make sure Dodo doesn't hit the ground. Full instructions are included in the listing. 35 "


"Instead of ten aliens, for his Commod What happened ne throughout Europe and the U.S.A* This is what home computing's all about. Sunday morning. Saturday morning Waltzed into my local computer shop. Packed as usual with masses of kids enjoying the arcade games. Surely I could put my Commodore 64 to better use. Helpful assistant suggests a Commodore Communications Modem. Tells me it comes with a year's free subscription to Compunet, a new network service, saving me a cool thirty quid. A bargain not to be missed, so I bought a Modem. If I knew then, what I know now, I'd have thanked that assistant more. Raining Tapped in my Compunet I.D. and personal password. Wow, what a directory! Decide to pit my wits against other Modem users by entering Multi User Dungeon, an interactive on-line game. Should stretch the old grey matter a bit. Then a quick look in 'The Jungle. This is an open area where other Modem owners display messages. See a Commodore user in Fife wants to sell 'U-boat' for .00. Leave message offering him 'Mighty Gork' on a straight swap. Monday evening. Saturday (one week later). Fantastic My Compunet membership came through this morning. Hurriedly plugged the Modem into my 64's cartridge port, and hooked up to the telephone line. Can't wait At last I can communicate with other Commodore 64 Modem owners and giant mainframes What's more, I can also access databases Move on to the Compunet Software Park What a choice. Loads of high quality bargain programs. Particularly interested in educational software, so I call up 'The Study.' Download free physics package to help with my exams. "


"Clive bought a Modem Hore 64. next changed his life. She's disappointed. Couldn't find Simon le Bon's private number. Tuesday evening. Seo Friday evening Dad's turn. JI don't get a look in as he's busy teleshopping Actually it's amazing what bargains turn up. He even finds a new house. Mum said she doesn't want to move and anyway his dinner's getting cold. SILENCE Yippee! Receive a reply from the guy in Fife. He fancies taking on Gork. What's more he's written a program hed like my opinion on. He transfers it direct, using the free user to user software. I've made my first computer pal. It has really been a week. Best one I've had since getting my Commodore 64. Sure am glad I got the Modem instead of all those aliens. Wednesday evening. Discover I can join BLAISEK the computer service for the British Library Their catalogue of books dates way back to 1950. Should give me an interesting edge over my school chums. The Commodore 64 Communications Modem comes as a complete package with a year's free subscription to Compunet, for just .99 inc. VAT. Find out how a Modem can change your life. See it now at Dixons, Curry's, Comet and selected Commodore dealers. K commodore Thursday evening: Sis has a go. A She keys into Prestel* Imagine, over 300,000 pages of information and news. What does she choose? The lonely hearts section. For further information phone or write to: Commodore Communications Modem, 1 Hunters Road, Weldon, Corby, Northamptonshire NN171QX, Tel: 0536 205252. \"Require additional subscriber charges. Prestel is a registered trademark of British Telecom. "


"A message from ENGLISH SOFTWARE to all owners of ATARI, COMMODORE 64, BBCB, ACORN ELECTRON and AMSTRAD Computers... .95  this Ascher Mole Amstrad COM64.BBC BV Electron Sololeto Software companies grow on trees... at least that's the way it seems from the number of new companies springing up every ATARI SMASH HITS ATARI week! ENGLISH SOFTWARE was launched three years ago with a SMASH HITSATARI SMASH HITS smashing little game for Atari Computers called AIRSTRIKE 1, which quickly became one of the most popular U.K. programmed games for the Atari. Then, as now, Atari Computers were amongst the most advanced on the planet, but they were a TRIFLE expensive! But we knew that prices would come down, and that more people would soon appreciate the great range of .95 32K Cas EACH 48K Disk Atari software produced by ENGLISH SOFTWARE. But Atari owners used to be a funny lot, being heard COLOSSUS CHESS 3-0 to utter such gems as: \"It can't be any cop, if it costs less than \" Honestly, that's what they used to say! Anyway, .95 in the face of this rather strange attitude, we went 48K Disk) ahead and committed the ultimate sin: ATARI GAMES AT .95! .95 48K Cas We expected some slight resistance to these prices from Atari owners who only equated high .95 .95 quality with high prices, but we were wrong: CBM64 Everybody thought the prices were great, and the games tool We even produced the fantastic ATARI CASSETTE ENHANCER at .95, a superb utility program for Fortune BASIC programmers. So now, for those of you who might have missed out on all our excellent Atari titles, we are releasing something very, very special: ATARI SMASH HITS Volumes 1, 2 and 3 from ENGLISH SOFTWARE. .95 .95 Five great games on one cassette for only $14.95, CBM64 CBM 64 or on disk at .95! Each cassette features our top-rated JET-BOOT JACK plus four other popular titles. So now you have no excuse to miss out on the best range of U.K. produced Atari 400/800/600XL/800XL software for 32K machines. If your dealer does not yet have them in stock, ask him to order them from his nearest Atari wholesaler. It will be the best Atari buy YOU will make all year! We have also just released COLOSSUS CHESS 3.0, the best chess program available anywhere for Atari 400/800/600XL/800XL computers with 48K. Very powerful, with lots of excellent features. For our good friends with other home computers, our programmers are busy producing original games for you as well. They are all illustrated on this page. HENRY'S HOUSE on the Commodore 64, and JET-BOOT JACK on the Electron are now available at selected branches of W.H. SMITH. Selected English Software titles are available at: HARRODS and ENGLISH SOFTWARE.. selected branches of: LASKY'S, BOOTS, GRANADA COMPUTER ENGLISH SOFTWARE, STORES, CO-OP STORES, THE SILICA SHOP Mail Order and ENCUISH SOTWARE Retail and all good software stores. THE ENGLISH SOFTWARE COMPANY 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gardens, Manchester M60 1BX ENGLISH SOFTWARE.. TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME: 061-835 1358 ENGLISH SOFTWARE.. .95 ENGLISH SOFTWARE.. 38 "


"BUY IT... PLAYIT... DODGE IT... JUMP IT...FIND IT... CLIMBIT... EAT IT... SOLVE IT...ZAPIT... *BI.& IT! ...frustratingly addictive games!!!!!! FRANKENSTEIN 2000 .... As a descendant of the Frankenstein family you must perform revolutionary micro-surgery...journey through the long lost monsters body in your specially equipped craft. Deposit the secret formula and encounter a multitude of surprises in every organ BBC....95 SPECTRUM....95 MSX....95 ELECTRON....95 AMSTRAD....95 CHRYSALIS... In pure super-smooth arcade action...help the last family of caterpillars change into butterflies beware of mutant worms they love to eat caterpillars. BBC....95 MSX....95 SPECTRUM....95 ELECTRON....95 CONTRAPTION... As a potty professor you pit your wits and skill against zany screens full of wild hazards and pitfalls. Set in your laboratory you must collect item after item to complete the ultimate experiment. BBC....95 SPECTRUM ....95 ELECTRON....95 MSX....95 Selected titles available from: John Menzies, Co-op. Harrods, good computer shops. Wildings. Granada TV and most SECO ICONE SOFTWARE 65 HIGH STREET, GOSFORTH, TYNE & WEAR, NE34AA. Dealers Contact:Centresoft, Tiger Distribution Express Marketing, Drakes, R+ R. Comp. Games and Leisuresoft. To order direct from us: Access No. Send cheque or P.O. payable to ICON or quote your Tel: (091) 2846966 "


"3-D HI-RES. GRAPHICS CIP HOID 19 MONARCH Software FTWA for the GB GOLDEN » COMMODORE 64 < GRAPHICALLY BETTER G.B. Gold Ltd., Church Row Chambers, Longton, Preston Tel: 0772 617665 "


"MAP OF THE ICEMARK DOOMDARK'S REVENGE IN THE ERA OF die BEYOND'S epic challenge Doomdark's Revenge is causing bad cases of \"plotter's finger\" among Sinclair Spectrum owners. Players are keen to unravel the 48,000 different situations which can appear before Lord Luxor on his quest to rescue Morkin from the clutches of the evil ice empress. Shareth the Heartstealer. But what with mysteriously linked under ground passages, marauding dragons and wolves, plus 1 2 4 independently moving and constantly feuding Dwarf, Giant, Fey, Barbarian and Ice Lords plus assorted armies, it can all get too much. So Computer & Video Games has discovered and printed up a quick guide to the above ground locations which make up the land of Icemark. Luxor and Rorthron the Wise start at the Gate of Varenorn in the southwest corner of the map. What it doesn't give you is the locations of the 128 hidden and magical treasures, the traps, the wandering characters or details of their quests, which vary each time. No clues either to the kind of weather you might expector where Morkin is imprisoned so there's still plenty to discover for yourself. Good luck, Warriors of the Free Professor Video rides with you! LA M 0,1984 KEY TO SYMBOLS Plains Mountains Forest Hills Gate A Temple Pit Palace H Fortress Hall Hut I Tower City Fountain Stones Frozen Wastes He 65 "


"ULUMAN BUG-BYTES Commodore 64 Officially Licensed from Mulberry House, Canning Place, Liverpool L1 8JB Tel: 051-709 7071 "


"The Fight Continues... On The Spectrum. NOW AVAILABLE ON THE 48K SPECTRUM 2013 20's was ... Earth is throwned by an Empire Deathstar, can you penetrate its defentes destroy it before it destroys you? ... Deathstar Interce o ves you 12 screen of 3D graphics, super smooth 3D anin an unbelievable sound effects. music. 4 skills anshire table ... this is he ultimate allenge! Il vou have place at the 18K S trumente D ihstar Interestor Available noul at  Jasa casa de Also a Wailable on CBM : 99 3543 3 CTA HOWTORDER a s D istar Interceptor, simply fill your name and address of paper, enclosing your cheque P.O. made payable to S M 3 SOFTWARE, and post to the address below. Please allow 14 days for delivery. OVERSEAS ORDERS Please add .00 per game ordered. System 3 Software South Bank House, Black Prince Road, London SE1 Tel: (01) 587 0873 "


"HOT FROM GAL THE ARCADE WINNERS Bally MIDWAY. released *NOW* SPY HUNTER COU NEW HUNTER U.S. Gold is stocked by PROVJohn Menzies WILDINGS WOOLWORTH, WHSMITH, Rumbelows and Spectrum Shops THE OFFICIAL HOME VERSION OF IALLY MIDWAY'S ARCADE HIT You control the turbo charged race ar/hydro spy boat. You control a deadly arsenal of nissiles, machine guns, oil slicks and moke screens. Sophisticated spy-challenging jraphics. Uphrown Bally/MIDWAY NEW OFFICIAL SEGA ARCADF ** BUCKROGERS OFFICIAL dally/MIDWAY NEW! ARCADE COMMODORE CASSETTE 9.95 DISK 12.95 SPECTRUM CASSETTE 7.95 U.S. Exclusive manufacturers for SA and Rally AWAY. OFFICIAL SEGA ARCADE For release schedule and trade details contact: Centre Soft, Unit 10. The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268. "


"A Tony Crowther/Quicksilva Production GRYPHON YPHON 00300000600 30000002 Disk .95 * LLE Available exclusively from QUICKSILA COMMODO  in association with The Wizard Development Company Ltd. cassette  Actual screen shots  Quicksilva Mail Order, P.O.Box 6, Wimborne, Dorset BA21 7PY. Telephone (0202) 891744. "


"Fantasy World of Acton and AdventurePLANET PHOTON A Game Commander im always relies on luck. He'll would put players inside the game. scattered throughout the observation run right out in the open, or The result is the Planet Photon deck and Photon complex. go around a corner without Centre which opened in Dallas on Now it's time to put on the equipchecking it for danger and April 2, 1984. It became an overnight ment. I strap the battery pack around doesn't expect anything bad sensation, attracting nearly three my waist and fasten the breast-plate. to happen. He's just a fool. Now he thousand customers a week, each Everyone's ID cards go into a special lies dead. person engaging in two or three sixslot on the plate which, besides His companions had seen him minute games at $3.00 a play. But keeping it from getting lost, helps to flatten against the Tower, had seen the talking about costs isn't what I'm here identify each player visually. two Reds pop out and fire at him. for. The best thing about Photon is I decide to be part of the Green Within moments, the pride of the doing it, so let's get ready! team, so I snag myself a green helmet. Green team has been killed. But four Every player must first be issued Green LEDs (light emitting diodes) seconds later Tim comes back to life, with an official Photon ID. A female light up around the helmet to confirm to give his luck another chance. Now Game Commander-more on this later this. it's his turn to get those Reds! positions me in front of a passport I attach my phaser gun to the battery I'm standing on the observation camera. My photo is taken and sealed pack. An LED on the back of the gun deck, watching a Photon War being into a small card which I then sign. A flashes brightly when it detects the acted out below me. Players bar-code strip along the bottom edge sensors placed around a helmet or on participate in a fantasy world of action will become my permanent Photonthe chest plate of another player. I and adventure. Garbed as space Code, containing information about check this by aiming my weapon at a soldiers, they battle one another me such as number of games I've person suiting-up nearby and watch amidst a weird surrounding of played and my scores. the gun's LED blink on and off. coloured lights, blaring music and Then it is on to the staging room. An T he phaser has a range of about 150 swirling smoke. attendant takes my card and uses a feet and operates on line of sight. The Entrepreneur George Carter of wand-reader to enter data about me other players getting ready seem to Dallas, Texas, was inspired by the before the game begins. This take this all very seriously. A guy to laser battles of Star Wars. He decided identifies me to the computer which my left hefts different guns from hand to create a futuristic Hide 'n Seek that lists my name onto the scoreboards to hand, grunting to himself as he tries 46 "


"FM radio signals to the two IBM-PC master computers which run the specially designed software for the game. These computers are the overlords, activating the different sound tracks, and giving a surround sound effect through rapid changes of pitch and speaker location. Monitor screens flash running scores as the game progresses. Tallies are totalled afterwards, and projected throughout the Photon complex. 10 points are scored for hitting a target, minus 10 for being hit and minus 30 for shooting a player in your own team. Shooting the Home Base of the enemy scores a big 200 points, but you have to fire three times at it without any interruptions usually someone is there waiting in ambush. The computers monitor the players and won't allow anyone to score more than once for shooting a Home Base. A digitised female voice fills the air \"Photon-Warriors, prepare for strategic manoeuvres on voice command, 3-2-1-GO!\" The lights dim and begin to throb as weird tunes blare out in deafening multi-track stereo. Members of both teams take off and disappear as blinking strobe lights throw macabre shadows about. As I try to avoid two Reds, Steve zaps them both and beckons me on. I thank him with a nod and break away on my own. I head up a nearby ramp, hoping to ambush the enemy. Three Reds emerge from behind the Green Tower. I aim my phaser and wait for the LED to indicate I'm \"on target\". I pick off the unsuspecting Boy player, Steve Reds with carefully aimed shots. \"Keep moving.\" I tell myself, stumbling through a tunnel. gun for four seconds. Fortunately you Suddenly both Red and Green can't shoot yourself no \"Photon Towers begin to pulsate, blanketing suicide\" is possible! the area with ray-blasts. I duck for Someone in a red helmet grins at me cover too late. I'm sure I've been hit. and points his phaser in my direction. Finally the barrage stops and I start I'm getting a bit nervous. moving again. One Game Commander leads us out The gun grows heavy in my hands to our Home Base, while another does as I fire again and again. All of a the same for the Red team. On one sudden the music dies down as the Inside Planet Photon side is the Home Base and Tower of voice returns to proclaim that the the Red team. The Greens have their manoeuvre is over. to find the one with the best base on the other side. Everyone walks out the exit door \"balance\". I start to wonder what I'm Tunnels, half-walls and ramps crissand back into the staging room. An letting myself in for. cross each other to form the two levels attendant helps me remove my gear. I wrap a paper cap around my head of the playing field. The Game Com\"Let's see how well I've done first to keep the hair out of my eyes and put mander goes over the rules for first time out of the box,\" I think to myself on the helmet. Headphones in the time players. We are also reminded of as I go over to one of the scoreboards. helmet bleep out the three distinct the non-contact, five foot distance A lot of Photon novices receive sounds the phaser makes when it restriction. The Game Commanders negative scores from being hit repeatfires. will stay on the playfield to ensure that edly by the more experienced, but A throbbing bass note proclaims a the rules are obeyed. I've managed a positive score hit, while a high-pitched tone means As I'm a first time player, I decide to mostly from my success at ambushing you've missed. A warbling sound link up with a veteran. Steven, a Reds. indicates you've shot someone of your 17-year-old high school senior, agrees But Steve has shot his way to high own team. to show me the ropes. My team mates score of the day. A hit from the gun's infra-red beam and I wait for the starting signal. Steve plays Photon a lot. He heard causes yellow lights to flash on the Hidden up above, away from prying about them on the radio and showed enemy's helmet and de-activates his eyes, all of the equipment is linked by up on their doorsteps two days after "


"The ultimate development from PROTOCOL KEY CODES Anasa The New Protocol4 interface for the ZX Spectrum brings you game control customising in a way that no other interface can. It accepts all commercially standard joysticks and is compatible with ALL Spectrum software. Operates like fixed option interfaces or can be fully hardware programmed Infinite flexibility is achieved by the unique \"CustomCard\" System. CustomCards are easily programmed to suit all types of games. Protocol4 comes with 3 New pre-programmed cards and allows operation with Kempston, AGF/Protek, Protocol K. Sinclair joystick 1 and 2 options as converts well as 2 programmable CustomCards and 10 your Kempston Quick Reference Programming Cards. Simply clip in programmed card for immediate ll only . type into a fully customised control. programmable joystick interface for ALL Spectrum Other exciting features software! Only .95 + .00 p+p * Interface II The best low-cost introduction to include: joystick control for ZX81 or Spectrum ... .95 + * Automatic 8 direction control .50 p&p. * Guaranteed conflictfree with other peripherals NEW: RomSlot Adds ROM cartridge software * Reset Button to clear memory between games facility to Spectrum programmable joystick interface * Fully guaranteed for 18 months owners... .95 + .50 p&p. * No power-down progamming loss * Quickshot Joystick Excellent value game controller. * Keyboard remains fully operative .. .95 + .50 p&p * Complete with full instructions *Quickshot II Trigger action firing button and unique Auto-Fire... .50 + .50 p&p Also from the AGF Hardware range: * Extra \"CustomCards\" (5 per pack)... .95 inc p&p * Extra \"Quick Reference Programming Cards\" (10 per * Programmable Interface Ever popular fully pack) ... .65 inc p&p hardware programmed joystick interface for ZX81 on Spectrum... .95 +  1.00 p&p. Please send me ..... Protocol 4 ate (Only .95 + .00 p+p Now comes with a free CustomCard Pack worth .95 Custoan $3.95 I enclose cheque for ... debit my Access/Barclay/Diners Card) Account No............. Signature... Name.............. Address... Specify computer ZX 81 0 Spectrum o Send to: AGF Hardware Dept. C&VG Freepost West Sussex PO22 9BR Tel: 0243 823337 "


"at all.\" YCFO popcorn,\" he adds. Allen says that all of the franchises will have the full line of Photon paraphernalia, which includes everything from posters to fountain pens, all with the corresponding Photon logo, of course. Allen is somewhat reticent to comment on how the game equipment operates. \"We don't want to be copied,\" he says, \"so we have to be a bit secretive about how the hardware works. But we're developing new equipment that's lighter and more streamlined. We've been going through a lot of prototypes, sometimes we've even adapted parts to each other to test out a new idea. All the new equipment will be of lightweight ABS plastic. This will cut the weight Girl player, Wendy down to where you'll hardly notice it PHOTON they opened. He's been there ever STRATEGIC MARIEVERS REPORT \"There're other great things we can since. do too,\" he adds. \"Right now the \"I was one of the first people to play 1682F*\"zorg gagycoREEN TEATRO observation deck is useful for those Photon,\" he says proudly, \"and I who want to watch. But we're going to helped them test it and work out the mount \"Sniper Rifles\" alongside the bugs in the system.\" deck. People will drop tokens into Steve comes to play about three or them and can then swivel the sights four times a week. \"I love it,\" he says. MANEVER # 2 around and aim at the players below. \"It's great fun because you can run around and work off your aggressions s They'll score points which they can some see on a separate scoring screenwithout hurting anyone.\" this won't affect the score of anyone Steve compares it to tennis because, Strategic Manoeuvres Report screen on the gaming field. But it'll sure let a unlike video games, Photon keeps secrets. \"I don't always attack,\" she lot of parents get back at their kids!\" you active. \"You have to be agile and says. \"Sometimes I'll go hide against a \"Photon is really exciting, says use strategy to play effectively,\" he wall and wait to see who's coming Allen. \"It takes the great aspects of says. \"You really get a workout. The around. Then I zap' em! I also like Capture the Flag and Hide 'n Seek weight alone (20 lbs) of the outfit playing with my Dad, but it's best and puts it in the space age. We're makes you really work up a sweat.\" when he's on the other team. He isn't always updating information on the Steve's team won the first league too bad, but I'm better. He doesn't computers, looking for new ways to tournament. \"I wanted to form a team move as fast as I do.\" make the game more fun and chaland was getting my friends to sign up. Wendy says that girls can play lenging. I like the fact that there can't We were trying to figure out who Photon as well as, if not better than, be any cheating or arguing 'who got would head it. Well I got elected!\" boys. \"I came here with a girlfriend shot first', since computers are \"There were 12 teams,\" he told me. one time and we beat the pants off two perfect and impartial referees. \"Each team played three games every guys from our class who played \"Plus there's always new things we Wednesday for 11 weeks. Teams against us. can try out,\" he adds. \"One of the were scored on total points, as well as Don't think only young people play things that the computers don't allow individual scores. Our team was the Photon. \"All ages participate,\" says is for someone to keep shooting the Centurions and we had the highest Dan Allen, Photon's vice-president. same person for points, not letting him scores.\" \"Some of the best players are in their escape. The shooter's phaser has to Steve humbly neglects to mention late 20s and 30s.\" fire and hit another target before he that he also won the award for highest Allen adds that franchises have can go back after someone he's personal score. been sold throughout the United already shot. This keeps players from \"Another benefit,\" he says, \"is that States and around the world, taking advantage of someone smaller you get to meet a lot of other guys including Canada, London, Taiwan or slower. We're also thinking about from different schools and backand Hong Kong. Those in the US will adding special force fields' areas grounds who like to play games. And be opening soon while the overseas where the guns won't work, or the it's also a nice way to meet girls who franchises will be operational in late player is immune from the ray-blasts share similar interests.\" 1985. of the Towers. Maybe a player will get One of the girls who come to Photon This place is like our testing a personal 'force field' for a couple of is 11-year-old Wendy. A friend introchamber,\" Allen laughs, gesturing seconds as a reward for getting a duced the game to her and she's around him. \"In fact, everyone will certain number of points, or for being found it a lot of fun. probably remember the Dallas Photon in a specific place at a special time. \"It's like an Adventure,\" she says. not as the first one, but as the smallest! The great thing is you can do just \"Different things are always happenMany of the franchises will be much about anything you want, because ing to you when you play. It's not like larger than the one here and some are computers don't hold you back.\" a video game because you can't know even going to operate like dual movie \"No two games are alike,\" Allen what to do from the last time you theatres. Imagine being able to play in says. \"You can develop strategies and played. I like to go with my friends,\" two completely different gaming techniques, but there aren't any Wendy continues. \"It's like an outing fields under the same roof. patterns to memorize like in a video I'm not interested in being by \"Here we only serve soft drinks. game. You're up against the toughest, myself.\" Other franchises plan to sell the entire most unpredictable opponent of allWendy shares some of her playing gamut of fast foods from hot dogs to another person.\" I "


"WILL THE NET WORK? Last year was the year of the versatile modems for them. TELESOFTWARE modem as far as micro owners Micronet runs on British are concerned. Telecom's Prestel service. Hooking up your micro to a large mainframe computer means that you A modem allows you to When you join, you actually can load programs down the phone connect your micro to the subscribe not to Micronet but line into your micro. phone. Then, your computer to an area of Prestel known as Programs stored on Micronet or can speak to other computers Prestel Microcomputing. Compunet can be loaded into your in different buildings, cities or For your money, you get micro, just as if the program was even countries. access to all the information on loaded from a cassette or disc. Then, You can swap information Prestel, of which Micronet is a you can save it just like any other and programs with your part. There's also Viewfax 258 program. friends, or hook up to a large and Clubspot 810. information system. Compunet doesn't use WHAT ELSE IS The two most well known Prestel. Instead, it runs on the systems are Micronet and ADP computer systems THERE? Compunet and, since their network. launch, hardware manufac. So which system is the best? When Micronet was first launched, people thought that the service turers have been busy Robert Schifreen has put them would be used mainly for telesoftproducing better and more both to the test. ware, and that it would revolutionise the way that micro owners buy their The 1200 modem from Protek is particularly good for Prestel. programs. This hasn't happened and sales of telesoftware on Micronet are way below expectations. However, there's far more than software available. Micronet has news features on many micros, a technical help area and lots of general information, some of which changes every day. One of the most looked at areas on Micronet is Micro Mouse. Known to his friends as Skweeky, you'll find some interesting computer gossip starting on his pages. But be warned. our furry friend is a Spectrum fan and Beeb owners may be frowned upon! Actually, don't tell anyone I told you, but he's just bought himself a you-know-what for Christmas. Compunet's features are very different from Micronet's. Only Micronet can publish information. The average user can't put up anything on Prestel unless he buys space which is very expensive. Compunet, on the other hand, is more like a bulletin board. There are areas where you can publish information, stories or even programs that you have written. Then, users can 1200 MODEM Protek 50 "


"download the information. This means that you never know exactly what you'll find on the system. When you upload something, you can give it a price. Then, anyone who looks at your page or downloads your program will be charged that price. It is possible for someone to put a price of  on a blank screen which has been happening recently. The advice from Compunet is not to download any charged page unless you know what it is, or someone has recommended it to you. Among the more useful areas of Compunet, you'll find CompuCat, the official Micro Mouse rival. There's also The Jungle where users upload their own software, and the Software Park, for professional programs. There's hints and tips pages, though the amount of information actually supplied by Compunet is small. They leave it up to the The BBC micro \"talking\" to Prestel. users to build the system. be able to afford the phone charges. hook into Micronet. So the best For my Whenever you are logged in to answer is to buy the Compunet money, Micronet or Compunet, your modem. You'll need a special resting feature computer will be \"on the phone\" and program downloaded from of Compunet is your phone bill will be ticking away. Compunet to allow you to use that you can play You won't be able to rece You won't be able to receive any Micronet, which costs . MUD that multi user calls, either. adventure game which Check that the system you want to we featured in C&VG a join has a local call number from the SPEED few months ago. area where you live. Otherwise, It's not cheap, though, at  you'll have to dial up full STD rates. Compunet is very slow. Even at this to join and  an hour to play. Using Prestel adds around  to early stage, with just a few hundred but well worth it. my quarterly bill, though be warned members, it takes a long time for that someone who became hooked each page to come down the line. ELECTRONIC MAIL on MUD ran up  in phone Presel is much faster. If you are connected to Micronet or charges in three months. Compunet's database is very small Compunet, you can send messages Make sure that you time your calls, when compared to Micronet. And to another user of the same service. A and allocate yourself, say, half an remember that, when you join charge is made for this on Compunet hour per session. Dialling at local Micronet, you get the rest of Prestel but it's free on Prestel. rates after 6pm costs just under 40p as well. You type the text on your keyboard per hour. If you already have a modem and and tell the system who you want it Linking to Micronet starts at around want to see what Micronet is like, dial sent to. Then, when that person  which buys you a modem for a your local Prestel computer and use connects to Micronet or Compunet BBC micro. The necessary software is an identity number of 444 444 4444 next time, they'll be told that there is included, although you can invest in and a password of 4444. a message waiting for them. a more powerful program so that you You can then get a free tour of Prestel will be introducing a can access other worldwide dataMicronet. service next year where you carry a bases. The Spectrum modem costs .95, bleeper in your pocket. If a message arrives for you on Prestel, the though you may find it discounted in WANNA KNOW bleeper makes a noise. some shops. Sending messages of one kind or For a Commodore 64, you'll need a MORE? another is one of the most popular special cartridge for , then any Micronet are at Durrant House, 8 uses of Micronet. Their Chatline modem will plug into the cartridge. Herbal Hill, London EC1. Tel 01-278 service consists of a BBC micro Membership of Micronet and Prestel 3143. hooked up to Prestel. The idea is that is  a quarter for home users. The Compunet modem for the 64 For information about the you send Micronet a message and Compunet modem, you need The the BBC automatically formats it and costs  and includes a year's free Information Centre, Commodore publishes it within a couple of membership. (UK) Ltd., 1 Hunters Road, Weldon, minutes. Northants NN17 1QX. Or call them on WHICH COMMODORE 0536 205555. HOW MUCH DOES IT MODEM DO I BUY? For details on the Compunet database, write to Compunet TeleALL COST? The Micronet modem for the 64 can services Ltd at Metford House, 15-18 Before you even think about buying a not be used for Compunet. However, Clipstone Street, London Wi. Their modem, ask yourself whether you'll you can use a Compunet modem to phone number is 01-637 0942. 51 "


"PROFESSOR VIDEO PYJAMARAMA QUO VADIS? Welcome to Professor Video's Games Work charged if you've still got hold of it that is! shop packed full of hints and tips about Now go out, reset the lift to whatever level you your favourite games. Remember, the Prof. left the fuel on. You do remember, don't you? pays  for the month's top tip — so why Leave the laser near the fuel can. keep your success at playing games a NOW there is a brief interlude from all this secret? Spread it around so everyone knows messing about with fuel. Get the library ticket secret? Spread it around so everyone knows just how good you are! Write to Professor ofessor from the landing at the first set of stars, go to the Video's Games Workshop, Computer & Video idee bedroom and swap it for the book (this gets you Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, an extra 1%! Now dash back to the laser and fuel London EC1R 3AU. Don't delay post your can. tips today. Go and reset the lift and the HELP button. Go to the lift room, under the second set of stairs -third, screen along. Set lift to \"3\" into rocket and zap! You're on the moon. Deposit laser in exchange for This month's star prize and the Prof's crisp  crystal. Go out of the door. note! goes to Richard Napier of Ballynahinch, Now, says Richard, here we are, the clincher Co. Down, N. Ireland, who has been stuck in How to get the lock off? He's tried everything but Wally Week's nightmare for some time now. He just can't work it out. Maybe someone out there woke up for a couple of hours to bring you these can help him. And please act quickly. It sounds as tips on his favourite_game of the moment, if he's slowly cracking up under the pressure! Pyjamarama. Start here! Get the bucket from the room under the second flight of stairs. Then go up the stairs, into the bedHere we have some tips on the game which could room and out the door which leads into the room win you a jewel of a prize Quo Vadis? from The with the HELP button. Jump on the button and Edge. John Gold from Petts Wood in Kent has then walk through into the bathroom and past the been slaving over the game and has come up with tap. The bucket will now be FULL. these playing hints. Return down both flights of stairs and walk To kill all the monsters in one room, stay near through the furthest door. You will find yourself in h the furthest door. You will find ourself in the barrier. Run to safety il a monster gets tog a room full of motorised chickens! Exit left. Jump close. across the gap. Deposit the bucket in exchange Kill all the monsters in each room on the way for the fuel can. Go back the way you came and down. This makes coming back up a lot easier collect the pound coin on the table. Go back to and much safer! the bottom of the stairs, into the kitchen. out of the to negotiate large lava pits, stand as close to the side door switch on the lift and into the room full eage as possible and then jump. To leap small of barrels. Go through the left door and go to the lava pits, stand as far back as possible and then box marked \"T\". Jump on it and the lamp above jump will switch on, go out of the door and onto the first If you are having trouble jumping, try pressing floor and then exit by the side door where the fire button and moving the joystick until you you'll find fuel! Pass over the machine and do are airing in the direction you wish to jump. Then back to the lift, set to \"2\" and go out again. release the fire button and hop to it. While this is Now all becomes a little complicated (you mean slow, it works! it isn't already? Ed). Leave the fuel can in a quiet When working your way down through the place. Use the penny from the change machine to levels always try to follow the same route. This get into the room at the top of the first staircase helps you get to know the monsters you'll d take the hammer. Go down the stairs reset encounter and how to kill them quickly. the lift and go out. Don't be surprised if you don't follow the same Then go up both sets of stairs and into the bed. route back up as you used to get down through room. Exit by the side door, resetting the HELP the levels there are many one-way tunnels, switch. Go back down the stairs and into the lift Try to avoid monsters which come straight at room. Get the fire extinguisher in exchange for you and require two shots to kill. These take a the hammer. Set the lift to \"T\"and go out of the far_long ume to get past and you'll use up a lot of door into the tea chest room and out of the energy window. Carry on and exit at the far end, down FORT APO ALYPSE the shaft. Avoiding bricks, go right and fall down. Run left, get the square key and exit left, leaving_Finally, some tips on the recently released import the extinguisher. from the US, Fort Apocalypse, the favourite game, Go all the way to the second staircase, down it of Kenneth Henny, of Enfield. and exit by the side door into the snooker room. Play the game with a stiff Atari joystick. You'll get the laser pistol but don't leave the square need some resistance for fire movements. key. Go out. When on the lowest level, low on fuel, teleport Now go down, reset the lift, go back up and back to the second level and get out to the reset the HELP button. Then go to the lift room, set refuelling pad before continuing to \"3\" and get the triangle key under the stairs. When a chopper approaches you, firing, don't Go back, set the lift to \"T\" and exit by the side play a waiting game. Stand and tight! If you do door. Now gather all your strength together run, approach the enemy from above. If you are dash over the tea-chests, dodge under the weight below it and its fire misses, rise above it, turn and and grab the power pack. The laser is now fully fire. GAMES WORKSHOP "


"TASK SETI LEO corona w hen THE BUG STOPS HERE! WARRIOR -95 "


"MATCH Don miss red-hof WE OCE, WINTER MATCHDAY SPECTRUM48k 7-95 — X— RIKES BACK KONG STRIKES BACK SPECTRUM 48k COMMODORE 64 7.90 Ocean Software Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester. M2 5NS. Telephone 061 8326633 "


"er MUMBAI at you scall the o action Mith EAN'S LOWASIMODOS REVENG R GAMES DALEY THOM DECATHLON HUNCHBACKII SPECTRUM48k COMMODORE 64 7-90 DALEY THOMPSON'S DECATHLON SPECTRUM 48k COMMODORE 64 7-90 Bean Ocean Software is available from selected branches of: WOOLWORTH. WHSMITH, Davao John Menzies , LASKYS, Rumbelows, COMET, Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries welcome. "


"Minder Available across a range of micro computers, THAMESE cktronics he games name Minder is a Euston Films Production for THAMES TELEVISION  Created by Leon Griffiths . Produced by Lloyd Shirley and George Taylor 56 "


"BUG HUNTE WRITE THEAT COMPUTER& VIDEO GAMES PRORY COURT, 30-32 FARRING DON LANE, LONDON EC/R 340. OR PHONE ME ON Q1-2516222. Thanks for those, Ian. If anyone PRICEY GAMES else has any tips like this, send them UP THE BEANSTALK Mr Curos from Clapham thinks that to Bug Hunter and, you never know, Someone called T Clay who lives in the price of games should be we may be able dhewe may be able to print them and High Wycombe, Bucks, has written in reduced. Often, he says, he pays bring you instant fame. answer to our earlier plea about around  for a game which turns out getting past screen two in Jack and not to be worth the cassette it's UNDERWURLDE the Beanstalk. As soon as you get to recorded on. Next, Stuart Lindley from West screen two, says Mr Clay, keep your If you see an advert for a game from finger on the \"left\" key until you are Yorkshire, who wants to see even a company you've not heard of, I'd at the far end of the second brick. suggest that you don't send off for the more reviews in C&VG, just like a Then go to the top of it and work game unless you see a good review certain other games magazine. Stuart back until you reach the top of the of it in a magazine, or someone else starts by asking whether a screen. When you get the item, you recommends it to you. It's true that Commodore or a Spectrum's the best work your way over to the far left of software is expensive. But, in among computer to buy. The next part of his the screen. It's as easy as that! all the rubbish, you'll often find a real letter, though, offers some tips on gem. We hope that C&VG helps you Underwurlde. to sort out the difference between the Well, Stuart, you've almost OUT OF ORDER answered your question yourself. If two. you want to play games like Modi F El-Nadi writes all the way Underwurlde, Knight Lore and other other from Cairo, Egypt, to tell me that he's MANIC BUGS classics, it seems likely you'll have to been playing tennis for almost six Detlef Wacker is from Germany, buy a Spectrum Or be prepared to years now. Well, Modi, that's the though you can probably tell that longest tiebreaker that I've heard of! wait six months for the Commodore conversion. Anyway, enough of the awful jokesfrom the name. Anyway, he's got a The sheer number of Spectrums he's found a bug in Match Point. bug in his Amstrad version of Manic around means that most software Sometimes, during the game, when Miner. If you reach a five-figure score like 10199 and then, next game, only companies write their games for that he plays a smash in or out of the machine to start with. This tactic may service box but inside the singles reach 8745, the machine doesn't remove the first digit from the not be a hit with anyone who doesn't court, the computer prints \"OUT previous high score and you will get own a Spectrum, but that's what and awards itself the point. If anyone happens in the world of big business, knows why this happens, or has a 18745 for your new high score. I'm afraid, I don't like it either spare glass of barley water for Modi. though I do just happen to own a let me k CAVELON CHEAT Spectrum! First this month is Sean Gordon from BOULDERDASH Letham, Fife. While hacking through MISTAKES? WHERE? Frazer Wild thinks he's found a bug Ocean's Cavelon, Sean found a Unfortunately last month's Book of in Boulderdash. On cave D, he says, routine which seems as though it was Games didn't manage to avoid the you need 34 jewels to complete the used by the Ocean programmers to onslaught of the collective power of screen. There are four butterflies test the game. Start the game and the Bugs and we have to admit to which should make nine jewels each, then hold down D,F,R,T,1,K and some mistakes..........sob! Our giving a total of 36 jewels, but the mist until the screen says \"Hi Chris, what rigorous testing system didn't prove only gives six jewels, leaving our do you want?\" Then, just press the too much for them, and they sneaked hero three short and unable to collect number of the level from 1 to 6. a couple of slip-ups into the magazine. the screen. I haven't heard of this bug Are you sure you just stumbled\" Cosmic Pyramid, on page 39 of the before, Frazer, though I'm sure that if on this tip, Sean, or do you have some Book of Games, is in fact for the Vic anyone else has the same problem inside information? 20 and not for the Spectrum as we they'll get in touch. printed. We also credited the PLOTTING ON program to the wrong person. That's about all we have time for Apologies to the author, Paul Gill. this month. If you have a tip or Ian Turner from Bexleyheath, Kent, Another game, Planet Lander for suggestion that you think belongs on has a few variations on Sinclair's the Vic, is a little faint and hard to this page, or you need help with a DRAW command for the Spectrum. read in certain parts of the program. listing from C&VG, just write to me Try typing Plot 100,50: DRAW If you have any problems, don't at the address on the top of the page. 60.60.9999 for some interesting hesitate to send us a self addressed You can leave me a message on results. Also, try PLOT 40,87: DRAW envelope and we'll send you a new 01-251 5633, or contact the Bug 87,87,50000 or PLOT 128,5: DRAW Hunter on Micronet on Mailbox copy. 65,65,40000. account 012786556. BY ROBERT SCHIFREEN 57 "


"TID DOH UM 3.5. PLE 1_BORDER 7: PAPER Z INK WAIT WHILE HICS LOAD FOR = TO 55 2 READ F 3 POKE USR an, f 4 NEXT . 5 DATA BIN 00000000.BIN 00011 000 BIN 00011000.BIN 00011020 BI N 00011000.BIN 01111110.BIN 1101 DATA BIN 00000000 BIN 11001111, BIN 000101 BIN 010000 BIN 11101 011100 BIN BIN 000001 1.2.1.2 TA 16, 16 0.1 TA ,BIN 1111 IN 11110111 O IZHOZ O ZE MOMO ZSS HHHHH-019 HZH2m H OH ZO Z8 ZOH-AHZOO 00009OHOM. OHH9 FEEHO Z 0 0 USDA OZ IZHI 20 -9O OHHH OOHOM Z 9 H 0 LE ZIL Z OHTOHO HUWJOIL JOT H 00MH 00 HHHHS Z 0:00 OLOLEH.... TUZIL Fusco 0 ZO 0> -99 SOHO 9999 HOSIS HO 9Z -9 ZOH Z 0 0-0 00 00 HO ZOH _9Z 100 HOCH HO 29 z TA BIN 10001021 BIN 01001 0001000, BIN 11100000, BI 1. BIN 00010000 BIN 0101 ER : PAPER : INK 7: B AT ,-; INK 6: \"WELLCO TO. DER SET PRINT AT 19 FIGHTER ei! ! ! FFFFURE . : NEXT F 41 FOR F= TO 13: PRINT_AT_F.1 INK 4;\" : NEXT F PRINT AT 14 . 1. INK 3 2009 42 PRINT AT 19, INK 2; PAPER B 1000++ +++ IFID + SD CD Lif 13-0 HD | HUB C D & 0.LL.ID AQIL FILOLOTHO 3HE HZ OH I CUCWE OUWT1 & OLE OTOCOCOCXTIFO. ODOTH00 -0 LINO z HOW OF EXIE OUT OZIL 20 zlour HZ HOZOTZ O I 3QH III IILUZ HO 1 LJ TOH. 1932 WILQ UIT OL JOO WHlu 02 ZZLOTO ILZ OR PRINT AT 18 n OR n=30 TO 2 STEP 1: BEEP INK 5. \" FOR F=1 TO 5: NEXT PRINT T RINT AT 18.2: INK 5 . OR n = 17 TO 14 STEP 005, n. PRINT AT 1.2 INK 6 \" FOR = 1 TO 10 NEXT : PRINT AT 1.2 \" NEXT 46 FOR n=35 TO 40: BEEP.005, n. 47 PRINT AT 14.1 INK 63 48 FOR N=1 TO 50 NEXT : PRIN FOR =30 TO 2 STEP 1: BEEP .: PRINT AT 18, INK 5; \"* OR F=1 TO 5 NEXT PRINT U CH 10 000 0 * 000 Z IN KERE ul 303 HH TWO Totu HH HIZIHO ZZ IZOLO 71 PRINT AT 13. INK 5; \"YOU S TART OF WITH 3 LIFES_AND FEE LIFE. SPIDER LANDS YOU LOSE A 80 PRINT AT 21.8 INK 6; HIT KEY TO CONT 85 PAUSE 0 CLS "


"SPID IGHTER Research has been in progress for several months on a brand new, and top secret, military project. You have been involved in research into changing the size of the human body and making it invisible your ultimate aim is to create an army of invisible soldiers. Today has gone BB normal. You have been experimenting with the laser reduction ray, fine tuning the machine for the final experiment of the day. Having turned away to study the display of the computer, the laser reduction ray malfunctions, swings around and fires beam straight at the back of your head The light in the room begins to fods and you feel your legs collapsing beneath you. Your body has now shrunk to one hundredth of its original Ble. The tiny spiders which inhabit the dark corners of the laboratory now tower above you and are advancing toward you. Your only chance of survival is to blast away the spiders with the tiny leser plotol atrapped to your weist. Only a direct hit will harm the spiders, BO always aim to hit them right between the eyes. Full instructions are included in the listing. RUNS ON A SPECTRUM IN 16K BY IAN FOWLER CUN RINK ATARINA DD 91 PRINT AT 8. ,5\"X:RIGHT; AT 2 PAUSE 100: CLS rijon NO Tlu 191 LUS=3: LET SC = 19 LET C=12 AT 0,2; INK 4; SCORE OS: DE 30 Oto 0.8 INK 4: SCORE PRINT AT 0,2 JUILL001.10.UILIZOHHH: H: HZH INK SCORE: ROUP R. 140 PRINT AT P OR NETO 10 NEXT N PRINT AT B INK 3: 20 F PRINT AT RC: INK FC THEN LET C = FC30 THEN LET C=30  IF INKEY $=\"2\" THEN PRINT AT C_ 165 IF INKEYS = LET CEC-\": LET CE THEN PRINT AT IF SO THEN LET :=0 LET C=31 IF C3 THEN 00 SUB 1 180 NEXT P 190 GO TO 2000 1000 PRINT AT P OR 9335 TO 40 BEEP.005 INK 3 9. FOR n=18 TO 2 STEP F AT__C NEXT W PRINT AT NG INK 4: PRINT 1 TO 5 1010 IF TOP AND PEOR =9+1 THEN GO TO 1020 NEXT 100 FOR n = 10 TO 20 DEEP .005 PRINT AT P INKS TO SO 'NEXT 9 PRINT AT P.; ZOOL OIL TOTO TU DOTO 1600 OOO Omo 2009 a 25 . 2039 FOR =1 TO 300 NEXT 3000 PRINT AT 2,0 FLASH 1 OLS 4, \"HA HA!!, AT 2.8 6. \"YOU HAVE NO MORE LIVES LEFT FLASH INK : INK 3001 IES Chi THEN LET 3002 PRINT AT 5.0 INK 3012 INPUT \"ANOTHER BO 3020 IF A$=\"Y\" OR AS L INE ALLET $C = GO TO THEN OL THE 3038 BRINT INK 3 CE SYESYE 3040 GO TO 3030 PORE 23592,25 "


"SOFTWARE 31 STONEYHURST ROAD, ERDINGTON, EXPRESS BIRMINGHAM. Telephone: (021) 384 5080 Dear C & VG Reader, The management and staff of Software Express would like to express their thanks to the readers of C & VG for their tremendous support and good wishes since the last issue of this magazine NEW SOFTWARE.... Infocom's Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy .... Cut Throats .... Suspect (latest releases). We are now able to supply . . . . Infocom INVISICLUES for the following titles ..... Zork I, II, III. ... Deadline . . . . Witness .... Starcross . . . . Suspended.... Planetfall.... Enchanter . . . . Sorcerer & Infidel .... all at  6.70. F15 Strike Eagle . . . . (disk)  14.95 Atari Corporation's NEW TEXT ADVENTURE 'PAY OFF' (Disk Only)  9.95 Atari Writer Printer Driver (disk)  19.99 Touch Tablet to Epson Printer Dump Routine (disk) [ 19.99 Touch Tablet to 1020 Printer Dump Routine (cass & disk) .99 Atari Adventure Writing System by Codewriter (disk)  24.95 Asylum (Adv) Screenplay  25.90 Atari Graphics and Arcade Game Design .....  12.80 Atari XL Graphics Hand Book Atari Colour Graphics (Beginners Guide).....  10.95 Subscriptions NOW being taken for ANTIC & ANALOG  40.20 each pa. SO DON'T forget, if you've seen or heard about it then we will try and get it for you... PLUS remember that our NEW Atari Service Department is NOW OPEN. STOP PRESS ...... ATARI 1020 Colour Printer + Atari Touch Tablet + Touch Tablet Dump normal retail normal retail price  169.97 OUR PRICE  109.99 Save  59.98 ATARI 800 XL, 1050, DOS 3, Home Filing Manager, Pay-Off (Adventure), Demo Disk .99 ATARI 800 XL, 1010, Invetation to Programming, Pole Position, Demo Cassette  129.99 Pole Position Cassette 48 K  9.99 Revision \"C\" Basic Rom  9.99 ww Frol Z WITH MARCH ISSUE OF SINCLAIR USER GIANT CUTAWAY POSTER of the Spectrum anatomy, displaying the circuit board, chips, resistors, capacitors, heat sink everything, in fact, that you ever wanted to know about the internal workings of your home computer PLUS  PIXEL PAINTER Ann Hughes of Psion demonstrates the mind-bending intricacies of the Match Point and QL Chess graphics PROGRAMMING MAESTRO John Gilbert shows how to create character reaction and interaction in the second part of our Al adventure series FIRST INSTALMENT of a complete course for Spectrum beginners QL INVADERS are here at last! Juice up you QL, and fill the holes in the User Guide, with our user-defined graphics program Make sure you get your issue of Sinclair User next? month by placing an order with your newsagent now. Please reserve a copy of Sinclair User for me next month/every month* \"delete as applicable Name Address Sinclair User is published monthly by EMAP Business & Computer Publications. "


"GOLD! 64 ATARI Serangakuine & Premier Arcades from Datasoft As licensed by leading American Arcade Game manufacturers to Datasoft the original PAC-MAN featuring the original MR.DO! CASSETTE DISK IDIG-DUG DIG-DUG .95  PAC-MAN THE ULTIMATE IN AMERICAN SOFTWARE FOR YOU ON U.S. GOLD U.S. Gold is stocked by all leading computer stores including: John Menzies WHSMITH WILDINGS WOOLWORTH Pac-Man and characters are trademarks of Bally Midway Mfa, Co. C1980 for the Western Hemisphere: Trademarks of Namco Ltd. 01980 throughout the rest of the world, Licensed to Datasoft, Inc. by Namco America, Inc. Dig Dug is designed and engineered by Namco 1982. Licensed to Datasoft, Inc., by Namco-America, Inc Mr. Do is a trademark of Universal USA, Inc. 1984. Datasoft is a registered trademark of Datasoft, Inc. Premier Arcades is a trademark of Datasoft, Inc. 1984 Datasoft, Inc. All rights reserved, "


"DAILY Mirror SENSATIONAL SOFTWARE FROM MIKROGEN SPECTRUM48K MATCH SOFTWARE! GAMES OFD 300 ocea 1984 PYJAMARAMA FOR 48K ZX SPECTRUM MIESTPROBE (Also Available on) RAID OVER MOSCOW SPECTRUM VIC 20 CMMDRE 64 ELECTRON ATARI DRAGON ORIC BBC OTHER 2 8 1 1 1 LAST THIS WEEKS IN CHART WN-WEEK IIAN WEEK | TITLE Publisher GHOSTBUSTERS ACTIVISION DALEY THOMPSON'S DECATHLON OCEAN STAR STRIKE REAL TIME ELITE ACORNSOFT RAID OVER MOSCOW U.S. GOLD/ACCESS PYJAMARAMA MICRO-GEN ELITE ACORNSOFT MATCH DAY OCEAN Computer COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM SPECTRUM ELECTRON COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM BBC SPECTRUM SPECTRUM SPECTRUM U.S. GOLD Adventure A ACCESS PLAY IT LIKE THERE'S NO TOMORROW! BOOTY FIRERIRE SVOOL DAZE MICRO SPHERE "


"LOTHLORIEN a SPECIAL OPERATIONS CHALLENGING SOFTWARE Diretot watable Sed the Scene 11 8 PSYTRON. 16 -TESTS-9298-88-12-28 17 MATCH DAY OCEAN BOOTY FIREBIRD SKOOL DAZE MICRO SPHERE DALEY THOMPSON'S DECATHLON OCEAN 11 HUNCHBACK | OCEAN CHILLER MASTERTRONIC 3 KNIGHT LORE ULTIMATE 3. SELECT ONE COMPUTER RECORDS 14 BEACH HEAD ACCESS/U.S. GOLD COMBAT LYNX NEW GENERATION 2 SELECT ONE COMPUTER RECORDS AIR WOLF ELITE 6 BEACH HEAD ACCESS U.S. GOLD 1 PERILS OF WILLY SOFTWARE PROJECTS 2 CYCLONE VORTEX 4 BMX RACERS MASTERTRONIC 1 SCRAMBLE 64 INTERCEPTOR BOOTY FIREBIRD 2 DOOMDARK'S REVENGE BEYOND JET SET WILLY SOFTWARE PROJECTS 3 UNDERWURLDE ULTIMATE 4 COMBAT LYNX DURRELL 2 JET SET WILLY SOFTWARE PROJECTS SPECTRUM SPECTRUM SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM SPECTRUM SPECTRUM VIC 20 SPECTRUM SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM SPECTRUM SPECTRUM 20 HERS 28 DEATHSTAR INTGREEPTOR TERMINAL SOTWARE BACKPACKERS Ons GUIDE TO THE UNVERSE PARTI Commodore 64 Spectrum 48K System Sorware Graphicall,Amazing! THIS TOP 30 HAS BEEN COMPILED FROM CHART INFORMATION SUPPLIED BY N.O.P. MARKET RESEARCH LTD BETWEEN 6th FEBRUARY AND 19th DECEMBER 1984 Spectrum Software by fantasy Commer "


"SOFTWARE WORLD 12, ETHEL STREET, BIRMINGHAM B2 TEL: 021 643 7559 FOR ALL POPULAR MICRO HARDWARE, PERIPHERALS & SOFTWARE BIRMINGHAM'S LARGEST STOCKISTS OF: AMSTRAD, ATARI, BBC, COMMODORE, DRAGON, ELECTRON, MSX, ORIC, SPECTRUM AND TEXAS. SOFTWARE AT AMAZING PRICES! (i.e. Atari from .00) SEND S.A.E. FOR FREE LISTS (SPECIFY MACHINE) ATARI ATARI ATARI PACKAGES BOOKS & MAGAZINES SELECTED CARTRIDGES e.g. Star Raiders, Pac Man 800XL 800XL ANTIC .50 each 1010 RECORDER 1050 DRIVE ANALOG .00 for two + SOFTWARE + SOFTWARE PAGE 6 .00 for three .99 .99 (inc back issues) (please phone) Latest issues from U.S. Place your regular order with us now. ALL LATEST ATARI SOFTWARE IN STOCK IN OUR NEW 1ST PRICE REDUCTIONS ZX SPECTRUM .00 FLOOR ATARI CENTRE. AMSTRAD & TEXAS NEW STOCKS SPECTRUM + .99 NOW AVAILABLE. ACORN ELECTRON .99 PLEASE PHONE TO CHECK STOCK AVAILABILITY BEFORE SENDING MONEY REMEMBER IF WE DO NOT HAVE WHAT YOU REQUIRE IN STOCK WE CAN NORMALLY 'OBTAIN IT FAST! U.K. & AMERICAN SOFTWARE IS AVAILABLE MAIL ORDER U.K. POST FREE Cheques payable to \"Software World\" GOODS DESPATCHED BY RETURN POST, SEND FOR UP TO DATE LISTS ALL ITEMS AVAILABLE MAIL ORDER OLYMPIAD Believe in the beat... its back on the street!.. w z 8 EVENTS CBM 16/PLUS 4 C 16 .95 ELECTRIC BOOGALOO Original Soundtrack Album on ... Records Tapes and LCD Pady Canon FDSTUKILA OTHER TITLES AVAILABLE FOR THE C. 16 RIG ATTACK .95 LUNAR DOCKING 6.95 ZAP-EM .95. C. 16 SOFTWARE STARTER PACK CONTAINING SHOOTIT, HOPPIT, CLIMB-IT, MUNCH-IT E14.95. AVAILABLE BY MAIL DIRECT FROM TYNESOFT JUST SEND REMITTANCE POST AND PACKING FREE. Tynesoft Computer Software. Addison Industrial Estate, Blaydon, Tyne & Wear NE21 4ZE. 091 414 4611. STILL SHOWING CLASSIC HAYMARKET CLASSIC OXFORD ST. AND ALSO FROM MARCH IST ALL OVER LONDON SOUTHERN-ANGLIAAND CENTRAL TV AREAS FROM APRIL 19 ON RELEASE IN GRANADA-WESTWARD-YORKSHIRE TYNE TEES-HARLECH-SCOTTISH-BORDER AND GRAMPIAN TV AREAS LUL COMPUTER SOFTWARE ADDISON INDUSTRIAL ESTATE, BLAYDON-ON-TYNE, TYNE & WEAR. TEL: (091) 414 4611. 64 "


"HERO wwy GAME OF Z MONTHS THE mm BY PAUL GILL RUNS ON A VIC 20 IN 3.5K PARTII Becoming a hero in this day and age is no easy job. There are so few opportunities for an aspiring hero to make a name for himself that many would-be knights in shining armour pack it all in and become bank clerks. So, C&VG, with the help of Paul Gill, have designed a computer game to keep ambitious and over-active heroes in good shape until their day of triumph finally arrives. Your task is to enter a fortress guarded by soldiers of the evil Baron von Hell and rescue the beautiful Princess Elena who he has locked away in the east tower of the fortress as ransom for taking over the neighbouring king's country from him. Arrows, swords, chasms and crocodileinfested pits have to be negotiated before you can rescue the fair princess and claim the title of Hero of the Land! PARTI 5 FORI=1T05:HI$(I) =\"801082\" :HI(I) =1000 H NE(I) =\"???\" NEXT 13 PRINT\" SHERON POK E36879,25 : POKE36878,15 12 FORINT0511 : POKE7168+I. PEEK (32768+1): NEXT FORT=7168 T07271 READA : POKET, A : NEXT -DATA254, 254, 254,0.239.239,239,0,0,0,2 4 36,36,66,98,182,129.145, 102.24,0,0,0. 16 DATAB, 0,32,67,255, 67,32.0,8,41,84, 118 165.173,88,255 18 DATA68,66, 153, 165, 165 153,66,68,56,12 4.127 244, 236, 194,68.56 28 DATA122, 127, 126,56.5643.48,56 28.62 254.47,55, 67, 34,28,94.254.126.28, 12 12,1 2 28 22 DATA127, 127,35, 43,67.35.63,3, 120.8.8 28.62, 127, 18,54 24 DATA16,56,124.254.16.16, 16, 16: FORT=1T 016 POKE7271 +T, 8: NEXT 26 FORT=T08:POKE7424+T, B.NEXT GO TO 1818 46 Sk=1: SC$=\"80000\":LI=3 SC=@ SM=1 EX= -3 w$=\"eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee\" Wit=\"@ee 022 @eee eeee eee-W2$=\"eeee eeee 52 PRINT\"C\":POKE36879.12 POKE 35869,227 OKE36878,15 52 ONSKGOSUB54,54.56.68.68.56.62.68.56.6 4 GOT068 54 PRINTSIDERUNG FORT=17042:PRINTWS NEXT: RETURN 56 PRINT\" TARGET FORT=1T09:PRINTW23 NEXT:PRINT\"eee :DDDDDDDDDDDDDD reeee\" ws 58 R$=\" 1\" :R1$=\"O \":FORT=1T09: R$=R$ NORR1$=R1$+\" \"NEXT P=18 59 PRINT\" TAB (P)R$ RETURN a PRINT : POKE36879,25 12 PRINT\"29 . ... HEROL 14 FRINTATO PLAY BHERO THIS\" PRINT\"PROGRAMME MUST BE RUN FIRSTGRITCH'S OFF THE COMPUTER.\" 25 PRINT\" WHEN IT HAS DONE SO YOU MUS TEPRESS SHIFT AND HIT THE RUN/STOP KE ANART 29 PRINT\" .....HIT A KEY 22 OKE 198,: WAIT198, 1:POKE 198.a 2FORT= 1 TO 1888 NEXTT 26 POKE642,32:SYS64824 SW 65 "


"www 5 GAME OF S th THE RO AD Z MONTH. www T 60 PRINTS TT FORT=1T03 PRINTW1$ NEXT : FORT=1T09:PRINTW$, NEXT IFSKC7 THE NRETURN 62 FORT=1T04:S(T) =4358+T#5: POKES (T) 12 N EXTT: U=@ :SU=-22 RETURN 64 GOSUB60:PRINTS TAB (18) \"eecame e me me me\"; 66 PRINT\" eeee e \" : RETURN 69 PRINT 1080\" , TAB(16) SC$ PRINTS WORDT DAAR AARMEN FORT=1TOLI:P \"\", 70 NEXT: IFSK=18 THEN74 72 PRINT\"O\", TAB(21) \"BAB 74 FORT=8T021 POKE38372+1,7: POKE 458+T, NEXT 76 PRINTSTAANOTTOSTOMATOLSTOM H13/1) \" HN+1) 78 PRINTS\"; TAB(9) SM 90 F=4273: H=6: B=7 A=4315 A1=427@R=@: C=3 3792 P1=1 : J=1 :B0= 1888 92 POKEF +0,3 : POKEF +C +22.3 POKEF H: POKEF + 22. 94 RESTORE FOR I= 1 TO 103 READA : NEXTI: FORT= 17010 READA : POKE36875, AFORI= 1 TO 120 NEXT 96 DATA195, 215,195.219, 195, 221, 195,219, 108 IFPEEK (F+44) =320RPEEK (F+22=5 THEN900 101 IF PEEK (F+1)=B THEN750 182 IFF=> 4293 THENPOKEF +22 32 GO TO75 .83 KEPEEK (197) IFK=33 THENH=3 B=9IFF) 42 72 THENPOKEF, 32: POKEF +22.32 F=F-1 184 IFK=34 THENPOKEF 32 : POKEF +22.32 H=6 B =7 F=F+1: IFF=) 4293 THEN758 195 IFK=30 THEN118 126 IFPEEK (F+44) =320RPEEK (F+22=5 THEN900 108 IFPEEK (F +44)=32ANDR=@THEN988 118 POKEF +0,3 : POKEF +C+22,3 : POKEF ,HPOKEF +22.B 112 ONSKGOSUB 140, 172, 152, 148, 166, 152, 168 168, 171, 178 114 IFBOD 9 THENBO=B0-18:PRINT\" \"BO\" \" 116 GO TO100 113 IFPEEK (F +22)=5 THEN900 119 IFR=1 THEN 174 128 IFH=6 THENJ=1 121 IFFC4273 THEN112 122 IFH=3 THENJ= -1 124 POKEF, 32 : POKEF +22 32: F=F-22+J: IFPEEK (F) = 14 THENR=1: GOTO 112 125 IFPEEK (F) = 13 THEN750 126 IFPEEK (F) 320RPEEK (F +22) > 32 THEN900 127 POKEF +C.3: POKEF +C+22,3 POKEF ,H: POKEF +22 B 123 FORT=280T0235 : POKE36876 T:NEXT: POKE 3 6876, 129 IFBO) 9 THENBO=B0-18 PRINT\"S\"BO\"#\" 138 ONSKGOSUB 140, 172, 152, 140, 166, 152,160 268,171,178 132 IFPEEK (F) HTHEN988 134 POKEF.32 : POKEF +22.32 F=F+22+J: IFF) 42 93 THEN750 136 POKEF +0.3 : POKEF +C+22,3 POKEFH:POKEF +22 BIFF +22=ATHEN900 137 FORT=235T02BSTEP-1: POKE36876, T.NEXT T POKE36876.B 138 GO TO 114 14B POKEA, 32: A=A-1 IFAC4294 THENA=4315 143 POKE36874,234+(4315-APOKE36874, 144 POKEA+0,7 :POKEA.5 : RETURN 146 POKEA1,32: A1=A1-2 IFA1C425@THENA 1 = 42 149 POKE36875,234+ (4229-A1) POKE36875. 159 POKEA1+C, 1 POKEA1,3 RETURN 151 POKE36877 228 POKE36373. (16-P) 152 PRINTS; TAB (PR13 PEP+P 1 IFR=THEN EF P1 66 "


"MWh GAME OF ww THE HERON 2 MONTH www 764 PRINT _MEN 766 FORT=1T02BBO: NEXTT -\"LI 768 GOT058 808 SC$=STR$(SC) L=LEN(SC$) SC$=LEFT$(\"@ B000\",7-L) +RIGHT$ (SC$.L-1) 305 PRINT \"BO\" \"TAB (16) SC$ 810 RETURN 820 PRINTT E LL DONE!!! :PRINTRYOU RESCUED THE\":PRINT .ODAMSEL !\" 822 FORT=1T03:FORI=180T0235STEP2 :POKE368 76, I : FORG= 1 TO 18 : NEXTG: POKE36876, NEXTI, 154 IFP) 16ORP (5 THENP1=-P1 155 POKE36877, 228 : POKE36873, 17-P 156 PRINT \"; TAB (P)R$ : POKEF +C,3 : POKEF +C +22,3 : POKEF ,H: POKEF +22,B 153 RETURN 168 FORT=1T04: POKES (T),32:5(T) = S(T) +SU:U =U +1 : POKES (T) , 12:POKE 36876,128 +U#3 NEXT 162 IFU 12 THENSU=-SU: U=B 164 RETURN 166 GOSUB140: GOSUB145 : RETURN 168 GOSUB 140: GOSUB16B : RETURN -178 GOSUB 140: GOSUB145 : GOSUB 16 : RETURN 171 GOSUB140 GOSUB 152 : RETURN 172 GOSUB 148 : GOSUB 146: RETURN 174 POKEF 14 : POKEF +22,14: F=F+22+J: POKEF + 0.3: POKEF + C +22,3 176 POKEF HEPOKEF +22.B: IFPEEK (F +44)=32TH EN998 173 REB:GOTO 108 180 GOSUB 140 : GOSUB152: RETURN 750 POKE 36874,6 : POKE36875, :POKE 36876,8: POKE36377,8: POKE36878, 15 751 POKE 4249,H:POKE 4271.B :POKE 4293 +C,5 :P OKE 4293.13: SK=SK +1 : SM=SM +1 : IF SK=11THEN92 324 PRINT E : POKE36879,42: 826 PRINT\"T\" TAB(9) 828 PRINT\"|\"; TAB (7) F E 838 PRINT\" VEGEK ... TRUE LOVE! 832 SC=SC+BO: IFLIC4 THENLI=LI +1 SK=1 34 PRINT\" SCORE = SC +10 : POKE36875,234 POKE36875,@: \"SC FORT= 1 T0128 : SC 842 PRINT\"....... 844 POKE36375,255 : FORT= 1T0250:NEXTT POKE SC: NEXT 36875,8: FORT=1 TO 1080: NEXTT: SK= 1 : GOSUB888 GOT056 988 POKE36878,15 : Y=@ : P=32 P1=32 902 FOR TEFT04541STEP22 : POKEFP: POKEF +22 P1: F=F+22: P=PEEK(F) :P1=PEEK (F+22) 904 POKEFH: POKEF +22,B: 910.POKE 36876,238-Y: Y=Y+ 1 FOR I=1 T02 NEX TIT 911 POKEFP: POKEF +22,P1 : POKE 36876. :POKE 36877,23B:FORT=1T0208 : NEXTT: POKE36877, 914 LIELI-1: IFLIOTHEN918 915 DATA195,308,8.30. 195,688,0,80, 195,20 B. 195,808., 82,283,680, 281, 288, 2,88,201, 620, 195 916 DATA288,6.80, 195,680, 80, 195,208,, 80, 195, 1808 917. FORT=1T025@ : NEXTT:GOT058 752 PRINT DING! DING!\":PRINT BONUS!\" 753 FORT=1T06 : FORI=230T0248 POKE36876, 1: NEXTI, T: POKE36976, 754 BO=B0-10: SC=SC+10:POKE36874.234: GOSU B8B0 : POKE 36874,0 : IFBO) 9 THEN754 756 POKE36874,255 : FORT=1T0128 : NEXTT: POKE 36874,8: FORT=1T0500: NEXTT 758 PRINT\":POKE36879,25 :PRINT1909.. HERON :POKE36869,192 76B PRINT SCORE: -\"SC 761 IFSC) 18BBANDEX=THENLIELI +1 : EX=1 762 PRINT\" LEVEL : \"SM "


"913 FORI=1T018 : READA, B : POKE36876, A:FORT= 1TOB : NEXTT: POKE36876,8: NEXTI 919 POKE 36879,25 : POKE36869, 192:PRINT\" YOU'RE DEAD!\" 928 PRINT\" YOU SCORED :-\"SC:POKE 198, 922 FORX=1T05: IFSCHI (X) THENPRINT\" .. BUT YOU'RE ON THE HALL OF FAME!\":GOT HEROES 3 MONTH THE W ART 0926 EE 924 NEXT:FORT=1T02808 : NEXTT: GOTO 1080 926 FORT=5TOXSTEP-1:HICT)=HI(T-1):HI$(T) =HI$(T-1) : HN$(T) =HN$(T-1) : NEXT 928 PRINT\" ENTER THREE INITIAL'S.\" INP UTHN$(X) : IFLENCHN$(X))) THENPRINT\"C\":GOT 0928 938 HI(X) =SC : GOSUB300 :HI$(X)=SC$ 1080 PRINT\" :POKE36879,25 :POKE 36869.207 1982 PRINTE.. HEROES\" 1284 PRINT\" eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee\" : FORTE 1T011 PRINT\".\"; TAB(19);\"2\":NEXT 1986 PRINT\" eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee\" FOR T= 1 T05:PRINT\" \" \"HI$(T) HN$ (T) 1987 NEXT:PRINT\" 1988 PRINTHeeeeeeep@ @@@@@@@ .PRINT we\" ; TAB (19); \"@\":PRINT H IT SPACE TOP LAY \" 1010 PRINT \" TAB (19);\"@\" PRINT\"Weeeee eeeeeeeeeeeeee 1812 GETA$: IFA$=\"\" THENQ=@ : GOTO46 1014 Q=Q+1: IFQ) 5 BOTHENQ=@ : GOTO1018 1016 GO TO 1812 1818 PRINT\"\":POKE 36879,25 : POKE36869,207 1020 PRINTE E EEE EEE EEE\":POKE 198, 1022 PRINTEEEEEEE\" 1824 PRINTWEEEEEEE 1026 PRINTEDE EEEEEE 1828 PRINT\" EEE EE 1938 PRINT\" DE EE 1032 PRINT\"WE EE EEEEM 1834 PRINT\" EE EEEE 1036 PRINT\" E EEE EE EEE 1838 PRINT\" (C) 1984\" 4848 PRINT\" PAUL GILLEN K\" 1845 PRINT\"..... 1846 GETA$ : IFA$=\" \" THENQ=@ : GO TO 46 1848 (=Q+1: IFQ) 250 THENQ=B:GOT01052 1858 GO TO 1846 1052 PRINT\" . DE EEEE EEE EEE   EEE EE EE E 1054 PRINTWEEEEEEE   1856 PRINT\" CAN YOU RESCUE THE DA MSEL IN DISTRESS\" 1058 PRINT DODGE THE ARROWS AND BARRELS BUT WATCH OUT FOR THE 1860 PRINT\" . GUARD'S SPEAR'S!\" 1252 PRINT\" GRAB THE SWINGING ROPE AND LEAP OVER THE RANPARTS.\" 1864 PRINTERJAT THE END OF EACH SCR EEN GET THE BELL ROPE.\" 1056 PRINTERBLEF TOMJUMPENRIGHT\" ; 1868 PRINT\"F2 ZNOW OC\" 1878 GETAS: IFA$=\" \" THENQ=B:GOT046 1872 (=Q+1 : IFQ) 1808 THENQ=2: GOTO 1800 1874 GO TO1078 MA v "


"F-15 U.S. Multiple Combat Scenarios Full Aerobatics 3-D Graphics GOLD 000 American in Software STRIKE EATAE MicroProse Software 64 arhe ATARI F-15 Strike Eagle features superb 3-D graphics, F-15 manoeuvreability, computer assisted targetting including modem fighter Heads Up Display, airborne radar, air to air missiles, surface to air missile defence, ground target bombing, full aerobatics, and multiple combat scenarios. DISK/CASSETTE $14.95 1809 POWER FLIGHTS COMMANDER SOLO FLIGHT: Take off with this user friendly flight simulator which includes 3-D graphics, full cockpit instrumentation, dual VORs, ILS, 21 different airports, and real life challenges from weather and mechanical emergencies. DISK/CASSETTE .95 SPITFIRE ACE: Save London during the Blitz in your RAF Spitfire! Outstanding out-ofthe-cockpit 3-D graphics: 14 different combat senarios. DISK .95, CASSETTE .95 NATO COMMANDER: Defend Europe in an accelerated real-time war situation! Full scrolling battle map, includes infantry, armour helicopters, airforces and tactical nuclear weapons. DISK $12.95, CASSETTE .95 U.S. Gold is stocked by all leading ROOL computer stores including: John Menzies WHSMITH WILDINGS WOOLWORTH U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre. Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 ALY Telephone: 021.3593020 Taley 337268 "


"CHALLENGING SOFTWARE NEW THE GAME WITH 32,000 SCREENS NOW PLAYING ON COMMODORE 64 CHALINGING SOFTWARE SCOMMODORE 64 version Simply in a different league from graphic adventures that have gone before Your Computer The Lords of Midnight is one of the most exciting games currently available, Micro Adventurer Once you get into it, The Lords of Midnight is mind-gripping to an almost unhealthy degree Personal Computer Games An outstanding success Popular Computing Weekly Lords of Midnight is an 'open' game using intelligent play by the computer. Routes aren't dictated by the programmer in advance. Big K SEAT de 1984 Meados Winnet ST BEST TEXT/GRAPHICAL ADVENTURE For the COMMODORE 64 By Mike Singleton conversion by TAG & The KID INCENTIVE Ahed fod 1984 Winnet STATE OF THE ART We ve created a new programming technique called Landscaping. It provides an epic game with 4000 locations and a stunning 32,000 screen views of Midnight Defeat Doomdark, the evil witchking, with Morkin's quest or Luxors armies. Your skill alone will lead to victory or death. The Lords of Midnight is more than an adventure, mightier than a wargame. Your skill alone will lead to victory or death, in the ever changing lands of Midnight. The Lords of Midnight is available now from better software dealers everywhere. Mail Order: Beyond, Competition House, Farndon Road, Market Harborough, Leicestershire LE16 9NR. Price .95 including P&P. Access & Barclaycard ring: 0858 34567 Cheques & POs made payable to BEYOND. "


"ANIMATED DID Range DANE.. KnightSoft Out now on the 48K Spectrum and the Amstrad Animated Sirip Poker the four URL Software range. Available from most leading retailers Dealers contact us for you are Park, Glenfield Road Nelson Lancashire o telephone 0282 698052 AMITATEA STRIP POKER Soker Mecard s u pervele play drame de con pounds and your skill allt merus Programmers Origine programmes required for most computers Play the g ame Strip Poker was and it Could you in te rawise, stand, fold or cheating this lagle, Dyse sal the cards, though it's your chance/thichards to a ir shangg and how much to take RULES ENCEDSEEK THE SPELTTI te version only! "


NA


"You should see what he's just seen. For only  a quarter and just a local telephone call whenever you want to connect up (that's only 22p per half hour at cheap rates) you could be part of Micronet. The only accessory you need is a Modem. A small price to pay to join the other visionaries on this exciting new system. Fill in the coupon for more details and send to Micronet 800, Durrant House, 8 Herbal HillLondon EC1R5EJ. But be warned, Micronet 800's features are almost limitless and constantly updating. So maybe you'd be better to call in at Laskys, John Lewis, main Boots or your local Micronet 800 Action Station. To feast your eyes on all the amazing things it can do. Micronet 800. Stretching the mind of your micro far beyond its limits. Micro evolution continues with this unique communications, information and software system. Set on our mainframes nationwide. Includes 30,000 pages and access to Prestel with its full range of services. A tremendous Communications section that networks you to thousands of other members across the country. Send and receive electronic messages and graphics at a touch of a button. And there's the Chatline service, Swapshop and Teleshopping. Check with daily updates on the very latest computer news. Micronet also has its own huge facts data base. And a choice of up-to-the-minute software to download absolutely free. micronet To: MICRONET 800, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill. London ECIR SEJ. Telephone 01-278 3143. Please send me the full facts about Micronet 800. AND Name Make/Model of Micro Address Telephone For 97 of telephone user Prestel is a trademark of British Telecommunications On Prestel "


"See Micronet 800 in action. This 1 RANIAMS Centre 337161. AVON DEVON KENT MERSEYSIDE Bath. Boots, 1 Marchants Passage, Exeter. Boots, 251 High Street, Tel: 0634 405471. Heswall Thornguard Computer Woking. Harpers, 71-73 Southgate. Tel: 0225 64402. Tel: 0392 32244 Gravesend. Gravesend Home Systems, 46 Pensby Road. Commercial Way. Tel: 0486 225657. Bristol Avon Computer Rentals, Exeter. Open Channel, Computers, 39 The Terrace. Tel: 051-342 7516. 16 West Street, Old Market. Central Station, Queen Street Tel: 0474 23871 Liverpool. Hargreaves, 31-37 SUSSEX Tel 0272 550600. Tel: 0392 218187. Gillingham. Regal Software Warbreck Moor, Walton Bexhill-on-Sea. Computerware, Bristol Boots, 59 Broadmead. Paignton. Computer Systems Ltd, Supplies, 49 High Street. Tel: 051-525 1782 22 St. Leonards Road. Tel: 0272 293631. 35 Hyde Road Tel: 0803 524284. Tel: 0634 579634. Liverpool. Laskys, Dale Street Tel 0424 223340. Bristol Laskys, 16-20 Penn Street Plymouth. Syntax, 76 Cornwall Maidstone. Kent Micros, 51 Union Tel: 051-236 3298 Brighton. Boots, 129 North Street. Tel 0272 20421. Street. Tel: 0752 28705. Street. Tel 0622 52784. Liverpool Laskys, St. Johns Tel 0273 27088. Seaton. Curtis Computer Services, Rainham. Microway Computers, Precinct Tel: 051-708 5871. Brighton. Gamer, 71 East Street. 426 High Street. Tel: 02756 5575. Seaton Computer Shop 39 High Street. Tel: 0634 376702 St. Helens. Microman Computers, Tel: 0273 728681. Weston-super-Mare. K&K 51c Harbour Road. Tel: 0297 22347. Sevenoaks. Emest Fielder Rainford Industrial Estate, Mill Brighton. Laskys 151-152 Western Computers, 32 Alfred Street Tiverton. Actron Microcomputers Computers, Dorset Street. Lane Rainford. Tel: 0744 885242. Road. Tel: 0273 725625. Tel: 0934 419324. 37 Bampton Street Tel: 0884252854. Tel: 0732 456800. Southport. Central Studios, Crawley. Gatwick Computers BEDFORDSHIRE DORSET Shortlands. The Village House 38 Eastbank Street TeL: 0704 31881. 62 The Boulevard. Tel 0293 37842 Bedford. Boots, The Harpur Centre, Bournemouth. Brook Computers, of Computers, 87 Beckenham Lane. MIDDLESEX Crawley. Laskys, 6-8 Queensway. Harpur Street. Tel: 0234 56231. 370 Charminster Road Tel: 01-460 7122 Tel: 0293 544622. Enfield. Laskys, 44 48 Palace Dunstable. Dormans, 7-11 Broad Tel: 0202 533054. Sittingbourne. Computer Plus, Garden Shopping Centre Eastbourne. Boots, 15 Eastbourne Walk Tel: 0582 38302. Bournemouth. Lansdowne 65 High Street. TeL: 0795 25677. Tel: 01-363 6627. Arndale Centre. Tel: Leighton Buzzard. Datasine, Computer Centre, 1 Lansdowne Tunbridge Wells. Modata Harrow. Camera Arts, 42 St Anns TYNE & WEAR 59 North Street. Tel: 0525 374200. Crescent, Lansdowne. Computer Centre, 28-30 St Johns Road. Tel: 01-427 5469. Gateshead. DP Supplies Leighton Buzzard. Milton Keynes Tel: 0202 20165. Road. Tel: 0892 41555. Harrow. Harrow Micro, 24 St. Andrews House, Westfield Music & Computers, 17 Bridge Dorchester. The Paper Shop, LANCASHIRE Springfield Road Tel: 01-4270098. Terrace. Tel: 0632785068 Street. TeL: 0525 382504. Kings Road Tel: 0305 64564. Blackburn. Tempo Computers, Hounslow. Boots, 193-199 High | Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Boots Luton. Hobbyte, Unit 16, The Poole. Lansdowne Computer 9 Railway Road. Tel: 0254 691333. Street Tel: 01-570 0156. Eldon Square Tel: 0632 329844. Arndale Centre. Tel: 0582 457195. Centre, 14 Arndale Centre. Blackpool Blackpool Computer Southall. Twillstar Computers Ltd, Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Laskys, Luton. Laskys, 190-192 Arndale Tel 0202 670901. Store, 179 Church Street. 7 Regina Road. Tel 01-574 5271. 6 Northumberland Street. Centre. Tel: 0582 38302. ESSEX Tel: 0253 20239. Teddington. Andrews, Broad Tel: 0632 617224. Luton. Terry More, 49 George Basildon. Basildon Software Burnley. IMO Business Systems, Street Tel: 01-997 4716. Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Street. Tel: 0582 23391. Centre, 78-80 Liberty Shopping 39-43 Standish Street. Twickenham. Twickenham RE Computing, 12 Jesmond Road. BERKSHIRE Hall, East Square. Tel: 0268 27922 Tel: 0282 54299. Computer Centre, 72 Heath Road Tel: 0632 815580. Reading. Laskys, 118-119 Priar St Chelmsford. Maxton Hayman, Preston, 4 Mat Computing Tel: 01-892 7896. WALES Tel: 0734 595459. 5 Broomfield Road Tel: 0245 354595 67 Friargate. tel: 0772 561952. Uxbridge. JKL Computers, Aberdare. Inkey Computer Slough. Data Supplies, Chelmsford. Way In Computers, Preston. Laskys, 1-4 Guildhall Preston. Las 7 Windsor Street. Tel: 0895 $1815. Services, 70 Mill Street, The Square, Templewood Lane, 7 Village Square, Chelmer Village. Arcade. Tel: 0772 24558. NORFOLK Trecynon. Tel: 0685 881828. Farnham Common. Tel 2 820004. Tel: 0245 467858. Wigan. Wildings Computer Centre, Norwich. Adams, 125-129 King Aberystwyth. Aberdata at Slough. Laskys, 75 Queensmere Colchester. Boots, 5-6 Lion Walk. 11 Mesnes Street. TeL0942 22382. Street. TeL: 0603 22129, Galloways 23 Pier Street. Centre. Tel: 075378269. Tel: 0206 577303. LEICESTERSHIRE Tel: 0970 615522. NOTTINGHAMSHIRE Slough, MV Games, 245 High Grays. H. Reynolds, 28a Southend Leicester. Boots, 30-36 Gallowtree Sutton in Ashfield. HN & L Fisher. Cardiff. Boots, 26 Queens Street Street. Tel: 75 21594. Road. Tel 0375 31641. Gate. Tel 0533 21641. & 105 Frederick Street 87 Outram Street Tel: 0623 54734. BUCKINGHAMSHIRE omputer Centre, Market Harborough. Harborough Nottingham. Laskys, 1-4 Smithy Tel: 0222 31291. Bletchley. RAMS Computer 17 Staple Tye Tel 0279 22846. Home Computers, 7 Church Street Row. Tel: 0602 413049. Cardiff. P & P Computers. Centre, 117 Queensway. Harlow. Laskys, 19 The Harvey Tet 0858 63056. 41 The Hayes. Tel;0222 26666. OXFORDSHIRE Tel: 0908 647744. Centre. Tel: 0279 443495. LONDON Swansea Boots, 17 St Marys Chesham. Reed Photo & Hornchurch. Comptel Computer W1. Computers of Wigmore Abingdon. Ivor Fields Computers, Arcade, The Quadrant Shopping Computers, 113 High Street. Systems, 112a North Street, 21 Stern Street tel: 0235 21207. Street, 104 Wigmore Street Centre. Tel: 0792 43461. Tel: 0494 783373. Tel: 0402 446741. Banbury. Computer Plus, Tel: 01 486 0373. 2 Church lanc. Tel: 0295 55890. WARWICKSHIRE CAMBRIDGESHIRE Ilford. Boots, 177-185 High Road. Wi. HMV, 363 Oxford Street Oxford. Absolute Sound & Video, Coventry. Coventry Micro Centre, Cambridge. Boots, 65-67 Sidney Tel: 01-553 2116. Tel 01-629 1240. 19 Old High Street, Headington. 33 Far Gosford Street. Romford. Software Plus, Street and 28 Petty Curry Street W1. Laskys, 42 Tottenham Court Tel: 0865 65661. Tel: 0203 58942 72 North Street. TeL: 70 65271. Tel: 0223 350213 Road. Tel 01-636 0845. Oxford. Science Studio, 7 Little Coventry. Impulse Computer Southend-on-Sea. Computerama, W1. Lion House, 227 Tottenham Cambridge. Cambridge Computer Clarendon Street Tel: 0865 54022. World, 60 Hertford Street Precinct 88 London Road. Tel 0702 335443. Court Road Tel: 01-637 1601. Store, 4 Emmanuel Street. Tel: 0203 553701. Tel 0223 358264 Southend-on-Sea. Computer SCOTLAND W1. Sonic Foto Micro Center, Coventry. JBC Micro Services, 200 Cambridge. Heffers Stationers Centre, 336 London Road. Aberdeen. Boots, 133-141 Union 256 Tottenham Court Road. Earlsdon Avenue, North Earlsdon. 19 Sidney Street. Tel: 0223 358241. Tel 01-580 5826. Street. Tel 0224 585349. Tel: 0203 73813. Peterborough. Boots, Southend-on-Sea. Estuary W1. Tomorrows World Today, Edinburgh. Boots, 101-103 Princes Coventry. Laskys, Lower Precinct 40-42 Bridge Street, Queensgate. Personal Computers, 318 Chartwell 27 Oxford Street. Tel: 01-439 7799. Street. Tel 031-225 8331. Tel 0203 27712 Tel 0733 65352. North, Victoria Circus Shopping W1. Walters Computers, DH Evans, Edinburgh. Laskys, 4 St James Leamington Spa. IC Computers CHESHIRE Centre. Tel 031-556 1864. Centre. Tel: 0702 614131. Oxford Street. TeL: 01-629 8800. 43 Russell Street. Tel: 092636244. GLOUCESTER Chester. Boots, 47-55 Foregate WC1. Transam Micro Systems, Glasgow. Boots 200 Sauchichall Leamington Spa. Leamington Street. Tel: 0244 28421 Cheltenham. Laskys, 206 High Street. Tel: 041-332 1925. 59-61 Theobalds Road Hobby Centre, 121 Regent Street Chester. Computer Link, 21 St. Street. Tel: 0242 570282. Tel: 01-405 5240. Glasgow. Boots, Union Street Tel: 0926 29211. Cheltenham. Screen Scene, 144 W8. Walters Computers, Barkers, Werburgh Street. Tel: 0244 316516. and Argyle Street Tel: 041-2487387. Nuneaton. Micro City, 1a Queens Glasgow. Tom Dixon Cameras, Chester. Laskys, 7 The Forum, St. Georges Road. Tel: 0242 528979. Kensington High Street. Road. Tel: 0203 382049. 15-17 Queen Street Northgate Street. TeL: 0244 317667. Gloucester. Boots, 38-46 Eastgate Tel: 01-937 5432 Rugby.O.E.M.,9-11 Regent Street. Tel: 041-204 0826. Crewe. Midshires Computer Street Tel: 0452 423501. SE7. Vic Oddens Micros, Tel 0788 70522 SHROPSHIRE Centre, 68-78 Nantwich Road. 5 London Bridge Walk HAMPSHIRE WEST MIDLANDS Tel: 0270 211086 Basingstoke. Fishers, 2-3 Market Shrewsbury. Clairmont Tel 01-403 1988 Birmingham. Boots City Centre Ellesmere Port. RFR TV & Audio, Place Tel 0256 22079. SE9. Square Deal, Enterprises, Hills Lane. House, 16-17 New Street. 1 Pooltown Road, Whitby. Tel: 3647 52949. 373-375 Footscray Road, Southampton. Business Tel: 021-643 7582 Tel: 051-356 4150. New Eltham. Tet 01-859 1516. Shrewsbury. Computerama, 13 Electronics, Micromagic At Atkins, Birmingham. Laskys, 19-21 Hyde. C Tech Computers, 184 Castlegate. TeL: 0743 60528 7 Civic Centre Road Tel: 0703 25903 Lewisham. Laskys, 164 High Corporation Street Market Street. Tel: 061-366 8223. Waterlooville. GB Microland, Telford. Computer Village Ltd, Street Tel: 01-852 1375. Tel: 021-632 6303 Macclesfield. Camera Computer 7 Queens Parade, London Road. SE15. Castlehurst Ltd, 152 Rye 2/3 Hazeldine House, Central Dudley. Central Computers, Centre, 118 Mill Street. 0625 27468 Tel: 0705 259911 Lane, Peckham. Tel 01-639 2205. Square. Tel 0952 506771. 35 Churchill Precinct EC2. Devron Computer centre, Telford. Telford Electronics, Macclesfield. Computer Centre, Tel: 0384 238169. HERTFORD u 68 Chestergate. Tel 0625 618827. bin County Computers 38 Mall 4. Tel: 0952 504911. 155 Moorgate, tel 01-638 3339. Stourbridge. Walters Computer Marple. Marple Computer Centre, 13 Bucklesbury. Tel: 0462 36757. N14. Logic Sales, 19 The Bourne, STAFFORDSHIRE Systems. 12 Hagley Road. 30-32 Market Street The Broadway, Southgate. Newcastle-under-Lyme. Tel: 0384 370811. Potters Bar, the Computer Shop, Tel: 061-427 4328 Tel 01-882 4942 Computer Cabin, 24 The Parade, 107 High Street. Tel: 0707 44417. Walsall New Horizon, 1 Goodall Stockport. National Micro Centres Stevenage. DJ Computers, N22. Boots, 38-40 High Road, Silverdale. Tet 0782 636911. Street Tel 0922 24821. 36 St Petersgate. Tel: 061-429 8080 11 Town Square. Tel 0438 65501. Wood Green. Tel: 01-881 0101. Stafford. Computerama, 59 West Bromwich. DS Peakman, Stockport. Stockport Micro Centre, Watford. Laskys, 18 Charter Place 58 Rosslyn Hill, Hampstead. NW3. Maycraft Micros, Foregate Street. Tel: 0785 41899. 7 Queens Square. Tel 021-525 7910 4-6 Brown Street. TeL: 061-477 0248. TeL: 0923 31905. Stoke-on-Trent. Computerama, Wolverhampton. Laskys, Widnes. Computer City, 78 Watford. SRS Microsystems, Tel 01-431 1300. 11 Market Square Arcade, Hanley. 2 Wulfrum Square. Tel:0902714568. Victoria Road. TeL: 051-420 3333. | 94 The Parade, High Street. NW4. Davinci Computer Store, Tel: 0782 268524. YORKSHIRE Wilmslow. Wilmslow Micro Tel: 0923 26602 112 Brent Street, Hendon. SUFFOLK Centre. 62 Grove Street. Bradford. Boots, 11 Darley Street Tel: 01-202 2272. Watford. Watford Electronics, Bury St Edmunds. Boots Tel: 0274 390891 Tel: 0625 530890. Cardiff Road Tel: 0923 405588. NW7. Computers Inc, 86 Golders 11-13 Cornhill. Tel: 0284 701516. Leeds. Boots, 19 Albion Arcade, Green. Tel: 01209 0401. CLEVELAND Welwyn Garden City. DJ Bury St. Edmunds. The Bond Street Centre, Middlesbrough. Boots, NW10. Technomatic, 17 Burnley Computers, 40 Fretherne Road. Computer Centre, 1-3 Garland Tel: 0532 33551. 88-90 Linthorpe Road, Tel 96 28444 Road, Wembley. Tet 01-208 1177. Street. Tel: 0284 705503. Sheffield. Laskys 58 Leopold The Cleveland Centre. MANCHESTER HUMBERSIDE Ipswich. Brainwave Micros, Street. Tel: 0742 750971. Tel: 0642 249616. Bolton. Computer World UK Ltd. Beverley. Computing World, 24 Crown Street. Tel: 047 350965. York. York Computer Centre, 208 Chorley Old Road CUMBRIA 10 Swabys Yard, Dyer Lane. SURREY 7 Stonegate Arcade. Tel: 0204 494304 Kendal The Kendal Computer Tel: 0482 881831. Bagshot. P & H Electronics, 22-24 Tel: 0414 641862. Manchester. Boots, 32 Market Centre, Stramongate. Guildford Road. Tel 0276 73078 KENT Street. Tel: 061-8326533. Tel 0539 22559. Ashford. DGH, 10 North Street Croydon. Laskys, 77-81 North End Manchester. Laskys, 61 Arndale Penrith. Penrith Communications, Tel: 0233 32597. Tel: 01-681 8443. Centre. Tel: 061-833 9149.. 14 Castlegate. TeL: 0768 67146. Croydon. The Vision Store, Ashford. Geenings of Ashford, Manchester. Laskys, 12-14 St Whitehaven. PD Hendren, 53-59 High Street. Tel 01-686 6362 80 High Street. Tel: 0233 33366 Marys Gate. Tel: 061-833 0268. 15 King Street Tel: 0946 2063 Croydon. The Vision Store, Bexley heath. Laskys, Manchester. Mighty Micro, Workington. Technology Store, 96-98 North End. TeL: 01-681 7539 15-16 Broadway Shopping Centre. Sherwood Centre, 268 Wilmslow 12 Finkle Street. Tel: 0900 66972. Tel: 01-301 3478. South Croydon. Concise Road, Fallowfield. Tel: 061-2248117. DERBYSHIRE Computer Consultants, 1 Carlton Bromley. Boots, 148-154 High Manchester. NSC Computer Road. Tel 01-681 6842. Alfreton. Gordon Harwood, Street. Tel: 01-460 6688. Shops, 29 Hanging Ditch. Epsom. The Micro Workshop 67-71 High Street. Tel: 0733 836781. Bromley. Computers Today. Tel: 061-832 2269. 12 Station Approach. Chesterfield. Boots, 35-37 Low 31 Market Square. Tel 01-290 5652. Manchester. Walters Computers, Tel: 0372 721333 Pavement, Market Place. Bromley. Laskys, 22 Market Kendal Milne, Deansgate. Square. Tel: 01-464 7829. Guildford. Walters Computers, Tel: 0246 203591 Tel: 061-832 3414 Chesterfield. Computer Stores Army & Navy, 105-111 High Street. Bromley. Walters Computers Oldham. Home & Business Army & Navy, 64 High Street Tel: 0483 68171. 14 Stephenson Place, Computers, 54 Yorkshire Street. Wallington. Surrey Micro Tel: 0246 208802 Tel: 01-460 9991. Tel: 061-633 1608 Derby. Boots, I Devonshire Chatham, Boots, 30-34 Wilmott Swinton. Mr Micro, 69 Partington Road Tel 01-6475636. Systems 53 Woodcote Walk Tel: 0322 45886. Square, Pentagon Centre. Lane. TeL: 061-728 2282 Micronet "


"Mirage Top Floor 1 Sandy Road Seaforth Liverpool L21 3TN Tel: 051-928 8443 SOFTWARE & DISTRIBUTION PROGRAMMERS CONCEPT. CODE WITH E PROGRAVITY WE ARE LOOKING FOR TOP QUALITY PROGRAMMES TO MARKET IN THE UK AND ABROAD. THE PROGRAMMES MUST BE OF TOP QUALITY AND IN MACHINE CODE WITH GOOD GRAPHICS AND SOUNDS AND ORIGINALI CONCEPT. WE ARE LOOKING FOR PROGRAMMERS TO CARRY OUT WORK ON NEW MACHINES SUCH AS THE C.B.M/16 AMSTRAD AND M.S.X. WE CAN SUPPLY THESE MACHINES TO CARRY OUT WORK FOR MIRAGE. WE ARE ALSO OFFERING  PRIZE FOR THE BEST PROGRAMME RECEIVED BY THE END OF FEBRUARY 1985 WHICH WE WILL DECIDE TO, MARKET. WE OFFER AN OUT RIGHT PAYMENT OR 10% PLUS PAYMENT OR 20% ROYALTIES. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT THE SOFTWARE MANAGER HE WILL BE GLAD TO LISTEN TO ANY QUESTIONS YOU MAY HAVE. SOFTWARE HOUSES WE ARE LOOKING FOR TOP SELLING PROGRAMMES TO DISTRIBUTE TO OUR WIDE RANGE OF OUTLETS THROUGHOUT THE UK AND GIVE YOU A VERY FAST SERVICE TO HELP WITH YOUR SALES AND TO MAKE THE MOST OF YOUR PRODUCTS. SEND A SAMPLE COPY OF YOUR PRODUCTS WITH RATES AND TERMS FOR A FAST ASSESMENT. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT THE SALES MANAGER HE WILL BE GLAD TO HELP AND ASSIST YOU. DEALERS AND DISTRIBUTERS DEALERS WE HAVE THE BEST SELLERS FROM THE BEST PRODUCERS; WE ALSO OFFER VERY GOOD RATES AND TERMS TO HELP YOU AND US TO ACHIEVE THE BEST SALES AND SERVICE. FOR MORE INFORMATION, CONTACT THE SALES MANAGER. DISTRIBUTERS HAVE YOU GOT THE MIRAGE RANGE ON YOUR SHELVES, IF NOT THEN CONTACT THE SALES OFFICE FOR SAMPLES AND RATES. TRIST THESE BEST GOOD REST SELLE SALES MANAGER T.C. SAPHIER SOFTWARE MANAGER C.A. SAPHIER "


"RUNS ON A SPECTRUM IN 16K ILES 10 CLS PRINT et EY PRESENTS 15 PRUSE 25: BEEP 10 20 PRINT AT 3.0 LINK 2 CRACK:PO1 ELIM BER! E LIRE BY GARY NAZARETH Your town has been raided by the invading Urdi tribe from across the ocean and the town has been left in ruins. The temple has been wrecked and looted, the High Priest murdered and the Casket of Relics stolen. This is your tribe's most highly treasured religious symbol, without which great bad luck will fall upon your people. You have been chosen, as the bravest and most ferocious warrior, to take on a secret mission into the heart of the Urdi's kingdom and recover the Casket of Relics. After days of sailing across the ocean and trekking across mountainous forests, you have reached the temple where your tribe's Casket has been hidden. The most difficult part of your mission now faces you. Numerous ledges must be climbed and fanatical guards avoided at all costs if you are to succeed in your holy quest. Full instructions are included in the listing. 30 PRINT AT 20.1: \"PRESS ANY KE Y FOR INSTRUCTIONS PAUSE 40 CLS PRINTAT 48; \"INSTRUC TIONS\";AT_5,8: 50 PRINT AT 7,0; INK 1 JUST CLIMB UP THE PL AND COLLECT THE VALUBLES 22PLE PLATFORMS FROM THE BOX AT THE TOP. NOT AS EASY AS IT SOUNDS BECAUS YOU ARE UNDER A CONSTANT ATTACK BY THE GUARDIANS OF THE BOX THEY WILL FIRE ARRO TO KEEP YOU AWAY. ZELEFT X=RIGHT SPACE=JU KEMPSTON JOYSTICK COMPATIBLE 60 PRINT AT 21.5; \"PRESS ANY KE Y TO PLAY. PAUSE 100 FOR F=TO 7READXPOKE 52.50.81.25 EAD X: POKE 240.36 98 RETA 20.52 49.58552 AD X: POKE 4,76.138.2 AD X: POKE 52,36,68,13 AD_X: POKE ATA .56.56.57.49 = 0 -Q0S JO: 1 + L 0.0 1 + HD DO D O: do: b I D UT NENEWru + 1 u Ng. 0 0  + 0 0 LLL LL LLL EO 0 t jin TI D + LL LOLA LLOLL IL-LOOL ILOZOOL .ZO. 1 0 HOWOZHAFA HAXHOWOZHOFO E L + II XIXIXIXIXIXIXIXIXILO LIX 1 OLL-LLLL02 FEEXEZ EZEEEEX OF UIO O 019 0:00: HOE HOE D + .. 1 OLID Z D D + 1 DUO 0-01 NONI 13 + x + 1 900 0 EO HL ) H 164 DESODO DIODO DO DW READ X: POKE 16,24,20.24 ERD X 2.38) TO 7: READ X: POR T 255 129255 29 NEYTE 7: READ X: POKE X: DATA 0.0.0.0.0.0.0 C =0. LET LI=3. FOR F= TO 150 STEP 2 W.255.0 NEXT F RF=21 TO STEP-6: PRIN 1 INK_2, \"D\";AT NEXT F  "


"220 FOR F=21 TO STEP -6: PRIN F 29: OVER 17 INK 1; 1; AT -1,29 INK 1, \"I\" AT F-2 29: INK * NEXT F FOR F=6 TO 21 STEP 6PR TF, OVER 1; INR 1, \"B AT FLINK_1; \"A\" NEXT 5 PLOT 216 167 DRAW 39. FOR F=6 TO 21 STEP 6: PRINT AT F. 2; OVER 1; INK 2 \"I'AT FI\" AT F-2,2; INK 2 AT 0.31: OVER 1 INK X=20: LET Y=0 LET YY = 3 LET I=1: LET R=29 STICK=IN 31 INKEY $=\"Z OR INKEYS: 2 THEN LET Y=Y\"X\" OR INKEVE! 0 OF 11 HX TOXHOC DEO su 1 H11 ZID 0 0 Citeste 3 AND 1=2 THEN PRINT A XYY\" \" LET_X =X-3 LET Y=Y 1 @ LET K=25 LET SC=0 F STICK=1 THEN LET Y=Y + 1 347 IF Y=31 THEN LET Y=31 RINT AT X,Y INK : \"E\" AT INK : \"F AT X+1, Y; INK \"G\", AT X,Y; ;AT X+ 1,Y INK : NT AT 0, 5 CORE \"50; AT IVES: \";LI 360 IF I = 1 AND STICK = 18 OR STIO NEFND Y325 THEN GOSUB 560 365_IF INKEY $=\"\" AND Y725 AND EN GO SUB 560 FINKEYS AND Y4 AND I =2 THEN GO SUB 570 375 IF I =2 AND STICK = 16 OR STIC Y > 4 THEN GO SUB 570 NT AT XK, INR II NT AT X.YY; # I=1 THEN LET YY =YY-1 I=2 THEN LET YY=YY+1 I=1 AND YY <=@ THEN LET Y I=2 AND YY >=31 THEN LET NT AT X,YY; \"J\" BEEP .00 520 IF YY=Y THEN LET LI= OR F=1 TO 10: OUT 254 R 254 RND #7: NEXT F BORD 530 IF LIKE THEN GO TO 700 TO 300 569 PRINT AT X-2 Y+1 AT \"G\" PAUSE 5 BEEP.01 X-2, Y +1; \"J\";AT X-1, Y+1\" 565 IF X=2 THEN PRINT AT X t. OIT T 7 ON THE OEM T L I. Cl. QUOMODO MIO : .   OSZTOVUZX II. Da li. -| F Khu X |ICH HILI H 7 I ullo || O -7 JILL JU HII || llt + Z II ADAXOS: H -|| + | 10 Z ostuOXONS : THE O90 HL| | | = 1HHOCHII || Xino in D  II LLOC E -OMIO 102ZX HH + MO ON O o SO99999 L ZILLIL ZIL Z 0 ... ... LILI D I mino E ID : In Z10:01Z 999HE NOODHO LOCOEEL CLEFOLLO: -H: D.D 90 DI UN : 570 PRINT AT X-2 Y-1, \" E AT X-1 Y-1; \"F PAUSE 5 BEEF.01.0 RINT AT X-2,7-1, \"J AT X-1,-1,LET YEY-2 RETURN 610 FOR F=40 TO-40 STEP -1BE 615 PRINT AT 0, \"SCORE\", SC, AT 8.10, \"LIVES 820 PRINT AT 12,0 LI INK 1; \"A\", AT 13.0 INK 2 B AT 13, 3iINK 6 625 FOR F=4 TO 30 PRINT AT 12 F: \"EAT 13,F: \"F\" AT 13 FG AT 12 F-3: \"J\" AT 12, F; AT 13, F \"\";AT 12, F-3, BEEP 1.55: N EXT F 630 PRINT AT 15.0;\" YOU H HE BOX INSIDE ARE\" PAUSE 2 EP.1,10 PRINT AT 17,0 * * DIAMONDS + + + +\": FOR F = 0 TO 10 STEP 2: BEEP .1.F: NEXT F: PAUSE 100: GO TO 200 700 CLS PRINT AT 10.12; \"AGAIN 710 IF INKEY $=\"Y\" OR INKEY $='y THEN GO TO 195 720 IF INKEY $=\"N\" OR INKEYS=\" THEN STOP 730 GO TO 710 800 SAVE C.CLIMBER: w * "


"ICOMMODORE LUSE INCORPORATING VIC COMPUTING WordStar 2000 future with Into the 950 Personal Computer Commodore User 6 However well you do, the game remains exciting, nail biting stuff. 'In space no one can hear you scream'the blurb says. My neighbours aren't so fortunate I've been giving them a hard time. But who needs neighbours with entertainment like this. Personal Computer World The screen display is split into three areas: a map of each of the ship's three levels; a report monitor which displays the ship's and crew's status (who's next on the Alien's menu); and a command monitor. The command monitor presents you with the instructions available to you; these can be selected with a joystick. This is a particularly nice feature of the game as it eliminates typing errors. The Alien you encounter can either be a timid beasty or a blood-curdling monster, and no doubt the intensity of your screams will reflect this. From beginning to end you're looking over your shoulder. Games Computing The game follows the track of the film quite closely, with a large number of variations. (If you knew exactly what was going to happen the game would get very boring.) The game is basically of a strategy type with adventure bits thrown in as well.\" Your Commodore The novice will require a few attempts to become accustomed with the game but the authors have thoughtfully provided a short scenario option for the space-rookie. The cassette is accompanied by a booklet giving clear instructions for play and a summary of the film. To appreciate the game's subleties, it will help to have seen the movie which would also give the player some idea of what to expect. Thid under my cinema seat first time roundthe game is true to the film. Only the bravest players should confront the Alien in the small hours of the morning. I'll say no more the hairs on my neck are bristling again. Home Computing Weekly At first I was disappointed as Alien is neither wholly adventure nor arcade, but after playing several times I can say that this game grows on you. The sound effects add to the suspense as does the sudden arrival of the monster. World February 1985 95 BRITAIN'S BIGGEST MICROCOMPUTER MACA TINIS ANARCUS SPECIALIST PUBLICATION ( Oleiro CAMES COMPUTING COMMODORE MARCH 1985 YOUR BEST INDEPENDENT COMMODORE MAGAZINE Computing ARGUS PRESS SOFTWARE LTD Liberty House, 222 Regent Street, London W1R 7DB Commodore 64 Now available for SPECTRUM 48K WEEKLY EXCLUSIVE: "


"Are you brave enough to enter the savage world of mighty Conan? You've experienced his barbaric world in movies, novels and comics. Now Conan is ready to spring to life in your home. So flex your muscles and prepare to do battle Your mission is to slay Conan's wicked rival and bring home a bounty of gems. Blocking your way are fire-breathing dragons, poisonous scorpions, vicious bats and other deadly adversaries. If that wasn't enough, you also have to fight your way through dark caves and dangerous dungeons, while looking out for mysterious creatures waiting their moment to attack! ATARI Commodore 64 Atari Disk Commodore 64 Atari Cassette .95 .95 $19.95 FAMOUS FACES\" from Datasoft BRUCE LEE THE LEGENDARY  Twenty Secret Chambers  Dazzling Graphics  Unique Multiple Player Options Spectrum 48K .95 Commodore 64 Cassette .95 Commodore 64 Disk .95 Atari Disk/Cassette .95 U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10. Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Tel: 021-359 3020. U.S. GOLD) Erica Soriano welkom D C D edemark of Teader of Defoe Copertine Codec olare the trademark of 14 Dec "


"SNAIL SWITCH A While Albert has been lounging in front of his TV, the snails have been busy squirming and sliding around in his box of plant labels. Each used to have the name of something Albert would be planting but the slimy specimens have rather messed things up. EE OTT LRY PS CEE CEGS CEEL AE As March gales howl, thoughts of spring arise, along with the sap of new growth, and Albert's mind is pushed towards his allotment, mainly by Nora prodding him with a fork. When he gets there, he is faced with the shambles wrought by nature and could do with some help putting the patch into some kind of shape. Perhaps you'd be kind enough to lend a mental hand... ASPUDS UP The vegetable patch has been dug and labelled. The number shows how many potatoes will et in the yield if a seed spud is planted in that plot. IN Albert has just eight potatoes to plant and, Being Albert, he will only .. plant one in each row and column and no two potatoes will e, in a diagonally straight line Where should he bed down the shevighedwards to achieve the highest Mossible yaeld s BCCE AOO O STTU AMO ACO AABB ORRT AABB MRUD INN First, they took the letters of each item and rearranged them into alphabetical order on the label. Then along came Percy, the plastic-eating parasite, who neatly snipped each label in half. Thus APPLES would end up as AEL PPS. The slugs excuse-me at the New Year's Dance served to thoroughly muddle the labels up so you could save Albert a few minutes by writing out fresh labels for him if you can work out what was originally on them, of course! 6/1 6/4 BOOG "


"L See H I J K B C D THE SOZZLED SPARROW its of up of ud is JUMPING HARES ent, with Another of nature's little games which has Albert leaning in a ruminative way on his fork instead of heaving compost is the trail left by a sparrow after the pl End e is bles will would z 11871 T the of kind ental ili sulle Before Albert can begin to concentrate, he must do something about the dozen hares which, true to form, are leaping madly about in the background. They start off in a line and a hare jumps over exactly three others before landing on the next available hare, or pile of hares. They are trying to end up, in just eight leaps, with four piles of three hares each. That isn't too difficult but, having spent the winter on an Open University maths course, they want every pile of three hares to have the same total. W KEY RIGHT LEFT Y UP **** been nber will ud is VN IN P) will .. eight and, only and will line NI*fill M * LYFY KYY ** Y**++ Y . * * 7 Y + + title + + * + + cu Y * * * Y the hebt.. ll wykle Witam START ***] OGA WWW. recent snowfall. Completely sloshed as he was, the The bird had imbibed too freely of poor bird couldn't take off and fly at the juices from a rotten apple and in a all, nor was he capable of making a Uhighly inebriated state had staggered, turn. Which means that at each square hoppity-splat, around the strawberry he either went straight on or turned patch. right or left only. The footprint shows the direction he What Albert is trying to do is work took through all the places he passed out the shortest path the sparrow through once only and the asterisks (*) could have taken from start to end of show places he visited more than its staggering journey. Can you work once. it out? xwe... FOR RESULTS PLEASE TURN TO PAGE 117 "


"You my rap I shoo AVAILABLE NOW CLIFF HANGER AUTHOR JAMES DAY ORIGINAL MUSIC BRIAN DOE Thrill to the cartoon style action of Cliff Hanger, a really original, Wild West game. As Cliff the hero, you've got to stop the bandito shooting up the canyon. But with its own brand of wacky cartoon action fun, things simply aren't as they seem in Cliff Hanger. For a start, the boulder you throw at the ol' bandito may just come bouncing back at you. Cliff Hanger incorporates all the elements that have made New Generation games best sellers for the Spectrum, such as original ideas, superb graphics and hilarious happenings but now it's available first for the Commodore 64. Featuring 50 separate screens, three levels of difficulty, one or two players scoring, Hall of fame and joystick compatibility or user defined keys, Cliff Hanger is set to be THE Commodore games playing sensation. Available from any good software store for just .95. Selected titles of New Generation Software are available from your local computer store and larger branches of John Menzies WHSMITH DO WOOLWORTH Spectrum "


"AVAILABLE NOW shoota DNS, then o'a you! Shoot the Rapids AUTHOR PAUL BUNN Ever wondered what it would be like to face the fierce white water in a top class canoeist slalom run? Well wonder no more because you can enjoy the fast action thrill of competitive canoeing from the comfort of your own armchair with Shoot the Rapids. It's a game that involves real skill because you must move your joystick to simulate paddling action. You must get through the gates of the slalom course in the fastest time possible, while avoiding the river bank and rocks. There are also extra hazards like rogue speed boats and interfering beavers to worry about. This multi level game features increasingly difficult river courses with superb graphics and smooth scrolling along the river. Qualifying times have to be reached to move onto the next course. With Hall of Fame, one or two player scoring and joystick compatibility, Shoot the Rapids is probably the best sports action No simulation game devised to date. Available from any good software store for just .95. News Generation NEW GENERATION SOFTWARE Software Tet 0225 316924 AND FREEPOST Bath A24TD GSH New Generation products we sold according to their terms of trade and conditions of sale "


"...50 I SAID-NO NEED FOR THAT, DIRK JUST BUY ME A COPY OF COMPUTER XI LATCHFORD "


"EXIDEO GAMES YEARBOOK. Available at Only .65 your newsagent now! "


"ARCADE The annual arcade show, The Amusements Trade who is battling to destroy the Exhibition, designed to whet the appetites of gargantuan Imperial Walkers, arcade owners, made its debut early this year at great monsters resembling a Olympia in London. Clare Edgeley went to have a cross between the horse of look round and to bring you news of some of Troy and massive metal 1985's hot new games including news from Luke camels. The only way to Skywalker in The Empire Strikes Back. Word is annihilate them is to blast out that a brand new racing game, GP World, is their controls and so render them incapable or to throw about to hit the streets as rival to TX-I. Plus what tow cables around their legs you've always wanted to do lose your marbles to bring them crashing to the in a whacky game called Marble Madness. ground. DON'T LOSE YOUR waves of increasing Not a moment to relax. No Each time the pinball world difficulty levels, each with its sooner have the Walkers settles down to normality, MARBLES! own lanscape. Expect the gone than Darth Vader sends Williams have a pleasant habit Somewhere in a galaxy far unexpected when dealing bands of Probots against of shocking it back to life. removed from anything we with marbles. Should you fall Luke in his Snow Speeder. If With the current price of the as earthlings know, exists a down a level, the ball will these monsters are not pound against the dollar, a the men planet with a very basic life shatter and crumble to dust, destroyed new pintable is selling at le 15 senngat form whose one aim in life is whereupon a dustpan and operating them will transmit F1.750 plus VAT. At those to beat its contemporaries in brush will appear to sweep a message to Darth Vader kind of prices the operator can a a race from the top of its city away the debris. A new ball informing him of the no longer afford the luxury of to the bottom. will appear at the spot the old whereabouts of the Rebel ordering the five latest pins. one went over the edge. base. Blasting Probots is no He must be certain that the Although it's fun playing easy task as they return machine he is buying is going against the computer where Luke's laser fire in an to be a real money taker. you have a set time to finish attempt to wipe out his Williams' Space Shuttle is the course a two player shields. such a machine. game is more exciting as youAction then switches to The game features excelcan do the dirty on your space where the Millennium lent pulsating sounds and it is partner by bumping him into Falcon, under the control of nice to hear the return of the space whenever possible. Han Solo, is fighting with voice, absent from Williams' Its very simplicity should enemy Tie-Fighters. Han has last few games. The voice make Marble Madness a hit one other job to do and that featured is that of Mission in the arcades. is to evacuate the rebels on Control which talks you nicely Watch out for it, it's very Hoth and transfer them to a through the game. The back. You cannot get anything playable. The next time you place of safety. flash artwork depicts the much more basic than a lose your marbles you'll The ultimate aim is to help Space Shuttle, and there is a marble, and a new and know where to find them! Luke gain full Jedi status and 3D model of the shuttle on original game from the Atari to do this you have to the playfield. stables was launched at the THE EMPIRE destroy a given number of I have a bad habit of only ATE show Marble Inc CMPIRE targets. Each time the reviewing American Madness featuring these STRIKES BACK targets are destroyed you machines. This is to be useless round objects. will earn the letters J-E-D-I. immediately rectified, as I The race course is Once again, the fate of the The series is now review a machine from suspended in mid-air and Rebels lies in the capable complete. In one afternoon, Europe's top manufacturer, seems to be composed hands of Luke Skywalker and you will be able to re-enact Zaccaria of Italy. You may entirely of narrow funnels Han Solo as they fly across the film and help Luke to have seen Farfella, Magic and gang planks from which the frozen wastes of the destroy Darth Vader once Castle and Devil Riders in your it is all too easy to roll off into planet Hoth to bring the and for all by going on to local arcade. All of these a bottomless void. Empire to its knees. complete his quest in The machines are feature packed Control of your marble isAt last, Atari has launched Return of the Jedi (C&VG but share the one innovative simple. A track ball provides The Empire Strikes Back, the Dec '84). May the Force be feature, whereby the player a 360° control of the ball's middle section to the Star with you. has to complete a sequence movements. Rolling it Wars trilogy where the to drop a ball ramp to allow upwards will decrease the forces of good and evil battle access to the top playfield. marble's speed and rolling for supremacy. Their latest release is entitled downhill will increase it. Many of you will have seen Robot check this one out. Various obstacles are the film and the game The artwork, normally their placed in the ball's path and follows sections of it closely. downfall, is above average it will take a little practice to For those who haven't, Luke and the playfield is amazing. be able to get around these. Skywalker is being trained to There is a tunnel running Beware swinging trap doors the status of a Jedi Knight so above the deck, across the far and Slinkies they like that he can help a small band end, and the Robot Bridge nothing better than to gobble of rebel warriors defeat Darth which runs the ball up and up your marble as it passes Vader and his Imperial across the playfield. It's difthrough the slinking zone. Forces. ferent to say the least. There are six different You play the part of Luke 86 "


"ACTION THE PERILS OF A added to Paperboy's controls. Gone are the PAPER ROUND standard firebuttons and Getting up early in the joystick — jutting out from morning to do a paper round the cabinet is a set of bicycle is hard at the best of times, handlebars complete with but in some areas it's non-slip rubber grips and a downright suicide. Only the tiny fire button for throwing toughest will survive. the papers. The going gets really rough Pushing the handlebars when you have to ride up forward, in a manner of most Hard Way in Atari's Joysticks, will increase your want to do when travelling at Paperboy. Medium Road and speed and pulling back will break-neck speed is to tear Easy Street aren't exactly a reduce you to an almost racing game incorporating your eyes away from the bundle of fun either. They're falling off wobble. Sudden some new features. It is dual track even for an instant. probably the toughest braking can produce a screened and offers you the beautifully controlled skid if streets on any paperboy's Before you can enter the chance to try your prowess Grand Prix of your choice, you're good enough. If you round. behind the wheel round three you have to participate in a aren't too bad. Should you manage to circuits ending up, funnily preliminary race. It's fairly enough, with the Mount Fuji easy to get through and if complete your street by delivering the right papers to race circuit in Japan a you don't have too many the right houses, you'll be feature which is included in blow-outs and pile-ups you'll rewarded with the almost every other racing be well on your way to paperboy's training course, game. victory and a good position which takes the form of a The cars are superimposed at the start. The green light BMX assault course, full of graphics set on real film of flashes, engines rev, foot jumps and obstacles. A the three tracks. Taken from down and you're off, group of friends will be the driver's view close to travelling at a suicidal speed awaiting at the end of your the ground it produces a towards the first chicane. gruelling ride to welcome you very realistic effect, made Watch out for the cars in back to safety for another doubly so by the two super front of you and those And the hazards. An army wide screens the game coming up alongside it's day. incorporates. These are set every man for himself and You start off the game on a assault course is peanuts compared to what these Monday morning and if you nobody will give an inch. In guys have to go through. can prove yourself will join With a heavy load of papers the ranks of successful riders balanced precariously on the and will carry through to 1984 1 handlebars, the aim is to Tuesday and so on through throw the morning papers the week. When the new into the mailboxes and week starts, you will have to porches of those houses on contend with Medium Road your round. You can always and eventually Hard Way, tell your houses they are each of which offers more painted in light colours. and more scope for your Those who aren't your nerve and ability to ride out customers are in dark colours at a slight angle to each other of trouble. so that when sitting in the the actual race, you have to If this is what a paper and have welcoming slogans driving seat you have an complete two circuits within like \"Get Lost' round is really like you'll on their incredibly wide view of the a given time to qualify for the take my advice and stay doormats. These people are track unfolding in front of next race. treated with derision safely tucked up in bed. Only and you with only a slight line daredevils need apply to ride extra points can be scored by The game handles well down the centre to show the although it is very easy to this course. aiming the papers at join. However, if you are over-correct when in a skid. windows and other targets viewing the game and The controls are very to cause as much WHY NOT GET ON standing a little to one side, sensitive and a heavy hand constructive damage as TUC DIAUT TDAV possible. as THE RIGHT TRACK? you get a distorted view as if on the steering wheel will be MUI a chunk from the middle is enough to send you out of Watch out for other kids Racing games and sports missing. control and out of the race. breakdancing on your route, themes have cornered the As well as the usual The background which was playing around with remote market in the arcade world high/low gear, you also have shot on location flashes past controlled toys, loitering and, not to be outdone, Sega an accelerator, brake and as you whizz along and you dogs, hedges and workmen has come up with an exciting three dials on the dashboard barely have time to marvel at and especially cars. new game which, if a to add an extra touch of the scenery. It's easy to get distracted success, will surely rival realism. They give you your GP World is probably the and then CLUNK you Atari's TX-I. fuel, revs and oil status at closest simulation to a Grand come to in a heap on the GP World, one of the only any time throughout the Prix race that you are likely to sidewalk. laser disc games at the race, though from find in the arcades at the A neat innovation has been show, is another Grand Prix experience the last thing you present. 87 "


"chlox L ELLELE LETTER FROMAMERICA games. But the American consumer * didn't spend his or her dollars on * adaptations of Raiders from the Lost Ark or ET, the Extra Terrestrial Competition from numerous companies (some making awful games), plus a movement away from the VCS machine didn't help either. The final result was that Jack Tramiel was able to snap up the ailing company. Tramiel is best known for his amazing salesmanship which turned Commodore into the top dog of the low-end computer heap. He didn't buy the company for peanuts and there's an estimated 400 million dollars in debts to deal with. But nobody thinks Tramiel did it for laughs he is a man who gets what he wants and turns a profit in doing so. The question is will the millions of Atari users also profit? Right now nobody seems to know anything. The American computing field seems to be constantly Atari is like the Sleeping Beauty, changing. Not content to just add or adapt a bit from year to year like a television set, each couple of months seem to bring new turmoil. How does this affect the computer enthusiast, the gamer? We have a lot in common with you folks in the UK. We're all interested in computers, software and what makes the gaming world tick. I'll try to talk about some of the things that are happening and changing here, that might affect you as well. Publishing a computer magazine in dollars. But where was the under Championship Lode Runner the US doesn't seem very profitable standing of the reader's needs? I awaiting the kiss. The holiday season lately. Dozens of once-thriving titles think that the survivors will be the may see some life, some indication of have disappeared. There are less \"old-timers,\" the magazines that feel what is going to happen. But for now than three like C&VG now a few their readers deserve quality and * Atari sleeps on. months ago there were more than 20. even-handedness. * Time to move on to some of the And greed is part of the reason. One of the obvious signs that things great new games that have appeared. Computers seemed like such a good weren't going well with the industry Trivia board games have become thing that every publisher and his in general was the crashing of Atari. quite a rage here in the States and mother got in on the act. Reporter, * Warner Communications, the parent software companies have been rushDenise Caruso, of Infoworld (the * company, suffered huge lossesing to get their versions out on the weekly computer newsmagazine) perhaps, among other reasons, market. One of the best of those agrees. \"I think that what happened because they thought people would currently available is PQ The Party is that people saw a boom but they buy \"movies\" made into video Quiz Game, from Suncom (available oversold themselves, and a lot of for IBM, Apple, Atari and companies did the same thing. Commodore). I like it for a number of Enthusiasm was high, she POLII reasons, the first being that hand continues, \"but everybody got * controllers come with it. You don't scared when growth slowed down. have to touch the computer at all. The Remember, we're not dealing with designer obviously thought ahead marketing professionals -a lot of the because four controllers can be people were new to this, more used, even with the two-slot entrepreneurs than computer Commodore. The game uses bright specialists.\" Caruso feels that too graphics and a moving \"time bar\" to many people couldn't take realizing count down as the questions and that the golden egg had some lead in possible answers are displayed. An it and went around screaming that the PQ The Party Quiz Game option lets everyone score for a right sky was falling. And just like * answer which makes the game more Chicken-Little, enough screams * enjoyable for groups. Since my 91 provoked a bad response. year-old uncle can't read the screen My feeling is that, while you don't as fast as I, a handicap feature slowed need to know everything about a me down (he beat the pants off me, computer in order to publish a by the way). The program comes with magazine about it, there does have to a \"General Edition\" disc and other be a love for the subject. It looked types of question areas are like too many publishers decided forthcoming. that they needed a computer > I saw the worst example of breakmagazine because there seemed to * dancing in France last April. Four be outstretched hands holding * guys were making themselves look LETTER FROMAMERICA "


"Lode Runner very silly as they tried to perform in a * street of Montmartre, while a crowd watched with sour looks. Now I can't jump on my head (or turn flip/flops either), but fortunately Epyx software has a way for me to still try it out. Their Breakdance program features a series of action-oriented games in which your surrogate dancer can spin his way to high steps and scores. You can also record and play back a * sequence you've created. Different New York street scenes liven up the action and the jazzy, funky music is very entertaining. Epyx has also come out with a most desired cartridge that speeds up the disc drive operations of the Commodore. It is compatible with most software * and is really a must for players of interactive adventures. van can be docked with to supply weapons such as forward machine guns, rear smoke screens and oil slicks. There are even times when you can change into a speedboat. Controls can be either keyboard or joystick, with a second joystick necessary to activate the rear weapons. This would normally be *impossible to handle, but Sega conveniently supplies a special bracket with purchase that joins the sticks together. The game translates Championship Lode Runner well from the arcade and is a must for racing/shooting fans. *Championship Lode Runner Tapper deals with supplying a BRODERBUND SOFTWARE, INC. formed barful of thirsty patrons with drink. 17 PAUL DRIVE while cleaning up after them and SAN RAFAEL, CALIFORNIA 94903 trying to maintain your cool. The U.S.A. Bruderbund animation is excellent on the disc version, even the limited memory **Realm of Impossibility ELECTRONIC ARTS cartridge looks good. Eye/hand co-2755 CAMPUS DRIVE Championship Lode Runner ordination was never so vital as here. here. SAN MATEO, CALIFORNIA 94403 the book The \"personalities of the various US patrons are hilarious. From Electronic Arts comes Realm After you've gotten through Tapper* *Breakdancest of Impossiblity. This is an enhanced unscathed, it's time to push your EPYX COMPUTER SOFTWARE version of the same author's skills to the limit and take on 1043 KIEL COURT Zombies, wherein you navigate * Championship Lode Runner SUNNYVALE, CALIFORNIA U.S.A through three-dimensional rooms, (Commodore 64). The very popular casting spells in your search for Lode Runner had you infiltratina Spy Hunter Tapper points and treasures. What I find I find treasury rooms in search of gold that SEGA EI treasury rooms in search of gold that SEGA ELECTRONICS, INC. most refreshing is that, like PO, had to be kept from the Bundeling16250 TECHNOLOGY DRIVE Rearm invites two players to Empire, as evil quards dogged your SAN DIEGO, CALIFORNIA 92127 participate with each other rather every step. There was also an option U.S.A. than compete. Two playing together to create your own treasure rooms. **PO *PQ The Party Quiz Game* doubles the fun and both must work Championship pushes your ability to SUNCOM INCORPORATED sin together in order to succeed. One the limit with 50 rooms. Besides player can also resurrect the other making a hint book available, 260 HOLBROOK DRIVE WHEELING, ILLINOIS 60090 U.S.A. from a premature death. Some games * Broderbund will also send you a encourage the player to sit huddled personalized Champion Certificate if Broderbund and Electronic Arts up alone. Realm, however, seems you complete all 50 levels, but you'll games are available through made for twosomes. need the special password that only * AriolaSoft in the UK. Breakdance is Sega has released two favourites appears at the end. It's a good thing * available from CBS Software, while from the arcades for the Commodore you can save a game in progress. Tapper is on the US Gold label in this and Atari Spy Hunter and TapperClimbing, jumping fans -take note country. Spy Hunter is a combination of Turbo of this one. (with less awesome graphics) and a That's about it for now. I want to The Author James Bond adventure. You race hear your comments and suggestions When he's not operating his photoacross a vertically scrolling road, on what you'd like to read about in graphic studio in New York, pursued by a variety of enemy this column. Please feel free to write Marshal M. Rosenthal is a computer vehicles. A wily helicopter dropping to me c/o Computer & Video Games.columnist for a number of publicabombs (with corresponding craters I may not be able to answer everyone tions dealing in computers, video in your path) must also be dodged. A personally but I'll sure try and technology. VJNWVWOUL ULEI ALETTER FROMAMERICA "


"REWRITE HISTORY IS WEEKEND! -the world's Nolwar game company THE BLABOR THE BULGB: ATARI Spectrum versions available soon! Allaction strategy games from SSIAt last here is your chance to see how you shape up as a General in a real battle! The pages of history record the triumphs and failures as Eisenhower Montgomery, Rommel and Von Rundstedt battled in Europe and Narth Africa. But with a clear thinking strategist like yourself in command perhaps the historians would have had a different story to write! U.S. Gold is proud to present four of the best strategy games by Strategic Simulations Incorporated: KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT pitches the British Forces of Montgomery against the might of Rommel and his Panzer Divisions in the classic North African campaign of 1941 BATTLE FOR NORMANDY commences on 'D-Day' June 6th 1944 and relives the Allied Forces attempt to smash Hitler's Atlantic Wall. TIGERS IN THE SNOW reconstructs the legendary Battle of the Bulge as in December 1944 the Panzer Divisions of Von Rundstedt try one last gamble in a desperate attempt to halt Eisenhower's advancing Allied lines. Who will be the victor and who the vanquished? Only you have the answers! And if you're looking for strategy with arcade action then COMBAT LEADER will test all your wits, depth of thought and reflexes in this toughest of battle challenges! COMBAT LEADER SEL S .95 U.S. G O L disk& cassette THE ULTIMATE IN AMERICAN SOFTWARE FOR YOU ON U.S. GOLD U.S. Gold is stocked by all leading computer stores including: BOOTS WHSMITH JOHN MENZIES WILDINGS WOOLWORTH DEALERS! For information on how to become a U.S. Cold Stockist write to: Centre Soft Ltd., Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham BT 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. D . DEALERS Per information on how American Alle SRL Software STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS INC. "


"COMPETITION USIVE A long time ago in a galaxy far away the great gamester Atari decreed that there should be a games machine called the VCS. It would have a cartridge port and two joysticks and would be dedicated to playing games. Atari's machine was a great success but at last time and other computers caught up with it and the poor old VCS became a bit of an antique. But people still enjoyed playing games on the machine and some companies still produced cartridges for it. And that's where Computer & Video Games comes in. Together with our friends at Silica Shop we've come up with a competition exclusively for Atari VCS owners. We've got 10 copies of the arcade classic Star Wars game conversion for the Atari video games machine. All you have to do is answer the simple questions based on the Star Wars movies, fill in the coupon and send it to Computer & Video Games, Atari Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Normal C&VG competition rules apply and the editor's decision is final. Closing date for the contest is March 16th. Silica Shop have a whole range of new games available for the VCS, including Star Wars and Gyruss from Parker Brothers, plus a new range of games for a German company called Gakkan, who have licensed some Konami arcade titles for the VCS. These include Pooyan and Strategy X, a tank battle game. Watch these pages for more details of these newceyCISILICA SHOP STAR WARS COMPETITION games. Meanwhile, if you've got a C&VG/SILICA SHOP STAR WARS COMPETITION VCS, put your brain in gear and enter i M My answers are: our competition. You won't regret it! 1. ............ THE ARCADE GAME THE QUESTIONS 1. What were the rebel space-craft which attacked the Death Star in the first Star Wars film called? 2. What are the odd furry creatures Name...... who helped Luke Skywalker and his friends fight the Empire forces in the Address. latest Star Wars film, Return of the Jedi, called? 3. The actor who plays Luke's friend, Han Solo, in the Star Wars films is also well known for playing another hero in other action-packed adventure | Do you own a computer or video game system? If so which one?. films. What is the actor's name and what is the name of the character he plays in those other movies? 91 "


"LIVERPOOL Software ATARI 400-600-800 RENTAL CLUB THE FOOTBALL MANAGER GAME FOR ANY 48K ATARI FEATURING: The full first division programme, together with all F.A. Cup, Milk Cup, and European Cup games Varying skill and stamina levels, scouts reports, injuries, team and tactics selection, full league table, managerial rating and save game facility. ON CASSETTE ONLY AT .45 From D. Corbishley 212 Walmersley Old Road, Bury, BL9 6SA. Be one of the first to try out the very latest releases. For the most comprehensive selection of the best and most popular games available on cassette and cartridge. Constantly updated. Send a large SAE for details to: D.J.B. SOFTWARE (Dept C.V.G.). 59 WOODLAND AVE, HOVE, SUSSEX TEL: (0273) 502143. CG36 E-JE COMMODORE 64/AMSTRAD OWNERS MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY The First and the Largest Commodore 64 Library in the world OFTEN COPIED BUT NEVER EQUALLED 1) All the latest titles on cassette, disc and cartridge 2) Hire your first two games absolutely free. Up to E2 in value 3) Life membership  4) Hire charge form only El inc p&p for full 7 days 5) No limit to the amount of games you can hire 6) All games originals with full documentation 7) Games, Business and Education software 8) Return of post service guaranteed 9) Lowest new hard and software prices in the UK 10) Join now on 14 day money back guarantee 11) Over 10,000 games in stock including many US imports Send cheque or postal order for E6 with your two selections or large sae for further details to: MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY 172 Studley Road, Redditch, Worcs. Telephone 0527 23584 BLANK DISKS SPECIAL OFFERS 54\" BLANK DISKS (40 track) Prices for box of 10 All prices include VAT, P&P is FREE VERBATIM single sided double density........818.95 SCOTCH 3M single sided double density.....216.95 DYSAN single sided/double density....... .95 SJB SUPER SAVERS 50 single sided double density 544\"blank disks perspex storage box only...... .........95 ATARI 400/600/800/XL OWNERS UTILITIES DISCO Will play your music cassette through your computer using TV speakers and giving a sound to light show on screen through 256 colours 16K on TDK Cassette  post free CRACKER Will list M/C progs to screen, you edit, download your personalised version with or without me knowledge. Hours of fun changing text to leave personal messages on screen. Stuck on an adventure search for clues. Also acts to back up your Atari tapes. All for only  on TDK Tape (16K Post Free THE TRANS-PAC Bought a disk-drive, stuck with programs on tape? THE TRANS-PAC solves it. Multi tape to disk, disk to tape, disk to tape, multi mover, etc. Comes on two double sided Memorex disks 25 All orders post free. Mail order only, 24 hour despatch. STOCKSOFT 15 Woodbrooke Road, Birmingham 830 1UE 50 double sided double density 514\" blank disks in a perspex storage box only......................279.95 FOR FREE FAST DELIVERY-Please send cheques/PO to: SJB DISK SUPPLIES (DEPT 01) 11 Oundle Drive, Nottingham NGB 18N Tel: (0802) 782310 ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE We have an all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE. Apply now and hire your first 4 games free. Well over 800 different original titles. For full details send stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends. LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVES E192.95 Purchasers of the above receive free membership BEST QUALITY DISCS, BOXES OF 10 Single density discs 16.50 Double density discs E18.00 Antic & Analog magazines available GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept C&VG. 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney Close Sunderland SR3 4PO. Tel: 0783 286351 SPECIAL OFFER FOR ATARI 400/600/800 OWNERS Hire your first 2 games FREE from our extensive range of software. Up to the minute releases available. Apply Now! We now have Atari hardware for sale at discount prices. Modems suitable for Atari Computers now for sale. For further details send s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD GAMES 27. WARWICK AVENUE QUORN, LOUGHBOROUGH LEICESTERSHIRE TEL: 0509 412604 CG219 EXPRESS JOYSTICK REPAIRS Joysticks repaired and returned within 24 hours, e.g. Atari, Vic, Quickshot, Triga Command etc. Send joystick and .95 + 50p postage. Reconditioned joysticks for sale .95 each. ATARI/COMMODORE SPARES Strong replacement joystick handle inserts at .50 pair Atari 12.75 pair Commodore. Joystick handle top fire button kit, includes insert and grip at .95 gach Atari or Commodore OL Macro Assembler/Disassembler E19.95 inc. postage. JOYSTICK FOR OL Plugs straight into control port 1 or 2. No interface required. .99 each of two for E15. Add 50pp&p COMPUTER SUPPLIES 146 CHURCH ROAD BOSTON, LINCS PE21 OJX E ATARI UTILITIES AUTOMENU-Automatically lists every file on disc (Basic or binary) and will run them at the press of a button .95. HOWSEN DOS-A new disc file management system 7 functions Inc. tape to disc (sinaleldouble), disc to tape, disc to disc, tape to tape .95 DISK DOKTOR-With this utility you can examine and alter the contents of any Atari disk .95 TAPE INSPECTOR-With this utility you can examine and alter the contents of any Atari tape .95 Also KT4--.95; DD2-.95; KK-.95. For full details of this range of tapeldisc/cartridge utilities send large sae to: AWG 145 Bankside, West Houghton, Bolton, Lancs CARTRIDGE CITY Simply the best cartridge rental service for Atari Computers. es FUZE FUZED DEFUZED CONFUZED CONFUzion Full information pack from CARTRIDGE CITY 25 Gaitside Drive, Aberdeen, AB1 7BH. Tel. (0224) 37348 THE SOFTWARE LENDING AND EXCHANGE LIBRARY SPECTRUM, COMMODORE 54, DRAGON, VIC 20, BBC & ZX-81 YES! We have programs for your computer. We hire programs from 50p. ZX-811. Two weeks. 15.00 LIFE MEMBERSHIP Less than the cost of a single gamel brings you our membership kit, including hire listings, software exchange Catalogue and introductory letter We now have OVER 300 HIRE TITLES, and 500 EXCHANGE TITLES, with large Spectrum and Commodore sections All mail dealt with on a daily basis and OVERSEAS MEMBERS VERY WELCOME. New software discounted to our members at impressive rates. Send cheque/PO for [5.00 to THE SOFTWARE LENDING LIBRARY PO Box 3. CASTLEFORD WEST YORKSHIRE WF10 1UX Stating name, address and computer type. FORGET THE REST AND JOW THE BEST! ZOOM SOFT FOR THE VERY BEST SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 AND ATARI GAMES (including U.S. SOFTWARE) See page 15 VIC 20/CBM 64 SOFTWARE HIRE Free membership, top titles from 50p per week. Two first class stamps for your hirekit to VSH(CV), 242 Ransom Road, Mapperley, Nottingham. Please state which machine. 92 "


"COMMODORE 64/VIC 20 ATARI COMPUTR OWNERS Make the most of your Atari 400/600/800 by hiring from our Software Library. We offer a wide selection of the many games and adven tures on the market for your computer. For full details send a S.A.E. to: Star Hire, P.O. Box 48, Bracknell, Berks. RG12 4WD. CG60 RESET BUTTON for use with: Turboloaded games owing you to enter the Magic Pokes which cheat the system Accompanying software IC10 Cassette covers YOU basic or mic program following crash-out Price 8 in. PAP COPIER BOX For making back up copies of your favourite game  Copies programs onto second cassette while loading from Price Eise. P&P TURBO-LOAD SOFTWARE C10 cassette .Enables you to make fast loading copies of your tape based software Reduces loodtime to same se 1541 die drie Price (Sine. PP Send cheque or P.O. with address to MUNDY & ROBERTS LTD. Box No 11, 5 Crompton St, Bury, Lancs BL9 OAA. FAST SPECTRUM REPAIRS FIRST CO. IN ALL U.K. TO INTRODUCE WHILE-UWAIT SERVICE. NOW FIRST TO OFFER AN INTERNATIONAL REPAIR SERVICE  MOST SPECTRUMS REPAIRED IN 45 MINS.  PLEASE PHONE FOR APPOINTMENT FIRST.  OR PHONE/SEND SPECTRUM FOR FREE ESTIMATES. ENC .80 (U.K.I.O.M. EIRE. C.I.) .50 (EUROPE/SCANDINAVIA)  NO HIDDEN HANDLING CHARGES  24 HR TURNAROUND.  EVERY MICRO INSURED FOR RETURN JOURNEY.  OPEN TILL 7P.M. MON-SAT. \"I have come across a firm that will be more than willing to advise you as to how to remedy your problem. They are called MANCOMP. and as well as repairing faulty Spectrums, are also quite willing to discuss your problems with you, and offer reasonably cheap. and (more importantly) correct cures\" PHIL ROGERS 'PEEK & POKE' \"POPULAR COMPUTING WEEKLY\" JAN 1985. (VOL IV NO 1) THE MAGAZINE FOR ALL ATARI COMPUTER OWNERS ATARI THE BEST NEWS PROGRAM LISTINGS REVIEWS from USA TUTORIALS WARNING! UTILITIES IT IS ILLEGAL TO DUPLICATE & SELL COPYRIGHTED SOFTWARE AUSTRALIA PUBLIC DOMAIN SOFTWARE LIBRARY SPECIAL HINTS & plus more G PAGE 6 is published bi-monthly Annual Subscription is .00. Send TODAY to PAGE 6, P.O. BOX 54, STAFFORD, ST16 1DR Tel. 0788 41183 REPAIRS For all computers + T.V. games. Good rates Insured delivery. Fast turnaround Trust the people who know. Parts replacement despatch. MANCOMP LTD. (DEPT VG Printworks Lane, Manchester M19 3JP 061-224 1888 SNOWY SOFTWARE. Software available on Commodore 64, MSX, Amstrad, Spectrum and C16. SAE for bargain titles to 36 Curzon Street, London W1Y 7AF MERLIN GAMES 111 DOVER RD., DEAL, KENT. Telephone: 0304-36 1541. O ONLY C&VG, MICROSELL OUPON TO ADVERTISE IN C&VG MICROADS TEL: 01-251 6222 NG Les & 26 29 TERMS AND CONDITIONS 1. Trade advertisers will appear in the MicroAds section, private advertisers in the Microsell Section. 2. All free MicroSell ads are subject to space availability PLEASE PRINT IN BLOCK CAPITALS ONLY ONE INSERTION PER COUPON Minimum number of words is 15, maximum 40 (continue on a separate sheet where necessary). TOTAL number of words for ALL insertions ..... (i.e. 15 words per advertisement to appear in two months = 30 words in total) COST: MicroSell (Private) MicroAds (Trade) .00 40p per word 50p per additional bold word I enclose a cheque/P.O. for ............. made payable to Computer & Video Games. Name ..... Address ............... 3. The Publishers reserve the right to refuse an advertisement POST TO: AD. DEPT, C&VG, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU 93 "


"GOOD BYTE SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 WORLD SERIES BASEBALL... BEN A RRIOR.... -STEVE JACKSON'S SWORDMASTER DOOMDARK'S REVENGE DALEY THOMPSON DECATHLON...... GREAT SPACE RACE GHOSTBUSTERS...... SABRE WULF UNDERWORLD TIR NA NOGI. PSI WARRIOR. SUICIDE EXPRESS ALL OTHER ACTIVISION.... STRIP POKER ..... 8.95 -6.95 TALES OF ARABIAN NIGHTS SOLO FLIGHT TAPPER.. SERIES The definitive role playing adventure from the pen of the world's leading author and the keys of the world's leading software house. In your High Street shortly. TERNATIONA 85 New Summer Street, Birmingham B19 3TE Tel: 021-359 0801 Spid's leading SCHOOLDAz QUASIMOOOS REVENGE JET SET WILLY  LYNX. Adventure Adventure BATTLE FOR MIDWAY.. QUOMODOS REVENGE KONG STRIKES BACK NESRA RA8888888888888 In your High Street shortly. LAXKOR GAMES SHERLOCKOR STAFF OF KARNATH OUDIR DASH DEATH STAR INTERCEPTOR 5.85 SELECT L ZAXXON POTTY PIGEON 3D STAR STRIKE RAM TURBO INTERFACE.. ANDS MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS 19. COMBAT LYNX 8.50 RIVER RAID KONG STAKES BACK BLUE MAX GIFT OF THE GOOS SELECT 1 PROJECT FUTURE DECATHLON (ACTIVISION SUICIDE EXPRESS BATTLE FOR NORMANDY...... TIGERS IN THE SNOW... TRIPOD BRUCE LE AMSTRAD COMMODORE 16 SPECTRUM DOOMDARK'S REVENGE.......8.50 COMBAT LYNX GHOSTBUSTERS 8.50 UNDERWURLDE CLIEF HANGER GIFT FROM THE GODS.... 8.50 KNIGHT LORE 8.50 FIGHTER PILOT MUTANT MONTY 5.95 FALL GUY... 5.95 GHOSTBUSTERS HUNCHBACK IL 5.90 ZOMBIE ZOMBIE 5.85B.CO'S QUEST... SKOOL DAYS 4.95 TRAVEL WITH TRASHMAN... 4,95 MOTOR CROSS. .... SKY RANGER KING FU 5.95 INTERNATIONAL FOOTBALL 12.95 ALIEN R 8.50 PROJECT FUTURE 6.00 CADCAM WARRIOR 8.50 BOULDER DASH... 6.85 AIRWOLF 5.50 STAFF OF KARNATH BLUE MAX .85 DEATH STAR 6.85 RAID OVER MOSCOW SON OF BLAGGER AOS CYCLONE 5.85 SUNCIOE STRIKE KONG STRIKES BACK .... 5.90 ZAXXON 5.50 CURRAH SPEECH STAR STRIKE 4.95 COMMODORE STELLOR 7 AMERICAN FOOTBALL 8.50 BATTLE FOR NORMANDY 12.95 BLACK THUNDER MATCH DAY 5.50 COMBAT LEADER 12.95 SPY HUNTER PYJAMARAMA 6.85 SPACE SHUTTLE SENTINEL 7.50 SHOOT THE RAPIDS...... 6.85 FLAK.... MONTYS INNOCENT.......5.95 BOULDER DASH. 6.85 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION TECHNICIAN TED ..4.95 INDIANA JONES 8.50 AUTOMAN BRIAN BLOODER 6.85 CONGO BONGO 8.50 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT... HELLFIRE 5.95 SUICIDE EXPRESS... 6.85 KNIGHTMARE FREE POST PLEASE STATE WHICH MICRO FAST SERVICE SEND CHEQUE.P.O. TO: MEGASAVE DEPT CVG, 76 WESTBOURNE TERRACE, LONDON W2 RIGHT PATH 727 GAMES PACK L.. GAME ADVENTURE QUEST...... COLOSSAL ADVENTURE DUNGEON ADVENTURE LORDS OF TIME. RETURN TO EDEN FOREST AT WORLDS END MANIC MINER.... PYJAMARAMA MASTER CHESS 8.50 GAMES PAGASTS PACK SPIDERMAN STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER ALL PRICES INCLUDE PLP PLEASE NOTE YOUR ORDER 6.00 FOOTBALL MANAGER CENTRE COURT GOODBYTE W LEATHER LANE LONDON EC1 Tek 010   ADVERTISEMENT INDEX Icon.. Incentrive Intrigue.. QL User.... Quicksilva Addictive Games.. Adventure International AGF.. Alligata........ Amstrad... Anirog. Audiogenic. Automata.. 15 48 12 8-19 IBC OBC 109 KnightSoft... Recordmania.. Romik. Llamasoft....... 114 .60 .60 Beyond ....... Breakdance II.. Bug Byte.... .70 .64 Sinclair Research. Sinclair User... Software Express... Software World... System 3... ..4 .94 .28-29 .64 3,113 Commodore User.. Compunet... C & VG Books.. Martech.. Megasave...... Memorex.... Midland Games Library... Micro-ad. Micronet 800.. Microsells Mikrogen... Miles Better.... Mirage Talent..... Taskset. . 102 ...53 O 92-93 72-74 93,97,104 115 27 DK Tronics..... Ultimate.. US Gold.. ..75 .. 122 44,61,69,79,90 116,121 Educational Computing.... English Software.. National Software Library.............27 New Generation Software.......82-83 Vanguard.... ........40 Games Workshop............ Gremlin Graphics.............. 32-33 10-11 Ocean. .....30,54-55 Zoomsoft. 94 "


"THE WAITING IS OVER The long awaited follow-up to FOOTBALL MANAGER by KEVIN TOMS is now available SOFTWARE STAR Available SPECTRUM 48K .95 COMMODORE 64 .95 NOW for AMSTRAD CPC 464 .95 SOFTWARE STAR is the NEW game from Kevin Toms, who designed the Software Classic FOOTBALL MANAGER. SOFTWARE STAR allows you to try your hand at running a successful software company. You have to cope with staff problems, game launches, advertising, financial problems and more while trying to produce chart topping successful games. One other thing, SOFTWARE STAR has that gripping Addictive quality that all Kevin's games have! Commodore NOW AVAILABLE FOR YOUR COMPUTER! , MANAGER by KEVIN TOMS FOOTBATI MANAGER \"Absorbing and realistic Highly recommended\" Sunday Times, February 1984 \"Completely fantastic I want onel\" Charlie Nicholas, Arsenal sriker in Big K, April 1984 Some outstanding features of the game  Transfer market Promotion and relegation FA Cup matches Injury problems Full league tables Four Divisions  Pick your own team for each match As many seasons as you like Managerial rating  7 skill levels. Save game facility Financial manipulations You can even be sacked! Aconteca STRATEGY GAME OF THE NEED WE SAY MORE FOOTBALL MANAGER is available for the following computers:AMSTRAD CPC 464............. .95 COMMODORE 64 .............. .95 SPECTRUM 48K.... .95 ELECTRON.. .95 BBC MODEL B..... .95 ORIC 48K & ATMOS... .95 DRAGON.... .95 ZX81 16K ........... .95 VIO 20+16K .95 (soon for MSX) GOLDEN JOYSTICK AWARD KEVIN TOMS Available from ARTE WHSMITH a ndsche Menzies (selected titles) In case of difficulty buy by mail order. Send Cheques/P.O.s to:ADDICTIVE GAMES 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth, Dorset BH26HE. "


NA


"ATARI SOFTWARE for sale from . Dig Dug, Qix, Star Command, Space Invaders, Music Composer, paint, Chess, Preppie 2, Tankics, Conversational French, Jet Boot Jack, invitation programming and 2 etc. All originals with instructions. Tel: (021) 7475368. SPECTRUM PENPALS wanted to swap hints, tips and games. Write to Stephen, 337 Winchester Road, Bassette, Southampton S01 7DJ, Hampshire. ATARI 400/800/XL games to swap or sell. Zaxxon, Lone Raider  each. Airstrike, Airstrike Il . Airstrike I . Diamonds . Ring 01 472 9286. VIC 20 + CASSETTE, five games cartridges and two cassette games. Boxed as new. Cost , will sell for  ono. Contact Cardiff (0222) 561999. Weekdays after 4pm or Sundays. CBM 64 SOFTWARE to swap or sell. Over 200 titles including the official Pole Position and Choplifter. Write to: Marc Roberts, Hanbery House, Trent College, Long Eaton, Notts NG 10 4AD T199/4A HOME computer with cartridge and 25 tape games, Miner 99er, Kong, TiTreck. With duel cassette leads. Worth  will accept  ono. Tel Winscombe (84) 3868. COMMODORE 64 and Vic 20 Centronics Parallel Painter Interface. Original price . Allows Commodore machines to support a range of painters, e.g. Epson. Contact David Fearn 0452 830675. Price , includes full instructions. COLECO ADAM computer and Colecovision games console. Brand new. Cost  sell  ono. Includes 80K ram, 72K rom, professional keyboard, Daisywheel printer, fast tape drive, joysticks, arcade games, blank tapes, built-in word processor, comprehensive instructions. Ideal business systems. Phone 0932 225276. WHICH LANGUAGE student in England with VHS video would swap English TV programs for German, French or Italian ones on regular basis? Postage refunded. Dane Durth, Langgasse, CH3292 Busswil, Switzerland. T19914A EXTENDED Basic, Speech Synthesizer, Carwars, Invaders, Attack, Soccer Modules, Cassette Games, Joysticks, Cassette Lead, Program Book, Manuals. Boxed. . Tel: Alexandria (0389) 52945. COMMODORE 64 GAMES for sale or swap Buck Rogers, Pole Position, F15, Tapper, Summer Games, Ghostbusters, Bluemax, Spyhunter etc. Lipson Vale Post Office, Plymouth, Devon PL5 7HF. Phone 0752 665200. VIC 20 DOWNSWAY 16K switchable rampack. C2N tape recorder plus over  worth of software. Including Mastermind, Quizmaster, Tomb of Drewan, Jetpack, Fire Galaxy Snooker. Will sell  ono. Timothy Valmas, 2 The Oaks, Epsom, Surrey. MICRO-DRIVE ANDinterface 1  ono. Hundred + software titles for sale many at under half price many recent adventure and arcade games. Ring Reading 581 969 ask for Neil BBC B, DATA Recorder, 37 original games. Acorn Speech Rom, 35 magazines + books, joysticks + interfaces. Worth  wanted.  ono. Ring Milton Keynes 564373 after 6pm. CAMBRIDGE JOYSTICK and interface hardly used. Bargain at  compatible with Spectrum. Must Sell. BBC MICRO cassette backup system. Transfers virtually any file from one tape to another. Make  P/O payable to B. Howard, 4 Belle Vue Terrace, Heslington Road, York. Full instructions included. CBM 64 SOFTWARE wanted. I have about 1000 programs. I do only swap on disk. You must have at least 800 programs. Send lists to: Thomas Lund-Hansen, Baekskov 3, 5290 Marsley, Denmark. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE to swap (originals) 40 titles. Adventure or arcade. Tel Blackpool (0253) 21236. Ask for Andy. CBM64 GAMES to swap, sell or buy including Flight Simulator II, Raid Over Moscow, Stellar 7. Ghostbusters and many more. Send lists to Ranxerox, 20 St Davids Road, Old Colwyn, Colwyn Bay, Clwyd LL29 9BH. SHARP MZ-80K with Hi-Res, 4 MHZ reset switch, advanced monitor, dual disk drives, WO box, joystick, books 750 cassettes, 65 disks, over 2000 programs, yes two thousand. Everything worth over . Sell for only . Phone Steve 01-590 8165. TAPECOPY. ATARI back-up tape copier. Makes back-up copies of virtually all your cassette programs. .00. I Wiseman, 13 Swift Gardens, St Giles, Lincoln LOOK CURRAH Speech Unit.  ono. Stonechip programmable joystick, interface  ono. Eddy Kidd Jump Challenge  ono or swap. Phone Roxton (0469) 60636 ask for Peter. VIC 20 SWITCHABLE 3K/16K ram pack. Software including Omega Race, The Count, Jetpack. Books including programmers, reference guide, Innovative Computing. Plus joystick. As new all items still boxed. All only  ono. Telephone Great Harwood (0254) 887065. DRAGON 32 QUICKSHOT joystick games including The King, 8 Ball etc. Phone 0977 793012. 100 ono. All boxed. COMMODORE 64 games to swap including Pyjamarama, Pole Position, Dig Dug, Pac-man, Flyerfox, Ant Attack, Alice in Videoland, Poster Paster, Turbo, Save Hunchback II, Jungle Quest, Kong Strikes Back. Tel. Barry on 0232 469829 or write to B Compston, 448 Ravenhill Rd, Belfast 6 OBY, N Ireland. ATARI GAMES for sale or swap. I have many games. Ring (0778) 422240 for list. Have your list ready. Repeat (0778) 422240 for Dave. This is too good to miss! T199/4A with terminal emulator, speech synthesiser, Joysticks, cassette leads, cartridge software included: Parsec, Alpiner, Wumpus, Tombstone, Invaders, Hunchback on cassette all manuals and packing. Including Basic Tutor cassette. Sell for  ono. Phone Aldride 52975 after 5.30pm. CBM 64 I have more than 650 M/L games to swap or sell on disk or K7, write to T Blanchot, 57 Rue des Fougeres 57070 Metz (France) COMPUTAPIX LIGHTPEN for CBM 64. Complete with three games and paintbox program. Unwanted present, two months old. Sell for . Tel. (0639) 55828. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE over 1000 titles for sale, all half price. Send s.a.e. for full list. AceWare PO Box 264, Sheffield S6 2PQ. DOMINOES, Character Generator, Maze of Maths, 21-Dice, Beer Shoot, disassembler for Oric 1 48K great value, .99 each, or .99 for 3. Full details from DJ Wyatt, 77 Redgrave Gdns, Luton, Beds. Sae (trade enq. welcome). WANTED for ZX81 16 or 48K RAM plus decent software. Tel. Northampton (0604) 810836 after DALLAS QUEST SOLVED. The complete solution to this brilliant complex adventure, only  Send large s.a.e. to David Fearn, 38 Byford Road, Huntley, Glos GL19 3EL. ATARI 800 cassette player, Donkey Kong, Zaxxon, Firestrike, 2 many books of programmes and self teaching guides worth well over  sell for . Ring 0596 72865 ask for Andrew VIC-20 16K datacorder plus super expander cartridge, also one cartridge game and ten cassette games. Plus program books. Good condition total equals . Micheal Beard, 10 Thicknall Rise, Hagley, West Midlands DY9 OLQ. 48K SPECTRUM software databaser .50.500 titles per database, with software house and price. As many databases as required. Cheques, PO's to Sylicon Systems, 48 Coedonn Road, Flint, Clwyd, CHE SQE. 48K SPECTRUM DATACORDER, cassette rack, 58 great games, Kempston interface with joystick, spare keyboard, all perfect condition.  ono, loves children, very loing, eats scraps, house trained! Phone Canterbury 66338. WANTED ATARI 850 interface, Centronics printer and Koala APD, also for sale discs and tape, various titles, new and old. Tel 0642 823882 ask for Peter. COMMODORE 64! Are you one of the greatest software swap freaks in England or Europe? Then please write (send you list) to Roger Zens, Waldheideweg 10A 4224 Huenxe 1 WGermany, disk only! Innumerable mass of programs including American and arcade games. COMPUTER 21K VIC-20 with 100's of games and cartridges .95 or .95 with cassette unit, also Scott Adams solutions with map for  with sae. Phone 7324597 ask for Cem Akbay. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE including Ultimate, Sinclair, Elite, Quicksilva, Soft Projects etc. .50; Scrabble .00; Knight Lore .00: Picturesque Improvedass/Monitor  each. Tel (021) 422 6780. PSSSSTTTI VIC-20 users! Bored with your present software? Want to swap it for other games? Write to Leo Wankersoft, 62 Husband Road, Forest Hill, Victoria 3131, Australia, Send  cash for more information. 6 GREAT GAMES for 48K Spectrum, full colour, great sound, full instructions provided. Spectrum software for sale. Send sae send cheques/PO to J Marks, 36 Chapple Drive, Haverhill, Suffolk. !!!!HELLO C-64 USER!!!!A lot of software is waiting for you. Are you interested? Then write to: Postlageind Kennword \"Why not\" 4300 Essen, W Germany WANTED 48K Spectrum-joystick and interface preferred, games required, but optional, will pay up to . Phone Bracknell 423943 after 6pm, southern area only please. ATARI 400 16K and leads with Basic cartridge and manuals suitable as games machine only . Telephone Wigan 45527 after 6pm evenings. COMMODORE 1541 disk drive plus Easy Script, Easy Rile, Intro to Basic, plus games including Alice in Videoland , Commodore MPS801 printer . Please phone Medway (Kent) 0634 221142. SOFTWARE EXCHANGE. Swap your used software, free membership, Spectrum/Dragon, huge program base, sae please to UK Software Exchange Club (CVG), 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield 55 9GB. 10 ATARI games on one tape. .50 inc p&p.C Eastman, Marylebonne Cottage, Wigan Lane, Wigan, WN1 2NSS. INTELLIVISION CONSOLE with Intellivoice and 3 games cartridges Trom Solar Sailor voice cartridge Pitfall and 3D Soccer 245. Tel 74682 (Dartford) Kent GRAFIX 48K Spectrum print anywhere on the screen, up to 64 characters fine advanced smooth scroll routines and more .95 from A.M. Hay, Glendale, Salcombe Hill Road, Sidmouth, Devon EX10 8JS. TWO ATARI 81 disk drives to swap for one Logo Atari disk drive. Tel 0908 610438 ask for Glenn. 6pm. SHARP MZ700 unwanted gift data recorder  or software  ono. Atari VGS four carts: Tennis, Indy 500, Airsea-Battle, Combat. New paddles and adaptor  ono. Swansea 586510 (0792). SPECTRUM Fuller FDS keyboard, Protek joystick interface, eleven games including: Manic Miner, Kong. Arcadia, Penetrator, Robon and Firebirds. Also utilities incl. games designer worth over , sell for  the lot, no offers, won't split. Phone Desmond (01) 286 8133. ATARI GAMES for sale: Donkey Kong Jnr, Pengo, E.M.I. Soccer, Pac-man, Astro Chase and Star Raiders,  the lot. No offers, won't split. Phone Desmond (01) 286 8133. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE to swap: Armageddon, Firebirds, Ah Diddums, Les Plics, Alchemist, Daley's Decathlon, Splat! Would like Beach Head, Monty Mole or Match Day. Phone Mat on 01-599 3731 now! ATARI SOFTWARE for sale or will exchange for another computer. Too many to list here. Also Atari 822 printer at  ono. Tel: B'ham (021) 747 3618. Ask for Nigel after 6pm please. 48K SPECTRUM complete with Currah Microspeech 2x Interface Dk Tronics keyboard well over 100 games. Worth + sell for  ono. Tel. Tim (0203) 464751 Coventry. Also wanted Atari 800 software. ATARI 400/800/XL software to sell or swap. Best of the Atari range (including latest titles) at very low prices! Write to: Craig Fuller, Thorn Hall, 11 Lower Rd, Wicken Elt, Cambs. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE for sale or swap. .50 each: Test Match, Orbitter, Meteoroids, Zzoom, Jet Set, Maziacs, Atic Atac. Would like Zaxxon, Match Day for details. Ring (0248) 362496 after 6pm. Ask for John also Sinclair programs .50 for seven. COMMODORE 64 software to swap. Many games including Congo Bongo, 3D, Pole Position, Raid over Moscow, Cad Cam, etc. Please send your list in return for mine. Write Leon Moon, 121 London Road, Gloucester, GL2ORR, England. All letters will be answered. 97 "


"FIGHTING FANTASY Way back in November last year we asked you to come up with some monster ideas. And you did just that. Hundreds of horrible aliens, nasty space barbarians and assorted evil creatures invaded the C&VG offices in search of prizes like 20 copies of the Forest of Doom Adventure game for the Commodore 64 and 50 Fighting Fantasy books for people who don't own a 64. Here we present just some of the many entries we received for our Fighting Fantasy Design a Monster competition. Our readers never cease to amaze us with their many ideas and considerable talents! Sorry we can't reprint more of the many great drawings you sent us but the rest of the winners will be receiving their prizes very soon. A full list is available from the C&VG office RESULTS with body Above: Stuart Cowap Right: Chris Williams Left: Rufn Mills Scaly fiel She hou. "


"PS I already, howe 'The Worloce or Foreto Mootou BERDY E SUPER LASER Beam EYES GORGONORUM UGLY AINT HE 36 258 LONG SAND -Paper TOUNGE The BERDY EYED GORGONARIUM SOME Hos mary qualities. His best habit is turning into potrebic looking CREATURES HE creatores, and he also has the abuty to troud at 173.2 mph (flying CAN CHANGE That is). Also con become nusible. INTO SWOBBERY OBOLD EAGLE (Power :DEAFENING PEOPLE) GOLFARIUM BARMY BATARIUM (Power RADAR DETECTION (Power: SLOBBERING FLAPPED FLER WASTE OF TME TOTRLD USELESS Above: M Azhar Below: Timothy Eggleton P. Brown Paul Brown WBL Peter Stitson "


"t all started early in 1984, just including the famous gold museum the first time now after 400 years after I'd moved in to my which contains an immense private without any outside contact. The new lab/games room extension. collection of Inca gold (yes, there Valley itself is the deepest ravine on I'd decided to have a mural WERE gold llamas there ...) and Earth, being twice as deep as the done all down one wall of lots tried some of the Peruvian food. Grand Canyon in Cruise-Missileof llamas. The artist who came to do After a couple of days in the Land...! the painting brought lots of source capital, we left to tour some of the After Arequipa we proceeded to material featuring my favourite other parts of Peru. First on the Puno, located on the shore of Lake beasts, and in one magazine was an agenda was Arequipa, the second Titicaca, the highest navigable lake article about someone who'd been to largest city and situated in a beautiful in the world at around 13,000 feet. At Peru, the very centre of camelid setting beneath a conical volcano this height we all learned the \"high territory, for a holiday. (like Mount Fuji, the one you see in altitude shamble\", a slow, lazy walk As any follower of my game style the background of Pole Position). you have to adopt if you're going to will doubtless know, I have long After Lima which was interesting but explore: there's only two-thirds as been a fan of llamas and Peruvian a little dingy. Arequipa was very much oxygen in the air as there is at stuff in general. It had often seemed to me to be a good idea to actually go about 8000 feet) was clear and the sun very tiring. Many of our tour grop there, but I didn't think that many warm and bright. We explored the developed headaches and sickness people ran tours there. There city on foot (the best way, I might and some had to be given oxygen couldn't be very many llama freaks add, to explore any city) and it was (available free on demand in all the in England wanting to go... here that I first drank Inca Kola! This hotels!), but I was OK, probably Luckily for me there are a small amazing drink is as big as Coke out because I'd been doing regular number of firms specialising in there they have huge adverts all running for a few months before the unusual trips abroad, and it was with over the place and even on the radio. trip to prepare for the high altitude. one such firm that I booked a 15-day Mind you, it is nothing at all like Coke Here we visited the descendants of tour of Peru. There are only two or it's yellow for a start and tastes like the Uros Indians. These people three trips per year and the one I ice cream soda but a bit tangier. It's actually live on Lake Titicaca, on picked coincided with the PCW ace! I drank gallons of the stuff out incredible floating islands made of Show. So in due course I shouldered there and sorely miss it now! reeds. We visited an entire village my bag and left Olympia headed for Close to Arequipa is the Colca floating on such an island, which was the tube, Heathrow and subsequently Valley, an amazing place little known weird. The ground undulates under Peru. outside Peru. Within the Valley are your feet, and one fat German The flight was gruelling, to say the villages which are being visited for actually put his leg right through the least. From London (where I had a final few games of Galaga at the airport, needing a final fix of video games before departing for unknown territory) we went to Madrid where we waited three hours in the airport. Finally boarding the Iberia jet at 2.00 in the morning, there followed an exhausting 18-hour flight with stops at Puerto Rico, Bogotà, Ecuador and finally Lima. After such an ordeal you never, EVER want to see another plastic tray of airline food as long as The Lost you live! We staggered off the plane but I What do programmers cheered up as we queued for Immido on their holidays? gration, because over Passport We decided to ask the Control was the symbol of the man who launched a Peruvian national tourist board a thousand camels and other assorted furry vicuna (like a llama but smaller and creatures, JEFF more delicate). MINTER. Read on for a After stashing the bags at the hotel I really cosmic set off for a wander around the capital experience. city of Peru. A short distance up the road was the Bing Bang Arcade, a fairly dingy but adequately stocked place (Defender, Sega Turbo, Scramble, Time Pilot, plus a few others). There were masses of shops selling model llamas, llama rugs, jumpers, hats, scarves, even gold and silver llama jewellery, pottery llamas, llama belts, even llama matches! In the main square is the cathedral (very ornate) and some of the main Government buildings, patrolled by guards toting sub-machine guns, and also a water cannon (which they didn't like my taking photos of). Whilst in Lima we toured some of the more interesting museums, 100 CAMELID TOUR 84 long as The Lost City of the Incas, Machu Picchu. Alpacas at Machu Picch "


"island into the foul-smelling ooze walls. The joints between the stones you finally emerged, up a wooden beneath (yak yak!). There was even a are so good that even today you can't ladder, onto a circle of large stones floating school on the island ... can't get a knife into some of the cracks. right at the summit, it was worth be many of THOSE in the world! We took a trip out to the ruins at every penny of the airfare just to sit Also in Arequipa I encountered a Ollantaytambo, a breathtaking there. flock of alpacas (like sheep built on a journey by bus through the Sacred Once you'd got over the stage of llama framework) which lived around Valley of the Incas. Some of the hanging on and swearing. you'd our hotel. Most of them were friendly photos I took from that bus look like begin to appreciate the view. (as were nearly all the llamas and they were taken from a 'plane Looking down, through the clouds alpacas with which I came to grips in window. All the while I was listening below you, the ruins of Machu Picchu Peru) but there was one alpaca with to Pink Floyd on my Walkman, and lie a thousand feet below ... and all only one eye who distinguished the combination of amazing scenery around near-vertical drops right himself by the ability to spit with and music was a freakout. The ruins down to the valley floor. I sat there for unerring accuracy from any angle. themselves are more evidence of the about an hour, not saying anything, Approach him from behind and he'd fantastic stoneworking abilities of the just a total freakout high. swivel his head 180° and ZAP! Incas. Not even the local people That hour was one of the most The locals turned up one day and there today know how the structures amazing experiences I've ever had. I were vastly amused as One-Eye were made so perfectly. By the end didn't ever want to come down, but scored hits on some of the old dears of the day my mind was pretty well unfortunately time, tide and Peruvian who'd come out to take photos ... blown ... but the best was yet to trains wait for no man, and I had to but I really freaked them out (and come. return to planet Earth. One-Eye too, I expect) when I From Cusco we left by train to That was the climax of the trip, and became the first \"gringo\" they'd spend two days in the Lost City of the after Machu Picchu we returned to ever seen actually SPIT BACK at an Incas, Machu Picchu (Activision Cusco and from their to Lima, ready alpaca! take note of that spelling!). Although I for the journey back home. Returning After a few days in Puno we took didn't see Pitfall Harry or his Lost to Gatwick and sitting on the cold, the train to Cusco, the old capital of Caverns, what was there was simply windy platform waiting for a train to the Inca Empire. The train journey brainzapping. take me through the pouring rain to took about eight hours, passing Perched on a mountain ridge Reading, it was difficult to believe it through spectacular Andean between the peaks of Machu Picchu had ever happened. It was like being scenery, and I spotted vast herds of and Huayna Picchu are the remains of on another planet. llamas from the train windows. a large Inca city. \"Remains\" isn't In this short summary I can't hope Above Cusco we visited the vast Inca really the right word because most of to have described even a tenth of the fortifications of Sacsayhuaman, it is still there! The setting is truely things I saw and experienced. The where vast stone blocks which look awesome with steep drops all around whole place, with its Inca and like they've been cut with precision and Inca terracing in the most amazpre-Inca remains and amazing lasers are formed into enormous ing places. The whole place has the mountain scenery, is far too big to most incredible atmosphere about it. even begin to appreciate in just a I'm not normally a freak for ruins and two-week package tour. I intend to suchlike, but sitting in this incredible return in 1985, with a backpack and city watching the sun go down was hike around, spending at least a just too much. month there. And think of all those I got up early next morning to llamas!! ! climb the trail up Huayna Picchu, It was certainly the best holiday I about 1000ft above the ruins. The ever had, and two weeks in Peru are climb was fairly heavy in places, and worth an eternity on the Costa Brava, occasionally you'd glance over the believe me. I returned to England edge of the narrow trail to look down laden with llama gear and two litres a 400 foot vertical drop ... but when of Inca Kola (which has since run out). the idea for my next game, a refreshed brain and a burning desire to return. Walls at Sacsayhuaman. Jeff on a reed boat, Lake Titicaca. Vicchu View of Machu Picchu from the top of Huayna Picchu. "


"The first QL adventures from TALENT! The Lost Kingdom of Explore the ancient dwelling place of the Dwarves-where the Wizard guards the last precious secret. A classic and complex text adventure with hundreds of locations and a huge vocabulary. Set in real-time with traps, tasks, puzzles and mazes -and a special note-pad feature to aid you. \"the quality of the game is superb Micro Adventurer PRICE .95 + 50p postage and packing WEST You are on the track of a notorious gang of bank robbers who have gone to ground near an abandoned mining town deep in Indian territory. Your task-to outwit and outgun the robbers, collect as much loot as possible and piece together clues on how to escape. Ademanding and exciting text adventure for the experienced games-player, using over 200 words and as many phrases. There are over 130 locations to search-not all of them easy to find. Events happen in real-time outside your control Indians charge, rattle-snakes slither past and robbers appear and shoot at you. How long can you survive? PRICE .95 + 50p postage and packing (Also on CBM54, BBC & Electron) COMPUTER SYSTEMS CURRAN BUILDING, 101 ST JAMES ROAD, GLASGOW G4ONS 24 HOUR CREDIT CARD HOT-LINE 041-552 2128 "


"PLANETOID 1) Adam Smith, Stanmore, Middx 6,463,250 2) Edward Montgomery, Greenock, Scotland -2.425,360 3) Alan Haley, Coventry, West Midlands — 442,005 4) John Finney, Hatfield, Herts 176,200 OUR HALL OF FAME GAMES PARSEC 1) Daniel Mitchell, Wigan, Lancs 12,720,600 2) Guy Betts, Farnborough, Hampshire 9,463,500 3) Mark Hamilton, Co. Sligo, Eire 403,100 GUY BETTS DALEY THOMPSON'S DECATHLON 1) Stephen Eadis, Wanstead, London 1,504,004 2) Chris Hall, North Humberside 1,299,489 3) Lee Stevens, Biggleswade, Beds * * 396,550 4) S. Taylor Leasingham, Sleaford 270,669 5) Garry Palmer, Bedford, Beds — 107,700 SABRE WULF 1) D. Britz, Abergavenny, Gwent, Wales 9,636,965 2) Jonathon Lock, Bromley, Kent 499,630 3) Jens chr Skyttle, Vanlose, Denmark 442,005 4) Stuart Giblin, Manchester, Lancs 433,620 CHRIS HALL T  1) Graham Peters, Billericay, Essex 5,629,796 2) Gary Watts, Bishopstone, Hereford 1.724,605 3) Carl Thomas, New Ferry, Wirral995,003 4) DJ Murray, Denstone, Uttoxeter 985,833 MANIC MINER 1) Marcus Cornall, Sutton, Hull 28,648,336 2) Anthony Carr, Sunderland, Tyne & Wear 10,705,880 3) P Hutton, Brackley, Northants 10,246,120 4) Richard Douthwaite, Hyde, Cheshire 7,549,048 5) Uther Mahmud, Colindale, London 5,020,183 Since we relaunched our Hall of Fame with some new games, your hi. scores have been flooding in. Keep it up! If you look below, you'll see we've added a few more new games for you to try your skill at. There's Starbike the space game with a difference from The Edge-Acornsoft's Elite, a very sophisticated trading game and Micro-Gen's Pyjamarama a sort of Jet Set Wally! DIAMONDS Michael O'Mahony won a  diamond for his 5,997 high score on Diamonds English Software's other big game Jet Boot Jack for the Atari computers and 64 will now replace Diamonds in Hall of Fame. JET PAC Fly Jet Man around the screen collecting the three sections of his space ship. DONKEY KONG The king of climbing games. The ape, the carpenter, and the blonde are now available on Atari, Vic 20, 64, and TI-99/4a from Atarisoft. MANIC MINER The zany 20-screen climbing game that introduced Miner Willy. JET SET WILLY What Miner Willy did next. This time there are 60 screens. THE PYRAMID The Pyramid has Fantasy's unique high score verification system. ZALAGA Splendid arcade clone for the BBC. SABRE WULF Similar to Atic Atac but twice as tough and thrice as pretty. PSYTRON Beyond's first big hit for the Spectrum. The Psytron is a computerised defence system for the planet Betula 5. ELITE Acornsoft's sophisticated space trading game. Great graphics and action. STARBIKE The Edge promise a gold BMX bike to the highest scorer on their new game. JUMP CHALLENGE Eddie Kidd's brand new computer game which features buses, barrels and bikes. Even Eddie found it difficult! PYJAMARAMA Wally steps into a nightmare and into C&VG's Hall of Fame. ANDREW GILL ELITE 1) Anthony Roper, Porthcawl, South Wales -(Elite) 301,613 2) Jonathon Stephens, Gillingham, Kent (Elite) 58,000 3) Tim Everest, Banstead, Surrey (Deadly) 505,973 4) Ben Howard, Heslington, York (Deadly) 73,195 5) Graham Peel, Lawnswood(Dangerous) 114,008 PYJAMARAMA 3 1) Andrew Gill, Plymouth, Devon100% (6,651 paces) 2) Ewan Burnett, Abercrave, Swansea 96% (6,286 paces) 3) Oliver Duke. Williams, Woodthorpe, Notts 96% (5,532 paces) 4) Douglas Nolan, Rosendale, Lancashire 94% (4,851 paces) 5) Richard Podmore, Dymock, Glos92% (3,645 paces) STARBIKE 1) Scott Morrisey, Hayes, Middlesex 393,180 2) Steven Routledge, Hayes, Middlesex 246,385 3) Tim Peggs, Scarborough, Lancs 424,400 JUMP CHALLENGE 1) Jason German, Dunton Green, Kent 33 cars (BBC/Electron) 2) Craig Billington, Birkenhead, Merseyside 25 cars (Spectrum) PSYTRON 1) Clive Richards, Monkton, Pembrokeshire 254% 2) Stuart McIntosh, Bishopsbriggs, Glasgow 248% 3) Clive Richards, Monkton, Pembrokeshire 206% HALL OF FAME Name. Address Ige T-shirt size sm med I scored. Time taken... Game Computer Witness's signature... ALL OF AME "


"WANTED Amstrad games sell or swap on a regular basis. I have Roland in Time, Harrier Attack, Electro Freddy Etc. Write to N Blow, 47 Oakwood Rd, Brickett Wood, St Albans, Herts. SPECTRUM GAMES 130 to sell, for up to date list send four 2nd class stamps to N Blow, 47 Oakwood Road, Brickett Wood, St Albans. Herts AL23PZ. ATARI SOFTWARE for sale all orginals around .00. Tities include Donkey Kong, Juice, Wayout, Zepplin, Zaxxon and many more. Ring 01 748 6331 between 6pm-8pm weekdays only. AMSTRAD SOFTWARE: Puncy, Masterchess:  each. CPC474 Computing:  (contains lots of info and listings). Fighting Fantasy and Sorcery Gamesbook at .00. Loads of listings. Telephone 01 698 3321 BBC SOFTWARE hire over 200 titles available including games, educational utilities by over 20 leading software companies options to buy new software at discount prices or second hand software membership  send stamp for details to Magicsoft (A), 18 Elm Grove, London 3AA. CBM 64 software to swap or sell. Many American titles eg. Shamus, One-on-One, Spy Hunter. Phone (0621) 53987 after 4.00. Ask for lain if anyone has M.U.C.E. please phone me. ATARI 600XL plus Tennis and Asteroids cartridges, excellent condition still in box.  ono. Tel Maidstone 46579 evenings. 48K48K SPECTRUM 8 months guarantee. Boxed with manuals. Software included: Atic Atac, Lunar, Jetman, J&BS. All going for incredible . Needs sell urgently. Contact Alam 01 791 1718 after 4pm. MATTEL INTELLIVISON Intellivoice, plus 20 good games  the lot, or cartridges  each. For details: 11 Lindfield Road, Reddish, Stockport, Cheshire. 48K SPECTRUM still under guarantee plus Kempston interface and Quickshot TWO joystick paddles . London phone 272 9804 ring after 5 pm. ATAIR 400 (32K) 410 recorder Basic cartridge, Tadmod transformer with Adventure Land, Circus, Jumbo Jet Pilot. Golden Baton, Nukewar, Ghost Hunter, Preppie . Phone 0484 30521 after 6pm. T1994A T199/4A T199/4A cartridges Video Chess module, immaculate, bosd with instructions, used .00. Also Blackjack/Poker module, immaculate, boxed with instruction .00. Phone 061 440 0153 T199/4A T199/4A TI99/4A. COMMODORE 64 plus cassette player, one year old in excellent condition, fifteen games including Ghostbusters, Hunchback 2, Kong Strikes Back  ono. Telephone 0203 319885 between 4-7 pm T199/4A speech teach yourself extended Basic, Adventure, Alpiner, Parsec, Video Games 1, Early Reading + Grammar, cassette games + utilities, joysticks, books . Expansion box + RS232 1/F . Tel: 01 552 7562 BBC B backup program. Make backups of your programs simply send a cheque or PI to Eagle Software. 41 Silverthorn Gardens, Chingford, London E4 for .50 payable to David Brimley. BBC ARCADE style games including Jortex, Micro Olympics, Saloon Sally. Bug Bomb, Trench .50 for all give or .50 each. Make cheques to M Bradley, 2 Springfield Gardens, Upminster, Essex. 48K SPECTRUM SOFTWARE, character designer .50. Designs 256 large characters. Graphic compiler . Turns basic graphic routines into machine code. Screen display designer .50. VU3D . Rescue .50. Avenger . Sheer Panic . Nicholas Bradley. 21 Froxfield Road, Havant, Hants. SUPERB SPECTRUM SOFTWARE. Titles such as Snowman, Full Throttle and Polo. From  to  each 10 games for . Tel: Corby 4769 after 4pm please or send list to 87 Farmstead Road, Corby, Northants. FOR SALE, Atari 800 48K with basic cartridge and manual plus joystick plus rom game.  ono. Good as new. Tel: Wickford (03744) 4011. SPECTRUM original keyboard. One week's use, only . Also original software. White Lightning . Hurg . Penetrator . Horace and Spiders . Wye Valley Compiler . Tel: 061 620 2598 300 PROGRAMS to swap for 64. Disk only. send list to Morten Petersen, Strandakken 8, 600 Kolding, Denmark T199/4A SPEECH SYNTHESISER or speech editor wanted. Tel: Dave Horn, Canterbury 62659 evenings after 6pm. PRIZES to be won every month, for more details and lists of our competitive prices send sae to Select Software Services, 88 lolanthe Drive, Exeter, Devon. ATARI 400, 48K, 410 cassette drive,  worth of top games software including Buck Rogers, B.C's Quest for Tyres, Pole Pos. Also magazines, Joystick. Worth . Bargain . Quick sale. Tel: (04427) 5434, Alan Green. T1/99/4A Computer and manual Beginners Basic Tutor 4 games. 6 books including 3 program ones, cassette lead.  O.N.O. Tel: (0639) 884329. After 5 pm customer collects. SPECTRUM ADDION electronics light pen, plugs into user port of computer, Includes instructions excellent conditions  O.N.O. Tel: (0639) 884329. After 5 pm for Spectrum 16K and 48K, Customer collects. SHARP MZ711 with data recorder and printer, lots of games cassettes ideal for small business and home use . Ring 051 639 7640 ATARI 800 \"Zork !' for sale. Price .00! including booklet. Also 'Terry' the program you can converse with! (.00 cass). Cheque/P.O. to R. lan Jess, 42 Drumeil Road, Agadowy, Co. Derry, Northern Ireland BT51 4AG. ATARI 400, Star Raiders, Zaxxon, Slinky, Darts, Diamonds, Captain Sticky's Gold and others. Basic kit and manuals with boxes the lot for , or swap for Atari 800. Burgh Heath 53913 48K SPECTRUM  worth of software including most of the latest games. Membership to the National Software Library, manuals and 20 magazines, cassette recorder optional. Worth , want  ono. Tel Nick on 01 640 5498 (after 5pm). ATARI AND SPECTRUM software for sale. All Atari software is original disc based including Arcade Machine, Oil's Well and others. Spectrum (cassette) includes Devs Ex Machine, Hobbit, Eskimo Eddie, plus more. You name the price. Ring 01 300 7039. TULA COMPUTER plus tape lead, beginner's basic tutor and Pik A Dee graphics creator tapes. Under 6 weeks old.  ono. L Thomson, Southfield Cottage West, Inchgarth Road, Cults, Aberdeen AB1 9NT. Best offer takes! CBS COLECOVISION games for sale, Venture, Donkey Kong Junior and Gorf. Only  each. Zaxxon and Cosmic Avenger with box only  each or buy the whole lot for only $28. Please telephone Southampton 732826 after 6pm. ATARI 2600 VCS. 1 year old, with six tapes plus Mattell Intellivision six months old with four tapes: Soccer, Ice Hockey, Golf and Space Battle. Phone (SLH) 643615. . BBC DISK owners wanted to swap software. I have over 400 titles including Manic Miner, Donkey Kong Junior, Sabre Wulf, Elite, Jet Boat, Airlift, Jet Pac and many more. Phone (05827) 69152 (original software wanted). SWAP HELP and problems on any BBC adventures. Enclose SAE. Alison Richardson, 112 Stockley Road, Barmston, Washington, Tyne & Wear. CBM 64 Software to swap. Hundreds of titles (British, American etc) send letter and list to: Darren, 23 Lansdowne Road, Hayley Green, Halesowen, West Midlands B63 1BP all letters answered, hurry!! COLECOVISION GAMES, Zaxxon, D. Kong (Jun.), Popeye, Q. Bert, Looping, Mr Do, Ventures Avenger, Corf, Carnival,  each cheques/P.O. to: C. Cowperthwaite, 16, Midfield, Langho, Blackburn, Lancs BB6 8HF. CBM 64. I have more than 600 quality games to swap against other new titles, send your list to T. Blanchot 57, rue Des Fougeres 57070 Metz, France 48K SPECTRUM including Kempston interface Curram U speech.  worth of Software including Jet Set Willy, Wheelie, Jetman, Atic Atac, Kosmic Kanga. Worth  accept . Telephone 778 3039 (021). SPECTRUM Horserace Predictor, 16k or 48k. 65% success rate, avarage odds approximately 2.1 send  cheque payable to S. A. Jeffery or write to 84 Saddlers Walk, Blackpool Village, Worcester WR4 9JR. 48K SPECTRUM (boxed), Kempston joystick interface, Sharp cassette recorder, sound amplifier, 37 software cassettes plus magazines. Would normally cost , sell for  ono or will split. Write to Richard, 46 Springfield Avenue, Millhouses, Sheffield S7 2GA, South Yorkshire. VIC 20 C2N recorder, 32K, switchable ram, 50 softwear titles (Piratecove, Ratrace, Chess, Jupiterlander, etc.). Programers reference guide plus other books, joystick,  ono. Tel: Oxford (0865) 55320 after 4pm. VIC 20 Starter Pack plus 16K, C2N recorder and six cartridge games and 16 other cassette programs. All in excellent condition, worth , sell for . Tel: Bath 331649.. FOR SALE: Cheetah 32K ram pack for Sinclair ZX Spectrum. Still in box. Rear edge connector. Price  ono. Tel: 041 946 9569 after 5pm. VIC 20 plus 16K ram, tape recorder, joystick, books, games, only  also Atari vcs joysticks, paddles, nine cartridges including Decathlon, Frogger, only . Write J. Smith, 175 Norham Avenue, South Shields or telephone 0632 555114. VIC 20 16K C2N recorder, over 30 games, three cartridge games, Introduction to Basic Part 1, Super Expander, Quickshot joystick and manuals. Worth over . Sell for  ono. Contact Simon at 01-733 7210. PINBALL MACHINE fully working, genuine arcade game , delivery can be arranged. (This machine will fit inside a hatchback when disassembled.) Ring 01-518 1047. BEWARE OF THE ANSWER PHONE. FOR SALE SPECTRUM SOFTWARE, 115 games to choose from. Send a large sae to N. Blow, 47 Oakwood Road, Bricket Wood, St. Albans, Herts. (Latest titles, Frank N. Stein, Monty Mole, etc.) ATARI VCS, 27 games including Pitfall 2, Space Shuttle, Dig Dug HERO. Also supercharger unit with seven cassettes, Mindmaster Dragon Stomper, etc.  all in original boxes. Tel: 390 3201 Winston 9-6. COMMODORE 64 software to swap or sell. Tapes and discs of English and American games. Tel: 7173736 and ask for Dave. Any time after 5pm. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE for sale. Hurg , Space Shuttle , World Cup , Jet Set Willy . Various other titles  each. Tel: (0244) 21767 after 4pm and ask for Alan. 16K VIC 20 ADVENTURES. Amazonian Quest, Haunted House, Swordquest and Spy Story. All include save game.  each. Special Christmas offer buy one get one free! T. Runeckles, 2 Warners Avenue, Hoddesdon, Herts. SPECTRUM PROGRAMS (all originals): Doomsday Castle, Ship of Doom, Zip-Zap, Blue Thunder .50 each or  for two. All for .50. Tel: Worcester (0405) 54830. ZX81 16K ram with manuals, magazines, books and software including ZX Forth, Super Scramble, Football Manager, Vu-Calc, Froggy and five adventures plus many more. Only . Tel: Ruthin (08242) 3360. ATARI 400/800/XL software to sell or swap. Roms , cassettes . Please telephone 01-237 4351 after 4pm, ask for Tony. T199/4A home computer for sale + Invaders and Soccer cartidges. Nine months old. Good condition  ono. Tel: Bristol (0272) 508695. ATARI 800XL + disk drive + graphic tablet + joystick + 100 pieces of software and games + manuals etc. . Tel: Burnham 62545. VIC 20 16K ram pack. Over 20 games. Starter tapes. Programing guide. Various reference books. . Tel: Eastbourne (0323) 29885. SHARPS MZ700 still in box also data recorder in box plus books, games, cover. Mint condition  ono. Tel: 051 256 0697. WILL SWAP 48K SPECTRUM interface joystick + ZX printer +  worth of software for Commodore 64, cassette deck + games. Can meet anywhere in Merseyside. Tel: 051 226 3078. Ask for Jason. ATARI 800, data recorder with Atari basic, microsoft basic 11 system 2.0, assembler editor, Defender, Star Raiders, Flight Simulator, Caverns, Scram also normal and painting joysticks. All manuals plus Atari sound and graphics users guide.  ono. Tel: Adam 01-859 4218 after 6pm. 104 "


"y salone R-E-V.T.E.W.S Value: Is the game really worth all those pennies? How long will its attraction last? Is it worth going without Computer & Video Games for a month because your parents won't give you any extra pocket money — or could you write a better listing? continued from page 26 worked them out you can organisation known as the LODE RUNNER start designing your own and FIRM. Hawke has to rescue BLACK THUNDER MACHINE: save them to tape using the five US scientists who are MACHINE: CBM 64 games neat user-definable being held hostage in a subSpectrum/joystick or feature! terranean base beneath the SUPPLIER: Quicksilva keyboard Lode Runner rightly has a Arizona desert. PRICE: .95 (cass); SUPPLIER: Software great reputation as a quality You have to fly Airwolf on a .95 (disc) Projects game — and this Spectrum series of night missions Tony Crowther's first PRICE: .95 version is no exception. rescuing each scientist in game for Quicksilva It seems only right turn. Only the destruction of is fast, furious and that the company who  Graphics strategically placed control lots of fun! brought you the all  Sound boxes within the cavern will You control a futurtime classic English platform  Value allow Airwolf to descend to istic car armed with game in the shape of Manic  Playability the heart of the base where rockets, and trapped on a Miner should now be bringing the scientists are imprisoned. massive freeway system in a You have to find them to lost city somewhere on a complete your mission. mysterious planet. You start the game at the car is being chased by Airwolf's base and take off numerous android vehicles into the enemy lair where out to destroy! There are force fields suddenly appear UFOs, helicopters and tanks before your 'copter. You must to deal with too plus blast holes in the force torpedoes and guided ! !!!! Dii !!!! !! SCORE G12075 LIVES GOBLEVEL 1 you the all time classic American platform gameAIRWOLF Lode Runner. Ignore the graphics they MACHINE: Spectrum/ can't be described as the keyboard or joystick best ever on the Spectrum SUPPLIER: Elite just play the game! PRICE: .95 The scenario goes like this. Hot out of the Elite shields big enough to allow missiles. So you'll get the You are a highly trained hanger comes Airwolf Airwolf to squeeze through general idea that there's a lot galactic commando on a another super-copter and continue the rescue going on. mission to recover a fortune in the Blue Thunder mission. The screen display is split in gold from a power hungry mould. If you've been Background graphics are into two. The top half shows bunch of empire builders. The watching telly on Friday great but I felt the your car, Black Thunder, and gold is hidden in an undernights recently you'll know all representation of the Airwolf its immediate surroundings. ground treasury packed with about the billion dollar chopper could be improved. Below is a display which mysterious passageways helicopter and its pilot, Game play is addictive and shows your current status designed to baffle would-be Vietnam veteran, Stringfellow you must move fast to get lives, ammo left etc. Below raiders. Hawke, who zooms around through those force fields this is the crucial plan view of You are armed with a lasersaving the world and damsels once you've blasted a way the freeway system. This drill which blasts through in distress through otherwise they close shows your position plus the walls but you'll need more E ven if you haven't caught up on you! oncoming android vehicles than brute strength and speed up with the series you'll enjoy I reckon it's Elite's best yet. and helicopters etc. The to work out the many ways to this game from Elite who Airwolf is also available on action is fast and furious. the bullion. continue their policy of bringthe 64. found this a bit annoying If you enjoy platform ing out games based on hit TV because I didn't get enough games then this is the game shows  Graphics time to admire the great backfor you. The puzzling screens In Airwolf, you take on the  Sound ground graphics at the top of there are 150 of them role of Hawke who has been Value the screen without getting will keep you guessing for given a dangerous mission by  Playability blasted! quite a time. And once you've his employers, the mysterious There's some nice built-in 00 @ 00 105 "


"REVIEW.S DL POD 04. 0 sound synthesis too a Breakdancing on the micro ranks of dancers move closer and attempt to get into the voice reads out your score at that's really got the juice and closer Space Invader Breakdance hall of fame. the end of each game and the Commodore 64! style Overall Breakdance is a tells you to \"Get Ready\" as CBS have imported this Game three is a real novel game but I'm sure you launch into the next odd little game from the USA puzzle. You have to arrange anyone who enjoys dancing game. where Breakdancing dancers in the correct order isn't going to sit down in front As Tony Crowther has said began. It features four of moves and I must admit of a computer to do it! The elsewhere, the game is really different games based around this one got the better of me, graphics are nice but the a revamped version of the Breakdance craze and Game four is probably the sound, considering the potenSuicide Express but even sets them to an Electro-style best game of the lot t ial of the 64's sound chip. so it is a good game in its leaves a lot to be desired. own right Documentation is great — Graphics are excellent and and includes a glossary of game action is well Breakdance terms and a list frantic! Superb fun for shoot of dance moves. Now you out fanatics with quick need never feel out of place reactions. The game has 14 when people start talking levels and 32 screens. about Gyros, Moonwalking and Up Rocking!  Graphics Full marks for originality  Sound but I'm not sure who will want  Value SCORE to play the game.  Playability  Graphics BREAKDANCE  Sound  Value MACHINE: CBM 64/  Playability joystick SUPPLIER: CBS/Epyx INDIANA JONES PRICE: .95 Hip-Hop Be-Bop, don't soundtrack. especially if you get out of MACHINE: CBM 64 stop! Grab your ghetto The first is a simple \"Simon breath just watching Break SUPPLIER: Mindscape/ blaster and head down Says\" game where you have dancers at work! You can use US Gold to the shopping preto follow the dance moves of the menu to create your own PRICE: .95 cinct. It's time to get a computer controlled B-Boy dance routine then record Jet Set Jones? Well down to some crucial popping Game two features the it and play it back on screen. almost. This new import guys! Rocket Crew, a bunch of Your little dancer does all the from the US features the Yeah! While you are in breakers who move down the hard work while you sit back biggest box office hero hospital recovering from that street/screen at you — you and watch! this side of Ghostbusters headspin which whacked you have to outdance them and there is also an option to Indiana Jones in a platout why not keep up your make them vanish as the play all four games in a row form games which owes a lot i 0 0 0 screen instructions are com10 AM, FOOTBALL prehensive and you also get a 10 booklet with the game. MACHINE: Amstrad The main screen display SUPPLIER: Amsoft/Argus shows a representation of the Press \"grid iron\" playing area — PRICE: .95 complete with two teams Now Amstrad owners lined up on it. The centre of can enjoy the rough the screen is given over to a and tumble of that all display of game statistics American sport much such as time left, distance YANKEES OOREDSKINS loved by millions of still to go for that elusive \"first BUARTER VANESCO:15 Sunday evening TV viewers. down\" etc. Below is the This game already availprompt area where the able for the Spectrum and 64 computer asks you to input is a faithful translation of the two letter instructions to the real-life game. You can your team and display your either battle it out against the opponent's move. computer or a friend. At half time you get a Football fans everywhere. If  Graphics . Granice Using a \"menuof statistics readout which you want more details of the  Sound defensive and offensive shows how your team is game, check out our review  Value \"plays\", you have to master doing. of the Spectrum version in  Playability mind your team's victory. On Great fun for American December's C&VG 106 "


"REVIEW.S to the Manic Miner and his exit from the labyrinth. as \"markers' in the catapals. Indiana Jones in the 12 THE GODS' GIFT The Guardian's chamber is combs. But beware, the evil Lost Kingdom is a platform the home of demi-gods who clytaemnestra has a nasty game with a few frills like MACHINE: Spectrum/ use their powers of illusion to habit of moving them around. the two player option and the keyboard or joystick prevent Orestes discoveringO restes is also assisted by six levels of play. SUPPLIER: Ocean the right shapes. \"messages from the gods Our hero has to find his PRICE: .95 The gods have revealed the which appear at the bottom of way around the many perils of Enter the world of Greek correct solution to Orestes' the screen. the Lost Kingdom in order to mythology in this latest sister, Electra, imprisoned by The animation is excellent. find a priceless lost artifact. game from the team who the nasty Clytaemnestra Orestes moves smoothly and He has to solve a puzzle on once worked on another within the catacombs all graphics are completely each of the six screens in software legend the beneath the palace. Orestes flicker-free. The monsters our order to move onto the next mythical and mysterious must seek her help in dis hero discovers in the labyscreen and get closer to his Bandersnatch! covering the correct shapes. rinth are stunning. Watch out goal — and you have to help Gift from the Gods, unlike Without her he must make his for the three-headed serpent him. that other game, has actually own mind up and can and the horrible pile of There are no rules supplied reached the shelves of your easily be led astray by the animated skulls! with the game you simply local games shop -and it's masters of illusion. The game includes an Clytaemnestra has learned \"intelligent\" joystick feature of Orestes' quest and has which basically means herself entered the labyrinth that it's much easier to move in order to kill Electra and Orestes around. You don't make her son's task even need to mix both keyboard more difficult. Orestes must and joystick or end up protect Electra as well as struggling to work out which seeking the shapes. All the control will get you out of a time his strength is ebbing tight corner when your energy away — although he can is rapidly being drained by a discover the waters of life nasty monster. dripping from the roof of Documentation is good and OECDICIO have to act as Indy would in a brilliant bit of software. The the same situation. Or so it scenario is taken from Greek says in the blurb that goes legends and stars Orestes along with the game. who, aided by the ancient And solving those puzzles Greek gods, has returned to isn't easy. You have to do Mycenae to regain his rightful certain things in a certain way kingdom from the clutches of or a certain order before you his evil mother Clytaemget to the next screen. It can nestra. get quite frustrating. Orestes must fulfil his SVAMNA as There are assorted destiny by trial in the monsters and odd hazards to mysterious labyrinth beneath make life more difficult too. the palace of Mycenae. No certain parts of the labyrinth it includes playing and The graphics are OK but man has ever returned from which restore his powers. strategy hints as well as the not brilliant and the sound this labyrinth a series of That's the basic theme of usual instructions. could be better. inter-connecting chambers this entertaining and intricate If you like Avalon then Overall a bit of a discreated by the gods to punish game. There are other you'll love Gift from the Gods appointing game given that mortals for their misdeeds. features you'll come across it is great fun to play and it's based on the exploits of Hidden in 16 special rooms like the awesome illuyou never know just what you such a superhero as Indiana are objects known as sionary monsters but you'll are going to find around the Jones. Euclidean shapes, strange enjoy finding them out for next corner! geometric designs based on yourself!  Graphics circles, triangles and Orestes is armed with a  Graphics  Sound squares. Six of these shapes, sword, a gift from Zeus and  Sound  Value placed in the correct order in also has seven tears shed by  Value  Playability the Guardian's chamber will Icarus when he flew too near  Playability prompt the discovery of the to the sun. These he can use NO 107 "


"Sophore R-E-V.T.E.W.S Sound: Does the game sound like a Duran Duran LP played at half speed — or does the noise from your micro knock you half-way across the room. The C&VG review team don't judge games with their ears plugged up, we can tell you! \"Sample new product. Price the start of the game. video \"window\" also shows SPACE RACE to follow. Delivery to follow. You must choose four of the various space stations MACHINE: Spectrum Name to follow.\" the oddly named racers to act being visited, space battles The product was duly for you delivering the between the rival racers etc. SUPPLIER: Legend sampled and that was pretty Natof around the galaxy. At the top of the screen you Software much, that. People wanted to Racers like Dos, Vindaloo or see a control option window PRICE: $14.95 know the price. They wanted Gurm. while at the bottom there is a At last after all the to know about delivery. They Once you have hired them, message window Valhalla hype and pre-release wanted to get their hands on it you have to arm their style. Tantares. Legend's ne and naming the brew was the spacecraft with lasers, Dotted around the Galaxy Great Space Race is least of their concerns. missles and shields. They'll are space hulks full of Natof. \"Name to follow\" didn't need all this as attacks are But now for the bad news of your local software shop. exactly roll off the tongue frequent and you may wish these hulks are booby The packaging, as you'd however. And so, in the to launch one yourself from trapped. The traps can be expect, is impressive. The absence of any better ideas, it time to time. defused using special codes game cassette is lost inside a was simply abbreviated Each arm of the galaxy has which your racers pick on giant video-style box and and Natof was born its own characteristics which their travels but you must comes with a 56-page booklet be sure to note down and use which features game details VIEW: Haberda ber at NATOR the right code in the right and cartoons, plus a colour   be c d b  location if you are to survive poster. 4. DOS an attempt to plunder the The booklet explains the system commands cargo. scenario of the game, which I found The Great Space goes like this. Race nice to look at — but Once upon a time there there just isn't enough to do. was a small unvisited planet As the instructions say, you at the centre of a small can actually sit back and unvisited galaxy watch the game unfold. But When the first colonists when you spend over  on landed they stepped on to a T +190: Valcon defea a game I think you want a bit lush green landscape dotted Haber daber. more action than that! with strange purple plants — attack range. Payme cases You do have to make split of Natofor I attack. plants that looked second \"yes\" or \"no\" suspiciously like ... vines. decisions and pick the right Those first pioneers And that's where the Great you learn as you go along. code to defuse the hulk gathered in the purple fruit Space Race begins. The idea And each of the characters booby trans jumped up and down on it for is for you to take part in an you control have their own You can't control the hours before someone intergalactic Beaujolais race distinct ways of behaving space battles, though, which remembered the pulping to get all the Natof you can again you learn these as you found Irritating machine in their supplies to the people who want it in play. Overall, The Great Space and left it to ferment. the four spiral arms of the As your racers move Race is a nice looking game The first tasting was an Natof galaxy. through the galaxy, they send but despite the nice historic event, which regrettYou also have to watch out messages back to you and graphics and all that packagably nobody present can for nasty pirates like ask you what to do next! You ing not really worth the E14 recall, but at the end of the Ghengis, Krone and Zanik. have to make quick decisions price tag. dayor week or whatAnd the equally nasty police as you only get a matter of ever — the least incapable force known as PKBs. And the seconds to decide what to do.  Graphics businessmen rushed samples other racers who you failed to the graphics are well done.  Sound of this fantastic liquid to every hire at the start of the game. Each character's face is  Value planet in the galaxy. Their Talking of hiring racers flashed up on screen when he  Playability : this is what you have to do ator she is talking to you. The ENE completely familiar with! PSS say that the bikes your poor old joystick a HYPER BIKER Owners of Decathlon will behave exactly like the real Decathlon-style work-out. MACHINE: CBM 64 notice a similarity in the basic thing but I reckon pedalling Overall the game is well joystick or keyboard idea of the game except a joystick is much more presented and the graphics SUPPLIER: PSS that this time all the difficult! and sound are adequate but PRICE: .95 athletes\" are riding bikes! You really have to work out how long will these DecathFans of BMX biking Up to four players can take all the controls before taking lon clones keep their playmay find this indoor part a new twist and bid part in the events other ability value.? version of their favourfor a place in the Hyper Biker wise you'll spin off your bike.  Graphics ite sport appealing hall of fame or you can There are several events to  Sound but first you must make simply take on a computer take part in — ranging from  Value sure that you've got patience controlled opponent in a ordinary races to obstacle  Playability and a joystick you are series of BMX challenges courses. All of which will give 108 "


"DEUS EX MACHO THE FIRST COMPUTER MOVIE OSDEPESO o STARRING FRANKIE HOWERD JON PERTWEE IAN DURY FORM qok 2X SPECTRUM COMMODORE 48K SPECTRUM INCLUDING: PI-BALLED, OLYMPIMANIA, DARTZ AND MANY MORE AUTOMATA CLASSICS! TEN CAMES FOR A TENNER DEUS EX MACHINA. Commodore 64 (cassette)  -or48K Spectrum  GO TO JAIL. 48K Spectrum/Amstrad CPC 464  PIMANIA. 48K Spec  MORRIS MEETS THE BIKERS. Amstrad CPC 464  10 PACK* 48K Spec  * 10 PACK includes the following programs: Morris Meets the Bikers, Olympimania, Crusoe, New Wheels John? Pi-Balled, Pi-in'ere, Piromania, Yakzee, Dartz & Pi-Eyed on 1 cassette. BACKCHAT'Speech Synth. CBM64 with Software & Programming Book ........  Piman's Stereo L.P. Cassette ....  PIMANIACS CLUB for 20% off all products, etc. Annual Subscription UK Overseas  Piman's Greatest Hits Vol.2.... 23 Tenclose the right money, or debit my ACCESS/VISA Card. My Card number is.... . Expiry Date. Card holder's signature .............. ...... Card holder's name Tel. Number Card holder's address...... Post Code NO EXTRAS! All our prices include VAT and Postage & Package. 24 hr.-CREDIT CARD HOT LINE (0705) 735242. Send your order and payment to: AUTOMATA U.K. LTD. 27 HIGHLAND ROAD, PORTSMOUTH, HANTS. PO4 9DA, ENGLAND. "


"When it comes to joysticks, value for money can be difficult to assess. Naturally, you want one that's human proof, flexible, accurate and not likely to fall apart so, to help you in your search, C&VG did a test run to see what you can expect for your money. We found that the most expensive wasn't necessarily the best. JOYSTICKS WHAT TO LOOK FOR The Boss .00 from Wicos Trackball .00 from Wico. "


"Aside from working out how much touch-sensitive joysticks, like has that touch sensitive pad for you can afford, decide what you want Cheetasoft's RAT. direction control and another pad for in terms of design and size if you RAT, which stands for remote firing/jumping. have limited desk space, or even no action transmitter, is a nice little The RAT is fully Kempston comdesk space at all, you may need one gadget that enables you to play games patible and is available for the of the mini versions that is either without all those awkward dangling Spectrum and Commodore 64 at hand held or stays rooted to the spot wires getting in the way. .95. by little black plastic feet attached to The RAT comes in two parts the Maidenhead-based company Wico the base, to stop it slipping. stick itself with a touch sensitive do a selection of traditional-style joyYou may also have figured that control surface and the receiver sticks priced between  and , most joysticks come in zap-pow interface which plugs into the back of made specially for the CBM 64, Atari colours like red/black, but more your Spectrum or Commodore 64. and Vic 20. The best one, in my book, variations on the colour theme keep The stick looks more like one of is also the cheapest, at . Light grey appearing and, more importantly, those gizmos you get to work your TV in colour, with a black gear lever and there is an increasing abundance of set with except instead of buttons it white fire button on top, The Boss looks rather like a vacuum cleaner. However, it will zoom you around arcade games at the speed of light and has decent finger grips for you to hang onto. Their strangest joystick is the  Three Way Deluxe which comes with three different grips. One is a puny oval shape, another resembles an outsize radish which is very difficult to hold and the third is very similar to The Boss. This last one, again with proper finger grips, is the only one I'd use if given the Three Way joystick as a present. All three are red on a black base and the two fire buttons can be found on the base and grip tops. The selector switch determines whether you use one fire button or both at Junior Pro Joystick .99 from Kempston. once and each grip is easy to pull on or off, without being too loose. However, the price seems excessive unless you really are going to use all three grips remember you could get an equally good joystick for  less. But, to be fair, the thin grip may be good for little kids whose hands can't manage the bigger models. This one didn't work as effectively as The Boss or, for that matter, the Redball joystick. Despite its name, the latter is a grip-type rather than ball-type joystick and costs . Again, there are two fire buttons and a selector switch so you can choose which one you want. Although you have to wrestle a fair bit with this one, it is accurate. However, there is always the problem of gaming cramp rather like writer's cramp. It certainly makes you limp-wristed just as if you'd been trying to twist the top off a new jar of marmalade. So instead of giving your aching wrists a break and shaking them around periodically, you may care to raid the bank and fork out a whacking great  for Trackball. However, this one was the least reliable of all when tested, with absolutely no results at all. It didn't matter which way you span the ball — you got about as much action as Silent Night. This offering is visually quite plain, Above: Redball .00. Below: Three Way Deluxe .00 both from Wico. consisting of a white ball in a square "


"box with a red top and one fire make sure you get a good product. white boxes with black switches at button. Meanwhile, on the other side of the the top, only one worked. If there Kempston's joysticks inspired both fence is the BBC Pro Joystick, also were two of you playing a game, one love and loathing. Love was directed from Kempston at .95. Its ugliness of you would be right out of luck. at their cute Junior Pro joystick which is its most interesting feature. Loaded However, the one that did work did is red all over and very tiny great if with clashing colours, it looks like a an excellent job and can be you have an untidy desk or limited big, square milky bar with two huge recommended. space. It costs only .99, and works red fire buttons on the base, brown From the same company come very well indeed. More attractive grip and black lead. three more joysticks Slik Stick, than most joysticks due to its Also for the BBC is Strike Control, a Starfighter and Joy Sensor, all for the miniature features, it's a smart, set of two joysticks from Consumer Atari, Vic 20 and CBM 64. The first, compact little number which will Electronics at .85. These can be although it sounds like a make-up work on Vic 20, Atari, CBM 64 and hand held or left on a surface and, pencil or cover-up stick, likes moving Sinclair Spectrums. Like all the joy while they're quite dinky and attrac-characters up or down but has an sticks previously mentioned, it has tive looking, the duo we tested didn't aversion to right or left. This is a little rubber feet on the underside of work at all well. Of the two blue and shame, as it is a really smart number, its base to stop it sliding around during use and one fire button can be found on the base. The company isn't kidding when it says this joystick has been designed to combine economy with high performance the price is unbeatable and shows you don't have to shell out loads of bread in order to BBC Pro Joystick .95 Kempston. WS Joy Sensor from .65 Consumer Electronics. black and orange with quite a sophisticated finish and one base fire button. This one can also be used on the TI-99/4A but you'll need adaptor model 11060 first. The  Starfighter gave much the same performance, with up or down movement but apparently no left or right. This one also looks quite good, in a mixture of black, silver and orange, but design-wise is not quite as smart as the Slik Stick. Last but not least, the Joy Sensor seems to have no sense of left or right, either. This .65 model is a touch sensitive joystick simulator resembling a calculator without any buttons. But you won't be in luck if you want to use these joysticks on the Commodore C16 — its joystick ports are different from those on the CBM 64 and Commodore expects you to purchase your joysticks from Commodore dealers only. MAKE FUNCTION DESIGN RATING RATING DISTRIBUTOR THE BOSS CGL 0628 75171 THREE WAY DELUXE REDBALL TRACKBAL JUNIOR PRO KEMPTON 0234 856633 BBC PRO SLIK STICK STARFIGHTER JOY SENSOR THE RAT CHEETAHSOFT Strike Control from .85 Consumer Electronics. "


"System 3 Software PRESENTS Multi Arcade Activity et From America ALL TYPES OF TRADE ENQUIRIES INVITED No.1 USA SYSTEM 3 SOFTWARE EXCLUSIVE IMPORT PRICE WAS .95 NOW .95 TITLES! CROSS! S 3 SE for the commodore Off ICE! SUICIDE STRIKE Commodiorg commodore or AVAILABLE AT Hools SmitsLosky on Menzies Woollots and gf good computer stores Edison, the Kinetic android, ledes a frustraling lite All the real wants to do is build US CITCullboards Oiago with the flow But things keep gering in the way Nomsoncalve intuence in regularly. The DISTRIBUTORS M odeler Tiger Distribution and Contre son Al the start to fish line you sirap on your homel, check you restrumentun your engine and urge onto the course Through corners, up the hills to the ruls and down Ve Straight you manoeuvre for posfion and try to beat the GUR say thead if you can. But whatever you do, stay on couise ou don't one of two this will happen ou'll slow down and los valuable seconds geflingback Into the race or worse, fou'll end up on the seat you Who says computerson't like to get dirty? Your agents risked their lives to find the enemy's secrd headquarters Now you're risking ours to destroy it And they know you're coming ETTEISTOT I S squander your precious fuel supply Needless to say hey don't u parachutes on missions Flash, the lightning boll, disconnect everything in his path. Which co be frustrating after dard day on the circuit And the cunning Killerwalt is out to fry por Edison's brains But our hero simple solders on TUTTI I PUTETI V Tou're charge our of it. And a few jo 100! As you soge overundreds of miles of distinctly unfriendly Territory, the action is thick, fast and frighteningly three ROSI Fighter aircraft Surface-to-air missiles Helicopter gunship The attacks come from every direclion Even from behind DO YOU WRITE YOUR OWN ts you have a marketable programme send to us for evaluation Excellent Payment Terms and Send to Product Development Manager at the address below. HOW TO ORDER V OU ond oudrugs on a poor paper enclosing your hequo Morect ng plans Lucha Onthe aboVLOMO Oversed Orders: Add 200 per game ordered Sustem 3 Sattware, South Ban House, Black Prince Road, London SE "


"LIC. THOUSANNICO New-the official Spectrum Upgrade! Turn your Spectrum into a Spectrum + for just   Professional full-size keyboard -includes 17 extra keys.  Responsive typewriter-style action.  Accepts all current Spectrum software and peripherals.  Complete with 80-page User Guide and Companion Cassette. Inverse True video video Graphics Edit Caps lock Break Delete S o do Space bar Extended mode Caps Shift Caps shift aboodles Semicolon sapa g Inverted comma Cursor controls Full stop Comma Here's some exciting news for 48K Spectrum owners ... the official Spectrum Upgrade Kit. The  Kit has everything you need to turn your Spectrum into the stylish new Spectrum +. You don't even need an understanding of electronics, just the ability to solder a few wires together. The leaflet in the kit gives clear, step by step instructions If you're not sure about doing it yourself, don't worry. Simply return your 48K Spectrum to Sinclair and for  we'll upgrade it for you. Whichever you decide on, you'll also receive the new 80-page User Guide and Companion Cassette The bigger, better Spectrum keyboard The Spectrum + measures 12/2\" x 6\" It has a large typewriter-style keyboard, with hard, moulded keys. You'll find the new keyboard has a smooth positive action ideal for touch-typing word processing simulation programs, and extended programming sessions. Two retractable legs give a perfect typing position. There are 58 keys in all, including 17 new keys. Programmers will be pleased to see dedicated punctuation keys, a space bar, and separate shift keys for graphics and extended modes. And a reset button allows you to clear a program from your computer's memory without disconnecting the power supply. The official Spectrum Upgrade Naturally your upgraded computer will accept all the peripherals in your Sinclair system interface 1, Microdrives and so on as well as all Spectrum software. Just as important, new Spectrum software and peripherals will be designed with the Spectrum +in mind. So the Sinclair upgrade adds stylish looks, new capabilities ... and new potential for the future. Included the new Spectrum + User Guide and Companion Cassette The new User Guide has over 80 pages of information, including a handy BASIC dictionary. The Companion Cassette provides an interactive tour of the new keyboard, and includes three entertaining arcade games. TO ORDER BY MAIL: When ordering the Upgrade Service, send off your 48K Spectrum to the address below, carefully wrapped, together with car the completed coupon and appropriate payment (Please do not return the mains adaptor, manual or other ancillaries.) Your upgraded computer will be despatched to you within 10 days of receiving your order. When ordering the Upgrade Kit, simply complete the coupon, endosing the appropriate payment and post it to us at the address below. Please allow up to 28 days for delivery BY PHONE: Access or Barclaycard holders can call Camberley (0276) 685311 for personal attention, 9am to 5pm Monday to Friday. Only the Upgrade Kits can be ordered by phone. Please note: the upgrade offer applies to working 48K Spectrum models in the UK only To: Sinclair Research Limited, Upgrade Dept, Stanhope Road, Camberley, Surrey, GU15 3PS. All prices include VAT post and packing User Guide and Companion Cassette Please send me the Spectrum + Upgrade Kit. I enclose payment of . OR Please upgrade my 48K Spectrum for me. I enclose my computer together with payment of . I enclose a cheque/postal order payable to Sinclair Research Limited for  OR Please charge my Access/Barclaycard no. Signature Name: Mr/Mrs/Ms Name: Mr/Mrs/MS Address PLEASE PRINT PLEASE PRINT CVG 503 Sinclair Research Limited, Upgrade Department, Stanhope Road, Camberley Surrey, GU15 3PS. Sinclair "


"Meet the Gang! Wilma Tom Dick Herbert Everyones a IST EVER MULTI-ROLE ARCADE ADVENTURE Includes Hit Single on reverse \"Everyone's A Wally\" performed by Mike Berry Spectrum 48K .95 Commodore 64 .95 Available shortly on Amstrad CPC 464 44 The Broadway, Bracknell, Berks. 0344 427317 MIKRO-GEN "


"YOU MARVELLED AT BEACH-HEAD... NOW ACCESS PRESENT THEIR LATEST MASTERPIECE: RAID OVER MOSCOW \" A EMM00m= commodore 64 The most breathtaking 3-D graphics yet seen on the Commodore 64 Gripping arcade action Multiple scrolling screens LLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLL STATUS: READY _SCORE: 00000 HEN BEACH-HEAD The Soviets launch a nuclear strike against major cities in the United States and Canada. With our own VELOCITY X DOTK/ HCOORDINATES X009! nuclear arsenal Y 00 KH dismantled, in 80 accordance with the ENETO IMPACT *65.1956 ALTITUDE BOMBERS  SCORE: 98988 Salt IV Arms Agreement, the Soviets believe their treachery will lead to total world domination. Our only hope is our space station equipped with stealth bombers, which can fly undetected in Soviet airspace. As squadron leader, you must lead your commandos on a virtual suicide mission, knock out the Soviet launch sites, and then proceed into the city of Moscow. Armed with only the weapons you can carry, you must seek and destroy the Soviet defence centre to stop the attack! Top multiscreen action! THE FIRST 64GAME TO REACH No.1 IN THE CHARTS Availableon .9 CASSETTE Available on CASSETTE CASSEROT & 9-95 Disk $12.95 U.S. GOLDI U.S. Gold is stocked by all leading computer stores including: BOOTS WH SMITH JOHN MENZIES WILDINGS WOOLWORTH American in Software Dealers! For information on how to become a U.S. Gold Stockist write to: Centre Soft, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268, "


"AFRICAN SAFARI PETER PAN Hand's up all those who want to go on an African Safari. Yes, I thought so, too many of you. Well only 25 can go, and here they are — the 25 winners of our December competition to win the new Adventure game, African Safari: I Heather, Lewes, E Sussex; Nils Rudi, Molde, Norway; Stuart Hurley, Salisbury, Wilts; Jason Sayer, Wavertree, Liverpool; Nalin Solanki, Ilford, Essex; RJ Malkin, Newcastle; Stuart Crump, Sutton, Surrey; Michael Seddon, Holland on Sea, Essex; D Fenner, Bexhill, E Sussex; James Dick, Potters Bar; Darren Campbell, Southport; Gozlan Philippe, Alfortville, France; S Bateman, Middlesbrough; Richard Douglas, Birchington, Kent; Bradley Tyrrell; Woodford Green, Essex; D Jackson, Penrith, Cumbria; David French, Manchester; GR Elton, Bromley, Kent; Richard Bocock, Huntingdon, Cambs; Jason Hillard, Darlington, Co Durham; Chris Lewis, Kingsley, Cheshire; K Flanagan, Burscough, Lancs; Robert Coles, Warminster, Wilts; Paul Meadley, Normanby, Cleveland; Detlef Wacker, Detmold, Germany. Remember, the jungle can be a dangerous place, so take care out there! Only six people could win the new never lose our fascination for Peter Pan game by Hodder and children's fairytales: Stoughton, but, going by the Asim Jalees, Abu Dhabi; response, everyone wanted to Louis Vallis, Gwent; escape to Neverland with Peter and Edin Egan, Co Kildare, Eire; Tinkerbell. Stuart Turvey, Sidcup, Kent; Two of our winners turn out to be Dr Karim Kamel, Doha, Qatar; doctors which just goes to show we EC Jones, Coventry. CROSSDecember must have been a good month for us here at C&VG the crossword had no problems with it! Even so, we didn't have as many entries as normal must have had something to being just around the corner. No do with Christmas excuses next time, okay! The first three out of the bag won a C&VG \"The Champ\" Magnus Wadsack, Stuckton, Hants; T-shirt. They are: Mr A J Willet, Newcastle-upon-Tyne and C J Wilkes, Mitcham, Surrey. WORD SOLUTIONS JUMPING HARES G-C; H-C; D-J; F-K; E-K; B-I; A-I; L-J. ACTIVISION MSX Northants; SPUDS UP 60 is the high yield by planting at: A8; B2; C5; D3; El; F7; G4; H6. Going by Tyne & MSX compought an Raheel Bar Halesowen, was it an early R Morgan 1. Sunderland, MSX cotas presente 15 sets of which ihn Lanyon.n. Cheshirerixhams Peter Thorogood, Kettering, Eddie Ho, Hull, N Humberside; Going by the response to our Raheel Bari Malik, Slough; Activision MSX competition, R Morgan, Halesowen, W Midlands; everyone went out and bought an Lee Farrell, Sunderland, Tyne & MSX computer or was it an early Christmas present? John Lanyon, Colchester, Essex; We put up for grabs 15 sets of MSX Jonathon Smith, Cheshire; games, courtesy of Activision which Wear; Christopher Bennen, Brixham, s Devon; Nigel Johnston, Surrey; Mr M Muress, Nottingham; The Rucli Maes, Torhout, Belgium. Richard Hedges, Basildon, Essex; Hope the rest of you got them as a Andre Bougard, Isle of Wight; stocking filler! Remco Holst, Amstelveen, The Netherlands; Lee Joyce, Northolt, Middx; go to: SOZZLED SPARROW The path can be traced by the sparrow changing direction at the following squares: B9; B5; D5; D9; B9; B7; E7; E3; G3; G5; JS; J9; M9; M7; N7; N4; K4; K1; M1; M3; H3; H9; F5; F7; J7; 18; L8; L7. SNAIL SWITCH Carrot; potato; cabbages; leek; cucumber; lettuces; peas; onions; tomato; celery. 117 "


"80 99129 BREM *** BY ANDREW CLARKE (C) 1984 ** 1 FORS-200 T0208 :FORT=T062 : READA : POKES #6 4+1.A :NEXTT, S:GOSUB288 : CLR 2 POKE2841,288 : POKE2842.208: LF=5:14=50 3 POKE2843,281 : POKE2844.201 SO=D 4 TI$=\"888888\" 5 BX=7:BY=7:DX=7 :DY=7. GOSUB7ee 8 X1=100:X2=15@: Y1=180: Y2=158 8 IFLF (=THEMPP INTCHR$(147) CHRS (5); \"OUT OF LIVES!!\" GOSUB758: GOTO308 10 V=53248 PRINTCHR$ (147) S=282:X3=5@: Y3 78 POKEV+23,30 12 PRINTCHR$(19) TAB (198) CHR$ 158) SCORE PRINTCHR$ (19) CHR$ (5) TAB (229280 13 PRINTCHR$ (19) TAB(30) CHR$ 158) LIVES: CHR$(5); LF 14 POKEV +21,255 POKEV 1.43 : POKEV, X3 POKE +28.255 : IFLF 5 THENY4=Y4+36 15 GOSUB6BB. IFD=2 THENRETURNS 16. POKEV +2,X1 : POKEV+4 X2 :POKEV+3.45: POKEV +5.72 28 SOKEV +6.160 = ORE. 200 29 FOREV+7, 14:POKE V9Y4 20/ POKEV+11 229 POKEV +13,229 32 POKEV+3 1.POKEV+3818 POKEV+39. 34 POKEV+48.2 POKEV +41 6 56 COSUBIDO POKEV+38 @ J5=EEK 56321) IF JE=255 THENPOKE2840)S GOT053 $2/05=SC:FL=LF: GOSUB588.D=2 IFX3) 25B THENX3=256 IFX3<5@THEN 3=56 IFY3C6@THEN 88 FY3>230 THEN43=238 1=Y1+BX: 17.10 2380R125@ THENBX=-BX 2=X2-DX JFXE) 2300RR2 C5 @ THENDX=-DY 2 \"1=Y1-BY IF Y1: :500R41643 THENBYE-BY 22+DUIF 2:8812:43 THENDY=IFSO CS THENPRINTR$(19) TAB (229) CHR$ (5) SC 78 IFLF CFL THENPRINT CHR$(19 TAB(30) CHR$(1 59LIVES: \";CHR$ (5) ; LF 14 IFLR<=@THENPRINTCHR$(147)CHR$(5 \"OUT OF LIVES!!\": GOSUB75@GOT7800 244 PRINT 1 UP\" 76 IF (PEEK (V+32 AND 1 )=1 THENLF-LF-1 PRINT 246 PRINT'L 2 -RIGHT\" CARS (147); \"EUCH!!\"D=8 GOSUB752 GOT05 248 PRINTS + DOWN\" @@ POKEV +1,43 POKEV X3 256 PRINT R USE 'SPACE VOR 'FIRE 82 POKEV+3, Y1 -POKEV +5, Y2 POREV+42 X1: POK TO SHOOP\" EV+43, Y1 : POKEHF +7,81 POKEHF +14,2/7 252 PRINT E PRESS FIRE\" 34 POKEV +2.81 POKEV + 4 X2:30T052 256 IFPEEK(56321) 239 THEN256 108 IFPEEK (2841)=20 THENPOKE2041, 208 POK SA 258 RETURN E2842 208 : RETURN 588 IFJS) =250 THEN512 102 POKE2041, 280 : PORE2842 208 RETURN 561 IFJS) =247THEN588 22 POKE58288,11 POKE53231, 582 IFJS=239AND Y3 (215 THENFORGY3T0225S TE 201 PRINT \" BRUCE BRUCESBRUCEGBRUCE 22 POKEV+1,G: NEXT:GOT0558 BRUCE BRUCEDERL CEDERICE 584 IFJS=245 THENX3=X3 8:43=Y3+3 5=282 PO 202 PRINT\" . E2848,283 : RETURN 526 IFJS=246 THENX3=X3+3:3=93-9:S=202 PO 204 PRINT\" . . KE2048,283 RETURN 588 IFJS-247THENX3=X3+85=202: POKE2040,2 206 PRINT\" 36 83 RETURN 518 IFJS=249 THENX3=X3-8/43=Y3+8 S=204:PO 209 PRINT\" *\" ** KE2048.285 RETURN 511 RETURN 210 PRINT 512 IFJS=25@THENX3X3-8: Y3Y3-8:5=204 POR KE2840,285 RETURN 212 PRINT\" 5:4 IFJS=251THENX3=X3-8:5=284 POKE2840.2 25 RETURN 214 PRINT 516 IFJS=253THENY3Y3+10 RETURN 518 IFJS=254 THENY3=3-10 RETURNS 5 FF1HT GE=ER 528 RETURN SE BRUCEQERUCE BRUGT 55@ LE=PEEK (V+21) 113 PRINT\" PRE 554. IF (PEEK CV+30) AND 32) = 32 THENPOKEY +21,3 35 FIRE 1-GOSUB760: SC=SC +180 OKEV+1, Y3 GOSUB 15 226 PRINT\" BY BANDREW CLARKE I 558 GOT0518 091984\" 00 P=INT (250-7BYRND (1273 22201FPEEK (56321) 239 THEN222 ) 582 POKEV +18,P POKEV +21,63 224 PRINT 604 IFRND (1) 2.5 THENPOKE 2845 208 POKEV+30 226 PRINT' ODPLEGUIDE BBRUCE QAROUND THE @ POKEV+44.2 RETURN SCREENIV 686 POKE2045, 287 POKEV+32.8 POKEV 44,6R ETURN ze PRINT\"WAVOIDING THE BALIENS BAND THE LETHAL\" 702 FORC=54272 1054296 POREC, NEXT d. 232 PRINT'AGSWORDS ABOVE YOU.\" 702 VO=54296 : AT=54277 WA=54276 SU=54273 234 PRINT S WOOR ONTO THE FUEL 784 HF=54273 : S=54272 786 POKEAT,32 POKEAT+732 POKEAT+14.02 D THE BOIL\" 708 POKESU,255 POKESU+7,255 POKESU+14.25 236 PRINT DRUMS 2180 EOINTS 238 PRINT U BE JOTOK 718 POKEVO 15 ROKEWA 33 POKEWA+14,33 POKS EWA+7, 33: RETURN 248 PRINTE 75@ POKEWA, 17 POREHF+24.8. POKEHF +7,FOR 242 PRINTINGOTET=108 TOESTEP-1 POKEHT AN "


"QUOS Fole ST. Deserted on a barren and in hospitable planet, your task is to build yourself a new space craft and blast off from this god forsaken world and try to navigate your way to your home planet. The old civilization of the planet has been dead for tens of thousands of years but the huge automated factories they built are still producing and robots are digging for coal and oil. You have managed, by raiding various of the robot controlled factories, to construct your space craft. All you need now is to steal enough oil and rocket fuel for your escape. The last part of your mission is the most difficult. So, be warned one wrong step and you will never see your home planet again!! Full instructions are included in the listing. BRUCE 752 NEXT POKEHFB: RETURN 62 POKEWA, 21 : POKEHF +14 20 POKEHF 1.8 782 POKEVO, 143 FORT=TO280STEP3 54 ROKEH+14 AT POKEHF.NEXT 766 POKEHF +14.@ POKEHF @ POWEVO, 15 768 POKEWA+14.21 RETURN 200 POKEV+21, FORC=542727054296 POKEO BY ANDREW CLARKE 882 PRINT\"GYOU SCORED 80 524 PRINT \"PLUS EVALTTN \"S FOR LASTI 986 PRINTTI$;\"SECONDS\" 50=5C VAL (T14 888 PRINT PRINT A TOTAL SCORE OF 30 818 PRINT 3:2 PRINT \"QANOTHER 30C FIRE ORN 814 GETAS: IFAS=\"THEN814 2:9 IFPEEK (56321)=239 THENGOSUB200 RUNZ 8.8. 1FAS \"N\" THENS828 PRINTCHR$(147) ECO BYE BYE! !!! END 38BBB REM#*#ALIEN A 38881 DATAB, 8,8,8,8.8.8 3BB02 DATAB, 2, 8, 32,0,,184 30883 DATAB, 2, 254, , 11,255, 128 30884 DATA45, 117, 224, 189, 195, 248,189 30885 DATA185, 248, 191,255, 243, 45, 117 30086 DATA224,11,87 128.2.222.B 30007 DATAB, 168,8,8.168..2 30008 DATA178,8,2,2,0,10,2 30889 DATA128,8,8,128,40,,160 38818 REM***SHORD 38811 DATAB 32,0,2, 170,0,18 30812 DATA34, 128, 2, 170,0,0.32 30813 DATAB,2,178,8,8, 16, 38814 DATAB, 16,8,8, 16,8,8 38815 DATA16,0,2, 16,@..16 38816 DATAB, 8, 16,8,0, 16, 30817 DATAB, 16,0,0.16.@.@ 38818 DATA16,8,0, 16.8.8.16 30819 DATAB.8.16,0,, 16, 30828 REN***BRUCE 1 30821 DATAB.8.8.8.84.0.0 38822 DATA88,0,,184.@.@. 124 30023 DATAB, 21, 43..25, 168, 30324 DATA25, 134,025 184.16.25 38825 DATA127, 248,25,85,80,21,168 30826 DATAB, 4, 168.0.21,84.8 30627 DATAB, 168.8.@.168.2.8 38828 DATA168.8.2.128.8.8 64 32329 DATAB, B, 64,@.8, 88.8 32B3B REM**BRUCE 2 38031 DATAB.@.@..84.a. 32832 DATA88,0, 184,8,9,124 30833 DATAB 21,48 .25 168.0 38834 DATA25, 184,8.25.184.16.25 38835 DATA127 248 25.85 88.21. 168 30836 DATAB, 4169 .21.34.8 30837 DATAB, 168.2.B.168.8.2 32838 DATA168.0.22, 123, 0.16.8 38039 DATAB 8.8.8.8.8.8 39848 REM***BRUGE 3 38841 DATAB.8...84.@.@ GB42 DATA148.@.@.164.2.2.244 38843 DATAB.8,49,80.@ 169, 144 32844 DATAB 185 144, 16, 185, 144.63 38845 DATA249, 144,21,85,144.8, 169 B0846 DATA30.8.16864.2.85.88 30047 DATAB 168.0.2.168.0. 32348 DATA40, a..8..0.4 38849 DATAB.,4.@.@.28, 38858 REM***BRUCE 4 38851 DATAB 8.8.8.84.9, 38852 DATA 148,8,164..2 244 38853 DATAB, 2.49,88..169.144 32854 DATAB,185,144:16 185 144.63 38855 DATA249, 144,21.85 144.8. 169 38856 DATASE, 8, 168,64,6,85,88 38857 DATAB, 168,@.@ 48.8. 32858 DATA10,,10.88 e.a 32859 DATA16.8.8.8.8 8.8 38862 REM***FUEL 1 30861 DATA2 @.128.2 @ 123 2 38862 DATAB, 128,2.100.128 8.138 30863 DATAB,,138..8.178 38864 DATA2 170,128 12,170.160.42 38865 DATA172.168.249.155 238.233 30866 DATA166.249 155 238 233,155, 38867 DATA233.91.229.178.178, 178,4 30868 DATA178, 168, 1@ 170 169,2. 170 30869 DATA128.8.178.8.8.8. 3887 REM***FUEL 2 38271 DATA63,255,252.55.255.228.87 38872 DATA235, 213, 23,178,212,5,170 38873 DATA30, 1, 178.641.178.64 38874 DATA85 178 85, 188 178. 169. 186 38875 DATA178,169,186.178.169,90,170 38876 DATA165 22, 170 148.22.178.143 38877 DATA5, 178.80.5.170.82.1 38878 DATA178,64,1.85 64.5.28 38879 DATASO, 28,20,20,84.28.21 38888 REM***ALIEN 2 30881 DATAB,0.8.8.8.8. 32882 DATAB, 0.8.32...184 38883 DATAB.2.254..41255 128 38084 DATA45, 117,224 189.185 248, 32885 DATA185.248, 191 255 248,45,117 30086 DATA224.11.87.128.2222, 30887 DATAB, 168.8.@ 168.B.@ 38888 DATA168.@.@, 136 2..136 30089 DATAB., 136,.2.138. RUNS ON A COMMODORE 64 WITH ONE JOYSTICK 119 "


"NEX-I M-O-N-TH : N-E-X-In DISCOVER THE TREASURE TRAP CASTLE Eureka! we've got them! Maps of the colossal Adventure game that has a ,000 prize tag. Professor Video will be bringing you hints and tips on the game that has captured the imagination of adventure gamers everywhere. Not to mention the interest the ,000 prize has aroused.  M-O-N-TS WHO ARE THE REAL PIRATES? SOFTWARE PIRATES H-I-N-O-W 10:11N Keith Campbell leaves his mist-shrouded tower and ventures northwards to discover just what is going on behind the thick walls of the Treasure Trap castle. Demons, wizards, barbarian warriors and evil dwarves all lurk within this strange edifice or so we've been told. Join Keith and his band of intrepid adventurers on a journey into the unknown in the next issue of Computer & Video Games. Plus a second chance for you to win a trip to the Treasure Trap Castle! Ahoy there all you software pirates! C&VG has been sailing the high seas in a bid to discover the truth about Johascos pirates and the effect they are having on the software industry. You'll be surprised at what we've discovered! It may be that their days are numbered, too. Don't miss April's C&VG, shipmates! l:X PLUS NEWS FROM THE FRONT! Mike Singleton, the Man from Midnight, will be bringing you the second part of his new computer moderated epic called Seldon's Game. Plus his regular 5th Column feature with news of the latest strategy and war-games to hit the computer battlefields! ON SALE FROM MARCH 16 13 games listings, reviews of all the latest games and news so hot that it burns the printer's fingers. Rush out and grab a copy of C&VG before it SALE grabs you! grabs you! N-O-W M-O-N-THN-E-XI-M-ON-THZ RAPID ROUND-UP OF NEW RELEASES AMSTRAD Kuma Amsoft CSM Visions Kosmos Software Projects CRL Amsoft Fruity Frank Screen Designer Snooker American Football Manic Miner Test Match Pitman Typing Tutor Mr Wong's Loopy Laundry Mutant Monty Blackjack Rescue Raiders The Hacker Sim Ultron Apple Pie Identity Europe Games Pack 1 & 11 Home Base Rommel's Revenge C16 Melbourne House DRAGON 32 Cable Software Design Design ELECTRON Acornsoft ACORN APPLE II Rezayat Europe Ltd Sir Tech Complete Cocktail Maker Watch Your Weight Kami Kaze Zalaga Aardvark ATARI CSM Parker Bros Henri Star Wars Supersoft Aardvark BBC IBM Romik Software Ltd Acornsoft Infocom Suspect MSX Lothlorien Level 9 Special Operations Colossal Adventure Holy Horrors Paul Daniels Magic Show 7th Star GO Labyrinth Acheton Duck Acid Drops Gold Digger Estra Bird Strike ORICIATMOS Orpheus Severn Software VIC 20 Firebird The Hellion Chopper Firebird Snake Bite Micky the Bricky Z-Xtricator | ZX81 Software Farm 120 "


"I-N-U-W ANATONES in the LOST KINGDOM 6 4 CASSETTE .95 The artifact is just too tempting. Sure, no one has ever returned with it but they didn't have your brains and courage. This treasure is worth any risk. An artifact containing the total history and knowledge of a lost, forgotten civilization! Just think what that could do for your career, for the university museum, and for your bank balance! Of course, there is the small matter of finding it. The perils en route are sure to be the most fiendishly clever traps and puzzles you've ever faced. You'll need all your skill and daring just to survive. Then there's the ancient curse ... but what the heck; if it were easy, it wouldn't interest you, Dr. Jones-would it? MIVU : El. Distributed in the U.K. by U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. #1-80600H-SE INDIANA JONES IN THE LOST KINGDOM game elements and character names and likenesses are trademarks of Lucasfilm Ltd, Used by Mindscape. Ing Authorised User 1984 Lucasfilm Ltd. and Mindscape, Inc. All Rights Reserved "


"48K SINCLAIR ZX SPECTRUM \"ALIEN 8\" recommended retail price .95 inc VAT Available from W.H.SMITHS, BOOTS, J.MENZIES, WOOLWORTHS, and all good software retail outlets. Also available from ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME, The Green, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire LE6 5JU, (P&P included) Tel: 0530 411485 "


"COMMODORE C16 AND PLUS 4 LAS VEGAS ZODIAC 0121212) OUT ON A LIMB MOON BUGGY 3D TIME TREK 000g FLIGHT PATH SKRAMBLE TURBO FAST LOADER LAS VEGAS Las Vegas brings all the challenges of a deluxe arcade fruit machine direct to your fingertips. Many exciting features include, gamble, cancel, collect, nudge and number options, with a three row display and maximum payout of 20$. K.B. Only C.16 .95 ZODIAC This is an enthralling arcade adventure in which the evil powers of hell have scattered the signs of the Zodiac in the four hundred chambers of the abyss. Struggle to collect these signs and at the same time try to annihilate everything in your way. How long can you stay alive? J.S. or K.B. C.16 26.95 PETCH Race Petch around the screen, moving ice blocks to alter the maze, however, beware of the nasty monsters who are constantly chasing Petch as you attempt to collect the bonus cherries. Also if you can touch the edge of the maze the monsters will suddenly burst into flames, but look out they'll soon be back! J.S. or K.B. C.16 .95 MOON BUGGY You must skillfully manoeuvre your jumping patrol vehicle over dangerous moon craters as well as large boulders and cunningly placed mines. Not only this but avoid the hovering alien spaceship as it bombards you from above. J.S. or K.B. C.16 26.95 3D TIME TREK As sole survivor of the planet \"Corillian\" your quest is one of anger and revenge. The starship you are flying is full of the latest inboard computers and extra powerful sensors. Also included are full 3D graphics, to add unbelievable realism to this fantastic journey through time itself, and beyond. J.S. and K.B. C.16 .95 SKRAMBLE Earth has been overrun by the Cobrons and its up to you to battle through the six ferocious and testing sectors. Adversaries include meteors, UFO's and deadly fireballs. Fly through an armoured city, then an elaborate maze and finally the command base itself. J.S. or K.B. C.16 .95 FLIGHT PATH Flight Path is without doubt the best flight simulator on the C/16 and Amstrad. The many elaborate features include: Altometer, flaps, directional headings, crosswinds, fires, ground warning lights and reverse thrust to name but a few. Also included are smooth graphics as you take off, cruise over mountains, and land once again. J.S. and K.B. C. 16 .95 OUT ON A LIMB This is a fantastic and in parts outrageously funny game. Based on the fairytale of Jack and the Beanstalk, Out On A Limbis full of the most strange and eccentric characters you are ever likely to meet. Firstly, climb the stalk and jump onto the clouds, then enter the giant's castle searching for treasures. However, watch out for vacuum cleaners, musical notes, televisions and potted plants, all of which chase you round the many and elaborate rooms of the castle. Once the treasure is collected the single exit will be opened, and then...........? J.S. or K.B. C.16 .95 ANIROG Mail Order: 8 HIGH STREET HORLEY SURREY 24 HOUR CREDIT SALES HORLEY 02934 6083 Payment by: P.O. ACCESS VISA AVAILABLE FROM YOUR COMPUTER STORE "


"commodore Alice IN VIDEOLAND NOW ON CASSETTE! PURE MAGIC! Join Alice in her journey through Videoland an enchanted place populated by strange creatures such as bread-andbutterflies and pipe smoking caterpillars; where little girls change size and flamingos turn into croquet mallets! Alice in Videoland is a revolutionary new concept in entertainment for the Commodore 64, incorporating some of the finest graphics ever seen on any home computer, accompanied by a charming musical score. There are four different game scenes involved, and your performance in earlier ones will affect your ability to get through later ones and determine your eventual total score. Scene One Stunning title page graphics give way to the first game scene as Alice falls into the rabbit's warren. Score points for collecting the objects to be found there including keys to open doors, bottles to make her smaller, cakes to make her bigger! Scene Two Out in the garden the Cheshire cat looks on as Alice meets the pipe-smoking caterpillar. Help her to catch the bread-and-butterflies and the rocking-horse flies that change into the balls used in the croquet game in the last scenel Scene Three Alice is a pawn in the chess game where her opponents are the Jabberwocky and Tweedledum and Tweedledee. Help her across the board by protecting her with your White Knights! Scene Four The most bizarre croquet game everl Help Alice hit the balls through the playing-card-soldier hoops before the Queen of Hearts stomps on them! Alice in Videoland is available for the Commodore 64 on disk .95, and now on cassette .95. Alice in Videoland features graphics created with the Koala Pad. Audiogenic P.O. BOX 88, READING, BERKS. SEND FOR FREE COLOUR CATALOGUEI "

