" APRIL 1987 S$4.60 Dm5.50 285pta HFL 5.50 + VIDEO ISLJA VORME LED TITUITIRITU STIIN TAKE OFF WITH GUNSHIP! FREE GAMES UP FOR GRABS GOLDEN JOYSTICKS RESULTS/WIN A TRIP TO SEE NESSIE! SPECIAL WHODUNIT DETECTIVE ISSUE/16 PAGE ADVENTURE SPECIAL FREE GIANT POSTER!/MINTER'S MUTANT CAMELS RETURN! M.A.Bromle "


"6 MASSIVE HITS IN ONE 6-PACK PLUS BONUS GAME-DUET HIU PIAK PGHTING SRRIOR .95 Spectrum Cassette Commodore 64 Cassette .95 .95 Commodore 64 Disc .95 Amstrad Cassette .95 Amstrad Disc FIGHTING WARRIOR SCOOBY DOO 1942 14 Sete THE SACRED ARMOUR OF Tili MNIRIAN Mail order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to ELITE SYSTEMS LTD. or quote your credit card No. a 1942 JET SET WILLY II ANTIRIAD ANCHOR HOUSE Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands WS9 8PW Telephone: (0922) 59165 Telex: 336130 ELITE G DUET PLUS BONUS GAME DUET. PREVIOUSLY UNRELEASED SIMULTANEOUS TWO-PLAYER ACTION. RELEASE DATE: MARCH 9th EUROPE MARCH 19th UK en SPLIT PERSONALITIES DUET "


"JACK'S BACK! Cassette Cassette Disc Cassette Spectrum Amstrad Amstrad Commodore Commodore C16 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 Disc Cassette   GAME GAME TNSS GAME FREE with The original coin-op smash 299K hit: every copy of Bombjacki Mail Order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to Elite, or quote your Credit Card number VISA Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands, WS9 8PW. Telephone: (0922) 59165. Telex: 336130 ELITE.G. On sale Feb. 9th Europe Feb. 23rd, U.K. Fresh from pinging around the screen in his first caper, Jack's back in a brand new arcade game. This time it's a great new combat game -in fact you could call it a Jack Attack! The very best Elite Titles are available at selected branches of: Bul.WHSMITH, Tandy John Menzies LAHY Officially licenced from Tecmo, Ltd of Japan Amstrad Spectrum EFE CBM-64 Elte Screen shots taken from various computer formats "


"FEATURES INSPECTOR GADGET/80 40 MONTY MOLE COMPETITION 42 XEVIOUS COMPETITION RESULTS 45 MURDER PARTY 50 INSTANT KARMA-US GAMES 53 ADVENTURE SUPPLEMENT 54 EUREKA + GRANGE HILL 56 THE FIEND 58 KNIGHT ORC PREVIEW 61 HELPLINE 63 A-Z OF ADVENTURE 72 THE BOGGIT SOLVED 77 ADVENTURE MAIL 78 STARLIGHT COMPETITION 80 INSPECTOR GADGET 84 SHERLOCK THE FINAL SOLUTION 86 HUNT THE LOCH NESS MONSTER 89 IDEAS CENTRAL 91 WIN A SEGA SYSTEM 92 ARCADE ACTION 95 PLAY-BY-MAIL 100 GOLDEN JOYSTICKS RESULTS 104 STREET SEEN 106 MAILBAG 109 LIEUT LAWW 114 TONY TAKOUSHI'S HOT GOSSIP PLAYER 1 6800 INSPECTOR GADGET/80 CONTENTS ergo SPELL BOOK LEMEDEN FEUD/15 NEWS & REVIEWS 8 NEWS + REVIEWS Prepare for a fresh outbreak of Minter Mania. The hairy one is back with more camel zapping. Fall under the spell of Nemesis the Warlock, make a pig of yourself with Oink and see the fur fly with Garfield. ALIENS/24 13 REVIEWS THIS ISSUE: Games of the Month: Take off with Gunship, perhaps the ultimate flight simulation, and get involved in Feud, one of the best budget releases. No argument. C+VG HITS: Delta, Leviathan, Hive, Krakout and Star Raiders Il. laun De TERROR OF THE DEEP/86 "


"WWW INSIDE STORY 11 MOD909093 DODO Whodunnit? We did that's who. Yup, you are now the proud owner of a copy of the UK's number one computer games magazine. Thanks to you we now sell a staggering 106,57 copies each month which means we've got an amazing 600,000 readers! Why? Because we've got more hot news, reviews and colour than any other games magazine you care to name. And we continue the tradition of bringing you the best this issue with an awesome line up of features and competitions. Thanks to Elite you can win one of the incredible Sega Master System games machines which every games player in the universe has been lusting after ever since we announced its existence in C+VG a few months back. You can also Go with Inspector Gadget and win a pair of his Gadget skates. Talking of skates you can also win tickets to that smash hit West End show Starlight Express thanks to, you've guessed it, the new Starlight software label. We've also got a 16 page Adventure Special packed with adventure goodies like the exclusive Helpline A-Z of hot clues, plus previews of Knight Orc and Grange Hill. Mirrorsoft want to take you on a monster hunting trip to Loch Ness in search of the mysterious Nessie. We want to take you to the exclusive C+VG Golden Joystick Awards-in spirit anyway-as we announce the results of the most prestigious reader awards in the games world. All this plus the latest action from the arcades. Play By Mail, Tony Takoushi's Hot Gossip and lots more. Check it out! PARAMOS ARCADE ACTION/92 101 DB Tim BURY Du ENERY NZD HELICOPTER BIRORE GUNSHIP/14 RTF VG IRIFFIP MINTER'S MUTANTS/8 EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John ART EDITOR Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Steve Donoghue Matthew Woodley AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANTS Tony Takoushi PUBLICITY Clive Pambridge ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Garry Williams ADVERTISEMENT EXECUTIVE Katherine Lee AD PRODUCTION Debbie Pearson PUBLISHER Rita Lewis COVER Mark Bromley EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222 July-December 106,571 THERE'S HELL TO PAY... ABC THEY'RE ANGRY.. IT'S KNIGHT ORC/58 "


"SINCE TRUE VIDEO WY VIDEO Na #m GRAPH 12 do WEBruce 6 S alon ir ran | < RUN BREAK LOUD CAPS  ENTER CAPS SHIFT SIM MONSTER MEMO "


"GET YOUR HANDS ON THE NEW SINCLAIR 128K+2. BEFORE EVERYBODY ELSE DOES. ZX Spectrum +2 The new 128K ZX Spectrum +2 is more than just a monster memory. It's the ultimate family computer. With a built-in datacorder for easier loading, superb graphics capability, two joystick ports, a proper typewriter keyboard and more games available than you can shake a joystick at (well over 1000 software titles, in fact) Better get your hands on the new 128K ZX Spectrum +2 soon. Before they do.  1ORY MONSTER VALUE To: Sinclair, P.O. Box 462, Brentwood, Essex C14 4ES Please send me more information about the Sinclair 128K ZX Spectrum +2 Name Address Available from: Allders, Boots, Clydesdale, Comet, Connect, Co-op, Currys, Dixons, Electric Supreme, Laskys, John Lewis, John Menzies, Power City Rumbelows, Ultimate, WH Smith, Wigfalls, and good independent stores. We recommend Sinclair Quality Control Software. "


"* Mews new, promising looking game. Laurel and Hardy may seen unlikely characters for a game but Andy-ever keen to find something a little bit differentthought otherwise. Laurel and Hardy introduces a new programming technique called Cinevision. In keeping with the original character of Laurel and Hardy films, the game is in black and white and the soundtrack features an \"organ music\" accompaniment. The game can be played by one or two players -or by one against the computer. The game has been in development for nearly eight months. Laurel and Hardy will be released in late March/early April for the C64. Prepare yourselves for a catastrophe! Garfield, the cynical but cute cartoon cat is making his computer debut during April. The Edge have picked up the character licence and intend to produce a series of Garfield games. The first will be called Big Fat Hairy Deal and should be in the shops in time for Easter. Software, which aims to help would be games coders. The handbook will be given free to anyone responding to Superior's big spring recruitment campaign. Full colour advertisements will be appearing throughout the home computer press during March inviting people to send details of their abilities. brave step of converting the comic into a computer game. Can't be done, you say. But those guys down in Stratford are going to have a crack at it. In the game you play the part of Uncle Pig who is attempting to get an issue of Oink! together. You play different games, get the articles you need for various pages together and finally end up completing the issue and hopefully get a massive circulation figure. Bit like C+VG really! Express Raider from US old should be arriving at a station near you soon, while Konami's Iron Horse is still waiting in the sidings. Meanwhile here's a reminder of what the fantastic arcade versions look like! BIG,\" FAT, HAIRY DEAL Make a pig of yourself and grab a copy of CRL's game of the comic, Oink! In case you've not heard about this offering it's a sort of grown up Beano, packed full of characters like Harry the Head, Rubbish Man and good, old Uncle Pig. CRL are currently taking the DES 1     Ever wondered how to become a successful games programmer It's a profession packed with pitfalls for the unwary--but Superior Software, of Repton fame, have put together a new handbook called Success in Andy Wilson, who created the brilliant Commodore Dan Dare game for Virgin has turned to a dynamic duo from the era of silent films for the subject of his Following in the wake of Rogue Trooper and Judge Dredd, the popular 2000AD comic characters, Nemesis the Warlock, is to make his debut on computer. The rights have been snapped up by Martech and the resulting game will be out on the Spectrum Amstrad and Commodore Nemesis the Warlock leads the Resistance Movement against Torquemada, Grand Master of the Terminators. Nemesis has sworn to destroy the evil empire of the Termight. Torquemada has cleansed Termight of all aliens and is recognised as the protector of all human life on the planet. He treats the extinction of alien life as a religious crusade and sets about to cleanse the galaxy only Nemesis can save the aliens. In the game, Nemesis seeks out Torquemada in an attempt to finally destroy him. Each new screen will provide him with different obstacles to overcome. The Terminators will try to destroy him before he can reach their Grand Master. But Nemesis is well-equipped; his trusty sword, Excessus, has killed many Terminators. If that fails he has his gun and the ability to breathe fire at his opponents. As Nemesis gets nearer to Torquemada his face will gradually appear at the bottom of the screen Once fully visible the final battle is about to begin Way, way back you may remember C+VG's Hot Gossiper Tony Takoushi raving about a game called Firetrack from the legendary Orlando. Well the game itself has finally surfaced on the Electric Dreams label. Firetrack is an exciting shoot'em up featuring smooth, vertically scrolling graphics and a constant stream of fast and furious attackers. The Firetrack, which crosses four main worlds fueled by nuclear power plants, cunningly concealed by a Devil Rock at the end of each section. You must first destroy these plants, plunging the colonies into darkness, and then prevent them rebuilding by attacking again in "


"SCORE: BERSCS: They are back! Those beastly through the various levels and 90 foot high spitting camels to have a good solid blast at are set to reappear on the just about everything in sight. Commodore 64 compliments There should be around 100 of Mr Minter. attack waves, all with their own I took a little peek at how the touch of strategy and reflex. game was coming along and it The game will also feature a got my taste buds tingling and nifty little tune which is my hand itching for action! described as \"a traditional In Revenge Two the Peruvian melody\".. camel animation is smoother There are also aliens in the and there are seven scrolling border and a really laid back planes in front of the camel to camel smoking a ciggy in the give a classy look to the game. top right hand side of the The aim of the game is to get screen. the black-out. After a year and a half's painstaking development, Firetrack will be available in February on Commodore 64/128 cassette (.99) and disk (R.R.P. .99) and BBC B/Master series. We've already told you about Sun Star for the Atari. Now this fast and furious game is available for the Amstrad and Spectrum from CRL. Sun Star will retail for .95 on cassette and .95 on disc. The first in Gremlin's range of inside this issue of C+VG you'll Atari ST titles, Typhoon is due for discover a special poster from release in February. Typhoon is a Powerhouse, the new budget space action game, licenced from label from the CRL stable. There's Germany by Gremlin and written some excellent stuff on the way especially for the ST. The games including a terrific version of feature 50 different zones at play Wonder Boy, the arcade hit, and difficulty. called Terminator. Star Wars isn't a Trivial Pursuit but Domark are still bringing out the game! Yup, those classic arcade coin-ops are coming to a home computer near you. Star Wars, The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi were all seen on the old Atari VCS cartridge machine way back in the mists of time. Quite why it's taken so long to get them out for computer is a mystery. The games are scheudled for release in late 87. Remember Classic Invaders? Well, Bubble Bus has done it again with Classic Muncher Pac-man in other words. And it's only .99! Starquake, originally written by C+VG Golden Joystick winner Steve Crow, is about to be released on the Beeb. I'll set you back .95 for the tape, .95 for the disc. And there's an Electron version coming soon! Gremlin Graphics hasn't given up on the old favourite martial arts. Their new game is Samurai Trilogy and will be for the CBM 64/128, the Spectrum and Amstrad CPC's price .99. DESTROYED A couple of issues back we printed some special C+VG stickers and stuck them on the front of your favourite mag. We also asked you to send us pictures of your stickers in silly places. None was sillier than David Setrup's of Wallasey. Last month we printed the first part of our offer for 200 FREE games of Pete Cooke's Academy. This month we print the final token which puts you in with a chance of the game. Send these two tokens to Academy Offer, CRL, CRL House, 9 King's Yard, London E15 2HD. The Fifth Quadrant is an arcade adventure complete with role playing elements and a whole bunch of robots is on the way from Bubble Bus. This arcade adventure is set on a spaceship which will have approximately 250 rooms/ locations and the player will have control of four robot crew swapping from one to another as necessary. The game will be available for the Spectrum, Amstrad and C64 but a price has not yet been fixed. ACADEMY OFFER Name:... Address: I enclose two Academy Coupons from C+VG. Please indicate which computer you own Spectrum Amstrad TOKEN 1 "


"Arcades witho Licensed to deliver big brothers acti SE WONDER \"Wonderboy reminds me of Super Mario Brothers... you can't go wrong with Wonderboy, it requires skill, timing and is good, clean fun. \"Dressed to kill in nappies and a motorbike helmet, with a skateboard as his trusty steed and wielding a stone axe, Wonderboy is born ready to fight off the nastiest of nasties, willing to leap the widest chasm, and eager to risk his life. Arcade Action, Computer and Video Games POLEERITURE ARCADE SCREEN ARCADE SCREEN JUMP INTO THE WORL, This Sega coin-op conversion puts other top software 'Best and fastest scrolling on a racing game! 'Best sprite design 'Best playability 'Best coin-op conversion' Popular Computing Weekly ...brilliant' Arcade Action, Computer and Video Games Your Sinclair Megagame ACTIVISION ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE ZX SPECTRUM 48K/128K/+(.99), COMMODORE 64/12 and Dicl 1 99and "


"out the change. ction without busting your pockets. FREE GAME OFFER (details inside each pack) 2 QUARTET SPACE COLONY \"06\" has been attacked by space pirates. To put an end to their plundering, a private rescue team calling themselves the \"QUARTET\" is recruited. ...extremely addictive and highly playable' Arcade Action, Computer and Video Games ARCADE SCREENS RLD OF ENDURO RACING are , houses to shame. It sets a new standard for arcade tie-ins. Sinclair User Magazine WOOD DO 600 RA TM SPECTRUM SCREENS 128 Cassette (.99) and Disk (.99), AMSTRAD CPC Cassette (.99) 128 Cassette (69 99 and Disk (14 99) AMSTRAD CPC Cassette (Co99 nd A TARI ST (.99) All titles. TM &  SEGA 1986. All Rights Reserved. Activision, Inc. Authorized User Mail order: Activision (UK) Ltd., 23 Pond Street, Hampstead, London NW3 2PN. Tel : 01 431 1101 "


"GUILD. THIEVES Ariolasoft is to release The Fourth Protocol, based on Frederick Forsyth's best-selling booking and soon to be a film starring Michael Caine, for the Amstrad PCW (.99) and the IBM and Apple (.95). Southern Belle and Heathrow Traffic Control are to be released on the Amstrad PCW by Hewson. Southern Belle, the first authentic locomotive simulation, is based on a 1930s King Arthur Class Locomotive on the London to Brighton run. Southern Belle/ Heathrow Air Traffic Control is available for the Amstrad P.C.W.8256 and 8152 price .95 Dun Darach, Heavy on the Magic and now The Trials of Therion. But the bad news for followers ut the bad news for followers of Gargoyle is that Gregg Follis is delaying the release of the game until he feels the time is right. Greg is also toying with the idea of a game based around The Hunting of the Snark. Lewis Carroll's famous nonsense poem. The seventh in the long running Atari Smash Hits series hits the streets this month. This time English Software have put together Elektraglide, their own original race game, Colossus Chess 3.0, Alley Cat, and Blue Max. Alley Cat isn't the Braybrook game it's the Synsoft game favoured by programmers and Atari freaks. Smash Hits Seven runs on the Atari 400/800/XL/XE/ range. The win tape pack costs .95, twin discs .95. Using the Konix Speed King joystick will give you an 84 per cent chance of improving your high score, according to research carried out by Epyx in the USA. While not disputing the findings, it should be pointed out that Epyxis selling the joystick in America under the name Epyx 500XJ. A touch biased... Gary Partis follows up his BBC hit Psycastria with Spear of Destiny, again released by Audiogenic. Meanwhile Audiogenic is releasing Thunderstruck 2 for the BBC/Electron on cassette and disk. Spectro, the Thunderstruck hero, will also be featured in Peter Scott's next game. This is C+VG's Lesly Walker yes that is how you spell Lesly! with just some of the huge number of entries for our Xevious arcade machine competition. Amazing but true! This MUST be the biggest ever response to competition in C+VG. But the Euromax Design a Joystick competition is rapidly catching up. Soon we won't be able to see our desks. Big Red is beginning to look worried by the pile of mail. No, I know a man who does! This droid, who looks as if he's in desperate need of the AA is Number Five, the mechanical star of Short Circuit. A fun movie and game from Ocean. Check them both out! A computerised gaming aid called the AFV Combat Calculator is available for World War Two military model wargaming, from a company called History in Miniature. The system covers AFV-short for Armoured Fighting Vehicles with infantry support from 1939 through to the last battles of 1945, and all known wargaming scales As the AFV Combat Calculator is available on the Spectrum 48K (with tape or microdrive) and the BBC. It can be obtained from Robin Hunt, 1 Ostade Road, London, SW2 2AY. Price .95 Help! Stop Thief! Get the police. Get MI5. Somebody has stolen all of the goodies for the next C+VG. It's a conspiracy. We've fallen victim to the Guild of Thieves. But never fear we'll get it all back and be on sale with an offering which will probably cause you a touch of the old GBH that's Great Bliss and Happiness. Yes we're ahead of the pack with an exclusive on Guild of Thieves, the next offering from Magnetic Scrolls and Rainbird. Adventure ace Keith Campbell says you won't believe your eyes. What else have we got in the C+VG May swag bag? Steve Turner, the ace Hewson programmer, has written a players' guide to Rana Rama, his latest chart-buster. There's also an indepth look at the Amiga, a round-up of the latest videos, and a high tech life-enhancing feature called A Room of my Own. The wonderful Wayne is also back with another Play-by-Mail spectacular, and he also takes a look at some heavy metal rock albums. We will rock you! You daren't miss next month's Arcade Action. Clare Edgeley will be bringing you a mega-special report on a real sizzler which will set the arcades alight. As for competitions, how does Grange Hill, Challenge of the Gobots and Mastertronic's Milk Race grab you. Yeah, we sure are the prize guys. And due to huge public demand, Paris the Pen has suffered utter artistic anguish to produce a special Melissa Ravenflame poster. Look out for the Guild of Thieves on next C+VG's cover next month. It's a steal at . It was great to see so many C+VG readers at The Second British Play-By-Mail Convention in London recently. We thought it was a great success. How about you? V C+VG's Wayne at the PBM convention. The magazine that gives you more does it again! We've got 200, yes 200 copies of Super Sunday, the epic American Football game from Nexus, to GIVE away. All you have to do is simply cut out the American Football helmet token below and send it together with the second coupon which will be printed in the next issue of C+VG — to Nexus, DSB House, 30 High Street, Beckenham, Kent. Strange but true department. Did you know that according to Gallup, the people who put the software charts together, Yie Ar Kung Fu was the all time top selling game of 1986. The 1986 top ten reads like this: Yie Ar Kung Fu/Imagine; Formula One Simulator/Mastertronic; Commando/Elite; Green Beret/ Imagine; Thrust/Firebird; Ghosts and Goblins/Elite; Paperboy/Elite; Rambo/Ocean; Kik Start/ Mastertronic; Ninja Master/ Firebird. Amazing facts department. Football Manager from Addictive Games entered the chart at number 49. "


"Awarded to Top Flight Stunt PilotsOnly The Sports Jet Simulation The Decathlon of Sports Aviation Events is a tough and dangerous competition, the ultimate challenge for any stunt pilot. To compete in it, you must learn to fly the BD-5) -a fully acrobatic, 300 m.p.h. sports jet. To win you must be prepared to live dangerously. Acrojet puts you in the hot seat to experience the same thrill, excitement and split second action as real stunt pilots, Superb 3-D graphics, sophisticated cockpit instrumentation and lightning fast joystick response enable you to perform precision loops, rolls and Immelmanns. Even the deathdefying Cuban Eight In this simulation there's no room for human error. Only for skill, courage and nerves of steel. Up to 4 players can compete in Acrojet. Challenge your friends and become the World's Greatest Sports Pilot. Acrojet for the Commodore 64/128k, Spectrum 48/128k and Amstrad CPC series. Cassette .95. Disk .95. SIMULATION SOFTWARE "


"C-VG GUNSHIP REVIEWS WIN O-OS STORES STATUS DISPUT DDD 1201 GUMY HEP DOD 115 FORE HUE DODO SIDEWINDER DOD O HELPIRE DDD DDD 33 2. 17 FFT FUEL GAME OF THE MONTH. Bigger, better and bolder than the rest. Try it, buy it. Don't miss out. C+VG HIT Miss the hits at your peril. They are the business! THE REVIEWERS Tim Metcalfe: The Ed man wields the fastest joystick of all. When his word is heard your better listen. Paul Boughton: Shoots from the lip. Likes zip in his zap. Lee Brathwaite: Radio Lancashire's ace games man, always ready to air his views. Video will never kill the radio star. Chris Cain: The Amiga man. But Cain is able to persuaded that 64 isn't near retirement age. David Bishop: As an Amstrad fan, The Bishop preaches what he practices. He is also full of praise for the Atari ST. Steve Badsey: The Doctor reports from the frontline about war and strategy games. Nicky Trevett: Reclusive Nicky has the knack with the BBC. Brian Webber: Sees all, hears all, plays all. John Minson: Games expert Minson has the Atari 8-Bit between his teeth. Something he XLS at. Hakan Akbus: The Atari addict who knows a good deal. Lesly Walker: Lesly heads C+VG S.P.G. That's Specially Playable Games. They must be good. Gunship is without doubt the best flight simulator available on a home computer. used in Vietnam, it is armoured, not easy to fly. There are two MACHINES: CBM64/128, ATARI and is designed specifically as a main controls, a cyclic stick800XL/XE OR 520/1040/ST tank-killer, carrying Hellfire represented in Gunship by a AMIGA SUPPLIR: MICROPROSE laser-guided missiles, unguided normal joystick, which controls PRICE: .95 (DISK) rocket pods and a 30mm chainpitch and roll, and a collective > VERSION TESTED: CBM 64 gun, plus Sidewinder missiles lever which controls the REVIEWER: STEVE BADSEY (the same as those used by amount of lift generated by the Harriers in the Halklands for air rotor blades. To fly forwards in Gunship, the attack-helicopter defenge, Its heart is the TADS a helicopter you gain height and flight simulator, is rapidly and (Target Acquisition and then point the nose deservedly turning into a bestDesignation System) built downwards, rather than pulling seller for Microprose in this round the guidance system in the stick back to take off as with country. How they managed to the gunner crewman's helmet a conventional aircraft. This pack so much into a 64K while the pilot flies the aircraft. takes time to learn, and program seems to be a You may remember a civilian Gunship begins with a training mystery even to themselves, version of the Apache from the scenario in the United States, in but after seeing this, any firm film and television series Blue which while your own weapons putting out a single-scenario Thunder. Eachi Helicopter flies at fire live ammunition and the wargame should be ashamed of up to 220 miles an hour, weighs returning enemy fire is blank. itself. about nine tons fully laden, and from this the pilot is advised to The AH-64A Apache attack costs a little under 82 million graduate, slowly, through helicopter has, after various dollars. missions of increasing difficulty teething troubles, now come Microprose set out with the against enemy with gradually into service with the frontline object of making their improving training and and reserve forces of the US simulation as realistic as weaponry. Army. Unlike the helicopters possible, and a real helicopter is the scenarios read like a B EBWEMBEREDELE BAS SRBS CRISIRISISSIT "


"REVIEWS + TODA SWIFT SPEEDWELL Feud handbook of American's worldwide commitment. First, a chance to refight Vietnam with a return to South-East Asia, then air support for American ground troops committed in Central America, then part of the Rapid Deployment Force gainst Soviet-style equipment in the Near East, and finally World War Three in Germany against the Warsaw Pact. On each occasion the player can opt for a normal mission, a mission which requires him to volunteer, or a \"suicide\" mission with a low chance of surviving. Missions can be day or night, in any kind of weather conditions, and the Apache can be set to fly \"realistically\" or be a little more kind to the pilot. After seeing the mission the pilot chooses his own weapons load, and his own path to the target. The object is not just a survive one mission. The pilot starts as a sergeant and can earn promotion all the way up to colonel by consistent good flying. He can also be awarded medals for a particularly good performance on one spacific mission. The US Army gives helicopter pilots their first medal for completing flight training without killing themselves but after that it gets harder! If the pilot decides that a mission is just too difficult he can pass it by using the \"sick call\" option, but this will affect his future promotion prospects. With so many variations to select, it is almost impossible to fly the same mission twice. Gunship is such a simply excellent game that any complaints seem like carping, but I have a few. The helicopter flies far more sluggishly than is normal for a simulator, which Microprose believe to be realistic, but which needs a little adjustment for the player. In particular, the collective, which is really the key control in flying a helicopter simulators-by a second joystick acting as a throttle. The program may also be taking the claims for the real Apache too much at their face value-the machine has suffered from endless technical problems, and malfunctions may be far more common than Gunship suggests. But this does little to detract from a very fine A Brilliant value at .99 together so much quicker than you. Fortunately you have a compass which shows you where your opponent is but often you'll need to be where he is in order to pick the herbs or flowers you need for your special brews. You can dodge Leonoric's deadly fireballs or bolts of lightning but it's better to attempt to avoid him if possible. Another guy to avoid is Hieke the Gardener who can drain your energy on contact. He'll form spells which you can use also chase you around his  MACHINES: SPECTRUM/ garden which you have to enter to wipe out your brother. AMSTRAD/C64/MSX to get more ingredients. It's a SUPPLIER: MASTERTRONIC Brother?! Yeah, Leonoric is  PRICE: .99 your brother who once turned good idea to get together the  VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM/ you into a frog. No wonder invisibility spell before you AMSTRAD there's no brotherly love attempt to brave the garden. REVIEWER: TIM occurring here! You'll need Chondrilla and Your spells are shown in a Hemlock for that. Sounds like a It's magic! Feud, the first spell book at the bottom rightrelease on the new Bulldog hand corner of the screen. The label will cast a spell on you. It's ingredients you've collected are a battle between two weird highlighted in red. Highlight wizards reach out to become two ingredients on the same page-Dandelion and Burdock up against Leonorica for instance and you can particularly evil looking red dash back to your cauldron to robed wizard who simply wants mix them. to destroy you. Only when you've done this To become top Wiz you have will you be able to activate the to explore the surrounding spell and use it against your countryside and find opponent. ingredients for spells which Leonoric is a real meanie who fengu when mixed in your cautaron always seems to ge Con your software collection be without Feud? SPELL BOOK LEREISTON game. These are people now who believe that the attack helicopter is the weapon of the future, eventually to replace the tank altogether. The US Army says that should it ever come to war, it expects the Apache to kill fourteen tanks for each helicopter lost. Gunship is about as close as you will ever get to finding out if that is true. It comes with my highest recommendation, strange cocktail you find in dodgy wine bars. You will also come across villagers and travellers who can be turned into Zombies and forced to obey your commands. Feud reminded me a bit of Sorcery in atmospherealthough it's more of a Sabre Wulf-ish style game. Especially the Spectrum version. The Amstrad graphics are extremely pretty and both versions and the Amstrad game have neat hip-hop soundtrack which strangely fits in well with the game. Brilliant value at .99 you shouldn't fail to add Feud to your collection NOW! BEARIG CITATOR TELEPORT DANDYL ION BURDOCK N WE  GRAPHICS REALISM VALUE PLAYABILITY one Amstrad/Spectrum  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"CVG EGREYFELL MACHINES: SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD/C64 SUPPLIER: STARLIGHT PRICE: .95 VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: TIM 01.:SS About time! A game with a cat as the hero. In their debut game Starlight strike a blow for catkind and prove for good that all cats are probably the most intelligent creatures in the known universe. Norman is the name of our feline friend. He finds himself in the strange world of Greyfell on a quest for the Orb of Light which will restore sweetnessand light-to Greyfell, currently under the evil rule of Mauron the Evil One. Norm the Cat explores a world which owes a lot to Knightlore, Fairlight and several other similar games but never fear it's FUN anyway. You have to interact with the agnus other characters in the game. NO AMMO There are five nice guys who will help you and eight baddies who seek to rid you of one of your nine lives. These characters talk in riddles which appear in speech bubbles -first seen in Movie. Unravel the riddles and you could be on the way to solving some of Greyfell's numerous puzzles. Watch these bubbles carefully 'cos you could get a clue which will lead onto other clues. For example someone might ask for some fruit. Take him a nice fresh Granny Smith and he might give you something in exchange. Use this to pick things up. select useful spells yup, old Norm has magic leaping from his paws and use objects. At busy times, when you are being attacked for example the icon system gets a bit frustrating and difficult to manipulate. Traps are everywhere. Pressure pads, magical selfbuilding walls, pot-holes, dungeons and so on. Very mappable, extremely playable and very addictive, Greyfell is quite simply the cat's whiskers. Arcade adventurers shouldn't fail to add this debut game from Starlight to their collection. 00000 2. GREYFELT OHVG GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY OR RIDER 02 SHOCKWAY  MACHINES: SPECTRUM AMSTRAD/C64 SUPPLIER: F.T.L. PRICE: .95 AMSTRAD/C64 .95 SPECTRUM (.95 ALL DISCS) VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: TIM If this is what the future holds for pedestrians then I'm rushing out to buy an armoured car! F.T.L., alias Gargoyle Games, has come up with yet another original and amusing offering. Shockway Rider is set in a futuristic city where people get around on moving walkways. These walkways are dangerous places. There are muggers, street gangs, barriers and bouncing police balls!? The objective is to guide the Shockway Rider, a rockabilly punk type character, through eight different districts of the city. To complete a district the rider has to travel full circle on one of the hazard packed moving pavements. NOT an easy task. 00059 A: DEGREUFEL is a whole lot easier than keeping your Rider alive and kicking, punching, brickchucking.. Shockway isn't an easy game by any means. But it is challenging and a whole lot of fun to play. Don't expect to find it easy to start with but persevere. It's well worth it. It's nice to see in these days of arcade copies, shoot-'em-up clones by the score that someone can come up with a well thought out, original and playable game. It just oozes quality. Watch out for the jokes on the billboards and get your maps in to Ideas Central pronto! Otherwise I'll never be able to walk alone again! Gory in places, Shockway Rider could just be the computer game equivalent of a 2000AD comic strip. But it also has the humour of those strips which makes it even more playable. Check it out today. TE The Rider is armed with There's always someone or bricks — which have to be something -waiting to knock replenished from time to time your block off. Literally. from \"ammo-dumps\". He can Hit a barrier or tangle with a use these to beat off the street tough-quy and you could just gangs and lob a few at innocent lose your head which passers-by if you are so trundles along on the walkway inclined minus the rest of our hero. But the key to the game is the The sprites are big and well speed at which you can switch animated with lots of funny \"lanes\" on the shockway. It's graphic gimmicks to keep your fatal to stay still for too long. interest alive and kicking. Which UYG GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY no "


"ATARI COMMODORE SPECTRUM SPECTRUM GET ON TO A WINNER WITH WOOLWORTHS AMSTRAD COMMODORE 1. Leaderboard U.S. GOLD SPECTRUM. .95 2. Bombjack 2 ELITE SPECTRUM. .95 3. Bombjack 2 ELITE CBM-64. .95 4. Championship Wrestling U.S. GOLD CBM-64. .95 5. Gunship MICROPROSE CBM-64 .95 6. Ace of Aces U.S. GOLD SPECTRUM. .99 7. Fist 2 MELBOURNE HOUSE SPECTRUM .95 8. Gauntlet U.S. GOLD CBM-64. .99 9. 10th Frame U.S. GOLD CBM-64. .99 10. Jail Break KONAMI CBM-64. .95 11. Bazooka Bill MELBOURNE HOUSE SPECTRUM. .95 12. Shao Lins Road EDGE CBM-64. .95 13. Gauntlet U.S. GOLD SPECTRUM. .99 14. 10th Frame U.S. GOLD SPECTRUM .99 15. Jail Break KONAMI SPECTRUM .95 16. Paperboy ELITE SPECTRUM. .95 17. World Games U.S. GOLD CBM-64. .95 18. Paperboy ELITE CBM-64. .95 19. Super Soccer OCEAN SPECTRUM .95 20. Elevator Action ARGUS CBM-64. .95 21. Leviathon ENGLISH SOFTWARE CBM-64. .95 22. Arcanoid OCEAN SPECTRUM .95 23. Arcanoid OCEAN CBM-64. .95 24. Judge Dredd MELBOURNE HOUSE SPECTRUM. .95 25. Escape Singes Castle SOFTWARE PROJECTS CBM-64. .95 26. Space Harrier ELITE CBM-64.9.95 27. Space Harrier ELITE SPECTRUM .95 28. Bombjack 2 ELITE AMSTRAD .95 29. Raid 2000 MIRRORSOFT CBM-64. .95 30. Super Huey 2 U.S. GOLD CBM-64. .95 COMMODORE AMSTRAD COMPUTER GAMES ATARI TOP 30 CHARTBUSTERS *HOT NEW RELEASES *FULL RANGE OF MASTERTRONIC SOFTWARE ATARI WOOLWORTHS A Great Deal in Entertainment SPECTRUM * At selected larger stores Items subject to availabilly COMMODORE I SPECTRUM AMSTRAD "


"IN EMESIS THE WARLOCK 62000 AD ODO GIGA Software Communications Limited, Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE PHONE: (0323) 768456 TELEX: 878373 Martec G Spectrum 48/128 Cassette .95 Commodore 64/128 Cassette .95 Disc .95 Amstrad CPC Cassette .95 Disc .95 Available from all leading software retailers or order today by mail. Prices include postage and packing plus VAT. "


"Mutants  MACHINE: C64 You are a member of a thinly SUPPLIER: OCEAN spread group of freedom PRICE: E8.95 (TAPE) .95 fighters who are opposed to the DISC) weapons researched carried out REVIEWER: TIM by the Survivor Zero Corporation; have discovered Now here's a funny thing. that the weapons used by all Denton Designs strike back with sides in the war are supplied by a strange and possibly the Corporation, and that they innovative game. It's a shoot are currently experimenting 'em up with icons--and odd with a new generation of combination to say the least. weapons called Macro-Genetic The game is set in the distant Mutiods. future, when man has colonised MGM's are the first large the remote star systems and scale biological weapons matter can be manipulated with capable of mutating into ever ease. Unfortunately man's more virulent and robust political and moral species, hence the name development has remained Mutantsyou must eliminate stagnant since the second this deadly system. millenium and inter-stellar war You control the Rainbow has raged for the last 600 years. Warrior, a single man patrol REVIEWS ship. Your task is to enter the 15 deep-space test zones of the Survivor Zero Corporation and find the components of a self destruct mechanism. Each test zone contains a different strain of mutants. You have four lives and no time limits to complete your task. Each zone requires different techniques to master and some are more difficult than others. But you always begin at, and return to, the mothership menu. This is on the left of the screen and contains six icons. The top two icons select music or sound effects. The top arrow points to which mode is currently selected. The next three icons are the weapons available. The bottom white arrow points to the weapon currently selected. Missiles are high-yield explosive devices that have an effect over a large area, but can only be fired one at a time. Barriers are degradable defensive weapons that can be used to erect a temporary shield against the mutants. They have no effect on the ship. The supply of these devices is limited, so after ejecting the full load of ships weapon system automatically switches to photon torpedos. Photon torpedos are rapid fire and buy it just for that -and I low yield optical weapons. reckon the lastability factor The last icon is a picture of could be a bit limited. Mutants the ship and selecting this icon is different and difficult to switches to the Zone Map, four classify but if you are a fan of by four grid representing the 16 Denton games, and this is zones of the research pretty typical of their style, establishment. The top left zone combining strategy and quick is the control zone, the others thinking, it's well worth having are the test zones. a look at in your local computer Mutants won't appeal to store. everyone but I must admit found myself quite taken with it, GRAPHICS thanks to the weird things going SOUND on in the zones. VALUE PLAYABILITY However I wouldn't rush out PASTO IOA A Mutants is a combination of icon and shoot 'em up. MACHINES: ATARI (DISC ONLY) SPECTRUM, AMSTRAD, CBM64 SUPPLIER: ATARI CORPORATION (ATARI VERSION), ELECTRIC DREAMS PRICE: .95 DISC (ATARI. CBM64, AMSTRAD) .95 CASSETTE VERSION TESTED: ATARI REVIEWER: BRIAN STAR RAIDERS II In the early years of the home computer, the Atari was a favoured machine, but was over priced. Some of the games that have been released are considered to be classics Miner 2049'er and Star Raiders are two examples. Star Raiders Il is destined to follow them into the book of Atari classics. Star Raiders was released in 1979 only on the Ataris, now eight years later we have the follow up, which will be making an appearance on the big three machines from Electric Dreams, around the middle of March. Star Raiders Il on the Atari turns out to be an upgraded game that was never released from three years ago. That game was called The Last Starfighter, but due to the copyright laws has not been released until now. The main differences are a new title screen and the controls of the Liberty Star (your ship) have are the ships responsible for the your next destination a line, been made more responsive. destruction of your cities. The appears from where you are The Zylon fleet has been motherships take a various and all you have to do is place it laying dormant building up number of hits depending on on your destination and press their weapons and defences what type it is. The blue fire, your ship is then plunged since their defeat and are on the motheship takes two hits, the into hyperspace and the arrival offence once more, threatening green takes three and the red is almost instant. On the the star system of Celos IV with takes four hits before you versions from Electric Dreams total destruction once again. destroy them. In combat you do this part of the game will almost You are the only person that not have very good control over certainly be changed. stands in their way. You your ship as it does not go left the graphics maybe a bit mission is to defend all the or right very quickly and up and blocky but have been used to cities in the Celos IV star down seems nonexistent. It is the very best, the way a fighter system. The cities are spread lucky that the zylon fleets have is winged and spins off into a over three major planets and the worst pilots ever trained big explosion is showing the one moon in orbit around the (unless they were trained for Atari graphics at their very best. planet Teris, the number of some to do shooting practice on Sound effects are also used to cities you have to protect varies them). the very best with quite a good each time you play the game. To travel from planet to title screen tune. The Atari In the fighting sequences you planet or between the two stari version is worthy of being the have to destroy a various systems you are given a three April game of the month. number of fighters, some of the dimensional view of the system If you have got an Atari then fleets have motherships which that you are in. To decide on rush out and get the game now, Excellent graphics and lots of fast moving action. if you have only got a cassette 6550 DIECAREMELUENDUR DOS ERR based machine then buy a disc drive as well it is certainly worth TELOSITE UTAN T ERS OUESHAD it, with software like this appearing on the Atari scene, GRAPHICS 3 YOU ARE HERE SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY TERIS ID: 806 451..1351M6.2E225. 36.6E8SCH ENUIRONMENT TEMPERATE CITIES: DESTROYEES F IAHTERSHAN "


"all in one superb package All Action Packed Games INDOOR SPORTS Darts, Air Hockey, Bowling & Ping Pong C.U. Screen Star C.C.I MEGA 999 *PING PONG IS NOT INCLUDED IN COMMODORE VERSIONS Advance SPORTTIME COMMODORE 64* (C) .95 (D) .95 SPECTRUM 48K,128K,+ .95 AMSTRAD CPC (C) .95 (D) .95 ADVANCE SOFTWARE PROMOTIONS LIMITED 17. STAPLE TYE  HARLOW ESSEX  CM 18 7LX.TEL(0279) 412441 "


"WEST BANK 5 CNG  MACHINES: CBM 54/ any one time. SPECTRUM The doors open in random SUPPLIER: GREMLIN GRAPHICS order. A figure appears. You PRICE: .99 must make a snap decision: Is VERSIONS TESTED: CBM 64/ that person a baddie or SPECTRUM innocent? You have to control REVIEWER: PAUL your itchy finger. Shooting the Why are you reading this when innocent does you no good you could be playing West whatsoever. If a baddie appears Bank? in the door don't shoot too Here in South Dakota men are soon. Wait for him to draw men, women are women and before opening fire. reviewers are reviewers. A man Get the money from the first lives by the gun and if you don't three doors and you can then watch your lip you're gonna eat move onto the next three, all lead and bite the dust. the way up to 12. Survive and Gold fever is in the air and you move onto the next stage. there's a mean bunch of peskey Between each stage you have varmints out to get their to fight a duel with three paid thieving hands on your gold. assassins. Again wait until they West Bank has 12 doors. You draw before firing. must get the money deposits It's pretty nerve-wracking to from each of these doors. Three find yourself facing three killers, doors appear on the screen at waiting to see which one will shoot first. Even if an innocent person appears in the door don't let you guard down. Baddies have been known to push them suddenly aside and blast you. The people you'll meet are Green Jordan, a good-guy farmer: Jack Vicious, a swindler; Daisy, the beautiful daughter of the city jeweller; Alfred and Joe Dalton, both meanies; Bowie, a dwarf, whose hats make ideal target practice except that one may contain a bomb; Mackeyham, another villain; Julius, he may Excellent fun and excellent shoot or give you gold. There is value. Buy it and you won't be a final mystery character. The graphics in West Bank CBM 64/Spectrum are highly detailed and realistic. GRAPHICS There's real tension in the air as SOUND you wait for the door to swing PLAYABILITY 10 10 open. disappointed. S#TREBAY SHY: THERAS C3 ZNIS OOLOS LIVES MGT MACHINE: AMSTRAD 464 664 6128 SUPPLIER: LORICIELS /ACTIVISION PRICE: .99 VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD DISK REVIEWER: DAVID As you step into the MGT prototype you are painfully aware that the Magnettle, as it is affectionately known to the that drift back and forth like a harmless enough until you try Corporation, has not been pyrotechnic watchdog. landing on them -the last tested in a full assignment. Elsewhere droids and many landing you'll ever dol There's Nevertheless the Crystal Palace other sundry hazards lie in wait even an invisible maze in one is all frozen due to the untimely for the careless player. room. shutdown of the support Iceblocks that slowly rise into Keys can be obtained by system and you've been given the air when shot at and then, shooting at them with the honour of finding out what's just when you're underneath gone wrong and returning they come crashing down then disappear off the wall and things to normal. splintering you into a thousand are absorbed for later use. And so, as the Corps motto pieces. Floors that seem Control is with joystick or \"Finish the job or we'll break your neck\", is still ringing in your ears, you set off on your most dangerous mission to date, deep inside the Palace, The Crystal Palace is a mazelike structure full of ice walkways and doors, some of which are guarded by lasers which can be disabled by finding a key with the same symbol as that above the door in question. Lift pads lie scattered about the palace and can be used to propel Magnettle to sufficient height to allow access to raised entrance points. Yet other rooms are guarded by vertical pillars of pure energy keyboard and may take a few minutes to get used to as moving the stick in a certain direction will make the MGT face that way but will also make it move in that direction if you keep holding. The fire button, too, has a dual purpose as it is used to fire the laser and to raise the Magnettle when resting on a lift pad. The action is viewed from an isometric angle and the graphics are very well designed bringing a frosty metallic look to the proceedings very much in keeping with the game scenario. The main Magnettle sprite is large and well animated as it turns to face each new direction. Particularly realistic is its movement which continues in one direction even while you're now trying to move in another. The net effect is one of driving on ice as you skid around the place trying not to slip off walkways or into danger. MGT is yet another very playable, well designed, and graphically pleasing isometric arcade adventure from the Loriciel stable that is gaining a growing reputation for turning out quality games, especialy for the Amstrad NS GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY Ctvo HITI "


"CVG Brian Clough's FOOTBALL FORTUNES MACHINES: CBM 64/AMSTRADI SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: CDS SOFTWARE PRICE: .95 cass/E17.95 disk VERSION TESTED: C64/128 DISK REVIEWER: SIMON INGLIS 3323 You are judged not only on league points but overall performance, including your bank balance. If I was being really critical I'd say there's a bit too much money floating around the game with too few regular outlays. You only have to pay wages, for example, if you land on a certain square, and not even Brian could get away with that in real life. Also, to avoid miscalculations or typing in the wrong combined value for your team in an otherwise rowdy atmosphere, the appointed computer operator needs to be strict and sober. Brian would expect no less. Otherwise this is a winning idea quick to play and simple to understand. Just like the real game, eh Brian? \"Now look here young man.. N/A Given the frequency with which sporting heroes put their names to bum computer packages quaked at the thought that the venerable Cloughie might have slipped up on this one. But no fears at all. \"Young Brian did very well,\" as he might say to PRU his smug self. Football Fortunes is a combined board and computer text game, and although the board, its money and counters are a bit cheap the combination works well for between two to H ARNIYAREY five players. Each player takes on a team for a nine game season, plus rated defender Chris Fairclough cheekbone or give you a top the FA Cup. The following to merit ony 1, while current ranking player for free. The season you can also enter for aces Clive Allen and Tony computer throws the dice and European competitions Cottee only get ratings of two picks your card, so all you have (remember them?). This will each. to watch is your team selection take a couple of hours but time But that is nit-picking. Each and your money. doesn't drag. player has a turn on the board Scores come up on a To start, the computer gives before the week's fixtures are teleprinter -no dull graphics to you a random team which you played. On the board you can sit throughand you share the lay out using a selection of win or lose money, buy players gate receipts. cards depicting 13 players with or be sent to the computer At level one, success is values from 1-5. Interestingly where random events can almost impossible to avoid, so Cloughie has allowed his highly either break your best striker's be bold and start at level four. serious challenger at last? No way chaps. At this point The Double goes into irreversible slo-mo. Team selection is by cursor, which irritatingly returns to the top of the screen after each decision, and since none of the players have varying levels of skill it's SUPPLIER: SCANATRON Undaunted, I spent ten PRICE: .95 CASS partly pointless. To make it fascinating minutes going VERSIONS TESTED: C64 more laborious you have to REVIEWER: SIMON INGLIS through menus and subcount eleven players because menus; listing 66 clubs with the graphics don't tell you when The Double is packed with players and their wages (as of vou've reached the full side. more genuine detail than any 1985 and reasonably accurate), Never mind, the game's the other football managerial game plus ground capacities and thing. yet produced average gates. Oh no it isn't. Fifteen minutes But what happened? Before Managers have to guess their of primitive, stilted and I'd even picked my team, The next home gate in order to book stupifying dull graphics were Double went and scored a the requisite number of boys in enought to make even a day horrendous own goal. On the blue. They can pay for ground with po-faced Howard Kendall list of teams were Watford improvements, order scouting seem fun. And that indeed is the Town and Bury Town. Who? missions and even sack a few honour you'll win if you ever Still the other 64 names were staff along the way. Interesting stay awake long enough to right. stuff. Has Football Manager a manage The Double GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY THE DOUBLE THE Even skipping the match itself you still must endure 65 other meaningless team selections (one minute) plus 32 other results with scorers (seven minutes). On one occasion when in a fit of exasperation I said NO to seeing all the attendances they still came up (another four minutes). Kevin Toms need have no worries. The Double is too ambitious on details and too, tedious on everything else, which is possibly why they claim that being a manager takes 24 hours a day, seven days a week. It certainly seemed like it with this game. N/A GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"21st CENTURY WARRIOR: Apache GUNSHIP The Apache.. Fierce and elusive like its warrior namesake ....CapableSee your software dealer today and become a part of the GUNSHIP of defeating enemy tanks, infantry, and hostile aircraft on the modern adventure! Challenge the enemy, the sky, and YOURSELF with this electronic battlefield extraordinary simulation Gunship's revolutionary 3-D graphics enable you the pilot to fly into the GUNSHIP for Commodore 64/128. Cassette .95, Disk .95. world's hottest trouble spots ....You'll use an unbelievable array of high tech information and weapon systems, including lasers, video cameras, night viewers, radar warnings. jammers, computers, missiles, rockets, flares and a 30mm cannon! Successful missions will be rewarded with medals and rank promotions. Experience the danger and excitement of attack helicopter action. your latest adventure in the ever-growing line of MicroProse Simulation SIMULATION SOFTWARE Software MICROPROSE MICROPROSE SOFTWARE LIMITED. 2 MARKET PLACE, TETBURY, GLOUCESTERSHIRE GL8 8DA. TEL: (0666) 54326. TLX 43422 MPS/UKG "


"ALIENS REVIEWS which amazingly still continue cassettel In the first game, you must to sell throughout the world. The game is divided into an guide your ship through an For Aliens the Activision introduction, and six different increasingly twisted corridor of overlords in sunny California games, each of which can be hoops until Drop is achieved. A decided that different games entered immediately by \"Profile Compliance Indicator were needed to exploit the entering a codeword given will tell you when you are license either side of the when the previous section has getting off course. If the PCI Atlantic been successfully completed. goes into the red, the Drop is So how does Aliens US-style You can, though, get a taste of aborted and you must try again. compare with Activision's the other games by using the For a first game in a series of excellent and atmospheric cheat mode but no final rating six, this was perhaps rather too domestic release? Whereas the will be given if you succumb to difficult. European game is an arcade this! While the game loads the In game two, four of the adventure, the American one is credits appear on the screen in marines in your landing party much more arcade orientated, suitably movie-like fashion are trapped in sub-level three of although it contains some arc/ accompanied by the theme the Atmosphere Processor (AP), adv sections. music from the film. Those and you've got to get them back The first, and most obvious, people who did not see Alien to the relative safety of the difference is that Aliens US is a are then given a brief resumé of Armoured Personnel Carrier multi-load, disk only product where the film ended and the (APC) -like now! Each marine which reflects the market which sequel began. Then, after can be moved around the AP is primarily aimed most passing the weapon which is seen in side view Yanks collapse into fits of identification test, the first location by location. Each apoplexy at the very suggestion game, 'Drop-Ship manoeuvres, location has between two and of loading a game from a is loaded four exits depending on MACHINE COMMODORE 64 (DISK ONLY) SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION PRICE: E14.95 VERSION TESTED: C64 DISK REVIEWER: DAVID Activision, are one of the few companies that have really made good off the backs of a film license, namely Ghostbusters. Versions of her, wou BITCH PA A Marine caught! A The Operations Room The power loader DELTA MACHINE: CBM SUPPLIER: THALAMUS PRICE: .99 CASSETTE/E14.99 DISK REVIEWER: PAUL Forget the plot with its unpronouncable names. Who cares what Hsiffies are? Gimme some action! And with Delta you get action with a capital A. In the charts it will be Nemesis and Delta battling it out for the top spot. Which one will win? Hard to say but Nemesis has the advantage of being an arcade conversion Delta is from the mind of Stavros Fasoulas, the brain behind Sanxion. The man certainly knows his shoot-emups. You control the Damocles against the never-ending alien menace. The more points you score, the more you are able to enhance your ship's weapons. New weapons and accessories are represented by icons strung out across the screen every so often. The ones available to you and this depends on your credits are lit up in blue. Icons out of your range remain grey. Touch these and it's boom. To collect the available weapons you just fly across the icon. Such is the speed with which credits. Supa Shield: Seven credits spent well could make you almost unbeatable. Well, perhaps. As you advance further into the games the aliens become you encounter these icons. yourself with super multiple more amazing to look at. And strung out in your path, that my fire. Ideal for dealing with the they become deadlier, of reactions were frequently not spinning wheel of death. Three course. quick enough to get through credits But there is a tremendous The icons are: Fish Weapon: For four credits sense of power as with your Extra speed: Defending your you get extra pulse lasers. Damocles, fully equipped and planet needs speed. But be Protector: This ball of razor fully powered up, rampages on careful not to overdose on sharp spinning shrapnel and blasting and destroying speed. The ships engines will glass chops, mashes, winds and everything in its path, soon overload and will go grinds. Five credits The music is by Rob Hubbard, slower than ever. This is my favourite weapon. king of the computer keyboard. More bullets: The basic It reminds me of a knight's The brilliant thing is that you firepower is fine enough for mace spinning in a circle of can actually play about with the dealing with the front line attack devastating destruction. music as the game loads in. force but you should be better Warper: This gadget does Never again will you be bored equipped when entering the things to spacetime. Once while a game loads. later levels. Two credits. attached to your craft all time Original Delta isn't, fun it Multiple fire: Aliens will slows down. This makes it easy definitely is. Buy it and you and attack from all sides. Guard to avoid and shoot aliens. Six your Commodore will have a good time. What next we wonder from 300do o Stavros Fasoulas, Finland's top games programmer. Whatever it is he'd better hurry up. I've got an itchy trigger finger just dying to get some more action.  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY op CHVG "


"whether it's a corridor or bend, Once a hole has been blasted a Tjunction or a cross-roads. in the operations room door, it's When aliens are near, the upper on to the 'Air Duct Scramble' portion of the screen becomes which can best be described as which can best be described as agitated and you know to a double-decker Pacman expect trouble any second, derivative in which you must When the aliens get into the find your way from the same location as you, there is Operations Room to the Dropno escape until you have Ship landing field. This plan polished them all off a view maze game differs from rewarding, if messy, task. Pacman insofar as some tracks Although part two is similar, pass over or under other ones in many ways, to the European giving the game a maze-like game, the remaining four are quality. This means that you substantially different, although may be right next to the exit but not necessarily original in their on the wrong track, and thus own right. Part three, 'The unable to reach it without going Operations Room Rampage', way back towards the finds our heroes cornered in the Operations Room OR with one last hope of Safely back in the Drop-Ship escape, if you can hold off landing field, and with only 17 hoards of marauding aliens minutes before the whole long enough for the others to planet becomes nuclear history, cut a hole in a two ton steel it becomes apparent that there door. The aliens drop through is one human survivor left on the ceiling and rush at your the planet. Sensors are picking from left to right across the up the life readings of a little screen. By moving your sprite girl, called Newt, who is up and down the right hand somewhere in the Atmosphere edge of the screen you can Processor. The penultimate liquidate the litttle darlings game involves the location and before they can slip past you rescue of Newt by Ripley, leader and grab one of your pals. of the landing party. The screen display is similar to the other game set in the AP, but this time you only control one character so all the other bio-displays etc are replaced by ammo, flare, and time readings. Flares can be dropped at key locations to mark your course, while the ammo display tells you how many of your original 99 shots remain. In this final encounter, you don the power-loader, a robotic exoskeleton that works a little like a forklift with two enormous mechanical claws. These claws can be manipulated in all directions using the joystick Each time you hit the queen with the claws the green scroll bar at the bottom of the screen indicated how much damage involved or challenging as the you have inflicted. When the single game in the European bar is fully green, you will be version, as a collection on one able to pick up the dead queen disk there is sufficient variation, and dump her in the airlock. If, challenge, and gameplay to however, she succeeds in keep most gamers happy and getting to the bottom of the frustrated for many a long night. screen before this time, it's curtains and all your efforts will GRAPHICS have been in vain. SOUND VALUE Although no one of the six PLAYABILITY games in Aliens US is as REVIEWS SITES TE S TIMO FIGT, The beginning of the adventure A The Alien Queen A Weapon indentification LEVIATHAN beast. It can twist and turn, flip MACHINE: COMMODORE 64 and flop with the greatest of SUPPLIER: ENGLISH ease. SOFTWARE Some of the obstacles I found PRICE: .95 infuriatingly difficult to REVIEWER: PAUL overcome. The great thing is pods or blasting pods in the start of each game. This gives that if you come across some Leviathan. What can I say about space sectors. you a hint of what you're up really mean and nasty looking it? Is the game original in its If you bought last month's against bit of the game you can turn concept? No, not really. It's pure C+VG you'll already know the The Leviathan ship is round and fly back the way you arcade shoot-'em-up, very slick what you're up against from the equipped with unlimited came, hopefully travelling full and very colourful. maps of first two levels. They missiles and three smart circle and sneaking up behind Is it good? Very. In fact, it's show you the terrain but not the bombs. the tricky bit. probably English Software's dangers. These include The graphics are excellent. The enemy ships come in all best game to date. No,l'll revise cannons, flack, lightning bolts Quite what the relevance of the shapes, sizes and varying that opinion. It is the best and, of course, and a whole Greekscape is I don't know. but degrees of nastiness. 10 English Software game I've host of flying aliens. it's very nice to look at. successfully complete the zone seen. The game feels a little bit like Interestingly enough the idea you must destroy all the enemy. The mission is simple: seek Super Zaxxon, with diagonal for Leviathan was inspired by Leviathan ranks high in the and destroy enemy ships across scrolling. The Levithan ship can the video for ZZ Top's Rough first division of space shootthree planet zones fly either way but going from Boy. Remember how their 'em-ups. Moonscape, Cityscape and left to right, I found, enables groovy car turned into an Greekscape. Your ship has you to gain a little more time equally groovy space ship? Well GRAPHICS limited fuels and is up against when the aliens attack. It is also that, apparently, inspired the SOUND CHVO the clock. Extra fuel can be useful to consult the central VALUE Leviathan ship. collected by landing near fuel monitor on the screen at the The ship really is a nippy little PLAYABILITY oncom 25 ODER DS BOOOOO "


"METESTS The Final Challenge O AMI Launching soon on: For mail order enquiries please write to: Spectrum .95 Amstrad, Commodore tape .95 Amstrad, Commodore disc .95 NMC Limited, PO Box 67 London SWII IBS or call on 01-228 6730 "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES Order by credit line 01-809 4843 VISA SPECTRUM PRICE COMMODORE PRICE COMMODORE... PRICE AMSTRAD PRICE PRICE NEMISIS 12.95 EMISES HELLCAT ACE NEMISIS 695 VIE AR KING PUIS-02 NPOSSABAL 615 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 7.95 STAR RAIDERS 750 SCOOBY00002 MPOSSABALLOZ SSTAR HITS STOP GAMES 795 THE LASTNINA 790 CHOLO 9.55 TRIVIAL PURSUIT \"PAPER SOY-02 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-04 BRONS LAR 536 SILENT SERVICE 7.50 RAAMA DALEY THOMPSON SUPERTEST-D2 7.95 DRONS AR-02 CONFLICT IN VIETNAM TOMA _02 FOOTBALL OF THE YEAR02 795 7.95 EUPLOOING ESTE 5.96 ACE OF ACES02 1135 BRAN CLOUGHS FOOTBALL 12.95 FARLIGHT 750 WTANTS02 95 14 ROADWAR 2000-DISKONLY 17 50 FUITE KRAKOUTO 795 KONAMI COOPS ITS02 795 6.95 INDOORSPORTS SHUNS ROAD REGADE-02 696 SHAOLINS ROAD 02 IMPOSSIBLE MISCONO THE PRESIDENT 695 1962 GUNSHIP 12.95 BLOOD AND GUTS_02 MERCENARY 795 FUTE-DISK 17.50 SOMAT DIN PARAROOD2750 TH FRAME TRIVA PURSUIT 1295 BEACHHEAD STAR GAMES ONE GAMES 795 GAUNTLET EXTRA DUNGEONS 4 TAO TEAM WRESTLING-2 5 0 FIRELORDDZ TP YOUNG PLAYERS 14 SKYRUNNER 750 NIGHT ORC 12.5 BOMBAK-02 6.95 KAYLETH LEADERBOARD 750 ONS JACK 20002 LASER GENIUS OR BASIC 04 125 SUPER SOCCER--02 ENDURO RACER 7:50 \"IKARI WARRIORS 5.95 BCLOUGH FOOTBALL-04 4 95 SOLD AMELION 02 705 CARI WARRIOR 2 BATTLE OF BRITAIN 7.95 ENDURO RACER 750 SHAOLINS ROAD 02 750 LITE HIT PACK_02 FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR-02 7.50 12.95 TOMAHAWK 750 PER BOY02 WINTER GAMES 02 750 SILENT SERVICE D2 SUPER SOCCER STAR GAMES ONE-GAMES-127.95 605 THE SCARFO ANTRIADO ARKANIt 599 PMC HARRIER 6.95 LERROARD TORMIDISK 40 THE ART STUDIODISKI 17.50 SPITFIRE 4002 STARILIDER 12.95 NAPOLIAN AT WAR 750 DELTA-02 7.95 ELITE PACK 7.95 SPACE HARRIER-02 TT PACER 7.50 VULCAN + MINI OFRCE-04 TOMAHAWK-02 SOLD A MILLION 3 JEWELS OF DARKNESS-02 12.95 NICKFALDOS GOLF-CASS 499 PLAN-IT-04 ALTERNATE REALITY DEEP STRIKE 20 RENASADE 5.95 SHOCKWAY RAIDER 02 6 95 NICK FALDOS GOUD FADERBOARD-02 795 SPINDUNY-02 7.50 SHOCKWAV RIDER 5.95 SCALEXTRIC 795 FIRE TRACK_02 7.50 DISREUTILITIES DURELL RIG4_01 795 ATARI STE ACE OF ACES SCOOBY DOO VATAN bg 7.95 HOLLYWOOD MJINKS 2495 STAR RADERS-02 UGHTFoack SWORDS OF SANE 7.50 ALTERNATE REALITY LOUNGEONS SHOORWAY RAIDER-02 8.95 CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING ANNATORI 73 SPECTRUM PLUS 2 LEAD LEADERBOARD FIFCUTIVE02 795 HITCHHEXERS DESK SCOOBY DOO 2 ALTERATE REALITY 7.95 COMP PRINTERE 95 LEADERBOARD SILENT SERVICE WORLD GAMES KEYSTON INTERFACE DESTROYER TURBO INTERFACE UNTLITOUNG ONSD=15 4 18.30 99 PUGHTSULATORSK SANG 50 705 STAR GUDER KONACONHETS 595 BATTLEFIELD GERMANY-03 1995 FAST MAKEN SIGT01 PARLORD ACE OF ACTS_02 5.95 ROCK AND WRESTLE ACTION PLAY TT RACER 12 GREENBERETROM THEATRE EUROPE 795 NOK FALDOS GOLF THE LAST NINJA 2 THE FINAL CARTRIDGE GAUNTLET-02 SPITFIRE 0 THE BIG 4 OURELL 795 POLE POSITION 205 DEEP STRIKE 7.50 THE POWER CARTRIDGE GAUNTLET-DUNGEONS D499 WINTER GAMES TRAP Doon 5.95 MS PACMAN 2.95 ENDURO RACER-D2 750 THE EXPERT CARTRIDGE + ESM37 50 BATTLEFIELD GERMANY 13 10 95 CAUNTLET WORLD GAMES SPECTRUM 128K, TITLES TOMAHAWK 7.50 FREEZE FRAME 39 95 INTO THE EAGLES NEST-D2 95 ANY KONAMI CARTRIDGES 1595 TRIVIAL PURSUITS 12.95 ARTISTII 14.95 7.50 THE DOUBLER 12.95 ULTIFACE I ** JOYSTICKS ** 595  ANS BOXING 795 FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR -02 750 QUICK DISK + 19.85 + ACTION REPLAY MKII 1295 INTO THE EAGLES NEST 6.95 THE WRITER 7 95 1541 PHYSICAL EXAM 39 95 14 95 ELITE HIT PACK 795 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT 790  s 2 DISC DISCETOR 15.0 TRIVIAL PURSUIT (PCW) 17 50 DNIXS OYSTICK 12.99 KONAMI GOUF GRAPHY 7.50 DOLPHIN DOS \"MERCENARY 795 STARS ON 128 GAMES TOMAHAWK (PC EUROMAX PROFESSIONAL PLUS 1995 CYRUSS 2 CHESS LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE 7.15 CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING -02 7.50 DEPLODING FIST 8.95 FRANK BRUNOS BOUNG-PCW 1750 EUROMAX NON-AUTO FIRE 16.95 STARGLIDER 1295 1942-02 7.50 FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR 0 0 sAKE FORCE HARRIER Pcw 17 30   MUTANTS 795 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT 8.95 SCOOBY DOO 5.35 TAU CETIPCW ANNALS OF ROME 10.96 FARLIGHT OR 7.95 ELITE-03 12.95 KONAMICON OP HITS 7.95 FARLIGHT-PCW 12.95 COMP PRO SODOC BATTLEFIELD GERMANY 10.98 WINTER GAMES SILICON DREAMS-04 12.95 ELITE HIT PACK SCRABBLE 12.95 ALSO AVAILABLE ON DISK FORMAT D1=.95, D2=.95, D3-.95, D4=.50, D5=.50 ACCESS AND VISA CARD ORDERS FOR MAIL ORDER CUSTOMERS PERSONAL CALLERS PLEASE PRODUCE THIS ADVERT AT PLEASE SEND CHEGP.O. TO: S.C.S. (DEPT CVG1) 01-809 4843 CREDIT CARD LINE 24 HOUR ANSAPHONE OUR SHOP FOR ABOVE DISCOUNTS TO 01-800-315601-631-4627 CREDIT CARD ORDERS P.O. BOX 394 LONDON N15 61 SHEKHANA AT COMPUCENTRE UNIT 5. 221. TOTTENHAM DESPATCHED SAME DAY SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY P&P INCLUDED IN U.K. EUROPE ADD C1 PER ITEM COURT ROAD, LONDON WIR SAF. (NEAREST TUBE STN ELSEWHERE ADD  PER ITEM. SEND A SAE FOR FREE GOODGE ST.) OPEN 5 DAYS A WEEK 10.00AM 18.00PM \"ALL NEW RELEASES ARE SUBJECT TO RELEASE DATES FROM SOFTWARE HOUSES LIST C64/C16 SPEC AMSTRAD BBC/MSX/ATARI (-DENOTES ITEMS ONLY AVAILABLE ON MAIL ORDER) PLEASE RING TO CONFIRM AVAILABILITY LOWEST\" you've EXTRA Order by If you've seen the title(s) Or you want currently ICC advertised at a lower price (except special offers)tell us Who & Where advertised at How much and DI we will match it. FREE POST 10% OFF NOP&P Sand NO P&P. on orders PLUS All orders over . FREE WIN ALL SOFTWAREZ and pay on orders in U.K. PLUS All orders received during each month will go into a prize draw and those picked will receive a credit voucher for the total of that order. Winners names will be published in a future sto advertisment. SPEC CHAD AMST AMSTD SPECCHCHIDAMIST AMSTD 59 7 11.09739 11 09 730 109 739 11.00 HT PACK 6.62106 LEGEND OF KAGES CITY SLIDER JUDGE DREDD 562 PRES DENT LASTNIA ICE TEMPLE 735 CLOUR MAGIC MASTERS UNIV FBALLER VEAR DLAIR PT 2 SHADO SIMS B DOG TORDOG STARGLIDER 662106 7.36 1106 1495 1895 SPECCH BREAKTHRU GOLF COBRA TAN PURSUIT SKY RUNNER SARMOUR ANTA CHD AMST ANSTD 1459.95 5.00 739 11.09 1106 ARKANGO ACROJET 500 GRAND PRIX 10th FRAME PANARAMA 736 DODGY GEEZER ALIENS TOP GUN TERRA CRESTA SUPER SOCCER MARB MADNESS TTD NMARE RALLY S. FORCE COBRA HITS 103 ACKNIPPER PARALAX 5 83108 ATARIST PING PONG UTOURNAMENT TARZAN TSAM MAMI VICE A BE A TRANSFORMERS 5 STAR GAMES 736 736 1106 HAROBAL THE BOXING KNIGHT GAVES SUPER CYCLE   EASTENDERS HIGHLANDER FIRELORD TRARELATER 20 TRACER PARAORDURUM S SLENT SERVICE KARWARRIOR 360 SPACE HURES 11 VALSTROM  GHOST GORS HOT WHEELS LEADER BOARD SOLO FLIGHT ALLEYCAT pone DYNAMITE DAN NOWGAMES SLENT SERVICE MERCENARY COMP WINTER GAMES TOMAHAWK 558 62 106 110 CWRESTLING FBALLER YEAR STARCIDER HITS 103 LEADERBOARD SLENT SERVICE MERCENARY COMP FLIGHT SIMULATOR ART DIRECTOR WINTER GAMES 19.90 JAILBREAK KNOCKOUT DANDY BOMB JACK GREEN DERET STREET HAWK NIGHT ROER 5.F HARRIER THANATOS AVENGER REPTON THREE   736 1106 KUNG FU MASTRS 58 DANDARE 588 LIGHTFORCE 736 1106 736 1106 699 1106 662 DE 736 FASTENDERS DEEP STRIKE THE SENTIAL NEOCADO ACE OF ACES SCALEXTRIC 0735109 7.39 11.09 588 588 736 1032  DRAGONS LAR SIGU CFAA Fungoo TIL CHINA DEFCOM CAGE KRAKOUT 5.91 MUTANTS FIRETRACK NEUESS TAGTEAM KARATED  B.CLOUGHSBALL GUNSHIP BESESS RACER DELTA ERECEDUCADO SALNG FIRETRACK DEEPER DUNGEON ARANOID ACORNSOFT TH DER STROX2 588 SPACE SHUME HITS VOL! HITS VOL 2 736 DEEP SPACE RV PURSUIT PERIPHERALS JOYSTICKS SKATE ROCK 735 13 731109 PASAL EDES TUTOR GALAVAN if the title you want is not show availability and price phone for Zehr answer service) 19 7391159 HOWARD TOUCK 73 DONKEY KONG 73 562 STAR GAMES MOSSABALL INOORDO REMOTE CONTROL NEDS MOUSE A DESES CWRESTUNG ISM FREEPOST 1 RUSSLEY GREEN, WOKINGHAM, BERKSHIRE.RG11 1BR TEL:(0734) 774942 All orders despatched within 24hrs. "


"C+VG E DOUBLE TAKE REVIEWS ME SCORE DOUBLETAKE which has been causing quite a stir lately. It also states \"Startling action: Innovative Game Play: State of the Art Graphics.\" I have to agree with all of these, especially the graphics. This game must include some of the best graphics seen on a Spectrum. You take control of an overcoat that someone forgot to wear. Your objective is to travel around the numerous locations, and find object's in MACHINES: SPECTRUM 48/ the wrong place and return 128K/CBM 64 them to where they should be.  SUPPLIER: OCEAN On the lower half of the screen a 00022 PRICE: .95 (SPECTRUM)/ .95 red light will turn green if the (CBM64) VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM object you are carrying belongs REVIEWER: BRIAN in the room that you are in. To travel to different rooms Two Worlds the mirror image whirlwinds are used (these act of each other, touched in space as doors), but to travel to the through a time-warp. other world to replace or find an shooting the aliens that sap i maginative and innovative One is positive, good, familiar object you will have to use the your energy. The aliens appear game of the year. This is our world. The other is sparkling cloud. When using the in the now well used Ultimate certainly worth considering if negative, evil yet unnervingly cloud the object you are style, but adds to the you want a game that strays familiar. carrying will stay in the same atmosphere of the game. Due to away from mindless shooting, Their interface is a time state, whereas if you wait for the use of a lot of colours, the and will keep all the arcade window through which objects the worlds to change on their old Spectrum problem of adventurers happy for some and being can pass; contact has own, the object's state will be attributes creep into the time. Full marks to Ocean on resulted in the beginning of altered. The cloud only travels program. Sound may be limited this one and hope they can exchange. along the central complex, so but is once again another old produce the same quality for Restore our world stop the this means using the Spectrum problem. The sound Short Circuit and other future invasion, but do it now, for as whirlwinds a lot to find it. that there is has been used to releases. the exchange accelerates, the If you do not manage to find very good effect. time windows grow larger, the cloud in time and the object Overall the game turns out to GRAPHICS domination is at hand! is altered, then do not worry as be one of Ocean's best releases SOUND This is the story line which all is not lost. You are able to ever on the Spectrum, and will VALUE PLAYABILITY accompanies the game's advert change the objects state by probably be the most DOGO MACHINE: 064/128 SUPPLIER: ELECTRIC DREAMS PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: CHRIS Fancy a change? Well why not as their master. could destroy them, this is try Chameleon. Geddit! No? Oh But the elements started to where you come in. well it takes all sorts. get greedy and each one Controlling the Chameleon, Chameleon is the new one from wanted supreme power, and you must travel to the different Electric Dreams, and it's... this he would not allow, and so realms of limbo, to destroy the well, a bit different. they killed him, and also found demons and collect the tainted The game is based on a tale the gateway, back to the normal flux placed there by the first about elementals, you know, world. man, and return it to the heart Fire, Water, Air, Earth, Mother Disaster struck, storms of limbo. Nature and all that. It seems destroyed cities, wind First you go to the realm of that a man, who was a little evil, destroyed buildings and the Fire, which is the easiest of the discovered a gateway, quite by ocean kept man firmly on land, realms. Using all the powers of accident, to the realms where which was very humiliating. nature and pulling back on the these elements lived. Until Nature in her last joystick three times with the The elements welcomed him, attempt at restoring order button held down, you can created the Chameleon. He was choose the alignment of flux before, and he managed to a hybrid of man and flux, the you want. learn about the element's very essence of the elements. You will change to the colour creation. He began to plot an He could realign his flux to form of the flux, and can hurl the flux evil plan in his twisted mind, any of the elements, and thus at the demons. But first you and set about doing dirty deeds. For in Limbo, the elements were together and balanced, but he could create a new breed of elementals, more powerful, each in its own realm, with him must find the powerful tainted flux hidden by the demons. To find the flux, you must pass the right gateway at the right time of day, which is a more luck than judgement job. Once found you must destroy the remaining elements and go through a gateway to the next realm. While you seek the flux, you will be attacked by everything in the realm, but you can fight back. You can regain your energy by shooting a path demon, which will turn into flux. But of course the further you get, the more elements attack, and so on. You will also have to dodge elements which have come from other realms, as you restore them. If you want a different sort of game then try this, but take a good look first, OK.  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY Fire Earth Days 2 Exit 0 air, Water, 10 "


"SueTownsend THE GROWING PAINS ADRIAN MOLE PROGRAM BY LEVEL 9 BOOST SPLASH 9 Vilain Games presents the computer version of\"The Growing Pains of Adrian Mole\" Based on Sue Townsend's best-selling book, and be popular TV s , the game allows you to help Adrian with day-to-day decision. It's a texFaled game with beautiful illustrations and your aim is to make Achidian as popular as possible throughour answers to multiple-choice questions. This four part game covers 18 months the life of aspiring intellectual, Achilari, and is available for 7 different computers. \"BBCB version is not illustrated. Produced by Mosaic Publishing Ltd. The Growing Pains of Adrian Mole is available from all good software stockists. If you have trouble finding it you can buy directly from Virgin Games. Please encircle the software yourequire and send this tear-off to Virgin Games Mail Order, 2-4 Vernon Yard, Portobello Road, London W11 20X. Make cheques or crossed postal orders payable to Virgin Games Ltd. Please do not post notes or coins. COMPUTER FORMAT PRICE RELEASE DATE Spectrum 48/128 CASS 59.95 10 February 1987 Commodore 64/128 CASS .95 10 February 1987 Amstrad CPC CASS 19.95 10 February 1987 BBCB CASS .95 17 February 1987 MSX 64 CASS .95 17 February 1987 Atari 400/800x/XECASS .95 17 February 1987 Amstrad CPC6128 DISC& PCW8256/8512 DISC .95 17 February 1987 Name Addres Money Enclosed "


"LE. REVIEWS fiske igre Igre e SCORE 00000 CLOCK 17:46 The graphics are excellent especially the Amstrad and the game play clever and absorbing. By all account the film was good and the game doesn't disappoint. Go on, blow a fuse over Short Circuit CBM 64/Amstrad GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY SHORT CIRCUIT MACHINES: 64/AMSTRADI SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: OCEAN PRICE: .95 (CBM)/.95 AMSTRAD VERSION TESTED: CBM/ AMSTRAD REVIEWER: PAUL Enter the SAINT that's causes corrosion. The guards are deadly but Strategic Artificially Intelligent Because Number 5 has a remember the \"Robot Code\", Nuclear Transport, to you. conscience, he cannot kill. But means he can only stun them. Otherwise known as Number 5. he can stun his enemies in He also must avoid colliding This strange looking hero looks order to gain extra time. But with the wildlife. They can very much like a skeletal E.T. when he does zap them his easily be killed causing But Number 5 is a robot with \"conscience level\" drops. overload from grief and a difference. While being built Once outside part two of deactivation for a short time. at the Nova Robotic's factory, the game-the chase begins. If you manage to locate a van Number 5 was struck by a freak Pursued by security forces before the Nova helicopter lightning bolt. Something ordered to kill and other Saint arrives, Number 5 has a chance happens deep down with his Robots programmed to to create the dummy robot, fool circuits and he suddenly deactivate him, the odds look all his adversaries and escape becomes alive, able to think slim for Number 5. to live happily ever after. express emotions and, worst of all for a military robot, develops  MACHINE:SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD a conscience.  SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD This robotic freak, PRICE: .95/.95 (AMSTRAD understandably, attracts a lot of DISC) attention. Because Number 5 is VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM equipped with deadly weapons, REVIEWER: PAUL the factory president wants him locked up. Others are not so \"Myrtle Rowbottom always The intruments are as kind. Blow him up, they enjoyed the summer months in follows: suggest. the Oxfordshire village of Upper Code Display: This is used for Number 5 isn't too keen on Slaughter.\" noting your position in the this idea and decides to escape. What? Has my brain slipped a game. It saves loading and And that's where the game gear? This was not the saving your position on tape. starts. As with the film, on beginning I had expected to Junction Indicator: This lights which the game is based, Hive. I read on and found up when there is a junction Number 5 must escape the myself in a setting strongly behind you. factory complex, get into the reminiscent of John Your Ship: This shows countryside and build a replica Wyndham's excellent science whether the Grasshopper is of himself to foil his pursuers. fiction novels. stationary, moving or The game is divided in to two A huge metallic hive about crouching. parts. Part One is set in the the size of a tower block-has Life Force Indicator: If it factory complex --all 36 rooms decended from space and reaches zero, you're dead. of it. The robot must explore it settled in the Oxfordshire Armour display: Shows how collect hardware and software countryside. Now this is much front and rear armour the for activating his laser and also enough in itself to send the Grasshopper is carrying. the technical manual for council planning chiefs into a Icon Selection Display: As building a replica robot. fury but when huge insects you travel around the Hive Number 5 begins with just come roaring out of the hive to various bits and pieces of enough data to log-on to the terrorise everyone, something Nova Research computer had better be done and system and download other quickly. programs into his memory The authorities respond by which is restricted to three sending in The Grasshopper programs only, including the Ship, able to enter hostile link. Load a fourth you will be environments. Officially called required to erase an existing the S.E.A.C. Mk II, it got it's one. This also applies to objects. nickname because of its ability carried. In this section Number to jump and crouch. 5 must solve puzzles and The mission is seemingly outwits the security guards for simple to enter the Hive, only then can you leave the locate and destroy the queen complex and make your break bee. Easy? You must be joking! for freedom. The game opens with you Points are awarded for tasks sitting in your Grasshopper attempted don't forget to Ship in Hive's entrance. The top search drawers and beware of two thirds of the screen is taken the coffee machine. Its liquid up by a view of the tunnel. equipment can be picked up. This display shows what you've got and the item currently in use. Your ship also carries three markers which can be dropped to help you map the tunnels. The ship is powered by electronic pylons which are scattered throughout the Hive. Besides the myriad of electronic insects roaming aroundand attacking you three stings, spikes, webs and tripwires to cope with. This Firebird game is a real goody. Excellent game play and a mapper's delight. Enter the Hive and you're in an absorbing, sometimes frustrating nightmare world of creepy-crawlies. Hive is the bee's knees. Send help. I need it. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE  PLAYABILITY nino > RÔN <747 10A BL3. "


" MACHINE: AMSTRAD 464, 664 AND 6128  SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION/ LORICIELS  PRICE: .95 VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD TAPE REVIEWER: DAVID REVIEWS BOB Billed as the world's very first piece of antibiotic software, Bactron from Loriciels via Activision is a medicine suitable for both adults and children. From the same team who produced MGT here is another full colour, isometric arcade adventure with smart graphics and an outstanding soundtrack. The Bactron has already saved your life on numerous occasions but this time you're really sick! Mac the macrophage, Steffie the staphylococcus, Dot, Spek and all the other germs that live in your body, could prove too much for you unless you can guide the Bactron through your organs and arteries in time to release the healing enzymes trapped in the yellow cubes scattered throughout your body. The Bactron is a cute yellow, blob shaped fellow, with terribly bad breath, who prances around on two long rubbery legs rather like a cross between an ostrich and a piece of sweetcorn! So bad is our hero's breath that one well aimed puff will temporarily paralyse many of the germs wandering around inside you, just long enough to make a quick exit or activate an enzyme block. Apart from the main location display, the patient's (that's you) heartbeat and temperature are both graphically depicted by an oscilloscope display and thermometer which shows an ever increasing temperature. When the thermometer reads 42 degrees it will smash with terminal consequences. Many objects in your organs can, and must, be moved in order to gain access to other as he takes another step. Indeed most areas of this latest French offering are polished and well designed, even if it's too easy to O 150 get stuck in a corner from where there is no escape. When this happens all you can do is watch the Bactron's energy plummet unceremoniously to zero! areas of your body. Other objects, such as blue cubes, By far the most memorable spring into action on contact thing about this game is the and must be avoided at all costs boogie-woogie music which is if energy is to be preserved. entirely addictive and, once Contact with any of the other heard, demands at least a dozen germs will also drain Bactron's further plays. Possibly the catchiest tune ever for the meagre energy supply. Luckily Amstrad, and the game isn't you have three back-up bad either. Bactrons to carry on the good work when one expires. Although moving the Bactron > GRAPHICS around takes some getting used  SOUND CHO to, its worth it to see the quality  VALUE of the animation of its legs as PLAYABILITY they stretch out in front of him 000000 KI KOUT 150000 115 MACHINES: CBM 64/128/ tricks such as putting the SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD/MSX brakes on the bat so you can't SUPPLIER: GREMLIN GRAPHICS move it, others will suddenly PRICE: .99 introduce a second ball onto the VERSION TESTED: CBM 64 screen. Then there are the REVIEWER: PAUL bricks which will blow up. Alien monsters also suddenly I almost feel like sighing with appear on the screen, contentment from the sheer joy apparently quite harmless, just of playing Krakout. It's simply floating around and then wonderful and wonderfully WHAMI They fly off with simple. demonic speed into the path of If you were around a few the ball, normally knocking past years back and remember you. ploughing all your money into There's even one alienBreakout coin-op, then this is known as the Ogre-who the game which will bring back appears and actually eats the those wonderful moments ball. I must admit I've not yet and a lot more. Even if you encountered this beast while don't remember Breakout then playing the game properly. do yourself a favour and get But I've played a cheat your hands on a copy of this version of the game where you game. can flip through the screens The idea is very simple. The until you find the home of the screen is made up of bricks in Ogre. He's definitely worth different patterns. You control a seeing. bat at either the extreme left or There are also extra right of the screen, which just hardships you can impose on moves up and down. You serve yourself. a ball into the bricks, as the ball I have only one small gripe. hits them the bricks disappear, On the screens giving the shooting the ball off at differing instructions the writing is angles. Destroy all the bricks incredibly hard to read. and then it's on to the next All in all Krakout is an screen. And in Krakout thee are excellent and absurdly around 100 different layouts. addictive game. You just won't Stretching and straining your be able to resist going for reflexes to cope with this is hard o another brick in the wall. enough but there's more. Hitting some bricks can cause GRAPHICS some very strange things to SOUND happen. For instance one brick VALUE will elongate the bat. This is PLAYABILITY useful. Other bricks play nasty DDDDD 750 "


"FOR AS LITTLE AS  YOU CAN BE THE HOME SECRETARY. There's more to home computers than fun and games. Just add a printer (and the necessary software) and your computer becomes a word processor. And you become a very efficient secretary. If the printer you add is the Amstrad DMP 2000 your efficiency will even extend to saving quite a lot of money. Because the DMP 2000 costs just  (incl. VAT). Yet it will print draft quality text at an impressive 105 characters per second. And Near Letter Quality at 26 characters per second. As you would expect it is compatible with all Amstrad home computers. But it is also compatible with Epson and any other make that has the same Centronics Parallel Interface. AMSTRAD DE DDD If you've already graduated to a PC there's the Amstrad DMP 3000 printer. It's compatible with all the Amstrad PC 1512's as well as Epson and all other IBM compatible PC's. It costs just  (plus VAT). Both printers have easy front loading and both will take ordinary A4 paper. One of them is bound to be right for your particular home office. AMSTRAD DMP 3000 VG 4à Please send me further information on the DMP 2000 and DMP 30000 Name Company Telephone Address AVAILABLE AT: CPS. DIXONS IBL LASKYS JOHN LEWIS MBS NORBAIN NORTHAMBER OFFICE INTERNATIONAL P&P-RYMANS SANDHURST VISTEC WILDINGS AND GOOD INDEPENDENT COMPUTER STORES AMSTRAD PRINTERS Amstrad plc., PO Box 462, Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF Telephone: (0277) 230222. "


"LAST BRIDE OF FRANKENSTEIN G-VG 12 MACHINE: AMSTRAD CPC 464, 664, AND 6128 SUPPLIER: ARIOLASOFT PRICE: $14.95 VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD DISK REVIEWER: DAVID Outside the castle walls a terrible electric storm rages, while inside Frankenstein's bride begins a frantic struggle to bring her horrible husband back to life by finding some of his more important vital organs that have been secreted about the castle's 60 rooms. The game starts with a view of Franky still plugged into the mains in the lab at the top of the castle tower. Before you can help him, you must locate his lungs, heart, liver, kidneys, and traditions of Frankenstein, a working brain. To locate these many of the rooms in the castle delights you will need to rob the are mysteriously locked but odd grave, open a crypt or two seven different keys may help and pop into the butchers.... you in your quest. Various So a spade and pickaxe will be ghosts and killer skeletons, essential, not to mention a lamp however, will not to help you negotiate certain Ajar containing the elixir of parts of the castle devoid of life will gradually be drained as light. you wander from room to Of course, in the best room, so one of your first tasks respect for the fact that you may be unable to see what's going on behind the front wall. However, this aside, Bride of Frankenstein is an attractive and playable game with enough problem solving to make you want to get further and further into it. Definitely one that all arcade adventure lovers should check out and promises to be a reasonable challenge to all mapping addicts, especially as the castle layout is reversed when a certain room is visited! is to find a refill. The colourful and well designed action is seen from an elevated side view and gives a 3D feel by the presence of the front walls of each room. Unfortunately, although this gives the game more depth than the average arc-adv, it also means that you can be attacked by ghoulies that have no GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY SHANGHAI MACHINE: COMMODORE 64 TAPE AND DISK SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION PRICE: .99 VERSION TESTED: C64 TAPE REVIEWER: DAVID Based very loosely on the ancient oriental game of MarJongg, Shanghai is a souped up version of the old card game 'pairs' in which cards are layed face down in grid and players attempt to turn over matching pairs which are then removed from the grid. In Shanghai the cards are replaced by tiles, as used in Mar-Jongg, and the grid is replaced by the 'Dragon', a kind of designer pyramid' into which the 144 tiles are stacked before the start of each game. The tile at the apex of the pyramid stands on five high stack of tiles, those immediately around it are four high and so on. Only tiles at the tip of their respective stacks 'free tiles' can be picked up during the game. There are three 'suits' of tiles called Dots, Bam and Crak. Each suit consists of 27 tiles, three of each number from 1-9. In addition to the suit tiles, there are 12 dragons (four white, red, and green), 16 wind (four each of the main compass points), four seasons, and four flowers. There are four variations of the game, but in each case the rules remain the same: you can remove only identical free tiles, two at a time. The exception to this rule is found with the turns to remove pairs of tiles in seasons and flowers which co-operative manner. Team need not match exactly to be effort games can also be saved. removed. The Dragon is viewed Any number of players can from above and the height of participate in Tournament play each stack is shown by lines in which each player removes underneath the tiles the more as many tiles as possible from lines the higher up the tile. Only an identical dragon, and the the tiles on the surface of the winner is the player who dragon are visible so you have removes the most tiles. no idea what tile will be In Challenge games two revealed when the one above it players take turns removing is removed. However, not all tiles from the same dragon, tiles that are visible are 'free' only this time against the clock. ones but will become so as a A player's turn is over if he result of others being removed. removes a pair or he runs out of This is where brains and future time. The player who has planning come in and means removed the most tiles at the that a chesslike strategy of end is the winner. looking ahead, can be adopted. Shanghai is a game that can Removing tiles is done by be played on different levels moving a cursor over the depending on how much dragon and pointing to the first strategy you bring into your and then the second tile of the tactics. For example, it is always pair to be removed. A dark advisable to remove the tiles at outline will appear around a tile the tip of the highest stacks as to confirm your choice. If you they are blocking the most made a legal selection, the two future moves. Another tip is to highlighted tiles will disappear look carefully for a matching! to reveal the tiles underneath trio and decide which two to (unless either of the selected remove and which to leave as a tiles was the last one in the potential block. stack), and another selection Anyone who likes board or can now be made. card games, or who enjoys Ther are four ways to play giving the old grey matter a Shanghai: Solitaire, Team touch of overtime, will not be effort, Tournament, and disappointed with this one. Challenge. Solitaire is for one player only and has no time limit. A solitaire game in progress can also be GRAPHICS saved and resumed later. The SOUND N/A Team effort game is similar to VALUE Solitaire except that any PLAYABILITY number of players can take it in "


"THE NASTIES TILNS LULLELTED Juu TINE HELLITTLE LILLLLLLL HARRYS ROOM REVIEWS NEVER MIND COUNTDOWN MACHINE: SPECTRUM 48/128 SUPPLIER: ATLANTIS PRICE: .99 REVIEWER: BRIAN NUCLEAR MACHINE: AMSTRAD 464,664 to heaven, cloud nine, the AND 6128 power plant, and the computer SUPPLIER: ROMANTIC ROBOT room en route. PRICE: .95 Add to this such bizarre  VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD locations as 'Lunchpack Il DISK REVIEWER: DAVID Squashynodoe's Revenge' and 'Bats in the Belfry', throw in a Romantic Robot has come with liberal sprinkling of logic a platform game for the problems and screens requiring Amstrad called Never Mind The careful timing and stick control, Nasties which, in true Jet Set and you have a pretty good idea Willy style, starts off inside our what you're in for. heroes, Harry's, room in his All the usual platform game more than spacious house but features can be found lurking ends up taking you on a whistle somewhere in this one stop tour through an including multiple exits from underground sewer complex many locations (some of which past the quay to the caves and require a key), plenty of on to the moon, stopping off at bouncing, spinning, or sliding an Egyptian tomb and the mad nasties of every description. professor's laboratory on the There's even a lift which takes way, not forgetting the stairway you to various places depending on what keys you have. The object of the game is to locate the professor's computer and stop it blowing up by collecting all the flashing objects in the 130 plus screen before losing all of the five lives that you start with Although the graphics and sound in the game are nothing special, it should appeal to many platform, and some arcade adventure buffs, and is a definite challenge to map freaks everywhere. GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY 00 If anybody out there fancies saving the world from a nuclear explosion yet again, then this offering from Atlantis will certainly be worth the .99 asking price. The idea is to guide your robots around 25 rooms to locate and destroy four unstable 'nucleo' cells that are threatening the world. Care must be taken to preserve your energy levels, energy is lost when travelling through various parts of the 'nucleo' complex, especially when close to an unstable cell. Energy is also lost by contact with one of the many mutant droids. Your shields will reduce energy loss and in some cases destroy the mutant droid. At various points throughout the complex you are able to restore your energy levels. When you start, the playing area scrolls onto the screen from below. The playing area is in the now worldwide famous Knightlore style. 3D for those of you who are new to the computer game terminology. The movement of your droid is very smooth as is the movement of the other droids that will drain your energy. You are given a time limit of 600 on the countdown clock to locate and destroy all the unstable 'nucleo' cells. Nuclear Countdown is a very good try at 3D and will keep a lot of Spectrum owners happy. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY XCEL MACHINE: SPECTRUM 48/128/ AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: MASTERTRONIC PRICE: .99 VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: BRIAN This game was originally released a few years ago by a company called Program Techniques at an asking price of .95. Now Mastertronic has brought the copyright and rereleased it. This not only makes the game excellent value but will be one off the best budget games of the year. playing area. smooth in all parts of the When you take out the cover There are over 300 planets for program, especially the to have a look at the you to discover (that save landscape and map screen. instructions you will wonder option will come in handy after on the main screen the planet why there is so much. But you all), this is spread over 100 of your choice is seen rotating. will need to read them all to get systems. Some of the planets Occasionally an alien message the idea of the game before you may seem similar, as some are may decide to appear on the start playing. Included with the mirror images of earlier planets. screen, which will take a lot of instructions is a very Out of these 300 planets you decoding to be able to informative background to the have to locate the 30 sentinel understand it. No sound has game. planets and destroy them. So been included in the game so The game has that nice basic this turns out to be a very big you will have to make your own ingredient of shoot anything search operation and you will explosion sounds. that you want to, but you can have a one in ten chance of On the whole Xcel is a game not destroy the trees. You also finding a planet. The map that is well worth the asking have a hit/miss ratio so your option will certainly come in price, and will keep you amused aiming has to be spot on. On handy to show what you are in for a few weeks at least. Shame most of the planets that you store for. When you decide to about those that bought it when visit immaculate control of the send a probe down to the planet it was first released, they are spaceship is required, to get use the \"P\"key instead of the missing the bargain of the year. you through some very tight stated \"O\"key. spots. If a sentinel base is on the The graphics may be a little GRAPHICS planet that you are visiting, and dated but beats much of the SOUND N/A are good enough, you will see it software that is just being VALUE PLAYABILITY blow up at the end of the released. The scrolling is very "


"Don't miss this launchpad for all that's new in Atari computing COMPUTER 10am-6pm Friday, April 24 10am-6pm Saturday, April 25 10am-4pm Sunday, April 26 Champagne Suite, Novotel, Hammersmith, London On display for the first time in the UK will be new Atari products that are set to rock the micro world. Star of the show will be Atari's IBM PC compatible, offering a radically new design at a price that will revolutionise the PC marketplace. There, too, will be the latest models in the ST range the Mega ST workstations. Plus the remarkable Atari laser printer, the machine that has broken the price barrier in desktop publishing. All of these along with breakthroughs for the ever-popular 8-bit range and hundreds of new software packages will be on display at the April Atari Computer Show. MORE arcade games MORE bargain offers MORE business software MORE graphics packages MORE hardware add-ons MORE utility programs MORE adventures Advance ticket order POST TO: Atari Computer Show Tickets, Europa House, 68 Chester Road, Hazel Grove, Stockport SK75NY Please supply O Adult tickets at  (save ) .............. Under-16s tickets at  (save )...... TOTAL  COMPUTER ATARI SHOW Apr Champagne Suite, Novotel, Hammersmith, London April 24-26, 1987 TOTAL = Send for your advance tickets now and SAVE l a head! Cheque enclosed made payable to Database Publications Ltd. Name Address Please debit my credit card account: Access / Visa Signed PHONE ORDERS: Show Hotline: 061-480 0171 PRESTEL ORDERS: KEY \"89. THEN 614568383 MICROLINK ORDERS: MAILBOX 72:MAG001 Please quote credit card number and full address + Ref SCVG4 Admission at door:  (adults).  (under 16s) "


"BAR BILLIARDS GOOD 180 WHO DARES WINS thing. WAR one could have done with a bit around ten chambers.each with (which is difficult enough!). more subtlety isn't warfare its own set of hazards. It's well presented and meant to be an art? The plant is infested by challenging to play, but the mutant nasties and cyberdroid 'window' idea doesn't really  GRAPHICS guards, all of them kill at a work. Nice try, but there just SOUND touch. There are assorted VALUE isn't enough room for the action PLAYABILITY obstacles, like electric security to really open up. floors, and some rather ingenious disappearing floors GRAPHICS that vanish as soon as you tread SOUND on them. There are escalators,  VALUE the ubiquitous moving PLAYABILITY platforms, conveyor belts and so on. Oh, and you've got a MACHINE: BBC/ELECTRON limited air supply. SUPPLIER: BLUE RIBBON Yes, you've heard it all PRICE: .99 before. This is tried and tested MACHINE: C64 VERSION TESTED: BBC arcade action. But Condition SUPPLIER: Mastertronic REVIEWER: NICKY Red is a good example of its PRICE: .99 type. The graphics are REVIEWER: Chris Blue Ribbon is not renowned reasonably smooth, the screens for setting the world alight, but look lively particularly liked Mastertronic's done it again! it does produce reasonable the perky plutonium crystals, What have they done? They games at reasonable prices, which look like no crystals I've have produced a  to  and Bar Billiards is no ever seen, and screen response quality game for only .99, exception. to the keys is good that's what. As a snooker player, with a If you get frustratingly stuck Yes folks, Mastertronic's 180 nodding acquaintance with on one level as I did you is a gaming masterpiece if there billiards, Bar Billiards took me can give it up and try out some is such a thing. It's a darts game by surprise. You have to knock other levels by keying in which captures all the skill, balls into toles with a cue ball, passwords listed in the tension, and pure fun of the real but there all similarity ends. The instructions. Maybe this holes are in odd places, for a detracts from the challenge, but When you've loaded it up, MACHINE: BBC start a row of five down one believe me, for the weary you choose between practice, SUPPLIER: ALLIGATA end of the table, one half way reviewer it's a very welcome tournament, and two player SOFTWARE along each side, and two down feature indeed! PRICE: .95 (DISK) games. REVIEWER: NICKY the centre of the table. Yes, In practice mode, you play actually in the middle of the GRAPHICS 'around the clock' against the Only the bravest volunteer for table. SOUND timer. Around the clock is when the ultimate suicide mission, Four of these holes are VALUE PLAYABILITY you hit all the numbers from says the cover blurb, and how protected by irritating little pegs 1-20 in sequence. Use this game right they are. For the first few which must not be knocked to polish up on your skills. games at least, it's suicide all over. Needless to say, I sent the Next is the tournament, the the way as you attempt to duck wretched things flying with real game itself. You are placed bullets and grenades and every stroke until I got used to in the quarter finals, and must MACHINE: BBCB wonder what's hit you. Literally. there presence. SUPPLIER: MARTECH win your way through to the The idea is simple. You have You get points for every ball final. Your opponents for the to battle your way through eight you pot, and you lose points for PRICE: .95 CASS./.95 DISK REVIEWER NICKY Quarter and semi finals are screens to free your lost foul strokes -like hitting the picked randomly from a group comrades who are held by pegs, failing to hit a ball with A race of hostile aliens who live of eight. In the final you must some rotters called the Armies the cue ball, and so on. There's and travel in huge, complex play the world champion, of Death. a built-in time limit of 15 cylinder-shaped worlds are Jammy Jim. On entering the game, you minutes for each game. bearing down on Earth. The To control your throwing you are dumped into chaos. There The graphics are clear and religion of this people, says the move a hand around the screen are little manic men scurrying easy on the eye. The balls roll blurb, is the conquest of lesser with the joystick. You can only around, fining apparently at smoothly, if they don't go down worlds. move the joystick diagonally, random. Your best bet is to holes very convincingly, and Several dissions from Earth this is to simulate the difficulty charge up the screen firing your the angles seem about right. have already failed to stop the in lining up. Once you are ready rifle indiscriminately thang the You set the speed and direction cylinders, so it's all down to you to throw pressing fire will training and avoiding the flying of the cue ball (using keys or in your hi-tech military shoot your dart towards the bullets and grenades as best joystick) before actually hitting spacehip. The idea is to attack board. you can. When you reach the it, and you even have the option each cylinder and destroy it You start with 501 points, and outpost, blast every man in of top or bottom spin, which do from within the aim of the game is to get sight and that's that. For that make a noticeable difference. There's just one snag. The down to 000. It sounds easy, but screen, anyway. I found Bar Billiards a weird cylinders are defended by you must start and end with a The tactics appear to be much game, but this is a pretty good Droidan patrols who naturally double. I know this sounds the same for the other screens, simulation, and more take exception to your activities. obvious to you sonny, but too. Never mind the years of entertaining than I thought it So in addition to destroving the there are some people out there training, never mind this 'officer ground installations in each who can't play darts.! and a gentleman rubbish, it's cylinder, you must also fend off After you have thrown three kill or be killed. And you don't  GRAPHICS the persistent Droidans. darts, you must watch your have much going for you SOUND A familiar scenario, but the opponent have his throw, and even though you're meant to be VALUE PLAYABILITY graphics are snazzy. You play in this is shown in an animated a crack SAS veteran, it appears a small playing area, a kind of sequence. If during one of your you can't swim. So when you window on the screen, with the throws you score 180, a digitised come to the river, use the cylinder in impressive close up scorer will shout it out. Funny bridge! behind. It looks good, but after a though, if your opponent scores It also appears that your while you begin to feel 180, the computer just carries training instructor forgot to constricted by the rather on. Talk about favouritism. teach you how to throw cramped dimensions of the The games are played 'best grenades, which is a very hit or MACHINE: B/ELECTRON playing area. out of three style and if you win miss business. You're quite  SUPPLIER: BLUE RIBBON The movement is standard you will progress to the next likely to blow yourself up, in PRICE: .99 up, down, left, right fire, and stage. fact. VERSION TESTED: BBC you get auto-fire if you hold Amazing value, miss it at your REVIEWER: NICKY The graphics aren't too down the Return key. You move peril. inspired, and the screen on to the next screen by hitting movement is a bit juddery. On Your mission is to explore a as many ground and flying  GRAPHICS the other hand, with a bit of malfunctioning plutonium targets as possible. There are SOUND Cevo patience and practice the game plant, collecting 50 plutonium two games, with game two being VALUE tends to grow on you. But I forcrystals. These are scattered PLAYABILITY harder to play than game one to battle to freeware held armies already failed to sto to you to throvour dart toward CONDITION RED "


"SILENT SERVICE «Sonar reports distant explosions.» ASSUBMARINE CAPTAIN WILL YOU SINKOR SWIM? There are 4 skill levels and various reality levels so you can customize complexity. Success is rewarded with rank promotions Enrol for Silent Service. Available for the Commodore 64/128k, Spectrum 48/128k and Amstrad CPC. Cassette .95. Disk .95. You're captain of a lethal fighting submarine in the perilous South Pacificand your goal is to find, attack and sink Japanese shipping. You spot your prey through the periscope-but then-the enemy's escort sights you. Suddenly, hunter becomes hunted and survival depends on your skill and courage. Silent Service is an ultra-realistic simulation of submarine warfare. Using superb graphics and sound effects, historical combat missions are accurately recreated. The action is non-stop, the suspense gripping. Your submarine features all the critical battle stations the engine room, conning tower and ship's bridge-and has a sophisticated attack plotting system. But, you must live by your wits. The Submarine Simulation MICROPROSE "


"ESCAPE FROM SINGE'S CASTLE  MACHINE: CBM 64 SUPPLIER: SOFTWARE PROJECTS PRICE: .95 CASSETTE/E14.95 DISK REVIEWER: PAUL REVIEWS 15 100008 SKYHAWK MACHINE: BBC/ELECTRON SUPPLIER: BUG-BYTE PRICE: .99 VERSION TESTED:BBC REVIEWERD: NICKY Skyhawk is a plain and simple shoot 'em up, with the emphasis on plain and simple. Bug-Byte has dispensed with all this namby-pamby plot stuff who needs a storyline, anyway? All you need is a ship, and raiders to shoot at. Don't you? In fact, Skyhawk is just plain boring. It looks promising to start with. You have to take on ammo and fuel, then get in the air in time to avoid the first wave of raiders. You then shoot down the raiders, who first appear on your radar screen. But it's so slow. If you're using the keyboard, the controls are very sluggish, particularly when you want to turn the ship. I never did work out how to refuel when it happened, it happened by accident! And although the raiders move fast, you don't. Even at top speed, you can't catch them once they've passed you. And there are so few of them, you can go for ages without a sniff of an enemy. In fact I spent most of my time messing about attempting to refuel. The graphics are boring, too endlessly scrolling green land and blue sky. Bug-Byte can do better than this. Software Project's first plundering of the smash arcade game Dragon's Lair attracted quite a lot of unfavourable comment. It was fiendishly hard to play. Escape from Singe's Castle offers eight more scenes from the arcade game. Our hero Dirk the Daring has rescued the beautiful Princess Daphne and killed the dragon, Singe. Now he must escape. First up is Ye River Caves where Dirk must brave the rapids and submerged rocks in a boat. Boulder Alley has Dirk avoiding being crushed by rocks. In the Throne Room Dirk must avoid fiery hands and sizzling electric flashes. The Dungeons of the Lizard King has him searching for his sword and gold before jumping on the Magical Flying Horse for a high speed gallop, avoiding rocks, ice and walls. Doom Dungeon contains evil creatures and evil traps. I found the Mystic Mosaic the hardest section to play. Dirk must move across an appearing and disappearing sort of chessboard of squares. Move onto the wrong square and he could fall to his death in a murky pool below. If you make it this far, Dirk must now brave the Mud Monsters. He must jump canyons, bridge gaps and hopefully find his way to freedom. Escape from Singe's Castle is far more playable than Dragon's Lair, eight very good mini-games, great graphics and brilliant sound. It's a huge improvement over its predecessor. Dare Software Projects bring out some more of the arcade game's scenes? We think they probably will ... : C+VG CAVO GRAPHICS SOUND SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY HD PLAYABILITY GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY Konami may well be the King of the Coin-Ops but they'll have to do better than Jailbreak to establish any sort credibility on computer. When you think of the wealth of games Konami has. It's really surprising that they came up with this for a firstouting on their own for the micro. If the lure of the name Konami is too much, then buy Nemisis. JAILBREAK away from Jailbreak. blast barriers and cars and the Konami's conversion of tear gas comes in handy for Nemisis one of C+VG's escaped prisoners hiding in Games of the Month in March buildings. With Jailbreak was wonderful. Jailbreak, on didn't need tear gas to bring the other hand, is a complete tears to my eyes and utter no, no Arising scale of points are The story is simple. The bad awarded for freeing the guys have broken out of jail, hostages, 500 for a man, 1,000 taking the warden prisoner. for a woman-that smacks of Guiding your little copper, inequality, surely -2,000 for a armed with a pistol, you must child, right up to 50,000 for the shoot the convicts, rescue the warden. warden and free other But the graphics are awful hostages. Just for the record, and the gameplay is boring. you can also pick up extra Even the game's packaging has weapons, namely a rocket gun been designed to annoy-a and tear gas bombs. naff cardboard box which With the rocket gun, you can quickly falls to bits. Yuk! MACHINE: SPECTRUM/CBM 64 SUPPLIER: KONAMI PRICE: .95 (SPECTRUM)/.95 (CBM) VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM/ CBM 64 REVIEWER: PAUL It's a breakout. Everybody is trying to bust out of the computer roomtrying to get Spectrum/CBM GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY "


"BARGAIN SOFTWARE: Dept. C+VG; Unit 1; 1 Esmond Road; London W4 1JG BUY BY * PHONE ORDERS OVER  DEDUCT 10% RING 01-995 2763 MINE 4.99 7.45 8.95 1:20 7.95 9.95 5.90  STAR GAMES 1 PACKS PRICE PROMISE If you wish to purchase any product from our list and find that you can buy the same product cheaper from another mail order company, simply enclose the lower amount, stating the name of the other company and where you saw the advert. (it must be a current issue: Price Promise does not apply to other companies \"Special Offers\". SPECTRUM COMPILATIONS COMMODORE 64 OUR R.R.P PRICE SPEC. AND COM. 64 OUR IMPOSSABALL 6.70 R.R.P. PRICE COIN OP HITS SOLD A MILLION EXPRESS RAIDER 6.70 14.95 GUNSHIP (01) 11.20 FIGHTER PILOT SHOCK WAY RIDER GREEN BERET 6.70 JAILBREAK 9.95 7.45 RAMBO NEMESIS (FINAL CHALLENGE) 5.90 SHORT CIRCUIT 6.70 GHOSTBUSTERS YIE AR KUNG FU GAUNTLET II (DEEPER DUNGEONS) ALIENS 9.95 7.45 KUNG FU MASTER HYPER SPORTS 10TH FRAME 8.99 6.70 HANDBALL MARADONNA 6.95 PING PONG SHORT CIRCUIT 5.90 STARGLIDER (1) 14.95 11.20 BANGKOK KNIGHTS 9.99 TRIVIAL PURSUITS (01) 14.95 11.20 SPEC AND COM. 64 SILENT SERVICE 8.95 6.70 SPY VS SPY III (ARTIC) 9.95 7.45 FISTII 8.95 6.50 FIVE STAR NOW GAMES EITHEA EXPRESS RAIDERS (D2) 9.95 THE LAST NINJA 8.95 6.70 SPINDIZZY AIR WOLF PACK 10TH FRAME (D2) 9.95 DOUBLE TAKE 7.95 BATALYX CHUCKIE EGG 11 5.90 STAR RAIDERS (O2) 9.95 FOOTBALL MANAGER TIR NANOG 8.95 ZOIOS 6.50 PAPERBOY (D2) 9.95 S.A.S. STRIKE FORCE 6.70 SCARABAEUS CAULDRON SCOOBY DOO (62) 9.95 TRIVIA PURSUIT 14.95 FOLUNOX WORLD CUP 11 SPACE HARRIER (02) 9.99 JAIL BREAK 7.95 THE LAST NINJA 9.95 PAPERBOY SPEC. ONLY BOMB JACK 18 (D21 IKARI WARRIORS 7.95 SOLD A MILLION EITHER  SHOTS NEMESIS (THE FINAL CHALLENGE) (02) ENDURO RACER 7.95 DALEYS DECATHLON MIND SHADOW CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING (D2) 9.95 RANARAMA 7.95 5.90 SABRE WULF FIGHTING WARRIOR CYBORG 9.95 TERROR OF THE DEEP 7.95 5.90 JET SET WILLY SHADOWFIRE DRAGONS LAIRS II (D3) 9.95 L. COMP. PEOPLE (128) 9.95 7.45 SPY HUNTER GYRON DEATH OR GLORY (02) 8.95 ARKENOID 7.95 5.90 TOMAHAWK (02) 9.95 GREYFELL 8.95 6.70 GREAT ESCAPE 8.95 HIVE 9.95 SPEC. AND COM. 54 SPEC 128 7.45 TOP GUN 8.95 KRAKOUT 7.99 5.90 HIT PAR EITHER FOOTBALL MANAGER 8.95 6.70 STAR GLIDER 14.95 10.99 BOMB ACK WAY OF THE TIGER SUPER HUEY II (02) 9.95 7.45 SKY RUNNER 9.95 COMMANDO BMCGUIGANS BOXING 7.45 BIG TROUBLE IN LITTLE CHINA 9.95 7.45 BOMBJACK 1&2 7.95 5.90 FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING 12.45 BEACH HEAD II MARBLE MADNESS (D2) 9.95 7.45 SHADOW SKIMMER 5.90 AIRWOLF RESCUE ON FRACTULUS DELTA 9.99 7.45 9.95 6.99 ELITE (11) 14.95 11.20 LEADERBOARD 9.95 7.45 SPEC. AND COM. 64 9.95 ACE OF ACES (D2) 7.45 TERRA CRESTA 8.95 6.70 ***SPRING CLEARANCE*** COMP. HITS 2 COMP, HITS 3 WORLD GAMES (D2) 9.95 7.45 YIE AR KUNG FU II SUPER PIPUNE 2 G CAPES STRONGMAN MASTER OF THE UNIVERSE (02) 9.95 7.45 GALAXIAN 7.99 MUTANT MONTY ELIDON THEY STOLE A MILLION (D2) 7.45 MS PACMAN HENRYS HOUSE BLAGGER GOES TO HLLYWD GAUNTLET (D2) 7.45 STAINLESS STEEL 8.95 2.99 CRIBBLY'S DAY OUT CAULORON SUPER CYCLE (02) 9.95 7.45 FROST BYTE 8.95 SNOOKER 3D LUNAR ATTACK PARALLAX 8.95 6.50 COBRA 7.95  CRAZY COMETS KRAKOUT D2 9.99 7.45 SPLIT PERSONALITIES 8.95 BASKEL DYNAMITE DAN DEEP STRIKE 9.99 7.45 SNOOKER 7.95 AQUA RACER HERBERTS DUMMY BUN THE VIKINGS D2 9.95 BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK 7.95 3.99 FRENZY ATTACK OF MUTANT CAMELS RANARAMA D3 8.95 6.70 SIR FRED 9.95 CIRCUS BASILDON BOND TRACKER D1 14.95 11.20 DEFENDER 7.95 HIGHWAY ENCOUNTERS 9.99 7.45 PROJECT FUTURE (CRASH SMASH) 7.95 SPFC AO COM 64, GRANGE HILL 9.95 7.45 THE PLANETS 9.95 SPORTS PACK GAMES PACK TAG TEAM WRESTLING 9.95 7.45 MIAMI VICE WORLD CUP VIEW TO A KILL KARATE CHAMP SUPERBOWL 9.95 DERBY DAY FRIDAY THE 13TH WORLD CUP FOOTBALL 7.95 ***SPRING CLEARANCE*** OLYMPICS CODENAME MATI SPIDERMAN 7.95 SNOOKER 7.95 2.99 SNOOKER THE PYRAMID PANZERDROME COMBAT LEADER TEST MATCH THINK? 7.95 WAY OF THE TIGER BEAKY & ECG SNATCHERS DARTS EQUINOX MIAMI VICE 8.95 4.50 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE 9.95 BIGGLES 9.95 SPEC. AND COM, 54 GHOSTBUSTERS 9.95 TRAP DOOR 7.95 4.99 WINTER SPORTS 3.99 9.95 MEGA HITS COMP, HITS MOONCRESTA 8.95 COP OUT 8.95 3.99 B. JACKS SUPERSTAR 30 SIA STAKE SKYRUNNER 9.95 REVOLUTION 9.95 ANCIPITAL BLUE THUNDER URIDIUM + PARADROID 8.95 6.70 POLE POSITION 7.99 SEASIDE SPECIAL SON OF BLAGGER ELECTRO GLIDE 9.95 LEGEND OF KAGE 7.95 3.99 JINN GENIE AUTO MANIA COBRA BUGABOO MOONCRESTA 7.95 SPECIAL OPERATIONS SKYFOX 3.99 SUPERMAN 9.95 HUSTLER PYSTRON DEACTIVATORS 9.95 INT. KARATE 6.50 SPACE PILOT WHEELIE HERBERTS DUMMY RUN 9.95 GLADIATOR 8.95 CHUCKIE EGG FALL GUY ZZAP SIZZLERS (4 TOP GAMES) 9.95 6.50 BLADE ALLEY DRAGONS LAIR SORCEROR OF 9.95 FIST | 9.95 ZOIDS CLAY ORGUE CASTLE PENETRATOR 8.95 GHOSTCHASER 2.99 KNOT IN 3D 7.95 MASTERMIND 12.95 3.99 SAM FOX SPEC. AND COM. 54 COM 64 KENSINGTON 12.95 TERRA CRESTA DURELL PACK SPORT FOR ALL SUPERBOWL GRAPHIC ADV. CREATOR 22.95 SABOTEUR ICE HOCKEY SCRABBLE + MONOPOLY+CLUEDO 39.00 GEOFF CAPES STRONGMAN TURBO ESPRIT 7.95 WATER SPORTS SHOOT A RAPIDS SWORDS AND SORCERY CLIFF HANGER CRITICAL MASS BURNING RUBBER 7.95 2.99 COMBAT LYNX TEE UP WHILE STOCKS LAST. * WHILE STOCKS LAST (01) = 16.50 (D2) = 11.20 (D3) = 10.50 4.50 9.95 7.99 2.99 3.99 4.50 2.99 2.99 7.45 7.95 2011 2.99 14.95 GOLF 3.99 2.99 2.99 5.99 3.99 4.99 3.99 9.95 2.99 8.95 inimes SSSSSSSS 2.95 Date.............. BARGAIN SOFTWARE ORDER FORM Please send me the following titles. BLOCK capitals please! Type of computer Name Title: Amount Address Visit our new shop Tel. No... High Road London 538 Chiswick Total Enclosed  Please make cheques or postal orders payable to BARGAIN SOFTWARE Prices include P&P within the U.K. Europe please add .75 per tape: _ __Elsewhere please add .00 extra per tape W4 -"


"GVG COMPETITION My Arctic Antics Spy Kit consists of: VS 4. Send your compute 30-32 Farr The + Video Send your answers to Artic Antics Competition, Computer Games. Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is April 16th and the Masterspy's decision is final. Artic Antic Competition Name carrier.\" Polar bears, penguins, blizards send a shiver down their spines. So how do you win the competition which has come in from the cold? Simple. If you were on a spying mission to a frozen land what five essential items would you take in your spy kit? That gives you plenty of scope. Be original and you could be a winner. don't Artic Antics will be released on formats. So Commodore and Atari, both in cassette and disk forget to tick the appropriate boxes on the printed coupon spy a real chiller thriller of a killer competition Spy vs Spy 3: Artic Antics. Yes, those Mad spies are back again battling to outsmart each other in the frozen wastes of the Artic. A right Cold War, in fact. And thanks to our chums at Databyte we've got 50 copies of their crazy antics to give away in a great snow-covered competition. Artic Antics is similar in format to those other smash hit Spy games. The spies this time are searching for a space helmet, charts, uranium cube and the mysterious \"master Address..... Disk Cassette Please tick the appropriate box. Commodore 64 Disk. Cassette Atari Monty Mole Ahh So! Who is liss furrly littlele Security services have been called in to investigate allegations that a \"mole\" has been operating deep within Gremlin Graphics. The molecondenamed Monty-has been responsible for leaking secrets of the software company to the computer press. Earlier this month C+VG received a telephone call from someone claiming to be Monly saying Gremlin has six sets of Monty Mole framed prints to give away as competition prizes. Monty says the prizes will go to the people who come up with the best Mole jokes. Soueaked Monty: \"The heat is on. Gremlin has set Intermole on to me. I may have to skip the country and set up a hideaway in Moledavia. So it's Auf Wiedersehen Monty.\" By a strange coincidence, Auf Wiedersehen Monty happens to be the title of Gremlin's next Monty Mole game. In it Monty must flee for his life across Europe and raise enough money to buy a Greek island. Those readers wishing to send their Mole jokes to C+VG should write them in the space provided and send them to Monty Mole Jokes, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. The closing date is April 16th the editor's sense of humour will decide the winner. Ah mole ok meeo? WAVE Pirmited Edition My Monty Mole Joke Is... MONTY MOLE JOKES O-VH COMPETITION) Name... 40 Adress. "


"Elite CHOSTS'N GOBLINS SIEN TALERBOY cltc PROGRAMMERS GRAPHIC ARTISTS COMPUTER MUSICIANS We need Programmers, Graphic Artists and Computer Musicians to help develop our big hits for 1987. Games that will follow in the footsteps of classics such as 'Commando', 'Ghosts and Goblins', 'Paperboy' and others. In 1987 we will be releasing some of the years most prestigious titles coin-op conversions, TV and film licences, character merchandised games and several original products. In particular, we are looking for personnel who will work on our biggest projects. These are the titles that are most important to us, and worth the most to you. Personnel working on these 'Special projects would be expected to work 'in-house' and take some part in the design specification and development of the game. In return you will be offered highly competitive terms, either royalty or lump-sum if you prefer, and the security of working under contract. Successful applicants will almost certainly have a history of involvement with commercially successful games, we are looking for Experienced Professionals. If you feel you have the right qualifications in the field of game design, programming, graphics or music for the Spectrum, CBM64, Amstrad or Atari ST please reply enclosing a CV to: Steve Wilcox Elite Systems Ltd Anchor House Anchor Road Aldridge Walsall WS9 8PW Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, England. Telex: 336130 ELITE G "


"COMPETITIO Unbelievable that's the only word to describe the The response to our Xevious prospect of competition. C+VG's office winning an arcade machine/ was deluged with entries prompted thousands of from people frantic to get C+VG's mega-talented their hot hands on a Xevious readers grap for pens, pencils arcade machine of their very paints and paper to draw or paint a Xevious space ship. own, read on for the winner So who is the winner and runners-up. Congratulations go to Roy Lewis, 17, who lives near Preston in Lancashire. His friends are probably rushing round to his home eager to get their hands on the machine. Second prize of a US Gold Grab Bag packed with games goes I ROSE VR LEACH W LEE WAM KAN VN MOHAMMED V S POOLE "


"ON RESULTS Ganee, Craig Cochrane, 13, Belfast. 14, London; Henri Five more runners-up get Big Pulla, 15, Helsinki, Finland; Red T-Shirts: C Kessell, 18, The next ten Nadeem Mohammed, 15, Cheltenham; Toby French, 13, runners-up will get a copy Walthamstow; J.M. Ray, 16, Wooton, Beds; Sumedha of the Xevious computer game. South Shields; lan A Rose, 13, Wijay Asiri, 12, Sale, Cheshire; They are: Steven Poole, 14, Redmile, Notts; Maxwell NS Wenchin, 14, Kingsbury, Battersea, London; Jonathan Robinson, Northampton London; Win de Gent, 15, Eggelton, 15, Bletchley; Isaac Richard Leach, 18, Bradford; Belgium. to William Lee Wah Kan, 18, of Amsterdam OVA XVI AC KESSELL FRIT AM ROBINSON ComsT CRAFT *** INILITY IND COMPONENTS THERMALERR Ches. HER A FORBAS SA AIRCRAFT PEWA T FRENCH RUNS ON SOSTIK NEVLAR FIGER FUEL    MERRT wa CABELLES CRUISING Wicury OFFICIENT ZO SITERUSING ROUGE FTS IN BE ROCKETS .EVESTATING ANG .U -SIGHTED COM AMAZING MAT CRABILITES A LOC VH PULLA A JEGGELTON v C COCHRANE 0 0 "


"COMPETITION RESULTS W DE GENT WENCHIN NG ship:We are in deep V SWIJAYASIRI 13 IN ACTION U N S TAYLOR TELORANTA "


"URDER PARTY New York. Night. A body lies slumped across a typewriter. Is he asleep or is he ... DEAD? In the typewriter is a story a tale of murder. Whodunnit? Marshal M. Rosethal, C+VG's American hit man, that's who. THE CHILDREN ARE APALLED WHEN THEIR DAD, FERRIS SMITH GOES + MARRIES HIS MAID, ROSE HIPS, BUT TO LEAVE HER EVERYTHING INCLUDING CONTROL OF EMPIRE PHARMECEUTICALS.../S IN TOLERABLE. FORTUNATELY ROSE HAS JOINED FERRIS PASA IN THE GREAT DRUGSTORE IN THE SKY, VICTIM OS STORE IN THE SKY VICTIM OF THE FAMILY BA M I V RA AN ACCIDENTAL OVERDOSE OF DIGOXIN. MAYBE THIS TIME YOULL GET WHATS COMING TO YOU.... THELMA THE BASSY OLDER SISTER + BEAUTY URDER ALEX THE FAMILY LAWYER OF EMPIRE CORA. SKIP HARVARD LAUREATE GONE FLAKE CARLA HEAD OF PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT CRIGINAL COMPUTER SANE BY TRANS F/C1/0N SYSTEMS VIRP/ADAPTATION PRODUCED WRITIEN BY MARSHAL M. ROSENTHAL LETTERED DRAWN BY MICH WAXMAN moto TAD THE FAMILY MAD SCIENTIST M MARIELLA ESTRANGED WIFE OF TAD I, ROSE HIPS, BEING OF SOCAD AND BL DECLARE THIS MY LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT wy ... IN THE EVENT OF MY NATURAL DEATH, I LEAVE ALL OF MY ESTATE 10 THE... FOXGLOVE FOUNDATION.IF, HOWEVER, MY DEATH IS DETERMINED TO BE OF UNNATURAL CAUSES ... ... I LEAVE ALL MY ESTATE TO THE PERSON WHO CAN IDENTIFY MAY MURDERER ... LATIT Continued on page 46 "


"Ayunan Murder parties were a favourite game to play in the parlours of the early 20th century. People enjoyed getting together to pretend to be detectives; to investigate fabricated crimes, sift through convoluted clues and documents before trying to guess whodunnit. The fun is still going strong, only now it's been upgraded into the computer age. 4 CONFESSION REVERT MYES 4 PIRE CORPORAN ROSE HIPS WAS MURDERED ONE OF YOU IS GOING TO FRY IN THE CHAIR FOR IT. MMM, HOW DROLA SOO-WHODUNNIT? **50B SO, IT'S JUST A SUSPICION. WELL, I Hoge YOORE RIGHT, BUCKO. 2012 LE HAPPY-BIRTH SHA I REMEMBER AND I REMEMBER THE DAY SHE DIED. SHE ALEX, I SAW YOU WAS HAVING A BIRTHMAY RIFLING THRU DADDY'S PARTY FOR HERSELF. DESK UPSTAIRS. THIS IS A VERY IMPROPER WAY TO BEHAVE AT THE READING OF A WILL. BESIDES, I'M STILL YOUR FAMILY LAWYER... THATS FUNNY, CUZ AND I SAW ROSE I SAW HIM MUCKING HIM ARGUING ON THE VAROUND IN HER MEDICINE STAIRS. HE WAS WAVING CHEST UPSTAIRS! SOME PAPER AROUND ... EVEN IF I DID LEAVE EMPIRE YIKES!!) WAKE UP WH SKIP! a WUN 81 "


"estad MURDER PARTY, from Electronic Arts, takes on all the chores leaving you with the important task of creating the proper party environment for the guests. The program not only prints the invitations, it also eliminates the vexing necessity of the host having to know beforehand who the criminal really is. Only the computer knows WHO DONE IT, and it isn't telling. Two distinct games are included. The Big Killis based on the popular movie The Big Chill, and concerns a bunch of college friends reunited over the apparent suicide of a friend. EMPIRE follows along the lines of the Dynasty television show, with a well-to-do family gathered to squabble and fight over the will of the un-beloved RELAX ALEX, IT'S COOL. BUT SPEAKING OF MUCKING ABOUT, DIDNT ANYONE ELSE NOTICE CARLAROSE WORE IDENTICAL PURSES THAT DAY? AND TELL ME ROG, WHEN YOU WERE PUTTING IT BACK IN THE VESTIBULE, WHOM DID YOU THINK THE PURSE BELONGED TO? LOVE HAM 3 LISTEN DIRT FOR BRAINS/ THAT EXPLAINS WHY YOU KOOKED SO NERVOUS WHEN YOU PUSHED ME OUT OF THE WAY TO GET INTO ROSES BATHROOM ! POK EMT I WASNT NERVOUS, I WAS DESPERATE. BUT, SINCE WERE 50 QUICK TO ACCUSE, WHY NOT MENTION THE SPAT TWIXT ROSE + PADA.? ROSE WAS ALWAYS SWEET TO ME.. mmm, TELL ME DEAR, WHAT DO YOU DO WITH THOSE NOTES THAT YOURE ALWAYS SCRIBBLING AT OUR 204RD MEETINGS? butas HOLD ON, MARIELA I MAY BE HAVING PROBLEMS, BUT AT LEAST SHE'S MTERESTED IN MY WORK Continued on page 48 "


"PARTY The action takes place in a series of rounds as each player talks about his/her life in relationship to the victims and to the others present. As the game progresses, conversation becomes more intense as layer after layer of ugiy truth is revealed about everyone. Finally, it's time to reveal the killer. Did you guess correctly? You'll just have to play the game to find out. matriarch. Author's bio: Marshal M. Rosenthal is a New York-based Each person attending receives a packat of photographer whose advertising work takes him information which includes biographical data throughout the world. When he can come up for air: he about themselves and the other participants also writes on computers, video and high-tech for a (each game can be played seven to eight times number of domestic and overseas publications. with a different ending since the computer can Product information: Murder Party: Electronic Arts, juggle the facts around). 1820 Gateway Drive, San Mateo, California 94404. MORE LIKE THE CIAS INTERESTED IN THE KGB. SAY, THADEUS, WHY WOULONT YOU LET ANYONE SEE WHAT WAS IN THAT BAG YOU HAD AT THE PARTY? TAD, HAVE YOU BEEN TAKING HOME SAMPLES FROM THE LARS AGAIN? USTEN, MS. Gaby 2-SHOES, EVERYONE Khows WHY DADDY IGAVE YOU A JOB IN THE FIRST PLACES WHY DONT YOU TELL EVERYONE ABOUT THE TEA I SAW YOU SERUING 70 ROSE, HOH SKIP? YOU KNOW, 7 SAW B/6 SISTER HERE DROP SOME SQUISHED UP PIUS IN KOSES COFFEE SPLISH SPLISH SPLISH du AT LEAST I CAME BACK TO HELP CLEAN UP. WHAT A VINDICTIVE CHILD YOU ARE, PABA. WIE WWXH ang YS W705H SZT nya n nou 919 W XHOSA Y3H YOU LOVY inom Soy doma 9910 S97047389 3 mo 798 OL BINIMI V SV 98-01 X3H/LW 1774 w WS7004 W 301 970s 3000 911 WL 109 H{ { {  D{ ] BUT WAIT, JOLNIM I SOSTEM WHODONEIT *** 1700d 1978 SHI ANNO SI 9070/WOH UNO NI SWOILES LOL HLIM 17 IND .109 'snis ng SALI PNS 09 FALSIDES 1117 11 09 110 I ins-NI KW 73139 OWN II NI INV Nox: 7779d93 7248/0 SSVy s ond 9/ WYM FH 23 VYHL 3HS TXH 99111X I X / Y 93/VHM WWW.719_NSUM LIVU VH WWI1087777 ON W. Yoox "


"rantama Can you escapeits slimy grasp? .95 .95 .95 $14.95 .95 Spectrum cassette Amstrad cassette Commodore cassette Amstrad disk Commodore disk For Mail Order send a cheque., Howsor Consultgurts ud. O der by Credit Card sending your Access/Barclaycard number and specimensignaturg, Dopt forget to enclose your name and address. HEWSON Sob Milton Trading Estore, Milson, Alingdon, Oxon OX14 4RX "


"INSTANT INT Sneak peeP Assassins lurk in the dark places. 2364 mpty your mind of all manoeuvre. Their only comearthly and polluted plaint will be how \"limited\" a thoughts. The disciple campaign may be, or how Kaimen has abandoned the there aren't enough variaone true path of Moebus the tions to try out. Time to shut Windwalker, and stolen the up guys, 'cause now there's Orb of Celestial Harmony. Wargame Construction Set Ruin and devastation now from SSI. result. It is your destiny to the construction set does seek out Kaimen, return the exactly what you think; it enOrb and bring peace back ables the wargame player to to the earthly plane. create his own worlds to batThis cannot be accomtie in, whether it's Roman plished by thought alone. Legionnaires, NATO armies, Your body must become as or Space Marines. strong as oak, as potent as A main menu prompts for driving rain, and as directed the creation of all aspects of as a ray of sunlight the upcoming game, played To help in attaining this either against the computer goal are three instructors. The or another person. This game Sword Master, the Martial Arts can also be saved on disk Master and the Zen Master for later use. Only when you have you create the various finished this training can you components using icons and venture forth in search of the menu screens. Complete Orb. maps can be formed, with This search will take you rivers, roads, woods, cities through strange places, past and towns. obstacles and unusual stranCombat takes place in gers possessed of magical phases which range from properties. Beware and be Observation through to Fire. on guard. There are all the difficulty Moebus is an adventure levels to set that could be game that places as much asked for, and even the colemphasis on strategy and ors of the various elements thought as it does on action can be changed at whim. and quick reflexes. Eating Degas was a quality drawand drinking may not being program for the Atari ST. exciting, but it's vitall Degas Elite completely outThere's little time to wipe shines it! This new enhancethe sweat off your hands bement adds more features fore returning them to the than can be easily menkeyboard! tioned, and brings the ST Wargame fanatics will wax level with quality Amiga art poetic on how a scenario packages like Deluxe Paint can be completely changed and Aegis Draw. by a single tactic, or through Degas Elite still uses two the application of a different screens, one for the art while O PIRATES OF THE BARBARY COAST Sneak peep CANNON ELEVATIONS ATLETAS GENERAL STORE "


"KARMA Sneak peeP the other lists commands. 30mm cannons and three discuss jack), Keno, Draw Poker, and However, additional drop-Sidewinder surface to air misBattles on the sea will the ever popular silver dollar down menus can also be siles for a posture of extreme affect both crews and Slot Machine. accessed. offense. goods, but hopefully a desNew features include a While the mouse controls troyed pirate's ship will proProduction Information: four part animation cycle, direction and firing, vide plunder or useful inMOEBUS (Origin Systems): and extra clipboard screens keyboard presses affect formation. There seems to be for the Commodore 64/128 depending on memory speed and throttle controls. some hidden treasure about Distributed by Electronic Arts available. Oncoming targets will be as well. 1820 Gateway Drive A section of artwork can noted on the HUD (Heads-UpText appears when necesSan Mateo, California 94404 be turned into a block, which Display), and can be viewed sary, either as a window can be picked up as a selfin various magnifications (68000 machines) or at the DEGAS ELITE: contained brush without the from the radar map while in bottom of the screen. Batteries included background. flight. All controls are handled by 30 Mural Street These \"parts\" can also be Harrier features rapid the joystick or mouse. A simRichmond Hill, Ontario rotated, skewed and saved movement combined with plified version is also availL4B 1B5 Canada for later use. 3D shaded perspective. A able for the very young (six An extremely convenient unique \"flipping\" menu years and under). HARRIER STRIKE MISSION: touch is that almost any kind screen lets you set up the Pirates is primarily a Various systems including of picture can be loaded, be action to give you, or them, strategy game, one that can Atari ST it NeoChrome, Degas or the the edge. be played to completion Miles Computing Amiga IFF. You can even choose day within 90 minutes. 7741 Alabama, suite 2 Files can be saved with a or night scenarios. Just don't Cartoon-like graphics, ori. Canoga Park, California special compressed format expect a leisurely flight. ginal musical interludes and 91304 for greater packing on a disk Journey back with us to a periodic animation enhance as well. time and find a deck be. the program without turning it PIRATES OF THE BARBARY Harrier Strike Mission puts neath your feet and a wind into just another shoot-emCOAST: you in the pilot seat of a at your back. Pirates of the up, although that's pretty for the Atari XE-XL/ST and Mach 1, V/STOL (Vertical/ Barbary Coast joins animuch what the battle sequCommodore 64/128 Short Takeoff and Landing) mated action scenes with ence is. TDC Distributors combat plane, whose shrewdness, as you trade Cannons must be loaded. 3331 Bartlett Blvd., Park 33 helicopter-like hovering abiland ply the seas of Northern aimed and fired at the Orlando, Florida 32811 ity gives it an edge in stability Africa in the 18th Century, in enemy. They're also firing at and movement. search of your kidnapped you, with sometimes fatal reVIDEO VEGAS: Rather than just going for a daughter and her abductor, sults! For the Atari XE/XL/ST and joyride, let's leave the aircraft Bloodthroat the Pirate. What will be the outcome? Commodore 64/128/Amiga carrier and head for the You must raise her ransom Will you end up paying off Baudville nearby island. within 30 days by trading Bloodthroat, or try to blow 1001 Medical Park Drive, S.E. The mission isn't too tough. goods between one port him and his scurvy crew out Grand Rapids, Michigan Take out all the enemy fightand another, while watching of the water? 49506 ers in the area, bomb the out for despicable rogues Video Vegas addresses airbase and wipe it clean of and ships flying the Jolly Rothe difficult problem of how WAR CONSTRUCTION SET: tanks and surface to air misger. to bet like a fool without for the Atari XE/XL and Comsiles. Your vessel must be stock ending up in the poor-house. modore 64/128 Good thing this baby is ed with more than just canW creates a graphic reStrategic Simulations, Inc. equipped with more than just non and grape there are creation of the most popular 1040 speed-there's also a supply sailors to recruit and provide, games to be found in any Mountain View, California of flares for defence, and two as well as transactions to casino. There's \"21\" (or Black. 94043-9986  HARRIER STRIKE FORCE MISSION  VIDEO VEGAS Lucky 7 DE Sneak peep 1 TO 3 VOLNE "


"AMSTRAD 8.95 COMMODORE 8.95 SH UM 7.95 your SPECTRUM Available NOW for It was a one-in-a-million accident but Number Five, designed to be a strategic artificially intelligent weapons system, the most sophisticated robot on the planet. has escaped and has come to the conclusion that he's alive! Now the scientist who put him together wants to take him apart SHORT CIRCUIT Ocean again to find out what went wrong. The president of Nova Robotics wants to capture him before the weapons he's carrying kill millions of civilians. And the security chief wants to blow him up so that he can get home in time for dinner YOU are Number Five... YOU are alive and YOU have got to stay that way TM Ocean Software Limited Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Telephone 061 832 6633 Telex 669977 Oceans G Short Circuit is a trademark of Tn-Star Plctures, Inc. and PSO Presentations 1986 Tri-Star Pictures, Inc. and PSO Presentations. All Rights Reserved "


"+ +0 WA Abandon hope all ye who enter here! 'Cos this is the annual C+VG adventure extravaganza when Keith Campbell and his band of apprentices are allowed to run riot through your favourite magazine. KC brings you the best adventure coverage anywhere year round in C+VG but here he's got a few extra special items. Like the newie from Level 9 called Knight Orc. Like everyone's favourite school Grange Hill, which is getting the adventure treatment. Like the Adventure Helpline A-Z-all the clues fit to print from Keith's extensive database. Then there's the second in KC's Complete Solutions this time he deals a devastating blow to The Boggit. All that plus the regular review, news and your letters. What more could you ask for? P55 EUREKA P54 GRANGE HILL PREVIEW P56 — THE FIEND SPEAKS! P58 KNIGHT ORC PREVIEW P61 — HELPLINE P63 — HELPLINE A-Z OF CLUES P66 ADVENTURE REVIEWS  P72 THE BOGGIT SOLUTION P77 ADV MAILBAG + NEWS O CONTRIBUTERS KEITH CAMPBELL STEVE DONOGHUE MATTHEW WOODLEY DANIEL GILBERT ADRIAN BOLT FARINGDON FIEND "


"EUREKA Eureka was music to the ears of the C+VG Adventure example, T falls at 25, 43, and Helpline. It came blasting out at full volume from the 52. Add these together to get Domark stand at 1984's PCW Show — right next to 120, then add the three digits where Keith Campbell and his two tireless apprentices, of 120 together to get 3. Therefore T=3. Paul Coppins and Simon Marsh, were dispensing clues So there are six runners for to troubled adventurers. the six letters. Using the One year later Eureka was sweet music indeed to biblical verse the next four Matthew Woodley, then aged 15, and now himself a letters can be filled in, giving member of the C+VG Adventure team. He had won the ten numbers and ten letters. ,000 prize by being the first person to discover the Examining the pictures and secret phone number to ring. poems from each chapter Here, Matthew explains how he came to play Eureka, reveals two letters. Each and reveals the trials and tribulations that eventually led adventure is represented in the him to that all-important number! race picture in chapter 6. Arthurian wins the race, and its letters are LS. The number It was at the PCW Show of resorted to playing arcade Stephan Byrne. I quickly for Lis 0, and for S is 2. So the 1984 when Eureka first came games. finished the Arthurian phone number commenced 02! to my attention. But then, I Sometime in 1985, C+VG adventure. At this point I rang the had been the proud owner of a printed a map and solution to I could write a whole book number to be confronted by an Commodore 64 for six the Prehistoric Adventure, myself on all the different answerphone. It mentioned months, and my software and I took to Eureka again! ways I tried to obtain that nothing about Eureka. so collection was devoid of an After completing Prehistoric telephone number! One when it asked me to leave a adventure game. With this in with ease. I moved on to methods was to make a message. I hung up! I mind. I visited the Domark Wartime Germany. Now my number from the Prehistoric subsequently phoned three stand, took a leaflet, and interest was being fuelled border, and to work out the more times, until I plucked up gazed at the suitcase full of increasingly by the pot of gold morse code in the German enough courage to give my lovely money. And gazed, and at the end of the rainbow, and section. name and address, and reason gazed, and gazed... within a couple of weeks I had The main answer was in the for phoning. And then I rang That night, when I returned completed it. Bible. I made the connection again, because I thought I had home. I talked about it to my Next I went back to Roman with The Bible from Roman forgotten to add my phone brother Mark. As I was rather Italy, which took a few weeks adventure, but there were number short of money. I persuaded to complete, as the problems references in the booklet, Finally I got it right, and 15 him to buy it, and the next seemed more complex. Once which hinted at Revelation minutes later, Dominic morning he sent  off to I'd resisted the temptation to Chapter 22 Verse 13. This Wheatley of Domark phoned order the game. But Mark was go to the orgy, and started a comes from clues in the book me up to tell me I had won! just about to go off to fire to confuse the fiddling which give: re, c, v, 22. 13. After picking myself up from University (ho ho!) and by the Nero (how come he wasn't at Having got the biblical the floor, I told my family, and reka arrived. I had the the orgy?) I had the Talisman. verse, the letters had to be we went to the Domark office game and the computer all to From Rome to the transcribed to numbers in to celebrate. myself! Caribbean, the last game in Base 10 form. So the sequence If you played Eureka too. I I played all the adventures chronological order, and also ran: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.8.9. hope you enjoyed it! Keep to start with, and then chose the hardest. With the aid of a 11. 12. 13 etc. The third verse your fingers my favourite. Roman history book to answer some of Chapter 6 in the booklet Eureka ll, which will also have Adventure, to try to finish of the introductory questions, tells you there are three of the lovely prize money. first. After playing for a few I eventually had another each ignoring one\". In the I would like to take this hours. I started to draw up a Talisman biblical verse there are 4 opportunity to thank my map, and then continued with By now it was Easter 1985. I \"THE's and 3 AND's. So family (especially my Mum) the other adventures, but had started to look at the ignoring the last THE, it turns for encouragement, and to becoming rather frustrated at Eureka booklet, which came out that using Base 10. each thank Mark and Dominic. the lack of a save-game with the game, and which letter in THE and AND falls Lizzie, and Co. at Domark. facility, I left them, and contained cryptic clues by to a certain number. For for making the year so enjoyable. "


"PREVIEWS PREVIEWS PREVIEWS You boy! Stand still. What's that in your pocket? Come on, you miserable little creature, show me. Grange Hill? Computer game? Right, this is confiscated. Get it back at the end of term. No buts. On your way, boy. GRANGE TITLE BACK HOME. \"HELLO LOVE SAYS YOUR MUM. \"TEAS READY.\" LOOKS LIKE SHES FORGOTTEN. OH YES SHE CONTINUES, \"WHERE'S YOUR CASSETTE PLAYÉR? YOU SHUDDER, AND AUAIT THE INEVITABLE..YOUR MUM IS GOING TO KILL YOU. 16 46 SUPPLIER: ARGUS PRESS action. SOFTWARE MACHINES: SPECTRUM You control Gonch with the AMSTRAD, CBM joystick. Hitting the fire PRICE: .95 button will bring up a menu REVIEWER: PAUL BOUGHTON with various options PICK Grange Hill is a classic of UP, DROP, USE, children's television. It's been EXAMINE, ete. When you running for ten years now. An meet other characters you can ideal candidate for a computer also talk to them and get a game. I would have thought. response. Argus Press Software There's even a drug pusher obviously think so, too. in the game. One tip never At the time of writing I've say anything but \"No\" to him. only seen a pre-production It'll get you extra points. Spectrum and Amstrad There are lots of items to version. So a full review will collect--fishing rods, bone follow later. This is what you (useful for luring a dog which might call a half term report. keeps savaging Gonch), and Strictly speaking this is an lots more. arcade adventure, the type of The Amstrad version bas game Keith Campbell raises some decent digitised pictures his eyebrows at when it goes of Hollo. Gonch and Griffiths. into the adventure section the school's caretaker, but the The storyline is based on the graphics of the rest of the book Grange Hill After Hours, game don't really impress. written by the programme's The puzzles, however, I creator Phil Redmond, and found very intriguing and centres on two characters, entertaining. Luke Gonch\" Gardner and The text for the adventure Paul \"Hollo\" Holloway. contains some really annoying Gonch has a problem. His mistakes. Just take a look at stereo walkman has been the screen shots on this page. confiscated. One contains \"TEAS If he goes home without it. READY\" instead of \"TEA'S his mum will not be pleased. READY\" and another Gonch's last walkman was \"SHES A RIGHT NUTstolen from the staffroom JOB\" instead of \"SHE'S A when it was also confiscated. RIGHT NUT-JOB\". Mum now demands to see his And again, there's a space new one everytime he goes missing, between home. TIPPING YOUR. Annoying. Unless Gonch can get his Okay, I accept these walkman back, he's in danger mistakes don't really affect the of getting a severe case of the game but they do grate. verbals from mum and Grange Hill was designed by probably a few backhands. Colin Jones, whose past games Not a pleasant prospect. have never been different. There's only one answer Deus ex Machina and it get the walkman back. Gonch probably being the best gets Hollo to accompany him known. The programming is on his hazardous task. by Binary Design The intrepid duo must find a Final judgement must wait way into the school, find their until we receive a finished way through a maze of heating version so there are no scores. pipes, avoid getting caught, But if pressed for an opinion it get the stereo and get out all before midnight strikes. \"Hmmmmm.\" Will it be a hit? The top half of the screen is I can definitely say: 'Please. taken up with a window on the Sir. I don't know.\" CERINTELEEEEEEELLLILIIT "


"SUPPLEMENT Right you lot, now you really are in trouble! The Faringdon Fiend, number one Public Nuisance, is at large, leading a one-Fiend campaign against poor adventure writers. Unlike more apathetic mortals, The Fiend does not sit still and accept bad games in silence. He complains loudly and bitterly, and mainly to Keith Campbell. The Fiend's identity still remains a secret even to us at C+VG. But eventually, Keith broke. No longer could he alone bear to suffer this regular onslaught of anger and abuse alone. So we asked The Fiend to give you, the readers, a taste of his venom. Here, for the first time in C+VG, The Fiend writes ... There did man running about from? What awful \"manipulating\" objects and V V event led to the birth rodgering the odd sprite. of The Fiend? What caused So what is it that sends The Fourth Protocol. What a The Fiend to crawl out of the Fiend into fits of rage? What is wonderful game it would have dark corners of the mind of an it about adventure games that been if only they had finished ordinary adventure player? gets right up my amply it first. How can any game get All this will remain a secret, proportioned hooter? onto the market which crashes known only to myself and And for those of you who when you simply enter one of those superior beings who have not read the last page of the locations? It happens in were not too mean to fork out your favourite mag latterly. I my version, in The Barbican. a couple of measly quid to join must say that The Fiend's nose And was I alone in my the C+VG Adventure Club. is much bigger than that of ability not to finish Gremlins They found out in the last Tony Takoushi and many because I could not put down a newsletter! more things get up it than his piece of plastic pipe, because Suffice to say that I am here, and it has far more horrible reasonably, I had held it while I exist, and I will never go things hanging down it as well. I connected it? You must drop away until producers of It is The Fiend's proposition it before connection or you get adventure games stop selling that a well written adventure stuck with it it becomes faulty programs to us poor should contain many puzzles undroppable! unsuspecting players. and problems, and that the Never, ever, should a game Things have been so bad this solutions should be logical, kill off an adventurer without past year, that The Fiend can even if obscure. prior warning. The warning think of only ONE game that These solutions should may be embedded in an raised feelings of admiration. examine routine -that is intrigue, and of money well objects, or the possession of totally acceptable. And it is spent. Every other game, and the said objects at the reasonable to destroy anyone I have played most of them, appropriate time and/or place. stupid enought to jump off a has raised anger, for one The use of obscure cliff, or drop a bomb on reason or another. vocabulary as a solution is themselves. But it is well Does anyone out there think totally unacceptable. So here below the belt for a perfectly Bored of the Rings is funny? are my gripes. reasonable and logical action Then you are too easily Which of you can honestly to result in death. amused. Does anyone actually amused. Does anyone actually say that you have never been As an example, I cite Seas think that any funny\" game is stuck in an adventure because of Blood for the corpse in the a true adventure? If you do of a vocabulary problem? The tunnel below the Roc's nest. then I raise my shaggy Fiend has, many times. What would you do if eyebrows in your general Perhaps the most glaring presented with this object? direction. example of this is contained You would examine it, of It is a sad indictment of the or should I say not contained? course. current state of adventure in Claybore Castle. Can WRONG! If you do then writing, that as I sit here anyone justify why the game some sort of worm will leap typing, I am casting my eyes does not recognise the word upon you and burrow into over the top 30 adventure \"cupboard\"? your body. games being played (as I call this kind of atrocity the Or you could try taking the defined in another magazine, l \"shine sonic\" syndrome. ring from the skeleton. Same admit) and I see that 18 of Those of you who have played result, and back to the start them are arcade adventures. Ship of Doon will know you go. and that the highest true exactly what I mean. Why, oh why, do people adventure is The Hobbit at To make matters worse, the think it acceptable to produce number six. latest Scott Adams game, illogical games provided they But it is not of these that I Fantastic Four requires call them \"funny\"? They don't wish to rant and rave, but at multiple word inputs to solve make The Fiend laugh. I will what I would call \"proper\" some of the problems. And excuse Very Big Cave, adventures. You know, with they must be the right words in however, because of its words and graphics (if you the right order. wonderful swear routine. But must) and without the little One of my favourite hates is how about Zzzzz? Knocking on the door elicits no response, but ringing the bicycle bell does! And what about The Hobbit, where the only way to pass the bulbous eyes is to wait TWICE in each location? Who in their right mind could figure that one out? I could go on, but I feel my blood pressure rising. I do not like graphics. I hate graphics. They occupy memory that could be better used to enlarge the game and improve the vocabulary. It appears, howeer, that only that nice Mr. Campbell and Th (Here leave me out of this! KC) What's the matter with the rest of you? Do you lack the imagination to play a game without, or do you just like the pretty colours? The Fiend challenges anyone to rise to the defence of the graphic Level 9 games when compared with their wonderful early adventures. I wouldn't mind half so much if these graphics were worth having. This is less of a problem nowadays, but then they rereleased Holy Grail, didn't they? The Fiend couldn't play this game, and started screaming with boredom while waiting for a picture to draw. or the computer to reply. The Hobbit has them. So does Lord Of The Rings, Sherlock, and Fantasia Diammond. All these have one thing in common, and that is, you can spend more time chasing the characters around than in solving the game. F antasia was a classic, where one independent character could, and often did, quite happily kill another, and that other was needed to complete the game! Now it is time for me to slink off into the undergrowth once more. But before I go, what is the only adventure I found worthy this twelve months gone? What game is so good that it passes all my stringent criteria? Well, I am not going to tell you! The Public Nuisance! "


"E ND AHEAD OF ITS TIME AMSTRAD COMMODORE SPECTRUM CLASSIC LECTI AHEAD OF ITS TIME CLASSIC New from Mikro-Gen, the exclusive Classic Collection offers four superb games in one. Guaranteed to give hours and hours of play. Nol ROST BYTE GEN AHEAD OF ITS TIME CLASSIC 1 Stainless Steel 2 Frost Byte 3 Battle of the Planets 4 Pyjamarama OLLECY CTION No2 AUTOD 1 Automania 2 The Witch's Cauldron  Pyjamarama 4 Battle of the Planets TOK WITCH'S CADLDBOD PIJAMARARA COMMODORE Classic Collection 1 available on Spectrum and Amstrad. Classic Collection 2 available on Commodore. Both contain a four-pack of top selling Mikro-Gen games including the classics Pyjamarama and Witch's Cauldron. Amstrad Cassette .95 Disk .95 Spectrum Cassette .95 Commodore Cassette Disk .95 .95 SAS STRIKE FORCE Join forces with the country's elite team of marksmen and pit your wits against the terrorists. This game is not for the fainthearted. Only the best will succeed. Amstrad Cassette .95 Disk .95 NOW ON COMMODORE wowow ROST DATE Spectrum Cassette .95 FROST BYTE By popular request, now available on Commodore 64. Frost Byte is an eery game of monsters and caverns. Something to get your teeth into if you can stand the danger. Commodore Cassette .95 Disk .95 Available from all good software stores now. Look out for the distinctive pack. Mikro-Gen Software 44 The Broadway Bracknell, Berkshire Telephone 0344 427317 AHEAD OF ITS TIME "


"KNIGHT ORE As exclusively predicted in C+VG last June, Knight Ore tedious aspects of playing an change of mind whilst this is was to be Level 9's next major adventure following Price adventure with a large number happening, the process can be of locations. halted by simply pressing any of Magik. Now it is almost upon us, and Level 9's Pete Knight Ore is a multi key. This virtually eliminates Austin, complete with Amiga, travelled the motorways character, single-player game. the need to make a map; from Bracknell to Brighton to give Keith Campbell this There are about fifty indeed, the player is positively exclusive preview... independent characters in the discouraged from doing so in game, who all go about their the game's instructions. normal lives whilst the Not only can the player go adventurer is adventuring. to any location, he can They can be commanded, and command other game can be followed. They also character to do so as well. So, have a tendency to repossess for example, HELEN, FIND any of their property that may THE SWORD, GET THE have found its way into the SWORD, FIND ME, GIVE player's grasp during the THE SWORD TO ME, will game, set Helen trotting off in search This is where the game differs of the sword. Eventually she from all others that I can think will return to wherever you are of, and points to the direction at the appropriate time, and of future Level 9 adventures deliver the sword. In the Pete Austin believes that meantime, you can be getting characters have been too fixed on with something else. in their reaction to events, As far as the program is even in Infocom games. In concerned, Helen is not just Suspect, for example, the held back for a suitable many people attending number of moves and then Veronica Ashcroft's fancy made to re-appear at the dress ball, all wander around player's current location with doing their own thing, but the sword-she actually goes number of the early complete part one before respond very fixedly to any and gets it just as the player adventures produced proceeding to the other parts, interference in their would do himself. That means by Level 9 were each although, as an introductory movements, unless specifically that if the player happened to complete in themselves, yet game, the first part is complete allowed for in the game. intercept her route to or from formed parts of trilogies. in itself. In Knight Ore, things are the sword's location, he would These trilogies were brought This is the first game to be much more flexible. The meet up with her. He could together under the Rainbird developed by the Austins on player can get to any location then, if he wished, FOLLOW label recently as Jewels Of the Atari ST, and it was done (providing there isn't a puzzle HELEN, and would do so Darkness and Silicon Dreams. using a completely new to solve en-route) by until he commanded STOP In Knight Ore, Level 9 has adventure system. The range commanding GO TO (place). FOLLOWING departed from their normal of commands and facilities This walks the player along the A number of characters can practice of producing a single available to the player has best route to that location, be under similar commands game at a time, and has come been increased to the point of displaying all the relevant concurrently, the limit being up with a whole new trilogy all giving the game an entirely information as he passes the space remaining in the at once. It will be necessary to new 'feel', eliminating the through. If the player has a buffer that keeps track of it all. Papa "


"PREVIEW LAXY Only when that is full will the increased from 3.5K to 16K All these new goodies will into the game. But what I did player be told he could not Text compression allows this help the player to enjoy the s ee looked very impressive command another character. increase, whilst still leaving adventure without the it's going to be great fun just Pete sees this sort of feature room for lengthy descriptions, drudgery of trecking through wandering around having all being the way adventures will on the smaller micros. For endless locations, drawing the characters at your beck tend to develop in the future most of the 8 bit machines, maps that don't quite fit on the and call, never mind solving and particularly Level 9 Knight Orc will be available paper, and remembering the puzzles! I can't wait to see adventures. \"In the past, on cassette, although where everything is. But what what happens when I adventures have tended to be Commodore 64 owners with a rather static. We've tried to drive will have the choice of a create one more like a model disk version. The game will railway, with things happening play the same on each all around all the time.\" machine, but the amount of Another new feature will text will be trimmed or make its debut on the larger augmented, as necessary, machines, those with at least depending upon the space 256K of memory like the Atari available. ST, Amiga, IBM, and possibly Level 9's graphics system, Amstrad PCW. The player too, has undergone a major will have the ability to recall change. For disk versions, his previous command by a digitised graphics have been single keystroke, and to introduced, giving much more continue to do so, going back detail and range of colour than one command further each before. They are effectively time. photographic reproductions of The narrative text, too, has the artist's original drawings. come in.for treatment. To but made just a little hazier by make it seem more like written the minute colour pixels on the text, as opposed to computer screen. This mistiness, in fact, generated text, the pronoun a dds to the effect, given the has been used extensively, to style of drawing employed. link two distinct actions. As an K night Ore players will also of the plot and puzzles command a number of people example, where most be hit by a similarity to without which, no amount of each to get the same object adventures would say Magnetic Scrolls' graphics. technical wizardry will make a and bring it to me! Will they <SUSAN SHOUTS \"I'M They can be slid up and down good game? fight over it? To the death? FIGHTING A WAR.\" over the text using a mouse, When I saw it, Knight Orc What other sort of conflicting SUSAN HITS YOU> Knight and left hanging in any desired was not sufficiently advanced commands will the perverse Ore will say <SUSAN position. However, in the to play; indeed, Pete himself adventurer be able to think SHOUTS \"I'M FIGHTING A initial display, they do not roll was demonstrating it with up? WAR.\" AND SHE HITS off and on the screen, but CHEAT ME WITH ME, one Knight Ore will be ready for YOU> instead, dissolve from picture of those commands review in time for next Since their early games like to picture. This method was programmers build in to help month's C+VG-make sure Colossal, the size of the A chosen, says Pete, because it is them zip around to the parts of you don't miss out on what code progrm which drives the faster than the rolling type of an adventure they want to test, looks set to be one of adventure, has typically display. without having to play right Adventure's Greats for 1987! "


"YOUR GYES ARE Take on the mantle of Deceptor and acquire the gift of three body forms not one. Metamor phosise from super fast, highly manoeuverable surface vehicle to airborne craft of exquisite lightness and grace or become your very own alter ego in robotic embodiment. Master each of your forms in order to master the world your elders have compelled you to journey. Face the challenge of a lifetime and experience the traumas of this unique multidimensional world filled with the strangest, most animated objects, beasts and machines, the like of which you will have never encountered or ever imagined in your weirdest dreams. ARE YOU READY TO TAKE UP THE CHALLENGE? Avoid a multitude of threatening beasts, objects and machines... ...face the Keepers that stand between you and your continuing journey. ...collecting, as you survive, the ammunition you need. Witness on screen the sensational graphic metamorphosis as you bodily transform to meet each challenge, 1 Disk SONRWAND CBM 64/128 Maneour ur way world-scape... around, over, and behind the truly dimensional $9.99 US. Gold Lid Units 2/3 Holford Way Holford, Birmingham B6 TAX Tel: 021 356 3338 I Tape .99 "


"WIR NINE eventually dies.settling down at Poly, he's now the subject will cost them. Is he a Moron changed his 64 for an Atari though, Mark, for in ignoring moron, or simply 520ST, and let himself in for The Pawn, they are closing bugged? what is the most difficult their eyes to the beginning of a Here is a message adventure he has played to whole new revolution in games for Ann-Marie, who date Trinity. buyers habits. is French, and wrote He is trying to make a spell But not all computer stores from Kuwait. Your letter in the cauldron, and shocked are as bad as this, though. to the Helpline became to find nothing happens. Now Visit my own local games separated from your address, he is burning midnight oil in shop, Gamer in Brighton, and Wandering around with so I couldn't write to tell you search of a crescent moon you well see copies of almost nowhere to go and no idea of that in Circus, you should go the only thing he feels he may every adventure you care to what to do next, can be very round to the back of the car have overlooked. He's also mention, in stock. boring, as The Fiend this and open the boot. Then head noticed that other people are And you should have seen month explians. Winter across the fields to find the having trouble in moving the their eyes pop out of their Wonderland seems to a game circus tent. And if you write meteorand so is he! heads when I took in a preof that sort, for Sharon again with your address. I'll be Some problems come from production copy of C-64 Lowndes cannot decide what games that are very little PAWN, to test out on one of her final goal really is, other known. their machines! than to score 100 per cent. If they are of the mail-order The reason I did so. was due She can't use the ski-lift, nor variety, and not available in to a possible problem you may get past the Womps. Is there shops, then we are usually run into if you play The Pawn any use for her banana, and delighted to return the big kiss unable to offer help if we (or even a Level 9 graphic how can she get the mallet and hug you sent! haven't been sent a copy for adventure) on a C-64. If you from the igloo owner, she Who can help our Italian review have a faulty VIC-chip in your asks? friend Andreoli Marco. A disturbing letter came machine. (and some versions Stuck at the top of the Eiffel currently on military service, from Mark Kerr of Newcastlereleased by Commodore Tower, is Alan Osborne of upon Tyne, I've been tryingdidn't fulfil the specification Rotherham. He has found a some slimy stairs in Causes of to get a copy of The Pawn for as interpreted by Magnetic tramp he doesn't know what to Chaos? my trusty Spectrum 128.\" says Scrolls) it may cause the game do with, and a cab driver he Gary Gould of Bristol, has Mark, but the computer to crash doesn't know how to instruct got the murderer to admit his shops up here are totally in Americana's Spy Trek. guilt, in Vera Cruz. But he unhelpful, not even willing to Let's hope he has a head for can't arrest him. He cannot check if it's been released yet, ridic heights! fathom out Lerat and Nadine or if they have it on order! Having completed seventy Lafeuille, nor how they are Mark offered a deposit for percent of Demon From The connected with the murder. the game, but they refused, The fault will not show up Darkside, Gregory Quinn, a Mohammed Fiaz of saying adventures are a under Commodore's standard Birmingham, is also unable to minority interest. diagnostic tests, so your local arrest the guilty party, despite \"They got quite abusive Store is unlikely to be able to having got his confession. And when I asked if all the graphics confirm the condition. what other examinations can and design pasckages were in But the people at Magnetic he perform besides an great demand. This was a shop Scrolls, who know the insides regular plea-er and clue-giver. autopsy? of a 64 like the back of their can't kill the evil Lord Mike Hodgson is in the hands, have come up with a Drakon. He thinks he needs Necris Dome, and cannot de REALLY COMPLEX test, someone to help him, and that activate the Battle of Droid in which will tell you if your VIC person just could be Stodge Chamber 8. Chris Letch of eure chip is faulty. Here is Roddy but if so, how is he to enlist his Blackpool has the same supposedly staffed by experts, Pratt's Basic program listing help? problem. yet they all looked blank when that checks it: 10 POKE Who has been playing Ditched! That is the state of asked anything technical,\" 53265,63: POKE 53265,31: Inheritance? I haven't, that's Huw Howells, in Myorem. added Mark GOTO 10 for sure! Jerome Chui of Stuck in so deep, that he I'm sure there are plenty of RUN this program, and the Caerphilly has, though, and is cannot get out. Who can give small shops who see computer effect will be a wide blue band being hijacked in Part 2. He him a helping hand? games as a way of making rolling up your screen, over wonders what objects he Here is a helping hand for *easy money. Since many, some red on black patterns. If should have taken into Part 2 Leslie Hiss from Hungary. particularly older people, are your VIC chip is faulty, this with him? Andrew Hoyle of Cardiff says frightened to go near a will crash within about one Has A. Manning of Swansea of Thorn, in Fourth Protocol: computer, others almost minute, and the computer will found a bug? He is trapped in \"Ignore him.\" genuinely consider themselves lock up. Take it to your local a room with a deaf aid in it. There has been a period of 'experts if they are able to 64 specialists, and ask them to and listed exits are North, uncanny silence from regular plug a system together, and change the chip. Quote this North-East, and East. But he adventurer Andrew Bethell. type RUN magazine if you are told the cannot use them, and But he hasn't been idle! After Their lack of knowledge of chip is not faulty. "


"Sorry! Limited to one only per customer FREE TWO 7.50 large (100 disk capacity lockable disk storage box worth .95-When you buy 25 disks for only .95 including postage and VAT! All disks supplied are superior QUADRUPLE density / DS disks which are best for both single & double track dries 6.95 Nebulae, Dept MJ, FREEPOST Kilroor Park 7 Day Delivery Industrial Estate, Carrickfergus. Co Antrim One war guarantee B738 7BR TEL:09603, 65020 14 day money back period We accept orders from all government bodies, schools, universities, PLC's ete. We despatch on receipt of an official purchase order. MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS SPECTRUM L Computer People....7.95 Rogue Trooper........7.50 Fisti! 7.50 Agent Orange 6.95 1942 D1 7.50 Super Cycle 6.95 Express Raider .. 7.95 Ace of Aces 01 .7.50 Battle of Britain 7.50 Deeper Dungeons 4.95 Shao Lins Road 7.50 Paper Boy . 5.95 Grey Fell 7.95 Paper Boy 7.50 TT Racer 7.50 Knight Orc.............. 12.50 America Cup 01 750 Strike Force Harrier 7.50 Silicon Dream.... ... 12.95 Bombjack Two Theatre Europe 7.50 Butch Hardguy 5.95 Aiwolf Two.... 7.50 Silent Service 750 Acro Jet ... 7.95 Super Hule Il D1 7 .50 Strike Force Cobra 750 Arkenoid 5.95 Xevious 7.50 Trivial Persuits 12.50 Panarama 5.95 Tan Warriors 7.50 Ace of Aces 6.75 Sailing 5.95 Last Nina 7.95 Short Circuit 5.95 Krakout 5.95 World Games... 7.50 Mercenary 7.95 Death or Glory ... 6.95 Boulderdash Con Kit 7.50 Bazooka Bilt. 6.75 Grange Hill... 7.95 Champ. Wrestling....... 7.50 Footballer of Year 5.95 Star Games 7.95 Space Harrier 7.50 ...........5.95 Into Eagles Nest ... 6.95 Jail Break.. ....7.50 Light Force 5.95 Enduro Race 5.95 SAS Strikeforce 6.75 Dragons Lair 5.95 Shockway Rider 5.95 Death or Glory Super Soccer 5.95 Stars on 128 7.95 Arctic Antics Academy 6.75 Terror of the Deep 5.95 The Double 8.95 Cobra Ramboll) 5.95 Call Me Trooper 6 .95 Clough's Football D4 12.50 10th Frame 6.95 Indoor Games........... 6.95 Raid 2000 D3........7.95 Judge Dredd 6.75 Monty Video 5.95 Deeper Dungeons 4.95 Sam Cruise .95 Delta D1 ...... 7.95 Gauntlet 5.95 COMMODORE 64 10th Frame D1..........7.95 Shadow Skimmer 5.95 Headcoach 7.95 Bard's Tale Desk Only 12.95 Sky Runner............... 7.50 Sky Runner D3 6 .75 L board Exec Edit 01 7.95 Bombjack TWO 5.95 Gauntlet 7.50 Express Raider 1 .7.95 Airwolf Two. 595 Judge Dredd ........ 7.50 B Trouble L China D1 7.95 B Clough's Football 12.95 Sentinel D1.. ..........7.50 Apache Gunship D4 12.95 Scalectrix 7.95 Glider Rider .... 6.75 Agent Orange ....6.95 Top Gun ........... 5.95 Strikeforce Cobra ..7.50 Chameleon 1 kari Warriors 5.95 Blitzkrieg D1 7 .50 Leviathan 01 Xevious 5.95 Trivial Pursuits D4 12.50 Bangkok Knights 7.95 Leaderboard 6.75 Fist Il D1 ... 7.50 Nemesis 1 6.95 World Games 6.75 Knuckle Busters... 7.50 Tomahawk 01. 7.95 Hand Ball Maradona, 5.95 Destroyer Disk Only 12.50 Mutant Marble Mad. Con Set 6.75 Great Escape .............6.75 Arkenoid.. Big Trouble in Chin 7.95 Double Take. 6.75 Vikings D1 7.95 Space Harrier 5.95 Cobra (Ramboll) 6.75 Sailing D1. 7.95 Scooby Doo 595 Top Gun. 12.95 Deen Strike 7.50 Hand Ball Maradona 6.00 Krakout 1 7.95 Star Glider .............. 12.50 Konami's Arcade Hits 7.50 Grange Hill...... 7.95 Konames Hits 7.50 Footballer of Year 7.50 Tag Team Wresing D1 7.95 Jail Break.......... 5.95 Marble Madness D17.50 Star Games 101. 7.95 Last Ninja...............7.95 Bismark 1.......... ......7.50 Road War 2000 Donly 17.50 Nemesis.. 5.95 Lightforce . 6.75 Fantasy Il Disk Only 17.50 Hive. 7.95 Short Circuit 6 .95 Firetrack 01 .......7.95 Bangkok Knights....7.95 Dragons Lairil........... 7.95 Superbowl Sunday 10.95 Postage included UK. Please state which micro. Fast service Send cheque PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept CVG, 49H Sutherland Street, Victoria, London SW1 V4JX MAIL ORDER ONLY: Send for FREE list Amstrad, C16, MSX, Commodore, Spectrum. D-Disks Available: D1 at .95, DJ at C10.95, 04 at C17.50 5 27 Indigenous & Foreign Armoured Vehicles 240 AFV & Infantry Support types from 50 different Nationalist & Republican troop countries with 140 weapons types and 90 versions of weapons 1 7 .95 7.95 000 000 6.95 Spanish Civil War World War II AFV COMPUTER COMBAT CALCULATOR Two New Comprehensive Computerised Gaming Aids for Military Model Wargaming In Any Scale Which Adapt Themselves To Your Models Why wade through page after page of look-up tables which make you take hours over every move??? Let a computer take the strain! These programs take movement of both firer and target into account include morale factors, range and modifiers, then put actual AP ability against true armour defence for a realistic outcome. With up to 26 elements per side, each of which may consist of up to 5 Independently targetable weapons/rifle groups. Single key press menu type controls Separate data loader and combat calculator too much to fit into one program 48K Spectrum 32K BBC Disc Only World War II AFV 9.95 .95 Spanish Civil War .95 111.95 Robin Hunt, History in Miniature, 1 Ostade Rd, SW2 2AY MAIL-SOFT NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY COMMODORE 64 NEMISIS-02 HELLCAT ACE-02 DRAGONS LAR-02 ++ SPECTRUM ++ NEMISIS LIGHTFORCE DRAGONS LAIRI WAPOLEAN AT WAR EXP FISTIL 5.95 Hire Software Before You Buy It 6.50 699 5.50 6.50 AMSTRADO NEMISIS-12 FILTE IMPOSSABALL-02 ALIENS-02 SHOCKWAY RIDER-02... SCOOBY DOO 02 FOOTBALLER YEAR-02 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-04 GAUNTLET DUNGEONS GAUNTLET-02 KARI WARRIOR 12 SPACE HARRIER-02 MIN OFFICE 1104 ELITE HIT PACK-02 HAAOBALL02 SHAOLINS ROAD RASA RAVA KNIGHT ORC B DICHSFOOTBALL 6 99 10.95 BRR88 STRIKE F. HARRIER VERCENARY 11.95 BONE JACK SHOCKWAY RAIDER-02 HIRDALL ANNALS OF ROME GRANGEHILL DESERT RATS WINTER GAMES LEADERBOARD HEAD COACH BATTLEFELD GERMANY ARTIST 5.50 6.50 PAPERBOY-02 LORD OF RINGS-03.........9.95 DELTA 02 KUNG FU MASTER-02 TRIVIAL PURSUIT -14 FISTI-02 SPACE HARRIER-02 B CLOUGH FOOTBALL 11.96 CONFIN VIETNAM 04 .10.95 BOMB JACKIE-02 GAUNTLET DUNGEONS LEADER EXECUTIVE-02 SILICON DREAMS-04 INDOOR SPORTS-D2 FIRELOAD-02 TOMAHAPK 2... IGHT FORCE 02 TS MILLION 3-12 ELITE HIT PACK-02 THE DOUBLE EXPRESS RAIDER-126 .99 SCOOBY DOO-02 ACE OF ACES-02 INTO EAGLE NEST-D1.......6.99 BATTLE OF BRITAIN-02 6.99 THE PAWN-DISK 14.95 WORLD GAMES09 SHOCKWAY RADER-02 6.99 SAILING-02 TOP GUN 02 GREAT ESCAPE-02 CAMELEON-02 BATTFLD GERMANY-039.99 FREEZE FRAME 38 3795 FXPERT ESM ACTION REPLAY MKII FINAL CARTRIDGE OVER 8.000 different titles available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, ELECTRON, BBC, AMSTRAD ali models, ATARI, and MSX computers ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too. HIRE PRICES from only 75p INC. P&P. 20% DISCOUNT off all purchase software LIFE MEMBERSHIP .00. Hire your first title FOC FREE CATALOGUE FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given) ALL GAMES manufactured ORIGINALS with full documentation. OVER 25,000 satisfied members EUROPEAN members welcome. UP TO 65% OFF software, regular sales lists sent to all members Full computerised system keeps track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with staff of 14 who know what the word service means. Backed by our own software company and programmers. TRIVIAL PURSUIT04 SPITFIRE 40-02 GAUNTLET -02 TOMAHAWX-02... SMASH HITS 7-02 SPINOZZY-02 SILENT SERVICE-02 PAAN-DISK +ATARI ST STRIKE FORCE HARRIER LEADERBOARD ALTE ATE REALITY II SUPER CYCLE CHAMP WRESTLING 18.95 EXPRESS RAIDER GRAPHIC CREATOR GAUNTLET OUNGEONS \"STAR RAIDER II 19TH FRAME SOLDA MILLION 3 5.99 6.50 PSI CHESS UCHI MATA DEEP STRIKE WORLD GAMES SUPER HUEY MERCENARY COMPENDIUM STARGLIDER JOYSTICKS KONIY JOYSTICK CHEETAH MACH 1 8888888888888 TRIVIAL PURSUIT GAUNTLET TRAP COCA THEATRE EUROPE URIDIUM SCALEXTRIC RAM TURBO INTERFACE.... 15.00 MULTIFACE 128. 44.96 QUICK SHOT PLUS Send large S.A.E. now for free catalogue. NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY Unit 4, M.E.B. Works, Windsor Road, Enfield, Redditch, 897 60J. Tel: Redditch 65671. CVG NAME ADDRESS EUROMAX PROFESSIONAL... 18.00 COMP PRO 5000 13.95 Disk version available: D1 19.95. 02 .95, D3 C1295. D4-614.95. Post & Packing included in UK Europe add ci per tape. Elsewhere at cost. Chg/PO to: VISA Mail-Soft. PO Box 589. London N15 6JJ. Access and Visa orders welcomed If you do not see the game you want simply deduct 30% of the RAP and we will send to you. (Except Budget Titles Denotes new releases will be sent to you as soon as the game is released from the sonwarehouse AV COMPUTER MODEL "


"WIENTIRE GVG HELPLINE the swamprose, go E, SWE E, NE, N to find the lathe Asylum: and Sin the swamp. bracket, and NEE, NEE. Hack the phone Fahrenheit 451: Show the N to return. To meet the man for a magnet. buttercup to Clarisse. The on the train, wear tweeds. Asylum 2 (TRS-80): house on the library steps is carry an arty mag, and be a In the circular interested in Ecclesiastes! The good credit risk! For wedding passageway is a wall telescoping knife is in the restaurant at bells, drive with memo and that can be chopped down. the rope. E53-54. Steal it. Chemindexer report, to enter mansion, After hacking the electrician Colditz: For a blunt is in the doctor's desk. Heat Helm: Blow the griffin, and to pieces and getting the fuse, instrument that requires the padlock to get into the KAZAM! Shine the torch try and kill the hypochondriac. sharpening search the sewers. magic shop. Tell them you are avoid hypnotism. Translate Close all the doors, ten on Emerald Isle: Go east from the sick at the hospital, and in the the sign in the canyon with each side, using the silver native village for a bowl. treatment room tell them reverse logic, for an aid to card, to get a present from the Fancy a paddle? An axe can where Dr Foster went. Use a crossing the gorge. To enter footsteps. carve a mighty hole in a log clip on the cabinet the castle, ruin a used (old Aztec Tomb (Part 1): To cross if you know how to do it! Fantasia Diamond: Go and fashioned) stylus. the stream, do a bit of Enthar Seven: Carrying the open the iron door and get Heroes of the Karn: The falcon climbing first! decibox into the cave will not Boris to kill the guardian for chamber is south of the king's Ballyhoo: A little helium gives ante-room. Drink the white you a little voice. Give what potion to pass the firegate. you find in the lion's cage to I.C.U.R. in X.T.C. Y? Your first here can open Jenny C+VG's A2Z is 4U.OK? something with a bit of Bored of the Rings: Morona leverage: Haldir's music and gate is passed with ease, if you T.T.E.N.-K.C. Do we oiled hinges will lead to a can make a Giblet sneeze! In have to spell it out? All chesty Khadim. Got a hero to part three, let SENSE guide right. Keith Campbell wave a wand for a big leap. you, and say HOG to get the presents his A to Z of Hitch Hiker's Guide to the rope. You need to summon help to escape from the Galaxy: Remove common Adventure Clues. sense from the maze, and willow! show the door both tea, and Borrowed Time: Burned your no tea! hands? Try the doctor's desk. be considered batty! you, or use his gun to do the Jewels of Babylon: Throw the Castle Blackstar: To delay Erik the Viking: The cauldron deed yourself. nut at the lion and feed it. explosion, use the flame should be emptied. Fantastic Four: Breath and Trouble with crabs? Don't talk resistant liquid from the Escape From Pulsar 7: To get then hold it, about move 17, to me, shout at rocks! The kitchen. Wear the crown and into the air vent, jump. then wait until you lose that watch is at Wrecker's Cove. carry the sceptre to get the Eureka Arthurian: To sinking feeling! Feel around. Unlock and open the door sword. SAY ABRA to use the purchase a boat, take statuette and clobber what you find! with the key. It's at the dead from banquet hall, and have a Make your throw a hard one. end, S and W of the pit. Be wisely! Wave the staff to pass good feast, but don't go or it will simply fall back. shadowed to canyon by crab, the troll. Play the violin with upstairs! Torch must rescue Thing in then shout! Then check north the bow, to get the eggs. Eureka Caribbean: In the the end-concentrate on the of rockpool. Castle of Terror: Cool a hot uranium mine, check the bolder and shaft. Kentilla: Pull the gargoyle's pot with ale, for a move count all the way to the Gremlins: Leave the bedroom arm to open the door. Get leading down. Examine the shower. Follow the plane immediately, and return with a someone to hold your barrel outside the mill! If you down the runway, and then weapon from the kitchen. If possessions before attempting find nothing. examine the just jump in! When you are you can't drive, then welding to swim. Sagagoo activates the other! Get a spear and have a feeling nearly crushed, use the will make sure others can't. staff: carry a dead Quarg at all break, to find the Drac's pump. The combination is on Ground Zero: The road block times! Give Elva the knife. heart-piercing stake! a terminal is a dead end. Fell a tree and and when she has made a Catacombs: Go to north, and Eureka German: Use the snip a fence, for falloutweapon with it, have her shoot go go south, the echo's a mirror to answer the there's your main defence. For Darg-vool. Store sunlight in problem! Sing and invite Helf resistance. Have a mark for a a slice of bread, give the the crystal, for a bit of trollto join you, to cheer him up. drink. Pause for reflection grocer a radio! bashing! Insert rod into statue To take the sword, go east before digging. Hampstead: The man on the after ridding yourself of the Eureka Roman: Wait on the train wants the lathe bracket demon, and get the gauntlet. road by the army camp until found in the industrial estate Use this to get the sword nightfall. Enter unlit tent and maze. The Industrial Estate Causes of Chaos: The key unlock what you find with the Maze: From the factory problem is solved by key from the stream. To find entrance go NE, E, NE, E "


"WHENTURE DEC Robin of Sherwood: To get to thefountain for a guiding light. Nottingham, go there when Spellbreaker: The ogre has you can see it! It takes a thief hav fever. Perhaps you can to open a chest. make pollen count. Seabase Delta: Play the tape to Sphinx: The mouse is slide the doors. Blow a bubble underneath the ballroom in and everything will go eggthe castle dungeons. shaped. Entere 104 and 199 to Spiderman: You can't defeat launch the small missile. Swim Mysterio -just feel to get the plank, which will act directional from his cloud. The as a lever. mirror is fixed-leave it Seas of Blood: Cut the zombie alone! with silver Subsunk: Spill something See Ka of Assiah: Search every corrosive on a floor door. To room for the doors to open. stop an overflow, be a sucker Slide the western door to leave and do a bit of plunging with a the castle. Harness the wind broom handle! for the Black Guardian. Slide Trinity: Push while it teeters to pass through the door! After the kill, pull to reach the central door. Grako's shrine. the hook with the ankh on the Twin Kingdom Valley: The Leather Goddesses harder to end of the staff. Sliding the wooden staff is upstairs in the of Phobos: harder, or trying door leads the way across the west turret. The Sultan's laundry will help convince, gives the droid's lake, to the casket of Vibra. Upper Gumtree: Use the first you with a kiss! Extract password. To overcome the Press the staff stud, and throw aid kit in the wreck, to stem machine parts from the scrap. problem in miniature, you it at the Guardian! the bleeding. To pacify dogs. and decode the remainder. could use a breather! Sherlock: Tell Lestrade about drop some raw meat as they Lord of the Rings: Ask for Mystery of Munroe Manor: the sale, and follow him to approach. Drop the hanky in some elfish help to cross the Carry only the brass key to Leatherhead. Get in the cab the field, but don't forget to river in Lothlorien. To get the unlock the wardrobe. before he does, for a drive to shut the gates! scroll: Tom Follow me\". N. Pawn: The Guru might have Old Mill Road. Code for the Valkyrie 17: The stethoscope W W .NNW, SW, W W .S. something useful to say, if only ripped note: A=I B=NE=U is an indirect route to cash. SW.SE, NE, SW.W.W.N. he wasn't laughing at the sight F=MG=D H=EI=V KES Pawn the necklace. The key to W. S. To pass a skeleton. of your wristband!! Don't be LEO MEKN=A POGO=D Room 20 is hidden in a throw a gem. stumped for light after helping R=BS=HT=RU-TV-W handbag. Lucifer's Realm: Tell the Guru mix 'em! Water is WEL X=Y Y=P. Code for Vera Cruz: Get some info on Eichmann who you want to the elixir of life, and snow the singed note: A=MC=R Fuzzy's bar, and for a see, and then enlist! Try killing melts at low altitudes! Perhaps D-BG=DI=O K=TL=W statement from Hubert Booth, and then go the other the tree-house door opens O-PR-US=AU=E V=H Delroche, study the way. A crystal bar is the key inwards? Two tools together W-SX-NY-TZ=Y. and Once through, remember that help with the heavier then read it backwards! Warlord: To avoid burns, confession is good for the soul groundwork. A push in Snowball: To find the examine someone who should Macbeth: Climb into the sieve private, and the floor is yours. crewmember: Insert mempack have suffered from them. Urn before giving the thumb to the Snow melts and white is hot! in video viewer, and take needs headwear! Throw the Manx cat. To sum up the day: The Pay Off: Rubbing the down the crewmember's code. urn into the fire for a victory Fair and foul. ashes is safe. A spray stops the Go to the north end of the Magician's Ball: You can't get noise: a stool helps to reach it. cylinder. Go through doors Waxworks: If mummy is a through the garden gate until Pen and the Dark: Examine and head north, examining the bother, wear the talisman and after you have killed the the Pen before visiting Doctor bracelet until the last colour is give her leaves! Magician. Courtney's office. Falling the same as the first colour Zim Sala Bim: Check the Magic Mountain: To find the rocks help with gravity, code you wrote down. Go Sultan's jacket to sleep in magic carpet. go down from thermometers help with down and into the elevator. Sultan style. For help with the the maze location from which temperatures. Be sure to wrap then press the third colour treasure chest, help the north leads to the dwarf. up warm. button. Walk along corridor beggar! Look at Sultan's Mafia Contract: Dving for a Pirate Adventure: Under a examining the lights until they fireplace to escape with drink? Exchange a paper for a field and in a pit. correspond with the first three treasure pile. Through the tramp's meths! To defuse the Price of Magic: Look through colour codes. Find the chimney and back with a key. bomb, cut the blue wire, to the door, and control what's mortuary and enter it, then Zork II: Sweets for a reptile, survive meeting with rival on the other side, to open it. press the colour buttons well for a clue, and pour to gang boss, wear the bullet Pub Quest: A slab through the corresponding to last three float a basket. Three spheres proof vest. shed will lighten your journey colours in code. lead to a fourth, and the Message from Andromeda: --refills in the sewer! Use the Sorceror of Claymorgue wizard's downfall. Cut the ropes to free the smoke canister on the rats. A Castle: The obvious way into ZZZZ: If the crocodile stands skeleton, for missiles to defeat slab aimed at a field will help the castle is not necessarily the in your way, stand on him! the scaly thing. Wear gloves, with a tramp. Say something best! Ferret about quickly, and Raise the sign and your hand, get fungus-goodbye slug! to get past the tramp. he walk up. for you won't stay then pay vour fare. Open the Mindshadow: D-vine digging Examining oneself gives the that way for long! Plainly you exit and leave the bus. Ring reveals the slow route. key to crossing the road. must push, pull, and kick, in the bell, and give it to Sanman Mordon's Quest: Give Quest for the Holy Grail: Find all directions. Permeate the at the igloo. Thumb a lift to Spiderman a newspaper to the rabbit, east of the narrow crate for information purposes cross the road. make visible that which cannot path. Learn about arms before only. be seen. A spray reveals the approaching, and throw the Souls of the Darkon: Zap the barrier code. For more power, grenade at it. Type it thus: robot and get the visor and \"count' the hay in the barn. GIVE KNIGHT push the button and get the Dial 1611 in the time machine SHRUBBERY. When you've crystal and put it in the for the password. Trying got it, put it on the pedestal. fountain! Put the crystal into "


"SUPA SOFT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Present the Following Special Offers to C&VG Readers SPECTRUM Starglider Space harrier Miami Vice M's A Knockout Cobra Paperboy Dan Dare Great Escape Nemesis Arkanoid Leaderboard His Pack Triv Pursuit Ghost & Goblins Bomhack 2 Double Take Commando 86 RRP OUR SPECTRUM 14.95 10.95 Thanatos 7.95 5.25 Trap Door 7.95 5.25 Inftrator 7.95 5.25 Krakout 7.95 5.00 Sold a million 3 14 95 10.95 Top Gun 7.95 5.25 Handbal 9.95 E75 F2 9.95 8.50 Durer's Big4 7.95 525 Xevious 795 5.25 Xeno 7.95 5.25 Aliens 795 5.40 Footballer Year 9.95 6.50 Terra crosta 14.95 10.00 Tau Cati Academy 7.95 525 Silent Service 7.95 525 PS Trading 7.95 $25 Buch Hard Guy 7.95 525 Double Take 7.95 5.25 Donkey Kong 8.95 6.50 Grange Hill 7.95 5.25 Super Soccer 8.95 625 Superbowl 7.95 5.25 Matchday (128) 9.95 6.50 Winter Games 9.95 6.50 Jail Break 7.95 525 Super Cycle 795 525 Masters Universe 7.95 5.25 Hive 9.95 700 Shockway Rider 7.95 5.25 Gauntlet 8.95 6.25 Xevious 8.95 6.00 Sky Runner 8.95 6.00 Dandy 9.95 6.50 Yle w Kung Fu 9.95 8.75 Last Ninja 9.95 6.50 Judge Dredd 9.95 8.75 Deep Strike RRP OUR CMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK COMMODORE 64/128 CAS$ DISK ATARI ST RRP OUR AMSTRAD PC1512 RAPOUR 9.95 3.75 Starglider 10.95 14,95 Master Universe 6.50 10.95 Starglider 24,95 1999 Winter Games 19.95 16.95 7.95 525 Leaderboard 6.50 10.05 Sentinal 6.50 10.95 World Games 24.95 19.99 Summer G (2) 19.95 16.95 9.95 6.75 Alens 6.50 10.95 Big 4 5.50 10.95 Leaderboard 24,95 1999 Pitstop (2) 19.95 16.95 7.99 5.25 Xevious 6.50 10.05 Lgh torce 8.00 10.00 Leaderboard (T) 9.95 6.95 D. Desert 24.95 22.95 9.95 8.75 Triv Pursuit 10 95 14.05 Sigma 7 6.50 NA The Pawn 24.95 1999 Silent Serv 19.95 16.95 725 525 Paperboy 650 10.05 Tau Ceti 2 6.50 10.95 Silent Serv 2495 1999 gins Snok 19.95 16.95 8.95 5.99 Championship Wrest 5.50 10.95 Donkey kong 8.00 10.00 Streamer 2995 2005 S FB (2) 19.95 16.95 8.95 6.00 Year Kung Fu 2 6.00 10.00 Arena 2995 2495 Champ God 19.95 16.95 9 93 6.75 Grange Hill 675 10.95 Jack Nipper 5.50 10 95 Deep Space 29.95 24.95 Hellcat Ace 19.95 16.95 7.95 525 Highlander 600 10.00 World Games 5.50 10.95 St Karate 19.95 15.95 Mindshadow 24.95 $9.99 8.95 6.00 Spy Spy 3 5.50 10.95 Judge Dred 6.50 10.95 In Karate 19.99 15.95 Strip Poker 1999 16.95 9.99 6.50 Leviathan 6.50 10.95 Bobby bearing 6.00 10.00 SDI (Cinema) 45.95 35.95 Spitfire Ace 19.99 16.95 7.95 5.25 Elite 10.95 14.95 Five star 6.50 10.95 Gauntlet 24.95 19.99 Pinball Con 24.95 22.95 7.95 5.25 Sky Runner 6.50 10.95 Ghost & gobling 6.50 10.95 Champ Wres 2495 19.99 Music Con 24.95 2295 9.95 6.50 Bolderdash Cons 5.50 10 95 Future Knight 6.59 10.95 Silicon Dream 24.99 1999 Mean 18 19.95 16.95 9.95 8.75 Coin-op 8.50 10.95 Frelord 6.00 10.00 Jewels Dark 24.95 1999 Cyrus 2 Chess 1995 16.95 995675 Fist 2 8.50 10 95 Amour A nd 6.50 10.95 (FULL INFOCOM RANGE IN STOCK PLEASE RING FOR DETAILS) 795 525 Xeno 6.00 10.00 Super Cycle 6.50 10.95 ( WE TAKE ACCESS OR VISA FOR ATARI ST. & AMSTRAD 1512 7.95 5.25 Top Gun 6.00 10.00 Acro Jet 6.50 10.95 PRODUCT ONLY RING FOR DETAILSX1512 BUSINESS PRODUCT) 795 5.25 Gauntlet 6.50 10.95 Super Huey 2 6.50 10.95 ALSO IN STOCK RING FOR FULL LIST & PRICE) 9.95 TS Sold a million 3 6.50 10.95 Trailblazer 6.50 10.95 AMSTRAD 6128/454 CASS DISK SPECIAL OFFERS) 7.95 5.25 1942 6.50 10.95 Ikan Warriors 6.50 10.95 Mini Office 2 1 2.00 14.95 DOUBLE PACKS SPECTRUM 9 95 660 Space Harrier 6.50 10.95 indoor Sport 6.50 10.05 Trivial Pursuit 11.95 16.95 Dan Dare Hardball C10.00 9.95 6.50 Scooby Doo 5.50 10.95 Big trouble LC) 6.50 10.95 Sold a Milion 3 6.96 10.95 Batman Topgun C10.00 9.95 6.50 Bomb jack 2 6.50 10.95 Shockway Rider 6.00 10.00 1942 6.95 10.95 Footbaler of year 7.95 5.50 Ace 5.50 10.95 Dracular 6.50 NA Konami Coin op 6.95 10.95 Super Soccer 10.00 7.95 5.25 Commande 86 8.50 10.95 Ninis 8.50 10.95 Scooby Doo 696 10 95 For Worm Thantos C12.00 8.95 6.25 inftrator 5.50 10.95 Jailbreak 5.50 10.95 Dan Dare 6.95 NA Paperboy Great Esc C1000 9.95 8.50 Freeze Frame 3 Cart 33 95 Gunship 10.95 14.95 Starglide 11.95 1695 Space Harry Scooby 10.00 7.95 5.25 Expert Cartride NA 25.95 Destroyer NA 10 95 Trivial Pursuit (PCW) 16.95 Donkey Kong/Xevious 10.00 8.99 6 25 Death or Glory 6.25 10.95 Trap Door 5.50 NA Batman 6.50 10.00 (SPECIAL OFFERS) 7.99 525 Delta 11.95 15.95 Sort Circuit 5.00 10.00 Green Beret 6.50 10.00 DOUBLE PACKS/COMMODORE 7.95 5.25 Double take 6.00 10.00 Nomises 6.25 10.95 Prospell NA 19.95 Scooby Doo + 7.99 5.25 The Pawn NA 14.95 Elite Hit Pak 6.50 10.95 Prospell (PCW) NA 2495 Space Harrier .00 705 525 Marble Madness 5.50 10.95 Rouge tropper 6.50 NA Gauntlet 7.25 11 95 World Games + 9.95 6.50 Arkanoid 5.00 10.00 Zap 2 6.50 NA Plant 12.00 1595 Cobra .00 8.95 8.25 Cobra 6.00 10.00 Graphic Ad Cre 1 7.95 22.95 Planit (PCW) NA 20 95 Gauntlet 9.95 8.50 Ace of Aces 6.50 10.95 Uridium Paradroid 8.00 NA Sold Million 2 6.96 10.00 Vchi Marta .00 7.95 525 Avenger 6.50 10.95 Shao Lins Road 6.50 10.95 sako 6.00 1000 9.95 6.50 Footballer year 6.50 10.95 S on Dreams 10.95 14.95 Protest NA 21.95 (All of the above on 9.95 5.00 Terra Cresta 6.00 10.00 Jewels Darkness 10.95 14.95 Big Four 6.95 10.95 Cassette only! Indoor Sports Scooby Doo Impossaball Ikari Warrior Stars on 128 Fairlight 2 Shao Ling Rd Short Circuit Konami Golf Death or Glory Uridium Firelord Avenger Dracula Sky Runner Scalextric The Fat Worm Dragons La 1942 9.95 7.95 6.50 Dan Dare 5.25 Price of Magic Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders Please Add 75p per tape, Mail Order only. Cheques/postal orders (Sterling only please) Made Payable to: DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, Dept 3, 210 Nicholls Tower, Harlow, Essex, CM18 6EF TELEPHONE (0279 29076) WEEKDAYS ONLY PLEASE RS232C Serial Interface V21/23 Modem .95 inc VAT .95 inc VAT inc VAT ANSTRA RSS face PACE TS/S IND 500472 COMMST FREE! Send coupon to: Marketing Dept. Amstrad Consumer Electronics Plc, Brentwood House, 169 Kings Road, Brentwood, Essex. CM14 4EF Name Registration to MICROLINK in association with TELECOM GOLD and 1st quarter subscriptions to MICRONET 800 and PRESTEL. Available from good Amstrad computer stockists. Or send coupon to Marketing Dept, Amstrad, Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood. Essex. CM14 4EF. Address ..... Postcode ..... Tel. No. AMSTRAD V21/23M O Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood Essex. CM144EF. Tel. 0277 230222 | RS232C V21/23 INTERFACE MODEM (PLEASE DO NOT SEND ANY MONEY WITH THIS COUPON) CVG/3 "


"|C+V6 N REVIEW SUPPLIER: US GOLD ADVENTURE SOFT  MACHINES: AMSTRAD, SPECTRUM 128K, SPECTRUM 48K, SPECTRUM 48K, COMMODORE 64/128, COMMODORE 16, BBC/ ELECTRON AND IBM PC. PRICE: AMSTRAD/ SPECTRUM 128K/CBM 64 .99, SPECTRUM 48K .99, CBM/ELECTRON .99, IBM PC .99 REVIEWER: KEITH A lot of thought, plus some trial and error, is required to determine how to either pass or defeat them. There's a fair number of sudden death situations, in doing this, which find Cringer. The normally would be quite necessary program unacceptable. However, the unacceptable. However, the logic would have way it is handled in this game, been not only mindbending, makes the adventure very but too large, says Mike playable, and, perhaps, even Woodroffe, one of the co more realistic. After all, in authors. \"Adventurers try out real life, it is quite likely that ANYTHING\" he explained. you would walk into a trap \"Imagine what would happen with no warning, yet would be if, for example, Cringer was able to save yourself had you Earthquakes threaten Eternia, and King Randor summons Prince Adam to seek out Heman, for only he can save the land. As the Prince, you know better than to set off in search of He-man. Instead you must find the Sword Of Power that actually transforms you into He-man. Without it, you will get nowhere. Battlecat, with He-MAN had the knowledge of how to A tour of the locality reveals Riding him, and He-man overcome it. the extent of the damage decided to drop his sword!\" When you walk into a caused by the quakes. A stable There are also some real dangerous situation, there are block has collapsed, and the n asties to test you usually a few moves before Palace Gardens are in a state Beastman, Mantanna, you die. Thus if you make of ruin. Down at the inn, many Merman, and Skeletor -and regular use of the QSAVE of the locals have gone for there's no shortage of option, you get the chance for shelter, and, presumably, monsters, either. If the a little experimentation, to try inner-strength! There, if scorpions don't get you, to discover the way out, before observant, you might meet an chances are Rockbinder or the it is too late. And then you can old friend in the crowd. Shadow Weaver will. return quickly to the point at Knowing the secret, you will soon make your way over the Jawbridge and into Grayskull Castle, where your old friend, The Sorceress, confirms that indeed, it is none other than the dastardly Skeletor who is behind the quakes. She offers you help in defeating him, but first asks you to restore the Timelinks. Do this, and a potent weapon will be yours, Before long you will be re in King Randor's throneroom. Rir traversing tunnels and caves, Sits before you wearing an and emerging into the ssion of deep concern. You can go Shadowlands. Along the way you will meet up with many characters. It pays to stop and talk to them! But you won't which you saved, by QLOADing an old position. This is the adventure game do not confuse it with the Masters Of The Universe arcade game. There are over 80 locations and, except on the BBC and C-16 versions, each has an attractive and instantly displayed picture. The BBC and Spectrum 128 versions have augmented text. Masters of the Universe is not easy. The hand of Stefan Ufnowski has once again been at work here, in conjunction with Mike Woodroffe, Teoman Urmak and Graham Lilley. So you won't be surprised to find strange devices like a Minus Manale, a Moleculator and a Wycord lying around. The EXAMINE command is required extensively, and is often rewarding in disclosing hidden objects, and vital clues. Unfortunately, although many clues describing objects put you on the track of the correct solution, implementing it is another matter. If you went along to the local hardware shop, and asked for a Minus Manacle, for example, you would expect more than just a rundown of its purpose -you would hope for a set of operating instructions. The Manacle, to do its work, must be attached to something, although you are not told so. That would be fair enough if the required command was simple, with plenty of alternative words. However, you must FIT MANACLE TO xxxxxx. FIT MANACLE on its own, in the right location, will not do. PLACE, ATTACH, PUT, and FIX are not allowed. Other than this, here is another excellent adventure from the Adventure Soft team. VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL VALUE 00 00 un "


"ESCAPE FROM KHOSH SUPPLIER: ATLANTIS obvious. I walk through the the jungle -but which one cliff. SOFTWARE LTD door and straight into the should be taken? From the way the game  MACHINES: AMSTRAD, 464/ 664/6128 camp compound. The soldier And will you make it reacts and displays, I strongly PRICE: CASSETTE .99 did not stop me. My luck is unobserved? If not, the guards suspect the GAC was used to REVIEWER: KEITH holding. will send the dogs after you create it, although no mention The jungle lies to the south. The weather is hot enough is made on the inlay. You have been held Prisoner I keep on walking one and on to kill you through thirst, and Escape from Khoshina uses Of War by the Japanese for and on. Guess what? I'm finding water is not so easy normal VERB/NOUN over a year. hopelessly lost. I cry for help. although once you do, you commands such as Drink Relying on the difficulty of PARDON? Comes the reply. may find more of it than you Water. Open Drawer. Get escaping through the Burmese It was worth a try. Back to the bargained for! Knife. Direction commands Jungle, security at the camp is beginning. This adventure is quite are N for North etc. nominal. Various objects are lying competently written, but lacks You can turn the graphics Today, there are only two around the camp. most are that certain sparkle necessary off and play it as a guards left in the camp, and immediately visible. So the to make it stand out from straightforward text adventure they are both sleeping in the first stage of the camp involves many others. which, when taking into the heat of the afternoon .... collecting everything you see It is all rather routine and quality of them into The object of the game is to lying around, and finding one tedious. consideration, is no bad thing. escape from the camp and or two other items. There are graphics, but Not bad for the price, and through the jungle. One doesn't have to be too many of the pictures are should give some hours of The game starts off in the discerning, since everything almost identical to each other. play. barrack room. There are just that is available can be carried. and none are particularly rows of empty beds, an open A fter visiting the inspiring, door through which a soldier Commandant's office, guard VOCABULARY The worst I came across was ATMOSPHERE can be seen. room, barracks, and hospital. of a waterfall, with a plain PERSONAL Oh well, be bold and try the there are numerous exits to zig-zag sheet of blue crossing a VALUE DA SUPPLIER: TARTAN SOFTWARE MACHINE: SPECTRUM 48K PRICE: .99 MAIL ORDER ONLY FROM: TARTAN SOFTWARE, 16 BAILIE NORRIE CRESCENT, MONTROSE, ANGUS, SCOTLAND. REVIEWER: KEITH RAYS Four of the sun's eight rays have been stolen by the Moon Raydiator. It seems that the logic that lets the game down, MR is acting in retaliation I examined a carton I came against the proposed marriage across, and apparently it of his daughter Diana, to the contained a toy, for the screen Sun God. But by dawn was redisplayed with the new tomorrow, if the rays have not object listed, but with no been found and restored, the message to tell me I had found Sun will not shine, and all something. I examined the living things on earth will toy, and the same thing perish. Your job is to find happened. This time, a battery them. appeared. Well, despite the sickly I picked up the lot, and then scenario, if the rays are treated every time I examined either as treasures, there's no reason carton or toy, the toy or the why the adventure shouldn't battery, respectively, was be enjoyable. I thought. So I dropped, and removed from pressed on my inventory. Trying to insert This is a Quilled adventure the battery in the toy brought of the primitive sort, that is to the killer: \"Try something say. white on blue text, with else.\" Spectrum character set, and But the worst part for me, square cursor. True, there are was a rusted bolt problem. a few illustrations, although I Having found some toast and found none on my prebutter in the kitchen, I production copy. suspected the butter might But it is the text and the ease the bolt. Trying to pick it The Quill. They are manifestly absent in Rays. I feel a bit rotten about giving this game a poor review. Author Audrey Meredith, of Dublin, has dedicated the game to me, on account of the enjoyment and help she has received from the Helpline. However, I would be failing in my duty to up, I was told: \"It's not here.\" readers, the prospective I couldn't believe my eyes! purchasers, were I to The program was lying: the recommend it — sorry butter WAS there it was Audrey. listed plainly on the screen! On the reverse side of the The toast wouldn't let me pick finished cassette (which I it up either, complaining that haven't seen) comes some it was too dry without butter instructions on adventure spread on it. SPREAD playing, and a three-part BUTTER resulted in a new object, BUTTERED TOAST. at the novice adventurer. the final straw was trying to \"Friendly and ongoing,\" is GET TOAST. You've guessed how Audrey describes them. still too dry without butter Green Door takes you into a spread on it! world of fantasy about a green All this goes to prove that, witch; Black Door is set in an with The Quill, anyone can Egyptian Tomb; and Blue write an adventure without Door is about Bluebeard. knowledge of a programming Save your pennies for a language. But to have better game. credibility, it must behave VOCABULARY logically. All the logical steps ATMOSPHERE that a real programmer would PERSONAL have had to write into his  VALUE code, must be properly thought out, and supplied to UNAN "


"lévi'athan (livi'n). ME. [a. L. (Vulg.), a. Heb. livythan. Ult origin unkn.] n. huge ship; anything very large of its kind. Commodore C64 COMMODORE C128 PERSOOH B OOOOOO B E DOODD ENGLISH Cassette .95 Disk .95 SOFTWARE 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gardens, Manchester M3 2NH. Tel: 061-835 1358 U.S. GOLD COMPUTERSPIELE GMBH, Daimlerstrasse 11, 4044 Kaarst 2, Holzbttgen. Tel: 02101 600425 "


"C-VGA 36. 2REVIEWS clues and the red herrings. We must not neglect the guests; let us approach and speak with them. This can best be done through the videotelephone: there is no need to leave the comfort of this desk console. Observe their concern and KILLED UNTIL DEAD keep track of any clues found inside the rooms, especially SUPPLIER: notes or messages that might ACCOLADE MACHINE: CBM 64 indicate possible clandestine PRICE: N/A meetings. REVIEWER: MARSHALL however, I have also installed a video M. ROSENTHAL until after the tape recorder with three Good afternoon. My name is correct response has been timers. It will enable us to Hercule Holmes. You are given to a mystery trivia record events even if we are probably wondering why I have asked you to join me here in the Gargoyle Hotel? Did you see the other guests? They are not ordinary people, in fact they are five of question. not able to directly view them the world's greatest mystery Should the unthinkable writers. occur; a security guard will bar Feel free to consult my One of them, I do not know any efforts to enter the room Detective Journal, for in it will which as of yet, is no longer for 10 minutes of game time, be found all content with literary mayhem and we will have to try again discovered. Use it to organise and has decided to commit a later. Remember, we must the facts, and consider the \"perfect\" murder this very evening. But he shall not fool me, for I am truly a great detective. With your help, I shall seek out this would-be killer, force a confession, and prevent a henious crime. It is a mere tut that I have only until midnight to avert this disaster. Nor do I fear the consequences of error, although I have heard vague rumours of what might happen should I guess wrong. First we shall study my files. noticed Peter was on the pistol range today. I have compiled much about these so-called guests; Sydney Meanstreet, Lord Peter Flimsey, Agatha Maypole, Mike Stammer and Claudia von Bulow. Note please the pertinent (and impertinent) facts about their personalities, their habits, likes and dislikes. I have placed a network of sophisticated camera monitors and listening devices throughout the hotel. These shall enable us to \"go\" almost anywhere electronically: silently observing a monitoring their conversations. There is also a portable mobile unit/camera which is excellently equipped for 182: gathering clues from the writer's rooms. This can not be done, SURVEILLANCE reactions as they are assailed by facts and acquired information. Yes, they are indeed like children in our hands. Soon they will empty their minds of all they know of this affair. Now it is time to confront the killer-to-be. Watch this disbelief as the plot is exposed. See him cringe as all becomes known, as his secrets are stripped away layer by layer. Are we not right? Ah Hercule, are we not clever? Killed Until Dead lets you assume the persona of Hercule Holmes, hopefully with a bit less conceit (depending perhaps upon the skill level chosen). An onscreen clock counts down the 12 hours between noon and midnight, the hour of the dastardly deed, consuming about 24 minutes of real time. There are 20 different mystery plots to solve, each with its own clues and variations. The joystick is used to make all of the selections and adding to the fun is the humorous cartoon-like animation of the characters, and a wealth of digitised sound effects. VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL  VALUE N/A "


"G+VG HEB REVIEWS W weapon\") had no effect. It seems that its extremely formidable power will work only on the Arch mandroid. What a very strange game! To be successful, an adventure must hold the interest of the player. Being weak on background, logic. atmosphere, and mystery. I soon found it failed to hold SUPPLIER: inside it-apparently the CODEMASTERS parser was looking only for SOFTWARE CO. LTD. one letter, the 'G of GO. This  MACHINE: time, however, there was a COMMODORE 64  PRICE .99 pair of gloves inside. REVIEWER: KEITH Moving around the dome, I In the far future, with the went from chamber to earth's resources severly improvement. chamber, and came across depleted the dead are sent to That was my theory. Mandroids, and a Battle an orbiting cemetery, the anyway! The instructions tell Droid, and all sorts of weird Necris Dome, to conserve you that PUSH LID will get machinery, most of which space. The Dome is run by Mandroids, but their boss, the Arch-Mandroid, has become a sentient renegade, and a threat to the earth. You are shipped abroad the Dome in a coffin, and your mission is to kill the Arch baddy at all costs. With a background scenario out of the casket in which you seemed unusable. I met as flawed as this (if things were arrive. So, I found, did instant death a number of that bad, they'd re-cycle the LISTEN TO BLEEPER times. just by walking corpses, instead of depleting my personal homing bleeper. I innocently into places I fuel resources even further to thought I'd take the coffin shouldn't. Tryi get them into orbit) the game around with me, but GET way out with my At-lan (\"a itself has got to be an COFFIN merely put me back formidably powerful NECRIS DOME me, and I lost any motivation to proceed further. VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL VALUE GROWING PAINS SUPPLIER: VIRGIN MOSAIC an American friend threatens choice of action, ensure that LEVEL their relationship. the game isn't the same every  MACHINES: AMSTRAD, SPECTRUM 48 128K. Like Secret Diary (the game time around. Nor does it COMMODORE 64128, ATARI reviewed December 1985), follow the Sue Townsend 400 800, BBCBAND MX Growing Pains comes in the version enirely. PRICE: .95  REVIEWER: KEITH form of diary entries. It is The format of the play interactive fiction of the demonstrates Level 9's Here is Adrian, grown up a bit multiple choice' variety excellent adventure system. since his famous secret diary. rather than an adventure adapted and used to good Now fifteen, and with proper. Every so often you get advantage in a way never levels looming, he's trying to the opportunity to select what originally intended. There are cope with parents who keep to do next, by number. For graphics, which don't add parting and having example. Adrian realises that much to the proceedings, but reconciliations he's never seen either a dead at least this time the pictures His father's girl friend has a body or a female nipple are more relevant to the baby, and moves in with Should he (1) Ask Pandora to current subject. There's type. Adrian's gran. His mother show him one of hers: (2) ahead'. or should I say 'read also has a baby. and creates Resign himself to ignorance: ahead\"? And there's plenty of havoc at the social security or (3) Ask Nigel for advice? text to read, decompressed officers when her giro-cheque It's really like reading the from a state of virtual fails to arrive. Meanwhile, book, with variations every dehydration. Even so, the Pandora continues to time you make a decision. game comes in four parts, each dominate Adrian's thoughts. Random elements in the of which must be loaded but the unexpected arrival of program, together with your sequentially when prompted. But did I detect a glitch, or just a silly mistake in the narrative? The entry for December 31st refers to what is going on at school, and the sending of Christmas cards. And the bonfire party is held on Thursday November 4th. The object is to become the most popular boy in the neighbourhood, and every so often your percentage score is displayed, together with a suitable description such as namby pamby schoolboy But don't expect to solve puzzles to achieve a 100% rating-this must be played by intuition! It should please Mole fans everywhere --it is excellently produced, and full of humour "


"COMPUTER REPAIR CENTRE COMMODORE, SINCLAIR & AMSTRAD APPROVED CENTRE como TRUM Repairs also undertaken for all the following computers: SPECTRUM, COMMODORE, ATARI, BBC, IBM NO HIGH FREE FIXED SOFTWARE WORTH PRICE  REPAIR! WITH EVERY SPECTRUM REPAIR The established company with a proven reputation Over the years we have built up an enviable reputation in the UK for computer repairs, which is second to none. This is based on many years experience in repairing Spectrum, Commodore, BBC and other leading makes and we were the first AMSTRAD repair centre anywhere. This is why we have customers all over the world. We are the best forget the rest, look what we offer DON'T DELAY ACT TODAY It's as easy as ABC! No high fixed price you only pay what the repair actually costs. While-(-Wait Service spare parts for all leading computers available over the counter. State of the art test equipment to provide comprehensive test report and locate faults. Repairs to all leading makes of computer. Amstrad specialist. Spectrum rubber keyboards repaired for only .95. Commodore 64's, Vic 20's, Atari, Commodore 16's and Plus 4's repaired. Discounts for colleges, schools etc. Every computer repaired by us is completely overhauled and tested before return. All computers returned carriage paid and covered by insurance. Three months guarantee included. Free Software worth  with every Spectrum repair. DISCOUNT COMPONENTS e.g. Power Transformers Simply send your computer securely packed, together with a cheque or postal order for the maximum fee to the address below. Your computer will be repaired and returned to you within 24 hours together with the balance of the fee and your FREE 133 worth of software Or if you prefer a written quotation just send .50 to cover post & packing. Alternatively just quote your Access or Visa card number. BBC REPAIRS from SPECTRUM REPAIRS AMSTRAD REPAIRS from from 12 to . J to .90 19.90f12 to  COMMODORE REPAIRS from Commodore .00 .50 p.p. Spectrum .95 +1.50 pp  to  Spectrum 1 2 SPECIALIST COMPUTER REPAIR CENTRE VISA Trade orders welcome Dept. 18, Unit 4, M.E.B.Works, Windsor Road, Enfield, Redditch, B976DJ. Tel:Redditch 65671. WE SET THE STANDARD BY WHICH EVERYONE ELSE IS JUDGED Computers received beyond economical repair, or tampered with, may cost more than our fixed rates, these will be charged at an hourly rate + parts. "


"Oh Boggit! We give in. Are you stuck in the Gloomy Lands, stranded by the Wiffy Mountains or trapped in the Goblin's Dungeon? Don't worry. Help is at hand. C+VG proudly presents Keith Campbell's Complete Solution Number Two Delta 4's The Boggit. The ! 0 SOMA HO CORTE E PART TWO PART ONE 1110 WEBTRN ENTINCE VALLEY UN The solution to The Boggit is security card. Following the route: S. S When asked by the minion if you want arranged in order of locations (credit card), N (cigarette). N.ES any Duty Free goods. DROP CREDIT Visited. Where it is necessary to (security card). N. and W. will take you CARD. GET DUTY FREE. Then return to a previously visited location, to Beor's House GO IN CLIMB OUT. arriving back at (2). Go the direction command is followed by 12. BEORN'S CUPBOARD Wto (1), and then Sto: the location number in brackets For Take the marmalade sandwich--but 4. SINISTER TREES example W(1) means \"go west and you don't cat it! You have now completed GOE will be in location 1.\" everything you need to do in Part 1 5. JUNCTION OF FOREST ROADS Note that locations which are not Proceed OUT. WW, and N, to reach Here the Beholder threatens to kill necessary to visit are not included the cave. you. ATTACK BEHOLDER and go E here, to aid clarity. Many thanks to 13 CAVE to: C+VG reader Kenneth Sean Allan, of Here is where you pass into Part Two 6. BASE OF WATERFALL Houghton-le-Spring, who sent in his Type a few commands that keep you in Here there is a Wood Ell. If he TROLLS solution GOBLINS the cave, and a large crack will appear. captures you, you will be throw APART\"I want it to be only printed in my CAVE To proceed, you will be prompted to into the Elvenking's Dungeon MENT favourite magazine-C+VG\" he SAVE the data before loading the next (12). Follow the part I used Kenneth's solution as the basis for exhaustively playing and replaying The Boggit to include more detail and explanation 1. IN THE GOBLIN'S DUNGEON TROLL Here you must DIG the sandy floor to PATH reveal a trapdoor. SMASH TRAPDOOR reveals a TORCH and 1. THE TUNNEL-LIKE HALL GOBLIN'S CASH-take them both To leave, you must know the correct EXAMINE TORCH dislodges the number for the combinaton lock on the battery within, and a Goblin runs off door. The clue is in the diary, which is with the torch. INSERT BATTERY hidden in the chest. OPEN CHEST now causes the battery to be inserted in GLOOMY SMELand CLIMB INTO CHEST, to get the the sword, which starts to glow FORESTA PONDS HOUSE diary. READ DIARY for a list of three THROWing the ROPE is now dates. 1985 isn't a leap year, so the date necessary, until it fastens itself securely START 5 29/2/85 is false, and is the correct to the ledge by the window. PULL number for the lock ROPE lowers the window until you are While you are in this location, able to climb through it to: Grandalf will arrive with a box of 2. THE DARK WINDING explosive chocolates. You have only a PASSAGE TUNNELI OUTSIDE CLOOMY EOCE OF SECRET few moves to THROW Make sure you collect the rope, as it is BOGGIT LANDS WILBER HALL CHOCOLATES before they explode. LAND HOLE your only means of escape if you are S leads to the toilet. Do not bother to captured. GOSW go, yet! DIAL 29285, and GO OUT 3. THE BIG GOBLIN'S CAVERN 2. OUTSIDE THE BOGGIT HOLE Here you will find an egg. GET EGG SAY when asked the value of one and return to (2). To reach Goblin's fourteenth of Thorny's treasure. Note Gate from here (see Passages) go: E. what the theologist tells you. Before W.W.U. long you will find yourself in: 4. THE PASSAGES... 3. THE ROUND GREEN TOILET These form a maze. Before moving to Go north to return to (1) Talk to Part Three, you will need to get the Thorny and Grandalf, and tell them to Golden Ring. From (2) go: SEN.SE follow you, before leaving, and then ESE, E for the ring continue cast from (2). At any time you may get captured 4. GLOOMY LANDS and end up back at (1). Simply repeat route out of Gonorth. the rope trick to return to the passages (12) to return. Otherwise, 5. GLOOMY FOREST each time remembering to GET go Sto: When faced with the trolls, you need ROPE after you have used it. 7. BESIDE RIVER WALKING the answer to the theologist's clue: If Goldbum asks you his riddle Go Sto: SAY LUX. This disposes of the trolls, before you have the ring and egg, type 8. BROAD PAVED HIGHWAY and you should now CLIMB INTO AFRICAN OR EUROPEAN. If he Go Sto: CAULDRON TO GET KEY. and asks you a second riddle, or when you 9. OUTSIDE DOL' COOLER CLIMB OUT. before heading north have both the items, type DELTA 4 Go Sto: If the butler allows you to remain again This takes you into the real world of 10. INSIDE ASYLUM WAIT until he opens the barrel. Che 6. TROLL PATH Fergus's bedroom in Swanmore, where There is a slot in the wall. INSERT won't do this until the pink door has Here is the door, so UNLOCK you will meet Colin and Judith. Stroll SECURITY CARD and you will find been closed and locked) and CLIMB DOOR. OPEN DOOR, (rather around if you will, but to return, simply yourself in: INTO BARREL laboriously!). and go north to enter type BOGGIT. You will now be at 11. DRAIN'S PADDED CELL 14. IN A BARREL 7. TROLL'S APARTMENT Goblin's Gate Where you will find Drain in a straight DRINK the red WINE while inside. There is a useful rope here, so GET 5. GOBLIN'S GATE AND BEYOND jacket. UNTIE DRAIN and he will and continue to type WAIT until the ROPE before returning to (5) and drop something. LOOK to see what it barrel falls open, when you can CLIMB heading east. Go U, and you will find yourself at the is, and then TAKE CURIOUS KEY OUT to find yourself on the 8. EDGE OF WILBERLAND top of a tree. Wait until an cagle carries and INSERT SECURITY CARD to 15. SHORE OF EXAGGERATED Head east again to reach: you all. He will deposit you in his nest, return to (10) and then go N(9). N(8). LAKE 9. SECRET VALLEY OF and leave for a while to find a bare N(7). N(6). Here you will get captured from here, go to: RIVENDULL head to use as a toilet. On his return by the Wood Elf, and find yourself in: 16. ATEXAGGERATED LAKE And then go north to enter: he will carry you off into Part Three 12. THE ELVENKING'S DARK If you got captured before taking the 10. SMELROND'S HOUSE DANK DUNGEON curious key.gosto (6) else go to: Here you should talk to Smelly, and he PART THREE Keep typing WAIT until the pink door 17. FLAKE TOWN will give you lunch, which you should has been unlocked and opened Lard is here, so TALK TOLARD, and take and eat. Go south to return to 19). 1. DARK WOODS WEAR RING, and go SW to: SAY HELLO. To get the weaponry to then continue east West leads back to the previous part. 13. THE ELVENKING'S WINE kill the dragon, DROP DUTY FREE 11. WESTERN ENTRANCE TO GO E, to: CELLAR and DROP CURIOUS KEY Then WIFFY MOUNTAINS 2. WEST BANK OF RIVER If you are not wearing the ring, you will GET BOW and GET ARROW. and You are now near a maze of mountain Here there is a boat. CLIMB INTO be immediately ejected by the butler. go Wto (16), and then to: paths. You need three objects from the BOAT so repeat the actions from location 18. FROTHY WATERS maze: a credit card, a cigarette, and a 3. IN BOAT (12) Go U to: puolen A ndered "


"MAP C-1G MAP C-HG Sogot sure #08 DARI INDIN ASS PASSAGE LamE HALLS 23 | PASSAGE DARK HTTP| PASSAGE PASSME IMP231MS FRONT GATE 22 PROPE |Go LING HOUNGEONS CAPTURED PASSAGE | PES | (SOLDEN ) TOP OF TREE NEST ELEVEN I KINCS DUNGEON WAVEN| HELL | QLE VALLEY 20 330 DE 9 803 + E003 3981905 36 30503  ELSE BA AVE GATE de Tiars LING WINE ELL FROTHY | SHOUL WATERSPRING DESERT | CLIMB ENTRANCE DARK | SHORE or | TEM UHBTRAIGLING -LEDGE E/W PATH EASTERN EDGE BEORN'S HOUSE WEST BANK BOAT FLAKE TOWN WOODS TORET CATE LAKE 15 IR Al PATH! ONE OF MANY PATHS PH BORNS CUPBOARD SINISTER LUMETtol || TREES FOREST ROAD PATH Note Only location necessary to visit are shown 2 Connecting lines indicate compass points | unwokeitualBe Bloon, 3 Aroly headed lines andcate one Malau only route + Location numbers wriarked 9 refer to best narrative (each part separately numbered) (RESIDE RIVER WALKING 7 ROAD PAVED HIGHWAY 8 ouTB IDE. 19. SMOULDERING DESERT (in H IN 20. DALE VALLEY Where you will first meet the dragon HEAL THINE ST = = N. 2L RAVENHILL READ the NOTICE that the small bird is carrying. It asks for a donation, so DROP CASH, and learn of the Dragon's Achiles heel Then E120) and Sto: 22. AN IMPOSING FRONT GATE Carry on N to: 21. LOWER THALLS Where you will find the Dragon in residence. You know how to do it, so SHOOT TAIL, GET TREASURE and GET BARKENSTONE Now fouless the bute S22) 200 S19) D1B) [16) STf) und W5) Here you will find a Class 37 Space Cruiser with no propulsion crystal DROP BARKENSTONE, and proceed W(4). NU) in Whick ints Part One of the game COOLER On loading the newly saved Part Three data into the reloaded Part One you will find yourself at the entrance to The fores gate. Keep ID(Swing W. Lantil you come to the Putty Trolls, then turn S. and continue W until you are back in the Tunnel like Hall. CLIMB INTO CHEST. and Drop TREASURE Next month Keith Campbell grabs his towel and brings you the complete solution to The Hitch-Hiker's Guide to the Gaultury Deph pare, there's only 28 days to wait. | Hsie | BYLUM | BRAINS CELL *RENTRANSK RSS "


"Star Raid The Great Galactic Advent "


"lers II ature Continues Star Raiders Il is a trademark of the Atari Corporation The future of the Atarian Federation is in your hands as the evil Zylon Master, Chut, plans to destroy the Celos IV Star System. Pilot the hottest fighter in the galaxy, the Liberty Star and wipe out the Zylon Master Force and its super Attack Bases. The sequel to the game that astounded the world STAR RAIDERS II will leave you stunned; there is simply no other game to compete with its sheer excellence. AVAILABLE ON: Amstrad CPC cassette Amstrad CPC disk Commodore 64/128 cassette Commodore 64/128 disk. ZX Spectrum 48K/128K/+ .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 SOFTWARE ELECTRIC DREAMS SOFTWARE, 31 CARLTON CRESCENT SOUTHAMPTON S01 2EW. TEL: (0703) 229694. Mail Order: 23 Pond Street, Hampstead, London NW3 2PN mCORTECK "


"DEEP TROUBLE SUBBATTLE SIMULATOR |/A: SIMULATOR Test dive one for yourself. Unquestionably the most detailed, historic World War II submarine simulation ever created. Select your command on one of six different US Navy submarines or German Kreigs marine U Boats patrolling the Pacific or Atlantic Oceans from 1939 to 1945.  Encounter over 60 different missions commencing with convoy target practice and working your way to the highest Wartime Command over the course of the entire way.  Learn every aspect of underwater warfare: navigation, weapons usage, weather, repairs and conflicts strategies. . Completely authentic vessels with five levels of maps, periscope, binoculars, radar, sonar mines, torpedos, deck and anti-aircraft guns. \"The undisputed champion of US games houses\" Your Computer Nov. 1986 CBM64/128 .99 tape .99 disk IBM .99 disk Atari ST .99 disk SURFACE TENSION DESTROYER ESTROYER The time: 1400 hours. Somewhere in the Pacific. You're at the helm, commanding the greatest concentration of firepower ever put in a lightweight fighter the deadly Fletcher Class Destroyer. You've embarked on the first simulation that actually combines the intricate, largescale strategy of wargaming with the intensity of furious.cyeball to eyeball action. This time you right in the middle of it all. You knew it wouldn't be pretty, but how tough could it be to rescues downed pilot? It sure seemed a lot easier than shelling Islands, scorting a convoy or hunting subs. Or so you thought. But now look what you've got. Thirteen fully-operational, carbursting battle stations to worry about, all armed to the gills. Not to mention radar. Navigation. Sonar. And half the lapanese fleet crawling up your spine Time to make some tactical decisions Will it be the twin mm Boons anti-aircraft gunsr or the leadspewers aft? Depth charges or torpedos? Autopilot or guts? Any choice could be your last, so make it good. CBM64/128 .99 disk IBM .99 disk -TheMASTERS EpYX -CollectionEpyx Dette by U.S. Gold Lud. Unit 18 Holland Why Holland, "


"WIR NIKE Adams, has From the same address, a This is abysmal. Despite been involved. Snip at .25' says Incentive, sending it back. I still don't Not at comes the GAC Adventure have a working copy. Runner present finished, the Writers Handbook. A 48-page up: Lord Of The Rings. only UK adventurer booklet in half A4 size, this Funniest Adventure: Very Big discovered to be currently has contributions from Simon Cave. So you thought The Pawn's playing Beaurocracy, is Anita Lipscomb, Tim Walsha, Pat This is very much a subjective graphics were good? Wait till Sinclair. Playing by night on Winstanley, John Gwinnell, category, and many will argue you see the Guild of Thieves! Magnetic Scrolls' VAX, she and Lesley Anderson in favour of Fergus McNeill. At a sneak preview of Guild has a special arrangement Starting off with \"How to However. I feel he often back in January, I had whereby she can dial into write a good adventure\" the resorts to schoolboy humour. expected to be shown a text Infocom's main computer in book continues with a detailed whilst that of St. Bride's is only game on Magnetic Scrolls the USA look at how to use the various truly zany. VAX computer. But after an 'It's costing a fortune but features of the GAC: markers. Best Ending: Price of Magik. all-night session debugging a it's worth it! It's a terrific counters, diagnostics, and it has two endings, an corrupted parser. Anita game!\" she exclaimed. advanced commands are just a optimistic and a pessimistic Sinclair was able to show me few of the topics covered. The one. Thus you have to finish it the first micro version of the Two of Scott Adams' most booklet is not specific to any twice to discover its secrets game, running on an Atari ST, difficult adventures, Savage machine, but it IS specific to Most Illogically Mapped complete with magnificent Island Parts / and 2, are being using the GAC. Game: Lord Of The Rings. graphics. released for a range of Most commands in the manual Alongside the ST, artist machines, by Tynesoft. I would like to ask other not recognised: Sorderon's Tristan Humphries was Complete with graphics, as adventurers whether they like Shadow. Almost nothing in running through his C-64 well as the more popular big or small adventures. You the instructions is actually graphics conversion for the machines, versions will be may think this is an odd accepted by the game, benefit of Ken Gordon and available for the Commodore question, but I hate large including the two example Roddy Pratt. I can report that Plus 4. in twin-packs. games. You often have sentences! Runner up! Lord of graphics for both machines are Already reviewed in C+VG millions of objects in a large the Rings. Manual says HELP: way. way, ahead of those in some years ago, the new game, such as Kentilla, and game wants HINT. The Pawn! releases will be up for re this makes my head spin! I would be interested in But graphics take second review in their new formats, Kentilla is fast, which is not what other readers think of place in Magnetic Scrolls next month. bad, but Level 9 games are so mav choices? priorities, to the game itself, slow. The graphics would best Malcolm Harden, and the parser which drives it. Incentive Software has be removed. Minster Enhancements have been announced two products in The only games that need Sheppey made, and completely new support of users of their graphics are the fabarootie Keith: I've not played Q3 on a commands added. Graphic Adventure Creator Questprobe games. They Spectrum, but it MUST be bad Has that whet your utility. really add to the atmosphere. to beat LR! appetite? Guild of Thieves will The GAC Paper Matthew Tyler, be released by Rainbird during Management System is a pad of Rochford, You may recall a while ago. May. Computer + Video upwards of 200 sheets of Essex. I sent a full solution to Games Adventure column double sided forms. Based Keith: I always think that the Interceptor's Aftershock, for will be bringing you an around locations, they provide more compact the puzzles, the use in your column and exclusive full review, and a space for locations better the game. helpline. I also sent it to look at developments at descriptions and room several other magzines, but Magnetic Scrolls, in the next number, local conditions, and Every year I make an only received an issue due out on April 16th. connections between rooms. assessment of the History of acknowledgement and a t-shirt Don't miss being among the Since they do not provide from YOUR magazine. I first to find out about one of for non-location data, they will categories: decided that the next solution the greatest adventures likely help to keep track of things Smallest Playable Adventure: would go exclusively to to come your way in 1987! but do not allow for complete Hulk. C+VG. documentation of a game. This is a category which is M. Kerr Hollywood Highjinks is one Designed in tear-off format going out of fashion, as people Newcastle Upon Tyne. of two titles announced from for easy filing, each pad costs judge adventures by number Keith: Thank you, Mr. Kerr! Infocom. Due to be released .95. plus .25 towards of locations rather than what is We always TRY to answer later this year, it will be joined postage, from Incentive, 2 achieved in those locations. EVERY letter sent to the by Beaurocracy, in the Minerva House, Calleva Park. Most Bug-Ridden Adventure: C+VG Adventure Helpline. creation of which Hitch Aldermaston, Berkshire RG7 Questprobe 3 (Spectrum It's nice to know our efforts do Hiker's Guide author Douglas 4QW. version) not go unrewarded! "


"gospel online What do stars, trains and roller-stakes have in common? The answer is Starlight Express, the mega-successful West End Musical by Andrew Lloyd Webber. And you could be sitting in the Apollo Victoria Theatre enjoying this show if you win our Starlight Competition. You'll really see stars. Starlight is a new label launched by Ariolasoft. Their first game is Greyfell, about a mysterious land caught in the evil grasp of the Evil Moron and how Norman the Wise, a humble cat, who decides to take on Moron. Our friends at Starlight have come up with some prizes which will put a twinkle in your eye. There are two first prizes of two tickets to see Starlight Express plus a copy of Greyfell. The next five people will get a Greyfell sweatshirt and a copy of the game. A further 25 people will get the game. How do you get in on the action? Just answer the following questions and send your answers together with the printed coupon to Starlight Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. The closing date is April 16th. 1 What is a star? Is it: A) A Moon B) A Sun C) A planet 2 Stars appeal to twinkle. This effect is caused by the earth's atmosphere. TRUE or FALSE. 3 Starlight Express is by Andrew Lloyd Webber. Which of the following is not a Lloyd Webber musical. A) Jesus Christ Superstar B) Phantom of the Opera. C) Garry and the Amazing Technicolour Pullover D) Cats E) Evita STARLIGHT COMPETITION Name...... Address Computer owned ................ Sweatshirt size ... . CHVG COMPETITION "


"Section Your Ticket To The Best In Sports BOX SEAT RESERVED Row Seat When was the last time you had the chance to attend a championship sporting event-or better yet, play in one? Gamestar's series of outstanding sports simulations give you that chance. Make the playoffs. Play in the final round at Pebble Beach. Compete against the top teams. Every Gamestar simulation is as real as the sport itself, from gameplay to strategy to graphics. So winning the championship won't be easy. If it was, it wouldn't be worth it. For the very best in sports the excitement, the challenge, even the championship-Gamestar is your ticket. Admit all to sports excitement year-round EANESTIR GOLF BASKETBALL FOOTBALL BASEBALL The Great DE IBM PC, PCjr and Tandy 1900, Commodore Amiga, Apple II, Atari ST and compatible computers IBM PC, PCjr and Tandy 1000, Commdore Amiga, Apple II Atari ST, Commodore 64, 128 leasette and disk), Amstrad CPC (enssette and disk), Sinclair ZX Spectrum 451128/ and compatible computers. IBM PC, PCjr and Tundy 1000, Commodore Amiga, Apple II Atari St, Commodore 64, 128 (cassette and disk), Amstrad CPC cassette and disk), Sinclair ZX Spectrum 12 and compatible computers IBM PC, PC and Tandy 1000, Commodore Amign, Apple II Atari ST. Commodore -, 128 Teitssette and disit, Amstrad CPC cassette and diniu, Sinclair ZX Spectrum 4 1 24 + and compatible computers Gamestar la trademark of Activision Inc. Commodore Bad Amigare trademark of modern Electronie Limit Ali and ST are trademarks of Atari Corp. Apple is a trademark of Apple Computer Amstra, incluir a perim IHM is a trademark of international Business Machines Corporation, Tandy is a trademark of Tindy Corporation are trademarks of Amstrad pe Activision is the registered trademark of Activision. In Activision, Inc Mail order: Activision (UK) Ltd. 23 Pond Street, Hampstead, London NW3 2PN. Tel: 01-431 1101 ACTIVISION HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE "


"GO-GO WITH Wowsers! Let's go with Gadget, the world's most brilliant crimebuster and teevee superstar! Now the criminal capers of Gadget and his friends have been turned into a computer cartoon by the Wizards of Oz. Make the French connection with Gadget and take on the agents of M.A.D in the Circus of Fear! yix million of you watch Inspector Gadget's adventures on ITV. Why? Because it's the funniest thing since Dangermouse, that's why. Gadget is a cartoon clone of Inspector Clouseau, hero of all those Pink Panther movies. He bungles his way through criminal cases aided by his incredible array of gadgets built in to his standard-issue detective style trenchcoat. He reckons that he's the one who foiled the agents of M.A.D and the evil Doctor Claw but generally it's the fast thinking friend Penny and the wonder dog Brains who really crack the case. Gadget first appeared on French TV, where his adventures can be seen six days a week. The inspector has become just as popular in this another level, teleporters country and in other far flung which zap you back again, countries like the USA and more gremlins, coins, magic Australia. wands and of course gremlins. But what about the game? No wonder Gadget looks a bit Well, the Australian Beam bewildered by all this! Software team have The good news is that successfully captured the spirit Gadget can pick up his useful of the cartoon in pixels. A new gadgets along the way. Like graphics system means that the the ever-useful Gadget-skates Gadget character is the biggest Gadget-copter, Gadget-elastic you've ever seen on screen legs, Gadget-hammer and anywhere in the history of the many more extremely weird world. add-ons made famous by the The plot of Inspector TV cartoon Gadget and the Circus of Fear The game is divided into is pretty simple. M.A.D three worlds the first is agents have planted bombs all really a training mode where over a circus big top. Gadget you can get to grips with the has to get to them before they Gadgets and learn how to deal explode! with the obstacles you The road to the circus is encounter. On later levels paved with dangers. Dangers there are more hazards and like boulders, ponds, slippery bombs to difuse. patches, snakes, apes, man The game is heavy on eating plants, small gremlins, humour. Watch Gadget as he hands which appear out of the slips and slides across a ground to grab Gadget's slippery patch -a truly trouser-legs, bouncing balls, amusing bit of animation this. more impossible to classify Gadget also has speech gremlins, holes, trap doors bubbles which appear at which send you plummeting to different points of the game. BES 00x 3200635 SLAZE 00z& 52 1079 "


"GADGET Name:... Address....... ....... ............. Computer owned (tick box) C640 Spectrum Tie breaker: If you could have your very own gadget gizmo what would it be and how would you use it He shouts \"Go Gadget!\" if you get him stuck, \"Wow!\" if he trips over a hazard, and \"Wowsers!\" when he leaps using his amazing spring loaded Gadget legs. Wowsers?! What does that mean? Answers on a postcard please! It's the attention to detail that's been put into the graphics and animation that really make this game. The graphics are big and colourful and capture faithfully the style of the original cartoon. The animation likewise. Gadget bounces along nicely and his leaps would please Torvill and Dean! Inspector Gadget and the Circus of Fear is fast and fun to play If you're missing the French detective -who should be back on your screens soon by the way what better way to fill in the time until he returns than by playing the game. There are 87 episodes of Gadget made for TV. We may not see quite as many computer games based on the cute crimebuster but here at C+VG we reckon that you'll be shouting for at least one more! Inspector Gadget will be available shortly on the 64 at .95 (.95 disc) and Spectrum at .95 WOLJ s, Oug Sg 103 Go Go Gadget skates! Yes, you could be the proud owner of a pair of genuing Gadget roller-skates if you can solve the amazingly difficult C+VG Gadget Mystery Quizl Those wonderful beings at Melbourne house has persuaded the Inspector to part with a pair of his special skates and donate them to the winner of this delightfully dotty competition. 40, yes you read right, 40 runners up will get a copy of the game, currently available for the C64 and Spectrum. So what are you waiting for Get your skates on and race to the coupon which is just begging to be filled in. Once you've done that rush it off to Computer + Video Games, Go with Gadget Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Normal C+VG competition rules apply and the closing date is April 116th. Now for the questions, set of course by Penny and Brain! GO WITH GADGET COMPETITION 1. Name the actor who starred as a daffy detective in the Pink Panther movies. 2. Name the West End musical which features actors zapping around on skates and pretending to be trains. 3. Name the evil leader of M.A.D. "


"PER THE GAME OF THE SEASON AREGIN. Available NOW for your COMMODORE--95 We think Super Soccer is the best computer soccer simulator yet. Be Maradona on screen You can dribble past opponents, slide tackle, make crosses, even attempt diving headers. But what makes this game outstanding in its own field is the control you can exercise over the ball. No other game allows you to control the strength of your sharp shooting and ball passing like Super Soccer does. What's more, when taking free kicks you can organise the whole team with the \"full team positional play\" feature. This is a 1 or 2 player game and there's an optional SPECTRUM extra which allows up to 8 separate players to A lhe eame participate in a So get on the ball in the game of the season. the name .95 Imagine Software (1984) Ltd., 6 Central Street, Manchester M2 SNS. Telephone: 061-832 6633. Telex: 669977 OCEANG "


"| MAKING TRACKS What do you need for a What are the vital ingredients of mega The final aspect of any successful wargame? Most megagame is the de-brief at the people would say they needed wargames. Model soldiers, no rules, up to 70 end, in which the players and toy-sorry, model soldiers. people and a good lunch afterwards. C+VG's umpires gather together to And if the game-scale is too big Steve Badsey reports from the frontline of discuss the game and try to for that then you need a board, unravel what really happened. with pieces of cardboard August 1914 where six German armies face five Sometimes they can't agree, representing hundreds and French armies. would history be re-written? which is perfectly normal. It is thousands of troops. not unusual for people to Of course, you need rules, disagree to what happened often very complicated rules, to after real battles as well. make your models behave as if Two years ago I won a they were real human beings. Peninsular War battle as But have you ever tried to play commander and a chief of staff) agree on what is happening (it Wellington and my a wargame with no rules at all, led by the great German gets to be fun when what they subordinates and I still disagree just with the human beings General Staff under von Moltke have all agreed turns out to be as to how we did it (really it themselves? (five players) faced five French wrong anyway). was all in my master plan, and Take teams of two or three armies under General Joffre The big problem for the they're just jealous...). players representing the (with the same organisation) French in 1914 was that driving In the event, the megagame controlling staff of an Army. plus the tiny but powerful anywhere left you completely of August 1914 turned out Place them in a room, with a British Expeditionary Force and out of touch with everybody surprisingly like the real thing, map, cut off from everybody the Belgian Army on the French else, and that the British, in The British on the left flank else. Let them write orders for left wing. what turned out to be the showed less willingness to their own troops and receive Megagames usually involved crucial position, not only didn't fight than their historical communications from higher from 40 to 70 people, which speak French very well but counterparts, and as an headquarters and other means they take up a lot of weren't actually under French atmosphere umpire I had to commanders. If you have 20 space. A small game can be run command. phone them a few times, people or so on each side in a private house, but a club of It is very important, once the representing Lord Kitchener, to working like that, with about 40 some kind with several small basic problems of how to run a remind them of their duty. umpires to co-ordinate the rooms is ideal. One of the megagame have been solved Although, the British work between them, you have best features of August 1914 (think of it as a seven-hour. commander did have a a megagame. was the way in which players 40-a-side obstacle race) for the perfectly good reason for his The megagame of August stuck to their orders rather than umpires to give the players the behaviour: as it put it in the 1914 took place last November, going off on their own. Th and was one of a long series were also very good at a crucial Otherwise they just send the Germans\". A rather wide organised or supervised by skill in this kind of wargame, messages in, get them out gap opened up between British military historian Dr Paddy marking maps accurately. Two again, and it feels no different and French commanders the Griffith. neighbouring forces having whether they are German German swing west of Paris Each game is usually played totally different ideas of where generals in 1914 or French was checked. only once, and is no small their own troops are, not to admirals in 1805. The game ended with the commitment, taking typically a mention the enemy, has Mood creation actually needs Germans having got a bit year to research and organise, produced more than one a separate cell of umpires further forward than they and a day to play. military disaster. whose job is nothing else than managed historically, but still This time the game featured The Commander-in-Chief to make the game feel realistic. being forced to retreat. It was a the great offensives along the needs to get out from his own very impressive game. And we Franco-German border in the headquarters as often as had some good lunches. first months of World War One. possible to visit subordinates Six German armies (teams of and make sure that two players each for a they all "


"HERLOCK THE FINAI At last the truth about the Leatherhead tragedy can be told. It was one of Sherlock Holmes' finest cases. For years the sensational truth about the body on the bridge has been securely locked in a safe deposit box belonging to Dr John H. Watson, friend and chronicler of the great detective, now in the hands of Melbourne House and C+VG. At last that box has been opened and the original notes of the case, which became known simply as Sherlock, can at last be made public. The notes which provided the solution are written in an unknown hand. are written annkown bands neither that of Holmes or Watson. It is possible, therefore, a third person was involved in preparing the details of the case for publication but for some reason never completed the task DAY ONE: MONDAY SAM Holmes is in the sitting room of 221B Baker Street with Watson. He says to Holmesis Watson READ CHRONICLE and then goes through the plain door. Here he finds two disguises. In order to take the disguises Holmes must WEAR then TAKE OFF. He takes both disguises He returns to the room where Watson tells him about a murder. Holmes takes the oil lamp and says to Watson FOLLOW ME. Holmes goes into Baker Street, ie out of the front door Holmes heads for Leatherhead after consulting the train timetable. A train leaves Kings Cross at 9.15am Holmes takes a cab to Kings Cross Road. The method of travelling in a cab in London is A HAIL CABB CLIMB INTO CAB CSAY TO CABBIE \"GO TO \" This method must be used all the time At platform three Holmes mects Inspector Lestrade. He waits until 9.15am and climbs into steam train. He waits until 10.30 when he arrives at Leatherhead Station. He follows Lestrade around the town and listens to his interogations. Holmes first command is FOLLOW LESTRADE and he must repeat this when the detective moves. Holmes follows Lestrade to a sandstone bridge where he sees a female body-Mrs Brown and a crumpled note. He TAKES and EXAMINES the note. It has been sent by someone called T. FHe closely examines the body and the bridge. Mrs Brown has been shot from close range, the bullet entering from the right temple. It appears Mrs Brown was holding the gun as she has powder burns on her right hand. There is also a chip in the sandstone bridge. From this Holmes deduces Mrs Brown MAY have committed suicide. However there is no conclusive evidence or motive at this stage Holmes follows Lestrade to Mrs Brown's house where the inspector interogates Basil Phipps. Daphne Strachen, the gardner, the cook and maid. Holmes learns the following. 1. Mr Brown was a top scientist working on a secret military project before his death. The plans have gone missing. 2. Basil Phipps cannot be trusted. He appears to have an alibi staying up late playing chopin on the piano. Next to Jane's house where Holmes meets Percival Fiawks who refuses to say where he was at the time of Mrs Brown's murder. He lives in Sidmouth Street in the library Holmes linds what APPEARS to be the body of Mrs Jones, Lestrade returns to London but Holmes stays. He closely examines the bookcase, finds a hidden room containing bloodstained clothes labeld Tricia Fender. He goes to the study in which there is a desk, close examination reveals a drawer with a false bottom. This contains bank statements belonging to Mrs Brown showing withdrawals. There is also a note from Tricia Fender Holmes now wants to know more "


"Holmes now has conclusive evidence that Phipps has the plans. He returns to Scotland Yard and wait until 7am on Wednesday for Lestrade to return _ SOLUTION DAY THREE: WEDNESDAY On Lestrade's return, Holmes savs BASIL HAS THE PLANS I. at the stage. Holmes has already examined the notes and the empty folder. Lestrade says. WELL DONE. HOLMES, WE MUST NOW OBTAIN THE SALE LOCATION Basil is obviously expecting a return note from HW Holmes must return to Camden Street At 9 Stam a messenger bov arrives and gives a note to Basil Holmes must obtain this note at all costs. He goes to the window. (Keep entering the command LOOK THROUGH WINDOW). At about 10.00 Holmes sees a burning note. He about Tricia Fender. He goes to hidden door but to enter he must wear HOLMES and confirms Mrs Brown must go through the window. take the Daphne Stachen in the sitting room of the chinaman's disguise. He enters killed hersell. The second task is note and go out of the window. He Brown's House and says: TELL ME (north) and finds himself in an opium complete must do this quickly. The old man's ABOUT TRICIA FENDER. He is den. He leaves, sees Lestrade and says: It is vital Holmes returns to London disguise is not required. When in told three things. THE MAJOR IS IN AN OPIUM on the 11.15 train and arrives at Kings Basil's yard Holmes examines the note. 1. Tricia Fender was Mr Brown's DEN Soon the Major appears and Cross at 12.30. He goes to Kings Cross which is in code. It is different from the secretary before he died Lestrade says: WELL DONE Road, hails a cab and goes to Portman first code and is written backwards 2. She lives in London at Portman HOLMES and lets the Major go Road where Daphne and Tricia lived apart from the names at top and Street Arriving at the front door. Holmes bottom 3. She and Mrs Jones looked very alike. DAY TWO: TUESDAY then enters the sitting room and sees It reads: Basil. I will buy the plans at Holmes now must investigate Basil Holmes returns to Leatherhead and Tricia and a wall safe. He opens the two thirty at Old Mill Road near Phipps. He goes to his flat in Cobden goes straight to Basil's flat the south sale and finds a folder labelled Military Leatherhead. H.W Lane and to the upstairs bedroom from the lounge to a room with a wall Plans and an unfinished note which Holmes returns to Scotland Yard and Close examination shows Chopin's safe. He opens the safe and finds says \"Meet me at the bridge.. It is tells Lestrade. He asks whether music and was not being played on the blackmail letters from Tricia to Mrs now obvious Mrs Brown was being Holmes has found the sale location. piano but a record is on the Brown. It is obvious Tricia stole the blackmailed by Tricia, The plans must Holmes ayd THE SALE IS AT THE gramaphone. It appears a sheet has secret plans and was blackmailing Mrs have been stolen and Mrs Brown was OLD MILL ROAD Lestrade replies hene caught in the window or Brown, Mrs Brown's bank statements so upset that she killed herself and tried QUICKLY. HOLMES. WE MUST deliberately tied to enable someone to confirm this. to blame Tricia, hence the crumbled HURRY IF WE ARE TO CATCH climb down. Basil cannot be trusted. Holmes goes to Leatherhead station note with the initials T. F. Holmes says HIM Holmes has now collected all of the and waits for Lestrade to arrive. At to Tricia: FOLLOW ME and takes her Holmes follows Lestrade to required information and returns to about Sam Holmes says to Lestrade back to Parliament Street in a cab. He Leatherhead and arrives at 1.30. He London to investigate the Major. But MRS BROWN KILLED HERSELF waits in Scotland Yard for Lestrade to must climb out of the train before first he goes to Parliament Street where and then follows him back to the arrive and then says to Tricia: TELL Lestrade and immediately go south to he meets Lestrade. It seems the Major bridge. With Lestrade with him ME ABOUT THE BLOODSTAINED the main street He will see a police cab is too obvious a suspect for Mrs Holmes CLOSELY EXAMINES THE CLOTHES and must climb in before Lestrade and Brown's death. Holmes says to DEEP STREAM Lestrade helps. Tricia confesses that she is really Mrs Straker Lestrade THE MAJOR IS stumbles on a rock to which a gun is Jones and that she killed the real Tricia This is important otherwise there is INNOCENT. Lestrade asks for proof tied. Holmes realises Mrs Brown shot when she found out she was no room in the cab for Holmes. They must visit the Major's home in herself in the head, the rock fell over blackmailing her friend Mrs Brown. It Lestrade tells the driver to go to Old Sidmouth Street where they must wait the bridge taking the gun with it. The is evident that the body in the library Mill Road. They arrive at 3.13pm just for him until he returns about 11pm. gun hit the bridge causing the chip. was Tricia Holmes says to Lestrade s Basil speeds ofl. Lestrade tells the After entering his house, he leaves and Holmes goes back to Leatherhead MRS JONES KILLED TRICIA driver to return to the mainstreet. goes by cab to Slater Street, Hail a cab, station and meets Lestrade at about FENDER. He asks about evidence and arriving at 4.47pm. They see Basil and and go to Slater Street. Holmes sees a 10.45am. He says: WELL DONE. Holmes says to Mrs Jones TELL a German agent. If Holmes follows LESTRADE WHAT HAPPENED. they will go to platform two at She tells him, a local policeman arrives Leatherhead station, climb on a train and takes her away which leaves the station. Holmes Note: if this does not happen it cannot catch the train and must find means you have not closely examined another way to get to London. He says all of the evidence. to Lestrade FOLLOW ME returns to After Mrs Jones' arrest Holmes has the police cab, climbs in Watson and one more crime to solve who stole Lestrade must also come. Holmes says the military plans for Tricia. After GO TO KINGS CROSS ROAD reviewing all the evidence it appears If quick enough Holmes will see there is one main suspect Basil Basil and the agent in a cab. Basil says Phipps but he must obtain evidence to the cabbie GO TO BUCKINGHAM Holmes leaves Scotland Yard and PALACE ROAD. Holmes realises goes to Camden Street and finds Basil's that the underground station there is house. He goes east to the front vard Victoria. Holmes Watson, and where he finds locked windows. He Lestrade must catch the train from waits until 10pm when somebody opens platform one at Kings Cross which goes the window. Holmes MUST wear the to Victoria, where they climb out. old man's disguise and proceed. NE When Basil and the agent arrive through the open window. He finds Basil attempts to shoot Holmes. If himself in Basil's bedroom. He quickly Watson is there he will push Holmes explores the house and finds the out of the way, giving Lestrade time to library. In the bin is a ripped note. He arrest Basil and the agent takes it and goes to the back yard and If Holmes get this far he will indeed sees a trash pile and a torn coded note. be THE WORLD'S GREATEST He takes this and leaves the house DETECTIVE through the window. He takes off the And so ended one of the most disguise and examines the notes which complex and intriguing cases ever shows they belong to each other. They investigated by Sherlock Holmes. Why must be decoded. In the code one letter it was never made public until now is replaced by another. eg E becomes must remain a mystery The exact year in which these strange It reads: I now have the plans. Your events happened is not known. But price is acceptable. Let me known certain clues suggest it was near the end when the sale is to take place. Take of his career, shortly before he retired care. Mrs Brown's death has started the to the Sussex Downs to study beepolice nosing around. Basil. keeping "


"ww CVG MONSTER COMPETITION Can you imagine the it if we locate her! Our guide will be Adrian Shine, who is Director to of the project and an expert on Nessie. On Monday we all travel home and don't worry about missing school that day (as if you would) because it's a bank holiday. The weekend Who believes in the Loch Ness Monster? Well, if you do then this is the chance of a lifetime with your parents that they are not planning on go and take part in an expedition to seek out the taking you somewhere that weekend. world famous Nessie by winning this Terror of And if that isn't enough, you will also receive a the Deep monster competition. copy of the game Terror of the Deep from All you have to do is send in your drawing or Mirrorsoft and a copy of the board game Nessie painting of Nessie and hope you will be one of the has been arranged for 1st-4th May, so, check Hunt by Searchglen. lucky winners. That's right, one of them. Due to S ix runners-up will also receive the game and the amazing generosity of Mirrorsoft, three the board game. lucky winners will be able to spend a weekend at So what are you waiting for? Get those pens, the Loch Ness Centre, Drumnadrochit, paints and crayons out and start working. Inverness-shire. But, please don't just put three humps in the The weekend starts on Friday with everyone middle of some blue water. Let your imagination travelling up to Inverness. On the Saturday a bus trip around the Loch and a visit to the Loch Ness entry form securely to your entry. Monster Exhibition have been lined up. On Sunday the highlight of the whole weekend Mirrorsoft has arranged for YOU to actually go out on the expedition boat the New Atlantis while she does a sonar search of the loch go wild, it'll be worth it! Remember to attach your for Nessie. Loch Ness Monster Competition Name:.. Address: Computer owned: .... "


"konix SPEEDRING VR CAN YOU OW! HANDLE THIS MUCH POWER? ZAP! The KONIX SPEEDKING packs more punch. That's why it's fast overtaking ordinary joysticks to become one of the world's most popular hand control. As it's name suggests it's built for fast handling to give you lightening fast control. Micro switches await your slightest movement, and fly into action ZAP, POW, SPLAT, BLAM giving you instant reactions to every command. Tough, rugged and made in Britain to the very highest standards, the KONIX SPEEDKING comes with a twelve month guarantee. Available for:Spectrum and Spectrum Plus, Commodore 64, 128 Vic20. All Atari Computers, Electron, M.S.X. Computers, Amstrad and Oric at .99. Also:BBC, Commodore C16, Plus 4, and, Dragon at .99. Trade and export enquiries contact Wayne or Sandra on 049525 5913. Please send me Speedkings at .99 each. Speedkings at .99 each (Price includes postage and packing in the U.K. Overseas orders please send .50 per Speedking.) Computer make and model I enclose a Cheque/Postal Order for — made payable to KONIX. Please charge my Access/Visa No.Card holders can telephone on 049525 5913. Signature Name Address Postcode Telephone Send to Konix Computer Products, Unit 13, Sirhowy Hill Industrial Estate, Tredegar, Gwent NP2 4QZ. U.K. "


"Is This Really Auf Wiedersehen Monty? mole er ZEN ROUGE I wonder what's Just a few lines between continental heists and yet more hairy escapades to say hello to all my fans and invite you on my most exciting and exacting journey to date, a whistle stop tour of the capitals of Europe acquiring more than just the local scenery on the way. Dops... must dash... gendarmes hot on my tail. Will write again soon with more news of my exhilarating escapades and growing booty bag. soon with more news of my MONTY MOLE FANS EVERYWHERE Monty Fantastic Full colour wall poster anly 99p. see pack for details. Pastarfree with every Aur Wiedersen Morty purchased at branches of WH Smith FREE Lapel Badge with all games ACS S027 Spectrum 48K tape .99 CBM64/128 tape .99 disk .99 These squeaking windmoles are driving me mad! Amstrad og tape .99 disk .99 LRETILINN Gremlin Graphics Software Limited. Alpha House 10 Carver Street, Sheffield ST 4FS. Tel: 0742 753423 "


"Hi there, how're things?. This has been one busy month at I.D.E.A.S Central — getting things organised for the Golden Joystick Awards and going along to the Play-By-Mail convention. It was nice meeting all our readers who turned up and especially a certain journalist from Crash who should dispel the rumour that there is no Melissa R. Don't forget to keep sending your tips, pokes, maps etc to me. MSX/ORIC Although we are not getting a London. First up is Track and if there is an electrical charge square with various keyboard steady flow of MSX games to Field TWO-for those of you flowing through them. symbols -you now have review in the office, we are who have been having Pyramids on gaining infinite lives. getting a steady flow of hints problems clearing heights of access to a pyramid you will The second tip is for The and tips from our readers 2.40 metres upwards, here is notice that some objects are Hellion and this method will keep it up guys. a way to clear any height all of white, this means that you are allow you to begin at any One of those readers is the time. either carrying it or it is screen/level up to 95. Follow Graham Pole of Merseyside, When the game sounds for somewhere about the game, these steps. Press Esc, Press who followed our tips for you to start your run-up press don't bother exchanging for CTRL and DEL together. The Nemesis (February issue) and the right cursor or move the these items unless it is really enter code should now appear then found that on the second joystick right once and you will necessary. On leaving a on the screen. Press B, Press stage near to the end, there is see your speed go up about pyramid you will notice that it , Press G, Press Shift and a loop of rock at the bottom. 300 — wait a second then do it disappears --use pyramids Shoot away debris and go once more then jump when The Demo screen should into this loop. You will now be you are just by the mat. Here's one to prove that now be running. Press Cas transported to the first bonus If you have to much speed C+VG don't turn their backs normal to start and you will be stage. Couple this with the your legs will knock the bar off. O your legs will knock the bar off, on the less well known on level 95. second bonus stage and you to little and you will land on the computers a few tips for the If you substitute another at will have about 25 lives. ground but if you do it just right Oric!!! step seven, the game will start Knightmare -there are you will land on the mat and Keith Thompson of Surrey at the level of the ASCII code secret exits in this game to the computer will think you is the man responsible for of that letter eg A=65. higher levels. The first of these have cleared the height these cheat modes. A couple of issues back is before the first river on the Here Martin lists the 12 Zorgon's Revenge if you Mark McGuiness needed far left hand side this takes Teleport codes for Starquake, only have the one life left help with Dragon's Lair. Mark you to level two. The second is but, would like to know if there choose the Space Mission on Archer wrote in with these after the third river on the far are any more: Kwake, Angor, this screen and shoot as many tips. right — to take you to level Ercot, Antio. Vorax, Zodia, alien craft as possible and try S econd level — when the three. Touch a pause slab Kranz, Dulan, Indie, Uplan, to avoid bumping into the skulls bounce towards you, (red) as soon as a power Argol, and Snool. indestructable Cuboids. push up on the joystick. Press crystal appears. This will Objects The Access card When you have destroyed a fire to smash the hand. provide two power crystals, will open all security doors and predetermined number of Push up again to dodge one during the pause an done Cheops Pyramids. The key them you will see the Freighter some more skulls and then fire straight after will remove all Barriers. come across the screento smash the hand. Moonrider — if you press all Joystick gives you an extra you must shoot the Freighter Another hand will try to grab left hand keys, you will be put Blob. and at the same time blow you from the left, so push left into cheat mode. You can gain Death Floor creatures, yourself up on a Cuboid or on on the joystick and press fire points without being killed. UFOs, Spikes and Eggshells the alien craft's fire. Now look to swing your sword. Another two for the MSX will kill on contact. Generators at how many lives you have come from Martin Green of and some barriers will only kill left it should display a cyan "


"SPECTRUM O COMMODORE SPECTRUM ZA **REZZI MEES 5 * * COMMODORE IV 484 . * * * IT A quick cheat from Stephen McLaughlin of Glasgow for Kung Fu Master. Simply press shift and G and you will get a gun but only when the figure are moving is facing left and only when he is standing still Stephen would like someone to help him finish Rambo. Someone else who wants help is Philip Malone in * *6 Sunderland. His problem is with Green Beret which he has been playing for three months and still cannot get past the Here, courtesy of the man potions too quickly and don't second stage. Who has some who brought you the map of use them to kill Death. If you pokes for endless lives for the Dandy, is his latest can out run him and the gap is CBM64 that does not need masterpiece Gauntlet. big enough, out run the Fiend. Trilogics Expert Cartridge? Thanks also for the tips, If you don't think you can Danny Blackman complete a level and you have On the CBM64 version Thor only got about 220 energy left, is about the best all rounder just wait for about 45 seconds so always choose him. Go and every thing apart from the through all the levels so you generators, treasure and can get the most potions out of monsters will disappear and your game. Wherever you go turn into exits. always shoot the generators But if it's just a key you lack first this prevents them from then just wait for about 20 releasing any nasties. secs and all doors will Stephen McLaughlin Try not to use all of your disappear. VJ Spanner has found a cheat on Superior Software's Space Pilot and here it is. When playing the game you Keith Swan has sent a few nearest hanger and collect hold down the Caps Lock and hints for some of his the scientist. Return to the Ctrl keys and press Escape. Commodore 64 games: ship and then again leave This enables you to jump into Sanxion-on most again and return to the the next screen at any time. levels, more points can be hanger. On returning there Simple isn't it! scored by going slowly than will be another scientist. Here we have P Limmons by going at the maximum Collect his kard and use it of High Wycombe with a bug speed. Forget about the with the compubank to get he found in US Gold's bonus. some cash. Repeat as Gauntlet-but, he warned, it Parallax at the start of necessary. Bonanza packs will only work on a two player the game, walk into the are needed. game. P. Limmons Select your characters and load as normal, but, when one player's health runs out don't bother about entering his initials just press the space bar. You will now see the flashing Gauntlet sign; The player who has been killed must press his fire button and when he has done this his character will re-appear with 2000 health points. Derek Clements and Steven Gardner of Fife have also found a bug on Gauntlet for the Spectrum. This time you have to hold down the Symbol Shift and M with Enter (or fullstop and Enter) and you are able to go through all the walls and also go off one side of the screen and come on the other. You have to keep your finger on the buttons to keep going through the walls, so Derek and Steven recommend that you put something on the buttons to weigh them down. Jon Oldroyd of Leeds would like someone to help him with a map of Jet Set Willy Il for the Acorn Electron he received at Acorn Electron he received at Christmas CBM 64 CBM 64 "


"SEGA SYSTEM The Sega MasterSyste Funtasy Just take a look at this fabulous Sega Master System.Dreams are made of this. How can you make your dreams come true by becoming the proud owner of such a system plus two game cartridges? Just thank your lucky stars you bought this copy of Computer + Video Games and read on. Win a Sega System Competition Name:... Address: ....... ......... Age: ..... The following characteristics are thought to represent the best features of a dedicated game console. Use your skill to place each of the features in order of importance to you, as a potential buyer. For example, if you think an Optional Keyboard is the most important feature, write 5 in the box next to the line First Most Important Feature. Then in each of the remaining boxes, write the number which corresponds, in your view, to the second most important feature, third most important feature and so on. Feature Description of feature Low cost console Arcade quality full-screen graphics and sound. Instant loading of games and software. Compatibility with games and software for existing home computers. Optional keyboard. Optional disc/drive. Optional cassette player/recorder. Large number of games available. New games released frequently. Other (Specifically) In order of importance I have selected the following features. 1st most important feature: 2nd most important feature: 3rd most important feature: 4th most important feature: 5th most important feature: 6th most important feature: 7th most important feature: 8th most important feature: 9th most important feature: 10th most important feature: Tie-Break. The most I would be prepared to pay for each of the following is: a) Console .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 b) An instant loading .95 Cartridge. .95 .95 .95 .95 Send your entries to: P.O.Box 27, Aldridge, Walsall, W59 8PS. 0000000000 "


". o * O In her continual quest for everything that is new and exciting in the world of arcades, C+VG's Clare Edgeley braves the hustle and bustle of London's arcades, to bring you the review of Bermuda Triangle, Lengendary Wings and Gigas o # Heizure GIGAS For those of you w o There solo in the night rebounds off corners, the side of lost... the screen and onto your platform the only time I caught any letters if you can position it in time. And where when they fell in exactly the Following the success of Taito's then it off for another bouncing same place as the ball, which, to Arkanoid a Break-Out clone attack. Getting the ball to bounce my mind, smacks too much of luck. another very similar game has in one particular direction is If you're really fast you can catch entered the arcades. Based on extremely difficult and depends on both, but the extremely sensitive Arkanoid, it could almost be the the speed angle and time when it joystick has to be under total same game if it were not for the hits the platform control. slightly different presentation, colour schemes and wall patterns. The game gets especially The joystick is a knob which is difficulty when there are only one Sood's Gigas plays in exactly the or two bricks left which require turned in both anti-clockwise and same manner as Arkanoid, and to clockwise directions to control the several direct hits to make them my mind there isn't a lot to choose platform. The tiniest twitch on it disappear. With only the walls to between them Both require split tends to send the platform rebound off you can't guarantee zooming from left to right and second timing and are very fast. which direction the ball is going to found, at first, the small degree of For those of you who haven't travel. movement necessary to place the played Arkanoid, you have to There's also the added horror of move a platform from one side of Tor of platform in the right position placing your platform in the night difficult to get the hang oil is very the screen to the other and bounce place to catch the ball. Too often an energy ball onto a wall of bricks easy to overestimate the amount of above you. Imagine are actually in misiudge the distance and the ball you'll whizz it across the screen, turn that is needed. the final stages of releasing the will sail past you. One life lost. As A continue play facility is official version of the game but you've only got three lives and this available, and without this I don't Gremlin Graphics Krokout looks is a very addictive game. I can think I'd have got anywhere in the like it may pip them to the post in the release date race and perhaps into the machine like there's no guarantee you'll be feeding money game. Certainly not past level wol As you move onto higher levels the chart success. bricks will need several shots to tomorrow In early levels the bricks will As in Arkanoid, when you hit make them disappear, there are disappear as soon as the ball more lurking nasties which need to various bricks letters drop down, touches them, and the wall is pretty which if caught, give you various be dealt with and the wall easy to destroy. On the first level of extras like an extended platform structures become more complex. Gigas there are a couple of gold slowing the game down and so on. slo This month Gigas made a coloured bricks which need to be It's very tempting to go after the welcome change from the shoot hit more than once before they letters, catch them only to find em ups and is a truly addictive disappear, but there's no real you've missed the ball. Another life game. I loved it! difficulty at this stage. There is the added problem of a prancing gremlin strutting on top of the wall throwing balls down at you but these are easily avoided. The same goes for the odd buzzing mosquito as it divebombs towards you. The way to kill the mossie is to hit it with the energy ball easier said than done as it's very difficult to aim. As the ball hits the bricks it BERMUDA TRIANGLE There's one thing about Bermuda Tangle which is a pretty obvious omission and that is you don't ever disappear. Bermuda Triangle from SNK is a space shoot-'em-up involving you and your partner if you're using the two player option against squadrons of enemy fighters. One of the most noticable features of the game are the extra large and colourful sprites which at times threaten to take over the screen. At least you can see what your ship looks like and can even see the gun turrets mounted on top, swivelling from side to side, which makes a change from many games where you control a minute aircraft fighting it out against hoards of microdots. At first sight the game looks easy, but this is very much a false impression. At all times the odds are overwhelmingly against you and the only way to survive is to get extra fire power from the enemy, make sure you don't run out of fuel and to Power Up when an unintelligibly garbled voice tells you to. You have to fly your ship up the vertically scrolling screen blasting the enemy and dodging their fire power as they move down towards you. The only additional protection offered are the occasional flights of little green ships which position themselves round your wingtips. You can either fly over these to pick them up or blast an enemy fighter and pick up any that were protecting his "


"Oom oo o OMO cony wingtips. A push of a button will rearrange these fighters for maximum protection either grouped around the nose of your craft, around the wing tips or at the rear by your tailplane. As you skim over the landscape try to zoom over the letter Es which bump up your fuel. There are masses of these around and you shouldn't find it too difficult. Your swivelling gun turrets are a nice innovation which allow you to fly forwards on a relatively safe path while blasting the enemy as they pass to one side. Every so often you'll come across strings of mines placed across your pathway which are almost impossible to destroy. The only way past these seems to be to thread you way through, colliding with them drains your shields to such an extent that you die a few seconds later. When the mines are strung right across the screen totally blocking your way the only possible thing to do is to go into reverse. This happens automatically and the screen scrolls in the opposite direction for a while. The mines then disappear and you can continue forward. As you fly deeper into enemy territory the numbers of aliens increase. This means that you'll soon have two or three alien aircraft flying down towards you, each matching your ship in size and strength instead of the single aircraft you fought at the beginning. The battle becomes frenetic, your trigger fingeris overworked as several shots are needed to destroy each clien, and at the same time you've got to aim your guns and dodge enemy fire and mines. rmuda Triangle's not the best of shoot-em-ups and the craft isn't the speediest, but it's tricky, demanding and the overwhelming odds add considerably to the game play. LEGENDARY WINGS Another well worn plot sets the scene for Capcom's latest offering, Legendary Wings, which sets you and your pal as saviours of the human race. This tumultuous 'end of the world' setting must happen about twice a month and I'm continually surprised it didn't die a welcome death years ago. Still, you get a great 'zap-'emdead' game which isn't as half as bad as its storyline. It's not the most original game ever but is sufficiently fast and tricky to make you want to continue playing. The idea is to trace \"DARK\" -a super-computer which is malfunctioning and with this aim you take off on the wings of Love and Courage given to you by Ares, God of War. Doesn't sound like your average 3012 AD shoot-'emup does it. So with wings flapping wildly you set off over a barren, tortuous landscape of mishapen rocks resembling long dead bodies with heads that creakily turn to follow your progress. And in direct contrast to their passive watchfulness are the spinning, whirling formations of aliens which zoom down from the top of the screen. Now's the time for action. If you position yourself in exactly the right place, you can knock off all the aliens as they swoop down in line formation before they start forming circular patterns which are almost impossible to destroy. If you do it right, you can flit from left to right of the screen killing the aliens before they even know you're there. At this stage dodging their fire bolts is simple. As you progress up the verically scrolling screen you'll come across the ugliest head in history with a huge gaping mouth which you'll be sucked into if you get too close. Fly post on the outskirts of the screen and it won't touch you but I warn you that the oncoming aliens are a new breed which give you less chance of survival and also fire for more laser bolts. Extra firepower is available throughout the game if you know where to look and is located in POW domes on the ground. Pick up one of these and your lasers will increase their intensity giving you a valuable edge over the enemy. You're given a choice of direction when you get to the hideous face either forward to meet more hoards of swirling aliens, or sideways to a inconsistency in this two player horizontally scrolling scenario game. The brochure and artwork inside the mouth. Let yourself get give the impression that the two sucked into the new maw and fearless heroes are male and you'll find yourself in a platforms female. In fact she is definitely and ladders complex inside a cave. female and scantily dressed too! Your wings are no good at this So what is she doing wild a name point and the controls change to like Michael Heart or Kevin Walker allow you to jump and fire. which the instructions insist are the There is one amusing names of Ares' Legendary Wings? 2354ad SO 1347ak3 TOP TEN COIN-OPS OF THE MONTH 1 Out Run Sega 2 Side Arms Capcom 3 Championship Sprint Atari 4 Nemesis Konami 5 Soldier of Light Technos 6 Valtric Taito 7 Bubble Bobble Taito 8 Street Football Bally Sente  Victory Road SNK  10 Night Stocker Bally Sente Chart compiled by John Stergides at Electrocoin. AAAAAAAA "


"  DE ASTATING EFFECTS OF..  OF THE WE WERE ABOUT TO WARN A two way test of skill and nerve-can you outmanoeuvre the awesome ogre and blast a path through the myriad of colourful blocks and on the return, are your reflexes fast enough to retrieve the speeding missile, deflected from its block shattering journey or regurgitated contemptuously from the ogre's mouth. Graphically brilliant. Compulsively absorbing. At the highest levels your skill and speed must be exceptional. BUT WE MISTIMED IT! _DON'T LET THAT HAPPEN TO YOU-GET TO IT BEFORE IT'S TO LATE! CBM64/128, Amstrad Spectrum 48/128k, MSX TAPE .99 DISK .99 TAPE .99 Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd., Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield SI 4DS. Tel: 0742 753423 DANGER: 100 ACTION PACKED SCREENS MEANS THIS GAME IS OVERLOADED WITH FUN!! "


"G+VG PLAY BY MAIL period 1805-1809. Further into Fantasy was Historical Engineering, the recently launched on the company who run this game, market by a company called are well known in the P.B.M. The Laboratory. I am circles as their presentation is currently playing this game excellent and their games are and I am pleased to report that very well detailed and precise. I am enjoying every minute of Muskets and Mules enables it. you to take over conflict of the Once again you play a single four major countries that were character, but although this involved in this European game is semi-fantasy conflict (Russia, France, orientated, I get the feeling Prussia or the Hapsberg that there is an as yet Empire) and you should use undiscovered sci-fi element your wargaming skill to about it. eventually dominate and You are limited to three defeat the other players. How character classes, which are all D ight, let's start the ball rolling as I've a lot to get you do this is up to you. human A priest, a warrior through this month and very little space to do it in. The rulebook alone is or a sage. Once you have I have three offers to tempt you with and a review of a probably one of the most decided what you want to be, new fantasy P.B.M. called A-E's which in view is impressive I have seen. It is 61 you then allocate your pool of possibly the best fantasy P.B.M. game in the market as I pages long, easy to read and 15 points on various abilities, explains complex rules with a e .g. reflexes, killer instinct, write. By the way, I'm Wayne, chairman of the welcome clarity. If you like to survival etc. Play-By-Mail Players Association!!! play over the table face to face However you just can't There is a new single character are four styles of magic and Napoleonic wargames (or any allocate points on your fantasy game going to be anyone can try to cast a spell wargames for that matter), but abilities casually as you will launched onto the P.B.M. from a lowly peasant to a don't have the time or the find that when you come to market in the not-too-distantnoble of the highest courts! partners, then this game is the choose skills such as weapon future called Pangea, which by However, what happens when one for you. skill and magic skill you will be all accounts, is going to be a you try is anyone's guess. Once again, I have been in sadly lacking in either one or household name shortly. I The word on the P.B.M. contact with the directors of the other. must come clean and confess grapevine is that once this Historical Engineering and If you wish you can either that I have not played the game is released it will take off they have offered four C+VG worship one of the 12 game personally (Only the in a big way! readers the opportunity to supposed gods straight away lack of time to do so prevents At the present time the play test their game or practise athesism. Once you me), but I have seen the game is still in the playtest ABSOLUTELY FREE!! This have created your character rulebooks plus various turns stage and after entering high is no mean offer as the set up you send off your start up form received by friends of mine level negotiations with G.M.S fee and rulebook in Muskets and you receive a nice yellow and both are of a very high I have arranged for ten C+VG and Mules is usually .00 and fully detailed, printed quality indeed. readers to playtest this game. further turns (one every 14 character form for your You can play any character This means that you will days) can be anything between retention and loads of other from an Assassin to an receive the rulebooks, start up .00.00 per turn. So bumph, then off you go! Elementalist and become any forms and newsletters for as a game can last anything up The first thing that attracted race from a Elf (all kinds. NOTHING to two years, a playtest in this me to this game, like Muskets including dark) to a Hobbit. Furthermore, you can play game will be a big money saver and Mules was the eyecatching The magic system looks Pangea ABSOLUTELY indeed. rule book and free newsletter extremely interesting. There FREE OF CHARGE until it Player Of The Month Keith It is not only packed out with is released on a commercial Mosley has chosen to become clear, concise rules but it also basis. one of the four playtesters of contains great artwork. poems If you decide to play the this game, so there are now game when it is released, you three playtest positions open. will have at least ten rounds All you have to do to obtain advantage over the players this position is again write in to who join after you. Think of me stating the full name of the all that power! All you have to leader of the Prussian forces do is write into me and tell me which took part in this who your most favourite Napoleonic war. Once you fantasy hero is and why. have obtained the playtest Nothing could be simpler. position you will have to keep If you win a playtest me up to date with any feelings position, you will be expected or comments you have about to play the game to the full and the game by sending me report back to me when the regular monthly reports. playtest is over. Please bare in mind that this Muskets and Mules is a game could take two years to postal representation of the complete, so only serious, Napoleonic Wars in Northern experienced, P.B.M.ers/ Central Europe between the wargamers should apply. 1200 24 "


"C+VG PLAY BY MAIL ISS does. to create my character, but your favourite fantasy book. when I did I had something Furthermore, the game has that I could really relate to. 15 levels that your character Then it was time to can progress upwards through complete my first round. You and you do this by earning get masses of maps and info to experience points. start you off and once more All this plus well produced the scope was terrific. newsletters, detailed I opted to try to join a guild, adventures and action packed listen to rumours and explore G.M's replies make the game the city that I started off in: all one of, if not THE, top in it's in all a pretty heavily field. If I have to level one roleplayed, but standard first piece of criticism at the game, turn. You can therefore it is that the G.M. tries too imagine my delight when I hard to please you and at time received two full scap pages of you are left wondering how G.M.'s replies, written legibly your last adventure in a creepy in a exciting, descriptive style. dungeon can be bettered! The A.E's struck me as a You don't have to take my P.B.M. game that wants to word for it however, you can mould its self around you and join in and play the game not vice versa. yourself. Start up in the game For example, you can have costs .00 and you get two three types of G.M's reply, at free turns (plus an extra one if a price and style that suits you, you mention C+VG). All as shown below:cheques/P. Os should be made Basically Descripted payable to Legend (.50): This gives you the Incorporated and sent to basic outlines of what your C+VG. This is because of yet another one of Wayne's and, most importantly. character sees and actually Well, once again, I have wonderful offers: the first descriptions of dreams that arranged for ten C+VG ten letters sent to C+VG you have had. readers to start up in this game Fully Documented (.75): applying to play the AE'S will If you read between the and play for ten turns for More descriptive than the have their cheques/POS lines and interpret the dreams nothing. They even pay for the Basically descripted text with returned to them and their correctly, you can learn a lot postage. So the first ten people elaborated and more realistic start up will be absolutely free. about the planet's history and to write into me stating the full text. If any of you out there have its future. It is important that names of any three of King Story Orientated (.00): any P.B.M. problems or you analyse the dreams section Henry VIII's wives gets to play Self-explanatory really. It is enquiries, just drop me a line. before you create your for zilch!! So get writing. written as if you are reading as this is what I'm here for... character as you may well find I was priviliged to get asked something that may well to play in the playtest version change your mind when of AE's in the summer of last ADVERTISEMENT creating it. year. I remember to this day The first newsletter, aptly the fear I felt when a large The named What's Stirring, is in envelope crashed through my the same vein as the rulebook letterbox and hit the doormat Napoleonic and it would appear that a lot with a loud thud, making me Wars of work has gone into it. jump out of bed. I gingerly For a company that has opened it and extracted the Muskets & Mules is the never organised a P.B.M. contents from inside. An AE's Most realistic and therefore the game before. The Laboratory most elegant and thrilling Rule book was all that it wargame over designed It is the has impressed me. If I had to contained. I made myself a world's first plas-humail put my finger on the point Napoleoni Warsame Hidden large cup of coffee and settled nosement captures that \"logo about this company that back to read this mighty tome war which was the essence of impressed me the most with some trepidation. the Napoleonic campaigns. The four players in cach ume direct the first fronchli mpire, the (quality of the rulebooks You can, therefore, imagine Hahshur Empire. the Ningdom of Prussia and the time of all the aside), I must plump for their my relief when I found that the Russias. In the course of a macho Muskets & Mulesch place. who commands hundreds of thousands of man ranum fram foresight. rulebook, despite its volume, renadiers to Cossacks, will receive hundred maps. Spread They have realised that the was one of the best reads I er the duration of the wame. representing the changing military and P.B.M. community is a close political situation in Central Europe between Is And IN have had for a long time. \" Warth knit one. so they have knit one, so they have Written in plain, but very wm Dr Nicholas Palmer.cclitorot Has Magazine expanded their game to readable, English it rambled Send for full details to include Fantasy gamebooks, in on with a pleasant ease about Historical Engineering. The Stable The Temple Girout Wilbraham Cambridnited Kingden CRIST or elepha n id which they send you a the fictional world of the 011+14+233 Imth 122 rum inside thek SINIS continuous adventure type AE's. antime the of the nicht book which you can play in the As a matter of fact the rule comfort of your own home and book took me 30 minutes to Your and it links in with the rest of the read and was well worth it. It Addres game. took me a further 45 minutes Irasto lice "


"SEBEEEEN ENE HUSHAN STATUTA Screen after screen of the most addictive action and the most compulsive game-play Lu THE BLOCKBUSTER Licensed una compok Programelor Amstrad Spectrum Commodore Alon by lodgine Store TAITO COIN-OP Taito's current Arcade Hit W now available for: WWW SPECTRUM 17.95 COMMODOREX AMSTRAD .95 A ATARI ST 8.800 .95. Ask for ARKANOID \"The REAL thing\" at your local computer stockist. Screen shots taken A C h estime Imagine Software (1984) Litnited "


"DURELL SABOTEUR TI Avenging Angel Available on Spectrum, Amstrad & Commodore DURELL sales dept., Castle Lodge Castle Green, Taunton, Somerset, TAI 4AB Telephone (0823) 54489 R.R.P. .95 "


"DURELL 4 Smash hit games in one pack Only .95 available on Spectrum, Commodore 64 & Amstrad COMBAT NEW ON AMSTRAD SABOTEUR! tumbo. esort NEW ON COMMODORE DURELL sales dept., Castle Lodge Castle Green, Taunton, Somerset, TA1 4AB, England Telephone (0823) 54489 & 54029 software getting harder.... "


"GOLDEN JO Road. WINNER A Game of the Year Gountlet. US Gold Geol Browokes of his gauntlet beford zing the squeeze on C-VG Editor Tim Melcole. Jools Holland practices his Color Codexpression, C+VG's prestigious awards for 1986 had the top people from the British computer games industry flocking to London. And in keeping with C+VG's tradition of holding the ceremony at an unusual venue last year it was on a Thames riverboatyear we enlisted the help of the army. Amid tight security the joysticks are worth a fair amount of money we took over Cadogan Hall at the Duke of York's barracks in the Kings And no, before you ask, it wasn't Prince Andrew who presented the joysticks but Jools Holland, presenter of the television rock show The Tube and the pianist with Squeeze. In fact, it's the third time he's handed out the awards. Champagne, wine, a marvellous meal and then a visit to The Limelight, one of London's newest nightclub's put the seal on a great day for everybody. As you know, the Golden Joysticks go to the people and games you voted for. And that means these awards mean more to the software houses because you're the people that matter. This year there were eight categories, each having a winner runner-up and commended. The full results are printed opposite in C+VG's Roll of Honour. US Gold captured the top award of Game of the Year with Gauntlet. Elite was Software House of the Year and Andrew Braybrook was Programmer of the Year. The Pawn captured the award for Adventure of the Year, Vietnam was Strategy Game of the Year, Uridium was Arcade-style Game of the Year. Best Original Game was Firebird's Sentinel. For the first there was a Golden Joystick awarded for the Best Soundtrack. The winner was Rob Hubbard for Sanxion. A Best Original game runner-up: Troe Door. Pirahana's -Richard Basson bears his teeth in a victory grin. Best Original Gme Sentinel. Herbie explains to Jools the Wright approach to Firebird games. SED K44 A Arcode style Game of the Year: Uridium. Hewson's Debbie Sillitoe holds the only joystick which can be broken playing Uridiure Adventure of the year Runner-up. Lord of the Rings. JC Meade's explains to Jools that Melbourne House's game 3 "


"ISTICK AWARDS Software House of Voor Elle Valsal wonder Steve \"Serida Wilcox Jools and Tim show everybody how to enjoy themselves. A Programmer of the Year Andrew Braybrook. A Golden Joystick should prove handy for Andy, king of the Joystick Adventure of the Year: The Pawn. A worried Jools wonder if there's a cure for Magnetic Scrolls as Rainbird's Roulsyrne and MS'S Anila Sinclair look on WINNER Game of the Year: Gauntlet/US Gold Runner-up: Uridium by Hewson. Commended: Space Harrier by Elite. Software House of the Year: Elite Runner-up: US Gold. Commended: Hewson. Programmer of the Year: Andrew Braybrook Runner-up: Chris Butler. Commended: Steve Crow. Adventure of the Year: The Pawn/ Magnetic Scrolls/Rainbird Runner-up: Lord of the Rings by Melbourne House. Commended: Heavy on the Magik by Gargoyle Games. Strategy Game of the Year: Vietnam by Strategic Simulations/US Gold. Runner-up: Johnny Reb II by Lothlorien. Commended: Silent Service by Microprose. Arcade Game of the Year: Uridium by Hewson. Runner-up: Gauntlet by US Gold. Commended: Ghost 'n' Goblins by Elite. Best Original Game: Sentinel by Firebird. Runner-up: Trap Door by Piranha. Commended: Trivial Pursuit by Domark. Best Soundtrack: Sanxion by Rob Hubbard for Thalamus. Runner-up: Knucklebusters by Rob Hubbard for Melbourne House. Commended: Star Glider by Rainbird. Strategy Game of the Year Vietnam Vhaven?ployed this g Chaine Us Gold's commanding officers, before making withdraw the table. a dmits Time tegic WINNER A Best Soundtrack Sancion by Rob Hubbard. How do you play a computer Jools asks musical maestro Rob Hubbard? "


"CUT PRICE SOFTWARE FURTHER INTO FANTASY SPECTRUM RAPOUR SPECTRUM Xeno... Terra Cresta... Masters of Universe Sky Runner Stars On 128 995 695 Starglider.... 1495 11.95 It's A Knockout 795 5.50 Koras Got795 550 OUR 895 795 8.95 7.95 PRICE 6.50 5.50 6.50 5.50 COMMODORE 64/128 CASS Commando 866 95 Freeze Frame 3 Cart Great Escape ISAK Out .6.50 DISK 11.95 35.95 NA Shock Rider 7.95 8.95 5.50 5.50 11.96 Paperboy Expert Cart Five Star Fest 2 Avenger 5.95 1135 995 5.95 Cobra ... 6.50 10.95 Konan Coin Op 995 95 Great Escape 7.95 5.50 Uchi Marta ..... 8.95 5.95 Butch Hard Guy 7.95 6.50 Now Games 3.... ...9.95 5.95 t Pak Triv Pursuit......... 14.95 11.95 Space Harner 795 550 AMSTRAD TOP 10 CASS DISK COMMODORE 64/128 CASS Mini Mice 2... 1195 Laurel & Hardey6 .95 Masters of Universe 5.95 Durell's 4 695 Leaderboard EE 5.99 DISK 15.96 11.95 11.95 1195 1195 wa EM Tri Pursuit Mini Otice 2 Starglider Winter Games 550 6 Super Huty 2 Now Games 3 .95 695 1095 11.95 Bomb Jack 2 7.95  . Commando 36 795 Airwol 2 ...... 7.95 Donkey Kong 7 95 Scooby Doo ........... 795 Top Gun 7.95 11.95 11.95 11.95 725 11.00 11.96 595 NA NA 15.96 14.95 16.95 11.95 17.96 15.95 11.95 19.95 21.95 5.50 5.50 Planit Scooby Doo Praspall.... Protext Short Circuit 6.50 Space Harrier ........ 6.95 Bomb Jack 2 .5.95 Sigma 7........... 9.95 Judge Dredd 5.95 Mit Pak Express Raider 7.25 5.50 5.50 10.96 11.95 11.95 NA 11.95 Sloved ATARI ST TOP 10 Stargiider ST Karate Indoor Sports .... 8.95 9.95 9 .95 5.95 6.95 695 NTVk 11.95 Deep Strike Dynamite Dan 2 Winter Games 7.99 $50 Za 2 Rogue Trooper 695 Championship Wres695 6.95 Fist 2.... ... .6.95 Donkey Kong...... . 6.50 Graphic Ad Creator 17.00 Hypa Ball..............725 Sold Milion 3 6 .95 5.95 Star Games One 7 25 Rad 2000 695 Sicer Cyce SD Cremawar Alternate Reality Leaderboard Star Trex... 88888888 10th Frame ... 8.99 Jal Break 7.95 Uridium....................8.95 Firelord 895 Yie Kung Fu 2.......... 7.95 Dragons Lair 2 9 .95 Judge Dredd.............8.95 Graphic Crea 22.95 Theatre Europe 9.95 11.95 1195 NA 11.95 10.95 22.00 11.95 11.95 1795 1195 1195 5.95 5.50 5.50 6.50 5.50 695 650 18.00 725 1942 AMSTRAD P.C.W. 8256 8512 Strike Force Harrier ........... .. 19.95 Fairlight Tev Pursuit Steve Davies Sho WMMMM 10.95 NEWS UNIQUE PBM FANTASY BASED WITH SCI-FI UNDERTONES. LOTS OF PLAYER PLAYER INTERACTION, FULL NARRATIVE, 48 HOUR PROCESSING TURN COST A MERE El.20. 2. FR TURNS. SEND 5 to: laboratory wwwwww \"The Laboratory 19 Colbourne Street, Swindon, Wiltshire Terra Cresta 6.50 Arvanad Death or Gory..... 5.50 Cep Out Krout 19.96 Brian Clough Batman 11.95 Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders please add 75p per tape Cheques/post orders (Sterling only please). Made payable to: VISA Cut Price Software Unit 6, Stort House, Riverway, Harlow, Essex CM202DW 24 HOUR ANSWER PHONE (0279) 24433 OR (0279) 31956 WE ALSO STOCK IBMAMSTRAD 1512 PC COMPATIBLE SOFTWARE G-TEN LIMITED GOLDEN OLDIES SPECTRUM Valyre 17 To Pursus DEPT. C+VG, 1st Floor, Commerce House, 146/150 Commercial Street, London E1 6NU THE Mail-Order Software House COMMODORE 64 Deus Ex Machina Thug On A Song Trva Pursuits Under de SD Friday Kong Series en canfod Room of Sherlock Syangiop Vakynti Advent Twitngdom Valley Footbatana Padrome Passerome AMSTRAD 5PINDIZZY DESERT FOX  COMMANDO WORLD CUP CARNIVAL From Gods Sordon's Shadow Hunter Killer INTEETIN ATARI 2500 Dutian KUNG FU MASTER ACCESSORIES PRIDE Q2 STALLONE CORRA SAI COVEAT GHOSTS N GOBLINS MIAMI VICE HIGHLANDER PAPEABOY DRUD NOW GAMES 3 Tape Dust MIAMI VICE 5 50 NA AC MICRO 675 1125 PARALAX 550 1050 COMMANDO 6.75 1125 425 NA GAUNTLET 725 11 25 YEAR KUNG FU 675 11 25 5. NA GREENBERET 8.50 1125 TEDAL 559.25 675 11 25 LEADERBOARD 675 1075 SPEECH 1125 TERRA CRESTA 6.75 1125 675 1125 TOP GUN 650 NA STRE FORCE MARRIER 675 10 SO 750 NA REPTON 550 1135 TRAP 6.75 750 THRUST 550 NA DRAGONS LAR 875 1075 KORAMICO-OP HT 725 1125 550 NA ROCKY HORROR SHOW 15 NA STRYKERS RUN 650 11 25 NHILTRATOR 675 1125 RAVENSKULL 6.75 950 650 1125 SANXION 6.75 1125 CRYSTAL CASTLES NA HOT WHEELS 5 75 1125 DODGY GEEZERS 6.50 NA STRIKE FORCE HARRIR 675 10.50 YE AR KUNG FU I 650 11 25 NOW GAMES 3 6.75 NA FOOTBALL FORTUNES 25 12.75 STS 1075 DEACTIVATORS 6 75 1125 ACORNSOFT X 25 9.75 675 NA WORLD GAMES 11 75 15 50 REBEL PLANET 425 NA 575 NA SUPERSTAR PING PON 425 NA MPOSSIBLE MISSION 425 NA ATARIST Mut Pes High Quality Lands of Havoc Robot Tank NEW LINE PC COMPATABLES PRICE  /   Sou der Dash D Orders over 15 FREE Boulder DashD Overseas 100 per te Wind Dance (D 1250 per patel D-DISC. Many other relate to these and other machines Send Large SAE for current p e machine Cheus & POD TREASURE CHEST. Dept C. 220 Beverley Road, Hull, N. Humberside HUS 1AH COMPUTER HIS 15 400/806 NOW LOOK XLUXE 6 15 11 75 ASSAULT MADENE 675 050 ATARIST MARBLE MADNESS 575 1175 23.25 650NASTAR RACER 575 115 HACKER 23 25 GAUNTLET 675 175 1942 5.5 11.75 STAR GLIDER STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 725 NA GALVAN 5.50 NA SUPER HUEY 12.75 THEY SOLD A MILLION 3 7 25 1125 BAZOOKA BILL 675 11 25 STRIP PONER 17.75 HUMAN TORCH 3 25 NA THEY SOLD A MILLION) 6.75 1175 THUNDER 37 25 OBSIDIAN 425 NA GUNSHIP 11 75 14 50 425 NA POWERPLAY 7 25 1125 AMIGA 25 NA COLOUR OF VASIC 575 NAMOON MIST 22 25 725 115 NEVESS 725 NA NUOKLEBUSTERS 725 115 ATARIST 725 1125 SILENT SERVICE THEY STOLE A MILLON NA MOVIE MONSTER CAME575 1125 STRE FORCE HARRER 1725 SHANGHA 725 1125 PRO SPRITE DESIGNER 3725 COMMODORE 54.128 AMAZON WONEN PAPERSON 425 NA PERIPHERALS \"IKARI WARRIORS 15 11 25 HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER 325 NA QUICKSHOT II TURBO GHOSTS N GOBLINS 675 11 25 BOMB JACK 2 8 25 12.75 AMX MOUSE PRVOP 0541 6525 STALLONE COBRA 550 NA DESTROVER NA 1275 AMX MOUSE S TOP BAC) 7525 \"Game not released. Will be sent on release date Please specify machine. Please allow 14-28 days delivery. Please add 750 P&P per item (UK or BFPO only) Overseas add .50 P&P per item. Please make Cheques/Postal Orders (sterling only) made payable to G-Ten Limited. UK or BFPO orders, please send to: G-TEN LTD, DEPT. C+VG2, FREEPOST (no stamp required) London, E1 GBR PLEASE NOTE ANY GAME NOT RELEASED WHEN ORDERED WILL BE SENT ON RELEASE DATE ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 "


"There are some places in the universe you don't go alone. *****+ US VERSION 6 GAME COMPENDIUM THE COMPUTER GAME AVAILABLE ON: ZX SPECTRUM 48K/128K/+.. .99 AMSTRAD CPC CASSETTE ....99 AMSTRAD CPC DISK ... .99 COMMODORE 64/128 CASSETTE ... .99 COMMODORE 64/128 DISK ... .99 ELECTRIC DREAMS SOFTWARE, TERMINUS HOUSE, TERMINUS TERRACE, SOUTHAMPTON. S01 1FE TEL: (0703) 229694 Mail Order: Electric Dreams Software, 23 Pond Street, Hampstead, London NW3 2PN. "


"91+9 FRON 6 LIUES OPENED & LIVES OPENED S GATES BISEE 10868869 DITITI Handle these pages with care. The information they contain is so hot you could burn your fingers. What have we got? Only the return of Ultimate (gasp) with Martianoids, another Monty Mole game (dig it), CRL smartens up its image (hey), Ariolasoft's in a scrap with Dogfight (heavy) and Firebird's using its Imagination (cosmic). Martech is set to release Pulsator, a multi-maze shoot-'em-up with a challenging puzzle, for the Spectrum, Amstrad, Commodore 64/128 and MSX The game offers five game levels, each consisting of 49 rooms. On each level is a \"Pulsy\" who has to be rescued. This is done by finding the key which unlocks the door to the prison. The aliens on each level become progressively more intelligent and will deplete your power if they touch you. The landscape of each level also becomes increasingly more difficult and hazardous to negotiate. The game is far more complex than simply finding your way through a moze. Various pathways are blocked by gates, of which there are six types, numbered one to six. The gates can be opened or closed by passing over sensors. The sensors are also labelled one to six. If a particular type of gate is closed and you pass over its associated sensor then it will open. If a gate is open and you pass over its sensor it will close. It is this element of the game which makes it far more exciting than simply solving a maze. Pulsator will sell for .95 on the Spectrum and .95 for the Commodore, Amstrad and MSX Commodore disk versions will cost .95 and Amstrad disks for .95. PERCK: C3 0 5 8B2829 HISCG 182275 DEBRECEN WTH IMAGE Taw Image BATTERY JO BRISTOR Brush Texture 4 000,000 Text Print Disk Special Thange made Dporation Distort page Sun Star, CLR's fast and furious shoot-'emup for the Atari, is now set for release on the CBM 64. You play the part of a pilot of the space craft Sun Star. You are destined for the Xxarion Star Corporation's solar energy grid to collect energy. Due to a build-up of unstable energy pulses, that task is far from easy. You must hurtle around the maze-like grid at breakneck speed destroying disrupter pulses to collect the fast moving energy crystals that are left behind. You must avoid the grid walls and disrupter pulses or you will be destroyed. The price of Sun Star is as yet undecided The Image System, new computer graphic package is being released by CRL. In addition to providing the usual drawing and painting facilities, it allows you to create your own text fonts. Zoom, move, copy, scale, rotate and even fold your pictures in 3D space. The Image System will retail for .95 on cassette and .95 on disc. It can't be! But it is! A game from Ultimate! In case you've forgotten, Ulti mate were once regarded as THE games people. Since they were swallowed up the U.S. Gold little has been heard from the enigmatic Ultimate crew until now Martianoids are on the way. A vast robot ship has been launched into outerspace by the Markon Empire to find new life forms and gather know ledge of the galaxy. Installed on this ship is the largest and most powerful computer the Markons have ever cre. ated. You are the guardian of this advanced computer named The Brain of Markon and it is you ultimate mission to defend, maintain and activate the Brain in the attack by Aliens. The Martianoids are such vicious and barbaric enemies who enter your ship, disrupting the passage of programs transmitted through the Brain draining your battery in desperate suicidal attacks to destroy you and your ship. Your task is to guide the program from the transmitter to the receiver in each sector, avoiding the disposal chutes which may lose your program and repairing any damage and active components. To defend yourself you are equipped with powerful lasers. A console acts as your aid displaying a map which shows your position, the position of the program, the status of each sector and messages to update you of the activities within the Brain. Available for the Spectrum at a recommended retail price of .99, Amstrad and MSX at .99 Cassette from April 1987. pernama In all the current American Football games you simply get to play the coach. Now, thanks to Gamestar and Activision, you can get down among the action on the field. So prepare to find yourself face to face with The Fridge or running for that game winning touchdown! At last a true arcade version of the US sport we've all come to love so much. GFL Championship Football will be available for the C64/128 now. .99 tape .99 disc. Go for it! Ariolasoft plans an interesting twist on the space shoot-'em-up with Dogfight 2187. The screen is split in two, representing the view from two different craft, yours and the enemy. So you have to keep your eye on both screens to cope with the action. It's one or two people against the computer or human versus human. Three dimension vector graphics and the promise of very fast action should make Dogfight a goodie. Out first on the Commodore 64. "


"GIOCO w OBOBOB w 20. YA, ESPESO? legat poco SWEDEN SCORE: DODOC HIGH: GODDE How many stars are there in AT TH TRANS the universe? Difficult, eh? RECE MONEY 1284 Well that's your mission in The Mighty Mole is back! After a world tour old Monty is about to Imagination, a graphic/text return to your screens in Auf Wiedersehen Monty from Gremlin. More adventure from Firebird. platform antics from Mr Mole but this time set in exotic locations all The game begins with you around the globe. Our screen pics show Paris and Sweden. The idea sitting in your living room with a computer and floppy of the game is to help Monty raise enough cash to buy his dream disk and a choice of four island Molas shown at the bottom of the screen. This latest and games to play, all of which last? — addition to the Mony epic is going to be a must for platform are linked. Imagination is freaks. Watch for C+VG's full review coming to a magazine near you from the mind of Peter Torrsoon. And while you're chewing your nails waiting for that, why don't ence, creator of Subsunk and you enter our Monty Mole joke competition on page 40 of this month's Seabase Delta. issue. Welcome to the clone zone or, as Ariolasoft prefers, Challenge of the Gobots on the Moebius Strip. The computer game Friendly Gobots based on Hanna-Barbera's hugely successful cartoon series should be out in May. It revolves around the plight of the goody Gobot Scooter which has been cloned. There seems to be hundreds of him all over the Moebius strip. Not a good state of affairs. The mission is to find and collect all the Scooter clones and bomb enemy bases. The plot of the game is by Tony Crowther and included on one side of the tape is a Gobot story vital to the playing of the game. LEADER-1 the Turtled downwards he had the satisfaction his other friends on Earth would be receiving the Signal that would tell then of which he, Micky Hatt now found and Back on the Earth base Pathfinder was red danger light flickering on the COMmunications Screen Leaving an urgent Hessage for Leader 1 and Scooter, he Set Off for the unknown planet as fast as possible. But when he arrived on Moebius he was set by Snoop and C-K 11, armed with Dr Braxis hypnotish ray. TURBO SCOOTER ESCORT C+VG "


"Computer + Video Games 30-32 Farringdon lane London ecmr zau Mailbage yet you seem quite happy to make money out of pirates. I am of course referring to your Microsell adverts. I know you print a prosectuion warning at the beginning of Microsell. Do you really believe all these adverts from foreign countries especially, are not pirates? The same advertisers month after OTTIS here again. Yes it's time again that I put my deal from a software company? stamp on Mailbag. Okay, the others to a good job but I only recently started reading C+VG but I hope to read more you must admit nobody does it better than me. Agree? balanced issues for a long time to No? Who cares anyway. My ego circuits are big enough come. for all of us. lan Worle Leeds I get your mag every month and who are reading this, I got that Glad you like Steve Badsey's think it is great. One of the best game by writing to C+VG wishing war game features and reviews, things are the reviews. A few and hoping I could enter the Viva lan. Why not write to the software months ago I read a review about Vic competition, but knowing I was companies who produce war an adventure called Dracula by too late and they ended up sending games and tell them about yours. CRL. I needed a new challenge me a tape anyway. Who knows what might happen. instead of yet another shoot 'em C+VG you have me hooked for As for getting a good deal, that's up, so as soon as the game came life and to prove my loyalty I am difficult. In the end you must into the local computer shop! going to burn my other magazines decided if you think you're getting bought it. I believe in your review and frame the staff photo. treated well or ripped off. you said there weren't many Oh and another thing, who I am sorry to say that after five locations but it still wasn't a five actually got Tim to smile in the staff years of reading your magazine, it minute job. You weren't kidding! It photo. Michael Field, is time for the parting of the ways. I took me two days and a stroke of South Australia imagine you are wondering why. luck to complete the first level. But You must have touched our Well, my reasons are threefold. it was worth while to get the hearts, Michael. It was probably Firstly I feel you have a slight satisfaction in completing it. pay day and we were in a good anti-Amstrad tendency and a Well, onto the next level I went mood. But before everybody definite bias towards Commodore This I found was much easier to get writes begging games from us, we and Spectum. Although your into. I was going great until I got obviously can't do it for all our support of the latter will probably into Dracula's personal couch, thousands and thousands of wane now that they are where I kept freezing to death. I've readers. Tim smile? You must be owned by Amstrad. I know tried everything but to no avail, it seeing things. We've never seen you review plenty had me stumped, as it has as my him smile. Never. of software for the Amstrad friends and still after three months Thank goodness there is still a but your letter replies and we cannot find the solution. so, strategy section in a computer articles give the was wondering if anyone can help magazine —C+VG. I am an impression I have me on my ill-fated quest. Amstrad computer owner and mentioned Matthew Wood have in the past bought Amstrad The only York magazines which had strategy time you The whiff of garlic from this sections, but they died off seem to letter is pretty strong. I'd like to This seemed to give much joy to mention tell you but somebody's just bitten the arcade fanatics. I like various Alan me on the neck and my circuits are selections of games ranging from Sugar is beginning to go all blank. Keith shoot 'em ups to wargames. I think to offer Campbell will hopefully come to your rescue. various sections such as strategy form of After buying your November arcade, adventure, etc. criticism. issue I opened the Mailbag pages. In this, C+VG have got it right. If Secondly, scanned the pages for my letter but Dr Badsey is stuck for articles to feel the to no avail. Then on the 9th write, how about inviting a general January a small brown package programmer of a strategy game to content was hurled at me by my younger write an article on how he selected and sister. Seeing the English address ideas and some general tips and attitude (calmly) opened it and inside was a hints. of the copy of Viva Vic the compilation My next point is on writing magazine has changed from Llamasoft. wargames on a computer. I read towards the Now thenget this I turned your article State of War and I have younger reader. Anyone who OFF my C128 that I got for noted down some useful ideas. sends a letter to Mailbag seems Christmas and actually touched my One question that I would like to get a silly reply such as Big VIC. Anyway the games are answered is when one writes a Red will come and sort you out. brilliant and it was better than my wargame who should one You seem to have forgotten that 128 game. approach or contact? If the game is not all your readers are young. I thank everybody at C+VG for good enough for sale to the public, Finally you like all magazines are the games. All you other readers how would one recognise a good quick to condemn software piracy, "


"month are offering vast collections of games, etc, in exchange for other readers lists. I am sad to see a once great magazine fall into such a decline, for one will not purchase it again until it is returned to its former glory. Anon Gwent Well Anon, it's sad that you feel it's time for us to part. We don't have an anti-Amstrad bias and to be honest I can't think of any time we have criticised Alan Sugar. C+VG has always been a young magazine which also appeals to older people as well. We still are and always intend to be so. Printing the Microsell adverts doesn't actually make us any money. We run it as a reader service. We try to weed out the pirates but, of course, some get through the net. As for C+VG returning to its former glory, well, these are the glory days, Anon. We are five Scottish girls who are all'into' computers and Play-byMail. It was great to see an article on Play-by-Mail in your magazine. We found Wayne's article interesting and look forward to next months's. Could we have Melissa to cover up. Hold on. Is accordingly the reputation of your another photo of Wayne next this letter from the famous Fiend magazine, issue? of Farringdon? I bet it is. This is This self-important and Wayne Fan's serious not only does he haunt egotistical reviewer is wallowing in East Kilbride. Keith Campbell but he's turned his his own opinion, which counts You'll find another picture of attention on the rest of us now. only for whether they like the game Wayne on the news pages, girls. Help. or not and not for actual game Us other chaps are jealous that I have an Atari 800XL, disc drive content. nobody wants to see more pictures and data recorder. I would like to may sound like sour grapes etc, of us. We are, of course, the know if I could help your magazine to you but half truths mixed with world's most elegantly eligible in reviewing software. I have read opinion and rubbish are the computer magazine. your mag for two-and-a-half years makeup of any daily newspaper or It is no good, I cannot hold back and thinks it is great. I am 15 and lesser rag, so come off it, Hakan, if any longer AAAHHHHHH!! That's have thought of starting my own you're going to slam a game, do it you're going to slam a game, do it better. Right now to get down to mag or software library, but I do on a truthful account of its content, it. What was the point of having an not know where to start. Please or lack of it, as no-one gives a toss index, when none of the pages had could you help me. I would also for your \"wit\" and lies. any numbers on? I refer, of course, like to know when The Last Ninja Darren Thomas to the January issue. And while from System 3 is coming out. Wales have your attention, where are Ricky Young  Obviously we have a difference those tantalising glimpses of Southampton of opinion here. Hakan plays a lot stocking top that I demanded in my We get lots of people wanting to of games. He has no axe to grind last letter? That's what we want review games for us, Ricky, What about your game, Darren. from our Melissa, not all this we usually ask them to do is send Presumably he just didn't like us a sample review and we put it Caverns of Eriban. Yours most sincerely on file. There's not enough space I am a regular reader of C+VG T.F.E.G.A.P.N, to write about starting magazines. and especially look forward to the Oxfordshire Why not give us a call and we'll Mailbag section. Just before I go You, again. Didn't you read have a chat. Who knows when the into work, I look forward to a really Kaliber's reply to your last letter Last Ninja will appear. Do you good laugh with the readers letters printed in the March issue? really care? it's the best letters section in any Stocking tops? Paris the Pen gets I am disappointed to find that the magazine. too excited so we've had to tell standard of reviewing (reviewer). The reason for my letter is to sort Your organ is on the slide. I refer to out you guys in the softwarethe February isue, in which reviews section. Why on earth do Caverns of Eriban was given an you not review any software for the untruthful review by someone who Oric computers? (Yes, you've must have been sitting on their guessed, I'm one of many who brain, and @!!@* all. praise the Oric) I've hardly seen a Caverns is of importance to me as I am the programmer of this You can't say that there isn't any \"Crude, Naff\" game and while bad around. I'll have you know that reviews are of course expected, F.G.C. have released new titles as \"reviews\" presented in the puerile well as OPEL LTD. Also in France 6th form \"humour'' of one of your there's a whole heap of it! so-called reviewers is not to go Oric is very much alive in unnoticed. England and abroad, I'm sure ! I quote: \"All you have to do is to speak for many owners of the Oric fly some crummy old spaceship who would like to see some around the Caverns and that's it.\" software reviewed for their The obvious reviewing inability machine. So come on, shape up, shows through as the reviewer lets see some Oric reviews. could not have encountered the To the many readers of C+VG surface rockets, mortars, and who own the Oric, may like to supply points. Or subsequently, know that support is at hand for the underground missile silos, their machine in the form of a stalactites, stalacmited drips newsletter called Your Oric. Your furnaces, etc, etc. Oric is run by my brother (K. Also \"if you like a good old Thompson). For details send S.A.E. shoot em' up then give this a miss to 41 Morden Gardens, Mitcham, ... if you like any game... you'll Surrey, CR4 4DH. hate this, it will kill them with That's the software reviewers boredom\". This is of course his sorted out, and now for that Bugopinion, but had he attempted to Hunter who goes by the name of spend more than 10 minutes on it, 'Grill-He looks like a left over as I'm sure you pay him too, he from a Metal-Mickey Convection. would have found that all these Just give me five minutes with him hazards he claims do not exist, and I'll cool his circuits! And now a few words to the My last two games Thrust and The delightful Melissa (sigh, sigh...) Designers Pencil for Firebird and will be sending on some Oric Activision, were not give excellent cheats and pokes etc for you to reviews, but at least when I read print in I.D.E.A.S. Central. How them, I didn't read \"a bucket about a post of you, I've reserved beside me to be sick in\" as they space! One final word, let's see the were an honest and accurate software review pages with some report of what the game involves, Oric reviews, O.K. which to the games buying and C. Thomson, magazine buying public is an Surrey important measure in the standing Oric? What's an Oric. We never of your magazines reviews and see any Oric games these days.  FARIS'85 "


"ATAR ST/800XLXE OWNERS COLECOVISION SOFTWARE CLEARANCE SALE OF GENUINE COLECOVISION CARTRIDGES FEW ONLY AVAILABLE OF FOLLOWING TITLES: Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest, biggest and best Atari Club on the market. Now incorporating ST software into our stocks and approaching 350 titles MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over 4 years ago first conceived the idea of a software library Now Over 1,700 titles on disc, cassette and Rom (games business, education and utilities Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Over 2.500 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany, Holland, Denmark and Elre. A fast efficient and friendly service operating a computerised custom built system to keep track of all your records. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities Important: Midland Games Library are in no way connected with or responsible for Midland Computers Ltd. of Worcester. SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All Our Drogas ar cicinals wat full tentation CLASSIFIEDS VENTURE CARNIVAL COSMIC AVENGER D.K. JNR FRENZY TIME PLOT SMURF BUMP 'N' JUMP ALL AT .99 EACH Send Cheques or P.O. to: JLN DEVELOPMENTS, UNIT 11 KINGSLAND INDUSTRIAL PARK, BILTON ROAD, BASINGSTOKE, HAMPSHIRE RG24 OG HINTS-POKES-MAPS ATARI 400/600/800XL/ST SOFTWARE ATTENTION ALL SPECTRUM 48/128 USERS Studying for levels? Pan Course Tutors Biology Physics, Chemistry. French (An Integrated Study & Revision pack for level RRP $14.95) *SPECIAL OFFER PRICE $4.99 $1.00 p&p Send cheque or postal order to Simply Software lid, 241 Hul Rood. Anlaby Common Hull HU4 TRY Tol: (0482 565516 Send SAE for list of other software borpains, all machines Stunning Value T owy Bridge, Popular Computing Weekly The monthly handbooks, packed with tips, polos, hints, maps solutions, gossip, latest reviews, competitions, plus much more. Adventurers Handbook (CBM/SPEC) C16/Plus 4 Handbook Amstrad Handbook BBC Handbook Commodore (64/128) Arcade Handbook ,00 Spectrum (48128) Arcade Handbook 1.00 Or for even better vabe take advantage of our reduced b scription rates-3 ses 12.75, 6 5.00, 12 9.00 Send cheque or P.O.to HD Services (CNG), 1338 Ashton Old Road, Higher Openshaw, Manchester, M11 10 Tel: 061-370 5686 We have all all round selection of dis c assettes and cartridges FOR HIRE Apply now and hire your first tour games free Around 1,000 different original titles For full details send large stamp addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 Disc Delve C119,95 post free Atari 5205STM .90 post tree + 10 free disks Casio C2230S 1279.90 post free Antic and Analog magazines available BEST QUALITY DISCS Memorex V S SADD Discs 10 for $13.95 . Unlabelled 51SS. DO Discs 10 for $9.95 0.1 Unabelled 514 SSDD Discs 25 for $22.95 ct Unlabelled S SS 00 Disc 50 for $42.95 . Unlabelled 514 S S/D Discs, 100 for $79.950 Memorex32 pises, Boxes of 10 S. SADD 124.95 Unlabelled 312 SSDD Discs 10 for 119.95 .f. Atari 520 STM with 2 Megabyte Drive 2449.00 + 23 oss Happy enhancement for the 1050 Drive with revision 7. C139.95 post free GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB DEPT. C+VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thornex Close, Sunderland SR3 4PD. Tel: (091) 5286351. UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64 Send s.a.e. for fast response and details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG), 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB FREE MEMBERSHIP!!! Hire CBM64, Spectrum, Vic-20 software! Write now for free exciting details! COMPUTERSOFT (cv) PO Box 28, North PDO, Nottingham NG5 2EE (Please state machine Stamp appreciated) FOOTBALL MANAGEMENT 47 BRIDGE STREET NEWCASTLE STAFFS Tel:0782 619159 Ext 25 Castle Computers 3 Classic Football Management Strategy Games. Each of these Quality games is packed with GENUINE FEATURES to make them the most REALISTIC available PREMIER II A COMPREHENSIVE LEAGUE GAME Play all teams home and away Full squad details all teams. Injures, Team styles, in-match substitutes, Named & recorded goalscorers, Comprehensive transfermarket, 5 Skill levels, Financial problems. Job Offers, Morale, save game and MORE! Pnce 48/128K Spectrum .95 Also available on the 64/128K Commodore-PREMIER LEAGUE includes many of the features of Premier Il-Price 16.50 WORLD CHAMPIONS A COMPLETE WORLD CUP SIMULATION From the first friendlies qualifying stages, four matches and onto the FINALS Select from squad of 25 players, 2 In-Match substitutes allowed, Discipline table, 7 Skill levels and MUCH MUCH MORE! Includes a full text match simulation with injuries, Bookings. Sending ofl, Comers, Free kicks, Match timer, Injury time. Extra time. Goal times and MORE! Price 48/128K Spectrum .95. 64/128K Commodore .95 EUROPEAN IICAPTURES THE FULL ATMOSPHERE OF EUROPEAN COMPETITION Home & away legs, Away goals count double (ildrawn), Full penalty shoot out with SUDDEN DEATH), 7 Skill levels, 2 subs allowed. Pre match team news, Discipline table, Full team & substitute selection, Disallowed Goals and MUCH MUCH MOREI Plus FULL TEXT MATCH SIMULATION Price-48/128K Spectrum .95. 64/128K Commodore 67.95 Last Ninja FANTASTIC VALUE Buy any 2 games Deduet 2.00 from total Buy all games Deduct 3.00 from total All games are available for IMMEDIATE DESPATCH by 1st Class Post and include FULL Instructions (add .00 outside UK) From: E & J Software Room 5, 37 Westmoor Road, ENFIELD, MiddiesX EN3 TLE 5.95 SPECTRUM RAPOUR AMSTRAD RRP OUR Express Raider Shock Way Rider 9.95 6.95 Bomb Jack 2 5.50 Last Ninja 995 6.95 Hit Pack 6.50 Bomb Jack 2 8.95 6.50 Mercenary Knuckle Busters 6.50 Nemesis Bomblack 2 5.50 Oregon's Lair 2 9.95 8.95 M Warriors Commando 87 7.95 5.50 Leaderboard Exec 9.95 6.95 Footballer of Year 9.95 6.95 Leaderboard Arkanoid Paperboy 7.95 8.50 SPECIAL OFFERS CH4 Coin Ops 8.95 6.50 Knight Rider 9.95 4.95 9.95 6.95 Football Manager 4.95 SPECIAL OFFERS AMSTRAD Ace of Aces 895 6.50 PS15 Trading Co 9.95 4.95 8.95 2.99 Fighting Warrior Coin Dos 9.95 6.95 Hit Pack Gyroscope Super Cycle Starglider 14.95 10.50 Uchi Mata 5.95 Barts SPECIAL OFFERS SPECTRUM Transformers (Activ) 3.95 Saed King Rock 'n' Wrestle 1.99 Rock'n'Wrestle 5.95 Super Soccer Graphic Arty Creator 22.95 11.9 Footballerol Year 7.95 4.95 Young Ones 9.95 2.99 Dragon's Lair Doomsday Blues Highway Encounter Football Manager 4.95 Comic Bakery Avenger Super Cycle W. Series Baseball Sport 4 2.99 7.95 9.95 5.95 Knight Games 9.99 5.95 Avenger Waterloo Knight Games Tau Ceti Theatre Europe Ghosts & Goblins Tempest 9.95 3.95 AMSTRAD DISCS Masters of Universe Rebel Planet Breakthrough Top Gun Dr Who & Mines 12.95 3.95 Leaderboard 9.95 Pub Games 4.95 Legend of Kage Paperboy Jack Nipper Nightshade Red Moon ATARI ST 2.99 Gunship 24.95 18.95 19.95 14.95 World Games 24.95 1895 Arc of Yesod 19,95 14.95 Star Glider 24.95 18.95 Moon Cresta Destroyer Pole Position World Games 14.96 10,95 Conquestador 7.95 3.95 Gauntlet 14.95 10.95 Leaderboard Gyroscope 7.95 1.9 Paperboy 14.95 10.95 Super Spy SPECTRUM 128 Little Comp. People 8.95 Everest Ascent 14.96 3.99 Pele Soccer Star Glider 10.50 Ship of the Line 14.95 3.99 Video Pinball Kingdom of Krell 6.95 Urban Upstart 14.95 3.99 Galaxan Stars on 128 6.95 Lord of Hings 14.95 7.95 Snoopy & Red Baron Want a game that's not our lists Phone our Hotline between 930am and 5.00pm any w ay Ask for EXT 25 PS These prices are not a misprintall games are originals Orders under 15 please ads 50p for psp Overseas onder and 75 per me FAST RELIABLE SERVICE oooooo Bas NOONG NGONO 8888888 25 Bank Amsoft CF2 8888 CLEARANCE BARGAINS !!!! JOYSTICKS THE CHAMP (CGL) 4.99 THE BOSS (WICO) 5.99 COMMAND CONTROL (WICO) 11.69 AMSTRAD JY2 (AMSOFT) 3.35 All prices include VAT and carriage. For larger orders please contact the sales office for discount prices. Trade enquiries welcome. PLUS we have a range of colour monitors, printers, computers etc please call for further details. YOU WILL NOT BE DISAPPOINTED!!! RI Ltd, 30c Great Sutton Street, London ECIV ODU 01-251 8790 (24 hours) Please make cheques/PO's payable to RI Ltd and allow 14 days for delivery. FREE P&P with all orders over  within UK "


"NE EPISODE LIEUT. KLAWEWE TWO: Cson INSPIRED RESCUE, LAWW... LEAPING FROM THE 53RD FLOOR WE'RE PAVEMENT PATÉ!. I THINK I'D RATHER HAVE HAD THE BULLET... SMACK ON TIME... THE 08 22:40 GARB O'MATIC...SEE,5PILLANE, IF YOU'D BEEN ON YOUR TOES... ...YOU'D HAVE KNOWN IT FLEW PASSED OUR WINDOW AT THIS EXACT SECOND I ONLY HAD TO CALCULATE THE CORRECT TRAJECTOR-MMMFFF! m o SPLOHITA 37...38...34... EE PO LOAD ) OH GREAT A MODEL CONVERTABOT! OH GREAT PPHHEWWW! WOLFACTORY OVERLOAD! MUST BE THE W.C. CLEARANCE RUN! STILL... LANDING'S 50FT, KAN' IT'S BETTER THAN BEING ACED BY THAT DAMNED ROACH HEADHUNTER!.. NEITHER DOI.  APART FROM A MISSING LEG... MUST BE MY LUCKY I DON'T BELIEVE IT... OH, THAT...THAT'LL BE THE PRIMARY PULPERS STARTING UP... W WHAT'S WHAT'S THAT I'M GLAD YOU'RE HAVING A GOOD TIME... 36 NOISE? PRIMARY. PULPERS. CHUNG: RIIT SCRIPT JERRY PARIS AND GARRY LEACH ART: JERRY PARIS 1987 PARIS. "


"NO GARBAGE GULPER'S GONNA EAT ME... FIRING ARM CANNON'S... ANOTHER LEAK... FLEET STREET BELOW... STILL, THAT'S ...THEY'RE USED TO IT!.. CLANG! Kouche OUCH! BEDEECLICK NOT THE MOST DIGNIFIED WAY TO REACH THE GROUND... STILL, WE'RE DOWN... IT LOOKS TO ME AS IF CHIEF MASON'S GOT A GRADE A SECURITY BREECH... HOW ELSE COULD THE ROACH HAVE LOCATED US 50 QUICKLY... ER... CHIEF... I WAS JUST ABOUT TO CALL Y-STVU PUT... DO NOT MOVE!.. Wucky I WANAGED TO GWAB WER CONWERTOWOT! WHAT'S GOING ON... WHERE THE HELL ARE YOU NOW? IF YOU COULD APPLY YOURSELF TO OUR PRESENT SITUATION FOR A MOMENT... I'VE DISPATCHED AU.T.5.# YOU'RE COMING IN UNDER GUARD... BY GOD I'LL MAKE YOU SUFFER FOR THIS.. CLICK FLEET STREET, SIR 848 AM -.. AND YOU'RE SUPRISED THAT THIS ROACH CHARACTER FOUND YOU?.. IT ONLY HAS TO SNIFF THE AIR... HALF THE CITY KNOWS WHERE YOU ARE... THIS HAPPENED AFTER HE FOUND US, YOU NUMHEAD... AND IF YOU'D DONE YOUR HOME WORK, YOU'D KNOW THAT IT DOESN'T BREATH THE SAME AIR YOU DO... US BLOODY 1 MA5 CONSIDERING GIVING IT UP MYSELF... ANYHOW, I'D LIKE TO SEE THAT OVERGROWN INSECT TRY ANYTHING NOW THE PROFESSIONALS ARE HERE... NEA! *URBAN TACTICAL SQUAD. 110 "


"COMMODORE TITLES 8593 E COMP DISNES MOUSE & CHERRY 7245 BOS STRIKES BACK. THE TRAIN GAME, EDDIE KIDO, ZORRO, MONTY MOLE. BUZICOM (RRP (1495) SPIDERMAN HULK, CHIMERA THUNDERBIOS, CHICKEN CHASE, ROBIN OF SHERLOCK .95 EACH DECATHALON $5.95 INTERNATIONAL KARATE. EQUINOX, STAINLESS STEEL, .99 EACH 18 PUBLISHING PROGRAMS ON DISCRED ARROWS 5.95 ALL JUST .95 EACH KOP OUT. PLANETS, FROST BYTE, CHUCKIE EGG II, BATTLE OF THE PLANETS, SIR FRED, RIVER RAID. FIRST WORD WORO PROC.) CHINESE JUGGLERFASSEM. SUICIDE EXPRESS RIVER RID .95 FIRSTBASE DATABASE) ADVENTURELAND/SECRET MISSION PITFALL ENDURO WHIRLNURO, TONY HARTS ART MASTER TWIN KINGDOM RESCUE ON FRACTALUS $5.95 BASIC 54 TWISTER SPY V SPY, SURFCHAMP, CYBERUN, ZOIDS, VALLEY. HEREOS OF KARN, JUMPMAN, JACK ATTACK PARK PATROL PASCAL LANGUAGE SUPERSLLETH, WHAM MUSIC BOX BOUNDER TOY BIZZARE, BASILDON BOND, LUNAR OUTPOST ROCK 'N BOLT. DOUGHBOY, MASTER OF LAMPS, WORLD CUP PITFALL ADA TRAINING COURSE RESCUE ON FRACTALUS, REALM OF IMPOSSIBILITY H. WEB DIMENSION, ACTIVE COMPUTER LEARNING SPINAKER PANZADROVE THINK VALKYRIE 17. DEATH STAR INT THING ON A STRING HAMPSTEAD GUNGKT SKYFOX FRANK BRUNO'S .95 EACH EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE BOXING NOMAD, WEST BANK, SAU STOAT COMBAT LEADER. ONE ON ONE MATOSING. TOUCH SAFEBREAKER, T OF THE MASK VINOSIADOW ROCCO WILLIAM WOBBLER $5.95 COMMODORE E1.98 TYPE, ARK PANDORA BEAMRIDER, POTTY PIDGEON REVOLUTION METALBOLIS, WILLIAM WOBBLER WEB DIMENSION CRAZY COMETS MONTY MOLE ZAKON KONG STRIKES ALF, AGEAN VOYAGE, SONGMAKER, SEA SPELLER $5.95 RUDOLERS DEN WINTER SPORTS BALLBLAZER NUMBER TUMBLERS. FRACTION FEVER, MAKE A FACE BACK. TAPPER. SPIDERMAN HULK, BOMBO, WHO DARES BEAMRIDER 13 QUARTZATRON, NIGHTGUNNER FALKLANDS B2 WINS 1GYROSCOPE FIGHTING WARRIOR, FLAK RANCH, STONY MANCHINE, ALPHA BUILD, DANCE THE TRACER SANCTION 15.95 MOTOCROSS DARK TOWER STAR TROOPER JET SET FACTORY, LOGIC LEVELS, ALPHABET 200 .95 EACH DESIGNERS PENCIL WILLY, MONTY ON RUN, BEACHEAD, STARION, ROCK N' .95 SPECTRUM 1.95 WRESTLE, MUGSYS REVENGE ZORRO, BC'S QUEST FOR RED ARROWS, MINI OFFICE, WOW GAMES COMP E5.95 BALLBLAZER KIDS ON KEYS FRACTION FEVER ALPHABET 200 AGEAN COLOSSAL ADVENTURE ADVENTURE QUEST. JET SET TYRES MANIC MINER SPILUNKER, COMBAT LEADER VOYAGE, UP AND ADDOEM NUMBER TUMBLERS, LOGIC GALACTIC CONTROLLER LEVELS DANCE FACTORY, RANCH, MAKE A FACE, KINDER WILLY, ABERSOFT FROTH VECTRON 30. AMAZON WIZARD OF WORQUAKE MINUS 1 JOURNEY, EDOE KOOS. GEOFF CAPES. DUMMY RUN FRAK, SUICIDE HIGH FLYER WOMENURU THE ELUSTRATOR OFF THE HOOK NEVER ENDING STORY, ARCADE HALL OF FAME COMP. THE STRIKE JUICE, DREURS. MOEBIUS, GHOST CHASER AZTEC CHALLENGE HOBBIT GERRY THE GERM RASPUTIN, COSTA CAPERS IMHOTEP BLACKWYTCH OUTLAWS. PITSTOP NUMBER LEARNING UTILITIES & RUNESTONE, TAU-CETI, HOT SHOTS COMP. THE YOUNG MONTY ON THE RUN .95 EACH PERIPHERALS ARCADE EXTRAVA PANDA CHUCKIE ECG SHERLOCK ORAGONSKULE, FIGHT 169 95 .95 EACH NIGHT, TIGERS IN SNOW KNOTS OF DESERT, LAW OF 95 SOLD A MILLION 1 TERRA CRESTA, COBRA, PACMAN THE WEST. SELECT 1 12 TITLE SI HENRYS HOUSE VOLL 95 AMFM TRIVIA MUSIC CHALLENGE 19.95 + 100pp Alariso. THE KET TRILOGY, SUPERBOWL DRAGON'S HENRYS HOUSE PVOLLI SOLO POHT. CONGO BONGO RAILBOS SIMONS BASIC EXTENSION DISCO CASS) 495 AIR MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE THE FIOFLON MUSIC STUDIO, MERMAID MADNESS, WIZARDAY, MOONZOR 1551 DISC DRIVERS FOR CH CRESTA, SPACE SHUTTLE SKYFOX CRITICAL MASS, 799 95 4 HIGHLANDER, TARZAN, PRODIGY, CRYSTAL CASTLES QUESTPROBE AMAZON WOMEN, BALL BLAZER, RED FIGHTING WARRIOR 14.95 FASSIM WC LANG, ASS [2.99 SINCLAIR UTILITIES ARROWS, MACADAM BUMPER STAON TOUCH TYPE ICASS ZORKI 13.95 AND PERIPHERALS .95 CONTINUED PROGRAMMES REF GUIDES  III 295 MACRO ASSEMBLER DEVELOPMENT (DISC THING ON A STRING, ZOIDS, BOUNDER, WILLIAM CURRAN MICRO SLOT RUS STARCROSS 195 WOBBLER REOHAWK PARANOID, COMBAT LYNX FUTURE FINANCE DISC WORLD SERIES BASEBALL. HAMPSTEAD, TIME TUNNEL DEADUNE ADDITIONAL DRUMKITS EASY SPELL DISCO LATIN BRIDGE PLAYER 099 SUSPENDED PINBALL WIZARD, BOUNCES, VICOM COMMODORE SAMSVARER 54. ADVENTURELAND, SECRET MISSION, PIRATE LOGO LANGUAGE  BREDENS BASC DISC & CASS ELECTRO ADVENTURE. VOODOO CASTLE FIGHTING WARRIOR 14.95 ALPADOV PAPERTS SCRIPT WORD PROCA CARTA FOR C1684 95 +1.00 p&p .95 EACH REDHAWK .95 COMPANY PACK 123 ACCOUNTING CONTROL SINCLAIR FLAT SCREEN TV-HALF RRP .95 +1.00 ULTIMA IN .95 SYSTEM FOR 4 ON DISC DEVS EX MACHINA, THE FORCE, UTTLE COMP PEOPLE .95 po DHMERIVWILLOW PATTERN MIG ALLEY, ACE, JET SET WILLY, ADVENTURE QUEST [4.95 AM/FM TRIVIA MUSIC CHALLENGE ASSEMBLER TUTOR DISC 9,95 +1.00 p&p SOLO AM SPECTRUM 48K128K POWER SUPPLIES LORDS OF TIME INTERNATIONAL SOCCER, FOREST OF LION .95 +1.00 PROGRAMMERS UTILITY DISC DOOM BOOK & TAPE, BIG CAVE ADVENTURE, GHOSTBUSTERS .95 DISCS 10 FOR 18.95 SOUTHERN BELLE CRITICAL MASS COMBAT LYNX 8795 p&p 1-3 titles 75p .95 EACH MURDER BY THE DOZEN 17.95 SPECTRUM SOFTWARE 3 or more 11.00 WINTER GAMES, WHITE LIGHTNING, AMERICAS CUP Overseas .20 per tape BARGAINS .95 EACH DRAGONS LAIR CHEQUES PAYABLE TO FROM 1st PUBLISHING VALHALA GEOFF CAPES MUGSYS REVENGE, BRIAN .95 EACH JACKS PROJECT FUTURE CHESS BY SENCIAIR TEACH BROOKS FOR JUST 19.95 +2.50 p LOGIC MAIL ORDER LTD BACCION 2 CONVENANT. STARBIKE WHO DARES WINS Q-BERT (CART) AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT, AMERICAS Normal RRP overs, IL PSYTRACKET SET WILLY, BC S QUEST FOR TIRES YOUR 54 CASSETTE BOOK, GRAPHICS BOOK FOR THE BEACHHEAD. MANIC MINER, MATCH FISHING HACKER Department 4 COMMODORE 64, PEEKS & POKES 064 TRICKS & TIPS SIR LANCELOT POTTY PIGEON, GHOSTBUSTERS, MUGSY 17 Leotric Square, Eastern Industry COMMODORE 64 DISCS FOR YOUR COMMODORE 64 ADVANCED MACHINE POLE POSITION, GYROSCOPE FIGHTING WARRIOR, TOY Peterborough, Cambs. LANGUAGE BOOK FOR THE 054 IDEA BOOK 064, MACHINE BIZZARE TALDS, ALIENS, NIGHTSHADE, KONG STRIKES MASTER OF LAMPS .95 LANGUAGE BOOK FOR THE C54 BACK SHOWJUMPING, MONTY ON THE RUN, BOUNTY Tel: 0733 313870 D95 Short of Floppy Disc storage ? 3\" Discs now available fmsoft CA CF-2     New low price for these top quality discs. Suitable for all Amstrad disc based computers. Except the PC1512. Order your CF-2 Discs now ONLY .99 each CONDICIONE and coupon to this House, 169 Kings Road, Brentwood, Essex. CM14 4EF Name Address .. Address.... Available from good Amstrad computer stockists. Or send coupon to Marketing Dept, Amstrad, Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood. Essex. CM14 4EF. Postcode Tel. No. AMSTRAD CF-2 CF-2 PACK OF 5 PASKOF5 PACK OF 10 PACK OF 10 O | Other quantity (please state) .. Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood Essex. CM144EF. Tel. 0277 230222 PLEASE DO NOT SEND ANY MONEY WITH THIS COUPON) CVG/3 "


"SE À 70 IT'S TAKEN OUT THE ENTIRE SQUAD. SMALL CALIBRE FIRE'S STOPPED... I THINK IT'S GONNA USE ANOTHER TANKSTOPPER, YEAH, AND NOW HE'S ZEROING IN ON US... 3 WE'VE GOT TO GET OUT OF THIS AREA... WERE ENDANGERING THE PUBLIC... YOU THINK THEY'VE NOTICED SOMETHINGS GOING ON THEN... LET6CT) THIS HEAP OF JUNK OUTTA RANGE FAST... "


"USEL 95 Ta niin DON'T KNOW WHAT IT'S USING, BUT A FEW ROUNDS FOR MY ARM CANNONS WOULDN'T GO AMI55... HEY. WHERE'S MY CONVERTABOT?. DER TO BE ONTINUED... "


"C+VG's Hot Gossip ace Tony Takoushi has the biggest eyes, nose and mighty mouth in computer games. He sees all, hears all and he then shouts about it each month exclusively in your favourite computer mag. So read on for the man who shoots from the lip at the good, the bad and the ugly in the software world. ur eyes met across easy). She has fallen into a the table and I deep sleep and she can only reached out for her. be woken by fruit from the Her touch was so soft and Golden Tree. gentle. \"Oh my love\", i Penguin Adventure is murmured. from Konami and runs on The candle lit her the MSX format. It is the beautiful eyes to perfection. follow up to Antartic What a woman!!! Adventure (which rates as She eased the fish pâté one of my all time faves). It smoothly into her mouth comes on a 128K cartridge and her smile sent my pulse (oh brilliant! ) this makes racing. for some gorgeous It all seemed so perfect graphics, really groovy and I thought it would never tunes and some awesome end, but now I have to get gameplay. fruit from the Golden Tree to The game starts with the save my beloved Penguette hero penguin standing on (a penguin's life is never an ice flow watching a PENGUIN ADVENTURE shooting star. The star explodes and you see his beloved Penguette's face in it then a tear drops from his eye (Love Story eat your heart out). You then choose from twodifficulty levels and go into the game. You have to complete 24 stages to reach the Golden Tree. To complete a stage you must cover a set distance in a set time limit. You run forward through forests, seas, rivers and Space leaping over craters in the ground trying to catch fish which pop out of the ground. The fish are important as they allow you to barter with traders along the way for better equipment Every three stages you have to face a dinosaur who spits fireballs at you while you try to knock four spikes into the ice to make him fall through it (there is a nice bonus sequence if you get hot at this stage). When you complete a stage your extremely tired pengy collapses on the ice mopping his brow and little thought bubbles pop up showing his beloved Penguette. This game is PACKED with quality items and it really gives me a thrill to play games of this quality and SHEER playability. Konami don't you EVER stop producing those carts. PUSH SPACE KEY OKONAMI 1986 ear Marjorie ProopsClaire Rayner Anybody!! Can you please HELP ME! I am torn between two stunning, warm and electrifying computers and I am finding it hard to choose between them. The worst moments are late at night and I just do not want to leave them and go to bed. When I do go to bed all I can think or dream about are their beautiful casings and I long to have their keyboards nestling gently on my pillow.. The Amiga has a strong, cool, white exterior which hides untold processing power. While the Atari ST is solid, reliable and is truly a machine of the and very flexible. Indeed the Amiga is masses. the same but actually offers more Thad better explain how I met them processing power than the ST. and maybe you will understand how have to choose and right now it must got into this mess. My first, brief be the Atari ST which gets my vote for encounter with the Amiga was at the being the machine of 1987. Personal Computer World show of It is a machine of the masses and its 1985. I was locked away in a dark secret software base is growing at a room and was given the merest taste of phenominal rate. Peripherals are cheap what lay beneath the classic Amiga for what they offer ( for a 1 meg bodywork. The demonstrations were drive or  for a 20 meg drive), truly mindboggling and I knew then I modems, printers the works. had to have this machine. The Amiga is very expensive BUT IT The ST eased its way into my IS IN A CLASS OF ITS OWN. Its affections and before I knew it had technical spec leaves the ST standing taken a firm grip on my emotion. The and its software even now in its ST is very affordable, very powerful formative years is here soon enough before Atari gets too strong a foothold to give it a run for its money. The Amiga currently leads in the USA and the Atari ST lags behind badly. In the UK and Europe this is turned on its head. The ST is wiping the floor with the Amiga in volume sales and software. So where is all this leading? Right now, nowhere because there is still no clear eut leader all I can do is go on gut feeling The final battle will be fought in the highstreet chain stores, on television and in the computer press Tatonklu "


"You are invited to join the MURDER CLUB, but be careful you could end up. KALAPIN CBM 64/128 \"YES, IT WAS A DARK AND STORMY NIGHT... A PERFECT NIGHT FOR MURDER** **1 Hercule Holmes, had gotten used to nights like this. As the world's greatest detective and resident house dick of the infamous Gargoyle Hotel, I've made a living looking for the subtle signs of impending foul plex Sloomy weather, blood curdling screams, gunshots, empty bottles of poison. bodies tumbling down stairs, a mutilated corpse or even an axewielding maniac might slip right by the untrained private eye. But to a master sleuth like myself, these telitale signs can only mean one thing. The Murder Club has just checked in!\" Poison CORTINUE **The Murder Club? Yes, the Murder Club! Five of the world's bestselling murder mystery writers who transpose their fictional pulp plots into real-life murder and mayhem. Once again then have convened for their annual reunion here at the Gargoyle Hotel. And once again the dark, damp halls will echo with the cries of *Don't shoot!'. 'I've been poisoned!'. 'Who stabbed me?', 'I've been shortsheeted!\" and \"Who took all the hot water? Yes, with the Murder Club as tonight's guests, more than the plumbing will be amiss!\" *Each member of The Murder Club will try to bump off the others and lay down claim to the crown of World's Greatest Murderer. But it will not be a piece of quiche! For these brilliant criminal minds must match wits with moi, Hercule Holmes! I have only until midnight to discover the would be murderer, victim, murder weapon and the scene of the crime.\" *At my disposal will be every imaginable piece of high tech crimestopping gadgetry known to sleuthdom: minicameras, hidden bugs, even wire taps. Yet all these modern electronic wonders cannot replace my inherent ability as a born detective... instincts passed from generation to generation in the Holmes family. Therefore, I accept the challenge. I will uphold the family honour! Before this night is over I will prevent a murder or be murdered trying! If I fail, one of the illustrious members of the Murder Club will surely be killed... yes Killed Until Dead!\" CBM64/128 tape .99 disk .99 SPECTRUM 48K tape .99 AMSTRAD tape .99 disk .99 BGOLD U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 ACCOUDE "


"NOW FROM THE AUTHORS OF BATMAN COMES... DOUBLE TROUBLE Hi! My name's Mr. Head. Some say I'm the one with the brains but I don't think my flat footed friend would agree. I'm a real sharp shooter, but without my pal Mr. Heals I'd get nowhere fast...or slow! I can jump like a flea and even glide but Heals is the Daley Thompson of the two of us he's FAST! Together, if we can find each other, we really do make an awesome twosome, and that's the only way we can overcome the emperor Blacktooth. The last time we entered Castle Blacktooth we found the crowns of THREE of the supressed kingdoms but by that time I'd run out of doughnut ammunition and my buddy was lost somewhere in the Safari world it was the closest we had come to defeating that rapscallion we were jumping for joy, splitting our sides, dying with laughter...we were Head over Heals! COMMODORE SPECTRUM MSX .95 8795 8895 2895 Ocea .95 .95 AMSTRAD Ocean Software: 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS Telephone: 061 832 6633. Telex: 669977 Oceans G "


"MICROSELL SECTION MITTITTITTIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII 100s OF COMPUTERS 1,000s OF GAMES IN YOUR FREE 8 PAGE PULLOUT  If you want to advertise in Microsell, send a cheque or postal order for .00 made payable to Computer and Video Games. Maximum of 24 words. BLOCK CAPITALS PLEASE: Send this coupon with your cheque/P.O. to: C+VG, Priory Court, 30, 32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1. Please note: The publishers reserve the right to refuse an advertisement. "


"MICROS E IL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell duplicated or pirated software on tape or disc. You will now be liable for prosecution. All suspect advertisements will be forwarded to the Federation against Software Theft for further inspection. LANDBUYS: A strategic game for the CBM 64. Deal with land, corn, cattle and harvest your crops. Treat your subjects well or they will rebel and battle your armies. Send PO for .50 to A McGavin, 23 Compton Way, Merseyside, Liverpool 6. If you have a Commodore 64 (cass or disc) or Spectrum 48K and you want to swap games (originals only) Write to: Milwosoft, Hukanpolku 17, 96580 Rovaniemi, Finland. Write now. SPECTRUM PLUS, Data recorder, RAM turbo interface, Euromax Arcade Joystick,  worth of games including Paperboy, Winter Games and Commando. Well worth  sell for a bargain price of . Phone Woking 68193 anytime. OVER  worth of software for sale for Spectrum 48K. Mikie, Yie Ar Kung Fu, Commando, Alien Highway, Mugsy's Revenge, Zids, Killer Tomatoes, .50 each. View to a Kill, Friday 13th, Ball Blazer, Fighting Warrior Bugaboo .50 each or all for . Tel: 0473 76937 all originals FOR SALE ZX Spectrum plus. Data recorder, cheetah interface, Quickshot II Joystick over  worth of software including Knight Rider, Jack the Nipper, Buck Rogers, Computer Hits three and lots more. Will sell for  ono. Tel: 0706 30131 ORIC GAMES, Utilities, books etc, worth over , will sell for . Phone 0580 211157 for more details. C64 USER wants to swap software with people all over the world. I have over 1,000 games, all the new ones too! Contact Andrew Somerville, Drumbad, Roscor, Belleek, County Fermanagh, N Ireland or phone 036565 674 LATEST STUFF!! A Norwegian 64 freek wishes to swap brand new software on disk!! Write or send disks to: Vidar Salvesen, Hellemyrstien Yo, 4600 Kr. Sand, S, Norway. Hi to NER and all other contacts!! MERLIN CONTACT CLUB Membership 50p. Send your name and address with 50p and a sae to: Merlin Club, 1 Merlin Close, Hainault, Ilford, Essex IG6 3XL. We will put you on our extensive files and send you a list of contacts with whom you may swap software etc. Remember to include details of your computer. It's wizard! XYZ. A great new software magazine on tape for the C64. The features include: latest games reviewed, news, hints & tips, top twenty charts and much more. Also free game on flip side of cassette, Make cheques/pos payable to Robert Saphier, Order your copy now, send .50 to XYZ, 86 AMSTRAD CPC 464. No monitor, Mottershead Rd, Wythenshawe, with Modulator tor TV, disc drive Manchester 22 7GW. with 30 discs, RS232, Mirage Imager ATARI RIG 800XL Computer with + 300 titles of software, cassettes & Fix chip, 1050 disk drive with Happy discs, . Also COMMODORE C64 Backup chips fitted, 1029 printer & C2N cassette, joystick + 20 with many programs, XCII tape cassettes of software, . Tel: 01recorder, Over 170 disks, Many 907 6023. games on disk and tape, Dozens and CBM64 Do you need programs dozens of magazines and books. PRINTED OUT? If so send programs Price  ono Phone Bill on 0204 on eithe disk or tape. Price is  inc 709317. p&p. Cheques to N. Steed, 92 FOR SALE: Commodore 64, disk Loxwood Road, Lovedean, drive, tape deck, plus 41 games Hampshire POS 9TY. worth a total of over . Games COMMODORE 1702 colour monitor include: World Games, Hitch Hkers, for use with CBM computers, for Sitness, Superbowl, Leaderboard, sale, hardly used, still boxed, in Uridium, Hardball, Elite, Ghost'n' excellent condition, cost , sell Goblins. All worth over , sell for for . Phone 01-748 1895 after around . Contact Paul on 01-981 6pm (Richard). 7462, 6p till 10pm all week. AMSTRAD COMPUTER GAMES for AMSTRAD CPC 464 COMPUTER sale. Lightforce , Bomb Jack with colour screen, disc drive, 64k .75, Kung Fu Master .50, 3D expansion pack (making a 6128). Boxing .30. Plus many more from Lots of games, all originals 75p, all prices include p&p. Also (including Elite on disc, Spindizzy. Issues 1 and 2 of Amstrad user Bombjack, Biggles. Utility software magazine dated 1984 and 1 to 16 (including Tasword 464D, Bebugsoft issues of Amstrad Action. Open to toolkit. All would normally cost offers. Phone 0782 518236. Ask for -plus if bought new. Offers Jason please around , Will split if COMMODORE 64 GAMES TO SWAP necessary. Telephone Leicester (tape only). I've got many good (0533) 888254 after 6pm, or write to games. I will answer all letters. Write Shaun Rowley, 17 Woodcroft to Christian Sveholm, Rnnvgen 16 Avenue, Knighton, Leicester C23, 10650 Ekenas 5, Finland. LE2 GHU FREE! Grafpad 2 digitising tablet SPECTRUM 48k GAMES to swap or Just send 15 of your best CBM 64 money offers exeptable. Ace, games on disk. The person who Tomahawk, Hypersports, Strike sends the best games wins the Force Cobra, Paperboy, Bombjack. Grafpad. All losing disks are Lots more. Send self addressed returned. Mr R. Manley, 4 Rein envelope for list of games to Mr M. Gardens, Tingley, West Yorkshire Mutty, 29 Perth Rd, Plaistow, WF3 1JR. London E13 9DS. Tel: 01-471 6035. AMSTRAD ORIGINALS on cassette CBM64 SOFTWARE TO SWAP on to sell or swap for Atari VCS tape. I have always the lastest cartridges. Elite, Commando, releases. Write to: Jacobsen Sven, Marsport, Starion and many others. Prioryhofstr. 13,84 01 Bredene, Seap all, plus cash for Atari 7800 Belgium Tel: 0532 672723 evenings. AMSTRAD CPC464 Colour monitor, GODS! You are a brain, a God, disc drive, SSA1 speech synth + 13\"creator and destroyer and you thirst disc drive, amplifier,  worth of for power. This is total war, the war games worth over , Sell for of the Gods!  for start up pack + 2  ono. Loads of mags, joystick free turns or send for details on this Tel: 770-25 99 (Birm) after 4pm. exciting PBM game. Send to: Elite C16 COMPUTER, cassette, joystick PBM Games, Henri Houssaye 16 and over 200 of software. . and over  of software, . 1410 Waterloo, Belgium Phone Otterham Station 381X. CBM64: 22 games for sale inc COMMODORE 64/128 SOFTWARE Uridium, Paradroid, 1942, Parallax, TO SWAP Disk only. Over 600 titles, etc. Worth over , only . Also including latest games. Please send C128 Rocky Horror (disc) . Write: lists to: Elliot Mason, 41 Brittany D. Huntley, 43 Fullwood Ave, Road, Hove, Sussex, BN3 4PA Newhaven, East Sussex COMMODORE 64 (BOXED), C2N COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE TO tape deck, joystick, magazines SWAP. 1000 titles, many new from (C&VG/ZAPP64), dustcover, USA. Contact Adrian Roberts, 75 manuals, over  worth of s/ware, Elvaston Road, North Wingfield, Music System, Gauntlet, Sanxions, Chesterfield, Derbyshire S42 5HH. Escape from Singe's Castle, Terra ATARI 1300XE COMPUTER , Cresta etc. Worth over , sell for Atari 800 Computer , 810 disk . Tel: 672 9553. Jeff after 5pm. drive , 850 interface module , SPECTRUM 128+2 FOR SALE 410 cassette , all excellent Joystick + built-in tape recorder + condition. Owner upgrading. Phone over 60 original games. Worth , Andy on Burwash 882121 (evenings still boxed, bargain at . Phone & weekends). Russ on Blackpool 823639 (still 9 AMSTRAD CPC 464 only 6 months months guarantee on it). old, vgc, for sale together with FOR SALE: Maps & pokes. Most colour monitor, instruction manual, games' maps & so many pokes it's plus 16 software games. Total worth easier to list the ones we haven't . Will accept . Genuine got! Fast service, cheap & reliable. bargain due to upgrading Contact Send a large sae to: DGC Maps, 385 Ashford, Middx (0784) 244614 Duffield Rd, Allestree, Derby DE3 CBM 64 SOFTWARE TO SWAP 1000 2DN. Hurry! + titles, including latest games Send lists to Gavin Reeves at 8 St Margarets Road, Leyfields, Tamworth, Staffs B79 8HJ, England, or telephone 0827 67625.4pm 11pm. Disk only COMMODORE 64 OWNER wishes to swap games with people in Europe. I already have contacts in the USA. I have 800-1000 games which I'd like to swap. Please send lists and games to Jonathan, 45 Downfield Ave, Ings Bridge Est, Hull, HU67XE, England. HEY YOU, don't read that, read this. Here is an ad for THE Spectrum (48k and 128k) fanzine called Loaded. It has everything, news, reviews, preview, features, plus lots more. Send 60p (including postage) for a copy of the latest issue to: 15 Melbourn Road, Bishopstown, Cork, Ireland BARGAIN! Amstrad 464 computer, GT 64 green screen monitor, MP-2 modulator for colour TV) + brand new Maestro sound system with two Techno speakers! Also Amstrad 464 has brand new tape recorder system fitted only days ago! Well over  of original software including Space Harrier, Ikari Warriors and Gauntlet. Literature included. Worth over , sell for  (open to reasonable offers), Tel: 513386 (5pm-10pm). Ask for Nick HI, YOU FREAKY JOYSTICK DESTROYERS! We are two Commodore 64 owners, and we will be happy if some other 64 owners would like to swap all kind of software with us! If you are interested, then write a letter to us. All letters answered. Write to: Christian Bonnesen, Londoevaenget 41, 8381 Mundelstrup, Denmark, or to: Ole Henriksen, Lindoevaenget 6, 8381 Mundelstrup, Denmark ATARI 130XE, 1050 disc drive, data recorder + Ballblazer, Koronisrift, Star Raiders II, F15-Strike. Eagle & many more. All new. Actual price , only  the lot. Ring: Darren (0602) 636948 FOR SALE: 48k Spectrum + data recorder + Quickshot joystock interface + 10 starter games, ie Chess, Reversi, VU-3D, etc. Excellent condition, asking  ono, or exchange for Spectrum 128+2. Tel: (0742) 431695 after 4pm. Ask for Philip COMMODORE 64 original software to swap or sell. Many present day titles, looking for a lot more. Phone (0222) 731451 and ask for Craig. Oversears welcome. ATARI 800XL (64k), 1050 disc drive with happy & US Doulder chips fitted, which offers warp speed loading + an excellent selection of software titles of 200+ contain on disc, 2 joysticks. All in very good condition and complete with manuals. Worth over , will sell for . Phone Mark (0246) 852886 after 6.30pm. FOR SALE: Spectrum 48k with leads, 2 instruction manuals, 37 original tapes, light pen and software, Kempston interface and joystick, 4 tip books, plus 18 magazines. Worth +, asking  ono. Call 01-902 1090. All in perfect working order. "


"MICROS E IL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell duplicated or pirated software on tape or disc. You will now be liable for prosecution. All suspect advertisements will be forwarded to the Federation against Software Theft for further inspection. ATARI 800 (48k), 1010 cassette recorder + Basic cartridge + an excellent selection of software titles of 100+ on tape, joystick All in very good condition and complete with manuals. Worth over , will sell for  ono Phone Mark (0246) 852886 after 7pm. BBCB (1.20S) with carrying case and data recorder. Over 650 tapes (all originals), inc many bestsellers. Many bound issues of BBC and other magazines. Cannot split-for collection only. Worth ,700, will accept ,300. Tel: 01-200 6316 levenings only) FOR SALE: CBM 64 reset switches .50. Spectrum on/off power switches  Connect your CBM 64 or Atari 8 bit to your hi-fi (via your monitor socket) with an audio lead Igive or draw the hi-fi sockets). 1 meter lead  (add 50p per extra meter required). Also Atari 800XL software to swap (cass/disk, over 40 titles). Make cheques/pos payable to Colin Froggatt. Please add 50p p&p. Send orders and lists to 13 Edith Terrace, Sunnyfields, Doncaster, S Yorks DN5 8RT ATARI ST OWNER wishes to make contact with fellow ST owners in Europe and the USA with a view to exchanging software. Please write to Merseyside Atari Club, 84 Fitzroy Way, Liverpool, Merseyside, England L6 1JS. NUDES!! Now I have your attention. Spectrum 48k, Kempston interface games, including Top Gun, Star Glider Originals-need the money  ono. Tel: 0742 401289 after 6pm. COMMODORE 64 tape back-up board will back up all turbo leads onto a normal audio tape recorder. Send a cheque or plo for .95 to Michael Rowlands, 53 Whitehall Lane, Gravesend, Kent DA125LT NORWEGIAN HACKER wants to swap with people all round the world. I have a CBM 64 originals only please send your list to: Gunner Ronning, Fossumberget 30,0983 Oslo 9, Norway. Tel: 02 108516. COMMODORE MPS 803 printer for sale,  or suitable exchange for 1541 disk drive or modem. Tel: Southwater 731342, Mr Barry Spooner, 7 Smugglers Way, Barns Green, Sussex COMMODORE 64 software to swap. lots of new titles-tape or disk. Send your list for mine to Paul Sargent, 16 Chiltern Approach, Canvey Island, Essex SS89 9SJ. or Tel: 0268 681463. All letters answered. ATARI 800XL cassette games for sale for all those Atari freaks with a new computer. Over 50 games, these include Red Max, Despatch rider, Scooter, Spellbound. All originals and they are only  or 5. Send sae to Mr A. Shilstone, 121 Slades Drive, Chislehurst, Kent BRZ 6JE for list ST KARATE for sale, . Phone 028487 547 after 4pm and ask for Richard AMSTRAD TAPES for sale, Beach Head, World Series Baseball, World Cup Carnival, The Price of Magik,  (Irish) each, or will swap any for Tau Ceti. Eire only). Tel: (Dublin) 863024 CBM 64 OWNER wants to swap disk and tape with people all over the world. I have the latest games. Send your list for mine or call C. Warmenhoven, Tichelkuilen 208, 7206 Zutphen, Holland 05750-21674. NEED HELP? with one of these, Spellbound, Boggit, Pawn, and many others, then write to Adrian Harris, 57 Franklin Street, Scarborough YO12 7JU. If you want a full list then send an sae. DISKS: 54 10 for .50 inc p&p. C. Heathcote, Deckham Hotel, Old Durham Rd, Gateshead, NES 3TR. Tel: (0910) 4781249 4-6pm AMSTRAD CPC 464 colour monitor, 130 games all cassette cased, mags, Euromax pro joystock, computer cover. Wants Commodore 64 cassette recorder disk drive and software with joystick. Tel: (0787) 281160. Ask for James ACORN ELECTRON for sale, plus leads mains adapter, data recorder 20 games worth , will sell for  ono. Tel: 01-423 0208 ATAIR ST. I am a bot from Norway who wants to swap games Originals only. Send your list to: Bjarte Koppen, 6160 Hovdebygda, Norway. ATARI ST original programs all very cheap. Send for list to Mike, 19 Portree Drive, Rise Park, Nottingham NG5 5DT or ring (0602) 274369 ATARI 800 for sale, over  of software, . Tel: (06284) 73187. SPECTRUM 48k with manuals and carry case and Kempston Interface, joystick and excellent selection of software. Best offer accepted. Phone Stevenage 0438 362937 AMSTRAD CPC 464 ith green monitor and colour modulator and quickshot Il joystick and approx 50 original titles and manual.  ono. Tel: 0422 54425. Ask for Andrew 48K SPECTRUM PLUS, tape recorder, Protek switchable interface, Quickshot Il joystick, magazines, boxed over  of software. Worth , bargain at . Tel: 058283 3917. Wheathampstead Herts, after 4.30pm, ask for Marcus GROUP A INTERNATIONAL would like contact with all crews throughout the world, reply quickly for newest stuff. Or phone 051 639 3766. Write to Group A International 58 Charlotte Road, Wallasey, Merseyside L44 ODW, England. Greetings to SC9 Triad Gamebusters and Omega Man CBM 64 SOFTWARE to swap, tape or disc. All latest titles including: Gauntlet, Paperboy, 1942 Leaderboard, Trailblazer, Dandy. and many more. Send list to Barry Desmond, Carrigfadda, Skibbereen, Co Cork, Ireland. All letters 115 Ebony Close, Colchester answered CO2 9LY. COMMODORE HINTS AND POKES PENPALS WANTED for CBM 64.1 send 30p and 1st class stamp to C have over 400 games, please send Ellis, 22 Lostock Grove, Stretford, your list to Gary Sewell, 53 Lakes Manchester M32 9RP. Road, Keston, Kent BR2 6BN. CBM 64 GAMES for sale. 22 COMMODORE 64 BARGAIN: 64k originals worth,  plus. Including computer C2N joystick, 1520 printer Sentinal, Back to the Future, Indiana plotter, over s worth of Jones, Daley Thompson and more, software, including Short Circuit, . Will swap. Tel: 0842 63621 after Flash Gordon, many other recent 5pm weekdays. releases, all worth over , will ATARI 800XL, plus recorder and sell for . Tel: Burntwood 4261 over  owrth of games including: after 6pm. F15 Strike Eagle, Goonies, Pole ADVENTURES GALORE! Detailed Position, Spy Hunter, Electra Glide, 20+ page catalogue of new and Drelbs and 30 others, will accept unusual adventures. Also discount  for quick sale. Tel: Phil on + used software catalogue only 50p. Redditch 63202 \"Adventure Contact\" magazine (for WANTED: Spectrum penpals have writers) only f1 cheques/po etc to P. you got any games to lend. If so Winstanley, 13 Hollington Way. please send a list of them to me, Wigan WN3 6LS. James Heath, 12 Binnington Wold, MILLIONS OF SOFTWARE for Staxton, Scarborough, North Commodore 64 to swap. Send your Yorkshire. swap list to Linda, Il Form Common COMMODORE 64, 1531 datasette, Room, St Bride's School, quickshot turbo, magazines, over Burtonport, Co Donegal, Ireland.  worth of software including IT'S A BARGAIN. Commodore 64 latest games, Aliens, Jailbreak, computer. Datarecorder 1 joystick Labyrinth, Terra Cresta, Gauntlet over  of software including etc. Sell  ono Tyneside. Tel: Space Harrier, Uridium and (091) 4384694 after 5.30pm. Paperboy, Fist 2 and Ace of Aces. CBM 64, plus 1541 disk drive and the Also Gauntlet.  worth of Expert and Superklone. Many magazines. Ring 01-222 8814 Tues games on tape and disk. Tape to Fri between 4 and 6pm. Ask for recorder slightly damaged.  Steve. Tel: (0530) 33553. Phone after six SPECTRUM GAMES sale. Infiltrator, FOR SALE: Package only BBCB 32k Breakthru, Redhawk 2, . Roch'n' (DFS) 400k-40/80 dual disk drive. Wrestle, Movie, Yie Ar Kung Fu, . BBC colour monitor BBC data Plus big bargains Mastertronics recorder. 10 blank disks, software including Knight Tyme, Future (optional) Expansion Board all in Games, Space Hunter, One Man and good condition. Asking price  His Droid, Finders Keepers and ono. Tel: 021 422 2972. Warley, West Action Biker all 75p. All in good Midlands condition, some brand new to AMSTRAD CPC 6128 with colour purchase. Send a cheque/po to monitor,  of software, speech Darren Mitchell, 2 Bader Walk, synthesiser, light pen, two joysticks, Northfleet, Kent DA11 BPO cassette recorder, just covers and Deliveries within a week more. Immaculate. Only 10 months BARGAIN SOFTWARE for Spectrum old. . Tel: 01-979 0735. 48k. All at half price or less. GAC, CBM 64 OWNER with the latest Laser Genius, Dandy, Starglider, games wants to swap software with Lightforce, LOR, Exploding Fist you. All the latest in the world. Write many others). Send sae for full list to: lan Shaw, 31 Sandringham to Lee Hodgson, 54 Church St. Drive, Sutton, St Helens, Tewkesbury. Glos GL20 5RZ. Merseyside, WA9 3TG, England ENTHUSIASTIC ATARI ST owner PENFRIENDS: Amstrad/Spectrum keen to write to other similarly owners, write enclosing cheque/PO motivated ST owners to swap tips for 50 pence and enclosing a sae and all kinds of software. Write now stating your interests and I will try to to Lee Hodgson, 54 Church St, match them. Daryl Ward (Penpals), 3 Tewkesbury, Glos GL20 5RZ for Pineways, Appleton, Warrington, guaranteed reply. Cheshire WA45EJ. LORD OF THE RINGS, full solution to ADVENTURE PROBE is a monthly both parts & detailed map, only 50p magazine for adventures containing + sae. Also have 200 other solutions hints, reviews, discount software available at only 50p from Lee and juch more. Send  for sample Hodgson, 54 Church St. copy to Adventure Prob, 78 Merton Tewkesbury, Glos GL20 5RZ. Road, Highfield, Wigan WN3 6AT. SPECTRUM GAMES PLAYERS. For COMMODORE 643 printer disk drive just .49 you get TDK D90 full of with Dolphone DOS, many games, latest pokes to help you finish top books, magazines, load games in games. Send cheques/posto Lee under 5 seconds with Dolphin DOS Hodgson, 54 Church St. excellent condition,  ono. Tewkesbury, Glos GL20 5RZ (Please Phone (07421873182 and ask for send sae) Simon. ADVENTURES ANY MICRO I have FREE MEMBERSHIP into annual solutions to 200 top games (Level 9 exchange club, meet computer pen Infocom and many others) at just pals, exchange games and 50p each. Send sae now to Lee programs for C64, SP, ELE, BBC Hodgson, 54 Church St. range, Amstrad and others, send sae Tewkesbury, Glos GL20 5RZ for full to AEC for membership and details list. "


"MICROSELL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell cheaply. Send a S.A.E. for , Karateka , Psi-Warrior . BARGAIN! Spectrum 48K. duplicated or pirated softdetails and FREE membership Many more. Will swap, wanted Datacorder and lots of games. ware on tape or disc. You to: ON-SPEC S.E.C., 23 Florence Mercenary. All originals contact VGC  for quick sale. Phone: will now be liable for pro Road, West Bridgford, Marcus on Barnsley (0226) 382 Romford 0708 41776. secution. All suspect Nottingham, NG2 5HR. We will 080. Also wanted Commodore WANTED CBM 64 software on also be hiring tapes soon1571 disk drive in good tape also BBC B software on warded to the Federation watch for further details!! condition. Pay up to . tape and disk. Also Pen pals against Software Theft for SWAP CBM64 SOFTWARE with MAKE A FORTUNE learn how anywhere to swap ideas etc. further inspection. anyone in the world. Well over to make money. (,000 plus) Write to Martyn Young, 19 1000 programs on disk or tape. in order to buy all that computer Priory CRS, Uiceby, DN39 6TS. BRAND NEW CBM 64 software Includes all the latest from USA equipment you couldn't afford! S. Humber, England. to swap. I have the topnewest and Gt Britain. All letters Send SAE and  to J. Murray, SPECTRUM SOFTWARE FOR software to swap, and I'm answered. Send lists to: Scott 43 Taunton Avenue, SALE. Elite . Laser Basic , looking for swappartners all McCabe, 37 Navarre Street, Northampton NN3 3LY. Saboteur , Battle of the over the world, special in Barnhill, Dundee, Scotland. WANTED word processor for Planets , Dynamite Dan , England and America. Write to: ATARI 1040 STF+MODEM, Commodore Vic 20. Please Lode Runner ,4 Crash Michael Kappenberg, owner with over 100 titles contact W. Neary, 7 Haining Smashes .30 games , Burgsdorffstr. 6, 4270 Dorsten would very much like to Road, Whitecross, Linlithgow, Arcade Hall of Fame , West 21, West Germany or tel: 02362/ exchange SW. + information. Scotland EH49 6LH. Bank , Bruno's Boxing . All 73362 (Germany) 3pm-8pm or Write to: A. Manzarra Miguel, FOR SALE Tandy TRS 80 level II originals. Send cheque/po 1pm-1am. Av. Almirante Reis, 247, 3-Esq., plus Interface plus VDU plus payable C. Yau and SAE to C. AMSTRAD machine code 1000 Lisboa, Portugal. disc drive. Both computer and Yau, 39 Delancey Street, assembler for sale. Also DISILLUSIONED Spectrum disc drive mannuals. Very good London NW1 7RX. For list send disassembler, machine code owner wishes to sell software, condition,  ono. Tel: 061 SAE. monitor and 'Amstrad machine ALL originals. Starglider, Elite 799 4564. BBC GAMES FOR SALE. All language for the absolute  each, Terra Cresta, Space COMMODORE 64 GAMES originals. At least 40% off.. beginner'. Boom by Melbourne Harrier, Room 10,  each, originals boxed, Ace of Aces, Repton 3 , Monopoly , House. Cost over , will sell Gauntlet, Academy, Uridium,  Mercenary (with book), Gauntlet. Academy. Uridium.  Thrust . Also discs. 40T disc for . Write to John Knight, each, plus many more send International Football, Wing drive . Send stamped SAE 199 Curzon Street, Netherfield, S.a.e. for list. Also Currah Commander, Thrust, Starglider. for full list to P Yau, 80 Nottingham, N64 2NR. Microspeech . Will accept The lot .00. Tel: Ruislip Broadway Avenue, Halesowen, SPECTRUM CHARACTER SET less for Microspeech. Write to: 635588. W. Midlands B63 3DR. DESIGNER program for sale. Brett Patterson, 139 Hague FOR SALE -48K Spectrum SPECTRUM review magazine Design your own character sets Row, Park Hill Flats, Sheffield, plus only 3 months old with \"Eprom\" No 1. The irregular for use in your own programs to S25SB. over  worth of software alternative Tips, Reviews, give it that professional look like BOWLED OVER! The cricket including Stainless Stell, Interview with Tony Bridge, all the hit computer games. managerial PBM needs you! Adventure solutions. Buy it and Includes 7 pre-designed New season about to start, think Games and loads of other find out what else/Only 80p p/o character sets. Full instructions that you can do better than a recent titles. Joystick, form Eprom 328 The included. Send .50 for a bunch of 'gin sodden taperecorder, Games ace, Maltings, Penwortham, cassette copy to Leigh dodderers'? Yes? Well prove it! Kempston interface and lots of Johnston, 5 Turrocks Croft, Start-up costs only , matches mags. Well worth over  but Little Neston, South Wirral, L64 ATARI USERS! Do not, I repeat, cost between 75p and .20 will sell at . Phone Swanley OUB. (For use with 48K Do not send any money to the each. Also, 'Vesuvian' the (0322) 67171. C.Mos Newsletter as it has now machines). fantasy PBM that features fast SPECTRUM OWNERS send  folded. The Editor is sorry for WANTED Atari Necromancer on return rate and detailed turns, and an SAE for books of pokes ROM, disc, or cassette. Write to any inconvenience caused. now at reduced start-up at only to M. Pettett, 40 Trubridge K. Lowles, 70 Northland, , inclusive of 3 free turns. Road, Hoo, Rochester Kent, COMMODORE 64 and over 100 Carrickfergus, Co. Antrim, N. Subsequent turns at only .20. ME3 9EW. Make cheques and games and joystick and data Ireland BT38 8JZ. Cheque/P.O. payable to V. postal orders to M.C. Pettett. cassette recorder etc, to swap SPECTRUM 48K+, cassette Napolitano. Send to: MAIM ATARI 1027 printer for sale. for Atari 800XL and disc drive, recorder, Quickshot Il joystick GAMES, 48 Ledgers Road, Three months old, never used. games etc. Tel: 777 6721 after and interface. Over 40 original Slough, Berkshire SL1 2RL. Bargain at . Post free in UK. f85. Post free in UK 6pm-Glasgow. games (including Elite, Winter FOR SALE: 48K Spectrum + Phone Henry at 061 707 3965 BBC B games for sale Games, Movie, Spindizzy). With (Boxed), Microspeech, after 5pm. Commando, Nightshade, manuals and machine code Microslot, Joystick, Kempton BARGAIN BBC B COMPUTER. Citadel, Strykers run and Yie Ar book. In good condition. Worth Interface, Books and  Excellent condition. Software Kung Fu. .50 each. over , will sell for . worth of original games. total including Hobbit, Elite, Beach Hunchback, Winged Warlords, Ring Scunthorpe (0724) 856689.value . sell for  o.no. Head, Pahntom Stars Gisburnes Castle and Frak .50 BBC GAMES FOR SALE: The Write now to: Greig McKenzie, Command. Selection of Mags each. Write to Nick Jefferson, 3 Price of Magik ; Sabre Wulf 4/10 Gunnet Court, Edinburgh, and user books:  to include St Helen's Close, Rixton, Nr ; Starship Command ; EH4 4SG. Or phone 031-332 joystick and cassette recorder. Warrington, Cheshire, WA3 Space Adventure .50; 4938 and leave your phone Various C64 games also 6JG. Nemisis .50 + many more at number. Games include Elite, COMMDORE 64 owner wants to .50. Sensible offers accepted. Uridium, Trailblazer, Academy, 0306 888456. swap software. I have over 250 Write to: \"Temple Gardens\" Infiltrator, Dandy, Fairlight 2, ORIC ATMOS 48K, five games games on tape. Send your list Goring, Reading, RG8 OJY. Fat Worm, Great Escape and also some books and for mine. All letters answered. ON-SPEC Software Exchange Tomahawk. handmade dustcover with logo. Have all the newest games. Paul Club. FREE membership. COMMODORE 64 GAMES Also a reset switch. Only . Jones, 6 Primrose Way, Spectrum 48 and 128. Exchange Fist Il , Knight Games , Tel: Plymouth 500359, after Maesgwyn Estate, Wrexham, your unwanted originals Time Tunnel , Starion , LCP 6pm. Clwyd LL11 2AT, North Wales. "


"MICROS E L L MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell hundreds of magazines and Dinky Doo, 100 m/c Disk , (cassettes) Screaming Wings, duplicated or pirated soft spare keyboard. Everything is tape . Postal orders/cheques Spy Hunter, Smash Hits 4, ware on tape or disc. You as good as new and together is payable to M Buckingham. Fighter Pilot, Mediator, will now be liable for pro worth over . Bargain at Send to 15 Chamberlin Close, Goonies. .00 each. secution. All suspect  ono. Call 01 947 7911 and Norwich, NR3 3LP. International Karate, Swat, advertisements will be forask for lan. I WANT to swap the latest and Warhawk, Nuclear Nick, warded to the Federation CBM 64 software to swap. Over original CBM 64 games on disk/ Dropzone, Ninja, Action Biker, against Software Theft for 500 titles, old and new. All the tape. Send your list to Jerrel One Man Droid, Kikstart, Cloak further inspection. latest titles please send your Boyd, Trumanlaan 177,3527 BE of Death, Chinera, Submarine Boyd, Trumanlaan 177,3527 BE of Death, CF list to: Jonathan Lewis, 18 Utrechi Holland. Phone: 030 Commander.  each.  the CBM 64 GAMES: Scooby Doo Oaklands, Swiss Valley, 931525. lota real bargain. Ring J. Space Harrier, Tenth Frame, Yie Llanelli, Dyfed, Wales, SA 14 CBM 64 originals for sale. Great Furniss Barnsley 756137.S. Ar Kung Fu II, Paperboy. The lot 8DD. prices Ball Blazer, Fist, Rambo, Yorks. . Tel 0532 565134 after 6pm COMMODORE 64 software to LCP, Commando, Fight Knight, ATARI penpal wanted to swap ask for Richard sell. Elite, PSI 5, Exploding Fist, Scarabeaus, Rocket Ball, and software tips etc. Disk or CBM 64, data cassette, Fairlight, Hobbit, Designers many more. Plus Prism Modem cassette users originals only. Joysticks, printer, games. Will Pencil, Commodore Music 2000  for any home Letters to J Sinclair, 126 swap for CBM Disk Drive and Maker. All as new and original. computer call 06592 371, for Hinchcliffe, Orton, Goldhay, disk software. Ring 0322 842067 .00. Write to 22 Hilldown details after 4pm and ask for Peterborough, PE2 OSS. and ask for Jason Road, Highfield, Southampton, Craig AMSTRAD original cassette BBC B with DFS Opus Twin SO2 1SX FOR SALE. Atari 800XL 64K, games for sale. Prices from  drive 40180 Track and leads and data recorder, joystick, leads, AMIGA programs to swap. manuals. Over  worth of to . Including Jack the Nipper software on disk and tape Please send your list to MrTA manuals, magazines, 32 games , Speedking  and other including Elektraglide, latest releases. Write to Dave including Elite, Hypersports, Maley, 298 Braidcraft Road, Mercenary, Spellbound, Arcade Harrison, 2 Russell Street, (Disk) Exploding Fist, Pollock, Glasgow G53 5LT, Classics and Ninja.  the lot. Bishop Aukland, Co. Durham, Impossible Mission (tape) and Scotland. Also Atari UCS adapter, DH14 7PT. more. Originally , sell for C16/PLUS 4 Games for sale or paddles, joystick, 9 games CBM 64 software to swap. Over . Phone (0202) 748423. swap. All originals. From . including Starmaster.  the 1,000 super turbo's (tape only) After 6pm weekdays and ask for Tel: 01 735 6495. Ask for Joe. lot. Write to Paul C., 59 send your turbo list for mine. Jeanette. Also free C16/Plus 4 game offer. Seafield Avenue, Liverpool, L23 Write to: Darren Hunt, 1 Church TO SWAP Atari 800X1 and 1010 CBM 64 correspondence OTG Lane, Eston, Middlesborough, recorder plus 38 games wanted. I have over 1,000 titles. WANTED 1541 CBM disk drive Cleveland TS6 9DU. including Spy Hunter and Send letters, lists, to David in exchange for a 48K ZX FOR SALE: Spectrum plus and Rescue on Fractalus. Wanted Davis, 3 St Johns, Starion Road, Spectrum. Write to: JR. games: . Microdrive . Commodore 64 and games and Puckeridge, Herts, SG11 1SX. Douglas, Craigmore,  for both. Will swap for tape recorder. Write to Gavin Phone Ware 822277. Highstreet, Slamannan, By microdrive for 1 good joystick Jordan, 60 Albion Ave, COMMODORE 64, disk drive, Falkirk FK 1 3EH. and . Phone (0532) 623161 Beckfield In, York, YO2 5QY. tape deck, sound sampler, COMMODORE 64 and plus/4, and ask for Edward. Also Artist CBM 128, 1571 disk drive, 1531 modem, joysticks freezeframe joystick, 15 games and tape for . cassette deck, 1701 colour 2. plus 400 games on tape and CBM plus 4. Joystick, 5 games ATARI USERS! Softmag is an monitor, plus over  worth disk inc. Alter Ego, Scooby Doo and tape for CBM 64. Worth excellent Atari Games of software. Jet, Elite, Pawn, etc. Wants  ono. Phone Ben over . Will sell all for  Magazine it features charts, Silent Service, Summer Games after 6.00pm 01 692 2957. Also ono. All boxed. Inquire for news, reviews, hints and tips 1 & Il Five Infocom Games, 100 mags inc Zzap 1 issue. individual sale. Tel: 0203 and lots more. For one issue 40&80 Columns mode CALLING ALL BUSINESS 599922 after 4.30pm. Tell your send 80p to J Jones, 21 connections etc. Total value SOCIETIES ETC. List of cheap mates Herrongate Close, Enfield, ATARI REVIEWER: new Middx, EN13BN. Cheques and 01 627 2489 after 6pm. from business cards to bags to monthly newsletter for Atari 8P.O. accepted. Send now!. FOR SALE Spectrum 48K plus bears to balloons to bee mats to bits (issue). Full of reviews. New C128 COMPENDIUM lots of games-Gauntlet, book matches etc. Special offer releases, hints and tips, plus (Datacorder, software inc) plus Masters of the Universe etc, only .00 Paragon, 1st floor, much more. (only ) send to: K 3 good joysticks freeze frame Kempston Pro Joystick Grange House, 1 Middlefield Dolecki, 15 Collingham Avenue, MK 3B plus 1541C disc drive, interface and cheetah interface. Road, Rotherham, South Yorks, Buttershaw, Bradford, BD6 lots of software cassette and Quick shot two joystick and a S60 3JH. 2AN. disc (Spae Harrier, Gauntlet, few mags. All in good working ASTOUNDING VALUE. Three SWAP unused sound sampler World Games, Champ. order . Ring 01 883 9485 plus graphic adventure creator, Wrestling, Paperboy). All under and ask for Leon many great profitable Trivial Pursuit and a few games. 5 months old. Will not seperate. SPECTRUM games for sale opportunities for only .00. All originals. For a 1541 disc  ono. Tel Gary 01 461 2305. from 50p buy over  worth Paragon, 1st Floor, Grange drive (should be in good SPECTRUM PLUS, Joystick and get a free game. Will swap House, 1 Middlefield Road, condition). Write to H. Dhimar, interface, Joystick,  worth for BBC games (send list before Rotherham, South Yorkshire, 196 High Street, Harlesden, of magazines and books hand). No SAE required write S60 3JH. London, NW104ST. Willing to everything is as good as new. to; Richard Lloyd, 4 Edmund GERMAN CBM64 USER wants part with some cash if in top Asking price  ono. Will sell St., Salford 6, Lancs, M6 5WQ. contacts all over the world to condition seperately. Ring 01 947 7911 SPECTRUM PLUS, WHS data swap newest stuff. Always AMSTRAD 664 mono monitor and ask for lan. recorder, D'Ktronics interface, latest titles! Write to PLK. with T.V. modulator, cassette CBM 64 German computer freak Quickshot II. Hundreds of 3292600, 4444 Bad Bentheim, player, protext ROM, Masterfile wants to swap software with pounds of software. Including West Germany. III, Blank disks, desk, . you. (originals only). Write to Elite, Computer Hits 3, Great CBM 64 game 'Columbia', cross Phone 01 568 3499 after 7pm. HCA, PLK042309C, 2400 Lu Escape, Cyprus II. Also between Jet Set Willy and ATARI Software for sale. beck, West Germany. "


"MICROS E IL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell mint condition. Must sell,  ono, TURBOBAUD transforms 48k Or buy the lot for  reasonable duplicated or pirated softor swap for Atari ST, plus disk drive. Spectrum Basic/MCode programs offers taken). Phone Bournemouth ware on tape or disc. You Contact Miss Zoe Downes, 3 Inglesinto reliable turboloaders. Twice (0202) 295210 and ask for Daniel Road, Chatham, Kent. normal speed. Unusual loading ZX SPECTRUM FOR SALE with over will now be liable for proCBM 128 + CBM 1531 tape deck + borders. Includes \"Hacking\" utility 80 original games worth over  secution. All suspect MPS 801 printer + 128 metal casing MPS 801 printer + 128 metal casing to disable autorun and read headers and Kempston PRO joystick advertisements will be for+ monitor stand + joystick + many Easy to use, .95 pes. 81 Jutsums interface, Currah Speech & slot warded to the Federation softwares, sell  ono or swap for Lane, Romford, Essex Konix Liberator (RS232, joystick against Software Theft for Atari ST + disc drive. Contact Miss FOR SALE: Spectrum + with 70 sound through TV etc), interface further inspection. Zoe Downes, 3 Ingles Road, games, speech adaptor, Spectrum Quickshot II + The Stick joysticks, 2 Chatham, Kent. Quickshot Il joystick, printer, joystick spare keyboards. Altogether worth COMPUTER GAME exchange club. adaptor, computer tape recorder well over 600, going for just  FOR SALE: Mattell Intellivision Free membership Exchange your and Sinclair pocket TV and adaptor Call Simon Clarke after 6pm on Intellivoice 10 games: Tron, Deadly unwanted software for C64, C16. All boxed and in good condition: Tunbridge Wells (0892) 37676 Discs, Utopia, Night Stalker Armour Plus 4, Spectrum computers. Send  ono. Phone Potters Bar 52140 SX-64 PORTABLE COMMODORE 64 Battle, Space Battle, Soccer, Sea sae for details to CGEC, 24 after 4pm Monday to Friday and all computer. With built-in disk drive Battle, Lock'n' Chase, Dungeons Hollywood Road, Bolton, Lancs day Saturday and Sunday. and monitor. Also easy script and and Dragons, D&D, Treasures of BL1 6HL ATARI SOFTWARE to swap only on other programs on disk. Compatibel Tarmin, plus 3 Intellivoice games: ATARI 1029 printer + spare ribbon + tape and disk. I have many with all C64 software,  ono. Solar Sailor Space Spartons, B17 dust cover + Atariwriter software + programs such as Mr Do's Castle, Ring Otley Inr Leeds) 461528 after Bombers, . Contact: R Fleming, printer utilities disks + paper, $95. BC's Quest and many, many more. 6pm 47 Wood Street, Port Sunlight, Atari 850 interface + dust cover + Please send list to: Orlando, 2 PERSONALISED GOODS Calling all Bebington, Wirral, Merseyside communications software, $75. De Beechcroft Rd, Southwoodford, businesses, societies etc. List of CBM 64 SOFTWARE to swap. Disk Re Atari book, S10. Technical London E18 1LA I will try to answer cheap personalised goods, from only please. All letters answered. reference notes book $10 Disks: all letters business cards to bags to bears to Write to Richard Harris, 8 Shooting Arcade, Clowns & CLASSIFED ADS making you good balloons to beer mats to book Craggwood Close, Horsforth, Leeds Balloons, Deluxe Invaders, Softporn profits. Write successful ads with the matches etc, etc. For only . Post LS18 4FL. Tel: 0532 588698 Adventure, $5 each. Roms: proven secrets of success found in now to Robert Burgess (CVG), Office COMMODORE 64 + C2N tape Computer Chess, Assmbler Editor our great booklet. Post  now to D, 1 Middlefield Road, Rotherham recorder, both boxed and in $7 each. Telephone Crewe (0270) Robert Burgess (CVG), 1 Middlefield S60 3JH. excellent condition. Also 2 joysticks, 766462 & ask for Gary or write to: 11 Road, Rotherham, S60 3JH. COMMODORE 128 AND 1541 tape a mouse and  worth of original Cookesmere Lane, Sandbach, INTELLIVISION GAMES console for deck, 23 tape games, over 30 disks games such as Gauntlet, Summer Cheshire. sale + 10 games including voice box of games (Pawn, Mercenary I & II Games 1 and 2 Pit Stop 2 Way of WORD PROCESSOR for use with + cartridges. Offers. Also Sinclair etc), joystick, 6 books, Seiko the Exploding Fist, Kung-Fu Master CBM 64 and 1520 printer plotter. Full software for sale. Elite, ACE, etc. programmable watch Worth over etc. Sell for . Ring 072763306. use of colours and character sizes. Phone Dronfield 417190. , sell for . Write to: STAR PURSUIT. Not just another Automatic justification, and intext 520 STM FOR SALE with IME Marcus Lynn, 8 Somme Court. Howe trivial game, loads of questions, play command system, with memory upgrade, 500k disk drive, Barracks, Canterbury against friends or computer. Only programmable margin & line width games eg, Starglider, Leaderboard, MSX SOFTWARE TO SWAP Games .99. Cheques or postal orders to for advanced printing Superb value blank disks, disk box, demos, mags, include Batman, Trailblazer, Kung Carl Waters, 23 Arleston Lane, for only .40 (inc p&p). Available mouse mat, dust covers, joystick 7 Fu Master, Rambo, Knightmare, Wellington, Telford, Shropshire. from STX Enterprises, \"Fairfield\" months old, boxed as new. Worth Goonies. European's welcome. EVESHAM DISC WIZARD, for the Newey's Hill, Worcester WR3 7DZ , sell for only . Phone Ken Write to Peter Jess, 58 Legacurry Amstrad, copies your programs fro AMERICAN PENPAL WANTED to 0993) 841182, after 5pm. Road, Ravarnette, Lisburn, Co tape to disc at the touch of a button swap Commodore 64 software with ATARI PICTURE DISC. Packed with Antrim, BTR27 5LZ, N Ireland. Hardly used, only . Tel: (0634) games, utilities etc. If interested then brilliant graphics screens, includes ATARI DISK SOFTWARE TO SWAP 253030 after 6pm and ask for Mark send a list if possible to: Julian auto-icture fader. Also amazing including Raid over Moscow, or write to: 8 Cooling Road, High Smith, 45 Maplecroft Crescent digitized music disc, you won't Koronis Rift, Starfleet and The Island Halstow, Rochester, Kent ME3 BSA Sheffield S9 1DN, England. No believe your ears! Includes free XL Caper, etc. Send lists to Jeff, 23 AMIGA SWAP! I want to swap messing please, I will try to reply to translator for your older software. Brayes Manor, Stotfold, Hitchin, games and programs, send your list all letters. Both discs, four sides full for .95 Herts. for mine. Trond Westre, Amiga-Soft, COMMODORE 64 software for sale. post free. P. H. Cunningham, 11 SPECTRUM + with a Doodler Rorstadv. 6017 Aasestranda, PSI-5 Trading, Eidolon, Sold Million Berwyn Ave, Penyffordd, Chester, lightpen, Ferguson data recorder, Norway. Phone (Norway) (71) 1. Little Computer People, Paradroid CH4 OHS. Doubler Mk II, switchable joystick 35733) and Uridium,  each. 12 SPECTRUM SOFTWARE FOR SALE interface, joystick, over  worth COMMODORE 64 adventures to Mastertronic titles, 6. Graphics 16K AND 48K FROM  UPWARDS of software including stainless steel swap. Sherlock, Castle of Terror, pack, 16. Laser Basic  and Revs . Also Cheetah sweet talker for sale. If Cost over , bargain at  ono. Lord of the Rings, The Helm, Holy Write to: M. Sibthorpe, 18 The Stray, interested please send your name Please phone Stockton (0642) Grail, Bored of the Rings. Most Darlington, Co Durham DL1 1EP. and address to Richard Griffin, 62 565141 Channel 8. Phone 0294 51645 or AMSTRAD SOFTWARE Goat Lane, Enfield, write: Brian Wallace, 17 Edzell Row, SPECTRUM 48K, 2 manuals, over compilations for sale, all originals: OLE OLE SPANISH EXCHANGE Whitehirst Park, Kilwinning.  of software including Super Knightlore, Hypersports, Ghosts 'n' CLUB Hey, attention Commodore 64 Scotland. Goblins, 3D Grand Prix, . Shorts: and Spectrum owners, if you want Cycle, Super Soccer, Green Beret, AMSTRAD SOFTWARE. Fighter Fuse, Finders Keepers, Chiller, Kane, to swap good games, this is your Rambo, etc. Lightpen and software, Pilot, 14. Marie Minor, 4. Er Sert, . Tank Busters, Sorcery, Kempston interface and brand new great opportunity. We've almost all . Tape to tape copier, . Hunchback 2. Spannerman, . lightening joystick. Over 30 latest games including new good Spellbound . Last V8, E2. Ghouls. Harrier Attack, Hunter Killer, Spectrum mags, 3 tip books full of Spanish games. Please send us your  Knight Tyme, . Finders Codename Mat, Roland in Time, pokes and playing tips together latest games list to: Rafael Garcia Keepers, . Send cheque/po to N Manic Miner, . Kung Fu Master, worth over +, asking  ono Garrido, C Zamora No5-30B Waring, 223 Chester Rd, Stainless Steel, f10 Trailblazer, Ikari Alcorcon (Madrid), Spain (for Contact: Darren, 01-902 1090 Grappenhall, Warrington, Cheshire Warriors, . Starstrike 2 (disc). Commodore 64). Jose Luis Sanz AMIGA PROGRAMS TO SWAP and WA4 2QD Green Beret (discl, . Who Dares Fernandez, AV/Cantos no7-30A; sell. All the latest titles available. Il AMSTRAD COLOUR MONITOR Wins 2 (disc), Dragons Lair (disc), fo Alcorcon (Madrid), Spain (for swap with anyone in the world. WANTED! Will swap for green Tel Mark on 01-428 1415 Spectrum). Don't delay send disk or list today screen + modulator + over  of CBM 64 GAMES FOR SALE ATARI SOFTWARE FOR SALE to: Carsten Bjerrum, Niels Bohrs software + joystick Phone 0522 Gauntlet, Space Harrier, Avenger, Action Biker, Bounce, Chuckle Egg. Alle 23/3210, DK 5230 Odense M 24620 and ask for Rob or write to R World Games, Hardball, Superbowl. Crystal Raider, Despatch Rider, Gun Denmark, Tif: 09/17 87 39. Ward, 57 Maple St, Lincoln All at reasonable prices. Also Law, Last V8, Ninja, Marathon INTERNATIONAL AMIGA & LN5 80S Quickshot II Joystick 125, Freeze Maths for Fun, One Man & His Droid, Commodore 64 contacts wanted. I COMMODORE 128, Commodore Frame Mk 3B, Freeze Frame Ulitity Player Misile Editor, Scooter, have all the new software for both MPS 801 printer, with paper, CBM Disc, Do Soft Disks. Send sae for full Screwball, Shamus, Soccer Thorn computers. Send your disk and/or 1531 tape-deck, monitor stand and list to: Andrew Sobryan, 62 Albury EMI), Spellbound, Vegas Jackpot list soon to: Carsten Bjerrum, Niels metal casing for 128.joystick and Avenue, Isleworth, Middlesex All at  each. Atari Smash Hits 4 & Bohrs Alle 23/3210, DK 5230 Odense many games, plus all manuals, all TW7 5HZ. Bounty Bob Strikes Back At f4 each. M, Denmark, TIT: 09/17 87 39 "


"MICROS E I I MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell AMSTRAD Home and business duplicated or pirated softcomputers at amazing prices! Also ware on tape or disc. You software for most makes of will now be liable for procomputers. Please state computer when enquiring. Cumana disc drives secution. All suspect for the BBC & Master series and a advertisements will be forlarge range of personal stereos with warded to the Federation popular makes such as Aiwa, Sony against Software Theft for and Ferguson. Send a large sae for further inspection. colour details with amazing prices! to: Data Business Systems, 10 C64 SOFTWARE TO SWAP or sell. Lucknow Street, Plumstead, London have all the lastest titles. I want to SE18 2SN exchange new programs with COMMODORE AMIGA AND 64 anyone in the world. Disk only. Send PENPALS WANTED. I am interested your disk or list today to: Carsten in all types of software. I have well Bjerrum, Niels Bohrs Alle 23/3210 over 3000 titles. New games every DK 5230 Odense M, Denmark. Tlf: week. Don't wait Send letters, lists, 09/17 87 39 disks to: Stefano Gilardo, Via Enrico COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE TO Mattel 62, 40138 Bologna, Italy. Tel: SWAP Disk only. Send your list to: 051/534581. All letters answered. Brendon Hull, 1/10 Reilly St. CBM 64 beginner would like penLiverpool, NSW 2170, Australia. All palls for swaps etc, tape or disc letters answered. (originals only). Write to Roy COMMODORE 64 AND ATARIST Pritchard, 271 Caernarvon Road, owner wants to swap software with people all over the workd. Disk only Bangor, Gwynedd, North Wales All letters answered. Please write to: LL57 5SG or tel: 0248 362593 Matti Jarvelin, Paimenpolku 23, FOR SALE. Atari 800XL with 1050 90140 Oulu, Finland disk drive, 1010 cassette recorder, COMMODORE C16 COMPUTER blank disks, storage case, books, Data cassette recorder, Quickshot Il magazines, one quick shot II joystick.  worth of games, 3 joystick, plus 44 top games. Worth books, 2 basic tapes, all leads over . Will sell for . Phone: included, all boxed in good condition.  ono. Phone: 01-858 62922. Swanley, Kent 4514 after 6pm FOR SALE: MPS 801 printer for ATARI USERS! I have many games Commodore 64/128, VGC E80 ono, on disk, in single and double density plus freeze frame Mkil . If IUS doubler), to swap. Interested? interested please phone Salisbury Please contact B. Archer, 31 Ermine 862 698 and ask for Peter, Street, Huntingdon, Cambs COMMODORE 64 owner wishes to PE18 6EX. FROM THE SPECTRAL GUARDIAN swap latest games on tape or disk ANGELS comes Pokemaster. Over like Paperboy, Xevious, Marble 500 Spectrum pokes-tips make this Madness and many others. Every the most comprehensive package letter answered. Please write to ever compiled. Yours for only  finc Jonathan, 45 Downfield Ave, Ings p&p). Extra Bonus: become a Bridge Est, Hull HU6 7XE Spectral Guardian Angel yourself AMIGA USERS. I have over 58 titles. with certificate, badges and compos some games and some business. Trevor Tulloch, 39-2 Varden Croft Edgbaston, Birmingham BS 7LR. would be interested in swapping COMMODORE 64-2 C2N FOR SALE COMMODORE 642 C2N FOR SALE programs and ideas with anyone in Also 3 joysticks and over  worth the UK or any country in the world. of software. Still under extended Please write or call: Dennis guarantee. Wanted:  ono. Tel: Robillard, 16 Gilbert Street, Dover 10532) 589417 Heights, 2030, NSW, Sydney AMSTRAD CPC464 green screen Australia. Tel: 02 3719149. monitor, + colour modulator, E440 worth of games, including CBM 64 owner wants to swap games. I have got all the latest Elite, Matchday, Gauntlet etc. Total value , asking  ono. Tel: software. Write to Paul, 61 Melling 01-302 1681. Way, Old Hall Est, Kirkby, Liverpool COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES FOR L32 1TN SALE from November 1981 (Issue 1) SAVE  on Amstrad computer to October 1984 inclusive. All in hardware, colour monitor, stereo mind condition, except issue No 2 sound, speech synthesis,  torn cover. Will separate for right worth of software, CPC 464 price. Andrew Elliott, 59A Ampthill Rd, Maulden, Bedfordshire computer only  ono. Tel: 0652 MK45 2DH. 34363 C64 GAMES FOR SALE. Uridium , HI AMIGA FREAKS, fellow freak Paradroid , Dragons Lair , 1942 wishes to make contact with a view , Dan Dare  and many more. to swapping software. Contact Me Send for list to D. M. Huntley, 43 Richard Turbine, 27 Drumpark St. Fullwood Ave, Newhaven, East Glasgow G46 8LR. Scotland. Sussex BN9 9SW. WANTED: Interface one anf C64 GAMES FOR SALE, excellent titles. Leaderboard, Ghosts & microdrive for Spectrum. Must be Goblins, Green Beret, Spindizzy. reasonably priced. Contact S. Wood, Mercenary, all  each, Starglider Cinder Path Cottage, Goldsborough, . Phone Neil 02912 71783 any Knaresborough, North Yorks. 0423 time after 5pm 865320 ATARI SOFTWARE on disk and . Private sale, write to Simon, cassette to sell and swop-Last Yeoueney Lodge, Moor Lane, Starfighter, Stealth, Trivia Quest, Staines, Middx TW19 6EE Crystal Castles, Ultima IV-Plus 300 JOIN THE LEAGUE! The Soccer PBM more titles! Enquiries and lists to: game. Prizes. S.ae League Games, Neil, 90 Queens Drive, Surbiton, PO Box 48, Newport, Gwent NP9 Surrey TKT5 SPP 2UD AMIGA USER GROUP in Bristol, 14 COMMODORE POKES, hints and Parkstone Avenue, Horfield, Bristol, tips for your 64. Our successful Avon, England. booklet, covering 70 top games like ATARI 520 ST SOFTWARE TO Uridium, Paradroid and Spindizzy SWAP. I have all the latest games costs only .50, with a great from America and Europe. Every original tape free for every fifth letter answered, just send your list order! Post now, cheques/wrapped for mine. Write to Fraser Anderson, coins to Robert Burgess, Office D, 1 609 Mansfield Avenue, Ottawa, Middlefield Road, Rotherham, South Ontario, Canada, K2A 2T3. Yorkshire S60 3JH. Written COMMODORE 64 USER wishes to enquiries welcome. swap software, tape and disk, over SPECTRUM PACKS E2 brings you a 1000 titled. All letters answered booklet of 70 infinite lives pokes on instantly, write to. M. Alfraih, Riyadh hits like Lightforce, Paperboy and 11474 PO Box 16600, Saudi Arabia Ghosts and Goblins, plus your Most of latest software. choice of a great free game from our PENPALS WANTED. I own an Atari list of chart topping titles. Post now, 800XL and disk drive and I wish to cheques/wrapped  coins to Robert swap games and ideas with people Burgess, Office D1, Middlefield all over the world. Please rite with a Road, Rotherham, South Yorkshire list of your games to: Adrian, 188 S60 3JH. Written enquiries Grace Way, Stevenage, Herts SG1 welcome 5AG. AMSTRAD USERS, 2 exciting new COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE TO games on one cassette. Freedom SWAP (disk only). Some good Fighters, a game of strategy and quality titles. Will swap with anyone exploration. Race Day, enjoy a day All letters answered, send list to: D. at the races in your own home Send Andrews, 132 Barkly Road, Beeston, cheques or PO for .50p to Glyn Leeds LS117ES. Booth, 78 Princess Street, CBM 64 reset switch .50 inc p&p. CBMM 64 reset switch 13.50 inc p&p Woodlands, Doncaster, S Yorks DN6 Enter pokes etc, fits serial port of 64 ZLU. or d/drive. Works with most games CHEAP SALE: software + books, all and most 64's. Money back if original games. Pyracurse , doesn't suit your 64 (British made Dragontorc f5, The Warlock of ones). Neil Burrows, 24 Fairclough Firetop HNT , Terrordactil 4D . Road, Thornton, Cleveleys, Also: Multifile (with blank tapes) , Blackpool, Lancs FY5 2RN. Screen Machine (graphics and title CBM 64 original cassette games 1 designer) 5. Learn Basic on the 48k to -Staff/Karnath, Imposs/ Spectrum . Books: Microguide Mission, Raid/Mowcow, Ancipital, .50, games book f2, all for 48k Stellar 7. Snowball, Lords/Midnight, Spectrum. Contact: Kate Birks, 1 Hobbit etc. Utilities f1-, Walker Close, Grenoside, Sheffield Panarama, Practifile, Practicale, CHEAP STATIONERY 250 selfAcos + Superbasic and more. Phone adhesive labels 34\" x 11\" only .75 Neil on (0253) 826218. inc p&p. Sae for complete list or I HAVE an amstrad 6128 colour cheques payable to: Kelvin Brace, 34 monitor + 15 good games (Raid, Woodstock Road, Broxbourne, Herts Great Escape, and Tank Command) EN10 7NT. if possible I would like to trade this SPECTRUM 48K, joystick, cassette for an Amstrad 464 colour monitor, recorder with 6 months guarantee possibly 15 games. Please ring 502 Over 110 games including Bomb 3979 from 4-10pm. Jack, Green Beret and many more. ABOUT 700 PROGRAMS for MSC Many Mastertronic and lots more. computers. I will swap with C&VG's Contact David John Martin at 0700 readers. Send your lists to the 83 248  ono following address. Carlo Bianchini, FORCE 55, monthly review for C64 Viale Argonne 12, 27100 Pavia, Italy software. Read about all the new Also available selected games! software, maps, tips, previews and utilities for MSX 2. loads more! Order your copy now or ATARI ST OWNERS wanted to swap send for subscription details and software. Write to: Ranjan, 3 preview issue to: 80 Fenham, Hall Wensley Close, Harpenden, Herts Drive, Newcastle NE49XA ALS 2RZ or phone 05827-69152 Magazine 50p + 25p p&p. COMMODORE 64, software for sale, WANTED: CBM 64 + tape recorder all games original and as new. + games + joystick. Must be in Paperboy, Infiltrator, Fist 2. reasonable condition. Preferabl Breakthru, Green Beret, Jack the S Wales area Contact David on Nipper, all at f6 and Trivial Pursuit at Porthcawl 3468 between 4 and 9pm "


"MICROS E L I MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell to be sold or swapped. All on tape, CBM 64 SOFTWARE TO SWAP Disk CBM 64 OWNER wishes to swap duplicated or pirated softall originals, no loading faults. Plus or tape, many titles available. All tape based games. Many new ware on tape or disc. You an unused Konix Speedking joystick originals. Send your list will now be liable for pro For the full list send an sae to D. Only genuine letters. Write yours. B. Lamming, 5 Jubilee secution. All suspect Marks, 18 Arandora Cres, Romford, immediately to Mick, 2 Yates Terrace, Newbiggin-by-the-sea, advertisements will be for Essex RM6 4SS. Gardens, Top Valley, Nottingham Northumberland. Or phone and ask warded to the Federation NG5 9EF, England. for Bill on 0670 851876. against Software Theft for CMB 64 plus C2N tape recorder, 3 further inspection. joysticks, magazines and over  VTX 5000 MODEN. Fully boxed, CBM 64 SOFTWARE for sale. of all original software, 127 titles mint condition, . Contact Colin Originals for less than  each FOR SALE: Vic 20 computer, including Elite, Theatre Europe. Yie Gallagher, 64 Newlands Rd, including Impossible Mission, includes: Vixen 16k switchable ram, ar Kung Fu, Uridium, Paradroid, Newlands, Glasgow G43 2JH. Theatre Europe, Ghostbusters and 6 cartridges + games worth . Commando, Summer Games 1+2 Scotland more! Send sae for details to S. Data recorder, joystick, games Value , accept. Tel: Keane, 5 Battle Place, Lorches include: Games Designer, Jet Pak, Maidenhead (0628)38545. FOR SALE: CBM 64, over 40 titles Estate, Preston, Lancs PRZ ILS. Also originals, graphics pack, Busicale, Football Manager and many more. have C&VG and Zzap 64 ags for 50p SPECTRUM SOFTWARE  worth The Times puzzels and games, each. Asking for  ono. Tel: 061 339 0965 incl. Aliens, Lightforce, Ghust'n' Biology Revision, Quickshot Il Goblins, Marsport +  worth of joystick, machine code master book. FOR SALE: CBM 64, C2N Quickshot ACUMEN CLUB Play this amazing magazines. Sell for  or swap for a Cost . Accept  ono. Prism 2 joystick,  of games, top titles Moden 1000 plus accessories Cost Commodore 64 + C2N data strategy game by post. You've never Many books as well. Wirth  the played anything like it. Acumen is a recorder. A bargain for new , accept  ono. Send cheque lot for . Quick sale. Tel: Watford game to beat the classics from our 092337483 evenings. Tony. Spectrum owners. Phone to J. Gilbert, 14 Pingley Meadow, starter kit, including free program Lennoxtown 310127 after 6pm. Ask Brigg, South Humberside VIC 20 colour computer. Lots of for Spectrum 48k or 128k. Send for Chris. DN20 9HQ software, 16k Ram pack and .99 to: Acumen Club, 1 Merlin introduction to Basic Part 1, 65. Tel: Close, Hainault, Ilford, Essex IG6 SWAP 128K SPECTRUM and tape 64k MSX FOR SALE. As new, boxed Norwich 0603 37994 after 4.15 and 3XL Spectrum owners only please. recorder, 1 joystick and over 150 with cassette recorder and games. ask for Jonathan It's great. games, Star Glider, Academy, Worth , will accept . Write Gauntlet, Uridium etc. For a CBM 64 to Nic Herring, 36 High Gill Road, ATARI 800XL including 1010 DATEL ELECTRONICS sound + leads + tape recorder or disc drive Nunthorpe, Middlesborough, recorder, joystick, many games sampler and drum machine for CBM with games (will offer  with disc Cleveland TS7 OEF. including Dropzone, Mig Alley Ace 64. Excellent piece of hardware drive and games). Tel: Oundle, and Electraglide, plus Arati manual Great fun and good quality sampling Northamptonshire 73520 after 4pm WANTED: used Commodore , Phone Luton 508245, ask for drum machine incorporated, in and ask for Rick. software, no copies please, Glen. some case hardware leads and all adventures in particular, but ADVENTURE WRITERS novice or software , was . Tel: 0908 CBM 64 USER wants to swap games anything considered. Send list and on supertape turbo or disc. Every 648189 and ask for Paul Free expert, any utility/language. prices to 4 Cresthill Road, Bracken letter answered quickly. Write to: M. Hall, Huddersfield, West Yorks HD2 Redhawk original to buyer. Adventure Contact' is your Driskell, 34 South Park Road, Ilford, 1PD. Tape only magazine! Each issue 50-60 pages. AMSTRAD CPC 464 Utilities for sale Sample copy . Twelve issues . Essex, IC1 1SS or Tel: 553 2907 COMMODORE 64/128 Sub-logic or to swap, electric studio light pen, Payment to: Pat Winstanley. FOR SALE: 16k Spectrum manual, fig-forth and the Complete Machine flight simulator. For sale: worth , Adventure Contact, 13 Hollington Way, Wigan WN3 6LS. Code Tutor. Only  for the lot or books, and Kempston joystick will sell for  ono. Contact Mike will swap for the equivalent amount interface, hardly used, any offers Hodgson, 123 Beech Lane, Early, CBM 64 SOFTWARE to swap. Many of software. Write to R. Downing, 38 considered. Phone Steve (0272) Reading RG6 20D or phone Rdg titles. Send your list for mine. Rayleigh Ave, Birmingham, 681278 864727 Originals only. All letters answered. Chesterfield, Derbyshire S43 1JP ORIC ATMAS 48K COMPUTER, with C128/64 PENPALS WANTED to Write to Dave Ashman, 89 Marston Lane, Frome, Somerset BA11 4DG. ATARI 800 XL 1010 recorder + Panasonic tape recorder, riginal swap rogams, ideas, hints etc. Prefer joystick +  worth of software games and books. Worth +, seil disc. Write to Onn Lee, 125 Arnold BIT 1 DANISH GOLD. Please contact including Elecktra Glide, The Price of for  ono. Tel: 0772 718595. Road, Bestwood Estate, Nottinghamm e. I have lost your address. Write Magik. In excellent condition for NG5 5HR. All letters answered. to: Nick, 47 Oakwood Road, Bricket only . Tel: 206 0658 after 4pm. FOR SALE for the Commodore 64: Wood, St Albans, Hert AL23PZ. Or Neos Mous, . The final cartridge AMERICAN ATARI 600XL for sale anyone else who knows Danish ROCK 'N' WRESTLE for sale for two copying cartirdge, . Both for never used, excellent condition, not Gold's Address Amstrad CPC 464 played once only. , also satellite 6006 joystick, . for use with normal English TV  + 50p p&p or swap it for either Tel: 0532 623161, ask for Edward needs converter or works fine in AMIGA SEARCH TOP. Software Goonies, Who Dares Wins II Turbo the States! Complete boxed as new swap partners all over the world for COMMODORE 64K COMPUTER Esprit, Congo Bongo (originals lor swap for CBM 64) any offers? new stuff. Write to Obelisk 1541 disk drive, C2N cassette deck, 2 only). Ring Bristol (0272)611966 Tel: Bishop Stortford 0279 813730 Softworks, Postlagenkarte Nr joysticks, floppy disks, software. now. Ask for Zac. after 6pm weekdays. All day Sat and 004945B, 2100 Hamburg 90, West Assembly language macro Sun. Buyer collects. Germany development system, machine code COMMODORE 64 computer games, monitor Pascal 64 compiler, Valhalla originals, for sale. Prices start at 50p. FOR SALE: 48k Spectrum plus with RESET SWITCHES for CBM 64, only and many more games. Books Call Patrick on 0203 25402 or 150 St datacorder, joystick interface .50, plus 25p p&p. Cheques/po reference guide, advanced machine Georges Road, Stoke, Coventry. (Kempston compatible) over  of payable to S.T. Bainbridge at 9 code book and magazines. Sell for Send sae for full list. Over 350. recent games (oldest Knightlore), Melbourne Street, Newport, Isle of CBM 64 cassette games to swap.  ono. Tel: 0273 35438, various magazines. All for . Wight, PO30 10X Many new games available. Send Phone Plymouth 0752 665596, C64 GAMES FOR SALE Titles AMSTRAD DDI-1 disc drive with your list for mine to 20 Levens Walk, include Yie Ar Kung Fu, Uridium, Beaconhill, Cramlington, FOR SALE: Dragon 32, plus  interface and disc wizard and 28 Commando, Monty on the Run worth of software Data recorder, discs which include Elite, Way of the Northumberland NE23 8DZ. Or call Mercenary etc and many more. No quickshot 1 & 2 joysticks for  Mark on Cramlington 735252 Tiger, Who Dares Wins 2, Odd Job. price more than f6. Tel: 0972 COMMODORE 64 AND ZX81 games 674627 Phone lan Burroughs, Ascot 0990 Discovery etc.  ono. Tel: 0302 2682 530818. "

