"THE MAG REAL EAD... his satanic majesty's  COMPUTER DOOM & DOOM 2  N VIDEO NEONGUIGUIN surcu original and the sea rate the follow-up GAMES first review STREET RACER it's mario kart 2 and more! exclusive this disney game is dynamite! MICKEY MANTA FRE TEINO MAGAZINE EVERY MAJOR NEW GAME REVIEWED AND RATED CHADS CONTROL sonic's 300 we've never seen a shoom -up like it! INSIDE THE BEST MAGAZINE FOR NEW GAMES MACHINES JAGUAR with exclusive shots of amazing future games THREE BIG FIRST REVIEWS! NOVEMBER 1994 ISSUE NO 156 68.00 ASCH OM 12.50 S$ 13.50 $5.95 7000 L ISSN 0261-3697 BEST FOR NEW MACHINES 11 > EXCLUSIVE! BURN:CYCLE REVIEWED wasting the CD-i doubters EXCLUSIVE! FIFA 3DO REVIEWED the best ever version by far.... EXCLUSIVE! Mow 'em down! RISE OF THE ROBOTS FIRST REVIEW 100% INDEPENDENT 9770261\"369062\" "


"MIND BLOWING FOUR PLAYER DESTRUCTION upp 09 2 Dua DE D Dang Sun fah OO 1:09. \"Playable and addictive beyond belief ... Super Bomberman 2 is it\" Total 94% «Superb multi-player action» NMS 92% AVAILABLE IN NOVEMBER "


"SIVE.COM SUPER NINTENDO ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM HOSON GROUP HUDSON SOFT Hudson Solt is a trademark of Hudson Soft Co. Lid. 1994 Hudson Soft Super Nintendo Entertainment System is a trademark of Nintendo. As ng ts reserved "


"CVG CONTENT DOUBLE DOOM GAMES Doom & Doom Special Edition on console o Doom 2 on PC @XCLUSIVE! MANAGING EDITOR: STEVE JAMES ASSOCIATE EDITOR: MARK PATTERSON DEPUTY EDITOR: GARY LORD ART EDITOR: JULIE HEAP GROUP ART EDITOR: JEFF ZIE STAFF WRITERS: DENIZ AHMET RIK SKEWS CONTRIBUTING WRITERS: LUCY HICKMAN TONY DILLON DEAN EVANS RADION AUTOMATIC TOM GUISE COVER ILLUSTRATION: SEBASTIAN QUIGLEY Without a shadow of a doubt one of the finest games ever to smash its way into the home; the incredible Doom is finally available to a much a wider audience. Fantastic. So feast your eyes on the screen shots from the 32-X and Jaguar versions, starting on page 34 and then turn to page 58 and read the review of the sequel on PC. Editorial enquiries: 071-972 6700 Advertising enquiries: 071-713 1983 Subscription and Back Issues enquiries (9.30-5.30 Mon-Fri): 0858 468888 CVG Headquarters: Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU TEL: 071-972 6700 FAX: 071-972 6701 ADVERTISING MANAGER: Simon Hamer; ADVERTISING EXECUTIVE: Holly Eadie; PRODUCTION: Tina Gynn; SYSTEMS AND PREPRESS MANAGER: Sarah-Jane Leavey: MARKETING MANAGER: Karen Williams; MARKETING DIRECTOR Marc Swallow; PRODUCT MANAGER: Nichola Bentley; EDITORIAL DIRECTOR: David Kelly MANAGING DIRECTOR: Terry Pratt SUBSCRIPTION ENQUIRIES: CVG Subscriptions, Tower Publishing, Tower House, Sovereign Place, Lathkill Street, Market Harborough, Leicestershire LE16 9ES TEL: 0858 468811 RATES: 12 ISSUES UK: .00, AIRMAIL EUROPE: .00, AIRMAIL REST OF WORLD ZONE 1: .00, AIRMAIL REST OF WORLD ZONE 2: .00, REST OF WORLD SURFACE: .00, BFPO: .00, EIRE: .00 PRINTED IN THE UK BY: St Ives, Peterborough ADDITIONAL COLOUR BY: PrePress, London EC1 DISTRIBUTED BY: Frontline (c) COPYRIGHT: Computer and Video Games 1994 ISBN NO: 0261-3597 DISCLAIMER: Although we take great care to ensure as far as reasonably possible the accuracy of the information contained in this magazine, CVG and the publishers cannot be held responsible for omissions, errors, misprints or mistakes which may occur. NOVEMBER 1994  ISSUE 156 Goluen CRUIS'N AROUND REGULARS WOS Remember where you read it first. We lift the incredibly tight lid off the pressure cooker that is Nintendo's next console, the Ultra 64, to bring you the first yes the very first shots from one of the machine's first games, Cruis'n USA. 6 News 102 Out Now 106 Help! 112 Big Eds & hot compo! | 113 Charts 114 Next Month 25 MILLION REA "


"CONTENTS CVG SELECT COURSE REVIEWS : 90 Street Racer SNES The best multi-player race game available. If there ever was a Mario Kart 2 this would be it. TEKNO SPECIAL 3F Micro Machines 2 p.100 94 Probotector Mega Drive Incredible arcade mayhem from  Konami in this never-ending plat form shoot-'em-up. : 70 Batman and Robin -SNES You've read the comic, watched the TV series, now play the game! CVG WORK IN PROGRESS 74 Way of the Warrior 3D0 : More gore and blood than a day trip to Hell with Clive Barker & Dracula, and it plays like Mortal Kombat to boot! Burn:Cycle 2.40 MAJOR GAME EVERY REVIEWED AND RATED 76 Smurfs SNES As cute and as cheerful as they come. And that's all you need to know about this difficult game. : 96 Colonization PC : One for the strategy buffs and for  the value conscious among you. 78 Sparkster SNES/Mega Drive A very imaginative and lovingly presented platform game. Konami's best ever release? Alien vs Predator p.44 40 Burn:Cycle CD-I You've heard about interactive movies, but you've never played one that's this interactive... Tower Assault p.14 14 Tower Assault PC/Amiga 16 Magic Carpet PC-CD 18 Dawn Patrol PC 98 Mickey Mania Mega Drive The best Mickey game has arrived, and it's in glorious black and white. Eh? : 54 Rise of the Robots PC/SNES 42 Earthworm Jim SNES/Mega Drive The most wonderfully animated platform game this year? It's taken a while but this stunning-looking beat-'em-up has finally arrived and we've got the exclusive first review! 58 Doom 2-PC The PC game to end all others returns in a blood-splat. tered sequel. Gore city... 60 Red Zone Mega Drive Is Time Warner's big chopper game more fun to play with than Jungle Strike? FIFA on 3D0 p. 64 Total Distortion p.20 20 Total Distortion PC-CD 22 Power Drive SNES/Mega Drive 23 WolverineSNES/Mega Drive 2Aladdin Amiga 26 WWF Raw SNES/Mega Drive 29 Street Hockey SNES 61 Super Bomber Man -SNES A contender for numero uno most playable game of all time or not? 81 Mega Bomberman Mega Drive The Mega Drive gets its first sweet taste of bombermen. 100 Micro Machines 2Mega Drive Simplistic gameplay at its best. Best four-player game ever? SUPER SHORTS Wolverine p.23 44 Alien Vs Predator : 64 FIFA — 3DO Jaguar Amazing graphics prevail in this lavish version of the SNES and We put the hype to the test in our Mega Drive chart toppers. in-depth review. Time to buy a Jag? 67 Universe CD32 49 SS Lucifer Mega Probotector p.94 Adventure and strategy plus Drive/Game Gear gallery-quality graphics in this lat. : 84 Super Stardust est conversion from Core Design If it's puzzling Lemmings clones A1200 you're after then the Codies may 67 Tiny Toons Asteroids for the 90s with graphics have what you're just after. from the year 2010! Game Boy 52 Guardian CD32 The Toons are back and at their 87 Urban Strike Fast vector graphics and lots of sugariest, driving you mad in this blasting in this Starwing wannabe. cute and wacky adventure, Mega Drive More helicopter blasting in the third 68 Sonic and sequel from EA. 53 Pete Sampras Game Gear Knuckles 89 Tiny Toon The finest tennis game you'll find Mega Drive Adventures on a handheld. Even better than Three games in one, well kind of... the Mega Drive version. as the duo return for more hedgeMega Drive hog antics of the backwardly com. The Toons go into sporty mood with patible kind.  some typically wacky results. : Check 'em out on page 105 NBA Live '95 SNES Samurai Shodown Game Boy World Cup '94 Amiga Pinkie Amiga Battle Bugs PC Dark Legions PC Misadventures of Flink Mega Drive NHL '95 Mega Drive 30 Samurai Shodown 3DO 30 Off-World Interceptor 3D0 32 Wing Commander 3 PC-CD 34 Doom Jaguar 37 Doom Sega 32X RS SINCE 1982... AND STILL THE MAGAZINE REAL GAMERS READ! "


"CVG NEWS connected As Sega gear up for the the wired-up gaming news sectioi Virtua Fighter 2 hits Japan launch of their 32-X, The mystery of Bureau 13 we bring you exclusive Revolutionary Saturn Software NINTENDO TO FOLLOW SEGA'S ROAD TO 32-BIT SUCCESS news of Nintendo's 32Rise returns already Bit SNES booster. Chess killer Floors Kasparov We all know about Nintendo's 64-bit plans, but we bet you didn't know about what the Big Nin's got in store for the SNES... Meanwhile Virtua Dragon's Lair comes to 3DO Fighter 2 is about New AM2 game on the way Despite much posturing and defending its apparent decision to make the Ultra 64 a cartridge based machine, we can now tell you that it won't be. Sources close to Nintendo Japan claim that the Ultra 64 will be CD-based, but that isn't the end for cartridges or the SNES for that matter. The Japanese giant is allegedly planning a 32-bit upgrade cartridge for the Super Nintendo, very much along the lines of Sega's 32-X. Unlike the 32-X it's likely to have just one processor, but thanks to custom architecture it will be at least as powerful. If this happens it will really throw the cat among the pigeons with Sega still attempting to have the 32-X ready for Christmas, and no confirmed UK launch yet for the Saturn. Meanwhile, Nintendo's VR-32 battery-powered virtual reality console looks as though it could be released here after all. If it does appear it should be around Easter '95, although details are so scarce, we wouldn't pin our hopes on it. Apparently it'll no longer come with a head set, instead it might use goggles with the images appearing on the lenses. We hear that there's a lot of enthusiasm for the project from Nintendo's third party developers in Japan. More information on VR32 in our January issue after the machine's unveiled at the Tokyo Toy Show in November. to hit the AITD back for thirds arcades in Japan. We Brutal set to hit SNES bring you first shots... FRITZ YOUR BRAIN MK2 a record breaker Fancy exercising your brain and as your fingers? Well Fritz Chess o PC d o just that. Before you think to yourse , Dot chess' and turn to another story, believe us when we say this is some very different. First off, it's beaten Kasparov and, secondly, it features are base of key matches from the last 200 years. Released by Playtime, s esso "


"NEWS CVG connected MORTAL VIRTUA SELL OUT FIGHTER — THE SEQUEL Sceptics may argue that Acclaim's complete sell-out of Mortal Kombat Il is evidence that people are fed up with Street Fighter games. In its first week alone, MK2 pulled in over  million in sales a world record. Its nearest rival, Jungle Book, only managed to sell one copy for every seven sales of MK2 in that same week. Question is: can MK2 hold out until Christmas? If looks could kili, Sega's latest game would be banged up for life. CVG gets a first look at the follow-up to Virtua Fighter... BUREAU 13 Sega's Virtua Fighter hasn't had the success over here that it has enjoyed in Japan. Undeterred, Sega is bringing you the sequel. Virtua Fighter 2 has been designed with the Model 2 board as used in Daytona USA (a CVG 'Gold' winner at 96%). As a result the game can now handle texture mapped polygons, and at a greater speed. As you can see from our exclusive shots it's all looking stunning, and that extends to the detail in the backgrounds where there are more layers of parallax. More importantly, all the characters' moves have been updated to provide real playability so it's no longer a case of the winner being the person who can tap the keys the quickest. The original cast has been added to and there are two new characters including Shun, who is rumoured to be Akira's dad. Although you're unlikely to see Virtua 2 in the arcades before Christmas, we might just have a full review for you in our next issue. Stay tuned. Here's some funky shots from a game coming at you from Gametek. We're not going to tell you anything about it yet because it's all hush-hush, but if you've got a PC with CD drive get excited! WW SEGA'S AM2 Noted wiboard Soya tarded the COPS OUT Armed with a fully loaded Model 2 board Sega target the trigger happy among you. polygons stamped all over the game, especially when you take into account the specs for the Model 2 board it uses and its potential for great coin-ops. Take the plastic gun into your hand and you and a friend can become Rage and Smarty, two detectives from Virtua City out to terminate a firearms syndicate. As with Lethal Enforcers, guns are Virtua Cop is Sega's answer to Lethal Enforcers, and Sega being sega it's no surprise to see the com pany's texture-mapped reloaded by firing off-screen, but what's new is that the graphics zoom in and out, alerting you to the nearest baddie. A novel lock-on-sight feature also means that your sights automatically target not the nearest, but most danger ous of your enemies. Virtua Cops should be making an appearance in the arcades about now, and will proba bly blow you away graphically. All that remains to see is how it plays. Saturn version likely? Watch this space. "


"CVG NEWS connected BACK IN THE DARK Infogrames is at it again. Yep, it's Alone in the Dark 3, and this one seems even better than the second awarded 94% by us). The graphics are more detailed and faster, unfortunately though the game will be CD-ROM-only to start with. The third instalment is set out in Cowboys and Indians territory with the usual exploration and fighting scenario. At one point in the proceedings you turn into a cougar and have to fight the other zombies who have also been transformed in to animals. Strange but true, and available in January. REENTER THE DRAGON As if there weren't enough versions of the spectacular Rise Of The Robots already, Mirage is planning a CD-ROM special edition for release in November. It contains the game as it is, plus a second CD loaded with pre-production images, work-inprogress graphics and loads of FMV footage which didn't make it into the finished game. Also included with this version is a novel written by the ex-editor of our sister mag The One For Amiga Games, Ciaran Brennan. All that, and it's only a tenner more. ROBOTS RISE AGAIN It's been a staggering 11 years since Dragon's Lair made its coin-op debut, but there's still life in the old warhorse as Elite bring it to 3DO. Like most of the other home versions it's the product of Canadian company Readysoft, who've succeeded in making this the best looking version yet. If you fancy a bit of daring with Dirk, it should be in the softshops now. AIRBORNE BRUTALITY It's cartoon combat and carrier chaos this Christmas at Gametek. The company has got the rather tasty looking SNES version of its parent-friendly and rather playable beat-'em-up Brutal on the way. Also in the pipeline is the smart-looking Mode 7 air combat sim, Carrier Aces. It's a split screen head-to-head shoot-em-up where you take each other, or the computer, on in dogfights, aircraft carrier attacks, and defending against your mate's in-coming strike from the gunner's turret on the boat. It certainly looks novel. More info next month. THEY'RE BACK. Feast your eyes on these shots. They're not from any intro, this is Acclaim's Alien Trilogy on Saturn and it's like nothing you've ever seen before. A 32-X version is also planned, but wherever it show's up, it's odds-on to have people reaching into their wallets to buy the machine it's running on. Featuring full-rendered sprites for both the heroes and the acid-blooded aliens and Facehuggers, Alien Trilogy is a shoot-'em-up viewed through the first-person perspective with the player blasting away at the on-coming extra-terrestrials as they search for cocooned survivors. Acclaim's aim has been to make Trilogy as realistic as possible, and as the action progresses scenes recreated from the three films are interspersed with the action as links thus, expect cameo appearances from the APC vehicle and the queen alien. The basic aim of the game is to pick your way to the egg chamber, destroy the Queen and her minions and get out before the place explodes. Just don't expect them to give up without a fight: 'Game over man, game over... "


"TM ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM OOOOOO In the dark and forbidding cities of tomorrow, crime Syndicafes compete for global domination. As a Syndicate executive it's your mission to expand the Syndicate's empire, arming cyborg agents to the teeth and bringing chaos to the city streets........  Battle for global domination in 50 missions MAP Storm through futuristic living cities, and spreading destruction SYNDICATE 135  Tool up your agents with Uzis and shotguns  Research and develop beller weapons Modily your Cyborgs with extra powerful limbs Stunning action-sensitive music FROM BULLFROG PRODUCTIONS LTD. OCEAN SOFTWARE LIMITED 2 CASTLE STREET CASTLEFIELD MANCHESTER M3 4LZ TEL: 061 832 0033 FAX. 001 834 0050 "


"CVG THE NEW MACHINES HOLLYWOOU TEKNO MENO SPECIAL Nintendo Cruis'n s On Ultra 64 Only CVG has the contacts to bring you the first news on the first Ultra 64 game. The Cruis'n USA coin-op is on test in some arcades now and will be in your home next year. CHOOSE RACE Want to know how long it's the Ultra 64 home techgoing to be before you can nology and gives Nintendo play the first Ultra 64 the invaluable asset of game? Well how about the being able to test games time it takes to get from on the public before your house to the Trocthey've even got the adero in London, where machine launched. Funland has the first Ultra This means you'll be 64 coin-op, Cruis'n USA up able to familiarise yourself and guzzling quids. The with the games (at their machine is based on the best) in the arcades and then be able to play exact promises high-resolution copies on Nintendo's images and stunning texhome console by the close ture-mapped graphics of next year. With the which are scanned from coin-op machines coming actual film footage. Each from hardware giants race is against the clock Williams, the people with nine other racers out responsible for Mortal 2 to be first across the finamongst other things, it ishing line. Like Virtua could turn out that Ultra Racing it'll have three 64 has the most impresviewpoints, but you'll also sive portfolio of games of be able to start on any any debut machine. stage, although you'll have Cruis'n USA is a game to complete the full you're going to be hearing course to win the race. a lot about. The aim is to If you can't face the drive across the US in 14 seething crowds that will stages from San Francisco no doubt swamp the to Washington DC in one machine, stick with CVG of four vehicles. Using as we'll be bringing you an Midway's new UltraGrafx exclusive Cruis'n USA visual system, the game review next issue. "


"THE NEW MACHINES CVG 32-X Virtua Games Ready To Debut 198 react As if 32-X Doom (see page 39) wasn't enough, Sega is also putting the finishing touches to their two eagerly awaited Virtua games. So feast you eyes on the latest shots of the 32-X games you could be playing this Christmas. Virtua Racing Deluxe As you can see this is a quantum leap over Mega Drive Virtua Racing, not only in graphics but in terms speed. The smooth transitions between views and the pace of the action are easily up to coin-op standard plus you get the two new vehicles. Our money's on this game being the biggest selling of the first 32-X titles. Domark Plays things up Star Wars Arcade It's the biggest name game to hit the 32-X and we're promised more levels than the coin-op original. You won't believe your eyes when you see it running. The 32-X shifts the polygon graphics at high speed without so much as a flicker. Outstanding. Already on the 16-bit trail, veteran softco Domark makes some 32-bit plans... FAX SANDFARE Unashamedly looking like Virtua Fighters, this PlayStation beat'em-up could have 'em bleeding in the aisles... Currently in development ters to choose for Sony's PlayStation is from and lots of this yummy looking beatsmooth camera 'em-up which looks rather panning, but shamelessly like Sega's the only real Virtua Fighter. Using a difference similar concept as the between this Sega coin-op, two players and Virtua battle it out in a square Fighter is that the contesarena trying to knock each tants here have weapons. other out or kill their Given the combatants' opponent on the spot. arsenal, this game could There'll be eight characturn out to involve lots of Domark is currently going through renaissance at the moment with a collection of astounding games coming up. The firm's development team, The Kremlin has just received its Sony PlayStation development kit. Scheduled for release in late 1995 is 'Frozen State' (pictured), which will combine cartoon graphics with rendered images, creating a game that's similar in effect to the movie Who Framed Roger Rabbit. Also in development for the PlayStation is a racing sim where the participants are insects and have insectoid driving machines; the early rendered images are looking stunning. Domark has no news on its plans for the Saturn, but as soon as we hear of anything we'll let you know. gore, but there's none at this stage. It'll be interesting to see how well the PlayStation handles this sort of game when it's released mid next year by Takara. Watch this space. PlayStation Virtua Fighter beater on way "


"CVG THE NEW MACHINES TEKNO SPECIAL | UK Release Date Set For PlayStation As the PlayStation's Japanese launch grows nearer, it looks as though we finally know when us Brits can get our hands on it... sneaked a glimpse of a couple of new games: Crime Crackers is an RPG played in first-person perspective and is set in a futuristic space station invaded by monk-like The Japanese launch of the creatures. Also, we've PlayStation is now scheduled sneaked a peep at for November 30 this year, Philosoma, which is a fabuwhile the European launch has fous-looking hi-res shootbeen set for September 1 '95. 'em-up played through exterWe estiamte the UK price tonal and internal cockpit be between -. views. Also, sources tell us that the mighty Ridge Racer will be bundled with the PlayStation. Namco refuses to confirm this, but we should have a mega preview for you very soon. Elsewhere, we've Into The Next Millennium The latest British software company to jump on the PlayStation development train is Millennium, who is branching out big time from its Amiga roots. One to watch is Incoming, a delicious looking space game featuring music from Jesus Jones frontman Mike Edwards. It's out towards the middle of next year. Incoming has recently been signed up by a large Japanese firm for a six figure sum and as you'll see from these early screenshots it's looking like money well spent. don't forget there's more great new machine previews and reviews on the following pages in this issue: 30 Samurai Shodown. 3DO 30 Off World Interceptor  3DO 34 Doom Special Edition  Jaguar 37 Doom  32-X 40 Burn Cycle. CD44 Alien vs Predator  Jaguar 64 FIFA International Soccer  3DO 74 Way Of The Warrior  3DO As if that wasn't enough, don't forget to get stuck into your copy of Tekno the world's first magazine dedicated to the new breed of consoles. Free only with CVG. Ultra 64 To Power. Mortal Kombat MIDWAY, the makers of the Mortal coin-ops has teamed up with Nintendo exclusively for the creation of Mortal Kombat 3. No news yet on what the game will feature, but the good news is that the MK3 coin-op will be using the Ultra 64 technology so it'll be on the 64-bit home console first! The team responsible for Mortal 2 should be working on the follow-up. which will feature all new characters and moves. CD-i to eye Philips is keen to follow up on the success of Burn:Cycle with a gather ing of even more impressive games. The next ones to watch for will be Lost Eden and Creature Shock, as we reveal in these new pics. With both titles scheduled for PC-CD, 3DO, CD32 and possibly PlayStation formats, the CD-i version is likely to be one of the most visually impressive thanks to the Digital Video add-on. Both games will be released early next year for CD-i. OOPS! In last month's Tekno supplement we quoted the price of Philips' CDi-450 as being . It'll actually cost  and is available NOW and not in December. Somy! 12 "


"Professionals mr. Asciipad SN mr. Fighter Stick SN  mr. Asciipad MD-6 mr. Fighter Stick MD-6\" mr. Super Advantage ETS GET TO WORK WITH CREDIT TO POLYGRAM Nintendo Nintendo Nintendo Super Advantage (SNES) Fighter Stick SN (SNES) Fighter Stick MD-6 (Sega Megadrive/ Mega CD) Ascii Pad MD-6 (Sega Megadrive/ Mega CD) Ascii Pad SN (SNES) 8 direction oversize control stick. Extra long cord. Variable speed slow motion. Six super response fire buttons. Turbo speed adjustable fire. Hands-free auto turbo. Hands-free auto turbo. Slow motion feature. Independent turbo control. Independent turbo control. Adjustable turbo speed. 8 direction oversize control stick. Six action buttons. Slow motion control. Hands-free auto turbo. Adjustable turbo speed. Mode control button. 8 direction oversize control stick. Independent turbo control. Six button action. Hands-free auto turbo. Hands-free auto turbo. Slow motion feature. Special ergonomic design. Independent turbo control. Mode feature. ASCIIWARE DISTRIBUTED BY INFOGRAMES LTD. 14 SMEDLEY STREET, LONDON SW4 6PF INFOGRAMES "


"CVG PREVIEW WORK INPROGRESS PC/PC CDIAMIGA/CD32 Shoot-'em-up Team 17 PC.99 PC-CD .99 AMIG .99 PC.99 Out November No other versions planned No other versions available E Climb into some acid proof undies 'cos those nasty aliens are back in town once again... ALIEN BREEDTOWER ASS number of new features have been incorporat. ed into this the third of the Alien Breed series. For a start there will be multiple exit points, which should eliminate the rather linear style of the original games. A nifty retreat feature is also included. This means that when playing a one-player game with nobody else to cover them players can retreat and fire at the same time. There are also some rather pant filling levels set in the dark with the aliens' beady eyes providing the only light source CD owners are in for a special treat because, apart from heaps of rendered graphics and digitised speech, sound FX and music, these versions of Tower Assault will also include the entire Alien Breed 2 game free of charge. TUESE D HE KEY AMIGA AMIGA AMIGA A It might look big, but this is just one of the smaller baddie bosses that are stumbled upon during the game. A There are weapons galore available once enough credit has been amassed. This homing weapon is particularly useful.  GAME DESIGN BY TEAM 17 CONTACT TEAM 17 (0924 291867) FOR INFORMATION 14 "


"PREVIEW CVG AMIGA REAR END AULT The 3D animated cut scenes and the end sequence were rendered on Raptor Plus Renderfarm, while the realistic intro was animated using live action sequences and an animatronic three foot alien model. A Expect lots of lovely sound effects and ditties from top tunesmith Allister Brimbie. THE BITCHES ARE BACK PC LTVESI 10 M MO AMIGA A The player sprites have been made far more detailed than those in the original Alien Breed and its sequel. AMIGA AMIGA AMIGA It's not just the rendered images that are breathtaking, the whole game is full of high quality graphics. Some of the decks have markings on them that point in the direction of the lifts. Quite handy, really it's very easy to get lost in the sprawling levels. Shock, horror! Is that a mashed-up body littering the deck? Hunt down the medikits, you'll need them. This is going to be one seriously tough game. 15 "


"CVG PREVIEW IN PROGRESS PC Shoot-'em-up EA Unconfirmed OUT December No other versions available No other versions planned <You see that shadow cast on the water by the hot air balloon laying an egg? That shadow moves according to where the sun is that does. Shazam Kobar! Size of an elephant! Forget that. If you're looking for in-depth gaming, we're looking at king-size woolly mammoths here! MAGIC CARPET ana, Magic and amounts of damage. Put this Mayhem are the together with the likes of order of the day Meteor, Possession, Steal in Magic Carpet, Mana, Summon Fire, Beyond as you climb aboard your Sight, Lightning, Speed-Up, high-quality rug and blast Rubber Band Stun, Cloud of the bejesus out of just Darkness and Raise Undead about everything in sight in to name but a few and your quest for territorial you'll see that Bullfrog has domination. gone all out for an imaginaWhile you're shoottive approach to death. ing, don't forget to collect A fantasy game some Mana, a residue left by like Magic Carpet wouldn't dead beings, found floating be the same without monin mid-air in the form of sters though, and Bullfrog golden balls. Once collected, hasn't let us down in this Mana-power can be transdepartment either; skillful 3D ported back to your home Studio rendering has created base and used to boost your some weird and outrageous standing in the community. beasties like gryphons, krakMana also means ens and loads of other sea spells, and there's a hoojah monsters for you to have a array of these death-inflictors go at. Slap this all together and life-savers to choose with gorgeous Gouraud shadfrom: Fireballs cast flaminging. 3D texture mapping and spheres across the horizon; some freak weather condiRebounds chuck back at the tions for good measure and opponent what they've just Magic Carpet looks a surefire blasted at you (cheeky!), and winner. Is it? Catch the full, Volcano, funnily enough, definitive Computer And raises up volcanoes which Video Games review soon last for the duration of the and find out. level and can go off at any moment causing huge SEA AND FIRE One spell you can nab is Volcano which allows you to plant a live volcano anywhere you like. It lasts all through the level and can go off at any time A Monkey-faced guards hover, ever-hoping that they can shoot you down. GAME BY BULLFROG CONTACT ELECTRONIC ARTS (0753 549442) FOR INFORMATION 16 "


"PREVIEW CVG WORLDS APART The art department spent months using texturemapping techniques to produce some stunning! graphics like the Jungle-esque and the Stone Henge-type scenes below. Giant killer bees are just one form of fearsome foe you'll encounter on your berugged quest And there's no point cowering in that lighthouse you can run but you can't hide. A \"Wibble, splok, shazmahal.\" \"Oh shut up Fred, you're drunk again!\" Two beings ride towards across the lonesome plains of this strange world. Kaboom! Don't fret if someone chucks this sort of thing at you slap on the Rebound spell and bounce it back. A This shot may show the mythical city in its early stages but the intricate detail of the backgrounds is already in evidence. A Quite why a global planet which looks suspiciously like the Earth is hovering in space we're not sure. Looks good though doesn't it? A Our hero jettisons devastating flaming spheres across the skies from his stock of Fireball spells. 12 "


"CVG PREVIEW IN PROGRESS IPC Flight Sim Empire Unconfirmed Out November No other versions available Amiga version planned DAWN SVAR After the World War Two antics of Overlord, Rowan Software now turns its hand to flying crates to produce Empire's Dawn Patrol... Like any other modern flight sim, Dawn Patrol has a wealth of external views and fixed and floating camera angles. re you fed up with jets and spitfires? Would you like a touch more intimacy and personality in your air combat? Well, with the imminent release of Dawn Patrol from Empire Software, you can relive all the thrills of World War air combat in all tion, 640x480 SVGA mode (blows your socks off). Add to this a very detailed flight model, historically correct pilots, real campaigns, over 90 individual missions and a facility that lets you fly for the Germans as well as the Allies, and what Dawn Patrol promises to deliver is something very special indeed. Origin eat your heart out. exciting game and Dawn Patrol can be played in either bog-standard VGA mode (quite nice) or high-resoluits fully Gouraud. shaded, texture. mapped glory. Being a WW1 fighter ace was glamorous. Imagine the exhilaration of nose-totail dogfighting above the muddy, lice-filled trenches of France; the chatter of the machine guns, the wind in your hair... ah the romance of it all. Er, forget the bit about the three week life expectancy and the fact that the planes were little more than sheds powered by lawnmower engines, this was the dawn of air combat. This is as close as it gets. Like the forthcoming Wings of Glory from Origin, Dawn Patrol lets you take to the skies in a wide variety of flimsy World War One aircraft. Like its previous game, Overlord, Rowan Software has developed a beautiful, noted H Nieuport 1 Heaching 13\" Speed 100 pl Inst. WP Navigate Rel Brg 27 Range 5 Mil os Info Hone Rel Bcg 27°Range 5 Mili The detail of the planes is simply stunning. If you look at your wingmen you can even see the pilots sitting in the cockpit. Shoot your enemies down in spectacular Gouraud-shaded, tex. ture-mapped style... GAME BY ROWAN SOFTWARE CONTACT EMPIRE (081-343 7337) FOR INFORMATION 18 "


"PREVIEW CVG PATROL Final Victory co baren Richthofen of the to the format tvorted. The death of the urter do te Meist Norter les escenas THE MISSION the water Did German aircraft really have purple wings? Wouldn't they stand out like a sore thumb? Even if you're not too hot at history, If you see a purple smudge in the distance, you'd better shoot it down. The British planes were pink, I suppose? Dawn Patrol takes the form of a book which details all the great pilots and individual, historically correct battles. LORDY LORDY... Developers Rowan Software has created a very flexible flight engine which was used to great effect in its previous game, Overlord. Overlord followed the exploits of a World War Two pilot in the Battle of Britain, a desperate conflict that has you strafing! bridges, rail yards and radar stations to prepare the way for the Allied invasion of Normandy. Fail to deplete the Luftwaffe and knock out key radar installations and the invasion will be put off. And it will be all your fault. A There are 20 different aircraft to fly in Dawn Patrol, each of which has its own particular flying characteristics and handling problems. Po nchlbatros Navigate Heading 243 Rel Fra 225 atteg 116 Speed 114 Range Range Dawn Patrol features a stunning SVGA option, but it's just as playable and equally as pretty in the ordinary VGA mode. Unlike modern flight sims, World War One combat allows you to fly right up to the tail of your enemy. Imagine this in 640x480 SVGA graphics... Although the cockpit view is very pretty, it's much easier to sight the enemy using the Dawn Patrol external views. Rowan's fast 3D polygon technology allows a huge number of aircraft to be on screen at once and dogfighting can get really frantic. Dawn Patrol is beautifully pre. sented and like Overlord, great care has been taken to make the mission briefings look as good as possible. MESES Alt Piloted Re EinDekker 1 Next HP Navigate Pas Info Hone Uieu Type Outside Heading 78°Speed 108 Mph Rel Brg 191 Range 6 Miles Rel Brg 350° Range 33 Miles EinDekker Range 0 Miles World War One dogfighting was slow but very violent. If you catch your enemy just right, their fragile plane will explode and shatter. Alt State OVERLORD TOPPED THE PC CHARTS AND IF DAWN PATROL IS ANYTHING LIKE THIS WORLD WAR TWO SIM, EXPECT HIGH PRAISE AND HIGH MARKS RIGHT ACROSS THE BOARD... 19 "


"CVG PREVIEW TORPROGRESS IPC CD-ROM Adventure Mindscape Unconfirmed OUT December No other versions planned No other versions available OK, we admit it, this confused the pants off us. Look, just shut up will you? Read the preview and wait for the review to explain it all... DISTORTION cacs e like games game works but, basically, like this. They it's a series of interconnectstop people ed sub-levels linked by an from using adventure game bit. And it's pathetic terminology like these sub-stages that give interactitainment', or the game its strangeness. whatever the buzz word of One minute you're buying a the moment is. It's almost guitar, the next you're cutimpossible to classify, ting heads with a robotic other than to say it's weird, guitar warrior in an axe batand we wouldn't let any of tle to the death. It looks the programmers marry our good, though. sisters. Oh yeah, they're During all this you've got American as well. to find time to flick on your The aim of the game video camera, get back to makes it sound like that the editing studio, replay nasty piece of work, Kriss your work, splice in additionKross Make My Video on al footage, add sound effects Mega-CD but it couldn't be and captions, then choose a further from it. This is a tune which sounds right to heavy metal, corpse-dancing, accompany it. We might lose food mixing, guitar twanging, our marbles in the process utterly confusing piece of but we only hope we underpotential software landmark stand this better by the time excellence. It's really tough we bring you the review. describing exactly how the Excelsior, true believers! A Well this bit is one of those match the face games where you swap various facial features to create one almighty hermaphrodite mutant while digitised comments blast from the speakers in stereo. A Right, this is a dream segment OK? So all you have do to is manoeuvre the bulbs through the on-coming objects and plug them in to have sweet dreams about wrecks and bugs and rock 'n' roll. 6000 TINE This is one of the straightforward bits of the game. Simply release giant ball bearings to smash the objects on the conveyor belts below. Cuddly toy anyone? Take a fish tank and a radio into the living room? Get rid of all your spacerelated piscine and transistor blues by buying fish-radio. bec COMMUNICATION What's the connection between these video clips other than the fact they all come from the same game... Newsbleak TET We couldn't quite work this bit out and here's why: this zombie rises from his grave, plays a few cool tunes and you have to hit various letters of the alphabet which make the zombies in the background change the way they dance. Help mummy, I don't understand. ...no, we couldn't either.  GAME BY POP ROCKET CONTACT MINDSCAPE (0444 246333) FOR MORE INFORMATION 20 "


"TEL BRUCE LEE STORY ble to buy or rent from your local video stockist 51LUYE Enter the world of Dragon. A place where the martial arts legend Bruce Lee lived for 32 troublesome years. A place where you will encounter a multitude of the smartest and fiercest opponents ever seen in a beat-'em-up. At your disposal is a devastating array of over 35 different moves. You WILL need them...  Contains three different fighting styles: Mantis, Fury and Nunchuku.  Many secret special moves to discover  Using a Multi Tap, three human opponents can fight to the finish. UNIVERSAL SEGA GAME GEAR SEGA Master Sostenta The Bruce Lee Story &  1994 Universal City, Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. Licensed by MCA/Universal Merchandising, Inc. Game code.  1994 Virgin Interactive Entertainment (Europe) Ltd. All rights reserved. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises Ltd. INTENDO and NINTENDO ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEMS are trademarks of NINTENDO. Sega Mega Drive, Game Gear and Master System are trademarks of Sega Enterprises Lid. Virgin Interactive Entertainment (Europe) Lid., 338A Lodbroke Grove, London W10 SAH "


"CVG PREVIEW WORK INPROGRESS SNES MEGA DRIVE Racing US Gold SNES/MD Unconfirmed Out November No other versions available PC and Amiga versions planned VERDRIVE Drive as fast as you like, with no traffic lights, police or waiting for old people to cross the road in US Gold's newie. onkey Kong Country isn't the only new console game to take advantage of state-of-the-art rendered graphics. Powerdrive, from Rage, also relies on them not to deliver something as trivial as cute jungle animals, but to supply realistic rallying action, with cars that look real and scenery that looks like it will write your car off if you hit it. Like the real thing, the aim is to win races to earn money, to improve your car, to win more races etc. If you manage your finances cautiously you'll end up with enough spend to upgrade to one of six bigger, faster and more durable cars. Speed isn't everything, though. A good driver needs to be able to master emergency stops, reverse turns and negotiate hairpin bends whilst driving in the rain. Just be warned that the handling of these cars will take a LOT of getting used to, especially under the varying weather conditions and treacherous terrains you'll encounter. Bash the bodywork around too much and you might just end up on a night course with no headlights! It's not because Rage are trying to make things tough, just realistic. MEGA DRIVE SNES QUALIFYING You'll need to make it to each checkpoint in the allocated time. As the race progresses the time gets tighter. MEGA DRIVE $1 VEHICLE COMPONENT CHECK ENGINE DAMASE 715 TYRE DAMAGE 732 SHOCK DAMAGE 224 SEARTRAIN DAMAGE 716 SPOTLIGHT DAMAGE x09 MEGA DRIVE SNES Here you need to reverse into the booth. Touch the bar. riers as shown here and penalty points will be yours. SNES A After sach race you get a status report on your car. At ehis point you can allocate your funds to repairs or just Teave them and buy upgrades. SNES These are the top cars you need to work your way up to. They're durable, fast and handle well. Perfect for the learn. er driver. A Driving in different weather conditions is demanding. A few runs on a practice track will make all the difference. SNES A If you don't earn sufficient cash you'll have to race against a bigger opponent car. Quite unfair really. A Sadly you can't run over the spectators so don't waste time trying MEGA DRIVE MEGA DRIVE For morice drivors there are plenty of practice circuits which cover all aspects of the te. But no other learners to cut up or swear at. Follow the arrows to get around each track as quickly as possible. It's easy to miss them mind you. GAME BY RAGE CONTACT US GOLD (021-606 1800) FOR INFORMATION CART SIZE: SMEGS 22 "


"PREVIEW CVG WOAK (INPROGRESS MEGA DRIVE I SNES Platform Acclaim ETBA OUT December No other versions available No other versions planned SNES Stand back Spiderman and back off Batman, the hardest superhero of them all is about to debut on console. ay before the more than liberal amounts of Nineties trend of punch ups. In both versions, showing the which don't vary that differdarker side of ently, Wolv-erine is very superheroes, one character capable of giving a lot better A Not just a dab hand with was slashing his way through his claws Wolvie is also than he gets, with an adept at martial arts. villains, chasing after women armoury and suffering the kind of perof wicked sonal angst that would make punches, us mere homosapiens spend kicks and a year in bed rather than put claw on a spandex costume and slashes, fight crime and that's most of Wolverine. Naturally that which made him utterly cool, sold would get millions of X-men comics for him into any para regiment a regiment MEGA DRIVE Marvel and had kids running without having to fill the around playgrounds worldforms in first. wide going 'snikt' and pre As for how well the game tending to stab each other in will do, well it's got the forthe head. With this kind of midable Wolverine in it, rep, it really is a wonder that innit? He's capable of doing this game has been such a for games what Arnie does long time in coming. for movies. Except for the Acclaim has opted for a spectacular' Last Action They say that brawn is nothplatform game format here, Hero that is. Oh dear, let's ing without brains. It's proba. bly true, seeing as brains is but mixed it up with plenty of not go down that route, eh? getting hit by brawn here, propuzzles to solve and and viding us with a rather nice screenshot WOLVERINE SNES A Obviously Wolverine's claws are his main weapon, but he has a few other tricks up his sleeve. SNES D'YOU SPILL MY SHANDY? MEGA DRIVE What separates Wolverine from other comic characters is a violent streak a light year wide. Rather than take the time out to procrastinate in front of a villain, he'll just dive in, claws first, get the job done and get out. There's no poncing around with mind powers of laser beam vision, all his powers are purely physical from his indestructible bones to foot-long claws. It's that abnormally aggressive edge which sets him aside from the usual hot-pants wearing Marvel and DC heroes. A After literally an hour's exhaustive research, Wolverine finally perfected his pirouetting half-axe windpipe slash. file view info sort help 3-FILES SNES SNES REAL TIME: LOGAN A Wolverine's most lethal move in the Mega Drive version is this rather dangerous. looking back-slash. MEGA DRIVE HEIGHT: HAHSIA LEIGHT: AFFILIATION : A Bosses reside at the end of each level and have specif. ic weak points that you've got to attack.   MANY FOANS MARTIAL To keep the genuine comic book fans happy, there's plenty of stills and animations keeping the plot up to date and giving the gamesplayers a chance to rest before a bad dose of joypad thumb sets in. The Mega Drive version features plenty of vandalism as Wolverine trashes enemy installations.  GAME BY ACCLAIM CONTACT ACCLAIM (071-344 5000) FOR MORE INFORMATION 23 "


"CVG REVIEW WORK IN PROGRESS AMIGA Platform Virgin LUNCONFIRMED SNES/NES/GB/MD/MS/GG versions avallable No other versions planned ALADDIN Obviously slowed down by his baggy pantaloons, Aladdin gets ready to shine on the Amiga at last... emember Cool game, which means Aladdin Spot and Global can use a sword to dispatch Gladiators? If so, the baddies with instead of then you'll have the wimpy apples featured in no trouble getting your the SNES version. The brain around Aladdin, which apples are still present howwill be based on a similar ever, but are collected to game engine. Aladdin is boost the player's score. Also platform based and sees watch out for jewels; which you battling it out over a can be used to buy wishes or number of levels until the extra lives in the shop, and final showdown with the the end-of-level fruit machine, despicable Jafar. which can be played to get Thankfully, this versionyet more lives and jewels. will be like the Mega Drive 2650. . 10900.000 As soon as the game's loaded, the Disney influence shines great graphics and sound! A Swing Aladdin round these poles to reach higher sections of the game. genie bonus level abu Bonus save princess jasmine restar 06nt health meter to spend apples A Ouch! Don't run Aladdin across the hot coals or his strength will soon vanish. Stand by them though, as the stupid guards will do anything to get to Aladdin including running across the coals and killing themselves in the process. A Unlike the SNES version in which they're collected for weapons, these apples only increase the player's score. Interacting with the background is a key feature of the game. A Aah, this is what I like. A picture that explains everything without me having to write anything. Oops, I already have! Every so often the shopkeeper pops up. NISHA Exchange a varying number of jewels collected for either wishes or extra lives.  ORIGINAL GAME BY DAVE PERRY CONTACT VIRGIN (081-969 2255) FOR INFORMATION 24 "


"YOU WON'T SEE ME WITH SPOTS. That's it. That's all you need to know about how to get clean, healthy skin. And how to keep it that way. Of course, even when I'm really careful a persistent spot can slip through the FACIAL WASH FACIAL WASH net. And if one does, I just use some Oxy 10. But I hardly ever have to. Hola pre Unblocks Antibacteria Helps prevent With added moistus Unblock peres Antibacterial With added moisturise HARDLY EVER. Twice a day, morning and night no more soap and water for me. Getting spots was no big deal. But given First, I wet my hands and clean them UNBEATABLE TREATMENT FOR STUBBORN SPOTS AND ACNE the choice, I can live without them. thoroughly with Oxy Clean Facial Wash. It's been a while since I've had one. Then I lather up some more and rub it Clinically Tested Nowadays I use Oxy* Clean Facial Wash. all over my face before rinsing it off. Always read the label. Oxy 10 contains Benzoyl Peroxide, *OXY and OXYCUTE 'EM are trademarks 0 0 OXYCUTE 'EM! COLOURLESS LOTION MAXIMUM STRENGTH "


"MEGA DRIVE MEGA DRIVE CVG PREVIEW WORK INPROGRESS MEGA DRIVE, SNES Beat-'em-up Acclaim MUnconfirmed SNES EUnconfirmed No other versions available No other versions planned In the cut-throat, often lardy world of wrestling, can Acclaim come up with the goods for the third time in a row? Team work is essential. Even if you haven't tagged your partner, he can still come in handy if an opponent wanders too close. A Flatten the ref and you can't be counted out. It's worth knocking him out just for the fun of it, rather than for any practical reason. WWF RAW MEGA DRIVE MEGA DRIVE Holeone to corigent' hink of wrestling and you instantly conjure up images of pink, middleaged men forced into lycra body stockings and looking for all the world like they're about to keel over from a massive coronary. Of course you'd be partially right, but in between them, where there's room, and now in this game are a whole new breed of dynamic wrestling types, and not all of them are men... Acclaim's latest bit of grappling action is based on the unedited WWF Show Monday Raw. It's a really great program because you get to see them make mistakes and actually hurt each other, which opens many new possibilities to the game. The results so far are more moves, different tournaments and a tin bucket with which to hit people. The addition of a (vaguely) female wrestler in the form of Luna Vachon seems strange, but she can match any of her opponents for speed and agility. She needs to. There are more moves in Raw than all the previous WWF games combined, plus hidden attacks and the all-import trademark finishing moves. Oh yeah, and there's the bucket which you can wrap around someone's head if they follow you out of the ring after chucking you out. A As well as the survivor series which featured in the previous game, there's now an option that lets you take on two opponents at once, If you're suicidal. A If your opponent's still got some energy when you pin them, their partner will climb into the ring stamp on your head. SNES AH, BUT IT'S ONLY ACTING The real-life action may only be play acting, barring accidents, but the moves in the game look realistic enough. Just check out these: An atomic drop is a sure way to daze an opponent and leave him singing castrato for the rest of the month. A Choke holds, like atomic drops, stun wrestlers when they're on their last legs, which lets you set them up for a finishing move. SNES SNES VACHON SERRES HEIGHTINDS Razor Ramon applies his patented Razor's edge throw which results in the victim being almost drilled through the canvas. HEIGHT : HONISHING FINAPSE Another classic from the World of Sport days, the good old piledriver puts most out for the count. PLAYER LE CHOOSE A The lovely (ahem) Luna Vachon, for people who don't know, has half her head shaved and fake veins drawn on the bald bits. She walks in a style that resembles Quasimodo's, and has a voice which sounds like she's been sucking on exhaust pipes. There's nothing like a mass bundle, especially when there are so many other wrestlers in the ring that you get overlooked and can hide in a corner. SNES BY UNMD BY SCULPTURED SOFTWARE CONTACT ACCLAIM (071-344 5000) FOR INFORMATION 26 "


"I'LL BE THERE. AROUND EVERY CORNER IN EVERY ROON AS INEVITABLE AS YOUR GUILTY CONSCIENCE SUPER NINTENDO ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM Shadow. Ocean  1994 UNIVERSAL CITY STUDIOS, INC THE SHADOW TM &  ADVANCE MAGAZINE PUBLISHERS, INC, USED UNDER LICENSE. ALL RIGHT RESERVED TEGA DRIVE OCEAN SOFTWARE LIMITED. 2 CASTLE STREET . CASTLEFIELD MANCHESTER . M3 4LZ TELEPHONE 061 832 0033. FAX: 061 834 0650 "


"Hundreds of top-selling games at 72 price. (They won't take megabytes out of your dough.) Whatever your system there are hundreds of top quality games to choose from in the Woolworths k price software sale. IWOOLWORTHS Time A 130 S All items subject to availability IT'S RIGHT UP YOUR STREET. "


"PREVIEW CVG ISNES Sports GTE Interactive Media ETBA Out early '95 No other versions available No other versions planned KUPROGRESS STREET HOCKEY LET'S SKATE A Certain levels have extra fea. tures such as ramps and manholes which suddenly flip up, catapulting the surprised player right across the pitch. The player graphics in Street Hockey are made up from actual digitised footage, so each time your player takes a tumble you know that they've ended up with bruised elbows in real-life. Once the graphics have all been digitised and turned into sprite form, they can then be dropped into the game. It's an almost identical technique to that which is used in movie production. The actors are filmed doing their thang against a green background. The footage is then transferred to computer, the number of frames cut down and a proper computer animation sequence created. Remember the days of two-on-two footy against a garage door? Well here's the American equivalent... ince in-line skates arrived kids all over the country have been gleefully soraining and breaking themselves in the pursuit of speed, and now GTE is about to introduce us to an even more dangerous variant inine hockey. With just two players a side, no ref, almost no rules other than get the puck into your opponent's net, it's dangerous, painful stuff. To bring the action to life the characters are given a huge array of swipes, slices, leaps and skids made up from over 2,200 frames of digitised animation. Each player has their own set of strengths and weaknesses, which, combined with the different courts, should make for plenty of variety in the gameplay. They've also incorporated a two-player mode which is an important feature in this kind of game. One thing's for certain about Street Hockey it's fast. The end-to-end gameplay gives much bigger scores than you'd find in the real thing. BAS A Apart from the sticks and puck, there's not much similar ity between Street Hockey and the proper turf game, not until there's a goal anyway, at which point the players go ape. A All's fair in love, war and Street Hockey, as this player demonstrates. Why use the stick when you can use your hands. MUDA OKHACK As well as slapping the puck around, hockey sticks also double up as useful weapons especially when cracked across the ankles of any player who's showing off too much. PAC GAME BY GTE INTERACTIVE MEDIA CONTACT GTE (0101 619 431 8801) FOR MORE INFORMATION 29 "


"CVG PREVIEWS INPAOGAESS 3DO Beat-'em-up Crystal Dynamics ETBA Out November Neo Geo and SNES versions available No other versions planned SAMURAI SHODOWN New to the UK, publishers and distributors BMG is about to fire off its salvo of 3DO releases so expect an explosion of cheaper PAL games. CVG detonates two potential bombshells. ant to see a retained plus it's superbeat-'em-up on fast. Your task is to wipe out your 3DO that is 12 sword-wielding characters EXACTLY the one by one: attack with skill same as its coin-op parent? to snatch a weapon out of Well, you can on this very your opponent's hands and page of CVG because Takara's then give them a right slicing Samurai Shodown is here. and dicing: go in close and Every other beat the perspective will shift with 'em-up that's appeared on you. Naturally, special moves the 3DO so far has borrowed abound and the effectiveideas from Mortal Kombat, ness of these depends on with digitised characters and the status of a 'Rage Gauge' lots of gore: Way of The which grows if you're getting Warrior page 74 and smacked. Join us for the Shadow in particular. show down next issue. Samurai Shodown is different to the latter games because it's based STUDET around 'normal' graphics Street Fighter style and emanates from the Neo-Geo UGEON game of the same name. The quality of animation and scope of moves have been The speed of the game means that special moves have to be done really quickly, there's a lot to master. CREDITS IN PROGRESS 3DO Racing Crystal Dynamics .99 Out November No other versions available No other versions planned OFF-WORLD INTERCEPTOR The first driving game for PAL 3DO owners is revved up and ready to speed you along in a texturemapped version of Stunt Race FX. CVG intercepts the action... ake one monster sized truck and place it in an alien terrain, beautifully presented in texture mapped 3D. Assume that the driver of this vehicle is a bounty hunter out to dispose of fugitives, terrorists and other n'er-do-wells as he races through tricky off-road terrains. Intensify the action with the news that there are in fact nine different planets to be cleaned-up, not to mention competing bounty hunters and stomach-turning climbs and rolls to avoid. In short, there's a lot to do in this game. Off-World is all about control: take a ramp too fast and you'll tumble down the side of a mountain, quite possibly into some land mines. Ideally, you'll need to hunt out the boss and earn heaps of money which you can then exchange for special weapons and other enhancements to your vehicle. If you find the going too hard, you can always activate the split-screen twoplayer mode and play a friend. It's looking good. 30 GAME BY CRYSTAL DYNAMICS CONTACT CRYSTAL DYNAMICS (071-973 0011) FOR INFORMATION GAME SIZE, ONE CD "


"PREVIEWS CVG Charlotte Earthquake Galford Ha-oh Man Nakoruru Genan Shiranui  11. KK Each character has a selection of special moves or \"Methods of Mayhem'. Mainly these are based around weapons use. Some of the characters even bring their pets along to join in the fight. You don't control them directly, but they help you out when you're getting bashed. SDITO Kanzo Hattori Jubei Yagyu Kyoshiro Senryo Oryo Tachibana Tam Tam Wan Fu Other bounty hunters are after the same rewards as you. Try to knock them away whenever you get the chance. You can only drive forwards: there's no turning back if you miss something. COST Enter the split screen world for a head-tohead challenge with a friend. Watch out for mines placed in your path. Jump over them for the quickest escape. PLAYER 1 You can jump very high but don't try to leap anything too big or you'll tumble over, which makes you vulnerable to the enemy. 31 "


"as CVG PREVIEW WORK ZINPROGRESS PC CD-ROM Flight/Shoot-'em-up EA TBA Out November No other versions planned No other versions available WING COMMANDER 3. the heart of the tiger na LIU JO The force won't be with you, but Mark 'Skywalking' Hamill will be in the third part of the Wing Commander series as the interactive movie goes big time... n the CVG games room we're getting the chance to see all the new interactive movies, from Ground Zero on the Mega-CD to the CD-I's impressive Burn Cycle. What's looking likely to be particularly stunning though, is the third instalment in the series of games that pio. neered the concept of an 'interactive movie' Wing Commander. The problem with the first two games was that they had to rely on animated sequences and plenty of hard disk space, but now with the advent of FMV it looks like we're going to see Here we see the wchll production team whilst filming a scene with the Kilrathi enemy. I mean, hey, who needs Klingons when you've got these guys. something very special indeed with over two hours of film footage involved and a budget of $4 million. As Chris Roberts, the creator of WC explains: \"There's an intensity in storytelling you get with live actors that you can't get with animated film.\" The game continues along a similar vein as previous ones, ie the iniquitous kilrathi race is still being a serious pain in the rear end, and you as heroic starfighter Chris Blair (played by Mark Hamil, yes old Skywalker himself) have to do them before they do you. Your flying abilities will be paramount, as will dogfighting techiques each mission draws on your wing commanding talents. We'll be reviewing it as soon poss. HOORAY FOR HOLLYWOOD A Precision flying skills are required when you fly inside the larger vessels. In the Further Adventures of a Wing Commander the main ship is the TCS Victory. In true Millennium Falcon tradition it's an aging old tub that relies on its diverse and talented as well as luck. Approximately 50 Hollywood filmakers were involved in the making of Wing Commander III, and each scene had to be storyboarded before it was shot/drawn/rendered, and here is one such snippet in its rawest form. Yes! Burgeoning development costs, lots of luvvie actors on highly expensive sets, cinematographers, dramatic soundtracks being composed and to top it all veteran screenwriter De Palma (albeit Frank and not Brian) roped in to pen the script. No! We're not talking about the next Christmas box office blockbuster, but the latest Wing Commander. Taking the lead in this FMV-laden sci-fi adventure is the man who took the lead in three of the most successful films ever, the Star Wars Trilogy Mark Hamill no less.... There are about 40 or so different missions to put you through your paces and various advanced Starfighters for you to crash and burn. GAME BY ORIGIN CONTACT ELECTRONIC ARTS (0753 549442) FOR INFORMATION COMES ON TWO DISCS 32 "


"CRYSTAL DYNAMICS Total Eclipse The Horde Off-World Interceptor Star Control II PaTaank WITHOUT CRYSTAL DYNAMICS... ...3DO IS JUST AN EXPENSIVE TOY. Bus Crystal Dynamics. Off-World Interceptor. Total Eclipse and The Horde are trademarks of Crystal Dynamics Inc.  1994, Star Control II is a trademark of Accolade, Inc.  1994. Fred Ford and Paul Reiche III. PaTaank and PE Magic are trademarks of PF Magic  1994. 3D0 and the 3D0 logos are trademarks of the 3D0 Company. All rights reserved, 3DO "


"CVG PREVIEW NICE DOC & SONS SPECIAL EDITION We're not the only people to go loopy over Doom. A major Hollywood movie company has picked up the rights to produce a movie, and in the battle of the new consoles, it's Doom vs Doom, although Atari has something rather special up its sleeves... So lock and load, put your fighting trousers on and feast your eyes on the kind of action that until recently console companies could only dream of... JAGUAR GAME BY id SOFTWARE CONTACT ATARI (0753 533344) FOR MORE INFORMATION 34 "


"PREVIEW CVG IN PROGRESS JAGUAR Shoot-'em-up Atari Unconfirmed Out Nov/Dec '94 PC versions of Doom & Doom 2 available No other versions planned We love Doom, we love Doom, we love Doom, we love Doom. And now it's on Jaguar. 'Nuff said. Ill. There's notsible to do on a 16-bit machine, a fact which much left to be has blazed a trail for the Jaguar version. And said about the first impressions are nothing but good. Doom that we, As you can tell from the screen shots, the or everyone else hasn't graphics are identical to the PC original. said yet. It can be something which is particularly impressive summed up thus: fast considering this isn't just a straight port. 3D, big guns, plenty Rather than dump the original PC code on to to kill, superhuge fun the Jaguar development kit, the programmers with a chainsaw. It have started the game from scratch, and really is that simple. although they've stuck to the same winning However, until now formula, they've also been able to make you've needed at least some enhancements. Atari describes it as  worth of PC to being a sequel to Doom, and that's where play it on. Thankfully the Special Edition bit comes in. Atari, in a fantastic disAlthough finding fault with Doom is liable play of foresight, has to get your hands chopped off in some parts made it one of the first of the world, even the most ardent Doom licensed games for the Lord has to admit that some of the levels, Jaguar but it doesn't stop perhaps, weren't as interesting as they could there, thankfully. have been. That's obviously the opinion of Doom, to put it lightly, is a phethe people responsible for the Jaguar version. nomena. There's even a Doom They're planning to add to levels and replace club on Internet. And if you're a others. So you're guaranteed to get stuff in regular CVG reader you'll know this version that you won't find anywhere we namecheck it more than a else. With Doom on its way and Alien Versus tabloid entertainment columnist Predator out now this is very good news for brings up Take That (urgh). the Jaguar without a doubt. And the brilliant We're self-confessed addicts, bit is that the two games really are different, and things aren't going to get any as we point out in our Aliens Versus Predator better for us as the first console review, starting page 44. Meanwhile load version will be making its debut your shotgun and refuel your chainsaw in before the year's out. This game is impostime for the Doom review next issue. A One of the best moments in Doom is when you pick up the Berserk pack. It looks like an innocuous medical kick, but once collected, the screen changes colour, you become almost impervi. ous to damage and are capable of killing most creatures with just one punch. Best of all is that it lasts for the whole level! A These zombie soldiers are your former colleagues, although they don't recognise you anymore. A perfect excuse to fill them full of hot lead/plasma/buzz saw. 35 "


"CVG PREVIEW AN MO' GUNZ DOOM Knuckle Dusters You've got to be desperate to resort to these, or just sick. Get the berserk pack and you'll be able to wipe out most lifeforms with one punch. Chainsaw More fun than a life-size jelly model of Claudia Schiffer. Makes minced meat out of monsters and has the rest scarpering in fear. It doesn't run out of fuel either. When there are all the soldiers that hell can muster up, and you're stuck in the middle, it's going to take more than just good intentions to get you out of the mire. Guns are secreted throughout the game's levels, and if you know where to look, you can tool up with a complete arsenal early on. Pistol Get a decent weapon as soon as poss, as the pistol just doesn't cut the mustard. It's the worst gun of all and, frankly, embarrassing to use. You're better off with fists. Shotgun The preferred weapon of professional Doom lords, big, brutal and bloody fun. A good spread of fire, economical with ammo and devastating at close range. CANNON FODDER BFG 9000 Chain Gun Takes ages to kill bigger crea. tures, but great for strafing a room full of zombies. Goes through bullets at a rate of knots though. Rocket Launcher Excellent at long range, but close up it'll catch you in the blast too. Downs Cacodemons with just two shots. Plasma Rifle Unleashes wave upon wave of deadly plasma energy. Powerful enough to trash most creatures and is good for strafing with. We won't tell you what BFG stands for, but it can empty a room in one shot. However you only get a couple of shots, so use them wisely. ME AND MY POSSE Apart from one or two large and deadly characters, which you'll have to deal with all by your lonesome self, here are the kind of ugly great mothers lurking in dark corridors and who comprise the bulk of your opponents in Jaguar Doom. Precisely how they take to you prematurely ending their vitriolic existence is anyone's guess, but mine is that they won't be 'appy. In the slightest. In fact Although everything you'll encounter in the Jaguar Doom is out to kill you, drink your blood and dine on your flesh, a sneaky player can gain some unwitting allies by letting the creatures fight each other. ARAS LEVER Now sit back in a quiet corner and watch the carnage. Whatever the result, the winner will end up much weaker, making the job of finishing it off much easier. FEPIMO HEALTH DEATH MATCH When the screen gets busy and there's all sorts of crap flying around, remember that what the hell-spawn in Doom hate the more than anything is being shot by their own side. One feature Atari is desperately trying to incorporate into the finished game is a link-up feature, so two Jags can be hooked together for a cooperative or head-to-head death-match game. This is one of the best features of the PC version, and if Atari manages it for this game, we'll doff our hats and get ready to chainsaw each other to death. END HEALTH POR AS LEVE Which is exactly what's happened here. Try to lead the more powerful creatures right into the crossfire. Thankfully you're pro. vided with a run button, which is something you'll be using a lot when you play the game. A Life-sapping hazards don't always come on two legs. Plop into an acid pool without adequate protection and you'll soon be walking around on fizzing knee stumps. 36 "


"PREVIEW CVG CNPROGRESS MEGA DRIVE 32-X Shoot-'em-up Sega Unconfirmed 1 Out Nov Dec '94 IPC versions of Doom & Doom 2 available Jaguar version planned ITIEGIDRIVE SEG DOOMED AGAIN? Now that the basic engine has been written for the game it won't take much to produce Doom 2. It's essentially the same, but with new levels, creatures and a fantastic double. barrelled shotgun. Find out more by reading the review of the PC version on page 58. ASTY Let's hope that the advent of Doom on 32-X will lead to more PC-to-console conversions. Games like Indycar would be fantastic on cartridge. BI SEX For Sega's landmark hardware upgrade comes a real landmark title. It's going to be the most violent Sega game ever of course it can only be Doom. here's an old already, retaining the saying that wh same graphics and speed en computer of the original. However, power doubles, what isn't known is existing prices half. And whether Sega will certifionce more it looks like cate the game, and if being proven with the they do, what it will get. arrival of Doom on 32-X. The final cartridge When the game was size hasn't been decided first released it was yet either. On the PC the strictly PC only, there game takes up a chunky was nothing else on the 14 megabytes of hard home market capable of drive space. But then, PC, running it. But now, a programmers are notoriyear on, the 32-X is ous for not compressing about to arrive, offering game code simply becPC performance, and ause they know that Doom, for . almost every PC owner Although the version has a hard drive. Chawe saw was at a fairly nces are it will weigh in early stage, the devel with at least a 24, or opment is coming on in maybe even a 32-Mbit leaps and bounds and cart. Hefty stuff. HOWthe game's well on ever, if they get the schedule for its Christ game right, it will be mas release deadline. worth the extra few quid It's looking very good for the larger cartridge. Even on high-end PCs the game slows down when the screen gets really busy (ie over a dozen creatures), but with its twin 32-Bit processors there's a chance that the 32-X can handle the pace when the going gets tough. It's still not known whether Sega will be sticking with the original Doom levels, or introducing new ones as Atari say it'll be doing with the Jaguar version. We can but hope and write begging letters to Sega LFER If you need convincing about why Doom's so brilliant, pop along to your local software shop and ask them to demo the game to you. It's simply one of the best things to happen to software in years. The fact that the 32-X is more than capable of running Doom is a good indicator as to how fast it can run other kinds of game. Texture mapping is a key feature in many games these days, largely thanks to Doom. GAME BY id SOFTWARE CONTACT SEGA (071 373 3000) FOR MORE INFORMATION 37 "


"GORILLAS IN THE FIST DOT MATRIX WITH STEREO SOUND GAME BOY START BATTERY Nintendo 240199 Nintendo GAME BOY SELECT START DONKEY KONG Ook ook ook. Ook ook Donkey Kong. Ook ook, ook ook 100 levels ook; ook ook. Ook ook ook battery-backed memory ook ook. Cook Super Game Boy ook ook 256 colours). Ook ook .99. Ook ook ook ook. Ook ook. GAME BOY Nintendo "


"THE REVIEWS START HERE... CVG reviewed this month. here's a sky-high pile of excellent games in this month's reviews section and how many of them have we got to first? Loads is the correct answer, including the fabulously playable StreetRacer, Burn:Cycle, FIFA 3DO and Mickey Mania, which is probably the best Disney licence for centuries. Oh, and read all about these, too... Mega Bomberman, The Adventures of Batman and Robin, Colonization and the not-unpretty-looking Super Stardust. Enjoy! Steve James, Managing Editor What we're playing this month This month's hot-hits HIT! Doom p.58 STEVE Doom 2/PC Being an angst-ridden hyper-tense editor, it's either Doom or life in the slammer for murder. Micro Machines 2/MD The multi-player mode is brilliant, especially as Rik and Den have to let me win if they want to live. The Adventures Of Batman and Robin/SNES One of the finest cartoonto-game conversions of all time. Superb graphics arid playability. GARY MARK Doom 2/PC I don't care if it's just like Doom, it's still brilliant. Almost my game of the month behind... Colonization/PC Civilisation is my all-time fave game, and this is almost as good. Micro Machines 2/MD One of the finest Mega Drive games of all time, especially in four-player. Here at CVG we don't give high scores away lightly. A game has to be rather special before it scores over 90% and a CVG Hit. Even rarer though is a CVG Gold (awarded to games that have pushed back the boundaries of gaming) but don't expect to see more than a few of these a year as it takes a score of over 96% to earn one. Anyway, here are the top games this month... SELECT COURSE Micro Machines 2 p.100 RIK 40 Burn:Cycle/CD- 42 Earthworm Jim/MD+SNES 44 Alien vs Predator/Jaguar 54 Rise Of The Robots/PC+SNES 64 FIFA International Soccer/3DO 68 Sonic & Knuckles/MD 70 Batman and Robin/SNES 90 Street Racer/SNES 98 Mickey Mania/MD+SNES The Adventures Of Batman and Robin/SNES The most fun you can have wearing tights and leather pants without getting arrested. Red Zone/MD Hmm, plenty of chopperrelated double entendres and brilliant rendered explosions. Street Racer/SNES Mey Dinc told me it was realy good and I believed him. DEN FIFA Soccer/3DO Street An essential Racer/SNES purchase. It It's the looks great most and is playable incredibly racing game immersive. One of the best on the SNES | football games of all time. -even better Sonic & Knuckles/MD than Mario Kart. A great new game but Way of the Warrior/3DO more fun is had plugging in Ever since the dire Ultra the old Sonic games and Man on 3DO I've been wait seeing all-new stages and ing for a decent beat-'em-up bonus screens. on this machine. And this is. Mega Bomberman and Doom 2/PC Micro Machines/ MD You can pretend that the Bland one-player games monsters in this game are but grab some mates for moaning CVG designers and unrivalled multi-player blow them to pieces. games fun. The big picture If any other version of a game is available, then we'll tell you via our Alternatives and Other Versions boxes. We'll even tell you it it's destined for any other formats. For consistency's sake, games retain the original scores in alternative boxes. 39 "


"CD-i CVG REVIEW CD-i Adventure Philips .99 Out October PC and Mac versions planned No other versions planned Truth may be stranger than fiction but fiction is more believable when it plays like Burn:Cycle. A CD-i game so shocking it had to be censored... ntil recently, most decent CD-i games relied on the MPEG cartridge to provide the graphics. It's rather ironic, then, that the brilliant Burn:Cycle contains more FMV than we've seen for ages and it doesn't even require the MPEG unit very good news for existing and new CD-i 450 owners alike. You take the role of Sol Cutter, a futuristic data thief unknowingly infected with a killer brain virus. Two hours remain before you're history, and in that period you must gather tokens, solve puzzles, kill, bargain and try to track down Softech, the company who planted the virus in the first place. There are three key gameplay elements: shoot-'emup, exploration and puzzles. They crop up randomly, blended together seamlessly with excellent video sequences. As you drift from place to place in realtime 3D you don't just play for fun, you play for realblood, love, and life. burn:cycle 90 DOV 10000 VOO A The bar lady has more than just drinks to offer. You get to pick one item, so think about it. A Down at the bar, you can get anything you like for the right price. Bargain with items you find elsewhere. 21 A Move the cursor to the bottom of the screen and your inventory scrolls up. He Out in the televerse, parts of Cutter's body are crumbling away. The Buddha holds the secret to your escape. A On the way to Cutter's room Gala makes a comment about keeping her legs shut-she's a nice girl you see. 40 40 GAME BY TRIP MEDIA/PHILIPS CONTACT PHILIPS MEDIA (071-911 3000) FOR INFORMATION GAME SIZE: ONE CD G "


"REVIEW CVG LOST AND FOUND DEPOT Getting through Burn:Cycle successfully will require the collection of numerous objects. Some are necessary for bargaining with, while others provide access to inaccessible places. Here's what you should keep a look out for First Marmi Bank of Conscious Credit Jano Tri-ZAMISOF S 6328162 TRIPWORLD OWERBRUNCI valid Basantha FX057503 This is the futuristic equivalent of a bank, and Sol Cutter has a refined taste for Nigerian money. card tra Sanics Vol Gala is a futuristic mercenary who helps you out during the game. You can call her at any time with your remote unit, but you'll have to decide if she's to be trusted. VERDICT Here you are the follically challenged Sol Cutter. Most of the game is played through his eyes but when the FMV cuts-in you get a spectator view point. Who's this? Well, it's the big surprise of the game, and we ain't telling so you'll have to complete it yourself. CD-i The quality and quantity of Burn:Cycle's FMV footage is impressive, and the fact it doesn't require the MPEG cartridge is amaz. ing. If you can imagine a film where you make the decisions, you'll have a good idea of the gameplay on offer it's not just trial and error. The only weak points are the shoot-'emup segments, but this is compensated by the amount of thought and involvement required to play the game. The most impressive CD-i title yet! DENIZ AHMET Purple A In this sub-game a smoke bomb has exploded and you must guide your way out. SECOND OPINION GRAPHICS 93 SOUND 91 PLAYABILITY 84 VALUE 85 OVERALL This is the kind of game I've been waiting for ever since the CD-i was launched. It's the perfect blend of action, adventure and video footage combined with a strong storyline and a quality script. It doesn't rely on actors to provide the interface between player and game, and as such is thoroughly absorbing. You're pretty much left alone to explore the game at will, which is what really makes the game so playable. All this makes for a game which is a certain classic. Top stuff. MARK PATTERSON 13 "


"SNES CVG REVIEW SNES MEGA DRIVE Platform Virgin Games SNES .99 MEGA DRIVE .99 OUT NOW No other versions available No other versions currently planned This 24-meg platform buster promises to push this genre to the limit. It's a first of sorts and is likely to worm its way to the top of the charts... CVG HIT! The whip will kill the scavenging birds quicker than the gun. If the birds chew Jim's head he'll lose heaps of energy. MEGA DRIVE FR 100% SNES he secret of a good platform game is in the central character. Make him, her or it a pleasure to control and you'll hook the player instantly. Earthworm Jim does this better than any other platform character this year. The cartoonish graphics are exactly that. a cartoon. Never once will the player feel that Jim is out of place in the 30 stages open to him even with just a few weapons available. Briefly, your plot tells of an outer-space accident which sends a cybernetic suit plummeting into Jim's mud pool where he and the suit merge indefinitely. As Jim you're asked to explore the uncharted territories of deep-space Worm holes. It would be wrong to suggest that Earthworm Jim will astound with originality; the routine of crossing gaps, balancing on awkward platforms and utilising various forms of travel is tired; but somehow it's more imaginatively achieved here. A game with clear personality and individualism. x1000 The machine-gun shown here can be upgraded to a laser later on. Both are good for attack ing while on the move. Like all good worms Jim's a stretchy fellow and uses this to good effect when climbing and swinging. MEGA DRIVE Not as graphically strong as the SNES version, but Earthworm Jim is still one of the best looking Mega Drive games ever. WOTTA LOTTA SNOT! This game will put a grin on your boat, especially this scene with Major Mucus and battling it out over this slimy lake on bungee ropes. A It's a race to the end of the space tubes with Psycrow. Pick the shields up then ram Psycrow to make him lose. SNES THE WORM'S A Fifi the dog appears very suddenly and will chew Jim's butt. Use the gun to keep him back. arthworm CONTACT VIRGIN (081-960 2255) FOR INFORMATION  CART SIZE:  GAME BY SHINY ENTERTAINMENT 24MEGS. ONE-PLAYER GAME "


"REVIEW CVG SNES A CAN OF WORMS SNES Being the worm he is, Jim can perform all sorts of bizarre and beautifully animated movements. In fact, the animation is the game's is like big, and is definitely worth experiencing. To water your turf, here's a look at just some of Jim's many um, positions. Jim's bungee jump is very funny to watch, but avoid the swamp monster or it'll cut his line! MEGA DRIVE MEGA DRIVE ABOVE: Here you can see Jim swinging around having morphed his head into an extra hand. BELOW: Just some of the spot animations that Mr Floppyhead gets up to A Jim has just shot the fridge down, catapulting the cow into the sky. This serves no purpose but is just one of the many visual gags. VERDICT A Family pet ahoy! Use this rather large gerbil to chomp your way through the level. A While whizzing around the tubes, try and collect these orange ball things. They'll give you a continue. SNES SNES About now I'd normally be moaning that there's nothing new here. But what Earthworm lacks in originality it makes up for in variety, levels and action. One element that can make or break a game is the central character. Fortunately, Jim is one of the best in terms of handling and animation. Lots of wonderful touches create an absorbing cartoonish experience. Instantly addictive and the best use of sound any platform game has had for ages, too. DENIZ AHMET ALTERNATIVE GAME BOY Probotector Konami/.99 An amazing conversion of the brilliant SNES original. A platformer with lots of weapons and heavy-duty shoot-'em-up action. ISSUE 155: 84% There are occasions when you'll need to climb or slide down these ramp-type ledges. MEGA DRIVE VERDICT GRAPHICS 93 SOUND PLAYABILITY 90 I VALUE 84 OVERALL Blasting away with the gun is great fun, but take care because it soon runs out and refills are few and far between. The gun does refill automatically but only very slowly, so beware. MEGA DRIVE I was ready to slag Earthworm Jim off because it's yet another take on the Global Gladiators engine from Dave Perry and co. The thing is, everything hangs together so well, hence criticism on that front isn't fair. The graphics and sonics push the machine to the limit, and while there's not that much variety, the brilliance of the graphics make you want to progress to see them all. Well worth a look, but think twice if you already have Aladdin, Cool Spot et al. RIK SKEWS MEGA DRIVE YOUR OYSTER COMING SOON 3DO GEX Crysyal Dynamics This is looking smart and well-animated. It's a plat. form game where you play as a lizard, enabling you to stick to any surface and do lots of sneaky things EXPECTED RELEASE: NOVEMBER GRAPHICS 92 SOUND 92 PLAYABILITY 87 I VALUE 82 SNES 10053 OVERALL A Sizzle! I wonder what burnt worm smells like? Here Jim has to protect Pete the puppy as they dash through the stage. If Pete encounters any harm he'll turn into a monster and attack Jim!  EXPLORE THE TOP LEFT OF THE FIRST STAGE AND TRY TO FIND THE TOILET FOR A LAUGH 43 "


"CVG REVIEW JAGUAR Shoot-'em-up Atari .99 OUT 20th October No other versions available No other versions planned JAGUAR SURBE GOODS No prizes for guessing where you are now. The alien hive is one of the best looking parts of the game. Accore One of the few disappointing aspects of the game are the Predator graphics. They're not that well animated and look pretty poor up close. The animation for the marines is exceptional, especially when they're walking or taking pot-shots at you. It was big enough to overshadow the Jaguar launch and it could end up as one of the greatest sci-fi movies of the decade that's if people can pull themselves away from the game. These two glants of the big screen lock horns and mandibles on the world's first 64-Bit console. It's going to be big, and here's why... t's a funny thing. When we previewed the Aliens. It took Dan game back in the dark O'Bannon three days of issue 148, most of years to sell the the basics were in place, script for the first bar much of the shooting. film, James Cameron $50 It was still a case of million to make the secseemingly fawning journalond, and the critics justists, who were being totalone showing to dislike the ly honest, going on to the third. Replace Hollywood programmers about what movie moguls with the an excellent game they Predator however (if that's had. Now it's finished and any real change), bring in it's good. Really good. a bunch of trendy proThere's even a good reagrammers from the city of son why it's taken so long Oxford in the form of to arrive. Rebellion, Rebellion, then cram the instead of sitting at their lot on to Atari's Jaguar keyboards and taking the console and you've got a easy route of a shoot-'empotential game of the year up, have tried to give the just waiting to be played. game real depth. Rather first ces on thorns BY MARK PATTERSON GAME BY REBELLION CONTACT ATARI UK (0753 533344) FOR MORE INFORMATION 44 "


"REVIEW CVG S ISTS A The quickest way to get round the ship is by crawling through the ventilation tunnels. Unfortunately the aliens have worked this out too... Title: Alien Status: Large, hungry bugger Weapons: Tail, jaw, claws, Hollywood contract for fourth movie. Mission: Locate and protect alien queen It doesn't take much to kill an alien, but they have the distinct advantage of extra lives. By cocooning marines they create even more aliens, so you can afford to lose a few lives here and there. Title: Marine COLONIALS Status: Lunch Weapons: Shotgun, pulse rifle, flamethrower, smart gun Mission: To survive The marine isn't particularly fast or strong, but he does have the advantage of being able to crawl through the ventilation shafts, although so do the aliens... than just take on the role of a marine mindlessly wasting aliens in the pursuit of entertainment, they've given you the option of playing the Predator and the Aliens, each of whom have their own objectives, weapons and varying degrees of hardness. Arguably the marine is the best character to play. He starts off with no idea about what's happened and can only piece the story together by tracking down the personal logs of his dead colleagues the first priority is getting a weapon though, without encountering any aliens.... often the first sign that a One of the questions Predator's in the same we've been asked about room as you is the clicking this game is if it really is noise from its jaw followed something that couldn't by some speech, which is have been produced on a usually a challenge. The conventional system. The best effect, though, has to answer's yes. The back be when you switch ground graphics are drawn between the Predator's at a higher resolution than vision filters, the visual Doom and with more and audio effects are just colours. While that does amazing, totally in fact. make it run slightly slow. It's not quite the game er, there's no doubting we were expecting, and that it's truly impressive. there are many areas where it could have been FILM SAMPLES better, but, on the whole, The sound consists we are very impressed. mainly of background This is the first big game noise and effects sampled for the Jaguar and it straight from the films. So deserves to be successful. One of the key weapons on the Predator's arsenal is his invisibility shield. It also lets him see across sev. eral different spectra, so lack of light isn't a problem. What is a problem, though, is the way his score drops for killing people while being invisible. It's not as much fun as taking out an entire platoon without taking so much as scratch. Title: Predator Status: Death machine Weapons: Wrist blades, combi stick, smart disc, shoulder cannon, invisibility Mission: Claim the head of the alien queen. He may be the hardest character in the game, but he loses points for killing something while invisible because it's considered dishonourable. He gains extra weapons when he reaches a certain score, so it pays to spend most of the time visible. predator 45 "


"CVG REVIEW PREDATOR'S EYE VIEW Ever wondered what all that stuff going on in the Predator's headset is? So do we, but here's what it all means in the game. You Combi Staff SCORE OGODOS Score Shoulder Cannon CORE:DROOTSDOO Medi-kit Smartdisc Wrist Blade Bioscan Prey Weapon Power View Filter The alien can gain extra lives by paralysing and cocooning marines. Icons on the left of the screen show the progress of the embryonic xenomorph, and once it's fully grown and you die, it hatches, and you carry on from there. VERDICT Once a face hugger takes a liking to you it's really tough to shift. While its there your energy keeps on going down. Killing an alien close up isn't smart. If it's close enough to hit you, it's close enough to spray you with acid. SECOND OPINION Sometimes you can't avoid close-quarter combat, but although you end up with major acid burns, it does look very good. Graphically AVP is a match for Doom and although the speed isn't quite there it beats the PC classic in the smoothness and detail departments. Sound is disappointing though, when playing the marine there's complete silence much of the time, a heartbeat or footsteps would help. Playing the alien offers the most fun, thanks to neat weapons and the sheer speed it moves. The marine's quite good, but the Predator is downright boring. My main criticism is that there's occasions when nothing happens but even so this is the best Jaguar game yet. RIK SKEWS JAGUAR There's an old software industry adage which says that games sell machines, and that's definitely going to be the case with AVP. Apart from the graphics, the individual components of the game, such as the characters on their own and the occasional dull period aren't outstanding, but together do justice to an extraordinarily tricky licence. When you compare it to the kind of early software which appears on many machines, it's a commendable game indeed. MARK PATTERSON IT'S A BUG HUNT Being a puny human, the Marine needs all the help he can find here's his most useful weapons... SEITEN GRAPHICS 91 SOUND PLAYABILITY 91 VALUE 92 89 XI EFELS CEX R NEXT P ORSC EOT NEXT FRERES EX A XIS FERES C. EXIT OVERALL Shotgun Start with this. It's not powerful and very slow to reload. Three shots kill an alien, several dozen flatten a predator. Pulse rifle A massive improvement over the shotgun. It's fast and powerful, but still not quite enough against a Predator. Flamethrower Perfect weapon when you're attacked by dozens of aliens. Still leaves you short when facing a Predator, though. Smartgun It's not smart as in brainy, it's smart because it's big and reduces Predators to glowing green stains. 90 46 "


"ZAP The new Casio C300 My Magic Diary has a brilliant battle game. And because it's got a magic beam, you can play it with your mates even when they're not sitting next to you. Or you can try to beat the built-in computer. 21 YOUR MATES WITH A BP: 56000 270001 Your warrior Opponent's warrior Battle Screen Battle Result Screen ESP Power Replenishment Screen And it's got tons of other fun and useful features. 50 DOO DODO It'll keep a record of all your mates names, addresses, birthdays and telephone numbers. Even their faces. SAUAGE TED ***** RE 4 280 SOUTH HOBBY. BASEE Fortune Telling Telephone Directory Telephone Directory BRILLIANT BATTLE Using the montage feature you can build a picture of anyone you like (no matter how ugly they are!). And you can store things secretly with the secret password function. We've also squeezed in a calculator, calendar and clock/alarm. With this many fun features you'll be beaming from ear GAME. to ear. MAGIC BEAM DIARY CASIO SEND [EXEJ O OOOOOOOOOOO OOOOOOOOOO THE CASIO CLUB RANGE COMPRISES C-100 ELECTRONIC DIARY PRICE GUIDE  C 200 ELECTRONIC DIARY PRICE GUIDE E64.99 C-300 ELECTRONIC DIARY (SHOWN ABOVE). PRICE GUIDE .99: M-100 KEYBOARD PRICE GUIDE .99: M-200 KEYBOARD PRICE GUIDE .99. MLFLASHING LIGHT KEYBOARD PRICE GUIDE .99: ML-2 FLASHING LIGHT KEYBOARD PRICE GUIDE 259 99. U-200 PERSONAL STEREO, PRICE GUIDE . THE CASIO CLUB RANGE IS AVAILABLE FROM: ARGOS, BOOTS. DIXONS, FREEMANS, GUS. INDEX JOHN LEWIS PARTNERSHIP. TEMPO, TOYS' US WH SMITH AND ALL GOOD TOY STOCKISTS. PRICE GUIDES CORRECT AT TIME OF GOING TO PRESS. SOME MODELS MAY NOT BE STOCKED AT ALL OUTLETS FOR MORE INFORMATION ON THE CASIO CLUB RANGE. PLEASE CALL OUR CONSUMER HELPLINE ON 081 751 0167 CASIO "


"PLAY! JA QUESTION OF... KNOWLEDGE!!!\" TELEPHONE QUIZ Play CHOOSE YOUR SUBJECT by picking your subject and answering at least 3 questions correctly to enter our prize draw OR INSTANT WIN by answering 10 your subjects... questions correctly first time to win a prize. TELEVISION POP MUSIC 3 FOOTBALL BOARD GAMES PICK YOUR SUBJECT INSTANT WINE FULL MOOR DITT HEARTS Paul Weller W ood 16-BIT OU MODERN DIE IS RUBBESE A SEGA MEGADRIVE FOR SOME LUCK WINNER! JUST ANSWER ALL TEN QUESTIONS CORRECTLY FIRST TIME, PICKED FROM ALL SUBJECTS AND YOU'LL INSTANTLY WIN THREE TAPES OR CD'S OF YOUR CHOICE 0891 300 122 5 0891 300 123 PICK YOUR SUBJECT GRATTATOS SPIDER INSTANT WIN JUST ANSWER ALL TEN QUESTIONS CORRECTLY FIRST TIME, PICKED FROM ALL SUBJECTS AND YOU'LL WIN YOUR CHOICE OF THREE COMPUTER GAMES! 0891 300 124 D GAME GEAR A JAGUAR CONSOLE IS UP FOR GRABS 0891 300 125 If you are under 18 or do not pay the phone bill, get permission before dialing. Calls cost 39p per minute cheap rate. 49p per minute at all other times. Maximum duration of each competition is seven and a half minutes. Maximum cost .68. Non-instant win competitions close 28/2/95 and each winner is selected at random from a draw. All winners will be notified by post after the closing date. Instant winners will be notified within 48 hours. Full rules/winners are available from Shpn, 4 Walnut Tree Park, Walnut Tree Close, Guildford, Surrey, GU1 4TA. Instant win consists of questions selected at random from any of the subjects. Call prices correct at time of print. "


"REVIEW CVG MEGA DRIVE GAME GEAR Puzzle Game Codemasters MD.99 GG.99 Out now No other versions available No other versions planned GAME GEAR The ocean liner's sinking fast, can you save the passengers and crew in this Lemmings-like puzzler from Micro Machines masters Codemasters? The player can't use the same exit as the passengers but his one tends to be fairly close by. MEGA DRIVE E SUNT LOVPRE SUN emmings has a lot to answer for. Since that classic game first arrived on the Amiga nearly four years ago, all manner of substandard ripoffs have appeared in an attempt to cash in on the innovative puzzler. Now Codemasters is serving up its own version and while SS Lucifer isn't an original product it's certainly well presented and playable. As would-be hero and all round good guy the player has to rescue the stranded crew and passengers before the combined terrors of rising water, blazing fire and other nasties get to them. To get the people through each level the player generally has to run ahead Sleepwalker style pulling levers to change the directions of conveyer belts and blasting doors with his unlimited supply. Like Lemmings a certain percentage of people have to be escorted to the exit before the player can progress and attempt to complete the other 99 levels. 000000 SCORE SCORE VERDICT DUNI MEGA DRIVE This high quality screen is a good example of the game's graphical finesse. GAME GEAR A number of reasons make this the best version of the game. For a start It's  cheaper than the Mega Drive, yet offers virtually the same game. The excel lent graphics are all the more impressive for being on a handheld, and heck even the sound is unusually good for the Game Gear. A great little puzzler on a great little machine. RIK SKEWS VERDICT 032 05 06 LEFT S GAME GEAR A It's worth releasing a dinghy when found just in case the water rises faster than expected, so that the passengers don't end up to their neck in it. GRAPHICS 87 SOUND 74 PLAYABILITY 73 VALUE 86 MEGA DRIVE Graphically, S.S. Lucifer is excellent, with small but finely detailed graphics and neat visual tricks. Sound is also good with some chirpy ditties which drive the player on and there's a great sampled scream when he dies. Gameplay is fun but this genre is getting a little stale, I'd rather wait for the definitive Lemmings 2. RIK SKEWS GAME GEAR OVERALL RESCUE RESCUE MEGA DRIVE GRAPHICS 84 SOUND 81 PLAYABILITY 72 VALUE 73 A Splat! There are many traps for the player and the passengers to avoid including this internal organ revealing crusher. GAME GEAR A Bomb the doors to allow the passengers and yourself through. Don't get too close to the explosion or you'll end up more than a little charred through. TIL BURE MEGA DRIVE OVERALL COLOCO DE A Many of the levels require the player to traipse ahead, Sleepwalker style, and sort out any traps before the passengers hit them. These switches have to be pulled in the right order to enable the passengers to progress. Don't pull them all at once though, because they might doubleback. A limited amount of oxygen keeps the player alive under water for a short time.  GAME BY CODEMASTERS CONTACT CODEMASTERS (0926 814132) FOR INFORMATION 49 "


"YOU CAN BE THE ALIEN. Lunch. Toast. Dogmeat. You're on the menu. The Alien eats you from the inside out. The Predator's razor-like mouth parts go for the crust. It's one thing to be low man on the food chain in a 16or 32-bit game. But in Jaguar's 64-bit system, it takes extremely fine-tuned reflexes to stay alive. Give your reptilian hindbrain a workout. Be the 123456789 SLURE DUIS SCORE : VODOUGE YOU'RE THE MARINE, YOU'RE THE ALIEN. YOU'RE THE PREDATOR. Be any one of them and fulfill your biological destiny; kill or be killed. THE ALIEN LASHES OUT. His claw and tail strikes are beautiful and deadly. No such aesthetics apply to the face suckers. That's just plain sick. YOU'RE JUST A CRYBABY WITH A SHOTGUN TO THE ALIEN. Texture-mapping heightens the claustrophobia of the airduct. Too bad. Tell your therapist. ATARI Game tips and hints: 1-900-737-ATARI 95 per minute. If you are under 18, be sure to get a parent's permission before calling A touch-tone telephone is required. USA only. Atari Jaguar information is available in the Atari Gaming Forum on CompuServe. Type GO JAGUAR to access this area 24 hours a day. Atan, the Atari logo, Jaguar and the Jaguar logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of Atan Corporation. All rights reserved. Ahen and Predator & Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation. All rights reserved. Used under sublicense from Activision NE USA "


"YOU CAN BE THE PREDATOR. OR YOU CAN BE LUNCH. PREDATOR Predator or the Alien. Ancient animal senses exploit the high-resolution bit-mapping the better to see you. Huge sound-sampling the better to hear you. And unparalleled animation the better to come out of nowhere and eat you. In a 64-bit environment, pure sensation can overwhelm. Keep a little blood in your adrenaline system, and maybe you'll survive. At least until dinner. JAGUAR SOFTWARE HELPLINE 0839 994460 MARINE? HAPLESS VICTIM Is MORE LIKE IT. Your extraordinary bit-mapped image makes the shape of your skull look so very right to the Predator Jaguar Software Helpline Cuckoo Wharf Units 1-4 Lichfield Road, Aston Birmingham B6 755 Pestan e n is tal from te per te pare te Cale cop per dag The 49p per m e tell her munum charge 320. Phasend und so pong to press. We tengo change the and the better trendy THE PREDATOR CAN SEE WHAT YOU CAN'T. Stay out of his view. Too many X-rays can be bad for you. JAGUAR DO-THE THE PREDATOR'S DISKS FROM HELL may outmatch your more conventional weaponry. Might be a good idea to keep your first-aid kit handy. DO+THE o ooo oo MATH INTERACTIVE MULTIMEDIA SYSTEM "


"CVG REVIEW CD32 Shoot-'em-up Acid .99 OUT NOW No other versions available No other versions planned 12850 From the Skidmarks team comes a gusset busting and rather fast blast-'em-up... One of the power-ups dropped by the dronoids is a tracking missile. This automatically tracks on to the nearest dronoid when fired. orrowing all the best bits from the evergreen SNES classic Starwing, Guardian is a blast fest of rather large proportions. Set in the far future the player's job is to repel the relentless attack of alien life forms. Dronoids are the main targets and these nasty critters are armed with bombs powerful enough to destroy the last few remaining human installations. Once a wave is destroyed, another more powerful one appears. Laser and shield boosts among others are dropped by some of the Dronoids when destroyed to give the player a better chance. Don't think this makes the game easy though, the Dronoid scum are protected by a variety of fighters. Looking on the whole like something from Cybermorph or Starwing the best way to avoid them is to keep moving. Of course that makes picking off the Dronoids all the more difficult and that's where the main gameplay attraction lies. The odd looking trees and especially the alien buildings must also be considered. With all the low level flying involved it's easy to smash into the human installations and aid the alien's quest! The dronoids are dropped by this mothership. Thankfully it doesn't fire back, so stay close and you should be able to pick some Dronoids off before they stray too far. Here's a Dronoid in action. That red blob is the bomb about to wipe out a few more unfortunate humans. ALTERNATIVE SNES Starwing Nintendo/.99 Starwing was the first game to use the FX chip and is a bit of a classic. A genuine bargain at its rereleased price though. ISSUE 137: 96% A multitude of different playing angles are available but to be honest the preset one is the easiest if not the prettiest to use. guardian VERDICT 150 14 The mothership where the Dronoids are dispensed. It can't be shot, sadly. It's a fire and forget track. ing missile! Great for taking out Irritating Dronoids. CD32 There's no denying that this is a good game but it lacks a continual challenge, and there are occasions when not a lot seems to be happening. It's fun though and offers a variety of baddies, backdrops and weapons. The graphics are smooth and fast, even more so than Starwing on SNES and the music is excellent! Not the classic It could and should have been but a solid blast nonetheless. Nintendo can sleep easy for the time being though. RIK SKEWS GANL QUER PLAYER ONE! This screen pops up all too often when first playing. Mastering control of the craft is the only way to sur vive. IN A GALAXY FAR FAR AWAY... Amazingly enough for a CD game the intro isn't rendered. Instead it features lots of polygon ships having a good old scrap. GRAPHICS 79 SOUND 81 PLAYABILITY 81 VALUE 83 OVERALL 82 GAME BY ACID SOFTWARE CONTACT GUILDHALL LEISURE SERVICES (0302 890000) FOR INFORMATION 52 "


"REVIEW CVG GAME GEAR Sports Sim Codemasters .99 OUT NOW Mega Drive version also available No other versions planned GANES ::SE. pete sampras tennis After a very successful time on Mega Drive, Pete Sampras squeezes himself into the Game Gear... A If it seems like the player won't reach the ball then hit button 2 and watch the player reach for it while diving. OTHER VERSIONS Fun but is spoilt by a couple of niggly points like unfair calls by the ref and the fact your player often argues with the ref for no reason, which wastes time as it can't be stopped. he gadget factor of Mega Drive Sampras, with its four-player J-cart overshadowed what was actually a rather decent tennis game. With the Game Gear version coming on a bog-standard cart, it's clear that the game on its own would have been enough to score big marks. But there is one major bit of cleverness on the cart you will be able to play two-player mode on one machine, just like on the Codie's previous release, Micro Machines. It's also packed with options such as matches for one or two players, a tournament mode, a knockout competition for eight players and a world tour for up to four competitors which features famous venues and players from around the world. If you don't fancy cramming on to one machine with a mate, it also supports a link-up cable so two Game Gears can be hooked up. MEGA DRIVE ISSUE 15184% VERDICT 15 15 WIOUS SETS GAME GEAR This was fun on Mega Drive but didn't quite make hit status because of a few annoying gameplay faults. They've been ironed out for this version, though, making it a much better game. Graphically It's very polished, though the size of the screen means placing shots is difficult. And the speech is absent, which is a shame. It also seems a lot harder to pull off power shots but the control is so instinctive this isn't a problem. A game as good as the player it's based on. RIK SKEWS A Pause the game for a replay option which allows the player to relive glory moments. COURT IN THE ACT A Fancy a game of doubles? Pete Sampras' Tennis caters for fans and allows for two players to play in the same team or against each other. Like Micro Machines two players can play on one machine as well as via a machine link up. There's three different courts in the game and each has a distinct effect on the way the ball bounces, GRAPHICS 84 SOUND 70 PLAYABILITY 87 VALUE 15 30 88 OVERALLE STUTTGART A Use the World Tour option to play all the classic courts around the world. CLAY: Slows the ball down and gives minimum bounce. GRASS: No surprises here, grass provides normal bounce and speed HARD: The hard court gives the ball a strong bounce and high speed. 88 . GAME BY CODEMASTERS CONTACT CODEMASTERS (0926 817595) FOR MORE INFORMATION 53 "


"PC CD-ROM CVG REVIEW PC CD-ROM ISNES Platform Konami PC.99 SNESUnconfirmed Out November 18 No other versions available PC Floppy, PC VGA, Mega Drive, Mega CD, Gamo Gear, CD-i and 3DO versions planned CVC To quote the song 'how long has this been going on?'. Who cares if it's been worth the wait, and believe us it has... SNES STOP ALL THIS SILLINESS ub your eyes, take a deep breath and accept the fact that Rise Of The Robots is finally with us. In a plot which rivals Bobby Ewing's resurrection in Dallas, Rise has been promoted, delayed, bought by Time Warner, delayed again, improved re-promoted and finally, after all that, is going to be released. It's a recipe for failure, but Mirage has managed to pull the game through with some remarkable results. Every piece you've read on this game will tell you how remarkable the graphics are you can see that for yourselves, but the hot news is it plays brilliantly too. Each robot has an excellent variety of moves unique to them, including special moves and a few hidden super-specials which are left to you to discover. The SNES version is a landmark in console games. Nearly all the cinematic sequences from the CD-ROM game are featured, which is an amazing achievement, even if it did take a 32-Meg cart to do it. The game has undergone a slight alteration, with the addition of parallax scrolling and an enhanced control system to take advantage of the SNES' six-button pad. Considering the amount of memory the graphics eat up, the programmers can rightly pat themselves on the back for keeping the same fluid animation on this version. It's amazing totally As it's a beat-'em-up, Rise has the obligatory special moves, although not all of them are designed to hurt your enemy. Certain joystick combinations will render your robot invisible, invincible or reverse your oppo. nent's controls. Naturally this is the gameplay equivalent of kicking someone in the 'nads and running away. It's one of the features which makes the twoplayer game such a riot, although the temptation is for both players to spend more time trying to activate them than actually hitting each other. A Your Cyborg's special attacks include this shoulder barge, which is handy for getting in close to your opponent. Probably the most lethal of the special attacks disables all your special moves, That's a real problem when you're up against the Crusher Still, having your controls reversed is no fun either, especially when your foe closes in for the kill. Krise of the GAME BY MIRAGE CONTACT MIRAGE (0260 299909) FOR INFORMATION 54 "


"REVIEW CVG PC CD-ROM A The military droid isn't the biggest robot you face, but he's certainly the most ferocious. His special moves include a lethal claw slash. SNES WOOD PC CD-ROM SNES WHO NEEDS CD? The poor old loader is little more than a forklift with attitude, but it's a fairly bad attitude. A The robot animation is superb. Just as impressive are the shadows beneath them which move perfectly in time with the action. SNES Check these out! The SNES version of Rise features almost all the eye-popping cinematics from the CD versions which add immensely to the game. These crop up before and after you encounter another robot, along with discriptions of their strengths and weaknesses. PC CD-ROM The Japanese robot is the most formidable-looking opponent. He's armed with a vicious spinning kick. robots A direct hit is rewarded with an excellent clunking sound effect and a shower of sparks and shrapnel which gives a brilliant feeling of having just tonked some thing really hard. 55 "


"CVG REVIEW SNES PC CD-ROM COMING SOON... CD32 AND A1200 The A1200 and CD32 versions of Rise are almost complete and look every bit as good as their PC brother. The CD32 game will feature all the cut-scenes plus CD music, while as much as possible is being retained for the A1200 version. PC CD-ROM The flying head-butt is a great way to finish a bout, but if you miss-time it, you'll end up standing right in front of your enemy, per. fectly lined up for a hit. A What really separates Rise from other beat-'em-ups is the artificial intelligence routines used to determine how a robot attacks you. If you're pretty crap at fighting, you won't be overpowered with special moves and unstoppable attacks. However, try to be a smart arse and you can expect stiffer resistance. The 3D rendered robots which feature in the cinematic scenes are the same as those in the main game. Each victory is rewarded with an animation of your enemy short-circuiting, or your cyborg dissing them off some suitably high level. VERDICT PC CD-ROM ON GUARD Lurking in the game's last level is the awesome supervisor who makes all the robots that came before her look like Metal Mickey. Most of her attacks are based around the fact that she can morph, you can't, and that makes her much better than you. Here are a few moves and robos to be on your guard against. VERDICT SNES Technically this is probably the most advanced game ever, combining rendered graphics with the cutscenes of the CD versions to produce a truly spectacular game. Although memory doesn't allow it, a few more characters would have been welcome, but the one's that are in there are varied, and dangerous enough to give you more than a run for your money. Don't expect SF2 or MK from this game, it's a completely different thing something which is very much to its credit. MARK PATTERSON GRAPHICS 94 SOUND PLAYABILITY 92 VALUE 91 PC CD-ROM When a game takes as long as this to appear you take a guarded stance. Hopefully, even the most doubting journo will realise that the wait has been worth it. The CD-ROM version is the best beat-em-up the PC has seen. The control system gets around the PC's joystick button deficiency and forces you to think about your attacks rather than wade in mindlessly. As ever, it's the twoplayer mode which shines and finishes off what is an undoubtedly good game. MARK PATTERSON The supervisor Preying mantis OVERALL 91 Claw punch Claw punch Spike kick Spike kick SNES GRAPHICS 93 SOUND 92 PLAYABILITY 91 VALUE 90 OVERALL 90 The SNES version makes full use of the six-button pad to give you different strengths of moves. Killer floor kick Energy morph 56 "


"LMP (GAMESTER IDEO GAME ACCESSORIE 20  ..oos) POWER WIDE VIEW SCREEN MAGNIFIER 2.5 X MAGNIFICATION FOR GAMEGEAR FOR GAMEGEAR RECHARGEABLE BATTERY PACK COMPLETE WITH MAINS ADAPTOR FOR GAMEGEAR FOR GAMEGEAR\" AGRANDISSEUR D'ÉCRAN GROSSISSEMENT DE 2,5 POUR GAMEGEAR BILDSCHIRMVERGRBERUNGSGLAS 2,5-FACHE VERGRRENING FR GAMEGEAR PAMEST CAMS ACCUMULATEUR RECHARGEABLE COMPLET AVEC ADAPTATEUR SECTEUR POUR GAMEGEAR WIEDERAUFLADBARER BATTERIESATZ COMBETT MUT NETZADAPTER FR GAMEGEAR SUPER ACTION CASE: CARRY CASE COMPLETE WITH SCREEN MAGNIFIER, POWERGRIP AND MAINS ADAPTOR, (Gamegear Games and Batteries not included). MEGA DRIVE CARRY CASE: (Console and Games not included). CE LMP 1 GAMESTER VIDEO GAME ACCESSORIES THE RANGE OF VIDEO GAME ACCESSORIES. NOW AT A GAMES STOCKIST NEAR YOU! STONEMASON'S HOUSE, 75 RAILWAY STREET HERTFORD, HERTS. SG14 1RD TELEPHONE: 0992 503133 FAX: 0992 503061 "


"CVG REVIEW PC Shoot-'em-up Virgin .99 OUT NOW No other versions available No other versions planned Hell on Earth? Well let's hope so because an inumerable number of Doom junkies are waiting for their next fix, and if this is no good there will be Hell to pay... doom 22 A As before, the sound of your gunfire will attract more monsters towards you. he sequel every PC owner has been waiting for is here. So, have we been given something radically different, or has programming team id Software taken the safe approach? Well, a quick glance at these screenshots should tell you it's very similar to the first. Again you move around in a real-time play area where the immediate objective is to find the exit, survive, slaughter hellspawned demons and maybe collect a few bonuses. The more demanding player however, will choose to hunt out hidden doors and try to eliminate everything on the level. Subsequently, the appeal of Doom 2: Hell on Earth (to give it its full title), as before, is that there is always so much to explore and see and of course, lots of sadistic violence. For this sequel the action is played across three stages, each with typically themed nasties: The City, The Space Station and Hell present increasingly complex maze structures to negotiate. It also ups your arsenal, with a new weapon the double barrelled shotgun. It's more powerful than the original, which you can also select, but goes through ammunition at a rate of knots. A few new creatures have also been added, which are typically nasty and, generally, the game makes its predecessor look like a picnic. Doom 2 is certainly one of the most exciting 3D games available, and has a special atmosphere all of its own. But if you bought the full-price version of the first game, you might want to think twice before donning the knuckle dusters a second time. This new baddie kills everything, including other monsters. Kill him and you can steal his chain-gun. It's not always obvious which platforms can be raised and lowered. If you're stuck in the acid hit the nearest rock, it usually reveals a door or lift. KILL OR BE KILLED In case you've missed Doom before here's the com plete line-up of weapons available for collection. Naturally bigger is better. A New to Doom 2 are trap doors, which aren't visible until you fall through them. A This monster reappears elsewhere when shot. He also brings dead monsters back to life. As If there wasn't enough gore already, Doom 2 also has many corpses hanging around. This weapon is only effective at close-range, and it takes quite a while to finish off monsters. Out of ammo? Then use your fists, which are fortunately adorned with lethal-spiked knuckle dusters. This is your default weapon, but it's not that powerful so only use it as a last resort when there's nothing else. Make no mistake, the shotgun is one of the smartest weapons in the game, takes a second to reload though. With twin barrels the shotgun can kill double the monsters but it uses double the ammo of its single barrel cousin. CONTACT VIRGIN 081-960 2255) FOR INFORMATION MULTIPLAYER VIA MODEN 56 GAME BY id SOFTWARE OR NETWORK "


"REVIEW CVG Collect the sphere to enhance your abilities. Learn what the various colours signify. Doom 2 has a lot more of these narrow corridors. If you need to pass through, make sure there's nothing hiding inside. The graphical detail on this foe is particularly impressive, but as the collectable blue armour suggests, he's very difficult to beat. GUNS DON'T KILL BULLETS DO SECOND OPINION This is one of those games upon which it's difficult to make an opinion; should it be criticised for being little different to its daddy or praised for being just that? I think the answer lies somewhere in-between, after all Doom is the original first-person perspective blaster and arguably the greatest PC game ever, but it is disappointing to get only one new weapon and a few new baddies and backgrounds. If you've not got the original then this is an essential buy, otherwise strictly for Doom junkies only. RIK SKEWS You may recall these creatures from the end of the original Doom game. Expect to meet them often in Doom 2 and watch out for their fireballs. If you're in a room with bar. rels, be careful where you fire as they'll all explode in a chain reaction. VERDICT A Stand under a door and you can shoot both ways. PC Doom 2 is more a case of Doom 1.5. Doom 2 is still the best game of its kind but it's definitely more of the same. There should have been completely new weapons rather than just adding an extra barrel to the shotgun. To be fair there are plenty of new baddies, but there's a lot more that could have been done here; why not two weapons at once one in each hand? Anyway, I'll get off my soap box and say that if you like gore, you can't get much better than Doom 2. DENIZ AHMET A You'll find a lot more variety in door design for Doom 2. You can identify them by bright markings rather than fumbling around walls hoping something's there. One new weapon is all you get in Doom 2, but it comes with a lot more blood. A This chap is dangerous, try to blast him in the back. GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY 90 VALUE 80 OVERALL If you want to kill monsters in a real gory way, use the rockets for a quick death. Don't get caught in the explosion though. The chaingun goes through ammo faster than any other weapon. It's brill for strafing a room full of monsters! This is the fastest weapon of the bunch. It does a lot of damage, but doesn't feel as good as the shotgun to use. Without a doubt the most awesome weapon of all. It's slow, but takes out an entire room in one shot. 88 59 "


"CVG REVIEW MEGA DRIVE Adventure/Shoot-'em-up Time Warner MD.99 Out November No other version available No other versions planned AH-64B APACHE: My missle preference has to be the Hellfire, it gets rid of the enemy instantly, and the cannon's good for destroying oncoming missiles. Some barmie commie needs sorting out; luckily you've got a big, sod-off, tooled-up Apache to help you out. Cue dialogue... WEAPONS: Stinger Missi 70-MM rockets Hellfire Miss 30-MH chain gom This is your info screen telling you what sort of infantry you're up against. red ALTERNATIVE AMIGA Desert Strike EA/.99 A perfect conversion of the classic Mega Drive original but tarnished by long loading times. ISSUE 138: 88% Zone VERDICT MISSION 2 passwor RADAR COMPLEX ENDANGERING COVERT OPERATION ed Zone. Remember the Cold War? It was the time when the Western super powers (and us) were at loggerheads with the Red Menace (the USSR et al) this is all before Saddam and co raised their tyrannical heads. But slick German coding programmers, Zyrinx (yes, they of the brilliant Sub-Terrania fame) are obviously oblivious to that Wall coming down and have set their sublime new copter, top-down-view, 3D scoping adventure shoot-'emup (and blimey that's a mouthful) on you trying to avert a radical communist party nuking the non-Marxist influenced world into a radioactive desert. Yeah, bad karma or what? To aid your quest into the red zone (and 12 testing missions) is a nifty Apache helicopter that has more of an arsenal than north London. Said whirlybird helps you deal with outing radar installations, enemy personnel, tanks, armoured powerboats, supersonic aircraft and homing missiles. There is more than a similarity to Urban Strike here but Red Zone's 3D landscape scrolls around your chopper making it quite distinctive, and the flight control method is incredibly realistic. On-screen help and navigational aids are all just a button-press away and there are enough texture mapped explosions and atmosphere enhancing sound FX to keep you going until Sean Connery stars in the Hunt For Blue November, and God knows when that is. Find the Military base wher Zyristan main radar complex placed. Destroy the radar Complex enter the COROL Center and install the computer Virus. By the way, it might be wise to cut of the power Supply for the Dase. MEGA DRIVE The stylistic FMV intro sets this game up. Luckily what follows more than lives up to the former because underneath these stunning graphics, stonking weapons and storming soundtrack is successful gameplay. Each of the 12 missions has its own individual appeal the underground sections make a fab sub game. The control is innovative and the onscreen help aids you in mastering each level. The only irritation is having to switch to the main map to find out where you're going is too time consuming. Incredibly minor niggle aside though, if you bought Jungle Strike and want another chopper blaster that's rather phenomenal, then buy this. GARY LORD HELLE 20 It takes a while to suss your way round the map and learn where not to go if you don't want to end up as cannon fodder. When your crosshair locks on target then just press that button B and it's a case of not-so-friendly fire time. GRAPHICS 90 SOUND 88 PLAYABILITY 88 VALUE 89 THE RUSSKIES ARE COMING... OVERALL ... and when you've endured this smacking intro you're going to have to do your utmost to avert nuclear mushroom cloudsville. So, as your gung ho contemporaries would prob. ably say: 'Let 'em have it. 93 GAME BY ZYRINX CONTACT TIME WARNER (0604 602800) FOR INFORMATION CART SIZE: 16MEGS 60 "


"REVIEW CVG SNES Puzzle Virgin Unconfirmed OUT NOW No other versions available No other versions planned The Bombermen are back for Xmas. Trouble is, their presents tend to be of the exploding variety. Oh yeah, this message will self-destruct. Tick-Tock... PVG O GO 118 OOO Reg! DDDDDDDDD RES ODIO DI DUI Moerman 2 A On many stages there are escape routes which you can take to wrap-around the screen and avoid potential bomb traps. ZOO 042 O 600 @ 3:32 O 37 Pue ombermen always blow-off. No, not like that. These guys hate their own kind so much that they spend all their time blowing each other up. The idea is that you plant bombs, dash behind a corner, and wait to see if a trapped or unsuspecting fellow Bomberman has been offed. With the collection of power-ups you can move faster, lay more bombs, increase the range of your bombs, or even sling them over walls for starters. It's easier to blow yourself up than it is to force others into making that mistake. You might drop a bomb ahead of you, but another player might do the same behind you, and as you're always confined within a maze structure, escape may not be possible. Blow up parts of each maze to avoid getting trapped so easily, but that benefits the opposition too. Either way, there are so many intelligent opponents that you'll be forced to change your tactics just when you think you've got it sussed. Pue A There are only ten stages in the Multiplayer mode (less than before) but they're filled with better ideas. A If you bomb the door here by accident you'll introduce even more enemy Bombermen. Try and work out what the magnets do. OM OS Dropping a bomb on the amplify token will give your explosions the maximum range and power. Make sure you keep clear. In Bomberman 2 each player now has bombs of their own colour so you can see who's doing what. LORER VERDICT SNES The first Bomberman game was near-perfect, so I'll forgive Virgin for not altering the sequel significantly. The multi-screen stages and coloured bombs (so you can recognise each others' weapons) are great additions; but why dispose of some of the old power. ups? The one-player game has been enhanced, but Bomberman 2 is best suited to two or more players, and the number of stages in multi-player mode have been cut. Bomberman 2 had the potential to be one of the best games ever, but as it is, it's just very good. DENIZ AHMET OOO 1359 O. A Some stages have flowing streams of water or oll. You control the speed and direction you move by hitting the marked blocks. If you bomb the oil it'll set the lot on fire! BLOW UP THE SCREEN :43 238 02:30 3 363 GRAPHICS 83 SOUND 83 PLAYABILITY 93 VALUE 90 OVERALL The major new addition to Bomberman 2 is that you now get scrolling stages. This one here is just three screens wide, but some are huge and shift in every direction. You need to be extra quick on these stages because the time limit becomes tighter. CONTACT VIRGIN (081-960 2255) FOR INFORMATION  CART SIZE: 8MEGS GAME BY HUDSON SOFT SUPPORTS MULTITAP 61 "


"MACHINES Sco BRITAIN'S BUBBLIEST AND BEST-SELLING SEGA MAGAZINE! MACHINES WITHOUT BEING TOO MODEST, MEAN MACHINES SEGA IS THE HOME OF THE EXCLUSIVE. IT'S FIRST FOR NEWS, PREVIEWS, REVIEWS AND GOSSIP EVERYTHING THE DISCERNING SEGA OWNER NEEDS, IN FACT. GET THE COMPLETE GAMING PICTURE GET MEAN MACHINES SEGA.. OUT THE 30TH OF EVERY MONTH. SKOR "


"GREAT COVERAGE PC REVIEW DOOM NOVEMBER 1994. .95 mm LORDS OF THE REALM CYCLEMANIA AND SIMON THE SORCERER ON CD From the creators of Alone in the Dark LITTLE IF YOUR HIGH-DENSITY COVER DISK IS MISSING, CONSULT YOUR NEWSAGENT ADVENTURE A magical new quest IF YOUR CD-ROM IS MISSING CONSULT YOUR NEWSAGENT THE EASY INTERNET GUIDE Giant modem group test  Internet access made easy Step by step modem set-up YOUR COMPLETE GUIDE TO PC ENTERTAINMENT You spend ages choosing the right PC; the machine which delivers the best performance for money, one which can keep you ahead of the crowd, and most importantly, a machine which you can be proud of owning. cerning when you choose a magazine to keep you informed and entertained? PC REVIEW is the magazine which has been designed with all your needs in mind. It covers the latest technology and software, including the best games and how to play them. It also delivers the hottest previews and reviews of the latest developments in the PC arena. Whether you're an old hand or a new user, PC REVIEW delivers the expert coverage you need to get the most from your machine. If you're switched on to PC, get switched on to PC REVIEW! OUT ON THE 15TH OF EVERY MONTH! "


"CVG REVIEW 3DO Sports | EA .99 Out Now SNES, Mega Drive, Mega-CD, and PC versions available Amiga version planned FORMATIONS DESCRIERE SE CVG If you're after a game which is a quantum leap ahead of the rest, then FIFA 3DO is definitely one to admire. But can it steal the footy crown from Sensi? One of the key features of the game is the incredible sound. It's almost worth buying a surround sound TV for! A When you change tactics the players automatically move into their new positions, which is useful for seeing who plays where and for making sure they're in the best positions to match the other team. fifa Soccer 00:15 Ist Half WHO NEEDS SKY? FIFA 3D0 recreates the real game better than any other computer footy sim yet seen. Here's a look at another goal being scored. All it lacks is Sheepskin Motson providing the commentary. here's no denying that FIFA Soccer is great fun to play, but there was always the niggling doubt that it was the graphics that made the game appeal, and not the gameplay. Not any more mate. Sure the 3DO version has remarkable graphics, but the most importantly features are the intelligent players and the incredibly realistic gameplay. The basic gameplay engine is similar to the 16-bit versions, although there are noticeable refinements, especially in the intelligence of the computer players. EA has also dumped the three-quarter perspective view of the previous FIFA games and provided multiple camera views, from bird'seye down to an on-the-ball viewpoint. This isn't just a neat graphical gimmick though, it genuinely comes in handy for judging where both your own and your opponents' goalies will place the ball, as well as making corners and throw-ins easier. The presentation is enhanced even further by heaps of FMV clips from famous football matches and Dolby Surround sound. Best of all is the multiplayer game which supports up to six human players at once in various combinations of one to six a-side. Every camera view is useful for a particular section of the game. The End Zone Cam, shown here, is particularly useful when kicking off. POINTS OF VIEW FIFA 3D0 is immediately distinguishable by its variety of camera angles. They're put to especially good use when a goal is scored. COVERAGE VE Use the coverage screen for positioning your players. Especially useful for making sure your attackers don't end up offside. Tower Cam view The number 11 is closing down the opposition defender... Free Cam view Now the number 11 is going in for a tackle... Midfield  GAME BY EA SPORTS CONTACT EA (0753 549442) FOR INFORMATION GAME SIZE: ONE CD 64 "


"REVIEW CVG FILM Baia TEAMING WITH FMV There's plenty of full motion video from famous footy moments to gawp at. Although chunky, it's pretty impressive considering it's running without an FMV board. Here's a typical sequence taken from the end of a half. Thankfully the FMV scenes can be skipped through, but they're all taken from classic football matches and well worth watching a few times. 1986 GERMANY VS. ARGENTINA STRATEGY The sideline view looks beautiful but it's very difficult to play with IT'S HOME AND IT'S AWAY COMING SOON The graphics in the throwins and corners can be panned round to judge where best to place the ball. It all moves very smoothly too. SNES International Superstar Soccer Konami Looks like being one of the most playable footie games yet. Superb animation and an elegant range of moves make tackling a real joy plus there's oodles of realism. Even promises to feature recog. nisable players too. EXPECTED RELEASE: JANUARY VERDICT A Unlike every other footy game, the ref in FIFA 3DO is on-screen at all times. And just like the real thing he even gets in the way. SECOND OPINION OTHER VERSIONS The other FIFAs' play is akin to the 3DO version, but the biggest difference is obviously in the graphics: no animated shadows and a fixed viewpoint. All are jolly good fun, though. With a variety of camera angles and realistic CD sound the gameplay experience in FIFA 3DO is totally absorbing. It's fast too, with detailed player sprites and responsive controls. You also feel you're more in command of the players in this version, so unlike other FIFA games, here you actually feel in control of the ball but still not quite enough. The only other niggle I have is if you're linked up with other players you end up fighting over which viewpoint to go for! Overall the best version of FIFA by a mile and several hundred yards. DENIZ AHMET SNES ISSUE 151 90% MEGA DRIVE ISSUE 145 91% PC ISSUE 154 89% 3DO I'm not the biggest fan of 16-bit FIFA having felt that it lacks control. I was sur prised, then, by how much I enjoyed this version, especially given the 3DO's iffy joypad. The controls are great while the graphics and sound are not just icing on the cake, they add substantially to the realism and fun of playing the game. While I still prefer Sensi this is the next best thing and a fantastic next generation game which should persuade a few people to buy a 3DO. RIK SKEWS Use the scouting report to check out the strengths and weaknesses of each team. 91 GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY 92 VALUE 91 OVERALL Game Cam view The number 11's won the tackle and passes it to the number 10... Game Cam view 11's run into clear space and 10 delivers a beautifully weighted pass. Game Cam view he shoots from a long way out, but it's looking good... Net Cam view what better angle to watch a remarkable Goooooal! 92  FIFA HAS NOW SOLD MORE THAN 500,000 COPIES. RIK AND DENIZ NOW ACCOUNT FOR TWO OF THOSE 65 "


"X-CITING! X-CEPTIONAL! X-TRAORDINARY TM MARVEL COMICS SLITHELS THE MIGHTIEST MUTANTS IN THE KNOWN UNIVERSE ARE NOW ON VIDEO SABAN AVAILABLE 10TH OCTOBER AVAILABLE 19TH NOVEMBER PolyGram Vide X-TRACT THEM FROM A VIDEO STORE NEAR YOU OR BY TELEPHONE ORDER HOTLINE 0733 232800. RRP .99 1994 Marvel Entertainment Group Inc. All Rights Reserved MARVEL COMICS X-MEN SENTINELS and all other character names and all other distinctive likenesses thereof are trademarks of Marvel Entertainment Group, Inc, and are used with perm "


"CVG REVIEWS CD32 Arcade Adventure Core .99 Out now Amiga, A1200 versions also available PC version planned VERDICT Collect everything on the planet and I mean every thing. You never know when a bit of rubbish might come in handy.. universe With Universe Core Design showed what's possible with an A500, will the CD32 be as breathtaking? ARCADE This is just another straight port, and I'm sure CD32 owners demand and expect more. The CD rave tracks are on the whole poor and nowhere near as atmospheric as the original chip tracks. There's no denying the game itself is brilliant, but if more of the CD32's power had been utilised it could have been really special. Something like digitised speech would make a lot of difference. Recommended, but if you've got an Amiga as well, get that version instead. RIK SKEWS GRAPHICS 90 SOUND PLAYABILITY 85 VALUE TELL ME A STORY... COMING SOON 88 s long as a hard drive drive is to hand, Beneath a Steel Sky is still the best example of the arcade adventure at present. Universe comes a pretty close second though, thanks primarily to its great plot and gameplay, but also because it seemingly squeezes every last drop of power out of a basic A500. With a more technically more sophistiThe intro is in the cated machine like the CD32 it seems style of a book with only right to expect more brilliance. the pages flipping Sadly, this is a direct port, with CD as the story promusic being the only enhancement. gresses. This is one Still, the gameplay remains excellent, of the few sections casting the player as a teenager blasted of the game where into another dimension after tampering the CD music is with his mad uncle's time machine. The more atmospheric player must not only attempt to get than the original home but also help out the oppressed chip tune. inhabitants of this other universe. 81 OVERALL PC Universe Core Design Graphically much the same, although the 256 colours will be real rather than the clever programming tricks used in the A500 version. And time permitting it will feature digitised speech too. EXPECTED RELEASE: NOVEMBER VERDICT GAME BOY SUPER GAME BOY Sports Game Konami .99 Out November No other versions available No other versions planned tiny toon adventureswacky sports GAME BOY This isn't really a game as such, more a number of reaction tests sequenced together. As a whole it works well, with competent graphics of Buster, Babs and gang, clear backdrops and smooth scrolling. Ignoring the cuddly charac. ters which suggests this is for the young, it's difficult to see who this game is aimed at, as the events range from ridiculously easy to very tough. One of those titles that won't be played regularly but will be dug out from time to time. RIK SKEWS Buster, Babs & Co compete in a full blown sports competition inside the miniature Game Boy... CBOL. A A bit of maths is called for in the basketball game. Work out the optimum speed and height angle and the ball will go in every time. Thankfully Buster Bunny takes a better penalty than Teddy Sheringham! GRAPHICS 78 SOUND 76 PLAYABILITY 77 VALUE 79 iny Toon Adventures Wacky Sports follows along a similar line to Acme All Stars on the Mega Drive. It's not the same though, the reason being that Konami develops games according to the strengths of each particular machine. So instead of in-depth basketball and football games what's here instead are two different sports festivals. Carnival is simply two different variations on the Lethal Enforcers theme but sports festival is more substantial, consisting of six different sports events like soccer, basketball and golf. The events are predominantly reaction-based though, rather than full games, with the aim generally being to score a quota of goals, baskets and so on within a time limit or number of chances. OVERALL One of the carnival levels sees the player indulging in this Lethal Enforcers -type blaster. ALTERNATIVE MEGA DRIVE Tiny Toon Adventures-Acme All-Stars Konami/.99 Opinions are divided in the office over this one, but I think it's pretty good. It contains an average basketball game and a great football game. ISSUE 156: 84% ale GAME BY KONAMI CONTACT KONAMI (0895 853000) FOR MORE INFORMATION 67 "


"CVG REVIEW MEGA DRIVE Platform Sega Unconfirmed Out Now No other versions available No other versions planned SE 15900 THE 1:13 He started life as a Rastafarian mole bitplayer, but now Knuckles a red echidna in his final screen persona is ready to upstage Sega's biggest star in its Christmas biggie... This is a shot from one of the abseiling sections found in the Sandopolis Zone. There's not much to them, but they're quite enjoyable. AL 16600 3:49 A More abseiling tomfoolery for the spiky one. sonic & knuckless The Sonic 3 slides return, but they're now sand not snow. an221.300 onic & Knuckles is a plug-thru cartridge which is backwardscompatible with the spiny one's last two encounters, adding new characters and levels to the old games. An 18-Meg game in its own right, it also heralds the arrival of Knuckles (previously a misguided villain in Sonic 3) as a player character, while Tails, who no-one really liked that much, joins the ranks of washed-up videogame heroes. Whilst Knuckles has a wider range of powers and abilities than Sonic, being able to tunnel, climb and glide with the aid of his hands, the route he takes through the levels is different to that of Sonic, making it a different game depending on who is you select. If you don't want to play Knuckles, watch your back. When controlled by the computer he reverts to his previous affiliation with the evil Dr Robotnik making Sonic's life difficult. As always, the main challenge in Sonic & Knuckles comes from the bosses. Unlike Sonics 2 and 3 though, there's no Tails to help you out if things get tricky. Whilst Sonic is certainly an affable character, the real appeal of his games lies in the imaginative hazards sprinkled throughout each level. The designers have obviously been hard at work, as this latest installment in the Sonic series features a wealth of inventive obstacles. It wouldn't be a Sonic game without plenty of speed ramps. BONUS ROUND There are two new bonus rounds in Sonic & Knuckles, each of which yields a fat pile of powerups to those with skilled joypad fingers. The fruit machine round is \"borrowed\" from Sonic 3... ... and is probably the easiest Sonic bonus round yet. CONTACT SEGA (071-373 3000) FOR MORE INFORMATION 68 "


"REVIEW CVG 1 MS SCORE 2 700 TIME 2:01 RINGS 191 The first boss you encounter is ever so simple to destroy, just keep bouncing on his metallic head.... A It doesn't matter if you're Sonic or Knuckles, running around loops is fun whoever you play. BE46do SEO36 A Sonic deftly avoids the whipping, stinging tail of the evil robot scorpion. If you need to reverse your trajectory whilst travelling at speed, grab one of these poles and spin around. A The flame-throwers pictured here spring Sonic to heights which Knuckles is easily able to climb to. A Whilst the blades of these propellers are deadly, the spinning of the shaft can be used to spring yourself off in all manner of kooky directions (left and right, for example). GET THIS, KNUCKLE-HEAD VERDICT ALTERNATIVE MEGA DRIVE Dynamite Headdy Sega/.99 A platform game that redefines the genre. Amazing variety, weird graphics and sound lead to an exceptional cart and an antidote to Sonic-mania. ISSUE 155: 92% A Take out the radar to complete the level. SECOND OPINION With the short time since Sonic 3, I expected Sonic & Knuckles to be scrappy it isnt. The graphics have been overhauled and look very distinctive. While the main game is unoriginal it does introduce new ideas like the pulley system. The backwards compatibility is what makes the game however. While Sonic 2 is no great shakes, Sonic 3 is even more fun than before when playing as Knuckles. Don't take it any further Sega, this makes a great conclusion to the series. RIK SKEWS MEGA DRIVE Whilst the format of the Sonic games is starting to look a little dated right now, it's hard to knock Sonic & Knuckles simply because it's so much fun to play. The level of challenge isn't exactly formidable if you only have this cart, but when combined with the earlier Sonic adventures, this is one of the best titles in the series available. It certainly delivers in the value for money department too, it's great to dig out those old Sonic classics again! RAD AUTOMATIC This hanging boss is very easy to beat, provided the right method is figured out! Otherwise it never stops firing its flame thrower which results in crispy death sooner or later. BACKWARDS COMPATIBILITY Now you can play new versions of Sonic 2 & 3... 1020 GRAPHICS 91 SOUND 90 PLAYABILITY 90 VALUE 92 NEUE 2 OVERALL ISONIC 3 GKNUCKLES 91 The first thing you'll notice are the different title screens. In Sonic 2 you can now play as Knuckles. Huzzah! Playing as Knuckles in the first level of Sonic 3. Knuckles takes part in the bonus round from Sonic 3. GAME SIZE: 18MEGS ONE PLAYER GAME CART FOR THE LONER! 69 "


"CVG REVIEW SUPER NES Platform Konami .99 Out Now No other versions available No other versions planned HITI Konami has devised all sorts of fiendish levels and supervillians to test the guile of the Darkest of Knights, the inimitable Batman... A Apart from the taxing plat. form sections there's also a puzzle level and this Micro Machines-style racing game to try out. There are some nice touches here, for example if you drive under the street lights the car is illuminated by the light. Cool, pointless, but appreciated, along with all the other added extras included n 1988 the naff Adam West Batman memories were ousted once and for all replaced by the Gothic, dark and mysterious film by Director Tim Burton, which featured an excellent soundtrack from his Princeness, Symbol. The recent cartoon series continues in the cool tradition, and it is the latter on which Konami has based its superlative new platformer upon. Konami seems to have taken its time to produce an action platformer that is highly polished. Obviously you control the Caped Crusader, as he plows through eight huge levels of taxing, platforming gameplay, facing all of Batty's adversaries: The Joker, Catwoman, Penguin. The sprite is highly manoeuvrable; Batman can dispose of baddies with a plethora of different moves, aided by a Utility Belt comprising of a Batarang, gas mask, smoke bomb to mention just a few; no shark repellent spray here thank you very much. the adventures of batmar TURN YOUR BAT RADIO ON a good idea, make sure everythin 18 okay. Gotham City Azeem Park just for all Poison Ivy, se'11 hay a major panic on our A All the Batman characters appear. The game has a real 1950s comic feel. The Joker is your first adversary, A Poison Ivy Breannan is a tricky opponent. What the heckity heck is going on? There you are relaxing in the Bat Cave with your copy of Nocturnal's Monthly, but all you keep getting is dozens of pleas for help from that infernal Bat Radio, telling you precisely what the villianry's afoot and how best to tackle each superfoe. You need the right tools for job, and if you forget your flashlight then you could tread in something you wished you hadn't; something more lethal than what the local mongrel left down the park. A Batman is one seriously manoeuvrable sprite. It's worth having a quick mess around with the moves to find the easiest way of getting rid of mobsters like this character that Spikey Ears has just grabbed hold of. A Learn how to do Battie's throw because then you can pick up this guy and throw him into his on-coming mates. 20 GAME DESIGN BY KONAMI CONTACT KONAMI (0895 953000) FOR INFORMATION CART SIZE: 16 MEG "


"REVIEW CVG Shennanigans afoot for his nocturnalness, el batto.... BATAAN O2000 ALTERNATIVE and robin MEGADRIVE FLASHBACK DELPHINE/.99 Similar to konami's new Batman. Stunning sprite animation makes it one of the most distinctive platform games on the Mega Drive. ISSUE 138: 94% \"To the Batmobile RO VERDICT BAIRAN O2000 BATAAN 10 Zoo SNES This a great SNES game, and Konami has more than done the licence justice with a cracking soundtrack that helps set the tone for the accurately depicted Batman characters and sets. Many of Batman's psycho enemies have been included and the prerequisite Mode 7 touches are here the roller coaster section is very similar to a stage in Probotector (page 94). But the scene-setting pieces of text can irritate after a while, and more variations on the levels would have been appreciated; but on the whole what you get is a well-rounded package. GARY LORD A He may look all smiles but if he sticks that pole where the sun don't shine then you're History, or some other subject, like Geography. A Top left is your energy bar and what weapon from your Utility back is currently active. Your spray gun should get rid of Poison Ivy. SECOND OPINION 89 GRAPHICS 88 SOUND PLAYABILITY 80 VALUE 79 OVERALL One minute you're racing in sideon (inset) view and next you're in Mode 7 Land headon in this dramatic confrontation with Mr Happy himself. Apart from the old Ocean isometric platformer, nobody has ever done justice to the Caped Crusader in a computer game until now that is. Batman and (unfortunately) Robin is a fantastic example of imaginative game design combined with brilliant graphics and stunning programming and the sort of animation that's usually only the domain of a Delphine game. It's also challenging right from the start, which makes a pleasant change for a game of this type. They've really taken advantage of the cartoon to make Batman into a border-line psychopath with decent weapons and martial arts moves available. A great licence that's been made into an even better game. MARK PATTERSON 21 "


"*No DEPOSIT BUY GET SERIOUSLY REAL FOR 6 MONTHS FATAL ECLIPS .95 CORNUTLU TOLE JLUS Too Good to be True! Not a bit of it. Order the amazing Panasonic 3DO complete with a FREE Copy of the Cult Game Meg Race and use it for 6 long months before you pay a penny. After 6 months you use our easy payment terms. So, why save up fo the most desirable games system on the planet when you could be using it for 6 months for nothing. Latest CD Technology: the Panasonic 3DO plays State of The Art CD Games and audio CD Disks in Full Digital Stereo sound. *32-BIT RISC BASED SYSTEM * PROCESS 6 MILLION INSTRUCTIONS & 64 MILLION PIXELS / SEC * DOUBLE SPEED CD DRIVE + 3MB RAM PANASONIC REAL 3DO CD GAMES SOFTWARE Escape from Monster Manor .99 The Horde .99 John Madden Football .99 Star Control II .99 Road Rash: Blood of the Couriers .99 Pa Taank .99 Shock Wave .99 Super Wing Commander .99 Twisted .99 Theme Park .99 MegaRace Mega Race .99 20th Century Almanac .99 (Titles may vary as new games are launched.) The Animals .99 Another World .99 Dragons Lair .99 Sherlock Holmes .99 Ring for comprehensive software list. Software titles are subject to change 1st Option Call into your local Calculus Store CALCULUS or phone our Mail Order number to order your Panasonic 3DO and software titles. Sign our credit form confirming the period over which you wish to pay. Once we have received a good status report the Panasonic 3DO is yours to enjoy. confirm your easy payment term. A. Choose easy payment terms of your choice from 6 to 36 months. CALCULE PRESTON St Georges Centre, Preston Lancashire TEL: 0543 418666 SHEFFIELD 67 The Moor Sheffield South Yorkshire TEL: 0742 721192 SUTTON COLDFIELD 80 The Parade Sutton Coldfield West Midlands TEL: 021 355 4839 TAMWORTH ALTRINCHAM LEEDS Unit 34 Ankerside Shopping Centre 59 George Street 11 Albion Arcade Tamworth TEL: 0827 67776 Altrincham Cheshire Bond Street Centre Leeds TEL: 061 929 7433 TEL: 0532 454098 WALSALL BURTON-UPON-TRENT 48 Park Mall Saddler Centre Walsall MAIDENHEAD TEL: 0922 21700 6 Nicholson Walk Unit 30 Octagon Centre New Street Burton upon Trent Staffs Maidenhead Berkshire WARRINGTON TEL: 0283 517505 TEL: 0628 770768 52 The Mall Golden Square COVENTRY NORTHWICH Warrington Cheshire Unit 24 Orchard Walk Orchard 85 Witton Street Northwich TEL: 0925 575055 Shopping Centre Coventry Cheshire WIGAN 0203 520778 TEL: 0606 47883 18a The Galleries Shopping Centre HULL OLDHAM Market Street Wigan Unit II Princes Quay Hull The Spindles, Oldham. TEL: 0942 323913 TEL: 0482 585 100 Lancashire TEL: 061 6270822 On High Streets Nationwide.... * Subject to Status. Written Details upon request "


"Now PAY LATER. TAME A JAGUAR FOR 6 MONTHS No DEPOSIT, INSTANT CREDIT, NO STRINGS ATTACHED loted the number 1 games system. The all new UK version Jaguar has at last arrived in Calculus Stores, complete with the latest software direct from the States. Every Jaguar sold by Calculus comes with a FREE copy of Cybermorph. So, fon't hesitate when you could be taming a Jaguar for 6 months for nothing. JAGUAR * 64BIT * 16.8 MILLION COLOURS * 16 BIT CD QUALITY SOUND JAGUAR CARTRIDGE GAMES SOFTWARE Crescent Galaxy .00 Wolfenstein Raiden .00 Alien vs Predator Dino Dudes .00 Club Drive Tempest 2000 .00 Chequered Flag Kasumi Ninja .00 Doom Jaguar Controller .99 .00 .00 .00 T.B.A T.B.A Cybermorph .99 ond Option Ba PAY IN FULL Now. We accept Access and Visa Cards or a cheque, put your cheque guarantee card number on the back of your cheque for an instant status cheque otherwise allow 5 days for clearance. Mail order goods are normally dispatched the day that an order is cleared and delivered Nationwide by Securicor HINTS AND TIPS If you are visiting a Calculus Store, bring a cheque guarantee card and proof of identity for Instant credit clearance. Otherwise it can take upto 24 hours but you must be over 23 and in Full Time Employment. *APR 29.9% CALCULUS CALCULUS advice costs a ng at Calculus. PHONE OUR MAILORDER NUMBER 0543 419999 3.CSG.94 ORDER FORM OR PHONE 0543 419999 FOR CREDIT DETAILS CALCULUS COMPUTER STORES, RINGWAY IND. EST., EASTERN AVENUE, LICHFIELD, STAFFS. WS13 7SF Panasonic .95 Atari Jaguar .99 Jaguar Controller .99 TOTAL TOTAL  3DO CD SOFTWARE JAGUAR CARTRIDGE SOFTWARE 1. Escape from Monster Manor .99 1. Tempest 2000 .99 Name .................................................*** Name .......... 2. John Madden Football .99 3. Road Rash .99 2. Wolfenstein .00 Address......... 4. Shock Wave 139.99 3. Alien V Predator .00 5. Twisted 239.99 6. Theme Park .99 4. Tempest 2000 .99 7. Super Wing Commander .99 Postcode..... 8. The Animals 149.99 9. The Horde 239.99 I enclose my cheque for .......... 10.Star Control II 239.99 Write your cheque guarantee card number and name I I.Pa Taank .99 Visa /Access No TIM I T and address on the back of your cheque and we can 12.20th Century Almanac .99 normally despatch goods the same day otherwise allow 13.Another World .99 Expiry Date.................. 7 days for cheque clearance. "


"CVG REVIEW 13DO Beat-'em-up Universal Interactive Studios .99 OUT NOW No other versions available No other versions planned Not just another beat-'em-up but a game that has taken the best bits from its rivals and put it on the formidable new 3DO... Way of the ab ust how do you improve on a genre that has been done to death by the biggest software houses in the world? Well one answer is to try the same format but on a new machine. The game we have here for the 3DO is a beat-'em-up which has borrowed ideas from the best games in the genre and merged them on to a single CD, presenting more moves and more variety than we have ever seen before. To get you in true beat-'em-up mood, the plot tells of nine warriors who have gathered to battle for a place in The Book of Warriors. End plot. Battles follow the usual threeround rule and are set against a backdrop of arenas burdened with dangers such as lava and treacherous falls. Each of the warriors has a staggering range of moves some as many as 80 different ones! As if all this wasn't enough though, additional power-ups drop in from the sky making you invisible, invincible or just stronger. Like Art of Fighting, the camera is constantly zooming in and out of the action, effortlessly handling fast sprite-scaling and providing a really frenetically paced game. Way of the Warrior has masses of combination moves and has the sort of fatalities that would make Mortal Kombat quake with fear. You don't get more gore than this, which, on its own, is a good enough reason to rush out buy it. A Ouch! Dragon is super-fast and throws fire balls (and he can hit you with his fist in the flaming, fleshy ones, too).... OO20 002 RI Crimson Glory is a modern cowgirl and is the sort who never played with toys and always beat up lads when she was young. Her moves are based on wrestling and boxing and she's the best at blocks. Up close her moves are the elbow, suplex, strangle, head butt and lethal back break. UNISARE 001s Straight off the farm comes Konotori. He's good at throwing those razor sharp fans and slashing opponent's necks at arms' length. Up close his moves are back. hand, hat slash, fan slap and fan swipe. They call him Shaky Jake and this Australian can breathe fire, fly and attack you with his stick. A Major Gaines is an English SAS nutter who slings grenades at you and gives himself steroid boosts to grow in size and strength. Up close his moves are ear swat, suplex, knee and knee drop. HEAD AND SHOULDERS 150000\" Every move in this game earns you skull points for the complexity and damage of the attack. You can use these skull points at any time to activate special moves. Each move requires a different combination of keys and you have to find them out. The greatest number of skull points are awarded for killing ene. mies. You perform fatalities when your opponent's energy bar is flashing and if you manage to off your foe, you'll win the rounds automatically. Poezee 94 GAME BY UNIVERSAL INTERACTIVE STUDIOS CONTACT COMPUTER EXCHANGE (071-636 2666) FOR IMPORT COPIES "


"CVG 0020 Konojorit A Each character has between 60 to 80 moves available. The easy ones use Street Fighter moves like forward and reverse fireballs. The manual doesn't actually explain them but you'll soon get the hang of things... SECOND OPINION DRAGON 0462 GAI I've heard a lot of bad things said about this game, and to tell you the truth, I can't imagine why. Providing you use the old screw-loosening trick on the joypad, this is a perfectly playable beat-'em-up. The graphics and sound are both extremely good, although if we awarded points for originality, this would probably score minus figures. Like most beat-'em-ups, the game really comes into its own in the two-player mode, but even on your own, it's challenging and very playable. Two years ago this would have made a fine coin-op, today it's made a fine 3D0 game. MARK PATTERSON A The Ninja's can dispense a lethal charge of electricity. VERDICT In the third round of this stage the platform supports disappear, so if you fall in the pit you'll be melted alive. 3DO Way of The Warrior is an excellent first attempt at a 3D0 beat-'em-up. Once you start discovering the moves the game becomes very challenging. It's all très easy to get into though, because it uses established Street Fighter and Mortal Kombat button combinations. So, experience the excellent intelligence in the baddies and discover the secret ones, but just make sure you loosen the screws under your joypad or you'll strug. gle with diagonal moves. DENIZ AHMET A Nikki Chan is the living soul of a banished god. She attacks at long distance with her hair and has a mean high kick. Up close she uses the suplex, knee and roll throw. 58 097 91 GRAPHICS 89 SOUND PLAYABILITY 80 VALUE 89 Above: the Cliff stage. Here you have to climb up and down the ledges while doing battle. Try to keep your opponent on the ledge below you. T OVERALL Garelas The Ninja's mainstay moves are the electric charge and the formidable hurricane kick. Up close his moves are elbow, throw, head butt and roll. 25 "


"CVG REVIEW SNES Platform Infogrames .99 OUT NOW No other versions available Mega Drive and Game Boy versions planned The Smurfs are in a 'tights' situation, but it's not just their leggings which are causing discomfort fellow Smurfs have mysteriously Smurfed off. A The final boss is the Smurfs' worst enemy Gargamel! The animation is actually very good for a sprite so big. COMING SOON aving about as much credibility as a garden gnome you'd wonder why anyone would want to rescue four, little, blue Smurfs. But, hey, we're not prejudiced, if there's a platform caper (or even an anchovy) to be played then we'll give it a go; and seeing as Gargamel has smurfnapped your mates it's time to go smurfing. You start the game off as Hefty Smurf entering a land full of customary jumps, awkward platforms, falls and rides. The idea is to free each of the stolen Smurfs, and as you rescue each one you switch control to play as that Smurf until you discover the next. A couple of the Smurfs are able to sling objects such as weaponry, while others are better equipped for the more explorative stages. In the caves for example, you'll take control of Brainy Smurf as there are lots of mini-puzzles to be taken care of. The sense of adventure is expanded in bonus Mode 7 stages which are reminiscent of those in Konami's Axelay technically. Yet, it's in the cheerfulness department where Smurfs is best appreciated. A There are many mini-boss creatures to face. You'll need to jump on the heads of this Smurf-eating plant while dodg. ing the deadly black Smurfs (not very PC methinks). GAME BOY The Smurfs Infogrames This version manages to use many of the attributes and play-styles from the 16-bit versions but you only get to play as one of the characters. EXPECTED RELEASE: BER 09000 VERDICT SMURFNAPPED! This is the first level in its entirety (well almost). To avoid the obstacles (like the winches) enter the cottages and leap across the rooftops and the trees, collecting mushrooms as you go. Jokey Smurf is equipped with exploding presents which he can use to clear a path through a level. SNES While we cry out for originality in platformers it never seems to appear in licensed games. Smurfs is a case of playing it safe, but it just manages to step one foot into the 'pay attention' arena by including Mode 7 stages. It's also original(ish) in the way you change characters sequentially during play, and for a cute game it's actually quite tricky; though it does become incredibly tricky. Not a bad tribute to those infernal cartoon midgets. DENIZ AHMET GRAPHICS 84 SOUND 81 PLAYABILITY 82 VALUE 78 OVERALL MO 80 CONTACT INFOGRAMES (071-738 8199) FOR INFORMATION CART SIZE: 8 MEGS. ONE PLAYER 76 "


"FRANK SKINNER DAVID BADDIEL & FRANK SKID ANCO SOFTWARE FANTASY MANAGER YOUR OWN DREAM TE DEAM TEAM TO CITING FEATURE PACKED EXCESTEN PLAYING FORMAT INCOMECH AFFECT YOUR RESTHLONS REAL PREMIER EEAGUE BUILD YOUR PLAY AGAINSTRE CLUBS AND THE AND THEIR ACTUAL PEAH WAL PLAYERS MANTERT MAINAN You've watched the TV programme but can you play the computer game? Top soccer pundits Baddiel and Skinner bring you the first truly interactive football game. Live out your football fantasies then turn them into reality. Settle soccer arguments instantly Fantasy Manager will give you clear, objective and measurable ratings of your managerial judgements. Up to 15 players at a time can battle it out to sort the managerial maestros from the total turnips. Always thought you could beat the experts? Now you can prove it. Will your  million build a dream team or will you only manage a nightmare?  YERS HE PRICE OF ONE 600 PREMIER UT OF TROUBLE TWO GAMES FOR BUY AND SELL TO MO YOUR WAY OUT OF TENAGE OG AND 94 95 SEASONS 93/94 ANO 9492 ARA AVAILABLE FOR IBM PC PC CD ROM CBM AMIGA CD32 WARNING THE UNIQUE 15 PLAYER OPTION CAN TURN YOUR FRONT ROOM INTO A FOOTBALL TERRACE 1994 Playtime Software Published by Anco Software Ltd, Unit 7, Millside Industrial Estate, Lawson Road, Dartford, Kent DAT 5BH Tel: 0322 292518 Fax: 0322 293422 "


"CVG REVIEW MEGA DRIVE I SNES Platform Konami MD .99 SNES .99 OUT NOW No other versions available No other versions planned SNES 2. RESZ 99 og MEGA DRIVE en 29 Hazards, like this giant laser, cause huge amounts of damage if you're dumb enough to leave Sparkster in their way. w SNES sparkster It's a tale of two Sparksters as the Rocket Knight returns to console... SNES 32 espite liberal amounts of praise heaped upon it by the press at large, the original Sparkster game, Rocket Knight Adventures, never received the kind of popularity it deserved. Perhaps that was down to a glut of platform games, or people just didn't take to Sparkster as a cute character the same way they did to Sonic. Whatever the case, Konami has pressed on with a duo of sequels which tell two completely different stories. On the SNES there's nothing but good news, with a top-notch platformer loaded with features and cool ideas. The Mega Drive game, alas, is a different bucket of kippers. In its own right it isn't that bad, it simply suffers from a major lack of imagination, which gives the title an unfortunate air of unoriginality, which it never recovers from at any point in the game. It really took us by surprise in fact, especially when you look at Konami's Mega Drive version of Probotector (reviewed on page 94), which is one of the most imaginative Mega Drive games we've seen this year. A Nothing's as easy at it seems in this game. Kill a few wolves, then one of their mates show up with a massive spiked shield. MEGA DRIVE SOME BRIGHT SPARK Although he looks much the same as he did in Rocket Knight Adventure, Sparkster has many new tricks up his sleeve. A Watch out for the cross-hair which locks on to Sparkster. If it does, you won't be able to avoid the missile that's launched a few moments later. SNES 0985 SCORES RESS SO DO SCORE PREZ PES 27 30 Rolling Rocket Super Rocket Super Spin Climb Dangle GAME BY KONAMI CONTACT KONAMI (0895 853000) FOR MORE INFORMATION 28 "


"REVIEW CVG MEGA DRIVE COSERCOU Oxer ROBO-DETEKTOR Konami's programmers have a thing about robots. and this is probably the largest one to appear in any of their games. 23EET Taking the direct approach against this boss is a bad idea because you'll end up plopping into the lava which, to be honest, isn't much fun. MEGA DRIVE OUT 005 5 SNES SNES One minute you're up here in the head, dishing out punches... MEGA DRIVE WOOD Oxoo Do VERDICT A There's a lupine feel to many of the nasties. Maybe they should of called in the Walton-on-theNaze hunting club to run them into the ground. MEGA DRIVE . A Smack this knight in the eye to finish him off, but watch out for the little drill-headed robots he chucks at you. SNES It takes a lot to bring something new to the platform genre, but Konami has managed it with Sparkster. There's a new hazard around every corner, which makes the fluid gameplay even better. It's also very tricky, providing you don't play on easy, and the game's so big it'll take you a long time to work your way through. The SNES hasn't seen many platformers this year, and as long as we get a few that are this good, we don't really care. MARK PATTERSON VERDICT The next you're all the way down here stamping on things. MEGA DRIVE Vau Dixon A Hovering over a fiery lake is this giant boat. Who knows how it stays up there, who cares? It's Sparkster's job to make sure it comes down to earth with a splash. GRAPHICS 88 SOUND 80 PLAYABILITY 90 I VALUE 86 MEGA DRIVE I'm not prejudiced after seeing the excellent SNES game, but the Mega Drive version just isn't that absorbing. It's a nice enough game, but it's occasionally frustrating, and dull in places. I appreciate producing a game like the SNES one would have been impossible, but at least they could have taken some ideas from it. Compared to the likes of Dynamite Headdy and Sonic 3 there isn't enough here to make you consider Sparkster ahead of those. GARY LORD OVERALL Finally it's head-to-head with a robot that's just as large in one of the hardest battles of the game. GRAPHICS 81 SOUND 78 PLAYABILITY 75 VALUE 77 ALTERNATIVE senso sa SCORE OVERALL AMIGA Ruff 'n' Tumble Renegade/.99 Not very original, but Ruff 'n' Tumble has its moments, especially where the graphics are concerned. ISSUE 156: 90% Slash Energy Bolt 29 "


"ADVERTISERS INDEH ARCADE MANIA ................PAGE 83 IMAGINEER ... .....PAGE 77 ATARI ENTERTAINMENT. .....PAGE 82 INFOMEDIA SERVICES. .....PAGE 86 ARENA GAMES ........ ....PAGE 82 K.T. KONSOLES ... ....PAGE 86 ATARI ......................PAGE 50 ........... L.M .P. .............. .PAGE 57 ADVANCED ENTERTAINMENT ... ... .PAGE 82 NEW AGE ELECTRONICS ..........PAGE 83 BMG (INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT) PAGE 33 NINTENDO ...................PAGE 38 .PAGE 38 CONSOLE EXCHANGE ............PAGE 83 OCEAN SOFTWARE ......PAGES O.B.C.,9, 27 LHSIU CASIO ........ ....PAGE 47 POLYGRAM . .....PAGE 66 CA GAMES ....PAGE 83 RAVEN GAMES ....... ....PAGE 88 CCG ......... ..PAGE 82 SILICA SYSTEMS ..... ....PAGE 103 DEEP LOGIC ........... . . . . . .PAGE 82 SMITH KLINE BEECHAM ......PAGE 25 DANIELS DEPARTMENT STORE . . . . . .PAGE 80 SOFTWARE EXPRESS ... . . . . . . . . .PAGE 88 E.I.D. ....... ...PAGE 83 SONY .. . . . . . . . . .1.B.C. FURNLEY TRADING ESTATE . . . . . . . .PAGE 48 ULTRASOFT ....... . . . . . .PAGE 88 GAME OVER . . . .PAGE 82 VIRGIN GAMES ... .....PAGES 1, 2,21 GAME SHACK . .PAGE 88 WILD CONSOLES .......PAGE 82 GAMEBUSTERS .................PAGE 82 WOOLWORTHS ..... ........PAGE 28 GREYHOUND ... GREYHOUND .................. PAGE 86 . PAGE 86 Z.C.L. ..................PAGES 728 73 Z.C.L. ......PAGES 728 73 OFFICIAL UK STOCKISTS  Daniel Department Store 120-125 Peascod Street Windsor, Berkshire SL4 1DP WD0753 8621060 ob 2106 Tempest 2000 Crescent Galaxy Raiden Alien vs Predator Wolfenstien Club Drive Brutal Sports Football "


"REVIEW CVG 56lege 7800 MEGA DRIVE Platform Sega .99 Out November No other versions planned No other versions available but different ver. sions of Bomberman can be found on SNES, Game Boy, PC Engine and Amiga (dyn ablaster). 22 CVG One of the best multiplayer games of all time finally gets converted to the Mega Drive... That creature with the big ears is a right pain to avoid and blow up because of his high speed. bomberman ne of the best kept secrets for what seemed like ages was Bomberman on the PC Engine, a conversion of a fairly old but very decent arcade game that still gets fed plenty of coins by me in my local arcade. That was before it was converted to the SNES and subsequently other formats under various guises. The basic gameplay element has remained throughout the conversions and is no different here destroy blocks in a series of mazes by blowing them up. Each completed level rewards Bomberman with a missing piece of magical locket. Hidden behind certain blocks are various power-ups. These range from coloured kangaroos (which the player can ride and which will take a bomb hit first) to extra bombs, extra bomb strength and so on. Bomberman's best feature however, is it's fantastic multi-player battle mode. Here, up to four players indulge in a battle to the death with all the power-ups found in the regular game via a multitap. There's also a choice of bombermen, each of which has different specialist skills. ISC12800 WWW ALTERNATIVE AMIGA Dynablaster UBI Soft/.99 The Amiga version of this classic game is brilliant too. It comes with a 'free' adaptor allowing another two players to join in! ISSUE 124: 93% Complete a stage in the one-player game and Bomberman will be rewarded with a piece of amulet. VERDICT A Once all the baddies are destroyed, all the remaining scenery turns into bonuses. Pick as many up as possible before the time runs out.  0.000 0 The kangaroo is one of the best power-ups. Climb on its back and let it take the flak when a bomb goes off. Don't tell the RSPCA though. 100-00 0000 wwwwwww O 00-0000-00-00 000.000.00 D0-0000-0000 monumunun MEGA DRIVE Thanks to more power-ups the multiplayer game here is even better than on the SNES. The inclusion of kangaroos to ride is a brilliant idea too; they take a hit before you, meaning that if you accidentally bomb yourself the kanga will kick the dust, not you. The oneplayer game, where each level had to be cleared of baddies still hasn't been improved, but if you've got any friends though (and you will have if they play this) this is an essential multiplayer game. RIK SKEWS EDWU MEGA WEIRD The game's intro is er... rather weird basically. It looks like it's telling the story of how Bomberman's mystical amulet was broken up, but your guess is as good as mine. One of the best multi-player stages is this conveyer belt level. If a bomb is dropped on the conveyer belt it follows the direction of the arrows! Keep an eye out for moving bombs. 68 GRAPHICS 79 SOUND PLAYABILITY 90 VALUE 90 tepat 36 OVERALL 91  GAME BY SEGA CONTACT SEGA (071-373 3000) FOR MORE INFORMATION "


"LOCAL ERS GUIDE MIDDLESEX SURREY PLAYSTATION GAMES & CONSOLES(UK) LTD SPECIALIST IMPORTERS FROM THE FAR EAST SONY PLAYSTATION AVAILABLE FROM DEC ONLY  ALL GAMES WILL BE AVAILABLE @ ONLY  PC CD ROMS AVAILABLE WE HAVE THE ONES YOU WANT! ALL @  SUPER SNES 32M VERSIONONLY  32M UPGRADES FOR ALL MACHINES 24 HOUR TURNAROUND  SUPERGAMEBOY ADAPTOR FOR JAP/USA SNES ONLY  GAMEBOY & GAME GEAR CARTS AVAILABLE CALL 0753 576546 OR 0956 363104 NOW! ARENA COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES WE STOCK: * SUPER NINTENDO * CD32 * * SEGA MEGADRIVE * * ATARI JAGUAR * 3DO * * 2nd hand GAME EXCHANGE * \"SUCK OUR CARTS\" CALL SPENCER ON: 0860118358 PEACOCK WALK, WOKING TOWN CENTRE, SURREY WEST MIDLANDS BERKSHIRE G GAME 3DO OVER JAGUAR  EXPECTED RELEASE U.S. BIGGER BETTER FASTER MELON  (CONSOLE + GAME)  (CONS  INC POWER SUPPLY SCART BOX +2 GAMES UK  INC TOTAL ECLIPSE BE THE FIRST TO BUY  ALIEN V PREDATOR 9 Corporation St EXPECTED RELEASE Caldmore DATE: OCT 20TH Walsall SNES U.S.  USED FROM  M.KOMBAT II  West Midlands MD FROM  M.KOMBAT II  WSI 4HW MCD FROM  AMIGA CD32 FROM  Tel: 0922 616833 ALL GAMES ON ALL SYSTEMS NEW USED IMPORT OR UK BOUGHT SOLD & PART EX Fax: 0922 723444 COMING SOON WE HAVE 100'S OF GAMES IN STOCK 32X. SATURN P.S.X. GAME OVER STILL SIMPLY THE BEST! DO YOU OWN AN ATARI LYNX OR JAGUAR? If you do you should read Atari Entertainment, the only dedicated Lynx + Jaguar magazine in the world. Issue 3 has reviews of Wolfenstein, Kasumi Ninja + Club Drive for the Jaguar. For our Lynx readers we take a special look at the Lynx scene, with a comprehensive run down of future titles. Apart from all this we have loads of news, articles and much more. To subscribe please send  incl P & P to: Atari Entertainment PO Box 7 Riseley Reading For enquiries phone (01734) 885176. WEST MIDLANDS SUFFOLK GAME CRAZY MAIL ORDER LEISURE SOFTWARE AT TRADE PRICES CALL US. WE STOCK.... SEGA, NINTENDO, PC CD-ROM, CD-32, MAC CDROM, 3DO, CD-I, JAGUAR WE STOCK: MEGADRIVE SUPER NES MEGA CD 3DO JAGUAR GAME BOY GAME GEAR **UK AND IMPORT TITLES AVAILABLE ** WE ALSO BUY & SELL USED GAMES** 38, UPPER LICHFIELD STREET WILLENHALL WEST MIDLANDS TEL: (0902) 604090 MAJOR STOCKISTS OF BOTH NEW AND USED 3DO GAMES NEW USED & IMPORTED GAMES AVAILABLE THE FUTURE WILL SOON BE HERE SONY PSX SEGA SATURN ALSO AVAILABLE: NEO GEO PC ENGINE LOGIC FOR OUR LATEST LIST DROP US A LINE AT DEEP LOGIC PO BOX 42 LOWESTOFT SUFFOLK NR32 4XB OR CALL US ON .. BEST PRICES AVAILABLE 0502-561683 MILTON KEYNES OXON Access MAD CONSOLES C.C.G VISA Specialist in SNES & Megadrive back-up devices. CALL FOR DETAILS. S.W.C.  Call Memory Expansion  Call New CD Roms .00 Megadrive SSF II .00 SNES SSF II .00 NEXT DAY DELIVERY GUARANTEED. TEL: 0908 379049/ 640162 FAX: 0908 379049 Mobile No: 0850 994372 3 1/2\" HD Disk, Grade A 100% 40p Each. Trade enquiries welcome Please make all cheques payable to Wild Consoles MAIL ORDER ONLY We have games and hardware. Available at low prices for:Sega, Mega CD, Nintendo, IBM, PC Compatible, Amiga, Atari ST, 3DO, CDI, CD Rom, Macintosh If you would like a full price list send your name and address to: 3 Hillside Close, Upper Arncott, Bicester, Oxon OX6 OPF or Telephone 0869 324472 "


"LOCAL ERS GUID LEICESTER WATFORD CD Cart 288  0 D 300 Neo Geo 300 Panasonic Cal Neo Geo CD Rom 300 Sanyo Cal med Stock Dragon Tales 39.95 Star Controll 12.99 King of Fighters 94 Demolition Man Cal Fatal Fury 3 (Dec94) AD & D Slayer 43.99 Zedblade (Oct 94) Blonde Jusce 25.99 Samurai Shodown 2 49.99 Aggr of Dark Combat Way of The Warrior 49.99 Art of Fighting Cal Art of Fighting 52.99 Samurai Shodown Dead Hunt 49.98 Suporside Kicks 2 Jurassic Park The Horde 49.99 4899 Football Frenzy Sewer Shark 52.99 Fatal Fury Special Draxon's Revenge 52.99 King of Monsters ADVANCED Jaguar Jaguar System C ENTERTAINMENT USA & UK Alien Vs Predator Call Wolfenstein 3D... 49.99 54A KEDLESTON RD, EVINGTON Tempest 2000 LEICESTER LES SHU Raidon DEAR CUSTOMER, Due to our Evolution Dino Dudes advanced network we can now Crescent Galaxy 48 99 provide you with an even better Brutal Sport 49.99 service phone for more details Club Drive FREE Postage throughout Mainland UK Kasumi Ninja All items Direct from Manutacturers. Doom Cal Al Software compatible with UK Machines Chequered Flagll 54 99 All items fully GUARANTEED Star Raiders Pre bookings for Christmas available Rise of The Robots .Cail O Al Software available betare European Tiny Toon Adv C al Launch Poling facilities for latest information Accessories For further details please send large SAE JAGUAR Controller 25 99 S-VHS Connector . 22 99 Compsite Monitor Connector Tel/Fax: (0533) 733228 Fax: (0533) 739705 After Spm CONSOLES 49.96 59 99 59.99 59.99 59.99 59.99 59.99 59.99 59.99 58 99 59.99 59.99 59.99 59.99 Soon Cal Resort Now 155.99 165.99 165.99 165.99 165.99 155.99 129.99 129.99 165.99 139.99 129.99 129.99 129.99 Soon LOOK! no further for the LATEST IMPORTED ACCESSORIES from the FAR EAST! CALL US NOW! for unbelievable prices SNES/SEGA SOFTWARE MORTAL KOMBAT I..............CAL S/ STREET FIGHTER II ........CALL Please phone or write for Your FREE Information Pack For Fast Friendly Service Tel: 081386-1454 89.98 89 99 Ghost Hunter Jaol. Wacky Races (Jap) Accessories 300 Controller The Super Spy Buming Fight World Heros 3 Aero Fighters 43.99 21.99 300 Gun Fax: 081 950-6262 E.I.D P.O. Box 23, Bushey, Watford WD2 3YL SW LONDON SCOTLAND C.A. GAMES NEW AGE COMPUTER GAMES 12 TOOTING HIGH STREET LONDON SW17 ORG FOR ALL THE LATEST OFFICIAL & IMPORT GAMES. SAVE 'S ON ALL YOUR SEGA GAMES MEGADRIVE MASTER SYSTEM MEGA CD GAME GEAR SUPER NINTENDO GAMEBOY NES 3DO JAGUAR PC CD-ROM AMIGA CD32 HUGE RANGE OF SECONDHAND GAMES ALWAYS IN STOCK OPEN: MON SAT 10.00 am TO 6.00 pm TEL: 081 767 2575 Sega Saturn, Sega 32X, 3DO, Sony Play Station, Jaguar and Nintendo GLASGOW DE COURCY'S ARCADE CRESSWELL LANE OFF BYRES ROAD TEL: 041 334 3901 STIRLING 6 THE ARCADE MURRAY PLACE STIRLING SCOTLAND TEL: 0786 447470 WOLVERHAMPTON BRISTOL Arcade Mania The LATEST GAMES at the ZOWEST PRICES! RRP GAME SHACK 801 38 42 42 513 Imports our speciailty, please call for availability and competative prices. Exchanges start from .50. Repairs from . Call in to \"Try before you buy\". Huge second hand base stock We now stock PC/CD Rom software and hardware. Doom levels nowavailable. Look at my WADII SUPER NINTENDO SEGA MEGADRIVE ATARI JAGUAR PANASONIC 3DO SEGA MEGA CD NEO GEO PC ENGINE PC/CD ROM We buy sell and exchange ALL of the above formats. Post and packing .50 Courier service .00 SPECIALISTS IN: Mega Drive. Super Nintendo. Jaguar. 3DO. Super Gun SNES TITLES A.M. PRICE SUPER SF 2 JOE & MAC 3 FATAL FURY SPECIAL MEGA-DRIVE TITLES VIRTUA RACING STREETS OF RAGE 3 MORTAL KOMBAT 2 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95  CALL .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 5 Wolverhampton Street Dudley West Midlands DY1 1DA O MAIL ORDER SERVICE NOW AVAILABLE II Why Walt ??! CALL NOW I Prices include 1st Class recorded delivery ! Telephone ANYTIME: (0831) 267711 or write to Arcade Mania 15 Stoke hill, Stoke Bishop, Bristol. BS9 1JN for a PRICE LIST SCOTLAND ADVERTISING SAFE SERVICE Sick of waiting weeks for your games to arrive? We will have your game on your doorstep within 3 days of receipt or order. BUY & SELL SEGA & NINTENDO Monday 12-8 Console Exchange Tuesday 12-8 Wednesday 12-6 Business hours 0463 221173 25 Greig Street Thursday 12-8 Inverness Other times 03744 95958 Friday 12-8 IV3 5PX Saturday 10-6 0463 221173 Sunday 12-4 TO ADVERTISE IN THIS SPACE CALL HOLLY EADIE ON: 071 713 5289 "


"CVG REVIEW A1200 Arcade Team 17 .99 Out Now CD32 soon to be available No other versions planned cccccccc Some rocks leave special weapons behind, like this spiral bomb that takes out everything. Super stardust One thing Asteroids never had was enemy ships that fired homing missiles at you! Have the crew at Team 17 just refined the term 'classic game'? Well with a little help from their friends at Bloodhouse, they might just have... he problem with trying to update an already classic game is that most of the gaming world will regard you with complete derision, if not contempt. If you remember the remarks made about Super Space Invaders when it was released, you'll know precisely what I mean. Bloodhouse were putting themselves up for the same kind of trouble when they released Stardust to non-AGA owning gamers last year, but somehow were accepted with open arms. Asteroids had been reborn. That's about the size of the game really. It's simply nothing more than Asteroids with bells and whistles. For a start, you are stationed above a planet to begin with, instead of just floating randomly in space. All of the craft and rocks have been rendered in the infamous Amiga art package Lightwave the one used to create Babylon 5 and Seaquest DSV So it all looks marvellous. Some rocks will leave bonuses when shot, and there are all sorts of enemy craft to fight in-between bouts of taking out large chunks of masonry. Best of all, however, is the famous tunnel sequence. This takes the form of a warp gate between the five worlds, and is played in third person (from behind your own craft), as you race high speed to your destination... At the end of the first world, you come up against this thing, whose firepower covers the entire screen! A This is what you are going to be looking at for pretty much most of the game. It's only a shame we can't show you this mov. ing, as those rocks look incredible. A The spinning bomb takes its toll on a whole bunch of small rocks, and you just sit there and smile...  GAME BY BLOODHOUSE CONTACT TEAM 17 (0924 291867) FOR INFORMATION COMES ON THREE DISKS 84 "


"REVIEW CVG Fail to complete a screen in the time allotted, and you have to go against 'The Flies'. Eurgh! Just one of the special tokens you can collect as you blast around. These can give you anything from a little extra shield energy to an extra life. A If you're really lucky, you'll get to kill a couple of these, which drop new weapons when they die. This is the reason to buy this game the tunnel sequence. You just wait until you see it move! You wouldn't think that avoiding a couple of mines could be as hard as this! SECOND OPINION VERDICT LEVEL Reetted disetty tovel I worry when I see games where this much time has been spent piecing the graphics together. The way I see it, if someone has to spend that much time on a bunch of rocks, then they have to be trying to take your attention away from something else. Not so with this game. Two minutes with the joystick, and it's like Asteroids never went away. What a game, and forget this crap about nostalgia, this is a Nineties game and no mistake! GARY LORD Catedry West POSLEDNA trocart A1200 I loved Stardust on the Amiga, so I guess I'm a little biased right from the outset. My only problem with it was that it was a little slow to play at times. This new AGA version is everything I could have asked for, though. It looks absolutely incredible, with the most realistic looking rolling boulders ever seen, and the game is just fiendishly addictive. If I have one complaint, it's that it's a smidgen too hard for the average player, but that just keeps you at it! RIK SKEWS MY WATT VITU VIN VINKO Before each level, you can select which of the six current screens to play, which difficulty to play them on and what you'll have to fight. COMING SOON GRAPHICS 94 SOUND 88 PLAYABILITY 92 VALUE 86 OVERALL CD32 Super Stardust Team 17 Produced by the same team, expect nothing more than perfection. The graphics and speed will remain much the same, as both machines use the same chip set, so expect a major upgrade to the sound. EXPECTED RELEASE: JULY A Some screens start you off with absolutely huge rocks, that need to be broken down as quickly as possible. Before you know it, you've got a screen full of splinters, and that hurts. 85 "


"Instant Win LCD watches, Casio personal stereos, colour TVs...hundreds of prizes ...and a top prize of... win MORTAL KOMBAT 0839 406053 0839 406050 0839 406050  WIN PREDATOR ITS A JURASSIC 0839 406054 Instant Win FROM ADIDAS THE BOOTS THAT BITE! Win SUPER STREETFIGHTER II 08.39 406058 Win SUPER NINTENDO + Stunt Race FX 0839 406051 Win Jurassic Park: the video, the book, the game and more! 0839 406056 ce F Win a PLAYER LEATHER JACKET with your Premier *For more details on Player League club logo! Jackets call Player direct 0839 406055 on 071-242 5888 PLAY A SEGA MEGADRIVE + Virtua Racing 0839 406052 WIN  WORTH OF GAMES! RUN RIOT IN A GAMES STORE! 0839 406066 GLADIATORS! Win a Mountain Bike 0839 406059 For more competitions see Teletext Page 129 WIN  OF GLADDIE GOODIES! 0839 406057 Cals cost 390 per min (cheap) 49p (other times). Max possible cost .68. Please be sure you have permission to make this call. Compettons close ether as indicated or on 30.11.94 and involve multiple choice questions with tiebreaker. Where Instant Win is indicated there is no bebreaker and prizes are awarded instantly. All trademarks acknowledged. For rules and winners' names please send SAE to Into Media, PO Box 28 Northampton NN1 5DS. KT. KONSOLS VISA VIDEOZONE 336 Londonderry Road Warley Smethwick Birmingham B69 9NB Tel: 021 511 1436 / 021 544 7041 Fax: 021 544 7041 Specialists in: SNES, MEGADRIVE, JAGUAR, 3DO But we can get hardware and software for other systems as well.  off with this ad when sending over  the cheapest anywhere. We are the largest Game Exchange Service in Britain At present we have the following games in stock: Over 225 Mega Drive, over 225 SNES, Over 60 Neo Geo, Over 100 PC Engine and also a variety of 3D0 games. To find out what titles we have in stock, please phone. Once you have chosen your game, we'll reserve it for you then all you have to do is send us your unwanted game and we'll despatch your reserved game immediately by First Class Recorded Delivery It couldn't be easier! WE ALSO SELL SECOND HAND GAMES AT VERY COMPETITIVE PRICES The machines we cater for are SNES, Megadrive, Neo Geo, Jaguar, 3DO and PC Engine/Turbo Express. NEW GAMES ALSO STOCKED Super Street Fighter...... FX Trax ....................... All latest releases are in stock Tel/Fax 0847 896949 3 Lines 26 Princes Street, Thurso, Caithness KW14 7BQ, Open 6 days a week. Mon-Sat 10.30 6pm You've tried the rest now come to the best! IF AN ADVERT IS WRONG, WHO PUTS IT RIGHT? We do. The Advertising Standards Authority ensures advertisements meet with the strict Code of Advertising Practice So if you question an advertiser, they have to answer to us. To find out more about the ASA, please write to Advertising Standards Authority, Department X, Brook House. Torrington Place, London WC1E 7HN. This space is donated in the Interests of high standards in advertisements. "


"REVIEW CVG MEGA DRIVE Shoot-'em-up EA .99 OUT NOW No other versions available ISNES and Game Gear versions planned We fought them in the deserts, and in the jungles, but still those terrorist dirtbags keep coming. There's only one thing to do, get your chopper out and shoot your load! One of the many amusing, but not particularly spectacular, intermittent cut scenes. Here, you're making your way through a secret underground tunnel, to the final confrontation with Satan himself. urban strike here was a time when your local bobby needed to do little more than clip an apple-scrumping young ruffian round the ear in order to keep the peace. However, times have changed and by the 21st century, policing our cities is going to take more than a bit of ear-clipping. Unless, that is, it's done with a rocket-powered grenade launched from a Mohican helicopter of course. Yep, Urban Strike the third instalment in Electronic Arts' hugely popular shoot-'em-up series has arrived. Once again, the aim is to fly through seven different campaigns, killing spineless terrorist scumballs and completing important military tasks. But mainly, killing spineless terrorist scumballs. This time however, the war takes place in our very own cities. Well actually, not in our cities, but in the USA's (Hell, by the 21st Century, Britain will probably have sunk beneath the waves). So you get to fly through such familiar sights (if your name is Hank) as San Francisco, New York and Las Vegas. As far as the playability goes, Urban Strike is as playable as any of its predecessors and at a whopping 24 Meg you'd expect it to be a lot bigger, but it isn't. Nor is it any more challenging and old hands at this Strike malarky should have it clocked within a week. Nonetheless, it's still great fun and rates as one of the better Mega Drive shoot-'em-ups to have surfaced of late. A After a heavy night out on the town Fred the pilot felt 14 pints of ale and a biryani did not enhance his combat skills. VERDICT On some levels, you get to take out the enemy on foot but you walk as if your spine is broken and you've lost your knee-caps. A A good co-pilot is vital, as they control your winch and weaponry. Being the harmo. nlous future, you get an international selection of sidekicks, although strangely there aren't any from the Middle East. Or Guernsey. ALTERNATIVE MEGA DRIVE Jungle Strike EA/.99 Last year's Desert Strike sequel took all the qualities of the original and moulded them into a bigger, better and ballsier follow-up; and better programming puts Jungle Strike above its own follow-up. MEGA DRIVE The Strike games have always been good, so it's no suprise to find Urban Strike is highly playable, addictive and good blasting fun. What is suprising is how rough-edged the whole thing seems. The graphics seem unfinished in places, as does the scrolling. What's more, the on-foot sections are downright shoddy. These faults, and it's low difficulty set. ting, aside, Urban Strike still manages to shine out as an enjoyable blaster. But is it better than Jungle Strike? Read my lips No! TOM GUISE THAT HERTZ! Unhappy with your current killing machine? Looking for something with a bit more ouch? Well, there are other vehicles around if you can find them. Here's what's up for grabs as we enter quick-fire round! MOHICAN HELICOPTER It's just the standard military helicopter, but don't be ashamed. You'll find most pilots have exactly the same-sized chopper once it's in the air. Attack these jet fighters before they take off and cause plenty of big trouble. GROUND ASSAULT VEHICLE You know what they say about fellas with flash cars. Well lordy be, yours is almost indestructible and has a gun turret on top. Makes you feel kinda small, eh? GRAPHICS 83 SOUND 81 PLAYABILITY 84 I VALUE 72 OVERALL BIG CHOPPER Forget what Claire Rayner says, a bigger chopper is better. Especially for carrying loads of people around and staying up throughout a tough beating 82 Destroying this bridge is just one of the many sub-mis. sions in the first level.  GAME BY ELECTRONIC ARTS CONTACT ELECTRONIC ARTS (0753 549442) FOR INFORMATION 87 "


"AVEN GAMES LONDON ..99 VISA 74 BROMLEY ROAD, BECKENHAM KENT BR3 2NP TEL: 081 663 6810 MAIL ORDER/ CREDIT CARD LINE: 081 663 6822 FAX: 081 663 0046 FIRST WITH THE LATEST RELEASES OWN YOUR OWN ARCADE MACHINE 3DO UK Pal inc Game ...... ....99 SUPER GUN DELUXE... ..99 3DO USA NTSC inc. 2 Games .. . ..99 SEGA MEGADRIVE AS SEEN ON ITV'S BAD INFLUENCE AND Joypad .... ....99 REVIEWED IN EDGE THREE Scart Boxes ............... . ..99 6 BUTTON CAPCOM STICK .......................99 Game Gun ( USA Only) ....... ..99 HAVE YOUR MACHINE CONVERTED TO RUN EVERY GAME Sample Disk (New Version) .. . .99 6 BUTTON PAD... 50/60 HZ JAP TEXT /UK TEXT Japanese Magazine (inc. Disk) ..... ......... P&P  .99 SUPER SFII JOYPADS. OTHER EXTRAS AVAILABLE S.A.E. FOR FULL LIST INSTOCK LATEST RELEASES SEGA SATURN .....AVAILABLE MID NOVEMBER PCB VIDEO (VERSION II) ROAD RASH .99 JAPANESE MAGAZINES.. SHOWS LOADS OF OLD CLASSICS . . . . . . .99 P&P .50 VR STALKER .. ..............50 ..99 S.A.E. FOR FULL LIST BELOW IS A SMALL SELECTION OF OUR PCBS SHADOW ....99 D3 BOY  HIT THE ICE .R TYPE LEO  SOCCER KID. .99 MAD DOG II.. SALAMANDER . ROBOCOP . CONTRA  .99 FAMICOM/SNES MICROCOSM......... CAPTAIN AMERICA  EURO FOOTBALL CHAMP  ..99 WAY OF THE WARRIOR. .99 DYNAMITE DUKE  BATTLE RANGER  GUARDIAN WAR .99 HAVE YOUR UK SNES CONVERTED TO 50/60HZ  P&P  .WONDERBOY III . SUPERMAN . TATSUJIN  BURNING SOLDIER. SUPER SFII JOYPADS ... INSTOCK . GRYZOR . CARRIER AIRWING  COMMANDO  CRASH & BURN. JAPANESE MAGAZINES. . .. .......50 GUN SMOKE HAMMERING HARRY  SLAYER .. .99 S.A.E. FOR FULL LIST TURTLES IN TIME  COLUMNS  .99 PLEASE NOTE: ALL PCBS ARE ORIGINAL SHERLOCK HOLMES .....99 S.A.E. FOR FULL LIST STAR CONTROL II. ..99 MEGA RACE .PLEASE RING THEME PARK ...PLEASE RING UK MACHINE ..99 Engine PETANT ...PLEASE RING USA SCART MACHINE.. ...99 S.A.E. FOR FULL LIST SCART LEAD WITH AUDIO.... GT HANDHELD ...ONLY .99  .99 GT MAGNIFIER NEO GEO SCART LEAD .99 *SVHS VIDEO COMPOSITE LEAD .99 AVP *CLUB DRIVE * DOOM STREETFIGHTER II (CHAMPION).. .ONLY .99 NEO GEO CD NOW AVAILABLE JAPANESE MAGAZINES PLEASE RING FOR LATEST RELEASES PLEASE RING PC ENGINE COMPLETE GUIDE ... S.A.E. FOR FULL LIST HISTORY OF SNK OFFICIAL VIDEO ...00 NEO GEO VIDEO SHOWS EVERY GAME ... ... ..99 P&P .50 LATEST RELEASES LATEST RELEASES WE ALSO STOCK KING OF FIGHTERS 94 ............99 STRIDER * VG ADVANCE * FATAL FURY SPECIAL FM TOWNS MARTY NOW .00 AERO FIGHTERS II ....99 GAME GEAR * NES * LYNX * MAD STALKER * AGRESSORS OF DARK KOMBAT.. . ......99 S.A.E. FOR FULL LIST GAMEBOY * MASTERSYSTEM * TOP HUNTER ..NOW .99 SPIN MASTER .. ..NOW .99 JAPANESE MUSIC CDS S.A.E. FOR FULL LIST WE STOCK A MASSIVE SELECTION OF SECOND HAND GAMES OPENING HOURS MONDAY -SATURDAY 10AM-5.30PM WEDNESDAY 10AM. IPM P&P GAMES, MAGAZINES, PADS .50, NEO GAMES  WE ARE NOT JUST A MAIL ORDER COMPANY. COME AND SEE US AT THE ABOVE ADDRESS AND SEE ALL THE ABOVE MACHINES ON DISPLAY. S.A.E. FOR FULL PRICE LIST. PLEASE MAKE CHEQUES PAYABLE TO: RAVEN GAMES ABOVE PRICES ARE MAIL ORDER ONLY. SHOP PRICES MAY VARY. JAGUAR .....99 ... .99 .99 EVERY GAME SOFTWARE GAME SHACK SUPER NINTENDO 701 3 8 4 2 4 2 5 13 SEGA MEGADRIVE ATARI JAGUAR Imports our speciailty, please call for availability and competative prices. PANASONIC 3DO Exchangs start from .50. Repairs SEGA MEGA CD from. Call in to \"Try before you buy\". NEO GEO Huge second hand base stock PC ENGINE PC/CD ROM We now stock PC/CD Rom software and hardware. We buy sell and exchange Doom levels now available. ALL of the above formats. Post and packing .50 Look at my WADII Courier service .00 FREE P & P GREAT PRICES CARTRIDGE SOFTWARE for CONSOLES Sega 32X.......Due Nov .95 Clay Fighters ......... SNES .95 UK Jaguar Console... 3219.95 Mortal Kombat 2........SMD .95 Crash Dummies....... SNES .95 Alien Vs Predator ....... JAG CALL Pete Sampras .......SMD .95 Lethal Enforcers...... SNES .95 Brutal Football ........ JAG .95 PGA Euro Tour ...... SNMD .95 Mortal Kombat 2.. ...SNES .95 Raiden... JAG  Super SF2 SMD .95 Super Mario Kart .. SNES .95 Tempest 2000.... JAG .95 Virtua Racing ........SMD ,95 Donkey Kong 94 ... NGB .95 Wolfenstein 3D JAG .95 Desert Strike .......... SGG .95 Mortal Kombat 2........NGB .95 Road Rash .. 3DO  Mortal Kombat 2.... SGG .95 Talespin ............ NGB . NGB .99 Shock Wave... 3DO .95 Sonic 2 SGG .95 Micro Machines ... NES .95 Top Hunter ........NEO-GEO .95 T2: Arcade ......... SMS 325.95 Totally Rad...... NES .95 ? -see cat... LYNX CALL LYNX CA CD SOFTWARE for CONSOLES/COMPUTERS 7th Guest...........PC CD .95 Deep Core... CD32 .95 FIFA Inter .........'SM-CD .95 Day of The Tentacle PC CD E26.95 Fields of Glory ..... CD32 .95 Jurassic Park SM-CD .95 Indian Atlantis PC CD .95 Humans 1 & 2... CD32 .95 Thunderhawk ..... SM-CD .95 Laser Squad PC CD .95 James Pond 3... .CD32 .95 7th Guest .CDi  PC CD .95 Nigel Mansell .CD32 .95 Litil Divil ........ .CDi .95 Theme Park PC CD .95 Zool..... .CD32 .95 Mad Dog McCree ....... CDi .95 FLOPPY DISK SOFTWARE for COMPUTERS 5 Wolverhampton Street Dudley West Midlands DY1 1DA VISA Mostar MAIL ORDER SERVICE NOW AVAILABLE II a SOFTWARE EXPRESS Cannon Fodder PC .95 Bubba N Stix.. AS00 .95 James Pond 2 ...A1200 .95 PC CALL Chase 11Q 2 A500 .95 Rise of the Robots.....A1200 .95 Lemmings 2. PC .95 Dreamweb A500 .95 Theme Park 1 5 Theme Park .... A200 23.95 Nascar Racer PC .95 Gooch Wld Class ... ... A500 .95 Chaos Engine .........AST .95 Sim City 2000..... PC .95 Rise of The Robots....A 500 .95 Gremlins 2... AIST .95 Theme Park PC .95 Streetfighter 2......... A500 .95 Nigel Mansell ....... AIST .99 THIS IS JUST A SMALL SELECTION OF THE GREAT GAMES WE SELL CALL NOW ON... CD32 44 99 01295) 73 00 60 a VISA MAIL ORDER HOTLINE 0925 828455 LINES OPEN 9-6 MON TO FRI 10-2 SATURDAY MEGADRIVE SNES EARTHWORM JIM .CALL JUNGLE STRIKE BENETONE RACING KICK OFF 3... .42.99 JURASSIC PARK 47.99 DIGGERS 2 FIST MICKEYMANIA 38.99 MORTAL KOMBAT 2 54.99 TRACKSUIT MANAGER MICRO MACHINES 2 .. MICKEYMANIA .CALL 49.99 SHAO FU STUNT RACE F.X. TOP GEAR .44.99 44.99 RYDER CUP GOLF SHINING FORCE 2 SUPER BATTLE TANK 2...48.99 42.99 SONIC AND KNUCKLES. SUPER ICE HOCKEY .... KICK OFF 3 ... .CALL 39.99 FRONTIER ELITE... URBAN STRIKE 38.99 3DQ PANASONIC 3DO REAL CDI MEGA CD SYSTEM .95 LITIL DEVIL BATTLE CORPS 38.99 MAD DOG McCREE .... BRUTAL .38.99 HORDE (U.S.A.) ...49.99 SEVENTH GUEST LINKS GOLF 38.99 JOHN MADDEN 94... ..34 99 ULTIMATE NOAHS ARK... SOULSTAR 38.99 JURASSIC PARK (U.S.A.) 49.99 STAR WARS CHESS 34.99 LEMMINGS (USA) VIDEO CD PRIZE FIGHTER PATRIOT GAMES .. MEGA RACE 42.99 34 99 . STAR TREK 6 ...........14.99 REBEL ASSAULT .. THEME PARK .......38.99 .42.99 888888888888 FOR YOUR COPY OF OUR LATEST FREE SOFTWARE AND SUPPLIES CATALOGUE 49.99 14.99 We sell games and supplies for. Sega Mega Drive; Mega-CD; Game Gear; Master Systems: SNES: NES; Game Boy: Amiga; A1200CD32, Atari Jaguar: Atari Lynx Atari ST, PC, PC CD-Rom; Neo-Geo; Phillips CDi; Macintosh; Mac CD; PCW: C64CPC etc. Call now for a catalogue for any make of games machine MEGA CD 2 WITH C.D.I. 450 + DV CART, TENNIS + JAGUAR 10 GAMES ............199.99 7TH GUEST ...........399.99 WITH CYBERMORPH ...215.00 MEGA DRIVES FROM ...79.95 GAME FAN MAGAZINE ....2.95 WOLFENSTEIN 3D ......44.99 PLEASE ADD 1.50 POSTAGE FOR GAMES, 6.00 CONSOLES AND SEND CHEQUE/P.O.'s PAYABLE TO SOFTWARE EXPRESS AT: UNIT 1C, CAUSEWAY PARK.WARRINGTON, CHESHIRE WA46RF Cheques & PO's only made pavable to Ultra Software. Please send your letters to: Ultra Software (CVG156) Fulling Mill. Broughton, Banbruy, Oxon OX15 6AP "


"REVIEW CVG MEGA DRIVE Sports Game Konami | .99 OUT November No other versions available No other versions planned 8. We've had Megaman Soccer, now Tiny Toon team sports, is it time for a dose of reality? ome games are innovative, some unique, others are downright silly. This is sillier than a haddock suit with the Tiny Toons taking to basketball courts and football pitches to try and out-cutesy each other. As well as the two core events, there are plenty of sub-games to keep you interested, including perennial favourite 'bash the mole'. On the STANDING ROOM pitch, though, the characters each have a power bar which ONLY let's them execute their own Five stadiums await. unique special move, Buster Each one has its own Bunny for instance is blessed dangers to beware of: with super speed which comes in handy when you're bearing down on goal. It's certainly not a game for older players, if you can beat FIFA Soccer hands down, you'd have trounced this in a couple of hours. But it's fun and well presented, even if it does lack a challenge. Stadium: I lied! This one has no dangers so there! mas A Without any sort of power gauge, it's difficult to judge the right amount of power needed to score a basket. COMING SOON CTME GAME BOY Tiny Toon Adventures Wacky Sports Konami A similar storyline and style of game, but this cart will feature six events including baseball as Buster, Babs and company attempt to find out who's the real champ at Acme Looniversity. EXPECTED RELEASE: NOVEMBER TIMES VERDICT Western: Keep away the horse in the corner kicks! TIMES 10 adventurescme alls MEGA DRIVE Acme All Stars is beautifully presented but does have its faults. The pitch's perspective makes the basketball game almost unplayable. No shot power bar doesn't help either. Still, the sub games and special moves are great. The football game is brilliant, on a par with FIFA but with better control, although the pitch is tiny. Definitely a cart for younger gamers who can't quite get the hang of the complicated sports games we're being offered these days. RIK SKEWS Forest: Bushes can make the players tumble and slip. TIME 2:28 TIHE SODD GOAR m.in. BS S inine Downtown: Watch out there's lots of slippery oil. A Unlike FIFA Soccer the control method is very fluid and responsive. Scoring is down to skill rather than luck as is often the case in EA's classic. GRAPHICS 85 SOUND 84 I PLAYABILITY 83 VALUE 76 ENDT 12 TIHE 1786 TIME 8:00 OVERALL A To score easily shoot at goal and then follow up the rebound with a special move that blasts past the goalie. Monty's Playroom: Hit the train or car and you'll fly. A Use the special move to power a path through the opposition. How many points the player scores here depends on this random score roulette wheel.  GAME BY KONAMI. CONTACT KONAMI (0895 853000) FOR MORE INFORMATION. 89 "


"CVG REVIEW SNES Racing UBI Soft .99 OUT November No other versions available Mega Drive, PC and Playstation versions planned CVG UBI Soft has come up with a combination of Road Rash, Mario Kart, and FIFA in its new Mode 7 race game. And it happens to be the first SNES racing game to support four-players... HITI street racer intendo will neither confirm or deny that a Mario Kart 2 is in development, but who cares when Vivid Image has essentially done it for them? The main difference with Street Racer though, is that you get to fight opposing cars Road Rash-style! Eight combat vehicles are on offer, and in total there are 24 courses to race on spanning the home lands of the competitors. Each character has three attack moves during a race as well as a turbo, SO you can choose to race by skillful driving or get out there and knock everyone else off the course. Tokens on the courses will provide damage repair and bonus points when driving over them, so you don't always have to win to get the most points. Street Racer also features two unique alternative games: Rumble is a game of bumper-cars played in a ring where you have to knock each other out of the playing area, and Soccer is a bizarre footie game played with cars. With a multitap connected four people can join in on any of Street Racer's events, and with a full action-replay mode there'll be no arguments over cheating. fire 02:20:94 99 ASS LP3 All the characters have a method for knocking away opponents when they get near. Biff expands his wheels as shown here. A With Helmut at the wheel you can cut into opponent's wheels forcing them off the course. RSS La 5 A The only female char. acter has a magnetic attraction feature which pulls opponents near for a Mr Blobby wheel splat. A On tracks with overlapping roads you can bash opponent cars into different lanes forcing them to drive the wrong way round. Drive over the blue tokens to repair damage to your car. Mind you don't cross a land mine though! A Hodja's magic carpet should be used to take corners safely or cross expanses of water as shown here. CART SIZE: 8MEGS 90 GAME BY VIVID IMAGE CONTACT UBISOFT (081-343 9055) FOR INFORMATION MULTITAP COMPATIBLE "


"REVIEW CVG 04:57 Even with four players on the screen there's absolutely no slow-down or loss of animation in the game 00342 KID MARKS 00:54 00:54. GUYS AND GALS With eight different characters there's a lot of tactics to learn. To get you started, here are the attack moves available with each. There are many ways to get past an opponent in this game. Using your special moves is the most effective method but these need time to recharge themselves. SUMO-SAN Weapons: Sumo hit, electric shock and sumo splash. SURF SISTER Weapons: Beach towel flick, expanding tires and magnetic attraction. HELMUT Weapons: Walking stick swipe, flight and spinning saw wheels. SUHO SHI SURF HELLUT HODJA Weapons: Dagger swipe, force field and magic carpet FRANK Weapons: Bash, screaming banshee and batmobile. SUZULU Weapons: Voodoo stick, Rhino charge and Rhino spear BIFF Weapons: Bat hit, grapple and expanding tires. RAPHAEL Weapons: Punch, stereo music blast and chain grapple. HODJA SUZULU BIFF RAPHAEL DAN 91 "


"CVG REVIEW 2916 The replay mode is superb in Street Racer. You can watch the game from each player's viewpoint or take the camera and place it anywhere along the course. COMING SOON ALTERNATIVE The Rumble mode places players in an open or sealed arena and the idea is to try and knock each other out of the field. PC MEGA DRIVE Street Racer Ubisoft Although the Mega Drive isn't capable of matching the SNES for colours, or creating Mode 7 effects, Street Racer will be quite unique for the Sega system. Soccer is another of the bonus games on this cart. Like the real thing, you can actually do lots of fancy ball control and it's all very fast. You can even play on different surfaces. Super karts Manic Media/.99 This is a simulation of real kart racing, with a 'faster than Doom' graphics engine providing the visuals to very realistic handling. Excellent. ISSUE 156: 86% EXPECTED RELEASE: EARLY '95 SECOND OPINION EL EST VERDICT What we have here is more than a Mario Kart clone in that this game is so distinctive in itself: the characters; the special tactics; the variety of courses, the Rumble and Soccer sections (which are separate games in their own right) all make this a highly desirable purchase. The best feature has to be the four player option though; plug in a multitap and this game will keep you and your pals entertained until Street Racer ll comes along. GARY LORD Sumo-San is a big guy so when he jumps and lands on you, you'll be out of business for a while. SNES Street Racer's impressive use of Mode 7 has established a standard for the rest of the industry. This is a game of skill and experimentation and it'll be months before you exhaust the tactics for success. Like Mario Kart, the playability grows as you explore and master the different cars. In fourplayer mode there's absolutely no slow-down and it plays undeniably well. Street Racer is frankly the most enjoyable race game on the SNES. DENIZ AHMET line 00:08:00 FERS SE 81 Drive over the stars to gain bonuses, progressing up the league without having to win each race. GRAPHICS 93 SOUND PLAYABILITY 92 VALUE 95 OVERALL 94 Unlike Mario Kart, on the starting grid players can perform around 10 different quick starts to gain a lead. A Two player games are excellent and can be valuable for learning new tactics. You'll need to practice if you want to find the four secret courses. A Frank's car can float for quite a while with those bat wings. Incidentally, Frank's tracks are among the hardest. 92 "


"ADVERTISING PROMOTION WH SMITH HOT CAMC OF THE MONTH URBAN STRIKE : riE REVIEWS. YOU'VE SEEN THE SCORE NOW TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS OFFR BROUGHT TO YOU BY WH SMITH \"We fought them in the deserts, and in the jungles, but still those terrorist dirtbags keep coming. There's only one thing to do, get your chopper out and shoot your load! Yep, Urban Strike the third instalment in Electronic Arts' hugely popular shoot-'em-up series has arrived. Once again the aim is to fly through seven different campaigns, killing spineless terrorist scumballs and completing important military tasks. It's great fun and rates as one of the better Mega Drive shoot-'em-ups to have surfaced of late.\" CVG! TRIKE THE SEQUEL TO JUNGLE STRIKE URBAN STRIKE This voucher entitles the bearer to save .00 when they purchase the Urban Strike computer game. (Mega Drive version only) Valid until 1st January 1995. This voucher may not be redeemed for cash or any other merchandise. WH SMITH Tom Guise PITH Staff initials: Till No. 82% Reciept No. Cash value: 0.001p Offer exclusive to WH Smith "


"CVG REVIEW MEGA DRIVE Shoot-'em-up Konami .99 OUT NOVEMBER ISNES and GAME BOY versions available No other versions planned Four years on from the SNES version, can Konami still deliver the goods. It looks as though they can... ut of all the SNES titles ever released, there are about a dozen or so which clearly stand out. Among those is Super Contra (aka Probotector) arguably one of the finest action games ever written, and it looks as though they've done it justice on the Mega Drive. Rather than try to cram the SNES version onto the Mega Drive, Konami's programmers have pretty much started the game from scratch with all-new levels, new characters and more bosses than you'll find in any other game. The result is fantastic. Each level is crammed full of excellent ideas, stunning technical features and, naturally, plenty of things to shoot. There are also several different routes through the game, so it's impossible to see all the levels in one hit. Because the story line changes depending on which levels you visit, there are also several different endings, so it's not a case of selling the cartridge to your mates once you've completed the game. ROAD RASH By far the most impressive stage is this, where your character sprints down a motorway closely pursued by yet another massive robot. He'll try to shoot you, jump on you, whack you with the massive spiky maces at the end of his arms and generally make life tough. Even when you've blown his body up, his head still finds enough presence of mind to attack you. ctor CARTRIDGE SIZE 16MEG 94 GAME BY KONAMI CONTACT KONAMI (0895 853000) FOR MORE INFORMATION 1-2 PLAYERS "


"REVIEW CVG Some bosses aren't very original, but they'll keep you on your toes, or off them for that matter. For some reason you encounter vicious looking creatures such as this, which are pathetically easy to kill. However, you can normally count on something very tough following close behind. ZP PRESS START THRIL A This is the robot you work for, he sends you on your way with a comedy salute which is probably very insulting in some parts. The game starts with you driving our armoured right into the heart of the battlezone, taking out a few enemies on the VERDICT A Many of the bosses rely on surprising you, then leaping on to your character while you work out what to do next. This one, for instance, plummets off the top of a building, which it then proceeds to destroy. OTHER VERSIONS Three years on and this is still one of the best SNES carts ever. It has more depth than almost any other shoot-'em-up. The Game Boy version is also very close to the original. SECOND OPINION 91% SNES  ISSUE 126 GAME BOY ISSUE 155 At first you will find Probotector tough and annoying because \"Game Over' appears on screen soon after you've started, because it's that difficult. Perseverance reaps rewards however, and though it doesn't get any easier enemy weaknesses are learned and exploited. More than any other shoot-'em-up I've played Probotector delivers immense satisfaction when you complete a level or destroyed a nasty baddie. Graphically and sonically this isn't up to the SNES version but the gameplay is still as lavish. RIK SKEWS MEGA DRIVE I still rate Super Contra as one of the best SNES games of all time, and while this isn't quite as good, for a Mega Drive conversion it's stunning. One of the key features is that it's so tough, and you can't play all the levels in one game, so you have to go back several times to see everything. It's this kind of challenge and longevity, coupled with stunning action and amazing technical effects that make Probotector one of the hottest Mega Drive carts of the year. MARK PATTERSON 84% POWER UP! Each of the game's four characters has their own set of weapons and weaknesses, just so you know who to choose from the start, here they are. 89 GRAPHICS 90 SOUND PLAYABILITY 91 VALUE 94 DX-3 OVERALL A good, all-round character, although you don't get his better weapons until midway through the first level. Very similar to CX-1, only this guy's armed with an excellent homing laser which makes the game much easier. Plenty of big weapons, but because this dog-borg is the tallest character it's harder for him to dodge bullets. He's small, but CX-4 can jump higher than the others and his weapons are powerful, but have a limited range. 92 95 "


"CVG REVIEW PC Strategy Microprose PC.99 OUT NOW No other versions available No other versions planned CVG Set sail for the new world in Sid Meier's sequel to one of the best ever PC games Civilisation... or a game that looks like it has been knocked up in a couple of evenings for less than a tenner, Sid Meier's new strategy game, Colonization, promises to be just as absorbing and as playable as Civilisation before it. Using the same rudimentary top-down, icon-based graphics, the game is all about the discovery and development of the American continents during the period 15001800 the colonization of the land the Europeans called the New World. Like Civilisation, in Colonization you must build up a complex colony of interconnected towns and trade routes, while also fending off attacks from local Indian tribes and other imperialist European nations. Whereas in Civ, your aim was to send colonists to Alpha Centauri, in Colonization your objective is to gain independence from your mother country. Of course, this is far from easy and to win the game, not only must you have a strong colonial presence (huge armies, lots of supplies, etc) you must defend your lands and your people from a final attack from your former home. How many hours playing time to be had? Well, we've had the game for two weeks and we're still in the 'fledgling' stage. You can play this game for months... coloni FLOUNDERING FATHERS Back in the old days founding a colony either involved conning the natives out of their land or pointing guns at them saying 'big chief make bang bang with firestick if you don't give land pretty pronto, Tonto.' But that's not the nice way of doing things. Here's our guide to starting a colony of your very own, while being nice to the indigenous people. You've just landed in the New World. If you build a settlement here you'll end up having to buy land from the naative American Indians who occupy the village to the south of the map. However, having a friendly village close by is handy if you're ever attacked. One of the big advantages of having a nearby village is that, providing you're on good terms with the locals, they'll train unskilled colonists for you. They're also good to trade with. Get on their bad side, though, and you'll make an enemy for life. Importing religious missionaries from Europe is another good idea. These will introduce Western religions to the Indians, who will then become more well disposed to you, with mem. bers of their tribe often defecting to your set tlement bringing plenty of goods with them. A town is best positioned near lots of natural resources like food, forests and mineral deposits. Unfortunately, there are three other European nations all trying to colonise America so you've got to be quick. At the town screen, you can assign different jobs to your colonists. First of all you're going to need farmers and fishermen to provide food, then lumberjacks to provide lumber for new build ings. kad) AU them A In the intro, the colonisation of this new land is shown in watercolour style stills GAME BY SID MEIER CONTACT MICROPROSE (0454 326532) FOR MORE INFORMATION 96 "


"REVIEW CVG DDDDededoodde Bound For France Your progress in the game is measured by a score and there is a wealth of statistical information to refer to. A Although as ambitious colonists your thoughts for your mother country take second place, Europe is still an important source of trade goods and new colonists. zation ALTERNATIVE PC/A1200 Civilization Microprose .99 Similar in style and gameplay, the original Civilisation is still a very difficult challenge, mainly because the onus is on conquest as much as survival. NOT PREVIOUSLY REVIEWED A Most of your time is spent looking at the map, which shows your colonies, individual units and the different terrains. VERDICT FLY THE FLAG STILL the PC Despite the bland and somewhat basic graphics, If you play Colonization for more than five minutes, you'll find that there is a subtle and absorbing strategy game lurking beneath the bland exterior. OK, it takes some getting used to, but once you give your colonists jobs and you make friends with the Indian nations, this game is as engaging as Civilization ever was. With the focus on colony management, rather than rampaging imperialism, Colonization is very different. Just because you can take Genghis Khan to the stars in Civ', doesn't mean you can easily suc. ceed in Colonization. This is a huge challenge. STEVE JAMES Your country of origin effects the tactics you need to employ in the game. Being English, for example, means there are more immigrants as people try to escape religious persecution. While the Spanish are very good at fighting, especially when up against lightly armed South Americans. Exploration is essential. Find out where your enemies are and get to the booty (the gold discs) before they do. If you encounter any rival colonies that are weaker than you have a pop at them they'll only start on you later in the game, so hit 'em first. It's easy to tell if you're doing well in Colonization because the king ups your tax as soon as you start making some decent cash. The ultimate aim is to become strong enough to declare independence from the crown and fight any troops the king sends over.... 80 GRAPHICS 65 SOUND PLAYABILITY 91 VALUE 87 IrTS LIG Fitas RESSOU guters at Douille. Ho vone to offer YOU & incognitum of the cu lasting The different Indian tribes can be fought, traded with or even converted to your way of thinking by sending missionarles into their villages. SECOND OPINION Civilization is one my fave games, so I couldn't wait to get my hands on Colonization. Within 20 minutes Goonerville, my colony, had been wiped out as my expansionist policies which were a throw-back to Civilization failed miserably. This is a very different to the latter and a major challenge; there's no way you can just have a quick game of Colonization, which is testimony to the game's appeal. It really is tremendous stuff. MARK PATTERSON OVERALL 92 "


"CVG REVIEW MEGA DRIVE SNES Platform Sony MD.99 SNES.99 Out end October No other versions available No other versions planned Mania was originally planned to coincide with the rodent one's 65th birthday last year, but it looks like the delay has been worth it... mickey mania MEGA DRIVE Eager not to burn his britches Mickey has to escape from getting his bott' burnt. SNES Gather collectables in the castle. Sling them at spi. ders in order to use the ropes to cross gaps safely. ove him or loathe him there's no denying that Mr falsetto voice is a bit of a star everywhere he rears his rather large ears. He's already shown his face in a couple of decent Mega Drive games, most notably Castle of Illusion. A landmark in Mega Drive games, its awesome graphics showed the potential of Sega's 16-bit machine in the hands of capable programmers. Mickey Mania looks like being a landmark game too and although the graphics are brilliant, it's the variety in the gameplay which sets it apart from countless other platformers. The game is based around seven of his most famous and character-developing encounters, including Steamboat Willy (his first cartoon from 1928), The Mad Doctor from 1933 (his first colour outing) and Moose Hunters from 1937 (his first talkie). THE WONDERFUL WORLD OF DISNEY Disney animation is second to none and that quality is seen in abundance in Mickey Mania... EUR Boy and dog (or rather dog and mouse) as they jump to avoid the rampaging moose. Mickey could be about to turn in to Mickey Mush if he doesn't watch out. Here you have to hang on for dear life, and unlike real life here you get more than the one. Are you a man or a mouse?' If the answer was the former Man's Best Friend might be more helpful. Mickey fluidly ducks down in an attempt to avoid any danger that's thrown at him. GAME BY SONY CONTACT SONY (071-911 8700) FOR MORE INFORMATION 98 "


"REVIEW CVG SNES MEGA DRIVE THE WONDERFUL WORLD OF 16-BIT Although the game looks fine on SNES, it's the Mega Drive version which is technically more impressive. SNES A Most of the time you kill creatures by the usual bum-splat method. The bigger they are the more times you need to hit them and I'm sure there's a Disney moral tale there somewhere. Does anyone ever think Michael Jackson looks like Mickey Mouse? Oh, it's just me then. COOLER THAN On the SNES' first level they've omitted that old film feeling Here Mickey has to make it along a rotating tower before the flames catch him up. This is an idea borrowed from the old C64 game Nebulus. PLUTO VERDICT MEGA DRIVE This house scrolls by Mode-7 style as Mickey passes by. SNES A Pluto often acts as a sort of radar and will warn Mickey of imminent dangers. SNES Mickey has had more platformers based on him than any other character, so it's surprising that original ideas can still be found. With this version, everything is appealing: from presentation to animation, no other game captures the animation techniques used by Disney better than this. In play it holds few surprises but there's plenty of variety and impressive 3D sections. A great and taxing challenge, but there are better platformers around. DENIZ AHMET VERDICT AI don't wish to reinforce stereotypes, but have you ever seen Mickey eat any cheese? SNES Another Mode 7 style trick is seen in this swinging girder section. GRAPHICS 98 SOUND 82 PLAYABILITY 89 VALUE MEGA DRIVE And I thought platform games were becoming stale! Last month saw Dynamite Headdy and now this. Variety packed, from standard platform levels to the Castellan-esque tower and the brilliant 3D moose chase sequences, Mickey feels good to play too, with responsive control and sensible restart points. Technically it's outstanding, with so many SNES-style effects, I thought it was the SNES version! Mickey Mania Is destined to be one of the year's best platformers. RIK SKEWS 85 OVERALL A Here Mickey balances on a high-speed trolley and needs to be guided over gaps and ducked under spinning blades. MEGA DRIVE The ground spins like a giant carwash as the moose attempts to catch Mickey. GRAPHICS 91 SOUND 86 PLAYABILITY 98 I VALUE 88 OVERALL ALTERNATIVE PC Cool Spot Virgin/.99 The PC doesn't really have many decent platform games apart from this of course! A perfect conversion from the console version ISSUE 152: 85% Climb the tower, Nebulusstyle, and admire the superb parallax scolly-scrollies. The colour palettes chosen for the game are so evocative of those early Mickey cartoons. ONE OF THE REASONS FOR MICKEY MANIA'S DELAY WAS BECAUSE THE PROGRAMMERS HAD TO DRAW MICKEY DIFFERENTLY FOR EACH OF THE LEVELS, RATHER THAN USE THE SAME SPRITE THROUGHOUT LIKE MOST GAMES 99 "


"CVG REVIEW MEGA DRIVE Driving Codemasters .99 I OUT NOW Future versions to be announced No other versions planned CVG No violence, no bad language, no need for CDs. It's just solid gameplay all the way in a game that's destined for classic status. 1.59\" Jest Lap 4.59\" De 300 . . . hen Micro Machines first appeared on the old NES not even Codemasters could have predicted the kind of success it would achieve. Almost every format's had a version and, although the Codies have stuck to the basic format, they've utterly topped it with the sequel. It's nice to see that the programmers recognised the strengths of the original game and refrained from making any changes there. Instead Micro Machines 2 plays very similarly to the first game, but it's been dressed up to the hilt. Because the game comes on a J-Cart, up to four players can compete without the need for a Sega Tap, there are more courses, new vehicles, plenty of options and playmodes and, above all, even more playability than the first game. It may sound like a Luddite attitude, but with so many companies placing faith in Silicon Graphics machines and actors, it's really nice to see something which, technically at least, is stuck in the Dark Ages, but nobody really cares 'cos it's just so great. 0-41 micro Emachines 2 GOGA RACE DAYS The pool table's one of the fastest tracks in the game. That, combined with sharp turns and loads of hazards, make it a real challenge. MM2 is loaded with different vehicles, all of which have their own characteristics determining speed, acceleration and handling. Some are slightly easier to control than others, and some, when combined with the tougher courses, are purely the territory of experts. CTCOONS LECT COURSE SELECT COURSE The basement provides a few tricky moments as you can't see what's coming next. TINY TREEHOUSE FOUR BY DERVISH DANGER DLLER COASTER KHINE ON! MIOI MAYHEM SELECT COURSE SELECT COURSE SELECT CO FROSTY RECEPTION BRICKS N TREES CHOPPERS BATHTUB BURNOFF DRAGST 14 PINBALL PANIC A All new hazards, such as this rotating corn on the cob, make the tracks even tougher. GAME BY CODEMASTERS CONTACT CODEMASTERS (0926 814132) FOR MORE INFORMATION "


"REVIEW CVG 0:0870 Laps BFGERONT BUMPE BEBT HP A The biggest danger you face in courses such as the Tree House here, is plummeting off the edge of the track. It costs valuable time and will get you laughed at by any human opponents. A You can race against yourself in Time Trials. From the second lap onwards a 'ghost' car will appear, which is a recording of your fastest lap. Beat that and that performance replaces it. 0.04 A The cars in Micro Machines are now outfitted with horns. It's a completely pointless feature, but most appreciated all the same for the comedy value of it. Like most games, Micro Machines 2 is best played with a couple of mates, espe. cially ones who are crap at games and make you look like an ace gamesplayer. MICRO MACHINES FOR BEGINNERS Winning a race is a fine against the computer, but when you're up against flesh-and-blood opposition, the aim is to score points. It's a rather clever sys, tem, really. To ensure that both cars are on screen, points are earned by whoever gets far enough in front to touch the side of the screen. Obviously it's made a bit easier if you ram your opponent into a hazard, but that would just be unsporting... A Novices start on the training camp, which is the equivalent of water wings and nose clips. Pathetic. A real gamesplayer will go straight in at the deep end, flounder, and go out looking good. A One way to be immensely successful, and unpopular, is to race dirty and force your opponents off the track. VERDICT SECOND OPINION It's hard to define exactly why a game like this is so playable. It could be the speed, the simplicity or the multiplayer mode. Whatever it is, this version possesses all the playability of the original and then some. Once you start playing it's easy to forget the simplicity of the sound and graphics and spend far too long staring at the screen trying to beat your times. There won't be many better multiplayer games than this on the Mega Drive this year, so why hang around when you can buy this? DENIZ AHMET MEGA DRIVE The next game you should buy features tiny, crude graphics that are almost impossible to control. Yes, Micro Machines 2 is utterly brilliant! It plays like the original, only with more vehicles, tougher tracks and plenty of new play modes and it comes on a J-Cart, so you can have a four player game without buying any extra kit. I've got a feeling that in ten years' time gamesplayers will be harping on about how great games like this were back in the good old days... MARK PATTERSON A When you're racing against the Mega Drive you need to come first or second to qualify for the next round. SELECT COURSE SELECT LOUNSE SELECT COURSE S MFTER CHASE HOVERORI BASEHENT BIJPG HIOT MAVH FINSES CHAISE! MIO MAYHEM FERRY FIASCO GRAPHICS 69 SOUND 67 PLAYABILITY 93 VALUE SELESCOURSE SELECT LOURSE SELECT COURSE 94 SELECT COURSE SELECT OVERALL 9 HUSICAL HITS MONSTER TRUD STRERNI STRUGGLE MEOT MAYHEM O PODE SLALOM HINT II GARAGE GRIES "


"CVG REVIEWS out now... We want to make your life easy when choosing games. Heck, we've even decided to save you the trouble of turning the page in our monthly eyeball on what's covering the shelves in punter land. Get the knowledge. cd VORTEX ROAD INFERNO RASH cart cart cart co IMORTAL KOMBAT 2 DYNAMITE HEADDY MD issue 155 192% SNES, MD issue 154 SNES96% MD97% One of our highest scoring games this year and straight in at number one on the SNES and Mega Drive charts. A faultless coin-op conversion with enough tactics and lastability to knock Super Street Fighter away. Will never disappoint... In our judgment Dynamite is a Sonic beater. This is simply the best platform game on the Mega Drive at the moment, with original graphics and a demanding line in puzzles. Variety and depth are what you're paying for with this one. SNES issue 155 192% An FX chip game which doesn't quite match the quality of Stunt Racer but is impressive all the same. Imagine Star Wing with a ship that can change shape and you'll get the idea. Offers many ways to play and a very good challenge too. 3DO issue 155 91% This is the first game on the new consoles to earn a CVG hit. Amazing texture mapped graphics and genuine addictiveness are complimented by lots of tracks and very humorous use of FMV interludes. Just like a coin-op game. PC CD-ROM issue 155 193% This combines the playability of an arcade game with the complexity of Elite 2 and the features of a flight-sim. Features an overwhelming number of things to do, but is made annoying by slow disc access. Still, it's one of the best CD games yet. handheld cd SIMON THE SORCERER handheld YOGI BEAR handheld_nclamiga RACE DAYS I PROBOTECTOR 2 RUFF 'N' TUMBLE GAME BOY issue 155 82% CD32 issue 155 86% CD32 issue 155 86% A gorgeous looking pointand-click adventure game with a really involving script and loads of spoken dialogue. Funny to play and challenging with it. Even features vocals by Chris Barrie from Red Dwarf and ex-CVG writer Steve Keen! GAME BOY issue 155 84% A mirror image of the SNES original and its just as playable. One of the best arcade games the Game Boy has seen, with its popularity arising from aggro appeal and the number of crippling weapons. Enhanced through a Super Game Boy. GAME BOY issue 155 80% Much better than the SNES version, thanks to its largely varied gameplay. Track down the stolen money and save Jellystone Park in 32 plat form stages which are littered with cleverly-structured puzzles and plenty of original features. A clever little overhead racing game which for 25 Sovs is an absolute barg', as they say in Bargain Land. Looks like Micro Machines and plays a lot like it too. Even features a head-on driving game. Decent graphics and great controls. A standard but very playable platform game that makes killing baddies disturbingly satisfying. It's picked up a number of very jazzy items from the graphics depot, and there are some intelligent opponents to mangle. Hours of gameplay! nclamiga nc/amiga nd ZOMBIES 2 | GORF | FIFA SOCCER PUTTY SQUAD JAZZ JACKRABBIT 555 POTCHES PC issue 154 86% AMIGA 78% AMIGA 80% PC 90% Even though you can't play four-up, as you could with the cartridge versions, there's no stopping this floppy version. Very fast graphics, realism and fabulous sound make this the best footie game to be formatted on to floppy disk for some time. A1200 issue 154 87% Up to the eyeballs in AGA graphics, here's something a tad different. It combines puzzles and platform antics, and you control a morphable piece of putty, changing his shape to duck and dive the many tasks ahead. Very original. Life is inexpensive when you're in PD land, and if you hunt out this Operation Wolf you'll be in for a zombie blitz of the stomach-churning variety. Simple, cheap, and good for when you want a quick blood snack. It's not particularly challenging, but what did you expect? Remember Gorf? Until now the only home version was on Vic20 cartridge. But now you can experience the full effect of this superb early-eighties coinop for just a couple of quid. It remains faithful to the original, although isn't as tough as we remembered it to be. Resembles Sonic in gameplay, but your tooled up with weapons. Pick up and use anything that doesn't move an excellent idea. Even includes 3D bonus levels akin to Space Harrier, and all delivered in 256-colour graphics. Plenty to do and worth every penny. 102 "


"SILICA ARE NOW IN 18 BRANCHES OF DEBENHAMS SEE BOTTOM PANEL FOR DETAILS JAGUAR | IT'S THE WORLD'S FIRST Gacuare HERE! 64-BIT CONSOLE OFFICIA RODUCT The 64-bit Jaguar is here to make other games consoles look prehistoric! Look out! There are some stray cats coming into the country! Some USA Jaguars have been imported into the UK unofficially. This imported product has been manufactured for America and is not compatible with UK Jaguar equipment. Look out for the UK sticker above on the Jaguar products you buy. This will ensure it is official product and will work properly in the UK. 227484 AWESOME SOFTWARE Atari, the inventors of video games, have developed another world exclusive the FIRST EVER 64-bit games console. Why settle for less, when the Jaguar can deliver arcade quality sound and graphics in games which would be impossible to play on other consoles. Check out Jaguar's impressive specifications, then visit your nearest Silica store for a demonstration. Or, if you can't wait to get your hands on one, call our mail order hotline now. Stock permitting, we can make sure your Jaguar is delivered to you the day after we receive your order (UK mainland). And, delivery (Mon-Fr) is FREE! CD-ROM add-on To provide access to even bigger and better games, plus films and standard music CDs. Atari expects to deliver a CD add-on for Jaguar before Christmas '94. 5 Processors 64-BIT DATA BUS  2Mb 32-BIT RAM Spectacular 32-BIT Graphics including 3D Animation  16.7 Million Colours CD Quality Stereo Sound 17 Button Controller Plugs Straight into a TV Free Cybermorph Game On Cartridge Worth  INC VAT LATARI FREE! CYBERMORPA JAGUAR CEEEER PRODUCT WORTH SUK JAGUAR There are now more than 150 developers signed up to produce Jaguar software titles, with over 50 titles in progress. The following are the current titles, with Atari's release dates Crescent Galaxy JGS 1852 NOW Evolution Dino Dudes GS 2462 NOW Raiden JGS 6722 NOW Tempest 2000 JGS7472 NOW Wolfenstein 3D. JOS 8322 NOW Alien v Predator 105 1122 OCT 94454 Club Drive JGS 1754 OCT 9  Kasumi Ninja GS 4502 OCT 94 949 Chequered Flag GS 1781 OCT 94  Brutal Sports Football GS 1582 OCT 94  Doom-JOS 2282 OCT 94 TBC Rise of the Robots JGS 6942 OCT 94  Tiny Toon Adventures JGS7592 NOV 94 49 Space Wars JG57031 LATE 94 TBC Battlemorph (CD) LATE 94 TBC Battlezone 2000 JGS 1341 LATE 94 TBC Blue Lightning (CD) LATE 94 TBC Creature Shock . JGS 1802 LATE 94 539 Demolition Man 365 2142 LATE 94  Dragon-Bruce Lee Story G52272 LATE 94 639 Hardball Ill JOS 384 LATE 94 TBC Highlander (CD) LATE 94 TBC Iron Soldier JGS 4011 LATE 94 TBC Jack Nicklaus Golf CD) LATE 94 TBC Legions of the Undead 1654941 LATE 94 TBC Star Raiders 2000 JGS 7182 LATE 94 249 Bubsy the Bobcat JGS 151 EARLY 95 TBC Brett Hull Hockey EARLY 95 TBC Charles Barkley Basketbal JGS 1741 EARLY 95 TBC Chaos Agenda EARLY 95 TBC ACCESSORIES Jaguar Controller JGA 2000 .99 Composite Monitor CableGA327 .99 RF Switch Box inc Cable JGA 4371 .99 Scart Cable JGA 4200 .99 All Prices include VAT OOOO JAGUAR CONSOLE + CONTROLLER PLUS CYBERMORPH GAME  INCLUDING VAT JAG 1064 SIL SILICA 18 THE SILICA SERVICE MAIL ORDER 081-309 1111 ----------| To: Silica, CVG-1194-217. Silica House, Hatherley Rd. Sidcup. Kent, DA14 40X PLEASE SEND A BROCHURE ON THE ATARI JAGUAR SERVIU Mr/Mrs/Miss/Ms............. Initials SHOWROOMS: We have demonstration facilities at all our stores THE FULL STOCK RANGE: All of your computer requirements from one supplier FREE CATALOGUES With special offers and product news PAYMENT: We accept most major credit cards, cash, cheque or monthly terms APR 29.8% written quotes on request) Surname: Company of aplicable) Address: Before you decide when to buy your Jaguar console, we suggest you think very carefully about EAR O WHERE you buy it. Consider what it ICE TO will be like a fex months aher you have made your purchase, when you may require additional peripherals and accessories or help and advice. And, will the company you buy from contact you with details of new products? Al Silica, we ensure that you will have nothing to worry about with our unrivaled experience and expertise, we can meet our customers' requirements with an understanding which is second to none Complete and return the coupon now for our latest FREE iterature and begin to experience the \"Silica Service FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY: On all hardware orders shipped in the UK mainland (there is a small charge for Saturday delivery) TECHNICAL SUPPORT HELPLINE: A team of technical experts will be at your service PRICE MATCH: We match on a \"Same product Same price basis ESTABLISHED 16 YEARS: We have a proven track record in professional computer sales PART OF A BON A YEAR COMPANY: With over 300 staff We are solid, reliable and profitable BUSINESS EDUCATION + GOVERNMENT: Volume discounts are available. Tel: 081-308 0888 PLUS TECHNICAL AND HEAD OFFICE SLICA, SLICA HOUSE, HATHERLEY ROAD, SOCUP, KENT, DA14 4DX PLUS BRANCHES AT: BRISTOL Debenhams Bid Poor St James Barton 0272 291021 CARDIFF Debenhams 46-50 St David's Way 0222 399789 CHELMSFORD Debenhams Floor 27 High Street 0245 355511 CROYDON Debenhams (Indoori, 11-31 North End 081-688 4455 GLASGOW Debenhams Poor 97 Argyle Street 041-221 0088 GUILDFORD Debenhams Ord Poorl, Millbrook 0483 301300 HARROW Debenhams Open Sept 94 Station Road 081-427 4300 HULL Debenhams Indoor Prospect Street 0482 25151 IPSWICH Debenhams.thdoor, Westgate Street 0473 221313 LONDON 52 Tottenhamn Court Road 071-580 4000 LONDON Debenhams .0 Floorl. 334 Octord St 071-493 3735 LUTON Debenhams (tot oorl Arndale Centre 0582 21201 MANCHESTER Debenhams 130 Floor Market Street 061-832 8666 PLYMOUTH Debenhams Crd Floor, Royal Parade0752 266666 ROMFORD Debenhams 3d Poon, Market Place 0708 766066 SHEFFIELD Debenhams Ord Roor, The Moor 0742 768511 SHEFFIELD Debenhams Open Set '94 Meadowall Centre 0742 568555 SIDCUP Hatherley Road 081-302 8811 SOUTHAMPTON Debenhams ist Floorl Queensway 0703 223888 SOUTHEND Keddies and Pool High Street 0702 468039 THURROCK Debenhams test for Lakeside Centre 0708 860066 Postcode NOW IN 18 BRANCHES OF Tel (Home) Tel (Work): DEBENHAMS Which computer(s), if any, do you own? STORES NATIONWIDE 217E ] ERE antes por make a break France en verander vers une teme "


"ZAP COMPUTER GAMES TECHNO HOUSE.LOW LANE.HORSFORTH LS18 4DF MAIL ORDER SIZZLINGLY HOT LINE 0532 5.90077 LOW LOW PRICES ALL THE LATEST GAMES & MACHINES SUPER QUICK DELIVERY NO SILLY MEMBERSHIP FEES REQUIRED TO BUY. OUR MOST FRIENDLY STAFF ARE WAITING FOR YOUR CALL 0532 590071 N°1 MOSER ZAP HOURS: 9am-7pm Mon-Fri 9am-5pm Sat. and Sun. FAX NO: 0532 586523 OPEN NO FOR SERVICE AND PRICE THE NEW GENERATION 5 COTING te tera dan Perben DAYS A WEEK Call for details of Sony Pa Satan. Sega Satur Sea 32X and Neo Geo D1 Pesene las na SUPER NES USA FAMICOM JAPAN 3-D-O USA MYSTICAL NINJA II (KONAMT) ....................CALL SUPER BOMBERMAVIT (HUDSON) .............CALL SUPER STREET FIGHTER II (CAPCOM .....99 US MACHINE AND GAME & SCART BOX 450.00 UK MACHINE AND G.LMIE ........................399.00 ROAD RASH .CALL THEME PARK ....... SLAYER (RPG)..... .54.99 PGA GOLF .......... ..CALL MAD DOG MAGREE II... ..54.99 WAY OF THE WARRIOR ..254.99 THE NEED FOR SPEED..... JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL .. ..99 THE HORDE ..... .99 PEBBLE BEACH GOLF..... 239.99 STAR TREK THE NEXT GENERATION 3-D-O GAME GUN..... .99 3-D-O CONTROLLER. ..99 SAMURAI SHOWDOWN (FAMICOM) MORTAL KOMBAT   CAL HARDWARE THIS WILL PREPARE YOU! THIS EXCLUSIVE TO ZAP PRE-PROGRAMMED PAD FEATURES 96 SPECIAL MOVES FOR MORTAL KOMBAT IT INCLUDING ALL FATALITIES, BABALITIES, PITS AND FRIENDSHIPS. ALSO COMPATIBLE WITH SMART CARDS FOR SUPER STREETFIGHTER, CLAYFIGHTERS & MANY MORE CALL FOR DETAILS OF SPECIAL OFFER WHEN BUYING RTAL KOMBAT PACK AND PAD. . SUPER STREET FIGHTER CALI SOUL BLAZER IT (ENIX)... CALL FINAL FANTASY ITI (SQUARE) ... . BRIL LORD (ENZX... .99 STREET RACER UBISOFT) .............. ...CALL SUPER STREET FIGHTER II (CAPCOM ....CALL BREATH OF FIRE (SQUARE) ...... ...59.99 POCKY & ROCKY II (NATSUME) ............ EARTHWORM JIM (VIRGIN) ................... FTEVEL GOES WEST (SUNSOFT)............ MORTAL KOMBAT II (ACCLAIM).............. FIGHTERS HISTORY..... SATURDAY NIGHT SLAM MASTERS (CAPCOM ............... ...CALL STUNT RACE FX NINTENDO) .......... JUNGLE BOOK (VIRGIN) ....... . CL DOUBLE DRAGON V TATO)... .CAT SUPER BONK (PC KID) HUDSON)........... .CALL LORD OF THE RINGS (INTERPLAY) ..... .CALL ULTIMA RUNES OF VIRTUE I (FCT) ... .CALL AERO FIGHTERS (TAITO).. ...CALL SUPER METROID (PAL) (UNBOXED)........99 SUPER METROID (LS)....... S E54.99 STAR TREK (SPECTRUM HOLY BYTE).......99 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER (CAPCOM ........54.99 FATAL FURY II (TAKLR).. . SOS (VIC TOKEN)........ E.19.99 FIFA SOCCER (OCEAVEA).. 1.99 KICK OFF II (LMAGINEER)... .99 WORLD CUP STRIKER (ELITE)... 159.99 WORLD CUP SOCCER US 94 (US GOLD)....254.99 SOCCER SHOOTOUT (CAPCOM).... PINBALL DREAMS (GAMETEN ....... .99 MEGAMAN SOCCER (CAPCOM)..................254.99 MEGAMAN X (CAPCOM)....... .99 HARDBALL MI CACCOLADE)... 1.99 MIGHT & MAGIC IIT (FCD. .99 KING OF THE MONSTERS IT.. SPELLCRAFT CASC IT.. ..99 SPEEDY GONZALES (SUNSOFT) ...... 49.99 SUPERMAN (SUNSOFT)... .99 SPIDERMLV & VENOM CACCLAIM..... 2.59.99 VIRTUAL BART CACCLAIM 154.99 OPERATION EUROPE (KOET). 2.59.99 CLAYMATES INTERPLAY... $29.99 SECRET OF MAYA (SQUARE)... FINAL FANTASY IT (SQUARE).. WIZARDRY 3 (CAPCOM .... JOE & MAC II (DATA EAST).... BUGS BUNNY (SUNSOFT).... LETHAL ENFORCERS + GUN .99 BATTLE GARS VAMCO) E3-1.99 MARIOS TIME MACHINE AERO THE ACROBAT (SUNSOFT)... $24.99 ACTRAISER I ENIX). 24.99 COOL SPOT (VIRGEN) ......... .99 GOOF TROOP (CAPCOM).... 24.99 I MADDEN SH (EA) ......... .99 STANLEY CUP HOCKEY (NINTENDO).... SPORTS BASEBALL/FOOTBALL MALIBU .99 OPERATION LOGIC BOMB... MECAROBOT GOLF.... .00 TECMO SUPER BOWL (TECMO) ...... EVO (EVTX) ........ RED LINE FI RACER .... PEACE KEEPERS CALECO)... .99 ROMANCE OF THE MI KINGDOM KENDO RAGE......... DARIUS MI..... ..$24.99 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION CMICROPROSE) .......CALL ANDRE AGASSI TENNIS (TECMAGIR)......229.99 BATTLE CARS (TECMO) ..... ATARI JAGUAR UK MACHINE. US MACHINE ALIEN VS PREDATOR KASUMI NINJA ............. RED LINE RACER ............ BRUTAL SPORTS FOOTBALL TEMPEST 2000...... CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN 3D... ...32 10.00 ........00 .CALL .CALL ..CALL .CALL .CALL ..CALL SUPER GAMEBOY (SCURT ONLY .99+.50 POP PUL SEPER SCOPE & 6 GLMES....00 +5.5.00 PB P SVES US CONSOLE ...... ..+.50 POP NEO GEO CONSOLE.... ...........2300+.50 PEP NEO GEO USED CONSOLE ........2220+7.50 POP 3-D-O CONSOLE & CRASH & BURN...... . ....450 ATARI JAGUAR UK CONSOLE............ .....210 ATARI JAGUAR US CONSOLE..... .2240 SNES MULTITAP ....................$24.99+.50 P&P SNES PAL BOOSTER...............99+.50 POP TRISTAR (NES TO SNES CONVERTER)..... ......99+.00 P&P SNES MOUSE .......... ....99+.50 P&P ASCH FIGHTER STICK (SNES].99+.00 P&P TOP FIGHTER JOYSTICK (SVES)..99+.00 POP NTSC GAME CONVERTER (SVES)...00+.50 P&P NEO GEO JOYSTICK ...............00+.00 P&P NEO GEO MEMORY CARD......20.00+1.50 P&P 3-D-O PAD...............................239.99+.50 P&P JAGUAR PAD. $24.99+.50 P&P NEO GEO STYLE JOYSTICK (SNES) .99+.00 POP NEO-GEO SPECIAL OFFER WHEN BUYING A UK SNES CONVERTOR FOR .50 AND AUS JAP NINTENDO GAME YOU CAN KNOCK A WHOLE NEO GEO CONSOLE..... ...00 NEO GEO CONSOLE (USED)... .00 NEO GEO CD.......... ..CALL SAMURAT SHOWDOWN CD..... ....... .00 FATAL FURY SPECIAL CD..... ...00 ART OF FIGHTING II CD .........................00 SUPER SME KICK SOCCER II CD........ BASEBALL STARS IT CD.. .........00 SAMURAI SHOWDOWN II CARTRIDGE .......CALL MANY USED CARTRIDGES IN STOCK CALL FOR BEST PRICES!!! 10 OFF THE PRICE OF THE GAME, NOW THAT'S WHAT I CALL AN OFFERII EXAMPLE IF YOU BUY THE CONVERTER & GOOF TROOP THE TOTAL COST WOULD BE A MERE .49 + (P&P) OUCH!! SAID OUR BANK MANAGER! SOUL BLAZER 2 CALI CUT HERE :ORDER FORM NAME Send to this address:  ZAP ADDRESS TECHNO HOUSE LOW LANE, HORSFORTH  LEEDS LS18 4DF : Please rush me the following TELEPHONE NO. ITEM PRICE POST/P TOTAL POSTCODE FAMICOM JAPAN Credit card number SAMURAI SHOWDOWN (TAKARA) ... ..CALL TINY TOON SPORTS (KONAMI).. SPARKSTER (KONAMIT)............ DEMONS CREST (CAPCOM ...... WILD GUNS (KONAMIT).......... CUL FIGHTERS HISTORY ........... CALL KING OF THE MONSTERS IT (TAKARAN ......CALL Expiry Date Cheque Credit Card ALIEN vs PREDATOR Postal Order Our premises are bulging with games, so if you don't see what you want do not despair Just call! All Postal orders and credit card purchases will be whisked to you the same day. All prices subject to change and availability. Post and packaging Games .50 Handhelds 85 Consoles &7.50 VISA CALL  Please make cheques/PO's payable to ZAP GRAND TOTAL Switchcards welcome. Please quote issue na for Switch "


"REVIEWS CUG supershorts... 3 Footie ones, leder ones, or those funny spangly ones that Kylie used to wear, everyone's got their favourite shorts. Here's ours... NBA LIVE '95 GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY OVERALL SNES EA Unconfirmed Wicked, and furthermore, crucial basketball sim. Superbly drawn and animated sprites really improve the atmosphere, although the courts are samey. Extremely realistic spot effects add a lot (although you'd be a bit worried if your trainers were that squeaky). It's a bit difficult working out which players to put where at first, but once you suss this out Live '95 is darned ace. 91 SAMURAI SHOWDOWN GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY OVERALL Game Boy Takard Unconfirmed Surprisingly well converted beat-'em-up. The sprites are large and well-drawn, but, sadly, the animation is a bit on the flicky and not-too-great side. The horrendous and irritating game tune could tip you into fullblown psychosis. But the effects are all right. The limitations of the screen can cause confusion every now and then, but the game is still great fun. 85 I WORLD CUP USA '94 GRAPHICS I SOUND PLAYABILITY OVERALL Amiga .99 Tiertex Blocky sprites and cobblers animation add up to a visual non-starter, even in the field of football games. Fuzzy, crackly and hissy are three words you could use to aptly describe the sound of this game. Godawful. Takes about half an hour to get to the main game, and the faffing doesn't stop there. Full of major irritations. Horrible footie cash-in which is miles too late. 41 PINKIE GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY OVERALL Amiga Millennium .95 Enjoyable platform/puzzler for kids. An annoyingly cute sprite wanders through an array of brightly coloured and strongly drawn environments. Not bad, not bad at all. The standard, inoffensive bouncy tunes and effects are professional if lacking in flair. Strictly for kids, for certain. But this is a quality example of non-violence which may interest concerned parents. 80 BATTLE BUGS GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY OVERALL IPC Sierra .99 Original if occasionally irritating strategy title. Garishly coloured, but the sprites and backdrops on display here are at the very least nicely drawn. Have you got an expensive soundcard? You're not going to get your money's worth from this, that's for sure. Plenty of good ideas in the package, and original enough, but there are still a few fatal flaws lurking around. 79 DARK LEGIONS GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY OVERALL PC ISSI/US Gold .99 Brilliant marriage of RPG and beat 'em up. Just damned lovely. Deep and dark use of shading lends a baroque atmosphere to the game. Pretty, too. Not awe-inspiring, but at least it has the air of hard-work about it, which is something in this day and age. Fans of both genres will definitely like it a lot, but solely strategy or arcade-minded players may not quite enjoy. 90 MISADVENTURES OF FLINK GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY I OVERALL Mega Drive Psygnosis Unconfirmed Visually impressive and fairly enjoyable platformer. Whilst the colours look a bit pale and washedout, the actual sprite artwork itself is brilliant, and so's the animation. Annoyingly rustic theme tune abounds, but the sound effects, where they exist, are nearly always pretty effective. A surprising wealth of new ideas here, but whilst it's good fun to play it doesn't get the adrenaline going much. 81 NHL '95 GRAPHICS SOUND PLAYABILITY I OVERALL Mega Drive EA Unconfirmed Umpteenth outing for this (now four-player) oldster. Better animated than ever before, but at the end of the day still small little diddy ice hockey players. Grunting and groaning and that irritating jingle they play whenever anyone scores a point, it's all here. It's more playable than before, but anyone who doesn't own a version of NHL by now obviously doesn't want one. 80 105 "


"CVG Q&A HELP!TIPS From Rik & Den's love for each other comes their biological offspring, our help & tips section... 3G9&3 84 lives, 4 hearts, Fester/Puggsley/Wed. saved BLRXX 76 lives, 5 hearts, Wed/Pugs/Gran/Fester saved the game and press UP, UP, DOWN, DOWN, L Button, R Button, L Button, R Button, B. A, and START ISNES NINJA WARRIORS Hard battle eh? Well, if you hold down buttons X and Y on title screen and press A, A, A, A, B, B, B, B, A, B, A, B, A, B, A, B, as if by magic, a stage select cheat will appear. If you do the same on the stage select screen you then get an area select screen. SNES SUPER EMPIRE STRIKES BACK The force will be with you if you use this cheat to start the game with all the forces. At the title screen press X, B B, Y, X, A, A, X and START. Super Demo At the intro screen, hold the A button until the demo starts. Super Password and Snappy Solo This password will save all of your family, except Morticia, give you 41 lives and 5 hearts. Enter the code on the password screen as: BL#ZS. Also on this screen, you can press the Land R buttons to snap along to the music, or make your own solo. SNES HYPERZONE For a sound test in this little known import game At the title screen, hold the Land R buttons and press START. SNES Mortal Kombat II Apparently, Boutros (reader dude) has come up with a pointless but enjoyable cheat for MKII on the SNES which lets you see a fancy new introduction sequence. All you have to do is hold down LR and START as the game boots up. SNES RANMA 1/2 If there's one cheat every beat-'em-up seems to have these days it's the one which allows you to play as the boss. To do that in this game highlight the story Level 1.2-ETQCWXLB Level 1.3 EXQBEXYP Level 2.1 FBQBRXYH Level 2.2 FFQBYXRL Level 2.3 FJQHMXPH Level 3.1 FNQERXAO Level 3.2 FRQDRXWH Level 3.3 FUQZNXFL Level 4.1 FZQAXXUA Level 4.2 GDQLWXIJ Level 4.3 GHQLVXVJ Level 5.1 GIQCOXRG Level 5.2 GLQZGXCJ Level 5.3 GQQBJXOF Extra Lives To get an amazing 99 lives enter the password as 11111. Subsequently you'll start the game in the hall of stairs and the counter will read 00, but once you die it will read 99. SNES Rainbow Bell ADVENTURE Yet again Rik's (pretend) brother, D. Boutros offers another exclusive tip for fans of this top Konami game. For a level select simply use the password TGTm). SNES GRADIUS HII A few of you have been asking us for tips on this old classic so here's all the cheats we could find for it. Extra Credits At the title screen, press X very rapidly. If you are fast enough, you will earn yourself 9 credits. SNES JOE & MAC The follow-up to this has just been released officially by Elite but if you're having probs with the original shift through these superb tips. Max Out Your Lives Go into a level that has a 1-Up in it. Finish the stage and go back into it. Find the 1-Up, collect it then press START and SELECT to get out of the level. Repeat this to max your lives. Extra 1-Ups Collect a key and go to the first blue spot you can find on the map. Once in the bonus round, catch all of the meat that is dropped from the sky. A 1-Up SNES ADDAMS FAMILY Yes we realise this is an old game but these are some new tips sent in by Luke James from London. For secret doors and a Power-Up Room, once you start the game, go into the hall of stairs and proceed to the left. Once you are past the last door to the left, push UP and there will be a secret door that leads to Puggsley's den. Go through the second secret door and you will be Behind the Stairs'. mode strap and hold Arcade Mode Go to the option mode and when in Game Level, press the A button rapidly until \"Arcade\" mode appears. with R then press START. The boss character should now appear on the selection screen. SNES Top Gear For a funky stage select simply select UK as the country you want to play and enter \"VALHALLA' and you can then play any country that you want. SNES LAWNMOWER MAN If you want to do virtually anything in this game pause it once started and press B. R. A, SELECT, Y, A, B, Y, A, B, START, START, A, L. L and START. This will activate Nigel Wayne Mode eh? Incredible Passcodes: here 30 Extra Ships are a few combinations that At the title will get you through the game screen, hold in no time at all. At the title left on the pad screen, go to the password and press the A option and put in these codesbutton three for a real boost in the game: times. When &1RRL 36 lives, 3 hearts you start, you'll have 30 DORZ8 46 lives, 4 hearts, ships. Fester saved L6#GC 61 lives, 5 hearts. Trick Full Power-Up Pause Granny saved the game and press UP, UP, B6KGB 62 lives, 5 hearts. DOWN, DOWN, LEFT,RIGHT, Granny/Puggsley saved LEFT, RIGHT, B, A, and START. DGRGV 66 lives, 4 hearts. Fester/Wednesday saved Real Full Power-Up Pause AMIGA IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 2025 Suddenly this game becomes not-so-impossible when you have all these level codes at your disposal... will fall. Do NOT catch it. Let it fall and four 1-Ups will appear in its place. Get Back in Dinosaur If you die in the last stage (inside the dinosaur), you can continue back inside by going to the last stage on the map and Level 1.1 No code 106 "


"Q&A CVG XTRAS pressing START, then SELECT. Hidden Levels In levels 8 and 9, there are red eggs. Make sure there are no enemies on the screen, and then crack them. You will be transported to hidden stages. ARE YOU BATTY? Those of you familer with the TeeV Golf add-on which gave players the chance to use a real golf club for their games, may be pleased to hear that the same company has now produced a similar device for baseball games. Batter Up plugs into your Mega Drive or SNES and works with any baseball game to date. Your physical movements with the bat are simply transfered into the console. A wireless version is also available. Due soon. SNES SUPER GHOULS AND GHOSTS Make short work of one of the first SNES games ever with the help of these tips from Kenny Mason in Wales. 108 00: 01 SNES STUNT RACE FX If you'd like a computer opponent in the Battle Trax option start the game as usual, but don't touch the pads and after a while the computer will drive START the opponent car. Also, while in any race, if you press L, R and SELECT you'll get a new diagonal perspective. Stage Select and Sound Test Plug in controller 2. Go to the option screen and move the cursor to the exit. Instead of exiting, hold button L and START at the same time on the second controller and press START on the first controller. You will find yourself on a special screen in which you can select stages, areas, sound effects, & music. Change the Music Enter the option screen and use the trick shown above. Go to the sound select menu and look through D5-EA. These are music selections for the game. Select one of the music tracks and then select B5. When you press the button to hear it, the music will change from the normal instruments to drum beats. You can do this with any music in the sound select menu. JAGUAR EVOLUTION: DINO DUDES For the ultimate in dudes, ie infinite ones, do this: Press AC on the password screen and enter ONCE DEAD as the password. Press OK and you should hear a sound. Now hit AC again and enter TWICE BORN as a password. If you hear a burp when you press OK you will have infinite Dino Dudes. WOULD YOU LIKE A RAISE? SNES owners who like the feel of the raised thumb pad on Sega pads should try out the Gamester SN8. Excellent but ton response for a .99 joypad. Alternatively, Sega own ers out for a new six-button pad might consider the MD6 for the same ridiculously low price. SNES Super Metroid Having reached the end of the Maridia Stage you might have trouble killing the Dorigon boss. The best method we've discovered is to let Dorigin grab you and then fire your grappling beam into the electric side panels this will electrocute the boss. Jaguar WOLFENSTEIN 3D For a level select to make this game easier to clock, press 1,3,7 and 9 simultaneously on the game select screen. Alternatively, during the game press 4, 6,6,8 sequentially for God Mode or 4,9,9,6 for full ammo. GAME GEAR DISNEY'S ALADDIN You don't need a genie's lamp when you've these passwords... AJGJ Level 1 LAEA Level 2 ASNF Level 3 JOYUS FRENCH Infogrames, better known for their Alone in The Dark games, have grabbed distribution of all ASCllware peripherals in the UK. Ascii pads are used by many software developers and even at Nintendo's HQ! Prices for joypads range from .99 .99, and for around  Game Boy owners can grab an excellent accessory holder. Available now. SNES Muscle Bomber If you'd like to take weapons into the ring, climb out, grab one and go to the side of the court. Now jump into the air and as you do so press attack to throw the weapon back into the ring. 107 "


"CVG Q&A HELP! JAG GAMES INFO Yes, indeed, 'Help'the name by which this section is known. Notice the exclamation; this suggests some positive action on our part... CD 32 POSERS I'm thinking of buying an Amiga CD32 and would appreciate it if you would answer the followcing questions: 1. Recently I have heard about an expansion module which will allow connection of a disc drive and an A4000 keyboard. is this for real? If so when will it be available and how much will it cost? 2. Please list the 5 best games available for the CD32 3. Are there any joypads available for the CD32, if so how much do they cost? 4. Are there any plans for Mortal Kombat 2. Super Streetfighter 2 and Body Blows being released on the CD32? Stephen Quantick, Middlesex Out now check out the Doom and Allen Versus Predator reviews on pages 36 and 44 of this issue respectively.... See below for our recommended CD32 games list.. 1. Is Mortal Kombat 2 coming out for the Jaguar? If so, when and how much will it cost? 2. I've heard that on Mortal Kombat 2 it's possible to play as Goro by pressing DOWN and BLOCK where the toasty program mer appears. Is this true? 3. When will Theme Park be available for the Jaguar and how much will it cost? Adam Nend, Birmingham 1. It certainly is. It's called the SX-1 and is available now for just under . Contact your local CD32 stockist for more details and availability. 2. It depends on your taste. At the moment we're playing Liberation, Frontier: Elite 2, Fire and Ice, Gunship 2000 and Ultimate Body Blows. 3. Commodore ones are available to buy separately. The only third party one we know of is by n Pro. They're better than the official Commodore ones as they offer delights like auto fire and slow motion. Both pads retail for .99 4. No, nope and it's already available and very good Issue 151. 85%), 1. There's no plans for it. Kasumi Ninja is the closest looking Mortal Kombat game for the Jaguar but it's based on the poor original Mortal Kombat, not the sequel. 2. Nope. 3. It'll be out in November. The price hasn't been confirmed as yet. GAME TIPS UP AND JAM NEVA Level 4 AALG Level 5 BLTO Level 6 VIAN Level 7 Stage 5: 12ST?X69 Stage 6: 12NP?1?9 Stage: 7 12BC?2BM Mega Drive DYNAMITE HEADDY If you want to see all of the character animations in this Sonic beater (hope you caught our exclusive review last issue Ed), do this: Press Game Boy PARODIUS A shoot-'em-up is no fun without power-ups, so why not start the game with all of them using this cheat. Press UP, UP, DOWN. DOWN, LEFT, RIGHT, LEFT, RIGHT, B, A, B, A at any time. START on the title screen, highlight options; press B, A, B, C, B and hit START. Here are some codes from someone who thought his passwords would win him  of free games. Sorry Brian we don't run a charity you know. We thought we'd print them anyway. Stage 2: 12CM1VLM Stage 3: 12QR1X9Z Stage 4: 12GH2X3Q Mega Drive BARCLAY SHUT Mega Drive OUT RUNNERS Not a particularly good game this but if you'd like to burn IOB "


"Q&A CVG MORE AMIGA WORRIES MORE MEGA 32X PUZZLERS About a month ago heard that Commodore had gone bust. Then didn't bother me then but I now want to buy an A1200. So please answer my questions. 1. If Commodore don't get bought out, will games companies still produce for the Amiga range of computers and if so, for how long? 2. Will the new CD drive for the A1200 play CD32 games 3. What is the best Amiga game? 4. Does the A1200 package come with a joystick or will need to buy one? L. Martin Scotland 1. The Amiga has a massive userbase so there's new danger of it not being supported in the short term (say a year). Without a buy out though, there will be no new Amigas (either models or available to buy), and no new owners, while current owners will look to upgrade. If that worse case scenario happens though, the future for Amiga software after the end of next year looks very bleak. That's unlikely though, the Amiga still has plenty of mileage left in 1. Is Sim City 2000 comiog out on the Mega Drive, Mega CD, Mega 32X or Jaguar? 2. How good is the Jaguar compared with the A1200 and 3DO? 3. Does the Mega 32X improve the Mega CD FMV scenes? 4. Are Virtua Fighter and MK2 coming out on Jaguar? 5. I think the A1200's games seem a bit basiq Do you agree? 6. How much will Jag CD and 32x games be? 7. Should I buy the A1200, Amiga CD32, Mega 32X or Jaguar? E. Comwalk, Norfolk 1. No, it couldn't cope with the processing power required, ditto, nope and possibly if the Jaguar proves to be popular. 2. How good at what? Technology-wise it has the power to trounce the A1200 and 3DO but we're still waiting to see a killer game on the machine. 3. Yep. 4. Not a chance. THE HELP! LINE 5. You obviously haven't played games like Liberation and Frontier amongst many others then. This is your magazine, so 6. No prices have been confirmed on either as yet, but one if you've got a tip or thing's for sure, they won't be cheap. query about a game why 6. Don't buy an Amiga or CD32 until there's final clarification on not phone it in te the Commodore's future. The Mega 32X is in danger of being treatCVG! Help Line. It's open ed like a stop gap for the Saturn and the Jaguar has yet to prove every Friday afternoon. itself in terms of quality and consistency of software. All you ve got to do is phone 071-972 6720 and leave your message. That's all there is to It $o get cracking and remene ber there's a software prize on offer for any stupendously excellent or unique tips. 32x it. 2. Yep, but unlike the CD32 there's no room for an FMV board, so CD movies are a no go. 3. Sensible Soccer, at least until Sensible World of Soccer comes out. 4. Officially it doesn't but most shops will supply one free and if they don't shop elsewhere! Kevin Stout reveals heaps of funky options for this. To use them enter B. A. DOWN, A. START, START on the warning screen, then any of these codes. Money = $2000 Speed = Three nitros Thrash = Player gets best weapons Beach = San Diego stage Armor = Get grade 5 equipment Broncos = Denver level Capital = Washington level Cars = Detroit level Hills = San Francisco level Jays = Toronto level Liberty = New York level Palms = Miami level Pizza Chicago level Mega Drive WIZ 'N' LIZ For a very tasty cheat in this fruit filled game use the password HSSN RLLL. This will open the shop door and give you 100 stars. Buy a banana and potato and mix them together for a hint shop. Use up all your stars in the hint shop and when you leave stand under the door and hold C. You should now have thousands of stars to play with! cash and reach the top of the table quickly, use this handy tip from Khan Patel. Firstly, pick a skins tournament for two people. Now choose any course and start the game. When it's your go pick up the ball and your opponent's. Keep doing this until you reach the eighteenth hole. Having reached this point, play your shot and make your opponent pick up his ball. If you now finish the hole you'll win all eighteen skins and the money. new car in the Arcade mode. Simplee, eh? round the circuits with a Virtua Racing car we can tell you how, it's easy. Press LEFT, RIGHT, LEFT, RIGHT, B, C, A on the title screen and if you hear a noise you should then be able to play with the Mega Drive SKITCHIN' Mega Drive PGA TOUR GOLF 2 If you want to make loads of 3DO THE HORDE For all of you movee109 "


"CVG HELP! A CD 32 FAN MR MONEYBAGS 1. I've got  to spend on a console. I already have a SNES, Game Gear and PC and can't decide between a CDi, Jaguar, 3D0 or CD32. Which one would you say is best? 2. Do you think it's worth waiting for the Saturn or Ultra 64? 3. I was told that Nintendo would bring out a CD drive for the SNES. Is this true? 4. Is Sim City 2000 as good as they say it is? 5. In Issue 154 you said: The Sony PlayStation would be the 'best bit of kit out. Is this right? Mr Money Bags, Kent I'm interested in the CD32 so here's a few questions: 1. Wil Super Streetfighter 2 ever appear on this system? 2. Are there any CD32 joysticks available? 3. Will CD+G be sold on shelves at shops and be as popular as tapes, and is the FMV unit required to play them? 4. Will a music package like Octamed be released? And will any special expansions be needed to use it? D. Beckett, Isle of Wight 1. None of them is the best, they all have strengths and weaknesses. At the moment though, 3DO is leading the pack. 2. They both should be great, it could be a long wait though... 3. It seems unlikely to ever see the light of day now. 4. Better 5. it's brilliantly specced however both Sega and Nintendo are reputedly delaying the releases of the Saturn and the Ultra 64. In order to fight it off. MISERABLE MEGADRIVE OWNER AEG CD I have a Mega Drive but am wondering whether should sell it and get a Saturn or buy a 32X upgrade. Will Sim City 2000 and Theme Park be released on either of these machines? I would be grateful for your advice. D. Brookes, Walsall We wouldn't advise selling your Mega Drive, there's some cracking software coming out for Sega's 16-Bit machine over the coming months. Wait and see what the software will be like before commiting to the 32X. Saturn won't be out here for ages but looks like an excellent machine and will definitely come with a recommendation when it's out. It's unlikely Sim City 2000 or Theme Park will hit the 32x, but with the power of the Saturn there's no reason why they shouldn't eventually Mappear, apart from the fact they'll be knocking on by then. 1. It's very unlikely 2. Not to our knowledge. 3. CD+G's have been around for about five years and the infor mation is already included on a normal CD. The only one that springs to mind is the last Fleetwood Mac album. mainly because it was the first CD+G disc available. You don't need an FMV unit to play them, just a CD+G compatible CD player, 4. Something commercial will probably be released sooner or later but we don't know of anything at present. PD stuff like Octamed can be picked up on PD CD's available from decent PD Wbraries. Scan the small ads in CU Amiga for one. GAME TIPS goers, who would like to watch all of the Full Motion Video clips, but without actually playing the fine game then we can show you how. In the game hold UP, A and B. Then press P. While paused hit RIGHT, A, LEFT, LEFT, A, UP, and B. Press P to skip the scenes. 3DO TOTAL ECLIPSE It was a great move by Panasonic to bundle this game instead of Crash and Burn with its PAL 3DO machines, but if you're finding yourself eclipsed by the complexity of it all try this level skip: Go to the Quit/Preview option and hold down STOP, push B, L, A and release STOP. Now push B, A, L, B, L and A and you can start on any of the first 20 levels. 3DO ANother WORLD You'll be out of this world and into another a lot quicker than you think if you use these passwords, which were kindly gathered by ours truly while reviewing the game in CVG 152. LDKD Level 1 HTDC Level 2 CLLD Level 3 LBKG Level 4 XDDJ Level 5 FXLC Level 6 KFRK-Level 7 KLFB Level 8 BFLX Level 9 BRTD Level 10 TFBB Level 11 TXHF Level 12 CKJL Level 13 LFCK Level 14 IIO "


"Q&A CVG DUTCH DILEMMAS... anasoni the computer save your game. If you now exit the control room and hold START on pad two a node jumper should appear. 1. Have the 3DO, CD-i and Mega CD been improved because they didn't start off too well? 2. Will the Saturn be 32 Bit or 64-Bit? 3. Will these games come out on SNES: Urban Strike, Doom 1 and 2, Sim City 2000, Gunfighters, SSF2 Turbo and EA Tennis ? 4. Will there ever be a Streetfighter 3 and do you know anything about it? 5. When will you have a big tips book on the cover again? 6. Are these sequels planned: FIFA 2. Sonic 4. MK3, Super Metroid 2 and Super Return of the Jedi? D. Kooy, Holland 1. The 3D0 looks better and better and has some cracking software at present and in the pipeline. It would be even better if the price came down. The MegaCD is still suffering with only a handful of decent games, while the CD-I is just getting off the ground as a games machine with titles like Burn Cycle (reviewed this issue), but it is the business for CD films with an ever increasing catalogue of great titles. 2. 32-Bit. 3. A good chance, no, no, next Easteri no & no and probably 4. It's in development at the moment. It's believed only Ryu, Ken and Sagat will survive from number 2, and news in from the set of the up and coming Street Fighter movie is that Kylie, Van Damme and Raul Julia will appear in the third version of the game, giving sFill a Mortal Kombat look. More news as we here it. 5. We're more interested in bringing you booklets on new technology at the moment but who knows, are there any readers out there who'd like to see another tips booklet? 6. It's almost here, yes as Sonic & Knuckles, it's in development, possibly and it's almost here. MEGA-CD WONDERDOG IYou'll find comfort in these level passwords. Level 1: Mystic Level 2: Ankles Level 3: Ledzep Level 4: Reeves Level 5: Pixies Level 6: Woopie this cheat only works on a coin-op with Free Speed Select. Pick speed 3 with the Fierce button when the cursor is on Ryu (both players). After hitting Fierce, pause for two seconds and move to T.Hawk. After another two seconds move to Guile and pause again. Now move to Cammy but pass through Dhalsim. Pause again (but just for a couple of seconds). Move to Ken then Ryu and pause for a final two seconds. If you now press all three punch buttons and START simultaneously, Akuma will replace Ryu! Good luck with the po PC CANNON FODDER Got a copy of Sensible's excellent warmongering game> Are the little peorest! HOME 3.0 AWAY THE HELP! LINE skip stages. Mega-CD JURASSIC PARK To find the Node Jumper which lets you skip stages and view all the film footage follow these instructions, which are more simple than a Sue Barker cooking recipe. Collect one egg and find the pliers in the toolbox at the visitor's centre. Using the pliers, remove the blue keycard out of the slot before the large wooden entrance. Once you've got the keycard, go through the doors and to the visitor's centre. Inside, go up the steps and enter the second door to the right with the blue keycard. In the office, find the incubator and place an egg in it. Next, exit and go to the control room. After accessing 020 ple in this bloody game getting on your nerves? Well you can skip past them, and to any level you please, by simply pressing SHIFT and ENTER to find the level you truly want to be on. We live in the caring, sharing nineties, so hey! If you've mapped out a level, found a secret part of a game or you've just got a common or garden hint or tip (and that doesn't mean we want adice on planting sprouts, OK), then send it in. And if it's any cop we'll print it. Address your correspondence to: CVG Help!, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R Mega-CD FIFA If you'd like to see some secret video clips go to the coaching/stats option and move the soccer ball next to formations, coverage or strategy. Press A on one of the options and you should see a clip. | Mega-CD CLIFFHANGER Here's a simple tip. For 99 credits take controller 2 on the title screen and press LEFT, RIGHT, START, C and A. Simple eh? Alternatively, if you'd like to access a level skip press START, C, B, A, RIGHT, and LEFT. Press C while paused to ARCADE SUPER STREET FIGHTER TURBO A lot of readers we've spoken to recently have been getting the Akuma cheat wrong, so read on if you want to know how to play as Akuma. Please note, "


"CVG COMPETITION JAGUAR BIG EDS win The editors of Britain's top games magazines tell us what games have molested their fancy this month... Com po an 'ectual slice of alien versus predator! Andy McVitie, Editor NMS has been the only magazine Nintendo Magazine System to play Donkey Kong Country this month and that's because we've got the exclusive review! It's sure to be the Christmas number one! The NMS crew has also amassed a pile of new sports games, comprising NBA Live, International Superstar Soccer and NBA JAM on Game Boy. Steve Merrett, Editor 32X fever hits Mean Machines Mean Machines this month, as we unveil Virtua Star Wars in an exclusive review. Fans of the coin-op are going to wet their slacks when they see this! However, when we're not struggling against the evil Empire, we're also busy with the superb Micro Machines II. All of the models used in the game were digitised, so you get a chance to win something that actually appeared. Richard Leadbetter, Editor Micro Machines II. What a Sega Magazine game! The Ecco Ils, Lion Kings and Mortal Ils may be the really big sellers this Christmas, but in terms of sheer enjoyment, it's the Codemasters' game that gets my well-considered vote. It's so simple that it could well be the best Mega Drive game of all time. Forget about your virtual, actual and quasi-'ectual reality so beloved of Late Show types... Yup, this is your chance to obtain a real and proper slice of a top-notch game... For the first time in Amiga hisAlan Dykes, Editor CU Amiga tory no-one is bothering to do a Christmas game. But who cares when you're getting spectacular graphics in Super Stardust and a game which is better than Sensible Soccer Football Glory. Keep your eyes peeled for Sim City 2000, TFX and Tower Assault. Those short-and-colourful-haird men of Rebellion Software have deposited on our desks a number of lovingly framed model wall panels which were filmed and used in their excellent new Jag game, Alien Versus Predator (top review, page 44 this issue). The models are for you to win! 000OCOCO Simon Byron, Editor Time to reveal a secret. I am in The One for Amiga Games fact Dr Who and galactic forces are transporting me from the One Amiga to a new dimension. Next month I'll look completely different, but in the meantime I've been playing a truly excellent conversion of Aladdin and, once again, Sensible World of Soccer. All you have to do is to answer the following easy question, pop it on a postcard and send it to: 'ectually, Computer and Video Games, EMAP Images, Priory Court, Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Entries in no later than 25 November 1994. David Upchurch, Editor Christmas is coming so be PC Games happy-unless you're a Turkey. We've been playing the excellent Ecstatica from Psygnosis, which could be one of the best 3D games you'll see even better than Alone in The Dark II. But it's hard to drag me away from the rather good Wing Commander 3.... And your question is... In which Predator film did an Alien's skull appear? Christina Erskine, Editor This month I've been net-surfPC Review ing and chatting with pundits about life and love. Meanwhile, the rest of the team have been splatting blood with Doom 2, and declaring independence in Colonization. For Christmas though, we're all getting high about Magic Carpet it's simply amazing. And remember, you will never ever be able to buy any of this Alien and Predator merchandise. Anywhere. Not open to anyone who works for, supplies, or is a relative of the following companies: EMAP and Rebellion Software. Also excluded, all of the beautiful but deadly operatives of that worldwide web of machinemeisters, A.T.A.R.I.. So there! Steve James, Managing Editor Alien Versus Predator Computer and Video Games gets a great big new machine thumbs up from me this month, as does Burn:Cycle. Back in the land of 16bit, The Adventures of Batman and Robin (reviewed page 70 this ish) is going to keep me glued to the screen for ages. Finally, Magic Carpet's looking mouth watering. I can't wait to get my hands on it. 112 "


"CHARTS CVG chart attack with HMV HMN Welcome to Mortal Kombat 2 month! Yep, the sizzling reviews have assured it of the top slot in all its released formats. Let's see if it can hold its position until Christmas... but expect Doom 2 to make a major, major impact next month. See you then... NOW HMY KNOW GAME all format top 10 snes top 5 gb top 5 nes top 5 Mortal Kombat 2 Acclaim Mortal Kombat 2 Acclaim Tetris 2 Nintendo FIFA Int.Soccer Ocean Donkey Kong Nintendo Kirby's Dreamland Nintendo Super Metroid Nintendo 2 Power Rangers Bandai Pacman Nintendo 3 Jungle Book Virgin o Warioland Nintendo Micro Machines Codemasters Sim City Nintendo Tetris 2 Nintendo Yoshi's Cookies Nintendo mac top 5_nc top 5 md top 5 Myst EA Space Simulator Microsoft Mortal Kombat 2 Acclaim Demonolo Mortal Kombat 2 Acclaim SNES, MD, MS, GG, GB This is the best conversion of a coin-op we've seen for ages. Each format has been pushed to the limit of its abilties and it's a bloody good game too. Super Street Fighter II Sega MD One day you're all moaning about the high price of games and the next you're out there buying essentially the same game twice. Please explain why? TIE Fighter Virgin PC Basically X-Wing played as the enemy. This sequel is totally essential for any PC owner looking for a shoot-'em-up with depth and challenge. Tetris 2 Nintendo GB The magical addiction of Tetris returns. Not much different to the bundled original, but obviously the public want it and we don't mind it either. FIFA Int. Soccer EA MD, SNES, PC The most atmospheric footie game around isn't as playable as everyone makes it out to be. Totally fab on the PC, though. Smash Tennis Virgin ISNES A cute tennis game which handles so well, you'll be desperate to try it out with a multitap and four pals. Very humorous, too. Jungle Book Virgin MD, SNES One which probably sells on its big-name appeal alone, but expect it to drop big time when Earthworm Jim (see page 42) hits the scene Theme Park EA PC, Amiga Fancy managing a Theme Park and building rides which you can sit in? Well, that's what this game is about, and it's the business Pete Sampras Tennis Codemasters MD Enjoy four-player tennis in the best tennis game on the Mega Drive by far. Superb control will have you on the edge of your seat. Warioland Nintendo GB There seems to be no end in sight for this mega-selling platform game. No complaints from us though, we play it on the way to work. Syndicate EA O TIE Fighter LEA 2 Super Street Fighter 2 Sega Sim City 2000 Mindscape 3 Theme Park EA EA Jungle Book Virgin Peter Gabriel's Explora Real World Doom LID Software Pete Sampras Tennis Codemasters 7th Guest Virgin 5 FIFA Int.Soccer EA Streets of Rage 3 Sega mcd ton 5 ga top 5 ms ton 5 Jurassic Park Sega Mortal Kombat 2 Acclaim Mortal Kombat 2 Acclaim FIFA Int. Soccer LEA Sonic Spinball Sega Sensible Soccer Sony amina ton 5 300 ton 5 Tomcat Alley Sega NBA Jam Acclaim Sonic Chaos Sega 1 1 2 3 Mortal Kombat 2 Acclaim Aladdin Sega Desert Strike EA On the Ball Anco Kick Off 3 Anco Beneath a Steel Sky Virgin Skidmarks Acid World Cup Year '94 Empire Road Rash EA A Pebble Beach Golf Panasonic Super Wing Commander EA Shock Wave EA Escape from Monster Manor EA Battlecorps Core Star Wars Sega WWF Steel Cage Acclaim move up move down non-mover new entry 113 "


"CVG COMING SOON TEKNO3! cruisin' for a You won't find a better or sexier-looking guide to new machines, and next month Tekno returns with the latest news on the console that many are claiming will support some of next year's best games the Sony PlayStation... the lion roars For those of you who missed the CES report in issue 153 (where were you?), Cruisin' USA is among the very first of the games destined first SAEMON for the arcades and then for Nintendo's forthcoming 64-bit conHOLLYWOOD sole, Ultra 64 (and it won't be any different, allegedly). You've read the very first preview this month now read the first review of this potential blockbuster.... OK, ok, so we all hate the ultra-crap theme song by Elton John but the game of the new Disney film, Lion King, is about to burst out of the savannah and into our paws.... citement \"NEXT MONTH Megarace got a resounding thumbs-up and a score in the nineties when it appeared on CD-ROM in May. Its conversion to 3DO should provide the hot new console with one of its many top new games so don't miss the review next month. DU It's hardly surprising but Star Wars games have always been up there in the popularity stakes along with Coca-Cola and Buddha himself, lord bless 'im... next month we review the very latest Star Wars release, the seemingly rather excellent Super Return of the Jedi. COMPUTER Oh, and there'll be the usual brace and a half of top games under scrutiny including Super Drop Zone, Lemmings, Cannon Fodder and Dino Dini's Goal, plus Psycho Pinball, Lethal Enforcers 2, Generations Lost, plus, if Virgin will let us get our mitts on it, Creature Shock.... GVG 157 OUT NOVEMBER 15 THE MAG THAT REAL GAMERS READ 114 "


"LET THE MANIA BEGIN...  Disney "


"SLAP IT IN THE SLOT NHL GO AND GIVE YOUR SNES A TASTE OF REAL POWER-PLAY SUPER NINTENDO ESPORTS ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM NLPA nds NHLPA and Becicted are REY LE 1994 Electronic Arts. EA SPORTS, the EA SPORTS logo and it's in the game, it's in the game are trademarks of Electronic Arts. NHLPA, National Hockey League Players Association and the logo of the NHLPA are trademarks of the NHLPA and are used, under license, by Electronic Arts, NHL, the NHL Shield and Stanley Cup are registered trademarks of the National Hockey League. Team names and logos depicted are officially licensed trademarks of the National Hockey League 1994 NHL. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED OFFICIALLY LICENSED PRODUCT OF THE NATIONAL HOCKEY LEAGUE PLAYERS ASSOCIATION, 740901 OCEAN SOFTWARE LID 2 CASTLE STREET CASTLEFIELD. MANCHESTER M3.412 . TELEPHONE: 061 832 6633. FAX: 061 834 0650 "

