"DECEMBER 1981 MAKES COMPUTERS MAGAZINE THAT FUN FUN FUN 75p THE COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES USE THIS HANDY FRES TEMPLATE ZX81. PET APO TANDY PROPRIA & MANY MORE [ \"ROUND THE TORN TRILISTEARING RACE ARE YOU THE WORLD'S BEST ARCADE GAME PLAYER? ENTRY FORMS INSIDE SOLVE THE CUBES "


"NEW FROM THE LEISURE GROUP ...::: 1 Bill Budge's 000 Blaster Ovde VIDEO PINBALL FOR THE APPLE I; REQUIRES A 48K APPLE II CLIP THIS COUPON AND SEND IT TO: EMAP LTD., DEPT CVG, DURRANT HOUSE, 8 HERBAL HILL, LONDON EC1 PLEASE SEND ME RASTER BLASTER postal order for .50 I enclose a cheque/ RASTER BLASTER The speed and dynamics of Raster Blaster will astound you. It is an amazingly realistic full-colour pinball simulation, keeping separate scores for up to 4 players. 'Easy' and 'hard' options can be set and the paddles control the force of ball release as well as the flippers. Raster Blaster comes complete on a 52\" diskette and is available for just .50. Clip the coupon and enclose a cheque or postal order payable to 'The Leisure Collection'. Please allow 14 days for delivery. Name Address Apple II is a registered trademark of Apple Computer, Inc. "


"CONTENTS COMPUTER GAMES 20 No 2 December 1981 & VIDEO 5 MAILBAG What do you think of it so far? COMPETITIONS So you solved our free puzzle ... Now try the Great Template Competition GAMES NEWS With Christmas just around the corner, start compiling your games package list here CHESS Mate in up to 62 moves. Max Bramer takes you back to the first chess playing electronic marvel GO The most popular game in the world and one of the greatest computer challenges mm BRAINWARE Try our champagne games. Mind Routines for the mathematical and Nevera's Crossword for the literary-minded VIDEO'SCREEN Games centres to make your T.V. make music and war THE BUGS All you ever wanted to know about Screaming Foul-up but didn't know how to ask ADVENTURE Write your own adventure program. Keith Campbell gives the tips ARCADE ACTION Meet the unlikeliest arcade screen hero of them all in Frogger HM The deadly Sharp game for apprentice poisoners BREAKOUT As compulsive as ever on the Atom. The only \"bat and ball game you still can't put down GOAL Score over your Apple in this strategic struggle for supremacy MINI GOLF The park putting green was never as addictive as this Atari game POT SHOT VIC serves up the drinks as fast as you can shoot them down \"ROUND THE HORN Find your sealegs in this thrilling Tandy seafaring race to earn California's gold COSMAX Space Invaders in 1K. The ZX81 challenges you to send the aliens packing SO SOLVE THE CUBE We gave Rubik's tantalizing puzzle to our Pet and made it child's play KIT KORNER The Sinclair may be breaking sales records but it is not without its problems. Keith Mott goes trouble-shooting CHRISTMAS PARADE Don't just trust to Santa, let us give you a run-down on the latest electronic stocking-fillers SOUNDS Does your computer squeak when you want it to roar? David Annal can boost your decibels PRACTICAL PROGRAMMING Are you making the most of your memory? Let Ted Ball jog it into action GRAPHICS Now bring that space invader to life, Gary Marshal gets things moving SOFTWARE REVIEWS Stick out your thumb and set off to discover the universe in The Hitch-Hikers' Guide to the Galaxy an adventure with a difference DOWN TO BASIC Moira Norrie guides you through the world's most widespread computer language micro by micro an SOFTWARE GLOSSARY We all slip into jargon now and again but now there's a way out OHARDCORE What else could we call it? A guide to the low-cost computer market AD INDEX calli the low Puter NEXT MONTH TXTE uncover the seamier of the software business in our January VV issue. An \"X\" Certificate is slapped on our review pages as Elspeth Joiner tracks down and gets to grips with a copy of Softpornone of the new generation of pornographic computer games. Should you be dressing your micro in a plastic mack?! Editor Terry Pratt Assistant Editor Elspeth Joiner Editorial Assistant Susan Cameron Art Director Paul Flint Design Linda Freeman Illustrator Gary Scrace Advertisement Manager Simon Teager Advertisement Executives Rita Lewis, Neil Wood Publisher Tom Moloney Editorial and Advertisement offices: Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5JB: Telephone 01-837 3699 COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE By using the special Postal Subscription Service, copies of COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES can be mailed direct from our offices each month to any address throughout the world. All subscription applications should be sent for processing to COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES (Subscription Department), EMAP NATIONAL PUBLICATIONS LTD., BRETTON COURT, BRETTON, PETERBOROUGH. PE3 8D Z All orders should include the appropriate remittance made payable to COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES Annual subscription rates (12 issues): UK and Eire .00 Overseas surface mail .00 Airmail Europe E20.00 Additional service information including individual overseas airmail rates available upon request. Published and distributed by EMAP National Publications Ltd. Printed by Eden Fisher (Southend) Limited, 555, Sutton Road, Southend-on-Sea, Essex  Computer & Video Games Limited ISSN 0261 3697 Cover: Illustration by Tony Gibbons TXTE take the wraps off the 1981 stocking-fillers this issue but what VV has Christmas '82 in store? We preview the British Toy & Hobby Fair and its store of electronic wonders the kids will be clamouring for a year from now. OUR Treasure Hunt wins top billing in the January games program listings. A fully-fledged adventure for you to key-in. You can tackle a ferocious creature of fantasy in Dragon Druggin' and Sinclair owners will find three IK wonders for their micros. THE arcade game which is being tipped as the game to watch in '82. I We look at the game which will be filling video screens around the country in Arcade Action. Plus your last chance to bid to be the Best Arcade Game Player in the World and the final three arcade creatures which could help you win a Taito space invaders table of your very own. X LL this on top of our first look at the computerised Bridge scene, our regular round-up of the latest games and first-class features. Make 1982 a year to remember by starting it off with a copy of Computer & Video Games. NEXT ISSUE ON SALE DECEMBER 16TH "


"THE SHARP MZ-80K HAS GOT IT ALL STOP PRESS... NOW AVAILABLE BASIC COMPILER PASCAL (CASSETTE BASED) DOUBLE PRECISION DISC BASIC NOW ONLY SHARPSHARP SHARPSMAN SHARPSHARP SHARPSHARE SHARP SHARP SHARP SHARF SHARPSHARP SHARP SHARP SHARPSHARPSHARP SHARP SHARP SHARP SHARPSHARPSHARE SHARP SHARP SHARP SHARI \"HARPSHARPSHARP SHAR NCUADDCHARDCUR.R.P.  mm +Vat 48K PUASA You'll find all the help and advice you need about the MZ-80K at your Specialist Sharp Dealer in the list below If there is no dealer in your area, or if you require any further information write to Computer Division Sharp Electronics (UK) Ltd. Sharp House, Thorp Road, Newton Heath, Manchester M109BE Since its introduction the Sharp MZ-80K has proved to be one of the most successful and versatile microcomputer systems around. Sharp now have a comprehensive range of products ready to make the powerful MZ-80K with its Printer and Disc Drives even more adaptable. Products include: Universal Interface Card, Machine Language and Z-80 Assembler packages, CP/M plus a comprehensive range of software. *Trade mark of Digital Research Ltd. SHARP First, and foremost GET IT ALL HERE AVON BCG Computer Systems Ltd Bristol Tel 0272 435338 Decimal Business M/C Ltd. Bristol Tel: 0272 294591 BERKSHIRE Computer 100, Bray Tel 0628 35619 Newbear Computing Store Ltd. Newbury Tel: 063530505 BIRMINGHAM Camden Electronics Small Heath Tel: 021 773 8240 Electronic Business Systems Ltd Hemingharm Tel: 021 384 2513 Jax Restud Birmingham Tel: 021 328 4555 Newbear Computing Store Ltd. Birmingham 826 Tel: 021 707 7170 BUCKINGHAMSHIRE Curry's Microsystems. High Wycombe Tel: 049440262 Interface Components Ltd Amersham Tel: 02403 22307 CAMBRIDGE The Avery Computing Co Ltd. Rar Hill Tel 095430991 CHESHIRE Bellard Electronics Ltd. Chester Tel: 0244 380123 Charlesworth of Crewe Ltd. Crewe Tel 027056342 Chandos Products, New Mis Tel New Mills 44344 CR Technical Services, Chester Tel: 0244 317549 Fletcher Worthington Ltd Hale Tel: 061 9288928 Newbear Computing Store Ltd Stoceport Tel: 061 491 2290 Ons Group Ltd Warrington Tel:092567411 Sumlock Software, Warrington Tel: 0925574993 CLEVELAND Hunting Computer Services Ltd. Stockton-on-Tees Tel: 0642 769709 Intex Datalog Ltd. Stockton-on-Tees Tel. 0642 781193 DEVON Crystal Electronics Ltd Torquay Tel: 080322699 Plymouth Computers, Plymouth Tel: 075223042 DURHAM Neecos (DP) Ltd. Darlington Tel 0325 69540 ESSEX Prorleidi Westcliff-on-Sea Tel: 0702 335298 Wilding Office Equipment ford Tel: 01 514 1525 GLOUCESTERSHIRE Gloucestershire Shop Equipment Ltd Gloucester Tel: 005236012 The Computer Shack, Cheltenham Tel. 0242 584343 HAMPSHIRE Advanced Business Concepts New Milton Tel: 0125 618181 Xitan Systems Ltd. Southampton 0703 39890 HEREFORD BMP Little Dewchurch Tel: 021 643 3832 HUMBERSIDE Commercial Systems Ltd. Hull Tel: 0482 20500 Silicon Chip Centre, Grimsby Tel: 0472 45353 KENT Technolink Europa Ltd Tunbridge Wekt: 089232116 Video Services (Bromley Lid Bromley Tel. 01 4608822 LANCASHIRE Nelson Computer Services Rawtenstale: 0706 229125 Sumita Electronics Ltd Preston Tel: 0772 51686 The Micro Chip Shop, Blackpool Tel 0253403122 LEICESTERSHIRE Gilbert Computers Lubenham Tel: 0858 65894 G.W. Cowling Ltd, Leicester Tel 0533553232 Leicester Computing Centre, Leicester Tel 0533 56268 Mays HI-FI Leicester Tel 0533 22212 LINCOLNSHIRE Howes Elect & Autom. Servs Lincoln Tel: 0522 32379 Z.R. Business Consultants Lincoln Tel: 0522 31621 LONDON Bridgewater Accounting Whetstone Tel 014660320 Butel-Comco Ltd., Hendon Tel 01 202 0262 Central Calculators Ltd., London EC2 Tel 01 729 5588 Deans London W8. Tel: 019377896 Digital Design and Development London WITH 013877388 Euro-Calc Ltd., London FC Tel 0122945 Lion Computing Shops Ltd London W1 Tel: 01632 1601 Scope Ltd. London EC2. TH 01 729 3035 Sumlock Bondain Ltd London EC Tel: 01 253 2447 MANCHESTER The Byte Shop, Manchester M1 Tel: 061 2364237 Sumlock Electronic Services Ltd Manchester M3 Tel: 0618344233 MERSEYSIDE Microdigital Ltd. Liverpool Tel 051227 2535 NORFOLK Surmlock Bondain (East Anglia) Norwich 060326259 NORTHAMPTONSHIRE Computer Supermarket. Corby Tel: 0536602571 NORTHERN IRELAND Bromac (UK) CO Antrim Tel: 023831329 OAM Systems Belfastte 0232 494,40 NOTTINGHAMSHIRE Mansfield Business M/C Ltd Mansfield. Tel: 0623 26610 OXFORDSHIRE Oxford Computer Centre, Oxford Tel: 086545172 REPUBLIC OF IRELAND O'Connor Computers Ltd Galway Tel: 0009 61173 Sharptext, Dubin2 Tel 0001 764511 Tommorows World Ltd. Dublin 2 Tel: 0001775861 SALOP SUSSEX Computer Comer Crown Business Centre Shrewsbury Tel 07435978 Eastboumet012367993 SCOTLAND A&G Knight, Phone: 0273 626 Aberdeen 0224630526 M&H Office Equipment Business and Electronics M/C Brighton Tel 97221 Edinburgh Tel: 081226 5494 WALES Esco Computing Ltd Limrose Electronics tid Glasgow. 041 204 1811 Wexthum Tel. 097 883 5555 Micro Centre, Morriston Computer Centre Edinburgh Tel: 0315567356 Swansea Tel. 0792 795817 Micro Change Sigma Systems Ltd Glasgow T0415541462 Cardott fel: 022221515 Microforth, WARWICKSHIRE Dunfermline Tel: 0383 34954 Business & Leisure Moray instruments Ltd Microcomputers Ein Tel:0343 3747 Kenilworth Tel 0926512127 Pointer Business Equipment Ltd. WILTSHIRE Glasgow Tel: 041332 3621 Everyman Computers SOMERSET Westbury Tel 0373 823764 Norset Office Supplies Ltd YORKSHIRE Cheddar 0012184 Bits & PCS STAFFORDSHIRE Wetherby 0226744 W.B. Computer Services, Datron Micro-Centre.tid Cannock Tel: 0543 75555 Sheffield Tel 0742 585490 SUFFOLK Huddersfield Computer Centre, CUJ. Microtek Co. Ltd Huddersfield Tel: 0184 20774 swich Tel: 0473 50152 Omega SURREY Leeds Tel: 0532 204499 3D Computers, Ram Computer Services Ltd Surbiton Tel: 01 3374317 Bradford Tel 074391166 Microlines Ltd Superior Systems Ltd Kingston, Tel: 01 546 9014 Sheffield Tel 0742755005 Wolong Tel 04862 69032 R.M.B. Ltd., Croydon 016841134 Saradan Electronic Services Wallington Tel 01669 9483 Also a selected Lasky's and Wildings Office Equipment Branches Circle No. 102 4 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"MAILBAG MORE LETTERS on Page 7 GAME FOR A NEW MODEL PROGRAM TO PUZZLE OVER Dear Sir, Firstly, can I congratulate you on a, happily, very different magazine which I think is assured of being a long and lasting success. I have a Tandy TRS-80 Model 1 and look forward to keying in Tarot when I have the time. However I am thinking of upgrading to the new Model III machine but am waiting to see whether any games software becomes available for it. Do you know if any software houses are going to specialise in the Model III Tandy. I have quite a library of Model I discs and would like to build up a similar one for the new machine. J. Hodgkiss Harrow Middlesex Editor's reply: The best answer here, is that the Model III does have a conversion facility so that Model I discs can be changed to run on the upgraded machine. The technique is well documented in the Model III's TRS DOS manual. Dear Sir FREE PUZZLE PROGRAM 10 PRINT \"TAKE PENCIL AND PAPER\" 20 PRINT \"EXAMINE CARDS. CALL NUMBERED SIDES 'A' AND UN-NUMBERED SIDES 'B'.\" 30 PRINT \"STARTING AT ZERO (TWELVE O'CLOCK) DEGREES = 1 SUCCESSIVELY NUMBER EACH 45 DEGREES 1 TO 8\" 40 PRINT''MATCH AND LIST MATCHING SYMBOLS. FOR EXAMPLE 1Al = 2B2 AND 4A4\" 50 PRINT \"CONSULT LIST AND MATCH CARDS\" 60 PRINT\"1A5 = 2B3, 2B1 = 4A8, 4A6=3A3, 3A1=1A7\" 70 REM I THINK THIS PROGRAM DESERVES A PRIZE FOR AUDACITY, EVEN IF ITS ONLY A YEAR'S SUBSCRIPTION TO YOUR NEW AND EXCELLENT (GROVEL, GROVEL) MAGAZINE. Peter Brown West Bridgford Nottingham lo se A TALE OF TRIAL AND ERROR To whom it may or may not concern (in other words, to the person who doesn't want to concern him/herself with it, and I don't blame you!). I wish unhappily to tell you that I have here the solution to November's puzzle. Unfortunately, we (my family) won't have any sort of programmable or semi-programmable computer or T.V. game until Christmas, when we get the Atari T.V. game, and thus, I was not able to think up a suitable program to run on the nearest computer, five miles away in Portadown. So I tried trial and error, and then I tried maths, and with a little luck stumbled on the solution at roughly 7.30 (I had bought this magazine at 3.30). What I wish to know is: is it possible to get some sort of wooden spoon? If so, I would like very much for you to send me as much info as you can legally gain from Atari about their T.V. game. But wait for it... in return I will give an honest criticism of YOUR magazine! READY?... (clever eh?) RUN. For a start, though I run the risk of being shot, I think your magazine centres too much on the actual games programs. Secondly, I find only one page for the Bugs, which, I think, are highly entertaining and should be given more room (by the way. the artwork is incredible). Thirdly, the words, \"hardware\" and \"software\" are thrown around like ping-pong balls (what are pseudo random numbers?) To finish, I think your Basic programming guide is a great help to my classes. I do computers for \"O\" level but unfortunately, our computers won't arrive until January. Colin Agnew Lurgan Craigavow Co. Armagh Editor's reply: To all the many people who wrote in with solutions to our giveaway puzzle: congratulations, you did much better than I did! But without a computer program to go with them, I'm afraid the fact that you solved the puzzle (I have heard of solution times ranging from 30 seconds to two hours) is not enough to win you a computer — we need a program listing as well. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 5 "


"THE Video Genie E6300 Series Acorn Atom WITH 16K user RAM plus extended 12K Microsoft BASIC in ROM \"Fully TRS-80 Level Il soft ware compatible \"Huge range of software already available 'Self contained, PSU, UHF modulator, and cassette \"Simply plugs into video monitor or UHF TV Full expansion to disks and printer Absolutely complete just fit into mains plug  16K + VI The most compact 80 column impact graphic-dot printer available at a very compact price by seikosha Graphics, Normal and Double-Width Characters can be printed on the same line. Pine Feed Tractor is equipped as standard. Two Line-Feed Commands (1/6 and 1/9 inch) Print on Plain Paper with two copies Continuous Self-Inking Ribbon for easy handling Centronics type Parallel Interface standard Wide Range of Optional Interface Boards Self-Test Programme standard + VAT Unique in concept $150 the home computer that grows as you do! Special features include *FULL SIZED KEYBOARD *ASSEMBLER Simple to build, simple to operate. AND BASIC A powerful, full facility computer *TOP QUALITY with all the features you would expect. MOULDED CASE Just connect the assembled com *HIGH RESOLUTION puter to any domestic TV and COLOUR GRAPHICS power source and you are ready to begin. cassette interface UHF TV outFull-sized QWERTY keyboard put Full assembly instructions 6502 Microprocessor Rugged injection-moulded case 2K RAM 8K HYPER-ROM 23 integrated circuits and sockets Audio + VAT 120 VAT The Second Generation Personal Computer DAT onal interface Boards  + VAT Aculab TANTEL Highest performance lowest price PRESTEL ADAPTOR Floppy Tape The tape that behaves like a disk. Connects directly to TRS-80 level 2 keyboard. Operating and file handling software in ROM 8 commands add 12 powerful functions to level 2 BASIC. No buttons, switches or volume controls Full control of all functions from keyboard or program. Maintains directory with up to 32 files on each tape for all TRS 80 & Video Genie owners TRS80 version: Video Genie: *48K (8080A) *Full ASCII Upper & Lower * 16 Colours or shades of Grey Character Set * Multiple High Resolution Graphics \"Unique graphical Sound Modes (64 x 71, 129 x 159, 255 x 335) Commands for Smooth Music, *Character mode (60 x 24) random frequencies & *Split Screen Modes enveloped sound! Personal 'RS232/F at only Computer + VAT  Paper Tiger 460   Converts any blw or colour TV to accept Prestel at only  + VAT GPO Jack plug  and 50p per quarter On The Paper Tiger 460 sets new standards by incorporating many features previously only available on units costing much more Features like a specially developed nine wire staggered column\" head which overlaps the dots of each matrix character with just one pass of the printhead giving a dense, high quality print image without reducing the units 160 c.p.s. print speed It also offers a bidirectional logic Seeking device to enhance its print optimisation character istics and wide range of print versatility features such as mono or proportional spacing, auto matic justification programmable honrontal and vertical tabbing and fine positioning for word processing applications Paper Tiger 560  PRINTERS EPSON TX80B (inc. VF & cable)  EPSON MX80T  ANADEX DP8000  ANADEX DP9500  ANADEX DP9501  VIDEO MONITORS 10\" BLACK & WHITE  10\" GREEN SCREEN  Please add  Securicor delivery charge to all computers etc. Plus 15% VAT on all prices The Paper Tiger 560 is the first printer which bridges the gap between convenitonal matrix and daisy wheel types offering quality printing at a relatively low price Full width 132 column printing at 160 CPS a unique nine wire staggered print head, bi directional printing, an inbuilt tractor feed and a host of selectable features set it apart from ordinary matrix printers Plus for even greater versatility a full dot plot graphics facility if supplied which includes a 2K buffer  + VAT MicroStyle Books & bits Books Manuals Diskettes ribbons Paper chips (2114 x 2 1K)  pair. RS232 to Centronics interfaces  etc. etc. A variety of second-hand computer equipment usually available, spares, repairs and service. New Showroom NOW OPEN 29 BELVEDERE, BATH. 2 minutes from town centre Circle No. 103 6 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"MAILBAG CITY BOMB BOMBS OUT If you have a comment or idea for Computer & Video Games we would like to hear from you. Please drop us a line at: Computer & Video Games, EMAP, Durrant House, 8, Herbal Hill, London EC1R 5JD. While we will respect requests for anonymity, names and addresses must be supplied Dear Sir, Having just purchased the first edition of your magazine, I was sorry to find so many faults in your City Bomb program. I have a ZX80 with new RAM and am very new to programming but after much puzzling, I finally got the program to run. Apart from this I found the magazine very good. J. Wilson Harlow Essex Editor's reply: We were ashamed to discover the mistakes that had crept into the City Bomb listing. We were made to do penance by rushing around answering the many queries about the listing after we appeared in the newsagents. For the record: Part of line 160 went mysteriously missing.it should read: 160 IF NOT F = 118 AND F>0 THEN GOTO 700 A bracket escaped from line 560, it should read: 560 LET X=INT (RND 2) +X) As hardly anyone has access to nine computers, this would make nine programs accessible to almost everyone, and I'm sure it would put you \"head and shoulders\" over the other 'zines, who just say: \"the POKEs have to be changed\" but to what?). and would almost certainly ensure your survival in a competitive field I look forward to your Adventure series, especially writing your own. B. A. Moore Bolton Lancs Editor's reply: That is a perfect solution Mr. Moore but I think we would soon run into problems if we tried to produce a table with each of the many computers special Basic commands. However, we have already adopted your idea in our Down to Basic pages, where we are teaching the language with reference to each machine's statements and how to transfer a command from one to another. many computer cassettes now out on the market. I also have a Philips G7000 games centre which I could utilise on your behalf in reviewing their cassettes. Either way can I wish you all the best for the future of a welcome addition to the magazine world. T Greener Rickmansworth Herts A CHANCE TO REVIEW CAUGHT IN THE TRAP Dear Sir, Thank you for a marvellous magazine which I thoroughly enjoyed. I would like to contribute to the\"mag\" myselfand wondered if I could offer my services as a reviewer of games on the ZX81 and possibly the Acorn Atom (after Christmas). I have acted as a reviewer for many of the lesser known games magazines and would welcome the chance to tackle some of the Editor's reply: We have received several letters already from people who would like to help us out with our reviewing of games and TV centre cartridges. We do use outside reviewers and would welcome some additions to our list of helpers. so if you are interested please write and let us know which machines you have access to and we will try to send you some tapes and see what sort of a job you manage. If possible please enclose details of whether you can use disc drives and give us a work and home phone number to allow us to contact you easily. If we get swamped with reviewers for a certain machine then I'm afraid you will be unlucky but until then, we would love to hear from you. Dear Sir I've just seen your new Computer & Video Games, and on the whole I think it is quite excellent. Unfortunately you have fallen into the \"trap\" of those 'zines before you. You have published nine programs for nine computers, but, who, in the home computer hobby circles, has access to nine computers? I'm sure that with a bit of research it would be possible to produce a page of computer dialects. I'm not suggesting you do it with every command, just those that have their own dialect. In addition I suggest a similar thing before each program, giving the alternative POKEs for each machine etc. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 7 "


"INNOVATIVE TRS 80-GENIE SOFTWARE from the professionals Mysterious Adventure LUM, GOLDEN BATON TIME MACHINE ISTIT + & ARROW OF DEATH 00000000000000 Three months ago we introduced the Mysterious Adventure series, a brand new series of machine language Adventures written by Brian Howarth. The first one, The Golden Baton, was greeted with enthusiasm by experienced and beginner Adventurers alike. Now the second and third in the series, The Time Machine and Arrow of Death, are available. The Arrow of Death, although entirely self-contained, is the first of a two part Adventure. The second part will be available early in the new year Mysterious Adventures are available for Models I and III TRS-80 and Models I and Il Video Genie, both on tape (16K minimum) or disk (32K 1 disk minimum). A TRS-80 Model Il version will be available shortly. Any 1 Adventure: On tape ..... .. .06 Any 2 Adventures: On tape .... .....40 On disk ............65 On disk ............ .00 All prices are inclusive of V.A.T. Please add 50p for P. & P. MOLIMERX LTD AJ HARDING (MOLIMERX) 1 BUCKHURST ROAD, TOWN HALL SQUARE, BEXHILL-ON-SEA, EAST SUSSEX. AMERICAN ESPRESS VISA TEL: (0424) 220391/223636 TELEX 86736 SOTEX G TRS-80 & VIDEO GENIE SOFTWARE CATALOGUE .00 [refundable) plus 50p postage. They whom Circle No. 104 8 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"TIONCOMPETITIONCOMP ARE YOU KEEPING THE ALIENS AT BAY? Save wandwo COMPUTER ANGH CARDS TERNS MATCH 1 Do space invaders fight eachother to avoid duty on machines which you're playing? If so, then why let your reputation rest on those cold distant planets inhabited by the green meanies, let your own world into the secret. In conjunction with Taito Electronics we are searching for the fastest, deadliest arcade player this side of Alpha Centuri. No matter which game you excel at, you are eligible to enter and it's very easy to do so. Just turn to the reader reply card, which you will find inside our back cover and fill it in. There are some questions to be answered on what you are looking for in arcade games, so that we can tell the manufacturers and help you to get the kind of games you want. Next fill in the name of the machine which you have accumulated all that expensively won expertise and take the card down to your local pub, club or arcade. Put the best score you can on the machine and ask the pub or arcade owner to sign it and send it off to us. Should you find yourself finishing with a score which is not up to your usual standard, simply try again. If, after you have sent the card in, you manage an even higher score, don't worry, you'll find another card and another chance to enter in our January issue. HERE IT IS SOLVED AT LAST! We will keep a running chart Here it is ... the free first issue on the scores on the 10 most puzzle as you might have despaired popular arcade games which of seeing it, solved! will be published in our Arcade Although judging by the amount of Games section to give the rest of letters and phone calls we had, you something to aim at. many of you have already managed And the three top scorers on to match the four cards as shown the three most popular machines above. who send us back their entry Times for the puzzle ranged from forms by 1 January will be an impossibly \"lucky\" 30 seconds to invited along to take part in our a couple of hours slogging through Grand Arcade Game final. mathematical formulae. Many of you So if you are the only human proudly claimed that you produced a still keeping the multifarious solution without the use of a compuhordes of space still locked ter. inside their machines and off the Our congratulations go out to all streets of Britain, then let the of you who managed to do what we world know who they owe their in the office couldn't, but I'm afraid thanks to. that there are still only three VIC-20 computers up for grabs and these will go to the best programs we THE BUBBL'ESORT receive to solve the puzzle. HAAL But it's not too late for you to enter, the closing date is 13 EPIC STEPSC December when all the entries will \"NORTHDMICRO go forward to be tested against E O ACRER one-another by our judges. LCT FUN ONE Next issue we will be printing our STEERUNTILO program solution for those of you E SANS LOG who could not work out how to start. SCOCSH And if you were one of the many BLOCKT UNIT who complained that you do not yet DR ORIEGO have a computer and so were unable NOE N to enter, then turn to page 11 where O you will find the all-too-easy-to-enter SPACE INVADERS Great Template Competition. BRAINWARE ANSWERS Mercury, Venus and Mars will be the first three planets in line with the sun in our Mind Routines problem. And this astronomical wonder will take place in some 7,341, 802.4870886 days (correct to seven decimal places). The solution to Nevera's Crossword is printed right. We will print the names of the winners next issue. This month's Brainware problems are on page 20. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 9 "


"MICRU COMPUTER: PACKARD HP 85 Scientific and technical professionals favour the HP 85, they are being joined by increasing numbers of business professionals. Find out why the HP 85/ is the professional microcomputer at your nearest Laskys store or write to our Mail Order department for more details. MICRY MICRO MICRC MICROCOMPUTERS MICROCOMPUTERS MICROCOMPUTER MICROCOMPUTE' ZMICROCOMPUT MICROCOMPU MICROCOMP MICROCOM MICROCOT MICROCO MICROC MICROC MICRO MICR MIC KYS is the largest specialist Hi-Fi chain in Europe, in July 1980 they acquired Microdigital an independent, specialist microcomputer store based in Liverpool. Since then specialist microcomputer departments have been set up within selected Laskys stores under the Microdigital name, these have now been renamed Microcomputers at LASKYS The Professional Microcomputer Retailer with 10 Outlets Nationwide & Mail Order BIRMINGHAM 19/21 Corporation Street, Birmingham, B2 4LP. Tel 021-632 6303 Manager Peter Stallard 300 yards from Bullring Centre BRISTOL 16/20 Penn Street, Bristol, BS 3AN Tel 0272 20421 Opening 16th October Between Holiday Inn and C&A CHESTER The Forum, Northgate Street, Chester, CHI 2BZ Tel 0244 317667 Manager: Jeremy Ashcroft Next to the Town Hall MANCHESTER 12/14 St. Mary's Gate Market Street, Manchester, MI 1PX Tel 061.832 6087 Manager Lesly Jacobs Comer of Deansgate NOTTINGHAM (Opening early 1982) 1/4 Smithy Row, Nottingham, NGI 2DU. Tel 0602 415150 Manager Alister Hawkes Within Market Square, Exchange Buildings, Nottingham, SHEFFIELD 58 Leopold Street, Sheffield, SI 2GZ Tel: 0742 750971 Manager. Justin Rowles. Top of the Moor, opposite Town Hall EDINBURGH 4 St. James Centre, Edinburgh, EH1 3SR Tel: 031-556 2914 Manager: Colin Draper East end of Princes Street, St. James Centre KINGSTON (Opening early 1982) 38/40 Eden Street, Kingston, KTI 1 EP. Tel: 01-546 1271. Opposite Main Post Office LIVERPOOL 33 Dale Street, Liverpool, L2 2HF Tel: 051-236 2828 Manager Mark Butler Between the Town Hall and Magistrates Courts LONDON 42 Tottenham Court Road, London WI ORD Tel 01-636 0845. MICROCOMPUTERS Mail Order Microdigital Limited, FREEPOST (No stamp required), Liverpool L2 2AB AT Circle No. 105 10 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"ITIONCOMPETITIONCOMI TEN WINNING WAYS TO USE OUR TEMPLATE TAITO SPACE INVADERS IN YOUR HOME You are now the proud owner of a Computer & Video Games free template and are probably wondering just what miracles can be performed with it. The quick-witted among you will probably already have noticed that the edges on the template are ruler-sharp. Some you think it ought to be a template at all or who among the rich and famous could make best use of this 8\" x 1\" piece of plastic and why? The 10 most imaginative suggestions which we receive by 7 December, will win a Bugs T-shirt and their names and ideas will be entered into the annals of Computer & Video Games' history. ENTER THE GREAT TEMPLATE COMPETITION. SEE THE COMPETITION PAGE IN THIS ISSUE FOR DETAILS. SUPER PRIZES TO BE WON! The judge's decision is quite final and her mind is reasonably unwarped it might be worth bearing this in mind. of you might possibly have gleaned the information that when it is linked up along the bottom of a C&VG page, it reaches from one edge to the other. The reasons for this may soon become clear ... long ago, when this publication was a barely suppressed gleam in our publisher's eye, he pondered long and hard over the problems of keying in computer listings. Realising the difficulties of keeping one's place in a long listing, he decided that what the public was crying out for was a tool a carefully designed precision instrument to help with the keying-in process. He came up with the very template that was attached to your magazine's front cover. So we want you to use the template to key-in our program listings. You might have come up with some other more imaginative uses for it. This is the essence of the Great Template Competition: we would like to know just what you would like to use our template for, whether COMPETITION RULES COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES' many free competitions are open to anyone except EMAP employees and their relatives. Entries to our Mind Routines, Nevera Crossword, Know Your Creature, Great Template Competition, Game of the Year and Arcade of the World competitions, should be sent to: COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1R 5JB. Judges' decisions are final and no correspondence can be entered into. Send entries to Mind Routines on a postcard and in all cases please include a name, address, and where possible, a phone number so we can let you know should you have won. A Taito space invaders machine is up for grabs for the winner of the Know your Creatures competition. Taito Electronics, the name behind the space invaders craze, will make one reader's dream come true — putting an inexhaustible supply of alien terrors, safely locked away in a cocktail table, in his or her living room. If you can tell which machines the three creatures below inhabit, then that space invaders table is looking closer already. All you have to do is write beside each picture what machine you think that particular creature features in. For example: if the first one looks like a Puckman, Pacman or Mazeman inhabitant, then write any of these words beside it and we will know what you mean. Then answer the question below, in not more than 25 words and cut out that part of the magazine, but do not post it yet. Put it with the three creatures we featured in our first issue and in our January magazine you will find the last three creatures to complete your set. When you have named all nine, send the three sections back to us. This gives you time to hunt around your local arcade if there is a creature you are not sure of. The first correct answer out of the hat wins Taito's space invaders table. And if you missed our first issue, then don't despair as we will be showing them again in that January issue. KNOW YOUR CREATURES/2 Name Address RE Telephone: I THINK SPACE INVADERS PROVED SO POPULAR BECAUSE: For details of Computer & Video Games competition rules see page 9. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 11 "


"NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTSN GAIVIES NEWS A RANDOM ADVENTURE London based Shares o el for the The game is supplied by London-based Sharpsoft for the Sharp MZ-80K and costs .25. THE DUNGEONS OF DEATH Among the other new games from Sharpsoft is a logical, test Not only a random dungeon but ated, he is armed and armoured for people who like a financial random monsters await the and then sets off on the quest by challenge. It is called Stockmarintrepid adventurer who dares loading the first level. ket \"F\" and involves amassing as the Dungeons of Death. A list of strangely named monmany stocks and shares of the Ten tortuous levels have to be sters with a toughness rating in highest prices as possible. braved in a 45 minute time limit percentage terms is generated Stockmarket \"F\" costs .85. to win through this graphically and should be memorised if you VAT and postage are included in displayed adventure. are not going to end up fighting both games. The adventurer must first barsomething deadly after running ter with the dungeon master for from a pretty harmless creature, his arrows --magic and the more Treasures are there for the usual wooden variety his taking to reward the bold advencharacteristics are then generturer. THE NEW CHESS CHOICE his arrows -magic and the more Treasures are there for the A FEW PUINIS RHINO A BETTER BET FOR PUNTERS HELTA SKELTA FLATS Chess enthusiasts, who opt for a computerised opponent are having an ever more difficult choice to make. London based Westrak has a new medium priced chess game (itsells for ) tempting buyers with a yen for a \"full-sized chess board in an attractive brown plastic casing\". The chess board has a sensory surface with lights in each square which show when the computer wants to move. The player has to move its piece into the new position. It means you don't have to enter each move via a keyboard just like playing a human, except you can set the skill level of your opponent. Altogether there are 12 different levels, ranging from the learn mode, where the computer will help you along by suggesting a suitable move to make, to good club player standard. If you make illegal moves the computer will also let you know by flashing it's lights at you. Lights also flash when the player's king is in check, and when checkmate is secured it will make another noise. The game sells under the name Westrak CC1 and is available directly from the firm which is based in North London. A sorry fate awaits the computerised figure who walks innocently onto a field in Rhino. He is faced by an animal of the same name with a hasty temper and a rather intimidating horn. Followers of the Turf will find the form card. Once this is done The creature in question tends to \"Sport of Kings\" lovingly repbreeding can take place -Tor a take an instant dislike to anyone roduced in the horse-breeding fee. It should be possible for invading his field and has a few and racing game of Helta Skelta somebody who knows about points to make on the subject. Flats. these things to produce a winLuckily there is a wooded area The aim of the game is to ner. in the field and that is the poor breed horses and then run these Unce interbreeding has taken unfortunate's only chance of thoroughbreds in a race against place the race can begin. Udds escape. He must craftily entice rival horses, placing bets on are calculated by the computer the furious rhino into the trees them to win money. depending on the form of each and try to lose him there. It is similar to that popular horse. Bets are also taken, with Even if he succeeds the board game Totopoly and a fastote slips also provided in the reward is not a pleasant one cinating concept for the Sinclair package. The race is run and the with only a few seconds respite ZX81, but in some ways it winner collects from the other he wanders into another field to requires more work with pen and players. find himself with two beasts to paper than with the keyboard. Our reviewer felt more work lure to a forestv fate! The ZX81 acts as a random needed to be done on the preRhino comes on a tape with selector for most of the time, sentation and that some of the another animal game called Wigwith the information being kept paperwork necessary could be gle. This time there is a smaller, on forms which come with the incorporated in the available 9K but equally dangerous creature games package. Two-six players of unused memory, Horse Racing to contend with. The player has can take part. enthusiasts will soon forgive to guide a snake through the Each contestant starts by namthese niggles though. gaps in a set of parallel walls. But ing their horse, and the computer Helta Skelta Flats comes from allocates various characteristics, London-based Helta Skelta Soft gets more difficult with the gaps for example: good runner or ware and costs . getting more closely spaced. weak legs. This allows the player It runs on a ZX81 with 16K RAM These two games are for to enter the information onto the pack. Acorn Atoms with 10K memory and require the floating point ROM. The cassette is priced at .00 from Liverpool-based BugByte. A second new cassette from the firm contains three games: Squares, in which you have to arrange letters in alphabetical order within a square; the musical memory game Simon; and Parachute which involves landing three parachutists on a platform. This also costs .00 "


"I EW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTS NEI NEWS WHERE THE ENDS ARE REALLY DEAD WORKERS STRIKE IN ALIEN ACTION APPLE PANIE The space labourer is given a tough test of his workrate in the alien-bashing game of Apple Panic Finding the way out of a maze is difficult enough without the hazard of man-eating monsters waiting to gobble you up if you cross their paths. Running on the Commodore VIC-20, Monster Maze is an unusual game without a time limit and could be a big seller. rooms to search through to comThe maze unfolds in five square plete his task. The damsel must sections as you walk through it, be found by working through so you cannot see where you are these rooms, armed with clubs headed-it could be a dead end. which can be used either to beat At the beginning of each round DAME AND THE the beast, or smash down obsa new maze is generated rantructing walls. domly so the player cannot get Only once the hero has slain familiar with a particular one. He the beast can he lead his thankful controls a man at one end of the The age of chivalry and gallantry damsel to the exit. maze using a joystick to follow returns in the maiden-in distress To help light his path our the path moving up, down, right game, Damsel and the Beast. knight is given a number of or left. As the player does not the player takes the part of torches at the outset, which can know the section he is walking our brave hero, sworn to save be used to fend off the beast if into will be the correct path the the wretched but vociferous he attacks. The tally of the clubs game can be frustrating when damsel who is locked in the and torches is kept and displayed you keep finding dead ends. bowels of the wicked beast's bowels of the wicked beast's as each can only be used once. as It sounds easy enough but not castle. Bug-Byte is the supplier of when a hairy monster is guarding A rather tongue-in-cheek this adventure game and it is for the exit and moves towards you adventure, this game sets its use on a ZX81 with 16K RAM pad. intent on killing you. He is a hero a randomly generated 35 The price .50. crafty beast and moves only as the crow flies, so he sometimes walks diagonally and has the nasty habit of hiding in the walls of the labyrinth-lying in wait to take the intrepid explorer unawares With each new maze the number of monsters increases, Captain Kirk and Dr. Spock are creating more hazards to negotiready once again to tackle the ate. What you can do to thwart baddies of the furthest galaxiesthem, is lure the creatures away but this time through the aus from the exit. You have to be pices of a Sinclair ZX81. clever to entice him towards you, The 16K RAM pack gives ZX81 making sure you can side-step owners a Startrek game with him and quickly make your way to more details and more facilities. the exit. It entails all the usual features of Once you have reached round Startrek with the player in conthree with three monsters lurktrol of the Starship Enterprise, ing in the maze for the next stage navigating it and Kirk's crew on a you are given a break with only hazardous mission through one monster to contend with. For space. each round completed you score The Klingons are there in full points. force too, complete with superThis is one of the latest games fast firing lasers which the for the VIC specially imported Enterprise has to avoid. She can from the States by Adda Comdefend herself with the special puters' VIC Centre. With one photon lasers she is equipped other game on the cassette it with. Startrek costs .00 from sells for .95 Bug-Byte of Liverpool. Any attempt to down tools from this worker of the future, results in death by devouring. The labourer is given a shovel and a network of ladders connecting various levels on the screen. His task is to climb the ladders and dig holes which the Apple aliens will unwittingly fall down and hang from-suspended by their feelers. The workman then puts aside all thoughts of teabreak and rushes up to fill in the hole and send the creature plummetting to its death before it can climb to safety. Five beasts inhabit the first \"wall\" and these can be killed by walls and these a fall of just one level. the second screenful of creatures include a variety which can only be destroyed by digging two holes, one under the other, and sending him crashing down two levels. If you succeed in bringing down this second creature, a third needing a three levels fail to kill it appears. There are three lives to start off with, but bonus lives can be gained by the industrious. This time and motion studier's delight is available from Richmond-based SDB software among others for .95. BOLDLY GOING ON THE ZX81 "


"We can all help if we care enough from special Computing Educational M Lowe Mos Crompton Mss. Thornhill Mr Bates Suhaib friend plays cames goldfish bowl table Kitchen Borg McEnroe name shop went com a playing DON Many people regard computers as some form of man-made monster, heralding the advent of an era where machines are the masters of men. The emergence of microcomputers in the mid-seventies has helped to overcome this misguided view of how computers will affect our lives. Each month, Educational Computing shows the tremendous advances being made in the enhancement of computers, particularly micros, as teaching aids. In this annual de issue, Learning to cope computers in special education, we look at the marvellous achievements of many very dedicated people working with disabled and mentally-handicapped children. Tremendous progress is being made in this area, brought about by a mixture of ingenuity, flexibility and determination on behalf of the manufacturers of specially-adapted products, writers of applications software, nurses and teachers putting ideas into practice and the children themselves. In our annual, we look at the latest developments in special education. You can read about the many fascinating applications of microelectronics in this field, what the people involved think and what to the future holds in store. Most important of all, you can find if you can help even in a small way. London Learning to cope computers in special education .50 Now please post to Learning to cope computers in special education, 8 Herbal Hill for .50 (including P & P) Please send me a copy of Learning to cope computers in special education I enclose a cheque/postal order made payable to Educational Computing Name Position Establishment Address EC1 5JB Circle No. 106 14 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCT GAMESNEWS MOORE STARS ON YOUR T.V. PLUMBING THE 3-D DEPTHS COMMANDER REBEL AGAINST AN EMPIRE well as revealing the presence of A computerised rival to celebrity stargazer, Patrick Moore, can guide you through the night sky and its starry wonders. Constellation is the astronomy For sheer atmosphere it is hard aid which will turn your televito beat a good submarine warsion screen into the night sky fare game and the new one comwith the help of an Acorn Atom. ing out for the Atari home comThe view you get on the screen puter has the graphics is of the night sky as seen capabilities to really bring it to through the revealing lense of a life. telescope. Using this computerCalled Submarine Commander, ised guide it is possible to look at it incorporates 3-D graphics. stars from any point in the northRealism is brought out with all ern hemisphere at any chosen the dials and gauges found in a time and date. real submarine, including: air All the stars that appear on pressure, oxygen, speed and the screen can be shown by depth readings. magnitude, constellation or And that atmospheric bleeping number (supplied in a list with sonar, tracks your own vessel's the cassette). Make use of the path with a shadow indicator as zoom facility to get a good close well as revealing the presence of up of selected stars. other enemy submarines in the This program was written for a area. Nascom originally and has only You can take the vessel into just been converted for use on the galaxy has been taken over four levels of skill, so the player battle station mode and fire torthe Atom. Program Power of by a force of ruthless, wicked can work his way through from pedoes at a chosen range and Leeds is behind this version aliens bent on suppressing the inexperienced to advanced. depth. which will cost astrology fanatics inhabitants. Special features of this new To add variety and realism to E7 Alone rebel leader with a game include checking the fuel the submarine's simulation, the Another recent addition to spaceship is the only means of supply and refuelling and having programmer who wrote the Program Power's Atom list is defence and the only hope of to fly a disabled ship, damaged in game for Atari has given the Mazeball. The player's part in this ridding the galaxy of the tyrannian exchange of fire. Control is via player three different views he game is to control a ball which cal invaders. The player takes a joystick can survey bounces up and down the paths control of the rebel and plans his From the Tandy Corporation Firstly, there's the picture of of a maze. strategy against the alien empire. Project Nebula costs .95, the scene below and around the A variety of hazards crop up in Project Nebula is the mission fairly expensive as games go but sub., so you can see hazardous your way which must be avoided undertaken by the player to free the new Tandy has colour graphobjects and possibly creatures by bouncing the ball out of their the galaxy. In the Tandy TRS-80ics and the software is most up which might be lurking in your path. Mazeball retails for .95. colour computer game, there are to date. path. Then, there's the view of the submarine's position in relation to the land, and finally what is in sight when you look through that vital periscope. securely locked up in the wall This will be out at the end of safe. November from Atari's U.K disTake a giant step with two hands will home in using a random Minotaur runs on an Acorn tributors Ingersoll Electronics full of gold and it might take you direction to surprise the intruder. Atom requires 5K with 6K graph. The cost is  and a full review right into the jaws of a greedy The adventurer who dares ics. It is the latest pack out from will follow in a future issue. minotaur. wander into the minotaur's terAcorn's software arm of AcornHe paces the labyrinths of a ritory is armed with a speciallysoft. deep cavern guarding five valudeveloped minotaur detector Two other games are on the able bars of gold which lie wrapwhich warns him when the creacassette, a version of the popular ped up inside a treasure chest. ture is five squares away. The arcade game Puckman called As soon as he senses an extra higher the tone given out by the Snapper, and a sadistic but compresence in his lair, he is on the detector the nearer the creature pulsive game, Babies. The player alert and uses his automatic homis, warning the intrepid explorer must catch babies who are leaping device to track down the to take evasive action. ing for their lives from the top of intruder. Like any human the explorer a burning building. If the tramThe only thing that will stop can only carry two bars at once poline misses three babies, it him moving towards the intruder so he has to keep making trips marks the end of the game. It are walls blocking his path but he back and forth until all five are costs  plus V.A.T. GOLD RAID ON THE LABYRINTH "


"_the vic Adda Computers Ltd., a major supplier of computer systems to industry and business, have opened the Vic Centre in West London. Here you can see, discuss and buy everything to do with the new VIC 20 personal computer-in person or by mail. Hardware, software, technical advice and information is available from an experienced staff of experts. Even if you already own a VIC 20, get on our mailing list to know about new developments. Remember-everything has the backing of Adda's reputation, and there's a full 12-month warranty on all hardware. The Vic Centre is easy to reach-Just off the A40, close to North Acton tube station centre Not just a computer but a whole expandable system TED 732 AT ONLY .95 inc. VAT. Special cassette deck .95 inc.VAT. The VIC 20 is a fully-fledged, easy-to-use computer. It's the core of a great expandable system, with full size keyboard operation, First-time users can work it immediately with plug-in program cartridges, using your own colour TV to get up to 24 colours on screen, and three different sound tones. Or write your own programs in BASIC. The VIC 20 lets you build a system as needs and budget dictate. You can expand its memory to 32k Byte with Plug-in modules, and transfer data to external storage units. So the VIC 20 is more than just a personal computer-and its system will expand to put it even further ahead. VIC 20 Dot Matrix Printer Tractor-feed, 80 character-per-line, 30 characters-per-second printer .95 incl VAT VIC-RS232 INTERFACE VIC-LIGHT PEN Fully implemented (true levels) This high quality light pen works in both RS232C-V24 normal and Hi-Res modes on the Vic BI-DIRECTIONAL INTERFACE allowing simple interaction with the Vic Allows Vic to work as Mainframe Terminal without keyboard entry Drive a Qume Daisywheel or a Paper Tape Easy to program and easy to use. Punch etc. etc. eg. Menu selection. Non-keyboard entry FEATURE This unit contains master power Teaching Games. supply which supports Vic's own supply FEATURE touch sensitive \"Enter\" contacts when carrying Memory Expansions, .35 incl VAT to eliminate accidental entry Cassette Drives, Light Pens, Printers etc .75 incl VAT Vic-MEMORY  VIC-Games Port Adaptor Cable Small size-low cost memory expansion games port plug .95 incl VAT Plugs into Vic and reproduces memory-port. A two into one adaptor for use with both Can be used with other expansions gives a joysticks and light pens. A must for those total of 6k user static ramon Vic. who require full control of games with FEATURE This board allows Vic to move graphics Basic to begin at 1024 (S0400) as in Pet FEATURE low-cost High quality. Robust. and enables the use of HIGH RESOLUTION COLOUR GRAPHICS VIC JOYSTICK Single VIC-TOOL KIT .75 incl VAT Hand-Held joystick units for games use For those who know tool kit on Pet we now available in Pair or Single configuration. have same facilities for Vic N.B. (2 Singles will not work as a pair Renumber. Auto, Append etc. unless modified) .95 incl VAT This may be used with the stack VIC Rom Le Stick .75 incl VAT Switch Board The ultimate joystick. One handed multi-directional super VIC ROM SWITCH BOARD .25 incl VAT sensitive stick with built in fire button An inexpensive unit which plugs direct on to Memory Expansion Port of the VIC and allows the insertion of up to 4 ROMS for games packs or toolkit aids, etc FEATURE. Simple software switch exchanges each pair of VIC software Each of these tapes .95 incl VAT. ROMS into VIC'S ROM space allowing clashing' ROMS to be Codebreaker/Codemaker used You play the VIC or the VIC plays you in this computerised FEATURE. Plug-in zero force sockets are available as optional version of Mastermind extras to help eliminate pin damage to valuable ROMS VIC Seawolf, VIC Trap and Bounce-out 3 fun games, a submarine shoot out, a beat the VIC and an TERMS AND CONDITIONS: All goods sold subject to Adda old favourite pub game. Good games with different skill levels. terms and conditions of sale. Full details available Monster Maze and Maths Hurdler on request, but include: 7 day money back guarantee, Adda A fun game with good colour and sound and a mental arithmetic 12 month hardware warranty. Please allow 21 days for delivery learning game. Highly rated by everyone we have shown it to Allow 7 days for personal cheques to be cleared. Quoted Harder than you think prices are inclusive of VAT aths Hud games a beat the Goods Required Price MAIL ORDER to: Adda Computers Limited, FREEPOST, London, W13 OBR or telephone your order (24 hours a day) to 01.992 9904 quoting your BARCLAYCARD OR ACCESS number payable to Adda Computers Limited for Add .00 p. & p. for orders under .00 Total Please charge my Barclay Access Name: account My account number is Address: Please add my name to your mailing list SHOP ADDRESS: Adda Computers Limited \"Delete as applicable 154 Victoria Road, Acton, London, W3 Tel 01.992 9904 Date OPEN: 10 am-6pm (Tuesday-Friday, 10am-5pm (Saturday) Circle No. 107 16 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"AFTER the hoax perpetrated in the mid 18th century by Von By Max Bramer Kempelen's Chess-playing In 1975, Donald Michie, \"automaton\", the world had to Professor of Machine Intelliwait until the end of the 19th gence at the University of EdinCentury for the genuine article. burgh, published a reconstrucThe Spaniard, Leonardo Tortion of Torres algorithm in res y Quevedo (1852-1936) was an modern \"decision table\" form. early pioneer of dataprocessing Michie states that in the worst and a prolific inventor. He built case, it can take 62 moves for an electro-mechanical device to White to win (compared with a play the basic endgame of King \"theoretical\" maximum of 16 and Rook against King. The machine, which appeared needed from any starting posiin the 1890s, always played tion). White's play is painfully slow and tedious, as the reader White (the stronger side) and will soon discover by choosing one or two starting positions and following through a \"Torres strategy for White in each one. Producing an efficient algorithm remotely comparable to that of Torres in terms of com pactness took almost 90 years further to achieve. The machine is now housed in the museum of the Polytechnic in Madrid. Delegates at a conference on Advances in Computer Chess at Imperial College, London, in April were fascinated by a description by Ken Thompson (of Bell Laboratories) of his special-purpose chess machine named Belle. Belle is an almost frightening example of the power of microinvariably forced checkmate, chip technology. It can generate although frequently not in the a candidate move for considera smallest number of moves tion in just over one twonecessary millionth of a second and Torres' principle motive for examines 160,000 positions per building the machine, was to second. It uses a pre-stored disprove the argument that opening \"book\" with 300,000 posautomation could never be used itions, compared with an estifor tasks which required the mated 200,000 positions in each \"intervention of the mental faculvolume of the Encyclopedia of ties\". Chess Openings. The entire book is scanned in one and a half seconds! The speed with which this machine was developed is also incredible. The first \"light\" design was in February 1980, when the components (approximately 1.700 chips) were ordered. It played its first move in July, won a celebrated simultaneous game with Pfleger in Hamburg in August, won the third World Computer Chess Championship in Linz last autumn with a score of 41/5 and has won several human tournaments since then. Belle now has an official E.L.O. rating of 2140 and could well go much higher. To dispel any feelings of overconfidence about the state-of-theart\" of computer chess in the 1980s, here are the first few moves of two games from last years' first world microcomputer championship in London. Black on both occasions was the aptly named program, Albatross: 1. P-04, P-K3; 2. N-KB3, P-04; 3. N-B3, B-K2; 4. B-B4,Q-03?? 1. P-Q4, P-K3; 2. N-KB3, P-Q4; 3. N-B3, B-K2; 4. P-K4, PXP: 5. NXP, Q-04; 6. N-B3, N-QB3?? I shall return to the subject of computer blunders next month. Here is one of its recent games, an excellent win against a senior U.S. master, Mike Valvo. White M. Valvo Black Belle 3.P-QN3, P-KN3; 4.B-N2, B-N2; 5.P-N3, O-O; 6.B-N2, N-B3: 7.0-0, P-N3: 8.P-K3. B-N2: 9. Q-K2, P-K3; 10. P-Q3, P-Q4; 11. QN-Q2, P-Q5; 12.P-K4, P-K4; 13.N-R4, B-KR3!; 14.P-KB4? PXP; 15.PXP, N-R4!; 16.Q-N4, BXP!; 17.RXB? N-K4; 18. Resigns White loses the Rook and is then the exchange and a Pawn down in a hopeless position. White's 13th move is dubious but Black's combination is surprising, and clearly foreseen on his 13th move (or 13... B-KR3 is inexplicable). After 15 ... N-R4, White cannot avoid losing material The black king is in the same zone as the rook is not in the same zone cu the took and the vertical distance between the black king and the rook is more than one square one square, with the vertical distance between the two kings being more than two squares two squares, with the number of squares representing their horizontal distance apart being The rook The rook moves away horizontally (to the rook file of the other zone) The king moves down one square odd The rook moves one square horizontally The white king moves one square towards the black king The rook moves down one square down one square Torres algorithm, which divided the board into three zones of 3, 2 and 3 ranks. "


"Acorn Atom Acorn Atom ESS 747 T4214241 0+ 0 + 0 + 0 + I NU Imru FLIGHT SIMULATION PROGRAM FOR THE 12K ATOM Written for Bug-byte by a 747 pilot. Accurate simulation of a 747's cockpit display (airspeed, altitude, rate of climb, attitude, flaps, etc., and graphic display of horizontal situation and attitude); allows you to guide your craft to the landing strip. On making your final approach the display changes to a high-resolution 3D representation of the runway coming up to meet you. A real test of skill. Finding the runway is quite a challenge landing safely is even more difficult. If you succeed, you are awarded a skill rating and the chance to take off and try again. REQUIRES FLOATING POINT ROM PRICE ONLY .00 204040 r1==34 ABCDEFGH THE PROGRAM YOU'VE BEEN WAITING FOR! Fantastic machine code chess game for the 12K Atom Features include: split screen (high res. + alphanumerics): many levels of play, casting and en passant: computer plays black or white Supplied on cassette with instructions. PRICE ONLY E9.00. DON'T FORGETOUR PRICES INCLUDE VAT AND POSTAGE VISA ALL PRICES INCLUSIVE TELEPHONE 051 227 2642 BUG-BYTE BUG-BYTE 98-100 THE ALBANY OLD HALL STREET LIVERPOOL L3 SEP 98 100 THE ALBANY OLD HALL STREET LIVERPOOL L3 SEP ACORN ATOM Sinclair ZX81 ATOM INVADERS 12K, Gr. 4 PINBALL 6K, Gr. 2 ATOM BREAKOUT 4K, Gr. 1 FRUIT MACHINE 8K, Gr. 2 STAR TREK 12K, F.P. DISASSEMBLER 2K UFO BOMBER 7K LABYRINTH 12K, Gr. 2A, F.P. LUNAR LANDER 12K, Gr. 4 BACKGAMMON 7K GOLF 7K, F.P. TYPIST 7K LAST RUN 7K WIGGLE + RHINO 10K SQUARES + SIMON + PARACHUTE BK MINI-BREAKOUT + MINI-INVADERS 2K STATISTICS (4 programs) 12K 2114L MEMORY CHIP C12 CASSETTE .00 .50 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .95 .50 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .50 .00 .00 .70 ZXAS MACHINE CODE ASSEMBLER Although many people have expressed disbelief, we assure you that this is a full-specification 280 assembler. Standard mnemonics are written directly into your BASIC program. Code be assembled anywhere in memory Handles labels. FOR 16K ZX81 & BK ROM ZX80-A GIVEAWAY AT ONLY .95 ZXDB DISASSEMBLER/DEBUGGER The perfect complement to ZXAS, giving you the power of very expensive computers. Apart from a full disassembler, the program contains Single step routines, string seach, block transfer, hex loader and many more. Can be held in memory at the same time as ZXAS, still leaving about 8K free. FOR 16K ZX81 & BK ROM ZX80 ONLY .95 MULTIFILE A multi-purpose menu-driven filing system supplied on cassette, together with 3 blank data cassettes and comprehensive documentation describing many applications. FOR 16K ZX81 & SK ROM ZX80 NOW ONLY .50 NEW RELEASES:STARTREK for 16K ZX81. All the usual features: 9 levels of play ONLY .00 THE DAMSEL AND THE BEAST A fantastic adventure game for the 16K ZX81 one of the best 16K games available ONLY .50 ORDER NOW FOR CHRISTMAS 2. Ker ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT & POSTAGE 24 Hour answering service on 051 227 2642 for Access orders. PROGRAM PACK 6 for the 16K ZX818 8K ROM ZXBO Two programs for the expanded ZX81 to keep you entertained for hours 3-D OXO is written in machine code, and is hard to beat. The other is a compulsive adventure game called MARS RESCUE BOTH PROGRAMS FOR ONLY .50 .. made payable to PLEASE SUPPLY: ...... I enclose a cheque PO for . Bug.byte, OR debit my Access card number BREAKOUT THE ATOM: a bi-monthly magazine for Atom users, containing TESTED programs. Covers machine code and BASIC programming. 6 issues for only .50 inclusive, Signature .. NAME .. . ADDRESS This cassette contains two versions of the popular arcade game, both written in machine code, and both fitting into the 1K ZX81. Flicker free fast moving graphics BOTH GAMES FOR ONLY 3.50 BUG-BYTE BUG-BYTE 98-100 THE ALBANY, OLD HALL STREET LIVERPOOL L3 9EP SOFTWARE Circle No. 108 18 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"CGO played in a simple fashion almost like the children's game, \"boxes\". Part of its charm is that in these circumstances the outcome is by no means predictable. But the game can be played at many levels of skill. At the higher levels, Go is revealed as the most subtle and profound board game of them all (including that modern upstart, Chess!). Novo ABCDEFGHJKLMNOPQRST The players have sketched out areas around the edges of the board ton! GO affords many levels of By Allan Scarff programming challenge, from GO is the most popular board game the very simple to the ultimate in the world. If you haven't heard of challenge an intelligent it, that's because most Go is played program. It is possible to in China, Japan and Korea. But Go is develop your Go program one coming west fast. step at a time, each step giving In the UK, Go has found popularity a useful program. with computer professionals, but it The first step is to use your is the advent of the personal comV.D.U. screen as a board. The puter which offers the greatest simple elements of the grid and opportunity to develop computer Go. circles for stones are relatively Perhaps there already exist huneasy to represent. dreds of Go programs? (If so, please Secondly, build in game write and tell me about yours!) recording and playback. No Go Go is, in essence, a very simple player should be without such a game. The playing pieces, called program! It can do for Go what \"stones\", are black for one player video recording did for sport. and white for his/her opponent. Play You can relive your triumphs consists of the contestants placing, and catastrophes. You can in turns, a single stone on the analyse in slow motion the crit intersections of a 19 x 19 grid. Each ical points, perceive the sweep player attempts to surround territory: of events by fast replay, even first sketching it out, then fighting to obtain an entirely different hold it and capture his opponent's perspective by reversing the areas, until the boundaries are complayback pleted. The winner is the contestant And all at the push of a butwith the most territory and captive stones combined. Next you should build in the Go originated in China over 4,000 rules of Go. Two novice players years ago, perhaps as a primitive can then play without fear of abacus, but more likely as a method inadvertent illegal moves. Capof divination. The board can represtured stones should disappear ent the universe, the black and white automatically and illegal stones the two universal elements, moves should be firmly rejected negative and positive, or yin and (with appropriate sound yang. In Japan as well as China, Go effects!) became very popular amongst warNow you can include an riors. It proved ideal for devising evaluation routine to count termilitary tactics. Indeed, in more ritory not only when play has recent times the Vietcong included finished (enabling the program Go in their military training for officto announce the winner) but ers (some would say to devastating also during the game. The difeffect!) ficult part is getting the pro Its simple rules allow Go to be gram to decide sensibly where the individual areas are, before ritory evaluation routine), the they are completely formed. program should accept the The above four steps bring move. If not, it should generate your Go program to the brink of another. Your program will now taking on an active role as a play Go ... very, very badly! player. Avoiding the distracHowever, this in itself is valutions of adding more facilities able for a beginner we all for archiving, displaying and like to beat somebody! It's also evaluating the game of Go, the interesting to see by how much next step is to include a crude you can win. move generator. One method is Improving the play of your Go to use a random number program provides a fascinating generating routine to provide study into the concepts of both candidate moves. If the move Go and programming. Unlike turns out to be legal and does Chess, nobody has ever been not decrease the computer's able to write a Go program that score (as determined by the terplays really well. What takes nwoo ABCDEFGHJKLMNOPQRST At completion: the two players held onto their areas but black gained more territory than white (opponent stones behind enemy lines are captive). the machine an hour to calculate in Chess, would take a millennia in Go. There are just too many possibilities. Advances in programming Go will inevitably rely on new ideas, not on massive computing power. The micro is as suited to this task as the largest machine. Thus micro Go provides the ultimate programming challenge. Allan Scarff's next article. which explains the rules of Go and the first steps to \"Micro\" Go, will appear in our March issue. Next month Alan Hiron looks at programming Bridge. "


"MIND ROUTINES WIN OUR CHAMPAGNE A man's wife normally drives to the station to meet her husband on the 5 p.m. train. Her average speed in m.p.h.. the time in minutes for her journey and the distance in miles from her home to the station are all whole numbers. (Her speed exceeds 15 m.p.h. but never 60 m.p.h.) The train is early, however, it arrives at exactly the same time the wife is leaving home. Since it has gone 5 o'clock the man starts walking at 3 m.p.h. towards home. He meets his wife on the way and they eventually get home at an exact number of minutes to 6 o'clock. The number of minutes the train was early is not an exact Two bottles of champagne are up for grabs on this page every month. The first correct answers out of the hat for both the Mind Routines problem and the crossword on 15 December will have bottles of champagne rushed to them. lan Pedder's Mind Routines problem will test both your ability to think through a puzzle and set it out as a program. These lend themselves to solving by program. If you are more literary minded try Nevera's Crossword and see how you get on See page 9 for the solutions to the first issue's puzzle and crossword.  For details of Computer & Video Games competition rules see page 11. multiple of the number of minutes they were home early. (1) How early was the train? (2) And how far away did she live? NEVERA CROSSWORD HAMIA Across 1. Do they keep 19's player's trousers up? (8,5) 8. A micro often does when a sum is late. (9) 9. Basic function of the sun. (3) 10. Management Information System user of poor quality. (7) 11. Round number. (3, 2) 12. I'm put off the cuff around the PROM. (9) 15. 2 killed by Video. (5) 17. Allay on apple case statement by removing 150 characters. (7) 20. The number system Capone left last month. (3) 21. A set theoreticians level of pay. (5, 4) 22. Just the number for a bubble sort. (8,5) Down 1. Language maker. (9) 2. Basic star. (5) 3. Commands the syntax of a programming language. (5) 4. Mathematical Insertion into plate iron. (13) 5. End of the line from the micro. (3, 4) 6. Game in which to plot together. (5) 7. Evil Function. (3) 12. Step for a king in the hard stuff. (9) 14. Hardware result of 4. (7) 16. Non-alphanumeric character as above. (5) 18. Shut away the plotter won't draw with this. (3, 2) 19. A seaman one who became a micro manufacturer. (5) 20. There's nothing loud when the machine's in this state. (3) 20 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"ndere RSG Make the most of your Sinclair ZX Computer... Sinclair ZX software on cassette. .95 per cassette. S NIEGAMES SOFTWARE ZXBI The unprecedented popularity of the ZX Series of Sinclair Personal Computers has generated a large volume of programs written by users. Sinclair has undertaken to publish the most elegant of these on pre-recorded cassettes. Each program is carefully vetted for interest and quality, and then grouped with other programs to form a single-subject cassette. Each cassette costs .95 including VAT and p&p) and comes complete with full instructions. Although primarily designed for the Sinclair ZX81, many of the cassettes are suitable for running on a Sinclair ZX80-if fitted with a replacement 8K BASIC ROM. Some of the more elaborate programs can be run only on a Sinclair ZX Personal Computer augmented by a 16K-byte add-on RAM pack. This RAM pack and the replacement ROM are described below. And the description of each cassette makes it clear what hardware is required. 8K BASIC ROM The 8K BASIC ROM used in the ZX81 is available to ZX80 owners as a drop-in replacement chip. With the exception of animated graphics, all the advanced features of the ZX81 are now available on a ZX80-including the ability to run much of the Sinclair ZX Software. The ROM chip comes with a new keyboard template, which can be overlaid on the existing keyboard in minutes, and a new operating manual. 16K-BYTE RAM pack The 16K-byte RAM pack provides 16-times more memory in one complete module. Compatible with the ZX81 and the ZX80, it can beused for program storage or as a database. The RAM pack simply plugs into the existing expansion port on the rear of a Sinclair ZX Personal Computer. Cassette 1-Games For ZX81 (and ZX80 with 8K BASIC ROM) ORBIT your space craft's mission is to pick up a very valuable cargo that's in orbit around a star SNIPER you're surrounded by 40 of the enemy. How quickly can you spot and shoot them when they appear? METEORS-your starship is cruising through space when you meet a meteor storm. How long can \" you dodge the deadly danger? LIFE-J.H. Conway's \"Game of Life' has achieved tremendous popularity in the computing world. Study the life, death and evolution Study the life death and evolution patterns of cells. WOLFPACK your naval destroyer is on a submarine hunt. The depth charges are armed, but must be fired with precision. GOLF-what's your handicap? It's a tricky course but you control the strength of your shots. Cassette 2-Junior Education: 7-11-year-olds For ZX81 with 16K RAM pack CRASH-simple addition-with the added attraction of a car crash if you get it wrong. MULTIPLY-long multiplication with five levels of difficulty. If the answer's wrongthe solution is explained. TRAIN-multiplication tests against the computer. The winners train reaches the station first. FRACTIONS fractions explained at three levels of difficulty. A ten-question test completes the program. ADDSUB-addition and subtraction with three levels of difficulty. Again, wrong answers are followed by an explanation. DIVISION with five levels of difficulty. Mistakes are explained graphically, and a running score is displayed.\" SPELLING-up to 500 words over five levels of difficulty. You can even change the words yourself. Cassette 3-Business and Household For ZX81 (and ZX80 with 8K BASIC ROM) with 16K RAM pack TELEPHONE-set up your own computerised telephone directory and address book. Changes, additions and deletions of up to 50 entries are easy. NOTE PAD-a powerful, easyto-run system for storing and retrieving everyday information. Cassette 5 Junior Use it as a diary, a catalogue, a Education: 9-11-year-olds reminder system, or a directory. BANK ACCOUNT-a For ZX81 (and ZX80 with 8K BASIC ROM) sophisticated financial recording system with comprehensive MATHS-tests arithmetic with documentation. Use it at home to three levels of difficulty, and gives keep track of where the money your score out of 10. goes, and at work for expenses, BALANCE-tests understanding departmental budgets, etc. of levers/fulcrum theory with a series of graphic examples. Cassette 4-Games VOLUMES-'yes' or 'no' For ZX81 (and ZX80 with 8K answers from the computer to a BASIC ROM) and 16K RAM pack series of cube volume calculations. LUNAR LANDING-bring the AVERAGES what's the average lunar module down from orbit to a height of your class? The average soft landing. You control attitude shoe size of your family? The average and orbital direction but watch the pocket money of your friends? The fuel gauge! The screen displays your computer plots a bar chart, and flight status-digitally and graphically. distinguishes MEAN from MEDIAN. TWENTYONE-a dice version BASES-convert from decimal of Blackjack (base 10) to other bases of your COMBAT-you're on a suicide choice in the range 2 to 9. space mission. You have only 12 TEMP-Volumes, temperatures missiles but the aliens have -and their combinations, unlimited strength. Can you take How to order 12 of them with you? SUBSTRIKE-on patrol, your Simply use the order form below, frigate detects a pack of 10 enemy and either enclose a cheque or give subs. Can you depth-charge them us the number of your Access, before they torpedo you? Barclaycard or Trustcard account CODEBREAKER-the Please allow 28 days for delivery. computer thinks of a 4-digit number 14-day money-back option. which you have to guess in up to 10 tries. The logical approach is best! MAYDAY in answer to a distress call, you've narrowed down the search area to 343 cubic kilometers of deep space. Can you find the Sinclair Research Ltd, astronaut before his life-support 6 Kings Parade, Cambridge, system fails in 10 hours time? Cambs., CB21SN. Tel: 0276 66104. hories The logical approach is best! S inc lair ZX SOFTWARE Please print Item price Total To: Sinclair Research, FREEPOST 7, Cambridge, CB2 1YY Please send me the items I have indicated below. Qty Code Item Cassette 1-Games Cassette 2 Junior Education Cassette 3-Business and Household Cassette 4-Games Cassette 5 Junior Education *8K BASIC ROM for ZX 80 *16K RAM pack for ZX 81 and ZX80 *Post and packing (if applicable) SON 23.95 3.95 (3.95 3.95 .95 C19.95 249.95 22.95 Total *Please add .95 to total order value only if ordering ROM and/or RAM I enclose a cheque/PO to Sinclair Research Ltd for Please charge my Access/Barclaycard/Trustcard no. *Please delete as applicable. Name: Mr/Mrs/Miss L Address: LLLLLLLL CVG 12 | Circle No. 109 "


"Sinclair ZX81 Personal Compu the heart of a system that grows with you. Kit: 20.4.62 1980 saw a genuine breakthrough the Sinclair ZX80, world's first complete personal computer for under . Not surprisingly, over 50,000 were sold. In March 1981, the Sinclair lead increased dramatically. For just .95 the Sinclair ZX81 offers even more advanced facilities at an even lower price. Initially, even we were surprised by the demand over Higher specification, lower price 50,000 in the first 3 months! how's it done? Today, the Sinclair ZX81 is the Quite simply, by design. The ZX80 heart of a computer system. You can reduced the chips in a working add 16-times more memory with the computer from 40 or so, to 21. The ZX RAM pack. The ZX Printer offers ZX81 reduces the 21 to 4! an unbeatable combination of The secret lies in a totally new performance and price. And the ZX master chip. Designed by Sinclair Software library is growing every day. and custom-built in Britain, this Lower price: higher capability unique chip replaces 18 chips from With the ZX81, it's still very simple to the ZX80! teach yourself computing, but the New, improved specification ZX81 packs even greater working Z80A micro-processor-new capability than the ZX80. faster version of the famous Z80 It uses the same micro-processor, chip, widely recognised as the best but incorporates a new, more powerever made. Kit or built-it's up to you! ful 8K BASIC ROM the 'trained  Unique 'one-touch' key word intelligence of the computer. This entry: the ZX81 eliminates a great You'll be surprised how easy the chip works in decimals, handles logs deal of tiresome typing. Key words ZX81 kit is to build: just four chips to and trig, allows you to plot graphs, (RUN, LIST, PRINT, etc.) have their assemble (plus, of course the other and builds up animated displays. own single-key entry. discrete components) a few hours' And the ZX81 incorporates other  Unique syntax-check and report work with a fine-tipped soldering iron. operation refinements the facility codes identify programming errors And you may already have a suitable to load and save named programs immediately. mains adaptor 600 mA at 9V DC on cassette, for example, and to Full range of mathematical and nominal unregulated (supplied with drive the new ZX Printer. built version). scientific functions accurate to eight Kit and built versions come comdecimal places.  Graph-drawing and animated plete with all leads to connect to display facilities your TV (colour or black and white)  Multi-dimensional string and and cassette recorder. numerical arrays.  Up to 26 FOR/NEXT loops. Randomise function useful for games as well as serious applications.  Cassette LOAD and SAVE with named programs. 1K-byte RAM expandable to 16K bytes with Sinclair RAM pack. . Able to drive the new Sinclair printer. Advanced 4-chip design: microNew BASIC manual processor, ROM, RAM, plus master Every ZX81 comes with a comprehensive, specially written chip unique, custom-built chip manual a complete course in BASIC programming, from first principles to complex programs replacing 18 ZX80 chips. "


"puterZTOK RAM 0000000 48 PRINT AT 10,%;\": --50 FOB 10 TOT 1822 9988 REM 9989 FOR 090 FOR 1992 POKE Available nowthe ZX Printer for only .95 Designed exclusively for use with the ZX81 (and ZX80 with 8K BASIC ROM), the printer offers full alphanumerics and highly sophisticated graphics. A special feature is COPY, which prints out exactly what is on the whole TV screen without the need for further intructions. At last you can have a hard copy of your program listings -particularly useful when writing or editing programs. And of course you can print out your results for permanent records or sending to a friend. Printing speed is 50 characters per second, with 32 characters per line and 9 lines per vertical inch. The ZX Printer connects to the rear of your computer using a stackable connector so you can plug in a RAM pack as well. A roll of paper (65 ft long x 4 in wide) is supplied, along with full instructions. 16K-byte RAM pack for massive add-on memory. 11 How to order your ZX 81 by cheque, postal order, Access, BY PHONE Access, Barclaycard or Barclaycard or Trustcard. Trustcard holders can call EITHER WAY please allow up to Designed as a complete module to 01-200 0200 for personal attention 28 days for delivery. And there's a fit your Sinclair ZX80 or ZX81, the 24 hours a day, every day. 14-day money-back option. We want RAM pack simply plugs into the BY FREEPOST use the no-stamp you to be satisfied beyond doubt existing expansion port at the rear needed coupon below. You can pay and we have no doubt that you will be. of the computer to multiply your data/program storage by 16! To: Sinclair Research Ltd, FREEPOST 7, Cambridge, CB2 1YY. Order Use it for long and complex Qty Item Code Item price Total programs or as a personal database. Sinclair ZX81 Personal Computer kit(s). Price includes Yet it costs as little as half the price ZX81 BASIC manual, excludes mains adaptor 12 49.95 of competitive additional memory. Ready-assembled Sinclair ZX81 Personal Computer(s). With the RAM pack, you can Price includes ZX81 BASIC manual and mains adaptor 69.95 also run some of the more sophistiMains Adaptor(s) (600 mA at 9 V DC nominal unregulated). 10 8.95 cated ZX Software the Business & 16K-BYTE RAM pack. 49.95 Household management systems Sinclair ZX Printer. 49.95 for example, BK BASIC ROM to fit ZX80. 17 19.95 Post and Packing. 2.95 Please tick if you require a VAT receipt TOTAL  \"I enclose a cheque/postal order payable to Sinclair Research Ltd, for  *Please charge to my Access/Barclaycard/Trustcard account no. *Please delete/complete as applicable. LL L Please print Name: Mr/Mrs/Miss LLLLLLLLLLLLLL LUI Address: LLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLL LLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLL 6 Kings Parade, Cambridge, Cambs., CB2 1SN. FREEPOST -no stamp needed. CVG12 Tel: (0276) 66104 & 21282. Circle No. 110 Sinclair ZX81 "


"TVGAMES CENTRES TVGAMES CENTRES TVGAMES SHOOT-OUT, CHESS AND DRAUGHTS KNOCK-OUT Perfect your marksmanship in a the part of one of the cowboys shoot out to the death in the on the screen, who is in a gundesert sands of the wild west. fight and must save his skin by BOXING That's the theme of one of the being quick off the draw. new games for the Acetronic Two other additions for the Landing a K.O. blow in the boxing MPU1000 home video games Acetronic range include chess ring is an exhilaration few of us centre. Either play against the and draughts which follow the will ever know but it is possible computer or take on a friend or format of traditional computer to relive some of the cut-andfoe in this captivating game cal-ised games and sell for the same thrust of the sport in the led Shoot Out. price as Shoot Out. Chess and new Intellivision cartridge. The tension and excitement of draughts are available direct from Boxing is now added to the those lawless days of gunfights Ace or through the firm's dislong list of Intellivision sports are all there for .95. You take tributors in the UK. cartridges which show off the machine's graphic qualities to best effect. It's \"seconds out\" as you control one of the boxers fighting for survival in a tournament match. A clock on the platform stage in the and penalties given for below righthand section of the screen the-belt punches. The winner is ticks off the seconds of each the player with the most points round and the entire picture is at the end of a bout or a win from dealt with in the usual perspeca knock-out. tive. Boxing is available from the As with most of the Intellivi. Intellivision Major League Sports sion games arms and legs bend Network range through UK disin the right places so the figures tributors Ace (Advanced Conappear to be really moving and sumer Electronics) of Wembley not as if they are suffering from a Its retail price is marked at severe case of arthritis of the .95. joints. Space Armada is of the space Points are scored for every invader version for the Intelliviblow each of the players strike sion. It has some graphically interesting aliens and costs There's no time to hang around .95. Otherwise the tactics are in in the sport of Drag Racing and if the time-honoured tradition. you like your thrills short and swiftly with perfect changes tak. sharp, you should enjoy the new DRAG RACING AND LASER BLAST ing place that split second before television version. the red revs line moves into When the game is mastered, a blow-out mode. reverses the usual alien descendto give them the best chance of race can take as little as six to It can make frustrating learning from the heavens role. hitting you. When all three laser seven seconds and from then ing as itchy fingers push too Satisfyingly brilliant laser stations have been destroyed, on it's just a question of how early or too long in the search for flashes illuminate the night sky the next three roll on to the many .01s of a second you can a good time. The sound effects as you guide your fleet of flying screen. You have just three shave off your best time. are convincing but the graphics saucers over the planet's reserves to call on but have the Mastering this cartridge is a are all too ordinary and capture defences. additional advantage of being real test of reactions and under: none of the thrills and colour of The defences come in threes. able to pilot your wrecked ship standing. Two cars wait on a the real thing. They roll along the ground on to the defenders. Further reinscreen, revving away as the starThe cartridge is produced for beneath your ships and home in forcements are available with ter counts down from 10. As he the Atari by US firm Activision swiftly with their deadly fire. each score of 10,000 and after reaches \"one\" it's both fingers, and distributed over here by Shots from your own saucer some initial low scores, a dedion the accelerator button and a Computer Games for .95. are just as lethal as you soar cated player can reach this score swift change into first gear, sec. Also new out from Activision above the ground forces for the loss of each life -and so ond, third and fourth, follow is Laser Blast, the game which unfortunately, at just the height keep going ad-infinitum. Four skill levels and an asking price of .95 but perhaps too easy to master. There's no time to hang around NO TIME TO HANG AROUND the time-honoured tradition. *** KOL PERU "


"S CENTRES TV GAMES CENTRES TV GAMES CENTRES  WHEN BARONS SQUABBLE WARLORDS TUNING UP ON YOUR PHILIPS KEYBOARD and treble staves with the note's YOUR FLIPPER CAROLS FOR CHRISTMAS In feudal times the all-powerful For the musical minded there is a full instruction leaflet telling you barons ruled their fiefdoms from new game out to teach you to exactly what notes you can use castle Strongholds and any you manoeuvre the protective tune in and play by ear. to write a tune. It also contains squabbles were resolved by shields against the fire balls Called Musician, the pack tunes which you can program in seige using the most awesome which bounce between the casincorporates an overlay keyboard if your creative/streak is lacking. weapons of the day the tles. They have to break down which is put on top of original Three of those included are Sur catapulted firebomb. the walls of your castle before keyboard to look like piano keys. le Pont d'Avignon, Muss I'Denn This is the backdrop to the they can aim a shot at your war. It is out now for the Philips and Limehouse Blues latest Atari TV video game lord. A direct hit puts the castle G7000 T.V. games centre The Musician retails for double centre cartridge called Warlord, out of the game. Even if you know nothing the usual price of Videopacs at which takes players back to it's the best of five games in about playing or writing music about . those lawless days which to conquer your rivals. The this cartridge will present no Four sons of King Frederick pack is written with three main problems. The notes that you SHARDEN TID were banished because of their variations, the number of players, strike on the piano keyboard are evil ways and from then on they the speed of the balls and the displayed on the screen on bass were constantly at each others shields. throats battling one another for One to four players can play, or name written underneath. Simuldominance of a territory. The you can play doubles. The ball taneously the sound of the note obiect of the game is to re-enact speed can be either fireball or is played when you press the those battles and beat the other lightning ball and the shield has a key. So you soon recognise the PINBALL princes into submission. dual function. You can either use note and its correct pitch. The player takes the part of it to ricochet balls or you can use You can program in your own Pinball players can sharpen up one of the four princes defending it to catch opponents balls and melodies and edit them if you their flipper skills at home before his castle and attacking his release them at high speed. This dislike the final outcome. There going out and impressing their brothers' tridge costs .95 from are also record and playback local arcade users. Using the paddle controller distributors, Ingersoll. facilities for you to check what Database has just added this tune you have written. game to its list of cartridges Coming with the Videopac is a available this Christmas. Pinball's rules are faithful to most MUSICAL MEMORY AND EARTH INVADERS arcade games the player striving to keep the ball in play for as Musical Memory will give carol long as possible to build up the lovers an extra bit of seasonal highest score. flavour this Christmas. With eight different skill verThere are 36 different notes sions of Pinball on the cartridge for the musically gifted to play it gives players of all capabilities with, to either invent your own a chance to have a go. In all tunes or recreate old favourites variations you have five \"balls\" to already written into the play with but games can either game's memory is that well be played with single or double known ditty, When the Saints Go flippers. Marching in. Four of the games are more If the key of the melody difficult because they are faster doesn't sound quite right, it and and the difficulty increases when the speed, can be altered. The you pass the 200 points mark. composer can see the music as Then the flippers get further and he writes it on the five bar further apart leaving a larger gap staves, making alterations and for the ball to escape through. editing the tune as he goes No tilting and no cheating in along. this game! If you keep your Adding an extra dimension to software range costs  and is Database users to be too slow finger constantly on the \"fire\" the game are a couple of varia obtainable directly from the and too easy to master. The button so that the flippers are tions including a version of the manufacturers, Voltmace, or from renamed game, Earth Invasion is flying all the time, you will only popular musical memory game, the firm's distributors. much faster. The waves of aliens decrease your score quickly. Simon with both four and six An improved version of space increase their speed across the You can get hold of a Pinball colour options. invaders has also been brought screen more quickly. Apart from cartridge directly from This new addition to the out. The original version, called the extra speed the game conHertfordshire-based Voltmace for Database T.V. game centre's Alien Invasion, was said by tains the same features, . . COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 25 "


"ELECTRONIC GAMES COLOUR CARTRIDGE GATA DATABASE T.V. GAME A.V. GAME E ATARI SPACE SPACE INVADERS T.V. GAME SEMI-PROGRAMMABLE TV GAME FULLY PROGRAMMABLE CARTRIDGE TV GAME 14 Cartridges availableC CO Normal Price  86 NOW REDUCED TO: VAT Adaptor Handheld invaders Games available 19.95 Invaders Cartridges available to fit ATA RADONACETROVCIS G7000 The most popular TV Game on the market with a range of over 40 cartridges including SPACES INVADERS with over 112 games on one cartridge  .45 NOW REDUCED TO ME VAT CHESS COMPUTERS TELETEXT ADD-ON ADD-ON $199 ADAPTOR THE RADOFIN TELETEXT ADD-ON ADAPTOR We carry a range of over 15 different Chess computers: Electronic Chess .95 Chess Traveller [39.95 Chess Challenger 7 79.00 Sensory 8 119 00 Sensory Voice .00 SPECIAL OFFERS ORACLE television information services THIS NEW MODEL INCORPORATES 8888 ions MANY UNITS ARE COVERED BY THE EXCLUSIVE SILICA SHOP 2 YEAR GUARANTEE Normal Price 245 NOW 135 00 SARGON 25 BORIS 25 Normal Price .70 NOW 199.95 Meets CIA broad c Push button channel change Unnecessary to remove the unit to watch God t urband New SUPERIMPOSE News MATTEL T.V. GAME SPEAK & SPELL ADDING MACHINE OLYMPIA HHP 1010 Normal Price 249 95 NOW REDUCED TO: NOW REDUCED TO  24 TUNE ELECTRONIC DOOR BELL Normal Price (5721 .50 Normal Price (1970 NOW REDUCED TO: 1230 VAT Fast PRINTER econd, 10 digit capacity this unique learning hid Fully automatic features and scoring Additional word modules available to extend the range of control and volume ControlSelect the most appropriate ture for your visitor with appropriate tunes for different times of the year $199.95 soon to convert the 2 .95 VAT MATTEL to m puter with TK HAM expandable and programme in Microsoft Other access will be ava i n the HAND HELD GAMES EARTH INVADERS THE OLYMPIA — POST OFFICE APPROVED TELEPHONE ANSWERING MACHINE PRESTEL VIEWDATA WITH REMOTE CALL-IN BLEEPER This telephone answering machine is manufactured by Olympia Business Machines, one of the largest Office Equipment manufacturers in the UK is fully POST OFFICE APPROVED and will answer and record messages for 24 hours a day with your remote call in bleeper you can receive these messages by telephone wherever you are in the world. The remote cailin bileeper activates the Answer Record Unit which will at your command repeat messages, keep or erase them and is activated from anywhere in the world or on your return to your home or office The machine can also be used for message referat you have an urgent appointment, but are expecting an inportant call simply record the phone number and location where you can be reached with optional extra bleepers 13 cach this facility can be extended to colleagues and members of the family Using a C90 standard cassette you can record as many 45 messages ens chase home to the only way of Coping for .95 Prestel The ACE TELCOM VOX1000 Prestel View data adaptor simply plugs into the sea socket of your television and enables you to receive the Prestel Viewiata service HAND HELD GAMES GALAXY 1000 seconds long and the incoming message up to 30 seconds long The machine is easy to install and comes with full instructions its sily wired to Our Junction box with the spade connec o provided or alternatively plug can be provided to plug intojack socket Mos portant of course the fact that The price of 135 tine VAT includes the machine an extra light remote callin Bleeper the microphone message tape AC mains adaptor The units 946 x2 and is fully guaranteed for 12 months The telephone can be placed directly on the unit odional desk Space is required The danneration Galaxy in the unders have regrouped and have seemingly endless of cecat with plavesanais Full Post Ofice .95  SPECIAL .85 FOR FREE BROCHURES -TEL: 01-301 1111 Silica Shop SILCA SOCUP NOTE The Name CHE DIT CARDS WELCOME SILICA SHOP LIMITED DEPT NO. SHOP 14 The Mews Hatherley Road Sidcup. Kant DA14 4DX Telephone: 01-301 1111 or 01 309 1111 26 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES Circle No. 111 "


"MAL FUNCTION SNAG JNR SCREAMING FOUL UP T. HITCH IT'S NEARLY TIME. WE'D BETTER START PACKING UP NOW... O.K. SNAG JNR IS FETCHING SCREAMING FOUL UP100 100.00 TAPPITY TAP: ITs ALL GO IN THE BUG'S MICRO COMPUTER BINARY SNAKES CRAY QUICK.' IT STARTS IN A SECOND TECHNO STRUGGLE! SNARL! STRUGGLE NOT DRAC RULES DISTY OK! BINARY SNAKE ADDRESS BUS 20 PM 1010 NAP! ANKETT SORTERTREND ** MISSIE AH BEJABBERS! WELCOME TO ANOTHER EDITION OF BLANKETTY BLANK. TONIGHT'S GUESTS INCLUDE LORRAINE (LUTON. AIRPORT) CHASE AND COMEDIAN BILL GRUNDY.. SNAP! WAVK BLISS! UPS A DAISY! MEANWHILE TOTALI HUKMUR! ...WELL LORRAINE. WHAT DID THE OIRISHMAN SAY WHEN NE WAS OFFERED. POTATO?.. .... .. IT ALWAYS CUTS OUT AT 80 CLOCK!!! UM!....... OI'D RATHER AVE A GINNIS.... UMMM. OI DONT FINK OI SPELT THAT RIGHT!!!! HMM! FUNNY! THERE MUST BE SOME THING WRONG WITH THIS TIV INTERFACE CABLE... COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 27 Circle No. 111 "


"What would I dowith a computer? MAJONES AIM TO 33 REFERENCE DATE BALANCE NEWTOWN POWS NEWTOWN 2305 END OF STATEMENT PAESS ANY KEY TO CONTINUE Passau de fome in Manager your Noutati Inchi Fuschiando MONDAY 1000 AM GO TO POST OFFICE 1100 AM COFFEE WITH GE DEFINITIVES STAMPS 1934 KGV PHOTO AO MODA ?O100 1200 AM LUNCH 7900   \" puhuts of futur e C o llection Testherent from nome W YOUR A Calactic COMPUTER Computing Personal Computer COMPUTER  keyunds the memorability bys in time 5.39.95 require the unit The first personal computer that only adds uptode that only  ZX81 DEOAIE ASOGN MAJA JUAAVBNM You'll be surprised how much you can do with a personal computer and even more surprised at how little it costs. We made it our business to find not only the best-value-for-money computer on the market, but also the best books to enable you to progress from a beginner to an advanced user. And W.H. Smith is the only retail chain where you can buy the incredible ZX81. C12 The Sinclair ZX81 is a masterpiece of design. Which is Computer why it can carry out programs you'd normally expect from more Cassette expensive computers. Although the ZX81 is fast and powerful, it's also simple to use. C12 Computer Cassette Within hours you can learn to run programs and within a week you could be writing your own complex programs. All you need is your own TV (any model that receives BBC2) and a cassette player when using pre-programmed cassettes. And W.H. Smith have a range available from .95 each So take your first steps in computing at W.H. Smith and make your life easier to run. assette C12 Computer Cassette WHSMITH Prices correct at time of going to press Available at the branches only Altcham Basildon Bedford Birkenhead Birmingham Bolton Boumemouth Bracknell Bradford Broadway Bradford Kirkete Brent Brighton Bristol Broadmead Bromley Bur a Humley Camden Yard Canterbury Cand Caride Chatham Chelmsford Chester Chichester Chippenham Colchester Coventry Crawley Croydon Darlington Derby Doncaster Ein Broadwayt ourenbuch ham ter Gloucester Guildfond Hammerumitanley Harrogate Hartlepool Hemel Hempstead Holborn Hull ford Iwich Kenton Kidderminster King Lyn Kingway Leamington Spa Leeds Leicester Letchworth Lewisham Lincoln Liverpool Loughborouch Lowestoft Luton Macclesfield Maidenhead Maidstone Manchester Middlesbrouch Monkeys Newcastle Net Ao Northampton Norwich Notichum L ate Nottingham Victor O ndo Osord Peterborough Plymouth Pontiac Poole Portsmouth Putney Reading Richmond Romford S unSheffield Slouch Solihull Southampton Southend Staffond San Steven Stockport Stockton Stratford East Streatham Sunderland Sutton Cold Swindon T on Terond Watford Winchester Woking Wolverhampton Wood Green Wolwich Worcester Worthing Wrexham York Circle No. 112 28 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"SCOTT Adams is the name behind a whole library of Adventures and his games have introduced many enthusiasts to micro adventuring. My own introduction was his Adventureland on a friend's machine. It is set in a swampy forest near a sunny meadow and progresses underground to a maze of pits. Various things lying about the place seem rather innocuous, but as the game develops a feeling grows that most objects have a purpose, and that some very devious thinking will be needed to find uses for, among other things, an empty wine bladder and patches of oily slime! The large dragon, peacefully sleeping in the meadow, begs a good hard kick to wake him up is he really as impervious to attack as he seems? And the \"No Swimming\" sign by the lake is positively urging you to take a dip but with what consequences? The object of the game is to collect and store 13 treasures. To say more would be to give away too much. So I'll merely say \"Bunyon\" and vibrate on to another Scott Adams' game Pirate Adventure. A strong theme runs through this game which is littered with bottles of rum, treasure chests, anchors and a parrot, which is not only excessively greedy but very loquacious. The story begins in the player's London flat, from where, after some chilling discoveries, it moves to Pirate Island. There it soon becomes apparent that you are being urged to do something without being told quite what. Pirate is not as deep as Adventureland and the machine's memory is not so fully packed. But this is more than offset by a delightful sense of humour running through the game. climaxed by a cruel and dramatic hoax. Both these games are available on the 16K TRS-80 and Video Genie; the 16K Exidy Sorcerer; 24K Apple 2 and Apple 2 Plus. The Adventure series by Scott Adams, currently comprises 10 A swift glance down most software catalogues will reveal a veritable hoard of Adventure games. They compete with Space Invader and Asteroid type games for the top-of-the-micro-pops. Which you prefer depends on whether you like to test your reactions and control, or are the mystery-loving puzzle-solver type (these are by no means mutually exclusive) If you are new to Adventure and wondering which to try first, or if you are just wondering which to buy next, I will be helping to guide you through the Adventure jungle each issue. A brief rundown of what to expect from each Adventure, will help you select tapes and discs to suit your taste a little less randomly. games. All games are written in machine code and have a \"save game\" feature enabling the current state of the game to be recorded and reloaded later. Each month I shall be bringing you tips on how to write an Adventure program in Basic. In order to do this you will require a machine with at least 8K RAM and capable of holding many string variables, arrays (single dimension will do). It will also need string manipulation statements like: MID$, LEFT$. RIGHT$, LEN, plus the ability to concatenate. Having devised your plot and drawn a map the next step is to number the locations from zero, and draw up a table. For simplicity I have shown a five location map in Figure 1 and the corresponding table in Figure 2. All exits in the example are compass bearings, hence the exit column entry for location 0 shows \"ES\" --East S(outh) leading to destinations in the corresponding positions of the destination column entry, of locations 1 and 2 respectively. If more than 10 locations were to be used, double figures would be needed in the destination column. Type the contents of the table, omitting the number column, row by row into data statements. Part of your program will now look like this: DIM L$(4), E$(4), D$(4) For I = 0 TO 4: READ L$(I), E$(I), D$(I): NEXT DATA COTTAGE, ES, 12, LANE, WS, 03, FOREST... and your logical network is formed! Putting aside sophisticated word decoding routines for the moment, we can test this network out with the following simple routine: 150 (clear screen): LN = 1: REM CURRENT LOCATION IS 1 160 PRINT \"I AM IN A \"; L$(LN) 170 INPUT \"WHERE TO NOW\"; R$ (clear screen): REM ANSWER N, S, E or W 180 R$ = LEFT$(R$, 1) 190 FOR I = 1 TO LEN(E$(LN)) 200 IF MID$ (E$ = VAL (MID$ (D$(LN), I, 1) ): GOTO 160 210 NEXT 220 PRINT \"I CAN'T GO THERE\" : GOTO 160 To place objects in these locations is now quite easy. Make an object table as in Figure 3 using array P to hold the current location of each object. Read this in from data statements as with the locations. Now add these lines to those above, and Hey Presto! 165 OS$ = \"I CAN SEE\": FOR I = 0 to 3 166 IF P(I) =LN THEN OS$ = OS$ + O$(1) 167 NEXT: PRINT OS$ We can't manipulate the objects yet that will come after we've had a look at word decoding next month. Cottage 1 Lane Fig. 1: Simplified net1 Knife) ing initial positions 2 Forest 3 Meadow of objects in brackets (3 Axe) (2 Cowl Note: objects and locations independently 4 Lake (1 Fish) work of locations shownumbered. Destination DS (4) Location (Array LS (4)) Cottage Lane Forest Meadow Lake Exits ES (4) ES WS -NWS 124 Fig. 2: Location table derived from map in Fig. 1. The number column is merely the subscript used to access the information on a given line. Note all variables are character (string). No. Object Array DS (3) Knife Place P(3) Fish Cow Fig. 3: Object table derived from Fig. 1. Again the number column is the array subscript. Note that since array P will only hold the number of the current location of an object it may be defined as integer numeric BY KEITH CAMPBELL "


"ARCADE STREET TALK ASTEROIDS DE LUXE GOLF: NOT When the blown up asteroid sent out three arrow-head missiles on A brief rundown of machine that first revenge mission, many slang: phrases and comments players decided that Asteroids which players use while blowing de Luxe was too hot for them. up asteroids. A pity, because good use of  Reggae rattle a phrase to the faster firing and moving describe the constantly on the advantages of the second genermove player. ation Asteroids game, could still  Orgy of destruction -keeping ensure a long play. And the new up a constant stream of fire in an features make for a more enterattempt to wear down the taining play, than that offered by meteors. its popular predecessor. Here we  A bouncer a player who tell the uninitiated what to makes good use of his shields. expect from Asteroids de Luxe  Bad boulder a meteorite and offer a few hints on survival. which will unleash missiles when The first difference from the blown up. original game is that there are As far as we can tell there are more meteors on the first no noticeable programming bugs screen, seven instead of four. in Asteroids de Luxe. But you will soon find that the  Next issue we look at the faster firing button it is posspopular but tactically difficult ible to fire almost continuously arcade game of Defender. makes for more dramatic destruction. This fire-power makes it easy to stand your ground when inexhaustible means of defence. ship normally follows soon after. meteors are heading straight for The U.F.O.s are a very different When the \"geometric\" you, as you should reduce them proposition in de Luxe. The small asteroids begin appearing it is to smithereens before they one is usually on patrol early and best to leave them until you have become a real danger. is far more deadly, hitting room to manoeuvre, when these Japan goes in for crazes with There is also the question of stationary targets with ease and are hit, three homing missiles are such gusto that our firtation the shields. These are an also picking you off if you move in loosed upon you and fire and run with Rubik's Cube seems halfimprovement on the hyperspace a straight line. So weave tactics are the best way to hearted by comparison panic button of the original No point in leaving that last reduce the threat of these split. So Pro Golf, which combined because there is no random luck rock and waiting in a corner to ting horrors. the crazes of golf and video element involved. However, timbuild up a high score in this As in the earlier Asteroid vergames (two of Japan's biggest) ing is all important. New players version either. The small U.F.O. sion, the best players learn how was bound to be a hit over in the tend to press the shields too responds by blowing up that last to use the thrust and keep on the on the Orient. early and waste this far from rock with its first shot and your move. But our own arcade industry is pessimistic about this graphically superb game finding a following over here. The game is certainly It's back in time, for once, in the which downs the capturing bala far cry from the usual spaceKing and Balloon aerial defence loon will enable him to parachute fodder fare to be found in pubs game. to safety murmuring his thanks. and arcades but it could worm its Instead of the usual space When a squadron of balloons way into western hearts. invaders and laser bases, this is downed by the crossbow a Anine hole golf course is to be game features balloons which faster-moving one appears to played. Choose your club, descend from the heavens and attempt the next snatch and grab address the ball and hit, before crossbows. raid. the golfer takes his fifth automaThe balloons are the villains of And should that royal figure tic swing, or you will lose your the piece, attacking in squadrons disappear over the horizon, ball. of 42 which will stretch your dangling captive from his basket. A limited number of balls are more primitive resources to their it's a case of: \"The king is dead! allowed per hole and if that is limits. Long live the king\", as another is passed a golfer will also be lost. You play the part of a faithful sent out to tempt the balloons Trees, ponds, bunkers and out marksman employed to defend back. of-bounds areas add to the diffithe royalty of the castle from the Up to three kings can be lost culty. Each hole has its own par aerial kidnappers. before the game is over. score and holes in one are possShould the invaders snatch A fun variation on the usual ible. your monarch, he proves quite theme which is not too demandA game which deserves to see vocal, crying for aid from his ing graphically but still challeng. a wider audience than just the retainer and a well aimed shot ing. \"19th holes\" of the golf clubs. ROYAL SNATCH AND GRAB 30 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"ACTION AN AMPHIBIOUS ARCADIAN KING KONG GOES CRAZY IN A CABINET The arcade games industry Manoeuvring the creature by a seems to have discovered a new joystick, either vertically or hori. hero figure to tempt us onto zontally, it must avoid a steady its machines. stream of vehicles to reach the It is questionable whether river bank. Here the aim is to The box-office success, King hard-bitten arcade and pub vetecross without falling in, via a Kong, now looks likely to become rans, who are used to seeing series of logs and the treachera success in a box -or at least themselves as laser bases or ous diving turtles, who are not an arcade cabinet in the game rocket ships, will be able to idenaverse to giving a hurrying frog Donkey Kong. tify with this new character a an early bath. Kong has captured an elecfrog but he seems to be cropOther terrors lurking here tronic starlet and is holding ping up in several games now. include deadly snakes, otters and her hostage at the top of the Frogger is one of the popular crocodiles. screen. He hurls down barrels at new generation of arcade games Points are scored for each safe the rather unheroic rescue figure which are getting away from jump (10), arriving safely home as he rushes up a series of tilting space themes. (50) and beating the timer (10 levels. The rescuer must leap It does give an idea of how points per beat saved). Bonuses over the oncoming barrels and so tough a life frogs may lead. Our can be accrued by escorting make his way to Kong's hideout. intrepid amphibian is first set the home a lady frog (200), gobbling A hammer with which to knock problem of crossing a busy highan insect (200) and safely getting the barrels clear of the level, can way without getting run over. all five frogs home (1,000). be reached by a well-timed leap skywards. Once at the top, Kong realising he is beaten, picks up our heroine and carts her off to a Piloting your craft above a New ground to prompt you forwards So the game progresses until new screen. here the rescuer York-like skyline gives you first and a fleet of alien spacecraft you are speeding between large must leap between passing lifts taste of the Space Odyssey chal-speeds towards you. Firing to black holes which will draw you to attain the giant chimp's hidelenge but the action does not pick off those you can, while into their voids should you fly too out. stop there. flying skifully to avoid the rest of close and leave you spinning and On achieving this, the screen S pace Odyssey is reminiscent the enemy craft and the tall buildvulnerable to enemy fire. Then it changes again to a conveyor belt of the Defender game but with a ings, you pick your way through is back to the opening sequence affair and so the chase continues, much less daunting array of but the waves of attackers. again. with Kong hurling obstacles in tons to become familiar with. A regular feature of the early The game is easy to learn, the the path of our plucky hero until Just two buttons and a lever waves is the laser-firing Mother action is always changing and the the girl is finally saved ... then it here. The buttons are simply ship Galactica, a large craft which graphics and backdrops are all starts again only with more \"Fire\" and \"Bomb\" and the lever appears initially to be indestruct among the best you will see. If obstacles. gives you all the manoeuvrability able but a little perseverance will you liked the idea of Defender Can Jumpman save the you will need on the long voyage prove otherwise. Later the action but found it too difficult to maswretched heroine? Find out ahead of you. switches to a mountainous ter, Alca Electronics is distributdown your local arcade. Missiles are launched from the moonscape. ing the game for you. once at the top. Kong realising ALIENS ABOVE THE SKYLINE GALAXIANS MARK II The second generation of Galaxians is on its way to our arcade skies. This new breed, which beares the Midway logo, do not sit passively in the skies waiting to be shot at but swarm in from the sides of the screen to form their convoy and then dive groundwards to put your laser station out of action. Apart from this peculiar behaviour, the new creatures resemble and attack in the same fashion as the already popular Galaxians. And the action will be just as frantic as before. One other important change is the name, this new breed answer to the name of Galgas. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 31 "


"Chomp runs on a Sharp MZ-8OK By Karl Parker and Terry Brown CHOM Pahile waiting last suppon the Sharp Arsenic and Old Lace's elderly poisoners probably played Chomp while waiting for their victims to tuck into their last supper. The supper prepared on the Sharp screen in this game is going to be somebody's last too. The screen is set out like a large piece of cake but the piece in the top right hand corner could have been made by Lucrezia Borgia. The fact that it is labelled \"Poisoned\" is a bit of a giveaway But the cake has to be finished so someone is going to end up eating the piece which will give them more than heartburn! The players take it in turns to Chomp on a piece of cake and try to manoeuvre their opponents so as to force them to eat from that poisoned section. This game makes good use of the Sharp's musical facility and includes a fitting end to the game when that fatal Chomping has taken place. Not for the queasy! 32 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"440 PRINT\" 458 PRINT\"The maximum amount of columns is \" 460 600  479 PRINT\" # 488 PRTNT\" 499 INPUT\"HOW MANY COLUMNS :C:PRINT\" 588 IF CC=9 THEN 548 518 PRINT\" 529 PRINT\"The maximum arount of Columns is \" 538 GOTO 499 540 PRINT\" 558 FOR I=1 TO R 568 FOR 7=1 TO C 578 AII:J)=1 588 NEXT 599 NEXT I . 688 A(1,1)=-1 619 PRINT\" 628 PRINT\"1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 639 FOR I=1 TOR 640 PRINT I: 658 FOR J-1 TO C 668 IF AIJ):-1 THEN 798 )=# THEN 720 678 IF A 689 PRINT\"F::PRINT\" \"; 698 GOTO 710 700 PRINT\"T, PRINT\" \"; 718 NEXT J 729 PRINT 721 FOR E=3 TO 50 722 POKE4513, E:POKE 4514, E 723 USR (68) 724 NEXT E 725 PRINT 726 USR(71) 738 NEXT I 249 PRINT THEN 778 758 IF FE 770 LET 11=11+1 788 LET P1=11-INT (11/P) *P 798 IF P108 THEN 818 S DIM N$110) 19 PRINT # 28 PRINTTAB(15); PRINT\"CHOM P 49 PRINTTAB(14):PRINT\" 55 PRINT\" The board is set out like a large piece\" 65 PRINT\" of cake, but the piece in <he top right\" KILL your opponent by forcing hin\" 75 PRINT\" hand corner is POISONED.\" 85 PRINT\" to take the poisoned section.\" Choose the board size up to 9x9\" 95 PRINT\" The poisoned piece is shown as \" 159 PRINT\" edible pieces are displayed as \" 168 PRINT\" 165 PRINT 199 PRINT\" PRESS ANY KEY TO CARRY ON 191 FOR A-1 TO LI:FOR B=255 TO 1 STEP -1: POKE4514, A: POKE4513,R:USR168):NEXT 192 USR(71) 195 SETAS: TFASTHEN195 20A PRINT\" 289 DIM A 418,181 299 PRINT 389 F=1 318 Full 328 FOR I=1 TO 18 338 FOR 1=1 TO 18 349 ATAJ)=8 358 NEXT 3 368 NEXT I 388 PRINT\" 398 INPUT\"HOW MANY PLAYERS\":P 391 FOR F=1 TO P 393 INPUT\"INPUT NAMES OF PLAYERS\":NS (F) 394 NEXT 488 11=8  PRINT  429 INPUT\"HOW MANY ROWS\":R 439 IF RC=9 THEN 488 139 PRINT A GAME FOR APPRENTICE POISONERS continued on page 35 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 33 "


"CASTLE ELECTRONICS COMPUTER SUPERMARKET Telephone Hastings 0424437875 COLOUR Acorn Atom BRITISH DESIGNED OMPUTER PERSONAL COMPUTER graphics character set 8K ROM + 2K RAM Kit. . -00 * plug-in programme/memory cartridges 8K ROM + 2K RAM Ass. . -50 *colour sound 12K ROM + * programmable function keys 12K RAM Kit... -00 *5K memory expandable to 32K 12K ROM + * standard PETBASIC 12K RAM Ass.: -50 full-size typewriter keyboard 4K Floating Point *low-priced peripherals ROM... . 2300 * joystick/paddles/lightpen Colour encoder...  21-85 self-teaching materials Mains Power .95 FROM  Cassette Deck now available -95 Supply........ 9-20 FREE POSTAGE AND PACKING ON ALL CASH/CHEQUE/P.O. ORDERS ONLY COMPUTERS FOR TANGERINE microtan ATARI' PEOPLE Model 400 16K.... -00 Model 800 16K...-00 Cassette.......  50-00 Disk Drive ...... -00 80 Col. Printer -00 Microtan 65 Kit: . . -35 Microtan 65 Built. -85 Tanex Min. Config. Kit. . .45 20 Way Keypad ... .-50 We hold a complete stock of all the Tangerine equipment. Send SAE or 'phone for details. TANTEL PRESTEL ADAPTER .00 Plus All Accessories Available. apple computer | COMMODORE PET BUILT IN SOUND HIGH RES. GRAPHICS 8K PET........-85 Apple 11 Plus 48K ....... -00 16K PET........-00 Disc Drive + Controller. . . . -00 32K PET.....-00 Dual Disc Drive. . -00 D.D. without Controller ..-00 Printer........ -25 Pascal Card............-00 External Cassette.......  63-25 Eurocolour Card . . . . .  73-00 Complete range PET equipment in Stock. Hitachi 9\" Monitor ..-00 CASSETTE SOFTWARE: Strathclyde Basic Course, Basic Basic Course, Invaders, Treasure Trove of Games 1 to 10 (10 selections We stock all the goodies for the Apple. of games), Basic Maths, Algebra, Statistical Packs and lots more! SPECIAL OFFER 20% OFF ALL nascom PRICES. IMP PRINTER NOW . PHONE OR WRITE FOR DETAILS. U MAKE DNT 27 MHZ FM. MOBILE 4 WATTS, 40 CHANNELS > STRICTLY ACCORDING TO GOVERNMENT SPECIFICATION ONLY .25. SEND SAE FOR SPECIFICATION G.B.RIGO ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT. A ACCEPTED. ORDERS NORMALLY DESPATCHED DAY OF RECEIPT. CASTLE ELECTRONICS 7 Castle St., Hastings, E.Sussex shop hours 09.00-17.30 Mon-Sat personal callers welcome Circle No. 113 34 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"SHARP CHOOSE YOUR SLICE WITH CARE Continued from page 33 8PA P1=P 819 PRINT\"Player\":P1 828 INPUT\"Coordinates of CHOMP (Row Column! \": R1C1 838 IF R161 THEN 988 848 IF R1>R THEN 988 858 IF C11 THEN 988 860 IF CC THEN 200 878 IF A(R1, C1)=B THEN 988 889 IF A (R1, C1)=-1 THEN 988 885 PRINT\" 899 60TO 928 988 PRINT\" 981 PRINT\"You can't CHOMP an empty space!! 918 FOR D=1 TO 5888: NEXT D:60T0 818 928 FOR I=R1 TO R 939 FOR J=C1 TOC 948 AIJ)=8 958 NEXT J 968 NEXT I 978 6OTO 61.9 988 PRINT\"\" 999 PRINT\"Bad Luck you have lost player\":P1 1848 PRINT 1818 PRINT\"Do you want to play 1991n (VES OR NO) 1928 INPUT AS 1838 IF A$=\"YES\" THEN 298 1035 PRINT\" 1836 PRINT\" 1837 PRINT\"CLOSEDOWN!!\" 1848 L1$=\"C4C1R1C505_B6C3D5\" 1958 L2$=\"E4E1R1E5F5E6D3C5\" 1868 L3$=\"05C5_65C7C3R2\" 1978 L4$=\"C3D3E3F36461R16461 R164611\" 1988 L5$=\"66F3E5F4F1R1F4F1R1F4F1R1\" 1998 L6$=\"F6E3D5E5F3E3D3C3\" 2888 L7$=\"E6F365A3F3E7D7C8\" 2018 TEMPOS 2920 MUSIC L1$;12$,L3$:145:15$: L6$:L75 2825 PRINT 2838 FOR A=1 TO 388:REINT 188#RND (11) 2848 SFINT (7**RND (1)) 2858 SET R,S:NEXT A 2868 PRINT\" 2878 PRINT\" 2988 PRINT\"GOODNIGHT!!\" 2098 FOR D-1 TO 388 : NEXT D 2188 PRINT\"\" 2118 FOR BS=1 TO 18988: NEXT ES 2120 END COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 35 "


"ACORN ATOM BREAKOUT RUNS ON AN ACORN ATOM IN 3-5K BY TIM JACKSON BREAKI As a study in concentration and instinctive reations, it's hard to beat Breakout. This is the second generation of \"bat and ball\" arcade games and the only one to still keep its place in the pub circuit. The aim of the game is to demolish a brick wall by bounding a moving ball against it by use of a bat. As the ball hits each brick it vanishes from the screen and the ball rebounds to be hit again. But should it slip past your bat then you lose a life. The experienced Breakout player aims his ball continuously at a single spot in the wall to weaken it and let the ball through to wreak havoc on the other side. This gives him a respite while the ball bounces destructively behind the wall seeking a path back into play. It makes for compulsive playing as the speeding ball defeats your attempts to return it. I don't know if it is popular in H.M. Prisons but Breakout is a simple but effective game which will keep the player on his toes. 1 REN BREAKOUT 5 REM BY TIM JACKSON, JAN 81 10 DIN A1, PP5, BB5, LL5, NN 6 20 FOR JO TO 5: LL-11 BBJE-13 PP-11 NEXT 30 PRINT $12,621 40 GOSUB a GOSUB a 50 PRINTS 60 -3; C709PRINT BREAKOUT\": 80 PRINT 90 PRINT \"BEST SCORE SO FAR \".C 100 PRINT\" \"HOW FAST DO YOU WANT TO PLAY?\". 110cINPUT TYPE 1 TO 5 AND PRESS RETURN\", SA 120 IF LEN A >1 GOTO E 130 B53-7A 140 IF BCO OR B>4 GOTO C 150 CLEAR O 160 MOVE 1,0; DRAH 1,44 170 HOVE 62,0; DRAH 62.44 180 70E1-0 190 PRINT $1E, SIA, 59, 6223, 223 200 GOSUB 210 PRINT SD.SA, 69: GOSUB e PRINT $255,255, , SA, 59 220 PRINT $223, 223: GOSUB et PRINT SO1E 230 S 01 7080=14 240 FOR NESTO 1 STEP -11 REM MAIN LOOP 250 X-ABSRNDX60+2: Y-35: REM INITIAL X & Y OF BALL 26074--1; REM DOHN 270 R-ABSRNDX3-11 REM R,L ORO 200 PRINT\" SCORE: \",3,\" BALLS LEFT\".N, 3.1E 290 0-08000 300 PLOT 13, X, Y 310 Z-3 320 DO REM GRAPHICS LOOP 330 IF BE GOTO D 340 FOR J1 TO B; HAIT: NEXT 350dHAIT 360 LINK LLO 370 UNTIL Z<3 380 IF ZE PRINT $7: GOTO b 390 REM Z IF BAT MISSED 400 IF 2-2 S-S+50; LINK NNO: GOTO D 410 REM Z-2 IF THRO' CAP 420 REM ZE IF BRICK HIT, AND 430 REM OTHEN HOLDS SCREEN 440 REM ADDRESS OF BRICK HIT 450 IF Q22-1 QaQ+1 460 0-1 470 ?M=59: ?Q=666 480 LINK NN3 490 ?403 70-40 500 S-5+10; GOTO | 510bNEXT NI REM NEXT BALL 520 PRINT FINAL SCORE: \".S,\" BALLS LEFTI 0\", S1E 530 FOR J-1 TO 15: P.S.A: NEXT 540 PRINT 69, \"PRESS SPACE BAR TO PLAY AGAIN \" 550 LINK OFFE3 560 IF SC CS 570 PRINT $12: GOTO 9 580aDIM P(-1) 590C ILLO 600 LDA OB001 610 AND 2000 620 BEQ LL2 630 LDA B002 640 AND 2.40 650 BNE LL3 660 ILLI LDA 080 670 CHP @26 600 BCS LLS 690 INC 80 700 BNE LL3 710 ILL2 LDA .80 720 CMP @2 730 BCC LL3 740 DEC 080 750ILL3 LDX 930 760ILL4 LDA B1E0.X 770 AND OFC 780 STA .81E0, X 790 DEX 800 BNE LL 810 LDX 680 820 LDY @3 830 LLS LDA -81E0,X 840 ORA 03 850 STA 081E0.X 860 INX 870 DEY 880 BNE LL5 890 LDA @2 900 STA SE 910 LDA 33A 920 BEQ BB1 OUT IF Y=0 930 STA OSC 940 LDA 0339 950 STA OSA 960 JSR OF6E2 BLANK BALL 970 LDA 0339 980 CHP @2 CHECK L.H. HALL "


"Stephen aa 990 BNE BBZ 1000 LDA 21 STA .333 1010 BNE BB3 10201BB2 CMP @61 CHECK R.H.HALL 1030 BNE BB4 1040 LDA @OFF! STA #333 10501BB3 LDA 339 10601BB4 CLC 1070 ADC .333 1080 STA .339 NEW X 1090 JSR PPO 1100 CLC 1110 LDA 33A 1120 ADC .336 1130 CMP 245 1140 BEQ BBO OUT IF THRO' GAP 1150 STA 33A NEW Y 1160 LDA 339STA OSA 1170 LDA 33A: STA 65C 1180 JSR OF6E2 PLOT BALL 1190 RTS 1200:BBI LDA 23 STA 338 1210 RTS OUT WITH 2-2 1220: BB1 STA 338:RTS OUT WITHZ=0 1230 :PPO LDA #339 1240 LSRA 1250 STA #5F STORE X/2 1260 LDA 247 1270 SEC 1200 SBC #33A 1290 Sec #336 Y = NEW Y 1300 LOX DOFF 1310 SEC 1320 !PPI INX 1330 SBC 3 1340 BCS PP1 1350 ADC 3 1360 STA #61 STORE (47-Y)23 1370 TXA: ASL A ASLA 1380 ASL A ASLA ASLA 1390 ORASF 1400 STA #5F STORE (X/2) (47-Y)/3332 1410 LDA 280; ADC 20 1420 STA +60 HI BYTE OF SCREEN ADDRESS 1430 LO 133%; LSR . 1440 LDA #61 140 60 A TAY 1460 LDA 9F7CB, Y 1470 LDY PO 1480 AND (SF), Y 1490 BEQ PPS RIN IF BIT CLEAR 1500 LDA 33A 1510 CMP 1: BNE PP3 1520 LDA 21 1530 STA #336 GO UP IF BAT HIT 1540 LDA B001; AND 2.0 1550 BNE PP4 BRANCH IF NO SHIFT 1560 LDA 333: BMI PPS 1570 DEC #333; DEC 339 DECKER 1580 RTS 1590 PP4 LDA IB002 1600 AND 2640 1610 BNE PPS RTN IF NO REPT 1620 C00 1333; CHF 21 1630 BEQ PPS 1640 INC #333; INC#339 INC RAX 1650IPPS RTS 1660IPP3 LDA 21 1670 STA 33B Z=1 1600 LDA SF 1690 STA 332 SAVE BRICK POSN IN O 1700 RTS 1710 INNO LDA #B002 HIGH BLEEP 1720 LDY BOFF 1730 : NN1 LDX 280 1740: NN2 DEX 1750 BNE NN2 1760 EOR 24 1770 STA B002 1700 DEY 1790 ENE NN1 1800 RTS 1810 INN3 LDA 23 EXPLOSION 1820 STA 081 1830: NN1 LOX BOFF 1840 INNS TXA; TAY 1850 LDA B002 1860 EOR 04 1870 STA OB002 1880: NN6 DEY: BNE NN 1890 DEX: BNE NNS 1900 DEC 081: BNE NN4 1910 RTS 1920) RETURN 1930eFOR I-1 TO 7 1940 PRINT $255, $255, $223,5223; NEXT 1950 RETURN "


"APPLE GOAL IS AN APPLESOFT PROGRAM REQUIRING AT LEAST 16K. BY FRED PENCE GBAL At the far end of the board, the Goal is beckoning as you and the computer plan your respective routes to victory. The computer is out to make things difficult for you but achieving life's goals should never be easy. Moving a single counter alternately you must aim to outwit your opponent and be first to move into that elusive Goal area and win the game. You can choose who takes the first move in this game of strategy and thinking ahead. If you wish the computer to go first, enter nought, or key-in a number between one and six if you are taking the first move. Once the counter is set in motion, it can only be moved left, right or down but it cannot be returned to a box it has already entered. Good use is made of the Apple graphics in a well thought out game with plenty of scope for tactical maneouvring. 38 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES OREM *11111111111111111 1 REM ** 2 REM ** GOAL 3 REN 11 BY 4 REM ** FRED PENCE ** 5 REM 11 6 REM ** NOV, 1979 ** 7 REN 11 8 REM 1111111111ittitt 10 GOTO 1000 20 HOME BR 30 DIM A(6,7) 40 FOR M1 = 0 TO 61 FOR M2 = 0 TO 71A (N1, M2) = 01 NEXT M2 NEXT 37. HLIN 8,10 AT 35: VLIN 33 ,37 AT 51 VLIN 35,37 AT 10 110 HLIN 14,19 AT 331 HLIN 14,19 AT 371 VLIN 33,37 AT 131 VLIN 33,37 AT 19 120 HLIN 22, 27 AT 331 HLIN 22,27 AT 351 VLIN 33,37 AT 221 VLIN 33,37 AT 27 130 HLIN 30,35 AT 371 VLIN 33,37 AT 30 140 IF PG > 2 THEN PRINT \"0. K. YOUR 60 '11 GOTO 160 150 GOTO 200 160 PRINT A NUMBER FROM 1 TO 6' INPUT N 170 IF N < 1 OR N > 6 THEN PRINT PRINT \"NO YOUR 60 1 GOTO 160 180 IF N = INT (N) THEN 280 190 PRINT PRINT \"AN INTEGER ) 1 GOTO 160 200 PRINT 'ENTER AN INTEGER FROM 1 TO 6 IF YOU WANT TO 60 FI RST. 210 PRINT IF YOU WANT ME TO 6 O FIRST ENTER 0'11 INPUT N M1 50 R = 11C = 1 60 HOMEGR COLOR= 11 FOR X = 2  38 STEP & LIN 0,30 AT X1 NEXT X1 VLIN 31,39 AT 21 VLIN 31,39 AT 38 70 FOR Y = 0 TO 30 STEP 61 HLIN 2,38 AT Y NEXT Y HLIN 2,38 AT 39 80 REM PRINTING 'GOAL' 90 COLOR= 12 100 HLIN 5,10 AT 331 HLIN 5, 10 AT "


"430 REM COMPUTER'S GO PLOTTED 440 PRINT PRINT PRINT PRINT THE COMPUTE R IS\"PRINT PRINT THINKING') 450 FOR T = 1 TO 10001 NEXT T 460 BOSUB 8701 COLOR= 131 PLOT 6 # C 1,6 R-3 470 FOR T = 1 TO 1001 NEXT TI GOTO 510 480 REM PLAYER'S 60 PLOTTED 490 BOSUB 8701 COLOR= 131 PLOT 6 # C 1,6 IR 31 FORT : 1 TO 2001 NEXT TI GOTO 310 500 REM PLAYER'S 60 510 PRINT PRINT PRINT PRINT . IT'S YOUR 60\" 520 PRINT PRINT \"INPUT AN 'L', AN 'R' OR A 'D' \" 530 INPUT 6$ 540 IF 86 = \"L\" AND C > 1 AND AL R,C 1) = 0 THEN C = C 11 A(R,C) = 11 BOTO 490 550 IF 66 = 'L' AND C = 1 THEN 6 40 560 IF 65 = 'L' AND A(R,C 1) = THEN 660 570 IF 6$ = 'R' AND C 6 AND AL R,C + 1) = 0 THEN C = C + 11 A(R,C) = 11 BOTO 490 580 IF 6$ = 'R' AND C = 6 GOTO 6 590 IF 66 = \"R\" AND A(RC + 1) = 1 THEN 660 600 IF 66 = \"D\" AND R < 5 THEN R = R + 11A (R,C) = 11 GOTO 490 610 IF 68 = 'D' AND R = 5 THEN P G = PG + 11 GOTO 690 620 IF G$ = \"U\" THEN PRINT 1 PRINT 1 PRINT YOU CAN'T GO BAC K UP\", GOTO 520 630 PRINT 1 PRINT PRINT PRINT 1 PRINT YOU MUST EITHER US E'L' OR 'R' OR 'D'11 BOTO 530 220 IF INT (N) = N THEN 260 230 PRINT PRINT 240 PRINT\" ENTER AN INTEGER 250 PRINT PRINT (BETWE EN O AND 6) \"11 INPUT N 260 IF N > 6 OR N OTHEN PRINT PRINT PRINT PRINT , GOTO 240 270 IF N = 0 THEN C = INT (61 RND (2) + 11A(RC) = -11 GOTO 440 280 C  Mi 4 (B, C) = 1 290 GOTO 490 300 REM COMPUTER'S 60 310 IFR = 5 THEN CG = C6 + 11 GOTO 760 320 IF (C INT (C/2) ) = 0 THEN 390 330 REM MOVE RIGHT 340 IF A(R,C + 1) = 0 THEN C = C + 11A(R,C) = 11 GOTO 440 350 IF R ( 4 THEN J = INT (3 : (RND (2))); IF J > 1 THEN R = R + 11A (R,C) = -11 GOTO 440 360 IF A(R,C 1) = 0 AND C > 1 THEN C = C 11A (R,C) = -11 GOTO 440 370 R = R + 11 AIR,C) = -11 BOTO 440 380 REM MOVE LEFT 390 IF AIR,C 1) = 0 THEN C = C 11 AIR,C) = 11 GOTO 440 400 IF R ( 4 THEN J = INT (3 RND (2) IF J > 1 THEN R = R + 11A (R,C) 11 GOTO 44 640 PRINT PRINT PRINT PRINT YOU CAN'T MAKE THAT MOVE. IT'S OFF\" PRINT \"THE BOA RD.\" 650 GOTO 520 660 PRINT PRINT PRINT PRINT YOU CAN'T MOVE THERE, THAT 'S WHERE\" PRINT \"THE COUNT ER WAS JUST MOVED FROM.\" 670 GOTO 520 680 REM PLAYER WINS 690 COLOR= 01 FOR Z = 1 TO 6: PLOT 612 1,27: NEXT Z 410 IF AIR,C + 1) = 0 AND C 6 THEN C = C + 11A(R,C) = 11 GOTO 440 420 R = R + 1 A (R,C) = -1 continued on page 41 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 39 "


"ATARI AUTHORISED DEALER N1APLIN for ATARI The World-beating ATARI PERSONAL COMPUTERS AUN LED Atari 400 Console Atari 800 Console 3 consoles available Atari 400 with 16K RAM (AF36P)  Atari 400 with 32K RAM (AF37S)  Atari 800 with 16K RAM (AFO2C)  (expandable to 48K) All consoles when connected to a standard UK colour (or black and white) TV set can generate the most amazing graphics you've ever seen. Look at what you get: MORE HARDWARE * Background colour, plotting colour, text Atari 410 Cassette Recorder (AF28F  colour and border colour settable to any Atari 810 Disk Drive (AF06G)  one of 16 colours with 8 levels of Atari 822 40 column Thermal illuminance! Printer AF04E) E265 * Video display has upper and lower case Atari 850 Interface (AF296)  characters with true descenders, double Joystick Controllers (AC37S) .95 and quad size text and inverse video. Paddle Controllers (AC29G) .95 * 57 Key keyboard (touch type on Atari 400) 16K RAM Memory Module (AFO8J  and four function keys. MUCH MORE FOR ATARI COMING SOON * Full screen editing and four-way cursor control. * 29 keystroke graphics and plottable points up to 320 x 192 (160 x 96 only with 8K SOFTWARE RAM). Lots and lots of amazing software for * 40 character by 24 line display. Atari available NOW * Extended graphics control and high speed * Word Processor VISI-CALC action using a DMA chip with its own ADVENTURE GAMES * Arcade Games character set. *Trek Games * ASSEMBLER & * Player missile graphics DISASSEMBLER FORTH * Teaching * Four programmable sound generators can * 3D GRAPHICS Character Set be played individually or together and each Generator has 1785 possible sounds playable at any SEND SAE NOW FOR OUR LEAFLET XH52G1 one of eight volume settings, for game sounds or music * Full software control of pitch, timbre and duration of notes in 4-octave range. LE STICK * Four joystick or paddle ports, sounds For Atari Computer or Video Game output to TV Replaces standard joystick, but much * BASIC cartridge and 10K ROM operating easier to use. Internal motion detectors system and full documentation sense hand movements. Large pushbutton on top of Stick. Squeeze Stick to freeze motion A MUST for SPACE INVADERS, STAR RAIDERS & ASTEROIDS ONLY .95 (AC45Y SPECIAL PACKAGE OFFER Disk based system for  with Le Stick The Atari 400 Console Special 32K RAM Module Atari 810 Disk Drive Disk Operating System Documentation Interconnecting Leads Everything in \"Look at what you ger\" list. Can any other computer on the market offer all this at anything like this price? VERSAWRITER 12% 8in. drawing board Drawing on board is reproduced on TV via Atari with 32K RAM and Disk Drive. Closed areas may be filled in with one of 3 colours. Text may be added in any one of 4 fonts. Paint brush mode: select size of brush and paint away Airbrush mode shade in your drawing colour and density is up to you Plus many more features. Sa e for price and further details NIPLIN Maplin Electronic Supplies Ltd P.O. Box 3, Rayleigh, Essex Tel: Southend (0702) 552911/554155 Note: Order codes shown in brackets. All prices include VAT and shipment by Data Post. Demonstrations at our shops NOW See Atari at 284 London Road, Westcliff-on-Sea, Essex Tel: (07021 554000 and at 159-161 King St., Hammersmith W6. Tel: 01-748 0926 Circle No. 114 40 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"APPLE Continued from page 39 700 PRINT PRINT PRINT TAB 7) \"YOU WIN. YOU MUST BE LUC GOAL KY! 710 PRINT PRINT \"THE SCOREC OMPUTER \"C6' PLAYER ! PG 720 PRINT \"SPACE BAR TO PLAY 'ESC' TO END\", 730 GET CO, IF ASC (C$) 32 THEN 740 IF ASC (C) = 27 THEN 880 750 GOTO 720 760 GOSUB 8701 PRINT PRINT PRINT PRINT 'THE SCORE: COMPUTE RC6) PLAYER \"PG 770 PRINT PRINT \"SPACE BAR TO PLAY, 'ESC' KEY TO END\") 780 COLOR= 01 FOR I = 31 TO 38: HLIN 3,37 AT 11 NEXT I FORT = 1 TO 2001 NEXT T 790 X = PEEK ( 16384) IF X = 160 THEN POKE 16368,01 GOTO 800 IF X = 155 THEN POKE 163 68,01 GOTO 880 810 COLOR=b1 VLIN 32,37 AT 61 PLOT 5,321 PLOT 5,371 PLOT 7,321 PLOT 7,37 1080 HLIN 30,34 AT 17. HLIN 30,3 3 AT 191 HLIN 30,34 AT 211 VLIN 17,21 AT 30 1090 HLIN 14,19 AT 251 HLIN 14,1 9 AT 291 VLIN 25,29 AT 131 VLIN 25,29 AT 19 1100 HLIN 22,27 AT 251 HLIN 22,2 5 AT 271 VLIN 25,29 AT 22 1110 HLIN 5,10 AT 331 HLIN 5,10 AT 37. HLIN 8, 10 AT 351 VLIN 33 ,37 AT 51 VLIN 35,37 AT 10 1120 HLIN 14,19 AT 331 HLIN 14,1 9 AT 371 VLIN 33,37 AT 131 VLIN 33,37 AT 19 1130 HLIN 22,27 AT 331 HLIN 22,2 7 AT 351 VLIN 33,37 AT 221 VLIN 33,37 AT 27 1140 HLIN 30,35 AT 371 VLIN 33,3 7 AT 30 1150 VTAB 24PRINT TAB 20), A PENCE PROGRAM\") 1160 FOR K 1 TO 50001 NEXTK 1170 TEXT HOME VTAB 31 PRINT YOU AND THE COMPUTER WILL ALTERNATELY 1180 PRINT PRINT MOVE A COU NTER UNTIL THE WINNER MOVES 1190 PRINT PRINT INTO THE 6 OAL AREA.\" PRINT 1200 PRINT 1210 PRINT PRINT. YOU MAY CHOOSE WHO YOU WANT TO MOVE FIRST.' 1220 PRINT 1230 PRINT FOR COMPUTER TO MOVE FIRST 1240 PRINT 1250 PRINT A NUMBER FROM 1 T O TO PICK A Box 1260 PRINT IN THE UPPER RON FOR YOUR 60' 1270 PRINT PRINT \"THEREAFTER Y OU MOVE LEFT, RIGHT OR DOWN 1280 PRINT \"BUT YOU CANNOT RETUR N TO A PREVIOUS BOX. 1290 PRINT PRINT (ADAPTED FROM A GAME IN MATHEMATICS IN MICHIGAN 'SPACE BAR' TO CONTINUE\", 1300 GET S$1 IF ASC (58) = 32 THEN 820 VLIN 32,34 AT 151 VLIN 34, 36 AT 161 HLIN 16,22 AT 361 PLOT 17,371 PLOT 20,371 PLOT 15,3 41 PLOT 15,351 VLIN 33,36 AT 221 VLIN 32, 34 AT 23PLOT 1 9,341 PLOT 19,351 PLOT 18,37 PLOT 21,37 830 VLIN 32,37 AT 261 PLOT 25,32 PLOT 25, 371 PLOT 27,321 PLOT 27,37 840 VLIN 32,37 AT 29. VLIN 32,37 AT 331 PLOT 30,33: PLOT 30, 34, PLOT 31, 341 PLOT 31,351 PLOT 32,35 PLOT 32,36 850 PRINT\" 860 FORT : 1 TO 1001 NEXT TI GOTO 780 870 COLOR= 01 NORMAL FOR F = 1 TO 61 FOR 6 = 1 TO 51 PLOT 6 F 1,6 18 31 NEXT B) NEXT F1 RETURN 880 TEXT HONE VTAB 141 PRINT TAB( 10), \"WELL I ENJOYED IT E YOU DID TOO! 900 PRINT PRINT PRINTEND 1000 HOME GR COLOR= 13 1010 HLIN 9,15 AT B1 VLIN 8,12 AT 12 1020 VLIN 8, 12 AT 181 VLIN 8,12 AT 231 HLIN 18,22 AT 10 1030 HLIN 26,30 AT BHLIN 26, 29 AT 101 HLIN 26,30 AT 121 VLIN 8,12 AT 26 1040 HLIN 5,10 AT 17: HLIN 5, 10 AT 211 HLIN 8,10 AT 19, VLIN 17 21 AT 5: VLIN 19,21 AT 10 1050 HLIN 5,10 AT 171 HLIN 5,10 AT 211 HLIN 8, 10 AT 191 VLIN 17 21 AT 51 VLIN 19,21 AT 10 1060 VLIN 17,21 AT 131 VLIN 17,2 1 AT 191 HLIN 13,19 AT 171 HLIN 13,19 AT 19 1070 VLIN 17,21 AT 221 VLIN 17,2 1 AT 271 HLIN 22, 27 AT 181 PLOT 23,171 PLOT 26,171 PLOT 24,1 9. PLOT 25, 19 890 PRINT PRINT TAB 10), \"HOP 1310 BOTO 1300 1320 END COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 41 "


"ATARI 1 REM MINIATURE BOLF 2 REM  ORIGINAL PROGRAM BY 3 REN BY MITCH VOTH 4 REN 1 ATARI TRANSLATION BY 5 REN RICH BOUCHARD ALL THE FRUSTRATION OF THE PUTTING 6 REN No municipal park, or seafront worthy of the rock bearing its name, should be without a putting green. Those nine to 18 patches of well manicured turf which can divide friends and turn happy families into bitter rivals. Remember that straggling white bush on the eighth, which belied its battered appearance and refused to surrender its white prize until the fifth stroke. Or how about the fifth hole, whose cup protruded a solid half inch above the surrounding circle of dried and dented earth. If someone were to write a thesis proving that that famous stiff upper lip was tempered on the putting greens of England... I wouldn't be at all surprised! If you thought you had left those ninth green dandelion beheading tantrums behind you, this program will bring them back all over again. In fact the only putting frustration not to be experienced on this computerised version, is the wait for the previous group to move on. Mini Golf is an excellent representation of a nine-hole miniature putting green, which will accommodate up to 10 players. You control the angle of your putter by pressing the keys marked \"+\" and \"*\", which have small arrows marked on their upper left-hand corners. The following strings should be typed using the Atari logo key to produce reverse video: Line 10: \"ATARI 9 HOLE\", and \"MINIATURE GOLF\" Line 40: \"SCORE.\" Line 2000: \"FINAL SCORE.\" Line 2040: \"GOOD BYE.\" The messages such as: \"HOLE l\" and \"PAR 2\" should be typed using reverse video for all nine holes. 8 OPEN 01,4,0, \"K 9 DIN 28(100), A$ (30), 8(10) 10 GRAPHICS OPRINT ATARI 9-HOLE 1 PRINT MINIATURE GOLF 20 FOR A-1 TO 100128 (A)=\" \"NEXT A 25 FOR A-1 TO 1018(A)=01 NEXT A 30 PRINT PRINT PRINT \"NUMBER OF PLAY ERS')INPUT NPIF MP>10 THEN 10 32 FOR ANI TO NPIS (NP)=O1 PRINT \"PLAYER !\", AD INPUT AB, IF LEN(AS) >10 THEN AS A$(1,10) 33 IF LEN(AS)=0 THEN A$'. 34 Z8 (A110-LEN(A$)+1, A310) A$1 NEXT A16 RAPHICS 51POKE 752,1 38 SETCOLOR 0,0,01 SETCOLOR 4,3,10. BOTO 300 40 GRAPHICS O.POKE 752, 11 PRINT SCORE,\" PRINT FOR A-1 TO NP1 PRINT Z $(A10-9,A110), 8(A) 1 NEXT A 42 PRINT PRINT \"HIT ANY KEY\":GET #1, A MALO BY MITCH VOTH AND RICH BOUCHARD 1 GRAPHICS 51POKE 752, 11 SETCOLOR 0,0,01 SETCOLOR 4,3,101 RETURN 50 GET 01, 211F Z<58 AND 2X48 THEN WH= { 2-48) 111. HN=O1VN=01 COLOR A PLOT C1,C21 BOTO 200 60 T=OTIF Z>43 THEN 70 62 CP=CP+11 IF CP=17 THEN CP=1 64 COLOR A PLOT C1,C216OTO 100 70 IF 2<342 THEN 50 72 CP=CP-11IF CP=0 THEN CP=16 74 COLOR A1PLOT C1,C21 BOTO 100 90 COLOR 11PLOT HP1, HP21PLOT HP1+1, HP2 92 COLOR 31PLOT B1,B21 LOCATE C1,C2, A11 FA<>2 THEN COLOR 21PLOT C1, C21 GOTO 50 94 COLOR 3. PLOT C1,C21GOTO 50 100 SOTO CP+100 101 C1-B11C2-B2+2:M1=01M2=-11 BOTO 90 102 C1=B1+11N1--11 BOTO 90 103 C1=B1+21C2-B2+21 M12-21GOTO 90 104 C2-B2+11M2-0.51BOTO 90 105 C2=B21M2=0;BOTO 90 106 C2=B2-11 M2=0.51 BOTO 90 107 C1-B1+21C2-B2-21M1E-2-N2=11 BOTO 90 108 C1=B1+11M1=-119OTO 90 BAWAY UNIVE ! sal CAWAU 42 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"TO 420 500 BOSUB 401COLOR 21FOR A-13 TO 36:PL OT 17, A1 DRANTO 55, A: NEXT A FOR A=0 TO 11.PLOT 17+A, 13-A1 DRANTO 55-A, 13-A 502 NEXT ACOLOR 11 PLOT 36, 101 DRANTO 3 6,36 109 C1=B11 M1=01 BOTO 90 110 C1=B1-1111=1180TO 90 111 C1=B1-21C2-B2-21M1=21M2=1160T0 90 112 C2-B2-11M2=0.51 GOTO 90 113 C2-B21M2=0.60T0 90 114 C2-B2+11 M2=-0.51GOTO 90 115 C1=B1-21C2=B221M1=21M2=-11 BOTO 90 116 C1=B1-11N1=11BOTO 90 150 COLOR 31PLOT HP1, HP21PLOT HP1+1, HP 211F B1 THEN 156 152 PRINT \"A HOLE IN ONE!!!!!!FOR A= 1 TO 51FOR B-1 TO 59. SETCOLOR 4,B/4+1, 141 SOUND 0,1,0, 101 NEXT B NEXT A 154 SETCOLOR 4,3,101 SOUND 0,0,0,01 BOTO 158 156 PRINT 'THAT TOOK YOU 8, STROKES \"FOR A-1 TO 501 SOUND 0, A, 10,101 NEXT A 1 FOR A349 TO 2 STEP 1 157 SOUND 0, A, 10, 10: NEXT A1 SOUND 0,0,0 C=11GOSUB 1501 RETURN 214 LOCATE HP1+1, HP2, A1IF A 1 THEN SI PT)=S (PT)+8-PRC=11GOSUB 1501 RETURN 220 COLOR 21PLOT B1, B21IF (ABS (N2)=0.5 AND VN=1) OR ABS (N2)=1 THEN 02-B2+86N 42) Ve01 6000 230 222 VI=1 230 LOCATE B1, D2, A1IF A=0 THEN RC=O1 RE TURN 231 IF (D1<>HP1 AND DICHP1+1) OR D2C> HP2 THEN IF A-1 THEN RC=O: RETURN 232 COLOR 31 PLOT B1, D21B2=D21 LOCATE HP 1, HP2, A1IF A-3 THEN B(PT)-S (PT)+8-PIRC =1960SUB 1501 RETURN 234 LOCATE HP1+1, HP2, A1IF A-3 THEN BIP T)=3(PT)+S-PIRC=11GOSUB 1501 RETURN 240 T=01 HH HH-1. IF HHKO THEN RC=21 RETU 510 PRINT HOLE  3 PAR 2\":FOR PT1 TO NP: PRINT Z${PT110-9,PT110),\"S TU RN\"1B1=INT (RND (0)111+42) 512 S=11B2=32.CP= 11HP 1=251 HP2=32-GOSUB 100 158 FOR A-1 TO 7001 NEXT AIPRINT CHR12 8) \"PRINT CHR$ (28), CHRS (28))) RETURN 200 D1=B1102=B2.COLOR 21PLOT B1, B2.IF ABS (N1)=1 AND HN=1) OR ABS(N1)2 THEN 204 202 WN=11BOTO 210 242 BOTO 200 300 COLOR 2-FOR A 3 TO 361 PLOT 27, ADR ANTO 45, A1 NEXT AIPRINT MOLE 1 P AR 2\" 302 P=21FOR PT=1 TO NP18-11 PRINT ZS (PT 110-9, PT110);\"'S TURN\" 1B1=INT (RND (0) 11 1 +32) B2=311CP=1 304 HP1=351HP2=6 305 GOSUB 100 310 IF RC2 THEN S=5+11CP=11 BOSUB 1001 BOTO 310 320 IF RC=1 THEN NEXT PTIBOTO 400 325 BOSUB 3000 330 IF D1=26 OR D1 46 THEN MI=-N11 BOSU B 2001GOTO 310 332 M22-N21 BOSUB 2001 BOTO 310 400 GOSUB 40: COLOR 2FOR A#13 TO 361 PL OT 27, A1 DRAWTO 45, A-NEXT A FOR A=0 TO 111 PLOT 27-A, 13-A: DRANTO 70,13-A 402 NEXT AIPRINT HOLE 2 PAR 2\" FOR PT*1 TO NP: S=11PRINT Z$(PT110-9,PT 010),\" TURN\" 520 IF RC=2 THEN S=S+1,CP=1:60SUB 100 GOTO 520 530 IF RC=1 THEN NEXT PT:GOTO 600 540 GOSUB 3000 550 IF D2=1 OR 22-37 THEN M2--M2: GOSUB 2001BOTO 520 552 IF 01-16 OR D1=36 OR D1-56 THEN M1 =-11: GOSUB 2002 GOTO 520 554 IF D1<3. THEN A=W11M1=-M2121M2=-A/ 21BOSUB 2001 BOTO 520 556 A-111M1=N2121N2A/2100SUB 2001 BOTO 520 600 GOSUB 401COLOR 2:FOR A-13 TO 24.PL OT 21, A: DRAWTO 63, A: NEXT A:FOR A=25 TO 361PLOT 21, A1 DRANTO 35, A.NEXT A 602 FOR A-1 TO 81PLOT 36+A, 24+A1 DRAWTO 63-A, 24+A1 PLOT 21+A, 13-A1 DRANTO 63-A, 13-A: NEXT A 604 COLOR 11PLOT 36, 251 DRANTO 36,141 DR ANTO 51,141 PLOT 51,141 DRAWTO 51,24 610 P=31 PRINT HOLE #4 PAR 3'FOR PT=1 TO NP-PRINT 28 (PT310-9, PT110),\" S TURN' B1INT(RND (0) 18) +20 615 S-11 B2=32:CP=13HP 1=43: HP2=191GOSUB 100 620 IF RC=2 THEN S=5+1:CP=11 BOSUB 1001 GOTO 620 630 IF RC 1 THEN NEXT PT:BOTO 700 640 BOSUB 3000 650 IF 12=4 OR D2=12 OR D2=37 OR (D2-3 3 AND DI>44 AND D1(55) OR (D2=14 AND D 1736) THEN 654 652 GOTO 656 654 M2=-M2, BOSUB 200160T0 620 656 IF DI=20 OR DI=49 OR D1=51 OR DI=6 4 OR D1=36 THEN M1 -M1: BOSUB 2002 GOTO 620 658 IF (D1%56 AND D2(13) OR (D2>24 AND D1(57) THEN A=N11M1-M2121M2-A/2100SUB 200180T0 620 659 A-M1: M1=-M2121M22-A/2 660 BOSUB 2001 BOTO 620 700 GOSUB 401COLOR 21 FOR A=25 TO 361 PL OT 41, A1 DRAWTO 55, A: NEXT A1FOR A-1 TO 91 PLOT 33-A, 25-A1 DRAWTO 55, 25-A 702 PLOT 24+A, 11-A1 DRAWTO 55-A, 11-A1NE IT ATFOR A1 TO 51PLOT 24, 16-A1 DRANTO 55, 16-A-NEXT A 704 COLOR 11 FOR A-1 TO 21PLOT 55, 25-A1 DRANTO 45,15-A.NEXT A 710 PRINT' HOLE # 5 PAR 2 P=21F.OR PT=1 TO NP1S=11 PRINT ZS (PTX10-9, P1010 204 D14B1+SBN (1) B=0 205 T-T+11 IF T>4 THEN RC=21 RETURN 210 SOUND 0,200,10,101 SOUND 0,0,0,01LO CATE D1, B2, AIF AO THEN RC=O1 RETURN 211 IF (D1<>HP1 AND D1<>HP1+1) OR D2C> HP2 THEN IF A=1 THEN RC=O1 RETURN 212 COLOR 31PLOT D1, B21B1-D11LOCATE HP 1, HP2, A1IF A<>1 THEN S(PT)=$(PT)+8-PIR 404 HP1=601HP2=81B1=INT (RND (0) 811+32); B2=31 405 CP=1160SUB 100 420 IF RC=2 THEN S=S+1:CP=1: GOSUB 1001 GOTO 420 430 IF RC=1 THEN NEXT PT.60TO 500 435 GOSUB 3000 440 IF 12=1 OR D2=37 OR (D2=14 AND D1> 45) THEN M2=-M21GOSUB 2001 BOTO 420 442 IF D1<27 OR DI=46 OR D1=71 THEN MI --M11GOSUB 2001 BOTO 420 444 A-113M1E-M2121M2-A/21BOSUB 200160 continued on page 45 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 43 "


"SCORE 24447 CC THE LATEST AND, INDEED, THE GREATEST OF THE KANSAS ARCADE SERIES ARCADE SCRAMBLE Don't waste your time playing the simple starts to the Big Five games get straight into the heavy action with this brand-new multi-action, home grown 'Arcade game. Yes, it's the famous one of the Arcades, and the first time it's ever been achieved on a computer, Not that easy though, for without warning suddenly there's a squadron of enemy fighters heading straight at you hell bent on your destruction. Then comes the ack-ack flung at you from the ground batteries to add to your difficulties, and there's the cluster of blimps to make things even more difficult. But the real nasties are the rockets, which the enemy blast at you, without warning, from the ground installations. Even if you manage to out-shoot, out-fight, out-manoeuvre that little lot, you still have the mountains to negotiate which is a problem with the fighters streaming through the only available space. But with this really unbelievable game, you have no less than six different controls at your fingertips, being able to move your bomber forward, backward, up and down, whilst at the same time both firing your guns at the enemy and bombing the installations. The installations include rocket launch pads, ack-ack batteries, forts, munition dumps and fuel dumps. You do your damnedest to destroy these as they unfold below, so building up your score. There is so much happening it really is unbelievable with sound adding to the realism of this ultra-fast moving game. .50 Programs are for the Tandy TRS 80 and Video Genie. All prices are VAT paid and postage free. Same day return first class post service. All software fully guaranteed and in stock as we are the actual publishers, not the retailers. Free catalogue upon request. kansas 0246 850357. KANSAS CITY SYSTEMS, UNIT 3, SUTTON SPRING WOOD, CHESTERFIELD S44 5XF. Circle No. 115 ZX80/81 HARDWARE/SOFTWARE .95 2K RAM PACK 4K RAM PACK 16K KIT .95 .95 .95 DEFLEX LIFE & 3D 3D .95 on one cassette ZX KEYBOARD 16K SOFTWARE CASSETTES from .95 7 Two RAM 80/81 KEY 16K SOFTWARE 2K & 4K RAM Static Ram memory expansion for the 80/81. They both work with onboard Ram i.e. 4K plus onboard = 5K. This is the cheapest small memory expansion available anywhere. 16K RAM Massive add-on memory for 80/81. 16K KIT-A-KIT VERSION of a 16K Ram. Full instructions included. All memory expansions plug into the user port at the rear of the computer. As seen at the ZX Microfair. DEFLEX This totally new and very addictive game, which was highly acclaimed at the Microfair, uses fast moving graphics to provide a challenge requiring not only quick reaction, but also clever thinking. One and two player versions on same cassette. .95 3D/3D LABYRINTH You have all seen 3D Labyrinth games, but this goes one stage beyond; you must manoeuvre within a cubic maze and contend with corridors which may go left/right/up/down. Full size 3D graphical representation. .95 CENTIPEDE This is the first implementation of the popular arcade game on any micro anywhere. Never mind your invaders etc this is positively shining, the speed at which this runs makes ZX invaders look like a game of simple snap. .95 Please add .00 p/p for all hardware. Software p/p free. Specify ZX80/81 on order. ALL OUR PRODUCTS ARE COVERED BY A MONEY BACK GUARANTEE A full size keyboard for the 80/81. The keyboard has all the 80/81 functions on the keys, and will greatly increase your programming speed. It is fitted with push type keys as in larger computers. The keyboard has been specially designed for the Sinclair computer and is supplied ready-built. It also has facilities for 4 extra buttons which could be used for on/off switch, reset, etc. K'tronics 23 Sussex Road, Gorleston, Great Yarmouth, Norfolk. Telephone: Yarmouth (0493) 602453 Circle No. 116 44 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"MINI continued from page 43 0,\"S TURN.CP715 B1-INT (RND (0) 18) +43, B2=331HP 1-331H P2=13: GOSUB 100 720 IF RC-2 THEN S=5+11CP=11GOSUB 1001 BOTO 720 730 IF RC1 THEN NEXT PT, BOTO 800 740 GOSUB 3000 750 IF 02-1 OR D2=37 OR (D2=25 AND DI 41) THEN W22-M2160SUB 2001GOTO 720 752 IF Di=23 OR D1=40 OR D1=56 THEN M1 --#1:60SUB 2001GOTO 720 . 754 IF D1<40 AND D2(11 THEN A-M1M12821M2-A/21BOSUB 200160TO 720 756 A=N11N1-N212:M2=A/2-GOSUB 2001 BOTO 1120 IF RC 2 THEN S=S+11CP=1160SUB 100 1 GOTO 1120 1130 IF RC 1 THEN NEXT PT. GOTO 2000 1140 GOSUB 3000 1150 IF 02-37 OR 12-2 OR D2-28 THEN M2 -M21 BOSUB 2001 BOTO 1120 1152 IF Di=19 OR D1-53 OR ((D1-28 ORD 1244) AND D2>26) THEN MI-M11 BOSUB 200 1 BOTO 1120 1154 IF (D1>37 AND D2>13) OR (D1<36 AN D D2(14) THEN A=#11N1-N2121M2--A/2160 SUB 2001 BOTO 1120 1156 A=W11N1-N2121N2-A/21 BOSUB 200 1160 GOTO 1120 2000 BRAPHICS O PRINT FINAL SCORE 'PRINT PRINT\" PLAYER SCORE\": PR 720 950 IF DI=15 OR D1=55. OR (D1-39 AND D2 >26) THEN NIE-M1260BUB 2001GOTO 920 952 IF D2=37 OR D2=7 OR D2=27 THEN M2= -M2: GOSUB 2001BOTO 920 954 IF D1(25 AND D2<17 THEN A=11M1-M 212.22-A/2160SUB 200160TO 920 956 A=#11M1=2121N2-A/21 GOSUB 200-60TO 920 1000 GOSUB 40 COLOR 21 FOR A=27 TO 361P LOT 29, A: DRANTO 43, ANEXT AUFOR A=1 TO 81PLOT 29-A, 27-A1 DRANTO 43+A, 27-A 1002 PLOT 21, 19-As DRANTO 52,19-A1 PLOT 21+A, 11-A1 DRANTO 52-A, 11-A1 NEXT A 1004 COLOR 1: PLOT 30, 111 DRAWTO 33,141D RANTO 33, 21: DRANTO 36, 24: PLOT 37,241 DR ANTO 40,211 DRAWTO 40,14: DRANTO 43,11 1010 PRINT HOLE 8 PAR 3Pa31FO R PT-1 TO MP: -11 PRINT 26 (PT110-9, PTti 2005 FOR ANI TO NP-PRINT Z8(A110-9, Ati 0) ; ';8(A)NEXT A 2010 PRINT PRINT \"PLAY AGAIN (Y/N)'). 2020 GOSUB 30001A-PEEK (764)IF A(>43 A ND A(>35 THEN 2020 2030 IF A=43 THEN RUN 2040 PRINT PRINT PRINT \"BOOD BYE.\"1C LOSE 011 END 3000 SOUND 0,50,10,10 3005 HH-HH-101 IF HH 2 AND HH-6 THEN H H-2 3010 SOUND 0,200,10,10 3020 SOUND 0,0,0,01 RETURN 9999 END 0) 800 GOSUB 40: COLOR 21FOR A=25 TO 361PL OT 31, A1 DRANTO 45, A1 NEXT A FOR A#1 TO 111 PLOT 31,25-A: DRANTO 51+A, 25-A B01 NEXT A 802 FOR A-2 TO 13: PLOT 31, A1 DRANTO 62, A1 NEXT A COLOR 11FOR A=1 TO 21 PLOT 30+ A, 241 DRANTO 39+A, 151 NEXT A 804 PLOT 41, 15: DRANTO 41,101 PLOT 49,10 DRAWTO 49,4 810 PRINT HOLE #6 PAR 391P31FOR PT=1 TO MP1S=1:PRINT 28 (PT810-9, PT110 17\"S TURN' 815 BI-INT (RND (0) 18)*341B2=331HP 1=351H P2*13:CP=11 BOSUB 100 820 IF RC2 THEN S=S+11CP=1160SUB 1001 BOTO B20 830 IF RC 1 THEN NEXT PT60T0 900 B40 BOSUB 3000 850 IF 02-5 OR 12=1 OR D2=37 OR (D2-25 AND D1345) OR ((D2-10) AND (D1-41 OR D1-49)) THEN M2=-N2160SUB 2001 BOTO 820 852 IF D1=30 OR DIE46 OR D1=63 OR DIE 9 OR (1-41 AND D2(*16) THEN M1-M1760 SUB 2001 SOTO 820 854 AW1111-12121 M2-A/2160SUB 200160 TO 820 900 GOSUB 401COLOR 21FOR A=1 TO 91PLOT 25-A, 37-A1 DRANTO 54,37-A1 PLOT 15-A, 17 -A1 DRAWTO 51-A, 17-A1NEXT A 902 FOR A-21 TO 271PLOT 16, A1 DRANTO 54 A1 MEIT AIFOR A-1 TO 41PLOT 16, 16+A1 DR ANTO 50+A, 16+A: NEXT A 904 COLOR 11PLOT 38, 111 DRANTO 50,231 PL OT 38, 16: DRAWTO 45, 23: PLOT 26, 27DRANT 0 38,27 906 PLOT 39,271 DRANTO 39,36 910 PRINT HOLE 7 PAR 3\":P=31FOR PT=1 TO NP:S=11PRINT ZS (PT110-9, PT110 ,\"S TURN 915 BI-INT (RND (0) 18)+441B2=331HP 1-33:H P2=32:CP= 1 BOSUB 100 920 IF RC=2 THEN S+S+11CP=1160SUB 100 BOTO 920 930 IF RC 1 THEN NEXT PT, BOTO 1000 940 BOSUB 3000 1015 B1=INTIRND (0) 18+32) 1B2=33: HP1=363 HP2-175CP311 BOSUB 100 1020 IF RC=2 THEN S=S+11CP=BOSUB 100 1 BOTO 1020 1030 IF RC 1 THEN NEXT PT160T0 1100 1040 BOSUB 3000 1050 IF D2-37 OR D2=2 THEN M2=-N2-GOSU B 200:GOTO 1020 1051 IF D1=33 OR D140 THEN IF 12:21 0 R 12-14 THEN 1054 1052 IF 01-20 OR D1-53 OR D1-33 OR DIE 40 OR D1=28 OR D1=44 THEN MI=-1180SUB 200:60TO 1020 1054 IF (D1>43 AND D2>18) OR (D1(30 AN D D211) OR (D1>36 AND D1<44) THEN A=# 11H2=-2621M2--A/21BOSUB 2001GOTO 1020 1056 ANI1N1-N2821M2-A/2: BOSUB 200 1060 BOTO 1020 1100 BOSUB 401COLOR 2FOR A=27 TO 361P LOT 29, A1 DRANTO 43, At NEXT A1FOR A-3 TO 271PLOT 20, A1 DRANTO 52, A. NEXT A 1102 COLOR 11PLOT 34, 101 DRANTO 31, 131P LOT 39,101 DRANTO 42,131 PLOT 27, 14. DRAN TO 35, 221PLOT 38,221 DRANTO 46,14 1110 PRINT HOLE #9 PAR 4\":P= F0 R PT=1 TO NP13=13PRINT 28 (PT110-9,PTt1 0);\"'S TURN\" 1115 BIRINT (RND (0) 18+32) B2=331HP1=361 HP2=17:CP-1180SUB 100 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 45 "


"VIC-20 BY IVOR STONES RUNS IN 3.5K POT ON A VIC-20 Not just anybody can get glass as it falls. would do well to note how tions. served in the Computer & When you score six hits in well Pot Shot puts 10 of the 6) If no keys are pressed Video Games City Saloon one round, the game golden game rules into the \"attract mode\" shows Newcomers are chal becomes harder and you practice: game operation lenged to prove that they have to hit just the handle 1) It is visually novel. 7) Appropriate sound are good enough to drink for all subsequent rounds. 2) As a reaction game it is effects add to the overall with the other games play. Don't worry about the bar hard but not so hard that impact. ers. The only way to prove bill, as many drinks as you maximum scores cannot be 8) Complicated character what a games player's gotta want will be provided by obtained. strings have been put in as prove, is by demonstrating your landlord, Vic! 3) As the player improves data statements and odd your nerve and reactions in Pot Shot is one of those the game automatically symbols have been kept to a a few rounds of Pot Shot. deceptively simple but gets harder. minimum to aid entry by The bar tender will fill compulsive games. The 4) The rules are easy to readers. your glass and slide it along graphics show just what understand and are printed 9) Key program sections the bar top to you. It will go can be obtained using the in an interesting way. indicated by REMarks. over the edge and fall to the VIC-20's built-in character 5) The game does not 10) The game makes the floor. You must fire at just set. require constant resetting most of the computer's the right moment to hit the Aspiring games writers by the player-so no interrup-facilities and memory. 46 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"SHOT REM VIC POT SHOT 1 REM (C) I A STONES..MR.MICRO LTD 2 REM P.O.BOX24.SWINTON. MANCHESTER.M273AL 3 RR=73: BB=168: CC=183 5 RESTORE : SC=0 7 POKE36879, 25: REM SCREEN COLOUR 9 SO=36876: V=36878: REM SOUND & VOL. 11 REM DATA FOR R$ 13 A$=\"\":FORI=1 T027 : READA: A$=R$+CHR$(A): NEXT 15 DATA18, 158.46.17, 157, 157, 146, 172, 18, 32,17,157, 203,17,157, 146,28,223, 18, 223 17 DATA17, 157, 157, 169, 146, 169, 144 19 REM DATA FOR G$ 21 G$=\"\":FORI=1 T035: READA: G$=G$+CHR$CA) : NEXT 23 DATA144, 175, 18, 17, 157, 162, 162, 162, 164, 164, 164, 145, 157, 146, 172, 17, 17 25 DATA157, 157, 157,205,203, 18, 32, 223, 146, 17, 157, 157, 157, 163, 223, 18, 32, 146 27 REM DATA FOR B$ 29 B$=\"\":FORI=1 T012: READA:B$B$+CHR$(A): NEXT 31 DATA31,167,17,157, 167, 164, 165, 157, 145, 157, 167,201 33 REM DATA FOR C$ 35 C$=\"\":FORI=1 T025: READA: C$=C$+CHR$CA): NEXT 37 DATA31, 145,32,32,32,17,157, 157, 157, 167, 17, 157, 167, 18, 32,146,32,32, 145, 157, 15 39 DATA157, 167,201,32 41 A=7680: B=22: E=A+19*B+12: F=0 45 PRINT\"\"; 47 PRINT\" L IVE. RESH CITY SALOON\" 49 FORGAME=1T06: R=0 51 D$=\" DI\" 53 Z$=\"ALITATORI RIRINIRAIRIRINI NINIRINIAN\" 55 PRINT\" SAINT\" TAB(19)A$ 57 PRINTTAB(17)B$ 59 IFSC=OTHENPRINT \"A \":FORI=1T06: PRINT\" \"; NEXT: PRINT PRINT\" \"; 61 IFSC=OTHENFOR I =1 T06: PRINT\"2 \"; NEXT:PRINT 63 IFSC=OTHENPRINT\" T 65 PRINTLEFT$(Z$, 11)\" ? 67 PRINT 69 PRINT\" INI ILI \" 71 PRINT\" TRIINI 73 PRINT\" RIIIIII 75 PRINT\" II 77 PRINT\" I ! 79 PRINT\" IRLL L \" 81 PRINTLEFT$(Z$, 19) TAB(13)G$: J=1 83 IFH<1 THENGOSUB183 84 REM FILL GLASS 85 POKEV,8: FORI=128T0240: POKESO, I POKESO-1.1 87 IFI/8=INTCI/8) THENPRINTLEFT$(Z$. 10) TAB(18)MID$(D$,J,1); : JEJ+1 89 NEXT: POKESO, O POKEV, POKESO-1,0 91 POKE198,0: REM CLEAR KEYBOARD BUFFER 93 PRINTTAB(19) \"E\". 94 REM MOVE GLASS 95 FORI=17TOSTEP-1: PRINT \"SINTAINICIACIMINTABIC$: GOSUB141: IFI=13THENGOSUB123 97 NEXT 98 REM MOVE GLASS DOWN 99 FORI=1T013: PRINTLEFT$(Z$. I +9) C$\"IT: GOSUB141 : NEXT PRINTLEFT$(Z$,22)\" 101 PRINTZ$\"\"; 103 POKEE-2+F, 32 continued on page 49 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 47 "


"An education in computers starts with you! If you are a responsible parent you will want to know what your children are being taught in schools about the new technology. Many parents are diligent members of their local PTA. From January we shall carry a regular feature looking at the many ways PTAs have helped schools raise money for computers. peripherals and software The best way of keeping yourself directly informed is to subscribe to Educational Computing There is another side to microcomputing, just as interesting as games: especially if you are a responsible parent or a teacher with responsibility for teaching computing or using computers as teaching aids. Computers in Education is an important and expanding field the implications. and potential is only just beginning to be realised If you have children, or are a teacher you have a responsibility to keep yourself informed of developments in this area. Educational Computing is written for you. Every issue is packed with useful and up to date information covering product news, conference news, opinions, advice application stories, case studies and a forum for you to discuss your concerns and interests Each month we select a specific applications area In the past we have looked at such subjects as Mathematics, Home Economics, Business Studies and Engineering. In the coming months we will be looking at Social Sciences. English, Computer Science and History. We show the many interesting ways people are using computers as teaching aids. And give practical advice and guidance. Educational Computing also publishes comprehensive surveys that are packed with the kind of information you need to know. In the past we have looked at systems costing less than . Educational software. courses and training. If you are a teacher, the nature of your job and the responsibilities that go with it demand that you keep yourself informed of current affairs and little is going to affect you, your colleagues and your students in this respect as much as computers. Stop Press Special notice : Special notice : Special notice From the January issue onwards Educational Computing will publish the official newsletter of MEP (Microelectronics in Education Project) all the latest details of their activities will be available. So make sure you take out your subscription now Simply fill out the form Educational computing I enclose a cheque for .50 (U.K.): Europe : non-Europe . Ten issues a year Cheques should be made payable to Educational Computing. Name Position Computerlearning Survey: Singi wuard computers Birectory of software Establishment Address PLUS: News, Views, Schools Report and much more Signed Date Educational Computing NOW POST PLEASE TO: Educational Computing, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1 5JB the magazine looking to the future. 48 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"VIC-20 PATSHOT Continued from page 47 104 REM SMASH GLASS 105 F$=\" 107 POKEV, 15: POKE36877,200 109 FORI=1T016: PRINTMID$(F$.1.1); POKEV, 16-I: FORJ=1T0200: NEXT: NEXT 111 POKE36877,0 113 PRINTZ$\"3 115 PRINT\" ___7\":FORJ=1T0200: NEXT: PRINT\" . 117 GOSUB131 119 FEO: H=1 : NEXTGAME 121 GOTO173 122 REM SUB TO MOVE ARM 123 PRINT\" IRIART\" TAB(19) \"2V 125 PRINTTAB(18)\" 127 PRINTTAB(16) \" \" 129 PRINTTAB(19) \"2 \" : RETURN 131 PRINT\" NALITA\" TAB(19)\" \" 133 PRINTTAB(18)\" 135 PRINTTAB(16)\" 137 PRINTTAB(19)\" \": RETURN 139 RETURN 141 IFFCOTHEN147 143 REM TEST FOR SPACE BAR 145 GETK$: IFK$(\" \"THENFORJ=1 T020: NEXT : RETURN 147 F=F-1: IFF=-11 THENF=0: RETURN 149 IFFC-2 THENPOKE36877,0: POKEV.: GOTO153 151 POKE36877, 190: POKEV, 15 152 REM CHECK IF HIT 153 P=PEEK(E-2+F): IFR=1 THENRETURN 155 IFP=AAORP=BBORP=CCTHENGOSUB161 : R=1: RETURN 157 POKEE-2+F, 119: POKEE-2+F+30720,0: POKEE-1+F, 32: POKE8098,32 159 RETURN 160 REM HIT 161 SC=SC+1 FORJ=1T02*SC:POKEA+3+B+J, 32: NEXT 163 FORJ=1T02*SC : POKEA+4*B+J, 32:NEXT 165 FORZ1=1 T05 167 POKEV, 15:FORZ=20070230: POKESO, Z NEXT: FORZ=230T0200STEP-1: POKESO, Z NEXT: POKE So, 169 NEXTZ1 171 RETURN 172 REM PRINT SCORE 173 PRINT\" YOU GOT \"SC\"IL OUT OF 6 175 IFSC=6THENPRINT\" SHARPSHOOTER\":PRINT\"DO I TAKE IT YOU DON'TWANT A DRINK? 177 FORI=1T08000: NEXT: H=1: IFSC=6THENBB=AA 179 IFSC=6ANDBB=RATHENCC=AA 181 GOTO5 182 REM INSTRUCTIONS 183 READX$: IFX$=\"#\"THENRETURN 185 FORI=1 TOLENCX$) 187 PRINT\"0\"TAB(20)MID$X$,11) 189 PRINT\"DOLCHR$(20): FORDELAY=1 T0100: NEXT 191 NEXTI:GOTO183 193 DATA\" VIC POT SHOT,\" THE BAR TENDER WILL POUR YOU A DRINK, \",\" AND \" 195 DATASLIDE IT ALONG THE BAR TOP... YOU MUST SHOOT THE GLASS .... BEFORE IT HI TS 197 DATA\" THE FLOOR ...USING THE SPACE BAR TO FIRE...... FOLLOWING 6 HITS\" 199 DATA\"IN A ROW, THE GLASS WILL ONLY BREAK IF THE BULLET STRIKES THE HANDLE.. 201 DATA\"... YOUR FIRST DRINK IS COMIN' UP 203 DATA\"#\" READY. "


"TANDY \"ROUND THE HORN RUNS ON THE TRS-80 LEVEL II 16K. BY GEORGE BLANK 'ROUN HOI Srem The Horn, where our world's two mightiest oceans rage against oneanother, long ago wrote its own stormy passages into seafaring lore. Its unpredictable racing currents, heaving swell and treacherous rocks and reefs, have littered the bleak coastline at the foot of South America with many wrecks. But in the mid 19th Century the rich pickings to be made by North American clippers made captains risk their vessels and sailors, their lives, once again in the race to be fastest 'Round the Horn. George Blank has recreated the golden age of the clippers and their most hazardous route in this computerised test of seamanship a race between three ships from New York to California. The discovery of gold at Sutter's Mill in 1849 triggered a hurried migration to California that lasted for several years. While few prospectors struck it rich, many shippers did by shipping men and supplies to California. The highest freight and passenger rates went to the fastest ships, and three of the fastest were the Surprise, the Flying Cloud and the Challenge. The Surprise was owned by A. A. Low and Brother, and her captain was Phillip Dumaresq. This clipper, displacing 1261 tons, sailed in December of 1849 on a record breaking run to San Francisco of 96 days, 15 hours. The high demand for fast shipping, not only in the California trade but in the trans-Atlantic trade to Liverpool and the China tea and spice trade as well, led to the golden age of the clipper ship. Two of the greatest were launched within weeks of each other in 1851, and raced to California amidst great publicity. They were the Flying Cloud and the Challenge. The Flying Cloud, owned by Grinnel. Minturn and Company, was captained by Josiah Cressy. This ship of 1782 tons left on June 2, 1851 and set a new record for the California trade of 89 days and 21 hours. This record stood for several years, partly due to stormy weather that moved the ship to record breaking speeds of over 300 miles a day several times. (The ship did suffer damage to her masts and rigging.) The Challenge sailed a few weeks later and ran into very calm weather, leading to a disappointing but still impressive time of 108 days. Captained by Bob \"Bully\" Waterman, the Challenge was the largest ship of her day at 2006 tons and was owned by N. L. & G. Griswold. This computer program tampers with history a little to allow the three ships to sail from New York on the same day on a race to San Francisco. You will captain one of the ships and attempt to find favourable winds and currents that will allow you to get to San Francisco first. It is by no means certain you will arrive in San Francisco. The passage around Cape Horn is dangerous, and many vessels were wrecked there. If you try to sail through the doldrums at an angle and have bad luck, you could spend months right there. The computer will display a map of North and South America, with New England indicated by the letter N and San Francisco by the letter S. Your position will be indicated by an exclamation mark, and that of the other vessels by the first letter of their name, assuming that they are not in the same square. To win, all you have to do is sail your ship into the square containing the S in the fewest days. As soon as WEST LINDIES HUMBAT PER PERU CURRENT ARGENTINA NOTICE TO MARINERS 1) Observe special caution in Long Island Sound, Eastern U.S. coast at 40 degrees north latitude. Onshore current is treacherous, especially when combined with southerly winds. 2) The Cape Horn Passage is extremely dangerous. For safe passage, remain south of 55 degrees, 30 minutes until longitude 72 degrees west and south of 46 degrees latitude until longitude 84 degrees west. Dangerous polar ice is virtually certain south of 64 degrees south latitude. 3) The Caribbean Sea contains many unmarked reefs and is especially hazardous without local knowledge. 4) Vessels are advised to maintain good distance from the northeast coast of South America. Light winds and flat calms, combined with unfavourable currents, make long delays likely 5) Vessels bound for California are advised to set course well west of the southern coast of Mexico. Light winds make delays likely. 6) Beware of all capes. Reefs often project out from them and make sudden shipwreck likely. (Computer only checks for land due north, east, south, and west. If you approach a cape from the northeast, for example, you will run aground before any land is displayed.) 50 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"OCEAN CURRENTS NAME 132W 129W-114W VD THE ORN 63W 39W Japan current Japan current Gulf Stream Gull Stream Canaries current N. Equa, current Guinea current S. Equ. current Humbolt current Brazil current Benguela current West wind drift 48N-32N 32N-19.2N 48N-32N 32N-19.2N 48N-28N 19.2N-BN BN-O 0-9.25 9.25-27.65 925 27 55 9.25-27.68 4425-64.45 24W NAME Japan current Japan current Gulf Stream Gulf Stream Canaries current N. Equ, current Guines current S. Equ. current Husocus Brazil current Benguela current West wind drift South South ENE North SSW West East West North South North West CLIMATIC REGIONS &N Horse Latitudes Northeast Trades Doldrums Southeast Trades Roaring Forties Strong and variable Moderate from Northeast Calm and variables Moderate from Southeast Strong and Westerly 64S DODRUMS WTER E. CURKANT change it back when the wind changes back. Should you wish to make a course correction, you may press \"Z\" for a 22.5° turn to starboard (right for you landlubbers) or \"/\" for a NORTH-SOUTH WEST-EAST turn to port. You will find it especially helpful to keep one finger on the \"Z\" and one on the \"/\" when you are making the passage around Cape Horn. In the centre of the screen, directly above the waves, the computer will display any land that is in sight. Don't count on seeing land before DIRECTION SPEED (KNOTS) you run aground! Sometimes you will see it in time and sometimes not. It is safer but sometimes slower) to stay away from the coast completely. There are some navigational aids provided by the computer. You have a compass in the centre of the ship. and a nameplate under it. When the computer accepts a course change, it will display \"PORT\" or \"STARB'D\" where the nameplate is. At the bottom left is information on the direction the wind is coming NAME SOUTHERN LIMIT TYPICAL WINDS from and the windspeed. The bottom right displays the ship's calendar and your last navigation position. Expert players will want to depend on this latitude and longitude disyou enter any point in that square, play extensively, for the map and the computer will print an arrival land displays give only a rough notice. indication. As a help to players, I You will begin each turn by have enclosed a table of ocean curindicating the course you wish to rents, a table of climatic regions, sail. While the computer asks for a and some notices to mariners, all of number, it will also respond to \"N\". which relate to the latitude and \"E\", \"S\", and \"W\" for North, East longitude. South, and West. Landlubbers may assume that a Once you have entered a course, ship will sail in the direction she is the computer will display your ship pointed, but \"it ain't necessarily so\". the ocean, any land in sight from the Two other factors affect your bow, and your fore topmast staysail. course: leeway and current. Leeway The size and position of your sail is the result of the wind blowing you will indicate the tack you are on. The off course in the direction it is blowwind comes across the side of your ing. Current carries you in the direcship opposite the sail. The three tion the water is flowing sizes of sail indicate that you are Weather is also a factor, but there close hauled, (sailing into the wind) is a trick to it: the computer only on a reach, (wind coming from the checks the region at the beginning of side) or running, (wind at your back). each turn. So, you can wait just The larger the sail, the faster you are north or south of the Doldrums for a going. good wind, and possibly get comShips cannot sail directly into the pletely across without getting stuck. wind, and yours is no exception. In If you think this is cheating enter fact, it will not sail closer than 45 to this line in your program: the direction from which the wind is 1110 GOSUB 7000: GOSUB 7600 coming. The computer will The region will then be checked on automatically change your course if each half-day, but the game may the wind shifts against you, and take longer 10 REM 1 AROUND THE HORN : 20 REM 1 COPYRIGHT 1978 GEORGE BLANK LEECHBURG PA 156561 30 GOSUB 3000 99 INITIALIZE 100 CLEAR 600 110 DIA D (3) DIN ELS, DIP H 15 DIN 4716,3): DIE NIS, 12) DIP . 3,2):DIM T(3,2):DIM V(15):DIN W(5, 4) 120 DIN DS (15) 130 FOR A=0T015: READ DS (A):READ H(A): READ V(A): NEXT 140 FOR A=1T03: READ CS(A): NEXT 160 WS (0)='1.11,..... ... .....!!}]}},..1... . COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 51 EU CURRENT os BRAZIL HORSE carmen LATITUDES VERANT KAZIL HORN C PCAKES PASSAGE "


"TANDY 170 NS (1) ELEFTS (#5 (0), 16):WS (2) =MIDSINS (0), 3,16):NS (3)=MIDS (NS (0 ),6,16):WS (4) NIDS (US (0),9,16):WS (5)=RIGHTS (WS 10), 16) 190 FOR A=1T03:N{A,1)=35:N(A,2)=1.1:N(A, 3)=99:N(A,4)=1:N(A,5)=11 NEXT 200 FOR A=1T05:N(A,1)=29+RND (100)/100: NEXT 210 w(1,1)=(1,1)+1;W(3,1)=(3,1)-1 220 FOR A=1T03:N(A,B)=(1,1): NEXT 300 CLS:PRINT 310 PRINT CLIPPER A RACE AROUND THE HORN TO CALIFORNIA IN 1852 320 PRINT:PRINT HON MANY PLAYERS (1 TO 3)?\" 330 ASINKEYS: IF A$=\"\" THEN 330 ELSE PEVAL (AS) 340 IF P<1 THEN P=1 350 IF P>3 THEN P=3 360 IF P<3 THEN N(3,0)=-10 370 IF P=1 THEN N12,0)=-10 380 PRINT P; \"PLAYER\" ; 1 IF P1 THEN PRINTES\", 390 PRINT 999 CONTROL ROUTINE 1000 IF N(1,0)=-10 AND N(2,0)=-10 AND N(3,0)=-10 THEN 2300 1010 GOSUB 7500 1020 FOR C=1TOP 1025 IF MC,0)=-10 THEN 1170 1030 GOSUB 7000: GOSUB 7600: GOSUB 7700 1040 GOSUB 9000 1050 GOSUB 8000 1060 FOR CL=1T014 1062 IF WR=1 THEN 1150 1065 GOSUB 8200 1070 GOSUB 8040 1075 GOSUB 8200 1080 GOSUB 2060 1085 IF INT (CL/2)=CL/2 THEN (C)=D(C) +1 1090 GOSUB 8300 1100 GOSUB 8200 1120 GOSUB 7700 1130 GOSUB 8200 1140 GOSUB 8400 1150 NEXT CL 1160 WR=0 1170 NEXT C 1190 GOTO 1000 1999 NEW LOCATION 2000 R=N(C, 4):T=0:NIC,0)=N(C, 12) 2009 'PORT TACK 2010 IF NIC,O) N(C, 11) THEN TENIC,0) -N(C, 11):T(C,2)=2: IF T-1 THE NT-2:NIC,0) = N(C,0) +1 2019 'STARBOARD TACK 2020 IF NIC,O) CN(C, 11) THEN TEN (C, 11) -NIC,0):T(C,2)=1: IF T=1 THE =2; NÉ,0} = (,0) 2025 IF NC,0) >15 THEN NIC,0) = 0 2030 IF T=0 THEN NIC,0)=NIC,0) 116OTO 2020 2035 IF NIC, OX CO THEN NIC,0)=16+NC,0) 2040 IF T) THEN T-16-T 2050 IF T1 THEN M.6 TIC,1)=1: IF T>3 THEN M-1:T(C, 1)-2. IF T>5 T HEN M=1.2:1 (0,1)=3 2052 IF TIC,1))S(, 1) OR TIC, 2)(>810,2) THEN GOSUB 2500 2055 M-MINC, 5)INC, 10/8: 60TO 8050 2060 DEN (CO): HEN (C, 1):V=NIC, 2):L-WR, 4)+8:IF L15 THEN L-L-16 2070 H=H+ (HD) IM)/6+H(L)/6001NC, 10) +N IC, 67/30 2080 V=Y+(VID) IN)/10+V (L)/10001N (C, 10) +NC,7)/50 2085 GOSUB 2400 2090 MC, 1) =H:NC,2)=V: N(C,3)=INT (V)164+INT (H) 2100 IF NIC, 3)=145 THEN 2600 2190 RETURN 2200 CLS 2210 PRINT 2220 PRINT SOS ...-... SOS ...-... SOS 2230 PRINT 2240 PRINT' SHIPWRECK!\" 2250 PRINT 2260 PRINT THE CLIPPER \"C${C)WAS LOST AT SEA WITH ALL HANDS 2265 GOSUB 2700 2270 NIC,0)=-101E(C, 11-21E (0,2)=H:E (C,3)=V: E(0,4)=D (C):N(C, 3)=99 2275 PRINT'LAST REPORTED POSITION \"11 PRINT USING F8;LAJ: PRINT US ING 68;LO 2280 FOR A=1T02000: NEXT A 2290 WR=1: RETURN 2299 'END OF GAME 2300 CLS:PRINT:PRINT GAME OVER\":PRINT 2310 FOR C=1TOP 2320 IF EC,1)=2 THEN 2350 2330 PRINT THE CLIPPER \"C$ (C); SAILED TO SAN FRANCISCO INTE! C, 4); \"DAYS 2340 PRINT: GOTO 2370 2350 PRINT THE C$ (C)WAS LOST AT SEA AFTER\"; E(C, 4); ' DAYS 2360 H=E(C, 2): V=EIC, 3) GOSUB 2700:PRINT NEAR PRINT USING FS; LA;:PRINT USING 6$;LO 2365 PRINT 2370 NEXT C 2380 INPUT\" (PRESS ENTER FOR NEW GAME)\"; AS 2390 RUN 2400 B$=\"### DAYS\":PRINTO 951,\"\"; 2410 PRINT USING B$;D(C); 2420 GOSUB 2700 2430 PRINTO 1005,\"; 2440 PRINT USING FS;LA; 2450 PRINT USING 68;L0; 2490 RETURN 2500 IF S(C,2)=T(C,2) THEN 2540 2510 IF SIC, 2)2 THEN X=615(C, 1) +1:FOR B-15392T015904 STEP 64;FO R A=B+1 TO B+X:POKE A, 128:NEXT A: X=X+1: NEXT B 2520 IF SIC,2)=1 THEN =615(0,1)+1:FOR B-153927015904 STEP 64;FO R A-B-X TO B-1: POKE A, 128: NEXT A: X=X+11 NEXT B 2530 GOTO 8050 2540 IF T(C,1)>S(C, 1) THEN 2530 2550 IF TIC, 2)-2 THEN X=615(0,1)+9Y=61710, 1) FOR B-15392T015904 STEP 64.FOR AB+Y TO B+X:POKE A, 128: NEXT A: Y-Y+11 NEXTB 2560 IF TIC,2)=1 THEN X+61S (C,1)+9: Y=611(0, 1) FOR B-153927015904 STEP 64:FOR A=B-X TO B-YPOKE A, 128: NEXT A: Y=Y+11 NEXT B 2570 GOTO 8050 2600 CLS:PRINT 2610 PRINT THE CLIPPER CSC);' HAS JUST ARRIVED IN SAN FRANCIS CO 2620 PRINT'AND IS UNLOADING CHOICE EASTERN MERCHANDISE AT THE WH ARF.:PRINT 2630 PRINT\" THIS FAST SHIP,\";D(C); DAYS OUT OF NEW YORK, IS NO 2635 PRINT BOOKING PASSENGERS AND FREIGHT FOR NEW YORK.\" 2640 EC,1)=1: E(C, 4) =D (C):N(C,0)=-10 2650 PRINT:PRINT'TOUCH ANY KEY TO CONTINUE 2660 AS-INKEYS: IF At=\"\" THEN 2660 2690 GOT01000 2700 IF V6 THEN 2740 2710 FS=' ##.#N 2720 LA=16-V) 18.2 2730 GOTO 2760 2740 F$=' #.#S 2750 LA=1V-6) 19.2 2760 6$' 41.44 N 2770 LO=174-H13 2790 RETURN 2999' INSTRUCTIONS 3000 CLS:PRINT 3010 PRINT\" THIS GAME SIMULATES A CLIPPER SHIP RACE AROUND THE HORN\" 3020 PRINT DURING THE CALIFORNIA GOLD RUSH. THE FIRST PERSON TO 60 3030 PRINT\"FROM NEW YORK (N) TO SAN FRANCISCO (S) WINS.\" 3040 PRINT:PRINT\" TO SAIL YOUR SHIP, AT THE BEGINNING OF A TU RN, ENTER\" 3050 PRINT YOUR INTENDED COURSE AS DIRECTED. IF YOU WANT TO CHAN BE continued on page 55 "


"Silicon Chip MAIN DISTRIBUTORS Economice to the area of social ve which deals with ATARI Oletribution Consumption It is sometimes called \"Political Economy Economice ay be ignored. until disturbances occur which affect our prosperity. or our jobs. Blend business with pleasure * One Year's Guarantee * Programming Courses * Maintenance Contracts * Software Services *All Atari Prices include VAT * Part exchange welcome OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO OOOOOOOOOOOOO QOOOOOOOOOOOO OOOOOOOOOOOO IJ. High resolution graphics with up to 320/192 Possible Points * Querty keyboard touch type on Atari 400 and four function keys. * LE Background colour. plotting colour text colour, and border colour settable to any one of 16 colours with eight levels of illuminance * Both shops are open for full demonstrations. Software is in cassette form or ROM modules Also plug-in cartridges with higher resolution graphics than APPLE Cheaper than PET and is also expandable (very flexible system/ The following printers are compatible with Atari The following printers available ex-stock. 150 CPS DOT MATRIX PRINTER  25 CPS WORD PROCESSING PRINTER ,495 55 CPS NEC DAISEY WHEEL PRINTER ,695 EPSOM MX 80 FT  EPSOM MX 100  CENTRONICS 7371 2  OKI MICROLINE 80  All above prices plus VAT Full screen editing and four-way cursor control Benefit now 40 character by 24 line display * Four channel synthesiser which can be played individually or together and each has 1785 possible sounds playable at any one of eight volume settings for game sounds or music chords * Video display has upper and lower case characters and quad size text and inverse video Atari 400 with 16K RAM  Atari 800 with 16K RAM..........  including VAT and one year's exchange guarantee Atari Accessories Light Pen 410 Cassette  810 Disc Drive  822 Thermal Printer.....  825 80 Column DOT MATRIX  850 RS232 Interface  16K RAM Expansion..  Atari Software 28 Different Programmes at Launch from .95 Circle No. 118  Software written by Silicon Chip will soon be available including Stock Control, Payroll, Mail Shot Payroll package now available 302 High Street, Slough, Berkshire Tel (07531 70639 50 London Road Kingston upon Thames, Surrey Tel 01-549 6657 Silicon Chip COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 53 "


"NEW! For Atom Owners MICROCOMPUTER COMPONENTS LOWEST PRICES FASTEST DELIVERY THE BIG ONES Price Device Price Price 060 0.22 0.24 Device 74LS95 Device EF6862 EF6871-AIT EF6880 EFGBR EF66408 EF6875 18.70 4078 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.80 9.11 0.19 4.18 0.39 0.69 0.55 7415122 74LS123 741S124 741 S125 74LS126 6502 FAMILY SYPA502 1.00 4.95 0.28 3.15 4502 4507 4508 0.39 Device Price MEMORIES 2114L-200ms 1+1 28 2114-300 1+1 28 2708 450n 1.99 2716 450ns 1+2.49 2716 350 6.95 2532 450ns 1+5.50 2732 450ns 1+4.80 25+408 4116 150rs 1+1.15 25 +1.06 4116 2005 +0.80 25+0.72 6116 200 10.95 4118 200ns 8264 200ns 12.00 5515 2005 22.88 0.28 4.95 SYP6522 SYP6532 7.95 74LS136 74LS138 0.28 034 Acorn are right on target with a whole range of games GET THE BEST FORGET THE REST All Acornsoft games are designed and produced by the manufacturers of the Atom. Trust the manufacturer to get the very best out of his product. Realistic sound effects, great graphics and colour too! SPACE INVADERS This has proved to be the most popular video game ever. And now we've brought it right up to date. Different types of invaders, flying saucers, shelters, laser guns and full sound effects Program 5K, graphics 6K Also in Games Pack 5 Wumpus + Reversi 0.49 4511 4512 BOBO FAMILY BOBSA 5.50 0.75 0.90 1.70 1.70 74LS145 74LS148 74LS151 74LS153 0.75 4516 4518 8224 035 0.39 8251 038 0.28 0.69 1.49 3.95 7.95 4522 0.36 0.70 CMOS 4000 B SERIES 0.89 4527 4528 CRT CONTROLLERS AND GRAPHIC DISPLAY PROCESSORS EF9354 5.94 FF935 62.90 EF9366 5290 0.39 0.39 0.39 74LS156 74LS157 74LS158 74LS160 74LS161 74LS162 7415163 74LS164 74LS165 741 S156 74LS173 0.12 0.89 0.13 4541 0.47 0199 0.50 0.99 BUFFERS 0.17 0.55 0.28 0.28 4555 4556 0.84 0.70 054 0.54 1.30 0.55 0.98 BILS97 BIAS98 8125A 8128A 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90 150 150 1.50 1.50 1.50 74LS175 741S181 74LS190 24LS191 0.55 0.69 0.17 LOW POWER SCHOTTKY 0.33 TTL ICS-74LS SERIES 0.58 74500 5 741 SOL 0.28 74 SO2 0.12 0.45 741SS 0.12 0 58 174LS04 0.13 0.59 4015 4016 BTOTA 8198 0.39 0.39 74LS193 74LS194 74LS195 74LS196 74LS197 74 5221 74LS 240 4018 0.58 0.65 0.60 0.89 350 CHRISTMAS SPECIAL OFFER 0.79 DATA CONVERTERS ZN425FR ZN425-8 3.00 6.28 ZN42BE 8 4.78 2N429E-8 2.10 2N43203-10 28.09 22.59 56 53 10% 0.79 0.79 0.89 74LS 242 74LS 243 74LS 244 7415 245 74LS 247 741 5248 741S249 74LS251 74LS 253 741S257 74LS258 7415259 DISCOUNT ON ANY ORDER IF ACCOMPANIED BY THIS ADVERTISEMENT MISCELLANEOUS 1.00 0.88 0.39 0.39 3.90 3.45 6.95 4019 0.13 054 AY 5-1013 AY-5-2375 MC1488 MC1499 MC14411 MC14412 RD-3-2513L F-251 ZN450E 0.29 0.58 0.60 0.62 0.13 0.13 0.38 0.38 1.90 0.23 0.90 4023 0.14 6.94 7.99 7.70 7.70 7.81 050 0.50 74LS05 74LSOB 74LSO9 74LS10 74LS11 74LS12 74LS13 74LS14 74LS15 741520 0.15 0.22 4025 0.58 44 0.13 4027 7812 7905 7912 0.38 0.16 0.99 0.30 055 1.65 1.60 1.55 0.45 0.34 055 GAMES PACK 1 Asteroids Shoot them before they crash into you. Lists ten best scores. Program 4K, graphics 6K Sub Hunt Command a destroyer tracking a submarine, find its position and destroy it. Program 1K, graphics XK, needs floating point. Breakout Score points knocking bricks from wall. Ball has two changes of angle and speed. Program 3K, graphics 12K. COLOUR GAMES PACK 2 GAMES PACK 3 Dogfight Two player game Rat Trap Move your rats without each player controls a plane and colliding with the trails left. tries to shoot down his opponent Entangle your opponent before without crashing. Program 4K, he entangles you! High-speed rat graphics 6K. action-replay. Program 4K Mastermind Guess the com graphics 6K puter's code before the computer Lunar Lander Land a spacecraft guesses yours, program 3K on a lunar crater, altitude graphics MK, velocity, fuel and drift. Program Zombie Land on Zombie island, 1K, graphics K. try to lure all the zombies Into Black Box Deduce the position the swamp. In desperation jump of four invisible objects in the into hyper spacel Program 3K, Black Box by firing rays at them. graphics K. COLOUR Program 4K, graphics K. GAMES PACK 4 Star Trek Classic computer game, rid the universe of Klingons. Short and long-range scans, galactic map. phasers, photon torpedoes, shields, etc Program 5K, graphics 2K. Four Row Take turns in placing marbles on the board, the first to get a line of four wins. Program 5K, graphics 6K. COLOUR Space Attack Repel the invasions of earth and avoid being hit by the gunner ships Becomes progressively harder with each invasion. Program 3K, graphics 6K. GAMES PACK 7 GAMES PACK 6 Green Things An alien life form Dodgems Steer your car and has invaded your spacecraft, avoid the computer-controlled discover a way of destroying it car programmed to collide. with the weapons available on Survive, and the game gets faster the ship. Program 5K, graphics Program 4K, graphics 6K. 2K. COLOUR Simon Test your ability to Ballistics Take turns in firing remember a progressively longer shells at the other player, taking sequence of lights and tones. into account the wind and shape Adjustable skill level. Program of the hill, Program 3K, graphics 2K, graphics 3K. COLOUR 6K, needs floating point. Amoeba Try and create the Snake Grow yourself a snake by shapes devised by the computer guiding it towards digits which Program K, graphics 3K. it eats. Program 2K, graphics ORDER TODAY! Just send a cheque or money order only .50 per pack including VAT and post and packing. State which packs you want. . Or ring 0223 316039 or 01-930 1614 quoting your Access or Barclaycard number. Allow 14 days for delivery. Or if you think you can wait for more details just write to Acornsoft Limited, 4a Market Hill, Cambridge. 0.55 0.14 4033 7415266 74LS273 74LS279 74LS283 74LS290 74LS 293 74LS365 74LS366 74LS367 741 S368 74LS373 74LS374 74LS375 74LS377 74LS378 74LS379 74LS386 74LS390 74LS393 0.34 0.34 0.34 0.74 0.18 072 *241528 0.19 0.12 ZILOG ZBO FAMILY 280 CPU Z80A CPU 4.82 280 CTC 4.00 ZBOA CTC 4.00 280 DART 7.18 20A DART 7.18 11.52 280A OMA 0.47 74LS32 4042 4043 4044 0.69 0.54 0.59 0.64 0.89 0.89 0.16 0.16 0.16 0.28 74LS37 74LS38 74LS40 74LS42 74LS47 741548 74LS49 0.59 0.59 0.58 0.68 0.54 0.30 0.30 0.59 4048 280 SIDO 20A SIDO 0.60 0.59 LOW PROFILE DIL SOCKETS Number of Pins 13.95 13.95 13.95 13.95 13.95 74LS54 015 007 4053 0.09 0.15 0.20 0.59 1.20 1.20 089 74LS73 74LS74 74.575 EFCIS 6800 FAMILY 3.70 0.95 0.28 0.20 0.24 034 0.17 0.21 0.23 0.25 0.29 11 80 4068 0.17 1.35 741S&b CRYSTALS 0.19 EF6840 EF6845 EF6850 741591 74LS92 950 1.70 4073 4075 0.35 0.344 18432 Mhz Mhz 3.00 2.50 1.85 0.17 74LS93 OFFICIAL CREDIT CARD ORDERS QUANTITY ORDERS WELCOME WELCOME DISCOUNTS AVAILABLE All prices exclude post and packing on orders under  (50p) and VAT (15%). ALL ORDERS DESPATCHED ON DAY OF RECEIPT WITH FULL REFUND FOR OUT OF STOCK ITEMS IF REQUESTED 24-hour Telephone Credit Card Orders ACORNSOFT TAKE GAMES SERIOUSLY MIDWICH COMPUTER CO. LTD. (Dept CV) HEWITT HOUSE, NORTHGATE STREET, BURY ST. EDMUNDS, SUFFOLK IP33 1 HQ TELEPHONE: (0284) 701321 TELEX: 817670 Circle No. 119 54 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES Circle No. 120 "


"3100 PRINT COURSE DURING A TURN, PRESS / CORS) FOR A TURN TO 3110 PRINT STARBOARD (RIGHT) OR PRESS 2 (ORP) TO TURN TO PORT (LEFT).':PRINT 3230 PRINT' ANTARCTIC ICE BEGINS AT 64.4 DEGREES SOUTH. CAPE HO RN\" 3240 PRINT'EXTENDS FROM 69 DEGREES WEST TO 74 DEGREES WEST AT 55 .5 3250 PRINT\" DEGREES SOUTH. IF YOU TOUCH ANY OF THESE BOUNDARIES O R ANY 3260 PRINT\"OTHER LAND MASS, YOU WILL SHIPWRECK. :PRINT: INPUT\" PRESS ENTER)\";AS 3270 CLS:PRINT:PRINT' THE DOLDRUNS EXTEND FROM 8.2 DEGREES NOR TH TO 2.8 DEGREES 3280 PRINT SOUTH. IF YOU FINISH A TURN IN THE DOLDRUMS, IT MAY T AKE\" 3290 PRINT MONTHS TO GET OUT BECAUSE OF LIGHT WINDS. 3300 PRINT:PRINT' THE COMPUTER CONSIDERS ANY POSITION BETWEEN 120 AND 123\" 3310 PRINT\" DEGREES WEST AND 24.6 TO 32.8 DEGREES NORTH TO BE A S AFE 3320 PRINT ARRIVAL IN SAN FRANCISCO. YOUR POSITION IS AFFECTED B 3330 PRINT WIND, CURRENT, LEENAY, AND YOUR SAIL POSITION.\" 3520 PRINT SEE AN ATLAS, GLOBE, OR NAVIGATION CHARTS FOR APPROXI MATE\" 3530 PRINT\"DESCRIPTION OF WEATHER CONDITIONS AND CURRENT. 3540 PRINT: INPUT (PRESS ENTER TO BEGIN), AS 3550 RETURN 3999 COMMANDS 4000 CS=INKEYS 4010 IF CS=\"7\" THEN CS=\"p' 4020 IF CS=\"P' THEN NIC,12)=N(C, 12)-1 4030 IF NIC, 12X<0 THEN NIC,12)=15 4035 IF C$='/' THEN CS=\"S\" 4040 IF CS=\"S' THEN NIC,12)=N(C, 12)+1 4050 IF NIC, 12) >15 THEN NIC,12)=( 4060 IF CS=\"P' THEN PRINTO 985,' PORT \" 4070 IF ($=\"S' THEN PRINTO 985, STARBOARD 4090 RETURN 4999 'SHORELINE 5000 DEN(C,) 5010 ON D+1 GOSUB 5100,5110,5120,5130,5140,5150,5160,5170,5180,5 190, 5200, 5210,5220,5230,5240, 5250 5020 PRINTO 576, AS; 5090 RETURN 5100 A-DW:U=2160SUB 5700: A=DN+U=32:60SUB 57001A=DE:U=61: GOSUB 57 00: RETURN 5110 A-DN:U=16: GOSUB 5700: A=DE:U=58: GOSUB 5700: RETURN 5120 A=DN:U=10: GOSUB 5700: A=DE:U=54: GOSUB 5700: RETURN 5130 A=DN: U=6: GOSUB 5700: A=DE: U-48:GOSUB 5700: RETURN 5140 A-DN1U*21GOSUB 57001A=DE: U=32: GOSUB 57001A=DS1061: GOSUB 57 00: RETURN 5150 A=DE:U=16: GOSUB 5700: A=DS:U*58: GOSUB 5700: RETURN 5160 A=DE:U-10:GOSUB 5700: A=DS:U=54:GOSUB 5700: RETURN 5170 A-DE:U-6: GOSUB 5700: A=DS1U-48:GOSUB 5700: RETURN 5180 A=DE:U-2GOSUB 57001A=DS:Ua32: GOSUB 57001A=DM:U=61GOSUB 57 00: RETURN 5190 A=DS:U=16:GOSUB 57001A=DW:U=58: GOSUB 5700: RETURN 5200 A=DS:U=10: GOSUB 5700: A=DW: U=54: GOSUB 5700: RETURN 5210 A=DS:U=6:60SUB 57001A=DW: U=48:GOSUB 5700: RETURN 5220 A=DS:U=2: GOSUB 5700: A=DW:U=32: GOSUB 5700: A=DN:U-61: GOSUB 57 00:RETURN 5230 A=DW: U=16:GOSUB 5700: A=DN: U=58: GOSUB 5700: RETURN 5240 A-DW: U=10: GOSUB 5700: A=DN: U=54: GOSUB 5700: RETURN 5250 A-DW: U-6: GOSUB 5700:A-DN:U=48:GOSUB 5700: RETURN 5700 Q=A1A 5710 IF Q>3 THEN 5790 5720 B-SQR (4-0) 5730 Y=ATN(B/A) 5740 IF 1X2 THEN 1-2 5750 X=INT (X132) 5780 GOSUB 5800 5790 RETURN 5800 Y U-1:2=U+X 5805 IF AKI THEN AA-10-101A:Y=Y-AA:2=Z+AA 5810 IF Y>64 AND 2764 THEN 5890 5820 IF Y1 AND I<1 THEN 5890 5830 IF Y1 THEN Y=1 5840 IF 2)64 THEN 7=64 5850 IF UC32 AND 2U+8 THEN Z=U+8 5860 IF UX32 AND Y<U-8 THEN Y=U-8 5870 LS=\"[\":IF V>3 THEN LS=\"#\":IF V7 AND HC32 THEN L=\"4\" 5875 IF V>10 AND A=DS THEN LS. 5880 GOSUB 5900 5890 RETURN 5900 A=2-Y:B$=\":FOR B-1TOA:B$=B$+L8: NEXT: ALS=\"ARS=\"\" 5910 ALS=LEFTSIAS, Y-1) 5920 ARS-RIGHTS (A$,64-) 5930 ASEALS+B$+ARS 5990 RETURN 6999 DETERMINE REGION AND OCEAN CURRENTS 7000 HEN (C, 1):V=NC, 2):NIC,6)=0: NIC, 7) =0; IF v>2.5 THEN 7100 7010 NIC, 4)=1 7020 IF WC2 AND H>30 AND HC 45 THEN N(C,6)=1.9: NIC, 7)=-.2 7030 IF HB45 THEN NIC,6)=-, 45N10,7)-,8 7040 IF H>14 AND HC18 THEN N(C,7)=1 7090 GOTO 7490 7100 IF V>5 THEN 7200 7110 NIC, 4)=2 7120 IF V>3.6 THEN NIC,6)=-1.2 GOTO 7190 7130 IF H>15 AND H<20 THEN NIC,7).7 7140 IF H>32 AND H<37 THEN NOC, 7)-1 7190 GOTO 7490 7200 IF V>6.3 THEN 7300 7210 NCC, 4)=3 7220 IF H>45 THEN NIC,6)=1.3 7290 GOTO 7490 7300 IF V>9 THEN 7400 7310 Nt, 4}=4 7320 IF 7 THEN NOC,6)=-2.1.60TO 7390 7330 IF HC42 AND H>32 THEN N(C,7)=1.5 7340 IF H>48 THEN NIC,7)-2 7350 IF H>24 AND H<31 THEN N(C,7)=-1.8 7390 GOTO 7490 7400 Nt,)=5 7410 IF V>10.8 THEN NIC, 6)-2.2:60T0 7490 7420 IF H>27 AND H<37 THEN NIC, 7)=-1.8 7430 IF HX37 AND HC 41 THEN NIC, 7)=1.4 7490 RETURN 7499 'WEATHER BY REGION 7500 W(1,2)=RND (6)-1: IF N(1,11 >30 THEN M(1,2)=-(1,2) 7510 A=ABS (N(1,2)):N(1,3)=RND (7) IRND (A+1) +RND (15)-11N(1,4)=RND (1 6)-1 7520 W12,2)=RND (6)-1; IF N(2,1)>29.5 THEN N(2, 2)=-W(2, 2) 7530 A=ABS (N(2, 2)):N(2,3)=RND (5) IRND (A+1); IF N(2,3) (10 THEN W12, 3)=(2,3) +RND (15) 7535 N(2,4)=2+RND (8)-RND (8): IF N(2, 4) (0 THEN W(2,4)=(2, 4) +16 7540 W(3,2)=RND (3) -1: IF W(3, 1) >29 THEN W13,2)=NW (3,2) 7550 A=ABS (W(3, 2));W(3,3)=RND (3) 1A+RND (3)-13W(3,4)=RND (16)-1 7560 W(4,2)=RND (6)-1. IF M14,1)>30 THEN W14,2)=-W(4,2) 7570 A#ABS (N(4,2)); M(4,3)=RND (6) 1A:M(4,4) +6+RND (8)-RND (8): IF (4 , 4)(O THEN W(4,4)=15 7575 IF W14,3/<10 THEN (4,3)=(4,3) +RND (21)-1 7580 N(5,2)=RND (3)+2: IF (5,1)>29.7 THEN (5,2)=-W5,2) 7590 A=ABS (W (5,2)):N (5,3)=(3+RND (7))1A:N(5, 4) =11+RND (8)-RND (8):1 F (5, 4) >15 THEN W(5,4)=(5, 4)-16 7595 FOR A=1T05:W(A, 1) =W(A,1)+(A, 27/7: NEXT: RETURN 7599 'CURRENT PLAYER'S WEATHER 7600 R=N (0,4) N (C, 8) = (R, 1) 7610 NIC, 9)=WR, 2/50 7620 NIC, 10) =#R,3) continued on page 57 "


"PERSONAL COMPUTER SUSTIM IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII ATARIO ATARIT ATARI ICON CENTRE APPROVED DEALER abban 400x800 CORN ATARI COMPUTER IN MANCHESTER EDINBURGH MINIT MAIL ORDER Price List, order form on request ATARI 400 (16K)  ATARI 800 (16K)  ACORN ATOM (Kit)  ACORN ATOM (ready built) .50 VIDEO GENIE (16K)  GENIE II (16K)  VIC 20 .95 EPSOM AND SEIKOSHA PRINTERS BARCLAYCARD VISA * SOFTWARE * PERIPHERALS * COMPUTER CHESS GAMES (FULL RANGE IN STOCK) wwwmu N N MANCHESTER'S N A TARI BEST ATARI DEALER ATARI BUT YOURSELF ONTO OUR NEW AVAILAZ HIARI CARTRIDGE INFORMATION MAILING LISTS VIDEO COMPUTER SYSTEM SPECIAL MAIL ORDER Buy it with A ACTIVISION SERVICE WRITE OR PHONE FOR FULL DETAILS FULL RA CARTHIOCESIN STOCK umum Commodore VIC due shortly! GEMIO ELECTRONICS Dept. VG. 50 Newton St.,Off Piccadilly, Manchester M1 2EA. Tel: 061-236 3083. WE ARE AT THE CORNER NEWTON ST./ HILTON ST. Mattel Intellivision, Electronic Games, Chess, Software, Books, Accessories, etc. SILICON CENTRE 21 Comely Bank Road, Edinburgh 4 Tel: 332 5277 VISA BARE ARCADO ELECTRONICS FOR THE 80S TIRIRIRBIEBERRIIIIIIIIIII IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII Circle No. 121 Circle No. 122 NR P1K ZX81 MINI SPACE INTRUDERS .95 wwwwww 26 Spiers Close Knowle, Solihull West Midlands B93 9ES England M. Salinan ZX80 Yes! Our machine language programmers have scored another first! Now you can play this super game on your 1K Sinclair ZX81. All the fun of the arcade game in the comfort of your own home. IK Space Invaders HINTS & TIPS for the ZX 81 .25 by Andrew Hewson A superb version of the famous arcade game in fast interactive graphs A4 x2 array of aliens descend moving right & left and they can detect your Laser Base so keep it on the move. Previous and current game On screen scoring Destructable protective shields and keyboard control of the Laser Base & Laser Bolt firing using & and the Rubout key *80 pages explaining clearly how to squeeze a computing quart out of a Sinclair pint pot. \"Saving Space vital reading for all ZX81 owners. Understanding the Display File using the display file as memory, clearing a part of the display, using tokens in PRINT statements Converting ZX80 programs -explaining simply but comprehensively how to convert the hundreds of published ZXBO programs *Chaining Programs revealing techniques for passing data between programs, calling subroutines from cassette and establishing data files. Machine Code Programs all you want to know about 280 machine language. Explaining how to write, load, edit and save machine code and how to debug your routines Routines and programs are scattered liberally throughout the text and the final chapter consists of twelve useful, interesting and entertaining programs such as LINE RENUMBER, BOUNCER, SHOOT, STATISTICS etc. IK Breakout An interactive graphs 9 ball game, as Invaders written in mic for good graphs. Try your skill and patience at knocking all bricks from the wall Use (&D to control the paddle. IK Music From a range of 8 notes you can use your ZX as a toy piano Your selected notes are written to cassette-continous prompt for new selection of notes-play back your cassette and just listen to it sing. Example tunes. fun Cassettes for 16K ZX81 SPACE INTRUDERS fight the marauding alien as you battle to save the Earth All the dynamic parts of this program are written in machine code for super fast E6.50 PROGRAMMERS TOOL KIT-line renumber including GOSUBs and GOTOs. Hexadecimal Loader/Printer, Find, Edit and Replace BASIC program strings .50 Cassettes for 1K ZX81 STATISTICS Mean, standard deviation, regression, trend analysis, chi squared test, graph plot + ++ PLANET LANDER + space docking, clock, stopwatch 780 Op Codes this handy ready reckoner lists all 600 plus, 280 machine codes in decimal and hexadecimal with their mnemonics. Each code is succintly explained and cross referenced. Complete with protective transparent wallet E3.75 Please specify 4k ROM or 8k ROM mc when ordering. Introductory Offer for 1K ZX machines 3 cassettes & program listings for ONLY .95!! BLANK C12 CASSETTES 5 for .75, 25 for .25 Send SAE for full catalogue Cheque with order or quote Access number to: HEWSON CONSULTANTS, 7 GRAHAME CLOSE, BLEWBURY, OXON OX11 90E, TEL: (0235) 850075 Lots more software for all ZX machines from 15-16K Send S.A.E. for catalogue. Circle No. 124 Circle No. 123 56 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"TANDY 7630 NIC, 11)=(R, 4) 7690 RETURN 7699 HOURLY CHANGE IN WEATHER 7700 N(C, 8) =N(C, 8)+NC,9) 7710 N(C, 10) =N(C, 10) +RND (3)-2: IF N(C, 10) (0 THEN N(C, 10) =0 7720 IF NIC,B)(28 AND NC, 9) (-.09 THEN NIC, 10) EN (C, 1) +RND (5): AR ND (12) IF (A+CL) >10 THEN NOC, 9)-N(C,9) 7730 NIC, 11)=N(C, 11) +RND (3)-2 7740 IF NOC, 11) >15 THEN NIC, 11)=0 7750 IF NCC, 11) (0 THEN NIC, 11)=15 7790 RETURN 7999 VIEW FROM BON 8000 CLS 8010 FOR A=16128T016382:POKE A, 1911 NEXT 8020 FOR A=16139T016146: POKE A, 128:POKE A+32, 128: NEXT 8030 POKE 16095, 190:POKE 16096, 189 8040 GOTO 2000 8050 IF TIC,2)=1 GOSUB 8100 8060 IF TIC,2)=2 GOSUB 8150 8070 SIC,1)=T(0,1) 8080 SIC,2)=T(,2) 8090 RETURN 8099 'SAIL FOR STARBOARD TACK 8100 Y=6ITIC, 1) :FOR B-153927015904 STEP 64:FOR A=B-X TO B:POKE A ,191.NEXT A:1=Y+1:POKE B-X, 186 8110 NEXT B: RETURN 8149 'SAIL FOR PORT TACK 8150 Y=61T1C, 1): FOR B-153927015904 STEP 64:FOR A=B TO B+X:POKE A , 191: NEXT A:X-X+1+POKE B+X,181 8160 NEXT B:RETURN 8199 'WAVES 8200 W=W+1: IF WE THEN W=1 8210 PRINTS 640, MS (W);MS (W); NS (W);WS (W); 8220 WS (0)=LEFTS ($ (N+1), 15) B230 PRINTS 704, MS (N+1);$(0);PRINTS 737, N$(0);WS (N+1); 8240 WS (0)=LEFTS (NS (N+2), 8) B250 PRINTA 779, MS (0) ;; PRINTS 811,$ 10); 8260 GOSUB 4000 8290 RETURN 8299 DATA DISPLAY 8300 DENIC,0): PRINTO 862,05(D); 8310 PRINTS 985,C5 (C); 8320 PRINTO 896,\"WIND; 8330 PRINTO 960,0$ (N(C, 11); 8340 B$='11 KNOTS\" 8350 PRINT USING BS;NIC, 10); 8390 RETURN 8399 'LAND TEST C(O)=LAND NEARBY 1=N 2-E 3=S 4=w 8400 HENIC, 1):V=NIC, 2):1-INT (H) : Y-INT (V) 8410 DW-H: DN=V: DE=64-H: DS-13-V 8419 NORTH BOUNDARY 8420 IF 16 OR H744 THEN 8550 8430 IF HC 44 THEN DN=V-8 8435 IF H42 THEN DNEV-9 8440 IF H<38 THEN DN=V-10 8450 IF HC35 THEN DN=V-12 8460 IF H33.5 THEN DN=V-11 8465 IF XX30 AND X<34 THEN DN=V-11 8470 IF H(31 THEN DN=V-8 8475 IF H<29 THEN DN=V-6 8480 IF H(27 THEN DN=V-5 8485 IF H<20 THEN DN=V-(X-15) B490 IF H(34 OR V>8 THEN 8550 8499 'EASTERN ATLANTIC 8500 IF X<44 THEN DN=V: DS=6-V 8505 IF Y=39 THEN DNEV 8510 IF X<39 THEN DN=Y-1 8520 IF XC35 THEN DN=V-2 8530 IF 1)41 AND X<45 THEN DS-7-V 8549 WEST COAST 8550 IF HX32 THEN 8600 8555 IF Y=12 THEN 8690 8560 IF Y<5 THEN DE= (15+Y) -H: GOTO 8690 8570 IF Y=11 THEN DE=33.5-H 8575 IF Y(11 THEN DE=31-H 8580 IF Y< THEN DE=29-H 8585 IF Y=5 THEN DE=27-H 8590 GOTO 8690 8599 'EAST COAST 8600 IF Y(12 THEN DWTH-36 8610 IF Y=9 THEN DW=H-38 8620 IF Y=8 THEN DW=H-42 8630 IF Y=7 THEN DW=H-44 8640 IF Y=6 THEN DW=W-43 8650 IF Y=5 THEN DW=H-36 8660 IF Y<5 AND Y>1 THEN DW-H-33.5 B665 IF Y=1 THEN DW=H-35 8670 IF Y=0 THEN DW=H-39 B680 GOSUB 8200 8690 FOR A=0T04:C(A)=0: NEXT 8700 IF DNK 2 THEN C(1)=1:C(0)=1 8710 IF DEC2 THEN C12)=1:C(0)=1 8720 IF DSC2 THEN C(3)=110(0)=1 8730 IF DKK2 THEN C(4)=1:C(0)=1 8740 A$=\"\" FOR A-11064:A$A$+\" \"NEXT: IF C(0) = 0 THEN 8790 8750 GOSUB 8200: GOSUB 5000 8760 IF DNKO OR DECO OR DSCO OR DNKO THEN 2200 8790 RETURN 8999 MAP 9000 CLS: A=15360 9010 POKE A+16,162:FOR B=A+17T0A+33:POKE B, 1911 NEXT: POKE A+34,15 1:FOR B=A+35TOA+37:POKE B, 143: NEIT:POKE A+38,142 9020 A=A+64:POKE A+17,139:FOR B=A+18T0A+32:POKE B, 191+ NEXT: POKEA +33,159: POKE A+34,159 9030 A=A+64:POKE A+18, 162.FOR B=A+19T0A+32:POKE B,191NEXT: POKE A+33, 157 9040 A=A+64: POKE A+19,131. FOR B=A+20TOA+25: POKE B, 1911POKE B+6,1 43: NEXT: POKE A+20,175: POKE A+21,175:POKE A+28,135: POKE A+32,175: POKE A+33,145 9050 A=A+64:POKE A+21, 133: POKE A+22,143:POKE A+23, 1431FOR B=A+24 TO A+26: POKE 8,191: NEXT: POKE A+33, 130 9060 A+A+641POKE A+26,139:POKE A+27, 173:FOR B+A+29T0A+38:POKE B, 176: NEXT 9070 A=A+64:FOR B=A+28T0A+41: POKE B, 191: NEXT: POKE A+42,180: POKE A+43, 144 9080 A=A+64:POKE A+28,138:FOR B=A+29T0A+43:POKE B,191: NEXT 9090 A=A+64:FOR B=A+31 TOA+36: POKE B, 191: POKE B+64,191.POKE B+128 ,191: POKE B+5, 1911 NEXT:POKE A+41, 143:POKE A+42,135 9100 A=A+64:POKE A+37, 131 9110 A=A+64:POKE A+36, 128 9120 A=A+64:POKE A+31, 1311 POKE A+32,191.POKE A+33,1913 POKE A+34, 181: POKE A+35, 148 9130 PRINTO N(1,3), \"C\" ; :PRINTO N(2,3), \"F*; : PRINTO N(3,3), *S*;: PR INTO 99, \"N\"; PRINTO 145, 'S\"; 9140 PRINTO NIC,3),\"!\", 9150 PRINTS 832, \"CLIPPER \"CSIC); \"; 9170 PRINT WINDS\";DS (NIC, 11); \"AT\";N(C, 10); KNOTS\" 9230 PRINTS 896, '1-N 2-NE 3-E 4-SE 5-S 6-SW 78-NW\" 9240 PRINTO 960, \"CAPTAIN, WHAT HEADING DO YOU WISH (0-8)\"; 9250 AS=INKEYS: IF ASS' THEN 9250 9252 IF AS='N' THEN AS=\"1\" 9253 IF AS=\"E\" THEN A$=\"3\" 9254 IF A$=\"S' THEN A$='5\" 9255 IF A$=\"W\" THEN A$=\"7\" 9260 AEVAL (AS): IF (A(1) OR (A/B) THEN 9250 9270 N(C,12)=(A-1) 12 9490 RETURN 19999 60T0 9999 10000 DATAN ',0,-1, \"NNE',. 4,-.9,\"NE\", 7, -7,'ENE',.9,4 10010 DATA'E',1,0, \"ESE\",.,.4,' SE',.7,.7, \"SSE\"..4..9 10020 DATA \" S \",0,1, 'SSW\", -, 4, 9, \"SW\", -.7, 7, \"NSW', -9,.4 10030 DATA'N,-1,0, \"WNW\",-,9,-.4,\"NN\",5,-.7, \"NN\",4,-.9 10040 DATA CHALLENGE \"FLYING CLOUD\", SURPRISE. "


"SINCLAIR Space invaders in IK cause to destroy the creatures middle character between plenty of headaches to a you move your laser base so the quote in line 60 is a conscientious laser base that one of its two guns, reversed quote character determined to survive. mounted at either end is Line 90 determines the Tim Bull's Cosmax aliens directly below the centre of initial height of the alien come in four different var. the alien. The \"1\" key moves and line 120 tests whether ieties depending on the the base left and the \"3\" key the alien is above one of the player's score. When you moves it right. two laser base's guns and score above 1.000 points you to fire press the \"O\" key. whether the \"fire\" button is find yourself up against a The guns fire invisible laser being pressed — if both second generation alien. rays when key is pressed conditions are fulfilled con Another mutation takes Only one life in this game trol jumps to line 250. place at 2,000 points. The though and the first alien to Lines 130 and 140 move fourth variety are at liberty hit your base puts an end to the laser base. 150 and 160 to drop on you at any time your score. Tim has some move the alien and keep it and being \"semi-invisible\" ideas which will help on the screen. Line 180 tests they carry a bonus of 50 games writers working with whether the alien has hit points. limited memory. your laser base and line 200 You are rewarded for an in lines 10-30 the \"VAL prints an explosion and early strike on the descend function is used to set up your score. ing creatures as they are variables since it takes up The variables used are worth 100 points to you at less memory. Lines 50 to 80 A$ alien type: H, horizontal the top of the screen but determine which type of position of alien; P. position only five if you leave them alien will come down the of laser base: S. score: V. to the last moment. screen next. Note that the vertical position of alien, COSMAX program listing 5 RAND 10 LET K = VAL \"2\" 20 LET S = VAL \"O\" 30 LET P = VAL \"8\" 40 LET H = INT (RND*18) 50 LET A$ = \"<V>\" 60 IF S> 1E3 THEN LET A$ = 70 IF S> 2E3 THEN LET A$ = 80 IF RND >.8 THEN LET A$ = 90 FOR V = INT(RND\"15) TO 19 100 CLS 110 PRINT AT V, H-1; A$: AT 20, P-K; \" IL\" 120 IF ABS (P-H) = K AND INKEY $=\"0\" THEN GOTO 250 130 IF INKEY$ = \"1\" THEN LET P = P-(P>K) 140 IF INKEY$ = \"3\" THEN LET P = P+(P<15) 150 LET H = H+ INT(RND*3)-1 160 LET H = H+(H<K)-(H>16) 170 NEXT V 180 IF ABS (P-H)>3 THEN GOTO 40 190 CLS 200 PRINT AT 19, P-3; \"X X X\"; AT 20, P-3; \"XXXXX\"; AT 7, K; \"GAME OVER\"; S 210 PAUSE 40000 220 POKE 16437, 255 230 RUN 250 PRINT AT V, H-K; \">xxx<\" 260 LET S = S+100-V*5+50* (CODE A$ = 14) 270 GOTO 40 "


"COSMAX RUNS ON A SINCLAIR ZX81 IN 1K. COSMAX BY TIM BULL "


"PET THIS CUBE SOLVING PROGRAM RUNS IN 16K ON A 40 COLUMN PET BY PETER AND MATTHEW RICHARDS Cubism is more popular today variable takes up only 2 bytes, than Picasso would ever have but this is sufficient as only intethought possible. gers are involved. But if watching 10-year-olds The program itself takes up solve Mr. Rubik's little box of about 8K of RAM, but the varitricks on the T.V. screen in ever ables bring the total of memory decreasing times, is getting you needed to about 11K. It was down, then go one better and tell designed for Pets with Basic 2 people you got your Pet to solve or 3 but will also work on a it. Basic 4 machine with 40 colThis program enables anyone umns. to solve the cube by giving them The part of the program before a precise list of rotations to carry line 1000 prints the instructions out. Rather than calling for and sets up the subscripted varinformation at various stages iables. The part from 1000 to 4900 during the solution, the program works out, in stages, what rotaissues a complete solution from tions are necessary to solve the the initial data. The computer cube. holds the state of the entire cube As each stage is completed the as it manipulates it internally instructions are put into a string, until it reaches the final soluM$, and the program jumps to a tion. The would-be solver has subroutine at 5000 which prints only to enter the original pattern out these instructions and rearof colours on each face of the anges the cube in the memory cube. in preparation for the next stage. The solution is printed on the It then returns to the main part of screen and the solver can manthe program and continues this ipulate the cube directly from procedure until it \"sees\" that the this information. If required he cube is finally complete and can also have the list or rotations prints FINIS. output to a standard printer by The program is written with simply replying \"yes\" to the questhe rotation instructions based tion \"WILL YOU WANT THE on the suffixes \"-1\" and \"2\", but SOLUTION TO BE OUTPUT TO A when it comes to printing out the PRINTER?\". instructions a notation based on The program holds the state of lower case letters is used, as this the cube, after every move is is a more convenient notation for made, in \"percent\" (integer) varithe solver to follow. The solution ables, namely E% and C%. This usually runs to about 100 rotasaves memory, since one eletions and a specimen printout is ment of a subscripted \"percent\" shown. 60 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"BE 1 PP= POKE59468, 12 2. PRINT MAGIC CUBE SOLVER 3 PRINT\"COPYRIGHT P.N. M. J. RICHARDS 1981\" # PRINT\" THIS PROGRAM WILL SOLVE THE MAGIC CUBE\" 5 PRINT\"PUZZLE FROM WHATEVER POSITION YOU ENTER\" 6 PRINT BY GIVING YOU PRECISE INSTRUCTIONS AS\" 7 PRINT\"TO WHICH FACES TO ROTATE.\" 8 PRINT\" SELECT ANY FACE AS TOP. LAPEL THE OTHER\" 9 PRINT\"FACES AS SHOWN LATER AND KEEP THE CUBE\" 19 PRINT\"IN THIS OVERALL POSITION THROUGHOUT. IT! 11 PRINT IS VERY USEFUL TO IDENTIFY THE FACES BY 12 PRINT\" THE COLOURS OF THEIR CENTRE SQUARES AS 13 PRINT\" THESE NEVER CHANGE.\" 14 PRINT\" THE DIRECTIONS OF ROTATION ARE GIVEN AS 15 PRINT\"IF LOOKING DOLIN ON THE TOP FACE.\" 16 PRINT\"N.B. UPPER AND LOWER CASE LETTERS MAY\" 17 PRINT\"BE INTERCHANGED ON SOME MACHINES.\" 18 DIMEX (5.5,5).CH(1.4.4.5) 19 DEFFNA(X) =X-**INT(X-1),4% 20 DEFFNB CX)=X-CXCSANDX>0)*(FNACX+A-1)-X) 25 FORA=0T05 FORB=OTOS FORC=3T05 EXCA.B.CO=C NEXTC.B.A 30 FORA=0T01 FORB=0T04:FORC=T04 FORD=OTOS CWCAB.CDD NEXTD.C.B.A 40 F$=\"TESWNB\" 50 DEFFNF(X)=ASC(MID# (F$.X+1,1) 60 T$=\"CKATRLTALRKC\" 70 PRINT\"NEPRESS SHIFT TO CONTINUE 80 WAIT152.1 100 PRINTUOTATION 110 PRINT\" STOP FACE IS LABELLED 120 PRINT\" BOTTOM FACE IS LABELLED 130 PRINT\" FRONT FRCE (SOUTH) IS LABELLED. 140 PRINT\" BACK FACE NORTH) IS LABELLED ... 150 PRINT\" EFT FACE (WEST) IS LABELLED 162 PRINT\" RIGHT FACE CEAST) IS LABELLED .... 178 PRINTTAB(13)\" 180 PRINTTAB(9)\", 190 PRINTTAB \"Ta 200 PRINTTAB(5) \" in 210 PRINTTAB(7 FRESS SHIFT\" 220 PRINTTAB(7)\" IEI TO CONTINUE 225 PRINTTAB(7)\" 239 PRINTTAB(7)\" 240 PRINTTAB(7) \"L 250 WAIT152,1 255 POKE59468,14 260 PRINT 261 PRINT\" 1800 / -) ....... 12\" 265 PRINT\"HT-O \" 278 PRINT\" Uri#1 900 rot# Tr .. 271 PRINT\" #1 990 to! T .. 280 PRINT\"HT## 281 PRINT\" #1 900 282 PRINT\" 900 IT . \" 290 PRINT\" 291 PRINT\" 99 N 2 O ... 292 PRINT\" #!** 900N -0. ... \" 390 PRINT\":77-** 1 381 WAIT152.1 310 PRINT + 1 Ti ! -B A \" 329 PRINT\" 2 1 1 18602\" IN TWIDDLING WITH A PET "


"PET 330 PRINT\" TANO 90.00 101 T.\" 340 PRINT\" V / 350 PRINT\"NIKA/ 900 /1-t -o 355 PRINT\" HR 360 PRINT\" NO. 06/ 12 1 7 \" 378 PRINTHIT \" Z 1 -SV)? \" 371 POKE144.53 374 GETA* IFA$=\"\" THEN374 375 POKE144.46 IFA$CYTHENPRINT\" \" GOT0377 376 PRINT\" \"PP=1 OPEN4.4 PRINT#4 377 FORJ=1T0530 NEXT PRINT\"]\"POKE59468,12 378 A=3 379 FORL=105 389 PRINT LOOK AT THE \"CHR$ (FNFCL)\"-FACE OF YOUR CUBE\" 390 PRINT\" TAB(18) : CHR(FNF-4* L=30RL=5)) 400 PRINT\":\"TAB(12)\" 413 FORZ=1 TO3 429 PRINTTAB(12)\"; 425 PRINTTAB(12)\"; 430 PRINTTABC12\" 435 IFZ=3 THEN460 443 PRINTTAB(12) 450 NEXTZ +63 PRINTTABC12) L 479 PRINT\"#\"TAB(18) : CHR$CFNE(5+3* L=CORL=5))) 480 POKE33178, FNF (FNAXL+1+2*(L=0) + L-5)))-64 490 POKE30194, FNF CENACL-1-2* L-++ (L=5))) -64 500 PRINTTYPE LETTER OF FACE WHICH HAS THE SAME 595 PRINT\"COLOUR CENTRE SQUARE AS FLASHING SQUARE\" 519 PRINT\" (PRESS DELETE TO ERASE RY ERROR.\" 512 PRINT PRESS RETURN WHEN -FACE IS COMPLETE. 513 POKE33786, PEEK (32780)-128 515 PRINT\" NININGIN TAB(11); 520 FORY=9T03 FORV=T02 538 PRINT\" \"; 531 IFY=3THEN535 532 IFY=1 ANDY=1THENA$=CHR$(PEEK(32789)-64) GOT0600 533 POKE 144.50 535 GETA$ : IFA$=\"\" THEN535 536 POKE1 44,46 537 IFA$OCHR$(20) THEN575 540 IFVTHEN550 545 IFY=8THEN533 546 Y=Y-1 V=2 547 PRINT\" PRINT\" TITI\"TAB(22):\" \"; GOT0533 550 PRINT\" \"; 560 V=V-1 565 IFV=1 ANDY=1 THEN550 579 GOT0533 575 Q=10 577 IFY<3 THEN588 578 IFASC (A$)-13THEN535 579 GOT0820 580 FORI=8T05:IFASCA$)=FNFCI THENQ=I 590 NEXTI: IFQ=13 THEN533 608 PRINTA 613 IFCY+V) 02#INT CY+V)/2) THEN740 620 IFY=1 THEN800 625 IFL=BORL=5THEN660 630 TE-CY=2) 543 -FRAKL-V:1KEL 650 GOT0713 660 TEL/5 679 J=FNACV-1-2*<L=5))=K=4-Y 710 CXCT.J.K.L)=Q 720 CXCT.KJ.L)=0 730 GOT0808 SOLVE CUBEL 62 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"( H HAYDEN SOFTWARE GAMES 00 Get all the latest APPLE Software GAMES here! Raster Blaster ........ .. ...95 Have your own pinball machine within the Apple II. Apple Panic .... . ...95 Don't let the apples eat you as you race up & down the ladders Pool 1.5 ........ 18.95 Play pool on your Apple, improve your game. Zork. .95 The best adventure game yet. Sneakers . ........95 There are Sneakers, Cyclops, Saucers, Fangs, H-Wings ... and more Autobahn ..... . ....95 Drive your car down the Autobahn, avoid collision if possible. Epoch..... .95 Guide your spaceship through the galaxy. Shoot down the aliens, go through time warps, refuel on friendly bases. Gorgon... ...95 The Warp Factor ..... ......95 This galaxy game is one of the trickiest on the market. Cranston Manor... The latest in the Hi-res Adventure series. Pegasus II. .95 Missile Defence ...... . . ...95 Defend the cities against rocket attack. Three ground bases. And of course we still have all your favourites: The Galactic Saga, Alien Rain, Alien Typhoon, Snoggle, Oldorf's Revenge, Draw Poker, The Wizard & the Princess... & lots more. All prices plus VAT, postage & packing free Dealer Enquiries welcome. Contact: SBD Software 15 Jocelyn Road Richmond TW9 2TJ Tel: 01-948 0461 Circle No. 125 **** ..95 Available from Good Computer Stores and Technical Bookshops SARGON II (Spracklens) The first great computer chess program! \"We are impressed with the program's speed, its opening book, and its much improved end game... Save your money and buy SARGONII...\" '80 Software Critique Seven levels of play, and levels 0-3 play in tournament time. It has a randomized opening book for all seven levels of play through three moves. When setting up the board, the user can scan up and down, left and right. A special hint mode included at all levels of play but I will suggest a good, but not necessarily the best, next move you can make. 400034042 APPLE II .30 400034093 APPLE II Disk .20 400034034 TRS 80 Level 1 .30 400034085 TRS 80 Level Il Disk .50 400034107 OSI .30 40003414X OSI Disk .20 REVERSAL (Spracklens) Winner of the software division of the First International Man Machine OTHELLO Tournament, this version of the 200 year old game Reversi features 27 levels of play and high-resolution colour graphics 400070049A PPLE II Tape .30 40007009X APPLE !! Disk .20 STARCLASH (Walton) The mission in STARCLASH is to achieve victory by destroying the opposing empire, it is easy to learn, yet constantly challenging and fun. STARCLASH is unlike most other space games, in that it does not involve firing ray guns at passing ships, dropping atom bombs, etc. It is truly a strategic battle game played in outer space. Speed is not a factor here. A player may take as much time as he or she wishes to make a move, much like computer chess. In addition, the computer plays several different strategies, so that you never play the same game twice. 400059037 TRS 80 Level II .20 LANDAU ELECTRONICS LTD THE COMPUTER, VIDEO AND ELECTRONIC GAMES SPECIALISTS COME TO OUR PRE-CHRISTMAS * ATARI EXTRAVAGANZA THURSDAY 26th NOVEMBER ALL DAY TILL 8pm LION HOUSE, 227 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, LONDON WC1. Tel: 637 3024 PRODUCTION OF THIS AD ENTITLES YOU TO  OFF ATARI 400/800 COMPUTERS  OFF ATARI VIDEO GAME  OFF ALL SOFTWARE on this day only MIND THRUST(Sackson and Wazaney) The first of its kind an exciting game that lets you match wits with the computer! The object is to complete an unbroken chain across the board before your opponent, the computer. There's a special feature; you may switch sides whenever you wish and gain control over your opponent's pieces, but this means that the computer has control over your chain, as well. Every game is different. 400074036 TRS 80 II Tape .50 Software prices exclusive of VAT APPLE is a trade mark of Apple Computer Co. Inc and is not affiliated with Hayden Book Co. Inc. New detailed Software Catalogue Now Available See our tremendous range of hand-held games. Also chess, learning aids and programmable calculators at very competitive prices. BUY EARLY FOR CHIRSTMAS! MAIL ORDER DEPT 01-643 5494 Also at: Video City Centre, 5 Tottenham Court Road. Sonic Sound, Charing Cross Rd. Landau Radio, 195 High St., Sutton. Distributed by John Wiley & Sons Limited Baffins Lane Chichester Sussex  England Circle No. 126 Circle No. 127 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 63 "


"ZX81 ATOM VIC Make the most of your microcomputer with our popular range of proven books: 30 AMAZING GAMES FOR THE 1K ZX81, by Alistair Gourlay ...... .95 50 RIP-ROARING GAMES FOR THE ZX80 and ZX81, edited by Jeff Weinrich ............95 GETTING ACQUAINTED WITH YOUR VIC 20, by Tim Hartnell, with over 60 programs to get your VIC up and running from day one ....... .95 GETTING ACQUAINTED WITH YOUR ACORN ATOM, by Trevor Sharples and Tim Hartnell. 184 pages, 80 programs, including draughts. .95 INTERFACE, the monthly magazine published by the National ZX80 and ZX81 Users' Club, in conjunction with the Independent Atom Users' Group, is just .50 for 12 issues. Sample copy, with many programs for each machine, book, software and hardware reviews, education, contact addresses, just . GETTING ACQUAINTED WITH YOUR ZX81, by Tim Hartnell. Eighty plus programs in this 120-page book, including draughts . . . . . . .95 Please send me the items marked. I enclose  ... MASTERING MACHINE CODE ON YOUR ZX81 OR ZX80, by Tony Baker. 180 pages, teaches machine code from first principles .......95 Name ..... Address...... THE GATEWAY GUIDE TO THE ZX81 AND ZX80, by Mark Charlton. Over 60 programs and routines, ZX BASIC explained in detail... .95 Please make cheques payable to INTERFACE, and send the above form, or a copy, to: INTERFACE, Dept. CV, 44-46 Earls Court Road, London W8 6EJ Circle No. 128 PLAY FOR TODAY COMMODORE VIC VIDEO GENIE II 16 User Ram Extended Microsoft Basic Connection to UHFT or Monitor Integral Cassette Render .00 TEAC DISK DRIVES Interfaces with Video Genie, North Star Horizon SHIP HI 4 | 171 H ) Tak Sinde . The Disk 259.00 .00 Tran Single The .00 .00 TRS80 MODEL Colour Sound Programmable Function Ress  Memory Expandable to 32K Standard PETBASIC Full sized Typewriter Keyboard Graphics Character Set Plugin Program Cartridges .Low Priced Peripherals .95 VIC Compatible Cassette .95 III ACORN ATOM 18 User Ram Extended Microsoft Basic Parallelor RS232 Interfaces With 10 Track Single Density Disk Drives .00 lith 80 Track Double Sided Disk Drives .00 With 80 Track Double Density Drive MB .00 SHARP MZ8OK 48 User RAM Extended Basic Integral Cassette .00 THE COMPUTERSHACK . Rom + 2K Atom Power Ram Assembled E138.00 Supply .50 .20 Computer Shack Ltd. 14. Pittville Street. Cheltenham.Glos. Telephone:(0242)584343 Ring or call in for details of our Nationwide 6 months FreeCredit Scheme A ssar Rana Cand Acated. Malonder Enquiries Helmed All the above prices include VAT Circle No. 129 64 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"PET SOLVE THE -CUBE! Tin 749 IFY-1 THENK=32866+Y*326 758 IFY=1 THENK=33178+V*8 760 FORX=0T05 IFFEEKCK) +64=FNFCX) THENEXCX.L.L)=Q EXCL, XL)=Q 770 NEXTX 800 NEXTV 810 PRINT PRINT \" TAB(11); NEXTY 820 NEXTL 825 POKE59468,14 830 PRINT\"H TO 1 -,840 PRINT\"NI-_-21 TLI1 T 11 1\" 850 PRINT 1000 A=0: FORB=1 T04 1010 FORR=9T05 FORS=0T05 1820 IFE%CRS.R)=OTHENIFEXR,S.S)=BTHENE=R FES 1030 NEXT NEXT 1037 IFE=FNACE ANDF=FNACF) THEN1965 1338 IFE+FCSTHEN1048 1039 BR=FNAKE+F-B)-1 1949 ONBR+1 GOT01048, 1341.1342,1343 1041 M$=\"B\" GOT01045 1942 M$=\"B2\" GOTO1645 1843 M$=\"F-1\" 1345 GOSUB5080 1346 IFF=5THENE=B: GOT01948 1347 FEB 1848 IFE=DANDF=BTHEN1140 1349 A=E+F+5*(E+F5) M$=\"E\" GOSUB5906 1050 IFE=FNACE THENFEFNACE+INT (F. 2)-1) 30T01065 1960 E=FNACF+INT(5.2)-1 1365 00= 1379 TREFNA (F-B+1)1 1375 ONTR+100101396. 1382, 1985, 1890 1989 M$=\"T\". GOT01295 1885 M$=\"T\" GOTO 1895 1990 M$=\"T1\" 1995 GOSUB5000 1996 IFQQ=1 THEN1140 1997 A=F 1190 IFFNACE-F)=1 THENM$=\"E\" : GOT01120 1110 M$=\"E-1\" 1120 GOSUB5000 1138 QL=1 TE=4-TE+4+ ( TR=#) GDTC1075 1149 NEXTB 1150 FORB=1 T04 1160 FORTB=9T01 : FORS=1 T04 1178 REFNA(S-1) 1180 F1=C2CTB.S.R.5*TB) 1190 F2=CH(TB.S.R.S) 1200 F3=CXCTB, S.R.R) 1210 IFF1#F24F3THEN1230 1220 IFF14F1+F2*F2+F3*F3=B*B+FNA(B-1) 12 THENE=TB:F=S 1230 NEXTS, TB 1232 IFE=BANDF=BANDCXCO,F.FNACF-i),0)=GTHEN1378 1240 IFETHEN1286 1250 A=F 1260 M$=\"EBE-1\" GOSUB5080 1270 F=FNACF-1) 1280 ER=FNACF-B+1)-1 1290 ONER +160T01348, 1399, 1310 1320 1300 M$=\"B\":GOT01338 1310 M$=\"B2\" GOTO1330 1320 M$=\"B-1\" 1330 GOSUB5000 "


"PET 1340 A=B: IFCX(1, B. FNACB-1), FNACE-1)=@ THENM$=\"N-1B-1N\" GOSUB5000 GOT01370 1350 IFCX(1, B, FNACB-1.5=UTHENM$=\"EB2E-11-1\". GOSUB5000 1360 M$=\"EBE-1\" : GOSUB5000 1370 NEXTB 1375 D$=\"B-1E-1BEBSB-18-1\" 1388 FORE=1 T04 1390 FORR=1T05 FORS=1 T05 1490 IFEXR, SR)=BTHENIFEXCR,S,SDEFNACE-1) THENEER F=S 1410 NEXT NEXT 1420 IFE=BANDF=FNA(B-1) THEN1590 1430 IFE=50RF-5THEN1478 1435 IFF=FNACE+1) THENA=E: GOT01450 1440 A=F 1450 M$=D$: GOSUB5000 1460 GOTO1390 1470 IFE=5THENQ=F:GOT01485 1480 Q=E 1485 GT-EXE,F,Q) 1490 BR=FNACE+F-GT)-1 1500 ONBR+1 GOTO1550, 1510 1520 1530 1510 M$=\"B\":GOT01540 1520 M$=\"B2\" GOTO1540 1530 M$=\"B-1\" 1540 GOSUB5000 1550 A=FNACGT-1) 1560 IFGT=BTHENM$=D$: GOTO1580 1579 M$=\"BWB-1W-18-18-1BS\" 1588 GOSUB5080 1590 NEXTB 1600 R=@: FORE=1 T04 1610 BB=FNA(B-1) 1615 JCB) = 1620 IFC(1, B, BB,B)*C%(1, B, BB, BB)*CX1. B.BB.5)=5*B#BBTHENJ (B)=1 R=R+1 1638 NEXT 1640 ONR+1 GOT01655.1688. 1656.0.1750 1650 IFJ(1)=J (3) THEN1660 1655 M$=\"B\": GOSUB5000: GOT01600 1660 A=2-1(2) 1670 M$=\"BSWBW-13-15-1\" : GOSUB5000: GOTO1600 1680 FORB=1T04: IFJCB)=1THENA=B 1690 NEXT 1790 S=C(1, A, FNACA+1.50*C%1. AFNACA +1), A C 1. A. FNACA+1), FNACA+1) 1710 IF6=5*AXFNACA-1 THENM$=N-1BEB-1NBE-13-1\" GOT01733 1720 M$=\"BEB-1W-1E-1B-1W\" 1730 GOSUB5300: GOT01609 1750 R=0 : FORB=1 T04 1755 BB=FNA(B-1) 1760 JCB=0 1770 IFC 1, B, BB,5) =5 THENJCB)=1 R=R+1 1780 NEXT 1790 ONR+1GOT01852, 1839.1800..1963 1800 IFJ(1)=(3) THEN 1820 1819 A=J4)*2+J (3)-14)*((3)2-1)+1 GOTO1860 1820 A=I(3) + 1 GOT01860 1830 FORB=1T04: IFJB) = 1THENAEFNACB-1) 1849 NEXTGOTO1863 1856 A=3 1860 IFCX(1 FNB(3). FNB(2), FNB(2))=5THEHM$=\"W-1 THSTS-1 BST-19-1W-1T-1WB-1\":GOT018 SOLVE CUBES 80 1870 M$=\"BW-1TWSTS-18-18T-15-1W-1T-IW\" 1880 GOSUB5306: GOT01750 1990 R=3:1=3 FORD=1T04 1920 IFE(5.3.5) #E%C5.B.B)=5BTHENA=B RR+1 1930 NEXT 1940 ONR+1GOT01970, 1960.0.0.2000 66 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"1960 IFEX<5. FNB(2), FNB(2))*E%<5. FNB(2).5)=5#FNB(4) THENM$=\"W2BSN-1H2NS-1BW2\" GOT 01980 1970 M$=\"W2B-1SN-1W2NS-11-12 1989 GOSUE5880: GOT01900 2000 R=0: A=2: FORE=1 T04 2010 JCB) =0 2820 IFEX(5.3.5)=5THENJ (B)=1:RR+1 2038 NEXT 2040 ONR+1GOT02080.8.2050,2.3200 2050 IFJ (1)=(3) THEN2070 2960 A=J(3) *2+J (2)-(3) J(2)*2-1) + 1 M$=\"SBT-1E2B2T2HBW-1T2B2E2TB-15-1B-1\" GOTO 2990 2070 A=2-1(1) 2080 M$=\"SBT-1E2B2T2WB2W-1T2B2E2TB-15-102\" 2090 GOSUB5809: GOTO2000 3000 IFEE=120REE=25 THENPRINT: IFPP=1 THENPRINT#4 3005 PRINT \" IFPP=1 THENPRINT#4,\"RFINIS\" : CLOSE4 4900 END 5009 IFM$=\"\" THENRETURN 5019 R$=LEFT# (M$,1) 5015 IFR$=M$THEN5030 5020 IFASC(MID(M$. 2)) <64 THENR$=LEFT$(M$ 12-ASC(MID$M$,2))/5) 5030 M$=MID(M$. LENCR$)+1) 5040 FORD=GT05:IFASC(R$)=FNF (U) THENL=FNBCU) 5056 NEXTU 5054 IFPP=1 THENPRINT#4,\" CHR$CFNFCL)); 5055 PRINTCHR$(FNFCL) +128); 5056 EEEEE+1 5057 IFLENCR$)=2 THENSF=\"2\" GOT05059 5058 SF$=MID(T$. L*2+1+LEN(R$)/2,1)+\"\" 5059 PRINTSF#;: IFPP=1 THENPRINT#4, \"X\"SF# 5061 IFEE=13THENPRINT: IFPP=1 THENPRINT#4 5062 IFEE=26THENPRINT\"N: EE=0: IFPP=1 THENPRINT#4 PRINT#4 5065 FORLP=1TOLEN(R$) 5070 ACO)=-4*(L=30RL=5):A(4) =A(0) 5880 A(1) EFNACL-1-2* (L=0)+(L=5)) 5090 A(2)=5+3*(L=OORL=5) 5190 A(3)=FNACL+1+2*(L=9+ (L=5)) 5195 FORLK=0T04:BCLK) =ACLK) NEXT 5112 E1=EXCLA(3),L) 5114 E2=E%CLA(3,A(3)) 5120 FORTN=3 TOISTEP-1 5130 EXCL,ACTN, L) =EXCL. ACTN-1),L) 5140 EXCL. ACTN,ACTN))=EXCL. ACTN-1). ACTN-1)) 5150 EXCACTN). LACTN))=EXCAKTN-1), LACTN-1)) 5160 EXCACTN), L.L)=EXCACTN-1), L.L) 5170 NEXTTN 5175 EXCL, ACO), L)=E1 EXCACO), L, L=E1 5180 EXCL. ACO), AC )=E2 EXCA(Q), L. ACO )=E2 5190 IFLOANDLC5THENACO)=LAC4)=LA 2)=L 5200 T=-(L=5) 5210 C1=CXCTA(3), ACO), L) 5215 C2=CXCT A(3,A(0), B(3) 5224 C3=L LR3, R 3 E30) 5230 FORTN=3TO1STEP-1 5240 Ti=-(CTNCSANDLOORL=5) 5250 T2=-(CTN 1 ANDLOORL=5) 5260 CXCT1. ACTN+1). ACTND, L)=C%CT2, ACTN), ACTN-1),L) 5270 CXT1. ACTN), ACTN+1). L)=C%CT2.ACTN-1), A(TN).L) 5280 CXT1, ACTN+1). ACTN), B(TND)=CXCT2ACTN), ACTN-1),BCTN-1)) 5290 CX(T1, ACTN), ACTN+1), B(TN)) =CXCT2, ACTN-1), ACTN), BCTN-1)) 5300 C%(T1. ACTN), ACTN+1), B(TN+1))=CMT2. ACTN-1). ACTN), BCTN)) 5310 CXKTI ACTN+1) ACTH) BKTN+1)C T2, AXTN), ACTH 1), 3(TH)) 5320 NEXTTN 5830 CXCT. ACO),A(1),L)=C1 CXCT,A(1), ACO), L=C1 5340 CXCT. ACO),A(1), B(0) )=C2 CXCT,A(1), ACO), BCOD=C2 5350 CXCT, ACO),A(1), B(1))=C3 CXCT,A(1), ACO), B(1))=C3 5360 NEXTLP 5320 GOT05000 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 67 "


"TROUBLE SHOOTING ZX81 have damaged their's the direct equivalent to the ZTX313 is the 2N2369. Take care this time to mount the transistors at least a quarter-of-an-inch above the board and solder lightly. Also make sure that you have put the transistor in the right way round as the pin layout may be different. Another problem I found, even with ready-built versions, was the keyboard connector. Initially the connectors are very stiff but after a few insertions it becomes easier, although you must still take care not to crease the keyboard tails. If the ZX81 will not accept inputs from the keyboard check this point first, the regulator will overheat and may even cut out after a time. This will not harm the circuit for as soon as the regulator has cooled down it will return to operation, but it is annoying if you have just entered in a long program. To cure this I cut out a larger heat sink from a piece of 12 gauge aluminium sheeting, which sits all the way across the front of the board, as I sometimes use a power supply of 14.5 volts, i.e. a spare car battery. Of course you must never run a computer off a battery in a running car! There is one precaution you should take to prevent \"blowing up\" chips. This can occur when a ilali THIS year Sinclair has flooded the home computer market with the ZX81, giving almost everyone the chance to break into this fascinating field. Despite the low cost of a ready-built ZX81, the saving offered on the kit has tempted many with no constructional experience whatsoever, to chance their luck. Unfortunately a simple fault or problem can be very off-putting for the beginner, so I am going to give you a few points to look out for before and after construction. Many of these have come up on the ZX81 but most apply to all kits. To begin with, the ZX81 has been designed to fit into as small a case as possible. Consequently the board layout is a little more muddled than some I have come across and requires careful checking. If you bought a kit before June of this year the first thing to look out for is an incorrect component listing. An errata was supposed to have been included but many kits went out without one. The circuit diagram if you can follow it shows that R3 and R6 must be swapped over, i.e. R3 not used and R6 2K2. Also R15 should read 220K but this is not crucial and works well with the IKO resistor suggested on the components list. If there is a circuit diagram as well as a component list with any kit, check one against the other and if there is a discrepancy find out which is correct before proceeding. It will save you time and trouble in the long run. As I mentioned before, always take care when soldering in components, especially transistors, to prevent overheating. Two transistors are supplied with the ZX81, TRl and TR2. Both are ZTX313's, which are very small physically, and proved a real problem to even the skilled kit builders. The effects of overheated transistors are distorted characters or no picture at all. For those who think they may 68 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES BY KEITH MO even if yours is ready-built. It may have been shaken loose in transport. One trick I had to learn was to cut the tails, having fractured one of the tracks through creasing, and carefully scrape away the insulation on the right side to make contact again. This is a last resort as a creased tail is not a serious problem unless you intend to take the ZX81 apart often. However, send the ZX81 back for a replacement if the fault is in the keyboard itself. When specifying the kit version you are given the option of buying the power supply which is recommended. If, however, you decide to use your own, be warned that if it gives more than 12 volts, which is permitted by the regulator but not by Sinclair, static charge accumulates on one or more of the pins of the chip. To prevent this, touch something earthed, like a water tap or some large item of electrical equipment, such as a washing machine or cooker, before going to work. Also touch the chips as little as possible. Dirty pins are as difficult as open circuits to trace Fortunately the ZX81 comes with a circuit and layout diagram as well as a corrected component list. The board, even in its muddled design, has a helpful layout printed on it, as so many do these days, with the component number nearby. Build it correctly and carefully as instructed, as you will be very lucky to find the faults afterwards! "


"WWWWWWWWWALITETETTIITTEITA EG 3003 GENIE I WROCOMPUTER TEM ingenious! New!...Printer that's the only word to really describe the superb Genie microcomputer system, the home computer which is compatible with the TRS 80, and ideal for all microenthusiasts, especially the committed hobbyist Genie has now been upgraded to Genie I incorporating all of the original excellent features, but with the addition of Extended BASIC including RENUMBER and SCREEN PRINT, Full upper and lower case flashing cursor and auto-repeat on all keys An internal SOUND UNIT to add a new dimension to your own programs A MACHINE LANGUAGE MONITOR with Display modify, enter and execute with break points facilities Genie T has all of this, plus the built-in cassette deck. 16K RAM 12K ROM with BASIC interpreter full-size keyboard, an extremely wide range of new and up dated peripherals, and literally 1000s of pre-recorded programmes available. Yet, almost unbelievably, the price of Genie lis even lower than that of the original Genie The EG 502 printer can be connected to the Genie either through the expander or directly into the computer using the Parallel Printer Interface. It is a compact unit, with an 80 column 5 x 7 matrix print out operating quietly and efficiently at 30 characters per second Disk Drive Ingenious for business As well as the obvious advantage of mass storage, the addition of the disk system to the Genie means much faster access to other languages and full random access he handling Up to 4 of these 40 track drives can be used on a system The Genie II is a major breakthrough for small business computers Harnessing all the advantages of Geniel including low price Genie Il adapts perfectly to commercial functions with the following features SPECIAL TECHNICAL GENIE HOT-LINE ON 0629 4995 Numeric keyboard Four usable, definable function keys Extension to BASIC Basic business commands Fully expandable with the same peripherals for all your technical advice and service back-up on any aspect of the Genie system direct from the experts! New!...12\" Monitor For full details and demonstration of Genie 1. Genie II or advice on any aspect of the system, either call in to your local dealer, or write directly to the sole importers at the address below Now, a choice of 2 monitors giving a clear easy to read image. The updated EGIol has a new green phospher tube New!...Expander An updated Expansion Box (EG 3014) is a major feature of the new Genie I system, and unleashes all its possibilities, allowing for up to 4 disk drives with optional double density. It connects to a printer, or RS232 interface or SI00 cards. There is 16k RAM fitted and it has a new low price! electronics Chesterfield Road, Matlock, Derbyshire DE4 5LE. Telephone: 0629 4995. Telex: 377482 Lowlec G. Circle No. 130 "


"ELECTRONIC TOYSELECTRONIC TOYS ELECTRONIC TO GRAND PRIX COUNTDOWN TO PANIC ON A \"SPACESHIP\" MUSICAL MEMORY TWINS Le Boom is built to last and it's durable plastic moulding will withstand most violent bangs. If you fail to defuse the thing don't worry, it won't blow you to If you panic in stress situations, kingdom-come--but you do get the bomb defusing game, Le a series of explosion noises Boom, will either kill or cure you. imitating the real thing. If racing cars are more up your Discover whether you are Your sense of panic is prompstreet than space vehicles then clear-headed and steely-nerved ted by the electronic din getting try one of the electronic versions enough to compete with the louder as the bang comes closer. around. army's bomb disposal unit. It is The toy is a welcome addition to In this replica of the arcade your job to defuse a rocket the range of electronic toys game you have got two options shaped bomb from electronic brought out by Oxfordshire to go for. Either the player can clues before the thing goes off. based toy manufacturers Action try a circuit race completing a A choice of four different skill Games and Toys certain number of laps, or he can levels, generate the game's elecIn addition it falls into the low race against the clock tronic sounds, which form the end of the electronic games marThe car is controlled by two clues to preventing the big bang. ket with the cheap price tag of small joysticks which alters the You must also choose the length .49 and runs on four MN1300 car's speed by accelerating and of fuse wire the longer the batteries (not supplied). A good braking, as well as steering the wire, the more time you have to Christmas bargain from most car. find the correct sequence to stop large stores with toy departOther cars on the race track the bomb from exploding. ments. are controlled by the microprocessor. The track itself is displayed on an L.C.D. screen divided into three lanes. But the The design teams of Waddingown logo. The Adam Import veractual body of the game looks tons and Adam Imports must sion is called Adam Super 11 more like a space ship than any. have got together to produce (pictured) from the company's thing remotely to do with formula their respective versions of the Grandstand range of electronic one racing musical memory money-spinner, toys while the Waddingtons' one When you opt for the circuit Simon. goes by the name Wizard. TRUIVI THE DEEP race the computerised game Each is made of the same Both games are for one to four People who prefer shooting works out the time taken to white and blue plastic casing players, with a minimum age of down enemy craft under the sea, complete a fixed distance of 800 with four coloured, triangular six, on Wizard, and seven on rather the deepest voids of kilometres. When you're racing shaped buttons in the corner of Adam Super 111 Both run off six space, will like a 3-D hand-held against the clock the idea is to the mould. There's also a circular HP11 batteries (not supplied). game, Torpedo Shoot cover as many kilometres as screen on the top of the game The biggest difference beits neatly shaped body is possible in 140 seconds. with a grid of nine squares tween the two and the most based on an arcade games Points are scored for timings, marked on it and circles in the important, is the price. Wizard machine with a screen at the top. the number of crashes with other squares corners containing red clocks in at .50 but Adam The aim is to destroy the fleet of cars, and the whole game comes lights. Super 11 comes into its own at a battleships which sail across the complete with sound effects of The only differences in the price of .95. In some stores it path of a torpedo under your car engines and thunderous physical appearance of the game will cost up to .95, depending control. Using the two arrow butcrash noises. are the name and each firm's on the manager's discretion. tons you can manoeuvre the A record of your achievements submarine into one of four posiand lap times, number of crashes tions from which to fire at the are kept by the microprocessor ships. at the heart of the game. This is no ordinary hand-held it costs .95 and is available game though, the screen with its from Computer Games. L.C.D. display of red lights is also three dimensional adding depth and reality to the entire game. Everytime you wipe out a battleship another one comes breezing onto the screen until your time is up. When you manage a direct hit the little machine provides you with accompanying MAINLARINE explosion sounds to add to the realism and the target sinks. Torpedo Shoot is aimed at the over eights and runs off one nine volt battery (not included in the package). It costs .83 from Leicestershire-based distributors AA Hales. "


"OYS ELECTRONIC TOYS ELECTRONIC TOYS ELECTRONIC .1111 JET FIGHTER A BIG MATCH AT YOUR FINGERTIPS MAKING TRAKS All your tactical abilities are needed in the \"search and destroy\" game with a jetfighter pilot theme. Intercept is played on an electronic board with pieces to move into position and buttons for firing on the enemy. Two electronic football games You are provided with an came onto the scene this season, interceptor plane and S.A.M. updating the popular pub game (Sea to Air Missiles) sites and of mechanically operated table tracking indicators which are football. placed on the plastic grid surThe first, called Match of the face. Day, has been given the seal of Players can either choose to be out and hear the rewarding and dexterity game of Computer approval by England football capthe attacker or defence comsound of a direct hit and a riot of Perfection. tain Kevin Keegan. The oblong mander. Find out where your flashing lights. The players have to match up shaped game has a pitch marked enemy is concealed by using the From the Action Games and the symbols shown on the dome out on an L.C.D. screen with the clues of coloured lights indicatToys stable this game is reminis. shaped display, by remembering correct lines, goal areas, netsing enemy rockets and missiles cent of Battleships and retails at the sequence of the symbols first and corners. For one or two playlaunched to destroy your own .49 from the firm's dis played by the computer's brain. ers, the game can be played at forces. tributors. This latest version of the game is two levels, aptly named amateur Track down an enemy craft Also in the Action Games and an advancement on the nonor professional. using the fire button to wipe it Toys catalogue is the memory electronic baby brother PerfecBeat the opposition team by tion where you race against the controlling your players with four clock to fit the correct shaped directional buttons and when you pieces into their home slots. Not judge the right moment press only is it fun to play and a test of A good toy for children who Big Trak can be made to the \"shoot\" button to whack the your memory but you also get a ball into the net. have heard about microprocesnegotiate courses that you set good light and sound show. Sound effects include the sors, is Big Trak, a programmby estimating distances for the It runs off two 9 volt batteries able model lorry. toy to cover by multiplying the referee's whistle blowing It came into the UK shops lengths of Big Trak it meas(not supplied) and costs .39. whenever there's a foul, a penlast year amid a splash of publures 14\". It's a test of skill and alty or a goal scored. The only icity because of its programmaccuracy on the programmer's sounds the game doesn't recreWESTERN LORE able capacity. You can enter in part to get Big Trak safely ate are the shouting and singing up to 16 different commands round a course. of the football hordes. Time is simply by pressing calculator A transporter is also avail kept for each half-just like the type keys. The truck will go able at extra cost to tack onto Find yourself being drawn back real game. Match of the Day forwards, backwards, turn at the end of Big Trak. Not only is to the lawless days of the wild retails for .95. any angle and complete a Big Trak fun to play with it is west this Christmas with GunAnother offshoot of Adam Imwhole circle. also believed to be educationfighter. ports' Match of the Day is the Another special feature is ally good for children in learnThe game relives the legend of slightly more sophisticated game that it can fire single or rapid ing how to program and amend the shoot-out between Jesse Grandstand Soccer. Notas shots from its laser cannon. It the program after seeing the James and Cole Younger, on a attractive to look at but made of looks a bit like a moon buggy result, without the child realisliquid crystal display screen, in similar long-lasting plastic to with big tank tracks on the ing what he is doing. the hand-held format. Match of the Day, the game is wheels and is made of heavy Made by Milton Bradley, Big Two figures fight it out in the along the same lines. For one or duty plastic so it will withstand Trak costs between  and  apt setting of sandy western two players, two levels and two any unsuspected crashes into but make sure your furniture is scrubland. coloured teams, red and green, furniture if the programmer as robust as the toy before you Obstacles appear on the as well as diving goalies. The miscalculates his instructions. buy one. screen to add to the difficulty illuminated figures look more like tumbleweed wafting betrealistic than the Match of the ween the two gunmen. If any of Day counterparts and have a these are hit points are deducted flourescent display. from the score. Another feature is that the ball The toy is made of robust plasis separate from the players. In tic so it should survive if it is Match of the Day, the player in hurled to the floor through frustpossession of the ball is more ration at not winning. brightly lit than the others. The game is one of the more Both games are battery powexpensive hand-held type at ered (not included with the .95 and is distributed over game) or can be run off the here by Computer Games. It runs mains. Grandstand is priced at on two HP11 batteries (not sup.95. plied) IN YOUR HANDS "


"BY DAVID ANNAL DOES your computer squeak when you want it to roar? Several of the \"second generation\" microcomputers have sound circuits built in but their output power is small and the loudspeaker often minute, one example being the Apple. Such a loudspeaker is not capable of anything but a small squeak and will certainly not do justice to a music program or speech output. Other computers, such as the Pet, are not equipped with any on-board amplifier or speaker at all-although the circuit to generate sounds is there and pin-outs are provided (80 column Pets do have a small \"bleep\"). incorporate a L.E.D. indicator to show when the amp is on. The current used when nothing is being output is quite low but does slowly run the battery down. The indicator should be a flashing type e.g. using a LM3909 so as not to use up all the battery power itself by staying on all the time! Connecting to the computer should not be difficult. In the case of a 40 column Pet for example simply join the input wire to pin M of user port and the ground to pin N. The circuit will also give increased output from your audio cassette player and can be used to monitor the cassette functions on the computer consult your manual. All the components are standard and should be easily obtainable from component shops or by post. The total cost of the whole sound box including speaker and mains power pack should be no more than , excluding case. INDEX 14 MARK LM 380 VR1 (TONE) VR 2 (VOLUME) C2 GND familiar with the DIL package, we show the chip as it actually looks when viewed from above. This chip houses all the amplifier circuit except for the few additional components shown. Cl is an isolating capacitor. C2 and VRl form a top-cut tone control and may be omitted if desired. VR2 is the volume control. R2 and C4 supress any tendency for the circuit to oscillate at high inaudible frequencies and thus lose power. They are not essential and the circuit should work without them. If the amplifier is supplied by a power pack running anything else, then decouple it with a 100 uF electrolytic capacitor from pin 14 to ground. The circuit will work on voltages from 9V to 22V and, depending on this, will give 2-5 watts output. The speaker should be of reasonable size e.g. an eliptical of 6x3\". It can be 4-8 ohms impedance (even a large PA type can be tried you'll be surprised!) For portability and ease of operation power can be provided by a battery of PP9 type. Alternatively, a small separate mains power pack could be constructed. This needs to be rated 100mA and a circuit for one is shown in figure 2. If the sound box is to be permanently housed inside the computer case, there may be some power available to run it from the computer power pack see your manual but take care! Construction is straightforward. Use 0.1\" Veroboard or, if soldering is not a strong point, make it up first on a small breadboard. Make sure the electrolytic caps are the right way round. Use a 14 pin socket for the integrated circuit. The latter is quite sturdy and will stand short circuits. It also incorporates a temperature overload and will cut out if it sets too hot, For this reason, if more power is needed a heatsink can be clipped to the integrated circuit. If a box is purchased big enough for the loadspeaker, all the rest, including the power supply, should fit inside. If using a battery, it is a good idea to OV FIG.1 In the case of these quieter type of computers, a sound box is necessary and it can be used to advantage in the second generation type to increase volume and fidelity. It is always possible to connect the computer to your hi-fi auxiliary inputs and thereby obtain amplified sound. However, it is inconvenient to trapse around to the club or your friend's house with the musiccentre in tow! For these reasons I am giving details of a small, cheap, but quite powerful, general purpose amplifier which is easy to construct and which should prove very useful in many ways. Component list C1 0.15uF 100V Polyester. C2 0.047uf any type. C3 1uF min. electrolytic. CA 0.1uf any type. C5 470uF 25V electrolytic. C6 1000uF 25V electrolytic c7 2000uF 25V electrolytic. VR1 10K Lin. potentiometer. VR2 250K log. potentiometer. Also required small piece. 1\" veroboard, 14 pin DIL holder & suitable case. MAINS 240V. = 12V 12V. R1 680K | watt. R2 2.7ohms | watt. R3 47ohms 1 watt. BR1 50V 1A min. bridge rectifier. T1 12V 100mA mains transformer. IC1 LM380. SW 2-pole mains on/off. LS 8ohm loudspeaker. Mains neon if required. SWM AINS NEON IF REQ. FIG.2 The circuit is shown in diagram 1. It centres around a small 14 pin integrated circuit chip, the LM380. For those of you not "


"The Essential Software Company. THIS IS NOT A PRACTICE DRILL! EARTH IS BEING INVADED ON YOUR ON YOUR TRS80 & VGENIE VIDEO Galaxy Invasion ZIDEO Attack Force The newest and most exciting invaders type game yet! Cruel and crafty aliens attack Earth. You are the sole defender. As you fire your laser at the aliens they swoop down and bomb you. Exciting use of graphics! Must be seen. TRS 80 Level 1 & 11 16K Tape Video Genie 16K Tape WITH Dodge the alien Ramships and fire missiles to destroy them before they get you. The alien Flagship uses his deadly laser bolt to transform a Ramship into another Flagship or into your ship's double. Look out! Destroy your double and you could destroy yourself. TRS 80 Level 1 & Il 16K Tape Video Genie EG3003 16K Tape SuperNOVA ORDER NOW Robot Attack THE GAME THAT TALKS 2H lalo Cosmic Fighter for Now the amazing ASTEROIDS arcade game for your TRS 80! Your ship is floating in the middle of an asteroid belt! Your only escape is to destroy them and TRS 80 Levels I & II 16 K Tape the crafty alien spacecraft! Blast them Video Genio 16 K Tape with your laser, thrust, rotate or hit hyperspace to survive! The Newest and Most Astounding Arcade Game that TALKS has just Reached Planet TRS 80 Levels 1 & 11 16K Tape Earth. You can't help yourself. You have to Video Genie 16K Tape stop them at all cost. Don't let up. Written especially for high quality graphics you'll simply be dazed and excited by the action. Your tighter appears below a convoy of MAN Aliens! If you destroy them another set appears who seem to be slightly cleverer Watch out behind you! than beforel Soon your space station As you hurry through nears but before you can dock the station the maze collecting comes under attack! Survival is up to you! your energy The excitement is just beginning!! modules you score points. But don't let the TRS 80 Levels I & II 16K Tape Gobblemen catch you. If you are crafty. sneek up behind them and neutralise them Video Genie 16K Tape extra points. Just keep a watch When they attack you they come in fast. Just don't lose your nerve. TRS 80 Levels I & II 16 K Tape Video Genie 16 K Tape 3-D means that as you wander through the mazès and buildings, AU T full screen graphic display constantly shows your position in a perspective format as though you were actually there! This \"rat's THE ESSENTIAL SOFTWARE COMPANY (Viscount Ltd.) 01-837 3154 eye\" view adds an entirely new dimension to adventure. 47 Brunswick Centre, London WCIN 1AF English language commands can be entered at any time to manipulate your environment. The command sets are extensive and sophistiPlease send me your software catalogue. enclose a stamped self addressed envelope cated. Dozens of objects are scattered throughout the mazes and 1 Please send me buildings. You can pick them up, burn them, throw them, etc. You I enclose a cheque/postal order for (plus 50p post & packing may need the sword to fight off an ugly little man. Or a steel rod to hold apart crushing walls. Deathmaze 5000 and Labyrinth allow the traditional one and two word commands. Asylum incorporates our Advanced Language Interpreter (ALI), which allows full sentence input. Deathmaze and Labyrinth consist of over 550 locations! MY ACCESS Nois... Asylum tops 1200 locations! ---TRS 80 4 > LEVEL 1 I have a ...microcomputer Signature Name Address ASYLU Postcode "


"TED BALL PRACTICAL PRACTICAL PRACTICAL EN PROGRAMMING BY TED BALL WHEN YOU NEED TO SPEED THINGS UP It is the computer's calculating speed which has made it such a boon to mankind but a good game can often be ruined because a calculation is carried out too slowly. In microcomputer games, speed is particularly important in moving graphics, where slow processing will give a jerky effect. In strategy games where the computer must calculate to decide its move, a long wait will result in all-too-human boredom. One important way of speeding up programs is to use tables which allow the computer to look up already calculated values instead of repeating the calculation every time the result is needed. In its simplest form a \"look-up table\" is just an array in which each element is the required value corresponding to its index. For example, if we have a program which uses the square roots of the numbers from 1 to 10 we could use an array R dimensioned to 10 with R(I) equal to the square root of I. Whenever a square root is needed it can be obtained as N=R(I), which is much faster than the calculation N=SQR(I). As an example of a more complicated look-up table, consider the problem of evaluating hands in five-card draw poker. (You do not need to know the game in order to follow the example, and the method can be applied to other games in which runs and pairs are important.) To avoid making the example too complicated I will ignore flushes and the fact that an ace may be high or low in a straight. The simplified problem then consists of deciding whether a hand contains high cards only, a pair, two pairs, three of a kind, a full house (three of a kind and a pair), four of a kind, or a straight (five consecutive cards). It would be possible to write separate routines for testing each possible case but this is likely to be very slow. It is not immediately obvious how we can use a table to solve this problem; the key is to arrange the cards in ascending order and look at the differences between the cards. A difference of zero means two cards of the same value, a difference of one means two consecutive cards, while a difference greater than one means that the two cards cannot contribute to pairs or a straight. To make this clearer, let us look at a few hands: 2, 3, 3, 5, 6 differences 1, 0, 2, 1 2, 3, 3, 3, 6 differences 1, 0, 0,3 2, 2, K, K, K differences 0, 11, 0,0 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 differences 1, 1, 1, 1 In the first hand we have a pair a single difference of zero; in the second hand we have three of a kind two consecutive differences of zero; in the third hand we have a full house a single non-zero difference; in the fourth hand we have a straight, and four differences of one. The pattern of zeros, ones and numbers greater than onecan be seen to be related to the type of hand We can obtain a single number from the four differences by replacing all differences greater than one by two (as the actual value of the difference is irrelevant to this type of hand) and regarding the differences as 74 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"03 IV the digits of a ternary (a base 3 rather than decimal) number. Thus, the four hands above give: ternary 1021 = decimal 34 ternary 1002 = decimal 29 ternary 0200 = decimal 18 ternary 1111 = decimal 40 If the five cards in the hand, in ascending order, are in the array C, the following simple routine will calculate the index for the hand: 100 LET I = 0 110 FOR N = 2 TO 5 120 LET D = C(I) C(I-1) 130 IF D>2 THEN LET D = 2 140 LET I = 3 1 + D 150 NEXT N The value of I calculated by this routine can be used to access an array of dimension 80 containing code numbers corresponding to the type of hand, and these code numbers can then be used to select routines which further refine the valuation of the hand according to the values of the cards. PRINTING WITHOUT BEING DAMNED The PRINT statement, like almost everything in Basic, is subject to numerous dialect variations. Some of the variations can be seen if we consider how we might arrange to print at different places on the screen without changing anything except where we are actually printing The current print position is marked on the screen by a cursor, and the cursor location is stored in memory where the Basic interpreter can find it. It is possible to change the print position by POKE-ing the different values into the cursor location, but most Basics provide other methods. The most direct method is found on the Sinclair ZX81, with PRINT AT, and on the TRS-80, with PRINT @. These allow the print position to be set immediately to any part on the screen. The POSITION statement on the Atari machines works in a similar fashion, while on the Apple II the TAB and VTAB functions set the horizontal and vertical position separately. The Pet has keys for cursor up, down, left and right, and these commands can be incorporated into PRINT lists. It is usually necessary, when using cursor control functions, to keep track of the cursor position. Some Basics provide a function POS which returns the current cursor position, but even without the POS function it is quite simple to use variables to record the cursor position. All these methods of shifting the print position can be simulated by POKE-ing to a memory-mapped screen. If the screen has M rows and N columns, and the memory location corresponding to the top left-hand corner has address S. then the address for row R and column Cis easily seen to be S+ N*(R-1) + C-1. To print a string X$ starting at RC we can use the following routine: 1000 LET Z = S+N*(R-1) + C-1 1010 FOR W = 1 TO LEN(X$) 1020 POKE Z +W-1. ASC(MID$(X$, W.1)) 1030 NEXT W 1040 RETURN The equivalent to PRINT AT X,Y, \"MESSAGE\"; is 100 LET R = X 110 LET C = Y 120 LET M$ = \"MESSAGE\" 130 GOSUB 1000 The routine can easily be modified to print vertically instead of horizontally (this is not provided in most Basics). 1000 LET Z = S + N*(R-1) + C-1 1010 FOR W = 1 TO LEN(X$) 1020 POKE Z + (W 1)*N, ASC(MID$(X$.W, 1)) 1030 NEXT W 1040 RETURN The above routines do not alter the simulated print position, so that: 200 LET M$ = \"SECOND MESSAGE\" 210 GOSUB 1000 would overwrite the first message. To cause a second message to be printed after the first we can add the following lines to the first routine 1022 LET C = C+1 1024 IF C>N+1 THEN GOTO 1030 1026 LET C = 1 1028 LET R = R+1 With this modification we can simulate cursor up, down, left, right as follows: Cursor up: LET R = R-1 Cursor down: LET R = R+1 Cursor left: IF C>1 THEN C=C-1 ELSE C=N; R=R-1 Cursor right: IF C<N THEN C=C+1 ELSE C=1: R=R+1 The above routines test for the left and right edges of the screen and adjust the row and column values accordingly, although no tests have been given to ensure that the print position stays on the screen. However, the latter tests are very important and should be included during the development of a program; it is sometimes possible to eliminate such tests in the final version, provided you are sure that nothing can make the print position move outside the screen. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 75 "


"D COMPUTER SYSTEMS FOR THE 105 HOME & BUSINESS ENTHUSIAST SPECIAL XMAS OFFERS GREAT REDUCTIONS! GAME COMPUTERS PRICES INCLUDE Phillips G7000 computer system Matel Intellivision computer system  82.00 .00 Atari 2600 computer system + combat Atari 2600 computer system + combat & space invader package Atari 2600 computer system + asteroids package E 94.99 .00 ,00 GAME CARTRIDGES  8.75 Brain Games Adventure Championship Soccer Superman Space Invaders Maze Craze Video Checkers Indy 500 Backgammon Basic Programming E14.95  22.25 E 25.50 E 22.25  27.75 E 22.25  22.25  22.25  31.50  22.75  28.50  32.50 E 11.25 .25  11.25 Game Library Mains Adaptor Blackjack Othello Video Pinball Missile Command Asteroids War Lords Flag Capture Super Breakout Air Sea Battle E14.95 E 14.50 E 14.75  14.95  13.95 14.95 E14.95 E14.95 Video Olympics  4.25 Breakout E 14.95 Basketball E 21.50 Mini Golf  21.50 Human Cannonball  27.25 Bowling  29.95 Skydiver E 22.75 Circus  15.50 Night Driver .75 Golf E14.95 Dodge-Em  14.95 Surround  14.95 Concentration 13 95 Codebreaker E 14.95 Fun Numbers Hangman All Mattel Game Cartridges Atari Paddles Joysticks Keyboards Outlaw Slot Racer Street Racer E14.50  14.95 E14.95 E 14.95 E 14.95  14.95  13.95  16.49 All Phillips Video Pac Games .89 ATARI 400/800 Acorn Atom & Full Range Of Sharp Computers Available GAMES TO BE RELEASED OVER XMAS P.O.A.  Volley Ball . Bowling Dambuster Boxing Battlefield Music Supermind Jumping Acrobats Satelite Attack Astro Smash Snafu S pace Amarider Tripple Action Billiards Sea Wolf Soccer Ice Hockey Stella Treck CREDIT FACILITIES SPECIAL DEALS FOR MAIL AVAILABLE CASH & CARRY CUSTOMERSI ORDER AVAILABLE VIDEO SERVICES (BROMLEY) 8 SUNDRIDGE PARADE PLAISTOW LANE BROMLEV KENT Prices include VAT TELEPHONE 01-460 4169/8833 near Sundndge Pork Station may change dunng month Circle No. 131 COMPUTER TRS-80 in Surrey CHESS CHAMPION MARK V SciSys' most advanced chess computer. SciSys Mk V *Plays strategic chess *Has problem speed and tournament modes. *Can play 12 games simultaneously *Provides analysis, comment, advice or complete game history. *Integral LCD chessboard *Two clocks *Memory retention when switched off *Modular game 24K memory *Full take back and playback facility Move entry by cursor or keys \"intelligent sensor board and printer available soon. \"SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE Space Shuttle Luna Lander 5.75 Zossed in Space 10 05 Music Master Adventure 10.06 Golden Batton 17.19 Amazin 6.33 Numb (Renumber) 10.93 Android Nim 10.06 Pinball 14.95 Animation Poker 10.06 Asteroids 10 06 Purchase Ledger 21.85 Astro Navigator 14.95 Quad 10.93 Battle of Britain 15.53 Slot Machine 8.80 Cheque Book 15.53 Sound 9.78 Compak 1 16.10 Space Eye 10.06 Cribbage 14 38 Star Fire 633 Dark Void 10.06 Star Trek 10.93 Dominoes Submarine Chase 6.32 Draw and Graphics 10.93 Supa Trek 17.19 Driver Basic Course 1 8.95 Duel-n-Droids 10.93 Basic Course 2 11.95 Microsoft Editor Ass Plus 24.95 Disk Basic Course 15.95 Galactic Empire 9.78 T.Bug 11.95 Galactic Trader 9.78 Light Pen 18.40 Gomoko 11.33 Keyboard Bounce Fix 5.75 Index 17.19 Invaders 14.95 Instant Sort Search 28.18 System Savers 12.94 Treasure Trove 10.06 Treasure Quest 9.78 Typing Tutor 13.23 Z Chess Ill 16.68 Tandy Editor Ass 24.95 Visicalc 59.95 and many others *** SPECIAL OFFERS SPECIAL OFFERS SPECIAL OFFERS SPECIAL OFFERS Great game machine with Morphy program Capablanca and Gruenfeld modules available. CALL US FOR PRICE. Morphy Encore available SAE for details. ALSO Chess champion sensory challenger  SAE for details. Atari 400  VIC 20 phone or SAE for details. We stock a vast range of chess computers at the most competitive prices. Call or write to: 100 pounds off Modell 16K Level Il CPU now only 339.00 120 pounds off Modell 16K Level Il System (VDU, CPU & Cassette) 439.00 Verbatim Datalie 5 inch disks for Mod l or all 19.90 (for teni OFFERS LIMITED TO EXISTING STOCKS ONLY ALL PRICES INCLUDING VAT KRAMER AND CO. DEPT. CVG, 9 OCTOBER PLACE, LONDON NW4 1EJ. 01-203 2473 SURREY MICRO SYSTEMS LTD 53 WOODCOTE ROAD, WALLINGTON, SURREY TEL: 01-6475636 Access and Barclaycard Holders may phone their orders-Post and Packing extraadd 5% to order value. Send s.a.e. for full software list Circle No. 133 Circle No. 132 76 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"Graphics BY GARY MARSHALL done by increasing the reference position by one and plotting the invader again. Movement to the left can be achieved by subtracting one from the reference position. The changes which have to be made to the reference position for all directions of movement are illustrated in Figure 2 for the Pet, which has 40 character positions in a row. WHEN we can place a shape on a memory-mapped screen by making it up with graphics characters, the next step is to make the shape move round the screen. It is fascinating to make it move in a way that can be controlled by you, the user. In the better games programs that have been written for the popular microcomputers, a fairly standard arrangement for movement under user control has evolved. It usually involves the use of the numeric keypad, although if a particular micro doesn't possess one, any square block of nine keys can be used. P-4 P-40 P-39 consisting of spaces, so that the part left behind is a space and no trail is left. A Basic program, written for the Pet, to draw an invader and move it round the screen as directed, is shown below. The program lines have the following functions: line 10 clears the screen and line 20 sets the reference position for the initial plot of the invader. Lines 30 to 50 plot the invader with reference to P and lines 60 to 110 put the border of spaces around it. Line 120 scans the keyboard until a key is pressed, while lines 130 and 140 reject all depressed keys except control keys. Control only passes to line 150 if a control key is pressed, and lines 150 to 230 move the reference position in response to the depressed key before returning to re-plot the invader in the new position. Notice that the invader can be driven off the top or bottom of the screen, which is not to be recommended. In fact, a good refinement to the program would prevent it. Removing lines 60 to 110 converts the program to a rather pretty pattern drawer. The movement scheme gives some insight into how the pieces in many games can be moved. P+1 P+39 P+40 P+41 4 5 Figure 2: Screen Locations and directions One refinement is needed because if an invader, or any other shape, is moved like this, it leaves parts of itself behind so that its movement is characterised by a bleeding' which marks its course. To avoid this, the shape can include a surround GET THINGS MOVING 10 PRINT\"CLR\" 130 C=VAL (C$) Figure 1: Control keys and directions The movement control plan is illustrated in Figure 1. The number 5 is central, and is taken to indicate that no movement is required. Since the number 6 is situated to the right of 5, this key is used to indicate that movement to the right is required, and so on with the other keys. Using the routine given last month to plot a space invader we can write a program to move the invader around the screen. The program should scan the keyboard to see if a control key has been pressed, and if so it should move the invader appropriately. Thus, if the invader is situated with reference to a screen position, P, and the 6 is pressed, the invader should be moved one place to the right. This can be 20 P=33268 30 POKE P-1,255: POKE P, 247 40 POKE P+1, 127: POKE P+39, 255 50 POKEP+40, 249: POKEP+41,127 60 POKE P-2,32: POKE P42, 32 70 POKE P+38,32: POKE P+42,32 80 FORI=P-42TOP-38 140 IF CC1 OR C> THEN120 150 IF C=1 THEN PEP+39: GOTO30 160 IF C=2 THEN P=P+40: GOTO30 170 IF C=3 THEN P=P+41: GOTO30 180 IF C=4 THEN P=P-1: GOTO30 190 IF C=5 THEN 120 90 POKE 1,32 NEXT 200 IF C=6 THEN P=P+1:GOTO30 210 IF C=7 THEN P=P-41: GOTO30 220 IF C=8 THEN POP-40: GOTO30 230 IF C=9 THEN P=P-39: GOTO30 100 FORI=P+78TOP+82 110 POKE I, 32: NEXT 120 GET C$: IFC$\" THEN120 READY. "


"E SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOF together and awkward to use. The asteroids themselves give Once 3-D Asteroids is running, a reasonable 3-D effect and are instructions are displayed briefly, flicker-free, resembling partially followed by details of the length eclipsed planets which seem to of the approaching storm (usually give a rotating effect. However, 20-40 seconds), a short counttrying to avoid these objects down and you're on your own. alone is not enough to make an The T.V. screen becomes the interesting game and Program \"front window\" of your space. Power have turned a very good craft, and all you have to do is idea into a disappointment. frantically press the correct keys The price is .95 plus V.AT to \"skilfully\" avoid the approachand it requires 5K memory ing asteroids. (including 2K graphics). CAN LIFE EXIST IN JUST 1K? SINCLAIR'S GAMES PACK No 1 BEWARE THE When there's only 1 of memory times you managed to kill him. to play with the programmer is Wolfpack is not a wolf shootfaced with a real challenge. ing game but, in fact, dropping Sinclair have come up with six depth charges on to a submarine, games for its ZX81 and, although this is again hard to master. the games are necessarily simple The final two games were not in concept, Games Pack No. 1 so entertaining. Golf asks you to represents good value at .95. enter a number between 35 and The software package consists 75 to determine the strength of of a C12 tape with three games your drive and see if you can on each side, along with program drop the ball in the hole. By the loading instructions and a short way, don't expect too sophistibut descriptive summary of the cated graphics, this is just a line actual playing instructions. with a hole at one end. Life is I particularly enjoyed the Orbit another version of the cell and Meteors games which generating game. involve, in the first case docking By entering a two letter code your spacecraft with cargo you build up a pattern of \"cells\" rather tricky; and avoiding and according to several simple meteorites for as long as you can rules you can then automatically ASTROBIRDS AND 3-D ASTEROIDS in the second game. generate new cells to build up Sniper and Wolfpack are both random patterns. The Astrobirds have you in their of the Atom's built-in loud game oud games for those of us with blood. There were loading difficulties, lust! Sniper involves making 40 but only on side two, and after sights and it is really only a speaker. sequential pot shots at a ranloading the tape with the 16K matter of time before you slip When you have successfully domly appearing figure, the final RAM pack the problem was beneath their falling bombs. cleared the screen the next fleet score informing you how many overcome. It is an extremely addictive appears. space attack game in the mode of As the game goes on the the Galaxian arcade game. This Astrobirds move faster and drop version is produced by Program more bombs until you can't cope. Power for the Acorn Atom and Astrobirds is a most enjoyable has excellent graphics and sound game that will give hours of effects. entertainment and just the right The tape loaded first time and amount of frustration. Very good upon being run produced a good value at .95 plus V.A.T., it set of instructions and details of requires 11 K memory (including point scoring. After pressing the 6 K graphics). return key the game commences. Another Program Power tape The total invasion fleet of 19 for the Atom is 3-D Asteroids. Astrobirds shift back and forth 3-D Asteroids is a one-player across the screen dropping game in which you manoeuvre bombs. your craft through an Asteroid The Astrobirds carry out storm without colliding with the swooping attacks, one by one, on meteors. your laser base, which can be hit The controls used are \"/\",\"1\", three times before the game is \"<\", \">\" which provide up. over. All this is accompanied by down, left and right movement the most extraordinary selection respectively. These keys are a of sound effects making full use bad choice being bunched "


"FTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWA EWS REUTERS RESCUE MISSION GORGON sanding out bands of fighters to X M ARKS THE POT your shot depending on where the balls are positioned on the table. If only a slight touch with the cue is needed, then hit the fire button on the joystick when the column on the left hand side of the screen and table is at the A remote planet's inhabitants are bottom. That is the marker indibeing terrorised by bird-like kidcating the power behind the nappers who lift them from the shot. surface and carry them away. After the ball has been hit the In Gorgon, you are the surface white cross disappears momendwellers' best chance of survival, tarily from the screen. When all fighting off the waves of aliens in the balls have settled into their an Apple version of the arcade new positions the cross will game, Defender. reappear on the snooker table Navigating his way above ready for your next shot. hazardous terrain the pilot can Measure your shot and try to check his course on the radar. work out exactly where all the The race that has taken over balls will go. The power indicator the planet is devious and brutal constantly moves so you don't sending out bands of fighters to have long to wait for it to reach ward off any intruders. They steal the level you want. the people from the surface of SNOOKER ONNOVER Wherever the cross is set, marks Atari's software men come up the planet by clutching them in the spot where your ball should to scratch in this game with the the vice-like grip of their claws. A new skill must be acquired by end up. usual good graphics and colours Using a joystick plugged into the players of Atari's snooker It takes a while to perfect your but it takes a while for a player to the Apple, you control a fighter game. shot, so have a practice before grasp that he cannot actually line plane. To fire, press the button Instead of mastering the cue you tackle the professional game. up his cue with the ball he wants on the side of the paddle and this game calls for a steady eve There is an untimed game to get to hit. It costs .95 and is turn the wheel to the left or right in positioning a white cross the hang of it. You can soon available from North London to manoeuvre the aircraft alterbehind the ball you wish to hit judge and apply the power of based distributors, Ingersoll. ing the altitude to avoid the mountainous landscape. The radar at the top of the screen shows what's coming towards you both in the way HITCHHIKERS GUIDE TO THE GALAXY of landscape and enemy aircraft So by following that guide you Time to grab your towel and set If you try and pick-up more \"save\" command enables you to can keep just ahead of the action out to discover the galaxy. objects than you can carry, then save your exact position, with before it appears on the screen. Harrow-based Supersoft's Eddie\", your shipboard compuevery object you've worked so If one of the surface dwellers adventure game, based on Dougter, prompts you, you'll just have hard to get or where you've wandering across the planet is las Adam's Hitch-hikers' Guide to to drop something, but which dropped it, on tape. kidnapped the plane's pilot can the Galaxy is a well thought-out one! Each object has its own key Supersoft has received so still swoop into action to save attempt to reproduce the word for picking it up, or dropmany calls for help about Hitchhim. By moving the aircraft into imaginative radio/T.V. series. ping it, e.g. if you wanted to pick hikers that they now send a position so that the plane is just Extremely well written and up. \"a big fat book of Vogan \"hints\" list out with the program touching the man in mid-air it programmed by Bob Chappell, poetry\" you could type \"take -they even had a request from automatically releases him from the game favours those who book\". South Africa! I think I'll start a the creature's clutches. watched the T.V. programme or The usual command words lost Hitch-hikers' club. The next step is to land him read the two books available apply to this game like: take, get. It costs  in cassette form back on the surface of the planet from Pan: Hitch-hiker's Guide look, read. As in most other and runs on a 32K Pet. Good so that he can run to safety. Your and Restaurant at the End of the adventure games, using the Hitch-hiking! plane gets just three lives. The Universe at least they will score is worked out according to know what a Vogan is and how to the number of attacking ships use a Babel fish. and Gorgons you destroy, rangThe object of the game is to ing from 20, 40 and 60 points. And take and then place a certain if you fail to rescue a man from a number of objects in certain Gorgon, or let him fall off your places to gain points. plane through dangerous flying on your way to this elusive you get 50 points deducted from score you are bound to get lost your score. in the \"Total Disorientation VorGorgon is a U.S. import and is tex Maze\" or get lost in space. available through Apple software When this happens to you don't dealers including SBD Software despair too much, there is a way of Richmond for .95. out! NOT FOR THE PARANOID HIKER "


"ComServe COMPUTER SHOP PRESENTS THE ELEGANT, EXPANDABLE COMSERVE VIDEO GENIE HOBBYIST PACKAGE This machine is fully expandable NOW, a printer and/or Aculab may be connected to the console, or an expansion interface may be connected, which includes disk and printer drivers and spare S100 slots. The S100 bus in the expansion interface can take a huge selection of boards to cover most hardware needs, and this includes the ability to run other processors, including 16 bit ones. There is a massive selection of good quality software for all small computer applications including word processing, accounts, stock control, engineering applications, and educational use. It can run many other languages apart from BASIC, compilers and assemblers too. This is a package of all the items we feel a beginner will need when he first starts to use his Genie. The offer comprises a Video Genie EG3003 with 12K BASIC, 15770 bytes of user programmable memory, upper and lower case and graphics display, built in tape recorder and QWERTY keyboard, with sound kit and joystick sockets installed and two joysticks. There is a user manual and a BASIC manual, and a programming for beginners book. There are three cassettes with demonstration programs and games and useful routines including a STAR TREK type game, SURROUND, CHECKOUT, HANGMAN, WORDFIND, FRUIT, MAGIC CARPET, a name and address list program and a pre-school letter recognition game. Four other games tapes will be included. There are three blank computer quality cassettes for your own use. There is also a head cleaning tape with a demagnetising action for the tape recorder. There are four coloured folders for the manuals or for screen overlays. The television is not included. There is a one year's guarantee on parts and labour. This package is available on ten day delivery, send your cheque for  with your order. Epson and Seiko printers stocked, from  inclusive. Graphic games at .20 each inc. GALAXY, METEOR MISSION, NOVA (asteroids), ATTACK FORCE, COSMIC FIGHTER, INVADERS, SHOWDOWN, BASKETBALL, PINBALL, DEATH MAZE, LABYRINTH. Adventures at .85 each, ADVENTURE LAND, PIRATE, GHOST TOWN, VOODOO CASTLE, THE COUNT (Dracula), SAVAGE ISLAND, SPACE ODESSY. Many, many others available NOW. 98 TAVISTOCK STREET, BEDFORD, BEDFORDSHIRE TELEPHONE (0234) 216749 Circle No. 134 80 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"OFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOF NOW THERE'S NO EXCUSE FOR POPPING DOWN TO THE LOCAL About the only thing the new Atari darts game doesn't have is that familiar T.V. commentator's soaring screech announcing the high score 'Wun-hundred-an-eightyyy!!'. The graphics on this game, which runs on the Atari 400 and 800 personal computers, beats most others into a cocked hat. The picture on the screen shows the interior of a pub and it looks convincingly like the local with wooden beams lining the walls and ceilings. A figure stands on the left hand side of the THE SUBTERRANEAN TERROR For those of you with the good fortune never to have come across a Wumpus, let me inform you that this species of cave dwelling amphibian is absolutely deadly. The Wumpus inhabiting Texas Instruments' new T.I. 99/4 computer package is pretty typical of the species in this respect. When you are hunting down his lair you must use all due caution. Should you blunder in on him at home, he will wolf you down without giving you a chance to fire. In fact your only chance of killing a Wumpus is to fire before you see him. Loose an arrow into his cave and you'll live to fight another day but choose carefully because the Wumpus does not give those who miss a second chance. A hopeless task it might sound in a massive complex of caves and twisting passages but luckily the Wumpus leaves clues to his whereabouts. In fact every cavern within two of his lair bears the taint of the creature. But there are other hazards in this complex of caverns. Slime pits for example. These revolting green traps can do for you just as surely as the Wumpus, who — by the way — will wallow quite contentedly in the middle of one of these. Among the other fauna present is a kind of bat with an extremely good memory. Once you have wandered, however innocently through his roost he will have committed your disturbing of his peace to memory and he will begin to grieve over it. He works himself up into such a tizzy that next time you enter his cavern he will grab you and deposit you elsewhere. Experienced Wumpus hunters very few and far between will search out the creatures in especially tortuous tun. nels. They may attempt to do it very fast or they may even go in blindfold! Foolish people! Wumpus brings the art of logical deduction to life, with just a pinch of luck as well. The graphics and sound effects are good and the cartridge costs .35 from T.I. picture representing the darts player. His jumper changes colour according to whoever's turn it is. When the game is in play the darts board itself is clearly marked out at the bottom right hand corner of the screen with the dart throwing hand hovering nearby An ear catching feature of the game are the sound effects. If you throw a dart which hits the wire on the board you hear the realistic chink of metal against metal and then a soft thud as it touches down on the carpet. And if you miss the board completely but get the wall instead the sound effects are once again spot on, crashing into the wall and dropping to the ground with a clatter. Kick off play by selecting the type of game you want from 301 to 901 and choosing a skill level to suit you between 0 and 9. Level 6 is about average and a good one to start on. Once you have typed in the player's initials the board appears in closeup on the screen, press start and you're off. Then you play just like any 'normal' darts game. The computer keeps tabs on the score and flashes it up on the screen after each player has had his go. But it's not as easy as it looks at first. The hand holding the dart hovers and you have to judge carefully when to fire. So you have to make sure the finger tip is pointing at the numbered section of the board you want to hit and fire at that exact moment. Like any game involving skill it makes you want to improve your performance and continually beat your opponent. The game is for either one or two players. At the beginning and end of the game a tune starts to play ... and play ... and play (and good graphics too)... pleasant to listen to at first but, after a while, it becomes tedious. The programmer concerned must have put a lot of effort into it but perhaps he could have spent his time better. Apart from that, a standards setter, Darts is available from Britain's Atari distributors, Ingersol for .95. "


"Video Genie 13K ROM version available THE NEW TEXAS TI 99/4A 42K PERSONAL COMPUTER ONLY .00 * Latest version with vu-meter & extra keys * 16K RAM, 12K Microsoft Basic * Includes software, manuals and leads * All our machines are fitted with lower case characters as standard 32K Ram memory version of Video Genie + VAT +VAT  VAT 32K RAM Optional Extras The unique 1K BIONIC Rom f29.50 +VAT.  +VAI LOOK AT THESE FEATURES 9900 16 BIT PROCESSOR 3-5 MHZ. 26K ROM INCLUDING 14K BASIC 7.6K GRAPHICS LANGUAGE INTERPRETER  4.4K MONITOR 16K USER RAM (EXPANDABLE TO 48K) HI-RES GRAPHICS 192 x 256  16 COLOURS WITH FOREGROUND, MIDDLE, AND BACK GROUND FULL MEMORY MAPPED SCREEN 5 OCTAVES SOUND FROM 110Hz TO OVER 400003 SIMULTANEOUS TONES + NOISE GENERATOR SOUND THROUGH YOU OWN TELEVISION PLUGS INTO ANY PAL COLOUR TV (B/W GIVES SHADES OF GREY)  INTERFACE TO CONTROL 2 CASSETTE PLAYERS (AUTO COPY AND UPDATE FROM ONE TO THE OTHER) PLUS MANY MORE SUPER FEATURES 12 MONTH GUARANTEE OPTIONS INCLUDE: BIG RANGE OF SOLID STATE PLUG IN SOFTWARE RS232 INTERFACE THERMAL PRINTER DISK DRIVES. SPEECH SYNTHESIZER JOYSTICKS ETC ETC.  Double joysticks with software 28-VAI  Lower case characters with 'L' sign  VAT We stock a wide range of Genie accessories for the businessman and the hobbyistWord processing, stock control, ledgers systems plus ganiesRefer to catalogue BIONIC ROM The Rom enhancement for your Video Genie will add the following immediately accessible features to your machine:  Lower case driver  Screen printout  Keyboard debounce  Cursor select  Shift lock  Keyboard lock  Repeat key routine Bleeping keyboard etc Available only from us. Kit  + VAT fitting .50 SAVE! EPSON MX-80 Letter quality matrix printer, has full software control of 40, 88, 66 or 132 columns 80cps bidirectional, disposable print head. There's lots of printers to choose from, but once you have compared you will find it hard to pass up to the MX-80. E call Video Genie interface  + VAT Other interfaces available. 400 & 800 Computer Systems ATARI ATARI 400 f295 + vat ATARI 800  6 Vt Please send me T199/4A COMPUTERS (Inc. Power supply modulators and cass interface). Please send me details and price list (For which I enclose a large S.AE) ACORN ATOM Name Address 8K ROM, 2K RAM BUILT  12K ROM, 12K RAM BUILT  Power supply .20 Colour modulator  all plus VAT  The BBC Microsoft basic upgrade  Plug in disc drive unit Available shortly Phone Phone for availability of VIC 20 Computer I enclose cheque for .25 per computer including .25 VAT) Please charge my Access/Diners Club Card. Number or telephone your card order during shop hours to: i Watford (0923) 44057 | Signed Q-Tek Systems Ltd. 2 Daltry Close Old Town Stevenage Herts Tel: (0438) 65385 Send  for latest catalogue (refundable). Please add vat to all items. Orders und  add 60p P + p otherwise carriage at cost Send to The Computer Centre, Watford, Ltd. 150 High Street, Watford, Herts. WDI 2EN Circle No. 135 82 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"DFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOF ISREVIEWSRE UNDER AND OVER THE WALL ESCAPE FROM COLDITZ REBEL AGAINST FARSIDE'S PRINCE TAWALA'S LAST REDOUBT lems. WHAT A LOAD...! camps they control, their strengths and weaknesses. Will the ruthless Chief Dumas take your offer of money and send you 100 men or will he return your messenger's head on Helping you out at the start of a plate? While awaiting the escape attempt are your feldevelopments send spies to dislow prisoners of war who have cover Tawala's movements is amassed a selection of goodies to aid you. he marching on your camp? He probably is and using Paoli's map On the list are things like a you had better order \"Breaktrenchcoat, a grappling iron, a Camp\" and move on. map of the district, money, Benthi is the ruthless rebel When you feel Benthi's forces chocolate, tobacco and a gun. leaderene with just 100 men and are ready it is time to attack Remember that some Germans 15 rifles to her name and a planet Redoubt and you must move your are particularly susceptible to to conquer in Tawala's last army to Tawala's stronghold. bribes and for the price of some Redoubt. \"Attack Redoubt\" flashes on the sought-after chocolate they may This strategy game is the latscreen and you move your army The most notorious of World War turn a blind eye to your escape. est in the Galactic Saga series in. Then all you can do is sit back Il prisons Colditz was famed for Guard dogs, locked doors and set on the planet of Farside and await the outcome, hoping the tough time POWs had in searchlights add to your probwhich is ruled over by the selfish your forces are well equipped escaping and the few successful Prince Tawala. and numerous enough to defeat attempts recorded. The Sharp MZ-BOK, which the The game takes its name from Tawala. In Escape from Colditz you're game runs on, understands only Tawala's fortress which Benthi It runs on an Apple in 48K, given just as hard a time as those a few word commands. You can stormed to win a famous victory. instruct it to move you from one Your task is to recreate ner tac. Pete & Pam Computers of Lancaget out of the notorious prison place to another or to take tics and planning which brought shire castle. actions when necessary. As in all this victory about. the usual adventure games you must give commands using words like get, take, search, and directional instructions like SHIP OF THE LINE north, south, up and down. It's fun to play but like most Two games from Croydon based thought out warship game, with Premier Publications, who have adventure games you end up varying wind direction to complibanging your head against a wall the audacity in the light of this cate the tactics. cassette, to style themselves It runs on a Sinclair ZX81 with with frustration when you keep \"Britain's biggest hobby software a 16K RAM pack. going round in fruitless circles. specialists\". London based Sharpsoft supply Also available for the Sinclair's Escape from Colditz on cassette If the rest of the software is as new memory pack are two games from .95 on a 48K Sharp. badly presented as this cassette from JRS Software of Worthing, then they should think again! which use the graphics facilities Ship of the line proved impossnear their best. ible to load, and this was not Slalom, .95, is a race against surprising when the program is time. You have to negotiate 14 interspersed with people talking! posts, making sure that none are At the start your forces are Alpha-square, which was a missed, or that none are hit. The hopelessly outnumbered and very unreliable loaded, is a simconcept of the game, and its badly equipped. But using your ple letter puzzle where the 24 implementations, are good. intelligence officer's reports letters A to X are arranged in a However, with a little thought it wisely and sending messengers 5x5 grid, with one empty space. could have been much better. to Farside's other chiefs and The object just like those The posts are all in a straight line spies to watch for Tawala's plastic puzzles is to get the and equidistant. A simple key approach, you build up and stay letters into alphabetical order sequence of: cursor down, curout of Tawala's reach until you moving individual, a whole row of sor down, cursor right, cursor are ready to take on his Last letters. right and so on gets you to the Redoubt. The instructions come on a finish safely. Benthi's only advantage is the scrappy piece of paper, but were Black Holes, .40, is quite a intelligence reports of Chief quite clear. The graphics are fiendish game. A pattern of Paoli's team. This right-hand man good with no flashing screen a reverse field zeros approaches knows Farside's layout like the letter move, and the cassette constantly. Within this pattern is back of his hand. He has dossiers sells for .95. a pathway to be navigated using on each of the other four chiefs. It was a pity about Ship of the the cursor left or right keys. Anson, Beonj, Covoi and Dumas line which costs .95 as it in both these games the knowing which villages or seemed to be quite a well documentation is not too hot. "


"DOWN TO BASIC DUWI BY MOIRA NORRIE DIVIDING RULES CALCULATING PLUS By experiment you may have already discovered the order in which a computer will perform arithmetic operations when faced with a choice. In a simple program like: 10 PRINT 3+2*5 20 END the answer would be 13 because, when faced with a choice between multiplication and addition, it will always do the multiplication first. Similarly, by trying other examples, you would find that it always gives preference to the multiplication and division operators over the addition and subtraction operators. So 3-4/2+6 gives the answer 7 and 4*2-3 gives the answer 5. What would the answer be in the following case? 12/6*2. Here the computer has a choice between multiplication and division. If the division is done first, then the answer will be 4; if the multiplication is done first, the answer will be 1. Multiplication and division are said to be of \"equal precedence\", meaning that there is no hard and fast rule as to which one will be done first. In this situation, the rule that is adopted is that the computer works from left to right so that in this case it would do the division first; not because it has any natural priority over the multiplication, but because it occurs first as we read the expression from left to right. Addition and subtraction are also of \"equal precedence\". As yet, I have not mentioned the exponentiation operation (i.e. working out powers of numbers). Exponentiation has priority over any of the other operations. 3**2+5. This expression would therefore give the answer 14. (Remember exponentiation is represented by either \"**\" or \"*\". At this stage, these rules of precedence may seem very complex, but the important thing at the moment is that you learn to be careful when writing expressions for calculations. Don't worry if in doubt, try it out and see what happens! If at any time you wish to override such rules of precedence (or if you are not sure of the rules of precedence), you can use brackets. For example: (3+2)*5 will cause the computer to perform the addition first and the final answer will be 25. You are now in the position that you should be able to write programs to perform any straightforward calculation. You may be asking yourself: \"Why use a computer rather than a simple calculator?\" One of the features of using a computer is that you can write a program which will perform the specified calculation for any set of values and not just one particular set of values as you have done until now. To illustrate this, I will return to the simplest of examples a program to add two numbers. This time, I will write a program that will add any two numbers these numbers will be provided when the program is RUN. 10 INPUT A,B 20 PRINT A+B 30 END This program uses \"variables\" A and B to describe the calculation to be performed on the numbers. If you RUN this program, the computer will wait for you to type the values of A and B when It encounters the \"INPUT\" instruction. It will print the prompt \"?\" so that you will know that it is waiting for \"input\". You then type in the required values, separated by commas if there is more than one, then press the \"Return\" key. Therefore, for the above program you should have something that looks like: \"? 3,2\" printed by the computer. In this example, I used the names A and B to represent the two values. As these are only \"dummies\" to allow us to des3+2*5? 84 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"been introduced the FOR statement and the NEXT statement. These will be discussed in more detail next month. For now, it suffices to say that they bracket the instructions to be repeated, and that the variable called \"T\" acts as a count of the number of times round the loop. cribe the operations the computer has to perform, it is not significant that I used these particular names. Some versions of basic restrict you to names consisting of a single letter or a single letter followed by one of the digits 0,1,2,3,...9. The following are examples of names that could be used: A, X, Y2, T9. Other versions can cope with longer names for variables. This means that you can have more meaningful names such as \"PROFIT\" or \"VALUE 66\". Note that I have always written my programs in uppercase letters. Again, many systems are more flexible and permit lowercase and uppercase letters. I shall always use the more restricted forms as my programs should then work, as they are given, on the majority of systems. MESSAGES IN QUOTES repeat a calculation a thousand times than it is to write one to repeat it five times. The programs I have looked at so far have been of the form INPUT data PRINT answer to calculation on data Now let's look at examples where these instructions are repeated a given number of times. For example, I might have a program of the form: Repeat five times INPUT data PRINT answer to calculation on data end of repeat I have used a \"loop\". In this example, I \"loop\" five times meaning that I loop back and repeat the instructions five times. To illustrate how you can write a program to do this, I'll write a program to add, not one pair of numbers, but five pairs of numbers. 10 FOR I=1 TO 5 20 INPUT AB 30 PRINT A+B 40 NEXT I 50 END Two new instructions have The PRINT instructions used so far have been used to print the answer to a calculation. PRINT instructions can also be used to print messages. To do this you simply enclose the message that you want printed in quotes. A simple program to illustrate this is: 10 PRINT \"THIS IS A TEST\" 20 END REPEAT FIVE TIMES Another powerful feature of computers is that it is easy to repeat calculations. It is no more difficult to write a program to I will leave you with the following example program. It includes loops and the use of the PRINT instruction to print mes. sages. Try running this program and then see if you can work out what each instruction does. I will go through it in detail next month. 10 FOR I1 TO 2 20 FOR J-1 TO 4 30 PRINT \"XXXX XXXX 40 NEXT 50 FOR K=1 TO 4 60 PRINT\" XXXX XXXX\" 70 NEXT K 80 NEXT I 90 END a FORI:1 NEXTI NEXT ISSUE CALCULATION Most computer games involve graphic symbols — these are the building blocks used for drawing pictures on the screen. Many of the versions of Basic developed for microprocessor systems include special instructions for graphics. The more specialised instructions will be dealt with later in the series. Next month, I will describe how you can achieve simple graphical displays using the PRINTinstruction. NEXT ISSUE COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 85 "


"«My finger slipped,i hit the button, and nuked Washington by mistake» Whether your kind of fun is Every issue's packed with pages saving the World in a war game, of games listings for you to prosharpening your chess strategy gram. And you don't have to be a or piloting a 747, computer games computer expert. reach new levels of exhilaration Each month there's reviews of in terms of excitement, intellect new computer and video games, and dexterity. regular pages on chess, bridge And, to help you get the most and mainframe games. Brush up fun out of your computer, there's or learn programming with our a brand new monthly magazine: regular workshop, and discover Computer & Video Games. the fun of creating graphics and It brings the best entertainadding sound to the games you inment out of all types of computer, vent yourself. There's also regular from personal Sinclairs, Ataris, brain teasers (some with prizes) Tandys, VICs, Apples and PET's plus the secrets of beating arcade right up to mainframe IBMs. video machines. "


"I would like to take out an annual subscription. | I enclose a cheque/P.O. for , ( overseas) for twelve issues. Computer & Video Games, Bretton Court, Bretton, Peterborough PE3 8DZ. Name Address Computer & Video Games is packed with new levels of stimulation for people who get fun out of computers. The second great issue is out today at all good newsagents. And on the front cover you'll find the programmers most useful little tool. A template to run up and down listings to prevent you skipping lines. Saves a lot of de-bugging time! Using the template, you can enter what is probably the silliest competition on which / you've ever bent your brain./ | Computer & Video Games. The magazine that makes computers fun. DECEMBER 1981 COMPUTER GAMES THE FUN FUN FUN MAKES COMPUTERS MAGAZINE THAT USE THIS HANDY GREAT TEMPLATE  TEMPLATE COMPETITION. RIZES TO BE WON! PAGE IN THIS ISSUE FOR DET \"ROUND THE HORN FREE ARE YOU THE WORLD'S BEST ARCADE GAME PLAYER? SOLVE THE CUBE CATHY FORNISSEN PLAYER? ENTER SEE THE CON speg4 Ao9 The second issue is at your newsagent now. "


"ZX80 and ZX81 WARD ELECTRONICS BIRMINGHAM 021-554 0708 SALES AND SERVICE Apple computer VIDEO GENIE ARCADE GAMES FROM QUICKSILVA ALL PROGRAMS WRITTEN IN MACHINE CODE TO ENSURE FAST FLICKER-FREE GRAPHICS QS DEFENDER Generally considered to be the best arcade type game available for the ZX-Computers CONTROLS Up-Down Thrust -Fire FEATURES First and only full screen display Software to drive OS sound board Moving planetary surface Up to 84 fast moving charac ters on screen at once. On screen scoring Ten missiles at once increasing attack patterns as the game progresses Quicksilvas new arcade game CONTROLS Left-Right Thrust Fire Software to drive OS sound board MultiFEATURES ple missiles firing in 8 directions Attacking spaceships On screen scoring Increasing number of asteroids Full mobility of ship to all areas of the display Asteroids break up into smaller asteroids when hit Wrap around screen QS ASTEROIDS From  From  LOW PRICED AND READY TO PLUG POWERFUL AND VERSATILE. ONE INTO YOUR OWN TV. COLOUR  OF THE FINEST MICROCOMPUTERS EXTRA. UNITS AVAILABLE EX AVAILABLE FOR BUSINESS, EDU STOCK WITH THIS AND OTHER CATION AND LEISURE. TV COM OPTIONS  SOUND  EXTRA PATIBLE WITH UHF MODULATOR MEMORY PRINTER INTERFACE EPSON PRINTERS CENTRONICS MOLIMERX SOFTWARE SEE AND CHOOSE FROM THIS RANGE OF TRS80 SOFTWARE DISCS AND DISK DRIVES FOR APPLE, VIDEO GENIE, TRSBO COMPUTER BOOKS ON ALL ASPECTS OF COMPUTING C12 CASSETTES 55p each. 5%\" DISCS .95 each. All the LOWE ELECTRONICS RANGE of equipment for the Computing, Amateur Radio, and Test Equipment Fields including Trio Oscilloscopes PLEASE ADD VAT AT 15% 9am-5pm Tues-Sat Closed Mondays. WARD ELECTRONICS All programs are recorded twice on high quality cassettes to ensure reliability. Cassette inserts are full colour reproductions of original artworks by \"STEINAR LUND' Full instructions sent with order OS DEFENDER 4K For ZX-80 with 4K ROM and minimum of 3K of RAM GS-DEFENDER SK For ALL machines with BK ROM and minimum of 3K of RAM OS ASTEROIDS For ZX-81 (or ZX-80 with BK ROM and FAST/SLOW mod) + 4K RAM All at the fully inclusive price of .50 each For complete arcade realism Quicksilva also produce a range of high quality hardware OS SOUND BD For 3 channel sound effects or tunes Q CHRS BD Program your own characters for use with any program. Enables display of real SPACE INVADERS characters on your machine Also OS MOTHER BD and as 3K RAM BD Send S.A.E. for data sheets on our complete range of products. Orders and enquiries should be sent to the following address: First Floor Soho House, 362-364, Soho Road, Handsworth, Birmingham B21 9QL, Tel: 021-554 0708 QUICKSILVA, 95 UPPER BROWNHILL ROAD, MAYBUSH, SOUTHAMPTON, HANTS Circle No. 137 Circle No. 138 WILTSHIRE PAMES SENTRE The Largest Selection of Games in the World including SHARP * LOWEST PRICE * SHARP MZ 8OK * 20K MACHINE  VIDEO GENIE SPECIALISTS VIDEO GENIE GENIE 11   VIDEO GAMES D.A.I. 48k + 16 COLOURS + STEREO SOUND  22 OXFORD STREET LONDON W.1. VIC 20 ORDERS NOW BEING TAKEN SOFTWARE BOOKS SERVICE ALL PRICES EXCLUSIVE OF VAT ALSO (near Tottenham Court Road) and also at 439 OXFORD ST. W.1. (opposite Selfridges) 126 CHARING CROSS ROAD, W.C.2 (opposite Foyles) 184 REGENT STREET, LONDON W.1. (opposite Hamleys) everyman Jomputers 14 EDWARD STREET, WESTBURY, WILTS. Tel: (0373) 864644 Home Tel: 823764 TO Circle No. 139 Circle No. 140 88 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"At last. Awatch that's fun. Imagine. It's a cold damp winter's day. You return to your car to realise that you've left the lights on all day. You kick the car and stomp off to phone for help. An hour later you return to await the arrival of the mechanic. Back in your car without lights or radio. you think that sometimes life is anything but fun! You reach into your pocket and take out a watch about the size of a tiny calculator. You press the time button and see you should have been home about an hour ago. You press the game button and start to play. The game's called Lion and features a number of electronically controlled \"Kings of the Jungle You have to stop them escaping from their cage by moving two lion tamers into their path Suddenly life is fun again, the mechanic arrives and after he has a few dames you're on your way There's more good news. There are five such games in the Game and watch series from CGL Headache. Parachute. Octopus, Lion & Manhole, Sometimes life can be fun. Game and Watch You can buy Game and Watch products at larger branches of Boots. Rumbelows, Selfridges and Hamleys. GAME WATCH ooo o Circle No. 141 TWICKENHAM COMPUTER CENTRE LTD With the best microcomputers available B.B.C. ROM SETS SACORN SINGLE FLOPPY COMPUTER DISK UNITS (100K) WRITE FOR DETAILS to:the ACORN SPECIALIST IN YORKSHIRE New Hardware * ACORN Atoms From .00 * ACORN GP80 Printer + Cable E232.00 * ATOM Word Pack ROM  30.00 * Extra Memory per 1K (Recommended)  3.20 WK21 (commodore apple I GAMES FOR APPLE Missile Defence High Res Soccer Alien Typhoon Etc. NEW! ADULTS ONLY. SOFT PORN ADVENTURE NEW Prestelth an e .00 + VAT. New Software from ACORNSOFT * GAME 1 Asteroids + Subhunt + Breakout * GAME 2 Dogfight + Mastermind + Zombie * GAME 3 Rat Trap + Lunar Lander + Black Box * GAME 4 Star Trek + Four Row + Space Attack * GAME 5 Invaders+Wumpus +Reversi * GAME 6 Dodgems + Simon + Amoeba * GAME 7 Green Things + Ballistics + Snake * GAME 8 Stargate + Go + Moko + Robots * SOFT VDU New character set design * MATHS PACK 1. MATHS PACK 2 * UTILITY PACK 1. Disassemble + Fast COS + Renumber * ATOM DATABASE. Versatile & Efficient * PEEKO-Processor Simulates micro * ATOM FORTH. Full implementation * ATOM FORTH. User's Guide  11.50  11.50 E 11.50 [ 11.50 f 11.50  11.50  11.50  11.50  11.50  11.50  11.50  11.50  11.50  11.50  5.00 01 892 7896 TWICKENHAM 01 891 1612 CENTRE LIMITED COMPUTER 72, Heath Road Twickenham Middlesex TW1 4BW Books * ATOM Business by J. Phipps  6.95 * The ATOM Magic Book  5.50 * Getting Acquainted With Your ACORN ATOM  7.95 ALL PRICES INCLUDE UK P&P + VAT WHERE APPLICABLE ELTEC SERVICES LIMITED 231 MANNINGHAM LANE BRADFORD BD8 7HH TEL: 0274-491372 Circle No. 142 Circle No. 143 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 89 "


"SUPERMARKET COMPUTERS CALCULATORS COMPUTER GAMES EXTRA LOW PRICES! SOFTWARE GLOSSARY A beginner's guide to plain jargon Make your 41C more productive with HP application plug in modules They provide instant access to sets of programs covering diverse ranges of subect matter Mathematics Electrical Engineering Business Decisions Games and lots more Each Module comes in a Pae with a detailed manual containing descriptions and examples plus helpful programming techniques HP41C complete plus additional mem. module & stats module 185 001 HP41C complete plus mem module & 1 Card Reader 248 001 *HPC IB Memprog Sc Stat plus Cont Mom) 149 00 HP34C Sci Prog 20 Mem .50 HP41 (Newest Sci from HP 133 00 HP41CV incorporating quadam 16900 HP4C Printer E193 00 HP ECONOMY PACK HP41C together with card reader and printer All complete as manufacturer's  95 HP BUDGET PACK HP41CV together with card reader and printer All complete a manufacturer's 449 00 COMPUTERS Texas 1994 16K Computer which plugs direct into any TV for full colour ideal learning aid for every member of the family including preschool children  expandable to 48K) Hewlett Packard HP 85 16K Computer incorporating VDU Printer eten advanced Scientific Business Computer with very sophisticated software 1.935 00 (expandable to 32K) Apple 48K Computer system complete with disc drive graphic printer 12 Video Monitor inexpensive Scientific Business Education system (1 980 00 VIC PETATARI c together with Printers Disc Drives etc for all above detailed systems available SPECIAL OFFER  TEXAS T159 together with PC100C Complete as manufacturer's specifications 1234 50 TEXAS T159 Card DOG 950 Prag Steps or C10400 * TEXAS PCIOOC Printing Unit for i58 159 13600 TEXAS 157 Key Prog 8 Mer 150 Key C25 50 \"TEXAS T5BC Key Pro 480 stp or 60 mom with continuous memory & programme 55.00 TEXAS TI PROGRAMMER Hexadecimal Octal Dec. Converter 86 50 TEXAS TIS111110 Dig 10 Mem32 Prag Steps E27 50 COMPUTER CHESS Hand held Chess Traveller E3075 complete with board men etc) Boris Diplomat ES5 00 flightweight portable deal for begin ALGORITHM A process or set of rules to carry out a task or solve a mathematical problem. ARRAY A series of items (data or information) arranged to form a meaningful pattern. ARRAY SUBSCRIPT An indexing notation e.g. X(1), X(2) where 1 and 2 are subscripts, used in an array. BITS BInary digits. The Os and is that make up the binary code computers understand. BUG A slang term given to a mistake in a computer program which prevents it working. It can refer to a mechanical, electrical or electronic defect in a computer. BYTE A term to measure a number of bits (binary digits). usually eight bits to a byte. CHIP A tiny piece of silicon which holds all the components that make up a microprocessor. CHARACTER STRING A sequence of characters in a row. CONCATENATE To unite in a series, link together or chain. CURSOR A small square-shaped mark which indicates where a character will appear on the screen. It can be moved around the screen using certain keys on the keyboard. DECODE To interpret and determine meaning, and to translate a code into more understandable form. ELECTROLYTIC CAPACITOR A component which allows the passage of AC current but not DC current. ELLIPTICAL Of or relating to an ellipse or ellipsis. ELLIPSIS/ELLIPSE Omission from sentence of words needed to complete construction or sense. ERRATA (Erratum) Errors in printing or writing, usually in lists. EXPONENTIATION A mathematical operation used to calculate powers of numbers. FOR ... NEXT A Basic statement which is an instruction used for repetition of a sequence of program statements (see loop). GOSUB A Basic command instructing the computer to go to a subroutine in a computer program. GOTO A Basic command which tells the computer to jump to another line in a computer program. GRAPHICS CHARACTERS The name given to pictorial representation of data such as plotted graphs, engineering drawings and computer games. HARDWARE A general term given to all pieces of electronic and mechanical devices which make up a computer system, i.e. the actual machines. . INPUT Information which is fed into the computer. INTEGER A number which does not contain a decimal point, i.e. a whole number. K Abbreviation for Kilobyte. KILOBYTE A measurement of memory capacity. 1024 bytes of memory. So 8K is equivalent to 8192 bytes. L.E.D. (Light Emitting Diode) Provides a simple display and consists of an electron tube which lights up when electricity is passed through it. Used as an alternative to liquid crystal displays in calculators and watches. LET A Basic statement which defines a variable. E.g. LET A=0. Mini Chess Master \"1\" E75 00 slow priced portable sensory Challenger Mini Sensory 147.00 the mini version of the Challenger Sen sory ideal for travel Challenger E63 50 Ideal allround Chess Computer Challenger Sensory .50 sensory chess to club standard Murphy Encore E133 00 top level chess with fast play! Great Game Machine E 15300 mainframe games centre for games cartridges including Murphy Chess, Bor chek Draughts Las Vegas Blackjack Revers etc COMPUTER GAMES Backgammon Challenger 89 50 Omar Backgammon Advanced Bridge Challenger E174-00 TEXAS ECONOMY OFFER TEXAS T159 Calculator complete manufacturer's spec. PLUS statistics module & extra set of 40 Blank Prog Cards 133 00 TEXAS LEARNING AIDS SPEAK AND SPELL for older children 8 13 years E33.00 SPEAK AND MATHS 15 yrs and up 100 000 random maths Price 136 50 *FREE Main charger included. GOODS FULLY GUARANTEED PRICES EXCLUDE VAT AND P-P Company hospital and Government orders accepred by phone Diners Barclaycard Access Visa accepted by phone Tel.: 01-455-9824 MOUNTAINDENE 22 Cowper Street London EC2 Circle No. 144 90 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"SUPERMARKET GOLD RUSH SOFTWARE GLOSSARY A beginner's guide to plain jargon If you've got your VIC 20 this programme is made for it, 1849 GOLD RUSH. As reviewed in 1st issue of Computer & Video Games. Play the game, solve the puzzles, compete against daunting odds to find your own gold mine with REAL GOLD First to send us the golden word receives the prize. (The value of which is going up with every copy sold.) Accept the challenge join the Gold Rush. Send  which includes VAT and P&P. RIGHT NOW Mr Micro Ltd. PO Box 24 Swinton, Manchester M27 3AL Tel: 061 728 2282 LOGICAL NETWORK A series of interconnected points linked by communications facilities. LOOP A Basic function referring to the repeated execution of a series of instructions for a fixed number of times. MEMORY A measurement of how much information a computer can cope with. MEMORY MAPPED SCREEN Data called up on the V.D.U. screen to help when processing scattered program fragments in the computer's memory. MESSAGE A sequence of letters or symbols which has some sort of meaning. NEXT (See FOR... NEXT). throwing a dice these numbers are useful in games. ROM (Read Only Memory) A memory chip which can only be read from and not written into. ROUTINE A set of coded computer instructions used for a particular function in a program. SCAN To examine stored information for a specific purpose as for content or for arrangement. SOFTWARE The programs fed into a computer, which make them perform what we want them to do. STRING A connected sequence of characters, words or other elements usually symbolised with the $ (dollar) sign. ZX81 CASSETTE ONE  REACT Im/c)  INVADERS (m/c)  PHANTOM ALIENS (m/c)  MAZE OF DEATH (m/c)  PLANET LANDER (m/c)  BUG SPLAT (m/c)  BOUNCING LETTERS (m/c)  I CHING (basic) MASTERMIND (basic)  BASIC HANGMAN (basic)  ROBOTS (basic) PROG OF THE MONTH PHANTOM ALIENS A very weird version of invaders. The phantom aliens move at different speeds, setting up strange defensive patterns, some disappearing and suddenly reappearing Genuine pixel graphics for continuous movement. Continuous display of score, All for 1K RAM, all on CASSETTE ONE sent first class) for 3.80 from: Michael Orwin 26 BROWNLOW ROAD WILLESDEN LONDON NW10 9QL SHARP MZ-80K software SUBROUTINE A computer program routine that is translated separately, generally used in several computer programs or several times in one program. TERNARY Relates to the number system of the base three. OSCILLATE To undergo highfrequency alternations as across a spark gap or in a valve transmitter circuit. POKE An instruction used in most versions of Basic allowing you to store integers in a specific place in memory. PRINT A Basic command which tells the computer to perform a calculation in a program. PROCESSING Handling and manipulating computer data. RAM (Random Access Memory) This is a number that can only be repeated by chance. As it is like USER PORT The entry channel which a data set is attached to. VALUE The numerical quantity of a data element, and is the number assigned to a variable. VARIABLE Asymbol whose numeric value can be changed at all times. It is used when writing programs. 5DUST COVERS for MZ-BOK COMPUTERON MZ 80P3 printer Black, waterproof 6HEAD ON, Basic machine code arcade game. Gobble up dots buto duicidal obat can intent on your d e tion! Very tast 5 MOONLANDER Complex real time ander Superlative picsound 10K RAM) 05 COMPOSER Pay tunes via the keyboard Replay your co sitions Print music string for future use. 5CHASE Excellent real time chave. Steal them but void the vicious dog! 15 MANIAC Exhausting real time maniac drive Run dowe says, but don't crash 81 skills 4 BANK ACCOUNT, Input your income outgoing See the vear's cash flow in monthly statements E4 BANNER Inout your message and see it scroll up the sein large characters NA FACH-BIORHYTHMS MASTERMIND, FOX & GEESE ADDRESS BOOK COMPUTER ASSISTED LEARNING. Superbe of pro grams written by experts. Exclusive to us. 5 each WORD MATCHCOUNT & ADD PICTURE COUNT 14 CHARACTER MATCH Write or phone for full catalogue. Cash wuth order or ACCESS All prices fully inclusive Orders despatched by FREE machine code SPACE INVADERS with all orders of E15 HIGHLIGHT SOFTWARE 3 Nether Court Halstead Essex CO9 2HE Telephone (0787) 475714 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 91 "


"NOW IN STOCK THE NEW & EXCITING TRS80 MODEL WE ARE NOW STOCKING THE APPLE I AT REDUCED PRICES AUTOSTART EURO PLUS 48K  + VT APPLE DISC II 3.3 Dos Disc with Controller E349 VI Additional Drives F299 VI GUARANTEE BY RANTEE BY  GUARANTEE BY COMPARE Getting Started APPLE II is faster smaller, and more powerful than its predecessors. And it's more fun to use too because of built-in features like: .BASIC The Language that Makes Programming Fun. High-Resolution Graphics in a 54,000 Point Array for Finely Detailed Displays Sound Capability that Brings Programs to Life. Hand Controls for Games and Other Human Input Applications Internal Memory Capacity of 48K Bytes of RAM, 12K Bytes of ROM for Big-System Per formance in a Small Package Eight Accessory Expansion Slots to let the System Grow With Your Needs You don't need to be an expert to enjoy APPLE IIIt is a complete, ready to run computer. Just connect it to a video display and start using programs for writing your own the first day. You'll find that its tutorial manuals help you make it your own personal problem solver Powerful Disk Operating Software Supports up to 6 drives  Name Access to Files for Ease of Use .BASIC Program Chaining to Link Software Together Random or Sequential File Access to Simplify Programming Dynamic Disk Space Allocation for Efficient Storage Individual File Write Protection Eliminates Accidental File Alterations Loads an BK Byte Binary Image in 65 sec (1.2 sec in Pascall . Storage Capacity of 116 Kilobytes (143K Bytes with Pascall on Standard 5% Diskettes . Powered Directly from the APPLE Up to 6 Drives) for Convenience and High Reliability Packaged in Heavy Duty. Colour Coordinated Steel Cabinet Colour Monitors for Apple  +VAT NEW The GUARANTE 48K  +VAT The Radio Shack TRS-80 TM Model lll is a ROM-based computer system consisting of .A 12 inch screen to display results and other information  A 65 key console keyboard for inputting programs and data to the Computer .AZ BO Microprocessor, the brains of the system A Real Time Clock Read Only Memory (ROMI containing the Model II BASIC Language fully compatible with most Model I BASIC programs) Random Access Memory (RAM) for storage of programs and data while the Computer is on amount is expandable from \"16K 1048K\" optional extral. A Cassette Interface for long term storage of programs and data requires a separate cassette recorder, optional/extral A Printer Interface for hard-copy Output of programs and data requires a separate line printer optional extral Expansion area for upgrading to a disk based system loptional/extral Expansion area for an RS 232 C serial communications interface (optional/extral All these components are contained in a single moulded case and all are powered via one power cord Disc Drives Kit with 2x40 Track Drives 599 + VAT Disc Drives Kit with 2x80 Track Drives E729 +VAT Add E26 for Installation PEDIGREE PETS 32K ONLY  + VAI RRP  for 32K GET YOURSELF GARTENGED A NEW MX70 COMPTE PRINTER AND SAVE A FORTUNE only  VAT .80 Column, Upper & lower case Apple dot Graphics  Centronics Parallel Uni-directional TX 80 R49 + VAT STOCK Very popular for home business use 8K Microsoft Basic in ROM 32K with new improved keyboard. 12\" screen Cassette Deck 55 extra EX 8032 80 COLUMN PET ONLY  +VAT NEW CASIO VL TONE EW E31. 25 VI ACORN ATOM UNIQUE IN CONCEPT THE HOME COMPUTER THAT GROWS AS YOU DO Fully Assembled  VAT HII IT The reliable value for money system with after sales support instruction and training facilities and a wide range of programmes It's a new kind of musical instrument. A computer controlled synthesiser that helps you create, play and arrange compositions that normally take years of musical training SALE MEMORY UPGRADES s 16K (8 x 4116) .90 VAT 4K Compukit (8 x 2114) .90 + VAT NOBODY CAN GET NEAR OUR PRIC ES EXCEPT OUR CUSTOMERS Special features include . Full Sized Keyboard Assembler and Basic . Top Quality Moulded Case High Resolution Colour Graphics 6502 Microprocessor GUARANTEEB TV GAME BREAK OUT CENTRONICS 737 DOT MATRIX PRINTER only  VAT including cables COMMODORE VIC-20 ONLY  + VI Has got to be one of the world's greatest TV games You really get hooked As featured in ETI Has also 4 other pinball games and lots of options Good kit for up-grading old amusement Standard Features .80 CPS Proportional Spaced Mode 50 CPSMonospaced Mode  Proportional Spacing, Plus 10 CP1 and 16.7 CP1.NX 9 (Proportional) or 7XB Monospaced) Dot Matrix .7 X 8 Dot Matrix 3 Way Paper Handling System 96 Character ASC11 plus 6 European character sets Microprocessor Electronics Expanded Print Right Margin Justification Print Underlining .9 Wire Free Flight Print Head  Bidirectional Stepper Motor Paper Drive Full One Line Buffer 21 LPM With 80 Columns Printed .58 LPM With 20 Columns Printed .6 Lines Per inch Vertical Spacing Paper Tear Bar Centronic Colours and Logo . 18 foreground colours  8 background colours . Real typewriter keyboard with full graphics  Music in three voices and three octaves  Language and sound effects MINI KIT PCB sound & Vision modulator memory chip and de code chip. Very simple to construct 14.90 + VAT OR PCB .90 MAIN LSI E8.50 Both plus VAT THE VIDEO GENIE SYSTEM GFVOE TANTEL GUARANTHEBY  GUARANTEE BY COMPUCARE VAI Microline Demonstation available at our showroom NOW IN STOCK PRESTEL BY TANTEL The greatest thing since television telephones. Communications at your fingertips for business & home. 180.000 pages of up-to-date information on travel news, investment, holidays, hotels etc etc. Ask Prestela question and you have your answer in seconds in full colour on your own TV Only requires a telephone jack socket available from the PO. NEW ideal for small businesses, schools, colleges homes, etc Suitable for the experienced, inexperienced, hobbyist, teacher, etc EG3000 Series WITH NEW EXTRA KEYSI 16K  16K user RAM  plus extended 12K Microsoft BASIC in ROM Fully TAS-80 Level II software compatible Huge range of software already available Self contained PSU. UHF modulator and cassette Simply plugs into video monitor or UHF TV Full expansion to disks and printer Absolutely complete just fit into mains plug The Video Genie is a complete computer system, requiring only connection to a domestic 625 line TV set to be fully Operational or if required a video monitor can be connected to provide the best quality display 51 key typewriter Style keyboard, which features a 10 key rollover Supplied with the following accessories BASIC demonstration tape: Video lead Second cassetee lead Users manual BASIC manual Beginners programming manual Write useful programs in the BASIC computer language yourself HITACHI PROFESSIONAL MONITORS 9\"  .95 12\"    Roliability Solid state circuitry using an IC and silicon transistors ensures high reliability 500 lines horizontal resolution Horizontal resolution in excess of 500 lines is achieved in picture center  Stable picture Even played back pictures of VTR can be displayed without jittering  Looping video input Video input can be looped through with built-in termination switch External sync opere tion available as option for U and C types)  Compact construction Two monitors are mountable side by side in a standard 19 inch rack MICROLINE 80 299+ VAT.  80 cps Uni-directional Small size: 342 IWI X 254 ID) X 108 H) mm 160 Characters, 96 ASCII and 64 graphics 3 Character sizes: 40, 80 or 132 chars/line . Friction arie Pin Feed Low noise: 65 dB Low weight: 6.5 kg MICROLINE 82 f449 + VAT .80 cps Bi-directional logic seeking Small size: 350 W) x 328 (D) x 130 (H) mm 160 characters. 96 ASCII and 64 graphics with 10 National character set Variants 4 Character sizes: 40, 86, 80 or 132 chars/line. Built-in parallel and serial interfaces  Friction and Pin Feed  Low noise: 65dB Low weight: 8kg MICROLINE 83 ET9+ VAT  120 cps bi-directional logic seeking 136 column printing on up to 15in forms Small size: 512 W) x 328 (D X 130 (H) mm.  160 characters, 96 ASCII and 64 graphics with 10 National character set variants 3 Character spacings: 5, 10 and 16.5 Chars/in Built-in parallel and serial Interfaces  Friction and Pin Feed Low noise 65dB Low weight: 13 kg VIDEO GENIE EXPANSION BOX Complete with RS232 interface and floppy disc controller O memory [225 VAT Memory expansion card (S1001 16K  32K  +VAT 92 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"EUROPE'S FASTEST SELLING ONE BOARD COMPUTER YOUR ZX80 IS NOW NO LONGER REDUNDANT COMPUKIT UK101 STOCKTAKE SALE NEVER TO BE REPEATED AT THIS PRICE UNTIL STOCKS LAST Upgrade your ZX80 to the full animated graphics of the ZX81. (No screen flickerl. FOR ONLY .95 VAT IN KIT FORM Works only in conjunction with NEW 8K ROM from Sinclair (Not Included) ZX81 part-exchanges accepted GOOD PRICES OFFERED *6502 based system best value for money on the market Powerful BK Basic Fastest around Full Qwerty Keyboard 1K RAM Expandable to BK on board Power supply and RF Modulator on board No Extras needed Plug in and go Kansas City Tape Interface on board Free Sampler Tape including powerful Dissassembler and Monitor with each Kit Il you want to learn about Micros, but didn't know which machine to buy then this is the machine for you D3 COMPUKIT WITH ALL THE FEATURES THAT MADE IT THE MOST PROFESSIONAL COMPUTER KIT ON THE MARKET. Now WITH FREE NEW MONITOR (a saving), which includes Flashing Cursor, Screen Editing, & Save Data on Tape. ATARI CARTRIDGES IN STOCK Phone for availability Build, Understand and Program your own Computer for only a small outlay. KIT ONLY .95 + VAT Fully Assembled  VAT NEW MONITOR IN ROM available separately at .90 + VAT Improved Basic function revised GARBAGE routine Allows correct use of STRING ARRAYS .90 This chip can be sold separately to existing Compukit and Super board users 4K Upgrade Kit [15.80 + VAI COMP PRO MIXER Professional audio mixer that you can build yourself and save over . Only .90 plus VAT for complete kit FOR THE COMPUKIT Assembler Editor E14.90 GAME PACKS 1 Fout Games .00 21 Four Games .00 31 Three Games BK only .00 Super Space Invaders (BK Chequers .00 Realtime Clock .00 Case for Compukit .50 40 pin Expansion Jumper Cable .50 All Prices exclusive VAT TTL SALE Minimum Order  74LSOO .10 74LSB6 .30 6502 54.90 74LSO .10 74LS93 .50 ACIA 6850 .90 74LSO5 0.15 74LS 157 .60 OP AMP 74LS10 .15 74LS 165 .90 74LS32 0.20 74LS365 .40 REG 74LS74 .25 74LS373 11.20 7805 5V 0.75 Low Profile Sockets 14 PIN 0.05 18 PIN E0.10 24 PIN 0.20 16 PIN 0,06 2 0 PIN 0.15 40 PIN 0.27 PANASONIC KX-T1520 AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE ANSWERING SYSTEM CA3130 .45 Plus FREE power supply valued at .00 NOW AVAILABLE TEAC DISK DRIVES IT WASN'T FOR THE LOWEST PRICES, THE BIGGEST CHOICE AND THE BEST AFTER SALES SERVICE, WE JUST WOULDN'T BE COMP SHOP 19 Herbert Street, Dublin 2. Telephone: Dublin 604165 HEAR OUR ADS ON RADIO NOVA 88.1 VHF Stereo  + V One of the most technically advanced telephone answering units available, the KX T 1520 features a double cassette system, a C60 cassette for incoming calls which can be limited to 30 5 5 Each of recorded in their entirety and a 20 sec continuous loop Cassette for your outgoing messages which are recorded through the built in microphone Your telephone conversations can also be recorded after a bleep tone has notified your caller they are beina taped Incoming calls can be monitored and the ring control is adjustable The remote call in pick up with Playback Reset Repeat and Skip controls, activates the system to play back your messages to you Over the phone wherever you are in the world NEC SPINWRITER s only B  TEAC FD 50A has 40 tracks giving 125K Bytes unformatted single density capacity The FD-50A can be used in double density recording mode The FD 50A is Shugart SA400 interface compatible  Directly compatible with Tandy TRS80 expansion interface Also interfaces withi Video Genie SWTP TRSBO North Star Horizon, Superbrain, Nascom, etc, etc  Address selection for Daisy chaining up to 4 Disks  Disks plus power supply housed in an attractive grey case 40 TRACK Single +225 VAT Double 389 VAT Disk Drive 4 77 TRACK Single VAT Double Disk Drive 24 WE HAVE ONE OF THE LARGEST COLLECTIONS OF COMPUTER BOOKS UNDER ONE ROOF, ALONG WITH RACKS OF SOFTWARE FOR THE GENIE AND TRS80. GUARANTEE EXTENDED COMBUCARE NEC's high quality printer uses a print thimble that has less diameter and inertia than a daisy wheel, giving a quieter faster, more reliable printer that can cope with plotting and printing (128 ASCII characters) with up to five copies, friction or tractor fed. The ribbon and thimble can be changed in seconds. 5b characters per second bidirectional printing with red/black, bold, subscript, superscript, proportional spacing, tabbing, and much much more. Disk Drive  VAT SHARP PC1211 .90 Bowe 4 V COMPUTER POWER THAT ONCE FILLED A ROOM CAN NOW BE CARRIED IN YOUR POCKET  Programs in BASIC . \"QWERTY\" Alphabetic Keyboard  1.9K Random Access Memory  Long Battery Life FERR 33 .90 .90 10 for .00 FANTASTIC FOR FILE HANDLING ACULAB FLOPPY TAPE The tape that behaves like a disc, for TRS-80 LEVEL 2. only  + VAT The Aculab Floppy Tape for the TRS 80 and Video Genie is a highly reliable digital storage system that provides many of the advantages of floppy disks at loss COST Automatic debounce routine for the Level 2 keyboard Connects directly to TRS 80 Level 2 Keyboard. Operating and file handling software in ROM 8 commands add 12 powerful functions to Level 2 BASIC .00 8MHz Super Quality Modulators 6MHz Standard Modulators C12 Computer Grade Cassettes Anadex Printer Paper 2000 sheets Floppy Discs 5% Hard and Soft Sectored Floppy Disc Library Case 5% .90 .50 Ribbons DP8000 DP9500/9501 .50 .50 TERE We give a full one year's guarantee GRACIAS on all our products, which normally only carry 3 months guarantee A SELECTION OF APPLE INTERFACES ARE NOW AVAILABLE AT OUR EDGWARE ROAD SHOWROOM All Prices exclusive VAT S Delivery is added at cost. Please make cheques and postal orders payable to COMPSHOP LTD., or phone your order quoting BARCLAYCARD, ACCESS, DINERS CLUB OF AMERICAN EXPRESS number MAIL ORDER AND SHOP: CREDIT PACILITIES ARRANGED send SA E for application form 14 Station Road, New Barnet, Hertfordshire, EN5 10W (Close to New Barnet BR Station Moorgate Line) Telephone: 01-441 2922 (Sales) 01-449 6596 Telex: 298755 TELCOM G TELEPHONE SALES OPEN (BARNET) -10am 7pm Monday to Saturday NEW WEST END SHOWROOM: OPEN 24 hrs. 7 days a week 311 Edgware Road, London W2. Telephone: 01-262 0387 01-449 6596 OPEN (LONDON) — 10am 6pm Monday to Saturday IRELAND: 19 Herbert Street, Dublin 2. Telephone: Dublin 804156 COMPSHOP USA, 1348 East Edinger. Santa Ana, California, Zip Code 92705 Telephone: 0101 714 5472525 \"Europes Largest Discount Personal Computer Stores\" Circle No. 145 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 93 "


"APPLE SOFTWARE VIC20 THE PERFECT XMAS GIFT THE FIRST FULL FEATURED COLOUR COMPUTER AT UNDER  ! ! Alien Rain (Galaxian) Colour + hi-res version of pub game .95 MBK Alien Typhoon A much more difficult version of Alien Rain. Apple Panic Chase little apples up and down ladders .95 MBK Autobahn-Road race game with sound and hi-res graphics E14.95 M4BK Both Barrels -2 hi-res action games on one disk .95 A48K Cranston Manor Anew hi-res adventure like Wizard and the Princess .95 M48K Cyber Strike 3D hi-res action adventure in space. .95 M4BK Demon Derby (Hyper Head-On) 4 skill level hi-res car race game .95 M32K Galaxy Wars Colour graphics Sound effects Hi-res 1395 M32K Gamma Goblins Yet another superb hi-res action game .95 MBK Gobbler Eat up the dots but watch out for the Gobblers .95 MBK Gorgon Another superb pub game for your Apple. 21. S MARK Hi-Res CribbageThe title describes it. Even hear the pegs move, h nmv t14 9  Hi-Res Soccer English football for 1 or 2 players in hi-res .95 M4BK Missile Defense Hi-res animation and sound arcade game. .95 MARK Mission: Asteroid-Hi-res adventure in 21 colours. Save the Worldll E10.95 M32K Mystery House Hi-res adventure using over 100 pictures 12.95 MBK Oldorf's Revenge Hi-res adventure with 100 rooms 11.95 A4BK Operation Apocalypse Four computer simulations of World War I. E3595 A48K Orbitron Fight off enemy forces and avoid meteor showers. E14.95 MBK Pegasus 11 The pub game now available on your Apple. 16 9  Pool 1.5 Hi-res graphics pool table simulation 4 games in colour .95 M48K Pulsar il2 superb hi-res games on one disk E14.95 MARK Shuffleboard Real time hi-res game for 1 or 2 players Sneakers Waves of little creatures attack you in hi-res .95 M48K Snoggle (Puckman) -Hi-res maze of ghosts. Great fun. .95 MARK Space Eggs Hi-res super fast arcade style game 14.95 M4BK Space Warrior Hi-res pub game .95 M4BK Tarturian (Wizard) Another hi-res adventure with 160 rooms E14.95 A48K The Shattered Alliance Swords and Sorcery on a far-flung world ,95 A48K The Warp Factor 1 or 2 player hi-res Star Trek Space War game 23.95 A48K The Wizard and the Princess Hi-res adventure in 21 colours Threshold Hi-res space ship battle with aliens E16.95 M48K A: Requires Applesoft in ROM. M: Will run on any Apple II WE DON'T JUST SELL GAMES. We can also supply Visicale, Wordstar, Z80 Softcard, 16K Ramcards, etc. at very competitive prices. If you want anything Apple please contact us. WE ALSO OFFER A BESPOKE SOFT WARE SERVICE WHICH IS SECOND-TO-NONE. PRICES INCLUDE VATAT 15%. Add 50p PP for orders under  totally Please write or telephone for your free copy of our up-to-date software list. DEALER INQUIRIES INVITED. PERSONAL CALLERS BY APPOINTMENT ONLY PLEASE 620 SPIDER SOFTWARE 98 AVONDALE ROAD, SOUTH CROYDON, SURREY Tel: 01-680 0267 (24 hours a day 7 days a week) Circle No. 147 YOU AND YOUR FAMILY CAN ALL ENJOY THIS TERRIFIC NEW MACHINE personal computer software ZX81/ 16K 'STARTREK LOOK AT THESE FEATURES * Sound * Colour * Programmable function keys * 15K memory, expandable to 32K * Uses standard 'Pet' Basic * Full size typewriter keyboard * Graphics character set * Plug-in memory cartridge * Low priced peripherals 16K STARTREK: GRAPHICS, 4-LEVELS OF PLAY, 8X8 GALAXY, STAR BASES, KLINGCNS, ROMULANS, PHOTON TORPEDOS, ETC. GAMES PACK 1: STARWARS, HAMURABI, GRAPHIC LANDER, MASTERMIND, MINEFIELD Prices: .95 each cassette; .95 for both Further games packs coming soon. Large S.A.E. for details. Mail order only. Get hold of yours from us IBEK 437 Stoney Stanton Road. Coventry CV6 SEA West Midlands Tel: (0203) 86449 SYSTEMS SILVERSOFT 40 Empress Avenue Ilford, Essex 01-518 0877 Circle No. 146 Circle No. 148 94 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"ZX-81 16K SOFTWARE PACK 16/1 includes all of: AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL: Animated radar screen of busy airport shown, you must bring planes into land; INVADERS: INVADERS SELF PLAY: PHONEBOOK; keep friends and relatives numbers on cassette; DATE '81: computer dating program, who will it pick for you? ALL ONLY .95 The breakthrough you've waited for: PROGRAM THE ZX-81 IN ENGLISH!! with GAMAL 81, you can now write adventure programs in hours not weeks and with GAMAL 81 you'll have every adventure you'll ever want for the price of one. Comes on cassette with instruction book, .95. (requires 16K) (.00 see below) ZX-81 PACK 16/2 includes all of: ADVENTURE ATLANTIC: You may become very rich or you may be marooned forever; BREAKOUT: SQUASH PRACTICE: TRANSLATOR: translates any European language to any other, vocab on cassette; COMPUTAPRINT: use this program to predict horse races, or football pools! ALL ONLY .95 PACK 16/1 ONLY SAVE PAXK 16/2 .95 .95 Both packs come with full instructions, booklets and are saved on cassette ready to run. PACK 16/1 + ONLY SAVE PAXK 16/2+ Tapebooks 50.3 .95 .90 SPECIAL OFFER TO ZX-81 OWNERS TAPEBOOK 50 version 3 GAMAL is .00 only if you order either offer 50 PROGRAMS for the IKRAM ZX-81. The latest version includes: SQUASH, INVADERS, COLUMBIA, SPLAT, INTEGRATION, BANK A/C, CREDIT CARD CALCULATOR AND LOTS MORE. All on cassette and ready to run now. With full instructions. Still amazing value at .96 the lot. CONTROL TECHNOLOGY 39 Gloucester Rd, Gee Cross, Hyde, Cheshire SK14 5JG 061-368 7558 C*tech Big ideas for small computer all software by return of post!! Circle No. 149 NEW GAMES AVAILABLE MONTHLY SHARP DUNGEONS OF DEATH A harrowing adventure game set in dark, dank dungeons kept by a wicked master who guards the entrance. On your way collect the treasures hidden in the dungeons ten levels fighting off monsters with your magic arrows. Price is .25. OTHELLO The traditional tactical game for the MZ-80K. Sit down and pit your wits against the computer or a friend using the two programs on the cassette. Included for the price of .90 is a booklet with full instructions for novices on how to play the game. STOCKMARKET F A brain teasing game for the shrewd minded who like to take a gamble in amassing stocks and shares on the money market. Knowing the right time to buy and sell shares is a knack that sometimes puts your head on the line. The cheapest of these three additions it costs .85. Towering Inferno Head On Las Vegas Asteroids .85 .85 .85 .85 Simon MZ80K Empire II Election 1984 Colditz .85 .85 .45 .45 SHARPSOFT For the Sharpsoft hardware/software catalogue and registration/subscription form for SHARPSOFT USER NOTES send 35p stamps to Sharpsoft Ltd., 86-90 Paul Street, LONDON EC2A 4NE. Circle No. 150 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 95 "


"SUPERMARKET HARD A GUIDE TO THE LOW-COST COMPUTERS AV. WE ARE THE ONLY PEOPLE WHO WANT YOU TO READ OUR COMPETITORS ADVERTS... SO YOU ARE SURE WE GIVE THE BEST QUALITY AND VALUE!! The following software is for ZX81 1K RAM & BK ROM ZX80 For 1K RAM ONLY: Tapebook/20: .95/30: .95/includes first 20 & 30 of ...The full list of Tapebook 50: Columbia, Invaders Squash, Invest, Loan, Hilow Breakout Matadd, Matsub, Matmult, quadsolv, simpson, inreg, valsum, percoms, fact, tankbattle, Banka/ Torpedo, Rungekutta. Splat 1, Splat 2. Duckshoot, Cursor Plot, Datastore, Crossover. Finite difference table. Gauss, SeidelSuccessive over relaxtion, Inverse matrix, Differentiate. Logs. Prime, Wages. Shopdisplay, Bubble. Sift, Triangle, Pascal, Binary Hox.loader, Stock, RCCIRCUIT. 2nd ORDRESP. Fruit Machine ALL FOR ONLY $6.95 all incl. (UK & EUROPE) Full user instructions included ZX81 16K RAM PACK .95 Now available, 16K plug-on RAM PACK for your ZX81 Why wait weeks to pay more? Please write for details on other expansions inc. colour board for ZX81 ACORN ATOM Cambridge based Acorn Computers manufactures the Atom machine which has a memory capacity of 2K, but it can be upgraded to 12K. It must be plugged into a television and is available in either kit form or ready built. As a kit it costs  for the 2K computer and  for the finished product. For a more powerful system, 12K, the price stands at  (in kit) and  completed. Acorn also makes the Systems 1, 2, and 3 which cost between  and . These are available direct from Acorn or through the firm's distributors. NASCOM There are two Nascoms available at the moment, both can be used for business and games. The Nascom 2 is the more powerful of the two with 8K RAM and with a Basic interpreter. It can be bought in kit form or off the shelf complete. The kit is  for 1K RAM and  for the finished 1K product.  will secure an BK kit. ATOM STAR TREK THE KLING ONS V. THE GALAXY Features: SHORT & LONG RANGE SCANNERS PHASERS TORPEDOES. DAMAGE CONTROL HELP FUNCTION. IMPULSE & WARP ENGINES THIS program has full graphics with animated Enterprise and torpedoes with sound effects This program requires 6K lower and 4K upper RAM (Floating point not needed) 15.95 These programs are loaded directly from a master tape on to TDK AD-C90 cassettes, a microprocessor is used to monitor the input signal when copying the programs to check for disturbances, if there is the slightest blemi ish then we start all over again. The tapes are finally tested on several different machines before despatch  Some of these programs require ZX81, all run on ZX81 BK ROM 1K RAM GAMAL-B1, there is an interpreter we have written specifically to produce interactive Literature\" 12.95 PASCAL 2X Not a tiny Arrays, Case, While, Repeat, IF Then Else Else stel Interpreter POA CONTROL TECHNOLOGY 39 Gloucester Road, Gee Cross, Hyde, Gtr Manchester SK 14 5JG APPLE The Apple has a solid software base for both business and entertainment applications. The machine comes with a memory capacity, ranging from 8 to 48K. You can buy joysticks and paddles to plug in for use with computer games. Colour graphics can be used with a colour television. The 48K machine costs  and is obtainable from Apple U.K., formerly Microsense, which is based in Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire. NEWBRAIN This is a hand-held computer unit which is at the low end of the price bracket. For 2K RAM you pay  upwards and it is expandable to 20K of memory. Hobbyists often opt for this machine because of its low cost and it is used for general business and for playing games. An expansion unit is available which supports floppy disc drives, a printer and a visual display unit. It is available from the Grundy Group CONTROL TECHNOLOGY BIG ideas for small Computers ZX81 SUPERB SUPERB SOFTWARE OHIO SCIENTIFIC Ohio Scientific (OHI) makes the Superboard which is aimed at the hobbyist market. Its memory capacity starts at 4K RAM and is expandable to 32K if you buy the add-on board. Other machines in this family include the Challenger 1, 2, 3, and 4. These are essentially cased versions of Superboard. The Challenger 4 is the cheapest of these at  and is similar to the Challenger 1 but has colour and sound options. FOOTBALL POOLS Professor Frank George's famous Football Pools Forecasting system is now available for microcomputers The program (and useful booklet) is supplied in the following versions Apple 11 32K diskette Pet 32K cassette or diskette Sharp MZ8OK cassette Obtainable from Dealers, or write to: Professor F.H. George, Bureau of Information Science Commerce House, High Street, Chalfont St. Giles, Bucks. Horse race Forecast Program soon ATARI 400/800 Most of the software for the Atari microcomputers are games or educational, with business applications only recently being Introduced. The basic 400 with 16K RAM costs  direct from Atari's UK distributors, London-based Ingersoll Electronics. The 32K version sells for . Peripherals for the machines, like disc drive units and cassette recorders can also be obtained from Ingersoll for  and  respectively. The 800 is expandable to 48K and the 16K machine sells for . PET Made by Commodore Business Machines, the Pet ranges from 8K RAM to 32K RAM. They are used mostly by small businesses for general applications but have a hefty hobbyist following. It is available from Commodore of Slough or their many UK dealers at a starting price of . Compatible peripherals are available for the Pet, including disc drives, cassettes for loading tapes and printers. BBC COMPUTER The computer adopted by the BBC to sell in conjunction with its forthcoming series is based on the Acorn Proton. The BBC has developed its own Basic to be used on the machine. Minimum memory is 16K RAM, maximum being 32K. Present plans for the machine are dual purpose, both business and games. Optional extras include joysticks, paddles, disc drives and a cassette for tape loading. Price is put at  for the 16K computer and  for the 32K version. SHARP MZ-8OK One of the more expensive personal computers on the market it is used for both business and home entertainment. Memory capacity for the machine starts at 16K with a top limit of 48K and disc drives or cassette as required. The price is  for the 48K unit with add-on units costing extra SHARP MZ-80 ( + VAT for 48K) VIDEO GENIE ( + VAT for 16K) ACORN ATOM ASSEMBLED ( + VAT) VIC 20 ( + VAT) TEXAS T1994 ( + VAT) + INTELIVISION+ACE TV GAMES + CHESS COMPUTER + HAND HELD ELECTRONIC GAMES + SF, FANTASY & WAR GAMES + ALL KINDS OF GAMES & PUZZLES ATARI 400  plus VAT ATARI BOO 525 plus VAT VIC 20  plus VAT TEXAS T1994 E242 plus VAT DAI This is a personal computer made by Data Applications for both business use and home entertainment. The U.K. system (it is made in Belgium) has 48K RAM as well as full colour and sound commands. Data Applications is based in Cirencester, Gloucestershire. The 48K system now costs . SHARP PC-1211 The smallest computer in the Sharp range. Sharp classifies it as a pocket computer and it is programmable in Basic. It also has a cassette interface for loading and costs upwards of  from Sharp itself in Manchester or from its appointed dealers. 18 SYDNEY STREET BRIGHTON 0273 698424 96 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"SUPERMARKET AVAILABLE IN THE U.K.. TRS 80 and GENIE Owners Now available in UK Cload Magazine. America's monthly program tape for games orientated people. Why pay higher prices when each month you can receive a cassette with at least 6 programs? Our latest issue includes Trolls Treasure (Adventure Program). Crolon Diversion (Arcade game with sound) Banner (Scoils 2in letters on screen). Edit (Full screen editor) PLUS 3 other programs 1 for disc users (all programs for Model 1, most for Model 3) Single cassette .95. 6 month subscription . 12 monthly subscription .50. Post your cheque to MICRODEAL, 44 Corn St., Bristol 1. Tel: 0272 276769 SINCLAIR There are two types of Sinclair microcomputer available for under . Sinclair really brought the microcomputer into the home. The machines are ideal for learning the rudiments of computing but are limiting graphically. The ZX80 has 1K of memory and is no longer in production. The ZXB1 sells for .95 for 1K in kit form. The 16K RAM packs cost .95. T1-994 This computer has recently been re-launched by Texas Instruments. It consists of a separate keyboard with graphics facilities in full colour and now plugs into a UK television. Software available for it from Texas Instruments is mostly business and educational but the firm has recently introduced a bundle of games to run on the computer. It has 16K RAM and uses tapes, discs or plug in games cartridges. You can buy one of these from T.I. itself or through some of the high street retailers like Rumbelows for . Software for MZ8OK .50 EACH SORCERER The Exidy Sorcerer is a home computer with a sizeable games following but it is one of the more expensive of the microcomputers, costing upwards of . Memory amount ranges from 48K to 55K and there is a plug-in ROM pack for extra capacity. Disc drives and visual display unit are an additional cost. Sorcerer's can be obtained from a Cornish firm, Liveport of St Ives. Treasure Word Power Space Adventure History Impossible Maze Geography Cowboy Round-Up Memory Test MX80 Composer Mult Tables Grand Prix French One Man One Dog German Kaleido Spanish Spies Welsh The Pit Math Test Road Race Maths Drill Alligator Master Mind VIC-20 The VIC is the much publicised baby of the range of microcomputers from Commodore of Slough. At  it is one of the MORRISTON COMPUTER CENTRE 46 CROWN STREET, SHARP MORRISTON, SWANSEA. Tel: 795817 ZX-81 16K SOFTWARE C1: 13.50 NUMEROLOGY The computer uses this ancient science to find your outer and inner personality, lucky numbers etc. Have andiess fun finding the secrets hidden within yourself and friends ESP This program tasts your clairvoyant powers by running a random series of symbols. Find out if you or any of your friends are psychic by predicting the sequence C2: ,50 VOLCANIC DUNGEON You are the Hero/Heroine, in a fantasy world of myth and magic. You must try and rescue the Elfin Princess, impris oned in a crystal coffin, deep within the Volcanic Dungeon Monsters, pits, firey caverns and collapsing bridges make your task far from easy. Diminishing strength and water supplies add to the problems. Single kay entry cuts out tiresome typing Map of Dungeon included HANGMAN A deluxe version of the classic game, in two degrees of difficulty Features include, computer opponent word choice, gradual build up of hanging man etc Make cheques/P.O. payable to R. CARNELL. ALL ORDERS PLUS 40p P/P TO CARNELL SOFTWARE, 4 STAUNTON RD, SLOUGH, BERKS SL2 INT. cheapest. Deliveries to dealers have just started. The VIC has full colour graphics on a colour T.V. and there are joysticks available. Although Commodore are plugging the business use of the machine it is also tipped to be a hot games computer because of its colour graphics and low cost. 56 TANDY TRS-80 Tandy's TRS-80 Model 1 is a machine which is often used for games and is well-supplied with software for both entertainment and business applications. Its memory capacity goes from 4K to 16K but there is an expansion unit available upgrading it to 48K if you want the extra memory. The Model 1 is the cheapest of the Tandy range. The Model 1 costs  but comes complete with a monitor to use as a VDU and a cassette. The Model Ill is an integral unit made up of a keyboard, 12 inch screen and two slots for 5\" discs and has a printer interface. It costs from . .54 Macronics Maplin Electronic Supplies Ltd Microdeal Microdigital Microstyle Midwich Molimerx Morriston Mountaindene Mr Micro Ltd Michael Orwin Printivity Q-Tek Systems Ltd AD INDEX Acorn Acornsoft Adda Braintree Micro Leisure Bug Byte .... .....18 Calisto Computers Ltd ...Back Cover Carnell Software .97 Castle Electronics 34 Compshop .93 Computer Centre 82 Computer Games...89 Computershack ...64 Comserve Control Technology 95 & VIDEO GENIE The Genie is made by E.A.C.A. and is a popular games machine. It is compatible with the Tandy TRS-80 Model 1. With 16K to 48K RAM there are disc drives available. The basic unit costs from  and is available from Lowe Electronics of Matlock in Derbyshire. 96 Dk-tronics Eltec Services Ltd...89 Essential Software Company Everyman 8 8 SBD Software Sharp Sharpsoft Silica Shop Silicon Centre Silicon Chip ........53 Silver Soft 94 Sinclair 21 & 22-23 WH Smith 2 8 Spider Soft . 94 Surrey Micro Systems 76 Twickenham Computer Centre ...89 Video Services Bromley Games Centre 88 U.K.101 This machine comes in either kit form or ready built with memory capacity of 4K to 40K (with an expansion board). It contains television and cassette interfaces so you don't need a V.D.U. The U.K.101 is a popular computer for playing games and there is a lot of software around for it. The kit costs  for 4K, ready built, it sells for . TANGERINE Tangerine Computer Systems produces the Microtan 65, a microcomputer for games and personal use like household accounts. It comes in kit form and is expandable from an initial 1K memory up to 48K of RAM. The Microtan 65 costs .35 for the 1K kit, or .85 assembled. Tangerine is based in Ely. Cambridgeshire. Hewson Consultants Ltd Highlight Software 91 Ibek .......... ...94 Kansas City Systems 44 Kramer & Co 76 Landau Lowe Electronics .....69 Voltmace 98 Ward Electronics .....88 John Wiley & Associates ZXB1 Users Club 84 Zynar 2 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 97 "


"THE ATOM DEALER LIST VOLTMACE Itd. DATABASE COMPUTER GAMES COMPUTER B.E.A.B. MODEL AVAILABLE Computer stores are stocking Atoms there's a list below. If there isn't one near you, fill in the coupon and we'll rush an Atom to you within 28 days. BORONG NO.19. TREASURE HUNT & NO.21. MUSICAL OUT THIS MONTH: MEMORY MORE THAN 300 GAME VARIATIONS INCLUDING: SPACE WARFARE SPORTS EDUCATIONAL BRAIN TEASERS MADE IN ENGLAND BY VOLTMACE LTD PARK DRIVE, BALDOCK, HERTS. Circle No. 151 Granite Chips Ltd. Aberdeen 22863. Inismor Holdings, Ayr 58602. Micro Style. Bath 334659 Broadway Elect, Bedford 213639. Micro-C, Birmingham 021-233-1105. Owl Computers, Bishops Stortford 52682. Microcentre, Bognor Regis 827779. Eltec Services, Bradford 491372. Gamer, Brighton 698424. Electronic Information Systems, Bristol 428165. Micro-C, Bristol 0272-650501. Cambridge Comp Store, Cambridge 65334. Rhombus, Cambridge 312953. Cardiff Micros, Cardiff 373072. Bellard Elect. Chester 380123. Vixon Computer Systems, Cieethorpes 58561. Customised Electronics Ltd., Cleveland 247727 Emprise, Colchester 865926. Ibek Systems Coventry. Lendac Data Systems, Dublin 37052. Silicon Centre, Edinburgh 332 5277. Highland Microcomputer, Forres 73505. H.C.C.S. Associates, Gateshead 821924. Mikrotronic, Germany 05 31 72 223. Esco Computing, Glasgow 204 1811. Computer Shack Ltd., Gloucester 584343.Control Universal, Harlow 31604. Unitron Elect, Haslington. Castle Elect., Hastings 437875. Currys Micro Systems, High Wycombe 36431. Northern Micro, Huddersfield 892062. Customised Electronics, Leeds 792332. Micro-C, Leeds 446601. D.A. Computers, Leicester 549407. Micro-C, Leicester 546224, Microdigital, Liverpool 236 0707. Barrie Elect, EC3 488 3316. Eurocalc, London 729 4555-9. Group 70, E18 352 7333. Microage, North London 959 7119. Ragnorak Electronic Systems, E2 981 2748. Sinclair Equip. Int. (Export), WI 235 9649. OFF Records, SW12 674 1205. Technomatic, NW10 7230233. Micro-C, Luton 425079. Micro-C, Ace Business Comp. Maidstone 677947, Manchester 834-0144. NSC Comp Shops, Manchester, 832 2269. Customised Electronics, Middlesbrough 247727. Compshop, New Barnet 441 2922. Micro-C, New Malden 949 2091. Newbear Computing Store, Newbury 30505. H.C.C.S., Newcastle 821924. Newcastle Comp Services, Newcastle 761158. Anglia Comp Centre, Norwich 29652. Leasalink Viewdata, Nottingham 396976. Micro-C, Nottingham 412455. J.A.D. International Services. Plymouth 62616. R.D.S. Electrical, Portsmouth 812478. Computers for All, Romford 60725. Intelligent Artifacts, Royston Arrington 689. Owl Computers, Sawbridgeworth 723848. Computer Facilities, Scunthorpe 63167. Datron Micro Centre, Sheffield 585 490. Superior Systems, Sheffield 755005. Micro-C, Southampton 29676. Q-TEC Systems, Stevenage 65385. 3D Computers, Surbiton (01) 337 4317. Computer Supplies, Swansea 290047. Abacus Micro Comp., Tonbridge Paddock Wood 3861. Bellard Electronics Ltd., Upton 380123. Northern Comp. Warrington 601683. Compass Design, Wigan Standish 426252. Datex Micros. Worthing 39290. MICRO LEISURE HOBBY MODULE (HOME PROGRAMMER) The 'Hobby Module' enables you to programme your own games computer in colour. This unit fits directly into the existing cartridge slot of your 'Teleng Rowtron/Database' games computer, and enables you to write your own games/computer programmes using machine code. It incorporates its own 2K monitor and user RAM with six 1/0 lines. Cassette interface included to store user programme Price .95 each Also: Alien Invasion Cartridge (to fit Teleng Rowtron/Database) .45 each Chess Cartridge (to fit Teleng Rowtron only) nine levels of play single/two player, allows you to retrace moves, requires off-screen board (not supplied) .95 each Standard range of Teleng Rowtron/Database cartridges available .95 each Also: Cowboy, Face The Music, Flag Capture/Memory Match, Video Pinball, Reverso .45 each All prices inc. VAT and delivery. For further details send S.A.E to: BRAINTREE MICRO LEISURE LTD. SEE OUR ADVERTISEMENT ON IBC 2 Everitt Way, Station Road, Sible Hedingham, Halstead, Essex Tel: 0787 61460 Circle No. 153 Circle No. 152 98 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"DO I CHEREN CHOOSE ATOM POWER At work or play-everything you need in a personal computer The Atom is a machine to be used. Optional Extras YOU AND YOUR CHILDREN Every day, day after day. It's a full  Network facility with Econet function machine-check the Disk OPAL UHF colour encoder More and more schools are buying Atoms. specification against others. It's Add-on cards include 32K memory More and more children will learn on an Atom. rugged, easy to operate built to last analogue to digital, viewdata VDU, disk You can give them that extra familiarity with an and features a full-size typewriter controller, daisywheel printer, plus many, Atom in the home keyboard many more! Power supply Just look at some of the features! FREE MANUAL More hardware support than any other The Atom's highly acclaimed manual comes microcomputer Superfast BASIC-can be free with every Atom and leaves nothing out. In ACORN updated to BBC BASIC if required just a while you'll be completely at ease with  4a Market Hill COMPUTER CAMBRIDGE CB2 3NJ High resolution and comprehensive your new machine! Within hours you'll be graphics ideal for games programmers and writing your own programs. When you order your Aton we will include players\" Integral printer connection full details of all software packs and the Software available for games, education, optional hardware maths, graphs, business, word processing, etc. To: Acom Computer Limited, 4A Market Hill, Other languages: Pascal FORTH, LISP Cambridge CB2 3NJ I/O port for control of extemal devices I enclose a cheque/postal order for ....  Built-in loudspeaker Cassette interface Please debit my Access/ Full service/repair facility Users club Barclaycard No.......... \"Expanded version only Signature ............... ATOM SOFTWARE is designed and produced by Acornsoft, a. Name(please print). ....... division of Acorn Computers, Trust the Address.... manufacturer to get the very best from its own product. Current software includes Telephone Number word processing, maths packs Registered No 1403810 VAT No 215400 220 over 30 games, database, Item price in Item Forth and business packages Anon   14000 C14450 AKBMISA CHESTER Quantity Total 2K RAM Atom AssembledBK ROM + 2K RAM Adam A mble 12K ROM + 1 AM Write to Acorsoft, 4a Market Hill, Cambridge for full details and prices SO DE 10 20 TOTAL SEE OUR DEALER LIST ON PAGE Circle No. 154 "


"THE ATARI.RANGE HEL ATARI HARDWARE 400 16K  800 16K  410 (Recorder)  810 Disk Drive  80 Col. Printer  Paddles Pair  Joysticks Pair  ATARI SOFTWARE Star Raiders .95 Missile Command .95 Asteroids .95 Space Invaders (Rom) .50 Space Invaders (Cassette) .95 Basket Ball .50 16K(C) ATARI SOFTWARE FROM DYNACOMP Stud-Poker 16K(C) Moon Probe 16K(C) Alpha Fighter 24K(C) Intruder Alert Giant Slalom 16K(C) Monarch Crystals Dominoes Chomp-Reversi 16K(C) Management Simulator 24K(C) .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 ATARI SOFTWARE FROM ADVENTURE INTERNATIONAL Adventures 1-12 24K(C) Star Trek 3.5 24K(C) Sunday Golf Angle Worms 16k/C) Mountain Shout Deflections 16KC) Lunar Lander Galactic Empire Galactic Trilogy 24KIC 16K(C) 16K(C) .50 .50 .50 .50 .50 .50 .50 .50 .50 24K(C) 16K(C) 32K(C) .50 .50 CRYSTALWARE House of Usher Galactic Quest Sumer Laser Wars World War 3 Beneath the Pyramids Sands of Mars Little Crystal Fantasy land 2041 Waterloo Quest for Power .50 OOOOOOOOOOO .50 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 Helicopter Battle Tractor Beam Keno Horse-racing Supermaster Mad Marble Lightning Bolts & Reaction 40K(C) B-1 Nuclear Bomber Midway Campaign North Atlantic Convoy Raider Planet Miners Lords of Karma Computer Acquire Conflict 2500 Empire of the Overmind Tanktics 16K(C) .95 8K(C) .95 8K(C) 16K(C) .95 8K(C) .95 .95 16K(C) .95 16K(C) .95 16K(C) .95 16K(C) 24K(C) NA 32K(C) 40K(C) 24K(C) .50 .50 .50 .95 .95 .95 8K() Tag War at Sea We also carry a large range of software for TRS-80 and Apple computers send 50p for catalogues. (C) Cassette All prices include VAT Trade enquires for software welcome. Mail order available all prices include P&P SPECIALISTS IN MICROCOMPUTER HARDWARE & SOFTWARE CALISTC COMPUTERS LIMITED 119 John Bright Street, Birmingham B1 1BE. Phone 021-632 6458. Circle No. 301 "

