"Britain's best selling computer magazine sedl only OCTOBER +VIDEO AMS FREEGLAN AUS FREE INSIDE-ATART ST/AMIGA SPECIAL. CENTURIONS PLAYERS GUIDE/SLAINE MAPPED GAME BY GAME GUIDE TO THE PCW SHOW E OUTRUN THE VIDEO VERSION REVIEWED "


"Don't spend a penny until you hear what... Slite have got for Christmas Elite Systems Limited, Eastern Avenue, Lichfield, Staffs WS136RX Telephone: (0543) 414188 Telex: 336130 ELITEG "


"SIX OF THE BEST FROM... STILL AVAILABLE 6-PAK VOLI .95 .95 Spectrum Cassette .95 Commodore 64 Cassette .95 Commodore 64 Disc .95 Amstrad Cassette Amstrad Disc Into the Eagles Mail order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to ELITE SYSTEMS LTD. or quote your credit card No. STAMO GA REALLY EY! ACE BATTY INTERNATIONAL RATE INTO THE EAGLE'S NEST ANCHOR HOUSE Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands WS9 8PW Telephone: (0922) 59165 Telex: 336130 ELITE G FASTER THANG LIGHT FORCE INTERNATIONAL KARATE FASTER EN SHOCKWAY RIDER RELEASE DATE: SEPTEMBER 14th HIT-PAK "


"O-sFeatures PRACTICE REVIEW 142 GET LASHED! | 45 IDEAS CENTRAL 51 GRAFFITI COMPETITION 57 PLAY BY MAIL 163 THE BIG SCREEN 66 SLAINE GETS WARPED 70 SLAINE MAP 71 A-TEAM SPECIAL SUPPLEMENT 72 ANCIENT MARINER 73 ATARI/AMIGA NEWS 176 INFOGRAMMES PROFILE 80 MAGNETIC SCROLLS PROFILE 83 ATARI ST/AMIGA REVIEWS 92 MICRODEAL PROFILE 194 ATARI ST/AMIGA BUYERS' GUIDE 198 MEAN MACHINES 101 ADVENTURE 119 FANTASY | 122 FRAME-UP! | 126 KARTING KOMPETITION 128 PCW SHOW GUIDE 140 CENTURIONS PLAYERS' GUIDE 154 MAILBAG | 158 NEXT MONTH | 162 HOT GOSSIP TONCE CINDR JUDGE DEATH/PCW SHOW G Contents News e Reviews, 18 NEWS ! 14 REVIEWS: GAMES OF THE MONTH: BUBBLE BOBBLE, DRUID II. C+VG HITS: this issue include Ace 2. Addictaball, Flunky, California Games. Other reviews include Sidewise, Deathwish III, Mask and Last Mission. | 140 ARCADE ACTION SLAINE/P66 CHVG team EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIALI | ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John ART EDITOR Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Steve Donoghue Matthew Woodley AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANTS Tony Takoushi PUBLICITY Clive Pembridge ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Garry Williams ADVERTISEMENT EXECUTIVE Katherine Lee AD PRODUCTION Debbie Pearson PUBLISHER Terry Pratt COVER Glen Fabry EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222. July-December 106,571 THE BIG SCREEN/P63 "


"-ContentsPLAY VOLUME Player 1  he eldest brother, Julian, was bravest of the three ROMEDA ce of Tab Opered 35 Lekt 20 t ot WOD GUIDE/P128 ATARI ST/AMIGA SUPPLEMENT/P71 Inside Story And a new age dawned in the legend of Computer + Video Games as the world's greatest computer magazine strides on bringing you the future today. Barbarian Slaine runs amok in our exclusive preview and we bring you the map of this amazing game. And don't miss the pulse-pounding competition that goes with it. Check out the A-team our FREE 24-page Atari ST and Amiga supplement and marvel at artist Herman Serrano's work on Ancient Mariner, The Mean Machines are Sega, Nintendo, Sega and Atari-are back creating new sensations. We've also a five page PCW Show | preview, packed with all the new games. All this plus a Centurions Map and competition, news, tons of reviews and much more. C+VG-essential reading Tim ANCIENT MARINER/P72 HOLLYWOOD PLAY AGAIN? YES CALIFORNIA GAMES/P36 | EE | OPCW PREVIEW/P128 CENTURIONS/P55 GIANT JIGSAW POSTER-FREE! -Contents "


"YOUR BEDROOM (ITS Www PRENE BETOTYRE 100IDOS "


"20 CODINGEY ORIE HRIN FIGHTEGERFI EV HREH Ons THE PITS! 'COMMODORE SCREEN' It's here! Super Sprint races out of the arcades and on to your own screen! The official licensed tie-in has all the features that have kept Super Sprint top of the arcades. UPER TM VAX Eight different tracks, four skill levels, jump ramps, short cuts, gold wrenches, oil slicks, customised cars, they're all here. King of the coin-ops. On cassette or disk for Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad home computers. SPRIN ATARI GAMES ELECTRIC DREAMS SOFTWARE Terminus House, Terminus Terrace, Southampton, SOI IFE ZX Spectrum 48K/128K/+ (.99) Commodore 64/128 Cassette (E9.99) and Disk (.99) Amstrad CPC Cassette (.99) and Disk (E14.99) and Atari ST (.99) Mail Order. Activision (UK) Ltd, Units 3 & 4 Lloyds Close, Finedon Road Industrial Estate, Wellingborough, Northampton, NNS 4SR Tel: (0033) 78787. Access, Amex and Visa Accepted. 16 Bones Compra FT HT ATH4 . và "


"* News adventure game based on the soon to be seen TV show. C+VG saw an early version of the game down at ED's Southampton programming palace and it looks exciting. The action takes place within a mysterious castle and you have to complete a mysterious quest helped and hindered by two oracles. Knightmare the TV show started on ITV on September 7th we've seen the pilot and can tell you that the show, which will go out twice a week, is really ace. Teams of adventurers guide one of their number through a TV dungeon, helped by Treguare the Dungeon Master. Don't fail to catch the show! will be available first on waiting to blow. Commodore 64/128K priced at Using your driller tank you must .95 cassette and .95 disk, explore the planet and drill in the with other versions following. correct areas to release this dangerous build-up. There are clues scattered around for the best place to drill or you can do it by trial and error. Laser turrets left LALITSED LAZITI CLADIRI by the aliens to protect the mines No-one knows exactly what the amazingly secret US Stealth Fighter looks like. No-one except Major Bill of Microprose that is! The new flight-sim from the Stateside specialists features this advanced \"invisible\" aircraft. The designers of this game, Jim Synoski and Arnold Get an eyeful of these solid Hendrick, noted that the Air three dimensional graphics from are still active -so watch out. Force does not acknowledge the Driller on the Spectrum from Driller will be out in October development of the Stealth aircraft, Incentive. or November but that its existence has been The game is set on a new Earth confirmed by other sources. \"We colony once inhabited by an have a fair idea of what the outlawed alien race. Their mining capabilities of the plane must be,\" activities have led to a build-up of Coming soon from Electric said Hendrick. dangerous gas below the planet's Dreams is Knightmare the Project: Stealth Fighter surface and everything is just computer role-playing arcade 1951 Have you been wondering what Archer Maclean has been doing since the classic Drop Zone? We have-and now we've found out. He's been putting together International Karate 2 for Activision. And if you think that IK2 is just another martial arts game, think again. Archer has taken the original game, added an extra computer controlled player, remixed the music and chucked in a new bonus round. IK2 will hit the streets in October and will set you back just .99 Meet Bravestarr, the rootin' tootin' cosmic cowboy! He'll be riding into computerville around Christmas time partners but watch out for the TV cartoon starting in September and the Commando with lots of frills. That's the new action game from Microprose. A real departure for the flight-sim specialists, Airbourne Ranger is a fast moving shoot'em up. There are 12 missions in three different regions of the world. The player controls one soldier's battle against overwhelming odds, running walking and crawling across fullscrolling, 3-D terrain. Tactical thinking and lightning reactions determine your fate. In Airborne Range oployer parachutes into enemy territory and must outmanoeuvre hostile troops on patrol or hidden in bunkers, machine-gun nests and armoured cars. Initially armed with submachine gun and hand grenades, the player embarks on solo infiltration and commando combat missions. Additional weapons and first aid materials can be added by locating supplies hidden in the countryside. Airbourne Range will be available firstly on Commodore 047128K of .95 cassette and 219.95 disk, olher versions will follow. "


"WELCOMETER POINTS FARTOMETER 000000 133 HOW TO BE A SC: 000000 ACTIONTORCES 00000000 6293-000 ili (PAUSE UN Hot off the presses from the folks any top secret into the boddies down of Virgin are a couple of have captured. Action Force has good looking games which you'll been pul together by the be seeing at the PCW Show at legendary Gang of Fiveand Olympia. Action Force is features ten levels of all action based on the toys/comics of the adventure. You control the same name and stars all your airbourne Assault Copter clearing favourite characters including Wild a path through COBRAS defences, Bill and Crankcase. The Force's Wild Bill and Bazzoko lay down a arch-enemies COBRA have taken withering wall of fire but over on island and bits of a top COBRA is armed and dangerous secret military inslottion. It's up to as well. Also on the way from the AF to raid the island and rescue Virgin is the game of Ade \"Young Ones\" Edmondson's book How to be a Complete Bastard rumoured to be based on the antics of C4VG's advertisment chief Garry Williams, it's an arcade adventure in which you play Ade who has invaded o yuppie party with the sole aim of incapacitating the guests. Our screen shols show the C64 and Spectrum versions of Action Force, plus the Amstrad version of HTBCB! Reviews next issue. ACTION FORCE comic which should be on the newstands about now. Forget Centurions, Go-Bots, Masters of the Universe Bravestarris going to be THE cartoon cult for Christmas. He's six feet tall with the eyes of a hawk, strength of a bear, ears of a wolf and as fast as a speeding puma the animal not the running shoes, Bravestarr is the marshall of Fort Kerium on the frontier planet New Texas. Bravestarr is the law on this wild planet, he has to deal out justice to all the outlaws and other criminal types attracted to New Texas by the precious metal Kerium. The Bravestarr game is currently being programmed by Probe Software. Watch this space for more Bravestarr news goes. of the water defending the shores Now there's Bangkok of the United States. But they may Knights from System 3, creators become embroiled in other areas of the hugely successful of the world. International Karate and The Last Ninja. P.H.m The game which features PEGASUS large cartoon-style graphics follows your bid to take on eight characters in order to become the Champion of Bangkok The days when you could zap away at the aliens on your televison screen in safety are over. The television can now zap back with the advent of The Video Challenger, Bandai UK's interactive tv and video linked game. The player uses a gun to fire at the aliens or baddies as they appear on the screen. But the screen fires back registering hits on the gun. Points are scored for hits and losses. The shoot-out can take place against a wide variety of backgrounds with footage with sources such as a war movie and from computer generated animation. The basic Video Challenger game complete with Gun and one minute starter cassette costs about  (approx). Further video cassettes will cost about . Not satisfied with Super Sprint and Enduro Racer, Electric Dreams Activision is bringing your Rampage the coin-op monster game and are working on Karnov, a Rastan Saga/Rygar style game featuring a character who looks like a tubby Mr T. It's not pool, it's not billiards, it's not even snooker it's Q-Ball, English Software's extremely original and very playable 3D combination of all the above games. Originally on the Atari ST Q-Ball is now available for the Amiga at a .95. Srces 00145.00 COOT Ball F GALERIE Here's Hysteria, the latest from the Software Projects, the people who brought you Dragon's Lair. Hectic chase action over three time levels in ancient Greece, medieval times and in the future. The hero chases an evil monster across time zones. Had To Happen Dept: You can get involved in the Gulf crisis thanks to Electronic Arts and their new simulation PHM Pegasus Escorting a supply ship through the Straits of Hormuz is one of the missions included in this strategy/ action game from the US Lucasfilm outfit. PHM Pegasus puts players in controls of a hydrofoil as they battle in oceans with numerous Viz Design releases its first enemy vessels in any of eight game, Werewolves of different combat assignments. London, this November on Hydrofoils are navy owned, Spectrum, Amstrad and assault crafts that literally fly on top Commodore. Thai boxing is one of the meanest dangerous and exciting martial arts sorts going. Kicks, punches and just about everything "


"Samasaki PHONY EDYX BARHEDH2 CBM64/128 ASSETTE 118 SPECTRUM *8*ASSETTE SPECTRUM+3 . Bos K AMSTRAD 9 SETTE $14.99 MSX 9 CASSETTE PRIEDAI AMIGA .99 4 DISK Now the Summer will surely las "


"lifornia **GAMES** The smell of the surf, the sun on your back, the sand between your toes... This isn't California Dreamin' this is for reall six of the best West Coast sports designed to set your pulse racing! Wow your friends with your Incredible flying skateboard feats; or show your cool hacking at the sack Skate down the boardwalk, flip the Frisbee and wheelie the BMX. And then the ultimate test that King of Californian sports shooting the aurl 88 you battle with those giant Paciflo rollers to decide which surfer truly rulea the waveel California Games features superb graphics, all the atmosphere of the West Coast, and one to eight players can take part. All the quality you expect from an Epyx product is here and so much more. We could tell you more but instead lets hear what 38AP 64 had to say: California Games is quite simply the apex of computer sports gaming\". \"Even in purely technical terms Epyx have somehow managed to surpass their own high standards the pictures and sounds generated by this program are atmospheric beyond belief. \"If you gather up all the superlatives from previous Epyx reviews and add them together, you just might to halfway towards describing California Games. There. Need we say more? TM Hollywood AOBO STOP ast forever! Manufactured and distributed by U.S. Gold Limited under licence from Epyxine U.S. Cold Limited, 2/3 Holford WAY Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX Epyx is a Registered trademark No. 1195270 "


"Mews 3. Corrierissidn 54STEM. UrlT 3 FIT 200 5. Detroit. RoboCop sets out to revenge the death of the human he was, taking on a gang of depraved killers led by a drug-crazed psycho. Lots of action and adventure in this movie which opened to rave reviews in the USA a couple of months ago. You should see the film in this country around Christmas time and there's a sequel already in the making. The game? Ocean tell us that it won't be around until late next year. Nigel Mansell may still become this year's Formula One Who said chivalry was dead? World Champion if Lady Luck Not the guys at Mindscape! smiles on him. Martech will be They brought you the classic hoping he does, because at the Defender of the Crown on the end of the F1 season they'll be ST and Amiga and now the good unleashing Nigel Mansell's ol 64. We've got 10 copies of this Grand Prix on a unsuspecting swashbuckling game to GIVE world. This promises to be THE away to the first C+VG readers Grand Prix racing simulator. It who rush us a postcard with the features all the latest technological correct answers to our Defender of advances in race car design. We're the Crown quiz thanks to hoping that Martech don't let Mirrorsoft. Could you become Murray Walker's digitised voice on King of England and win the hand the game! The Ed couldn't bear it. of a fair damsel? We reckon that This is Morpheous, Andrew Prepare yourself for ambient the 64 version of the game is a real Braybrook's latest and possibly music. What?! Well, it's like this. US winner could you be one of greatest offering. Hopefully ill Gold reckon that the one big our winners & Answer these simple You could be in for the make up for the rather disappoint thing missing from your life when questions to find out! ALL entrants experience of a lifetime at the ing Alleykat and restore Mr B to his you're playing games is a really will get Special Defender Posters. ina aames is a really will get Special Defender Posters. Personal Computer World rightful place as King Zapper. As cool soundtrack. So they are 1 What was Robin of Locksley Show if you're a winner in our om our screen shots toying with the idea of putting better known as amazing Microprose Andrew has returned to a Uridiumaudio soundtracks in with their 2. What is the main weapon used Gunship Competition! style screen but the new game games. The first candidate could when knights joust on horseback? Microprose will be bringing their promises much more malevolent well be Outrun. And how 3. Name the squire who became incredible Gunship Flight morphs even! We hope to bring about music to play adventures king after pulling a sword from a Simulator to the show and you a full review next issue. with? What do you reckon on the stone YOU can book a trip in it by idea? How about sending us your Send your answers, on postcards winning one of six places top ten game playing tunes too. ONLY please, to Computer and exclusively for C+VG readers! Mail your list, on a postcard Video Games, Defender of the The Gunship simulation has been What do you mean you missed please, to Computer and Video Crow squeezed into an actual Link part one of our mega-jigsaw Games, Top Tunes, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London deo Crown Competition, Priory Court, Flight Training Simulator, poster! Personally I'd like to say 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Don't delay enter used by pilots for training sessions. that's your own tough luck, buddy! ECIR 3AU. And you could start by lode It's like one of these hydraulic checking out the funes on tapes arcade games -except much Corp say you ought to have the going out with games on the new more sophisticated. chance to make up for what you've Go! label. There will also be a direct line to missed. So if you clip the COUPON Major Bill Steeley, boss of Remember Cyborg? The below and send it together with Microprose in the US, and he'll talk game that almost never was from your name and address and the CRL. Well, the Mandroid is back in you through any problems you part of the poster you missed to have during the flight. a brand new arcade adventure Computer + Video Games, Poster called-yup, you've guessed it To win all you have to do is Offer, Priory Court, 30-32 Mandroid. Let's hope CRL has answer three simple Gunship Farringdon Lane, London ECIR the technology to bring you this questions, which are: 3AU. Then we'll rush you the bit game on time! Cyborg is in search 1. Name the helicopter on which you missed. Don't say we don't of his roots in this latest offering. He Microprose based their hit Gunship give you anything! But remember wants to find the blueprints of his wants to find the blueprints of his simulation this offer is subject to availability so construction before a totally evil 2. Name the helicopter flown by act FAST! b***?! gets his hands on them and Stringfellow Hawke in the hit TV starts turning out mini-borgs by the show. million. The action takes place on a 3. Name ONE other hit desolate planet where the dregs of intergalactic society have If you're going to be at the PCW gathered. They do say it will cost Show just come to the C+VG stand Make way for RoboCop, part .95 on tape and .95 on with a copy of this magazine and man, part machine. He's the star of disc. tell us the answers. The FIRST SIX a new movie and a game in the correct answers will get a ride on way from Ocean, who snapped the simulator during the show. up the rights to this new superhero. If you can't make it, never fear, Robocop is a mixture of Frankbecause six runners-up will get a enstein, Terminator, Blade Runner, free Gunship t-shirt and 20 other Dirty Harry and every comic hero lucky entrants will receive a giant you've ever come across. Once a Gunship poster. Just send your human cop killed in action Roboentries to Computer + Video Cop has been transformed into a Games, Gunship Competition, cyborg ready to bring rough justice Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon to the crime ravaged streets of Lane, London ECIR 3AU. at the big boss mht to have the Go! label Poster Offer "


"cereals C BB boca From Taito, the masters of arcade entertainment \"BUBBLE BOBBLE' Blow and bounce and bob your way into oblivion in this incredible conversion of the greatest arcade game of the year... Bubble Bobble will blast your brains and bruise your senses... Baffle yourself...buy Bubble Bobble Spectrum .95 Commodore & Amstrad cassette .95 Commodore disk .95 Amstrad disc .95, and for the Atari ST .95 TATTO TAITO Firebird Mail Order PO Box 394 London NB OOR TAITRONICS FIREBird Relegations im TAITRONICS Firebird Software, First Floor, 64-76 New Oxford St., London WC1A1PS! Firebird is a Registered Trademark of British Telecommunications plc. "


"C+VG Bubble Reviews this issue Bubble Bobble dragons Bub and Bob, water shoots, magical objects, fruits and treasure. You start at the bottom of the screen and the monsters race down from above. Your only weapons are bubbles which you shoot at the oncoming nasties. The bubbles surround their bodies and they start to float to the top of the screen. After a few moments they'll be released but if you get to the bubble and burst it first they fly around the levels and turn into fruits. If they manage to escape, the bubbles turn red and you'll have to go after them again. If you're slow at completing a level, and catching all the bullies on it, Baron Blubba, a fishy fellow, appears and he chases you round the screen. The screens get more complex as you move downward from one to another. Sometimes you'll drop down a random number of levels but you can take some comfort because the first moves of the bullies on each level are always the same, so you can easily build up strategies for avoiding and bubbling them once you Druid 11 B24/Apocalypse Tube/Baseball  MACHINES: C64/128/ AMSTRAD/SPECTRUM/ ATARI ST  SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD  PRICE: .95 VERSION TESTED: CBM64/128 REVIEWER: JOHN Bubble up that gum and prepare to take on the evil Baron Von Blubba and his cronies. Firebird's done an ace job of convertina Taito's hit coin-op Bubble Bobble to the likes of Commodore 64. You get the simultaneous two-player option with those two bubble blowing Hybrid/Flunky Addictaball Il/Last Mission Sidewise Defender of the Crown Ace 2 Ace 2 MACHINE: C64  SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD PRICE: 58.95 REVIEWER: JOHN 10 banished him. Already the Druid's apprentice has fallen under the undead spell. The land has been desolated as the corpses of the long dead struggle to breathe air through their melted lungs and destroy every living thing The evil Acamantor and his legions of the undead have returned to Belorn, 103 years after Hasrinaxx the Druid Mask Atari Round-up within reaching distance. Hasrinaxx must travel through the four elemental kingdoms of earth, air, fire and water. He's learned a lot since his last encounter with Acamantor in the original game, so his few spells have become many and he can call upon four element spirits Golem, Wisp, Phoenix and Kraken You start on the earth plane, so the Golem is already on your list of ten possible spells together with a free lunch, and one key to open a field gate or stone wall door. The Golem's conjured by pressing the RUN STOP key and once invoked you page through his actions with further RUN/STOP presses. Golem will guard you, attack the undead, or wait by your side as long as he's in a safe environment. He is clumsy. though, and may get in your way when you try to go through doors The other elementals will perform like the Golem if you take them into hostile territory. The Phoenix loses strength if you invoke him in wet areas, the Kraken is weak in desert lands and the Wisp is naturally fragile. You are also equipped with lightning bolt power which Atari Round-up Laurel and Hardy/California Games 14 Death Wish III OOD 15 Armageddon Man Nobel, Hacker, Codename Droid. 16-bit Reviews Faery Tale/Colonial Conquest/ Academy/Impact/ Deluxe/Pain / Karate Kid Il/Space Battle/Road Runner/ Hades Nebula/Barbarian "


"C+VG Bobble REVIEWS DOVOLI DOUD DODUOS EKELILIK BODOHET but all have different attack movements which will remove one of your three lives if you lose concentration for a moment. You can get some of those lives back by bubbling the letters that spell extend as you move through the levels. You can also destroy the magical targets that occasionally appear. The bubble up sweet will, for instance, launch a storm of bubbles from your mouth, the shoe will speed you up and the 1 up symbol means extra lives. It's unlikely you'll ever discover or master all the features in Bubble Bobble. If you're not finding ways to dodge Baron von Blubba or finding the best place on the screen to burst a group of bubbles, you'll be working out how to collect all the fruits and treasure on the screen before the time runs out. The game's as addictive as bubble gum and as long lasting. GRAPHICS SOUND NIA  VALUE PLAYABILITY 000000000000 DDDDDDDDDDDUUUUUUUUUUUUUTA memorise the layout of each mechanism is also slowed up. level and that's not difficult. As you advance through the You have one added levels the bullies or should advantage over the bullies--the they be bubblies-change. At game movement does not have first they're clockwork powered the same spring or speed as the mouths, then the white sheeted coin-op so, on the one hand the ghosts appear, the fish and bullies move slightly slower springy creatures. All of them and on the other your bubbling are affected by your bubbles EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE En Suig Sauses HEL. COGIE t DRUTI PAUSES DRUID EHITS DRULD PAUSES ***** * strikes the undead back into the dark places like a lamp. There ground again but that quickly are also spells which sustain the drains and you'll have to pick up druid's life, like the Banquet and other spells by standing on the wine. The final spell is White tomb stones that mark them Orb which destroys Spells include water and fire Acamantantor and takes you to walls, Deathlight which strikes the druid grade of all undead creatures on the Enlightenment. screen for a limited period, Until you've achieved Invisibility, fireshield, and InfraEnlightenment, you'll have to vision which you can use in put up with grades such as Orc Breath, Air Shaman, High Adept lose out for not having played and Overlord none of the the original. Yet another hit for original game's sense of Firebird which recently appears humour has been lost. to have risen like the Phoenix in As sequels go Druid Il is a Druid Il from its ashes. masterpiece, a game which develops and enhances the original's features. It provides a GRAPHICS frame of reference for Druid SOUND hardened players but also  VALUE ensures that newcomers don't PLAYABILITY "


"BANGKOK \"WHERE FEET ARE AS DEADLY AS FISTS ACTUAL CBM 64 SCREENS Commodore 64/128 cassette (19.99), disk (.99). Spectrum 48K/128K (29.99) and Atari ST (224.99), System 3. 23. Pond Street, Hampstead, London NW3 2PN. ON 431 UOL Mail Order: Activision (UK) Ltd. Units 3 & 4 Lloyds Close. Finedon Rd. Industrial Estate, Wellingborough NNS 4FR. Distributed by Activision (UK) Ltd. "


"KNIGHTS "


"GVG MIIATS Conflicts 1 This is the first of two compilation sets released by PSS both of games only a year or so old (all have been reviewed in C+VG in the last 12 months). Look carefully before you buy, since the versions for different machines DON'T include the same games. The Spectrum and CBM64 versions of Conflicts 1 contain Battle of Britain, Falklands 82, and Theatre Europe but the Amstrad version substitutes Tobruk for Falklands 82. Whether you think this price for three games is a bargain depends on whether you need more than one of them. My own difficult for a beginner and not view is that PSS put together very appealing to someone who what they had available rather just likes arcade games. than choosing three games for The Tobruk of the Amstrad the same sort of player version is too limited as a Whereas Falklands 82 is a strategy game of Western child's game that barely Desert warfare, but includes a qualifies as a wargame or as good tank simulator. All four any kind of representation of games involve a single player the Falklands War, Theatre against the computer. Europe is a taxing and very It's an interesting collection playable game of a hypothetical but it still needs a second World War Three in Europe, in thought at .95. which the main problem is to avoid nuclear destruction. Battle of Britain falls GRAPHICS somewhere between the two, SOUND as too unrealistic a game for the VALUE true enthusiast but probably too PLAYABILITY MACHINES: SPECTRUM/ CBM64/AMSTRAD SUPPLIER: PSS PRICE: .95 (CASS), .95 (DISK)  VERSION TESTED: CBM64 REVIEWER: STEVEN Noon Conflicts II OUT AF B MACHINES: SPECTRUM/CBM64 appear with more than twice without getting bogged down in game on its own.  SUPPLIER: PSS the number of carriers they are details, but is close enough to PRICE: .95 (CASS) SPECTRUM/.95 (CASS). .95 supposed to have. the real event to be exciting. GRAPHICS (DISK) CBM64 This is an almost perfect midIf you can't get Battle of SOUND REVIEWER: STEVEN level of difficulty game, It can be Midway by itself the VALUE played in about 20 minutes compilation is worth it for this PLAYABILITY Like Conflicts 1, the second compilation is also available in different versions. Along with Battle for Midway the Spectrum version has only Iwo Jima, a 2/27 game using the same mechanisms, and of the same quality, as Falklands 82. The CBM64 version also includes a completely new game, Okinawa. However, as DF 5 the instruction book admits, this is only another version of Iwo MU6 Jima with a different terrain map. Perhaps the best way to describe these two games is as slow-moving shoot-em-ups. Battle of Midway, however, is one of the best wargames that PSS have so far produced, despite being over two years old. The player take the American carriers against the computer in the first decisive naval battle of World War Two fought without the two sides ever seeing each other. Everything depends on the ability of the American search planes to find the Japanese TURN: 1 carriers and launch an air-strike first. The game includes a training option, a regular game in which the Japanese follow their historical course, and a \"trap\" scenario in which they suddenly ft efst SEAS CALM "


"VIDEWIE Sidewize the ultimate shoot-em-up. Incredible weapon pick-up systems. awe-inspiring arcade action. \"Sidewize is the stickest, po-messing shootout in a long, long time\" wrote Sinclair User...don't mess with the others, try messing with Sidewize, Bireler NB OOR INCIARUM CLASSIC FIREBIRD SPECTRUM CASSETTE $7.95 COMMODORE CASSETTE $8.95 COMMODORE DISK $12.95 SINGLA LED Firebird is a Registered trademark of British Telecommunications ple Firebird Software First floor od 76 New Oxford St. London WCIA IPS "


"KNIGHT ORC Available in August: AMIGA (Disc) ATARI ST (Disc) To follow soon: IBM PC (Disc) MAC (Disc) APPLE II (Disc\") AMSTRAD CPC (Disc) AMSTRAD PCW (Disc) ALL AT .95 CBM 64/128 (Cassette or Disc) AMSTRAD CPC (Cassette') SPECTRUM (Cassette\") ATARI 800 (Cassette or Dise\") MSX (Cassette\") ALL AT .95 *Text version only. Enter the world of Knight Orc. The latest, most challenging and fun packed three part adventure from Level 9. The text is pure Level 9 at their most innovative and the graphics, well they are superlative; state of the art and worlds beyond. You are cast as a desperate, downtrodden, evil minded Ore on the rampage in adventureland. For generations the Humans have been persecuting Orcs, which is hardly surprising as Ores are singularly unpleasant creatures Now it's time to redress the balance. At all good retailers or direct from: RAINBIRD MAILORDER To order enclose a cheque/PO payable to BRITISH TELECOM plc stating machine, cassette or disc, and number required and send to RAINBIRD MAILORDER, PO BOX 394, LONDON N8. Or call the RAINBIRD HOTLINE on 01-348 8618 quoting your Access/Visa card number. Remember, always state your Name, Address and Postcode including the reference code printed below. All prices include P&P Allow 28 days for delivery RAINDIRD With 70 characters to contend with, masses of spells and puzzles to use and solve, you'll need all your Orcish cunning if you are to reap your ultimate revenge. But be warned adventurers, for all is not as it first appears in ... Knight Orc! PUBLISHED IN THE UK BY RAINBIRD SOFTWARE FIRST FLOOR, 74 NEW OXFORD STREET LONDON WCIA IPS Rated and the Ranbird logo are trademarks of Britis Telec c ions pic Ref: C+VG 10/87 Screen shots taken from the Amiga version. "


"The Tube C+VG REVIEWS If, whilst you are in or when you try to enter the Capture Area, your energy levels become insufficient to operate your shields the mission will be instantly terminated. The Tube comprises eight segments each consisting of  MACHINES: C64/SPECTRUM/ Your objective is to survive a three zones, the Transfer Zone, AMSTRAD journey through the alien scrap the DMT (Defence Mechanism  SUPPLIER: QUICKSILVA PRICE: .95 (SPEC), .95/ collection system known as The Tunnel) and the Capture Area, .95 (C64) Tube. In order to do this you designed to trap even the most must plunder the energy from  VERSIONS TESTED: skillful of pilots. SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD those ships less fortunate than The first area is the Transfer REVIEWER: CHRIS yourself which are stored in the Zone, which is designed to Capture Area ready for the next capture space vessels, sustain It would be SO good to say alien dust cart to collect them. and draw them into the main something nice about a Energy is essential, although body of The Tube. Quicksilva game for a change. your shield will give your ship The Transfer Zone is basically a duck shoot gamea cursor SCORE 003695 to take control just in time to avoid them then the shuttle waits for the scrolling to catch up! Next up is the capture area which features a top view Slap SY Fight type screen. You have to drive your shuttle about in Boris DMT 1 search of other ships to gain type sight has to be lined up on energy. targets. The Commodore The graphics on the 64 and version has an interesting Spectrum versions strangely \"moving window\" effect not don't look very different and found on the Speccy game. some play is similar in both This part rapidly gets boring versions. after a couple of games as you Overall The Tube is a mishalways survive it and you begin mash of ideas taken from other So I will. The music on both reasonable protection, energy to wish you could skip directly games which is no bad thing versions of this new multi-game will be drained whenever to the next part of the game, the IF they come together well. In game is great. David Whittaker shields are used or a collision DMT. this case I have to say they has done a masterly job. occurs. This is an easy Scramble-type don't. As for the game itself well, Shields consume energy at game with some distinctly slow I'm afraid that it wouldn't keep an increased rate, so should be scrolling. At the start of each Spectrum C64 your interest very long even on GRAPHICS used sparingly, until you enter DMT level the shuttle streaks SOUND a rainy Sunday afternoon. Let's the Capture Area where their along out of control towards a VALUE take a look at the scenario. activation is automatic. couple of hazards allowing you PLAYABILITY mm 21909011, LLLL Base lunge with the bat at the right opposing team out than on your time. If you miss the ball three own runs times, and it falls into the hands Street Sports Baseball has a of the catcher crouching behind few strikes against it. The you, you're struck out without a batting and pitching controls chance to run. are too limited and the When you do manage to hit computer comes across up aces the ball the computer displays too many times for natural skill. your run, base to base, from a If you can put up with the bird's eye view. It also marks machine's team ego, and select the position of the ball on that a good squad from the rabble plan so you can gauge whether you're shown, you might just to try for the next base. enjoy this game. Pitching isn't a cinch either,  GRAPHICS but it's easier than batting and you're likely to make more  VALUE headway by knocking the PLAYABILITY va MEAGLES ROCKETS BALL STR OUT  MACHINE: C64 you've got to choose your team SUPPLIER: EPYX from 16 neighbourhood kids PRICE: .99 who all want to be in on the REVIEWER: JOHN play. Each kid has his or her, own It may lack the lustre of characteristics, some make American big league sport but good runners while others field Street Sports Baseball players well or are hot on the pitching have all the form and diamond. Butch, for instance, determination of their high will take chances if he can see profile counterparts. They play even the slimest likelihood that with the same type of ball, bat he can make it from one base to and bases, and they use the another, while Ralph is so fleet same terms-pitcher, territory, of foot and mentally agile that left field, runbut the game he can dodge just about takes place on a local playing anything. field rather than a big stadium. A computer controlled team The same's true of Epyx's makes play look easy. Its version of the game which players hit the ball accurately follows the rules closely, allows almost every time and its the players strategic flexibility fielders are slick and almost and scores through the runs on always on the mark. a multiple screen, 3D, Batting's the most difficult. representation of the pitch. The pitcher can throw at any First, though, you decide angle or speed and you've got whether you want to play to match it with bat positioning against a friend or chance not an easy task in this suicide with a computer simulation because the only opponent. Decision made, sure way to hit the ball is to Batting's throw are got "


"C+VG Hybrid REVIEWS got an inventive if graphically mediocre game.  GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY 00 small hero. He's not only got to help destroy the alien but he's got to take out the station's dangerous defences. There are gun implacements, enemy space ships and power points to knock out, plus electrified fences to avoid. You can also try the teleports which'll take you deeper into the complex. When you find the Robot, the next piece of the hybrid Repeat the process another creature, link up with it and two times and you've move on to find the last completed the game. Sounds componentthe brain. The so simple but most of the Xylon and Robot must work in complex screens are lethal. tandem to defeat yet more Combine that with a complex defences--this time frustrating search and you've streams of electric current and more powerful laser posts. No one character can complete the game because each has different characteristics and  MACHINES: SPECTRUM/ powers. When, for instance, AMSTRAD/C64 you meet up with Brain you  SUPPLIER: ARIOLASOFT PRICE: .95 have the intelligence to solve VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM/ the complex's puzzles, the AMSTRAD armoured protection of The REVIEWER: JOHN Robot, and the speed and agility of The Xylon. That's all you'll Three creatures Brain, Robot need to confront the alien. and Xylon must find each The game's not over once other and unite to destroy an you've found and blasted it. The alien in a deep space complex. members of the team are You initially have control of scattered throughout the the Xylon, a beast with light complex. You've got to find armour and slight fire power. them again and go after another Such a large task for such a alien. nnnnnn VE FLUNKY how he can get it but that's a MACHINE: SPECTRUM/CBM 64/ problem for you to solve. And AMSTRAD the game carries on in much the PRICE: .95 VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM same way. REVIEWER: PAUL Fail in your task and you soon find a guardsman in hot pursuit What did your last servant die ready to shoot you. I tried of, then? Was he shot or blown running away, disappearing up by a bomb? Didn't think so. through different doors but he But as Flunky to the Royals always managed to find me. yes, those Royals that could If and when you get Andrew's be your fate as you slave away autographs of all the members with. Now if you've been boat, you then have to provide around the corridors of Buck of the Royal family. But they will keeping an eye out, you'll have Fergie with freckles. House. only sign when you have noticed various boats in the It's then off to Charles and Most of the famous family are completed the task they set you, rooms you pass through. The Di's apartment, again hunting here The Queen, Prince For instance, in the first obvious one to get the Prince is for those rare autographs and Charles, Princess Diana, Prince apartment you find Prince a purple boat on a table. But it's then on to H. M. The Queen Andrew and Fergie. And you're Andrew and Fergie. Prince not the one he wants. In fact it's herself. at the beck and call of all of Andrew, who is in the bath, asks the one high up on a shelf way All the cartoon Royals are them. Woe betide you if you you to get him a boat to play out of Flunky's reach. I know instantly recognisable. Thier don't complete your task. looks and features are precisely This is Don Priestley's follow captured and exaggerated to up to the highly praised the point of cruelty. Just take a Trapdoor and both games have look a curvey Fergie, Andrew's a lot in common, excellent giant choppers-teeth, that is, cartoon graphics, large and not helicopters -and Charles' extremely stylish, and problem ears. They could put an solving. elephant to shame. The first problem I found was Don Priestly will get a lot of how to switch from keyboard to praise for Flunkey, but no joystick control. I must admit knighthood. that I did have a copy without Flunky is a thoroughly the full instructions but didn't entertaining game in the tradition expect it to be so difficult. (You of Trapdoor. It's not overly do it by getting Flunky to push a difficult and it may lack enough select level to the required action for the more energetic choice and then ring a bell. player Flunky if first ordered to light the fires. He sets off at a sedate pace clutching a box of matches and an autograph book. And in GRAPHICS the second item lies the clue to SOUND what the game is all about. VALUE You must collect the PLAYABILITY 0000 "


"Once again the time has come to face the challenge! INFILTRATORII CREATED BY CHRIS GRAY THE NEXT DAY.. Available for the CBM 64 .99 cassette .99 disk Special Infiltrator plus Infiltrator|| Offer! CBM 64 .99 cassette .99 disk U.S. GOLD "


"0+VG . Addictaballe REVIEW MACHINE: ATARI ST/ complete with standard ball and your way at the end of each SPECTRUM/C64/AMSTRAD/MSX the standard bricks to knock level. You can collect extra SUPPLIER: ALLIGATA out. ammo and fuel by hitting PRICE: E24.95 Then you get added VERSION TESTED: ATARI ST special bricks along the way REVIEWER: TIM armaments/boosters to collect, but they aren't always there plus bonus bricks which have when you need them! If you thought Arkanoid was different effects on your Other special bricks allow you addictive then just get a load of progress. You have to guard to stop the scrolling for a short time, catch the ball on your bat, Alligata's Addictaball. Addictive against falling bricks and fireballs which damage the by name addictive by nature. slow or speed up the ball. Bricks It must be the best Alligata barrier behind your bat. marked with a skull and game for an age! Unlike Arkanoid you get the crossbones blow bigger holes Basically it's Arkanoid which added protection of that wall in barriers when hit, and there scrolls, with a lot of extra added which bounces your ball back are mystery bricks which do into the action and gives you ingredients. There's the mysterious things. more time to work out a standard spacecraft-bat Watch out for secret strategy to blast away the walls hyperspace transporters which which move closer by the speed you through time and second. space to new levels or simply a The back wall can be repaired different section of the level you by hitting bricks marked \"B\" are currently playing. but it's best not to allow any There's a two-player option fireballs through if you want to and the game can be played keep going. using joystick-or mouse on Each level is based on a the ST version we tested. I theme, Transport, Space, Circus found the mouse the best bet etc but it's hard to see the on the ST-after all, the relevance of this when all you movements are pretty see is-saya bus which straightforward. moves back and forth across Up to now the ST has been the screen to mark the start of lacking games of this addictive the next level. But who cares quality but Addictaball will when the game is so great. alter all that! Hopefully the Collect the rocket booster and other versions will be just as blaster at the start of the game nifty. We'll let you know as soon and take care of them. You'll as we can meanwhile ST need the blaster to kill off owners should make this a big whirling alien creatures hit. released when you hit certain 1 Player 1 GRAPHICS bricks. You'll need the booster SOUND to dodge your way around the VALUE bikes and buses which block PLAYABILITY 1 Player i 1328290 Last Mission  MACHINES: C64/SPECTRUM SUPPLIER: US GOLD PRICE: .99 C64 (TAPE), .99 SPECTRUM (DISK) VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM REVIEWER: JOHN It may be the last mission, and a to get back from your exile is to you're caught between three of classic arcade game, but this defeat the invading forces that four fighters. game still has some addictive hover and spin across the When you hit some of the power to it. planet surface. Your ship is enemy craft they explode and You've been driven from your equipped with a standard laser let off pieces of debris whch home planet and the only way attack system but, as the game drift in a straight line. If any of progresses, you can collect those pieces hit you you'll lose more defences and attack one of your lives. In the latter modules from the planet's stages of the game these debris surface bombs gang up and often First, though, you've got to protect mother ships which you get a grip on the control of your need to shoot repeatedly to ship. It moves forward at a destroy DOTECO constant, fairly slow speed. To There are compensations for change course move the all this death and despondency TISSIC joystick left to right and the no, really. The planet's nose of the ship turns clockwise surface is studded with strange, CECEFTEL or anti-clockwisejust like that flower shaped pods. When you other oldie Asteroids. It takes a shoot them the casing falls bit of getting used to because apart and a small square, you expect to speed up and embossed with a letter of the slow down when you push or alphabet, beams out at you. Fly pull the joystick up and down, through the square and you add but the only way you can avoid to your weapons or defences. oncoming enemy craft is to When you take on a new quickly turn the nose of your weapon you lose the benefit of ship. the previous one. For instance, That's not so easy when you may have picked up a fast "


"XI  MACHINES: SPECTRUM  SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: JOHN C+VG REVIEW DOPODOOSA You're a lone space man, drifting through the endless star fields of four alien worlds with only a laser gun to protect you against their inhabitants. In the beginning you choose to work alone or with a second player. Then you select the world you want to enter. First up, the Forest World of Onricon. The monsters there are green and fly at you in whirls and walls. There's the chain linked snake with two heads that need to be shot off before it's destroyed, blackcurrent shaped clusters that cartwheel around the screen and let off tiny but lethal bombs, and lines of medallion monsters which can only be destroyed with multiple hits. There's also a series of walls that whizz towards you and are almost impossible to Player 1 Player 1 Player 2 blackberry that creeps up behind you. Finally, the Frozen World of lota with its metallion walls and ranks of laser blasting squares. The aliens in each world deposit bonus signs which you can pick Sidewise Player 1 Player blast or dodge. up. You'll gain more points and The desert world of Delta is give yourself a breathing space no kinder. The same snakes and for a while. medallions get up to more Sidewize has all the features weird contortions, while other of a classic shoot-'em-up arcade creatures in this yellow world, game, yet I'm dissatified. The such as the gyrating snakes reason is that each world which throw off more bombs contains the same monsters, make up for the lack of the plus one or two new ones, the Forest world's wall. configurations are basically the The Cuboid World of Mu same on each level and some of includes medallions that give the aliens are just too fast to hit. birth to baby medallions, diamond shaped spaceships  GRAPHICS that are a devil to destroy, a SOUND chain snake which you must VALUE avoid and an exploding PLAYABILITY OSPOD D27900 TISSID CONVEETED Varbo LASE IFULSTENCE HYPER Gau Pada 9 MI-CE PODUTO 2 watcs co firing, continuous stream laser then hit another square and it changes to a blast gun which sends energy bolts out at the four corners of your ship. That may change to a wall of energy blasts which comes out of your ship's nose and get bigger as you pass through other squares, or a force field bubble which allows you to float through obstructions without damage. There's just so much in the game that's not documented in the instructions! Okay, I've told that it's old, but it's also one kill after another and enough skill techniques to master to keep you going well into the autumn months. It's addictive, compulsive and real lasting appeal stuff. If you liked Uridium then this is the next game for you! > GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 209 21-T BEAVE? 200222 canada CCC CEDOM OD "


"ATARI SPECTRUM COMMODORE SPECTRUM WOOLWORTHS TOP 30 COMPUTER SOFTWARE AMSTRAD JAMES BOND 007 THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS POSITION THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS HEWBON 1. 2. 3. COMMODORE 5. 6. COMMODORE 3. 9.95 Barbarian 24 CBM 64/128 ATAR 11. 12. 13. SEPTEMBER 1987 TITLE SOFTWARE MACHINE PRICE HOUSE TYPE Exolon Exolon Hewson Spectrum 7.99 Last Ninja System 3 C64 9.99 Rood Runner U.S. Gold Spectrum 8.99 Barbarian Palace Spectrum 9.99 Living Daylights Domark Spectrum 9.95 Rood Runner U.S. Gold C64 9.99 Enduro Racer Activision Spectrum 9.99 Paperboy Elite Amstrad 8.95 Living Daylights C64 Palace C64 9.99 Epyxs Epics U.S. Gold C64 9.99 Leaderboard U.S. Gold Spectrum 9.95 Ace 2 Cascade C64 9.99 World Class Leaderboard U.S. Gold 6 Pak Elite Spectrum 9.95 Wizball Ocean Spectrum Game Over Ocean Spectrum 7.95 Wonderboy Activision C64 9.99 World Games U.S. Gold Spectrum 8.99 F15 Strike Eagle Microprose Spectrum 9.95 Trio Elite Spectrum 9.95 Pirates Microprose 14.95 Big 4 Durrell C64 9.95 Paperboy Wonderboy Activision Spectrum Paperboy Elite Spectrum 7.95 Trio C64 6Pok Elite Amstrod 9.95 Exolon Hewson C64 9.99 Gauntlet U.S. Gold Spectrum 8.99 1. C64 9.95 15. LIVROS AMSTRAD ATARI A SPECTRUM 4 128K-2 ATARI PEERBOY EARBARIAN The Climatario 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. ., 1313 ATARI WOOLWORTHS A Great Deal M Entertainm SPECTRUM Al selected larger stores Mastertronic games at f1.99 and .99 \"Hema subject to availably COMMODORE SPECTRUM S AMSTRADE "


"REVIEWS Defender of the Crown TERET MACHINE: C64 prestige as well. Use the money SUPPLIER: CINEMAWARE/ to build more castles, MIRRORSOFT consolidate your territory, and PRICE .95 (disc) take over. REVIEWER: MARSHAL A \"map\" feature helps you Defender of the Crown looks check out what all the other great on the Amiga, nobody will boys are doing, and rescuing a argue with that. But there was a fair damsel will make you a lot of scepticism surrounding better, stronger leaderCinemaware putting out a 64 everybody likes a family man. version of the game. Your ally, Robin Hood, will So how did they do? The also come to your aid three answer is GREAT! Not only are times, but success or failure will the graphics and music faithful still be on your shoulders. to the original version, but Defender runs quick and game-play has been clean on the C64, with an significantly improved. But first excellent sound track thanks a bit about the game itself. to sound compression It's 1491. The King of England techniques. has been assassinated and all Packed with data on both the real-estate is now up for sides, the program has been grabs. It falls on you to become improved in a number of one of four Saxon Knights, with important ways. First off, it is the computer taking on the possible to move through roles of all the other characters. neutral territories providing Each knight has attributes that the landowner has no that dictate his life, as well as a reason to hate you. castle and small army to start. Sword-play is now indicated Through boldness and with a strength bar at the strategy, you must increase bottom of the screen, making it your holdings, defeat the other a lot easier to decide whether to Knights, and take on the fight or flee. Norman conquerors as well. The interior castle swordThis takes a lot of cash, but fighting scene is intact, there are a number of ways to complete with the shadows of build a fortune. The easiest is to the combatants flickering from raid a castle, wipe everybody the torches. out and run back home. Of Battling your opponents' course, others might take a dim armies is now done with swordview on this, so be sure to take play, rather than just watching a plenty of troops and knights, screen indicate whether you've and leave a good force to won or lost. defend your home castle when Other elements remain the you go \"stepping out\". same, such as assaulting a You can also participate in castle with a catapult, and jousts, which add to your manoeuvring your armies around the landscape. My duplicate the digitised sounds, favourite, going head to head at or highly visual graphics of the the tournament, hasn't been Amiga, but you get a whole lot trashed either. In fact, the of game with this version of animation here actually seems Defender of the Crown. quite a bit smoother than that of its predecessor. Plus, your opponent isn't a  GRAPHICS perfect shot anymore, so two or SOUND CHVG three passes are now the norm. VALUE Of course, the C64 can't PLAYABILITY ooo "


"REVIEWS RUP 114 el 18 W $50 3033834 23:33 18 p rax& 014: smaures oletis 03 bove Acell V8 149903  MACHINE: CBM 64 of flying time to really enjoy it. SUPPLIER: CASCADE So what do you get? Ace 2 is PRICE: .95 (CBM 64) .95 head to head combat. Either (SPEC) REVIEWER: PAUL you versus the computer or against a pal. The screen is split When Cascade first played its in half showing the views from Ace a good few months ago it the cockpit of both fighters met with great critical approval which are a different design. and was generally hailed as one One jet is based on a carrier, the of the best flight simulations other at an inland airbase. In the around. Now the Harrogate one player mode you fly the based software company dealt carrier based jet. its second ace. And once again There are two game they've turned up trumps. scenarios. The first is a close But be warned, coping with range dogfight. Both jets, Cascade's colour-codes security armed with aerial cannons and device could seriously damage heat-seeking missiles, are your sanity and colour placed at random on the map perception. These things are within a fairly short range of sent to try us, I suppose. Stick each other. It's then seek and with it and you'll win through. destroy. Even with the Now a second warning. Air computer on the lowest skill Combat Emulator Two does not level-it ranges for one to 20 reveal all its secrets in a few I kept getting a nasty shock minutes of sky-high action. from behind. Those heatYou've got to log in a few hours seeking missiles are lethall Poor ons Ps 83 The second game play involves a full scale aerial and ground attack and centres on a spyship positioned just off coast which is monitoring an inshore radar station. This unfriendly act is not well received and ends in some real jet-set action. The layout of the cockpit instruments in each jet is different but you basically get the same controls. These include radar, compass, altitude and fuel and velocity dials, a messages screen and weapon selection. You also have control over engine power and must return to base if your fuel and weapons are running low. Now for the weapons. These are: Cannon--for use at a range of less than one mile. Heat-seeking missiles can be used at distances of up to eight miles. Radar-guided missiles these are for real long shots from up to 25 miles. Air-ground/ship missiles can be used at altitudes of under 2,000 feet and at speeds of less than 500 knots. Hitting the V key will bring up a map of the battlezone. Useful if your enemy seems to be staying away. I quite like flight simulations providing they are fairly easy to get into. Nothing annoys me more than having to read a flight manual which seems just as long as the real thing and then having to spend what seems like hours getting the right engine thrust, flap setting and rudder control correct before being able to take off. And even then I always end up raising the undercarriage before I've taken off! Well with Ace 2 there's none of this to worry about. The fiddly controls are kept to a bare minimum and when you hit the fire button the action starts. Ace graphics and ace sound from music man Rob Hubbard ensure Ace 2 is a worthy successor to Ace. GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY Rass es 00 00 00 "


"PO BOX 394 FIREBIRD MAIL ORDER LONDON NS OQR TEL HOTLINE: 01-348 8618 to the perilo intrepidfio as they Dolgoths Of Abd Sahl. Monoraidhol feedless explora Collom duross sun-baked deserts arough am fons in search bf odvenfor og A.Sadownfall Alihis her and one will be available to your Spedum Binmodore and Ainsrad (cassette .95, disc 01 2015) all dood compuestockists soon FIREBIRO "


"MATT TRAKKER REVIEW SHA AGE :28 OD OD VERBA HORFERME GREMLIN is behind the kidnappings which are further attempts to de-stabilise world peace and may signal the start of a massive global crime spree. Your mission is to track down the missing agents and destroy as many of Venom's cohorts as possible. There's not much you have to go on. The agents have disappeared into a vortex which has taken them into one of four fantasy worlds. Don your mask, the trademark of your organisation, and remote controller of all the weapons, communications and equipment at your disposal, and take to the skies in your Thunderhawk pursuit craft. Once you've found and entered the Venom vortex you're dumped on one of four fantasy worlds-Boulder Hill, Pre-historic, Far Future and Venom Base. You'll find two of the six agents in all but the first of those, and at Boulder Hill you have to find your own mask before you can start your rescue mission. The landscapes are finely detailed and the terrain is natural enough until you come across the five symbols which mark the locations of useful objects. There are bombs and repair kits for your Thunderhawk, as well as security keys, scanners and masks which'll help you to locate your missing buddies. Just scoot through them to pick them up and they're entered on your ship's control at the bottom of the screen ready for use. To find an agent you've got to go through a search and pick-up sequence which is unnecessarily complicated but which lengthens the game. First you've got to pick-up a scanner and find the four keys, amongst many, which will activate it. Once found, pick up the agent and go in search of his mask and collect it before going off in search of the next agent. Each of the four locations contains a scattering of deadly fanua, aliens, monsters and high-technology weapons all aimed at you. Boulder Hill is sweet with its helicopter bombers, jeeps, tanks, boulders and freight trains, compared with Pre-history which hurls Pterydactyls, Snapping Turtles, dinosaurs, volcanoes and lava at your Thunderhawk. The Far  MACHINES: C64/SPECTRUM/ Future, with Black Holes, Gun AMSTRAD Emplacements, radioactive SUPPLIER: GREMLIN GRAPHICS waste, and UFO mothership is PRICE: 27.99 (SPECTRUM) .99 no better, while the final scene, (AMS) .99 (64) .99 (DISCS) Venom Base, throws everything VERSION TESTED: AMSTRAD at you in a last-stand effort to REVIEWER: JOHN protect its villainous dynasty. It's unlikely that you'll get Gremlin must be one worried through Mask easily, even if software company. It's only had you're an arcader, but Gremlin the licence for the Mask range has made sure that there are of toys, and cartoon series, for a plenty of ways to knock up high few months and the agents of scores, apart from finishing the that high-tech law enforcement game with all agents safe and organisation have started to well rescued. disappear. Gremlin could have moulded Matt Trakkar, inventor, the game around any old shootstrategist and leader of the 'em-up style an accusation group, suspects that the recently levelled at Domark and villainous Venom organisation Living Daylights but it didn't. Thankfully, with the release of Mask, I wasn't in despair town long. A great cartoon and a very good game. Instead it's paid attention to all the attractions of the licence and used them to transfer nonstop cartoon action onto the computer screen. I despaired of seeing a good cartoon/toy licensed conversion when US Gold released its overhyped He-Man games.  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY 180 GOOQO "


"Konami MAN ARCADE NIGHTMARE NOW FOR YOUR HOME-MICRO ocel SPECTRUM COMMODORE AMSTRAD Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street. Manchester M25NS Tel: 061832 6633 . Telex: 669977 "


"COMING SOON OUT RODUCTIONS presenta Their First Major Release SHOOT-EM-UP CONSTRUCTION KIT See us on Stand 3041 at the PCW Show OUTLAW PRODUCTIONS is part of the PALACE Group of Companies. D "


"ATARI ROUND-UP REVIEWS the wildly imaginative graphics. It's been rated a classic in every other version, and all I can add is that XL and XE owners really must have this in their collection Overall Rating: A school report for the Atari XL/XE series would probably read 'late starters'. Somehow they failed to attract the public when they were first flocking to buy C64s and Spectrums. But the story has a happy ending. Discount prices led to a solid user vase which Atari, much to their credit, continued to support. So did the software manufacturers, some of whom were in from the start, others arriving rather later when they saw an untapped market. The result is that the machines' capabilities are now being exploited by some excellent full price games, balanced by a brilliant budget selection. So forget the ST for a minute here's a baker's dozen to prove that the Atari 8-bit bites back! HEAD OVER HEELS You then have a choice of  OCEAN sending them back to Freedom, .95 which is the safe but unheroic At last Atari 8-bit-ers have the option, or to take on the mighty Blacktooth Empire a truly chance to try the arcade adventure which is guaranteed epic task. My guess is that you'll to bowl you over, not to mention tying you in knots. Jon Ritman and Bernie Drummond's follow-up to Batman has been brilliantly converted by Colin Porch, with music and sound FX from those nice people at Red Rat. It's every bit as playable, difficult 0 36 and downright cute as the previous versions. The plot of Head Over Heels is ELEKTRA GLIDE ATARI SMASH HITS ENGLISH SOFTWARE collection, .95 Overall Rating: 8 A full-price package, but you get four titles for your money, and BALLBLAZER as most of these were once ACTIVISION full-price, it's good value. .99 (CASS), .99 (DISK) Elektra Glide is a tricky crossThough it's been out a while country racing game with this 'sport of the future remains superb graphics and sound at the leading edge of Atari 8-bit effects plus a selection of software. It's a phenomenally surreal hazards. Blue Max is fast game on any machine, but Zaxxon, World War one style, this is probably the most as you fly a biplane across breathtaking version of all. diagonally-scrolling occupied You compete against either territory, bombing and the computer or another player shooting. in a wild ball game. Two droids try to take control of a floating sphere, which must be blasted between goalposts at either end of a huge pitch. Ballblazer uses a horizontally split-screen for the two points of view, and the chequerboard playing area positively flies under you as you both zoom around. There's even a pounding music score! TOURNAMENT Overall Rating: 9 00000 7: 52 00000 BALLBLAZER WHO DARES WINS II TYNESOFT .95 (CASS), .95 (DISK) HEAD OVEP. HEELS a case of double your pleasure, double your puzzles, as you take control of not one but two heroes. Head and Heels are alien creatures bonded as a symbiotic pair which means that if you can reunite them you can stand Head on Heels' shoulders to form a single, more powerful being. Reuniting them isn't that easy HEAD OVER HEELS though, because they're go for the latter, because Head trapped in separate cells deep Over Heels is packed with the in Castle Blacktooth. Luckily sort of problems that just insist each cell has a teleport, and if on being solved. you get them into the maze of Everything about this rooms there's a chance that conversion is excellent, ranging they'll be able to collect the from the zingy spot effects and right objects and find ways past catchy tunes to the spot-on the deadly perils to meet up. positioning of various leaps and Rambo's sprained his ankle so it's up to you to rescue your fellow soldiers, held captive deep in the jungle. This is another Commando clone, but unlike the budget Gun Law it's much closer to the arcade  CONFLICT IN VIETNAM original. Alley Cat originally appeared It's a tough and noisy game, on Americana and features a slightly let down by the feline hero who has to rescue subdued graphics perhaps all his girlfriend by tackling a that desert dust got to the number of strange rooms. programmers! But if you loved Colossue Chess 3.0 is just what the arcade machine, go to it it says and it's probably the soldier. strongest version of the board game available. All in all a great Overall Rating: 7 "


"REVIEWS WAR HAWK Wins II (reviewed below), and  FIREBIRD SILVER life's made more difficult by the .99 absence of the grenades that Where better to start than with a give you the extra fire power in shoot'em up? Atari owners the full price game. may not be able to experience The graphics are a little basic, the joys of Uridium, but they but if you're not a wild fan of the can come close with this original, but fancy some lively, vertical scrolling blaster. bloody action, this is well worth The plot is as simple as you a look. could wish-zoom across the Overall Rating: 6 asteroid surfaces, wrecking any structures that get in your way BUBBLE TROUBLE restatger in your way and taking pot-shots at the PLAYERS  .99 Swooping alien craft, which don't take too kindly to your Another odd scenario as you wanton vandalism. play a little bubble who aims to The asteroid graphics are become big foam in the Continued from page 33 great but the aliens look rather bathtub! You do this by washed out. Still, they swoop absorbing other bubbles while CONFLICT IN VIETNAM around fast enough to keep you eating the soap brings in bonus MICROPROSE on your toes. pointsf, but avoid everything  .95 (CASS), .95 (DISK) Overall Rating: 7 else, because nailbrushes and Atari 8-bit software isn't all alien the like sap your strength or UNIVERSAL HERO even burst you. zapping arcade action and MASTERTRONIC Played on a single screen it's armchair generals can tackle .99 some of the toughest problems Arcade adventures must be the tough to master. The graphics a simple game which is quite of modern warfare as they refight the Vietnam war. second most popular type of are a little disapponting, but game, after shoot'em ups, and there's a bubbly soundtrack and Microprose recognises the this budget title offers most of touches like the basin draining controversial nature of the war. the features you could wish for at the end of the game are and while the company hardly takes a pacifist stance, even including odd objects to collect great. and strength-sapping aliens to those with hardened anti-war Overall Rating: 7 views could learn something of avoid Set in a giant maze, around SPELLBOUND the problems of the war in MASTRONICS which your hero walks and flies, South East Asia, from 1954 to E2.99 1972, in five scenarios. it's a bright and colourful game calling for much mapping and David Jones's brilliant arcade The game successfuly some lateral thinking as you adventure system of computerises the style of puzzle out how to use the things Windimation, comes to the traditional board wargames, using a cursor to give orders to that you've collected in your Atari. It uses windows and nine pockets. menus to give commands, so units. The scenarios are It's major fault is its you're never stuck while you carefully graded, with an initial instructions they're totally look for the right word only to tutorial for complete novices, and there are options to cover insufficient, so you have to pick find you can't do what you up the finer points by wanted. most personal perferences. experimentation. You control Magic Knight, Serious wargamers should find who has to rescue the victims of much to challenge them here. Overall Rating: 7 Gimbal the Wizard's magical Overall Rating: 7 UP, UP AND AWAY ineptitude from the Castle of BUG BYTE Karn. .99  TOURNAMENT The only disappointment with  US GOLD The Atari has attracted some this conversion is the colour .95 (CASS), .95 (DISK) odd arcade scenarios in its time. scheme, which seems more There have been golf games for The perils of ballooning suited to a modern battlefield almost as long as there have presented here include things than the mystical past, even if it been computers, but there has that Richard Branson never was known as the Dark Ages! never been a golf game like dreamed of, including rockOverall Rating: 9 Leader Board. Never before has hurling punks and pigeons with GAUNTLET/THE DEEPER the sport once described as, \"a loose bowels. You have to float along, great way to ruin a walk\", been DUNGEONS so accurately simulated. avoiding the hazards and US GOLD picking up fuel or you'll soon be Everything about Leader .95 (CASS), .95 (DISK) Boaard impresses, from the forced to jettison sandbags to There's something about perspective view of the course, Gauntlet that makes it stay aloft. Things get more incredibly addictive-the ideal taken from just behind the difficult as the lightning begins to flash and you have to hold combination of running round a golfer, to the variety of holes maze and massf destruction. back to dodge the thunder found across the four courses in Every level holds its own the orginal game, and the bolts. additional four for Tournament An interestingly different surprises... and exits lead to game that can prove strangely ever-more terrible tasks. And if players. You can even choose the original isn't enough for the level of difficulty that you'll addictive! you, there are always the 512 play at, so novices can get Overall Rating: 8 Deeper Dungeons. straight into it! GUN LAW As nobody who's ever played Up to four people can take MASTERTRONIC the arcade original will know, to part and about the only feature .99 of the real thing that isn't get the most from the game you Commando gets cloned, which included is the torrential need a partner, so beg, steal or thunderstorm that sends you means that you have to march borrow a second joystick so that scurrying back to the up the scrolling screen, dodging you can take on the assorted bullets and blasting the enemy clubhouse. Even if you don't nasties with some assistance. as the terrain becomes The game's extremely normally like sports simulations, you should take a increasingly difficult. playable but it's a pity that the With five levels of aliens to graphics rather let it down by look at this. tackle, there's a lot to do in this being far too small. Overall Rating: 9 budget answer to Who dares Overall Rating: 7 ATARI ROUND-UP "


"THE ACTION—SIMULATION AIRBORNE RANGER SEE US AT PCW, STAND 1511 MICROPROSE You are one of the elite ... parachuting alone behind enemy AIRBORNE RANGER.Achallenging combination of danger lines. The enemy controls the terrain, hidden in bunkers and and suspense. Available for the Commodore 64/128K. machine gun nests ...you may be surrounded. The action is Cassette .95 Disk .95. fierce as you control one soldier's battle against overwhelming odds. You'll need skill and strategy to outmanoeuvre your enemy, plus courage and some luck to make your escape. Airborne Ranger is an exciting fastpaced simulation with 12 desperate missions in 3 different SIMULATION. SOFTWARE regions of the world. The possibilities are endless! Please send _copy/ies of Airborne Ranger CBM 64/128 Cassette .95 Disk .95 Further details. Name (block capitals) Address Post Code I enclose  including 55p P+P. Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd, or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tlx: 43422 MPS/UKG. "


"AUREL & HARDY REVIEW MACHINES: C64 excitement turns out to be SUPPLIER: ADVANCE unjustified. PRICE: .95 REVIEWER: IAN The aim of the game is to hit your opponent either Stan or Billed as a game in glorious Ollie, controlled by another Cinevision black and white player or the computer full in for those readers under 50 the face with a predetermined Laurel and Hardy from Advance number of flans. would at first sight appear to be To do this, you have to visit something new and original. various locations and collect The fact that it is objects to help you in your programmed by Andy Wilson quest. You can also enlist the the man behind the classic help of a stray dog whilst Dan Dare on the C64 --does avoiding the Keystone Cops. nothing to dampen initial However, since the long arm enthusiasm. Unfortunately, this of the law refused to show itself during several hours of play, can only assume they were avoiding me! During play, the screen is divided horizontally into three windows, Ollie and his immediate surroundings at the top and Stan likewise at the bottom. In the middle of the screen is a green strip containing a pianist more of him laterand icons to show the status of both characters. To carry out any action you must first stop moving. You then press fire and move your joystick up or down to choose an option. These come in the form of silent screen \"captions\" which appear in your playing area and give you a description if sometimes a little cryptic of what you can do. These are a nice idea, but they're hell to use. It is very easy to select the wrong option because of the awkward way you have to choose. The skill in this game ought to be your ability to collect a pie, lay traps for your opponent, catch him off guard and siap him right in the mush while avoiding a similar fate yourself. If you could actually do this, not only woud the game be fun, but it would also capture the slapstick style that Advance has tried so hard to create. Instead, you spend ages trying to achieve what should be routine tasks in the game. In the game's favour I have to say the animation is brilliant, especially in the way that is used to bring Stan and Ollie to life, but this alone cannot save the game. It's just a pity that Advance couldn't put it together.  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY L NU W 00 CALIFORNIA GAMES presented. California Games deserves all the accolades and trophies it's likely to get this year. The action is realistic and the graphics detailed GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY  MACHINES: CBM64/128/ SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD CPC a half pipe. Push the joystick it or off the screen. Any error SUPPLIER: EPYX back and forward to gain and you'll wipe out. Scoring's PRICE: .99 (SPEC/AMS) .99 momentum. When you've done by a beach party, holding (64) .99 (DISCS) gained enough speed to fly up up cards and giving inane grins.  VERSION TESTED: CBM64/128 over the lip of the pipe move the Two to go; BMX biking and REVIEWER: JOHN joystick diagonally to perform flying disc that's discus to an aerial turn which spins you you and me. The bicycle I'm off to join those craaazy folk in the air and puts you back on motorcross takes place on a in California and it's all the fault the board facing the opposite course choked with jumps, of those Epyx people. They've direction. bumps, dips, tyres and slippery got me hooked on surf, You might also like to try a bits. The usual joystick skateboards and BMX bikes, hand plant when you plant your directions apply but, if you go and I've not even been near the hands on the pipe and flip the too fast and try to twist the front place yet. board over your head. wheel of your bike around There are some radical You might also like to try a something like a tyre, you'll fall pastimes here: half pipe hand plant when you plant your over. skateboarding, foot bag kicking, hands on the pipe and flip the By comparison flying disc is surfing, roller skating and BMX board over your head. Naturally a doddle. bike racing. How refreshing, not I didn't do too well at that, I've At the end of the competition a ball or goal in sight. You can never been a contortionist. I did the awards ceremonies are compete in one or all these do better at the kick turn, held, new world records events or take the easy way out though. Just kick back at the announced and trophies and go for practice. pipe and flip your board around You can make a choice of the so, yet again, you're facing in competition events one the other direction. some, or all. There are six, On to foot bag, a wimpy some of them stored on the game in which you keep a second side of the disc, so juggling bag in the air with your you're spoilt for choice. toes, soles, knees and head. I'm A sidewalk above the beach reliably informed that the real forms the roller skate obstacle thing's painful, but you'll be course. To glide forward pleased to hear, that it's only waggle the joystick left and your fingers that are likely to right to make your feet move. drop off as you move your As you pick up speed you're player around the screen. faced with cracks in the If foot bag bouncing isn't your pavement, bouncing beach scene, go down to the beach balls, banana skins, slippery and try surfing. It seems easy at patches, ramps, clefts and, to first. All you've got to do is stay cap it all, a seagull that on top of the wave when it performs a squawking fly past. breaks and ride it in. Don't flip Skate boarding takes place in over the top, disappear behind "


"G+VG statististati A EHF  MACHINES: SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD/C64 SUPPLIER: GREMLIN PRICE: .99 (SPEC) .99 (AMS) .99 (64) .99 (DISCS)  VERSIONS TESTED: SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD/C64 REVIEWER: JOHN As street vigilante Paul Kersey you've gotta have guts to relieve the street gangs and muggers of theirs. You take the role that Charles Bronson made famous, along with a pledge to rid the city of scum. The city is displayed in 3D. You can point your man at any compass point then run him along the screen street in either direction firing past the punks who carry knives, machettes, guns, lead piping and choppers You've got a choice of four weapons, including an automatic pistol, machine gun, rifle, sawn-off shotgun and bazooka, each of which has a REVIEW SCOPE -7639 H5CERE + TER PINORTHEAST RLOT IN LAREA PRORTH HESTEA BROTHIN AREA window targets are almost double that of street shots, so it often pays to enter as many buildings as you can. mainly be concerned with shooting the punks. On occasions the little old ladies also get in on the vigilante act. constant stabbing, hammering or shooting by gang members. The injury status display creeps slowly from green to yellow and DEATH WISH III limited amount of ammo. If one of the guns runs out of bullets or missiles it's discarded and you must enter buildings and find new weapons. The buildings comprise of several rooms and offer opportunities to make bonus points. You can look out of a window onto the street, line your gun sight and blow away more villains. The points for Always remember that the bad guys are the ones carrying weapons and not wearing blue uniforms. If you blow away a little old lady or pulp a policeman, points are taken away from your total and you could end up with a minus score. Once you've hit a policeman, you've clearly broken the law and they'll start to fire at you, although they'll They use their handbags, no then to red. doubt filled with bricks, to bash Despite the violent nature of muggers over the head. Go to it Death Wish III, the game is grannie. technically excellent with The streets also contain brilliant graphics and a three characters which confuse your channel sound track from the line of fire. The prostitutes, for film's title music. Some of the instance, raise their skirts in the screens show graphic gore and hope that you'll pay more lewdness, particularly on the attention to them than to their Commodore version, but no bosses. You may think the men doubt others will pass in white coats who walk on judgement on this Gremlin title when you've blown away three probably without seeing it of more punks are there to first. So, all I will say is that it's confuse you, but the opposite is an excellent game which is true. They're there to pull the shockingly realistic! bodies off the screen, and a good job they do of it too. Spectrum C64 You may think you're GRAPHICS invincible with all that armour SOUND and a bullet proof vest to boot, VALUE but you can be killed by PLAYABILITY mo C+VG HIT! MUSIC DEATHSHIR? 000 TOESCOLEGIO 5CQRE -3832 INJURY DEATHLESH TI 1907 005 "


"JEFFREY ARCHER NOT A PENNY MORE, NOTA PENNY LESS THE COMPUTER GAME Published by Atari ST CBM 64 Amstrad CPC Spectrum 48 Spectrum 128 BBC B & Master We have had our money stolen by a very clever man. Gentlemen I therefore suggest we steal it back. Each of you must return with a plan of how we are to extract $1,000,000 from him without his ever becoming aware of it. NOT A PENNY MORE, NOT A PENNY LESS\" DOMARK Scripted by: Robin Waterfield. Programmed by: Imagitec Design Ltd. Domark Ltd., 22 Hartfield Road, London SW19 3TA. 01-947 5624. "


"C+VG INFORMATION If you select this icon a window will open presenting you with three futher sub-icons. By choosing one of these you will be presented with the latest intelligence reports on each country's status in three vital areas, food, resources, missiles. REVIEWS situations, some serious, some not so serious. Each country will be in MACHINES: SPECTRUM/ regular contact with you for AMSTRAD/C64 advice, guidance or approval of  SUPPLIER: MARTECH their actions. You must learn PRICE: .95 (TAPE), .95 when to give way, when to be (C64 DISK), .95 (AMSTRAD DISK) firm and when to compromise.  VERSION TESTED: SPECTRUM A country which becomes REVIEWER: TIM unstable is much more likely to be unreasonable or aggressive Armageddon out of here! The towards both you and any other world is a dangerous place and countries it has poor relations I've been put in total charge of with. it! Talk about mind-boggling AIM TWO: Promote good it's even worse than running the working relationships between C+VG office! each individual country and Martech's newie is a strategy each of its 15 fellow UNN game which you'll either love or members. hate. There's no real actionAIM THREE: Achieve but it will tax your patience and economic stability. test you diplomatic skills to the Each country has two max. principle needs, FOOD and Like Catch 23 it's a big game RESOURCES. If a country has a but this time not big in terms deficiency in either of these it's a complex simulation. And areas it will be less stable. It will although it's supposed to be set also be seeking to gain any far in the future some of the shortfall from other countries, scenarios you come across are either by coercion or trade. You horribly close to the present. must keep an eye on each Playing the game is like Risk country's resources and as far or Diplomacy in reverse as possible try to allocate them instead of looking after the fairly or in whatever way you COMMUNICATION This icon is divided into IN and OUT. Choose the IN icon you can look at letters that countries send to you. Choose the OUT strength of each country icon a menu of standard letters involved and further to that, on that you can send to countries who attacked who. will appear. They do little damage in SATELLITES: Choice of this themselves but if they are not icon will display the satellites Over quickly, they tend to which are available. By moving escalate into nuclear war. the cursor over a satellite and If one country launches a pressing FIRE you pick the missile or missiles at another satellite up. Move the cursor country, you will see the over the World Map to position missiles tracking towards their the satellite in geo-stationary targets on your world map. At orbit and press FIRE to release this stage, it will be too late for your to move your SDI satellites RADIO: The world's airwaves to shoot them down. If you did are alive with radio not spot the conflict coming and transmissions which originate did not cover it with your from each of the 16 UNN satellites, then all missiles member countries. The launched will strike their information carried by these targets. Armageddon Man DN interests of one country you have to babysit the whole world! Which makes it a bit of an aquired taste. The year is 2032, there are 16 nuclear superpowers and the world is balanced on a knife edge. To prevent disaster they have formed the United Nuclear Nations and appointed a Supreme Commander to oversee the economies, technological development and weaponry of these nations. The Supreme Commander, that's you, sits high above the world in a space station codenamed Olympus, collecting information and reports via a network of defence and intelligence satellites. You are the Armegeddon Man, in control of the destiny of the Earth. Your task is to prevent Armageddon. How you achieve this is up to you! There are three main aims. AIM ONE: Achieve a good working relationship with each individual country. There are 16 member countries of the UNN. Each country has its own political system. its own problems, its own aims and most importantly its own personality. The only thing they all have in common is a desire not to be destroyed. You must learn how to deal with each country in different A side effect of any nuclear conflict is an increase in the level of radioactivity in the FEPO4 Earth's atmosphere. It is not necessary, therefore, for every country in the world to START be destroyed for Armageddon STORE4 to occur. A large scale nuclear war between two countries ony may still release enough lethal radioactivity into the atmosphere to kill the entire EXECUTE population of the world. As you can see you've got a lot on your plate if you decidet become the Armageddon Man. I went for a total nuclear disarmament policy but before I could get rid of all the missiles Japan and Lybia decided out of the blue to have a little conflict! No feel is appropriate given the transmissions may provide you warning at all. prevailing conditions. The with invaluable informaton. Then I attempted to start a big extent to which you are able to Wars come in two types, conflict by doing stupid things control the movement of conventional or nuclear. and suddenly got fired! resources will depend largely Conventional wars are punitive. Armageddon Man is a on your relationship with each In such a conflict both sides thought provoking and well put country involved and also on realise that due to the together game but you'll their relationship with each enormous advances in weapon have to be a strategy or other. technology it is virtually wargame fan to enjoy it to the AIM FOUR: Achieve military impossible for either side to full. stability. win. However, they can ease the GRAPHICS Some countries may be tension between two countries, SOUND naturally more aggressive, but whether this happens VALUE others more peaceful. However, depends entirely on the relative PLAYABILITY of paramount importance to a country is its own security. N/A "


"REVIEWS Rebel good idea from Virgin's Dan Dare and incorporated it here the C64 version anyway. Waste not want not! If you remember the laser/ reflector game in Dan Dare you'll get my drift. Still, in this game you find yourself inside a tank attempting to blast your way out of the many different complexes which make up the farm and head for freedom. To escape you have to use the farm's solar reflectors to open doorways -deflecting the beam by placing reflectors in the right place/combination, THX2240 breaks into the armoury and steals a one person mobile Crowd Control Vehicle, she makes her bid for freedom. In the agricultural block, giant solar conductors are used to provide artificial sunlight for the crops during spells of bad of the outermost compound appear to start from the point weather. The solar beams are and join the rebels. you entered the level. 'bounced to their destination All the compounds are There are 13 levels to points by directable glass heavily patrolled by police penetrate before you can finally reflector stations. Obviously, if surveillance machines. Contact a beam were to be fired in the with any of these will mean It is easier to collect all the wrong direction, the results immediate termination. reflectors on a level, clearing could be lethal. You must collect reflectors on paths as you go. The agricultural block is split each level while defending Rebel is a reasonably into separately enclosed yourself from attack. Once you entertaining game but it lacks compounds, each of them have explored the level you are any sense of urgency and the joined by sealed exit tunnels. on and found the sealed exit, thrill power that will get you Using the CCV, THX2240 will you must strategically place coming back for just one more be able to turn the reflector and position the reflectors go. stations so that they guide the between the Solar Beam solar beam into the exit tunnels, Generator and the exit. Spectrum C64 shattering their seals! In this Turn the solar beam on to GRAPHICS way, there is just a slim chance blast your way through the exit SOUND that she could escape to to the next level. On each  VALUE freedom through the exit tunnel following level, the beam will PLAYABILITY  MACHINES: SPECTRUM/ AMSTRAD/C64  SUPPLIER: VIRGIN PRICE: .95 VERSION TESTED: C64 REVIEWER: TIM Meet the rebel WITH a cause. THX2240 a worker with a mission to escape from the mind-crunching tyranny of the factory farm! Someone has been watching George Lucas films here I reckon. And someone has also rescued a  MACHINES: BBC/B+/MASTER SUPPLIER: SUPERIOR SOFTWARE PRICE: .95 (TAPE), .95 (DISK) VERSION TESTED: BBC REVIEWER: NICKY Codename Droids Codename Droid is the sequel to Stryker's Run, which topped the BBC charts last year although I personally found it a little disappointing. Anyway, our true-blue hero commander John Stryker is back, this time to tackle the mysterious planet Volga. His mission is to penetrate the underground defence systems to locate and purloin a new secret spacecraft. The nice thing about the Superior at its best is that storylines actually mean something, thanks to the usually excellent graphics. Codename Droid is no exception. The graphics are really first class, with superb colour and good sound. The things that disappointed me in Stryker's Run first time round have been put right there's fast action and lots of it. At the start, ten fingers don't seem enough our agile Biggles of outer space can run, jump, kneel, crawl, shin up and down ropes, and use lifts to get around. He can also fly for short distances using a jet pack, He can blast aliens to bits, lay mines, and use his wrist computer to keep a wary eye on suit shield and blaster energy. This stirring action takes place in a series of caves divided into four zones surface defence, ancient shrine, crew's quarters and the missile factory. Each zone is heavily defended by Volgan soldiers. But someone has thoughfully left various useful objects lying around to be picked up, like fuel cells, jet packs and microfilm cassettes You must also find the four plutonium rods and navigation rom so you can power and fly the ship. The controls take some getting used to, but stick with it it's worth it. There's lots going on and plenty of imaginative features to keep you going for a good long time. Definitely one to add to your collection. Hacker Oh no, not again! This is the instinctive reaction to the opening screen of The Hacker. OK, I know it's hard to come up with anything mind blowingly original these days, but if you're going to stick with tried and trusted formats, you need that little extra something — like speed, imaginative graphics, wide awake sound, a touch of class. And I'm afraid The Hacker just hasn't got it. You have control of a sprite that travels through the telephone network. Being the age of high tech, he moves from modem to modem. So off he goes, climbing along different levels, using moving walkways, avoiding obstacles, picking up five floppy disks along the way. There's a time limit to each screen, with 12 in all before he reaches the CPU and the main file store. There to rifle data at his leisure, one supposes. Keys are right, left and jump. Key response is not exactly instantaneous and it's easy to make mistakes. Graphics and sound are basic, although the animation is not bad. You've seen it all before.  GRAPHICS SOUND  VALUE PLAYABILITY C+VG MACHINES: BBC/ELECTRON SUPPLIER: FIREBIRD PRICE: .99 VERSION TESTED: BBC REVIEWER: NICKY  GRAPHICS SOUND VALUE PLAYABILITY GOO "


"WHEN YOUR World is UNDER ATTACK Without doubt, the FASTEST multi-SCREEN SCRolling GAME EVER IMPLOSION will defy completion by EVEN THE MOST ARDENT GAME PLAYER. 8 levels of 360° scrolling action. Arcade siyle multi-colour Graphics.\" Dual play field, Arcade style multichannel sound . CONCEIVED and CREATED IN ASSOCIATION with Mindscape Inc effecps COMMODORE 64 DISK.....95 COMMODORE 64 CASSETTE.....95 SPECTRUM 48/128 CASSETTE.....95 1-3 HaywRA CRESCENT, HARROGATE, HGI SBG, England. Tel: (0423) 525325 Telex: 265871 MONREF C OOTING 72: MAG31320 CASCADE Screenshots are taken from the God version "


"Tony Takoushi, C+VG's Hot Gossiping megamouth, has discovered the meaning of life. Has he found religion or uncovered the joys of contemplation? No, he's discovered Backlash and Damocles, Novagen's follow-ups to Encounter and Mercenary. TT sings the praises of Paul Woakes, the brain behind both games. Woakes 0123456789 ARENA hh! Paul Woakes. What are with is as though you were sitting you doing to me!!! in a tank looking out from a Few people give meaning window. to life when it comes to playing the landscape that I saw was a games but Mr Woakes is one of desert with a misty almost surreal the few people I would call a horizon where you could move in genius in his field. all directions, the illusion of His field is 3-D graphics, and movement was very fast, the his previous games Encounter ground which has solid lumps and Mercenary are in a universe strewn over it just slides away of their own. under you, and objects come at That was THEN this is NOW you with a real smooth and solid and his latest two games feel, it makes you just want to currently under development are reach out and touch them. Encounter Mk 2 (titled Backlash) The aliens already in the game and Damocles, the follow up to include a menacing eyeball that Mercenary. comes at you from a distance and Honestly, I know I rave a fair opens slowly to spy on you thenbit but these two games will take zoom away your breath away This is beautifully animated and Backlash is a full blown Solid typical of the classy presentation 3-D tank type game. You are of the game. placed in various landscapes and You can also fire missiles to have to take on various nasties destroy alien targets, these This is done by zipping around missiles fly out from under you taking out real mean looking alien and when they hit a target it gunge. explodes and showers debris Each level of the game places beautifully around you. you in a sector and you have to Again the animation and brake battle you way to a hole in the up is incredibly realistic, its as sector walls that surround you. If though you are watching a war you reach and manage to get film with shells blowing up through the hole. you warp to the around you. next level. Your bullets have gravity on The view you are presented them as do various objects in the 8123456789 ARENA 8 game, the use of gravity is original and applied with a strong sense of gameplay, your bullets can be directed with gravity to encircle and disperse over a wide area to attack a variety of aliens. There are also little alien bases that have strong centres of gravity and these can divert your bullets and in some cases cause them to cycle around in decreasing circles. You are limited to 16 bullets on screen at any one time, if you can call that a limitation! There is also a fountain type object that throws out glitzy little diamonds around you, this has yet to be implemented in the game as an aid or hazard. Which ever it turns out to be it will stun you. It is gorgeous to look at The graphics are colourful and a delight to the eye, the use of 3D is done to perfection and sound 8123456789 ARENA "


"of Genius 8123456789 ARENA effects just add to the illusion of reality The final version will feature around 40 aliens with a tasty control panel. The game will also feature strategy elements, SO mindless zapping is only half the story. The game should hopefully be finished around PCW time in late September (costing .95) and will ONLY be available for the ST. ARE YOU LISTENING TO ME ST OWNERS? Put some meaning back into your life and go out and buy this game ... I am a sucker for a classy bit of software and Damocles (Mercenary 2) fits the bill perfectly. It follows on from Mercenary-Escape from Targ where you have taken off into space and new adventures await you. All the original Mercenary fans will be pleased to hear that you can load your status from a previous game this will give you a flying start in the new adventure. The scene is set, Damocles is a massive comet racing towards impact with the planet Eris, the fifth in its solar system. Your point of arrival is in orbit around Eris and you have a few hours left before the planet is destroyed. The game is played out in real time so the heat is on the solar system is vast and has nine planets, 19 moons and space stations galore to explore. The game is not finished but I was able to see some of the space and planet sequences. Just what can I say? It is so atmospheric, the light and shading effects from the central sun on to the planets makes me swoon. MORE, MORE, MORE! Forget NASA. Forget flight D A MO CLES sims, forget sci-fi movies. This is as close as you will get in your lifetime. You can fly through the crescent of a moon, ease through the back of an eclipse, zoom at heart-wrenching speeds into a planet, only to see its buildings slowly take form below you WOW! The final version will have a starfield and the space stations will be wireframe. Again the emphasis will be on arcade action AND strategy thus satisfying both urges. It is being written on the ST (priced .95) with conversions to Commodore/Spectrum and Amstrad 8-bit machines to follow. Damocles has still got a fair bit of work to be done on it so it is unlikely to be ready for the PCW show, more likely around Christmas time. So you will just have to wait eagerly for it. It is actually worse for me, I have SEEN it, but I cannot play it. all I can do is D-R-E-A-M. Hurry up Mr Woakes, we are waiting for you ... DAM OCLES D A MOC LESUID A MOC LES "


"3 lg g w do S DOUBLE SCORE  DOUBLE DOUBLE WORD SCORE WORD SCORE DOUBLE WORD SCORE DOUBLE DOUBLE   DOUBLE SCORT SCORE vi ozSCORE WORD SCORE DOUBLE SCORE  DOUBLE WORD icone SCORE DOUBLE WORD SCORE DOUBLE LETTER SCORE    DOUBLE DOUBLE SCORE WORD SCORE DOUBLE DOUBLE score  e A, L, T, E, R, N, A, T, I, VE, SCRABBLE DISTRIBUTION WORD SCORE DOUBLE DOUBLE LETTER SCORE WORD SCORE DOUBLE WORD SCORE oovit SCORE DOUBLE DOUBLE WORD SCORE DOUBLE BLANK SCORE DOUBLE LETTER SCORE DOUBLE SCORE RIGHT SCORE DOUBLE WORD SCORE DOUBLE WORD SCORE DOUBLE DOUBLE WORD SCORE SCORE DOUBLE SCORE RABBLE esent COMPUTER Genisyre. SCRABBLE DE LUXE CPPPPPIES IT'S ON THE TILES. Leisure Genius presents this classic word game elegantly translated to computer. SCRABBLE is available for most home computers and now a new De-luxe version is available for Commodore 64/128, Spectrum 128 and Amstrad CPC6128 Computer SCRABBLE faithfully follows the board game rules and has a large vocabulary. The computer provides you with intelligent computer opponents, a clock and 8 skill levels. Spectrum 128 cass.95 disc .95 Amstrad CPC 6128 disc only .95 Commodore 64/128 cass.95 disc .95 Name Address Please make cheques or postal orders payable to Virgin Games Ltd and send to 2/4 Vernon Yard, Portobello Road, London W11 2DX. (Please do not post cash) SCRABBLE Trade Mark and Copyright licensed by J.W. Spear and Sons PLC. Leisure Genius is a registered trademark of Winchester Holdings Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary of Virgin Games Ltd. ard. Leisure Genius "


"IDEASI CENTRAL EAGLES NEST Isn't it typical! After thinking Summer has arrived, what happens ... rain for three weeks. Never mind, just think of me as I'm laying on some sun drenched beach for the next two weeks — 'cos I'll be thinking of you. But just because I'm off for my annual hols, it doesn't mean you have to stop sending in your maps tips etc. Keep sending them to Melissa R, I.C. HQ, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London; EC1R 3AVU. ATRIST Someone who heard my plea for help was The Falcon. He sent in some tips for four games on the ST. Arkanoid: when the game loads, press CAPS LOCK and the type the word Deathstar. Start the game and now you can simply press the S key to jump to the next screen. You can do this right through to the final screen. Rogue: when your saved character is loaded in, quickly remove the character disk and put a blank disk in. This prevents your saved character being deleted from the disk after it is loaded in. Saves time loading, too. Ultima: when you first starta character, allocate most of you points to Agility. Then you can steel most of the useful equipement-phasers and food without being caught. Airball: The spellbook is in the room with the candle. You have to pick up and remove the blocks to get it. Take the Spellbook back to the start screen and drop it in the top left corner and follow the instructions to get the ingredients to complete the game. But, where's the Budha and the beads. Stuart Henny and Garry Sinclair of Fife have these tips for Micronaut One and Star Raiders II. First up is Micronaut. Collect the small clouds with float about the tunnels as they increase your energy. Destroy all of the webs. This is done by shooting the grey blob at the base of each one. Don't shoot the eggs. It wastes too much energy. Only attend to the Etus when they are at danger or critical, otherwise you waste time. The other objects you see in Spyke of Switzerland sent in 62,202,205,180,234,33, these pokes for Eagles Nest 241,130,16,241,130,1, and Green Beret in the 230,2,6,2,176,205,180, Spectrum after reading Mr D 234 Kong's pleas in IC HQ in 120 DATA 33,241,130,16, August. 6,4,156,1, 36,0,236,176, 10 REM EAGLES NEST 33,7,3,156,34,100,156, HACK SPYKE INC. 33,83 20 LOAD \"\"CODE: POKET 130 DATA 165,34,88,156,3, 8714,24 4,93,156,62,195,33,96, 30 FOR N=58833 TO 58845 255,50,102,156,34, 103, : READ A: POKE NA: 156,195 NEXT n 140 DATA 64,156,221,33, 40 FOR n=58403 TO 1e9 1,93,234,221,229,51,51, READ A: IF a 256 THEN 237,79,195,193,234,237, POKE na: NEXT n 95,175 50 RANDOMIZE USR 58368 150 DATA 119,237,160,224, 60 DATA 245,62,228,221 59,59,232,13369 188,40,3,221,117,0,241, 200 DATA 49,95,255,221,3, 24,144 3,144,16,16,0,205,230,1, 70 DATA 50,31,143: REM 32,221,33,0,64,237,91,19, INFINITE AMMO 193,133,33 80 DATA 50,59,148: REM 210 DATA 88,132,34,86,13, INFINITE KEYS 2,205,103,131,165,50,10, 90 DATA 50,180,160: REM 1,28,50,11,128,253,33,58, INFINITE HITS 92,62,201 100 DATA 50,10,156: REM 300 DATA 33,0,0,34,179,1, NO EXPLOSIVES DEATH 62,34,181,162: REM 110 DATA 195,0,128,999: INFINITE LIVES REM DATA END 310 DATA 50,254,173: REM MARKER NO MINES POKE FOR GREEN BERET 320 DATA 50,115,180: REM 10 REM GREEN BERET NO MORTOR POKE SPYKE INC. 330 DATA 50,245,180: REM 20 CLEAR 59999: LET t=0 NO MOTOR FIRE 30 FOR N=60000 TO 60106: 340 DATA 50,14,164: READ a: POKE na: LET REM SPEED t=t+a: NEXT : READ A; 350 DATA 50,68,175: REM IF tea THEN PRINT NO BULLETS FIRED \"Data Error\": STOP 900 DATA 195,0,128,999 4 0 FOR N=65376 TO 1e9 Someone having a lot of READ a: IF a-999 THEN problems with Spectrum POKE na: next n games is P F Burman of 50 PRINT \"Play Tape\": Lincoln. One game in RANDOMIZE USR 60000 particular is causing him 100 DATA 221,33,203,92, aggro. Can you help? 1,7,186,6,62,255,55,205. The game is ACE. No 86,548, 241,243,33,353, matter how he tries to read the 94,17 code letter with the lens 10k, 110 DATA 195,130,1,20,3, he can never get the code. get in your way. Don't waste energy shooting them. The first three levels are the tunnels of Ceres, the tunnels of Ganymede and the tunnels of Phobos. Now for Star Raiders 11 Clear one planet of Zylons. Either Teris or Imbri and forget about the others. Destroy any Zylon squadrons that come anywhere near your planet. Warp to the Zylon universe and destroy the alien bases. Keep those ST-and Amigatips coming! "


"DEAS CENTRAL more successful than shooting before you pick up your directly at a ghost. existing energy by clearing the Occasionally, you will enter screen of ghosts before you a room which has a recharger, pick up the recharger. In this but you don't particularly need way you will have maximum it as you will have plenty of energy for the next screen. It shots remaining. is impossible to re-enter a In this case it is better to use screen you have just left, so up your existing energy by make sure you collect all the clearing the screen of ghosts objects before you leave. PHANTOM HEAD OVER HEELSI HINTS AND TIPS h e reaches the bottom right, and rum. Here are some general tips for This means that you can Phantom on the Atari 800 usually wait safely in the Simon Stokes of Birmingham. middle of a room while the following on from last month's block and jump onto it. Remember where the ghosts circle you, following the tips for Head Over Heels, Warning-do not touch the ghosts on each screen. Two walls. Daniel Hargreaves, of floorit kills on contact! ghosts will appear in each An important factor to London, has sent in some Move to the edge of the area and they tend to remember is that your reactor more of the solution. block and jump onto the materialise at the ends of only has limited energy and After taking the exit right dalek's head. Then jump corridors. due to the fact that rechargers from the fish/drum room, again onto the conveyer belt, All ghosts follow general are very rare, it is important youwill find yourself in the go along it, and you've got the rules of movement. They will not to waste shots. The best room containing the bag. Go bag. change direction only when tactic for shooting ghosts is to left until you are behind the From there, jump three they bump into object such as fire a beam of energy directly black knob. Push right and times, then jump from the keys, walls, doors and other into their path so that they you will see the dalek move block onto the bricks and ghosts. walk straight into it. This if far towards the bottom right of the leave the room. You're now in screen. Move the dalek until the room with the fish, table he reaches the bottom right, and rum. then move heels so that he is Get the drum, jump onto the Two brothers who normally 60 DATA141,39,107,206,32, facing the control stick with his table and get the fish. Get off send their pokes to other rags 208,76,80,0 back towards the left of the the table and push it towards have decide they want to see screen. the upper exit. their names in the best Army Moves-code for the Push up and hold the Once done jump onto the magazine around. So all you second part is 15863 joystick in the up position until table, drop the drum and leave Commodore owners see if the dalek is on the square the room. In the next room there are any pokes below for Mario Brothersenter this directly beneath the bag. dodge the homing robot and you favourite games. Thanks listing and type RUN. Press Move heals so that his back is jump onto the table, drop the Sean and Adrian Meads, alias play and this will give you facing the bottom right of the drum and leave the room. In The Nutcrackers UK, of infinite lives. screen, his face against the the next room dodge the Basingstoke. 2 SYS65371 control. Then push left and homing robot and jump onto Wizball Infinite lives 3 FORI=532296T053256: make the dalek push block to the lift in the room above, 10 FORI=53229T053258: READA:POKEI,A:C=C+A: the second square from the KELA:C=C+A: the second square from the leave by the door. READER:POKEI, NEXT;IFC=3204THEN top left brick. In the next location drop A;C=C+A:NEXT SYS53229 Move Heels around to the down from the doorway and 20 IFC=2999THENSYS 4 PRINT'ERROR IN DATA back of the corner, his back go up, avoiding the crate 53229 RECHECK.\":ENDS should be facing the shield on thingies. In the room with the 30 PRINT\"ERROR.\":END 5 DATA198,157,1690,162,1, the wall. two rums, push one drum in 40 DATA32,44,347,32, 168,32,186,255,32,189, Push right until the dalek is front of the upper exit, get the 108,245,169,9,141,61 255,32,213,255,169,208 on the square just in front of other drum, jump onto the 50 DATA4,169,208,141, 6 DATA141,146,4,96,14,0 the conveyer belt. Move Heels drum in front of the door, drop 62,4,76,99,3,169,96 42,76,3,1 onto the top left brick, face the the drum and leave the room STORMANCE MOX TIDS Vijay Rao (that's him below) yet!! Then get the chicken and And here Mr Anon answers Here are some tips for the and three fellow MSXers have wait for it to lay a golden egg. Richard Williams plea for help MSX from someone who sent in these hints for Now using the \"take an o n Knight Tyme. First get the doesn't want to give his name. Stormbringer. object\" command on Robin glue and the I.D. card, next get I thought you weren't First get the disguise which and take the newspaper from the camera off the table on the supposed to be embarrased is on first screen. Don't wear it him. He will exchange it for the last screen to the left. Now owning an MSX nowadays? golden egg. \"unwear\" your invisible cloak Read the newspaper and it and take the instant film off Journey to the Centre of the will say chambermaid, guard Gordon, give the camera and Earth — Password for part two etc, wanted. Wear your film to Klink and command him DECENT part threedisguise for the person. You to help. Klink takes a photo, ADRIFT and part fournow go to the entrance of the take if off him. If everything RETURN castle and enter. In the first has been done correctly then room of the castle fall into the you shold now have an Flight Deck-keep resetting hole where the stairs meet. accident with the glue and the game until the smallest Pick up both objects there and card, sticking the photo and island is on the map, it's teleport. You will now be in making the I.D. card valid. easier to photograph. limbo Wear it. "


"DED Le REAL ARCADE ACTION AT ITS BEST! STARLIGHT SPECIAL FEATURES The year is 2379: Earth's vant resources are finally running out (again). You must bridge the path to the much needed matter supplies, using three ZMX all-purpose battle-droids to link up the vital cosmic-interface grid.  Pal 30 mooth scrolling action 37 different landscapes Bonus levels. Teleport pace and enemy generator Graphics by Pete James Sound FX by Tony Crowther. C64/128 cass .99 C64/128 disk .99 AMSTRAD cass .99 AMSTRAD disk .99 SPECTRUM .99 "


"SAR UNLEASH THE POWER OF YOUR "


"It's 7.00 in the evening. You've just finished another meal. You should do your homework but something is calling you from the garage. Something that would terrify the neighbours. Something agile, fast and deadly. Pegasus-the Patrol Hydrofoil Missilecraft. The temptation is just too much. PODSED SINESS ANY KEY TO CONTINUE the authentic handling of NATO ally hydrofoils: US, Italian and Israeli. 76mm water cooled naval gun, Harpoon and Gabriel missiles. LCTRONIC IRIS LCTRONIC RTS Sissi SKPERRISTS 8 real life missions and on-screen maps. Alus PEGASUS ELECTRONIC ARTS IR IMAGINATION. \" TM &  1987 Lucasfilm Ltd. (LFL). All rights reserved. Screen shots represent C64 versin Others may vary Electronic Arts software is available on a wide range of home computers including Commodore C64. Commodore Amiga, Atari ST, IBM, Spectrum and Amstrad. Electronic Arts. 11-49 Station Rd. Langley. Slough. Berkshire. SL3 BYN England "


"SEVEN NEW MIND BLOWING SIMULATIONS FROM SPEL STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS INC * FLIGHT SIMULATOR * B-24 * COMBAT SIMULATOR From the world's greatest creator of simulation software comes a further collection of outstanding challenges. Relive some of the momentous struggles that have changed the course of man's history; escape to worlds of Fantasy and mystery where lies the unknown or create your own encounters played out in time and place of your own choosing. These are the challenges in which you take complete control. B-24 From the war torn skies of World War Il emerged one legendary offensive weapon the B-24 bomber. This superb simulation allows you to recreate the exploits of this great aeroplane on single mission runs or a 19 mission campaign to destroy oil refineries in Ploetsi, Rumania. As pilot you control the mission Flight on a bombing raid from your home base in Italy: as group leader you command 40 B-24's on bomb runs to 14 targets deciding on when and where to bomb depending upon weather, plan availability, group efficiency and target oil production levels. A Flight and combat simulation of unparalleled quality CBM 64/128 .99 Cassette .99 Disk BLOESTI MER SCA B-24 \"The most realistic Flight simulation you're ever likely to experience\" RERIT TAROT The Wrath of Nikademus REILLES Laikmenys CHIRUMUGA WARGAME CONSTRUCTION PEBEL CHARGE AT CHICKAMAUGA is the definitive simulation of the Soth's last major offensive thrust the Battle of Chiclamaua This game fachly recreates the two day Beetle to give you the opportunity to try and repeat or reverse history, APPLE, ATARI, CBM 64 .93 Disk .99 IBM PHANTASIE N-THE WRATH OF NIKADEMUS Promises a spel-binding storyline with mough twists and turns to satisfy your wildest Fantasie This time the Bart Lord Nikades has seth sights on conquering not only an island but the entire world ATARI, AMIGA .99 REALMS OF DARKNESS Fame fortune and power. These are the spoils of victory for those who survive this incredibly challenging and mub-faceted fantasy adventure game CBM 64/128 .99 WAR IN THE SOUTH PACIFIC Three acting scenarios from the story mating and sea and air campaigns of May 1942 to March 1943 CBM 64/128, APPLE ATARI .99 BATTLE CRUISER Two hrating laring opportunities to relive the classic naval engagements of World War I between Great Britain and Germany and menact World War surface battles between Britain France and Germany Italy CBM 64/128. APPLE ATARI .99 WAR GAME CONSTRUCTION SET Break Free from all limits and constraints unleash your imagination and create your own role playing scenaries and battle sc h on modern fantasy or even plan sofi encounter as you struggle for control of the Stars CBM 64/128 ATARI .99 GOLD U.S. Gold Ltd.. Units 2/3 HolFord Way. Holford, Birmingham B6 TAX Telephone: 021 356 3388 Telex 337268 SET STRATEGIC SURES "


"TOPTEN TOP! GRAFFITI MPERPAN C+VG HIT! C+VG HIT! Fancy a trip to the Big Apple -all expenses paid? Bet you do! New York is THE place to see ace graffiti artists at work and new budget software specialists Top Ten want to take YOU to see their superb creations. How do you get there? Simple. Just create your own original piece of graffiti and enter the Top Ten National Graffiti Competition. The only restrictions on your creation are that it MUST include the Top Ten and C+VG logos somewhere about its person. You can either send us a photo of your work if it's too large to fit into a postbox, or simply send your completed artwork to Computer and Video Games, Top Ten Graffiti Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. The competition will run for three months and we'll print the best of the month in upcoming issues. The winner will be picked from the top three entries judged by C+VG and Martin Maynard, boss of Top Ten. Ten overall runners-up will get a complete set of Top Ten software for his/her computer. So if you're a spraycan supremo get busy with the paint and prepare to win yourself the chance of a trip of a lifetime! But don't forget to clip the coupon and send it with your photo or artwork otherwise your entry won't be eligible. C+VG/TOP TEN GRAFFITI COMPETITION Name Address Age Computer owned "


"NOW!  OFF TRADE ALL TRADE PRICES NOW! YOUR MICRO DESERVES THE BEST. When your home or business micro costs several hundreds of pounds, it deserves the finest repair facilities in Europe (well, probably!). And the finest prices  off trade rates for a limited period only. * How? At Verran we use our own range of advanced automatic test equipment (now sold worldwide), backed by stringent 2-8 hours soak-rack testing. That means speed, ultra-low prices and most important, guaranteed reliability. For the first three months we'll repair any fault free. For the next three, at half these quoted prices. * It's the finest service available. * Currently we handle over 3500 products on average every day. Providing services for such leading companies as Amstrad plc, Commodore Business Machines, Sinclair Research, Rank Xerox, Dixons, Currys, Boots, WH Smiths, John Menzies and many more. * Join them and take up our special offer now.   * SPECTRUM *COMMODORE 64 1:24 Mening * BBC B STD BRD * AMSTRAD 464 * ELECTRON AMSTRAD Recommended and Approved by ATARI ACORN SINCLAIR COMMODORE EUROPE'S LEADING COMPUTER REPAIR CENTRE ...AND UNBEATABLE DISCOUNTS ON ALL COMPONENTS!!! * With over ,000 worth of spares in stock, we can meet many of your specialised requirements. We've listed a few examples and for anything not displayed just call us and we'll quote immediately inclusive of first class post Keyboard Membrane Spectrum Spectrum Plus Metal Templates 3.00 SPECTRUM SPARES 280 CPU ULA 60001 Power Supply ROM 4116 RAMS ZTX 690 ZTX 213 COMMODORE SPARES 6510 Processor 6525 CIA 6581 Sid Chip 901225 Graphic ROM 901226 Basic ROM 901227 Kernal ROM 906114 House Keeper 6569 VIC 4164 RAMS Memory 12.00 12.00 15.00 10.00 10.00 15.00 10.00 18.00 1.00 Power Supplies 064 19.50 C16 15.00 All the above prices include VAT but please enclose a further  post and packing on all component orders. HOW TO CONTACT US *For quotes on computers not listed or on any component, telephone 0276 66266. (Quoting VID/107). * To send us your micro for repair mail it securely packed, accompanied by cheque, postal order (made out to Verran Micro Maintenance Limited) or quote your Access or Barclaycard number. And to obtain your special discount quote VID/107 Verran Micro-Maintenance Limited, Unit 2H & 2J, Albany Park, Frimley Road, Camberley, Surrey GU15 2PL. Telephone 0276 66266. "


"Preview The Future! PROJECT: STEALTH FIGHTER SEE US AT PCW, STAND 1511 MICROPROSE Stealth Fighter... the hottest topic of conversation in aviation PROJECT: STEALTH FIGHTER. Another brillant simulation circles today. Space Age technology and engineering make from MicroProse. Available for the Commodore 64/128K. these aircraft virtually undetectable by enemy radar. Cassette .95. Disk .95. Stealth Fighters are believed to be in operation, flying the most sensitive missions, flown by a superior class of pilot. You can experience that thrill of flying a revolutionary aircraft, previewing the edge of the future. SIMULATION SOFTWARE Please send -_ copy/ies of Project: Stealth Fighter CBM 64/128 Cassette .95 Disk .95 Further details. Name (block capitals) Address: _Post Code I enclose  including 55p P+P. Cheques payable to MicroProse Software Ltd. or debit my Access/Visa card. Expiry date. No. MicroProse Ltd., 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. UK. Tel: (0666) 54326. TIx: 43422 MPS/UKG. No. "


"STARLIGHT HYBRID HAVE YOU GOT WHAT IT TAKES! A complex and deeply developed strategy game brought together to generate the battleground of the future. HYBRID is a combination of superb graphics and original techniques to emulate those fevered imaginations hitherto found only in nightmares. HYBRID challenges your ability to master this superior space adventure. The superb detail and engrossing strategy is a feast for the imagination. SPECIAL FEATURES + OVER 200 ROOMS + MULTIPLE ROBOT MERGE FACILITY + WEAPON SILOS, POWER PODS, TELEPORT CONSULES + MULTIPLE FIREPOWER & ARMOUR CHACHETS C64/128 cass .99 C64/128 disk .99 AMSTRAD cass .99 AMSTRAD disk .99 SPECTRUM .99 "


"CENTURIONS COMPETITION Message from Ace McCloud to C+VG: Hi guys, this is Ace talking at you! I've heard that The Centurions are starring in a new computer game back on planet Earth. I think that's great. So great that I'd like to present a great competition for all your readers to enter. You'll find the details on your IDEAS Corp computer. So check it out NOW! ACE'S ACE CENTURIONS COMPETITION! Rock on with The Centurions and Ariolasoft. Yup, thanks to the A-Team we can offer two lucky C+VG readers the prize of a lifetime! We're giving away TWO tickets to ITV's top pop show THE ROXY. The winners will not only see the show but also get a look behind the scenes AND meet THE Roxy's top presenter David 'Kid' Jensen. The show is filmed in Newcastle and thanks to Ariolasoft you'll stay over in a flash hotel and all your travelling expenses will be met! Talk about generous! 10 second-prize winners will get one of the huge Centurion character models, like the Ace McCloud model on this page! 10 runners-up will get a copy of the Centurions game! All you have to do to win of these mega-prizes is answer the simple cartoon quiz below, fill in the coupon and rush it to Computer and Video Games, Centurions Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Closing date is October 16th and normal C+VG rules apply. Do it NOW! >QUOQUCOUP CENTURIONS CARTOON QUIZ 1. Name the two main characters in The Flintstones. 2. Complete the following cartoon catchline. \"ScoobyDo, where........?\" 3. Who is smarter than the average bear? 4. Name one of the renegade GOBOTS. 5. Who are Max Ray, Jake Rockwell and Ace McCloud? C+VG/ARIOLASOFT CENTURIONS COMPETITION Name Address Age My answers are: int "


"GET INTO CRIME! In the late 1990's the streets of New York are a jungle. You are the ice cool leader of a gang of drug crazed terrorists. Your main goal is to become the richest, toughest and most notorious gang in the city. DARE YOU PLAY. FREE OFFER un Saino 1 S ANGIN FREE! *** SEND YOUR NAME AND ADDRESS TODAY FOR YOUR FREE TRIAL OF IT'S A CRIME THE WORLDS MOST POPULAR PLAY-BY-MAIL GAME Write to:KJC GAMES, PO BOX 11, CLEVELEYS, BLACKPOOL, LANCS FY5 2UL. "


"Wayne's Play by Mail YOUR character's details put your are immediately on record for the other players promoted to Commander and to inspect. assume control of an X-71 There were one or two scout ship. things that I though weren't You know that the universe quite right about the rulebook. is divided into six time-space For a start there is no artwork areas which are called \"shifts\" inside it to make it more named A to F. Although no appealing. Secondly there is fighting takes place in Shift A the movement system which by unanimous planetwide leaves a lot to be desired agreement, fighting takes Another nice touch is the place in shifts B, C, E, and F, \"character folder\". This is with large fleets of Dreadyours to keep and again is noughts or Destroyers locked printed on high quality yellow in combat. card and has a neat bit of It is your task to travel artwork on the front. You around in your scout ship, enter all the details of your recruiting men and winning charcter, including his/her/its resources from various description, magic learned, planets, while at the same time history and equipment. building yourself a powerful A start-up package costs ship before returning to your .00 and future turns are homeworld with the minerals .00 each. The character and energy resources they so charts cost around 35 per print badly need. out. The game seems one for This game is ideal for those fairly experienced P.B.M.ers Time for some more mail domination with our of you who have considered who enjoy pitting their wits very own Wayne, the postman's friend. Tons playing a single character against the computer and are P.B.M., but have not yet tried good at analysing printouts. of stuff has been happening in the wacky world please contact: Anvil Games, Good diplomacy and tactics of Play by Mail — so let's get on with it! The Old Fire Station, Queen would also be an advantage in St, Godalming, GU7 1BD playing this game. nvil Games have final. The rulebook aslo tells you All cheques should be made Set up costs .00 and future A ly managed to officialabout the magic system — payable to the company rounds are a very reasonable ly release Pangea their which is easy to learn, the please. If you are one of the .00 per time. However any hand moderated, computer guilds, which are an essential first 50 C+VG readers who reader who writes to me at assisted, fantasy role-playing part of this game and your apply you will receive a free C+VG enclosing the logo P.B.M. and it has been worth skills, which you can choose. turn. above will be credited with waiting for I looked at the in depth STAR TROOPER two FREE turns worth .00. Anvil have come up with a description on how to comIf you are interested drop me a cracker of a start-up package. plete your turn, the lengthy, Talking of new games, line. Please make all cheques I'll be giving this game a full easy to read instructions on Mitre Games, one of the leadand postal orders payable to review in an up and comping how to create your character ing P.B.M. companies have Mitre Games. issue of C+VG. just launched their new game, The first thing that grabs ter charts\". This is a novel idea Starship Commander your attention is the A4 size that is particularly useful. Say This is a totally computer rule book. It's a high quality you are in a town and you moderated game and it is production and has very good wanted to know how many aimed at sci-fi fans. You are a artwork on the cover. The 72 characters in the same town captain of a starship flying pages are very easy to read worshipped the same diety as from planet to planet in search and it explains their system in you. All you have to do is send of resources which will enrich clear, simple English. a request to the G.M. and he your home world and increase The game history is well will send a printout. its power. planned out and you get the The G.Ms input all kind of Your home planet is inchance to play one of the 10 starts into the computer and it volved in an age-old struggle races available. This can be is there for you to take advanfor domination over a large anthing from a Goblin to a tage of. With the aid for this number of other planets. Each Dark Elf. computerized system, you will planet is striving for an advanThere's a choice of eight be able to get all sort of useful tage in either economic or character classes, from mage information. military areas which will boost to assasin. There is a lengthy. To go to the extreme, if you both status and power. if sparcely detailed, descripreally wanted to find out how You are called to the tion of each class, which inmany black haired, blue eyed Admiralty, and you are handforms you of SOME of your Goblins were in town, you ed a briefing cunningly disadvantages. You will be incould find out! guied as a rulebook from an formed of the others when you But there is a catch. If you admiral who seems familiar. have finally selected your wish to use this system, you Yes, folks it's universal class. must be prepared to have all domination time again! "


"Wanno Play 1 Games have come up with a still welcome. The start up run. I'm afraid that you joined great offer. They are offering costs .00 and consists of two a great game too late, Mr  A FREE start up free turns, rulebook and maps, Felly. Mitre have told me that A FREE rule book with further rounds costing they have re-worked StarmasThree FREE turns .50 and no hidden extras. ter and they are play testing it In their most popular game. Discounts are available when at the moment and hope to Key Of Bled for the price of an buying orders. Buy .00 re-release it by early summer Stamped Self-Addressed enworth of turns and you get one 1988. velope free turn. Urghbash The Orc is this If you write to me enclosing person for real?) from Kingsthe logo at the top of the page PBM MAILBAG bury, London, has scrawled a plus an S.S.A.E. all this can be Mr M. Felly from Bristo note on a piece of toilet roll yours. Spellbinder believe in a writes to say that \"About a asking me to \"Send him some try-before-you-buy policy and year or two ago I bought a information on P.B.M.\" Well they are so convinced that you P.B.M. called Starmaster. AfUrhgbash, just let me know are going to like their game ter only a couple of rounds I what kind of info you want and they are giving away all the was informed that the game I'll send it to you. I ask you above. was being wound up. I thought George McFadyen from GIZZA ANOTHER JOB! Tribes Of Crane is a game the concept of Starmaster was Orkney wants to know if it is Mitre inform me that they that has been around for a great could you please inform still possible to get involved in are looking for another four long time. Most of the experi me if it has ben re. C+VG's resident game people to run their games. The enced P.B.M.ers who have established?\" Domination. The answer is pay is not a king's ransom, but it been around for a long time If my memory serves me yes. Just write to Nice Dice job satisfaction is very high. h have cut their teeth on this correctly Starmaster was on of Games, PO Box 11, Carrick English Language and Literagame and quite a few of the Mitre Games Mega-games Fergus, Country Antrim, N. ture 'O' Levels would be a G.M.s that now run their own that everyone and I mean Ireland BT 38 7TH, and they help but are not essential essential games have played it at one EVERYONE was playing. will send you full details. Good handwriting is! Experiritime or another. Somebody eventually wonThat's it for this month. If ence in role playing games You are the captain of an the game and quite naturally it you are going to the Personal would also be an advantage. interstellar Colony ship transcame to an end. Everybody Computer World Show at You would be expected to to porting a 2200 large group of was given credit in other Mitre Olympia, London any time work in South London. InIn Colonists to a newly discoGames or their money back between 23/27 September then terested? Then drop me a line vered and unexplored plant. when the winner was I will be at the C+VG stall care of C+VG and I will pass You are happily travelling announced. stand, giving away various it on. along in deep space when your Mitre then withdrew the P.B.M. material, and generaly ship receives an S.O.S. from game from the market to make having a good time. See you CRIME ON THE INCREASE! an unkown planet. You deit even better and easier to there! cided to go to the rescue. The C+VG version of It's A When you reach the planet Crime is now underway and as your radio and navigation sysI write The Mau Maus are top tems go dead. Then your realof the Noteriety Table. Over ise that you are being pulled 3000 potential C+VG Lawtowards the planet by a tractor breakers joined the game from beam. all over Europe and the UK You find yourself on the and are ready to wage gang planets surface uninjured but war. your ship is totally destroyed. The game is still open and as Y ou decide that rescue is only a couple of turns have unlikely and that you're going taken place it is as good a time to have to try and survive. to join as any. To get your FREE rulebook, FREE set up NEWS FROM NOVA and two rounds FOR NO. I have news for all ConTHING, simply drop me a line quest players. Nova Producwith the logo above telling me tions have written to me asking that you wish to participate me to inform you that they and I will do the rest have assumed control of the Remember the winner gets game. They, have re-designed the C+VG It's A Crime tro certain areas in order to make phy, plus a FREE position in the game more playable as another game of It's A Crime well as improving the turnarplus free rulebooks and round ound time. Steve Brunt, who in any one of K.J.C.'s other originally conceived Conquest, three games — Earthwood, is still running his version of Capitol and Craisimoff's the game, but he is doing this World. more or less as a hobby. Nova's version of Conquest WAYNE'S WONDER OFFER has been running for two The people at Spellbinder months and new players are 2 "


"FOR THE AMIGA STRATEGY MIRROR ADVENTURE SIMULATION FANTASY SINBAD BERMUDA PROTECT Uninvited BALANCE OF POWER ARRIE 1 WWIIGATO-Class Submarine Sektion 1. DEFENDER OF THE CROWN \"Defender of the Crown has set a standard that others will be hard pressed to meet.\" Computer and Video Games. $29.95 5. BERMUDA PROJECT COMING SOON Danger and adventure in the mysterious Bermuda Triangle. 10 9. GATO COMING SOON Take command of a GATO class World War Il submarine in this award-winning simulation. .95 2. SINBAD AND THE THRONE OF THE FALCON \"A game to challenge anything on the market at the moment.\" Personal Computer World. .95 6. UNINVITED *The game is a classic of the graphic adventure game... If you like adventures, you had better not miss Uninvited.\" Amiga User. .95 10. STRIKE FORCE HARRIER COMING SOON The most realistic simulation yet of flight and combat in one of Britain's most exciting fighter planes. 3. KING OF CHICAGO COMING SOON Pit your wits against the legendary Capone mob in a deadly battle for control of the Windy City. $29.95 7. DEJA VU Set in a sleazy underworld distinctly reminiscent of Raymond Chandler, Deja Vu is like no other adventure you've ever experienced. .95 The publishers reserve the right to alter prices and specifications without notice. Please check prices and availability before ordering. MIRROR Soft 4. SDI Features \"Top Gun' space combat with state-of-the-art flight simulator, romance, intrigue and heart-stopping action. .95 8. BALANCE OF POWER \"One of those games any serious games player cannot be without.' Popular Computing Weekly. .95 Mirrorsoft Limited Athene House, 66-73 Shoe Lane, London EC4P 4AB Telephone: 01 377 4645. Fax: 01-3530565 Telex: 9312100112 "


"HOW PIRANHA YOGI BEAR Hey Hey Hey! Are you smarter than the average bear? You'll need to be to get out of this one. Boo-Boo's been bear-napped and must be rescued before hibernation time, Hunters, mooses, vultures, bees, caverns, geysers as well as good old Ranger Smith are determined to stop you! Spectrum Commodore Amstrad Cassettes .95 Discs .95 THROUGH T Berk is back! Now you can actually explore the dark and nasty regions for yourself as you try to rescue your friend Boni, trapped in the murky depths. Along the way all sorts of creepy critters will try to spook you in exciting arcade action! Spectrum Commodore Amstrad Cassette .95 Discs .95 FLUNKY The Royal Family as they have never been seen before! This is your chance to work at Buck House as a menial manservant. Your job is to cater to the residents' every whim, but you'll need cunning, strong nerves and quick reactions if you are going to avoid a nasty end. Spectrum commodore Amstrad Cassettes .95 Discs .95 Coming soon for the Atari ST. "


"ATTACK! BOME VOF THE ROVERS Melchester Rovers is under threat of closure from greedy property developers. On the eve of a special celebrity match organised to save the club, Roy's team mysteriously disappears. Unless he rescues them he may end up facing the opposition alone! Spectrum commodore Amstrad Cassettes .95 Discs .95 Megacity is being terrorised by the Dark Judges Death himself and his cronies Fear, Fire and Mortis. They are dedicated to putting an end to life itself. As Judge Anderson you stand alone. Only your psychic powers and blazing gun can save Megacity! Spectrum commodore Amstrad Cassettes ,95 Discs .95 Powerful, manoeuvrable and deadly, the Gunboat under your command carries the most lethal waterborn weaponry to date. Deep in the complex maze of fjords and canal systems are your targets huge submarine pens. Your mission to seek and destroy! Spectrum commodore Amstrad Cassettes .95 Discs .95 For release schedules, please contact Helen Holland at the address below. Piranha games are available from all good stockists or, in case of difficulty direct from Helen Holland, Piranha, 4 Little Essex Street, London WC2R 3FL, Tel: 01-836 6633. "


"THE PATHWAY TO FEAR. 3 === 7 ROAD a ne naime SPECTRUM S7.05 COMMODORE $8.95 AMSTRAD 18951 of the game COMMODORE DISK 12.95 AMSTRAD DISK $14.95 Imagine Software 6 Central Street Manchester M25NS Tel. 061 834 3939 Telex 669977 Shiron Kaos ECTION S "


"the Big Screen 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Like all good rock 'n' roll HERE WITH A FISTFUL OF THRILLERS, legends, Valens came from a IT'S THE MAN THEY CALL THE poor and troubled UNTOUCHABLE. YES, WARDR. STREET background. There was his IS ON THE WARPATH ONCE MORE! biking hoodlum brother for example, who grew Chicago, 1931. A group of increasingly jealous as the journalists surround a money poured in. And like sharply dressed man. He all good legends, Valens died replies to their questions young, in the plane crash with a grin and they laugh. that killed Buddy Holly and He could be a boxer or a The Big Bopper. filmstar. He is, in fact, Al La Bamba is an Capone! affectionate telling of his Capone's corrupt influence brief life, an incritical biospread from speakeasys to pic, which needs more the police force itself. Only a dramatic content. Sure the man who was pure and brother is a no-goodnik, but determined could hope to Ritchie comes over as such a crush him, a White Knight creep, I sided with the biker who's name was Eliot Ness. when it came to the punch His team of hand-picked Extreme Prejudice: Hey boss is that boy readin' Crash. Yup, an' if up. Rock purists won't be too he holds still a while I'll plug him! investigators was known as pleased with the way that all The Untouchables! tough guys ever to match morality is all confused, so the songs have been reBlazing machine guns, macho against macho along he just loves his country, recorded either. brutal murders, shootouts the Tex-Mex border. They're Ya-hoo! Eight months, three hits and ambushes — director so tough that when one of I must confess an extreme and a plane crash in Brian de Palma has taken them sees a scorpion in the prejudice of my own against distinguished company are the gangbusting 50s TV desert he lets it crawl into movies like this. It has all just not enough to justify this series and blown it up into his hand, wander around for the political sophistication of sort of star treatment. What big-screen legend to create a a while, then crushes it! a Reaganite A-Team but about the corrupt managers, classic crime-thriller. This is all too much for rather less character the payola, the darker side of Newcomer Kevin Costner Nick, who has a way of The same sort of dusty, the music biz? La Bamba, is superb as Ness, facing a furrowing his brow that desert border country bred a the record, didn't rock hard corrupt and cynical police suggests a total absence of more peaceful hero back in enough for my liking force as he battles against intellect, so he concentrates 1958, when a 17-year-old neither does La Bamba, the the underworld. Sean on his Mexican girlfriend called Richard Valenzuela Connery excels as the and her ex-boyfriend and his picked up a guitar and Let's not give up on the streetwise cop who comes to ex-best pal, Powers Booth, a became a rock and roll star. became a rock and roll star. late-50s though, because in his aid, even if his Irish drug smuggler with a white As Richie Valens he The Big Town there's much accent drifts East, towards suit, a helicopter and an crashed the charts three more trouble as teenage dice Scotland! And Robert De army of Mexicans straight times in eight months, first player Matt Dillon finds out Niro immerses himself in the out of the Wild Bunch. with the rocker Come On when he joins a gambling role of Capone, switching Eventually everybody is Let's Go, then the dreamy syndicate run by Ferguson form merriment to murder in explained to Old Nick-and Donna, and finally his Edwards and her blind the twinkle of an eye. to us as one of the Vets version of the traditional husband. There's an epic struggle as announces that he can't get tune which gives the movie He's a small town kid, out the heroic band take on their to grips with a world where its title, La Bamba (15). to make good in the big city larger-than-life nemesis and by proving that he can shoot Ness loses his naivety as he The Untouchables starring Sean Connery and Andy Garcia. craps like no other. Now, sees his friends murdered. despite my wasted youth, I They don't make 'em like never learnt the arcane rules this any more, huh? Well, of the dice but no worry. I Ward makes it his movie of guarantee anyone will the month. understand enough to bring Extreme Prejudice (18), them out in a sweat as J.C. on the other hand, is just the rolls the big one. sort of thriller they do make Breaking the bank is bad all too often. Up to the enough if you're an upstart minute and bloody, it mixes from Hicksvillle, but when drug dealers, ultra-clean you mess around with the cops and even the elite squad local mobster's wife as well of Vietnam veterans. -brother, you're in trouble. Contemporary Texas Which is just what J.C. finds Ranger Nick Nolte takes on out. the meanest collection of If you liked Colour of ULLITUUUUUUU "


"1: The Big Screen Money you'll love this. The cast is superb with Dillon and Tommy Lee Jones, as the gangster, rolling particularly high. But it's the atmosphere that really sets it off. You can almost smell the sweat in those shady backrooms. Big Town isn't the biggest movie of the year — but it may be one of the best. Don't, whatever happens, bribe and she has to prosecute him, the big easy is threatened with a long time in jail. Did I care? Not one bit! Dennis Quaid's McSwain is such an arrogant sonnuva Cajun that I'd have been quite glad to see him go down the river. The script makes him reform eventually, but the turnabout comes too late. DODDI00000000000000000000000DDIT Outrageous Fortune: Now, here's a lovely model, only one careful owner. confuse The Big Town with McSwain has it all too easy The Big Easy (18). That's and it's as credible as an slang for the way of life in episode of Miami Vice. The another big town, New Big Easy should have been Orleans, where designer cop much harder. Remy McSwain treats life Still, I'd rather sweat it like a joke. out on a Mississippi So what if the Mafia chaingang than have the trashes a few of its own in a outrageous misfortune to sit private drug war a smile through Outrageous and a quip will set the Fortune (15) again. There's investigation underway at wacky and there's Hollywood its own leisurely pace. But wacky and this is the latter, the special prosecutor from a supposedly screwball the DA's office, Anne thriller that's devoid of Osborne, is investigating thrills and humour. police corruption and isn't Designed as a star vehicle too happy with Remy's for Bette Middler and flippant suppositions. Shelley Long it has them as Not that it worries Remy. acting students, unwittingly He turns on women like caught up with the CIA and radios and he soon has career KGB when the man who had minded Anne squirming in a been dating them both is semi-steamy sex scene. But apparently blown up in an when he's caught taking a explosion. Hope and Glory: We found a copy of Zapp under your bed. Explain yourself! Hellraiser: Smoking can seriously damage your health. Unluckily for Peter Coyote dogfight above the street; a he's not written out of the barrage balloon breaks free; script so early, and has to eventualy the family is suffer the indignity of a forced to evacuate to the manhunt as the two women countryside where the tale track him to New Mexico. takes on a more rural tone, Unless you're a fan of either but it's no more peaceful, of the stars I'd suggest you thanks to an irritable old make a run for it — far away grandfather. from this mishmosh! Hope and Glory is a If you're lucky you may gentle movie but it's never hide out in a cinema where nostalgic. Boorman views Hope and Glory is history with a sharp eye. showing. After the exotic However, he does find much dangers of The Emerald that's hysterically funny in Forest, John Boorman has episodes that made up his turned to perils of a much war and they're sure to hit more personal nature-his home with anybody who's memories of growing up in ever been young. A great London during the Blitz. British film which sees great The movie centres on the events in a personal light. Rohan family dad, who Clive Barker's Hellraiser enlists immediately to be (18) was made in London too, given a desk job; mum, though it tries hard to pretend it's New York. It fails! In fact, apart from some very grisly effects, it's difficult to imagine much being spent on this movie at all. The plot's as silly as you could hope for -a magic box which summons up sensual demons who take your very soul beyond the limits of sensation. It even vaguely resembles two recent horrors, Evil Dead II and From Beyond We've all seen it before and I, for one, don't Big Easy: Unfair cop. particularly want to be reminded of those bad-oldbringing up a family single days of schlock. Hellraiser handed; older sister Dawn ... no, it merely raised a who thinks that the war's a groan. great way to further international relationsAnd this is Prince Charles... with a Canadian soldier; younger sister Sue; and Bill, the nine-year-old hero. For Boorman/Bill, growing up in wartime is very much like growing up at any time, only more of an adventure. Nowadays kids play in shopping precincts; 40 years ago they played on bombsites. A Spitfire fights a "


"ESTARF:0. IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII 1.5 ... --Tud KEAKOK The eight planets of the Hyturian System are under attack by multitudinous, swarming, hordes of odious Star Thugs. There is but one hope. STARFOX. The most advanced fighting machine ever built. Unfortunately, so long is it since warraged within the System that all the old figher pilots are either senile, bedridden, or dead! What is needed is someone young, brave, and with a lust for action. In short, someone like YOU!!! Features you must be told about!  23 DIFFERENT WEAPONS  3D HOLOCUBE MAP OF STAR SYSTEM 1 MILLION CO-ORDINATE LOCATIONS DIFFICULT TASKS AND NINE PLANETS TO FIND C64/128 cass .99 C64/128 disk .99 AMSTRAD Cass .99 AMSTRAD disk E14.99 SPECTRUM .99 "


"Meet Slaine the barbarian the spikytopped celt who makes Conan look like a social worker. The cult comic-book antihero is heading your way with his trusty axe Brainbiter ready to slay any meanminded reviewer who doesn't like his game! So we'd better tell you all about it before things start getting nasty... laine is the latest character from REFLEX, which we'll tell you 2000AD, everyone's favourite about later. But first the plot. comic, to get the computer if you know the comic you'll know that treatment. And here at C+VG we Slaine inhabits a mysterious and reckon it's the best yet-after Nemisis barbaric world based on celtic myths anyway. and legends. In the game Slaine and Strangely enough Slaine comes his cunning, cowardly sidekick Ukko from the very same company who the Dwarf are searching for the name brought you Nemisis Martech. of the inhabitant of an unmarked But this new game is unlike anything grave. you've seen before. It's a hybrid not This quest soon becomes a series of quite an adventure, not an arcade quests as Slaine has to unravel more game, and definitely not an arcade puzzles connected with Elementals of and that's where the new REFLEX adventure Earth, Air, Fiure and Water. He also system comes in. In fact the programming team has to rescue a damsel in distress from Look at the screen shots and you'll behind Slaine, called Creative a high tower and battle horrible see that the screen is divided into two Reality, get REALLY upset if you monsters before the final frightening the left hand side shows you the even say the word adventure in the conflict action in spectacular comic style same breath as their game. In fact it All this and more happens in this graphics which appear in overlapping almost brings on a warp-spasm. Lucky epic action packed game and YOU windows at the action progresses. for us they were all wearing a are Slaine. Making all the decisions, The right hand consists of another hero-harness! making all the moves, and making sure window which represents Slaine's Meanwhile, back to the game. It you survive! mind. You'll see random thoughts uses a brand new system which the You have to act as fast as you think scrolling across which you have to grab Creative Reality team have called in order to get through unscathed using the Slaine \"hand\" cursor. As you can see the game definitely isn't a traditional adventure. But it does include many of the many well known elements the \"thought commands\" use many familiar adventure type words. But there's none of the irritating searching for the correct word which often upsets even the mest experienced adventurer. But the system does need quick wits and, you've guesed already, reflexes. With skill and patience the player can build up commands using the \"grabbing\" technique. So Slaine can MOVE-NORTH, GET-MONEY, DRINK-BEER and so on. Like a regular adventure you can examine objects, and pick up and drop things. rom LL Y00 Car    EasT A Warp spasm A Spectrum A New style of adventuring "


"AINE preview In fact the game contains 100 verbs and 80 objects. As you move, or examine, or indulge in a warp spasm, graphic windows show the action in intricate detail. Could Slaine create a whole new style of adventuring? Maybe. But one thing is fore sure, you haven't seen the last of REFLEX, Creative Reality or Slaine the King! THE PROGRAMMERS Creative Reality are Jas Austin (Spectrum), Neil Dodwell (Amstrad), Michael Archer (C64) and Dave Dew on graphics. Jas and Dave came up with the REFLEX system which took them three months to perfect. Said Jas: \"We wanted to create a completely new system, something removed from both adventure and arcade. We reckon that the REFLEX system is a lot easier to play than a regular adventure, but contains as many words.\" Right now the team are working on a new project for the Amiga. Prepare Anything could happen in the next 12 months! THE COMIC Slaine is the brainchild of top comic author Pat Mills, who based his character on myths and legends from the golden age of the Celts and the mystic land of Tir Nan Og, the Land of the Young. The comic has been drawn by several artists including Mike McMahon, Bellardinelli, Pat's wife Angela and, currently by Glenn Fabry-who created this issue's Slaine cover and the inside illustration. Pat Mills reckon's that Glenn has captured the spirit of his celtic hero. You can see Glenn's wors in the second Slaine comic comp on available from Titan Books at a bargain $4.50. The first Slaine book is also still available plus the Slaine role playing game book. But you could always try winning some Slaine goodies in our well-warped competition A Creative reality OLI ng   east 12e north A Kiss my axe "


"The Ultimate Maze Challenge There are no random events in XOR slabyrinthine palace and there is no premium on hand-eve coordination. You have all the time in the world to work out the precise nature of the hazards you encounter. Logical thinking, strategy and tactical problem solving are all part of the XOR experience. And XOR is not simply about finding solutions. If you can solve the entire puzzle (15 levels plus an encrypted anagram), vou qualify to be a member of the ORDER of XOR, with a certificate and a badge to proveit. \"...this is one of the most compulsive, cunning and attractive programs I've seen for some time! .... the game is superb a very classy original twist on the basic maze theme\" A+B Computing swavle BNC XOR's Features 15 graded mindbending mazes Each maze approximately 16 screens Super smooth high speed scrolling High resolution quality graphics High speed or step-by-step replay Intriguing logical problems Interactive dynamic puzzles am XOR Now available on; Commodore 6+ Disk Cassette Spectrum Cassette Amstrad Disk Cassette BBC Disk Cassette .95 19.95 .95 E14.95 19.95 .95 19.95 Coming Soon for IBM PC and compatibles XOR Designer Available for BBC and Commodore computers. Lugotron Guarantee All orders discricoithin 3 days of receipt of onder Faulty sottime will be replaced ediatilu. Postage and Packaging Free m LOGOTRON RECREATIONAL TEATRU RHORENTIONAL PRODUCTS DATES BREWI SYRIR SIRULLE STRIX CHC02231205 "


"Thrill to the action as the legend comes to life! DANASONE and the TEMPLE OF DOOM*** The Home Computer Version of the Atari Coin-Op Masterpiece 1985 Lucasm ord Games Corporation License to US Doldud, 2/3 Holbord Hoford, Birmingham B5X Telephone GOLDIE exicanso We're giving away 5000 games one of them could be yours! Pick up your trilby and trusty bullwhip and don the mantle of the legendary Indiana Jones! Prepare yourself for your most dangerous adventure yet-to storm the evil Temple of Doom and rescue the imprisoned children and the magical stones of Sankara! Beware the foes and hazards that block your way. The Thuggee guards will fight to the finish and poisonous cobra snakes will rise up in front of you. You will traverse perilous ledges, ride under-ground railways, and cross the bottomless fiery pit in pursuit of your quest! You will call on all your reserves of courage, strength and skill, Push yourself to the limit, ride your luck and the magical stones may just be yours! ATAR! A M E S Yes! To commemorate the sale of US Gold's 5 millionth game in April this year we are Including a fantastic opportunity to win a game of your choice with every copy of Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doomwhich itself is set to become a software milestone. Here's all you have to do: Simply make your choice of game on the voucher to be found in each copy of Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom Should yours be one of the first 5000 vouchers to be drawnt you will receive the game of your choice absolutely free! The draw will take place on November 30th All vouchers to be included in the draw should be returned by October 30th. COMMODORE 64 cassetre .99 sisk .99 AMSTRAD CASSETTE .99 nisk .99 SPECTRUM 48k cassette .99 ATARI STISK .99 Screens from Arcade Version "


"Smallsky Tampere Fell Pass jutot lamin ShEBILERA SSSSS Cromni "


"BRAVE THE COMPUTER +VIDEO ANCIENT MARINER. GAME FREE ST & AMIGA PULLOUT VIST THE PAWN SHOP-NEWS MAKE THE FRENCH CONNECTION / REVIEWS "


"Previews 2-64335 Ancient Mariner A lost ship. A lost soul. A lost tember. So if you're planning a love. Prepare to sail beyond the visit to the show remember to edge of darkness. Welcome to check it out. You won't be disthe swash-buckling world of the appointed. Ancient Mariner, a world of The team behind the game romance, pirates, gold, death and Systems Architects are a new danger. name to the games scene. They Ancient Mariner promises to are best known for producing be one of the most dramatic and Mirrorsoft's Three Little Pigs impressive games being prodemo using Film Director. grammed for the Atari ST and Ancient Mariner will be a huge, Commodore Amiga. sprawling game. At present it is These impressive screen shots intended to release it in three exclusive to Computer + Video volumes with each volume conGames are taken from the ST taining three disks. and it is hoped that a working You play the part of the 16th demo of the first part of the game Century seadogwho must sail the will be at the PCW Show this Sep world, fighting, brawling, doing ORBIS TERRARUM business deals and eventually resSystems Architects are making cue his lost love. some proud boasts about the It's very hard to classify Ancient animation for the fight sequenMariner. It will contain play that ces, claiming it will be superior to will appeal to the traditional adthat in Defender of the Crown, venture game player as well as matching the realism Palace combining arcade action and fight Software produced in Barbarian sequences. The Ultimate Warrior. 72 "


"News When is an Atari ST not an Seeing is believing but will you The Merseyside Atari Club Atari ST? When it becomes an believe what you see? This is the has launched a new ST section IBM-PC! Incredible as it sounds, game to make speed kings drool on ClubSpot 810 on Prestel. PC-Ditto needs only 40 seconds Uridium on the Amiga. Called ST Online, it aims to or so of disk-spinning to turn Sam This is how Hewson main cover most aspects of the ST Tramiel's 16-bit baby into a near man Andrew Braybook thinks World, including reviews, news, perfect emulation of an IBM. Just Sun the game could look. But when games, tips, helpline, letters, load the program in the ST the and if he finds time to get to grips beginner's and business section. usual way, and wait for the confirwith the game is not known. But ST Online should be open by mation screen. C+VG's super spy who snapped the time you read this and can be Now it's time to place an MS Leviathan, English Softthese pics thinks it better be soon. found on page 810428 of Prestel. DOS disk into the drive, and if ware's ace space blast 'em up is What's the point of Commodore A fanzine will be launched to you've got it on a 32 inch disk set to explode on your ST and making an Amiga if there isn't run in conjunction with the Pres. just pop it in. Otherwise, use a 544 Amiga Uridium to play on it. tel section called ST Offline. inch floppy drive attached as It features left and right diagonDrive: B (one source of this is the ally scrolling planetscapes, digiPlauer L.B. disk drive). Within moments, tised music and continuous Stand by for these new titles the familiar IBM a) prompt will sound effects. heading our way from the good appear. Meanwhile ES's pool game old U.S. of A during the remainNow just go ahead and use inside a cube, Q-Ball has been der of this year your IBM, and that includes using converted for the Amiga. In it you Kings Quest III: Sierra adv. that Hard Disk as well. Text will be line up shots in three dimensions. Match Point Michtron/Microdeal 80 columns of easy readability. There's no gravity, eight pockets, (sport). and it's only with graphics where and the ability to rotate the table in Shadow World: Michtron/ things seem to be moving a tad 3-D in real time while you make Microdeal. slow (about 20 per cent). Pretty your shot. Rings of Triton: Michtron/ nifty, eh? Ocean's first release on the Microdeal. Product information: Amiga will be Wizballand Army W all and Army World Karate Championships: PC Ditto, Moves. Epyx (sport). Avant-Garde Systems, Space Snatchers/Aratoom: Sierra. 381 Pablo Point Drive, Leisure Suit Larry: Sierra. Jacksonville, Police Quest: Sierra. Mastertronic are developing Thexder: Sierra. Florida 32225. no less than 14 titles for the 221 Baker Street: Datasoft Retails in U.S. for $89.95. Amiga, including a conversion of US Gold. I.B. Drive: the spectrum hit Feud. All Mas Frank'n Emest Adventure LB. Computers, tertronic titles will sell for .95 Polarware. 1519 SW Marlow Avenue, At the other end of the priceline, Guitar Wizzard: Baudiville. Portland, Melbourne are producing new Rainy Day Games: Baudiville. Oregon 97225. B52-Amiga arcade games for the Video Vegas: Baudiville. Retails in U.S. for $300.000 \"Scalpel, nurse. This is a tricky home Amiga's. The first two titles Rings of Zilfin: Strategic bit. The patient has a ventricular fibrillation that's an irregular would be the classics Rockford Simulations. After predicting that Dan hearbeat. It could prove fatal. It's (Boulderdash) and the much High Roller: Mindscape. Dare: Pilot of the Future will lucky that I, the world famous Dr talked about Road Wars. Both Three Stooges: Master Designer be making a landing on the ST Darekill, was around to operate.\" titles will sell for .95. Software very soon, news filters from Virgin If you've a strong stomach for Astrologer: Antic/Electric. that the game will not be released medical realism-no gory detail Breakers: Broderbund. until next year. However they will is left to the imagination then a Cascade's Ace flight and Diablo: Classic Image. be releasing Deluxe Scrabble new game out in America, The fight simulation was reckoned to Electro-Solitaire & 21: Solftlogik soon. Surgeon, could appeal to you be about the tops in its class. Corp. The idea is to perform major Now there's Ace 2 and it's going Spiderman: Adventure heart surgery on the unfortunate to make your Atari ST soar International. Mr Jones. You must then carry Ace 2 is real time two player air Questprobe: Adventure out the operation as it would be in combat featuring high speed dog. International. real-life, using a vast array of fights, missile attacks, warning medical instruments, constantly sequence, artificial intelligence, monitoring the patients condition. mutli-level play, Rob Hubbard It's written for ISM by a doctor did the soundtrack. Ace 2 will DAN DARE TRA LEDER and probably should not be played cost .95 and should be availbefore you have your dinner. able by Christmas. DAN UNS FROM THE TREENS 13 "


"POSTRONIX OFFERS YOU TI PLUS OVER  WORTH O AND ACCESSORIE FOR ONLY OFFER APPLE TO UK. MAILANO, ONE S450 +YOUR OLD  COMPUTER *OFFER APPLIES TO U.K. MAINLAND ONLY ALL PRODUCTS GUARANTEED FOR 12 MONTHS. Diskette Storage Box This compact and sturdy storage box holds 40 Amiga discs, offering protection and safe keeping to your valuable collection of Amiga software. RRP.... .99 CANY MAKE OR MODEL ACCEPTED AS PART EXCHANGE  WITH NO PART EXCHANGE). MIMIC DELUXE Paint 10 Blank Discs High quality, double sided double density discs (pack of ten). A must for any Amiga owner and a real saving for all new users. RRP.... .99 SHANGHAI NAME CARD NO L OR ENCLOSE CHEQUE Deluxe Paint This graphic art and paint package compliments the Amiga's capabilities totally and will add hours of sheer delight to your Amiga activities. RRP.... .99 Shanghai A captivating strategy challenge HOW TO ORDER SIMPLY FILL IN THE COUPON derived from the ancient Chinese AT THE BOTTOM OF THE PAGE game of Mah Jongg. The exceptAND SEND IT TO POSTRONIX LTD 8, FARADAY COURT, ional 3D graphics of the Amiga PARK FARM WELLINGBOROUGH, NNS 3XY. add realism never before TOGETHER WITH YOUR REMITTANCE OF 8450+  experienced on home computers. CARRIAGE PLUS THE COMPUTER YOU WISH TO PART DOD A EXCHANGE (ENCLOSE  IF NO PART EXCHANGE). RRP.... .99 YOU MAY PAY BY ACCESS, VISA, CHEQUE OR POSTAL ORDER, ALLOW 28 DAYS FOR DELIVERY SIGNATURE AMIGA 500 + SOFTWARE AND ACCESSORIES. PRICE $450 EXTRAS I ITTTTT ADDRESS CARRIAGE TOTAL Priveliged Purchaser Card When you participate in this unique offer from Postronix, you will also receive a priveliged purchaser card enabling you to add to your collection of Amiga software, accessories and hardware plus many other products available from Postronix, all at incredible discount prices. DESCRIPTION PART EXCHANGE .00 "


"WHEN YOU PART EXCHANGE SAVE OVER YOUR OLD COMPUTER.  THE VAMIGA 500 DF SOFTWARE SHANGHAI TM DELUXE Peint The Music Studio EZ HACKER I HACKERI The Music Studio Joysticks 2 high quality joysticks included, enabling full use of your Amiga and software from the very start. RRP.... .99 EACH REGRINE Hacker II The Music Studio A popular strategy game simulating This piece of software has been the infiltration of a high security especially included in this pack, as complex somewhere in Siberia. it fully exploits the outstanding Exciting and realistic when musical capabilities of the Amiga experienced on the Amiga. 500, giving you all the benefits of a RRP.... .99 professional sound synthesiser. Midi compatable. RRP.... .99 postronix IF YOU'RE THINKING OF BUYING AN AMIGA CAN YOU AFFORD NOT TO BUY IT FROM POSTRONIX? A Prestwich Holdings plc Company ALSO AVAILABLE OPTIONAL EXTRAS AMIGA A1081 COLOUR MONITOR (STEREO) .00 AMIGA A1010 EXTERNAL DISKDRIVE .00 AMIGA A501 512K RAM EXPANSION .00 AMIGA A521 TV MODULATOR .00 Q= "


"The French Con Company Profile thed tean tarted four years ago by European market. Bruno Bonnell and But it's also a little crazy with a Christophe Sapet, lot of companies all fighting Infogrames, with its distinctive each other and dropping their multi-coloured Armadillo logo, prices every five minutes. has emerged as one of Europe's \"But the English market leading developers of 16-bit entertainment software. needed immediate feedback in Catherine Pasquiers, order to be able to satisfy the needs of the British market, and companies foreign markets, be ahead of the game back in explained about the Armadillo! France,\" Catherine explained. \"Bruno and Christophe chose the Armadillo because it's an animal that's been around for a long time and has adpated itself to cope with each new change in the environment. Infogrames is here to stay and we will always adapt our products to give the market what it wants.\" Their first product was called The Basic Cube, a beginners Basic course for the Thomson David Crossweller heads computer, packaged in a cube Infogrames UK. David has been shaped box. The Thomson is in the industry for some years, still the most popular machine at one time running his own in France, with at least one in business specialising in public every school, similar to the BBC in the UK. companies. To begin with, Infogrames Infogrames now employ concentrated on the domestic around 100 people working on French market. Within two everything from Minitel the years they had 30 staff and French equivalent of Prestel — were established as one of the to artificial intelligence research. leaders in their field. It was now They also have an interest in time to look at converting their an educational development games to other systems for house, formed by ex-Infogrames foreign consumption. employees, and a domestic Apart from its own products, distribution company called it also publishes everything Cable, jointly owned with a produced by two other French number of other French developers, Ere Informatique companies. Then of course, Get Dexter/Macadam Bumper) there's the games. Lots and lots and Cobra Soft (Murder on the of games! Atlantic). Infogrames currently employ Although the company has 30 programmers, a very international agreements with talented musician called companies in most of the Charles Callet, four graphic world's leading markets, artists, including Josiane Girard they wanted to set up who designed the graphics for their own subsidiary Prohibition, and four project in the UK. managers, including Daniel \"We see England as Charpy who was responsible for our number one Passengers on the Wind. Daniel explains how the games the MSX, Amstrad, are developed Commodore 64, and \"Initially, many of our game sometimes the Spectrum ideas came from the \"Infogrames works closely programmers themselves. Now with hardware manufacturers. we have two marketing people This obviously has benefits in who advise us as to what kind of terms of getting new games are selling and what kind technology, but we also of presentation and feel are produce specific versions of most popular at the moment. It some of our games especially is also their job to come up with for certain manufacturers. scenarios, or go after film, book, \"We try to develop as much or comic licences,\" said as we can in 'C', making the Catherine, code as portable as possible, \"Each game is developed by although anything requiring fast groups of between two and five animation or other graphical people. We are installing a processing, such as Prohibition, networked, multi-user has to be written in machine development system based on code as C just isn't fast the 3808 chip. Each enough.\" programmer will have a PC XT. \"Outside programmers are as a terminal with which he can often contracted to do . tap into the central library of conversion work for us, as we tools, algorithms etc.\" prefer to spend the majority of \"Although, historically we our time working on new have developed all our graphics projects rather than converting on the Thomson, we're turning existing ones.\" to the ST for future graphics Past Infogrames products development, and have created include Mandragore, Vera a set of tools to allow ST Cruz, The Sydney Affair and graphics and animation data to Heritage. If you notice a be easily ported to other distinct bias towards adventure machines,\" she added. games it's because many of When the company's output Infogrames programmers prefer was primarily for the French playing and writing this kind of domestic market, almost every game. However, they have Infogrames title was produced always tried to do something a solely for the Thomson. little different with each title, Nowadays, their target either in the design or with the machines range from the packaging Amiga, the ST, and the PC, to Apart from its own products, distribution company called The G a m e s So what are the Gallic geniuses dreaming up at the moment? Well between their own titles, and new ones due from Cobrasoft and Ere Informatique, Infogrames will have a whole sack of goodies lined up for the Autumn and Christmas. You may even be able to get your sweaty little palms on some of them right now! Already available, or due out any day are T.N.T., a "


"mection France has always been renown for its superb bread, wines, and cheeses, but has never been thought of as one of the major powers in games programming... but all that may be about to change! Direct from the heart of the Beaujolais region DAVID BISHOP sends this report on Infogrames, one of the most successful and creative software developers and publishers in France. Commando style, vertically working title only are both scrolling shooter for one or two due for launch in October. players, and eight-bit versions of Although you may be the excellent Prohibition (See forgiven for thinking it would be ST feature in June +VG for impossible to make interesting full review). and playable games around Released already for the C64, such subjects, Infogrames have and due out in September on come up with two highly ST, Amiga, and PC, The Three original games. Musketeers is a superior Precipice puts you in charge looking graphics adventure of an expedition to climb an ELLETTEN in this most exhilarating of Hot watersports. De Again, this sport has been given the Infogrames treatment resulting in a three-part arcade NEIGE game covering the three SOLRIRE disciplines of slalom, jump and freestyle. Each discipline is presented in a different way, giving the game plenty of variation. total weight of kit In the slalom, you have a Alpine mountain, loosely based Once you begin your climb, skiers-eye view of the buoys you on a peak in the Mont Blanc you will have to perform a must ski round. A successful region. Having chosen from the whole range of tasks and pass qualifies you for another ten possible routes to the movements, such as jumping run, only this time the rope summit, and in which season over crevices and using the pick length is shortened making you wish to make your attempt to make safe footholds, or test things much trickier. you must select from 80 objects, the ground in front of you with i n the jump section of the those you think will be most a quick prod provided you game, seen from an elevated needed during your assault on have bought along a pick that is! view, you must guide your the peak. The screen is divided into skier onto the ramp, hitting it at Of course, your rucksack can various sections including your the fastest possible speed. Once featuring Artos and Co. in a only hold a certain weight of rucksack and contents, moving airbom, you must keep him at romp around \"Olde England\". equipment, each piece having hand and feet icons, and a the right angle for landing. The 16 bit versions of this its own specific weight. So graphic of your face wearing In the freestyle discipline you four-part swash-buckler, feature choose carefully or risk dying of alpine sunglasses whose must make as many 180, or 80 locations with amazingly exposure clinging to some reflection shows the next part of 360 degree spins and jumps high quality digitised pictures of inhospitable Alpine rock face, or the mountain to be across the boat's wake as you such scenes as the rooftops of running out of food just when encountered. can without falling over. Dover the peak was yours for the There is so much in this The action is viewed from Just when you thought taking. game it would take a couple of inside the towing boat, although Infogrames were only ever The route you have chosen pages to mention everything another window shows your going to release adventures, and the time of year, will affect Suffice it to say that Precipice is skier as seen from the shore. along come two highly polished what climbing and weather a very playable, graphically In November and December sport/activity programmes to conditions you will encounter. It impressive, icon and joystick we should see yet more games tempt those of you who prefer is therefore imperativey driven game that will appeal to emerging from the the great outdoors. appreciate these differences anyone interested in climbing Infogrames stable, Precipice, is an alpine when packing your rucksack. With the Waterskiing World including one based climbing simulation, and Each piece of equipment has a Championships being held at on the cult comic Waterski World specific weight, and your Thorpe Park this September, character, Tin Championships it's current rucksack can only hold a certain there should be a lot of interest Tin. the A team "


"The French Connection the A team Due later this month are Passengers on the Wind II, L'affair, and Sidewalk. POTW II is a graphically intensive adventure similar in style to the original, but with a brand new series of episodes, and some new features. As with POTWI, the sequel is based on the famous French comic book series of the same name. The game tries to reproduce the format and appearance of the original books, while taking advantage of the computers added flexibility. Some people, especially given is correct, you can go on to the next section. If not, you know you have missed something.\" Latest in their detective mystery series, L'affair is a graphical adventure set in western Europe. You've been framed for a crime you didn't commit so obviously you want to find out who wants you behind bars. The game features many high-res pics of various European cities. By moving a cursor around each screen, you can talk to different characters in each city, game, from movement within a location to interaction with other characters in the game, and assembling the parts of your bike that you've already found. You will also need to have found various spanners, and screw drivers to be able to assemble the bike! With its elegant combination of arcade adventure and adventure elements, and show stopping graphics, this easy to use, icon driven game looks set to be a big hit over here on ST, Amiga, and PC, as well as the hardened adventurers found while, at the same time being three main eight-bit machines. POTWI a little odd or difficult treated to digitised pictures of Also on the way are to use. Many were also upset their faces. Prohibition II, Get Dexter having reached the end of the Available late September or II, Stryfe, II, and Pigalle, a game without, apparently, early October on ST, PC, and graphic adventure set in Paris. having achieved anything. possibly Amiga, L'affair looks Watch out also for an Amiga As it turned out, not getting a like being one of Infogrames mega-game called Captain specific letter at one point in the most polished and graphical Blood. Expected early next game was enough to guarantee interactive adventures so far. year, Captain Blood has been your failure, even though you In Sidewalk you get your two years in the making and weren't aware of it at the time. bike stolen on the way to a rock promises to set new standards Catherine explains: \"In concert. Due out in September, in Amiga entertainment. POTW II, you'll soon know if and loosely based on a famous Looking further into the you've gone wrong as a wise French song and movie, the future, Daniel Charpy seems to man appears at the end of each game involves your search for all have a very clear view as to episode and asks you a the different parts of your bike where the market and question. You must then work and features superb black and Infogrames are heading: out which of the handful white graphics, in true comic \"The 16 bit machines will of characters you book style. In the UK proceeds have completely taken over control, should answer from the game will be used to within three years. The ST will the question. If you support the Band-Aid Trust have the Lions' share of things choose correctly. The screen is split into five during the rest of 87 and most and the answere sections or windows, each used of 88. But the Amiga, or its son for different aspects of the or grandson will come back into contention by late '88 or early 89.\" \"Infogrames will also be involved in interactive compact disc technology with either Thomson or Phillips. Using CD technology, we will be able to make bigger and better products, with far greater depth and meg after meg of digitised graphics. Our job will become more like that of a film director rather than a games programmer.\" «Because there are so few different types of game, the user-interface becomes very important. We are constantly looking for new and original ways of presenting our games to the public either with new methods of play or with interesting packaging. With the products we have under development now, and the ideas we have for the future, I think Infogrames will be around for a long time to come.\" If the evidence of Infogrames current batch of new releases is anything to go by, they will be a major force in the not too distant future. How refreshing to see creativity and imagination alive and kicking in an industry so often knocked for its blinkered, inward-looking approach to software development. 78 "


"THE BARBARIAN HAS ARRIVED! THE TERRORPODS ARE COMING! TWO GREAT NEW TITLES FROM PSYGNOSIS BARBARIAN Can you become Hegor the famous dragon-slaying, monster-mangling Barbarian? Are you the warrior who can enter the fearful realms of the underground world of Durgan, a world terrorized by the evil Necron? Can you handle the adventure, the frenzied attacks, the hidden traps, the gruesome death dealing monsters?... Your quest; to destroy the lair of the accursed Necron. Your prize; the kingdom's crown. Your task is awesome! You must live on your wits, conquer your innermost fears, use every skill and weapon available to you. Hideous perils await. Can you survive?... Are you Hegor the famous dragonslaying, monster-mangling Barbarian? 512k colour versions available for Atari ST and Commodore Amiga colour monitors only TERRORPODS Its been a long watch... As the sun disappears over the horizon, the uninviting, grey bleakness of Colian becomes apparent. Following the intense heat of the day, the onset of night adds the bitterness of sub-zero temperatures to an already hostile environment, and the stark interior of the D.S.V. appears almost homelike. Deep melancholy is suddenly smashed by the shrill scream of a siren. The status panel has gone crazy, an extrordinary array of lights flash uncontrollably. Good grief... what's happening? Frantically, you turn to look at the command scanner, hunting through the mass of information before you, in a desperate attempt to decipher what has happened. Your whole being freezes... It can't be! The Terrorpods... 512k colour versions available for Atari ST and Commodore Amiga colour monitors only BARBARIAN TERRORPODS DEEP SPACE BRATACCAS ARENA ARENA BRATACCAS .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 (A) ARENA The classic sports simulation BRATACCAS Become Kyne the earth scientist accused of genetic fraud. DEEP SPACE The ultimate interstellar war game. 512k colour versions available for Atari ST and Commodore Amiga colour monitors only Psygnosis FREEPOST Liverpool L3 3AB United Kingdom Tel. Nos. 051 647 8118 (Daytime) 051 227 4800 (After hours) SE ET N G IS BELIEVING "


"The Pawn pre Magnetic Scrolls the cd team \"There's no doubt that the ST version really established The Pawn. Before that it was nce upon a time (to of nostalgia and disatisfaction. just another adventure. And the coin a phrase) there \"The original release date reason the ST version caused was an ambitious was October '84, but the first such a stir was primarily because of the graphics and the parser. woman, a bright bloke, a new shipments weren't despatched 16-bit computer called the QL until September '85. The adventure itself hadn't another equally bright bloke, Unfortunately Sinclair Reseach really changed from the QL and a nifty little parser. did a pitiful selling job on the version,\" says Anita. The two blokes, Ken Gordon The Pawn has now delighted original Pawn, it deserved and frustrated the owners of and Hugh Steers, both wanted better. In fact we've sold more to use Hugh's newly developed for the Spectrum 128K then many different makes of \"At the time, we were still parser to produce the definitive they ever managed to ship for computer from the Apple finishing off The Pawn so Macintosh to the Spectrum adventure game for the newly nobody took much notice of the QL.\" what he was doing. The only released Sinclair QL. Not long after this, Magnetic 128. And Magnetic Scrolls are The woman, a mental over Scrolls signed an agreement now widely regarded as brief we gave him was that it achiever called Anita Sinclair, with the newly formed Rainbird England's answer to the would be nice to do a get the also wanted to exploit the Software a branch of mighty Infocom. treasures type of adventure, and we wanted to keep character exciting new potential offered by Telecomsoft. The first version of \"I make no secret of my the infant QL. The Pawn, to come out through admiration for Infocom, I know interaction, in the game, to a many of their authors and minimum. People don't always they're a great bunch. But we like talking to other characters deliberately try to differentiate in an adventure, or if they do, our products from theirs.\" Anita they're often not quite sure explains. what to do with them.\" The company's second The original script is split into adventure, The Guild of a number of sections. Thieves, was released about Firstly, every object is four months ago, and is already identified and given a unique attracting the kind of cudos program name. Then all lavished on The Pawn. locations are named and given Compared with it's an initial states flag where predecessor, Guild is a more appropriate. An initial states mature, more tightly designed object or person is something or Te statue game, with better (trickier!) someone you see only once the Mettre reseables one of the teaple's greatest sealots ungar the puzzles. How did it all come first time you enter a specific location. For example, the old \"An excellent writer, Rob man dragging the trunk. If you However Anita's plans were Rainbird, was for the Atari ST. Steggles, did the original script. revisit the same location a to produce arcade games for At the time, the ST was still a He's a fun-loving, outgoing kind second time, the old man will be the new machine, because they novelty machine that nobody of guy who could write a fantasy gone. could be finished relatively had got to grips with. game every day of the week. The next section of the script quickly, thus enacting the sound Consequently, everyone who of approaching dosh this year had an ST wanted to see what rather than next. their machine could do. In the end, Ken and Hugh The graphics featured in The won, and Magnetic Scrolls and Pawn showed them! Many The Pawn were born. became adventure converts as a The QL version of The Pawn result. didn't have any graphics, but Apart from the impressive contained the same parser as graphics, The Pawn is also a found in later versions. classy adventure incorporating Now, four years, countless possibly the world's most awards, powerful and flexible parser. and thirty This, combined with the man-years memorable packaging, had Files Text G raphics and Goodies on, Anita looks punters rushing to get their B o sh out 10 24: the succulents the syrie 3004s towards our la back with hands on one of those shiny a mixture blue boxes. 1999:04 911 at spille together? 80 "


"Shop 3 Magnetic Scrolls are the UK's leading Atari and Amiga adventure authors. Here David Bishop delves into the secrets of the scrolls and comes up with some interesting clues to the next generation of adventure games. verbose to a manageable form. So after six months, Scrolls from a computers point of view. had the bare bones of The During the coding process we Guild of Theives. But it lacked try to think of any little additions atmosphere and felt flat. Now that might improve a particular came the time consuming task location or puzzle. of putting flesh on the bones. \"For example, in the first «We took various bits out at location, you're standing in a this stage because they didn't boat moored to a jetty by a rope. The script calls for you to Sometimes we'd all be a little jump from the boat to the jetty, unhappy with the way a puzzle but we added the ability to pull worked so we'd see if there was time to get back to her current is entitled specials, and deals on the rope, thus dragging the a way to jazz it up or add pet project entitled Upon with all the puzzles in the game boat towards the jetty so you another twist to it. Westminster Bridge. if you open the golden cage don't have to jump.\" \"At the same time we have to \"Westminster will be the first while the bear is still alive he One of the most impressive test every situation to make sure Scrolls title written by one of us, eats you\" that kind of thing. of Fred's features is the way he there are no logical consequently I think it'll be our After specials comes a logic handles objects, each of which inconsistencies. This involves us best! ... no seriously it's a diagram for each character in is given a set of properties which in trying to anticipate what departure from games like The the game. For example \"what determine what happens to that people may try, in order to Pawn and Guild, for a start would the miller do if you object in ANY set of allow them to have a go, even if there's no graphics. It won't be offered him some rat poison?\" circumstances possible within it brings them no closer to ready for another year though!\" Next comes a table of doors the game. solving the game,\" says Anita. \"As to the future, well we'd and other obstructions. Also Because each object can be \"The testing, debugging, and like to get to the stage where we listed here is what happens to given such a detailed profile, refining process can take had a \"black box\" parser which each door when you try various Fred can immediately tell which forever but you have to draw other companies could use in things such as opening, ones can be picked up, broken the line at some point, their games not adventures knocking, trying to unlock it or put into other containers. otherwise the game would you understand, but things like with various keys. This allows for a high level of never see the light of day!\" a flight simulator you could talk The final, and most bulky, reality and flexibility when The first release of Guild was to! section of Steggles' Guild script handling objects. the culmination of nearly five In general, we want to carry is the description of each location The remaining parts of Fred's man years of work, including a on writing adventures but and what happens there. This huge database contain a year for the graphics. Each maybe get away from always forms the basic framework \"network\" showing how and machine conversion can take having rooms, objects, and your around which all the other where locations are linked up to another six man months, persona moving through them,\" information is crafted. together. There is also a so producing and releasing a she added. The script took about three complete list of verbs, synonyms top-notch adventure is not a \"It would be nice to try months to write and it took the (for example, \"drag\" is a short process. Consequently, something where other same time again to code the synonym for \"pull\"), and Scrolls are very concerned about \"forces\" in the game act raw information into Fred, scenery nouns (words used to what happens to their games according to what you do. Magnetic Scrolls development describe objects in a location once they're finished. Imagine two businessmen going system. which can't be productively \"We did almost all the pack after the same contract. You \"Fred turns data from examined). design, artwork, and layout for might try something, he may the Pawn and the Guild counteract your efforts by doing With such an impeccable something else, and so on. The track record, will it be hard for possibilities are immense and, Scrolls to reach or even surpass as yet, largely unexplored.\" their own very high standards in For those of you who haven't future releases. played The Pawn or The Guild Luckily for us, we won't have Of Thieves yet, you should, and to wait very long to find out, as soon! their next title, another fantasy But be warned. These adventure, again through adventures can cause Rainbird, is due to be launched withdrawal symptoms. at the Personal Computer World show later this month. Looking ahead, Scrolls are southwest corner of the gardens is a rushing to complete another toolshed.. There is a Mat here. adventure by the end of the year. Anita has also found some Small 81 "


"Look at the Deal... Not Just the Price! NEW LOWER PRICES AND... ust the Price! EVEN BETTER SERVICE NOW ALL Goods Despatched SAME DAY by SCCLASS POST-FREE! 3-5 DISKS & STORAGE PRINTERS AMAZING PRINTER DEALS SAVE LEL'S Phone now for details of our Easy Payment Scheme on all these printers. MD 70L Storage Box Smoked Perspex/High Impact Plastic Holds max 70 35\" disks Hinged Lockable Lid (2 keys) ATARISM 804 BO Column Dot Matrix Friction & Tractor Feed 12 Month Warranty ONLY .95 FREE PANASONIC KX-P1001 BO Column Dot Matrix BO Column Dot Matra 165 CPS Draft Mode 120 CPS Draft Mode 35 CPS-NLO Mode 24 CPS-NLO Mode Friction & Tractor Feeds Friction & Tractor Feeds Full 2 year Warranty 12 Month Warranty NLY .00 ONLY .00 ON SAVE OVER ! SAVE OVER  All the above printers need the ST to Centronics cable to connect to your ST computer. Buy this cable with one of these SAVE !! printers & you pay only .95 ONLY .00 SAVE 110 TOP QUALITY BULK PACKED 3X\" DISKS 10 Single Side 50 100 E13.95 Double Sidel 516 95 .95 E119.95 Fully Guaranteed 179.95 .95 Individually certified 100% Error Free Supplied in Strong White Card Boxes Complete with user labels etc. ALL DIS NOW PO FREE POSTAGE All Printers EASY PAYMENT SCHEME FREE!! STFM \"SUPA-PAK' Announcing NEW LOW PRICES... SAVE OVER  o blankets uite Demo's et E299 ADDITIONAL DISK DRIVES OTRIANGLE-1 Meg. Double Sided Drive Fully Compatible with third Party Soltware Compumart Price Built in Power Supply FREE Disk Very Quiet operation Software 130 POST 139 FREE Cumana 1 Meg Drive-Only  POST FREE Atari 1 Meg Drive Only  POST FREE ST SOFTWARE SPECIALS These excellent packages are the BEST in their fields and ONLY Compumart offer these Excellent Prices and FREE 1st Class Delivery VIP PROFESSIONAL (VIP Technologies) THE Integrated Spreadsheet atabase/ Graphics Package .00 PUBLISHING PARTNER (Softlogik) THE Desktop Publishing Package .00 SUPERBASE PERSONAL (Precision Software) THE Friendliest Database with Spreadsheet .00 FAST BASIC (Computer Concepts) THE Most Comprehensive Basic -ROM Cartridge .00 1st WORD PLUS (GST Systems THE Wordprocessor .00 FLIGHT SIMULATOR 11 (Sublogic) THE Ultimate 3D Flight Simulator .00 Whatever Software Requirements you have, we will do our best to fulfill them. Call us today for THE BEST SOFTWARE DEALS. Please note faulty software will ONLY be exchanged for SAME TITLE PAPER High quality 11\" x 9% ONLY 60 gsm Weight Micro Perl all round .95 2000 Sheets POST FREE COMPUMART GUARANTEE ALL Products are fully Guaranteed by Compumart. Any HARDWARE products faulty WITHIN 30 DAYS of Purchase (due to manufacturing fault) will be replaced for NEW (We will pay all Carriage Costs) after that time we will repair AT OUR COST if faulty WITHIN 12 MONTHS Atari 520 STEM Computer Built in % Meg 3.5\" Disk Drive Built in TV Modulator & PSU All this for the Excellent Mouse Controller Value Compumart Gem on ROM Supa-Pak' Price Atari Language Disk 5 Disks with C/PM Utilities/Demo's etc 20 Blank 3.5\" Disks (worth .90) MD 70L Storage Box (worth ) POST FREE Ask now for details of our LOW COST Easy Payment Scheme Also Available The Full Range of Atari 520 and 1040 Computers, Peripherals etc Phone Now for Details. MONITORS ATARI SM 125 ATARI SC 1224 PHILIPS CM 8533 ONLY COMPUMART offer these top quality monitors for ATARI 520's and 1040's at these EXCELLENT PRICES & with FREE Connector Cables & FREE POSTAGE!!! PHILIPS CM 8533 ATARI SM 125 ATARI SC 1224 14\" Colour Monitor 12\" Mono Monitor 12\" Colour Monitor Medium Resolution High Resolution Medium Resolution Composite Video & Tilt & Swivel Base Analog RGB Special Compumart Price Special Compumart Price Special Compumart Price ONLY .00 ONLY .00 ONLY .00 ALL of these Monitors are supplied with a FREE ST/SCART Connector Cable (Worth .95) to plug directly into your STI! How to Order... any your order, sane and with the folder inde payable to comparan Door oss o Phone any of our order lines and order using your h and select your time and adde det bed ol your order the refere you are being om O gos y despatched same day 1st class postFREE OF CHARGE OF SPEEDY CUARANTEED NEXT DAY DELIVERYBY SEGURCORPUSTS to co We conocial with purchase orders in gove and can b e Goods wil be espected receipt oder 2 day COMpumart A GREAT DEAL MORE.FOR A GOOD DEAL LESS! COMPUMART DepcCVGUnit 8 Falcon Street Loughborough Leics . LEI IEH F0509-262259/233893/266322 Overseas de a tt and rance Alpes 25 pricinde VAL Prices by Algohguaranteed "


"BAC Reviews Faery Tale Phillip, the The bottom third of the screen is when used in the right places, the status area, divided into three often reveals hidden objects of sections. great importance or value. On the left, a scroll contains the right hand section of the a commentary on the game status area is a stone tablet, cartogether with your levels of ved with the eight principle points of the compass. You can make Julian move in the required direcSUPPLIER: HABA MARKETING/ tion by simply clicking on the releMICROILLUSIONS vant part of the compass. As Julian begins walking around PRICE: $24.95 the village, so the screen smoothly As everbody knows, a reviewers second brother, follows him, lagging slightly behind, lot is not a happy one. I mean, was lucky and so that when he stops, the screen being payed to play games all day scroll continues for a second as it and then write about them is no clever. too, slows and gently stops -ones idea of fun-right?! very neat! However, from time to time, a Although the view is essentially little cracker comes along, like a plain, the hut where you first breath of fresh air, breathing new encounter Julian, as with all buildlife into an industry much criticized ings is seen from a slight angle, for its lack of imagination and allowing you to see both the south originality. Such a game is Faery and east facing walls. Tale from Microillusions! In this case, the south wall has a Faery Tale was written in Calidoor which will automatically fomia over six months by proWhen the game is first loaded, bravery, luck, vitality etc. These open if you move Julian towards grammer, musician, and artist you are treated to a graphically affect your performance during it. David Joiner, who has created a sensational picture book account combat and can be improved by After a slight, and annoying, 17.000 screen magical land comof the story so far, complete with eating and gaining experience in pause of about eight seconds for plete with underground caverns, pages that turn, like some old much the say way as with many disk access, Julian enters the mazes, forests, deserts, snow Hollywood movie. Dungeons & Dragons type building where you are given a capped mountains, lakes, castles, The game starts with Julian games. view \"through the roof\" onto the villages, and even the Astral World the first of the brothers, standing In the centre of the status area proceedings below (If you have so the packaging promises. outside a wooden hut in Tambry, is the control box, with which you the \"music\"icon switched on, you The name of Joiner's land is You only get to play the second communicate with the game. will notice the music changes as Holm, and you play the parts of and third brothers if and when the Here you can instruct Julian to you enter the building, and reverts three brothers in their quest to first and second ones are killed eat, sleep, use magic, or buy, give, tothe \"outside\" soundtrackwhen recover a carved Talisman, stolen off. pick up, and use any object being you go back outside. from their village, Tambry. The top two thirds of the screen carried or within range. You can Faeru Tale, is full of neat touches The Talisman had been kept are a window looking down onto also talk to other characters in the like the day and night feature. sacred by generations, by the the immediate area around Julian game and look around, which, With superb music and digitised villagers, who firmly believed it sound effects, together with well had the power to protect the 35555 designed graphics, plenty of village from all evil. characters to meet, both good The theft of the Talisman and evil, and lots of objects to find followed a night of strange goings and use, this first class animated on which started with a dark, adventure should keep advenhooded, figure floating through ture and arcade adventure freaks the middle of the village. Not far occupied for ages highly behind this mysterious spectre, recommended marched hoardes of dead corpses  Graphics and skeletons, all armed with  Sound swords and maces.  Value The ghastly procession halted  Playability in the centre of the village and the creatures began performing a homens Of Tambry hideous ritual which lasted until T oninc. dawn. When the first villagers ven It opened tured out of their houses they dise entered the river. covered the Talisman was missing. Br 35 lekt 20 ind: 15. Vir: 23 With 28 And so your quest begins. C+VG ana "


"Reviews Road Runner the A tean presented, their Latin name is displayed beneath them. These, often hilarious, names change from game to game. With the formalities over, it's The answer is a resounding YES! down to the serious business of SUPPLIER: US. GOLD/ Although RR is by all accounts scoffing bird seed. Level one ATARI GAMES a simple game, it nevertheless begins with a meandering road PRICE: .99 possesses all the pre-requisites of full of neat little piles of seed. At VERSION TESTED: an addictive, fast moving arcade the back of the first screen is a ATARI ST The most obvious difference romp. cave, cut into the rock. At the The game has four basic levels moment, there is a board, nailed ere is a board, nailed between levels one and five is the DE Everybody has their favourite car which are repeated, with added across the cave's entrance The introduction of mines which blow up when stepped on. The bad toon characters. For some it's extras, for levels five to eight, nine board says \"closed\"! Tom and Jerry, others swear by to 12 etc. In each level, you conn each level VOU CON As RR heains collecting the news is that mines are normally to As RR begins collecting the the Pink Panther, but for me nothtrol Road Runner as he tries to seed, he has to avoid not only be found right next to seed, making could match the blank look of gobble as many piles of bird seed Covote but also a series of trucks ing eating a much more preresignation on Wile E. Coyote's as he can, without getting nabbed that rush along the road from left carious business than before. When you start your next game, face seconds after he has eaten a by Coyote. to right. If you get run over, you whole bag of Acme earthquake Of course, life is never that simloose a life, but if you can lure and providing you got past level pills and decided that perhaps ple, and soon RR has to contend Coyote into the path of an on one, the cave, remember the cave, coming truck, you get a bonus. will no longer be blocked. If can A bonus is also awarded if you now be used as a short cut to the eat every pile of seed. If you miss last level played in the previous five piles RR will faint and loose ga game V. useful! With typical cartoon-like chase a life. The road soon turns into a cliff music, excellent sprite design and path, full of hair-pin bends that animation, and simple but effecslows RR down if he runs too tive gameplay, Road Runner will close to the edge. If you manage make a worthy addition to any ST to get to the end of the cliff path it's arcaders collection. on to level two. C+VG HIT! Having failed in level one. Graphics 9 Coyote resorts to various gadgets, Sound in level two, to help him nab Value vou.  Playability 9 Le C+VG version by CHIVAS Rtari Games 1985 Hades Nebula this wasn't such a neat idea after with falling boulders, mines, and all. other hazards that we know and As with many of the most en love from the cartoon series. dearing, and enduring, cartoons, Each level is comprised of a Road Runner relies on the simhorizontally orientated map any. MACHINE: ST ple, but effective, one against one thing from eight to about 12 SUPPLIER: NEXUS/ theme, for its success. screens wide, and one screen INFOGRAMES Every plot involves Coyote high. The action is seen from an PRICES: .95/.95 chasing Road Runner but never elevated side-view and the ultraquite catching him, always being smooth scroll follows the move. Two more titles to add to the ever thwarted by RR's superior speed ment of RR across the map from increasing number of vertical and cunning, or tripping over his right to left. shoot-em-ups for the ST (see also own ineptitude. By making the foreground June +VG), both less than So has Road Runner ST, conscroll, while leaving the backperfect. verted from the arcade, captured ground static, the game is given a Altair is Infogrames latest the atmosphere of the cartoon? feeling of depth which, in part, offering, and features extremely offsets the rather simplistic, stylised slick graphics giving the whole foreground graphics. game a distinctly metallic feel. Level one starts by introducing Almost anything can be des us to the two main characters in troyed and most things animate the game, namely Road Runner when hit. and Wile E. Coyote. As each is Unfortunately most of us will 84 "


"of achievement giving you the urge to go back and get further next time, an urge you just don't get here. Hades, Nebula, the latest pods giving you extra speed, fire offering from Nexus, is another power, and weaponry. But none flawed shooter, this time suffering of this helps you forget the fact from frustratingly sluggish con. that Nexus expect you to save the trols, giving you the feeling that world flying the equivalent to a the game is being played in a 50cc moped with wings on. average on the presentation and huge bowl of very thick galactic general flashness scales, it doesn't syrup. Altair Hades Nebula wean you gently into the really HN does have redeeming Graphics 10 tricky bits, by giving you a few features like well designed Sound 8 easier levels first. graphics and even mining platValue If it did, you would have a sense forms, from which rebels release  Playability 7 never see much of this designer programming, because the game is just too hard to play, and even requires the use of the keyboard to utilise certain weapons. Although Altair is way above Barbarian ing on whether you're walking or running) During combat, you are treated to a whole gambit of digitised grunts and groans, as Hegor butchers away at whatever monstronsity is unfortunate enough to MACHINE: AMIGAIST Happily no. Although Barbe within hacking range. To defeat  SUPPLIER: PSYGNOSIS barian still exhibits some of the your foe timing is crucial: VERSION REVIEWED: failings which held back Arena When you eventually do kill AMIGA and Brataccas, overall these are someone, or something, their PRICE: .95 far less in evidence, and are outspirit swirls up into the air crysFOR BOTH weighed by tight game design and tallising into a skull with sparkling good playability. ruby eyes which then dissolves The three previous releases from Barbarian is a four-way scrollinto nothingness. Merseysiders Psygnosis have all ing combat arcade/adventure in Apart from the more obvious belonged in the \"floored masterwhich you, that's Hegor the Barliving, or semi-living, video naspiece\" dept; being ambitious offer barian, must brave the fearful ties, the game is packed full of ings with impressive packaging realms of Durgar., an underIndiana Jones type collapsing and graphics, but with little or no ground world created by your bridges, trap doors that suddenly real gameplay to match the out: erstwhile brother Necron for him halo for the job, and after all, he open to reveal archers like mutastanding presentation, and his hideous band of followers. did his favourite dragon, Vulcuran, ted jack-in-the-boxes, and spikes, So was Barbarian, the latest Necron is so awesomely evil to kill your father a couple of years activated by pressure pads in the effort by Psygnosis programmer that he can only be killed by an back, so there's a spot of revenge floor, that have a nasty habit of David Lawson and artist Garvan equal and opposite force of good mixed up in the plot too. droping down from the rock ceilCorbett destined to fall into the and, yes you guessed it, you're Anyway, here you are at the ing with alarming speed, ready to same category? the only one with a big enough entrance to Durgan, armed only install air conditioning in your with your wits and a gleaming brain. sword, given to you by a mys And, if you do persevere, you'll terious druid just before he disapbe richly rewarded with the sight peared behind a tree. Later in the of new, and even stranger looking game you'll find arrows and a animals, not to mention traps of bow, which lets you kill things an extremely devious nature. from a safe distance. Control is via a keyboard, d, Graphics Graph mouse, joystick, or any combina Sound tion of these. Joystick control is . Value 'not recommended'in the players.  Playability guide, and small wonder with all the different actions that Hegor can be made to perform. These include walk in all four directions, stop, run, attack, defend, flee, pick up, drop, use and jump (a different action depend200000 85 the ed tean "


"Reviews Yes : Colonial Conquest the A team puter controlled major power in The same rules apply to naval an attempt to curtail it's intentions incursions, except that a ship can of attacking you. sail to any other port on the map. If you intend attacking a minor Each ship can only carry 1000 tional areas that they actually concountry with more than just brute soldiers and all are lost when you MACHINE: ATARI ST trolled at the time, and the army strength and ignorance, there are suffer a defeat at sea, so it's imporSUPPLIER: STRATEGIC strength and net worth of minor two more ways to ensure your tant to co-ordinate the moveSIMULATIONS/ countries are present to reflect victory. ments of your navy in the most US. GOLD Firstly, you can send spies into efficient manner possible. PRICES: .99 In addition, if the computer that country to ascertain the The final phase, combat, is controls Russia, France, or strength of its armies and the where players see the results of The late 1880s and early 1900s England, that country is deemed value of its treasury. the decisions they made in the marked the grand age of im to be at war with Germany, and Secondly, you can try to under previous two phases. perialism. Great Britain, the U.S. vice-versa. mine that country's military In this computer controlled Germany, France, Russia and Up to six humans can play strength by causing a coup d'etat. sequence, the game scrolls over Japan were all involved in the per Colonial conquest, but if you if you spend enough money, a the 4x2 screen map of the world, suit of world dominance. can't get hold of five other power coup will occur and you will be in showing the result of each indiNow you can relive that era crazed individuals, the computer control of the country without vidual battle by the colour in and leave your own mark on his can always be relied on to act as a having to lift a single military which disputed territory is filled. tory, as the head of any of these stand in imperialist! finger. No change of colour means great powers, in a bid to colonise Having chosen which of the The second phase, movement, the defending power managed to as much of the free world as poss three scenarios you wish to play, is used to move armies to adja hang on to control of that ible, while fattening the domestic and which country you want to cent countries. If the destination country. coffers, and defending your shores represent, the game commences country is neutral, or controlled As each player inputs his or her against attack from other major in earnest. by another major power, this is instructions for each of the game powers all as greedy as you! Colonial Conquest consists of seen as an act of war and battle phases, the other players must There are three scenarios: three phases: building, move. ensues. look away from the screen. This is standard, 1880, and 1914. If you ment, and combat. During the a perfect time for the other choose the standard scenario, all building phase, each player in players to indulge in a little dipthe major countries control only turn can build up his land and lomatic banter or back-stabbing. their own areas at the start of the naval forces, as well as fortify army The ability for players to make game, and the army strength and installations. You can also offer and break peace treaties and net-worth of all minor countries economic aid to neutral countries COLONIAL CONQUES agreements, and to gang up on are randomly set. in the form of a loan which they one another, makes the game With the other two scenarios, will use to build larger armies. You similar in some respects to the each country starts with the addican even lend money to a comexcellent board game Diplomacy. COPYRIGHT 1985 As you delve deeper into Colonial Conquest, you realise STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC. just how much thought went into VERSION 1.1 the design of this computerised DATUS board game. SEE sai? The ST conversion (another by Hungary's Andromeda Software) 2) SCENARIOS is proficient and bug-free, and STANDARD GAME should appeal to anybody who likes Risk, Diplomacy, or a spot of 1914 THE BRINK OF HAR armchair dictating. SAVED GAME 1888 THE RACE FOR THE COLONIES 00 3) PLAYER SETTINGS ENGLAND A GERMANY FRANCE USA JAPAN RUSSIA EXIT 333333 323000 @mocec    NNNNNN AAAAA UVUVIVO  JJJJJJ  mnnnnn  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability 00 00 4) HIMMING SCORE 1500 1888 1586 UNLIMITED 86 "


"NEW LOW PRICE ST! ATARI 5205 ATARI VIV ONLY FROM SILICA  VA=299 MUCH FOR SO LITTL3 There is nothing that can compare with the incredible value for money offered by Atari's 520ST-FM. For only  (+VAT-), you can purchase a powerful 512K RAM computer, with a 95 key keyboard (including numeric keypad). MIDI interface, GEM, a palette of 512 colours, mouse controller, and a 512K built-in disk drive. The 520ST-FM has a TV modulator built-in, and comes with a lead to allow you to plug it straight into any domestic colour television set. The mains transformer is also built-in to the keyboard, so there are no messy external boxes. You couldn't wish for a more compact, powerful and stylish unit. Atari ST computers are now firmly established in the UK, there are nearly 500 software titles already available for a wide variety of applications and the list is growing all the time. And that's not all. When you buy your new 520ST-FM (or any Atari ST computer) from Silica Shop, you will get a lot more, including a FREE Silica ST Starter Kit worth over . Read the ONLY FROM SILICA section on the left to see why you should buy your new high power, low price 520STFM from Silica Shop, the UK's No1 Atari Specialists. For further details of the range of Atari ST computers and the FREE Silica ST Starter Kit, complete and return the reply coupon below. ATARI 520ST-FM NOW ONLY  (+VAT=) 520ST-FM with 512K RAM & mono monitor 399 tinc VAT) Upgrade from 512K RAM to 1024K RAM 6100 Cinc VAT Finally, there's a personal computer that not only solve problemake other computers, but is solves the one problem that other computers have created. Affordability, Silica Shop are pleased to present the ST range of personal business computers from Alar The ST designed using the most recent through conductor technology, producing a personal computer that performs with Sewer parts which means it costs to make and less to buy. The latest ST computers now include built in Do p pland buildink driver The TOSporting system and GEVindow environment are now on ROM chips which are already instated in the ST Reyboard. This enables automatic tant booting when you switch on Silica Shop are pleased to offer the complete Atari ST range Our mail order department is situated in Sidcup and we have a retail outlets at Sidcup, Lion House Tottenham Court Rd) and Selfridges (Oxford Street. We have eight years experience of Atari products, longer than any other UK company, and are well established as the UK'No 1 Atari specialt with a group turnover of over 9 million and excess of 30 we offer you unbeatable service and support. We provide several tules which you will find invaluable during your Atari computing life and most of these facilities are available ONLY FROM SILICA We suggest that you read through what we have to offer, before you decide where to purchase your Atari ST FREE STARTER KIT-Only From Silica When you purchase any Alan ST keyboard, you will not only receive the best value for money computer on the market, but you will receive the following from Aal Corporation was part of the package \"BASIC Language Das \"BASIC M S T Owner Manual TOS GEVON ROU you buy your ST from Silica Shop, you will receive NEOchrome Sampler color graphic program for Word Word Processor In addition, we al Silica would like to see you get off to a flying start with your new computer, so we have put together a special ST STARTER KIT worth over 100, which we are giving away FREE OF CHARGE with every ST computer purchased at our normal retail prices. This it is available ONLY FROM SILICA and is aimed at providing users with a valuable introduction to the world of computing. We are continually upgrading the ST Starter Kit, which contains public domain and other licensed software, as well as books magazines and accessories all olevant to ST computing Return the coupon below for details DEDICATED SERVICING Only From Silica Al Silica Shop, we have a dedicated service department of seven time Atari trained technical staff This team is totally dedicated to servicing Atan computer products. Their acumulated knowledge, skill and experience makes them second to none in their field. You can be sure that any work carried out by them is of the highest standard. A standard of servicing which we believe you will find ONLY FROM SILICA In addition to providing full servicing tacities for Atari ST computers (both in and out of wamanty, our team is also able to offer memory and modulator upgrade to ST computers IMO RAM UPGRADE Our grade on the standard Alar SOST-MO 520ST-FM keyboard In the memory from 512X1 & masse 1024K has a year warranty and is available from Siica at an additional retail price of only 656 96 (VAT 100). TV MODULATOR UPGRADE: Silica can upgrade the 10405T-F to include TV modulator so that you can then use it with your TV . This is an internal upgrade and does not involve any untidy external boxes. A cable to connect your ST to any domestic TV la included in the price of the upgrade which is only 14 (inc VAT). The upgrade is also available for starty 520ST computers at the same price THE FULL STOCK RANGE Only From Silica em to stocks of all Atar d products and our warehouse cames stock of over million We import many software tiles direct from the USA and you will find that we have new releases in advance of many of our competition. Unlike dealers who may only lock selected tirties, we have the full range. In addition, we carry a complete line of all books which have been written about the Atari ST. A ranges wide sound is something you will find is available ONLY FROM SILICA AFTER SALES SUPPORT Only From Silica Resured that when you buy your ST from Silica Shop, you will be fully supported. Our freemailings ofre s and development. This will help to keep you up to date with new software is well as what's happening in the Alan market and in addition, our sales staff are at the end of a lephone line to service all of your Atar requirements. If you purchase an ST from Silics and would like any technical advice, we have a full time fechnical support team to help you get the best from your computer. Because we have both the staff and the systems specifically dedicated to providing after sales service on Atari ST computers, we are confident that our users enjoy an exceptionally high level of support. This can be received ONLY FROM SILICA FREE CATALOGUES Only From Silica Asics Shop, we recognise that serious ses require an in-depth information service, which is why we maltre newsletters and price lists to our ST owners. These are up to 48 pages long and are crammed wie technical details as well as special offers and product descriptions. If you have already purchased an ST and would like to have your name added to our mailing list, please complete the coupon & return it to This information service is available ONLY FROM SILICA FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY From Silica Wost orders are processed through our computer within 24 hours of receiving the Most hardware on went by the overnight GROUP 4 courier service FREE OF CHARGE to customers within the UK. This method helps to ensure minimum delay and maximum protection PRICE MATCH Only From Silica We hope that the combination of our low prices, FREE UK dellvery service, FREE Starter Kit and FREE ar sales support, will be enough to make you buy your Atari equipment from Silica Shop. If however, there is something you wish to purchase, and you find one of our competitors offering it at a lower price then please contact out was department, providing with our competitor's name, address and phone number of our competitor has the goods in slock, we will normally match the other on me product same price basis and will provide you without normal tree delivery. We that we are not the only company who will match a competitor's price. However, you come to us for a price match you will also be entitled to our after sales service including tree newsletter and technical support. This makes our price match promise rather special, something you will receive ONLY FROM SILICA We don't want you to go anywhere else for your Aiari products. So shop at Silica, the UK's Not Alan Specialist ATARI 1040ST-F NEW PRICE We are pleased to announce a new reduced price point on the 1040ST-F which is now available for only 2499 in VAT). The 1040 is a powerful computer with Mb of RAM and to includes built-in 1Mb double sided disk drive. The 1040 has been designed for use on business and professional applications most of which require a high resolution monochrome or colour monitor. It does not therefore have an RF modulator for use with a domestie TV set. Modulators can be fitted for $40 fine VAT) ADS Keyhow with con ATARI MEGA STs NOW IN STOCK For the user who requires even more RAM than the 520 or 1040 ST offer the new MEGA ST computers are now available There are two MEGA ST', one with Mb of RAM and the other with a massive 4Mb. Both new computers are fully compatible with existing ST's and run currently available ST software. The MEGA ST styled as an expandable Central Processing Unit with open architecture and a detachable keyboard. They are supplied with GEM, a tree mouse controller and all extras as with the 520 or 1040. Prices are as follows: MEGA STO Kevard GPU MEGA STA . CRU+SWS Mono Monitor e WAT GAST 40 yard CPU C ATE MEGA STAM CU Mor e WAT To: Silica Shop Lid, Dept CVG 1087, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX PLEASE SEND ME FREE LITERATURE ON THE ATARI Mr/Mrs/Ms: ........... Initials: ............ Surname: Address: SIDCUP (& Mail Order) 01-309 1111 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX LONDON 01-580 4839 Lion House (1st floor), 227 Tottenham Court Rd, London, WIP OHX LONDON 01-629 1234 ext 3914 Selfridges (1st floor), Oxford Street, London, W1A 1AB Postcode: Do you already own a computer If so, which one do you own? --"


"Reviews Deluxe Paint II the A team    BYTE. SL 05 menu called \"effects\". These are MACHINES: AMIGA Stencil, Background, and Per SUPPLIER:ELECTRONIC spective. ARTS Stencil allows you to literally PRICE:  make a stencil of your painting. Imagine you have painted a land. Electronic Arts were the first comscape but decided you want it to pany to take the Amiga seriously. be set against a sunset instead of a They were working on a range of cloudy sky. No problem! Just titles for the new wonder-machine make a stencil of the colours months before its release in the you've used in the cloudy sky. All Autumn of 85. the other areas of your painting One of these, Deluxe Paint, will now form a stencil through became an instant success and which you can paint. achieved an unprecedented 50% How many times have you penetration amongst Amiga made a mistake and wanted to go like five minutes ago? And of not only to define the position of owners by the end of 1985. back to what your picture looked course you were too lazy to save the vanishing point in your picbefore you made your fatal artisticture, but to cut out a brush, rotate blunder. it into any plane you want by Well now you don't need to twiddling its x, y, and z axes and worry because, using Back then paint with it, in the plane you ground, you can \"fix\" your have just created. You can even current painting to the screen and cover the whole plane with wallthen paint over it, safe in the paper made up from any pattern knowledge that if you click on you care to use. \"clear screen\" at any time, only Deluxe Paint II has well over a the bits you've added after fixing hundred new features making ita the background will be cleared, must for any Amiga owner with a leaving your \"fixed\" painting as it creative bent Owners of Deluxe was when you last used the back Paint I can get an upgrade for ground feature. about . For the rest of us, the SACHS Perhaps the most impressive price of  may seem a little new feature in Deluxe Paint II is steep. but you are getting the Although flushed with the suc Perspective, which allows you, best! cess of his program, Dan Silva didn't rest on his laurels. Instead he set about creating Deluxe Paint II almost as soon as the original was completed. A year later the sequel was ready, running faster and packed full of tasty new features many suggested by Deluxe Paint users. The August 1986 issue of C+VG carried a review of Deluxe Paint and we'll be reviewing Deluxe Paint Il in depth in the near future. But, for now, here's a quick look at three of the most impressive new features to be found in HE definitive Amiga art package The teatures are all found in a new "


"Academy COMP similar products are the digitised sound effects, the icon/weapon system, and the screen editor. Along with ST Gauntlet, ST Impact must boast the most impressive sound effects yet to grace the Atari 16 bit range. Every fanfare and effect has been  MACHINE: ST classes, so secret only qualified sampled to give the game an  SUPPLIER: CRL pilots are told about them. atmosphere far superior to that PRICE: .95 Once you graduate from GASP possible using the ST's own humthere's 20 real-live missions just ble sound capabilities. waiting to get you killed! Each time the ball hits your bat sules. These capsules can be The executive version of Tau The ST version of this CRL or one of the brick wall sides, a caught as they drop down the Ceti, Academy, has finally classic is essentially the same as its musical note, of randomly chosen reached the ST. As a trainee 8-bit predecessors, but with a host pitch, is played. Close your eyes and destroyed. screen when certain bricks are hit skimmer pilot, you enroll in the of graphical bells and whistles to and you could be forgiven for galaxy's top training school, the tart it up for its first 16 bit outing. the nine powers are shown in believing you were listening to Galcorp Academy for Skimmer a 3 x 3 matrix of icons, situated If you fancy a thinking persons someone improvising a tune on a beside the play area. These are Pilots GASP. arcade game, then Academy is xylophone. At GASP, you will learn to cus arranged in order of cost in for you. As with certain other games of bonus capsules) from top left to tomise your own skimmer, by the same ilk, various sundry items bottom right. selecting its physical characteris Graphics 7 soon start floating towards your tics such as well as what weapons The flexibility of the weapon/ Sound bat during play. and displays to include. icon system introduces an eleThese objects range from black ment of strategy to Impact, not You will also participate in many  Playability 8 holesto Invader-style space ships, present in other breakout clones. and have the annoying habit of Being able to choose what icons, deflecting the ball at all sorts of or combination of icons, to activate, embarrasing angles. sets the game above the rest. And What makes this feature toler as if that wasn't enough of a able, however, is the fantastic reason to buy it, there's the small sampled explosion that bursts out matter of eighty different screens. of the monitor whenever one is Mercifully programmer John destroyed. Dale has implemented a passHissiles 8 Equally impressive is the fan Shield Loser word system allowing instant fare that greets you at the start of access to high levels. ANN'S 4 every game, and the sound effects So, after you've completed Height Speed that accompany warping to the level ten, the program gives you a Flares 4 next level and the \"game over password which can be entered at Torgetting some other Fuel message. When you lose a life, the start of subsequent games command > LAUNCH the program emits a sound not allowing you to skip the first nine Launch 0.K. unlike the mating call of a sperm levels. A new password is given whale but played backwards! every ten screens. Bat and ball movement is But, after all this, Impact still smooth and the bricks disin has one final goody at the bottom tegrate, pixel by pixel, when of the sack the screen editor. destroyed. Although there are 80 pre-deAs with similar games, many fined levels, screens S1-128 have bricks must be hit two or more been left blank for the user to times before they bite the dust. create his or her own walls of any Some deflect back your laser--a shape, size, or colour. These can particularly nasty way to go! then be saved off, and accessed and some are plainindestructible. and played immediately by enterIn addition to these, some ing the correct password. screens also contain five bricks, each with one of the letters of the Combine the editor feature word BONUS. Destroy these in with the incredible sound effects order and an extra life is awarded. and the icon weapon system, stir All the action takes place in liberal portions of playability against a scrolling starfield, makand addictiveness and Audiogenic ing the ball much easier to follow have a sure fire ST and Amiga MACHINE: ATARI ST and the Amiga. Both versions than in Arkanoid, although this winner on their hands. SUPPLIER: AUDIOGENIC are identical. also means the screens lack the PRICES: ST .95/ Although on the face of it, 3D feel achieved in the latter Graphics AMIGA .95 Impact looks close enogh to using the shadows cast by both Sound 11 out of 10! VERSION TESTED: Arkanoid to make Audiogenic's bricks and ball onto various tex Value ATARI ST lawyers tremble at the knees, in tured backgrounds. Playability fact there area number of fun. Further sound effects can be If you thought you'd seen the last damental differences between heard when either bat or ball is of the Breakout clones, think the two. Indeed many people given extra powers or weapons. again because Audiogenic have may and up buying them both. There are nine different powers come up with a little gem called The three main features which you can use, each costing betImpact, available for both ST set Impact apart from all other ween one and nine bonus capImpact "


"SYSTEMS ARCHITECTS D ' Title 29.00 20.00 GLF Football Hacker Borrowed Time Basketball 20.00 ST/Amiga ST/Amiga 24.95 24.9 19.95 19.95 Trinity Witness Wishbringer Zork Cards Electronic Pool Flipside Goldrunner Karate Kid il Lands of Havoc 16.00 20.00 20 00 16.00 20.00 Shanghai Tasmes 25.00 Activision Activision Activision Activision Activision Activision Activision Activision Activision CAL Football Hacker Hacker 11 Intern Karate LOP 25.00 STIAmiga 34.95 29,95 ST/Amiga 29.95 2495 STIAmiga 29.96 24.95 ST/Amiga 29.95 2496 STAmiga 29952495 ST/Amiga 29.95 24.95 6.95 5.95 19.95 16.95 ST 19.95 16.95 ST 19.95 16.95 Stiga 24.96 1995 STiAmiga 24.96 1995 STIAmige 24.9519.95 ST 19.95 16.96 STIAmiga 34.95 28.96 ST/Amiga 34.95 28.95 Ins-Clue Books 25 00 7 Cities of Gold Archon Adventure Cons Set Artic Fox Marble Madness One to One 16.00 20.00 35.00 25.00 15.00 20:00 25.00 Crafton & Xunk Eden Blues Infocom Infocom Infocom info.com Icon Infocom Intocom wogrames ogrames gunes Infogrames Infogrames Infogrames Lamasoft Vasartronic Vatronic Microdead Microdeal Microdeal Microdeal 25.00 25.00 Mud Pies Pinball Factory Super Conductor Time Bandes Trivia Challenge Silent Service Crusade in Europe F15 Strike Eagle Ultima Balance of Power Black Cauldron Kings Quest 2 SOIL Sr Force STiAmiga 24.96 STAmiga24.95 Activision Activision Anco 1995 1995 ST ST 19.95 19.95 20.00 25.00 16.95 16.96 Shanghai Tass Times Demolition Karate King Space Battle The Puw Guld of Thieves Faery Tale Adv Borrowed Time Balyo Cut Throats 10.00 McAdam Bumper Colours Outcast Nina Mission Ance STi Amigo 995 8.95 35 00 20.00 15.00 Anco Phalanx Challenger Cruncher Factory Amiga Amiga Amiga Amiga ST 9.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 14.95 29.95 29.95 8.95 8.95 8.95 8.95 12.95 2095 24.95 Anco Anco Enchanter THHGTG widel Leather Goddess Mindhadow AMV Goldrunner Jupiter Probe Karate Kid il Starglider Hollywood Poker Swooper Leaderboard Leaderboard Tour Mean 18 20.00 27700 20.00 ST 9 95 7.95 ST9 .95 7.95 ST 249519.95 ST 19.95 16.95 ST/Amiga 249519.95 ST.Amiga 295 1995 STiAmiga 24.95 19.95 Stiga 24519.95 STrAmige 249519.95 ST/Amiga 39.95 32.95 ST/Amiga 29.95 24.95 Amiga 29.952495 Amig 2995 2496 StAmige 2995246 ST 49.00 39.00 15.00 20.00 Amiga Microprose Microprose Mirrorson Mirrorson Mirrorson Mirrorsoft Uima Balance of Power Defend. of Crown Music Studio Planetfail Seastalker Sorcerer Spellbreaker StarCross Asha Trogy World Games Hades Nebula Mercenary Arkangid 16.00 20.00 Amiga ST/Amiga 24.00 2400 24,00 29.95 29.95 24.95 24.95 Sinbad Archon Archon Adventure Const. Artic Fox Marble Madness One on One Instant Music Skylox Super Huey Bridge Player Arioso Ariola Arolasoft Arolasoft Arilo Arios Arias Arioso Arason Suspended Trinity Witness Wishbringer 30.00 30.00 Amiga STIAmiga STM Amiga ST Stiga Amiga 2995 29.95 19.95 19.96 26.96 19.95 Art Director Fim Director Fleet Street Hades Nebula Mercenary Comp. Arland 24.95 24.95 16.95 16.95 1995 16.95 Mirrors Microsoft NUS 24.00 24.00 24.00 ST ST 115.00 95.00 19.95 16.95 Arena Brattaus Deep Space Jewels of Darkness Guild of Thieves 20.00 Ederson Elders Elders Edersoft Electric Uma l Balance of Power Defender + Crown ST 1495 11.95 ST 19.95 16.95 ST/Amiga 3495 29.95 STIAmiga 34.95 29.95 ST/Amiga 245 19.95 12.00 20.00 Amiga Karte ST Karate Pro-Sprite Pre-Sound 1st Word O Bal Silicon Dreams Games Compendium CheckMate Wanderer Tarrestial Encounter Liberator Mousetrap ST/Amiga 39.95 32.95 35.00 Deep Space Arena Brattacus Barbarians Sound Digitiser Hollywood Poker 12.00 Sinbad 12.00 12.00 Pandora Psyposis Psygnosis Psygnosis Ro Ro Roti Robik Tynesot Tynesant Arena Bratacus Deep Space 25.00 24.00 Stiga 19.95 16.95 STAmiga 19.95 16.95 ST/Amiga 19.95 16.95 ST 12.959.96 ST 1495 11.96 ST 14.95 11.95 Apsargy Alamat Realty Dungeon Reality Championship Wrest 20.00 20.00 POA Extensor Uberator Mousetrap Plutos ATARI ST TITLES Altar Firebird Firebird Firebird Forbind Find Grein Graphics Gremin Graphics 15.00 Mercross Guild of Thieves The Golden Path Silicon Dreams Starglider Typhoon Trailblaze Faerytale Bally 17.00 Leaderboard Tour, Leader Mean 18 US Gold US Gold US Gold ST/Amiga 24.95 ST/Amiga 9.95 ST/AMiga 29.95 19 95 8.95 24.95 Macadam Bumper Art Director Film Director FeST Publisher Borrowed Time Basketball Questorbe Roadwar 2000 52.00 100.00 20.00 15.00 20.00 20.00 15.00 Marco STA 19.95 STAmiga 19.95 ST/Amiga 24.95 ST/Aiga 24.95 ST 19.35 ST/Amiga 19.95 STIAmiga 24.96 ST Amiga 24.96 ST 2 4.95 Amiga 19.95 STAmiga 29.95 STAmiga 34.95 STAmiga 29.96 STAmiga 29.95 ST/Amiga 29.96 STAmiga 29.96 ST.Amiga 29.95 STAmiga 29.95 ST/Amiga 34.95 ST/Amiga 29.95 ST/Amiga 29.95 STAmiga 29.95 Stiga 29.95 1595 16.95 19.95 19.95 15.95 16.95 1995 1995 19.95 39.95 24.96 29.35 2495 24.95 24.95 24.95 24.95 24.95 29.95 24.95 2495 2495 24.95 Phantasie ST 2 4.95 24.95 Inicom 20.00 Intocom Deadline Enchanter Hitch Her Intidel Hacker Hacker2 Little Como. People Shanghai ST 24.96 1995 Infocom Icon US Gold US Gold US Gold US Gold US Gold US Gold US Gold US Gold US Gold US Gold US Gold Winter Games World Games 20.00 Xevious 20.00 ATARI ST MARDWARE 520 STEM 355.00 520 STAV + Mong 485.00 520 STEM + Colour 585.00 1040 STF 585.00 1040 STF + Mono 585.00 Hard Disk SH204) 685.00 Mono Monitor 135.00 STAmiga . Hardbal Autodu Roadrunner Roadwar 2000 Colon Conquest Altern. Reality Champ. Wrestling 10th Frame Quest Probe 24.95 19.95 Mind Forever Moonmist Planetail Seastaker Sorcerer Indocom Infocom Skylox Bridge Player 2000 ST Karate Protector Station Pro Sorte Pro Sound 15.00 15.00 20.00 32.00 ST 19.95 16.95 US Gold 12.00 399.00 249.00 Starcross Stationtall Star Glider Intocom Intocom Super Huey Submarine Sim. Temple Apshal World Games Winter Games ST/Amiga 29.95 24.95 STAmiga 29.952495 STAmiga 29 952495 ST.Amiga 19.95 ST 24.96 STIAmiga 24.95 STiAmiga 24.95 STiAmiga 24.95 17.95 19.95 19.95 1996 1996 US Gold US Gold US Gold 20.00 15.00 Suspect Colour Monitor External Drive Amiga 2000 PRATURS Atari SMA Quedate Typhoon Passengers 17.00 See Amiga Listing for prices of ST Infocom Adventures Please make cheques payable to Systems Architects Ltd. We also accept Access and Visa. Prices subject to availability VISA  01-549 3028 6/9 MARKET PLACE, KINGSTON UPON THAMES, SURREY KT1 4BR "


"ho O Reviews Karate Kid II KARATE KID II The first thing you'll notice is MACHINE: AMIGA, ATARIST that both guys are incredibly small, SUPPLIER: MICRODEAL but the pictures on the box show PRICE: $24.95 normal sized characters. Weird, REVIEWER: CHRIS Still, that's not really important. You must defeat your opponFollowing the recent trend in ent with the same old Karate \"Kick 'em dead\" games, it was moves, roundhouse kick, low only a matter of time before they punch, sweep, flying kick etc. started to appear on the new 16. However, I am told by one of our bit range of micros. readers that the flying kick is not Karate Kid II is one of the first included in any style of karate, if the hell out of me why Microdeal martial arts games to do so, and it this is so then why include it? made the music so terrible. originally made its debut on the All moves, there are 16, are Yep, I am telling you that the Atari ST. Having sold quite a few executed very fast, and it is this music on an Amiga game is awful! copies in this format, Microdeal fact which puts KK2 in a slightly The Glory of Love, more like The has decided to convert it to the higher category than most other Glory of Earmuffs! Amiga. \"beat em ups. The animation is After beating your opponent At first glance the game seems also improved by its speed, and you progress onto the next scene, playable, and slightly addictive. gives a high degree of realism. For of which there are 11. I say eleven, But once you've had 19 or 20 example, you see a roundhouse but after every two screens you where he disappeared only to rerounds, it begins to show its kick go all the way round, not like get to go for a bonus by either emerge right behind me. flaws. some other games. breaking ice or catching flies. The game starts with you. While fighting you are treated The game is also not without Daniel, standing in front of your to some nice sampled effects, and the odd bug or two, and I found it Graphics first opponent, Toshio. There's you really know when you've hit quite amusing when with one  Sound no messing about, it's straight into your opponentin a soft spot. With kick I sent my opponent whizzing Value battle. all this digitised screaming it beats across the screen into the wall, Playability cono Space Battle action after mode selection, you'll usualy ended up right in front of a notice the difference between this large asteroid, but it seems this one and the arcade straight away. ship has been fitted with a new The rocks are nicely shaded in version. various greys, they move fast, and Overall, Space Battle is a nice SPACE BATTLE special bonus, you can have two in a slightly alarmingway, towards game at the right price, which MACHINE: AMIGA players on screen at the same you! should appeal to lots of gamesSUPPLIER: ANCO time Your ship is placed in the centers. Even the loading picture, a PRICE: .95 That's right, and Anco have tre of all this, and it is coloured red death-blossom lookalike, is nicely REVIEWER: CHRIS even mucked about with this or green, depending on the playing done, and is complemented by a option allowing different kinds of mode selected. It can fire laser short but adequate musical score. What's this? Asteroids? Yes, but a two player mode, you can play beams (small pixels) in rapid Be careful with the Two-Player very good version of the arcade Competition or Team. bursts and really moves fast modes, one wrong shot and fists classic and what's more, it's Competition has you playing Your speed can lead to really fly. A great little game. cheap. against your partner, blasting flashy performance. You can I know that .95 is a lot of her/him as well as those nasty whizz after a small rock, doa quick  Graphics money, but it's cheaper than most rocks which try to end your game 360 degrees, and then blast the  Sound  Value Amiga and ST games, which nor quickly. Team mode puts you in sucker with one amazingly accur mally retail at around .95. action together, and both players ate pixel. This takes time to per  Playability Space Battle is a version of that go for one big score. fect, but it's worth it just to show old classic Asteroids, but it has If you are playing on your own off colour, solid graphics, and some (sigh) then the usual one-player It can also hyperspace, which neattwists, all of which were missmode is available. will transfer you to another part of ing from the original. And, as a When you're launched into the the screen. In the original you 0000 "


"Cornished Company Profile the A team on having a \"work in progress\" attitude. Although most or demo disk from each programmers are payed on an programmer, or a group of advance and royalty basis, he programmmers, at least once will listen to any deal put to him. every two months, and more \"They will almost always often towards the end of a make more money in the end project. It's important to always on a royalty deal, but sometimes know how each game is someone needs a cash lumpprogressing and whether there sum to buy a car or a house, so are going to be any major I'll buy the game outright if it problems. helps them.\" \"We don't really use outside Apart from publishing home evaluaters to play test or debuggrown games, Microdeal also our products. The programmers has the European rights to the are their own most severe complete catalogue of US. based Michtron, who specialise When it comes to money, in ST utilities such as Back-up, John has a fairly relaxed Zoomracks, and Mighty Mail. critics.\" musicians and graphic artists The G ames here's a war and it can only be good for the public. Hardware and software prices will continue to fall. By January or February of next year, we may have TV modulated versions of both the ST and the Amiga, with internal drives, selling for . Both machines are going to be perceived as top end games consoles.\" \"Within a year, sixteen bit software price points will have come down to .95, Microdeal have gradually .95, and .95. There built up a tightly knit core of will be a few premium priced about 13 programmers, products but they'll have to musicians and graphic artists be very special to sell for  who are responsible for the or .\" majority of the company's new \"People talk in terms of games. who will win Atari or \"We don't tend to loose Commodore. I think there is programmers once they're enough room for both the ST working with us. They are well and the Amiga to survive and paid, get lots of perks, they go do well.\" to all the exhibitions. In fact, six So says John Symes, boss of our top guys are off to the man of Microdeal. States in November!\" Microdeal began as a \"We don't commission people publisher and distributor, to do programs for us. What we eventually specialising in do, though, is have regular biDragon and later QL monthly meetings where all the software. Having outlived programmers and artists get both machines, Symes made together and exchange ideas, a decision two years ago, to routines and other tricks and publish games and utilities for the brand new Atari 520 \"Steve Bak, who worked on ST. Goldrunner and Karate Kid II, First out of the starting often chairs these discussion blocks was Time Bandits groups, where we also evaluate which, along with Brataccas what kind of games are likely to was one of the first arcade/ sell in the near future adventure games released for \"There is never any question the ST. of a programmer jealously Despite a less than modest guarding their latest routine. installed base, Bandits sold well Everybody enjoys a free flow of because ST owners had virtually information so that we all nowhere else to go. With so little benefit. That way we have a competition, Microdeal soon much better chance of staying established itself ahead of the pack.\" as one of the \"We have about seven countries original titles being developed leading for the ST at the moment. Many publishers of these involve programmers, on the ST. working from home, so I insist ast hits from the Microdeal stable have included Karate Kid II the only martial arts game to be launched off the back of a successful film. The Amiga version has now been released and features 12 extra screens (see June +VG for full ST review). One of the most graphically impressive vertical shoot-em-ups to appear on the ST was Goldrunner, a Microdeal hit in the Spring Apart from super fast scrolling and moody graphics, the game also featured a memorable soundtrack complete with some of the first digitised speech ever to be used in an ST game (see June C+VG for full ST review). As with KKII, Goldrunner is being released on the Amiga, and what a treat to the eyes and ears that promises to be. Microdeal have also had the distinction of releasing the first isometric game for the ST. Called Airball, the game is set in the evil wizard's castle, where you have to find a spell book before you can change back from a balloon to a human. The castle has 150 rooms packed full of exquisitely designed stone walls, statues, ice-stalagmites, and a hundred other graphical delights. tips.\" 16_1 "


"Cream Cornwall is famous for its smugglers but if any pirates set foot in St Austell they'd soon find themselves hanging from the highest yardarm. Why? Because this town is the home of Microdeal, at the cutting edge of ST and Amiga games software. What is surprising is that it construct an entire 150 room used to be a lordly lion. according to plan, the game was more than 18 months after castle, ACS should appeal to all While zapping around the should be ready by midthe launch of the ST before a those frustrated arcade place in your time machine, November on both the ST and company launched an isometric adventurers that always felt they you've also got to avoid meeting Amiga\". game for the machine. Consider had an isometric game festering the hyper-evil Schark, who is One final project Microdeal just how many 8-bit ones there inside them just waiting to get always on your tail looking for a have been working on, is a are, and you wonder why it took out -held back merely by the way to thwart your plans. laser disc game called Journey so long! Anyway, Airball was minor detail that they don't Needless to say Tanglewood is to the Lair. definitely worth the wait and has know the first thing about played in real time! Based on the Dragon's Lair set a standard others will have ers will have programming! Leathernecks, Microdeal's laser disc game that amazed to follow (See August C+VG Apart from ACS, Microdeal next arcade title, is a vertical arcade goers a couple of years for full ST review). have at least five other ST Still on the subject of Airball, originals in the pipeline. First up Microdeal are due to release is Black Che, an adventure Airball Construction Kit soon. with a secret plot full of neat This nifty utility allows you to looking animated graphic construct your own castle, room locations. The game also by room, adding all the features various sub-games graphical details used in the where you must solve specific original. problems on screen before You start by defining the progressing dimensions of the room One of these involves you together with the walls which deciphering an ancient have exits. You can even set the matchstick problem. You height of each exit, making know the kind of thingsome at the top of stairs etc. arrange five matches in a Once you've set up your square, move one and make a room framework, you can start giraffe instead! ago, Joumey uses the picture disk from the original and DANIEL TOSH includes a user interface to let KARATE KI 0200 ST owners play a more adventure orientated version of the same game. \"There's one small catch though... they need a laser disc player to play the game. At scrolling wartime shoot'em up, the moment they cost about very much in the Commando/  so we're treating this Ikari Warriors mould. project as a learning exercise so The Leatherecks project that when the hardware catches team were being kept very up, we'll be ready to take much under wraps, but it advantage of the new sounds like this one will really technology and produce games take full advantage of the ST's of a completely new genre. It advanced graphical capabilities may take a few years yet and provide ample satisfaction though!\" The other adventure on the for up to three killers at once! By this time next year, all way from the Comwall Coders. In complete contrast, another Microdeal's new products will Tanglewood, is another highly project on the secrets list is a automatically be released at the graphical affair, this time new soccer game from a same time on both the ST and centered around the exploits of completely new perspective, as Amiga. five characters, all under your you've never seen it before,\" \"In the meantime we're just control. enthuses John. More than that going to do what we're good at, Each character behaves in its he was not prepared to say! which is being successful at own sweet way, and has Flushed with the success of giving other people a tough time. adding objects that can be different problems to solve. his last licensing deal, Karate Other people being picked up, together with Some of the characters you'll Kid II, John is busy putting the anyone who hazards, statues, trees and other meet in Tanglewood include a final touches to his latest film is trying to pieces of scenery. wallaby who has lost his bounce deal. knock US off Although it will take an and has difficulty climbing The film in question is the top of estimated three months to ladders. There's also a frog who already out, and if all goes the pile!\" the A team "


"Buyers Guide DATABYTE 01 482-1755 Boulder-dash constsetan LLAMASOFT Colourspace zaraz (Aug 86) THE EDGE 01-831-1801 Bobby Bearing, are Fairlight Trilogy arc/adv MAGISTER 01-486-6838 Artscribe: graphics The Powers of Armelin: adv/role playing (g) MARTECH 0323768456. PR Lesley at Headlines 01-258-3999 Zolds arc Deep Space:arc/stram (Feb 87) Arena: sport/am (Feb 87) Brataccas arc/adv/am (Aug 86) Terropods arc/str/am Barbarians: arc/strat/am (Oct 87) EIDERSOFT/PARADOX 0708-852647/ 851099 Karate: arc/am Protector: arc War Zone: arc Fireblaster: arc Xenon are 3D Chessboard Mission Mouse: Space Station arc (Jan 87) Demo Disk arc Pro-sprite designer graphics/animation Pro Sound Designersounds Digidrum: sounds MASTERTRONIC 01 377-6880 Ninja: arc Outcast arc Chopper, arc/sam RIO PROMOTIONS 01349-2764 Wandererarc/str (Feb 87) ACTIVISION 01431-1101 Hacker stram Hacker Il str/am Shanghai: card (Feb 87/am Music Studio: music/am Wishbringer adv/am Moonmistadu/am Trinity: adv (Feb 87/am Ballyhoc adv/am Ch Basketball: sport/am\" Ch Baseball: sport/am\" Ch. Football sport\"/am Ch Wrestling sport/am\" Ch Golt: sport/am The Last Ninja arc Portal adv/am Enduro Racer arc Quartet arc/adv Tass Times: adv (gl/am Paintworks graphics LC People: (Jan 87/am A Mind Forever Voyaging adv (Aug 86/am Leather Godesses: adv (Jan 87/am Mindshadow.adv (Aug 86/am Borrowed Time: adv (g) Aug 86/am Cutthroats adv/am Deadline: adv/am Enchanter adv/am Hitchhikers adv/am Infidel adv/am Planetfall adv/am Seastalker adv/am Sorcerer adv/am Spellbreaker adu/am Starcross adv/am Suspect adv/am Suspended adv/am Witness: adv/am Zork I, II, and Ill: adv/am Beaurocracy, adv/am Hollywood Hijinxe adv/am MGT: arc Stalonfall adv/am Lurking Horror adu/am Pun with Nord: adv/am Kings Quest ll: adv (gl/am Space Quest: adv (gl/am Black Cauldron: adv (gl/am ADDICTIVE/PRISM LEISURE 01-804-8100 Football Manager Sport ELECTRIC 048066433 Red alert arc/sim Creator: graphics Easy Draw It: graphics ELECTRONIC ARTS Skyfox arc/sim/am Arctico a/stram Chessmaster 2000:board/am Starfleet I sim/trading/am only Deluxe Print graphics/am only One on One: sport/am only Degas Elite graphics Marble Madness: arc/am only Bards Tale troll playing adv (gl/am Art parts I & II: graphics am only Seasons and Holidays: graphics/am only Earl Weaver Baseball: sport/am only Deluxe Music music/am only Archon: str/board/am only Music Constr Set: music Deluxe Paint graphics Deluxe Paint Il: graphics/am only ENGLISH 01-061-835-1358 QBallsport (Feb 871/am Knight Games: sport Levianthanarc Electraglider ANCO 0322-92513 Bridge 4.0: card/am Compubridge: card/am Tee-Upsport Peg Gammon board Strip Poker card (Jan 87) Karate sport Fri Flop: arc Thai Booking sport Trva trivia FIREBIRD 01-631-5373 Elite: arc/sim Druid: arc/adv Pandora arc/adv Golden Path: advig Sentinel: unique Startrek: adu/str Bubble Bobble: arc Black Lamp: arc/adv MICRODEAL 0726 68020 RAINBIRD 01 240 8838 Major Motion: arc Jewels of Darkness: adv (g) Cards Card Advanced Art Studio: graphics Pinball Factory sport (Feb 86) Tracker: arc/str Electric Pool sport Silicon Dreams: adv/am (g) Karate Kid II: arc/am (June 87) Guild of Thieves adv/am (g) Shuttle il: sim Starglider arcam (Jan 87) Animator, animation The Pawn: adv/am (g) (Aug 86) Trivia Challenge: trivia Knight Orc adv/am* (g) Time Bandits: arc Over Westminster Bridge: adv\" (g) Lands of Havoc arc Sprite Construction Kit graphics/animation ROBTEK 01-847-4457 Goldrunner: arc/ar (June 87) Checkmate chess/am (Od 87) Tanglewood: adu (g)\" Hollywood Poker cards'am Airball: arc/adv (Aug 87) Extensor arc Airball Constr Set: arc/adv Shuffleboard/pool sport Jupiter Probe: arc Leathemecks are SILICA SHOP 01-309-1111 Perfect Match cards Mudples and SOFTWARE EXPRESS 021 328-3585 Flipsides: board Brimstone: adv Journey into the Lair: (Laserdisk game under Coverted mirror advg development) Crimson Crown: adv/am (g) Soccer sport Delta Patrol defender Black Che:ady (g) Dragon World: adv (g)\" Electro Solitaire: board MICROPROSE 0666 54326 Essex adv/am Silent Service: sim/am\" Forbidden Quest: adv Gunship: Sim Gateway: adv (g) F15 Strike Eagle: sim\" Hex: Q bert/am Kennedy Approach: sim Hippo Backgammon: board Ogre stram\" Mindwheel adv\"/am Ultima Ill adv (g)\"/am\" Monkey Business arc/am Autoduekstram Murray and me 00 Topos: adv/amig MIRRORSOFT 01 377-4837 Phantasie: arc/ady SDI: arc/am Spiderman advigl Sinbad: adv (g)\"/am Sword of Kadash: adv (g) Defender of the Crown: adv (g)\"/am The Wizard of Oz: edu King of Chicago (Carl adv glam Terrestrial encounter arc Film Director: animation Transylvania: adv (g) Art Director graphics (Jan 87) Treasure Island adv/am (g) Spitfire 40: comb/sim Universe11 Strike Force Harrier comb/sim (Feb 87) Winnie the Pooh: edu/am The Bermuda Project: adv (g) Mindwalker arc/am Fleet Street Publisher: desktop Da Vu ad (gl/arm SUB LOGIC Balance of Power: sim/am\" Paight simulator il: sim/am GATO:simam Jet: sim F 15 Flight Sim: sim\"/am\" TYNESOFT 091414-4611 Uninvited adv (gl/am Time Blast: arc (Feb 87) Shadowgate: adv (gl/am Mousetraps arc/am Liberatora NEXUS 01-658 5723 Plutos arc/am Hades Nebula arc Blood Sever arc Nexus arc Micronaut one: arc US. GOLD 021-356-3388 Leaderboard: sport/am (Jan 87) NOVAGEN 021-449-9516 Leaderboard tournament sport/am (Aug 87) Mercenary Compendium: arc/sim/str/adv (Jan 86) Gauntlet: arc/adv/am Winter Games sport/am (Feb 87) OCEAN 061 832-6633 World Games: sport/am (Jan 87) Archanoid: arc Championship Wrestling sport Top Gun: arc/sim\" Super Cycle: arc Tal Pan: arc\" Rogue: arc/adv/am Slap Fight: arc Phantasie Il: role playing/fantasy 10th Frame Bowling sport/am\" PALACE 01-278-0751 Mean 18sport/am Barbarian the ultimate Warrior arcam\" Sundog strat/adv Starship: arc/sr/am\" Super Huey, simam Abemate Reality, adv/am (g) (June 87) PANDORA 07356-71500 Temple of Apshal adv (g)\"/am The Eagles Nest Xevious: arc (Aug 87) Metrocross Arc PSION 01-723 9408 Road Runner arc (Oct 87) Psion Chessboard (Jan 87) Sub Battle Simulator sim Colonial Conquest board/str (Oct 87) PSYGNOSIS 051-236-8818 Road Wars: str ATARI 0753 33314 Battlezone: arc Joust arc Millepede arc Star Raiders are Crystal Castles arc (Aug 87) Robotron arc Neochrome 11: graphics AUDIOGENIC 0734-303663 Impact arc/am Perry Mason: adv/g/am Nine Princesc adv (gl/am Amazon: adv (gl/am Farenhet 451: advigl/am FTL Sundog arc/st Aug 86) Dungeon Master role playing/fantasy GREMLIN GRAPHICS 0742-753123 Trailblazer: arc Typhoon: arc Karate Master Sport HABA MARKETING Faery Tale: adv (gl/am only INFOGRAMES 01 364-0123 Maccadams Bumper: arc Eden Blues: arc/adv Turbo GT: arc Krafton arc Krafton Il: arc Passengers in the Wind: adv (s) Passengers in the Wind II: adv (g) Prohibitions are Prohibition ll: arc AVILA Make it Move: animation CRL 01-533-2918 Academy are Pheonic arc The Three Muskoteers adv (gl/am Precipice: sim/am Water Skiing sport/am L'affair: adv (g) Pigalle: advig Captaine Blood: ? am only TNT: Sidewalk: arc/adv 94 "


NA


"ONLY THE COOL AND CLEVER SURVIVE.. QUE DEX THALAMUS THE QUEST FOR ULTIMATE DEXTERITY 995-PLUS TERE AND STILL AVAILABLE.. Bad BY STAVROS FASOULAS CDC 9 0 Cassette  9.99 TON CBM 64/128 Disk $14.99 Thalamus Limited 2 Minerva House Calleva Park Aldermaston Berkshire RG7 4QW Tel: (07356) 77261 CBM 64/128 SANXION "


"UNLOCK THE THRILLS & MYSTERIES OF... SOLOMONS \"An arcade strategy game with enough addictive qualities to turn even the toughest coin-op critic into an arcade junky\". C & VG Return to an age of mystery and intrigue, a place in which the fabled treasure of King Solomon shone brightly with its glorious wealth. Where amongst the network of mysterious rooms lies the next key that will bring you nearer to these fabulous riches. Where amongst the stone pillars and hidden dangers lle mythical creatures that can perpetuate your life long enough to reach your ultimate goal. CBM 64/128 U.S. AMSTRAD Cass.  9.99 Disk.  14.99 GOLD Cass.  9.99 Disk. .99 ATARI ST E19.99 SPECTRUM 48/128K (8.99SCREEN SHOTS FROM AMSTRAD VERSION U.S. Gold Ltd., Unlts 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 TECMO "


"000 III III REVIEWS  Outrun is the current hot car racing sim from the arcades at the moment, it comes on a 256K cartridge for the Sega and will retail at .95. The version I reviewed was pre-production and has a few rough technical preproduction and had a few rough technical edges, but there was enough there to convince me of its quality. Outrun pile-up! MEAN MACHINES Tony Takoushi will be pulling out all the stops to bring you all the latest, hottest news and reviews from the console scene-not only in the UK but worldwide. Just look at the gems in this issuean exclusive review of Outrun, plus a red-hot news on Nintendo games coming soon from the US/Japan So stay with C+VG it's where the NEWS is! D efore delving into together and has a very big software a little word of catalogue of quality arcade warning to any of you conversions currently thinking about buying games available. direct from Japan or the US. The Atari XE is very much Nintendo has released the dark horse, there are three different versions of its thousands of Atari 8-bit console, one for the UK, owners out there and the XE is another for the US and one for simply an 8-bit machine with a Japan. What this means is that very tasty new casing, you cannot run a Japanese So who is going to buy it? cart on a UK or US system and Atari is pitching it at the under vice versa. 10 year-olds and new The carts are the same size console/micro owners selling but they will bomb when you at  for the basic unit boot them. (upgrade to a micro for an Sega's Japanese carts will extra  pounds) with games not even fit into a UK/US starting at  pounds. console as they are slightly Just one more point to make larger. However you can buy before reviewing the games, a US cart and run it on a UK those controller pads from system. Nintendo and Sega It is In case you are wondering really driving me NUTS using why they did this the answer is these things! really quiet simple. Each They are OK on a few territory can set its own prices games but generally they ar and not have to worry about naff and fiddly. imports from abroad at a Now the good news New lower price. Sneaky, huh? joystick controlled have been Talso have to come clean designed by both Sega and over my own personal views of Nintendo, so hopefully we the systems. Sega as you may will not have to suffer for to already know I rate very long. highly. In fact I used to think the You will have read in last Nintendo system had no month's C+VG about the chance at all against it. Well, different packs offered by things have changed. Sega and Nintendo (Basic Firstly I discovered Super and Deluxe) and of the games Mario Bros, this game makes it to be launched with them. worth buying the system, it is so Rather than harp on about player! the same games (boorr-ingg) Secondly I found that the will give you a taste of two new Nintendo is actually way hot games, Outrun on Sega ahead of Sega in Japan and (an exclusive no less!) and thrid party software reflects this Nemesis on the see the US/Japan release Nintendo schedule for Nintendo I'll be back next issue with with some really brilliant coin tons more hot stuff from the op conversions coming wacky world of games available. consoles. Unfortunately there is a But if there's anything you'd qualification to this enthusiasm, like to see on these pages write Nintendo's own catalogue to me at Mean Machines, is pretty old, and there is no Computer and Video Games, real hint of when these hot Priory Court, 30-32 third party games will get to Farringdon Lane, London the UK. ECIR AV. Sega has got its act TAK Night rider! The overall aim of the game is to complete all six sections of the course, with each section having its own time. There is a zippy little attract mode which demos various levels from the game, a res-up of the Outrun logo and a high score display table to keep track of those curucial scores. On entering the game you can choose from three backing ingles Passing Breeze, Splash Wave and Magical Sound Shower (my favel) You are then placed on E-00000000000000 "


"00000 III III III IVO WS the start line in your ,000 Ferrari Testarossa with the flag-man happily waving you on. The graphics are minutely detailed and you could really mistake this for the arcade version. Even better, this game plays like the arcade, and you can use the same tactics as you did on the coin-op. You find yourselves driving blind into and through comers not knowing what is at the tip of a hill or around the next bend. The backdrops and signposts all whizz by convincingly and in colourful detail. The road widens periodically from one to five lanes and various hazards in the form of cars from Porches to WW beetles) -and sharp bends appear out of nowhere to threaten you. Here is the bottom line Outrun on the Sega has all the thrill power of the arcade version, it has detailed, colourful, graphics and it even managed to keep me away from MY flash red sports car In case you are wondering just what the Japanese systems look like, then wonder no more. As you can see the Sega unit is longer than the UK version and has the controllers attached to its sides. The joystick ports and card slot are at the front with the cartridge fitting on top. Which do you prefer, the white of Japan or the black of the UK? The Nintendo unit is nice Hans Japanese Sega TONY'S TIPS Since the C+VG team gave you all the hot tips for Super Mario Bros (boo hissl!) I will have to settle with tips for Alex Kidd in Miracle World (Sega) and Ikari Warriors (Nintendo). Nothing bugs me more Before and After! playing a game than getting through to level 999,999 then dying with just one more level to beat! So here is a cheat for Ikari Warriors. When you have lost your last life and still on the game screen press the letters A-B-B-A on your control pad and you get three more It's before and after time! In lives continue where you left off. my aim to bring you the inside You can also let a friend join snippets I have included a sneaky look at the prototype of you in the middle of a game by the Sega 3D Glasses as having him plug his controller in port 2 and enter the letteres well as a pic of the finished . (and packaged) item. They really have a sci-fi feel and TONY'S TOPSCORE look to them. Aren't they CHALLENGE cool.. Reckon you can beat my top I'm a real arade nut, soll scores? Well, here's your cheating a little bit this month chance. I am throwing down by bringing you pics of the gauntlet to all you video Nemesis 2 and R. Type on addicts and challenging YOU the MSX format. to a head to head top score battle! It doesn't matter what games system you own — all I want to know is your top score on your fave game, the level you've reached and any tips or tricks you've discovered. Each month I'll put the best scores together and pick the Nemesis 2 winner -who I'll challenge to a battle of the giants at T.I.'s Games Tower in the heart of London! I'll invite you in, show you round, let you play on my coinop machines, maybe even feed you. Send your hi-scores in on the OR-Type coupon below OR just visit the Finally a sneaky look at the C+VG stand at the Personal 6800 scene in Japan. They too Computer World Show and are getting into the new give the coupon to a C+VG person. processor, they are currently writing Space Harrier on Sharp 6800 based micro. I T.T.'S TOP SCORE CHALLENGE think you will agree it will looks Name: to abs and choll you vide Japanese Nintendo and compact, again the controllers fit snugly into its sides. Unlike the UK model the cartridge slots in on top, and it has a thin profile. Another difference is that Japan has a disc drive system for the Nintendo which nobody (except yours truly!) has mentioned before. Think of the games potential... All you boxing fans can sleep easy as Punch-Out has arrived for the Nintendo! No release date has been set for the UK, but as soon as I know, you'll know! That old classic Zaxxon has been revamped, and Sega will be releasing it for its = PEPEE 1750 OSTAPE Address: Sega 3D Zaxxon game system in November This game features special 3D presentation with the Sega 3D glasses, so prepare to do some ducking and weaving as those missiles leap out at you. Game: Ready to Outrun! for many an hour. Need I say more? T.T.'s Thrill Rating -9 Machine: Score: Space Harrier 200C "


"TRANI(. THE LAST STORM TROOPER The order of the solar system as kept for thousands of years by the people of Zybor was coming apart. Growing dissatisfaction in outlying planet bodies increased as their technological achievements reached greater heights. Zybor reacted in the only way tell to it what the technological advantage remained in its hands. And so Trantor was brought from out of the ranks of the w ors forces where a brutal streak and rebellious nature made sure his talenta never realised their full potential. His credentials were perfect his mission was simple, to lead a band of outlaw mercenaries and smash the growing power of the New World NEBULMTHONE before Its atomle threat turned into an awesome cataclysm of conflict. But the Nebithons were not unprepared and when on return from a reconnaisance scouting, Trantor found the remains of his undercover force scattered amongst the alien landscape along with the last fragments of his battle cruiser, he felt the hate and rage surge through his body and within the lee cold compartment of his mind, he recognised the burden that now lay with him, that all now depended on he Trantor, the Last Stormtrooper. KKK SPECTRUM +3 .99. SPECTRUM 48/128K .99 AMSTRAD TAPE .99 Disk .99 CBM 64/128 TAPE .99 Disk .99 Coming soon on Atari ST .99 CODO. 00002 Si LL SAMANTE TODAY probe probe Screen shot from Amstrad version Screen shots from Spectrum version, TOMORROW'S SOFTWARE TODAY Units 2/3. Holford Way. Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX Tel: 021 356 3388 como "


"ADVENTURES news ght hbs efore his month brings a sorry subscribing to the recommence on Ist October. Compass Order Coupon, tale from readers, in Adventurer's Club. After a long spell response to Heiz and send it together with Unfortunately, we printed the cheque or P.O. for .95, to Schulte's difficulties with developing the Knight incorrect address of the club. Compass Software, 36 Globe Orc adventure system, Vonsoft's Arena. A prize The CORRECT address is Place, Norwich, Norfolk NR2 Level 9 have two new titles in game offering \"up to 64c Menelik Road. (NOT 63C $60,000\" you remember, the pipeline. One will be a 25Q. Or of course, you could as originally printed) London fantasy game, and a second, keep the order coupon by which came with no NW2 3RH. (Telephone 01-794 instructions. you until you see the a modern day adventure. 1261.) competition results. First, a letter from Charles Depending upon as-yet A year's subscription will Sharp, the author of the cost you $11.95, but members unsigned contracts, the COMPASS COMPETITION modern-day adventure looks game, who shares Heinz's of the ex-C+VG Adventure dismay over the way he has Club, can get a special set to be published by Rainbird Software, Level 9' Tick the boxes by the games been treated by Vonsoft. discount of $1, by enclosing below which you think were Charles hiptself is \"totally o wn new release, will be on the special token printed in Show at their stand at the written using The Quill: disillusioned with the the final C+VG club O Demon From the Darkside company. If you write to PCW Show. newsletter Charles Heinz, enclosing an Hollywood Hijinx The Members Dossier is the Meanwhite, Rainbird are Frankenstein envelope with reply paid, he releasing Time Into Magica journal of ACL, and contains Bugsy will give any help you need Wilogy comprising updated adventure ches, reviews, and versions of those old Level 9 The Zone except the answer to the articles by the likes of Tony competition question. favourites, Lords of Time, Red \"Bridge, Mike Gerrard, Peter Moon and Price of Magik Guild of Thieves Charles' address is: 4 Osprey Austin, Fergus McNeill, and Robin of Sherwood Gardens, Sheffield 52 5GE K / Adventure specialists Yorks, Thanks, Charles! To celebrate its association Adventure Soft are Ady So what was the matter with with Non #VG/readers. It has looking to produce a the package? Next in the pile now adopted a new format, new adventure system for Addr was a letter from long with a distinctive front cover their future games Mike standing C+VG readers on coloured paper, the he Woodroffe, Adventure Soft's Andrew Bethell whose. woogronte, aventure Sorts corner staple forsaken tora b oss is inyiting enthusiasts to younger brother bought a set right through the middle write to him to so just what copy of Arena: of the double-sized pages. es it arrived on a cheap program teater program features they would! post this coupon to: COMPASS making it much easier to like to see in the perfect COMPETITION, Computer + cassette in a brown handle and store. It is mailed adventure envelope (no box) with a slip directly to all members. Video Games, Pliory Court, of paper reading \"What is The thita Ketovatan 30-32 Farringdon Lane, Arild here's your chance to saga from Magnetic your enemy's weakness?\" London ECIR 3AU. receive this, plus all the other That was ! \"I think it warrants Scrolls, is due to hit the benefits of ACL membership stores y Octoberor looking into,\" writs Andrew absolutely FREE! COMPASS COMPETITION Finally Michael Filippidis November. Watch out for a Every month thanks to of Cardif, has actually preview version on demo at Henry Mueller, I will be Project-X The Microman AND the PCW Show, at the end of managed to play the game The ozone, for SPECTRUM awarding one year's free September fo conclusion. \"Lucky fellow\" ONLY at .95 subscription to the STAR letter you are thinking enviously, to the C+VG Adventure WIN PROJECTX and O-ZONE 9 Name: \"He must be 360,000 better Helpline. If you are already off. You'd be wrong! an ACL member, don't worry Compass Software are the He went off the claim slip to. Vatrangements will be Address: publishers of Project-X, The Vonson some 11 weeks ago made for your membership Microman, Demon From The and still has had no reply 96 be extended by a year Darkside, and The O Zone. \"Please Will you get so you will still get the same compass are offering 10 touch with Vonsoft and tell benefit copies of Project-X PLUS O them that I have completed the winner of this coveted A Zone to TEN readers who can with a cheque or Postal Order Send this coupon, together their game. If this is not prize will be announced answer the questions on our possible than please print in fedch month in these pages, for $3.95 mage payable to Compass Competitions your column the prize was just starting from next month.86 Compass Software, to: coupon a big con,\" says Michael. get writing! Compass Software, 36 Globe The games are available I passed all the details on New members of the ACL Place, Norwich, Norfolk NR2 for Spectrum only. In to C+VG's ad chief Garry should note that the club 25Q. conjuction with the Williams, who reported that issues a double sized Dossier competition, Compass are And don't forget Vonsoft is no more. Yes--you at this time of the year whilst offering the two games, C+VG's Adventure were conned! it closes down for holiday normally selling for $5 the Helpline will be in In the July issue, we during the month of pair, at .95. If you wish to operation at this year's PCW recommended readers September. The phone-in order the games direct, Show in London. If you're at interested in joining a Helpline and all the other rather than enter the the show, drop by and say club to think seriously about services of the club, competition, fill in the hello to Keith and the team. "


". . .95 .95 .95 WARGAMES ADVENTURE ROLE PLAYING SIMULATIONS SPORTS MAGAZINES SOFTWARE C-64/128 * AMIGA + APPLE II * ATARI ST ATARI XL XE IBM PC + COMPATIBLES C64/128 STRATEGY Atari ST AMIGA STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS INC. Phantasie I, II, III .99 The Faery Tale Adventure ....... .00 Kampfgruppe ..... . .99 Colonial Conquest .99 Bard's Tale .95 Battlegroup .99 Roadwar 2000 .99 Earl Weaver Baseball . .95 Mech Brigade $29.99 Starfleet I. $43.00 Barbarian .95 Antietam .99 Great Battles .00 Alien Fires $43.00 Gettysburg .99 Balance of Power .95 Flight Simulator II .00 Rebel Charge at Chickamauga .99 Gridiron (US Football) .......... .00 Scenery Disc #7 .... $20.00 Warship .99 Micro-League Baseball II ........ 349.00 Scenery DISC #11 .00 Battlecruiser $24.99 General Managers .00 Gridiron (U.S. Football) .00 Fighter Command .99 \" 1986 Teams Disc............... .00 Kampfgruppe ... .99 U.S.A.A.F .99 Flight Simulator II..................... .00 Ultima III ........ .95 Imperium Galactum $35.00 Scenery Discs #7/11 Each .... .00 Silent Service ... Colonial Conquest ... $24.99 F15 Strike Eagle (NEW) $24.95 Chessmaster 2000 B-24 ....................NEW $19.99 Autoduel .95 Balance of Power .95 Roadwar 2000............. .99 Ultima III ..... P.H.M. Pegasus $14.95 Tracker (NEW) .95 Moebius $24.95 IBM PC & COMPATIBLES Strategic Studies Group Flight Simulator ....... .00 ALSO ON APPLE II COMPUTERS Atan XL/XE Scenery Disc #7...... .00 Reach for the Stars .95 Phantasie ..... .99 Scenery Disc #11 ..... .00 Carriers at War .95 Wizards Crown ........... .... $19.99 Jet Simulator .00 Europe Ablaze $29.95 Kampfgruppe ........... .99 Computer Diplomacy Battlefront $23.95 Mech Brigade............... .99 Gettysburg...... Russia .95 Antietam ............. .99 Rebel Charge at Chickamauga Battles in Normandy .95 Gettysburg ........... .99 Roadwar 2000 Run 5 (magazine) each .50 Rebel Charge at Chickamauga.... .99 Wizards Crown ....... Scenario Discs ....... .99 Warship .99 Kampfgruppe Battlecruiser $24.99 Balance of Power Adventure Imperium Galactum ..... .00 Incunabula Bard's Tale .95 Autoduel...... .95 Ancient Art Of War Legacy of the Ancients ..................$16.95 Guderian......... .00 Wizardry I..... .00 Phantasie II, III $27.00 Gulf Strike ... ............... each .99 .00 Wizardry II..... Wizards Crown .99 Rommel ...... .00 Starflight .95 Shard of Spring .99 Space Max .95 Rings of Zilfin .99 Apple II 64k Gunship .95 Realms of Darkness .99 Might & Magic .... .00 Conflict in Vietnam $24.95 Darkhorn.... $27.00 .99 Blue Powder Grey Smoke ......... . Pirates (NEW) $24.95 Autoduel .............. .95 Under Fire ...... .00 Ultima I, III, IV each .95 U.F Extended Capability ........ .00 Moebius..... .95 U.F. Campaign Disc ................. .00 COMPUTER GAMING Pirates....... ................95 $19.95 Bard's Tale II ......................... .00 WORLD Flight Simulator II ........................... $42.00 ...00 A must for both wargamers PHM Pegasus .99 Phantasie III ...99 and adventure gamers giving Hardware Strategic Studies Group reviews and hints. Amiga A500 * MODULATOR (see C64/128 for details and prices) CGW is the serious gamers Deluxe Paint Free software handbook and should not POA Apple GS be missed. ATARI 520STM 1 MEG DRIVE Bard's Tale ................. .00 Back issues .50 Mean 18 ............... .00 MODULATOR + FREE SOFTWARE Current issue .00 Deluxe Paint II ........ .99 $369 Shanghai................. .95 Subscriptions 6 issues .00 ATARI 520STEM $299 Music Studio ............ .95 Please ring for more details Tass Times $24.95 *3333333 888888888 .... . Send .00 for our latest catalogue (redeemable with lst order) STRATEGIC PLUS SOFTWARE P.O. Box 8 C+VG HAMPTON MIDDX. TW12 3XA Tel 01-979 2987 ALL SOFTWARE IS ON DISC ONLY PLEASE SPECIFY COMPUTER WHEN ORDERING OVERSEAS ORDERS WELCOME ADD .00 EUROPE & .00 OUTSIDE EUROPE PER ITEM. ALL PRICES INCLUDE V.A.T. & P.P. ACCESS VISA "


"PILOT one Las es 0000000 ICE 2 BIRCRAFT HERPons SELECTION PILOT TUO Puines os ORAIR-SHOP GODDDDD High speed one or two pilotaction. (Computer oppint his vided artiticial intelligence al 20 shill levels. l. SCORS 0000000 RCE 2 21 Tu0 PLANES 03 coach Commodore 64 Disk..... .95 Commodore 64 Cass. ..... .95 Spectrum 48 Cass......... .95 Spectrum 128 Cass........ .95 Commodore Plus:/4 (64k)... .95 IBM PC........... ..95 Atari ST IBM and Atari for Christmas) War and ground combat Real time, real space chon   li 11 ) zinc all spes and a movie wiedern missile's .....95 2 CASCADE 1-H aCrescent Hire HGL 60 Eng I 0123 lahendering i I T MONITOR I THE ULTIMATE HEAD TO HEAD CONFLICT C . "


"ADVENTURE preview THE ENCHANTA hour, whilst going from one room to the next in a building, will take only one minute. \"Will anyone else be using this new system?\" I ask three spells Freeze, Flow Cult adventure author Fergus McNeill is and Find. well known for his Abstract Concepts, and Each will solve the you'll find them in force in his new problem, but in a different way, and in so doing will adventure The Enchantress. Keith make another problem more Campbell brings you an exclusive difficult had the spell not preview. been used. Players will get as much ergus McNeill has been adventurer Colin Buckett. help in carrying out actions working on The \"I took it out again!\" as is possible. The Enchantress for over a Insists Fergus. programme will unlock and year now, and it will be the Enchantress is the diary of a open doors for you first adventure released by young girl in post swords and automatically if you issue a his new company, Abstract sorcery times. \"Probably command to pass through Concepts. And that means no about the era of Kerovnia,\" providing you have the jokes! suggests Fergus. correct key, of course. No Abstract Concepts has The object is to kill the more of this UNLOCK OAK been set up to develop Enchantress. To do this, you DOOR WITH WOODEN KEY, \"serious\" adventures unlike must catch her at worship OPEN OAK DOOR, frustration the Delta 4 spoofs. an activity she undertakes One of the features of \"What? You must have only at a certain time. You Fergus' new adventure some humour in any have to speak to other system is a variable time adventure!\" I protest. characters to discover the element, so that moving \"He sneaked in a message appointed time and place. between adjacent locations about using the rope when it Clever use of magic is will become more realistic. was already in use: THE made in one of the puzzles, Traversing from one end of ROPE'S A BIT TIED UP AT THE whereby the player has a a valley to the other, for MOMENT\" says Fergus' fellow choice of acquiring one of example, may use up half an > U1 Adara went vest. East and west the the Plains. H al north. H tall tre 3 teu bushes were Rain fell all arou moaned cross the LOGOOOOOOOOOOOO BOOOOOOOOO GOOOGOOOO innocently, wondering if it might be a bit Quillish. \"What? I should hope not! We paid good money for it!\" Fergus exclaims indignantly \"Who to?\" I continue, relentlessly. \"Aha! There are an awful lot of people who would love to know that!\"Fergus is giving nothing away Fergus is very proud of the new system which gives a completely new look to his games. Deciding that he didn't have the time to develop his own his original intention he decided to limit himself to specifying what he wanted included in the design. He had it custom written by a third party who was definitely remaining nameless! Invisible to the user, the The stream flowed down towards the end of the valley. The sides of the valley rose a little way above, becoming steeper towards the north further up the stream. To the south, the Plins opened out. Flashes of lightning exploded on the horizon. illuminating the sky to the Sound of thunder. Heavy 18111 WES DIOW through the valley. "


"RESS player's strength and constitution will be constantly monitored, and, if outdoors, the prevailing weather will affect the health of the Adarg vent south. Tall trees skirted the ides of the road 35 it bent 3way north 10 gst through the forest. To the South, Pine trees stood in dark ranks on a Carpet of golden heedles. Flashes of lightning exploded on the Horizon. illuminating the Sky to the sound of thunder. Heavy rain WES DIOwn More... the bad led away across 311 lay to the tree rood beside it and ere Battered by the road. Broun and a low wind the Indscape. player, and his ability to do things. And if something unpleasant has just befallen him, his nerves will be shattered. He won't be able to thread a fine needle if he has just had a nasty shock, for instance. As well as including all the latest aids, like RAM SAVE, multiple commands, recognition of IT, OOPS, and VERBOSE/BRIEF, there will be an icon screen, which displaces the graphics with a \"shutter\" effect, at the touch of the enter key. From this screen an icon can be selected and its options toggled on and off. GRAPHICS/TEXT for example, shows a mini screen, displaying alternately microscopic pictures and words. input process. Baldrick is definitely a bit on System messages are \"Have a drink?\" asks Colin, the dim side. superimposed on the icons interrupting the intense \"For weeks he kept in an appearing and discussion on how the system toppling off his treadmill just disappearing window. works, carefully decanting a as he got to the top. It was There will also be a limited supply or orangeade ages before he learnt that \"previous command\" editor. into glasses. you have to walk on the Now I've very rarely used an \"We'll go round the corner inside of the wheel!\" input text editor when it's for pizza in a minute,\" comments Fergus, been available, because so disparagingly. often I have found that The parser, too, has a Someone who IS smart is moving the cursor to the unique feature it new recruit to the McNeil required position in the text automatically changes wordempire, Anna Popkess. She and then making the types if it doesn't understand has been working on a novel alteration, takes just as long what you have entered. which will be turned into a as retyping the majority of No longer will you get a new adventure called commands in their entirety. reply like I DONT Mindfighter. It's based on the And let's face it, we all tend UNDERSTAND (word) IN THAT to use the simplest command CONTEXT, where (word) is stars a character called required, most of the time, known by the program, but Robin who must stop a anyway not valid in the sense that you devastating nuclear war. But this editor has an have used it. He travels through time additional feature. Suppose Whilst graphics on Atari ST and generally has an you have four rods: red, and Amiga will be in colour exciting and thought yellow, blue and white, and machines like the Spectrum provoking experience need to INSERT (colour) ROD The concepts may be IN SLOT, trying each in turn. white. abstract but the adventures The editor remembers That way the detail can be are shaping up to be where you left the cursor, and much greater, and indeed, blockbusters. Watch this repositions it automatically. with a coloured border, the space! So by recalling the previous screen looks really smart command, (colour) can be Smart isn't the word to C+VG changed with little effort, describe Baldrick, Abstract ENDS speeding up the Concepts Hamster-in-Chief. "


"IGRE Stop The Ogre in its Tracks HHORIGIN #SYSTEMS INC. All-out war against a juggernaut fighting machine on the nuclear battlefields of tomorrow! An exciting game of strategy for one or two players, based on Steve Jackson's famous boardgame. Available on Apple, CBM 64. Atari, Atari ST, Amiga and IBM, From just .95. MicroProse Ltd. 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA Tel: (0666) 54326 Telex: 43422 MPS/UKG "


" helpline ADVENTURE Are you floored by Bored of start a Scott Adams adventhe Rings on the BBC? So is fure cartridge? Mrs Samuels Thomas Skelley of Doncaster. of Gillingham has just He is trying to pass the brought their old VIC out of dreaded Nazal in the C5 and retirement, and can't replay wants to know who is padany of those old games — dling along in the inner tube? she's forgotten the code! Under intense crossColin Joss, of East Lothian, examination Delta 4's Fergus has got a fair way in Winter McNeill remained over tightWonderland, but is stuck at 63 lipped. It appears the conper cent. He knows he needs Help this month comes from ? versation, carried out by a the stakes to get to the Island, Paul Arendt, Guildford; Hugh third person, who was not but how can he get rid of the Walker, Guildford; R. Henderfaithful to the original. bee, and what is the banana son, Liverpool: Pauline GarHowever, information for? He also has a hankering nett, Andover; Helen Goddard, Dagenham; Russell wou 09 xujyds our puy oL reaches, me from my 18-yearfor the mallet, even though Mills, Bodicote, Aage ChristXNIHDS old nephew Karl Manning of he dosen't know why! offerson, Denmark; Simon Jejsod eu North Baddersley, near SouthHelen Goddard had a reLyle, Lewes; Huw Howells, Llappel 'upipoisno outssod oL P ampton. He didn't actually cent Spytrek problem, involvnidloes; tony Norris, Woking: 3MOD JO ONI know Fergus personally, but ing giving money to the Mike Thomas, Caerphilly. Jejue of moj um Disko dol \"knew someone who did\". It framp. INV7d 73838 turns out this \"someone\". Seeing the problem in the 1977VM NIWVXO '1977VM XVI name of lan, is our much Helpline prompted a letter of LEXOd 30ISNI INIWVXS sought after BBC converter. help direct to her from a Bid Dunyt esn -AUD OLXIV EXOd 3NINY Are you out there. Ian? Please friend. It seems the precedejow elD'EXD pup 'enoys-XS 'uns 3NIWVXG 'SNIVIan help us. ing moves must all be carried dwi 'ejju v spopa MVG 'an un'an NIWY John Beff has been talking out in a set sequence, or the eyloj yoq buy wos Duug-XS (uose 09-5) wejqoid to a horse-headed child via tramp will not oblige. out dui eu of kpd jo lepo a bird-head, in an effort to see the clues section for Jo no te ofenwp eyl BUIMS Walds get a silver key to enter the the moves using that sequWNLOHDOSOTIHd SIVI \"lles mind of Eva Fein. Who can ence, you should end up with jsu  dpose upo nok u help him, Mindwheel? 10 coins, seven of which hast  ,uop pu joyu    'uoistoly Macro Andreoli of Turin, be give to the tramp.  d ojeg Oup ONEANIN has year of National Service Vince Smith of field has all 4    un up u  p u  nd pup recently completed, is now the evidence about Humn, Ouippe Buseje w ojs oul of edoi ou ell back at adventuring. But can such as the laxative packet -up sexdu sjemes uo oog VIUNEX he find the 10th treasure in and the cab. He knows that s832339  (p ups    Hollwood Hijinx? Is it in the Hurn is Moriarty, but every epoo dozy UD joj se ApS) \"PIL Dish eul uedo oli bomb shelter, he asks? If so, time he redials Lestrade, he -Jonb soubo, euluoxe pub ejoy OJU NDJs posuj silinopod he can it without a source of won't believe Vince has the 'eqqug of sinuo ou 19 uedo oi qos uo jepinog ind light? evidence. How can Vince get \"Pildid so 'eqno poi SSOINVOI JO SHOW A. J. O'Donovan is having into Hurn's cottage, and  jd uez   wojun Bolod D trouble meeting Long John where can he find Lestrade? pueosep pup'oppos eleju jeb enjsou od job Silver in Treasure Island. Who HEAVY 1,00downsou sumo eu knows how? Oliver Moraz is French, and JOZD je nok 'eunsoo o ang no Paul Blythin of Viceby with four friends, he is writing eul HM Deuet eut YDHV Asong bought Colour of Magic an adventure for the Amstrad. NOSNVH XON eBudio 'BAND 'uee when it first came ought, and the original text will be in WyD exD Boods lepo ou up seq010 out pesu has still not managed to get French, but Oliver is looking et MOJU 'uello et op HEWOO NVWANVS 3HI a reply when he came out for someone who can, WO jueydhy and has still not managed to perhaps with some help from WOUA SOVSSIW el epnjou 'PJOMSSDd pud di reply when he tries to talk to himself, translate the French 'NSMISNS: M3S Joy Hodijo el oj epp qoo out someone. And he wants to into English. NS3M3SN ueu 'pesep out Joj uspo Bujnueo ppeu nom get Twoflower to go go his in particular, Oliver is lookou noepiy seldud eu wody Vonvang room. ing for someone who can How do you deal with a help with the English sense of torturer. If they hadn't already . humour. been extracted, Tony Norris The English version, Oliver of Woking would be biting his hopes will be published fingernails over this. He is sometime before Christmas, playing Temple of Terror by a well-known company. If Anyone out there with a you speak French, and are and details demonstrating VIC? Do you know the SYS interested, send details abyour interest in adventure 25 Edmond Roussin. 35300 code required to type in to out yourself, including age, games, to Olivier Moraze, at Fougeres, France. "


"MUSIC BY MAIL SOFTWARE DEPARTMENT P.O. BOX 14, BUTTS GREEN RD. HORNCHURCH, ESSEX, RM11 1HT. SPECTRUM COMM 64 AMSTRAD ELECTRON 2.99 2.99 2.99 ATARI 400/800XL cicie 3.50 3.50 nia WORLD CUP FOOTBALL 1.65 GOLF 1.65 ON THE OCHE (DARTS) 1.65 GOLF 1.65 ON THE OCHE 1.65 WORLD CUP FOOTBALL 1.65 ELECTRO FREDDY 2.99 STARSHIP COMMAND SNOOKER 1.65 JOHNNY REB II 1.65 JET BOOT JACK 2.99 FIVE-A-SIDE SOCCER 2.99 GOLF 1.65 A VIEW TO A KILL 2.99 PUNCHY 2.99 GUNSMOKE VIDEO POOL 1.65 CODE NAME MATT II 2.99 HAUNTED HEDGES 2.99 SUPER POOL 2.99 CASINO ROYALE 1.65 TURBO 64 2.99 CODE NAME MATT II 2.99 STRATO BOMBER 2.99 A VIEW TO A KILL 2.99 PILOT 64 2.99 A VIEW TO A KILL 2.99 HYPER DRIVE 2.99 CODE NAME MATT II 2.99 SUPERMAN 2.99 G CAPES STRONGMAN 2.99 CATERPILLA 2.99 SUPERMAN 2.99 JET SET WILLIE 2.99 SUPERMAN 2.99 INVADERS EUREKA 2.99 ON COURT BASKETBALL 2.99 SPLIT PERSONALITIES 2.99 3D BOMB ALLEY 2.99 BROA STREET 2.99 HYPABALL 3.50 GLADIATORS BLITZKRIEG 2.99 WAR ON WANT 2.99 MISSION A.D. HERBERT'S DUMMY RUN 2.99 TALES OF ARABIAN NIGHTS 2.99 MS. PACMAN 2.99 ELEVATOR ACTION 3.50 CHOPPER SQUAD 2.99 CYCLON INVASION ENDURO 2.99 NUCLEAR EMBARGO 3.50 STAR COMMANDO 2.99 TREK II DRAGONS LAIR || 3.50 VIKINGS 3.50 HUNCHBACK 2.99 SPACE CAVERS KAYLETH 3.50 SCOOBY DOO 3.50 HOME RUNNER 2.99 BOZO THE BRAVE STARFOX 3.50 NOSFERATU 3.50 HEATHROW ATC 3.75 ZYNAPS 3.50 PARANOID 3.50 MANIC MINER 2.99 TEMPEST 3.75 THING BOUNCES BACK 3.50 STAR RAIDERS II 3.50 ALIEN 2.99 OVERDRIVE 3.75 GREAT ESCAPE 3.50 GREAT ESCAPE 3.50 BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK2.99 SMASH 'N' GRAB 3.75 SHADOW SKIMMER 3.50 WONDERBOY 3.50 FU KUN FU KUNG IN LAS VEGAS 2.99 PROHIBITION 3.50 GRANGE HILL 3.50 FRIDAY THE 13TH 2.99 SKY RUNNER 3.50 INDOOR SPORTS 3.50 MASTER OF THE LAMPS 2.99 NEXUS 3.50 HOWARD THE DUCK 3.50 FIGHTING WARRIOR 2.99 AVENGER 3.50 MONOPOLY 3.50 AMERICAN FOOTBALL 2.99 FIGHTER PILOT CRASH SMASHER 3.50 SHANGHAI 3.50 BARBARIAN 3.50 GOLF FUTURE KNIGHT 3.50 KARATE CHAMP 3.50 ARKANOID 3.50 DANGER RANGER STAR GAMES 3.50 KAYLETH 3.50 ANIMATOR MR DIG KRAKOUT 3.50 SAMURAI TRILOGY 3.50 ACE OF ACES PENGON OFF THE HOOK 3.50 BEACH HEAD 3.50 ITS A KNOCKOUT 3.50 TUTTI FRUTTI KAT TRAP 3.50 ON COURT FOOTBALL 3.50 DANDY 3.50 BUG OFF GRANGE HILL 3.50 COMBAT LYNX 3.50 IMPOSSABALL 3.50 CANNIBALS ENDURO 3.50 GHOSTBUSTERS 3.50 ACROJET 3.50 SUPERMAN EVIL CROWN 3.50 LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE 3.50 AVENGER 3.50 PITFALL II RIVER RAID 3.50 BRUCE LEE 3.50 JACK THE NIPPER 3.50 SPACE SHUTTLE SAM FOX STRIP POKER 3.50 MARBLE MADNESS 3.50 FUTURE KNIGHT 3.50 FRIDAY THE 13TH 3.50 ACROJET 3.50 GRANGE HILL 3.50 LIGHTFORCE 3.50 STAR GAMES 3.50 M.G.T. INTERNATIONAL TRAILBLAZER 3,50 FUTURE KNIGHT 3.50 TRAILBLAZER KARATE SPACE SHUTTLE 3.75 JACK THE NIPPER 3.50 DRAGONS LAIR FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD NEMISIS 3.50 FINAL MATRIX 3.75 MISSION ELEVATOR 3.50 WINTER SPORTS KARATE LORDS OF MIDNIGHT 3.75 LEVIATHON 3.50 COMBAT LYNX PACMAN 3.75 IMAGINE 3.50 MICROVALUE (6 GAMES) PITFALL 2 3.75 DAN DARE 3.50 MERMAID MADNESS SKY FOX 3.75 DECEPTOR 3.50 DEACTIVATORS MICRO VALUE (6 GAMES) 3.75 DANDY 3.50 LIGHT FORCE HACKER 4.25 ALIENS 3.50 IT'S A KNOCKOUT GHOSTBUSTERS 4.25 TAG TEAM WRESTLING 3.50 BOBBY BEARING BALLBLAZER 4.25 D THOMPSON DECATHLON 3.99 XEVIOUS GO TO HELL 4.25 AVENGER 4.25 COMPUTER HITS 3 DEACTIVATORS 4.25 SUPER HUEY II 4.25 COMPUTER HITS 5 WINTER SPORTS 4.25 SHAOLINS ROAD 4.25 WORLD GAMES 12.99 SPECTRUM C64 C16 BOBBY BEARING 4.50 BOMBJACK II 4.25 MAG MAX +4 AMSTRAD MSX 1942 4.50 PITFALL 11 4.95 FIVE STAR GAMES LASER BASIC 4.50 NOW GAMES 4 5.25 BOMBJACK NOW GAMES 4 5.25 THING BOUNCES BACK 5.25 LEADERBOARD IBM AUF WIDERSEHEN MONTY 5.25 AUF WIDERSEHEN MONTY 5.25 SPACE HARRIER METROCROSS 5.25 HIT PACK 5.25 AUF WIDERSEHEN MONTY COMPUTER HITS 5 5.25 XEVIOUS 5.25 SKYFOX 5.75 BOULDERDASHI 7.95 PSI CHESS 5.25 COMPUTER HITS 5 5.25 BACK TO THE FUTURE 5.75 BOULDERDASH II 7.95 QUARTET 5.75 QUARTET 5.75 THEY SOLD A MILLION III 7.95 AMFM TRIVIA 1 7.95 MAG MAX 5.75 FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR 5.75 INFILTRATOR 7.95 AM/FM TRIVIA 2 7.95 PAPER BOY 5.95 MAG MAX 5.75 KONAMI COIN OP HITS 7.95 AMFM TRIVIA 3 7.95 GOLF (KONAMI) 5.95 ACE 2 5.75 ACE 7.95 MIND DANCE 7.95 ARKANOID 5.95 ROAD RUNNER 5.75 GAUNTLET 7.95 FOOTBALL MANAGER 12.95 GAUNTLET 6.95 WORLD CLASS LEADERBOARD BOMB JACK 2 7.95 SUPER SUNDAY 12.95 10TH FRAME 6.95 5.75 LEADERBOARD 7.95 PINBALL CONSTRUCTION 12.95 WORLD GAMES 7.95 PITFALL 5.75 SPACE HARRIER 7.95 MUSIC CONSTRUCTION 12.95 ROAD RUNNER 7.95 TRIVIAL PURSUIT 7.95 STAR GLIDER 7.95 ARCHON THEY SOLD A MILLION 7.95 ARKANOID 7.95 THEY SOLD A MILLION II THEY SOLD A MILLIONM III 7.95 BOULDERDASH 7.95 THEY SOLD A MILLION III 7.95 LEADERBOARD 7.95 BOULDERDASH FOOTBALL LEADER BOARD 7.95 KONAMI COIN OP HITS C64/SPEC/ATARI 7.95 4/800/AMSTRAD SPACE HARRIER 7.95 PAPER BOY 7.95 MANAGER GAUNTLET 7.95 BOMB JACK 2 7.95 .99 C64/SPECI/C.16/BBC/ SEPTEMBER'87 WORLD GAMES 7.95 ATARVAMSTRAD 10TH FRAME 7.95 EACH ELECTRONIVIC 20 STARGLIDER 7.95 ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT BOULDERDASHI .99 & DELIVERY IN THE U.K. C64/SPEC/ATARI 4/800 O O ENDURANCE GAME O O LOLOLOLOL 12.95 MANAGER PLEASE MAKE CHEQUES OR POSTAL ORDERS PAYABLE TO MUSIC BY MAIL "


"TWO NEW SPORTS SIMULATIONS FROM EPYX ITS TOUCH ON THAT SETS STREET SPORTS BASEBALL The Pitcher winds, throws, crack! Its a long fly ball to... bang... right into the catcher's mitt. To make a home run you'll have to cope with makeshift diamond bases, made from sparetyres and trashcans, bushes, rocks even quealing cars. Not to mention 16 neighbourhood players each with their own personalities and skills in pitching, hitting and fielding. With the right combination you could be the champs. With the wrong combination the chumps. You'll pick the place, the team, the positions, the CBM64/128 strategy and then you'll be in the middle of it all. It won't be easy but it's right up your street! .99 cassette .99 disk DLL STS BUT CENTRES novom U NEIGHBOURHOOD BACK LOTS. HERE'S YOUR CHANCE TO JOIN IN AND MAKE YOUR TEAM THE CHAMPIONS! SOME OF THE MOST THRILLING AND ACTION PACKED BASKETBALL AND BASEBALL GAMES TAKE PLACE ON AMERICA'S STREET CORNERS AND STREET SPORT BASKETBALL You'll shoot hoops in dingy alleys, playgrounds, parking lots, occasionally even the suburbs have fun dribbling on the lawn). You'll pick your three-strong team from the 10 toughest players in the neighbourhood. There's hot shooters and slow dribblers. Team players and show offs. There's guys who can shoot the eye out of a needle at 20 feet and guys who couldn't sink one if they were sitting on the backboard. Pass on the run, pop 'em in from the corners, take a hookshot, a tip in. But don't dribble through the oil slick and for heavens sake watch out for the windows! CBM 64/128. AMSTRAD .99 Cassette .99 Disk SPECTRUM 48/128K .99 Cassette Coming U.S. (GOLD 4) Epyx SO U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2) Holford Way Halford, Birmingham 4 TAX. Tel: (021) 356 DB "


"ADVENTURE reviews DOUBLE GOLD MACHINE: AMSTRAD (CASSETTE) $7.95 EACH SUPPLIER: INCENTIVE SOFTWARE REVIEWER: KEITH the back garden? So I entered the back garden, and the police Immediately arrested me as a thief-they had been called in by the farmer. Not very Inspiring to play. despite the possibilities that such a topical scenario had to offer. Coming with Mountains of Ket, that golden oldie in illustrated GAC form, is the saving grace in terms of value, for this package. Double Gold is Incentive's label for packages with two adventures on one cassette. The only thing the games have in common is that they ahve all been written using Incentive's Graphic Adventure Creator. Here I look at two recently released Double Gold cassettes for the Amstrad: Top Secret plus Mountains of Ket, and Sharpe's Deeds plus The Black Fountain. Other versions will follow if these adventures prove to be a success on Amstrad. VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL PACKAGE VALUE (including Kot) TOP SECRET alteratively, death by mauling power. You are asked to enter dogs. Of course, there could be a the top secret military way round this.... establishment, and expose the Taking another route leads you story. to the nearby farm, and this is Having agreed and knowing where total frustration with the the approximate location of the game sets in. A coat is hanging underground complex, you set on the line in the back garden, off into the countryside. It is now a but GET COAT merely provoked matter of finding one of the two the program to tell me I couldn't entrances, and getting in with no hint, even after unobserved. Not so easy, fora examining both coat and line, as likely route through a drainage to why. tunnel leads to a gassy death, or Perhaps, then, I wasn't yet in As an ace reporter, you are approached by a Goverment \"mole\" about a new weapons system on which you have been working, and which is likely to change the world's balance of ed. You Et STATIONFALL MACHINES: COMMODORE 64/ 128, ATARI XUXE, AMSTRAD PwC/CPC, ATARI ST, AMIGA, MACINTOSH, IBM PC, APPLE II  SUPPLIER: ACTIVISION/INFOCOM PRICES: $24.99 (C64/129, ATARI XE, AMSTRAD) $29.99 THE RESTI) REVIEWER: KEITH As I step out of the docking bay, I notice the station is unusualy quiet. Where is everyone? A look in on the Commander's log reveals that there has recently been trouble in the \"village\" -a sort of shanty town of assorted spacecraft connected to the station by flexible pressurised tubes. Fuel cells have gone missing. Village Access forms have been falsely validated, and ID cards have been faked. The Commander has obviously had a trying time recently, since as if that wasn't enough, a ship of unknown origin was spotted drifting in space in the vicinity of the station. It was towed in, and found to contain nothing but the Without them, my base is we are indeed to have such unable to request the forms a facility. necessary to acquire some with a scenario like that, urgently needed black form you could be forgiven for binders, so you can thinking that this is a satirical understand the urgency of or comic adventure. You'd be my task wrong. A more gripping sci-fi The space station has the thriller I have yet to play! forms in stock, of that I have Your average thrillerno doubt, since it is here that adventure single-mindedly all forms are made, printed, concentrates on the plot, with packaged, and recycled, perhaps a few funnies thrown using the great forests of in for good measure, the nearby plants as raw above mentioned sub-plot material. runs strongly throughout Indeed, forms are the Stationfall, and it is of such raison d'etre of the entire stuff that Infocom games are station and how fortunate made. Here I am, a lieutenant in the Stellar Patrol's Paperwork Taskforce, just arrived on space station Gamma Delta Gamma 77-G 59/59. I travelled with my faithful robot companion Floyd in a space truck, on a top priority assignment to pick up 24 pallets of forms. "


"SHARPE'S DEEDS THE BLACK FOUNTAIN In the Gatehouse where you can also see exit soutk andse where you can see any Garros Your move: 5 In a large Courtyard. There's a gave the west, and other exits are north and south. Your move: Your great-uncle has died, and, a On the planet Areth, you are much travelled collector of Shardor, a humble servant. Your artifacts, ho left them all to you in three older brothers have gone his will provided you spend a on a mission to investigate a night in the village of Stapley fountain of black water, made by It is not long before you are the evil eccentric Abhaldos reading a note conveyed to you which is polluting the rivers. by the solicitor executing his will: Not having any faith in the \"A dozen treasures and deeds abilities of your brothers, you you'll need, plead with the High Chancellor \"Ere as my heir you can succeed.\" to be given leave to follow after A ring of familiarity, perhaps, in them, and help with their mission. the plot, but then this game is First there is the Court to completely different from anything Infocom ever did. With this in mind you set out to explore the village with a \"Hello, old manl Momin', baker! God bless, vicart and all that, as you wander around collecting objects likely to help you in your quest. This is a graphic adventure, although not all the locations have a picture. On the whole, the Indoor pictures are rather drab, whilst when out of doors, the graphics tend to complement the rustic atmosphere, which comes over nicely. Not a difficult adventure, and with an adequate vocabulary, Sharpe's Deeds should help pass a few pleasant hours. explore, for othr than the tunic which you are wearing, and a VOCABULARY 7 scroll authorising you as a court ATMOSPHERE official, you are empty handed PERSONAL 7 Then, it's out into the big wide brewery, makes. Huddled around the town hall square are a group of buildings, and alien is the last thing they seemin fact, they have more of a Roman air about them. Atmosphere apart, this is another reasonable and lighthearted adventure, that goes well with its cassette-mate. More Gold packages are planned by Incentive, and if they are all up to this standard they'll be well worth checking out world, always assuming you can open the gate! Next the search seems to be for money, or else you're not going to get any of that real ale which Brusto, down at the VOCABULARY ATMOSPHERE PERSONAL PACKAGE VALUE (whole cassette) OU decaying skeleton of an level five. and computer control, have captain has locked up the alien being, and a small All is not well aboard. The been sealed off from village access forms, and pyramid on a pedestal. station's monitors indicate underneath! And from time to hidden the validation stamp. The pyramid was put in that Printing is at condition time some very strange This is a problem worth quarantine in the science red. It seems that one of the noises and throbbing pressing, for once entered, quarters, while attempt were collating machines, the very vibrations are heard through the village proves to be a made to decipher a series of machle scheduled to the floor... large sprawling area, housing strange dots marking the process the request forms Meanwhile, quite many essential objects. hull's interior. you need, has inexplicably unconcerned, Floyd, that But as far as life goes, it These attempts were broken down. irrepressible little robot you too, is deserted, save for an unsuccessful, despite being Other important functions teamed up with in Planetfall, ostrich and an Arcturian run through the most powerful are deteriorating to has palled up with a local balloon creature. computer programs condition yellow. Not to worry, poetry-reading robot by the Arcturian balloon available. though, for computer control name of Plato. creatures, as you are The space station is huge is at green, and so for sure it Their incessant light probably aware, propel and a full set of detailed will all be sorted out before h earted chat about matters themselves by the explusion plans are provided in the long. personal to robots, is of digestive gases. package. Exploration is Down more levels, then, to costantly in the background I've been stuck now for therefore an easy matter, seven, which houses the all and before long it begins some six play-hours, over half from the garden dome, down important printing centre. It is to unnerve me, as I struggle way through, and I still keep through the mess hall and here that perhaps the first against time to solve the coming back for more! library, theatre, laundry and sinister overtones appear. mystery of what is going on VOCABULARY chapel, past the crew You can't go any further, more anxious by the minute ATMOSPHERE accommodation levels to the since the levels below which to put a stop to it. PERSONAL nerve centre of the shop at house life support, power, As a precaution, the VALUE 011 "


"GROW INTO A BIG FISH IN A BIG POND. -MY LAST GAME GOT NOWHERE BUT I JUST KNOW IT WAS GOOD ENOUGH THIS TIME I'LL TAKE MY TALENTS TO THE PROFESSIONALS. PTAUTISK SOME TIME LATER... ..WITH OCEAN BUT FIRST THE BAIT/ If you haven't heard of Ocean then you're probably not the person we're looking for (unless you've been living on another planet, in which case we'd be delighted to meet you) Ocean Software is sold worldwide and it's producing maximum sales revenue. That means a lot of money for someone. That someone could be you! SO, HOW DO YOU MEASURE UP? We're looking for people who want to make their names in program coding-graphic/games design-music and other related computer skills If you have experience in the Software Industry, all the better -it's a distinct advantage. Ideally, we'd like you to work with us here, where we can give you the training, support, equipment and advice that will help you grow, but if you insist, you can work on a freelance basis (providing you are good enough) And talking about freelance, we're always looking for finished software to market successfully and we can translate original programs into every relevant micro format And because we are one of the biggest, we can guarantee big payments-in whichever way you want, outright purchase, flat fees, royalties, payments in advance-if your work is good enough, the sky's the limit-remember we work and publish in both 8 and 16 bit environments-worldwide-so no project is too large (or too small) for us to make the most of its potential. ARE YOU HOOKED? Then contact us today, telex, fax or letter We promise we'll treat your correspondence in total confidence. We're waiting for you to byte (sorry about that). Garry Bracey Telephone: 061-832 6633 Software Manager, Telex: 669977 OCEANS G Ocean Software Limited, Fax No. 061-834 0650 6 Central Street, Manchester M2 5NS. Fus ocean SORAS WOWO "


"1 ADVENTURE round-up Star W reck has the hallmarks of being 'em! solut This is graphic adventure mazes. And you certainly get Journey, and you're in Berlin, has the hallmarks of being with the KGB tailing you. After GACked but doesn't say so. But are mazes really a rendezvous with a double MACHINE: AMSTRAD The instructions on the inlay necessary, now that we all agent, the action moves  SUPPLIER: ALTERNATIVE SOFTWARE are minimal, comprising of a know how to map them? To across the Iron Curtain, via PRICE: .99 Isit of some available my mind, they just hamper the notorious Checkpoint REVIEWER: KEITH commands, and they are play, without adding anything Charlie. QUICK-GUIDE RATING: 5 very unusual ones, such as of interest. And the author Slowly, you will manage to This, as the title suggests, is a CORRUPT, INVESTIGATE, and himself seems to agree! Just fit the puzzles together as you rather corny Star Trek spoof. CHAT. It doesn't say how you as I was getting fed up with plunge deeper and deeper As Captain James T Cake, use them. mapping an interminable into the shadowy world of you command the Starship With very scant locations forest, I got the comment I'M espionage, the premature Paralysed. Together with your descriptions, and abrupt text, BROWNED OFF WITH ALL THESE termination of your existence crew, Lieut Yahoo, Mr Zulu, Mr this adventure does not give TREES! being likely more than a few Checkout, and Mr Spark, you much encouragement Not a bad series of times! Wonderful things these are taking to the planet A number of commands, adventures, they are quite RAM saves! Dandrox. such as SLEEP, seem to be well written, with a sense of There's quite a lot of soaked up with no message humour. But the package is, COMING YOUR WAY starship to explore, but most at all, and it is difficult to tell perhaps, a little expensive Here are the games that of it consists of \"empty\" whether you are having any when compared with the arrived too late for review locations, described with a effect, or the command has better budget games around this month. Watch for the section number and deck been overlooked in the these days. lowdown on the best in level. coding. November's C+VG. The vocabulary, on the The map is unnecessarily whole, is adequate until illogical, and once out of the THE PAY OFF you try to do something a dome and onto the landing A re-release of the Atari little special, such as using pad, one seems to be stuck adventure, from Bug-Byte. the transporter. Then, words outside forever -whether by On cassette for begin to fail, and no clues accident or design is difficult Commodore 64 and Atari, MACHINE: SPECTRUM are given to point you in the fo tell. SUPPLIER: WRIGHTCHOICE priced $2.99 right direction. Uninspired pictures SOFTWARE (MAIL ORDER Like Life-Term, this is also by contribute to a fairly drab FROM PO BOX 100, 159 RICK HANSON WELBECK CRESCENT, TROON, Substantially re-vamped Charles A Sharp, and and awful game. AYRSHIRE probably GACked. Both PRICE: .95 Amstrad version of games suffer from the REVIEWER: STEVE Robico's BBC original. problem that the text window QUICK-GUIDE RATING: 7 Cassette $9.95. is very small, and the location The sequel to Operation Substantially revamped description, together with its Stallion, this is the second of a review in the next issue. object list, soon scrolls out of trilogy offering a $500 prize to sight. Therefore, if there are  MACHINE: BBC/ELECTRON the first person who solves all THE HUNT SEARCH FOR three or four objects which SUPPLIER: RIVENDALE three. Most of the bugs that SHAUNA SOFTWARE (MAIL ORDER you want to take, the FROM 95 PRINTON AVENUE, made Stallion such a chore Robico's first graphics descriptions are lost before MANCHESTER to play are gone, making it adventure for the BBC. you can get them all. If there PRICE: N/A much slicker. Cassette ($9.95) and disk is a command that turns REVIEWER: KEITH Again, you play an agent ($12.95) versions available. QUICK-GUIDE RATING: 7 graphics off, I didn't find it. allowed to operate outside Review and competition As the name suggests, this is the law. However this next month. Don't miss a spoof based on soap privilege does not come your chance to win a copy operas. A Quilled four-parter, cheap. If you fall on any from among 10 cassettes each part takes on a the mission, a miniature bomb MACHINE: CBM 64/128 and 10 disks on offer! SUPPLIER: ALTERNATIVE theme of a different implanted in your skull will SOFTWARE programme. detonate... BOOK OF THE DEAD PRICE: .99 Emmeroid Farm features in You begin at Heathrow CRL release of graphic REVIEWER: KEITH part one, while in part two Airport, at the start of a adventure by Essential QUICK-GUIDE RATING: 3 your aim is to survive the vacation, but on reporting to Myth. Spectrum, $8.95. In a future world where rigours of Abdication Street the information desk, you Been knocking around for commercialism is everything. Cross Eyes Motel and the learn something important nearly a yearseems and the rich get richer, you Dead End of London appear has cropped up. You must the game has found a are sentenced to life for a in parts three and four. report immediately to CJ, a publisher at last. murder you did not commit. In text only, there is a man who is in constant Sent to run a refuse re-cycling LOCATION command, which contact with the Prime GAC PAC plant on a planet dedicated displays the current location Minister. A suite of add-on utilities, and to that purpose, your number useful, says the An important scientist has book of useful tips for GAC objective is to escape! instructions, for mapping been kidnapped. A quick air users, for Spectrum. Essential Myth, $5.95. hat the text window Suds-The "


"ADVENTURE The tiendo.. and written the game using Revenge is sweet, GAC, then is would have been of some merit, for the so they say. After Fiend actually found the months and months of country manor/missing being plagued and scientist plot not without tormented by the Fiend of Faringdon, Keith after all. And it does have its some attraction. Campbell attempts to get his own back by good points. Those of you who type at the rate of one letter per sending him Inspector Flukeit to review. For example, I was able to paint another masterpiece, minute, and were able to Campbell's chuckles could be heard all study for another degree, maintain their interest while day. \"That'll teach him, he laughed. The and climb the north face of playing that other sluggard Fiend was not amused. Campbell may live the Eiger during the time! Holy Grail may find the game to regret his actions. awaited a response from the playable. It night just have program. penetrated into your feeble It was the end of KC had taken upon himself to But the irony of it all, is that minds that the Fiend didn't. another perfect send Inspector Flukeit, If only the author has used I'LL GET YOU FOR THIS, A summer's day. The sun knowing full well that it some simple common sense CAMPBELL! was setting in a blaze of glory, contravened nearly all of the silhouetting the angular Fiend's rules of how not to outline of Faringdon Folly, as write an adventure, which you it stood swathed in mystery may remember from a recent atop Folly Hill issue of C+VG. The simple country folk of It was with disbelief that the Faringdon were about their Fiend encountered the rustic pleasures, and the independently minded Fiend had settled characters, who wandered comfortably in his pit, deep in aimlessly and pointlessly FIEND the caves beneath the hill. about. Only by feeding the Fiend with incredulity he regular inputs of adventure witnessed the drawing of software can his excesses be feeble pictures that scrolled kept to a minimum, and it was straight off the screen again. with eager anticipation that But it was the agonisingly he unwrapped the latest slow input and response that peace offering from KC. aroused the Fiendish wrath. With claws atremble, the I was suspicious right at the Fiend loaded up Old Faithful, start, while attempting to and set to with a will. All examine the desk in the should be safe tonight, as he study. EMDK I had typed in at would be too busy to bother the first attempt. the humble mortals This was swiftly followed by hereabouts with his public EXM EK and EXAM DEK before nuisancing. I finally forced myself to type The moon rose full over the at the sluggardly speed sleeping town, turning its required. Being of a naturally streets into rivers of silver. inquisitive nature, Save for the subdued ribaldry investigated. And VOCABULARY MICROSCOPIC yes, I think it will be in the unbelievebly, the operating ATMOSPHERE from the local inn, all lay in DETECTABLE VALUE shops by next week...\" said a stillness. part of the programme is PERSONAL IF ONLY.... Melbourne Houseperson. And then came a howling written in Basic! It seems I'm not the only from the hill! Children awoke, I could rave about a So you thought that one who dares to have screaming with terror, the vocabulary that is all but noncompanies producing opinions. Matthew Conway singing from the pub was existent yet knows FIFTEEN advantures knew a lot hates the adventure pages! stunned into horrified silence, swear words. about them? Wrong! Sadly. He thought the old style was and many a brawny bravo I could rant about the the games are merely bad enough, but with no blanched and quailed at the illogic whereby the vicar calls looked upon as \"product\"... illustrations to break up the fearsome bellow. the police to report you for A recent example of this text, it is like reading all And for those with the wit to grave-robbing if you dig in c omes from Jeff Hough of Infocom descriptions ever understand, there were words the graveyard even if you Pontypool. written in one go, says to be heard in the Fiendish take him by car and deposit He was so chuffed when he Matthew! And where did the shriek: \"I'll get you for this, him miles away first. But I completed Shadows of adventure forum get to in the Campbell!\" won't. Mordor, that he rang the August issue, he asks? In some feeble attempt at Let no mortal accuse the publishers to tell them! Were The Fiend disagrees and revenge for the Fiend's little Fiend of being churlish, for they impressed? what the The Fiend says goes. japes over the past two years, the game costs only $1.99 \"Shadows of Mordor... oh WILL RETURN! Fiend's Fury "


"BY TONY CROWTHER & ROSS GOODLEY NOW FROM THE T.V. SERIES ROWERXTRE FROM TV SERIES * POWER-X-TREME!!! 8871 0898 FROM TV SERIES * EXOFRAME ON AND READY! SITTITUTE 2008379 FROM TV SERIES ZAP MILLIONS OF BADDIES! Choose from an awesome array of weapons and prepare for the battle of a lifetime! Ace McCloud, Jake Rockwell and Max Ray are THE CENTURIONS! Stop the evil Doc Terror in his desperate bid to destroy the world! Guide the Centurions through Space, Sea and Air, and find all six parts of the master key before it's too late! SPECIAL FEATURES Multi-directional scrolling 3 massive levels Amazing 'Exoframe' feature FAKIR C64 128 cass .99 C64/128 disk .99 AMSTRAD cass .99 AMSTRAD disk .99 SPECTRUM .99 CENTURIOUS. SPES MESES, INC "


"LOGIC SUMMER SALE COMMODORE 64 CASSETTES .99 EACH SIGMA 7 FASSEM MC LANG ASS SPIDERMAN HULK SURF CHAMP PITMAN TYPING TUTOR GRANDMASTER CHESS/OTHELLO ALLEYKAT FIRELORD J.S.W.HI YABBA DABBA DOO CHUCKIE EGG II ADVENTURELAND/SECRET MISSION MANIC MINER WHO DARES WINS II THING ON A SPRING CHIMERA STARION FRAK 64 IRIDIS-ALPHA HOWARD THE DUCK MUGSYS REVENGE PARADROID COMBAT LYNX HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER GHOST CHASER ARK PANDORA MERMAID MADNESS BULL DOG KETTLE DRAGON SKULL WILLIAM WOBBLER HAMPSTEAD FOREST OF DOOM BOOK & TAPE SHERLOCK BOMBO THAI BOXING WILLOW PATTERN NEXUS MATCH FISHING BEAMRIDER LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE DEVS EX MACHINA UCHI-MATA TOUCH TYPE PRODIGY HERBERTS DUMMY RUN R.M.S. TITANIC BARRY MCGUIGAN'S BOXING UTILITYS & PERIPHERALS XEVIOUS CHAMELEON 8 BOOKS FROM LAST AD EXPLORER .95 + 5.50 P&P BACK TO THE FUTURE FUTURE FINANCE .95 CLASSIC SNOOKER SCRABBLE CLEUDO. MONOPOLY ROBIN OF THE WOOD ALL 3 for .95 KINETIK EASY FILE .95 JACK THE NIPPER ASSEMBLER TUTOR .95 THE COMET GAME KNIGHT GAMES PROGRAMMERS UTILITYS .95 WAY OF THE TIGER QUICK DATA DRIVES .00 ADRIAN MOLE LORD OF THE RINGS 64 CASSETTES FOOTBALL MANAGER .99 SYSTEM 15,000 2nd EDITION RETURN TO OZ HEARTLAND MAJIC MADNESS KRAKOUT ESCAPE FROM PARADISE IMPOSSIBLE MISSION W.A.R. SUPER BASIC JOHNNY REB 11 APSHAI TRILOGY EVIL CROWN GT AMERICAN CROSS COUNTRY MASTERS OF UNIVERSE GHOSTBUSTERS ADVENTURE KORONIS RIFT MASTERS OF UNIVERSE ARCADE TRANSFORMERS (Activision) SCOTT ADAMS SCOOPS THE MUSIC STUDIO COMPILATION THE EIDOLON DRUID DANDY MISSION A.D. DRAGONS LAIR MOON CRISIS 1999 MAX HEADROOM PLATFORM PERFECTION THE FORCE (Compilation) ACTION PACK (Compilation Alligata) BEACH HEAD II INFODROID FIGHTER PILOT L.C.U.P.S. AMERICAS CUP CHALLENGE AVENGER HOT WHEELS GROGS REVENGE MONTY ON THE RUN SUPER HUEY II DONKEY KONG (Cart) BOULDERDASH CONSTRUCTION TARZAN KIT STARGAMES 1 (Compilation) HYPERBALL UNBELIEVABLE ULTIMATE PARRALLAX (Compilaton) SUPERBOWL FUTURE KNIGHT JUMPING JIMMY SHOOT EM UP (Compilation DISCS ALL 1.99 ZORK 1 ZORK II ZORK III STARCROSS DEADLINE SUSPENDED PATHFINDER GHOSTBUSTERS TRACER SANCTION PITFALL PITFALL II STARION REDHAWK SHEEP IN SPACE BEAMRIDER NEXUS WEB DIMENSION DECATHALON BALLBLAZER CRITICAL MASS/COMBAT LYNX RED ARROWS RESCUE ON FRACTALUS PARK PATROL SIGMA 7 FIGHTING WARRIOR GALACTIC CONTROLLER WILLIAM WOBBLER THING ON A SPRING p&p 1-3 titles 75p 3 or more 21.00 Overseas .20 per tape CHEQUES PAYABLE TO LOGIC SALES LTD Department 4 17 Leotric Square, Eastern Industry Peterborough, Cambs. Tel: 0733 313870 Are you horrible enough to go on the "


"Elite OPPORTUNITIES In-House and Free-Lance Technical Staff Having established the key elements of a well organised and equipped 'In-house' software development team, the company has the following opportunities to Offer in Entertainment Software Development. Senior Programmers O.T.E. K Having been responsible for at least one technically excellent (though not necessarily commercially successful entertainment software product you will be experienced in 280, 6502 and/or 68000 assembler. You will be looking for an opportunity to join an in-house' environment committed to the development of original products and conversions of the very highest quality and will expect to call on graphics, music and other support functions of the highest calibre Programmers -O.T.E. K Though not necessarily able to show direct Involvement in any commercially available entertainment software products, you will be able to demonstrate through specific routines and demo programs, a high degree of technical ability in 280, 6502 or 68000 assembler. You will be looking for an opportunity to realise your ambition to be responsible for the developmenof technically excellent entertainment software products and will expect to call on graphics, music and other support functions of the highest calibre. Graphic Artists/Musicians/Game Designer-O.T.E. -K With or without formal qualifications you will already be working in a free-lance or inhouse capacity supporting programmers in your specialist discipline in the development of commercially available/to be published entertainment software products. You will be able to demonstrate a number of different examples of your work and will be looking to put your experience to use whilst developing it further in the production of commercially available products All appointees to the above positions will be offered an attractive working environment, substantial basic salary and an opportunity to develop their ambitions with the full support of the company's management and financial strength. In addition to the above opportunities the company has a regular flow of program conversion contracts avaliable at attractive rates to freelancers and is particularly keen to support proven programmers and development houses wishing to write and have published by a major brand name original games for all popular machines. If you would like to arrange an interview to discuss any of the above opportunities please write, giving full details of your relevant experience to: Steve Wilcox Director Elite Systems Ltd, Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall WS9 BPW TM You'll know soon enough! Rampage, coming to your home computer screen, December. ACTIVISION ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE TM &  Bally Midway MFG.CO. All rights reserved. Activision Inc. Authorised User "


"MOEBIUS SEE US AT PCW, STAND 1511 dventure through a complex and colourful Oriental world of magic, mysticism and intrigue. Moebius-fabled deity of the island Kingdom of Khantun-has chosen you. his disciple, to reclaim the stolen Orb of Celestial Harmony from the renegade warlord. Featuring superbly animated martial arts and sword-fighting combat. Moebius is far better than other Far Eastern adventures. Strategically and tactically more challenging, this odyssey takes you through the realms of Earth, Water, Air and Fire. The dynamic playfield changes constantly as you travel across 26 terrain types. encountering earthquakes, rockslides, heavy rains and heat waves. Graphics are top-notch and you can communicate with all the townspeople, There are 2 distinct magic systems, mixed combat modes and a fearsome array of enemies. Strategy, planning and quick thinking are essential to reach the final confrontation in this engaging and unique fantasy. Moebius fills both sides of two disks and is available for the CBM 64. Amiga, Atari ST and Apple. Prices from .99 Abe Beek Bek AHORIGIN PROPROSE MicroProse Software Ltd. 2 Market Plage, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GLS SDA. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tix: 43422 MPS/UKG "


"FANTASY Byran Talbot's The Adventures of Luther Arkwright was hailed as the first and only adult British graphic novel when it was launched five years ago. The second volume of Arkwright's adventures will be published this autumn.C+VG's comic expert Philip Morton investigates. |THE FIVE-YEAR parallel earths. There are CLIFFHANGER worlds, for instance, where Cromwell's roundheads are It's 1987 (in this space-time still in power ... worlds where continum, at least). Is the the Crystal Palace didn't burn world finally ready for Luther down in 1936... you get the Arkwright? picture. Arkwright is an If Bryan Talbot's name or interdimensional agent, cold artwork look familiar, it's and unemotional by nature, possibly because of the who gets caught up in a exquisite detailed work he's fiendishly complex battle done on 2000AD's Nemesis the against the Warlock (now available in forces of chaos book form from Titan Books) which rages and on the computer game of across the same name. numerous Talbot created Arkwright for a late-1970s issue of Brainstorm Comics. Following a favourable reaction to this, Arkwright reappeared in a much longer, more complex, story serialised first in Near Myths, then in Pssst! This serial was gathered together in 1982 as Book One of The Adventures of Luther Arkwright. The book was hailed as the first and only truly adult British graphic novel. As a confirmed Arkwright enthusiast (which you'd probably guessed by now), I can't wait to read Book Two. Talbot's artwork, from the pages I've seen, is as finely-detailed as ever, and he promises a gripping story in which the cold, calculating super-agent undergoes a dramatic transformation. In fact, we will see Luther Arkwright die a symbolic death, whereupon he is reborn as a messianic, almost Christ-like figure. In the outside world the Battle of London rages, and all the while a doomsday device is ticking away... So, where can you find Luther Arkwright? Three places: In Book One of The Adventures of Luther Arkwright, published in 1982 by Never Editions — who still have a few copies left at knock-down price of .95. Arkwright will also be appearing in a nine-issue comic book, published every two months starting in August 1987 by Valkyrie Press at 60p per issue, and reprinting the story from Book One. The attraction here is that Bryan Talbot has prepared a series of attractive new covers and frontispieces guaranteed to enhance your lifestyle. Sul "


"FANTASY You always see it in the movies. Some Mad Scientist attaches himself to a computer and is transformed into a monster or superman. Forget about the monsters, but why not try to become supermen? It may not make us all men of steel but Bodylink can help you improve your lifestyle using a personal computer. Bodylink harnesses the electrical energy in the human body and turns it into information that can be monitored and learned from. This can help you learn to exercise more effectively, even control the old rock and roll of daily stress. The module plugs into the cartridge slot of a Commodore 64/128 computer. The Bodyscope cartridge is then used to create a personal record based on such factors as sex, age and weight. This information is then saved to the disk drive for use later on in conjunction with the other plug-in programs. A special graph monitors in real time, and let's you customize the upcoming workout for the desired performance, and amount of difficulty. The module receives its information from a series of sensors which are attached to your body The headband, for example, uses three electrodes which conduct body electricity from your forehead into the computer How about a cardiovascular workout on a stationary bike? Of course you could just run on the spot if you like. Strap the electrodes on the leg band along the muscle area of your knee, plug it into the EMG sensor cable and into the module. A pulse sensor attaches to the handle bars, and a finger clip grips your index digit. Then pop in the Ride For Your Life cartridge. Start pedalling as your little onscreen buddy weaves through city traffic. Meanwhile Bodylink is looking at your speed and heart rate, measuring calories burned and the time and distance of your jaunt. When you're done, the program will display a graph showing the results, as well as comparisons with previous efforts. This can be printed out as well. Let's work on better muscle coordination Attach the sensors to your wrist and practice swinging (golf club, cricket bat, tennis racquet). The Bodyscope program will display the characteristics of your swing so that you can work on improving Dixon Miniatures are famous worldwide for their top quality metal gaming figures. They have built their reputation by being one of the only companies around that produces high quality, metal cast, 25mm oriental role-playing figures. However, they also produce a fine line of 15 and 25mm historical wargaming and fantasy roleplaying miniatures. Recently Dixon's have released new figures for their oriental range in the 25mm size. They are issued in their Land of Nippon range. The model costs .50. All models are available from: Dixons Miniatures, Unit 28, Colne Valley Workshops, Spring Grove Mills, Linthwaite, Huddersfield, West Yorkshire, H 5QG Fancy your own space station with all modern convieniences. Well, here's your chance to build your own cosmic home-on computer anyway. Space M+A+X, from Final Frontier Software, is a space station construction simulator for the IBM PC family and based on the NASA space station program, Space M+A+X is envisioned as the first commercial space station. Designer, T.L. Keller, used his experience as a computer systems analyst at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory to develop this highly complex and realistic simulation. The object of Space M+A+X is to launch, construct and operate a commercial space station given limited budget and time constraints. The project manager you! is confronted with a number of real-life situations involving personnel and resources. A variety of real-life accidents such as fires, and explosions illness and strikes also occur. Space M+A+X is available from good software retailers at a recommended retail price of .95 plus. Musclepeople will take to Comet, the computerized muscle exercise and trainer attachment This is a training bar with handles at each end that is used to develop muscle groups through isometric exercises. Bodylink is no substitute for fresh air and outside activities, but it can help you tune and perfect your exercise technique. Interested? The contact Bodylog, Inc, 34 Maple Avenue, Armonk, New York 10504. Marshal M. Rosenthal. "


"SEE US AT PCW, STAND 1511 SURVIVE THE 21ST CENTURY DRIVING TEST Drive aggressively and give way to no one. AutoDuel is a fast-paced, strategy rle Only the most cunning road warriors playing adventure set in the year 2030. A are enlisted by the FBI to drive out the time when the American highways are ultimate evil force. Will you gain honour controlled by armed outlaws, and when and entry into the elite circle of danger lurks around every bend. AutoDuellists? our aim is to earn fame and fortune. AutoDuel. Pick up the gauntlet. AvailCompete in spectacular auto dogfights in able on disk for the Apple, Commodore, true gladiator style the prize money will 64, Atari, Atari ST and Amiga. Prices from buy you a powerful custom-built vehicle .95. equipped with lethal weapons, including Based on the award-winning Car Wars lasers, machine guns and flamethrowers. board game by Steve Jackson, Undertake lucrative courier runs for the THE JOINT VENTURE IN EUROPE American AutoDuel Association or become a vigilante of the open road. Somewhere on your travels between 16 cities are the vital clues you will need to SYSTEMS INC. complete the final mission. MicroProse Software Ltd. 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tix: 434222 MPS UKG HHORIGIN "


"It's movie month in C+VG's awesome Frame-Up gallery. You've been beavering away transforming your silver screen heroes into pulsating pixels! First up Is Marcus Thompson from West Lothian with old Sylvester as that gun-toting super-cop Cobra. You'll be seeing more of Mr T's work on the ST, which he created using the Neochrome package, on these pages in future. Meanwhile, Beebsfer Robert Timothy From Cardiff has transformed the Terminator and colourised Conan for your viewing pleasure. Frame-Up welcomes overseas artists and here's J. Vander Vis from Holland who brings you The Great Escape not only a great movie but also a pretty nifty computer game. J. also sent us his Impression of what Out Run should look like on the C641 We've also got a message from Tommi Louronen in Finland. Hi Tommil A. O Donnell sent us this neat C+VG promo on the Specey featuring our robo-cop cover from years ago. Ana David Sowerby, the Elc-Man, continues the Ravenflame legend with this portrait of our female tipster on the Electron. We finish up FrameUp with another Marcus Thompson ST spectacular, Echoes of Terror. Nicel If you've got pictures you reckon we'd like to see send them to Frame-Up, Computer and Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3A0. From next month Rainbird will be providing Art Studio prizes for the BEST pics we print. TIME 51 SCOREN LAPP BIOS TIME 51 SCORE S LAP 0199 BEK FINLAND C+VG GREETINGS TO: MIGU,JAZU, MINU, PETSKU, RCE JANTSU, NALLE,ROE HUBERRD ARE CRULDRON II HAS RUITE HARD) AND OF COURSE HEFY NICE TEZE "


"If you go down to the woods today youre sure of a swift demise... Poet86 vozcz THE PUMPKIN STRIKES BACK does-86 ' THE TERMINATOR >> D COMPUTER UIDEO GAMES EYAN DARE YOU MISS YOUR COPY? ELCMANG Melisa R Melisa $ "


"Thing Quese se Avatar ZA MICRO MICROWAVE PROSE SEE US AT PCW JOURNEY THROUGH THE LEGENDARY LAND OF UDC bark on the test epic advent Ultime, the latest seque the award winning Ultima saga is now here. Mondain, Minax and the hell pla Exodus have finally been vanqatshed from the lands of Britannia. Peace prevails, but a perfect mortal an Avatar-is sought to conquer evil and lead the nation into a golden age of prosperity. With a party of adventurers track evil to the furthest reaches. Explore towns and dungeons, converse with hundreds of characters to glean vital information, and Unravel the myster er system. But, tread ef o on dragons and long-dead and then emigdy tranquil places Strategic use of terrain and weapons is essential to survive dangerous combat as youjoury to the final frontier. Only those who have pursued virtue to become an Avatar can brave the terrors of the Abyss. In *this tie fantasy classic the ultimate solution lies within. Ultima TV. Available on disk for the CBM 64 and Atari. .95. Time Quest of the Avatar Please send _copy/ies of ULTIMATIV Format Name Address Postcode Which magazine have you cut this coupon from? Please debit my Access/Visa Card No. I I TTT TTTT Expiry Date Cheques payable to MICROPROSE SOFTWARE LIMITED, I enclose .00 postage & packing. # ORIGIN 7SYSTEMS INC. Each ULTIMA sequel is a complete adventure in itself. For more information write to MicroProse Software Limited, 2 Market Place, TETBURY, Glos, GL88DA. "


"Disk SEE 064128 Cass Aco Il Adv. Ant studio...... 19.95 Armageddon Man 9.75 Athena ......6 55 Kangkok Knights...-725 Battleships 725 Bismark 7.25 ..... ....7.25 California Games 725 Convoy Raider.......725 Elha 6 Pack 725 Epyx Epics.......... 725 Explon........ 6.55 Final Matrix... ... 7.25 F15 Sork Eagle......... 7.25 Game Over 6 .55 Bu Guadalcanal 7.25 Gunship............. 11.20 High Frontier...........725 Implosion............. 7 25 19.95 11.20 9.75 11.20 11.20 11.20 11.20 11.20 11.20 11.20 11.20 9.75 11.20 11 20 9.75 11 20 14.95 11 20 11.20 AMIGA Barbarian. ...19.95 Bureaucracy Defender of the Crown....... 22.95 Guld of Thieves ....... Hardball 1895 Holywood Strip Poker 14.95 Leaderboard Golf 1995 Night Orc 14.95 Portal... .....25.95 Roadwar 2000 22.95 Silent Service.... Sinbad Space Guest 18.95 Stargader. ......18.95 Stationfall... Super Huey... Uninveed........ 22.95 Winter Games ....18.95 World Games....................18.95 ATARI ST Al Reality Dungeon 18.95 Amazon 14.95 Autoduel.......... Barbarian Extensor.. 14.95 Fahrenheit 451 ........... 14.95 Gauntlet 1995 Guild of Thieves....... ...18.95 Indiana Jones 14.95 Night Orc . .... 14.95 Prohibition....... 14.95 Road Runner 18.95 Silent Service..... 18.95 Solomons Key........ ... 14.95 Space Quest Stationfall 22.95 Subbattle Simulator............18.95 TNT... 14.95 Top Gun......... 14.95 Tracker........... ..18.95 DRILLER Sponsored by Personal Computer World and PC Week Mail Order Software service WORLDWIDE SOFTWARE. Europe, Middle East USA, Africa Australia and many other countries 23-27 SEPTEMBER 1987 OLYMPIA LONDON Wersona, omputer PCW Show SHOW STAND No. 3052 FEATURING World Britain FREESCAPE 19.95 CH4/128 Cass Dise C64/128 cass disk C64128 Indiana Jones.........725 11.20 Stifflip & Co. ...... 7.25 9.75 Defender of the Crown........ 11.20 Jack Nipper 7.25 11.20 Sirt Baseball 7.25 11.20 Flight Simil Kad Until Dead.........725 11.20 Strt Basketball 7 35 11.20 Gettysburg. 24.95 Last Mission ... 7.25 11.20 Subbattle Sim. 725 11.20 Guld of Thieves... 14.95 Last Ninja.......... 7.25 11.20 Summer Gold......725 11.20 Hitchhikers Guide...... Living Daylights .7.25 Tai Pan.......... ...6.55 9.75 Halywood Hink 1 9.95 Mask .............. 7.25 11.20 Tank..............6.55 9.75 Leather Goddess 19.95 Mega Apocalype 6, 669 75 Wargame Cst Set 11 20 14.95 Moebius 54.95 Mini Micell.......... 12.75 14.95 Wargame Greats 11.20 14.95 Panzer Grenadier ...... 19.95 Midon All 11 20 14.95 World Ciss Labd 725 11.20 Phantasiall Pirates 1 1.20 14.95 DISK ONLY Portal Prohibition............7.25 11.20 Al Reality Il 14.95 Realms of Darkness.......... 14.95 Rebounder 7.25 11.20 Autoduel.......... .............14.95 Rob Chiokamauga... Renegade..... ......6.55 9.75 Battle Cruiser 19.95 Stational 19.95 Revs+ 725 9.75 Broadsides.. 19.95 The Pown ......... Road Runner........... 7.25 11.20 Bureaucracy (128).............28.95 Ultima VIIV Silent Service....... 7.25 11.20 Carrier Force .....24.95 Up Periscope.... Slaptight................6.55 9.75 Carriers at War ...........24.95 USAAF.. 22.95 Solomons Key...... 7.25 11.20 Colonial Conquest... .19.95 War in S Pacific 1995 Star Games il......... 7.25 11.20 Destroyer 11.20 10 514 Blank Disk All price include postage and packing in UK, Overseas orders please add 11.00 per cass/disk for AIR MAIL delivery, Send SAE for catalogue and new releases (please state machine type i.e. Spectrum, MSX, BBC etc.) Credit card orders welcome by phone or letter. Cheques and postal orders payable to WORLWIDE SOFTWARE VISA 1 Bridge Street Galashiels TD1 15W Tel: 0896 57004 LITERALLY THOUSANDS OF BILLIONS OF SCREENS! incentive SOFTWARE LTD 2 MINERVA HOUSE, CALLEVA PARK, ALDERMASTON, BERKSHIRE RG7 4QW (07356) 77288 WHY RUN WITH THE PACK, WHEN YOU CAN FOLLOW THE LEADER...? "


"KARTING KOMPETITION Vrooom! Neeeooww! Screee! And Nigel Mansell is in the lead of the C+VG Grand Prix, here at the Farringdon Road Raceway. He's streets ahead of the rest of the field — but wait! He's slowing down! This is incredible! Can it be that Mansell's luck has deserted him again? Has he lost another wheel? Has his engine blown? Or has he just decided that it's better to let the Ed win! We'll probably never know, but C+VG's superfast Ed has taken the chequered flag and the champagne! Well, we can all dream, can't we? We may not be able to get you a drive in a Formula One carbut we CAN offer you the chance to go Karting thanks to US Gold! Yup, we want to put TWO lucky C+VG readers behind the wheel of a high-powered kart at Britain's only indoor kart circuit in London. You'll get the full VIP treatment, learn how to drive a kart AND then take part in the C+VG Gold Grand Prix where you'll come up against members of the C+VG team. Can you beat us? It's a good chance to sharpen up your driving skills in time for the release of Out Run— the epic driving coin-op soon to be converted for your computer by the Golden Boys in Birmingham! Check out our karting kwiz below, answer the questions, fill in the coupon and rush it to Computer and Video Games, Karting Kompetition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Closing date is October 16th and normal C+VG rules apply. Burn rubber and enter NOW! IIIIIIIIIII C+VG GOLD KARTING KOMPETITION 1. The current leader of the Formula One World Championship is: A) Nigel Mansell? B) Nelson Piquet? C) Alain Prost? 2. The British Kart Grand Prix is held at: A) Silverstone? B) Brands Hatch? C) Donnington? 3. Nigel Mansell drives a: A) Lotus-Honda? B) Williams-Honda? C) Ferrari? C+VG GOLD KARTING KOMPETITION Name Address Age My answers are: 1. "


"G-TEN LIMITED THE Mail-Order Software House WIN A FREE FLIGHT ON Tape Disc ATARIST Our Price 1925 8.75 1125 BALANCE OF POWER CORDE 675 1175 725 1125 STAR GLIDER SUPER HUEY STRIP POKER THUNDER 8 25 12.25 SILENT SERVICE 6.75 10.50 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER PRO SPRITE DESIGNER KARATE MASTER 115 1225 135 22 25 AMSTRAD Tape PRESS RACER ENDURO RACER 25 || 5 | THATTH  6.50 115 STARCUDER LEVIATHAN 6.50 115 STAR RAIDER METROCROSS 725 1125 THEY SOLDAVILLON 6.50 11.25 PROHIBITION 725 1125 SENTINE WORLD GAMES XFVIOUS BARBARIAN 7.25 NA TRANTOR 5.50 10.75 DESTROYER DIANA JONES 8.25 12.25 TOP GUN STALLONE CARA BATTLESHIPS FIRETRACK NERATOR 575 115 BOLUS 6.75 NAS STAR GAMES 2 GAUNTLET 8.75 115 TEMPLE OF APSA DEATH WISH 8.25 125 SIX PAK HITS PAKO THEY SOLD A MILLION 3 7.25 1125 SARACEN DEATH OR GLORY ROAD RUNNER THEY STOLE A MILLION 825 1125 LAST NINUA SUPER CYCLE 7.50 12 25 SPY V SPY 5.75 1225 CONFUCTS 7.50 1225 SUTRIEG HEAD OVER HEELS SHAUNS ROAD PAPERBOY FIVE STAR GAMES 2 725 11.25 TEMPLE OF TERROR SARACEN 5.50 9.75 COMMANDO ARMY MOVES 5.50 11.25 ARWOLF LIVING DAYLIGHTS 8.25 NA REPTON 3 F-15 STRINE EAGLE 8 25 13 25 KONAMI COIN-OP HIT STAR RADERS 8 25 135 RAVEN SKULL CRYSTAL CASTLES COMMODORE 4/17 VIE AR KUNG FUH METRD CROSS 725 1125 FOOTBALL FORTUNES ROUGUE TROOPER 725 1125 PRETRACK MAG MAX 6.50 10.75 XDR 6.50 10.75 IMOGEN 725 1125 GRAND PRIX CON SET 8.25 12 25 TARZAN 6.50 NA STARQUARE 725 1125 PHANTON 6.75 10.75 THE HUNT TERRA CRESTA 6.50 NA ROUNOHEADS TRAIL BLAZER ARKANOIDS XEVIOUS TURBO GT 6.50 10.25 -STAR RAIDERS 8.50 11.25 GAUNTLET 8.25 13 25 8 25 13 25 8.25 13 25 825 13 25 8 25 25 WINTER GAMES BUREAUCRACY DEJAVU 6.50 10.75 MOON MIST 675 11.23 THE PAWN SEVENTIES OF GOLD 725 9.75 GRAPHICRAFT 725 1125 TEST CRAFT HOLLYWOOD MUNK SILENT SERVICE WORLD GAMES STRIP POKER 8.25 12.75 BARBARIAN 725 10.50 8.50 10.50 725 9.75 PERIPHERALS 7.25 10.50 1ST PRIZE A flight on Concorde 2ND PRIZE.. A computer of your choice up to the value of  R.R.P.inc.VAT. 25 runner up prizes of 3 free games from the current U.S. GOLD range AND a free T. Shirt! All you have to do is fill in this coupon and present it at our stand-No 1311 at the PCW Show in Olympia or send it direct to us at US GOLD LTD, UNITS 2 & 3, HOLFORD WAY, HOLFORD, BIRMINGHAM B6 7X. NAME:.......... ADDRESS: .... 825 1050 QUICKSHOT PLUS NA 10.50 QUICKSHOT TURBO ........ AGE: ....... . Send .00 (inc P&P) for our catalogue-redeemable on your first order. Please specify computer. Please allow 14-28 days delivery Add 75p P&P per item (inland/BFPO only). European (inc N.VEire) ADD .50 p&P per item. Elsewhere add .50 P&P per item. Make cheques or postal orders (sterling) payable to G-TEN LIMITED COMPUTER:.. Closing date for entries 31st October 1987 Draw will take place 2nd November 1987. Winners will be notified by post. Send your orders to: G-TEN LIMITED DEPT C+VG 10 FREEPOSTS (no stamp needed in UK/BFPO) 146/150 COMMERCIAL STREET LONDON E1 6BR GOLD THE WORLD'S No 1 HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE HOUSE ACTIVISION ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE Don't miss us at the Personal Computer World Show. Stand No's 1317 & 1417 The Activision Group of Companies incorporates Activision, Electric Dreams, System 3, Gamestar, Personal Choice, Infocom and Sierra On Line "


"PCN SHOW Es sh ZCHCO ZJHCO t's show time! The Personal Computer World Show, is the biggest and best software showcase -all the major games makers show off their latest and greatest creations here. And C+VG's very own show-stopper John Gilbert has brought you this game by game guide ot the games you'll be able to see if you make the annual pilgrimage to London's Olympia on September 25, 26, 27, the conversion. June. Indiana Jones we previewed Meanwhile, back on the US C+VG will be there will you? back in our July issue and will be Gold label, prepare yourself for another all format release. Infiltrator II! Yup, Jim McGibbets You're going to be dazzled by the sticky floors, laser gates Go! will be bringing you is back to take you on three brand the Golden Boys from moveable walls, stun tiles, acid Sidearms, a super-fast shoot 'em new missions in the now famous Birmingham when you visit the puddles Plus the fire-breathing up set in a deadly underground Infiltrator helicopter! Us Gold stand. They've been on a dragon and the Super Sorcerer. world. Lots of zapping, firepower i nfiltrator I will be for the 64 spending spree to bring you the We were rewarded with a sneak to collect, mystery objects and only, but fans of the original best coin-op conversions peak at Outrun on the C64 and action based on the Capcom game will be able to pick up this together with a whole new bunch Amstrad and it looks pretty damn coin-op. sequel at a bargain .99 (tape) of original home grown games good despite the limitations of the Speed Rumbler puts you in the .99 (disc). If you haven't US Gold's coin-op conversions machines compared to the megamiddle of a terrorist incident. You already got the original you'll be include Gauntlet II, 720, Rygar, memory of the coin-op. Slip into have 24 hours to free the able to buy both for .99 on tape Indiana Jones and the mega-hit your Ferrari and race across hostages. You leap into your and .99 on disc. 566258 LEISESSIE MERICA Defies the Door Tube CIUS (ROUNDOutrun Rygar heavily armed auto and blast your Elite's kicking up a storm with way through the 21st century. Thundercats blasting onto the Then there's Bionic video screens of its tennis courtCommando's the Capcom game sized stand. The less than cuddly which C+VG's ace arcadester cats already star in a television Clare Edgeley raved about in our series, and are immortalised in Arcade Special back in June. You toy and Marvel comic form. control a super-trooper with an Buggy Boy, Elite's latest coinCaptain America deserts, mountain roads, blacktop highways. DUNGEONS 720° was the skateboarders dream machine-challenging coin-op with all the elements of street skateboarding. In the jargon a 720° is the most difficult move a skateboarder can makeand you'll have to learn it to beat this blockbuster of a game. Infiltrator Next up is Rygar the of the year Out Run! Plus, on the spectacular running, jumping new Go! label you'll be seeing zapping game set in a fantasy versions of Sidearms, Bionic land inhabited by awesome Commandos and Speed monsters. This is being YELLOW Rumbler. That enough to be developed at Probe Software, the going on with? people who brought you the nifty Gauntlet Il comes direct from Enduro Racer conversion. Rygar the arcades and includes loads was a smash in the arcades and Gauntlet II op conversion, will also be on more features seen on the coin having seen the Spectrum version amazing Bionic Arm. show. The company says it's a op versions. Over 100 different in action a couple of weeks ago, Also from Go! are Bravestarr samsh on the Commodore and levels, the chance to choose your you won't be disappointed with ST. Amstrad and Spectrum favourite character even if and Laser Tag based on the someone else is playing him, plus neat laser-gun game from Worlds of Wonder featured in C+VG in MCOIDDITBI "


"PEN/SHOW Eow time! The top film preview, flashed across Ocean's giant video screens will be Platoon, the story of a group of US soldiers during the Vietnam war. Part of the licensing deal, struck with British film company Hemdale, stipulated that the game includes some moral content, and it does. You take the parts of the four platoon soldiers. You must look after them and don't go killing or pillaging without reason. The objective is to get back to a able to see an advanced video preview at the show. Konami comes in again with Gryzor. It's a surrealistic shoot 'em up game with some very weird alien creatures. It also will be out in November and the programming is being done inhouse at this very moment. Other top Christmas releases include three games, Freddy Hardest, Phantis and Basket Master from Spanish software in the States and is likely to score house Dinamic, on the Imagine here on arcade machine and label. Freddy H appears to be the computer by Christmas. pick of the crop. You take control Renegade features bloody of a real hard space guy who violence in US undergrounds. must run and jump around a streets and offices. You are a lone planet's surface knocking out the fighter, skilled in the martial arts, alien life forms. who must face the combined You can also pick up Athena forces of the New York street which'll be on sale on the stand, gangs. You've only got your fists or play the original coin-op. for protection and attack but Psycho Soldier. Athena's sequel. they've got lead pipes, knives and will also be on show across three guns. formats, but you won't be able to The action's detailed and buy it until Christmas. versions are bringing up the rear but, according to Elite, all versions of the game should be ready for show time. Battleships, which made a splash on last month's C+VG cover, will have been out for a week by the time the PCW doors open. Elite will, however, be heavily promoting it there and you'll be able to buy copies of it over the counter MORT LETRARE INTE mmm THE So to Gros Thundercats Buggy Boy The company has more in store base in the camp. To achieve it! with some new Hit Pack you've got to race through enemy compilations. Six Pack II will, infested jungle, burrows and among other arcade conversion, tunnels. Your score depends include the best selling Paper Boy upon the number of men you and the classic Ghosts 'n manage to get back, injured or Goblins. not, to base. Blockbuster coin op Ocean is also showing four of  Buggy Boy realistic, esepcially on the Amstrad version. It's so realistic that the company's had to take out the head-splitting/bloodleaking sequences shown in our original screen shotsbecause of German anti-violence laws Combat School, the first venture in a new Konami tie-up, is also due on three formats and the original coin-op machine will be at the show, together with Renegade The game takes you through a US infantryman's training Thundercats its top Christmas coin-op schedule, across obstacle conversions. The biggie is Rastan courses, across rapids in a conversions and heavy film Saga, an epic fantasy combat canoe, onto the firing range and licensing deals from Ocean's way game-similar to Barbarian on through to a bout of arm ack to to the top this year. the ST across the three major wrestling. The game's out in formats. It's already number one November but you'll be Renegade Game Over Ocean intends to make this a show to remember, with a continued on page 132 "


"IBM/AMSTRAD PC+ COMPATIBLES-.95 WA Heather to seller Stoc Tent fame Cravel come 144 PR and a terde     tton deg974pcs. 72.21 thee Screen shots dat het e Koland Seine taken from quafdrace, segona Atari version. d udarat de tickes betro Exer a cold at kon 10% tilaskets a adme of Grameendedoria Copright 1986 James Clavell. Tal Pan is a registered trademark 1986 de Laurentils Entertainment Inc. 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS. Tel:061 832 6633 Telek Ocea "


"EUROMAX VOUCHER Tinh Esci Micro ACE For the sophisticated games player >>---Contact your nearest computer store for details on full range or clip the coupon. Prices from .95.95 Euromax Electronics Ltd., FREEPOST Bessingby Ind. Estate. Bridlington. YO16 4SJ O 0262 602541 A Access Accepted Please send me full details.... Name ... Address "


"Pehlshow it's shows time! continued from page 129 The Mastertronic stand more than just completing a its corporate chest. massive stand, assistants there to features the full ranges from the series of tricky tasks. Mirrorsoft's showing off the answer your queries and a popular budget labels. They Next up. Judge Death, another spectacular James Bondish massive shop in which all of its include Americana, Bulldog, 2000AD comic license, this time hardware of its latest super products will be on sale. Richocet, Entertainment USA, with a heroine, Judge Andeson. weapon, Mean Streak, a bike The name of the game is Racket and MAD. We say pitted against the evil Judge with lasers, bombs, missiles and coin-op conversion at the \"features because the games Death. Piranha claims the arcade a mission to keep the peace. Firebird stand. The company will won't be on sale on the stand, adventure will put all the other Also The Bermuda Project, have two coin-op machines you'll have to rely on Microdealer 2000AD tie-ins to sham you'll have to rely on Microdealer 2000AD tie-ins to shame. What from the time-worn Bubble Bobble and Flying Shark et al if you intend to buy. The even Rogue Trooper? programmer's toolkit of Eugene -to keep your fingers busy. stand will, however, include The company is also carrying Evans very late of ImagineThere will be high score videos of the latest products and on its vampiric tradition in the will make its first appearance. The competitions, of course and, if catalogues of the complete highly polished size nine's of strategy game was due for release you get addicted to the machines Mastertronic ranges, plus the Nosferatu with Mr Weems last October but... better late you'll hopefully, be able to buy American Video Game and the She Vampires. than never Commodore, Spectrum, Amstrad Championship Team! It's out on the Commodore PSS will show off its latest and ST conversions of the games. Berks of the Trap Door will disc and tape now so there's strategy/war simulation, Fortress The Atari 8-bit conversion of greet you at the Piranha stand no excuse for passing by that America. It's a fast ride through Druid will be also be there, which, our spies tell us, is twice haunted house. the US arms stockpile, must of together with its mega-graphics as big as last year. If you don't like all that dark which you could use to ward off sequel, Druid ll — The Piranha plans to celebrate its stuff then Yogi Bear is on hand invasion plans by a certain other for a laugh. The big bear's friend, country. Boo-Boo has been kidnapped by Mindscape will have its hunters and you've got to chase Cinemaware range of products round the park to release him on show — they're the games from his cage. that lok like interactive films with Piranha will also have a some of the most mind blowing, number of quizzes on hand, a if memory expensive graphics on Whirley Wheel challenge that'll the ST and Amiga involve other stands, and a Fin Spectrum Holobyte promises Club which you'll be able to join. to blow Ocean's Top Gun out of The pet fish will be back let's the air with an F-16 fighter hope feeding time is more lively simulation for the PC and this time around. Macintosh. Five companies join Mirrorsoft It's a full blown, battle on its massive stand. They are simulator, rather than an arcade Spectrum Holobyte, Mindscape, game, and promises some of the Athena Enlightement, which you'll see on the Spectrum, Amstrad, Commodore and ST. This time the Druid has dozens of spells, which he can pick up along the way, and four elemental 1 23 guardians which he can invoke in the lands of Air, Earth, Fire and Enlightenment Mystery of the Nile Water. Star Trek Two other new Spectrum games, On the Tiles, and Sidewise, will be joined by the ST version of Sentinel — the strategy game has been souped up with incredible fast draw graphics, but retains the original, novel, plot. Firebird will also have its Star Trek budget ranges on the stand plus all of the recent hits, including first birthday in style with SEVEN Scary Monsters and Mystery of new products on the stand. Its mega-launch is the long awaited the Nile Trap Door II. The original game, You may even be able to buy the ST version of Star Trek no based on the ITV cartoon series, official promises, though! Dark was a hit with kids and critics but UPON not with retail stores last year. Sceptre will NOT be there. Word is that Firebird will be hard Programmer Don Priestly says Judge Death most spectacular flying pushed to put it out in time for the the sequel will be larger, take PSS and an American company sequences ever seen if you can NEXT PCW Show! Berk out of his cellar and involve that Mirrorsoft's keeping close to get it into the air without continued on page 135 "


"PIRATES: UCHASE FAME & FORTUNE ON THE HIGH SEAS The Action Adventure Simulation Pirates! The world's first swashbuckling simulation. Non-stop action and Raid treasure-laden 1-negotiate the greatest profits bistorical drama take place galleons and plunder rich Success will determine ou the Spanish Main during ports. Learn to navigate, to your status in later life. How the century and you play fence and to avoid mutini will you end your days? A the leading role-Privateer Uniquel: Pirates! prosperous noble or common Captain, at pirale in all but combines the excitement of scoundret? . an adventure story with the Pirates will be landing in Leap into this era o challenge of simulation all good software stores soon turbulence and change-a decision-making. You must time when daring choose the most lucrative adventurers can gain power expeditions, forge the most and wealth. fruitful alliances and Commodore 64/128. Disk .95. Cassette .95. MicroProse Software Ltd, 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA. Tel: (0666) 54326. Tix: 434222 MPS/UKG "


"NOW FOR COMPUTER MASK The Battle Continues !!! Join with the forces of MASK, skllfully commanded by the brilliant strategist Matt Trakker and combat the evil of the villainous VENOM In their quest for domination of the world. No longer need you stand by and passively observe the evil deeds of Mayhem and his co-conspirators. Here is your chance to dig deep into your ainning and put your skills to the test against possibly the greatest master criminal the world has ever seen, factor fiction. This classic conflict of good versus evil is portrayed with a reallsm and excitement that can only take its lead from the world's most famous collection of superheroes and supervillains. There are creations of adventure, there are creations of combat but there is not a creation quite like MASK!!! MV SAY GOODBYE CONDOR VW BRAD! THIS IS THUNDERHAWK HOLD ON, 141 SOON BE O HIS TAIL... MASK MAND THE ASSOCIATED TRADE MARK ARE THE PROPERTY OF KENNER PARKER TOYS, INC. IKPT) 1987 .99 TAPE CBM64/128 & Amstrad .99 DISK Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd, Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS Tel: 0742753423 "


"it's shon time? continued from page 132 crashing, But if you want to actually buy any of the completed products on the stand you'll have to go the Microdealer stand. Apocalypse, at reduced prices. Sounds like a good deal! Basil the Great Mouse Detective and his arch-enemy Rattigan will be on autograph duty at the Gremlin stand. They're on loan from Walt Disney whose GMD film has been licensed by Gremlin for a graphic adventure. released but at the show you'll planet destroying, blitzer on the see that it has four missions plus Commodore. Despite the screen the chance to select your MASK shot evidence, the game is not team and vehicles. just another version of Crazy Other Gremlin titles include Comets. The strategy's different, Alternative Games, with log and the planets are swifter, and you boot throwing, a compendium can play 2UP. that stars the Winks family in a Slaine, reviewed this issue. is four-player romp in a board game Martech's attempt to follow the jungle, and Gary Linekers success of Nemesis. The Superstar Soccer, which'll be out character is a barbarian king in October. You can also catch whose liking for quests and battle Blood Valley, a fantasy adventure puts his friends in peril. taken from the Duel Master Martech will also preview Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix -a Melbourne House recently snapped up by Mastertronic is being secretive about the range of products it'll be showing on its stand. Our spies tell us that the main event is the UK Arcade Championship play-offs between a Brit media team and a bunch of high scoring American video junkies. The final will be played out on a bank of new Arcadia coin-ops. Melbourne House will be showing the computer conversions of the Arcadia games should be good. The Sega games console will be on display, so you can get some hands on experience, but don't expect to be able to buy over the counter. Like so many stands at the show Melbourne ANDERSON DIVISION Slaine WAGNER + GRANT 001754 Judge Death The mouse and his faithful cohorts live in the basement of 221b Baker Street but must leave the safety of their hole to rescue Dr Dawson from the clutches of Rattigan. The game's got clues, disguises and famour London locations. He-Man and the Masters of the Universe (What, again?!) also put in an appearance to publicise Gremlin's license tie up with the FILM version of the cartoon series. The film stars Dolph Rocky IV-Lundgren as the muscled superhero and, hopefully, the arcade game's better than US Gold's effort. Mask Il can be previewed. It's due for release in November ther first part has only just been Bangkok Knights series of Fighting Fantasy books, the authors of the Way of the Tiger series. The blockbusters at the Martech stand are MegaApocalypse, from Crazy Comets author Simon Nichol, and Slaine another 2000AD tie-up. Mega Apocalypse is another speedy, destroy everything, Basil House is all show and tell, but no sell. Activision and Electric Dreams have separate stands again this year. The main event at Activision will be the launch of Predator, licensed from the block busting film starring Arnold Schwarzenegger and a gruesome Bangkok Knights alien. Schwarzenegger plays the complex Grand Prix racing leader of a commando force sent simulation. We're told the game into the South American jungle to is like nothing you've seen rescue a bunch of kidnapped before, a bit like Mansell's diplomats. He doesn't count on driving, and it'll be the first his team being killed off one by chance Press or public get to see one by an alien hunter, and soon it. to quote an old cliche-the If you're in the mood to spend, hunter has become the hunted. Martech will be offering recent Bankok Knights, from System titles, like Nemesis, Catch 23, continued on page 137 The Armageddon Man and Mega"


"SEGA NOW THERE ARE NO LIMITS SEE US ON STAND 1109 AT THE PCW DISTRIBUTED BY MASTERTRONIC 01-377 6880 AAN PROSI ACE HUNTER KA PUNIVERSER IKSTART THE CAPTIVE AC IACKPOI BMX RACERS SPECTIPEDE ZSPA OPCE NOVACAGEMATCH RAPID FIRE BOSCONIRRE MENGER SPOO A SPEED KING HOLLYWOOD OR BUST SUPER VYNN XADIUM STARFORCE NOVA RA VIDEO MEANIES PODIKANE MASTERCHESS STORM COMMAN GUNLAW O MASTERTRONIC SPECTIPED STREASURES NES PE PERS SE KAA OF AS LLYWOOD OR BUST SUPER RAPID FIRE SOS POOKS KIKSTART THE CAPTIVE ACTION BIKER FIND OR WING COMMANDER RACE HYPERFORCE KIKSTART 2 STARFORCE NOVA CAGEMATCH A SRCE NOVAS ONE OBLIDOSTRZ STARFORCE NOVA NARUSOS POD CURSE OF SHERWOODSTERSCAN VIDEO M RAW BATILE FRENESSANS Backed by IKKIKSI WAN PROSPE ST SUPERP ONIANS OMMAND MALONE OBLIDO STREET OLYMPICS EROID FORMULA ONE SIMULATOR WING COMMANDER KENTILLAS SURE ISLAND MILK RACE HYPERFORCE KIKSTART 2STARFORCE NOVAC AS ANBACEZEU PHANTOMS OF THE ASTEROID FORMULA ONE SIMULATOR WIR A QUEOUS ONE MAN & HIS DROID HUMAN RACE 2222 PHANTOMS OF THE ANE NO ASHI NARUSOSPODCURSE OF SHERWOOD RASTERSCAN VIDEO MEANIES FRENESIS HOLY GRAIL SPACE/FER KANE NONTERRAQUEOUS ONEINEN TIFRUTIROCKMAN MRI UNIVERSE RETURNE POCKMAN MESTIK KIKSTARTEXPLORINGERS MALONE OBLIDO STREET OLYMPESONEMANS SOROINDES KCALBA MONTY PYTH TORM MASTER S EDE ZSPA 1 SIMULA STA PUNIVERSE RETURN OF ROCKMAN HEKTIK KIRST AS HOLY GRAIL SPACE HUNTER KANE NONTERRA C AIBA MONTY PYTE SE KAA OF ASSIAH HUNTER PATROL BMX TRI SWANSIREELAR QURMAQ OLMAZERS SPECIVEDE ZSPAL SIMULATOR SIG MAC TUTTI FRUTTI ROCKMAN ENGVIDEO MEANIESPOOLEANEMASTERCHERM MOLECULE MAN PROSPECTOR PRIE POWERBALL MEGARONSGUIWBATTLE FRENESIS GWINNI S ES M ARCHALLENGER SPOOKS KIKSTART THE CAPTIVE ACTION BIKER FINDERS KEES O NE MAN HIS DROID NIMI A NE NONTERRAQUE NASMI NARYSOG ACKPOTBN in the World 1109 at POW C AGEMATCH RAPID FIRE BOS ARAS ALLENES H TER 1983 EG MASSIV RIGHTER CHALLENGER SPOOKS KIRSTAR ORTA SUPERPELINEN BACK TO REALITY STORM MASTERCHESS 89 INIANSTEETBEAT SQUIRM IACKPOTEMKRACERS SECTE APTIVE ACTION BIKER FINDERS KEEPERS SE KAA ADEON ANIES PODSKANE MASTERCHESS STORM MOLEC MANDER KENTILLA SPEEDUNG HOLLYWOOD K C ONE MAN & HIS DROID FINDERS KEEPERS SPEED PHANTOMS OF THE ASTEROID FORMULA ONE SIMULATOR ATOR WING COMMANDER KENTILLA SPEED KINU ONE MAN & HIS PRO FIN XADIUM STARFORNOVA RAD AEGA JACKPOLMX RACERS COMEROUS P SURE ISLAND MILK RACE PERFORCE KAART 2 STARFORCE NOM CACEM TERUTT-ROCKMA NTOMS OF THE ASTEROID FORMULA ONE 7 ERRA. FUS ONE MAN HIS DROID HUMAN RACE START EXPLOITS OF FINGERS MALONE OBLIDO STREET OLYMP HUMAN RACEZE CETER KANO ROCKMAN HEKT RBOWL KOBYASHI NARU SOS PODE CURSE OF SHERWOOD RASTERSCAN VIDEO MEANIES FRENESIS TREASURE ISLAND MILK RACE HYPERFOR OR BIG MAC TUTTI FRUTTI ROCKMAN VE PUNIVERSE RETURN OF ROSMAN HESTIK KIKSTARTEXPLOITS OF FINGERS MALONE OBUDOS WYNNXADIUM STAFORCE NOVA RADIO FREVEAS JACKPOT MX RACERS DIABMX TRIALS EXCALISA MONIY PYTHONS HOLY GRAIL AC TUTTI FRUTTI ROCKMAN MR. PUNE MEGABOLTS GUNLAW BAT MOMASTERTRONIC LTD. 8-10.RAVESTREET  LONDON ECZA 4d CTELEPHONE: 01-377 6880 OLECULE MAN MUSTASA KACERS SPECTIPEDE ZSPAI CRETersom FC "


"PeWsHow it's show time! 3. will also be on show. It's a Thai will be launched at PCW: Nova Boxing simulation with cartoon on the book by Jeffrey Archer. Nick on the stana. and Haunted House for the style animation which, Activision Drop in on the stand on the Amstrad: Zodiac and Secret of A preview no serious believes, will be as popular as balcony, and see if it's arrived. If adventurer should miss, will be Life for the C-64, and Alien from System 3's last hit The Last you have an ST you may even get one of the features of the Outer Space and Dragon's Tooth Ninja. the chance to buy an early copy. Rainbird stand. Magnetic Scrolls for the BBC. The company also plans to The ST version will be the first to Main feature of the Incentive third adventure, still in its preview its Christmas range, one be released, closely followed by development stage, will be stand, which will be found on the of which is a coin op conversion otheer formats. balcony at Olympia, will be the demonstrated by Anita Sinclair, and two others new adventures Adventures galore will be on some six weeks before its likely unveiling of Driller adventure, on from Infocom. The major coin op, which Incentive has been sale at this stand, operated by release. Also on show will be Mike Woodroffe and his wife Pat, Time and Magik, a newly a Bally title called Rampage, will working for the last couple of of Adventure Soft. Go along and bundled and upgraded trilogy of be on the stand so you can have years. hands on experience of it before speak to Mike, and select your three Level 9 classics: Lord Of There will be no new the Spectrum, Amstrad and adventure software from amongst Time, Red Moon and Price of adventures on the Pirhana stand, Commodore versions arrive at the whole range of Scott Adams Magik. All Rainbird software will but Delta 4's Colour of Magic Christmas. Rampage is a battle of and their lastest, The Big Sleaze adventures, Brian's Howarth's be on sale on the stand, which Mysterious Adventures, Fighting will encompass the other the titans, starring King Kong, will be on show. When you visit Godzilla and Wolfman. The Fantasy adventures, and a host of Telecomsoft labels, Firebird and the stand, watch out for Fergus original had a three player option others, including the whole US Firebird Silver. As well as Anita and Co., who will be at the stand in which you could join forces to Gold and Broderbund range. All throughout the show. Sinclair, watch out for destroy US cities or batter each formats and versions of a appearances by the Austins of other. The Activision version is a Level 9. and C+VG's Adventure little more restrained with only Helpline expert, Paul Coppins, one or two player options. who will be wearing his Rainbird The two Infocom titles are Adventure tester's hat. Plundered Hearts and Beyond Cascade, currently roaring up Zork. Both are massive textthe charts with Ace 2, follow it up based games, the type of with three hot releases interactive novels for which C aus Implosion, Ringworld and Infocom has become famous Nineteen this autumn. Activision has also licensed Implosion in eight levels of 360 Knightmare, the Anglia TV degree scrolling shoot 'em up. adventure game program. You must destroy an alien grid Electric Dreams has left the system set up around a planet, Aliens of last year behind. Its 000000 penetrating deeper until you get stand this year has a racing car to the planet's surface. Destroy theme, not surprising because energy cells on the grids and you most of the coin-op conversions and you can open portals which the company's offering are sports Implosion allow entry to the next level. orientated. The previews include Nothing new in adventures will Implosion, created in Super Sprint from Atari, Super be shown by Melbourne House, conjunction with the US company Hang-On and Firetrap who, until but try out the latest Lord of The Mindscape will cost .95 and recently, had links with US Gold. Rings adventure, Shadows of .95 on Commodore cassette The company will also have its Mordor, which will be available and disk and .95 on Spectrum usual bounty of tee-shirts, and for purchase. Ringworld is also set in place. current titles on sale, as well as Watch out for CRL on the Alien lifeforms have moved in on the opportunity to try before you Electronic Arts stand. CRL the solar system on a quest for buy. publish many adventure games, Ring World minerals, destroying planets as lan Andrew's Incentive among them those from St. they go. Your quest is to locate Software will be offering all their Bride's, Delta 4, Abstract multitude of adventures will be and destroy existing range of adventure Concepts, and Rod Pike. Who available for purchase on this Meanwhile, more news on products, including Graphic knows who you might bump into stand, which will be found on the Nineteen, that's the game with Paul Hardcastle's hit single as a on this stand... and you might Adventure Creator in all its ground floor of the National Hall, even get to see the latest versions. soundtrack near the front door. As well as the recently readventure from St. Bride's It's basically two games in one. Level 9 will as usual have their released ket Trilogy, the Jack The Ripper. own stand on the balcony. As well Depending on your choices at the Medallion series of GAC Still no appearance of a second as demonstrating and selling their directe beginning of the game, you'll be adventures will be available, Eureka, the prize game that was Rainbird product, there will be at directed into either the action joined the recently released launched amid much publicity at completely new Level 9 'non(that's if you're pro-war) or Double Gold adventures Black the 1984 show. However, Rainbird adventure on show. towards the adventure section Fountain and Sharpe's Deeds, Domark hope to be unveiling Not Past titles from the Austins will (anti-war) in which you become a plus Top Secret and Mountains A Penny More, Not A Penny also be available for purchase. peace campaigner. Cascade say of Ket and the Amstrad. Less, an adventure game based Watch out for Pete, Mike and its's a game with \"morals\". Check Three new Double Gold packs out Rob Hubbard's sound track of Nineteen. It's excellent. "


"NOW TAKEN Castle Computers 47 BRIDGE STREET NEWCASTLE STAFFS ST5 2RY Tel: 0782 619159 Ext 25 OUR PRICE OUR PRICE Atari ST OUR PRICE 6.50 Spectrum Special Offers: OUR PRICE Last Mission 6.50 Eyelon 5.50 World Leaderboard 8.50 5.95 Renegade 5.25 Headcoach 9 Express Raider 10th Frame Incredible Hulk Rocky Horror Show Room Ten 6.50 2.99 3.95 3.95 Amstrad Special Offers: OUR PRICE Exelon Rode Runner 6.95 Indiana Jones 6.95 Amix Accolades Wizball 6.50 DEGAS ELITE ONLY 24.95 5.95 495 5.50 Asterix O Sentinel 6.50 Space Harner Split Personalities 6.95 Boulderdash Con Kit 6.95 Now Games 4 5.50 The Boggit 5.95 Warrior il 5.95 Highway Encounter 6.95 Bazooka Bill 6.95 Tag Team Wrestling 6.95 Deactivators Wiz Ball Rode Runner 2.99 1.99 Starglider Slaplight World Class L Board Tai Pan Mad Max Renegade Promotion Paperboy Wonderboy Solomons Key Space Harrier Sup Fight Living Daylights Hit Pack Six Hit Pack Six Voll Indiana Jones Auf W'Sehen Monty Roundheads 2.99 1.99 1.99 2.99 Barbanan OUR PRICE C64 Special Offers: 2.99 Last Mission 2.99 Exeon 2.99 Tai Pan 1.00 Renegade 2.99 Last Ninja 2.99 Rede Runner 3.99 Epyx Epics 2.99 Silent Service 1.99 Barbarian 1.99 Revs+ 2.99 World Class L'Board 3.96 H Pack 3.95 Hit Pack 6 Volll 3.95 Conturions 1.50 Fate 3.95 Survival 2.99 Indiana Jones 2.99 Solomons Key 2.99 Slap Fight 2.99 Starglider 2.99 Gunship 1.99 Thing Bounces Back 2.99 Dragons Lair Ptil 2.99 Parallax 2.99 Trivial Pursuit 2.99 Super Huey ! 2.99 Coomarks Revenge 3.95 Lords of Midnight 2.99 Shogun 2.99 Kung Fu Master 2.99 Crystal Castles 4.95 Breakthrough 2.99 Mega Apocalypse 299 Star Paws 2.99 Enduro Racer 2.99 Wonderboy 2.99 Game Over 2.99 Quartet 2.99 Star Games II 2 99 Howard The Duck 290 Comc Bakery 7.50 4.95 6.95 6.95 6.95 8.50 550 6.95 6.95 6.95 6.95 6.95 5.50 3.95 4.95 4 25 5.50 6.95 6.50 6.50 6.50 5.50 5.50 5.50 5.50 6.50 7.50 5.95 495 7 95 5.50 6.95 Silent Service Buggy CUPS Skyrunner Ghosts & Goblins Cobra Feud Space Harrier Kung Fu Master Breakthrough Crystal Castles FA Cup Football Forelord Galacian Judge Dredd Butch Hard Guy Orex Terror Bal Sold A Million Stainless Steel Shockway Rider Soredons Shadow Growing Pains A Mole Heavy On The Magic Gauntlet Heartland SAS Strikforce Pyracurse Marble Madness Bobby Bearing City Slicker Thanatos Deep Strike Virgin Atlantic Challenge 8.95 Artic Fox 17.95 5.95 Bards Tail 22.95 6.95 Chessmaster 2000 6.50 Music Con Set 22.95 5.95 Starlight 17.95 6.25 Guild of Thieves 18.95 6.95 Perry Mason 6.95 T Pan We Won T Be Beaten 6.95 Airball 16.95 Black Cauldron 24.95 3.95 Indiana Jones 14.95 Barbarian 18.95 199 Rode Runner 18.95 2.99 Advanced Art Studio 3.95 Sennel 14,95 2.99 3.95 AMIGA SOFTWARE OUR PRICE 2.99 Duild Of Thieves 18.95 Defender of Crown Barbara 18.96 2.99 Bards Tale 22.95 Chessmaster 2000 22.96 1.99 Delux Music 7:50 Dantes intero 6.95 Bulldog 6.95 FA Cup Footbal 6.96 Shao-Lins Road 5.95 Krackout 8.95 Yie At Kung Full 10.50 Spitfire 40 3.95 Black Hawk 3.95 Enigma Force 3.95 30 Games 795 Tiger Mission 3.95 Judge Dredd 4.95 Rocky Horror 2.99 Rocky Horror (128) 3.95 Shockway Rider 2.99 trator 2.99 Cobra 2.99 World Games 6.75 Movie Monster 4,95 Short Circuit 6.96 Zapp Sizzlerst 6.96 Star Games 6.50 Power Play 6.95 Biggies 5.95 Two Jima 2.99 Elevator Action 1.99 Mutants 3.95 3.96 1.99 1.99 4.96 2.99 2.99 2.99 2.99 2.99 3.95 3.95 Commando Get Dexter Deep Strike Batman Desert Fox Virgin Atlantic Top Gun Spindi Toth Frame Night Rider Tech Ted 69.95 Gun Runner Bubble Hydrofool Killed Until Dead Survivor Solomon Key Centurions Zynapps Athena Jack Nipper Game Over Catch 23 Ninja Hampster in Stock Quartet Prohibiton Battlefield Germany Convoy Raider Wonderboy 2.99 Delux Paint il 64.95 3.95 Strike Foros Cobra Saboteur Equinox Football Manager Colossus 4 Chess Melboume Draw Ghosts & Goblins Xevious w Games The Big Size possaball Shaolin Road 1.99 3.95 6.95 3.95 3.95 3.95 2.99 2.99 395 2.99 Visitors will be very welcome at our new shops in Borse & Hanley besides Newcastle FREE P&P ON ALL ORDERS OVER S. UNDER C5 PLEASE ADD SO OVERSEAS (1 PER GAME ANY GAME NOT RELEASED WILL BE SENT ON DAY OF RELEASE 5.50 2.99 3.95 PHONE OUR HOTLINE NOW 0782 619159 400/806 NOW CUT PRICE SOFTWARE LOOK XL/XE ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to:CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 CoinSPECTRUM RRP OUR SPECTRUM OUR PRICE COMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK item . 14.95 7.50 The Pawn (128 Only) 14.96 11.95 Jack Nipp II........... 7.25 11.95 Stars On 128 9.95 5.95 Trantor 8.99 6.50 Freeze Frame 3 art 35.95 Starclider 14.95 11.95 Enduro Racer 9 .95 7.25 Epyx Epics 7 25 11.95 Mag Max.. .7.95 5.50 Road Runner......... 8.99 6.50 WC Leaderboard ..... 7.25 11.95 7.95 5.50 Sold Milion 3. 9.95 6.95 Tai-Pan ......... ........ 6.95 .. 11.85 Triaxos 8.99 6.50 Shockway Rider 7 .95 5.50 Battle Ships ... 7.25 11.95 Paperboy Renegade 7.95 5.50 Epert Cart Convoy Raders 9 .95 7.25 Ace 2 (48K)..... .8.95 6.50 Five Star .... ........6.95 11.95 Konami Coin Op ...,9.95 5.95 Ace 2 (128K)..... 9.95 7.25 Destroyer.... NA 11.95 7.95 5.50 Hybrids ...725 11.95 Catch 23 7.95 5.50 COMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK Sabotsaur 2.......... 7.95 5.75 Mini Mice 2....., 11.95 14.95 AMSTRAD TOP 10 CASS DISK Athena 7 95 5.50 Road Runner 7 .25 11.95 Hit Pak 6 7 25 11.96 Last Mission .......... 8.99 6.50 The Pawn ....... NA 16.95 Triv Pursuit Triv Pursuit 14.95 11.95 Durell's Big 4 6 .95 11.95 Mini Omot 2 11.95 14.95 Hydrofool ... 7.95 5.50 Leaderboard EE.......6.95 11.95 Starglider 1 1.95 Hit Pak 6 9 .95 7.25 Ace 2 7 25 11.95 Paperboy 5.50 10.95 Wonder Boy.. ....9.99 . 9.99 7.25 Wir Ball ...........6.50 10.95 Final Matrix Defender of Crown NA 11.95 7.25 11.98 Battle Ships . 7.95 5.50 Try Pursuit 1 1.95 14.95 Head O Heels 6.50 10.85 Trio ( Pak)...........9.95 7.25 ........ 6.50 10.95 Prospel ....NA 19.96 Space Harrier ........... 7.95 5.50 Space Harrier 6.95 11.95 Protext. Five Star 2 9 .95 7.25 Bomb Jack 2 6 .95 11.95 Slap Fight ....... 7.95 5.50 Barbarian ATARI ST TOP 10 Hybrid 8 .99 6.50 Nemesis 6.95 11.95 Karate Kid Gunrunner... ...7.95 5.50 7.25 11.95 pitor Probe Jack Ninpil 7.99 5.50 Survivor 7.25 11.95 Barbarian Quartet...... ..... 9.99 7.25 E 1195 14.95 Gauntlet Explon 7.95 5.50 Last Nini ... 7.25 11.95 Silent Service Game Over 795 5.50 6.50 10.96 Balance of Power 2496 Quartel.... 7 25 11.95 S.DI Cinemaware....... Gobots 8.95 5.50 Pirates....... .. 11.95 15.96 Road Runner 19.95 Zynas Tranto 7 25 11.95 Guild of Thieves Urdum 8.95 6.50 Graphic Ad Creator 17.00 22.00 19.45 PAW 22.95 17.95 Renegade............. 6.75 11.95 Survivor 8.99 6.50 Sold Million 3 6 .95 11.95 AMSTRAD P.C.W. 8256 8512 ..9.95 7.25 Hit Pak 7 25 11.95 Strike Force Harrier Bomb Jack 2 Gunship 11 95 15.95 Fairtight Living Daylight 9.95 725 Hana Rama............. 6.95 Rana Rama 11.96 Try Pursuit. 16.95 Bismark 9.95 725 Explon . 6.95 11.96 Steve Davis Snooker....... 15.95 Army Moves... 7.95 5.50 Enduro Racer 7.25 11.95 T ati Big4.. . 9.96 6 .95 Arkanoid .6.95 11.96 Brian Clough ............... 19.95 Head O Heels... 7.25 5.50 Death or Glory ......... 6.50 11.96 Batman Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders please add  per tape Cheques/post orders (Sterling only please). Made payable to: Deathscape Star Tree SPECTRUM 48/128 CBM 64/128/+4 AMSTRAD 464/664/128/256 AARL XL XE ST IBM/1512 MSX ROM BBC/ELECTRON CBM AMIGA SINCLAIR QL Computer Supplies APPLE MAC SOFTWARE & HARDWARE FOR YOUR COMPUTER * At least 25% off hardware and non-budget software * 1000's of software titles past and present * Business, educational and games software * Free catalogue showing our wide range of supplies * VAT and P&P included in prices Send now with your name, address and computer type stating whether you require a disc or cassette catalogue T.T.T. COMPUTER SUPPLIES 31 TOP ROAD, KINGSLEY, Nr WARRINGTON CHESHIRE WA6 8DA Telephone: (0928) 88150 Cut Price Software Unit 6, Stort House, Riverway, Harlow, Essex CM20 2DW 24 HOUR ANSWER PHONE (0279) 24433 OR (0279) 31956 Blank disks 3\" x 10 .99 5% x 10 .99 372 x 10 from 12.95 "


"\" Suncom Joysticks Compatible with the roughest SEE US AT PCW, STAND 1511 rugs M Suncom Suncom joysticks are tough, capable of taking the rough with the smooth. Combining durability and quality they are among the most reliable joysticks available. Which is why Suncom offer what no other manufacturer dares to offer -a 2 Year Guarantee on our Starfighter and Tac ranges with the extra benefit of a Limited Lifetime guarantee on the TAC 5. Please rush me complete details of the Suncom range. * Compatible with most Micros, including models for IBM and APPLE Name Age * Complete range of joysticks, from .99 to .99. Address *2 year guarantee on most Suncom joysticks. Post Code *Limited lifetime guarantee on TAC 5 joysticks. For further details regarding the entire range of Suncom joysticks and accessories complete the coupon and return it to: Computer used MicroProse Ltd. 2 Market Place, Tetbury, Gloucestershire GL8 8DA Tel: (0666) 54326 Telex: 43422 MPS/UKG "


"CO900 5 oCo POWERXTREME! Ultimate power could be yours if you follow C+VG's exclusive Centurions players guide-brought to you by the programmers themselves! Tony  Development Centre and find hidden keys to unlock high security sections in an attempt to stop the Doc turning his evil dreams into reality. If you want to stop him before it's too late then you're going to need these maps and Tony's Tips! Here we show the first three levels the rest will appear in the next X-tremely X-citing issue of Computer and Video Games! Crowther and Ross Godley took a break from coding to bring you this X-tra special map. Want to know how to defeat Doc Terror? Then tune in to Crowther and Godley's control centre! The Centurions are a 21st century team of elite mercenaries — fighting evil where ever they find it. They wear special power suits called Exoframes and special weapons. Kitted out in all this gear the members of the team each gain the power of 1,000 men! Crowther and Godley's game puts the Centurions up against the incredibly evil Doc Terror. The deadly Doc is after a lethal substance called Tyron-Dichromate -a chemical so awesomely deadly that it could destroy all life on Earth. The men machines that are The Centurions have to search the Weapons TONY'S TEN TOP TIPS! 1. Try to get to large open spaces it's much easier to kill aliens here. 2. Try to find keys WITHOUT using Change Zones. Use these zones as little as possible. 3. Collect all the cannisters for megapoints 4. If you're playing with a friend and his "


"UDSEN ARCOBlogliatelo TRENTINGENE [4]] LATE energy is running low you should find Quantas for him and help keep him in the game. 5. When you are weak you can stand safely on one of the Zones which protect you from alien attackers. 6. Shoot the walls! Well, shoot them to kill aliens lurking behind you. The bullets will bounce back and wipe them out. 7. Try to open as many doors as you can with the same key. 8. Don't be greedy with Quantas if you're playing in two player mode. 9. Be careful with your weaponry--some firepower is more useful than others. And yes, you can shoot each other or yourself if you're not careful. 10. Study the C+VG maps! Watch this space for a Crowther cheat mode coming your way soon! KEYS DOORS Triangle Square Circle Two Cubes Rhombus OO Hexagon A Prism Key Shape Sulsea O Master Key A Air Change Zone L Land Change Zone 5 Sea Change Zone E Exit OOOO "


"BRAND NEW! Competition PRO ARCADE QUALITY JOYSTICK IT'S A CLEAR WINNER! WITH RAPIDFIRES SLOW MOTION R.R.P. -49 INC. VAT. DYNAMIC ..-:. Burgess COIN HOUSE NEW COIN STREET ROYTON OLDHAM OL26JZ ENGLAND TELEPHONE: 061 626 7222 TELEX: 669705 COING 1823 AT P.C.W ON STAND SEE IT FOR THE FIRST TIM "


"ATARI ST/800XLIXE OWNERS ( 24 HOUR SEGA szerelem Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest, biggest and best Atari Club on the market. APPROX 550 ST TITLES NOW IN STOCK DELIVERY SEEING IS BELIEVING SEGA GAMES MACHINE .95 + HANG ON GAMES (3 DAY DELIVERY) DOUBLE MEGA BYTE CARTRIDGE 1048k SPACE HARRIER .95 ONE MEGA BYTE CARTRIDGE 524K BLACK BELT .95 SAVE YOUR PALS MONEYS CHOPLIFTER .95 HAS YOUR LOCAL SHOP BEEN IN TOUCH PRO WRESTLING .95 WITH OUR SOFTWARE LIST? NO WELL TELL THEM OUR ACTION FIGHTER .95 PRICES MAKE MAIL ORDER PRICES LOOK! SEGA CARD 256K CANT PRINT COMET GAME 40P GHOST HOUSE .95 PHONE FOR MY HERO .95 NEW RELEASE'S TRANSBOT .95 PLEASE NOTE SUPERTENNIS .95 U.K. ONLY MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who nearly 5 years ago first conceived the idea of a software library Now approximately 2,000 titles on disc cassette and Pom games, business, education and utilties. Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Several thousand very satisfied members many as far away as loland Sweden West Germany. Holland, Denmark and Eire A fast efficient and friendly service operating a computerised custom built system to keep track of all your records. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities SEND LARGE S.AE. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos, Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 Al our programare canals with full o p tion FOOTBALL CKET KLI SPORTS SIMULATIONS FROM E&J SOFTWARE (Established 3 Years) assic Sty games from E & J Software packed with GENUINE FEATURES to make them the most REALSTICO CRICKET MASTER A SUPERB SIMULATION OF ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL CRICKET Features Weather Wickel Outfield Conditions. Batting blowing Tactice Team Selection Select Ford Layout 3 Types Bowler, Types Batsmen, Bang Bowling Analysis Score appeals 3 Sil Larvel STAR FEATURE Complete Match Overview indung baby bal commentary Boring Analys Scoreboard. Widos. No Ball Misteld, Dropped Catches Cow PLUS MANY MORE FEATURES PRICE SPECTRUM 18 128K ONLY 57.95 including FREE SET OF SCORE SHEETS PREMIER H AN EXCITING FOOTBALL LEAGUE GAME Features Select Team Play all teams Home and Away, Ful Squad Details ALL TEAMS. Injuries, Team styles, in-match subs Goalscorers recorded. Transfermarket allows approach to any player in league Job Offers, Team Morate Financial problem Manager Attendance PRICE 08128K Spectrum 08.95 Amated CPC 67.95 A PREMIER LEAGUE for the 125K Commodore includes many of the res of Promo PRICES SO WORLD CHAMPIONS A COMPLETE WORLD CUP SIMULATION From the t rendies, qualifying stages four matches and onto the FINALS Set from squad of 25 players, 2 in-Match subs Discipline table Skill levels, Select Friendlies & Tour Opponents COMPREHENSIVE TEXT MATCH SIMULATION Includes Goal Times Bookings Named Recorded Goal Scorers, Sending on Comes Free licks, PenatisInjuryme Match Clock, and MORE PRICE 4120 Spectrum 08.05: 64/128 Commodore 67.95 way lags, Away o ut double drewniach Subs 7 SC FULL PENALTY SHOOT OUT WITH SUDOEN DEATH Team Selection Disciplinary Table SUPERB TEXT MATCH SIMULATION INCLUDES Named Recorded Goal Scorers, Free Kicks Comers. Penalti, Goal Times, Bookings, Dialowed Goals, Injury Time Sending ON A MORE, PRICE 48/120K Spectrum 08.95 64/128K Commodore 67.95 CHEQUES PAYABLE TO: A.I.S. DISTRIBUTION 202/203 SHOPPING HALL MYRTLE RD EAST HAM VISA LONDON E.6 PHONE NOW 01-471 8900 OR CALL IN OUR SHOP FANTASTIC VALUE BUY ANY 2 GAMES DEDUCTC FROM TOTAL BUY ANYS GAMES DEDUCTC FROM TOTAL BUY ALL & GAMES DEDUCTES FROM TOTAL ALL GAMES AVAILABLE ON TAPE FOR IMMEDIATE DESPATCH BY FIRST CLASS POST From: E&J SOFTWARE, Room 5,37 Westmoor Road, ENFIELD, Middlesex EN3 LE SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES Order by credit line 01-348 2907 (24 hrs) VISA BUTES PACK THE LAST NINA ZVADS GRAVYRIDER-01 ARKANDID TRIVIAL PURSUIT04 CODENAME DROIDDI PAPERBON   REVS TRACX00 ATARI 2010 SYSTEM VCS GAMES CONSOLE MILLIPEDE 95 GUNSHIP 115 STRIKE EAGLE SPACE INVADERS LEADERBOARD ENDURO RACER HYBRID FUTE MARIO BROS CRYSTLE CASTLE W PACMAN 1 0.95 KONGWTORC02 EWELS OF DARKNESS-02 A REALITY DISK SUILD OF THIEVES-DISK SLICON DREAMS-02 CALUPOU OCP ART STUDIO STAR TREK BATTLE FOR CADA CANA SLICON DREAMS PRICE SPECTRUM 250 ARTISTIK WITZBALL SIDE WE01 7.50 750 FLITE 6 PACKI 02 7.95 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-04 MYSTERY OFNILE-D2 5.95 5.50 SILENT SERVICE 7.50 750 EXOLON WORLD CLASS LBOARD D2 02 FLITE 6 PACK 02 WORLD CLASS LEADERBOARD BATTLESHIPS-02 REVS PLUS-01 ACE2-02 JACK THEMER2 BARBARIAN-02 750 TANK 6.75 5.95 MERCENARY 7.96 RENADADE-12 STAR GAMES 11 (GRE)-02 795 BATTLESHIPS02 5.95 FOOTBALL DIRECTOR GUNSHIP KNIGHT ORC02 INDIANA JONES-02 GAUNTLET SOLOMONS KEY JEWELS OF DARKNESS-01 750 TAIPAN 5.95 ATHENA-02 ATHENA NNUA HAMPSTER-02 FOOTBALL DIRECTOR-01 MEGA APOCALYPSE-02 7 50 OCP ART STUDIO-02 DEATH WISHI-D2 750 750 MYSTERY OF THE NILE 5.50 TAIPAN-D2 6.95 STAR FOX02 TRANTORD? 7.50 6.95 TOMAHAWK 7.50 EPYX EPICS-02 795 WAR GAMES CONSDISK 14.95 TAIPAN 02 5.95 INDIANA JONES WORLD CLASS BOARD 02 750 CARRIER FORCE DISK GUILD OF THEVES-DISKONLY 14.96 ADVANCE ART STUDIO-DISK 1995 DESTROVER-DISKONLY VASTUSSON 14.99 KNIGHT ORCD 9.95 3.98 JEWELS OF DARKNESS 9.95 QUFDEXD2 750 DEFENDER OF CROWN DISK 12.99 ADVANCE ART STUDIO-DISK 1995 303 SLEIGH 7.50 CPT COURAGEOUS-D1 6.95 PIRATES-D4 12.95 MINI OFFICE 04 12.95 RENAGADE 5.95 LAST MISSION 02 *** SUDESSUTUTES 5.95 SCALECTRIC EWELS OF DANESS3 996 750 EXCELERATOR DISK DRIVE S HEAD OVER HEELS-02 FLUNCY 02 + 1541 DISK DRIVE 15095 BLACK LAMP TRANTOR 6.95 HYBRIO-02 2.50 + COMOLD STOR 139 95 ROAD RUNNER-02 5.99 PLUS 3 SYSTEM 249.00 CENTURIONS-02 750 + 2N DATA RECORDER 2994 BATTLESHIPS 750 SLICON DREAMS AV ART STUDIO 128K ARMAGEDDON MAN-02 275 5.95 THE PAWN125% OOP ART STUDIO JACK THE NIPPER 11-02 ADV MUSIC SYSTEM-DISK 22.95 5.95 ARTISTI 120K 14.95 HIGH FRONTIER-02 7.50 + ACTION REPLAY MKII ADV ART STUDIO DISK SEBA SYSTEM 19.95 DEATH WISH3--02 PHANTOM GAME OVER-02 695 + SEGA MASTER SYSTEM THE LAST NIUA-02 750 SUMUNE KEYBOARD 19.95 GAUNTLET STAR GLIDER OG 5.95 GHOST HOUSE SLAP RIGHT 02 685 1995 TRANSBOT 14.95 CALIFORNIA GAMES 02 BARBARIAN FOOTBALL DIRECTOR 750 SUPER TENNNIS 1495 HITCHIKERS GUIDE 2415 MULTIFACE 7,95 F16 FIGHTER SILICON DREAMS CROPUFTER 10x525-SSAT 13 95 ANTONIGTEA 19.95 STAR PAWS-01 EWELS OF DARKNES 14,99 10x5250548 TPI 8.95 5.50 PRO WRESTLING 19.95 MASK-02 7.50 HARIAL 19.99 25x525 DS4 TPL 14.95 6.50 SHOOTING GALLERY NEED GUN 19.95 SPY V SPY -02 STARGLOER 19990395 14.95 SPACE HARRIER 24.95 ENDURO RACER-02 39.95 LOT PASER 495 AZIMUTH HEAD ALONMENT 599 GULD OF THIEVES 1999 025265SATPL COLOURED 10.95 2495 EUTE03 10.95 STATION 4 19.95 10x5.25 DS48 TPI-COLOURED SILICON DREAMS99 DEFENDER OF THE CROWN 249510x3 DISKS 25.95 ALSO AVAILABLE ON DISK FORMAT D1=.95, D2-.95, D3-.95, D4-.95, D5=.95 GULD OF THIEVES EDGE CLASSICS ARMAGEDON MAN SIDEW ZE ARMY MOVES ADX THE NIPPER II GOLDEN PATH RENEGADE TRACKER STARGLIDER 18.75 18.75 TRIVIAL PURSUITS SILICON DREAMS HARDBALL ADV ART STUDIO JOYSTICKS QUICK SHOT STARGAMES IN GREMLIN SANKOK KNIGHTS NINJA HAMPSTER NS JOYST COMP PRO 5000 EUROMAX PROFESSIONAL PLUS 1895 FUROMAINON AUTO PRE CHEETAH MACH 1 CHEETAH 125 7.95 COMP PRO 5000 FANTASTIC STICK BATTLEFIELD GERMANY FOR MAIL ORDER CUSTOMERS CALLERS, PLEASE SEND CHEO PO TO: S.C.S. (DEPT CVG. 655 GREEN LANES, LONDON N QOY, P&P INCLUDED IN U.K. EUROPE ADD EI PER ITEM. ELSEWHERE ADD C2 PER ITEM ADD CS FOR MACHINES FOR PSP UK ONLY SEND A SAE FOR FREE LIST 054 SPEC AMSTRAD BSC ATARI ST AMIGA IBM PCW Please specily computer type. Phone us for the latest news on the Nintendo and Sega Systems PERSONAL CALLERS PLEASE PRODUCE THIS ADVERT AT EITHER SHOP FOR ABOVE DISCOUNTS TO: SHEKHANA AT COMPUCENTRE UNIT 5. 221 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD. LONDON WIR 9AF INEAREST TUBE STN GOODGE SLOPEN 6 DAYS A WEEK 10.00AM 18.00PM OR 655 GREEN LANES LONDON N OCY TURNPIKE LANE SINI ITEMS ONLY AVAILABLE ON MAIL ORDER OR FROM 655 GREEN LANES ACCESS AND VISA CARD ORDERS 01-348-2907001-340-8565 22 01-631-4627 CREDIT CARD ORDERS DESPATCHED SAME DAY SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY *ALL NEW RELEASES ARE SUBJECT TO RELEASE DATES FROM SOFTWARE HOUSES PLEASE RING TO CONFIRM AVAILABILITY "


"SUPA SOFT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Present the Following Special Offers to C&VG Readers SPECTRUM Starglider Space hamer Barbarian Head over Heels Endura Racor Paperboy Hades Nebula Kon Coin-op Great Escape Arkanoid Leaderboard Triv Pursuit Ghost & Gobling Tro (Elto) Bomb Jack 2 Double Take Road Runner Catch 22 Indoor Sports RRP OUR SPECTRUM RRP OUR CMMODORE 64/128 CASS DISK COMMODORE 64/128 CASSISK ATARI ST RRP OUR AMSTRAD PC1512 RRP OUR 14.95 10.95 F-15 Eagle 9.95 7.00 Starglider 10.95 14.95 Deathscape 6.75 10.95 Starglider 24,95 19.99 Winter Games 19.95 16.95 7.95 5.25 Trap Door 7.95 5.25 Leaderboard 6.50 10.95 Sentinal 6.50 10.95 Guild Thieves 24.95 19.96 Summer GX21 1 9.95 16.95 9.95 5.75 Hyrdofool 795 5.25 Aliens 6.50 10.95 Big 4 6.50 10.95 Leaderboard 24.95 19.99 Pitstop (2) 19.95 16.95 7.99 5.25 Xevious 6.50 1095 Gobots 6.75 10.95 Hades Nebula 19.95 15.95 O Desert 24.95 22.95 9.95 5.75 Said a million 3 9.95 6.75 Triv Pursuit 10.95 1495 Sigma 7 6.50 NA The Pawn 24.95 $9.99 Sient Sery 19.95 16.95 9.95 7,00 Top Gun 7.25 5.25 Paperboy 6.50 10.95 Living Daylights 6.75 10.95 Silent Ser 24.95 19.99 Subbattle Sim 2 4.95 19.95 7.95 525 Handball 8.95 5.99 SbrFOX 7.00 1100 Auf Monty 6.75 10.95 Gold Runner 24 95 19.95 Destroyer 24.95 1995 7.95 5.25 Fist 2 8.95 5.00 World Leaderboard 6.50 10.95 Great escape 6.00 10.00 Subbattle 24.99 19.99 Leaderboard 24,95 1995 9.95 6.50 Durell's Big 4 9.96 6.75 Black Magic 6.75 10.95 Samurai Triogy 6.75 10.95 Deep Space 29 95 24.95 Guild Thieves 24.95 19.95 7.95 5.25 Xevious 7.95 525 Delta 6.75 10.95 World games 6.50 10.95 Star Trex 24.95 19.95 Passengers on Wind 24.95 19.95 7,95 525 Silent Service 9.95 6.75 Spy Spy 3 6.50 10.95 Tank 6.25 10.00 Arkanoid 14.95 11.95 Balance Power 2 4.95 19.95 7.95 5.25 Aliens 9.99 6.50 Leviathan 6.50 10.15 Epyx Epics 6.75 10.95 Star Raider 2 24.95 19.95 Orber 29 95 24 95 9.95 6.50 Footballer Year 795 5.25 Elite 10.95 14.95 Five star 6.50 10.95 Gauntlet 24.95 19,99 F16 Falcon 29.95 24.95 9.95 6.50 Starfox 8.995.50 Re-Bounder 6.75 10.95 Ghost & poblins 6.50 10.95 Champ Wres 24.95 1999 Gato 29.95 24 95 14.95 10.95 Gun Runner 7.96 525 Bolderdash Cons 6.50 10.95 Wizball 6.25 10.00 Slicon Dream 24.99 19.99 Psian Chess 24.95 19.95 7.95 5.25 Silent Service 9.95 6.75 Coin-op 6.50 10.05 Subbattle 6.75 11.95 Jewels Dark 24.95 19,99 9.95 8.75 Auf Monty 7.99 525 Fist 2 6.50 10.95 WC Leaderboard 6.75 11.95 (FULL INFOCOM RANGE IN STOCK PLEASE RING FOR DETAILS 7.95 5.40 Army Moves 7.95 5.25 Barbarian 6.75 10.95 Silent Service 6.75 10.95 (WE TAKE ACCESS OR VISA FOR ATARIST & AMSTRAD 1512 7.95 5.25 Rana Rama 7.95 525 To 6.75 10.95 Acro Jet 6.50 10.95 PRODUCT ONLY RING FOR DETAILS 1512 BUSINESS PRODUCT 8.99 6.25 Leviathan 7.99 5.25 Gauntiat 6.50 10.95 Head Over Heels ALSO IN STOCK RING FOR FULL UST & PRICE 7.95 525 SILO & CO 9.996.75 Sold a milion 3 6.50 10.95 Mario Brothers 6.25 10.00 AMSTRAD $128.464 CASS DISK SPECIAL OFFERSI 8.95 6.50 Super Soccer 7.95 5.25 Road Runner 6.75 10.95 Tai Pan 6.25 10.00 Mini Office 2 1 2.00 14.95 DOUBLE PACKS SPECTRUM 7.95 5.25 Eagle Nest 9956,75 Spaco Harner 6.50 10.95 Game Over 6.25 10.00 Trivial Pursuit 11.95 16.95 Butch Hard Guy + 8.95 6.25 Falcon 9.95 8.75 Catch 22 6.25 10.95 Sold A Milion 3 6.96 10 95 Sold a Million 3 6.95 10.95 Hardbal 511.00 795 525 Winter Games 995 6.50 Bomb jack 2 6.50 10 95 Shockway Rider 6.00 10.00 H Pak 6.95 1095 Footbaler of year 9.95 6.50 Mask 799 5.25 Ace 6.50 10.95 Dracular 6.50 NA Konami Coin op 6.95 10.95 Super Soccer $10.00 9.95 6.50 Super Cycle 795 5.25 Quartet 6.75 10 95 Ninja 6.50 10.95 Acro Jet 6.95 10.95 Space Harrier 795 5.25 Living Daylight 9.95 8.75 Pirates 11.95 15.95 Jailbreak 6.50 10.95 Silent Service 6.95 10.95 Head Over Heels .00 7.95 5.25 Zyraps 7.95 5.25 Freeze Frame 3 Cart) 33.95 Gunship 10.95 14.95 Starglider 11.95 16.95 Mag Max + 795 5.25 Shockway Rider 7.95 5.25 Expert Cartride NA 25.96 Destroyer NA 10 95 Trivial Pursuit PCW) 16.95 Army Moves .00 9.95 7.00 Gauntiat 8.99 625 Death or Glory 6.25 10.95 Trap Door 5.50 NA Head Over Heels (SPECIAL OFFERS 795 5.45 Shadow Mordor 7.95 5.25 Star Raiders 2 6.75 10.95 Short Circuit 6.00 10.00 Army Moves 6.50 10.00 DOUBLE PACKS.COMMODORE 7.95 5.25 Stap Fighting 7.95 5.25 Slag Fight 6.25 10.95 Nemises 6.25 10.95 Auf Monty 695 10.95 9.996.75 Game Over 7.95 5.25 The Pawn NA 14,95 Elite Hit Pak 6.50 10.95 Starglider (PCW) Last Ninja .00 7.995.25 Bubble 8.99 625 Elite 6 Pak  75 0.5 Rouge trooper 6.50 NA Gauntlet 795 5.25 Last Ninja 9.95 6.50 Arkanoid 600 10.00 Zap 2 6.50 NA Shadows Mordor 6.50 10.95 .00 9.95 6.75 Wiz 7,95 525 Wiz 6.75 10.95 Graphic Ad Cre 1 7.95 NA 20.95 22.95 Plan It (PCW) 9.95 6.50 Deathscape 8.996.25 Defender Crown NA 11.95 Urdu Pardroid 6.00 N/A Sabater 2 .00 9.99 7.95 6.50 Sigma 7 5.25 Army Moves 6.25 10.00 Shao Lins Road 6.50 10.95 Ankanoid 9.96 6.75 Survivor 8.99 625 Zynaps 6.25 10.00 Sicon Dreams 10.95 14.95 Uvingstone 6.50 11.95 All of the above on 9.99 6.75 Gobots 8.99 6.25 Shadow Mordor 6.25 10.95 Jewels Darkness 10.95 14.95 Big Four 6.96 10.95 Cassette only) Post & Packing Inc. Overseas Orders Please Add 75p per tape, Mail Order only. Cheques/postal orders (Sterling only please) Made Payable to: VISA DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, Dept 3, 210 Nicholls Tower, Harlow, Essex, CM18 6EF TELEPHONE (0279 29076) WEEKDAYS ONLY PLEASE Impossaball kari Warnor Stars on 128 Fairtight 2 Mario Brothers Short Circuit NA 19 Sky Runner Sabateur 2 Tai Pan Quartet Final Matrix Weball Dracula SkyRunner High Frontier El Pak Samurai Trilo 6 25 650 1000 Gauntlet 11 05 Bomback 2 MICROS E IL MICROSELLScosts only E1 to advertise in Microsell! ATTENTION ALL MICROSELLERS! Due to several ads of the Long John Silver type slipping through the Microsell net, Computer and Video Games will now no longer accept Microsell advertisements for the sale and swap of SOFTWARE. This section will now only feature advertisements for swapping or selling second hand HARDWARE. So be warned ye hearties! (All postal orders already received will be returned. All cheques will be destroyed) The address to send you hardware Microsell to is: Computer and Video Games (Microsell), Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. "


"A GIANT CONTEST OF SKILL STRENGTH & STAMINA GBA CHAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL Two-on-Two SPORTS AND POOL PING PONG. HIT GAMES BARRY MCGUIGAN WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP BOXING OVER SPORTS BARRINGTON'S WORLD SERIES BASEBALL SUASA Daley Thompson SUPER TEST Konami GAME SET and MATCH IS AVAILABLE FOR AMSTRAD COMMODORE SPECTRUM SPECTRUM + 3 CASSETT .95 Commodore version features Snooker and Match Point in place of Pool and Konomi's Tennis Ocea Special BUMPER Pack .95 AVAILABLE SEP. 21st Ocean Software: 6 Central Street. Manchester-M2 5NS Tel: 061 832 6633. Telex: 669977 Oceans G "


"AKUA CROSSFIRES FLAK ATTACK Arcade ace Clare Edgeley checks out Once you get the hang of it, and it is definitely more fun playing with Devil World Exterminator, Crossfire, a partner, you'll be able to whizz Flak Attack and Black Tiger. All this and high scores as well onto the more interesting ones later in the game. You may have been wondering what the jump.  DEVIL button is for as in the early levels almost identical to those found in you don't need it at all. Just wait till WORLD Gauntlet. Destroy the cairns and you get to the river of lava over you'll stop the flow of aliens. It's not which you have to cross by leaping difficult to see where the idea from plate to plate of unstable, Konami's latest offering, Devil came from. Some monsters weild unmelted lava crust. At the same World, is hardly original but it is axes which they'll use to hack at time, you've still got the monsters to highly playable. you if you're within range or throw contend with. And if you're playing Arcade addicts will recognise at you. Either way, they're good a two player game you must make the hybrid immediately. Devil shots and this particular breed is sure that you keep up with your World is based heavily on ideas highly dangerous. partner. It's nerve-racking stuff. taken from both Gauntlet and the Power balls litter the screen and One scene which sticks in my relatively new Alien Syndrome. It's you should pick these up whenever mind as a test of endurance o two player game where you play possible. These give extra concerns the rope ladders. These either a man or a woman and, like weapons like machine gun, laser, link three islands together, and you con guess where the key and exit is 156700 to be found. Trying to cross o swinging rope ladder with a bunch of baddies breathing down your neck and having to concentrate on jumping over the gaps left by rotton planks is not my idea of a quiet Sunday walk. One false step and you plummet to your doom. Another scene has you wading through a plain of waist high grass which catches fire and sweeps out of control blocking you off from the exit. And then there's the dragon. It's a one screen scenario with no scrolling and you can't get away until you've zapped him on the head a few times. It's this fight in a confined space that really eats away at your health and stamina. There seem to be masses of screens and all of them with differing landscapes to negotiate Alien Syndrome, the playing areas bazooka, crossbow and so on. All before you can pick up the key and are many, but each is very small. of which are more deadly than the hotfool it to the exil. The graphics Put in a nutshell, you must fight peo shooter you're given when are large and clear though not as your way past the monsters on you first start the game. neat as those in Alien Syndrome. each level, find the key and take it to the exit where a stairway is 56700 SO STORT revealed leading down into the next level. Very simple, but very tricky. The playing areas are islands floating in a sea of nothingness. Fall over the edge and you're a gonner. A map button (again like Alien Syndrome) reveals the whereabouts of the key and exit, though each time you start you ought to check their locations as they have an annoying habit of shifting position. The monsters are suitably ugly os well as being dangerous and the sprites are surprisingly large if not particularly brilliantly drawn. Shooting a monster tends to phase it out, but more are regenerated from small stone cairns which look When a whole spate of games appear all based on the same theme, it has got to be said that the coin-op manufacturers are jumping on the band wagon of one or two success stories Take for instance, the Gauntlet games of a while back, or more recently the Commando and Nemesis lookalikes. We've already seen 1942, 1943, Flying Shark and this month there are two more to add to the already full list. Crossfire by JKL Corp and Flak Alack from Konami. Perhaps Flak Attack is a more accurate clone and to be fair it is more addictive and exciting than Crossfire. But that is because Crossfire is more of a cartoon based game and no attempt at realism has been made. I'm not knocking Crossfire because of its lack of realism, it's still an exciting game to play though it's easier all round than its rival. You take off from a landing strip in the normal manner and immediately squadrons of enemy planes zoom in for the attack. The planes come in a multitude of different sizes, shapes and colours, some attacking in formation, others flying in silently alone for the kill. Watch out for rocky outcrops in the sea, they look harmless enough, but back slides a panel and out pops yet another cannon These are fairly easy to douse before they create too much havoc. What you do have to watch are the planes which fly up from the bottom of the screen behind you. If you're in the wrong position, and they suddenly appear on your tail, you've no time to manoeuvre and you'll collide. One large plane always appears towards the end of a level and this needs to be pumped full of cannon fire if you're to blow it up. Especially difficult as it is well protected by its own cannons. Still, you'll quickly learn where to find extra weapons. Four blue planes randomly appear in formation, zipping in and on and off the screen almost before you have a chance to react. Shoot all four and a capsule drops into the sea cycling through a range of colours. Shoot it and fly over the remains and you'll have got yourself another weapon. The landscape changes as you fly on, but the enemy attacks don't "


"11E ACTION 324001501200 EXTERMINATOR -27540 HIGH SC diminish they just get more ferocious. Volcanoes and hover craft are added to the list of undesirables, ground based canons are a pain and the aircraft at the end of each level are larger and more difficult to kill Crossfire is fun, fast but not instantly addictive and I'd only play it for a spot of light hearted relief. For a more serious game of blowing up the baddies I'd turn to the screaming, roaring engines of the fighter jets in Flak Attack No one could accuse Konami's Flak Attack of being unrealistic with its super fast jet aircraft engaged in a series of bitter dogfights. In fact the opening sequence is superb as your single fighter takes off with its engines roaring to take its fighting position in the skies over some helpless city. Although you start off over a city, the fight swiftly moves on over a number of landscapes and in each area it becomes more difficult to make headway. The city area is relatively easy. Just blast the enemy and avoid the pink mushroom clouds which spring up from the city far below. Initially these aircraft attack singly, though there are many on the screen at once and it's impossible to get to them all. They also travel at a greater speed than your craft, making it difficult, on occasion, to dodge them. And, they re just as likely to turn a swift 90 degrees and fly over the screen in your direction, so ignoring those aircraft that are not diving directly overhead is a big mistake. Soon the city is left behind and a rugged terrain appears guarded by uncannily accurate ground to aircraft missile launchers. These missiles fill the screen with a blanket of enemy fire and to get through safely you're going to have to take some of them out. It's tricky and gives you a great feeling of satisfaction should you manage lo hit the target without getting yourself killed. Eventually though, you'll have to run the gauntlet ihrough a long line of these cannons virtually impossible to get it right first time as the skies are filled with a thick blanket of missiles. The enemy now attack in formation, and though they are easier to kill when grouped together there are now many more jets to contend with. Flak Attack is very noisy, realistic and addictive enough to encourage you to put in just another 20 pence. It's very similar to the other games of this genre, but is still an exciting shoot-'em-up in its own right Exterminator by Taito is really self explanatory. Just blast everything in sight and you should make enough headway up the screen to take on the massive three-headed robotic cyclops. This is one of those games where playing in the two player mode adds enough excitement to want to continue playing. So to the start. The first wave of mutants descend from the top of the screen flying eyeballs, swamp monsters and killer millipedes do their best to stun you. Touch one and you'll be thrown back a few feet while your life span gets that much shorter. When your life points reach zero you die only to reappear for a second shot at the mutants. The pace is quite fast and you'll have to zip niftily round the screen to avoid a collision. Boulders litter the area shoot these and, as they disintegrate, you might find a hidden stairwell leading to an undergorund cavern. As soon as you leg-it underground, your LIFE partner will automatically follow. Once there, you'll find some metal caskets and if you blast these open some bonus goodies will be revealed. Perhaps an aura capsule which protects you for a short while, or armour, a psycho helmet, even a search goggle Search goggles are greatthey allow you to detect the rocks which conceal the hidden staircase. And when the millipedes swarm, the time stopper stops them dead, allowing your escape. If one of these dear little creatures get you then tend to hang on tenaciously chomping away at your legs. There's no shaking them off either. Rows of blue aliens are pretty helpful though, once they're dead. They'll occasionally leave a pulsing blue all behind which, if you pick it up, will dog your footsteps while giving extra fire power. A string of these, each firing upwards, can do lots of damage to the descending enemy forces. Other items seem to fall at random from laser frazzled aliens INSERZNUE 2 and these include the ability to fight and fire in formation, extra speed calibre that'll have you coming and more weapons. So if you've back for more and more... Once got your wits together there's I'd got the hang of and shoved in absolutely no reason why you a few pounds worl a d my hills shouldn't be armed to the teeth with a host of other bonuses to see you through to the end of the level. Although it's a relatively fast moving and enjoyable two player game, Exterminator isn't of the you're goinho get trive to take 66900 "


"THE TUBE G DARE YOU ENTE THE TLFE IF YOU DOYOU WILL ENCOUNTS   Available for 'SE ECTRUM 48,128 .95 COMMODORE 64/128 Tape nd  ESE 324.95 prend senterabela pm all good stockists TRANSFER ZONE DEFENCE MECHANISM TUNNEL CAPTURE AREA 0103132 105579 1113497 rawyere * 18 DISTANCE 196 ATES 256 E DISTRICE 03 PAUSED DISERICE 325 OFF SHIELDS PRISER BUTES 403 5851 EBER TZONE2 600 OF SUELON 1500 W Go PAUSED on POSLE CAREA100 DMT2 "


"MORE FUN THAN A BARREL FULL OF MONKEYS steinar THE NIPPER... Help! Stop! The country has had enough, no more can It take of the devilish pranks and obnoxoas behaviour of darfing little Jack. Od to a land where many of yoar kind were banished long before. Off to Australia Jack you must goll! Banished Britain's most otorious nipper is deported to Ananth mina w to wh Australia minythm Its no fan being cooped sp. Maybe there's something down there that fascles being mugged ... bitten..spatat or pinched. As ever poor Mam and Dad dutifully follow their nauseating little offspring \"I don'like your stinking climate anyway you coughlsplutter...lgs. There's plenty of places just waiting for me. Har biaffed Jack defently, keep On the ground, in the air, you can mischief maker out of trouble and with all those pretty air hostesses around... well what do you expect Olen Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd. Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS Tel: (0742) 753423 MAR Capture the full excitement of Jack and his jungle capers with This waper full colour will poster. Only Dp post and packing indluded. Order form in the game. CBM 64/128 Cassette .99 Disk .99 SPECTRUM 48/128K Cassette .99 AMSTRAD Cassette .99 Disk .99 "


"BEAT THE WORLD BEATERS! WITH THE ORIGINAL ARCADE TRACK EVENT GAME **** KONAMI E2222 ON COMMODORE 64/128 CASSETTE .95 DISC .95 You're in for the workout of your life. 6 gruelling events await you: 100-Meter Dash, Long Jump, Javelin Throw, 110-Meter Hurdles, Hammer Throw, and the High Jump. You can play alone, or against up to 3 other players. You can choose 4 levels of difficulty: Easy, Normal, Difficult or Awesome. You can play the whole game or just one event. But keep in mind that your real opponent is yourself. You have to make the qualifying DISTRIBUTED BY time or distance in each event to move on. N.M.C. LTD., 2 IFFLEY ROAD, Otherwise, it's all over. LONDON W6 OPA. TEL: 01-846 9701 KONAMI For subscription details please send a S.A.E. to: KONAMI SOFTWARE CLUB KONAMI HELPLINE Bank Building, Bank Street, Newton Abbot, Devon TQ12 2JL. 0626 56789 Another ? KONAMI gripping Arcade Conversion SOFTWARE CHE KONAMI PERLIS "


"AKCAE AC IN BLACK TIGER and there are columns you can he UK COIN-OP HIGH SCORES JUK HALL OF FAME ages. Black Tiger is weird. With a deep and dingy colour scheme, a strange subterranean atmosphere and characters which have stepped straight from the dark When I first saw the game it wasn't fully completed, so this is very much in the way of a preview. The reason the colour scheme is in varying shades of purple and black is because the land is doomed to eternal darkness, thanks to three unwanted dragons who descended from the once clear skies above the planet. As usual you've been cast in the role of hero and it's your unenviable task to get rid of the dragons and so lighten the atmosphere. Garbed in armour and equipped with a business-like chain with a studded ball of cast iron at one end, you tread warily to your doom. Peering ahead you can just make out the shape of what looks like a giant ram in armour. But as you creep closer the shape turns into that of the shield and huge torso of one of the dragon's guardians. Clutching your shield you leap forward into battle, swinging the ball and chain for all you're worth. If you keep your distance you should be able to knobble the mighty warrior with no trouble. The idea is to keep out of reach of hid deadly double-headed axe. Get too close and you're likely to lose your armour and shield which leaves you feeling very vulnerable. Black Tiger is played in tunnels use to jump up, leaping from one to the other to get to higher playing areas. Arrows point in the directions you can travel and often there are junctions where there is a choice of paths leading perhaps to the dungeons or up to a higher level. Prehistoric bats flap into your face while you're clinging to the columns and these are just as likely to kill you as the warriors. Floating blue orbs should be avoided at all costs. You'll stand a much better chance of winning if you manage to find the power box. Catch the item coming out of it and you'll be awarded with a variety of extras like the ability to become tranparent, to speed up, or you'll be given piercing bullets, rapid fire, poison or a time-stopper. Some of which will be very useful when fighting your ultimate opponents -the dragons. Black Tiger looks very interesting even though it is rather gloomy. And the music doesn't helpill strike doom into the most cheerful of souls! Still it's got a lot going for it and it'll be interesting to see the finished game. TE Rygar 4,735,250 Keith Bradley, Blackburn, Lancs Green Beret 6,166,500 Michael Robertson, Newcastle Street Fighter 1,975,600 Graham Smith, Manchester Ikari Warriors 2,192,200 Charles Taylor, Lincs Gun Smoke 1,876,250 Gavin Davies, Swansea Bubble Bobble 4,793,200 Keith Bradley, Blackburn, Lancs Gauntlet II 6,758,572 CM Bradley, Sussex Quartet 8,576,750 James Washburn Yie Ar Kung Fu 9,999,999 Geoffrey Clarke, Sunderland Out Run 350,070,030 Steven Martin, Leicestershire Slap Fight 6,680,550 Phil, Farnworth, Bolton Indiana Jones 1,180,060 U.S., Bristol King Of Boxer 1,800,000 Gary Spencer, L.O.W. Hyper Olympics 2,100,000 Gary Spencer, I.O.W. Spellunker 3,500,000 Gary Spencer, L.O.W. Block 228.980 Jason Dowling, Dublin Jackal 674,810 Paul Stokes, Sussex Victory Road 130,200 Martin Deem, Hants Rampage 68,400 Manish Ragvari, London E8 Battle Lane 1,343,700 Elout de Kok, Holland Enduro Racer 22,020,000 Elout de kok, Holland XX Mission 1.565,300 D Prueilt, Staffs Valtric 116,400 D Prueitt, Staffs Great Gurianos 5,640,000 Matthew Fevrier, London SE17 Mag Max 192,000 AJ Rolfe, Cafe Chertsey, Sussex A.S.O. 780,000 Fiz, Coventry 720 264,950 Martin Deem, Hants Arkanoid 1,142,000 Matthew Fevrier, London SE17 Rolling Thunder 491,100 Martin Deem, Hants Legendary Wings 361,400 Matthew Preece, Kent Side Arms 17,663,300 Jonathan Cook, Co Dublin Gryzor 1,439,900 Simon Mills, Southport Fighting Wings 101,400 Bredon Bird, Glasgow Metro Cross 793,940 Gavin Davies, Swansea Arm Wrestling 345,000 Peter Huesken, Holland Jail Break 265,450 Martin Deem, Hants Paperboy (Cheat mode) 1,782,214,387 Matthew Hill, Sussex Space Harrier 31.900,730 Matthew Preece, Kent Hogans Alley 1,004,000 Matthew Fevrier, London SE17 Terra Cresta 10.000.000 Cao Nicholas, London W2 Section Z 3,200,500 L Murphy, Essex Tokio 3,485,500 Stuart Dixon, Oxon Express Raiders 950,220 Matthew Preece, Kent Tube Panic 428,368 Stuart Dixon, Oxon Pacland 4,150,400 Mark Mendes, London, W10 Iron Horse 1,756,200 Jason Dowling, Dublin Shao Lins Road 8,270,000 Fiz, Coventry Mikie 310,800 Nigel Parker, W Yorks My Hero 9,857 212 Gavin Davies, Swansea Trojan 280,650 Fiz, Coventry Ghosts 'n' Goblins 7,554,700 Simon Lennox, N. Ireland Kung Fu Master 564,800 Romano Lindhout, Holland Wonder Boy 2,020,170 Daz, Famworth, Bolton Tiger Heli 1,350,640 Larry Barr, Shropshire 1999 1,009, 200 Geoffrey Clarke, Sunderland Salamander 1,700,000 Keith Bradley, Blackburn, Lancs Nemesis 1,195,500 Paul Ashworth, Plymouth, Devon TX-1 289,000 G Whittingham, Birmingham Road Runner 2,000,000 U.S., Bristol Gauntlet 5,867,911 Jeremy Wait, Comwell 1942 12,172,270 N Watson, Starburst, Bridlington Marble Madness 208,340 Martin Deem, Hants Return of the Jedi 2,250,310 Martin Deem, Hants Do Run Run 1,605,100 Adam Mastromarino, Bristol Star Force 3,315,000 R Jones, Star Games, Dyfed Buggy Boy 103,200 Peter Huesken, Holland Super Mario Bros. 2,702,800 Martin Deem, Hants Hang On 49658 320 Martin Deem, Hants Commando 1,600,320 Bev, Farnworth, Bolton Choplifter 2,238,400 Michael Kane, Scotland Bomb Jack 16,424,000 Matti Javelin, Finland 10 Yard Fight 480,050 Brett Caines, Bristol Track & Field 7,899,500 Nick Roberts, London Tazzmania 2,300,000 Gary Spencer, L.O.W. Robofron 368,950,000 P Cles, Cardiff Pole Position 110,545 Matthew Bryden, Kent Pac-Man 3,500,000 Christopher Burns, Lancs Mr Do 10,000,000 Peter Huesken, Holland Mr Do's Castle 679,720 Lee Taylor, Lancs Elevator Action 149,000 Peter Huesken, Holland Dragon's Lair 993,920 Lee Taylor, Lancs Defender 2,000,000 Gary Spencer, I.O.W. Flying Shark 558,340 Neil Wilde, Farnworth, Bolton Flicky 9.990,990 Neil & Steve, Farnworth, Bolton Arian Mission 2,213,790 Phil, Farnworth, Bolton Haley's Comet 574,450 Phil, Farnworth, Bolton AFTER BURNER After Burner, a fabulous roller coaster ride through war-tom skies is the latest blockbuster from Sega. And having experienced a couple of superfast stomach churning flights, I can see why the game's being heralded with such excitement. The first five levels are fairly easy to get through with automatic refuilling on the third level. The only difference in these early scenes are the numbers of enemy fighters and the background colours of the scenery. The sixth level is a real killer and consists of high brick walls in a mazelike formation. You've got to fly between these walls to get to the open spaces outside. After Burner is definitely the best game I've seen this year and if you can afford a pound orten give it a go. F AFTER BURNER "


"NUEYDP NINJA HAMSTER ACADEMY eril CRE DISTRIBUTED BY ELECTRONIC ARTS CRL Group PLC, CRL House, 9 Kings Yard, Carpenters Road, London E15 2HD "


"SEGA THE ULTIMATE HOME VIDEO ARCADE MACHINE Masters OEST S This is SEGA — the powerful new video games system designed specially for the home and the whole family. It's compact and easy to assemble, and the high technology gives you sharp video images, vibrant colour and realistic sound! games console 256k cards! And Sega has (to run a card or cartridge), 1 megabyte and huge 2 megabyte a FREE copy of the hit arcade game cartridges to take the 40 new titles «Hang On\", 2 control pads, a TV coming your way later this year aerial fixture to let you watch TV including smash hits Out Run, even when the console's still Space Harrier and many more. connected as well as a fitted SEGA GIVES YOU ALL 3-pin plug and a special mystery THIS FOR JUST .95! game built-in and ready for you to find! GAMES! GAMES! GAMES! Sports action, exciting thrillers and great arcade LIGHT PHASER hits there's a feast of fun covering Take aim and fire at your targets with ease and stunning realism! 3-D VISOR GLASSES Get more out of your gameThe Ultimate Games More force, more action and more amazing 3-D realism! COMING SOON! GEGVA LOOK HOW MUCH SEGA GIVES YOU With Sega, you get a complete, ready-to-use system. All you need is a TV! The package includes Machine Tor Your Home Choplifter World Grand Prix Super Tennis Space Harrier F16 Falcon Out Run Distributed in the UK by Mastertronic Ltd. 8-10 Paul Street, London EC2A 4JH. Tel: 01-377 6880 "


"Computer + Video Games 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ecir zau Mailbag. Recent concern over the gorilla and having to be saved name was not printed, my programming just one-offs. Alligata release, Livingstone, 1 by Mario. The Bug rightfully letter was! So, I felt I had to I think that about wraps it up Presume has brought racism said this only to be heavily write again to get the fame! for now, I shake hands with all in computer games out into the ridiculed by S.U. It's comments deserve and to sort out a few the male members of the team, open. Racism in computer just showed how pathetically things. and love and kisses to the software is quite often horrific sexist some writers to be. First, though, I don't want to ladies, and robots may your but sexism in computer games The popular computer press talk to any Conanth joints never rust. Well done on seems to have been neglected had a chance a little while back or some idiot in the margin but a superb mag. From your most recently. to break the sexist mould when to someone of the stature like loyal reader. Many games are stuffed full Teresa Maughan became Lieut. Laww, one cool dude. Rik Munro of sexist stereotypes, editor of YS. Instead of Right, on with the letter Surrey reinforcing prejudice and countering the readers and am sick and tired about people Editor's reply: At last! increasing division in society. some writers sexist drivel, she complaining about Somebody understands the Strip poker games are the most merely laughed it off and advertisements for games problems we face. It's hell, 1 obvious example of sexism by continues to do so, the unreleased yet. The reason is tell you being me. The degrading women, portraying magazine still also takes sexist that the advert is given to responsibility, the pain, the them as sex-objects. Sexist and racist adverts. C+VG by the company well in worry. attitudes are already reinforced Dwelling upon adverts, we daily by all areas of the media, can see a further tentacle of in between the time the I would just like to especially scandal seeking computer sexism the sexist company sends its adverts out congratulate you on your 'news sheets' published by the advert. The most blatant and the time they actually excellent magazine, especially \"News Tycoons.\" modern example is Barbarian appear in the magazine, your Play by Mail pages written Sexist games are often not by Palace which went one step something can go wrong in something can go wrong in a nd conducted so well by noticed, they have been further from drawings of programming the game 50 Wayne. incorporated into the very scantily-clad women and there is an advert but not I have been reading your design of today's software. actually showed a photo of game. magazine since April '83 Your recent review schedule Maria Whittaker with a lack of Tony T. appears to be in the without I might add missing shows the male dominance inclothing. Palace has shot to the middle of things at the any copies and I feel that the games characters, scenarios Number one slot, this means moment. It is my belief that he content has improved year by and graphics. Take for instance that they are sinking lower than is actually nearly always right year. I started buying C+VG these games — Mag Max low to sell their products. but goes way over the top and because it was unmatched in (Male, Greyfell (male cat), A conclusion for all the appears wrong. Adventure gaming news and Head Over Heels (two male companies out there can be However, he does have an features handled by a certain characters), Little Computer that by ignoring and exploiting expert knowledge of the Mr Campbell — just as his People (only male characters) 52 per cent of the population computing industry and knows column was allowed to and guess which gender the they are obviously losing out what he is taking about expand, I feel that Wayne's star in Tubaruba is? on 52 per cent of the profit that I don't like this music review column should be expanded Most games can have neutral they could make. A more feature. Normally I enjoy the also. characters, especially when normal conclusion is that special features you do but It is good to see new ideas they are robots and aliens. Is sexism in computer games music has too many different being used and tried out, and I the sex of the character always ignores and often degrades tastes. However it is good to think this column was your best necessary? Do software firms women. see that your still coming up bet yet. It would be nice to see think that women only exist in Jaron Lewis and Jeffrey Davy with innovative ideas to make the reaction of an article about the home and only venture out The Bug the mag better. Well done. Fanzines, but this may be to do the shopping? Editor's reply: We've all had You have successfully straying to far. If they don't where are the a ponder about racism and managed to cover a very wide Mike Danaher 52 per cent of female computers, chaps, but we range of computers. So, it is Northampton characters which would make can't think of any \"horrific\" Editor's reply: We'd love to games representative of the examples. Write in and tell us. from Oric and Enterprise expand lots of C+VG's population. We know quite a few girls read owners having a go at C+VG features but time and space It is said that women do play C+VG so why don't you also for not doing reviews. It is are always against us. parts in computer games, but write in with your views on obviously not C+VG's fault, these passive roles merely sexism and computer games. they just do not get the games Okay! Plucked enough reinforce existing sexist from the manufacturers. I think courage once again, here goes. attitudes, an example being there should be special features He removed his trusty Biro Donkey Kong which portrays I wrote to your magazine on things like starting your own from its rather fetching holder. the woman carted off by the once before, but though my magazine or advice on It was a BIC roller ball, which "


"he had customised by covering at Frennesis again and what did big thank you for all your I loved the advert for Game in Tipex and drawing funny I see? Written by Tony T. I support of this fabulous new Over could you do that into faces all over it with felt tips! didn't have to look any further! computer. a gigantic poster? I would also Yes, there was even one of Tony, the guy who always talks Yesterday, I purchased love a poster of Hewson's the Ed on it. His hand fluttered about the latest Good software. Gauntlet for my ST after Zynaps. Regards to Jerry Paris nimbly over the paper as he So, I bought it. I came home reading the review in your -some real neat artwork! wrote his next offering of and the first thing I wanted to magazine. I must say that it Wim de Gent earhole G.B.H. to the C+VG do was play the game. must be the best game out Belgium Mailbag. Well, I wish I hadn't because of the fantastic Editor's reply: Alien Sex Hi Guys. Comin' over to my bothered!! This game is the graphics and gameplay. There Fiend unknown? Where have place for a game of scrabble most stupid, disgusting game is a bug in it though. If one you been Wim? Oh, Belgium. and a cup of Horlicks. And if ever. I'm really angry about this character dies in a two There you go then! World's you edit this letter to V12th of one, Tony. This is what is player game and the INSERT centre for New Wave, eh? it's content as you did last time called a Rip-Off!! Here are my key is pressed immediately What about Berlin then?! I really will send my 172 stone points. two resurrected characters will have seen a good group from overweight mother to make Big Graphics 1 appear!! Belgium M.A.M. I think they Red look like a speak 'n' spell. Sound 0 Try it and see. were called. But we take your Grill look like a Morphy Value 0 In your review, you point watch this space for a Richards toaster and Otiss... Playability o mentioned that a four player more comprehensive music well, what's he supposed to be Total o Gauntlet will be out. Will it be section. anyway? I hope no one else has bought an add-on, or will it cost Okay, a half serious matter this stupid game. Tony's another . In last month's Mailbag, next. Remember these always talking about the best Gavin Lim read a Mr G Evans letter immortal words. \"We are software and he publishes this Kent concerning Imagine's Game trying to improve our Atari 8 bit load of \"@\"*@\". Even my little PS. I've finished Ultima 3 on Over advert. If the boy is so coverage. We've got a new sister who's just two years old my Atari 800. Please write to concerned about the advert reviewer Jerry Muir to check could write this program. me if you have any trouble why doesn't he just turn the them out.\" Why, oh why. Bart Treommelen playing it. page over. I am sure people Why? You never use him! It's The Netherlands Editor's reply: Thanks for like me prefer these sort of always this Brian Webber Editor's reply: Tony T sends the Gauntlet tip, Gavin, watch advertsit catches my chappie. Needless to say if a his regards and thanks you for out for Gauntlet II. attention. So Gareth if you really good Atari 800X game your well thought out and Wayne's outdated. OK, if don't like it, buzz off. comes along the Editor grabs it! balanced comments. you want a \"music\" section in I'd be very grateful if you What was wrong with Haken I am writing to reply about a your mag please remember this could tell me more about the anyway? certain A Q from Norfolk who is the 80s not the 70s. I think it wonderful Sega system. How Glad that's behind me. Now say Mel and Kim are rubbish. is ridiculous to review only long will it take to get to the would you like to hear my They are the bizz and heavy hard rock, heavy metal, speed shops, will you be doing views on Rock On? Tough, metal is very out dated, and metal and other metals! regular reviews etc? your going to hear them why was the Beastie Boys' LP I completely agree with Another comment to Mr anyway. in your heavy metal section, Stuart Gorland. If you want to Taylor if he is still reading Get rid of it. Who ever they outclass anything in heavy review hard music, how about C+VG. C+VG is very fair thought of this idea needs his/ metal. Why not ditch the H.M. punk. Don't say that there is no when it comes to competition her legs slapped. Don't ever let section and bring in a hip hop more punk, cause if punk is winners whatever race, creed me see it again. Use the page one, because this is the music dead, then hard rock lies 13 or colour. for an Atari XL extra. Before of the moment. billion years away. Just look at know because I am brown go, I would like to offer a Oh yes, a question. What's The Conflict, The Exploited, skinned and Moslem and I suggestion as to why Tony T is the best, an Amiga or an ST, ISGBH and many others or have won a competition in blue. I think it is because it an Amiga for it's graphics and won't you dare to review it every four times I have entered someone let Big Red out of the sound or an ST for it's vastly because there's lots of *@* and because there's lots of war that's a ratio of one out of C+VG nursery room with his superior game's collection? !$* in it? every 4 dumbos. So, Mr Taylor Junior Artist Paint Set want to know because I might If you want something new go bury your head under a What was the relevance of buy one--for games only. come over to Belgium, it's the rock. that revoltingly fat and lan Walker world's centre for New Wave. Please leave Mr Tony T nauseating gentlemen on Leicester If you're too lazy to come over alone. So what if he's an alien. August's Mailbag pages? As the Editor's reply: On the just open your eyes up And to end, please please can! Editor was replying I sort of contrary HM is very in at the there're loads of good, go out with Melissa? I am thought if was him. Let's have moment, but we take your unknown groups in England handsome, intelligent, loving, Tony T replying to the letters point and hope to expand the like Alien Sex Fiend, Sisters of caring, and sexy!! sometime. Everyone else type of music covered. Mercy, The Dead Kennedy's Romeo Mo seems to get a shot. Can I get a Rumours have reached us etc. I think you should review London shot? from a very unreliable source records of unknown, new Editor's reply: The Game Andy Blair which talk of Amiga price cuts bands bringing different music Over ad has certainly stirred Glasgow soon. Stay tuned. so that more people know that up a hornet's nest. It's not fair Editor's Reply: No! Firstly, I'd like to say that I it exists and buy it. Got it to tell someone to ignore a This letter is about a game welcome any album review in Wavne? page of C+VG if they don't just bought written by Tony T your magazine of any type. I was a bit disappointed with like it. There should be no your Hot Gossip man. He's would prefer other music to be three of your issues earlier on forbidden areas of the always talking about the best reviewed. I own an Atari ST this year-namely March, magazine. And no part should software and all these things. and have done so for a year April and May. They were so be offensive to our readers. Well, when I went to a shop now. Therefore, after reading weak. But, I am glad to report Sorry, Romeo, but Melissa is a few days ago, I saw a game the Atari ST special, I decided that you have got it together booked up for the next few called Frennesis. that I'd better write in and say a again. months. "


"MAIL-SOFT 888 699 6.99 24.95 Golf.... COMMODORE 64 ** SPECTRUM AMSTRAD *** BATTLESHIPS-02 BUBBLE BOBBLE BUBBLE BOBBLE-02 INDIANA JONES-02 WC LEADERBOARD 6.50 ELITE-03 WC LEADERBOARD-02699 MYSTERY OF NILE DEATH WISH 3-02 ELITE-03 HITE SPACK ., MYSTERY OFNILE02 6.99 FLITE HIT PACKI-02 EPYX EPICS-02 BATTLESHIPS02 5.50 SOLOMONS KEY-02 HYBRIO01 THE LAST NINJA... 6.99 W.C LEADERBOARD-02....6.99 CENTURIONS-02 FLUNKY -02 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-04 ADE2 BATTLESHIPS 12 6.50 TANK KNIGHT ORC04 10.95 ATHENA-02 HIGH FRONTIER STARGLIDER-04 9.95 GUILD OF THIEVES-DK SOLOLINS KEY 650 THE PAWN120 9.95 GUILD OF THIEVES JACK NIPPER 11-02 THE PAWN REVS PLUS-02 ADV ART STUDIO 125 STARGLIDER LAST MISSION 02 5.50 KNIGHT ORC 14.95 DEATH WISH3---02 SOUDAR HAROBALL 18.75 TRANTOR-02 DEFENDER OF CROWN... IMPLOSION 02 DEATH WISH 3. 5.50 SUPER HUEY FOOTBALL DIRECTOR TRANTOR *** BLANK DISKS *** BOB SIE GH-02 LAST MISSION 6.50 10 x 3 DISKS KNIGHT ORC-02 JACK NIPPER II 5.50 10 X 528 SS48TPI MPLOSION 25 x 525 SS4SP1 1396 LAST MISSION 6.50 10 X 5.250S48TPI ON THE TILES-D2 ELITE TRIO PACK 25 x 5.250S48TP1 14.95 SOLOMONS KEY--02 10 X 3.5 14.90 SIOEWIZE-01 FOOTBALL DIRECTOR * ATARI ST STAR PAWS01 INDIANA JONES 6.50 SENTINAL ELITE TRIO PACK-02 OCP ART STUDIO TAIPAN 14.95 TAL-PAN-02 KNIGHT ORC FUGHT SIMULATOR 11 3595 CALIFORNIA GAMES-02 GULD OF THIEVES STARGLIDER AOV ART STUDIO ARKANOID-02 13.95 MASK-02 F15 STRIKE EAGLE TALPAN KNIGHT ORC GAME OVER-02 JEWELS OF DARKNESS TRANTOR OCP ART STUDIO-03......9.95 9.95 MYSTERY OFNILE-02...550 ENDURO RACER 5.99 ** JOYSTICKS HARDWARE ++ MUSIC STUDIO-03 9.95 TRIVIAL PURSUIT 10.95 STAR GLIDER ---D3.   5.50 CHEETAH MACHI JEWEL OF DARKNESS-02.9.95 5.90 CHEETAH 125 7.95 SILICON DREAMS-029 .95 FREZE MACHINE PLUS 3 SYSTEM QUICK SHOT TURBO EXPERT + ESM 2799 KEMPSTON INTERFACE ACTION REPLAY MK3 27.96 RAM TURBO INTERFACE 054C COMPENDIUM FINAL CARTRIDGE 36.96 MULTIFACE 128 ATARI STEM ***SEGA MASTER SYSTEM 199.95 +  P&P *** Disk version available: D109.95, D2 10.95, D3 01295, DA 14.95 P&P included in UK Europe add cl per tape Elsewhere C1.50 per item Adu ES for P&P on all machines Cho PD Payable to Maison PO Box 589. London NIS 6JJ. Access and Visa orders welcomed you do not see the software you want moly deduct 30'. of the RRP VISA and we will send to you. Except Budo & Sega Software by the softwarehouse Please specify computer type in your order NINTENDO \"THE GAMES MACHINE\" HARDWARE Control Deck ...... ..Our Price .95 Zapper Guns........ Our Price .95 SOFTWARE Hogans Alley Our Price .95 Wild Gunman ..Our Price .95 Clu Clu Land Our Price .95 Super Mario Brothers, Our Price .95 Our Price .95 Pinball..... .Our Price .95 Soccer ....... Our Price .95 Tennis Our Price .95 Kung Fu ... Our Price .95 10 Yard Fight... Our Price .95 Ice Climber.... Our Price .95 ALSO AVAILABLE Lazer Tag Game Kits.................... Our Price .95 Amazing prices for hardware and software. All of the prices quoted above are inclusive of VAT and P&P charges *SEGA systems available soon Chris Stamper Software 135 Burton Road, Ashby-De-La-Zouch, Leicetershire, LE6 5LH. Tel: 0530 411871 Slip. A. Disc NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY en ont Hire Software Before You Buy It DEPT CV2 228 ORME ROAD NEWCASTLE STAFFS STS 2P8 TEL: 0782 711269 YOU HAVE TRIED THE REST NOW TRY THE BEST! 2495 1796 BATTLE SHP 01 AVAILABLE BARBARIAN MUTO DUEL KNIGHT ORC MOEBIUS LURKING HORROR BARBARLAND CENTURIONS 02 GUADALCANAL 01 BUBBLE BOBBLE 01 SOLOMONS KEY DE 9.996.95 8.99 6.50 9.99695 8.95 6.50 9.95 695 1495 13.50 DEATH WISH 301 NIGHT ORC ULTIMA SILENT SERVICE 1999 13.95 1999 13.95 1995 13.95 KNIGHT ORC 1999 1399 19.95 13 95 TRANTOR 1999 1399 2495 1795 RENEGADE 19.95 1395 29.99 23.99 AUTO DUEL 19.95 1395 2495 1795 TRACKER 2495 17,95 24.96 1795 25 17 95 VOEBIUS 2461795 SANGKOK KONGS 295 1796 2016 1796 COLONIAL CONQUEST 2999 22.96 2495 1795 LURKING HORROR 24 17.95 2495 1796 HADES NEBULA 1996 13.95 24.95 1795 ALTAIR 2495 17.95 ACEDEMY RING KARATE KID 24.95 1796 KARATECO BUILD OF THIEVES SILICON DREAMS STAR GLIDER THE PAWN ACADEMY ALTAIR ET SOYS RENEGADE 01 GUNSHIP HYBRID 02 6 PAK VOL 2 DE FLUNKY 01 STAR FOX 01 TRAXXION 01   9.95 595 NOW UNDER new management OVER 8,000 different titles available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, ELECTRON, BBC, AMSTRAD all models, ATARI, and MSX computers and now ATARI ST. ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too. HIRE PRICES from only .00 INC. P&P. 20% DISCOUNT off all purchase software. LIFE MEMBERSHIP .00. Hire your first title FOC. FREE CATALOGUE FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given) ALL GAMES manufactured ORIGINALS with full documentation. LARGE DISCOUNTS ON ALL PURCHASES for members. UP TO 65% OFF software, regular sales lists sent to all members Full computerised system keeps track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with experienced staff who know what the word service means. 9 99699 5.98 6.50 9.95 8.95 895 695 FXOLON DE 9.995.95 995 895 995 695 SPECTRUM 995 596 TEMPLE OF DOOM 9.996.96 HYBRID 895 6.50 ROAD RUNNER 995 695 ACE 2 95 6.50 NINA HAMSTER 95595 BUBBLE BORRLE 715 STRKE EAGLE 141795 TEMPLE OF ASP 1795 295 1796 TEMPLE OF DOOM O LEATHER SODESSES 295 2396 HYBRD 12 SPELLBREAKER 296 2395 ROAD RUNNER D1 206 17.95 CENTURIONS D2 ULTIMAI 24.95 17.95 GUADAL CANAL D1 WORLD GAMES 24.95 1750 STARFOX 02 MECA APOCALYPSE D2 ATARIST BLITZKRIEG 01 2495 17.95 BUBBLE BONALE D2 1995 13.95 SOLOMONS KEY 01 METRD CROSS 249517 95 BUD OF THIEVES 24517.95 DEATH WISH 25 1796 TT R22 TAIPAN JUPITER PROBE 2495 1795 SATTLE SHIPS 01 2495 17956 PAK VOL 2 D1 STAR GLIDER 2017 95 CATCH 23 02 WARZONE 249617.95 PIRATES 24.95 1795 REBOUNDER HALLYHOD 29 952395 ACE2 01 WISHORINGER 1995 1395 STAR PAWS HUMAN TOROK 1999 3.95 STREET WISE 02 9.95 6.96 GAME OVER 795550 995 8.95 JET BOYS 995 695 FLUNKY 995 895 Send large S.A.E. now for free catalogue. NATIONAL COMPUTER LIBRARY 1 Walkers Road, North Moons Moat, Redditch 139B 9HE 0527 591450 9.95 696 CENTURIONS 995 595 STAR FOX 9.95 695 SIDE WISE 5.95 450 TRAIDOON 895 650 SANOKOK KNIGHTS 799550 NAME ADDRESS ... STRP POKER SILENT SERVICE 795 895 5.50 6.50 IMPLOSION KENNEDY APPROACH GOLDEN PATH FAIRY TALE 2495 1795 1495 10.50 996 36.95 AMSTRAD TEMPLE OF DOOM 01 999 6.99 JACK NIPPER 7.995.50 COMPUTER MODEL ............ WE ALSO STOCK SOFTWARE FOR ALL TYPES OF COMPUTERS PLEASE SEND FOR OUR LATEST LIST INCLUDE A LARGE SAE GAMES NOT YET RELEASED WILL BE SENT ON DAY OF RELEASE ANY TITLE THAT YOU REQUIRE WHICH IS NOT ON OUR LIST THEN RING US NOW POST & PACKING FREE EXCEPT OVERSEAS PLEASE ADD EL CHEQUES ETC PAYABLE TO SLIP-A-DISC "


"DURELL DURELL DURELL DURL cha DURELLE TROUBLE TAILS NEW Spectrum Only .95 DURELL R.R.P. .95 SABOTEUR! 4 Smash Hits In one pack for any SPECTRUM DUR SPECTRUM Ar Anger SURELE DURELL SIGMA NEW .95 BIG 4 vol. BIG 4 VOLUME II RRP 9.95 Spectrum Commodore 64 Amstrad CPC Available September 21st SAME PRICE! Commodore and Amstrad DISKS 9.95 From leading stores, or send cheques and postal orders to Durell Sales Dept, Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton, TAI 4AB. Give your name, address, game required, computer type, and whether for disk or cassette. Order by Credit card phone 0823-252193 for our 24 hour ordering service by credit card (BARCLAY CARD visa and ACCESS mastercard). "


"Free with the awesome November issue of C+VG st The Thundercats COMPUTER +VIDEO games tape! . While the other mean minded magazines ask you for more money when they stick a tape on the front C+VG gives you a tape of a playable game absolutely FREE! e next Month . On our free tape you'll find playable demos of Elite's latest smash THUNDERCATS for the Spectrum, Amstrad and Commodore 64/128. You'll be able to play through the FIRST LEVEL of the game which will have you on the edge of your seat! Inside the power packed issue we'll also have a special Thundercats cartoon strip, based on the game, plus some extra special competitions! . It's an awesome gift which ONLY C+VG can offer -SO don't fail to buy November's C+VG, on sale OCTOBER 15TH! STILL ONLY  Game of the Month Druid ll gets the C+VG Games Players Guide treatment in November's issue. Hints on tips on this magical game straight from the programmer's mouth! Have you got the Right Stuff? Find out as we take a supersonic trip into the stratosphere with none other than ace jet pilot Chuck Veager. C+VG-faster than the speed of light! PLUS: Anything else we can squeeze in!  All items correct at time of going to press Want to be a beach bum? Then enter our stylish California Games competition. Win a whole kitbag full of sports goodies in the next super-fit issue of C+VG! Demg I PLUS: All the hottest news from the Atari ST and Amiga games scene PLUS: All the latest from the including a look wacky world of games consoles at Nemesis ll. Demand for this extra special issue of C+VG is I bound to be high-so to avoid disappointment and possible violence in your local paper shop 1 why not reserve a copy with your local newsagent TODAY using the form below. You I know it makes sense! 1 Dear Mr Newsagent, PLEASE RESERVE ME A COPY OF THE NOVEMBER ISSUE OF COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES! 1 Name Address "


"MEAN A one or two player arcade game for the Commodore 64/128 that will 'captivate' even the most experienced gamesman The mutant federation and the enclave cities are locked in struggle. Your father the mutant leader has been captured, you must race your evil cousin, who would be King, through the Mazeways against the dangers they hold. COMMODORE 64/128 Cassette .95 COMMODORE 64/128 Disc .95 This is one Mean City. Victory House, Leicester Place, London WC2H 7NB You can obtain your copy of Mean City direct from Quicksilva Post and packaging FREE!!! Write now and send with a cheque or postal order to: Quicksilva, Unit 1, Conlon Development, Water Lane, Darwen, Lancs. BB3 2ET. Name.. Address Town or Phone: 01-439 0666 our Credit Card Hotline "


"MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS THE CLASSIC MERCENARY LWOAKES SPECTRUM Salomons Key 6.95 Living Daylights 01 Army Moves..... 5.95 Deathwish 5.95 Warship OK Only 5.95 Carrier Force DK Only 6.95 Ultima IV OK Only on Wernors 5.95 5.95 Accolades Coma Dk only 5.95 Dehwish1 6.95 Street Basketball 1... 5.95 Street Baseball 01. 7.95 Revs Plus 03...... 5 Hit Pak Ele) 5.95 Gettysburg Dk only Aliens US Comp. 7.95 Battleships 5 Bariecruiser blnl. Bismarck 7.95 Centurians 6.95 Ultimal Ok only.... 7.95 Footbal Director Win Bal 48/6.95 128/7.95 Carmen S Mungo Ok only.. Funky 7.95 Sur Paws... 5.95 Rebel Chickamaua Dk only. Arkanoid Enduro Racer 7.95 implosion.... 6.95 Last Mission 11 Head over Heels 5.95 Sur Games Il. 7.95 Mask D1 Renegade 5.95 Hit Pack Vol 2 ...7.95 Battleships 01. .7.95 Bangkok Knights ... ... 5.95 Hybrid D1... Zyras ... 5.95 Captain Courageous..............6.95 Bangkok Knights 01... Wid Class L'board 7.95 Classics ........6.95 Hit Pack Vol 2 D1 Starfox.... 595 let Boys..... .....95 Indiana Jones D1... Trio (Hit Pack) .......... 5.95 Football Director ..........6.95 Jack The Nipper il 01 Tank ...5.95 COMMODORE 64 B2401 Int. Events........................5.95 Enduro Races D1... 7.95 Moebius Dk only.... Game Over ....5.95 Subbattle 01.. ... 7.95 Guadal Canal Of... Micronaut One 7.95 Killed Until Dead 01. 7.95 Centurians D1 Survivor... ....... 6.95 Head Over Heels .............. .6.95 Side Wize D3 Armageddon Man 10.95 Last Ninja 01. .7.95 implosion D1 Living Daylights... 7.95 Apache Gunship D4... 12.95 Trantor 03... 5.95 Tal Pan 6.95 Mega Apocalypse 03 Indiana Jones...... 5.95 Broadside Dk only. ... 20.95 Deceptor 01 MASK 5.95 Page Grenadier Drony..... 20.95 Salomons Key D1 Super Sprint 7.95 Fighter Command Dk only..... 25.95 03.... High Frontier 5.95 Barbara 03 7.95 Jude De Jack The Nipper il 5.95 Wiball D3 6.95 The Double Judo Death 7.95 Roadrunner 1.. 5.05 Rebound 01 5.95 Wargamescon Set Dk only. 17.99 Rebel 7.95 Colonial Quest Dk only... 17.50 Caifomia Games 01 Yog Bear 7.95 Murder on the Atlantic D4 ... 12.95 Star Paws 03 7.95 Words Leaderboard 01 7.95 Elon 03 Practical Fighter......... ...7.95 5 Epics (Epya) 01...... 7.95 Punky 01 6.95 Bubble Bobble 03 Mission 6.95 Game Over 5.95 Super Serie 1 The Double ... 12.95 Barbury Coast Dk only Convoy Raider........... ...5.95 Auto Duel DK Only ..... 17.50 Renegade 3... Kids Play .... 7.95 Defender of Crown DK Only... 12.95 G-Coach All Stars 03... Postage included UK. Please state which micro. Fast service. Send cheque PO ta: MEGASAVE Dept CVG 49 Sutherland Street, Victoria London SW1 V4JX MAIL ORDER ONLY: Send for FREE list Amstrad, C16, MSX, Atari ST Commodore Spectrum. D-Disks Available: D1 af .95, 03 at 10.95, D4 at .50, D5 at .95 142 ALCESTER ROAD BIRMINGHAM B13 BHS 021-449 9516 CONVERSION BY DR. DAVID AUBREY-JONES ATARI 400/600/800XL/ST SOFTWARE We have all a round selection of disks. Cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE Apply now and hire your first four games free Around 1000 different originale s For details and large stamp addressed anvelope or telephone evenings Tpm-10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES Atari 5205STM 9345.90 post free 10 free disks FREE MEMBERSHIP!! Hire CBM64, Spectrum, Amstrad, C16, BBC Electron, Vix-20, Amstrad, Atari software Send 2 x 18p stamps for your hire kit. Computersoft, PO Box 20, North PDO, Nottingham NG5 2EE (Please state which machine) THE NOTTINGHAM SOFTWARE SWAP CLUB Free membership to owners of Spectrum, CM64. Amstrad BBC, Atari XL OF ST. For Details Send A SAE. TO N.S.S.C., 27 COLVILLE TERRANCE, NOTTIGHAM NG1 4HL Antic and Analog magazines BEST QUALITY DISCS Memorex S9700 Discs 10 for 13.95 pr. Unlabeled S S S DO Discs 1 for Unlabeled S S.SOD Disc 25 for $22.95 p.1. Unlabelled SS.OD Disc 50 for $22.9 p.. Memorex 3 D se Botes of 10 SS200 120.951 Un beled 312 5700 DO 10 for 19.95 p. Atari 520 STM w 12 Megabyte Drive 44900 + 23 discs Happy enhancement for the 1050 Drive with revision 7. 139.post tree GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB DEPT. C+VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thornex Close, Sunderland SR3 4PD. Tel: (091) 5286351. WANTED! ATARI ST ORIGINAL SOFTWARE If you have any unwanted, original, commercialised Atari ST programs that you want to sell, ring Dave for cash offers on: 0242 674960 CLASSIFIEDS THE COMPUTER SOFTWARE EXCHANGE MATRIX HIRE The cheapest way to play them all Top games titles for Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad. Please state system Details from: Matrix Leisure Club 271 Stanstead Road, Bishop's Stortford, Herts CM23 2BT USED HARDWARE Spectrum 48K  Spectrum +  Spectrum 128K 79 Spectrum + 2  Commodore 64  Others: Please phone A wide range of peripherals always in stock. Please phone for prices etc. USED SOFTWARE BARGAIN PACKS (Spec & 64) 10 Different io 20 Different  Please state machine when ordering State preferences (Arcade, Adventure, Mix ) Send a list of your own collection so we know what not to Want to swap the software you no longer use. If you own a CBM64, or AMSTRAD and would be interested in joining. For free membership and club magazine send large s.a.e. to: C.S.E.(V) 8 Poplar Croft, Bramley, Leeds, LS13 4SX UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64 Send s.a.e. for fast response and details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG), 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield $5 9GB REPAIRS. SPECTRUM  OTHERS: PHONE All our used products are in good to excellent condition and include a 3 month warranty. Send cheques PO's to: Software City (CV) 173 Mansfield Road, Nottingham NG1 3FR Telephone (0602) 410493 Allow 10 days for delivery. Overseas Add 5 "


"e CBM 64/128 Spec 48/128 BBC \"MR. DISK\" Someone in Atari 800 XL Atari ST AMS MSX FREE GIFTS SOFTWARE/HARDWARE PERIPHERALS FOR ALL LEADING MAKES OF COMPUTERS PRIZE DRAWS AT LOW LOW PRICES WRITE OR PHONE FOR YOUR FREE CATALOGUE NOW!! (STATE MC) 11-12 THREE SHIRES OAK ROAD, BEARWOOD, WARLEY, WEST MIDS, B67 5BA. PHONE NO: 021 420 1360 COMPUTER ANGLE The leading 16 bit Software/Hardware dealer NOW IN STOCK AMIGA A500 With free Software including free modulator, mouse mat, Starterkit and deluxe paint, all for the amazing price of .00 inc VAT ALSO IN STOCK ATARI STEM 520 with free software for .00 inc VAT Amiga Software Atari Software Our Price Our Price Marble Madness 24.00 Goldrunner 21.95 Karate Kid Il 20.95 Karate Kid II 20.95 Amiga Karate 18.00 Star Trek 14.95 7 Cities of Gold 24.00 Leaderboard 20.95 Barbarian 20.90 Barbarian 20.95 Alien Fires 24.00 ST Karate 16.00 Uninvited 24.00 Alternate Reality 20.00 Deja-vu 24.00 International Karate 18.00 Guild of Thieves 19.95 Guild of Thieves 19.95 The Pawn 19.95 The Pawn 19.95 Gauntlet 18.95 Gauntlet 18.95 Road Runner 19.95 Road Runner 19.95 Archon 24.00 Gato 22.95 Archon 11 24.00 Enduro Racer 19.95 Tai Pan 11.50 Tai Pan 11.50 Artic Fox 24.00 Silent Service 19.95 Deep Space 27.00 Deep Space 27.00 Swooper 16.00 Karate Master 12.95 Flight Sim 11 42.00 Flight Sim Il 42.00 Fairy Tale 45.00 MGT 19.95 Cinema Ware Software SDI 26.00 Sinbad throne of Falcon 26.00 Defender of the Crown 26.00 King of Chicago 26.00 all cities available on Amiga SDI available on Atari Infocom adventures in stock. American Software available. Full range of business products backup utilities. Commodore 64s and software in stock. For price lists and information ring Harlow (0279) 639567 Cheques postal orders made payable to: Computer Angle Unit A, 31 Amherst Lodge, Bramble Rise, Hodings Road Harlow, Essex CM20 1EE TELE-GAMES IN ARADATIORE GAMESSTM Europe's Largest Stock Of Video Games & Cartridges 100s of cartridges for Nintendo CBS COSESA INSER SET ATARI SPECIAL PRICE 2600 INTELLIVISION, .95* with 2 FREE GAMES WICO JOYSTICK DONKEY KONG and Il .95 SMURF ...STOP PRESS..... 2 PLUS 2 NEW COLECO Nintendo .00 GAMES ARRIVING SOON IN STOCK NOW P&P Plus .00 P&P (Trade welcome) Send for lists (state make of game) to TELEGAMES, WIGSTON, LEICESTER, LES 1TE (0533-880445) FOR DAUTODID SOFTWARE ADVERTISEMENT INDEX Activision ..... 6,7,16,17,116,117,125,127 Argus... Ariolasoft...........................47,54,65,115 Arcade International... 143 58888888888888 Mastertronic......... 26,136,153 Microprose....... 35,53,106,118,121.124 133,139 Mirrorsoft. Midland Games Lib.................. Mr Disc .161 Music by Mail. 138 108 Cascade.................................... 41,103 Castle Computers.......... Charwood. C.S.S. Computer Angle....... Compumart.. CRL 156     National Comp. Lib. Novagen Norasoft.... 160 ...156 Ocean........OBC,31,62,112,130,145 Domark... Durrell. Dynamics Marketing  60,61 60 HIGH STREET HANHAM BRISTOL BS15 3DR TEL: (0272) 604130 24 HOUR ANSWER PHONE FOR ALL QUERIES ATARI ST PRICE PRICE PRICE PRICE TRAILBLAZER ARBALL 24.95 19.00 ULTIMA HII ADVANCED ART STUDIO VAGUS GAMBLER ARKANOID TAI PAN BARBARIAN Pagnosis) WINTER GAMES BOULDERDAH CON SET WORLD GAMES BAAN COCHS FOOTBALL BAG PAYFA 00 221B BAKER ST CHAMPION WRESTLING DEATHSTRIKE AUTO DUEL OUTCAST EDEN BULES LURKING HORROR EXTRAVAGANZA 12.95 10.50 FLEET ST PUBLISHER 115 00 90.00 AMIGA FLIGHT SIMI 49.95 39.95 FLIGHT SIM 1 SCENERY DISK 7 29.99 26.50 ADV CONSTRUCTION SET 29.96 24 50 G.FL CHAMP FOOTBALL 24.95 19.00 ALIEN FIRES 29.95 24 50 CAUNTLET BARBARIAN GOLDEN PATH BORROWED TIME 95 19.00 DEFENDER O CROWN GE OF THEVES HADES NEBULA 19.95 15.50 DEMOLITION 79.95 70.00 FAIRY TALE HOLLYWOOD HIJINX 29.99 24.50 FLIGHT SIMI JUPITER PROBE 1495 12.50 GRANDSLAM TENNIS KARATE KOT 24.95 19.00 GUILD OF THIEVES 24.95 19.00 KINGS OUEST 29.95 24.00 HITCHHIKERS GUIDE 29.99 24.50 LEADERBOARD 24.95 19.00 HOLLYWO00 HIJINX LEADERBOARD TOURNAMENT 9.95 8.25 JEWELS OF DARKNESS 19.95 15.00 KNIGHT ORC 19.95 16. KARATE KID II MACADAM BUMPER 2495 19.00 KNIGHT ORC MEAN 18 LEADERBOARD MERCENARY COMPENDIUM VETROCROSS LEATHER GODDESS 9.95 8.25 MARBLE MADNESS PASSENGERS IN WIND MINDSHADOW PHANTASIE PIRATES OF THE BARBARY COAST PORTAL PLUTOS 14.95 12.00 SILENT SERVICE PROCOPY 1.41 SINRAD PRO SOUND DESIGNER STARGLIDER PROHIBITION STATION FALL ROAD RUNNER SONIY SILENT SERVICE THE PAWN SECONDREAMS ULTIMA SKYFOX ST REPLAY WINTER GAMES STARGLEDER WORLD GAMES STATIONFALL SPACE BATTLE STRIKE FORGE HARRIER BRIAN CLOUGH'S FOOTBALL SUB BATTLE SIM 24,95 19.00 DELUX PAINT 2 149.95 120.00 19.95 17.00 24,95 19.00 SOFTWARE AVAILABLE FOR MOST SYSTEMS TIME RANDT 29.95 24 50 PLEASE CALL OR WRITE A prices are inclusive of VAT and delivery inside the UK Please make the PO payable to lightspeed Software al orders despatched with 24 hours, please allow 7 days Palace Piranha... Postronix... Psygnosis............. .............. Elite Electronic Arts E&J Software Euromax 2,3,117 ...48.49 ..143 Rainbird... ... 131 13.19.29 Firebird Future League 222X2R&RAZAR Silica Shop. Shekhana Strategic + ...... Supersoft Systems Architects ................. G-Ten... Gremlin...... .......... Incentive Thalamus. Telegames TTT Computer Supplies ...161 KJC Games...................... Konami US Gold..... 23,50,69,97,100,109,127 ...52 Lightspeed..... Logic Sales... Logotron... Mailsoft... ..68 156 Verran... Virgin Worldwide "


"C+VG's Hot Gossiper Tony Takoushl has the biggest eyes, nose and mighty mouth in computer games. He sees all, hears all and he then shouts about it each month exclusively in your favourite computer mag. So read on for the man who shoots from the lip at the good, the bad and the ugly in the software world. ust recently there has been fan increase in the number of ads which feature various parts of women's bodies. There is a time and place for everything. I pick up computer magazines to read about computers and games and NOT to have huge breasts thrust at me! What is even stranger is just WHY this has been happening... There was a time, a few years ago, when the now defunct mag, Home Computing Weekly, started to display models on its cover holding computer peripherals. This did lead to protests and the idea was dropped. Mark Cale of System Three probably has the dubious honour of the worst sexual exploitation with his exploits at the PCW Show of too suggestive... Recently this sort of exploitation has increased with the ads getting even more daring; the one for Game Over really did take it to the extreme. Ocean was not the only one, Mirrorsoft with its Defender of the Crown and Palace with its promo of Barbarian with a raunchy cover featuring Maria Whittaker also got in on the act. Of course it does get the game coverage for better or worse, all software companies are allowed artistic license to plug their games, it really is just a matter of degree. In our society sex is generally acknowledged as a selling point, but being honest, to my mind crude sexual artwork has NO PLACE in computer games. ST WARS 1985, he was due to release a be described as \"very game called Twister Mother physical\" to dance on his of Harlots, and hired a dance stand. The girls were banned troupe of girls that could only eventually as it was all a little hree dimensional games Well it plays well but the sequence. You now find are in this monthl After animation gets real slow real yourself in the Asteroid Field having experienced the fast as the action hots up. zapping asteroids and tielatest Novagen offerings There are loads of different fighters coming in from all see this issue I now scenes to try and some of sides. have to try and put another them work well with To get to the Space Assault 3-D game into perspective. reasonably fast graphics, you have to fly through a It's called ST Wars and it sound is boring in the game moving slot in the side of a comes from a US company (but rather nice in the title box, this gives you energy called Miles Computing sequence of the start of the and pressing H will Inc. game). hyperspace you to the next It's based on three I will give you a smattering scenarios from the Star Wars of some of the better scenes The next tasty item is the film trilogy in the game, you start by Surface Mission, here you The game boasts nine trying to get your man to his have to blow away the different scenes, Asteroid fighter through a couple of control towers and avoid Field, Space Assault, Wave corridors and through a missiles launched at you from Attack, Surface Mission, Enter hanger. the ground bases. When you Trench, Enter Tunnels, Control is via the mouse zap the towers they explode Obstacle Room, Power (which works well) and you true to life with bits all over Generator and Exit Starbase. can shift from ground view to the place. Lovely, lovely, \"Enough of these blasted a top down view quite easily. lovely! descriptions what is the When seated in your fighter The Trench Tunnel game like?\" I hear you cry. there is a quick launch sequence is real close to the original Star Wars coin-op, the obstacles are nicely coloured-all in wire frame and you can get a little dizzy if you lose control and start to spin. The last couple of scenes are fun, the obstacle room is exactly that and you have to steer around obstacles-a really strong 3D effect here -and then blow up the power generator, if you manage to do this you leave through the trench again and fly off into space to see the planet explode. The variety of scenes makes this game entertaining, and although it is weak in parts it does generally satisfy. Indeed if you are a fan of the arcade Star Wars games then this is for you. "


"TRAD) LET'S FIGHT!!! with From the Dawn of Time comes a Legendary Warrior to thrill players everywhere.... 4.5 billion years have passed since the earth's creation. Many dominators have ruled in all their glory. But Time, their greatest enemy ultimately, defeated their reign. And now a Dominator's reign begins....Rygar, the Legendary Warrior! A warrior who respects one code and one code alone, the code of combat. Antagonistic gladiators, reptiles, mammals, monsters, creatures of magic...come one, come all come to meet the might of the fearless Rygar and in the words of the immortal warrior LET'S FIGHT! CBM 64/128 SPECTRUM 7 U.S. SCREEN SHOTS FROM ARCADE VERSION. AMSTRAD .99 .99 GOLD .99 .99 .99 U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Cassette Disk Cassette Cassette Disk Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 10000 per per (TECMO\") "


"FEA NYHET! In the knife-edge world of the vigilante here is no place to rest, no time to thinkbut look sharp-there is always time to die! From the city subways to the gangland ghettos you will always encounter the disciples of evil whose mission it is to exterminate the only man on earth who dares to throw down the gauntlet in their path-the Renegade. A breathtaking conversion of the sade hit by SEITE Taito now for your home computer. With all the original play features. PLAY RENEGADE...PLAY MEANS les-G re Licensed from Taito Corp. 1986 Programmed for Amstrad, Spectrum, Commodore by Imagine Software Imagine Software. 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS. Tel: 061 834 3939. Telex: 669977 "

