"Nov   50   675 \" 1982 NOVEMBER 1986 $$4.60 Dm5.50 285pta HFL 6.25 ARRGGHHH IT'S THE + VIDEO t ikation tiket 4 UVALA UPANG THIIIIIIIIIIIII 5th BIRTHDAY ISSUE/FIRELORD PREVIEWED DRACULA REVIEWED/PLAY BY MAIL GAMES GETAFIX OF ASTERIX RAMPAGE HITS THE ARCADES/ TRIVIAL PURSUITS THE NEXT GENERATION/FREE ADVENTURE POSTER WIN A VAMPIRE'S HEAD!/CRYSTAL CASTLES REVIEWED/WIN ATARI SMASH HITS "


"HE'S EE Spectrum Amstrad Amstrad Commodore Commodore C16 Cassette Cassette Disc Cassette Disc Cassette .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 HEREI! Scooby Doo in his own Computer Cartoon Mail Order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to Elite, or quote your Credit Card number vis Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands, WS9 8PW. Telephone: (0922) 59165. Telex: 336130 ELITE.G. Fax: (0922) 647359 After months of development he's finally here-Scooby in his own hilarious computer cartoon. Designed and coded by Gargoyle Games, Scooby Doo is a fast-action arcade game that's as funny to watch as it's exciting to play-ScoobyDooby-Doo!! The very best Elite Titles are available at selected branches of: Bee.WHSMITH. Tandy Sorv Menzies WOOLWORTH 100000000 ? SCOOBY Screenshots shown from various machine formats "


"Cassette Cassette .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 Spectrum Amstrad Amstrad Commodore Commodore C16 Disc Cassette Disc Cassette Take a Trip Into The Fantasy Zone redit Mail Order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to Elite, or quote your Credit Card number. VISA Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands, WS9 8PW. Telephone: (0922) 59165. Telex: 336130 ELITE.G. Fax: (0922) 647359 \"The Most Outstanding Coin-Op Game of the Year!! Segam invite you to take a trip to the Fantasy Zone in the fascinating 3D-Action game that set the Coin-Op world alight Steel your nerves, alert your senses and prepare for a thrilling trip into the future. The very best Elite Titles are available at selected branches of: Bob.WHSMITH, Tandy Sohv Menzies WOOLWORTH LA \"Officially Licenced Coin Op Classic\" Screenshots taken from various computer formats "


"FEATURES 18 ALIENS PREVIEW 53 ASTERIX COMPETITION 57 HARRIET'S LAST BATH 70 ADVENTURE POSTER 73 ADVENTURE NEWS 74 ADVENTURE HELPLINE 78 DRACULA REVIEW 81 DRACULA COMPETITION 92 C+VG'S STORY 97 FIVE YEARS OF GAMES 98 FIVE YEARS OF ADVENTURES 107 BIRTHDAY HONOURS 105 FIVE YEARS OF COMPUTERS 110 FIRELORD PREVIEW 114 EXTRA BITS 122 ARCADE ACTION 125 PLAY BY MAIL 126 ATARI SMASH HITS COMPETITION 129 THE BUGHUNTERS 135 PEN-PALS 136 MAILBAG 138 NEXT MONTH THE ALIENS/P18 CONTENTS NEWS & REVIEWS DRACULA PREVIEW/P88 22 REVIEWS THIS ISSUE: GAME OF THE MONTH: This issue is Domark's brilliant Trivial Pursuit. C+VG HITS! go to Druid, Trap Door, Deactivators, Dan Dare, Atari Smash Hits, WAR, Conquistador and Nightmare Rally. Plus the best of the rest! 73 ADVENTURE Keith Campbell, rises from the grave to terrify unsuspecting adventurers with a tale that will freeze your soul. Drac's back and thirsting for blood. Rod Pike is the man who is out for the Count. Plus a Vampire competition, news and yet more reviews. 8 NEWS/HOT GOSSIP Are you ready for this! Gauntlet, World Games, Academy, Labyrinth, Judge Dredd, Bazooka Bill, C+VG's Combat Zone Award, Customised Computers, Antiriads, Top Gun, Last Ninja, Sam Cruise. All that AND Tony Takoushi enthuses about Crystal Castles and Montezuma's Revenge! A.R./REVIEWS/P36 "


"VE TEAM FROM TOP L PA SE M, CHRIS, KEITHLESLY RITA AND GRAIG INSIDE STORY SCOOBY SCOOBY DOO/P8  Is it really five whole years since C+VG took its first faltering steps into the brave new world of computer gaming? Yup, sure is! C+VG came into being at around the same time as the ZX81 was revolutionising home entertainment. So this issue we've decided to have a bit of a celebration with a bunch of fifth birthday features. Keith Campbell, the only writer featured in that very first issue who is still going strong today, looks at adventures through the ages. Our Happy Hacker, Robert Schifreen, brings you a look at the five ages of computers, subtitled These You Have Loathed. There's our own Birthday Honours for long serving software people and our first editor brings you C+VG's story how it all began. All that and a preview of the game of the mega-movie ALIENS. Plus a preview of C+VG programmer of the Year, Steve Crow's latest called Firelord. Dracula rises from the grave to terrorise adventurers thanks to Rod Pike-the game is reviewed and there's a competition from beyond the grave. There's a special Spectrum listing from no less a person than Steve \"Dragontore\" Turner's dad! It's a murder mystery and there's a special tape offer as well. All this and much more inside your special fifth birthday issue of C+VG. Don't miss out on the party... Menu Home | AHEUM BON, VOYONS VOIE DE CE CÔTÉ-LA! EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John DESIGN Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Paul Coppins Steve Donoghue AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANTS Tony Takoushi PUBLICITY Marcus Rich ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Garry Williams ADVERTISEMENT EXECUTIVE Katherine Lee AD PRODUCTION Debble Pearson PUBLISHER Rita Lewis COVER Gary Ward OHI C'EST LUIN VITE, DE LA CLASSE DU STYLE! LE STYLE INCOGNITO-PASSE PARTOUT INSP'R GADGET/P8 853 SED EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222 July-December 98,258 DAELU DLHOREC. O setence Sport Geog. Clientment RIWALPURSUIT ABC RAMPAGE/P22 "


"Sinclair TRUE 2 3 Good come W GRAPH <RUN CODE -LOAD H 2 cro  ENTER . os Sur CAPS SHIFT MONSTER MEM "


"GET YOUR HANDS ON THE NEW SINCLAIR 128K+2. BEFORE EVERYBODY ELSE DOES. 23K ZX Spectrum +2 The new 128K ZX Spectrum +2 is more than just a monster memory. It's the ultimate family computer. With a built-in datacorder for easier loading, superb graphics capability, two joystick ports, a proper typewriter keyboard and more games available than you can shake a joystick at (well over 1000 software titles, in fact) Better get your hands on the new 128K ZX Spectrum +2 soon. Before they do. * MORY MONSTER VALUE To: Sinclair, P.O.Box 462, Brentwood, Essex C14 4ES. Please send me more information about the Sinclair 128K ZX Spectrum +2. Name Address CVGI Available from: Allders, Boots, Clydesdale, Comet, Connect, Co-op, Currys, Dixons, Electric Supreme, Laskys, John Lewis, John Menzies, Power City Rumbelows, Ultimate, WH Smith, Wigfalls, and good independent stores. We recommend Sinclair Quality Control Software. "


"Mike Singleton, brains behind many new projects, is working on another new idea, this time for Melbourne House. Called Throne of Fire this will be an original one or two player game. I have a screen display similar to Spy Vs Spy, in that there will be a split screen effect with lots going on in all the windows. The game will be completely mappable and will be a real mix of arcade/strategy and adventure in true Singleton fashion. The game is being developed on the 64 with Spectrum and Amstrad versions on the cards. XOXOXO BEN. AAH In all the computer rooms in all ruthless Cy-kill, the reckless Quite simply, this is brilliant. the world, you had to come into Crasher, the cold-blooded Start queuing at your nearest mine. And it looks like I'm going to Cop-Tur and the Godzilla of software emporium right now love ya, kid. Gobots, Zod. to make sure you get a copy. Both games should be released Palace Software describes The in December for the CBM 64/128, Sacred Armour of Antiriad as Spectrum and Amstrad. \"'visually stunning.\" Normally the praise heaped on games by thier creators is grossly exaggerated. However, At last a dragon makes good. methinks, Palace could be Thanatos, Durell's latest accused of understatement. Spectrum release, has a dragon as The game plot is as follows. The year is 2086 and the world the good guy. is on the brink of collapse. Here's a look at what promises Disarmament talks have broken to be an excellent private eye down. Troops are mobilised game on the Spectrum from And then the enevitable Microsphere, the people who happens a holocaust and the brought you the \"Skool\" games. planet is plunged into a nuclear Contact Sam Cruise draws winter for hundreds of years. its inspiration from old black and After several centuries a new race has emerged on earth. white private investigator movies. They are tough strong and We've only seem a scrolling peaceful until alien tyrants demo of the game so it's impossible conquer them and set them to to say how well the game plays. work, ruling this beleagured But it looks excellent and will people from inside a volcano. probably sell for .95. A champion is chosen from And for fans of the \"Skool\" the people Tal. To save his games, watch out at Christmas. people he must find the Legendary Sacred Armour of Antiriad and use it to destroy the aliens deep inside their volcano. The \"sacred armour\" is, in fact an anti-radiation combat suit which has survived from the old days before the nuclear disaster. Meet David Renwick, the proud owner of C+VG's customised Spectrum. David entered our customised computer comp and his design was picked out as the winner by artist Steinar Lund. Steinar translated David's design onto the C+VG Spectrum and presented him with the real thing at the recent Personal Computer World Show. David, from Hornchurch in Essex, is a bit of an artist himself and enjoys messing around with computer graphics. You must control the dragon This here's Breakthru, the Thanatos in a battle against the next no-nonsense bit of arcade evil forces of the underworld. He action from U.S. Gold and must fly, swim, walk and burn his Data East. It's based on the way across seas, countryside, break into three castles of doom rescue an enchantress, while Ariolasoft is indulging a spot fighting off hordes of monsters. of cartoon capers with two of its next releases The Centurions and The Challenge of the Gobots, Watch out for the next based on the Hanna-Barbera generation of Trivial Pursuit! shows. Following on from the The Centurions are a considerable success of the coin-op machine of the same name supreme unit of three men, made original TP, Domark will be and is a sort of Commando on all powerfull by \"Exoframes\" onto releasing the Young Players edition wheels. Your mission is to retrieve a which they attach advanced very soon. Just like the original revolutionary fighter which has assault weapons. board game Domark plan to been captured by the enemy and is Together they must fight the evil release several different editions of hidden 400 miles behind their Doc Terror and his sidekick thug TP-as promised in our preview a lines. You are driving the world's Hacker, and save the world from couple of issues ago. Thanks to most sophisticated armed vehicle their terrible hands. ODE's innovative multi-load system equiped with Rambo-style In The Challenge of the which enables one tape to carry armament. Gobots, renegade forces on the code for several different Breakthru is coming soon for planet Gobotron have been computers. Watch out for the the 64, Amstrad and Spectrum on forced to flee. They are led by the future TP generations! tape and disk at the normal prices. "


"First came Commando, then A Lord of the Rings arcade They claim Bugsy will be the Gal-Corp Academy which trains there was Rambo and Green game? Whispers picked up by definitive criminal rabbit story. would-be space aces by sending Beret. Now meet Bazooka C+VG spies relate tales of such a The gameplay of this graphic them to tough missions anywhere Bill, the two-fisted hero of the creature being dreamt up by adventure is an entire criminal in the galaxy. game of the same name. Tolkien's number one fan Mike career in miniature, in which you The completely finished version 64 owners should sharpen up Singleton in conjunction with must help Bugsy work his way up should have an amazing 20-yes their joystick skills now! BB will be Melbourne House. from petty crime to the managerial 201 --different missions. out on the new Arcade label at Interesting... levels of criminal mastermindship. .95. Bugsy will be published by CRL, price .95 Thought you'd seen all the daft Inspector Gadget is the names people think up for new hero of a French cartoon series graphic techniques? Wrong! Here which many of you have probably Melbourne House will be comes Mechavision, a new seen on TV here already. Now he's laying down the low in no scrolling 3D style from been transformed into a computer uncertain fashion with the release programmer Mev Ding for his form by Melbourne House of their long awaited Judge game called Prodigy. The Inspector is a real bungler, Dredd game. The cult comic Macabre mechlabs infested with often saved from disaster by his character has been long overdue dog or cat. He has a hat full of on the games scene and this gadgets hence the name-like Australian team has come up with DOLLS telephones, helicopter rotors, and a fast and furious bit of arcade such like. The game comes in three action well suited to the style of the parts and features big cartoon style character from 2000AD. graphics. It's set in the circus which The game is set in Mega-City a Mad Professor type is using as One and it's Dredd's job to clean cover for his plan to destroy the up the streets. Armed with his world. But in the true spirit of deadly Lawgiver he patrols the city showbusiness the show must go on -picking up messages from the and Gadget has to keep the Hall of Justice which tell him where genetic horrors hinder Solo, a synthetic man, and Nejo a human circus going as well as thwarting the crime is telling place. The game B the Prof's mad plan. Gadget hits is a sort of cross between Green baby, as they fight their way to the 64 in November. Beret and Mission AD with freedom through the nightmare excellent graphics and promising zones -ice, fire, tech and vegie gameplay. Watch for the 64 created by Wardlock the machine version of the game coming soon. sorcerer to house his ghastly flesh experiments, the Globenels and Bloberites. Pete Cooke's eagerly Solo has to look after Nejo, awaited sequel -or is it prequel? cleaning, feeding and protecting to the amazing Tau Ceti is h im as they make their way coming your way extremely through intelligent mazes, quickly. Pete has almost completed teleporters, strange geometric the game and gave C+VG's buildings and uncanny vegetation Guess who is about to blow in spies a sneak peek at the recent created by Wardlock, who, as a Graphically, Antiriad is from the Windy City? Bugsy Personal Computer World machine being, is malevolent exquisite. It's the tiny attention that's who. He's a blue rabbit trying Show. toward organic life. Prodigy to detail the amazes. For to build himself a nice little career It's called Academy and as will be released in September on instance, the stonework in one in organised crime in the 1920s. we told you ages ago -the idea the Electric Dreams label for of the screen shots. On a And the people behind this bit of behind the game is to become a the Spectrum 48K/128K Amstrad television it's great but seen on bunny business are those really ace Skimmer pilot. To do this and Commodore 64/128 at a monitor it's a work of art. wonderful ladies from St Bride's... you have to pass through the regular prices! Mark \"Twister\" Cale, a C+VG's spies got a sneak peek favourite with many C+VG at Gauntlet at U.S. Gold's regulars, has announced a new plush new HQ. The Commodore game which is \"unlike anything yet and Amstrad versions look brilliant seen on computer\". Which could as you can see from our screen shots. be like many of System 3's The Amstrad version was games, many of which have yet to actually playable at the time of our be seen on computer. Still, it's visit--and it's awesomely called Dominator and features addictive right from the time you the Silicon Slayers, whoever they touch the joystick. A sure fire might be. Other games \"on the Christmas number one in the way\" from Mr Cole's outfit are said making we confidently predict to be Bangkok Knights and We also caught a glimpse of the The Last Ninja. Meanwhile Atari ST version of the game Andromeda Software, has under development and as you'd done an amazing job on the ST expect it's enough to make you go version of International out and buy an ST for. Karate. Watch out for our special If you want to buy your little Gauntlet Games Players Guide brother or best friend a Christmas coming your way next issue and pressie, then you couldn't do any FOOD keep an eye on the shelves for the better than buying US Gold's arrival of the game itself en newie World Games December 1st. The Atari St version will be Gauntlet will face a tough released in October at a price of challenge from Electric .99 and the Commodore will Dreams' Dandy the follow in November at .99 or Spectrum version of this is looking .99. The game will also be good released on the Spectrum. Sport 499 "


"TM Martin Walker, he of Back to Hellow me old pals, me old the Future and Rupert fame, is beauties, welcome to an everyday set to release his latest game on the story of computer folk. Electric Dreams label next C+VG's increasingly rustic month. Called Chameleon it has editor Tim Metcalfe achieves a an original theme. Chameleon lifetime's ambition by passing a few possesses the ability to align his moments with Jack Wolley and power to the forces of nature. Eddie Grundy, two of the stars The game is set in sixteen realms, from The Archers, the world's each of which is ruled by one of longest running radio serial. the four elements, these give 100 Jack and Eddie-actors screens of scrolling landscape, Arnold Peters and Trevor featuring 3D adverseries. Harrison -were at the show to Scheduled for promote Mosaic's new game based on the radio serial. The text for the game has been written by the Archers scriptwriting team and the program written by Level 9. The Archers will be available . on the Spectrum, Commodore 64, Amstrad, Atari and MSX, prices ranging from .95 to .95. release in November, Chameleon will ba available for the commodore 64/128 cassette (.99) and disk (.99). Versions for Amstrad and Spectrum coming soon. Meet Jason Holland and Lee Hazeldine Big Red's number one fans. Jason actually painted Big Red on his bedroom wall-as you can see from our picture! Jason, left, is 15 and loves the Bug Hunters but it was 13year-old Lee, right, who first told us about Jason's artistic endeavours. Both are proud owners of a special C+VG Big Red t-shirt-and we're thinking of asking Jason to do us a lifesize mural of old Red on the outside of C+VG Central here in London. Start saving up for the paint Jason... saline kom is a trademark of Alan Corp Star Randers The F-14 Tomcat jet costs $36 million, can climb to 30,000 feet in just 60 seconds and cruises along at twice the speed of sound with Tarzan,-Martech's new seven tons of weaponry on board. arcade combat adventure is due A mean machine by anyone's for release in November standards. Any you could find Based on the hero created by yourself in the cockpit of one of Edgar Rice Burroughs, Tarzan is these high-tech aircraft courtesy of set in the sprawling jungles of Ocean. They are bringing out a Africa, the game centres on his game based on the movie called quest for Jane, his mate, who has Top Gun which went down big in been kidnapped by hostile natives. the states and is soon to be Tarzan will be simultaneously released over here. The film tells released on the Spectrum 48/128, the story of top U.S. Navy pilots Commodore 64/128, Amstrad training to be super-pilots! 464/664/6128, BBC 'B'. Star Raiders II The Great Galactic Adventure Continues Computer + Video Games reaches the parts other magazines can't all over the world! We've just been given a World Wide Press award by Combat Zone, the outdoor war and strategy team game, which celebrated its first birthday recently precious coupons to is Cyborg Offer, CRL, CRL House, 9 King's Yard, London, E152HD. After C+VG featured Combat Zone back in January, they received enquiries not only from this country but also from abraod. Combat Zone's Pete Tyler says: \"It went so far afield. We had people from Holland and Belgium even Australia.\" Other awards went to the best Here's the moment you've been Combat Zone team of the year, waiting for the second coupon organiser of the year and local in our Cyborg free games offer. press award. Thanks to CRL we've got 200 copies of their new Commodore 64 game, Cyborg, to give away for absolutely nothing. All you have to do is collect the two C+VG/Cyborg Coupons. The first was printed in our October issue. Now send the coupons to CRL not to C+VG-and the first 200 to arrive will get a copy of the And just to prove C+VG's selling game, the address to send the power here's a picture of Danes Jan Olsen and Mark Orsten, both 18, who decided to sample the perilous and exciting delights of Combat Zne after reading about the exploits of the C+VG team at this battle recreation game. COMING SOON ON SPECTRUM COMMODORE & AMSTRAD HOME COMPUTERS CYBORG OFFER Name Address. I enclose two Cyborg coupons from C+VG SOFTWARE Electric Dreams Software, 31 Carlton Crescent, Southampton, Hampshire S01 2EW. Tel: (0703) 229694 CYBORG C+VG TOKEN 1 CYBORG "


"NEW CLASSIC TITLES AT -99 from 2-99. FNE ZX Spectrum FLIGHT SIMULATION SPECTRUM SNC Spectru WHEQUERED FLAG MI 2.99 SOFTWAREBY PSION SUD00127 DURELL weekly releases of the best top games new games... A ... re-releases D D available from all good .RETAIL OUTLETS... CODENAME MAT For AK Spectrum by Derek Brewster or order direct from 2-99.CLASSICS. quoting your credit card number, or send a cheque or postal order for .99 (each incl. P+P) made payable to 2-99.CLASSICS Anchor HouseAnchor Road Aldridge-Walsall-West Midlands WS9 BPW "


"5 FUN FILLED GAMES GAMESSI TISTE CARTES Virgin Games presents the third fantastic compilation in the NOW GAMES series...5 best selling full price games on one tape for the price of one full price new one! NOW GAMES 3 is a wide choice of high quality games the whole family can enjoy Available for COMMODORE 64, SPECTRUM 48 and AMSTRAD CPC, NICK FALDO PLAYS THE OPEN Mind Games This beautifully presented simulation features 900 scrolling screens of authentic action over the 18 holes of the Royal St George's course in Sandwich. SORCERY Virgin Games This beautifully designed arcade adventure features great graphics and gameplay as Fransports you to a land where evil must be defeated and the power of good restored CODE NAME MAT II Domark You are the Captain of Centurion Il in this exciting shoot-em-up. Your ship has a range of weapons, shields and a tracking system, but you must decide the best strategy to eliminate the attacking Myon craft. EVERYONE'S A WALLY Mikro-Gen This is a multi-screened arcade adventure featuring excellent cartoon graphics and lots of humour. Use your ingenuity to get the gang working and uncover the combination to the wages safe. VIEW TO A KILL Domark Spectacular 3 part multi-screen arcade adventure based on the James Bond film. There's a car chase around the Eiffel Tower, a rescue from a flaming City Hall and some code-breaking at Silicon Valley. Look out for NOW GAMES and NOW GAMES 2, still the best value around For COMMODORE and SPECTRUM NOW GAMES 3 is available from all good software stores or, if you have difficulty, directly from Virgin Games Please make your cheque or postal order payable to Virgin Games Ltd, Please do not post cash NOW GAMES 3 is .95, please tick the version you require. COMMODORE OSPECTRUM ET AMSTRAD. NOW GAMES 2 is .95 (features: Alt Wolf, Chuckie Egg, Tir Na Nog, Cauldron, World Cup II) COMMODORE ESPECTRUM NOW GAMES is .95 (features: Lords of Midnight, Brian Bloodoxe, Strangeloop. Pyjamorama, Arabian Nights, Falcon Patrol 11 COMMODORE DI SPECTRUM Name Address Virgin Games Ltd, 2/4 Vernon Yord, Portobello Road, London WU12DX "


"and gain access to the lower which wastes valuable time. chambers. You guide your Marble around Your character is Panama Joe metallic cities full of wondrous, and he rumbas around the screen mischievious, and down-right nasty beautifully. He can leap over gaps inhabitants. in platforms, climb up and down Attackers take the form of Black ladders and cross bridges which Marbles. These guys ram you at have the nasty habit of speed and try to knock you off disapperaring! platforms. You get 1000 points for There are many rooms to each every one you lead astray. level and when you have collected Gameplay? Now here I really the right number of keys you can had problems to start with. On progress to the lower depths. certain levels there is only ONE Dangers along the way include way to pass a pathway or an rolling skulls, these also bounce attacker. You do not have any along the platforms and you have leeway in these situations so it is a to slip UNDER them. Raging fires case of do-or-die. (these can be awkward), speedy Ariola told me that there is a spiders (they really move!), SECRET level in Marble vanishing platforms and conveyor Madness! It is called the Water belts that drag you along where Maze and it is devilishly difficult to you don't want to go. get through. Access to it is BY TONY TAKOUSHI In the lower levels you face a restricted to doing (not doing?) a They're here! Two of my all time mixed bag of all the dangers. particular action at a set point. I bet fave raves have finally been When you get to the INVISIBLE no one out there finds it. It you do, licensed for release in the UK. levels you know things are about to let me know as I will personally Crystal Castler--(originally get REAL beastly! congratulate you! an Atari coin-opand There are in fact two Atari The other goody this month is versions of this game. It appears Crystal Castles. It is a faithful that the original Montezuma's copy of the arcade classic best Revenge, called Preliminary described as 3D Pacman. Monty 16K, featured a character Your character roams over called Pedro and he looked many different 3D castles different. collecting gems and bonus I have got my mits on a copy of points from honey pots. Marble Madness for the Crystal Castles has excellent Commorodre 64, but I am having graphics a great title tune and is a terrible time trying to review it. I very, very FAST had better explain ... The Amiga Marble Madness (note I did not use the word Montezuma's Revengea Parker Bros game — have been snapped up by U.S. Gold and Databyte. Crystal Castles was written by a company called Thundervision and it has been Each screen has a title, the first is on the underground software simply called \"Get The Gems\". circuit for the best part of two Here, as with all the screens, you years. version) is immaculate. There is NO have to collect gems scattered over Montezuma's Revenge comparason to any other format. the pathways of different castles. has also been around for the best first the good news, this is the Getting in the way are various part of two years but it was a real McCoy for all Commodore nasties. Ther are trees-yes trees! casualty when Parker pulled out of owners. Forget the rest they were You read me right-a swarm of the UK home micro market. all pretenders to the crown and bees, and green worm like Crystal Castles is initially cheap imitations at best. characters which defy a name. available for the Commodore 64 The bad news is that it will not These dangers appear at various and BBC Electron micros, with bring on spasms of ecstasy on the staes throughout the game. The Speccy and Amstrad versions to first screen has some cute but follow. It will retail for 9.99 on tape The aim of the game is to guide vicious blue balls tracking you. If and .95 on disk. US Gold have a marble through six different contact is made you lose one of a November release date for it. platforms. Each platform has your four lives. Montezuma's Revenge different dangers to negotiate and The second screen features (.95 tape and .95 on disk) is a time limit is enforced to ensure those 'orrible Trees. Here you are a Databyte product. Whoever you you do not dawdle along the way on an angled square 3D block with are I luv ya! You play the game on a set connected pathways. The trees It's fast, it's totally playable, the difficulty level, there are no options chase you mercilessly around until graphics aren't mega-stunning and (except two player, see later). The all the gems are gone or you die. the sound isn't brilliant. BUT it is fun six levels to work through are Another nice touch I discovered to play and boy it really zips along Practice, Beginner, Intermediate, were \"secret warps\". When you and keeps you on your foes. Aerial, Billy and Ultimate. reach certain screens a secret The game is available on the As you start each level you are message appears telling you Commodore 64 and Atari given a time limit to complete it. 55 where the warps are. machines for levels one and two, 50 for For example, on reaching level Montezuma's Revenge three and 45 for four. That's as far seven you are given the message gets you running around a vast as I got! \"Jump at left back corner of first underground complex collecting If you collide with a nasty on the screen\". If you do this you get treasure. You also have to collect course play stops and your Marble 140,000 points and are keys along the way to open doors is destroyed then rebuilt, all of transported to level three. VALLENS THE COMPUTER GAME There are some places in the universe you don't go alone. Twentieth Century Fox Speccy and Amstrad versions to graphics front. COMING SOON ON SPECTRUM COMMODORE & AMSTRAD HOME COMPUTERS SOFTWARE Electric Dreams Software, 31 Carlton Crescent Southampton, Hampshire S01 2EW. Tel: (0703) 229694 "


"TM .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 Cassette Cassette Disc Cassette Disc Cassette Spectrum Amstrad Amstrad Commodore Commodore C16 .95 THE WORLD'S MOST FOREMOST COIN-OP MANUFACTURER COMES THE WORLD'S FOREMOST ARCADE GAME Mail Order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to Elite, or quote your Cred Card number. VISA «PAPERBOY PFERBOY Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands, WS9 8PW. Telephone: (0922) 59165. Telex: 336130 ELITE.G. Fax: (0922) 647359 LICENCED TO THRILL-ALL SUMMER LONG -GET IT The very best Elite Titles are available at selected branches of: BEWHSMITH. Tandy John Menzies, WOOLWORTH wh Fh \"Officially Licenced Coin Op Classic ATARI ULU "


".95 .95 .95 .95 no Cassette Cassette Disc Cassette Disc .95 Spectrum Amstrad Amstrad Commodore Commodore THE REVIEWERS ARE RAVING... .95 Cassette C16 stal Credil singdi ES Five Star review Sinclair User tit \"the game is gripping, a taut ariel dogfight drama for all Red Barons\" C + VG \"... extremely satisfying and very playable\" Your Sinclair YOUR \"With 32 levels to go this should keep you in the UNTULIT, air for quite a while Mail Order, just send a cheque or postal order payable to Elite, or quote your Credit Card number VISA 7359 1942 Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands, WS9 8PW. Telephone: (0922) 59165. Telex: 336130 ELITE.G. Fax: (0922) 647359 Twang Available from Monday 29th Sept. Elite titles are available from these \"Key Distributors': R+R Centresoft Gem Vanguard Lazer Lightning Barry Paul Leisuresoft TBD RM Software Microdealer CSD PSL MCD \"Officially Licenced Coin Op Classic\" The very best Elite Titles are available at selected branches of: sant.WHSMITH, Tandy Son Menzies, WOOLWORTH Screen shots taken from various computer formats "


"GAMESTART ARE YOU GOOD ENOUGH TO TACKLE THE ULTIMATE IN SPORTS SIMULATION? CHAMPIONSHIP GBA CHAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL GOLF Two-on-Two The Great Courses of the World\" In the US one company is hailed as the undisputed champion of sports simulation 'GAMESTAR'. That's because GAMESTAR is the only software label devoted exclusively to realistic and challenging sports action. Now the ultimate is available in the UK, so if you like your sports software to be a real life full action simulation of the real thing, if you want tough competition and all the colour and spectacle of the big game: start training now, because GAMESTAR is the real thing! Volume One : Pebble Beach So w Downty A thenes of the for Intl preters of all tim e will claim Se peshead. Tee Number 1 I' yards to the three CHAMPIONSHIP GOLF put the And Pubble Beach will make your work in real you the crack fenery inch Your BALLETWO-ONT he most you chce Realment allation s P CHAMPIONSHIP GASTAR BASEBALL GBA CHAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL Two-on-Two Designed by Troy Lyndon, Scott Orr and John Cutter The computer basketball challenge that picks up where the best of the others leave off. Here's the first and only computerized basketball game with two-on-two team action. A four-division, 23-team league gives you the chance to reach the playoffs and go for the GBA Championship. It gives you real choices. Really lets you show your stuff. Game after game. Season after season. For Commodore 64 and 128 Coming soon for Apple Series, Commodore Amiga, Atari ST, IBM PC and PCjr and Tandy 1000 CHAMPIONSHIP GOLF The Great Courses of The World Volume One: Pebble Beach Designed by Jerry Shurman and Henry Perkins with interplay Productions You are there. Pebble Beach. Here's a stimulation so real you'll feel the crack of the ball as it sails off your driver... and sand in your shoes as you blast out of a deep bunker. So go ahead. Tee it up on Number 1. It's only 6600 yards to the 18th green. And Pebble Beach will make you work for every inch For IBM PC, PC, XT and AT and Tandy 1000. Coming soon for Apple Il Series and Commodore Amiga r as the w orks the brothe den hier stepping Ch e st Baschall you here the wa y As the Music \"The BASTAR NEW CHAMPIONSHIP BASEBALL Designed and produced by Scott Orr: developed by Darrin Massens of Synergistic Software Step into the major leagues of computerized Baseball. The lastest in premiere sports simulations from Gamestar. US FOOTBALL FANS WATCH THIS SPACE GAMESTAR Available now from ACTIVISION iust bowl round to your local Dealer! "


"VADOVABLE BAZA LOS 2 a 188 COMMODORE .95 SPECTRUM .95 Arcade Machine Ltd. software is distributed by Melbourne House Publishers Ltd. All enquiries and orders to: 60 High Street Hampton Wick Kingston upon Thames Surrey KT14DB. Telephone: (01)943 3911 Telex: 935425 MELRSO Facs: (011943 2688 "


"Just when you thought it was safe to go back to your keyboard there appears a game so terrifying, so awesomely gruesome, so gut-wrenchingly exciting that you need to sit down and have a comforting MacDonald's chocolate milkshake before even contemplating the very fact of its existence. ALIENS is one such game. It will be creeping up on your computer very soon. So prepare yourself by studying carefully the next couple of pages. They may just save you from a fate worse than playing another dodgy game... LIENS the movie is the original Alien movie But then all contact is lost currently leaving a trail of Warrant Officer Ellen Ripley with the colony where space totally freaked-out film escaped the doomed space engineers and their families are fans in its sinisterly stunning freighter Nostro.no and working on a vast atmospheric wake. If you haven't seen it at outwitted the indestructible processor set up to make alien beast by sneaking into an Archeron's air breathable for must either be an Eastenders escape pod along with her cat humans. Aliens, of course, addict or simply too scared to Jones aren't really bothered what they come out from behind the sofa. ALIENS finds her dozing in breathe and would even sit in ALIENS, the game of the movie her sleep capsule a mere 57 the smoking section of a bus if from Electric Dreams, promises years later and being there were some healthy to be just as enthralling and discovered by other space humans to sink their teeth into. exciting as the film. Created by travellers. She is taken to a Ripley agrees to go back to veteran games designer Mark space station orbiting high Archeron with a squad of Eyles, the game puts you right above Earth where she is heavily armed and highly in the hot seat on the Aliens horrified to learn that the planet trained space marines to home planet of Archeron. Big Archeron where the crew of investigate what is going down trouble in the shape of those the Nostromo unwittingly on the remote planet. And that's evil little devils who like nothing discovered the vast alien when the nightmare starts all better than a human host to hatchery has been colonised over again. help them grow-is brewing by foolish earthlings. See what On arrival they discover the on this remote and inhospitable happens if you stay in bed too colony deserted and signs of a dust ball in space. long! savage struggle. Then as night For the uninitiated let's take a Ripley attempts to persuade falls the aliens come out... quick look back at the events her superiors of the danger Yerrrrggghhhh! which lead to your arrival on the Turking on the planet. But, like Aliens' home world... most people, they didn't get DATA READOUT where they are today by THE GAME... DATA READOUT... believing in monster aliens. You have arrived on Archeron, BACKGROUND... Ripley's bosses don't accept her landing near the engineers Remember that at the end of horrifying story. base. You set up a mobile tactical operations bay (MIOB) in the marines' massive armoured personnel carrier, The game centres on the MIOB's screen which shows you the view from the small portable vid-cams strapped to the helmets of the six members of your crew as they move about the base under your control Once you have selected one of the six team members their digitised face appears in the small personnel scanner window at the bottom of the screen. You can then control their movements and the Smart Gun they are armed with. You can see the gun-sights on the screen. These smart guns are computer aimed, video targetted automatic weapons. Your job is quite-err simple! You must regain control of the earth colony by fighting the Alien Warriors and shooting away Bio-Mechanoid growths as they appear on the walls of the base. A roomful of growths will start to fill with Burke. Acompany man. More Interested in money than the lives of his companions: DATA READOUT. THE CREW Ripley: Flight Officer, Sole survivor of the Nostromo. Terrified of the Aliens, but comes out fighting when she sees them! Hicks: Corporal A Colonial Marine. He has a talent for survival and reacts fast in an emergency Vasquez: Private She is tough, reliable and reacts well under pressure Gorman: Lieutenant Helsin charge. Unfortunately this is his first mission and the strain's showing: Bishop: Executive Officer An android, faster than any numan and dependable. "


"ARBITES EREN FEMMEL RIPLEY RIPLEY BISHOP GURMAN URSUL EURME You will be unable to control a captured crew person, Device will be activated and the next ten rooms you enter will be free of Bio-Mechanoid growths. Once used, the Bimech Device decomposes and vanishes. It will then be replaced by another one in the Queen's Chamber. DATA READOUT... SPECIAL ROOMS... The Armoury You may top up your ammunition here Face Huggers and Eggs. You can seal areas of the base Moving the crew members off by shooting out the lock around is easy. You simply line_mechanisms. Only a Queen or a up the gun sights on a door and group of Alien Warriors will be hit the space bar. If there's no able to break through. Alien door then your character won't Warriors can also move around move. outside the base so a sealed As well as moving crew door may not be much help to members through doors you you. If you try to move outside can also instruct them to move then the poisonous atmosphere N.S.E or W. But the command of Archeron will quickly kill your has to be followed up with a teamsters. number between 1-9. This tells A member of the crew may your character how many be captured by Aliens if they do rooms to move through. If they not fight back. They will be reach a dead end they will stop. moved and will then be Once you've commanded one impregnated with an Alien member of your team you can Embryo. If you are able to reach go away and talk to another, them before they are leaving the first to carry out impregnated you may be able your orders. to save them by killing the If you blast an Alien and don't_Aliens that have captured them. kill it then boy are YOU in big If they have been trouble! A wounded alien is bad impregnated then you will have news. Remember at all costs to to kill them. If a crew person has avoid the Alien blood which been impregnated, or is dead. consists of a powerful organic then their picture will be acid which can eat through replaced by the picture of an almost anything. If there's any Alien. Their helmet video blood in front of a door don't try cameras will continue to to get through it. function until they are dead. The Control Room If you do not keep back the Bio-Mechanoid growths that are coming through from the ducts then the lighting in the base will fail Exits from the Base Aliens may bypass the corridors by walking around outside the Base Complex and entering through a doorway to the outside. If you walk outside the Base you will be rapidly poisoned by the atmosphere. The Generating Room To take a break from the Similarly in this room you must action you can pause the game, keep the walls free of growths The armoured vehicles blast or else the power and lighting screens will shut down and will fail. you'll see a status readout including stuff like the number The Queen's Chamber of Alien Queens you have This is where the Queen lays eliminated, the number of Face her Eggs. Also contained in this Huggers and Eggs you've chamber is the Bimech Device.destroyed and the number of You may collect this by running the attack wave you've reached, over it. The next time you fire This screen also appears your Smart Gun the Bimech between attack waves. Name of crew person. This will flash (or turn another colourlifan Alien Queen or Warrior is in the same room as the crew person Bio-monitor Green = Healthy Yellow = Tired/Captured Red = Injured/impregnated Blue or Black = Dead Amount of ammunition left@ Bio-functions of selected crew person Number of rooms crewperson currently Occupies RIPLEY Score: Picture of selected cre person URSUL "


"Without music, graphics and sound the Board Game has become the most popular in the world. Now it has them. Pursuil Rivial THE COMPUTER GAME COMMODORE-GENUS«EDITION \"Over 3,000 questions of no vital importance.\"  John Menzies Available now on Spectrum 48/128K Commodore 64/128K BBC 'B' Amstrad CPC Cassette and Disk and all local stockists HORN ABBOT INTERNATIONAL ORNALBOTINTERNATIONAL TRIVIAL PURSUIT is a Trade Mark owned and licensed by Horn Abbot International Ltd. Published by Domark Limited, 204 Worple Road, London SW 20 BPN. Tel: 01-947 5624. Trivial Pursuit was programmed by Oxford Digital Enterprises. DOMARK C "


"The Edge...do you have it? BOBEL -95, Let the good times rou: CRASH Smash \"I love this game... if you don't buy this, throw away your Spectrum!\" C&VG Game of the Month August 1986. \"Bobby Bearing is very nearly perfect. This may sound a bit over the top but this game deserves a whole string of superlatives.\" AU ZX Computing August 1986. MEO MONTH MINDSTONE -95 The Ultimate Quest... You are Prince Kyle accompanied by your loyal warriors in this fantastical quest for the legendary Mindstone. This is the first icon-driven graphics, adventure toboast the full features ofan adventure and strategy game. Bound to enter the annals as a true classic in micro adventures. Spectrum FEROE Commodore 64 and Amstrad versions coming soon. "


"C+VG NOV software REVIEWS 1 TRIVIAL PURSUIT GAM G MONTH De D foot... C+VG HIT! Machine: Spctrum/C64/Amstrad/ BBC Supplier: Domark Price: .95 GAME OF THE They said it couldn't be done. But Domark has done it! Turned the world's best board game into an entertaining computer This is C+VG's highest honour. challenge. If you've been hiding your head under a stone for the It's granted to the game which, in last few years you won't know our honest opinion, is the most that Trivial Pursuit has sold playable, original and exciting almost 70 million copies in game released during the month. board game form worldwide CARRE Scuenca Geos We look for all the key points and entertained at least twice listed below but also that extra that number of people who mor. Select which wouonto added ingredient which makes enjoy answering totally trivial the game stand head and questions. shoulders above the best of the Domark's version, programmed by the Oxford done that, TP wanders off to his the board game can't do for rest. based ODE team, follows study where he ask you the you. Give an indication of what closely the spirit of the original. question. The timer is areas you're really smart at! C+VG But it uses the capabilities of the represented by a candle on a Your ratings appear in bar machine to present more shelf. If you've got the timer on graph form and you can call titillating trivial questions in a it burns down. TP also walks them up at the beginning or way the inventors of the board around impatiently tapping his end of any turn from the board game never dreamt of. There screen. are pictures using computer You have to say your answer All the questions you've graphics and sound out loud for everyone to hear come to expect from Trivial This symbol is C+VG's way of questions, too. before pressing the fire button. Pursuit are included. They also telling you a game is the The game has a host. A little TP then gives you the correct TP then gives you the correct clude a number o include a number of computer BUSINESS! chap called TP. And the game answer and you have to tell the game related questions. Like takes place in the study of his computer if you were right or what do the intitials J.S.V. \"Who writes your reviews?\" That's a luxurious Oxford home. wrong. No cheating pleasel s tand for. Betcha can't guess question our readers often ask. Everything he needs to test then it's back to the board M that one! your knowledge is there-a screen for another go. The sound questions are a bit Name the guilty ones, they demand. screen to project graphic The computer keeps track of tricky on the Spectrum version So that's what we're doing. Satisfied questions, a hi-fi to play the how many questions you have you have to strain your ears now? tunes and all the best reference answered, how many you've to hear -but they are fun. books. He also gets to wear a got right, and in which Especially when the tune is different hat for each different category. This is another thing played backwards! question category a crown for history, a beret for art and a mortar board for science. LESLY WALKER: Lesly brings a The game begins with the set Trivial Pursuit up screen which allows you to gentle touch to the C+VG review enter the names of the players team. She enjoys GOOD games, up to six-load new whatever they are. But nothing has questions, turn the sound really come close to her favourite effects on/off, set a time limit for answers and even turn old TP game Sorcery — yet anyway... on and off if he irritates you! TIM METCALFE: The veteran Ed Then it's on to the board has been around with C+VG almost screen where TP throws a dart sich Indian-horse since it started and as he's getting on in place of the dice to get you 1963 moving. If you turn him off, the a bit now likes to do more restful numbers on the board flash things like basket weaving. But he rapidly acting like a dice until has been known to get stuck into a you hit the fire button. good shoot-'em-up. Generally it's the Once you've thrown, you can select which of the six more leisurely games like flight-sims categories you want to answer and such like. Leaving the more strea question from. Once you've nuous stuff to the rest of the team, Typical... JIM DOUGLAS: Jim \"Crockett\" PAUL BOUGHTON: C+VG's CHRIS CAIN: Our junior joystick NICKY TREVETT: The mysterious Douglas is first and foremost an smooth, sauve and sophisticated de jockey Chris \"Odduns\" Cain likes Nicky reviews Beeb games from her adventure person -but he is also a puty ed is well known for his joystick nothing better than an arcade advencountry retreat in Hertfordshire. An fan of arcade adventures the BBC, skills. Paul is a sporty type and enture or a good shot-'em-up between enigmatic figure Nicky is another and extremely trendy clothes. Jim is joys all those sport simulations munching packets of dodgy crisps. arcade adventure fan-but does ena wordsmith who writes reviews so which require you to totally destroy The Commodore is his favourite joy a bit of martial artistry from sharp you could cut yourself on the stick. Which he does. Fremachine but he has been known to time to time. them. quently. actually touch an Amstrad. C+VG'S REVIEW TEAM Pursuit\" D "


"C+VG NOV Software REVIEWS 2 The best thing about the game is that you can play with a whole bunch of people. No longer do computer games have to be solitary pastimes. And it means the game really captures the TP spirit. Another good feature is that Another good feature is that you can enter a new player who comes along after you've started a game. Simply go back to the main menu screen and enter his or her name and you're away. ODE have developed an amazing new multi-load system which means one tape can be used to load question modules into any computer. This means that they can be continually updated. Domark will be issuing a Young Players Edition, and a Baby Boomer Edition. But the system means that the game could go on forever adding new modules. Trivial Pursuit on computer is as much fun to play as the original and the graphics and sound add a whole new dimension. TP will make a far from trivial addition to your games collection. Tim Graphics C+VG Sound  Value Playability HIT! anno AN DARE 1942 TITELTU Machine: C64/128 Supplier: Virgin Price: .95 Now as I said last issue, Dan Dare on the 64 is a totally different game from the Spectrum/Amstrad versions. But fear not, it's just as good, in fact it may be better. In case you didn't read last month's review (why not?) here is the basic storyline. Dan is about to receive awards for his various brave acts during the last few years when the Mekon (Yes, that little green one) shows up on everybody's telly demanding control of the earth and a packet of choccy biscuits. Anyway, being a superdooper hero, Dan can't let the Earth fall under control of the Mekon and he sets out with his friends, who are Digby, Prof Peabody, and Digby's alien pet Stripy, to save the world. First off, Dan thinks it would be a good idea if the friends a real joy. When a caption split into groups to cover more appears on the screen it will be ground. Off he trots with Stripy, in one of four colours. If it is red, and Digby goes with the Prof. it will say something like:\"A Just when Dan gets round the Treen is nearby,\" and you must corner, he sees the others get try to avoid him or for the more try to avoid him or, for the more captured by the Treens, who are rough type, you can challenge the Mekon's helpers, and now him to a bout of fisticuffs. he must rescue them, as well as saving the world. What a day green, it will display a message this is going to be! that is relevant to the situation The game is best thought of as at that time. To make it a little having four sections. These are clearer, if you are standing on a One: Above Ground, where Dan hatch it will say: \"Dan has must find a way into the found a hatch.\" underground city. Two: The N ow if you decide to do Prison Complex, which is where something with this hatch, you Dan's chums are being held. can select various options with Three: The Laser. Dan must use the stick and then choose the the laser to destroy the one you want. computers controlling the The only caption left is white, asteroid. Finally four: The which tells you the outcome of Mekon. Dan must destroy the your actions. Now, back to the Mekon's dome. game. Above ground Dan must The next part is the prison. solve various puzzles in order to Here Dan runs up and down find an entrance to the City. ladders, in and out of doors and There is more than one has the odd punch up with a entrance and Dan need only Treen or two. find one to get in. But he must Dan must get pass cards and find the others to complete the use them to open the prison game with 100 per cent. doors to get his friends out. The puzzles include an The laser is all set to fire and if electrified hatch which Dan Dan hits the button it will do so, must open, and he also has to but if Dan looks further he will work out a way to breathe see reflectors in other parts of under water. the complex and using them he Before I go on, I'd like to tell can guide the laser's path and you about the control method. use it to destroy the control Normal left/right/up/down computers. Here Dan will find controls are just plain and the Mekon! simple, but selecting actions is The Mekon sits in his large Machine: Spectrum supplier: Elite Price: .95 Who says the 64 has all the best shoot-'em-ups? Hot on the heels of Paperboy comes Elite's version of the Capcom arcade game, 1942. 1942 is a sort of airbourne Commando. You're flying a twin-tailed fighter over enemy territory shooting down anything that strays across your path. The enemy sends several sorts of aircraft after you all of them have kamikaze tendencies--So watch out and don't let them get too close. There're blue aircraft which are relatively easy to dispose of. Black fighters are slightly dome, all ready to kill Dan by tougher. They can fire and fly firing energy bolts at him, so rings around you! Collisions using his grenades Dan must are, of course, fatal to you, and destroy the enemy and get back you only have four lives to to his ship with his friends. Will complete an amazing 32 levels! he do it? Only you can Red fighters are the ones to decide... watch out for. A red squadron One thing that makes the carries one of the useful POW capsules which, when collected, not leave without his buddies. gives your fighter extra You must rescue them to get capabilities. They can boost out alive. your firepower or act like The screen graphics of all SMART bombs, destroying all locations are excellent. They the enemy aircraft near you look like cartoon backdrops and when you pick them up. the characters are very good You are flying from an aircraft too. Stripy leaps about doing carrier and you land back on his own version of the board ship after completing a Impossible Mission somersault level where you get a chance for and he makes a weird sort of a breather and earn a big sound which, although good, bonus. can get on your nerves at times. This is an extremely The sound is fairly poor satisfying and very playable bit though apart from a small jingle of arcade action. at the beginning which is Tim repeated when you pause the game. Graphics Of course no arcade Sound adventure could be complete  Value without a timer, so your mission ends at 1300 hours, and Playability you start at 1200! Dan Dare is a super-cool game which deserves all the credit it gets! Well done Virgin. Chris Graphics Sound C+VG Value HIT! Playability Ovo OOO PLAYER "


"3 C+VG NOV sobtware REVIEWS GO FOR GOLD Machine: C64 Supplier: Americana Price: .99 (disc) Go for Gold must be the billionth sports simulation to hop, skip and jump into the C+VG offices this month. This game has six events: Springboard Diving, 100 Metre Sprint, 110 Hurdles, Archery, Long jump and Weight Lifting. It's out onto the diving board, then, for an energetic bout of air-to-sea flight. You can choose which sort of dive is most suited to your own particular abilities. According to the instructions, the judges in this event are pretty useless, and you can 110 Hurdles is next on the possible to run straight through achieve a good score by other disc, and is great fun! It's 100 the obstacles-providing you methods than merely a good sprint all over again, except it's have the strength to keep up ten metres longer, and there are momentum. Next up is the 100 Metre large wooden things in the Archery comes next, and jolly Sprint. This event is pretty middle of the track which you interesting it is too! You are straightforward, as all you have must jump over. Movement is given a view down your own to do is bash the joystick left left and right with the joystick, arm, and through the sight of and right faster than your and up and right at the same the bow. You must draw back opponent in order to win. time to jump a hurdle. It is the arrow, and endeavour to hold it steady while the wind gives you no end of trouble. You are lined up against a handful of targets at varying distances, and must release your arrow at exactly the right moment. The penultimate event is the Long Jump, in which your little character must run hell-for-leather down a cinder track, before hurling himself into the air. More left right, left right movement in this event. Finally comes the weightlifting. You have to take a few pauses here, while the 25kg (at the beginning) weight sways around in your hands. Go for Gold is quite a nice version of the tried and tested \"sports\" simulations. Jim Graphics Sound Value Playability dive... 000 v EL TORO Machine: Spectrum Supplier: US Gold/Americana Price: .99 A sick \"sport\" becomes a sick \"game\" thanks to the Spanish Dinamic programming people. They've taken their national pastime of butchering bulls in public and turned it into the nastiest bit of \"software\" I've seen for some time. Just like the real thing the idea of the game is to get your little matador to butcher the bull in the most \"artistic\" manner possible. The people who created this game ought to have THEIR ears chopped off--and US Gold ought to be ashamed of themselves actually releasing it. If you see this on the shelves of your local computer store get them to take it off and put it where it belongs. In the bin. It's a crude and barbaric game that should never have been released. Tim OLYMPIAD '86 Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Atlantis Price: .99 Olympiad '86 is a brave attempt at a budget Decathlon-style game which doesn't quite come off. It nicely presented with a good scorechart and instructions for each of the five events on screen before the event begins but the controls for the events leave a lot to be desired. For example on the sprint and weight lifting events you have to wait until the whizzing \"hand\" on a clock-like powermeter lines up with an arrow at the top of the clock before hitting the \"action\" keys. Quite why the programmers didn't simply use the tried and trusted two keys being hammered at once method to get things going I don't know. This spoils what otherwise could have been a good budget offering. As it stands Olympiad '86 lacks a lot in the playability stakes and misses out on a medal in any event. THINGY AND THE DOOODAHS Machine: Spectrum Supplier: US Gold/Americana Price: .99 Thingy and the Doodahs is one of the best of the bunch of new Americana budget releases for the Spectrum from US Gold. The game is a pretty basic dashabout-the-maze-collectingobjects and avoiding-nasties game. You've seen it all before but the game is at least playable. Thingy is a wally-not one of THE Wally's you understand just a bit of a berk who has broken his Spectrum. He sets out to collect the  he needs to buy a new one, chased by all sorts of refugees from Jet Set Willy's mansion. Thingy will keep your interest for a couple of hoursbut I reckon that it's about  too expensive even so. The graphics are very basic and so is the sound. Save your money for a better budget game. SCRIZAM Machine: Spectrum Supplier: US Gold/Americana Price: .99 More stuff from the Spanish Dinamic team has arrived in the shape of a space age cavalier on a quest to free a beautiful princess from a bunch of 'orrible aliens. Armed only with a sword he plunges into the passages of the enemy fortress and more often than not comes a cropper in the first couple of seconds. This game looks as if someone hadn't quite finished the fine tuning before it was released. Enemies come at you so impossibly quickly that your three lives are used up in a matter of seconds -however long you persevere trying to get into the game. And looking at the pictures on the cassette inlay it looks as if the person who was taking them didn't get any further into the game than me. The main screen shot shows the central character getting speared by an enemy which happens with frustrating regularity. Tim Tim Graphics Sound Value Playability less than 0 Graphics Sound Value Playability AAA Graphics Sound Value Playability om at ww Graphics Sound Value Playability SHORTSSHORTS SHORTS "


"ALLEYKAT ROLLING THUNDER IT'S ALLEYKAT! Take up the challenge and ride the wheel of death... you'll have two things on your side lightning speed and heavy firepower but to blast your way through the 32 events on the space race calendar you'll need cash, skill and nerves of steel.... will yours be the new name on the trophy? Another fantastic and visually stunning game by Andrew Braybrook, author of Paradroid and Uridium. For Mail Order send a cheque P. O to Hewson Consultants Ltd Order by Credit Card sending your Access Barclaycard number, and a specimen signature. Don't forget to enciose your name and address FOR COMMODORE CASSETTE .95 DISK .95 DOUBLE VALUE PACK! HEWSON .95 for Commodore, on Cassette. Paradroid is available from November. Uridium, and the new mega-fast version of Don't miss it! Sob M ileading Estate Millon, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RX As part of our continuing developmentatapovative software we are always happy to evaluate software a s with a view to publication "


"TA VS TM ARCTIC ANTICS mis 399UDOU 502032 navigation chart, uranium Simulvision-both players cube and the \"master active at the same time. carrier\". Once you have Booby trap construction, recovered all these items Joystick or keyboard One you can enter your rocket or Two player option and and head for outerspace. for the first time in the Spy GAME ELEMENTS series there is Interiors and Booby trapped ice, Exteriors, where Spies can Spy Vs Spy the Arctic Antics snowball fights, water enter igloos. takes place in the wintry buckets, snow shoes, conditions of the Arctic saws, TNT, ice slicks, complete with igloos, polar drifting snow, deadly 3520UU bears, penguins, snow icicles. blizzards and other natural PROGRAM FEATURES hazards. Your mission is to Full scrolling screens, find a space helmet, Real Time Animation, DC 330SOOL Available for Commodore 64/128, Atari 400/800/XLIXE48K ram cassette 9.95 disk 14.95 Available from all good computer stores or post free from: Databyte, 15 Wolsey Mews, London NW5 2DX Telephone 01-482 1755 JATABYTE "


"Konami IGGGO 12-100 HL 2500 SH11 The arcade hitooo INNOUrhome's SIERE Screen shots from arcade version home micro versions may differ. 1999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999 Hit follow up to Lie Ar Kung-Fu Spectrum Commodore 64 and Amstrad versions coming soon. Our hero has finally mastered the secret martial art \"CHIN'S SHAO-LIN\" but is trapped by triad gangs. With kicks and other secret powers, escape from and travel SHAO-LIN'S road to freedom! EML Published under licence by The Edge, 36/38 Southampton Street, London WC2. Tel:(01) 831 1801 TX: 892379. "


"software REVIEWS 4 Machine: C64 Supplier: Hewson Price: .95/.95 disc ALLEYKAT Andrew Braybrook's latest game, Alleykat, looks set to be every-bit as popular as Uridium The game takes place in a futuristic world, where all that seems to matter is that you become the top racing pilot in the Alleykat trials. What probably saves the game from a terminally short life-span is the way in which you can vary the aim of the game. As well as choosing the type of landscape on which you race, you can decide if you want to try your hand at endurance, demolition, speed trials, dodgem or random games. The different landscapes all or peculiar gravity. Each of these allows you to have different properties. Your craft, the Speeder, is amass points by different Arboris is mainly a forestation. pretty nippy too. It's got a very means. Demolition is Lots of things to shoot. There handy laser cannon with which reasonably straightforward. are also Aquadromes which are you can destroy just about Basically, you must destroy made up of pools. Then there is anything if you hit it enough anything in sight with your laser Hardwall, Grafico, Shatter-rock times. You can zoom left and guns. In the Speed Trial, you and Technorame. All have their right, picking up the energy must travel at full velocity all own snags; whether it be boosters as you go. Yo can also the way. amazingly tough construction, accelerate and decelerate, loop the loop and even metamorphose into another craft. The graphics and sounds are up to Uridium standard. The screen scrolls from top to bottom, and your Speederalthough small is very well ainimated. Apparently, you are lucky enough to have \"45 degree viewpoint with the light perpendicular to the Speeder shadow.\" So there... There are a couple of special features which 128 owners will be able to use. You get more bullets, more Katterkillers (your biggest problem) and extra craft. Alleykat is a cracking game. There is detail, speedy gameplay, and enough depth to keep you coming back for more. If you liked Uridium then Alleykat's the next game for you. Jim 00 Graphics Sound  Value Playability 00 00 ASTERIX AND THE MAGIC CAULDRON to LULISH VILLA Machine: 064/128 Asterix's best friend and he's calms ol' Vital down, and starts for very long, and the most very strong. His strength is a search for the pieces of common result is Roman 1Supplier: Melbourne derived from the fact that he fell cauldron, taking Obelix with Asterix 0. House into Getafix's cauldron at birth, him. If by some miracle you do Price: .95 and the super strength potion Having found one piece win, you gain nothing and just had a permanent effect. already, Getafix recovers continue with the game. The Obelix is just about to take enough potion for one and large window also appears if Those with good memories some of the potion when gives it to Asterix to take on his you fight a wild boar. You need may well remember this game Getafix grabs the ladel and quest. So begins the game. to kill them for food. Although being talked about ages ago. I, a says: \"You can't have any, you You control Asterix. Obelix it's usually the boar who gets a true Asterix fan for ages, have don't need it.\" And reminds him follows close behind. You walk bite for his supper. played this game for weeks, why. Becoming upset, Obelix around various screens looking During my travels I was hoping that the excitement of kicks the cauldron and, to for the pieces. locked in a dungeon, which I Walking around will instantly quickly escaped from, only to introduce you to one of the find myself in the gladiator's annoying features in the game. ring facing a large -and I mean This is the fact that the screens, large-gladiator who was although very good graphically, mean and angry. take an enormous amount of Thinking things like \"Oh, my time to draw. God,\" or something to that Having got over this, I effect, I quickly drank the potion wandered around and found given to me by Getafix. I myself in a Roman camp. Campbecame super strong and with Compendium to be precise. It three blows I sent the weapon was here that I had my very first wielding creature back to hell. I fight with a Roman guard, which is another feature which should have been developed a CAMP COM bit more. Fighting consists of Asterix and opponent enlarged in a window at the top of the screen. The opponents face each other, fists at the ready. I say fists, but the Roman will have a large stick which he will quite being one of my heroes would everyone's horror, it shatters frequently bash you over the pull me into the game, but alas into pieces. head with. What a nice chap. no luck. Anyway, here's the \"What have you done,\" Moving the joystick left and storyline. shouts Vitalstatistix, Chief of the right with the fire button held Everyone was queuing up for druids. \"We won't be able to down will cause Asterix to their ration of Getafix's magic hold up much longer against punch in that direction, and you strength potion. Who should be the Romans without the may also jump and duck to next in line but Obelix. Obelix, potion.\" avoid an early retirement. for the unenlightened, is Suddenly, Asterix appears, Fighting doesn't usually last "


"Software REVIEWS 5 DRUID Jostek Machine: C64/128 99999999 DRU Supplier: Firebird Price: PERSON Firebird claim that the game is & RAT SNG D JoysITEK not a Gauntlet rip-offso we'll have to believe them. BAWSE SNODE The aim of Druid is this: As the last Druid in the world you must set about destroying four skulls which form a chain of evil around the land. Or something like that. To destroy a skull you must use the Chaos Spell, which is one of the many spells you must find in order to complete your quest. Now, you remember that I mentioned that this game could have two players, who play at able to do level two. If you can that the amount is just right. the same time. People seem to manage to get all the way. When the Druid gets attacked, be treating this theory as through the first level, that is his energy will deplete rapidly. revolutionary, but I myself Once a level has been cleared To recharge with magical remember gmes such as Bruce of all its chests and skulls you power you must stand on a holy Lee and Spy vs Spy which did must make for the exit and get must make for the exit and get pentacle which will spin and the same thing ages ago. So to the next dungeon/maze. recharge you. much for the new ideas. The first screen is a little When you reach a skull, you boring, it is a sort of forest, but may be presented with a the form of a Golem spell. This the levels inside are much more problem. To kill it you must use spell will create a huge like the arcade classic. On his a chaos spell, but you have to monster, a Golem, which can be quest the Druid will be attacked be standing next to the nasty controlled by a second player. by a horde of creatures, thing. The problem is the skull This creature is used as including demons, slime, has incredibly bad breath which protection for the Druid, as it kills ghosts, skeletons and wraiths kills a Druid after about 50 sniffs. What do you do? Try this. Use som the Golem as a shield, and walk DRUUT 2D up to the skull's mouth. When you get there, step aside and get next to it. The skull will be distracted by the Golem giving Le RAT SNG IS you time to cast a chaos spell and dispose of it. BAWSE SODE When you have died, or completed the game (Ha!) you will be presented with a rating a bit like Elite. The lowest is Halfwit, which speaks for itself. Moving up, you get Apprentice, Acolyte, Seer (my best so far), Sprite Master and so forth until you reach the ultimate title, C+VG reviewerl, otherwise known as Light Master. The graphics are not stunning, but they do look good, in a strange Gauntlet sort of way. The sound is quite good with a nice noise when the ghosts, slime and demons with which look like Druids, only Druid walks, and a lovely a single touch. This allows the black). lightning sound when you cast Druid to save his energy. He must choose his weapon, a chaos spell. But the music at But before you get to gather strength and fight to the the start is a bit on the naff side. enthusiastic about the Golem, death. I say Druid is great, and those it's not indestructible. Every Unfortunately, not all of you who like Gauntlet can time it kills something it loses weapons are that effective on have real fun without putting energy. different creatures. Fire kills pounds into the arcade Do not fret single joystick beetles with one blast, but you machines. Me, I'll wait for the owners, as the Golem can also must use three shots to kill a official Gauntlet. be controlled by player one Demon. Chris using the Commodore key. Now onto important things, Pressing this will select one of like control. The Druid is Graphics three commands which the controlled by joystick, with Golem will carry out instantly. eight directional movement and Sound These commands are Wait fire button activated weapons. Value (obvious), Follow (even more The Golem is very difficult to Playability obvious) and Send (send the control in a one player game, so Golem in the Direction the you may not see his real use Druid is facing). until you have a friend round. W DRUD SALARARAS The layout is a general Walking up and down the maze PBNRP . g * # # 2 g Gauntlet style maze, but it has is fine, but the doors are chests which the Druid must sometimes a bit tricky to get & RASKO po sostex open and choose a spell from. into. PAUSE SOODE These spells include more The Druid has energy, which Druid weaponry, in the shape of must be topped up to keep him Fire, Water, and Electricity alive, I don't think you get spells, keys -you must take enough energy, although the key from the first chest to be Firebird's Tom Watson argues presumed it came from there. On escaping I found a piece of cauldron, followed by another and another. Things were starting to go right. After many more fights, lengthy walks and hard searches I had discovered five or six peices of the cauldron. Just when I was feeling so pleased with myself, a legionnaire kindly rearranged my bodily structure and the game came to an end. On playing the game several more times, I found I couldn't get as far as before, which seemed quite strange. Asterix is good graphically, it has great music and a good storyline -the only thing it lacks is playability. Even devoted Asterix fans like me will get pretty bored with the game after only a few goes. What a shame... Chris Graphics Sound  Value Playability MUUTOS 9 495 MPENDIUM "


"DURELL 4 Smash hit games in one pack Only .95 available on Spectrum, Commodore 64 & Amstrad COMBAT THASSL NEW ON AMSTRAD SABOTEUR! turbo esprit NEW ON coMMODORE DURELL sales dept., Castle Lodge Castle Green, Taunton, Somerset, TA14AB, England Telephone (0823) 54489 & 54029 software getting harder.... "


"The great Christmas extravaganza 9th official commodore computer show HOURS R LOCATION Champagne Suite & Exhibition Centre, Novotel, Hammersmith London W6 IGRANGE 10am-6pm Friday, November 21 10am-6pm Saturday, November 22 10am-4pm Sunday, November 23 PRESENT TIME On show: the entire Commodore family from the C16 and Plus 4 to the 64, C64, C128 and the fabulous Amiga. Looking for ideas for gifts? Take your pick from many thousands of products from stocking fillers to major presents, including all the latest software and hardware releases. GEOS MUSIC HALL When the versatile C64 takes to the stage you'll be treated to an amazing kaleidascope of sound and music. Windows, icons and pull-down menus — see the innovative GEOS in action. AMIGA VILLAGE X?) WHO'LL BE THERE? The centrepiece of the whole show this is where you'll see for the first time the exciting new products that will make the Amiga the most talked about computer range of them all. Everyone who's anyone in the growing Commodore world including a number of mystery celebrities. The last time a Commodore Show was held in London it, attracted a record 20,000 visitors. I Advance ticket orders TICKETS 9th official commodore computer show November 21-23 1986 Please supply: Adult tickets at E2 (save ) ............ Under-16s tickets at  (save ) ... Total  Cheque enclosed made payable to Database Publications Ltd. Post to: Commodore Show Tickets, Europa House, 68 Chester Road, Harol Grove, Stockport SK7 5NY. Write today for your advance tickets. Walk past the queues and save money too  per head off the normal admission prices Name Address Please debit my credit card account Signed Access Visa LU Admission at door:  (adults), 2 (under 16s) L U PHONE ORDERS: Show Hotline: 081-456 8835 PRESTEL ORDERS: KEY .89, THEN 614668383 MICROLINK ORDERS: MAILBOX 72:MAG001 Please quote credit card number and full address, Ref.C&VG 11"


"6 G-VG NOV sobtware REVIEWS O DROIDS Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Anglosoft Price: .95 cassette/.95 disc Edward is such a nice friendly name, don't you think? So it's very hard to treat anyone or thing-called Edward as your deadly enemy. But in Droids there's no time for sentimentality about the Environmental Defence Warden which is controlling a new prototype space warship called Arachnid. Contact has been lost with the ship following a massive solar flare. The Intergalactic Law Enforcement Agency (ILEA) fears that all transmitters and receivers on the ship have been destroyed. The fear is that Edward thinks the ship has been attacked and has switched to defence mode meaning it will destroy anything within range of its weapons. And within 24 hours the (0000060 DROI CONQUESTA QUU Qoru UU VIJU III NIGHTMARE RALLY Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Melbourne House/ERBE Price: .95 Take that varlet! And that! And that! But I'll have this copy of Conquestador, thank you very much. Why? Because it's really neat, fun to play and awesomely addictive! Which is all very strange really as Conquestador, programmed by ERBE software from Spain, isn't very original in its design or even its theme. It just looks very nice and plays even better. Enter the world of Conquestador and you become Redhan, battle scarred champion of a thousand conflicts. Armed only with a bow and a limited supply of arrows, Redhan is on a quest to find the blazing Star Stones taken from the world by the Lord of Magicians, Kulwoor, and hidden in his mountain citadel. Redhan has to explore the citadel in search of 40 caskets which may, or may not, contain the jewels he seeks. Some give him extra weapons, others have beneficial potions, but some contain horrible curses which can do things like turn him into a pig. I quite liked being the pig, I must admit. The magician's slave warriors fill every room and cavern. Redhan can zap them with his bow-but as arrows are in short supply it's a good tactic to try and kill them by jumping on their heads. It worksbelieve me! There are also dodgy creatures which scuttle about Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Ocean Price: .95 This is a racing game with a difference. It has some odd mystical overtones which add a bit of originality to what otherwise could simply be an average driving challenge. You are in control of a super rally car and your aim is to complete all the stages of the strange Nightmare Rally by reaching the target score for each stage without destroying your car. You get three to start with. Damage is indicated by the \"lives\" icon changing colour. Red spells imminent danger, of course! You can drive a manual or automatic car auto is better to start with as it's one less thing to worry about when you're learning how to play. Each stage is packed with obstacles some dangerous some useful. Picking up Psi symbols dotted around the course adds gadgets like turbos and even a hyperspace gizmo to your car. Yes, hyperspacetold you this was a different driving game, didn't l! Other mystical objects which have strange effects are Standing Stones and the Pulsating Eye. You'll have to find out what! Nightmare Rally is a one for race game buffs. It has enough quirky bits to keep your interest and it's pretty playable. Joystick and keyboard reactions leave a bit to be desired and the choice of colours on some of the stages aren't the best for the style of graphics being used. But overall this is an interesting twist on the driving game theme. The only real gripe is the poor old Spectrum's sound. The car sounds a bit like a distressed wasp. Still, Nightmare Rally is well worth checking out if you're a driving game freak. Paul Graphics Sound Value Playability CA "


"C+VG NOV sobtware REVIEWS O GLIDER RIDER planet Venus will come within range of Archnid's weapons and... need I say more? I bet you've already guessed the mission. You've been teleported onto the top deck of the Arachnid, and must shut down each of the craft's decks by entering the correct codes into terminals. Droids under Edward's direct control patrol the levels and must be destroyed before you can attempt to shut down a level. Graphically Droids is quite nice and the sound is quite pleasing but the idea of the game is not particularly original. As far as we can remember this is the first game we've seen from Anglosoft and as a debut it's not bad. Paul Graphics Sound Value Playability Machine: Spectrum all that. -'cos these things fry you to a Supplier: Quicksilva You begin the game with just crisp whether you're in the air nine grenades but you can or on the ground. Price: 8.95 find more on the island if you There's a free packet of Hula At last! A decent game on the are smart enough. And if you Hoops awaiting the first person much respected and late were smart enough to qualify as to phone the Ed with the lamented Quicksilva label. a secret agent you're going to answer! Since Argus took over the name be smart enough to find the Transforming your bike into not much of worth has ammo. Aren't you? the hang-glider is no mean feat. appeared under the once But the first necessary act is First you have to find you way legendary Quicksilva banner. to find out the way to disable to the top of a plastic hill. The But Glider Rider could change the defence lasers on the island higher the better if you're a beginner. Then you drive the bike fast downhill pulling back on the joystick will make you sprout wings and wheeeee! It's a bird, it's a plane! No it's a motorbike falling back to earth! Never mind. Practice makes perfect. The graphics are really nice just one colour but extremely effective. Sound isn't bad on the 48k machine and the 128k version has a neat soundtrack making the most of the machines extra soundchip. COCO COCO TADOR Tim  Graphics Sound  Value Playability ATARI SMASH HITS the lower regions of the castle to deal with And then there's the brooding, fire-breathing dragon Glaurung and Kulwoor the Master Mage to deal with ... You'll find yourself getting killed off pretty easily to start with this is a deceptively easy looking game to play. However, although it may look like every other arcade adventure you've played, it turns out to much faster than you think its going to be! Jumping about the many platforms of the many rooms is easy. Redhan has a real spring in his step which means no frustrating attempts at leaping to that all important ledge when a nasty is coming at you. The graphics are large, colourful and well drawn. Hardly any colour clashes at all. Animation isn't bad. Beware of the little green bowmen they shoot at you on sight. A good tactic is to let them shoot at you and then leap out of the way of the arrow. Zap them with one of your arrows when you land. Conquestador is a classic arcade adventure which would grace even the most choosy gamesters collection. It looks good, sounds good, and by golly it does you Chop Suey. Eight levels of everybody is out to get him. To martial arts mayhem with a prove his innocence he must slow or fast option to add a little find the jewels. But meanwhile, spice. Both fighters have pretty all the good citizens are out to much the standard range of get him. There are only three punches, kicks, somersaults etc, levels to the game but and the score is based on how nevertheless it's still very well you fight, whether the playable. Graphically it's not move is defensive or offensive. brilliant, though. Quasimodo. This is probably Paul the oldest of the games here. If Graphics my memory serves me well i think it was previously released Sound by US Gold. Poor Old Quasi has Value been accused of stealing Playability precious royal jewels and Machine: Atari 400/ 800/XUXE Supplier: English Software Price: .95 cassette/ .95 disk English Software continues its presumably — successful recycling of its back catalogue of games. My verdict on this latest offering is that three out of four aren't bad. The package includes Mediator, Quasimodo, Chop Suey and Elektraglide. Let's deal with the one I can't get on with first — Mediator. When I first reviewed this complained that I just couldn't get anywhere with the game. The idea is to find the Good Mediator and a time crystal to prevent a nuclear holocaust. I still can't get on with it but if you do write and say what happens, I'm vaguely interested. Elektraglide. This is a graphically excellent high speed race action with extra hazards such as bouncing balls and spinning cubes. The scrolling is very fast and smooth, and the game play addictive. VOLUME 5 SLOH 00250 0:52 00200 good! Tim Graphics Sound Value Playability C+VG HIT! PON! PON! "


"BOXING The cuts and bruises on boxers faces visibly show the pounding they are receiving from the kicks and punches to the face and body. Fast and furious action in 3D brings to life one of the greatest spectator sports, which has just one aim ANCO Victory! SPECTRUM Cass 7.95 AMSTRAD 6128 Disc 13.95 AMSTRAD 464/664 Cass 8.95 Disc 12.95 Cass 9.95 MSX ATARI ST Disc 19.95 CBM 64 Screen shots. CBM 128 Disc 11.95 CBM 64/128 Cass 7.95 Disc 9.95 CBM PLUS 4 Cass 7.95 VOICE MASTER THE AMAZING VOICE MASTER SPEECH SYNTHESIS -VOICE RECOGNITION plus a whole lot more! YOUR COMPUTER CAN TALK IN YOUR OWN VOICE. Not a synthesizer but a true digitizer that records your natural voice quality, in any language or accent Words and phrases can be expanded without limit from disk. Speech Edit program alters or improves sounds. WILL IT UNDERSTAND WHAT YOU SAY? A real word recognizer for groups of thirty two words or phrases with unlimited expansion from disk/tape memory back and word recognition can work together. Have a two way conversation with your computer. Easy to use with new basic commands like SPEECH, LEARN, VOLUME etc, Machine code programs and memory locations for more experienced programmers Totally transportable software. Speech recorded on a CBM 64 using a V.M.can be loaded into another CBM 64 via tape or disk and reproduced without using a V.M EXCITING MUSIC BONUS. Lets you hum or whistle to write and perform Notes literally scroll by as you hum! Your composition can be edited, saved and printed out. You don't have to know one note from another in order to write and compose! NEWI DEMO SPEECH DISK AVAILABLE an introduction to Covox speech The disk gives several general vocabularies that you can use in any of your own programs. Sample programs include a talking keyboard, calculator, clock and more. English, French and German selections. Samples of level 1 and 2 speech, editing. Twenty eight page booklet included. Price .50p Available from ANCO. Dealers write to us on your letter headed note paper for a FREE sample of the talking disk ULTIMATE HUMAN TO COMPUTER INTERFACE You will never find better value. ICE MASTER CONN AVAILABLE FOR: COMMODORE CBM 64/128, ATARI 800/800X L/130XE, APPLE Lc/Ile. .95 ANCO E Rihaise en toe en EL L ANCO SOFTWARE, 4 WEST GATE HOUSE, SPITAL STREET, DARTFORD, KENT DA12EH. Telephone: 0322 92513/8 Telex: 892758 ANCOG 24 HOUR CREDIT CARD SERVICE 0322 522631 "


"Battle for Midway, Battle of Britain, Theatre Europe, Falklands '82, Iwo Jima, AND NOW Bismarck MAIN MAP AIR RECON MAP On the evening of 24th May 1941, HMS Hood took a direct hit in her magazine. Of the 1415 men on board, only 3 escaped with their lives. BISMARCK had claimed her first kill..... COCKPIT VIEW BRIDGE VIEW S FREE DEMO TAPE OFFER > See below for full details Features: GAME CONTROLS: Command Bismarck vs. Computer, Royal Navy vs. Computer, Full joystick control, Icon driven, Variable speed game, Variable difficulty level, \"Set Battles\" option, Save Game, Real time Action. FLEET CONTROLS: Main map screen, Air reconnaissance screen, Weather forecasting. SHIP CONTROLS: Visual search from bridge, Radar search, Control heading, speed etc., Fire heavy guns, Control anti-aircrafty guns, Allocate damage control via fully detailed plan views, Torpedo attacks, Fairey Swordfish flight simulator To receive your FREE Demonstration Tape of BISMARCK and a catalogue of our other products, send a self addressed envelope (at least 11cm X 22cm) with a 17p stamp to \"BISMARCK DEMO\", DEPT Z, PSS, 452 STONEY STANTON RD, COVENTRY, CV6 5DG, TEL (0203) 667556. (Offer only available while stocks last) CBM 64/128 9.95 (C) 14.95 (D) WARGAMERS SERIES "


"C+VG NOV software REVIEWS * FUNGUS OPEE Machine: CBM 64  Supplier: Players Price: .99 O *** a. My heart sank. Not another Players game. Bigtop Barney was an ordeal. Surely it was someone else's turn for Fungus. But the moral of this review is never judge a game by the software house's name. Fungus is a fun game. The plot, about Fungus craving the Great White Mushroom which can only be found in a remote part of the galaxy, is irrelevent. The graphics scroll from right to left. You control Fungus, a strange little man in what appears to be a space helmet. He runs about collecting mushrooms, leaping gaps, avoiding aliens and piling up the points. There are seven sections to cope with, various difficulty levels and the ability to vary the screen colour. Midnight Blue was my personal favorite. Not stunningly original but the game play is surprisingly addictive. Without fear of contradiction I can say Fungus grew on me. Paul Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Sparklers/CSD Price: .99 Dangermouse could be a great computer game star. Unfortunately none of the games released with his name attached has matched up to the potential of the character. Making Whoopee is no exception. It's a pretty basic arcade adventure maze game with some platform screens thrown in for good measure. A nice idea which doesn't quite work. The scenario is that Penfold, DM's faithful sidekick, has been kidnapped by the evil Baron Greenback who is out to disrupt the United Nations by making enough whoopee cushions to fill all the seats in time for the next congress meeting. He hopes the cushions will create such confusion that his plan to take over the world will work. The first screen of the game shows DM in his car at the top and a plan view of the maze-like streets below. Controlling DM's car is difficult to say the least. You must aim for the dead ends where you'll find entrances to the platform screens which, when successfully completed, yield a useful object which DM can carry back to his car and use to get past an obstacle in the streets. Graphics are average, sound the same and game play basically frustrating. Nice idea shame about the game. Tim Graphics Sound Value Playability DANGERMOUSE IN MAKIN A G the abus difficu Screen Graphics Sound Value Playability 14  Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Martech Price: .95 ROOM TEN IOA co co com it. Now here's a funny thing. A game that's completely different from version to version. The 64 War is Uridium-ish and not terribly original. But the Spectrum version is something else again. OK, SO it's still a straightforward shoot 'em up but thanks to the \"different graphics and original small screen layout War has a really nice feel about War will be fighting it out with the soon to be released Spectrum version of Uridium but shoot 'em fans might like to have both. Oh yes, you do get that cute flipping effect but in this case it's more like the 1942 fighter's roll. Tim . Graphics Sound  Value Playability Machine: CBM 64/ The Spectrum and Spectrum Commodore versions play Supplier: CRL virtually in the same way. Price: .95 Paul Room 10 must be one of the most obscure titles ever for a CBM64 Spec game. It tells absolutely nothing Graphics about this new and excellent Sound variation on the bat and ball game. Value The name actually comes Playability from the court or \"cell\" where the game is played in a futuristic leisure complex. Not that this is explained anywhere on the cassette packaging for either Spectrum of Commodore version sent to us. I assume CRL forgot to include the instructions. The players-two can playcontrol a floating bat and all they have to do is stop the ball hitting the far walls. Points are scored and the first to 35 wins. The screen is split in two allowing each player to view the game from his end of the court. pool ten GYTRY BERRETI ORL CROUP PLS "


"BARCLAYS SUPERSAVERS CLUB GETS YOUR SAVINGS OFF THE GROUND Competitions wrin Travel Prizes Only  tojom DANGERMOUSE IN MAKING WHOOPEE Regular Free Magazme Join Barclays Owny Supersavers Club and things start looking up. Because it isn't just a great way to save, it's great fun too. There's a free Club magazine with Club news and articles on fashions, sport and money matters. Plus some great competitions. And you can take part in Club activities like tennis, Orienteering and basketball, so you'll meet other Supersavers too. To join the Club just save $1, and you'll get a free account opening pack with a membership card and paying-in book. So join Supersavers now. And prepare for take-off. Club Actiities Free Account Opening Pack YERE Just fill in this coupon, cut it out and take it, together with , to your nearest Barclays branch. (Over 400 of them are open on Saturday mornings.) BLOCK CAPITALS I would like to open a Supersavers Account. Address Name BARCLAYS materno Scena CLUB Date of Birth a Postcode For very young children account will be opened on their behalf in the name of an adult. They will not be eligible for Club membership of the magazine until they reach the age of 7. Instruction to branch Attach this coupon to Supersavers Registration Card and send to Supersavers Head Office CVG 1511 "


"As if producing \"The Sports Simulation of the Decade» was not enough... NOW AVAILABLE.. ATARI ST.95 AMIGA .95 ATARI .95 .95 CASSETTE DISK Practice Driving Rang SPECTRUM 48K .95 Multiple 18 hole gols course AMSTRAD $9.95 CASSETT .95 OSK GOLD The most realistic 3D golf simulation available America TOURNAMENT DISKS!!!!! CBM 64 DISK .95 ATARI DISK .95 CASSETTE OWNERS!!! AMIGA Coming Soon Tournament Leaderboard DISK .95 4 extra courses .99 each CBM 64/128 ATARI ST DISK .95 (The Second Tournament .95) TEE SHOT APPROACH SHOT LEADERBOARD GOLF ACCES Software incorporated PUTTING R . kkb. 31 U.S. Gold, Units 2/3 Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 "


"software RE REVIEWS Machine:Spectrum I'm not calling you names. Berk on a new animated TV show For example, a monstrosity Supplier:Piranha is the hero of this crazy caper coming your way this autumn, can escape through the open Price: .95 which is the closest thing to an Berk lives in the lower regions trap just when you don't want it interactive cartoon I've ever of a dark and gloomy castle. toand it sticks around to Hey! This is the most fun I've come across. Here he serves the needs of the plague you for the rest of the had with my Spectrum since I Let's take a look at what The unseen Bad Tempered Thing. game. used it as a frisbee. The Trap Trap Door is all about. Well, Berk slaves away completing The characters are huge and Door is truly a fun game with a firstly it's probably a good thing tasks set by the Thing. Usually colourful, the animation is capital BI For Berk, stupid. No, to note that it's a game based these tasks are dirty and excellent and if there are any difficult. colour clashes they are so tiny Berk, a big, blue blobby as to be completely irrelevant. character, has two matesThe game play may be a bit Boni and Drutt. Boni is a skull simplistic. But when you get the and Drutt is a sort of firebreathing Flamethrower spider-thing chasing you while you are The centre of Berk's world is trying to get together a dish of The Trap Door. If he opens it Boiled Slimies for Thing, and lots of things happen. Monsters there's a spook drifting around, appear from the depths, things and Drutt is eating all the fall in and are lost forever but worms, and Thing's Anger the trap door is essential if Berk Meter is glowing, and, having a is to complete the tasks set by fit of the giggles, you'll Thing. suddenly realise that you're In the game, Berk sets out to having FUN! complete five tasks and earn a The Trap Door is a brilliant safe full of loot. Thing's game-one of the most commands appear on the original and entertaining I've screen one by one and you only seen for ages. get a limited amount of time to Tim complete each of them. LCIRCLLLLLLLLLLLLLL LLLLLLL But the game doesn't end if Graphics you fail to complete one task. C-HVG ba 1520 Sound You can carry on although DOO the results of your failure can Value LOCCCCCCCDBDCCO DOCCCCLCCL2ELEC take on rather dangerous forms. Playability TRAP DOOR Oro DISTRIKE FORCE COBRA WILSON MA 32 Machine: Spectrum To build the system The 48/12K Enemy has kidnapped top Supplier: Piranha cornputer experts and imprisoned them at his fortress. Price: .95 Each has a code which must be There are heroes and there are collected before access can be heroes. But Major Jan van gained to the main computer Heuson and Lieutenant Esther room Stern are in a league by Rather than give into this themselves. Intelligent, fearless fiendish plan, Supreme Allied and tough, they are the Command has put together a backbone of Strike Force Cobra. crack unit to smash The All right, it's time to declare Enemy's plan. an interest. The digitised picture That's where Major van of Major van Heuson at the Heuson and Esther Stern come beginning of the game is me. in. You must select the Strike And Esther Stern is none other Force Cobra team from eight than C+VG's editorial assistant candidates. Each has special Lesly Walker. skills. Van Heuson, for instance, The other pictures of the is an expert with explosives and Strike Force Cobra team belong Esther is a specialist in close to various hacks and hackettes quarters combat. of the computer press. But we The four members of SFC, don't really want to talk about armed with sub-machine guns them, do we? and grenades, find themselves Strike Force Cobra is from in the The Enemy's fortress. Piranha, recently responsible Killer robots, guards, automatic for some fairly decent games, weapons systems and booby Colour of Magic and the traps litter the place graphically wonderful You can switch from Trapdoor. Unfortunately, it's controlling one member of not as good. team to another as you attempt The plot is hardly new and to crack codes, explore the exciting. The world is under fortress and defeat the enemy threat of nuclear blackmail by The animated figures are very an evil genius known simply as mobile and agile. They can The Enemy. He has developed a jump, dive, crouch, stand up. computer hacking system kick etc. It's good fun to get which has enabled him to take them to dive through windows, control of all the world's machine gun blazing. defence systems. The fortress is a 3D maze, Select Strike Force quite fun to explore, but graphically quite crude. On my copy of the game! found I could not revert to the menu to change my team of toughies without re-loading the game. Not a major gripe, but it did become a little annoying. Graphics Sound Value Playability ogle Paul VNO OE C331, "


"HIGHLANDER THERE CAN BE ONLY ONE Manhattan: 1986. In a vast underground garage beneath Madison Square Garden, two men are locked in mortal combat The huge cavern echoes with the sound of clashing steel, for although this is the 20th century.one combatant wields an ancient samurai sword, the other a broadsword. The duel is deadly earnest, ending only when the loser is decapitated. For the victor, however it is only one more conquest in a drama he has been living for 450 years. A unique breed of men fated to duel down the ages to a distant time called the Gathering will battle for the Prize pover beyond imagination. The distant time is now. The place, New York, Highlander Productions Limited MCMLXXXVI. All Rights Reserved. TM Trademark owned by THORN EMI Screen Entertainment Ltd., and used by Ocean Software Ltd, under authorisation. Movie and Media Marketing Ltd., Licensing Agents. COMMODORE SPECTRUM .95 2098 A Ocean .95 AMSTRAD OCEAN SOFTWARE 6 CENTRAL STREET MANCHESTER M2 5NS TEL: 061 832 6633 TELEX 669977 OCEANSG "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES The largest range of discount computer software ORDER BY CREDIT LINE 809 4843 COMMODORE 64 *** SPECTRUM *** . RRP Our Price 9.96 750 8.95 796 9.96 9.96 7.50 6.95 8.95 9.95 8.95 8.95 995 9.95 7.50 6.75 7.95 5.95 9.95 8 750 995 750 9.95 14.96 7.95 996 9.95 1496 5.98 6.75 3.96 9.95 9.95 9.95 9.95 750 5.95 996 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.95 9.95 9.95 ASA 9195 +++ AMSTRAD PAPERBOY-D2 EXPLODING FIST I-D2 DOOMSDARK REVENGE-D2 MONOPOLY-D2 TOMAHAWK-D2 HI-JACK D2 ELITE-D4 TRAP DOOR DAN DARED2 MERCENARY TRIVIAL PURSUIT-D4 SHOCKWAY RIDER MAM VICE REVOLUTION D2 DRAGONS LAIR-D2 FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR-D2 1942D2 COMMANDO 86-D2 POWER PLAY-D2 ROOM 10-D2 DESERT FOX-D2 BOMB JACK I-D2 WINTER GAMES-D2 LEADERBOARD-D2 STRIKE FORCE COBRA MINI OFFICE 2-D4 CITY SLICKER-D2 STAR TREK D2 SILENT SERVICE D2 9.95 996 996 8.95 7.50 7.50 6.75 6.75 9.95 998 9.95 7.96 8.98 1.96 5.95 14.96 7.50 11.96 790 5.95 6.75 7.50 8.95 9.95 7.95 9.95 8.95 9.95 5.95  296 798 6.75 7.95 12.95 9.96 14.96 7.95 9.95 9.95 625 7.50 9.96 795 9.95 15.95 7.50 10.96 7.50 9.95 14.96 896    14.99 12.95 5.95 14.95 7.95 9.95 9.95 8.95 10.96 7.50 7.50 9.96 9.96 7.95 7.95 5.95 2.50 17.50 9.95 796 5.95 17.30 17.50 PAPER BOY EXPLODING FISTO COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0 LCI SHAOLINS ROAD CITY SLICKERCI LEADERBOARD \"SILENT SERVICE LAN BOTHAMS CRICKET HEADCOACH HIGHLANDER THE GREAT ESCAPE STAR TREK PUB GAMES DARK SEPTRE GALVAN INFODROID DARTES INFERNO ELITE-CI REVOLUTION FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR SHOCKWAY RIDER TT RACER TOMAHAWK HEARTLAND WAR DRAGONS LAIR ARCADE CREATOR LIGHTFORCE HI-JACK-CI STRIKE FORCE COBRA PSI-S TRADING COMPANY MIAMI VICE ROGUE TROOPER THANATOS THEATRE EUROPE THE BIG 4-DURELL TRAP DOOR PRODIGY TRIVIAL PURSUITS TULAD CAMELOT WARRIOR BATMAN-CI KONAMI COLF JACK THE NIPPER CYRUSS 2 CHESS DRUID PSI CHIESS *INFILTRATOR FTRELORD URIDIUM DYNAMITE DAN STRIKE FORCE HARRIER GHOST AND GOBLINS REVOLUTION TRAPOOR ASTERIX \"DESERT FOX  DESERT RATSCI WINTER GAMES 1942 GRAPHIC ADV CREATOR KUNG FU MASTER COMMANDO 86 BOME JACKI \"IKARI WARRIORS BOUNCES KNIGHTMARE RALEY DAN DARE TENNIS (KONAMI) NAPOLEON AT WAR +++ DISKS +++ AMDRUM CHEETAH 34.98 JEWELS OF DARKNESS-6128/PCW 19.86 TOMAHAWK (PCW) 19.96 G.GOOCH CRICKET (PCW) 19.96 BATMANPCW 14.96 INFORCOM TITLES IN STOCK FOR 6128 AND PCW 9.95 PAPERBOY D2 SPLODING FST-D2 IRIDIS ALPHA DI ALLEYKAT-DI ASTERIX TRAP DOOR NFLTRATOR -D2 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER-D2 DAN DARED2 BOBBY BEARING_02 SOLO FLIGHT 1-D2 VIETNAMD2 ACROIET-D2 DRAGONS LAIRDI TOUCHDOWN FOOTBALL-D2 SHAOLINS ROAD-D2 MARBLE MADNESS-D2 ROOM 10 DI LIGHTFORCE SHOCKWAY RIDER SILENT SERVICE-D2 JEWELS OF DARKNESS-D2 HOGHLANDER GHOST AND GOBLINS-D2 LORD OF THE RINGS-D4 PUB GAMES TRACKER_D3 LEADERBOARD_02 PARALAXDI GOLF CONS SET-D2 ASTERIX TOBRUK D2 FLOYD THE DROID DRUID CYBORG HOT WHEELS-D2 SUPERSTAR PING PONG-D2 HEARTLAND BISMARK-D2 KAYLETH MIAMI VICE-D2 SUMMER GAMES I-D2 CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING-D2 1942-D2 COMMANDO 86-D2 ELITE-D3 INTER SOCCER BOMB JACKI D2 \"IKARI WARRIOR-D2 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT FOOTBALLER OF YEAR-D2 CYBERUN STAR TREK D& WINTER GAMES-D2 TRIVIAL PURSUIT-D4 DARK SEPTRE-D2 INFODROID-D2 DARTES INFERNO-D2 THAI BOXING (Disk 10.96) POWERPLAY-DA ACED2 SUPER CYCLE-D2 HI-LACK D2 MERCENARY COMPENDIUM-D3 HACKER I-D2 STRIKE FORCE COBRA ALIENS-D2 SANXION-Da QUICK SHOT II JOYSTICK COMPETITION PRO 5000 JOYSTICK 9.95 7.50 5.96 9.95 9.95 6.95 7.50 7.50 7.50 12.95 24.96 996 7.99 7.95 12.96 9.99 750 . 6.95 8.96 795 9.95 5.95 8.96 5.95 6.95 9.95 7.50 7.50 7.50 129 11.96 11.08 14.96 * BBC ELECTRON SPY HUNTER RAID OVER MOSCOW TRIVIAL PURSUIT-D4 GRAPHIC ADV CREATOR -DS FOOTBALLER OF YEAR-D2 POWER PLAY-DISK ONLY COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0 IAN BOTHAMS CRICKET (BELEC) *IMPOSSIBLE MISSION SLITEDISK GREEM BERET PSYCASTRIA-DI 9.96 14.95 796 5.95 14.95 995 6.75 675 9.95 7.95 9.95 8.99 8.95 8.95 8.95 6.75 995 9.95 9.95 8.95 7.95 7.96 7.50 7.96 8888888888888888 9.95 7.95 9.95 7.95 7.50 12.95 8.75 9.96 7.95 8.75 796 5.95 7.50 ***ATARI RAID OVER MOSCOW-D2 HARDBALL D2 SOLO FLIGHT I-D2 FOOTBALLER OF YEAR MERCENARY COMPENDIUM-DS SUPER HUEYD2 SILENT SERVICE-D2 ATARI SMASH HITS 5-D2 FIGHTNIGHT-D2 9.95 7.95 7.95 7.50 5.95 5.95 9.96 14.96 9.96 9.95 9.95 1995 750 7.50 14.95 795 735 9.95 7.95 9.95 7.95 24.95 5.95 5.95 5.95 7.50 5.96 7.50 5.96 7.50 996 905 8.95 14.95  DISKS MERCENARY ST VERSION THE PAWNST ONLY L. C. PEOPLE-ST ONLY WORLD GAMES-ST ONLY KNIGHTS OF THE DESERTD LEADERBOARDDISK ONLY ULTIMA IV-DISK ONLY 22.50 22.50 32.50 22.50 120 9.96 +++ DISK SOFTWARE +++ 24.99 14.95 14.96 19.95 12.96 17.50 CI COMPATIBLE WITH SPECTRUM 128K 1296 14.35 24.95 24.96 22 50 795 596 9.95 7.95 ** SPECTRUM 128 TITLES ** PRINT SHOP 221B BAKER STREET GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR ALTER EGO (MF Versions) TRINITY (128 only) FLIGHT SIMULATORII FAST HACK EM ACTION REPLAY FINAL CARTRIDGE II THE EXPERT CARTRIDGE FREEZE FRAME III -(Cartridge) FAST LOAD CARTRIDGE INFORCOM TITLES IN STOCK FROM 8.95 7.50 FOOTBALLER OF YEAR SCRABBLE MONOPOLY FOOTBALLER MANAGER SUPER CYCLE ANY KONAMNI CARTRIDGE JEWELS OF DARKNESS WINTER GAMES 19.99 24.96 29.00 7.95 9.96 9.96 9.95 796 795 17.95 14.95 12.95 7.95 2.09 39.95 9.95 2.99 798 INTERNATIONAL MATCH DAY GLADIATOR 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE KNIGHT TYVE SAMANTHA FOX  HACKER THE MUSIC BOX FAIRLIGHT NODES OF YESODS GHOSTBUSTERS WINTER GAMES 7.50 7.95 9.96 24.95 9.98 os os anos 9.96 ALSO AVAILABLE ON DISK FORMAT DI 11.95, D2 .95, DJ 614.95. D4 .50, DS E22 $0. 9.95 For Mail Order Customers please send cheque PO to: S.C.S. (Dept CVG 10) PO Box 394 London NIS 9JT P&P included in UK. Europe add El per tape. Elsewhere at cost. SAE for list For C64 C 16 SPEC AMSTRAD BBC MSX KA YIE AR KUNG FU BOMBACK 3.95 FOOTBALLER OF YEAR SABOTOUR (C16 OR PLUS 4) WINTER EVENTS 6.50 LAN BOTHAMS CRICKET Acces and Visa card orders: 01-809 4843 — Credit Card line 01-800 3 156 To 01-631 4627 Credit card orders despatched same day subject to availability. *All new releases are subject to release dates from software houses. Please ring to confirm availability of new releases. If you would like to pick up your discount software from our shop please bring your copy of this advert to: S.C.S. Compucentre, Unit 5 221 Tottenham Court Road London WIR 9AF (near tube station Goodge St) Open six days a week 10.00am-18.00pm U13 6 "


"C+VG NOV Software REVIEWS 10 Following the success of C+VG's War Games Special in July, Dr Stephen Badsey, formerly of the Imperial War Museum and a researcher on the BBC's Soldiers series, is back to cast his expert eye over some of the latest war games on the market. RG 1 IWO JIMA SEAS CALM Machine: Spectrum/CBM64  Supplier: PPS  Oruce: .95 At Iwo Jima in World War controlling indirect fire from Two there was only one kind of aircraft and ships off shore. Japanese casualty-the dead. But to accomplish this the Of the 22,000 defending the computer offers the player as a island against American target, for each of his own invasion only 216 finally units, every one of the twenty surrendered. In this PPS game or so Japanese units on the the player, taking the island in turn. For a game Americans, must land and lasting 30 turns set aside a wipe out all opposition. whole afternoon-there is no Designer John Bethell has save mechanism. employed the same game To compensate for this mechanism as for his Falklands awkward playing mechanism 82. It is a slow, plodding the designer has had to ignore system, and works better at historical realism to speed the representing the grim advance game up a little. of the US Marines across the The American force is cut to island than the British about a third of its true size, manoeuvres in the Falklands. the Japanese defence But it hardly makes for a randomised, and an challenging or exciting game. improbable Japanese The key to winning is submarine added to the game. The result is not much like Iwo Jima, but the slow grind to destroy all enemy units gives a fair idea of what Marine tactics in the Pacific had to be. Iwo Jima is released as part of the Strategic Wargames Series (an odd title, the game has little to do with strategy) the idea of which is to provide beginners with an easily played wargame at a low cost. Fair enough, but there's no reason why beginners should be taught bad habits which they wil only have to un-learn later.  Graphics Playability Realism Value The morale system seems simple, but responds very well to recreating the behaviour of Civil War troops in running, rallying, and coming back to fight several times. A player needs patience, persistance, Machine: Spectrum/Amstrad CBM64 Supplier: Lothlorien Price: .95 (Cass) .95 (disk) TURN 1 POINTS JOHNNY REB II half a minute to load and fire their muzzle-loading muskets. The graphics, which are very impressive, actually show this happening, allowing the player to judge force. (He cannot, however, downgrade the state of his troops. the enemy the designer thought of that one!) Unfortunately this defence-strengthening, which takes up a large part of the program, isn't really needed as the Union forces can win against the computer as they stand. The computerised Confederates always attack in the same three places one unit at a time, rather than employing sensible tactics. If there was surplus memory available, it should have gone into correcting this, which for serious players really makes Johnny Reb Il a two-player game only. The playing mechanism is a very straightforward icon-based system, easy to use at high speed. The game can be set for real-time, in which it genuinely takes the infantry of both sides about CONTE I've never met the original Johnny Reb, but its successor is a good, interesting game of minor tactics in the American Civil War, for one or two players. The scenario offered is of a small Union force (numbers and sizes are not given, but it seems to be about eight regiments) defending a bridge and two fords against considerably larger forces of Confederates (either another player or the computer) while reinforcements come to their rescue. The terrain and forces are pre-programmed, but the Union player can add further field defences and upgrade the morale and weapons of his 2 WAR GAMES "


"C+VG NOV sobtware REVIEWS O force\". This is a bit like saying that in Viet-Nam the Viet Cong had a better industrial base than the Americans! and a determination not to be defeated in getting his men to stand before the enemy-all good qualities for a general. Occasional oddities in the equipment of both sides can be traced to a remarkable error in the instruction booklet, \"the Confederate Army had a better industrial base than the Union Graphics Playability Realism Value THEATRE EUROPE the year\", is now out. The graphics are Pact forces are virtually unstopable by a bit flawed this version, but still a conventional means, perhaps nuclear airburst over a city isn't meant unrealistically so. to look pretty. The ability of the Romanians to drive For those who can't take even World through Yugoslavia to northern Italy in War Three seriously the program has a ten days raised a few eyebrows, as did built-in option of action screens\" the American tendency to attack the allowing the player to shoot down Swiss Army for no apparent reason. aircraft and destroy tanks in true The game also includes the use of arcade style as part of the battles. strategic chemical rockets for gas I hated it, but non-wargaming friends attacks on cities, which neither side thought it was the best part of the game. actually has and a reflex For the rest, the player controls land launch-on-warning system which we operations in Europe at Corps and hope neither side will use. Army levels, and has some realistic On my best effort with the NATO decisions to take about how to deploy forces I finally halted the Pact drive just west of Paris. Three European cities had been reduced to radioactive rubble. West Germany had been devastated. In 30 days nearly as many people had died in Europe as in the whole of World War Two. It was a victory. Machine: Spectrum Supplier:PPS Price: .95 The teletype chatters happily ... \"Warcomp on line\"... The war computer s talking to you... \"Civilian casualties will be minimised where possible. Thank you for your attention\" ... The date may be tomorrow, although I hope not! Warsaw Pact conventional forces have attacked western Europe from Denmark to Italy. The player can take either these or the NATO forces opposing them, with the object of winning the war without blowing up the world. At his disposal lie the tactical use of gas on the battlefield, a deep airborne strike against the enemy rear supplies, and strategic rockets capable of destroying cities. Any one used too early, or in the wrong place, may trigger a massive nuclear exchange which will destroy Europe for ever. The Spectrum version of Theatre Europe, last year's strategy game of his airpower, and the moment when he must decide to go nuclear. In this version of a future war the Graphics playability Realism Value Ca AUSTERLITZ gumim! When Machine: Spectrum CBM64/Amstrad Supplier: Lothlorien Price: .95 (Cass) $14.95 (disk) and carried the fight to the enemy. The Lothlorien game which bears the same name as the battle offers none of these features, at least in the Spectrum version which I tried. No artillery is shown, and cavalry fight in exactly the same manner as infantry. The combat mechanism (given in full in the booklet) gives the greatest advantage to troops holding defensive positions, and the only way to win with the French is to place them behind river lines. AKSE EHBERE KEYS, TURGERLI, LA The sun of Austerlitz rose over this battlefield in modern Czechoslovakia on 2nd December 1805 to show, through the morning mist, 80,000 troops of an Austrian-Russian Alliance confronting 70,000 under the great Emperor Napoleon, By the end of the day the Allies were in headlong retreat, and Napoleon had won what is always regarded as his greatest victory. He won it with superior training of his troops, with superior manoeuvrability, with superior co-ordination of infantry, cavalry and artillery, and above all with the superior leadership of his Marshals of France, each commanding one of the six Corps of his army. The side that won took the offensive Allies. Any resemblance between the Austerlitz and the batle of the same name, or any other Napoleonic battle, is a co-incidence. It doesn't even feel like a wargame. initiative and personalities in carrying them out. But it simply doesn't work. Marshals of France attack superior numbers with fractions of their own forces, march in the wrong direction, and generally behave in a manner which would get them all reduced to corporal, if that, in about five minutes. The computer-controlled enemy, on the other hand, shows a persistence and desire to fight well above that of the real There is a very promising system of devolved command, whereby the player as Napoleon gives outline orders to his Corps commanders, who use their own Graphics Playability Realism Value "


"C+VG NOV sobtware REVIEWS 12 The action flows fast and furious without any irritating delays or glitches. Tennis is a well put together game it plays well and looks good. If you're a sports fan, check this one out. Tim Maching: Spectrum Supplier: Imagine/Konami Price: .95 You cannot be serious? Another tennis game? Aren't there enough already? Well, not quite. Imagine's conversion of the Konami arcade game is rather good, despite not being terribly original. The players are drawn in a sort of outline cartoon style to avoid the colour clash problem and dash about the forced perspective court pretty quickly. However it's sometimes difficult to tell exactly where and how high the ball is, despite the \"shadow\" effect the playable and easy to get into players to control two players right from the first volley. The if you get my drift. Things computer player does seem to can get quite hectic and lead have the habit of bashing over a to real life arguments if your few untouchable aces if he's in partner misses a crucial shot. trouble. But he's not Still, it all adds to the unbeatable, and this makes the excitement. game even more playable. There is a two player option Scoring follows the normal for the singles, and you can real life game, you can play redefine the control keys to suit advantages and deuces which yourself. The sound effects are can add to the tension of a hard pretty good for the Spectrum fought match. Calls from the despite the compulsory, judges appear in a little window irritating little tune over the at the \"back\" of the court which intro screen. is also occupied by the scoreboard. Individual scores appear in small boxes superimposed on the right hand side of the screen. You can't argue with the judges -the computer will put Graphics Sound  Value Playability TENNIS ZOLA Konami LESERS NO MS FOOTBALL MANAGER IMAGINE LOVE TQUE Machine: Atari Supplier: Addictive Games Price: .95 Glory, glory, it's the face that scored a thousand goals good old Kevin Toms. Just when you thought you'd seen the last of Football Manager it pops up again. If you haven't seen the game here's a quick rundown. You have to try and take your team to league or cup victory. You can pick you own team, enter the transfer market, look after the weekly financial bills, play matches and fight promotion and relegation battles. This is football as it is. Football Manager has also been repackaged across all its other formats -Spectrum, Vic 20+16K, CBM 64, Electron, C16/Plus Four, BBC Model B and Amstrad. It all goes to prove that you can't keep a good game down. Paul program uses to help you. It also seems all too easy to run up to the net and play lots of close in shots to defeat the computer controlled opponent. But these are minor gripes really, the game is pretty you back on the baseline despite all your protests! A really original touch is the doubles feature which allows two people to play against the computer. Shame the option didn't extend to allowing two Graphics Sound Value Playability 000 MOONLIGHT MADNESS o ao  Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Bubble Bus Price: .95 John Cain had a lot of success with the budget-price Booty. But it's doubtful whether Moonlight Madness will repeat his success. If it had been a budget game and I wouldn't mind betting that's what it was intended to be Moonlight Madness might have got a better reception. But at .95 it's a rip-off. And that's a shame because Bubblebus has put out some nice product over the past year, including a great budget title called Classic Invaders on the Amstrad. But MM does not cut the mustard at this price. It tells the story of a young lad who arrives outside the old oak door of a mansion demanding: \"Bob-a-job, Mister.\" Could he be a cub scout by any chance? The door has been opened by an ancient scientist who promptly collapes, gurgling \"My pills.\" Your task is to get his life saving pills out of the safe which can only be opened with 16 keys and then by cracking the combination. Get the idea? A succession of screens packed with ladders, platforms and puzzles follows. The puzzles are fairly entertaining, the graphics are fairly crude. There's nothing really new here. Paul Graphics Sound Value Playability HUWUWV IIIIII1111111111 000 IO "


"THE SACRED ARMOUR OF ANITIA e. Find this EDIAS Actual screen shots from the Commodore Pack includes 16 Page COMIC READ THE COMIC! PLAY THE GAME! WONEN AS THE Available from all good computer game stockists or by mail order from Palace Software, 275 Pentonville Road, London N1 9NL Send cheque or postal order for .99 plus 80p p&p. PALACE Access and Barclaycard holders phone 01-278 0751 STOOD OUT AS A CHAMPION O "


"I COMMODORE 64 8.95 . SPECTRUM 48K 7.95AMSTRAD 8.95 ==== === A street cop with a test-pilot mentality AS STREET HAWK. Ir locean 93 ====== = OCEAN SCETUIRRE UIMITEGA OCERN HOUSE 6 CENTRAL STREET TANCHESTER M2 SOS TELEPHONE 083 832 6633 TELEX 669921 OCEANS "


"C+VG NOV sobtware REVIEWS 13 DEACTIVATORS  Machines: transporters and lightsC64/Spectrum/Amstrad working. To remove the bombs from Supplier: the building you will have to Ariolasoft/Reaktor carry them to the exit and throw Price: .95 (tape) them out. There is not always a direct route out of the building, .95 (disk) so you will have to throw the There's nothing like a droid. Not bomb between a number of when you're playing droids to remove it. Deactivators, there isn't! If you The exit room is the only haven't got one or two of these room with a door which leads to nifty little things then you're stuffed. Certain elements in each UUUUUU DE FACING NORTH PERIODICALLY A BUS RUSHES PAST, AVAILABLE EXITS W.E.S YOU HAVE BEEN ARRESTED FOR JAYWALKING AND TOSSED BACK INTO THE SEA. PRESS ANY KEY TO CONTINUE This is one of the most building will not function until original games to come from you replace the corresponding Ariolasoft and it's British! circuit board in the computer Programmed by the people room. who brought you The Music These include lights, matter Studio, this little number will transmitters and door or grab you, shake your senses window openings. Some circuit upside down and then do it all boards are dummies and have over again. Not an easy game to no effect and others switch off put down once you've started. obstructing forcefields. The basic idea is this: You are You can move around the in charge of a bunch of droids building in a number of -the Deactivators. Your different ways. Through the mission is to remove terrorist doors, dropping through bombs from five different hatches, sliding up and down buildings. Level one is a four by poles, or using the matter four building-later levels get transporters. much bigger and more Moving around would be complex quite easy if it were not for the The display at the top of the Guard Droids who have only screen shows two rooms at a one aim in life. To vapourise time. In the centre of the lower you. Fortunately for you we've part of the screen there's a map got a games guide to of the building showing the Deactivators in the thing you positions of your droid team found stuck to the front of this and the bombs. On the right issue and it tells you how to there's a status box which deal with the guards in no shows anything the droid under uncertain terms! your control is carrying. What with the guards, The map window can be sideways-yes sideways replaced by droid control icons. rooms, blocked exits and But I'll tell you about those later. entrances and different As well as bombs you'll find gravities in each of the rooms circuit boards scattered about things tend to get a bit weird These have to be replaced in the from time to time. Most of the buildings computer in order to time to be more precise. get certain things in the You see these buildings building-like matter belong to a top secret research establishment so they need cursor is over two droids, then different gravities in some the droid shown hovering is the rooms, and some of them just one available for selection. have to be sideways or upside In scan mode, moving the down. joystick in any of the four This makes controlling the directions will move a cursor droids and throwing things over the building map. about reasonably difficult. OK, Releasing the joystick will very difficult! You see as soon display the highlighted rooms. as you enter an upside down this mode will enable you to room your joystick controls get plan your routes and keep an reversed. Which makes life eye out for any guards which interesting until you come to might be lurking in adjacent terms with it. rooms. All the bombs in a building In building five, no scan mode are set to go off in a sequence. If is available until one of the you are carrying an active bomb circuit boards is replaced in the you will see the fuse burning in computer! Sneaky, eh? the status display. Be careful Beginners may find the game when throwing bombs as they looks complicated. It isn't so can only withstand a limited don't be put off. Take time to number of impacts before they read the instructions and play will explode. through the first level which is Four control icons apear in really a training session for the icon window. They are: what comes later. Droid select: Enables the Using the icons is pretty selection of another droid by simple and gets simpler with moving joystick left or right and practice. Don't try to pick up a pressing fire. Control is circuit board when you're switched to this droid. holding a bomb or the other Throw: Enables the droid way around -because you'll being controlled to throw a end up one droid less if you do. bomb or circuit board. Throwing items around Scan: Alllows you to view all between different gravities is an the rooms in a building. art which again comes with Movement: Returns you to practice. But you'll soon learn to movement control of the position the droids effectively to currently activated droid. catch items. Control passes A droid can only carry one automatically to the catcher. object at a time. Trying to pick Successfully complete a up a bomb whilst carrying building and you get an extra anything else will cause the droid which can be placed at bomb to explode. To pick up will in the next building to give either a bomb or a circuit board you an extra edge. you move your droid over it. Graphics are good and the To throw, press the fire sound on the 64 version is button to open up the control superb. Playability? Well it goes icon window and select the off the C+VG scale. bomb throw icon by pressing Deactivators is a demanding, fire. challenging and original game. The display is replaced by a It requires quick thinking and meter showing the angle and fast reactions. I was hooked direction at which the throw will from the moment I started be made. playing. Deactivators is When a new level starts, you destined to become a cult will be placed in droid select game. Get it. mode. This is shown by the Tim flashing highlight on the map. 64 Spec/Ams By moving the joystick left and Graphics right. The cursor can be moved Sound over all the available droids in the building. Pressing the fire  Value Playability 10 10 time. In shows twee top of th. oo 26 EP 129123 56 "


"ADAM CAVEMA The mountains are waiting to claim you. Travel with us back in time to the Prehistoric Ages. Here you must guide Adam in his quest to rescue his wife from the clutches of the hostile mountain men. She is well guarded, the desert is crawling with mighty beasts, prehistoric birds roam amongst the caves, rugged savage mountain men will try to kill you as you enter the dead lands, there is no turning back from this nightmare journey. Can you succeed or will you perish like all those who went before you. A full colour 3D cartoon action packed arcade strategy spectacular. PROGRAMMING Ron Rose Polar Pierre is a one or two player arcade game where two can play at the same time. Guide Pierre or his cousin Jacques through an icy obstacle course, racing through ski jumps, mystery chalets, lifts, electrogenerators, shooting snowballs, springboards, stompers and thunder and lightning. Polar Pierre also includes a construction set so you can design and play your own screens. Both games available for: Commodore 64/128 cass 9.95 disk 14.95 Atari 400/800/XL/ XE 48K ram cass 9.95 disk 14.95 COMPUTER GRAPHICS Art Huff 1 OR 2 PLAYERS 100 ACTION PACKED GAME SCREENS BUILD YOUR OWN Available from all good computer stores or post free from: Databyte 15 Wolsey Mews, Kentish Town, London NW5 2DX Telephone 01-482 1755 Adam Caveman and Polar Pierre are TM'S of Digicorp Inc. 1986 Digicorp Inc. DATABYTE "


"MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY MAIL-SOFT ++ SPECTRUM ** PAPER BOY.... 1.5.50 ..5.50 Voyou use Software COMMANDO 86 BOMB JACK II. FISTII CITY SLICKER JACK THE NIPPER SPITFIRE 40 ..5.50 NOW YOU CAN HIRE IT BEFORE YOU BUY IT! HIGHLANDER BOMBACK THEATRE EUROPE DARTES INFERNO WINTER GAMES COMMANDO REVOLUTION TOMAHAWK FOOTBALLER OF YEAR STRIKE FORCE COBRA TRAP DOOR FIGHTER PILOT TRIVIAL PURSUIT DRUID FIRELORD Non 5.50 MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY + COMMODORE PAPER BOY-02 10.99 ALLEYKAT -01...... CALLORONI URIDIUM-01 ACROET02 SHAD LINS ROAD... LORD OF RINGS-03 TRAP DOOR TRIVIAL PURSUIT -04 SILENT SERVICE-01.. ACRO JET-02... WINTER GAMES-01 DAN DARED2 MARBLE MADNESS-D2  ACX II 02. COMMANDO-02 COMMANDO '86-02 PUB GAMES DRAGONS LAIR -01 PARALAX-01 LEADERBOARD-01 FLOYD THE DROID DRUD SUMMER GAMES 1-12 HOT WHEELS-02 MARBLE MADNESS --12 UGHT FORCE PS 5 TRADING -01 KNIGHT GAMES 01 ROOM 10-02 SHOXWAY RIDER 1942-02 FOOTBALLER OF YEAR STAR TREK ASTRY SOLO FLIGHT II -01 DOLOSSUS CHESS 4.0. FLOYD THE DROO MERCENARY-01 GHOST+GOBLIN-D1 ..........6.99 CYBORG POWER PLAY--02 BISMARK-02...................6,99 1942-02 STRIKE FORCE COBRA...........6.99 QUICK SHOT II .......7.99 OVER 8000 different titles available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, ELECTRON, BBC, AMSTRAD, ATARI, and MSX computers. ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too. HIRE PRICES from only 75p INC. P&P. 20% DISCOUNT off all purchase software. LIFE MEMBERSHIP .00. Hire your first title FOC. FREE CATALOGUE FREE HINTS AND TIPS. FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given) ALL GAMES manufactured ORIGINALS with full documentation, OVER 25,000 satisfied members EUROPEAN members welcome UP TO 65% OFF software, regular sales lists sent to all members Full computerised system keeps track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with staff of 14 who knows what the word service means. Backed by our own software company and programmers  MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY  PAPERBOY-02 ELITE14 FIST II D2 TOMAHAWK -11 DAN DARE-02 REVOLUTION-02 HIJACK 02. GHOST+GOBLIN-01 DOOMSDARK REVENGE TRIVIAL PURSUIT-04 TRAP DOOR STRIKE FORCE COBRA BOMB JACK II 02 COMMANDO 86-02 1942-02 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER...... COMMANDO-01 TRIVIAL PURSUIT -04 COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0 YIE AR KUNG FU -01 SPY HUNTER RAID OVER MOSCOW PSYCASTRIA-01 JAN BOTHAMS CRICKET BEACHHEAD *****ATARI ***** MERCENARY SECOND CITY MERCENARY (ST ONLY HARO BALL-02 PGHT NIGHT-02 SMASH HITS SOLO PUGHT I-02 FOOTBALLER OF YEAR MONOPOLY INTER KARATE JEWELS OF DARKNESS FOOTBALLER OF YEAR WINTER GAMES VIS AR KUNG PU WORLD CUP CARNIVAL AN BOTHAMS CRICKET..... COMMANDO EUROPEAN GAMES FOOTBALLER OF YEAR DESERT RATS PSICHESS STAR TREK TURBO ESPRIT ROGUE TROOPER CYRUSS 2 CHESS THE GREAT ESCAPE GHOST-GOBUN FAIRLICHTI VAN BOTHAMS CRICKET ARNEHAM KNIGHTMARE RALLEY..........5.50 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER...... 5.50 LEADERBOARD............. Send now for free catalogue stating which NAME computer MIDLAND ADDRESS COMPUTER LIBRARY 28 College Street Worcester WR1 2LS Telephone 0905 611072 Disk version available: D1 19.95. D2 .95, D3 .95. D4 (14.95. Post & Packing included in UK. Europe add  per tape. Elsewhere at cost. Cho/PO to: Mail-Soft, PO Box 589, London N15 6JJ. Access orders accepted you do not see the game you want, simple deduct 30% of the RRP and we send 100, \"Uenotes new releases will be sent to you as soon as the game is released Genie ICOS G-TEN LIMITED BEST TITLES AT DISCOUNT PRICES AMSTRAD Toe Disc GHOSTS 'N GOBLINS 725 11.25 INFILTRATOR SPINDUZI TS 1125 HEAVY ON THE MAGICK 725 NA BBC MICRO DESERT FOX 725 NAVAMI VICE TOMAHAWK 650 9.75 YEAR KUNG FU COMMANDO 6.50 11.25 CITEDAL WORLD CUP CARVINA 7.25 1125 CAULDRON 8.50 10.75REPTON 2 SHOGUN 8.50 10.75 SPEECH KUNG FU MASTER 725 1125 GREEN BERET 8.50 1125 AIRWOLF GREEN BERET 850 115 LEADERBOARD 725 10.75 STRIKE FORCE HARRER 735 HEAVY ON THE MAGIOK 725 1075 SHOPIN 7.25 11.25 GHOSTS 'N GOBLINS 725 11.25 THRUST 850 115 BOTEUR 850 NA PAPERBOY GHOSTS N GOBLINS 011 NEXUS VAMI VICE Authorised dealers for Datalie INTERNATIONAL KARATE 550 NA ACE PAPERSON 550 11.25 TRAP 725 750 BOX OFTENS 750 NA ORAGONS LAR 7.25 10.15 DATALIFE 5500 TPI COMMODORE 64/128   How DATALIFE S OS0O 451P! WORLD CUP CARNIVAL 725 1125 126 725 11 DATALIFE S SS GO TP SPINDUTY 11.25 ARCANA 5.50 NA DATALIFE 5 S0096 Please send SAE for full ft. Please specity machine Please allow 7day delivery. Mailorder only Please add sperm (UK PO Overseas ad fperem Pase make Cheques Postal Onders terting only made payable to G-Ton Limited G-TEN LIMITED 1st Floor, Commerce House, 146/150 Commercial Street, London E1 6NU Ahoy there you scurvy eyed scrawny sons of sea dogs.. you'll soon get a chance to hoist that spinnaker and challenge those lager swilling Aussie dingos for the greatest sailing trophy of all... THE AMERICA'S CUP 400/806 NOW LOOK. 29 XLUXE ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 Arnie's AMERICA'S CUP Challenge OFFICIAL AMERICA'S CUP COMPUTER GAME "


"G+VG NOV Software REVIEWS 14 SPIKY HAROLD HEAD COACH Machine: Spectrum Getting the balance between HOUSTON CLEVELAND Supplier: Addictive offense and defence is crucial to Games success -so study your scout's report well. Price:.95 Once the team is established Have you got what it takes to it's out onto the astroturf for the win the Superbowl? If you're action. This is depicted in smug enough to say: \"Yeah, of similar fashion to that other course,\" then you should try popular U.S. Football game Head Coach. It's a humbling from Mind Games you see experience. the grid iron pitch and tiny Kevin Toms and his Addictive players dash about on it at your G 20 50 20 G Games outfit are trying to do for command. American Football what You have a limited choice of THE BALL IS WITH HOUSTON Football Manager has done for defensive and offensive plays 1st Down & 10 on the HOUSTON UK soccer, Will the U.S. version which appear in menu form at sell for as long as Kevin's the bottom of the screen. This is FIELD GOAL MISSED original? Only time will tell where your scouting report but there's no question about comes in useful -you should the time, effort and detail that have a good idea what plays the statistics. rebuild your team during the off programmer Simon Davies has oposition are likely to use At his stage you also get season. This is quite a tricky put into this strategic against you. But beware offered other players by other stage again menu driven. simulation. sometimes they throw in a teams in a trading sequence Then it's back to the action Head Coach is entirely menu surprise or two. but you can't palm just any old again. driven. You begin the game at The irritating thing about this player off on your opposition, Only a couple of gripes -the the master menu which allows part of the game is that you only your offer can be rejected. And two \"downs instead of four, you to do stuff like check your get two chances to move the don't take just anyone from the irritating music and it would be offense and defence line-ups, ball ten yards rather than other teams either. Check their nice to have a few real player check skill levels, or simply go four as in the real game. statistics before agreeing to names in the line ups instead of to the next match of the season. Addictive say this is to speed anything. This is a useful stage made up ones. Oh yes, when you first start things up. But sometimes you if you've got an injured player in Head Coach will appeal to playing you can choose which get carried away planning your your squad. American Football fans with team you wish to manage from game plan to the real rules that The aim of the game is, of strategic minds and owners of the several divisions. it's a real jolt to find your out of course, to reach the Superbowl. Addictive's other classic soccer For the first season' you are it after just two moves! To do this you must win your simulation. But there's STILL given a team to play with During the game you can also division, get into the playoffs, room for a decent arcade Subsequent seasons allow you call up into on how your game emerge successful from this American Football game. Are to actually set up a team of your plan is working out how your stage and go for the big onel you listening out there!? Tim own from scratch. You choose moves failed or succeeded. This It's a long hard road and your offensive and defensive helps if you find yourself in a fortunately you can save the Graphics line-ups for the each match tight spot. game at any stage. Sound after checking up on your After the match is over it's After the first season' you  Value scout's report of your next back to the master menu where move into the college draft\" opponent. you can check up on your game stage which enables you to Playability Machine: C64 Unfortunately, Harold isn't. for food. With only 24 hours until  Supplier: Firebird When the game starts, you winter, Harold must trek along are treated to a nice version of Price: .99 the hedgerow picking up food 'Flight of the Bumble Bee' Spiky Harold is a hedgehog. to eat, so he doesn't starve. Just which keeps you in a jolly mood And being a hedgehog, he must to make it interesting, his path through the game. prepare for hibernation when is blocked by unfriendly things, On eating a piece of food, you winter comes. While watching such as sulphur clouds, get a lovely piece of animation his pocket telly, Harold hears bouncing balls and peeping as Harold's jaws open and the weather man say something periscopes. \"munch\" down on it. On your about a sharp frost closing fast You must guide Harold travels you will find things such and that all hedgehogs should though the chambers (about 57 as grapes, apples, pears and be asleep by now. in all) and help him in his quest even the odd glass of wine. If Harold drinks the wine, all his moves are reversed. This means that Harold is one stoned hedgehog!!! The graphics are quite nice and well defined, but rather colourless. Harold is completely white, which is a bit strange because I thought all hedgehogs were brown. All the other creatures follow suit, although in different colours. Sound is not of the highest quality but the tunes are very good, although the drums sound a bit strange, This game has been converted from the Spectrum and it's easy to tell. This may put some 64 owners off, but for .99, you can't complain. A nice game, if you like running around collecting things. Chris va Graphics Sound  Value Playability BIGTOP BARNEY BLIVES ITEMS TIME Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Players Price: .99 There are times when you realise you've just wasted precious time. It felt like this "


"C+VG NOV Software REVIEWS 15 VELOCIPEDE II Machine: C64 Supplier: Players Price: .99 Players, a reasonably new software house, has launched a game with a rather unusual title, Velocipede l/l While the game is loading, you have the chance to play another little game, which is quite simple, but fun nevertheless. It was one of those \"paint the squares\" type and proved to be more fun than the main game in the end. Funny that. again, only harder. The main game is all about a The scenarios start and end at man called Mr Megafat who has a bike shop. When you start, Mr just taken up a new hobby M. wheels his pride 'n' joy out cycling. However, as luck would of the shop and leaps upon it. have it, the roads home are very You finish the screen when you dangerous (he must live round reach the next bike shop. my estate) and they are All the shops, by the way, frequented by the usual nasty have different names, like bugs, aliens, and general Mike's Bikes and Bill's Cycles. riff-raff. No matter how many Not wanting to die young, Mr paragraphs I write on this M. has developed a new game, it's not going to hide the unicycle with a plasma cannon fact that the game is really sad, Very handy... as you have and I mean SAD! probably worked out, you can T he graphics are colourful, use this cannon to dispense of but a little blocky, and the the low-life which hassle you. sound is in the form of a strange Now what you have to do is tune, which gets on your nerves control Mr M. and his unicycle extremely quickly. through four different Just a boring left to right scenarios, and get him safely scrolling game. Steer well clear. home. Mr M. can make his cycle Chris do jumps which will help you to cross various obstacles like Graphics lakes, ponds, and large holes in Sound the ground. If, however, you do Value manage to get home, you go through the whole charade Playability COBBLESTONE OG SEE LIVES LEFT SPEED c SPEED HIN9895 BRHASE d  COUNTER   few shots. It would have been designer), or for those who just nice to be able to call up a map like a simple round of computer on the screen which shows your golf. correct position. Still, what can you expect for .997 All in all, Hole in One is fair Paul fun for those who look back in Graphics fondness to the days when plus Sound fours were fashionable (The Ed. for instance), or those who like Value to wear loud check trousers (our Playability COCO Machine: CBM 64 woods and irons to choose Supplier: Mastertronic from. Perhaps part of my Price: .99 problem is that I haven't the faintest idea what each Hoping for a hole in one was individual club is supposed to perhaps a little optimistic. But I do. A one iron means had hoped to keep my score absolutely nothing to me. under double figures for each You take aim by moving an hole. I guess golf just ain't my arrow back and forth across the game. top of the screen. Pressing the In fact I hate the real thing, so fire button fixes the direction it's funny why I quite like the shot will hopefully go in. playing the various golf games The amount of power to the that are around, Mastertronic's swing is made by moving the Hole in One included. joystick to the left and then to Unlike Ariolasoft's Golf the right. The time lapse Construction Set and between the two movements Leaderboard from US Gold, effects the amount of hook or Hole in One has just one course slice on the ball. to play. When the ball is 12 yards or About the top two thirds of under from the hole, the screen the screen is taken up with a changes to an overhead view of view of the course and the the green. golfer. The graphics are simple, The one major criticism of the but serve their purpose. game I have is that, although The lower part of the screen is you're supplied with a course taken up with details of hole, map on the inlay card, I kept distance, par, club and wind losing my sense of direction, direction. especially after hacking away at There's a choice of 14 clubs, the ball in a clump of trees for a BA HOLE IN ONE after playing Bigtop Barney through boredom. It's simplistic, boring and Act one sees the clown graphically crude. But enough walking along a tightrope, of the compliments, let's get leaping through hoops and down to the action. jumping some really talented You control Barney, a circus highwire walking canines. clown, who must perform four Act two see Barney indulging **death-defying\" acts. Those in a spot of platform fun foolish enough to undertake the_(boring), collecting balloons. acts could well face deathAct three has Barney riding a unicycle over an assault course gives budget software a bad of wooden platforms. And name. Bigtop Barney 7 Bigflop, finally, act four has Barney on a Barney, more like, trampoline, bouncing from one Paul platform to another, swinging on ropes. Graphics It's all very basic stuff that Sound probably won't have looked Value much good four years ago. It's all very mundane and Playability wou "


"NEXT HINTS, TIPS & MAPS on the latest 64 GAMES t's freebie time again and Commodore User is set to add value to your favourite magazine by giving you 24 extra pages of your favourite column Play to Win. This column has established itself as the leading hints and tips column in the business with scoops so far this year on Ghosts and Goblins, Druid and Mercenary the Second City to name but three. Play to Win III is 24 pages of full colour maps, hints and tips of the toughest games around. For security reasons we can't say what the games are going to be but they will be big, tough and frustrating. Our crack team of tipsters have been beavering away through the Summer backed up by our regular game reviewers. Miss this one and we can guarantee you will be disappointed. FREE WITH COMMODORE COMMODORE USER DELIVERS! EXTRA! The Daily Sun EXTRA! DELIVERS! MYSTERIOUS VORLI BAFFLES POLICE RESIDENT PERFECT SERVICE AMAZING SCREEN SCENE STOPS THIS The Christmas launches are beginning to arrive. We already have copies of 1942, Jack the Nipper, Deactivators, Ghosts 'n' Goblins on the C16, Paperboy with lots more promised. The November issue will have a mass of Screen Scene occupying most of the extra pages left over by Play to Win which is appearing as a super free booklet. TYPE-INS C16 type-ins are back. We are giving away a free game from Robcom's King Size 50 Game Pack. Robcom reckon you'll like the sampler so much you'll buy the company er sorry, the tape. TRIED AND TESTED Little red boxes to control your home? Tried and Tested investigates. Hot Shots, Into the Valley, US Hotline, Buzz and all your favourite regulars. On sale October 26. Yours for a pound. MONTHS P.S. Our previous Play to Win issues sold out. Order your copy now. "


"Asterix OMPETITION Obelix, who fell into the magic potion when a baby and now is permanently under the potions influence, becomes angry when Getafix refuses to give him any. He kicks the cauldron which shatters into eight pieces and flies in all directions. Asterix and his pals must find the pieces. It means they will have to venture right into Roman camps and strongholds. And that could prove very dangerous. ASTERIX COMPETITION Okay, Asterix fans, here's a competition with a difference-14 of them, in fact. We've been waiting a long time for Asterix and the Magic Cauldron, Melbourne House's computer game based on the famous cartoon character. But now it's here, we're celebrating with this spot the difference competition. Printed here are two pictures of Asterix and his faithful companions Obelix and Dogmatix. They appear the same but, in fact, there are 14 differences. All you have to do is find them. Frist prize is four specially cased Asterix books plus a six foot Asterix frieze for your bedroom wall. The next 20 runners-up will get a copy of the game-which is available on the Commodore 64 and Spectrum. Send your entries, together with the printed coupon, to Asterix Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is November 16th and the chief barbarian's decision is final. Asterix and the Magic Cauldron is an arcade adventure ranging across 50 screens. It starts with Asterix queuing with other villagers to get a share of Getafix's magic potion, without which they would fall under the power of the Roman army. Name Address Please indicate which computer you have. Spectrum Commodore 64 0 ERO .UCOZO "


"Any more realistic and you'd need insurance to ride it. There are two guys in front. One coming up from behind. And another just off your elbow. The screams of the bikes are deafening. The wind is pulling your face off your head. Your adrenaline is pumping like Hoover Dam. You kick your bike to the right. He's bumped. He's flying. You push on. Take your eyes off the road for a millisecond, and you could end up a part of the road. It's all a blur. No time to think. You've just gotta pump it. The next turn's the steep one. Bank, bank! The curve's wide open, but the screeching wheels of the bike in front are kicking gravel right in your...your... You hear a phone. A phone? Hey, wait a minute. This isn't a bike. It's a chair. It all comes back now. Yes. You're home. The pizza's here. The computer's on. Looks like it's going to be another quiet night after all. batt On Super Cycle! If it were any more realistic, you'd need insurance to ride it. Commodore 64 Spectrum 48K Amstrad Disk Cassette Cassette Disk Cassette $14.95 $9.95 $7.95 $14.95 $9.95 SUPER CYCLE Manufactured in the UK under license from Epyx by U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 2/3, Holford Way Holford, Birmingham, B6 7AX. Telephone: 021-356 3388 Ey is stered trademark No. 1135270 Sentro Commodore 64/128 vinge U.S. GOLD) . COMPUTER SOFTWARE "


"IREBIRD SOFTWARE ERST FLOOR 06-TO NEW OXFORD ST. LONDON WC2 Available for BBC 'B and soon for AMSTRAD CPC SERIES CBM 64/128 SPECTRUM 48/128 PRICED: .95 CASSETTE .95 DISC (CBM, BBC) .95 DISC CAMSTRAD). FIREBIRD IS A REGISTERED TRADE MARK OE BRITISH TELECOMMUNICATIONS PLC | UIOJO FIREBIRD GOLD "


"USPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 AM SIT RADI .195 .195 MIAMI WILDE . c cein SOLO Crocket and Tubbs have heard the word on the streets-a contraband shipment is due in town, Get in the right place at the right time and you'll find your contact into the underworld. Its a mean scene shoof first and you'll lose the news, but keep your finger on the trigger or you'll be the news! TM ond 1984 Universal Cay Studios, Inc. All Rights Reserved Licented by Merchandising Corporation of America, Inc. OCEAN SOFTWARE O CENTRAL ST MANCHESTER M2 5NS TELEPHONE 001832 0033 TELEX 069977 "


"HARRIET'S LAST BATH by Roy Turner Roy Turner is the dad of a famous son — Steve Turner, the man who is responsible for those brilliant arcade adventures including Avalon and Dragontorc and the ultra zappy Quazatron. So see if you notice the Turner touch. 3 LET S=0: LET X=0: LET L=0 5 PAPER 1: BORDER 1: INK 7: C LS : PRINT ,,,,\" HARRIET'S L AST BATH \": PRINT : PRINT by ROY J TURNER.\": F OR K=1 TO 5: BEEP.6,18: BEEP .7 , 14.5: NEXT K 6 LET E=\"THE RICH, LOVELY HAR RIET IS DEAD, FOUND IN HER BATH I N HER COUNTRY HOUSE. YOU HAVE TO INVESTIGATE. WAS IT AN ACCIDENT ? OR SUICIDE? OR... MURDER? GOOD SLEUTHING\" 7 GO SUB 535 8 PRINT: PRINT \"PRESS ANY KE Y TO CONTINUE 50 IF INKEY=\"\" THEN GO TO 50 60 CLS : PRINT AT 10,0;\" =SUIC IDE\",\"1=ARREST\",, \"2=ACCIDENT\",, \"3=VIEW\",,\"4=QUESTION\" 70 INPUT \"WHAT DO YOU WANT TO DO NOW?\" ; 75 IF A4 THEN GO TO 70 76 CLS : GO TO 80+A 30 GO TO 9060 31 GO TO 2100 82 GO TO 9065 B3 GO TO 1000 84 GO TO 2000 85 GO TO 3000 530 REM WORD PROCESSOR 535 PRINT 537 IF LEN E#>32 THEN GO TO 54 The rich and beautiful Harriet has been found dead in her bath at her country house. What happened? Was it an accident? Suicide? Of could it have been murder? As the detective investigating the circumstances of Harriet's demise, you have to decide. Eight people were staying at Harriet's house when her death occurred Bessie, George, Arthur, Hennie, William, Lily, Jannie and Mervyn. You can quiz then, asking questions about their feelings, finance, work, suspicions and whereabouts when the body was found. But all you get are three chances to decide what happened. Was it an accident, suicide or do you feel there is enough evidence to arrest someone for murder? These options appear on the main menu. If you arrest someone you will have to support your case. To leave a room or finish questioning someone, press enter without inputting anything and you will return to the main menu. On some screens you are required to enter the name of an object, subject or person. Use the first three letters of the name as used by the program. For example, to examine a cupboard enter \"CUP\". To ask someone about their shoes enter \"SHO\". Now the suspects are assembled in the lounge. They nervously await your revelation. Who was involved in the foul play? What have you pieced together? Is there a murderer in their midst? Meanwhile, if you fail to track the mystery of Harriet's last bath, we will be publishing the full solution at a later date. Good Sleuthing. HARRIET'S LAST BATH 540 IF LEN E$<=32 THEN PRINT E #; \".\"; RETURN 543 GO TO 537 545 LET C= 550 IF C=32 THEN GO TO 575 555 LET F#=E# (32-C) 560 IF E$(33-C) =\" \" OR F =\",\" O R F $=\"\" OR F$=\"\" OR F$=\"; \" OR FI=\"\" OR F$=CHR$ 11 THEN GO TO 580 565 LET C=C+1 572 GO TO 550 575 LET C=0 582 PRINT E$( TO 32-C) 535 LET E$E$ (33-C TO) 590 IF E$(1) =\" \" THEN LET E$EE $(2 TO) 595 GO TO 537 1600 LET 0$=\" ROOM\": PRINT AT 0, \"O=LIBRARY\":\"1=DINING\":0$\"2=C OCKTAIL LOLINGE\":\"3=LOUNGE\"'\"4=SM OKING\":06'\"5=CORNER LOUNGE\":\"6=B ILLIARD*:0$ 1292 PRINT \"7=REC.\":0$\"B=HALL 13=SHOWER\":\"14 =THE RAND'S BATH\", 1003 PRINT \"15=MERVYN'S\":0$'\"16 BESS'S\";0#'; \"17=JENNY'S\";0'\"18= GEORGE'S\":0*';\"19=HENNIE'S\":06'; \"20=ARTHUR'S\":0$\"21=THE RANDS ;0$'\"22=CLOAKROOM\"\"23=OUTSIDE\" "


"Body of Harrish BILLIARD SULIT KITCHEN N19 Carle MAW HARRIET Lowse stour Arthur SERVORY BESS H Soort DINING COCKTAIL HOWNIE reon [SPURS  Room Reception SMOK WG Room Wilhiam RNA HAL Cloud mohry JENNLE LILY Lante Flowers 18:47H T Room Flowers 10060 de o TT HARRIET'S LAST BATH GROUND Floor FIRST FLOOR HARRIET'S COUNTRY HOUSE 1004 INPUT \"VIEW WHERE?\";A: IF A>23 THEN GO TO 1004 1006 CLS : GOSUB 4000+A+A 1008 GO SUB 535 1009 INPUT \"PRESS ENTER TO LEAVE \",\" EXAMINE\";A$ 1010 IF A$=\"\" THEN GO TO 60 1015 GO SUB 3000 1020 RESTORE 9500: GOSUB 1025 1021 IF M$=\"END\" THEN GO SUB 50 BO: GO TO 100B 1022 GO SUB C+C+5000: GO TO 1008 1025 LET A$=STR# A+A$ 1027 LET C=0 1030 READ M$ 1035 IF M$=\"END\" THEN GO TO 105 GO TO 1030 1050 RETURN 2002 PRINT \"O. DOCTOR\",,\"1. JENN IE\",, \"2. MERVYN\",,\"3. WILLIAM & LILY RAND\", \"4. HENNIE\",,\"5. ARTH UR\",, \"6. GEORGE\",,\"7. BESSIE\" 2010 INPUT \"WHO DO YOU WANT TO O UESTION? \";A 2020 IF A=0 THEN GO TO 2070 2030 60 SUB 4045+A+A 2040 GO SUB 535 2050 INPUT \"WHAT DO YOU WANT TO ASK ABOUT? FINANCE, WORK, FEELING S, SUSPICIONS, WHEREABOUTS WHEN BO DY FOUND, HOBBIES, PROBLEMS OR ANY OBJECT YOU HAVE SEEN ENTE RAT LEAST 3 LETTERS OF SUBJECT 1: A$ 1040 IF M$<A THEN LET C=C+1: "


"4020 LET E$=\"YOU SEE BOOKSHELVES TWO WRITING TABLES, CHAIRS, THREE ARMCHAIRS AND SETTEE, ALL WITH C USHIONS. THERE IS A DISPLAY-CASE ABOVE THE BOOKS. LOGS ARE STACKE BY FIREPLACE \": RETURN 4002 LET EN=\"YOU SEE TWO LARGE R DUND TABLES SURROUNDED BY CHAIRS SIDEBOARD , COCKTAIL BAR, SERVING TROLLEY AND SLIDING GLASS DOORS LEADING TO COCKTAIL ROOM\": RETUR N 2054 IF At=\"\" THEN GO TO 60 2055 GO SUB 3000 2058 RESTORE 9600: GO SUB 1025 2059 IF M$=\"END\" THEN CO SUB 90 00: GO TO 2040 2060 GO SUB C+7000: GO TO 2040 2070 INPUT \"DO YOU WANT TO KNOW ABOUT HER HEALTH, MY OPINION.MY EXAMINATION OR ANY SPECIFIC CAU SE OF DEATH? \";A$ 2074 IF A$=\"\" THEN GO TO 60 2075 GO SUB 3202 2079 RESTORE 9700: GO SUB 1025 2079 IF M$=\"END\" THEN GO SUB 90 00: GO TO 2090 2080 GO SUB C+5002 2090 GO SUB 535: GO TO 2070 2105 FOR Z=1 TO 5: FOR G=1 TO 2: FOR H=1 TO 4: BEEF .03,24: NEXT H: PAUSE 6: NEXT G: PAUSE 50: N EXT Z: FOR K=1 TO 5: BEEP .6,18: BEEP.7,14.5: NEXT K 2107 LET S=2 2110 INPUT \"Who do you want to a rrest? \";a 2120 LET A=0: GO SUB 2200 2130 INPUT \"What method?\";a$ 2132 GO SUB 2202 2140 INPUT \"What item was used? \";A$ 2150 GO SUB 2200 2155 INPUT \"What motive? \";a 2157 GO SUB 2200 2160 INPUT \"What item did only t he murderer know about?\"; a 2163 GO SUB 2202 2165 IF S<>5 THEN GO TO 2180 2170 CLS : PRINT \"WELL DONE! YOU'VE CRACKED IT! YOU ARE A FIR ST CLASS DETECTIVE! FAME AND PRO MOTION IS IN STORE FOR YOU!\": ST OP 2160 LET E=\"OH DEAR! PRISONER R ELEASED WITH APOLOGY! YOUR CASE IS NOT STRONG ENOUGH\": GO SUB 53 4004 LET E=\"YOU SEE PHOTOS ON W ALL. WICKER CHAIRS ARE AROUND SMA LL LOW TABLES. DRINKS AND GLASSES CABINETS ON ONE SIDE AND A GLAS S SIDE OF ROOM LOOKS OUT ONTO RO SE GARDENS\": RETURN 4005 LET E$=\"YOU SEE 2 SETTEES, SEVERAL ARM CHAIRS, 2 SMALL BOOKC ASES AND SOME PAINTINGS ON WALLS .TV, VIDEO AND HI FI EQUIPMENT\": RETURN 4008 LET E=\"YOU SEE EASY CHAIRS WITH CUSHIONS, COFFEE TABLES WIT H MAGAZINES AND ASH TRAYS ALSO A CARD TABLE AND CARDS. A CABINET IS AGAINST WALL\": RETURN 4010 LET E$=\"YOU SEE FIRESIDE CH AIRS WITH CUSHIONS, A LARGE, LOW C ENTRE TABLE AND A CHESS TABLE WI TH CHESS SET PIECES STANDING ON IT. A SMALL PIANO IS IN THE CORN ER\": RETURN 4012 LET E$=\"YOU SEE SMALL LOUNG E CHAIRS AROUND THE WALLS,A TROP HY CABINET AT ONE END. SOME PHO TOGRAPHS ARE FRAMED ON WALLS ALS SOME SOUVENIERS FROM TRAVELS. THE ROOM OVERLOOKS SIDE PATH AND SHRUBS\": RETURN 4014 LET E=\"YOU SEE A SETTEE AN D 4 EASY CHAIRS, RADIO ON SIDEBOA RD, SMALL TELEVISION, COFFEE TABLE AND FISH TANK\" : RETURN 4016 LET E=\"YOU SEE A STATUE IN CORNER, TWO HUGE POT PLANTS ON E ITHER SIDE ALSO A GRANDFATHER-CL OCK\": RETURN 4018 LET E=\"YOU SEE USUAL FITTI NGS, FURNITURE AND EQUIPMENT WITH DOORS TO REAR GARDEN TO SERVERY AND TO CORRIDOR\": RETURN 4020 LET E=\"YOU SEE FOOD WARMER S, CONTAINERS AND CUTLERY AND CRO CKERY WITH LARGE HATCH TO DINING ROOM\": RETURN 4222 LET E$=\"YOU SEE A DOUBLE BE D WITH CABINETS AND LAMPS ON, DR ESSING TABLE WITH STOOL, DRAWERS ,2 ARMCHAIRS,2 SMALL UPRIGHT CHA IRS, LINEN-BASKET AND HUGE CUPBOA RD ACROSS ONE SIDE OF ROOM\": RET HARRIET'S LAST BATH 2190 LET L=L+1: GO SUB 2190+L: G O TO 7 2191 LET E=\"THE CHIEF IS NOT PL EASED\": RETURN 2192 LET E=\"THE CHIEF IS FURIOU S\": RETURN 2193 LET E$=\"YOU ARE THROWN OUT OF THE FORCE IN DISGRACE\": GO SU 3 535: STOP 2200 RESTORE 9800: GO SUE 1025 2210 IF M#<>\"END\" THEN LET S=S+ 2215 LET A=A+1 2220 RETURN 3002 PRINT PRINT A$: IF LEN A$ 3 THEN LET A=A*(1 TO 3): RETU RN "


"HARRIET'S LAST BATH "


"THE HELICOPTER FLIGHT SIMULATOR etHUERENEGADE ARCTIC RESCUE OIL BLAZE BRUSH FIRE NIGER UH-IX Cosmi The Original SUPER HUEY is Now Available for the Atari: cassette $9.99, disk f.14.99; and the Amiga, Apple and Atari ST at $19.99 SEX EXCITING RESCUE & COMBAT SCENARIOS: \"RENEGADE\" Chase the stolen UHLX before all the bases in the area are destroyed. \"BRUSH FIRE\" Use your fire-fighting capability to save homes in the burning hills of California, \"GULFOFTERROR\" Tackle determined terrorists in their gunships and submarines \"BERMUDA TRIANGLE\" Your mission is weather reconnaissance, but in the Bermuda Triangle anything can happen. \"ARCTIC RESCUE\" Battle in the harshest conditions to save lives. \"OIL BLAZE\" Save lives and fight the fire before the whole well blows AVAILABLE for the .99 % 14.99 COMMODORE 64/128 Cassette Disk "


"GREMLIN ALWAYS AHEADC Footballer of the Year The game to answer every boyhood dream-the chance to make to the very topol football stardom Starting on your path to glory as a 17 year old apprentice with a Fourth Dision toom and only  and 10 goal scoring and in your pockets, the lootboiling world is at your feet Adopt the idently far estional foobialer and develop a career through the ups and downs of match des, transfer deals and nures etc Display your talents in Football Lagu GEFA FA and Cup games and then if you're good enough the ultimate accolade of your sport, the Footbal of the Year Award om First Division giants and opted to stay with Rovers. This promising centre-back has sign ed a new contra team manager D Thorpe annou today. Cox, attrar t he relith .nd Managing LBERT DEBUT Derek IN Footballer of the Year C16+4 MSX Spectrum 4: .95 .95 Amstrad, BBC/Electron Atari CBM 64/128 .95 Avenger C16 +4 CBM 64/12 MSX Spectrum 4 endo signalls Amstrad remarka which has orn plaver orer e his DIV lie Ban Tow for collected .943 With spt ough or his h day's Ma against n 2nd Diena FOOTBALLER OF THE YEAR SALLover join ser The V Lovers for the for pa Lurope to new SF about his City. Cooper ott for 12 mo injury, brid week to me to a French medical tre expert Pierre has treated oth pean Stars. He is likely as City are transfer aders, Weve ill be reluctant with him. United looked the more menacing side in for e cor frccoulcrest of leg injust R expert Pierre He is likely Recor pasientering BANKS. English Interna or striker KENNY MOR fre could be out of actic withe rest of the me Eun because of a leg injury The injury also threatens ljus chances of making it into d with National Squad for the world him later in the year. Morgan, aged 29, has mis will be large part of this season beca several other injuries. He pullo leg muscle yesterday in an ex Hore game, after scoring a spo allavainst Rang , jus chances Squad for in n kes has bec week com after not contract. His departe end of an era signalling the ti remarkable scoris which has made th born player the club prolific scorer in their war league history. m the les muscles cam a lar Avenger. bo Availa Way Availab \"The Way of the Tig the marti arts des in which you had to prove your physical is to become a Ninja Now you have to prove your supreme mental agay in the second part of the Way of the Tiger saga \"Avenge the t r ade adventure Yoermonthe Grand Master of Flamehe assassinated your foster father Nahi and stolen the Scrols al Metsin. You have mom to the God won that you wavenge Yerron's murderous act and recover the sacred strok. Your menestre menyvanied in de deadly. All your skills courage and nerve be called upon when you begin the fral cole in the Great Keep Good Luck only the bravehearted wil surve Avenger (Way of the Tiger II) Thing of Availabi Gremlin Graphic Alpha House, 10 Carver Stres Available November "


"AD OF THEIR TIME ear um 48K 95 Ton Future Knight Trailblazer C16+4 MSX Spectrum 48K .95 .95 CBM 64/128 Amstrad .95 Disk Amstrad Disk CBM 64/128 Disk CBM 64/128 Future Knight Are St Randolph to uke up the challenge of death the a befalon the lar mad Amelie held in the evil dutches of Spebot the Terrible. Ading upon an inter dimensional distres signed from the galactic SS R udon your One Mat attack suit and venture forth in pursuit of your beloved captors. Defend yoursel nobly against the Berra Seutty dock Right your way through 20 grueling levels onto the planet's sur face into Socott's where the lute af meleles with the out Come of your morti comba win the wesome Hencho droid there any entry and browy latin the modem day universe? Available Novembe 164/128 um 48K .95 $14.95 heir FUTURE KN/EHTE TRAILBLAZER Bounder C16 36 vailable .95 November the Tiger Thunder no the unknown beamed speed pushing your relees to therimis in this de Inity ethierating jou ney that's not one for the fintheasted Roll let roligt avoiding the endless chasis of doom that lay in and around the squares a mystery Squares that sometimes slow your prog n o con with a consequences and sometimes speed up ungesyormak you jump tomatically. Keep a keen eye on the dock as the quicker you complete your bak the higher wil be your bonus CEM 6 versions aming player simultaneous game. Amstrad Disc venion contains tres. .95 November a Spring vailable +4 .95 26 wailable Graphics er Street December Software Ltd., Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 Trailblazer Available November "


"kunix SFEEKINE VR CAN YOU ON! HANDLE THIS MUCH POWER? ZAP!. The KONIX SPEEDKING packs more punch. That's why it's fast overtaking ordinary joysticks to become one of the world's most popular hand control. As it's name suggests it's built for fast handling to give you lightening fast control. Micro switches await your slightest movement, and fly into action ZAP, POW, SPLAT BLAM giving you instant reactions to every command. Tough, rugged and made in Britain to the very highest standards, the KONIX SPEEDKING comes with a twelve month guarantee. Available for:Spectrum and Spectrum Plus, Commodore 64, 128 Vic20. All Atari Computers, Electron, M.S.X. Computers, Amstrad and Oric at .99. Also:BBC, Commodore C16, Plus 4, and, Dragon at .99. Trade and export enquiries contact Wayne or Sandra on 049525 5913. Please send me Speedkings at .99 each. Speedkings at .99 each (Price includes postage and packing in the U.K. Overseas orders please send .50 per Speedking.) Computer make and model I enclose a Cheque/Postal Order for made payable to KONIX. Please charge my Access/Visa No.Card holders can telephone on 049525 5913. Signature Name Address Postcode Telephone Send to Kontx Computer Products, Unit 13, Sirhowy Hill Industrial Estate, Tredegar, Gwent NP24QZ. U.K. "


"5248 LET E$=\"YOU FIND AMONG ITEM S OF CLOTHING A LETTER FROM HARR IET TO ARTHUR SAYING SHE WILL NE VER MARRY HIM BUT ASKING HIM UP FOR THE WEEKEND TO TALK\"; RETURN 5012 LET E$=\"A SMALL BOTTLE OF S TRICHNINE FALLS OUT\": RETURN 5214 LET E$=\"A HATPIN HAS BLOOD ON IT\": RETURN 5016 LET E$\"SILHOUETTE SHAPE ON WALL IS NOT IN LINE WITH BLOWPI PE. A TINY PIECE OF LEAF IS IN E ND\": RETURN 5018 LET E=\"IT IS FROM A LAUREL \" : RETURN 5020 LET E$=\"YOU SEE LABELS INDI CATING THAT OBJECTS ON DISPLAY A RE BLOWPIPE AND DARTS, AND THE M AGIC IMPLEMENTS OF A WITCHDOCTOR A NOTE REFERS TO A MASK ON COC KTAIL LOUNGE WALL). THE DOOR OF DISPLAY-CASE HAS A LOCK\": RETURN 5050 LET E$=\"IT WAS PLUGGED IN A ND ON UNTIL FUSES BLEW\": RETURN 5052 LET E$=\"FANLIGHT IS OPEN AL SO MAIN WINDOW SLIGHTLY AJAR. MU DDY AND WET MARKS ARE ON CILL\": RETURN 5254 LET E$=\"ON STUDYING IT YOU REALISE IT HAS RED FLUID ON IT.. YES IT IS NEW BLOOD!\": RETURN 5056 LET E=\"YOU SEE ONE HAS BEE N MOVED IT HAS A RED TIP: RETUR 5022 LET E$=\"IT IS UNFORCED. THE DOOR OPENS\": RETURN 5024 LET E$=\"INSIDE IS A HOOK FR OM WHICH HANGS SMALL KEY... YES, I T FITS THE DISPLAY-CASE IN LIBRA RY\": RETURN 5026 LET E$=\"CLOTHES ON HANGERS PUSHED ASIDE. SOME HAVE SLIPPED TO FLOOR. STRONG SMELL OF LAVEND ER\": LET X=X+1: RETURN 5028 LET E$=\"INSIDE IS A WITHDOC TORS MASKI\": RETURN 5050 LET E=\"YOU SEE USUAL TOILE TRY ITEMS AND AN OLD PHOTO OF HA RRIET AND GEORGE TOGETHER BOTH W EARING SMART EXPENSIVE CLOTHES I N FRONT OF A DAIMLER\": RETURN 5032 LET E=\"UNDER SOME CLOTHING IS A COPY OF A WILL\": RETURN 5034 LET E=\"WILL MADE OUT TWO D AYS AGO. PROPERTY AND NEARLY ALL MONEY GO TO NIECE,JENNIE.WITNESS ES ARE SOLICITOR AND BESSIE\": RE TURN 5236 LET E$=\"INSIDE ARE CLOTHES SHOES LOOK DISTURBED\": RETURN 5238 LET E$=\"SOMETHING GLISTENS INSIDE A SHOE AT FRONT. IT IS THE NECKLACE BELONGING HARRIET\": RE TURN 5040 LET E$=\"IN IT YOU SEE A LET TER \": RETURN 5042 LET ET=\"YOU FIND CIGARETTES AND LIGHTER IN ONE POCKET AND A BILL FROM A BOOKMAKER FOR . THERE IS A SLIGHT SMELL OF LAVEN DER\": RETURN 5044 LET E$=\"IN HER 50'S SHE MUS I HAVE HAD STRIKING LOOKS. THERE ARE NO OBVIOUS MARKS BUT ONE HA ND IS RAISED BY HER NECK\": RETUR 5958 LET E=\"THE LIGHT FALL OF S NOW SHOWS SEVERAL FOOTPRINTS UP AND DOWN PATH. YOU NOTICE SOME C ATPRINTS\": RETURN 5060 LET E$=\"PATH AT SIDE OF HOU SE HAS SEVERAL FOOTPRINTS BACK A ND FORTH. THE STRETCH PAST THE BI LLIARD ROOM TO LOG STORE HAS ONL Y ONE SET OF FOOTPRINTS LEADING TO AND FROM THE STORE\": RETURN 5062 LET E$=\"THERE IS A LIGHT PA TCH BELOW AN EMPTY HOOK WHERE A WITCH DOCTOR MASK HUNG\": RETURN 5064 LET E$=\"YOU SEE A TINY WOUN D, AN INSECT BITE?\"; RETURN 5066 LET E$=\"UNDER ONE YOU FIND A PART USED PACKET OF CIGARETTES \"I: RETURN 5068 LET E$=\"IT IS TO A FRIEND C GNTAINING VERY UGLY REMARKS ABOU THER SISTER HARRIET AND REVEALI NG JEALOUSY AND HATRED\": RETURN 5070 LET E$=\"SOME FEEL FREEZING AS IF RECENTLY PUT THERE\"; RETUR HARRIET'S LAST BATH 5072 LET E$=\"THE SNOW IS ALMOST MELTED. THERE IS A MANS PRINTS A ND CIGAR ASH\": RETURN 5074 LET E=\"THEY ARE HALF AS B! G ASAIN WHERE THEY ARE PARTIALLY MELTED\": RETURN 5276 LET E$=\"IT LOOKS LIKE A FUR NITURE KEY. TO TRY IT NAME THE I TEM OF FURNITURE\": RETURN 5978 LET E$=\"YES IT FITS\": RETUR 5050 LET E$=\"YOU SEE NOTHING OF ANY SIGNIFICANCE\": RETURN 5282 LET E=\"THERE IS A SUIT INS IDE AND A JACKET\": RETURN 5084 LET E$=\"ON A SCRAP OF PAPER IS A LIST OF FINANCE COMPANIES\" : RETURN 7000 LET E \"I HAVE  IN SAVI NGS. I EARN A MODEST SALARY AS L IBRARY ASSISTANT\": RETURN 5246 LET E$=\"IT IS NOT MARKED AN D THE FIRE LAYS SUBMERGED IN FOA MY WATER WHICH IS AT A HIGH LEVE L\": RETURN "


"7201 LET E$=\"I AM A LIBRARY ASSI STANT STUDYING TO BECOME A HISTO RIAN. I WAS A TYPIST\": RETURN 7002 LET E$=\"I AM A AVID READER. I LOVE HISTORICAL OR OTHER RESE ARCH ABOUT HUMAN RACE. I SKI AND PLAY TENNIS. I LOVE THE COUNTRY A ND MOUNTAIN EXPLORING\": RETURN 7003 LET E$=\"I LIKED HARRIET. SHE WAS VERY FOND OF ME. I LIKE MERV YN IN SPITE OF HIS LACK OF STABI LITY AND RASHNESS. I GO OUT WITH HIM A LOT BUT WE ARE NO MORE THA N GOOD FRIENDS AT PRESENT\": RETU RN 7004 LET E$=\"I SENSE THERES BEEN FOUL PLAY BUT I HAVE NO IDEA OF ANYONE WISHING HER HER HARM\": R ETURN 7005 LET E$=\"I WAS IN SMOKING LO UNGE AT TIME OF HARRIET'S DEATH WITH MERVYN FOR ABOUT HALF HOUR BEFORE\": RETURN 7006 LET E$=\"I HAVE NO PROBLEMS OR WORRIES. MY ONLY REGRET IS BE ING PARTED FROM MY TWIN SISTER W HO HAS BEEN ABROAD FOR MANY YEAR S, BUT I AM SAVING TO GO AND VISI T HER\": RETURN 7007 LET E$=\"I LAST SAW HARRIET YESTERDAY EVE BUT HEARD HER TALK ING TO BESSIE EARLIER THIS MORNI NG ABOUT THE HEATING\": RETURN 7909 LET E$=\"I LAST LOOKED AT TH E SOUVENE IRS WITH MERVYN YESTER DAY. I KNOW NOTHING ABOUT THEM\": RETURN 7009 LET E$=\"HARRIET TOLD ME YES TERDAY ABOUT IT. THE ONLY OTHER PERSON WHO KNEW WAS BESSIE. I WA S STUNNED AS THE OTHER RELATIVE S HAD BEEN IGNORED ALSO HARRIET' S HUSBAND WHO HAD BEEN SO GOOD T HER IN THE PAST\": RETURN 7010 LET E#=\"MERVYN PUT IT ON AN DMADE ME LAUGH\"; RETURN 7013 GO SUB 9900: RETURN 7014 LET E=\"I HAVE NO SAVINGS I BELIEVE IN USING MONEY\": RETURN 7018 LET E$=\"I AM CERTAIN IT WAS FOUL PLAY. IT'S FUNNY THAT HARR IETS HUSBAND TURNED UP YESTERDAY OUT OF BLUE ALSO THE EX BOY-FRI END BUT THEY DONT SEEM KILLERS\": RETURN 7019 LET E=\"I WAS IN SMOKING RO OM WITH JENNIE WHEN THE DEATH OC CURRED\": IF X>=6 THEN GO TO 991 9: RETURN 7020 LET E=\"MY MAIN CONCERN IS GETTING A JOB, BUT HAD AN INTERVI EW RECENTLY. I JUST WANT JENNIE T O SEE HOW SERIOUS I AM\": RETURN 7021 LET E$=\"I WAS LAST WITH RAR RIET TOGETHER WITH JENNIE YESTER DAY. I FELT SHE LIKED ME. I WASN OT AT BREAKFAST BUT WE WERE ALL UP TILL LATE YESTERDAY\": RETURN 7222 LET X=X+1: LET E=\"I DIDN'T SAY ABOUT THE DEBT BEFORE I WAS NT PROUD OF IT. I'LL HAVE TO SORT IT OUT SOMEHOW. I WAS STUPID IN THE PAST BUT NOW I HAVE MET JENN IE I'VE CHANGED\": RETURN 7023 LET E$=\"I TAKE SIZE 6 SHOES YES THEY ARE WET .. I WENT OUT F OR SHORT STROLL EARLIER\": RETURN HARRIET'S LAST BATH 7024 LET E$=\"I DIDNT TAKE MUCH N OTICE OF THE DISPLAY\": RETURN 7025 LET E$=\"IT WAS VALUABLE -I WAS ALWAYS NAGGING HER ABOUT NOT LOCKING IT AWAY\": RETURN 7026 LET E=\"I THOUGHT OF GETTIN G MORE LOGS AFTER I TOLD THE SAD NEWS TO THE OTHERS, IT WAS COLD \": RETURN 7227 LET E=\"I WAS IN THE JEWELR Y TRADE UNTIL RETIREMENT\": RETUR 7215 LET E=\"I AM UNEMPLOYED -TH E ELECTRICAL FIRM I WORKED FOR W ENT BANKRUPT. I WAS AN ASSISTANT MANASER\": RETURN 7016 LET E$=\"I HAVE NONE\": RETUR 702B LET E$=\"I AM A KEEN TRAVELL ER. I LIKE HIKING MOTORING AND L OVE INDOOR GAMES SUCH AS CHESS,C ARDS, SNOOKER, ETC. I READ A LOT\": RETURN 7229 LET E=\"I HAVE NO REASON TO SUSPECT ANYBODY BUT ARTHUR IS N O GOOD. I DISLIKE JENNIES YOUNG M AN AS WELL... TARRED WITH SAME BR USH\": RETURN 7030 LET E$=\"I LOVED HARRIET IN SPITE OF OUR SPLIT A FEW YEARS B ACK. WE STILL SAW EACH OTHER FRO M TIME TO TIME. HER DEATH IS A G REAT SHOCK AND TRAGEDY. I AM NOT CLOSE IN ANY WAY TO ANY OF THE OTHERS\": RETURN 7031 LET E$=\"I HAVE NO PROBLEMS JUST WANT TO ENJOY MY RETIREMEN T\": RETURN 7032 LET E$=\"I BROUGHT THEM BACK FROM THE CONGO, THE PYGMIES USE THEM TO PARALYZE GAME\": RETURN N 7017 LET E$=\"I HAVE NEVER HAD A DEEP RELATIONSHIP WITH ANYONE BU T AM VERY MUCH IN LOVE WITH JENN IE. I LIKED HARRIET AS SHE WAS S O FRIENDLY TO ME ALTHOUGH YESTER DAY EVENING SHE SEEMED UPSET. I D O NOT KNOW THE OTHERS MUCH\": RET URN "


"7033 LET E$=\"I HAD COME OUT OF M Y BEDROOM AND HEARD A CRASH (WHIC H MUST HAVE BEEN THE FIRE FALLIN G ONTO THE BATH). I KNOCKED AND C ALLED BUT THERE WAS NO RESPONSE. BESSIE ARRIVED AND WE FOUND THE DOOR WAS UNLOCKED AND WENT IN TO FIND HARRIET LYING IN THE BATH, DEAD\": RETURN 7034 LET E$=\"I LAST SAW HER ON T HE LANDING JUST BEFORE SHE WENT INTO HER BEDROOM WHEN I CAME UP STAIRS AFTER THE OTHERS HAD RETI RED\": RETURN 7035 LET E=\"I KNEW THAT IT HAD GONE WRONG. I SAW THE HEATING FI FM'S VAN ARRIVE. I WENT TO FRONT DOOR AND SHOWED THE MAN IN WHEN ALL WERE CALLED AFTER THE BODY AS FOUND. THE CENTRAL-HEATING IS GAS REGULATED BY THERMOSTAT. IK NOW LITTLE ELSE ABOUT IT\": RETUR FOR A SHORT TIME\": RETURN 7044 LET E$=\"I HAVE NO WORRIES\": RETURN 7045 LET E$=\"I LAST SAW HER IN T HE COCKTAIL LOUNGE LAST NIGHT.SH E WAS COMPOSED BUT SEEMED DESPON DENT\": RETURN 7046 LET E$=\"I HAVE SEEN THE ITE MS BEFORE BUT NOT LATELY. I KNOW GEORGE TREASURED THEM. I HAVE NO IDEA ABOUT THE CASE BEING OPEN .. DIDN'T KNOW IT WAS LOCKED\": R ETURN 7047 LET E$=\"I TAKE A 10 SHOE. I STEPPED INTO A DEEPER PART OF T HE SNOW WHEN OUT WITH A CIGAR EA RLIER AND GOT MY TROUSERS WET\": RETURN 7048 LET E=\"I KNOW LITTLE ABOUT HEATING I HAVE NO IDEA WHAT IS WRONG WITH IT\": RETURN 7049 LET E=\"I KNOW NOTHING ABOU T THE NECKLACE BEING IN MY ROOM. SOMEONE HAS IT IN FOR ME\": RETUR 7036 LET E$=\"I ALWAYS KEEP IT LO CKED AND HIDE THE KEY. AMONG THE CONTENTS IS A DEADLY NERVE POIS GN\": RETURN 7037 LET E$=\"IT IS OF NO GREAT V ALUE. IT SHOULD BE ON THE WALL I N THE COCKTAL LOUNGE\": RETURN 7038 LET E=\"I HAVE SOME CAPITAL ACQUIRED WHEN I WAS MADE REDUND ANT BY AN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING FIRM. IT GIVES ME A SMALL INCOM E I SOON ADD TO IT WINNING AT CA ADS. I HAVE NO OTHER ASSETS EXC EPT A HOUSE LEFT BY MY LATE WIFE .\": RETURN 7039 LET E=\"I AM A TRAVELLING S ALESMAN NOW. PREVIOUSLY WORKED AN D TRAINED AS ELECTRICIAN. EARN M DRE NOW, BUT IT SOON GOES RUNNIN G THE PORCHE OR ON CLOTHES\": RET URN 7040 LET EX=\" I PLAY GOLF AND LOV E CARD GAMES, GAMBLING, HUNTING AND MOTORING ABROAD. I AM AN EXPE RT MOUNTAINEER: RETURN 7041 LET E=\"I'M STUNNED BY HER DEATH. SHE WAS THE ONLY WOMAN I WOULD HAVE MARRIED IF SHE WOULD AGREE. SHE LIKED ME BUT NOT ENOU G4 FOR A PERMANENT AFFAIR. \": RET URN 7042 LET E=\"IT MUST HAVE BEEN AN ACCIDENT. I CAN'T IMAGINE ANY ONE HARMING HER. SHE WAS TEMPEST LOUS AT TIMES BUT OTHERWISE 50 C HEERFUL AND GENEROUS. SHE WOULD NOT HAVE KILLED HERSELF\": RETURN 7050 LET E=\"I HAD A GOOD SALARY BUT HAVE HAD SOME BAD LUCK ON T HE STOCK EXCHANGE. MY WIFES TAST ES FORCE ME TO WATCH MY SPENDIN G.LILY HAS SOME SAVINGS BUT NO I NCOME\": RETURN 7051 LET E=\"I HAD A CHEMISTS S HOP WHICH I SOLD OFF. IT WAS LEFT BY MY FATHER. MY WIFE WAS NOT S KILLED IN THE PROFESSION BUT SHE HELPED SERVE AND WITH THE BOOKS \": RETURN 7053 LET E=\"WE BOTH DISLIKED HA RRIET.WE HAD A ROW WITH HER YEST ERDAY OVER AN OLD LOAN. GEORGE WH O WAS THEN MARRIED TO HER, HAD T OLD US TO FORGET IT. SHE WAS SUDD ENLY ASKING FOR IMMEDIATE SETTLE MENT. IT WAS SPITE AS SHE DID NO T NEED IT\": RETURN 7054 LET E$=\"LILY SUSPECTS MURDE R. SHE READS TOO MANY CRIME BOOK S. IT WAS OBVIOUSLY A STUPID ACC IDENT.\": RETURN 7055 LET E=\"I WAS PLAYING SNOOK ER WITH ARTHUR WHEN GEORGE CAME PAST WINDOW CARRYING LOGS AND TH EN ROUND INTO DOOR FROM LIBRARY TO TELL THEM ABOUT THE DEATH. LI LY WAS IN HER BEDROOM\": RETURN 7058 LET E$=\"WE DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT THEM\": RETURN 7059 LET E$=\"I GET  PER YEA R PLUS FOOD AND A ROOM FOR HOUSE KEEPING AND BEING A COMPANION TO HARRIET. I HAVE A MODEST INCOME FROM SAVINGS\": RETURN 7060 LET E$=\"I USED TO BE A PRIV ATE SECRETARY BUT GAVE IT UP DUE HARRIET'S LAST BATH 7043 LET E$=\"I LEARNT OF THE BAD NEWS WHEN PLAYING SNOOKER WITH WILLIAM. WE WERE TOGETHER EXCEPT "


"HARRIET'S LAST BATH TO BAD HEALTH\"; RETURN 7061 LET E$=\"I HAVE MANY PASTIME S AND LIKE TO TRAVEL. I HAVE MAN Y INTERESTS\": RETURN 7062 LET E$=\"WE GOT ON ALRIGHT B UT I KNEW WHEN TO STAY OUT OF TH E WAY. I ALWAYS GOT ON WITH HER GUESTS\": RETURN 7063 LET E$=\"IT WAS STUPID TO PU T THE FIRE ON A SHELF BUT SHE HA D CARELESS LAPSES. SHE HAD ONLY A SHORT TIME TO LIVE.. PERHAPS SO LOW SHE CONTRIVED THE 'ACCIDENT' \": RETURN 7064 LET E$=\"15 MINS BEFORE...SH E ASKED FOR AN ELECTRIC FIRE AN D FOR AN ENGINEER TO BE PHONED A S THE CENTRAL-HEATING WAS ONLY L UKEWARM. I WENT TO THE COCKTAIL LOUNGE FOR A FIRE .. SHE LEFT THE BEDROOM DOOR AJAR\": RETURN 7265 LET E$=\"NOT REALLY ALTHOUGH I FELT I WAS IN A RUT HERE\": RE TURN 7066 LET E$=\"AFTER GOING TO PHON E THE ENGINEER I ARRANGED FOR FI RES TO BE LIT AND LOGS TO BE BRO UGHT IN , I MISSED BREAKFAST. I W AS GOING UP THE STAIRS WHEN GEOR GE CALLED ME AND WE FOUND HARRIE T DEAD. \": RETURN 7067 LET E=\"I KNEW GEORGE HAD A SECRET HIDING PLACE FOR THE KEY SOMEWHERE BUT NEVER UNDERSTOOD THE FUSS OVER THOSE SORT OF REL ICS. I WAS NOT AWARE SOMEONE HAD BEEN AT THE THINGS. THEY WERE AL L THERE YESTERDAY\": RETURN 7668 LET E$=\"THE ENGINEER SAID I T WAS THE THERMOSTAT. ONE OF THE WIRES APPEARED TO HAVE BEEN LOO SE\": RETURN 7069 LET E=\"I HAVE NEVER WORKED I DONT KNOW HOW I'D MANAGE WITH QUT MY SISTER\": RETURN 7070 LET E=\"NO MY HEALTH PREVEN TS ME FROM DOING MUCH. IM NOT A S LUCKY AS SOME PEOPLE\": RETURN 7071 LET E$=\"I HAVE NEVER BEEN C LOSE TO MY SISTER BUT AM UPSET B Y HER DEATH. I WOULDN'T TRUST AN Y OF THE OTHERS. I AM SURE OF FO UL PLAY ,HARRIET MADE A LOT OF P EOPLE UPSET BY HER WAYS AT TIMES \": RETURN 7672 LET E$=\"WELL IT LOOKS LIKE AN ACCIDENT TO ME. MY SISTER WAS CARELESS YOU KNOW\": RETURN 7073 LET E=\"I WAS IN THE CORNER LOUNGE WHEN GEORGE CAME BY THE DOOR FROM THE SIDE ENTRANCE AND TOLD ME OF THE DEATH. I WAS ON M Y OWN\"; RETURN 7274 LET E$=\"I WORRY ABOUT HOW I WILL MANAGE NOW AND ABOUT THE WILL\": RETURN 7075 LET E*-\"I LAST SAW HER LAST NIGHT\": RETURN 7076 LET E=\"I HATE IT. IT ALWA *YS FRIGHTENED ME... I AM SURE IT WAS THERE EARLIER THAT MORNING W HEN I WENT TO THE LIBRARY FOR A BOOK TO READ. SHE KNOWS NOTHING ABOUT THE OTHER THINGS\": RETURN 7077 LET E=\"THERE WERE LOGS IN THE LIBRARY AND CORNER LOUNGE WH EN I WENT IN THERE. SOMEONE BROU GHT MORE IN\": RETURN 7@78 LET E$=\"I ONLY HAVE A WAR W IDOWS PENSION AND A MODEST SUM F ROM STOCK INVESTMENTS. I HAVE ON LY A SMALL AMOUNT OF CAPITAL HAV ING LOST A GREAT DEAL ON BAD INV ESTMENTS\": RETURN 7979 LET E=\"I SAW THE NECKLACE UN HER NECK LAST NIGHT AND IT WA S ON THE DRESSING TABLE WHEN IT OOK THE FIRE INTO THE BEDROOM: RETURN 7290 LET E$=\"SHE MADE A WILL I HEARD HER TELL SOMEONE VERY LATE ON THE LANDING, ITS NO GOOD... I HAVE LEFT EVERYTHING TO HENNIE THEN SHE SAID I WAS TO GET NO MORE OUT OF HER\": RETURN 7081 LET E=\"I HAVE A GOOD INCOM E FROM CAPITAL INVESTMENT\": RETU RN 7082 LET E$=\"I TAKE A 7 OR 8 SHO E. THEY GOT WET WHEN I POPPED OUT FOR SOME LOGS BEFORE I TOLD THE M THE SAD NEWS\": RETURN 70B4 GO TO 7008 7285 LET E$=\"I COULD NOT FIND MY CIGARETTES AND WENT TO MY ROOM. MUST HAVE BEEN JUST BEFORE THE D EATH\"; RETURN 7097 GO TO 7024 7088 GO TO 7032 B002 LET E=\"SHE HAD BEEN INCURA BLY ILL FOR THE LAST TWO YEARS A ND KNEW SHE HAD ABOUT 6 MONTHS T OLIVE\": RETURN 2003 LET ESTHER DEPRESSIONS WER E WORSE OVER THE PAST YEAR UNDER STANDABLY. HOWEVER THERE WAS NO S IGN OF DESPAIR ASSOCIATED WITH SUICIDE\": RETURN 8004 LET E$=\"IT COULD HAVE BEEN AN ACCIDENT OR MURDER\": RETURN B005 LET E=\"THERE ARE NO MARKS ON THE FACE THAT WOULD SUGGEST T HIS\": RETURN 8006 LET E$=\"I CANT FIND ANY PHY SICAL SIGNS OF THIS ,BUT YOU WIL L HAVE TO WAIT FOR THE AUTOPSY T BE SURE\": RETURN 5207 LET ET=\"THERE IS NO MEDICAL "


"EVIDENCE AGAINST THIS\": RETURN 8008 LET E$=\"NO HER LUNG CONDITI ON SHOWS SHE WAS ALREADY DEAD\": RETURN 8009 LET E=\"CAUSE OF DEATH LOOK S LIKE HEART FAILURE-PROBABLY IN DUCED BY ELECTRIC SHOCK. NO BRUI SING. NO MARKS ON BODY\": RETURN 8030 LET E=\"THERE IS NO MEDICAL EVIDENCE OF THIS\": RETURN 8240 GO TO 8007 9000 LET E$=\"YOU LEARN NOTHING A BOUT THAT SUBJECT\": RETURN 9207 RETURN 9060 LET E$=\"HARRIET LEFT NO NOT E OF GOODBYE. THIS WAS HARDLY A WAY TO CHOOSE TO DIE!\": GO SUB 5 35: GO TO 9080 9065 LET EH=\"EVEN A PERSON AS CA RELESS AS HARRIET WOULD NOT HAVE TAKEN SUCH A SILLY RISK WITH TH E FIRE\": GOSUB 535: GO TO 9080 9082 LET E=\"BESIDES THERE IS EV IDENCE TO THE CONTRARY\": GO SUB 6 SHO\",\"1 BLO\",\"1DIS\", \"2CIG\",\"2BLO \", \"2015\",\"&BLO\", \"END\" 9700 DATA \"OHEA\", \"SUI\",\"COPI\",\" @SUF\", \"OPOI\", \"QACC\",\"ODRO\", \"EXA \",\"STR\", \"OSHO\", \"ESTA\",\"DELE\", \"E ND\" 9800 DATA \"SART\", \"OGEO\",\"1POI\", \" GGUN\",\"1DAR\", \"1BLO\",\"2DAR\", \"2BLO \", \"6NEE\",\"3FIN\", \"SMON\", \"ZHAT\",\"4 KEY\",\"4DIS\", \"END\" 9900 LET E=\"I KNOW NOTHING OF I T\": LET X=X+1: IF X>=6 THEN CO TO 9900+C 9901 IF X=5 THEN LET E$=\"I WAS LYING BEFORE I WILL TELL YOU WH A? I KNOW IF YOU ASK AGAIN\": RET URN 9902 RETURN 9911 LET E=\"I TOOK IT AS AN ALI BI IN CASE I WAS SEEN. I LEFT IT IN THE BASKET WHEN I SAW THE BO DY AND HEARD PEOPLE COMING. I JU MPED OUT THE WINDOW\": RETURN 9912 LET E=\"I HEARD FOOTSTEPS A ND HID IN IT. I HEARD HER SCREAM \": RETURN 9913 LET E=\"I TOOK IT TO PAWN. I ONLY NEEDED IT FOR A DAY\": RET URN 9919 LET E$=\"I WAS IN HER ROOM I N THE CUPBOARD\" : RETURN 9099 GO TO 2190 9500 DATA \"23F00\",\"23BUS\",\"23LAU \",\"23FLO\",\"16BAG\", \"SPHO\", \"7POI\", \"3HAT\" 9510 DATA \"OBLO\", \"LEA\", \"DIS\",\" OLOC\", \"SGRA\",\"11CUP\",\"CLIN\",\"11 DRE\" 9515 DATA \"11 DRA\",\"11WIL\", \"ZOWAR \",\"20SHC\",\":9CAE\",\"1534C\",\"12SOD \", 12BAT\", \"20DRE 9520 DATA \"12FIR\",\"1ZWIN\", \"OTIP \"UDAR\",\"23SNO\",\"23PAT\", \"2WAL\", \" 12NEC\",\"4CUS\",\"19LET\", \"OLOG\",\"23 LAW\",\"23CAT\", \"BKEY\", \"3DIS\", \"BOO \",\"18WAR\", \"18SUI\", \"END\" 9600 DATA \"1FIN\",\"1 WOR\", \"1HOB\",\" 1FEE\",\"1SUS\",\"1WHE\",\"1PRO\", \"ILAS \",\"1DAR\",\"IWIL\", \"IMAS\" 9601 DATA \"ZMAS\",\"2CUP\",\"2NEC\",\" 2FIN\",\"ZWOR\", \"ZHOB\",\"2FEE\",\"2SUS \",\"2WHE\", \"PRO\", \"ZLAS\",\"2BIL\",\"2 SHO\", \"ZDAR\" 9602 DATA \"UNEC\", \"6LOG\", \"6WOR\", \" 6KOB\",\"6SUS\", \"6FEE\", \"PRO\",\"ADAR \",\"SWHE\", \"SLAS\",\"6HEA\",\"6DIS\", \"6 MAS\" 9603 DATA \"SFIN\",\"SWOR\", \"SHOB\",\" SFEE\", \"SSUS\", \"SWHE\", \"SPRO\", \"SLAS \",\"5DAR\", \"SSHO\", \"SCEN\", \"SNEC\" 9604 DATA \"SFIN\",\"3WOR\", \"SHOB\",\" 3FEE\",\"35US\",\"3WKE\", \"PRO\", \"ZLAS \",\"3DAR\" 9605 DATA \"7FIN\",\"7WOR\",\"7HOB\",\" 7FEE\",\"75US\", \"7LAS\", \"PRO\", \"7WHE \",\"7DIS\",\"7CEN\" 9606 DATA \"4WOR\", \"4HOB\",\"4FEE\",\" 45US\",\"4WHE\", \"4PRO\", \"4LAS\",\"4MAS \", \"4LOG\", \"4FIN\" 9607 DATA \"7NEC\",\"4WIL\", \"AFIN\",\" HARRIET'S LAST BATH Entering the Program Although Harriet's last Bath is quite a long listing, it is easy to enter because it is mainly text. Many misleading sentences are included so do not take any notice of the text as you enter it. Be careful to get the line numbers correct and the DATA statements. The BASIC is short and straightforward and should not be a problem to debug if you make a mistake. If you cannot be bothered to type in the listing there's still no need for you to miss out on all the fun. Remember you can send off for our special Harriet's Last Bath tape offer. Just send a cheque or postal order for .50 made payable to Roy Turner and send to Mr R.J. Turner, 2 St Michael's Road, Benfleet, Essex, SS7 2UW. C+VG/Harriet's Last Bath Tape Offer Name. Please send me copy(ies) of Harriet's Last Bath. I enclose a cheque/postal order made payable to Mr R. J. Turner for "


"COMPUTER +VIDEO CAMES "


NA


"  Q XX OX960 x XX X Spectrum in October, Amstrad in November, Commodore 64 in December All .95 DURELL Sales dept., Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton, Somerset TAI 4AB England Telephone 0823) 54489 & 54029 software getting harder .... "


"C+VG THOUUENCURE NEWS 10According to Level 9, who seem (\"Myxamatosis Scarell\" shout the uncommonly touchy about this newsboys) Bugsy will be released ADVENTURER'S subject, their own in-house by CRL in the autumn. system, (which is NOT available CLUB LTD. for purchase) gives them 70% more memory, far greater compression, and offers all sorts MUD WITH NO  In the September issue we of advanced features not seen PHONE! printed a rundown of elsewhere. Adventure Clubs and Fanzines. Among them was an organisation called The Soon you will be able to play a Adventurer's Club Ltd. Readers ATLANTIS MOVE version of MUD, the famous are warned not to send any Multi-User Dungeon game, on money to this firm, either for your own stand-alone micro, discount software, or by way of without the need for a modem and subscription charges. high phone bills! Pete Austin of Level 9, the Please note that Atlantis Micro MUD, which will be club's honorary President, is Software has moved from Islington released by Mosaic some time most concerned that two to new premises. Although some after Christmas, will seem like an Adventurer's Dossier's are now computer stores stock Atlantis ordinary adventure, but feature overdue, and that phone calls games, many do not, and so much the same scenario as the original to the club have recently been business is carried out by mail MUD. The part of the other players giving an answerphone order. will be taken by computer message about new Anyone wishing to order generated characters, some management, and more software direct by mail order, friendly, some hostile. recently, have not been should write to the address: 28 Such will be the size of the answered at all. A personal Station Road, London SE255AG. game, it will only be available on visit revealed that the address Meanwhile, any mail that has disk. Although being developed is occupied by someone who already been sent to the old on a BBC, it will not run without the In his penthouse claims that it is an address, will find its way to the second processor on board, and apartment in the accomodation address only, right place. this is unlikely to be a viable IDEAs Central although once being the proposition for commercial release. Published versions will building Keith premises from which Henry Mueller operated the club. probably be restricted to the Campbell, one of Neither Pete Austin nor Level TEMPLE OF Commodore 64 and Amstrad the few survivors 9 have any business or computers. TERROR of the corporate financial interest in the club. purges which Pete, on request, simply agreed DELAYED to accepi the post of President swept through the for a year, involving him in ADVENTURE software industry writing (unpaid) a short piece CONTACTS when the IDEAS for each Dossier. Rather than release the next Corp was Until now, Dossiers Fighting Fantasy adventure in its appeared regularly, and the original format, Mike Woodroffe establishing itself 2000 odd members of the club who is creating the adventure, has Why don't you have a clever busies himself (subscription  p.a.) have decided to enhance the game for contacts page, where people who with an intricate been receiving the service they 128K versions. Normal text and have solved loads of adventures, and time expected. graphics, and augmented text like me, have their name printed only, will be two versions available with the adventures solved? Then consuming task. for standard machines, but the people who were stuck could His job is to collect 128K machines will have a write to them for help. Because it and collate all the TAKING THE combined augmented text and will help you a lot, I am surprised data relevant to GAC APART graphics game. you have not done it before! Phil Symonds, adventure games Wallington, Surrey. and dispense words of wisdom Seems that Level 9 has been THE BLUE BUNNY Keith's reply: That's the easy having a close look at Incentive's to people with way out, and we're gluttons for Graphic Adventure Creator STRIKES! punishment! I'm not sure it problems. recently, and have come up with a works, either, Phil! Reading the This month the press release to counteract what Adventure pages of another Adventure Helpline they see as a misleading magazine recently, I noticed conception of the product. St. Brides has come up with brings much complaints that letters to the Apparently some reviewers another comedy, Bugsy, this time contacts printed, were, in many needed help, have been giving the impression in the format of an American cases, not answered. We advice and hints that it is possible to write an gangster movie a la Hollywood of endeavour to answer all letters to the troubled adventure of the same size and the 1930s. Set in a sepia-toned ourselves, and achieve at least programming excellence as the Chicago, the player takes the part 95% of replies. and tormented Austins, using the GAC. Of course, of a three feet tall, blue bunny Of course, we don't know ALL adventure games such claims have to be taken with rabbit, struggling to make a the answers, but then I'm sure player. a pinch of salt, and the proof is in successful career in the world of the pleas section makes more the actual writing, and completing, organised crime. interesting reading than a long of such a game. We haven't seen combining the vernacular of the list of dubious names and one up to Level 9 standard yet! mobsters with a leporidic outlook addresses. en, 4AB 554029 "


"THODZENCURE HELPLINE instructions pirating Globe), and O Segredo Dos Maudlin has found a large while-you-wait is the order of Templarios (The Templars' crystal in Kentilla. But he, like TOURISTS the day. Secret). me, doesn't know what to do HELPLINE! Vasco showed me a copy of \"And they are Quilled!\" with it! Alan, whose letter came Firefox, with a counterfeit inlay, complained Nuno, who is in Gothic script, spent three and you would take it for the awaiting the arrival of the hours writing it, and also real thing, Ariolasoft logo and Spectrum GAC, to write his own mentions the fact that the After completing my 60th all! What about games with adventure, already planned, in Commodore loading screen of Adventure column last month, I Lenslok?\" I asked. \"No problem! Portuguese, English, and the game has a rather nasty flew off to Portugal for a They make them too!\" German. spelling error in the title of well-earned holiday. Imagine Later in the week, I met Nuno, Nuno's English is now so good the game! my surprise, on arriving in my who is a great admirer of the that he translates English books Carl Young's recent Souls of hotel room to find an envelope work of Jerry Paris the C+VG into Portuguese. For reading, he Darkon problem, is a paradox of bearing the greeting Tourists artist, who among other things, likes science fiction, and as his own making, says Hugh Helpline and a local phone designed the Big Red t-shirts. there are very few Portuguese Walker of Burpham. \"He has number! With it, was a \"Are these the only ones in sci-fi books around, he reads lilled the woodman to get the gift-wrapped bottle of Tawny Cascais. They'd better be!\" he them in English as a matter of axe. The only use for the axe is Port, complete with wine-glass! joked. He confided that he was course. to give it to the woodman!\" The gift was from Vasco thinking of cutting Vasco's to Their interest in adventure Where can Umran Siddique of Novais de Oliviera, who, with his shreds, so that his really was started when they began playing Oadby find Blissful and Jude in friend Nuno Miranda, both of exclusive! The Hobbit, and became hooked. Ultima IV, folks? Cascais, has written many a The three of us spent an \"We once wrote to Tony Bridge Julie King of Poole is Upper letter to the Helpline over the evening in a Beirgartenabout that,\" Nuno confessed. Gumtree surrounded by sharks, last year. drinkding Perrier, of course! \"So \"But that was long ago, before shark repellant in hand, but Nuno is an 18 year-old art the software I brought you is we had found C+VG!\" Vasco unable to do anything. What student, who had once written to virtually worthless?\" I asked. added. next, as the saying goes? say: \"You really should visit our \"Oh no,\"explained Nuno, \"it is a Amongst the adventures they How to make the stake in have played is Eureka, although Castle of Terror, was a question they admit they only played it to I put to Steve King a short while try to win the prize. \"It was not ago. He was away in the Middle very logical,\" complained Nuno. East at the time, but his wife Julie \"We often rang Domark for a replied: \"I thought you broke the clue, and they soon got to know spear to make the stake.\" That, us as 'the two Portuguese indeed, is what everyone is just adventurers!\" grinned Vasco. trying to do! The nicest time of our entire However, Julie pointed out holiday was our last evening, that the game is very annoying when Vasco's parents invited in that things have to be done in my wife Ruth and myself to a set order to be successful. So it dinner at their home. We were seems that if the spear is not treated to a typical Portuguese ready to be broken, you will not meal-accompanied by Vinho be able to do it! Verde, and completed with a The Rats is a part-adventure 1970 Vintage Port, carefully game that crops up from time to decanted by Vasco's father, a time. Joseph Chiv of Sherbourne connoisseur. (What's this? Tall is having trouble because all his Man in the Kitchen? Ed) characters are getting killed. It is always a little sad leaving What should he do when Harris a place in which one has and Judy are in the flat together enjoyed a holiday. It is a lot one of his most difficult  Vasco de Oliviera and Nuno Miranda more difficult when one has problems? been given so kindly a welcome I suspect the most useful by such charming people. I strategy is to control the rats, count myself lucky to write for and not necessarily to try to beautiful village if you ever matter of great prestige here to C+VG, through which I have save individual victims. Has want a good holiday.\" actually own a genuine come to make such nice friends. anyone completed The Rats? Since Portugal is Britain's original!\" Obrigado Nuno, Elenor, Vasco, Which is the best way to go oldest ally, and this year is the C+VG is read by nearly all Leonor, e Nuno, Ate logo. about it? 600th anniversary, it seemed a their friends with computers, Jeffrey Moore is stuck with the good time to visit the country, they told me, and is by far the bird. He doesn't know what to do and the Estoril coast was our most popular computer next he has thought of choice. magazine in Portugal. PROBLEMS everything he can. What should Armed with a C+VG carrier \"We are not saying that he do next, in Seeka Of Assiah? bag full of software and because we're speaking to you,\" AND TROLLS Due to a purchase made at a magazines, I met 14-year-old Nuno assured me. Although he jumble sale, Andrew Rust has no Vasco at his father's bookshop in said he still couldn't believe he instructions for Hewson's Quest. the Avenida Vabom. Paul Gilbert of Nottingham is And he needs to know how to get Before long Vasco was leading Both speak excellent English, playing the Helpline Game of the the last 10 or 15 points! Well, me into the local computer store. and Nuno put his talent down to Month, Kentilla, and wants to Andrew, I doubt if the The Portuguese micro market his computer. \"I have learned instructions would help, but is almost 100% Spectrum, mainly most of my English through my dark tower. Trolls are also perhaps C+VG readers will be Timex version, and a new top computer-by playing causing Paul trouble in The able to? selling game costs about . adventures,\" he said. There are Boggit. Who can control the Nick Carter of Southampton But of course, for that you only two Portuguese adventures, trolls? has solved an incredible number don't get the inlay or O Globo Da Luz (The Light Like so many others, Alan of adventures, including some PUTER VIDEO GAMES "


"CLUES real nasties, like Lucifer's Realm and Spellbreaker. But there's one that has him beat! \"Anyone out there who has completed The Institute\" he pleads rare person exists, how do you pass the green man outside the gate? Depou ay epobed any ou Who knows anything about    ud we of 14 uger pue ispod Kingdom of Klein? In particular, jo apard set ay ja OL deosay of UST if you can get past the squid in  os Xpen    LIO908 the underwater cave, or find the   ooqsexqd exo Moebius Ravine, do write and zabuot xos heqje shapeu dax *Kuuel oj abes let me know, to help R. Auty, of 01 S pure PIOMS OY Aure s,uor    nok   Morecambe. Castle Blackstar has started to ANVISI TIONIANI  make a re-appearance in the mail, following its re-release on \"snq ay) ABS pure jpce ay wado UEA utoeq usea abes Amstrad machines. For some pure 'jei eyi qezh 'fauung ay OjU! ZZZZ reason, it didn't seem to catch on 00 d  pue 'sunu when it was originally released 01 06 'abeo e jag YeI e iq quroj \"Loop Tenues ay for the Spectrum, so the      Year 01 'stajaar [T4M ysnd database is devoid of clues. gun '  'prek ALINIUL One who seeks a few, is Kevin    Aq p[os Murphy of Fife. He is pulling like aq ve xojinogue PITYI OUL isso e VIM NOK mad, but can't get excalibur out djey TM Srpunet sureng BUL of the stone. And he asks: \"How SLV SODOHd do you use the broomstick and aspx sudo IO SISSI staff, and how can you get golden eggs from the eagles?\"  smoq-  sdeuxd YHLHIT ispre o 2e s u pue 'ah JO PTT y) s XOJEM \"pu-peap e st019 peox YL ADVENTURE NMH IHL OH3Z  \"Puy CHAT \"PIEM q s-p eps   no req ayn Y PIEZEM 4) UPI  ( x pu   e sajeappe oobebes UTMS Malcolm Harden of Minster in o bunduage exoja suossassod 'axe 4 YILM Wojs on IT! Sheppey, took me back a few     300 LIHS NATO years, with a mention of Artic's HL ANY OW&NIS Adventure C-Ship Of Doom. VTTILNI Having read my review of 'E', iyeys pue daproq he decided I wasn't one of those i?! PIOAD   ouop pu who helped to ban Adventure coabunp yi adesse , e nox ay u buryi nsz isnu YOL 'C'. So he asked if I had ever WI YTYS WIZ ano OILSYLNY obtained a message: \"Heat generated, metal fatigue, her leg flies off' which is contained in the program. Does anyone know what brings this message to the screen? If Commodore Kentilla players think themselves Every now and again, a letter SHOW ALL KEYS TO GURU and unlucky in not being able to use crops up suggesting that not the QL crashes! \"This Is a bug!\" the SAVE facility, then perhaps enough support is given for a says Max. they should think again! particular micro. Usually this BUG! When Roman attacks you, in Beeb players saving Kentilla refers to BBC or Atari machines, the Spectrum version of have to wait for about 170 and Richard Allaway of Warlord, go N. When he attacks blocks, says G. Whitlock of Llandrindad Wells is the latest itself after one of the characters again, type: GIVE ROMAN TO Malvern, and it takes about five to make the suggestion. is killed? Writes Allan Palmer of DRUID. minutes. This is too long for any Well Richard, and other Atari Basingstoke. The The druid will then go, leaving adventure,\" he adds. Quite owners, all the Atari format If certain combinations of you the amulet. The Roman will agree! Still, it IS cheap, so you adventures we receive for actions are performed, says then attack you again! \"As there get what you pay for, I suppose. review, get reviewed! For Alan, you may find the deceased is only one Roman in the game. I Or not, as the cassette may be. example, we have covered ALL body AND the living character claim this is a bug!\" says David A disappearing ring that can Level 9 games, Infocom games, present at the same time. Shortly Walling of Ulverston. be worn without being touched, The Slave and more recently after that, the game will fail with Say NO to Mordon's first is the subject of some Cloak of Death. an internal error, says Allan. question; a couple of rude words amusement to J. Dickson of If there aren't so many games Understandable in the in Tombs of Xeiopps, suggests Churchdown in Glucester. coming out for your machine circumstances, don't you think! Mandy Rodrigues, of Llandudno. The game is Forest at World's then blame the software houses, Try CLIMB GURU on the OL And from Mark Turner of End. Try wearing the ring twice, not us for failing to review version of The Pawn, suggests Swansea, comes another joke and wearing it without taking it! Something that doesn't exist! Max Berle of Kievermont in from Wales: Try examining the Then move off, and come back to \"Did you know the early Belgium. You find yourself on a trees north of Ogeron's house, the place where you put it on! versions of Infocom's Deadline snow plateau. \"Is that a bug?\" he and rubbing the brass lamp, in Fun, ain't it?! have a bug which may manifest asks, not entirely sure. But type: Kentilla. CATCH THAT "


"Does your micro answer backe.? Does your micro chat to 70,000 people across the UK? Can your micro interview pop stars, hackers and doyennes of the computer industry? Can your micro provide the answer to your technical and software problems?  Could your micro send and receive telex's worldwide?  Does your micro do your shopping for you-and have it delivered to your door? Is your micro an answering machine, delivering your private mail whenever you log-on? NO? .................... Shame! Bring your micro to life! Micronet 800To: Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1 Please send me a brochure on Micronet 800 Name Address Telephone No. Micronet 800 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5EJ Telephone: 01-278 3143 Micro I "


"RODEAMI Jeyx Sans Frontières AHOOTI Its a Holler It's a cracker! IT'S A CICCLE By arrangether with BBC Enterprises Limited. MAKIEtLily SPECTRUM COMMODORE 7.95 OCEAN SOFTWARE 6 CENTRAL STREET MANCHESTER M2 5NS TELEPHONE: 061 832 6633 TELEX: 669977 OCEANS G DISTRIBUTED IN GERMANY BY DISTRIBUTED IN FRANCE BY OCEAN FRANCE TELEPHONE: TELEPHONE: 02101 60040 010 33 93 42 7144 EACH EACH AMSTRAD "


"f the name Rod Pike is not familiar to you, you may be forgiven. To date, he has only had one adventure published. Pilgrim, a text adventure, (reviewed June 86) was his first attempt at writing a game, and he was thrilled at the enthusiastic way it was received by reviewers. He wrote Pilgrim for his own amusement, using the Quill. Although conversant with Basic, machine code is something Rod is convinced he will never grasp. However, his use of the Quill in Pilgrim, is so skilful that I failed to spot it as a Quilled game. When finished, Rod sent Pilgrim off to Silversoft to see if they would publish it. It was his lucky day. Silversoft was in the process of going bust at the time, and they kept stringing him along with promises, promises, but no action. They eventually disappeared without publishing Pilgrim. The luck came in the form of CRL, who picked up the pieces of Silversoft, and eagerly snapped the game up. In conversation with CRL ideas man Mike Hodges, Rod's absorbing interest in horror came to light. Among his favourite authors is James Herbert, and his obsession with horror stories comes from an enjoyment of being scared to death in the comfort of my own living room, as he puts it. These facts, coupled an expressed desire to one day write a full length Gothic horror novel, led Mike to come up with a project to turn Rod's remarkable talents and interests to good use. This would be a text version of the real' Dracula with plenty of text, too. Rod went to his local library, and ordered a copy of the racula / With Halloween approaching, Keith Campbell set off in search of horror. He found it at CRL's offices in Stratford, London, in the shape of Rod Pike. Never heard of Rod? You will... "


"Bram Stoker story. \"Being a have a defirute purpose, and horror vein. \"I don't like excitement in playing the Victorian novel, it was heavy he points out that in part one of humorous adventures, game may well be heightened, going. But it was full of Dracula, there are only a although that's not to say there although it will only be of atmosphere the Victorians handful, and yet there is still is no element of humour in minor help in completing it. were too proper to describe plenty to do! what I write,\" he explained. He Despite the volume of text, anything unpleasant in detail 2 When the writing was on the has plenty of ideas up his (quite often more than a but they hinted at it wall for Dragon Data, Rod screenful of narrative follows a sleeve, and his enthusiasm in beautifully.\" command) all is not visible on quickly acquired a his subject is infectious. So the idea of the Dracula entry to a room. Examining Commodore 64, and starting If you hadnt heard of Rod things often reveals what is not adventure, based closely on playing adventures in earnest. Pike before, then note of his noticed at a first glance. I've the original storyline, was Eureka he didn't like at all name. I am sure you will be always believed that bom. It was to be given the particularly the response hearing a lot of him in the EXAMINE is a crucial same Gothic horror obtained when he typed GET future. And if you're playing a command in an adventure, atmosphere that came over ALL. \"It just isn't a logical particularly spooky game into Without it, everything must be when Rod read the book. \"My game,\" he complained. His the small hours -cast a look taken at face value, and the aim in writing the game has favourite adventure is Level 9's player is left to the mercy of an over your shoulder from time been to scare the pants off the Colossal Adventure, despite author's not always logical to time. That flickering shadow thinking. In Dracula, the playerl\" claimed Rod. the fact that he still hasn't you thought you noticed, that command is handled well. Parts of the game have been completed it! Nevertheless, slight creak in the floorboard, Author Rod Pike believes developed away from the when he gets the occasional could just be Rod creeping up that adventure problems storyline, otherwise the player spare moment, he still goes on you, to claim another should be situation driven, and would have nothing to do. But back down the grating every victim! not rely on traversing it follows the main thread, and hundreds of locations to get Rod has tried to keep the object A to location B. problem logical and relatively Certainly Dracula is none too easy, especially at the start. heavy on locations; there are a mere six in the first part, for \"Tve put in a lot of text, and example. But getting through want the player to read and to the end of it is no five minute interact with the story not to job, and it culminates in a be put off by getting stuck for problem somewhat what to do right at the start,\" reminiscent of the shooting explained Rod. So in Dracula, gallery problem in Mystery he has attempted to grab the Fun House. The answer is so attention of the interested obvious, that it is all but staring adventurer right from the start, you in the face. But will you think of it?! not merely the interest of the Although an impressive text hardened adventurer. adventure, graphics are also He has paid special featured in the game. attention to the problems, and Unfortunately, these were not tried to make them occur as far enough advanced for me to naturally and logically as now and again, to see if he can DRACUDA see, and CRL were being possible, at the same time get just a bit further. aggravatingly secretive about Supplier: CRL keeping the game uncluttered Spare time isn't a what they had up their sleeves. with irrelevant or unnecessary Machine: Spectrum CRL's own artist cum commodity that Rod has a lot objects, which might detract 48k, Commodore 64, programmer, Jon Law, is of. An Industrial Engineer by from the atmosphere. The working on them, rather than profession, Rod has a full time Amstrad. leaving them to the mercy of dilemma an author has in job as a Works Manager. Price: .95 The Illustrator. Something setting the problems, is that he Writing Pilgrim wasn't too \"The coachman, a rough unconventional is promised, cannot easily determine how demanding, since he wrote it looking fellow, stands before but nobody was saying difficult the player will at his leisure, and was able to me. He has spent most of the anything, except that they perceive them to be. To this take his time about it. But journey complaining about his believe what they have in store end, he has carefully studied hard life, bemoaning his Dracula has been other people playing the humble upbringing on the one commissioned, and is being hand, then cursing those who game, and made changes written under contract -a had better fortune. I detect that where they found the going contract with a deadline. The he could be a villain, and too tough. approach of Halloween was probably a drunkard. ...\" The end result, Rod hopes, too good an opportunity for So starts Dracula, and the is an interactive story that, CRL to miss as a release date above text, verbatim from the when read on screen, will for a game of this sort. game, serves well to illustrate make the adventurer shudder Arriving home from work at the storyline, and atmospheric has never before been done in with fear and apprehension about seven each evening, it is nature of the game. Arriving at an adventure. To add a further your hotel, you must behave dimension of creepiness to the Rod's first excursion into eight o'clock by the time he . naturally, and do what is pictures there will be adventure came with has eaten and settled down to normal at a hotel. In order to accompanying sound. Mansion Adventure, a fairly his keyboard, where he will spend a restful night in Already in its silent text small 20-location game, played then work until about preparation for your onward form, Dracula is shaping up to on his first home computer — midnight. His wife, and his 15 journey. The next day, be a first class adventure of its a Dragon. Locations are a year-old daughter Julie, are however, it pays to watch what type, and will be released in subject on which he has very understanding, and didn't you eat. You wouldn't want to three parts on two cassettes, definite views. \"There's even object (too much) when suffer from nightmares, would on Halloween. nothing worse than trudging he took his 64 on holiday to you. ...? Vocabulary The game is based on the miles and miles through North Devon recently-to Atmosphere original Dracula novel by locations where nothing work on Dracula! Bram Stoker written some Personal happens. That is just boring.\" Rod hopes to continue with hundred or so years ago. If Value To Rod, every location should adventures in a similar Gothic you have read it, your Keith Campbell OO COD "


"\"GAMES AT THE SPEED OF LIGHT.\".. LIGHTFORCE is for VENGEANCE. LIGHTFORCE is the Punishment Arm of Galactic Fighter Command. When a Terran-settled system at the edge of the galaxy is seized by an alien force revenge comes in the form of a lone LIGHTFORCE fighter. LIGHTFORCE confronts alien in a dazzling battle above the strange landscapes of the Ice-Planet,the Jungle Planet, Alien factories and the impassable Asteroid Belt. LIGHTFORCE at the speed of Light from FTL. SLACY WAY SHOCKWAY RIDERS are the pick of the street gangs ATHLETIC, AGGRESSIVE & ARROGANT as they cruise along the triple-speed moving walkways that circle the great MEGACITYS of the 21st Century, THE ULTIMATE AIM OF EVERY RIDER is to go \"FULL CIRCLE\" to do that, he must fight off the Block Boys,the Cops and the Vigilantes as well as negotiating the Speed Traps and Rider Ramps erected by the angry local residents! SHOCKWAY RIDER is the most original, arcade game of the year THE ULTIMATE FUTURE SHOCK!! LIGHTFORCE AVAILABLE SEPT. 86 SHOCKWAY RIDER AVAILABLE OCT. '86, SPECTRUM .95 AMSTRAD & COMMODORE .95 FASTER THAN LIGHT FTL FASTER THAN LIGHT, CARTER FOLLIS GROUP OF COMPANIES, SEDGLEY ROAD EAST. TIPTON, WEST MIDLANDS DY4 7UJ. Tel: 021-520 2981 (4 lines), "


"COMPETITION .. ** ook into my eyes. I know they're red but that's nothing to be afraid of. You are feeling sleepy, your eyelids are beginning to droop. Sleep is enveloping you. Don't be alarmed. I only want to bite your neck. Nothing wrong with that, is there? Talking of biting, C+VG's ace band of vampire vam hunters has put the bite on CRL and we've managed to get some absolutely gruesomely and ghastly Dracula competition prizes. They're horrific, in fact. First prize is a coffin full of goodies. or should that be baddies? The winner gets a VHS video of Dracula starring Bela Lugosi plus the ultra creepy An American Werewolf in London (also VHS). Not only that. He or she will get a copy of Dracula by Bram Stoker, four Stephen King horror novels and a his or hers Dracula mask. Oh yes, and a copy of the game. The ten runners-up will get a copy of the games and a vampire bat. We tried to get live bats but we can't fit them in envelopes. So what do you have to do to win these prizes? Just answer the following horrible questions and send your answers, together with the printed coupon, to Dracula Competition, Computer+ Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is November 15 and Van Helsing's decision is final. 1) What is the name of the area Dracula comes from? 2) Name two methods of killing a vampire. A__ 3) Name the famous British actor best known for his portrayal of Dracula? 4) What's a vampire's favourite drink? C+VG/CRL DRACULA COMPETITION Name Address: Spectrum | CBMI) Amstrad "


"EX4 COMPUTER REPAIR CENTRE HOUR The only AMSTRAD SPECIALISTS recommended by Amstrad Repairs also undertaken for all the following computers: SPECTRUM, COMMODORE, ATARI, BBC, IBM ACC FIXED NO HIGH FREE SOFTWARE WORTH PRICE E35 REPAIR! WITH EVERY SPECTRUM The established company with a proven reputation Over the years we have built up an enviable reputation in the UK for computer repairs, which is second to none. This is based on many years experience in repairing Spectrum, Commodore, BBC and other leading makes and we were the first AMSTRAD repair centre anywhere. This is why we have customers all over the world. REPAIR We are the best forget the rest, look what we offer DON'T DELAY ACT TODAY It's as easy as ABC No high fixed price you only Commodore 64's, Vic 20's, pay what the repair actually Atari, Commodore 16's and costs. Plus 4's repaired. While-CI-Wait Service spare Discounts for colleges, parts for all leading computers schools etc. available over the counter. Every computer repaired by us Simply send your computer is completely overhauled and securely packed, together State of the art test equipment tested before return. with a cheque or postal order for the to provide comprehensive test maximum fee to the address below. report and locate faults. All computers returned Your computer will be repaired and carriage paid and covered by Repairs to all leading makes of returned to you within 24 hours insurance. together with the balance of the fee computer Three months guarantee and your FREE  worth of 1 Amstrad specialist. included. software. Spectrum rubber keyboards Or if you prefer a written Free Software worth  with quotation just send  to repaired for only .95. every Spectrum repair. cover post & packing. DISCOUNT COMPONENTS Alternatively just quote your e.g. Power Transformers Access or Visa card number. BBC REPAIRS from F12 to  21:50 PP JE7 to 119 90 Spectrum JAAN9952 .95 +.50 p.p. SPECIALIST COMPUTER REPAIR CENTRE Dept. 18, 28 College Street, WORCESTER WR1 2LS Telephone: 0905-611072/613023 AMSTRAD REPAIRS from SPECTRUM REPAIRS from $29.00 77 to .90 Commodore .00 COMMODORE REPAIRS from 12 to f35 f ca to f35  to . VISA Trade orders welcome Access WE SET THE STANDARD BY WHICH EVERYONE ELSE IS JUDGED "


"REVIEWS/1 LEATHER GODDESSES OF PHOBOS body. Supplier: Infocom/Activision Machines: Commodore 64/128; Atari 800 Price: .99 Disc only on all machines. If you're under-18, or not very broad minded, you shouldn't even think of playing this game-in fact, you shouldn't even be reading this review. Right now we've got rid of the old fogeys let's get down to the juicy bits... Leather Goddesses the first smelly adventure! is a sexy romp around a few planets, in search of parts to build a machine capable of destroying the Goddesses, who plan to turn the Earth into a vast pleasure playground. LGOP can be played in any of three modes: Tame, Suggestive, or Lewd. Default mode is Suggestive, and even the computer yawns if you switch to Tame. That leaves just one alternative, and I took it. Purely, you understand, to be able to warn you not to it is far too powerful! To start with, the game has to determine your sex, and it does this by giving you the urge to visit thrown into a very comfortable worlds, that are not much It's also instant death if you try to cell, minus your ordinary clothes. friendlier than the Goddesses! escape, or fail to answer. But don't worry, the Goddesses To start with, there's a mad But the promise of spending an have thoughtfully provided you scientist on Venus who is hour in the secret recesses of the with a brass loincloth, or a conducting research into whether inner harem, with one of the brass bikini if you went to the the sex drive is in the mind or the Sultan's 8,379 wives, in return for 'Ladies'. the correct answers, aroused my You have limited freedom to Give him half the chance, and journalist's investigative instinct. walk around the building, and to he'll transfer you and Trent into the Sharpening my wits to your horror, observe what must bodies of a pair of caged gorillas Wilkinson pitch, before long I was surely be your own fate. with wife number 69, who, amidst in his laboratory the exotic perfumes, lay naked on But fear not, a quick step into the Some poor wretch is being the luxurious furs and silks that circle at the foot of his stairs will forcibly experimented on furnished the place. anatomical experiments on allow you to avoid this fate. I won't tell you about what it urmentionable parts of his body, Only trouble is, you spot a feels like to kiss a revolting frog involving some plastic tubing, and length of rubber hose in the cage, de cage, for it was a let down at the end. a Yak. Eat your heart out Jeff and it's just about six feet long. With all this sensuousness, Minter! What's more, there's no way of LGOP would hardly be complete Teaming up with Trent, your getting it out of the cage from the without the scent of the many buddy from the cell across the outside.... odours that confront you, and so way, you set out to destroy these Even when you get out of this here, is the first adventure game friends before they can do any predicament and solve the main with added smells! more harm. Especially to you! problem, there is some tricky Included in the packaging is a Trent, although not very bright, thinking to be done to unravel the Scatch 'n' Sniff card, and if you comes up with an original design logical twist, and get back into want to sample a smell mentioned for a Super Duper Anti-Leather your own body, free, and with all in the game, all you have to do is in th Goddesses Machine, which he your possessions! type SMELL, and the computer scribbles down on the back of a Mars is not a whole lot better will respond with the number to matchbook. All you have to do is although if you enjoy a spot of scratch. Some of them are to get hold of the parts... canalling, as I do, you're in for a absolutely revolting! Easier said that done in an nice cruise on the Royal barge. Although the Infocom parser is Infocom adventure, especially Navigating from dock to dock is as good as any you'll get, the more when the parts are as diverse as: a not too hard, despite the rather I play Infocom games, the more I six foot length of rubber hose, a rudimentary controls, but hitting discover that it isn't quite as clever as it's cracked up to be. Too many times did it fail to recognise a sentence that seemed perfectly reasonable like KISS THE FROG AND GO EAST. The responses to impossible actions are usually helpful, by telling you not to bother, and there's a cheerful COME AGAIN if you press RETURN without entering any characters. I played the game on a I'M LANE Commodore 64, and must report MASTODON, that it is painfully slow, making OF COURSE lengthy disk accesses for relatively simple commands. This, of course, will not be a problem on I'M LYDIA CAMPBELL! other machines, for I cannot MY FATHER WAS KIDNAPPED imagine that any drive can be BY THE LEATHER GODDESSES! I'VE GOT TO FIND HIM! slower than the 1541. Well, all this talking's not getting pair of cotton balls, a Cleveland the dock that looks the most me out of the bedroom window. phonebook, a picture of Jean interesting, requires a careful Believe it or not, there's a 1933 Harlow, and a few other bits and analysis of the geometry of the Ford parked outside, and it's got a pieces. canal, and the meaning of the loose headlight! I just gotta get it! Your search takes you to other control buttons. Keith Campbell planets, by means of a teleport That dock is called My Kinda Vocabulary system of black circles. Stand on Dock, and it is the gateway to the one, and you fall through to Sultan's Palace. The Sultan has a Atmosphere another world. But there are riddle for strangers, and it's instant Personal characters around on the other death if you get it wrong first time. Value AS THEY NEAR MARS, YOU'RE SAFE THE \"VISITOR\" BEGINS NOW. WHO TO RECOVER ARE YOU? the toilet in Joe's Bar, where you are full to bursting with cheap beer. Once you've made your move, there's no sex-change available without restarting the whole game. Suddenly, THEY strike! With a blinding flash, the aliens arrive, and cart you off to Phobos, one of the moons of Mars, where you are 99 "


"ATARI ST/800XLXE OWNERS CUT PRICE SOFTWARE Disk Mongo 1095 10.96 1000 mo Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest biggest and best Atari Club on the market Now incorporating ST software into our stocks and approaching 150 titles MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over 4 years ago first conceived the idea of a software library Now over 1,700 titles on disc cassette and Rom foames business education and utilties Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Over 2.000 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany Holland, Denmark and Elre. A last officient and friendly service operating a computerised custom built system to keep track of all your records. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities Important: Midland Games Library are in no way connected with or responsible for Midland Computers Ltd. of Worcester SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos, Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programs are as we full documentation SPECTRUM OUR COM 64/128 Cass Disk Uch Marta 6.95 Theatre Europe 10.95 Tomahawk (255) Mini Otice 2 Graphic Ador Great Escape Dragonslar Dynamite Den 2 Alleycat Paperboy Tes Per 700 10.95 Highlander Paperboy WAR Tennis Konami's Sold A Million 3 Dureis Big4 Now Games 3 Trivial Pursuit Galvan. Knight Rider Now Games 3 | In Tu. Trivial Pursuit Exploding Fist Dark Sceptre Winter Indis Alpha Hardbal Expert Cartridge 2 Dan Care Durells Big 4 Green Beret Sold Mlion 3 Atlantic Challenge Miami Vice WAR Best of Beyond Knight Rider Best of Beyond Graphic Ad Creat 22.96 Atlantic Challenge Great Escape Nightmare Rally Double Take P&P included Overseas orders place de 75 per tape Marcheques payable to CPS V e r onderw e CUT PRICE SOFTWARE Unit 6. Stort House Riverway Harlow Essex CM20 2DW Tel: (0279) 24433 (24 hour ansaphone) or 31956 During Office Hours STR8888888888 10.00 && && 10.00 & 8 1095 1096 by phone LARCLARARD ATARI OWNERS OVER 150 TITLES FOR HIRE Write to: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos. Tel: 0242-67-4960 UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64 Send sa.e for fast response and details to UK Software Exchange Club (CVG), | 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB HINTS_POKES-MAPS ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE We have an all round selection of diskscassettes and Cartridges FOR HIRE. Apply now and hire your first four games free. Around 1.000 different original titles. For full details send large stamped addressed anvelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVE (131.90 post free 130 XE 127.90 pest free 130 XES+1050 Drive 0257 90 pont free Antie and Analog magazines available BEST QUALITY DISCS Unlabelled 0.0.15 S .95 for 10 pont free 199.95 for 100 pont free S.S. 614.95 for 10 pest free, Double density Memorex 34\" dises S.S.D.D. Born af 10 28.92 1050 Happy Enhancements with full double density warped and compaction (149,95 post free GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept. CAVG 35 Tilbury Road. Therney close Sunderland SRJ 4PD Tat 0783 286351 Stunning Valen\" Tony Bridge, Popular Computing Weekly The monthly handboals packed with tips pokes, hints, maps, solation gossip, latest reviews, competitions plus much more Adventurers Handbook (CEM SPEC) CIG/Phu 4 Handbook .00 Amstrad Handbook BBC Handbook .00 Commodore (64/128) Arcade Handbook 1.00 Spectrum (48128) Arcade Handbook Or for even better value take advantage of our reduced mat scription rates 3 issues (2.786 issues E300 12 19.00 Sand cheque or PO HAD Services (CVG). 1338 Ashton Old Road, Higher Openshaw, Manchester, M11 1JG Tel: 081-370 5666 El DO COMMODORE SINCLAIR ATARI ACORN SCARVES AND JUMPERS Quality knitted scarves and jumpers incorporating computer logos. Available for Commodore Sinclar, Acomand Atan in Black Navy Red or Rue with Gold White or Green logo SCARVES ONLY 65.00 in P&P JUMPERS ONLY 615 00 inc P&P Jumpers available in V-Neck or Round Neck Sleeves or Sleeveless All sizes 26 to tin chest TRUEKNIT 32 Hazell Way, Stoke Poges, Bucks SL2 40D JR SOFTWARE EMPIRE SOFTWARE 76A Downham Rd. London. N1 5BG Tel: 01-241 3288 COM C16 5.70 SPECTRUM .40 Ace 67.40 Crusade in Europe European Games .75 .00 Commando ES 95 Cauldron 2 Winter Events 16.70 15.95 Dragons Lair ES.96 Marrerong Commando 97 40 5.95 Dynamite 2 5.95 Monty on the Run 5.95 Decisions in the Dan Dare .40 Yie Ar Kung Fu (14.95 15.95 .75 Dirty Den Dan Dare $5.95 Ghosts & Gobling Dragons La Azimuth Head Aligner .70 Green Beret 15.95 Dynamite Dan 2 07.40 .95 Rambo $11.75 E5,95 Head Coach $5.70 Green Beret Exodus Ultima 4 (D) E14.95 Heartland 57.40 Green Beret Hyper Sports 15.95 6.70 1 Cups 96.70 .95 Jack the Nipper Graham Gooch E7.40 Johnny Reb ! [7.40 Iridis Alpha 09.70 Knight Rider ES 95 BBC Johnny Rabil Kung Fu Master ES.95 Psycastria 15.95 Jewels of Darkness E11.75 Nightmare Rally 15.95 Trivial Pursuit .95 Knight Rider Nexor 95 Graphic Av Crestor $17.95 Kung Fu Master Room 10 15.95 Galtaforce .40 Knight Games .70 Strike Force Harrier Raid Over Moscow Leader Board 17.40 Stainless Steel Spy Hunter Mission AD Trivial Pursuit Rebel Planet .75 .95 Miami Vice ES20 Time Trax 17.40 Commando Mercenary Tennis Yie Ar Kung Fu 15.95 Parallax Theatre Europe The Quilla .40 $12.00 Power Play Cauldron 2 17.40 Bothams Cricket Room Ten $5.95 Way of the Tiger Surf Champ Inti Karate 15.25 Strike Force Harrier .40 Galran $5.95 Super Cycle 7.40 Konami's Golf Stainless Steel Raid Over Moscow 17.40 Bothams Cricket ES.95 Second City Jewels of Darkness .75 Pub Games E7.40 Trivial Pursuit Ghostbusters .75 .40 Summer Games Tau Ceti Realm of Impossibilities (D1 09.70 TSAM .40 Uridium 56.70 Decision in the Desert Di 14.05 14.50 Way of the Tiger Gemstone Warrior (D) .75 Turbo Esprit 14.95 llingtn Ultima VID) $11.75 7.40 Saboteur .95 Elektra Glide Greatest Hits Vol One Parallax 67.40 The Great Escape Polar Pierre 6.70 .95 Miami Vice International Karate 14.95 We now have a better supply of software and can offer you any game available at 25% mirp. Also, any game that is not yet released we can guarantee to sent it you first class post so that you will get in the release day. \"Guaranteed SPECTRUM RRP Price AMSTRAD RRP Prlee COMMODORE RRP Price Johnny Rab Johnny Rab 9 05 720 Johnny Rah!! 05 720 905 7.0 Fist Jack the Nipper Mission Elevator 995 740 Knight Game 999 670 Heartland Stainless Steel 895 6.70 Mission Elevator Dynamite Dent 8.95 6.70 Dynamite ! 905 740 Stainless Steel 8.95 6.70 Vietnam 905 7.40 Grephie Ad Creator 22.95 1895 895 6.70 Galvan 6.70 Miami Vice 8.95 6.70 Miami Vice 9.95 7.40 EX Run Paper Boy 5.90 World Cup Cemivel BMcGuigen's Boxing 799 995 740 TESSE 1495190 Saboteur They Soldo Milioni 8.95 6.70 995 Knight Games 8.95 6.70 Knight Rider 8.95 6.70 6.70 Heavy on the Magic 905 740 Kung Fu Mostar Commodo 5.90 Said Million ll 905 740 Rombloch Streathew 8.95 6.70 Mercenary Turbo Esprit 8.95 670 Bomb Jack 9.95 670 Yie Ar King Fu Knight Rider 590 Land of the Rings 15.95 11.00 Tigers in the Snow Tomahawk 995 745 Battle of Plena 095745 RMS Titanic 5.90 Tomchowk 740 Wory of the Tiger The Goonies 3.90 Commande 7.40 Compute10 Storstrike 11 795 8.70 Folio 29 95 26.70 Herbert Dun e 9.95 900 Heavy on the Magic 9.95 5.00 Our ICUPS They Soldamin 740 RRP Price Battle of the Planet Dragons Loir Winte: Even 7.40 Ghost'n Goblin Commande 7.95 5.90 Tau Ceti E 7.40 Paperboy Kung Fu Kid Sealer Theatre Europe 14.95 10.80 Bobby Bearing Steve Davis Scolar 795 590 World Cup Caml Doomidors Range 0.95 995 745 Pyrocure 690 Pub Gomes Bomb Jack World Cup 6.95 5.20 Heavy on the Magic 005 C16 Class 099 745 Now Gomes III 7.40 Our M.SX Leaderboard 5.90 BRC Uchi Moto 6.70 mp Mission 995 740 Best of Beyond Any Konomi Bam's 17.05 1495 7.40 Poperboy 995 745 Konami's Tennis Gunlight 9.95 7.45 5.90 Rebel Planet 995 7.45 Way of the Tiger 740 Commando 9.95 Den Dare 7.45 Hounder 9.95 745 Zoid Dark Sce 995 740Moon Cree 8.95 6.70 7.95 5.90 Trivial Puru Night Shade 1495 10.80 Year Kung Fu 9.95 1942 7.45 lock the Nipper 795 5.90 8.05 6.75 Monopoly 12.95 11.95 Surf Champ ft Karte 6.50 10.95 3.99 Way of exist 4.95 9.95 745 Monopoly View look 1095 3.99 Who Does Wins 795 5.95 Code Name Me 2 8 Ping Pong Kerami1709 9.95 .95 3.99 Commonwealth Game 9.95 7.45 Mane Miner 7 .95 Sky Jaguar 2.99 17 95 9.95 Lord of the Rings 1595 099 Hyper Alley Qullus 29.99 14.99 Comp Hits! 17.959.95 9.95 6.45 Ya Ar Kung Fut 995 599 Compis! 1795 905 Pole Position 9.95 6.45 795 Yle Ar Kung Full 1 795 095 7.99 Matchday 095 8.45 Trockw Fold 2 1705 995 Please send SAE for a catalogue of games for Spectrum, Commodore and M.S.X. and all the other computers. Please make cheque's or postal order's payable to Empire Software. 5.90 7.40 795 5.90 Trio Thai Boxing ATARI ES.95 15.95 Send S.A.E. for lists and posters All payments in sterling postage. Free in the UK  for Europe, and $3 elsewhere overseas per item We also have a very large range of budget software and stock software for all machines including CBMS, At, BBC Elec, Vic 20. Oric CBM128 and Plus 4 Comp Pro  50 Konix Speed King .95 Revs Hotshot .50 Kempston Pro Interface .95 EMPIRE SOFTWARE DEPT CVG11 118A Palmers Road, New Southgate, London N11 1SL Postage and packing included in price. Overseas add 75p per tape "


"THE MASTERS OF COMPUTER SOFTWARE PRESENT... D OF THE UNIVERSE Join forces with HeMan the most powerful man in Eternia as he battles against the forces of evil led by the fearsome Skeletor. Help HeMan, Battle Cat, Teela, Man-at-Arms, Orko and their allies as they struggle in thrilling and dangerous encounters with the henchmen of Snake Mountain Already a worldwide success this incredible series will bring action and excitement to your computer ARCADE GAME Cassette Disk CBM64/128 $9.99 $14.99 Amstrad .99 $14.99 Spectrum 48K $8.99 SUPER ADVENTURE Cassette Disk CBM64/128. Amstrad .99 $14.99 BBC Electron C16 .99 Spectrum 128K .99 Spectrum 48K .99 IBM .99 Mattel, Inc. 1986. All Rights Reserved T one 021 356 93BB "


"Available for Commodore 64, Amstrad & Spectrum; and (Text Only) BBC/Electron. Based on a concept and story by Ian Livingstone De Temple sal of Terror U.S. GOLDI Saw Game written by Adventuresoft, Distributed by U.S. Gold The dark, twisted power of the young Malbordus is reaching its zenith. All he needs now is to retrieve the five dragon artefacts which have been hidden for centuries in the lost city of Vatos, somewhere in the Desert of Skulls. Each day that passes brings him closer to them and only YOU can stop him! YOUR mission is to reach the lost city before Matbordus and destroy the treasures ne seeks. But beware! Each step you take leads you closer to your doom... L.S. Gold Limited, 23 Holford Way, Holford Birmingham B6 ZAX Telephone: 02:56 1388 Telex IM denotes a trademark of lenguin Books Ltd Produced under licence from Li one Commodore 64 Amstrad & Spectrum 48K Disk 14.99 Cassette .99 BBC/Electron (Text Only) Cassette .99 "


"OUT OF THIS WORLD nosferatu Programmed by Design Design Nightfall. The deadly enchantment begins. Will you live to see the dawn? Fight a desperate battle to save your soul from the Vampyre's bloodlust. Your enemy's power is subtle and mysterious, his strength neverending. Can you overcome his cunning and bring to an end his reign of terror? Based on the haunting horror movie from 20th Century Fox, the ancient legend is, terrifyingly restored to life. * Challenging graphic adventure * Superb three dimensional graphics * Filled with the sinister atmosphere of the original legend Spectrum . Commodore. Amstrad . .95 DELTA 4 Programmed by THE COLOUR OF MAGIC Enter the amazing Discworld, set on a turtle's back. Meet naive, four-eyed Twoflower, the Discworld's first Tourist, with more money than sense. You are Rincewind, the inept and, cowardly young wizard charged with safely guiding and guarding the ridiculous Twoflower. Wherever you go, his many-legged luggage is sure to follow. Meanwhile, Death, rather weary from overwork, has a few surprises in store. * Challenging adventure by Delta 4 Based on the spoof fantasy by Terry Pratchett  Spectrum . Commodore  Amstrad . .95 Available from all good games stockists. In case of difficulty, from Richard Bason, Piranha 4 Little Essex Street, London WC2R 3LF Tel: 01-836 6633 Bilanna "


"I love to 18-15 KINE REVIEWS/2 events. Dig in the sand with the handily positioned spade, and from under a bucket will spring the Sanman (why not 'Sandman', for heaven's the instructions on the inlay are almost microscopic in size. Were it not for the pocket magnifier helpfully supplied by The Fiend some time ago, to read his Supplier: Mastertronic Machines: Spectrum 48k Price: .99 Here is one of those strange adventures that accepts text-only input, but also has provision for joystick selection of a number of icons. The icons represent some of the most common commands. Since it is necessary to input most commands in text, using the joystick means changing back and forth from the keyboard. For me this is no improvement over keyboard-only input. Changing over from one to another is an interruption in the flow of play. As the game starts, the player falls asleep, and can then only escape his dreams by passing through a border post in the game. The game is a jolly little affair, with a number of relatively unconnected problems, unlikely adjacent locations such as a beach and an igloo, and unrelated Almost as bad is the keyboard response. The characteristics have been changed, and the rate of repeat is fast and unpredictable. A short decisive tap on each letter is required to ensure that only one character is entered. For some reason, apparently at random, the program takes it upon itself, every now and again to decide that ENTER has been pressed usually when you are not looking at the screen! This results in wasted split commands, but for some unaccountable reason, it does usually give a helpful list of exits! Not a game to get up a good typing speed on, but fun nevertheless, and extremely good value if you've enough patience with its quirks. Keith Campbell 00000 sake?) and he will run off into the igloo. See what I mean? Starting off is the worst part, for eye-straining letters, I'd probably still be struggling with the icons now! Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal Value MORON but don't let that put you off. It has to be said Atlantis have done it again! There's plenty of adventure there for your .99, and it's worth playing! Keith Campbell Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal Value O CON Supplier: Atlantis each level within it, there is a large given that a replacement is Software, 28 Station Road, network of comidors and cabins. network of comdors and cabins needed. The number of moves London SE25 5AG Some of them are mighty strange, allowed after the warning is given Machine: Spectrum 48k too -like the execution room is fairly small. Price: .99 Mail order which has three levers ranging Moron is a Quilled graphic from Nasty to Very Nasty. adventure, and by having add 36p for P&P. There's the usual radio room, relatively short text, packs a lot of This is about a race of people electrical room, and many others, objects and locations into its single known as the Morons, who, whilst including the ship's cinema. load. Therein come the puzzles -joyriding in space, stumbled upon Being a Moronic Ship, it appears fitting the right object to its puzzle. and stole the three Pillars of Time. to be coal fired. How else can the Because of the diverse nature of The ship's captain, deciding to p ile of coal and coke found in the the objects and puzzles, the game keep them for himself, removed fuel store be explained? This is a is lacking a little in atmosphere, them from the safe, and hid them walk about game--you will need around the ship. to find out what's around, before When the theft was discovered, going in for the kill. the Moron crew killed him, but All the while you are searching being thickos, they forgot to the ship, and deciding what to do torture him first, so failed to learn with the various diverse objects where the Pillars were hidden. that you are amassing, you are Thus, whilst searching for them, consuming oxygen, and battery they let the ship drift out of control into a collision course with Earth. Scattered around the ship are Your job is to teleport to the spares. They cannot be carried, ship, find the Pillars, and get away but can be changed on the spot with them. As the game starts you with the help of a Moron Robot. find yourself in a teleport room, all It pays to keep a careful map, so set to go as to head in the right direction at The ship is a big one, and on top speed, when the warning is an also see dly DROID ITY OFFICERS QUARTERS "


"X MICROS E IL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell ATARI ST: I am looking for CBM 64 software for sale, all 4,6274 Huenstetten 3, West duplicated or pirated soft Software and informations originals, includin Germany. All letters ware on tape or disc. You from St Users all over the Commando, int. karate, answered. will now be liable for proworld. Please write to: winter games, silent service secution. All suspect SPECTRUM 48K in dk Andreas Schreyer, etc. Also five adventure advertisements will be fortronics keyboard. Interface 1 Flurlgasse 7, 8440 warded to the Federation international to swap. + 2 microdrives, interface III against Software Theft for Straubing. West Germany. Phone Karl or Gareth on Kempston \"E\" Printerface, further inspection. Deeside 815176. SPECTRUM EXPANSION Brother M1009 printer with KIT Includes interface one CBM 64 user wishes to swap roll and tractor feed. 14 ATARI 800XL With and Microdrive + Software. Contact: Del, 3, micro drive carts. Tasword Il datarecorder joystick, cartirddges baxed as new. Clover Court, Murston, and III, masterfile, cassette magazines and software First . Write A Bellamy, Sittingbourne, Kent, ME10 recorder VTX 5000 modern recent releases including 181, Model Village, 3QW. all leads and manuals. Over spy vs spy,mercenary, Creswell, Worksop, Notts.,  or software. (Maily COMMODORE 1541 disc electraglide etc.  ono. S80 4BT. Adventures) values at over Willing to swap for drive for sale. Still in box,  will accept  ono Spectrum or Commodore SPECTRUM 48K  of hardly used. . Tel: phone (0322) 92922 ask for 64. Ring 0482 507758 S/W,  of books mags = Slough (0753) 20463 ad ask Dave. 6pm-8pm ask for andy. maps, a Ram Turbo for Julian. interface + 2 Quickshots 2 FREE DUSTCOVER + other SPECTRUM software for Spectrum goodies, if you NEARLY NEW Joysticks, very good COMMODORE 64, condition, all worth  or sale. Elite, Lord of The buy my mint condition, Rings, Computer Hits, soft more will sell for . Datasette, 1541 diskdrive Datel electronics joystick and US gold collection, Please ring 01 769 6335 and interface for only . Hurry and software . MPS exploding fist, and over 30 ask for \"Big Richard\", before someone else buys 80-1 printer, software and other top selling games. it. Send cheque or PO paper  ono. Various AMSTRAD CPC 464 Worth almost . Sell for payable to: Chris Jackman, games including \"ultima III\" Modular, Joystick, user  ono. Ring Fray on 0555 3, Albion Street, Lexhamr Little Computer People manual and a selection of -61941. Road, Litcham, Kings Lynn, \"Elite\" \"Battle of Britain\" software.  ono phone Norfolk, PE32 200. and several other offers FOR SALE: CBM 64 games, Pontypridd 401183 any time.  worth sell for  phone Steve on 15 SPECTRUM games for Rickmansworth 772960. FOR SALE. Mind games ono. Games include the sale including Nightshade, Twin pack. Pontoon -break Ridolon, winter games, Way of The Tigar, Fairlight CMB 64 Software for sale. the bank before Jake comes Mercenary, S Games 2, 1, of the mask and many L.C.P. Quake Minus 1 and to town. Konnect 4-3 skill Beach Head 2, Ballblazer, Z, more. Sell together or Blackwyache,  each. levels plus time options. Uridium, LC People, separately. Open to offers. Shadowfire and Entombed Both games available on Impossible Mission, Mugsy Phone Nottingham (0602)  each. Spy vs Spy and one cassette only  or sent Revenge, Karateka, PSI 874167 ask for Richard. Quo Vadin  Pri Warrior + sae) to Brian Brass, Warrior, Ronck N Bolt, Combat Lynx  write to P Sunnyside, Oakumoor, Gryphon, Drelbs, Off The SPECTRUM +, Software, Booth, 14 Lowerhouse Rd, Stoke on Trent, Staffs. Hook, The Goonies and 23 including Eureka, Leyland, Lancs. PR5 1HT. others. All originals ring Shadowfire and Combat, COMMODORE games to Bristol (0272) 516332. Lynx, Data recorder only  SPECTRUM 48K PLUS, sell. All originals. Titles including postage cassette recorder, Joystick include Way Of The C16/+4 owners feeling left Cambridge, programmable and interface, 25 pieces of Exploding Fist. Paradroid, out? people ignoring you? joystick interface and softare and some books and many more. Tape only. then get the great new joystick (only fits standard .00  worth. Bargain at . magazine on tape only .75 Spectrum)  phone: 0236 COMMODORE 64 games to Tel: (0705) 381 871. every two months. The tape 25231 and ask for David. includes hints, tips, reviews swap or sell all original CBN 64 with 3 Joysticks and and a readers chart. Send 'THE LAND OF THE latest titles including Space Paddles with 57 Software BASILISK' a play by Mail orders to: Mr E Evans, Doubt, Yabba Doo, gold games including Cauldren, Olympian Software, 72, Fantasy Game send an sae Collection, v, Goonies, and Crazy Comets, Z, Ashbrook Rd, Stirchley, for rulebook, example: Hacker. Send list to Nick Hall Commando Space, Pilot 2, Birmingham, B30 2YB. order, status and results Maelgwyn Manchester Rd worth . Whole lot . sheets (+ 2 free turns) to Blackrod Bolton, BL6 5LS or Tel: 01 470 7039. 48K SPECTRUM WHS Delta project Basilisk, PO Box 24, ring 0204 696282 after 5pm recorder, Ram Turbo Sheerness, Kent, Me123QU. (tape only). C64 GAMES FOR SALE. interface + quickshot II, AMAGA PRG. to swap or SPECTRUM 48K. Interface Many latest, including Rom Cartridge, input computer course 1-13, one. 2 microdives. 19 Superbowl, Ping Pong, Yie sell, I have Deluxe Paint, + worth of software in cartrides ZX printer + 6 rolls One On One, Hacker and Are Kung Fu, Zoids, case plus books and of paper. Datacorder many more. I want to get in Uridium, Paradroid, Little magazines. Good condition joystick + switchable contact with other Amiga Comp. People, Nodes or  the lot. Tel. Martyn on interface. Specmate back-up owners in Europe and USa. Yesod, Ronck N Wrestle, Guildford (0483) 32383. interface. Keyboard, Every Send your list or a few disks and many more. .50 issue of crashmicro and with new games to Johhny each please phone: Mark on CBM 64 GAMES TO SWAP micro adventure. Adventure Kristensen, Jorgen 0292 264420 or write to: M. ON TAPE AND DISK, LARGE maps, software, books, Bronlundsvej 8, 7100 Vejle, Stratton, 25 Castlehill Rd, SELECTION. Write to: game hints, magazines, in Denmark. Ayr, Scotland, KA7 2HY. Steffin Schaeffer, Rosenwegfact a complete computer "


"MICROSELL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell Paul Benhaim, 26 St. James , Spectrum + .50 duplicated or pirated softAvenue, Whetston, London, Q1/Saga keyboards etc ware on tape or disc. You N20 OJT or phone Paul on .75. State length, width will now be liable for pro 01 361 4746. and height. Cheques to R secution. All suspect Bennett, 42a Northcote advertisements will be forZX SPECTRUM Garden Road, Battersea, London, warded to the Federation designer. Full graphical SW11 1NZ. against Software Theft for representation, only .00 further inspection. send cheque or postal order CAN YOU HELP ME? wanted to W Falcon, 144 Tudor Way, immediately 10 to 12 blank, Rickmansworth, Herts. SPECTRUM 100's of pokes very good conditioned disks WD32HL. for  each. And I'll pay . ready saved on take. Plus If so please, please phone hints and tips to many 48K SEPCTRUM, recorder, Hayley on 01 958 8051 (must games, and for a added interface, slik stick, 29 of be double sided). bonus this month free maps latest games inc. World Cup all for just .00. Send a Carnival, Mikie, Bounder, VIC 20 C2N, 21 Cassette large S.A.E to: Michael and Ping Pong, Gunfright, Yie ar games, cartridges, 11 blank Neel, 45 Mill street, Bilston, Kung Fu and others. Cost cassettes, intro to basic part Westmidlands, WV14 OHN. over . Sell for  ono. 1, . ono. Write to A DRAGON 32 computer Tel: 101) 809 3057 after Taylor, 53 Dickens Avenue, perfect condition. Plus 32 6.30pm. Tibury, Essex, RM18 8HJ. game two joy sticks CBM 64 cassette unit + COMMODORE 64 MODEM manuals and information  software inc. Pitstop II, + various and game books, cost about Yie Ar Kung Fu, Biggles, + Communications , sell for  ono. Elite worth  sell for Software. Swap for any Enquiries to: Tel. Chipping . Tel: 061 430 3769 good Printer or Sudbury. 321527. (Stockport). Commodore sound CBM 64 I am interested in GREAT COMMODORE sampler or expander. Ring buying very new and old OFFER: Commodore 64k Brendan on 050782 357. titles for a good price! Send computer, Commodore COMMODORE 64/128 list andprices to: Brian communications modern USERS! Contack the LDA Carlson, Rembrandtweg (inc. Prestel+ compunet), (Licence Destroyers' 311, 1181 6L Amstelveen, cassette recorder and 17 Army). We want to swap or The Netherlands. super software items. All buy the newest software, INTELLIVISION VIDEO worth  offer  open (disk only) no copies. Arjen games system + voice to offers. Tel: Russell on v Zeben, Eglantier 11, 6081 module and 10 cartridges 01-207 5551. CJ, Haelen, Holland. Tel: including B17 Bomber  04759 2044. CBM 64 original cassette or swap Commodore 64 games. All new, for sale or TRS-80 16K RAM Level 1-2 hardware swop prices from  to  P Switchable Cassette SPECTRUM + with all leads Rance, 10 Pine Close, Recorder, green screen. and manual. Seikosha GPS Canvey Island, Essex. Leads, manuals and books. printer. Dara recorder. 18 BBC B GAMES for sale. Aprox 5 years worth of games incl. Elite and computer magazines + Dune Rider .50, The Commando. Turbo joystick lots of cassette inc space Hacker .25, Hell Driver interface. Quickshot II DK invaders scramble, .00, Vortex .95, Swarm asteroids, -T Bug and Tronics light pen. Total .95, Football Manager value approx.  sell for others. Sell for  the lot .50, Fistful of Fun .00 . Telephone 0604 or swap for disc drive for and Fortess .00. Good 862384 ask for Simon. CBM 64. reason for sale. Tel: (0775) 5217 AMSTRAD CPC 464, colour CBM 64 SOFTWARE, sell/swap, 40 games. modulator, green screen, SPECTRUM software for SPECTRUM Software for Including; Goonies, Rock joystick plus .00 worth sale. Deira-Wing, Starstrike 'n Wrestle, Commando, Amstrad mags. Two dust 11. Starquake, Spellbound, Winter Games, Exploding covers, nearly -worth Roller Coaster, Highway of software, including: Fist, Pitstop II, Spy v Spy II. Encounter, Dynamite Dan, Also 5 channel 8 Spindizzy, Starquake, Back to School. On one adventure. Phone Deeside Knightlore, Sorcery, all cassette for for only .95, (0244) 815176. mastertronic, Yie Ar Kung lots of cassettes available, Fu and many more. Also total retail price .68. Tel: COMMODORE 64. Lots of head-cleaning tapy. Will (Liskeard in Cornwall) 47039 software to swap (disk accept  ono ring: 02 556 after 5.00pm. only) including games, 78257 ask for Dylan. educational programs, DUSTCOVERS specially utilities, etc. Please send TO SWAP.CBM 64 games, made with black vinyl and your list to Imad Sadeddin, disk only, large collectors all card. Prices based on the Yarmouth University, P.O. over the world! Write to: following sizes: Spectrum Box 1686, Irbid, Jordan. COMMODORE 64, 1541 disk drive, two data recorders, speech synthersizer, 26-inch colour television, extensive range of software, books and magazines. Total value exceeds : Accept . Loveden 0400 81250. COMMODORE 64 TAPE DECK, joystick and over 80 games, including Winter Games, Zoids, Super Heavy, Commando, PSI-5 Trading Co. Tel Ascot 21290.  or nearest offer. FOR SALE: Atari 800 Computer, 1050 disk drive, 410 program recorder, disk+cassette software, Rom board, manuals, books (mapping, compute, etc), magazines (antic, analog, compute),  o.n.o. Tel: 0495 245701 or write to: Morgan, 2 Byron Place, Croespenmaen Crumlin, Newport, Gwent, NP14BP. TOSHIBA MSX + Toshiba joystick + over  of software including Yie Ar Kung Fu ll (cart), Hyper Rally (cart), Red Moon, Sorcery, Manic Miner, will sell for  ono. Or exchange for Spectrum + and joystick interface + software. Write to M. Morgan, 30 Holly Way, Gurnes Est, Merthyr Tydfil, CF47 9SL. COMMODORE 64 owner wishes to hear from others with a view to swap disk based games. Many titles available. Please ring Paul on Luton (0582)455531 after 6pm. AMIGA USER wants to swap the latest news only. Write to: Wolfgang Waldmann, Pliss-Strasse 38A, 4130 Moers 3, Germany. T1-99A COMPUTER. With tape leads, dust cover, a pair of joysticks, all manuals, extended basic cartridge, 10 games cartridges, 9 tape game5 basic and 4 extended basic.  ono. Will seperate. Phone (0352) 711667 "


"QUE MAIL ORDER ONLY SOLAR SOFTWARE LTD Unit 7, Brittania Mill Cobden Street Bury BL95DW Solar Software are looking for freelance programmers for the following computers ATARIAMSTRAD C16/Plus 4 SPECTRUM If you are looking for a reliable company to market your program worldwide, then why not give us a ring. Tel 061 761 1770 and ask for John COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM 48/128 COMMODORE 54 6.50 Leaderboard Molecule Man 1.99 Kung Fu Master 5.75 Dragon's Lair 6.50 Ghosts + Goblin 720 Green Bere Knightly 2.99 Ninja Master 1.99 Ghosts Goblins Speed King 1.99 Molecule Man Knight Games Caluronil 6 50 Knight me 2.99 Ninja Master Leaderboard 7.20 Bobby Bearing 7.20 Video Poker Silent Service 7.20 Green Beret 5.75 Tau Ceti Knight Games 6.50 TLL Second City Paper Boy 6.50 Dan Dare 720 Paper Boy Dan Dare Trivial Pursuit The Inheritance D) PSI Chess Te Pursuit Vera Cruz Paper Boy 6.50 Parallax 7.20 Pub Games 720 Vera Cruz Tryl Pursuit Full Throttle Tnhhntn. 7.20 Masion Omega 7.20 Pub Games Mission Impossible .....6.50 Thai Boxing 5.75 intrator... The Trap Door ......... .... 6.50 Arcana.. Mission Elevator 7.20 Stainless Steel 5.50 Strike Force Harrier Intemational Karate 5.75 Strike Force Harrier 7.20 Beyond Forbidden Forest ...... 10.95 Mono 7.20 Mami Vice 5.75 Miami Vice . Jeans of Darkness Bomback 7.20 The Trap Door 5.5 The Trap Door Tomak 7.20 Action Reflex 5.75 Iridis Alpha Dragon's lar 7.20 Octagon Soad 1.99 Mission Elevator Mission Omega 6.50 Freak Factory Winter Games 7.20 is a knockout 5.75 Bum Set Spike Kung Fu Master Springiz 720 Best of Beyond 720 Mind Pursuit Jack the Nober 50 Heartland 7.20 Vietnam Talking Tiger Room Tom 5.75 sa Knockout 6.SO Phantasie (O) Beach Head 720 Quo 8.50 U ND Mermaid Madness 7.20 Sent Service 7.20 Jewels of Darkness City Sicer 720 Sant Service PS15 Trading to 5.75 metro ATARI BBC COMMODORE 16+4 Start A nte Realty 149 W Olympics 5.75 Street Olympics Action 1.99 Ghosts Gobins 7.20 Winter Events The Second City Jack AIR 2.99 Marszone Quick Shot 2 Turbo Joystick .95 Most tities can be supplied M discounts of 28 Just write the tes regured with a second chance and enclose the RAP less 28% 9 9 95-0720, 08.95 06.50, C7 95 5.75, except C1 99 +62 99 es. Postage in UK Europe add 75 per te. Overseas add 3.00 per title Al cheques PO's made payable to If you wish to advertise in our classified section the cost is .00 + VAT per single column centimetre. For further details call Katherine Lee 01-251 6222 Ext 2479 NOW AVAILABLE the official Spectrum Upgrade! iTurn your Spectrum into FANATIC SOFTWARE 70 WESTERN AVE, BOURNEMOUTH, DORSET BH10 6HJ. Makes a Christmas great present la Spectrum + for just  REMON ACCESS WELCOME ORDER NOW! Sinclair Break SER FE  Professional full size keyboard + .50 p + p -includes 17 extra keys  Responsive typewriter-style action Inverse  Accepts all current Spectrum True video video Graphics Edit Caps lock software and peripherals Delete SULTADO DICT Extended Space bar mode Caps shift Capsshult R EDIDDELE Semicoloncolon Epson Inverted comma Cursor controls Comma The official Spectrum Upgrade. Naturally your upgraded computer will accept all the peripherals in your Sinclair system Interface 1, Microdrives and so on. as well as all Spectrum software, Just as important, new Spectrum software and peripherals will be designed with the Spectrum + in mind. So the Sinclair upgrade adds stylish looks, new capabilities ... and new potential for the future, Here's some exciting news for Spectrum owners ... HOW TO ORDER BY MAIL the official Spectrum Upgrade kit. The Upgrade has everything you 1. If you require us to do the upgrade for you please send .95 +.50 p + p. Total .45 need to turn your Spectrum into the stylish new Spectrum +. You don't even 2. Should you require the do-it-yourself it just send .00 +.50 p p. Total .50. need an understanding of electronics just the ability to solder a few wires together! The 3. If you require your Spectrum to be repaired and upgraded to a Spectrum Plus we have a leaflet in the kit gives clear step by step instructions. If you're not sure about doing it special offer price of just .00 complete. yourself, don't worry. Simply return your 48K Spectrum to us and for .95 + .50 Orders can be placed by using your Access Card on the numbers below. D + D We'll upgrade it for you. The bigger, better Spectrum keyboard Ltd. The Spectrum + measures 1292 x 6. It has a large typewriter-style keyboard with hard, moulded keys. You'll find the new keyboard has a smooth positive action ideal for touch-typing, word processing, simulation programs, and extended programming sessions. Two retractable legs give a perfect typing position. There are 58 keys in all including 17 new keys. Programmers will be pleased to see dedicated punctuation keys, a space bar, and separate shift keys for graphics Upgrade Dept. 140 High Street West, Glossop, Derbyshire SK138HJ and extended modes. And a reset button allows you to clear a program from your Tel: (04574) 66555/67761 & Manchester 061-236 0376 computer's memory without disconnecting the power supply  Copyright Videovault Ltd No 689032 VIDEO Valuu Video Vault "


"C+VG'S STORY COMBONER It's five years ago that the first fun computer magazine was launched. Pioneer editor Terry Pratt boldly looks back at what everyone else wants to forget the early days of your favourite computer magazine and the crew that piloted it on those first faltering missions into the unknown... That night I flip open the communicator and talk to Warner Bros press office. Two days later Lieutenant Cameron gets an urgent communication, a telex rushed through the ether from Earth (Via Peterborough): \"We know nothing about this Startrek program. No permission has been given. We cannot, repeat NOT allow you to publish.\" COMPUTER GAMES gineering. Step into the transporter beam quickly. We're heading back five years to a time when everyone's favourite computer looked like a mis-shapen frizbee and graphics meant black squares in different sizes... Swallow deep the heady vapours of time as we materialise in a dingy office, three floors above a bombsite in London's EC1 and everybody's talking about... Startrek? LORD OF THE RINGS SHATTER THE WORLD'S FIRST COMPUTER COMIC INTER THE GREAT MID CHALLENGE WIN SUMMER GAMES COMPUTER GAMES & VIDEO ... IF1,0 AND 16M THEN GOSUB 2000 ... what did you say this was, Machine Code?\" We spend six hours making Gradually the game began to out our case to put to Star Fleet take shape. A complicated affair Commander Tom Molony of long and short range scans, publisher) to invest .95 in a vectors and hostile Klingons. 16K RAM-pack...\"... so you Then there were the graphics, see it'll make the computer 16 mainly white dots times more powerful. Just \"It's all quite logical Captain, imagine... the luminosity of the lone white He agrees to take our case to pixel on the screen is a perfect the Federation. representation of the star Beta Stardate 18/9/81: The issue is Centuri as seen from Earth.\" starting to take shape so it's Science officer Elspeth Joiner time to prepare the shuttle for a grappled with her scanner, a trip to the printers. We set Looks like we are in breach of black and white TV puloined phasors on stun. It promises to the Romulan Treaty. Damage from the publisher's gran a be a long discussion on the reports are coming in from all week earlier and already doing revised copy deadlines.. sectors: our RAM-pack has an sterling service in the computer \"Of course he had the Pet at awkward habit of losing the room, in between episodes of school, so we bought a Sinclair program. (\"No life readings Emmerdale Farm. ZX80. We thought about the Vic Cap'n\"); the science office is Stardate 15/9/81: Science but when the ZX81 came out behaving illogically over an officer still in orbit in the vicinty \"Aargh Klingons!! adventure column from of line 17 and only two weeks to planetary engineer Campbell press time. The crew are close (\"Strange Captain it seems he to mutiny over paying for their COMPUTER actually enjoys playing own coffee. We decide to bring & VIDEO computer games'). The in a computer expert at great GAMES flightdeck is full of Romulan expense to help the translation designers. along. Enter chief engineer McCoy prescribes new earrings for the science officer Error in line 18. \"The and coffee for the captain. He memory'll no take it Cap'n. can do nothing about the She's crying out for more Romulan designers and offers power.\" Hmmm seems 1K little comfort on the subject of doesn't go very far. Time to the RAM-pack\"It's wobble search out more dilithium RLON Jim.'') crystals. Stardate 24/8/81: Ahead Warp Factor Four, we've hunted out ACTIVISION another ZX81 listing, Space chTION Bomber, which runs in 1K. We We return from Southend deactivate shields, our with a RAM-pack borrowed problems are over. from the production manager's These have been the Voyages son and the knowledge that we of the Starship C+VG. It's five fulfilled our brief: to search out year mission, to seek out new new civilisations. games and new challenges. To Stardate 22/9/81: One week boldly ... Energise! 'til pressday. Starfleet \"Wake-up Terry, we've got Command seems concerned Beyond on the phone. Seems about copyright problems. they never game you assure him I have been given permission to use the digitised full permission to use the name pictures of the Startrek crew on FREE \"Startrek\". page 8 of the Oct...\" 5RB PLUS PRISI It was the first computer program I ever saw, spread out across 10 pages of an American Atari magazine. \"We want a magazine like this but featuring this new Sinclair thingummy.\" No problem. I surveyed the C+VG flightdeck and planned a first issue based around this super Startrek program. The office equipment budget didn't stretch as far as an Atari more like a packet of paper clips (in our dreams whole staplers would waft and sway temptingly). Diligently we set about translating the Atari code onto a ZX81: LET 1 = ... This was the stuff, to boldy go where no piece of moulded plastic had gone before. Dusky Lieutenant Susan Cameron was communications officer on the magazine: \"Wha' BOOK OF GAMES 92 "


"MUMDN Superspy ..... ... Intrigue and Espionage Your mission is to find Beldar the mad scientist and destroy Avaliable for: his laboratory before he destroys the world. The only clue Commodore 64/128 cass 9.95 disk 14.95 you have is that Beldar was last seen entering the sewer Atar 400/800/XUXE 18K ram as995 disk 1995 system of the city. But be careful he has an army of Available from all good computer stores or post free from: gangsters and has wired the underground with control Databyte panels, sliding doors, laser rockets, bombs and many other 15 Wolsey Mews hazards. Good luck on what could be your most Kentish Town, dangerous mission yet. London NWS 2DX Telephone 01-482 1755 1rom Mumbles Superspy is a TM of Digicorp inc 1966 Digicorp Inc. "


"VHEN MERE MAN WAS NOT ENOUGH.. ' IT WAS THE TIME OF.. PUDADA UTDUNG CRL R Hot Line: 0-533 018 roup PLC, CRL House 9 Kings Yard, Carpentiers (Road London 15 ZHD "


"HACKER II DADY Adam Cave Man C.64 .95 DATABYTE Druid C.64 .95 FIREBIRD Hacker II C.64 .99 ACTIVISION Dandy SPECTRUM .99 ELECTRIC DREAMS Cyborg C64 .95 FROST BYTE THAMAROC DURELL Thanatos SPECTRUM .95 DURRELL Frostbyte SPECTRUM .95 MIKROGEN Prodigy SPECTRUM.99 ELECTRIC DREAMS Uchi Mata C.64/128 .95 MARTECH Light Force SPECTRUM .95 FASTER THAN LIGHT RELEYKAT TRAR POR Trap Door SPECTRUM .95 PIRANHA Sports 4 C.16 .95 ANCO Pub Games AMSTRAD .95 ALLIGATA HEWBON Alleycat C.64 .95 HEWSON Bazooka Bill C.64 .95 ARCADE -INHERITANCE Cruz EXPLORE Inheritance C.64 .95 INFOGRAMES Vera Cruz Explorer Ninja SPECTRUM .95 SPECTRUM .99 C.64 .99 INFOGRAMES ELECTRIC DREAMS MASTERTRONIC AVAILABLE FROM SELECTED BULLDOG DEALERS The Apprentice AMSTRAD .99 MASTERTRONIC TOYS NUS Littleweeds makro SPERRINGS Lewis's AND FROM ALL OTHER GOOD SOFTWARE DEALERS BULLDOG DISTRIBUTION LIMITED TEL: (0782) 563399 TELEX: 36247 BULLDOG "


"Paris for breakfast, Tokyo for lunchand the Golden Gate Bridgefordinner Here's a switch. Instead of running from escape near Big Ben. Or just gobbling up monsters, you are the monster.. the Golden Gate for good. Your choice of Godzilla. The Glog. But don't expect a warm welcome. A Giant Tarantula. Mechatron Robot. Or Expect everything else those pesky humans others equally unsavory. can throw at you. Tanks. What's your favourite city? Paris? Tokyo? New York? London? How about THE Moscow? Yeah. A nice little trip to eat the Kremlin would be pleasant. Or how about a daring rescue in the Big Apple. A bold F-111 fighters. Cops. The Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines. Even a nuke now and then. Stop complaining. You know very well you had it coming. You monster you. ISTER GAME 64 Commodore 64 Disk &14.99 Cassette .99 MA PUS LOCURI Commodore 64 Disk .99 Cassette .99 EPYX COMPUTER SOFTWARE EM Schothom Comedores de "


"The true story of the last five years..... coffee. 69,000 acned youths . Clement Chambers grew ... well almost. C+VG goes out of control grow hairy palms and go blind out of his Cowboy Outfit and on this page as Juan Hu Nose, alias within the week opened a Post Office Savings computer guru Mel Croucher, takes a highly Account 1981: The Year of the individual warped and eccentric, in other Everyone played DecathMonkey lon. Daley Thompson became words-look at the micro world. Any Clive Sinclar invented mass a one-inch-high weakly. resemblance to truth is purely coincidental. monochrome 1K computing  Youthful Enterprise in 1985: The Year of The vented mass piracy. Pig Five years ago, when Norman public. The cost .50pee per Rod Cousons was born in a Alan Expletive Sugar and 'Norma Normal thought show, and I shared my tour lowly stable, near Bethlehem. Robert Mad Maxwell and Attilthat the Digital Computer was tables with Mikrogen, QuicksilEveryone played Ping la the Hun divided up the a rubber glove, that CD stood va and Artic. It was great fun. Pong. (Same old racket, new conquered world. for Corps Diplomatique, that a In 1986, several software balls.)  The price of software joystick was something to do houses paid over ,000 for halved. with insence, that Baud Rate stands to display their wares to 1982: The Year of the Geoff Brown was born in referred to Party Political you, our public, at Olympia. It Flea Broadcasts. COMPUTER & the US Gold. was hellish. Croucher's First Clair Sinclive invented mass . Everyone played compilaVIDEO GAMES hit the Law of Economics reads; colour 48K computing tions. Old software never dies, shelves. \"HYPE (EGO x S)\"\" Several thousand loonies they just change the packIn the most volatile, hilarious, \"Everyone's A Wally shall formed software houses. fastest and dangerous industry be given away free to the Jeff Minter was assembled ed aging. ever conceived by homo semmarketing personnel for the from Hazel twigs by Druids, 1986: The Year of the sapiens, C+VG has remained Oric, Jupiter Ace, Lynx, Enternear Stonehenge. Bitch constant as the Northern Star, prise, Dragon, and all those Everyone played Asteroids. A areat funeral pyre was with Tim Metcalfe twinkling, other machines whose names Gut. Health Warning, \"A sterconstructed from the corpses of bright and stable as Polaris the original computer industry. itself. To call him a pillar of the From the ashes, pedigree dogs arose, sniffing one another like establishment is hardly adequopen season at Crufts. ate, (besides, pillars are meant Mel Croucher was bourne to be lofty, slender and upkicking and screaming by the right.) But I can't think of anymen in white coats. one else in the computing . Everyone played Kung Fu. world who has given us five You can make lots of anayears of continuously splendid grams from Kung Fu. service. Happy Fifth Birthday C+VG. Happy Birthday, Tim. 1989: Home computers are With many thanks, and my very banned by the Revolutionary best wishes for the next Five Provisional Government, and Years. micro users are rounded up in Right! That's softened 'em up football stadia, forced to enough, let's see if they'll print watched video recordings of this load of libelous, The Great Space Race. Haregocentric, crummy garbage dened cases are tortured in solitary confinement by copies of The PiMan's Greatest Hits. FIVE RANDOM THOUGHTS FROM THE we forget. MSX fails to qualify, oid can seriously damage your 1990: The Ultimate BreakPADDED CELL due to the current alignment of health through in home computing Mercury and Uranus. entertainment is produced for  When cars were first pro1983: The Year of the the masses, by the Ministry of duced, they ran on electricity, THE TRUE HISTORY OF Rat petrol, steam, diesel, parrafinu Pleasure. It involves a lightAccountants, wholesalers, weight sphere, two manual or chicken manure. Cassettes THE NEXT FIVE YEARS lawyers and sundry bar ste manipulation units, a symbolic are like chicken manure; longy vor sie m ) wards proceeded to rip off division between East and winded, messy and prone to 1987 Clive Sinclair changes his anyone who breathed. West, and a smooth rectangucorruption. In five years time name by deed poll to Alan Matthew Smith was inlar, 4-dimensional playing they will be ex-stinki. Sugar, and loses a fortune with vented by The Sun. area. It is called Ping Pong.  In 1981, 1K of popular his Electronic toilet roll. Alan Everyone played computing memory cost  + Sugar changes his name to Dungeons and Dra1991: Computer + Video VAT, from the Chairman of Clive Sinclair 'cos he says so, gons. Orcs staged protest Games celebrates its Tenth Mensa. Five years on, IK of and is appointed by Queen marches outside Hobbitat. Birthday. Sir Timothy Metcalfe popular computing costs 78 Margaret to clean our streets organises a huge Charity Conpence, from an ex-barrow of Richard Branson. 1984: The Year of the cert in aid of famine relief in boy. In 1991, amnesia will be Sheep Farringdon Road, ECI. cured forever, free, by wood1986: The Interactive CompuCartloads of naff computers . Why are we still in this lice. ter Disc is lauched, enabling went on sale in the high street industry five years on? BeIn 1981, trestle tables were any player to participate in any multiples, and a law was decause, gentle reader, we love used by us innocent founders fantasy, with true-to-life creed that they all be named it! of British microsoftware to dis-graphics, binaural stereo, after rotting fruit or nearplay our wares to you, our touch, smell, and fresh ground extinct animals Mel Croucher. 722792 "


"ADVENTURE THRO Irom small beginnings, mighty adventures have Mysterious Adventures were started the Graphic Adventure, written by a fan of Scott Adams, a No matter that the Hobbit program grown. Keith Campbell, probably the most telecommunications engineer was prone to crash if fed certain knowlegable adventure writer in the world, from Blackpool, named Brian complex commands, it became a looks back over five years of brain-bruising, Howarth. Very much in the same pastime in itself for players to mind-bending problem solving. style, although with slightly less discover new bugs! 'bite' than Scott's series, they were The idea of a complex parser certainly the next best thing, and was not new. Infocom, a US Golden Baton was soon followed software house, split the DEC by Time Machine and Arrow of Dungeon into three separate parts, Death, eventually building into a running from disk on micros such series which included the classic as TRS-80, and Apple, and it had a (in my book, at leats) Circus. very advanced parser indeed. Not Soon the British Spectrum was only that, it worked! This with us, much more a games development went little noticed in computer than a serious micro, the UK, where disk drivers were a relative rarity amongst computer owners, but in fact Zork was available in the UK as early as 1980 well before C+VG was even thought of! With the arrival of the graphic adventure, Infocom's policy was to ignore it, concentrating on improvements to text, to produce 'Interactive Fiction'. That policy paid off handsomely in the US, where the top ten games list today, rarely fails to include one from Infocom. But the incredibly cheap Spectrum, without a standard disk drive, and the low-memory Vic-20, tended to attract people in Britain and at a price to match. With it with low cost graphics oriented came a whole series of new games. adventures from a UK source Nevertheless, in the UK, there is called Artic: Adventures A-Dlittle doubt that graphics attracted Planet of Death, Ship Of Doom, many people to the adventure Inca Curse, and Espionage game, who might otherwise have Island. These were very popular ignored it. Unfortunately, this fact amongst Spectrum owners, but became an excuse for those Five years ago today, the world's graphics, and disk-drives then, they had not seen any of responsible for accepting titles to first ever fun computer magazine becoming available at those early TRS-80 programs. In be sold in the big chin stores, to appeared on the bookstalls, and ever-decreasing prices, so the A-D, the plots were not so logical instinctively reject anything starting in it, was the world's very adventure evolved. Some modern and devious, some of the spelling without pictures, frustrating those first regular adventure column. adventures might seem like a (particularly in Inca Curse) was enthusiasts who preferred the Home computers, in late 1981, completely different genre, but atrocious, and often, the wording mental pictures that imaginative were just emerging from the era of think carefully about them, and required for the player's input was text can produce. relatively expensive machines, you will see that they all have their difficult to guess. SWITCH However, there was an such as the PET, Apple, and roots in the Adventure format. SWITCH and POINT SONIC are exception, as always. When the TRS-80, affordable mainly by Adventureland was written two of the more tortuous inputs BBC micro arrived, it soon had enthusiasts, to become more with the beginner in mind. After required, that spring readily to many followers, and its backing widely and openly, entertainment all, nearly everybody was one! In mind. by the BBC soon led to Acorn's machines, such as the VIC-20. fairly abbreviated text, with simple Then came a major turning point stranglehold on the education Fortunately, those early verb-noun input, it soon became in the popularity of the Adventure market. People naturally wanted enthusiasts were mainly interested popular enough to warrant being the arrival of what has almost their kids to have the same in the tricks computers could get converted from its original Basic, certainly been the best seling machine at home as they used at up to, and writing the programs to into machine code, with versions adventure ever The Hobbit. school. But with a mere 32K of do them. Such people often for the Apple and Atari. The This made use of the colour memory, it was undersized in worked in mainframe installations, display method, of almost graphics capability of the comparison with the and sitting in a mainframe in the instantaneously updating the Spectrum, and featured an overwhelmingly popular USA, was an innocent little location details in the top part of advanced parser, which accepted Spectrum. There wasn't enough program full of puzzles and twists, the screen, brought about by conversations with independent memory to add graphics to an written for fun to frustrate and machine code, added a sense of characters who moved around of adventure game. Perhaps this was entertain other people working on drama and excitement to a game their own accord within the game. a good thing for a whole series of the system. It was the called already full of surprises But perhaps more importantly, text adventures was produced for Colossal Cave. Little wonder, then, that this was there was a picture to go with it by Peter Killworth, starting off This was shortly followed by a the start of a series some of every location. with the now classic similar game called simply them classics like The Count, And so a whole new format was Philosopher's Quest. These, Dungeon, on a DEC PDP mini. Ghost Town, Mystery Fun Becoming hooked on both these House, and Sorceror Of games, a programmer working on Claymorgue Castle which defence projects took the format even today continues to be 2: 01 VARERATION and devised a smaller and converted for new micros. In those completely different cave. He then early days of C+VG, when half of set about seeing if he could cut the Adventure page consisted of a down the text and fit it into the 16K \"tutorial' on programming an memory of a standard TRS-80, adventure in Basic, there were running from tape. They said it only sufficient existing games, couldn't be done. He did it, his plus new ones appearing, for one name was Scott Adams, and the review per month, with the game, Adventureland, started off prospect of running out after a what is now, worldwide if not in year or so. the UK, probably the most popular There was a light on the horizon, form of computer game. however. As well as an occasional 16K was the start-point of this new release from the USA, new revolution, and as hardware adventures were appearing for the evolved, with memory, colour TRS-80, from a UK source. est wall spposite a large bed. Dere is a four poster bed bere. A princess is bere. "


"DUGHOUT THE AGES despite having no graphics, were was the most popular but lacked a machines. Since there are no walkable two miles of the site, and actually to be seen on the shelves proper' keyboard. The BBC was a copyright restrictions on the knew it well! of the multiples! For some quality machine, but soon became publication of commerical Another prize was offered in unknown reason, these games vastly overpriced, failing to follow programs written using The Quill, Eureka, an epic with five games in alone amongst popular one, and the prize was an adventures, were never converted enourmous ,000 cash. The to run on any other machine. adventure world was delighted A breakthrough of sorts came to when eventually both of these BBC adventuring, when a complex prizes were claimed, and seen to graphic adventure called Twin be genuine. Kingdom Valley appeared. Still a A less happy story was that of popular game today, and played the successors to the amazingly also on the Spectrum and popular Hobbit. Even if financially Commodore, it was first released succesful, both Sherlock and Lord on the BBC. The graphics were, Of The Rings, (Part 1), eagerly admittedly, somewhat garish in awaited by Tolkien fans, was a colour, but they were there, Sibelahap chapeng great let-down when it finally nevertheless. arrived too easy, not authentic, By now, owners of the popular But Ludrak parries the bow and and full of bugs was the general computers of the day were concensus amongst its players. becoming increasingly frustrated There have been offshoots from taliates at not being able to play Scott ire les his opponent and the mainstream of adventure. Adams games, and a start was There has been the development made on their conversion, by of the 'arcade adventure' which Brian Howarth. He had more eare parries the blow has caused much confusion in the quickly adapted to UK hardware, minds of computer gamesters, and had a ready made system for MORE unfamiliar with the format of true converting from the TRS-80 adventure. Joystick operated, and format. When graphics were usually with no text, the problems added, they were held in memory, just cannot be complex, and are and just flicked on the screenmore implied than posed. More no hanging around whilst the the market trends and become we soon saw a plethora of often than not, it is arcade skills player waited for the picture to be cheaper. The Commodore had a \"Quilled\" adventures, many of rather than mental agility, that drawn and filled with colour. good keyboard, at 64K a larger them at a very cheap price. leads the player to completion. In Around this time, a small firm memory than its rivals, and some It is all very well being able to my opinion, it is a pity the word called Level 9 were beginning to stunning graphics. write a game without 'adventure' was ever used in their attract attention. They had taken The BBC required internal understanding the programming, description. the mainframe Colossal Cave modifications to add a drive at a but nevertheless, use of The Quill Over the last five years the adventure, squeezed it into a BBC cost of at least 50% more; the requires a logical approach, and a C+VG adventure column has micro, amongst others, and added Spectrum had no facilities for a good understanding of how to use evolved from a few simple a whole new ending. Two more standard drive. As well as it effectively. In skilled hands, and programming tips and a review, games with original scenarios, attracting writers of new with further enhancements and occupying a single page, to a Adventure Quest and Dungeon adventures, here, at last, was an graphics capabilities later added mini-magazine bringing news, Adventure followed, soon affordable US machines, to which to The Quill, it can produce mail, the Helpline with its high completed a trilogy. Then a disk could later be added at an superb programs. level of reader interaction, special science fiction adventure, affordable price, and on which the Unfortunately, all too often, a features, competitions, and Snowball, really made big US adventures could be game has that 'Quilled look' about numerous reviews. The staggering adventurers sit up and take notice, played. Commodore released it. As one leading adventure growth in Adventure mail and this was helped in no small Zork and a number of other producer complained when one of reaching C+VG, has reflected an measue by the ability of Level 9 to Infocom adventures, in cut down its non-Quilled games was ever-increasing interest in the release versions almost packaging, at less than one third reviewed as possibly Quilled...! subject. simultaneously for a whole range of their normal price. In addition, a (this magazine but NOT in the An entertainment form doesn't of machines. whole range of new American adventure column!) \"saying a achieve that degree of success by Level 9 had got the conversion adventures, mostly with graphics game is Quilled is the kiss of standing still, and in retrospect, side sorted out right from the start, held on disk, started to become death.\" the progress in Adventure over and made the whole process available in the UK. If the Quill is so recognisable, the five years can, perhaps, best almost automatic. Their reputation But the arrival of the 16-bit then perhaps the new Graphic be measured by two gamesfor high quality text adventures micros, and the Atari ST in Adventure Creator, produced by Adventureland and The Pawn. soared, and each new release was particular, has seen the most Incentive, will gain a better Adventureland was where we eagerly awaited. It was a matter of recent advance in the adventure reputation. Easier to use, it has came in. In its time it was the great controversy amongst format, in The Pawn. Although more built-in facilities, a more state-of-the-art classic, and is still adventure enthusiasts when Level different in detail, with a parser as advanced parsing system, is fully enjoyed today. Crisp, cryptic, and 9 succumbed to the graphics powerful as Infocom's and with compatible with all combinations text only, it thrilled new computer bandwagon. They developed a graphics that really look like of tape and disk, and looks less owners with a whole new game graphics system for Erik the pictures rather than computer recongisable on the screen. format. The Pawn is today's Viking, which they wrote under representations, Magnetic Scrolls Whilst these have been the main classic adventure, combining the contract to Mosaic Publishing, has produced an adventure at developments in adventure, there best features of disk text specialists in \"Bookwareleast as good as anything the US have been some other adventures, with artistic pictures, computerisation of existing fiction. can offer. not-to-be-forgotten events. This using the advanced graphics Once developed, as a matter of Adventure software houses article would hardly be complete capability of the latest technology commercial necessity, their own have their own systems on which without a mention of Pimania, the in home computers. label adventures also had they can relatively quickly enter zany competition game, in which When I first started out writing graphics, the first of these being the design data for a game, the prize, a gloden sundial worth that single page column five years Return To Eden. However, their without worrying too much about , could only be claimed at ago, identified by the same style concentration on the business end the program and operating system one moment at the right place, logo used by features on Chess, of the programs, meant their latest itself, what about the budding each year. C+VG's regular loony Go, Graphics, and Sound, little did techniques of text compression adventure author who wants to reader, John Yeates, was I imagine how dramatically its allowed them to squeeze more write his own game? originally, a Pimaniac, and the shape and size would change over text into a new graphic adventure. It didn't take a firm called Gilsoft game kept him and many others the years. Thank you, adventurers, than had hitherto been possible in long to realise that there was a guessing for months, including for your support and a text adventure. market for an adventure writing C+VG's own Mike Turner, of Star encouragement, over those five The arrival of the Commodore utility, that would give the Dreams. He was absoloutely years. Without a doubt, this is what 64 saw yet another development in would-be author the speed convinced he knew the answer, kept me going when deadlines adventuring. The big three'as advantages of machine code but transport problems on the day, were close, and the pressure was they were known at the time, without the need to understand prevented him from turning up. on! consisted of the BBC, Spectrum, programming. The Quill first Imagine his astonishment when he I look forward to bringing you a and Commodore. Through a very appeared for the Spectrum, and learned that he was not only further history of the world of competitive price, the Spectrum was soon converted for other wrong, but that he lived within a Adventure in 1991! . "


"Spike Sparkler's pick of the hits at only .99 each. Y LOOK OUT FOR Street Date 29 Sept. SNODGTS TANK BLACK HAWK LOOK OUT FOR MY SPARKLE RATING COMMANDER Let battle commence! The outcome of the Wat is in your hand's Your task is to destroy enemy ammunition and supplies from behind the lines Nof easy as the terrain is rough and litered with swamps and minefeldis You are also on your own and vulnerable to serial attack al any moment just the thing for wer Sundays Atari Sparkle rating **** Test your sleuthing skills against world famous detectives Theyre all there hunting the slippery Snodgits-dreadful attle creatures who wreak havoc in Lord and Lady Piloting skills are not enough! You need courage and a Snodgers snobsville mansion A must for all bright cool head to guide Black Hawk over enemy terntory on sparks Amstrad CPC-464. Spectrum 48K the world's deadliest mission Defend your jet against NOW ON COMMODORE 64 barrages of missiles and dodge the rocket launchers to Sparkle rating ***** reach the ultimate goal--the airfield Do you have what at takes? Only the cool headed survive in this game of high stakes and fast reactions Black Hawk is a superb simulation with over 30 levels of play Your on-board computer allows you to view This race against time depends entirely on your skills as positions from the allack or delence with automatic a navigator and pilot. But you are not without help As the adjustment according to the rate of incoming missiles owner of the fastest power boar in the region you can This must be the ultimate in action/strategy play rely on your boat fosfeer you to the rescue of the trapped Commodore 64 and Spectrum 48K scientists But look out for crocs rocks and mineSparkle rating ***** dropping rivals Spectrum 48K Sparkle rating **** Also from Sparklers. Spectrum 48K Stagecoach Danger Mouse in Double Trouble Danger Mouse Making Whoopee Time Wreck Kidnap Commodore 64 Mad Doctor White Viper Danger Mouse in Double Trouble Atari Soccer Submarine Commander. Desmond's Dungeon RIVER RESCUE Tower of Evil Have you ever fought a Baphomet Well they are no pushover They guard where the Princess is imprisoned and have some equally horrendous friends Poor old Princess Diana-Socked away in the clutches of the Necromancer You are her only hope Commodore 16 NOW ON SPECTRUM 48K Sparkle rating **** AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE STORES Unit BII, Armstrong Mall, Summit Centre, Southwood, Farnborough, Hants. GUN ONP Tel: 0252 522200 GRAND SALE .95 SINGLE TAPES CASSETTE IMOTEP BLACKWYTCH OUTLAWS SPYS DEMISE SPY STRIKES BACK WHIRLINURD SUICIDE EXPRESS LAZY JONES GRIBBLYS DAY OUT DOUGHBOY HAMPSTEAD SABRE WULF UNDERWORLD HARVEY SMITHS SHOW JUMPING 3D LUNAR ATTACK SHOOT THE RAPIDS HOVER BOVER CHUCKIE EGG BLAGGER GOES TO HOLLYWOOD SON OF BLAGGER WHO DARES WINS II KNOCKOUT JET SET WILLY MANIC MINER BC'S QUEST FOR TIRES FIGHTING WARRIOR AUTOMANIA DUMMY RUN EVERYONES A WALLY VIEW TO KILL EUREKA COLOSSAL ADVENTURE CRAZY COMETS STAR TROOPER ARC OF YESOD DARK TOWER SPACE PILOT .95 SNOWBALL .95 HUNCHBACK II .95 HIGH NOON .99 CAVELON F2.95 CHINESE JUGGLER .50 BRIDGE PLAYER .95 PINBALL WIZARD .95 DEATH STAR INTERCEPTOR .99 SHEEP IN SPACE .95 ADVENTURE QUEST 14.50 LORDS OF TIME f4 50 MATCH FISHING .95 ANCIPITAL .99 ROLANDS RAT RACE .95 HENRYS HOUSE VOL 1-4 GAMES .99 HENRYS HOUSE VOL II 4 GAMES .95 FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD .95 GILLIGANS GOLD .95 ANDROID II .95 PSI WARRIOR E2.95 PSYTRON .95 COMBAT LEADER 42.95 TOY BIZARRE .95 TALLEDEGA .99 GROGS REVENGE .95 FORT APOCALYPSE .50 BEACH HEAD .95 UP & DOWN f2.95 TWIN KINGDOM VALLEY .50 SPIRIT OF STONES (CASS) .95 CASCADE (50 GAMES) .95 GHETTO BLASTER .95 CM COMMODORE 64 DISCS .95 SHEEP IN SPACE DISC) .95 HOVER BOVER (DISC) JACK ATTACK .50 ROBOTRON 2084 BY ATARISOFT .95 DONKEY KONG BY ATARISOFT $5.95 DEFENDER BY ATARISOFT .95 MOON PATROL BY ATARISOFT .95 .95 GALACTIC CONTROLLER .95 MS PACMAN BY ATARISOFT .95 .95 HIGH FLYER .95 DIG DUG .95 .95 RAIL BOSS .95 .95 MONTY ON THE RUN .99 UTILITIES & PERIPHERALS UTILITIES & PERIPHERALS .95 ZORKI .99 SIMONS BASIC EXTENSION (DISC) .95 .95 ZORK 2 .99 C2N DATA RECORDERS .95 .95 ZORK 3 .99 1551 DISC DRIVES FOR C16 and +4 .95 STARCROSS .99 FASSEM MIC LANG. ASS  2.99 .50 DEADLINE .99 TOUCH TYPE (CASS .95 .95 SUSPENDED TONY HARTS ART MASTER CASSI .95 .95 SPIRIT OF STONES DISC MONEY MANAGER (DISC) .95 .95 FANTASY FIVE DISC. .95 COMMODORE MODEMS .95 .50 EXODUS-ULTIMA III .95 INTRO TO BASIC PT. I CASS.) .95 .95 SUPER ZAXXON INTRO TO BASIC PT. II ICASS) .95 .95 6 GAMES DISC INC. INTRO TO BASIC PT. I DISCI .95 F295 SOOPER FRUIT DEPTH CHARGE. STELLAR WARS LABYRINTH. THE QUEST, PATIENCE EASY FILE DISC) .99 4.95 .99 PROGRAMMERS REF GUIDES .95 .95 BARGAINS FROM 1st PUBLISHING MACRO ASSEMBLER DEVELOPMENT DISC) .95 8 BOOKS FOR JUST .95 + .50 p&p .99 .95 Normal RRP over .00 ASSEMBLER TUTOR (DISC) .95 .95 YOUR 64 CASSETTE BOOK, GRAPHICS BOOK FUTURE FINANCE DISC) FOR THE COMMODORE 64, PEAKS & POKES .99 .95 C64, TRICKS & TIPS FOR YOUR COMMODORE EASY SCRIPT .99 .95 64, ADVANCED MACHINE LANGUAGE BOOK DR. WATSONS 64 ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE  q FOR THE C64, IDEA BOOK C64, MACHINE COURSE IDISCI .95 LANGUAGE BOOK FOR THE C64 .95 COMMODORE 128 MUSIC MAKER .95 1st PUBLISHING PROGRAMS ON DISC..50 ALL JUST E10.95 EACH MUSIC STUDIO BY ACTIVISION (CASS.) [3.95 .50 FIRSTWORD WORD PROC) EASY SPELL (DISC) .99 .50 FIRSTBASE DATABASE BASIC 64 p&p 75p all orders .95 PASCAL LANGUAGE overseas .00 per tape, .95 ADA TRAINING COURSE FOOE POWER PLAN CALCULATION PROG .50 per pack ASSEMBLER MONITOR (COMPILERI .95 .00 per peripherals 64 CARTRIDGES LOGIC SALES LTD WIZARD OF WOR .95 .99 STAR RANGER .50 6 Midgate Peterborough Cambs .99 MUSIC COMPOSER .95 24 hour ordering on 0733 313970 6395 "


"BIRTHDAY HONOURSE Welcome to Computer + Video Games' Birthday Honours celebrations. As you may have guessed by now, we've been around for five years. That's some achievement in the fickle, fast-changing world of computers. But we're not alone. There are other survivors and, at the Personal Computer World Show in London, we presented them with our own special awards — a Big Red Baked birthday cake and a bottle of champagne. Longest Surviving Software HouseLevel 9  C+VG's ace adventurer blow out the cake's candles. Keith Campbell explains to Get it wrong and the cake Level 9's Mike Austin the explodes and the champagne proper sequence in which to turns to vinegar. The Review C+VG GOT Wrong Monty Mole by Gremlin Graphics  C+VG's Deputy Editor Paul number one smash, Monty Boughton presents Gremlin Mole, were \"fair comment.\" boss lan Stuart with his cake and champagne while \"Fair Comment,\" says lan as explaining that our less than he expresses a culinary kind remarks on Gremlin's criticism on C+VG's cake. Longest  Surviving Software HouseMikro-Gen Spot the wally. Mikro-Gen's Mike Meak decides champagne and birthday cake are the next best thing to Longest spending Three Weeks in Paradise, while Tim explains Surviving why he should have been the Software role model for teenage hero Ricky Steel, star of Mikro-Gen's House latest offering, Stainless steel. Hewson Lean on me. A beaming Andrew Hewson provides central support for his relaxed team delightful Debbie Sillitoe and jolly Julia Coombs. C+VG's editor Tim Metcalfe refuses to smile, prefering to concentrate on the more serious business of trying to stand up Most Innovative Software HouseUltimate The ultimate cake for the as the most innovative Ultimate software house. US software house of the past five Gold's boss Geoff Brown years. Play the Game, says accepts the bubbly on behalf Geoff. Only if you remember of Ultimate who take the cake to send it to us, replies Tim. "


"Now you can experience the Wort Alright. So you've wiped out the Russians in Summer Games. You've scored near perfect 10s in Summer Games M And your performance in Winter Games now sends chills down competitor's spines. Well, just how far are you willing to go to prove you're the best? Does 24,000 miles sound, reasonable? Visit exotic places. In World Games, you'll wing your way around the globe beating the pants off foreigners in eight inter national events, each one authentic to its country of origin. You'll see incredible, exotic locales as you travel the world circuit. Why you ll even have your own on-screen tour guide to smooth your way. The events the Olympics forgot. To become the champion, you'll have to dive off the treacherous cliffs of Acapulco Go stomach to stomach with a 400 pound Japanese sumo wrestler. Jump barrels in Germany. And pump heavy iron in Russia. Next, it's off to Scotland for the caber toss. Canada, for the near impossible log roll. France, to ski the Slalom. And, at last, the U.S. of A., to ride the meanest bull in the states. This, then, is a challenge of global proportions. The question is, are you ready to go the distance? ESSER 2 Sumo. SHELTER 37 SUELO FERDISSAB ATTEMPT "


"rld's Greatest Sporting Challenge... D GAMES Eight international events: Cliff Diving, Sumo Wrestling, Bull Riding, Barrel Jumping, Log Rolling, Weight Lifting, Slalom Skiing, and, of course, the Caber Toss. Visit eight nations to compete. Includes a detailed history and travelogue for your reference. Join the World Hall of Fame, That is, if you acquire the gold. One to eight players. Commodore 64/128 $9.99 cass. $14.99 disk Spectrum 48K S8.99 cass. Amstrad $9.99 cass. S 14.99 disk Atari ST $24.95 disk Now Envx brings you their most outTHESES Stratulaon to chale World from around the world to test your joystick mettle to the full. Zzap 64 DON U.S. GOLD oftware Epyx TM "


"BARGAIN SOFTWARE: Dept. C+VG 2; Unit 1; 1 Esmond Road; London W.4.1BR BUY BY * PHONE PRICE PROMISE If you wish to purchase any product from our list and find that you can buy the same product cheaper from another mail order company, simply enclose the lower amount, stating the name of the other company and where you saw the advert. (it must be a current issue), Price Promise does not apply to other companies \"Special Offers\". ORDERS OVER  DEDUCT 10% RING 01-995 2763 COMPILATIONS COMMODORE 64 OUR 7.95 8.95 RRP PSYTRON PRICE 11.20 30 STARSTRIKE BLUE THUNDER SON OF BLAGGER AUTOMANIA BUGABOO FALL GUY BLADE ALLEY PENETRATOR 7.45 6.70 7.45 PEC & CRAS SMASHES WE SPY HUNTER NIGHT GUNNER DUN DARACH ALIEN 6 0844 ZAP SZALERS WHO DARES WINS I DROP ZONE WIZARDS LAIR THING ON A SPRING 9.95 SPEC. SPORTS PACK SNOOKER DARTS FOOTBALL OLYMPICS DERBY DAY GOLF 14.95 7.45 16.95 6.50 7.45 11.20 7.45 11.20 7.45 6.70 5.99 6.70    WORLD CUP FOOTBALL PILOT 64 TURBO 4  ATCH CACKET DERBY DAY GOLF 26 GAMES 8.95 888888888888888888888888888835 8.95 14.95 9.95 CONSONNING 8888 NNNNNNNNNNNNNN    VIEW TO A LL CODE NAME MATT 2 FRIDAY THE 131 TEST MATCH SPEC. ACTION PACK MISSION IMPOSSIBLE EXTERMINATOR ARMAGEDOON FREEZ BEES ART STUDIO PAPER BOY DOOMDARKS REVENGE DRAGON'S LAIR NOMA.D. JACK THE NIPPER MISSION OMEGA BEYOND FORBIDDEN FOREST QUESTRON ULTIMA IV (D) WINTER GAMES EXPLODING FISTII DECISION IN THE DESERT DAN DARE GEMSTONE WARRIOR (D) SUPER CYCLE IRIDIS ALPHA SABOTEUR LIGHT FORCE TRACKER POWER PLAY SUPERMAN TRIVIAL PURSUITS UCHI MATA THAI BOXING ALLEY KAT ASTERIX STAR TREK LEADER BOARD MIAMI VICE GALVAN KNIGHT RIDER STREET HAWK VALHALLA SHAOLINS ROAD MISSION ELEVATOR WAR PUB GAMES (7 Games) MUKIE QUESTRON (D) GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR GREEN BERET WAY OF THE TIGER TAU CETI MURDER ON THE MISSISSIPPI (D) MERCENARY SUPERBOWL HERBERTS DUMMY RUN INTERNATIONAL SOCCER FOOTBALL MANAGER BEAKY & EGG SNATCHERS W SPECTRUM OUR R.R.P. PRICE PAPER BOY 5.90 MINDSTONE 6.70 TAU CETI 9.95 PSI-CHESS 9.95 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE MISSION OMEGA W.A.R. THE QUILL AND THE ILLUSTRATOR 29.95 HEAVY ON THE MAGICK ROLLER COASTER LEADER BOARD PSI-5 TRADING CO 7.95 LAW OF THE WEST DRAGON'S LAIR DAN DARE 9.95 LIGHTFORCE 7.95 POWER PLAY 9.95 SUPERMAN DARK SCEPTRE TT. RACER FULL THROTTLE UCHI MATA REVOLUTION HARRIER FISTII STAR TREK HEARTLAND DYNAMITE DANI MIAMI VICE PUB GAMES ( Games) TRIVIAL PURSUITS JACK THE NIPPER THEATRE EUROPE HI JACK BOBBY BEARING ACE 9.95 CAULDRON II 8.99 G. GOOCH'S CRICKET 9.95 FOOTBALL MANAGER 8.95 6.70 GHOST & GOBLINS 7.95 5.90 GREEN BERET 5.90 14.95 11.20 GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR 22.95 20.95 TURRO ESPRIT 3.95 6.70 TOHNNY HED 5.90 STREET HAWK 5.90 KNIGHT RIDER 5.90 DRUID GALVAN SPECIAL OFFERS TO C+VG READERS SURF CHAMP MANIC MINER 2.99 MATCH POINT BOUNCES VIEW TO A KILL WORLD CUP FOOTBALL SPIDERMAN POLE POSITION GHOST BUSTERS LORD OF THE RINGS 15.95 PYRACURSE SKYFOX ASTERIX NEXOR KUNG FU MASTER BATMAN QUAZATRON MONOPOLY URIDIUM 30 STARSTRIKE SCUBA DIVE 2.99 BRAIN DAMAGE BEST OF METODE NANNNNNON SPEC. SORDERONS SHADOW ENIGMA FORCE DOONDARKS REVENGE SHADOW FIRE PSI WARRIOR QUAKE MINUS ONE SHADOWFIRE ENIGMA FORCE 2.99 SELECT 1 COMPUTER HITS 2 HUNCHBACK SPACE INTRUDER MA WIMPY SUPERPIPELINE 2 MUTANT MONTY HENRY'S HOUSE GRIBBLYS DAY OUT SNOOKER ELITE 6.70 7.45 6.70 11.20 20 95 6.70 14.99 22.95 UTIER PACK A TRANSVERSION MISSILE DEFENCE DENNIS THROUGH THE Z DRINKING GLASS MOONBUGGY SPECTRES TIME GATE METEOR STORN RASKEL AQUA RACER FRENZY CIRCUS 7.45 11.30 5.99 E EEEEEEEE 6.99 4.99 4.99 SOU A MILLON EC BRUCE LEE ONLIGHT LORE MATCH POINT MATCH DAY BRUCE LEE ENTOMBED  POINT MATCH DAY 8.95 14.07.15 9.95 2.99 8.95 9.95 9.95 8.95 DURFUL PACE 7.45 11.20 6.70 7.45 6.70 5.99 7.45 6.70 5.50 7.45 6.70 <ETHER PACK ONLY 9.95 11.90 SABOTEUR TURBO ESPRIT COMBAT LYNX CRITICAL MASS m EQUINOX INFILTRATOR (D) PARALLAX BOULDERDASH U KNIGHT GAMES COMBAT LEADER GHOST & GOBLINS CAULDRON II PING PONG SOLO FLIGHT II URIDIUM G. GOOCH'S CRICKET SPITFIRE 40 SABOTEUR SHOGUN ANY MASTERONIC ANY MASTERONIC SUPERBOWL ADVENTURES OF BASILDON BOND VIEW TO A KILL HARD BALL CS4 SPEC NICK FALDO'S GOLF SOURCERY CODE NAME MATII EVERYONES A WALLY VIEW TO A KILL 9.95 9.95 9.95 8.95 9.95 1.99 7.45 7.45 1.45 6.70 SPEC. OR CHA WOW LAMES AIR WOLF CHUCKIE EGG 2.99 1.99 2.99 SPEC. OR C84 NOW LAMES BRIAN BLOODAXE ST RANGE LOOP PYJAMARAMA ARABIAN KNIGHTS FALCON PATROL LORDS OF MIDNIGHT 6.70 9.95 9.95 6.50 CAULDRON WORLD CUP BARGAIN SOFTWARE ORDER FORM Please send me the following titles. BLOCK capitals please! Type of computer Name Title Amount Address London 474A Chiswick High Road VISIT OUR SHOP Tel. No.............. Total Enclosed  Please make cheques or postal orders payable to BARGAIN SOFTWARE. Prices include P&P within the U.K: Europe please add .75 per tape: __ Elsewhere please add .00 extra per tape W4 "


"YEARS OF COMPUTERS t's amazing how many micros and games machines have come and gone since C+VG's first Lissue five years ago. If you walk into your computer shop today, you can choose from around 10 different computers. But if you wanted to buy one of every computer and games machine that has been around during C+VG's lifetime how many do you think you'd end up with? Twenty? Thirty? Forty? More? Robert Schifreen decided to look back through the past 60 issues of the magazine, at some of the computers and games consoles that featured in C+VG. It's not really surprising that most of the hardware he found is no longer available. Cast your mind back and see how many of these YOU remember. would have set you back . integer Basic, like the Acorn Atom. The Commodore VIC is another Apart from the main circuit, the rest of that small group of machines that of the case was empty. featured in the very first C+VG. The If you wanted extra memory, basic machine cost  and if you graphics, sound disks, printer wanted a cassette recorder it would interface, RS-232 interface and so on, set you back another .95. you had to buy extra cards to slet in The VIC had 5K of RAM, but the By the time you had filled up the Basic interpreter used 1.5K for itself, slots to make a decent machine, the which left 3.5K for the user to write whole thing used to get so hot that programs in. you had to run it with the lid off to Within a few months of launch, stop it from overheating. there were 3K, 8K and 16K The two Steves (Jobs and expansion packs for the VIC. What Wozniak), who designed the Apple, made my life difficult, though, was were two of the luckiest people in that not all the expansion system computing. They designed their first were the same. micro in their garage while they If you had a 16K machine, for were still students. They took one to example, you couldn't necessarily use school, everyone liked it, and a program that was designed for use eventually a company approached on an 8K machine. Now that's what I them and offered to put them in call planning, Commodore business. MICROS PAST the green, slimy gloop that was spreading round the planet. Remember the Adam? Most people would like to forget it, especially Coleco, who made it. Luckily for me. I have almost managed to forget it, but not completely. Like today's modern PC's the Adam had a separate keyboard, monitor and main system unit. The system unit held the inner workings of the machine, along with two high-speed tape drives. These were cassette decks which were totally under the control of the machine, so there were no butons to press. Coleco likened them to disk drives, but even the Commodore 1541 was fast by comparison. As with most new machines, Coleco sent us a free Adam to use in the office. Normally, when we get a free machine, we try to hang on to it. If the company phone up to ask for it back, we make up excuses. With the Adam, we actually called Coleco and asked them to take it back. Eventually we managed to persuade One of the first games listings in C+VG was for the Acorn Atom. In 1981, the basic machine cost , had 3K of RAM and an integer version of Basic. Integer Basic meant that you could only write programs that used whole numbers. If you typed a command like PRINT 7/2, you would get a result of 3, because the machine couldn't handle the remaining half. The advantage of working only with integers (whole numbers), was that the Basic interpreter itself was smaller and would take up less memory. When I first joined C+VG at the start of 1983, one of the few computers we had in the office was the Atari 800. In its time, it was a very advance machine. An 800 (with decent keyboard, unlike the 400) with 16K would have cost you  then. For that, you got 16 colours, 8 levels of brightness, upper and lower case display (quite rare in those days), 320 192 pixels of graphics, sound, and a joystick port. I remember when Beyond Software was first formed. I was involved in testing their S.S Achilles game for the Atari 800. You had to load up a spaceship with various goodies, but avoid being caught by DECENTRO OS COCONTROL teter The Atari VCS is surely the best selling video games machine. Whenever any new game arrived in the C+VG office, we would throw it into the correct box, depending on what machine it was for. The Atari VCS box seemed to overflow every couple of weeks, with Atari and Coleco both bringing out new titles for it. In November 1981, an Atari Ah, I can see it now. Happy There's only been one real failure memories of sitting in the C+VG from the Apple stables, and that's the computer room in the middle of the Lisa. It was too expensive and people night, playing Smurf Rescue. The didn't buy it. The cut down version of Colecovision games console was the the Lisa became the Macintosh. first to bring really high resolution Commodore's Pet marked the start graphics and decent sound into the of this country's personal computers. living room. Its heart was a 6502 chip, as used in While the Atari was selling for the Beeb. The machine was designed under , the Coleco started off at by Chuck Peddle, who also designed . To be able to reach the castle the 6502 and free Smurfette from the wicked Pet, by the way, stood for Personal Gargamel, it was worth every penny. Electronic Transactor. The VIC stood I can hear that tune coming back to for Video Interface Chip, which was me even now... at the heart of that particular micro. Although it's still officially The Pet itself looked like a tank available, you won't find it easy to it was solidly built in very heavy walk into a shop now and buy an metal. A monitor was included and, Apple micro. The early machines with the earlier versions, a cassette cost around  and came with recorder was built in next to the "


"keyboard press the buttons in the same order The Seventh Empire, C+VG's as they had lit up. Now that's what I own play-by-mail game, was call excitement controlled by the office Pet. This In 1980, Sinclair produced the involved typing in around 4500 ZX-80. It cost .95, had a memory names and addresses when the game of 1K and used integer Basic. This was first set up, and entering a meant that you could only write tiny thousand sets of moves every month. programs, and these programs could I got to know the Pet's keyboard only use whole numbers. There was very well, but managed to retain my no sound, very crude graphics and sanity with hourly diversions to the the worst keyboard that anyone had Coleco to keep Smurfette from the ever used. hand of Gargamel. The reason for producing the The CompuKit UK101 was a ZX-80 became clear in 1981, when direct copy of the Superboard II the ZX-81 was launched. It too had from Ohio Scientifics Inc of America. 1K of memory, but a 16K expansion It was made in Britain and, with its pack was promised and, what's more, American counterpart, was one of the it arrived. most popular systems around the It was just about possible to write time of the ZX-80 and 81. The u possible w wie spreadsheet, database and graphics games for the machine, though the homework. What they were actually machine came with an 8K Basic package. graphics were still crude, and there doing was bashing away at one of a ROM and 4K of memory. There was a was still no colour or sound. The However, while each program on number of pocket arcade games. One the QL occupied around 80K ona cassette interface and nothing else. keyboard actually moved, unlike the microdrive cartridge all four of the best sellers was Galaxy 1000, No graphics worth speaking of and ZX-80, but was still slow to use. The microdrive cartridge, all four a mini invaders machine with little Commodore programs were built into no sound at all. machine was a massive success. graphics but lots of sound. Fair value Over the years many computers a single 32K ROM After all, compared to the ZX-80, it at around , and a popular have been quietly introduced and From its launch, everyone realised was a much better machine. Christmas present at the time. quickly, and just as quietly, faded that Commodore's so-called business By 1984, C+VG was the only Game and Watch was another in away. The Dai was the first of these software just wasn't. Even in those magazine that still published listings days, no one wanted a word processor machine looked like a flat calculator, the pocket machine line-up. The It was introduced some time in 1981 for the Texas TI-99/4a. The software that only handled 40 columns and just as people noticed that it was companies had long since given up. with a large LCD screen around two there, it went again. The basic model Although come to think of it, the QL so we were almost the only source of inches square. Like the Galaxy 1000, with 48K of RAM was priced at  had 80 columns and no one bought software for it. The only other you could play Invaders, but there at that time, which explains why. that either. software was available by buying were other games available too. The earliest mention of the Remember the Elan? Or was it the imported cartridges but, at around And after a hard night of playing Dragon in C+VG comes in August a time, they were out of reach for Flan? Or perhaps the Enterprise? with it when you were supposed to be 1982, the same issue that saw the The machine was announced so soon many. asleep, someone would usually shout magazine's first ever Spectrum before being available, that they up the stairs \"Hey, stop playing with listing. that thing. Don't you know what For just under , you would get time it is?\". Luckily for you, the a 32K micro with Basic, colour, makers had built a clock in to the sound and joystick ports. Only a few machine, so you could shout back the games were ever made for the answer. Dragon, and most were boringly Just about every home computer slow. over the past five years has used Right from the start, Dragon's Basic as its language. Now advertising department found companies don't launch a product themselves in hot water. There was a unless they've done their homework two-page advert in C+VG headed and are confident that it's what \"show this advert to your wife\". people want. It was all about a conversation If you don't do your homework, you betwen a man and his wife. He end up producing a machine like the wanted a Dragon. She wanted a Jupiter Ace. This machine used washing machine and told him to Forth instead of Basic, which is a **** ++ **??!!@xx??!!?OFF\" That's complex language, although much what the ad said faster than any version of Basic that Wives everywhere were not Around the time of the QL launch, hadn't even finalised the name! was around at the time. So few amused, and the ad was changed. Commodore launched the Plus 4 and When it did appear, it had 64K of machines were sold, that they are They needn't have bothered, really, the Commodore 16. The 16 looked RAM, 350,000 pixels, 256 colours and still available today. At the last as the computer soon disappeared as like a VIC, but in a case the same stereo sound. count, they were going for around well. colour as the 64. It had 16K of RAM With such a revolutionary  on a stand at a recent Sinclair Nowadays, you could write a and could produce hundreds of computer, no one was going to buy show. Simon program on any home micro colours. However, very few good one until there was sufficient stock of Believe it or not (I didn't), the (though no one in their right mind quality games were produced for the decent games for it. Unfortunately. Intellivision was around for issue would want to. In 1981. there wag machine and it slowly faded away the wames were slow to arrive, and so one of C+VG. If rescuing smurts was dedicated Simon machine that was My local computer shop was selling the machine didn't sell in large my favourite pastime on the Coleco, very popular with those who had the Commodore 16 last year, numbers. In fact it sold in amazingly then building hamburgers was what Christmas stockings large enough to complete with cassette recorder and small numbers. The company the Intellivision was made for Burger hold one. software, for around . officially went bust a few weeks ago. Time was the name of the game and From the outside, the machine was The Plus 4 was Commodore's Before everyone started buying our first designer Linda, now just eight coloured buttons. The answer to the QL, although the QL home computers, you used to hear somewhere in Mexico, thought the machine would make some of the wasn't a very good question in the some pretty strange noises coming little chef was so cute that she kept buttons light up, in a particular first place. Like the QL, the Plus 4 from under piles of books when taking the machine home at sequence. Your task was then to was supplied with a word processor, students were supposed to be doing weekends. "


"Trying to predict what will be happening in five years time gets harder as you keep thinking about what has gone before. One thing's for Acorn. The Spectrum is certainly the best selling home computer of all time. Sales in this country and abroad have already topped a million. Amstrad launched their first micro in 1983 and these are selling well. Commodore's 64 is still in the running, but has recently been replaced by the 64C, which is an upgraded 64 in a cut-down C128 case This was seen for the first time at the PCW show in September. One of the most interesting programs that C+VG ever published for the Beeb was written by Mike \"Lords of Midnight\" Singleton. It was October 1983, and C+VG went into the third dimension. There were 3D graphics programs for the Beeb, as well as the Commodore and Atari The programs generated stereo images in red and green, to be viewed through the special glasses that were given away on the cover of that month's magazine. In the interests of research, we tried to get hold of other magazines which had printed 3D pictures, to see how well they worked. At the time, the only magazine that had used the process was one of dubious contents sold with a warning about not One of the reasons why computers have advanced so far in so short a MICROS FUTURE time, is that each manufacturer is always trying to make his machine If you hadn't realised before, you will the best. This competition is what keeps new machines coming out month after month. The only annoying part of all this, is that machines are rarely compatible with each other. You can't put a Beeb disk drive on a Commodore 64, for example. And even if you could, it wouldn't read disks from any other micro. So in 1984 those ever-so-clever Japanese came up with MSX. It was to be standard for microcomputers, with each MSX computer being able to use a peripheral or program from any other There were about 14 companies making MSX machines and, what the agreement meant, was that none of them could improve on their certainly appreciate now just how far machines because that would make it the home computer industry has incompatible with all the others. come in the last five years. But what Needless to say, the public weren't will we be writing about after five impressed and MSX flopped. In more years? Commodore's new Japan, though, MSX is all the rage. Amiga can produce graphics of When I was lucky enough to go to almost the same resolution as a Tokyo at the end of last year, MSX normal colour television. It has was still fairly strong. stereo sound, a synthesizer and Just as the Spectrum was sound sampler. What will come next? announced, so was the Oric. Which Acorn will be producing a RISC was very fortunate for the computer machine some time next year. This machine some time next year. This magazines, as they could all publish uses a special chip, with what's articles on which was the best buy. known as a Reduced Instruction Set, Overall, the Oric lost. Its keyboard which is why the computer is known was even more unusable than the as an RISC. Spectrum's. Most important, though, The benefit of RISC technology is was that hardly anyone was mainly an increase in speed, but will producing software for the Oric, Acorn price it too high and stop it while thousands of games appeared selling? for the Sinclair. A cut down version of the Beeb is When the Oric version two came due out soon. This will, it is out, things didn't get much better for rumoured, include a disk drive and the poor company. They now had not monitor, along with a computer only a grey and white computer that that's a cross between a Beeb and an wouldn't sell, they had a black and Electron. The idea is to take on red one too. Amstrad, but can they win? The Sharp MZ-80K was also Amstrad, meanwhile, have just around at the start of C+VG. Like launched the PC-1512. This is an the Pet, it had a built in monitor. IBM PC clone, known within Unlike the Pet it had sound, but no Amstrad as the AIRO (the Amstrad volume control. Whenever we were IBM Rip-Off). This machine uses an sifting through Sharp listings in the operating system called MS-DOS, office, my first job was to locate the which is one of the most popular SOUND commands and remove systems in the States, where IBM them, otherwise we'd get complaints PCs are used heavily as home from the school next door. computers. certain, though the games player won't go short of machines. See you in 1991. MICROS PRESENT So much for all those old micros and games machines. What is available now? Well, at the moment, there are five major companies in the running for your money. Acorn, Amstrad, Atari, Commodore and Sinclair. Have you noticed how many computer companies begin with the letter A? The reason for this, as started by Apple, was so that the company would appear at the top of any alphabetical list of computer companies that was published. Acorn's Electron is almost on the way out. It's still available in some shops, though, and W. H. Smith are currently selling it for . An upgraded Electron, with hints of the Beeb built in, is being planned by showing it to minors. Linda, who had never been down a pit in her life, was the only person who would volunteer to go out and buy a copy. Rumour has it that following the failure of the QL Clive Sinclair decided to take the money and run. Unfortunately for him, he left in a C5 and the battery packed up at the end of the road. Never mind, at least he achieved the ultimate accolade of being immortalised on Spiting Image, along with such famous personalities as a sheep and an RS-232 Interface Lead. "


"Ocea ocean_They solda DIGITAL INTEGRATION D ACTIVISTON HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE PAMBO FIRST BLOOD PART II The HIT SQUAD have put together FOUR No.1 Blockbusters for this NEW games compilation GHOSTBUSTERS KUNGSFL MASTER THE OFFICIAL COIN ORGAME Featuring: ARIEL DOGFIGHTS JUNGLE COMBAT MARTIAL ARTS and of course... GHOSTBUSTING!! All in one special twin cassette pack for your COMMODORE SPECTRUM Or AMSTRAD KUNG-FU MASTER ACTIVISION SPECTRUM FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE DEALERS .95 THE FINEST FROM THE BEST COMMODORE CASSETTE DISK AMSTRAD CASSETTE DISK SQUAD .95 14.95 .95 14.95 SCHLAD "


"ICON JON Who happens to a program that doesn't want to die? WHY. IT TRIES TO ESCAPE, OF COURSE! WRRORSOFT Maxwell House, 74 Worship Street, London EC2A 2EN. Tel: 01:377 4644/5 Telex 886048 BPCCG PUBLICATION OCTOBER Amstrad CPC $8.95 tape .85disk "


"FIFELOLT Steve Crow, C+VG's Golden Joystick Programmer of the Year, has been hard at work since our award ceremony. He's been creating the weird and wonderful world of Firelord his first game since the award winning Starquake. Here we take a first look at Steve's exciting new arcade adventure. The wicked queen of the land of Torot has tricked a friendly dragon into parting with his powerful firestone. Now she is terrorising the land. Now let's listen to our hero Sir Galaheart as he takes up the story of Firelord... BISHOP WIZARD WITCH WISE MAN forest. The very air breathed the the ha inted land secrets of this haunted land. H ow that he must succeed if he The voice told me that as well as Westerbere the land. the ghosts there were a host of people who might prove helpful. NE GAME The Peasants know the villages Yob begithe game as a peasant, and forests well although they are and by batang haggling and often slow ed,\" said the voice tichting voor through the \"Travel maxis arranged by paying. Both the ultimate the Gatekeeper a 101.ptouse or by l or r quest is buying a Timescapere com a de m us servants of Herbalist or some other Quee l ls which pop up character. The Tithe Ward Keeperry a to scorch you. will keep objects safe and sound.\" \"Witches and Wizards have spells available and the Dragon's teeth may be of use. Weapons can be obtained WAE from the Knights and the Wise Old Form atter the came, the Man is a useful source of information how streene, with as is the Hermit who is rumoured to the knight batting with the live in the forests. Chess who support the Evil \"Bishops tend to be quick and Don't forget to avoid the greedy so it pays not to try and cheat usty fireballs that spring up from them. Justice is administered by the code to time! Reeves who may be helpful if treten. At the top or the screen, your score with respect. ba r an be found on the left, the number \"Princess Eleanor is held captive lives remaining is just to the right. by the Evil Queen and she may look Next come yoer energy, weapon and kindly on those who are trying to free ballering power. These fluctuate as you progress through the game Suddenly Sir Galaheart realised he Some of the buildings can be entered. was alone once more. A feeling of Walk up to the gap, and move around mystery filled the forest. The very air until you are directly in line with it of the place breathed the secrets of and then go in. GA EVIL QUEEN PEASANT PEASANT se KNIGHT her GATE KEEPER GATE KEEPER DRAGON TITHE WARD PRINCESS ELANOR KEEPER he path wove deeper through the forest beckoning me further into the flickering shadows. A voice spoke out in the dimming gloom. \"My son, you have returned to this land of Torot, to discover its hidden secrets. You must seek out the sacred Firestone and return it to the Dragon's safekeeping.\" I trembled with fear as I recalled how the Evil Queen had seized the Firestone and used its power to curse the land with fire and ghostly apparitions who drifted the streets in ghastly imitation of the once happy inhabitants. At one time the people had roamed freely but now they hid in their homes. The Evil Queen's price for the release of the Stone was for some brave warrior to win for her the four charms of eternal youth. I was the chosen warrior. The nature of my quest filled me with fear and foreboding \"Fear not,\" said the voice, \"for the answer lies within the kingdom. Use the enchanted crystals and fail not.\" A feeling of mystery filled the MOCENT THESE MOST THE TRIAL "


"BARTERING ENERGY LIVES WEAPONS ENERGY HOUSE OCCUPANT SCORE RIBBONS COLOUR DENOTE OF THE CHARACTER des og ever-increasing times. You must hit the fire button when the arrow points to Innocent. The best idea here is to let the arrow change a few times in order to get an idea of the rhythm. Make a map! It's pretty damned tough remembering where you are in the maze of streets, and when your energy is being drained at a ridiculous rate. It's essential that you can reach somewhere with a supply of provisions Firelord will be released on 29th October on Spectrum, price .95 cassette Amstrad price, .95 cassette and .95 disc, and on 25th November on Commodore 64, price .95 cassette and .95 disc. The following is a list of the required stages through which you must pass to achieve the ultimate accolade of FIRELORD: V OS *S Pheasant, Serf, Churl, Thaine, Squire, Knight, Baronet, Baron, Duke, Overlord and Firelord. SCALES Trade an object * SIGNPOST Find out where you are SERVICES TIMESCAPE Cista spell to magic place OFFER DENOTES A DEAL IS SET UP INFORMATION Find out how to accomplish your quest SELECT THIS IF YOU WANT TO CHEAT GALA HEART'S OBJECTS PORTCULLIS Pay a toll to pass through the himse EXIT THE TRIAL Here you must fight for your survival by proving-or persuading the judge of your innocence. This isn't as complicated as it may sound. It's pretty damned tricky, though! If you remember the bonus stage in Uridium, then you'll easily grasp what you have to do. Guilty and Innocent flash on and off at SUPPLIES Buy food, weapons or trading tokens ENCHANTED CRYSTAL Use to cast ciemal youth O AMSTRAD VERSION THE TRADING SCREEN Once inside the house, shop or other inhabitable area, the screen will change. In the top right corner of the screen, the character with whom you are trading is depicted. Below that is a cheat command. More of that later. Finally, on that side is the exit option. Down the middle of the screen you can find the various services offered by the character. A set of scales signifies that you may be able to trade with them. A signpost will tell you that you can find out your location. There are also symbols for supplies, information and a magical service. Finally, the portcullis icon will allow you to pay a fee at a toll gate, should you want to Using the cross-shaped cursor, you select which service you require, and how you intend to pay for it. Should you decide that it's worth the risk, you can choose to try and rip off the c.cupant of the building THE VILLAGE "


"Isaac Asimov's SCIENCE FICTION MAGAZINE PRESENTS KAYLETH KAYLETH The Zyroneans were an advanced, pacifistic civilisation, until the arrival of Kayleth and his obsessional craving for Chromazin, a rare mineral found in small quantities on the planet Zyron. Now, Kayleth rules the Zyron skies with awesome power, using an Atomic Bisembler system to send down his powerful army of androids to enslave the Zyroneans and force them to clawout the subterranean rocks to extract the precious ore. What is Kayleth? Why are particular Zyronearls transported to the orbiting nerve centre of his domain, never to return? How can this tyrant be eliminated? Have you got the iron nerve and cunning required to defeat him before he completes the total destruction of your home planet? You, a loyal Zyronean, have avoided capture long enough to set into motion a plan to liberate your beloved planet, However, as you are about to discover, certain events have overtaken your well laid schemes!!! CBM 64/128 Amstrad Spectrum 128K Spectrum 48K BBC Electron IBM (disk) . .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 .99 U.S Isaac Asimov's science fiction magazine is published by Davis Publications Inc. Written by: Stefan Ufnowski Written and published by Adventuresoft U.K. Ltd. Distributed by U.S. Gold Ltd., Units 2/3, Holford Way, Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388 GOLDE "


"With no hope on the horizon all that's left are dreams INHERITANCE Panic in Las Vegas GOLDEN NUGCER Michael INFOGRMES Things couldn't be worse. No money, no food, no hope. Until the day of the telegram. Now you must get to Las Vegas. And Why? To win a million dollars, that's all! It won't be easy, you may not even get out of your hotel, let alone survive the ordeal of the airport. And have you the skill, and the luck, to win in the Casinos of Las Vegas? Available on: Amstrad (Tape & Disk) CBM 64; MSX and Spectrum (Tape only) MITRE HOUSE, ABBEY ROAD ENFIELD, MIDDSX. EN1 2RQ Telephone: 01-364 0123 "


"SOFTWARE UTILITIES PCW JOYCESTICK say, 8 different areas. Into use a cleaning disk, except as a mouse, an advanced each area you can then put a a last resort if you are having disk-based Basic, a story, a picture, a big headline great difficulty loading monochrome monitor and a and so on. programs. single 5.25-inch disk drive, all Some interesting software The package contains a The other disk contains for  plus VAT. goodies have been arriving on number of pictures, and you programs which will, says the For another hundred my desk recently. Although can add your own if you want. manual, realign the heads on pounds, you can have a colour they can't be classed as There are also some clever your drive. monitor or another disk drive. hardware add-ons, they are features which will, for If you have trouble with a This machine certainly example, run a story around a disk drive that's under looks like being a massive certain parts of your micro sol picture on a page. guarantee, take it back to the seller for Amstrad. Sources don't see why I can't mention The Newsroom is from place that sold it to you and tell me that they have had them here. Springboard, who are based ask for it to be repaired or ONE MILLION copies of the For the Commodore 64 in Minneapolis, USA. You replaced. If the guarantee has manual printed. They comes PrintMaster. It's a should be able to get a copy run out, then Robtek's obviously hope to break all utility that lets you create from you dealer. package may be the answer. sales records with this one. banners, signs, greeting But don't try it on a drive that is More details next time, ersonal MAGIC DISKS guaranteed, as no one will when I've managed to play stationery on the screen, and repair under guarantee a drive with the machine myself. then print them on a dot matrix Robtek have produced that you have damaged by printer. something called a Magic Disk making a mistake with There are some 111 Kit, although I can't imagine realignment programs. different icons which can be why anyone would want to printed in a number of different make magic disks! sizes and patterns. Add some Actually the kit consists of Cascade Games have text of your choice and the two disks for the Commodore PC-1512 PC-1512 launched a joystick adaptor for job's done. If you want to 1541 or 1570. The first disk is the Amstrad PCW micros. It's design your own icons, there's a cleaner, which has some As I sit writing this column one called the Joycestick Interface an editor that lets you do just special cloth inside a normal mal sunny Saturday in August. (gerrit?) and it costs .95. that. floppy disk cover. The manual Qual Amstrad are just about to the interface plugs into the Your dealer should stock recommends that you play this play this launch their new computer. By edge connector on the micro, PrintMaster. If not, tell him it's in your drive for the time you read this, you will and gives you a standard from Ariolasoft and ask him to know more about it than I do at 9-pin connector that will take order it. And you may as well seconds every the moment. Basically, it's an any Commodore or Atari-type stock up with printer ribbons week. IBM PC compatible machine joystick. while you're there. Personally, that uses an operating system Your local dealer should Also for the Commodore I would called MS-DOS version 3.2. It have one in stock, or be able comes The Newsroom. It's recommend is also supplied with GEM and to order it. like Fleet Street Editor, and that you allows you to use your micro NEVER and printer to produce newspaper articles. This package comes on two disks and includes a well written manual to guide you through all the processes involved. You start by designing a grid for your page, which splits up the page into, AMSTRAD JOYCESTICK "


"TEA FOR TWO SIMULTANEOUS TWO PLAYER ACTION Two screens. Two players. Two Kettles. A truly amazing, interactive, all action arcade spectacular with a unique gameplan KETTLE Soundtrack created by W.E. Music Ltd. Screenshots from  version 2 PLAYER 222 ...... SECRET MAP PLAYER Tony Crowther Test your reflexes against mysterious aliens. Pit your wits against your determined opponent with split screen vision that allows you to compare your progress and to help or hinder his. Tape CBM 64/128 .95 AMSTRAD .95 Disc CBM 64/28 .95 AMSTRAD .95 \"Action packed. Nerve tingling excitement set in an unusual game scenario. You've never seen a game quite like this before.\" Tony Crowther Alligata Software Ltd. 1 Orange Street, Sheffield S14DW. Tel: 0742 755796 ALLIGATA 28 AMSTRAD CBM64/128 AMSTRAD CBM64/128 AMSTRAD CBM64/BITES BACK TRAD CB "


"CHEAP MONITORS MORE Yes, I know that monitors aren't cheap, but some are cheaper than others. Thomson seem pretty good value to me, and are now beginning to make an appearance in this country (they're French, you know). Commodore compatible ones start at  for green screen and  for colour. Philips also produce a range of monitors, including a helpful leaflet that tells you which monitor is compatible with which micro, and the type of lead that you need to connect them. can be 8K or 16K types. You details, or a copy of their can plug any Acorn interfaces catalogue. into the back of the ROM Box if you want. Now that you have a Rom Box, you'll want some ROMs COLOURS to put in it. Guess what? Slogger produce a whole ON THE range. Surprised? No, nor am BEEB Their list includes a machine code monitor and Wild Vision are producing an debugger, a sideways ROM extended colour card for the manager and a ROM-based BBC and Master micros. It Word Processor. With so from Mercury instead. The gives you a choice of 4096 benefit? Cheaper phone calls, ills many shops clearing out colours, of which any 16 can Electrons for around , this be on the screen at one time. For the latest information, may be a cheap way of getting The Palettemate Graphics and a copy of their very glossy into computing. Card costs 149 plus VAT, and Call Slogger on 0634 brochures, write to Mercury details can be had by calling Communications and 90 Longoro 811634 if you want more 091 281 8481. Acre, London WC2. DISKS IN A HURRY C64 TAPE TURBO Have you ever spent ages perfecting a program and then Finally for this month, news of realised that you haven't got a Turbo Tape for the 64. It's a any more blank disks to save it short proGram on tape which, on? You probably have to do once loaded, allows you to what I do, and delete an old save and load programs on a file to make some space. Commodore cassette Disking, who sell disks, have a recorder ten times faster than special hotline that's open 24 normal. It won't work with hours a day on 0428 722563. protected software, though. If you call them during the day. Still, what do you expect for and give a credit card number, only .95. The tape is from they'll have a box in the post Robtek, and your dealer within 4 hours. should have one. Right, that's it for this time. CHEAPER See you next year, in January's issue. The way to a hacker's heart is CLC ELECTRON to pay his phone bill. If you're unlucky enough to have to pay your own, you may be interested to know that your phone bill may soon be A new range of ROM cheaper. expansion units for the Mercury Communications is Electron was launched a new company who are recently by Slogger. Why any competing against BT to company wants to call itself supply telephone lines. At the Slogger baffles me, but I'm moment, their service is only sure there must be a good available to businesses. But reason somewhere. within the next few months, Their Rom Box plugs into you'll be able to give up your the back of the computer and BT phone line and rent one holds up to 8 ROMS, which CALLS ROM GOODIES ROM BOX 116 "


"The Latest Smash Hit from KONAMI TM V GSTEE992 ADIG Screen shots from Arcade version SPECTRUM .95 Available from all leading retailers and COMMODORE 64/128 CASSETTE .95 DISC .95 in case of difficulty send cheques or AMSTRAD CPC CASSETTE .95 DISC .95 postal orders to: MSX CARTRIDGE .95 NMC LTD., PO Box 67, London SW11 1BS. Tel: 01 228 6730 "


"SOFTWARE SPEECH REMOTE CONTROL Speech synthesizers get mentioned quite frequently on this page and here's news of two more. What's most interesting is that the package consists of just a program on disk or tape, and no extra hardware bits. The programs are from Superior Software and are for the Commodore 64 and 128, and also the Amstrad CPC range. They cost .95 on tape. The Amstrad one is also on disk for .95. The programs add a SAY comand to the machine's Now, though, you can do the same thing with a Commodore, Apple or IBM PC. Powerhouse is an American product which uses special 13-amp adaptors and the computer's RS-232 interface. There's menu-driven programs to program exactly what you want to turn on and off, and when. You could, for example, turn on the lights or the central heating just before you get Remember the Aquarius home from work. There's also computer from Mattel? No, not a thermostatic controller which many people do. One of its vou can program to go on and best features was going to be off. account only works between the ability to plug special If all this sounds like fun to 2am and 7am, so you'll need devices into it that would let yu you, write to Power House, to either get up early or go to control any electrical X-10 (USA) Inc, 185A bed very late. appliance in your home. The LeGrand Avenue, Northvale, Incidentally, if you're trying idea was good, but NJ 07647. You can call them to get through to the demo unfortunately the system was in America on 0101 201 784 number for BT MUD as never launched. 9700. mentioned in September's Module Map C+VG, you may be having trouble with the identity code. the id is MUDGUEST, and not MUDGAMES. MORE EN SOFTWEAR Table Lamp AS Forch Light It! PAPER AND THINGS X-10 POWERHOUSE @ 1986 X-10 (USA) INC. CODE TIME FRIDAY 7.30 PM LOCATION MASTER BEDROOM FAMILY ROOM KITCHEN DEBBIE'S ROOM LIVING ROOM STEVE'S ROOM GARAGE KEVIN'S ROOM GUEST ROOM write programs that will speak just about any word that can Remember the article last time be made up from the 49 about a printer ribbon that sounds the program can produces iron-on transfers? produce. Well here's something else that no budding clothers designer can do without. It's a program for the Beeb called SOFTWEAR which will If you still use a ZX Printer or generate knitting patterns. Using any art package (like an Alphacom one and you're AMX Art), or the program's having trouble getting the own built-in system, design a special paper, Microsnips tell colourful picture on the me that they still stock it. They're in Merseyside, so give screen. When it's done, the program will print you out a them a ring on 051 630 3013. knitting pattern on a printer. FREE MUD Follow the pattern exactly, and you will knit a jumper with your Yes, it's true. I've found a way pattern on it. of playing MUD on the Essex The company are currently University computer that's working on an interface to a totally free, apart from a phone knitting machine so that, once call. You don't even need a you have designed the PSS account. You'll need a picture, the machine will knit it 1200/75 baud Micronet for you as well. modem. Dial 01-831 6181 and Call Newsight on 01 627 you will get a prompt on the 3149 if you want to look very screen. Type LOGON HH strange this winter. and press RETURN. Then, to connect to Essex, type CALL SPER A000049600000 (that's 'A' followed by 4 zeros followed If you're tired of playing MUD by 496 followed by 5 more for free, try Casper. It's not a zeros.) game, but an electronic You will now be connected version of the yellow pages. to Essex university. Type You dial it up with a modem, HOST 1 and press RETURN, and browse through it on the then LOGIN 2653,2653 and screen. If you pay  you can RETURN again. You will be apply for a private mailbox on asked for a password, which is the system but you can, if you usually GUESS or GUESTS. want, use it for free. At Before you reach for the 1200/75 baud, it's on 01 724 dial, remember that this free 8000. DESCRIPTION AIR-CONDITIONER TV COFFEE POT LAMP HI-FI FLOOR LAMP CEILING LIGHT FISH TANK LIGHT DE-HUMIDIFER OMAN 63 ON FILES SAMPLE SUMMER WINTER HOLIDAY <F4> HELP ONOFF DIM <F2> <F3> <F4> REVIEW <F5> ERASE <F6> INSTALL <F7> FILES <FB) PRINT (F9) EXIT (F10 > Appliance Module A Any RS-232 computer X-10 POWERHOUSE Home Control Interface CP290 "


"From Basic to Degree Level THE COMPUTER COURSE FOR YOU! Whether you're an up-and-coming businessman hampered by that wellknown computer phobia' or a high tech whizz-kid looking for a degree level qualification, the Rapid Results College has a Home Study Computer Course for you. And you can start without any previous qualifications Choose from:  Introduction to Micro Computing (BASIC)  Certificate in Computing and Management Information Systems (for businessmen and women)  The Applications Programming Certificate (COBOL)  The Institute of Data Processing Management (Associateship)  The British Computer Society (Associate Membership) See how user-friendly an RRC pass-first-time Home Study Course can be! Send today for full details in your FREE PROSPECTUS FUROMAX FREE Just complete this coupon and send to RRC at the PROSPECTUS address below. Career in Computing & Data Processing Please send me details of your Computer Courses. RRC Name Address Postcode The Rapid Results College CAC Dept. FII1, Tuition House, London SW194DS. FREE ADVICE: 01-947 7272 (9am-5pm) PROSPECTUS: 01-946 1102 (24-hour Recordacall Service quoting Dept. FILT). SUPA SOFT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Elfe The top of the range model--precise micro switches for PROFESSIONAL FUROMAX The name for joysticks both fire buttons and direction with short travel gate giving the ultimate in player satisfaction. Tough and reliable. Auto fire version also available. FORGET THE REST GET THE BEST (PRESENT THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL OFFERS TO C+VG READERS) (BORING STATEMENT BUT JUST CHECK THE REST AND COME BACK TO THIS AD FOR THE REAL BARGAIN SOFTWARE) SPECTRUM RRP OUR RRP OUR RRP OUR 14.95 10.95 Solo Millon2 9 .95 6.60 Ace 9.95 6.50 Ghost & Goblins 7.95 5.25 Street Hawk 7.95 5.25 Commando 86 9.99 660 Miami Vice 7.95 5.25 Stainless Steel 895 60 Infiliate 9.95 6.50 It's AKO. 7.95 5.25 Hunchback Adven 7.95 5.25 Infiltrator (0) Konami's Tennis 795 525 Sold Milion 3 Highlander 7.95 5.25 Bobby Bearing 7.95 5.25 Dan Dare 9.95 6.60 Paperboy 7.95 5.25 Heartland 9.95 6.60 Double Take 8.95 6.00 Dan Dare 9.95 6.60 XFist 2 8.95 6.00 Expert Cart) 31.95 25.00 7.95 5.25 Int. Matchday (128) 9.95 6.50 Try Pursuit (D) 1995 15.95 Great Escape 7.95 5.25 W.A.R. 8.95 6.00 UchMarta 9.95 6.60 COMMODORE 64/128 Cobra 8.95 6.00 Starstrike 2 7.95 5.25 Great Escape 8.95 6.20 Dragons Lair 9.95 6.60 Uchi Marta 9.95 6.60 AMSTRAD Movie 7.95 5.25 Uchi Marta (D) 14.95 10.00 Sold Million 3 6.60 10.00 Trivial Pursuit 14.95 10.00 Durel's Big 4 9.95 6.60 Uchi Marta 6.60 10.00 Space Harrier 7.95 5.25 Leaderboard 9.96 6.60 Green Beret 6.25 10.00 1942 7.95 5.25 Leaderboard (D) 14.96 10.95 Batman 6.25 10.00 Bomblack 2 7.95 5.25 Durell Bg4D) 14.96 10.00 Batman 18256) Double Take 7.95 5.25 Now Games 3 9.95 6.60 Monopoly 7.00 10.95 Commando 86 14.95 10.00 WAR 6.00 NA Airwolf 2 7.95 5.25 Paper Boy 995 6.50 Scrabble Jack the Nipper 7.95 5.25 Jack The Nipper 9.95 6.60 Mini Office 2 11.95 14.95 Scooby Doo 7.95 5.25 Iridis Alpha 8.95 6.00 \" 6.25 10.00 Batman 7.95 5.25 Alleykat 8.95 6.00 Trivial Pursuit 10.00 15.95 karl warrior 7.95 5.25 Highlander 8.95 6.00 Is a knockout 6.00 10.00 7.95 5.25 Street Hawk 8.95 6.00 Now Games 3 6.60 NA Green Beret 7.95 5.25 Galvan 8.95 6.00 Elite 10.95 16.95 Street Hawk 7.95 5.25 Elite 1495 10.95 Leaderboard 6.60 10.00 Dynamite Dan 2 7.95 5.25 Elite (D) 17.95 13 95 Mike Pyraturse 9.95 6.60 Mission Ad 8.95 6.00 Movie 6.25 10.00 9.95 700 Green Beret 8.95 6.00 Highlander 6.00 10.00 Konami's Golf 7.95 5.25 X Fist2 9.95 6.50 Winter Games 7.00 10.95 City Slicker 8.95 6.00 Room 10 6.00 10.00 Uridium 8.96 6.00 Graphic Creator 22.95 17.00 Jack Nipper 6.50 10.00 Firelord 8.95 6.00 Graphic CID 27.95 22.00 Superbowl 6.50 10.00 Yle Ar Kung Fu 795 5.25 Sold Milion 3 9.95 6.50 Paperboy 700 10.96 Ping Pong 7.95 5.25 1942 9 96 6.60 XFist 2 7.00 10.95 Atlantic Challenge 7.95 5.25 Tau Ceti 9.95 6.50 Ourell Big 4 6.60 10.00 Graphic Creator 22.95 17.00 Tau Ceti (D) 14.96 10,95 Miami Vice 6.00 10.00 Theatre Europe 9.95 7,00 Bomb Jack 2 9.95 6.60 1942 6.00 10.00 Cauldron 2 8.95 5.50 Atlantic Challenge 8.95 6.00 Commando 86 6.00 10.00 Cheque and PO (sterling only please) made payable to DISCOUNT SOFTWARE, Dept 3, 210 Nicholls Tower, Harlow, Essex CM18 6EF (Overseas orders add 75p per tape) (Any game which is not released when ordered will be sent on day of release) WARNING: cheap imitations of our range are available. Please be careful and insist on our product to ensure full guarantee of satisfaction. games player For the sophisticated PROFESSIONAL --> Contact your nearest computer store for details on full range or clip the coupon Prices from .95 .95 Euromax Electronics Ltd., FREEPOST Pinfold Lane, Bridlington YO16 5XR O 0262 602541 Access Accepted Please send me full details.... Name ..... Address....... "


"GET THE BIG ONE !! O UUUUUUU RINN Soft DDDDD DOO OD SUPER VALUE PAGK THE BIGGEST GAMES PACK EVER NEW ORIGINAL PROGRAMS FOR UNLI ONLY THE COMMODORE S995 64 OR 128 THE BIG ONE CONTAINS... YHATEEE MASTERS OF I THE GAM SPACE ATTACK PONTOOS GAME OF KINCS KINDER MATHS OTHELLO CHESS PAKATAK BERZERK SUPER FROG BASIC MATHS SHUFFLE MAZE CHASE TROLLS TANK BATTLE VANPERES HAIR THE GONCAS 3 D MAZE MATCH BOXES ASTRO PANIC DEFLECTION BOMBER BARNEY SYNTHESISER DUCK SHOOT BOULING BREAKOUT SUB HUNTER SWITCH AROUND WORD SEARCHDEATH TRENCH COLLECTION DAY SPACE DOCK BARRICADE 3 D OXO HEAD ON DRY KIT DITTO SOLITAIRE MASTERMIND DYKE NIBHLER TERROR CASTLE DEPTH CHARGE MONEY GRABBER HANGMAN DEFINITIONS TIC TAC MATH NIM PEG PUZZLE CBM SPEC MSX GHOSTS 'N BATMAN 6.25 KNIGHTMARE GOBLINSXARG 7.95 GHOSTS 'N GOBLINS 6.25 BILLIARDS BOMB JACK 7.95 GREEN BERET 6.25 HYPER RALLY DAN DARE 7.15 THE EIDOLON 6.25 BOXING CAULDRON II 7.15 JOHNNY REB 2 7.95 SOCCER JACK THE NIPPER 7.95 PAPERBOY 6.25 PING PONG TRIVIAL PURSUIT 11.95 BOBBY BEARING HYPER SPORTS 1 BOUNCES 7.95 PYRACURSE 7.95 HYPER SPORTS 2 14.25 DRAGON'S LAIR 7.95 HEARTLAND 7.95 HYPER SPORTS 3 14.25 SPLIT PERSONALITIES 7.15 CAULDRON II 7.15 YIE AR KUNG FU 14.25 SOLO FLIGHT II 7.95 JACK THE NIPPER 6.25 YIE AR KUNG FU 2 14.25 LEADERBOARD GOLF 7.95 KNIGHTMARE RALLY 5.25 GROGS REVENGE 7.95 PUB GAMES 7.95 SPLIT PERSONALITIES 6.25 NIGHTSHADE 7.95 MIAMI VICE 7.15 PUB GAMES 7.95 JEWELS/DARKNESS 11.95 SUPER CYCLE 7.95 KNIGHT RIDER 6.25 ZOIDS 7.15 KNIGHT RIDER 7.15 TRIVIAL PURSUIT 11.95 BOUNDER 7.15 TRAP 7.95 DRAGONS LAIR 6.25 MANDRAGORE 11.95 BOMBO 6.25 SEND FOR NEW RELEASES + CBM DISK PRICE LIST 6.25 AND MANY MANY MORE...... ALSO AVAILABLE FOR VIC 20 & C16/+4 MINI COMPENDIUM 20 GAME PACK .95 SOLITAIRE PONTOON CHECKERS C16/14 THREES POKER SHUFFLE CHECKERS NIM DRIVER SHUFFLE DRAGONS FRUIT MACHINE CLUES THREES ATTACK KINDER MATH SOLGOR BOMBER SNAKES NISSLER MUSICIAS SK SAUCERS 3 D MAZE SKYDIVER BASIC MATHS DEPTH CHARGE PREDICTOR TANKS GAME OF KINGS EACHAS DETTO TIC TAC MATH SOLCOR FRUIT MACHINE 30 OXO YHATZEE MUSICTAS HOW TO ORDER PLEASE SEND METICK APPROPRIATE BOK) Goods Dispatched within Seven Days 75 CAMES FOR 64/128 ON CASSETTE ON DISKO 19.95 each inc.PP 20 CAKES TOR VIC 20 20 CAMES FOR C16/ 6 6 ,95 each inc.PP ENCLOSE A CHEQUE/ P.O. FOR MADE PAYABLE TO AMIC SERVICES LTD. NAME ADDRESS RINN 1) PRINT NAME AND ADDRESS 3) ENCLOSE CHQ/P.O AND SEND TO SOFT 2) PRINT THE GAME/S REQUIRED 777 MAUCHLINE STA GLASGOW G5 BHJ A SEND TO U.K.: 75 GAMES, GROUND FLOOR, 36 WEST GREEN RD, TURNPIKE LANE, LONDON NIS 3DX REP.Of IRELAND: 75 GAMES, DUNSINK AVENUE, FINGLAS.DUBLIN II. Another great new game from Bubble Bus MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS SPECTRUM Ace NOW AVAILABLE ON ATARI AND MSX VARLAKS Light Force 5.95 Hot Wheels D1......... 7.50 ........ 8.00 Shockaway Rider ....... 5.95 Iridis Alpha.................. 6.75 Tennis ......... 5.95 Uridium 6.75 Strikeforce Cobra....... 7.50 Dan Dare 7.50 Firelord 6.75 Ghost'n' Goblins...... 750 7.50 Asterix 6.75 Dantes interno....... 7.50 Pub Games 750 Mag Max... 5.95 Grph. Adv. Creator 19.50 Yie Ar Kung Full....... 5.95 Super Soccer 595 In trang D1. 7.50 Psi Chess 7.50 Highlander........ 5.95 Trivial Pursuits D4 ... 12.50 Fistil 7.50 Great Escape 5.95 Fist Il D1 750 Johnny Reb Il 7.50 Double Take.. 5.95 Tau Ceti D3 7.50 Super Cycle... ... 5.95 Sold a Million 3 7.50 Knight Games D3 ... 6.75 Jack the Nipper 5.95 Best of Beyond 7.50 Leaderboard D1 7.50 The Biggit 5.95 Terra Cresta 5.95 Best of Beyond 7.50 Its a knockout 5.95 Konami's Acrade Hits 5.95 Bobby Bearing 6.75 Uchi-Mata 6.75 Nightmare Rally 5.95 Trap Door 5.95 Galvan 5.95 Streethawk 5.95 Crystal Castles 7.50 Trap Door 5.95 Avenger 750 Highlander Paper Boy.. 5.95 Hardball 6.75 Great Escape ............. 6.75 TT Racer 7.50 Nexor. 5.95 Double Take 6.75 Rogue Trooper. 6.75 Captain Kelly 6.75 Sold a Million Ill 7 .50 Quazatron ........ 6.75 Deactivator 750 Cobra... 6.75 Revolution .............. 7.50 Star Trek.... 7.50 Top Gun Strike Force Harrier.... 7.50 Cobra 5.95 Mag Max 6.75 Spindizzy... ......... 7.50 Now Games 3........... 7.50 Konami's Arcade Hits 6.75 7.50 Glider Rider ................ 6.75 Footballer of Year... 7.50 Dragon's Lair 7.50 COMMODORE 64 Marble Madness D17.50 Theatre Europe ......... 7.50 Summer Games Il D1 7.50 Terror Cresta......... . 6.75 Groh Ad Creator.19.50 Cyborg................ ......... 7.50 . 7.50 Yle Ar Kung Full......... 6.75 Dynamite Dan II......... 5.95 Super Cycle D1 7 .50 Forbidden Forest D17.50 Silent Service ............. 7.50 Winter Games D1 ....... 7.50 Alley Kat D3................ 6.75 Strike Force Cobra... 7.50 Acrojet D1... 7.50 Firelord D3 6.75 Vera Cruz........... 6.75 Its a knockout....... 6.75 Bismark D1 7 .50 Miami Vice................5.95 Gauntlet. ... 7.50 Hacker Il D1................ 7.50 Trivial Persuits... 12.50 Druid 5.95 Lightforce 6.75 Druid... ..5.95 Uchi-Mata D3 7.50 Shockway Rider Bobby Bearing....... 5.95 Solo Flight Il D1 7 .50 Movie Monster D17.50 Dark Sceptre 7.50 Galvan 6.75 Legend of Sin Bad D3 7.50 Ace of Aces 6.75 Trap........................ 7.50 Trail Blazer 7.50 City Slicker 6.75 Dragons Lair 7.50 Super Ping Pong D17.50 Parallax 5.95 Uridium D3.... 6.75 Asterix 7.50 The Archers... 7.50 Mission Elevator D37.50 Rogue Trooper Doday Geezers 5.95 Johnny Reb Il 7.50 1942 D1 WAR 5.95 Green Beret. 6.75 Ace of Aces 01 750 Psi5 Trading 5.95 Zzap Sizzlers Il 750 Vietnam Di.. After Shock 7.50 Power Play D1 7.50 Sanxion D1 7.50 Bazooka B 6.75 Dan Dare ..7.50 Shao-Lins Road Footballer of Year 5.95 Glider Rider 6.75 Vera Cruz 5.95 Golf Construction D1 9.95 Jack the Nipper........... 7.50 Shao-lins Road........... 6.75 Legions of Death 7.50 Paper Boy... 7.50 Tujad 6.75 Spindizzy D1 .......... 7.50 Now Games 2 Postage included UK. Please state which micro. Fast service. Song cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept CVG, 49H Sutherland Street, Victoria, London SW1 V4JX MAIL ORDER ONLY: Send for FREE list Amstrad, C16, MSX. D-Disks Available, D1 at .50, D3 at .50 NOW 2 AVAILABLES ON ATARIS AND MSX 7.50 By Stephen Crow Author of Wizards Lar SPECTRUM 48K COMMODORE & AMSTRAD Stephen Crow Programmer of the Year CVG Golden Joysticks 7.50 7.50 bubble bus software 87 High Street, Tonbridge, Kent TN9 1RX Telephone: 0732 355962 Telex: 95151 "


"FROST MTE Spectrum Amstrad Commodore Cassette .95 Amstrad Disc .95 leinar "


" 3o Rampage has hit the arcades. Clare Edgeley reports on the game that's going to become the biggest cul game of the year. It's going to be a monster...   O writ 04 SPEED RUMBLER RAMPAGE The storyline to Capcom's latest offering, Speed Rumbler's the barest excuse for a drive-and-bash-em-up. It's a pretty average game with a fair amount of action involving a car chase in a bid to destroy the baddies, rescue the hostages and bring peace to the backwaters of whichever unfortunate country you happen to be in. And it's all got to be done in 24 hours. (Not real time, I hope). Rather than have you chasing the baddies, the idea is to zip through the maze of streets your targets. Run over or shoot avoiding enemy roadblocks and them to free the prisoners who'll the plethora of armoured vehicles come out waving bonus points or they throw in your way. Your car is carrying any one of a number equipped with machine guns and useful items. Hammers, wrenches, points are scored for blasting the First Aid Kits and win or treble groups of mercenaries from their shooters give you additional time, hideouts behind oil drums and strength, fire power and speed. All buildings. Failing that, just charge are vital if you're to steer clear and through the drums and run them beat the hell out of the baddies. down. Be careful though, blue The course is incredibly long and drums are harmless, but the red an indicator shows just how far you ones, filled with inflammable have managed to travel each time chemicals, explode on contact and you're killed. However, it doesn't are capable of turning you into a show the dead ends and much time torch. can be wasted by making the A nice touch, if you're quick wrong turning. Occasionally, you'll enough, is to press the escape button and leap out of your find your route blocked, but if you hang around, gates open allowing armoured car before it explodes. you to escape. Of course, you're then utterly Other hazards include rolling defenceless and even your puny rail stock with mounted cannons machine gun isn't much cop and further on you'll be expected against cannon fire. Still, if you're to negotiate a whole host of new good at dodging and you run in fraps. There are around seven the right direction and the car areas to the game, each with might be hidden from view in the different scenery and harder next screen, you can escape. courses as you travel deeper into Lone cells with the legend 'Help enemy territory emblazoned on their roofs are One hint which may keep you alive a bit longer is to keep an eye on the damage gauge for you car. Red oil drums aren't the only things which make it explode. Each hit decreases your chance of survival and unless you find a First Aid Kit to repair the damage guage the car will eventually go up in smoke. At least if you're ready you can leap out and hopefully find another car before you catch a bullet For all my gripes, Speed Rumbler is a tricky customer and is very difficult to play. It doesn't have quite the same degree of addictiveness as Rampage or Bubble Bobble, but for all that, it's definitely worth a bash. quite easy, and getting the hang of the controls is a sinch. Just use the jump or punch button while What have King Kong, Godzilla pushing the joystick in one of eight and the Wolf Man got in common directions. Shin up the side of a A burning desire to destroy all building and punch holes in its things concrete...and that means structure, but make sure that when skyscrapers. Three of the most it starts to crumble you jump away, terrifying monsters of all time have otherwise you'll end up in a heap joined forces in a hilarious attempt on the ground clutching a very to flatter America's greatest cities. sore head. Damage points are Actually the monsters go by the scored here and your life will be name of Lizzie, Ralph and George, shortened. but their resemblance to the In a vain attempt to stop you, famous film characters is obvious. American armed forces are out in Bally/Midway's Rampage is force, Choppers buzz irritatingly fantastically funny and one which_round your head like flies, shooting you'll have to queue to play. It's the missiles, but one well Timed swat first time I've seen hardened flings them into a fatal spin. zappers in fits of laughter as they Alternatively, you can have fun punched their way through this stomping on armoured tanks which idiotic, chaotic and brilliant game. Trundle helplessly under your feet, Using the now well tried feature And as for the snipers firing from of simultaneous play. Rampage is a The skyscrapers, their lives are in game for three in which you can more danger than yours. leave or join at any time-more O bviously when you are hit by likely when your pockets are the stray guided missile or rocket, empty. Each player takes on the your damage scale increases, but remarkable cartoon likenesses of to get back your strength just eat King Kong, Godzilla or Wolf Man any of the goodies found in the and then forces are joined to raze shattered windows of the scrapers, the city to the ground. That is if you don't pound them to You can only move onto a new dust first! city when the three or four Tactics are necessary and the skyscraper have crumbled, leaving quickest way to demolish a an empty skyline in their wake. It's building, that I could see, is to climb MAS HERE "


"o  * Oo DAMAGE BUBBLE BOBBLE andre to rise upwards but the bubbles only hold them for a limited time The idea is to throw out loads of bubbles, then when there's a good bundle, leap up and explode them Bubble Bobble, in contrast to for bonus points. Rampage, is totally lacking in The trapped monsters will all violence but is just as addictive. disappear at the same time. It's built on Mr Do! lines and Occasionally, letters appear if consists of 100 screens, through several of the enemy are exploded which you must hop trying to catch at the same time. Get to the letters and destroy Bub, Bob, Blubber, quickly they spell EXTEND Boris and the rest of their mates for even more points. The idea is to blow out a stream of the two player option is more bubbles to encase and imprison fun as both of you have a the nasties. Then bounce up and character on screen and can act as burst them. The baddies disappear a team to clear it of nasties. This is and fall back miraculously the first time that I've seen their transformed into succulent fruits familiar feature used in an ordinary Run over these for extro points. two-player game of this sort. So far It all sounds quite easy and the this feature, pioneered on Atan's first few screens let you in gently. Gauntler, has been kept for the However, as you plough through three and four-player biggies like the game, the nasties get Quartet, Rampage and Gauntlet faster, more of them appear and is a welcome addition, they're harder to catch. One touch with two players it's much easier and your cute little character falls to clear the screens quickly and so down dazed one life lost. There foot down in a bubble to the are ice creams, sweets and bow harder levels. The continue play ties to collect for bonus points, but facility is also a great help and these don't hang around for long_allows you to see much more of the and soon disappear if you don't game — providing that you've got jump on them quickly. the cash And more important, the Each screen consists of platforms sense of competition is heightened in a variety of shapes and sizes, as the player who grabs the fruit some of which make up quite gets the points, regardless of who intricate patterns, though that burst the bubbles. It fast develops makes it all the harder to catch the into a race against each other. monsters. Even harder is ensnaring Scattered through the game are them with bubbles, as the bubbles ten mystery screens, starting on only travel a short distance. That level 29. I didn't manage to get means you've got to get anywhere near them bull dangerously close to make a catch understand you're in for quite a Once trapped, the monsters tend surprise, , o to the top and then punching downwards, slide to the bottom And for a bit of a lark you can punch your team mates. It's hilarious to see them slump to the ground with a dazed look on their faces. But when they start to come round, you'll notice an evil red gleam in their eyes. I'd disappear smartly at that point preferably high up out of reach. Some lovely touches have been DAMAG g included too. Like stretches of water between buildings. Fall into one and King Kong will disappear from sight. Your only indication of movement is a fist or claw raised above the water line showing your progress to the far bank. And beware of bridges, their spindly structure won't bear your weight for long and are likely to collapse, spilling you into the drink. What adds the finishing touch to this loony game other than the ease of play, is the proportional size of the characters which makes this unrealistic game somehow more real. The skyscrapers are obviously taller than the monsters but Lizzie and her mates absolutely dwarf the choppers, trains and tanks, Humans don't even offer a nuisance value due to their minute size. However, the monsters tend to behave like shrinking violets when your money's run out, and their capers are a sight to behold. The story goes that each monster is really a human but chemical and other forces of nature have caused them to mutate. A bit like The Incredible Hulk. Anyway, 20 pence loses its strength, your monster shrinks, still hairy or scaly, and slowly transforms into a human clad only in a loincloth. You then go knock-kneed and shuffie off the stage clutching your shreds of clothing, scarlet with embarrassment. All very cartoonlike and the animation is excellent. For lovers of the ridiculous, Rampage is a must. Easily the funniest and one of the most playable games I've ever seen. 189570 "


"An event NOT to be missed! Atari Christmas Show Royal Horticultural Hall Westminster, London SW1 Friday November 28 10am-6pm Saturday November 29 10am-6pm Sunday November 30 10am-4pm The first ever Atari Show last spring was an outstanding success. From all over Britain Atari enthusiasts flocked to London to find out all they could about their favourite machine. Organised by Database Exhibitions Soon the record-breaking Atari Show will be back — with three days devoted to the exciting developments in this expanding market. Make a note in your diary NOW to make sure you don't miss this great Christmas extravaganza! * All the latest software from publishers in both the UK and USA * New hardware releases from Atari and other major companies * Experts from Atari User and Atari ST User to answer your questions Experience the fascinating world of computer communications Everything on show from stocking fillers to complete Atari systems They'll all be there! Games consoles, 8 bit machines ... the entire ST rangel Whether you're a new user or a seasoned addict, you'll find the show overflowing with ideas to help you expand your computing horizons! Avoid the Advance ticket order POST TO: Atari Christmas Show Tickets, Europa House, 68 Chester Road, Hazel Grove, Stockport SK7 5NY. queues! I Please supply Adult tickets at  (save ) ........... Under-16s tickets at  (save )....  TOTAL  Royal Horticultural Hall, COMPUTER Westminster, London SW1 November 28-30, 1986 Get your ticket in advance and... Name .... Cheque enclosed made payable to Database Publications Ltd. Please debit my credit card account: Address I Access     nws SAVE  A HEAD! Signed PHONE ORDERS: Show Hotline: 061-456 8835 PRESTEL ORDERS: KEY *89, THEN 614568383 MICROLINK ORDERS: MAILBOX 72:MAG001 Please quote credit card number and full address Ref.cvG Admission at door:  (adults).  (under 16s) "


"MAIL DOMINATION TIMUM This means that you can get David Bolton, receives your Welcome to the war! Soon you'll be involved in a the results back in less than two application coupon he'll send A battle for world domination if you simply fill in weeks if you and the other you a Domination/Casus players are quick at returning Belli rulebook explaining all the My the coupon and rush if off to our Games orders. details of the game. Master. Below you can read the If anyone desired it, We will Each month we'll be offering a scenario to C+VG's very own run fast turnaround games. special prize to the highest scorers computer moderated Play by Mail Which will have a deadline in the game. The top two Ngame but first let's take a look peroid of between seven and 12 Domination players will get a days (please specify your Big Red t-shirt. The top scorer will at what exactly a PBM is... preferred turnround time and also get five FREE turns, second we will match you with other place scorer will get two free turns. Play By Mail games are played players who want a similar S o what are you waiting forf? from home using the postal time). service to carry orders and WINNING results between players and a central referee/moderator. The The first person to get and WANT TO RULE THE WORLD! games played can be moderated keep control of 20 or more cities SEND ME A DOMINATION by a human or computer. for three turns is the winner. In Domination is done entirely by the very unlikely case of two RULEBOOK INSTANTLY! 383393 computer. players achieving this at the Unlike most types of games, same time, the player with the Name P.B.M. allows a large number of biggest total of points of ships people to play together in the and armies) wins. Address same game. There is also the Losing the game is very easy advantage of playing games that to do. Once your capital city is would be impossible or captured by an enemy army impractical to run face to face. then the game is over for you. Desired game turnaround period Each game turn you receive a So how do you join up? Just fill (ring number) 7 10 12 1421 rest sheet and an order sheet in the coupon below and send it which you fill in and return to to the address indicated. The Send this coupon to Send this coupon to Sus. first two turns are absolutely Domination/Casus Belli All games will have FREE-after that it will cost David Bolton, 22 Noth a deadline period of two weeks. you 90p per turn. This should be Road, Carrickfergus, C. After you get the results sheet, prepaid two to five turns in Antrim, N. Ireland BT38 you work out your orders and advance. Foriegn readers may SLR NOT C+VG! post your new orders back to us have to pay a little more. as soon as possible. The game Games will be started when turn is processed once the last there are 16 players on the same set of orders are typed into the turn around period. computer As soon as our Game Master, Yana Dan L ab Refers 2. og VA 13:01 H 2a LINE "


"long time ago, in a far off happy to jwelcome the merchants the rest of the world as maps were around your city. They rest of the solar system there was a back. The previous Governor was forbidden due to a mutual distrust world is unknown to you, all that planet known by its usually punished by starvation, a of each dictator. \"If one had a you know is that there are 15 inhabitants as Dexet. Dexet was a death thought quite suitable for his map, a spy could soon put it in the jother players like yourself and 134 bit like earth but had very crime. hands of an enemy, then we neutral cities. advanced technology and was This situation continued for would be conquered\", said the Economists and military leaders ruled by one government. But all many years until one day, a junior rulers. have worked out that once you good things come to an end member of the Quatorze city The merchants by now had have expanded your country into and when a minor rebellion got out militia discovered an underground gone into decline from their once an empire of twenty cities the rest of hand, grew into a massive civil cavern of vast proportions great glory. Bickering among will fall into line and then YOU will war most of the Dexetians were underneath the city. themselves was the cause and be the ruler of the world! wiped out by the powerful Many teams of militia were sent in they split into 34 smaller city weapons used by both sides and large amounts of relics of the states. Despite their quarrels, they ends here There were a few survivors and old civilisation were found and banded together from time to time, the once great civilisation began brought to the surface. These usually when one of the 16 major to rise from the ashes. First the included a vast library of technical countries tried to invade their survivors formed tribes, then they books and though time had territories created settlements which damaged many of these books As the major countries became towns and cities. survived to allow understanding of populations increased, these Most of the population of Dexet the equipment and to make use of invasions became more frequent centred on the cities and these it. and to stop it 'The legion of the evolved into City-states each The Quatorze city governor was 34\" was formed. This was a ruled by a Governor and guarded an ambitious man who wanted to permament defence force, by its armies and navy, becoming remove the stranglehold that the maintained by all of the 34 city something like Ancient Rome on merchants had imposed. states and big enough to defeat Earth. Despite precautions and any invading army. Travel beyond city perimeters secrecy, word soon got about the By its presence peace was kept was forbidden for a long time after discoveries and the merchants but it was expensive to maintain the war because of \"monsters tried to prevent this one city-state and after 25 years of peace, some lurking in the badlands\" waiting to from threatening their monopoly. of the smaller cities argued that it suspecting first by stopping all trade with it was not needed and stopped travellers. This was a reference to and then by sending spies in to try paying for it various mutated creatures which and acquire the secrets In the next five years the 34 appeared just after the war. themselves. became the 29 then the 12 and In time, travel outside cities did the expected reaction of the finally the legion was disbanded, take place and merchants started Quatorze people did not come. at precisely the worst possible to journey and trade. Soon they The governor took advantage of moment. were the only people who had any the hate generated against the After 30 years of containment real idea of what the outside world merchants and persuaded the and huge population growth, the was like. They drew maps but citizens to do without luxuries. He 16 major countries had become allowed no one else to own or use promised them that they would an enormous bomb waiting to them. Seizing the opportunity the rule the world, if it took 10 or 100 explode into global war. When the monopolised trade between all of years\" and luxuries would be legion was disbanded, at precisely the cities and soon became very theirs forever. the worst possible moment. rich. Preparations began straight After 30 years of containment Strange fruits, vegetables, away and the next 50 years saw and huge population growth, the ornaments and weapons were an unsurpassed period of social, 16 major countries had become moved in trade across Dexet by cultural and particularly military an enormous bomb waiting to land and sea. City-States which development. In a very short explode into global war. When the tried to trade direct with other period of time, Quatorze, and then legion was disbanded the fuse cities were stopped by the other city-states, transformed was lit and very soon after, full all-powerfull merchants. This was from an agricultural economy to scale war broke out. possible as only the merchants one base on heavy industy. This is where the story stops had maps Population increased massively and the game begins. You are one Merchants could discipline\" due to extensive efforts of the of the 16 countries determined to rogue cities by stopping luxury rulers, needed workers and conquer and rule the rest of the goods reaching the people. After a therefore rewarded large families. world by force. Diplomacy and short while, the people would dPolitically, the type of backstabbing. revolt and a new city governor Government was unchanged with You have four armies and one would take over. One who was a one man dictatorship ruling each troop transport ship deployed state. The city-states had now grown into small countries, but each country was still ignorant of Bumi TILA 20 GELO MEMEGI "


"TARZAN Owned by EDGAR RICE BURROUGHS, INC. And Used by Permission Tarzan TM Legend speaks of a child captured, then raised by the Apes. The child became a man and Lord of his jungle domain. NOW THE LEGEND COMES TO LIFE! Available from all leading software retailers or order today by mail. Prices include postage and packing plus VAT. SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE 64/128 Cassette .95 Disc .95 AMSTRAD 464/664/6128 Cassette .95 Disc .95 MSX .95 BBC 'B/ELECTRON Cassette .95 BBC 'B' Disc .95 Martech is the registered trade mark of Software Communications Limited, Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME. PHONE: (0323) 768456 TELEX: 878373 Martec G Copyright  1983, 1986 EDGAR RICE BURROUGHS, INC. All Rights Reserved "


"SCRAMBLE YOUR BRAINS WITH MIND BENDING SOFTWARE CROSSCHECK MIND PURSUIT Here's the ultimate challenge for word game fans. Gameplay is a combination of strategy and crossword puzzling that allows up to four players, including children. Optional word clue disks are available to provide even more hours of fun. CROSSCHECK is great family entertainment The ultimate test of information and knowledge. Three difficulty levels and an animated gameboard option make this new game fun for children, yet challenging for adults. Set the question timer for a tougher game. Up to four individuals or teams can play, making this a game the whole family can enjoy. CBM64/128. APPLE .99 IBM .................99 CBM64/128 ............99 APPLE ..................99 OUR SUMMER VACATION 221B BAKER STREET Join forces with Sherlock Holmes, travel the streets and alleys of Victorian London, and gather clues that will lead to the solution of some of the most intriguing cases ever faced by the famous detective and his sidekick. Dr. Watson. This adventure strategy game. complete with 30 cases (additional 30 case disks available). is designed for 1-4 players CBM64/128, ATARI .99 APPLE ..............99 CARIBBEAN CAYERS VIDEO TITLE SHOP This unique product fills a need for everyone who always wished they could put their own title or descriptive screens into their video tapes. VIDEO SHOP now gives them that capability to create titles in a variety of sizes and type styles to personalise their home or vacation video tapes, or as introductions to shows taped from their TV sets. CBM64/128, ATARI .99 APPLE . .99 Sit yourself down, down load your data and you're off on a trail of mind twisting tests. High quality software! High quality challenge! Can your mind take the strain? U.S. U.S. Gold Units 2/3 Holford Way. Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX Telephone: 021 356 3388 GOLD Al Datasolt "


"THE O.K.SKEEEE }{WHO WANTS A JOEY?SKEEE PART TWO STA WRITTEN AND DRAWN by JERRY FARIS AND FEATURING FUL HUNTEESE L INKS AND OTHER STUFF by GARRY LEACH, UM WEAPONS SYSTEMS ARMED AND LOCKED THERES A TACTICAL ASSAULT SQUAD ON IT'S WAY UP... THEY'LL SECURE THE AREA... BUT WE DON'T KNOW THE SITUATION INSIDE...HAVE TO USE A REMOTE FIRST... GOING IN.LETS OPEN A LINE OF DIALOGUE... I REPEAT YOU WILL RETURN NIYOU WANT THE CHILD TO-A1 THE KID..? SKEEEEE HEY JOEY 1 SKEFEEE HE'S ALL YOURS! (SKEHALEE) ATTENTION! YOU ARE ENDANGERING A HUMAN LIFE...You WILL RETURN THE CHILD TO THE LEDGE AND THEN SHUT YOURSELF DOWN IMMEDIATELY. "


"NO NEED TO PANIC.) Bed I'M PANICKING US ENOUGH FOR THE BOTH OF US... JUST A LITTLE CLOSER WAY AHEAD OF YOU, BOS5! KNOW SOMETHING JOEY? IF I HADN'T JUST CAUGHT YOU THEN, L'D MOST PROBABLY BE OUT OF A JOB, LIFES NEWS 2 . SKGEEFEEE INT-JOB GOT TOTERMINATE THIS SUCKER, FAST JACKSON... HE MUSTN'T INSIDE THE BUILDING GET BACK UIT DAMN HE MOVES FAST! DAMN SKH I'M BRINGING THE BUG-JET ABOUT... LAWW, USE THE RIGHT EXIT.. NOW... EXECUTING ASSAULT... YES, SIR, MR.KALLIBER. "


"MI CROS E L I MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Warning: It is illegal to sell tape and full instructions whole lot as one package for ACRON ELECTRON, duplicated or pirated softsend cheque/P.O. for .95 cassette deck  software ware on tape or disc. You to G. Moss, 472 Spring ) please contact joystick interface. Very good will now be liable for pro Road, Ipswich, Suffolk IP4 Richard on 01 561 6019 condition. Only  phone secution. All suspect 5LZ. (evenings) or write to 53 (0777) 704803. advertisements will be forSilverdale Gardens, Hayes, warded to the Federation 48K SPECTRUM + with Midlesex, WB3 3LN. SPECTRUM cassette against Software Theft for alphacom 32 printer, joystick interface and games further inspection. Kempston grand prix AMSTRAD 464, green including Rambo, interface + Quickshot II monitor, colour modulator, Commando, Green Beret, joystick. Over  worth of magazines,  of games, The Goonies etc. . set-up (going back to model software. Including project computer desk, + other bits. Wafadrive  ono both for railways),  Bourne End future, 911 TS, Alien 8+ all for . Phone: (090560)  phone Leicester 2452k9 evenings and ask for Knight Lore. For quick sale, 607. 867654. Dave. all cost around  will sell ATARI software for sale or for  ono. Phone CBM 64, PLUS CZN, FOR SALE. ATARI tourh Radcliffe-on-Trent (06073) swap all originals. E. G. Alphacom Dot Matrix tablet + Atari artist . Cassettes: Spitfire Ace, 2519 anytime after 7.00pm printer, wordpro, busicalc, Atari tape originals Lone and ask for Damian. Hacker, Elektraglide, Worm 55 games, 2 joysticks, 5 Raider, Chess Magic in Paradise, Kennedy Window, O'Rileys Mine, good books, couraah Approach. Cartridges: QIX, Invitation to Programming speech, all boxed and as VIC-20 CZN, 16K Ram Orc attack, Kaboom, + more  each, very good new, worth up to ,000, sell (switchable) Ouicksh (switchable), Quickshot II Robotron 2084 phone: 0832 condition. Phone (0298) for . ono. Tel (04012) plus Thirteen!, Cartridges -74037 evenings or 77641 ask for lan. 3200. Omega and Rat Race, 4 weekends. MZ 700 game for sale. SPECTRUM 48K: Quickshot Adventures, Sargon, Machine code, Monitor. ATARI USERS! an Icelandic Called Sharp Land. Price Il joystick ot sell for . Plus Atari user club wishes to Many tapes Sub and tank .50 including postage and games: starstrike ll , contact other Atari owners Commander, Matrix, Star Ghostbusters , Terror packing. Make Datatil (4D) + Zzoom  anywhere in the world. Just cheques/postal orders defender, Arcadia, send a sae to us, and we'll Rockman, plus mastering payable to M. Draisey. Write each. Chinese Juggler  contact you as soon as the VIC-20 (book). Cost pounds plus River Rescue to 12, Milton Terrace, Mount possible! All letters to: A.T. +, sell for  o.v.n.o. . Phone Wisbech: 582485. Pleasant, Swansea, SA1 Oskarsson, Alfheimar 3, 6XP. Also looking for a After 5 O'clock. Anytime call Clive on Luton 0582 Reykjavik 104, Iceland. 505849 5p.m.-8p.m. weekends. Ask for Christian. MZ700 pen pal. ACRON ELECTRON with SPECTRUM +, Cassette MOMMODORE 64 complete THAVE 19 ORIGINAL player, light pen,  worth with C2N cassette recorder AMSTRAD games plus tape recorder for sale,  worth of software including of software and mags. and Quickshot Il joystick and music Maestro and use it, I worth  sell for  ono ,000's worth of software, will swap them for your Exploding Fist etc. Excellent telephonel 975427 after 4. condition, worth over  Coleco cartridges. Contract: Including International A Mayers, 29 Rhymney Karate, Archon II, will sell for . Phone AMSTRAD software for Electroglide and Zoids, etc. Court, Thornhill, Cwmbran, Luke on (01) 485 9172. sale: who dares wins 2 All in good condition for Gwent NP44 5SG. FOR SALE. 1570 disk drive. 3 .00, Ghostbusters, 3D sale  ono. Phone 051 Boxing, Pyjamerama, and ATARI GAMES 3 disks, months old worth  will 488 6183. Sorcery .25 each, House accept  ono. Anyone Centurion 24K war game, of Usher, Master Chess, interest please contact Nick UNWANTED GIFT FDD1 Downhill 32K Arcade, Panic on 029884 546 after 6pm. Roland On The Run, Electro Express 48K Arcade. All 3 disk drive and interface for Freddy, Harrier Attack, Test the Amstrad. Free to the for . Write, enclosing 40 SPECTRUM games Match .50 each. person who sends their first class stamp, to J. including: Sam Fox, Ye Ha Telephone: 0782 518236 15-18 best games on a tape Ferguson, 15 Thomas Muir Kung Fu, Winter Games, and ask for Jason. to 12 Lindsam Ave., Merton, Ave, Bishopbriggs, Rambo, Sabjoteur, etc. + Blackpool, Lancs, FY3 9LB. Glasgow, G64 1SW. quickshot Il Joystick, all FOR SALE. Light pen , Winners name will be ATARI 1029 printer original worth . Want Mirage microdriver  or published in this section unwanted. Send me as just  ono phone swop both for Multiface 1 next month. Also 10 pack of many games as possible Farningham (0322) 862238 (48 version), VTX5000 games .00, 15 pack of and the person with will sell separately. modern , Spectrum games — .00. These most/best games receives it Kung Fu master . Will include Ping Pong, Yie Ar free: disk or cassette. T. CBM 64 + Shado tape swop Modem for Spectrum Kung Fu, Raid, Bruce Lee Ishikawa, 4 Talman Grove, recorder + 1541 disc drive + or Mouse. Tel. 0532 623161 and other great titles. Stanmore, Mddx, HA7 4UQ. 11702 colour monitor + two and ask for Edward. No better sale!!! send for it joysticks in excess of . ATARI/1010/DATA/ now!!! Software, elite, infocom 48K SPECTRUM for sale RECORDER with lots of games, doomdarks many with tape recorder, software such as Smash COMMODORE 64 OWNERS. tapes + discs. Also programmable interface + Hits 4, Dig Dug, all M, Tronic Make your tape think its a Spectrum 48 + Kempstow joystick,  worth of Range, Gridrunner, Goldew disk! Completely reliable Joystick interface +  software etc. all for only Baton, Scotter, and many utility loads, saves and  of software. (Spectrum . E. Bennett, 42a many more. also Atari verifies your programs at modified for use with Northcote Road, London software to swap. Tele. Greg ten times normal speed! For Commodore monitors). Sell SW11 1NZ. on 728 979. "


"SUSPECT MOVING THROUGH TO MAIN LIVING QUARTERS... OVERSHOT ATAPUST OF ADI.TAKEN THE WALL. AM IN PURSUIT... IN FREE THE HUMAN GOING YEAH...COME NOW WHO YA GONNA SHUT T HV T B SHUT DOWN se bo AND FULL DECORATE THE INSIDE OF H55XL: A MISUNDERSTAND SITUATION NEGOTIATION. SKEREGEE. S het you RAM 7 . Dey YOU'RE GONNA BE... SKEEEE.. STILL FUNCTIONING I BUT... IT'S GONNA BE Y SOON... EH.. SKEEEEEK REAL SOON. MEANING. OH, NO... TO EASY... HEY SKEEEE FOUR ARMS, SKEEEKK.. IZ IMPRESSED... TO BE CONTINUED... "


"BOULDENDASH CONSTRUCTION BOULDERS SARST 99 Boulder Dash Construction Kit is the action strategy game for ultimate challenge for the perfect introduction to one or two players fans of the multi award Rockford's underground Rockford has to dig world for those yet to feverishly, as boulders experience the magic. crash down all around him, Now for the very first time through 16 mystical caves you can design your own and 5 levels of difficulty in games with the Boulder his relentless quest for Dash Construction Kit and jewels. save your creations to disk GAME ELEMENTS or cassette. A new game is Fireflies, Butterflies, included for impatient Diamonds, Enchanted Boulder Dash fans. Walls, Multiple Rockfords, Multiple Rockfords are Blue Slime, Amoeba and winning Boulder Dash and featured in this new all one or two player option Avallable for Commodore 64/128, Atari 400/800/XLIXE48K ram cassette 9.95 disk 14.95 Available from all good computer stores or post free from Databyte, 15 Wolsey Mews, London NW5 2DX Telephone 01-482 1755 DATABYTE "


"GOTA SPECTRUM? Who will be the first computer magazine to review ... 'Dandy', 'Uridium', 'Druid' and 'Prodigy? URIDIU Who's got over thirty juicy Spectrum reviews in their November Issue? SCOOBY DOO Pablo BERBER Who's been re-designed to include more colour, more screenshots, more previews? Who consistently thrashes the competition in getting exclusives? Who's got a whacking great FREE booklet stuck to their cover, previewing the 'Top Secret' 20 games that are set to devastate your Spectrum? VISION FOTO Don't know? Find out Try the new-look Sinclair User. ... You won't regret it. TOP SECRET SINGLAR SINCLAIR And There's more! THE GAMES OF TOMORROW. TORATI FUTURE VISION TOLOSERYOSHI Unin: Next month Sinclair User is giving away THE crucial guide to Christmas buying. You know how much know what on! you want to pay we TEST SINCLAIR NOVEMBER SINCLAIR USER UNLEASHED OCTOBER 18 "


"ei If you would like to get in touch with any of the following British readers, please write to them c/o C+VG and I shall pass your letters on. Otherwise, if the reader is from overseas just write to them direct, at the address which follows their letter. I am an Italian reader of your magazine and I would like to get in touch with readers C16 and Plus/4 owners worldwide wanted. I am an Italian boy who owns a plus/4 with tape recorder, disk drive, hundreds of games and utilities memory maps and Rom disassembly. Please write with all your information. All letters answered. Aldo Bordieri Via Maiocchi 19 20129 Milano Italy I am a 10 year old Spectrum owner who would like an overseas pen-pal. I have an interface 1, 2 and microdrive. I enjoy playing arcade games and my other interests are cricket and swimming. Please write to James Russell 31 Hawera Road Kohimarama Auckland 5 New Zealand If anyone is interested in trading games for the Commodore 64, 128, Pet, Atari 800 or TRS 80 please write to: Frank Mignano 1357 85th St. Brooklyn New York 11228 USA I am a 19 year old Spectrum owner and would like to have a pen-pal of roughly the same age, who either lives here in Britain or the USA. Please get in touch. R Noble Lancs I am a French Spectrum owner and I would like to get in touch with someone who would like to swap software, hints, tips and pokes. If you write to me, enclose a list of your games and utilities. Thierry Macquet 27 rue de L'Echipuier 75010 Paris France I own a CBM64 and a Spectrum 48k. I would like to correspond with computer owners from all over the world. My interest lies in adventures and combat simulations. Tulpar Demirbilek Cemil Topuzlu Cadd. Dr Kazim Lakay Sok 6/9 Zeynep Apt. Giftehavuzlar Istanbul Turkey. I am a 17 year old Norwegian boy who would like to get a pen pal in the UK. I own a ZX Spectrum and I am a fan of all sorts of games, but most I prefer text/graphic adventures. I would like to exchange hints and clues and games. Please send a letter I have a BBC computer and would be interested in swapping games, hints and tips, So please get in touch. John Miller Edinburgh I own an Atari 800xl, tape player and would like to hear from someone with typed in games on blank tape to improve my collection. I have program listings and original games. I am in dire need of adventures. Philip Riordan Ireland Jan-Ivar Hansen-Bergli PB. 131 N-3482 Tofte Norway I own an Amstrad 464 and my whole spare time is devoted to it, so I am looking for budding Amsters who are willing to swap software and ideas. So why not drop me a line c/o C+VG. Jon Tyler Surrey I own an Enterprise 64 and think it's sound and graphics are great. I would like to get in touch with other Enterprise users. John Magnus Hopen Storaasen 136 5090 Nyborg Bergen Norway Please help a lonely Vic owner who is looking for some fellow users to swap games and ideas. All letters answered. Anon. Dyfed. more next month 18 "


"Manbagte COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU could take over six months to arrive in Australia. If any Australian is interested in ordering software from England then I would have to recommend Post Haste Software, which advertises regularly in C+VG. The air mail costs an additional .50, but for the time saved it is well worth it. My first order cost .89 in postage costs and they didn't charge me anything above the .50. This is what I call excellent service. Plus the time from when I posted my letter (air mail) to the time! received my software was only two weeks. Bruce Godfrey Australia magazine namenot corr Right, men. I'm only gonnal say this once, so pay I read with interest your attention. I'm Laww. I've been paying close article on the St and the Amiga. The Amiga has huge potential attention to what you people have to say about as a games machine with the magazine, and I'm going to have to set a few of superb graphics, Sound and an you right. Okay. Here we go. adequate 256K of RAM, which needn't be used as much with We (that is the more however, is that our reviews are the separate chips for sound intelligent members of this fair a little more in depth and and graphics. But why the huge planet) would like to reply to a provide a few more clues rather price tag? letter which was in your than the outright cheats that Surely very few people will mailbag a couple of months arcade games need \"fork-out\" over ,000 for a ago. What on earth was a Peter Wright and Darren home computer. certain Matt Dougherty bleating Coldwell If Commodore intended the on about it would appear that Eastbourne Amiga as a business computer, his brain capacity is somewhat I'm always one for a bit of then the price is correct, but, limited when compared to that adventure. In with the thick of there isn't any need for 4096 of us adventurers. ad he it. That's me. Whenever there colours and 4 channel stereo looked upon the cover of your are defenceless people in need when using an Amiga for word magazine he would have of rescue, me and the lads are processing. noticed the name 'computer + straight in there, diffusing the Do you think there is a chance Video Games'. Am I not correct situation. Ah, wait a second of the price dropping in the next is assuming that an adventure What are you talking about in year or so? I know I for one is a computer game and this part? Rambo? What's would pay around  for an deserving of just as much room wrong with him? I'll have you Amiga without the Monitor or as the moronic (that means know that John and myself get disk drive. What do your other silly) games for peabrained along very well. readers think? mortals with nothing better to You're right on a couple of Mark Birchall do than wipe out a race of points, though. Adventure and Merseyside beings with a character the strategy simulations are just same as that of Rambo? what the young people of today I have some advice for Simon Adventure games demand a need. Where would the great Healy, about ordering software lot more brain power and logic military tacticians of today be overseas. Most software than simply obliterating some without being allowed dealers will post software to poor defenceless sprite and so to fight the Battle of Australia using surface mail. do their reviews. Adventurers the Bulge on their This usually can take don't ask for a lot, I mean, 11 micros? Yes. Just between three to six adventure reviews compared to think of it! months. I hope Simon about 34 computer/arcade sent his order form by reviews, considering the air mail, otherwise his fact that adventurers are order beginning to consume a large area of the computer entertainment market What we do ask I have only one complaint about your excellent magazine. But first the good points. Your reviews are the best and I always go by them. The adventure helpline is on its own very outstanding. The competitions are the best. I could go on and on, but, now back to the business. I know your going to say \"Not another complaint about not printing competition results. But, think I am right. In the June edition, you said that there was no space to print the results. Returning to the scene of the crime, in the August edition you wasted a whole page (pg 95) e announcing Fist II. Don't come up with all that rubbish about the game being worthy of such a big space because it's not. Do you "


"have a good enough Did you like my introduction? because action graphics games Other parts of your mag are explanation? It's true... I think you could written in Basic are so slow and also first rate. Like the new film Paul Dobet send more copies here to jerky that they don't hold any releases. \"A waste of space,\" Manchester Portugal. About the letter itself interest for more than a few hear the masses cry! Not so, If Get this straight, geek. I didn't do you know that I only buy minutes. The answer to this the film is a hit someone is spend my time in the Academy the magazine because I like the problem is in the type of listings bound to make a game of it. learning how to bandy words way you talk about things... you print. To be of any value, a Happy Birthday! with a bunch of nampby pamby your so crazy... just like me. program written in Basic should Good to hear someone has got wingers. You seem to have got In addition to what I have be restricted to games that do good taste at last. But the Ed hold of the wrong end of the already said I can say that I like not involve animation. says to watch out for our new truncheon here, pal. Page 95 in the way you talk about games Programs requiring animated look reviews section coming the august issue was an advert. and I always agree with you. I graphics should be written in your way as from next issue. I That's why it had the like the Bughunters Cartoon, machine code. The trouble with hope to have a starring role in a Melbourne House logo at the but, I need a dictionary to this is that it is very easy to new police training film by the bottom of the page. It's one of understand it please don't make a mistake when typing way... those \"Conceptual\" ads., or so feel that you have to change it and it is beyond most people, When X died in the August I'm told. because of us stupid Portugese including myself, to fix it up issue I laughed. \"Those people I like your listings, one problem afterwards. This means that a at IDEAS can do anything. He'll I am a great reader of your though, it takes a lot of hard checksum program is essential. be back next issue.\" Now I am magazine, but, I am German so work to convert it to my So please, do continue to crying my eyes out. Please you must understand that my computer. print listings, but restrict Basic IDEAS bring him back! English is not so good, that! Claudion Filips da Silva Tereso programs to 'thinking' games One more thing is bothering could write a whole letter in this Portugal rather than action games, and me. Are the C+VG team REAL? I language. PS Ha Ha Ha you lost with include machine code would dearly love to see you all Your magazine is great, but Portugal, you can't play programs with checksums for especially that \"pretty little the price in Germany is 6DM, football!!! the action games. thing\" Lesly Walker and the that is my whole pocketmoney. Dammit. You're obviously very David Couche goregous M. Ravenflame. I have read your Twister offer weird. I think it's time to South Australia The demise of X was tough on and have sent a Euro cheque for arrange a little \"visit\" to Thanks for your thoughts, son. all us Bug Hunters, Kid. He was the correct sum. But I have not Portugal and sort out all that You obviously put a a strong silent type like me. But received anything since. What nonsense. Watch the skies! considerable amount of time there's no hope for the old boy has happened. into that letter. Do other -even IDEAS robo-surgeons Thomas Schmidt. couldn't save him. And anyway readers feel that graphic action I've come up with a great idea Deutschland games are pointless in basic? for a series of features which the cruel and heartless Jerry Big Red replies: The everso refuses to draw him any more. could be published in C+VG. reliable System 3 has failed to Why don't you do a series of Okay we lucky readers of His head now rests on Jackson deliver the goods. We'll be stories about what's happening Computer + Video Games got a returning the cheques. We're T. Kalliber's bedside table super pull-out poster of Big where he uses it as a reading on the software front in other very sorry about the Red, but, I am sure most lamp. And yes the C+VG crew disappointment many of our countries? I know you have readers would want a giant are all too real as can be seen in readers suffered. letters from America fairly regularly but the whole world the photo at the front of this pull-out poster of Melissa (sigh). As you sometimes look isn't America. Tttrrriinnnggg, the bell rings ... issue. I'd arrest them if I had my so great in Ideas Central All my What about Australia, it's here, the last day of the way... month. The time has come Europe, Japan and the Far East? friends would like a pull-out I bet there's tons of interesting when we have to fight for our giant poster. rights. I must go quickly, run as I things going on there. Wo will you please, please, I am a great fan of your game Bat Man. I'm eight years old and have never run before, fight as I PS. I'd like to volunteer to be please, grovel, grovel, grovel because I have Leukeamia, have never fought. The time has the one to visit these places. try and have one for us either come when we have to get our sometimes have to stay at next month or the month after. John Painter, home if there is sickness at copy of C+VG. I'm the first Rotherham My wall will be waiting for the arrival of Melissa's poster all school. When I have done all of no one else has arrived. I'm the Great idea, kid. The entire of us in Hull will be waiting! my homework I like to play on one who is going to get the only C+VG team are packing their my computer or my dads PCW copy of C+VG in 20 miles. I DID Elliott Ainley bags right now. which has Bat Man. I've spent a IT!I purchased it. Now, I must C+VG World Tour 1986-87. It Hull long time playing the game and run very quickly and hide has a great ring to it. But who's Come on, man! Keep a stiff as of now I have not finished it myself before the rest come. It's going to be left behind to upper lip. All that snivelling and I always get stuck on levels night, no one else around, now produce the mag? Oh no... isn't going to get you 6, 7, 8. Please could you help I can go home... come back guys... please...l anywhere. me get the batmobile part and When I read what Big Red won't be able to cope on my Lots of people have been return to the other levels, also if said -\"The magazine for all saying the same sort of thing, there are any other clues that computers\"-I got mad. Do though. And, although could help me I would be very you know that in all the C+VG's I have written in reply to your thought Big Red looked far pleased. more impressive in a combat that I have managed to buy,! request for comments about Oliver Reynolds situation than Melissa ever haven't found one single review whether program listings could, I'll talk to my superiors, Muswell Hill for my computer? So, I have should be printed or not. London written to you just to say how I enjoy the challenge of typing Metcalfe, St. John and Come on you 'orrible tipsters! Kennedy, and see what I can much I hate stupid Big Red. I in a program and debugging it Get your digits out and help think that my letter deserves a arrange. so that it runs correctly. Oliver solve his Bat problems! reward... please, could you Successfully debugging a He's used C+VG's Bat Map to put at least a very small review program provides the same I find your reviews ratings the full but he still needs a for my computer, just to give sense of achievement as spot on! Although your reviews helping hand. My old friend me a reason to buy this stu... solving a problem in an are sometimes short they are Batman is out of Gotham City magazine. by the way my Adventure. However, once a still very informative. A whole on holiday in Transylvania right computer is a Memotech MTX program is finished and two pages is not necessary and now so he can't help. But YOU (here in Portugal they sell like running, it is generally a great very unfair to other titles. I'm can. Or I'll want to know why. bananas!!... it's true). disappointment. This is glad you don't do it. Got it?! own... "


"MAKE YOUR OWN * ALIEN Yes, you too can make your own cuddly Alien creature! Be the envy of all your friends! Scare your family out of their socks! Thanks to model maker Gary Ward we can present C+VG's very own monster construction kit. And there's not a squeezy bottle or bit of sticky back plastic in sight. Now, over to Uncle Gary... 1. First get your plastic cine or modelling clay and rough out the overall proportions. Luckily, I have one already prepared here. MAGAZINE WANTS 5. Casting the mask in latex is the easy part. Poster paint is mixed in to get the basic desired colour, usually a flesh tone, but in this case it's blue-grey. The latex is poured in to the mould, coating the inner surface and any excess tipped back into a bowl, Six coats are enough to make quite a thick mask. 42. Each section is then sculpted in detail, finishing one side of the head first and then working on the other. Plastic wrapping (cling film) is as a barrier between the plasticine and a sculpting tool to give any texture in the \"skin\", a rounded more natural appearance. In this case the exposed tendons either side of the Sjaws. The mask pulled from its mould. Tale bas been Sprinkled over its inner surface to stop it sticking together. Next it's cleaned with a detergent and any rough edges tidied up with scissors. 3. The finished sculpture. Teeth made from an Sacrylic modelling material have been inserted into the gums and ribbed tubing an Alien trademark taken from castings of real tubing, have been blended in with the plasticene to give the creature it's \"biomechanoid\" appearance. The large windpipe on the throat was cast from a gametre connecting pipe! 7. The finished mask. Acrylic paint is air brushed onto the mask to add colour and depth. The Alien is mostly black, but to make it a little more interesting I used variety of grey tones around the jaws and neck. Some hand painting is employed to finish off the colouring. Here it was only used to give a mottled effect to the cheeks. The teeth are refitted in their sockets and glued. Trouble with Next Month pages is that there's never enough space. Still, here come the details of the next truly amazing and action packed issue of C+VG! It's Christmas already at IDEAS Corp, so we're bringing a very special gift wrapped issue, kicking off with an exclusive on Labyrinth the game of the film starring Duvid Bowie and a heap of Jim Henson's mea-muppets: Our U.S.scoop artist Marshal M Rosenthal has visited Lucasfilm's base in sunny California to bring you hol news about this hot game. More movie stars! This time of the feathered variety. Yes, Howari the Duck has actually agreed to be interviewed by a computer mag! Gaspas Howard reveals his innermost secrets! Marvel at the wierness of Duckworld. Find out what Howard REALLY thinks about computers. You won't read this ANYWHERE else! Plus our Games Player's Guide to The Sacred Armour of Antiriods. Dan Malone the designer of this brilliant new game will tell you how to find the last armour and defeat the alien invaders. In another unprecedented display of generousity the U.S. Gold Gauntlet programmers have agreed to give us hints and tips on the game that's going to be a sure fire number one smash this Christmas. You want more? OK, here it comes! Just because we're five years old and still first with the last word on games doesn't mean we're going to sit back and get stuffy. Next issue we'll be introducing some new C+VG features. Just to keep our readers in front of the trends there's going to be a specini preview section. Then there's our new monthly Programmer Profiles all you didn't want to know about your fave coders. Plus our new look reviews section -bigger, better and brighter.C+VG's Adventure section is the best read column on this area of computer gaming anywhere--and this issue our long serving Adventurer Keith Campbell brings you a sneak peek at the new Dick Francis murder mystery game. Plus a couple of Adventure competitions. Talking of competitions we've got our normal stack of goodies to give away in the many and varied challenges to your consciousness including a neat Duck Survival Kit! If you don't want to have a fowl festive season then don't miss December's O-VG. Watch for David Bowie and a couple of goblins on the cover < 4. Another C-VG exclosive! The Alien without its dentures! Now ready for making into a mould, the teeth and inner jaws are removed and collar\" of plasticine added. The collar serves two purposes. It prevents plaster from getting under the sculpture and making it impossible to free from the mould and it allows you to judge the thickness of the mould as it builds up. Stone-casting material is brushed on, care fully to avoid air bubbles 8. The final picture. I made an alien \"hand following the same procedure and a background before borrowing Jim Douglas's hair-gel to give it that wet-look ... Easy'aint it Now why not go off and make your own? HUNTERS STICKERS "


"SIENI Spectrum Commodore Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone: 061 832 6633 Telex: 669977 "


"YOUR MISSION RETRIEVE PK430 YOUR COUNTRIES REVOLUTIONARY FIGHTER... LOCATION-YOO MILES BEHIND ENEMY LINES..... POSSIBLE ENEMY ARTAMENTS FLAME THROWERS, HELICOPTERS, TANKS, JEEPS, LANDWINES. ...YOUR EQUIPMENTTHE WORLD'S MOST SOPHISTICATED ARMED VEHICLE ..... ENEMY STRONGHOLDS-PRAIRIES, CITIES, MOUNTAINS, AIRFIELDS, BRIDGES.....MISSION STATUSVITAL....MISSION CONSEQUENCES WORLD PEACE... DISSION OBJECTIVES-YOU MUST...... MOUNTAIN PRAIRIE BRIDGE CITY CBM64 E9:09 69:99 E14.99 TAPE TAPE E14:09 DISK DISK SPECTRUM 48K E8:99 U.S. Gold Ltd. Units 2/3 Holford Way. Holford, Birmingham B6 7AX. Tel: 021 356 3388. SCREEN SHOTS FROM ORIGINAL COIN-OP TAPE THE ARCADE SMASH HIT FROM U.S. GOLD in Softwo DATA EAST "

