"AUGUST 1982 &75p an electronic game chance to design Details inside Your COMPUTER 19 or the y for the Dromigo, Candyand any more inside ELOTOFTHE MUTR WIE"


"SPECIAL RANGE OF CARTRIDGES FOR THE VIC PRICE. The VCR cartridge, fitted in a luxury case, can offer up to 20K RAM (Random Access Memory) and 16K of preprogrammed ROM (Read Only Memory). It is compatible with the various utility chips currently available. You can start with just 4K (VCR 4) for only , adding more memory later. Each 2K increment will cost , offering the finest quality CMOS RAM or low power NMOS RAM (). The VCS is the Bete noire of software houses; in basic mode, it simply provides 8K of extra RAM with three slots for cartridges (including those produced by CBM). In VCS mode, it can read cartridges into RAM and simulates them once they are removed. This allows the programmer to use machine code tools (disassembler, monitor, editor, etc.) for analysing the cartridge. Available without RAM (VSC-) for , or with 8K of RAM for . The VEP (Vic Eprom Programmer): this cartridge can read 2K, 4K or 8K of ROM and program Eproms directly from a master ROM or tape. The software is already included in the cartridge in addition to a blank Eprom to help start you off. Cased as illustrated for just . by AUDIO COMPUTERS QUALITY In case you have only just heard of us — we are absolute specialists in memory upgrade, providing a wide range of items for the PET, Apple, Video Genie, TRS 80, Acorn and Sinclair Spectrum computers. Please ring us for a free brochure. Order form Dear Audio Computers, Please rush me the item(s) below: (VCR 4 . Add  for every 2K extra bytes required) Qty Item (e.g. VCR 4) Price per unit Amount VARIETY. Total, incl. P & P and VAT: I enclose a cheque/P.O.s/Bankers draft for  Please debit my Access/Barclaycard account no: Name Address For a free brochure, please call Linda or Sue on Southend (0702) 613081. For credit card orders, please call Jackie or Pam on Southend (0702) 618144. EXPANDABILITY, Orders please to: AUDIO COMPUTERS 87 BOURNEMOUTH PARK ROAD, SOUTHEND-ON-SEA, ESSEX SS5 2JJ Telex: 995337 AUDCOM G All prices are INCLUSIVE of VAT @ 15% and P & P. Export orders: please tel. 0702 618144. "


"COMPUTER CONTENTS & VIDEO AUGUST 1982 No. 10 My wife doesn't... News & Reviews 18 GAMES NEWS... 14 Four pages! In our expanded news section you can meet the Space Pirates and pick up a bargain byte. VIDEO SCREENS... Even more arcade games are making the transition to your TV set. We look at Atari's version of Defender. There's also a feature on a new company offering a little magic for the Atari console owners ARCADE ACTION... 26 Tips on Missile Command and news of the game which adds a new dimension to the arcades REVIEWS How to fight the Battle of Britain and survive Rat Alley, NEXT MONTH What's coming in September? Plenty. Does your wife understand the microchip or does she still switch the ZX81 off when you've popped down the local for more inspiration with a 16K program three lines away from completion. Or how about your Mum? Does she still call you for dinner when you're just four shots off the Space Invaders' record? Well, look at it from her point of view. Here we present the sorry tale of one woman's struggle to get to grips with new technology in the living room. Page 25. We set England soccer manager Ron Greenwood a real challenge. \"Win the World Cup on our Sharp\", we said. Find out how he got on... Page 13. 76 Listings Kenny Sansom (left) and Steve Coppell try to take England to the World Cup final by computer before flying off to Spain for the real thing 28 38 MOZAIC Features Puzzling poser for jig-saw fans on the Sharp MZ-80K. Can you complete the picture or will you go to pieces! Start off at an MAILBAG easy level and work your way up. More bouquets and brickbats. COMPETITION HAUNTED HOUSE You can get the double thrill of designing on your own electronic games and Accept our invitation to a macabre mystery tour around the possibly winning a Pinball gloomy corridors of the Acorn Atom. Can you escape the MEET RON horrors which lurk within the house. But don't play it alone. GREENWOOD CHESS BREAKOUT 36 The Belle of the boards. Bang your head against a wall in the BBC Microcomputer. The THE COMPUTER game for people with a good eye for a ball and quick reactions. WIDOW THE BUGS Mal Function needs to act as peaceSPACE HOPPER maker once again Bounce around among buildings in this original and fast moving REVERSI game for your TRS-80 played at several levels. Hop skip and More rules of thumb GRAPHICS jump but watch out for the dragon! The secrets of the third dimension FUR TRADER 42 GAMES SAY Grizzly Adams has nothing on this epic journey back in time for Is there any such thing as luck in gamthe ZX81. Can you catch little furry creatures and bargain with ing? KIT KORNER their skins in the backwoods of the Wild West. It's a question of Where to start with keyboards. economics, but more important, it's a question of survival. PRACTICAL MARTIAN EXPLORER 46 PROGRAMMING 70 Delve deep into the caverns of the red planet in this arcade Communicating to the games player. ADVENTURE style action game for the Atari 400/800. Keith Campbell climbs a beanstalk DOWN TO BASIC ROCKS 54 Moira Norrie on the world's more wideHuge chunks of flying space stone are hurtling toward your spread computer language. vulnerable craft in this version of the popular arcade game. BRAINWARE 80 Fight them off in the time honoured way on your VIC-20 More puzzles and more champagne to d way on your VIC-20. be won. ROBO RUN SOFTWARE GLOSSARY 81 The monthly tussle with jargon. We proudly present our first game for the Spectrum. There's a HARDCORE maze and a robot and all you have to do is program it in to The games' player's guide to the Atari discover just what they mean to each other. duo 65 keyboard69 82 Editor Terry Pratt, Assistant editor Elspeth Joiner, Editorial assistant Susan Cameron Design Linda Freeman, Production editor Tim Metcalfe, Advertisement manager Rita Lewis, Advertising executive Neil Wood Advertisement assistant Louise Flockhart Publisher Tom Moloney Editorial and advertisement offices: Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5JB: Telephone Editorial 01-278 6566. Advertising 01-278 6552 COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE. By using the special Postal Subscription Service, copies of COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES can be mailed direct from our offices each month to any address throughout the world. All subscription applications should be sent for processing to COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES (Subscription Department Competition House, Farmdon Road, Market Harborough, Leicestershire. All orders should include the appropriate remittance made payable to COMPUTER AND VIDEO GAMES. Annual subscription rates (12 ) UK und Ere 10.00 Overseas surface mail 12.00 Airmail Europe 20.00 Additional service information including individual overseas airmail rates available upon request. Cuculation Department EMAP National Publications Published and distributed by EMAP National Publications lid. Printed by Eden Fisher (Southend) Limited Computer & Video Games Limited ISSN 0261 3697 Cover: Stuart Briers COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 3 "


"INNOVATIVE TRS 80-GENIE SOFTWARE from the professionals JUMBO Fantastic new flying simulation Occasionally a program comes along of such magnitude that it is hard to describe it, especially within the space allowable in an advertisement Jumbo is such a program. There have, of course, been flying simulation programs before, but they have all rather fallen into the trap of trying to produce a graphic representation of the ground at some stage or other in the program, thus taking up space, and/or they have concentrated on the single act of flying in other words, although one gets the feeling of flying a small aircraft, one is not going anywhere. Jumbo is a fantastically accurate simulation of flying a Boeing 747. These planes are not small, and are not flown by eye. They are flown by eyes and instruments, and the instrument graphics in this simulation are really first class. As you may know, the primary instrument of an aircraft is the artificial horizon. This is simulated very well, and includes instrument landing approach indicators Graphic maps of very high quality are produced and it is possible to fly in all of the British Isles including Southern Ireland, and to New York on the Eastern U.S. seaboard. The actual airports are at London, Birmingham, Manchester. Prestwick, Edinburgh, Belfast, Shannon and New York The program was written by two authors who combined their joint skills to produce a unique piece of software. The programmer got the last byte of performance out of the machine and the pilot the last drop of authenticity out of the simulation. Other simulation programs produce at best a similarity towards flying. With Jumbo you really feel that you are behind the controls The authors have used a number of gimmicks and programming techniques. For instance, it is possible to switch on an automatic pilot and to jump forward in time in increments of one minute or one hour otherwise of course a flight from London to New York or vice versa would take some 8 hours to simulate. Whilst in this time skip the various controls are left as they are but fuel consumption and distance to go are taken forward at their correct rate A chart is supplied containing various items of data which you will need, including the take-off data for a 747 with various take-off weights, flap retractions, climb and cruise speeds and descent distances Realising that not everybody can fly a 747 and that there is even a large proportion of the population that cannot fly anything, two important items of assistance have been added. First of all is the documentation. This is split into two parts. The second is a manual on flying the 747. In other words, the instructions for running the program. The first part, however, is what amounts to an instruction manual for flying. It assumes that the user knows nothing about aircraft and although we do not purport that it gets anybody up to any sort of standard after it has been assimilated, the reader should have sufficient knowledge of flying and the theory of flight to fly in the program itself. The second feature of assistance to the novice pilot is a feature in the program which enables the user to practice landings. When the program is started, if one presses the p key, the aircraft is automatically put 11 miles out from London Airport approaching on an instrument landing The controls are pretty well complete, even to dive and wheel brakes. The flying track may be continuously monitored on the map display. Bearing and distance to your intended point of landing are available all the time. The instruments, incidentally, consist of Artificial horizon Attitude Fuel Aileron indicators Compass Elapsed time Indicated airspeed Turn indicator Distance to landing Power setting Flap indicator Rate of climb Elevators Altimeter Six maps may be chosen, as follows: Scotland, Northern England, Southern England, Ireland, Eastern U.S.A., The whole of the U.K. Route information and present position are shown on the map displayed. It is very difficult to think of any factor that the authors have overlooked. Even the quite meaningful thinning of the air with increasing height, which greatly affects the airspeed indicator in real life, is taken into consideration. Rather than having a fixed stalling speed, this continuously changes with the flight configuration, the weight, height and power setting again as it does in real life. We like to think that we publish good programs. Jumbo is outstanding. It is available on tape or disk for 16K or 32K memory machines. It is compatible with the Modell and Model III Tandy. Video Genie, Genie I and Genie Il machines. Tape .00 +VAT = ,25 Disk.. | .00 +VAT = .55 Plus 75p P & P please. MOLIMERX LTD AJ AJ HARDING (MOLIMERX) 1 BUCKHURST ROAD, TOWN HALL SQUARE, BEXHILL-ON-SEA, EAST SUSSEX. MEREN ES TEL: (0424) 220391/223636 TELEX 86736 SOTEX G TRS-80 & VIDEO GENIE SOFTWARE CATALOGUE .00 (refundable) plus  postage. 4 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"THE \"STARWARS OF THE 80's\" LAST CHANCE TO TAKE IN PARIS Tron lives inside a mainframe computer. He is referred to as a 107 \"Program\" and he fights for the \"users\". He has also given his name to the Walt Disney film which is set inside a huge games computer. The film has just opened to rave reviews in the U.S. and will be in London's Odeon Leicester Square Cinema from October 21. The film is unique in combining real actors, animation and some superb computer graphics and has been tipped as the \"Star Wars of the 80's\" by those privileged enough to have seen it. Our September issue gives two pages and the front cover over to this marvellously imaginative film, which is quite different from the usual Disney offerings. We look behind the scenes at the graphics men behind the film, a review of the film itself and a rundown on the huge boost it is already giving to the video games and computer games industry, both here and in America. This could be your very last chance to go to Paris at our expense. If you have a game for any machine which you think we ought to publish, then we want to hear from you. Come October, Computer & Video Games will be a year old and the writer of the best game to be published in the magazine in that first year will be treated to an all-expenses-paid trip to Paris with any friend he (or she) may care to take along. We already have some idea of the games we most enjoyed trying out in the office and those reviewers who have tested games have also given us some forthright opinions on their favourites. But the perfect computer game still has to be written and the judges will wait until the last moment before pronouncing on the selection. However, we would also like you readers to have a say in the result. So if there is a C&VG game which stands out in your mind as giving the most hours of fun, please write in and let us know. We want to know the name of the game and why you gave it your vote. After all it's your magazine so it's important that your opinions influence the result. Write to: the editor, Computer & Video Games, Durrant House, 8, Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5JB. DEFENDER IN ONE \"K\" NEXT WHAT'S THE ANTIMATTER? On the games front, we have a Mini Defender in IK for the 7 unexpanded Sinclair ZX81 owners. The ghosts of Pacman are ready to chase those of you with a VIC-20, plus Colditz, Star Wars, Bomber and many more listings for you to key-in to your machine. And as an extra bonus for everyone who has an interest in the BBC Microcomputer, the Owl supplement makes a comeback with issue two. It includes some marvellous tips and programs and if you thought colour was impossible in mode seven — then think again. It's all wrapped up in a Tron cover, look out for it at your newsagents next month or fill in the form below to make sure of your copy. I would like to take out an annual subscription I enclose a cheque/P.O. for , 20 overse ) for twelve issues Computer & Video Games, Bretton Court, Bretton, Peterborough PESNDZ. Name Our Science Fiction author, David Langford is back with MOND another offering. He takes the concept of anti-matter and shows how it can be used in a computer game. And as usual comes up with a listing to illustrate his points. Have you ever dreamt up your perfect computer game but felt that the programming skills necessary to convert it to your computer were beyond you? Next month we are offering the perfect solution. In conjunction with Sinclair Research and Psion Computers, we are challenging readers to come up with an original idea for a computer game. Sinclair are putting up five prizes for the best ideas, but more interesting for you aspiring games writers, is the chance to put your name to a game marketed through Sinclair. More details next issue. WHO BEAT How did you fare in our June issue's Beat-the-Bugs competition? We've just finished sorting through the entries and, although this puzzle was thought to be more difficult that our first program a puzzle solution, the standard of entries seems just as high. The winner's name will be published in our September issue. Did you choose the right three sides in our World Cup competition? If you rightly predicted the champions, runners-up and third-place play-off winners you are in the running to win an Atari TV games console. Watch our Competition pages next month. Address Computer & Video Games. The magazine that makes computers fun COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 5 "


"\"...the quality of the colour display is excellent». Popular Computing Weekly. \"The graphics facilities are great fun» Personal Computer World, \"...the Spectrum is way ahead of its competitors». Your Computer. \"The world's best personal computer forunder .\" Sinclair ZX Spectrum 16K RAM ,48K RAM . How to order your ZX Spectrum BY PHONE Access, Barclaycard or Trustcard holders can call 01-200 0200 for personal attention 24 hours a day, every day BY FREEPOST use the coupon The ZX Printer available now below. You can pay by cheque, postal the printer offers ZX Spectrum order, Access, Barclaycard or Trustcard. owners the full ASCII character setEITHER WAY please allow up to 28 including lower-case characters and days for delivery. And there's a 14-day high-resolution graphics money-back option, of course. We want Printing speed is 50 characters per you to be satisfied beyond doubt and second, with 32 characters per line and we have no doubt that you will be 9 lines per vertical inch ZX Microdrive coming soon Each Microdrive will hold up to 100K bytes on a single interchangeable microfloppy with a transfer rate of 16K bytes per second. And you'll be able to connect up to 8 ZX Microdrives Sinclair Research Ltd, to your ZX Spectrum they're available Stanhope Road, Camberley, Surrey. later this year, for around . GU15 3PS. Tel: Camberley (0276) 685311 To: Sinclair Research. FREEPOST, Camberley, Surrey, GU15 3BR. Order Qty Item Code Item price Total Please tick if you require a VAT receipt I enclose a cheque postal order payable to Sinclair Sinclair ZX SpectrumResearch Ltd for 16K RAM version 100 125 00 *Please charge to my Access/Barclaycard/Trustcard Sinclair ZX Spectrumaccount no Please print 48K RAM version 175.00 Sinclair ZX Printer 59.95 *Please delete/complete as applicable Printer paper (pack of 5 rolls) 16 11.95 Mr/Mrs/Miss Postage and packing Address orders under  28 2.95 orders over  4.95 TOTALE | FREEPOST no stamp needed. Prices apply to UK only. Export prices on application. CVGB081 This is the astonishing new ZX Spectrum a powerful professional's computer in everything but price! There are two versions 16K or a really powerful 48K. Both have a full 8 colours, sound generation, a full-size moving-key keyboard and high-resolution graphics. Plus established Sinclair features such as 'one-touch' keyword entry, syntax check and report codes! Key features of the Sinclair ZX Spectrum Full colour -8 colours plus flashing and brightness-intensity control Sound BEEP command with variable pitch and duration Massive RAM 16K or 48K Full-size moving-key keyboard all keys at normal typewriter pitch, with repeat facility on each key. High resolution-256 dots horizontally X 192 vertically, each individually addressable for true high-resolution graphics ASCII character set with upper-and lower-case characters. High speed LOAD & SAVE 16K in 100 seconds via cassette, with VERIFY and MERGE for programs and separate data files ZX Spectrum 27 29 "


"WAILBAG RE, MAILBAI Please drop us a line at: Computer and Video Games, EMAP, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5JB. PUZZLED BY too brief a glance at a AGGRAVATION SEARCH FOR too brief a glance at a for such a device already. First, it could be one of the Creative Computing I am by trade an electrical duff machines, if so, send it catalogue which had engineer, and therefore back and get it replaced. separate pages for different would be able to construct You can see from the letter machines. The Pet page did anything that was available. below the choice of tape Dear Sir, indeed list Pirate Adventure Considering, that there are recorder is rather sensitive, Whilst reading Keith and Adventureland, whilst reputed to be more and probably accounts for Campbell's Adventure the other pages listed more Intellivision consoles about loading problems. column in the February issue, than just these two. than ZX8l's I'm surprised that I was most intrigued as to his Unfortunately I did not look I've seen nothing advertised comment on the availability of closely enough at the Pet in this vein. Perhaps there are Pyramid of Doom, stating that page. However, your letter technical difficulties. it runs on TRS-80's, Video has made this all very clear G. Coleman, Genies, Apples and Pets. now my apologies! Worthing, Dear Sir, I happen to know they are Incidentally, I hope I Sussex. I am having trouble loading also available for the Exidy won't be sticking my neck Editor's reply: The and saving my own programs Sorceror, but never have I out by saying that the Scott peripherals and software on my ZX81. I use a Philips found any of the Scott Adams Adams series is now market is advanced enough AR113 which has an Adventure series for the Pet. available for the Atari to turn your ZX81 into a automatic recording level. I have searched high and computer. pretty impressive machine Does this affect the saving in low for them, and have only Mr Coleman. They can any way? found Adventureland and certainly add a good P. S. Murphy, Pirate Adventure for the Pet, keyboard, high resolution Chiswick, and they are in Basic. I graphics, and colour. London W4 would therefore be extremely Mattel will be the only grateful if you could tell me Editor's reply: With the Dear Sir, people launching an where I could get hold of the Philips tape recorder you First I would like to Intellivision keyboard in rest of the series, as I am an have to use the 5-pin DIN congratulate you on a fine this country. It will be Adventure addict--well socket for recording and magazine. As a complete distributed by ACE and playback. This, in almost! having several for newcomer to computers, I won't be out until the very use on a friend's Apple, but conjunction with the ARL is have found it extremely end of 1982 and will be only two on the Pet, they about the worst combination interesting and helpful. expensive in comparison to of circumstances for the being Hitch Hikers Guide and I recently purchased a a version of Microsoft. some of the new ZX81. You really need a second-hand Sinclair ZX81 E Armstrong, microcomputers which are new tape recorder, where and with the help of your reaching the market. Pinner, you can use the earphone magazine, have found that Middlesex and microphone sockets. already I am beginning to Sinclair have produced a Keith Campbell replies: You understand how programs long list of appropriate are absolutely right! I was work, and have been able to machines and it would be in error stating that modify some of the ZX81 worth your while sending Pyramid of Doom is program listings you have them an s.a.e. to 6 Kings available for a Pet. published. However, I have Dear Sir, Parade, Cambridge and I based this statement on two problems you could Last Christmas I purchased a asking for their technical perhaps advise me on. ZX81 computer. I had data. First, obviously the previously used a Pet capabilities of the ZX81 are belonging to my school limited, and I am wondering whether it would be better to disappointed. To start with invest in ZX8l add-ons or to my computer would not load, invest in a better machine. and I found the computer Secondly, I have an would continuously \"crash\". Dear Sir, Intellivision games console Now it will not switch on and I have recently bought an Atari and wonder whether only shows a blank screen. 400 computer and I would like anybody makes add-on I am writing hoping that to find out more about it. I hardware that could be used, you could advise me on the have heard that it has graphic i.e. keyboards, memory etc, best course to correct the faculties as yet unrevealed and that would turn the games fault. I hope that Computer and console into a workable Guy Smith, Video Games will spill the computer. I am aware that Banbury, beans. I also hope to see an Intellivision intend to market Oxfordshire adventure game soon. a keyboard unit, but this Editor's reply: There are Mr Beza Siddiqui seems a long time coming. I many reasons why the ZX81 | Greenford, have been waiting two years has the problems you list. Middlesex BLANK LOOKS FROM ZX81 HOPES FOR ADVENTURE COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 7 "


"ENEW Spectral INVADERS The very first, perfect arcade quality Machine Code game on cassette for the sensational Sinclair ZX Spectrum Just inclusive 12 months guarantee Spectral Invaders at  each Expiry date CWG860 Code Dealers Discount Available ANSAPHONE 051 227 2542 ACCESS BARCLAYCARD ORDERS Barclaycard 4929 _ORDER YOURS TODAY! _ _ SOFTWARE IMOS o molto FREEPOST a ona Name Address (No stampeg DAB Please send me I enclose cheque/PO. for OR Please debit my Access 5224 BUG-BYTE SOFTWARE, FREEPOST,(No stamp req) LIVERPOOL L3 3AB 8 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"FILLING IN THE HORIZON CHILDREN'S FAVOURITES THE APPLE TANTALISING want to do single things information is not in any then why pay for something logical order! You have to you don't need? read through it about ten New memory units are times to find what you need. available for the ZX81 all There is no book that will Dear Sir, the time. Now that Sinclair Dear Sir, do the \"translating\" for you. I have the use of a North Star have reduced the 16K RAM During the course of the Horizon computer and when I to .95, this seems the best present month I have asked a trend about the use buy. discovered your fabulous of graphics he told me that magazine. I am very instead of POKE, FILL could impressed with the amount be used. of information you manage Dear Sir, I experimented with FILL to supply. On reading the but could not get any results. March issue, I have found Although I enjoy reading your Please could you tell me how a great number of ZX81 magazine very much and find graphics are used on the Dear Sir, software suppliers, the contents very good I North Star Horizon as the only My father owns an Apple II previously I knew of none. think it could be bettered by games I can play are Plus, for which we bought a M. McKenzie the addition of a so-called adventure games which don't number of games. Ipswich children's page. involve graphics? As he is now thinking of Suffolk This could contain Stephan Evans, buying the Wordstar word programs written by children Bodenham, processing system he is and competitions. It would Hereford about to buy the Z-80 Softcard also contain letters and for its CP/M language. What queries and some hints. After Editor's reply: I can't really extra games will I be able to all, with the increasing answer this as it depends on the type of video board play on the Apple once the number of micros being used Dear Sir, Softcard has been installed? in your system. Most As a relatively new user of at school, a lot of your I am a very keen reader of readers are children and if graphics boards do not computers and owning a your magazine and copy allow memory mapped there was a children's page it Sinclair ZX81 my knowledge nearly all the Apple games would be easier for them to graphics which is what of the Basic used by other you print. POKE and PEEK are get their program printed. computers is very small. I John Hunter, specifically for. As you are Angus Winchester, would be grateful if you using a VDU to display the Midlothian, Iffley, could inform me if there is a video signals, the methods Scotland Oxford book that will change the Editor's reply: In our used depend on this, the Editor's reply: There are Basic used in the tantalising experience children are graphics board and the many games running under programs you write for other quite capable of taking the Basic. CP/M. As this operating computers, to that of the lead in the microcomputer system is mainly designed ZX8l's Basic gaming world John. for business use you will Kevin Hewitt, Longhope, Certainly many of our probably find that most are Gloucestershire games are sent in by young available on the Apple contributors and I would already. I don't hold much Editor's reply: Quite hate to patronise them by Dear Sir, hope for any new ones, honestly the most including their offerings on I have only been involved in especially as the Apple has comprehensive booklet on a children's page. One of computers for about nine a rather idiosyncratic Sinclair Basic is the ZX81 the fastest and best months and practical method of implementing Instruction Book! machine code space computing for about one /. Unfortunately the invader games I have come month and am therefore across was written by a 16totally bewildered by the year-old. The upshot is that whole thing. you youngsters can force I am saving up frantically your way onto our pages for a computer and I have a without us making any couple of questions to ask. concessions. Why is the ZX8l so much cheaper than its nearest rival? What's the difference? In the April Mailbag someone asked what the cheapest price for a memory Dear Sir, expanding pack was. Could We would like to apologise you tell me if the same is true to all our customers for any for the computer itself? delay or inconvenience Ian C. Feast, caused on orders received Bournemouth by Anglo American Software. Editor's reply: The ZX81 is This was due to an internal mass produced. This staff problem. Orders placed combined with some clever before May 10th have been design techniques allows it mislaid, and would anybody to be sold cheaply. It has a who has sent an order to us limited application and please contact us as soon as within these limits does possible. things very well. Other, Mike Davies, more expensive, computers Anglo American Software, can do more. If you only Birmingham COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 9 HELP! I'M BEWILDERED VERY SORRY PEOPLE a "


"COME AND MEET VIC AT YOUR NORTH LONDON VIC CENTRE SALE VIDEO GENIE SALE VIC 20 COMPUTER. SALE UK101 KITS SALE EG3003 .00 EG400 .00 P.P.I. .95 Colour GENIE I .00 EG3020 .00 A Typewriter Keyboard. Prog. Sound .95 .95 GENIE II .00 EG3022 .00 P108 Eprom .95 Memory EG3014 .00 EG3015 .00 5K memory-expandable JI Expand  9.95 .95 to 29.5K VIC SINGLE FLOPPY DISK VIC PRINTER 8 programmable function keys. High resolution graphics Music in three voices and three octaves, as well as sound effects Eight border colours and 80 characters per line sixteen screen colours * 30 characters  174K Byte Storage per sec Direct Interface to VIC ** SPECIAL SUMMER OFFER ** Dot Matrix printer Direct Compatibility with ONLY .00 + FREE * Tractor Feed CHOICE OF GAMES printer ONLY .00 ONLY .00 CARTRIDGES (Worth over .00) CARTRIDGES VIC CASSETTE DECK 8K Memory .00 Direct Interface to VIC 16K Memory .00 Tape Counter Programmers Aid ONLY .00 ONLY .50 supplied with Free cassette Super Expander High Resolution with 6 Programmes graphics with 3K RAM . VIC EXPANSION UNITONLY .50 7 Slot expansion board, for: SPECIAL SUMMER OFFER* extra memory, ProgramMACHINE CODE ming, Games, etc. MONITOR ONLY .00 Modulator Holder TERMS OF BUSINESS. Enclosed Power Supply Please add 15% VAT to all Prices. Deliver charged at Cost. Prices valid EXPANSION UNIT for coverdate of this magazine. Phone or Send your Order TODAY with LID using ONLY .00 ACCESS OR BARCLAYCARD ** SPECIAL SUMMER OFFER ** EXPANSION UNIT WITH LID AND MACHINE CODE MONITOR CARTRIDGE ONLY .00 | Please send me a copy of your 'VICI LIST' containing Software, Hardware and Books for the VIC 20 NAME ADDRESS CHROMASONIC electronics 48 JUNCTION ROAD, ARCHWAY, LONDON N195RD 100 yds FROM ARCHWAY STATION TEL: 01-263 9493/01-263 9495 TELEX: 22568.. L c.v. 10 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"NCOMPETITION COMP WIN A BALLY PINTABLE It is this kind of completely fresh outlook on a game that Bally hope the winner of this competition will produce. It can be a single feature on a game or a whole new concept ... but it has to be practical, so bear in mind the following criteria: Physical dimensions. That the game is capable of Bally's marvellous Electra pintable takes pinball just about as far as it can currently go. Pinball fanatics will know it as the three level pintable which adds a mini-playfield to the excitement of a two tier game. This pinball machine will go to the home of the lucky winner of our pinball competition. And the winner could even find his ideas incorporated in a future Bally pinball design. So how do you win an Electra pintable for your own living room, bedroom or hallway? Simply by being original. We want you to come up with an idea for a feature on a pintable or any other arcade game which you think would greatly enhance its playability. Or you could come up with a completely new machine. You'll have to go some to match the current crop of pinball designers, who have introduced some pretty impressive features lately. The Electra itself is a good example of many of these and we have gone into some of these, below. But among the many innovations, currently pulling people into the arcades are: drop targets, playfields on more than one level, captive balls, pinballs that talk back to you or the Vector's machine's flip-ometer Pinballs have also found a new direction recently. The Williams' Hyperball and Bally's Rapid Fire (reviewed on page 27) have given a new twist to the pintable by turning them away from the usual keep-theball-in-play strategy, to a firing game, shooting balls at lit targets. being mass-produced. Cost. Weight That it is safe to be used by the arcade player. The idea must not be stolen from any other arcade or pinball machine. And most important, it should be creative and original. The Bally Pinball Division will present an Electra pinball machine to the grand prize winner. All entries will be judged by the Bally Pinball Division's new product board and announced in Computer & Video Games. All entries will be the property of the Bally Pinball Division and the entrants will assign all rights, patents and privileges of their design to the Bally Pinball Division No employees of Bally or Computer & Video Games or their relatives may enter the competition. The judges decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into. Send your entries to The Pinball Competition, Computer & Video Games, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5JB before September 16th 1982. More features than Cosmopolitan, is one way you could bill the Electra pintable. For pinball buffs, we'll just outline a few of these. The first difference you will notice is the split-level playfield, which has two upper tiers and a central miniplayfield. On the upper level you'll find stand-up targets, rollover buttons and a saucer arrow which will release another captured ball. Drop targets and a stationary target combine to produce a boot-a-ball multiplier. Passage to the third, mini, playfields is achieved by collecting Electra time units on the upper levels. Each sequence of hit targets leads you into new possibilities. Now take a deep breath and vow never again to refer to any arcade machine as: \"Just another pintable\". IBRAINWARE ANSWERS o The answers to our July Mind MONOPOLY MONEY Routine problem is: Billy Bashem 59 pts. vs. Roger Rex llem 52 pts. OS BOURNED_C 15 reds, 5 yellows, 1 green, 2 NO G EDIFY browns, 6 blues, 4 pinks and 3 SEARCHTIME blacks (giving a total of 111 pts.). H R H A E The correction solution to last UPDATE LANDER month's Nevera Crossword is T S D R N printed right and the winners TQUEENSMOVE names will be published in next LEGUP F o BISECIPI For more puzzles turn to page 80 NO C for Mind Routine and Nevera CrossRESERVED WORDS word. month's issue. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 11 "


"ANGLO AMERICAN SOFTWARE CO TRS-80 — ATARI — APPLE VIC We know what it is like out there, because that's where we came from. Before we decided to become software entrepreneurs, we were just like you enthusiasts searching through magazines for the ideal mail order software source. What we hoped to find was a single entity that offered an ultra-wide selection for our micro-computer. That pre-selected only the best of many similar sounding programs that reached the market every month. That could give us personal assistance with the purchasedecision process, and that stood behind its products. When we couldn't find it we decided to become it. So ANGLO-AMERICAN SOFTWARE CO WAS BORN. Please state clearly the program(s) you require. Include your name, address & machine type + memory size. Prices include VAT, postage & packing. PACKS 80 3oned UK DISTRIBUTORS AUTOMATED SIMULATIONS INVASION ORION ,50 Create your own space battles. 10 different levels. Very good graphics TRS-80 Level Il 16K ATARI 32K TRS-80 32K APPLE 48K w/disk ATARI 32K w disk TEMPLE OF APSHAI... .50 An award winning adventure game. Discover for yourself the World of Aphsai. TRS-80 Level Il 16K TRS-80 32K APPLE 48K w.disk ATARI 32K ATARI 32K w disk IBM 64K widisk HELLFIRE WARRIOR E23.50 The first role-playing game that allows you a chance to step outside the world of magic and monsters TRS-80 Level il 16K TRS-80 32K APPLE 48K w disk UPPER REACHES OF APSHAI .50 The continuing adventure from Temple of Apshai. This game requires Temple of Apshai to play. TRS 80 Level ii 16K-TRS-80 32K APPLE 48K w disk. THE KEYS OF ACHERON .50 The Wizard Abosandra has summoned you to recover four magical gems. Requires Hellfire Warrior to play TRS-80 Level Il 16K TRS-80 32K APPLE 48K w disk. INTRODUCTORY 3-PACK .00 Contains the three best selling games on offer at this special price (Morloc's Tower, Rescue at Rigel and Datestones of Ryn), 24K PET w disk TRS-80 32K APPLE 48K w.disk. DATESTONES OF RYN .50 You are the heroe who must recover the precious Crown Jewels before time runs out. Twenty minutes is all you've got in this action-packed adventure TRS-80 Level Il 16KATARI 32K TRS-80 32K APPLE 48K w disk ATARI 32K w disk MORLOC'S TOWER .50 It's you who must discover how to use the mad wizard's own magical powers against himself in time to stop him from levelling the town of Hagedorn. PET 24K TRS 80 Level il 16K-TRS 80 32K APPLE 48K w disk APPLE 32K DRAGON'S EYE.... .50 Second role-playing adventure with real-time battle graphics. 32K PET APPLE 48K w/disk ATARI GAMES FROM SYNCRO LTD. SORCERER OF SIVA .50 MAZE OF DEATH Another active adventure graphic game. TRS-80 Level Il 16K-TRS 80 32K APPLE 48K w disk You are a freelance agent, you try to stop a cosmitron RESCUE AT RIGEL .50 device from exploding and destroying the city. Ten humans are held prisoner in the Tollah moon base Atari 16K cassette .50, 24K disk .75 TRS-80 Level Il 16K ATARI 32K TRS-80 32K APPLE 48K DRACK IS BACK w/disk ATARI 32K w/disk STAR WARRIOR .50 Atari 800 32K disk .25. Strategy game in which you have to free an occupied planet. An adventure game to test your logic and tendency TRS-80 Level II 16K ATARI 32K TRS-80 32K-APPLE 48K towards greed w disk ATARI 32K w disk ALIEN HELL CRUSH, CRUMBLE & CHOMP! .50 Terrorise different cities as this time you are the monster. Atari 16K cassette .50, 24K disk .75. TRS-80 Level Il 16K -ATARI 32K TRS-80 32K APPLE 48K Alien Hell is a graphic adventure. Your goal is to find a w disk ATARI 32K w disk way out using your wits and reflexes. RICOCHET... .50 Try and score more match points than your opponent. MAR TRESORO ATARI 16K TRS-80 Level Il 16K TRS 80 32K APPLE 48K Atari 24K cassette .75 and 32K disk .25. w/disk ATARI 32K w disk The lure of sunken treasure has been an intriguing JABBERTALKY adventure for centuries. Now you can embark on your A word game to test the powers of your mind TRS-80 32K APPLE 48K w disk IBM 64K w disk. own expeditions for fame and fortune. .50 Send 75p for full catalogue (Refundable against purchase) Dealer Enquiries Welcome ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT & POSTAGE 24 Hour answering service for Access orders 021-771 2995 PLEASE SUPPLY I enclose a cheque PO for ...... American or Debit my Access card number .. made payable to Anglo Signature ANGLO AMERICAN SOFTWARE CO 138a Stratford Road, Sparkhill, BIRMINGHAM, B11 1AG . 021-771 2995 24 hour ansaphone NAME ADDRESS . . ...... .. .... *** ** ***** .. . . .. ......................... ........... ... .. . . . * 12 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"WORLD SHOCK There was really only one way to put our June issue's World Cup Manager game to the test. And that was to get a national squad manager to play it. So we invited England's manager Ron Greenwood to test out his soccer skills against the computer. Ron graciously accepted the challenge and just before the England squad flew out to Spain, Sharp sent three computers (complete with the game) down to the squad's football headquarters at a Hertfordshire hotel Several other members of the squad also tried their hand at the game with Steve Coppell and Kenny Sansom being the notable successes. Between them they guided a rather strange England line-up through the first round and with Kenny in charge the team narrowly failed to qualify for the semi-finals on goal difference. Ron fared rather less well. With a team that consisted of: Corrigan, Mills, Foster, Sansom, Wilkins, McDermott, Coppell, Keegan, Mariner, Woodcock and Rix, Ron took on Hungary in the first game of his tournament C&VG's editorial assistant, Susan Cameron, helped Ron to key-in the opposition names and choose his tactics. And the result? England lost 7-0! Well we never said the game was easy .. But he ran into a few tactical problems, like being forced to bring on substitute Peter Shilton, in the attack after a disappointing first half showing, in which the Hungarians claimed most of the midfield and stamped their authority on the game early Confessions a Bug Machine code! What on neutral gave the editor the impression he could sneak that past us? The Bug hasn't been born who can't put a spanner in the works of a machine code listing. Snag Junior got to grips in line 1 which has a real question mark over it. Unfortunately author Pat Norris, soon spotted the problem and came up with a subroutine which makes data entry into that first line much easier. First of all replace line 1 with 45 fullstops. 1 REM (45 full stops) Next type in the following short routine: 3000 FOR A=16514 to 16553 3010 INPUT B 3015 POKE A,B 3020 NEXT A 3025 STOP After this short program has been typed, type in GOTO 3000. The cursor will appear, awaiting input. Put in the following data: 33,215,64,17,43,117,35,126,167,254, 118,32,7,35,35,35,35,35,24,242,254, 23,32,1,201,214,28,135, 135, 135, 135, 35,134,214,28,18,19,35,24,223. After the data has been entered, delete lines 3000 to 3025. One other point is that the asterisks in line 65 are two multiplication signs and NOT a power sign. Also a piece of rogue paper obliterated a part of Pontoon during the printing process-ably abetted by T. Hitch. Line 133 suffered as a result: 133 IF V=2 AND A=21 THEN PRINT \"YOU HAVE BLACKJACK\" is the correct version. Moonshuttle was left to Screaming Foul-up but he couldn't do much with it (he's not been well recently). But the printed version was for use with the keyboard rather than a joystick. The J in line should be changed to 37137 if you wish to use joysticks to play the game. Bye for now. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 13 "


"NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTSN WIN YOUR FORTUNE ON THE HIGH SEAS BARGAIN BYTES TWO THE MAZE MASTER AGAIN! ATTACK-MAN mined player cane bate his way holds, nudges and a winnings TO W ORK ON AN EGG Avast landlubbers! Here's your No computer is complete without chance to take to the high seas a version of that master of the in search of fame and fortune. maze, Pacman It's up to you to work your way The latest to sport a copy of up the ship's hierarchy, from this busy little creature and his cabin boy to admiral of the fleet, antagonistic cohorts, is Texas Inin a story similar to that of the struments' underrated T.1.99/4a. fictional Captain Hornblower. As usual the player must guide Once aboard the good ship this hungry alter-ego through a ZX81 you must use your seamaze-gobbling points and avoidfaring talents to win promotion ing the monsters. by fearless performance in batThe cassette costs  and is tie. Skilful use of resources is available from Stephen Shaw of vital while sailing the seven seas. Stockport. Coming soon, from the Supplies men and ammunition same source, are more T.I. promust be carefully calculated and grams which are being brought finely balanced. over from the Canadian Norton The journey is hazardous and Software catalogue. the battles fierce but a determined player can battle his way holds, nudges and a winnings up the ranks to become First Sea counter and a moving graphics Lord. Ski Run game are also on the Yo Ho Ho and a basket of eggs! SPACE PIRATES Sea Adventure is one of eight tape. What's this have all those games featured on Bargain The rest of the cassette inrough tough pirates gone soft in next spacecraft. If you miss all Bytes Two. Other major games cludes educational games, a the head! No, they are still hard the snatched eggs then you'll on the cassette are Stock Margeneral knowledge quiz, an boiled characters, but you could end up minus your trusty ship ket, in which the player must alphabetical Simon game and a say that this latest addition to and nothing for breakfast. make instant buying decisions as money calculation puzzler. games tapes for the BBC MicroSpace Pirate runs on the modmarket information flashes up on Bargain Bytes Two is available computer is a real cracker! el A machine in 16K, and the tape the screen. from Richard Shepherd, of in Space Pirate you really go comes from Bug Byte of LiverNoughts and crosses, with Maidenhead, Berkshire. It needs to work on an egg. On screen is pool and will cost around .00 three skill levels, a fruit machine a 16K RAM pack and costs .00 an asteroids type spacecraft Bug Byte are working on other game, complete with random including postage and packing which you control to defend a games for the BBC machine, inclutch of space eggs under cluding a chess tape with 1,000 threat from some thieving aliens. yes 1,000! skill levels, and Once an egg has been snatchPolaris a submarine warfare ed however your only defence is game for the model B using high VIC PANIC The only way to deal with some to shoot it. Then it turns into your resolution graphics. monsters is to trap them in a pit and hit them on the head with a shovel! That's the aim of the little character who inhabits the VIC Panic maze. You are in control of this little chap who, armed with a spade, rushes around the maze digging pits and trapping monsters. The aim is to wipe out all the nasties and collect a high score. The game is similar to the arcade Space Panic machines and runs on the unexpanded VIC20. The cassette is available from Liverpool-based Bug Byte and costs .00 including postage, packing and VAT. WIPE OUT THE NASTIES "


"EW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTS NEI 13 GAMES NEWS ARMED, FUELLED AND ON THE MOVE SCRAMBLE FROM THE COCKPIT DEATH LURKS IN SPACE Scramble aptly describes the player's desperate antics as he Bank, dive and climb as the Earth attempts to score points above a travels past beneath your feet world on which he is barely or actually it's on your TV screen equipped to exist! which has been transformed into FLIGHT SIMULATOR Already a big arcade success, a cockpit window. the game puts you in charge of a Flight Simulation is the name flight simulators which real pilots Fantasy Games which retails plane, armed, fuelled and on the of the game which is one of a train on, it does offer some of the at .75 and offers two advenmove across a mountainous series of five being produced for excitement and a very real chaltures in a Perilous Swamp and landscape. Sinclair by software house, lenge. on the Sorceror's Island Quicksilva is the company rePsion. The tapes are marketed under Chess costs .95 and has six sponsible and it is quickly making the simulation places you in a the Sinclair label and will be levels of play with a chess clock a name for itself for adapting cockpit of an aircraft available from the company or on which to time yourself. arcade games onto the limited The sky and the ground move your local W. H. Smith for ZX81s Backgammon, the gamblers' graphics facilities of the ZX81. through this window, and with a 16K Rampack Flight favourite dice game has a This version costs .95 (includalthough it hardly bears compariSimulation costs .95 and the graphics board, rolling dice, and ing post and packaging) and son with the multi-million pound other programs are: doubling dice for .95. allows up to five ships to appear The space invaders look-alike, on the screen at any time and Space Raiders shares a cassette has the fuel dumps, ground dewith the familiar City Bomb type fences and changing terrain of INVADERS AND ASTEROIDS game, Bomber and retails at its video predecessor. .95 Take your ZX81 where no Sinclair has gone before. Out in the darkest reaches of space lurk the Invaders and deadly fields of fast moving asteroids all out to BERSERK do you terminal damage. Both games include most of Berserk was the strange name the features of the arcade given to the game of robot genofavourites and are written encide which frequented arcades tirely in machine code for fast last year. and furious action. Invaders has It crops up again on one of the 10 skill levels, a high score listgames cartridges which can be ing, flying saucers, a bonus feabought for the new Dragon 32 ture and realistic invader movemicrocomputer. The Dragon is ment. being manufactured in Swansea Asteroids has 10 skill levels, a and is a division of toy company wrap-around screen, five attack Mettoy. waves and those flying rocks Berserk challenges you to come in three sizes. There is also escape from a room full of robots a high score listing and bonus without running into the walls, feature. the robots, or their bullets. Invaders and Asteroids will The game comes in cartridge run in 4K of RAM and are availform to slot into the computer able from Silversoft, Bader Park, and costs .95. Other games Melksham, Wiltshire, or the Loncartridges currently available don based Small Enterprises. Inare. Cosmic invaders, vaders costs .95 and Asteroids Meteoroids and Ghost Attack. will set you back .95. ROBOTIC GENOCIDE "


"NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTS GAMES NEWS THAT LITTLE YELLOW FELLOW SNAPPER FOR THE CUNNING AND DEVIOUS PHILOSOPHER'S QUEST * FINANCIAL Pac-Man, that cheerful glutton of Do you have a cunning and de the arcades will soon be inhabitvious mind? You'll need one to ing the recesses of the BBC solve the new adventure game, Microcomputer thanks to AcornPhilosoper's Quest soft. This text based adventure runs Their version of the well on the BBC Microcomputer Modknown video game is called el B and takes the player through Snapper named after the yela whole series of strange setlow creature which chomps its tings. way around a maze. The usual adventure format of The game a faithful reprocommand words is used to help duction of the original is easy the budding philosopher along on to play using four well-placed his search for the ultimate truth. keys on the BBC keyboard which During his search he has to overguide the hungry Snapper come several what the devious around the maze. programmers of Acornsoft, refer Snapper has even chomped to as \"cunning puzzles\" on the his way into the respected pages way. of the Financial Times. Bowler ghosts and can only eat them if and is able to chase and devour Part of the action takes place hatted city gents were told that he has first eaten a power pill.\" the ghosts. in an underwater scenario but Snapper is a little yellow figure So now you know Snapper includes a high score there also puzzles to be solved and he \"moves about a sort of The maze appears in eight table. To qualify for a place you on dry land in peculiar rooms as maze and scores points by gobcolours using the BBC microhave to score at least 1000. The well as out in the open. But bling up little wafers, power pills computer mode 2. There are also average beginner should score promised not to give too much and ghosts. The longer you keep sound effects including gulpabout 4000 points. The highest so away so I'll stop here, if you want him alive the more points you ing noises as the Snapper eats far is 100,560 according to to know more. score. If he eats all the video its way around the maze and an Acornsoft. The game is available from wafers he gets another life. But audible warning when the little Acornsoft Snapper is available Cambridge-based Acornsoft and he can be destroyed by the creature has eaten a power pill from Small Enterprises. costs .65 plus VAT. MEET THE SUPER BIKES Roar off on a high-power racing TT RACER motorbike for the thrill a minute experience of a TT competition. speed things up and complete A realistic motor cycle rider more laps. and his bike are in your hands on If you find you are travelling this difficult game in which bikes too fast pull the joystick towards smash into trees, barriers and oil you and you'll slow down. The slicks. game is for one player only, but You must complete as many that's just as well because addilaps as possible in this 30 second tional bike riders would only clutrace. Manoeuvre your biker with ter up the track and make your the sensitive joystick and see life more difficult. him lean to the right or left from Each time your rider crashes gravitational pull going round the the time on the clock ticks away, bends. giving you less chance to notch Sinclair's new baby, the Spec SPECTRAL INVADERS Absolute control of the bike up completed laps. It is difficult trum, is fast getting a library of rests with the joystick by to master the controls of the software all for itself. The game is controlled by pushing it hard forward the game but once done you will find The latest addition is the joysticks and has a high score speed increases quite drastically it challenging and compulsive to Spectral Invaders cassette a feature, as well as the usual and usually makes the bike head tackle. faithful copy of the now veteran invader antics. straight for the nearest tree or It runs on an Atari 800 with 16K forerunner of the video game It runs on the standard Spec. other obstacle. memory and is available from boom. trum and comes from Bug Byte It's best to try slow laps at first Currys stores, Calisto Computers It is written in machine code of Liverpool priced at .00 into learn the best technique for and Maplin Electronics for and makes full use of the Speccluding postage, packing and handling sharp bends. Once you .95. North London based Centrum's graphics capability. VAT. are more experienced you can taursoft is the producer AN ALIEN VETERAN Illustrations: John Davis "


"NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTS NEW PRODUCTS NEI GAMES NEWS DRAGONS AND GOLD DIGGERS... COLOSSAL ADVENTURE thinks it's all over it enters a new phase. The cave is flooding and you must rescue the elves. Deep underground in a mysteCOLOSSAL ADVENTURE The program is written in a rious land there lies a hoard of super-compact language de undiscovered golden treasures game, the Colossal Cavern a but the makers, Level 9 Com veloped by Level 9 called \"awhich are talked of in whispers maze of caves and underground puting, are offering a special ser code\". This is specially tailored in inns and taverns by groups of passages containing fabulous vice to their Adventurers. for the production of Adventure strangely garbed travellers. treasures. The player must dealE ach copy of the cassette games and includes a compiler The treasure is guarded by with a dragon, a snake, spiders, comes with a stamped addres. and a small \"a-code\" interpreter several denizens of the caverns orcs and a troll in order to grab sed envelope and Level 9 has which runs the compiled code. which the would be treasure the loot. undertaken to answer one ques. Colossal Adventure is the first hunter must outwit or defeat if he Commands are entered as Ention from a player who finds of a range of Adventure games wishes to snatch some of the glish phrases so the game is himself stuck in the caverns and from Level 9 Computing of High glittering prizes simple to play but difficult to provide the odd hint. Wycombe, Buckinghamshire. It Colossal Adventure is named complete. It should be possible Colossal Adventure has a twist runs on the Nascom 1 and 2 in after the central feature of the for the player to finish the game in its tail. Just when the player 16K and costs .00 A CHALLENGE FOR SPACE IT'S SNOW JOKE ON THE SLOPES SKI-ING will leap over the heap. An amusing game element occurs when a skier crashes, log piles. If you ski over an ice The game stops and two stretchpatch, which are denoted on er bearers run through the trees EARTH ATTACK screen by randomly placed blue onto the slope and cart off the pools, the impact speeds up the injured skier. Can you pilot a spacecraft on a skier. That has a tendancy to a tendancy to Ski-ing was written by CenSki-ing was written by Cenmission of destruction and return land you in trouble as it takes taursoft and runs on an Atari 800 safely to base? time to adjust to the new speed and costs .95 from branches Microtanic Software have If you find your skier hurtling of Currys, Maplin Electronics and issued this challenge to all you headlong into a pile of black logs Calisto Computers. space captains out there in the Ski-ing against the clock may press the action form of their new cassette Earth look easy to master but controll button and he Attack ing the athletic skier in reality is You have to fly your fighter a true test. over a rugged terrain of mounThere are two different runs to tains-dodging missiles fired attempt, a straightforward downfrom base on the ground and hill course and a more taxing bombing fuel dumps to ensure slalom race. your supply is replenished during You have as many skiers as the mission. If the game sounds you need to complete the course familiar that's because it's based within the set time limit, and the on the arcade favourite boundaries of each course reScramble. mains the same although the feaIt comes complete with sound tures alter, effects and good graphics and The slalom is the more difficult runs on the Microtan 65 in 8K or of the races because you have to less. It is available from Micromake your skier twist and turn tanic Software of Dulwich, Lonwith agility between the flagged don and costs .95. posts Microtanic also have versions Hazards abound on the course of Defender and a Pac-Man type in the shape of ice patches and game called Gobbler. "


"TVGAMES CENTRES TVGAMES CENTRES TVGAMES VIDEOSCREEN WHEN EAST AND WEST KEEP QUIET BRIDGE STAY OFF THE COMPUTER CAR'S TRACK HEAD ON The most animated aspect of the Driving a high-powered Formula card game bridge, is the postOne racing car can be as hazarmortem which follows a defeated dous on your television screen contract as it is in real life. But when the Atari TV games In Head On the screen is filled console becomes your partner with the lanes of a race track the \"How on Earth could you bid which spread outwards from a four spades with that hand\" bancentral rectangle. The car under ter becomes a little one-sided. your control can quickly swop Bridge has so far defeated the lanes to avoid a head on crash programmers' efforts to turn with the computer controlled computers into club-level playopposition. ers, despite some imaginative Your driver is luckier than his attempts. The fact that the game real-life counterpart. For in this is divided into the two distinct dice with death he has three areas of bidding and playing, lives to play with, only the third added to the problem that good collision is terminal. bridge players usually combine system and deals out a hand of the finesse (the winkling out of a Using the handsets you can educated guesswork with a fair cards which is displayed on the key card by devious means) very regulate the speed of your car amount of psychology, makes screen for you, as seen by the difficult to judge as there are less By pushing the joystick to the bridge a hard game to program. South position player. hints as to who holds the card. right you increase the speed. To Beginners and those who wish your partner North and you At .95, the Activision carslow down move the joystick to to relearn bridge skills will find are the only two players involved tridge only hints at the nuances the left. the cartridge useful. It plays in the bidding-so a rather false of this king of card games but it The game comes complete seven levels of bridge. The first picture of bidding systems is built will teach beginners and help fair with small cards which fit on top three are all bidded and played, up. East and West cannot double players sharpen their skills. It is of the keypads. These are used the other four are just played. It unlikely contracts or outbid you. marketed over here by Computer for directional control of the racuses the common Alco bidding All of which makes the playing of Games. ing car. On the bottom of the screen is a clock which keeps track of the number of miles your car has LASER ATTACK When the eighth cannon has set but take care to aim and fire covered. been wiped out each one thereat the right moment. There are nine different variaYou are in command of a space after earns you 10 points. Several variations are intions including games for one or armada flying on a warlike misTo avoid the missiles you must cluded in the game with varying two players, a role reversal game sion to a planet in the outer fly your ship swiftly and accudegrees of difficulty. Game four in which you have to attempt to galaxy rately to confuse the projectile's only gives you one chance to collide with the computer conYour mission is to lead a computer guided system. Your blast a laser cannon. If you miss trolled car, and a version when squadron of jet fighters in an ships are controlled with the a missile will automatically lock two cars are computer conattack on the planet's surface. handsets by moving the joystick on to your craft's position and trolled. Enemy fire comes from laser to the left or right, and up and destroy it. This game runs on the Acetrocannons placed strategically on down. Laser Attack runs on the nic MPU 2000 and is available for the planet. These fire radar To activate your own weapons Acetronic MPU2000 and costs .95 from all the usual ACE guided missiles which home in push the red button on the hand.95 from stockists. dealers. on your spacecraft. There are only two enemy cannons to contend with in the first round of Laser Attack. These are only worth one point each. You have an air fleet of four super-spaceships and can change planes if one is shot down. After the first two laser bases have been destroyed more appear on the screen. These are worth more points the further you progress through the game. NOW DODGE THE GUIDED MISSILES a clock which keep track of the Illustration: Terry Rogers "


"3 CENTRES TV GAMES CENTRES TV GAMES CENTRES VIDEO SCREEN 5:27 sides you need to be digitally dextrous to cope and survive the onslaught. Riddle of the Sphinx is an unusual scrolling game and a hard one to get the hang of. On the screen appear numerous palm trees interspersed with camels, pyramids and the occasional NFFFNDER oasis. You control a small man Defender was the dedicated whose quest in life is to discover arcade player's game when the the riddle of the Sphinx. He does novelty of space invaders wore this by picking up clues as he off and Asteroids had been conwalks through the desert, and quered. these are displayed along the Both space invaders and bottom of the screen once he asteroids converted well to the has collected them. Atari T.V. Games Centre screen, Your intrepid explorer needs although both lost some of the water for his energy source. challenge of the arcade original. Having just quenched his thirst at Defender is the new game to an oasis he can bound through make the transition with Atari the sands with a strong stride. continuing its successful policy Gradually the heat of the of buying up the licence to prodesert overcomes him and his duce the arcade money-spinners pace slows down, making him under their correct title. extremely vulnerable to hazards Graphically, Defender is not as like scorpions which have a impressive as the original but it deadly sting in their tail. does capture a good deal more An enemy force constantly of the playability harries the tiny traveller firing The controls are much more shots at him. The man is armed approachable with only a joywith a gun and you score points stick and one fire button, comby helping him shoot any ene-pared to the rank of buttons on mies that get in the way. the arcade machine. Other games in the Atari comThe planet surface is replaced patible range include space with a city skyline, behind which games like Demon Attack, and your craft can disconcertingly Star Voyager, a Fire Fighter game sink, making it difficult to judge in which you have to execute a your position on the screen. rescue from a burning building. The radar screen is still there, There's a version of billiards as are all the adversaries you called Trick Shot, and a sea will remember from the arcade, battle adventure called Atlantis. although they do look very difThe submerged city is battling a ferent. relentless enemy. Waves of the humanoids are still to be flying foes batter the city's defound on the surface of the world fences. You command three misand must be returned there if the sile installations and must track aliens' landers capture them. Adam Leisure Group has tied up bringing back creatures from disand destroy enemy ships. And the ultimate weapon is still a deal to bring American cart: tant planets in the galaxy. But the Cartridges are expected to reyour smart bomb, which destroys ridges to UK Atari VCS owners. ship is under constant attack tail at two basic prices, .95 or every alien creature on the Video games designed and from numerous alien beasts. .95. They will be available screen. produced by the US Atari spin-off As the Arc hovers above the from electrical dealers, big The attacks still come in Imagic are available now. The surface of a planet, fighting off stores and some toy shops. waves and every attempt has firm was set up in America at the the attackers you must send a magic also has a range of been made to copy the original beginning of the year offering a satellite ship with which to capgames packs which are compatias closely as possible. What range of seven games compatiture the creatures. ble with the Mattel Intellvision makes it more challenging than ble with the Atari home games The planet is protected by a games centre. space invaders and asteroids is centre. laser beam which will destroy As yet these are only available sheer difficulty. The aliens are Each one has high quality the satellite craft if it flies into the in America but in the autumn very accurate with their bombs graphics and some of the games path of the beam. Keep dodging these cartridges will begin to and quick to home in on you. are new in concept and very the laser to catch the aliens. filter through to UK retail outlets They also rush in at you from addictive. The Arc weapon sites are in providing a high degree of comoff-screen positions making it Cosmic Arc is a space des four positions, firing to left and petition for Mattel and a wider hard to line up your craft truction game. The pilots of the right, up and down. With alien variety of games for television Atari should have another winArc are entrusted with the job of bombardment coming from all games centre owners. ner on their hands at .95 FIRST SEVEN SPELLS OF NEW ATARI MAGIC IMAGIC IMAGIC "


"ACTION QUEST« 16K Assembly Language Real-Time Adventure Game For ATARI 400/800 Computer NOW IN STOCK ON 16K CASSETTE: FROGGER .95 CROSSFIRE .95 SHOOTING GALLERY O .95  PROTECTOR (32K Cassette Disk) Plus: on 32K DISK: MOUSKATTACK .95 \"THRESHOLD (40K) (unbelievable graphics!) RASTER BLASTER (real pinball!) *ALI BABA & 40 THIEVES  APPLE PANIC 1982 DESIRE ETS Call for Prices prop MORE ATARI SOFTWARE For The ATARI 400/800 DUE SHORTLY!! . INTRODUCING THE NEW ARCADE GAME FOR ATARI COMPUTERS !  SUPERB SCROLLING GRAPHICS WITH DAZZLING COLOURS ! . 100% MACHINE CODE PROGRAMME FOR ONE OR TWO PLAYERS I. MULTIPLE SKILL LEVELS FIGHT YOUR WAY THROUGH CAVERNS AND TUNNELS WITH ATTACKING MISSILES FUEL AND AMMO DUMPS TO CONTEND WITH! AVAILABLE NOW: 16K CASSETTE .95 Plus 50p P&P 32K DISK .95 NEW TITLES: CRYPTS OF TERROR-16K ADVENTURE OK.RAZY SHOOT OUT CARTRIDGE OAMERICAN FOOTBALL-16K CAVERNS OF MARS-16K COMPUTE BOOK OF ATARI SANTA CRUZ TRICKY TUTORIALS NOW IN STOCK : ATARI TV GAMES PLUS ACTIVISION CARTRIDGES AT DISCOUNT PRICES! WATCH OUT FOR PACMAN AND DEFENDER! NATIONWIDE MAIL ORDER SERVICE ON ALL PRODUCTS SEND STAMP OR CALL NOW FOR DETAILS 1 PAIRSTRIKE For The 16K CASSETTE/DISK .95 Plus 50pp&p Action Qui lme adventure game played with your Joyutick controller. You repre en hoeve from em to an attempt to care valuable press while taskaifferent technique or twiat la involved in obtain echosoma reguire physical dexterity to reach while others intelectual problemi Initially hidden from the player and must first be found before both om prises captured and lapsed time. Action Quest la entirely played an action game, the keyboard input la required Action Quest provides challenges both for familom players well as for those motivated by true A complete me encompasses 30 rooms and 20 prises, and price Gaye a mot always a GREY MICROCOMPUTERS 50 Newton St.,Off Piccadilly, Manchester M1 2EA. Tel: 061-236 3083 * COMPUTER CHESS GAMES Commodore PLUS GAMES NOW INISTOCK! ATARI GEMINI ELECTRONICS ATARI 400x800 LET ACORNSOFT OPEN THE DOORS TO YOUR IMAGINATION KODU BBC Microcomputer or Acorn Atom Acornsoft is the software division of Acorn Computers, designers and manufacturers, of the BBC Micro and Atom. We know better than anyone the capability of the machines, we know how to get the very best from the hardware. And we have produced a range of exciting games, exacting business and useful household software. The Biggest Range Available Acornsoft software ranges from authentic arcade games like Snapper to Algebraic Manipulation to Desk Diary to other languages like FORTH and LISP. Striking colour, amazing sound effects and powerful graphics are all used to the full. And it does not stop there. There is a complete range of manuals, accessories and plug-in ROMs. Free Brochures Just clip the coupon or write to us and we will rush our catalogue absolutely free. Can't wait for the post Please rush me my free literature from Acornsoft. Atom BBC Please tick Name ring 01-930 1614 now! Don't delaydo it today. Let Acornsoft help you get the best from our machine and open the doors to your imagination. Acornsoft and Atom are registered trade marks of Acorn Computers Ltd Address ACORNSOFT 4A Market Hill, CAMBRIDGE CB2 3NJ. Postcode 20 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"I have talked about human world chamwas the originator of the phrase \"the pions beating chess playing programs. horizon effect\" to describe the blindness Now I would like to introduce the experienced by any program at the limits strongest chess program of all, BELLE of its analysis. which has beaten several top players. He is also the author of a celebrated BELLE is a special-purpose chess Backgammon program which won a machine built by Ken Thompson of Bell match against the reigning human world Laboratories. champion a few years ago. Its processing speed is so great that it Berliner's motivation for arranging a can generate a candidate move in one challenge game against BELLE was, in his two-millionth of a second and can exown words, that: \"I felt it may be getting to amine 160,000 positions per second. the time when I would have my last BELLE has a stored opening book of chance to beat the world's best mechanic 300,000 positions which it scans in just al chess entity, so I thought I'd better try to one and a half seconds! It was built out of do it now.\" 1,700 chips in the Spring of 1980, won the \"It would be foolish to play a normal World Computer Chess Championship a game against BELLE. It was clearly better few months later and has since won a than I tactically, so I had to take advannumber of impressive games against playtage of its lack of knowledge in some way, ers of up to senior master standard. while intending to avoid tactical comThe human opponent for the game that plications if at all possible. follows was Hans Berliner, a strong U.S. \"My idea was to get it into an opening master, who is also a former world chamsystem in which I had private (unpubpion for correspondence chess. lished) analysis, and hope to get an advanBerliner has himself spent considerable tage that could hopefully be converted into time writing chess playing programs and a win at some future time.\" restricts the Knights even further. 28. ... P-KB4; 29. P-R3, K-B2; 30. K-BI, P-K4; A temporary Pawn sacrifice aimed at getting his King into play. However, the King and Rook now become vulnerable to Knight forks Berliner comments: \"I had done my calculations and everything seemed to be in order. But against a program that was by now probably looking at least nine ply deep, one mistake could prove fatal.\" 31. PxP, K-K3; 32. N-N6, R-B7; (If 32 ... KxP?; 33. N-B4ch wins the Rook.) 33. N-K2, KxP; 34. K-K1, K-K5; menacing, but also placing the King in a dangerously exposed position. 35. N-QB4, P-KN4; 36. K-Q1, 36. ... RxN (B5)! 37. PxR, K-Q6; More bold play by Berliner. He is now a Pawn for a Knight behind in material, but has a passed Pawn on the Queen side, a potential one on tt -NW Aa 21 MAR abcdefgh abcdefgh a b c d e f g h abcdefgh Fig 1. Position after Black's Fig 2. Position after White's Fig 3. Position after White's Fig 4. Position after Black's 18th move 28th move 36th move 41st move Berliner's obvious respect for his better-placed pieces in the follow the King side and a strong King electronic opponent may seem ex ing end game. 16. ... QxR; 17. NxQ position. cessive but it is justified by the BxQ; 18. N(Q4) x B, KR-Q1! He comments, \"Black has excelgame that follows Threatening to penetrate to the lent winning chances.\" Of course, BELLE (White) v H. Berliner (Black seventh rank. BELLE now defends this largely depends on the player's Alekhine's Defense) well. (If for example, 19. R-QI, ability. Against a lesser opponent 1. P-K4, N-KB3; 2. P-K5, N-Q4; 3. RxRch; 20. NxR, R-QB1; wins a than Berliner, BELLE might well go P-Q4, P-Q3; 4. N-KB3, P-KN3; 5. PPawn.) 19. P-QN3, PxP; 20. PxP, Ron to draw or even win. QB4, N-N3; 6. PxP, BPxP; 7. B-K2, 07; 21. P-KB4! 38. N-KNI, P-N5; 39. P-R4, K-K6; B-N2; 8. O-O, O-O; 9. B-K3, N-QB3; A good move which prevents 40. N-K2, K-B7; 41. K-Q2, P-QR4; 10. N-QB3, Black chasing away White's Knight Only now does a Black victory Up to here BELLE was \"in the with a Pawn when it reaches the begin to seem likely to the unbook\". 10. ...P-Q4! 11. P-B5, N-B5; 12. good defensive square of. Q4. trained eye. Even so there are many BxN, PxB; 13. Q-K2, B-KNS! Thre 21. ... R-QN7; 22. N-Q4, R-Q1; 23. difficult variations to consider, atening to take the Queen Pawn. 14. N-R4, R-Q7; 24. N-ONS, P-QR3; 25. which space prevents me from inQR-Q1, NxP; 15. BxN; BxB; N(5)-B3, R-QB7; 26. R-QI, R(1)-07; cluding here. White's best chance 16. RxB? Berliner considers this a 27. RxR, RxR; 28. P-KN3, now was probably 42. N-Q4. subtle mistake. Apparently White White is badly restricted. It was However, BELLE continued: 42. Kwins two Knights for only Rook and necessary to defend the King's Q3, P-R5; 43. N-Q4, P-R6; 44. K-B2, Pawn. However, the variation Bishop's Pawn to avoid threats suchP -R7; 45. K-N2, P-KB5! 46. N-B5, PxP; favours Black who obtains much as R-Q5 and R-ONS. Berliner now 47. Resigns. BY MAX BRAMER "


"Spectrum commodore FJE COMMODORE VIC 20 Spectrum is a new, rapidly expanding group of independent retailers who specialise in selling a range of popular home computers. Our group policy is simple: we won't be beaten on price and know-how. We can make this claim because our bulk buying power ensures that we select and buy at the best prices and then can pass on the benefits to you. We guarantee if you find an item advertised and in stock at any other retailer at a better price than us, we will match that price. You will see we quote our prices both including and excluding VAT no hidden 15% to suddenly uplift your bill but also making our prices easier to compare with our competitors. To ease payment we accept Barclaycard and Access as well as our own Spectrum Charge Card. Longer term credit terms are also available. We believe our product know-how' is crucial to you as a customer. In every one of our centres there are personnel who have been trained by the manufacturers or distributors themselves. So we know what we are talking about on the products we sell and can help every customer, including the complete beginner, find and understand the equipment to suit his or her needs. For us it's not just a matter of simply handing over a box and leaving you on your own to figure it out. Our service includes 'hands on experience that we can pass on to you. After sales care is also well catered for. Our own Spectrum Service Centres will insure that should your machine go down' we will get it up and running as quickly as possible. We can also offer extended warranties at reasonable prices. When it comes to mail order delivery we use Securicor for despatch to anywhere in the British Isles. The cost is low and the service is good. Further details are available from your local shop at the time of ordering, Finally, we should point out that although not every Spectrum centre carries every advertised item, they can always be obtained quickly from our central warehouse. If you have any difficulty, please telephone Spectrum Customer Service on (0727) 66646. Spectrum Computer Group is a division of Spectrum (UK) Ltd Britain's largest photographic retailing group. The VIC 20 really is extraordinary value for money It does so much for so little It's fully expandable to 271/K user RAM has a full .90 .99 INC.VAT plugs straight into your home TV. L Microsoft BASIC\" is standard but additional machine language is available via plug in cartridges. There is also a choice of other programs for chess, music and languages as well as games Printer disk drive and other peripherals, software and books are all available to further expand your use and enjoyment XE VAI | IN E VAT VIC C2N cassette unit  09 14495 VIC Printer (plain paper tractor) 120000 230.00 VIC Single floppy disc drive (5 ) 1344 35 396.00 3K RAM expansion cartridge  .95 BK RAM expansion cartridge 13919 15K RAM expansion Cartridge 174.95 Super expander Hi Res cartridge Joystick Games paddles (pair) .50 GAMES Programmers Aid cartridge Machine Code Monitor Cartridge  39 Iniroduction to Basic (1) E14.95 Avenger (ROM) $19.95 Star Battle (ROM) E1735 .95 Jelly Monsters (ROM) E1735 .95 Super Lander (ROM) .95 Road Race (ROM) 1995 Rat Race\" (ROM) [1994 cassette BOOKS Learn Computer Programming with the Commodore VIC [ 45 | 0 V VIC Revealed | | | 0 VI VIC 20 Programmers Reference Guide | | | 0 V VIC Computing Magazine .95 NOVA The model 400 has 16 of RAM and a touch sensitive keyboard The 800 model has a professional style typewriter keyboard and a memory which is user expandable to 48K. Add disk drives (up to 4) and a printer and you have a system of adequate power for business uses. EXE WAI | IN C VI .70 1499.90 143 48 250.00 1260 83 299.95 1230 43 264.99 1117 39 134.99 E56 52 .99 [12 13 .95  13 .95 3 48 .99 ATARI 80G 16 COMPUTER (EXPANDABLE) ATARI 410 PROGRAM RECORDER ATARI 810 DISK DRIVE ATARI 822 THERMAL PAINTER ATARI 850 INTERFACE FOR DOT MATRIX PRINTER ATARI 16K RAM EXPANSION FOR 800 ATARI GAMES PADDLES (PAIR) ATARI GAMES JOYSTICKS (PAIR) ATARI THERMAL PRINT PAPER (2 ROLLS) ATARI BLANK DISKETTES (5) SOFTWARE INVITATION TO PROGRAMMING (1) INVITATION TO PROGRAMMING (3) CONVERSATIONAL FRENCH CONVERSATIONAL GERMAN CONVERSATIONAL ITALIAN CONVERSATIONAL SPANISH MUSIC COMPOSER 200CROCCO SBOOMOO FM BOUWDOOSEFFE UMONT ACCESSORIES  .95 126 00 .95 .95 $229,95 $217.30 10.50 Prince PC31 12\" Green Monitor SPECIAL PRICE SANYO Slim 3G Cassette Recorder for use with com) CIT 3106 14\" Colour TV Set ACCUTRAK C12 Cassettes Single sided, double density disks (for Commodore Atari Apple Tandy etc) Double sided, double density disks (for Sharp  .95 $19.96 .95 3474 139.95 53474 $39.95 L39.95  74 E39 95  25 .95 .87 .95 .95 126 04 .95 126.04E29.95 126 04 129.95 125.04 .95  30 .50  30 .50 121 30 .50 .95 8691 99.95 E34 74 .95 .00 VAT Developed by the Company ATARI 400 famous for its TV and arcade games the Atari Computers have superb colour graphics and facilities for the manipulation of visuals on the screen In-built \"player-missile .90 INC.VAT graphics\" enable the user to Compose games to very professional standards. Any key on the keyboard can be made to produce any character the user wishes on the screen. Atari Computers have an extra microprocessor onboard especially to enable these unique features. There are over 200 programmable colours and tones and a wide range of programmable sounds. Plug a \"BASIC\"cartridge in and you have a comprehensive computer  [19% L27 ASTEROIDS MISSILE COMMAND PACKMAN SPACE INVADERS STAR RAIDERS SUPER BREAK OUT VIDEO EASEL COMPUTER CHESS GRAPHIT WORD PROCESSOR (DISK) ASSEMBLY EDITOR DE RE ATARI .30 Single sided, double density double track disks (for Nascom and Commodore 050) Disk Bank Interlocking cases for diskettes Disk head cleaner Single part 11\" x 9,\"printerpaper box of 2200 sheets [2.65 E4.50 E14.95 [13.00 10:39 11.95 CAMBRIDGE WIGAN Welding Lid ALFRETON Gordon Harwood 69/71 High Street Alfreton Derbyshire Tel 0773832078 BASILDON Godfrey's 28 32 East Walk BIRMINGHAM Sherwoods Great Western Arcade Birmingham 2 Tel: 021 236 7211 12a Kings Parade Cambridge Tel: 0223 68087 NOTTINGHAM Cameo Computers 8/9/10 Trinity Walk Nottingham Tel: 060242912 READING David Saunders Computer Centre CARDIFF Randail Cox 18-22 High St Arcade BRADFORD Photosave 18 Cheapside Bradford BD14 JA West Yorkshire Tel 0274 308598 GUILDFORD The Model Shop 23 Swan Lane Guildford Surrey GUILEO Tel: 0483 39115 HARROW Camera Arts (Micro Computer Division) 24 St Ann Road Harrow Middlesex Tel: 014275469 LEEDS Bass & Bligh 4 Lower Briggate Leeds w Yorkshire Tel 0532 45445 MIDDLESBROUGH McKenna & Brown 190 Linthorpe Road Middlesbrough Tel 0642 248345 NEWCASTLE Turner's 29-31 High Friars Eldon Square Newcastle Tel: 0632612901 NEWCASTLE-ON-TYNE Newcastle Camera & Computer Mart 16 Northumberland LONDON SES Square Deal 375 Footscray Road New Eltham London SEO Tel: 01 859 1516 LONDON W11 Electroleisure 120 Notting Hil Gate London W11 Tel 012217029 MACCLESFIELD Camera & Computer Centre 118 Mill Street Macclesfield Cheshire Tel: 0625 27468 WALLINGTON Surrey Micro Systems Ltd 53 Woodcote Road Wallington Surrey Tel 015475636 WATFORD SRS Microsystems 94 The Parade High Street Watford Herts Tel 092326602 WEST BROMWICH Bell & Jones 39 Queens Square West Bromwich Tel 021 553 0820 Las Tel 094242 WOKING Harpers 71-73 Commercial Woking Basildon Tel 0222 31960 Tel: 0268289379 BASINGSTOKE DERBY CT Electronics The Spot Derby Tel 0332 44760 BRIGHTON Capricorn 1 Ourens Road Brighton Sussex Tel: 027329634 Reading Berts Tel 0734 580719 TEDDINGTON Andrews 49 Broad Street Teddington Middlesex Tel 01977 4716 Tel: 0486261061 WORCESTER David Waring Ltd 1 Mamion House High Street 2/3 Market Place Basingstoke Hans Tel 0256 22079 Newcastle on lyne Tel: 0632327461 Tel: 0905 27551 "


" OF we won't be beaten on prices. \"Just compare them! NASCOM SHARP .38 FREE SOFTWARE WITH THE MZ80A COCOM special edition EXCVAT INC VAT The MZ80A is the newcomer to the Sharp range with the serious user very much in mind in the design A complete stand-alone 48K system incorporating a profiled typewriter keyboard with numeric pad and a 9\" green display screen. The \"BASIC\"contains a number of very useful additions over the SHARP MZ80A previous models A full line up of peripherals further add to the ver satility of this machine. INCLUDES E75 OF FREE .99 INC.VAT SOFTWARE SHARP PERIPHERALS FOR MZDA EXC VA INC VAT *Twin floppy disk unit (54) 1590 00 1678.50 *Single floppy disk unit 140000 450.00 Floppy disk interface card 10000 115.00 *Floppy disk cable 12400 127.50 Master diskette and manual .56 *80 colprinter inc cable 1/0 card and ROM E41500 .25 *80 col friction printer 1/0 card and ROM  .25 132 calguintetic cable card and ROM  00 .75 Expansion unit required for drive and or printer)  115.00 Universal interface card  151.75 Assembler tapes and manual E6200648.30 FOOS E8500 197.75 *MZBOK to MZ80A converter tage Handheld computers from Sharp give you a pocket genius at your Command. We sell the well established PC1211 and the new 1500 The PC121 packs high performance functions with Basic language into a slim compact body You can extend your PC121 with a cassette interface or printer cassette interface The new PC 1500 takes technology close to personal computer ability its compact body has 16K bytes of ROM and 3 5K bytes of RAM With an extended alpha basic numeric. You can then go further with the 4K or BK RAM upgrades. There's also for the first time in handheld computers a four colour graphic printer or a combined printer and cassette interface PC1211 Computer 165 00 74.75 PC1211 Cassette interface | .26 .95  E130 39 14343 1169.95 2149.95 349.95 VAT PC1211 Cassette and printer interface PC1500 Computer PC1500 Printer cassette interface PC1500 AK RAM upgrade SHARP PERIPHERALS FOR MZBOK Twin floppy disk unit ( including and Diskette manualand cable *Dot matrix printer *Expansion interface required for the both above) Machine code language tape and manual Assembler tages and manual Base complet 95 3891435 75 100 100 95 SPECIAL EDITION! UNIQUE TO SPECTRUM 196 00 .40  .20  00 141.40  .00 145.00 3800143.70 1.95 95 # Double precision Basic 1.95 395 STOP PRESS! At the time of going to press we still have a few of the very popular Sharp MZBOK Computer It has 48 RAM prox 345 user when operating BASIC) a BASIC SHARP MZ BOK tape manual as well as an appliction tape and demo tape is an acredible package at the price Phone now for availability .00 INC. VAT .57 3.95 9.95 .95 19.50 1675 18.95 .95 .95 BOOKS 95 The Nascom is a THE NASCOM British designed and built 'SPECIAL EDITION microcomputer and one of the first home micros to appear in this country, some five years ago. Since then, it has .44 INC.VAT been developed into one of the most powerful and expandable systems around It can have up to 206K onboard memory, combined with superb colour graphics, disk drives, printers and various input/output facilities can be added. Such is the versatility of this micro that it has been dopted for numerous commercial applications including hotel booking systems, blood grouping, weaponry and satellite tracking Previously looked upon as a machine for the knowledgeable hobbyist only Spectrum now bring you the opportunity to embark upon this remarkable sphere of computing in the easiest possible way. A ready to plugin and use 'SPECIAL EDITION' Nascom programmable in machine code or BASIC is now available from us If you are serious about computing the 'SPECIAL EDITION is your starter pack. The initial machine provides 8K of memory but a simple plug in board upgrades your computer to 56K EXC VA INC VAT THE NASCOM SPECIAL EDITION... SPECIAL EDITION 48K RAM BOARD 130.00 149.50 3.95 9.95 BASIC Computer Programs for the Home BASIC A self teaching Guide (2nd edition) Microsoft Basic More Basic Games Software Secrets (Sharp) Getting Acquainted with your Acorn Atom stant Basic Why do you need a Personal Computer 24 tested Games and Programs 33 Games for Apple TRS80 PE Byting Deeper into your ZX81 Gateway Guide 2X1 Getting Acquainted ZX81 Hints and los ZX81 Mastering Machine Code ZX81 Not Only 30 Programs ZX81 ZX1 Companion ZX81 Pocket Book What can I do with K ZX81 PEEK POKE BYTE RAM 2X81 Executive Computing Computers for Everyone Some Common Basic Programs Atant 49 Explosive Games ZX81 Practical Programs BBC & Atom 34 Amazing Games 30 Basic BBC .95 15.75 .60 .95 .95 15.45 15.95 .25 27.50 16.95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .75 .15 .10 ES 95 NO VAT ON BOOKS 50 1.95 We stock an extensive range of books to help you Check below and we're sure you'll find something to whel your appetite. CPIM Handbook 19.55 Programming the 280 .95 Programming the 6502 E10.75 Your First Computer BASIC Handbook (2nd edition) 14.95 A-Z of Computer Games 15.50 Alan Basic 15.95 Basic BASIC 19.95 BASIC Computer Games .95 BASIC Computer Programs for Business (VOLI) .55 330 NO VAT ON BOOKS 32.55 34.50 1495 14.95 1.95 LED SDC Spectrum Computer Centres . . operate on an exclusive area basis and if you would like to know more about our group, contact Mike Stem or Alan Warren now on (0727)66646. Spectrum COMPUTER GROUP 1 3 S poeta Prices correct at time of going to press. E. &0. E erigoing to pres. E. &o "


"C.P.S. GAMES EVERYTHING SPECTRUM OFFER... PLUS THE LORD OF THE RINGS: part 1 This adventure takes you night through the book! Part 1 takes you from the Shire to Rivendell. It is a real adventure, and on the way the Dark Lord throws everything at you Tolkien could think of .00 DARWIN Evolution as a game you start as a single cell. Environmental circumstances change and you have to make decisions. If you adapt you may survive and change. Ideally you end up as man but beware, depending on your decisions you might end up being a fish or a bird. Perhaps even a worm .00 EVOLUTION OF MAN The game begins somewhere in that remote past, when our ancestors were roaming the plains. As climate and other factors change you must adapt. The way in which you do this influences the line of evolution you will take Neanderthal, Cromagnon, extinct? Who knows. .00 Darwin and Evolution of Man are based on scientific facts and have a definite educational value. SHARP EXC VAT INC VT Nascom 3 48K We have in stock the full range listed Computer E499.00 .85 by Spectrum Nascom RAM B 16K The MZ 80B and a full range Board (kit) 80.00 .00 PLUS of peripherals. Nascom RAM B 16K Board (built) .00 .00 Additional 16K RAM 15.00 .25 APPLE Additional 32K RAM .00 .50 48K Add-on Memory Board Apple it and Ill Computer Systems in for Special Edition\" .00 .50 stock and we are an authorised Service 1/O Board (kit) $45.00 ,75 Centre for Apple. PIO Option .00 .80 ne We are an appointed dealer CTC Option E14.00 .10 PLUS for Jarman Business Systems UART Option .00 .40 Nascom Single Disk NASCOM Drive inc FDC Card .00 .50 Nascom Double Disk EXC VT VNC VAT. Drive inc FDC Card E685.00 .75 Nascom 2 (kit) No user RAM NAS-DOS .00 .75 Operating System $45.00 .75 Nascom 2 (built) No user RAM / 2.2 .00 .75 Operating System 100.00 .00 Nascom Power Supply (kit) NAS-SYS 3 Operating .00 .25 System .00 .00 Nascom Micro-ed BK Computer ZEAP Z 1 for 399.00 .85 NAS-SYS (EPROM) .00 .55 Nascom Special Edition\" BK Microsoft Basic ROM .00 .00 BK Computer E429.95 .44 Nascom 2 Graphic ROM 15.00 17.25 THE GAMBLER'S PARADISE A real treat for gamblers this tape contains craps, chemin de fet, Zanzia French dice gamel. roulette, heads and tails, horse race and a few more Money on the table, please 13.00 PETER RABBIT AND THE MAGIC CARROT An adventure for the very young This new series of adventures is mainly based on graphics Peter Rabbit goes on a quest for the magic carrot. On the way he can get lost in the forest, meet niceland not so nice) friends and he must find the secret cave, then get out with the magic carrot. Want to see some little eyes light up?.50 Also available! Peter Rabbit and the naughty Owl Peter Rabbit and father Willow KING ARTHUR Can you win the battles to free England from the Angles and Saxons King Arthur's fight for freedom in a fascinating war game 17.00 ATARI OWNERS!!! Commercial software available for 16K:sales daybook purchase daybook, cash flow forecast, petty cash book, etc. All with manual Ask for leaflet SRS MICROSYSTEMS 94 The Parade, High Street, Watford, Herts. Telephone (0923) 26602 YOU'LL VALUE OUR EXPERIENCE, YOU'LL VALUE OUR PRICES. FREE SECURICOR DELIVERY OR POST ON ORDERS OVER 50 THE SYMBOL OF VALUE new premii Wacord Access Barclaycard welcome Hire purchase and part exchange available. ESO. NEW LARGER Available for ATARI and ZX81T6K C.P.S. 14 BRITTON STREET LONDON EC1M 5NQ PREMISES FULLER FD SYSTEM .95 Professional Keyboard & Case for Sinclair ZX81 & ZX Spectrum KEYBOARD LAYOUT All the Sincla y s are duplecated on our layout with a hit and new money back guarantee 2005 INSTALLATION Simply the Zx printed circuit board from MOTHERBOARD We also manufactura motherboard which allows expansion to the memory and 10 facts The ZX81 fits inside The tough ABS injection moulded plastic case measures 8\" x 14\" x 2\" and hooks up to your ZX printed circuit board in minutes. No technical know how or soldering is required and switch Amount AD Code vg Fuller FD System 42 Keyboard & case FD System Motherboard FD 16K Memory Module FD 64K Memory Module FD PSU 9 Volts at 2 amp FD Shipping and Handling Mail to FULLER MICRO SYSTEMS The Zx Centre Sweeting Street, Liverpool 2 England, UK SAE for more details Enquiries Tel. 051-236 6109 39.95 15.95 29.95 78.95 12.95 2.50 The ZX16K Memory Module will fix inside the case, using the new Adaptor Board at .75 or the Motherboard By removing the ZX PSU from its case this can also be fixed inside. We will carry out the installation work free of charge if required Keyboard Only Available! Built .95 Kit .95 (+P.P.80p) Name Address City/State/Zip 24 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"The Wife's Tale ILLUSTRATION: TERRY ROGERS BY SUE GARDEN \"Disaster! I have been foully slain by a wicked warlock!\" \"I've torpedoed the sixth Klingon. Now I must find a Starbase. Heading 60 degrees warp factor eight.\" Such are the remarks that hurtle through our house, as husband, children, husband's friends, children's friends cluster around the 1980s equivalent of the old joanna. No more do the tinkling ivories herald a burst of \"Love's Old Sweet Song\", nor even a lusty chorus of \"Roll Out the Barrel\". These days the keys are pressed to see the grass has grown, I said. \"Maybe I could INST DEL it\", he replied. With a phasar operated cries of \"Poke the Ram\", lawn mower / suppose. (the modern version of 'Pin again.\" \"I could Inst Del it.\" floors? My interest was come to think of it. I wonthe Tail on the Donkey'), With a phasar-operated roused. Well, no, not yet, der whether the cunning \"Get G String\" (nothing to do lawn-mower, I presume. they were working on it. beast is gradually eliminatwith strip poker) or, more How insignificant the As the programmers tending the human element enigmatically. F2 OD OC. minutiae of everyday life to be men, obviously they go altogether. It sorted out the The computer, it seems, is must appear, to one who has first for the tiresome jobs world, all by itself, for four the latest in man's compenjust been ruling the world! around the house (i.e. put hours the other evening. End dium of hobbies to lure him Before that, he saved the ting on switches), leaving the of human life in 2030. It was from the real world. \"At known universe from extincsmaller tasks to a later stage fed with more information. least,\" declares my golfing tion by an alien force, then of development. We watched, helplessly, for widow friend, \"your husband traded intergalactically in in the States, there is a another four hours. End of does not disappear for hours medical supplies and recognised breed of compu-human life in 2030. on end every weekend. You machinery. Why is the magic ter widows. A computer can My football widow neighMy know where he is.\" not the same in a trip to the be cause for divorce. Neg-hour : bour knocks on the door. Physically, I cannot deny. chemist for soda, or to the lect? Desertion? Adultery? \"Fancy a trip into town? there is a figure hunched in hardware shop for a spare have had my doubts about tently in a corner of the room.part for the lawn-mower? that BASEX tape. \"Well I would, but I shall The cups of coffee, carefully I was engaged in conThe bookcase groans with have to make tea in a positioned, are retrieved, versation recently with a a new range of reading matminute.\" The soulless tones empty, after a lapse of time. plumber who had come to ter. Software Secrets, murof \"So long, it's been good to At mealtimes, the figure is mend a leak in the watermurs one tome, beguilingly. know you\" come clanging there well, eventually tank. (\"A drip? Good grief, 1001 Things to do with your into the kitchen. \"That and gives every appearance woman, famine has just Personal Computer volunmeans the SS Enterprise has of eating according to conwiped out two-thirds of the teers another. Odd that it collided with a star. I must vention. population.'') Spying the does not mention the half a put the kettle on quickly, beConversationally, it is computer, he expounded on dozen which spring instantly fore he boldly goes anywhere another question. Casual reits mysterious allure. The to mind. marks are met with a aggression of most games \"If you can't beat them, She looks baffled. What a dreamy, vacant look and appeals to man's violent najoin them\". says the old simple life she leads! She bizarre rejoinder. ture. He can sublimate, elecpiece of advice. Imagine the knows her husband is run\"More mince, dear?\" Itronically, instead of beating scenes of violence if we were ning round a muddy field, in ask. \"I saved 500 bytes.\" the wife. They don't make both jostting for the eightbitter cold and shorts, chascomes the reply. At what cost plumbers like they used to. hour slot on a Saturday. ing a piece of leather. to the digestion, one wonHad I realised that my Anyway, dinner is ready. Mine, on the other hand, ders? house could be run by com\"Won't be a moment. I'll just he's zapped five alien \"The sink is still blocked.\" puter, he enquired. It would program it to play itself at spaceships and failed, on a \"... then it might crash\" put on the heating, the oven, chess while we eat.\" Well, slight navigational error, to Surely it cannot be that the electric blanket. Do the that's fun for it! Imagine the repel a galactic invasion. serious? shopping, cook the meal, surge of triumph in its steely It makes you sort of proud \"I see the grass has grown I wash the shirts, scrub the I breast when it wins. doesn't it? COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 25 else.\" "


"NOT TO BE MISSED The 3-D space fortress ZAXXON TIPS ON MISSILE COMMAND altitude. You can judge your THE GAME WITH MORE ZIP Missile Command was the first be detonated by entering the arcade game to introduce a area of explosion. Also rememsemblance of realism to video ber that missiles from your cenwarfare. tre base travel faster and so Based around an anti-ballistic are more useful than those The deep blue fortress of Zaxxon missile (A.B.M.) conflict over a from the right and left bases. floats in space at the frontier of a number of cities, which have to the most important tactic is third dimension in arcade games. be protected from bombardment, the scatter. Done right at the It is heavily armoured with misit recreates some of the horrors beginning of the screen when siles, cannons and forcefields and of a nuclear war. missiles are first coming down, a your mission is to fly through its It also offers such a rush of good scatter will halt the deadly defences to destroy the deadly on that it can be confusing rain of missiles, hold-up the robot and its homing missile. It's made more realistic as you for the casual watcher. The first \"smart\" bombs and destroy the Over the wall and the enemy have to be at the correct altitude thing the beginner must learn is first satellite. Use the right or left fortress is mapped out in marvelto score a hit on the enemy not to aim his missile sight (a base to scatter a chain of cross lous detail before you. Une hand planes. Once through the doocross on the screen which marks two-thirds of the way up on the joystick and the other on fight you are involved in a new guides the warheads) directly on the screen. the tire button you can see the battle at the enemy headquarters, the descending missiles. This is This will produce a curtain of ranks of missiles, the green can. This is a better defended fortress because missiles have to be fired explosions which takes the initial nons and red fuel tanks. Planes w with tighter passages and infrom ground to air and in the split sting out of the enemy attack. are waiting on the runways becreasingly heavy firepower. second that takes, the enemy Leave one or two missiles in neath and these can be strated for the climax of Zaxxon is the warhead will have already pasthe base used to scatter, as extra points while blown-up fuel battle with the armoured robot sed through the area of explo these must be saved for the tanks provide extra fuel as you fly and its homing missile. Here six sion. satellites which come out from deeper into the fortress. hits are needed before the missile Instead, fire just below the either edge of the screen. The control stick allows you to and robot are vanquished. oncoming missiles and they will Satellites must be hit before bank left and right and change they reach the middle of the altitude. You can judge your screen or they will onload a height by the size of the player further deadly rain of missiles. ship, which appears larger or for a game with a little more smaller, depending on altitude. Save the centre base's misPEPPER II \"zip\" to it, try the new Pepper II siles for warheads which have And there is also a shadow which maze quest. penetrated your first lines of covfollows its every move. The main character in Pepper Sections of the screen, searching er. These are also useful when Altitude is critical when you fly II, is an angel but he is occafor secret areas. As he travels he v gel but he is occafor secret areas. As he travers ne you have reached a score over a through the tiny gaps between the sionally prone to complete a Dr leaves a zipper-like track behind million. Then 14 or walls and the electronic barrier. If Jeckyll and Mr Hyde transformahim. As in the game Qix, once a bombs can appear on the Vou survive the enemy barrage in tion into a devil. complete area has been sur screen. Smart bombs will hover the fortress, you next have to take Pepper is his name and he rounded by these tracks, it is over explosions and then conon the enemy fleet. spends his time exploring four filled by a brightly coloured pattinue their descent when they tern and points are awarded. feel it is safe. These can only be As he roams around the destroyed by a direct hit, usually screen, Pepper must take care to from the faster centre base. avoid the two villains of the piece, On most machines, bonus the roaming eyes and the deadly cities are awarded every 10,000 whippersnapper. points and a maximum of three The whippersnapper is a bright can be destroyed on any one crimson enemy who will unzip screen. If one city is left, a good any of Pepper's tracks which do strategy is to finish the screen not fully enclose an area. When just under your next bonus score, Pepper manages to surround an say 49,000. This means that in the area which contains a pitchfork, next screen you will only need to he turns into a devil for a few score a 1,000 to earn your next seconds (reminiscent of Pacbonus city. man). Simon Lord from Nottingham, While in his Mr Hyde form he who provided us with these tips can capture the roaming eyes for and has a high score of over 12 extra points but still cannot bring million in eight hours, also the whippersnapper to heal. pointed out a common bug on the As in Pacman, Pepper II just Missile Command game. When a has the one control, a joystick, score of 800,000 points is which adds to the playability but reached, many machines award does not detract from the excite-over 80 bonus cities this is the ment. time to go to the loo. "


"ON THE DOCK OF THIS BAY same position for a few seconds RAPID 23 ) ) FIRE Trucks also travel the quayside NO SITTING and if an item of cargo hits the and it an item of cargo hits the ISILA truck it will cause it to stay in the same position for a few seconds obstructing your freedom of movement on the dock. Once all the cargo is successPORTMAN fully loaded onto the boat between four pillars, the game There's no time to sit back and moves into its second phase. In take a tea-break in the dockyards this, conveyor belts travel across of the game Portman. the screen loaded with boxes of In this visual game, you take dynamite. The saboteurs use the the part of an overworked docker conveyor belts to try and kick the charged with the task of loading a boxes down onto the quayside ship which is just about to leave before you are ready to catch dock But you can't expect life to be You are armed with stones too easy in arcade games and the which you can hurl at the Portman docks are plagued by a saboteurs and throw up to disteam of saboteurs who are out to lodge boxes of dynamite when disrupt the work as much as you feel ready to catch them. If possible. you miss a box, it will blow away The ship's captain is also dea section of the floor and soon termined to make things difficult make the dockyard disintegrate. and he keeps his ship chugging Once through this section of backwards and forwards at the the game, you are returned to the dock. The cargo is stored at the first phase, except that it becomtop of the screen and drops ranes increasingly difficult as the domly earthwards. Your docker game goes on. must chase after descending carThree lives to play with but the go and catch it some pieces of union really ought to do somecargo can only be caught on the thing about the working condifirst bounce tions. them. 666 06683 0665 68638 99999 666865 A CUTE AQUATIC FAIRY TALE DEVIL FISH Look, up there in the arcade. Is it a pinball or is it a video machine? The playfield itself is a flat surNo ... it's a mixture of both! face covered with spear-wielding Bally's latest mechanical fanalien figures in the centre which tasy includes features seen on light up as the game progresses. both the screens and playfields at Down each side are ranged space your local arcade. tanks ready to blast the unLike pinball it features drop wary player targets and bonus scores. Like The aim of the game is to hit An aquatic maze made up of video games it employs laser the drop targets so that letters geometric seaweed and coral blasters, alien creatures and trusspelling out the word F-R-E-N-Z-Y reef is the setting for Devil Fish ty force field. are lit up. This puts the machine The story behind the game Rapid Fire — that's the name into rapid fire mode -and you reads like the wettest fairy tale: Bally have given to this hybrid can blast away at the space tanks Deep in the sea garden there creation comes in a pinball and aliens at a rate of 480 balls was once a happy group of sides which restrict the size of style cabinet and has a pinball per minute! aquatic creatures. But one day a creature which can pass through style L.E.D. scoreboard. But The aliens send out blasts of school of fierce Devil Fish broke them. there the similarity to a regular fire which you have to fend off out of their prison and occupied The Sea Dog of the saga is pintable vanishes. using your force field. the sea garden. represented on the screen by a The first thing the player will Also featured on the machine The angry King of the Sea fishy face and the Devil Fish are notice when he steps up to the are a laser blaster button which appointed the brave Sea Dog to small blue octopus-like creamachine are the two pistol-like you can use to help boost your conquer the Devil Fish and make tures. These grow progressively grips which control the action score -and in real moments of the sea garden a happy place larger as the Sea Dog feeds them at the front of the machine. stress when everything seems to again where honest aquatic creup with bait. Eventually they get with these you fire the projectiles be firing at you at once you can atures could swim in safety ... too large to pass by certain of and defend yourself with the force hit the panic button which brings This scenario places Devil Fish the passage nodules and when field button. about your salvation. But you can firmly in arcade games \"cute\" they are stuck, Sea Dog goes The grips direct the angle of only use it a limited number of category but it still offers a good back and attacks them. fire from the four inch \"gun\" times. twist to the familiar Pacman When he successfully disbarrel at the base of the machine. Rapid Fire may not be a theme. poses of the first batch of Devil Out of this barrel hurtle the small favourite with serious pinball The strange sea mazes are Fish a more complicated maze metal balls which the player has players but it certainly offers a made up of regular width pas features on the screen as the to aim at targets at the back of the new challenge to all arcade sages but with nodules on their game gets progressively harder. playfield. addicts everywhere. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 27 "


"This program is based on those plastic puzzles which consist of 15 numbered plastic tiles which have to be arranged in ascending order of value. In the program the numbers are replaced by shapes which when positioned in correct order make a picture of a sail boat. This picture is displayed at the start of the program before the computer scrambles it. Your task is to unscramble the bits and complete the picture in as few moves as possible. To do this you move pieces into the space marked with a cross. If the section you want to move is above the space you must press M the down key. Other keys used are U-up, H-left and K-right. There are five skill levels to the game. After you have become familiar with the method of moving the pieces you should be able to advance to higher levels which scramble the picture even more. RUNS ON A SHARP MZ-80K 5 REM 70 REM 100 DIMAS(17). A016).B(15.4. 15).D(15). (16) 110 FOPLOOP=1T016 READRELOOP). A CLOOP) 115 FORRING=1 TORCLOOP: READB (LOOP, RING) NEXT: READDCLOOP). E(LOOP: NEXT 120 DATA 130 DATA 1 .3.1.3.6.4.8 140 DATA 1.3.2.4.7.4.12 150 DATA 160 DATA 4.3.1.6. 9.8.4 178 DATAB 180 DATA .4.3.6.8.11.8.12 190 DATA 1.3.4.7.12.8.15 200 DATA 33333 3 .3.5.1a. 13. 12.4 210 DATA 183333 119333311.4.6.3. 11. 14.12.3 220 DATA 93335 3353 .4.7.10, 12, 15.12.12 230 DATA 3333 93333F 9.3.8. 1 16, 1216 BY JOSEPH HEWITSON 20 REM 50 REM By Joseph Hewitson 40 REM 58 REM For the SHARP MZ-SOK 28 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"308 DATA 33333333333 3.12. 13. 15.168 318 DATA 3333 3.11. 14, 16, 16.12 320 DATA 33333 3333 325 PRINTS 330 FORLOOP=67941: SETLOOP. THEY 340 FORLOOP=6T0411 SET41 LOOPINEXT 350 FORLOOP-41706STEPSETLOOP. 41:EXT 360 FORLOOP=41 T06STEP-1: SET. LOOP NEXT 370 FORLOOP=1T016: POKE4466.DLOOP): PRINTABLE CLOOPALOOP NEXT 389 PRINT\" PRINTTAB 241009990Altre Othe 390 PRINTTAB 026cean be 480 PRINTTAB 24: A home on the +10 PRINTTAB 26 rolling 20\" 420 PRINTTAB (241: Suhere the 430 PRINT TAB(26) scattered 440 PRINTTAB 26 \"waters rave.\" 450 PRINTTAB(24): \"And the wind 468 PRINTTAB(26):\"their revels 470 PRINTTAB026) \"keep.\" 480 GOSUB3080 490 FORLOOP=1T01000: NEXT 510 FORLOOP=6T018: POKE4466, LOOP:PRINTTAB(24): \"NEXT 530 PRINT\" :PRINTTAB(25): 38000INSTRUCTIONS 548 PRINTTAB(24): \"I will scramble\" 550 PRINTTAB(26) \"this picture.\" 560 PRINTTAB(24): \"Then you have\" 578 PRINTTAB(26) \"to unscramble\" 580 PRINTTAB(26it! 599 PRINTTAB(24): \"To do this you\" 600 PRINTTAB(26) \"have to move 610 PRINTTAB(26) \"pieces into\" 620 PRINTTAB(26):\"the space.\" 630 PRINTTAB (26): \"marked .\" 640 FORLOOP=1 T05000: NEXT 650 FORLOOP-ST018: POKE4466, LOOP:PRINTTAB (24) NEXT 668 PRINT\"\"::PRINTTAB(24): 999999 To Move a 678 PRINTTAB (26) \"piece into the 680 PRINTTAB(26): \"space, key in 699 PRINTTAB 26 \"the direct700 PRINTTAB(26):\"ion you wish\" 710 PRINTTAB(26): \"the piece to 720 PRINTTAB(26): move.\" 730 PRINTTAB(24) \"BU UP 740 PRINTTAB(24): \"H-LEFT\" 750 PRINTTAB(24)\"K-RIGHT\" 760 PRINTTAB(24); \"M DOWN\" 770 FORLOOP=1 T05000: NEXT 789 FORLOOP=6T017: POKE4466. LOOP: PRINTTAB (24) 798 REM *** SKILL SELECTION *** 800 PRINT\"\"::PRINTTAB(24): 233333SKILL LEVEL\" 810 PRINTTAB(24) \"91: Beginner 828 PRINTTAB(24): \"52: Improver\" 830 PRINTTAB(24): \"93: Apprentice\" 849 PRINTTAB(24) \"94: Expert\" 850 PRINTTAB(24):35: Wizz-kid\" 860 SWAPS=: GETIN: IFIN T HEN860 870 IFINS=\"1\"THENSWAPS=3 880 IFINS=\"2\" THENSWAPS-10 890 IFIN$=\"3\" THENSWAPS=17 900 IFIN$=\"4\" THENSWAPS=21 910 IFINE=\"5\" THENSWAPS=97 928 IFSWAPS=THEN860 930 LEVEL=UAL (INS) 940 FORLOOP=3T020: POKE4466. LOOP:PRINTTAB(24) NEXT:USR(62) 1000 REM*** SHUFFLE ** 1010 FORLOOP=1T016:CCLOOP=LOOP NEXT 1020 SPACE=8: MOUE=0 1038 FOR LOOP = ITO SWAPS 1040 CHANGE=INTCRND (1) ACSPACE)+1 1050 A1 =B SPACE, CHANGE): A2=C(A1):CCALS=C SPACE:CCSPACE=A2: SPACE=A1: NEXT 1968 R$(8) 3333 3333333 : NEXT 1970 FORLOOP=1T016: POKE 4466, D (LOOP): POKE4465, E LOOP): PRINTA$CCCLOOP 2000 GETIN: IFINS=THEN2008 2010 IFIN=\"U\" THENOTHER=SPACE+4 2020 IFIN$=\"H\"THENOTHER=SPACE+1: IF (OTHER=5+ OTHER=9+COTHER-13 THEN2000 2030 IFINS=\"KTHENOTHER-SPACE-11 IFCOTHER=4+ OTHER-8) +COTHER=12) THEN2000 2040 IFIN=\"M\" THENOTHER=SPACE-4 2050 IFCOTHER(1)+COTHER>16) THEN2000 2060 A1=C(OTHER) 2070 CCOTHER=C(SPACE (SPACE=A1:A2=SPACE: SPACE=OTHER: OTHER=A2 2080 POKE4456, (SPACE:PRINTTABE(SPACE IAC SPACE 2990 POKE4466.DCOTHER:PRINTTABE OTHER A$(CCOTHERMOVE=MOUE+1 2180 RIGHT=0: FORLOOP=1T016: IFC CLOOP)=LOOP THENRIGHT=RIGHT+1 2199 NEXT 2280 IFRIGHT(16 THEN2000 2210 FORLOOP=1T03 2228 MUSIC\".DE_F_G_ABCDEFGAB-C-DEF-GFB: NEXT 2230 PRINT\"O9330 2240 PRINTTAB(24) \"On Level\" LEVEL: 2250 PRINTTAB(24) \"You took MOUE 2260 PRINTTAB (24) Moves.\" 2270 GOSUB3000 2280 PRINTTAB(24) COSEST soin CV 2299 GETIN:IFINS THEN2299 2300 IFIN$=\"\" THENPRINT\"O\":END 2310 IFIN=\" THEN2350 2320 GOTO2290 NEXT: GOT0790 2338 FORLOOP=5T016: POKE4466. LOOP:PRINTTAB(24) 3000 TEMP06: MUSIC \"DURODROGUROG3ROGSREGI ROB6R5G1ROB3ROB3ROB3ROC5ROB1R8A6R4\" 3010 MUSIC AUROF3RODSROFGRASROB3RC6R4\" 3020 MUSIC \"CROPROTERODRO-CROBSRBAROGS\" 3030 RETURN OHDOS COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 29 "


"Calisto Computers Ltd. JI ATARI 119 JOHN BRIGHT STREET BIRMINGHAM ATARI ATARI 400 with Basic language 249.95 without Basic language .95 ATARI 800 with Basic language 16K .95 ATARI 810 Disc Drive with DOS 11 .95 ATARI 410 Cassette Recorder .00 ATARI 400 32K .90 ATARI 800 with Basic language 48K .95 32K UPGRADE for ATARI 400 .95 LE STICK .00 CRYPTS OF ERROR $22.95 ARCADE GAMES ACCESSORIES ASTEROIDS ROM .95 850 INTERFACE MODULE BASKETBALL ROM .50 16k RAM BOARD (800) MISSILE COMMAND ROM .95 16k RAM PACK (800) PAC-MAN ROM .95 32k RAM PACK (800) SPACE INVADERS ROM .95 32k UPGRADE (400) SUPER BREAKOUT ROM .50 PADDLES (Pair) MOUNTAIN SHOOT 16k (C) .50 JOYSTICKS (Pair) REFLECTIONS 16k (C) .50 DOS 2 MASTER DISKETTE ANGLE WORMS 16k (C) .50 BLANK DISCS (Each) LUNAR LANDER 16k (c) .50 REARGUARD 16k (C) .50 BOOKS AND MANUALS REARGUARD (d) .50 DOS 2 MANUAL JAW BREAKER (c or d) .95 DE-RA ATARI FROGGER (cord) .50 MASTER MEMORY MAP PROTECTOR 32k (cord) .00 CHICKEN 16k (c or d) .00 SOFTWARE DODGE RACER 16k (cor d .25 WORD PROCESSOR NUKE SUB/GALAXY INVITATION TO PROGRAMMING 1 DEFENDER 16k(c) .50 INVITATION TO PROGRAMMING 2 NUKE SUB/GALAXY INVITATION TO PROGRAMMING 3 DEFENDER (d) .20 CONVERSATIONAL FRENCH KRAZY SHOOTOUT ROM .95 CONVERSATIONAL GERMAN SHOOTING GALLERY 16k (c) .25 CONVERSATIONAL ITALIAN RACE IN SPACE 16k (C) .25 CONVERSATIONAL SPANISH GHOST HUNTER 16k (c) .95 MINI WORD PROCESSOR 32k (c) GHOST HUNTER .95 KIDS 1 16k (C) ALIEN SWARM .95 KIDS II 16k (C) ALIEN SWARM .50 BOBS BUSINESS 16k (C) HOTFOOT .80 GRAPHICS MACHINE (d) GALACTIC CHASE 16k (c) .95 PLAYER PIANO 16k (C) GALACTIC CHASE .25 ADVENTURE GAMES TUTORIALS ADVENTURELAND 24k (c) .50 DISPLAY LISTS 16K (C) PIRATE ADVENTURE 24k (C) .50 HORIZONTAL & VERTICAL SION IMPOSSIBLE 24k .50 SCROLLING 16k (c) VOODOO CASTLE 24k .50 PAGE FLIPPING 16K (C) THE COUNT 24k .50 BASICS OF ANIMATION 16k (C) STRANGE ODYSSEY .50 PLAYER MISSILE MYSTERY FUNHOUSE 24k (C) .50 GRAPHICS 32K (C) PYRAMID OF DOOM 24k (c) .50 SOUNDS 16K (C) GHOST TOWN 24k C) .50 SAVAGE ISLAND PART 24k C) .50 BUSINESS AND UTILITIES SAVAGE ISLAND PART II 24k (C) .50 CCA DATA MANAGEMENT (d) GOLDEN VOYAGE 24k (C) .50 TEXT WIZARD (d) ZORK .95 CHARACTER GENERATOR 16K (C) ZORK II .95 3-D SUPERGRAPHICS 40k (cord) DEADLINE (d) .50 K-DOS GAMES SOFTWARE .00 COMPUTER CHESS ROM .50 .00 VIDEO EASEL ROM .50 .00 STAR FLITE 32k (c) .50 .00 STAR FLITE (d) .25 .95 SUNDAY GOLF 16k (c) .50 .95 GALACTIC TRADER 32K (C) .50 .95 GALACTIC EMPIRE 32K (C) .50 .95 MISSION ASTEROID .25 .00 WIZARD & PRINCESS .50 ULYSSES & THE GOLDEN FLEECE .95 .95 CROSSFIRE .95 .00 MOUSATTACK .50 .95 THRESHOLD (d) .95 ACTION QUEST (cord) .50 ANALOG ADVENTURE (d) .25 .95 CRYPTS OF TERROR 16k (C) .95 .95 CRYPTS OF TERROR (d) .50 .95 CRUSH, CRUMBLE, CHOMP 32K (C) .45 .95 DRAGONS EYE (d) .75 .95 RICOCHET 16k (c) .95 .95 STAR WARRIOR 32k (c) .95 .95 TEMPLE OF APSHAI 32K (C) .95 .95 UPPER REACHES OF APSHAI 32k (c) .95 .95 RESCUE AT RIGEL 32k (c) .45 .95 INVASION ORION 24k (C) 218.75 .95 DATESTONES OF RYN 32K (C) .95 .95 MURDER ATAWESOME HALL 16K (C) .95 .50 INTRUDER ALERT 16k (C) .99 .95 RINGS OF THE EMPIRE 16k C) .99 MOVING MAZE 16k (c) .99 CHOMPELO 16k (c) .99 .95 SPACE TILT 16k (C) .99 SPACE TRAP 24k (C) .99 .95 MOONPROBE 16k (C) .99 .95 TRIPLE BLOCKADE 16k (C) .99 .95 STUD POKER 16k (C) .99 NOMINOES JIGSAW 24k (C) .99 .95 MONARCH 16k (C) .99 .95 CRYSTALS 24k (C) .99 TOURNAMENT & 8 BALL POOL 16K (C) .50 DARTS 16k (C) .50 .00 CRIBBAGE & DOMINOES 16K (C) .50 .95 BRITISH JIGSAW PUZZLES 16K (C) .50 .95 EUROPEAN JIGSAW PUZZLES 16K (C) .50 .99 NURSERY RHYMES 16K (C) .50 NURSERY RHYMES II 16k (C) .50 16K (C) 16K (C) 24K (C) To: CALISTO COMPUTERS LTD, 119 JOHN BRIGHT STREET, BIRMINGHAM PLEASE ACCEPT MY ORDER FOR THE FOLLOWING PROGRAMSCalisto Computers Ltd.! Despatch to Name: Address: ...... enclosed. Cheque No. ...............for Please debit my credit card ACCESSVISA No. Phone orders welcome on 021-632 6458 Signert SPECIALISTS IN MICROCOMPUTERS AND SOFTWARE 119 JOHN BRIGHT STREET, BIRMINGHAM B1 1BE Telephone: 021 632 6458 30 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"HAUNTED HOUSE Listen to the children of the night how sweet they sound. Their howls and moans echo through the gloomy corridors of the Haunted House. Once within the rambling edifice you will be confronted by many unknown horrors. There are several rooms to explore and dangers to cope with but you must escape. Otherwise you could be joining the inhabitants of this gothic mansion before long! Once the door locks behind you there is only one way out-but telling you more would spoil our macabre entertainment. Useful words to use are; Go, Take, Leave, Use, Exorcise, North, South, East, West, Up, Down. Statements 10-600 set up the arrays describing the rooms and their contents. 600-700 ties the subroutines together. 1000 handles the keyboard entry. 2000 lists what you are carrying. 3000 decodes verbs and generates the associated messages. The author reckons the strength of his program lies in its flexibility. Any room names, object names and room contents can be changed simply by altering the statements assigning the string contents. The vocabulary will alter accordingly. The interaction between the room contents can similarly be altered and does not depend on the names contained in the arrays. Thus the body of the program can handle any number of rooms, with any interconnection, without alteration. OLIS A on RUNS ON AN ACORN ATOM IN 12K BY ALEC PEARSON "


"10 REM HAUNTED HOUSE 15A=#8200; B=A+64; C=B+64 20 DIM RR (11), EE(11), DD (20) 50 F. N=0 T0 11; DIM J (14);RR (N) =J; N. 40 SRR (1) = \"HALL\" 50 SRR (2) \"LOUNGE\" 60 SRR (3)=\"DINING ROOM\" 70 SRR (4) =\"KITCHEN\" 80 SRR (5)=\"BALLROOM\" 90 SRR (6)=\"CONSERVATORY\" 100 RR (7) \"BILLIARD ROOM\" 110 SRR (8)=\"LIBRARY 120 SRR (9) =\"STUDY 130 SRR (10) \"CELLAR\" 140 SRR (11) = \"GARDEN\" 200 F.N=OTO 11;DIM J (12); EE(N) = J;N. 210SEE (1) =\"EKIHOJaaaaaa\" 220SEE (2) -\"Baaaaaaaaan\" 230SEE (3) \"EaDaajaaaaa\" 240SEE (4)=\"Iacoagba33a\" 250SEE (S)=\"CABaaaaaaaa\" 260SEE (6)=\"aGHB3raaaaa\" 270SEE (7) \"FIBaaacaaaa\" 280$EE (8) \"SAF aadhaaal\" 290$EE (9) \"GDOAakaaaaa\" 300SEE (10) =\"aaaa Aseisaam\" 310$EE (11) =\"aaaaaaaaaaaa\" 400 F.N=0 TO 15;DIM J (12); DD (N) =J:N. 410 DD (1) =\"KEY\" 420 SDD (2) = \"GUN\" 430 $DD (3)=\"TORCH\" 440 SDD (4) = \"BIBLE\" 450 SDD (5) \"CANDLE\" 460 $DD (6)=\"BELL\" 470 $DD (7)=\"BONE 480 SDD (8) \"DOG\" 485 $DD (9) =\"ROPE\" 490 $DD (12) =\"FIERCE DOG\" 500 $DD (13)=\"LOT OF RATS\" 510 SDD (14) \"GHOST 520 $DD (15)=\"LOCKED DOOR\" 530 $DD (10)=\"AXE\" 540 $DD (11) = \"BUGLE\" 600 REM MAIN PROG 610 F.NO TO 64;C?N=0;A?N=0;B?N=0;N. ; I=0;P. $12 620C?5=1;P. \"YOU HAVE JUST ENTERED A HAUNTED HOUSE AND THE 625 P. \"DOOR HAS LOCKED BEHIND YOU.\"\" 626 P. CAN YOU ESCAPE!!\" 630 P. \"WE ARE IN THE \"SRR (C?5) 633 IF C75=11 END 635 GOS. 4000 640 GOS. 2000 650 P. \"WHAT NOW?\" GOS. 1000 660 GOS. 3000; REM TEST VERB 662 IF C75=11 P.\"!!!! YOU MADE IT!!!\"\";G.630 665 IF ?C=1 G.630 670 G.650 1000 REM INPUT CMDS 1010 IN. SA 1020 I=0; IF LEN (A) <1 G. 1000 1030 DO; I=1+1 1040 UNTIL A?I=32 OR I=LEN (A) 1050 IF I=LEN(A) P. \"REPLY TWO WORDS\"';G. 1000 1060 A+CI+1) A+I 1100 IF SA=\"GO\" ?C=1:6.1200 1110 IF SA-\"TAKE\" ?C=2;G. 1200 1120 IF SA=\"LEAVE\"?C=3;G. 1200 1130 IF $A=\"USE\" ?C=4;G. 1200 1140 IF $A=\"EXORCISE\" ?C=S;G. 1200 1170 P.\"I DON'T RECOGNISE \"SA\" \"$B'';G. 1000 1200 IF $B=\"NORTH\" C21=1;G.1300 1210 IF $B=\"SOUTH\" C?1=2;G.1300 1220 IF $B \"EAST\" C?1=3;G.1300 1230 IF $B-\"WEST\" C?1=4;G.1300 1240 IF $B=\"UP\" C?1-5;G. 1300 1250 IF $B=\"DOWN\" C?1=6;G.1300 1255 10 1260 DO: I=1+1 1270 UNTIL $B=$DD (I) OR I=20 1280 IF I=20 P. \"I DON'T RECOGNISE \"$B':G. 1000 1290 C21=1+96 1300 IF ?C=1 AND C?1>6 P. \"YOU CAN'T DO THAT \" G. 1000 1305 IF ?C)1 AND C?1<7 P. \"YOU CAN'T DO THAT\" :G. 1000 1310 R. 2000 IF C729&AND C?3C96AND C?496 R. 2010 P. \"YOU ARE CARRYING A :\" 2020 IF C2%96P.\" \"DD (C72-* 2030 IF C?3%96P.\" \"$DD (C73-96) 2040 IF C?4%96P.\" \"ODD (C?4-96) 2050 R. 3000 REM VERB TEST 3010 $A=SEE (C75) 3020 IF ?C=1 I=C?1-1;REM GO 3030 IF7C1 G.3100 3035 $BSEEKA?I-64) 3040 IF A?I=64 P. \"THERE'S NO DOOR THERE.\"';R. 3050 IF B?11<>64 G. 3070 3060 C?5=A?1-64;C?6=64;R. 3070 P. \"YOU CAN'T GO IN THERE. THERE'S A \"SDD ((B?11)-96) 3080 C?b=B711;C77=A?I-64;R. 3100 IF ?C>2 G. 3200; REM TAKE 3120 I=5 "


"ZX8; GAMES from SPECIAL FREE OFFER READ ON! Vion J.K. GREYE SOFTWARE LTD THE NEW GENERATION SOFTWARE HOUSE \"Without question the finest machine code games available today.........J.N. ROWLAND Product Manager for W.H. SMITH. GAMESTAPE 1 for 1K Only 10 Games incl. ASTEROIDS, UFO, CODE, BOMBER GUILLOTINE, KALEIDESCOPE, etc. PROBABLY THE BEST VALUE 1 TAPE AVAILABLE We've done in tk, games which some of our competitors require 16% to do! THE FIRST FULL FEATURED COLOUR COMPUTER AT UNDER !! GAMESTAPE 2 for 16K only .96 STARFIGHTER Superb machine code Space Battle. Set against a background of twinkling stars with stunning explosions you can hit the enemy! PYRAMID Can you move the Pyramid? Make a mistake and it will collapsal A Thinkers game ARTIST The ultimate Graphic Designers aid. 8 Directions, 10 Memories, SAVE, COPY, RUBOUT, CLS, etc. 1620 GAMESTAPE 3 for 16K -only 4.95 *CATACOMBS A Multi-Level Graphics Adventure. Each level can contain up to 9 Rooms, 8 Passages, 7 Monsters, Food, Gold. Traps, Phantoms, an Exit to the next levell, and there's an infinite number of levels. NOTE This is NOT one of the necessarily limited text Adventures as sold elsewhere. an excellent addictive game which will keep you amused for hours.\".... COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES GAMESTAPE 4 for 16K only .96 3D MONSTER MAZE The Game to Top All Others Unbelievable Graphics! Can you find your way through the Maze? The EXIT is there somewhere, but then so is a T.REX and its after YOU! All in 3D (the T. REX will actually run towards you in full perspectivell, you've never seen anything like this before! \"3D MONSTER MAZE is the best game / have seen for the 2x81!... COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 7 had to choose just one programme to impress an audience with the capabilities of the ZX81, then J.K. Greye's 3D MONSTER MAZE would be the one without doubt ZX COMPUTING \"Brilliant brilliant, brilliant\"...POPULAR COMPUTING WEEKLY FEATURES *Sound Colour *5K Memory Expandable to 27K \"Standard PET Basic *Full size typewriter Keyboard \"Graphics Plug-in memory expansion *Low-priced peripherals. SPECIAL OFFERS AVAILABLE WHEN ORDERING YOUR VIC 20 COMPUTER 3K RAM CARD FREE or BK RAM CARTRIDGE .95 inc. VAT or 16K RAM CARTRIDGE .95 incl. VAT PLUS FREE PRESENTATION TAPE WITH EVERY CASSETTE DECK ORDERED THE FOLLOWING ITEMS NOW AVAILABLE 189.95 incl. VAT GAMESTAPE 6 for 16K only .95 3D DEFENDER The Ultimate Space Game. Super fast Machine Code 3D version of the Arcade favourite. You have to save your home planet from the marauding Alien Spacecraft This is all in 3D, your viewscreen shows you the view out of your fighters cockpit window. The backdrop moves when you turn, or fly up or down flight directions, just as if you were really flying it But then YOU ARE! The Enemy Saucers will actually zoom towards you in 3D, and shoot you if you let them! Your gisplay includes Score Shield Strength, Altitude, Proximity, Forward Radar and your viewscreen, which shows your rotating home planet, backdrop of Stars, Meteors, Explosions, Plasma Blasts, your Photon Beams, up to 4 Enemy Saucers and of course its all in A SMASH HIT at the ZX Microfir most of the other software house wanted copyl, a game not to be missed! .95 incl. VAT $44.95 incl. VAT .95 incl. VAT VIC 20 Colour/Sound Computer VIC Data Cassette Deck VIC 3K RAM Cartridge VIC 8 K RAM Cartridge VIC 16K RAM Cartridge VIC Joystick Control Arfon VIC Expansion Unit Machine Code Monitor Cartridge Programmers Aid Cartridge \"Avenger\" ROM Games Cartridge \"Super Slot\" ROM Games Cartridge \"Alien\" ROM Games Cartridge \"Super Lander\" ROM Games Cartridge \"Road Race\" ROM Games Cartridge Introduction to Basic (Part 1) Carriage & Ins. on items marked DE97.75 incl. VAT. 634.95 incl. VAT .95 incl. VAT .95 incl. VAT DE19.95 incl. VAT .95 incl. VAT .95 incl. VAT .95 incl. VAT GAMESTAPE 6 for 1K only .96 \"BREAKOUT Super Fast Full Screen Display Game. Your all time favourite with an added twist. See how much Money you can win and watch the pounds convert to Dollars. All in Machine Code for Fast Action with 3 Speeds, 2 Bat Sizes and three angles of rebound! The best BREAKOUT around and at this price you can't go wrong! 13.45 incl. VAT TOTAL All prices Subject to Manufacturers Price Changes 437 Stoney Stanton Road. Coventry, CV SEA West Midlands Tel: (0203) 661162 IBEK SYSTEMS GAMES MARKED INCL. MACHINE CODE. Prices include VAT and U.K. P. & P. (Add appropriate Postage on Foreign Orders). Cheques/P.O.s to J.K.GREYE SOFTWARE LTD Dept.cvG, 16 Park St., Bath, Avon BA1 2TE. CREDIT CARD SALES: Phone: 01-930 9232 19 a.m. 7 p.m.) FOR INSTANT DESPATCH Name: ........ Address: ...... If you prefer to see before buying, our range of GAMESTAPES are stocked by the following stores BUFFER MICROSHOP 347A Streatham High Rd., London SW16: GAMER 24 Gloucester Rd, Brighton; GEORGES 89 Park St., Bristol, Avon, MICROSTYLE 29 Belvedere, Lansdown Rd., Bath, Avon; MICROWARE 131 Melton Rd., Leicester SCREEN SCENE 144 St. Georges Rd., Cheltenham, Glos; W.H. SMITH Over 200 Computer Branches; ZEDXTRA 5 School Lane, Kinson, Bournemouth, Dorset: TRADE & EXPORT ENQUIRIES WELCOME Please charge my Barclaycard Access No. DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD Signed: Or telephone order. CVG $ 82 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 33 "


"VIC-20 PROGRAMS BY POST FROM Software ID Hy your bomber across the landscape and avoid the antiarea fire. Release your bombs and try to destroy the enemies gun positions Home Finance .95 Calculate payments interest rates, remaining balances, future balances annues and investments Calculates any n given the other variables of the classe interest formular own Screen prompts ep you through each calculation after selecting your purpose from a master menu Reversal .95 The Vic acts as the board and judge in a two player strategy game. Frank your opponents pieces and see them convert to your colour. Excellent game of strategy and si Vic acts your opponent expansion required Target Moon 68.95 Another hand eye coordination game involving a manoeuvrable cannon which you use to shoot down various targets. Excellent use of colour and sound 55.95 Tlty *Compare our prices Stock Portfolio Manager Berpansion required Traci plots trend curves on screen. Provides complete analysis of e s och and your portfolio including number owned, purchase date con value, appreciation, yieldete Moon Lander E14.95 game down the Astronaut' toe over the controla La Excursion Module it imagits descent to the moon. The program provides information via screen displays depicting amount of propulsion, fuel remaining, height and descent speed. In addition the LEM is displayed as descends to the surface. If the astronaut is not careful the module can be damaged or even totally destroyed upon Impact Wrap $5.95 two player game requiring man you attempt to trap your opponent and force hum to Crash and donen The Vic will act as your opponent if you desire Bricks 16.95 This game requires as you attempt to lock out the various coloured bricks without missing the returning ball The deeper you succeed in breeding into the wall the higher the value of your score until you breakthrough and my Incre your score See who can get the highest score Joystick version Blackck 84.95 Las Vegas style blackjack with the viewerving as deer wo players can play against the house (VIC) ting such aboubling Down and controlling your bets Each card is tegy displayed on the screen in a colour The Vic provides an wy way to develop your 'SYSTEM' before actually going the tables Tennis The standard game of Paddle tennis with the option of the Vic playing one or both sides of the net. Excellent use of the colour and sound capabilities of the VIC .95 ATARI JUST IN FROM THE USAT Crush, Crumble and Chomp! You are one of six different monsters let loose to destroy the city. Can they stop you? Hi-res colour, sound over 100 .95 possible scenarios. 48 page manual. CASS. DISK 32k Ricochet Fast action strategy game that allows you to put pressure on your opponent. 5 game .95 variants. 4 levels of skill CASS 16k DISK 32k. Dragons Eye Adventure game with real time battle .95 graphics. Star Warrior Superb graphics interplanetary adventure .95 LASS. DISK 32K Temple of Apshai Award-winning graphic adventure game. CASS. DISK 326 Rescue at Rigel You have only 60 mins to save the prisoners. CASS. DISK 32k Invasion Orion .95 10 space battle scenarios or create your own CASS. DISK 32K Datestones of Ryn 20 mins of fighting and chasing to retrieve .95 the gems CASS. DISK Draw the robots into andmines and while avoiding the sole purpose which is to capture you credences MAD Generates simple addition and Subtraction programs for the youngser. Uses giant numbers on the screen and rewards correct answers with a colourful display Biorhythm 56.95 expansion required Enter your name and birthdate and the day you wish your chart to begin. The VIC wil plot three weels of biorhythms for you on the screen and then pause until you tell it to proceed or start a new chart. Your physical intellectual and emotional cycles are plotted in different colours which really create an interesting and informative display Household Inventory .95 expension required household inventory for insurance purposes. Tracias purchase his program will create and managea date, cost description and location was total values and print to screen or printer Data Manager $9.95 Bk expansion required. Allows you to create and manage your own data base. You can define the number of items in a record and add. change, display, delete, search, sort, print, ate. Your data can be stored on e when not in use $14.95 BISK 48K and the handle pull uning the VICs colour and sound capabilities. You can really get weary pumping in your money Alien Raiders 14.95 me n s are invading the Earth and it is up to you to destroy them before they and the tension increases as you try to accumulate a high score. Joystick venom 16.95 .95 PLEASE SUPPLY ME WITH THE FOLLOWING PROGRAMS All prices include VAT. P&P FREE NAME ADDRESS FOR ATARI 400 ATARI 800 VIC-20) I ENCLOSE CHEQUE FOR  PLEASE SEND ME YOUR LIST OF SOFTWARE PERIPHERALS AND ACCESSORIES GALASET LTD 30, BAYFORD RD LITTLEHAMPTON, WEST SUSSEX WHAT PEOPLE ARE SAYING ABOUT OUR... BBC MICRO GAMES \"... I bought all your tapes to date \"... I was very impressed, not only \"... I must congratulate you on for the BBC Micro and I think they with the cassette, but also at the your MUTANT INVASION Cassette. are just super, especially STAR TREK, speed at which it came!\" have had it for two weeks now and it and the sound effects in CANDY -R.L., Cheshire is really superb. Incidentally, I have FLOSS really made me sit up! Well beaten your high score of 4,500 done and keep them coming\" mine is 7,5801\" J. S., Paisley S.L., Berks GAMES FOR MODELS A AND B CASSETTE ONE CASSETTE TWO CASSETTE THREE CASSETTE FOUR Contains Contains an exciting collection of Contains, for the arcade fanatics, Contains BREAKOUT. A terrific (i) STAR TREK games with music and graphics to -MUTANT INVADERS. A brilliant version of the popular arcade The classic computer game. A keep the family amused for hours: new \"Space Invaders\" type game. I game. Practice your wall demolisuperb version with 8x8 HANGMAN (in which you can Can you destroy the mutants be tion with 6 skill levels and 1 or 2 Galaxy, Klingons, Phasers, even enter your own category). fore they land and try to destroy player option! Photon Torpodeos etc. KRYPTOGRAM, DICE, BEETLE, you with their radioactivity. ONLY .95 Inc. (ii) CANDY FLOSS GRAND NATIONAL and MUSIC WARNING VERY ADDICTIVE! A tremendous new game in ONLY .95 Inc. ONLY .95 Inc. which you test your business skills running a candy floss stall on Blackpool's Golden Mile. But watch the weather and the donkeys! ONLY .95 Inc. GAMES FOR MODEL B ONLY CASSETTE FIVE Our latest cassette contains BEEBMUNCH. Our version of the record breaking 'PACMAN' arcade game and we believe one of the best versions available. Stunning, hi-resolution colour graphics including multi-ghosts, fruits, super points, screams etc. Liven up your micro with this tremendous game. ONLY .95 Inc. ALL CASSETTES AVAILABLE NOW FROM: SINCLAIR (I. J. K. Software) (SEE US AT MICROFEST '82, MANCHESTER) 55 Fitzroy Road, Bispham, Blackpool, Lancs NANNY 34 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"3130 DO; I=1+1 3140 UNTIL C? A?I OR I=11 3150 IF I=11 P. \"THE \"$\" IS NOT IN HERE\":R. 3155 IF C?1>108 P. \"YOU MUST BE JOKING!!.\" R. 3160 IF C?2-0 C?2-C?1;G.3195 3170 IF C230C?3=C?1:6.3195 3180 IF C?4=0C24-C?1;G. 3195 3190 P. \"YOU HAVE THREE ITEMS ALREADYR 3195 A?I=64; SEE (C?5) =$A:P. \"YOU'VE GOT IT\";R. 3200 IF ?C>3 G. 3300 3215 I=5;REM LEAVE 3225 DO; 1=1+1 3235 UNTIL A?I=64 OR I=11 3245 IFI=11 P. \"THERE'S NO SPACE IN HERE TO LEAVE THAT.\"':R. 3250 IF C1-C2 C220;G. 3290 3260 IF C1-C73C?=0;G.3290 3270 IF C?1-C?4 C?4=0; G. 3290 3280 P. \"YOU DON'T HAVE THE \"$B';R. 3290 IF ?C=3 A?I=C?1; $EE (C?5) =$A;P. \"OK.\");R. 3295 R. 3300 IF ?C>4 G. 3500 3310 IF C?1=C?2 OR C?1=C?3 OR C?1=C?4 G. 3330 3320 P. \"YOU DON'T HAVE THAT\");R. 3330 IF C?696 P. \"THERE'S NOTHING HERE. DON'T WASTE IT!\";R. 3335 SA=SEE (C77) 33401F C?b=108 AND C71=103 P. \"THAT'S SATISFIED THE DOG\"';G. 3400 3350 IF C76=109 AND C?1=104 P. \"THE RATS HAVE FLED\";6.3400 OR'S UNLOCKED NOW\":G. 3400 3370IF C?b=110 P. \"A \"B\" WON'T SCARE A GHOST\"\";R. 3380 P. \"THAT HAS NO EFFECT. I SHOULD KEEP IT\");R. 3400 IES 3410 DO; I=1+1 3420 UNTIL A?I=64 OR I=11 3425 IF C?1>110 A?I=C?1 3430 A?11=64; SEE (C?7)=$A;6.3250 3500 IF ?C=S AND C?1>110 P. \"YOU CAN'T EXORCISE A \"B\" !! :R. 3505 IF C?6<>110 P. \"WHERE'S THE GHOST!!\";R. 3510 IFC?2=100 OR C73=100 OR C?4-100 G. 3530 33520 G. 3600 3530 IFC?2=101 OR C?3=101 OR C94-101 G. 3550 3540 G. 3600 3550 IFC?2=102 OR C73=102 OR C?4-102 SASEE(C77): G. 3570 3560 G. 3600 3570 P. \"YOU DID IT. HE'S VANISHED!!\";A?1164; SEE (C?7) =$A;R. 3600 P. \"YOU DON'T HAVE THE NECESSARY ITEMS.\"\";R. 4000 SA=SEE (C75); REM LIST CONT 4010 1=5 4020 DO; I=1+1 4030 UNTIL A?I)64 OR I=11 4040 IF I=11 R. 4050 P. \"IN HERE THERE'S 4060 IF A?6>96 P. \"A\"$DD (A?6-96) 4070 IF A?7%96 P. \"A \"SDD (A?7-96) 4080 IF A?8 96 P.\"A \"DD (A?9-96) 4090 IF A2996 P. \"A \"SDD CA29-96) 4100 IF A?10>96 P. \"A \"$DD (A710-96) 4110 R. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 35 "


"AKOUT Here's a knock-out game for all you BBC micro owners. There's a pretty red and yellow wall at the top of the screen which Mr Hurd invites you to lay waste in the traditional time honoured fashion. Using a bat moved from side to side by the X and Z keys. There's a supply of three balls served by the space bar. The ball speeds up when it hits a red brick and leaves the bat at a somewhat random angle, defying the laws of physics in a carefree manner. Once a complete wall has been demolished a new allowing seasoned veterans of the one appears game to build up impressive totals on the high score display. You can make a couple of alterations to the program if you wish. The sound effects can be improved by changing the final parameter on each SOUND call to 5. For more advanced BBC owners a further improvement could be made by using the FX commands to change the responsiveness of the keyboard. RUNS ON A BBC IN 12K BY NICK HURD 590 IFY>649 AND YK701 Y=649: T=10 510 IFY>699 AND Y<751 Y=704:T=20: W=W+1 520 IFY>749 Y=752: T=20: W=W+1 530 MOVEE, Y:MOVEE, (Y+51 ): PLOT87.(E+60), Y:PLOT87; (+60),(Y+51 >> 540 IFZ=1 Y=Y+52: G=G*-1 549 REM *INCREASE SCORE AND INCREASE SPEED OF BALL IF BALL HITS RED BRICKS* 550 S=S+T NEN+1: IFW=1 F=F*1.3: G=G*1.3 560 PROCscore 570 ENDPROC 579 REM *PLOT WALL (BY COLOURING IN FOUR TRIANGLES) * 580 GCOLO, 1: MOVE8, 800 : MOVE1270, 880: PLOT85, 8.700 : PLOT85,1270,700 GCOLO 2 PLOT85 ,8.600: PLOT85, 1270,600 RETURN "


"--, IND<2>; IFE=1 F=Fx-1 10 REM *** BREAKOUT *** NAH *** \"71) TAB( 14 );\"CONTROLS\" 20 H=0 Z=1 30 MODE7: PRINT'TAB( 14 ); \"BREAKOUT\" TAB( 14 );\"---\"LEFT\", \"Z\" / \"RIGHT\", \"X\") \"SERVE\", \"SPACE BAR\"11TAB( 11 ); \"HIGH SCORE= \"; 40 PRINT TAB(4); \"PRESS SPACE BAR TO CONTINUE\" 50 A$=GETS IFA*<>\" \"GOTO50 ELSE B=3 59 REM *SET UP SCREEN* 60CLS: MODES. COLOUR1 : Ps-1.Q=-1.S=0: N=0: PROCscore 70 GCOLO,3.MOVE5,5: DRAW1275,5: DRAW 1275, 901. DRAW5,901 DRAW5,901 DRAW5,5: GOSUB5 80 79 REM *MAIN LOOP* BD REPEATXERNDC 1000 )+15+Y=490: A=520 W=0 L-110 90 MOVEA, 65: DRAWA+L, 65: A$=GET$: IFA$<> \"\" THEN90 100 B=B-1.PROCscore 110 F=RND( 5 )+11: GERND( 5 )+11 EERNDC2% IFE=1 F=F*-1 120 PROCbat 130 X=X-F :Y=Y-GIFN=84 VOU7: GOSUB580 S=S+50 PROCscore : R=520 : Y=590 X=RND 1000 + : 15:N=9. GOT0110 139 REM *IS BALL ON OR LOWER THAN BAT* 140 IFY(66 AND POINT(X, 65 )=2 G=G*-1 : Y=66 PROCbounce 150 IFYK66 Y=10 X=X-F: PROCbat : UNTILB=0: GOTO230 160 IFAK 6 A=7 170 IFA>1160 A=1160 179 REM *BOUNCE BALL OFF SIDES* 180 IFX 8 X=B: F=F*-1 SOUNDO, -9.2,0 190 IFX>1270 X=1270 FEF*-1 SOUNDO, -9,2,0 280 IFY>598 AND POINT(X,YX>0 AND POINT(X,YX>3 PROCwall:F=(RND( 5 )+10 >*SGNCF 210 IFY>896 Y=896. G=G*-1 Z=1. SOUNDO, -9.2.0: FERND( 5 )+10*SGNCF) 220 GOTO120 229 REM *END OF GAME CLEAR INPUT BUFFER* \"S 230 IFSXH H=S TABC7), \"YOUR SCORE 240 A$=INKEY$<> IFR$<>\" \"THEN240 ELSE MODE7 250 PRINT' TAB( 14 ); \"BREAKOUT\" TAB(14);\"--------\";' ;H !!! 'TABC 7), \"HIGH SCORE 260 PRINTTABC4%\"ANOTHER GAME? \"; A$=GETS. IFA$=\"Y\"THEN30 ELSE CLS END 269 REM *DISPLAY SCORE* 270 DEFPROCscore 280 VDU4: VDU31,0,2 COLOUR1.PRINT\" SCORE \";S: VDU31.12.2: PRINTBALLS=\";B:VDU5 290 ENDPROC 299 REM *MOVE BAT AND BALL* 390 DEFPROCbat 310 IFY=10 GOT0330 320 GCOLO, MOVE9, 65. DRAWA,65 GCOLO, 2 DRAWA+L, 65GCOLO,0 DRAW1264,65 330 MOVEP, Q PLOT69, P.Q 340 MOVEX,Y:PLOT70,X,Y 350 P=X: Q=Y 360 A$=INKEY$( 0 ): IFA$=\"Z\" A=A-45 370 IFA$=\"X\" A=A+45 380 ENDPROC 389 REM *TO MAKE BAT ANGLED'* 390 DEFPROCbounce 400 SOUNDO, -11,2,0 Z=0 410 IFXMA AND XCA+35) AND SGNCF )=-1 FEABSCF) 420 IFXX A+75) AND XCA+110) AND SGNCF )=1 F=F*-1 430 ENDPROC 439 REM *TO REMOVE A BRICK* 3. 440 DEFPROCwall 450 SOUNDO, -4,4,2 460 E=INTCX/60 >*60 X=E+30: GEABSCG) 470 IFE 9 E=10 480 IFEX1195 E=1211 490 IFY>599 AND Y<651 Y=599:T=10 "


"BY ROSS FULFORD RUNS ON A TRS-80 LEVEL II IN 16K HOPPER You could really get caught on the hop in this original graphics packed extravaganza. Space Hopper has five different stages to test your skill and dexterity. In stage one you have to leap your Hopper over buildings as they move past. You earn 10 points for each leap -and as the game progresses the gaps get smaller. Stage two sees the appearance of a dragon type monster in the top left hand corner of the screen. This monster grows bigger as you attempt to bounce your Hopper into flying bricks which flit across the screen at random heights. Then comes stage three which sees the monster start to move across the screen. You have to land your Hopper on the monster to win points. Stage four and a spaceship appears. You have to guide the Hopper into the landing bay. You get 500 points for a successful docking but take care as there's not much room for error and there is a time limit. Three other space hoppers appear for the final stage and you have to guide your Hopper onto one of its bouncing chums. You receive 300 points for a perfect landing. CLS: REM ** SPACE HOPPER BY >>> ROSS FULFORD <<< 1 CLEAR700: DEFINTA-Z:FORQ=1 T010: FORT=1T010: OUT255, 6:OUT 255, 7:0UT255, 6:OUT 255,5:N EXT: FORT=1 T030: OUT255, 6:OUT255,5: NEXT:FORT=1T010: OUT255, 6: OUT255,5: NEXT: FORT=1 TO 10:OUT255, 7:OUT 255, 6 : NEXTT,Q 2 CLS:L$=CHR$ (134) +CHR$ (132) : C=O: B=0:0=1020: Y=970:X1=0:51=0:52=0: E=3: GOSUB76 3 A$=CHR$ (152) +CHR$(179) +CHR$ (164) 4 GOSUB57:0=0-3: PRINTED, F$; :N$=\"\":M$=\"\" 5 P=1:M=202:S=O: Z=O:U=O:D=O: A=0:X1=X1+1: IFX1 (451=S1+1:52=S2+5 6 FORQ=1 T06:FORT=1T010:OUT255, 6:OUT 255, 7: NEXT:FORT=1 T010: OUT255, 6: OUT 255,5:NEXTT , 7 N=64:5%= \" B M$ (1) =\" \" +CHR$ (174) +CHR$ (175) +CHR$ (132)+\" \" 9 M$ (2) =\" \" +CHR$ (160) +CHR$ (165)+\" \":M$ (3) =\" \" +CHR$ (170) +CHR$ (174) +CHR$(174) + \":M$ (4) =\" \":M$ (5)=\" \" M$ (6)=\" 10 FORT=1T0196 STEP6:N$N$+M$ (RND (7-51)) :NEXT:M$=STRING$ (50, 32) +N$:PRINT@832, STRI NG$ (64, 151);:X=15360: Z=1 11 PRINT@5, STRING$ (10, 191); 12 REM ** START OF FIRST MISSION ** 13 OUT255, 6: OUT255, 7:GEPEEK (14400): PRINTOM, B$; :IFG=64M=M+1ELSEIFG=32M=M-1ELSEIFI NKEY$=\"J\"p=1 14 IFP=15=5+1 : M=M+N: IFS=9GOSUB17 15 PRINT@768, MID$ (M$, Z, 64);: IFPEEK (M+X+2) (> 320RPEEK (M+X) (> 32GOSUB64ELSEPRINTOM, A $; Z=Z+1: IFM (769ANDP=OGOSUB64ELSEPRINT@990, B; 16 IFZ=255GOTO20EL SEGOT013 17 S=O: IFN=-64N=64EL SEN=-64 : P=O 18 B=B+5: RETURN 19 REM ** START OF SECOND MISSION ** 20 FORQ=1T08:FORT=1T010:OUT 255, 6: OUT 255, 7: NEXT:FORT=1T020: NEXTT, Q:PRINT@15, STRIN 38 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES Illustrations: Terry Rogers "


"G$ (11, 191);:C$=CHR$ (130) +STRING$ (3+52, 172) +CHR$(141) : GOTO27 21 OUT 255, 6: OUT255, 7:6=PEEK (14400): PRINT@M, B$ ; : IFG=64M=M+1 EL SEIFG=32M=M-1 EL SEIFI NKEY$=\"J\"p=1 22 IFP=1 S=S+1 : M=M+N:IFS=9GOSUB17 23 PRINT@M, A$; :D=D+1 : 2-2-1: IFPEEK (Z+X) () 32GOTO26ELSEPRINTEZ, D$; IFM (769ANDP=OORM > B2BANDP=O: GOSUB64 24 IFD) 63GOSUB64ELSEPRINT@990, B;:GOTO21 25 GOTO21 26 B=B+20:PRINT@Z,\" \";IFN=64GOTO27ELSES=9-S:N=64 27 OUT255, 6:OUT255,5:PRINT@M, B$ ; : ZERND (8) *64+255:A=A+1: PRINT A+128, D$; :D$=MID$ (C $, A, 1) +\" \":D=O:IFA=LEN(C$) +1GOTO30 28 GOTO21 29 REM ** START OF THIRD MISSION ** 30 FORQ=1 T08:FORT=1 T010 :OUT255, 6:OUT 255, 7: NEXT:FORT=1 T020: NEXTT,Q:C$=\" \" + $: A=12 9:PRINT@25, STRING$ (12, 191);:PRINT@914, \"BIG BONUS\";CHR$ (94); K=800 31 IFA=76BGOTO110EL SEOUT255, 6:OUT255, 7:G=PEEK (14400) :PRINT@M, B$; :IFG=64M=M+1ELSE IFG=32M=M-1ELSEIFINKEY$=\"J\"P=1 32 IFP=1 S=S+1 : M=M+N: IFS=9GOSUB17 33 A=A+1:PRINTEA, C$; :IF PEEK (M+X+1) () 32GOTO34ELSEPRINT@M, A$; K=K-1: PRINT2926,K; :I FM (769ANDP > 1 ORM> 828GOSUB64EL SEGOTO31 34 IFN=64ANDS () OGOTO36ELSEPRINTCA, STRING$ (12, 32); : GOSUB64 35 GOTO31 36 FORO=1T010:FORT=1T010: OUT 255, 6: OUT 255, 7: NEXT:FORT=1T010: OUT255, 6:OUT 255, 5:NEX TT, Q:PRINT@914, CHR$ (209) ; : B=B+K: PRINT@990, B; 37 PRINTEA, CHR$ (220) : : PRINT@M, B$ ; : M=M+64: IFM (768PRINT@M, A$:: FORT=1T050: NEXT:GOTO 37 38 REM ** START OF FOURTH MISSION ** 39 PRINTOM, A$;G$=CHR$(174) +STRING$ (8, 187)+\" \"+STRING$ (8, 183) +CHR$ (157) 40 G1$=\" \"+CHR$ (184) +CHR$(144) +\" \"+CHR$(184) +STRING$ (3, 191) +CHR$ (180)+\" +CHR$ (160) +CHR$ (180) :S=O: N=-64: 41 FORQ=1 T08: FORT=1T010: OUT255, 6:OUT255, 7: NEXT: FORT=1 T020: NEXTT,Q:L=128: F=285 42 G2$=\"\"+CHR$ (130) +CHR$ (175) +STRING$ (6. 191)+\" \"+STRING$ (6, 191) +CHR$ (159) +CHR $(129): PRINT@36, STRING$ (12, 191) :: PRINT@276, G$ ; : PRINT@212, G1$; : PRINT@340, G2$; 43 OUT255, 6:OUT255, 7: G-PEEK (14400): PRINTEM, B$ ; : IFG=64M=M+1 EL SEIFG=32M=M-1 ELSEIFI NKEY$=\"J\" 1 44 L=L-1: PRINTEL, CHR$(131) :: IFL-64GOT064 45 IFP=1:S=S+1 : MEM+N:IFS=9GOSUB17 46 PRINTOM, A$; H=2: IFMFTHENGOT047ELSEIFPEEK (M+X-64) () 32GOT064EL SEGOT043 47 B=B+500: PRINT2990, B; : FORQ=1 T010:FORT=1T010: OUT 255, 6:OUT255, 7: NEXT:FORT=1T010: OUT 255, 6:00T255, S:NEXT:FORT=1T010: NEXTT, Q 48 REM ** START OF FIFTH MISSION ** 49 H=1:4$(1) =CHR$ (166) +CHR$(191) +CHR$(153) :A$(2) =CHR$ (166) +CHR$ (140) +CHR$ (153) : A $(3) =CHR$(152) +CHR$(179) +CHR$ (164) : P=0 50 PRINT@49, STRING$ (10, 191) ; :PRINT@728, A$(1) ; : PRINT2733, A$(2) : : PRINT@738, A$(3); 51 OUT255, 6: OUT255, 7:G-PEEK (14400): PRINT@M, B$; : IFG=64M+M+1ELSEIFG-32MM-1ELSEIFI NKEY$=\"J\"P=1 52 LEL-1: PRINTOL, CHR$ (131);: IFL=64GOSUB64ELSEIFP=1M=M+64: IFM) 767GOSUB64 53 IF PEEK (M+X) (> 320RPEEK (M+X+2) (> 32GOTO54ELSEPRINT@M, A$;:GOT051 54 FORT=1T0BO:OUT255, 6: OUT 255, 7: NEXT:FORT=1T060:OUT255, 6: OUT 255, 5:NEXT:FORT=1 T08 0:OUT255, 6: OUT255, 7: NEXT 55 B=B+300:PRINT@990, B;: IFM=728THENE=1 ELSE IFM=733THENE=2ELSEIFM=738 THENE=3ELSEE= E: GOSUB64. 56 A$=A$ (E) : FORT=1T0500: NEXT:FORT=128T0768STEP64: PRINT@T, STRING$ (64, 32);: NEXT:GO T04 57 REM ** SET UP SCREEN ** 58 G$=CHR$(191) +STRING$ (10, 131) 59. PRINT@4, G$;G$;G$;G$;G$; CHR$(191) ; : PRINT@64, STRING$ (64, 143); 50 PRINT@64, STRING$ (64,143); :PRINT2960, CHR$ (191) :: FORT-45T047: SET (126, T): SET (127 T) : NEXT 61 PRINT@978, \"SCORE >>> >>\"; : PRINT@832, STRING$ (65, 191); :PRINTE959, CHR$ (191);:F$=0 HR$(153) +CHR$(145) 62 RETURN 63 REM ** EXPLOSION ** 64 D=0:Y=Y-4:C=C+1:PRINTOM, CHR$ (146) +CHR$ (160) +CHR$(130) +CHR$(144) :: FORT=1 T060:0 UT 255, 6: OUT255, 5: NEXT: IFC=3GOTOEBELSEPRINT@Y,\" \"; :PRINT@M,\" \";ONHGOT065, 66 55 M=202: P=1: N=64:50: RETURN 66 PRINT@54, STRING$ (64, 145) L=128: M=330:P=1:N=64: S=2: GOT042 57 REM ** END OF GAME ** 68 FORQ=1 T010:PRINT@405, 7047 GAME OVER +-+--t.\"; FORT=1T010:DUT255, 6: OUT255, 7: NEXT PRINT@405, STRING(19, 32); "


"69 FORT=1T010:OUT255, 6:OUT 255, 7: NEXTT,Q 70 CLS:FORT=OTO896STEP64:PRINT@T, \"SPACE HOPPER\"; :PRINT@T+52, \"SPACE HOPPER\" ; NEXT 71 IFB> VTHENFORQ=1 T010: PRINT@405, \"NEW HIGH SCORE >>>\";B; : FORT=1 T030: OUT255, 6:OUT 255, 5: NEXT:PRINT@405, \"******************\": :FORT=1T030: NEXTT,Q: -B: GOSUB111 72 PRINT@405,\" YOUR SCORE >>> >>\";B;\" \";:PRINT@470, \"HIGHEST SCORE >>>>>\"V:: FORQ=1 T010: FORT=1T010: OUT 255, 6: OUT 255, 7: NEXT 73 FORT=1T010:OUT255, 6:OUT255, 5: NEXT:FORT=1T020: NEXTT, Q 74 PRINT@847, \" + + + PRESS ENTER TO PLAY AGAIN ++++.\"; :I$=INKEY$: IFI$ (> CHR$ (13) GOTO 74EL SEGOTD2 75 REM ** SET UP TITLE PAGE ** 76 PRINT@67, \"PLAY....\"; : FORT=1 TO200: NEXT: PRINT@112, \"HIGHEST SCORER\": 77 T$=STRING$ (2, 191) +CHR$ (143) +STRING$ (2,191) :T1$=STRING$ (2,191): T2$=STRING$ (2,1 31) 78 PRINT@137, T$;\" \";T$;\" \";T$;\" \";T$;\" \";T1$; STRING$ (3, 143) ; : PRINT@201, T1$;S TRING} {3, 188);\" \";i+;CHR% (188);T1;\" \"; 1%; 80 PRINTCHR$(188); 11$;\" \";T1$;\"\" ;T1$; STRING$ (3, 188); PRINT@265, STRING$ (2,1 88); CHR$ (176) ; T1$; 81 PRINT\" \";T1$;\" \";T1$;\" \";T1$;\" \";T1$;CHR$(176); STRING(2, 188);\" \";T1$; STRING$ (3, 176); 82 PRINTE329, T2$ ; T2$;CHR$(131);\" \";T2$;\" \"; T2$;\" \"; T2$;\" \"; T2$; T2$ ; CHR$ (13 1) ;\" \";T2$; T2$;CHR$(131); 83 PRINT2457, T1$;\" \";T1$;\" \";T$;\" \";T$;\" \";T$;\" \";T1$; STRING$ (3,143);\" \";T$ 84 PRINT, T1$; STRING$(1,188);T1$;\" \";T1$;\" \";T1$;\" \";T1$; CHR$ (188); T1$;\" \" ;T1$; CHR$ (188);T1$;\" \";T1$; STRING$ (3, 188); 85 PRINT\" \"; T1$; CHR$(188);T1$; 86 PRINT@649, T2$;\"\";T2$;\"'\";12$; T2$; CHR$ (131);\" \";T2$;\" \";T2;\" \";T2$ ; T2$; CHR$ (131);\" \";T2$;\" \";CHR$ (131); 87 PRINT0585, Ti$;\" \";T1$;\" \";T1$;\" \";T1$;\" \";T1$;\" \";T1$;\" \";T1$; STRIN G$ (3, 176);\" \";T1$;\" \";CHR$(191); 88 PRINT@O, STRING$ (64, 131) ; :PRINT@896, STRING$ (64, 176); : FORT=OTO896 STEP64:PRINT@T , CHR$ (191) ; :PRINT@T+63, CHR$ (191) ; : NEXT 89 FORT=180T0757STEP64: PRINT@T, H$; : NEXT 90 FORQ=1 T015:FORT=1T015:OUT255, 6: OUT255, 5:NEXTT,Q:PRINT@834, \"+++++++ PRESS (ENT ER) TO START (I) FOR INSTRUCTIONS +++++++.\"; 91 I$=INKEY$: IFI$=\"I\"GOT094 92 T=T+1:IFT=200GOTO90ELSEIFI$=CHR$ (13) GOT093ELSE91 93 CLS:PRINT@962, L$;\" \";L$; :GOT058 94 CLS 95 PRINT@13, \"7++ ++SPACE HOPPER +++ ++ +++.\"; 96 PRINT2256, \" (1) JUMP OVER BUILDINGS > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > 10 POINTS EACH JUMP\", 97 PRINT277, STRING$ (12, 131); STRING$ (11, 179); STRING$ (13, 131); 98 PRINT@153, CHR$ (191);\" MISSION\";CHR$ (191); 99 PRINT@320\" (2) JUMP INTO EACH SEGMENT AS THEY FLY ACROSS 20 POINTS EACH Illustration: Terry Rogers 100 PRINTC384, \"(3) JUMP ONTO THE <<BACK>> OF THE MONSTER >> >> >> BONUS POINTS\" 101 PRINT@448,\"(4) DOCK WITH STATION !!! BE QUICK !!! > > > > > > > > > >) 500 POINTS\" 102 PRINT@512, \" (5) GUIDE YOUR HOPPER ONTO ANOTHER > > > > > > > > > > > > > > >> 300 POINTS\" 103 PRINT2560, \"USE \";CHR$(93);\" AND \";CHR$ (94)\" TO MOVE\"; : PRINT@788,\">>> J S TO JUMP\" ; 104 FORQ=1 TO10: FORT=1T010: OUT 255, 6: OUT255, 5 INEXT:FORT-11010:OUT255, 5:OUT 255, 6:NE XT:FORT=1 T010: NEXT:FORT=1T010:0UT255, 6: OUT 255, 7:NEXTT,Q 105 PRINT@910, \"+-++-++ PRESS ENTER TO PLAY +-++-+\";IFINKEY$ECHR$ (13) GOTO93ELSES=S+ 1: IFS) 200GOTO106EL SEGOT0105 106 FORT=900T0640STEP-64: PRINT@T, CHR$ (152) +CHR$(179) +CHR$ (164); :PRINT@T+64,\" ; : FORQ=1 TOSO : NEXTQ, T 107 PRINTOT+64,\" \"; FORO-1 T010:PRINT@T, CHR$ (137) +CHR$ (179) +CHR$ (134): FORM=1 TO 50: NEXT:PRINTET, CHR$ (152) +CHR$(179) +CHR$ (164); 108 FORM=1 T050:NEXTM, Q:FORT=644 T0836STEP64: PRINTOT, CHR$ (152) +CHR$ (179) +CHR$ (164) : : PRINTOT-64, \" FORM=1 TOSO NEXTMT 109 FORM=T--64TOT-10: PRINTEM,\" +CHR$ (152)+CHR$ (179) +CHR$ (164); FORS=FOTO NEXTS, M: PRINTEM,\" \"; :S=0:GOT095 110 PRINT2768, STRING$ (64, 42);: FORT=1T0100: NEXT:FORT=1TO80: OUT255, 6:OUT255, 5: NEXT :PRINT2768, STRING$ (64, 32); B=0:PRINT@990, B; GOTO39 111 PRINT2405, CHR$(220); PRINT2405, \"WHAT IS YOUR NAME ME INPUTH$: IFLEN (H$) > 6GOTO 111ELSEFORQ=1 TO 15:FORT=T010: OUT 255, 6:OUT 255, 7:OUT 255, 6: OUT255, 5: NEXTT, Q 112 PRINT@448, \"SPACE HOPPER\"; :PRINT@500, \"SPACE HOPPER\": : RETURN "


"GET IN CLOSR, SEE WHAT IT IS. VIC 20 16K ZX81 DEES .000000 STAROL SUBSPACE STRIKER ... It comes from out of nowhere and then vanishes back into the ether. With your deadly Antimat torpedoes, you unleash havoc in the federation spacelanes. ZOR ... Two mighty robots are designed for one purpose to fight to the death. In the style of a mediaeval duel, you must do battle with the Champion of Zor to save your planet. ENCOUNTER... Would you know what to do if you encountered extra-terrestial beings. In this exciting game, you are abducted by aliens and the space invaders play YOU! STARQUEST... A voyage of discovery and adventure in the cosmos. With the help of your onboard computer, you seek a habitable planet amidst the perils of deep space. TRADER... A trilogy of three full 16K programmes that combine to give a fantastic 48K graphic adventure. As a galactic trader you seek your fortune and deal with some very bizarre customers indeed. A delightful and exciting change from the usual arcade spin-offs. Full screen animated graphics like you have never seen. Good value too at only .50 for VIC 20 and .50 for ZX81 per full 16K game. Trader is .50 for ZX81 only at present. Ask your dealer now or write to us direct IT 15FULL OF RUSTINO ROBOTS. MODO DE booooood MO ...oooooooooos22 PEGASUS PIXEL Pixel Productions 39 Ripley Gdns. London SW14 BHF HENRY'S CONSULTER KIT COMPUTER KIT DIVISION 404 EDGWARE RD, LONDON W2 1ED RETAIL SALES TEL: 01-402 6822 & DEMONSTRATIONS COLOUR COMPUTERS COLOUR  MICROTAN 65 CATCH UP WITH TODAY'S WORLD OF MICROCOMPUTERS ON THIS LOW COST POWERFUL MODEL FROM COMMODORE, IT HAS SOUND, COLOUR, EXPANDABILITY A COMPREHENSIVE COMPUTER LANGUAGE A GREAT PROGRAMMING BOOK. IN FACT EVERYTHING YOU NEED! Microtan 65 is the most advanced powerful expandable micro computer available.it also happens to be the most cost elective! YOU MAY DEDUCT  FROM MICROTAN 65 KITS 4. AND ASSEMBLED UNITS LISTED HERE ONLY FROM US Electronic Today International held a mammoth survey of its The result Microtan 65 WINS COMPUTER CLASS! STARTER KITS VIC20 COMPUTER . PROGRAM RECORDER .95. TOGETHER . WE HAVE THE RANGE OF ACCESSORIES AND SOFTWARE. BUY YOUR VIC FROM THE EXPERTS THE PEOPLE WHO CARE! THE PEOPLE WHO KNOW! WE GIVE 12 MONTHS FULL GUARANTEE MICROTAN 65 CONTENTS High quality, plated thru hole printed circuit board, solder resist and silk screened component identification, 6502 microprocessor 1K monitor TANBUG. Now with 'V' Bug. 1K RAM for user programme, stack and display memory. VDU alphanumeric display of 16 rows by 32 characters MICROTAN 65 system file binder. 136 page, bound, users hardware software manual with constructional details and sample progammes Logic and discrete components to fully expand MICROTAN 65 The MICROTAN 65 kit has won widespread acclaim for its superb presentation. We pay attention to detail! KIT FORM .00 + .35 V.A.T., total .35. MICROTAN 65 ASSEMBLED AND TESTED Specification as above, but assembled and fully bench tested by ourselves .00 + .85 V.A.T., total .85. DELIVERY EX-STOCK POST PAID PERSONAL COMPUTER PALACE 4-6 CASTLE STREET, READING, BERKSHIRE. Telephone: (0734) 589249 MAIL ORDERS to: 11/12 Paddington Green, London W2. TANGERINE TANGERINE COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 41 "


"FOR TRADER It sure was a tough life being a trapper out in the wilderness. If a great big grizzly bear didn't get you then RUNS ON A ZX81 the fierce winters would do their best to finish you off. But I don't regret a moment of it. There's nothing quite like walking into a trading post with armfuls of furs and $8 PRINT -(1) LOOK FOR TRADING doing a bit of haggling to get the best price. <2> GO TO BED.\" A lot of you young whippersnappers have been asking me just what it was like chasing little furry animals NO URTERNT \"<3> ET YRINK FOOD A <4> FOOD /HUNGER/REST around for their valuable skins. Well now you can relive those bygone days from the comfortable surroundings of your ZX81. 118 PRINT \"COMMANDS AT TRADING Among the many strange creatures you'll come across POST ONLY out in that desolate wasteland, are ocelots, rabbits and coyotes. There is also the little known haggis, a wondrous GE RATE.\" 130 PRINT «(5> SEE GOING EXCHERS beastie, whose fur commands some of the best rates-if 140 PRINT 6 > MAKE A DEAL.\" you can beat the trader up in price, that is! 150 PRINT AT 21,6; \"WHAT 15 YOUR You have to collect as many furs as you can and get them to the trading post. But you must take into account 170 IF INT A>A OR A1 OR A>6 your supplies of food and water and if you are getting NOT T AND A 4 THEN GOTO enough sleep. Otherwise you could get into big trouble! The instructions are included in the program. Good luck A=6 AND ERV=THEN GOTO and good hunting! BY J. S. YOUNGMAN 126 IFTINF** (RND +20) +1) >5 THEN & REM BUITEN BY J.S. YOUNGHARA 192: PRINHA DE PORC CONGRATULATIO % LET HERE =INT (RND *2)+1 18 LET OF=1&o 1 THEN LET F=F+1 O REFILL YOUR 1945 PAUSE 120 INT T DE CONGRATURA Hvem To 5806 BAD LUCK. YO FIND A TRAD 30 PRINT AT 3,0; \"YOUR COMMANDS 42 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"NT AT 12,0; \"OCELOT FUR = AT 16.0; \"RABBIT FUR s@ge PAUSE 32768 Z Z EE WE  Ozo 2 015 CHE 50-L LOCO 4:0. \"YOU HAVE ;HF 8. \"YOU HAVE \"i CF 6920 PINT AT 12 \"YOU HAVE *:0 5,;. \"YOU HAVE \";R 5 PRINT AT 0,6; \"YOU NOW HAVE 20.0; \"HOW MANY HAS IS FURS WOULD YOU LIKE TO SELL HF <= THEN GOTO 6090 T X=INTX xHF OR < THEN GOTO 50 5070 LET M+M+ (X*HFP) 6075 PRINT AT 0,25;M; \" LET HF =HF-X PRINT AT 4,9HF PRINT AT 20,9; \"COYOTE FURS IF CF <= 0 THEN GOTO 5140 N: 00: 0000: : 00:00 0000-00000 5;M ; Rosa DOTE 300 LET CF CE He SHOHO ( 0 LOO JOOOT WOOOWZHOI 0 0 0 ET A=INT (RND *5) A>1 THEN LEUCHT INT_AT_10.; \"NIGHT NIGHT TIGHT; MIND THE Ep, ozo A=1 THEN PRINT AT BUGS BIT AND YOU DID MANAGE TO GET ANY SLEEP.\" 2013 IF A=1 THEN PRINT AT 12 IF A=1 THEN PRINT AT 18, A1_THEN PAUSE 200 F F <> THEN PRINT AT 22,0; E NOW TAKEN THE LOAD FÉ E PACKHORSE.\" ESOTEEN PRINT AT 11 ERE IS NO FOOD LE < THEN LET F=F-1 1 = ( IF'XCF ORX THEN GOTO 62 LET MEM+XCFP) PRINT AT 8.25 M; PRINT AT 8,9;CF;\" PRINT AT 26.9: \"OCELOT FURS\" OF <= 0 THEN GOTO 5180 INPUT X ' LET X=INT X IF 'x>OF BRX  TREN GOTO 5 2 LET MEM+ EX *DFP) PRINT AT 0,25; M; LET OF =OF-X PRINT AT 28: ORA IF RF <=@ THEN GOTO 6220 TRENOR XC@ THEN GOTO 52 00 LET MEM+ EX *RFP) 205 PRINT AT 0,25;M;\" 10 LET RF =RF-X DOT :: Poenono: 0 001000 WHHVoor HHH CUDU V DD_DOCUTUTUU 1010 010010001 OH HOHOHOHDHHC MH TmZumm 1m2 DOFDDODIDOMDUDUD 0-000000000-000000000-00000000-0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000001010 01 onto Gautauwowwwwwwww OUTODORO NO TORO TORO OUTONOMOTO TORPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPROOOOOOOOOOOJHO O 200IQUI010010000100100100101000000000000000010101010 0 INPURINT X 2EE H 2 I CaZZAOIU Wo aZOO MUC COUW LLLLozw2w2z: zz: 22: 2: CE2    . REA\" . rrrrHOUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUOUOUOUHCHH IHONHHDMHU: Hrou DDUD UD IDU DOUDO DUO UDDOD 110 771 D110707 TZ0TD-140 MOD 2. PRINT AT 25 PRINT FOOD HUNGER PRINT AT 3.0; \"YOU HAVE 04 090 HO UOO 35 HOM 0.020000 U . DOTO009: WOOHOOOOOHO DOUDOUTOOLOOL DOLO 200 doHHILI I ON OWODOL REST ;HF 4030 PRINT \"YOU HAVE *: CF; COYO WOULD YOU LIKE TO BUY ? IF MCHFP THEN GOTO 6270 6235 LET X=INT X 8348 IFX*HFP) SM OR XC@ THEN GO LET MEM(X*HFP) PRINT AT 0,25; M; LET HF =HF +X PRINT AT 4.9: HF; PRINT AT 26,9;\"COYOTE FURS IF M(CFP THEN GOTO 6320 INPUT X ET X=INT X F(X*CFP) SM OR XC THEN GO \"YOU HAVE ; OF ; \" OCEL 4070 PRINT \"YOU HAVE \"; RF;\" RABB RINT AT 12.0: \"YOU CAN SURU M: COMMANDS WITHOUT ANY          RINT AT 0,25; M; LET CF =CF +X PRINT AT 8.9; CF; PRINT AT 20,9; \"OCELOT FURS IF MCOFP THEN GOTO 6370 INPUT X LET X=INT X 8349 IF (X*OFP) SM OR XC@ THEN GO 017 4100 PRINT_\"YOU HAVE\";F;\" PACK HORSES OF FOOD AND WATER. 4110 PRINT 4120 PRINT \"YOU CAN SURVIVE\":D \"COMMANDS WITHOUT ANY REST. 4125 PRINT T 21,0; \"YOU NOU HAVE 4130 SE 32768 4140 GOT 5000 IF ERV=1 THEN GOTO 5040 5005 LET HFP=INT (RND *40) +62 5010 LET CFP=INT (RND *30) +31 5820 LET OFP=INT (RND *20) +22 5030 LET RFP=INT (RND +13 +3 5040 PRINT TAB 9; \"EXCHANGE RAT 505 PRINT AT 4,0; \"HAGGIS FUR = {\"; HFP 506 PRINT AT 6,0; \"COYOTE FUR = PRIMERA EDES URS ET OF =OF+X RINT AT 20,9; \"RBBIT INT AT 12, 9; OF; FM (RFP THEN GOTO 5420 INPUT X ET X=INT X F X*RFP) SM OR XC THEN GO 64. LET MEM-{X*RFP) COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 43 "


"BBC COUNTRYSIDE PACKMAN MISSILE COMMANDER TANK ZONE COMPUTER SOFTWARE FROM You are a Rabbit in one of New York is about to be 2 million underground obliterated by incoming mazes, you must collect ICBM's. You must direct your carrots from the your Nuclear anti-missile farmer's field before the missiles to destroy them pole cats collect you. before they wipe out the Superb high-resolution city. Classic arcade game. graphics. Machine code | Colour & Sound effects and basic. .00 incl. are Brilliant. .00 Incl. Your roving tank moves around the Battlezone destroying enemy mines and installations. This game needs the quickest reflexes of all BBC games available so far. Uses machine code. .00 Incl. CONTROL TECHNOLOGY 39. GLOUCESTER RD GEE CROSS, HYDE CHESHIRE SK14 5JG 061-368 7558 ORDER BBC COMING SOON PLEASE SEND ME DISASSEMBLER CYLON ATTACK .00 BBC BUSINESS SYSTEM A fully fledged business system. PURCHASER LEDGER & SALES LEDGER. Can handle 200 entries per week, includes VAT analysis, check entries, search for suppliers and products automatically for Analysis. Comes with STOCK CONTROL as well. .00* Incl. NAME: Reveal the software secrets of 32k ROM and User Software. Standard 6502 Mnemonics, plus many other features. Register display, breakpoints. .00* Incl. PHOENIX .00 ADDRESS: .... *available beginning of June. MORE DEALERS REQUIRED They said it couldn't be done! IT111 Galactic FIREBIRD Those ever circling, swooping, diving Firebirds of the famous arcade machines, brought to the micro in Mike Chalk's ultimate achievement--Galactic Firebird Yes, it's the latest in the Kansas Arcade series, but alas, his last, for Mike has been writing these right back from the original Arcade Invaders, and feels he wants a rest. The reason being that he has always bettered his preceeding program, and feels that with Firebird he has reached a pinnacle. Many programmers of many machines have tried to emulate the arcade game, Firebird, but nobody, the Americans included, have managed to For TANDY TRS -80 & VIDEO GENIE get the circling, swooping firebirds on a computer. Until now! It is incredible how the Firebirds peel away, circle around in numerous positions on the screen, then suddenly sweep in to attack, all the while raining down their bombs. Even if you manage to dodge all their bombs whilst shooting them down, it is as though they realise they will not get you this way, for without warning they'll take kamikazi action and come straight for you! Then come the Astro Blasters, shooting down a solid energy bolt, to fry you completely, in adition to their own brand of super bomb. Oh, you can fire at them, but a solitary hit will have no effect whatsoever on these nasties. As though Firebirds and Astro Blasters are not enough, as the game progresses, come the Megon Bombs. With no less than three hits needed to destruct. And you can't dodge them easily either, as their explosions spread. Scores are kept of course, and there is the now expected realistic sound effects. And wait for it--it progresses to FOURTEEN levels of difficulty! Mike's last words:\"Nobody will ever get there! It's ONLY available direct from Kansas but at a sensible .50 Vat and post paid As pulishers (we do not retail other people's programs we have absolute quality control and thus give an unconditional guarantee on all our software. And of course all programs are always in stock for our famed return first class post service whether ordered by cheque or credit card. Ask for a copy of our free catalogue, you won't find any South Coast prices therol Access and Barclaycard welcome Kansas City Systems, Unit 3, Sutton Springs Wood, Chesterfield, S44 5XF. Tel. 0246 850357 44 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"PRINT AT 0,25; M;\" LET RF =RF +X PRINT AT 16, 9; RF;\" LET TE LET ERU= GOTD 12 ** \" FOOD HUNGER REST STORES CM YOU HAVE 5 HAGGIS FURS. YOU HAVE 50 COYOTE FURS. YOU HAVE 100 OCELOT FURS. YOU HAVE 200 RABBIT FURS. TE D< THEN GOTO 8020 IF INT (RND +125) > 5 THEN GOT (RND + (HF 12) LET CF ECF-INT (RND # (CF ) 2057 LET OF=OF-INT (RND # IOF/ 7110 LET RF ERF INT (RND * {RF 2) 138 PRINTAT 9,0\" SOME ROBBER JUST ROBBED YOUR PACK HOR SOME OF YOUR 7148 PAUSE 300 FINT (RND +125) >5 THEN GOT 7210 LET MEM-INT (RNDE (MX27) 7220 PRINT AT 9,0;\" SOME ROBBERS HAVE JUST ROBBED YOUR PACK HOR SES OF SOME OF YOUR YOU CAN SURVIVE 6 COMMANDS WITH OUT ANY FOOD YOU HAVE 5 PACK-HORSES OF FOOD ND WATER. YOU CAN SURVIVE 6 COMMANDS WITH OUT ANY RESTS COMMANDS WITH YOU NOW HAVE  PPP 00000PDOROUP WOU DIPOP DIOPOVI PODPOOD moo 000000oz COON000 DOO000000000000 EXCHANGE RATE. HAGGIS FUR =  ++ DONNONVILNONN 000000000HH W5HHQIUQI XOOOXQWoW: Hel Hot NN00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 e 00: 0000000000000000OOO l UOLLOOO COYOTE FUR =  OCELOT FUR =  RABBIT FUR =  3000 PRINT YOU DIED DUE TO A LA 8020 PRINT SO BAD LUCK.YOU STARVED TO DEATH PRINT \"YOU HAD \";F;\" PACK ES OF FOOD AND WATER LEFT PRINT \"YOU COULD HAVE SURUZ DE DAYS WITHOUT REST 8080 PRINT \"YOU COULD HAVE SURU I VED\";H;\" DAYS WITHOUT FOOD WATE PRINT 8118 PRINT \"IN YOUR WILL, YOU LEF ET M=M + HF HF LET MOM+ (CF CFP LET M=M + (OF OFP) LET M=M + (RF *RFP) PRINT \"A TOTAL OF \";M;\" NE PRINT PRINT \" \";HF;\" HAGGIS FURS 8160 PRINT PRINT \"{\"; CF;\" COYOTE FURS 8180 PRINT PRINT \"{\";OF; OCELOT FURS PRINT 8218 PRINT \" \";RF;\" RABBIT FURS 8220 PAUSE_32768 3230 GOTO 7 9000 PRINTAT 17.0, BRET E UT COMMEND YOU NOW HAVE A TOTAL OF 2100 PRINT YOU HAVE 5 HAGGIS FURS YOU HAVE 50 COYOTE FURS YOU HAVE 100 OCELOT FURS YOU HAVE 200 RABBIT FURS 9005 PAYS 25 PIKEMANY SEACCIS FURS WOULD YOU 9020_PRINT AT 17.0; \"PLEASE ENTER E CORRECT SEM 9030 GOTO 25 9040 PRINT AT 17.0 : \"Y ERE NOT AT TRADING POS 9045 PAUSE 500 9050 GOTO 25 YOUR COMMANDS ARE 12> GO TO BED. 1LOOK FOR TRADING POST. (3) EAT/DRINK FOOD AND_LATER <4> FOOD /HUNGER/REST STORES CH YOU DIED DUE TO A LACK OF REBT. YOU HAD PRCK-HORSES OF FOOD AN D WATER LEFT YOU COULD HAVE SURVIVED 1 DAYS WITHOUT REST YOU COULD HAVE SURVIVED 6 DAYS ITHOUT FOOD /WATER IN YOUR WILL, YOU LEFT : A TOTAL OF 25367 NET. ( 5 HAGGIS FURS) ( 5% COYOTE FURS) 100 OCELOT FURS) 200 RABBIT FURS) COMMANDS AT TRADING POST ONLY. 53 SESSINE EXCHANGE RATE. WHAT IS YOUR COMMAND ? COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 45 "


"S . WE acool MARTIAN EXPLORER Here's your chance to bodly go where no games player has gone before-deep into the mysterious caverns of the red planet Mars. Fly your spacecraft through the network of wierd and wonderful underground caves and tunnels but remember you could run out of fuel. Luckily for you previous Martian explorers have left fuel dumps which you can use -if you can land safely among the rocks cavern floor. The landing pad is coloured light green and is located on the right hand side of your screen. Once down safely your ship will be refuelled and the next cavern will appear. Points are awarded for a safe landing based on the difficulty level and the amount of fuel you have left. You have a display which tells you your speed and fuel the amount of fuel in your ship's tanks. If you come into land at a speed greater than 10 units you will crash. And of course you have to avoid contact with the cavern walls during your flight. You get five ships per game. To get the action underway all you have to do is press the red button on your joystick. This ignites your ship's engines. Gravity is simulated in this program so when you release the button your craft slows down and will gradually start to fall downwards at a gradually increasing speed. No error loops have been included to cover the accidental flight of a spaceship off the cursor end of the screen and if this happens an error message will ensue. So you should take care not to send your craft off the screen in this way. It is important that lines 4130 and 4140 are fed in exactly as indicated otherwise the fuel and speed indicators will appear in the wrong position relative to the dials Variables LV: Cavern level. LM: Number of spaceship in action. S: vertical speed of ship. HL, HS: In combination determine the horizontal speed of the ship L: Flag indicating collision of ship with cavern walls. XMO, YMD: Horizontal and vertical position of fuel indicator XMI, YMI: Horizontal and vertical position of speed indicator XO, YO: Horizontal and vertical position of spaceship. SC: score FD: Rate of fuel consumption 10 OPEN '#1,4,0, \"K:\" 20 PMBASE=54279: RAMTOP=106: SOMCTL=559 30 HITCLR=53278: POPF=53252: GRACTL=53277 40 HPOSP@=53248:HPOSM8=53252: HPOSP1=5324 9: HPOSM1=53253 50 FCOLR=704: PCOLR1 =705 70 DATA 104,104,194,133,205,104,104,133, 287, 168.1.169,8,133,204,133,266,177,284, 136,145,204,200,200,208,247,160 71 DATA 1,177,206,136,145,206,200,200,20 3,247,36,104,104,104,133,205,104,104,133 ,207,166,254,169 72 DATH 0,133,204,133,206,177,284,200,14 5,204,136, 136,208,247.160,254,177,206,20 0,145,206,136, 136,208,247,36 73 DATA 104,104,104,133,205,162,0,160,25 5,169,0,133,204,169,8,145,294,136,298 74 DATA 249,232,138,24,169,01,101,205,13 3,205,160,255,224,4,208,234,96 75 RESTORE (70) 38 FOR TO 111 RUNS IN 32K ON AN 85 REHD A 90 POKE 1536+IA 95 NEXT I ATARI 400/800 38 GOSUB 3000 100 GOSUB 4000 WITH JOYSTICKS 110 GOSUB 5006 180 LU=1 185 L'=1 BY MARTIN CRAWLEY 190 S=0 192 SETCOLOR 2,0,0: SETCOLOR 4,00 194 POKE PCOLR,88: POKE PCOLR1,30 195 POKE HITCLR, 196 HL=0 198 HS=0 200 FOR K=TO HL 205 S=S+0.05: POKE HPOSM1, 10*S+140 210 L=EEK POPF): IF L<> THEN GOTO 1000 Illustration: Dorian Cross 46 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"220 IF Xo<110 THEN X1=5: POKE_HPOSP1,5:S OUND 9,0,0,0: SOUND 1.0.0.0:6OTO 240 228 POKE HPOSPO,X0 230 IF STRIG(0)=0 THEN X1=XO:POKE HPOSP1 X1: SOUND 0,204,0,8: SOUND 1,128,0,8: XMQ= Xo-FU: POKE HPOSMO.XMO: S=S-0.1 240 IF STRIG =1 THEN X1=5: POKE HPOSP1, X1. SUUND 0.0.0.0: SOUND 1.0.0.0 250 IF 50 THEN GOTO 300 250 IF 30 THEN GOTO 400 270 GOTO 500 300 FOR I = TO S: RES=USR( 1574,PO,P1 : Y0= YO+1: NEXT I 33% GO TO 500 400 FOR =S TO : RES=USR( 1536,PO,P1 :YQ= Yo-1: NEXT 1 400 6010 500 500 NEXT K 505 HL=5-5*ABSHS 510 IF STICK(O)=15 AND HSKO THEN HS=HS+ .01: SOUND 2,8,8,8: GOTO 525 515 IF STICK(0)=15 AND HS > THEN HS=HS-9 (1 THEN GOTO 1020 1110 IF X2 153 AND Xe<171 AND YO>140 AND S<1 THEN GOTO 1120 1115 GOTO 2000 1120 SC=DF*CINT(XMO)-110) 1139 GOSUB 4115 1132 FOR J=1 TO 500: NEXT J 1135 FOKE PCOLRO,0: POKE PCOLR1,0 1140 X0=65:X1=65: Y0=144:41=151: YMQ=197:Y M1=207:X0=190 1150 POKE HPOSPO,65:POKE HPOSP1,5:POKE H POSMO, 190 1155 LU=2 1160 COLOR 1 1162 GOSUB 4200 1164 POKE 752,1 1165 GOSUB 4115 1168 GOSUB 5040 1170 GOTO 199 1200 IF XO>53 AND X«<72 AND YOX130 AND S <1 THEN GOTO 1020 1210 IF XOX160 AND XB<175 AND YOX160 AND .01: SOUND 2,0,0,0:GOTO 525 529 IF STICK(0)4 AND STICK(OX8 THEN HS =HS+0.35: SOUND 2,10,0,4: IF HS>1.5 THEN H 5-2.5 522 IF STICK >> AND STICKCOX12 THEN H S=HS-0.35: SOUND 2.10.0.4: IF HSK-1 THEN H S=-1 525 XQ=X+INTCHS) 536 GOTO 200 1000 PUKE KITCLR,0 1010 POKE HPOSP1,5: SOUND 0,0,0,0: SOUND 1 ,0,0,0 1214 UN LV GOT 1100, 1200, 1300 1020 IF STRIGCO=0 THEN GOTO 1040 1030 GOTO 1020 1840 FOR I=0 TO 1 1050 RES=USRK 1536,8,P1) 1060 NEXT I 1070 GOTO 190 1100 iF 40>51 AND X<73 AND YOX130 AND S S<1 THEN GOTO 1220 1215 GOTO 2000 1220 SC=SC+3*DF*CINTA XM10 -110) 1230 GOSUB 4115 1232 FOR J=1 TO 500: NEXT J 1235 POKE PCOLR,0: POKE PCOLR1,0 1240 x0=58:X1-58: Y0=175:Y1=182: YM10=197:Y Mi=207: XM6=190 1250 POKE HPOSP0,58: POKE HPOSP1,5:POKE H FOSMO, 190 1255 LV=3 1260 GRAPHICS 7: SETCOLOR 2.0.0: COLOR 1 1262 GOSUB 4300 1264 POKE 752,1 1266 GOSUB 4115 1268 GOSUB 5040 1270 GOTU 190 1303 IF X6X50 AND XO<66 AND YO>160 AND S (1 THEN GOTO 1020 1318 ir 2176 AND K 191 AND Y0X150 AND COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 47 illustration: Dorian Cross "


"CHANNELO OSOFTWARE lock Computers TWO NEW GAMES FOR ATARI PERSONAL COMPUTERS BOMB HUNTER Your Mission: To remove all the Bombs from the top Security Building before they explode The Problem in the rush of Evacuation someone forgot to disable the Guard Robots and Laser Screens CAVES OF DEATH The only 3D Maze Game designed to scare a player to death before they can escape from the Caves with all of their Treasures Both Caves of Death & Bomb Hunter use Player Missile Graphics. MURDER AT AWESOME HALL SKY SNAKES BOMB HUNTER CAVES OF DEATH CAVES OF DEATH Cassette (16K) .95 Cassette (16K) .95 Cassette (16K) .50 Cassette (24) .95 Disk (32K) .95 ANECMain Dealer TRS 80 Software We still support the most amazing graphics software yet for the TRS 80, extensive use of sound, real time etc. etc. Disk Cass ARCADE Eliminator-you're the pilot of the Eliminator a space fighter armed to the teeth with awesome firepower. But you're outnumbered and your attackers are keen. (super-sharp graphics and sound) 19.50 16.00 Defense Command The Galaxy Invaders have returned in this newest game of skill and excitement with a new twist, absolutely incredible voice effects with high quality graphics) 16.00 12.50 Valkyrie-Leo Christopherson at his best. One of the finest graphics-based adventures available. 30.00 26.00 Forbidden Planet The first talking adventure, three different voices-the best yet. (Disk only All voice output through cassette portno special equipment required! 30.00 Armour Patrol Real time battle action with excellent use of graphics Requires great skill. 19.50 16.00 Adventure (the system) Now you too can create your own adventure type game. The Adventure System allows you to create database containing your own instructions, this database is then used by the machine language driver part of the program to actually run the adventure you just created!!! (Disk only) 30.00 Forbidden City The second follow-up part of Forbidden Planet can you escape the deadly robots ?? All the features of Forbidden Planet.(Disk only) 30.00 Scarfman More popularly known as 'Pukman, this game is now available for the TRS 80. Extensive use of grahpics makes this as exciting as the Arcade version, Includes sound 16.00 12.50 Joysticks-Now you can add fast action to all your games with our latest joystick The adaption for the TRS BO includes a list of patches, this allows you to use your joystick with many of the popular Arcade games. .00 The following programs are variable to order Scarfman Missile noroctol de malhes and we feel w o nth EDASI Sky Warrior Command som e consomoy be put only comely valabile Editor for the Speakmed only PowerDraw single le TRS BO Model) Super Utility graphics EDAS Model 1 or Model 3 260.00 Plus Super Utility Conditional sembly suport A program penclude VAT IS Microproof Lazywriter reference utility P eodd 61.50 for Povere & Pock Starfighter Basic-S/CMD DOS DR. FREE KILL LISTAX Promovable for Model 1/11 Macro-Monitor Basics 14-character labels including Move Model and whether Deko Announcing EDAS. S EDAS chance Editor and assembler for the includes black move balong TRS NO All text dybe put in upper or lower cose EDASMA M-20 celes con bero Assemble directly from one or more disk of written Files GET The futures above are only half of what this prockopeconde in our the best Bullock Computers, Monaco House, Bristol Street, Birmingham. Telephone: 021 622 2167 ATARI 400 A.M. Computer (16K) ..... ATARI 400 A.M. Computer (32K converted) ATARI 800 Computer (16K). ATARI 410 Recorder ATARI 810 Disk Drive ... .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 NORMAN AUDIO stock a wide range of Software from the following Manufacturers: Avalon Hill Atari Channel 8 Software Atari Program Exchange. Inhome Software Adventure International Arcade Plus, The English Software Company, Santa Cruz Educational Personal Software Datasoft Inc. Spectrum Computers Thorn EMI Video ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT & POST & PACKING E.&O.E. 51 Fishergate, Preston. Lancs. Tel. (0772) 53057. (NORMAN AUDIO LTD ESSEX & SUFFOLK .95 0.95 Muh SALE SALE 1 as you loin hyperspough missi * ACORN .95 BBC .25 * VIC 20 .95 * VIDEO GENIE .00 NOW ON * TANDY  off All prices ex VAT, delivery free SAE FOR LISTS ZX81, ATARI, APPLE, NEC, PERIPHERALS, PRINTERS, CUMANA & OTHER DISK DRIVES, ETC. Full range of software, books, spares, etc. Authorised service centre for all the above. OFTWARE CLUB SAVE MONEY — TRY BEFORE YOU BUY CALL IN AT YOUR LOCAL OR RING FOR MAIL ORDER PROMPT DESPATCH IMAGIC NEW RELEASES DEMON ATTACK Devastating waves of cosmic creatures attack relentlessly. These interplanetary foes are tough to hit and, even more tricky, some split in two to continue their awesome attack. Destroy one gang of ferocious galactic monsters to be faced with yet more demons and a new assault strategy. Missiles change to laser blasts. The odds are almost insurmountable in this superb game one of the best yet seen at only .50 STAR VOYAGER Hold tight as you look out from your cockpit. Steering your ship through star portals in hyperspace. Enemy ships hurtle past and must be destroyed. This is a tough mission to command. Every striking alien ship to evade your laser guns and photon torpedoes drains your energy reserves. The action intensifies as you streak through space but your ship's radar screen helps you locate the attackers and energy giving star portals. Undertake this perilous mission with your second officer or take on the computer. A demanding game at only .50 BIG SAVINGS ON ATARI TV GAME CARTRIDGES ACTIVISION Ice Hockey 21.95 Barnstorming 21.95 NEW Stampede 16.95 Grand Prix 21.95 NEW ATARI Pac Man 27.95 NEW Missile Command Street Racer 13.95 Asteroids 27.95 Haunted House 21.95 NEW Circus 16.95 Super Breakout 21.95 Slot Racer 1795 Warlords 21.95 Olympics 15.50 Soccer 22.95 Space War 13.95 Superman 21.95 Adventure 21.95 Space invaders 24.50 24.50 www ENEWZ COMING SOON Activision: Chopper Command, Star Master USG: Jet Hockey. Commando Raid, Missile Intercert, Darts Apollo: Skeet Shot, Space Chase, Space Cavern Imagic: Trick Shot (Pool) Imagic.cent Darts Aster USG EMPRISES TERESSEX (0206) CALOWS 865926 58 EAST STREET COLCHESTER ESSEX CO1 2TQ TEL (0206) 865926 SPECIAL OFFER 'Le Stick the ultimate joystick for games or graphics. For Atari and Vic 20. ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT POST ETC 50p PER ITEM TWO OR MORE ITEMS POST FREE PANCOM. 20 Dudley Street, Grimsby, South Humbs. Tel: (0472)43740/694196. CHELMSFORD TEL (0245) 356834 SUDBURY TEL 0787 310110 CLACTON TEL 0255) 451296 48 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"3010 POSITION 5,1:? #6; \"MARTIAN\" 3020 POSITION 5,3:? #6; \"EXPLORER 3030 POSITION 8,5:? #6; \"by 3540 POSITION 2,7:? #6; \"martin J. Cawiey 3050 POSITION 2, 10:? #6; PRESS ANY KEY\" 3060 POSITION 2,11:? #6; \"TO START GAME 3070 GET #1,K 3075 GRAPHICS 18 3080 POSITION 4,1:? #6;\"INPUT NUMBER 3090 POSITION 6,2:? #6;\"1,2 OR 3\" 3895 POSITION 4,3:? #6; FOR REQUIRED\" 3100 POSITION 2.4:? #6; \"DIFFICULTY LEVEL       S<1 THEN GOTO 1320 1315 GOTO 2000 1320 SC=SC+15*DF*CINT(XMO)-110 +50*0F*5 -L11) 1325 GOTO 2500 2000 LITELM+1 2045 GRAFHICS G 2006 POKE HPOSP8,5:POKE HPOSP1,5: POKE HP OSM8,5: POKE HPOSM1,5 2010 FOR IED TO 16 2015 FOR JE TO 10 2018 SETCOLOR 4,1,10 2920 SETCOLOR 2,1,10: SOUND 0,10*1,0,10:S OUND 1,5*1,0,16 2030 NEXT J.NEXT I 2940 SOUND 0,0,0,0: SOUND 1,0,0,0: SOUND 2 2050 IF LM>5 THEN GOTO 2100 2052 GRAPHICS 7 2955 SETCOLOR 2,0,0: SETCOLOR 4,00 2060 ON LU GOTO 2070,2080, 2090 2670 GOSUB 4000: GOSUB 5000: GOTO 190 2080 GOTO 1135 2099 GU10 1235 2100 GRAPHICS 18 2110 POSITION 2,2:? #6; \"KEEP TRYING!!\" 2120 POSITION 2,6:? #6;\"FINAL SCORE\";SC 2130 POSITION 2,19:? #6; \"PRESS ANY KEY\" 2135 POSITION 2,11:? #6; \"TO TRY AGAIN 2140 GET #1,K 2150 GUTO 98 2580 POKE HFOSP0,5: POKE HPOSP1,5: POKE HP OSMO,5: POKE HPOSM1,5 2505 GRAF SICS 18 2510 POSITION 2.2:? #6; \"CONGRATULATIONS!\" 2520 POSITION 5,4:? #6; \"SUCCESSFUL\" 2530 POSITION 7,5:? #6; \"MISSION\" 2540 POSITION 2,8:7 #6; \"FINAL SCORE \";SC 2556 POSITION 2,10:? #6; \"PRESS ANY KEY 2555 POSITION 2,11: #6,\"TO TRY AGAIN 2560 GET #ik 2570 GOTO 98 3000 GRAPHICS 18 3110 POSITION 4,7:? #6;\"1=NOVICE\" 3120 POSITION 4,8:? #6; \"2=EXPLORER 3130 POSITION 4,9:? #6;\"3=COMMANDER 3150 GET #1K 3168 IF =43 THEN DF=1: FD=0.4: RETURN 3170 iF k=50 THEN DF=2: FD=0.45: RETURN 3180 ir K=51 THEN OF=3:F0=0.5: RETURN 3130 GUTO 3150 4000 GRAPHICS 7: SETCOLOR 2,0,0: COLOR 1 4008 PLOT 9,50: DRAHTO 2,55: DRAHTO 5,74 4010 PLOT 30,74:DRAHTO 36,70: DRAHTO 40,6 8: DRAHTO 43,63: DRAHTO 48,53: DRAHTO 58,50 DRAHTO 66,55: DRAHTO 63,30 4020 PLOT 63,36: DRAHTO 78,50: DRANTO 80,4 G: DRAHTO 07,36: DRAHTO 30,43: DRAHTO 105,5 3. DRAHTO 167,61 4030 PLOT 130,61: DRAHTO 135,55: DRAHTO 13 7,45: DRAHTO 143,42: DRAHTO 147.48: DRAHTO 159,60 4040 PLOT 0,6: DRAHTO 6,3: DRAHTO 8,0: DRAH TO 15,5: DRAHTO 23,9: DRAHTO 25,12: DRAHTO 37,6. DRAHTO 45.3: DRAHTO 63,0 4845 FLOT 63,0: DRAHTO 73,7 4050 PLOT 73,7: DRAHTO 76,3: DRAHTO 79,2:0 RANTO 81,0: DRAHTO 94,3: DRAHTO 120,7: DRAN TO 129,4 4055 PLOT 129,4: DRAHTO 134,9: DRAHTO 142, 8: DRAHTO 148,14: DRAHTO 159,9 4060 COLOR 2 4070 PLOT 5,74: DRAHTO 30,74 4080 PLOT 107,61: DRAHTO 130,61 Cross Illustration: Dorian COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 49 "


"MICHAEL ORWIN'S ZX81 CASSETTES The best software (by various authors) at low prices QUOTES CASSETTE 2 CASSETTE 4 \"Michael Orwin's  Cassette Two is very Ten games in Basic for 16k ZX81 8 games for 16k good value. It contains 10 stolid well designed Cassette Two contains Reversi. Awari, Laser ZX-SCRAMBLE (machine code) games which work, offer plenty of variety and Bases, Word Mastermind, Rectangles, Crash, choice, and are fun.\" Roulette, Pontoon, Penny Shoot and Gun Comfrom the ZX Software review mand. in Your Computer, May '82 issue. Cassette 2 costs . I had your Invaders-React cassette... was delighted with this first cassette.\" Bomb and shoot your way through the fortified CASSETTE 3 caves P. Rubython, London NW10 8 programs for 16k ZX81 GUNFIGHT INVADERS \"I have been intending to write to you for STARSHIP TROJAN (machine code] machine code) some days to say how much I enjoy the games Repair your Starship before on 'Cassette One' which you supplied me with disaster strikes. Hazards inearlier this month.\" E. H. London SW4 clude asphyxiation, radiation, escaped biological speciI previously bought your Cassette One mens and plunging into a Suand consider it to be good value for money!\" pernova FUNGALOIDS (machine code] Richard Ross-Langley, STARTREK This version of the well known space GALAXY INVADERS (machine code) Managing Director, adventure game features variable Klingon mobil Fleets of swooping and diving alien craft. Mine of Information Ltd. ity, and graphic photo torpedo tracking. PRINCESS OF KRAAL SNAKEBITE (machine code) An adventure game. Eat the snake before it eats you. Variable speed BATTLE Strategy game for 1 to 4 players. (very fast at top speed) CASSETTE 1 KALABRIASZ World's silliest card game, full of LIFE (machine code) (eleven lk programs) pointless complicated rules. A ZX81 version of the well known game. CUBE Rubik Cube simulator, with lots of func 3D TIC-TAC-TOE (Basic) machine code: tions including 'Backstep'. Played on a 4x 4x4 board, this is a game for the React, Invaders, Phantom aliens, Maze of death, SECRET MESSAGES This message coding prog brain. It is very hard to beat the computer at it Planet lander, Bouncing letters, Bug splat. ram is very txlp gexi jf. 7 of the 8 games are in machine code, because Basic: MARTIAN CRICKET A simple but addictive game this is much faster than Basic. Some of these IChing, Mastermind, Robots, Basic Hangman (totally unlike Earth cricket) in machine code. games were previously available from J. SteadPLUS Large screen versions of Invaders and The speed is variable, and its top speed is very man) Maze of Death, ready for when you get 16k. fast. Cassette 1 costs .80 Cassette 3 costs . Cassette 4 costs . Recorded on quality cassettes, sent by first class post, from: Michael Orwin, 26 Brownlow Rd., Willesden, London NW10 9QL (mail order only please) THE ATARI SOFTWARE SPECIALIST VIDEO SERVICES (BROMLEY) 01-460 4169/8833 8 SUNDRIDGE PARADE PLAISTOW LANE BROMLEY RENT ATARI 400 18833 SNOW F1 Emme Hickory Dickory Dock ..........95 Darts ...... S. ..........45 Snooker & Billards .45 Tournament Pool .45 British Jigsaw ....25 European Jigsaw .25 Super Cubes & Tilt .50 Adventure International Adventures 1 to 12 .50 Star Trek ... .... .95 Sunday Golf ........50 Mountain Shoot . .50 Lunar Lander ...... .50 Galactic Trader ... .50 Rearguard .......... .50 Deflections .00 Angle Worms ..... .00 Galactic Empire. .50 Crystalware (Disk) Sands of Mars .99 House of Usher ...00 Laser Wars......... .00 Little Crystal ....... .00 Quest for Power . .00 Galactic Quest.... .00 World War 3........00 Fantysyland 2041 .00 The Crypt .00 31.00 Sumer .00 Beneath the Pyramids .00 Waterloo .............99 Glamis Castle .00 Atari International Invite to Programming 1 ....................50 Blackjack .............. .95 Space Invaders ...95 Super Breakout .50 European Countries $8.50 States & Capitals . .50 Basket Ball......... .50 Kingdoms.............50 Word Processor . .50 French Conversation ........99 German Conversation .99 Spanish Conversation ............. .99 Italian Conversation .99 Asteroids.. . .95 Missile Command .95 Assembler Editor .99 .95 Video Easel ........ .50 Mortgague & Load .95 Star Raiders ....... .95 Music Composer. .99 Computer Chess .50 Statistics ..............50 Hangman.. . .95 Graph It.. . .50 Touch Typing ......50 Energy Czar ......... .50 Scram ..................50 Temple of Asphi . .99 Invasion Orion .... .50 Ricochet.............99 Upper Reaches of Asphi ... .99 Datestones of Ryan .99 United Software of America 3D Supergraphics .50 A.P.X Data Management System .99 Codecracker ....... .99 Tact Trek ....... -12.99 Blackjack Tutor ... .50 Domination .......99 Space Trek ..99 Video Maths....99 Dynacomp Moving Maze .........00 Giant Slalom ....... .00 Nomindes Jigsaw .99 Chompello .......... .00 Triple Blockade .. .99 Monarch ..............99 Space Tilt .00 Stud Poker Alpha Fighter ...... .00 Intruder alert ....... E14.99 Forest Fire ........... 114.99 .99 Rings of the Empire Ce Software Data Management System . ...99 Letter Writer .......18.00 .00 Datasoft D Text Wizard Text Wizard .........00 198.00 Character Character Generator Pilot .99 Atari Program Exchange Caverns of Mars. .99 Eastern Front 1941 .99 Outlaw/Howitzer . .99 Avalanche ............ 15.99 747 Landing Simulator ..........99 Bumper Pool ...... .25 Minatour ............. .99 Babel .......99 Lookahead .... .99 Basic Renumber. .99 Santa Cruz Tricky Tutorials Display Lists ........50 Scrolling ..............50 Page Flipping ..... .50 Basics of Animation ............50 Player Missile Graphics .............99 Sound ...... 10 . ....... .50 L Mini Word Processor ................00 Bobs Business ..... .00 Kids Prog 1 ........... .00 Graphics Machine .50 Kids Prog 2..........00 Player Piano ......... 19.00 In Home Software Crypts of Terror .50 Prices include VAT. Add 75p P&P COLOURVISION 8 SUNDRIDGE PARADE, PLAISTOW LANE BROMLEY,KENT I enclose a Cheque/P.O. for .. .99 Space Trap .........99 Moonprobe .......... .99 Avalon Hill Midway Campaign .00 Empire of the Overmind .00 Planet Miners ..... .00 Tanktics C 18.99 Lords of Karma ....99 or debit my Access Barclaycard card no Signature Name Arcade Plus Ghost Hunter ...... .99 Spectrum Galactic Chase ....99 Channer 8 Software Murder at Awsom Hall .99 Amazon Systems Hot Foot .......... .99 Address E.M.I. Cribbage & Dominoes .................. .95 Humty Dumpty Game .......95 Automated Simulations Crush, Crumble, Chomp 22.00 Star Warrior ........ .99 Rescue at Rigel . .95 Dragons Eye .......99 Please allow 28 days for delivery 200 50 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"AHTO 19,5: DRAHTO 27,8: DRAHTO 37,18: DRAHT 0 44,30: DRAHTO 48,42 4335 PLOT 48,42: DRAHTO 59,49: DRAHTO 72,5 4: DRAHTO 81,54: DRAHTO 97.49: DRAHTO 104,5 4100 Puke 752,1 4110 SC= 4115 ? 4120 ? \"SCORE\";SC 4130 ? \"FUEL 100 4140 ? \"SPEED -60 4150 PUKE 752,1 4160 RETURN 4293 GRAPHICS 7: SETCOLOR 2,0,0: COLOR 1 4220 PLOT 9,4: DRAHTO 20,7: DRAHTO 29,4: DR AHTO 34,9: DRAHTO 42,8: DRAHTO 48,14: DRAHT 0 62,8: DRAHTO 77,17: DRAHTO 86,39 4230 PLOT 86,39: DRAHTO 89,40: DRAHTO 93,3 9: DRAHTO 164,24: DRAHTO 114,14: DRAHTO 119 ..URAHTU 129,7 4240 PLOT 129,7: DRAHTO 139,9: DRAHTO 147, 18:URANTO 152,30: DRAHTO 156,47: DRAHTO 15 9.42 4250 PLOT 30,61: DRAHTO 34,55: DRAHTO 37,4 6: DRAHTO 43,42: DRAHTO 46,46: DRAHTO 47.50 DRAHTO 57,59: DRAHTO 59,60 4255 PLOT 59,60: DRAHTO 64.49: DRAHTO 66,4 7: DRAHTO 69,49: DRAHTO 79,75: DRAHTO 87,73 : DRAWTO 56,64: DRAHTO 113,42: DRAHTO 119,3 4260 PLOT id,39. DRAHTO 122,37: DRAHTO 12 4,39: DRANTO 112,68: DRAHTO 114,79 4265 PLOT 134,79: DRAHTO 138,69: DRAHTO 14 6,61: DRAHTO 153,60: DRAHTO 159,63 4270 PLOT 0,48: ORAHTO 5,53: DRAHTO 7,61 4275 COLOR 2: PLOT 7,61: DRAHTO 30,61: PLOT 114,79: DRAHTO 134,79 4295 RETURN 4300 GRAPHICS 7: SETCOLOR 2,0,0: COLOR 1 4315 PLOT 24,76: DRAHTO 26.72: DRAHTO 33,6 3: DRAHTO 41,61: DRAHTO 48,63: DRAHTO 56,73 : DRAHTO 64,78: DRAHTO 69,79 4320 PLOT 69,79: DRAHTO 77,74:DRAHTO 82,6 9: DRAHTO 87,70: DRAHTO 94,79: DRAHTO 124,7 6: DRAHTO 131,69: DRAHTO 133,55 4325 PLOT 133,55: DRAHTO 139,42: DRANTO 13 8.36. DRAHTO 134,29: DRAHTO 122,22: DRAHTO 108, 19: DRAWTO 92,20: DRAHTO 69,23 4336 PLOT 0,19:ORANTO 4,14: DRAHTO 9,8: DR 4340 PLOT 37, 13. DRAHTU 30,6: DRAHTO 31,3: ORAHTO 43,1: DRAHTO 59,4: DRAHTO 99,0: DRAH TO 103,3AURAHTO 114,5:ORAHTO 126,0 4345 PLOT 126,9: DRAHTO 136,2: DRAHTO 144, 5: DRAHTO 154,14: DRAHTO 159,39 4350 PLOT 149,69: DRAHTO 151,59: DRAHTO 15 6.55: DRAHTO 159,57 4355 PLOT 0,47: DRAHTO 9,39: DRAHTO 12,38: DRAHTO 14,39: DRAHTO 3,68: DRAHTO 4,76 4364 COLOR 2 4365 FLOT 4,76: DRAHTO 24,76: PLOT 131,69: DRAHTO 149,69 4385 RETURN 5000 X0=62:X1=62:Y9=171: Y1=178 5010 YMQ=197: YM1=207:XMQ=188 5020 POKE HPOSP9,62:POKE HPOSP1,5:POKE H POSMO, 188 53-0 A=PCEK RAMTOP)-24 5050 POKE PRIBASE, A: MYPMBASE=256*A 5055 POKE GRACTL,3: POKE SDNICTL,62 5060 POKE PCOLRO,0: POKE PCOLR1,0 5220 V=A+3 5225 PO=U+1: P1=U+2 5230 RES=USR( 1612,0) 5250 DATA 12,30,63,51,30,30,51,33,33 5255 RESTORE (5259) 5260 FOR I =MYPRIBASE+1024+YO TO MYPMBASE+ 1632+10 5255 READ A:POKE LA 5270 NEXT I 5275 DATA 12,12,30,30,63,38,39,12,12 5280 FOR I=MYPMBASE+1288+Y1 TO MYPMBASE+ 1288+Y1 5285 READ A: POKE LA: NEXT I 5290 DATA 3,3,3,3,3,3,0,0,0,0,12,12,12,1 2,12,12,121212.12.12.12 5295 FOR IEMYPMBASE+768+YMO TO MYPMBASE+ 789+YNO 5298 READ A:POKE LA: NEXT I 5400 RETURN 88013 Od Hlustration: "


"100 FREE PROGRAMS FROM SILICA SHOP — WITH EVERY PURCHASE OF AN ATARI 888 1978 1979 1980 ATARI PRICES REDUCED! We at Silica Shop are pleased to announce some fantastic reductions in the prices of the Atari 400/800 personal computers. We believe that the Atari at its new price will become the UK's most popular per sonal computer and have therefore set up the Silica Atari Users Club. This club already has a library of over 500 programs and with your purchase of a 400 or 800 computer we will give you the first 100 free of charge. There are also over 350 professionally written games and utility programs, some are listed below. Complete the reply coupon and we'll send you full details. Alternatively give us a ring on 01-301 1111 or 01-309 1111. ATARI 400 with 16K ATARI 400 with 32K ATARI 800 with 16K ATARI 400  ATARI 400  A ATRISOO 400/800 SOFTWARE & PERIPHERALS Don't buy a T.V. game! Buy an Atari 400 personal computer and a game cartridge and that's all you'll need. Later on you can buy the Basic Programming cartridge (E36) and try your hand at programming using the easy to learn BASIC language. Or if you are interested in business applications, you can buy the Atari 800 + Disk Drive Printer together with a selection of business packages. Silica Shop have put together a full catalogue and price list giving details of all the peripherals as well as the extensive range of software that is now available for the Atari 400/800. The Atari is now one of the best supported personal computers. Send NOW for Silica Shop's catalogue and price list as well as details on our users club. THE FOLLOWING IS JUST A SMALL SELECTION FROM THE RANGE OF ITEMS AVAILABLE: ACCESSORIES Mountain Shoot BUSINESS DYNACON Mathe Ta Toe Rearguard Calculator Alpha Fighter Metric & Prob Solvg State Capital Centurion Solitaire Mission Asteroid AIDSTFrom Atari Star Frite Database Managemt Chompelo Mugwum Touch Typing Checker King Space Chow Mouskat Asambler Editor Diskette Sunday Golf Decision Maker Crystals Musie Tema/Notat Chinese Puzzle Space Trek Threshold Doambier (APX) Joystick Graphit Forest Fire Musical Computer EMI SOFTWARE Codecracker Sultan Palace Ulysses/Golden FL Microsoft Basic Invoicing Intruder Alert My First Alphabet British Heritage Tact Trek Wizard & Princess Pascal (APX) SIMULATIONS Number last Criage/Dominees Dice Poker Pilot Consumer Crush Crumble amo Mort & Loan Anal Dog Daze Wizards Gold PERIPHERALS Datestones of Ryn Nominal Ledger Moving Mare European Scene Domination Wizards Revenge ADVENTURE INT Dragons Eye Payroll Nominoes Jigsaw Quia Master Hickory Dickory Downhill Disk Drive Scott Adams Ady invasion Orion Personal Finl Mgmt Rings of The Emp Starware Humpty Dumpty Eastern Front ENTERTAINMENT Epson Printer LANTA CRUZ No Adventureind Rescue at Rigel Purchase Ledger Space Tilt Stereo 3D Graphics Jumbo Jet Lander Galahad & Holy Grl from AYARL Program Recorder Basics of Animation No 2 Pirate Ady Ricochet Sales Lediger Space Tre Three Math Sys Snooker & Billiards Graphics/Sound RS232 Interface Bob Business No 3 Mission Imo Star Warrior Video Math Flash Submarine comme on Beskethall Thermal Printer Display Lists No 4 Voodoo Cut Temple of Asha Stock Control Triple Blackade Wordmaker Super Cubes & THE Blackjack 15K Memory RAM Gries Machine No 5 The Count Upper Reaches As Telink 1 32K Memory RAM Kids 1&2 NO Serge Ody EDUCATION EDUCATION Memory March Horizontal Scroll No Mystery Fun BOOKS Weekly Planner from APX from ATARI ENTERTAINMENT Midas Touch Entertainment Kit PERSONAL INT No Pyramid of D anie RefManual Word Processor Con French from APX Minotaur Missile Command from APX No 9 Ghost Town Compute Atari DOS Atlas of Canada Con German Alien Egg Outlaw/How Pac Man Adv Muse System Page Flipping No 10 San Island 1 Compute Bk Atari CRYSTALWARE Cubbyholes Con Talian Anthill Preschool Games Space Invaders Banner Generator Player Missile G No 11 Savand 2 Compute Magazine Beneath The Pyram Elementary Biology Com Spanish Artank Pro Bowling Star Raiders Blackjack Tutor NO 12 Golden Voy De Re Aa Energy Car Avalanche Pushover Super Breakout Going To The Dog Sound DOS U Galactic Quest Hickory Dickory European C & C Babel Rabot Video El Vertical Scrolling Deflections DOS2 Manual House Of Usher inst Compte Dem Hangman Reversi 11 Galactie Empire Mise Atari Books Sands Of Mars Lemonade Invit To Prog 1/2/3 Block Buster Saimon Run ONLINE SYSTEMS Personal Fitness PrSILICA CLUB Galactie Trader Op System Listing Waterloo Letterman Block 'Em 747 Landing Simul Crossfire Player Piano Over 500 program Lunar Lander Wiley Manual World War III Mopware Music Composer Bumper Pool Seven Card Stud Frogger Sketchpad write for details Alice FOR FREE BROCHURES -TEL: 01-301 1111 SLICA SHOP FREE LITERATURE I am interested in purchasing an Atari 400 800 computer and would like to receive copies of your brochures and test reports as well as your price list covering all of the available Hardware and Software: Name Address Postcode ICVG 0882)-Computer & Video Games-Aug 1982 SILICA SHOP LIMITED "


"ARCADE QUALITY SOFTWARE FROM LLAMASOFT!! Spectrum VI$20 by Geoff Minter ATARI 400/800 16K VIC=20 by Geoff Minter ATART GRAPHICS/CHARACTER CREATOR DEFENDA! m/c Now you can define your very own custom charac Full feature version of the popular arcade game including: Swarter sets. Or edit the existing sets. Results fully Results fully mers, Baiters, Pods, Landers and Humanoids. Controls: Up, Down, displayed on screen in modes 0, 1 and 2. Many Thrust, Reverse, Fire and Smart Bomb. High resolution colour exciting features including: Save, Screen Modes, graphics. Joystick controls. 8k or 16k expansion needed. Only .00 Reflect, Invert etc. Supplied on cassette with data .00 TRAXX! m/c Vic 20 version of the brand new arcade game \"Amidar\" A PackSPECTRUM man/Quix crossbreed. All machine code, fast and fun. Joystick Full details of our range of Spectrum software controls. Hi-res colour graphics. 8k or 16k expansion needed. Only .00 available on request free of charge. Arcade games and utilities. SAE for details. RATMAN! m/c Send Cash/Cheque/P.O. with Kill the squeaking rats which fall from the sky before they dig in and order to: prey on you! Game includes rats, hammers, men, mutants and LLAMASOFT SOFTWARE, spears. Mc, hi-res colour graphics. 8k or 16k expansion needed. Dept, CVG Fast and fun for only .95 Lindon House, BLITZKRIEG (3.5k) (Bomb B.A.) The Green Fly your Vulcan bomber over enemy territory and destroy the city Tadley, 25 levels of play. Hi-res colour graphics on the unexpanded Vic 20. Basingstoke, Hants. Only .95 Tel: (07356) 5038 UTILITY PROGRAMS (for unexpanded Vic 20) WANTED! GAME GRAPHICS EDITOR. Create your very own custom characGOOD QUALITY SOFTWARE ters. Full features include Reflect, Save on Tape etc. SEND DEMO FOR QUICK SOFTKEY 24.24 key words inc. Peek, Poke, List, Save on your REPLY function keys. TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME Both programs supplied on one cassette. PLEASE ADD 50P P&P Only .00 PLAY FOR TODAY COMMODORE VIC VIDEO GENIE I Machine Language monitor Sound and Lower Case Renumber and Screen Print .00 TEAC DISK DRIVES TRS80 MODEL III Interfaces with Video Genie, North Star Horizon Super Hill Màu [.. Track S Colour Sound Programmable Function Keys 5K Memory Expanelable to 32K Standard PETBASICI O Full sized Typewriter Keyboard Graphics Character Set Plug-in Program Cartridges Low Priced Peripherals  Self Teaching Materials .95 VIC Compatible Cassette .95 5259.00 The D Disk Driver F448.00 O Track Do.00 OHO Truck Single Disk Drive .00 Disk Drive .00 ACORN ATOM SHARP MZ-80A 48 K User Ram Extended Microsoft Basic Parallelor RS232 Interfaces With 40 Track Single Density Disk Drives .00 With 80 Track Double Sided Disk Drives .00 With 80 Track Double .00 SHARP MZ80A 48K User RAM Extended Basic Integral Cassette  THE COMPUTERSHACK .8K Rom + 4K Ram Sound  20 Introductory Programs F199.00  Built-in Colour Computer Shack Ltd. 14. Pittville Street. Cheltenham.Glos. Telephone:(0242)584343 Credit available through major credit company. Access or Barclay Card Accepted, Mailorder Enquiries Welcomed. Prices include VAT COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 53 "


"and stay alive-by blasting Rock and roll among the planets in this intergalactic adaptation of an all action arcade game. Rocks is similar to that arcade favourite Asteroids. You control a spaceship threatened by a swarm of deadly meteorites. You score points the rocks. When you have scored 300 an alien saucer streaks across the screen and attempts to ram you. You can avoid or shoot it down. To control your VIC ship use key 1 and 2 to turn, 8 and 9 to move left and right, 0 to fire. You can also use the spacebar to hyperspace your way out of trouble but this will cost you 100 points each time you use it. The main variables are: SC-score. X2-shape of space ship. RL the rock variable. Jinput form keyboard. F-direction of fire. 1 DATA 191,2,191,2,191,2,207,8, 223.8.0.4219,2,217,2,213,2,231.8,223,8 2 DATA 2,4, 219, 2, 217,2,213,2, 231,8, 223,8, 219, 2, 2172,219,2, 213, 12,0,4 5 DATA 16,16,16,16,16.16.16.16.0.0.0, 255,0.0.0.0 6 DATA 64,0.1.16.0.64.1.139.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0 7 DATA 68,108, 124,40.56.16.16.0.8, 12, 14,28,252, 122,38,1 8 DATA 6,224, 120.46,120.224,0,0,1,38, 122,252,28,14,12,8 9 DATA 2,16,16,56,40, 124,108,68,128,10095,63,56,112,48,16 10 DATA 0.7.30, 116,30.7.0.0.16,48, 112.56, 63, 95, 100, 128 11 DATA 1,2,4,8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 128,64,32,16,8,4,2,1 13 DATA 60.60, 126.65,255,255,60,60, 12, 28, 30, 127, 255, 255, 252,56 15 DATA 0,8,24,56, 48, 32,0,0,0,0.56, 252, 255, 255, 127 16 POKE52, 28: POKE56. 28: CLR: POKE36878, 15 17 POKE36879, 25: PRINT E RIE ROCKS*\" 18 PRINT\" DATA <C CONTROLS >> 19 PRINT\" 1 AND 2 TURNS SHIP\":PRINT\" 8 AND 9 MOVES SHIP\":PRINT\" FIRES A BER M\" 20 PRINT\"204 TO JUMP HYPERSPACE USE THE SPACE BAR\" 21 FORZ=1T022: READA: POKE36876, A POKE36875, A 22 READB: FORX=1 TOB*100: NEXT: POKE36876.0: POKE36875,0: NEXTZ 23 PRINT\" PRESS ANY KEY TO START\" 24 GETR$ : IFA$=\"\" THEN24 30 FORR=232T0382: READB: POKE5120+A. B: NEXT 35 FORR=382T0470: POKE5120+A, PEEK(327684A): NEXT 40 POKE36869.253: POKE36666, PEEK(36866) OR128 50 SC=D:X2=34 60 X=7991:X1=5 65 POKEO, 32 70 PRINT\"]\":POKE36879,8 80 FORA=7658T07679: POKEA. 33: NEXT: FORA=8164T08186: POKER33NEXT 90 FORR=7689T08164STEP22: POKEA, 33 NEXT 54 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES Illustration: Dorian Cross "


"100 FORA=1T04 110 IF PEEK(RCA))>33THEN 140 120 IFA=1 THENR(1)=INT (29*RND(1)+7703):T(1)=INT(3*RND(1) +45):M(1)=INT(3*RND(1)+21 121 IF A=1ANDSC>300ANDINT(5#RND(1) >=2THENT(1)=44: R(1)=7703+X1 :M(1)=22 124 IFA=2THENR=INT(20*RND(1):R(2)=7703+CR*22):T(2)=INT(3*RND(1)+45): M=INT(6#RND (1) 125 IF A=2ANDMC1 THENM(2)=23 126 IF A=2ANDM>1THENM(2)=-23 127 IFA=2ANDSC>300ANDINT(5*RND(1) >=2THENT(2)=44:R(2)=X:M(2)=1 129 IF A=3THENR=INT(20*RND(1>>R(3)=7723+(R*22): T(3)=INT(3*RND(1) +45): M=INT(4*RN D(1) 130 IF R=3THENM(3)=-21 131 IF R=3ANDM=2 THENM(3)=21 132 IFA=3ANDM=1 THENM(3)=-1 133 IF A=3ANDSC>300PNDINT(5#RND(1)=2 THENT(3)=44: R(3)=X+20:M(3)=-1 135 IF R=4THENR(4)=INT(20RND(1) +8143): T(4)=INT(3WRND(1) +45):M(4)=INT (4*RND (1)-2 136 IF AEHANDSC>3COANDINT(5WRND(1) >=2THENT(4)=44: R(4)=8143+X1:M(4)=-22 140 POKER(A),32:R(A)=RCAS+MCA) 145 IF TCA)=44 THENPOKE36876,200 RUNS ON A VIC-20 IN 4K 150 IF RCA)=X+X1 THEN600 155 POKE36876.9 BY ANDREW STANFORD 160 IF PEEK(RCA)032THEN180 170 POKE RCA),TCA): POKER(A)+30720. A+2 180 JEPEEK(197) 181 IFJ=OTHENX2=X2+1 : IFX2=42THENX2=34 182 IFJ=56THENX2=X2-1: IFX2=33THENX2=41 183 IFJ-4ANDX1C15THENPOKEX+X1.32:X1=X1+1 184 IFJ=32 THENPOKEX+X1,32:X=7681+(22*CINT(RND(1)*20) )):X1=INT (20*RND(1) 185 IFJ=32THENSC=SC-100: IFSCCOTHENSC=0 186 IF J=60 THEN400 187 PRINT\" 19 DISC 190 IF J=59ANDX1) STHENPOKEX+X1, 32:X1=X1-1 200 POKEX+X1, X2: POKEX+X1+30720,7 300 NEXT: GOT0180 430 IF X2=34THENF=22: F1=29 401 IF X2=35THENF=23:F1=43 402 IF X2=36THENF=1 :F1=39 493 IF X2=37THENF=-21: Fi=42 404 IF X2=38THENF:-22:F1=29 405 IF X2=39 THENF=-23:F1=43 406 IF X2=40THENF:-1: F1=30 407 IF X2=41 THENF=21: F1=42 410 F2=X+X1: J=250 420 F2=F2+F: IFPEEKCF2) 32THEN450 438 POKEF2, F1: POKE36877, J: J=1-2: POKEF2+30720.2 440 GOT0420 450 UEPEEK(F2) 455 IF PEEK(F2)<340RPEEK(F2) >47THEN510 459 POKEF2.31 470 POKE36875, 150 : POKE36877,150 475 IFU=44THENSC=SC+50: U=32: GOT0490 480 SC=SC+10: U=32 490 PRINT\" \"SC 510 FORW=X+X1+FTOF2STEPF: POKEW, 32: NEXT 515 POKE36877,0: POKE36875,0:POKEF2, U 520 GOTO200 500 FORX=1T01089: NEXT: POKE36869,240: POKE36866.150 : POKE36879,25: PRINT\")\":POKE368 78,9: END COMPUTER GAMES 55 "


"the IT non Lec! * wwww... Levice 000 Vrtu Us vius ROBORUN Here I am brain the size of a planet and they of the capital.C a graphics mode C. When the stick me inside a maze and tell me to get out program is run these capital letters will be re\"Is that all,\" I said. \"Yes,\" they said. Depressing placed by the proper graphics. To alter the speed isn't it of the game the variable \"V\" in line 33 may be So here I am in the maze trying to get out. I must altered. 1 REM ROBOPUN **** admit it's turned out to be a bit harder than \"PAPER : INX 7: thought. But don't tell them that. It appears this LS 3 FOR F= 24.4. TO 146 maze has three levels getting progressively harder $ READ P OKE USR CHR$ in) +f each time. They are controlling me by using keys 5 for left, 6 for down, 7 for up and 8 for right. There's some DATA BIN 00010000, BIN00012 200, BIN 00010000.BIN 01010100 BI alterations that should be made to the program. N 00111000, BIH 01010100, BIN 0001 But I'll let them tell you all about those. 30. BIN 000 DO 100200, BINDD When typing in the program from the listing a 23 BDOBIN 11331111. BIN 00012000 BIN C62.00 100,, capital A should be used in the graphics mode 15 DATA BI 100.BIN D 3100 place of the capital A's in the listing. A graphic 2.033010, BI mode B should replace the capital B and in place 9000, BZN 0610 Re813891 56 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES Dorian Cross Hlustration: MO ZH OMO "


"RUNS ON A SPECTRUM IN 16K IF Cb THEN PRINT OR C=TO SND 29+1) BY PAT NORRIS 0 O No J. J O im $=\"A : 0 99 Z 1010101 011010101 TUTTUIT 1 1 1 1 1 UTOLIPPARAAD LET j = 3: INK 3 PRINT $ FOR a = 1 TO 5 ET b=INT (RND +13+1) LET CINT (RND *11+1) + 13 FOR = TO 24 IF dsb THEN PRINT ** IF duc THEN PRINT PRINT PRINT \"AR\"  f PRINT F \"C\" _ =1 TO \" THEN LET M$=I > \"\" 1 40001 SRINT AT 21, 1+ E woon + om ill 00: 001 : , TAB 32. \"A GO REEN$ FOR E TO RND < 10 aas .. 229 THEN PRINT nch on THEN FORNTENT TO 34 PRINT AT L. 300 PRINT \"THE GAME OF 'ROBORUN 302 PRINT \"OF 3 COURSES, STARTI 304 PRINT \"A (EASIEST) TO 'C' Z DU UZDE00U-10-2ZD :093 NDOTO 3097777777777 To Momom I NI I HOC 0940 JIHOZ0.0.20.10.ILOZ000 KHXHHXHIMEHXHHH W222-21-ZZZZZ 2 FOOD Oj! 00:: : DONO D000) + DONJI WOWOWODOWODOWODO OU OUOOOOOOOWODOWOWOWODOO OOOWWINO H HOZ00020.10JILHO.Z0.0. E 22-2 NX22 LEOCIN EE III PN ZZZ illl N 02-222 NZ COCHO DECHO : WHO DOENZ 2 ..LMHHOZ0ZDJILHO ZDOTO: O00. 4 11 NIN REHTOIN. 2 UND DOO INH NW 223 XO O... E of UDC HH + w w 10000000000010 WOWOWOWOWW J WOLOLU JoJo HIZL00) 300MHHOLOO. HH Het S TOMTOM 0011110 220m2 MMODUM2000 i 0 mm 0 m ---HXH1-HHIH-X HHXHXH TOM 3 HHXH 8 Olom Nom 0.00 UND : 0 0 : 0. 09000+ HHXH 0 0 0 0 HOZ Cou J 0JO.W.ZOOHHHHHHHOLZHOF a & a& FEEZW IIIT 2 www00 AD O 10 0.00000000000 HOFU 22 OHXH HUHHEHHH DOIMO et es 00000000OZHOIDO 200.016) 01 to 0 MOM el CUOCOD W0.0.0.CO.ID QILD...0.0.0.0.0.HHH OHD: 00. COLLZOH 00 000000000000-00000000++ . 9: W0004000W 00 PRINT AT 2, 20; \"F*** LET F=TNT RND +7+1) LET SEINT (RND *5+1) +10 LET t =INT (RND 5+1) +20 IF dur THEN PRINT HEN PRINT s 308 PRINT \"A ROBOT IS SITUATED 310 PRINT \"LOWER LEFT OF THE SC 312 PRINT \"WILL BE MOVING TO TH OZO THEN PAINT ST GET THE ROBOT T 315 PRINT THE SCREEN, E.G. OUT TO WIN.\" \"TO ALTER DIRECTION U 520 PRINT \"FOR LEFT, 6, DOUN, 7 *KEY FOR RIGHT INNNNNNNNNNNNOL oos 333333 PRINT BRIGHT 1 PRINT AT ZZZzzaaappp\": FOR T : FLASH : BRIG PRINT \"INPUT COURSE\" PRINT \"E.G. A INPUT \"inputCOTS IF LEN 2 1 THEN GO TO 334 LET =CODE (Z$2)) -96 IF 1 OR 3 THEN GO TO 33 501 CLS. FOR TO : BORDER : PAPER : INK 7-W CLS : BEEP . 1. +12: NEXT FOR W=20 TO 30: BEEP .05, : B10 PRINT AT 100, Try again sy OF 1) O another Course te =1 THEN GO TO 374 343 PRINT \"I forgot to tell yo 350 PRINT \" the wire in the faze 355 PRINT \"ELECTRIFIED--don't b into it. PRINT 359 PRINT \"The Robot doesn't st RK= 2 TO 500 370 NEXT 375 INK 2: PAPER 7: BORDER 7: C 360 GO TO (i +3) *100 400 PRINT AT 0.; \"A\"; TAB 31; \"A\" 405 FOR a = 1 TO 7 LEN 1 THEN GO TO 520 : IF $(1) =\"y\" THEN 835 LET. -1: IF $(23=\"\" THEN (22=\"n\" THEN NEU 620 THEN GO TO 930 F i =3 THEN GO TO 950 10 PRINT AT 0,9; \"Not bad\"; GO 30 PRINT AT 0,6; \"Getting bette 950 PRINT AT 3.0; \"Super Star\": COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 57 "


"IF THE CLOUDHOPPERS, WASPS, SPIDERS, METEORS, OR SATELLITES DON'T BEAT YOU... ... RENAISSANCE WILL pakeisti 4 KUPTOR 4 CLOUDBURST neteor run Renaissance SPIDERS OF MARS =ratellite 5 and meteorites 5 More great VIC Cartridge games from Audiogenic Available from all VIC dealers or direct from Audiogenic Ltd. PO Box 88, Reading, Berks. (0734 586334) Credit cards accepted. Meteor Run, Renaissance, Spiders of Mars, Satellites and Meteorites .99. Cloudburst: .99 (inclusive of VAT and p&p). All titles copyright UMI INC represented in Europe by Audiogenic. Send for full catalogue. "


"TERMAL FUNCTION ST. HITCH SNAG JNR SCREAMING FOUL UP KEEP SAP SPACE SPACE IL MINVADERS  SO AS I SEE IT... YOUR FORCES WERE ENTITLED TO TAKE UP THESE NONAGGRESSIVE POSITIONS IN THE SPACE ABOVE EARTH SO LONG AS YOU WERE WATCHING THE FLY-PAST BY SAUCERS FROM YOUR IMPERIAL FLEET... LASER IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE INTER GALACTIC CHARTER ON GAMES PLAYING. TO SUPPO BASE BASE PORT YOUR LOCAL LASER BASE OMP ON SPACE INY ACE INVADER 052 ) .. THE GATHERING OF SPACE FORCES GOES AGAINST THE VIDEO BOUNDARIES ACT SUB SECTION 24 A, YOU SAY .. BUT, IF YOU WERE TO PULL BACK INTO AN OFFSCREEN POSITION, I THINK THE LASER BASES WOULD BE LI WILLING TO RELINQUISH SOHE PLANET TERRITORY. YOU CLAIM TO HAVE WIPED OUT SIX ENTIRE INVASION FLEETS FOR THE LOSS OF ONLY ONE LASER BASE, BUT THE INVADERS SAY THEY ONLY SUFFERED 'ACCEPTABLE LOSSES!! SO I BLASTED A QUICK SALVO SKYWARDS AND THEY TURNED GREEN-RIGHT BEFORE MY EYES! YOU STARTED 17.11 WELL, I'VE PIECED TOGETHER AN OUT LINE OF THE START OF THE CONFLICT AND ALL THE EVIDENCE SEEMS TO POINT AT ONE TNING! HITCH "


"ELECTRONEQUIP IN FOOTBALL MANAGER GRA Addictive FROM FROM Games NEW GAME for Les 28/ TRS80 VIDEO GAME BBC1 BBC Micro Model A .00 BBC2 BBC Micro Model B .00 BBC21 Upgrade Model A to B .00 BBC22 14\" Colour Monitor .50 ATM1 Atom assembled 2kram .60 ATM2 Atom assembled 12kram .60 ATM3 Atom assembled 5kram colour .60 ATM10 Atom kit 2kram .25 ATM11 Atom Kit 12kram .25 ATM25 New PAL Colour Encoder .70 ATM26 Atom 1.8A Power Supply .66 ATM53 Atom DIN to cassette DIN lead .30 Prices inc. of VAT and Postage (except BBC micros .50) All items in stock same day despatch All upgrades etc. are fitted free of charge and the computer fully retested. Credit cards not accepted for BBC micros. TIESE FEATURES * AS MANY SEASONS 15 YOU LIKE DIVISIONS * PROMOTION & RELEGATION *FULL LEAGUE TABLES * TRANSFER MARKET *NURIES* *LEVELS OF PLAY SALE GAME FACILITY MANAGERIAL RATING * PICK YOUR TEAM FOR EACH MATCHEF.A. CUP WWWWWWWWWWWW This is NOT a mere simulation. This is an exciting and highly enjoyable amme in which sau plus the part of a Football Manager cuping with the problems and decisions involved in running our club. There are so many features it is impossible to live them here but included are form (top teams NORMALLY win), giant-killings, wage bills to pay. and you can even be Nacked! ll is a game requiring a great deal of skill, and people play it for literally hours on end we have proof!). ME GUARANTEE that this is one of the best computer games you've ever played! BUT BEWARE, this game is extremely additive! ELECTRONEQUIP FOOTBALL MANAGER OXCUPIES THE ENTIRE LA RAM HARDWARE REQUIRED To Ordered ChwePO 7.95 made povable to ADDICTIVE GAMES TRS80 ar: Dept. C.F.G.P.O. BOX 278 Video Genie CONNIRURROW 8K ROM LEVELIT MILTON KEYNES MARINE 16 RAM 16K RAM PLEASE STATE COMPUTER 128 West Street, Portchester (opp. RUBY) Hants. P016 9XE. Tel: 0705-325354 Attention All BBC Microcomputer and Acorn Atom Users TICKERS MADNESS! ZX81 OWNERS VIO 20 If you've been looking for a reliable and regular source of information to help you make the most of your BBC microcomputer or Acorn Atom, then we ve got news for you. ACORN USER apple OFFICIAL STOCKISTS We will allow  off the purchase price of a VIC-20 & Cassette Deck in exchange for a complete working ZX81 In stock for the VIC now: Printers, Disk Drives, Games, Stack Range, Arfon Range, Vicmen, PR Soft, Books, Aliens, Dead Frogs, Dust Covers, Taysoft, Robot Zap, etc. Considering an Apple Package? OFFICIAL STOCKISTE Then ring Mick or Dave on 01-891 1612 for a mind-boggling low quoteyou won't believe it! In stock now: Colour Cards, Mathemagic, Books, Printers, Disk Drives, Visicalc, Visifile, Visimadness, Dragons, Caves, The 'Mill, Word Processors Also in stock: Epson MXBOFT2  (incl VAT) * Computer stationery Prince 12\" Green Screen Monitor  [incl VAT) The Alpha Numeric Tantel Haga 14\" Colour Monitor  (incl VAT) *Disc Library Cases C15's 10-pack 14.50 incl VAT) The Top Twenty Computer Books C30's 10-pack (5.50 incl VAT) * Chips * Leads * Interfaces Offers available whilst current stocks last PS: We've just planted an Acorn. WE'VE GOT MIKRO GEN PRODUCTS IN COMPUTER CENTRE LTD STOCK-SO THERE! The official monthly magazine of Acorn Computers Ltd, manufacturers of the BBC microcomputer, the Acorn Atom, and the Econet system 'Acorn User' is a new monthly magazine starting July 1st for users of all present and future computers and systems manufactured by Acorn Computers Ltd, published by Addison-Wesley. Readers who reserve their subscriptions now will receive the July August and September issues free Send your cheque or postal order for  including postage (UK only), made payable to AddisonWesley Publishers Ltd, to: \"Acorn User Addison-Wesley Publishers Ltd 53 Bedford Square London WC1B 3DZ TWICKENHAM WE We also accept Access/Barclaycard Visa/American Express/ Diners Club cards Overseas subscription rates on application TwW W90-8118 60 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"REVERSI BY JOHN BALL SUBTLE USE OF THUMBS The standard board values would strongly persuade you to avoid playing next to a corner, but look at diagram one. There is one square next to a corner that is safe due to white holding the side. So a White play at A would be far prefer8 CBOO 1 DOO A ly a must to play in. It is White's best move, so teach the computer to spot it. Generally, any corner with an odd number of squares is preferable to one with even. Maximum piece capture overall is thus not best judged by captures per go even near the end. The Japanese Othello machine seen in the shops has the major weakness of taking thumb three to extremes it hardly ever takes sides. In diagram three, you are fast running out of options as White, so you should take the side at F. For a computer program, you have to teach it to count \"options\", so that when there are few \"good\" moves, you make it take sides more readily before it is too late and corners have to be given away! Yet if you had plenty of good moves, taking sides would invariably be wrong especially if it meant getting a 5-five pieces in a row along the side. 8 2 The family Reversi champion can probably tell you the \"do\"s and \"don't\"s of the game. These are the \"rules of thumb\" which most keen Reversi — also known as Othello players will stick with, even though he may not have categorised them as such. But the expert Reversi player/ programmer will also know when to break those same rules. In the last article on computerised Reversi (C&VG May) I outlined these rules. They were: Board Values, so that the nearer the corners the worse the move, but capturing corners being best. The whole game is really about capturing the corners to help you capture pieces permanently. I have included the values diagram below. 8-9 29 5 4 4 5 29 -9 7 29 22 3 2 2 3 22 29 6 5 3 1 1 1 1 3 5 5 4 2 1 0 1 2 4 4 4 2 1 1 2 4 35 3 1 1 1 1 3 5 229 22 3 2 2 3 22 29 1 -9 29 5 4 4 5 29 -9 a b c d e f g h Piece capturing, where ironically it pays to take as few as possible to reduce your opponent's choice of moves. Side taking, which helps shortterm \"option-battles\" but is bad in the end-game, so generally avoid them. I said that a computer program based on those three points, if carefully balanced would result in a reasonable standard of play. But of course that is not the whole story. In my book Key To Othello, only half a dozen of the 36 pages deal with what I now call the three thumbs. The rest deals with other finer points that are really exceptions in other words telling you when to give the \"thumbs down\". 5 a b c d e f g h Fig. 1 able to B. B would provoke a Black reply at C, and give Black a future good play at D. So the values of the board squares change due to the position. They are not fixed. The most obvious exception to Thumb two is near the end of the game when you need to take as many pieces as possible to win. So at some point say 10 moves from the end, you reverse the Thumb. That abrupt change is a bit crude, so that more subtle methods of selecting moves near the end are required. For example, if the four squares of a corner are filled up with three pieces as in diagram two, then the empty square at E is almost certain 4 31 OOOOOO a b c d e f g h Fig. 3 Pattern Recognition Ultimately you find exceptions to the above exceptions! This forms the basic human skill and knowledge of the experienced player. The difficulty of transforming a good playing knowledge of Reversi into a good computer program, is that the game is so simple in format that many players find good moves by sheer instinct. It is turning that unconscious knowhow into hard and fast rules which enable you to write a worthy program. There is a simple way of giving a computer this detailed knowledge. This is best left for another article. DIO a Fig. 2 b c d e f g h "


"Gedich? ALTERNATIVE DIMENSIONS Fig. 3 Any video game or simulation that deals with real events and scenes has to face the problem of how it can successfully represent the real three-dimensional world on a flat two-dimensional video screen. The eyes and brain of every person have to cope with a similar problem because we see the world only via a flat image of it produced on the retina of the eye. The secret of representing threedimensional images in a realistic way on a flat surface was discovered by the artists of the Renaissance in the fifteenth century. One of the set-pieces used for teaching perspective at that time was to draw a chalice, and there is a famous drawing of a chalice by Uccello in the Uffizi Gallery in Florence which bears a startling resemblance to the most modern computer-generated images. The idea of perspective is that the cone of rays of light reflected from an object into the eye becomes narrower the further the object is from the eye. This explains why an object appears to be smaller when it is further away from one's eye. Students of art are usually taught to deal with perspective on say a street or a straight fence, by drawing a \"disappearing point\" on the horizon, this is where the houses or A surface can be represented by a 'wire-frame' model obtained by taking a rectangular grid in the x-y plane, calculating the height of the surface above each cross-point of the grid and then joining these surface points. A part of the surface z = x -y drawn in this way is shown in figure 2. A three-dimensional curve can be defined by the intersection of the fence would slip beyond the line of sight if they were to continue for ever. It works well on straight boulevards but more thought is needed on twisting or hilly terraces. This idea naturally leads us to a way of representing solid objects on a flat surface. We can specify the position from which an object is being observed and the position of the flat surface on which it is to be represented as shown in figure 1. The eye is at the origin of the coordinate system. The picture plane is parallel to the x-y plane at a distance d from the eye with its origin on the z-axis. A three-dimensional point with coordinates (x, y, z) can then be seen to correspond to the point (X, Y) in the picture plane, where X = x + (d/2) and Y = y* (dz) Using this perspective transformation, three-dimensional surfaces and curves can be represented by transforming points in the picture plane and joining them as appropriate. A three-dimensional surface can be represented mathematically by an equation such as: Z = x-ya or, more generally, by any equation giving z in terms of x and y. If the x-y plane is taken as horizontal, then for every point (x,y) in this plane, the height, z, of the surface above the plane is given by such an equation P(x, y, z) I Fig. 2 picture plane two surfaces, and so it can be given mathematically by the equations for a pair of surfaces. Any point lying on two surfaces at the same time must lie on the curve in which they intersect each other. Part of the helix given by: x = cos(2/2) and y = sin(2/2) is shown in figure 3 from several points of view. By Gary Marshall "


"Mwhy $,953 KAYDE Electronic Systems ZX80/1 ZX KEYBOARD WITH REPEAT KEY Fully cased keyboard ........ .95 Uncased keyboard............ .95 Keyboard Case.................. .95 This is a highly professional keyboard using executive buttons as found on top quality computers. It has a repeat key and comes complete in its own luxury case. This is a genuine professional keyboard and should not be confused with toy keyboards currently available on the market. KAYDE 16K RAM PACKS 3.953 The 16K RAMPACK simply plugs straight into the user port at the rear of your computer. It is fully compatible with all accessories and needs no extra power and therefore it will run quite happily on your Sinclair power supply. It does not over-heat and will not lose memory at all. As you may know some makes go down to 11K after being on for a while. man This 16K RAMPACK is very stable and will not wobble or cause you to lose your programme. It comes fully built and tested with a complete money back Guarantee. KAYDE FLEXIBLE RIBBON CONNECTOR ries Stops movement of RAM PACK and other accessories (Not needed with a KAYDE RAMPACK) .957 MW KAYDE 4K GRAPHICS BOARD The KAYDE Graphics Board is probably our best accessory yet. It fits neatly inside your ZX81. It comes complete with a pre-programmed 4K Graphics ROM. This will give nearly 450 extra graphics and with the inverse makes a total of over nine hundred The KAYDE Graphics Board has facilities for either 2K of RAM (for user definable graphics) 4K of ROM or our 4K Tool Kit Chips that will be available shortly. All the graphics are completely software controlled therefore they can be written into your programmes. Here are a few examples: A full set of space invaders Puckman Bullets, Bombs-Tanks Laser Bases and Alien Ships NO EXTRA POWER NEEDED KAYDE 16K GRAPHICS BOARD SOFTWARE PECKMAN: The only true ZX version of the popular arcade game. CENTIPEDE: \"In all, I think this is the best presented moving graphics program I've yet seen\" Phil Garratt Interface. SPACE INVADERS: The best version available anywhere. Graphics software can only be used with a graphics board 345.953 me mu KAYDE 16K 81 SOFTWARE w Centipede \"In all I think this is the best presented moving graphics program I've yet seen\" Phil Garratt, Interface 3D/3D Labyrinth. A Cubit Maze that has corridors which may go left, right, up, down Peckmen (the latest addition in 81 games) WHY WAIT TO PAY MORE FAST, IMMEDIATE DELIVERY Please send me. ZX Keyboards with repeat key .95 each Please send me 16K RAMPACKS .95 each Post to: Dept CV8 Please send me Flexible ribbon connectors .95 each Please send me 4K graphics boards $29.95 each Kayde Electronic Systems Ltd Please send me 16K graphics board software .95 each Please send me 16K 81 software .95 each The Conge VISA Great Yarmouth I enclose Norfolk NR30 1PJ Name Tel: 0493 57867 (Dept. C.V.) Address Don't forget you can always order on the telephone with your credit card All products include VAT, are fully Please add .50 p&p for all hardware and 50p for all software. Please make built and tested and come with a cheques payable to Kayde Electronic Systems Ltd. COMPLETE MONEY BACK GUARANTEE COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 63 "


"GAMES PACK INCLUDES TITIGIULIUOI. INVASION SIMON FORTUNE From Dreams to Reality..... ! It's here at last! STARWARS BLACKJACK ALIEN B.B.C Microcomputer Games Pack 1 w e BIG SAVINGS ON B.B.C 2 010 Memory upgrade 16K W for  inc P+P BBC GAMES PACK 1 FOR ONLY Now Available CARNELL ZX81 ADVENTURE SPECIALISTS C2: VOLCANIC DUNGEONHANGMAN .50 A) VOLCANIC DUNGEON: Rescue if you can, the Elfin Princess. Mythical monsters, pits, fiery caverns, diminishing strength and water make your guest anything but easy. FULL 16K PROGRAM . SAVE GAME ROUTINE SINGLE KEY ENTRY \"Volcanic Dungeon is terrific value and I would recommend it to anyone.\" Mrs. Thomas, Cornwall B) HANGMAN: Delux version of the classic game. Play against an opponent, or the computer's 400 word vocabulary. Good graphics C3: ALIEN INTRUDER/HIEROGLYPHICS .00 A) ALIEN INTRUDER: You awaken to find you are the only survivor on the Explorer Class 3 Starship. Can you escape before you also fall victim to the Alien monstrosity that devoured the crew? There are many ways to end this adventure but only one way to survive! FULL 16K PROGRAM INTERACTIVE GRAPHICS SAVE GAME ROUTINE. B) HIEROGLYPHICS: Decode the ancient 39 symbol alphabet in time to save the famous explorer \"Wullie Makeit from a sandy grave FULL 16K PROGRAM ANIMATED GRAPHIC DISPLAY RANDOM CODE C4: WUMPUS ADVENTURE/MOVIE MOGUL .00 A) WUMPUS ADVENTURE: FOR 1 TO 4 PLAYERSI: Seek the famous creature in the most dangerous Wumpus hunt ever. All the usual features are there SUPER BATS PITS TREMORS SWAMPS MAGIC ARROWS PLUS Exciting new features: EVIL GOBLINS that will try to sacrifice you to the Wumpus. GIANT SERPENTS WUMPUS MUCK MAGIC SPRINGS FULL 16K PROGRAM RANDOM & PRESET CAVE PATTERNS YOU CONTROL THE LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY . GREAT FUN FOR YOU AND YOUR FRIENDS .. B) MOVIE MOGUL: Guide your film through the often hilarious traumas of production. Use your budget wisely and you may make a fortune. Success depends on many factors and not just luck FULL 16K PROGRAM ORDERS: Plus 50p P&P or large S.A.E. for list to: CARNELL SOFTWARE 4 Staunton Road, Slough, Berks. SL2 1NT The above are also available from: BUFFER MICROSHOP, STREATHAM, LONDON Stor B.B.C Microcomputer NWM Pack 2 3 Great Games Star Trek Puck Chase $10: Mastermind ww Both Packs for B.B.C models A and B for further information send large S.A.E. BBC GAMES PACK 2 2 FOR ONLY comD e rs 72 NORTH STREET, ROMFORD, ESSEX. TEL 0708 752862 S SOFTWARE for VIC 20 ZX81 BBC COMPUTING IS EASY David Parker Martin Hann is 4 user 4 VIC 20 SOFTWARE Demolition; Red Arrows; Targets: Hangman: Maze; Guess a Number GREAT OFFER! PICK ANY THREE GAMES FOR ONLY .95 GRAND PRIX AND NUCLEAR ATTACK 2 PROGRAMS FOR THE PRICE OF ONE. ONLY .95. VIC 20 MINEFIELD AT .25 ALL PROGRAMS RUN ON THE BASIC VIC 20 BBC MICROCOMPUTER OWNERS AN ADVENTURE GAME FOR THE 16K MACHINE DUNGEONS AND DRAGONS .25 ZX81 GAMES FOR THE 1K MACHINE SPECIAL OFFER! ANY 3 GAMES CAN BE SELECTED FOR ONLY .95 FLYING SAUCER, CHOPPER, THE BLOB. SPACE BOULDERS, THE RACE, COMPUTASKETCH. ALSO FOR THE ZX81 16K MACHINE Football Manager @ .95 Murgatroyds @.95 Space Invaders/ Star Trek + Space Rescue @.95 3D O's & X's .95 ZX-81 Chess @.90 Breakout @ .95 3D Monster Maze @.95 Space Intruders @.95 All prices include VAT & P+P. Rom & Cassette Software available for Sharp MZ80A & K Texas T199/4, Video Genie, Acorn Atom, Atari 400. Send SAE for free list. BEC COMPUTERWORLD PO BOX 2. 66 LIME STREET LIVERPOOL L1 1JN. Computing is Easy has been written for first time computer users, and younger readers in particular will find it a simple and readable introduction. It tells you what a personal computer is, how to program it, and how to get it working for you The easy-to-follow style and amusing cartoons will help you to learn about computer programming in BASIC. All technical terms are fully explained when they first appear, and the book contains sample programs for many popular makes of computer-ZX81. ZX Spectrum, Apple TRS80, Pet, BBC Micro. Research Machines 380Z etc. If you are a newcomer to computing, this book will prove to you that computing is easy 0408 01203 X 128 pages .95 ORDER NOW from your local Bookseller in case of Patricia Davies at the address below culty send chec /PO with order to ewnes Technical Books Borough Green Sevenoaks. Kent TN15 BPH Telephone: (0732) 884567 (CVG/8 B2) "


"GAMES SAY You are in the hands of chance only if you believe in luck, according to ARNOLD ARNOLD. In this article he examines \"So-called\" games of chance whether they are played on computers, on game boards or on the stock market. Great, Ghengis Khan, Napoleon or Adolf Hitler. But the available variety of dirty tricks is sufficiently great so that they will wear out and defeat any aggressor, no matter what he does, provided he can't wipe you out with the first blow. Unless that occurs — and it is rare or impossible, except in nuclear war he who strikes the first blow, or makes the first move in any game, suffers a severe numerical disadvantage. That disadvantage is precisely equal to the number of turns he enjoys, unless he knows how to play perfectly. This is a mathematically based Many game of chance players generals, admirals, investors and habitues of gambling casinos believe in luck. Good luck to them, but bad luck to those they command or whose money they invest. Games, love and war can only be understood in terms of human behaviour (subjectively), machine behaviour (relatively objectively) or mathematically (with total objectivity) The latter method can provide an understanding of all three, thanks to newly discovered mathematical techniques which merely confirm what some people have felt all along — although they usually get into terrible pub arguments. The new mathematics of games ends such arguments because you can't argue with the facts. For one thing the new mathematics demonstrates that luck and chance are human superstitions believed by those who want to evade responsibility for their own actions. Let's start by pitching penniesby hand or by computer. No luck is ever involved there. It all depends on whether or not you know what you and your game partner human or computer are doing. If neither knows what he is doing, first one and then the other may win for a while. If both pitch pennies in a random, mindless manner for long enough, that game will end in a draw. But if both players are perfect craftsmen and know how to manipulate the coin with precision, each will get what he wants every time. That's also a draw. The only genuine victory that can be achieved is when one player knows how to manipulate the coin perfectly and the other can't, and doesn't believe that this can be done. The same principle holds true for war games and for actual warfare. All wars are based on dirty tricks. They constitute the only winning strategies — just as in pitching pennies. The idea in war is to create maximum confusion for the opponent so that he makes mistakes. Then you move in for the kill. To try winning by brute force is stupid, expensive and eventually fatal. No one can keep that up forever, whether it's Alexander the Given the new mathematics of games and a little self-discipline, anyone can win steadily and consistently at roulette, or any other socalled game of chance, unless the table is fixed, the croupier knows how to manipulate ball and table with relative precision, or the betting rules are rigged. Except for random programming that is nonetheless limited or deliberate exclusion of certain combinations, computers can't be made to cheat. The limits of systematic machine randomization can now be defined mathematically. That poses a threat for many who write game programs and for gambling casinos, but only from knowledgable players who are first rate mathematicians. The possibilities for human cheating may seem endless. But even such cheating has its limits. Once all cheating methods are known, no-one can ever take advantage of anyone else. One of the so-called winning ploys in what were believed to be games of chance consists of temporary alliances that are dissolved as soon as convenient. Then you turn on your former ally when he least expects it. That is virtually the only way to succeed at Monopoly, Risk and in other games in which such strategies are not expressly forbidden by the rules. But these realistic policies are difficult to apply in computer games, unless specifically allowed for in the program. As in the previous article which dealt with Space Invaders, the difference between defensive and attack strategies become clear. As far as any attacker is concerned anything goes. Defenders are best off with those they can count on to remain loyal, come what may. None of this involves any moral judgments. These are mathematically verifiable facts which are confirmed by experience, The trouble with war games is that one wonders to what they lead? What is won when the opposition is wiped out? In real life there is then no one with (or against) whom to play. In games, one war game can only lead to another. No chance, luck or fate is ever involved in either case. statement. Anyone can verify it by comparing the sum of choices available to the first moving player in Noughts and Crosses. This disadvantage declines towards the end of the game, but then it doesn't matter any more. The game ends in a draw when the first moving player's numerical disadvantage declines to zero. These facts are even true for games that are traditionally known as games of chance and luck. As every poker player knows, the player who makes the first bet is said to be under the gun. That is a very big disadvantage. illustration: Jon Davis COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 65 "


"THE DESKTOP GENIUS. Now from Sharp, the Sharp MZ 80A. A personal computer that is ready to run the moment you own it. Because the CRT display, the typewriter-style keyboard and the cassette-based data storage are all integrated into one complete system that leads the operator, either amateur or professional, into an incredible new computer world. For this computer has the power to do virtually anything within the range of Personal Computers. In it, Sharp has combined MZ 80FB Twin Mini Floppy Disc Unit. MZ 80P6 Character Graphic Printer Also available MZ 80P4 and MZ 80P5 all its fine electronic technology in the field of information engineering to create a marvel of precision. Plus, when you purchase you get a valuable software package absolutely free. The superb Sharp MZ 80A. Among its competitors, it is rated as a genius. To you, it will become a desktop companion you will treasure, an invaluable part of your daily life. Bringing to your school, office or home, the high-speed skills and advanced technology of the world of Sharp. Where great ideas come to life. Specifications MZ 80A CPU Z 80 Memory 4K-byte ROM; 48K-byte RAM; + 2K-byte Video RAM Display 9 inch (23 cm): 40 characters x 25 lines. Green screen Cassette Manual control, standard audio cassette tape. Data transfer (Sharp PWM system) 1,200 bits/sec. Keyboard ASC11 keyboard: upper-/lower-case alphabet: graphic symbols, numeric keypad. Other features Built-in clock and music function. Auto repeat on all keys. 2-page video RAM (allows the screen to be scrolled up and down) *CP/M available "


"SHARP FERRERO Floppy Disc Unit (MZ 80FB) Two drives per unit: 5.25\" dual-sided, double density: 70 tracks; soft-sectored; 16 sectors per track. Memory capacity 280K bytes per diskette. yte Printer Optional Printers specifications MZ 80P4 MZ 80P5 MZ 80P6 Printing method Serial impact dot matrix Feed method Variable Variable Variable sprocket sprocket sprocket; Friction Friction kinds of characters 230 Character make-up 9(W) x 8(H) dot matrix (normal size characters) Number of digits 136/68 per line 80/40 per line 160/80 136/68 per line per line Printing speed 150 cps 80 cps (normal-size characters) characters) Head sweep direction Bi-directional Other functions  Software-controlled full graphic function  Programmable number of lines per page  Battery-operated memory of HOME position (MZ 80P4 only) Design and specifications subject to change without notice. To: Sharp Electronics (UK) Ltd, Computer Division, Sharp House, Thorp Road, Newton Heath, Manchester M109BE. Tel: 061-205 2333. Please send me details of the Sharp MZ 80A Type of application: Name: Address: em) The world of SHARP where great ideas come to life. to *CP/Mis a trademark of Digital Research Ltd. "


"RSONAL CT ge nd LON intel vated lan ese, ATTI wish may ra ge. s. Se mar LONELY Genie I Microcomputer, early eighties, with large peripheral family but currently unattached, would like to meet interesting, attractively packaged software, Genie or Tandy specification, for programming, problem solving, entertainment and long-lasting friendship. Reply in confidence. Box No RS232. nt SO med (mu. tion. hum or a Vay, ngenious but lonely! MAL to nop wai wis ANSWERING MACHINES fice certified Buying your first Genie I microcomputer is just the start of a long and enthralling adventure, for it won't be long before you will want to expand your system with some of the wide range of peripherals which make up the complete Genie System. Firstly there is the The supreme advantage of the Genie I system is Expansion Box, its compatibility with the TRS 80, which means that literally 1000's of pre-recorded programs are which immediately expands your already available, just waiting to be plugged into Genie's capacity to 32K RAM, and your Genie! up to 48K RAM frequired. It can be connected to 4 disk drives, a The recent improvements in the Genie system, printer, RS232 interface or S100 including Extended Basic, sound unit and cards. machine language monitor, make it the ideal Then there is the system for the committed hobbyist, and an excellent and easy-to-use educational tool. Printer a compact unit with 80 column, 5 x 7 matrix print-out, which connects SPECIAL TECHNICAL GENIE to your Genie through the Expander, or via the Parallel HOT-LINE ON 0629 4995 Printer Interface. for all your technical advice and service back-up on any aspect of the Genie system direct from the experts Please send me FREE, 16 page colour brochure on the Genie Computer System. I enclose 25p postage. The Disk Drive gives you greater storage capacity and full random access file handling, with the option of double-density through a special adapter. New Dual Disk Drive now available! Name Address Finally, there is Genie's very own 12\" Monitor a must if you want to let the rest of the family watch their T.V. in peace! Available in B & W or green tube. Telephone CVG-B2 Chesterfield Road, Matlock, Derbyshire DE4 5LE. electromos Telephone: 0629 4995. Telex: 377482 Lowlec G. 68 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"THE KEYBOARD QUESTION For the unadventurous, replacing the keyboard on the Sinclair machines can seem a daunting task. There is a large selection of possible keyboards now available, for the ZX81 in particular, and it can be confusing to decide exactly what you need from the keyboards and how much hardware you wish to fit inside the case. Most of the models currently on the market have been produced in the same form for some time. They are usually about three-quarters of the size of a normal QWERTY keyboard which makes them especially attractive to users of the ZX81 who wish to keep their system as compact as possible. The case provided with many of the keyboards are even large enough to house the ZX81 itself. Unfortunately, for those who regularly use a full size keyboard, and are familiar with its \"feel\" there is, as far as I know, no alternative. That is, unless you are prepared to do a little modifying with knife and soldering iron. There are available, I know, several versions of unencoded matrix keyboard but as Sinclair uses a non-standard matrix, as tions will be effected by wire links. This will make your job all the easier, as all you will have to do on this side is to rearrange the links. The trouble will come when the tracks on the bottom of the board have to be changed. Fortunately, here, the most frequently used means of key connection is by soldering a fine wire in a very large plated-through hole. This will, as a consequence, mean that there will be plenty of room for the new connecting wires when you come to reassemble the board. After unsoldering the keys the next and most important step to take is to make a sketch of the board and all the usable connections. It is no good rewiring the board and then finding out that you have made a wrong connection somewhere. It will invariably be in the most inconvenient place, according to Murphy's Law, chapter two. Once you have convinced yourself that you have the matrix right, and you can refer to the diagram in last month's edition, the offending tracks must be cut and replaced by wire links. Do not remove the track at all, but cut through it with a very sharp knife. This will allow you, if you wish, to modify the board later to a different matrix without much trouble. I prefer to use singlestranded wire for this type of job but multistranded will do. Try to make the links as short as possible pppp Spele 11-2-3-45 6 7 8 9 0 Q-w-E-RI YU TOP A S D E G H-J-K-L-n sh -x-cV B-N-Msp you use the same sort of socket. These, fortunately, are generally available from \"most good stores\", as is the connecting strip. The modification above can, of course, be made on almost any type of keyboard, even the encoded type, which normally has an RS232 output. This would become redundant if the matrix is changed, though. These keyboard are, however very expensive for a straight modification and it is possible to alter them for both forms of operation. This is a very tricky job as the matrix must work in both systems and should only be undertaken by those who know how the UART (look it up) functions. Of course, second hand keyboards are available in junk shops and at computer bring-andbuy sales and many other places. These are ideal to practice on as they are cheap (as little as ) for the associated electronics are often defunct. You can make the most of the board by fitting extra sockets to take joysticks and other associated add-ons. Also, the boxes for these keyboards are large enough to take the machine, the power supply and the memory pack if you wish. You would then be left with only the printer and any other controls you yourself had added, to carry separately. RP3 LKBD 2 EKBD 1 shown last month, these are not suitable in their original form. If you contemplate buying a full size keyboard for your ZX80/81/ Spectrum try to get one in kit form. This will save you the job of having to unsolder all or most of the keys when you come to modify the matrix, as the connecting tracks are often on both sides of the board. If you are very lucky the top connecand as close to the board as you can this will ensure the machine is robust. On the board there should be a connector of some sort that would have taken the signal from the original matrix. You may decide to use this one or one of your choice. Whichever it is you will find it difficult to attach the same type of connector as is used by Sinclair unless BY KEITH MONT "


"PRACTICAL PROGRAMMING 1000 GET AS 1010 IF A$ = \"L\" THEN GOTO 2000 1020 IF A$ = \"R\" THEN GOTO 2100 1030 IF A$ = \"U\" THEN GOTO 2200 1040 IF A$ = \"D\" THEN GOTO 2300 1050 IF A$ = \"F\" THEN GOTO 2400 1060 According to the key pressed the program will branch to a routing to perform the appropriate action; if no key is pressed or if the key pressed has no defined function the program will continue. left, right, up, down, and are easily remembered by their positions relative to 5. The keys 7, 9, 1, 3 can also be used for movement in the appropriate direction. Another possibility is to use cursor control keys, if they are available, to implement directional movement. DO YOU TALK TO YOUR USERS? Even some professional software tapes fall down in the vital area of communicating with the person who will end up using them. Communicating instructions or other help in deciding what the computer next expects of its player is an important part of the games program and should be built into the program at an early stage. There are two types of input routine: in the first type the program looks to see if an input is ready and continues if there is not, in the second the program stops until an input is ready. The two forms are implemented in Basic by GET or INKEY$ for the first and INPUT for the second, although there are other differences. GET and INKEY$ are extensively used in interactive action games, where the display and the state of the game must be continuously upWHICH KEY DOES THAT? An important consideration in this type of program is the actual specification of which key does what. The keys and their functions should be easy for the player to remember; the above example satisfies this criterion if L, R, U, D, F stand for \"move left\", \"move right\", \"move up\", \"move down\", \"fire\". It is less satisfactory to use, say, the digits 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 as there is no immediate connection between the digit and IMMEDIATE RESPONSE In the action games, considered above, the program responds to one key at a time and the response is immediate. The player is given no chance to correct an error, but since such games are mainly a test of speed and dexterity pressing the wrong key is one of the hazards of the game. However, in strategy games and data processing applications we need a different approach to errors. As an example, consider the problem of checking the player's move in a game of chess. A standard format for specifying the squares on the board and the moves is to label the columns, from left to right, with the letters a to h, and the rows, from bottom to top with the digits 1 to 8. A square is specified by the column letter and row digit, and a move is specified by giving the starting square and finishing square of the move. For example, e2 is the square at the fifth column and second row, e4 is the square at the fifth column and fourth row, and e2e4 means move the piece on square e2 to square e4, as an opening move this would be, in another standard chess notation, P-K4, pawn to king four. dated whether or not the player has done anything, while INPUT is more often used in games where turns alternate or in applications where the program processes data that is typed in. In an interactive action game there is usually little difficulty in processing the result from a GET or INKEY$ instruction. It is often possible to have a single routine to handle the player's responses, which will work something like the following: BY TED BALL the corresponding action and the player will have to learn arbitrary key values before he can really get into the game. On machines with a numeric keypad separate from the main keyboard the keypad is often used to define direction of movement. With the standard layout: 789 456 123 O?? The keys 4, 6, 8, 2 can be used for THE CHECKING PROCESS The checking process can be divided into two parts: first, checking that the input string has a valid form for the specification of a move, and second, checking that a valid form specifies a legal move accord70 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"PRACTICAL PROGRAMMING Com ing to the rules of the game. To use some jargon, the first part of the checking process is a \"syntactic\" problem, while the second part is a \"semantic\" problem. The distinction is that syntax refers to form while semantics refers to meaning. In general, syntactic problems are much simpler than semantic problems, and this is certainly the case in checking a chess move. The syntax for a move can be defined precisely as requiring exactly four characters of which the first and third are letters from a to h and the second and fourth are digits from 1 to 8. This can easily be checked by a simple routine, for example: 1000 IF LEN (M$) < >4 THEN GOTO 2000 1010 IF MIDS(M$, 1, 1) < \"a\" OR MIDS(M$, 3, 1)>\"h\" THEN GOTO 2000 1020 IF MID$(M$, 2, 1) < \"1\" OR MID$(M$, 4, 1) > \"8\" THEN GOTO 2000 where line 2000 is the start of the error report routine. Android Nim: \"Get a move on we haven't got all day!\" and scientific applications it could be disastrous. Although a games magazine is not the place to discuss such applications every programmer should appreciate the importance of data validation. THE POLITE COMPUTER ARE YOU SURE THAT'S LEGAL? The semantic problem of deciding if a syntactically correct move is legal is much more complicated; too complicated to deal with fully here. A little thought will reveal some of the things that must be checked: does the player have a piece on the first square specified; is the second square vacant; if the second square is occupied is it occupied by one of the player's pieces or one of the computer's pieces; does the move expose the player's king to check. If a chess program is to be effective the routine that checks a move for legality must be thorough and efficient as the main use made of such a routine will not be checking that the player's moves are legal but in generating possible moves for the program. When the program is testing many lines of play for several moves ahead the move generator may be used thousands of times and must be very fast to avoid unacceptably long times for deciding on moves In game programs where the rules and the format of the input are precisely defined it is always possible to make a complete check on the input for validity and legality, and this should always be done. A program should never accept an invalid move and all invalid inputs should be trapped by checking routines written into the program and not left to the programming language or operating system. For example: in a gambling program if you try to bet 100 when you only have 50 the program should detect this and give a message like \"You don't have that much, try again\". If the program accepts the 100 it may later try to use the 50 left after subtracting 100 from 50 in an expression where negative numbers are inadmissable. In that case you would get a system error message, \"Function call error in 1234,\" or something similar. The program would then terminate and the machine would go back to Basic command mode, which could be confusing to someone who does not write programs and only uses his computer to run pre-recorded programs, and would be annoying to someone who had typed in 100 when he meant 10 and has been given no chance to correct his mistake. In game programs, failing to trap an invalid input is at most annoying to the user, but in serious business As a corollary to the trapping of errors we should also give some though to the form of the error messages given after an error has been detected. All messages from a program should be informative and polite. In some cases it may be sufficient to say simply \"Error\" or \"Invalid command\", in other cases it may be necessary to be more specific, for example in chess suitable error messages may be \"That move would put you in check\" or \"You already have a piece on E4\". Regarding politeness in error messages you often find messages like: \"You can't go there, you rotten cheat\" or, (a real example) in Android Nim, if you are slow in making a move you will be told: \"Get a move on, we haven't got all day\". Such things may be amusing the first few times you see them but by the 100th time they are just annoying. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 71 "


"MEMOTECH Explores the Excellence of your ZX81 MEMOPAK 326 MEMOPAK 16K THIS MONTHMEMOPAK 32K RAM Operates in tandem with Sinclair 16K Ram to give a full 48K! MEMOPAK 64K MEMOPAK GIRG NEW PAKS! VEWOPAH CENTRONICS I/F Memotech's Memopak Range 69 70 All five of the currently available Memopaks are housed in elegant black anodised aluminium cases, and are styled to fit wobble-free onto the back of the ZX81, allowing more add-ons (from Memotech or Sinclair) to be connected. MEMOPAK 64K MEMORY EXTENSION The 64K Memopak extends the memory of the ZXB1 by 56K, and with the ZX81 gives 64K, which is neither switched nor paged and is directly addressable. The unit is user transparent and accepts commands such as 10 DIM A(9000). plus VAT Breakdown of memory areas...0-8K-Sinclair ROM. 8-16K-This area can be used to hold machine code for communication between programmes or peripherals. 16-64K-A straight 48K for normal Basic use.  43/26° MEMOPAK 32K and 16K MEMORY EXTENSIONS These two packs extend and complete the Memotech RAM range (for the time being!) A notable feature of the plus VAT 32K pack is that it will run in tandem with the Sinclair 16K memory extension to give 48K RAM total. MEMOPAK HIGH RES GRAPHICS PACK HRG Main Features Fully programmable Hi-Res (192 x 248 pixels). Video page is both memory and bit mapped and can be located anywhere in RAM.. Number of Video pages is limited only by RAM size (each takes about 6.5K RAM)  Instant inverse video on/off gives flashing characters Video pages can be superimposed. Video page access is similar to Basic plot/unplot commands Contains 2K EPROM monitor with full range of graphics subroutines controlled by machine code or USR function  plus VAT 3470 plus VAT MEMOPAK CENTRONICS TYPE PARALLEL PRINTER INTERFACE Main Features Interfaces ZX81 and parallel printers of the Centronics type. Enables use of a range of dot matrix and daisy wheel printers with ZX8I. Compatible with ZX8I Basic, prints from LLIST, LPRINT and COPY SCII code  Gives lower-case characters from ZX8l inverse character set Total MEMOPAK RAM HI-RES GRAPHICS Coming Soon... CENTRES PAR Please make Please send me cheques payable to 64K RAM 168.70 + .30 VAT 32K RAM ,434 .52 VAT. Please Debit my | 16K RAM 26,00 + .90 VT Access/Barclaycard HRG .00 + .80 VAT account number CENTRONICS VF .70 5.20 VAT does not apply Packaging & Postage .00 per unit Price No 79,00 .95 .90 .80 239.90 ZX81 286L plog & G.A.C TOTAL ENC Please Tel. Oxford (0865) 722102 A complete range of ZX81 plug-in peripherals Digitising Tablet RS232 Interface We regret we are as yet unable to accept orders or enquiries concerning the above products, but we'll let you know as soon as they become available. SIGNATURE anton NAME DATE ADDRESS TELEPHONE We want to be sure you are satisfied with your Memopak so we offer a 14-day money back Guarantee on all our products Memotech Limited, 3 Collins Street, Oxford OX4 1XL, England Tel: Oxford (0865) 722102 Telex: 837220 Orchid G 72 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"*1 P(n) Flags are objects seldom found in Adventure games, but they often play a useful part hidden in the program. We will arrange for an array C(n) to provide a flag for each object, and its value to be negative if the object must not be taken. Consider a location numbered (say) 4, a garden. Lying around innocently at other locations will be found a SPADE (object No. 5), a BEAN (No. 9), a BUCKET (No. 12) and a pond. Figure I will remind you of the relevant variable names. The objective will be to dig a hole, plant the bean, and grow a beanstalk. Before it can grow to its full height it must be watered. The command DIG will return a value of Kl when decoded and via an ON KI GOTO (line no) statement, control will pass to line (say) 5000: 5000 REM 'DIG ROUTINE 5010 IF P(5)< >50 THEN LET Q1$ \"NOTHING TO DIG WITH\": GOTO 100 5011 REM THE FOOL FORGOT THE SPADE! 5020 IF LN<>4 THEN LET Q1$ = \"NOT HERE!\": GOTO 100 5021 REM MUST BE IN GARDEN 5030 IF C(5)< >2 THEN LET Q1$ = \"NOT AGAIN!\": GOTO 100 5031 REM ONLY ONE HOLE PERMITTED VARIABLE DESCRIPTION LN Current location no. of player Decoded number of verb input K2 Decoded number of noun input Q1$ & Q2$ Computer's current reply R35 2nd word of player's input OS (n) Object description array Object location no. array (if P(n)-50 it is held by player) C(n) Object flag E$(n) Exit code string for location n DS(n) Destination code string for loc'n 'n FIGURE ONE 5040 LET Q1$ = \"OK\":LET C(5) C(5)=4:LET L$(4)=\"GARDEN'LET =3:LET L$ (4)=L$(4)+ \"WITH A P(9)=LN:LET C(9)=-1:LET 0$(9) SMALL HOLE\":GOTO 100 \"BEAN-SHOOT\":GOTO 100 5041 REM C(5)=3HOLE IS DUG 6051 REM (1) C(5) NOW SAYS By having increased C(5) by 1 we BEAN IS PLANTED can control a PLANT routine:(2) HOLE REMOVED FROM LOCA6000 REM 'PLANT\" ROUTINE TION DESCRIPTION 6010 IF K2< >9 THEN LET Q1$= \"I (3) LOCATION OF BEAN FROM CAN'T PLANT A \"+R3$:GOTO 100 PLAYER TO GARDEN 6011 REM K2 = DECODE NO. FOR (4) BEAN MADE UNTAKEABLE BEAN & ONLY BEAN CAN BE (C(9) IS-VE) PLANTED (5) BEAN DESCRIPTION 6020 IF P(9)< >50 THEN LET CHANGED TO 'BEAN-SHOOT Q1$ = \"I've NOT GOT ONE\" :GOTO Now the plant must be watered. 100 Note that C(12)=2 for an empty 6030 IF LN< >4 THEN LET Q1$ = bucket and 3 if bucket contains \"NOT HERE\":GOTO 100 water. 6031 REM ONLY IN GARDEN 7000 REM 'WATER' ROUTINE 6040 IF C(5)<>3 THEN LET Q1$ 7010 IF P(12)< >50 OR C(12)< >3 \"NO HOLE IN SIGHT\":GOTO 100 6041 REM MAKE SURE DIGGING IS THEN LET Q1$=\"NO WATER\" GOTO 100 DONE 7011 REM NO BUCKET, OR NO 6050 LET Q1$=\"OK\":LET WATER IN IT! 7020 IF K2<>9 OR LN<>4 THEN Let Q1$ = \"SPLASH!\": LET C(12) = 2:GOTO 100 nounced \"YOUR NEXT MOVE IS SO 7021 REM IF NOT BEAN OR GAROBVIOUS I SHALL NOT MENTION IT\" DEN WATER GOES TO WASTE so I cried \"HELP\". The Wizard 7030 IF C(5) <4 THEN LET Q1$=\"I was obviously still sulking from my DON'T UNDERSTAND\":GOTO 100 earlier deceit, and refused. 7031 REM IF BEAN NOT PLANTED I promptly typed in a short sharp 7040 IF C(5)=4 THEN LET phrase suggesting what should be Q1$=\"OK\":LET 02$=\"BOY DID done to the wizard, and to my disIT GROW! \"LET C(12)=2:LET may I read \"THE DENIZENS OF THE 0(9)=\"BEANSTALK\":LET E$ (4) ADVENTURE HAVE DELICATE EARS. =E$(4)+ \"U\":LET D$(4)=D$(4)+\"37\" GAME ENDED BY ORDER OF THE LET C(5)=6:GOTO 100 PROGRAMMER. J. SPILSBURY\". 7041 REM GIVES NEW EXIT UP Eventually, of course, I got in to AND NEW DESTINATION 37. the cavern. The method was so LOC'N 37 IS TOP OF BEANSTALK obvious I shall not bother to tell 7050 LET Q1$=\"OK\":GOTO 100 you!!! 7051 REM DEFAULT IF STALK HAS Atom Adventure from Program ALREADY GROWN Power is in Basic and requires 12K of memory. The game's speed of If he took the right steps the execution was disappointing but this player has now grown a beanstalk. was more than compensated for by We have prevented him from the game's chatty manner and novel making any mistakes, and forced turn of phrase. him to grow it exactly as we wanted ... Hey Presto! DEALING WITH THE WIZARD I typed \"RUN\" and \"ARE YOU A WIZARD?\" flashed on the screen. \"YES\", I lied. \"ENTER THE PASSWORD\" commanded the computer. A wrong guess caused the Atom to call me a charlatan and terminate the game. Next time round I admitted that I wasn't really a wizard, and found myself on a twisty road through a dense forest. A hardy Adventurer will rarely venture anywhere exciting without a lamp, keys, and an axe. As I had now collected these essentials guessed it must be time to enter the cavern up the road. But how to get in? The entrance was closed, and no amount of violence to rocks and doors helped. An extensive search for an alternative way in proved fruitless. The computer suddenly anby KEITH CAMPBELL "


"New ZX81 Software from Sinclair 2X81 3 EDAS SUB 2 A whole new range of software for the Sinclair ZX81 Personal Computer is now available direct from Sinclair Produced by ICL and Psion, these really excellent cassettes cover games, education, and business/ household management. Some of the more elaborate programs can only be run on a ZX81 augmented by the ZX 16K RAM pack. (The description of each cassette makes it clear what hardware is required.) The RAM pack provides 16times more memory in one complete module, and simply plugs into the rear of a ZX81. And the price has just been dramatically reduced to only .95. The Sinclair ZX Printer offer full alphanumerics and highly-sophisticated graphics. A special feature is COPY which prints out exactly what is on the whole TV screen without the need for further instructions. So now you can print out your results for a permanent record. The ZX Printer plugs into the rear of your ZX81, and you can connect a RAM pack as well. Games Cassette G1: Super Programs 1 (ICL) Hardware required.ZX81. Price .95. Programs Invasion from Jupiter. Skittles. Magic Square. Doodle, Kim. Liquid Capacity Description Five games programs plus easy conversion between pints/ gallons and litres. Cassette G2: Super Programs 2 (ICL) Hardware required ZX81. Price .95. Programs Rings around Saturn. Secret Code. Mindboggling. Silhouette. Memory Test. Metric conversion. Description Five games plus easy conversion between inches/feet/yards and centimetres/metres. Cassette G3: Super Programs 3 (CL) Hardware required ZX81. Price .95. Programs Train Race. Challenge. Secret Message. Mind that Meteor. Character Doodle. Currency Conversion. Description Fives games plus currency conversion at will-for example, dollars to pounds. Cassette G4: Super Programs 4 (ICL) Hardware required ZX81. Price .95. Programs Down Under. Submarines. Doodling with Graphics. The Invisible Invader. Reaction. Petrol. Description Five games plus easy conversion between miles per gallon and European fuel consumption figures. Cassette G5: Super Programs 5 (ICL) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95. Programs Martian Knock Out. Graffiti. Find the Mate. Labyrinth. Drop a Brick Continental Description Five games plus easy conversion between English and continental dress sizes. Cassette G6: Super Programs 6 (ICL) Hardware required ZX 81 + 16K RAM. Price .95. Programs Galactic Invasion, Journey into Danger. Create. Nine Hole Golf. Solitaire. Daylight Robbery. Description Six games making full use of the ZX81's moving graphics capability. Cassette G7: Super Programs 7 (ICL) Hardware required ZX81. Price: .95. Programs Racetrack. Chase. NIM. Tower of Hanoi. Docking the Spaceship. Golf. Description Six games including the fascinating Tower of Hanoi problem. Cassette G8: Super Programs 8 (ICL) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95. Programs Star Trail (plus blank tape on side 2). Description Can you, as Captain Church of the UK spaceship Endeavour, rid the galaxy of the Klingon menace? Cassette G9: Biorhythms (ICL) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95. Programs What are Biorhythms? Your Biohythms. Description When will you be at your peak (and trough) physically, emotionally, and intellectually? Cassette G10: Backgammon (Psion) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95. Programs Backgammon. Dice. Description A great program, using fast and efficient machine code, with graphics board, rolling dice, and doubling dice. The dice program can be used for any dice game. Cassette G11: Chess (Psion) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95. Programs Chess, Chess Clock. Description Fast, efficient machine code, a graphic display of the board and pieces, plus six levels of ability, combine to make this one of the best chess programs available. The Chess Clock program can be used at any time. Cassette G12: Fantasy Games (Psion) Hardware required ZX81 (or ZX80 with 8K BASIC ROM) + 16K RAM. Price .75. Programs Perilous Swamp. Sorcerer's Island. Description Perilous Swamp: rescue a beautiful princess from the evil wizard Sorcerer's Island: you're marooned. To escape, you'll probably need the help of the Grand Sorcerer. Cassette G13: Space Raiders and Bomber (Psion) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95 Programs Space Raiders. Bomber Description Space Raiders is the ZX81 version of the popular pub game. Bomber: destroy a city before you hit a sky-scraper Cassette G14: Flight Simulation (Psion) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95. Program Flight Simulation (plus blank tape on side 2) Description Simulates a highly manoeuvrable light aircraft with full controls, instrumentation, a view through the cockpit window, and navigational aids. Happy landings! Education Cassette E1: Fun to Learn series English Literature 1 (ICL) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95. Programs Novelists. Authors. Description Who wrote 'Robinson Crusoe'? Which novelist do you associate with Father Brown? Cassette E2: Fun to Learn series English Literature 2 (ICL) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95 Programs Poets, Playwrights. Modern Authors. Description Who wrote 'Song of the Shirt'? Which playwright also played cricket for England? "


"Sinclair Cassette B3: VU-CALC (Psion) Hardware required ZX81 +16K RAM. Price .95. Program VU-CALC. Description Turns your ZX81 into an immensely powerful analysis chart. VU-CALC constructs, generates and calculates large tables for applications such as financial analysis, budget sheets, and projections. Complete with full instructions. Cassette B4: VU-FILE (Psion) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95. Programs -VU-FILE. Examples Description A general-purpose information storage and retrieval program with emphasis on user-friendliness and visual display. Use it to catalogue your collection, maintain records or club memberships, keep track of your accounts, or as a telephone directory Business/household Cassette B1: The Collector's Pack (ICL) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95 Program Collector's Pack, plus blank tape or side 2 forprogram/data storage. Description This comprehensive program should allow collectors (of stamps, coins etc.) to hold up to 400 records of up to 6 different items on one cassette. Keep your records up to date and sorted into order. Cassette B2: The Club Record Controller (ICL) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95. Program Club Record Controller plus blank tape on side 2 for program/data storage. Description Enables clubs to hold records of up to 100 members on one cassette. Allows for names, addresses, 'phone numbers plus five lots of additional information eg type of membership How to order Simply use the FREEPOST order form below and either enclose a cheque or give us your credit card number. Credit card holders can order by phone simply call Camberley (0276) 66104 or 21282 during office hours. Either way, please allow up to 28 days for delivery, and there's a 14-day money-back option, of course. ir's ard. To Sinclair ZX81 SOFTWARE M. 81 Sinclair Research Ltd, Stanhope Road, Camberley, Surrey, GU15 3PS Tel: Camberley (0276) 66104 & 21282. it a Cassette E3: Fun to Learn series Geography 1 (ICL) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM Price .95. Programs Towns in England and Wales. Countries and Capitals of Europe. Description The computer shows you a map and a list of towns. You locate the towns correctly. Or the computer challenges you to name a pinpointed location. Cassette E4: Fun to Learn series History 1 (ICL) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95. Programs Events in British History. British Monarchs. Description From 1066 to 1981, find out when important events occurred. Recognise monarchs in an identity parade. Cassette E5: Fun to Learn series Mathematics 1 (ICL) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95. Programs Addition/Subtraction. Multiplication/Division Description Questions and answers on basic mathematics at different levels of difficulty Cassette E6: Fun to Learn series Music 1 (ICL) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95. Programs Composers. Musicians. Description Which instrument does James Galway play? Who composed 'Peter Grimes'? Cassette E7: Fun to Learn series Inventions 1 (ICL) Hardware required ZX81 +16K RAM. Price .95. Programs Inventions before 1850. Inventions since 1850. Description Who invented television? What was the 'dangerous Lucifer'? Cassette E8: Fun to Learn series Spelling 1 (ICL) Hardware required ZX81 + 16K RAM. Price .95. Programs -Series A1-A15. Series B1-B15. Description Listen to the word spoken on your tape recorder, then spell it out on your ZX81. 300 words in total suitable for 6-11 year olds. sion) To: Sinclair Research, FREEPOST, Camberley, Surrey, GU15 3BR. Please send me the items I have indicated below. ank Item Code price Total .95 Item price Total Code .95 46 .95 Qty Cassette E2: English Literature 2 E3: Geography 1 E4: History 1 E5: Mathematics 1 E6. Music 1 47 26.95 888888 26.95 Qty Cassette G1: Super Programs 1 G2 Super Programs 2 G3 Super Programs 3 G4: Super Programs 4 G5: Super Programs 5 G6: Super Programs 6 G7: Super Programs 7 G8: Super Programs 8 G9: Biorhythms G10: Backgammon G11: Chess G12: Fantasy Games G13: Space Raiders & Bomber G14: Flight Simulation E1: English Literature 1 .95 EB: Spelling 1 B1: Collector's Pack B2: Club Record Controller B3: VU-CALC B4: VU-FILE ZX 16K RAM pack ZX Printer Post & packing only if ordering hardware 51 52 53 54 55 18 27 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 42 43 4 .95 .95 .95 4  TOTALE I enclose a cheque/postal order to Sinclair Research Ltd for  Please charge my Access/Barclaycard/Trustcard no. * Please delete as applicable. Mr/Mrs/Miss L LLLLLLLLL Address LLLLLLL ern LLLLLLLLLLLL LLLLLLLLLLLL NSA 12 "


"E SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SO REVIEWS REV WARTIME FLIGHTS OF FANCY game must be followed on a map. It is difficult to develop a good strategy, and the game London's safety rests on your BATTLE OF BRITAIN RATTIE NE RRITAIN bomber an aerial battle occurs. generally lacks realism. tactical ability as commander of One minor criticism is that the The program is also poorly crack fighter squadrons as you This, coupled with the fact that computer simply displays the written but with considerable refight the Battle of Britain. you are meant to use counters or word \"attacking\" when squad-writing it could be made into a Nine fighter squadrons are at a marker pen to follow the moverons are locked in combat and all stimulating simulation. your disposal to beat off attacks ments of the squadrons on the contact is lost. Battle of Britain runs on a 16K from nine German bomber map, does not make the game British fighters have to return ZX81 and is available from Camsquadrons. Each bomber follows very easy to play. to base for refuelling. A problem bridge based Microgame Simulaa different route towards its des commands you can send to which does not plague the tions for .95. tination. If 100 or more German your squadrons are: scramble, enemy forces as they are equipplanes reach London the battle is patrol, report, return to base and ped with long range fuel tanks. lost. change course. You must follow Battle of Britain may appeal to The computer allows you to each command with a squadron the keen wargamer but it will be send instructions to individual number. of little interest to the average squadrons and it controls the If a British fighter comes with ZX81 user, due mainly to the lack movement of British and German in five kilometres of a German of graphics and the fact that the forces. But there are no graphics. To follow this wargame simulation you must use a map. I am sure this will deter many potential buyers of the game and it certainly detracts from its realism. A sketch map showing the starting positions of the British forces is provided along with the cassette which loaded first time and the fairly comprehensive instruction leaflet. The controls are easy to use, but you can't spend very long deciding what to do next. The program continually updates the squadron positions and status. keyboard. This allows you to typ in your answer, but be careful if your answer is wrong 5 points will be deducted. You then have the option of CANDY FLOSS If you have ever had the inclinaquestions. By pressing L, a list of having another try at solving the When the sun is shining on tion to be a detective, Murder at suspects and weapons will murder or giving up. Blackpool beach and Mum has Awesome Hall will give you the appear. The game is not visually excitonly enough money for just one opportunity to test your powers The computer will occasioning and rapidly becomes boring. whispy sugary delight six-yearof deduction ally give you extra clues. Murder at Awesome Hall olds dream of becoming candy Written for the Atari 400/800 When you think you have costs .50 from Calisto Softfloss magnates. computers, Murder at Awesome the case solved press C on the ware and requires 16K. Candy Floss will either make Hall is very similar to the board that dream come true or turn it game Cluedo. into a nightmare of bad weather, Your job is to discover who miserable clientel and disruptive murdered Colonel Awesome, donkeys. which of the 20 rooms the murCandy Floss sets certain parader was committed in and which meters for you to discover a weapon was used. recipe by trial and error, for sucTo assist in solving the myscess on the beach. You are given tery, you are provided with an on the cost of basic raw materials screen floor plan of both the (sugar), the cost of advertising ground floor and the first floor. posters, and an accurate weathAfter entering a room, presser report. You have to decide ing allows you to discover who how much candy to make, how or what is in the room. If the many advertising posters to set room entered contains one of the up and at what price to offer your & Colonel's associates, you can wares. question that person. It comes, for the BBC model A You can also consult your deor B, with a professional Star tective notes which list the conTrek program on the same castents of the rooms you have sette. All for .95 from Blackpool visited and the answers to your based I.J.K. Software. WHAT'S ALL THIS THEN? MURDER AT AWESOME HALL in your answer, but be careful. I WANT CANDY! Illustrations: Jon Davis "


"O FTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWARE SOFTWA MOUSKATTACK JOURNEYS IN TIME AND SPACE ADVENTURE WHERE THE RODENTS RUN RIOT ALIENS WILL GIVE YOU THE SHAKES setelah ang replacement ceta From dingy dungeons to inter Larry Bain is a plumber with the stellar space. Acornsoft tempt Rodent Rooster Plumbing Seryou to travel these extremes with vice who installs pipes throughtheir Adventure package for the out the levels of Rat Alley 12K Atom This is a maze game and as in Attractively packaged within a other games of this type, there is lurid book type cover it stimuto decide which game to play. Of the two remanning games, always a catch In Mouskattack lates the imagination with visions for the next stage a tape House proved to be the most it is giant rats. of wondrous worlds and fancounter is a definite asset. As enjoyable. You explore a haunted They infest the maze causing They infest the maze causing tastic deeds. All instructions for you *RUN the title of your choice house for treasures whilst bumpconsiderable hindrance to you mpconsiderable hindrance to your loading, running and playing and the Atom reads it from tape, thus ing off its inhabitants plumbing activities. As protection a brief outline of the three scento load and play Intergalactic Dungeon has you searching against the rats. head office has arios capable of being set up are the last game takes about 21 caverns for treasure. issued you with two cats and two included minutes. A command word missing traps. The program is loaded in three What do you get once loaded u get once loaded from the instructions is EXIT, this from the instructions is EXIT, this The trouble is the traps only stages, the first being a file index Well, not a lot really. On the transports you from almost any hold the rats for a few seconds read direct to screen, allowing reviewed tape Intergalactic scene in the games without you The cats are so scared that tests for correct playback failed to RUN. An audible test having to give directions. they will not even move, but they volume. Next, Advent is revealed considerable deteriora siderable deteriora Acornsofts Adventure costs do scare the majority of the rats. Acornsoft's Adventure costs \"LOADed. Taking about five mition in recording quality on the .50, which could be spent on Unfortunately there are super nutes this gives you ample time last few program blocks. a more worthwhile game. rats in this maze and these simply eat the cats. Periodically replacement cats and traps are dropped in the A huge mother ship, lights SHOCKWAVE It is impossible to move and centre of the maze, but if they flashing, slowly approaches. shoot at the same time, but this is are not claimed quickly, they are Suddenly it drops a smaller spreads out a little way either not too much of a disadvantage retrieved by head office. saucer, which crashes down into side, destroying your base if it's because you can fire five shots Once you have plumbed one the atmosphere with a within range. Hence the name of in quick succession and dash maze completely, another maze tremendous boom. the game. The mother ship also back into hiding. commences with smarter rats. No, its not a scene from the drops small saucers at random. One criticism is that the conFor every two screens cleared, latest space movie but all part of it is important to shoot down trols are not explained anywhere you receive a bonus plumber. Shockwave, written for the these saucers before they reach in the program or on the sheet The movement of your plum Tangerine Microtan (Micron) the bottom line as the shockwhich comes with the program ber is controlled by a joystick system. It's a game which waves they generate spread out otherwise very addictive. This game is very difficult as although infuriating and tricky, is over the entire base of the Shockwave is available from well as addictive making each totally different from any other screen. the Tangerine Users Group, at a game a constant challenge. space game I have yet seen. A good strategy is to concenmembers price of .62 (nonMouskattack is available on You load the program at CUTS trate on keeping the stacks as members pay 25 per cent more) disc for a 32K Atari from Gemini speed, then, type G400 to start empty as possible. Aliens only and requires 3K on Tanex. Electronics and costs .95. the game. fall when the stack is full. It is The mother ship comes on and possible to fire a salvo of five once in the middle of the screen shots by keeping the fire button starts to drop its alien offspring depressed until five or more into stacks down each side of chunky pixels are above your the screen. ship. This means that you can be Each stack holds five aliens, in the middle of the screen to when the sixth alien enters a shoot the saucer while your stack one drops from the bottom shots are still destroying the To make things really hard, you aliens in the far right or left can only shoot the aliens whilst stacks. in the stack. The aliens do not shoot at you, they adopt a kamikaze action When they drop from a stack, they plummet to the bottom line, where a small shockwave & ations: "


"DOWN TO BASIC PRESENTATION IS VITAL In all uses of computers, the presentation of the output is vital. This not only applies to games with a visual emphasis like Space Invaders, but also to business applications such as payroll systems. In many cases, a lot of the time spent in designing and developing a program will be spent on the presentation of the output. The importance of this aspect of programming causes me to devote this month's article to the extra facilities provided in many versions of Basic to help programmers improve their display of information. These extra facilities can be divided into two main categories: the extra forms of the PRINT statement provided to allow the programmer to specify precisely where results are to be displayed; and the special graphics statements sometimes available — such as the PLOT statement which are particularly useful for pictorial displays. each column. The section of program PRINT TAB(3);\"NAME\":TAB(10);\"HEIGHT\" 75 PRINT 80 FOR I=1 TO 3 85 PRINT TAB(3):N$(I);TAB(10):H(I) 90 NEXT I could be used to output a table with the following format NAME HEIGHT FRED 1.84 MARY 1.62 CECIL 1.97 I have described the effect of TAB(X) as being the printing of the next item in positions X onwards. It should be pointed out that in some versions the effect would be to print the next item in positions (Xxl) onwards the result being that everything is shifted one position further to the right than in the version I have described. Some systems also have the statements HTAB and VTAB. These can also be used to specify the required position for printing however, these appear not as part of a PRINT statement, but as statements in their own right before the appropriate PRINT statement. EXTRA PRINT FACILITIES If the number of characters that can be printed on one line of the screen paper is N, then you can think of each character position on a line as being numbered from 1 to N (N will vary from one system to another). The TAB function specifies a move to a particular character position on the line. The general form of the TAB function is TAB(X) where X may be a constant, a variable or an arithmetic expression. If the function TAB(6) were encountered in a PRINT statement, then a move to position six on the line would take place. If X is a variable or an arithmetic expression that takes a non-integer value e.g. X= 14.5, then the integer part of X will be taken as the required position in this case 14). BY MOIRA NORRIE 78 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES The effect of using the TAB function is that printing will continue from the specified position. The statement 30 PRINT TAB (3);\"FRED\":TAB(10);Y would produce the following output, assuming that Y had the value 1.25. position 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 FRED 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 ... 1. 2 5 The cursor will move to position 3 then print \"FRED\" in positions 3 onwards; it then moves to position 10 and prints the value of Y in positions 10 onwards. The reason that the digit \"1\" appears in column 11 is that whenever a number is printed it is preceded by a minus sign, if it is negative, or a space, if it is positive. Therefore, position 10 will contain either a space or a minus sign depending upon the value of Y. It is important to remember the space that precedes a positive number as it causes the values to be printed one position further to the right than might be expected! It is also important to separate the items in the PRINT statement with semi-colons rather than commas when using the TAB function otherwise you will be mixing up the precise specification of positions in the output line with the ideas of \"skipping to the next zone\" caused by the appearance of a comma. In many systems, it is in fact possible to omit the semi-colons and obtain the same effect: 30 PRINT TAB(3)\"FRED\"TAB(10)Y The TAB function is particularly useful when printing a table — it allows you to specify the position of HORIZONTAL HELLOS HTAB (horizontal TAB) is similar to the TAB function in that it specifies the required position of the cursor on the output line. VTAB (vertical TAB) can be used to select a particular line on the screen as the next output line. The statements: 60 VTAB 10 70 HTAB 15 80 PRINT \"HELLO\" would cause the word HELLO to be printed on line 10 of the screen in positions 15 onwards. A number of the microcomputers offer special graphics facilities. These can include such things as special graphics symbols, statements for plotting points and drawing lines and things like selection of colours. The range of facilities varies greatly and I will, therefore, only cover one of the more common "


"DOWN TO BASIC POS statements the PLOT statement in this article. Before using the special graphics statements, such as PLOT, it is often necessary to indicate that you wish to enter \"graphics mode\". For example, on the APPLE II, you can use the statement 30 GR to set the computer ready for graphical display the screen will be set up with 40 rows and 40 columns which can be referenced by graphics statements, and 4 lines at the bottom of the screen reserved for text. It is then possible to select a position on the screen to be \"shaded\" by use of the PLOT statement: 40 PLOT 20, 10 will cause the small area in column 20, row 10 to be shaded. The APPLE II has colour facilities and it is therefore possible to select a particular colour for shading by using the COLOR statement. The number of different positions that can be selected will determine the amount of detail that can be produced in a picture produced in this way. The APPLE II system offers two levels of detail — low resolution and high resolution. If the statement 30 HGR is given, then the high resolution option will be selected. In this case, the area of the screen used for graphics is divided into 280 columns and 160 rows. Positions on the screen can then be selected for shading by use of the HPLOT statement, which is similar in use to the PLOT statement. The penalty paid for the increase in the level of detail is the reduction in the range of colours available. VAL THE CORE OF THE APPLE SYSTEM The peculiarities of the Apple || CHR$ converts code number to Basic feature in this month's character. machine-by-machine breakdown of FRE returns the amount of free the language. memory space. VARIABLES: LEFTS returns the specified numVariables names can be of any ber of leftmost characters length but only the first two characfrom a string. ters are distinguished. MIDS returns a specified subIf a variable name is followed by string. %, it is an integer numeric variable. PDL returns current value of ARRAYS: specified games paddle. Can have multi-dimensional arrays. PEEK value of byte in specified STATEMENTS: memory address Can have more than one statement returns the cursor position. per line using a \".\" as a separator. The form of the IF statement is RIGHTS returns the specified number of rightmost charac<line no.> IF <condition> THEN <statement(s)> ters from a string. SPC Either a STOP or an END stateused in a PRINT statement ment can be used at any point in a to supply spaces. STR$ number converts to program to terminate the execution. The ON statement can be used to character string of digits. transfer to one of a list of line nos. USR calls the user's machine depending upon the value of a given language subroutine. expression treats the specified string <line no.> ON <expression> as a number. GOSUB <list of line nos.> Plus ABS, ATN, COS, EXP, INT, LEN, <line no.> ON <expression> LOG, RND, SGN, SIN, SOR, TAB, GOTO <list of line nos.> HTAB (horizontal TAB), VTAB (vertiThe ONERR statement can be used cal TAB). to transfer to a line no. if an error is encountered GRAPHICS: <line no.> ONERR GOTO <line Colour graphics facility statements no.> COLOR and HCOLOR. CLEAR clears all variables. PLOT C, R plots a \"point\" in column DEF FN declare user defined oneC, row R line functions. similarly for HPLOT C,R in GET reads a character from the high resolution graphics keyboard without displayDRAW draws shape definitions ing it. set up in shape tables. POKE writes specified value at HLIN draws horizontal lines in specified memory low resolution graphics. address. VLIN draws vertical lines in low POP causes the most recent resolution graphics. subroutine return address ROT sets angular rotation for to be deleted shape drawn by DRAW. RECALL retrieves an array from SCALE sets scale size for shape cassette tape. drawn by DRAW. STORE records an array on casSCAN returns colour code of sette tape. specified point on screen. WAIT used to suspend program SHLOAD loads a shape table. execution. XDRAW similar to DRAW but each FUNCTIONS: point drawn in the comASC returns the ASCII code of plement of the colour the first character in the already existing at that specified string. point on the screen. NEXT MONTH Many inexperienced programmers are baffled by talk of the PEEK and POKE operations. Next month, I will explain the use of these in detail. In addition, the features of the version of Basic available on the BBC Microcomputer will be outlined. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 79 "


"SUPERMARKET ADULT ONLY 3-+3-0-7+-3 VIDEO CLUB! MIND ROUTINES 0 2-xday or evenings Icheap ratel Ring: 0373: 830563 + 3-6or send coupon to: VIDEO CLUB 1,DREWSTEAD RD., LONDON S.W.16 Starting at any of the above 16 numbers and by moving along the grid lines the object is to visit every one of the 16 numbers once and once only and keep a running total. The highest total wins. Send in your total and the path which obtains it. For example: moving along the top row:3+3-7+3 gives 2 as a subtotal.  Winners of our June issue Brainware problems were: D. Bell of Willsden Green, London NW2 and A. Leigh of Redruth in Cornwall. Bottles of champagne are on their way to both. Two more bottles can -o-W Please send FREE details. I am over 18 NAME ADDRESS PHONE be won for the first people out of the hat with this month's answers correct. Answers to the July problems are on page 11. Pleas e rber tot in your telephone number NEVERA CROSSWORD DO YOU PLAY TV GAMES? It could cost anything up to  to own your own comprehensive library of cartridges for your TV games console. We have such a comprehensive library for most systems, and are prepared to offer this facility to you at low daily rentals, with the option of purchasing at Special Discount Prices those cartridges which give you most pleasure. For further details please send a large S.A.E. to E&E ENTERPRISES, P.O. BOX 8, SALTASH, CORNWALL PL12 6 YU. ACROSS 1. Distant management of channel changing (6, 7) 8. Zero-ten Duck game (3) 9. Good man, metal disk? (5) 10. Colourful puzzle innovator (5) 12. Putting together the SIN SYS (9) 14. Average statistical distribution (6) 15. Such hand and nerve are required by arcade games players (6) 17. Program language collector (9) 19. Adventure game nobleman finds nothing in the barn (5) 21. Horror one might get from static (5) 22. Adventure game Humanoid from Odel Forest (3) 24. Best form rotor rotating for video adventure game (5, 2, 6) DOWN 1. Early sacrifice from the top chess nation (7, 6) 2. Creative from Adventure Game nesting in Gringo Green? (4) 3. Programming fish in force (6) 4. Animal back in the multiplexor (2) 5. Computer direction celebrity (5, NEBULAR SOFTWARE Brings BBC MICRO (A&B) Owners \"ALIEN ATTACK\" A fast Machine Code Space Invaders with intelligent aliens. Price .00 ALSO \"OTHELLO/REVERSI\" 4 skill levels. Price .00. Cheques and PO payable to: NEBULAR SOFTWARE, 356 Park Lane, Macclesfield, Cheshire. 6. Erase key without out (3) 7. Pedestrian Ending to Saint above us -a star in the Wars (4,9) 11. Play these close to your chest (5) 12. Apple game for explosive astral people like you (9) 13. Cutting computer (5) 16. What a Galaxian does when he leaves formation (3, 3) 18. God painful with LISP (4) 20. It does nothing but is basically helpful (3) 23. Behold a function without force (2) 80 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"SUPERMARKET pet set 1 l net pet set 2 plus  plus  greek alphabet math set electronic symbols and games set french set german set russian set hebrew set api printer (BBC RM380Z set medium density plotting matching set sets teletext Keymatch set DIFFERENT SETS OF CHARACTERS ON SCREEN TOGETHER FOR 2-3-4-8000 PET/CBM COMPUTERS ALPHA PLUS Avon Computer Rentals FREEPOST 17 THORNBURY BRISTOL BS12 1BR TELEPHONE (0454) 415460 VIC OWNERS make full use of the graphics sound capabilities of your machine GRAPHICS super graphics package adds 18 com mands to Basic requires 3k or Bk expander) $16.50 HIRES MULTICOLOUR utilities. Plot points, lines, boxes in 104 x 152 array .50 PIPER machine code music composer with sample compositions .50 VIGIL interactive games language including 9 games requires 3k or Bk expander). .00 All programs supplied with detailed manual which may be inspected for a nominal charge. SAE for details from ADAMSOFT 18 Norwich Avenue, Rochdale Lancs, OL11 5JZ ginner's guide to plain jargon ADVENTURE: A type of game in which L.E.D.: (Light Emitting Diode) Provides the player has to take a character role a simple display and consists of an and retrieve a number of treasures or electron tube which lights up when objects by a trial and error process electricity is passed through it. giving instructions to the computer. LOAD: Instruction which is used in The player encounters a variety conjunction with a cassette recorder of hazards often taking the form of to transfer programs from tape to the dangerous monsters, wizards and computer's memory. animals MATRIX: A rectangular array of numARRAY: A series of items arranged to bers subject to mathematical operaform a meaningful pattern. tions. BASIC: The most widespread com PACMAN: The first ghost in the maze puter language which is one of the arcade game which has since been easiest to learn and is used for prorecreated in many forms and on many gramming all microcomputers. computers. Player takes control of a BASIC COMMAND MODE: When you gobbling creature and eats dots in the break into a running program it reverts maze while avoiding pursuing ghosts. to Basic command mode i.e. it will wait PLOT: To map or draw points on the for new command instructions from screen. the keyboard. BUG: A slang term given to a mistake RAM (RANDOM ACCESS MEMORY): in a computer program which prevents This is a memory chip which you can it from working. It can refer to a load programs and data to and from mechanical, electrical, or electronic RAMPACK: A cigarette-case sized fault. pack of extra R.A.M. which plugs onto BYTE: A term to measure a number of the back of a Sinclair ZX81. Bits (Binary digiTS), usually there are RUN: Basic command word tells the eight bits to a byte. computer to perform the numbered COLOR: American spelling used to call sequence of actions referred to as a colour out of several U.S. computers, program. e.g. the Apple. SOFTWARE: Another name for comCURSOR: A position indicator used by puter programs. It can also refer to most computers to show where the computer documentation. next character should be entered. DROP TARGETS: Targets on a pintable STARTREK: A popular computer game which retract upon being hit by the based on the TV series of the same ball. name, in which the player takes comGET: A Basic command which tells the mand of the Starship Enterprise and roams the galaxy, destroying Klingons computer to scan the keyboard and return with either a numeric or string and investigating solar systems. value. STATEMENT: An instruction in a comGRAPHICS MODE: A mode in which puter program the computer can produce graphical STRING: Usually represented by a $ characters and displays. sign on the computer keyboard, a HARDWARE: The general term given string is a connected sequence of to all pieces of electronic and characters or words, usually placed mechanical devices which make up a within PRINT statements. computer system, i.e. the actual SYNTACTIC ERRORS: Typographical machines. mistakes in program lines. Information INKEYS: A Basic command which put in the wrong order, information checks the keyboard for input and which conflicts with other information places it in a string. or program lines which refer to other INPUT: Data or information which is unentered lines. fed into the computer. UART: Abbreviation for Universal K: See kilobyte Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter. KILOBYTE: A measurement of memory VARIABLE: A symbol whose numeric capacity, 1K is equal to 1024 so 8K is value can be changed at all times. It is equivalent to 8192 bytes. used when writing programs. Bridge Software 716K RAM ZX811 now only -95 Fuc k A Sensa Quality Software ZX81 FERNWOOD, MARPLE BRIDGE STOCKPORT CHESHIRE SKO SE VIC OWNERS NEED 'TERMINAL SOFTWARE Line up Four (Reviewed in Your Computer Brilliant .95 Maze Muncher Reversi 94 95 Scramble 55.95 All games include PSP TERMINAL SOFTWARE 19 Canberra Road, Bramhall. Cheshire. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 81 "


"SUPERMARKET HARDCORE BBC UPGRADES LOW PRICES 16K RAM< -A GAMES PLAYER'S GUIDE TO THE ATARI 400/800 ATARI ADDITIONS SUCCESS STORY Dealers Welcome Avon Computer Rentals FREEPOST 18 THORNBURY BRISTOL BS12 1BR TELEPHONE (0454) 415460 FOR SALE MODEL II TRS-80 64K COMPUTER Plus expansion disc drive and line printer V with pay roll and nominal ledger business programs ,300 or nearest offer For more information phone Patrick Sinclair on Colchester 867588 (evenings only) In the last year Atari computers have taken off in the U.K. after enjoying success in America second only to the Apple Computer. The main differences between the 400 and 800 computers is that the 400 cannot be expanded from its basic memory capacity of 16K, and it also has a sensory surface keyboard instead of the full typewriter keyboard which the 800 boasts. With the 400 system comes the computer itself, a power adaptor which can be plugged into an ordinary outlet in your house, a switchbox which is connected into the back of the television and allows you to swop from TV viewing to computer operation. An operation manual is also given with the machine. Software for the 400 comes in two forms, either cartridge or cassette. The latter must be loaded by tape recorder, the former can be plugged straight into the computer. You cannot change the information on the cartridges because they are ROM based and therefore not addressable. VIC 20 SPIRE SPECIAL SOFT SALES 6 GAMES FOR THE VIC 20 ON ONE TAPE ALL FOR THE AMAZING PRICE OF ONLY  ALL GAMES RUN ON THE STANDARD UNEXPANDED VIC 20 UTILISING FULLY SOUND COLOUR & GRAPHICS Send order for S.A.E for catalogue to SPIRE COMPUTER SERVICES. 59 Black thorne Avenue Strawberry Fields. Whitby, South Wirral L66 PUN Tel 051-339 7267 To date the only peripherals available in Britain are made by Atari itself. Each piece of equipment which can be hooked up to the Atari 400 and 800 computers is a product of the firm covering almost every computer owners' need. For loading programs into the machines there are two options open to you, either via cassette recorder or disc drives. The 400 computer can only be cassette loaded, but the more sophisticated 800 can use either method. The Atari 410 Program Recorder looks like an ordinary tape recorder but there is one significant difference. To facilitate easy loading the volume levels are set for playback and recording to the correct pitch. You can use the Program Recorder to load and save programs which have been written in Atari languages. It is available from listed Atari dealers for .00. For faster loading of programs Atari has produced a range of disc drives for the 800 series. A minimum of 16K memory space is needed to use the Atari 810 single disc drive which allows the use of one 5. inch floppy disc at a time. The computer does have the facility to attach up to four single disc drives which gives you about 92K bytes. It costs . Printed out information can be obtained on a printer which is plugged into the standard RS 232C interface. In Atari's range are two printers a 40 column thermal printer which prints out in dot matrix forms to a maximum of 40 characters per line. With the Atari 822 thermal printer comes an input/output data cable and an AC power adaptor. The price is costly at  for the unit. An 80 column printing out 80 characters per line is also available from Atari dealers. Code named the Atari 825 Printer can carry out a variety of functions, with underscoring and backspacing capabilities. This device has to be used in conjunction with the Atari 850 Interface Module which has four RS 232C compatible ports. The Atari 825 Printer is much more expensive at  and the interface module pushes up the total price by . However, the module allows you to expand the computer almost limitlessly. Various cables used for connecting a variety of devices to the Atari 800 can be bought through Atari dealers. These include a printer cable for .50, an interface cable for .50, and RS 232C cable for .00, and a monitor cable which costs .00. Paper for these costs  per roll. If you use the disc drive system you can buy a master diskette for .95 and a set of five blank diskettes for . Add-ons for playing games are joysticks and paddles, the Atari standards, both costing .95. BUFFER MICRO MICRO BUFFER SHOP SHOP (NEXT TO STREATHAM STATION) RETAIL CENTRE FOR * SINCLAIR COMPUTERS * SOFTWARE, GAMES, RAM-PACKS, KEYBOARDS Items from most leading mail order suppliers games, serious, business and technical progsavailable over the counter, sae appreciated for catalogue. Atari computers come into their own when it comes down to graphics and now software abounds for these machines But it is only during the last few months that firms have started to make available independently produced software as opposed to Atari-written software imported from America Gemini Electronics was one of the first firms to supply software in quantity and has made a point of adding the very latest and best games to its catalogue, as well as games written by its own programmers One of the newest is Mouskattack. This is a version of Pacman, but with a more complex maze. Atari itself offers a wide range of both games and business/personal software packages, all of which are available from distributors and dealers but not direct from Atari. On the personal side there is a word processor on disc, mortgage and loan analysis, visialc, sales ledger and purchase ledger, and a stock control package. Some of the software on Atari's books has been written by outside firms, in particular Thorn EMI. Atari has recently added another software string to its bow in the form of the Atari Program Exchange (APX). Games from the catalogue can be obtained from Atari at PO Box 59, Alperton Lane, Wembley, Middlesex HAO 1FJ. 374A STREATHAM HIGH ROAD, LONDON SW16 TEL. 01-769 2887 82 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"SUPERMARKET HARDCORE TANDY MODEL1&3 TANDY COLOR and VIDEO GENIE OWNERS NEW: Eornsoft carman WITHU SOUND!! PP America's latest Arcade craze. Its Eat or be Eaten You control SCARFMAN around the maze, gobbling up everything in your path. You attempt to eat it all before the GK monsters devour you. 11 05 includes VAT & Postage .IL Available from your local dealer or SCAREMAN MICRODEAL DEAL HOUSE, BRIDGES, BODMIN CORNWALL PL 30 SEF TEL: 0726 850821 DEALER ENQUIRES WELCOME EASY READING NASCOM 1&2 A GAMES PLAYER'S GUIDE TO THE ATARI 400/800 If you want to write any of your own MEMORY SPACE programs you will need to buy the Atari Basic cartridge from any Atari dealer. The Atari 400 comes in a standard 16K Atari can supply you with a list of unalterable version but owners can take dealers and distributors on request. the 800 up a grade. Atari Basic sticks closely to the indus The more sophisticated 800 can handle try standard Microsoft Basic but has up to 48K memory. The way to expand the additional commands to cope with system is to plug in three 16K RAM pack graphics and sound. cartridges. But remember that in reality Both the 400 and 800 have a number you only have 40K of total addressable of features in common including 16 memory out of the 48. colours with 16 intensities, four indeAtari dealers and distributors should pendent sound synthesisers to facili have stocks of these RAM packs which tate musical tones or game sounds in cost  each. In America the system can four octaves. You can alter the volume be upgraded to 128K via a Ramdisc from a and tone of the sounds which are emit firm called Axlon. These are not yet on sale ted via an internal speaker. in the U.K. There are 57 keys on an alpha For most owners' purposes the Atari numeric keyboard and four extra spe maximum is quite adequate. Further memcial function keys in both lower and ory space is only necessary only if you upper case. Inverse video can be want to build up vast data banks of storage achieved and you can carry out on capacity. screen editing. Graphics are Atari's strongpoint and there are 29 keys denoting graphics characters. The highest graphics resolution is 320 X 192 There are so many facets to this fine characters and the screen can handle computer that it is difficult to know where to start 24 lines up to a length of 40. Atari has recently brought the cost of The computer itself comes with compreits 400 down to .95. The 800 still hensive manuals and an excellent Basic retails at . book to start you on the road to programming. All of the books are in an easy to Many U.S. firms produce software com read style. If you are new to computers patible for the Atari 400 and 800 computers can recommend the Invitation to Programand these are now on tape from British ming series. distributors including Maplin Electronics, This \"listen and learn\" series utilises the which has recently set up a software arm Atari cassette track which allows synchro called Mapsoft. You can contact them by nised speech through the TV speaker. This writing to PO Box 3, Rayleigh, Essex. combination of speech and computer Another firm operating on the same lines graphics really make learning fun. is Calisto Computers. Calisto has an exten The Atari's modular concept has meant sive range of games including Scott Adams that I have expanded my 800 from 16K to adventures, and arcade favourites Ghost 48K in easy stages. To increase the memHunter and Galactic Chase, for 16K ory all that is required is a 16K RAM machines costing .95 and .95 re module. Lift off the top of the computer and spectively. Calisto can be reached at 119 plug it in the slot allocated. This modular John Bright Street, Birmingham B11 1BE. concept is also applied to the computer Holdco produce an intriguing adult only languages and games. It is the work of game entitled The Naughty One. seconds to remove Basic from the front of Other Holdco games include Gold, Peter the machine and plug in Pilot or an assemRabbit and the Magic Carrot (for children), bly language cartridge. Peter Rabbit and the Naughty Owl, Peter If, like me, you find it necessary to buy a Rabbit and Father Willow, and Lord of the disk drive, a whole new world of software Rings, part 1. Holco is based at 14 Britton becomes available as well as languages Street, London EC1M 5NQ. such as Microsoft Basic, Pascal and Forth. A recently formed company currently Unfortunately it seems that more and more devoted to Atari software is Centaursoft. of the American software houses are The first two games to come off the pro issuing their products on disk, (the Atari is duction line are Skiing and TT Racer, both a top seller in the States and disk drives of which will sell for .95 at Currys. are common place) making a disk drive a Other software suppliers are Anglo must if you want to play some of the American Software at 138a Stratford Road, fantastic games that are becoming availSparkhill, Birmingam B11 1AG. Software able. City which can be reached through One book I have found invaluable of late Galaset, 30 Bayford Road, Littlehampton, is Your Atari Computer by Lon Poole, pubWest Sussex, and the West End Atari lished by Osbourne/McGraw-Hill. This book Centre at 114-115 Charing Cross Road, covers first principles and goes through to London WC2. advanced programming. Compression Annembler.... NEW ... 12 27 in ROM) The only one of its kind for the Nanoon, the full ZAO embler compresses source to 50% no site. Thus birer pro f it in memory & loading/aving takea half an long. As a bonus, sembly is twice e fast an for other assemblers! It is 6K and comes with a utility to convert source from ZEAP. Extensions over 100 sold . (625 in ROM) Enhances ROM USTC with 30 new keywords AUNG PIND, RENUMBER, KEDUCE, REPEAD.. UNDIL, EUR, TRACE VDU, REP to. And you can add even more, 3 can alno run any standard BASIC program and is only 4K. DOS: dink filing for 9805 drive 625 (635 in HOM) Colonsal Adventure ... .. 8 (16 ) or 10 (32 ) Rumours tell of fantastic treen hidden in the depths and naturally they are ded! Colossal Adventure han 200 detailed locations & dozens of artefacts, yet It has been comprend to 16K or 32K Asteroidet fant ution in space. Must be played! Es Bomber: flatten your least favorite cities..... 5 Minile Defencet fant notion nuclear defence ... ES Nightmares Pork: battle the pia and the punis ... 15 Hrenkontiunner Mineraler und Wupun...... 6 YHDE P&P. NO VAT. Money back if not happy. Pal documentation. (Nascon 18 need as-Sya/Cotti 3.) Send order, or request for full details to LEVEL 9 COMPUTING 229 Hughenden Road, High Wycombe, Bucks. P13 5PG ATARI 400/800 SOFTWARE Large range of software now available * BEST AMERICAN GAMES SOFTWARE * ALL AT COMPETITIVE PRICES * SPECIAL OFFERS & DISCOUNT VOUCHERS (Also available for APPLE) Please send SAE to CREATIVE SOFTWARE, 48 Hartlip Hill, Newington Sittingboum Kent COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 83 "


"BEFORE YOU BUY YOUR MICRO! COMPUTER, PRINTER, DISC DRIVES & ACCESSORIES ALMOST EVERY MAKE OF POPULAR COMPUTER STOCKED . AT PRICES WELL BELOW RECOMMENDED RETAIL GIVE US A RING ON 01-441 2922 AND SAVE 's WITH THE LOWEST PRICE GUARANTEE All products carry a 1 year guarantee (parts & labour) Pay an extra 10% for a 2 year guarantee Shelves of Computer Books Computer EXPRESS PRESS. MAIL ORDER SERVICE Spares & repairs on all products, even if you didn't buy from Comp Shop *Phone Many items over stocked on Sale Offer your order New products arriving daily to reserve INSTANT CREDIT just pay the deposit by Credit Card and take it away LINE SATISFYING PRICE CONCIOUS CUSTOMERS FOR NEARLY 5 YEARS MAIL ORDER SHOP P.S. Hopeless on Software \"Europes Largest Discount He Ders Personal Computer Stores\" o muter Star Close to New Banner BR Station Moorgate ine) Telephone: 011 441 2922 (Sales) 01-449 6596 Telex 298755 TELCOMG TELEPHONE SALES OPEN BARNET ampm Monday to Saturday OPEN 24 hrs. 7 days a week 311 Edgware Hod London W2 01-449 6596 Telephone: OPEN LONDON Damm Mond to Saturday 84 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"YU UOY 1901  UOY OA $   I   TUMO UGo       Wojaa uaw      VIP Sses IPA-IO   HTTW 2383   V I WO VI (Toods[ 8  g) 99    borg IIA 99  85 xol o001 615   to Isfugoo asloo    IV  isq 8 ga ti f9V9 , 2uborq 116 mort yud t'rbib voy qona qmo5 ameti VSM  19vo 191to olsa  ? 19DIO HOY w9 boxq privino ylisb of    2U2 2UO 2   312    q trut Jibon vd Jizogab b by W  Ast    1968 wr bd n   io 129pqoyu3 (ent of the most2  ntn wow of peol) t o  -10 (e) Sses IP-10 ororiq      l bul 2 1 bnoM Imgul A8)    SW -  E w  b .tend PS  ortfqolo  -     )  .2.9 lg wfl  COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 85 "


"The Computer Centre, Watford, Limited Telephone: Watford 44057/40601 TEXAS INSTRUMENTS Our special offer: The TI 99/4A Home Computer for just .00. Compute the saving for yourself. THE NEW TEXAS 1199/4A 42K PERSONAL COMPUTER ONLY .00 + VAT LOOK AT THESE FEATURES Please send me iT199/4 A COMPUTERS (Inc. Power supply modulators and cassette interface) Please send me details and price list for which enclose a large S.A.E. Name Address 9900 16 BIT PROCESSOR 3.5 MHZ 26K ROM INCLUDING 14K BASIC  7.6K GRAPHICS LANGUAGE INTERPRETER  4.4K MONITOR  16K USER RAM (EXPANDABLE TO 48K)  HI-RES GRAPHICS 192 x 256  16 COLOURS  PLUGS INTO ANY TV INTERFACE TO CONTROL 2 CASSETTE PLAYERS (AUTO COPY AND UPDATE FROM ONE TO THE OTHER) PLUS MANY MORE SUPER FEATURES 12 MONTH GUARANTEE OPTIONS INCLUDE:BIG RANGE OF SOLID STATE PLUG IN SOFTWARE  RS232 INTERFACE THERMAL PRINTER DISK DRIVES  SPEECH SYNTHESIZER  JOYSTICKS ETC ETC. Phone que for .75 185 per computer including .75 VAT) Please charge my Access/Diners Club Card, Barclaycard. Number or telephone your card order during shop hours to Watford (0923) 40601 or 44057 Signed 150 High Street, Watford, Herts. WDI ZEN Powerful Printers Mighty Monitors Acorn AP8OA Printer 12\" Green Screen Monitor LONDON'S BIGGEST ACORN STOCKIST  (+.50 pp)  + .50 pop) Working BBC \"A\" and \"B\" machines in the shop. Lowest ever price! 14\" BBC Colour Monitor Call in for 'hands on' demonstration. Acorn AP100A Printer  + .50 pp) BBC Bargains  + .50 pop) BBC Model 'A'  (+ pp) Both with free cable below. 16k RAM 32k ROM Parallel printer cable  + 75p pop) Full-colour highPaper 14 per 2,000 (+.50 pp) resolution graphics. BBC Model 'B'   7 p-p) 32k RAM 32k ROM 16 colour graphics BBC Disk Interface f69* BBC 'B' Upgrade Kit * This is the official kit, beware of imitations, they will OFFICIAL invalidate your guarantee (These prices include fitting . send or bring in your machine Atom Attractions for instant upgrading) Atom kit  + .50 pp) BBC Single Disk Drive  (+.50 pp) Colour Atom  (+ pp) STOCKIST BBC Dual Disk Drive Atom Disk pack Cut price Cassettes  (+.50 pop)  335 + .50 pp) C12 Data Cassettes 40p each .50 per 10 (70p p.pl BBC Cassette  (+ pp) Attention Local Authorities, Schools, Businesses. As London's largest Acorn dealer we can supply from stock BBC Joystick  + pp) all your hardware and software requirements after sales servicing guaranteed Official orders accepted. ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT. FOR FURTHER DETAILS AND MAIL ORDER LIST SEND LARGE S.A.E. 135 HALE LANE EDGWARE MIDDLESEX HAS 90P Open Mon-Sat 9am-6pm. Thurs 9am -1pm TEL:01-959 7119 TELEX 881 3241 BBC WD 86 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"REFRESH YOUR MICRO FOR 85p. O ADIUTO Do you feel you could get more out of your micro? Perhaps new software would improve things. Or how about expanding with new peripherals or more memory? Maybe you even need to upgrade to a better machine. Then you can't do without Which Micro & Software Review, a brand new magazine which doesn't dabble in micros, it writes about nothing else. We'll give you more software reviews (especially in the low-cost field) than any other magazine, with a unique buyers guide to software packages, that is updated every month. We'll tell you what's available for each machine, what's in the pipeline, what's right for you, where to get it, and what it costs. We'll not stint on hardware coverage either. Not only will we publish the most extensive buyers guide section available but also reviews that take the machines apart. We'll compare cost against performance, point out compatibility problems, what's possible (and what's not), plus our best-buy opinions. With all this you'll get regular round-ups of new peripherals, literature reviews, and problem pages written by two of the most respected experts in the WHICH MICRO & SOFTWARE REVIEW business. W HICH THE A TO Z OF MICROS. DO OOOOR DODO JOJO new peripherals, literature reviews, and problem SECOND ISSUE-OUT NOW SASOFTWARE REVIEW I would like to subscribe to the first 6 issues of Which Micro & Software Review. I enclose a cheque for .00, payable to 'Which Micro & Software Review'. Name Address Send to: Which Micro Subscription Department, Competition House, Farndon Road, Market Harborough, Leicestershire, COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 87 THE GUIDE TO COMPUTERS & SOFTWARE UNDER ES000 "


"INTEREST FREE O CREDITS * Subject to approval which can take up to 48 hours (APR=0%) from NIAPLIN (until August 31st 1982) On Atari & VIC computer hardware If your order contains over  worth of computer hardware apply now for interest free credit by telephoning: Mail-order: (0702) 552911 London Shop: 01-748 0926 Southend Shop: (0702) 554000 or write to P.O. Box 3, Rayleigh, Essex SS6 XLR You pay 10% down, then 10% per month for a further nine months. (to nearest penny) Example: VIC20 Colour Computer. Cash Price .99. Credit terms: .99 down then  per month for nine months: Total .99. Credit quotations on request. The VIC20 Colour Computer Introduction to BASIC Cassettes Part 1 (AC57M) .95 Part 2 (AC58N) 14.95 Joysticks and Paddles: Single Joystick (AC53H) .50 Pair of Joysticks (AC37S) .95 Le Stick (AC45Y) .95 Pair of Paddles (AC30H) .95 Programming Aid Cartridges Super Expander 3K RAM and Hi-res graphics (AC54) .95 Programming Aid. Additional commands function key programming etc. (AC55K) .95 Machine Code Monitor (AC56L) $34.95 could be yours this week for just .99 down. Cash price and total credit price .99. Order as AF47B VIC20 Disk Drive: (AF50E) .00 VIC 20 ACCESSORIES: 170K storage on standard single-density single-sided, soft-sectored floppy disks C2N Cassette Unit (AF48C) .95 Add-on RAM Cartridges: K RAM (AF51F) .95 VIC20 Printer: (AF490) ,00 BK RAM (AF52G) $44.95 80 characters per line, 30 characters per 16K RAM AF53H) .95 second, tractor feed, full alphanumerics and Memory Expansion Board: graphics, double size character 6 ports for plug-in cartridges (AF54) .95 Game Programs Avenger Cartridge Star Battle Cartridge Super Slot Cartridge Jelly Monsters Cartridge Alien Cartridge Super Lander Cartridge Road Race Cartridge Rat Race Cartridge Blitz Cassette Books About VIC Learn Programming on the VIC VIC Revealed VIC Programmers Reference Guide (AC59P) AC600) AC61R) AC625) (AC63T) (AC640) AC65V) AC66W) (AC67X) .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .95 .99 (WA31J) (WA32K) (WA33L) .50 .50 .50 88 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"2001 ATARI ASTEROIDS FRENCH STAR RAIDES ACEINES See us at the Personal Computer World Show Barbican Centre 29-12 Sept (AF36P)    3 Consoles available: Atari 400 with 16K RAM Atari 400 with 32K RAM (AF378) Atari 800 with 16K RAM (AF02C) AF36P and AF02C special price for limited period only Lots of other hardware: 16K RAM Module (AF08J) .00 Cassette Recorder (AF28F) .00 32K RAM Module (AF44) .35 Disk Drive (AF06G) .00 32K Upgrade for 400 (AF45Y) .00 Thermal Printer (AF04E) .00 Floppy Disk (YX87U) .75 Printer Interface for 400 (AF410) .95 Le Stick (AC45Y) .95 Printer Interface for 800 (AF42V) .95 Joystick Controllers (AC375) .95 Interface Module (AF 29G) .00 For full details ask for our hardware leaflet Versawriter (AF43W) .00 (XH543) SAE appreciated NOW YOU CAN JOIN THE U.K. ATARI COMPUTER OWNER'S CLUB. An independent user's group Four issues of the club magazine for only .60! Address your subscription to Ron THE CHOICEST GEMS OF ATARI SOFTWARE FROM MAPLIN Adventure Games PageFloping 0-24 B056L) .95 Master Memory Map Book IXH57M) 2400 Fasion Business Programs Reversi (Othello type C 16K BO19V) 514.95 Visica -0-32K VL39N) 119.95 -C-16K B018U) E14.95 Word Processor -0.32K YG42V) 99.95 Hangman Calculator -24K YGSOE) .95 Humpty Dumpty & Jack & J C-16-B038R) .95 Ang Adventure C. 16KVG51F) 613 95 Hickory Dickory Dock CT6K 8039N) .95 Statistics Date Adventure British Heritage C2 -C-16-(Y652G) .95 B0018) E1495 -C-16 Arcade Games Mission B04011 119.95 gossible C 24KB003D) E14.95 European Scene Star Raiders E-BK (YG66W) 52995 Asteroids E.SK VG600) 529.95 Jigsaw Puzzles Atan Safari (25 Programs C-16B0490) .95 -EBK-YG7OM 629 95 Atan Satan 25 Programs) C24K 30066) Missile Command -15B050E E2495 14.95 EYG640) 529.95 Pyramid of Doom Super Breakout C24K 8007H) 1495 Mind Bogglers (3 Programs C 16-1Y3R1 E8 95 EBKVG67X) 24.50 C-24K (YL36P) .95 Utilities Savage Island -D-32K-YL375 .95 3D Super Graphics -0-48K BO2BF) $29.95 Savage island Star Trek 35 C-32KB015R 14.95 30 Surros G4H Bit 24K B011M E1495 Racein Snace C-16K-B0350) E14.95 Alan World Graphics C 15K YG53H) 59.95 Shooting Gallery 16 B036P) .95 E B YG65) E39 95 Mount Shoot -C-16-13012N) $10.95 A mbler Jawbreaker Teach-Yourself Programs ESKYG61R1 924 50 6502 Disassembler Conversational French 501644) 539 95 Tank Tran C-16K (YL34M 8.95 Character Generator -D-32K (VL350) .95 Character Generato 16VL2BF 1250 Conversational Spanish -5C 16K (Y646A) E39 95 Home Game Programs E B V559P1 E2150 Conversational italian -5C 16K-YG478) .95 Music Programs 2016K (Y6490) .95 0.32K (B020W 029 50 Music Composer E B YG48C) E35 95 States Capitals C-24K VG56L) .95 C 15K (B0375) .95 Move Themes use with European Countries Rotating til -C-16 130349 .95 Capitals -C-16K (YG57M) 19.95 C16K (B016S) .95 Computer Languages Learn Programming Operating System A+ --4BK B030HI E52 50 CBX 7643W 11595 0-16B042V .95 BISAnuration 32K (8057M9 D-203 VL296) 4995 95 Tournament per Pot consumer Basics of Animation -0.32KB058N) E10.95 Snooker & Billiards EK YG69A) 54.00 Player MisGradics  16k IB0P FIB 95 Chess Payer Visite Graphics D 206-B06001 .95 C-16% VL4OTI 1595 Display Lists C 16-B051F1E9 95 -16% VLT 515 95 Cribbage & Dominoes C-168043W) 14.95 Key Cassette Cartridge 2C2 Cassettes et 8K 16 Shows minimum memotywulement Send sae now for our new software leaflet with details of all the above programs. Order As XH52G Issue 2 Subscribe now to America's leading Atari-only magazine Analogissues per year for just .00. Order as GG243 Home Programs: New titles this month Arcade Games: Video Easel -E 16K (B072P) .50 Caverns of Mars -D-32K (B069A) .50 Learn Programming: Computer Languages: Centipede E 16K (B070M) .95 Invitation to Programming 2 .C-16K (B067X) .95 Microsoft Basic 0.32KB074R) .95 Pac-Man E-16K (B071N) .95 Invitation to Programming 3 C-16K (B068Y) .95 Pilot Educator E82C-16K (B075S) .95 K-Razy Shoot Out E 16K (B063T) .95 Business Programs: Mous kattack -0-32K-B077J) .95 Utilities: Personal Financial Ghost Hunter -C-16K (B064U) .50 Macro Assembler -0.32K (30730) .95 Management D-32K (B065V) .00 Galactic Chase -D-32K-B061R) .95 K-DOS (Superior disk Mortgage and Loan -C-16K (B066W) .95 Galactic Chase operating system D-32K-B076H) .95 -C-16K (3062S) .95 Maplin Electronic Supplies Ltd P.O. Box 3, Rayleigh, Essex. Tel: Southend (0702) 552911/554155. DIAPLIN Atarias Hag 0926ad, Demonstrations at our shops NOW See Atari and Vic in action at 159-161 King St., Hammersmith W6 Tel: 01-748 0926 or at 284 London Road, Westcliff-on-Sea, Essex Tel: (0702) 554000 Note Order codes shown in brackets Prices correct at time of going to press (Errors excluded) NOT COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES 89 "


"special Educational Computing from We can all help if we care enough.. Many people regard computers as some form micros, as teaching aids. In this annual issue, writers of applications software, nurses and of man-made monster, heralding the advent of Learning to cope -computers in special teachers putting ideas into practice and the an era where machines are the masters of men education, we look at the marvellous children themselves. The emergence of microcomputers in the achievements of many very dedicated people In our annual, we look at the latest mid-seventies has helped to overcome this working with disabled and developments in special education. You can misguided view of how computers will affect mentally-handicapped children. read about the many fascinating applications of our lives. Tremendous progress is being made in this microelectronics in this field, what the people Each month, Educational Computing shows area, brought about by a mixture of ingenuity, involved think and what the future holds in the tremendous advances being made in the flexibility and determination on behalf of the store. Most important of all, you can find if enhancement of computers, particularly manufacturers of specially-adapted products, you can help even in a small way. Learning to cope computers in special education .50 Mease send me a copy of L o c a l com I enclosa cheque postal order made payable to Educational Computing for 1.50 including P&P Name Position Establishment Address Now please post to Learning to cope computers in special education & Herbal Hill, London ECI SB ingenious! Advertisement Index GENIE I NWM Www 16K  3 32K 2  Audio Computers The Leisure Collection Molimerx Sinclair Bug Byte Chromosonic Anglo American Gemini Acornsoft Spectrum SRS C.PS 888888 WWW. $ 48K  Ibex Systems Sinclair Gala Set Genie Il business system with key pad . IN BLACKPOOL * SOFTWARE * PERIPHERALS * BOOKS EPSON MX80 FT/1 & 2 .00 Personal Computer Palace Henry's Radio Control Technology Kansas Norman Radio Bullock Computers Emprise Pancom COMMODORE VIC 20 Only WW Z  3 Video Services Brornley Silica Shop Llamasoft Audiogenic Electroniquip Addictive Games Twickenham Computer Centre Addison Wesley Computers For All Carnell Computerworld Newnes Technical Books TID Stockists for BUG BYTE, MOLIMERX, Hi-Tech, Avalon Hill, Big Five, Audiogenic, Software Masters. Memotech Comp Shop Computer Centre Microage Which Micro LEISURONICS COMPUTER STORES 64 Abingdon Street, Blackpool, Lancashire. Tel: 0253 27091 Please add 15% VAT to all prices. Educational Computing Leisuronics Texas 90 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES "


"TEXAS INSTRUMENTS You can't get a Home Computer from Texas Instruments under 16 K RAM. Make the right move into computing with the Home Computer from Texas Instruments. It gives you a large combined RAM/ROM capacity up to 110 K Byte and the ability to expand with a full range of peripherals and software. So as your knowledge of computers increases the TI Home Computer will grow with you. Just compare the versatility of the TI Home Computer with its price you'll find it real value for money that will prove to be a good long term investment. The TI-99/4A is a sophisticated computer designed not only for the beginner with its ease of operation, but also for the professional with its vast computing power through a 16 bit microprocessor. And it simply plugs into an ordinary household TV set. 822BONOBODA 8 With its high resolution graphics with 32 characters over 24 lines in 16 colours (256 x 192 dots), 3 tones in five octaves plus noise, and BASIC as standard equipment and options such as other programming languages UCSD-PASCAL, TI-LOGO and ASSEMBLER-and speech synthesis, you'll find that the TI 99/4 A more than compares with the competition. Especially when the starting price is around . When you want to solve problems there are over 600 software programs available worldwide including more than 40 on easy-to-use Solid State Software Modules. After all, from the inventors of the microprocessor, integrated circuit and microcomputer, it's only natural to expect high technology at a realistic price. NOSA2888888888 UNBEATABLE VALUE AT AROUND  525 stic Registered Trade Mark Texas Instruments We'll help you do better. TEXAS INSTRUMENTS LIMITED "


"LEISURE CENTRES FOR BRAINS Announcing anew range of Electronic Entertainment from one of today's most advanced computer companies. 2 HADEON NINSIA ISH In HADRON, there are over a dozen enemies from five different classes Many of the objects actually rotate as you approach them, creating astonishing 3-D effects  You set out to secure the secrets of the imprisoned Professor Eisenstadt The in-depth plot, extensive vocabulary and colorful graphics make Kabul Spy a most intriguing adventure game. 22285 Take Theseus place in the labyrinth and you will travel through 16 different three-dimensional mazes. Armed with a laser sword, you will encounter a myriad of fanciful and frightful creatures 12285 You are the last survivor of your starship crew on a suicide mission Your one-man Space Cruiser has only one weapon-a limited quantity of very powerful atomic missiles. 12265* FLY WARS BURI ORBITRON NEAKERS Was the Spider able to destroy the Fly-Fighters. elude the B.S and repair the damaged web??? Fly back in time with us and join the Alliance See how well you do as the Spider-Fighter 21955 \"There are ten rooms full of chambers and passages and they are all protected by this Drageroo that Grud created It has wings and heat sensors and can't be shot! 21955 Enemy forces are advancing from all directions and begin to place Killer satelites in orbit around your station And then, look out for the meteors!  Sneaker's popularity is based on its seeming endless variety of challenges. The game features some of the most anima and colorful characters to ever attempt lo stomp you into submission 21955 10 12 sellyfish FOOSBALL DORK Corest \"As if it wasn't dangerous enough batting the Russians, now it's the Jellyfish foo! We shot them, but they break into smaller pieces and keep coming They've got to be nuclear mutants\" 1955 Cy.clod (sikld) n. A mythical creature apparent in many legends: in Sirius legend, the video representation of a game wherein an eyeball fights snakes with bricks.  55 You say you have a sudden urge to play Foosball? Now you and up to three of your friends can play Foosball at home Divide into Grud and Robot teams and bash the ball around the screen * Dark Forest is a game of strategy which you against Trolls, Magicians, Sea Serpen Specters, Gruds and up to five other playe You can choose from any of eight levels of difficulty. 21955 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 LARCLAYCARE I 10 11 12 13 PHANTOMS FIVE VISA Please tick appropriate boxes To The Leisure Collection, PO Box 6. Uxbridge, Middlesex UBIJQ. I enclose a cheque/postal order for or please debit my Access/Barclaycard Account Number (All prices include P&P and VAT) Signature Name Address: THE EISURE OECTION A division of Zynar Ltd, 122, High Street,Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB8 IJT. All games require Apple) with 48K and one Apple disk drive. Games marked*require games paddle. To order by phone, ring (0895)59836 and quote your credit cardno While you try to make your bombing run you have to and being hit by anti-aircraft fire and fight off enemy aircraft as well. 21955 "

