"95p DECEMBER 1985 S$4.60 Dm6 COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES 0 WIN A GENUINE COMMANDO ARCADE MACHINE! FREE INSIDE: BOOK OF ADVENTURE OLYMPIC STAR TRACK TEST SPORTS GAMES WIN A METEOR PINBALL/WIN OUR TREASURE TROVE! WIN F.A.B. THUNDERBIRDS GAMES/HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER MAPPED "


"100L "


"THE SUASH HIT NO. 1 AIRMADE GAME! Conheart Japan Capsule Computers (UK) SUPERIORACK COMBAT SOLDIER FIG LONE BATTLE AGAINST OVES O ODDS. ALL THE ACTION ANDSION OF THE WORLDS NUMBER ONE ARCADE GAME Available for Spectrum Commodore 64 Amstrad/ Schneider and BBC. Elite Systems, Anchor House. Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, England, Tel: (0922) 59165 «Consumer Hotline "


"CONI ADRIAN MOLE/ADVENTURE BOOK FEATURES 37 HOTSHOTS 40 CHARTS 40 CHARTS 46 IDEAS CENTRAL 51 COMMANDO COMPETITION 54 PINBALL PRIZE 58 HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER MAP 64 BUGHUNTERS CARTOON 85 THUNDERBIRDS ARE GO! 93 DEAR BUGHUNTERS 98 GOONIES COMPETITION 102 POP STARS' COMPUTERS 109 BOFFIN COMPETITION 111 INTERACTIVE GAMES 117 GAMES COMPILATIONS 120 SPORTS REVIEWS 129 PSI WARRIOR 134 CHRISTMAS MOVIE ROUND-UP 141 MAILBAG NEWS + REVIEWS 8 NEWS  We have a preview of Activision's forthcoming Little People game and also exclusive pictures of Ariolasoft's great new game Wild West. Don't miss it. 14 REVIEWS  CRL have come up trumps with Tau Ceti the game C+VG BEYOND THUNDERDOME/P134 COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE By using the special Postal Subscription Service copies of COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES con be mailed duect from our offices each month to any address throughout the world. All subscrption applications should be sent for processing to COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES Subscription Department). Competition House Farmdon Road, Market Harborough Lecestershire All orders should include the appropriate emmance mode poyable to COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES Annual Subscription rotes (12 ssues: UK and Eure . Additional service information, including individual overseas cirmoil roles available upon request. Circulation Department EMAP National Publications Published and distributed by EMAP National Publications Ltd predicts will be number one this Christmas. Typeset by In-Step Lid 88 ARCADE ACTION  Clare Edgeley, Ideas Corp's Arcade Spy, has been hot on the trail of Atari's new mega-gameGauntlet. The dazzling screen shots will have your eyes popping out. GAMES BOOK 68 MAD MUNCHER/BBC  Work up an appetite with this great game, 71 NECROMANCER'S REALM/CBM64  Take on the role of an evil wizard it's spellbinding! 74 DRIP DROP/Spectrum 32K  Keeping dry in Drip Drop will be harder than you think. 80 TRUCKIE/ Vic 20  Six wheel mayhem for driving nuts. C+DG TOP 30 CHARTS PAGE 40 "


"TENTSI  near Elia Sn Injury THIS ISSUE  We've had some neat prizes to give away to the growing number of C+VG addicts in the past but this issue we've gone completely O.TT. on the competition front. Thanks to Elite we've got a genuine COMMANDO arcade machine to give a way to the first prize winner in our great C+VG Chartbusters Competition. And that's not all. PSS, the people who brought you the hottest computer pinball game around for the Spectrum and Amstrad have come up with a REAL pinball machine for the winner of our Design a Pinball competition. So, if you want to turn your home into an arcade, you won't want to miss these two terrific competitions. There's tons of software up for grabs too. Goonies is going to be one of the big movies this Christmas and you could win tickets to go and see it plus a Goonies treasure trove from Datasoft and U.S. Gold. Once you've riped the issue apart to get at the entry coupon you can settle back to read Keith Campbell's Book of Adventure FREE inside this action packed issue. There're reviews, a big helping of the Adventure Helpline, features and you guessed it, another competition. You could win a Goblin's personal stereo from Bored of the Rings. Arcade Action hits you with a game that's going to take the arcodes by storm. Called Gauntlet it's like nothing you've ever seen before. MIKRO-PLUS/REVIEWS/P14 MASK> NEWS/8 Le THUNDERBIRDS COMPETITION P85 EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John DESIGN Craig Kennedy DESIGN/EDITORIAL CONSULTANTS Steve Bush Viel MacDonald ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Paul Coppins Simon Marsh Jim Douglas AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgeley SOFTWARE CONSULTANT Tony Tokoushi PUBLICITY Marcus Rich ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Louise Matthews DEPUTY ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Bernard Dugdale ADVERTISEMENT EXECUTIVE Mike Core PRODUCTION ASSISTANT Melanie Paulo PUBLISHER Rita Lewis ... and the Bug Hunters! Jerry Paris EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR JAU Tel: 01-251 6272 GAMES BOOK Bumper GAMES BOOK/67 PINBALL COMPETITION/P54 "


"Trying to play all the games you can get for the Sinclai (About 5,000 times.) "


"How would you like to be blasted out of the sky by anti-aircraft guns? Or perhaps you'd prefer to be vapourised by a Thargoid starship. Or eaten for breakfast by mutant rats. Well, you have all this and more to look forward to, if you get a Sinclair Spectrum +. Because there are more games available for the Spectrum + than any other home computer (About 5,000 the last time we counted.) Not all of which lead to such sticky ends, we might add. HAUTE You may, for instance, rather battle it out on the chess board with a Russian grand master. Or cross swords with Nick Faldo on the golf course. You won't just have the pick of the current titles either You'll get first shot at the new ones too. Because most of them become available for the Spectrum + before anything else. And because there are so many other Spectrum owners there are more books and magazines and clubs to join. So if you get a Spectrum +, you may well end up in a Grand Prix pile-up. And your chances of being killed by Gremlins are very high. But you'll never die of boredom. lair Spectrum could kill you. Sinclair "


"C+VG PREVIEW WHO'S BE * NEWS Disturbing facts about little people actually LIVING inside your computers have been uncovered by C+VG's Investigative reporter DAVID BISHOP. Why has the truth been coveredup for so long? Who are these creatures? What do they want? And why do the eat so much? In this EXCLUSIVE report, C+VG uncovers the mystery of the Little Computer People... Here David Bishop tells how the L.C.P.s were discovered in where else the good old USA... Here are a couple of screen shots from an exciting new totally interactive graphic adventure \"movie\" soon to be released by Ariolasoft. Called Wild West it comes from the Hungarian Andromeda software team. It features some unique \"zoom\" techniques and much more. If you want to become a gun-toting Pale Rider, watch out for this one in your local computer store. It's extremely playable believe us. Full review next month plus a special feature on the software that's coming to you from behind the iron curtain. Don't miss C+VG next month. featuring C+VGs own champion adventurer battling against fellow Muddists will now take place in the Spring. Watch this space for more details. M.U.D's launch manager, Mike Anderlesz, said: \"There hasn't been a program of this size or complexity before. The problems we're experiencing are just last minute bugs.\" After loading, the player is asked to select between racing on one of the preset tracks that come with the program, or designing a new one. If you decide to construct your own track, you are presented with a larger grid in a window on the right-hand side of the screen, which scrolls over the whole area that can be built up. The left-hand third of the screen contains a vertically. scrolling menu which holds all the track pieces that can be used to construct your circuit. Actually constructing a circuit couldn't be easier. You simply move the cursor with the joystick to the track menu. Moving up or down causes the menu to scroll in the appropriate direction until you find the piece you are looking for. Pressing fire picks up the chosen track and you can now move it to the construction window ready for placing. When you find the right place, simply press the fire again and the track is placed on the map. Fast Tracks lets you review the track you are building on a small scale, 2D view at any time. 8P4 RELAIS 2866 798 MBUSTY Electric Dreams are also resurecting Automata's innovative Deus Ex Machina program. Deus features a proper audio soundtrack on a tape which you play in sync with the game. Electric Dreams ore repackaging and repricing the 64 version of this game. It will cost .95 and if you miss it at that price, you're absolutely crazy This is I, of the Mask, the latest game from Sandy \"Ant Attack\" White. Mask features the most advanced 3D graphics yet seen on the Spectrum. It should be out soon on the new Electric Dreams label. The game is all about reconstructing a long lost mega-robot — watch for a full review next issue. Meanwhile iust drool over these pics... DATELINE: DEC 18th 1980 David Crane (who would go on to write such notables as Pitfall and Ghostbusters) was thinking about computer systems. A niggling glitch was bugging him. Perfect code was going in but mumbo-jumbo was coming out. DATELINE: MAY 7th 1984 Rich Gold, an artist muscian with moderate computer experience was off key! Every D-flat he puched into his computer came straight back out as a Dsharp....not a pretty sound! DATELINE: JUNE 11th 1984 Gold theorised that the continued glitching he was encountering was caused by something or someone inside his computer playing havoc with his music. DATELINE: JUNE 28th 1984 James Wickstead & Associates, the well-known electronics design engineers, brought in to investigate the unexplained occurences in Gold's computer, DATELINE: NOVEMBER 2nd 1984 After months of research suspicions began to grow. The frequency of glitches was increasing as if someone was trying to tell them to 'go away. The research team could almost communicate with the perpetrators by setting up glitchtrap scenarios' creating situations that invited tampering...they were never disappointed! DATELINE: DECEMBER 23rd 1984 Gold and Wickstead came to the conclusion that whatever or whoever was in there probably knew all about them because TAYOFARRETORIO Following hot on the heels of Racing Destruction Set, Activision are soon to release their own racing game with a construction set called Fast Tracks. The game is based on the original Scaletric slot car concept where you can build up any shaped track you like, and then race on it against your friends or, in this case, the computer. British Telecom have proved to be real stick in the MUDs with their mega-interactive adventure. Technical problems are delaying the launch of the first nationwide Multi-User Dungeon game. The good news for existing subscribers is that they will still be guaranteed free credit for the trial period whenever it takes ploce. The Great M.U.D. Challenge C+VG PREVIEW "


"BEEN SLEEPING IN MY COMPUTER..? C+VG PREVIEW anything entered into a computer has to pass through the user. This led to a friendship treaty.\" \"Maybe they like us. If so, we have to create a comfortable environment to lure them out, exclaimed Gold, who further postulated that the computer dwellers would probably know of, and want, all the modern amenities of a modern home. DATELINE: JANUARY 9th 1985 Back in Mountain View, California, David Crane sets up the Activision Research Group (ARG) to investigate strange forces inside computers. DATELINE: JANUARY 22nd 1985 Crane hears of Gold's work and they decide to join forces. Work begins in earnest to find the right environment in which the computer dwellers could feel at home. They begin working night and day on everything from furnishings to plumbing to electrical necessities for the \"home\" they were creating. DATELINE: JUNE 1st 1985 At last, after months of trial and error, the house on a disk is finally ready to be loaded into the Apple. At first nothing happened. Then after agonising minutes the doorbell rang twice! It is very seldom that a computer game can be called completely original. Yes, many are clever with original themes or game play elements but strip away all the graphics and sound effects and, like us, most games are alike. It is, therefore, a moment to savour when you actually load up a program that is totally unlike anything you have ever seen before. Activision's Little Computer People is such a program. Imagine this guy, only one-inch tall, living in your computer, going about his daily life without a care in the world. Apparently, according to Activision, most computers are inhabited by Little Computer People (L.C.P.s) and each one is different. With their 'House-on-a-Disk you will be able to entice the L.C.P. into the house displayed on the screen. What his name is or what the personality of your L.C.P. will be can only be guessed at until he moves in, and you don't even know when that will be because some L.C.P's are more timid that others. What makes this program so special is not just that it is a refreshingly original idea, but the painstaking attention to detail in graphics, sound effects, over to the bowl to see if it needs filling. If it is empty, he'll put half the tin in the bowl and the rest in the fridge. If, however, there is already some in the bowl then Drew will put the unopened tin in the cupboard until it is needed. With such a new concept, treated so beautifully, many people could find themselves forming long and meaningful relationships with their L.C.P. In short, Activision have a real winner on their hands with this one! and design. Combine this with steps in his new home. the fact that every L.C.P will be During the next ten minutes or different in some respect so the latest addition to my surely a first in computer monitor set about exploring software and Activision have every nook and cranny of the a sure-fire winner on their house, opening a cupboard here hands. It even may prove as a drawer there, and even influential to future game design investigating the closet. Then, as Miner 2049er or Pacman suddenly, he left. have been \"Maybe he doesn't like the What you get! place,\" I thought. But a few In what promises to be an minutes later he was back elegantly produced package you beaming from eye to eye, will get one CBM 64 floppy (tape carrying a large grey suitcase. version very likely to follow) He had even brought his dog! containing one \"house-on-a-disk\". My L.C.P. went straight up to A full colour 14 page glossy his new bedroom and unpacked magazine is also included which before going down to the kitchen explains how L.C.P.s have a vote for a snack and a drink of water and pay taxes,\" while the Pentagon asks \"Whose side are he went upstairs, sat down at his they on anyway?\" typwriter and wrote me a letter The instruction manual tells explaining how nice he thought you all you need to know about the house was and shouldn't he looking after your L.C.P. and how really be paying rent? He signed to communicate with, feed, give it Drew. presents to and scratch the head The typewriter is a good of your newly adopted friend. example of the meticulous Loading your \"House on a attention to detail mentioned Disk\" for the first time. earlier. Drew sat facing me Having entered my name (you merrily typing away. At the same only ever have to do this once) time the top of the screen and the date and time, I waited showed a Drew's eye view of eagerly for my 1541 snaildrive to paper and typewriter carriage cease whirling. Finally a which move across the paper in beautifully designed but perfect synchronisation with the uninhabited house appeared. actual typewriter he was using, Three or four minutes passed Even the sound effects of the with nothing happening, but keys hitting the paper and the \"end of line\" bell sounded real. reloading, the doorbell rang! Other features abound, such Moments later the door as Drew's hands moving in opened and an unsure looking perfect time with the notes face peeked through. The face played on his piano, or the was followed by a body as my feeding of the dog. If you give L.C.P. took his first few tentative Drew a can of dogfood, he'll go The HOUSE ON A DISK created by Crane and Hold now commercially available for the Little Computer People (L.C.P.) in your Commodore 64. RECREATION ROOM Complete with TV, stereo and well-tuned upright piano. All L.C.P.s are musically inclined but some are more gifted than others. L.C.P.s often relax in front of the box or practice their latest Travolta moves to the newest disco sounds on their stereo. CLOSET What L.C.P.s.get up to in the closet is one of the mysteries as yet unsolved by researchers. Recent data shows closet popularity is definitely on the increase! TYPEWRITER For those more literary L.C.P.s this is a must and provides their main means of communication with humans because, after years of watching us, L.C.P.s have C+VG PREVIEW Continued on page 11 "


"SPECTRUM 48K SPECTRUM 48K U.S. GOLD scansoph .5   HALL OF FAME RAID!! FLAK HUNCHBACK | BLUE MAX * Entered UK Charts 22nd February 1985 Weeks in Charts-12 Blue Max is certainly a great game Crash \"Entered UK Charts 4th April 1985 Weeks in Charts 22 'Absorbing, addictive and fun to play Crash Smash Entered UK Charts 8th October 1984 Weeks in Charts 6 'Will you survive the Flak Your Computer ROCCO (Gremlin Graphics) * Entered UK Charts 1st July 1985 Weeks in Charts 6 Animation is great, if you want a good punch up Rocco is the game for you! Computer & Video Games \"Entered UK Charts 19th December 1984 Weeks in Charts 18 85% Very playable and addictive \"Long life in terms of appeal Crash Smash A CHARTBUSTING COMPILATION FOR SPECTRUM PACKED FULL OF PUNCH TERRY .95 TAPE .951 6.8. Gold Limited, usli 10 TAPE U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10 i ndustrial Centre, Heren Street, Birmingar ALY. Telephone: 021-359 8881 B odon.com led data (64/Spectrum) from Ram/c/Micro Dealer Charts TAPE .95 "


"Continued from p9 learnt to type perfectly in complaints about lack of hot English! water. FILING CABINET ALARM CLOCK L.C.Ps like to keep things as tidy Even L.C.P.s have to get up in the as possible. Packs of cards, books morning! of anagrams, typing paper DRESSER they're all here. The drawers are full of changes BEDROOM of clothes for the fashion Early experiments with water conscience L.C.P. Pyjamas are also beds proved disastrous to kept here. computer circuitry so traditional TOILET firm-matressed beds have been provided to alleviate certain back L.C.P.s, like anybody else, have to perform certain bodily functions. problems caused by cramped living conditions. Fortunately Crane and Gold were thoughtful enough to put the BATHROOM toilet behind closed doors. L.C.P.s Being fastidious little creatures value their privacy too, you L.C.P.s always wash their hands know! They also never forget to after going to the loo and their pull the chain. teeth after meals so a basin and cabinet are essential. L.C.P.s love KITCHEN to take long showers although . For many L.C.P.s this is the most there have been reported important room in the house and Rumours of Soft Aid II were premature. But Rod Cousens, the man who masterminded the original project says that there will be Soft Aid compilations for the Beeb and Amstrad coming soon. There's also a new compilation on the way to raise funds for the current antiheroin campain on the way. It will be called Off the Hook. comes with ample storage space, a cooker, water fountain, fridgefreezer etc. The dog's bowl is on the floor. STUDY Of course L.C.P.s have their own computer, the question is are there even smaller L.C.P.s living inside these? L.C.P.s keep their book collections here too. LIVING ROOM One of the most spacious rooms in the house, replete with armchair, log fire, reading lamp and phone. All L.C.P.s spend a lot of time on the phone — to whom nobody knows. FRONT DOOR This is where L.C.P.s keep their woodpile to feed the fire when it's cold. Presents, such as records, books and food (for both dogs and L.C.P.s), can be left here. The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole from Mosaic headlines the new Commodore 64 Christmas Compendium pack, which sells for . The compendium comprises: The Commodore 64, a 1530 Datassette, Music Maker, Designer's Pencil from Activision. The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole and a copy of the best-selling book, \"The Growing Pains of Adrian Mole\". In addition to the Christmas Compendium, Commodore is also launching two other valueadded packs: a peripherals package for the Commodore 64 and a 64 complete with disk drive and software. The peripherals pack, which will be available while stocks last, comprises a 1541 disk drive and dot matrix printer. For those first-time users who want a complete system immediately, Commodore is packaging together for Christmas a Commodore 64, 1541 disk drive and two top games, for .99. Both programs in the pack have produced by US Gold and available only disk: Super Zaxxonds.  Here we print for the first time anywhere extracts from the diary of a little computer person. The tiny book was found lying beside C+VG's trusty C64 one morning. Could the L.C.P.s be trying to tell US something? THE SECRET DIARY OF DREW AGED 1W Wed. 27th September: 5.37pm. Spent an amusing afternoon tinkering with a program my human was trying to run. He looked most upset. I must try and find out what this ritual of trying to pull their own hair out is all about. Very strange. Thur. 28th September: 10.13am. Discovered something new in my computer. Am debating whether to investigate. 10.16am. My curiosity has got the better of me. I'm going to take a look. If anything should happen to me, leave all my worldly circuit boards to my cousin Burt. 10.18 am. It would appear that the human I've been observing for some time has given me a house to live in. It may be a trap! 10.25 am. This is great, all the mod cons 1 ever dreamed of seem to be here. Stereo, phone, TV, shower, gas cooker, the works. I've even got my own computer. I've decided to throw caution to the wind and move in. Who knows, maybe my human wants to observe me! 12.01 pm. Just finished moving all my things in. This place is really roomy. The dog seems happy enough too. But remember how long it took me to homecomputer train him. 12.17 pm. Had my first meal in my new house...feeling very happy. 12.18 pm. Fed the dog. 12.52 pm. Can things get any better? There's a piano upstairs and ! just had a go. It's a breeze after that SID chip. 12.36 pm. My human's called David. He's just been talking to me. Can you believe it? 6.40 pm. The phone didn't stop ringing this afternoon. It's typical, get a new house and suddenly everyone wants to know you. From time to time various humans gathered round their side of the monitor screen to see what I was up to. Honestly, don't they know the meaning of the word privacy Still, I decided to humour them. 9.27 pm. It's getting a little chilly so I'm going to light a fire. I saw some logs outside the front door on my way in. 11.45 pm. Just watched a great movie on TV about these guys going around exterminating ghosts. think I'll try and learn to play the theme music on my piano it's quite a catchy tune. Time for bed. Fri. 29th September: 12.47 am. Can you believe it! Just as I was on my way to bed David asked me to play a game with him. I mean...it's the middle of the night! Still life does have its little compensations. I won $23 off him playing poker...he really hasn't got the faintest idea. 3.03 am. Got up to go to the little persons room and, while getting a glass of water, noticed that David hadn't left me any more food. I'm a little concerned but I'm sure he'll remember before the morning. 7.40 am. Slept well. Still no food. This is serious. Decided to write my human a letter. 8.55 am: Did some exercises in the bedroom. Hardly a substitute for two eggs sunny side up, but at least it took my mind off food for a little while. I feel a little weak. This is getting serious. 1.55 pm. Still no reply to my letter. Decided to write another one. Maybe I'll try to attact his attention by asking him to play a game or banging on the screen. Water almost run out. Things are getting a little desperate. 4.00 pm. Feeling ill. I'm even turning green. Am going to bed. Maybe this will increase my sympathy rating. 5.20 pm. At last! He's remembered me! About time too. 5.22 pm. Had slap up meal to celebrate! 9.55 pm. Ate super then sat down to read the newspaper. Read an interesting article about little people living in computers. Have they only just realised? Maybe Reuters could syndicate my life story! 9.57 pm. Wrote a letter to Reuters. Thurs 3rd October: 8.40 am. A letter arrived from a magazine called Computer and Video Games this morning. Apparently Reuters weren't interested but passed my letter on to these guys who want to publish parts of my diary. Great! This could be the break I've been waiting for. Sunburnt and salt-soaked, surfers are the riders of the storm. They challenge the sea's might and, although they can never tame it, they use it to their own advantage to produce one of the most exciting and exhilarating sports around. Now the challenge. frustration and enjoyment of trying to ride the waves on a board has been captured in a new computer game, Surf Champ, by the Irish software house New Concepts. And to launch and test reaction to the Spectrum game, New Concepts organised a computer surfing championship to coinside with the European Surfing Championships held in County Donegal, Ireland, in October. New Concepts claims Surf Champ is the ultimate sports simulation, as near to the real thing as possible. The game is also revolutionary in that it Continued on p 124 "


"Bond... Basildon Bond NEW RELEASES The Adventures of Bord \"THE ADVENTURES OF BOND. BASILDON BOND\" Starring RUSS ABBOT Featuring COOPERMAN, BLUNDERWOMAN, BOND Under strict and confidential orders from P, who has been re-named B, to confuse the KGB, Bond has been assigned to rescue Russ who is being held captive by a rival comedy act, in the dungeons of the television studio. Traps, puzzles, jokes, fight sequences and famous characters are combined to produce a funny and slightly hilarious arcade adventure. Featuring Russ Abbots New Single \"LETS GO TO THE DISCO\" Available for the Commodore 64 $9.99 cassette .99 disk Soon available for the Spectrum & Amstrad Devils Crown The most amazing arcade adventure to be released for the Amstrad is NOW available for the Spectrum. Amstrad Action Review A.A. Rave Graphics 94% Sonics 75% Grab Factor 85% Staying Power 89% AA Rating 87% Amstrad .99 Cassette. .99 Disk Spectrum 48K .99 0 EDITHIARE Screen shots from Amstrad version 155 MITCHAM ROAD, LONDON SW17. Tel: 01-672 9179 Selected titles available from W.H. Smith BOOL Laskys and all good software retailers "


"The Commodore 128. When you look at the facts they do seem to weigh rather heavily in our favour. When you add it up, the Commodore 128 is really three computers in one. It can run 64K, 128K and CP/M software. Giving it the largest range of computer software in the world. Making it as efficient in business as it is entertaining at home. That's why Commodore has become the world leader in microcomputers. And why, on balance, the Commodore 128 has no equal. commodore "


"C+VG DEC sobtware REVIEWSO KEY TAU CETIT OF THE MONTH GRAPHICS Are they really mind-blowing 3D technicolour visions like the adverts tell you or does it look like someone has simply scribbled on the screen with a magic marker? HEE THESE KEWS OR (W/WD? SOUND Does the game sound like a Duran Duran LP played at half speed? Or does the noise from your micro knock you half way across the room? The C+VG review team don't play games with their ears blocked up you know! VALUE Is the game really worth all those pennies? Will the novelty last? Is it worth going without C+VG for a month because your parents won't come up with the extra pocket money? Or could YOU write a better game? > LAUNCH HISSILE LAUNCHED  Machine: Spectrum Supplier: CRL Price: .95 \"My shields are low, the scanner is out, I've fired my last missile and there are three Hunters on my tail...I need to find a repair centre FAST! There's one and the airlock is opening. But will my Gal-Corp Skimmer make it before those Hunters wipe me?\" Just where in the galazy have you landed now? On Tau Ceti, that's where. The roughest, toughest planet in the known universe. And you're playing what we at C+VG confidently predict will be the Christmas Spectrum number one. Big words but just look at what's in store for you if you're lucky enough to get your hands on a copy Take Elite, and a dash of Impossible Mission, and some 3D Tank Duel to add some spice and you've got the recipe for a real blockbuster. And we haven't even mentioned the super fast scrolling, neat graphics and totally addictive game play. But before this review starts going totally over the top, Tet's take a look at what the game is all about. Basically it goes like this. A plaque has decimated the inhospitable desert world of Tau Ceti and the tough pioneer settlers have been forced to evacuate the planet, leaving behind the automated systems which helped them survive. As scientists battled to find a cure for the mystery plague a massive meteorite smashed into the planet. And something went horribly wrong with the automated systems all the droids and defence systems ran amok destroying anything and everything that dared to venture into the cities of Tau Ceti. The systems are controlled from a massive fusion reactor in the planet's capital Centralis. Someone has to get in there and shut down the reactor using hidden cooling rods and stop the rogue robotoids that someone is your After all, the scientists have discovered a cure for the plague now and Gal Corp want to start making some cash out of the planet, again... So it's into your Skimmer and down to the planet where all the adventure and danger you've ever dreamed of is waiting Fortunately, the Skimmer is heavily armed with a laser, eight heat seeking missiles, eight anti-missile missiles, eight starlight flares, infra red nite sights, plus shields and a four way Elite style scanner to avoid those nasty blind spots. You've also got an onboard computer to help you work out just what is going on down on Tau Ceti! On loading you see a view of the skimmer's instrument panel. The screen is divided into three areas. The large window on the left is your viewscreen, below that is a long blue area. This is your contact with the Skimmer's powerful computer. At the right of the screen are five information windows. At the top is a compass and real-time clock along with a message showing the direction of the view selected, the city you are in and the ship's flight status. Below that is the scanner which gives a plan view of you surroundings, and below that three more smaller windows. The first gives the pilot's name HIRICH HAME PLAYABILITY Will you be playing until the early hours of the morning as you attempt to complete just one more screen? Or do you fall asleep the minute the intro screen appears? LEENA CENTEALIS HEVROL BLITZ GAME BLITZ GAME C+VG's way of telling you that the game must not be missed! Machine CBM 64 . Price: .95 Watch our Ultimate Here comes The Edge Wizardry puts up a real challenge to the dungeons and dragons type arcade adventure pioneered by the Ultimate team. You play the part of Drinn, an apprentice loremaster, on a quest within the walls of the Castle of Illusion. Pass all the tests and you could become the youngest loremaster in the land. You start the game in a floating 3D corridor. Floating as the graphics for the castle corridors and rooms all appear against an inky black background. Below the graphics are status windows including an inventory, a hits/wounds readout plus a message window for mystic communications The game is played using a combination of keyboard and joystick. The stick is used for movement and firing spells, using your sword while the keyboard calls up objects from your SHOPE HDUTOS GAME  STARTS HERE "


"C+VG DEC software REVIEWS TA!! CET III 00:01:42 FOLHAR BEEHH LAUNCHED 3D GRAND PRIX EPILOT NRO HLT HM: FL: EUWEFLOR Height Shield Fue! Loser Sed TAL! CETTI 00:06:08 FORHMRDREEHN and the scanner's complement of missiles and flares. The second shows speed, shield energy, fuel remaining, laser temperature and height. The third displays two automatic direction finders the upper one locked onto the city and the lower onto your lander. The Skimmer operates it two modes, flight mode and ground mode. In flight mode control of the program is via single keys or a joystick In ground mode you are in direct communication with the skimmer's computer via the computer window. You see the message \"TYPE HELP OR SOME OTHER COMMAND\" in the computer window Type HELP and the commands you can use are listed. Commands like MAP, RODS, LAUNCH, EQUIP, STATUS etc. The MAP command enables you to see where you are and where you can travel to. Each city is connected by a series of jump pads\" which enable you to take your Skimmer from city to city. The map shows you these routes. While in this mode you can zoom in and out of the planet to get an overall view or to check out a specific city. Moving a cursor over the name of the city and hitting the fire button enables you to get a readout on the city's status. You can even ask you computer to FIND you a specific city and tell you all about it if you wish. The RODS commands is a bit like the \"pocket computer\" part of Impossible Mission. You need to find all the rods to be able to knock out the Centralis reactor. There are several types of flying nasties in each city the toughest are the Hunters there are three types of these and each are bad news to the average Skimmer pilot. There are also automated fortresses which take pot shots at you. Should you take a lot of stick from the various attackers you can zoom into one of the repair and equipment centres for more missiles and a 6,000 mile service through airlocks which open as you approach. Some of these centres are civilian and hold no weapon supplies. Other are military bases. You'll soon know how to tell the differencel This game has some really nice touches. Try landing without slowing down and you bump along the ground! Shoot a guided missile at a retreating Hunter and you'll see it explode on the horizon just like in Bugs Bunny cartoons when the villain is running away and Bugs chucks a stone which hits him just as you think he's escaped out of the frame! It's even got its own built in notepad for you to write hints and information on as you go. You call this option up by simply typing in PAD on your computer. You'll soon get the hang of using the map, computer and controls and recognising hazards, buildings and airlocks. DON'T approach an airlock too fast. You'll find out what happens should you try it... If you only buy one game a year then get Tau Ceti. You won't be bored for another 12 months! ME EINEO HI: EUWE LUND HM:S FL:8 Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Amsoft Price: .95 Just what the Amstrad needed. A really nice formula one racing game! 3D Grand Prix has great graphics, neat scrolling but LOUSY sound. This race car sounds like someone is playing a demented organ in the cockpit and this really lets an otherwise excellent game down. We suggest that you kill the sound and make your own vrooom, vrooom noises as you play. OK, moaning over. Let's take a look at the rest of the game. What you get is a driver's eye view of the cockpit and the race track ahead in regular Pole Position style. When you start Racing, you notice the nice touches programmers Mick O'Neill and Dave Mends have included. Like the rear view mirrors which show other cars looming up behind you. Like the front wheels which actually turn as you blast around the bends. Like the steering wheel which also turns. Like the nasty spins you can get yourself into going around the bends too fast! The \"car\" slides away from you most realistically. You compete on eight grand prix circuits for a season scoring points as you go. You must finish in the top three of each race to qualify for the next. Tracks include Silverstone, Zanvoort and Kyalami spelt wrong on the inlay! There doesn't appear to be any relation between the real circuits and the computer ones. Game action is fun Overtaking can be a problem until you realise that you must stick to the inside of the corners and take a tight line when attempting to get past the computer cars. 3D Grand Prix with a bit more fine tuning could be a great Amstrad game. But that naff sound...Yuk! o Height Shield Fuel Loser Speed  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability inventory and makes them ready to use. You also have to use the Commodore key to open doors it's not a fully scrolling game you see! There are lots of puzzles and problems to be solved but fortunately The Edge have included a few hints to get you started in the nice little booklet which comes with the game. You'll come across lots of surprises as you move through the castle like the flying skulls and horned beasts who guard various chests. You'll have to learn when to use a spell or when to fight with your trusty sword, when to open a chest or when to leave it well alone. But don't waste your spells use them wisely or you could find yourself in big trouble Wizardry is the closest thing we've seen to a real-time animated Dungeons and Dragons style game with many of the elements of the original role playing D&D included The graphics are dare I say it better than the Ultimate 64 games so far. The sound a different tune for almost every room is great. And the game is absorbing and addictive Could this be the start of something big from The Edge? LORD Some  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability co Graphics Sound  Value  Playability  CONTINUES ON PAGE 17 "


"WATCH OUT! IT'S SA DYNAMITE DAN 94% Crash Smash Amstrad/C64 .95 48K Spectrum/Spectrum+ .95 Popular Computing Weekly Pick of the Week MIRRORSOFT Maxwell House, Worship Street, London EC2A 2EN. Tel 01-377 4644 Trade orders to: Mirrorsoft Purnell Book Centre, Paulton, Bristol BS18 5LQ. "


"C+VGDEC software. REVIEWS 3 FAIRLIGHT CI-E GEME LUE Uttttttttttttco WWWWWWWWWWWWWW  Machine: Spectrum sword-in-hand. Basic movements  Supplier: The Edge in four diagonal directions are accommodated along with  Price: .95 jumping, object handling and \"Huh! Just like Knight Lore.\" combat. will probably be the most I was frustrated with the common phrase to pass cynical object routine. It seems gamers' lips when they view the impossible to push an object latest effort from The Edge, from one room to another, based in leafy Covent Garden. which is a definite problem if Despite comparisons being you find a chest obscuring a odious, closer inspection will doorway after some fearsome reveal a level of detail and combat. precision which surpasses When the room is narrow, anything seen on a Spectrum matters are made increasingly before. Of course, sacrifices difficult. You can't push the have to be made to incorporate blasted chest out of the way, such finery... you can't pick it up, turn around Loading proved no obstacle, and put it down somewhere and shortly an extremely pretty convenient. Doubtless you will title screen appeared, along with find the offending object too a three-figure number in the heavy to carry without dropping lower left hand section of the a valuable item first! screen. This number gradually There are lots of unfriendly decreases as the code is loaded, people in the castle where most until it reaches 000, and a of the action takes place. merry (if slightly lengthy) tune Whirlwinds, knights, bubbles issues from the Speccy. and hooded figures all wander The plot is very long-winded around with seemingly nothing so we'll leave out all the myth better to do than inflict severe and magic and press on with physical damage on any passing game-play. A 3D picture of each traveller! location is presented, very much All-in-all, a great game. like the Ultimate games of late. Certainly one for mapping The Edge have been making freaks! loud noises about a \"Worldmaker' which was used . Graphics to create the environment, and comments about hype aside, it  Sound really is very good.  Value You are presented as a fairly Playability insignificant-looking fellow, XCEL GOONIES switch control by simply hitting the fire button For instance in the first screen one character must nip up to the top of the lighthouse and start a money printing machine going. This makes Mama Fratelli who guards the light housedash out to collect the falling  Machine: Atari/C64 Supplier: DataSoft/U.S. Gold  Price: .95 (tape) .95 (disk). Yet another movie spin-offbut this one sticks pretty close to the plot of the latest Steven Spielberg production Goonies, the movie, tells of a gang of young adventurers who discover a mysterious treasure map and then set off on a search for the lost pirate treasure in some spectacular underground caverns. You can read about the movie elswhere in this issue. The game begins in the strange lighthouse owned by the nasty Mama Fratelli, It's basically a piatform game with enhanced graphics and a two character control system. You have to move two members of the gang around each screenand each must perform a specific task before you can move onto the next screen. You can either play the computer or two players can take part. You Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Program Techniques Price: .95 This game is so well put together it's hard to fault it — but some parts of Xcel are so frustrating to play that it almost put this reviewer off totally. But if you are a thinking zapper, you'll take to Xcel like an alien to hyperspace. The basic idea of the game is this. Computers called Sentinals are ruling the universe and mankind has become a completely servile race dominated by the machines. You have stolen a spacecraft from the Oceania Museum of Technology and are embarking on a deadly mission to destroy the Sentinals who inhabit 30 planets dotted around the galaxy. Each Sentinal is protected by various mechanical nasties. You have to hyperspace around the galaxy, visit planets, find the Sentinal installations and destroy them. Sounds easier than it is... You have two shipboard computers, one which keeps you informed about the status of your craft, the other which tells you about the planets you have visited, a communications channel which you can call on for game play hints if you get into trouble, a hyperspace drive, a galactic chart and five attack shuttles which you use to make low level attack runs on the planets. When you start the game, you get a view through the front screen of your ship with a planet spinning below. The screen is surrounded by icons representing the various functions described above. When the icon is flashing, your computer wants to tell you something To explore a planet you have to send a shuttle down to explore. Then the screen switches to a plan view Dark Star style of the planet's surface You fly your craft through a series of obstacles zapping them as you go. Then the first wave of Sentinal defenders appear, Zalaga fashion, spiralling down at you dropping deadly bombs. You have to fly your shuttle through a \"maze of trees and sometimes there seems to be no way out! If you're short on shuttles then this could be the end of the game for you. This reviewer managed to get through on about the fourth or fifth attempt — after visiting a number of planets to see if they were any easier! Immensely frustrating!!! The game features some really nice graphic gimmicks like the \"communications' which appear in \"computerese then get translated into English by your shipboard computer. And then there are the screen \"wipes which happen when you enter various stages of the game. There's a useful help function which tells you just what all your controls can do for you and that communications link which gives game tips as you play. So many nice touches shame about those trees. Xcel is a really well presented game — one of the best on the shelves right now. If someone can tell us how to master the trees we'll give it a Blitz rating! Play it before purchashing. Meanwhile your mate must dash into the lighthouse and push over a drinking fountain which opens the secret passage which leads to the buried treasurel Each screen is packed with interesting puzzles and problems. The attention to detail is good — and the game is fun to play. If you enjoy the movie, you'll want to get hold of the game. A challenge for platform fans.  Graphics Sound  Value  Playability }  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability CONN CONTINUED FROM PAGE 15  CONTINUES ON PAGE 20 "


" WRESTLE Rock'n Wrestle-the first truly 3 dimensional combat sports simulation game. Dynamic graphics, state-of-the-art animation, 1 and 2 player mode, brilliant gameplay, 10 different opponents and complete rock sound track. More joystick moves than you imagined possible-over 25-including the atomic drop, aeroplane spin, piledriver, body slam, back breaker. arm twist, elbow drop and turnbuckle fly. Rock'n Wrestle-the challenge begins here! Available for Spectrum .95, C64 and Amstrad .95 Com MELBOURNE HOUSE M Melbourne House (Publishers) Ltd., Castle Yard House, Castle Yard, Richmond, TW10 6TF. Trade enquiries call 01. 940 6064 Available from selected branches of CBWE.WHSMITH, Menties, WOOLWORTH, LASKYS, Rumbelows,Greens, Spectrum Shops, and all good software dealers "


"ONLY THE BRAVEST FLY.... TOMAHAWK New, from the author of Fighter Pilot... a stunningly realistic helicopter simulation that puts you in command of an Apache Advanced Attack BY D.K.MARSHALL helicopter. You will learn to take off, to land, to manoeuvre and locate and destroy enemy tanks using Hellfire anti-tank missiles. You will experience authentic battlefield conditions as you enDigital Integration would like to thank deavour to carry out your mission and return safely to base. McDonnell Douglas for all their help and technical support. 48K SPECTRUM .95 inc. p&p & VAT Speclecul 3D cockpit view with over 7.000 ground features Authenti b erfomance. Ground attack and abroair interception, with laser guided missiles, rockets and 30 mm. gun. Doppler navigation and target tracking. Day/Night vision systems. FREE HELICOPTER FLIGHT Competition Cloudy, Crosswinds, Turbulence. Pilot ratings Trainee to Ace. Pilots Notes Impressive sound effects. Twin Joystick Option Entry forms & fua details inside every pack st prices of troma ha icopt 2 Closing date Feb 15 20 Runner-up Prizes of Apache modelos Tele Sales .95 .95 SPECTRUM Tomahawk 48K Night Gunner 48K Fighter Pilot 48K COMMODORE 64 Speed King Disk Speed King Cassette Fighter Pilot Disk Fighter Pilot Cassette AMSTRAD CPC 464 Fighter Pilot Fighter Pilot Disk .95 .95 Cheques payable to Digital Integration Ltd Or debit my Access Account No. I enclose a cheque/P.O. for Total I II 10275084959 (0276) 684959 Name Address Please send to DIGITAL Trade and Export INTEGRATION O enquiries welcome. Lifetime Guarantee. Watchmoor Trade Centre, \" Watchmoor Road, Camberley, Surrey VAT and p. & p. inclusive within UK (Overseas inc. 55p. per cassette) GU15 3AJ .95 .95 .95 .95 "


"CAVG DEC software REVIEHSO GUY IN THE HAT  Machine: BBC  Supplier: Blue Ribbon  Price: .50 This game reminded me of Blue Ribbon's Banana Man, which was a weaker version of the same idea. You are the Guy in the Hat, and you stay alive by eating biscuits and dodging Bickie Bashers. When you eat a biscuit, the hexagon it was in changes colour. Bashers can't enter these hexagons, and if you do, you vapourize. It's more difficult to play than Banana Man, which is an improvement, and the enemies are much more fun and harder to avoid. You can also fight back by dropping your hat and changing a hexagon to white do it when a Basher is in the hexagon and you bash him for lots of points. There are more controls than usual for this type of game — in addition to up left, down left, up right and down right, you can also move left and right, hit space to drop you hat and 'hyperleap' by pressing return. Blue Ribbon seems to acknowledge the limitations of the idea behind the game. Like Banana Man, a second game Secret Sam 2 is provided on the back of the cassette.  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability CO  Machine: CBM64  Supplier: Ariolasoft  Price .95 It's a good time for C64 platform fans. What with Monty on the Run and now Wizard a U.S. import from Progressive Peripherals. The aim of the game is simple to guide Wilfred the Wizard through forty fun-packed screens in search of treasures and magic. The game follows the classic platform style but with a few new tweaks. Like the screen where everything gradually goes invisible on you, or screens where the stairs suddenly disappear! Some screens allow you to use certain spells to help you in your quest. You can become invisible to foil deadly monsters who prevent you reaching certain treasures, or blast them with fireballs on other screens or you can levitate when you make the wrong move and start plummeting toward certain death. The game has four difficulty levels, six game options ranging from beginner to mystery which you chose determines which level you start each game from. You can change the speed of the game AND Construct your own screens to call up later. All that and up to six players competing for the ultimate place on the hi-score table. Wizard is a fast moving game with neat sound and it's terribly addictive! It's deceptively easy to get started but you'll soon learn that there is much more to the game than you first suspect. The screens are designed in a way that will keep you guessing. For instance collect jewels or treasure and lots of other things start happening. Wizard is an extremely well programmed, well presented game don't be put off by those who tell you it's just another platform game. I t isn't it's something else! When the \"bowler' hits the bull, that counts as two wickets'. The outer bull counts as one wicket. When the bowler has got all ten wickets, the first player's score counts as his or her 'innings'. The roles are then reversed and the highest innings score wins. Nerve-wracking co o Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability  Machine: BBC  Supplier: Blue Ribbon  Price: .50 Well, it might not be what Eric Bristow would expect, but this is an interesting and varied game you'll keep returning to Needless to say, there is no dart playing skill involved. beyond the obvious hand-andeye co-ordination you need for most computer games. There are three games you can play 501. Round the Board and Cricket. 501 is the classic pub game for any number of players, with each player starting on any score up to 1001. This offers interesting handicapping opportunities. Each player gets three darts in turn and you finish on a double. Round the Board offers three skill levels, singles (dead easy). doubles (tough), and trebles Icould take you all night). Each player has three darts in turn and you work round the board from one to bull. Cricket is quite exciting. One player simply scores as many runs, as he or she can by aiming at the high numbers. while player two simply aims at the outer-bull and the bull. SOUTHERN BELLE  Machine: Amstrad  Supplier: Hewson Consultants  Price: .95 When the game starts, the dartboard is first drawn on the screen and, considering the fact that a dartboard is practically all curves, it's not bad. In all three games, darts are thrown in the same way the very wobbly dart can be controlled, vaguely, to move left, right, up and down, and when it's hovering over the part of the dartboard you want to hit, you must choose the right moment to press the space bar to throw the dart Not at all easy when you're aiming to hit a double or a treble. Could keep you and your mates amused for hours.  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability Hewson Consultants was certainly on the right track when Southern Belle was released on the Spectrum earlier this year. Southern Belle is not just any old simulation but an attempt to recreate the journey of a 1930 King Arthur Class 4-6-0 steam locomotive's journey from Victoria Station to Brighton. Not only must you master the steam engine's controls water and steam gauges, regulator, brakes etc but also make sure you arrive on time. The graphics are very effective, right down to the engine's fire. Southern Belle is a fairly complex game to get to grips with, but if you're a steam train freak you'll love it. Graphics . Sound Value  Playability co ono CONTINUED FROM PAGE 17  CONTINUES ON PAGE 22 20 "


"JUWXWEKVALVIUSUWOXINWESHWEINVILIVUWUXAUUXI-KVU.   HUUXILEVALVPEIXXVWJUIWEVIJUWXXI HEVIPUPUMIWASAWANIESY GORDERING O A ME ONE AT LAST! The eagerly awaited sequel to the fabulous classic \"The Hobbit\" is now available. \"The Hobbit\", classed as \"the ultimate adventure game of all time', was just a taste of what you can expect in LORD OF THE RINGS. Astonishing vocabulary, graphics and more locations than you could imagine possible! LORD OF THE RINGS Game 1 is available on C64, BBC, Spectrum and Amstrad at .95. This stunning package includes two cassettes, large booklet and a copy of \"The Lord of the Rings\" Part 1. M EL POUR NE HOUSE "


"5 C+VGDEC Software REVIEHSG IMPOSSIBLE MISSION BLITZ SLAPSHOT  Machine: Amstrad  Supplier: Anirog Price: .95 When Slapshot was first reviewed in C+VG back in May for the Commodore 64, we complained that you had to have several people to play it. Why wasn't there a player versus computer option? What was and still is a great sports simulation game had the edge taken off it because of this. Well, raise three cheers for Anirog. The Amstrad version of Slapshot has a one, two and player option. Slapshot is a good representation of the rough, tough and dangerous world of ice hockey. The idea of course is to score goals. Each game is divided into three periods of three minutes each. The puck can be passed from player to player in various directions. Just as in real hockey, you can bodycheck you opponent, but if the tackle is too rough, you may be penalized. Slapshot's great fun and worthy of a place in Amstrad owners games collections.  Machine: Spectrum The evil Elvin Atombender has  Supplier: U.S. Gold been tampering with the world's computers and is threatening to  Price: .95. launch a deadly nuke-missile They said it couldn't be done shower that will destroy the But U.S. Gold have achieved the Earth. impossible and converted the Your job is to penetrate Elvin's Game of the Year onto the underground HQ, break his Spectrum. Ok, so the amazing security code and get into speech synthesis on the 64 the control centre before he version of Impossible Mission is launches the missiles. You have missing but everything else is just six hours to finish. there. Including the awesome Being a mad prof type, Elvin addictiveness of the original. has left bits of the control room In case you've been hiding password scattered about the under a stone for the last 12 32 rooms of his stronghold months, we'll tell you just what hidden in his furniture. You must you've got in store once you lay search the rooms to find the hands on a copy of this game. bits and then use your pocket computer to piece I together in the corr e r Sounds easy bu to deal with Elvin's uni droids who inhabit each room. And find your way around the baffling maze of rooms and lifts. The rooms are constructed to foil even the best secret agent packed with catwalks and platforms connected by lifts. In each room there is a computer terminal which you can use to disable the robots or reset the lifts but only if you have discovered the right passwords during you search for the key to Elvin's control room. Elvin's robots behave in FILE co  Graphics Sound  Value  Playability JOB E LE HE ; LE WILLIAM WOBBLER  Machine: CBM 64 make up our minds. We asked an arcade adventure which But soon I got into a rut and  Supplier: Wizard Veronica Campbell KC's saves all that typing. And, if could do no more. I had found a Price: .95 (cass) .95 daughter to tell us what SHE you crack it, you could win key but could not reach it, nor thought. Veronica has played ,000! had I managed to find a use for (cass in video box) .95 (disk). adventures and arcade games. The theme music plays glowing orb. I was a tenth of Contusion hit the C+VG reviews Surely she'll know... throughout and, together with the way towards the .000 department when Tony \"It was the title that first the excellent display, put me in prize! However, as I hadn't Crowther's new game arrived. Is intrigued me. It sounded likely a good frame of mind right from discovered how to open the it an adventure? Is it an arcade to be a goody, especially as it the word go. The tune was locked doors I couldn't get any game?! Because we couldn't was not sci-fi and because it is catchy, and did not get on my further. nerves as much as it might have the game did not play like an done, because, quite honestly, I Adventure, but seemed very liked it (My Dad is trying to much like one from the whistle it now!). packaging. I am told that there It is the type of tune you feel are clues in the cover picture, proud to have playing when and in the cryptic poem on the you're on the phone, as people back. will think what a groovy The cover shows pictures of computer you've got! castles, magic wands, frogs and The graphics are good. You snakes, which are all Adventure control a comical worm who items. However, the game is bobs up and down, jumps down definitely more arcade than craters and gets chased by a adventure, since considerable fag-ash Lil type of character joystick skills are required before with a club. you can hope to succeed in As soon as I started playing I unravelling the clues! was rushing around trying to loGraphics find all the locations to get really into it. At first I found this Sound exciting with red snakes and  Value flying frogs were coming at me  Playability from all directions. CONTINUED FROM PAGE 20 "


"C+VG DEC software REVIEWS SUPERSLEUTH different fashions. Some are sluggish and don't seem too worried when you enter a room. But others will rush to zap you with a high voltage charge as soon as you set foot on their territory. You have to deal with these using a snooze password which puts them temporarily to sleep. You can either pick up these passwords during a search of Elvin's furniture in the rooms or by playing a sort of \"Name That Tune\" game in the Code Rooms you will find during your exploration. By playing you can earn extra snooze and lift reset passwords. The screen displays shows your agent in his current location and in the main window, with a plan view of the underground base which unfolds as you explore in the window below. Impossible Mission is a game any self respecting Spectrum owner should have in their collection. We defy you not to be hooked from the moment you load it. A mission not to be missed...  Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Gremlin Graphics  Price .95 You are sacked. GET OUT! Gilbert \"Grumpy\" Gumphrey, aged detective at Mole Brothers Store, has had another bad day. But there's always another day. There is enough going on in the 40 screens of Gremlin's new game to make Grace Brothers in Are You Being Served? seem really dull. And it's not the normal game we've come to expect from Gremlin. Supersleuth is a touch more sophisticated, a lot more infuriating and jolly addictive. The game invites comparisons with Pyjamarama and the like and comes off well. Messages appear on the screen telling Grumpy what to do next. For example you may have to get the boss his tea, clear an invasion of ducks, put out fires, clear up floods or trap an escaped gorilla. RO RS Fail to carry them out and you with it he can move around the get a warning letter. Three store very quickly. letters and it's the sack. For you gamesters who love making maps, Supersleuth will put your Graphics skills to the test. Without one, Sound you might as well give up. Value One hint, it's a good idea for Playability Grumpy to grab the skateboard. con coco well as thout Grume hint  Graphics  Sound Value  Playability YRUSCOPE 9 HIRISE Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Bubble Bus Price: .95 Beware of hasty judgements. I groaned inwardly at the thought of Hirise. Not another platform and ladders game. However, some very nifty three dimensional graphics make Hirise a cut above the current crop being unleashed on the poor, unsuspecting public. The story is simple. Builder Bob has a strike on his hands. But for him, work must carry on. He must work his way round the whole of the Hirise building site painting each scaffold as he goes. The strikers have other ideas, however, and set about chasing him. If they catch him, Bob loses a life. Hirise is a simple game but it is exceedingly hard and addictive to play. And with around 100 different screens to choose from, the game's challenge should last more than a few days.  Machine: Spectrum  Supplier: Melbourne House  Price: .95. Well, here's something different. Gyroscope is like nothing you've ever seen before. Except maybe Marble Madness, the megaarcade game. So what's the idea? Well, basically you have to guide a gyroscope a spinning top type thing -down five different courses, avoiding aliens, magnets and negotiating narrow ledges and staying away from deadly pits. The courses are set in a futuristic 3D gridstyle landscapes with weird folds and steep slopes. You must manoeuvre your gyro around the hazards, down slopes and up hills to the end of each course using the keyboard or joystick. It's a difficult little machine to control. You have five gyros to play with and you'll need every last one of them. Gyroscope is definitely different but difficult to get into. But DO give it a chance. It's worth getting hold of to stave off Marble Madness withdrawal symptons while we wait for that game to be converted for home computers. Be prepared to spend some time learning the game and the control system though... Oh yes, there's some really nice synthesised music to go with the game. Give it  Graphics BLITZ  Sound  Value GAME Playability o Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability Co Co o CONTINUES ON PAGE 26 "


"SUVO 2n the Gardus \"Knock ever Seconds out for the challenge of the season, guess this month's mystery Microgamer and prize! you too could win a super «My two top contenders\" 1. Scooby Doo by Elite In the red corner we have Scooby Doo-a real heavyweight when it comes to catching criminals, ghosts and other things that go bump in the night 2. Super Sleuth by Gremlin Graphics And in the blue corner another Super Sleuth. Which one will come out tops? Hard to say, Harry, but both are champs in my book. THORN EMI Computer Software International Micro Software Division "


"\"Take a ringside seat and sample the excitement\" -GRUMPY GUMPHREYC HANGER SU SLEUTH MINI LM OFFICE by New Generation This fighter doesn't use his fists, man, but everything else in sight! Cannons, boulders, boomerangs and bombs all come in handy for Cliff who has to do something to stop the bandit shooting up the canyon. Spectrum 48K .95 by Gremlin Graphics Keep your eye on the clock and look sharp! All your best moves have to be executed on time or you're in big trouble. Catch the shop thieves and above all keep the Manager happy my motto exactly! Spectrum 48K .95 by Database Comprising word processor for writing letters and reports, a database for storing addresses, and a spreadsheet for storing complicated numbers. Pretty high-powered stuff, don't you think? BBC .95 MAD DOCTOR ckout games for fans rywhere MARSPORT by Creative Sparks As Mad Doctor, in this blood-curdingly evil game, the player must create new life out of freshly killed body parts. If he arouses the villagers' suspicions, they'll kill him. A light touch on the scalpel is required. Commodore 64 .95 ---Win -by Gargoyle Games Box your way out of this one! The World needs a Champion (what about me?) Yes, but you can be the champ here. That is if you sneak the defence plans from the doomed city and reinforce the force sphere. Not easy, with aliens attacking your every move. Spectrum 48K and Amstrad .95 by Elite Slippery customers throw in the towel when this ace detective is around. With your help he can track down and solve the mystery that haunts his friends. Join the elite band and pit your wits against the spooks. Spectrum 48K .95 Commodore 64 .95 Amstrad .95 DYNAMITE Spot this month's mystery microgamer and win a fantastic prize. Ten 2-pack program prizes must be won plus single game prizes for the first 100 runners up. If you think you now the answer, send this coupon to us, no later than 14 December 1985. The first ten correct entries will each receive SCOOBY DOO and SUPER SLEUTH. 100 runners up will each receive a super game for their machine type. AN by Mirrorsoft Count to ten and concentrate. You think you can win on points? Well I tell you this game will have you reeling! He may not be a Jumbo or a Bonecrusher, but one thing is certain, Dynamite Dan is hard to beat. Spectrum 48K .95 Amstrad and Commodore 64 .95 SPARKLERS SPECIAL I say the Mystery Microgamer is: \"Games to keep you on your toes\" by Sparklers A fist full of games at a fantastic price. And nobody is pulling punches here. These games really are the greatest anyone who disagrees will have me to reckon with! Not to mention Slurpy, Orc Attack, River Rescue and Black Hawk Spectrum 48K and Commodore 64 4 games for .50 \"Non-stop thrills from start to finish\" Send me your latest full list of software programs. Name Machine Address by Database These guys can sure move. But their game is a non-contact sport, if you get my drift. You can try your hand at formation flying, looping the loop and all the other tricks. Duck, dive, dodge, swerve and break-only don't hit anyone here. Versions for most machines. Cassette .95 Disk .95 & .95 WHO DARES Postcode CVG4 Send to: THORN EMI Computer Software Mystery Microgamer Competition, Thomson House, 296 Farnborough Road, Farnborough, Hants GU14 7NU UNIO 2015 Last month's Mystery Microgamer was Ian McCaskill. Prizes are on their way. SPOT THE BALL by Creative Sparks Two sports classics in one pack, but you only play one at a time, OK? There's soccer and snooker. Both need skill and timing as well as a joystick and 32K ram. Go to it! Atari 32K .95 by Alligata Only the brave survive (and the lucky). Upper cuts and left hooks are no good to you here. You need to find the ammunition dumps to knock the stuffing out of the enemy and free your friends. Commodore 64 .95 Amstrad, Spectrum and Commodore 128 | versions available soon. Prizewinners Andrew James Swansea Bobby Earl, Birkenhead Mark Johnson, Knottingley Stephen Hirst, Castleford Barry Cheeseman Swindon Graham Langlands Dundee Tim Walter, Bristol Paul Cooke, Blackpool Robert Wooley, Peterborough John Baxter, Coventry All games featured above are available from Laskys, WH Smith and other good software stores. "


"5 DEC sobtware REVIEASO HACKER BLUE MAX 2001  Machines: CBM64 Atari  Supplier: U.S. Gold/Synsoft  Price: .95 (cass) .95 (disk) Remember Max Chatsworth, the daring air ace who took to the skies in his trusty bi-plane in Blue Max? Well he's backwarped far into the future and out to save the world from the evil FURXX! It's not really the same Max, it's alleged that this chap is a descendant of that first hero but who cares? This Max has forsaken his bi-plane and takes to the skies in his deadly new Cravonic Penetrator which sounds vaguely obscene. But then I've got that sort of mind. You must land at rebel controlled bases to replenish your supplies of ammo and fuel before taking off for more of the same! All in all, this game is about as boring as the first Max. The graphics are lifeless, for example your ship is a simple glittering blob. This game has no redeeming features. Save your pennies for Winter Games!  Graphics  Sound  Value . Playability HOTE -0313479 DER BESTE RILASED FOR RETURN  Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Activision . Price.95 In the twilight gloom the computer screen flickered into life. Two words appeared on the screen. The stark massage read: \"Log-on please.\" What computer could this be? The temptation to try and hack into it is overwhelming. Would it be possible? Would it be ethical? Would I get caught? Well none of those questions need worry you with the arrival of the brilliant Hacker from Activision. Your conscience can remain clear. Hacker comes with no instruction book, no rules and no clues. The player must decide how to proceed and, Indeed, just what the point of the game is Thanks to Activision's product review co-ordinator, we were given a helping hand along the way. But there lies a problem. If we tell you what happens and what it is all about the whole point of the game is ruined. Anyway, Hacker is a thoroughly challenging arcade adventure with a touch of strategy thrown in for good measure The clues and problems will want to make you want to rip your hair out by the roots and bite the carpet. After logging-onthis is difficult but if you persevere the computer will pretend to malfunction and give you a chance to access the computer. we suggest you try the name of the city. Hacker is an intriguing and complex game based on a new and refreshing idea. It's a winner. Graphics Sound  Value  Playability LUNACMA) EMBANRISATES FUTEBLXSUESHANE AN Q-MAN'S BROTHER  Machine: BBC Supplier: Blue Ribbon  Price: .50 As the title would suggest, this is a variation on Blue Ribbon's favourite Q-Man theme the company's Screwball game is based on the same principle. Instead of a pyramid, you have a simplified version of the 3-D Munchy grid to move around. As you move, squares change colour, and in theis version you have a time limit. When all the squares are changed, you move on to the next screen. The opposition is not so imaginative there's something else which not only chases you but changes any squares you've already altered back to their original colour, which is downright unfriendly of it. If you've played Screwball and Q-man, there's not much here to hold your interest, and 1 found it considerably easier to play than the other two. Machine: BBC  Supplier: Blue Ribbon  Price: .50 When I first played this, I almost decided it was impossible. You're a pipe being unreeled into a diamond mine and you've got to snake your way through narrow, tortuous tunnels to reach the diamonds. Trouble is, the mine is full of bugs which seem to live off unwary pipes if they eat you, the length of pipe in the mine at the time is lost. Not only that, if you touch a wall, you lose more pipe, and don't think you're safe if you've safely wound your way down to a likely diamond cache a bug could grab you anywhere. You get points for every diamond you manage to grab, and each one you reach is a real triumph, believe me. The pipe has a finite length, which didn't seem all that long to start with, and in successive screen it gets shorter. The controls are simple enough, left, right, up and down it's choosing the right split second to change direction and move down another tunnel that's so difficult. This is by far the best of the release of games from Blue Ribbon worth every penny of the .50 you pay for it.  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability Graphics  Sound  Value Playability CONTINUED FROM PAGE 23  CONTINUES ON PAGE 28 26 "


"Post Haste Softwares The total postal software service! Post Haste is part of GB Microland, the South of England's unique computer shop. Thousands of software titles. Lots of experience. The place that gave new meaning to the word \"friendly\". But not everyone lives nearby. So Post Haste Software was born. To bring the best to your door. With top service. Here's how. No \"Club\" to join, no \"subscription\" to pay. You come in our shop for free. Why pay to buy by LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE DISCOVERY KIT (Activision) This has to be the most unusual program of the decade. You'll have your very own Little Computer Person. He'll live in your computer in a three floor house. You'll feed him, talk to him, play games with him, and be part of his life. He'll certainly be part of yours! In fact, he'll probably take it over. We promise you this will be the most astonishing and irresistible creation you've ever loaded in your computer and you'll feel awful when you turn it him?) off! This is not, incidentally, a game! \"Animation of the Pet Person is incredibly lifelike. A stunning advance in computer entertainment 97% overall rating!\". Zzap. C64/128 [D] .99 STEALTH/(Ariolasoft) The definitive 3-D low-flying space-age super-action game from the American software house of Broderbund. Never before will you have experienced action and speed like this. Not for the faint-hearted but overpoweringly compulsive. \"I've seen many 3-D arcade games before but not one as exciting. It's knocked me into the 21st century\" HCW C64/128 [C] .95 mail? Unique \"double-your-money\" voucher with the 40-page catalogue. Check the box in this advertisement! Software for other computers? No problem. QL, Apple and IBM. Ask for lists. Post Haste has the lot! Postage free in the UK. Europe? Add 95p. Elsewhere? Add .50. For the whole order, not each program. Everything mailed in special cartons. No used boxes or padded bags. Who needs squashed software? Order by post or phone, day or night. Check the coupon for details. Then relax. It's fast! Pay by cheque, bank draft, PO, Access, Visa, Mastercard, Eurocard. Post Haste is convenient! INTERNATIONAL KARATE/ (System 3) We're certainly in a period when kung-fu and karate are the favourite computer pastimes. And each new program to appear brings its own special treatment CRL's long awaited offering is no exception. Dazzling graphics, excellent effects! \"If you're into karate and kung-fu, this is for you!\". PCS. Spectrum [C] .50 C64 (Cj.50 Amstrad [C] .50 A tari [C] .50 ALREADY SEEN SOMETHING YOU WANT ON THIS PAGE? GO RIGHT AHEAD AND ORDER NOW! Use the coupon or write on your own paper. Be sure to include all the details from the coupon. Cross cheques and POs for safety. Your software will be on its way by return. So will your catalogue. And your unique \"double-yourmoney\" voucher! YIE AR KUNG FU/(Imagine Konami) At last! One of the biggest programs of the year! The current arcade hit brought into your own home, with all the dazzling action you'd expect! Fight your way through screen after screen! A smash-hit if ever there was one! \"Konami's arcade hit brought home. Just Great!\". Games. Amstrad (C) .95 Comm 64 (C) .95 Spectrum [C] .95 THE POST HASTE CATALOGUE The Post Haste catalogue is just 90p with a unique \"double-your-money\" voucher tucked inside! Yes, the Post Haste catalogue contains a .80 voucher to use for your first order! How's that for value? You get 40 big pages crammed with over 100 program descriptions Recreation, utility, strategy. adventure, arcade they're all there! And so is your .80\"double-yourmoney voucher! Pack pictures, screen shots, review quotes, and much more. Programs for five micros: Amstrad, Atari, BBC, Commodore 64/128 and Spectrum. You're spoilt for choice with Post Haste! And your catalogue is the gateway to a huge program range from Post Faste: over 4,000 titles spanning 10 major micros! Where else is there such a choice? Phone Orders (24 hrs) (0705) 269333 1 TO GET YOUR CATALOGUE WITH THE \"DOUBLE-YOUR-MONEY\" VOUCHER, OR TO ORDER SOFTWARE, USE THIS COUPON! Send your catalogue. I've enclosed 90p. Don't forget my .80 \"Double-YourMoney\" voucher for me to use with my first order! I want to order software right away and the details are below. I want the catalogue too so I've added 90p Don't forget my .80 \"Double-YourMoney\" voucher! My name is: I My address is: ........ WINTER GAMES (Epyx/US Gold) The success of Summer Games and then Summer Games II is now legendary but until you've seen and played Winter Games\" you ain't seen nothing yet! Six stunning winter sports simulations to leam and master as you go for gold. An absolutely brilliant program playable by all the family at once! Bob-sled, ski jump, figure skating, and more! *Extraordinary graphics, incredibly skilled programming, immensely playable, totally absorbing. An absolute winner all the way!\". Computer Games. C64/128 [D] .95 064/128 [C] .95 ................ Post code ....... .... My computer is: ....... Can we contact you by phone if there's a query? STD/Exchange .............. Number .. IF YOU'RE ORDERING SOFTWARE, I PLEASE PRINT DETAILS OF THE PROGRAMS YOU WANT! PROGRAM NAME I PRICE ADVENTURERSI SPECIAL EXTRA SECTION! There are dozens of adventures in the Post Haste catalogue from virtually every major producer. Just about all the superb Infocom range Is there and many others too! And Port Haste carries the full range of Infocom Invialclues, plus hint and guide books to many other adventures too! Answers to the problems that keep you awake at night? The catalogue liata them all! MERCENARY/(Novagen) The wait's been worth it! Another total winner! Incredible 3-D vector graphics, changing with amazing speed. And the game's different each time you play! You'll really feel as if you're flying above the planet Targ! Believe us! \"We couldn't believe the speed. Smashing!\". Zzap 64. Comm 64 (C) .95 Comm 64 (D) .95 Atari [C] .95 Atari [D] .95 FAIRLIGHT/(The Edge) Produced with \"Worldmaker\", the advanced graphics system, \"Fairlight\" is one of the most brilliant and testing arcade adventures produced for the Spectrum. We found it hard to believe the graphic quality. Very highly rated indeed \"Pushes the arcade adventure into the realm of true graphic adventuring. Should make a very big smash!\" Crash. Spectrum [C] .95 Catalogue with .80 voucher Add .90 Postage is totally free in the UK Add .00 Europe postage for whole order Add .951 Airmail elsewhere for whole order Add .50 TOTAL AMOUNT ENCLOSED  PAYING BY CHEQUE OR POSTAL ORDER? Please make it payable to Post Haste Software and cross it for safety's sake! CHARGING IT TO YOUR VISA, ACCESS, MASTERCARD, EUROCARD? May we have your card number, expiry date and signature? IIIIIIIIII Expiry date Signature Now mail your order to POST HASTE SOFTWARE GB MICROLAND, 7 QUEENS PARADE | LONDON ROAD, WATERLOOVILLE HAMPSHIRE PO7 7EB, UNITED KINGDOM Or phone (24 hours) 0705 269333 THE POST HASTE SERVICE We can supply any program you've seen advertised. If it's released, you'll usually get it by retum. If it's not, you'll get it faster when it does come out. Simply order it and sit back. And here's our promise: we'll never cash your cheque or charge your credit card until a program is packed and ready to mail. That's Post Haste service! KARATEKA/(Ariolasoft) The Number 1 Hit from the USA and the most stunning karate program around. Unbelievable movie-like graphics as you fight your way through hazard after hazard. See it to believe it and even then you'll doubt your eyes! \"This must surely be the ultimate in animation on the C64. Superb. The best karate simulation Home Computing Wkly. Comm 64/128 [C] .95 "


"C+VG DEC sobtware REVIEWS AND THE ICE PALACE WAT RUPERT AND THE TOYMAKERS PARTY to get through the first part of the game saving your mates without losing a life or two. And you really need all your pills to succeed in the second part. Overall, quite a challenging game, but frustrating at first. It will probably appeal more to the gamester than Toymaker's. Don't be put off having a look at it because you think Rupert is an old sissy. The game is fun in its own right.  Machine: Spectrum  Supplier. Quicksilva  Price .99 While we're on the subject of Rupert The Toymaker's Party is now available in a Spectrum version. It follows faithfully the format of the C64 version as mapped in October's C+VG. But the graphics aren't so good and there's considerable colour clash and flicker. The game is basically a platform style arcade adventure. Rupert has to collect invitations and make his way through a castle to reach his mates who are already enjoying themselves at the party. Looking at the game, you realise that some games are destined for just one machine. And I'm afraid Rupert is one of them.  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability  Machine: CBM 64  Supplier: Quicksilva  Price .99 After having a tough time getting to the Toymaker's Party Rupert is back attempting to rescue his woodland pals from the Ice Palace. The latest Rupert game follows the hop, skip and jump format of the first. The graphics are as good as the original. Game play, despite the similarities to the first release, is a bit harder. The object of the game is to unfreeze Rupert's friends who include good old Edward Trunk and Bill Badger who have been captured and stuck in the freezer by Jack and Jenny Frost. Once he's defrosted his mates and taken them back to Nutwood Cottage, Rupert discovers that all his friends have left items of clothing behind. Just WHAT went on at the Toymaker's Party? Still, being a good mate, Rupert sets off back to the Palace to pick up the discarded clothes. And if you thought it was tough rescuing Edward, Bill and the rest, wait until you try getting their clothes back. There's this evil snowman who keeps chucking snowballs at you. Rupert has five lives or \"ice pills\" to help him complete the adventure. Once he's out of pills he turns blue and heads for home. He loses pills by tripping over various obstacles, getting hit by falling icicles or by making wrong moves. It takes quite a lot of practice CONTINUED FROM PAGE 26 "


"C+VG DEC software REVIEHS9 ADOW OF THE UNICORN Machine: Spectrum, Atari, CBM 64, Amstrad Supplier: Firebird Price: .50, Spec, CBM, Amstrad, Atari If you're looking for value for money and we mean REAL value for money then check out Chimera on any of the machines above. You won't be disappointed. It's the first game in Firebird's new Super Silver range and one can only hope other games in the range maintain the same high standard. Comparisons with Ultimate's Alien 8 are inevitable and flattering for programmer Shahid Ahmad. The game is a maze-type arcade adventure set on-board a mysterious ghost space ship. An American astronaut is sent up to investigate. He has to blow up the ship by collecting, making and priming four warheads. He then has to escape before the big bang. Various objects are to be found in the rooms to help the mission. You've also got to keep an eye on your water and food supplies. Various bizarre hazards are to be found around the craft, including radiators and egg-timers! There are 64 rooms to be explored so mapping is vital. The three dimensional graphics of the rooms are clean and sharp, and the colours bright and clear. Overall, Chimera is an excellent game which raises the quality of budget games to a new standard.  Machine Spectrum Mithulin, King of Oranfal: Ulin supplied, although not all the Gail, a satyr and the King's locations are marked on it. So  Supplier: Mikro-Gen friend, and the Wizard Avarath. beware! Once you've got your  Price: .95 But as you explore and meet bearings and are happy with the more people your forces controls, it's time to start on So here it is. The first Mikro increase. Each are accessed your quest. Plus came from the people who Wally style by pressing the In true Mikro-Gen style, you brought you the chartbusting appropriate key. Each have their have to find certain objects and Wally saga. very own purpose and affect use them in the right way. You Ever since the long lost the success of your mission. really MUST take time to read Imagine company began talking At first glance the game the novel which comes with the | about mega-games which would doesn't look that impressive game, otherwise you won't pick only work with extra-bits stuck The graphics just are not up to up on some of the useful clues into the back of your computer, the quality of Pyjamarama or contained within its pages. people have been waiting to see Herbert's Dummy Run for It would also be advisable for just what it was all about. They example. And despite all that the player to make a map as waited, and waited... extra memory there are still you play. You can get lost very But now something of the colour clash problems. easily told you it was BIG! sort has appeared. Is it a The main characters are Is the Mikro-Plus a great new genuine way of producing better depicted as black outline innovation? We reckon that still games? Or simply a new way to silhouettes with a bit of grey remains to be seen with the stop you people pirating shading in some cases. arrival of the second game software? It's a good idea to simply based on the TV cartoon series Let's look what you get for take one character and wander Battle of the Planets. your . To start with you get about and explore once you've In the meantime, if you can the Mikro-Plus gadget which loaded the game for the first persuade your parents to part adds an extra 60K of usable time. Pay close attention to the with the dosh Christmas IS memory to your Spectrum. You compass at the top of the coming up fast-then put plug it into the back of your screen and the location details Shadow of the Unicorn on your machine like any other interface which flash up Dun Darch/Tir shopping list. Your won't be and stick your joystick into the Na Nog style at the top of the disappointed. built-in socket. screen. Also above the main Then you get the Unicorn window you'll see two bar  Graphics game-tape, a map and graph read-outs. Green for your  Sound instruction booklet, plus a 100+ energy rating, red for your injury  Value page novel giving the status.  Playability background to the lands which It helps to use the map lie under the Shadow of the Unicorn. The game won't work without the Micro-Plus. The tape also includes a tape head alignment utility on the Bside which is pretty useful So you've already got quite a bit for your money. But what about the game itself? It has a basic swords and sorcery plot. Your task is to recapture the evil forces that have been released on the two kingdoms of Oranfal and Falforn. Like Lords of Midnight you can control to start with three characters. These are Graphics Sound Value Playability 000% 09:00 RIDDLER'S DEN Machine Spectrum Supplier: Electric Dreams Price: .95 What's a Manelephant? Find out by loading up the first game from new software house Electric Dreams. Trunkie that's the Manelephant's name sets off on the first part of his quest to find the Great Golden God Gregogo and needs to enter the Riddler's Den in order to find the Golden Tusk and get enough treasure to set off on his next adventure. Is there a sequel coming or what? Riddler's Den is a solid arcade adventure with nice graphics and pretty good game play. You must pick up objects as you go using them to solve puzzles. The game comes with a cluefilled poem all about The Den which you need to read to get the most out of the game. Overall, Riddler's Den is a good debut for Electric Dreams not terrifically original but a high quality product. erall. Ris of the bad to get Graphics Sound  Value  Playability  CONTINUES ON PAGE 32 "


"An Andrew Spencer Elite Joint Production AVAILABLE NOW Previously available only from Commodore U.K. for the CAM64, the author Adrian Spencer and Elite now.combine to bring you the spectacular nauona Interna BASKETBALL GAME FEATURES For SPECTRUM .99 and AMSTRAD .99 Furious non stop action with one or two player feature Realistic animation with jump, block and steal manoeuvres You can even jump and turn in mid-ar before slamming the ball into the basket Nine fierce skill levels from the utterly pathetic to the Harlem Globetrotter  Three fiery opponents with unique intelligent player characteristics Multisection game with end-of-match presentation sequence Sequel to immensely successful International Soccer Jon UN COME CBM64 SCREEN SHOT International Basketball is from Andrew Spencer author of the Sensational BestSeller' International Soccer Every single Elite product carries the unique Elite Holographic Sticker. Make sure your copy does it's your guarantee of quality Andrew Spencer Mail Order Just send a cheque or pa payable to Elite or quote your visa number Elite -Joint Production Elite Systems Limited Anchor House Anchor Road Aldridge Walsall West Midlands Telephone 0922) 55852 Telex 335622 SPETELO "


"SCOOBY DOO the caste mystery \"Scooby Doo\" The First Ever Computer Cartoon! Whether he's being hotly pursued at midnight over an eerie castle rooftop, or scrabbling around in the darkness of a creepy old dungeon the hapless Scooby is always at the centre of the action. In his first computer cartoon Scooby goes hurtling through underground caverns in a run-away coal truck and finds that even a leisurely paddle with Shaggy in a rickety old rowing boat can turn up to be an unofficial attempt at the waterspeed record when hes pursued by an angry shark, Scooby Doo the computer cartoon contains over 100 sometimes creepy. Often crazy scenes of startling animated action. We think it's going to start a whole new craze in com puter games. What do you Say Scooby? Scooby Dooby-Doo! BIEBE SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE $7.95 AMSTRAD .95 Elite Systems, Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, England. Tel:(0922)59165 \"consumer Hotline\" "


"C+VG DEC software REVIEWS 0 ME DO BOXER CONSTRUCTION SELECT: 00002 :08 0095 BODY FIGHT NIGHT \"Som 23 MISKM KKSTA 0314 0256  Machine: CBM 64 him the Fight Night tournament,  Supplier: Sydney/U.S. Gold or set up your own Price: .95 (cass) E14.95 championship using boxers you have constructed. This is where (disk) the two player mode really Look, why can't they make comes into its own. It's great games about flower arranging or fun building a boxer and fighting something a little less rough against one your mate has than boxing or Kung Fu? I'm created. covered in bruises from head to The computer opponents you toe and they ask me to come up against each have their review ANOTHER boxing game. own sneaky tricks. Dip Stick a Still, it was worth it! Fight deceptively weedy looking Night is a graphic spectacular. character who wears glasses The boxers are represented does this strange twisting cartoon style and it's a bit punch to your groin while like actually finding yourself in Chinaman Hu Him will aim a control of a TV cartoon. powerful Kung Fu kick at you! You can fight using the You'll soon learn all these little computer boxers or construct tricks as you play and how you own fighters AND train to avoid getting hit. The joystick them. You build your boxer up allows fluid movement/punching. in a construction set\" A nice feature of this game is sequence. You must choose his that you can actually win on body, legs and head which all points. You score every time you all range from weedy to brutal. land a clean hit on your You can even choose the colour opponent. You also get a KO of the boxer's kit 1 meter and the noise of the particularly liked the tasteful crowd gets loader as you get blues and greens nearer that KO punch. Then it's on to the training The computer boxers behave session where you build up your in a satsifying fasion when you boxer's strength and agility bash them they look using a punch bag. bothered and bewildered as you Once you think your boxer is land puches on their chin. My ready for the ring, you can enter Favourite is Kid Kastro who loses his cigar and his hat when you sock him on the jaw! Barry McGuigan's World Championship Boxing maybe a more accurate boxing simulation but if you want your boxing action to have a touch of humour then book a ringside seat for Fight Night. It'll keep you on your toes and have you rolling in the aisles at the same time. Great value Graphics Sound Value  Playability SCREWBALL And if you're in a really tight spot, you can hyperspace to the top of the grid but you might not survive the experience. And that's all there is to it simple, but reasonablly entertaining.  Machine: BBC  Supplier: Blue ribbon  Price .50 This is the first of the five games on Blue Ribbon's Games Disk Number Two, price .95, although the games are also available seperately on cassette at .50 each. slightly more complicated by having gaps in the middle of it. Unlike Q-Man, you can't kill yourself by hopping off the Screwball is strongly edge of the grid. In the place of reminiscent of Blue Ribbon's Qhostile bouncing balls are Man, based on the principle of aggressive snakes. There are jumping about from square to villainous black bugs out to get square changing the colour of you. They don't even play fair the square as you go. don't count on them moving You have 60 seconds to around simply by walking on change all the squares in the 3D squares like you! grid, after which you move on You can fight back by digging to a new grid, which is rendered holes for them to fall through.  Graphics Sound Value  Playability "


"C+VG DEC software REVIEWS SCARABAEUS ELITE  Machine: CBM 64  Supplier: Ariolasoft  Price: .95 (disk) .95 (cass). I have begun my quest to find Scarabaeus, the fabulous emerald jewel of the pharoahs. I have begun my descent into the dark horrors of the tomb! So starts the latest release from Ariolasoft their first non-US import. And it's a real goodie! At first glace it seems to be a simple revamp of the good old 3D maze puzzle games. But don't be deceived, there's much more to it than that. Three levels worth of much more infact. The screen display shows you next level very carefully one a 3D maze but you can slip with the joystick and switch to an overhead plan view WHAMI Into the second level of the maze by simply pulling where you have to brave back on the joystick. This poisonous spiders and solve enables you to see the mind boggling puzzles to whereabouts of the ghosts. collect medicine and zombie Ghosts? Yes, ghosts but this traps. You have to match your ain' Pacman buddy. glyphs with those you'll find on You need to chase and the walls of the second level to capture these ghosts in order to get these items. If you survive collect the nine hieroglyphs the spiders, it's back to the lift which are your key to the next for level three-Pharoah's level. jewels and menswear! This stage is really a warm up Here's where those zombie for what will come later! Your traps come in useful because glyphs are displayed when you the tomb isn't going to give up hit the fire button which its precious jewel without a accesses a nice graphic of a fight. You have to solve more gloved hand holding a rack puzzles and collect more which gradually fills up with the medicine some of which is pictures as you get them. poison in disguise, so watch Once you've completed the what you drink! key,it's into the lift. You have to The graphics are good and wind your way down to the the sound excellent. You can switch between a music soundtrack and a very realistic heartbeat/ breathing sound effects which add to the already considerable atmosphere of the game. Scarabaeus is a challenge for  Machine: Spectrum  Supplier: Firebird  Price: .95 Combine a strategy/trading game, a flight simulator, a space shoot'em-up and what have you got? The answer is, of course, Elite, originally for the BBC B from Acornsoft. At the time, most frustrated C64 and Spectrum owners listened to BBC owners talk of the delights of having military lasers and being \"Dangerous\". This almost caused several suicides and dumped machines, but soon word came about that a bunch of bright young sparks called Firebird Software had gained the conversion rights. So, what makes this game so special that it seems to sell on any machine? Well, it is highly original and totally addictive for a start, secondly, this is not a game that you pick up, play and finish in a month. This can be a lifetime's experience and an enjoyable one too. You are placed on a space station with 100 credits, a space ship called a Cobra MK III, and a rating of harmless and clean, these ratings are actually very important because you are hoping to attain the ranks of Elite. This is done by trading in a number of options available to you such as a long and short range chart, several equipping and trade menus, and the ability to look out from all four points of the compass through appropriate scanners. Now you must select a planet from your short range chart then find out its details. This will help you select goods for trading (this is logical so I'm not going to give you any clues). Also, the state of the government is an indicator of how much trouble awaits you. Having settled on which planet you are off to and what goods you're taking, you're off. Overall, a really good game. The Spectrum version is slightly faster than the Commodore version but not quite as fast as the BBC. Some of the missions have had to be cut down to conserve memory and there aren't so many graphic tricks as in the C64 but still worth every penny of the .95 you will have to fork out. This is definitely a game that no-one who owns a computer should be without. Take my advice, buy it and you probably won't be seen for six months. Graphics Sound Value  Playability TRO a mixture of action and strategy You need all your wits about you when there are monsters about. There's a scoreboard which you can call up at any stage of the game to see how you're going An a-maze-ingly intriguing game (Ugh!). Ariolasoft's best yet.  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability COCO SUPER ZAXXON  Machines: CBM64 Atari Supplier: U.S. Gold/Sega  Price: .95 (cass) .95 (disk) Is this the ultimate challenge? Well, almost. Super Zaxxon is the long awaited sequel to the all time classic arcade game Zaxxon. It still features the 3D diagonally scrolling graphics of the original complete with the floating space fortresses, heavily defended by rockets, laser barriers and cannons. The tunnel sequence is funbut doesn't really add much to the game. This is the only fun sequence of the game but doesn't really add much to the game. The only really tricky thing about these sections are the mine-laying saucers the mines can be avoided by flying close to the left side of the tunnels. If you haven't got a copy of the original Zaxxon and you enjoy fast action shoot-em-ups then this is the game for you. If you've got the original, well, I'd borrow a friend's copy or play it in your computer before shelling out E10. Overall, the original classic conversion from the arcades is still better. FUE: 018600 82 SECA HI:029800 1934 HESWARE  Graphics  Sound  Value . Playability  ENDS "


"3D Stuntrider .95 Tape .95 Disc 3D Grand Prix .95 Tape .95 Disc When it comes to computer games you can't beat an Amstrad. 3D Boxing .95 Tape .95 Disc Cyrus II Chess .95 Tape .95 Dise drive and again, it's own colour monitor or green screen. Both are available at an all-inclusive price you'll find hard to match. In fact, with Amstrad's unbeatable software, unbeatable hardware and unbeatable prices, how can you lose? _ — — — CVG/5/2 Tell me more about the Amstrad range of software. We've enlisted the help of some particularly wicked program designers to put our entertainment software range together. They've come up with over 200 Arcade and Adventure games. Many of them exclusive to Amstrad (like those shown above). All of them mindbenders you'll find hard to beat. And all at prices that are as competitive as the games, from .95 on disc and .95 on tape. But the software is only one of many good reasons for buying an Amstrad computer. The 64k CPC 464 computer comes complete with built-in datacorder and a choice of green screen or full colour monitor. The CPC 6128 is a big memory 128k computer with built-in, fast-loading disc AVAILABLE AT ALLDERS BOOTS COMET CURRYS. DIXONS LASKYS RUMBELOWS Name A Address Amstrad.Loads more fun. | Amstrad, P.O. Box 462, Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF SUPREME DISCOUNT STORES  TANDY WH SMITH AND GOOD INDEPENDENT COMPUTER STORES "


"TWO SMASH HITS FROM C. (GEOFF CAPES MWWWW COMMODORE 64 mwWMMWWW TOMY motoh 48K SPECTRUM Lolah 48K SPECTRUM  COMMODORE64. BBCB ELECTRON  AMSTRAD.MSX.ATARI (Zoids only) (Geoff Capes only) 48K Spectrum .95. ALL OTHERS .95. CBM 64 disc .95 march Martech is the registered trade mark of Software Communications Limited Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME. PHONE: (0323) 768456 TELEX: 87465 EXIM Brighton "


"OUT NOW by JEFF MINTER ON COMMODORE 64 CASSETTE & DISK -RE-ACTIVATE THE LEGENDARY IRIDIS BASE -SYNCHRONISE THE 8 LEVELS OF THE GREAT PSIONIC GENERATOR OF DHI-O RE-ACTIVATE THE METAPSIONIC POWER WAVE GUIDE CHANNEL \"\"BATALYX' will knock your socks off with its sheer megafunky urge to surge. I have completely flipped over this game, it is a landmark in my game playing career... Go out and buy this game'BATALYX' and COMMODORE 64'S were TONY TAKOUSHI made for each other\" OCTOBER 1985 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES PLAY JEFF'S \"HAIRIEST» GAME YET! by Jeff Minter SIX UNIQUE GAMES IN ONE:HALLUCIN-O-BOMBLETS OAMC II THE ACTIVATION OF IRIDIS BASE CIPPY ON THE RUN SYNCHRO II PSYCHEDELIA Fast Load Chrome Tape COMMODORE 64 The Incredible 6 in 1 Program 128 Compatible LLAMASOFT LLAMASOFT AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE RETAILERS IF IT'S NOT THERE, PLEASE ORDER IT-ORIN CASE OF DIFFICULTY. SEND YOUR CROSSED CHEQUE/P.O. MADE OUT TO LLAMASOFT LTD., INCLUDING YOUR OWN NAME AND ADDRESS, TO LLAMASOFT LTD.,49 MOUNT PLEASANT, TADLEY, HANTS RG26 6BN. «BATALYX» COMMODORE 64 Disk .95 COMMODORE 64 Cassette -.95 PRICES INCLUDE P&P. U.K. ORDERS ONLY. PLEASE ALLOW 28 DAYS FROM RELEASE FOR DELIVERY MARKETEDE DISTRIBUTED BY "


"e are still interested in your highscores on various computer games. So don't forget to send in your scores and a photo of yourself if you think we can stand it!! HI-SCORES ARY THE WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST To your marks. Get ready. Get set. GO! And another C+VG Hot Shot of the month challenge is underway. September's nominated game was Hypersports by Imagine for the Commodore 64. The sporting stars taking part were Brian Baso, 14, of Brackley, Northants, and Scott Mellors, 15, of Greenford in Middlesex. As fans of the game will know, the sports featured are swimming, skeet shooting, long horse, archery, the triple jump and weight-lifting. All require good hand and eye co-ordination, fast reactions and strength to survive marathon joystick-wiggling sessions. The contest was set to be fought over the best of five rounds. Scott won the toss and put Brian in first. Brian hit form straightaway scoring a healthy 51,884. Scott countered with 46,608. Round two saw Brian consolidate his lead with a 50,622 to 48,906 victory. Suddenly Scott was facing the crunch. To stay in the contest he had to win round three. But it was not to be. 1 Gareth Jones, Liverpool 1,900,400 2 Angus Duncan, Derby — 992,000 3 William Church, Liskeard 958,800 4 Andrew McLintock, Wishaw, Lanarkshire 309,900 5 Glen Lane, Canvey Island 239,400 HYPER SPORTS 1 Darren Bailey, Rochford 654,981 2 Andrew Lowe, Stoke on Trent — 597,829 3 Robert Maddison, Plymouth — 504,969 4 Scott Donaldson, Hamilton, Lanarkshire 502,335 5 Paul Gilliam, Ripon 501,229 C. VG HOTSHOT SEPTEMBER 1985 SPY HUNTER 1 Michael Reynolds, Wigan 5,360,455 Adam Watkins, Newport, Gwent 2,848,050 3 lain Stockman, Coleraine — 2,348,430 4 William Bell, Peacehaven, Sussex 1,420,535 5 A Taylor, Chichester 1,420,162 Brian took the round 51,846 to 49,228 and Scott gallantly conceeded. Both Brian and Scott agreed the contest was won and lost in the skeet shooting round. Brian scored well but Scott was off target. \"I lost about 4,000 points on the skeet shoot,\" said Scott. \"I'm usually rather good at it.\" The Hot Shot game for December is Daley Thompson's Super Test from Ocean on the Commodore 64. Send your score on the coupon printed below to December Hot Shot, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32, Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The top scorers will be invited to C+VG's offices in London for a face-to-face challenge. POLE POSITION 1 Steven Maddocks, Birmingham 110,250 2 Mark Terry, Stoke-on-Trent — 101,850 ME DECEMBER HOT SHOTS DECEMBER HI-SCORES Name: Address: Nam Address: My score on DAL THOMPSON'S was: Name of game: I scored: Machine: T-shirt size (S,M,L): Witnessed by: Witnessed by: "


"FREE TOUCH TARET 130E Cormoter Crt Compumart TITLE ATAR ATARI HARDWARE In the U. K A TARI Best Prices for NK DISKS in the UK Top Quality 5. Bulk Packed Disks (Hub-Ringed and in White Envelopes with a Lifetime Wananty) FREE!!! Plastic Library Case worth  when you buy 10 Disks Atari 130XE Computer (with a FREE ATARI TOUCH TABLET.)  p&p Atari 1050 Disk Drive (with FREE Home File Manager, Payoff Adventure & Demo Disks) +  p&p Atari 800XL & 1050 Disk Drive (with FREE Home File Manager, Payoff Adventure & Demo Disks) .. FREE!!! Perspex Disk Storage Box worth  when you buy 50 Disks 10-5X SINGLE SIDED DOUBLE DENSITY BLANK DISKS (with FREE case) 31 pop 10-SY DOUBLE SIDED DOUBLE DENSITY . LPP BLANK DISKS (with FREE case) 50-5X SINGLE SIDED DOUBLE DENSITY . POR BLANK DISKS (with FREE Storage Box) 50-5!\" DOUBLE SIDED DOUBLE DENSITY BLANK DISKS (with FREE Storage Box) C1 pp GOODS DESPATCHED Sone day Class Post MONEY BACK GUARANTEE: you are not completely your disore FULL REFUND that's the CompumartGuarantee Atari 130XE & 1050 Disk Drive (with FREE Home File Manager, Payoff Adventure, Demo Disks & 10 Blank Disks FREE) + c3 p&p Goods despatched: SAME DAY PARCEL POST 11 Month Warranty ANY PRODUCT FOUND TO ME DERECTIVE WITHIN 12 MONTHS OF Please send cheque portal order to: 1 Gracedier er best Please send cheques postal orders to 71 Gracedle Road, loborough Laks 11 i Tel (0 ) SO Lekcs11 BF Telfoss 0509-262259 HOTLINE. HOTLIN Comput...Compumart....Compume TLINE ..Compumart....Compuma 0509-262259 HOTLINE. HOTLIN TUNE Comp This boy is a fugitive. || This girl is dangerous. Prebird Pireord "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES OUR Good 995 9 399 7.50  5.95  9.95 9.95 150 750 9.95 6.75 995 ooooo 7.50 7.50  6.75 750 RE 5.90 995 OUR OUR OUR +++SPECTRUM *t RRP PRICE ***SPECTRUM RRP PRICE ***COMMODORE*** RRP PRICE ***COMMODORE*** RRP PRICE ELITE 11.95 ANY MASTERTRONIC TITLE 1.99 199 LORDS OF THE RINGS 15.95 11.95 NEXUS 9.95 STAR QUAKE HOBBITT 14.95 11.25 LORD OF THE RINGS OSKI 19.95 14.95 PACMAN 9.95 SOWRDERONS ELINDOR) ARNHEM 9.95 7.95 BIG DADDY ROCK. WRESTLE 9.95 7.50 COMBAT LYNX LORD OF THE RINGS 11.95 MONOPOLY 750 ELITE 14.95 11.25 PARADROID FAIRLIGHT RETURN TO OZ 9.95 795 WIZARDRY DESERT FOX DUN DARACH WINTER GAMES 7.95 5.95 SUMMER GAMES CASS) SHADOWFIRE 9.95 SHADOWFIRE-TUNER BEACH HEAD I BEACH HEAD II THE YOUNG ONES 7.95 SPY HUNTER THE RATS DA WHO 1495 13.50 THEY SOLD A MILLION 9.95 ROBIN OF THE WOODS DALEY TOMS SUPERTEST 5.50 DR. WHO DISKI 17.95 15.50 RACING DESTRUCTION DISKI 14.95 FIVE A SIOE SOCCER FIGHTING WARRIOR BLACKWYTCH ULTIMATE) 9.95 ARCADE HALL OF FAME 9.95 SUPERMAN 7.50 DIARY OF ADRIAN MOLE 9.95 7.50 EUREKA 14.95 KNIGHTSHADES Utimatel TERRORMOLINOS 7.95 SUMMER GAMES! IMPOSSIBLE MISSION DIARY OF ADRIAN MOUF 9.95 +++AMSTRAD*** SUPERMAN WAY OF EXPLODING FIST FRANKIE GOES TO HWOOD FIGHTER PILOT DISK) 11.95 13.95 F. BRUNO'S BOXING STAR STRIKE MERCENARY 9 95 HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER 8.95 F. BRUNO'S BOXING (ISK) 9.95 MERCENARY DISK) 12.95 ANIMATED STRIP POKER SUPERMAN 9.95 7.50 FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD 7.50 QUAKE MINUS 1 KNIGHT LORE INTER BASKETBALL 5.99 4.99 SHADOWFIRE I-ENIGMA FORCE 9.95 7.50 F15 STRIKE EAGLE 14.95 11.25 WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST SPY V SPY 7.50 DONALD DUCKS PLAYGROUND 7.50 MINI OFFICE 595 BIG DADDY ROCK + WRESTLE 6.75 RAID OVER MOSCOW) 9.95 7.50 BOUNCES CRISES 3000) LITTLE PEOPLE DISCOVERY KIT 14.95 11.95 HACKER 5.95 ARNHEM 9.95 7.95 SUPER ZAXXON 9.95 COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0 9.95 7.95 RUPERT+TOYMAKERS PARTY 6.50 DR. WHO 14 95 13.50 RED ARROWS 9.95 7.50 SCOOBY 000 5.95 POLE POSITION 5.95 DR. WHO DISK 19.95 17.95 BLUE MAX 2001 9.95 7.50 MASQUERADE IDISK) GYROSCOPE 5.95 FRANK BRUNO'S BOXING 8.95 INTERNATIONAL SOCCER 14.95 11.25 COMMANDO F. BRUNO'S BOXING 5.25 MARSPORT 9.95 ULYSSES GOLDEN FLEECE O 14.95 11.95 THUTH ASTRO CLONE 5.95 WAY OF EXPLODING FIST WORM IN PARADISE SOUTHERN BELLE 7.95 5.95 CYRUSS # CHESS HYPERSPORTS SCHIZOFRENIA 7.99 6.50 F. BRUNO'S BOXING DISK) 11.50 SABREWULF ***COMMODORE C16*** D  1495 13.50 SORCERY DISK) LUCIFERS REALM DISKI 14.95 11.95 THE BOSS WHAM THE KE BOX 7.50 LORD OF THE RINGS 15.95 11.95 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT 8.95 7.50 AIRWOLF FIGHTER PILOT SA SIDE SOCCER 8.95 7.50 MICKY MOUSE OISK) 14.95 11.95 DALEY TOMS STAR EVENT WORLD SERIES BASKETBALL 5.50 SCOOBY DOO 8.95 6.75 UNDERWURLDE 995 7.50 STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER INTER. KARATE DUN DARACH 7.50 SHADOWFIRE TUNER OLYMPIAO BEACH HEAD 795 THEY SOLD A MILLION KENNEDY APPROACH CASSI 14.95 11.25 HYPERSPORTS 7.95 6.75 YIE AR KUNG FU 6.75 KENNEDY APPROACH DISK) 17 95 14.95 MONTY ON THE RUN 795 5.95 FIGHTING WARRIOR WINNIE THE POOH DISK) 10.99 SHADOW OF THE UNICORN BIG DADDY ROCKWRESTLE 750 RED MOON FIGHTING WARRIOR WORM IN PARADISE LOROS OF MIONIGHT DISK) 11.50 WINTER GAMES 7,50 WORM IN PARADISE 9.95 THEY SOLD A MILLION THE HOBBITI ZAXXON WINTER GAMES DISK) MARSPORT 30 BOXING SPY V SPY LE MANS SHADOWFIRE 30 GRAND PRIX 795 SKY FOX (CASS) 2.50 BRIAN JACKS CHALLENGE SPY V SPY 7.50 GLEN HODDLE FOOTBALL SKY FOZ DISKI COMMANDO RED ARROWS 7.50 INTER KARATE FIGHTER PILOT SYSTEM 15000 BRUCE LEE PITSTOP II ***ATARI JET SET WILLY II IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 7.95 WINNER THE POOH (DISK) INTER, KARATE ICASSI INTERNATIONAL BASKETBALL MINI OFFICE INTER, KARATE DIARY OF ADRIAN MOLE IMPOSSIBLE MISSION LORDS OF MIDNIGHT SIRION SHADOWFIRE SUPERMAN ENIGMA FORCE MONTY ON THE RUN 6.95 MONTY ON THE RUN WORM IN PARADISE 9.95 BOUNCES CRISES 30001 SCRABBLE 7.95 FIGHTNIGHT TAPPER 9.95 CRITICAL MASS 6.75 +++BBCIELECTRON FIGHTNIGHT DISKI 11.25 BEACH-HEAD OLSKI 14.95 11.95 BRUCE LEE 5.90 BEACH-HEAD ELECTRON) 7.50 THE GOONIES 9.997.50 UP AND DOWN 995 ALIEN B TAPPER 7.95 THE GOONIES IDISK) 14.95 1125 SPY HUNTER 995 7.50 ARTIST 10.50 MATCH DAY ZORRO STRIP POKER 9.95 7.50 COO  DR WHO CASSI 18.95 16.95 BARRY MCGUIGAN BOXING 9.99 7.50 BALLBLAZER BOUNTY BOB 7.95 5.95 DR, WHO DISKI 19.95 1795 ANY MASTERTRONIC TITLE 1.99 1.99 SUPER ZAXXON MINI OFFICE 5,95 4.99 GYROSCOPE 8.95 7.50 QUICK SHOT 1 JOYSTICK 8.99 SUMMER GAMES I DISK) 14 95 11.50 DIARY OF ADRIAN MOLE 9.95 7.50 SCRABBLE 11.50 ELITE DISKI MERCENARY 9.95 7.50 \"YE AR KUNG FU HOBBITT DISK CRITICAL MASS 8.95 6.75 MERCENARY DISKI 12.95 9.95 SCOOBY 000 1295 EXPLODING FIST IDISK) 14.95 1195 KING OF THE RING 9.95 7.95 COMMANDO COMMANDO 9.95 HOBBIT 1495 11.25 CHOP SUEY 8.95 7.50 ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P IN U.K. EUROPE ADD .00 PER TAPE. ELSEWHERE AT COST. CHEQUES/POS PAYABLE TO: S.C.S. DEPT, CVG 4, PO BOX 394 LONDON N 15 JL. TEL: 01-800 3156. SAE FOR LIST PLEASE STATE MACHINE IN YOUR ORDER. PLEASE RING FOR AVAILABILITY. BARCLAYCARD AND ACCESS HOTLINE RING 01-631 4627 ONLY. GOODS DESPATCHED SAME DAY SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY. COME AND SEE THE LATEST GAMES ON VIDEO FROM BULLETIN 1000 IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO PICK UP YOUR DISCOUNT SOFTWARE FROM OUR SHOP, PLEASE BRING YOUR COPY OF THIS ADVERT TO: \"COMPUCENTRE, UNIT 5. 221 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD, LONDON W1\" (NEAR GOODGE ST. STATION), OPEN 6 DAYS A WEEK 9.00AM-18.00PM. 7.50 6.95 7.50 2.50 7.50 7.50 750 14.95 795 9.95 sa   Gooooooooo 6.50 499 5.95 7.50 7.50 1.50 095  7.50 7.50 7.50 NOONGINOONG 7.50 750 9.95 17.95 1595 ELITES ELITES This lady is deadly. This man is harmless. WoW Rebird Reard "


"THE SOFTWARE CHART  DECEMBER Hot off the presses is the latest C+ VG Gallop Software Top 30. It's the most accurate and up to date chart currently published in Britain. Just one look through the latest C + VG charts will tell you which top name games are selling the quickest making it easier for you to choose the shoot-em-up, karate game or boxing program you want. It's a knock-out. TOP 30/ ALL FORMATS . THIS MONTH LAST MONTH .WEEKS IN CHART SP GAME Way of the Exploding Fist Daley Thompson's Super Test Frank Bruno's Boxing Now Games Summer Games 2 Fairlight Sky Fox Finders Keepers Hypersports Beach-head Action Biker Nightshade Frankie Goes to Hollywood Beach-head 2 Barry McGuigan Boxing Fighting Warrior BMX Racers Formula One Simulator Chiller Karateka Elite Soft Aid Highway Encounter Red Moon Nonterraqueous Graham Gooch Test Cricket Blackwyche Dambusters Bored of the Rings Wizardry  MACHINE MANUFACTURER SP, C64 Melbourne House SP Ocean SP, C64, AMS Elite SP, C64 Virgin C64 Epyx/US Gold SP The Edge Ariolasoft SP, C64, AMS, MS Mastertronic SP, C64, MS Imagine SP, C64, AMS, BBC, AT, ELEC Access/US Gold SP, C64 Mastertronic Ultimate SP, C64 Ocean C64 Access/US Gold C64 Activision Melbourne House SP C64, C16 Mastertronic SP, C64, C16 Mastertronic SP, C64, AMS, MS Mastertronic C64 Ariolasoft C64, BBC, ELEC Firebird SP, C64 Various SP AMS SP, C64, AMS, BBC, AT, MS Level 9 SP. AMS Mastertronic SP, C64 Audiogenic C64 Ultimate SP, C64 Sydney/US Gold SP, C64, BBC Silversoft The Edge SP 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 30 AMSTRAD/TOP 10 SPECTRUM/TOP 10 ATARI/TOP 10 1 2 1 2 4 Way of the Exploding Fist/MH Frank Bruno's Boxing/Elite Nonterraqueous Mastertronic Chiller/Mastertronic Finders Keepers/Mastertronic Beach-head/Access/US Gold Scrabble/Leisure Genius Starion/MH Locomotion Mastertronic Lords of Midnight/Amsoft D. Thompson's Super Test/Ocean Way of the Exploding Fist/MH Fairlight/The Edge F. Bruno's Boxing/Elite Now Games/Virgin Nightshade/Ultimate Fighting Warrior/MH Hypersports/Imagine Bored of the Rings/Silversoft Highway Encounter/Vortex Rescue on Fractalus/Activision Chop Suey/English Software Seven Cities of Gold/Ariolasoft Ghost Chaser/Advantage/US Gold Red Moon/Level 9 Mig Alley Ace/Microprose Pinball Con. Set/Ariolasoft B.B. Strikes Back/Big 5/US Gold Spot the Ball/Thorn EMI Air Wolf Elite 8 8 9 10 7 8 9 10 10 MACHINE KEY SP SPECTRUM C64 = COMMODORE 64 AT = ATARI AMS = AMSTRAD ELEC ELECTRON ENT = ENTERPRISE Fighting Warrior heading for the Top Ten. Monty on the Run soon to hit the charts. COMPILED BY GALLOP "


"D DOMARK FRIDAY THE 13TH THE COMPUTER GAME THE ONE YOU'VE BEEN SCREAMING FOR.... ... Enter the Horror Sound Effects Competition — If You Dare! Spectrum Commodore 64 Amstrad .95 WARNING: THIS PACKAGE CONTAINS MATERIAL WHICH MAY DISTURB PEOPLE OF A NERVOUS DISPOSITION! DARE YOU ORDER NOW! CALL 01-947 5624 To: The Knife Sharpener Domark Ltd., 204 Worple Road London SW20 8PN Telex: 894475 G NAME: BLOCK LETTERS ADDRESS Please send me copies of \"Friday the 13th The Computer Game\" at .95 (includes postage and packing). I enclose a cheque/P.O. for  My computer is: You may order by Access Visal American Express Transcash by post or telephone (01-947 5624). (Our Ac. No. 544 5450) Please debit my CREDIT CARD O Signature Account No: Credit Card Expiry Date: COUNTY POSTCODE "


"LAV BEYOND BUMPER CHRISTMAS RANGE FOR CRM 64/128 CHALLENGING SOFT ISLAND ITS THE GAME YOU PLAY DIRTY TO WIN! AMAZING CARTOON STYLE ANIMATION. THE ISLAND 2 CAPER SORDERON'S SHADOW THE FIRST LANDSCAPING AND TEXT ADVENTURE 6100 LOCATIONS 1 KEY AND TEXT INPUT. Z PLAYER CHALLENGING SOFTWARE Spectra 48K plus "


"BEYOND .95 OF CHALLENGING SOFTWARE BEYOND FOR CBM64/128 ATARI 400/800/X2 SPECTRUM 43K/PLUS AMSTRAD 464/664 CUPERMAN THE COMPUTER GAME SUPERMAN vs. DARKSEID -THE ARCH-ENEMY OF MANKIND! YOU ARE SUPERMAN A GIANT ANIMATED CHARACTER PITCHED AGAINST DARKSEID'S PERILS AMAZING GRAPHICS, AMAZING SOUND 700! DENTON DESIGNS STUNNING SEQUEL TO SHADOW FIRE. CHRONOLOWANE BUT ITS NOT A STRATEGY GAME! YOU CONTROL THE ENIGMATEAM INA DEADLY ANIMATED ADVENTURE, WITH MAD GENERAL ZOFF AS YOUR QUARRY POR CBM64/128 SPECTRUM 48K/PLUS COLLECT THE FIVE BOYS FOR YOUR FREE POSTER AND GAME VOUCHER The five boys will be published in Beyond games, advertisements and the Beyond Newsletter Collect all live, mail them together with a SAE to the address below. We'll mail you the exclusive Five Boys poster and voucher which entitles you to 50% off the price of a Beyond or Monolith game bought through our FAST mol order service 3_EXCITEMENT MAIL ORDER: BEYOND 3rd Floor Lector Court, 151 Farringdon Road, LONDON ECIR 3AD. Price of all games .95 inc P&P. Cheques/POs payable to BEYOND. Credit cards call 01-837 2899. "


"OUNCES THE SPORT OF THE FUTUR GRAB THE ACTION! CBM 64/128 SPEC Lasaing Edge. Sommare SPECTRUM 48K PLEK HURONON two great games for ice of one! Boulder Dash . For for 2 daring players Deadly future sport MINUS: ciant, fast-moving, an game BOUNCES GET THE PICTURE QUAKE GET THE PICTURE O  9 NIC W GET THE PICTURE QUAKE THE SLUGATHON SHOOT OUT ANNOUNCING ANNOUNCING ROCKToros MINUS, & RIOT! CBM 64/128 SPEC Boulder Dash Giant, fast-moving, al-time action game Kommodore ECTRUM 4BK PLUS trol Two great games for the price of one!  For one or two players FAC VID MAD O 9 NIIN NONN Mail Order: MONOLITH, 3rd Floor Lector Court, 151 Farringdon Road, London ECIR 3AD. All games priced at .95 inc P&P. Cheques/POs payable to BEYOND. Credit cards call 01-837 2899 "


"UnitSoft Is UNIT 6 (DEPT. AI 136 INGRAM STREET GLASGOW G1 9EJ COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM AMSTRAD UNDERWURDE... EXPLODING FIST SABRE WULF. EXPLODING FIST 30 STARSTRIKE ELITE ... NODES OF YESOD ELITE disc SOUTHERN BELLE. MORDONS QUEST NOW GAMES THE HOBBIT SIR LANCELOT TOUR FRANCE GT. ROAD RACE MASTERILAMPS RESCUEIFRACTULAS CHOSTBUSTERS SORCERY ON COURT TENNIS BARRY MEGUIGAN KNIGHT LORE NECHTSHADE NOW GAMES DUN DARACH MEACEA. SCOOBY DOO PROJECT FUTURE RED MOON BLUE MAX 2001... UNDERWURDE NIPERSPORTS NEVER ENDING MODES OF YESOO EVIL CROWN DYNAMITE DAN RED ARROWS PROFANATION BOCCO KENNEDY APPROACH. 7.50 pus OAAACH HARD HAT MACK SUMMER GAMIS IL BOULDER DASH KFD Moon BATTLE OF BRITAIN PITSTOPIL BED ARROWS IMPOSS, MISSION WHIRLINURDS BOULDER DASH BEACH HEAD IL WHIRLINURD THING ON A SPRING NICK FALDO OPEN RUPERTITOYMAKER CHOP SUEY dise THEATRE FUROPE LEONARDO ge2ONE ENTOMBED.. ROBINISHERWOOD BLACKAYCHE NATO COMMANDER KARATEKA... SHADOWUNICORN. ONE O ONE OR CREEP CASTLES BACK FALDO PINBALL COND.... EVIL CROWN DAMBUSTERS MUSIC COND SUPER ZAXXON... BOREDRINGS BOUNTY BOB SCHIZOFRENIA. HIGH ENCOUNTER RED MOON RACE DESTRUCT SET 11.20 MONTYIRUN MULE MUSIC CONST. SET dise WIZARDS LAIR GT. ROAD RACE PINBALL CON SET di 11.20 ROCCO RESIFRACTALUS MAIL ORDER MONS BUCK ROGERS UP DOWN ROCKY HORROR KENNEDY APPROACH. 7.50 WIZARORY STAR QUAKE BALL BLAZER. ...50 BALL BLAZER disc.... .11.20 EXPLODING FIST IMPOSSIBLE MISSION SUMMER GAMES i dine............7.50 WHO DARES WINS 5.95 WORLD SERIES BASKETBALL 5.95 CRITICAL MASS PERIPHERALS WILLIAM WOBBLER 7.50 SORDERONS SHADOW..... ..7.50 QUICKSHOT IL HACKER .. 7.50 JOTCARD. DONALD DUCK DATEX MSTICK... . .....9.95 LUCIFER'S REALM ..11.20 HACKER JYZ STICKAMS Please state name, address and order clearly. Postage included UK Overseas orders add (1.00 per game. All cheques made to UNITSOFT MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS Release date say Ocean Oct/Nov/Dec CBM64: .75 SPECTRUM: .95 Yle Ar Kung Fu, Knight Rider, Rambo, Streethawk. Transformers: Never Ending Story .50 SPECTRUM Fighting Warrior......5.95 Sabre Wulf. 7.50 Shadow Fire...........6.95 Shadow of Unicorn 11.25 Batalyx.................. 7.50 World Baseball........5.25 Schizophrenia.........5.95 Scooby Doo............5.95 Beach-head.............5.95 Winter Sports......... 7.50 Crazy Comets..... 5.95 Tapper...................5.50 Riddler's Den........5.95 Karateka........ ... 8.00 Spy Hunter.............5.50 Sorderon's Shadow. 7.50 Wizard's Lair. ......6.75 Starionetsk 444 444 595 Bounce................... 7.50 Station.. 7.50 Frankie Hollywood... 7.50 Zoids... Monty on the Run... 7.50 Rocky Horror Show 6.50 Impossible Mission 5.95 S. Davis Snooker.....7.50 Daley's Supertest.... 5.85 Macadam Bumper....5.95 Paradroid................6.75 Soft Aid.................4.99 Starquake................5.95 Geoff Capes...........6.75 Jet Set Willy II........5.50 Astro Clone............5.95 Schizophrenia..........5.95 Dun Darach............ 7.50 Endurance.............. 5.95 Robin of the Wood.. 7.50 Spy vs Spy.............6.95 Doctor Who.......... 11.50 Superman..............7.50 Bulge. 7.50 Worm in Paradise....7.50 Battle of Britain....... 7.50 Dambusters ............ 7.50 Xcel... Bladerunner ....... .. 6.75 Pole Position..........6.85 Critical Mass............. 6.75 Underwurde........... 7.50 Glass ... ... 5.95 Sold a Million..........7.50 Fighting Warrior....... 5.95 Hyper Sports..........5.95 World Basketball.....5.95 Spy vs Spy II..........7.50 F.B. Boxing.............5.25 Chimera.................. 3.50 Nexus. .. 7.50 NF Open Golf..........7.50 Beach-head Il.......... 7.50 Bounce.................7.50 Karate....................5.50 Racing Destruction. 9.75 Dynamic Dan..........5.50 COMMODORE 64 Tinball Construction. 8.95 The Artist............. 10.50 Impossible Mission..7.75 Summer Games I..... 7.50 Exploding Fist...........6.95 Soft Aid.................4.99 Winter Games.........7.50 Nightshade ... .. 7.50 Frankie Hollywood...7.50 Mail Order Monster..9.75 Southern Belle.........6.85 Shadowfire... . 6.95 Night Fights.......... 7.50 Highway Encounter.. 5.95 Elite ..... 11.00 Goonies.................. 7.50 Basketball Int. (Elite) 4.95 Basketball ..4.95 Harvey Smith............6.85 Rupert Bear............6.75 Pitstop II................ 7.85 William Wobbler......8.50 Fairlight.................. 7.50 Daley's Supertest....5.95 Doctor Who.......... 11.50 Code Name Mat Il... 6.75 F.B. Boxing...............5.95 Worm in Paradise....7.50 Terromolinos...........5.95 Exploding Fist......... 7.50 Critical Mass...........6.75 Now Games............6.75 Blackwyche............ 7.50 Arcodia (US Gold)... 7.50 Bounty Bob.............6.75 Karate..... .b Sold a Million.......... 7.50 Scooby Doo............5.25 Beach-head Il.......... 7.50 Comp. People (dk)11.50 Monty on the Run...5.95 Summer Games Il.... 7.50 Ball Blazer... ... 7.50 Talos....... 5.95 Sky Fox................. 7.50 Who Dares Wins.....5.95 Trivia ... 5.95 McGuigan Boxing....8.00 Wizard.. Red Moon..............5.25 Kennedy Approach 12.00 Super Sleuth...........5.95 Sunar Sith Popeye...................5.25 Mercenary .............. 7.50 Sacarbeus .............. 7.50 Robin of the Wood.. 7.50 Terromolinos...........5.50 Chimera....... .. Geoff Capes...........5.95 Super Zaxxon......... 7.50 Rupert Ice Palace.... 5.95 Superman............... 7.50 Now Games..........6.75 Imhotep Hng444 4444... 60 Code Name Mat II...6.75 Desert Fox....... 7.50 Marsport ................ 7.50 Zorro ..................... 7.50 Crusade Europe..... 15.00 I of the Mask.......... 7.50 Hacker ................... 7.50 Out Triology........... 7.50 Blade Runner..........6.95 Zoids..................... 6.75 Kermit....... ........7.50 Postage included U.K. Please state which micro. Fast Service. Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept. CVG, 76 Westbourne Terrace, London W2 Elite .. 11.25 C WamiminWANIE The Secret Dioru of Adrian Mdle aged Sue Townsend Program by Level 9 SPECTRUM. CBM 64. AMSTRAD. ATARI.MSX.BBC CASSETTES .95. DISCS (BBC&CBM 64 ONLY) E 12.95 ALSO AVAILABLE THE ADRIAN MOLE SECRET DIARY KIT The Computer game +1986 Diary in one pack Cassette versions (14.95 Disc versions .95 WWWWWulker, W MOSAIC BOOHLJARE Distributed by WHS Distributors, St Johns House, East Street, Leicester Tel. (0533) 551196 SUNNUNTUTO BRAVO NA "


"WRP IDÉAS ETSI to the right as soon as you \"take off\". With a space helmet you receive an extra life and five gravity sticks. When placed these sticks have the effect of making your enemies in the room blow up. happened to all the pokes for the other computers? I want to see a big improvement by next month, get those lazy droids to work.  COMMODORE Audiogenic have devised these for the 64 version of Graham Gooch's Test Cricket. They have asked us to pass them on to you. They will enable you to save the teams that you have created onto tape or disk and so avoid having to type it all in again. load and run the SELECT program, then enter the teams as normal. At the end, when the program exits to Basic, enter the following. POKE43,0:POKE44,192: POKE45,40:POKE46,194: POKE56,200-CLR:SAVE TEAMS\" (8 if using disk). When the teams have been saved, switch the 64 off and then on again to reset the pointers, then load the teams by entering the following. LOAD TEAMS\",1,1 (or,8,1 if using disk). When the teams have loaded, enter NEW and then load the main game program.  STARION The winner of the Star Hint this month is Kevin Murray of Banff. His Pokes are for the ZX Spectrum and the first one up is for Starion. Kevin reckons that the most difficult aspect of Starion was getting it to stop as it has a machine code loader. Eventually he worked out how to overcome this problem. LOAD \"CODE this will miss out the basic program and load the machine code loader. POKE 23300,3:POKE 23301,19 Welcome to IDEAS CENTRAL. My name is Melissa Ravenflame, tells the loader to jump to a I.C. co-ordinator. IDEAS CENTRAL is where you'll find the Bug ROM, then return to basic Hunters' HQ and the man who keeps those rogue robots in when it's finished loading. order Jackson T. Kalliber. RANDOMIZE USR 23296 runs Jackson makes sure OTISS, Big Red, X and B-Con got out the machine code loader. there to find the hints, tips and pokes you all so desperately When the game has finished need for a happy existence. Don't tell them but I can't rely Tence. VONT Tell them but I can't rely looding, type the following on them to make a good job of It. So the IDEAS pokes for infinite lives. CORPORATION and yours truly, Melissa R., need YOUR help. POKE 46527,0:POKE Remember, the IDEAS CORP will pay a large amount of credits 46528,0:POKE 46529,0. to anyone assisting our enquiries. So send your game hints Run the game by typing and cheats to Melissa Ravenflame, IDEAS CENTRAL, Computer RANDOMIZE USR 32835. + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London One final one from Kevin, for ECIR 3AU. Now let's take a look at what the BH squad the game Arcadia. MERGE have come up with ... Edit line 10 and put the following Pokes just before the POKES PRINT USR 24577. POKE 25776,0 infinite lives. POKE 27339 timer Right, no messing about this | powerful ally. When entering a value, POKE 27334 number of month. It's straight down to room use the mole to scan the lives you wish to start with business to see what the BH sides of the wall. If he begins minus one. Then RUN. Squad have managed to to eat the rock then he has discover. found a mole hole.  PSYTRON Anthony Roper of Porthcawl In some rooms, instead of More Spectrum Pokes from has come up with some hints the usual nasties, you will meet Saleem Ahmad of Birmingham. for Nodes for the Spectrum. cyclone types. These will Psytron Type MERGE Use them with the Book of transport you to other rooms. and when it comes up OK, stop Maps from last issue. False floors can be detected the tape. If you want endless How to catch moles: When by fireballs, they will only fuel, type POKE 28625,0:POKE you begin the game you will appear over an open space. 28626,0. For endless men type find craters on the surface of in rooms E2-E7, you will find POKE 41098,17:POKE 41099,2: the moon. Every now and then the draughts. These will carry POKE 41100,1:POKE 41101,0. a mole will pop its head out you safely down five screens. And for endless oxygen, type When it does, jump towards it. However, if you jump up, you POKE 6142,62:POKE26143,255: You may have to wait quite a will hit the roof and fall back POKE 26144. Start tape. while for a mole to pop up, but down to your death. To prevent it is worth it as he is a this you must push the joystick pleased with that lot. What  VIC 20 Mario Richard of Rochdale has these Pokes for the Vic 20 which will allow you extra lives. For 200 lives on Multitron: Verify the loader, then type LOAD. After the main part has loaded, enter POKE 4516,20:SYS 7373 Micky the Bricky: For 100 lives-load the whole program and then reset the Vic by touching pins 1 and 3 of the user port with a piece of wire. Type POKE 4129,100:SYS 4100. For 200 men on Gridrunner: Reset the computer after loading the game and enter POKE 7045, 200:SYS 7076. Finally for nine lives on Alien Blitz: Load the game and reset the Vic. Then type POKE 6082,100:SYS 4110. SCHIZOFRENIA The following playing tips have "


" JERRY PARIS. come straight from the offices of Quicksilva themselves. Seems the game is a little too hard and they thought you may need the hints to get anywhere in the game. So read on and see what you can make of it. Screen one: Follow Alphonse ll very closely, pull top bolts, then go downstairs behind him. Pull bottom bolts, then go upstairs to the right hand lever. Pull this when Alphonse Il is as close to the top right of screen as possible. Go down the stairs and through the door before Alphonse Il closes it. Screen two: Build the bottom boxes into steps to reach the lift buttons. Press buttons and jump into lift. Go to top floor. Put top floor boxes into right hand lift and send it down. Go to middle floor and unload all boxes onto right hand ledge. Go to bottom floor on left and load boxes onto right hand lift. Ascend to middle floor on left hand lift. Load boxes onto the third lift three at a time. Send lift to ground floor. Go upstairs and call lift. To unload boxes merely walk into lift. To climb boxes, move toes over bottom of box and press fire. Screen three: To move the cleaner merely walk over it. To clean a lift, place the cleaner outside, lean and pull. The lifts ore ganged in two sets of three: only those with flashing lights will move. Lifts on the middle floor will continue to move in the direction they last moved in. Screen four: First turn on the generator (bottom floor) by finding the switch pattern (the switches must be pulled in sequence or all will switch off again). The generator sequence will also prepare the exit door for opening. Do this next. Get three switches to rooms on second floor into down position. Switch on corresponding switches on top floor. If a switched on room stays dark then Alphonse II is in there: otherwise he is in the office light switches except Alphonse ll's room. Go to second floor, switch on all rooms. Go to third floor, switch on Alphonse Il's room and race for exit! Screen five: The X/Y controls are already off (did you notice that?). Turn on generator and master switches. Go to second floor, open chamber door. Go to lower floor and turn on pulse charger. Meanwhile, Alphonse Il will grab the lift. Call it back when he is on the right hand side of the second floor. Use the UDLR switches to move pulse generator markers to coincide over chamber door. Get Alphonse II in front of the chamber and fire pulse generator. Get into lift, go to second floor and shut chamber doors. Use the UDLR to zero pulse generator marker counts. Switch off UDLR controls. Use V and H switches to set marker counts to target area (about 30 and 10). Switch on second floor and ground floor autoswitch. Get up to chamber and inside with Alphonse II (use the quick entry button and wait! ELITE It seems that the Commodore version of Elite is making just as big a splash in that galactic ocean as the original BBC version. We've been receiving plenty of tips and enquiries about the game, so I thought Id let you in on a few of the secrets. The first thing you'll want to do is make credits lots of them. To do this, you should first of all find two adjacent planets of the right type. One should be Poor Agricultural, and the other Rich Industrial. seem to remember that there are a couple of these about ten light years to the galactic east of Lave (your starting planet) Quitiri rings a bell for one of them. You can then travel between these taking computers to the I agricultural planet and furs the other way Once you've increased your cargo capacity (one of the first things you should buy) and have a little extra cash on these runs, it's always a good idea to load up with gold, platinum and gems when they're cheap on the agricultural world. They don't take up any cargo space, so you can carry them around until you find a good price. If you accumulate vast quantities of these, don't sell them all at once, but instead answer to the 'Do you want to sell (y/n)?' There's still a bug in the game (left over from the BBC version) which misses significant digits in large calculations. Of course it's no good knowing how to trade if you keep scraping your ship when docking. This is really just a matter of experience, but here are a few tips for novice pilots. When you have a visual sighting on the station, aim for a point directly midway between the station and its closest point on the planet. When doing this, imagine a line running between the station and the planet, and make sure that this is horizontal. Now move forward. If all has gone well, you should eventually see a green dot appear on your radar. You can now look either right or left depending upon the direction of your approach and you'll see the space station. Stop the ship when the entry port is lined up. Now look forward, rotate the ship so that the station is above you (vertical line in the middle of the radar), then turn upwards. The space station will come into view and, apart from a few minor adjustments, you should dock successfully. Now to those friendly/furry/ cuddly/cute and fertile little a lot of trouble, and the obvious eviction routine of using the escape pod doesn't work. Somehow, one of the Trumbles manages to survive in a way reminiscent of Alien, and haunts you in future ships. It's not much fun when you can't see what you're doing. but the trick is to aim for the brightest point in the sky. Know what I mean!? Unlike its predecessor, the Commodore version of Elite doesn't reward random killing very highly. You've got to choose the right ships with the highest points if you want to get anywhere. Of all the ships, the Thargoids seem to be worth the most. I'm told that they score five points each, and you need 256 points to get a \"Right On Commander\" at the higher levels. So, wouldn't it be useful to go through WitchSpace where these beasties hang out on every hyperspace jump? Thanks to a number of readers, I can tell you how to do it. Having left the space station, freeze the game, press the X key and then unfreeze the game. Everything should now continue as normal. So, set the hyperspace vector to a nearby "


"Net MORE HELP IDÉASE Dover — substitute the metal disk for washers and get the disks examined by a specialist. Neil J Hewitt is getting driven mad by Mikrogen's Mad Marther, which he has owned for 12 months and still cannot complete. Who can? BEBET system (make sure you don't go more than 3.5 light years), then press 'H' for hyperspace. As soon as you have done this, hold down the \"CTRL' key. You'll enter hyperspace, and 99% of the time continue to Witch-space. Finally, a note about the missions. We've had more enquiries about these than anything. Unfortunately, Firebird tell me that this version only has the two missions also found on the BBC. They promise me that the Spectrum version will have more, but that isn't much solace to Commodore owners. I stick left, or nine times out of ten you will fall off. If you do fall off, press fire and build up speed for the other jumps. Approach with speed or you will get a refusal, especially with the jump which consists of crossed poles and a small gate after it. There are two of these on the course, plus a double jump and two water-jumps. Remember, some of these appear in quick succession. Practice and you will eventually get around the course without falls or refusals. Fencing: Not as difficult as it looks. Best time to get the droid is while his guard is up. Otherwise stop the computer's quick lunges by blocking, then lunge the droid for a hit. Cycling: The only tip here is not to go faster than the arrow guide at the bottom of the screen or you will slow up to such an extent that you might lose the race. Kayaking: Reverse gate six how do you do it? Easy, after going through gate five make a sharp turn right and face backwards. Then go through. It's the same for reverse gate 13. TIPS For those of you who have spent a few of your readies on a 'nice little earner' Minder Mitchell Spicer has sent in a few tips for you to play the game. All your favourite characters are here Dave at the Winchester, Terry who delivers goods, collects them and minds you (for a price), Mr. Chisolm watches you for nicked stuff. If you sell some faulty goods, then they get a bit cheesed off but, even worse, stolen goods get them in big trouble and if they find you then you can bet on a new nose job! So it's best to bring Terry if you want to stay around. 1. When you start, look at your inventory and note your goods — then go straight to Dealer No. 1 and sell him your goods. Then go to Terry's and get him to deliver. 2. Look at your inventory and if your goods do disappear then they shouldn't be faulty. 3. Go straight to Dealer No.5 and repeat the above but Terry could be a long time. 4. When you are talking to Dealers and you say something rude they say something in the same manner and belt you. Camron McDade finishes off this month's hints and tips with a few for Bounty Bob Strikes FOURTH PROTOCOL Sanjay Kewwani from London has sent in a detailed list of tips for this adventure, starting with The Nato Papers — for telephone numbers access the file Telephone. When asked what to do about Stanistav, select Other Suggestions and enter Turn Stanistav. Use as many watchers as possible on a target, as this usually gets quicker results. Keep an eye on Faulkner and Genovese, these will allow British Telecom to intercept a call. Compare the Fingerprints on the Diplomatic file of Nilson (at Stockholm) and on Nilson's school notebook (At Storuman, look for Anna Nilson). This should give you a clue as to the real name of the contact. Plumb's question \"How was the traitor reunited?: could be phrased What kind of traitor is he?' You will find the answer in the glossary. When Bracton has called you, put as many watches as possible on him. When you find out about this weird social life, ring up Medical Security. To the question. What proof?' answer 'Black Magic The Bomb: Gordon's the essential things you should pick up here are a tubemap, wallet, ID card and a computer. To use the lift, you need a pass word, which you will find if you turn the sequence of numbers given at the end of Adventure one into a word. Once you have these essential objects and have talked to Harcourt-Smith you can leave Gordon's and need never return. You must now find your new base Sentinel House, Sentinel House: You will have to visit regularly to gain information. To use the lift you need a password, which you will find in the Admin Office. Go there and talk to Penfold. He will hand you a piece of paper, which is a poem code. Read 'poem code file in the computer. For money, ask C's secretary. For a 'make on a photograph, go to Blodyun in the Archives room. For a firearm go to the Armoury on the ground floor, and to get some special equipment, go to the special projects room. Make sure you visit the printer room regularly for information. Investigations: Bremerhaven go to the computer room to activate Search Bremerhaven. HELP!! Russell Jones and Thomas Lilley from Great Yarmouth are tearing their hair out trying to get out of the North Door at the beginning of Witches Cauldron. They also need help to get rid of Moctuper, because after throwing the soot over their shoulders Moctuper eats them. SUMMER GAMES CHEATS Once again Ideas Corp informer Kenneth Henry has written in with tips for his fellow readers. The game to be given the 'Henry' breakdown this time is Summer Games II. Triple Jump: When you have performed two movements for hop and step, don't bother to push left and then quickly forward to jump because you run the risk of getting a fault. Simply push the stick up/left. Javelin: Hammer the fire buttons. When selecting the angle, be careful to allow for the little jump the man makes when he throws. If you have a Quickshot II, switch on the autofire and select a middlerange angle. But remember to allow for that little jump or you will get a fault. Now for a few 'cheat modes' from Commodore owner Paul Stamp of Cleveland. Thing On A Spring: When the title page is shown, press the keys. THING, Inst Del and Left arrow all simultaneously. When this is done, the border should go grey and you get unlimited oil. Zaxxon: Again on the title screen, type in RED for indestructible ships. Booty: The keys K.E.V.IN must be pressed simultaneously to get unlimited lives. Revenge of the Mutant Camels: On the title page, type in \"goats\". This should reveal a message saying \"Cheat mode operative\". Then, on any screen, pressing space will allow you to proceed to the next screen. Level 1. Pick up the flower pot and press key 1 and start to warp to level 4. Level 5. Pick up the coffee pot and press key 8 and start to warp to level 8. Level 10. Pick up the pitch fork and press key 5 and start to warp to level 14 Level 13. Pick up the goblet and press key 4 and start to warp to level 15. Level 16. Set suction tube 1 to the left and pick up the pie and press key 9 and start to warp to level 19. Level 20. Kill all the mutants and pick up the paint roller and press key 3 and start to warp to level 22. After completing level 25 a message of congratulations appears and you are told to get to the game adjustment screen and set the special code to any number from 1 to 25 and press start to begin on any level. This unfortunately works only when you have completed the game, so you will not be able to practice the difficult screens until you do so. Before the game enters the name entrymode, you are treated to a firework display. Equestrian: Keep pushing the joystick up for speed. In the middle of a jumps push the "


"LIVE OUT YOUR DREAMS ON THE UTHERN BEL BELLE SOUTHE 48K -95 DNO 79 SPECTRUM OUTWARD NOW AVAILABLE ON RETURN AMSTRAD 464 CPC 664 CPC 87-95 SOUTHERN BELLE RAILWAY Now we have just the ticket to stoke up your Amstrad as the best selling Southem Belle is now available for all Amstrad computers Hop abroad the footplate of the powerful King Arthur Class locomotive and journey back to the glorious days of steam during the 1930's. You can almost feel the heat from the firebox and smell the billowing steam as you thunder along the famous London to Brighton run. Using the footplate controls and gauges, you have 60 minutes to tow the Pullman carriages from Victoria to Brighton. Any delays could ruin your timetable, so keep an eye on your stocks of water and coal-check the efficiency of your coal bum by the density of the smoke. Your present speed, time and the position of the next signal for guidance are also displayed. Wipe the soot from your eyes and peer out of the cab to pick out the 24 stations as they rush by. Look out for other well known landmarks such as Battersea Power Station and the Clayton Tunnel Take the option as the driver with your Spectrum guiding you along the right track, or harder levels where you are the driver and the fireman, perhaps facing adverse conditions that could make you disastrously late! Realistic controls such as a regulator controlling the flow of steam to the cylinders, the damper controlling air flow to the fire, vaccum brakes and the fire doors, plus authentic sound and graphics make Southern Belle second only to the real experience. These programs are supplied on cassette and are compatible with the 664 and 6128 when used it with cassette player and suitable Now you can develop professional quality machine code software on your Amstrad using this fast and versatile assembly language programming package Includes Editor Assembler, Monitor and Disassembler. (GSH M . HEWSON CONSULTANTS crowns of Dumnovia and free Merlyn to save Saxon Britain from a century of darkness 3D Sensory Animation across hundreds of locations add up to an adventure that could take a lifetime to completel For all Amstrad computers. .95 Also available for all 48K Spectrums .95 TLAND ZAPP-280 Assembly Programming Package 56b Milton Trading Estate, Milton, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RX. For mail order send cheque/postal order made payable to Hewson Consultants. For credit card sales state your Access/ Barclaycard number and enclose a specimen signature. Don't forget to include your own name and address. For all Amstrad computers. E14.95 Dragontore As Maroc the Mage, can you beat Morag the Shapeshifter to the lost As part of our continuing development of innovative software we are always happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication "


"48K Spectrum CHRONICLES OF THE LAND of fairlight 1. a prelude: the light REVEALED Fairlight BV BOJANGEBORG (author of 'The Artist) Maybe the game of the year!» Your Spectrum, November 1985 \"... one of the most sophisticated games the Spectrum has ever seen.' \"... one of the ten best programs ever made for the Spectrum.\" Popular Computing Weekly, October 1985. \"... the best arcade adventure of the year.\" Your Spectrum, November 1985 FEDGE 12/13 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London WCZE BLH Tel: 01-240 1422/7877 Telex: 892379, "


"COMMANDE  COMPETUTION forget to tell us which machine you own. Mail your entry to Computer and Video Games, Commando Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Remember the closing date is JANUARY 16th. THE GAME Which game makes Beach be giving this amazing Head look like a Sunday machine away. All you School outing? Which have to do is predict the arcade machine has been highest chart position YOU causing as much of a stir in think Elite's Commando the arcades as Space Game will reach in the Invaders? COMMANDO C+VG/Callup Top 30. That's that's what. all. To celebrate the release tell us if you think it will of their official Commando get into the top 20, top ten games on the Spectrum or even number one. Even and C64 ELITE software is Big Red could have a crack offering a genuine Capcom at this one! Commando arcade Once you've decided, all machine to the winner of you have to do is fill in the this exclusive C+VG coupon and send it to us at competition. C+VG. Then you'll have to Yes, one of these smash watch the charts to hit machines could be discover if your guess was yours to play in the privacy right. We'll be closing the of you own home. No more competition on January embarrassing moments 16th — so, you've got to when you start shouting allow for two months of and screaming and sales. The first person out jumping up and down as of the mailbag with the you get near that all time nearest guess gets the high score! prize. The first prize winner Elite have a good vill also get a copy of the reputation for producing Elite Commando game for chart games so bear his or her computer, plus a that in mind when you special combat issue Big come to make your guess. Red t-shirt. Fifty runners-up will get What you have to do is a copy of the game for the so simple we might as well Spectrum or C64. Don't Commando stars Super Joe a It's an action packed non-stop highly trained soldier. He's been game with plenty of thrills for sent on a seemingly impossible the computer gamester. one man mission to rescue Elite's version follows hostages from an enemy faithfully the excitement of the stonghold. Who needs this arcade original both in game Rambo guy anyway? action, graphics and sound Outnumbered by enemy and if you've seen the arcade troops and armed only with a game, you'll know that's machine gun, and the odd impressive.. grenade he manages to find on A copy of this instant smash the battlefield, our hero has to could be yours if you enter our save his hostages. mega-competition! C+VG/ELITE COMMANDO COMPETITION I think Elite's Commando game will reach number ... in the C+VG/Gallup Top 30. Name .... Address Computer owned (tick box) C64 Spectrum "


"\"...THE FUNREST CARTOON ADVENTURE YOU'LL EVER TAKE PART IN ...\" ANNNNNNNNNNNNNN SPECTRUM 48K AMSTRAD 464 .95 SWEEVOS O WORLD GARGOYLE SPECIAL EDITION GARGOYLE GAMES LTD. 74 KING STREET, DUDLEY WEST MIDLANDS DY Tlephone: \\Sales) OBA 238777 (Genby) 0384 237222 "


"Can YOU avoid the fangs of a deadly spider? Addictive launch BOFFIN A Mad Professor on the Loose  OFF BOFFIN  Boffin is a challenging, action-packed game requiring a combination of cunning and slick keyboard control. Beware the Giant Puffer-Blimps in your way and give the massive Tarantulas a wide berth! Land on the giant hydraulic rams and they will slam you into deadly neutron magnets embedded in the cave roof! Manta-bats are useful allies and the trampolines will help you gain height but remember to use your umbrella to break a deadly fall! Available BBC B and Electron ............ .95 ALSO AVAILABLE String FOOTBALL MANAGER dictive STRINGER Stringer is an arcade adventure game in which you are a press photographer set the task of snatching a shot of a Film Star in an hotel. The game is tantalisingly playable, graphically excellent and, of course Addictive! Available... .95 FOOTBALL MANAGER The All Time Classic Football Manager... Spectrum 48K .95 ... Commodore 64 .95.. Amstrad CPC 464 .95 ... BBCB $8.95 .. Electron .95... Dragon .95 ... Vic 20 .95 ...ZX81 .95 To: Addictive Games Ltd, 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth, Dorset BH2 6HE Please send me: cassette(s) for Boffin for............................. .... .....(computer) cassette(s) for Stringer for .......... (computer) cassette(s) of Football Manager for.......................... ..(computer) I enclose cheque/postal order for ....... Please debit my Access card No............... *Delete as applicable When you openan Addictive Game, there's a new world of discovery waiting for you. Vddictive . Name........... Address....... Postcode .................... Tel: Access orders can be telephoned through on 10202296404 For overseas orders, please add ,50 Addictive Games 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth BH2 6HE Telephone: 0202296404. "


"C+VG COMPETITION PINBALL COMPETITION A pinball machine of your very own? Yes — C+VG and PSS can make your dream come true! Thanks to the people who brought you Macadam Bumper the best Spectrum computer pinball simulation around we can offer you the chance to win a real Meteor pinball machine. And 25 runners up will be able to choose ANY PSS game for their computer. Now there's an offer you can't refuse. What do you have to do? Simple. Just use the C+VG pinball construction set to design the perfect pinball playfield. On this page you'll find all the bits and pieces you need to construct a pin-table. There are flippers, bumpers, shoots in fact all you need to make a great table. You can either cut the bits out and stick them on e piece of paper or card or draw your own, or simply make a photocopy of the page if you don't want to spoil your issue. You could even buy another copy then we could afford to fix Big Red's wonky eye! If you like, you could also have a go af designing a back-flash for you pinball you know, the amazing artwork that often appears around the bit where the scores flash up! Give your pinball a name, too. The more original it is the better. Let your imagination run riot and create a pinball for the video age! Closing date for the competition is December 16th, normal C+VG competition rules apply and the editor's decision is final. Don't forget to fill in the coupon and attach it to your entry which should be addressed to Computer and Video Games, Pinball Competition, Priory Court, 30-32, Farringdon Lane, London, ECTR 3AU. WANAN C+VG/PSS PINBALL COMPETITION Name Address I call my pinball: Computerowned "


"THE COUNTDOWN HAS BEGUN TASS From DURELL Commodore 64 Spectrum DURELL sales dept. Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton TA14AB "


"We'll take you beyond the Spectrum QUICKSHOT II AUTO RAPID-FIRE JOYSTICK SPECTRUM UPGRADE KIT SPECTRUM INTERFACE from TURBO INTERFACE Please send me Spectrum Turbo Interface(s) at .50 Quickshot II Joystick(s) at .95. Spectrum Interface(s) at .95. Spectrum Upgrade Kit(s) at .95. (Please state issue 2 or 30) +l per order P+P[ Overseas) TOTAL  Olenclose cheque/postal order charge my Access/Visa Four great new add-ons from Ram, Number One in everything for the Spectrum... TURBO INTERFACE NEW LOW PRICE Outperforms any other Spectrum interface. Supports Kempston, Protek, Interface 2 and ROM cartridge software, with a full expansion bus at the rear. The Turbo works with two standard joysticks, making the most of the Quickshot Il's fast action. Features a unique power safety device and a new Reset button. Even more amazing value at just .50 QUICKSHOT II AUTO RAPID-FIRE JOYSTICK The top games joystick with its sleek trigger fire button and an auto-fire switch for continuous shooting a snip at only .95. SPECTRUM INTERFACE This Kempston-compatible interface adds real games power to your Spectrum. Costs just .95. SPECTRUM UPGRADE KIT Boost your 16K Spectrum to a full 48K, allowing you to run all the latest and greatest software. Only .95 Where can you get your hands on Ram's amazing Spectrum add-ons? You can see them at branches of Boots, Menzies, Greens, Spectrum Group computer centres, and good computer stores everywhere. Ram Electronics (Fleet) Ltd (Dept CV), Unit 8, Redfields Industrial Park Redfield Lane, Church Crookham, Aldershot, Hants GU13 ORE. Credit Card hot line: Tel: 0252 850085. (Access & Visa). Expiry Date_ /__/__ Name Address Postcode Telephone 24 Hour despatch for credit cards and postal orders (7 days for cheques.) All products are fully compatible with the Spectrum, Spectrum + and Sinclair Microdrives. Ramn Electronics (Fleet) Ltd (Dept CV). Unit 8, Redfields Industrial Park, Redfield Lane, Church Crookham, Aldershot, Hants GU13 ORE Trade and Export enquiries welcome "


"e =CH Aos weapon. The Master reports proming results. (LIVE ALTEN cortical preparation.) Mine/ Factory S Machine skill VITAL. Doctor: ultimate risk scenario. Your in vention urgently requested. ? ? ?ELP??? Disable TIRD ntial bor Heatonite Regain o I Who's?) Z I Time Instant Replay Unit + brain Force futile. Weapon Skills NA LyWOO ARE NIVUS YOU LOL READY NIVUS FOR IN ASSOCIATION WITH THE BBC OMODODD0w robotics +techno trickery = Zi (ur. (A-CHEN), OFI) OH, Jse invisible cat+code: string etc. Full cerebral combat status needed 2nd Moon Rijar. AMSTRA (CASSETTE SPECTRUM COMMODORE .95 4 OF TERROR AND THE MINES (WHO DOCTOR Who would think of a Police box? gramme concealed in game Pack Madrag (genetically boosted saurian] + psycho MEGA SECURE !!! P Halt Heatonite prod. Access via all times. Blue print (part) supplied. Ky-Al-Nargath construct [RD M CAB SEITE 95 "


"CIGMAP Highway Encounter tuck on the road of no return? Never fear C+VG is here to help keep right on to the end with our special screen by screen playing guide to Highway Encounter one of the hottest games around for the Spectrum and Amstrad right now. Dimension Graphics supplied the screens while our very own highway patrol man MARCUS JEFFERY brings you some useful alien bashing tips to help you save the world. ZONE 30: The beginning of the road. No trouble here. Your Vortons form a line and move forward. It's a good idea to move to one side and start shooting forward to clear a barrel from the line in the next zone ZONE 29: Your first alien will be waiting for you, but on the other side of the barrels. If you've cleared a barrel as suggested you'll have no problem getting rid of him. Leave the Lasertron and your extra lives here for a while and go it alone ZONE 28: Enter this zone just to the right of centre. Three one eyed beasties will come straight at you down the centre of the road. If you've been firing as you enter, you'll hit the rightmost and if you're lucky, the centre one as well. Then just rotate left to finish the job. ZONE 27: Nothing here. You can't budge the glass towers, but the Lasertron will fit betwen them anyway. ZONE 26: The first major obstacle The two mines can't be moved, so you've got to use the barrels to curb (whoops a pun!) their destructive tendencies. The two blocks will disintegrate under fire Beware of two monstrosities which will attack you on this screen. It's a good idea to kill these before messing about with the barrels, but don't stray into the next zone, or you're likely to attract an even more unruly bunch. move that barrel from the centre ZONE 25: ZONE 20: Nothing here, but you may like to use There'll be three more of those loud the barrel or blocks as protection in the mouthed aliens lying in wait for you next zone. The leftmost block is nice here. This horrific cross-breed between cover. Just keep firing down the left Jaws and a beach ball will die easily if hand edge, and it'll come to a stop in you just sit back, relax and pick 'em Zone 24. Then just saunter up behind off. it, turn, and start blasting. ZONE 19: ZONE 24: You've just reached the first major This is where you meet the first major checkpoint. Congratulations! But don't resistance. Stay back to keep clear a get carried away and blast down the line of sight and lay into 'em. wood between the fires. It's not doing ZONE 23: you any harm, and provides an A repeat performance here, with plenty excellent stopping point for the of nasties attacking, Don't worry about Lasertron at a later stage. In addition, freeing the enclosed mine in the centre if the Vorton isn't EXACTLY central, you'll have to do it eventually you'll die anyway. When the aliens are clear, use ZONE 18 one of the blocks to push the mine Barrel moving time again. You only against the wall. Also, don't forget to need one barrel, two are provided if you move the barrel from the centre of the find this quicker road the Lasertron is counting on ZONE 17: Just for a little variation, this screen ZONE 22: requires block moves isn't that a Nothing nasty here, but take care to Z80 machine code instruction!? enter the zone either in the centre or ZONE 16: the right. Many a vorton has come to Peek-a-boo. There's a saucer hiding in grief in the fire there. I've sometimes managed to kill it ZONE 21: straight off I've still no idea how This is the start of the next shoot-out. but normally you should budge one of Plan carefully, entering down the centre the side blocks (one shot only!) then line with laser blazing. This will push line up down the diagonal to slaughter the two centre barrels to block the the offender. passageway into Zone 20 then either sit ZONE 15 at the side or move one of the barrels Now comes the real crunch. This screen into the next zone to finish off the halfcan be pretty tough. Fools rush in, but dozen aliens. Again, don't forget to the rest of us might consider using the you! blocks from the previous zone as protection ZONE 14: Full steam ahead, but take care in case one or two stragglers haven't bitten the dust from the previous shoot-out. ZONE 13: Hold your horses. It's no good rushing through here. You'll need these barrels in the next zone. One or two carefully controlled nudges should line them all up, then take them all together. ZONE 12: Remember: Mines can be dangerous to your health, and these diagonal ones are not exception. Just stay cool and it's really quite easy. ZONE 11: One of the meanest zones yet. The aliens just keep coming. There are a couple of barriers providing much needed protection. The first couple are just those one eyed freaks who move in a straight line until they hit something. From then on, normal commando "


"POWER SCORE igno To Zones completed and Vortons remaining tactics normally pay dividends. ZONE 10: A real barrier of blocks controls the road. You may like to leave a centre block to stop the Lasertron depending on your situation but don't forget to take one block with you for later use. ZONE 9: These three barrels are also needed, but there're one or two big mouths to fill with laser shot first. ZONE 8: This is what the barrels are for. I hope you remembered to bring along the block to help out! ZONE 7: Just as you thought things were getting easy. There are plenty of dastardly drivers to keep you occupied and a couple of horrors in the centre When you've finished off the former, you're going to have to let the others out if you want to clear the centre A little diagonal blasting will also deal with those mines. Whatever you do. don't forget to take one of those blocks with you. ZONE 6: Nothing in sight. The best bet is to blast the block just past the marked squares in the next zone, then move up to it. ZONE 5: you'll be immediately set upon by swarms of one eyed wonders, which come hurtling down both sides of the road. Fortunately, they're as stupid as ever, so you should be able to pick them off. Then deal with that mine The greatest multitude of malicious HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER and it mines yet. Use the barrels to let starts all over again. Is it my yourself through. Then rush to the next imagination, or are the aliens getting screen for help quicker this time? ZONE 1: GENERAL TIPS The end of the road at last. But the Don't worry about the time to begin saucers don't think so. Having taken with. Just work out the quickest care of these, you'll notice a few barrels method of clearing each screen. The just hanging about waiting to be used time factor is usually the most in the previous zone important in the end, but you've got to ZONE O know what you're doing. The Lasertron has made it, with just NEVER, never, go back for the seconds left on the clock. It hits the Lasertron. Unless you are on your last final fire barrier and ALL YOUR life and are taking the Lasertron along VORTONS DISINTEGRATE!!?! I had with you. Remember the time a heart-stopping moment, until a little martyrdom is much quicker. message appeared saying \"Lasertron With each life, just go as far as you Activate\", and it moved forward. The can, blasting everything in sight. When Lasertron obviously has a great time you lose a life, if you've reached one of humming to itself as the aliens look on the safe points, you can take the in horror. The alien spaceship quakes, Lasertron and all the spare Vortons then disappears under the onslaught. along the road together, saving Then an insignificant little message valuable time appears: END PREPARE FOR YOUR NEXT the mine on the left-hand side, or the Lasertron won't fit through otherwise. ZONE 4: It's the OK Corral again. Lots of saucers the meanest in the bunch to keep you amused ZONE 3: Take these barrels! ZONE 2: "


"1, OF THE MASK Featuring a new generation of advanced 3D graphic techniques by Sandy White. Available on the 48K Spectrum from Electric Dreams Software. 31 Carlton Crescent, Southampton. Tel:(0703) 225282 "


"SET TO STUN... READY TO RUN WILLOW PATTERN THUNDERBIRDS PANT MICROCOSM CYLU BOOT FAT MAN SAM CHIMERA STAR DRIFTER AMSTRAD 301 CYLU 302 DON'T PANIC 303 BOOTY 306 CHIMERA 310 WILLOW PATTERN 313 THUNDERBIRDS SPECTRUM 304 CHIMERA 308 WILLOW PATTERN 311 THUNDERBIRDS 315 CHICKIN CHASE COMMODORE BBC 317 MICROCOSM 309 WILLOW PATTERN 319 STAR DRIFTER 321 FAT MAN SAM 316 CHICKIN CHASE ATARI 318 MICROCOSM 307 CHIMERA 314 THUNDERBIRDS 305 CHIMERA ELECTRON 320 STAR DRIFTER_312 THUNDERBIRDS SUPER SILVER 395 MAIL ORDER Please state name of game, code number and quantity required. Enclose crossed cheque/PO made payable to FIREBIRD SOFTWARE. All offers are subject to avail ability Orders are despatched promptly. All prices inclusive of VAT and postage. MAIL ORDER: FREEPOST FIREBIRD, WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H 9BR. \"No stamps required FIREBIRD SOFTWARE, WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H 9DL. TEL: 01-379 6755/5626 Firebird and the Firebird logo are trademarks of British Telecommunications pic FIREBIRD "


"Exciting Speech & Graphic Air Traffic Control Action U.S. GOLD ATARI 4G KENNEDY @ APPRMACH from MicroProse $14.95 $17.95 CASSETTE IT HITSUI Screen as seen on Commodore 64 PS LR MIG ALLEY -ACESee and hear all the action. Here is the first simulation to include realistic high quality speech from your computer. Bad weather, in-flight emergencies and instrument failures provide an ever-changing environment. Twenty aircraft could be calling you, all vying for one runway! Hear their radio calls and your broadcasts in high quality speech! The safety of passengers is in your hands as you guide jet airliners and Concorde to their destinations! DON'T FORGET THESE OTHER SIMULATIONS FROM MICROPROSE: U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage St, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 8881. Telex: 337268. "


"Backtoskoo Dragged back for another term, Eric continues his one-man fight against the Education system. All his old adversaries are there, plus escapees from the Biology room and, even worse, girls! Lucky he stocked up on stink bombs over the holidays! Back to Skool (48K Spectrum) .95 Skooldaze (48K Spectrum & CBM64) .95 Available from all good computer shops or direct from: ITIICROSPHERE Microsphere Computer Services Ltd., 72, Rosebery Road, London N10 2LA. "


"DIEHUNEES THERE'S THE JOB... THAT GAME-TERMINAL ON THE BLINK... UH... HEY, YOU GUYS...) LET'S HAVE SOME LIGHT ON THE PROBLEM...AH-HAH! A MIS-INTEGRATED TERWILLIGER! I WAIT FOR ME, GUYS... IT IS? HERE, LET ME LOOK... OKAY, LET'S SNAP IT UP! SHOW IDEAS CENTRAL WE'RE ON THE BALL! WHATS A TERWILLIGERS SCRIPT: PEDRO HENRY ART: JERRY PARIS DUNNO... LEARNED ALL MY ELECTRONICS FROM COMIC BOOKS... NOT FAIR, FELLAS... YOU ALWAYS RUSH AHEAD... "


"U TERWILLIGER? WHERE'D YOU LEARN ELECTRONICS, OTISS? COMIC BOOKS?! DOESN'T MEAN I CAN'T HELP... HMM, COME OVER HERE... I'LL HAVE TO CONSULT MISS MELISSA ON THE MAINFRAME... JUST AUSE I'M VO AND GET THAT TERMINAL EIXED... AND STEP ON IT!!! I THINK SOMEONE JUST by DID... NOW... WHAT'S THE PROBLEM? (OTISS..? YOU KNOW, SOMETIMES TY WISH I WAS HUMAN...! 75 CRY...) NOTLEBIG HUNTERS FACE THEIR CREATEST CHALLENGE YET...BE ALHERE FOR AWINTER'SPECIAL WE JUST HAD TO CALL... WHO LET THESE GUYS INTO THE BUILDING ?!-ED HEY, PEDRO...WHO'S THIS GUY ED? JERRY. "


"COMMODORE 64 Wizarury \"A dream come true!\" (Commodore User) -Wizardry is magic!\" 127 4P!61) **One of the best games... excellent...get hooked on this game, I sure did!\" Commodore Computing International -Wizardry proves that the Brits are still the best when it comes to gameplay, matching the best graphics and music with imaginative plotting and fiendish complexity Commodore Horizons PICK OF THE WEEK(CT Weekly. PC Weekly) FRONT COVER FEATURE (Com. Hor..ZZAP!64) "


"No.3 DECEMBER 1985 GAMES BOOK MAD MUNCHER/NECROMANCER'S REALM/DRIP DROP/TRUCKIE "


"c+vg/games book/mad muncher/1  BBC 32K Work up a keen appetite for The Mad Muncher. Control this cute creature in and out of rocks eating the flowers. The more you eat, the longer you grow. But don't take a bite out of yourself.. Full instructions are included in the game which can be controlled by joystick or keyboard. The program is in two parts, each should be typed in separately. When the first is run it will automatically load and run the second part which should be saved on tape immediately after it.  By John Brown LISTING ONE 250 VDU28.13.23.27.22 260 VDU 23. 232.0.0, 66, 165. 24.60.90, 129. 23. 231,0,0,0, 64, 192, 36, 46.63.23. 224.60.1 26.255. 175. 86.60.20.40.23.225.60.126.255 .245.106.60.40, 20, 23. 226. 153.126, 189.126 .189.126,60, 24, 23. 227.24.60, 126. 189. 126. 189.126.153 270 VDU 23. 228. 24. 36.90.90.36.26.44.24 . 23. 229. 126. 126, 126,0, 231, 231, 231,0.23.2 30. 28. 122,251.249. 125. 121,63.28 280 ENVELOPE1. 3. 20.-20.8.5.5.5.0.0.0,1.110,: ENVELOPE2, 1.3.2.-2.6.6.6.127.0.0 .-2.127.0: ENVELOPE4.1,0,0,0,0,0,0,126,-1 .0.-5. 126.0 290 CHAIN\"\" | LISTING TWO 10 REM\"LOADER FOR MUNCHER 20 MODE7 30 PRINTTAB(0,0): CHR$141 CHR$132 CHR$15 7 CHR$ 129\" THE MAD MUNCHER\" 40 PRINTTAB(0, 1): CHR$ 141 CHR$132 CHR$15 7 CHR$135\" THE MAD MUNCHER\" 50 PRINT 60 PRINTCHR$ 128CHR$132 CHR$157 CHR$135\" (C) 1985 JAKL\" 70 VDU 28.4. 24.37.4 80 PRINT 90 PRINTCHR$134\"Can you control the m ad muncher\" 100 PRINTCHR$135\"weaving in and out th e rocks and\" 110 PRINTCHR$130\"eating the flowers th at grow in \" 120 PRINTCHR$132\"between.\" 130 PRINTCHR$133\"The more you eat the longer you\" 140 PRINTCHR$134\"grow and don't eat yo ursele or\" 150 PRINTCHR$135\"the wall.\" 160 PRINTCHR$129\"Watch out for the mut ant snail\" 170 PRINTCHR$130\"who turns the flowers into rocks\" 7180 PRINTCHR$ 131\"and don't eat him eit her.\" 190 PRINTCHR$132\"As 12 that wasn't eno ugh a \" 200 PRINTCHR$133\"mutant spider roams t he garden\" 210 PRINTCHR$134\"and turns the flowers into rocks\" 220 PRINTCHR$135\"like the snail he is also fatal.\" 230 PRINTCHR$132\"Use\": CHR$ 136:\"(Z x] u D_: /_down\" 240 PRINTCHR$135\" or\": CHR$136; \"JOYS TICK\" 10 *KEY10*FX4 MO.IM 20 30 REM\" AuthorJ. BROWN 40 REM\" Program (C) 1985 JAKL 50 REM\" Hi-score routine by 60 REM\" 70 REM\" HEPPYSOFT (C) 1985: 80 REM\" 90 100 *FX4,2 110 *FX9.7 120 *FX10.7 130 NM$=\"[[The Mad Muncher (C) 1985 JAK L control the muncher and eat the flow erst (The Mad Muncher (C) JAKL Control the muncher and eat the flowers\" 140 DIMSc (10), NAMES (10): RESTORE1200: FO RA=1T09: READAS: NAME$ (A)-A$: SC (A)=500-A*5 O: NEXT:SC(1)-500 150 MODE7: PROCDISPLAY: PROCTUNE1 160 DIM A(40).B(40) 170 MODE1 180 SC-0: MAX-500 190 LV-1: LF-4: L$-\"The Mad Muncher\" 200 A$-STRINGS (5. CHR$128) 210 CLS 220 VDU23.0.1.0.0.0.0.0.0.0 230 COLOUR2: COLOUR129: PRINTTAB(20-(LEN (L$)/2).30): L$: COLOUR128 240 PROCSCREEN 250 PROCFOOD (LV*3) 260 FORG-OTO80: VDU23.0.1.G.0.0.0.0.0.0 : NEXTG 270 IFLF<1 PROCGAMEOVER: VDU22.7: PROCSCO RE: CLS: PROCDISPLAY: PROCTUNEL: GOTO170 280 COLOUR 2: PRINTTAB 7.0):\" Score\": SC : \" Lives\": LF 290 VDU19.2.7:0; 300 VDU19.3.10:0; 310 FL=0 320 VDU23: 8202:0:0:0: 330 SNXX-37: SNYX=INT (RND ( 26 )+2): SNO%=0 340 SPX%=INT (RND ( 36 ) +1): SPY%= 3: SPOX=0 350 C$=CHR$130 360 FORHOTO 37: A (H)H+1:B(H)=2: NEXTH "


"370 T=0: SELENAS 380 D=3 390 XELENA$: Y=2: V=2 400 IF FL-1 THEN FL=0: GOTO290 410 IFLF<1 THEN270 420 IFADVAL(1) DIV64>900ORINKEY (-98) D=2 : C$=CHR$129 430 IFADVAL (1) DIV64<300ORINKEY(-67)D-1 : C$=CHR$128 440 IFADVAL(2) DIV64<300ORINKEY( -105 ) D3: C$=CHR$130 450 IFADVAL(2) DIV64>900ORINKEY( -73) D=4 : C$=CHR$131 460 IFD-1X-X+1 470 IFD-2X-X-1 480 IFD-3Y-Y+1 490 IFDY-Y-1 500 PROCLOC (X,Y) 510 COLOUR2: PRINTTAB(X,Y): C$: TAB(A(T). B(T)):\" 520 IFL-132SC-SC+10: COLOUR2: PRINTTAB ( 7 .0):\" Scorez\": SC;\" Lives\": LF:N-N-1: SOUN D1.1. N*10, 10:IF LEN (A$)<37 THENAS-A$+CHR $128 530 IFN=OPROCLEVEL: GOTO210 540 IFL<>32ANDL<>132 THEN PROCDEAD: GOTO2 70 550 IF SC-MAX THEN MAX-MAX+MAX: PROCEX TRA_GUY 560 T=T +1 570 S-S+1 580 IFT>-LENAST=0 590 IFS>=LENASS=0 600 A(S)-X:B(S)-Y 610 IFSNOX=0 AND INT(RND (40))-7 AND LV >1 THEN SNOX-1: SNXX-36: SNY%=INT(RND (26) 2): PROCLOC (SNXX, SNY%): SOUND2, 2, 100.5: IF L<>32 THEN SNOX-O 620 IFS POX-0 AND INT(RND (60))-7 AND LV >2 THEN SPOX-1:SPX%=INT (RND ( 36 ) +1): SPY%3: PROCLOC (SPX%. SPY%): SOUND2, 2.50.5:IF L< >32 THEN SPO%-0 630 IF SNOX=1 THEN PROCSNAIL ELSE IF S PO%= 0 THEN 400 640 IF SPOX-1 THEN PROCSPIDER ELSE GOT 0400 650 GOTO400 660 DEFPROCLOC(TV) 670 VDU 31. TV 680 AX=135 690 CUSR(&FFF4): C-C AND&FFFF: C-C DIV 8100: L=C 700 END PROC 710 DEFPROCSCREEN 720 COLOUR1 730 PRINTTAB(0,1); STRINGS (40. CHR$133): PRINTTAB(0, 29); STRING$ ( 40. CHR$133) 740 FORF-2 TO 28: PRINTTAB(0,F): CHR$133 : TAB (39.F): CHR$133: NEXTF 750 END PROC 760 DEFPROCFOOD (LEV) 770 FORFD=1 TOLEV 780 COLOUR5 790 PRINTTAB (RND (37) +1. RND (26)+2) :\" 800 NEXT FD 810 FORFD-1 TOLEV 820 COLOUR3 830 X1 (RND (37) +1): Y1 (RND ( 26 ) + 2) 840 PROCLOC (X1,Y1):IFL<>32GOTO830 850 PRINTTAB (X1,Y1 ) : CHR$132 860 NEXTFD 870 N-LEV 880 END PROC 890 DEFPROCSCORE 900 IFSCC-SC (9) ENDPROC 910 FORI -9 TO1STEP-1 920 IFSC>c() THENSC(I+1)-SC(I): NAME $ (I+1) = NAME$ (I): FIX-I 930 NEXT 940 se (FIX) -SC 950 PRINTTAB(4.2) CHR$132 CHR$141\"You ar e rated as number\":FIX 960 PRINTTAB(4.3) CHR$134 CHR$141\"You ar e rated as number\":FIX 970 PRINTTAB(8.7) \"Your score was \": SC 980 PRINTTAB(5,13) CHR$131 CHR$136\"Pleas e enter your name.\" 990 VDU31.7.15. 129. 157, 135. 31. 29.15.15 6.31, 11, 15:*FX15 1000 ! &DOO-&D10:?&DO2= 15:?&DO3-32:? &DO 4 = 127 1010 XX-0:Y%&D: AX=0: CALL&FFF1 1020 IF $&D10\"\" THEN NAMES (FIX) -\"MR. RE TURN\": END PROC 1030 NAMES (FIX) $&D10 1040 END PROC 1050 DEFPROCDISPLAY 1060 *FX15 1070 VDU23: 8202:0:0:0: 1080 PRINTCHR$ (141): CHR$130:\" AD MUNCHERS\" 1090 PRINTCHR$ (141): CHR$132: M AD MUNCHERS\" 1100 0-1: PO-1: CO=1 1110 FORT-3T019STEP 2 1120 PRINTTAB(8.T): CHR$ (131):0:\"\";sc (O): TAB(17.T);\"....\": NAMES (O) 1130 0-0+1: NEXTT 1140 PRINTTAB(8,23): CHR$136\"PRESS SPACE OR FIRE\" 1150 PRINTTAB(10.21): MID$ (NM$. PO, 17): PO = PO+.5: IFPO>=73THENPO=1 1160 PRINTTAB(8.3): CHR$ (128+CO): TAB(8.5 ); CHR$ (128+CO): TAB(8.7): CHR$ (128+CO): TAB (89): CHR$(128+CO): TAB(8.11): CHR$(128+CO ): TAB(8.13): CHR$ (128+CO): TAB(8, 15 ) : CHR$ 128 +CO); TAB(8.17) : CHR$ (128+CO): TAB (8.19) : CHR$ ( 128 +CO) 1170 CO=CO+.5: IFCO>=8THENCO=0 1180 PRINTTAB (10,0): CHR$ (128-CO): TAB (10 .1); CHR$ (128+CO+1) 1190 IF(ADVAL(O) AND3 ) = 10RINKEY(-99) END PROC ELSE 1150 1200 DATA JB, HEPPY, BUTTY, SMURF. JAKL, HEP PYSOFT, JAKL, HEPPYSOFT, JAKL 1210 DEF PROCDEAD 3 3 mad muncher continues p70 "


"c+vg/mad muncher/2 128) 1580 PROCTUNE1 1590 FORDE=0101500: NEXTDE 1600 IFLV-2 THENL$=\"the snail appears\" 1610 IFLV-3THENL$=\"The spiders lair\" 1620 IFLV-4 THENL$=\"the rocks attack\" 1630 IFLV=5 THENL$=\"Flower mania\" 1640 IFLV=6THENL$=\"Amazing!!\" 1650 IFLV=7THENL$=\"IMPOSSIBLE\" 1660 IFLV=8THENL$=\"Give up!!\" 1670 IFLV=9THENL$=\"You must be cheating 1220 FOR F=OTOLENA$-1 1230 PRINTTABA(F). B(F)):\" \": SOUNDO.15.4.2: FORDE=OTO50: NEXTDE: SOUNDO, 0.0.0:N EXTF 1240 IFL=133THENCOLOUR1: PRINTTAB (X,Y): C HR$133 ELSE PRINTTAB (X, Y);\"\" 1250 LF-LF-1 1260 IF LF>= 0 THEN COLOUR2: PRINTTAB 7.0 ):\" Score\": SC:\" Lives\": LF 1270 IFLENA$>=37 THEN A$-STRING$ (4. CHR$ 128) 1280 IF SNOX=1 THEN PRINTTAB (SNXX. SNYX) :\"\": SNO%=0 1290 IF SPOX-1 THEN PRINTTAB (SPX%. SPY%) :\"\": PRINTTAB (SPX%. SPY%-1):\" \": SPO%=0 1300 FORDENOTO200: NEXTDE 1310 END PROC 1320 DEFPROCTUNE1 1330 RESTORE1430: FORI-1109: READN%. D% 1340 SOUND&101.4, NX, D%: SOUND&102, 4, N% +1, D% 1350 NEXT 1360 END PROC 1370 DEFPROCTUNE 2 1380 RESTORE14 40: FORI=1T011: READN%, D% 1390 SOUND&101,4, N%. D%: SOUND & 102, 4, NX +1. DX 1400 NEXT 1410 FORDE-OT0500: NEXTDE 1420 END PROC 1430 DATA88.10, 100, 4.104.6, 116, 4, 124.6. 116.4.136.8, 132.6, 136, 10 1440 DATA4.8.4.4.12.4.16.4. 32,4, 16, 4, 12 ,4,4,6, 48.2.52,8, 4.10 1450 DEFPROCSNAIL 1460 SNX%=SNX%-1 1470 PROCLOC (SNX%. SNY%) 1480 IF L-132 THEN PRINTTAB (SNX%. SNY%): CHR$134: SNO%= 0: N-N-1: PRINTTAB (SNXX+1, SNY %):\" \":END PROC 1490 IF L=134 OR L=133 THEN SNO%=0: PRIN TTAB (SNX%+1, SNY%):\" \":END PROC 1500 IF L<>32 AND L<>136 AND L<>135 THE N PRINTTAB (SNX%+1, SNY%):\" \": PROCDEAD: FL1: END PROC 1510 PRINTTAB SNXX. SNY%) ; CHR$135:\"\" 1520 END PROC 1530 DEFPROCLEVEL 1540 LV=LV+1 1550 COLOUR1: PRINTTAB (15.13): \"LEVEL\":L 1680 IFLV=10THENL$=\"Wonder worm\" 1090 IFLV-11 THENL$=\"Super centipede\" 1700 IFLV=12THENL$=\"Mad millipede\" 1710 FORDE=0 T0300: NEXTDE: FORG=80TOOSTEP -1: VDU23.0,1.6.0.0.0.0.0.0: NEXTG 1720 END PROC 1730 DEFPROCSPIDER 1740 SPY%=SPY%+1 1750 PROCLOC(SPXX, SPY%) 1760 IF L-132 THEN PRINTTAB (SPX%, SPY%); CHR$134: SPO%=0:N-N-1: PRINTTAB (SPX%, SPY%1):\" \":ENDPROC 1770 IF L-134 OR L=133 THEN SPO%= 0: PRIN TTAB (SPX%, SPY%-1):\" \":END PROC 1780 IF L<>32 AND L<>136 AND L<>135 THE N PRINTTAB (SPX%, SPY%-1):\" \": PROCDEAD: FL1: END PROC 1.790 IF L<>32 AND L<>135 AND L<>136 THE N PRINTTAB (SPX%. SPY%-1):\" \":END PROC 1800 PRINTTAB (SPX%, SPY%-1):\" \": TAB (SPX% SPY%): CHR$136 1810 END PROC 1820 DEFPROCGAMEOVER 1830 VDU5 1840 GCOLO. 1: MOVE 480, 512: PRINT\"GAME OVE R\": GCOLO, 2: MOVE486518: PRINT\"GAME OVER\": GCOLO, 3: MOVE492,524: PRINT\"GAME OVER\" 1850 VDU 4 1860 PROCTUNE 2 1870 REPEATUNTILADVAL(-6)=15 1880 FORDENOTO1000: NEXTDE 1890 END PROC 1900 DEFPROCEXTRA_GUY 1910 SOUND1,4, 129, 2: SOUND1,4. 117. 2: SOUN D1.4,101, 6: SOUND1,0, 101, 1: SOUND1,4,101,2 : SOUND1,0, 101,1: SOUND1.4.101.2: SOUND1,4. 109.3: SOUND1, 4, 117, 2: SOUND1.4. 129.6: SOUN D1,0.129.1: SOUND1,4, 129, 2: SOUND1, 0, 129.1 SOUND1, 4.129.2 1920 LFELF+1 1930 COLOUR2: PRINTTAB (7.0):\" Score.\": SC : \" Lives\": LF 1940 END PROC 1560 COLOUR2: COLOUR129: PRINTTAB(10.14): \"PREPARE TO MUNCH!\": PRINTTAB (15.15): \"BON US-\":LEN (A$)*10: COLOUR128: SC-SC+LEN (A$)* 10 1570 IFLENA$>-37 THEN A$=STRING$ (4. CHR$ mad muncher ends "


"c+vg/games book/necromancer's realm/1 2 REALM : NEXT: FORA-1 TOB 100 PRINT\"FC[UP] (LEFT) (LEFT) BG\":: NEXT: PR INT\"L[YELLOW) [RVSOFF] [HOME]\"TAB(14) \"NOW CREATING\" PRINTTAB(9): 110 PRINT\" (DOWN) THE NECROMANCERS REALM: PRINTTAB(11) (DOWN (RVSON) NRVSOFF] CARL MULLER 1985 120 PRINTTAB( 15 ) [DOWN PLEASE WAIT FORA -33792 TOA+1023: READB: POKEA, B:NEXT 130 FORA-0T07: POKEV2+A, 16+A: POKEV+2*A. (6 0+32A) AND 255: POKEV.28A.1. 158. NEXT 140 POKEV+39, 4 POKEV+40.8: POKEV-41.3: POK EV-42.7: POKEV-43.5: POKEV+44,8 150 POKEV-45. 12: POKEV.46.8: POKEV +16. 128: POKEV-21, 255: POKEV+10, 212: POKEV+14,20 160 FORA-49195T051040: READB: POKEA, B: NEXT  POKEV+21,0 170 FORE-OTO232: READA, B, C, D: POKE36864+E. A: POKE37120+E. B: POKE37376+E, C 175 POKE37632 +E, D.NEXTOPEN1,0 180 REM*HOWZAT GOODWIN??? 190 GOSUB600 200 POKE648.4: PRINT\" (CLEAR)\": POKE 648. 128 : WE-O:TR-O: ME-3: POKE248.0:MK-O: AM-O: POKE NECROMANCER'S  Commodore 64K 10 Peraturan Explore 232 rooms collecting treasure and killing off nasties in the excellent Necromancer's Realm And here is a poem from Carl which should help you. An Amulet was split in twain. Here you see it yet again The Necromancer hid it well Be careful of his deadly spell. A map, you'll find, may come in handy Beware the Boomer, Wizard's dandy If a bird is troubling you Kill it with a bow of yew But be silent, stealth is needed. My advice is to be heeded. Transport, find, and return thence to the place you came from hence. Verse and prose come naturally When you kill, kill less than three You have three lives and various weapons can be found to help you. A long listing, but worth typing in. When typing in this listing, remember anything in brackets is a control key.  By Carl Muller 210 A1-A(RND(1)*8): A2-A(RND(1)*8): IFALDA 2 THEN 210 220 BR=26: WR-110: POKE3. 255: POKEV+21.4: R 16: GOSUB500 230 POKE56333.127: POKE788.33: POKE789.197 : POKE56333. 129 240 POKEV+11.158: POKEV 10. 172: POKE 1340. 35+RND (1)*5) 250 POKE1345.01 (RND(1)*6): POKE1346.01 (RN D(1)*5): DF 300 IFPEEK (247)<>RTHENR=PEEK( 247 ): GOSUB5 00 310 IF PEEK(2) AND 2)2 THEN700 320 IF (PEEK(2) AND32)-32 THENTR-TR+1: PRINT (GREEN) [HOME] [DOWN (DOWN) \"TAB(31) TR\" (LE PT1000\"GOSUB900 330 P-PEEK (V+30): IFPAND16THENA-PEEK(V2. ):IFA<>20 THENGOSUB1550 340 QW-QW-1: IFQW-50 THENPOKEV+32, 2: QW-O:G OSUB950: POKEV 32.0 350 I FAM-ANDR-16THENADO 360 IFWR-RAND ( PEEK (V-21 AND 16 )-OANDRND (1 ) <.1 THENGOSUB1500 370 YY-OHIFPANDA THENGOSUB 850:IFYY-1 THEN 7 00 380 IP(PEEK( 6 ) AND16) -DANDWE>OTHENGOSUB16 50 5 REM THE NECROMANCERS REALM (C) CARL MUL LER 1985 10 POKE55.255 POKE 56.127: CLR: V-53248:V233784: POKE648, 128: S=54272 20 PRINT\"[CYAN) (CLEAR) (DOWN) [DOWN) \"TAB(1 4) \"PLEASE WAIT\": POKE53280,0: POKE53281.0: POKE53272.4 30 POKE56576, 149: FORA-49152TO9194: READB : POKEA, B: NEXT: SYS49152: POKE53272.2 40 DATA120.169.0.133.254.133.252, 168, 169 . 208. 133. 255. 169. 136, 133, 253, 169.51 50 DATA133. 1.177.254.145.252, 200, 208, 249 . 230, 255.230. 253.165.255.201216 60 DATA 208. 239.169.55.133.1.88.96 70 FORA-3584OTOA+159: READB: POKEA. B: NEXT: PRINT (HOME) I DOWN (DOWN (DOWN (DOWN (DOW N] [DOWN] [DOWN)\" 80 FORB-1T015: A-8-ABS (B-8). PRINTTAB(20-2 #A)\"(RVSON\":FORC-1 TOA: PRINT\"COA\"; : NEX 390 IFMK=3ANDDF=OTHENDF=1: POKE2, PEEK(2)0 R1: GOSUB1950 399 GOTO300 400 POKE56333.127: POKE788. 49: POKE789. 234 : POKE56333. 129: PRINT\" (YELLOW) (CLEAR] [DOW N] [DOWN) (DOWN (DOWN \"TAB(15); 410 PRINT\" (8 M B NOU HAVE DONE IT!!!\": PRINTTAB(15)\"[CM) (CG): PRINT\"[DOWN YOU HAVE COLLECTED\": 420 PRINT\" BOTH PIECES OF THE\":PRINTTAB 15)\" (DOWN) (BN) [aM) MULET\" PRINTTAB( 15 ) [80] [8P]\" 430 POKEV+24.4: POKEV-21.0: FORA-1 TO2000:N EXT: PRINTTAB (8)\" (DOWN) (DOWN) (DOWN) (CYAN] (RVSON)\", 435 PRINT\" PRESS A KEY TO SEE THEM.\": POKE 198.0: WAIT 198.1: PRINT\" (YELLOW) (CLEAR) \":: POKEV +24.2 440 POKEV+21.3: POKEV2.30: POKEV2+1.31: POK EV+39.7 POKEV-0.7: POKEV.1.158 450 POKEV+3. 158: POKEV+16.0: FORA-83T012ST EP-1: POKEV. 172-A: POKEV+2, 172+A+NEXT 460 POKES. 20. 15: POKES 1. 8. POKES+ 3.15: POK ES+5. 10: POKES.6.0: POKES 4.0 470 POKES.4.65: FORA-1 TO 3000: NEXT: POKE 198 .0: POKE1024.0: POKE648.4: SYS1024: END 500 POKE56333.1271 POKE247. R: WAIT53265.12 8: POKE2, PEEK(2) AND1: SYS 50000 510 PRINT\" (YELLOW) WEAPON: (GREEN] \"WES (WE) PRINTTAB ( 30 ) INT PEEK (248)*1000/232)/10 90 PRINT: NEXT: PRINT\" (UP] [UP] [UP] [UP] [UP) [UP][UP] (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RVSON]M\": FORA-1 T08: PRINT\"DA (DOWN (LEFT) (LEFT) @E\": necromancer's realm continues p72 "


"c+vg/games book/necromancer's realm/2 520 PRINT\" (DOWN (YELLOW) MEN (GREEN) \"META B(30) \"(YELLOW) $(GREEN) \"TR\"[LEFT] 000 \"IF R=110THEN POKE 2. PEEK( 2 )OR1 530 PRINT DOWN) [YELLOW] MONSTERS\". PRINT\" DEAD: (GREEN) \"MKIFAMANDI THENPRINTTAB(35 \"CUP) (YELLOW) (\" 540 POKE163.64: POKEV.6, 172: POKEV.7.158:1 FAMAND2THENPRINTTAB(36) \"(UP) (YELLOW))\" 550 IFR-20RR-60RR-20ORR-210RR-230RR-310R R-32 THENGOSUB800 560 IFR-330RR-750RR-101ORR-1250RR-1390RR -18OORR-209THENGOSUB800 570 IFBR-RTHEN POKEV 2.172: POKEV.3. 158PO KEV-21, PEEK(V-21 ) OR2 580 IFWR-RTHEN POKEV, 1721 POKEV.1, 158POKE V+21. PEEK(V21 )OR1 585 IFA1-RTHEN POKEV. 21. PEEK(V.21 ) OR 641 PO KEV12, 172: POKEV+13, 158: POKEV.45.7 590 IFA2-RTHEN POKEV 21. PEEK(V.21 )OR128: P OKEV.10.172: POKEV 15.158: POKEV+45.7 595 POKE 164, 128: IPA1.RORA2-RTHEN POKEV2.6 .30: POKEV2+7.31 599 POKES+24.0: POKE53265.27: POKE56333.12 9: P-PEEK(V.30): RETURN 600 DIMWES (4). A(7). WS(6).01(5).92(5).0(3 ): FORA-OTOU READWES(A): NEXT 610 FORA-OT07: READA (A): NEXT: FORA-OTO6: RE ADWS (A)NEXT: FORA-OTOS: READQ1 (A), Q2 (A) 620 NEXT:O(O)-1.0(1)-0:0(21.310(3)-2 699 RETURN 700 X-V5: GOSUB1900: ME-ME-1 710 IFME>OTHENFORA-1 T01000: NEXT:GOTO220 720 POKE56333, 127: POKE788.49: POKE789.234 730 POKE 198.0: FORA-1 T01000: NEXT POKE 5633 3. 129: POKEV+21.0 740 PRINT(YELLOWCLEAR YOU HAVE KILLED (GREEN) \"MK\"(YELLOW) MONSTERS, COLLECTED (GR EEN (DOWN\" PRINT\"$\"TR\" (LEFT) 000 (YELLOW J\": 750 MA-INT(PEEK (208)*1000/232)/10: PRINT\" WORTH OF TREASURE, AND SEEN (GREEN) \"MA\" (LE FT)\" 760 H-(MATR+MK)*1000: PRINT\" (DOWN (YELLO W]OF THE MAZE. TOTAL SCORE (GREEN) HIFH SHITHEN790 770 PRINT\" (DOWN) (YELLOW) ENTER YOUR NAME: (GREEN) INPUT#1, AS: HI-H:HIS-LEFTS (A$. 1 790 PRINT: PRINTH (YELLOW) HISCORE GREEN \"HI\" (YELLOW) BY (GREEN) THIS: PRINT\" (CYAN) DOWN) PRESS ANY KEY TO PLAY AGAIN\" 799 POKE 198.01 WAIT198.11 GOTO200 800 POKEV+12.160: POKEV 13. 158. POKEV 14,1 84: POKEV+15. 158. POKEV-45.2: POKEV-46.2 810 POKEV2.6. 28POKEV2.7. 29: POKEV-21. PEE K(V+21 ) OR 192: POKEZ. PEEK( 2 )OR16: RETURN 850 IFPANDII THENYY-1.RETURN 855 IF(PAND16 ) AND PEEK(V2.)24THENYY-1 R ETURN 860 IF(PAND16 )ORIPAND192 ) AND PEEK (V2+6) 28AND PEEK(V2+7)-29 ) THENRETURN 870 IFPAND192 THEN920 880 IFNOT PAND 32THENRETURN 890 POKEV+21, PEEK(+21) AND223: WEWS PEEK (V2.5)-21): GOSUB900 899 PRINTH [HOME] (YELLOW) WEAPON: [OREEN\"W ES(WE) RETURN 900 POKES 1. 20: POKES.5.8: POKES6.0: POKES +24,15: POKES ,O POKES.4.33 910 POKE 2. PEEK ( 2 ) AND 223: RETURN 920 POKEV-21. PEEK(V+21) AND63: IFR-A1THENA M-AMOR1!A10 930 IFR-A2 THENAM-AMOR2: A2-0 940 POKES.24. 15. POKES.5.8POKES.6, O POKE S 4.0: POKES 1.65: POKES.3.15 945 FORA-1 T064 POKES. 1. ANEXT: POKES+4.0 POKES+24.0: RETURN 950 IFBR-RTHEN 965 955 A-INT(RND (1) *4): B=PEEK(36864+A+256-B R): IFBTHENBR960 IFBR-RTHEN POKEV+2. PEEK(O(A) +50152):P OKEV.3. PEEKO(A)+50157) 962 IFBRERTHEN POKEV+21, PEEK V+21 ) OR2: P-P EEK (V+30) 965 IFWR-ROR (PEEK( 2 ) AND1 )-OTHENRETURN 970 WRINT(RND (1)*232+1): IPWR<>RANDRND (1 ) >.2 THENRETURN 980 WRER: POKEV +21. PEEK(V+21 ) ORI: POKEV. 17 2: POKEV+1.158 1000 DATA192.48.12.3.0,0,0,0,0,0.0.0.192 48. 12.3 1010 DATAO.0.0.0.3.12.48.192.3.12, 48,192 .0.0.0.0 1020 DATA192, 176, 140, 131. 128. 128. 128. 128 1.1.1.1.193.49,13.3 1030 DATA128. 128. 128. 128.131.140.176,192 .3.13.49.193.1.1.1.1 1040 DATA3. 12. 48.192.192.48.12.3.192.48. 12.3.3.12.48.192 1050 DATA3. 13.49.193.193.49.13.3.192,176 140.131.131.1 40.176192 1060 DATA128. 128. 128. 128. 128. 128. 128. 128 2200 DATA15.128.0.95.0.0.122.0.0.48.0.0. .1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1 20.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0 1070 DATA60, 66.153.161.161.153.66.60.0.0 2210 DATAO,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0. 126,0 .0.0.0.0.0.0 .0.44,0,1,239, 128.6.44.96.8.44.16 1080 DATA7.3.3.15.63.124.251.251.252.255 2220 DATA8, 44, 16. 16, 44.8.32.444.32.44.4 255, 208, 255, 127. 63. 15 .63, 239, 252 1090 DATA224,192,192, 240, 124.30. 127. 127. 2230 DATA32, 44.4.0, 44.0.0.44.0.0.126.0.0 31,111,111.31. 127. 126.252.240 .0.0.0.0,0,0,0,0,0 1500 POKEV-21, PEEK(V.21 ) OR16: POKEV.8. PEE 2240 DATA3. 255. 192.7.170.224.7.0.96.7.36 K(V): POKEV-9. PEEK (V+1): POKEV-43.4 .224. 3. 195, 192.59.211.200.229.41.87 1510 POKE 164,4 POKES.24. 15. POKES.4.0: POK 2250 DATA 200,0.35.193.72, 147, 196, 16.71.1 ES+5,10: POKES+6.0: POKES +1.10 92.0.3.196, 16.71, 193.72.147.200,0.35 1520 POKEV244, 24 POKES.4.21: POKES.3.15: P 2260 DATA229.41.87.59.211.204.3.195.192. OKES 15.40: RETURN 7. 36.224.7.0.96.7.170.224. 3. 255. 192.0 1550 IFPAND THENRETURN 2270 DATAO, 129.0.0.195.0.0.165.0.0.153.0 1555 POKE164, 128 : POKEV-21. PEEK(V+21 ) AND 2 .0.90,0,0,60,0,0,29,0 39 2280 DATAO. 24.0.0.26.0.0.24.0.0.26.0.0.2 1560 IFPANDZANDA-22OR (A-21 AND ( PEEK(2) AN 4.0.0.24,0,0,29,0 D12) ) )<>OTHEN1600 2290 DATAO, 24.0.0, 24.0, 0, 24.0.0, 126.0.0. 1565 IF(PAND8) OTHENRETURN 60,0,0, 24.0.0 24.0.0 1570 IFA-25AND PEEK(V23)-19 THEN1610 2300 DATAO.60.0.0.102.0.0.223.0.0.191.0. 1580 IFA 22AND PEEK (V2+3)=20THEN1630 0.191.0.0.255.0 1590 IFA-26ANDPEEK (V2+3)=19THEN POKE163.2 2310 DATAO. 126.0.0.60.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0. 50 0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0 1599 RETURN 2320 DATAO,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 1600 BR-26: MK-MK+1:X-V+3: GOSUB 1900: PRINT .0.0.0.0.0.0 (HOME) DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN DOWN (RI 2330 DATAO,0,0,0,0,0.32.0.0.112.0.0.120. GHT RIGHT I FRIGHTIRIGHTIRIGHTGREEN 0,0,60,0,0,2,0,0.1.0.0.0 MK: RETURN 2340 DATA128.0.0.96.0.0.240.0.0.240.0.0. 1610 FORA-OTO: IFPEEK (A50892) <>RTHENNEX 104,0,0, 100,0,0. 98.0 T: RETURN 2350 DATAO. 97.0.0.96.128.0.240.64.0, 240. 1620 POKE1408 A 160MK-MK1:X-V7: GOSUBI 0,1,248.0, 3.252.0.0 900: PRINTH (HOME) DOWN (DOWN| DOWN (DOWN) 2360 DATAO.0.15,0,0,48.0.0.15.255.255.25 (DOWN) [RIGHT (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT 5.128,0,0,187.18.77.146.171.81 I GREEN\"MK: RETURN 2370 DATA147.58, 201, 146, 170,69.146.170,8 1630 FORA OTOB: IFPEEK (A50901)<>RTHENNEX 9. 128,0,0, 255.255.255.255.255.255 TRETURN 2380 DATA255.255.255.255.255.255.255.255 1640 POKE1472.A, 160MKMK11X-V7: GOSUB1 .255.255.255.255 900: PRINT\" (HOME) (DOWN) (DOWN) [DOWN) [DOWN) 2385 DATA 255.255.255.255.255.255.255.255 (DOWN) [RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT .255.255.255.255.0 (GREEN) \"MK: RETURN 2390 DATA240.0.0.12.0.0.240.0.0.255.255. 1650 POKEV+8. PEEK(V.): POKEV+9. PEEK(V.5) 255.0.0.1.137.157.217.85.73.21 POKEV+21, PEEK(+21) R16 2400 DATA149.137. 153.21.73.21.9.73.213.0 1660 POKEV+43.8: IFWE-1 THEN POKE164.6: POKE ,0.1.255.255.255.255.255.255 v2+1.26 2410 DATA 255.255.255.255.255.255.255.255 1670 IFWE-THEN POKE 160.6: POKEV2.4.25 . 255, 255, 255, 255 1680 IFWE-2 THEN POKE164, 2: POKEV24,21 2415 DATA255.255.255.255.255.255.255.255 1690 IFWEATHENPOKE 164.6: POKEV2.4.22: POK 255, 255, 255, 255,0 EV.43.12IFBR-RTHEN POKE 164,2 220 DATAO, 15.255.0.255.255.7.255.255. 31 1699 RETURN . 192,0, 62.0.0.60.0.0.120.0.0.120.60.120 1900 POKE56333.127: POKES+4.0: POKES.5.15: 2030 DATA240.64.132.240.64.72.240.64.50. POKES -6,0: POKES.24. 15: POKES 4.17 240, 64, 44.240.64, 76, 120, 60, 50 1910 FORAPEEK(X) TO2551 POKEX. A: POKES+1.A S+1.A 2440 DATA120.0.0.60.0.0.62.0.0.63.192.0. NEXT: POKES.24.0: POKES+4, ON PEEK(V-30) 7.255.255.0.255.255,0. 15.255.0 1920 POKE56333. 1291 X (X-V-1 /2: POKEV-21. 2450 DATA255.240.0.255.255.0.255.255, 220 PEEK(V+21 ) AND ( 255-2X): RETURN .0.3.248.0.0.124.0.0.60.0.0.30. 66.60 1950 PRINT\" (YELLOW) [HOME] (DOWN] [DOWN] [DO 2460 DATA30, 66, 66, 15.66, 64, 15. 36.64.15.3 WN (DOWN (DOWN) (DOWN) (DOWN) [DOWN] [DOWN] 6.71.15.20, 66, 15. 24.60.30 DOWN) (DOWN (DOWN) (DOWN (DOWN) (RIGHT) (RIG HT] [RIGHT) THE WIZARD HAS HEARD YOU! BEWA 2470 DATAO.0.30.0.0.60.0.0.124.0.3.248.2 RE! RETURN 55.255.224.255.255.0.255.200,00 2000 DATAD, 24.0.0.26.0.0.60.0.0. 126.01 3 000 DATA132.253.134.252.169,0.133.255.1 69.24. 56.229.252.229.253.133, 254 255. 128.0.153.0.0, 102,0,0.60.0 2010 DATAO. 24,0,1,255, 128, 3, 255, 192, 3, 60 3010 DATA6, 254,6, 254, 20, 101, 254,133, 254, . 192.3, 126. 192.7, 126, 224,0.126,0 6,254.38.255.6.254.38.255.6. 254 2020 DATAO, 255,0. 1. 255, 128. 3. 255,192,15. 3020 DATA38, 255, 169.18.24. 101.253.101.25 255.240.0.102,0, 1, 231, 128,0 3. 56.229.252.229.252.20. 101.254 2030 DATAO. 126.0.0.255.0.0.153.0.0.255.0 3030 DATA133.254.165.255.105.128.133.255 0,255.0.0, 231,0,0, 126.0.0, 60,0 . 96, 32.43.192.162.8 2040 DATA1, 255, 128. 3. 255. 192. 3. 189. 192.3 3040 DATA189. 126. 192.168.189.134.192.145 .189.192, 3, 189, 192.7.189.224.7.189.224 25, 202, 208, 244164.253. 166.252.06 2050 DATAO, 126,0,1,255, 128, 1.231.128.1.2 3050 DATAO. 1.2.3.40.41.42.43.130.131.128 31.128.3.231.192.7.231.224.0 129.128, 129, 130, 131 2060 DATAO, 60,0,0.66,0,0.129.0, 3.255. 1923060 DATA162.1. 160. 1. 32. 105. 192. 200. 192. .0, 90.0.0.36,0,0,24.0.0.04.0 9. 208, 248.232.229.9. 208. 201.96 2070 DATAO.239.0.1.181.128.1.185.128.1. 1 3070 DATA32.43.192.160,40, 169.132.145.25 89. 128, 1, 189, 128,0,60.0 4,160, 80, 169, 128, 145, 254, 200, 169, 133 2080 DATAO.60.0.0.36.0.0.36.0.0.36.0.0.3 3080 DATA145.254.96.32.43.192.160.43.169 6.0.0.36.0.1.231.128.0 . 135. 145, 254,160, 82,169.134.145.254 2090 DATAO.0.0.0.0.224.0.1.224.0.3. 224.0 3090 DATA 200, 169, 131, 145, 254, 96. 32, 143,1 .7.192.0.15.193.51.223.187 92.169,8,133, 251, 162.1. 160, 251, 234 2100 DATA223.224, 127, 51, 255, 251,0, 18.0. 0 3100 DATA32. 182. 192.160.1.166, 251.234.32 .36.0.1.100.0.0.149.0.0.30.0 , 161, 192, 198, 251, 208, 236, 76, 169, 193 2110 DATAO.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0 3110 DATA162.9.160.1. 32.43.192.165,250.5 ,0,0,0,0,0,0 6.233.240.176. 2. 198. 255. 133. 254 2120 DATAO.60.0.0.90.0.0.255.0.1.255.128 3120 DATA32,108,192.32.7.193.200.192.10. 1.231,128,1,231, 128,0, 231,0 208, 231.96 2130 DATAO. 102.0.0.36.0.0.36.0.0.36.0.0. 3130 DATA134.250.132.249.162.6.32.185.19 36.0.0.36.0.0.36.0.0.36.0.0.36.0 2, 165, 254, 24.105.40, 144, 2.230, 255 2140 DATAO. 39, 240, 63, 240, 8,111, 255, 252.9 3140 DATA133. 254.202.208.239.166.250. 164 6.0.3. 31.255.252.0 .249.96 2150 DATAO.0.28.0.0.110.0.0.191.0.1.127. 3150 DATA160.9. 162. 1. 32.43.192.165.254.5 0.2.254.0.5. 252.0, 11,248 6.233.240.176.2.198.255.133.254 2160 DATAO, 23, 224,0, 47,192.0, 159.0, 1.1203160 DATA32. 108. 192. 32.65.193.232.224.9. 0.11.224,0,29,128.0 208. 231.96 2170 DATA62.0.0.15.0.0.6.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0 3170 DATA134,250, 132, 249.162.6. 32. 164. 19 .0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0 2.165.254, 24, 105.40, 144.2, 230, 255 2180 DATAO.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.64. 3180 DATA133, 254, 202, 208, 239.166,250, 164 0.1.192.0.3. 128.0.15.0 249.96 2190 DATAO. 30,0,0.124.0.0.248.0.3.240.0. 3190 DATA162.9.160.1, 32.43.192.165.254.5 7.224.0.31. 192.0 6.233.240.176.2.198.255.133.254.162.7 "


"3200 DATA32, 164, 192.165.254.24. 105, 40, 143730 DATA189.0.147.240.4.133.207.132.4. 7 5160 DATA94.0.0.104.95.0.107.0.96.0.108. 4.2.230.255.133.254.202.208, 239.96 6.81.197 106.97.0.109.107.98.0.0, 108, 100,0,0.99 3210 DATA160.9.162.1. 32.43.192.165.254.5 3740 DATA165. 2.9.4.133.2.76.225. 194, 165. 5170 DATAO. 113. 112.0.0.114.0.111.111.117 6.233.240.176.2.198.255.133.254.162.7 2.9.8.133.2.76.17.195 . 114.0,112,118.0.113.0.119.116.0 3220 DATA32.185.192.165.254.20.105.40.14 3750 DATA165. 2.41.2.208. 3. 32.251. 195. 1655180 DATAO. 120.0.115.113.121.118.0.116.1 4.2.230, 255.133.25.202.208. 239.96 162.41.7.208.11.173.45. 208.73.8 22.0.117.115.125.120.0.116.126.0.119 3230 DATA32.233.192. 32. 35.193.32.93.193. 3760 DATA141.45. 208. 141.46, 208, 234, 234.2 5190 DATA117.0.122.0.118.0.123. 121.0.0.1 32, 131, 193.76.148.196 34. 76, 49,234 24, 122,0,0.125. 123. 119. 129. 126. 120 3280 DATA160.0.162.5. 32. 105. 192. 202. 32.1 3770 DATA 20.6. 31. 32. 2. 21.23.0.33.75.101. 5200 DATA120, 130, 127. 125.0.0.128. 126.0.0 05. 192. 32.185.192. 32. 164. 192.160.0 125. 139, 180, 209.0 .0, 127, 125, 131, 130,0,126,132.0,129 3250 DATA162.5. 32. 161. 192.160.0, 169, 137, 3780 DATA165.2.41.16.220.12. 165.6.41.1. 2 5210 DATA129.0, 132.0.130.0.0.131.0.0.134 125, 254.96 08. 36. 173.5. 208. 201. 158. 208. 29 . 133.0, 138, 135, 133.0, 139.0.134 3260 DATA162.0.160.5.32.105.192.136.32.1 3790 DATA173.4.208.56.233.152.201.48.176 5220 DATAO.141, 137,0,0,0,137, 136, 130, 143 05. 192. 32. 164. 192. 32, 185, 192, 162.0 .19.162, 17.202.189.65.197. 107. 207 .0.0, 135, 144, 140,0,0,0, 141, 139 3270 DATA160. 5. 32.182.192.160. 3. 169. 136. 3800 DATA208.248. 138.73.8. 170.189.65,197 5230 DATA136.145.142.140.0.0.151.141.138 145.254.96 .133.247.173.6.208.56.233.160. 201. 16 . 103,0,0,139, 144,0,0,141.0.146.0 3280 DATA162.9.160. 5. 32. 105.192.200, 32, 3810 DATA176.22. 173. 5. 208.56, 233, 150, 2015240 DATAD, 0, 146, 145,0. 151. 148.0.0.0.148 3. 192.165.254.56.233.240.176.2. 198. 255 .10176.12.162.16.189.214.197.197. 247 . 147.0, 153, 154.0.0, 155, 156,0 3290 DATA133, 254, 162,6. 32. 164, 192.160.39 3820 DATA240.6.202.208.246, 76,222, 198, 18 5250 DATA147.157.152.142,0,0.153.151.149 . 169.101.145.254.136, 169, 140, 145, 254 9.0.5, 201, 32. 208. 246, 169, 160, 157, 0,5 . 159,0, 152, 149, 160,0,0, 150, 160.0.0 3300 DATA165.254.24. 105.40.148.2, 230, 255 3830 DATA160.128.130. 148. 130, 200, 140, 1075260 DATA150, 160,0,0, 151,0.158,0,0,0,158 133.254, 202, 208, 228, 162. 3. 169.32 . 130, 200, 140, 108, 130, 200, 140, 147. 130 157, 153, 159,0,0, 155,0. 156.15 3310 DATA157. 207. 128, 202, 208, 250, 141, 170 3840 DATA173.192.219.141, 148, 218, 141, 1475270 DATAO,0,0,172,0, 176.0.173.0.175.0.0 . 128. 141.250, 128, 169, 134, 141, 150, 129 .218.101.107. 218. 141. 108.218 0,177.0.0.0.179.0.0.0, 180, 181.0 3320 DATA169. 132. 141, 194, 129.96 3850 DATA165. 2.9. 32. 133. 2. 96.55.112.116. 5280 DATAO, 182.183.0.0, 184, 169,0,0,0,0,1 3330 DATA160.9.162. 5. 32. 105. 192. 232. 32.4 121, 132, 133, 137, 144, 146, 148, 158, 162 6 8.0. 186,0,0,0.187.0.0, 161, 188,0,0 3,192, 165,254, 56,233.240.176.2. 198,255 3860 DATA167. 170. 203. 205. 32. 145, 195.32. 8 5290 DATA162. 189. 174,0. 162.190.0.173.163 3340 DATA133.254, 162.6. 32.185.192.160.45 8. 195. 162. 16.189.214, 197. 197. 247 . 191.176.0.0.0.177. 175. 164,0. 178. 176 . 169.101.145.254.136, 169, 140, 145.254 3870 DATA210.5.202.208.246, 240, 38. 189.0. 5300 DATAO.0.179.177.165.192.0.178.166.1 3350 DATA165.254.20.105.40, 141, 2, 230, 255 5. 201, 32, 208. 31, 160, 105.140.107.130 93.181.0.166.180.0.0.167.194.183.0 133. 250.202. 208. 228. 162. 3. 169.32 3880 DATA 200. 140. 147. 130, 200, 140.108. 1305310 DATA167.195.0.182.168.196.185.195.0 3360 DATA157. 228. 128, 202, 208, 250, 141, 189 200. 140. 148. 130, 169.7. 141. 148.218 .0.0.186.170.198.0.0.171.200.0.0 128, 101.13. 129.169. 133. 141. 173. 129 3890 DATA141, 147.218. 141. 107. 218. 141. 108 5320 DATAO.0.189. 172. 173.0.0.188. 174.0.1 3370 DATA169.135.141.213.129.96 .218. 173.64.5.197.247.208.18 91.0.175.0.0, 190, 179.0.193.0 3380 DATA166.207.189.0. 12.240. 3. 32.69.1 3900 DATA173.21. 208.9. 32.141.21.208. 169. 5330 DATA180.0.194.192.182.0.195.193.183 94.166.247.189.0.185.240.8. 32. 184,193 8.161.48. 208. 169.27.121.253.131.165.247 194,186,0,184.0.197.0.0.0.198.196 3390 DATA169.101.141.39.131. 166, 267. 189. 3910 DATA 201,100.208.18.173.21.208.9. 32. 5310 DATA186.0.199.197.0.0.200.198.187.0 0.146.220.8.32.215.193.169.140 141.21.208.169.12.181.44.208.169.22 . 201.199.0.0.0.200 340 DATA101.64.131. 166. 207. 189.0 167.24 3920 DATA141.253.131.173.65.5.197.247.20 5350 DATAD.211.0.210.0.212.213.0.0.215.0 0.3.32.246.193.162.7.189.217.194.168 8.18.173.21. 208.9. 32.141.21.208 .214.0.216.0.0.0.218.0.0.0.220.0.0 3420 DATA169. 141. 153. 105. 129.169.140. 153 3930 DATA169.8. 141,44,208, 169, 21, 141,2535360 DATAO. 221.209.0.0.0, 232. 208. 202.223 .142.129.202, 208, 239.96 . 131.173.66.5. 197. 207. 208. 18. 173. 21.208 .211.0.202.223.0.210.203.225.0.0 3830 DATAO, 10.80.120.160.200.240 3940 DATA9. 32. 181.21.208. 169.8. 141.44.20 5370 DATA203.225.214.0.204.226.215.213.2 3440 DATA160.0.132.251. 162.5.32 105. 1928 . 169.23. 11. 253. 131, 162.9 04. 227.0.214, 205, 228. 217.0 202, 32.105.192. 32.185.192.164.251.200 3950 DATA189.203.198, 197, 247, 208, 25. 189. 5380 DATAO.0.218. 216. 206.0.219.217.0.0.2 3050 DATA192. 10. 208. 235. 160.0.162.4.32.1 127. 5. 201, 32, 208, 18, 173.21, 208, 9,8 20. 218. 207. 229.0.219. 208.0.222.0 61,192.160.0, 162.5.32. 161. 192.169.101 3960 DATA141.21.208. 169.7. 141, 42, 208, 1695390 DATAO. 231.0.221.210.0.0.0.211.0.225 3460 DATA141, 39.131. 169, 140, 141,0,130,96 . 19. 141, 251, 131, 189.212.198.197.207 .0.212.0.213.224.214.0.0.0.215.0.228.0 . 162.0.160.5. 32. 105. 192. 136. 32, 105, 192 3970 DATA208.25.189.191.5.201. 32. 208. 18. 5400 DATA216.0.0.227.220.0.230.0.0.0.231 3470 DATA32. 164, 192, 232, 224, 10, 208, 239,1 173, 21, 208. 9.8.181.21.208.169.5 . 229, 222,0,0,230,0,0,0,209 62.0, 160,4. 32. 182. 192.160. 5.32, 182, 192 3980 DATA141.42. 208. 169.20, 141, 251, 131,2 20000 DATANONE, CATAPULT. CLUB, BOW, SWORD. 8 34 BO DATA169, 140, 141, 64, 131, 169, 101, 101, 02.208.189.96.000.000 9.111.143.156.161.171. 201. 223 231, 129.96, 22. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 99,000,000 3990 DATA14.62.70.72.79.232.000.000.000, 20010 DATA2,4.3.0.0.0.1.53.54.61.57.83.5 3490 DATAO00, 34, 40, 46, 140,000,000,000, 3 21.23. 122, 142, 154, 177.184,217.000 9.85, 86, 87, 82. 128.0 6.9.11 4000 DATA165. 163. 208, 23. 162.0.160.4. 32.1 65535 REM\" [141] [UP) (RVSON (WHITE) (C) CAR 3500 DATA169,0, 141, 17, 208, 76, 231, 197. 165 1. 199, 162, 2, 160, 4. 32. 11. 199 L MULLER 1985 .247.41.3.170.189.76.195.141.33.208 4010 DATA162.6.160, 4.32.11.199.230.163.1 3510 DATA141, 138.2.169.142.12.210.255.16 98.163.162.8. 164, 164.48. 3. 32. 11. 109 9.0. 141. 33. 208. 162. 10. 202.240.10 4020 DATA192.0. 208. 2. 230. 163.96 3520 DATA189.58.195.197207 208. 286.76.1 4030 DATA189. 1. 208. 217. 1. 208. 176. 2. 105. 2 5.197, 162.9. 202, 240, 10, 189, 67, 195 . 56.233.1. 157. 1. 208. 185.0. 208.56 3530 DATA197.247.208.246.26. 20.107.76.20 6040 DATA233.46.133. 169. 189.0. 208.56,233 3.192 .44.197.169.176.2.105.4.29.105.42 3540 DATA166.247.189.0. 4. 201. 32. 208. 2.23 4050 DATA157.0, 208, 201.0, 208.10.173.16.2 0.248.169.160.157.0.4.160.0.165.3 08.29.81.199.141.16.208.96. 201, 254 3550 DATA166.247.221.0. 106,208. 1.200.221 4060 DATA 208.9.173.16.208.61.82.199.101. .0.145.208.2.160.2.221..146,208, 2.160.3 16.208.96 3560 DATA221.0.167.208.2.160.4.185.231.3 4070 DATA1.254.2.253.4.251.8.207.16.239. 95. 151.4.208.185.236.195.141. 5. 208 32.223.64.191.128.127 3570 DATA169.0.141.16. 208. 169.6.181.21.2 5000 DATAO.0.0.0.0.7.2.0.0.0.0.1.0.9.0.8 .0.10.5.0.0.0.11.4.0.12.0.0 08.165.247.133.3.185.241.195.133.4 5010 DATA1.13.0.0.3.15.9.0.3.16.0.8.4.17 3580 DATA185.246.195.133.5.96 11.0.0.18.5. 10.6.19.0.0 3590 DATA172,234, 108.234.108.158.125.190 5020 DATA7.0.14.0.0.0.15.13.8.0.0.16.9.2 . 190. 125.64.64.64.0.128.68, 128.0.64.64 2.17.0, 10,0,0,16,11,0,19,0, 12.0,20.18 3600 DATA173.0, 220,133.6.41.1.208.13.165 5030 DATAO.0.0.19.0.24.0.0.16.26.0.0.0.2 .4.5.5.48.7.230.4.230. 5. 206. 5. 208 8.0.0.21.29. 25.0,0,0,26,24,22.0.27.25 3610 DATA165.6.41. 2. 208. 15. 165.4.2011 5040 DATAO.0.28. 26, 23. 30,0, 27. 24. 31.0.0. 165.5.240.7.198.4. 198.5.238.5.208 28.32,0,0,29,0,0,0, 30.0.0.0 3620 DATA165.6.41. 4. 208.20. 165. 5. 240, 16. 5050 DATAO.0.34.0.0.0.40.33.0, 41. 36.0.0. 165.4.201.128.280.10.230.6.198.5 42.0.35.0, 43.0.0.0.44.39.0.0.45.0, 38 3630 DATA206.4. 208, 206. 4. 208. 165.6.41.8. 5060 DATAO.0.34.46.35.47.0.0. 36, 48.0.0.3 208. 20. 165.4.20. 16. 165. 5. 201, 128 7.49.0.0.38.50,0,0.39.51.0.0 3640 DATA240.10, 230, 5, 198,4, 238,, 208, 23 5070 DATAO, 0, 47, 40, 41.0.48, 46, 42.0.49.47 8.4. 208. 173. 16. 208. 173. 16, 208 .43.0.50, 48, 44.0.51.49.45.0.0.50 3650 DATA172.4. 208. 208. 2.9.4. 192, 254, 208 5080 DATAO. 62.53.0.0.0.0, 52.0, 63.0.0.0.6 2,41.251. 141. 16. 208. 165. 2,41,4 4.0.0.0.65.57.0.0.0, 0.56.0.67.59.0 3660 DATA 20.9.165.4.56, 233.48. 201. 32, 17 5090 DATAO.0.0.58.0.69,61,0,0,0,0,60. 52, 6. 15. 165. 2.41.8. 210. 15. 165. 5. 56.233.48 71.0.0.54.73.64.0.55.74.0.63. 56.75.66.0 3670 DATA 201, 32, 14.6. 165.2.9. 2. 133. 2. 16 5100 DATAO.0.0.65.58.0.68.0.0.78.0.67.60 6.247.160.64.165.5.208.28.165.6.41.2 .0.70.0.0.80.0.69.62.0.72.0.0.0.73.71 3680 DATA208.18.165.4.56, 233.48. 201. 32. 1 5110 DATA63.0.0.72.60.0.75.0.65.0.76.78. 76.9.189.0.145.240.4.133.247.132.5 0.0.77.75.0.0.78.76.68.0.79.77 3690 DATA165. 5. 201, 128, 208.24. 165.6.1.1 5120 DATAO,0, 80, 78, 70,0,0.79.0.90.82.0.0 208.18.165.4.56, 233.48. 201. 32. 176.9 .0.0.81.0.93.0.92.0.94.85.0.0.0.95.82 3700 DATA189.0.144.240.4.133.247.132.5.1 5130 DATAO. 96.87.0.0.97.0.86.0.98.99...1 65.4.208.24. 165.6.41.2.208.18.165.5 00.0.0.81.0.91.0.0.102.0.90.83. 103. 93.0 3710 DATA56.233.48. 201.32,176.9.189.0.14 5140 DATAB3.10.0.92.82.105.95.0.0.106.8 6.240.4.133.227.132.4.165.4.201.128 5.94.86.107.0.0.87.108.0.0.88.109.0.0 3720 DATA208. 26. 165.6.41.1.208.18, 165. 5. 5150 DATA88.110.0.0.89.110.0.0.0.0.102.0 56.233.48. 201. 32.176.9 . 91.0.103.101, 92.0.0.102.93.0.105.0 NECROMANCERS REALM necromancer's realm end "


"c+vg/games book/drip drop/1  Spectrum | DRIP Don't be fooled by the apparent simplicity of Drip Drop. The game becomes progressively more difficult and addictive. The aim of the game is to control a robot to catch falling drops of water. Easy enough until one drop of water becomes two and then three. And, to complicate matters, each drip drops at varying speeds. The listing is in two parts. Type and save program one, then type in program two separately and save it on tape after the first. The listing includes graphic instructions which are underlined. Type any underlined character or digit in graphics mode (CAPS SHIFT + '9'). A digit may be preceded by 'sh. In this case hold down a shift key when typing it. Other underlined instructions are shown in brackets. Control keys are Q for left and P for right.  By Richard Taylor DROPS LISTING ONE 10 FOR K=USR \"9\" TO USR \"b\" +7 20 READ X: POKE k,x: NEXT k 30 DATA 60.219.255.129.189.165 .66.189 40 DATA 0,16.56.124, 124, 124, 12 4,56 50 LOAD \"\" LISTING TWO DROP 1 INK 7: PAPER O: BORDER O: C LS : PRINT \"HELLO\" 2 FOR X=1 TO 72 4 READ 2: BEEP.1, z: NEXT X: BEEP .1.0 5 REM data for tune. if get E. OUT OF DATA then check following numbers.if dont feel like typin & tune out then start at line 7 6 DATA 0, 2, 3.2,0,0,2,3,2,0, 3. 5.7.3.5.7.7.8.7.5.3,2,0,7,8, 7.5. 3,2,0,0,-5,0,0,1.-5,0,0,2,3.0,-5 ,1,0,0,-5,0,0,2,3.5.7.8.7,0,2,3. 5.7.8.7.7.5.3.7.5. 3.0.2.3.2.0.0, 2,3,2,0,0,0,-5.0.0, 1.-5 7 LET hi=0 8 REM introduction screen drip drop continues p76 "


"After 17 visits to the Pleasuredome, the novelty was wearing off. EUC. That's the problem with most computer games. However thrilling they are at first, eventually you master the tactics and the attraction begins to wane. You need a fresh challenge, but with games costing  plus, most of us can't afford to buy new titles every week. Renting your software from the Matrix Club provides the solution Our members enjoy a wide selection of games which includes the very latest titles. Life membership of the club costs only  and hire fees start from as little as 60p a game per week. Complete the form below or write for full details of our service without obligation, and very soon you'll be playing your favourite games at a fraction of the normal cost. Name: Other new title -WIZARD'S LAIR for Commodore 64, Amstrad and Spectrum bubble bus software 87 High Street, Tonbridge, Kent TN9 1RX Telephone: 0732 355962 Telex: 95151 MATRIX SOFTWARE System: Spectrum Commodore Post to: The Matrix Club, 271 Stansted Road, Bishops Storford Herts. CUT PRICE SOFTWARE ABC The Hallmark of Audited Circulation OUR OUR OUR SPECTRUM RRP PRICE COMMODORE RAP PRICE AMSTRAD RAP PRICE 14.95 11.00 Elite 14.95 11.00 Exploding Fist 9.95 7.45 Shadow of the Superman 3 35 1.45 Sain. 9.95 7.45 Unicorn 14.95 11.20 Spy vs Spy Il 9.95 7.45 Boulderdash Impossible Mission 7.95 5.90 Nextus 9.95 7.45 Dragontore 8.95 6.70 Scooby Doo 8.95 5.20 Winter Games 9.95 7.45 Scrabble 9.95 7.45 Starquake 5.90 Summer Games 1 9.95 7.45 Superman Monty on the Run 7,95 5.90 Monty on the Run 9.95 7.45 Frank Bruno Boxing 8.95 6.70 Rambo 7.95 5.90 All Ultimate 9.95 7.45 Sorcery + Marsport 9.95 7.45 AUS Gold 9.95 7.45 disk only) 13 95 10:20 Fairlight 9.95 7.45 Frank Bruno's 7.95 5.90. Beach-head 9.95 7.45 9.95 7.45 A Activision 9.99 7.50 Marsports 9.95 7.45 Superman 9.95 7.45 Amstrad Disks 12.95 10.00 Shadowline 11 9.95 7.45 ALU.S. Gold 14.95 11.20 Warlord 8.95 6.70 Alt US Gold 7.95 5.90 All Beyond 9.95 7.45 Raid over Moscow 9.95 7.45 All Ultimate 9.95 7.45 Shadowfire !! 9.95 7.45 All Ultimate 9.95 7.45 Daley's Supertest 6.95 5.20 Rambo 8.95 6.70 Devils Crown 9.99 7.50 Exploding Fist 8.95 6.70 Blue Max 2001 9.95 7.45 Trivia UK 8.95 6.70 Fighting Warrior 8.95 6.70 Daley's Suportest 7.95 5.90 Sorcery 8.95 5.00 Robin of the Wood 9.95 7.45 Quake Minus One 9.95 7.45 Transact 29.95 5.99 Sorderons Shadow 9.95 7.45 Summer G il disk 14.95 11.00 Invosat 29.95 5.99 Yie Ar Kung Fu 7.95 5.90 Starion 9.95 7.45 Codename Matil 8.95 6.70 Free game with every order over .00 P&P included. Overseas anders add 75p per tape. Make cheques payable to C.P.S. Visa Accessorders welcome by phone. CUT PRICE SOFTWARE, 4 Slacksbury Hatch, Harlow, Essex CM19 4ET Tel: (0279) 24433 (24 hr ansaphone) Your Guarantee Write a story Draw a picture Make a page Print a newspaper FLEET STREET CITY OF LONDON EC4 MIRROR OFT Mirrorsohilid. Ter:01-37728374645 Editor Mirrorsoft Ltd. Tel: 01-3774837/4645 Publication January 1986 "


"c+vg/games book/drip drop/2 9 POKE 23562.1 10 PAPER O: BORDER O: BRIGHT 1 CLS 15 LET lives=3 16 LET SC=0 20 FOR a=2 TO 6 30 PRINT INK &;AT 2.8; \"sh3sh3 sh3sh3sh3 sh7 sh3sh3sh3 sh56 sh5 5 sh5 S h5 5 sh5 5 sh5 5 sh, sh5 5 sh5 5 shish3sh2 sh5 shish3sh2 sh5 5 sh 5 sh sh shish3sh6 sh5 sh5 sh5 sh 5\" 40 PRINT INK a-1: AT 10.7; \"sh3 sh3 sh3sh3sh3 sh3sh3sh3 sh3s h3h3 sh5 6 sh5 5 sh5 5 sh5 5 sh5 5 sh5 5 sh5 5 sh5 5 sh5 5 shish3sh2 sh5 5 shis h3sh2 sh5 5 sh sh 5 sh5 5 sh5 shi sh3sh6 sh 5 sh5 shish3sh2sh5 sh5 44 BEEP.003, 13: BEEP .009. 15: BEEP.003.11: BEEP .009. 11: BEE P.003.15 50 PRINT INK 5: AT 9.7: \"B\": IN K 5; AT 9, 19:\"B\": INK 5: AT 8, 15;\" B\": INK 5:AT7. 24: \"B\" 55 BEEP.003.-5: BEEP.003.-7: BEEP.003.-1: BEEP .009.-4: BEE P.003.-1: BEEP .009, -4 60 PRINT INK 5: AT 17.6; \"B\"; I NK 5:AT 16, 14; \"B\": INK 5; AT 19.1 7:\"B\"; INK 5: AT 17, 21; \"B\" 75 PRINTINK a +1 :: AT 21.5: \"HI T THE S KEY TO START\": IF INKEY $ =\"s\" THEN GO TO 100 80 NEXT a: GO TO 20 100 GO TO 140 101 CLS : FOR A=0 TO 150: LET =INT (RND*30) : REM cavern graphics 116 PLOT INK 4: a. 170 119 DRAW INK 4:0,120 NEXT & 123 REM information table graph ics and gubbins! 125 FOR a=157 TO 160: PLOT INK 2; a, 0: DRAW INK 2:0, 170: NEXT a: FOR b=252 TO 255: PLOT INK 2 .: ,: DRAW INK 2:0.170: NEXT b: FOR a=157 TO 255: PLOT INK 2:a .0: DRAW INK 2:0, 3: PLOT INK 2 :a, 170: DRAW INK 2:0, -3: NEXT a 130 PRINT FLASH 1; INK 7: PAPE R1; AT 0,20:\"INFORMATION\": 131 PRINTINK 6: AT 3.21; \"PLAYE R \": INK 5; a$ 132 PRINT INK 4: AT 6,21; \"LIVES \"; INK 2:lives 133 PRINT INK 3: AT 9.21: \"SCORE \"; INK 2: SC 136 PRINTINK 3: AT 12, 21; \"BEST \"; INK 6; hi 137 GO TO 700 140 CLS : INPUT INK 4; \"YOUR IN ITALS PLEASE ?\": a $: LET C=LEN a $ : IF C>4 THEN BEEP 1.1: PRINT \" NOT MORE THAN (inv vid}(inv vid) 4{true vid) LETTERS MAX!\": PAUSE 105: GO TO 140 145 IF C 1 THEN BEEP.5.1: PRI NT AT 10,0; \"DON'T BE AWKWARD MY DEAR CHAP/CHAPESS!\": P AUSE 105: GO TO 140 150 GO TO 101 499 REM end of game program 600 REM actual game program. Pir st few subroutines make the move ment variables 700 LET 0=6: LET d=6: LET r=19: LET C=10 710 GO SUB 750 720 GO SUB 850 730 GO SUB 950 740 GO TO 1000 750 LET a=6: LET b=INT (RND*16) : LET fub 755 IF f = 0 THEN GO TO 750 760 RETURN 800 REM next few lines are impo rtant they decide wether you hav e scored anything or lost a life etc 840 IF sc>40 THEN GO SUB 9000 850 IF sc>20 AND d<19 THEN GO TO 7000 852 LET d=6: LET e=INT (RND*16) 855 IF = 0 THEN GO TO 852 860 RETURN 950 IF sc>40 AND O<19 THEN GO TO 9000 952 LET O=6: LET n=INT (RND*16) 955 IF n= 0 THEN GO TO 950 1005 IF a>=19 AND C=P THEN GO T O 6000 1010 IF a>=19 AND < THEN PRI NT AT a, f;\" \": PRINT AT d, e;\" \": PRINT AT on:\" \": GO TO 4000 3000 REM the next to lines shoul d be entered with the A and B in graphics mode 3010 INK 7: PRINTINK 6; AT ric; \"A\" 3020 PRINT INK 5; AT a, f;\"B\": AT a-1,f:\" \" 3024 IF Sc>40 THEN GO SUB 9000 drip drop continues p78 "


"ARCADE INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE This Great Game now available for COMMODORE 64 AMSTRAD and SPECTRUM 2.50 7.25 8888888 5.95 250 6.50 595 250 7.25 2.50 7.50 8.95 6.75 7.95 5.95 NO 5.25 SPECTRUM HIGHWAY ENCOUNTER 7.95 5.75 BMX TRIALS FRANKE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD 995 650 YIE AR KUNG FU DALEY'S SUPERTEST 6.95 5.50 INTERNATIONAL KARATE FRANK BRUNO 6.95 5.50 DYNAMITE DAN EXPLOOING FIST 9.95 SCOOBY 000 RAMBO 7.95 4,99 RAMBO 8.95 ACTION BIKER NEVER ENDING STORY 995 JASON GEM in pp 2.50 GEOFF CAPES STRONGMAN 8.95 NEVER ENDING STORY 9.95 STREETHAWK 7.95 GEOFF CAPES STRONGMAN 7.95 HUNTER PATROL YIE AR KUNG FU 7.95 SERIN 9.95 SCOOBY DOO 6.95 5.50 GOONIES 9.95 INTERNATIONAL KARATE 6.50 LAS VEGAS JACKPOT Inc pe HYPER SPORTS 7.95 5.75 SKY FOX FAIRLIGHT 9.95 7.25 NOW GAMES TERROMOLINOS 5.75 RUPERT BEAR STREET HAWK EXCALIBAR NIGHTSHADE 9.95 7.25 SPY HUNTER 9.95 THE GOONIES 7.25 TERRORMOLINOS 6.95 SUPERMAN DROPZONE NEXUS 9.95 BRIAN JACKS 8.95 INTERNATIONAL BASKETBALL AMSTRAD SPY HUNTER 7.95 5.75 CHILLER Inc ELITE 14.95 10.50 LOCOMOTION Inc D IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 9.95 7.25 NOTERAQUEROS Inc . FIGHTING WARRIOR 5.95 FINDERSKEEPERS Inc .p. DYNAMITE DAN SHION 9.95 EMPIRE STRIKES BACK 250 EXPLODING FIST 9.95 NOTERA QUARUS FRANK BRUNO BRIAN JACKS 7.95 5.95 CAAGONTAC 7.95 COMMODORE 64 BRIAN JACKS 8.95 SUMMER GAMES 9.95 INTERNATIONAL KARATE BEACH HEAD DYNAMITE DAN 8.95 INTER GAVES 725 SCOOBY DOO EIPLODING FIST RAMBO 8.96 DALEY'S SUPERTEST 7.95 GEOFF CAPES STRONG MAN RACING DESTRUCTION SET 14.95 10.75 INTERNATIONAL BASKETBALL 5.99 CIKKSTART 250 HYPERSPORTS 8.95 ACTION RRER RAID OVER MOSCOW 9.95 FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD YIE AR KUNG FU CODE NAME NATE ROCCO 8.95 HYPER SPORTS 8.95 5.90 VIEW TO A KILL 10.99 7.25 BRIAN JACKS ZORRO 995 C16 MONTY ON THE RUN 9.95 725 LAS VEGAS JACKPOT Inc . WHO DARES WINS 9.95 SPECTIPEDE Inc p.p. FRANK BRUNO 7.95 FORMULA 1 Inc D. PITSTOP 10.95 SQUIRM Inco AEKNITCH BMX RACERS Inc pp. SPY VS SPY 9.95 7.25 QUICKSHOT All prices include post and packaging. Overseas orders please add 1 per te Trade enquiries welcome. Send cheque. Po to: ARCADE INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE Unit 202, Shopping Hall, Murtle Road, East Ham, London E6 Telephone: 01-471 8900 99000000000 Csizards en Lair 2.50 upuri in 7.25 8.50  88888 7.95 s Software, s7 High Street, Tonbridge, Kent TND TRX, England Telephone: 0732 355962 Telest 95151 1 BYTE SPECTRUM PSI WARRIOR INTERNATIONAL KARATE WIZARD'S LAIR SABRE WULF WICHWAY ENCOUNTER FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD A VIEW TO A LL KNIGHTLORE NOW GAMES TERRORMOLINOS SKY FOK WARDRY CODE NAME MAT RACING DESTRUCTION SET FRANK BRUNO BOXING THEATRE EUROPE DONALD DUCK WHO DARES WINS RAM TURBO INTERFACE NGHTDADE ROBIN OF SHERWOOD WAY OF THE EXIST ROCKFORD'S ROT JUOGERNAUT Software Houses Opportunities in Japan We are looking for the top games manufacturers to convert their titles to the MSX computer. We want to import computer games Software finished products only for the Japanese users. We are looking for Importer/Wholesalers/ Dealers who are interested in importing stocks of MSX computer games made in Japan to the U.K. We're looking for Importer/Wholesalers/ Dealers who are interested in importing USED MSX COMPUTER machines made in Japan. KENNEDY APPROACH THAT'S THE SPIRIT AMSTRAD NT BASKETBALL INT, KARATE STARLAKE SHADOW OF UNICORN CODE NAME MAT SORCERY DUN DARACH DALEY THOMPSON DECATHLON EXPLODING FIST A VIEW TO A KILL WORLD SERIES BASEBALL EVERYONE'S A WALLY DRAGONTORC WIZARD'S LAIR THEATRE EUROPE DRAGONTORC CRITICAL MASS EUTE BEACH HEA  ROBIN OF THE WOOD SLAP SHOT TRIVIA SORCERY Disc) DEVILS CROWN MARSPORT BATTLE OF BRITAIN.. COMMODORE 64 QUICKSHOT NOW ONLY EN 50 ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P UNDERWURLDE................................... NICK FALDO FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOO..............5 WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST....................9 ELTE G. GOOCH TEST CRICKET DALEY T. SUPERTEST... ROOXFORD'S RIOT FRANK BRUNO ROGIN OF SHERWOOD NODES OF YESOO BATTLE OF BRITAIN THING ON A SPRING SHOYO BOEKI KAISHA LTD. HIGASHI BLDY, ROOM No. 15 6, 1-CHOME KAWARA-MACHI HIGASHI-KU OSAKA 541 JAPAN Tel: (010 81) 6-227 4260 Telex: J64117 SHOYO Goodbye ofers some of the most competitive prices for software mailable. If you don't we the the game you requirested please ring for the most up-to-date news on e s and back catalogue files on 01-404 4245 PLEASE NOTE OUR ORDER EXCEEDS 550 YOU GET ON FURTHER DISCOUNT SEND CHEQUEPO TO UNIT 10-11 IMPERIAL STUDIOS, IMPERIAL ROAD LONDON SWS (TEL: 01731 4807) "


"c+vg/games book/drip drop/3 3025 REM next line decides if yo u are to proceed to the next lev el of difficulty 3030 IF sc>20 THEN GO SUB 7000 3040 PRINT AT ric-1:\"\" 3050 PRINT AT r, C+1;\" \" 3120 IF INKEY$=\"9\" THEN BEEP.0 03..0009: LET C=C-1 3125 IF INKEY$=\"h\" OR INKEY$=\"H\" THEN POKE 23562,5: PRINT AT 21 .0;\" PRESS ANY KEY\": PAUSE O: PRI NT AT 21,0;\" \": POKE 23562,1 3130 IF INKEY $=\"p\" THEN BEEP.0 03..0009: LET CEC+1 3160 IF c>16 THEN LET C= 16 3170 IF <<1 THEN LET C=1 3173 REM next line decides if yo u have scored ten and if so it s ends you to the next line 3175 IF sc>=10 THEN GO TO 6100 3180 LET a=a+.5: GO TO 1000 3999 REM next few lines are the the lines in the program that m ake you loose a life 4000 IF lives<1 THEN GO TO 5000 4005 BEEP .1.-5 4010 LET lives=lives-1 4020 PRINT INK 2: AT 6, 21;\"LIVES \": INK 4:11ves 4100 GO TO 710 4120 GO TO 710 4999 REM end of game sedence 5000 CLS : FOR a=0 TO 10: PRINT AT a, a,\" GAME OVER \": a$;\" d-1.e:\" \" 7020 IF d>=19 AND Cue THEN GOT O 8000 7040 IF d >=19 AND C<>e THEN PRI NT AT d, e;\" \": PRINT AT a, f;\" \": PRINT AT o, n;\" \": GO TO 4000 7050 REM 7080+7100 DECIDE THAT I F YOU HAVE ENOUGH POINTS TO REWA RD YOU WITH AN EXTRA LIFE 7080 IF Sc=50 THEN LET SC=60: G O SUB 8700 7100 IF SC=100 THEN LET Sc=110: GO SUB 8700 7120 LET d=d+.3: RETURN 8000 LET SC=SC+2: PRINT AT 9.21; \"SCORE\"; INK 3;sc 8100 IF schi THEN LET hi=SC: P RINT INK 3: AT 12, 21; \"BEST\": IN K 6; hi 8120 GO TO 850 8700 FOR a=0 TO 19: PRINT INK 4 ; AT 21. a:\" BONUS LIFE!\": BEEP. 25.1: NEXT & 8710 PRINT AT 21,0;\" \";AT 21,0;\"P RESS ANY KEY\": PAUSE O 8715 PRINT AT 21,0;\" 5010 PAUSE 15: NEXT a 5020 FOR n=10 TO 29: BEEP.015,n : OUT 254, RND*7: NEXT n: GO TO 1 5999 REM score sequence 6000 LET SC=S C+2: PRINT AT 18, f: 8719 REM next few lines restore the sceeen back to normal after being messed around by the hiscore 8720 FOR Q=157 TO 255: PLOT INK 2;9.0: DRAW INK 2:0, 3: NEXT : FOR t=157 TO 160: FOR Y=252 TO 255: PLOT INK 2:7, 3: DRAW INK 2:0.4: PLOTINK 2: t.3: DRAW IN K 2:0.4: NEXT y: NEXT t: LET liv es=lives+1 8730 PRINT INK 2; AT 6.21; \"LIVES \"; INK 4;lives 8740 RETURN 9000 PRINT INK 5: AT o, n; \"B\"; AT 0-1, n;\" 9009 IF >=19 AND cn THEN PRIN TAT o, n;\" \": GO TO 9500 9010 IF >=19 AND c<>n THEN PRI NT AT o,n;\" \": PRINT AT a, f;\" \": PRINT AT d,e;\" \": GO TO 4000 9090 LET O=0+.3: RETURN 9500 LET SC=SC+2: PRINT AT 9, 21; \"SCORE\"; INK 5: SC 9510 IF Schi THEN LET hirsc: P RINT INK 3: AT 12, 21: \"BEST\": IN K 4:hi 9520 GO TO 950 9997 REM MATTHEW TAYLOR 1985 9998 REM... END OF PROGRAM... 9999 SAVE \"DRIPDROP\" LINE 1 6010 PRINT INK 7: AT 9. 21: \"SCORE W: INK 5: sc 6013 REM next line decides if th e hi-score has been beaten 6015 IF Schi THEN LET hirsc: P RINTINK 3: AT 12, 21; \"BEST\"; IN K5; hi 6020 GO TO 710 6105 IF sc>20 THEN LET a=a+.5: GO TO 1000 6110 LET a=&+.9: GO TO 1000 6999 REM in next line the print statement should be entered with the B in graphics mode 7000 PRINT INK 5; AT d, e;\"B\": AT drip drop end "


"MILES BETTER SOFTWARE BARGAIN SOFTWARE, Dept. CVG 12. Unit 1, 1 Esmond Road, London W4 1JG Phone orders welcome. Ring 01-995 2763 ELITE ? 7.95 8.95 14.95 221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffs WA11 2DD Tel: 05435 3577 SPECTRUM Cass Disk Inhotep....................... 7.95 N/A Hacker ...... . . ....50 N/A Rambo.. 6.50 NIA Shadow of the Unicorn, .95 N/A Fight Night....... ......95 N/A World Series Basketball....50 N/A Desert Fox....................95 Starquake..................... 6.50 N/A Fighting Warrior.... .....95 NA Impossible Mission..........50 NIA Starion. ... 7.95 N/A Fighting Warrior.........16.50 NIA Lord of the Rings............95 N/A Monty on the Run..........25.50 NIA Kennedy Approach........NIA .95 Elite............................ 10.95 N/A Mercenary ..... .......N/A .95 Sorden's Shadow............95 N/A All US Gold Disks.............N/A .95 Rambo............ ..... 15.95 NIA Robin of the Wood.........95 Mugsy's Revenge..........95 N/A ATARI Lord of the Rings.........11.95 N/A Rescue of Fractulas...[8.50 N/A of the Mask....... ......95 NIA Bail Blazer.. ............50 N/A Winter Sports..................95 N/A Chop Suey................17.95 N/A Theatre Europe................50 COMMODORE 64 Boulder Dash..................95 N/A Who Dares Wins II.........26.50 N/A Mercenary ....... .......... .95 N/A Mercenary .... ....... 17.95 Worm in Paradise..........50 NIA Kennedy Approach........E10.95 N/A Hacker... Hacker.......................NIA (12.95 Winter Games.............95 N/A Summer Games............N/A .95 Racing Destruction Set.... 8.50 N/A Ball Blazer .......NIA (12.95 Wizardry... .50 N/A Rescue of Fractulas.........NIA .95 Scarabaeus...... .50 N/A All U.S. Gold Disks............NIA E10.95 NIA SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 ARP STARQUAKE WINTER GAMES 7.45 14.95 11.20 SOLD A MILLION 745 SUPERMAN 9.95 7.45 SPY HUNTER 9.95 205 ASTRO CLONE 5.95 TAPPER 7.45 BOUNCES 9.95 745 UP 'N DOWN IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 7.95 5.00 BLUE MAX SCOOBY DOO 5.95 5.25 AZTEC CHALLENGE 9.957.45 FIGHTING WARRIOR 7.95 5.25 LITTLE COMP. PEOPLE ID) MONTY ON THE RUN 7.95 CRAZY COMETS TAU CETI 9.95 7.45 PARADROID 5.95 XOEL 5.90 ZOIDS 8.99 6.70 CRITICAL MASS 6.70 YIE AR KUNG FU 8.95 SHADOW OF THE UNICORN KENNEDY APPROACH 995 7.45 MONOPOLY 7.45 WHO DARES WINS ! 7.95 5.95 ROBIN OF THE WOOD 9.95 7.45 RAMBO WINTER SPORTS 745 SHOW JUMPER 5.95 BEACH HEAD 7.95 5.95 FIGHT NIGHT 7.46 RAID OVER MOSCOW 9.95 7.45 MONTY ON THE RUN 745 FLAK 9.95 CRITICAL MASS 6.70 9.95 7.45 SCOOBY DOO HUNCHBACK 9.95 7.45 PARAS ROCCO AAARGH! CONDOR FAIRLIGHT 9.95 JOHNNY REB NIGHTSHADES EGBERT 42.00 2.99 GAMES DESIGNER 19.95 3.99 SKULL each DOOMSDARK REVENGE 9.99 FABULOUS WANDA VALHALLA 32.850 2.99 SPY VS SPY 799 or PSYTRON VALHALLA VU CALC 6.99 ALIEN VU 30 27.85 or 2.99 PINBALL WIZARD 22.00 or 3.99 VU FILE BUGABOO SYSTEMS 15000 9.95 3.99 PSI WARRIOR SNOOKER PSYTRON DARTS MOON CRESTA 6.95 2.99 SOCCER 799 PILOT 64 6.99 OLYMPICS 40.00 or 2.99 GALAXY 20.00 2.99 GOLF RENAISSANCE DERBY DAY SELECT 1 12 TITLES 12.99 4.99 AMSTRAD COMBAT LYNX CHOPPER SQUAD MEGA HITS (10 TITLES) 19.95 FREE GAME 3.99 each QUICKSHOT 12.95 5.95 SNOOKER NOW GAMES 8.95 FREE GAMES QUAKE MINUS 1 7.45 GRAND PRIX HACKER 7.95 5.95 +FREE GAME ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P. OVERSEAS ORDERS PLEASE ADD 1 PER TAPE SEND S.A.E. FOR FULL LIST: PLEASE STATE MACHINE NIA 7.99 each 47.95 NIA Access/Visa welcome. Please telephone for software availability and software lists for 64, Atari and Spectrum. Add .00 for overseas orders. * Phone for new range of music CDs at discount prices.  Phone for all your Christmas software New Releases every week. 15.00 399 each 6 MIDGATE, PETERBOROUGH CAMBS PE1 ITN Tel: (0733] 49696 LOGIC SALES LTD SPECTRUM SOFTWARE LIST PACK 12. TASWORD TWO, TINY TOUCH 'N' GO. SCRABBLE, RETURN OF THE JEDI, VU 3D. CHESS .....45 PACK 14 TIME TUNNELS, FIVE DICE, PSI GAMES, MOTHERSHIP, SPACEWRECK, COSMIC DEBRIS .95 PACK 15. JIGSAW. DIMENSION DESTRUCTORS REFLECTIONS, SPECTRUM CHESS, 3D QUADRACUBE, ROAD RACERS ..95 PACK 16. COSMIC CRUISER, BC BILL, PEDRO ZZOOM ZIP ZAP. ALCHEMIST .95 ANDROID ONE ..95 ANDROID TWO... .C1.95 T.LL... ..95 CYCLONE [2.95 KENTILLA...... . .95 BRAXX BLUFF ........ .95 JASPER......... C1.95 STOP THE EXPRESS .[2.45 RUNES OF ZENDOS ..45 CONFUZION ... .45 PSYTRON....... [2.45 DOOMDARK'S REVENGE .64.95 EUREKA....... .95 SELECT 1 (12 TITLES) .95 AMERICAN FOOTBALL .. [4.95 THE BULGE ............. ...50 MERLOCK THE MEDE ......... 5.95 CODENAME MAT............... ..95 DERBY DAY.... ...50 Plus any title you want. Just knock [2.00 off the R.R.P. and send us the order. SPIRIT OF THE STONES.... ..95 PERCY POTTY PIGEON [1.95 EUREKA . .50 SPY VS SPY... .95 VALHALLA ..95 EASY SCRIPT......... 19.95 SIMONS BASIC .95 SKYFOX (CASS). ...75 SKYFOX (DISC) .75 DATEX MOUSE... ..[70.95 CURRAH SPEECH.. .95 INTRO TO BASIC PT. 1.......... .95 SELECT 1 (12 GAMES TITLES).. 3.95 PILOT (COMM LANGUAGE DISC)....... ....95 LOGO ICOMM LANGUAGE DISC)............... .95 PINBALL CONST. SET (ARIOLA DISC)..............75 MUSIC CONST. SET (ARIOLA DISC)...............75 RACING DESTRUCTION SET (ARIOLA DISC).....75 SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD (ARIOLA DISC)...........75 MAIL ORDER MONSTERS (ARIOLA DISCI........ .75 THE BULGE . ...... 6.50 QUO VADIS... 3.25 PACK 19. DOOMDARKS REVENGE, PSYTRON VALHALLA... .... (8.95 PACK 20. LOTHLORIEN TITLES, INC. DREADNOUGHTS, PANZER ATTACK, RED BARON, PARAS \"\" HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH4 C5 85 PACK 21. LOTHORIEN ACTION GAMES, INC. BILLY BONG, TWO GUN TURTLE, MICROMOUSE, BEETLEMANIA, BEDLAM BLASTER, GRID PATROL.. .95 Phone for quote on any item not listed PACK 2. SET OF FIVE SINCLAIR LEARN TO READ SERIES....... ...15.95 PACK 22. SPORTS PACK, INC. SNOOKER, ON THE OCHE (DARTS), OLYMPICS, ST ANDREWS, GOLF DERBY DAY, WORLD CUP FOOTBALL...............95 PACK A. PSYTRON BEYONDI, PSI-WARRIOR BEYOND) ..95 or .95 each PACK B. AZTEC. ANKH, MR ROBOT........... .95 or .25 each PACK 3. VU CALC, VU FILE, VU 3D ................95 PACK 5. ALPHABET GAMES, SPEECH MARK CASTLE SPELLEROUS, THE APOSTROPHE, CAPITAL LETTERS, EARLY PUNCTUATION....... .95 PACK 7. SMALL BUSINESS ACCOUNTS COLLECTORS PACK, CLUB RECORD CONTROLLER..... ...25.95 PACK 8. MAGNETS, GLIDER, FLIPPIT, CARGO CHESS TUTOR......... PERIPHERALS DK TRONICS KEYBOARDS .95 SAGA EMPORER KEYBOARDS... 39.95 WICO TRACK BALL JOYSTICKS .....................95 QUICKSHOT II JOYSTICKS ...95 SINGLE PORT INTERFACES ..95 ON/OFF SWITCHES........ SEIKOSHA GP50, INC. SPECTRUM INT............00 .........95 PACK C. ANY 10 FOR .95 'O' LEVEL GERMAN. 'O' LEVEL FRENCH, 'O' LEVEL COMP. STUDIES, GEOGRAPHY, HISTORY, PATRICK MOORES ASTRONOMY, ROBERT CARRIER'S MENU PLANNER, ASK THE FAMILY, HUMPTY DUMPTY, GET READY TO READ, FACEMAKER, BBC MASTERMIND. MATCHMAKER, KNOW YOUR 1.Q., PATHFINDER SPIRATES AND SNOWMEN, LET'S COUNT, WORDS WORDS WORDS, NUMBER PUZZLER, DEPTH CHARGE PACK D. PARAS, JOHNNY REB, SKULL, EGBERT. CONDOR, FABULOUS WANDS ..... .....(5.95 Add .50 for p&p or .50 each with 250 p&p. COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE LIST FIREQUEST WIZARD OF WAR........ BROAD STREET AMERICAN FOOTBALL .... MUSIC MAKER KEYBOARD PACK 9. SPACE RAIDERS, TRAXX, PLANETOIDS, HUNGRY HORACE, HORACE AND THE SPIDERS, SPELLBOUND ..06.95 PACK 11. INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS THE DUNGEON MASTER, HALL OF THINGS CATERPILLAR, SPACE RAIDERS, SPECTRUM SAFARI...............................95 .C3.25 ..C3.50 .64.95 ...95 .[13.95 "


"c+vg/truckie/1 200 POKE 36869.255+ POKE36870.8 210 PRINT (CLEAR WHITE 220 PRINT\" PURPLE (HOME).. TRUCKTE 225 PRINT\" (DOWN) [RED) [RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGH TI (RIGHT (RIGHT) [RIGHT) (RIGHT) +++ 230 PRINT\" (YELLOW) SLTRN 235 PRINT\" (RED) (RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RIG HT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT)...... 240 PRINT\" (WHITE) (DOWN) OX[ #ON XRL-20 3 250 PRINT(YELLOW) (DOWN (DOWN] [DOWN) > CYANI VXWXXO 270 PRINT\" (PURPLE) (DOWN) [DOWN (DOWN (DOW N] [DOWN) --280 FORV-1 TO8000: NEXTV 290 PRINT\" CLEAR\" 300 PRINT\" (PURPLE (HOME).  VIC 20 3.5K 310 PRINT\"(YELLOW)RW #QR! NW#N[#JRWRWPC DOWN) PJVN (X3 LXW (XUJ (DOWN) UX #JANUURWP MXRW 320 PRINT\"[DOWN) #QN !LINNW/\" 330 PRINT\" (DOWN) [RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RI GMT] [RIGHTSIN ON TN(* 335 PRINT\" (DOWN (WHITE) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RI GHT (RIGHT) (RIGHT (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) NEW 340 PRINT (BLUE) (DOWN (RIGHT RIGHTIRIG HT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [R IGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHTI) HITE)) (BLUE)\"_< (WHITE) L (BLUE) 345 PRINT\" (DOWN) (WHITE) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RI OHT] [RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) RIGHT) PYJLN 360 PRINT\" (PURPLE) (DOWN) ---In Truckie you travel down the screen avoiding pillarboxes, lamposts and the edge of the road by using the key Z for left and C for right. Use the Space Bar to pause the game and Return to quit. When you reach a score of 2,500 darkness falls and it won't get light again until 4,500. The listing is in two parts, type and save program one, then type and save program two separately. Any words inside square brackets eg (HOME) — represent control keys and will be shown on the screen as a graphics symbol. Some parts of the program look rather odd for example in program one lines 230,240, etc. These are correct and should be typed in as shown in the listing. Remember words immediately enclosed in matching square bracket represent control keys.  By Andrew Philpott 370 FORV-1TO8000: NEXTV 380 PRINT\"CLEAR\" 390 PRINT\" (HOME)......................\" 400 PRINT DOWN (YELLOW (RIGHT] [RIGHT) (R IGHT) (RIGHT TNI LXVVJWM!.\" 10 PRINT WHITE (DOWN (DOWN (DOWN RIGH T) (NSW (YELLOW) (WHITE) ZSR# PJVN.\" 420 PRINT\"DOWN] (RIGHT)) (YELLOW). WHIT E) VXXN! UX[[ UNO\" 430 PRINT DOWN (RIGHTL (YELLOW) WHIT EJ VXXN! UX[[( [RPO\" 440 PRINT\" (RIGHT)!YJLN (YELLOW) + (WHITE) YJSTNI PJVN. 460 PRINT\" PURPLE DOWN] [DOWN) [DOWN (DOW 470 FORV-1 TO8000: NEXTV 475 POKE 36869.240 480 POKE198.3: POKE632.147: POKE633.131 LISTING TWO LISTING ONE 5 POKE36869.255 10 POKED. 15 20 SCO: HI-5000:HIS-\"XRL20\" 30 SC-02-7734:5-7756: T=7:C-38454 M-3847 6: W-36877:Q-36876: D-36878:6-36879: POKED. 5 POKES 2.28: POKE 56.28 10 PRINT\" (CLEAR) (DOWN) (DOWN DOWN) (RIGHT BRIGHT RIGHT DEFINING GRAPHICS 20 PRINT DOWN) DOWN) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGH T] [RIGHT] [RIGHT) PLEASE WAIT...\" 30 FORI-7168 TO7671 35 READA O POKEI.A 45 PRINT\"[HOME] (RED) [DOWN) [DOWN) [DOWD OWN] [ DOWN) [DOWN) [DOWN (DOWN (DOWN) [RIGHT (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT (RIGHT RIG HT\" 60 GOTO200 100 DATA30.26.2.2.2.2.7.7 101 DATA56.124.68, 124, 120.116, 124, 12 102 DATA254, 198, 84,210,214, 84, 84.86 103 DATA254,198, 84, 214, 214, 84, 84, 84 104 DATA254.108.84, 210, 214,84,80,80 105 DATA129, 161, 161, 169, 165, 191, 133.137 106 DATABA. 68, 120.56. 120, 68, 68.56 107 DATA84.68, 124.56.124, 68, 68. 56 108 DATA88.68. 124. 56. 120, 68, 68.56 109 DATA129.133.133.149.165.253.161.145 110 DATA252.196.196.252.196.196.196.196 111 DATA252 19 19.252.252.196.194.252 112 DATA 252. 196. 192.192.192.192, 196, 252 113 DATA250.98.98.98.98.95.98.254 114 DATA252.196.192.192.208.192.196.252 115 DATA252.192.192.248.192.192.192.192 116 DATA252.196.192.192.192.206. 196.252 117 DATA 196. 196. 196.252.196.196.196.196 118 DATA62.22.22.24.24.24.24.62 119 DATA126. 24, 24, 24, 24, 24.152.240 120 DATA196.200.208, 223, 224, 208. 200. 196 121 DATA192.192.192.192.192.192.196,252 122 DATA196.236.212.196.196.196.196.196 123 DATA98. 110, 114, 106, 106 102. 102.98 126 DATA252.196.196.196.196.196.196.252 125 DATA252.196.196.252.192.192.192.192 126 DATA 252.196.196.196.196.204,254,1 127 DATA252.196.196.252.224. 208. 200, 196 128 DATAO.16.16.16.84.56.16.0 129 DATA16. 56.88.16.16.16.0.16 130 DATAO. 32.64.253.68.32.0.0 131 DATA16. 56.68, 199.68.56. 16. 16 132 DATAO.0.0.0.0.0.0.0 133 DATA126. 96.96.126.2.2.66.126 134 DATAO,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 135 DATA126. 24. 24. 24. 24. 24. 24. 20 136 DATA196.196.196.196.196, 196, 196.252 137 DATA194.194.190, 100, 100, 100, 56, 56 138 DATA193. 193. 193.98. 106. 106.52.52 139 DATA190.100.100, 56, 56.100, 100, 194 140 DATA66, 66. 36 36 20. 20. 20.24 101 DATA126.70.12.24.48. 96, 66, 126 142 DATAO, 24, 24.0, 0, 20, 24.0 143 DATAO.0.0, 126. 126.0.0.0 144 DATA146, 106.146, 146,210.186.146.130 145 DATA130.146.186, 214, 146, 146, 146, 146 146 DATA20, 24, 24, 24, 28,0,20,20 147 DATAO.0.0.0.0.0.24.24 148 DATA126.98.98.98.98.98.126.126 149 DATA120.88. 24. 24. 25. 24. 24.126 150 DATA124.68.4.4. 120.96.96.120 151 DATA126, 66, 2. 30. 30. 2.66, 126 152 DATA, 12. 28.4.76, 255, 12.12 153 DATA124.100.96.124.4.4.68. 124 154 DATA 252. 196. 192.192.252.196.196.252 155 DATA126.70.6.6.6.6.6.6 156 DATA126.98.98.98. 126.08.08. 126 157 DATA127. 67. 67. 127.3.3.67. 127 158 DATA 56. 58. 20. 56.80.184.40.40 159 DATA56, 56. 16. 56.84,186.40.40 160 DATAO, 8.4.126.6.8.0.0 161 DATAO.255.255.0.0.255.255.0 162 DATA126.129.189.161.161.189.129.126 31 A-36869 32 POKEG.8 35 PRINT\" (CLEAR) (YELLOW) [DOWN] [DOWN) » VXXXô \"\" 36 FORJ-1 TOLOCO: NEXTJ 100 POKED. 15: POKEG, 25: PRINT\" CLEAR)\". FOR R-128 TO190: POKEQ.R 101 PORK-I TO25: NEXTK 102 NEXTR POKER.O 103 FORR-195T0128STEP-1: POKEQ.R 104 PORK-1 TO 25 NEXTK 105 NEXTR 110 FORU-OTOO 125 SC-SC-10: IFSC-220THEN PRINT\" (HOME) (BL ACK) (DOWN (DOWN) [DOWN (DOWN) [DOWN (DOWN) [DOWN) (DOWN (DOWN) (DOWN) (DOWN) (DOWN) (DOW N) (DOWN) (DOWN] [DOWN) [DOWN (DOWN] (DOWN) [D OWN) [DOWN (DOWN) PX 130T-T 135 POKEQ. 1 36 140 IFSC-2500ORSC-1000OTHEN POKEG, 8 145 IFSC-400OORSC-13000THEN POKEG. 25 106 TESC.SOOTHENGOTO700 150 IFT-OTHENT160 IFT-BTHENT? 170 PRINTTABIT)\"(RED)E(RIGHT (RIGHT) (RIG HT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHTI\" 180 POKEZEX-22.32: POKEZX, 32 185 POKES.-22. 32POKES.. 32 200 IFPEEK(197) = 33THENX-X-1.3-3-1 POKEZ. X. 3: POKES.3.617-1: POKED. 15 204 IFPEEK (197) 15 THEN 1000 208 TEPEEK (197)32 THEN POKE198.01 WAIT198. 1. POKE198.0 truckie continues p82  "


"SEE MICRONET 800 IN ACTION At selected Boots, Laskys, John Lewis & your local computer store AVON Dorchester. The Paper Shop Tunbridge Wells. Modata Nottingham Boots, 11-19 Victoria Bath Boots, 1 Marchants Passage, Kings Road Tel 0305 64564. Computer Centre, 28-30 St. Johns Centre. Tek 0602 470676. Southgate. Tet 0225 64402 Poole. Lansdowne Computer Road Tel: 0892 41555. Nottingham. Testar, 280 Huntingdon Bristol Boots, 59 Broadmead. Centre. 14 Amdale Centre LANCASHIRE Street. Tet 0602 505585. Tel: 0272 293631. Tel 0202 670901 Blackpool Boots, 28-38 Bank Hey Worksop. Computer Graphix Weston Super Mare. Peter ESSEX St & Victoria St Tel: 0253 22276. 32 Bridge Street. Tel 0909 472248. Castell Ltd, 28 Orchard Street Basildon. Basildon Software Blackpool Blackpool Computer NORTHAMPTONSHIRE Tel: 0934 24778. Centre 78-80 Liberty Shopping Store, 179 Church Street Kettering Boots, 35 Gold BEDFORDSHIRE Hall, East Square. Tet 0268 27922 Tel 0253 20239. Street. Tel 0536 $14675. Redford Boots The Hamur Centre Braintree. Mirage Micros Bolton. Computer World UK Northampton Boots 9 The Harpur Street Tel: 0234 56231. 24 Bank Street. TeL: 0376 48321 208 Chorley Old Road Parade Te: 0604 22573 Bedford. Software Centre, Chelmsford. Maxton Hayman, Tel: 0204 494304 NORTHUMBERLAND 5 Broomfield Road Tel: 0245 354595. Burnley. IMO Computer Centre, S2a Bromham Road. Colchester. Boots, 5-6 Lion Tel: 0234 44733 Morpeth. Telerents (Northem) 39-43 Standish Street Lad 31 New Gate Street Leighton Buzzard. DJ Computers, Walk. Tet 0206 577303. Tel 0282 54299 Tel 0607 513537. 17 Bridge Street. Tel 0$25 385929 Colchester. Colchester Computer Lancaster. Northern Lights Luton. Boots, 82-86 Amdale Centre, Centre, 3a Short Wyre Street. OXFORDSHIRE 89 Sootforth Road Tel: 052462634 Tel: 0582 20592. Tel: 0206 47242 Abingdon Ivor Fields Preston. 4Mat Computing BERKSHIRE Grays H. Reynolds, 79 Orsett Computers, 21 Stert Street, 67 Friargate, tel: 0772 561952 Slough. Boots, 178-184 High Road Tel: 0375 5948 Tel 0235 21207. Rochdale. Boots, 50 Market Banbury. Computer Plus, Harlow. Harlow Computer Centre, Way. Tel: 0706 53225. Street, Tel 0733 27267. Maidenhead. Boots 54-58 High 17 Staple Tye Tel 0279 22846. 2 Church lane. Tel. 0295 55890 LEICESTERSHIRE Hornchurch. Comptel Computer Oxford. Science Studio, 7 Little, Street. Tet 0628 27892 Horachurch comprei computer Leicester. Boots, 30-36 Gallowtree Systems 112a North Street Clarenden Street. Tet 0865 54022 BUCKINGHAMSHIRE TEL 0402 446741. Gate. Tel: 0533 21641. Oxford. Absolute Sound and Video, Milton Keynes. Boots, Leicester. DA Computers Tlford. Boots, 177-185 High Road 19 Old High Street, Headington, 18 Crown Walk, Secklow Gate West Tet 01-553 2116. 104 London Road Te! 0533 549407. Tel 0865 65661. Tel: 0908 607327. Market Harborough. Harborough Romford. Software Plus, SCOTLAND Home Computers. 7 Church Street Milton Keynes. Depson Business 72 North Street. Tel 7065271. Aberdeen. Boots, 133-141 Union Systems, 65 Aylesbury Street, Tel: 085863056. Southend-on-Sen. Computerama, Street. Tet 0224 585349. Bletchley. Tel 0908 367446. 88 London Road Tel: 0702 335443. LONDON Dundee, Boots, 49-53 High Street, Aylesbury. Boots, 69-70 Friars W1. Computers of Wigmore Southend-on-Sea. Computer Tel 0382 21756. Square. Tel 0296 83661. Centre, 336 London Road Street, 104 Wigmore Street. Edinburgh. Boots, 101-103 Princes Chesham. Reed Photo & Tel 0702 337161. Tel 01486 0373. Street. Tel 031-225 8331. Computers, 113 High Street W1.Galaxy230 Tottenham Southend-on-Sea. Estuary Edinburgh. Microworld Computer Tel 0494 783373 Personal Computers, 318 Chartwell Court Road Tet 01-636 6500 Group. 12 Leven Street CAMBRIDGESHIRE North, Victoria Circus Shopping Wi. Sonic Foto Micro Center, Tel: 031 228 1111 Cambridge. Boots, 65-67 Sidney Centre. Tel 0702 614131. 256 Tottenham Court Road, Edinburgh Edinburgh Computers, Street and 28 Petty Curry Street GLOUCESTER Te+ 01-580 5826. 51-57 Lothian Road wi. Tomorrows World Today, Tel 0223 350213 Cheltenham Screen Scene, 144 SL Tel 031 229 4418. Cambridge. Cambridge Computer Georges Road Tel: 0242 528979. 27 Oxford Street. Tel 01-439 7799. Edinburgh. Silicon Centre Store, 4 Emmanuel Street Gloucester. Boots 38-46 Eastgate WC1. Transam Micro Systems, 7 Antigua Street. Tet 031 557 4546. Tel: 0223 358264 59-61 Theobalds Road. Street Tel: 0452 423501. Glasgow. Boots 200 Sauchiehall Peterborough. Boots, 40-42 Bridge Te+ 01-408 240. Street. TeL: 0733 65352 HAMPSHIRE Street. Tel 041 332 1925. W8. Boots, 127a Kensington High Peterborough. Logic Sales, Basingstoke. Boots 15 Old Glasgow. Microworld Computer Street. Tet 01-937 6882. Groun. 11 Bath Street Unit 6 Midgate Parade, Basing Mall. Tel: 0256 S1611. SE7. Vic Oddens Micros, Tel 041 332 1116. Tel: 073349696 Bournemouth. Boots 18-20 6 London Bridge Walk Commercial Road. Tel 0202 21713. Tel: 01-403 1988 Glasgow. Boots Union Street and St Neots. Compute 3 Cross Fareham Electronequip, 36-38 Argyle Street Tel 041 248 7387. Keys Tel: 0480 72013 SEIS. Castlehurst Ltd, 152 Rye Glasgow. Tom Dixon Cameras, CHESHIRE West Street Tet 0329 230670. Lane, Peckham. Tel: 01-639 2205. Fareham Boots, 21 Westbury 15-17 Queen Street. EC2. Devron Computer Centre Chester. Boots, 47-55 Foregate Mall. Tel: 0329 232011 Tek (41-24 0826. 155 Moorgate. Tel: 01-638 3339. Street. Tel: 0244 28421 Portsmouth. Micro Choice, Glasgow. Commscot Ltd N14. Logic Sales, 19 The Bourne, Chester. Computer Link, 21 St 159 Havant Road, Drayton 30 Gordon Street. Tel 041 226 4878 Werburgh Street Tel 0244 316516. The Broadway, Southgate, East Kilbride Boots 33-37 The Tel: 0705 327591. Tel: 01-882 4942 Crewe. Midshires Computer Portsmouth. RDS Electrical Plaza Tel: 035 52 20629. Centre, S7 Earle Street N22. Boots, 38-40 High Road, Falkirk Boots, 79-91 High (Portsmouth) Ltd, 157-161 Wood Green Tet 01-881 0101 Tel 0270 589191. Kingston Road Tel: 0705 812478. Street. Tet 0324 20535. Macclesfield. Computer Centre, NW4. Davinci Computer Store, Hamilton Tom Dixon Cameras Portsmouth. Boots, 194204 68 Chestergate Tel 0625 618827. 112 Brent Street, Hendon. Commercial Road, Tel 0705 825248 Tel 01-22 22. 8 Cadzou Street Tet 0698 283193. Warrington. Boots, 39-45 Bridge Southampton. Boots, 23-29 NW4. Boots, Brent Cross Peterhead. North East Street. Tel: 0925 574825. Above Bar Street. Tel 0703 333983. Shopping Centre. Tet 01-202 5256/7. Computers 1 Ellis Street CLEVELAND Waterlooville GB Microland, NW11. Computers Inc, 86 Golders Tel: 0779 79900. Middlesborough. Boots 7 Queens Parade, London Rd Green Tel 01209 0401. SHROPSHIRE 88-90 Linthorpe Road, The Tel 0705 259911. Shrewsbury. Computeramas GREATER MANCHESTER Cleveland Centre. Tet 0642 249616. 13 Castlegate Tet 6743 60528 HERTFORDSHIRE Altrincham Boots, 13-17 Darlington, Darlington Computer Potters Bar. The Computer Shop Telford. Computer Village, George Srect. Tel: 061-928 4471 Shop, 75 Bondgate. 2/3 Hazeldine House, Central 197 High Street. Tel: 0767 44417. Hyde C Tech Computers, 184 TeL 6325 487478. Square Tel 0952 506771. Stevenage. DJ Computers Market Street. Tel: 061-366 8223 CORNWALL Telford. Telford Electronics, 11 Town Square. Tel 0438 65501. Manchester Boots 32 Market St Austell. AB&C Computers Watford. SRS Microsystems, 38 Mall 4. Tel: 0952 504911. Street. Tel 061-832 6533. Duchy House, 6 Lower Aylmer 194 The Parade, High Street. Manchester. Mighty Micro SOMERSET Square, Tel: 0726 64463. Tel 0923 26602 Taunton Boots 64 65 High Bodmin. Microtest, Welwyn Garden City. DJ 18 Normandy Way Road, Fallowfield Tel: 061-224 8117, Street. Tel 0823 76061. Computers. 40 Fretherne Road Manchester. NSC Computer Tel: 0208 3171/3182 Tel 6 28444 Shops, 29 Hanging Ditch STAFFORDSHIRE CUMBRIA HUMBERSIDE Tel: 061-832 2269. Newcastle-under-Lyme. Kendal. The Kendal Computer Beverley. Computing World, Marple. Marple Computer Centre, Computer Gabin, 24 The Parade, Centre, Stramongate. 10 Swabys Yard, Dyer Lanc. 106 Church Lane. Tet 661-449 9933. Silverdale Tet 0782 636911. Stoke on Trent. Town Computer Tel: 0539 22559. Oldham. Home & Business Tel: 0482 881831. Whitehaven. PD Hendren, 15 King Grimsby. RC. Johnson Lid Computers 54 Yorkshire Street Store, 30 Town Road, Hanley Street. TeL: 0946 2063. Tek 0782 287540 Tek 061-633 1608 22 Friargate, River Head Centre, Workington. Technology Store, Tel: 0472 42031. Oldham. Boots, 1 Town Square Stoke on Trent Boots, 3-5 Market Hull Boots, 48-58 Prospect Shopping Centre. TeL: 061-624 2525 Square, Hanley, Tet 0782 23271. Tel: 0900 66972. Centre. Tel: 0482 22334 Stockport National Micro SUFFOLK Penrith. Penrith Communications Hull Computer Centre, 26 Analby Centres, 36 St Peters Gate Bury St Edmunds Boots 14 Castlegate. Tel 0768 67146. Road. Tel: 0482 26297. Tel 061429 8080 11-13 Comhill Tel: 0284 701516. DERBYSHIRE ISLE OF MAN MERSEYSIDE Bury St. Edmunds. The Suffolk Alfreton. Gordon Harwood, Douglas. T.H. Coleboum, Liverpool Hargreaves, 31-37 Computer Centre, 1-3 Garland 69-71 High Street. Tet 0773 836781. 57-61 Victoria Street Warbreck Moor, Walton Street. Tel 0284 705503. Chesterfield. Boots, 35-37 Low Tel 0624 73482. Tel 051-525 1782 Ipswich Computer Magic Pavement Market Place 24 Crown Street. Tel 0473 50965. St Helens Microman Computers, KENT Tet 246 m3591. Rainford Industrial Estate, Mill Ashford. DGH, 10 North Street. SURREY Derby. Boots, 1 Devonshire Tel 0233 32597. Lane, Rainford Tel: 0744 885242. South Croydon, Concise Walk Tel: 0332 45886. Southport Boots, 31-39 Chapel Computer Consultants 1 Carlton Beckenham. Supa Computers, Derby. First Byte Computers, Road. Tel 01-681 6842. Street. Tel 0704 33907 425 Croydon Road 10 Main Centre, London Road. Tel: 01-650 3569 St Helens Boots, 8 Church Croydon. The Vision Store, Tel: 0332 365280. Bromley. Boots, 148-154 High Street, 24 La Grange Arcade. 53-59 High Street. Tel: 01-686 6362. Street. Tel 01-460 6688 Tel 0744 25488 Croydon. Boots The Mall DEVON Chatham. Boots, 30-34 Wilmott MIDDLESEX 12-18 Whitgift Centre Square, Pentagon Centre Harrow. Camera Arts, 42 St Tel 01-688 6021. Exeter. Boots, 251 High Street, Tel: 0634 405471 Anns Road, Tel: 01-427 5469. Epsom. The Micro Workshop Tel 0392 32244 Gravesend. Gravesend Home Hounslow. Boots, 193-199 High 12 Station Approach Exeter. Open Channel, Central Computers, 39 The Terrace. Street. Tet 01-5700156. Tel: 0372 721533. Station, Queen Street Tel: 0474 23871 Southall. Twillstar Computers Ltd, Guildford. Guildford Computer Tel 0392 218187. Paignton. Computer Systems Lidl Road Tel: 0303 S4007 Folkstone Boots, 24-26 Sandgate 7 Regina Road Tet 01-574 5271. Centre 5 The Quadrant, Bridge Street. Tel 0483 578848. 35 Hyde Road Tel: 0803 524284. I Maidstone. Boots 56 62 King Teddington. Andrews, Broad Wallington. Surrey Micro Plymouth. Syntax, 76 Cornwall, Street. TeL: 01-977 4716. Street Tel: 0622 53912. Systems, 53 Woodcote Road Street. Tel: 0752 28705. Twickenham Productive Tel 01-647 5636. Plymouth. Computer Base .. Maidstone. Kent Micros, 52 Union Computers Ltd, 72 Heath Road. Woking Harpers, 71-73 21 Market Avenue Tet 0752 672128. Street. Tel 0622 52784 Tel: 01-891 4991 Commercial Way. Tel: 0486 225657. Plymouth. Boots 2-6 New Geo Rainham. Microway Computers Uxbridge, JKL Computers SUSSEX Street. Tel 0752 266271. 39 High Street. Tel: 0634 376702. 7 Windsor Street Tet 0895 $1815. Brighton Boots, 129 North Street Seaton. Curtis Computer Services. Sevenoaks. Emest Fielder NORFOLK Seaton Computer Shop Computers, Dorset Street Norwich. Adams, 125-129 King Tel 0273 27088. Brighton. Gamer, 71 East Street. 51c Harbour Road Tel: 0297 22347. Tel: 0732 456800. Street. Tel 0603 2129 Tel 0273 728681. Tiverton. Actron Microcomputers Shorts Shortlands. The Village House Thetford. Thetford CB & Micros, 37 Bampton Street Tel: 0884 252854 1 of Computer 87 Beckenham Lane. 21 Guikthall Street Tel: (84261645 DORSET Tel 01-460 7122. NOTTINGHAMSHIRE Bournemouth. Lansdowne Sittingbourne. Computer Plus, 65 High Street. Tet 0795 25677. Mansfield. Boots, 39 Four Computer Centre, 1 Lansdowne Seasons Shopping Centre, Crescent. Lansdowne, 0202 20165. Tunbridge Wells Boots, 7-11 Calverley Road. Tel: 0892 26486. | Tel 0623 32 Bognor Regis Bits & Bytes, High Street Tet 0243 867143. Eastbourne Boots, 15 Eastbourne Amdale Centre. Tel: 0323 27742 Horsham Boots, 1 Swan Walk, Tek 003 53053. Horsham. Orchard Computer Centre, 34 East Street Tct 003 6884. Worthing Boots, 48-52 Montague Street. Tel 0903 207106. TYNE & WEAR Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Boots, Eldon Square. Tel 0632 329844. Newcastle-upon-Tyne. RE Computing, Parkview House, Front Street, Lane Ends. Tel 091 2701740. Sunderland. Business Micro Communications Ltd, Refuge Assurance Buildings, Saint Thomas Street West Sunniside. Tek 0783 654916 WALES Aberdare. Inkey Computer Services, 70 Mill Street, The Square, Trecynon Tel: 0685 881828. Aberystwyth. Aberdata at Galloways 23 Pier Street T: 0971 61552 Cardiff. Boots, 36 Queens Street & 105 Frederick Street Tel 023191 Cardiff. The Computer Shop 41 The Hayes Tel: 0222 26666. Cardiff. Cardiff Microcomputers 46 Charles Street Tet 0222 373072 Newport, Gwent Computers, 92 Cheostow Road Tel 0633 841760. Newport. Boots, 155-156 Commercial Street. Tct 0633 51212. Swansea Boots, 17 St Marys Arcade, The Quadrant Shopping Centre. Tet 0792 43461. Swansea The Micro Store, 35-36 Singleton Street. Tel 0792 46980. WARWICKSHIRE Coventry. Boots, 38 42 Corporation Street. Tet 0203 26561. Leamington Spa Boots, 31 Parade. Tel 0926 24945. Leamington Spa Leamington Hobby Centre 121 Regent Street Tel: 0926 29211. Nuneaton. Micro City, 1a Queens Road. Tet 0203 382049. Rugby. O.EM, 9-11 Regent Street Tel 0788 70522 WEST MIDLANDS Birmingham. Boots, City Centre House, 16-17 New Street Tel: 021-643 7582 Dudley. Central Computers, 35 Churchill Precinct. Tel: 0384 238169. Stourbridge. Walters Computer Systems 12 Hagley Road Tel 0384 370811. Walsall New Horizon, 1 Goodall Street. Tel: 092 24821. WILTSHIRE Trowbridge West Wiltshire Micros, Whiteheart Yard Tel 02214 67259. YORKSHIRE Bradford. Boots, 11 Darley Street. Tel 0274 390891. Doncaster. Boots, 13-15 French Gate, Tel: 0302 62238 Barnsley. Boots, 34-40 Cheapside Tel 0226 82616. Huddersfield. Micro World Computers, 1006-1010 Manchester Road, Linthwaite. Tel 0484 846117. Huddersfield. Boots, 22 King Street. Tet 0484 21756 Leeds Boots 19 Albion Arcade, Bond Street Centre Tel 0532 33551. Leeds. Micro Power, Northwood House, North Street Tel: 0532 458800. Sheffield. PIP Micro Communications, 9 Taptown Crescent, Broomhill Tel: 0742 661096. Sheffield. Boots, +6 High Street. Tel 0742 78333. Wakefield. Boots, 26-28 Upper Kirkgate. Tet 0924 376181. York York Computer Centre, 7 Stonegate Arcade Tel: 0904 641862 12 Finkle Street Micronet Phone 01-278 3143 for your free information pack now! Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1. "


"c+vg/truckie/2 496 FORT-1 TO 3000: NEXTT 497 GOTO450 500 POKEG. 8: POKEA. 240 505 PRINT\" (CLEAR)\" 506 GOTO600 600 DEFFNA(E) INT(RND (1)*7 ) +1 605 E1=7680: E2-7701: E3=38400: E5-1: GOSUB6 30 610 E1=7701: E2-8185: E3-384 21: E5-22 : GOSUB 630 615 E1-E2:E2=8164: E3-38884 +21: E5=-1: GOSU B630 620 E1=8164: E2-76 80: E3=38884: E5--22: GOSU B630 625 GOTO640 630 FORLO-E1TOE 2STEPE5: POKELO, 160: POKEE 3 +LO-E1. FNA(O): NEXTLO: RETURN 640 PRINT\" (HOME) (GREEN) (DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN ] [DOWN] [DOWN) [RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT J HIGHEST SCORE (CYAN) \"HI 645 PRINT\" (GREEN) (DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [RIGH T] [RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RIGHT] (RIGHT) HIGH SCORE 210 IFPEEK( 197 ) = 34 THENX=X+1: B=B+1: POKEZ+ X, 2: POKES+B. 7: Y=1: POKED. 15 215 GOTO310 220 POKEZ+X. 2: POKED. 8 222 POKES+B. 7: POKED. 8 225 POKEC+X. 6 226 POKEM+B. 6 240 FORP=1 TO10: NEXTP 245 N=INT (RND(1)*22)+1 246 V=INT (RND (1)*2)+1 247 POKE38 905-N. 6-V 208 POKE8185-N, V-1 250 NEXTU 255 F=INT(RND (1)*3)+1 260 IFFITHENH=1 265 IFF-2 THENH=-1 270 IFF-3THENHO 280 O=INT (RND (1)*7)+1 290 GOTO110 310 IFPEEK (Z+X+22) OTHEN350 315 IFPEEKS+B+22) = 0 THEN 350 320 IFPEEK(Z+X+22) 5 THEN340 321 IFPEEK(Z+X+22) = 9THEN340 325 IFPEEK(S+B+22 ) = 5 THEN340 326 IFPEEK(S+B+22) 9THEN340 330 IFPEEK (Z+X+22) = 1 THEN 360 332 IFPEEK (S+B+22)=1 THEN 360 335 IFY-1 THENY=0: GOTO225 336 GOTO220 340 PRINT\" (CLEAR)\": GOSUB 400: PRINT\" (CLEAR 1 (X$ QR# #QN ! RMN.\":GOTO370 350 PRINT\" (CLEAR)\": GOSUB400: PRINT\" (CLEAR 1 (X$ QR# J UJVYX!#.\": GOTO370 360 PRINT\" (CLEAR]\": GOSUB400: PRINT\" (CLEAR (X$ QR# J YRUUJ [+KX'.\" 365 POKEG, 25 370 IFSC>HITHENHI ESC: GOTO450 371 POKEA, 255: POKEG, 25: PRINT\" (BLACK] (DOW N] [DOWN] (X$ #[J%NUUNM\": SC: PRINT\" (DOWN ) V N# (N!\" 372 T=7: X=0:30: H=0 375 POKEW.0: FORP=254 T0128STEP-1: POKEQ. P: NEXT: POKEQ.O 376 PRINT\" (DOWN) [DOWN) QRPQN! # MR! #JWLN \" R\" 647 PRINT\" (CYAN (DOWN) [RIGHT] [RIGHT] (RIG HT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT] (RIGHT) THIS 660 PRINT\" (YELLOW) (DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [RIG HT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RIGHT)H I TAKEY\" 670 GETA$: IFA$=\"\"THEN670 680 GOTO1000 700 POKED. 15 701 FORE=128T0255STEP1 702 POKEQ. E 703 NEXTE 710 PRINT\" (HOME) (BLUE) [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN ] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN) (DOWN] [DOWN] [DOW N) (DOWN) (DOWN) (DOWN) [DOWN) (DOWN) (DOWN) [D OWN (DOWN) [DOWN) [DOWN) KXW$! 720 PRINT\" (HOME) (DOWN) (DOWN] (DOWN] (DOWN) [DOWN) [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOW N] [DOWN] [DOWN) (DOWN] [DOWN] (DOWN) (DOWN) [D OWN) [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] \"1500 :HI 377 PRINT\" (DOWN) (DOWN] QRPQ+! LX[N[ = .\": HI 378 PRINT\" (DOWN) [RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RI GHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RIGHT] QR# !YJLN.\" 380 GETA$: IFA$=\"\"THEN380 385 IFAS\" \"THENGOTO1000 386 GOTO380 400 POKED.0: POKEW, 220 401 FORL=15TOOSTEP-1 402 POKED, L 403 FORM=1 TO300 404 NEXTM 405 NEXTL 406 POKED. O 407 RETURN 450 PRINT\" (CLEAR)\": POKEA, 240: POKEG. 8 455 PRINT\" [HOME] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] (WHITE) [RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT ) CONGRATULATI ONS!\" 460 PRINT: PRINT\"[DOWN) [DOWN) PLEASE ENTER YOUR NAME (DOWN]\":INPUTHI$:IFLEN (HIS) >8T HEN490 470 GOTO500 490 PRINT\"[DOWN] [DOWN) SORRY! NAME TO LON 730 SC-SC+1500 750 FORE=1 T03000: NEXTE 760 GOTO180 1000 POKEG, 8: POKEA. 255: POKED, O: POKEQ.O:P OKEW. O 1020 PRINT\" (CLEAR) (WHITE) (DOWN (DOWN (DO WN) [DOWN (RIGHT) (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT] URT NJWX #ON PX [DOWN( *W\" 1030 GETAS: IFA$=\"Y\"THEN POKED. O: POKEQ. O:P OKEW. O: GOTO30 1040 IFA$=\"N\"THEN1100 1050 GOTO1030 1100 PRINT\" (CLEAR] (WHITE)\" 1110 PRINT\" (DOWN) [DOWN] [RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RI GHT) (RIGHT) #QJWT! OX[ YUJ (RWP [DOW N] PXXM+K(N/\" 1115 FORL=1T010 1120 PRINT\" (HOME) (DOWN, DOWN (DOWN) (DOWN ] [DOWN] [DOWN] [DOWN] (RIGHT) (RIGHT] [RIGHT] (RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGH T][RIGHT) (RIGHT] :\" 1130 FORP=1T0200: NEXTP 1140 PRINT\" HOME DOWN I DOWN) [DOWN[ DOWN I [DOWN) [DOWN) [DOWN) [RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RIGHT) [RIGHT) (RIGHT] (RIGHT] [RIGHT] [RIGHT) (RIGH T] [RIGHT] [RIGHT) :\" 1150 FORP-1 TO200: NEXTP 1160 NEXTL G. 495 PRINT: PRINT\" (DOWN] PLEASE RE-ENTER\" truckie ends "


"MTWARE Co AT ROCK BOTTOM PRICES TAKE UP TO FIVE QE TITLES FROM JUST 35 RUSTERS BISYOND UNDER WRAPS! Top Games GROTELES LEOER Frank Bruno Finders Keepers Stanion Spectrum .95 Spectrum ED.95 Spectrum 5.95 Com 64 .95 Com .95 Com 64 .95 Amstrad .95 Amstrad .95 Dam Busters Spectrum .75 Commodore 64 .75 Dun Daragh Spectrum 7.75 Amstrad 07.75 Red Arrows Spectrum .50 Com 64 .95 Amstrad .95 Nodes of Yesod Spectrum 26.95 Com 64 .95 Superman Spectrum 7.45 Commodore 64 .45 Amstrad .45 PLUS ONE OF THESE FREE! Shadowfire Spectrum 5.95 Commodore 64 .95 Spy Hunter Spectrum .95 Com 64 .95 Hypersports Spectrum 15.15 Com 64 .95 Way of the Fist Spectrum 26.95 Com 64 .95 Amstrad .95 Spy v Spy Spectrum .95 Commodore 64 .95 Amstrad .95 Alien 8 Spectrum 7.95 Com BA 7.95 Amstrad .95 Arcadia Cosmic Cruiser Spectrum Spectrum Com 64 Com 64 Amstrad owners deduct  from your order instead INTRODUCTORY OFFER EXCELLENT VALUE reviewers sums up his personal favourites of w Place an order for one of our Mr Software's magazine the month. Club magazines and you can is excellent value. Each take up to five of the titles listed issue contains twenty or HOW TO ORDER above at the introductory thirty reviews of the Choose up to five titles from the \"Bonus Price\" plus one of the latest software releases selection shown. Enter them on two Imagine titles illustrated absolutely free. and on first joining you the order form below, choose A subscription to the magazine costs just also receive a twenty-four your free game, then fill in the .00 per annum and brings you six issues a page supplement reviewpayment details and your name year through the post. As a subscriber you ing a range of hardware and address and post the form to us. By will automatically be enrolled in our discount and utility products (C-64 return you will receive your copy of \"48K\" or Software Club giving you the opportunity to and Spectrum only at pre\"64K\" (depending which computer you have), make many more purchases at prices similar sent). In every issue there is a comfollowed shortly by the games you ordered, to the ones shown above. In addition to these petition to enter, a summary of how other Hurry, though, the introductory offer expires top selling games, we stock over 700 titles for magazines rate the new releases, game play 60 days from the publication date of this Spectrum. Commodore 64 and Amstrad coming tips from our members, and one of our magazine, puters. All titles are offered at a discount you'll find many on which you can save -. Note, however, that even though you belong ORDER FORM to the club we don't make you buy anything. CVG1285 There are no minimum purchase reMy computer is a: Spectrum Commodore 64 Amstrad quirements, so your only commitment is the annual subscription to the Magazine. Hurry I wish to subscribe to your Magazine and take advantage of your \"Introductory Bonus Price Offer.\" The titles I would like to buy are as follows: now and join over 10.000 members who are already enjoying Mr Software's low, low TITLE PRICE prices. | I would like as my free game: TOTAL: Post & Packing: Subscription: GRAND TOTAL E 75 .00 I enclose a cheque/postal order no. please charge my Access/Visa Card No 00000000000000000 I understand that if I am not fully satisfied with the goods, I may return them within fourteen days for a full refund of the cost of the games and the Magazine subscription Name (BLOCK CAPS) Address KELVIN HOUSE, TOTTERIDGE AVENUE, HIGH WYCOMBE, BUCKS HP13 6XG (0494) 450751 \"Export Customers. We welcome orders from all parts of the world, please note the following subscrip tion and postage rates outside UK:Europe Subscription .00. Post : U.S.A. and Middle East Subscription 19, Post : Australia, Far East and South Africa Subscription .00, Post . Please note that all Magazines are despatched by Air Mail postage to keep you right up to date. "


"FIRST CLASS SPECIAL OFFER! o nder customers waar H et plus out oblering fre 12\" x 16\" glossy posters of the cassette 3985 Poster Calendar Pose Collectors Bem AND ALL FREE Can Thor save Cute Chick from the hungry dinosaur? Only you can help. At first he only has to jump rocks and holes. Then he must jump and duck, almost simultaneously, to avoid the logs and low hanging tree limbs in the Petrified Forest. The only way Thor can get across the river is to hop on the turtles' backs. These turtles sometimes get tired and submerge at the wrong moment, much to Thor's dismay. To add to Thor's difficulties, his arch-enemy Fat Broad is waiting on the other side to ambush him. If Thor's timing is good, the Dooky Bird will help him over the lava pit. If he jumps the pit just when Dooky Bird is overhead, the prehistoric bird will pick him up and carry him across! Thor must build up plenty of speed during his downhill run before the cliff. Timing is crucial, too. If Thor's balance is off or he is too slow he will crash into the ravine or the face of the cliff. Once over the cliff, Thor faces his most difficult challenge: the volcanic eruption. In addition to the obstacles on the ground, he is showered with boulders from the sky. Once again Thor must cross the river on the turtles' backs. Then, at last, he must face the dinosaur! If Thor can get past the dinosaur and into the cave, he has only a short way to go to rescue Cute Chick. On his way Thor must duck under stalagtites and jump over stalagmites to avoid crashing. If Thor does crash, don't worry: he has five wheels. But True Love is calling him, so use all your agility and cunning to help him rescue Cute Chick! Spectrum Commodore 64 $7.95 .95 Available from selected branches of Boots, John Menzies, Lasky's, Spectrum, Rumbelows, Woolworth and good computer software stores everywhere. GAME MACHINE PRICE LO Please add $1.00 for all orders outside U.K. ACCESS CARD No.: NAME ADDRESS: Sydney SOFTWARE PROJECTS Sierra Software Projects Ltd., Bear Brand Complex, Allerton Road, Woolton, Liverpool L25 7SF Telephone: 051-428 9393 (4 Lines) Teler: 627520 ON-LINE "


"COMPETITION THUNDERBIRDS KAE. TTE COMPUTATION R NTE et=Aita | ARE FIREBIRD Thunderbirds are Go! Yes, the puppet heroes of International Rescue are back in action this time in a new computer game from Firebird Software Thunderbirds was a highly popular television series which started in the mid-1960s. Repeats are still shown from time to time. Each week viewers thrilled to the exploits of the five Tracey brothers and their friends Lady Penelope, Parker and Brains, who ran a private rescue service, saving the world again and again from doom and disaster. When all seemed lost, International Rescue, in their five wonderful Thunderbird craft, would be called in. No job was too difficult for them. Thunderbirds was created by the imaginative Gerry Anderson, who was responsible for many other smash hit puppet shows such as Supercar, Fireball XL5, Stingray, Joe 90, Captain Scarlett and more recently Terrahawks. Now Thunderbirds One and Two are back in action in Firebird's new game. Their mission: to rescue a team of egyptologists trapped deep inside a tomb. The game combines maze complexity and strategy as the two Thunderbirds move deeper into the tomb. Now is your chance to join in the rescue action in a great competition from Computer + Video Games and Firebird. We've got 25 of the new games as prizes for you to win. All you have to do is answer the three questions below and fill in the tiebreaker to be in with a chance to win. C+VG/FIREBIRD THUNDERBIRDS COMPETITION QUESTIONS 1) What colour is Lady Penelope's Rolls Royce? 2) Name three of the five Tracey brothers and which Thunderbird craft they are associated with? 3) Where is Thunderbird One's launch pad hidden? Tie breaker: In no more than 20 words, say which one of the Thunderbird characters you would like to be, and why? Send your answers to Computer + Video Games, Thunderbirds Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is December 16th and the editor's decision is final. "


"WINTER SPORTS Ice Hockey, Speed Skating, Ski Jumping, Down Hill, Slalom,Giant Slalom, Bob Sleigh Biathlon, SOFTWARE III Available on the 48K Spectrum from Electric Dreams Software. 31 Carlton Crescent, Southampton. Tel:(0703) 225282. "


"The return of the legendary crusader-skilfully fencing his way through twenty screens of mystery and danger! DISK CASSETTE Available for Available for .95 .95 Commodore 64 & Atari ONTO. Datasoft U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, GOLD Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Datasoft is a registered trademark of Datasoft, Inc. Zorro is a registered trademark of Zorro Production 1985 Zorro Productions. All rights reserved. 1985 Damasoft Inc. "


"*ARCA 185 PERKA ATARIES GAUNTLET A band of four unusual characters fight for their lifes as row upon row of sorcerors demons and ghosts descend upon them. Split by the fight they try to rally. Over here yells Questor the Elf 1 need help Although he's swift on his feet, hes no match for the hoards Help arrives in the shape of Thor the Warrior Within seconds the evil disperses as the numbers of dead grow. Finally they make their way through a gap and race forwards to help Merlin the Wizard whose magical powers are not much help in this instance to be joined there by Thyro the Valkyrie His strong armour hos protected him against many of the flying missiles. The search for the exit begins next. Questor has already found a key it is hoped that two keys are not needed to open the gate os the weary quortet cannot find another. They round a corner almost tripping over a magical potion Quick as a flash. Thyra stoops to pick it up it might contain any one of a number of potions, all will be helpful They roce round another bend more nosties and amongst them is The Grimreaper himself. Clod in block this evil imp-like figure leaps towards them. It will be a long fight and many blows will be needed to stun him Perhaps a magic potion will do the trick? The wizard is dying intones a clear loud voice. As it finishes speaking it can be seen that Merlin is fading fast Clare Edgeley, Ideas Corp's Arcade spy, has been scouring the country's arcades for the hottest games around. And it looks like she has come up with the goods in a big report on what's going to be this year's big arcade smash Gauntlet. He is in urgent need of food to in London. INDIANA restore his health or for more To complete the quest all money to be put into the four characters are necessary JONES machine. Merlin's health hos Each has its own strengths and suffered in the last fight. But weaknesses but banded he's saved with another 1000 together they make a Indiana Jones is back in whip health units and revives. formidable team. cracking form. Following the fighting for more action Instructions are flashed on huge success of the movie, it An exit is found. The four the screen colour coded for was only a motter of time disappear down the hole and each character giving advice before Indiana Jones and the find themselves on a new level and warnings. They are usually Temple of Doom made its The corridors are more accompanied by a voice debut in the arcades. complex and there seem to be issuing from the depths of the Help Indy to rescue five many more Grunts and Lobbers machine. The clarity suggests children locked in coges, by around. This time they have that someone may well be wielding his snake-like whip to learnt their lesson Stay hiding in there! The most open the doors, floor Thuggee together and fight as one. important warning is given guards and swing across There are treasure chests en when your health declines, but chasms. The guards are semiroute which fill the coffers of there is plenty of time to stop intelligent and, if you hang the one who runs over them. insert more money and around in one spot for too There isn't time for greed in continue playing long, they will home in on you mid battle but if it's possible Gauntlet has certainly proved A quick crack of the whip they pick them up for extra its popularity in the States and should bring them to their points. Once again the deep Atari hopes that it will do os knees, although they recover voice is heard The Warrior is well in the UK. We are quickly dying Within moments he hos delighted to see four people The children are locked in disappeared leaving the playing says Atari's David individual cages, each on a remaining three to continue the Smith. The English are in different level, connected only search for the Monster who general more reserved than by rickety ladders and narrow dwells deep within the the Americans, but we ve rocky paths. Watch your step or labyrinth. demonstrated that that can be Indy will plummet to his death Atari's Gauntlet is fabulous. overcome A good tip when beating off It is a four player game with There is so much to learn the Thuggees is to hit them simultaneous play the first about the game. The properties more than once. If you are on of its kind. The beauty of the of the magic potions, what the walkways and manage to game is that players can leave strategies to employ to defeat do that, they will fall a couple or join at any stage without the baddies, and the best way of levels, giving you more affecting the play of the to kill the Grimreoper. The list breathing space to reach the remaining characters. The is endless and only learnt with railroad cars problem is that you can't get practice. However, absolute This section is taken directly anywhere unless you've got beginners can play well and three people playing with you.\" have fun. It's very easy to get Score:20,300 says James Easton from into Canada, at present holidaying Well done Atari! SANADET LEVEL 1 scorz scong 2000 to WIZARD congue EREE REALTH ATARISMES SPEEDUD MISSIL "


"DE ACTION HANG-ON from the film a mad roller activate an exit door to the coster ride through the mines right of the screen. The statue in a battered mine cor The can only be reached by winding track divides at crossing a river of burning oil. various junctions only to be It is up to you to work out how connected further on making Through the exit and back to the chase hairy in the extreme the stort with more children to At the bottom Indy leaps of rescue, meaner Thuggees and saying, \"We walk from here. so on The game is addictive, Atari has once again done but nothing compared to wonders with the voice Gauntlet Atari's other new synthesiser. The words are release clear, unlike the unintelligible Indiana Jones is also a blurb which is more usually the limited game as once you have case worked your way through the Now the difficult part three difficulty levels there is where timing is essential not much more to do other Reach the statue of Kali and than repeat the whole collect the score stone to escapade over and over again DEMONSTRATION onl Lights on green the noise is machine. 50 pence may seem deafening as seven bikers line expensive, but with practice up for the race of their lives you will be able to stretch it The flog drops and they're for miles away Twisting the throttle for The most unique feature is maximum speed they approach the act of cornering. You have the first chicone, leaning over to physically lean the bike over until their knees are almost and wotch as your bike on scraping the ground to take the best line for the corner, straightening to pick up speed again. Next chicane and all seven are strung out in a line. One amateur tries to overtake on the corner, misjudges and skids out of control. Straight off the trock smock into a boulder The bike cartwheels and explodes luckily he's thrown clear. But tries to stand up. wobbles and collapses. End of the race for that one. Twenty seconds left as you screen follows suit Forget to cross the line marking the end lean and you will coreer of the first leg Extended time straight off the track. Taking a means that you can continue tight corner requires a bit of for another minute or so in this muscle power as you have to gruelling road test. Arms ache lean over quite for and hold with the strain of holding the the bike down until the corner bike steady when cornering The roce continues through the Hang on combines the night, and into the next. The superb graphics of a Pole strain is incredible let up Position style race with the your concentration for an physical act of riding a bike. It's instant and you will veer great made for speed nuts straight into a lomp post. and best of all you don't even Does that sound like an need a driving licence! arcade game? Youd better believe it does. Sego's Hang on STAGE 4 is the most realistic racing game to hit the arcodes for a long while. It's fantastica thrilling ride on a gleaming red bike that you have to sit on in order to play. The motor bike is lite size and set on a large platform. The screen is fucked away inside the fairing and the throttle and broke ore where they would be on a real "


"The Magician's Ball We Make 'em Good Here's a couple of challenging new games to lock your brain cells into over-drive. First, there's Magician's Ball. Enigmatic, enchanting and totally captivating, it's a weird and wonderful adventure story set to the haunting music of Tubular Bells. Sheer magic. With graphics to match. SPECTRUM -95 COMMODORE .95 AMSTRAD 17.95 STS al SUBTL 15 An adventure of mystery and suspense based around the London South Bank Then you can settle Old Scores. Cryptic from the start, Old Scores is a mystery to everyone. Even I haven't got a clue what it's about. So it sounds as if you'll have to play it by ear When that little lot's got your brain in a flat spin and your knickers in a twist, you'd better get yourself straightened out. SPECTRUM 56-95 COMMODORE 17.95 AMSTRAD $7.95 ...& We Make L'em Better M Old Scores essential purchase 2 regard it as a >plakete OLAR COMO L WYSERATION Operation Caretaker is a computer care kit complete with a cleaning tape and built-in demagnetiser, a tape to check azimuth alignment and a specially designed screwdriver to adjust the head alignment. And all instructions are displayed clearly on screen.! Now, isn't that better? I'd like to get the right games AND get my games right. Please rush me.......... ..............copies of OPERATION CARETAKER THE MAGICIAN'S BALLO OLD SCORES (Tick appropriate boxes) for my ****.....computer I enclose a cheque/PO for.. Access/Barclaycard No. (includes p&p) NAME ADDRESS CARETAKER that reps ...................... Delivery within 14 days SEND TO GLOBAL SOFTWARE, PO BOX 67. LONDON SWI IBS I or phone us on 01-228 1360 (24hr) SPECTRUM. AMSTRAD. COMMODORE $9.95 BBC/ELECTRON -95 The core and deaning your computersperring "


"Voted \"Strategy Game of the Year\" in 1984, MUGSY is now back with a vengeance. Join our dubious hero as he struggles to regain control of his underworld empire by any means at his disposal. More strategy. thrills and excitement in this new animated comic strip-includes a full arcade game sequence and stunning graphics. MUGSY'S REVENGE is available on C64 and Amstrad at .95, Spectrum at .95. Screenshots from Commodore 64 version Melbourne House U G S Y'S Revenge: 0 L 72 15 "


"This is the only warning you'll get. They're coming soon. FIREBIRD NEW FROM FIREBIRD. THE HOT RANGE F a rade Mark of British Council "


"Got a problem? Feel in need of a bit of help and assistance? Then why not write to the Bug Hunters at Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. DEAREILIG RUMBERS 'd been almost four weeks in a hospital bed, but it was worth it for the information. I'd also had plenty of time to plan my next attack on the Bug Hunter Recreation Room. It was an idle comment by Otiss that gave me the vital clue. The drinks machine was borrowed from the Tropical Paradise Club down the road. A nice big machine with plenty of room inside for both myself and my bandages. Bribing a small droid to wheel the machine into the room (You needn't try to put that on expenses! — Ed.), I got my second look at those daredevil Bug Hunters. They were all gathered around a table near the far side of the room where B-Con was trying to teach them how to play cards. \"But your cards only have one spot on them, and mine have seven,\" Big Red was complaining. \"You said that the more spots a card had the better it was, and if it had a picture on it, then it was better still.\" \"Well, yes, normally. However, if you'd been listening properly, you'd have heard me say that the Aces are special, and have the highest value of all,\" replied B-Con, controlling his obvious exasperation. \"I was listening,\" said Big Red. \"I've been told that my hearing is very good. Only you didn't tell me that the Aces only have one spot.\" \"Oh, good hearing, eh?\" queried Otiss. \"I seem to remember you having very bad hearing when those C+VG readers were phoning up about the Manic Pacman program for that Commodore 64 of yours. It's not really surprising either, given the amount of garbage at the end of that listing in the October issue.\" \"My hearing is perfectly okay,\" insisted Big Red. \"Unfortunately, I seem to have misplaced the Manic Pacman cassette. I've a nasty feeling I used the tape to record Big Bertha's Bathtime Ballads. I typed the whole Manic Pacman listing in myself recently, and it doesn't seem to make any difference if you just stop after typing line 61106. \"I think some people may be having trouble with the longer lines, such as 38 and 280, which are shown in the listing as being more than 80 characters long. So, you've got to miss out the space after the line number, and type in abbreviated commands, such as 'P' and SHIFT+'O' for POKE. \"Anyway, if everything has been typed in according to the listing, then the program should work.\" \"Have you two quite finished?\" enquired BCon, dealing another hand. \"Good, then maybe we can stop changing the subject and get on with the game. I do believe I'm winning.\" \"By the way,\" murmured X. All heads swivelled towards X. They always did when X spoke, simply because he didn't say much, so when he did speak it was usually fairly important. \"I don't want you to think I'm trying to change the subject. Only I wondered whether anybody would be interested in the new drinks machine which that droid over there has just delivered.\" \"I knew it,\" gloated Otiss. \"Power. That's what it is. I told you they'd break eventually. All we had to do was hold out for long enough and they had to give in. You see they need us. We're not continued on page 94 "


"just your common everyday service robots. I'm ... I mean WE'RE better than the rest. Next time maybe you'll listen to me, instead of...\" \"Have you taken a look at this machine,\" interrupted B-Con. \"It's quite unusual. Look at these drinks ... Tequila Sunrise ... Hawiian Punch...\" \"Not exactly a tasteful collection,\" said Otiss. \"However, it's a lot better than before. Of course, if we continue to ignore them, they'll probably buy us yet another machine, or possibly something much better altogether.\" \"I don't care what it tastes like,\" boomed Big Red. \"I'm thirsty. I could drink an ocean, but I'd probably start rusting. Here, let me have one.\" \"Hold it, lead head,\" shouted Otiss. \"I got the machine, so I'm going to be the first to use it. Out of my way B-Con. Now then, I think I'll try this unusual concoction, down at the bottom here.\" I felt something hit the back of my neck. \"Funny. Nothing happening. Give it a kick Red,\" said Otiss. \"DON'T do that!\" B-Con warned. \"Remember how the last machine got broken?\" Don't try and tell me what I can and cannot do,\" warned Otiss. \"You're not even fit to print a Spectrum listing correctly.\" \"There's nothing wrong with my Spectrum listings,\" B-Con objected. \"Oh no? Well, why weren't the graphics \"Well, I still think it would have looked better if you'd converted the graphics like you're supposed to,\" Otiss informed him. \"Now then Big Red. Why haven't you kicked the machine yet?\" \"I'm not going to do anything until you apologise for calling me a lead head,\" Red said sulkily. \"Don't be stupid,\" said Otiss. \"I was only telling the truth. You're made of a metal compound, just like the rest of us. Therefore your head must have metal in it. So why shouldn't I call you lead head?\" Suddenly Otiss, who had been rolling away from the machine, came charging towards me. There was a loud crash, the plastic cup dislodged itself and was immediately filled by five cup-fulls of steaming liquid. \"Before you do anything, I'd like to know if Big Red's excellent hearing heard anything just now,\" said B-Con. \"What? You mean a sort of 'Arrrghhh' type sound?\" Big Red enquired. \"Well. I'd have described it more as an 'Uggghh' sound, but you're close,\" confirmed B-Con. \"No. I didn't hear anything.\" said Red. \"Now, I think I'll have the Tequila Sunrise, second from the top. Here goes...\" \"Say, Otiss. What does yours taste like?\" Red asked, a slightly puzzled expression on his face.\" would have sworn mine was tea. White with medium sugar.\" \"I knew it,\" shouted Red, and gave the machine a hefty kick. The machine didn't seem to pleased about this and decided to fall apart. I knew the four faces staring down at me were less than pleased with me. \"He looks remarkably familiar...\" I heard someone say as I passed out. Dortorget you can call the Bug Hunter on 01 251 6223, Last 2470 every TBY They las dround to deul with your problems Bat plena ramember to call otherwise you might just e listing of Moon Buggy in the October issue, so that people could understand what to type?\" \"They were just the normal Spectrum userdefined graphics, insisted B-Con. \"All anybody has to do to find out what to type is to run the program with just lines 112 to 117 inclu sive. Then, if they print out the graphics characters 'A' to 'P, they'll be able to see which is which.\" "


"MLORDS, LADIES,& GENTLEMEN... FRESH FROM AMERICA U.S. GOLD PROUDLY PRESENTS... THE UNDISPUTED CHAMPION... WAKELW U.S. FIGHT NIGHT GOLD! From time to time a software title is released, so innovative that it breaks new ground in graphical and technical achievement Fight Night, the first animated simulation on the C64 is more than a game, more than a simulation it is a revelation! \"It has class, it has style forget the rest, Fight Night is quite simply the absolute best.\" Tony Takoushi Computer & Video Games/Computer Trade Weekly. \"It's like watching and playing a cartoon computer version of Rocky. Fight Night has pushed the graphical capabilities of the C64 to its utmost limits\" Zzap 64 November. Sydney 2 .42 .:36 Available for Commodore 64 Cassette .95 Disk .95 "


"FIRST CLA SPECIEN OFFER: e For all mail oder Customers were free 12\" X 16\" glossy porn Pure Collection Brems 985 Poster Card n AND ALL TREE plus ou SANYO & rocvey nier ee, In this game there are twelve different courses available for you to tackle, each presenting its own problems. You might fall off, refuse a jump, knock a fence down or even be eliminated for jumping a wrong fence. It's all up to you. Tell the horse to walk, canter, gallop, turn or jump when you want him to. All the thrills (and spills) straight from Hickstead! That's not all, if you want to try some new obstacles you can simply and easily design new courses for yourself, without any programming knowledge needed. You can decide where you want the walls, gates or any of the different types of fences available. Up to six riders may compete, each representing a different country with the scores being updated on the \"Master Scoreboard\" as each round is completed. All faults are recorded automatically, not forgetting that the clock is ticking away all the time as well. There is also a \"Hi-Score Scoreboard\" for each course. We would like to thank Team Sanyo and Harvey Smith for their encouragement and inspiration. 12.95 Codore 64 AU MSK Copper .95 Availabrom selected baches of Boots, John M as, Lasky's, Spectr Kumbelow Wool and good compute stores here. GAME MACHINE PRICE Please add 1.00 for all orders outside U.K ACCESS CARD No. NAME: ADDRESS: S-O-VIDE PB350T Software Projects Ltd., Bear Brand Complex, Allerton Road, Woolton, Liverpool L25 7SF Telephone: 051-428 9393 (4 Lines) Telex: 627520 "


"KKKKK Edi Steinar YAK'S PROGRESS FOR THE CBM 64 'Let there be sprites ...'a collection of eight of Jeff Minter's hairy classics for the '64; *ATTACK OF THE MUTANT CAMELS * MATRIX LASER ZONE HOVER BOVVER * REVENGE OF THE MUTANT CAMELS SHEEP IN SPACE * METAGALACTIC LLAMAS BATTLE AT THE EDGE OF TIME *ANCIPITAL IN PRESENTATION BOX WITH J.M.'s HISTORICAL NOTESI ON DISK .95 ON 2 TAPES .45 colour space SOLO A LITH SYNTHESISER COLOURSPACE FOR THE BBC B' A great version of this unique software, for BBC owners. COLOURSPACE and its predecessor PSYCHEDELIA have been described as INTERACTIVE FIREWORKS, fantastic lightshows, a wonderful accompaniment to fantastic music. We've caught the rainbow... ON TAPE .95 GAMES AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD COMPUTER RETAILERS OR FROM LLAMASOFT LTD. 49 MOUNT PLEASANT, TADLEY, HANTS TEL: (07356 4478) S.A.E. FOR CATALOGUE & NEWSLETTER THE NATURE OF THE BEAST 2014 MEHELE "


"GOONIES COMPETITION A OMPETI GOONIES COMPETITION X GOONIES COMPETITION refuse. Just check out the questions and rush your entry off today! C+VG/ SPIELBERG MOVIE QUIZ GOONIES COMPETITION ant to go and see it's a highly playable a really neat game and should soon movie? Want to be available from U.S. Gold win a copy of the game of for the C64, Atari, the film? Want your own Spectrum and Amstrad. piece of pirate treasure? Of Once you've got all the course you do! Stupid ques answers, fill in the coupon tions, right? and mail it to Computer + Well, thanks to the Video Games, Goonies people at DataSoft and U.S. Competition, Priory Court, Gold we can offer you the 30-32 Farringdon Lane, chance to see GOONIES the London EC1R 3AU. Closing latest Spielberg smash hit date for the competition is AND win a copy of the Data December 16th and normal soft game AND your very C+VG competition rules own golden dubloon! apply. Goonies is the story of a The first FIVE winners gang of kids who discover will get free tickets to go an old treasure map which and see GOONIES at a leads them to a mysterious cinema near your home, lighthouse with a hidden plus a copy of the GOONIES secret passage which leads game, plus a gold dubloon to high adventure! not real I'm afraid plus It's a platform, arcade an exclusive Big Red adventure style game with shirt. Not bad, huh? a difference you get to the next 20 runners-up control TWO little people in will get a copy of the game your quest for pirate and a dubloon. Now this is treasure. a competition you can't 1. Name the Spielberg TV film which featured an apparently driverless giant truck which terrorised a poor defenceless motorist. 2. Close Encounters of the .... kind. What number fills the gap? 3. Spielberg made a film about a little alien called E.T. who was stranded on Earth. What do the initials stand for? 4. Which nasty creatures terrorised a small American town. Was it A) Goblins B) Gnomes, C) Gremlins, D) Gnocci's? 5. Which famous American female rock star sings the theme tune to the Goonies film? GOONIES COMPETITION C+VG/DATASOFT GOONIES COMPETITION My answers are: ON Name Address Computer I own (tick box) C64 Atari Amstrad Spectrum "


"Commodore... Atari... Sinclair... Does YOUR computer speak ENGLISH, yet? OFT 10 TEPER   SOFT SOFT CLAIR QL SOFU Atari 400/800/600XL/800XLI, 150XE -48K .95 Cassette .95 Diskette Sinclair QL Microdrive VVIA CBM 64/128 .95 Cassette Cartridge .95 .95 Diskette UE VOLUME VOLUME TELLO 16/ps4 BUT BRIE Summer STRANDED NGUSI SU NGUISH SU NGUISH SOFTWARE ISH SOFTWARE NGUSH SOFTWAR ISH SOFTWARE (TIVAR C16/plus 4 $6.95 Cassette CBM 64/128 .95 Cassette Atari 400/800/600XL/800XLI CBM 64/128 .95 Cassette 150XE -48K .95 Cassette .95 Diskette PROGRAMMERS REQUIRED NOW TO WORK TO EXACTING ENGLISH STANDARDS CONTACT US NOW — NULL Selected titles available at branches of: BOOTS  W.H. SMITH LASKYS or available POST FREE from: ENGLISH SOFTWARE.. 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gardens, Manchester M60 1BX. Tel: 061-835 1358 "


"IK "


"CLIP THE COUPON 1ST QUARTER SUBSCRIPTION OFFER! FOR DETAILS OF OUR FREE Nice Identity. Shame about the Password. It's a unique combination. Your Special Identity Number and Personal Password. The valuable key to huge databases teeming with activity, set on our Mainframes across the nation. On Micronet 800, you're a valued individual, adding your own special flavour and personality to the database. Take our exciting new \"Gallery\" You control your personal screens for all to see. The intriguing \"Chatline\" public conversation service gives you freedom to express your views and meet some remarkable people. All part of a tremendous Communications section that networks you to 60,000 Micronet and Prestel users across the country. Try Teleshopping, or interview celebrities live on «Celebrity Chatline\" every Wednesday night. And there's FREE (& instant) National Electronic Mail, plus International Telex, and the Contact and SwapShop bulletin boards. Get computer news first on Micronet's daily (and controversial) \"Newsflashes\" and read up on the latest reviews and courses. Feast from our regularly changing menu of programs to download straight into your microabsolutely free. You also get access to Educational Computing's \"School Link\" and Prestel's huge 300,000 page database, including world news, business & share bulletins and optional homebanking. For only .50 per quarter, that's less than the price of a daily paper! The only accessory you need is a Modem, to get the best value for money around in micro communications. Fill in the coupon for the full facts and send to Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5EJ. But be warned, Micronet 800 is a \"living service with ever-expanding features. So maybe you'd be better to call in at your local Micronet 800 Action Station. There are thousands of Micronetters waiting to meet you! To: MICRONET 800, Durrant House, 8 Herhal Hill London ECIR SEJ. Telephone 01-278 3143. Please send me the full facts about Micronet 800. Micronet 800 Name Age Make/Model of MicroAddress CVG10/85 Telephone  For 9 . of telephone user Prestel is a trademark of British Telecommunicati pe "


"DAMNED COMPUTERS It may surprise you to learn that many of our most famous pop stars are interested in computers and computer games, So, at last, computer games are becoming hip with a little help from the stars of the music business, of course, WENDY PEARSON discovers what the average computer owning rock musician does after a hard day at the studio. Haven't you ever wondered what Nik Kershaw plays with in his bedroom at night...? ho would think shows up, too, in the He also reckons everything when went that someone working title of the band's computers, in a way, help back.\" with a name like current album, Flyovers beat the system. Playing with micros must Rat Scabies would have from Mars. Someone can always run in the family. Even Rat's fun playing with a Dragon Mr Scabies has a crack the uncrackable. dad, whose love of music 32? Fans of pop group The serious use for his micro Computers are having encompasses Wagner Damned may be surprised too. \"I use it for listing all our their effect in the recording rather than rock, keeps his to hear that Rat's favourite records and information on studio, too. At the band's record collection up to pastime is playing the best singles including the studios, all the sound date using an Atari. \"He's selling Chuckie Egg on his highest chart positions, recording and mixing an accountant but he's into micro that is, when he where they were details are transferred onto Wagner in a big way.\" isn't collating details of the recorded, the producer's disk. Another home micro fan band's activites and details name, how many we've Things like frequency, is Dolphin Taylor, from of their latest releases. sold, when we released noise levels and other Spear of Destiny. However Rat 29, whose real them and so on. technical details are there is one problem on name is Chris Miller, also \"I update it whenever backed up to disk, which the horizon. \"My Amstrad loves arcade games. necessary so that at any means that 48 CPC464 wakes up my \"I'm a great arcade given time we can independent mixes can be girifriend with its bleeping.\" game freak and produce details of things stored on one disk using said Dolphin, who likes to especially like the boxing we've done and run it off the SSL (Solid State Logic) play with his Amstrad in the ones. My favourite one, for whoever wants it, on a system. middle of the night. though, is Popeye, which computer printout. The But when it comes to \"We've had a few rows started playing on our trips great thing about it is that programming, Rat isn't about it, which is ironic, as to America two years it's so good at information interested. \"Why bother? it was her idea to get it in before it was released storage just like a filing Programming is so slow, the first place.\" here.\" cabinet. it's not really worthwhile.\" \"In computer buff terms Other favourites include Rat used the Dragon a However, he did give I'm a comparative novice, Kung Fu and space lot in the days when he Basic a crack, enrolling at but I got into it originally games. \"You know, the used to run a band. At that West Kensington College because of the ones where you get a load time, they had their own for a six week course. \"It computerisation of speakers up your bum!\" merchandising company was really good value, only recording studios, which No wonder one of the making things like t-shirts ,\" he says. \"But being in find very interesting,\" he band's recent singles was and in true form, he used a band and all that, I said. called Grimly Fiendish! a stock control program to missed the third lecture Will he upgrade to the The space age fixation help things along. and totally lost track of disk version? \"It depends. an of "


"women Kelly Pike. At the time of going to press, however, Wyman was on the beach in the South of France and, despite repeated efforts by his record company, he couldn't be hauled off it to come to the phone. Bob Last, who manages Human League, Scriti Politi and ABC through his firm Tunenoise, is also a great micro fan and at the last count he had an Epson PX8 portable, a BBC B with various add-ons, a Spectrum Plus and two Apricots, which all help him to keep the bands' affairs under control. \"I use the Spectrum solely for games at this stage although we have a small demo studio and we're working on music software using the Spectrum, doing digital sampling. Most music software is certainly useful,\" he says. \"Knight Lore is my favourite game, although after two weeks of playing it, you get a bit fed up with I have plenty of software It's a dog's life being as famous as Heaven 17 it. I use the BBC for games for the tape version and and lan Craig-Marsh both lan Craig-Marsh is but only ones on disk, as the loading time doesn't owning BBC Bs. another ex-programmer. tape based games are a bother me, even if it is slow. Manager Keith Bourton When we did our last LP, pain.\" But I do have a 10-year-old filled us in on the details. How Men Are, (which \"I also do home banking friend who's disgusted at \"Martyn uses his BBC for features a 40-piece through Prestel and the speed of it and thinks loads of interesting things orchestra) he did a bar electronic mail using it should load a lot faster. including accounting. He's chart with all the costs Telecom Gold as there are An artistic soul, Dolphin linked into Prestel, and has involved in making the no games for the Epson. likes drawing on the a banking system which album including the cost of \"Lots of people who buy Amstrad, plotting sets of lets him smuggle money the producer, engineer, records also by computer numbers then seeing what north of the border. It lets studio and everything. so games they're the comes out. \"I find that quite him do amazing things with we can see where we've same sort of people and relaxing,\" he said. \"I'm not his money at the Bank of spent all our money. the attraction of micros for exactly much of a maths Scotland without even Much to Keith's relief, me was the fact that our person.\" touching it!\" vocalist Glen Gregory is business is concerned He's also busy \"wading\" \"Martyn is a former \"completely computer with entertainment of all his way through Basic. \"I do computer programmer illiterate.\" On asking for a kinds.\" charts and things but and he even booked his word with Martyn, we were haven't written any original holiday in Venice using the told he couldn't oblige as programs,\" he says. \"I like BBC. He's a regular he is \"all quoted out and is playing games on it, consumer of computer afraid he will be perceived particularly the Wild Bunch, magazines and software, as a musician who always a western-type shoot-out and knows too much talks about computers.\" game where you play about it for his own good. But this is a computer poker with the town bandit. He's also got a Spectrum, magazine...Oh well, on to Other ones I like are sporty and he's a real buff. He someone who isn't quite ones like football bought me a Spectrum for so shy. managers and Tennis. I'm my birthday so now he's The Rolling Stones Bill not really the type who trying to educate me on it.\" Wyman is well known for likes blasting aliens.\" \"Two of them in the band cataloguing everything on At Virgin, Heaven 17 are really into it all, and their his micro and will soon be came across as the manager is desperately writing a history of the technocrats, with band trying to keep up with Rolling Stones on it, members Martyn Ware them,\" he laughs. according to spokesContinued on page 106 "


"Continued from page 103 know!\" home micros including Chris's band also did a Curt Smith of Tears for Fears, single for EMI called Stuart Adamson of Big Camophlage, \"the world's Country, Marilyn, Steve first game on a pop Winwood, Brinsely For of record,\" says Chris, who Asward, Stuart Copeland of began featuring games on the Police, Steve Hillage and records in 1981. \"On the BDave Greenfield of the side were three programs Stranglers. for the ZX81 which Jaki Graham, whose consisted of graphic single Round and Around displays which went with was a big success, has an songs. Two of the games, Atari Video machine and is one a 1K and the other a thinking of buying a 16K version, were called Spectrum, and Kim Wilde is Flying Train, and a also into home machines. Spectrum version of this We couldn't get hold of game was put out on its the ones who were on own through Manchester tour/in seclusion/on holiday base Random Records. but rest assured there are Chris, a seasoned home plenty out there! A spokes computer user, owns a man for the band Marillion ZX81 to see how much he best summed up the can fit into 1K. situation saying: \"Mark Although the band has Kelly, Marillion's keyboard never had any big hits, they player, has one and he have had 19 singles out on takes it everywhere with Singer Kim Wilde Bob says his various game for Virgin called The clients use micros for Bizz for the Spectrum 48K. recording, with Human \"It contains eight songs by League having done one us including \"I'm in Love of the first electronic with the Girl on the albums. The band's lead Manchester Virain Mega. singer, Philip Oakey, is also store Checkout Desk,a committed micro freak one of our many flops.\" who owns a MAC, Atari, says Chris modestly. Spectrum, QL and Tandy. \"The Biz\" also features \"Acornsoft games are an interview with Chris and fairly reliable,\" says Bob. one of his greatest fans. \"Aviator is a good flight Frank Sidebottom, who simulator but I don't like now has a record deal of Elite as it's too much effort. his own. The inteview I prefer the text guides Frank on how to adventures. My other get into the music favourite games are Jet Set business, and the Willy if I'm in a bad interview itself takes the Chris Sievy of Chris Slevy and the Freshies. mood, and Fighter Pilot, form of a game. \"It took the Spectrum flight me 18 months to write and 11 or 12 different labels, him, but nobody knows simulation program.\" the game encompasses nine cassette albums, plus what it is and we can't find Elite, however, wins everything you'll meet in six one hour videos him to find out...\" hands down as Chris the music industry,\" says \"I like playing with a Cross's favourite game. A Chris. micro as it's like having an member of Ultravox, he \"The interview is a piece alien being from another owns a BBC and although of software within an planet. If you do something he likes playing games he album, really. It also has a wrong, it tells you, and it's mainly uses his BEEB to competition in it, and from very educational. I have a compose and record that we chose some kids son of six and a girl of five music using the UMI who will be recorded on and they doodle for hours system. our next album. So we on them,\" says Chris. Chris Sievy of Chris Sievy might find the next George Many other personalities and the Freshies wrote a Michael — you never in the music business have 104 "


"Souls of SPECTRUM 48K .95 AMSTRAD CPC464 .90 commodore 64 .90 A text adventure with graphics Taskset TASKSET LTD., 13 HIGH STREET, BRIDLINGTON YO16 4PR TEL: (0262) 673790/602668 "


"NOISE OF ART DS The leaps and bounds in technology have radically changed the way music sounds. Mainframe members, Murray Munro and John Molloy, give you a guided tour of a modern musician's instruments. We're MAINFRAME. Murray viewed as part of the system with 15kHz be very happy to answer Munro and John Molloy. general picture of combandwidth and sample questions on the subject You will probably puters in music. time up to 1.3s using the providing that you write to remember us from Micro-computers have Apple memory of 64k us at C+VG. Please don't previous issues when we found many uses in the the ability to play four phone we are not created a couple of field of music. The main notes at once gives the normally at the C+VG \"Quests\" for C+VG, and areas are: system a great deal more office. Enclose a stamped, from our previous album, Sequencing: Sampling: power and versatility over self-addressed envelope \"Tenants of the Lattice Work\" Composing: Control of the monophonic samplers. for your reply. on which the drums and MIDIequipped instruSo much so that the MAINFRAME percussion were made on ments (More on MIDI next DS:3 is establishing itself as To get your copy of Into our own Digital month); Sound synthesis a professional instrument Trouble with the Noise of Art Sampler/Sequencer--the and control of sound in many countries of the send postal orders for DS:3 — using an Apple mixing consoles in world. There were three .50 to Computer + computer. recording studios. on the Live Aid marathon Video Games, Mainframe Well, we've moved on a We have had TV programme. Offer, Priory Court, 30-32 bit. We now have a experience of all of these. The actual techniques of Farringdon Lane, London, recording contract with and will deal with each of sampling sound will be the EC1R 3AU. Polydor Records and our them in the coming subject of next month's first single is out and about. months. Sampling and column, but anyone Continued Next Month It's called Five Minutes and Sequencing are closest to wishing to hear what can uses the computer almost our hearts, of course So be done with the art of exclusively for all the music we will briefly describe our sampling could listen to except lead lines and own DS:3 device in this our single 5 Minutes or vocals. And we've found introduction to the subject. write to C+VG for a copy ourselves pitched into the The DS:3 is a printed of Into Trouble with the world of commerce in a cirucit board add-on for Noise of Art a 12\". big way because we are the Apple Il series of 45rpm single which is ALL the music specification computers. We chose the made with the DS:3 on a writers for the company Apple for two very good four-track recorder in a Greengate Production reasons. We all had home studio. which makes the DS:3 Apple's, albeit old and This made the Disco system. battered, and the machine Charts in the UK and is an We've been asked to has very convenient slots exciting demo of a write this column on the for peripheral boards thus personal computer subject of computers in making life much easier for sampler/sequencer in music. And since we are the designer of the professional use. very proud of our efforts in hardware. We know that many this direction we are Together with powerful readers of C+VG are logically going to start software, the system is a interested in making music with our own scene four voice sampling with computers and we will In "


"NO.1 HIT ON THE CBM 64 & SPECTRUMI NOW RELEASED FOR THE AMSTRAD & C 16/PLUS 4 WORLD SERIES BASEBALL lelame Te G ate Imagine Software is available from: Behe.WHSMITH, John Menzies, WOOLWORTH, LASKYS, Rumbelows,Greens, Spectrum Shops and all good dealers. Imagine Software (1984) Limited 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS. Tel:061 834 3939.Telex: 669977 "


"FOR SPECTRUM AND SPECTRUM PLUS Concepts WOULD YOU TAKE YOUR SPECTRUM SURFING CHALE RAL SUR MAS GREAT PRIZES AND COMPETITIONS Weekly Prize: New Concept T-shirt Monthly Prize: New Concept Sweat Shirt National Championship: New Concept Surf or Skate Board NEW CONCEPT 1: A TRULY ACCURATE SIMULATION What a real expert thinks: \"I got caught up in the competition at the Inaugural Computer World Chamionships in the same way as I do in real surfing competitions. I really wanted to win the New Concept Surf Board Prize. I can assure the games player that this sports tutor gives them the closest possible simulation of my sport.\" JED STONE 1985 English Senior Surfing Championships and Five Times Winner of the Eurosurf Championships and Winner of the Inaugural Computer Championships at the 1985 Eurosurf Championships. NEW CONCEPT 2 Use of patented New Concept Surfboard. THIS IS SURFING! NEW CONCEPT 3 NEW BEACHES AND NEW CHALLENGES TO FOLLOW (i) Eurosurf '85 Bundoran: Peninsula angled breaks. (ii) Huntingdon Beach, California: Waves that die and are reborn. (iii) Burleigh Head, Australia: Longest tubes in world with sharks. (iv) Banzai Pipeline, Hawaii: Murderous ree break tubes. WIN YOUR WAY TO THE WORLD CHAMPIONSHIPS AT AN EXCITING VENUE. OTHER FEATURES Gear selected, board selection and personal details affect performance. 10 speed practice mode. Real scoring on full set of manoeuvres. Back up fully illustrated surf education program. ORDER INFORMATION PRICE .95 Please rush me......... .... copies of SURFCHAMP I enclose a cheque/PO for ..... ......... ADDRESS. NAME ....... Delivery 21 days. Make payable to: New Concepts, c/o S.I.D. Unit 10-11, Imperial Studios, Imperial Road, London SW6 "


"C+VG COMPETITION BOFFIN eet Professor Boffin. He's the brainy bloke who's going to beat, batter and baffle your brain in another great Computer + Video Games competition. He's the Star of Boffin, the BBC smash from Addictive Games. And, thanks to Addictive, we've got a games television to give away to the person who can solve our brainteaser based on the Boffin game. The ten runners up will have the choice of any game from the Addictive range. Printed on this page is a diagram of one of the Boffin screens. In the game, Boffin must pass through a series of caves as quickly as possible by destroying all the unlucky horseshoes in each cavern and then touchi the resident owl, guardian of each cave. What you have to do is work out the quickest route through the cave by joining up the dots. If it matches the route sent to us by Addictive Games, you're in with a winning chance. Send your entry, together with the printed form, to Boffin Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, ECIR 3AU. The closing date is December 16th and the editor's decision is final. III START C+VG/ADDICTIVE GAMES BOFFIN COMPETITION Name Address Name the Addictive game you would like and which computer you own. FINISH a "


"Another great new game from Bubble Bus ESAKAS GAME OF THE MONT By Stephen Crow Author of Wizard's Lair SPECTRUM 48K RH7A \"RAT 7-Smash bubble bus software 87 High Street, Tonbridge, Kent TN9 1RX Telephone: 0732 355962 Telex: 95151 "


"OMPUSERVE is one of the MegaWars Two is much more stop and reflect on strategy once largest and oldest of the sophisticated, and deadly. There you're behind the cockpit of a telecommunication netare two teams of four ships each. spaceship that's when you need works. Many an adventurer has cut Each team tries to capture as many to let your reflexes take over.\" He his or her teeth here. One of the enemy and neutral planets as docs admit, with a sheepish grin, advantages of the interactive possible. Phaser weapons are avail that \"Sometimes I'd rather blast games on Compuserve is that able, as are Photon Torpedoes. 'em than be diplomatic.\" many \"sets\" of them can occur at Good thing you have shields! Alfo is a dentist when he's not once. In fact there are often five MegaWars Two also features colour blowing up spaceships. He says or six different groups playing the graphics. that the Captain is more of a same game on the board at one Entity is the \"handle\" for fantasy role, not like his true self time. 16-year-old Steve. A high school at all. Space War is a good starter junior, Steve logs on at least twice Does he let other players know game, perfect for the beginner. a week, more if he can find the what his profession is? \"Are you One to eight people can particitime. crazy,\" he says. \"Can you imagine pate simultaneously as they \"I find the challenge of Megathe reaction of one of my Megaattempt to attack and destroy their Wars exhilarating,\" he says. \"It's Wars victims if they ever sat in my enemies. Each player controls a not an easy game to master, it chair and watched me come at spaceship and must destroy all the requires patience. I enjoy the comthem with sharp, pointed instruother players. bat of it, part of the fun is trying ments? The graphics consist of symbols to \"psych\" out the other players. A totally different game is Seathat represent the various planets and finding out whether they have Wars. Here space is out in favour and other players. the stuff to take me on. There was of the ocean. You can play against Space War requires good nerves a time when my mom thought a the computer or three other oppoand quick decisions. I found this light late at night in my room nents. The object of the game is out the hard way, by getting blown meant I was up studying. It's too to sink all of your enemies' ships up repeatedly. You can form an bad that she knows better now!\" by commanding your armada with alliance with another ship, but Steve logs on at night because skill and daring. ultimately you'll still have to get it's the best time to concentrate on There is a special War Room rid of him. Not exactly a situation playing. \"That's when I feel really mode where you can meet and that breeds co-operation. sharp and quick, itchy trigger talk to other players, as well as your You only need a 'phone, a The MegaWars series is the big fingers you know? MegaWars gives upcoming opponents. This is a time game in the States, in fact me something fun to do late at good place to get tips from those home computer, a modem Compuserve sells a comprehensive night. Besides,\" he adds, \"I'm more seasoned. As in MegaWars, and a little imagination to manual to use with it. MegaWars not spending nearly as much as if you can enter the game as an be able to transport yourOne is the least complicated. Up I was running back and forth to \"observer\" monitoring the self to another world. to eight people can square off the arcades. And I'm having a lot action around you in order to Marshal M. Rosenthal against each other in a real time more fun, too.\" become more familiar. shows how ... space battle that uses two dimen«Strategy is very important,\" Salty Sam is willing to give me sional graphics similar to Space says Captain Alfo, speaking about a few pointers. \"First off,\" he says, War. MegaWars Two. But I can't get \"keep on the move. Never let the through his polite but firm refusal enemy get a fix on you because in revealing the secret of his conyou kept in the same place too sistently high scores. long. And control those killer \"Part of it I will tell you.\" he instincts!\" he adds. \"Make sure says. \"I sometimes sit down and you aren't being suckered into a plan my long range moves out, trap.\" then contact other friendly players Sam is very secretive about his by electronic mail. Good commutrue self. \"It's not important who nication is one of the most importyou are \"out there\" in the real ant elements in maintaing a good world when you're here, shaping defence.\" your own reality the way you CONNECTIONS choose.\" He proudly admits that he's no landlubber, and was \"You have to hooked on board games long remember that it's before he went on the network. I not just you out asked what's so appealing about there all by your the sea? \"No funny green men.\" self,\" he adds. \"A he snaps back. good set of team The Plato Homelink Network mates will help has been around for over 10 years, protect you, enabling and features outstanding graphics you to be more and information capabilities. As secure, and attack might be expected, there usually better. You can't really is a catch when you say something CONTINUED ON PAGE 112 "


"CONTINUED FROM PAGE like that. In this case only special and expensive terminals could be used IBM/compatible systems could log on, but this bypassed all of the home computers. However, a recent program from Atari allows users to access Plato. The program fools the system into thinking that the Atari is a standard Plato terminal. Plato's games combine graphics with a high level of sophistication and elegance. There are over 25 interactive games on the network. Moria is one of the most popular, and is of the sword and sorcery type. The player establishes a character and then goes out in a land ruled by the laws of fantasy and magic. Some refer to it as the world's most confusing and compelling three dimensional electronic maze, with its seemingly endless rooms and corridors. Large numbers can play simultaneously, and the player can continue on indefinitely (the game never \"ends\", although each par. ticular event can be resolved). Stillbreath has been immersed in Moria for over a year. By day he does mundane work behind the counter of a bank but watch out for him when his fingers hit the keyboard. Does anyone know about his somewhat, to put it mildly, violent alter-ego? \"Nope,\" he says. \"Fantasy is fun, but I keep it as a separate special activity. It's fun but I try not to be fanatical about playing it too often. I know the value of money.\" Stillbreath started out rather poorly as a warrior. \"It took a lot of time for me to become powerful. But I learned from other players, and now I'm pretty good. potatoes for many an adventurer on Plato. Thirty people can logon the game at one time to form the four teams, the Kazari, Federation, Romulans and Orions. This no doubt sounds familiar to fans of Star Trek. Spacelanes is a multi-user interactive role playing game set in the Gray Sector. This is a galaxy of open space and lawlessness, where rules are infrequently obeyed, and fame and fortune await the bold and daring. There are a variety of sentinent races, androids and things somewhere in between that the adventurer must face. He must develop his own resources as he maps his way through space, strange planets and unforscen disasters. Spacelanes is text oriented, but differs radically in that there is an online referee. The designer, Pilot, monitors cach ongoing game, making suggestions and arbitrating events of the group playing at that particular time. Each player assumes a character who can buy (or steal) weapons, acquire wealth, and in general just try to stay alive as the Gray Sector is NOT the healthiest place to be. The date and time for a game session is posted in advance. This gives players time to plan and discuss possible scenarios with each other. I made a pact with Allswell that we'd be secret allies. A whisper mode allows you to speak to a selected person without anyone else knowing. He and I have been displaying open hostility towards each other the last few sessions, heck, I even nicked a bit of his ear off. This, by the way, led into our snatching a valuable bond off a robot messenger who had the bad luck to get in the way of our \"fight\". Allswell got rid of his anger losing purt of his ear by tearing off wc robots head in the process. Somehow I doubt that the other doubt that the other people around like either of us much. Every session is a continuation, and your character is saved until you are able to play again -providing of course you haven't been killed recently. A lot depends on the personalities of the humans. I've heard that there are actually some NICE people in the Gray he hardest thing about teleto use. It got pretty confusing for communications should be me, what with so many different pronouncing that long word. passwords to remember. Modems are becoming simpler to All telecommunication networks use, more sophisticated and require compatibility between their cheaper to boot! computer and yours. Each network Modems work over the standard has its own rules and regulations telephone lines, sending frequency that govern hooking up with it. information rather than words. A Listed below are the basic requireprotocol is an agreed system which ments: allows both sides to understand COMPUSERVE each other. Full duplex is like using 5000 Arlington Centre Blvd./PO a telephone, while half duplex BOX 20212 involves taking turns like using Columbus, Ohio 43220 a walkie-talkie. Some modems can 800-848-8199 be set either way for greater flexiSupports all systems bility in communicating. GAMES COMPUTERS PLAY, INC. The speed a modem handles 112 East Market Street data is expressed as a baud rate. York, PA 17401 The common 300 baud type 717-848-2660 sends/receives 300 bits a second, Supports Atari 400/800/XL but more expensive models can computers. also access 1200 baud, increasing PLATO HOMELINK communication speed four times. Control Data Publishing Company, These modems rely on advanced Inc. microprocessors to change tones PO BOX 261127 into electronic signals which are San Diego, CA 92126 then deciphered at the other end. 800-233-3784 There are basically two kinds of Supports IBM/compatible systems modems to use. An acoustic (Atari with special cartridge modem rapidly disappearing program) from the marketplace-plugs into PRODUCT INFORMATION: the phone line and has a set of HOMETERM terminal program: \"cups\" for a standard headset to Batteries Included drop into. Its main drawback is that 17875 Sky Park North, Suite P noise can sneak into the line, disTrivine, CA 92714 turbing the data or the headset could even fall out. But they're MPP-1000C Uniquave: fairly reliable and they LOOK the Microbits Peripheral Products, Inc. way a modem should be. A direct 225 SW Third Street connect modem costs more, but it Albany, OR 97321 bypasses any acoustic problems. Auto-dialing is another nice PLATO LEARNING PHONE feature, as is knowing when you're CARTRIDGE \"on-line\". Atari Corporation Copying a program is called 1265 Borregas downloading. Uploading is the Sunnyvale, CA 94080 opposite, sending information out. To pass information, both sources SIGNALMAN MARKA VII must have similar protocol, they Uniquave: must understand each other. Most Anchor Automation, Inc. software programs can initialise 6913 Valjean Avenue various kinds of procedures, proVan Nuys, CA 91406 viding that the modem is equipped with the capacity to handle differSpecial thanks to Bob Ramirez and ent kinds of protocol. Joe Radonski for their technical A system is fun when it's easy assistance. He has never met his friend Allon face to face. Nor does he need to. \"Allon and I travel together in the adventure and keep up each other's spirits. Some times it's lonely being a warrior.\" Allon interrupts to point out that warriors aren't all that much help at times. \"There's no substitute for a good thief!\" Allon says. Why would a thief and a warrior travel together? \"We don't get in each other's way,\" says Stillbreath. \"The brawn can always go first,\" Allon chuckles. Empire is the meat and Sector! mean, I know what to do with Dorothy was asked by the Good can opener Witch of the North what she had but I'd never have learned had the nerve to stick it in the back of that big, scary Bok on Termus 3. and tell him it was a in the land of Oz. laser gun. Throughout my electronic travels, Throughout my electronic travels. It's the different kinds of I've discovered that one of the \"minds\" you encounter that make computer's greatest strengths is the Interactive Gaming so much fun. way it encourages communication. Author's bio: Besides operating his Interactive gaming enables commercial photographic studio, many different people to share Marshal M. Rosenthal is also a thoughts and ideas. As you play computer journalist for various with and alongside other users, domestic and overseas you get a feeling of being part of publications. a much greater world, one of interesting and unique individuals. I ENDS "


"THE ULTIMATE GAMES FOR THE COMMODORE 64 SUKTI S DA SISISIE JE GAME Sabre Wulf and Underwurlde are available on the Commodore 64 at .95 inc.YAT FREBRD Firebird Software Wellington House Upper St Martins Lane London WC219DE Firebirdisa Trade Mark of British Telecommunicationspk "


"COMMODORE 64 \"IMHOTEP\" recommended retail price .95 inc VAT. Available from W.H.SMITHS, BOOTS, J.MENZIES, WOOLWORTHS, and all good software retail outlets. Also available from ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME, The Green, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire LE6 5JU, (P&P are included) Tel: 0530 411485 "


"ACTIVISION PRESENTS 2 GREAT TITLES FROM LUCASFILM GAMES. eeeoo :00. oeeee 1985 LFL ballblazer 1985 LFL The yoar, 3097. The game,  ho  most competitive sport in the known universe. The interstellar Ballblazer Conference is about to begin. For the first time, an earthling has bartiled Horough to compete for his planet's honour and the ultimate into any being a po Masterblaxer. Lot play commenco... KORONIS RIFT TM 1985 LFL You're a techno-scavenger. It's tough. Scouring the technologies of The Ancients hoping to strike it rich. Nothing... until you discover the logondary Koronls Rift hiding place of technological treasures beyond your wildest dreams Yours for the falling. Woll, almost... COM BIL 1985 LFL ACTIVISION HOME COMPUTER SOFTWARE TM * Actrice Home Come Softw a repstered trademark of Action Lucas Games Baltia Koronel The Edolor and s e nts of the game fantasies TMC 1985 Lutstid LFL A Peserved Activision, Inc. Authored User Ballblazer available on Sinclair ZX Spectrum. Commodore 64/128 cassette and disk Atari cassette and disk Koronis Rift available on Commodore 64/128 cassette and disk, Atari disk From colected branches of Boots WH Smith, John Menzies, Lasky . Spectrum Greens, Woolworth. Littlewoods and good computer software stores everywhere, Mail Order: Activision (UK) Ltd. 15 Harley House, Marylebone Road, London NWI 5HE Tel 01935 1428 The EDDOLON. COMING SOON "


"ASTRADOS SECTOS DODO Nie ATRUNG-FU Also for the BBC Micro 9.95 S neame Konami. er-Glare Imagine Software is available from: Buo.WHSMITH, John Menzies , WOOLWORTH, LASKYS, Rumbelows,Greens_ Spectrum Shops and all good dealers. Imagine Software (1984) Limited 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS. Tel:061 834 3939.Telex: 669971 "


"Software COMPILATION REVIEWS If you can sell something once, you can sell it twice that seems to be the current motto of many software houses. THEY SOLD A MILLION It was a lesson quickly Spectrum, Commodore 64, Amstrad, SPARKLERS SPECIAL learnt by the record industry. A .95. Spectrum, Commodore 64, .50 hit single can be included on Ocean, Software Projects, Ultimate and US Gold have also joined forces Sparklers Special is a \"best of the a compilation album with to release four well known titles Sparklers range of pocket money other past hits and sold at a under the name \"They Sold A Million.\" games available for the Spectrum and bargain price. The customer Titles for the 48K Spectrum and Commodore 64 Amstrad are Beach Head, Daley The Commodore collection has sees it as good value for Thompson's Decathalon, Jet Set Willy Slurpy, a strange creature with a huge money and the record and Sabre Wult. On the Commodore appetite who muches away at company squeezes a few extra 64 version, Staff of Karnath will Glowbugs and Cave Birds for points. pounds out of a song. Then there's Orc Attack where Wric replace Sabre Wulf. And for the Amstrad both Jet Set the Brave must kill all the Orc Now as Christmas Willy and Atic Atac are being written invaders or die, Black Hawke, an approaches, software houses especially for the project. action and strategy rescue game with are releasing their old games 30 levels of play, and River Rescue, another rescue game where scientists in compilation packs. MEGGA COMPILATION are at risk. And if you haven't already Commodore 64, .95 Interceptor The Spectrum collection also bought any of the games Software. Games individually worth  are includes Orc Attack and River included in the compilations, on offer here for just .95. Rescue. Added to them are many do offer good value for Stagecoach, a perilous Western Titles are Tales of the Arabian money. shoot'em-up where the stage must get Nights, an arcade adventure packed through, and Tower of Evil, an arcade Donning Father Christmas with spells, magic carpets and adventure ranging over 40 rooms in gear, the C+VG review team dangers, Bigtop Barney, circus action search of lost treasure. as the clown performs four deathhas sifted through some of the Each compilation represents fairly defying stunts, Where's My Bones?, a good value, remembering that each compilations now on offer murdered monk's search to find his game originally sold for .50 each. with a view to festive gifts. bones so he can Rest in Peace. Break Fever, a graphical break dance game with music. Try to master HENRY'S HOUSE AND the intricacies of the Turtle, Donkey FRIENDS VOL ONE Kick and Headspin. The Caverns of Sillah sets you on a mission to Commodore 64, .95. English Software. rescue stolen agricultural droids, and Frontline, a war strategy game. English Software has already released Megga Compilation represents a compilation tapes for the Atari with a nice cross-section of arcade-style lot of success. Now it's the NOW GAMES action. Good value. Commodore's turn. Volume One contains Henry's House, Spectrum, Commodore 64, .95. a one-player game, Jet Boof Jack, a This package really represents an 10 screen platform and collecting excellent deal, worth every penny. game set in a record plant, Neptune's In some ways Now Games is Daughter, a quest to rescue one of different from most of the other the Sea King's daughters packages. The games were all from the evil originally released by different software houses. The six on offer are Lords of Midnight (beyond), Brian Blood Axe (The Edge), Strangeloop (Virgin), Pyjamarama (Mikro-Gen), Arabian Nights (Interceptor) and Falcon Patrol (Virgin). grip of the All the games are well-known and it THE EPIC Sea Serpent you've already bought one or two of Spectrum, .95 Turtle Software. and Stranded, them, you will be forgiven for wincing The Epic offers six Spectrum games a text adventure with when you see how much all six can / graphics in which you covering a variety of game styles. tow be bought for. Excellent value Titles are A Liquid Simplex, must escape from a strange and a wise buy for the cash Spraymania, 3D Blood Dungeon. planet. conscience. Snakes Alive, One Man and his Job Volume Two also contains Henry's Houseand Moons of Tantalus. a strange decision which will surely put off people buying both tapes and the previously unreleased Soldier of Fortune which follows a man's search for gold in terror-ridden underground caverns. 200 HENRYS 03 ROO CORE 000650 277 "


"ELECTRIC | MORE LIVE WIRE HITS FROM THE | COMPUTER DREAMLAND OLLTE'S FOLLES TWO EXCITING GAMES IN EACH AMAZING PACKAGE AT THE SUPERB VALUE FOR MONEY PRICE OF ONLY NUCLEAR 999 BEER BELLY BURT'S BREW BIZ   12.95 DISK AVAILABLE ON COMMODORE 64/128 & ATARI Electric Dreams, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020 Telex: 337268 "


"LATINA SCUSSTATTOORSETETUR SVOLTE XTES Join Daleyinthese 8NEWarcade events a to test your skilland stamina Osons SUPER TEST PISTOL SHOOTING SPRING BOARD DIVING TUG O' WAR GIANT SLALOM CYCLING ROWING ASPECIAL VERSION DALEY THOMPSONS PARFEM for C16 and and PLUS 4 computers only PENALTIES 30 by RELEASED ON JPKIPUMASK 69 AMIDD 8.95 OMMODORE TO) Ocean Software is available from selected branches of DOLINWORTH. WHSMITH, DE Lona Menzies . LASKYS, Rumbelows, COME Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers Ocean Software, Ocean House 6 Central Street Manchester M2 SNS Telephone 061 832 6633 Tele 669977 Oceans G "


"C+VG software SPORTS REVIEWS SUMMER GAMES II COMPUTER PACER 0:18 re Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Epyx/US Gold  Price: .95 cassettel .95 disc Summer Games II has been hailed as THE sports simulation. Amazing graphics and realistic animation have quite rightly earned it rave reviews. Summer Games was great but Summer Games Il is better. The events covered are cycling. fencing, kayaking, the triple jump, rowing, the high jump, javelin and equestrian events. There's a choice of 18 countries you can represent. There are are opening and closing ceremonies, awards, national anthems and competitions against your friends' computers. Up to eight people can share in the fun. Judy's verdict: This is greatespecially the high-jump, triple jump and javelin, they're my events. The graphics are as good as the arcades, the movements of the competitors are very realistic and entertaining to watch. Presentation is superb. I prefer Summer Games Il because of the athletics Judy's Verdict EPYX British and former Commonwealth Heptathlon record holder Judy Simpson knows all about the skill, guts and dedication needed to compete in the world of top class athletics in seven gruelling events. So she seemed just the right person to undertake the C+VG sports games review challenge. Judy and her husband Robbie travelled from her home in Coventry and entered the special arena constructed in a spare few thousand square feet of C+VG's London offices to review this year's top sports games. Judy, who owns a Commodore 64, likes HYPERSPORTS Machine CBM 64. Spectrum, Amstrad Supplier: Imagine Price: CBM 64 and Amstrad (.95) Spectrum (.95) Hypersports, Konami's great simulation, is just as big a hit on the home micro as it was in the arcades. Six frantically exhausting events are featured swimming, skeet shooting, long horse, archery, the triple jump and weightlifting. Each one requires good coordination and fast reflexes. The Commodore version features terrific sound, and music Chariots of Fire plus brilliant graphics Judy's verdict: These to play games in both the arcades and on her computer. good as the arcades. 00_00_0 LEON LLLLLLL LES "


"USIVUIERCITTA SUL CDRIUSRICAN TOTAL 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 WINTER GAMES Machine: CBM 64 performing daredevil moves on Supplier: Epyx/US Gold skies Price: .95 cassettel Ski Jump: a deep breath and you're hurtling down the slope .95 disc to take off into the air. Points A fanfare sounds. It's the 1988 are awarded for style and Winter Games at Calgary in distance. Canada. And Epyx/US Gold Biathalon: a cross-country have another gold winner. race on skies combined with The same high standard of rifle target shooting. graphics and accurate simulation Bobsled: brave the track of which made Summer Games ll solid ice and speeds of up to such a smash, are all present 90mph. again. Judy's verdict: I suggest that Seven events are on offer. anyone who wants to invest in Figure Skating: a one minute this sort of game should buy a timed exercise of seven very good joystick and buy compulsory movements one very often. camel spin, sit spin, double axel These pictures are fantastic. I jump, triple lutz jump and camel would buy this one and skip all into spin, the joystick waggling events. I Free Skating: two minutes in would do the skating, ski which you can give free range jumping and hot-dogging. to your imagination and impress You can tell we like this the judges with jumps and because we want to take this spins. one home! Speed Skating: two racers The big pluses are superb compete against each other in graphics, good instructions separate lanes. not guess work or trial and Hot Dog Aerials: don't get in error. I thoroughly enjoyed it. a flap as you flip through the air This is the one for us! 00.00 DALEY THOMPSON'S SUPER TEST COBR> ATTEMPT SCORE 003 Machine: Spectrum/ It consists of eight new CBM 64 Amstrad events spread over two days of competition. Supplier: Ocean Day One consists of pistol Price .95 (Spectrum), .95 shooting, cycling, spring board (CBM 64), .95 (Amstrad) diving and the giant slalom. Day Daley Thompson's Super Test is Two covers rowing, penalty a worthy sequel to the original kicks, the ski jump and tug o' Decathlon war. The Spectrum version has clear graphics and a nice screen layout. Great fun with a lot of events at a reasonable price. Judy's verdict: I thought it was okay. I don't think the instructions are very good and you don't get enough time to choose things at least not for me SPEED S MET HISS SHOTS PUNTO "


"A DISNEY SIERRA COMPUTER SOFTWARE PERSONAL COMPUTER SOFTWARE SIERRA Walp Disney PLAYING FOR FUN LEARNING FOR LIFE DONALD DUCK'S PLAYGROUND Walt Disney Personal Computer Software is designed to make the learning of basic, everyday skills and the development of knowledge a happy and fun-filled experience. Any child will be captivated by the stunning graphics, the familiar and delightful characters and the scope of the compelling and challenging activities in which they become engaged. A truly remarkable series of educational software, with the unquestioned quality for which its originators are renowned. A FUN-FILLED WAY TO LEARN ALL ABOUT MONEY Donald's mischievous nephews-Huey, Dewey, and Louie, would love to have a playground of their own. You can help kind-hearted Uncle Donald DOUBLE CASSETTE build them one. IN THE HUNDRED ACRE WOOD THE POOH WINNIE .95 DISK & DOUBLE CASSETTE MICKEY'S SPACE ADVENTURE in the thismorning ONLY IT'S A DIFFERENT GAME EACH TIME YOU PLAY A blustery wind came up this morning in The Hundred Acre Wood; DISKit picked things up and blew them everywhere. Now it's up to you to find and return missing belongings to all the characters in the wood. EXPLORE OUR SOLAR SYSTEM THROUGH 150 CAPTIVATING SCENES You, Mickey, and Pluto can help put back together the shattered memory crystal\" of a far-off planet. Broken into nine pieces scattered throughout our solar system, the missing crystal stores the entire history of Oron and its inhabitants. Fire up the spaceship that's been sent for you, and be on your way. CBM 64 .95 DISK GOLD "


"GYROSCOPE Test your reaction and reflex skills to their limit, in an attempt to guide a fast and furiously gyrating gyroscope over a number of challenging and hazardous terrains. GYROSCOPE THE GAME TO SEND YOU SPINNING OFF YOUR HEAD Available for Spectrum at .95 and Commodore 64, Amstrad and BBC B at .95 Steinar ME MELBOURNE HOUSE Melbourne House (Publishers) Ltd., Castle Yard House, Castle Yard, Richmond, TW10 6TF. Trade enquiries call 01.940 6064 Available from selected branches of S .WHSMITH. Henzes, WOOLIVORTW.LASKYS, Rumbelows,Green, Spectrum Shops, and all good software dealers "


"LU BY TONY TACOUSHI Ring...ring...ring... I leapt to my feet and dashed to answer the phone. \"Hello? \"Hello Tak it's Orlando from Aardvark.\" \"Hello\" I muttered pausing to catch my breath. \"I've got something to show you. My latest masterpiece!\" \"Great stuff!, what have you got? >Continued from pll abandons the use of keyboard or joystick as a means of control. Instead New Concepts invented a minature surfboard which fits over the computer keys. By applying pressure to the board, real-life surfing moves can be performed. Variations in weather conditions and the surfer's individual details ensure the game is different everytime, just as every new wave is for a surfer. Before taking to the sea, the player must make a number of choices. Surfing gear must be selected. This depends on the player's size, weight, age and sex. Board length and weight must also be selected. Once the gear has been selected, the screen changes to a view of the sea from the beach. The surfer must paddle out into the sea, ducking through the breakers which sweep onto shore, and make his way out to the chosen point to catch a wave. At this point the screen changes to a closeup of the surfer on his wave. Points are awarded according to how the surfer performs various moves bottom turn, crankin', off-the-lip, cut backs, blasting, barrel rolls, 180 and 360 degree turns. But there's the constant danger of \"eating it big\" and getting wiped out. The game is hard, challenging, frustrating and, ultimately, very addictive. The player's score can be entered into the Hall of Fame alongside the name and score of the current champion player. Should the score be broken a coded message will be given and the player can return the tape to New Concepts and receive a prize. Programmer Desmond Mcenemy, 20, has almost finished Champ Skier, which again features a keyboard overlay this time two skis. Also planned are Ski Jumper, Water Skier, Sailing, Skate Boarder, Paragliding and Hang Gliding. Champ Surfer will sell for around , including the minature surfboard. Conversions to other machines should follow. \"I've got two games. Firetrack on the Beeb and Frak on the Electron. They are superb, the graphics are stunning, the sound is amazing, the playability astounding, the programming brilliant, the design fabulous...\" \"Hmm...\" Now I don't like hype even from the most talented of programmers. BUT Orlando has done it yet again! Both Firetrack and Frak are superb pieces of software. Beeb and Electron owners are usually starved of real top notch games software. But Orlando has delivered the goods with his latest pieces of genius Firetrack and Frak. Orlando's reputation speaks for itself with titles like Arcadian, Zalaga and Frak for the Beeb. and Electron. In fact he is one of the very few Beeb programmers whose games are eagerly awaited by proud Beeb gamesters. Frak rates as a classic on the Beeb and it's set to be the same on the Electron. Your caveman has to find his way around various scaffoldings picking up keys along the way. He also uses his yo-yo to knock nasties off their ledges as he clambers around. He climbs up and down ladders and leaps from platform to platform in his bid to gain the keys. Make no mistake this IS NOT just another platform game this is THE platform game. There are many sneaky twists and solving the screens will need some real ingenuity on your part. To make it more playable than the Beeb version there is an option to start on a higher level. You can also alter the background and use of colour to suit your own taste. Frak on the Electron is everything it should have been on the Beeb. It is faster, yes faster! There is no flicker on any of the characters and that music, oh THAT music is so good. The graphics are identical to the Beeb although there are 12 different screens to work through. An added bonus is the inclusion of a screen designer which allows the player to set up his own screens to play. Frak comes on tape for the Electron and will cost you .90. Electron owners have been starved of good software but there is now an answer! BUY Frak. I promise you will not regret it. Now on to the The BIG one, Firetrack. This is a version of the current arcade hit called Starforce. But version isn't quite the right word. Firetrack in many respects is better than the arcade original. It's as fast and the sound is as good. But where it really scores is in the graphics. The attention to detail and use of colour is superlative. The object of Firetrack is to battle your way through an asteroid belt to a white hole. You fly over various colonies in your bid to find the hole, the colonies' defence systems are activated as you enter their terrain. Their attack comes in many patterns and in many forms. You can move your fighter in eight directions as you zap the aliens to oblivion. At the end of each wave you encounter a head that floats horizontally across the screen and you have to pump it full of blaster to progress to the next stage. The graphics and pace of action really make this game. The asteroids scroll down the screen and the aliens filter in from all sides sometimes in sequence, sometimes at will. The detail and colours are stunning and the action just never lets up as you get deeper into the game. There is over 15 minutes of different scrolling backdrop. I defy anyone to reach the White Hole at the end without some real marathon sessions on the keyboard or joystick. Even ! couldn't crack this baby. Orlando sums up Firetrack in his own inimitable style: \"It's got the fastest kill rate ever. It's just total destruction.\" Firetrack should be available from the middle of November on tape and disk (.90 and .90). A Commodore 64 version is also due sometime before Christmas. Good news for all those MSX and Amstrad owners who have been frothing at the mouth awaiting conversions of Ultimate's classic games for their machines. Well cheer up and get down to your nearest software store. Knight Love, Alien 8 and Nightshade are all now available for the MSX. And Ultimate assures us that all the features found in the original versions of the game are all here to delight and tantalise you. And for Amstrad addicts there's now Sabre Wulf, the chart topping jungle adventure, for you to get you teeth into. We know it's vulgar to talk about money, but here's what you'll have to pay. Knightslore, Alien 8 and Nightshade will set you back .95 and Sabre Wulf will cost .95. But it's near Christmas and you never know what Santa might bring you... I say chaps, have you had trouble getting hold of the adventure game, The Secret of St Bride's? Up to now it's only been available by mail order. But not to worry . St Bride's School, the software house behind the game, has signed a distribution deal with Audiogenic. St Bride's, which must be the world's most unusual software house, is a school on the west coast of Ireland where grown women can pay to find out what school life was like 50 years ago. Strange, eh? Lately the school has been producing games. St Bride's headmisstress, Marianne Scarlett, tells us: \"Our aim is to build St Bride's into one of the foremost software houses in the British Isles.\" Calling all Atari owners... Calling all Atari owners. Fighter Pilot from Digital Intergration is zooming your way. This flight simulation runs in 48K and will cost .95 for cassette and .95 on disk. Over and out. Ends "


"SOFTWARE SERVICE COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES Seen a game you'd like in this issue? DON'T MISS OUT You can order today from Computer + Video Games super new SOFTWARE SERVICE. It's the easiest way yet of buying all your favourite games and every month there's a unique offer or competition open to everyone who uses the Software Service. This month, three lucky readers will win  of free software the choice of software is left up to you. But that's not all for every game over  we give you 50p off (just deduct it from your cheque/P.O. if the game costs over , deduct ). All YOU have to do is fill in the coupon below and send it off to C+VG — *ALL POST AND PACKING IS ABSOLUTELY FREE!! So send away today and you could win yourself  of the games of your choice. DON'T FORGET TO STATE THE MAKE OF COMPUTER. RING OUR HOTLINE TO CHECK ON AVAILABILITY OF LATEST GAMES 731 4607 SUPPLIER PRICE NAME ADDRESS Please send your orders together with a cheque/P.O. payable to the Computer + Video Games Software Service to: Computer + Video Games, FREEPOST, London  . All prices are as quoted in C+VG remember to deduct 50p off the RRP for each game costing over . minimum order . COMPUTER TOTAL COST "


"ADVERTISEMENT INDEX J.J.B SOFTWARE SERVICES 115 53 ..45 132 Activision Addictive Games.. Amstrad.. Anirog Arcade Software.... Ariolasoft... IBC .77 .36 Megasave Software.vn Melbourne House, 18, 21, 91, 123 Micro Ads Retailers...... Micro Ads.... 144 Micro Net...............81, 100, 101 Micro Power.. . .57 Microsell..... 26 Microsphere... .63 Miles Better Software.......... Mirrorsoft.... ........... 16. 75 Mister Software Club.. 83 Mosaic Software... PitstopElite. 79 Bargain Software............ Beyond. ...............42, 43, 44 Bubble Bus............... 75, 77, 110 79 Commodore............. Compumart.... . . 39 Cut Price Software.................75 New Concept Software.......... 108 ..19 Digital Integration Domark Durell. Ocean Software....OBC, 119, 138 Orpheus 127 ........55, 137 ...27 Poste Haste Software....... Probe Software................. .12 Electric Dreams.................60, 86 Elite Systems.........IFC, 3, 30, 31 English Software.... ....99 Ram Electronics............... ATARI Cass Disk COMMODORE CassDisk Blue Max 2001........ Dropzone... ..7.25 10.80 Ball Blazer..................... 7.25 ..... 7.25 10.BO Rescue Fractulas... .. 10.80 13.20 Droppone... Mr Do............................. 7.25 Bounty Bob................. Gt. American Rd Race....... 7.25 10.80 Boulder Dash....... International Basketball....4.20 Ghost Chaser Frank Bruno.....................5.20 Up 'N' Down... Exploding Fist.................. 7.25 Whirly Nurd... Hypersports..... ......... 6.50 Strip Poker.. Graham Gooch Cricket...... 7.25 Hacker 7.25 10.80 Mercenary....................... 7.25 10.80 Pinball Construction Set 10.80 Mail Order Monster....... 10.80 10.80 Music Construction Set... 10.80 Pin Construction Set..... ....10.80 7 Cities of Gold....... 10.80 Music Construction Set.........10.80 AMSTRAD Exploding Fist.................. 7.25 MSX Beach Head....... ......... 7.25 Boulder Dash..............5.70 Alien 8..... ... 7.25 Dun Darach....................... 7.25 Ghostbusters ................... Decathlon..... ... ..........8.70 View To A Kill................... 8.00 Buck Rogers .9.00 Sorcery .6.45 The Hobbit.... The Hobbit 10.80 10.80 Psychedelia.....................4.80 Morden's Quest..............5.00 Sorcery... .. 6.50 Knightlore... 7.25 StarWon Hoa Frank Bruno...............6.45 SPECTRUM Higgin's Snooker........... Exploding Fist... Jump Jet......................... 7.25 View To A Kill. .00 HARDWARE Terrormolinos...................5.70 Quickshot 2............ ...5.75 International Karate..........4.76 Gunshot 2. 5.75 Rupert Toy Maker.............5.76 Competition Pro............. 13.50 Dambusters..................... 7.25 Postage UK included Please state Name, Address + Order clearly Checks payable to: J.J.B SOFTWARE 14 Lorraine Crescent, Darlington, Co. Durham Tel: (0325) 288102 Send S.A.E. for Software List Firebird.........39, 40, 61, 92, 113 ..39 **-.77 Gargoyle Games....... .......52 Global Software...... ..........90 Goodbye Software..................77 Shekana Computers..... Shoyo Boeki Kaisha.... Sinclair Research............. .6, 7 Softek. .50, 56 Software Projects............. Hewson Consultants........... ..105 24, 25 Imagine........ 107, 116, 131, 133 Task Set. Thorn EMI.. Trade Discount Computer Supplies... 130 JJB Software............. ... 126 97 Llamasoft......... Logic Sales Ultimate.... Unit-Soft..... U.S. Gold..... 10, 62, 87, 95, 118, 122, 128 Martech Games........ Matrix Software Club..... .......75 Virgin Games.... MICROS E LI  48K SPECTRUM, cassette recorder, joystick, interface, ASII, 30 original games including Protocol and Starion. Several books, 40 assorted magazine. All good condition.  ono. Phone 01 303 4125 ask for Stuart. ATARI SOFTWARE for sale (cassette) Dropzone, Zaxxon, Pengo, Decathlon  each. F15 Strike Eagle . Phone 051 327 4676 or write to Jason Long, 26 Hooton Way, Hotton, South Wirral L66 6AH. CBM 64 GAMES for sale. All originals, great titles eg Frak, Ruper, Jack-Char, Fourth Protocol, and 23 more all for  or prices ranging from - please ring Aitaf after 6pm on 476 0149 HURRY!! .4$K SPECTRUM, Currah Speech Synthesizer, Programmable Joystick Interface, Tape Recorder, over  worth original software including Ghostbusters, Decathlon. Cost new , bargain at  ono or swap +C2N cassette unit, phone (04024) 71691 after 5pm. ATARI 400 48K, 810 disk drive, 410 recorder, several cassette/disk games, 10 cartridges (including Basic), S.A.M., all manuals and leads (including De-Re Atari)  telephone Rochdale (0706) 31658.  ATARI 130XE, 1010 Recorder, Joystick, Invitation to Programming, Pole Position, One-on-One and 6 issues of Atari User. Value . Sell for . Phone Tony on Luton 0582 584545 daytime or 607126 evenings/weekends. SONY MSX and over  worth of software, Data Recorder, Joystick, Magazines + Manuals. Overall value  sell for . Phone Basingstoke (0256) 52454. STUCK ON any of these adventures, Hulk, Spiderman, Mystery Funhouse, Voodoo Castle, Savage Island part 1 or 2, Ghost Town, Adventureland, The Count, Pirate Adventure, then send  and se to B. Wooffitt, 1 Elvington Lane, Grimston, York.  BBC-B + Compatible SureShot Joystick + 4 manuals + over 30 original games and morel eg. Elite, Aviator, Starship Command, all in excellent condition, worth  slel for  only. Telephone kang on 422 0032 evenings (Birmingham area). ATARI COMPUTER games Defender, Donkey Kong, Ms Pacman, Qix, Dig Dug. Computer Chess,  each. Centipede, Blue Max, Missile Command, Paint (disk), Feasibility Experiments,  each. Firefleet, Diamonds, Statos, Controller,  each. Telephone (021) 747,5368 after six. ATARI 800XL, 1010 Recorder, Quickshot 2, Missile Command, Pac-man, Preppie, Invitation to Programming 1 and 2, Tanktics, Asteroids, Firefleet etc. books and magazines and manuals. All are boxed an in excellent condition. Cost over . Under guarantee. Only  ono. Telephone (021) 747 5368 after six. ATARI NEW releases:Bounty Bob Strikes Back, Kennedy Approach, Chop Suey, Great maerican Road Race, etc. Also games on cassette Telephone 09263666. 8 disks  each. cassette .50.  BARGAIN SOFTWARE: Spectrum all originals. Lords of Midnight .50, Doomdarks Revenge .50, Mountains Ket .50, Quill  many others from only , Kempston Interface in very good condition .50. Telephone Churchdown 714394. SPECTRUM PLUS, cassette recorder, ram turbo and casette racks, all boxed, also Atari joystick, magazines and plenty of software . Write to Stuart Douglas, 5 Telford Place, Claggan, Fort William, Inverness-shire, Scotland. .MSX SOFTWARE wanted write to Franco Lucchese. Dinnendahls Hhe 28, 4330 Mlheim Ruhr, Germany (cassette only) Cassette di corder, Serdisk "


"DO YOU FIND CHOOSING At the VIRGIN GAMES CENTRES, we've worked long and hard to put together the UK'S BIGGEST RANGE of COMPUTER SOFTWARE GAMES. We've got an unrivalled selection of... Arcade Games, Adventure Games, War Games, Classic Games, Family Games, Sports Games, Business and Educational Software. For Spectrum, QL, Atari, BBC, Electron, Commodore 64, Commodore C16, Enterprise, MSX and Amstrad machines Plus a large stock of utilities, peripherals, chess computers, books and magazines and a range of Sinclair Commodore and Amstrad hardware. And if you find choosing software hard, we have a team of knowledgeable staff to help you. HARD? 'GAMES CENTRE 172 Union Street, Aberdeen . 94/96 Briggate, Leeds. 100 Oxford Street, London W1 The Tujad is a Josephson supercomputer that controls a fusion reactor orbiting Earth. It has gone berserk and the future of half the known galaxy is in the balance. You take control of one of the new GEN 19 multidroids, capable of running and flying and equipped with the latest weapons and neutron defensive shields. Your task is to search through the reactor, overcoming the automatic defensive mechanisms and piece together the circuit board needed to stop Tujad. TUJAD NEVER-LOOK BACK... Orpheus Ltd., The Smithy, Unit 1, Church Farm, Hatley St. George, Nr. Sandy, Beds. SG 193HP Tel. Gamlingay (0767,51481/91 Telex 817117 ETHGENG Commodore 64 Amstrad Spectrum ORPHEUS .95 from Orpheus Tujad SRPHEUS "


"U.S. GOLD Can Softwa Datasoft DISK ATARI & COMMODORE 64/128 .95 .95 CASS COMING SOON ON SPECTRUM 48K .95 AMSTRAD DISK .95 CASS .95 From the RICHARD DONNER Production RICHARD DONNER THE Based on the Story STEVEN SPEILBERG by ATARI conies Exciting Multiscreen Action and Adventure! U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268. Datasoft is a registered trademark of Datacoft inc The Goonies is a trademark of Warner Bros. Inc. 1985 Warner Bros Inc. All rights reserved Warner Tamerlane Publishing Corp and Relia Music Corp All rights reserved. Used by permission 1985 Datasoft inc "


"PSI WARRIOR 'TWAS THE NIGHT BEFORE CHRISTMAS AND HIGH ABOVE THE CITY, SANTA AND RUDOLF ARE MAKING THEIR ANNUAL TRIP OF GOOD CHEER... ..ENTERING INTO RUDOLF, CREATINGA SUDDENLY A PSI CREATURE LUNGES OUT OF THE DARKNESS AND ATTACKS! HO HO RUDOLF? WHAT'S THE MATTER, BOY? IT'S SANTA AND HE'S IN BIG TROUBLE! I'VE GOT TO MATCH HIS SPEED, THEN... KHELP! ... JUMP PSI WARRIORS ABSORPTION SUIT INSTANTLY BURNS OUT THE PUPAE, FREEING RUDOLP. BUT WITH ALARMING RESULTS... hind WOOMPTE YE, BYE, SI SORRY, SANTA. RUDOLF'S O.K. BUT YOUR SLEIGH IS ANOTHER STORY... MERRY CHRISTMAS, EVERYBODY OH MY! PLL NEVER GET ALL THE CHILDRENS GIFTS DELVERED' CALAMITY! ke NEXT: I THINK I CAN HELP YOU, SANTA... BOARD... "


"TRADE DISCOUNT COMPUTER SUPPLIES Quality Products at Prices You Can't T.D.C.S. Afford to Miss! OST + PACKAGE UK MAINLAND + 15% Elsewhere ............. PROTEK MODEM FOUR INTERFACES AVAILABLE BRITISH TELECOM APPROVED RRP .95 JOYSTICK & PROTEK SWITCHABLE INTERFACE FOR SPECTRUM & DDD SPECTRUM + QUICKSHOT I JOYSTICK RRP .95 COMMODORE 16/PLUS4 JOYSTICK RRP .95 PROTEK SWITCHABLE OUR PRICE .95 OUR PRICE .95 OUR PRICE .95 OUR PRICE .95 OUR PRICE .95 OUR PRICE .95 INTERFACE BRP .95 BBC GIFT SET INCLUDES JOYSTICK & INTERFACE RRP RRP .95 ORDER YOUR COPY NOW TO: TRADE DISCOUNT COMPUTER SUPPLIES 117 Higher Parr Street, Fingerpost Shopping Centre, St. Helens, Merseyside, England. WA9 1AGI NAME. ADDRESS.. 02 03 COUNTY. ......P/CODE......... Please send me the following order; (Please tick) 05 Please state which interface you require AMSTRAD BBC SPECTRUM 64 I enclose a cheque for ..... I enclose a postal order for ... I ACCESS .......... VISA ............. By post or ring DAY (0744) 22013! Please debit my credit card. Acc/No. 04 "


"TENSPEETTT93 WORLD SERIES BASKETBALL BH SPECTRE NAKELIN Wer names TunesGate Name your team, choose your colours, lace up and run'em off the court pass ... fake ... jump ... shoot in off the backboard ... GREAT BASKET! Simulating all the excitement (including FOULS!) of the Basketball Challenge. Play head to head or against the computer REACH FOR IT! Imagine Software is available from: SND WHSMITH, Merpes. WOOLIVORTH. LASKYS, Rumbelows.GreeneSpectrum Shops and all good dealers. Imagine Software (1984) Limited-6 Central Street-Manchester-M2 5NS-Tel:061 834 3939 "


"OMICRO RE TA I L ERS ASK YOUR LOCAL EXPERT Every month selected computer specialist shops will be listed in your favourite magazine. If you want to buy anything you've seen in the magazine, go and see your nearest specialist. AVON KENT MICRO COMPUTERS MIDDLESEX 57 Union Street SOFTWARE PLUS Maidstone INNOVATIONS, COMPUTER & VIDEO 12 York Street Kent 0622 52784 9 Harmondsworth Road Bath 0225 61676 MICROWAY COMPUTERS West Drayton 39 High Street Middlesex UB7 9JS 0895 420457 BERKSHIRE Rainham BRACKNELL COMPUTERS Kent STAFFORDSHIRE 0634 376702 44 Broadway MODATA COMPUTERS LTD MICROTRONICS Bracknell 0344 427317 30 St John's Road 27o Market Street Tunbridge Wells 0892 41555 Tamworth SOFTWARE CITY Staffs 0827 51480 47 Cheap Street Tatung Einstein Specialist Newbury LEICESTERSHIRE Berks RI 45BX 0635 31696 SUFFOLK DIMENSION COMPUTERS LTD DERBYSHIRE 27-29 High Street COMPUTER MAGIC Leicester 0533 57479 24 Crown Street FIRST BYTE COMPUTERS Ipswich 10 Main Centre Suffolk LINCOLNSHIRE MBX 91999 2473 London Road Derby 0332 365 280 SURREY MKD COMPUTERS 24 Newlands SOFTWARE CITY DORSET Lincoln 0522 25907 14 Thames Street DENSHAM COMPUTERS Kingston 329 Ashley Road Surrey KTI IPE 01-541 4911 LONDON Parkstone WARWICKSHIRE Poole 0202 737493 GAMES WORLD OEM COMPUTER CENTRE ESSEX 129 King Street Hammersmith Rugby Micro Centre London W6 ESTUARY PERSONAL COMPUTERS 9-11 Regents Street 01-741 4467 Rugby 0788 70522 318 Chartwell North LOGIC SALES Victoria Circus Shopping Centre 19 The Broadway WEST MIDLANDS Southend on Sea 0702 614131 The Bourne MBC COMPUTER CENTRE H. REYNOLDS Southgate 79 Orsett Road London N14 17 19 Lichfield Street 01 882 4942 Wolverhampton 0902 29907/29021 Grays 0375 5948 SHEKANA COMPUTERS MINNIE MICRO COMPUTER CENTRE 221 Tottenham Court Road YORKSHIRE 11/12 Eastern Esplanade London W1 631 4627 THE COMPUTER CENTRE Southend SOFTWARE CITY 26 Anlaby Road Essex 0702 615809/62033 382 Kings Road Hull London SW3 5UZ HAMPSHIRE 01-352 9220 North Humberside 0482 26297 JUST MICRO RAM ELECTRONICS VIC ODDENS 22 Carver Street 106 Fleet Road 6 London Bridge Walk Sheffield S1 455 0742 752732 02514 5858 London SEI 01 403 1988 LOOK & SEE VIDEO WORLD 45 Belmont Bridge HEREFORDSHIRE Rentals Skipton 0756 60078 HONEY SETT COMPUTERS 282 Harrow Road MICRO BYTE 17 Union Street 01-289 3102 London W2 36 County Arcade Hereford HR1 2BT 0532 450 529 0432 279404 Leeds MANCHESTER MICRO FUN KENT 11 Sheffield Road BUDGET SOFTWARE CENTRE Barnsley 0226 207063 ANIROG COMPUTERS 51 Fennel Street 29 West Hill MICRO FUN 061-834 2808 Manchester M4 3DY Unit 12 Dartford The Guardian Centre Kent 0322 91649 MERSEYSIDE Rotherham 0709 60000 CANTERBURY SOFTWARE CENTRE BLUE CHIP COMPUTERS YORK COMPUTER CENTRE 9 The Friars 77 Allerton Road 7 Stonegate Arcade Canterbury 0227 453531 Liverpool L18 2DA 051-722 3037 York 0904 641862 Fleet DEALERS: If you would like to see your shop included in this new service, please call 01 251 6222 EXT 2461 OM I CRO RETA I LERS "


"CI 795 DORES9SPORTS The officially endorsed version of the No.1 arcade game by Available  Terle Der-Gae Konami Released now for your Available BBC Micro only .95    Imagine Software is available from: .WHSMITH.com Merses. WOOLIVORTIN, LASKYS, Rumbelows.Greens, Spectrum Shops and all good dealers. Imagine Software (1984) Limited-6 Central Street Manchester.M2 5NS-Tel:061 834 3939 "


"Take your seats for another feast of fantasy at your local cinema. Science fiction, sword and sorcery, pirates and fairies are the ingredients the movie moguls are serving up on the silver screen to tempt you away from your computer and down to the local emporium of celluloid sensations. One film The Goonies has even been turned into a computer game by Datasoft as you will have no doubt read in this month's C+VG. So as the lights go down, the music softens and the screen flickers into life, C+VG presents a guide to what will be coming your way over the next few weeks. LEGEND THE GOONIES \"JF.I.L.M.SI Ridley Scott, the man who Summertime and the living is terrorised us with Alien and uneasy. Big shot developers thrilled us with Blade Runner, threaten the peace of a small is back with a fairy tale of good seaside town in America. But and evil, light and dark. not for long, that is. The Sounds a totally new idea, Goonies are out to stop them. doesn't it? The Goonies, a gang of kids Legend is set in a woodland with names like Chunk, Mouth where humans and forest and Data, find an old pirate creatures co-exist in a state of map and they set out to find extreme happiness, maintained the treasure which can help by the presence of two unicorns save the town. who know only love and But skeletons with swords, a innocence. booby-trapped underground But the evil Lord of Darkness passage and a murderous excue for loud boos and hisses convict make life difficult for who lives in his The Goonies. subterranean castle away from The Goonies is based on a sunlight, wants to destroy all story by Steven Spielberg, the this by capturing the unicorns. man who apparently can do no Goody, goody Princess Lila is wrong at the box office. even won over to become his His track record is Queen of Darkness. Will her currently the best in pal, Jack O'the Green, save the Hollywood, with such day? Will the sun ever shine on classics as Jaws, Close this paradise again? Does Encounters of the anybody care? Pass the popcorn Third Kind, ET, and Raiders of the Lost Ark. All worth checking out for sheer escapist fun. COCOON Cocoon has already been dubbed as Close Encounters meets On Golden Pond. Veteran Hollywood stars such as Don Ameche have been dragged up to play a group of elderly people living out their last days in a Florida home, browning gently in the sunshine. All is nice and tranquil until a group of aliens called Atareans move next door. They have come to reclaim friends they left behind on earth 10,000 years ago, cocooned on the bottom of the ocean. The aliens use their swimming pool as a temporary store for the cocoons But, unknown to the aliens, the old folk are using the pool for secret swims. The effect on them is dramatic. In all but looks, the elderly become young again, rejuvenated by the mysterious cocoons. Cocoon is directed by Ron Howard remember him as Ritchie in Happy Days? Don't be put off because the film is about old people. The message is: Age is just a state of mind. Ridley Scott's new fantasy film Legend "


"Mel Gibson and Tina Turner. Below — Beyond Thunderdome MAD MAX 3 Max is back, mean, moody and magnificent as ever, championing law and order in a post-nuclear nightmare. Civilisation has been destroyed and a new society is growing in the desert centred on the city of Bartertown. The Thunderdome of the title is a place where differences are settled violently. It's a sort of \"hall of justice\". It is into this arena that Max played by heart-throb Mel Gibson — arrives. The action is spectacular, with a stunt studded finale. Sounds one of the best films around at the moment. Great viewing even if you've not seen the two previous films. OCELLA LIFEFORCE Tobe Hooper he of Texas Chainsaw Massacre notoriety — has launched an attack of vampiric space aliens on London, hell-bent on draining our life energies in his new film Lifeforce. Not surprisingly, panic ensues. NATO forces battle bravely to save us. The special effects are said to be revoltingly spectacular. But the critics' opinions seem to be unanimous. What a load of space rubbish! JEWEL OF THE NILE with dervishes, snake charmers and various villains. Sounds fun. needed in order to find The Black Cauldron. But teenage pig-keeper Taran is determined that won't happen. The plot sounds quite strange but surely Disney wouldn't spend five years and 25 million dollars on a duff film. Would they? Michael Douglas and Kathleen Turner are reunited in The Jewel of the Nile, follow up to the highly successful Romancing the Stone. Jewel is another dose of wild adventuring with encounters THE BOY WHO COULD FLY RED SONJA Feminist sword play from Brigitte Nielsen as Red Sonja, a character created by Robert E. Howard, writer of the Conan stories. Sonja, a simple farm girl believe that and you'll believe anything falls foul of the menacing Queen Gedren and her marauding army. Sonja vows vengeance and with the help of Arnold Schwarzenegger, forsaking the part of muscle-bound Conan to o play muscle-bound Kalidor, that's just what happens. THE BLACK CAULDRON The Black Cauldron is a sword and sorcery cartoon from Disney involving the evil Horned King's pursuit of a pig with visionary powers which are Is it a bird? Is it a plane? It's not even Superman. Yes, it's the boy who could fly. Not a lot known about this film as yet except that it's being made by Nick Castle and Gary Adelson, who brought us The Last Star Fighter. THE EMERALD FOREST John Boorman's new film is supposedly based on the true story of a Peruvian engineer who finds himself kidnapped by Indians 10 years before — as leader of a local tribe. Sounds a little like a chap called Tarzan, to us. Lost as a child and later ends up as king of the jungle. Probably coincidence ... "


"|VlDEOS|  TIME WALKER  BRAZIL  THE LAST STARFIGHTER Not really being one of the Fancy seeing a good movie? Want to get a good video from lads, Alex gets more fun from your local tape store? But you don't know what to watch, blasting nasties on the right? Well stop getting all flustered. C+VG proudly presents Starfighter game which stands a rapid round up of what's good — and bad on the big on his front porch than he does from screeching around in his and small screens. Read and you won't have to watch friends' truck. 300,000th re-run of Wizard of Oz this Christmas! One evening, Alex achieves TIME WALKER turns out to be a terrorist his highest ever score on the game, and there are screams devoted to breaking the tyranny (GUILD) of the Government. and wild celebrations from If you've ever wondered and Another anti-establishment neighbours as he does so. Now which of us hasn't? — how figure in this world run this may be a daft fantasy film, King Tutenkamun died, this bureaucratically bonkers is but really!!! film offers a stupid explanation. Robert De Niro as an illegal Anyway, not long afterwards Ben Murphy, from Alias Smith freelance central heating he is visited by a jovial old and Jones plays a perpectually engineer. Dressed from head to chap in a rather futuristic puzzled professor of foot in SAS-style combat gear, looking sports car. Gullible archaeology who unearths King he swoops into Lowry's flat, Alex jumps in, and soon finds Tut's coffin and brings it into mends his heating and vanishes he is on his way to the planet the next classroom session back away down the side of the where the Fyland live at his American university. building with all the military intelligent aliens with huge During the unveiling of the precision of a commando. bald foreheads. coffin, the corpse within is Oh, and in case you're The old fellow, you see, is accidentally given ten times the wondering about the title, it's called Centauri, and he normal does of x-rays by a nothing to do with steaming deliberately planted the stupid boy with an irritating jungles, just the name of the Starfighter machine on Earth in cackle. tune which simmers along in order to find out which The worst thing about bad the background throughout. Earthling would be best suited films isn't that they're Never mind all the ballyhoo to becoming a real nastyimplausible, senseless and over the recent film of Orwell's blaster. Sure enough, even now cheaply made. It's that they're 1984. Brazil is a far more the dark forces of the Kordan so deadly dull. disturbing, moving, hilarious are massing to invade. Although Time Walker now and imaginative effort Strangely, Alex shows little embarks on an all-out imitation altogether. I didn't know enthusiasm for life in a of several much better films, whether to laugh or cry. See it! transgalactic multi-storey car including Raiders Of The Lost park, and insists that Centauri Ark, Halloween II and even THE LAST take him home. Psycho, it is a dreary piece of STARFIGHTER clodhopping hokum which (HERON wouldn't scare a child of six. If ever there was a film made BRAZIL specially for shoot'em-up (THORN EMI fiends, this is the one. The hero is young Alex Rogan, who Is Brazil actually funny? To be lives on a humdrum little more exact, is it even a trailer park comedy? The critics probably got it right when they described this astonishing film as a \"laugh-a-minute nightmare\". Terry Gilliam, the man who made Time Bandits, and who previously did all the weird animated drawings for Monty Python, has created something close to a masterpiece here. You could call it 1984-with-jokes. Nervous-looking Jonathan Pryce plays Sam Lowry, a minor clerk in a huge Ministry Of Information, who is haunted at night by dreams of a beautiful woman. One day he catches sight of her in the flesh, and desperately tries to track her down using the Department's antiquated computer system. When he finally meets her, she Jonathan Pryce from Brazil. "


"SABOTEUR! DURELL software getting harder SPECTRUM AMSTRAD R.R.P. .95 sales dept., Castle Lodge,Castle Green, Taunton TA14AB "


"JUST YOU AND A CAR NAMED 2010 \"KITT... KNIGHT RIDER THE ULTIMATE DRIVING TEAM. from A .95 .95 SPECTRUM 48K I SPECTRUM 48K COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM 48K AMSTRAD Ocean Software Limited. 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone: 061-832 6633 Telex 669977 Oceans G Ocean Software is available from selected branches of WHSMITH. John Moraes WOOLWORTH. LASKYS Rumbelows Greens. Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers Trade enquiries welcome 111111111111111111111111111111111111 1111111111111111111111111||||||||||| 11111 "


"ATARI 1050 DISK DRIVE WITH FREE SOFTWARE SAVE WORTH .98 ATARI 1050 NOW ONLY PREVIOUS PRICE  POWER OR 12 MONTHS AT .46 WITHOUT THE PRICE FREE SOFTWARE BUY NOW PAY LATER NEWS FOR ATARI 8-BIT COMPUTER OWNERS The new price for the 1050 disk Drive is not To help you to take advantage of the new low Silica Shop, the UK's leading Atari specialists, by the 410 or 1010 data recorders. Many probased in Sidcup Kent have announced a massfessional/business programs are only available the only good news for Atari Owners. The price of the 1050 Disk Drive, we have now Trust. You do not need a bank account to ive drop in the price of the Atari 1050 Diskon disk and not cassette. Until now, only a Disk Drive now comes with three FREE softnegotiated favourable credit terms with HFC Drive. The 1050 is compatible for use with the small proportion of Atari Computer owners ware titles, in addition to the DOS 2.5 Disk Atari 400/800 and XL/XE computers and allows have been able to benefit from the power and and Manual. The first of these is The Payoff take out credit with HFC, and no deposit is access to a range of over 450 disk-based soft-speed of the 1050. Now Silica are pleased to on disk, a new adventure game in which you required. Repayments can be made by post, ware titles. The 1050 comes with DOS 2.5, be able to offer the 1050 at a new low price of play the leading role. On the reverse side of standing order, or personally at your local and can also be used with other Atari Disk only  including VAT and FREE delivery, this disk is a demonstration program showing HFC office. If you wish to use these facilities, Operating Systems, making it compatible with We also offer credit facilities allowing Atari Atari's amazing sound and graphics. Also insimply complete and return the coupon below. application form by return of post. the complete range of Atari Corp and Third owners to purchase it over 12 months for cluded is Home Filing Manager which will We will then send you further details and an Party software for Atari 8-bit computers. The only .46 per month. The total purchase help you organise your files. It allows you to addition of a disk drive is a great enhanprice over 12 months, with interest at a flat catalogue and file details of books, birthdays, cement to any computer system, increasing rate of only 16%, is only 12*.46 -.52 your stamp collection or anything else which OUR SPECIALIST SERVICE storage facilities and cutting information access (APR 32.3%). There has never been a better would normally require you to use filing cards. We are now firmly established as the UK's time to seconds instead of the minutes taken time for Atari owners to buy a Disk Drive! The software which comes free with the Disk NUMBER ONE Atari specialists. so when you Drive carries a normal retail price of .98 buy an Atari computer product at Silica you and is as follows: will be fully supported. Our mailings keep SUPERB TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS .99 HOME FILING MANAGER you up to date with news of software releases .99 The 1050 is a dual density disk drive. This refers to the amount of information that can be stored on and developments. Our technical support team FREE single side of a disk. Three things determine the density of a particular disk format: The number of THE PAY OFF ADVENTURE and sales staff are at the end of the telephone FREE bytes in each sector, the number of sectors per track and the number of racks par disk, Single DOS 2.5 DISK & MANUAL line, to deal with your problems and supply Density formats give eighteen 128 byte sectors on each of their 40 tracks, thus giving a total capacity SOUND & GRAPHICS DEMO .98 your every need. We aim to stock all available of 18x128x40 or 2.160 bytes. Double Density formats give sectors that are twice as large as the single Normal cost of FREE software Atari hardware, software, peripherals and density sectors and are capable of holding 256 bytes on each sector This violds a capacity of 184 E DES DOST & PACKING accessories. We also stock a wide range of kilobytes per disk. There is also a third format, Dual Density which is the one used by Alan's new 1050 Disk Drive with DOS 3 and DOS 25. It has 26 of the 128 byte sectors on each of its 40 tracks, giving a total capacity of 133 kilobytes which after formatting comes down to 127K The 1050 is capable of Mail Orders to the UK and BFPO are sent Atari dedicated books and magazines. Here from Silica with post and packing FREE. We are some of the many facilities we can offer. running disks formatted in either single or dual density and can run either DOS 2 DOS 2.5 or DOS *FREE POST & PACKING ON MAIL ORDER this makes the machine completely compatible with all of the previous old style software. The 1050 is provide a 24 hour service and aim to despatch + FREE NEXT DAY SECURICOR DELIVERY compatible with the 400/800 and the new XL/XE series of Atari computers. However, if you run a 400 orders on the same day that we receive them. *INFORMATION MAILING SERVICE or 800 YOU would need to already have at least 32K RAM of memory in your computer. The 1050 has a 12 MONTH GUARANTEE TECHNICAL SUPPORT TEAM built-in 6507 microprocessor and an onboard ROM operating system for automatic standby capability 12 M It has automatic switching from single to enhanced density modes. It has a 'Disk Busy indicator and *AFTER SALES SUPPORT SERVICE up to 4 disk drives can be controlled at once included with the Disk Drive is the Owner's Manual the The 1050 Disk Drive comes with a full 1 year *HIGHLY COMPETITIVE PRICES DOS 25 Master Diskette, Reference Manual, Vo Data cable and Mains Adaptor. The 1050 disk drive guarantee. Silica will replace any faulty 1050 Disk Drive with a new unit within this period. *REPAIR SERVICE ON ATARI PRODUCTS comes with everything you need to plug it in and use it immediately ORDER NOW OR SEND FOR A CREDIT APPLICATION FORM Silica Shop Limited, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Telephone: 01 309 1111 BENODONT I BILITIBERIUIRED HOTLI To: Silica Shop Ltd, Dept CVG 1285 1050 ORDER FORM 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Road, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Please send me ........... 1050 Disk Drive(s) at  each .......... Initials........... Surname: Address: If you can't wait to get your hands on a brand new 1050 Disk Drive for your Atari 8-bit computer and you have a credit card or charge card, phone our hotline now! We accept Access, American Express, Barclaycard, Diners Club, Mastercharge and Visa. Telephone our hotline with your card number and your address details and we will dispatch a disk drive to you TODAY! You can also call the hotline to request a credit application form if you wish to take out credit facilities with HFC Trust. ................ .... Postcode: I enclose a cheque: for  (made payable to Silica Shop Ltd) Please debit my credit card: CREDIT CARD NUMBER: We accept: Access, American Express, Barclaycard, Diners Club, Mastercharge, Visa o I wish to pay by credit: (12 monthly credit instalments) Please send me written details and an application form 01-309 1111 end me written details and an application form --"


"FATE A CLOSER LOOK A GUMPHR VM Win 100 APPALLED AT HOW INCOMPETENT H. OG AND HOW BADLY HE NEEDS YOUR HELP GRUMPYGUMPHREY795 GEOTEUN SUPERSIEUTH .95 SPECTRUM 48K Available soon Amstrad Ageing, losing his sight and panic stricken with overwork can Grumpy Gumphrey, the geriatric store detective, hold down his position in this department store fantasia. A kind assistant is needed to help round-up the thieves, cage the gorilla and tidy the warehouse. Would you fit the bill? AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD SOFTWARE STOCKISTS Gremlin Graphics Software Ltd.: Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 "


"Mdlings COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU C+VG is well presented, I loved the cover, the new Bughunters and Psi-Warrior. Right, I must stop licking you boots. This is the 1st anniversary of me buying your magazine. That Thompson Twin game tempted me to buy it, but after a year of preserving, it still doesn't work! Can I get a decent copy? Also, next time you see Stephen A. Graham, smash his face in. Does anyone have Pokes for the Spectrum version of Airwolf. I've collected the scientist but no more than one. It is really an addictive game and I love it. Tim Greig, Caerphilly. Editor's reply: With someone with views like yours we can't refuse, can we? Watch Ideas Central for Airwolf tips/Pokes. facts wrong and may I suggest that they purchase the book Hedgehogs by Pat Morris. This book is available from the British Hedgehog Preservation Society's Headquarters. For the moment I have not stopped buying C+VG and will continue to purchase it until either the end of the year if some reference and suitable explanation to these slandering words is given. You cannot imagine the considerable damage you have caused to the public image of the native hedgehog. Laura Kay Middlesex. Editor's reply: We all like hedgehogs here at C+VG sorry that our review upset you so much, Laura. I hope we've put the record straight by printing your letter. And we'll all know better, won't we? My friend actually has a pet hedgehog in his backgarden...  I have just bought your latest issue and, having just read THAT letter from Stephen Graham, I have decided to reply 1) I have found that your letter's page is quite acceptable. It seems to me that Mr Graham wants a magazine that would give over half its pages to letters, and what would be the point in that? 2)No Top Ten'? Gosh! Wow! Amazing! So it was missed for one month, maybe there was something more important to go in its place? 3) Terrible reviews? They seem to be quite acceptable to me, and considering the C+VG supports more than one computer, I think that the games that do get reviewed are reviewed extremely well. 4) Competitions. I would have thought that it was obvious to even the simplest of intellects! The whole point of competitions is that if you win, you don't have to buy the game, you get it free. Can't Mr Graham take a joke? That is what \"Don't Buy This\" obviously was! If it is wrong to copy ideas, then how come Elite, which I personally think is the best BBC game of all time, is now coming out on the C64? If that isn't copying, what is? Or, if you wish, who brought out the first home micro? Whoever it was, why don't they sue all the other companies, as it is obvious that they all copied the first company's idea, and brought out home micros of their own? 6)Maps and tips. Rubbish? How dare he? What about the Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Universe map? I haven't seen that anywhere else? There is no better Adventure column, and what is wrong with plain tips? There are those of us that would like to beat a game without cheating, you know. 7) Typed-in programs. The programs are mostly Basic because that is what all of the computers use. 8) Layout. Seems OK to me? What is the perfect layout? Now I'm not saying C+VG is perfect, but there is a small page at the front, with the title contents, or hasn't Mr Graham bothered to read that far? 9) Games News. See my reply to question two. 10) Games they refuse to release. Surely, they refuse to release them because it isn't worthwhile. 11) C+VG said they had an exclusive interview/review and so did Your Computer, seems to me that the company who brought that game out, merely tried to get more publicity, so Mr Graham should be having a go at the company, not C+VG. 12) The Max Headroom interview. Call that writing big? I actually thought that the interview was very good, and in true Max Headroom style, and it certainly took more than three minutes, or else Mr Graham just looks at the pictures! 13) Graphics packages. If C+VG had reviewed more packages there would have been less room to show what the ones they did review can do. 14)What is Mr Graham going on about? Earlier, he said that C+VG contradicted themselves, but now he is doing it himself! He said that other mags have 89-100 pages of editorial, while C+VG has 70-120 pages, not if you average them out. You should find that the other magazines have 94.5 editorial pages, while C+VG has 95. Now, while page might not seem a lot, it is quite large for an A4 size piece of paper. 15)Hall of Fame. See question two again. 16) I will definitely buy your magazine again, in fact, after seeing your 'secret plan, I have put in a monthly order for one at my newsagents. And who wants to be serious about everything? If you take everything serously, you would have a very long and extremely boring life. I find this magazine worthwhile, and have done since I started reading it from issue two, it certainly isn't robbing its readers of anything, more likely people are robbing themselves, of a good read! Thanks C+VG, long may you print! Martin Ward Orpington Editor's reply: This was just one of the hundreds of letters answering Stephen Graham's epic criticism of C+VG in our October issue. We could print more, but Martin summed up many peoples' opinions. It's good to know that Mr Graham is one of a shrinking minority.  Up until now, I have always had a great respect for computer programmers and for your magazine. I considered those people who devise programs for home-computers talented. I thought that they had a special gift, I also believed that you and your colleagues were a decent bunch of chaps. BUT, all my beliefs were shattered into a million pieces on that fateful Sunday afternoon when I read your reviews in the July issue and there on page 94 was that disgusting slandering statement. I don't lay the blame entirely on your colleagues. Firebird are the suppliers of the so-called \"game\" Chicken Chase and the designers of that game are just as much out of line, so to speak. But when you wrote this paragraph \"The cockerel must defend the chicken house against hungry enemies, including hedgehogs.... All the rest of the world just fell into a blood red blur. Hedgehogs are meat eaters, true, but they DO NOT eat chickens alive. They are known to be partial to poultry but only when it is ALREADY dead. It is inconceivable to me, and any other sensible human being with an average size brain, that a cute little hedgehog would go into a chicken house and chase after some feathery bird when there are much tastier slugs and worms in the region, which only have to be found and not chased. Obviously someone got their  With reference to Stephen A. Graham's letter in the October, 85 issue. If he wants to moan, let him do it to Zzap 64, and Crash. Here are my observations on his points: 1) What is he on about the letter's pages being so poor? Can't say that I think much of his letter. 2) Can't he survive without a Top 10, 20, 30? 3) Review are terrible? Stephen you are probably a big-headed computer freak. 4) The competitions are good, and I think Stephen is frustrated because he can't understand them. 5) A programmer's diary? People do think the same things, especially if they are good ideas. 6) Type-in programs, might be for people who are skint and cannot afford games. 7)The lay-out is good since they changed the mag. 8) Crash and Zzap 64 are rubbish. You see that when you read C+VG news, it's full of info. 9) The only change of F.B's boxing is that Frank Bruno has been filled in, and in the review C+VG stated clearly that this was to be filled in. 10 Why did you let this freak (Stephen A. Graham) take up so much room in the Mailbag? Please print this letter. Roger. G. Copleston, Gwent.  I am writing to say your old magazine was fab. But this new one is mega-fab! The new CONTINUED OVER PAGE "


"G Mailboanga COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON. ECIR 3AU  I would like to say something to the arcade owners who own the game Star-Force Do you do regular checks on the joysticks? I find in most cases you put your 20p in the slit, press the one player button then find the ship will not move in certain directions, due to constant use. When a joystick is replaced, I have noticed that it is a fourway design. The game is totally unplayable. It needs an eightway design. When putting your money into any machine that doesn't work properly, are you entitled to a refund? This may sound stupid, but, I have put many a 10p in a machine that doesn't work the way it should Now a message to all software houses, please, please make a conversion of this wonderful game on to the C64. Finally a tip on the game. Hit as many question marks as possible as this will gain you an extra ship. Gary Jarvis, Catford. Editor's reply: Nice to hear from an arcade game player. Hopefully the arcade owners will heed your pleas, Gary. And you should be entitled to your money back if the game doesn't work properly. You must be prepared to make a fuss though. Let's have more letters from arcade fans... bases of Cl6s, Ataris and MSX is far less than the Acorn user base. The reviews are all for the C64/Spectrum owners with the odd one for the MSX, Amstrad and BBC. Do not say there are none for the Electron cos there's plenty of software around and some of it is worth reviewing. Hint when reviewing a game for many micros, eg Confusion or Combat Lynx, please give marks for all the versions, not just one. I admit I tried to sell my Electron to buy either a C64 or Atari no one wanted it. Gary Whitehead Norfolk Editor's reply: I think you've answered you own question when you admit to trying to get rid of you Electron, Gary. And I reckon your figures are a bit high, too. But the fact remains that software houses aren't supporting the machine as much as other more popular makes for obvious reasons. We'll review Electron games when we can persuade the makers to send us review copies. Are you listening out there...? of the Commodore to be as good as, if not better than the Atari which was hard to believe. I was very wrong indeed. Not only did most of the programs crash if a wrong key was pressed, but the graphics, sound and animation were way below the standard of my trusty old Atari. One of the things which dissappointed me most about the Commodore was the so-called advanced S.I.D. chip which did not sound too advanced to me at all, especially when it was trying to produce sound effects. It also seems very unpredictable as in many musical games the sound does gathered by now, we are searching the world for all the unreleased cartridges. We have already sent away to America and we have bought (with an incredible amount of difficulty) the 3D goggles plus three cartridges made for the goggles. The only problem now is that our contact has left America and the firms selling the last few cartridges are reluctant to send them to us. I have been an avid reader of your magazine for quite some time and if I recall correctly you held a competition and the prize was a Vectrex light pen and cartridges. We hope that you can give us some information in regards to the light pens, its associated cartridges, as well as the cartridges listed. If you know of any firms in Britain with these accessories, we would be immensly grateful if you could send us the firm's particulars or publish them. David Yammouni, Australia. Editor's reply: You probably know more about the poor old Vectrex than we do, David. But maybe one of our readers can help you out. If you can write to us, we'll pass the information on down-under. often. I did try to learn some of its so-called Basic but gave up accordingly. While Atari Basic is eight years behind the times, it supports all graphics and sound commands and is generally superior to Commodore Basic. I think if a devoted Commodore user saw an Atari computer really working he would turn blue with envy, sell his Commodore and buy an Atari straight away. That's if the Commodore user has any sense at all. I have since sold my Commodore for buttons which is all that it's worth and would never trade my Atari in for anything seeing as it's the best 8-bit home computer you can buy. I only wish you would support the Atari as much as the other, low grade, computers. If you did this, a lot more Atari owners would subscribe to your great magazine. Roy Lynch, Liverpool. Editor's reply: Atari gamers are amongst the most loyal to their machines. But I reckon your comments could start quite an argument on these pages...  We are a national charity set up to help parents and professionals dealing with Down's Syndrome children. Our membership now stands at approximately 4,500 and many of these children seem to have an aptitude for computer games and educational programs. As a result of this, we have had several enquiries over the past year as to what is available in computer software that may be of help to parents and teachers. May I, through your magazine, appeal to any software manufacturers who could let us have lists of what is available so we can pass this on to our members. Maggie Emsle, Director, Downs Chidrens Association, 4 Oxford Street, London WIN 9EL Editor's reply: Please help by writing to the above address.  I have owned my Atari 800 and disk drive etc. for over three years now and recently decided to buy a Commodore 64 to see if it really was as good as everyone said it was. I did expect the games aspect  In reply to your request in September's issue for views of other Acorn owners I thought I had better write in. I bought an Electron in June '84 after deciding on that rather than a C64 due to the supposed compatibility of the Electron to the BBC. Now I regret it, now that I have seen that you simply seem to ignore me and my fellow Electron owners. The BBC still gets a fairish look in, despite those complaints from the owners who are not satisfied. It is the Electron which gets left out. You admit you do not support machines which are not popular with your readers. How many Acorn users read your mag! Do you really know? The combined Acorn user base in the UK is around 600-700,000 which is nearly as many as there are C64s. I know it's not all your fault, but there are a few adverts in C+VG for Acorns they do exist. The user . I would like to tell the readers of C+VG about a software club that I joined recently. I had been looking for a good club and Preview Software Club's advert looked promising, so I sent off my  hoping not to get ripped off. Four days later I received some software lists; a news letter; a form for introducing new members for which you receive a  voucher. I earned four pounds in a few days. Also a $1 voucher for money off my first game. All games are sent first class. But what really pleased me was when I came home at five o'clock in the morning after setting my car's engine on fire while still 150 miles from home, to find on the mat two U.S. Gold games (9.95 each); five pounds in vouchers; two letters and a package, plus a cheque for  which I had sent earlier. Preview can be contacted at PO Box 87, Solihul, West Midlands B91 3UJ Richard Hammond, Oxford.  My friends and I are facing a problem and we hope that you may be able to help us. We are all proud and happy owners of the Vectrex video game system. Between myself and my friends we have nearly all the cartridges that were released for the system in Australia. Due to the demise of Milton Bradley as a video game firm, we were stuck with only the initial release of some 20 catridges. As you may have 142 END "


"FAST COMPUTER REPAIRS W ACCESS WELCOME VIDEO VAULT INTERNATIONAL W10* REPAIR SERVICE A WALCESTE TURNAROUND SPECTRUMS REPAIRED for only .95 including PARTS INSURANCE and P&P. 24 HOUR TURNAROUND 9.95 THE NO.1 REPAIR CENTRE IN THE U.K. WATO NO HIDDEN We don't give you a between price and let you guess IVU NILUCI the bill, we give you a 100% fixed price NO extras. We EXTRAS CVTDA don't need to boast about our service, we have 1000's of customers from all over the world highly delighted with our service and help. Only 20 minutes from Manchester Centre. BBC, Commodore 64, Vic 20, also repaired call us for details Don't wait weeks for your repair, we turn around all computers in 24 hrs. All repairs carry a full 3 month guarantee, plus on every Spectrum we repair, we send you a free game worth .95 for your enjoyment and pleasure.  While you wait service by Professional  Most Spectrums repaired within 45 minutes Computer Engineers  All Micros insured for return journey  3 month written guarantee on all repairs.  Keyboard faults only .95  International Repair Company. We repair School repairs undertaken-discount available computers from all over the world.  Free software with each Spectrum repaired  All computers sent by Mail Order turned . Over years experience working with around in 24hrs. computers. All computers fully tested Just parcel your computer in suitable wrapping enclosing .95 for Spectrum repairs, please do not send power supplies. Commodore computers, just send 61.75 (U.K. Eire, L.O.M.C.1.) or .50 (Europe/Scandinavia) with your te address or phone number and we will contact you same day by phone or letter with quote, If you prefer, please RENADR YOUR COMPUTER call us and we will give you a quote over the phone, we aim to please. That's what made us the most reliable mo service centre. IEEL HOW TO SEND liable welcome REPAIRS BEST SERVICE BEST PRICES! COMMODORE 64 *SPECIAL * NOW REPAIRED * KEYBOARD UPGRADE Call us for details or purchase THE the I.C's from our D.I.Y.section! 1. LOGICAL Why not upgrade your SPECIAL OFFER! THERE'S Spectrum into CHOICE a new keyboard, NOBODY QUICKER we can upgrade your IN THE BUSINESS AT PRICES old Spectrum Into a new THAT CANNOT BE D.K. Tronics keyboard for only .50 which includes P&F and VAT Normal retail price .95 without fitting WE ONLY USE SINCLAIR SPARES. FITTED BY OUR QUALIFIED STAFF! BEATEN ORDER NOW! YOU CAN'T REFUSE 16K to 48K Upgrade Upgrade your 16K Spectrum to 48K Spectrum for only .95 fitted including VAT and P.&.P. (Limited offers while stocks Last.) Makes a great Christmas present. To order the Upgrade Kit, (only .95.) VideoVaul viato Vauuu D.I.Y. CORNER PS We would like to wish all our customers P.S. past and presenta very Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year Spectrum Parts Commodore 64 Chips ZBOA CPU 3.00 6526 23.00 4116 Rams 0.95 6510 23.00 ZTX650 0.60 6581 23.00 Service Manuals 20.00 901227-03 23 00 ULA 60001 9.50 901226-01 23.00 Transistor ZTX 213 0.30 901225-01 25.00 Transistor ZTX 313 0.50 6569 23.00 We regret we cannot Keyboard Membrane 3.00 4164 Rams 3.00 show all the components Keyboard Template 3.00 Power Supply Units 29.00 available. Just give us a Keyboard Mat 5.00 call and we can quote youPower Supply Units All prices + P.& P. .50 over the phone, delivery Feet Eachi 0.25 But include V.A.T. WELCOME by return. VIDEOVAULT HEALTH WARNING!!! Sending your computer to any other Repair Centre can seriously Damage its Health TRADE 7.95 ORDERS STOP PRESS VIDEOVAULT LTD will shortly be opening their New Branch in Manchester City Centre for while you wait computer repairs. watch this space for details of Special opening offers OPEN OPEN VAGAO DAYS VIUCU VacuVOSERE DAYS WEEK Telephone: Glossop (STD 04574) 66555/67761 140 High St. West, Glossop, Derbyshire, England, FREE GAME WORTH .95 WITH REPAIR. EACH SPECTRUM "


"OMICRO ADS ATARI 400/600/800/800XLUXE SPECIAL DEAL FOR ATARI 400/800/XL/XE 0WNERS No. 1. Hire your first two games FREE from our extensive range of software. Up to the minute releases available. No. 2. Buy all the latest software titles at best possible prices new releases available direct from US). Atari hardware and modems now available at discount prices. For further details send s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD GAMES 30a Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Leicestershire Tel: 0509 412604 Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY The greatest. biggest and best Atari library on the market. An ideal present for old and new Atari owners MIDLANDS GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over three years ago first conceived the idea of a software library Now over 1.300 titles on disc, cassette and Rom (games, business, educational and utilities. Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Over 1.500 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany. Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast, efficient and friendly service. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter club activities. Now introducing original software written by existing members. Send large s.a.e. to: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos. Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programmes are originals with full documentation HG a ATARI 400/600/800 XL XE OWNERS UTILITIES BANKRUPT STOCK TOP BRANDED NAMES FROM 99p!!! Send sae for list ALIEN SOFTWARE (CVG4) 46 Watling Avenue, Edgware Middlesex HAS OBR SINCLAIR COMPUTER REPAIRS All machines despatched within 72 hours of receipt. Spectrum .00 ZX81 .50 16-48K RAM Upgrade .00 includes parts, VAT and return postage) For a fast and reliable service, send machine, brief description of fault and cheque or postal order to the experts CAPITAL COMPUTER SERVICES Unit K2, Cardiff Workshops, Lewis Road, East Moors, Cardiff CF1 5EG Tel: (0222) 461801 BOUGHT A DISK DRIVE? Stuck with programs on tape. TRANS-PAC solves it. TRANS-PAC, REV 2 Now released! Six disks with more progs. more up-dates, including multi-tape to auto boot disk multi-tape to menu, disk to tape, tape to tape. disk to disk. Multi-move of files comes packaged on three double-sided Memorex disks.  post free TAPE CRACKER REV 2 SIDE A will list M/C progs to screen, you edit download your personalised version with or without MC knowledge. Hours of fund changing text to leave personal messages on screen, Stuck on an adventure search for clues. Also acts to back-up Your Atari tapes SIDE B For the advanced user contains a disassembler. All this for only  on T.DK tape, post free. ATARI SOFTWARE DISCOUNT PRICES BLUE MAX 2001 CID 8.50 12.75 CD 8.50 12.75 SPYS DEMISE CD 8.50 10.95 WHIRLINURDS CD 8.50 12.75 STRIP POKER C/D 8.50 12.75 RESCUE ON FRACTALUS CD 8.50 12.75 BALLBLAZER C/D 8.50 12.75 HACKER 12.75 MUSIC CONST. SET 12.75 PINBALL CONST. SET 12.75 CHOP SUEY 10.95 WAR IN RUSSIA 75.00 SUNARO SOFTWARE ICVGI PO Box 78. Macclesfield, Cheshire SK 10 3PF TO ADVERTISE IN C&VG MICROADS TEL: 01-251 6222 Q000 NEW PICTURE DISK No 2 4 disks packed with computer art and multi-screen displays art form of the future. Packed on 2 double-sided disks. E20 post free 3 Games on disk from  Games on tape from Full lists send SAE Mail order only. Seven days delivery STOCKSOFT 15 WOODBROOKE ROAD BIRMINGHAM B30 1UE ELECTRON COMPUTER with 20 games cassettes, joystick, interface and lots of magazines. Worth  sell for . Tel: 01-586 2474 (d) 01-328 5670 (e). 600 800 500XL. SOOXL ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE LIVERPOOL now available for the Spectrum 48K featuring Full First Division. Milk and European Cups. League Table Managerial Ratings, Spy Missions. Team and Tactics Selections. 30 still levels. Only .45 from M Corbishley. 212 Walmersley Old Road Bury BL9 6SA, Lancs. PAGE THE SES MAGAZINE FOR ALL ATARI COMPUTER OWNERS ATARI THE BEST NEWS PROGRAM LISTINGS REVIEWS from USA TUTORIALS UK UTILITIES AUSTRALIA PUBLIC HINTS & DOMAIN SOFTWARE LIBRARY plus more SPECIAL OFFERS PAGE 6 is published bl-monthly Annual Subscription is 17.00. Send TODAY to: PAGE 6, P.O.BOX 54, STAFFORD, ST16 1DR Tel. 0785 41153 DOUBLE YOUR MONEY Send (1.00 cash for our catalogue of the best software for the AMSTRAD, BBC and SPECTRUM. We will send your catalogue with detailed reviews, what the critics say, screen shots, load time of the software we have selected as the best of its kind Plus a voucher for .00 off your first order minimum order value 101 so you double your money. Satisfied customers in 54 countries Send E1.00 to: SPEEDI-SOFT ICVGI 37 Church Road, London SW13 9HQ We have an allround selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE. Apply now and hire your first four games free. Around 1,000 different original titles. For full details send large stamped addressed envelope or telephone evenings 7pm 10pm or weekends. LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVE 162.90 post free 800 Xls (72.90 post free 10 90 91 tr 130 XES. 1050 Drive 6296.90 post free Antic and Analog magazines available BEST QUALITY DISCS Unlabelled SDS.S. (11.95 for 10 post free 100 for 100 post free Memorex SDIS.S. 16.50 for 10 pest free DDSS (18 for 10 post free Memorex 35\" discs S.S.JO... Boxes of 10 (28.92 TRADE ENQUIRIES INVITED FOR ALL THE ABOVE GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept. CAVG 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney close Sunderland SR3 4PD, Tel: 0283 286351 "


"NEXT MONTH INVC ON SALE DEC 16  RIGHT! Fall in at your local army surplus store for the next action packed issue of C+VG. For Wargamers we've got a special supplement packed with news, reviews and features about computer war-games. And there might just be a competition too. Why not get out from behind your computer screen for a while and play a real live war game? You can read how the C+VG Squad fought their way out of the Combat Zone next month! Our cover feature next issue is so special that we're NOT going to tell you what it's all about. But it's going to be a real BIGGIE so why not ask you newsagent to reserve you a copy of January's C+VG. Then you won't have to worry about having to fight for a copy. Zero hour is first thing on December 16th...  Andromeda is the name of a star system light years away. It's also the name chosen by a bunch of very talented Hungarian programmers who provide chart topping games software for many U.K. companies. Discover what's going on behind the Iron Curtain next issue... T-SHIRT OFFER ! Calendar by John Higgins.  Arrrrrggggghhhhh! Snik! Suzzzzzzle! If you can tell just what's going on here, then you'll have no trouble tackling next month's Friday 13th Horror Sound effects competition. You too could have a body like this! Just send off the coupon below and IDEAS CORP will mail you your very own musclebound body kit to assemble and wear in the privacy of your own home. But if you don't have time to play around with why not just send for C+VG's extremely attractive t-shirt? I can't wait to pose in my Big Red t-shirt so I've enclosed a cheque or postal order for a mere .50 and I await the arrival of my medium/large (delete as applicable) t-shirt trembling with anticipation Name...... Address.............  Inside January's C+VG you'll find something that's going to be by your side for the next 12 months. It's a giant full colour poster calendar and it's FREE with Computer and Video Games next issue.  Ghostbusters was last year's mega-hit game and smash hit movie. This Christmas you could win your very own copy of the genuine Ghostbusters video from Activision and C+VG. Tel. Send to: C+VG T-SHIRT OFFER, WARD LESTER, 14 HERTFORD ROAD, LONDON NI (Please allow 28 days for delevery. Overseas readers should add P+P) "


"Sir Fred A A severe attack of Chivalry on a Moonlit Knight Ye Olde 48K Spectrume .95 Unit 15, The Western Centre, Bracknell, Berks. 0344 427317 "


"Space Pilot In the skies above distant planets, in a galaxy far-removed from our own, a battle royal is in progress. Alien fire-power is devastating, their numbers overwhelming and their tactics fiendishly ingenious. Dexterity alone is not enough to ensure survival! Over 600 sprites are used to add that extra touch of realism to the eight distinct scenarios of breath-taking, futuristic beauty. providing the backdrop against which the Final Drama must be played. CBM64 .95 Joystick or Keyboard Space Pilot ANIROG PAUSE TRADE ENQUIRIES: Anirog Software Ltd, Unit 10 Victoria Industrial Park Victoria Road Dartford Kent (0322) 92513/8 MAIL ORDER: 8 High Street Horley Surrey Horley (02934) 6083 (0322) 91649/92518 Payment By: ACCESS/VISA/BARCLAYCARD CHEQUE or P.O. ANIREG CBM 64 "


"SOFTWARE PROJECT COLO Oceasure They solda MH4410 They sold a DALEY THOMPSONS The Best Group of \"HITS Game History DECATHLON Ist NOVEMBER 1985 RELEASE DATE YA BEACH-HEAD SHKO SQUAD ALL THESE BLOCKBUSTERS TOGETHER ON ONE GIANT COMPILATION SPECTRUM .95 AMSTRAD .95 COMMODORE 64 .95 DISC .95 COMMODORE and AMSTRAD) Stocked at Selected Branches of: WH Smith, Boots, John Menzies Woolworth, Greens, Laskys and Rumbelows STAFF OF KARNATH REPLACES SABRE WULF 1900OROLL NO from SQUAD MORE FOR LESS 6 CENTRAL STREET, MANCHESTERM25NS TELEPHONE: 061-832 6633 TELEX: 66997 "

