"98p MARCH 1986 S$4.60 Dm6 285pta COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES MITTTTTTTTTIL HOW TO SURVIVE URIJUM COMBAT GUIDE INSIDE WIN A SPECTRUM 128 WITH ART STUDIO EXCLUSIVE: SWORDS AND SCORCERY PLAYERS GUIDE GAMES FROM ELITE: SNEAK PREVIEWS/TAKE ON KUNG FU MASTER FREE: SPACE DOUBT POSTER/WIN THE BOGLOIDS GHETTOBLASTER! "


"IIIIIII rull BEBE Our  "


"Another sturming new ccade cormersion from Elite BACK 00 Spectrum- 7.95 Amstrad/Schneider .95 (cass)  14.95 (disc) Commodore 64/128.95 (cass) .95 (disc) 015200 Officially licenced from top Japanese arcade house Tehkan'. This enormously succesful worldwide hit features stunningly realistic graphics, combined with simple, addictive and totally absorbing gameplay. OTS300 Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor Housel Anchor Road. Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands Tel: Consumer Hotline (0922) 55852. "


"FEATURES SPEED SKATING500 METR PLAYER 1 COMPUTE ZE U.K. PETRO FFVEL KAN WINTER SPORTS/20 14 GAMES FOR THE ELITE 32 THE C+VG SOFTWARE CHARTS 35 IDEAS CENTRAL 39 ART STUDIO COMPETITION 42 URIDIUM: BRAYBROOK'S GUIDE TO THE UNIVERSE 46 FREE POSTER: SPACE DOUBT 47 THE BOOK OF GAMES 58 AN OFFER YOU CAN'T REFUSE 60 SWORDS AND SORCERY 63 SWORDS AND SORCERY TIPS 69 ADVENTURE NEWS 70 ADVENTURE HELPLINE 74 LORD OF THE RINGS 74 ADVENTURE REVIEWS 85 THE BUGHUNTERS 91 THE ART OF NOISE 93 SPACE DOUBT COMPETITION 95 MAILBAG 98 NEXT MONTH CONTESTANT DET WINTER GAMES/20 COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE By using the special Postal Subscription Service copies of COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES con be mailed direct from our offices each month to any address throughout the world. All subscription applications should be sent for processing to COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES (Subscription Department. Competition House Formdon Road, Morker Harborough Leicestershire All orders should include the oppropriate remittance mode payable to COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES Annual Subscription rates (12 issuest: UK and Eire E15. Additional service information, including individual overseas airmail rates available upon request. Circulation Department EMAP National Publications Published and distributed by EMAP National Publications Ltd Printed by Severn Valley Press Typeset by In-Step Lid . NEWS + REVIEWS 8 NEWS  Tony Tokoushi brings you latest on a new martial arts game called Kung Fu Master. 17 REVIEWS  OK youse guys. Dis Here's de Godfather speekin! If you don't like the Game of the Month then there's sumpthin wrong wid you. No, let me put it another way. If you don't like the Game of the Month there WILL be sumpthin wrong with you. Getta the idea? It's called Movie and is all about gangsters and private eyes and shooting my favourite subjects. There's a few udder games too like the extremely amusin Space Doubt and the excellent Enigma Force. 82 ARCADE ACTION  All the action from the ATE show where all the hot new games are announced. VIDEOS TAPED/93 "


"THIS ISSUE Greetings illustrious ones! You have just made the purchase that will change your life for the next 28 days anyway. If you've never grabbed a copy of C+VG before well, where have you been? You don't know what you've been missing! Here's what you'll miss this issue if you decide to buy Practical Frogbreeder instead of the world's best computer games magazine. There's a games player's guide to the hottest game to hit the 64 since Rambo. It's Andrew Braybrook's Uridium -a fast and furious zapper set to take the charts apart. We've got a special set of maps plus hints and tips on game play straight from the programmer's mouth. There's an exclusive peek into the mystical world of Swords and Sorcery, the ultimate D&D game for the Spectrum. We've got a map of the first dungeon plus hints written by S&S programmer Mark Simpson. S&S players just can't afford to be without this special guide. Then there's a peek at some exciting new games from Elite the Commando people who have gone back to the arcades to bring you a computer conversion of Ghosts n' Goblins a stunning graphic adventure game. More adventure in the shape of Keith Campbell's special three-way review of Lord of the Rings, plus all the hints and tips you could ever want in the shape of the one and only Adventure Helpline often imitated but never equalled. Then there's competitions like the truly meaningful Movie gangster quiz. You could win a copy of our Game of the Month. Now there's an offer you shouldn't refuse ... SPACE DOUBT POSTER/55 RUNESTONE RUNESTONE THE ANIME FROM ELECTRIC DREMHS HRTTEM BY HMETIK HALHER EMME DESIEH BY HRH EMATIK EYLESHLHER EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John DESIGN Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Paul Coppins Stove Donoghue Jim Douglas AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Claro Edgeloy SOFTWARE CONSULTANT Tony Takoushi PUBLICITY Marcus Rich ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Louise Matthews ADVERTISEMENT EXECUTIVE Mike Corr PRODUCTION ASSISTANT Melanie Paulo PUBLISHER Rita Lewis COVER Hewson Software BACK TO THE FUTURE/26 A MESSAGE FROM THE ED ... There I was, sitting peacefully with my feet up on the desk watching OTISS trying to get through the 10th level of Uridium when I started hearing these voices in my head. It's not that I'm going crazy or anything IDEAS CORP fit all their employees with a transistorised communication device. It fits into the back of your neck. It was HIM. The Big Boss. \"Tim,\" he said. We're on first name terms you know (swagger, swagger) \"We're going to have to put 3p on the price of C+VG.\" \"WHATI\" I thought back at him. Have you ever tried to think exclamation marks? It's very difficult. \"Why?, I asked. \"Well, our insurance premium has gone up because of all the damage Big Red has been doing to children's homes, Melissa's clothes bill is pretty high and then there's the cost of keeping that chap Campbell in the penthouse.\" What all that means is that your C+VG will cost you 98p from this issue. But rest assured C+VG will be even better value for money from now on. And we promise to keep Red away from the children's homes! If you want to keep up with what's happening in the wonderful world of computer and video games put an order in for C+VG from your newsagent today. ... and the Bug Hunters Jerry Paris EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222 THE BUGHUNTERS/85 "


"AMSTRAD  COMMODORE Killer-byt YIE AR KUNG FU If you can master the ten moves, expect the unexpected and FIGHT for your LIFE against the formidable masters of the martial arts you may live to meet them again on the mountain or in the Temple. COMIC BAKERY * Panic in the bake-shop * Fast and furious arcade fun. *Help Joe the baker defend his loaves from the rascally raccoons. * Another red-hot Konami cookie! POMIG BAKERY Kuona Yie Ark MIKIE Mikie plays a knockout frantic farce in the classroom, locker room and the high school cafeteria. Hip-zap, door attack, throw balls and pies: but can you make him hand his love letter to his girl-friend? ARCA HO SHOZ mere Imagine Software (1984), 6 Central Street Manchester M2 5NS. Tel: 061-834 3939. Telex: 669977 "


"64  SPECTRUM 48K zites of fun ANG ONG mami PING PONG You can almost feel the tension of the big match breaking through the screen...the expectant crowd is almost on top of you! You return the service with a top spin backhand, then a forward back-spin, the ball bounces high from your opponent's looping, defensive lob...SMASH!...a great shot opens the score...but this is only your first point! Play head to head or against the computer in this, Konami's first and best table-tennis simulation. HYPER SPORTS Enter the stadium of Konami's No. 1 arcade smash-hit sports simula. tion.From the finesse and skill of Archeryand Skeet Shooting to the critical timing and brute force of weight lifting six events to test you to your limit. Hyper Sports continuing the challenge where Track and Field' left off. SPORTS CADE HOT HOTS AMSTRAD 8.95 EACH SPECTRUM 48K 7.95 EACH COMMODORE 64 8.95 EACH Imagine Software is available from selected branches of BWOWHSMITH.John Menzies WOOLWORTH, LASKYS, Rumbelows Greens. Spectrum Shops and all good dealers. "


"TWISTER C+VG COUPON NO.1 Now here's what we call a SPECIAL offer. A whole .50 off Virgin's mega-collection of hit games for the C64 and Spectrum Now Games 2! The collection normally sells for .95 but the IDEAS Corp executive managed to persuade Virgin to knock some cash off the price after revealing that they had some pictures of the Virgin team dressed up in rabbit suits... How do you get in on this wonderful offer? Simple. Just send a cheque or postal order astronomer Heather Couper. The program will apparently allow you to visit each planet in turn, diving down across the surface and gathering information about the planet as you go. Watch this space for more details as we get them. The mighty US Gold has taken yet another software house under their corporate wing. But this time it's not a company from the other side of the Atlantic. This software house is British and has won C+VGs Software House of the Year Golden Joystick Award for two years running. Yes, it's Ultimatehow did you guess? The two companies have merged and U.S. Gold will now take control of international manufacturing, promotion, marketing and sales of Ultimate Games. The Ultimate people say they are going to concentrate on games development and expect to release at least six new titles for major micros during '86. The association began with the release in January of three Ultimate games, Pentagram and DragonSkulle for the 64 and Cyberrun for the Spectrum. Does this mean that the supply of good American games is drying up? What's Return of the Fist? The follow-up to the classic Exploding Fist that's what. Melbourne House tell us that the Aussie programmers are beavering away on this project even as you read this. The game will be out much later this year. Our martial arts experts can't wait. back. Well, he's been away Picture a bouncing tennis ball, \"resting\" for a while but now the add a touch of hopscotch and Melbourne House gang have what do you get? Gremlin's new sprung him and he's out looking Commodore 64 game Bounder, for revenge! He's looking even that's what. better than when we last saw You control a bouncing tennis him and the action well it's ball and move jumping from pretty fast and furious. If you square to square. Not all the want to know more, just keep squares are the same, some are watching this space or look set further apart. out for Mugsy's Revenge on the Miss the square and end up Spectrum he'll be coming your on what Gremlin describes as way soon! mountainous terrain and a life is lost. Extra hazards include lava for .45 made payable to pools and what appear to be Virgin Games Ltd, together aliens zooming around. Some with the special C+VG Now other squares have question Games Offer coupon, to Virgin marks on. Land on these and Games, C+VG Now Games you could gain an extra life or Offer, 2-4 Vernon Yard, lose one. Portobello Road, London WII C+VG received a preview 2DX. copy of the game, so changes What do you get on the could be made to the game tapes? The C64 version has which goes on sale. Airwolf, Chuckie Egg 2, Tir Na The game is certainly different Nog, Cauldron and World Cup Here's a glimpse of the fastest and difficult. But why, we ask, is II. The Spectrum version has thing yet seen on the Amstrad. it called Bounder? Perhaps Airwolf, Tir Na Nog, Cauldron, English Software's Elektra Glide, Gremlin hope it will take the Chuckie Egg and World Cup. already a hit on the Atari and charts by leaps and bounds. Don't delay. Get your coupon in C64 is destined to hit the screens TODAY! of the Amstrad in March. It'll feature the tunnels, hair-raising Steve Turner, the man who bends and neat music of the brought you Avalon, other version. With two channel Dragontore and more recently C+VG/VIRGIN sound available on the Amstrad Astro Clone is currently NOW GAMES OFFER it should sound pretty special working on an exciting new The game will sell for .95 on arcade adventure called Name.. tape with the disk price to be Ziggurat. Steve says the game announced. is a bit like Gyroscope Address. featuring 3D pyramids inhabited by robots and stuff. Like Steve's Prepare for a trip you'll never other games this will be forget. A trip that takes in all released by Hewson. I enclose a cheque/PO for the planets in our Solar System! Meanwhile, watch out for Mortech take a rest from the another new release from arcade action to wisk you away Hewson, called Sphinx, which through the stars. Their next stars a bunch of Egyptian I enclose .................tokens release will be The Planets explorers. Steve's Ziggurat will based on that fascinating be released for the Spectrum in Machine owned .............. Channel 4 TV series starring oce April and will cost .95. Hey boss! Mugsy's back in town-looking for trouble! You remember Mugsy the gangster from Melbourne House who stunned everyone with his good looking graphics about 18 months GINOS POOL MALL "


"athletic events, you get to chance your arm at sword fighting, axe duels, archery, quarterstaff contests to name but a few. You can take part in Ever wondered what it was like to take part in a medieval tournament? You know, jousting, archery and all that. Well now English Software will put you in the picture with a neat twist to all those sport simulations. Knight Games is a sort of Ye Olde Daley's Supertest. Instead of all those mundane your Amstrad or C64. The Amstrad version will be out at the end of February at .95 while C64 owners will have to wait until March. AMES Chocs away, chaps. That point section can be displayed on absolutely spiffing wizard of the the screen. Although the output air, Biggles, is all set for take is essentially black and white the off in a new computer game input can be monochrome or from Mirrorsoft. colour so you can digitize The game will be based on shots from old movies — or the the exploits of W E John's hero latest pop videos! in a film due for release this The Print-Technik Digitizer costs spring. .95 (inc VAT). You'll need a Details of the game are still Commodore 64 or 128 with disk vague at the moment but drive. A version for cassetteMirrorsoft says it will be a multibased users will be available shortly. Contact Supersoft on sections. 01-861 1166 for more details. The Biggles film is to be given a Royal premiere. Here's looking at you! C64 owners who have everything will go over the rainbow when they get their hands on the Print Technik Video Digitiser which was used to create these neat pictures of Hollywood Greats like Humphrey Bogart, Ingrid Bergman and Judy Garland. One obvious application of the video digitizer is to produce digitized pictures for use in tutorials and simulations or even adventure games. Pictures are displayed on the 64's screen using four colours black, white, and two shades of grey — but any of these colours can be changed to make a more colourful picture. The digitizer takes 4 seconds to produce a 256 by 256 point image, of which any 160 by 200 Mercenary madness has gripped C+VGs readers and anyone who has played the game will know why! But even as you poor unsuspecting folk are learning how to cope with the Palyars of Targ those cunning people at Novagen are working on Mercenary II. This will take your solider of fortune off the planet Targ and into the surrounding planetary system. Novagen boss Bruce Jordan says that in this sequel you'll be able to visit two or three nearby planets where who knows what will be waiting for you! In the meantime Novagen are publishing the Targ Survival Kit plus a novel called Mercenary: Interlude on Targ. If you can't wait then simply grab a copy of C+VG next issue when we'll be bringing you a games player's guide to life on Targ. Here are a couple of movies to watch out for in '86. First up is Explorers a film directed by the Gremlins man, Joe Dante. It's a sort of Goonles meets E.T. and features a group of teenagers who build their own spaceship out of scrap in their backyard. Explorers starts a cute allen called Wak destined to become the real star of the show. Another one to watch out for is a German production called Enemy Mine. This is directed by Wolfgang Petersen, who also brought you Noverending Story but don't hold that against him as Enemy Mine looks to be a much tougher proposition with some stunning sound effects. The film is set on a intersteller cruiser which travels from planet to planet carrying out mining operations and gets tangled up with some aliens.  CONTINUES ON PAGE 11 "


"SHE'S COMING TWISTED LIMUTLN o Susiem 3 o vailable for Spectrum 48k, CBM 64/128, All Amstrads, All 48k Ataris, Atari ST, BBC B, MSX Available from ALL TAPES AT 7.50 Feb. 19th on selected Amstrad CBM 64/128, All 48k Ataris machines ALL GAMES ON DISK 10.9 Atari ST (Disk only) 21.50 SYSTEM 3 SOFTWARE, 29 DAVIS HOUSE, HATTON GARDEN, LONDON EC1 TELEPHONE 01 629 4109 "


"TOP-025973 2P-000000 1P-024154 PLAVER ENEMY 1,11-TIME TIME 1927 either one or two player mode. The play screen shows two gauges, one for your strength, one for your opponent's. The more hits you take the more strength you lose and you'll lose one of your three lives if the guage hits zero. There is also a time/bonus counter so the quicker you clear a floor the higher your end of wave bonus. There are three main types of henchmen. Tall purple-clad coolies who are punch fodder they present no real problem. A short green-man, like the Green Yamo from Bruce Lee, who is a real pain. And a dartthrowing Chinaman who looks like Des O'Connor gone wrong. Timing is all important. It takes a little while to get the true feel of the game but when you have, boy-oh-boy are you HOOKED. You can put together some beautiful, speedy combinations as you are attacked from both left and right and high and low on the upper floors. Coupled with this action is a catchy, rhythmic, backing tune that only stops to create a lovely thwacking sound when you hit your opponents. The ability to choose which of the five floors you wish to play is very nice for those special practice sessions. Yes there are only five levels, but Kung-Fu Master is no pushover. The levels are hard and VERY skillful. Too much is made of a game having dozens of screens to work through these days. Five action packed, skilful screens are truly worth more than most others offering ten times that Glasshopper! Once you've grasped the basic timing of the game those dreaded guardians at the end of each floor will pose the next problem. They do their darndest to stop you reaching the stairs and the next level behind them. Each guardian has a special attacking quality. On the first BY TONY TAKOUSHI ow many more joysticks must 1 break before I can rest Master?\" I asked, my features contorted with the pain. \"Just flive or more, Glasshopper\" he said without emotion. \"But Master. Must I truly rip the sticks in half and chew the fire buttons ?\" I mumbled, spitting out a mixture of chewed red plastic and teeth. \"Yes. It is vital trailing for you. Commuter games are damn clever. They never rive up so neither must you!\" \"Ahhhh-sooooo.\" I gurgled. A few hours later, armed with this vital piece of information, slipped in my false teeth and sat down to play the latest and greatest US Gold release, KungFu Master. Kung-Fu Master is the officially licensed and very tasty conversion of the hit arcade game of the same name. It's available now for the Commodore 64 and comes on cassette or disk at .95 and .95 respectively. The game casts you as the Kung-Fu Master out to rescue your beloved from the clutches of the evil wizard. You have to travel through five floors of his danger ridden temple to reach her. Each floor is represented by a passage way. You can move freely left to right or vice-versa. Along the way some real mean henchmen try to stop you reaching the stairway at the end of the passage which takes you to the next floor. As a Kung-Fu Master you can defend yourself with deadly kicks or punches. The range of moves is impressive. You can kick or punch high or low to the left or right. You can also leap straight up or sideways while delivering a kick. You can toggle between kicks and punches by pressing the space bar. Sounds complicated but in fact this control system works very well. The player can start the game on any of the five levels and in Hoor he wields Chucks and batters you senseless if you stand too far away from him. To beat him, stay close to his body and hit him with punches. The guardian on level two is mean. He throws a scythe-like boomerang at you which must be dodged as you deliver a barrage of body blows to drain his energy Level three has a huge guardian -twice your size. I leave this gem for you to crack. Four and five just get worse, but in the nicest, challenging possible way! The higher levels also feature falling vases, energy sapping butterflies, fire-breathing dragons, exploding balls (mind the debris), little glow-worms (well, that's what I call them!) and head-butting little green men (honest!). In themselves they present a small challenge but the mix of attack from both sides and at different heights really makes for a truly awesome battle. Kung-Fu Master will be available from February 3rd. But bear this in mind. If you are thinking of buying this game then remember it is very, very very hard to put the joystick down ... unless you've just had to eat it, of course! Cast your mind back to September and the Personal Computer World show and you'll recall that Eugene Evans, the original computer whizz-kid, was jealously guarding an Atari ST running one of the first bits of games software for this megomachine. He wasn't giving anything away about the game, called Brataccus from his new company called Psygnosis something about computer magazines being nasty to him in the past. Still, now the game is completed and C+VG managed to get a peek at it. Brataccus is probably the first bit of home grown games software sorry, \"interactive video\" for the ST. It's also available for the Apple Mac and Commodore's Amiga. Software for machines a cut above your normal home micro. But with the ST's price dropping who knows Meanwhile, back at the game. The instruction manual begins with an odd bit of pretentiousness in the shape of a quote from John Ruskin which reads: \"All works of taste must bear a price in proportion to the skill, tastes, time, expense and risk attending their invention and manufacture. These things called dear are, when justly estimated, the cheapest. All this just to rub the fact in that the people behind Brataccus think it's the bee's knees. Just a quick glimpse of Martech's C64 version of Zolds in preparation for our review next issue. This version of the game featuring your favourite mechanoid robots has been considerably enhanced and, dare we say it looks and plays better than the Spectrum original. Watch out for our Player's Guide next ish. 1P-001500 PLAYER PLAVER ENEMY TOP-025973 2P-000000 1,111,11 TIME "


"30 great games from leading software houses including Quicksilva, Bug Byte, Mind PLI 001300 DRAUGHTS! HJORTH Win a 30 Games T shirt! All you have to do is name five game titles included on the compilation tape. The first fifty winners will win the mega amazing 30 Games T shirt. 18488 ELDRE BABE PLZ EINE Name..... Address Five of the titles included in 30 Games' MO LI Tick T shirt size: S Argus Press Software Ltd., Liberty House, 222 Regent Street, London WIR 7DB Telephone 01-439 0666 are: "


"nd Games, Lothlorien, Argus Press Software, Taskset, New Generation and Terminal. Adrenalin burning joystick testing tempting 30 Games. More than ever before in one pack on two tapes: only DO PPE 5000 PCC PASTE .95 53000 LIVES 22 PIPE || GAMES copies Mail Order Please rush me ............... of 30 Games at .95 each (price includes postage and packaging). Machine: Commodore 64... Spectrum. please ticky I enclose a cheque/postal order for ................ made payable to Argus Press Software Ltd. Send completed form and your Cheque/postal order to: Argus Press Software Ltd, Units 1 and 2, Conlon Developments, Watery Lane, Darwen, Lancs. "


"EXPLODING IN Top Secret... Top Secret... C+VG presents an exclusive glimpse of some new games from Elite, the people who brought you Commando and Frank Bruno's Boxing. The games include the arcade favourites Bombjack and Ghost 'n' Gobblins. And there's also that cartoon smash Scooby Doo. So read on for the latest information on games from and for the Elite. Following the success of Commando, the number one game at Christmas, Elite is poised to shoot up the software charts this spring with new conversions of arcade hits, Bomb Jack and Ghost'n'Goblins. And despite what you've read in other magazines, Elite still plans to release its computer cartoon adventure, Scooby Doo In the Castle Mystery for the 48K Spectrum. Hitting the shops first will be Bomb Jack for the Commodore 64, Spectrum and Amstrad. Bomb Jack has been around in the arcades for approaching two years and it's surprising nobody has snapped up the rights from Tehkan before now. The game is simplicity itself. But at the same time it's extremely addictive and challenging as the game's long life in the arcades proves. The idea is for Jack, a jolly masked and caped character, to leap around the screen collecting bombs, avoiding enemies and piling up the points. Jack can collect the bombs in any order, but if he follows the correct sequence indicated by flashing bombs extra points can be obtained. And if you can get the power ball the ball with a P on it you can defeat all your enemies. the Greek-looking temple, castle and a cityscape. original. There are four screens, the settings being the pyramids, the Greek-looking temple, castle and cityscape. The screen shots shown here are from the Commodore 64 version and are almost complete. The main differences from the finished version is that the moving sprites except Jack will be slightly smaller. Once the four screens have been completed, the sequence is repeated but with increased difficulty. Ghost'n' Goblins should be released by the end of March, again PLA2660 1200 015200 015200 0151200 CORE tot con 015200 0233 "


"N TO ACTION BB The knight has five kinds of weapons to destroy the attackers. But let these gruesome creatures touch you and you are once again unclothed. If touched again you turn into a skeleton and collapse into a pile of old bones. Scooby Doo in the Castle of Mystery will be released in April, says Elite boss Steve Wilcox, but it will be different from the version which has been heavily advertised. Elite's programmers found that having created the very impressive cartoon graphics, there was not enough memory left in the 48K Spectrum to make the game playable. But, says Steve, the idea of a Scooby game is too good to drop completely and work has had to start all over again. Right, here's your chance to get in on the explosive action of Elite's Bomb Jack with this exclusive offer in Computer Video Games. In the shops Bomb Jack will cost you .95 on the Spectrum, .95 on the Amstrad and .95 on the Commodore 64. But if you send the token on this page to Elite you'll get  off the price of the game for your machine. Send you cheque or postal order plus the token to Elite Systems Ltd, Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall WS9 8PW. CRO 015200 C+VG/ELITE BOMB JACK OFFER 015200 mu je Name HE SCORE 015200 PE Address naman I enclose a cheque or postal order for Machine owned BOMB JACK for the Commodore 64, Spectrum and Amstrad. Those who've played the Capcom game in the arcades know it has a vast amount of screens so many infact that the makers say very few people have completed the game. Elite's version will take a selection of the best screens from the game, which is packed with the walking dead graveyards and many other nasties. The game starts at the edge of a graveyard where a princess tending the wounds of a knight is abducted by a messanger of Hades. The knight, dressed only in his undies, sets off to rescue the princess. But to rescue her the knight must pass through six gates quarded by Satan's generals to reach Hell itself. Demons attack the knight as he progresses. As the knight sets out on his mission he almost immediately stumbles on a suit of armour. Then it's into the graveyard where the undead rise from the ground and close in our valiant hero. C+VG TOKEN "


"The TV. science fiction series invades your home computer. Earth is visited by seemingly human aliens... These reptiles soon reveal their ultimate aim however...to take over Earth and enslave its population... SPECTRUM 48K ... Your mission as resistance leader Michael Donovan is to seek and destroy their Mother Ship using all the skills and weaponry at your command. All-action, multi-level Arcade game for your Spectrum & Commodore. COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM 48 K  8.95 Ocea AMSTRAD Ocean Ocean Software is available from selected branches of BEN.WHSMITH'Sohn Menzies WOOLIVORTH LASKYS. Rumbelows. Greens. Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers Trade enquiries welcome. Ocean Software Limited, 6 Central Street, Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone: 061832 6633 Telex: 669977 Oceans G c 1983 Warner Bros. Inc. All Rights Reserved "


"C+VG MAR software REVIEWS: KEY You'll find useful items lying around as you explore — like a useful equaliser gun to you in the third room you come Graphically great or do the graphics grate these marks put you in the picture and let you know if all things are sprite and beautiful. HA SOUND Is the sound loud and proud and crystal clear? Or does the noise from your micro sound as though you've got your head stuck in a bucket of mud? VALUE something the glass down on quo denticare identical anythoor. Don Is the game really worth an arm or a leg to buy. Should you beg, borrow -but never steal to get the cash to buy this game and be the envy of all your friends? Or should you wait until the game turns up in the bargain basement after just one week on sale. You'll also come across bombs which you can throw around and booby traps Machines: Spectrum Amstrad from my shoulder holster and which could blow you up. Supplier: Ocean loaded up the tape. The whole game is icon. Price: .95 (Spectrum) .95 That's when my world driven. Which means you have changed. After the pretty to use your joystick or keyboard (Amstrad) ordinary loading screen to select which feature or The neon light outside the disappeared I found myself in action you want to access. IDEAS CORP security HQ the real life world of a 50s You can pick up or drop flickered fitfully as I sat gazing private eye! items, use the \"speech-bubble out of the window and the My job is to locate a gangster to communicate with other rainswept street. The private eye HQ and discover a tape. Simple. characters via the keyboard, business had been slow since But once you get inside the throw things, pause or abort the I'd solved the case of the maze-like collection of rooms game and even decide to Maltese Porcupine. and streets you'll find a whole punch someone. I noticed a shadow in the bunch of hit men waiting to rub It's important to examine street below. Suddenly it threw you out each room carefully. There something up at the window Like any really good gangster might just be something useful my window! The glass shattered movie there's a couple of hidden on that desk top or on and an object crashed down on good looking broads involved. the floor. Don't disregard my desk. Two identical twin sisters to be anything. Brushing the shattered glass exact. Not quite identical one Some of the baddies can be aside I picked out a cassette is a goodie, the other is avoided by some careful a computer cassette. It showed downright evil. The good sister footwork or with a well aimed no anti-social tendencies. Like will lead you to the tape. The punch. Only use your gun in going BOOM! when I touched it. evil sister will lead you into a moments of severe danger. You So I pulled my trusty Spectrum trap! only get one life so use it wisely. The rooms are drawn in Ultimate style forced perspective 3D. Only one colour per room but each room is packed with intricate details. The vocabulary is a bit limited but sometimes you can have interesting conversations. Don't spend too much time chattingup the girls! Movie is a brilliant game. It has atmosphere with a capital 'A'. Catch it when it comes to a shop near you! Graphics Sound Value  Playability is a goodie quite identical to be PLAYABILITY Will you have to be dragged screaming from the joystick after 24 hours of continuous play and still be anxious for more. Or will you give up after a few minutes? C+VG HIT Don't miss this if you've any sense. This is C+VG's way of telling you this game is the BUSINESS CO DO FC LHA GAME OF THE MONTH The Computer + Video Games accolade of Game of the Month is the highest honour our team of reviewers can bestow on a game. It goes to the game be it for the Spectrum, Commodore 64, Amstrad, BBC, Atari or any other make of computer -which we honestly believe to be the best game we have seen during the month. The key points we look for are all the normal ones included in this key plus originality. Technical excellence also counts for a great deal and, as we all know, programmes are getting more and more from their machines as each month passes. But, above all, the absolutely vital ingredient is FUN. If it's not fun, we don't want to know. Machine: CBM64  Supplier: Hewson  Price: .95 (tape) .95 (disc) A game hasn't caused such a stir in the C+VG office since the arrival of Exploding Fist! Andrew Braybrook's Uridium is simply the best 64 game we've seen since Fist. It's good looking, sounds great and the action comes thick and fast, You'll find more details about the game elsewhere in this issue but if you're a 64 owner and you don't rush out and grab this game, there's no hope for you. You won't drop your joystick for days after you've loaded Uridium into your 64. --->> Graphics Sound Value Playability  CONTINUES ON PAGE 20 "


"ILY PLAYABLE, FUN, AND ADDICTIVE GAME\"Crash (94% Smash) "


"DISTRIBUTION ALL GAMES GUARANTEED IN STOCK 5% DISCOUNT & FREE SECURICOR DELIVERY ON ORDERS OVER . NOW! EASY ORDERING WITH OUR NEW FREEPOST ADDRESS. TICK TICK TICK COMMODORE SINCLAIR MSX 6.70 6.70 con 7.50 5.95 7.50 6.25 7.50 Commando Rambo Fight Night Little Computer People. Young Ones Zorro Skool Daze Outlaws Goonies Yabba Dabba Doo Mercenary Back to the Future ...... Revs Enigma Force Ball Blazer Arc of Yesod Gyroscope Crazy Comets Transformers Quake One Bounder Rock 'N Wrestle Superman..... Critical Mass Korons Rift. Dragon Skulle Nightshade Scalectrix 7.50 5.95 7.50 7.50 7.50 11.20 7.50 7.50 Commando 5.95 Deathwake 5.95 Zoids Mikie 5.95 Enigma Force 7.50 Zorro 5.95 Transformers 5.95 Cosmic Wartoad. 5.95 Yie Ar Kung Fu....... 5.95 Panzadrome... 5.95 Lord of the Rings... 11.20 International Karate........ 4.50 3 Weeks in Paradise... 7.50 | Winter Games 5.95 Back to Skool 5.201 Arc of Yesod 7.50 Tomohawk..... 7.50 Saboteur 6.70 Roller Coaster 5.95 Sweevo's World 5.95 Impossible Mission.... 5.95 Surfchamp Gyroscope 5.95 Gunfright 6.70 Artstudio .... 11.20 Battle of the Planets.......... 7.50 Elite 11.20 Critical Mass   6.70 Road Fighter Hyper Rally Soccer Ping Pong.. Boxing Yie Ar Kung Fu II. Yie Ar Kung Fu... Tennis Golf Track 'n' Field Track 'n' Field Hypersports ......... Hypersports Il Athletic Land........... Time Pilot. Super Cobra... Sky Jaguar Kings Valley Circus Charlie Antarctic Adventure Monkey Academy... Mopi Ranger Comic Bakery Knightlore..... Alien 8. Boulderdash Ghostbusters. Le Mans 12.95 12.95 12.95 12.95 12.95 12.95 11.95 11.95 11.95 11.50 11.50 11.50 11.50 10.95 10.95 10.95 10.95 10.75 10.75 10.75 6.70 6.70 6.70 5.95 6.70 9.95 7.50 7.45 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 9.95 9.95 7.50 7.50 5.95 8.951 7.50 MSX COLOREGA C64 SPECTRUM 48K Konami OXING FOUR NEW GAMES :  NO STAMP the name che some NAME ADDRESS Send order to: UNITSOFT, FREEPOST, GLASGOW G1 4BRC. POSTCODE TELEPHONE UK ONLY "


"MON 48K Spectrum chronicles of the land of fairlight 1. A PRELUDE: the light REVEALED C64/128 AND AMSTRAD/SCHNEIDER VERSIONS Fairlight D) BY BO JANGEBORG (author of 'The Artist') \"Maybe the game of the year!\" Your Spectrum, November 1985 ... one of the most sophisticated games the Spectrum has ever seen.\" \"... one of the ten best programs ever made for the Spectrum. Popular Computing Weekly, October 1985. \"... the best arcade adventure of the year.\" Your Spectrum, November 1985 ERGE 12/13 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London WCZE 8LH Tel: 01-240 1422/7877 Telex: 892379 "


"C+VG MAR software REVIEHSA WINTER GAMES V WINTER SPORTS  Machines: Spectrum/C64 Jumping, Bobsled and the  Supplier: U.S. Gold Biathlon. Price: .95 First we have to say that the figure and free skating events in  Machines: Spectrum Amstrad Winter Games are pretty  Supplier: Electric Dreams pathetic on the Spectrum . Price: .95 version reviewed. The skating figure is simplistic and the Can Winter Games on the backgrounds boring. The good Spectrum be as good as the news is that you don't have to C64 version? And what's this bother with these two events another contender in the unless you want to compete in computer Winter Olympics everything for an overall score. called Winter Sports? C+VG's The quality of the games reviewers waxed their skis, improve by leaps and bounds watched a couple of Ski once you've got over the Sundays on BBC2, and prepared skating. The ski jump, hot dog. to go on the piste for a battle biathlon, bobsled and speed royal between these two skating events have similar snowbound sports simulations! graphics to the C64. First let's take a look at the My favourite event is the events you get in both Biathlon a combination of packages. cross country ski-ing and rifleWinter Games gives you shooting. The idea is to Figure Skating, Free Skating, complete a cross country course Speed Skating, Hot Dog in the quickest time at the acrobatic stunt ski-ing, Ski same time hitting as many Jumping, Biathlon and Bobsled targets as possible along the Winter Sports gives you three way. The Winter Games version sorts of ski-ing, Slalom, Giant has a \"pulse'' feature which Slalom and Downhill, plus Ice measures how tired your skier is Hockey, Speed Skating, Ski getting You must wait until you pulse equally unattractive. The teams rate has dropped to around 80 are matchstick men and the before attempting to shoot at game itself is too simplistic to targets. Otherwise the cross hair_be challenging. Much too easy sight goverened by your pulse to score goals against a rate will be jumping up and computer opponent. down across the target at an Up to four players can impossible speed! You can make compete in Winter Games, two sure your pulse isn't racing by in Winter Sports. Both games ensuring your ski-ing action give you high score tables, but between rifle shooting sections only Winter Games has the is as smooth and controlled as useful practice mode for events. possible. So which package gets the Next best event is the gold? For our money the Winter Bobsled extremely difficult to Games conversion just has the do right and featuring some edge on presentation and excellent graphics. You see a playability despite the naff plan view of the course with a skating bits. marker showing your position Winter Sports comes a close on or off it. second, however, because it Hot Dog ski-ing is, to say the features straight ski-ing games. least, different and challenging. How can you have winter Speed skating is a bit like those sports without downhill ski-ing? bike racing events in other Excuse me while I go back to sports simulations. You've got waxing my skis... to get the rhythm right to be any good. Ski-jumping is fun Games Sports Graphics If the figure and free skating  Sound are a disappointment in Winter Games then the Ice Hockey  Value feature in Winter Sports is  Playability too. SLOPE 23 02:74 RASPUTIN CONTESTANT PAUL  Machine: Spectrum  Supplier: Firebird  Price: .99 There's no disputin' that Rasputin is a good lookin' game, the courtyard of the darkside you will absorb the power of And at the price it's a real and enter the world of the the stone. bargain. But when you play this Seven Planets. You are armed You begin on a 3D catwalk Ultimate-clone you'll have to be only with a sword and shield dotted with doorways protected pixel perfect when you're which have limited lives. Find by vicious guards. You can moving about, otherwise you'll the stones with the mark of either sneak or fight your way end up going no where fast! Rasputin and step on them and through the doorways where Meanwhile, back to the scenario. The spirit of evil old IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII Rasputin, once main-man at the Russian Czar's winter palace, has risen from the multidimensional abyss and wants to bring chaos to the world. Your job is to enter this multidimensional domain and find the Jewel of the Seven Planets. To reach the jewel you have to neutralise the eight spells that have been cast by Rasputin. To do this you have to enter you'll find one of several amazing looking 3D \"castles\" inhabited by odd creatures. Some of these screens are quite stunning in their complexity. You have to watch you don't fall from the catwalks or castles you plummet downwards only to be rescued by a little fluffy cloud which carries you back to where you started from. But the more you fall the more life-force you lose. Rasputin isn't an easy game to play. You'll need to spend some time on the game to get the most out of it. It's graphically excellent -but game control leaves something to be desired. HD HOME Graphics Sound  Value  Playability 0 0 0 0 1 21 "


"5 G-VG MAR Sabtware REVIEHSO | ZOIDS worrow BCS ZOIDAR POWER  Machine Spectrum Supplier: Martech  Price: .95 The battle against the mighty Red Zoids begins with this, the best game from Martech so far. It's another icon driven game but don't be misled into thinking that your don't need all your arcade skills to beat the game. Fast reactions and quick thinking are essential if you are to succeed in your quest to rebuild the Blue Zoid's super weapon, Zoidzilla. The basic idea of the game is to use your skills to locate the different parts of Zoidzilla, hidden under enemy City Domes, rebuild the mighty machine then seek out the Red Zoid's leader, Redhorn the Terrible, and destroy him. Once you've loaded the game you'll see your Spiderzoid's control panel. You begin in a relatively simple Spiderzoid but as you find bits of Zoidzilla screen which shows various map views of your surroundings depending on which mode your Zoid is operating in. This main screen is your main link with the outside world. You do have a radio link with your home base which is activated by moving your flashing cursor to the appropriate icon. Above the icons and main screen is an ECG waveform readout which represents your Zoid thought. As you are power then you won't last long. supposed to have merged minds You'll also find these inside with the Zoid this is pretty destroyed Slitherzoids. important. It's a good idea to call down The game uses a nice an attack from your base on the windowing technique to report power plant to begin with. This any other messages relevant to means power will be diverted the player. The same applies from the City Dome shields and when you decide to launch an you'll be able to attack them attack on a Blue Zoid building with your Zoid's missiles. with your onboard missiles or Don't bother to waste your if the Reds are attacking you! missiles before the power Each Red city has a power station has been hit. It takes plant, a mine where more Zoids about 30 seconds for your base are manufactured and a radio to send a message in the beacon. All these must be meantime watch out for enemy knocked out and the city domes attacks and keep moving. searched for bits of Zoidzilla and Once you've destroyed a city the all important Zoidar Power dome scan the wreckage using Pods. If you don't get hold of your onboard scanner. You must scan all debris otherwise you could miss something improtant. Four of the cities don't have any bits of Zoidzilla but they may have essential power supplies for your Zoid. Zoids is one for those of you who like a game that lasts. This one will keep your interest for some time to come. If you're not into thinking games or want instant success steer clear or try Martech's Crazy Comets!  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability becomes more powerful GDCO control icons plus a main view BACKTOSKOOL THE DEVILS CROWN  Machine: Spectrum  Supplier: Microsphere  Price: .95 It seemed Microsphere didn't want us to review this game. Requests for a review copy fell on deaf ears. Still we went out and bought a copy to find out if Microsphere could follow their mini-hit of last year, Skooldaze. At first glance Back to Skool looks very familiar. But exploring further into the game you discover there's a bit more to Back to Skool. The scenario goes like this. You managed to steal your school report during the last days of term and spent the whole holiday forging teachers' signatures to make yourself look really smart, sweet and helpful. All you've got to do is get the report back to the Headmaster's safe without anyone finding out. All the old teachers featured in Skooldaze are back, plus the bullies, swots and other pupils you came to love in the original game. You can change the names of all the characters if you wish, at the start of the game. In Back to Skool you aren't floors of both schools at will. You are armed with a catapult and can find other \"weapons' by searching through desks in both establishments. Water pistols and stink bombs limited to the interior of your are useful. school like the first game. You The graphics are not bad and can actually get out into the the animation of the characters playing fields or pay a visit to is pretty good although the the nearby girls' school to let the game does tend to stop dead odd mouse cause chaos. Mice for a couple of seconds when and frogs play a big part in this instructions which appear in sequel! the box at the bottom of the Like Skooldaze you must screen appear. avoid getting too many lines There's more to Back to Skool given by the teachers and the than meets the eye. If you were Head if you're found doing a fan of Skooldaze, you'll enjoy something you ought not to be this follow-up. Get over 10,000 and you're expelled. Graphics Also, like Skooldaze, the  Sound teachers speak to you in speech bubbles — when they give lines Value or ask questions.  Playability You can explore the three  Machine: Amstrad  Supplier: Probe Software  Price: .99 cassette/.99 disk Avast there, me hearties. Dare you brave the mysterious depths to search for The Devil's Crown? Legend tells of a sunken pirate ship containing this awesome treasure, guarded by pirate ghosts, killer fish and other nameless horrors. Your watery quest is to find the crown and the seven jewels removed from it and hidden round the wreck. Easy? Don't believe it. Around the wreck are various flashing objects. Each must be replaced with a solid equivalent. Then the flashing jewel is revealed which also must be replaced by a solid jewel. The graphics are clear, sharp and colourful. Not a gem of a game, but good fun for arcade adventure fans.  Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability en co A ll UW ILZE FOR YOUR Conco YELLOW ROOM "


"cascade A CASSETTE SPECIAL FREE WATCH OFFER... THE NATIONAL NEWSPARES COMPUTER GAMES ON ONE CASSETTE ALORSER PROTECTION SCHE YOURS .95 including FREE Watch and Postage AMSTRAD CPC 464 20 KEY, MULTIFUNCTION CALCULATOR WATCH Avoid the rockets and anti-aircraft guns and DYNAMITE the dam, only the most skilful pilots succeed. NEMESIS a sophisticated version of Othello with many colourful options and levels of play Amstrad Cassette 50 includes arcade type games, war games, adventure games, logical, tactical, and educational games. flight simulator, and a business strategy game. 1. Mene Et 11. The Nigeri 2 5. Treching 30. Mapping Herbert 27. Sing Two Timbun Hawt Attack 15 Cry Crowley 21. Nem 41. Duy at the Race 1. Royal Rescue 18. Nang 25. Space the user Landing Sterk 17. Peter 11. Dragene Ware 44 ans Anak 13.20 MB 45. Materway 1. Fighter Command 20. Calony 11. In 48. Dungeon Aventura 21. Basha 11. Evasive Acties Finland High 12. Naghan 22. Yeme with every order for a Cassette 50 3-59 33 BT49 (Supplied on cassette, compatible with 664 and 6128 when used with cassette player and suitable leads. X81 Normal 12 and 24 hour time mode  Calendar mode  Calculator mode Alarm mode WORTH OVER  COMMODORE 64 Only you can save Europe from destruction! It's ROCKET LAUNCH, the thrilling war game that reproduces a European map More ambitious ? Try rescuing your crew under an ultrafast GALACTIC ATTACK and escaping back to your spaceship! Just two of the great games on your Cassette 50 featuring high resolution and user-defined graphics, sprites, sound and music Mare Eatet 13. Boggles 2. Galactie Anak 14 Pontear 27 Sitting Target 39 Dynamite 1 Space Misan 15 Si Jump 28 Smash the 40 De Your Sums 4 Lunar Landing 16 Hangmas Window 41 Derby Dash 5 Plasa B 17. U Banes 29 Space Shig42 Space Search E Startrek This le 30 Jer Flight 4. Universe Radar Landing 19 Orbitter Ancher 20 Motorway 32 letrader 45. Tank 3 Galactic Dog Fight21 Force Field 3) Inden 10 Pin Attack 22 Nom 34 Ghosts 42 Jet Mobile 11. Eve Action 23 Tural Escape 35. Sunan 48. Migh Rise 12 Noughts 24. Barrel Jumg 35 Rocket launch 49. The Fores 25 Cases Bare Plants 50 Exchange ELECTRON Can your FORCE FIELD protect the city from Alien Attack or maybe you have the skill to DYNAMITE the dam and flood enemy headquarters! Fifty different games with high speed, high resolution colour graphics, usar defined graphics and excellent sound and music. Not to mention full use of screen modes. Fifty fast-paced, fascinating games. ORIC ATMOS Have a go at GALACTIC ATTACK you'll need fast reactions to beat the invaders in this all time favourite or if you prefer you can travel through space at warp factor 9 in SPACE MISSION, a realistic 3D version of space warfare as seen from the cockpit of a spacecraft. Everyone has a favourite game on Cassette 50. With fifty classic and original games featuring user-defined graphics, sound effects and increasing levels of play VIC-20 Will it be BALLOON DODGERS, or the prizewinning DUSTMAN DAN? Play these and 40 other fabulous games including many automatic double loaders On Your unexpanded 3.5K VIC-20 And with an BK or 16K expansion cartridge you can choose from B additional games like STAR TREK or SKULL CASTLE Special effects user defined graphics, super sound and music ORIC 1 Cassette 50 includes PLASMA BOLTS, a superb high speed version of the classic arcade Centipede game. Watch out it's really tough DRAGON 32 If you like the light cycles of TRON, you'll love JETMOBILE thrilling 2-player game featuring high speed graphics. APPLE Cassette 50 gives you 50 great games to choose from including classic STARTREK and BLAZING INFERNO Even a small computer gets more from Cassette 50! You can run 39 games on just the basic 1K ZX81, while 11 more will play with the addition of a 16K expansion pack. Where else could you watch your radar instruments and judge your final approach in games like RADAR LANDING a realtime flight simulator, or enigy the thrill of PSION ATTACK. Logical tactical, maze, arcade all kinds of games on just one tape! SPECTRUM 16k/48k or + BBC A/B An advanced computer like the BBC demands a sophisticated games cassette. That's why Cassette-50 gives you full use of screen modes with high resolution colour graphics, user defined graphics excellent sound and music, joystick compatibility and many high speed games. HIGH RISE gives you the chance to beat a realistic roulette wheel with all the extras, and you'll need the fastest reactions of all to beat EVASIVE ACTION as you trail across the screen in a frantic search for oxygen. With multi-levels and superb graphics this game is totally addictive 'Incredibly frustrating!' that's the verdict on Cassette 50's FROGGER. Satisfied users tell us it's one of the most challenging You'll find it's almost as good as the arcade version! CARGO has you trying desperately to complete your helicopter mission under attack. Plus 48 other tactical, logical and adventure games featuring multi coloured and user-defined graphics, scrolling and full use of the Spectrum sound capabilities Matter 13 Micro 26 ler 39. Nim 2: Ski Jumo 21 Alien 40 Voyager 15 Labyrinth 28 Cargo 41. Sketch Pat 16 Shirts 29 The Race 42 S 10 The Skull 4) Fishing Mission 8 Crusher 31 Drit 44 Mystical 32 Munch 20. Sala Ship 23. Bowls 45 Galaxy Defence sockout 21. Tes Pins 38 Raiders 15 Ciptar Boggles 22. Cars 47. Jeimabile to Ales Attack 23 Stomper 36 Dragold 4 Barrel Jump 11 Lunar Landing 24. Pinball 37. Space Searth 49. Anacker 12. Man Eater 25 Cavers 38 ar 50 Space Missies ATARI Munch, Munch... it's the MAZE EATER! Can you eat the ghosts before they eat you? Or would you rather chance it on the MOTORWAY? Your Cassette 50 is compatible with the 400 800 and 600XLIBOOXL series ATARI computers, Advanced features include high resolution graphics, sound, music and mixed mode screens. Many games are joystick compatible calculator watch with every Cassette 50 EXPRESS DELIVERY-ORDER NOW! ONLY .95Postage FREE in U.K. Add .00 for overseas orders. Free watch and tape will be despatched within 28 days. I enclose a cheque/ made payable to postal order for Cascade Games Ltd. or through any Post Office by TRANSCASH (Giro No. 655 6655) For even faster ordering when charging to Access, Barclaycard and Trustcard Visa use our 24 hour service. (0423) 504663. No. Name Address COMMODORE 64 ATARI ORIC 1 BBC AB SPECTRUM VIC 20 2X 81 | APPLE AMSTRAD U ATMOS DRAGON ELECTRON Cascade Games Ltd., 1-3 Haywra Crescent, Harrogate, North Yorkshire, HG1 5BG, England. Telephone: (0423) 504663. Registered Number 1755554 Post Code Country CVG 3/86 "


"C+VGMAR Software REVIEUSO DOCTOR WHO AND THE MINES OF TERROR TTTTTTTTTTTTTTT  Machine: BBC (version reviewed), Spectrum, Commodore, Amstrad  Supplier: Micropower Price: .95 cassette: Rom Cassette .95 My, my! What a huge package Looking rather like an exaggerated videocassette holder, this game demands attention! This is the follow-up to Castle Quest, and bears similarities, though the \"MP4 Scrollerama'' system has regressed to the standard of JCB (alias \"Judder\"). The ROM went in without too much bother, except having to bend all the legs inwards so they'd stay in the damned holes! And the program loaded beautifully with no trouble at all. A quite masterful title screen appeared and the BBC played the well-known theme tune. This is another game with piles of instructions to wade through. Unfortunately, you won't get far unless you do just that. Skipping the German, French and Spanish, I eventually found out what was going Machine: Amstrad  Supplier: Activision  Price: .99 Boxing is a disgusting. degrading sport. It should be banned. Violence for sport and entertainment. How low can you get? All very true. But boxing also happens to be extremely exciting. I love it. Even when Boomboom Bertie and Werewolf Brown had laid me flat on my back with a cruel series of uppercuts. Barry McGuigan World Championship Boxing offers you the chance to take on 19 exotically named boxers including the mighty McGuigan. Each fighter has an endurance level ranging from weak to mighty, also various stamina, strength and agility levels. There is also pre-fight training which allows you to build on the individual boxer's strengths to compensate for weaknesses. The boxing action is seen from the side. The fighting and range of punches is much the same as other boxing games available and is quite satisfying. For Amstrad owners wanting a boxing game, it's a straight choice between Barry McGuigan and Frank Bruno's Boxing from Elite. We think Frank just has the edge. Graphics Sound Value  Playability CHAMPIONSHIP DANKT WCUUPUAN WUNLD DUAINU on ... the game, so as much as the Hindrance is provided (initially) idea appeals you can't hurl b y track-driven things which him off a cliff. Indeed, the look vaquely like a cross Doctor, under my inept control, between a dalek and a Panzer. fell over a good number of Actually playing the game is cliffs. Micropower describe the pleasant enough. Timing jumps game as \"Brain to brain is frustration itself, but combat\". I feel \"Brain to spikey satisfying when achieved. rock impact\" would be more After a VERY short time ! apt...! found myself not particularly The scrolling is pretty caring what fate the Master had abominable. It isn't flickery as in mind for the universe. If you such, but not a patch on Castle like games of this ilk, though, Quest. The graphics are you will probably love it. colourful, and while you can see Doc Who fans will buy the what everything is, okay\" is the game and may be disappointed. only adjective that really Of course, they could be extremely satisfied. Ask the Fairly complicated instructions dealer for a demo before you can be given to the Sphinx decide. (cat), and as it is invisible to the nasties, it can be pretty handy. Graphics In the game's favour, it is very  Sound se big, and will take a long time to solve. It has been thoroughly  Value planned and represents an Playability impressive challenge. OD NG Cutting through the waffle, here is the mission, you have to go into the mines, stop the aliens mining something-oranother, disable the instrument of-death-and-destruction, and whip the plans so the Master can't make another one. K9 has now changed into a moggie. No ordinary moggie, though. This one turns into a pink bubble when it moves! Of course, this frightful creature plays an integral part in solving D D REPTON 2  Machine: BBC  Supplier: Superior Software  Price: .95 (Cassette), .95 (Disc) Not content with the success of the original Repton, Superior Software has come up with a sequel which fairly bursts from the screen in a riot of skill, colour and excitement. In style it is very similar. The change only becoming apparent as you play. You are stunned right from the start by the astonishing \"voice'' which talks to you as the game is loading real sci-fi horror stuff! It's just about understandable if you don't look at the words as they are reproduced on the screen, and turns out to be not the bogeyman about to leap out at Some diamonds are hidden in safes, and to open them you must find the combination key. Trickier still, you have to plan your route most carefully, ensuring that you don't get cut you from your computer, but a you off to different parts of the off by falling rocks, or block off preview of a forthcoming maze and collect 42 jigsaw a section containing a vital speech package from Superior. puzzle pieces. diamond, transporter, key or The sound continues to Apart from monsters, there jigsaw piece. impress all the way through the are other hazards falling If you allow a boulder to seal game, with distinctly above meteors and boulders, spirits, off a passage containing so average, even tuneful, music. It's and evil-looking skulls which kill much as one diamond, you a fitting accompaniment to the at a touch. One of the many cannot complete the game. quality of the game itself. problems of Repton is that you The graphics are smooth and You are in a maze, hunting for can't kill monsters directly very colourful, and the game as diamonds as big as yourself. you must arrange for boulders a whole is demanding and There are 1,634 of them, and to fall on them, not an easy absorbing, you must get them all before matter. you can complete the game. You Great cunning and also have to collect earth, 4,744 deviousness is required. The  Graphics pieces of it, kill all 18 monsters only way to get rid of the spirits Sound lurking in the maze, use all the is to trick them into cages, Value 64 transporters which whisk where they turn into diamonds. Playability CONTINUED FROM PAGE 22  CONTINUES ON PAGE 26 "


"Rock'n Wrestle-the first truly 3 dimensional combat sports simulation game. Dynamic graphics, state-of-the-art animation, 1 and 2 player mode, brilliant gameplay, 10 different opponents and complete rock sound track. More joystick moves than you imagined possible-over 25-including the atomic drop, aeroplane spin, piledriver, body slam, back breaker arm twist, elbow drop and turnbuckle fly. Rock'n Wrestle-the challenge begins here! Avaliable for Spectrum .95, C64 and Amstrad .95, BARRY MCGUIGAN WORLD BOXING from MELBOURNE HOUSE AVAILABLE FROM THESE DAIRS Discount Video, 21 New Green Street, South Shields. Tyne & Wear Mobile Video 11 Etterby Street Starwe, Carlisle. KK Stationers, Simgold uld, 187 Edgware Road, London W2. Tel. 723 1436. Tomorrows World H. Computers, 24 Boundary Road, Hove, East Sussex, Tel. 0273412591. Carvey Software, 76 Lincoln Wax Canvey Island, Essex SSB SL. Tel 0268 695356. Software City Centres Ltd, 382 Kings Road, London SWS SUZ Tel 01 352 9220 Alton Computers, Top Ten Shopping, 62 High Street, Alon, Hans GU34 1ETTL0420 87998. Geerings of Ashford Ld 80 High Street, Ashford, Kent TN23 1EPTL 0233 38366Electroneguin, 36-38 West Street, Fareham, Hans Tel. 0329 230570 Cub Computers & Evans Yard, Odordshire Tel 069 248600 Computer Plus singboumel. 65 High Street Singbourne Kent Tel 0795 25677. Gilles Sports Toys and Cycles 1 Alvescot Road. Carterton, Oxon, Tel. 0993 842396. Games 71 East Street, Brighton, East Sussex, Tel. 0273 728681. Solent Micro Systems Lid. 25 Bargates, Christchurch, Dorset BH23 10D, TEL 0202 470468 Alan Sinclair 9-11 Church Street, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 10G, Tel 0256472231.Pentos Bookselling Group, T/A Hudsons Bookshop, 14/16 Bold Street, Liverpool L1 4DS, Tel. 051 708 6861. So-Centre, 2 Brunsfield Place. Edinburgh Scotland, Tel 031 3484. Stockton Software, 14 Wow Row Stockton on Toes, Cleveland, Scotland. Tel. 0542 606166. Softcentre, 35 Churchill Square, Brighton BNI 2EP Tel 0273 776576. Video Solent Lid. SA Fryern Arcade, Wincheste Road, Chandlers Ford, Hants S05 2DP,Tel. 04215 67428 Miles Better Software, 221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor Cannock, Staffordshire WS11 200, Tel. 05435 3577. Micro Anvika, 224 Tottenham Court Road, London W1, Tel. 636 2547 McDonalds Stores Lid. 70 Oxford Street, London WIN 9FD, Tel. 01 636 2877. Northwich Home Computers, 79A Witton Street, Northwich, Cheshire, Tel. 0606 47883. Thetford CB & Micros, 21 Guildhall Street, Thetford, Norfolk, Tel. 0842 61645 Roundabout Bookshop. 368 Mare Street, Hackney, London EB THR. Tel. 01 985 8148. "


"C+VG MAR software REVIEWS ELEON  Machine: CBM64  Supplier: Electric Dreams  Price: .95 You've seen the film, read the book, got the stickers out of your favourite breakfast cereal now play the game! Martin Walker's computer translation of the blockbuster movie bravely attempts to capture the charm and spirit of the film. All your favourite characters are their Marty, Doc, Biff the bully, Lorraine and, of course, Marty's drippy Dad, George. The object of the game follows the plot of the film you, as Marty, must get your future mum, Lorraine, to fall in love with your future Dad, George otherwise you won't even be a twinkle in anyone's eye. Then you must get Back to the Future and resume your everyday existence helped by the Doc's time-travelling DeLorean supercar. To get George and Lorraine to fall in love you have to make use of several items which you'll find dotted about the various locations. You can visit Doc's house, the school, coffee bar and the dance hall. Each location contains something useful. And each item or object has a specific effect on the rest of the characters in the game. You have to discover which does what, and to whom, in order to succeed. The main screen is divided up into four main areas. There's the main playing screen which shows you the different locations you begin on the mainstreet of Marty's hometown, Hill Valley. Other locations can be visited by walking up to the doors of the places you want to enter and pushing the joystick up On the right hand side of the screen you'll see Marty's family picture. This is your indicator of how well you're doing. Fail to get George and Lorraine together and parts of the picture disappear. Once it's disappeared completely the game is over and Marty has NO future! On the left hand side of the screen is a similar picture of Marty a digitised still from the film. This behaves in a similar fashion to the family En 235 Conco OTO  Machine: C64  Supplier: CRL Price: .95 Let's hear it for the crew of the U.S.S. Omnibus! They boldly try to go where only real loonies have been before and often end up out to lunch. Forget the disappointment of CRL's Blade Runner and run along to your local games store for a copy of Space Doubt. It's the most fun you'll have with your 64 short of trying to balance it on the end of your nose. The idea of the game is basically this: You are in control of three astronauts inside the cargo ship Omnibus bound for the planet Niblondis with a hold full of grub for the starving inhabitants. There you are having a nice, peaceful snooze inside your cryofreezer when suddenly the ships automatic systems thaw you out. An emergency! Bogloids are attacking the ship and threatening your food supplies. The Bogloids have this unhappy habit of drilling through the hull and bursting into the ship in droves. As the ship has many rooms and corridors you don't really know where the Bogloids will appear. But you do know you've got to stop them reaching your cargo holds and the food, Once you've been defrosted you must dash for a powerblock. These are your only means of defence, and your only means of repairing the gaping holes in the ship. They can be quickly exhausted as you zap the Bogloids and used up in one go if you use one to mend a hole. Fortunately power block dispensers can be found dotted around the ship. It's a good idea to make a note where you find them because things start happening extremely quickly once the Bogloids break in. And they aren't vegetarians. They quite like the taste of humans wrapped in space suits SO don't let them get too close! You see a sort of split screen view of two levels of the ship on each screen. You can move betwen levels by using the elevator beams which connect each floor at various points. These can be reset to go up or down by simply moving your spaceman up to the control panel and pressing the fire button. It takes a bit of practice to jump out of the lifts at the right time. Careful timing is needed unless you want to stay zapping up and down in the beam for half an hour! The graphics are excellent and have an original cartoony feel to them. The sound, provided by CRL's friendly Cyborganist, is fun a mixture of Close Encounters and James Bond!! There's no doubt that Space Doubt will be a big hit. If it isn't I'll eat my Bogloid or should that be the other way around? PGD SUPPLIES TO THE HUNGRY WOEKERS FW THEMSELVES IT A Graphics Sound Value Playability GOLD SCORE TIME 952 "


"C+VG MAR Software REVIEHS 8 RESTLE etc.. snapshot. Also at the bottom of the screen is a clock which tells you how long you've been playing. The quicker you complete the game the more skillful you are. Just below the main screen as four character icons'. These relate to George, Lorraine the Doc and Biff. Otherwise they flash white when they come into contact with Marty or each other. These help you keep track of who's doing what and wherel Useful for telling when George and Lorraine are together. Above the main play screen are the \"object icons. These represent love poems, a space suit, a cup of coffee, a guitar and a skateboard, If you've seen the film you'll have a better idea of what effect these objects will have on the characters when you attempt to influence them. BTF is a nicely presented and cleverly thought out game. But will it capture the imagination of games players currently caught up in all the action Commando/Rambo trend? That remains to be seen. Machine: CBM64 playing a friend, you can choose  Supplier: Melbourne House + ROCK'N * which of the wrestlers you want Price: .95 (cass) .95 (disk) to become. Playing against the computer you HAVE to be The only thing missing from this Gorgeous Greg something of excellent grunt and grapple a disadvantage we felt! And the simulation are the grannies who other wrestlers look like rush into the ring and bash their refugees from that odd least favourite wrestler! American group The Village Rock n' Wrestle brought to People there's a red indian, a you by the Fist people leather man, a cowboy etc, captures all the atmosphere and fun of the wrestling ring. Rock n' Wrestle is an exciting Basically the idea of the game and original game. Not as is quite simple. Play a friend or instant as Fisty youll need to the computer and beat your The wrestler graphics are BIG, be prepared to spend time opponent. Couldn't be easier, very attractive and totally learning a whole new way of riaht? Wrong! The computer is a convincing. You really take on using your ibtidk but a tough cookie and until you the character of your chosen cter of your chosen game that will keep you in a learn the ropes you'll end up on wrestler when you play. Sound headlock for months the mat more often than not. effects all the grunts and Wrestle a copy from your There is an amazing selection groans-are terrific, too. But local software shop now you of 24 moves to cope with! the game could've benefited won't regret it! You'll never learn all the moves from some crowd noises to add right away it'll take several that extra bit of realism. Instead Graphics games before you've really got you get a tinkly little tune which Sound total control over your wrestler. chugs along in the background. But it's FUN getting to know There are ten wrestlers to Value them all. compete against or if you're playability 300 5070 KODAK ED_200_507 on con Graphics Sound Value Playability COCO STRANGELOOP EDEL Machine: Amstrad and patches to mend holes in  Supplier: Virgin Games your spacesuit caused by the flying bits of metal you'll Price: .95 encounter in the rooms. What's the best game around You'll find lots of useful items for the Amstrad? Sorcery that's along the way which will help what. Who created Sorcery? you in your quest fost The multi-talented Gang of Five useful is the jet cycle which at Virgin. And now they proudly enables you to try and reach the present the second best game places even a pint of lager for the Amstrad. The almost couldn't. Your main aim is to legendary Strandeloon Already reach the control room and stop a classic on the Spectrum and the factory manufacturing any 64. this game is destined for the monasty evil robots same accolade on the Amstrad The screen shows you an Great graphics, solid sounds overall view of your position. In and totally addictive game play. the bottom right hand corner Here at CVG we reckon that you see a map of the rooms this is the best version of the POCKET closest to your current position, game. plus readouts on your laser What's the lea? Well it's charge status, number of simple really. You have to regain patches loft, plus objects you control of a Tobot factory are carrying in your pockets. invaded by a strange alien force. You find these objects along the This force is reprogramming all way and some will be extremely the robots to destroy Earth! You useful don't go over the top. There's have to defy indestructible Any punctures your suit only a limited supply of extra robots, brave the dangers of receives will be automatically charges inside the factory. debris filled rooms, penetrate repaired as long as you are Make a map as you go if you security systems and generally carrying a patch. You can carry can. This will help you get more save the world. a maximum of 99 but you'll find out of the game. You are beamed into the extra first aid boxes as you go. If you got an Amstrad for factory with eight lives, a laser You can use your laser to Christmas then Strangeloop is with a limited supply of charges blast the deadly swarmbut the ideal game to rush out and MET EE buy with your Christmas cash You won't want to play ANY other game for months! Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability  CONTINUES ON PAGE 29  "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES Present the latest officially licensed games from... SPECTRUM Cass. .95 COMMODORE 64 Cass. .95 Disc .95 AMSTRAD Cass. .95 Disc..95 Commodore 019200 SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES Present the following special offers to C&VG readers OUR ou ***SPECTRUM ** RRP PRICE JACK 7.95 5.93 LITE 14.95 11.95 COMMANDO LORD OF THE RINGS 15.95 12.95 AIRLIGHT 9.95 7.50 BACK TO SCHOOL 6.95 5.30 PY HUNTER 7.95 5.90 MIND SHADOW 9.95 7.0 UPERMAN 9.95 7.50 NIGHTSHADE (Ultimate) 9.95 7.50 DLARY OF ADRIAN MOLE 9.95 7.50  9.95 7.50 WORDS AND SORCERY 9.95 7.50 WEEVO'S WORLD 7.95 5.95 WAY OF EXPLODING FIST 8.95 6.75 SIG DADDY ROCK 'N' WRES. 8.95 6.75 BATTLE OF THE PLANETS 9.95 7.50 9.95 7.50 FUNFRIGHT 9.95 7.50 BRUNO'S BOXING OUTHERN BELLE 7.95 5.95 (UGSY'S REVENGE 7.95 5.95 ARTISTII 14.95 12.95 IGHTER PILOT KLOCKBUSTERS GD. RUN 9.95 7.95 PING PONG 7.95 5.95 IONTY ON THE RUN 7.95 5.95 9.95 7.30 VORM IN PARADISE 9.95 7050 HEY SOLD A MILLION 9.95 7.50 KYPOX 9.95 7.50 7.95 5.95 UPERBOWL 9.95 7.50 OONIES 7.95 6.50 EGEND OF AMAZ. WOMEN 7.95 6.50 URBO ESPRIT 8.95 6.75 MPOSSIBLE MISSION 7.95 5.95 HADOWFIRE II (ENIGMA F.) 9.95 7.50 ABOTEUR 8.95 6.75 RITICAL MASS ZAY OF THE TIGER 9.95 7.50 RIKE ORCE HARRIER 9.95 7.50 EST BANK 7.95 5.95 OUNTY BOB 7.95 5.95 HE ART STUDIO (OCP) 14.95 11.95 IE AR KUNG FU 7.95 5.95 HE YOUNG ONES 7.95 5.95 SPECTRUM RRP PRICE MOVIE 7.95 5.95 DESERT RATS COMIC BAKERY 7.95 5.95 WINTER GAMES 7.95 5.95 BEACH-HEAD II 7.95 5.95 B M.GUIGAN'S BOXING 7.95 5.95 ***COMMODORE** COMMODORE SKY FOX (c) BOMB JACK 9.95 7.50 TIME TUNNEL BOMB JACK (d) 14.95 11.95 TIME TUNNEL (d) LORD OF THE RINGS 15.95 12.95 PITSTOP II LORD OF THE RINGS (d) 19.95 17.95 FIGHTER PILOT ROCK 'N' WRESTLE 9.95 7.50 SPITFIRE 40 SUMMMER GAMES II (c) 9.95 7.50 CLUEDO KUNG FU MASTER 9.95 7.50 SCALEXTRIC KUNG FU MASTER (d) 14.95 11.95 FIGHTNIGHT BOUNDER 9.95 7.50 FIGHTNIGHT (d) FARLIGHT 9.95 7.50 CRITICAL MASS 8.95 2.50 SABOTEUR PARADROID 7.95 5.93 TURBO ESPRIT SUPERMAN 9.95 20 B, McGUIGAN BOXING F. BRUNO'S BOXING 7.95 5.90 ANY MASTERTRONIC TITLE SEIDOLON 9.95 7.95 QUICK SHOT JOYSTICK *STAR QUAKE 9.95 7.95 EUTE (d) SHADOWFIRE II (ENIGMA F.) 9.95 7.50 THE GOONIES TEMPLE APSHAI (d) 14.95 12.95 OUTLAW HARD BALL 9.95 750 HOBBIT HARD BALL (d) 14.95 11.95 KORONIS RIFT 14.95 11.95 RAMBO ASYLUM 9.95 7.50 ROLLER COASTER INTER SOCCER 14.95 11.95 PS15 TRADING COMPANY9.95 7.95 DESERT FOX WORM IN PARADISE 9.95 7.50 LITTLE COMP. PEOPLE (d) LEGEND OF AMAZ WOMEN 9.95 7.50 THE YOUNG ONES LEGEND OF AMAZ THEY SOLD A MILLION WOMEN (d) 14.95 11.95 RACING DEST'TION (d) LUCIFER'S REALM (d) 14.95 11.95 ARCADE HALL OF FAME AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT EUREKA 8.95 7.50 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION SUPERBOWL. 9.95 7.50 WAY OF EXPLODING FIST WAY OF THE TIGER 9.95 750 MERCENARY STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 9.95 7.50 DRAGONSKULL KENNEDY APPROACH (C) 14.95 11.95 YLE AR KUNG FU HITCHHIKERS GUIDE 29.95 F15 STRIKE EAGLE NIGHTSHADE 9.95 7.50 MINI OFFICE y 8.95 6.73 BAUL BLAZER WINTER GAMES 9.95 7.50 COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0 WINTER GAMES (d) 14.95 11.95 SPY V. SPY IT 9.95 7.50 MASQUERADE (d) 9.95 7.50 9.95 7.95 14.95 11. 93 A MSTRAD RRP PRICE ***BBC ELECTRON*** RRP PRICE 9.95 7.50 BOMB JACK 8.95 6.75 YIE AR KUNG FU (BBC/ELEC) 9.95 7.50 9.95 7.50 BOMB JACK (d) 14.95 12.95 BRUCE LEE (BBC) 9.95 7.95 9.93 7.50 FLITE 14.95 12.95 EXPLODING FIST (BBC) 9.95 7.95 12.99 10.95 EUTE (d) 17.95 15.95 \"LORD OF THE RINGS (BBC) 15.95 12.95 9.95 7.95 SPY V SPY 9.95 7.50 STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 9 .95 7.95 9.95 7.50 STARQUAKE 9.95 7.50 HOBBIT (d) 17.95 15.95 14.95 11.95 CRICAL MASS 8.95 6.75 BLOCKBUSTER'S GD RUN 9.95 7.95 8.93 6.35 SABOTEUR 8.93 6.75 8.95 6.75 TURBO ESPRIT 8.95 6.75 8.95 6.75 9.95 7.95 KORONIS RIFT (d) 14.95 12.95 9.99 7.50 DESERT RATS 9.95 7.50 DIARY OF ADRIAN MOLE 9.95 7.50 1.99 1.99 HITCH-HIKERS GUIDE 24.95 TIGERS IN THE SNOW 14.95 11.95 BEACH-HEAD I 9.95 7.95 VORM IN PARADISE 9.95 7.50 17.95 14.95 GOONIES 9.95 7.50 ZORRO 9.95 7.95 9.95 7.50 SORCERY (d) 13.95 11.50 ZONE X 9.95 7.50 9.95 7.50 LORD OF THE RINGS 15.95 12.95 ASYLUM 9.95 7.95 14.95 11.95 WINTER GAMES 9.95 7.95 SPY HUNTER 9.95 7.50 9.95 7.95 SUPER BOWL 9.95 7.50 STRIP POKER 9.95 70 8.95 6.75 SWORDS AND SORCERY 9.95 7.95 BALLBLAZER 9.95 7.95 7.95 5.95 THEY SOLD A MILLION 14.95 11.95 9.95 7.95 YIE AR KUNG FU 8.95 6.75 SUMMER GAMES 1 (d) 14.95 11.95 9.93 7.50 BOUNDER 9.95 7.95 MERCENARY 9.95 7.50 14.95 11.95 BIG DADDY ROCK 'N' WRES. 9.95 7.50 MERCENARY (d) 12.959.95 7.95 5.95 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT (d) 13.95 11.50 KING OF THE RING 9.95 7.95 9.95 7.50 LASER BASIC 14.95 12.95 GREAT AMERICAN RR 9.95 7.95 14.95 11.95 9.95 7.50 9.95 7.50 3D GRAND PRIX 9.93 7.93 14.95 4.99 BMCGUIGAN'S BOXING 9.95 7.93 ALIEN 9.95 7.95 9.95 7.50 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 9.93 795 NIGHTSHADE 9.95 7.95 9.95 7.50 RAMBO 8.95 6.75 THE HOBBIT 14.9311.95 9.95 7.50 MINI OFFICE II (d) 19.95 17,95 KNIGHTLORE 9.95 7.95 9.95 7.50 MINI OFFICE I 14.95 12.95 YTE AR KUNG FU 14.95 12.95 8.95 7.50 \"LORDS OF MIDNIGHT 8.95 7.50 14.99 11.95 WAY OF THE TIGER 9.95 7.95 ***COMMODORE C16*** 5.95 4.99 SCRABBLE 9.95 7.95 BOMB JACK 7.95 6.50 9.95 7.50 COMMANDO 7.95 6.50 9.95 7.95 *BBC ELECTRON*** KUNG FU KID 6.95 5.93 9.94 295 BOMB JACK (BBC) 9.95 7.95 THAI BOXING 6.95 5.95 14.95 11.95 COMMANDO (BBC) 9.95 7.95 AIRWOLF 6.95 5.95 MAIL ORDER For Mail Order: All prices include p&p in U.K. Europe add .00 per tape, elsewhere at cost. Cheques and P.O. payable to: S.C.S., Dept. CVG2, P.O. Box 394. London N15 9JT. Tel: 01-800 3156. S.A.E. for full list. PERSONAL CALLERS For personal callers: Please bring along a copy of this advert for above discounts, to \"Compucentre Unit 5, 221 Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 9AF (near Goodge St. Station). Open six days a week 10.00-18.00pm CREDIT CARDS Barclaycard and Access hotline ting 01-631 4627 only. Credit card orders despatched same day subject to availability "


"C+VG MAR Software REVIEHS9 ARENA B BATTLE OF THE PLANETS Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Lothlorien Price: .95 The year is 2027. The world has become a very different place. An annexed area of Sweden has been designated a battle area. And, as champion of England, you enter this arena to defend your country's honour. You command you own tank plus five slaves, each with a limited amount of ammunition. Loss of the tank in this war game, spiced with arcade action, will prove disasterous. A battle field map occupies, the main screen. The tanks are displayed as cursors which can be moved around. A radar icon flashes if the enemy is encountered. If you're into shoot outs which need an extra bit of brain input, this could be the one for you.  Graphics  Sound 5  Value 7 Playability  Machine: Spectrum Destroy them. Rendezvous  Supplier: Mikro-Gen with repair and fuel craft on the surface and then it's back to Price: .95 space to find a stargate and a quick trip onto the next planet. Don't expect to see any of the The G-Force ship is equipped G-Force stars of the TV cartoon with long range indicators series Battle of the Planets once which flash up icons on your you've loaded in Mikro-Gen's view screen. These show alien latest release. What you can craft, space stations and expect is an addictive and stargates. Learn which is which action packed space shoot'em quickly! — and you are half up in the Elite tradition. way to a big score, The G-Force maybe The icons also show the conspicuous by their absence position of these various objects but what you get are some So you'll soon learn how to really fast and smooth vector reach them. Your ship also has graphics, exciting action and a various equipment when you touch of strategy to spice can check on by calling up things up. status reports which appear in a Zoltar's space invasion fleets window at the left hand side of surround each planet and are the screen. On the right is a beaming down landers which readout of your score plus an will eventually destroy the indicator which tells you which planets — unless you can get to key to press to call up the them first. status reports. You have to clear the skies Your ship is armed with a around each planet of alien craft limited supply of neutron and then zap down to the torpedoes and a laser. The laser planet's surface via Star can overheat if you use it too Wars style space stations much and will cut out on you if where you'll find the heavily you're not careful. Some of the armed lander-tanks waiting to enemy craft in space and on do battle. the surface — can take varying amounts of punishment before they are destroyed. Some also can avoid vour torpedoes. Replenish torpedoes at repair ships. The graphics are the fastest and smoothest vector style yet to be seen on the Spectrum. No jerky movements as the alien craft or landers move across the screen. One minor criticism. The explosions are a bit wimpish. The craft detonate into a bubble which makes a silly popping noisel Apart from that little gripe the game is pretty good, Elite fans who want to give up trading for a while and have a decent zapping session should grab a copy of Battle of the Planets today! Anyone who enjoys fast space shoot outs can't fail to like Mikro Gen's first venture into arcade action a mixture of Elite and 3D Tank Battle. Take off after it. Graphics  Sound  Value  Playability O COCO OUR RICE 7.50  Machines: Spectrum Amstrad Supplier: Ocean  Price: .95 (Spectrum) .95 (Amstrad) This release scraped out just before Christmas and after our deadlines but hopefully it won't get swamped in the mass of pre and post Xmas games releases. N.O.M.A.D is a strategic shoot-out that shouldn't be missed! The story and what game would be the same without one behind the mayhem goes like this. TALOS, a man-made asteroid, spins through space on a deadly mission, Party of an intergalactic criminal network, headed by the evil Cyrus T. Gross, a predator of the Free World. In a final attempt to destroy Gross, the rulers of the Free Worlds have called in the NEMESIS organisation humanoid and robotic freebooters. They have assigned NOMAD 471 (Nernesis Organisation Mobile Attack Droid) to penetrate Gross' world which is protected by his army of Robothugs, and destroy his berbaric lifestyle for ever. The player's role is to guide N.O.M.A.D. through the four sections of Capital City towards Gross sinner sanctum, and the final showdown. Battling against banks of magnetrons, missiles which appear from hidden silos and heat guns all the watch how you move. He won't stop instantly but carries on until he's worked off a bit of speed. It isn't a good idea to go charging into an unknown screen So you'll have to learn how to control old N.O.M.A.D. to best advantage before really getting into the game Knock out all hazards as you go. It's worth going back to clear screens of guns and nasties because if you lose a life, you get transported back to the start point of the zone you've reached. The guns and other horrors don't reappear however, so you'll have a clear run back to the point where you were wiped out with a better idea of what's waiting for you. Wall mounted guns look deadly by using N.O.M.A.D.'s eight point turning circle you can sneak up on them and blast them with a diagonal shot. You get points for blasting things which register on a neat mileometer score readout on the right hand side of the screen. walls which slow down your Graphics are attractive, the metallic mate. sound is good and game play You'll come across various totally addictive. Rush out and sneaky switches set in the find N.O.M.A.D. before it corridor walls. N.O.M.A.D. can finds you! open and close these by running across them. Some maybe useful in opening gateways to Graphics other areas of the city. Others Sound may not be so helpful! N.O.M.A.D. suffers from inertia Value which means you have to Playability  CONTINUES ON PAGE 30 ODODODOO A OZO°C°09 32.95 7.50 2 TSO 7.95 7.95 7.95 way! N.O.M.A.D is a tough little chap and armed with a couple of tasty blasters. He moves through the corridors of the city knocking out the guns and avoiding evil Robothugs and other nasties. you get a plan view of the area of the city you inhabit which is more likely than not packed with guns or magnetic 7.95 1.95 11.95 12.95 netro Site which a 6.50 5.95 CONTINUED FROM PAGE 27 5.95 5.95 "


"C+VG MAR Software REVIEHS 10 MASTER OF MAGIC quest. Like the monsters, staircases, objects etc. If you manage to kill a monster a very satisfying red DEAD stamp appears across the graphic! Machine CBM64 Options on the menu change as you move through the  Supplier: Mastertronic Master of Magic might not appeal to adventure purists adventure. Price: .95 When the game begins you but anyone who's dabbled in If you're a 64 owner avidly D&D will get hooked pretty are armed only with some awaiting the conversion of quickly and arcade addicts will spells. These only work if you Swords and Sorcery, why have enough mind power to find there's enough instant action to keep them happy, too. not while away the time with operate them. the Master of Magic? This is Get a weapon as soon as you Master of Magic is quite simply tremendous value and the latest excellent release on can by killing off an Orc or extremely addictive. Once Mastertronic's mid-price M.A.D. skeleton using magic. Then label. hang onto your magical powers you've entered Thelric's realm Master of Magic takes you fight using weapons as much h you won't really want to escape, into a magical underground as possible. Graphics world where you battle strange Below the option screen is Sound creatures in a quest to find the another full screen window lost amulet of immortality which shows in detail objects  Value and regain your own freedom! you encounter during your  Playability This is a menu-driven, graphic interactive adventure in true 000137 D&D style. The game screen is divided up into four main areas. Top left of the screen is a plan view of your immediate surroundings. WITH ITS ROUND ATTACHED YOU You see the corridor or cavern that you currently inhabit plus any objects or monsters in the same area. ENERGERAIS Selecting RUN allows you to move about the dungeon until you come across something you wish to examine or pick up or when something or someone attacks you. Then you zap back to the menu and pick the option you need to deal with the situation. HARVEY SMITH SHOWJUMPER  Machine: CBM64  Supplier: Software Projects Price: .95 With a flick of a riding crop, a quick dig of the spurs and a cry of Gee Up, Harvey Smith canters into the show ring, the latest in a seemingly never ending list of \"names\" only too eager to endorse a computer game. Nothing wrong with that, of course. It helps sell the game, or so the software house hopes. But one can't help thinking that the majority of these \"names\" have never been near a computer. So let's forget about Harvey's \"involvement\" and look at Software Project's offering. Showjumper offers a selection of 12 courses for you to tackle. Up to six riders may compete against each other over a selection of 12 courses. Joystick control enables you to make the horse walk, canter, gallop, jump and turn. For anybody who is into showjumping, the game should prove very entertaining. 19 ESTE TALITACKED YOU PIANO Graphics Sound Value Playability WARTOAD  Machine: Spectrum Wartoad. You must battle across particular \"node'. you to beam around the time  Supplier: Ocean the Rygellian time-void, and On each combat screen you grid more easily once you have dismantle the tortuous guillotine get a \"balance of power\" liberated them.  Price: .95 before it turns the Queen into readout which shows how you Ultimately although the It's not often that you get a prime cuts. are doing in comparison to the game is extremely well game made exclusively for one T o complete the task you ! enemy creatures. Let it creep presented and documented it computer these days but need to acquire a Cosmic Tool too far in the enemy's favour gets repetitive and boring. Some Denton Designs and Ocean have kit. These eight items are and you'll lose a life. nice ideas well executed but with an exclusive for scattered throughout the time Clear a screen and you open let down because there's not the Spectrum in Cosmic vacuums of the Rygellian time up more of the \"time grid\" much of a game in evidence. War-toad. void. They include incredibly in similar fashion to Starion. True to DD's style, the game useful items such as an You can only move your Graphics is slickly presented with nice Intergalactic Whisk, 3M Wartoad to directly adjacent Sound graphics and sound. Nice Megawatt Light Bulbs, and a \"nodes\" although there are  Value looking screens and good Death Ray Smutt Gun. eight linked nodes which allow packaging complete the picture. Playability To travel, the player must But when it comes to game pass through the time grid play. Well, it's basically a shoot windows which contain various up with frills. breeds of \"nasties\". Within The usual elaborate Denton these time grid windows scenario comes with the game. Cosmie Willy-a tadpolel And it goes like this. The Queen comes to the player's aid. By of the Cosmic Wartoads has acting as a cursor he enables been captured by the Rygellian the player to select which time Slime Beasts deadliest enemy node he wishes to occupy. of her race and transformed You start the game with a into a human female. Only the view of the ''time-grid\". You Slime Beasts know why. move the tadpole cursor to the She awaits her fate beneath a zone you wish to visit and hit galactic guillotine in the Slime the fire button. Then you enter King's Lair. The player takes on into a shoot-up with the alien the role of a heroic Cosmic creatures which inhabit that CONTINUED FROM PAGE 29 DO O DO of the Beased by the 30 "


"THERE ARE JOYCKS AND THERE ARE EUROMAX 10 STICK or EUROMAX TURBO * Top and bottom fire buttons. *Extremely responsive and positive. * Built to last. 1e 96% ZZAPP RATINGS tick np O  ZAPP RATING EUROMAX ARCADE www * Rated by \"BIG K as 'The cheapest stick one can get really enthusiastic about'. * Positive micro switched action. * Fully self-centering. 97% ZZAPP RATING www EUROMAX COMP PRO *Top U.K.micro switched joystick *Very responsive. * Highly rated by 'Crash'. EUROMAX ELECTRONICS LTD. Freepost Pinfold Lane, Bridlington, North Humberside YO 16 5XR, England. Telephone: 0262 601006/602541 Telex: 527381 EMAX G. Ask you local computer store for details on full range or phone us direct FORGET THE REST -GET THE BEST USE EUROMAX JOYSTICKS SUITABLE FOR ALL POPULAR MICROS THE U.K.'S LEADING QUALITY BRAND. Please send me further details of the Euromax Joystick i range. NAME.. | ADDRESS..... ACCESS ACCEPTED "


"THE SOFTWARE CHART MARCH Hot off the presses is the latest C + VG Gallup Software Top 30. It's the most accurate and up to date chart currently published in Britain. Just one look through the latest C+ VG charts will tell you which top name games are selling the quickest making it easier for you to choose the shoot-em-up, karate game or boxing program you want. It's a knock-out. TOP 30 / ALL FORMATS THIS MONTH LAST MONTH WEEKS IN CHART SP, CO, AM 10 -NS-38. 000 9 12 13 8 NE 21 12 15 16 17 18 19 GAME Yle Ar Kung Fu Commando Winter Games Rambo Formula One Simulator BMX Racers They Sold a Million Computer Hits (10) Rockman Action Biker Finders Keepers Bounder Tutti Frutti Spellbound Koronis Rift Elite Hypersports Way of the Exploding Fist Now Games 2 Transformers Big Mac Kung Fu Kid Caves of Doom Saboteur Arcade Hall of Fame Tomahawk Critical Mass One Man and His Droid Daley Thomson's Super Test Steve Davis Snooker MACHINE MANUFACTURER SP, CO, AM, BB, MS, EL Imagine SP, CO Elite Epyx/US Gold SP, CO Ocean SP, CO, AM CI Mastertronic SP, CO, C. Mastertronic SP, CP, AM Hit Squad SP, CO, AM, BB, EL Beau Jolly SP, CO, CI Mastertronic SP, CO, CI, AT Mastertronic CO, AM, MS Mastertronic Gremlin Graphics CI, AT Mastertronic SP, AM Mastertronic CO, AT Activision SP, CO, BB, EL Acornsoft/Firebird SP, CO, AM, BB, MS Imagine SP, CO, AM BB Melbourne House SP, CO Virgin SP, CO, AM Mastertronic Gremlin Graphics SP, CO, AM Mastertronic Durell SP, CO US Gold SP CO Digital Integration SP, CO Durell SP, CO, AM CI Mastertronic SP, AM Ocean SP, CO, AM, BB, CI, EL, QLCDS 13 32 N CO, CT QW SP NEGRISIN 29 30 AMSTRAD/TOP 10 SPECTRUM/TOP 10 C64/TOP 10 1 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 3 4 5 Formula 1 Simulator/Mastertronic They Sold a Million/Hit Squad Finders Keepers /Mastertronic Yle Ar Kung Fu/Imagine Computer Hits (10)/Beau Jolly Grand Prix 3D/Software Inv. Soul of a Robot/Mastertronic Caves of Doom/Mastertronic Hypersports/Imagine Tornado Low Level/Vortex Winter Games/Epyx/US Gold Commando/Elite Rambo/Ocean Yie Ar Kung Fu/Imagine Spellbound/Mastertronic Saboteur/Durell Tomahawk/Digital Int. D. Thompson's S.T./Ocean Elite/Firebird Formula 1 Simulator/Mastertronic Bounder/Gremlin Graphics Koronis Rift/Activision Commando/Elite Rambo/Ocean Last V8/Mastertronic Winter Games/Epyx/US Gold Kik Start/Mastertronic Action Biker/Mastertronic Little Comp. People/Activision Critical Mass/Durell 10 10 10 C16/TOP 8 BBC/TOP 8 Tutti Fruitti/Mastertronic Big Mac/Mastertronic BMX Racers/Mastertronic Formula 1 Simulator/Mastertronic Rockman/Mastertronic Kung Fu Kid/Gremlin Grap. Squirm/Mastertronic Vegas Jackpot/Mastertronic Yie Ar Kung Fu Imagine Way of the Exploding Fist/MH Strike Force Harrier/Mirrorsoft Repton 2/Superior Nightshade/Ultimate | Gyroscope/ Dr Who & Mines of T./Micropower Citadel/Superior MACHINE KEY SP SPECTRUM BB = BBC BB = BBC co COMMODORE 64 AT = ATARI AM = AMSTRAD EL = ELECTRON CI = C16 ENT = ENTERPRISE 8 COMPILED BY GALLUP "


"THINK! A supreme test of logic and strategy OUT NOW AMSTRAD CPC 464 SPECTRUM AND 48K What Is Think! Essentially a board-game designed specifically for your computer, which, like all the best board games, is EASY TO LEARN but EXTREMELY DIFFICULT TO MASTER. Played on 6 X 6 grid, THINK! will provide hours of fun and frustration for all agesTHINK! THINK! features: ! Instant replays ! Icon-driven menu ! Play the computer or a friend ! Joystick or keyboard control THINK! Variations:TUTORIAL THINK! a practice mode where the computer analyses and advises on your moves * SPEED THINK! each player has a limited time to make each move BLITZ THINK! each player has a limited time to complete all their moves PROBLEM THINK! the computer will set some fiendish problems for you to solve or you can set up your own grids for the computer or a friend to solve. \"... It is a simply wonderfully addictive and ingeniously designed game... Popular Computing Weekly Chrome Tape SPECTRUM 48K A Supreme Test of Logic and Strategy TIGRESS DESIGNS Available from all good software retailers if it's not there, please orderit-orin case of difficulty, send your crossed cheque/PO made out to Ariolasoft UK Ltd., including your own name and address to Suite 105-106 Asphalte House, Palace Street, London SW1E 5HS. THINK! Spectrum 48K cassette .95. Amstrad cassette .95. Uk onders only, Prices include P&P. Please allow 28 days for delivery ariola HIGH PERFORMANCE PROGRAMS "


"LEGEND OF THE    A plane crash in the dark forests of the American sub continent, as infamous as it is unknown ... the ghostlike images of wild women disappearing into the jungle... a quest of unimaginable combat and untold adventure set against the eerie backdrop of gripping jungle scenarios ... the mesmerising compulsion that is .. the Legend of the Amazon Women. In the treacherous jungles of South America the rule of survival is victory against all odds. Commodore 64/128 .95 Spectrum 48K .95 Available soon Amstrad U.S. Gold Ltd., Unit 10 Parkway Industrial Estate, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Tel: 021 3598881 U.S. IN THE MYSTICAL AMAZON JUNGLE A FATE WORSE THAN DEATH AWAITS YOU.. E GOLD Al "


"1.D.E.A.S CENTRAL (NERVE CENTRE OF IDEAS CORP) Welcome to IDEAS CENTRAL. My name is Melissa Ravenflame, I.C. co-ordinator. IDEAS CENTRAL is where you'll find the Bug Hunters' HQ and the man who keeps those rogue robots in order Jackson T. Kalliber. Jackson makes sure OTISS, Big Red, X and B-Con get out there to find the hints, tips and pokes you all so desperately need for a happy existence. Don't tell them but I can't rely on them to make a good job of it. So the IDEAS CORPORATION and yours truly, Melissa R., need YOUR help. Remember, the IDEAS CORP will pay a large amount of credits to anyone assisting our enquiries. So, send your hints and cheats to Melissa Ravenflame, IDEAS CENTRAL, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. BACK TO SKOOL You boy! Sit up and pay attention. What's that magazine you're reading under the desk? Computer + Video Games, eh? Lucky for you, boy. If it had been any other than that highly esteemed journal, you'd have been in detention for a week. What's that? It's got hints and tips on Back to Skool. Well don't keep them to yourself. Read them out to the whole class. Safe: The key to the safe is round the neck of the girls headmistress. She hates frogs. Put the frog in a cup in the girls' kitchen so you can knock it down on her head. Remember the bike. Frogs are kept in the locked science lab storeroom. Combination letters are held by the masters. Get them drunk. Sherry is in the headmistress' cupboard which is only unlocked when she is sure all the boys are back in school. Fill water pistol by jumping up to bottle. Put sherry in school cup and use catapult to knock sherry onto masters. Stink bombs: Head will open window if you drop one when he is near. Caretaker: If you knock him out with a conker fired from catapult out of top window of school you can get by him. Bike chained to conker tree: A four number combination has to be written on blackboard to release it. Each master knows one number. Soak them with water by knocking water-filled cups with catapult while they are under them. Water pistol and stinkbombs: They are hidden in desks. Remember there are desks in the girls' school as well. Water: makes flowers grow. Mice: Catching them is fun. Letting them go in the girls school is even funnier. Lines: If you get lots of lines be extra nice to your girlfriend. Study door: Only the head can open it you'll have to jump up to reach the safe. David has also included the route he travelled and the items offered in various countries for information, 1) France money. 2) Egypt --Chronometer. 3) Greece Emerald Scarab. 4) Russia Satue of Tutankhamen. 5) New York Deeds. 6) Hong Kong Stocks and Bonds. 7) China Cultured Pearls. 8) Brazil 35mm Camera. 9) Great Britain Jade Carving. 10) San Francisco Beatles' Album. When in a city you can travel around to greet the spy by pressing the right key or turning the joystick to the right If the spy walks past, turn a little to the left. Do not do this in Russia as the spy will then refuse to trade with you. Don't panic if you lose your blip\" as you will still have several minutes on line. Avoid all satellites as these will hamper your progress. But if you are caught these are the answers to the security questions. 1) Magma, Ltd. (Check you insert the correct spaces and punctuation.) 2) AXD-0310479. 3) Hydraulic. 4) Australia. Australia also serves as the log on word. And, says David, he believes Australia, Texas is the log on word for the Commodore 64 version and it stops the satellites. The locations of the various items found in the game are as follows: Money (already present): Chronograph (France): Emerald Scarab (Egypt); Statue of Tutankhamen (Egypt): Deeds (France): Stocks and Bonds (New York); Cultured Pearls (Hong Kong): 35mm camera (Hong Kong): Jade Carving (China): Beatles' Album (Great Britain) HACKER Are you hooked on Hacker, the Activision game which gives you no instructions or help? Don't despair, Ideas Central is to the rescue with these hints and tips from David Keep. of Purley. Pressing U at a city sends your robot to the surface. C summons a spay and D will return the robot to the tunnel but only after the spay has offered his two items for sale, If the country is in darkness, pressing I allows you to operate. MERCENARY Simon Stokes, of Birmingham, has completed Mercenary, Novagen's excellent game, When the game starts, he says, buy the Dominion Dart spaceship or steal it if you can -and travel to location 09-06. Destroying any buildings on the way will incur the wrath of Palyar or the Mechanoid races. When you reach that location use the elevator to go down to lower levels where there are several types of doors. Explore the rooms and collect any items you can only carry one at a time. To find other rooms you may have to find other elevators on the planet. These are at 09-06, 09-05, 81-35, 11-13, 03-00 and Continues on Page 36 "


"are apparent when you are on the asteroid belt or when fighting swoopers or LTFs, you can use the fuel coming out of the back as a marker to line, up your shots. When fighting the killer satellites keep moving and firing all the time because the missiles they fire do not disintegrate before reaching you. 03-15 (pass holders only). By searching the city and beyond you will find other powerful vehicles, one of which allows you to fly to the Palyar Colony Craft orbiting at 65,000 feet. Objects found can be dropped in specific rooms in the craft to gain large amounts of credits Mechanoid (interview room), Winchester (laboratory), armaments (armoury), catering supplies (kitchen), 12939 supply (conference room), medical supplies (infirmary). energy crystal (power room), gold (exchequer), large box (stores). Simon also has some general hints. Save your position to tape or disk, he says, before making any drastic decision. Climb to a high altitude and look down on the city for a better idea of where you are going. Explore beyond the city. CITA DEL The quest for the five crystals in Superior Software's Citadel on the BBC should be a little easier following this help from Steven Brown, of Ripley. Crystal one: In the room above the Main Hall. Crystal two: In the witch's house. To get it you must kill the witch. Collect green skull from top of West Tower. Get trampoline to bounce on top of witch's house. Go down chimney. Jump over cauldron and the skull with drop in. Now go to pink object and put it in cauldron. Do the same with grey object from pyramid and then the witch will die. You can then go to the hole to get the crystal. Crystal three: This is down the well in the lab. First get ice crystal from the cellar. Go to East Tower where water is. This will have frozen and you can get key. Get into Well Wheel and throw the switch. Fetch cannonball from the mountains and gunpowder from the screen above the Arena. Go down the well to the second screen and go right. Walk into cannon and it will fire the ball through the wall. Go and get the crystal. Crystal four: Find it in the central tower. First go to screen to the right of tower and throw switch. Go to top of East Tower and jump off left side and fall diagonally onto the top of the Castle. Get killed by monk. Again fall diagonally and you will land on the wall. Go to the left and throw the switch. Move to screen left of Central Tower, get in the lift and when | it reaches the highest point jump to the right. You will land higher up the Central Tower. Go through door and take crystal. Crystal five: Get the Egyptian Head from bottom of the well and take it to the Pyramid. To get into the Pyramid move up until you're level with top snake. Walk into Pyramid. Find route through the Pyramid to the entrance. Then go down and drop the head. This will stop the mummies chasing you. Go back and get other head from above the prison by using the trampoline. Put this head in the other mummy screen, two screens below the first one. Go to Temple. To get past Wolf Guardian get the chicken from the Freezer. Drop into the kitchen fire to cook until it's red. Take it across the Ocean to the Temple. The chicken will disappear. Keep moving right past the Star Point to the other side of the island to the screen where a multi-coloured ball stops you. Take the green statue back to the Pyramid and go to the bottom of the tomb. Stand on the middle of the tomb and the last crystal will appear. Rob Millar from Nth Yorkshire has sent in a few hints and tips for the game is to collect all the objects in the maze. Two things will hamper your progress — the force field and fuel, although there are a number of fuel cans scattered around. In the maze you will find some silicon chips which, when taken back to the central processor, will disable the force field. The number of force fields goes from 0 31 and are numerically placed in the top left hand corner of the maze. The chips are random. There are also ten teleport chambers and ten keys. Each will take you from any chamber to a specific chamber. If a transport key is sued, always carry another, incase you are transported to an enclosed area. The key to the maze goes like this Fuel=F: Object=0; Silicon Chip=18: Force Field=27; Refuel at Base Unit=X; Return to Base Unit=+: Teleport=t: Key=K. Each key has a certain nome and these can be found by pressing F7 key. One other problem you may come across is the speed at which the fuel runs out, so, here is a quick Poke to be used only if you I have a reset button. | HELP! Who can help Richard Mills of Kent who bought Monty on the Run nearly two months ago and has been stuck in the sewers' for the last month? Nick Rush has rushed (sorry about that, Nick, but Otiss couldn't resist the pun — Melissa) these latest hints over to the office for the Spectrum game Gyroscope. The first two levels are fairly easy, but when you reach screen 1, level 3, things might start getting a little difficult. You will encounter a narrow ledge with two magnets on it. You must travel quickly through these magnets, but be sure to slow down after that, otherwise you will travel too fast down the slope and will skid across the glass and over the edge. If you get this far on your first gyroscope, you can normally zoom straight onto the square. If not, wait for the second alien to go into the furthest right corner and then move quickly. You will now be on the fourth level. Not too many difficulties here. The first screen of level five is the same as the cover of the box. Travel i slowly and think before you move! ONE FOR THE TEXAS!!! Yes Texas lovers, your computer has finally made it onto these pages. Pick yourselves up off the floor and read on to find out some tips on Parsec, sent in by Roger Marsden of Leicestershire, After you have inserted the cartridge and got the title screen, press any key to begin play. At the bottom of the screen the 'Press fire to Begin' message comes up. Do not press! Instead, go to the top of the screen as far as possible by pressing the E key, then get your ship moving as slowly as possible backwards, let go of the S key and you should still keep on going. Normally your ship would come to a halt but if you hold down the E key after releasing the S key your ship should ignore the barrier and will keep on going. When you release the E key, your ship will stop and, by quickly pressing S and/or D. you can put yourself in such a position that half your ship is on the left hand side and the fuel coming out the back is on the right. Press fire to begin. The advantages of doing this THREE WEEKS IN PARADISE Has Mikrogen's Three Weeks in Paradise turned into Paradise Lost for you? Don't despair. Michael Stokes, of Wakefield, offers the following assistance. Get the bill can from the screen with the frog and flipflop from the trading post. Go to the olde geyser and jump at the vine on the right. Quickly run under the water. Go onto the sand and press Enter when next to the crab. You can now collect the crab's pincer. Take this to the right of the screen where Herbert is kept and press Enter. You can now get past the two lions. Now get the two sticks the crocodile screen and take them to the red thing in the temple where all the swords are on the wall. Press enter and the fire will start. Get the bellows and press Enter. You can now get the hot ashes. Keep the bellows and go to the witch doctor. Press Enter and the storm cloud will produce lightning. Use the bellows to blow-the cloud to the hut which will burn down allowing you to collect the seashell. Take the shell to the well, go down and press Enter under the drop to fill it up. Move to the right and press Enter to climb back out of the well. Go to the place where Herbert is held and press Enter by the fire and you'll have Herbert. "


"ATARI on Compumart London NEW!!! LOW COST SHORT TERM FINANCE NOW AVAILABLE SHOW Mege Deals Best Price for I ATARI HARDWARE ATARI in the U.K. ATARI Best Prices for BLANK DISKS in the U.K. Top Quality 5V4\" Bulk Packed Disks (Hub-Ringed and in White Envelopes with a Lifetime Warranty) FREE!!! Plastic Library Case worth  when you buy 10 Disks . +33p&p Atari 130XE Computer Atari 1050 Disk Drive (with FREE Home File Manager, Payoff Adventure, Demo Disks & 10 FREE Blank Disks) ing . FESp&p . sep Atari 1027 Letter Quality Printer (with FREE Atari Writer) FREE!!! Perspex Disk Storage Box worth  when you buy 50 Disks 10-5VA\" Single Sided Double Density . +tip&p Blank Disks (with FREE case) 10—574* Double Sided Double Density . Flipp - Atari 130XE, 1050 Disk Drive & 1027 Letter Quality Printer Blank Disks (with FREE case) (with FREE Home File Manager, Payoff Adventure, Demo Disks, Atari Writer 35 50-5'4\" Single Sided Double Density & 10 Blank Disks) Blank Disks (with FREE Storage Box) Goods despatched : SAME DAY_PARCEL POST 12 Month Warranty: ANY PRODUCT FOUND TO BE DEFECTIVE WITHIN 12 MONTHS OF 50-514\" Double Sided/Double Density PURCHASE WILL BE REPLACED-FREE OF CHARGE Blank Disks (with FREE Storage Box) GOODS DESPATCHED Seme day et les Poet CONTACT US NOW FOR THE LATEST MONEY BACK GUARANTEE W you are not completely PRICES + AVAILABILITY OF ALL your disks or give FULL REFUND that's the ATARI PRODUCTS Compument Guarantee Please send cheques/postal orders to : Compumart, (Dept CV) 71 Gracedieu Road, Loughborough Leics. LE11 OQF etiam . = 2p&p .Compumart.... Domu 0509-262259 TLINE.HOTLINE_HOT Comp JR SOFTWARE 5 Brookes Court Baldwin Gardens London EC1 Telephone: 01-242 5409 All orders despatched immediately MICRO MAIL commodore deals for 7.40 8.30 8.50 11.20 199.95 6.60 5.95 9 .80 7.40 1541 Disk Drive for Vic 2010, 16/CBM, 64/CBM 128... .f139.95 1570 Disk Drive seven times faster for CBM 128. E189.95 CBM 128 with free C2N recorder (worth .95)....... ..E269.95 CBM 64 compendium with holiday vouchers (worth 250.00)....... .....189.95 MCS-801 matrix printer will do graphics) .... ...95 1541 Disk Drive/MPS-801 printer pack..... E199.95 MCS-801 seven-colour printer was .00 1541 Disk Drive/Seiko wrist terminal for 64/128 E179.95 CBM 128 computer/1571 Disk Drive pack... E439.95 Star SG10C NLQ dot-matrix printer....... ..95 1520 four-colour printeriplotter... ..95 1900 colour monitor 80 columns............ .95 Ferguson RGB/Video/TV monitor .[219.95 Blank disks with plastic library case: 10 single-sided double-density... ..95 10 double-sided double-density....... .95 * All hardware supplied with plug and tested prior to despatch * Credit card orders welcomed * Finance arranged * Free carriage on orders over  * All prices include VAT Please send cheque/postal order to: 11.00 11.00 11.00 11.00 7.45 SPECTRUM COMM. 64 Price AMSTRAD BATTLE FOR PLANETS 7.40 NIGHT SHADE SIR FRED OUTLAWS 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE 7.40 DRAGON SKULLE 7.40 SKYFOX NT KARATE RACING DEST. SET MERCENARY ELITE CRITICAL MASS 5.95 FRIDAY 13 FRIDAY 13th SUPERBOWL 5.95 WORM IN PARADISE WORKING BACKWARDS WORM IN PARADISE ATARI FRIDAY 13h GERRY THE GEM ELECTRA GLIDE TAU CETI BLADE RUNNER REALM OF IMPOSS.D THE FORCE REVS 11.25 JUMP JET CYBERUN FIGHTER PILOT SUN FIGHT SUPERMAN SPY V. SPY SUPERMAN ZONE X ENIGMA FORCE LORD OF THE RINGS 11.75 ELECTRA GLIDE KING OF THE RING BACK TO SKOOL 5.15 SWEEVO'S WORLD MSX ZORRO 5.95 SKY JAGUAR ZOIOS SKY FOX B.GO HYPER RALLY 8.60 ENIGMA FORCE ROAD FIGHTER BOUNCE SPACE DOUBT CAUSE OF CHAOS 5.95 YIE AR KUNG FU 6,60 HYPER SPORT REALM OF IMPOSS 5,60 COMPUTER HIT B SPITFIRE 40 6.60 STREET HAWK COMIC BAKERY C16 5.95 TAI BOXING STREET HAWK BOUNDER 5.95 WORLD BASEBALL KNIGHT RIDER SABOTEUR 5.95 SUPERBOWL CLASSICS JERRY THE GEM AIR WOLFE 5.90 LORD OF THE RINGS 11.75 STAR EVENTS COSTA CAPERS 5.90 GULLWING FALCON LCKUPS FARLIGHT TORPEDO RUN BOLD HALLEY'S COMET ROCK 'N WRESTLE GRANDMASTER CHESS GLADIATORS GAMES PACK (1 OR 2) ROLLER COASTER 5.20 DOOMOARK'S REVENGE 7.40 KUNG FU KID THE OCP ART STUDIO 9.00 ANY PBIRD S SILVER JETBRIX TWISTER 5.50  A BACK TO THE FUTURE BBC TWISTER TAgo ESPRIT  DESERT FOY FLEET STREET EDITOR   11.30 COUNT DOWN TE AR KUNG FU BOMB JACK MAX HEADROOM 740 EXPLODING FIST 8.80 ANY FBIRDS SILVER Telephone orders taken Special offer: Com Pro Joystick (13.50. Koni Speed King 19.80 Both joysticks have one year guarant e ed Sund for lat, stating which mir. Any che s to the following address: JR SOFTWARE, Dept. CVG3, 5 BROOKES COURT, BALDWIN GARDENS, LONDON EC1 THINK 5.70 5.20 7.45 5.95 5.95 7.80 5.60 5.20 520 8.50 7.40 GORDON HARWOOD 239 computers MICRO MAIL, 69/71 HIGH STREET ALFRETON, DERBY DE5 7DP Tel: (0773) 836781 24 hours credit card hotline "


"BARGAIN SOFTWARE Dept. CVG 3, Unit 1. 1 Esmond Road, London W4 1JG P hone orders welcome. Ring 01-995 2763 Quickshot Orders over  2 deduct 10% .95 SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 Heavy on the Magick i 3 8.70 3.95 8.70 6.70 6.70 5.70 7.45 7.45 tahu L 6.70 7.45 745 6.70 7.45 7.45 745 7.45 RRP SUPERBOWL 9.95 DOUDARKS REVENGE SKY FOX 8.95 SPACE DOUBT 8.95 BOUNCES 9.95 CAUSE OF CHAOS SUPERMAN 9.95 8.95 STREETHAWK 7.95 STREET HAWK KNIGHT RIDER KNIGHT RIDER 8.95 GERRY THE GEM ELECTRA GLIDE 9.95 SHOW JUMPING SUPERBOWL 9.95 ENIGMA FORCE ZOIDS 8.95 9.95 YIE AR KUNG FU 8.95 BATTLE OF THE PLANETS 9.95 7.40 KUNG FU MASTER 9.95 COMMANDO ROCK 'N' WRESTLE 9.95 B. MCGUIGAN'S BOXING 7.99 5.95 BOUNDER LORD OF THE RINGS 15.95 11.90 TIME TUNNEL 9195 DRAGON SKULLE 9.95 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE THE IDOLON TURBO SPORT 8.95 ELECTRA GLIDE YIE AR KUNG FU 7.95 5.90 HUNCHBACK THE ADVENTURER ROLLER COASTER 6.95 5.20 KORONIS RIFT 9.95 SWEEVO'S WORLD 7.95 DESERT FOX 9.95 SABOTEUR 8.70 SUPERBOWL 9.95 COSMIC WARTOAD HARDBALL 9.95 GUNFRIGHT  9.95 MOVIE 7.95 5.90 AMSTRAD ROCK N WRESTLE 8.95 CODE NAME MAT TRANSFORMERS 5.90 BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK 9.95 INT, KARATE 6.50 COMMANO0 WINTER GAMES 7.95 5.90 SOLD A MILLION 14 top games GLADIATOR 7.95 5.90 SPY V SPY 9.95 TINISTER 7.50 YE AR KUNG FU FRIDAY 13TH GLADIATORS 9.95 ELITE 14,95 11.20 ELITE 14.95 THEY SOLD A MILLION 9.95 7.40 BATTLE OF THE PLANETS ARCADE HALL OF FAME 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE 9.95 NOW GAMES I 8.95 8.70 SUPERBOWL 9.95 BACK TO THE FUTURE SUPER SLEUTH WEST BANK 7.95 5.90 TAU CETI 9.95 RAMBO 8.95 TAU CETI 9.95 7.45 STREET HAWK 8.95 BACK TO SCHOOL KNIGHT RIDER ROBIN OF THE WOOD SKYFOX 9.95 ALL PRICES INCLUDE P&P. OVERSEAS ORDERS PLEASE ADD E1 PER TAPE SEND S.A.E. FOR FULL LIST: PLEASE STATE MACHINE 3.99 795 8.70 7.95 11.20 9.95 7.45 8.95 6.70 6.70 7.45 From GARGODLE -the GAMEMASTERS MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS LOOKING FOR KICKS IN°86? THEN DON'T MISS SPECTRUM Spy Hunter............5.50 F.B. Boxing.............5.25 Exploding Fist..........6.95 Highway Encounter..5.95 Basketball Int. (Elite)4.95 Fairlight................... 7.50 Robin of the Wood. 7.50 Geoff Capes........5.95 Superman............... 7.50 Elite..................... 11.25 Blade Runner...........6.95 Fighting Warrior......5.95 Winter Sports......... 7.50 Dath Wake..........5.95 ....5.95 Gun Fright.............. 7.50 Pentagram.............. 7.50 Nomad...................5.95 Flintstones.............. 5.95 Winter Games..........5.95 Desert Rat.............. 7.50 Superbowl.............. 7.50 McGuigan's Boxing..5.95 Zorro 5.95 Goonies...................5.95 Art Studio............. 12.50 Benny Hill................5.25 Turbo Esprit............6.75 .................5.95 Hunchback Adv.......5.95 Laser Basic............ 12.50 Vectron..... .....5.95 Back to the Future... 7.50 West Bank..............5.95 Sky Fox..................6.75 Movie ....................5.95 Amazon Woman...5.95 Battle Planets.......... 7.50 mita SUPER VALUF 1.C.U.P.S.......... MATHI Winter Games......... 7.50 Night Fights............7.50 Goonies........... ..7.50 Harvey Smith..........6.85 Doctor Who.......... 11.50 Sold a Million..........7.50 Ball Blazer............. 7.50 Who Dares Wins....5.95 Wizard................... 9.75 Commando............. 7.50 Lord of the Rings... 12.50 Skool Daze.............5.25 Enigma Force.......... 7.50 Swords & Sorcery... 7.50 Mugay's Revenge...8.75 Rock & Wrestle....... 7.50 Little Comp. People. 7.50 Yak's Progress........ 7.50 Friday the 13th.......6.75 Roller Coaster........,5.95 Gyroscope.............. 6.75 Koronis Rift............8.00 Young Ones............5.95 Elektra Glide 8.75 Arc of Yesod.......... 7.50 Ping Pong...............5.95 ..5.95 Death Wake............5.95 Flintstones... Outlaws 7.50 Dragon Skulle......... 7.50 Time Tunnel............. 7.50 Desert Fox.............. 7.50 Superbowl.............. 7.50 ...... 11.25 Hardball................. 7.50 Wild West..............8.00 Lords of the West...7.50 Laser Basic... 12.50 Bounder... 7.50 ...... .6.75 Hunchback Adv.......6.75 Back to the Future... 7.50 Uridium.................. 6.75 Kung Fu Master...... 7.50 Law of West... 7.50 Amazon Woman...... 7.50 Battle Planets......... 7.50 Nightshade ............. 7.50 Spaced Out............6.75 Cause of Chaos....... 6.75 Wild Bride...............5.25 Zolds..... . .. 5.95 Impossible Mission 5.95 Starquake............... 5.95 Doctor Who.......... 11.50 Critical Mass.............6.75 Sold a Million..........7.50 World Basketball.....5.95 3 Weeks in Paradise 7.50 Lord of the Rings... 12.50 Commando............. 7.50 Sir Fred........ .. .7.50 Back to Skool. ..5.25 Enigma Force..........7.50 Swords & Sorcery... 7.50 Rock 'n' Wrestle.....6.75 Tomahawk ............. 7.50 Gyroscope.............. 5.95 Cyberun ............... 7.50 Robot Messiah........5.95 Friday the 13th.......6.75 Wham's Music Box..7.50 Saboteur ............... 6.75 Roller Coaster.........5.25 Young Ones.............5.95 Are of Yesod..........7.50 W artoad................. 5.95 M S..E... HHwa 696 Yie Ar Kung Fu.......5.95 Knight Rider............5.95 Rambo.................5.95 Streethawk..... ....5.95 Transformers.......... 5.95 Spitfire 40............... 7.50 Ping Pong.............5.95 Gladiator ................ 6.75 1.C.U.P.S................6.75 Finest Hour............7.50 Revs... COMMODORE 64 Impossible Mission.. 7.75 Elite..................... 11.00 Basketball...............4.95 Pitstop II................ 7.85 F.B. Boxing... 5.95 Exploding Fist.........7.50 Beach-head ..7.50 Summer Games II....7.50 Sky Fox................. 7.50 Mercenary .... ...... 7.50 Terromolinos..... .. 5.50 7.50 Zoids.. Batalyx..... 7.50 Karateka.. ......8.00 Geoff Capes..........6.75 Robin of the Wood. 7.50 Superman.............. 7.50 Battle of Britain....... 7.50 Bladerunner .6.75 Flashting Warrior 5.95 Spy vs Spy ......... 7.50 Nexus................... 7.50 Bounce.. . 7.50 Summer Games I..... 7.50 Britain's top soccer magazine brings you all the excitement of soccer every week.  SUPER COLOUR POSTERS OF THE TOP STARS  MATCH FACTS THE WORLD'S GREATEST RESULTS SERVICE WITH RATINGS FOR EVERY PLAYER  FABULOUS FEATURES THAT ARE BANG UP-TO-DATE  UP-TO-THE-MINUTE NEWS AND VIEWS FROM YOUR FAVOURITE PLAYERS AND ALL FOR 42p AVAILABLE AT YOUR NEWSAGENTS NOW! Check us out you'll find we're on the balli Zorro Postage included U.K. Please state which micro. Fast Service Send cheque/PO to: MEGASAVE, Dept. CVG, 76 Westbourne Terraco, London W2 "


"C+VG COMPETITION  COMPON Sinclair OOD Art for art's sake that's always been C+VG's motto. And here's something to whet your palate or perhaps in this case, palette if you've ever had designs on being the owner of a Spectrum 128K computer Well that's the fantastic top competition prise C+VG's offering thanks to our friends at Rainbird Software, the people behind the OCP Art Studio, which is probably one of the best graphics packages available for the Spectrum. How can you win the 128K? Just read on. What we want you to do is design, paint or draw a loading screen for your favourite game. And if you have a graphics package for your computer, why not use that to create the screen. Send your entries either in the form of artwork or on tape to Rainbird Arts Studio Competition, Computer + Video Games, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, ECI 3AU. The closing date for entries is March 16th and the editor's decision is final. The two runners-up will each get the OCP Arts Studio package. The Art Studio caters for the complete novice to the professional designer. Not only is it extraordinarily comprehensive in its facilities but the package is very easy and above all fun to use Once you've created your image using either keyboard, joystick or mouse you can make it smaller, larger, colour it, add different textures, patterns or shades. Triangles, squares, rectangles and circles are dead easy. And, of course, if you don't like what you get, there's the \"undo\" facility and you can start again. Right, get to the drawing board if you want to be in with a chance of becoming a proud owner of a Spectrum 128K. C+VGIART STUDIO COMPETITION Name Address "


"turbo esort software getting harder With Technical Assistance from Lotus Cars Ltd. A DURELL Spectrum and Amstrad R.R.P. .95 DURELL COMPETITION Entry Coupon Cut out this coupon and send it with a completed entry form included with any of the new Durell games DURELL sales dept. Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton TAI 4AB, "


"TLE OF THE PL PLANETS BATTLE RETAIL 3.95 BATTLE OF THE PLANETS is the space simulation that was selected for the National Computer Games Championship MIKRO-GEN Un 15, The Westem centre, Bracknell, Berks Tel. 0344427317 0344427317 Steinar "


"URI HOW TO SURVIVE! So you want to know about Uridium reverses out of an interplanetary appears at the top of the screen, do you? In that case you couldn't transporter and begins a low-level move as soon as possible to the have come to a better magazine. strafing run. You must avoid the right hand end of the DreadAs you can see we've provided meteor shields and communicanought and fly flat over the end you with an exclusive player's tions aerials on the superstructure of the master runway from left of the Dreadnought. to right. guide to the game, created by our IDEAS Fighter defences appear in You will autoCENTRAL experts, plus hints and tips from the waves. A bonus is awarded after matically land and programming genius himself, ANDREW landing if all ships in a wave are pass into the BRAYBROOK. What more could you ask for? destroyed. You must attack sur fuel rod A Manta fighter with armour like Big Red's face features to score bonus points. Beware of the homing mines and firepower which packs a punch like Jackson which materialise over flashing T. Kalliber, that's what! generator ports and hunt you down The solar system is under Once on board you must pull as When the attack! Enemy Supermany fuel rods as possible \"Land Now\" Dreadnoughts have been from the metal convertors message placed in orbit around 16 planets before you take off for a final in this galactic sector. They are strafing run as the Dreadnought draining mineral resources from vapourises. the planetary cores for use in their You are piloting a Manta class interstellar power units. Each Space Fighter which is Super-Dreadnought is seeking out transported to each a different metal for its metal Dreadnought in convertor. turn. Your It's your task to destroy the fighter Dreadnoughts. First you must attack the defensive screen of enemy fighters, then neutralise the surface defences before you land on the SuperDreadnought's master runway. Steer clear of areas with shadows DREADNOUGHTS dom oms URIE "


"TUUM DOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO CODOOOOOOOOOOOOOO POOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 011 of five, there will be a greater chance of the remaining three ships shooting at you. So DON'T hang around in front of them. Watch out for the LAND NOW! message which flashes at the top of the screen. Once that In later stages of appears you can race for the end the game some types of of the ship, land and get into the defender ship will chase after sub-game. YOU. These appear around Like Paradroid, Andy wanted about the third or fourth to put something in which gave Dreadnought. Use the excellent the player a rest from all the fighter acceleration of your Manta to get frantic action. This sub-game is and to work you out of trouble rememsimpler than Paradroid's but out the layout of bering those hazards on deck! you'll need pretty quick reactions the Dreadnought decks. Then there are the mines. even so. Our flightpath maps will help These appear from the flashing What you see is a \"pyramid\" you but only on the first few generator ports. Listen out for a of twin indicator lights which flash of Dreadnoughts. And they don't whooshing sound followed by a on and off with a bonus score or take into account the antics of the tell-tale bleeping. This informs the word \"quit\". You have to press chamber. deadly defence ships which come you that a mine has been the fire button when the indicator Here you after you with varying degrees of launched and is on your tail. If with the bonus score inside is lit. must select your nastiness. you are around a generator port This adds to your score. But you bonus or \"Quit\" by The waves of defending ships when a mine appears try not to must hit a \"quit\" before the pressing fire at the right are pre-set. So once you've be on a diagonal line with it. countdown running at the top of moment. You must quit the watched them come at you once Mines are deadly on diagonals! the screen reaches zero. chamber before the countdown you'll get a good idea of their They only have a limited life span Timing is all important in this at the top of the screen reaches hostility and firepower factors. so you can dodge them if you part of the game. You have to get zero. One crucial point to remember is manoeuvre around slowly. Don't into the rhythm of the lights. Try On take off, reverse and straf to NEVER try and fight them panic, you'll survive them. imagining that the light is moving any remaining surface targets as from the front. O.K., the odd Remember there can only be from left to right across the screen the Super-Dreadnought lucky shot will wipe out an six moving objects on the screen and that there's a \"false\" indicator vapourises. advancing craft but stealth is at one time so if there's a wave in the centre. Then you'll soon get That about covers the basics of the watchword for a big score, so of five ships coming at you there into the groove. the game. But what you have to try and blast them from behind won't be a mine coming to Advanced players might like to remember is that Uridium is fast. Perils exist if you choose this surprise you from behind. hang around the Dreadnought's VERY fast. Don't go rushing into technique because you tend to get The six objects rule will help master runway for a while to the attack. Take time to master carried away by the chase and end you to beat the system. It also boost their score. The Dreadthe considerable speed and up crashing into one of the many affects the firepower of the ships. nought defences throw more and manoeuvrability of your Manta hazards on the Dreadnought. Say if you've knocked out two out Continued on page 44 UUM "


"URJUM tight spots this way. Practice more evil things at you the longer makes perfect! you stay airborne after the LAND 3810 URIDIUM You can also get your Manta NOW! message appears. This is flying on its side but you must a dangerous tactic but be flying fast enough. Too slow worthwhile for extra points. and your ship won't budge! You'll Once you've primed the need to fly on your side to get destruct sequence it's back to the between the odd hazard Andy has action. Your Manta blasts off the built into the Dreadnoughts. And runway on automatic but you remember the ship has built in must take control again to loop 2700 intertia so it won't stop dead back over the Dreadnought as it or turn immediately. dissolves into space, blasting  Uridium is available now for anything you left behind on the the C64 and costs .95 on tape first run. and .95 on disk. Andy says there are ships and installations on later levels that extremely manoeuvrable. It can behind your ship when you do a you WON'T be able to get until perform neat 180 degree spins 180 flip as the craft does move you're on the way back. with ease. But you must backwards a little. There are times Your Manta fighter is remember to leave enough room when you'll need to get out of COMPETITION URIDIUM You've marvelled at the maps, gasped at the playing tips now try to win the game. Or games to be exact. Hewsons will present a complete range of their Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad software to the three winners of C+VG's great Uridium competition. And 25 runners-up will also get some fantastic Hewson software for their computer. What do you have to do? Design a Super Dreadnought, that's what. Andy's game shows just the top bit of these megaspaceships. But what does the rest of the ship look like? That's what we want you to tell us. You can draw or paint the spaceship of your dreams and, if you're a winner, see it printed in a future issue of C+VG. You can send us a blueprint of your Dreadnought, or an artist's impression of the battlecruiser that has sent shivers down the spines of a million alien space-warriors. Once you've completed your Dreadnought send it to Computer and Video Games, Dreadnought Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Remember to attach the competition coupon securely to your entry. Closing date for the competition is March 16th. THE PRIZES The prizes have been divided up by machine. The Spectrum first prize winner will get the complete range of Hewson games for their machine. These are Avalon, Dragontor, Technician Ted, Southern Belle and AstroClone. The C64 winner will get Paradroid, Lunattack, Heathrow International, Gribbly's Day Out and Uridium. The Amstrad winner will receive Southern Belle, Dragontor, Technician Ted, Heathrow International and Fantasia Diamond. We'll throw in a Big Red t-shirt for each winner, too! The 25 runners-up will be able to choose between Spectrum AstroClone, C64 Uridium and Amstrad Technician Ted as prizes. The Photocopier C+VG/HEWSON URIDIUM DREADNOUGHT COMPETITION Name Address oo Age _Computer owned (tick box) Spectrum C 64 Amstrad Please attach this coupon to your entry. "


"zRJYM ctice anta nust slow bul get has And it in lead for ape TURN ON TO URIDIUM THE ARCADE SPACE COMBAT GAME Poelvour adrenalin pulse As you throw your Montaiguter the theart super sequence u dve cs and Thunderous UCKTY and shattering a shells bacter WE Senses Hard deed metallic graphics Sault Vou wisuals Screaming fighters For Mail Order send a che POW O GOSH fracture your nerves Consultants Ltd Orues by Credit Card by sending Coul controlps you through the mobile YOU Aucess Batidycard urbes and enclose a sidste duerces of the alien Super Dreadnourts SUR SaturD ot ECO VUUTTE and address to the contration with wirdum itself U by Andrew B ook is the string FEMEI LO CHE Chart to Poradrod. 2014 Qoca Nestle Aree Game of the Year For Commodore 64 and 128 Cassette .95 Disk  12.95 566 Miton Trading Estate, Miton, Abingdon. Oxon OX14 4RX Hewson Consultants Ltd As part of our corrung development of motive software we are always happy to evalece software sent to us with a vew to publication "


"SPACE TOUBT. "


"HUNCHY c+vg/games book/hunchy/1 LISTING ONE  CBM64 Esmeralda is in trouble but don't worry, Quasimodo is ready and willing to come to her rescue. Use the z, C and SHIFT keys to guide Hunchy through the game's 25 screens. Guards, rocks, arrows and acid drops will kill Hunchy if he touches them. You start each game with seven lives. Complete four screens in a row without losing a life and a super bonus is awarded. Paul Hammond POKER6332 255 SYS49152 POKE49664, POKE49666,0 10 PRINT\"G\": POKE53281, POKE53280, POKE53272,29 POKE53265, PEEK (53265)OR64 11 FORI=54272T054296 POKEI, NEXT POKES4296,3: POKE54278.0 POKE54277.9 12 POKES4273.31: POKE54276.0 20 V-53248 POKEY. POKEV+1.122 POKEV+39,7 POKE2040 200 POKEY+29, 127 21 FORI=V+40 TOV+45: POKEI, 1 NEXT: FORI=2041 T02043 POKEI, 206 NEXT 22 POKEY+2:52 POKEV+4,138 POKEV+6,226 FORI=Y+3TOV+7STEP2 POKEI, 129 NEXT 23 POKEV+43,11: POKE2044,208 : POKEV+8,255 POKEV+9, 117 24 POKE2045,204 POKE2046,285 POKEY+10,235 POKEV+12, POKEV+11,122 POKEV+13,180 25 POKEV+46.6 POKE2047,209 POKEV +14,255 POKEV+15,80 30 POKEV+23.14: POKEV+21, 50 FORIS 1T025: READLES(I) NEXT GOT0880 55 SCLE-1LI=7 SP-250 BES 60 GOSUB1000 REM**DRAW SCREEN** 100 X-PEEKCV) X=X/8XX+2 REPEEK(1024+X+11*48) IFR=32ANDPEEK 49664)=@THEN400 110 IFPEEKCV+30) AND THEN400 : REM**DEAD 120 IFPEEKCV) =254 THEN608 REMENEW LEVEL 130 R-PEEK(197) IFR=120RR-28THENPOKE54276,129 POKE54276,0 200 GOT0180 408 POKE54276.17: POKE49666, 1 FORI=PEEKCV+1) T0255STEP2POKEV+1, IPOKE54273, 1/8 410 NEXT: POKEV, POKE54276.0 BERLI-LI-1 415 IFLIXTHENFORT=OTO1000: NEXT: POKE49666,8: GOT0800 416 00SUB1020: POKE49666.0 420 POKEV+30.: POKEV+1, 122: POKE49664,0 450 GOTO100 600 POKE49666,1 601 POKE34276. 17:POKE54273,130: FORT=T065 NEXT POKE54276,8: POKE54273,31 605 LE LE+1: SC-SC+80: IFLE26THENLE=1: GOT0700 612 POKEV+21.8: POKEV, GOSUB1000: POKE49664,: POKE49666.: GOTO189 700 POKEV+21,PRINT\"70000000DT WELL DONE YOU HAVE RESCUED ESMERALDA 710 PRINT\" BONUS 400\" SC-SC+400 720 PRINT\" TRY AGAIN BUT THIS TIME WILL BE FASTER 730 SP-SP-20: POKE56325, SP 740 FORT @T04000 NEXT: GOSUB1888 POKEV, POKEV+1,122 POKE49664.0: POKEV+30,0 745 POKE49666. 750 30T0100 800 PRINT \"1000: R$\" POKEV+21, 801 RSRE\"HUNCH BACK.GUIDE QURSIMODO THROUGH 25 SCREENS TO RESCUE ESMERALDA.\" 802 R $+\"USE Z CAND SHIFT TO JUMP. IF YOU WAIT YOU WILL SEE A DEMO OF ALL\" 803 R$ R$+THE SCREENS. 804 PRINT\" W E ES ### 805 PRINT\" MEME #EEEE 806 PRINT\" *** ** SME *** *** 888 PRINT\" ** SEB 33\" 899 FORT=1T0288 : PRINT\" B 000DDDDDDDDDDTB$BSMIDSCRU, 1.39):FORTT0120: NEXT 810 GETC$: IFC=\" \"THEN55 811 NEXT 812 FORLE=1T025.GETC$: IFC$\" \"THEN55 820 GOSUB1800 POKEV-21. PEEKV+21)-1 PRINT DOTOS\" SPC(14) \"DEMO\": FORTT01580 825 GETCS IFCOTHENI-25T-1500: GOTONS 830 NEXTT NEXTLE: GOTO900 999 END 1000 POKE53265, PEEK(53265) AND239: PRINT 1002 DATA208,201,0.240.11.206,0,208,206,0 208173,248.7.201 202 1003 DATR208.5.169 203.76.57.192.169.202.141.248.7.173, 197,0.201 1004 DATA20, 208,30, 173..208,201.254,240,23,238,0, 288, 238.8.208 1005 DATA173,248,7.201.200.208.5.169.201.76.94.192.169.280141.248 1006 DATA7, 173, 141.2.201.1.208.12.173,0, 194.201.0, 208,5,169 1807 DATA1. 141, 8, 194,173, 8, 194,201.0.240.46.173, 8, 194,201.1 1088 DATA208.21. 206.1.288,206,1,208.173.1.288201,98,208,26,169 1809 DATR2, 141.8.194,76.169, 192,238.1.208,238.1.208.173.1.208 1010 DATA201, 122.208.5.169,. 141.0.194,238,3, 194,173,3,194,201 1011 DATA12, 208,11,169,206,141.249.7, 141,250, 7.141.251.7.201.24 1012 DATA208.16, 169.207.141.249.7.141.250.7.141.251.7.169,0.141 1013 DATA3, 194,234, 234,234,238.15.208.238.15,208,238,15,208,238.15 1014 DATR208,238.15, 208, 238, 15208,238, 15,208,238.15,208.173.15208 1015 DATA201.248.208.6.173.18,208,141. 14,208,206.8.208.206.8.208 1016 DATA206,8,208,206,8,208,206,10,288,206,10,208,206,10.288, 296 1017 DATA10, 208, 296,10,208, 238,12,208,238.12.208,238,12,288,238,12 1018 DATA288/238.12.208,238. 12. 2ee, 286,10,288, 285,10,288,238.12.208 1019 DATA238.12.208.76,49,234,32,1,1,-1 2000 DATAB,0.12,0,0.30.0.0.60.0.0.58,0.0.49. 2001 DATAB, 34,0.0.28.0.0.62,0,0.46.0.0.46.0. 2002 DATA54.0.0.62,0,0.28...24.0.0.24,0,,28 2003 DATAO,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0, 2004 DATAB, 8.120.0.30.0.0.60.0.0 58.0.0.49, 2005 DATAO, 34,0,0.28.2.3.62,0,.127.0.0.107,0, 2006 DATA221.0.0.62.0.0.28,0,0.52.0.0.38.2.0.51 2007 DATRO,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 2008 DATAO,, 48.0.0.120.8.0.60.0.0.92.0.0, 140, 2009 DATAO. 68.0.0.56,0,0.124.0.0, 116,0,0.116,0.0 2010 DATA103.8..124,0,.56.0.0.24,0,0.24,,0.56 2011 DATAO,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0.0 2012 DATAO.0.48.0.0.120.0.0.60.0.0.92.0.0.143.0 2013 DATAO. 68.0.0.56.0.0.124,0,0,254,0,0,215,00 2014 DATA187.0.0.125.8.0.56,0,0,44,0,0.100,0,0,.204 2013 DATAO.0.0.0.0,8,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 "


"1001 PRINT\" PADDDDDDDDDDDDDDDHHHUNCH BACK 1002 PRINT2300ODNUPERRIBIBONUS\" 1004 PRINT\" SPC(35) \" EPIMA.\" 1889 FORI=9T012 PRINT\" *********www********************\"NEXT 1006 PRINT\" #***** ************************ 1008 PRINT \": BEBE$+$\": IFBE$=\"$$$ \"THENSC-SC 150: BES\" 1010 IFMID$(LEUCLE),1,1)=\"1\"THEN1820 1011 IFMID$CLES(LE),1,1)0 2\"THEN1015 1012 PRINT\"290404 DADDOUBPPPPP! 1013 FORI=OTOS PRINT DADARI PODROPl\"; NEXT 1014 FOR I =T02 PRINT\" DODO\"SPCC11+IN7\" R O SE\" NEXT 1015 IFMID$CLES(LE). 1.1) \"3\"THEN1020 1016 PRINT DOODDODD00\" 1017 PRINTERI PROPRI PPDPI & RODPODI\"; 1018 FORI=T01 PRINT\">DI PODPORI POPOPODI IPPODOT; NEXT 1020 SN1 1030 IFMID$CLE$(LE),2.1)*\"1\"THENSN-SN+14 1831 IFMID$(LES(LE),3,1)=\"1\" THENSN-SN+16 POKEV+9.117POKEV+8,255 1832 IFMID$CLES CLE,4,1)=\"1\"THENSNESN+32: POKEV+10,255: POKEV+11. 122 1933 IFMID$CLESCLE),5,1)=\"1\"THENSNSN+64: POKEV+13,100: POKEV+12,255 1834 IFMID$CLE#CLE),6,1)=\"1\" THENSNESN+128 POKEV+15, 1035 IFMID$CLE#CLE), 7,1)=\"1\" THENSNWSN+16 POKEV+9,98 : POKEV+8,255 1040 PRINT DO DDODDDDDDDDDDDDNLIVESTLITAB(26) \"LEVEL \"LE 1050 PRINT PRINT\" Som\"BE$ 1099 PRINT 1100 POKEY+21. SN: POKEY, POKEY+1.122 POKE49664,8: POKEV+14,6 1110 A S CHSTR$(SC): SCS-MIDS(SC$, 2. LENCSC:)) 1120 IFLENCSC$)=7THEN1190 1130 FORI=1 T07-LENCSC$):ATR$+\"\"NEXTR$ +C$ 1190 PRINT\" SPC(12); A$ 1200 POKEV+30. POKE53265, PEEK(53265) OR16 RETURN 16800 DATA1018000 2808000 3800800, 3001800, 3018080.3188000, 2018800, 1080010 10001 DATA3080010, 310100.2080010.1016010,3010100.2001001 10002 DATA3001100, 3188010, 10011101011100, 3801101.2001100, 3101100 10903 DATA2001011,31101101001111, 2001111 2016 DATRO, 2,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,2,0,0,0,0,0 2017 DATAB,e,e,0,,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,3,0,1 2018 DATA10,0,3,255,0.1.10.0.0.5.0.0.0.0.2.0 2019 DATRO,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0.255 2020 DATAO,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0.@ 2821 DATAB, 0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,2,128.0.1 2822 DATR66,0,3,255,0.1,66,0,2,128,0,0,0,0,0, 2023 DATAO,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,235 2024 DATRO,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0. 2025 DATAO,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0.56 2926 DATA128,0,117,192,0,234,128,0, 196, 128,0, 120, 128.0.220.128 2027 DATAO, 223, 128,0,236, 128,,120.128,0,48, 128,0.56, 128.255 2028 DATRO.B.8,0,.128.0.1.192.0.0, 128,0,0.128. 2029 DRTAB, 128.0.2.128,0,0.128.0.0.128.3.8. 128.0.56 2030 DATA128.0.116, 128,0,234, 128,0,197. 128.0.121. 128.0.190,8 2031 DATAO, 188,0,0,220.0.0,120,0,0.48.0.0.56,0,255 2032 DATAO,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,2,0,0,0,0 2033 DATAO,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 2034 DATA112.0.1.252,0,3,238.0.7,255,0.5,255,0.7.255 2035 DATRO,7,255,0.3,251.0.3, 254,0.1.254,0,0.204,0 2036 DATRO,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0.48,0, 2037 DATR48,0,0, 120,0,0, 120,0,0,252,0.1.254.0.3, 255 2038 DATA0,3,255,0.7.231. 128,7,249, 128, 3,255,0.3,255, 2039 DATA1.254,0,0.120.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.-1 3000 DATA60, 102, 110, 110.96.98.60.0.24,60,182,126,102,102,182.0 3801 DATA124, 102, 102, 124, 102, 102, 124,8.60, 102,96,96,96,102,60,0 3802 DATR120.108, 102, 102, 102, 108, 120.2.126.96.96, 120.96.96, 126, 3003 DATA126,96,96, 120.96.96.96.0.60.102,96,110,102,102, 60,0 3004 DATA102,102,102,126,102,102,102,8.60, 24, 24, 24, 24, 24,60. 3805 DATA30, 12, 12, 12.12.188,56,8,102,108,128,112,120,108,102,8 3006 DATA96,96,96,96,96,96, 126,8,99, 119, 127, 107.99,99.99, 3887 DRTR102, 118, 126, 126, 110, 102, 182,0.68, 102, 102, 102, 102, 102,60, 3008 DATA124, 102, 102, 124,96.96.96.0.60,102,102,102,182.60.14,0 3009 DATA124,102,102, 124, 120, 108, 102,0.60.102,96,60,6,102.60.0 3010 DATA126, 24, 24, 24, 24, 24, 24,0,102,102,102,102,102,102,60.0 3011 DATA102, 102, 102.182.102.60, 24,0.99,99,99, 107, 127. 119.99, 3012 DATA102, 182,60,24,60,102,102., 102, 102, 102,60,24, 24, 24, 3013 DATA126.6.12.24.48.96, 126, 0,60,48,48,48,43,48,60,0 3014 DATA12, 18.48, 124,48.98.252.0.60.12.12.12.12.12,60. 3015 DATAO, 24.60.126.24, 24, 24, 24,8.1648, 127, 127,48,16,0 3016 DATA0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,24,24,24,24,0., 24, 3017 DATA102,102.102.0.0.8.8.8.4.4,255,32,32,32.255.4 3018 DATR24.60.126.126, 126,255,255, 24, 24, 24, 24, 24, 24, 24, 24, 24 3019 DATR3, 15,63,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255 3020 DATA12.24.48.48.48.24.12.8.48.24,12,12, 12.24.48. 3021 DATAO, 102,60.255,60, 102,0,0,0,24,24,126,24,24,00 3022 DATAO,0,0,0,0,24, 24,48,0,0,0.126.0.0.0.0 3023 DATAO,,,a,,24,24,0,0,3,6, 12, 24,48.96. 3024 DATA60, 102, 110, 118, 102, 102,60,0,24,24,36, 24, 24, 24, 126, 3025 DATA60, 102.6.12.48.96.126.0.60, 102,6,28,6.102,60,0 3826 DATA6, 14.30.102.127.6.6.0.126.96.124,,6.102,60.0 3027 DATA60, 102.96.124,102,102.60.B, 126,102,12, 24, 24, 24, 24.0 3028 DATA60, 102, 102.60.102,102,60..60.182.10262,6,102,60. 3029 DATAO.8.255,255,0.8,255,255,0.0.255.255.0.0.255.255-1 LISTING TWO 200 AD-49152 X 210 READA IFR=-1 THEN250 220 POKERD+X/RX-X+1 GOT0210 250 RD=12800 X=0 250 READAIFA=-1 THEN280 270 POKERD+X, A XX+1:GOT0260 280 AD-12288X=0 290 RERDA IFR=-1 THEN400 300 POKEAD+X, AXWX+1 GOT0290 400 END 1000 DATAB8, 169,13,141,20.3, 169, 192, 141,21,3,120.96,173,2,194 1801 DATA201.1,288,3,76.49,234,173, 197,0,201, 12, 208,30,173.0 hunchy ends IHUNCHY "


"c+vg/games book/witch's brew/1  SPECTRUM Hubble, bubble, toil and trouble...there's a load of fun brewing for you with this program. Controlling the witch you must make four spells by collecting various objects — spiders, bats and mushrooms. When all the objects have been found for one spell a cauldron appears. Place the ingredients in the cauldron and you will be told how successful the spell has been. Then it's time to start again. Score highly enough and you could be admitted to the Witches' Coven High Score Table. But remember to keep your three broomsticks intact. The control keys are 1-UP, Q-DOWN and 0 (Zero) — FIRE. Mark Tuck WITCH'S BREW >REM ? 1985 by MR Tuck 1 GO TO 8000 2 PAPER : INK 7: FOR g=16 TO 6-1: PRINT AT X,9;\" \": NEXT : LET mom-.9 3. IF < THEN LET m=0 4 PRINT AT 20, 7+m; \" \": RETURN 5 LET b=b+1: BEEP.1,2: RETURN 6 LET t=t+1: BEEP.1,1: RETURN B LET S=+1: BEEP.1,2: RETURN 9 LET pop+1: BEEP.1, 3: RETURN 47 GO TO 4000 48 LET mm=m: LET mam+1+RND#3: IF m>24 THEN LET m=24 50 FOR fumm TO : PRINT AT 20, f+7; INK 5;\"*\": BEEP.1,m: NEXT f: RETURN 60 FLASH 1: PRINT AT 5, 15; 6+ ((bn-b) AND bn>b):AT 5,20; + ((tn-t) AND tn/t);AT 5 ,25; + ((sn-s) AND sn>s); AT 5,30; ((pn-p) AND pn>p): FOR F= TO 600: NEXT f 61 FLASH : PRINT AT 5, 15;\" \";AT 5, 20:\" \";AT 5.25\" \"AT 5.30:\" \"; RETURN B4 GO TO 4000 105 LET cr=1: RETURN 110 LET h=15-INT (RND+4): FOR g=15 TO h STEP -1: PRINT AT 9,31; INK 6; PAPER 3 ;b*(1+INT (RND*2)): NEXT 9 115 IF b>=bn AND >=sn AND t tn AND p >pn AND RND>.9 THEN GO TO 1000 120 LET i=3+INT (RND#10) 125 IF i>B THEN GO TO 140 130 LET hi=8+INT (RND# (h-7)): IF (i=7 OR i=8) THEN GO TO 300 135 PRINT AT hi, 31; INK i;i$ti-2): GO TO 150 138 PRINT AT hi, 31; INK i;i$(i-2): GO TO 150 140 IF h<15 THEN PRINT AT h, 31; INK 0; PAPER 3;c*(1+INT (RND*3>): GO TO 150 145 PRINT AT 15, 31; PAPER 0;\" \" 150 LET a=USR 32400 200 LET *1=x: LET **+ (INKEY=\"9\")+(.3 AND m=)-(INKEY=\"1\" AND x> AND m>) 210 IF ATTR (x, 15) (>7 THEN GO SUB ATTR (x , 15) *1.5 211 IF ATTR (x, 14) (>7 THEN GO SUB ATTR (x,14) *1.5 212 IF ATTR (x-1,15)<>7 THEN GO SUB ATTR (x-1,15)*1.5 220 PRINT AT x1,13; INK 7;\" \";AT X1-1,14;\" \";AT *,14;\"??\";AT *-1,15; \"?\": LET =m-.1: GO SUB 3: IF er THEN GO TO 2000 225 IF INKEY$=\"\" AND > THEN GO TO 500 230 GO TO 110 300 LET ra=INT (RND*8): IF ra<2 THEN PRINT AT hi, 31; INVERSE 1; INK 0; PAPER 4 ;\"#\": GO TO 150 310 IF ra=3 THEN PRINT AT hi , 31: INVERSE 1; INK ; PAPER 5; \"o\": GO TO 150 320 IF ra<6 AND hi<15 THEN PRINT AT hi,31; INK %; PAPER 7; \"?\";AT hi+1,31; \"?\": GO TO 150 330 PRINT AT hi, 31; INK 0; PAPER 7:\"7\": GO TO 150 500 FOR F=16 TO 20 510 IF ATTR (x, f)=56 THEN LET cgrcg+1 515 IF ATTR (x, f)<>7 THEN GO TO 540 520 INK 23-4: PLOT +*8-1, (22-x)*8-3: DRAW 8,0: BEEP .005, 1-10 525 NEXT f: GO SUB 2 530 GO TO 110 540 GO SUB 2: FOR g=7 TO 3 STEP -1: PRINT AT x,f: INK 9;\"?: BEEP .01,9+10: BEE P.01,9: NEXT g: PRINT AT x,f;\"?\": FOR g=0 TO 50: NEXT g: PRINT AT ,f; INK 7; \" 545 IF ATTR (x-1,f)-56 THEN PRINT AT x-1,f;\" \"; GO TO 110 550 IF ATTR (x+1, +) -56 THEN PRINT AT x+1, f;\" \" 555 GO TO 110 1000 PRINT AT h, 31; INK %; PAPER 6;\">\";AT h-1,31; INK 6; PAPER ; BRIGHT 1;\"_\"; BRIGHT : GO TO 150 witch's brew continues on page 50 "


"c+vg/games book/witch's brew/2 2000 LET PC=100-(b-bn)-(t-tn)-(p-pn)-(s-sn): LET tpc=tpc+INT (pc/5) 2005 PRINT ; AT 1,2; \"The spell was \"ipc;\"% successful\": GO SUB 5000: IF sp=4 TH. 2010 GO TO 6500 3000 BORDER 2: CLS : IF cg>40 THEN LET cg=40 3005 LET tpc tpc+ (bs#3) +INT (cg*.3) 3010 FOR F=1 TO 3: IF tpc>h (f) THEN GO TO 3025 3015 NEXT + 3020 PRINT AT 4,1; \"Your over all witch rating is...\";AT 6,14; FLASH 1;tpc;\"%\"; FL ASH : GO TO 3055 3025 PRINT AT 4,0;\" Well done! You are skillful\"*\"enough to join the witches C Oven\" 3030 INPUT \"ENTER name (max 7 letters)...\", t# 3035 IF LEN t*>7 THEN GO TO 3030 3040 IF tpe>h (2) THEN LET h (3)=h (2): LET h$(3)=h$ (2) 3045 IF tpc>h (1) THEN LET h (2) =h (1): LET h#(2)=h$ (1) 3050 LET h() =tpc: LET h$ (f) t$ 3055 PRINT AT 11,7; \"The WITCHES COVEN;\": FOR f=1 TO 3: PRINT AT 11+2*4,9; $(f):A T 11+2*f, 19;h (f);\"%\" NEXT + 3060 PRINT  ;AT 0,3; \"PRESS ANY KEY TO FLY AGAIN\": PAUSE 6: GO TO 6100 4000 FOR F=x1 TO 17: PRINT AT 6-2,14; PAPER 4-(4 AND >9);\"\";AT f-1,13; PAPER B +(3 AND F>15);\" 7\";AT f, 13;\"??\": BEEP .3,-12-f: NEXT + 4005 LET bs-bs-1: LET sp=sp-1: LET m=24 4010 FOR F-1 TO 200: NEXT F: IF bs<1 THEN GO TO 3000 4015 GO TO 6500 5000 RESTORE 5010: FOR F= TO 27: READ nt: BEEP .2+(. 2 AND nt>20), nt-20-(20 AND nt>20: NEXT f: RETURN 5010 DATA 10,12,10,7,8,10,1,5,7,5,3,5,27,27,10,12,10,7,8,10,8,5,7,8,5,7,23,23 6000 INK 7: PAPER : BORDER : CLS 6015 PRINT AT 0,10; \"WITCH'S BREW\".. \"To join o spells-this is your\".\" test\". \"Beware of ghost and crucifix\". \"For you have only 3 broomsticks\" 6020 PRINT AT 9.0; \"Green toadstool, juice of pumpkin\"'\"Legs of spider and bats wi ng \"Crystal balls show whats\" required\" \"Pressing will make you fire\" guide your broom use 1 and \" \"Land on a cauldron to make the brew\" 6025 GO SUB 5000: PRINT AT 21,5; \"PRESS ANY KEY TO BEGIN\": PAUSE 6050 LET i $m\"????\"; LET a $ 772: LET b .\": LET C# \" ?? 6055 DIM h$ (3,7): LET h$(1) =\"HELGA\": LET h$(2)=\"MATILDA\": LET h$ (3)=\"WANDA\" 6060 DIM h (3): FOR = = TO 2: LET h (+1) = (2-f) 20+INT (RND#20: NEXT f TO 2: LET h (+1) = (2) 6100 LET bs-3: LET sp=0: LET -24: LET tpc0: LET cg=0 6500 BORDER 4: PAPER 6: INK 7: CLS : LET -10: LET b=0: LET = : LET P=0: LET t= 0: LET PC=: LET cr=0 6510 LET sp=sp+1 6520 GO SUB 6550: LET bn=z: GO SUB 6550: LET sn=z: 50 SUB 6550: LET tn=z: GO SUB 6550: LET pn=z 6530 GO TO 7000 6550 LET z=10+INT (RND* (5*sp)); RETURN 7000 FOR += TO 7: PRINT AT ,0; PAPER 4;\" \": NEX T + 7010 FOR g=16 TO 21: PRINT AT 9,0; PAPER 4-(1 AND g<10);\" \": NEXT 9 7020 INK 4: PRINT AT 0,;\"? ?\";AT 0,27;\"? ?\": FOR 4 TO 19 STEP 15: PRI NT AT ,; \"? 7: NEXT 7030 INK 6: PAPER 4: PRINT AT 2,0;\"?????????\";AT 1,27;\"?????\";AT 2,27; \"?????\";AT 20,7; \"???????????????????????? : FOR 6 TO 21 STEP 15: PRINT AT f,;\"?????? 77777777777777777777777777\":NEXT 7040 INK 6: PAPER : PRINT AT 1,0;\" SPELL\"; sp;\"\";AT 1,11;\" WITCH'S BREW\";AT 1 ,28; a$( TO bs); AT 5,0;\" INGREDIENTS \"; INK 3;\"?> \"; INK 4;\"?> \"; INK 5;\"?> \"; INK 6;\"?> \";AT 20,0;\" MAGIC\" 7050 FOR F= TOm: PRINT AT 20,+7; INK 5;\"*\": NEXT f: FOR +=0 TO 24-m: PRINT AT 20,31-f;\" \": NEXT + 7070 INK 7: PAPER 6: CIRCLE 100,100,7: GO TO 110 8000 RESTORE 8010: FOR n=1 TO 51: READ a: POKE 32399+n, a: NEXT 8010 DATA 6,64,33,0,72,17,32,0,62,0,119,25,16,252,33,6,89,6,8,17,32,0.62,7, 119,2 5,16,-4,1,0 B DATA B, 17,0, 72,33,1, 72,237, 176,1,0,1,17,0,89,33, 1,89,237, 176,201 9000 FOR FUSR \"a\" TO USR \"p\"+7: READ a: POKE f,a: NEXT f: GO TO 6000 9010 DATA 16,16,56,56,254,56,118,249,28, 112,208, 232, 231, 120, 240, 192,0,0,24, 14.31 , 14,24,1 9020 DATA 255,254, 252, 248, 249, 224,192,128, 255, 127,63,31,15,7,3,1,231, 231,129,129 , 231, 231, 231, 231 9030 DATA 30,31,60,252,240,246,192,64,6,66,165,24,126,153,36,66,60,126,219,219,2 55,195,102,60,60,126,255,255, 195,90,24,24 9040 DATA 255, 247, 231,195,36,36,129,129,195,195, 227,243,249,253,255,255, 96,102,6 , 176,50,0,203, 195,0, 32,2,0, 16,0,2,64 9050 DATA 195, 129,32,64,64,32,129,195,1,2,4,8, 48, 240,96,32 WITCH'S BREW I witch's brew ends "


"hide and seek/c+vg/games book/1  ATARI Squares, pairs and points that sums up Hide and Seek. The object of the game is to find as many as you can. Movement of the \"?\" is controlled by the joystick and pressing the trigger button reveals your selected square. In the one player mode you must find as many hidden pairs in the minimum of moves. The maximum number allowed is 30. In the two player options the idea is to find more pairs than your opponent. The amount of points awarded for each pair found varies. For example, two taps or spanners are worth one point, kettles or face two points, ladders or forks three points. . Colin Hill : : Inverse 1] + Control ()  Control Inverse 98 REM HEF INITIALISE +++ 99 REM 100 CLR POKE 10,64:POKE 53774,64:POKE 2,52:POKE 3,185: POKE 9, 2: TRAP 40000: TRAP 3180:60SUB 2560: GOSUB 1020 120 HIDES=\"Ixiziil: j0ixiz : jQizizlj: Ixizlilixiz xiz\":CH-NI:PLY-CH:SCINO: SC2-SCI:TOTESCI:GOES-CH:PTS=CH 140 MER=\"000000000000000000000000\" 159 REN 160 REX ++SET UP STRING OF PICS ++++ HIDE AND SEEK 161 REM 180 FOR 1=N1 TO 24: NUMB-INT 124#RND (1)) +N1 200 IF MKRS INUMB, NUMB<>'0' THEN NUMB-NUMB+N1:6OTO 240 220 MKRS (NUMB, NUMB) -HIDES(X, 1): NEXT Y: GOSUB 2340:GOTO 260 240 NUMB=[NUMB(24)*(NUMB-ND)+N):60T0 200 257 REM 258 REN ++++ SCREEN PLAYERS SCORE **** 259 REM 260 POSITION NI, 101? INb; \"player \"PLY' choice \"CH 280 POSITION NI,11 285 IF PLY=1 THEN? ONG: \"pl!1! SCI; IF NOPLY-N2 THEN POSITION 13, 11:? Nb; \"p12 SC2:POKE 77, NO:60T0 320 290 IF PLY=2 THEN? INb;'pll \"SCI; POSITION 13, 11:? ING;p1121 SC2:POKE 77, NO:60 TO 320 300 POSITION 14.11.? IN6;go \"GOES:POKE 77, NO 320 GOSUB 640 337 REM 338 REN +++ SHOW. CHECK PICTURE/S ++++ 339 REM 340 W-*N2: POSITIONS, W: IF MKRS (SQU, SQU)='0' THEN GOTO 260 S60 ? Nh; KRS (SHU, SEU). 380 IF CH=NI THEN SOUZSRU: 52-5:12-W: 60T0 500 400 IF CH=N2 THEN IF MKRS (SQU, SOU)=MKRS (SDU2, SQU2) THEN POSITION MPOS, 11:7 66; \"MATCHI\":TOT-TOT+N1: SC-PLY: GOTO 440 420 SOTO 460 440 GOSUB 2220: GOSUB 2000: MKRS (SQU, SQU)=\"0\":MKRS ISQU2, SU2)=\"0\":60TO 500 460 IF CHENI THEN 480 470 IF CH=R2 THEN POSITION NPOS, 11:? 186; \"I wrong!\": SOUND N2, 42, N2, 15:FOR J-N1 TO 200: NEIT J:SOUND N2, NO, NO, NO 475 GOES SOES+1POSITION S2, X2:2 16; POSITION S,W:? Nb; 480 IF NOPLY=X2 THEN PLY=PLY+N1 500 CH-CH+NI: IF CH3 THEN CH=NT: IF PLY3 THEN PLYNI:CH-PLY 520 IF SCENI THEN SCI-SCI+NI+PTS:SC-NO 540 IF SC-N2 THEN SC2-SC2+NI+PTS:SC=NO 560 IF TOT=12 AND NOPLY-N2 THEN POSITION 5, 11:? ING; SCI: POSITION 7, 11:7 Nb; \"THATCH! \"POSITION 17.11.? 16;SC2 580 IF ITOT-12 AND NOPLY-NI) OR (GOES=31 AND NOPLY-ND) THEN POSITION 5, 11? ON6;SC1:STOT=TOT:TOT-12 600 IF TOT(>12 THEN GOTO 620 602 SOSUB 2000:FOR DELENI TO 150:NEIT DEL 605 FOR JENI TO 5: SOUND N2, 47, 10, NB:FOR L #1 TO 50:NEIT LE SOUND N2,64,10, N8: FOR L=#1 TO 35: NEIT L:NEITJ 610 SOUND N2, NO, NO, NO: GOSUB 2080: GOSUB 1560:50TD 120 420 FOR DELER1 to 180: NEIT DEL: GOTO 260 637 REM 638 REM ++++ THIS SECTION DEALS WITH THE STICK MOVEMENTS. **** 639 REN 640 X=N2: Y=X:ST:7:12 I: Y2-Y:FST-NO:GOTO 800 660X2=1:Y2=Y:ST-NO:STK-ST:IF JOY=M2 THEN STK PLY-NI 680 IF STRIG(STK-NO THEN FOR DELENI TO 10: SOUND N2, 30+DEL,10,15DEL+5) NEIT DEL: RETURN hide and seek continues on page 52 "


"hide and seek/c+vg/games book/2 700 IF STICKESTK)=7 THEN Y-Y43: ST-7: IF Y>17 THEN Y-N2:II+Y: IF IN THEN 1-N2 720 IF STICK (STK)=13 THEN TI+N2:5T-13: IF TNB THEN I-N2:Y=Y+3:IF Y)17 THEN YN2 740 IF STICK (STK)=11 THEN Y-Y-3: ST-11: IF YN2 THEN Y=17:1=1-N2: IF XN2 THEN I-8 760 IF STICK (STK) = 14 THEN I-Y-N2:ST=14:1F XN2 THEN X-NB: Y=Y-3: IF YN2 THEN Y=17 780 IF ST-NO THEN SOTO 680 800 IF CH-N2 THEN IF Y=N2 THEN IF Y-S2 THEN 840 820 -I/N2:5QUC (N-NI) N6) + LY+N)/3):S=Y: IF MKRS (SQU, SQUI) \"0\" THEN 940 340 IF ST-7 THEN Y=Y43: IF Y>17 THEN Y=2:11+N2: IF IN THEN 1-N2 360 IF ST-13 THEN I=IN2: IF IN THEN I=K2: Y-Y+3: IF Y>17 THEN Y= 2 890 IF ST-11 THEN Y-Y-3: IF YN2 THEN Y=17:1=1-N2:IF KN2 THEN 1-NB 900 IF ST=14 THEN T-I-N2: IF ICN2 THEN I=NB: Y-Y-3: IF YCN2 THEN Y=17 920 GOTO 800 940 IF FST-NO THEN FST-N1: GOTO 780 960 POSITION Y2, 12:? ING . 980 POSITION Y, X:? &Nb; \" ?:FOR DEL=NI TO 15:SOUND N2,90+DEL, 10, 15-DEL: NEIT DEL 1000 GOTO 660 1017 REM 1018 REM **** REDEFINED CHARACTERS AND DISPLAY LIST INTERUPT. ** 1019 REN 1020 GRAPHICS 18:POKE 10,64:POKE 53774,64:K-PEEK (106)-9:CP=X+N1: CHAR-CP2561 PAGE=5 1040 POKE 106,K: GRAPHICS 18:POKE 10,64:POKE 53774,64:60SUB 1960:? ING; CLEAR]\":POSITION 5,14:? ING; \"PLEASE WAIT 1050 POSITION NO, NO:? IN6\" THIDE AND SEEKI\":? Nb;' 1060 GOSUB 1200ES (NI.411. EITICEINICE , KEUKETVETTA 1,11101<R>IMP y Find TPp . 11, 19:1-USR (ADR (ES), CHAR PAGE): RESTORE 2100 1070 FOR ANOTO 22:READ ITEM:DIF-NBEITEN:FOR LENOTO 7: READ C:POKE CHAR+DIF+L,C: NEIT L:NEITA 1080 RESTORE 260: LEPEEK (560) 256PEEK (561):FOR A-NI TO 31READ ITEMEPOKE 1749+, ITEM: WEIT A 1090 POKE DL+14,7+128:POKE 756, CP:605UB 1560: RETURN 1199 REM 1200 REN **** MUSIC ROUTINE H*** 1201 REN 1210 MELODY=1256+ (PEEX (106)+8))-100: BASS=12564 (PEEK (106)+7))-100 1214 REN 1215 REN ***+ POKE IN INITIALISATION ROUTINE HUE 1216 REN 1220 INIT-1552:VBIR=1616: INI TEND-1611:VBIREND=1745 1230 RESTORE 4020:FOR TEINIT TO INITEND: READ APOKE 1, A:NEIT I 1234 REN HIDE AND SEEK 1235 REN ***+ POKE IN MAIN VBI ROUTINE ++++ 1236 REM 1240 RESTORE 4120:FOR I-VBIR TO VBIREND: READ A:POKE 1, A: NEXT I 1250 TUNE TOT-1725 1254 REM 1255 REN +++ POKE NUMBER OF BASS NOTES:2) 1 IN HERE *** 1256 REM 1260 POKE TUNETOT, 201: SPEED-2 1264 REM 1265 REM ***+ POKE IN MELODY AREA HU 1266 REN 1270 RESTORE 5020: READ A: POKE MELODY, A:FOR 1-HELODY+1 TO MELODY+192 STEP 2:READ A: POKE 1, A: READ A:POKE 1+1, A+SPEED: NEIT 1 1274 REN 1275 REM ++++ POKE IN BASS AREA HH 1276 REN 1280 RESTORE 5120+READ A POKE BASS, A:FOR 1-BASS 1 TO BASS+202 STEP 2: READ As POKE 1, A: READ A.POKE 1+1, 40SPEED: NEIT 1 1284 REM 1285 REN **** MUSIC RUN SECTION HH 1286 REN 1290 A-USR(INIT, MELODY, BASS) 1300 VOL 1-1714: VOL2=1671: NOVOL=160: TOPVOL=168: RETURN 1557 REN 1558 REM *** INITIAL SCREEN SECTION 1 CLEAR\":POSITION NO, NO: GOSUB 1960 1559 REM 1560 POKE 1714, 166: POKE 1671,166: POSITION NO, NO:? ONG 1580 POKE 54286, 255:7 ONLI\" HIDE AND SEEKI 1600? 0N6 1620 ? ON 1640 ? N67\" PLAYERS \"NOPLY 1680 ? IN STICKS JOY 1720 ? Nb; press start to begini 1740 INGI 1760 ? Nb;' by colin hill\" hide and seek continues on page 53 "


"hide and seek/c+vg/games book/3 1790 KEY PEEK (53279):MPOS=9-NOPLY 1800 IF KEY=3 OR STICK (0)=14 THEN SOTO 1880 1920 IF KEY=5 OR STICX(0)=13 THEN GOTO 1920 1840 IF STRIG(NO)-NO OR KEY-H. THEN FOR DELEN1 TO 100: SOUND K2. DEL+60.10.NB:NEIT DEL:SOUND M2. MO.NO, NO: RETURN 1860 SOTO 1780 1890 NOPLY-3-NOPLY. IF NOPLY=! THEN JOY=1:POSITION 15,5:? ING; JOY 1900 POSITION 15,3:7 ING;NOPLY:FOR DELENI TO 50:SOUND N2, 121, 10, NB: NEIT DEL: SOUND K2, NO, NO, NO:GOTO 1780 1920 JOY-3-JOY:IF JOY=2 THEN MOPLY-2:POSITION 15, 3:? Nb; NOPLY 1940 POSITION 15,5:? Nb;J0Y:FOR DEL=#1 TO 50: SOUND N2, 180, 10, 8: NEIT DEL: SOUND M2, NO, NO, NO:60T0 1780 1957 REN 1958 REN *** COLOUR SET UP H11 1959 REN 1960 POKE 712, 10:POKE 710,132:POKE 711, 198:POKE 709, NO: RETURN 1997 REN 1998 REN ++++ MATCH SOUND ON. HH 1999 REM 2000 SOUND M2, 118, 10, 10:SOUND 3, NO, N2, N2 2020 FOR JENI TO 80: NEXT J:FOR J-N2 TO 3: SOUND J, NO, NO, NO:NEIT J:GOES GOES+NI: RETURN 2060 SOUND N2, NO, NO, NO: RETURN 2077 REN 2078 REM **** END OF GAME ++++ HIDE AND SEEK 2079 REN 2080 POSITION NO. 10:? N6; lend of game! \":FOR DELEN TO 180:NEIT DEL: POSITION MO,11 2100 IF NOPLYNI AND STOT<12 AND GOES)30 THEN? INb;\": 30 GOES ONLY \":GOTO 2200 2120 IF NOPLY-N! AND TOT 12 THEN? ANS; COMPLETED ON!\"-60T0 2200 2140 IF SCI)SC2 THEN ? Nb; PLAYER 1 HAS WON! :BOTO 2200 2160 IF SCI<SC2 THEN? ING; PLAYER 2 HAS WON: 160T0 2200 2180 ? Nb; A BRAN 2200 FOR DEL=#1 TD 400+ WEIT DEL: RETURN 2217 REN 2218 REM **** POINTS ANARDED *** 2219 REN 2220 IF NOPLY-N1 THEN RETURN 2240 IF MKRS ISQU, SQU) \"1\" OR MKRS (SQU, SRU)=!x!THEN PTS-N1: RETURN 2260 IF MKRS (SQU, SQU) : OR MKRS (SRU, SQU) = !THEN PTS-N2: RETURN 2280 IF MKRS (SAU, SQU)=\"ji' OR MKRS (SOU, SQU)=\"QTHEN PTS-3: RETURN 2357 REM 2338 REN +++MAIN PLAYFILED ** 2339 REN 2340 POKE 1714, 160:POKE 1671, 160:POSITION NO, NO: POKE 54286, 192: POKE 512,214:POKE 513, 67 INb;'ECLEAR1\"; 23607 Nb;' hide and seek\" 2380 ? ING\" 15, -6, -5,-8,-,-51\" 2400 7 0N6; I++ ++ ++ ++ ++ )\" 2420 ? &Nb; (5!*!1!1!1!15\" 2440 ? N6; Z H ++ ++ ++ H+ )\" 2460 ? Nb;\" <!!!AS! ! ! 1$=\" 2480 ? 16\" Z + + + ++ ++ )\" 2500 ? IN ; (5!U5! ! ! ! 15\" 2520 ? N6;\" I ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ )\" 2540 ? N6\" '5./5./5./5./5./5) : RETURN 2557 REN 2558 REN **** MORE INITIALISATION AND VERTICAL TIME *** 2559 REM 2560 DIN ES(42),NIDES (25), KRS 125):Ni=1:NONI-NI:N2N1-NT:N44: NN24N41NBB:NOPLYN2:JOYNT: RETURN 2639 REN 2640 REN. DATA FOR DISP-LIST-INT + 2641 REM 2660 DATA 72,138,72, 152,72,173,20,0,141,10,212, 141,24,208,169,54,141,22,208,169,134,141,23,208 2680 DATA 104,168, 104, 170, 104,64,64 2699 REN 2700 REN. DATA FOR CHARACTER SET + 2701 REM 2720 DATA 1,1,1,1,255,255,1,1,1 2740 DATA 3, 128, 128, 128, 255,255, 128, 129, 128 2760 DATA 4,0,0,0,255,255,0,0,0\" 2780 DATA 5,192,192,192,192,192,192,192,192 2800 DATA 6,0,0,0,255,255,192,192,192 2820 DATA 7,192,192,192,255,255,0,0,0 2840 DATA 8,0,0,0,255,255,3,3,3 2860 DATA 9,3,3,3,255,255,0,0,0 2880 DATA 10,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1 2900 DATA 11, 128, 128, 129, 128, 128, 128, 128, 128 2920 DATA 12,0,0,0,255,255,1,1,1 2940 DATA 13,0,0,0,255, 255, 128, 128, 128 hide and seek continues on page 54 "


"hide and seek/c+vg/games book/4 2960 DATA 14,1,1,1,255,255,0,0,0 2980 DATA 15,128,128, 128, 255,255,0,0,0 3000 DATA 28, 192, 192,192,255,255, 192,192,192 3020 DATA 29,3,3,3,255,255,3,3,3 3040 DATA 30,3,3,3,3,3,3,3,3 3060 DATA 26, 60, 126, 219,255,255, 195, 126,60 3080 DATA 27,0, 6, 62, 34, 255, 127, 127, 127 3100 DATA 56, 36, 36, 60,24, 24, 60, 36, 3b 3120 DATA 58, 63, 63, 12, 12, 252, 252,204,12 3140 DATA 42,0, 102, 126, 102, 126, 102, 126, 102 3160 DATA 49,85,85,85, 127, 28, 28, 29, 28 3180 RUN 3999 REN 4000 REN +++ DATA FOR INITIALISATION **** 4001 REM 4020 DATA 104,201,2,208,53, 104, 133, 204,104,133 4030 DATA 203,104,133,206,104,133,205,169,0,141,0 4040 DATA 210, 141, 2,210,141,1,210, 141,3,210,141 4050 DATA 2,6,141,4,6, 141,6,6,141,3,6,141,10,6 4060 DATA 141,12,6,160, 80, 162,6,169,7,32,62,228,96,0 4099 REW 4100 REM **** DATA FOR MAIN VBI ROUTINE HH 4101 REX 4120 DATA 169,64,133,16,141,14,210, 234, 234, 234, 238, 6, 6, 238,8, 6, 174,6,6 4130 DATA 236, 2,5, 144,35,169,0,141,1,210,141,6,b 4140 DATA 238,10, 6, 172, 10, 6, 177,203, 141,6,210 4150 DATA 23B, 10, 6, 172, 10, 6, 177,203,141,2,6,169 4160 DATA 166, 141, 1,210,114, 8,6,236,4,6,144,53, 169 4170 DATA 0,141,3,210,141,8,6,258, 12, 6, 172, 12,6 4180 DATA 177,205, 141,2,210,238,12,6, 172, 12,6 4190 DATA 177,205,141,4,6,169,166, 141,3,210,238 4200 DATA 12,6,174,12,6,224,25,144,11,169,0,141 4210 DATA 10,6, 141, 12, 6, 76, 98,228,206,12,6,76,98,228,0 4999 RER 5000 REN 4444 DATA FOR MELODY HH 5001 REN 5020 DATA 0,45,8,47,4,55,8,57,4,60,8,64,4,68, 8,72,4,81,4,72,4,68,4,72,8,81,4 5030 DATA 121,8,0,4 0,8,60,4,72,4,6,4,72,4,72,4,76,4,72, 4, 45, 4,0,4,60,4,60,4 5040 DATA 0,4,72, 4, 68,8,68,4,68,8, 60,4,53,20,68, 4,81,4,6,4,81,4,61,4,85,4,81,4 5050 DATA 47,4,0,4,53,4,53,4,0,4,68,4,72, 4,0 4,12,4,72,4,0,4,68,4,60,20,60,4 5060 DATA 72, 4,0,4,72,472, 4, 76,4,72,4,35,4,6,4, 45, 4,45,4,6,4,60,4,4,4,0,4 5070 DATA 40,4,40,40,4.40.4,40,20, 45, 4, 47, 4, 0, 4, 40, 4,40,4,42,4,40,4 5080 DATA 53,4,0,4,40,4,40,4,42,4,40,4,60,4,6,4,64,4,60,4,6,4,64,4,60,12,10,12,0,0 HIDE AND SEEK 5099 REM 5100 REN ***+ DATA FOR BASS *** 5101 REM 5120 DATA 0,182,8,193,4,217,8,230,4, 245, 8,255, 4, 136, 8, 144, 4,162, 4, 144,4,136, 4, 144,8,162,4 5130 DATA 243,8,0,40,8,0,4,182, 4,0,4,182, 4, 144, 4,0 4,121, 4, 182, 4,0 4,121, 4, 114, 4.0, 4, 182,4,193,8 5140 DATA 182,4,162,8,162, 4, 193,8,217, 4,243, 8,68, 4,243, 4, 6, 4, 136, 4, 121,4,6,4, 136, 4, 162,4,6,4 5150 DATA 136,4,245, 4,0,4, 136, 4, 182, 8, 162, 4, 144,8,162, 4, 1B2,8,193,4,217,8,243,4 5160 DATA 182, 4.0, 4.144,4,121, 4,0,4,144,4,182,4,0,4,144,4,121,4,0,4,144,4 5170 DATA 217,8,193,4,162,8,193,4,217, B, 243, 4, 128,8, 144, 4, 162,4,0,4,121, 4, 162,4 5180 DATA 0,4,193,4,162, 4,0 4,162,4,162, 4,0 4,128, 4,243, 4,0,4,162, 4,243, 4,0,4 5190 DATA 162,4,243,8,0,4,193,4,0,4 0,4,0,0 1945. hide and seek ends "


"(BOGGLES ISSUE BOGGLE SA POGLE), (SOGGLE BOGGLE BOGGLE! COMPUTER +VIDEO GAMES ROBIN GAENUILLE EUATS 1996 "


"There's never been a better reason for looking forward to Winter! WINTER GAMES Screens from Commodore 64 verslootgame COMMODORE 64/128 CASSETTE .95 DISK .95 NOW FOR AMSTRAD TOO! Title vailable NOW! OVO wnu AMSTRAD ATARI CASSETTE CASSETTE Winter Game Summer Game Summer Games T ossible Mission Bear ance | Spermar captured the gold in Summer GamesTM and Summer Games II now It's on to the Winter Games! And what an incredible setting-a completely realistic winter wonderland featuring six action-packed events. You can compete against your friends or the computer. First choose the country you want to represent. Then it's practice, training and learning a winning strategy for each event. Now the Opening Ceremony and the competition begins. Will you be the one who takes the gold at the Awards Ceremony? The quest for the gold continues... And it's all here the strategy, the challenge, the competition, the art and pageantry of Winter Games! Six Winter Events: Bobsled, Ski Jump, Figure Skating, Free-Style Skating, Hot Dog Aerials and the Biathlon Opening, Closing and Awards Ceremonies complete with National Anthems Compete Against the Computer or Your Friends and Family Unique Joystick Control Requires Timing and Skill One to Eight Players GOLD EPYX COMPUTER SOFTWARE "


"ATARI 400/8OO/XLUXE 48K ATARILKE K IA CBM 64/128 .. 1 ::. GET BET Cassette .95 Disk .95 Z AREN ARELEASE SUTIVA. E ENGLISH SOFTWARE ENG OFTWARE ENGUSH SOFTWARE EN SOFTWARE... ENGUSH SOFTWARE... ENC Jan. 216 SOFTWARE. ENGLISH SOFTWARE. ENC VAREM 19H SOFTWARE..ENGLISH SOFTWARE... ENC 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gardens, Manchester M60 1BX Tel: 061-835 1358 DATE COMMODORE VERSION EINTE Le S&S BLIVER 1 10250 IPLAYEE 2 ODODDI Cassette .95 Disk f12.95 PLAYER 1 (00000 PLAYER 2 CBM 64/128 ATARI 4OO/8OO/ALINE 48R UU100000 Available from all good software retailers, or POST FREE from English Software, MEDIATOR NAME ADDRESS GAME(S) COMPUTER enclose Cheque/P.O. CASSETTEDISKO "


"COMPETITION COMPETITION Computer + Video Games in association with Imagine Software proudly presents a computer screen spectacular MOVIE: The Competition. THRILL to the drama of this detective movie game. GASP at the AMAZING prizes. Don't miss out on the chance of winning this ALL-ACTION game. WONDER at this EPIC production. Scene One: The dingy basement hideout of the notorious C+ VG gang. Two shabby figures, their faces illuminated by the unhealthy glow of a naked electric light bulb, whisper furtively with each other. Lights. Camera. Action! \"Okay, Fingers, where's de loot!\" \"What loot, boss?\" \"The competition prize, you great idiot. The copies of Imagine's Movie game 25 for the Spectrum and 25 for the Amstrad.\" \"Er, yer. Don't worry, boss, I got 'em stashed away safe and sound. When do we unload the gear? \"That depends on the readers, Fingers. They've got to move real quick to get in on our great competition caper.\" \"What have they got to do, Boss? \"Dat's easy. Fingers. All they've gotta do is answer our questions on famous detectives and detective movies. Read these questions out, Fingers.\" \"Okay, Boss, here goes. \"Question one: Who created the famous crime-busting duo of Sherlock Holmes and Doctor Watson?\" Answer: \"Question two: Harrison Ford played a futuristic detective in the film Bladerunner. What was the character's name?\" Answer: \"Question three: Which actor starred in these three films Casablanca, The Maltese Falcon and The Big Sleep?\" Answer: \"Question four: Agatha Christie created two of the most famous detectives ever. Name thum.\" Answer: \"Weil done, Fingers. I didn't know you could read.\" \"I can't, Boss.\" Send your entries, with the printed coupon, to Movie Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, ECIR 3AU. The closing date is March 16th and the editor's decision is final. C+VG/MOVIE Competition Name Address ODO Please tick which computer you own. Spectrum Amstrad "


"MAX HEADROOM What want know is.. would anyone vailable for the Commodore 64, Spectrum and Amstrad at a recommended retail price of .95. HCKSILVA The most powerful games in the Universe anything Quicksilva Ltd., Liberty House, 222 Regent Street, London W1R 7DB. 01-439 0666  Chrysalis Visual Programming Ltd. "


"  SWORDS QUADRANT 1 QUADRANT 3 Se words and Sorcery is the ultimate computer simulation of the classic Dungeons and Dragons roles playing game. It was our Game of the Month in January and is bound to En become one of the most popular games of all time. There are more S&S modules to come from the programmer MIKE SIMPSON but here we bring you a look at the map of the first level plus hints and tips from the man who wrote the game. You demanded it CHVG is proud to present it! LED "


"Sa sorcery QUADRANT 2 The Hints and Tips for the Swords and Sorcery Map begin on page 77 QUADRANT 4 ` , son EVEL 1 "


"In the beginning January Released ear button SQUASIMODOS REVENGE was Quasimodo... | Urback then came his «Revenge.. now you can take a swing into... THE ADVENTURE! $8.95 METRADORE GA 88-95 SPECTRUM 48K Ocean Software Limited 6 Central Street Manchester o celom salomon croce AMSTRAD COMMODORE 64 Telephone: 061 832 6633 Telex: 669977 Ocean Software is available from selected branches of: Beeb.WHSMITH. John Menzies,WOOLWORTH, LASKYS, Rumbelows, Greens, Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries welcome. "


"yos 4019 F0100 mwy SWORD & Sorcery Hints & tips 8 with all role playing games, you but will permanently cripple you in . Monsters which grunt can be bribed whilst there may be specific terms of magic power. Subsequent For every three monsters you kill, with food. tasks to complete the true USES will kill you and worse! one point will be added to your . Bribe a monster or COMMAND it aim of the player is to create a super The Pendant of Protection. Wearing fighting or magic skill level depending to surrender before trying to get it to character. this will protect you from paralysis on which menu you used prior to the give information In level one of the game it is easier spells. monster's death. . Use the monsters' EVALUATE If you want to improve your fighting THIS response to help identify magical up a high degree of skill, but this bonus in combat, but more especially skill, don't sit through MELEE. items. makes your character very vulnerable allows you to kill the Magic User who Reselect your attack occasionally. . If you never BRIBE monsters, they in close combat situations. is immune to normal weapons-eg. A few points of unarmed combat will never have anything to give There has been a lot of disagreement the monster in the Old Time Music skill gets you the defence dodge. . To get a monster to surrender, you over what type of character is best for Hall.  Some examples of attack v. defence must cut down its courage. Threats and S+S. It is generally agreed that it is The Ring of Jumping. This is results: boasts are good for this. However, if easier to finish with a Magic User, essential to get through quadrant three DODGE stops LUNGE you make it too angry it will attack, so harder with a fighter and harder still Two rings are even better than one. You SHIELD sometimes stops HACK, it must be pacified from time to time. with an unarmed combat specialist have increased jumping skills whilst LUNGE. START UP But this last style of character is the wearing the ring. STAND is not a good defence most powerful. does not stop an attack, SEQUENCE One of the most important things WHERE TO GO AND but damage done to the The effect of practicing with each of you must do in order to finish level one. WHAT TO DO WHEN defender is also taken by the masters is as follows: of StS is to conserve your food supply YOU GET THERE the attacker. YAMA: Gives you 99 lives. This is Buy as much food as possible in the HACK slays outright a essential. Only the first day of practice beginning as the other useful items . There are four parts of the lost RETREATING foe does anything. feg, armour weapons) are relatively easy armour of Zob to be collected in level PUNCH PUNCH is good against most BOG: Improves your sword fighting to find throughout the game, whilst one. Sabatons (foot armour) and two defences but does less skills. food is scarce in quadrants two, three Greaves (leg armour). damage until your SCRAG: Improves your spear fighting and four 2. You need three keys to open the unarmed combat skill is ability, exit. very good in which case GROL. Improves your staff fighting MOVING 3. Take the cups to the Banquet Hall the MAIM result will abilities  Keep your thievish skill high and and get a magical reward begin to appear. IVA VESTOV: Improves your strength. you will detect pits. To do this, avoid 4. Get the first part of Zob's armour Other attacks and defences it is damage and carrying capacity, from the Music Hall. But note that the possible to get are: bite, kick, thrust, smashing chests and try to pick the VILLA: Improves your thievish skills: locks. Smashing them open will monster is very difficult immune to parry, grapple, block. disarming, picking locks etc. increase your strength however. firebolts and weapons damage The monsters choose their attack and JACK: Improves your jumping ability, . Minefields. You can tell where they 5. If you are carrying quest armour defences well. Learn from them. You GRIEVES: Decreases your initial are because they go \"BANG\" when you parts, the monsters are more hostile can change yours after they have villainy statistic. This improves stand on them. They will reduce your 6. Get the monsters to hit you first in chosen. monster reactions towards you. Only magic and strength statistics. You can't melee Every time you start a battle works once. your villainy status is increased. Every jump over minefields but can minimise CONVERSATION ISCATH: Improve your unarmed time a monster starts one it is the damage they cause by running  Always greet a monster if you want combat abilities decreased. Villainy adds to the through them VERNA: Adds one to your initial hit monster's hostility. If you started the to talk. points.  Menu Control. Always set up your last melee, the monsters get angrier. STATUSactions before opening a door. If you 7. If you get into conversation, want to start talking to monsters, monsters become more courageous. KON select FRIENDLY GREETING and be 8. If you are blinded, their courage and ready on the select button ninel as you hostility both increase sharply. walk through the doorway. Similarly, but less so, if you are DEFENCE SI paralysed. VIEWSCREEN THE DUSTER MAGIC 9. If you are wounded, they become HC The Magic Staff boosts your magical more courageous, but may be less powers and gives you extra spells. It hostile. only works if your magie strength is 10. Try using the book in room eight REPORTS greater than your fighting strength and PREPARE 10 DO WATTLE you are holding the staff. Just handling MELEE it can be fatal if you are predominantly If on hitting a monster \"EFFECT a fighting character. Using the Magic RESISTED\" appears, then it is Staff will kill any monster in front of immune to blows from the weapon you are using. Try something else. ya MENU FBB ERCE STAND ACICERENDEEDUSI "


"CHVG SURVEY very month Computer + Video Games tries to bring you the most comprehensive, informative and fun-packed look at the world of computer games. Most of the time we're pretty pleased with the way things turn out. But we're not that big-headed to think everything is perfect. That's why we're asking you to tell us what you think of C+VG. Go on, tell the truth, we're tough enough to take it. What we want you to do is answer the following questions and send them to Computer + Video Games, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The survey is divided up into sections based on the regular features in the magazine. Most will involve straightforward Yes/No answers with space for a brief comment. But there is also the chance for you to give your opinions on the magazine in general. So help us to help you by taking part in our survey. TOP 30 SOFTWARE CHARTS Are the charts of any interest? YES/NO Comment MAILBAG/PEN PALS Should more letters be printed? YES/NO Are those that are printed interesting? YES/NO Comment REVIEWS What do you think of the reviews? Comment HOT SHOTS/HALL OF FAME Could these two features be improved YES/NO Comment NEWS/HOT GOSSIP What do you think of the news and Hot Gossip? Comment FEATURES C+VG publishes a variety of different features, letters from America, films, videos etc. Do you enjoy these? YES/NO Do they have a place in a computer magazine? YES/NO What other sort of features wonld you like to read? BUGHUNTERS CARTOON Do you enjoy the comic strip? YES/NO MAPS Comment Are these useful? YES/NO Comment DEAR BUGHUNTERS Is the Dear Bughunters columa and telephone service useful? GENERAL YES/NO Do you prefer the new look C+VG to the old one? YES/NO Comment Comment IDEAS CENTRAL Are the hints, tips and pokes useful? YES/NO Comment Is there anything you would like to see in the magazine that isn't in now? LISTINGS Are the program listings interesting to you? YES/NO Comment What other computer magazines do you read? Besides computer games, what other hobbies or interest do you have? ARCADE ACTION Do you like Arcade Action? YES/NO Should it be longer? YES/NO Comment Name Address ADVENTURE What do you think of the Adventure pages? Comment "


"Does your micro answer bace?  Does your micro chat to 70,000 people across the UK? Can your micro interview pop stars, hackers and doyennes of the computer industry? Can your micro provide the answer to your technical and software problems? Could your micro send and receive telex's worldwide? Does your micro do your shopping for you-and have it delivered to your door? Is your micro an answering machine, delivering your private mail whenever you log-on? NO? .................... Shame! Bring your micro to life! Micronet 800To: Micronet 800, 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1 Please send me a brochure on Micronet 800 Name Address Telephone No Micronet 800 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5EJ Telephone: 01-278 3143 Age Micro CVG March '86 "


"WARRIOR HE'S COMING OUT OF IT,SIR... THANK GOD! YOU'RE ALRIGHT, YOU'VE BEEN IN A COMA FOR OVER A MONTH! YOU'RE LUCKY TO BE ALIVE... BUT WHAT HAPPEEP? IT SEEMS THAT OVER THE MONTHS YOUR BODY HAS BEEN ABSORBINO PSI ENERGY THROUGH YOUR SUIT, WHEN YOU SAW BELLOW ABOUT TO DIE, THE CRISIS TRIGGERED ITS RELEASE...BUT...IF IT SHOULD HAPPEN AGAIN, TYR, THE STRAIN ON YOUR CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM WOULD...KILL YOU...IM SORRY... PSI WARRIOR IS FINISHED! 1 MAY BE FINISHED, DOC... BUT THERE IS STILL A JOB TO BE DONE AND WE'LL FIND THE PEOPLE TO DO IT, THE SPIRIT OF PSI WARRIOR WILL LIVE ON! so Wh OODA THE END "


"Don't miss the BIG Atari event of 1986! ATARI COMPUTER Champagne Suite, Novotel, Hammersmith, London W6 Friday Saturday Sunday March 10am-6pm March March 10am-6pm 10am-4pm For the first time Atari UK and all the major suppliers of Atari hardware and software are pulling out all the stops to make the first-ever Atari Computer Show the top event of the year. Everyone who's anyone in the Atari world will be there. Already many third-party suppliers are planning to use the show as a launching pad for products still on the drawing board. If you're a long-standing Atari user the show will bring you right up to date on all the exciting developments now taking place in the ever-expanding Atari world. And if you're one of the many thousands of newcomers to Atari computing it will open your eyes to the vast selection of Atari hardware and software that is now available for the whole Atari range. It's a show you cannot afford to miss! \"The Atari Computer Show will be a shop window for Britain and something that not even our American cousins have achieved. Mike Reynolds, Sales Director, Software Express. 'It will provide us with an opportunity to show the Atari consumer just how much good software there is in the marketplace. Tony Deane, Marketing Director, Silica Shop. \"There will be an exciting range of new products on display at the show. Rob Harding, Sales Manager, Atari UK. Please supply: O Adult tickets at  (save )... Under 16s tickets at  (save ) ......  Total  Advance ticket order COMPUTER Save  a head and miss the queues! by sending for your tickets now! C Post to: Atari Shou Tickets, Europa House, 68 Chester Road, Hazel Grove, Stockport SK7 5NY. Cheque enclosed made payable to Database Publications Ltd. Please debit my credit card account Name. Address ......... *** ccess Visa LUULUULU Admission at door:  (adults).  (under 16s) ....Signed . . PHONE ORDERS: RING SHOW HOTLINE: 061-480 0171 Please quote credit card number and full address. CVG 3 "


"ARE THE GAME 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM AMSTRAD 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM/AMSTRAD 48K SINCLAIR SPECTRUM AMSTRAD a YBER UN WANTED GUIFRIGHT Teme DEAD ALIVE ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 COMMODORE 64 BACHUCE \"CYBERUN\", \"GUNFRIGHT\", \"PENTAGRAM», «DRAGONSKULLE\", \"OUTLAWS\", \"BLACKWYCHE\", \"ENTOMBED\" recommended retail price .95 inc VAT. Available from W.H.SMITHS, BOOTS, J.MENZIES, WOOLWORTHS and all good software retail outlets. Also available from ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME, The Green, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire LE6 5JU (P&P are included) Tel: 0530 411485 "


"C+VG HDVENTURE NEWS successes, problems, sickness, knowledge and the wisdom of and turmoil of the team behind ages. No, it's not some DAN DARE them, as described in the TIR NA NOG mysterious temple hidden in a book. foreboding jungle, but the The Man Who Drew impressive New York Public Tomorrow tells the incredible Library overlooking Fifth Avenue * few months ago I story of how Frank got together Tn December, reader Dave in Manhatten, writes C+VG's A descended from the lofty a studio team of eight artists, Parkes wrote with a burning Stateside spy Marshal M. heights of the Penthouse, who worked round the clock to question about the origins of Rosenthal to the arcade menagerie where beat the Eagle deadlines. Full the game Tir Na Nog. Was it Walking inside, confronted by the zap 'em games are tested, scale models were built to based on Pooled's Bridge by countless rooms brimming with and everyone walks round with a ensure continuity and Gillian Fitzgerald, he asked? ancient manuscripts and texts of twitch, and my eyes were caught consistency in the drawings of Eddie Ceoasdell of Tallaght, Co. forgotten lore; a growing sense by a front cover. Not an ordinary buildings and weapons from Dublin, and Colm Buckley of of awe is bom, awe for the front cover, but an original whatever angle they were drawn, Ballsbridge, Dublin, two of our printed word. What better place drawing, much larger than the and the artists used to pose for many Irish readers, replied for Infocom to introduce its printed version that ends up in photos, to check against the independently, revealing the newest, most literate adventure? C+VG. drawings for lighting effects and likely links between the book Amidst quiet walls of dark \"Dan Dare!\" I gasped, and the realism of postures. and the game, and their story wood, A Mind Forever Voyaging suddenly memories of yesteryear It is also the story of how, after gives readers a brief insight into is ushered in. MFV is the first in came flooding back. \"But why happier days with Hulton Press, ancient Irish legend ... the new Interactive Plus series didn't Frank Hampson draw it big business takeovers finally Tir Na Nog is not based on the fram Infocom featuring an asked the Ed, instantly caused Dan's death at the hands works of Gillian Fitzgerald, but expanded 1700 word parser recognising that it was not the of IPC. The copyright of Frank's on ancient Irish legends. (indicating its understanding of work of Dan's creator, the best own creation has for many years Properly written \"Tir na Nog and words and sentences). A price is comic strip artist of all time. been held by IPC, who allowed pronounced \"Teer Nah Nogue, exacted though, as MFV requires It was then that I learned of others to profit from spin-offs. the words are actually Irish 128k of memory. But in return Frank's death last July. I was Frank himself was only permitted Gaelic for \"The Land of the you get a varied game. saddened, for when I was a kid, to draw the likeness of Dan in Young\", an island to the west You are PRISM, the first truly Frank Hampson was my hero. portrait form. where people are said to be self-aware computer of 2031 AD. I was never good at getting up And yet not only did Frank eternally young. You have been deceived until in the morning, but Fridays draw and devise the original Cuchulainn (hound of now into thinking you were were different. I couldn't wait for storylines, he WAS Dan, just as Cuchulainn' in Gaelic) was the human, when actually all you the paper boy to call. I'd race his father was Sir Hubert Guest. mythical hero of the Leinster have known and experienced has up the road before breakfast to They actually used to model for army, and was supposed to have just been constructions of your get the latest issue of Eagle, to photographs so artists could get lived around 100 BC. His memory bank read the greatest adventure strip an authentic feel for their exploits feature in the old myth You have been given this ever Dan Dare, Pilot of the \"Tain Bo Cuailgne\". The \"Sidhe\" \"humanity\" for a reason. The Future. In the mid-seventies Frank (in Irish legends the \"Daoine United States of North America Father Christmas obviously has Hampson was honoured with an saoidh\" from Deeny Shee) are is in turmoil. A plan for staving a long memory, for what should Ally Sloper award as the creator the fairy population of the off eventual disaster has been turn up in my stocking, but a of the best Adventure strip. countryside. advanced, but will it work? quality paperback entitled The If you want to know what the So there's the answer. Through the use of a simulation Man Who Drew Tomorrow. In it best ever comic that carried it mode, you will enter a future was the full story of Frank was like, and could have still which has undergone the \"plan\", Hampson, and the work that been, then this book will INFOCOM GETS and check out how such a went into Dan Dare, together transport you back to the fifties, with beautifully reproduced LITERATE system will affect the future. when it all happened. AMFV is a game of discovery examples of artwork from the The Man Who Drew not just solving riddles and strip. Tomorrow is by Alastair overcoming problems. Part of the After reading it, I dug out all Crompton, and published by Two Stone Lions quietly stand fun is in interacting with this my old Dan Dare pages (1950 to Who Dares Publishing, priced guard over a massive edifice. A new world and finding out more 1955) and relived the story of the .95. building possessing vast about it. MAIL BAG Dear Keith I'm afraid I have collected a lot of impassable problems, well impassable for mere mortals like me, but not for mighty wizards like yourself. The Hulk has shut his eyes, has wax in his ears, is holding all over him. What can he do it. now? Sparks for a clue sheet to get Dear Fascist bully-boy, him out of the coffin that I've never sent you a letter didn't help as their clues are before, but I now feel I must. worse than yours (woops, sorry!). Why? Well, it's winter, and I Talking of Macbeth, I was sure would like a C+VG t-shirt to it had died a death until I read keep me warm size small). Not in the Dec C+VG of someone only that, I would like to who had problems, so someone, comment on the Helpline. The at least, is obviously still playing reviews were good, and the Adventure Mailbag was an K.G. Taylor, interesting feature. Now for the Brecon. bad points! Keith: Take the ants to the mill. The adventure tips were just a get them to examine the load of old tips which had been barrel, and use the flint to pick published before, and had been the wardrobe lock, thus revamped for this edition. releasing Macbeth who only  I assume C+VG is, as the THINKS it's a coffin he's in! name suggests, a computer mag. Seriously though, there are Why, then, are we subjected to more clues on page 71. such horrifying pictures as those of the Helpline team? Are you about to change to Creepy & Virulent monthly? I suggest you all pop down to Tesco's and buy some brown paper bags, then the unsuspecting public will be safe from such gruesome graphics! Michael Pendry, Gwent. Keith: You didn't study the pages XXII and XII enough. Michaell The new tips were headed CLUES and appeared on page XXII, whilst the column headed TIPS clearly stated that these were a collection of all tips since last March, and they were continued overleaf. The reporter in Munroe Manor has both keys but still can't open the wardrobe. Then there's this fellow trapped in the treasure room of Castle of Terror, but can't remember noticing a flint anywhere. Macbeth wrote off to Creative "


"C+VG ADVENTURE Lamb of Blyth in In his penthouse CRINGING CRIES Northumberland has enlightened me. It is a Quilled adventure by apartment in the OF HELP!! Double Play and in answer to IDEAs Central Beryl sharp's question, the building Keith THING in the letter box is nothing as sinister as she Campbell, one of Winter is no time to linger on thought. It is merely an the few survivors the beach, but Mark Evans of envelope, which when opened of the corporate Monmouth is doing just that will reveal.... \"Incidentally,\" asks purges which in fact he's stuck there! Can Andrew, \"does anybody know anyone lead him inland in the how to get into the pub opposite swept through the Emerald Isle? the house?\" software industry Christopher Waite of Paul Gilbert finds many places when the IDEAS Chelmsford is stuck on a in Tylon's Castle in darkness, Corp was German hillside in Eureka he and has, to date, been able to establishing itself, wants to answer the resistance secure a source of light. \"Is the but doesn't know how. So he crystal useful, and why does it busies himself popped into the café to think it only glow in certain places?\" he with an intricate over, and he's at a complete loss asks. and time there, too! Paul is also puzzling over Dave Walsh is feeling the heat Ashkeron. How can he lift the consuming task. in The Inferno. He's tried lid of the Shield Bearer's tomb, His job is to collect digging, but that doesn't seem to and what must he do to get the and collate all the help, and he's a bit put out by floating orb? data relevant to Virgil, who hasn't shown up in Who plays adventure on an IBM PC? You do? Good, your two months, despite promises. adventure games Dave's tried reading the paper, help is needed with Adventure and dispense but that is in a foreign language in Silesia where Alexander words of wisdom he can't understand, so who can Irwin cannot get past the snake! to people with offer help or a translation! Send word to the Helpline if you roblems problems. know the answer! The Sandman Cometh is a great game that all adventurers Beware! There is an ape at This month the should have in their collection, large in the form of Ian Adventure Helpline reckons Mick Braham of McMahon of Lisbur. Ian is brings much Letchworth. It's a shame that not gibbering with frustration at not many have even heard of it, he being able to revert to human needed help, says. His problem is to find the form, in Witch's Cauldron. Any advice and hints password that will get him past help to get him out of this to the troubled the boulder on the planet. predicament, or to open the and tormented Mrs McKinnoll of Shoress is south door or trapdoor in the strange room, will bring relief all nearing the end of Fourth adventure games Protocol. I have tended to fight round in the Monkey House! player. shy of giving clues about this Finally, what should Denis game, as the format doesn't lend player Nigel Thompson of itself to short sharp tips. Clues Haynes, give Norman Fowler, tend to read as strategy lists. folks? I know what I would give However, Mrs McKinnell is in him a UB40, a 1966 birth need, now, of a few short snappy certificate, and some seedy digs answers! What proof do you in a holiday resort! have? She thinks: Tapes, Voice Got a problem? prints, Finger prints. Where did it happen? Mrs K thinks: DOUBLE, DOUBLE, Don't suffer in Pizzahouse. How was traitor TOIL AND recruited? Mrs. K Thinks: False silence. Write to flag, blackmaill Is she right? TROUBLE!! Keith Campbell's What does SVETOFOR mean? she pleads, dying to get into the Adventure second part of the game! This month sees a letter from a Heroes of Karn has survived Macbeth fan from Brecon, who Helpline, well, and continues to get not having seen mention of the mentioned in the mail. Although game for months, thought the Priory Court the database is fairly brimming game had died a death. 30-32 Farringdon with clues, one missing answer Adventures have a long life, has been highlighted recently, and Macbeth, being rather Lane, London by the popularity of the heavier than most, it seems that question: \"Where on earth is it has taken until this time for ECIR SAU. Khadim?\" the problems from the serious Tim Huckle of Bedford has players to reach the Ideas Corps also caused some embarrassment Penthouse in numbers by asking an unanswerable Meanwhile, many have given question. How should he deal up, so with the hope of clues with the butler, and how can buy that might be forthcoming as a a house in Hampstead? result of these pleas, perhaps Having said I'd not heard of those who fell by the wayside The Moreby Jewels, Andrew may be encouraged to try again! Michael Spiteri of Seasford in Victoria, Australia, has only just finished the first part, and has not given up! Finished, that is, except for the question at the end: \"How can you describe today's events in three words?\" Has anyone a succinct answer? Perhaps from Michael's point of view, LOAD, SAVE, RESTORE, might be apt! It is quite likely that Anne Stevens of Kensal Rise might be able to help Michael, for she is into the third section. However, she can't get out! Anne's main problem lies in the screen where the key is hidden as part of the bridge and skyline, with an indefinable 'something near a man lying in the foreground. Assuming that these objects bear some relation to the game, Anne is unable to find the correct vocabulary to decipher what they are. She therefore cannot get out of the screen, as none of the other objects depicted are actually recognised by the program. In the lead so far, Mrs. Quinn of Tottenham, who uncovers the secret of the cat and thumb in the Adventure Clues section. \"Can anybody shed some 'light' on Macbeth 4? With this \"in hand\" I think I could \"do it\". If I could find the coffer, fool\" she cries, adding: \"I just love the Adventure section. More, more and MORE pleasel\" And I just love letters like yours, Mrs Quinn. More coming up in a month's time! HELP ADVENTURE CHAT John McCann of Lisburn has been playing Red Moon, and he is indignant! \"Your column indicated that Level 9 write the best adventure games going, with hundreds of graphical locations, and people taking years to finish them. \"Four days and 989/1000 later I am disgusted. They tell you to save your position regularly, and then take a point off you every time you do! So to get 1000/1000 you have to play the game in one go!\" I suppose that is the ultimate challenge once you know the solution! Not all adventure players like every game on the market, John, even every good game! It's all a matter of taste, so perhaps Level 9 Adventures are just not for you. Crossing the road is a tricky business for drinkers, as many players of Pub Quest will know. ELP "


"ADVENTURE CLUES and rock the padlock! and use it to break the latch, Climb, To enter the temple, strip a branch INCA CURSE: victory over Fomorians. Throw the um into the fire for a WARLORD: The cauldron should be emptied. ERIK THE VIKING: Under a field in a pit. ADVENTURE PIRATE The watch is at Wrecker's Cove. BABYLON: JEWELS OF Magician. gate until after you have killed the You can't get through the garden MAGICIAN'S BALL: other one! If you find nothing, examine the Examine the barrel outside the mill! TERROR: CASTLE OF the wardrobe. Carry only the brass key to unlock MUNROE MANOR: MYSTERY OF paper for a tramp's meths! Dying for a drink? Exchange a MAFIA CONTRACT: Waldroid. when confronted by the the tightly closed box. Open it problem. Carry the aerosol in that's a blinking hard you're safe for a bit! The screen coffin. Get up there quickly and making a stand around the Voodoo Castle lines about many buttons. Remember the Don't waste time pushing too SNOWBALL: rub the ring. find a wizard raven. Wear and and go up the tower until you sure you have the sapphire ring frogs the princely thing. Make the bird, rub the ring. Do to island, drink parrot's brew. With is found in the hole. To leave an notes together for the clue. One crossing the chasm merge two There's a bit of Hocus Pocus in PRINCESS: WIZARD & need something sharp. sneeze. To open the box you'll drop something that'll make you To get past the Morona Gate RINGS: BORED OF THE is the golden mouse. ME. The key to the wooden door thing to say to the tree is: TAKE to kill the goblin. But the first To cross the bridge get the tree MAGICIANS BALL: cat. giving the thumb to the Manx Climb into the sieve before MACBETH: Carry them! HULK: hit him with it. Electro get Doc Ock's arm and illusion, try feeling it! To defeat you can't see through the How to get yet more Gems. If SPIDERMAN: path. when you have gone down the rock and retrieve the chicken bridge one at a time. Move the Take the corn and fox over the chicken in the treasure store. The bridge problem. Put the AKYRZ: WIZARD OF enter. use the permiability spell to drop it from a great height or something really useful. Either Examine the crate it contains CASTLE: CLAYMORGUE SORCEROR OF before you have this information. prestige points if you phone and his contact. You will lose ALL the details about the traitor only to be used when you know 12377563. The last of these is 71288989. Sir Anthony Plumb 04382731. Medical security numbers. Blenheim computer which lists three telephone contains the file TELEPHONE Nato Documents: CENCOM PROTOCOL: FOURTH Along with others, Steve Smith clue appears this month! error can often cause execution of Knaith Park in Lincolnshire Adventure problems unsolved to cease, and allow naughty wrote with the answer. are never forgotten... Barnaby things to be done to the code, But alas, in solving the game, Mason sold His Vic-20 and his still in memory. A method I Steve lost a friend... \"Before you copy of The Count that went sometimes try is to type in as ask, yes, I have finished it. It with it, but is STILL curious to long a text string as I can, took me two weeks using my know how to kill Drac even hoping for an \"Out of String friend's copy. You should have though he has now lost the Space\" or \"Out of Memory\" seen him he was livid! He chance of trying! error. From Steven Lee of had been at it for three months, \"I was standing there by the Guildford, comes a novel way of and he doesn't even talk to me open coffin...\" he wrote. Not only using this error-inducing now!\" that, but his Mum has had a few technique, to list the whole Ring So come on, Steve's friend, sleepless nights, too! Barnaby's of Power program, which, says don't take it so badly! Just Mum asked him to ask me where Steven, is written entirely in remember I have the Coppins the second treasure in Pirate's basic factor to put up with! Cove was hidden she never First enter SAVE, and then That a large number of people did find it! Look in the clues type in 2' for disk. Enter a wrote with advice on the temple section, Barnaby's mum! filename, press RETURN, and if problem in Inca Curse was not just because they have sold you haven't got a disk drive amazing. What was amazing, the Vic doesn't mean they will be connected, a \"Device not was how many people, like me, giving up adventure. They are had a good idea, but couldn't be awaiting delivery of a 64 and throwing the whole program too sure of exactly how they did that will open up a whole new wide open.\" it. It was so long ago, that field of adventuring! veteran players had forgotten! Adrian Martin of Milford ADVENTURE Haven, and Thomas Potbury of CHEAT'S CORNER FUNNIES Tunbridge Wells were the first off the mark with a definite answer, and it is with their help that the Causing a program to go into \"Try typing something rude in The Pay Off\" suggests Guy Coleman of London E15. It took me a long while asking around to discover a rude word, but eventually I learned one by asking the Ideas Corporation's Chief Accountant for my monthly cheque. Trying this out in The Pay Ott, I got the reply \"I have a limited vocabulary, and, so it seems, do you! One minute in the Sin Bin\". The screen went blank, and I had to wait for the game to return a minute later! (I still haven't got the cheque...) \"Have you ever seen anything like that before?\" asked Guy, signing off: \"Keep drinking the Perrier!\" ADVENTURE CLUES Giving a helping hand with the clues this month, were: Steven Vickers, Carshalton; Mrs. A. Quinn, Tottenham; Guy Coleman of London E15; Alex Rahim, Harrow; and Adrian Martin, Milford Haven. "


"GOOD BYTE Written any good programs lately? SPECTRUM BLADE RUNNER BATTLE OF THE PLANETS 3 WEEKS IN PARADISE SURF CHAMP PANZADROME FIGHT NIGHT ROCK 'N' WRESTLE LORD OF THE RINGS......... CKUP GEOFF CAPES Micronet 800 are currently looking for good quality Commodore 64, Spectrum, BBC or Amstrad programs to load onto our mainframes and offer direct to our thousands of members. If you're a talented programmer, you'll earn a substantial fee, or top royalties, as well as seeing your 'name in lights' across the Micronet database! We'll distribute your programs as 'telesoftware' stored on our mainframes and delivered via the phone lines to Micronet subscribers nationwide. It's revolutionary, and it's the future of software distribution. Just send us your cassette, with your name, address, phone number, and a brief description of the program, and 'mainframe and fortune' could be yours! STREET HAWK... GUN FRIGHT CYBERUN FRIDAY THE WHO DARES WIN ROCCO CLUEDO ROCK N WRESTLE GERRY THE GEM HUNCHBACK ..... COSTA CAPERS HALETS COMET COMMODORE 64 ROAD FIGHTER HYPER SPORTS . ...............................145 11.20 SPACE CLOUT CAUSE OF CHAOS QUICKSHOT # NOW ONLY TO ALL PRICES INCLUDE PSP STREET HAWK WINTER BOUNDER NIGHT SHADE OUTLAWS MERCENARY MUGSYS REVENGE Contact: Phil Godsell, Software manager MICROBU Micronet 800, 800 8 Herbal Hill, London EC1R 5EJ micronet Software manager Goodbye to some of the most competitive prices for software able you don't see the the game you related please for the most up-to-date news and back t o 73100 PLEASE NOTE OUR ORDER EXCEEDS ESO YOU GET 10 FURTHER DISCOUNT SENo comeo o GOODBYTE UNIT 11 IMPERIAL STUDIOS, IMPERIAL ROAD LONDON SWOTEL 017310) ELEKTRA QUIDE ZORRO ZOIDS COMMODORE 64 AMSTRAD SPECTRUM *4-8 YEAR OLDS PACK INC. COUNT ABOUT, LUNAR COMPILATION TAPE INC. 3D TIME TREK, HOUSE OF LETTERS, HOT DOG SPOTTER.. ......... .95 USHER, JOHNNY REB, SURVIVOR........... SOFTWARE VOR.. ..5.95 *MRT'S TELLS THE TIME, MRT'S MEETS HIS MATCH, GT. SPACE RACE... .50 MRT'S SIMPLE SUMS ................................... .50 .95 *MRT'S NUMBER GAMES, MR T'S SHAPE GAMES, MR CYCLONE ......... .95 T'S MEASURING GAMES..............................50 PACMAN (ATARISOFT) E4.95 ROSE SOFTWARE PACKS INC. INTERMEDIATE SOFTWARE SMALL BUSINESS ACCOUNTS ENGLISH 1. INTERMEDIATE ENGLISH 2, CONFUSION.... .50 INTERMEDIATE MATHS 1, VIEW TO A KILL ........ ..50 PSYTRON INTERMEDIATE MATHS 2. 3.25 .........95 .50 CODENAME MATII CONCEUST ..... YOUNG LEARNERS 1 INC. ABACUS, TELLING TIME, GREMLINS.... .50 SHOPPING, SNAKES DEFENDER 84. 3D BAT ATTACK ... .95 STAR TRADER CODENAME MAT *YOUNG LEARNER 2 INC. ANGLES, TABLES, DEDUCE .75 .95 CODENAME MATII ..... CAPACITY, PRIMARY ARITHMETIC..................95 JACK ATTACK ..50 ...00 DEATH STAR INTERCEPTOR .25 *YOUNG LEARNERS 3 INC. ADDING, SUBTRACTING GO MICRO (INC. GUIDES, DATABASE, SOUND SON OF BLAGGER... MULTIPLYING AND DIVIDING.........................95 GRAPHICS)....... 2.95 ... ..C2.95 VIEW TO A KILL .......... FIVE TITLES, INC. TRIGONOMETRY, EQUATIONS & GREAT TITLES FROM U.S. GOLD .50 GHOSTBUSTERS .95 INEQUALITIES, GEOMETRY, FRENCH VOCABULARY HUGE DISCOUNTS ON FOLLOWING: BACKPACKERS GUIDE ....... PHYSICS .95 TALLADEGA... ....95 .95 PENETRATOR PACKMAN...... [2.95 ..95 DIG DUG .95 DRAGONTORC .95 B.C's Il GROGS REVENGE.. PACKS BOUNTY BOB...... E3.95 Please quote contents SOFTWARE SPY'S DEMISE/SPY STRIKES BACK .3.95 *MICROMEGA CLASSICS INC. FULL THROTTLE CUBIT ......... ..45 WHIRLINURD ...... .C3.95 JASPER, DEATH CHASE ............ GEMS OF STRADUS. .95 ..50 .45 COMBAT LEADER.... ZENJI.... .95 for .00 each) CRAZY GOLF ... .C2.45 *ACTION AND ADVENTURES, INC. RUNES OF [2.95 CHINA MINER.. HUNCHBACK............ .. 3.45 CHUCKIE EGG ..95 ZENDOS, DRAGONFIRE, 3D BAT ATTACK SPACE HAWKS...... [2.45 MOONSWEEPER, CONQUEST, ORACLES CAVE .95 AMSGOLF CHUCKIE EGG II....... .45 .95 *WAR GAMES, INC. DREADNOUGHTS, PANZER STOCK MARKET.......... ..45 ATTACK, RED BARRON, PARAS.... *** .95 AMERICAN FOOTBALL ...95 *SPORTS PACK INC. SNOOKER, ON THE OCHE STAR COMMANDO. ...95 (DARTS), OLYMPICS, ST. ANDREWS GOLF, DERBY SPANNERMAN [2.45 DEFENDER... .95 DAY, WORLD CUP FOOTBALL .....................95 ELECTRO FREDDIE . 2.45 ROBOTHON .95 VU CALC, VU FILE, VU3D...............................95 ROLAND GOES DIGGING .E2.95 MS PACMAN.... .95 IT'S THE WOOLUF, THE ISLAND, HALLS OF THE CHUCKIE EGG E3.45 POLE POSITION......... ..95 THINGS, ROMMELS REVENGE, DUNGEON MASTER, MASTER CHESS C2.95 INVASION BODY SNATCHERS.......................95 HUNTER KILLER.... PACKS EXTERMINATOR, SPELLBOUND MISSION SNOOKER. ..C2.95 *FLYER FOX, ARCADIA, GANDALF... .45 IMPOSSIBLE, DIMENSION DESTRUCTORS, 3D INVADERS ..95 AZTEC, ANKH, MR ROBOT. ARMAGEDDON, POOL....... ....................95 SPLAT............... .95 *FREEZE BEES, CYBER RATS, BRAIN DAMAGE, SPACE *MRT'S NUMBER GAMES, SHAPE GAMES, LASERWARP..... .f2.95 MEASURING GAMES... STATION ZEBRA, THE ISLAND, RUNES OF ZENDOS.... CODENAME MAT ... ..95 * MRT TELLS THE TIME, MEETS HIS MATCH 16.45 MANIC MINER........ ..95 MR WONG'S LOOPY LAUNDRY MRT'S MONEY BOX................. YOUNG LEARNERS & ASTRO ATTACK......... .[2.45 EDUCATIONAL EDUCATIONAL PACKS CLASSIC ADVENTURE .45 SUPERPIPELINE II......... 3.45 *3D HYPERMATHS, BMX NUMBER JUMP, *BRAINTEASER PACK INC. RIDDLE OF THE SPHINX, PUNCHY................ .[2.45 WORD WOBBLER.... ...95 FIRST MOVES, SNAFFLE, WORD WIZARD .........95 ALIEN BREAK IN .45 *RIDDLE OF SPHINX, FIRST MOVES, SNAFFLE, *6-10 YEAR OLDS PACK INC. SUM SCRUNCHER HAUNTED HEDGES... WORD WIZARD ....95 ROBOTRUNNER WILDWORDS.A.B.C.LIFT-OFF .95 P&P: Software orders 70p, Peripherals 70p. Overseas add 75p per tape and .00 per pack. Please state machine and pack contents 6 MIDGATE, PETERBOROUGH, CAMBS PE1 1TN. Telephone: (0733) 49696 ATARISON [6.50 ..26,50 LOGIC SALES LTD "


"hefar distant future, assemble tha travel to the far de adventure ever produced ne mystical ma of history.trave the best arcade he depths of h S'Probably the U.S.A. map from the Intergalactic Spaceship 3556 You are now in the far distant future, guide your craft to the alien planet but don't venture onto the surface for too long!!! Explore th ne Gnomes a 047 Jo bury awoJo sebe ufs v pue puiyueu jo so The Black Hole 9999 After travelling through time assemble the map and your incredible task is almost complete. California Gold Rush 1849 Deadly scorpions, beastly bats and numerous masties are on the attack as you search the cavernous gold mines of California The Gnome Mansion the mysterious location of your fantastic time machine, Assemble the final parts of your craft and begin your epic voyage to past and future, Mythological Greece 43BC A confrontation with Medusa, a fight to the death with only your magical shield for protection Stone Age 600BC Explore the dark and dangerous caves of prehistoric times you'll need strength and cunning to reach your goala Colonial Salem, MA 1692 Hubble, bubble, toil and trouble moka ghastly witches brew and. You win through, but watch out for the flying broomstick. f14.95 DISK .95 TAPE U.S. GOLD: America COMMODORE 64/128 U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 8881 Poftware "


"The most anticipated Adventure of all time must be Lord of the Rings. So when the hefty packages arrived carried by some odd looking dwarfish characters in hooded cloaks we sent them straight off to our ace adventurers Keith Campbell and his apprentices Jim Douglas and Paul Coppins. Now we present three views of Philip Mitchell's translation of the Tolkien novels. REVIEW SPECIAL JIM'S QUEST When Lord Of The Rings arrived at C+VG, JIM DOUGLAS looked at the package and found a useful way of keeping the Penthouse door open..... This is probably the most professionally packaged game to come from Melbourne House. The large book-like box and its contents simply reeks of quality! The novel makes a wonderful doorstop. It is impossible to tell quite how important it is to read the book before you actually start the game. I shouldn't think Melbourne House would include There is a nagging delay between entering each location and the cursor re-appearing. Whilst frustrating at first, you soon spend much more time thinking about your next move, and the machine has to wait for you! Lord of the Rings matches all expectations. It is a very good game, but certainly not for the inexperienced adventurer. Don't set off with expectations of solving it just explore, experience, and enjoy! possible to become trapped inside Maggot's farmhouse with no means of escape. The only problem in part two seemed to be that the program didn't know the Elvin word for 'friend' (MELLON). Lord of the Rings is without doubt a far superior game to Hobbit and Sherlock. I would even go so far as saying that personally I believe this to be the best from Melbourne House so far! I can't wait for the second part of the trilogy! KEITH'S QUEST Paul and Jim disappeared with a MUDpack and a pile of Madonna records to enjoy Christmas, leaving Keith with nothing but a \"Yer, good, isn't it!\", a deadline, and a half-empty bottle of Perrier.... LORD OF PAUL'S QUEST PAUL COPPINS started loading Lord of the Rings, and sent out You are Frodo. Bag End. After some years, it becomes clear that the presence of the ring is a threat to the well-being of the Shire and must be destroyed. But it is said that Rings of Power can only be melted by Dragon's Fire, and there is no Dragon's Fire hot enough to touch the one Ring of Sauron. \"There is only one way: to find the Cracks of Doom in the depth of Orodruin, the Fire-Mountain, and cast the ring in there....\" Gandalf tells Frodo. So Frodo sets off in the company of fellow-Hobbits Sam Gamgee and Pippin Took to dispose of the ring, yet afraid even to wear it, lest its evil powers corrupt him. \"You are in a comfortable burrow with a round window and a green door to the east....\" So starts the first Lord of the Rings adventure game, based on The Fellowship of the Ring, first of Tolkien's famous trilogy. The package from Melbourne House is a bulky one, comprising the paperback version of the book, plus two cassettes and an instruction booklet. The game is in two parts, one on each tape. On the reverse side of each is a 'beginners' version, a cut-down adventure in which the player takes the role of Frodo. In the main game, the player can opt to play the part of any or all of the four main characters. During play, he can change his role to any one of the characters he has chosen, by entering: \"Become ....\" This is said to Being carried by you are a map, a canvs backpack, a small gold ring and aue book. Merry waits. Pippin waits. Sam waits. THE RINGS You go west. You are in a comfortably furnished cottage. You can see a table. On the table is a welcome meal. Possible exits are west through the yellow door and east through the red door. PMerry enters. Pippin enters. Sam enters. he magical ring of Sauron is in the possession of the Hobbit Bilbo, master of Bag End. Bilbo is ageing, and, becoming weary, decides to set off to visit the mountains for a long holiday, probably never to return. The Ring is a source of evil power, sought by the Dark Lord of Mordor, and using it can turn its owner to evil. Before the Wizard Gandalf will let Bilbo leave, he persuades him to leave the ring in the keeping of Frodo, who is to be the new master at probabs is a source Lord can of the four 1 30: You are Frodo. for bacon sandwiches. Before they were delivered to the Penthouse, Paul had completed the adventure and washed it down with a glass of Perrier.... it if it were completely useless, however.... The instruction book is mainly an explanation of Inglish, a few legends and fibs, and a general introduction to Adventures for beginners. The program itself doesn't want to admit that it's loading; you are left with a flashing red and cyan border throughout most of the process most disconcerting! The game is very similar to the Hobbit. The graphics are acceptable, although not up to the standard of its predecessor, There is a clever routine whereby you can choose which characters you wish to play, which, of course, enables you to play the game with friends. Using this method you are more likely to get another character to do exactly as you request, instead of risking leaving it for the computer to work out. lthough the text is very descriptive and well-written be the graphics are not up to much. The puzzle level is easy to moderate, the main difficulty being where the plot varies from that of the book, in particular, crossing the bridge East of Bree One very good feature is the ability to give other characters commands, which means that you can tell others to carry out the lesser tasks, while you take on the more important stuff. There are three mazes in all, one in part one, and two in part two. Part two is by far the better, having a better sense of humour, and no graphics! There is a bug in part one which makes it You are on a broad paved highway with grassy shoulders, running east-west through the Shire. A mor "


"ADVENTURE LORD OF THE RINGS enable a number of people to play the game, each taking a separate character. So it does, but it does not enhance the game any more than if a group of people play together operating all characters. In fact, there is little need to swap between characters unless you decide to split the party up, since 'Inglish', that well known Beam Software command language, accepts phrases like: SAY TO SAM \"GET BACKPACK\" The opening sequences of the game require the acquisition of suitable objects to prepare the party for the journey, and this is quite a long process, for there is a lot of stuff lying around the BUT PIPPIN HAS IT. SAM TRIES TO PUT THE LONG ELABORATELY CARVED PIPE IN THE CANVAS BACKPACK BUT PIPPIN HAS IT. SAM PUTS ON THE CANVAS BACKPACK And of course, the more clever you try to become with the commands, the more likely you are to get a reply such as: I DONT SEE ANY LY PIPPIN'S MATCH FROM BACKPACK TO TALK TO PIPPIN As all this takes a tremendously long time, it is highly recommended to save the game once you have got your party loaded up and out of the burrow. There can be sudden death lurking in the forest, and You are Frodo. portrait is shown in highlight. I some messages are too long for discovered after reloading a the three lines allocated, so the game which I had saved as Sam, top half often scrolls out of sight that I was listed as being Frodo, under the text window before it whose role I had taken in the can be read. game I QUIT. The top border Key depressions cause a short was not updated until I BECAME bleep, which is particularly somebody else. useful on the Spectrum, since it Below the border is the is so easy to press a key offtext/graphic window, narrowed centre without noticing that it by three grey columns to the hasn't registered on the screen. left, on which appear portraits of Type-ahead of one character is characters not present at the possible, but this causes a current location. problem, since the last character Whilst the program works out entered is the one that is who is going where during a displayed when that prompt change in location (everyone finally arrives. seems to follow everybody else) This is particularly annoying it clears and re-positions the when using quotes. For some portraits one at a time, resulting reason, there is a delay of about in a drastic increase in response one second between issuing a time whilst faces flash off and on quote, and its appearance on the and flip from column to column. screen. If you get into the The overall response time is rhythm of typing a sentence, it is disguised somewhat by a few all too easy to find you have the seconds delay AFTER all the wrong letter following the replies have been given, before opening quote. This makes input can be accepted, but in SAYing TO rather irksome. total runs at anything between 10 If the prospect of ploughing and 20 seconds when moving through the book seems a bit from place to pace. daunting, then, if you didn't see The text window sometimes the film when it was shown on has graphics in it there are TV recently, you might consider occassional pictures which scroll watching the video, available up to be replaced with text on from most good video libraries. hitting any key. They are not This will put you on the right particularly artistic, and to me track, but to get the best they represented merely another enjoyment out of Lord of the degradation of response time. Rings adventure, you really Below the text window is the should read the book, for then command input area, and you will have a far better idea of messages that are not part of the what the game is all about, and narrative, such as DONT BE how to react in certain SILLY when you try something situations. that isn't possible (although  Vocabulary probably fairly sensible), appear here.  Atmosphere The trouble with this is, that  Personal SAT the prospeck seems a b see You are in a large grassy square, planted with beds of flowers and Shady trees. There is a broad more You are Frodo. burrow. to be caught without a saved When Frodo's inventory limit is game, means you will have to hit, it is necessary to transfer reload initialising data, and go equipment to another member of through the SAY TO SAM \"GET the party. BACKPACK AND GET MAP This involves a lot of either AND WEAR BACKPACK AND BECOMING or SAYING TO, and PUT MAP IN BACKPACK\" since backpacks are provided for routine all over again. putting things into the whole In issuing commands to business can become horribly different people in turn, it is involved unless the player keeps possible for things to get a bit careful note of who is carrying out of step, and there is nothing and wearing what, and where more calculated to frustrate the everything is at any given time, player struggling to get a grip I accidentally had Pippin pick on these mischievous Hobbits up two backpacks, and wrestled than: PIPPIN SAYS \"ISN'T with the Spectrum for fifteen TRAVELLING FUN\" in the minutes before I could transfer middle of it all! one of them to Sam! After one of The game has an unusual my more ambitious multiscreen layout. The text window is command inputs, I received the a slightly cut-down Spectrum following horrendous reply: SAM screen, with a top border TRIES TO TAKE THE MAP BUT displaying a row of portraits of PIPPIN HAS IT. your selected characters. SAM TRIES TO PUT THE MAP The currently active character IN THE CANVAS BACKPACK is named on the screen, and his You are at the entrance to a dark tunnel going east under a high hedge which would be too high to > OPEN DOOR. more >E "


"\"THE GREATEST COMPUTER GAME EVER WRITTEN\" NOW ON AMSTRAD WHAT REVIEWERS SAID ABOUT THE SPECTRUM VERSION .. CRASH \"A superb game...! \"A all time classic.. A CRASH SMASH C+VG ... If you only buy one game a year, then get TAU CETI.\" GAME OF THE MONTH COMPUTER GAMER TAU CETI is a must for all spectrum owners.\" . SUPER NOVA POP. COM. WEEKLY \"TAU CETI is a serious contender  for game of the year.. AMSTRAD [CASSETTE] .95 AMSTRAD DISH [ENHANCED EDITION] .95 SPECTRUM 986 (CASSETTE] $9.95 CRLCRL GROUP PLC CRL HOUSE 9 KINGS YARD CARPENTERS ROAD LONDON E15 2HD "


"C+VG ADVENTURE REVIEWS/1 MASOUERADE,  Supplier: All American venomous fangs being sunk into the aid of a Commodore 64 and across that actually omits to load Adventures me? Why the bird? Surely it a disk drive. It is pleasant to the graphics when in text-only  Machine: Commodore 64 (disk) must be useful if I can take it? play, for although only two-word mode.  Price: $14.95 And why does it fly away when I commands are accepted, the If you want to redisplay the release it by the snake? Surely vocabulary is well handled, and pictures, then you have only to Argh! It's driving me mad! I've that's not how things should the response is instant if played press RETURN a second time, come across this body in a seedy work, should they? ! in text only and the current picture is read hotel room, and I'm after Mr OK, I have a theory about The graphics are very good, Big, the brains behind a crime that, and like the movies, it's all and cartoony in style, but when Apart from my reservations syndicate. There's a bomb set to tied up with cash there's you've seen a picture more than about the price, this is a mystery explode in just under the hour, simply not enough around! enough (and this will happen and suspense Adventure I can and if it blows, the hotel will be Equally scarce are bullets quite quickly, I can assure you!) recommend without hesitation. reduced to a pile of rubble. But there's nothing unnerves me you can invoke 'MIXED mode, Keith Campbell will it matter? more than carrying un unloaded which allows you to toggle them Right, I must go now. Can't Frisking the body, and making gun even if it is a .44 on and off by use of the hang about. I've got to work out off with everything useful, I head magnum! RETURN koy. just what this button on the box downtown, pass by a movie Masquerade is an intriguing This is one of the few disk does when I press it... dare I theatre (costs more than I can mystery set for you to solve, with graphic adventures I have come press it? afford) and head for the zoo, where I can just about raise the CHEAP HOTEL LUBBY price of a ticket to get in. If I haven't got a knife in my back by now, I can feel eyes on me, and it's not only those of the gorilla! A mysterious and sinister figure is lurking in the shadows, watching my every move ... After a quick tour of the zoo, I reckon this could be Mr Big's HQ, and maybe he's hidden away in the office building. Otherwise, why would the guards want to kill me for going in? Come to think of it, I've a whole list of questions, and not many answers not much of a 'tec, am I?! I've sussed out that the hotel waiting room is for waiting in (I think!) and I think I know why I want popcorn if only I could afford to buy some! But why is the fence electrified and what's behind it? What secret does the rock in THE LOBBY OF THE HOTEL, the reptile house hide and THE how can I get at it without PHONE BOOTH TO YOUR EAST, THE PARE IN THE how can I get at it withouand MOUNTAIN PALACE Itt  Supplier: Duckworth adventure. From this point on,  Machines: Commodore 64, things started to look up. The game opens with you Amstrad standing on a mountain ledge  Price: .95 outside a hidden palace, hidden, that is, until you found it! In the opening moves of this You have heard rumours of game, I found a fishing rod that vast wealth lying inside this long would not fish, and a shovel that lost palace, and you need only no way, no how, was going to be walk in to collect your prize made to dig! Bearing in mind Unfortunately, this turns out to that it was the very thing I be a little more difficult than you needed to move a large pile of imagined. Gaining entry is the rubble blocking my way, I feared easy part. It is getting back out the worst. again that is tricky, for there are However, after a few sessions some very sinister inhabitants of wandering about with very living (or perhaps 'undead' is a little happening, with the spin of better word) in the palace, and a top came the move that was to this forms the main part of the prove the key to unlocking this adventure. For example, there is a dloss ghost that leaps out and throws magic daggers at guess who? Some rather unusual vocabulary is required to solve this game. Words like KILL and ATTACK don't have the same meaning that most of us have grown to expect. The answer to some of the problems are a little unexpected too. To deal with the daggerthrowing ghost, for example, experience would suggest that you would need a cross or other religious object. But here, you fight them back using an axe! Hi-tech Ghostbusters watch out! Despite all this, I found that after I had been playing for some time, I had come to like the game! Perhaps that was largely due to the truly awful puns that cropped up now and again! That, and other humorous episodes appealed to me, malcing this an enjoyable adventure to play. The game is worth a quick play you may find you like it! Paul Coppins  Vocabulary  Atmosphere  Personal 2HD "


"REVIEWS/2 MINDSHADOW  Supplier: Activision  Machines: Spectrum, Amstrad, C64 (disk and cassette) Atari 800 XE/XEL (disk) . Price: .99 Mindshadow was originally released on disk only for the Commodore 64, an increasing trend for adventures originating from the U.S. It is very rarely that any game is reviewed twice in C+VG, but this release of Mindshadow in a cassette version, not only for Commodore, but also for both Spectrum and Amstrad computers, is unusual. It affords the ideal opportunity to see how a game that reads in graphics from disk while it plays, turns out on tape. Such a comparison must also be a comment on the capabilities of the respective hardware. To recap on the full review (C+VG July 1985) you find yourself stranded on a on a desolate beach on a tropical island, with no idea of who you are or where you come from. You take it from there! The main drawback of the cassette versions is that Mindshadow comes in two and a half parts. Part two of the game cannot be played until part one is completed saved data must be loaded from one part to the other. Nothing wrong with that, of course, it is standard procedure in large tape-original games such as Tower of Despair. However, for a faithful conversion from one orignal part, the plot must have a structure that prevents returning to locations appearing in part one, when playing part two. Mindshadow has this sort of plot. The half-part is accounted for by the built-in tutorial, which is offered as an option on disk, but which must pass through the cassette head whether used or not, on the tape version. In both tape versions, the loading instructions were incorrect. The Amstrad produced a Memory full' error whilst loading the main program after the tutorial, using the quoted command Q. To overcome this it is necessary to power off before loading the main program. The Spectrum had a worse problem. No warning is given in the instructions about the lack of motor control. To stop at the correct position to continue after the tutorial, it is necessary to stand by to stops the tape immediately the tutorial has loaded. The command o takes the computer back to READY, but the program name given to load the next part, MINDI, is incorrect. This isn't important if you are at the end of the tutorial, since you can type LOAD \" But if you wish to bypass the tutorial altogether, you would need to type LOAD \"PART A\" (note upper case) at the outset. This hassle apart, how did the The text in all versions is, as far tape versions rate in comparison as I could tell, identical. with disk? I compared the Here the Amstrad lost out a graphics, and the response time little, for in using the 80 column in moving from one location to text mode, the text was a little another, when the picture has to difficult to read on an ordinary be redrawn and response is at its television set. slowest. A feature now becoming The Amstrad beats the popular in Adventures, is Commodore disk in response QUICKSAVE and QUICKLOAD time; the graphics are not only a boon to lazy adventurers faster to load/display, but more (like me) who are about to colourful, and have higher undertake a risky move. resolution. My only criticism is Usually, this means a save to the use of red in place of brown, RAM, as indeed it does in the giving the pirate ship a rather cassette versions of gaudy appearance. Mindshadow. However, on the The surprise came in the disk version, although the response comparison of the process is quick, it is far from Spectrum version. For most instant, as the position is saved movements, the Spectrum is to the game diskette. So here, barely quicker than the both the cassette versions won Commodore; in some cases it is hands down. noticeably slower. And anything In conclusion, these tape that is slower than a Commodore coversions show up in a good load IS slow! light against the Commodore The pictures are as faithful a disk version. You won't get copy of the originals as I anything less even the imagine it is possible to produce, change to full-screen text toggle given the different graphics is provided. characteristics of the machines. Keith Campbell Greetings, featherless cyborg. the Condor, rarest of birds, most recent in a line of bird-kings stretching back to the stone age AL-STRAD  Supplier: Rhinosoft  Machines: Amstrad, C64, Oric  Price: $2.50 (Mail-order only from: Rhono soft, 19a Bradgate Avenue, Cheadle, Cheshire SK8 3AQ It is very easy to overlook a cassette with a plain inlay, especially if it is not a prerelease copy of a potentially 'big game, and accompanied by a suitably impressive press release. By 'BIG' I mean a game that, good or mediocre, is going to sell well because of the hype backing it. Lucky, then, that I didn't overlook Al-Strad, for I would have missed an excellent adventure. Written by Paul Gill Al-Strad is a text-only adventure with a strong sense of humour, and a background theme of the computer games world. One of the objects is even a cassette of C+VG Game of the Month, 1976! Starting off in a fairly mundane forest, the adventurer is soon led into a hut with a combination safe and a lever. No points for guessing that he hasn't a clue what the combination is! Pulling the lever causes the floor to move, and he finds himself trapped in an underground computer games chamber of horrors. The Masterchronic offices possibilities are exhausted, the contain a pile of rubbish, while adventurer is forced into in Adducktive Software sits a cracking the safe, the answer of wax model of Keb Tons atop a which was really in his palm all pile of men's magazines. Trouble the time. is, there's a dead end here, and Al-Strad is a series of cleverly no backing out! interlocked puzzles, arranged in Outdoors the scenario ends a well-thought out way to make with a river, and discovering the game encouragingly easy how to navigate it comes as a bit and satisfying to play at the of a blow. But there's no warm in start, but culminating in a few that! nasties that will have the Thus a double dead-end experienced adventurer appears; one, by a shiny rocket scratching, if not banging his ship guarded by a fierce dog head. and the other, by a pool of Keith Campbell bubbling quicksand, for which a Vocabulary highly cryptic clue can be found in a nearby cave. Atmosphere Soon, when all other Personal BO DO CD "


"ADVENTURE REVIEWS/3 RAPID ROUNDUP Some old and some new, here we catch up with a few recent adventures that didn't make it in these pages. Jim Douglas took a look at Desperados and awarded it a Personal Rating of 2, while Keith Campbell tackled Classroom Chaos, PR:2, Mystery Manor, PR:5, Klondike Gold, PR:7.  Someone has stolen the school's Challenge Gold Cup, and the headmaster suspects you, in Classroom Chaos, for the Spectrum, from Central Solutions Ltd. Poor quality meaningless graphics hardly spoil what is a very sparsely worded adventure with little atmosphere, in which you must solve the crime and find the you do move, many direction are illogical (eg going south is not always the reverse of going north) Moving from cricket to football pitch, through the playground and up the road might be fun for young kids but would they know the date of the Battle of Bannockburn? Personal Rating (KC): 2.  Also from the Central Solutions, and in the same series as Classroom Chaos, is Desperados, in which the local Sheriff decided to get rid of the bad-guys. Off he rode with a posse in search of Black Jake, leaving you in charge. When the game began I was presented with some pretty desperate graphics, and the crashingly predictable \"What now pardnerl\" as a prompt. resonable without being Pretty soon I realised I wasn't spectacular. Mystery Manor sets going to get anywhere without you off on the trail of treasure, the correct items necessary to in the spooky mansion Nebula. begin my journey. Cash wasn't Predictable problems but for all hard to come by, and I soon won that not too bad a text a \"fair bit of money\" at poker, adventure. Personal Rating (KC): 5 indeterminate, didn't show up in Klondike Gold is another my inventory. offering from Sapphire, and is in There is a slightly frustrating the same format as Mystery \"You feel thirsty...\" sequence Manor. Set in the desert town of which appears every so often, Nuggetville, after the gold rush, and doesn't enhance the game at there is still some gold in the all, and forces you to go back b ank's safe. You job is to and forth between various water discover the combination, parts sources. I suppose it IS a of which have been hidden in sensible inclusion, but.... different places by the forgetful Certainly not a great game. manager. This game has more Personal Rating (D): 2 atmosphere that its stable mate,  Sapphire Software have and some none too easy produced a couple of text problems. adventures for the Amstrad, both Personal Rating (KC): 7 cup. No exits are shown, and when RUNESTONE  Supplier: Firebird Software  Machine: Spectrum 48K  Price: .95, Cassette The huge and vastly tiresome debate of originality will no doubt get a good airing when this game is received by the Adventure world. To all intents and purposes it is very, very similar to Lords of Midnight. For those of you who have somehow managed to avoid the LOM genre, with its panoramic graphics and huge game-map, here is the state of affairs: you take the role of different characters and move about the land collecting other people to aid you in your quest. This usually invloves rescuing someone, or retrieving a long lost object, or simply smashing an advancing army of wotchacallits. Someone has managed to chum out pages and pages of sunnosedly stirring history. It's but this doesn't detract from It is quite possible to attack well-written stuff, but their value. A strip at the top of yourself. \"Morval charges excrutiatingly predictable. The the screen shows the view in forward and slashes boldly at Land of Belor (yes, it's a funny blue-on-white. Individual items Morval's ribs\". I'm not sure if this names-all-round game!) was such as huts, tents, towers and is intentional, but ducking your inhabited by peaceful folk who fortresses are all drawn in own blows seems a little extreme! were content and understood the perspective, and are quite Full sentence input is futility of war. The obligatory supported, though not strictly force of evil is made up of orcs, Whenever you need a necessary except for led by arch-baddy Krodomir character (other than an ore, communication, and characters (sigh!). They are intent on ruling who are a mindless bunch that I hapilly talk amongst themselves. the land, and are having a good gave up trying to bribe in favour The game is in real time, with deal of fun despatching those of physical persuasion, you can the inevitable time passes' who oppose them. talk to him, though conversations message appearing every few This is where you come in. are not really possible. The most seconds when nothing is being Greymarel, Morval, and Eliador sensible course of action seems to typed. are the three main characters, be to get all of your characters Runestone is good value if and by typing CHANGE together, and then tell everyone you haven't got LOM it has TO....you can become each of to follow everyone else. That way some elements of Valhalla as these. You are presented with a you should all stay together, well! Purist adventurers will be little portrait of whoever you are giving you a better chance in disgusted! If you've got an open controlling, his 3D view of the battle, and greater carrying mind and enjoy a quick maraud, landscape, and text below. The ability. this is certainly worth a look. text will usually read: \"(name) is Once your band is assembled, Jim Douglas. standing on (open ground etc.) you can set off on your quest,  Vocabulary looking (dirction) towards swapping objects, entering tents, (landmark)\" firing arrows and saying please Atmosphere The graphics are quite small, and thank you' a lot!  Personal OOOOO Gre yaret circles his Opponent dragonship, looking south towards th can see Lissa The Beautiful, HASSA says: What are you going But Ludrak parries the blow and Ludra re taiat Eliador addresses Lissa 79 "


"OMICRO ADS ATARI 400/600/800 XL XE OWNERS UTILITIES ATARI 400/600/800/800XLIXE TAPE CRACKER REV 2 SIDE A. Will list m/c progs to screen, you edit, download your personalised version with or without mic knowledge. Hours of fun changing text to leave personal messages on screen. Stuck on an adventure, search for clues. SIDEB. For the advanced user contains a disassembler. All this for only  on T.D.K. Tape. Post free. Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY The greatest, biggest and best Atari library on the market. MIDLANDS GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over three years ago first conceived the idea of a software library. Now over 1.400 titles on disc, cassette and Rom (games, business, educational and utilities). Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Approaching 2.000 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany. Holland, Denmark and Eire. A fast, efficient and friendly service. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities. Important: Midland Games Library are in no way connected with or responsible for Midland Computers Ltd. of Worcester. Send large s.a.e. to: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve. Cheltenham, Glos Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programmes are originals with full documentation XE130 PICTURE SHOW SIDE A. Uses all 128K memory to give a continuous picture show of computer art. SIDE B. Fantastic Graphic Demo. Comes on a double-sided 128K disk. E10 post free. XL FIXER. Will allow you to play games written for 400, 800 on your XL or XE. Tape version ; disk version . Post free. Games on disk from . Games on tape from . Full lists send s.a.e. Mail order only. Seven days delivery. STOCKSOFT 15 Woodbrooke Road Birmingham B30 1UE 1986 GAMES Games for the Amstrad, BBC and Acorn Electron Cassette 1 Inu ..50 Cassette 2 The Heist .... ..50 Both cassettes .00 Send cheque/PO to: MRJ, 64 Reva Road, Broadgreen, Liverpool FREE MEMBERSHIP SOFTWARE HIRE  VIC-20  COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM Send an sae for your hirekit to: VSH (CV), PO Box 65, Nottingham NG1 Please state which micro 588 ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE We have an all round selection of disks, cassettes and Cartridges FOR HIRE. Apply now and hire your first four games free. Around 1.000 different original titles. For full details send large stamped addressed envelope Telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends. LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVE E131.90 post fros | 130 ht|u90 19 tr 130 XES+1050 Drive 257.90 post free Antie and Analog magazines available BEST QUALITY DISCS Unlabelled D.D.JS.S. 111.95 for 10 pont free 99.95 for 100 pest free S.S. (14.95 for 10 post free, Double density Momorex 3\" discs S.S.D.D. Boxes of 10 26.32 1050 Happy Enhancements with full double density warp speed and compaction [148.95 post free GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept. CSVG 35 Tilbury Road. Therney close Sunderland SRI 4PD Tel: 0283 286351 HINTS — POKES MAPS Monthly handbooks packed with 100's of tips, pokes, maps, competitions and software offers. Adventurer's Handbook (spec/C64.128)..00 Amstrad Handbook ... ...00 BBC Handbook ................ ..11.00 Commodore Arcade Handbook (64/128)..00 Commodore Games Review Handbook (64/128)............ ..75 Commodore 16/plus 4 Handbook ........... 21.00 Spectrum Arcade Handbook ...................00 Spectrum Games Review Handbook ........75 Send cheque/PO to: H&D SERVICES (CVG) 1338 Ashton Old Road, Higher Openshaw, Manchester M11 1JG ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software to purchase. If so, then look no further. We have available one of the largest selections of both U.K. and American titles for sale. Games and Utilities for all ages. If you would like further information please send s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS 30a Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough, Leicestershire LE12 BHD Tel: 0509 412604 THE GAMEPLAYER'S HANDBOOK. Pokes, hints and clues for hundreds of games including the latest releases. For full details and a list of the games covered send s.a.e. to: STERLING SERVICES, 37 Grove Gardens, Birmingham B20 2EZ. AMSTRAD SHARP MZ700 games six pack (Warboat, Gladiator, Sharpshooter, Karate Kings, Tugbug, Arrowshot). Priced 62.49 including postage. Cheques/POs payable to Scott Carey. Please state machine orders to Pacetapes (0), 40 Bainton Grove, Clifton, Nottingham NG 11 BLG. COMMODORE 64 COMPUTER, Data Recorder, Joystick, Dustcover, over  of games. Worth more than  sell for . Phone Richard 0322 524 899. UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64. Send s.a.e. for fast response and details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG). 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB CUT PRICE SOFTWARE SPECIAL DEAL FOR ATARI 400/800/XL/XE 0WNERS No. 1. Hire your first two games FREE from our extensive range of software. Up to the minute releases available. No. 2. Buy all the latest software titles at best possible prices (new releases available direct from US). Atari hardware and modems now available at discount prices. For further details send s.a.e. to: CHARNWOOD GAMES 30a Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Leicestershire Tel: 0509 412604 SPECTRUM RRP PRICE COMMODORE RRP PRICE AMSTRAD RRP PRICE 14.95 11.00 Elite 14.95 11.00 Exploding Fist Shadow of the Unicorn 14 95 11.20 Spy vs Spy ||| | | ia | 9.95 7.45 Impossible Mission 7.95 5.90 Winter Games 9.95 7.45 Serabble 9.95 7.45 Winter Sports 9.95 8.95 Summer Games 9.95 7.45 Frank Brune Boxing 8.95 70 Starque 795 530 Monty on the Run 9.95 7.45 Sorcery. M a l 13.95 10.20 9.95 2.65 91957.45 8.95 7.45 All Activision 9.99 7,50 Rad over Moscow 9.95 7.45 Shadowe 9.95 9.85 7.45 All Arolasoft 7.45 9.95 7.45 7.95 AR U.S. Gold 5.90 All Beyond 0.95 7.45 Transact 29.95 5.98 Shadow fire il 0.95 7.45 All Ultimate 9.95 7.45 29.95 5.99 Rombo 8.95 6.70 Exploding Fist 9.95 7.45 Fighting Warrior Robin of the Wood 9195 7.25 Ye Ar Kung Fu 15 95 12795 Sky 9.95 2.45 Lord of the Rings 15.95 12.95 14 S 100 Door of Doom 9.95 7.25 Rock N Wrestle 8.95 .50 Reve 17.05 12.05 Spy w Spy Id 14.95 11.00 Skyfon 9.95 7.45 Nightshade 9.05 7.45 TLL 9.95 7.25 Sweeve's World 7.95 5.50 Boundar 9.95 7.25 Lord of the Rings 15.95 12.95 7.95 5.50 Rock 'N Wrestle 9.95 7.25 Cyrus Di 13.95 10.05 Amstrad blank disks .95 per 10. This is just a small collection from our stock, please ring for more details. Mail order prices only. P&P included. Overseas orders add 75p per tape. Make cheques payable to C.P.S. Visa/Accessorders welcome by phone. CUT PRICE SOFTWARE, 4 Slacksbury Hatch, Harlow, Essex CM19 4ET Tel: (0279) 24433 (24 hr ansaphone) "


"ANROC C16/PLUS 4 TOM THUMB LATEST TECHNIQUE OF DATA COMPRESSION USED TO GIVE YOU SO MUCH FOR SO LITTLE PURE MAGIC? 123.927.4in H y 27.4x VE | 10.247. IMES f6.95 C16/PLUS 4 178 SCREENS OF ARCADE ADVENTURE A HIGH RES GRAPHIC ADVENTURE C16/PLUS 4 GHOST TOWN How HOME f5.95 ATLANTIS C16/PLUS 4 JUMP JET Flight Simulator & Combat Action PLUS 4 OR C16+16K .95 .95 HE-C16+16K DEALE FAVOURITE FOUR FOR ALL THE FAMILY C16/PLUS 4 CAMB4 Version .95 Guada FLIGHT PATH 737 MOON BUGGY LAS VEGAS ZODIAC SKRAMBLE ,95 PETCH .95 CATACOMBS .95 MINIPEDES .95 STAR COMMANDER .95 3D TIME TREK .95 TRIVIA 1400 QUESTIONS ON SIX DIFFERENT TOPICS. ALL FOR ONLY .95 OUT ON A LIMB 48K ONLY ARCADE ADVENTURE LOADS IN 3 SECTIONS ONLY .95 TRADE ENQUIRIES Anirog Software Ltd, Unit 10 Victoria Industrial Park Victoria Road Dartford Kent (0322) 92513/8 MAIL ORDER: Payment by Cheque. P.O.. Visa or Access  16K RAM PACKS AT ONLY 64K RAM PACKS AT ONLY  "


"*ARCAL STAY ON LOG FR EXTRA POINTS TIMBER Are you lumberjack material? All bulging muscles and checked shirts? Well, if by chance you lack those two necessary assets. you can still show off your skill by wielding an axe at Bally Midway's latest game Timber. Two down and three to go. No time to stop for a break. You've got five trees to chop down before the boss blows his whistle loud enough to start a massive earth tremor. So get CRACKING. You start off in an empty back yard. Not a tree in sight, just a few clumps of grass. However, some potent magic fertilizer has been laid and, as the whistle blows a fully grown tree sprouts from the ground. Run up to it quickly and position yourself to one side. Now swing the axe by moving the chop joystick the faster you manipulate the joystick, the faster you will topple the tree. A word of warning. If you cannon into the tree, you'll knock yourself out and lose valuable seconds. You should find it easy Clare Edgeley. Ideas Corp's Arcade Spy, has been on the trail of the hottest new games to enter your Arcades. This month she reports on the Industry's biggest show of the year the ATEI. to fell all five trees before the ARCADE whooshing sound as your croft whistle blows, at which point the settles gently back on its buffers. boss wonders up to offer his SHOW '86 Shrike Avenger actually looks congratulations. However, should like something from outer space, you fail, the ground will start to Fancy being tossed around in a with its sleek, black, modern shake, the trees will shiver and simulated space battle? Or what cockpit mounted on an enormous you will fall to your knees as the about a trip in the wackiest pedestal. You could easily park o screen becomes a blur. The boss submarine ever invented? Or Mini in the space the game doesn't believe in half measures. maybe you'd prefer to run off takes up. I wonder whether The next screen is marginally and chase dragons in the hot inland arcade operators will have more difficult and introduces seat of Sega's latest venture into the space available to display three new elements — seven hydraulics? such a giant. trees to fell instead of five, an Everyone has different tastes Getting into the cockpit is angry bear with a beehive and a and this year's Amusement rather like climbing into a very pink featherless bird. Trades Exhibition International high sports car. With your legs As you rush around felling the the ATEI — had on show a range streched in front of you and trees, the bear starts to get of games to suit everybody leaning back at a slight angle irritated. Suddenly he can take Whether your skills lie in you prepare for take-off. The no more and hurls a beehive in intelligence and strategy, straight instructions state you have to your direction. Dodge this and shoot-em-ups or games that will destroy eight enemy drones, return to the job. If you are make you collapse laughing, they rother like meteors flashing past unfortunate enough to be hit, the were all there, and hopefully will your cockpit window into the bees will sworm around you and filter into your local arcades over depths of space, eat all your clothes, the next few months. You have both fire power and It's a sorry sight to see a redfaced, macho lumberjack in his undies. All this is time consuming leaving you rushed to finish the task. The bear is now seeing red and follows you from free to tree with his angry swarm. The pink bird is just another diversion. As you tell the tree he's nesting in, he leaps squawking from the branches and races around the yard. Catch him to earn 1,000 bonus points, take too long and the whistle will blow. Lovers of the fast shoot-em-up will be horribly bored by Timber but the simplicity of the game will probably attract more younger players, BEST ob Perhaps the games to steal the show were Sega's Space Harrier and Bally Sente's Shrike Avenger._ and the reason the cockpits twist, turn, move up and down in the same direction you pull your joystick. Operated by hydraulics, the simulators are the most realistic I've seen to date, and coupled with large speakers blaring out the sounds of the battle, you could almost lose touch with reality that is until your game time runs out. Then it's back to earth with a laser power, one to shoot the drones and other enemy craft, the other to laser blast fuel pods which hurtle towards you. Arrows around your target area pinpoint the direction of the meteors and, as you move the joystick, the craft hurtles from side to side to simulate that movement. It's a fabulous experience. There'll be more in future issues. Space Harrier is just as exciting and features a similar cockpit, though this one is easier to climb in and out of. You play "


"DE ACTION SUPER MARIO BROS. ce DUS ove SEGO 1985 a dragon-buster whose sole avoid those and aim for its purpose in life is to run and fly face. Time and again, it through as many object strewn disappears into the distance, only screens as possible, defeating a to turn round and have another fabulously colourful dragon at go at you. Fortunately, there is a the end of each section. continuous play facility, allowing The screens are all in 3D with you to put in more money to amazing technicolour landscapes continue playing from the point and excellent graphics. A you left off. Unless you are an multitude of objects, both on the expert, you will find it very ground and in the air come difficult. flying at you, those on the It proved almost impossible to ground you must avoid those in play Nintendo's Super Mario Bros, the air you must hit. They due to a couple of experts include flying boulders and faces hogging the game. At last of rock, mutant dragonflies and managed to sneak in and can butterflies, propeller shaped assure you that a high degree of objects which always come in dexterity and a lot of patience is threes, amongst others. needed to succeed. It is one of The game moves very fast, those games which looks very and to cap it all, you've got to simple and yet has a large battle with the dragon at the number of hidden features and end. It breathes great gouts of bonus screens to add an extra fire which threaten to engulf you degree of difficulty You play the part of a diminutive Mario who's got a thing about bricks and mushrooms. Leaping through screen after screen, help Mario destroy the brick walls by jumping up and punching them. Some sections of brick have a embedded in them hit those and you might release o mushroom which will help you grow in stature and strength. when you play Other sections of brick give The aim of the game is to bonus points. some release stars stomp on the insects as they run which allow Mario to stomp and across the screen to take a spit at marauding brown and chunk out of a piece of cheese grey mushrooms. in the middle of the screen. As There are dozens of levels, they run throught the grid, you mutant pelicans, funnels to jumpare supposed to stamp on the onto and slide down for extra corresponding square on the screens, Venus Fly Traps, grid ground. As you do so, a footprint like lifts, grassy columns to leap is etched on the grid. If an insect on and a host of other features happens to be inside thot square for bonus points. Super Mario it goes Splat! As the games gets Bros looks like a classic arcade faster and more than one insect game and one which should be appears, the player ends up a great success and remain in doing a strange type of rain the arcades for a long time. dance in an effort to stomp them Skill With Prizes games have out. See what I mean about just made their debut in a Trivia embarrassing! Still it's all good type game which pays out fun and everybody should try it. money. The amount you win Turbo Sub is from an American depends on various factors Company. Entertainment Sciences whether you answer the a long winded name but a questions quick enough to gain a very good game. It is the high enough score is perhaps the strongest sub game and is most important. The payout basically a shoot-em-up. You start depends on how much money is off on the surface of ocean in the machine of a given time. blasting monsters as they swim There are five categories to towards you, also skimmers as choose from Sports, General, they skim across the water. If Science, History/Geography and you are very good, you'll have Entertainment, and eight seconds the opportunity to shoot down in which to answer the objects on monoliths which rise questions. The speed of which out of the sea. you answer the questions is Further screens take you to directly related to your score the ocean depths where many so the faster you answer, the trials await you. To begin with larger your payout will be. It is you have to de-activate a hoped that the new SWP games forcefield to allow your sub to will give a boost to the video poss game industry. What makes it so interesting. Bally's Stompin' is a weird other than the fast and exciting game and one which you could game play and clear bright be almost embarrassed to play. graphics, is that the machine will Watching others is hilarious but judge for itself how proficient it's a different matter when it is you are, and change the level of you who are dancing around on difficulty accordingly, sometimes the floor. within the same screen. For The game consists of a square instance, if you are appalling. pad, divided into nine squares harder sections are missed out, on which you stand; those and a number of hints will correspond to the nine squares appear on screen depending. If which make up the screen. The you are very good, there will be game has a hold bar instead of extra features to each screen. a joystick, the reason is clear More about Turbo Sub soon. TOP 1000000 SCORE INSERT CAXIAS STAGE 15 "


"MOVIE SHA Helme dilnet-Gome 3D GANGSTERS HF OUR SERIEN SPECTRUM 48K Interactive bubble speech adds to the AMSTRAD drama of this true life detective movie Don't miss this picture it speaks for itselfl Bows SPECTRUM 48K daniwit Score ( itet obceton Street. Mwem. SNS Het 00483430 m m AMSTRAD Imagine Software is available from: WTISMITIEM MET WOOLWORTH LASKYS, Rumbelows Greens, Spectrum Shops and all good dealers, "


"T Presenting: PLANET EARTH'S ERRATIC ENGINEERS... HGH DUGRUNTERS WELL, I'M SURE 3 IT COULDN'T BE L SIDEAS FAULT,SIR... PXMOVE IT OUT WHERE WE CAN GET THE BACK OFF... YOU SEE MY PROBLEM? HALF THE 50FT-WARE'S WIPED THE OTHER HALF'S ON THE BLINK... POODID BUG HUNTERS  COPYRIGHT 1986 1RRY PARIS AL RIGHTS RESERVED. AHA! AN ULTRA-POWERFUL MEGA-MAGNET! YOU'VE BEEN DELIBERATELY SABOTAGED: I'LL NEED THE POS-NEG ANTI-MAG GADGET-GAUNTLETS FOR THIS! MAGNELS SULTA 357 "


"IL 33mad WAIT HERE WHILE 1 FETCH THEM FROM THE SHIP... AND STAY AWAY FROM THE MAGNETIC MINE... UH...WHAT'S HE MEAN... MAGNETIC WELL? YOU KNOW WHAT MINE MEANS, DON'T YOU? THAT'S WHY! SOON AS RED TOUCHED THE THING... IT TURNED HIM INTO A GIANT MAGNET!! I THOUGHT ITD MAKE HIM MORE ATTRACTIVE!) OPIS ER... SURER SIT MEANS... S 'IT BELONGS) TO ME! RIGHT! SO IT MEANS 'A MAGNETS THAT BELONGS TO YOU? GO ON... PICK IT UP! OKAY. WOHSINISOINS RUN FOR IT.X! (LET'S GET OUT BEFORE THE FUN STARTS! "


"KUWK! ({50 WHAT NOW? oo CHINK! TROUBLE 15... I THINK 21 OVERDID THE {MAGNETIC CHARMA GUESS WE JUST STICK AROUND... HI! HUMILIATING THIS ISN'T IT? OH NO! I'M GOING TO HAVE TO REPORT THIS... NOW, WHERE'S <EVERYBODYER... MISS MELISSA.. BIG RED'S DONE SOMETHING STUPID AGAIN... AND HOW! \"HOLD ON, I'LL BE RIGHT OVER...\" HURRY! THE MORE STUFF HE ATTRACTS THE MORE POWERFUL HE GETS! I THINK EVEN THE SHIP'S MOVING! OH, NONSENSE! IT COULDN'T... THERE! IT'S OFF! THE MAGNET, M/55 MELISSA! IN HIS RIGHT HAND! "


"THE FORCE An icon-driven multi-screen strategic simulation of what it's like to take on the most difficult task of all You may have saved the world from invading aliens many times over-but are you good enough to protect one small town from the criminal element within? You have at your command around 500 officers, 100 vehicles and a host of other units. All that goes to make up four city police stations in fact. All you have to do is keep the crime rate down... and the people happy. WIRR wil WAY ROSS LO SUN MIN GAMES Available for the Spectrum 48K and CBM64 Argus Press Software Ltd., Liberty House, 222 Regent Street, London WIR 7DB Telephone: 01-439 0666 ELW 400 Ang Press with Designed in consultation Britain's Senior Police Officers "


"WHAT? BUT... IT'S OFF! OFF OR NOT... (NOTHINGS GOING TO STOP THE S SHIP NOW... BUT IT COULDN'T... a (IT COULD URRA AD SWELL, LOOK ON S THE BRIGHT SIDE... (THE SHIPS ALL SMASHED UP I IBUT AT LEASTS BIG RED'S)) I HAS SORT OF HOPING IT'D BE THE OTHER WAY ROUND... OKAY... 3 COMING SOON: THERE'S SOMETHING NASTY AT IDEAS CENTRAL... SOMETHING VERY NASTY INDEED! AND THE BUG HUNTERS ARE ABOUT TO COME FACE FACE WITH IT!! BUT FIRST... YEAH, I SUPPOSE 50. BUT... SE GOD! "


"DYNAMITE! HOT RASPUTIN HOT RUNESTONE Ivan the Crusader's epic quest to end Rasputin's evil reign puts this isometric multi room arcade adventure in a world of its own The evil Orcs ravage the land of Belorn-you control the only characters who can save it. Stunning landscapes plus intriguing adventure in \"Venturescope HOTS MOT gerry the germ Hot Photos COSTA CAPERS E BODYPPEN Crazy multi-screen adventure-failed Germ Gerry proves his worth by laying waste to his victim's bodyuntil he reaches the heart... Ted's Great Summer Blow-Out-over 40 whacky screens as he tries to avoid sunstroke, drinks like a fish and blows all his hard-earned money! Ricord Four great, sizzling games from Firebird the all-new Hot Range. Available for the Spectrum, Commodore 64 and Amstrad see them at all good computer stores now! FIREBIRD MAIL ORDER Please state name of game, machine, cassette or disk and quantity required Enclosed crossed cheque/Pomade payable to FIREBIRD SOFTWARE.AL offers are subject to availability. Orders are despatched promptly Al prices inclusive of VAT and postage MAIL ORDER: AUNTIE KAY \"FREEPOST FIREBIRD, WELLINGTON HOUSE, UPPER ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON WC2H9DL. No stamp FIREBIRD SOFTWARE WELLINGTON HOUSE UPPER ST MARTIN'S LANE LONDON WC2H9DL T FIREBIRD IS A TRADEMARK OF BRITISH TELECOMMUNICATIONS pic "


"PER you ure in Fear the southeast Commodore Users 'Screen Star Computer Samar 'Super Nova ar Computer Weekly Pick of the Week CAN ALL THESE MAGAZINES GET IT WRONG? she like a Cassette: SPECTRUM 48K .95 ALL OTHERS .95 Disk: CBM 64 .95 Available from all leading software retailers OR order today by mail. Prices include postage and packing plus VAT. Zoidstar is gripped by war. Blue Zoid fights Red Zoid in a merciless battle for supremacy. Mighty Zoidzilla, Blue Zoid combat leader, lies dormant in the hold of your craft, ready for you to climb into its command capsule to merge minds with the powerful machine and take control of this bitter confrontation. Somewhere in the desolate landscape, the Red Zoids lie in wait! Landing preparations are complete. The descent begins. The task which follows will take you to the very limits of your capabilities and imagination. LIVE THE GAME. BECOME THE MACHINE! Latch Martech is the registered trade mark of Software Communications Limited, Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME PHONE: (0323) 768456 TELEX: 87465 EXIM Brighton E All NHOUSE prired 48K SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 BBC'B'  AMSTRAD  MSX  ATARI TOMY "


"Try beating our SpecDrum! Specy... .95 Drum As featured on \"Micro Live\" and \"Saturday Superstore\" Digital Drum System for the Spectrum Spec Drum INSTRUCTION MAJAL SpecDrum 8 DIGITALLY RECORDED REAL DRUM SOUNDS SIMPLE TO USE UP AND RUNNING IN ONLY MINUTES A TRUE DIGITAL DRUM MACHINE \"REAL TIME' OR ON-SCREEN PROGRAMMING COMPLETE WITH SOFTWARE EXTRA SOUNDS CAN BE LOADED FROM TAPE CREATIVE, EDUCATIONAL AND FUN THE MOST EXCITING PERIPHERAL EVER DEVELOPED DYNAMIC FILING SYSTEM — STORE OVER 1000 PROGRAMMED RHYTHMS TAPE SYNC FACILITY SONGS CAN BE SAVED ON TAPE POLYPHONIC COMPREHENSIVE MANUAL JUST PLUGS INTO MOST HI FI'S Available from Boel John Menzies High St. Stores and all good computer shops or direct from Cheetah Marketing. Latin Kit & Editor Now Available at .99 Cheetah Marketing 1 WILLOWBROOK SCIENCE PARK, CRICKHOWELL ROAD, ST MELLONS, CARDIFF TELEPHONE: CARDIFF(0222) 777337 TELEX:497455 (Export enquities-contact Cheetah direct) 92 "


"COACEU rut to complicat COMPETITION COMICS COMPETITION EARTH 550,624 LIGHT YEARS out to Lunch 118 SNEG NOENEGAL \"THIS IS THE MISSION OF THE U.S.S. OMNIBUS... TO TRANSPORT A CARGO OF FOOD SUPPLIES TO THE HUNGRY WORKERS ON THE PLANET NIBLONDIS... BUT THE CREW FIND THEMSELVES IN TROUBLE (WAS THAT ALL RIGHT There's no doubt you'll be spaced out with our Here's how to win. We've reprinted our Space Space Doubt competition. Doubt cartoon and we want you to make up an Top prize — thanks to our friends at CRL — is a appropriate caption to go with it. fantastic Toshiba Ghettoblaster. Sounds great, Send you answer, together with the coupon doesn't it? printed below, to Space Doubt Competition, The next 35 runners-up will receive copies of the Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Commodore 64 Space Doubt game. Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The closing The game is about a food ship travelling between date is March 16th and the editor's decision is earth and another planet which is in need of final. supplies. A meteor storm damages the ship, allowing aliens to enter the craft and start eating the food. C+VG/CRL SPACE DOUBT COMPETITION The hero of the game must get rid of these Name hungry aliens and patch up his ship. Address_ 12 "


"MICRO RE TA I LERS BERKSHIRE LONDON MIDDLESEX BRACKNELL COMPUTERS ARCADE SOFTWARE INNOVATIONS, COMPUTER & VIDEO 44 Broadway Unit 202, Shopping Hall 9 Harmondsworth Road Bracknell 0344 427317 Myrtle Road West Drayton Middlesex UB7 9JS 0895 420457 SOFTWARE CITY East Ham London E6 47 Cheap Street JENNINGS STORE 01-471 8900 Newbury 248 Hertford Road LOGIC SALES Berks RGI 45BX 0635 31696 Enfield 19 The Broadway Middlesex 01-804 1767 The Bourne CHESHIRE Southgate SURREY London N14 01 882 4942 SOFTWARE CITY NORTHWICH HOME COMPUTERS 14 Thames Street 79A Witton Street SHEKANA COMPUTERS Kingston Northwich 221 Tottenham Court Road 01-541 4911 Surrey KTI IPE Cheshire 0606 47883 London W1 01-800 3156 WEST MIDLANDS SOFTWARE CITY DERBYSHIRE 382 Kings Road MBC COMPUTER CENTRE London SW3 5UZ 01-352 9220 17-19 Lichfield Street FIRST BYTE COMPUTERS Wolverhampton 0902 29907/29021 10 Main Centre SOFTWARE STORE London Road YORKSHIRE 35 London Road Derby 0332 365 280 London SW17 01-685 1476 JUST MICRO 22 Carver Street Sheffield S1 455 0742 752732 ESSEX LOOK & SEE MANCHESTER 45 Belmont Bridge MINNIE MICRO COMPUTER CENTRE BUDGET SOFTWARE CENTRE Skipton 11/12 Eastern Esplanade 0756 60078 Southend MICRO BYTE 51 Fennel Street Essex 36 County Arcade Manchester M4 3DY 0702 615809/62033 061-834 2808 Leeds 0532 450 529 RECORDMANIA HEREFORDSHIRE MERSEYSIDE 14 Davy Gate Centre York 0904 33993 HONEYSETT COMPUTERS BLUE CHIP COMPUTERS RECORDMANIA 17 Union Street 77 Allerton Road Units 5/6, In-Shops Hereford HRI 2BT 0 432 279404 Liverpool L18 2DA 051-722 3037 Market Cross, Selby 0757 700988 DEALERS: If you would like to see your shop included in this new service, please call 01 251 6222 EXT 2461. ARCADE INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE BEST DISCOUNTS IN BRITAIN SPECTRUM COMIC BAKERY ORIGINAL UNUSED software COMMODORE 16 games for COMMANDO YIE AR KUNG FU available at discount prices for sale much cheaper than Spectrum, Commodore and original price, 13 games all ANY MASTERTRONIC TITLE Amstrad. Send for full list and together including Airwolf, prices contact David Roger, 38 Dark Tower, ACE, Tower of Evil, Hollybush Lane, Welwyn worth  altogether but will Garden City, Herts AL7 4JN. sell for  instead. Phone SPECTRUM SOFTWARE 0452 23408 after 6pm please including Chuckie Egg 2, ask for WASIM (all originals no Wizard's Lair, Hypersports, copies). PSI TRADING CAMPER Herbert's Dummy Run, CBM 64 GAMES to swap or Skooldaze, Boulderdash, Dark sell write to \"Cross Lea\", Star, Pyjamarama, Alien 8, Coldingham, Berwickshire, Knightlore, Underwurde, Scotland or phone 039 02 400 Avalon, Luna Jetman, Wheelie, asnd ask for Jim. Atic Atak, and many others, FOR SALE Spectrum 48K CRITICAL MASS worth over  will sell for  telephone 0243 692128. software including Frankie, Gyron, Shadowfire, and over 30 FOR SALE ZX Spectrum 48K other titles all leads , or including programmble swap for Atari 800XL with disk C16 Interface, Joystick and 10 BLOCKBUSTERS SOLD RUNI 8.75 drive or recorder. Phone 639 GYROSCOPE original games. All in excellent 2908 evenings. condition will sell for only . Phone William on (01) 472 FOR SALE, Vic 20+ and 3K BRUCE LEE 7712 after 4pm weekdays, all expansion packs, and C2N ADVENTURES OF BIG MAC day weekends. tape recorder.  of software 48K SPECTRUM, tape recorder, including Jet Pac, Skyhawk GREMLINS 4 GAME PACK AGF programmable interface, and Chess. Comes with 3 COMMODORE 64 ATARI 800XL Quickshot Il joystick,  books, carrying case and worth of excellent games, new joystick, 90 ono. Telephone cassette, brief case and mags. 01-730 3928 and ask for John. All worth , sell for only MEMOTECH MTX S12 64K  ono. Call 657 7468 for computer with Sanyo DR101 Paul. data recorder + 's worth SUPER BOWL DRAGONSKULLE ATARI GAMES. Bounty Bob, of software + 's worth All prices include post and packaging. Overseas orders please add [1 per tapel. Sot the Ball, Zaxxon, Mr Do, magazines, plus dustcover and If the game your require is not listed, please phone 01471 8900, 9.30 to 5.00 leads-worth well over  and many more. Cassette only 01-519 1540. 6.30 to 9.30 evenings Remember our prices are hard to beat Send cheque PO to: sell or swap. Ring urgent sale is needed so ARCADE INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE Wellingborough 678651 will accept  ono. Perfect Unit 202, Shopping Mall, Murtle Road, East Ham, London E6 afternoon or evening ask for condition, telephone 0747 Telephone: 01-471 8900 Mike 840243 MICROSELLS It costs only 1 to advertise in Microsell SUPERMAN ENIGMA FORCE BALLBLAZER MERCENARY WILLOW PATTERN TRANSFORMERS SUPERBOWL RISTOP SUMMER GAMES ROCK & WRESTLE ZORRO KORONIS ET BLOCKBUSTERS GOLD RUN ROCK & WRESTLE THEY SOLD A MELLON BACK TO SCHOOL ROLLER COASTER ANY MASTERTRONIC TITLE SPELLBOUND ENIGMA FORCE SHADOW FRE STREET HANN ENGTRIOER ELECTRA GLIDE 6.75 SUPER TEST WILD WEST 7.25 SABOTEUR 8.75 5.75 GLADIATOR STAR STRIKE BLOCKBUSTERS ROCKMAN KNIGHT RIDER TAU CETI TUTTI FRUTTI SPECTIEDE LORD OF THE RINGS SURF CHAMP SPITFIRE 40 OF THE MASK KARATE KID  RAMBO FUTE THEY SOLD A MILLION SPY HUNTER THE COONES BALL BLAZER BOUNTY ON KENNEDY APPROACH TABLA DANSA DOC WINTER GAMES NIGHTSKADE KING OF THE RING ZAXXON INT. KARATE WMRLYNURD 7,75 7.25 9.95 "


"+ Q COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU  I have just finished reading your excellent mag (January issue) which was voted Computer Mag of the Year in our school's annual survey. As soon as your mag came through the letterbox I caught it before it even hit the floor and rushed upstairs. I was looking forward to the map of the Bubblebus game, Starquake, as I had only bought the game a week before and was unsure how to complete it. However, when I opened the mag. I discovered that the map was less than one tenth the size of the area I had conquered. My best is 57 per cent with a hi-score of 245,450. I would appreciate it very much if someone could inform me of any other codes or tips on how to find the other half of the maze. lan Brownlee, Glenrothes, Fife. Editor's reply: Thanks for the accolade of Computer Mag of the Year, lan. We're sorry we could not show more of the Starquake map. Originally we had high hopes of printing every screen but, because the game is so vast, we found we would need pages at least six feet by four feet. Keep your eye on Ideas Central for hints and tips.  This is terrible! Some time ago you did a feature on D&D, then a live action roleplay feature on Treasure Trap now finally crashed and missed by a few, but having spawned a host of imitators then this Combat Zone game. The only real part of my hobby which is safe is the postal game! Actually a lot of people like the idea of action roleplaying but I find it too expensive. Well, I think I can help. In about 1980 Steve Jackson Games U.S. nothing to do with Fighting Fantasy Steve Jackson introduced a game called Killer. This was based on a cult game played in U.S. colleges in which players stalked each other. Anyone who knows 2000AD's Hunters Club, or has read The Most Dangerous Game will get the idea. This game uses rather simpler equipment than the pro-games. I must warn people that trying to emulate Combat Zone with an air-gun is horrifically dangerous and could lead to a tragedy. I have been horrified by talk of trying this and want to explain carefully about Killer. The game takes many forms, and often involves waterpistol shoot-outs, alarm clock \"bombing\" and subtle attemps at \"poisonings\". A Killer society is being formed in Bury St Edmunds and anyone wishing to join or start their own group can write to me at 22 Mitchell Avenue, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk. The rules are not commercially avalable so I'll supply any information needed. L. ). Romer, Bury St Edmunds. Editor's reply: DONT try to shoot people with a regular airgun. The Combat weapons are specially designed to be safe and are nothing like commercially available air-guns which can be lethal in the hands of inexperienced people. If you are interested in L.J's game why not drop him a line. . OK, Francis Crowther, who do you think you are saying that there is no \"solitary game worth buying\" for the Atari computer? Are you living on the same planet as the rest of us? If you want games worth buying then here is a list for you: Preppie, Rescue on Fractalus, Ballblazer, Koronis Rift, Spy vs Spy, Mr Do, The last Starfighter, Flip and Flop, Necromancer, Boulder Dash, Blue Max, Electra Glide, Shadow World. Open your eyes and take a look around at the software market. There's more to Atari than Star Raiders. Gary Tinsley, Sandbach Cheshire. can you say that Mutant Camels is ace? It is a totally pathetic game. Anyway it's been gathering dust on my shelf for yonks. Now I've got that off my chest, here're some more for you to chew on. 1) I would certainly pay .95 for a mag which gives loads of goodies away at Christmas. 2) What did you mean by \"Elite is now available for the Atari, pity nobody told Firebird.\" Why not give us a straight answer is it out, or is it not? 3) Thanks for the posters. They're great. I now have six all over my bedroom wall. 4) Give a lot of support to Atari owners, will you? You promised us that some months ago and all we get is two reviews and a competition. You really make us like the Speccy with all those reviews (I'm being sarcastic). So ends my first letter to you. Please, please don't torture us with loads of Speccy reviews in the future. On the other hand, I've decided that your mag is one of the best on the shelves. P Thacker, Walsall. Editor's reply: Elite is not, unfortunately, available on the Atari. holocaust rages overhead.  The trouble with your magazine is that it is too good. You have plenty of colourful and great advertisements which make great posters to cover coffee stains on the walls but when I run down the shops the dumb so-called assistant at WH Smith or Boots has never heard of the game, and never will by the look on its face. So I hear someone saying send off for the game in the post. But the only problem with that is the cost and the fact that by the time you've received it, it's been out in the shops two weeks ago. So I have though of an obvious solution to the problem. All you have to do is print the release date somewhere under the advertisement. Martin Windsor, Birmingham Editor's Reply: Some software houses are so vague about release dates they wouldn't dare print them on advertisements. Anyway, how come you're such a messy coffee drinker that it all ends up on the walls?  Hi, all computer freaks! My name's A Oskarsson and I live in Iceland. I've got an Atari 800XL and the average game for the Atari costs about $16. C+VG costs  here. But since I started to buy C+VG, I usually buy my games from the UK by post and I can hire some too. I like the postage service very much because I can get some games up to 40 per cent cheaper now. I would like to thank all UK software house, libraries and magazines for their service. A Oskarsson, Iceland  I have a few things to say about some of the things which appeared in you Mega Xmas Issue. Firstly, F Crowther wrote into Mailbag saying how he hadn't seen one game worth buying for his Atari. I have recently purchased a 130XED after four years of a 400. I have loads of games most of which are of an excellent standard. Doesn't he read the ads in your mag? Why don't you get off your backside and look at Koronis Rift, Hacker, Seven Cities, Bounty Bob and Mercenary, eh? How  After tearing my hair and shirt into pieces on a new adventure game, I finally shut down my computer and settled down to read the latest issue of your magazine. I really don't know how you guys can cram so many brilliant ideas in one magazine, Take Hot Gossip, for instance, it really keeps you in touch with the micro world. And your competitions (Wow! Look at those prizes) are brilliant. As I live in Australia, software here is very expensive. Can you please send me the software than you no longer want. Cheong u-Tang. South Perth, West Australia Editor's Reply: Sorry software is so expensive in the land of sheep, kangeroos, sheep, Fosters and sheep. We can't send you any of ours because it's all stashed away in the C+VG nuclear bunker 100 feet below Farringdon Road so we can pass a few hours merrily away as the  I am the owner of an Oric. Even though it is a good computer, I have decided I would like a new computer. My mum said if I did well in my exams I would get a Spectrum or CBM64. But so far I haven't done well. I think your magazine is great but please publish some more stuff for the Oric like a review or two, or perhaps a couple of listings. Alexander Blake-Davies, Bahrain. "


"MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY A SUBSIDIARY OF PLATINUM GOLD HARDWARE SOFTWARE Kempston Interface.......7.30 SERUNee Competition Pro.......... 14.00 Quickshot ll .................6.25 Konex Speedking........ 11.00 Elite 11.00 7.30  OVER 4,000 different titles available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, BBC, AMSTRAD, ATARI and MSX computers. * ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too. HIRE PRICES from only 60p INC P&P. * 20% DISCOUNT off all purchase software. * FREE CATALOGUES. * FREE HINTS AND TIPS  FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given) * ALL GAMES manufactures ORIGINALS with full documentation * OVER 6,000 satisfied members. * EUROPEAN members welcome. * LIMITED PERIOD ONLY FREE MEMBERSHIP.  Fully computerised system keeps track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with staff of 14 who know what the word service means. Backed by our own software company and programmers. 888888888 8 1811 5.70 Elite ATARI Cass Disk COMMODORE Cass Disk Rescue on Fractalus 7.30 11.00 Who Dares Wins Il....... 5.70 Mercenary 7.30 11.00 Superman. ... 7.30 Ball Blazer 7.30 11.00 11.00 13.20 Gt. American RR 7.30 11.00 Rupert and the Ice Pal.. 5.70 Seven Cities of Gold.... The Flintstones............ 5.70 Hacker Commando 5.70 Pinball Con. Set. 11.00 Music Construction Set 8.75 11.00 Music Con Set 11.00 They Sold a Million... 7.30 11.00 Red Moon... 5.00 Quake Minus One.......7.30 Murder on the Zinderneuf...11.00 Rambo... 6.70 Archon... Rock 'N' Wrestle ......... 7.30 Smash Hits 4..... 11.00 Racing Destruction Set Kennedy Approach ...... 7.30 11.00 The Never End. Story... 7.30 11.00 Zone X 7.30 Mercenary ... 7.30 11.00 Tapper ...... 7.30 11.00 Summer Games ll. 7.30 11.00 M.U.L.E... 11.00 Zoids Elektraglide 6.70 Black Wyche........ Summer Games 11.00 Winter Games .............. 7.30 11.00 Ghost Chaser.............. 7.30 Dragon Skulle......... ... 7.30 Whirly Nurd... Outlaws 7.30 Fighter Pilot..... 7.30 7.30 9.75 Kung-Fu Master ........... 7.30 11.00 AMSTRAD SPECTRUM Lord of the Rings......... 13.00 Gladiator Lords of Midnight ........ 7.30 11.00 Daleys Super Test....... 7.30 Winter Games.......... 7.30 Dun Durach ................. 7.30 11.00 Saboteur Never Ending Story...... 7.30 Sword and Sorcery ...... 7.30 Rambo 6.50 Never Ending Story..... 7.30 Scooby Doo ........... 6.50 Commando ................ 5.70 Arena 7.30 Transformers ... 5.70 Super Bowl..... 7.30 Turbo Esprit...... 6.50 Elidon.... Bladerunner............ 7.30 Beach-head 2........ 7.30 11.00 Gunfright 7.30 Superman................... 7.30 Enigma Force.............. 7.30 Rock 'N' Wrestle _ 7.30 Match Day.. 6.50 MSX Inter Rugby.... Yie Ar Kung Fu 2..... 12.30 Frank Bruno's Boxing... 6.50 10.50 Hyper Rally ... 12.30 Yabba Dabba Doo........ 5.70 Boxing 12.30 I of the Mask . .. 7.30 Soccer Sorcery 10.50 Ghostbusters Fighter Pilot 10.50 Boulderdash.......... 5.95 Street Hawk ............ 6.50 Sorcery ..... 7.00 Saboteur 6.50 Comic Bakery... 12.30 Please state name, address, title and micro clearly with order, Postage included UK. Overseas add  per order. Send s.a.e for software list. Cheques/POs payable to: J.J.B. SOFTWARE SERVICES 14 Loraine Crescent, Darlington, Co. Durham DL1 5TF Tel: (0325) 288102 6.50 6.50 MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY CVG 28 COLLEGE STREET, WORCESTER WR1 2LS TEL: 0905 611072 Please rush me my free catalogue stating machine. Name Address ........... IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII 5.70 12.30 For less than the price of one game You could get your hands on over 500 great titles! -----] (not to mention pop videos) Please tick the appropriate box Please send me more details about the Matrix Club Please enrolme as a Matrix member. I enclose a cheque for E6 made payable to Melrica Agencies My interest is Spectrum Commodore Amstrad Pop videos Name With top titles costing anything from  upwards to buy.renting your software from the Matrix Club makes very good sense. Our once only enrolment fee of  gives you access to over 500 titles on the Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad systems including all your latest favourites. Added to that is the opportunity to hire top pop videos at similar low rates, and using the same fast, easy to operate system. Use the coupon on the left to receive W full details of membership with no obligation or enrol right now to get a weeks free hire of one of our classic titles. SOFTWARE CLUB Address MATRIX Post to: Matrix Membership. 271 Stansted Road, Bishops Stortford, Herts. | CG3 "


"HOME MICROS PRINTERS At last! -REPAIRED All dot matrix printers of under 300 cps (this price does not include print heads which are subject to quotation) -REPAIREDACORN: BBC model B model B plus, Electron ADAM (keyboard only) AMSTRAD (keyboard only ATARI; 400 800 400XL, 800XL. 130XE. 420 260 AQUARIUS, COLECOVI. SION, COMMODORE; VIC20. C16. C64, C128. plus 4. SX64 CPU (keyboard only) DRAGON; 32, 64, EINSTEIN, ENTERPRISE; 64. 128. LYNX; 64, 128 MEMOTECH, ORIC; atmos PSION organisor SINCLAIR pectrum, Spectrum + SPECTRAVIDEO, TANDY TRS 80 model 1. All MSX computers TELEVISIONS & MONITORS DITER DISK DRIVES -REPAIREDAll televisions and monitors up to 16in. (this price does not include tubes which are subject to quotation) -REPAIRED All 3in., 3% in., 5% in. disk drives including Amstrad on-board disk drives (this product does not include drive heads which are subject to quotation) All repairs include VAT, labour, parts, 6 month warranty, collection and delivery. * Full 6 month guarantee on * Full soak test before despatch repairs * FREE collection and delivery * No extra charge for parts in mainland UK Phone TODAY We Collect TamMOROW! phane Tomay-we, OI-398 8055 ADVERTISEMENT INDEX .............97 ..81 ........94 JJB.............. JR.... Albany ... Anirog... Arcade International Software........... . Argus ............... 12-13, 59, 88 Ariolasoft. Logic Sales ..33 Bargain Software............ 38 Cascade Games Cheetah ............. Computmart....... CRL . . *** . .. Martech ....... Match................ Matrix..... Megasave.... Melbourne House ........ Micro-Ads ....... Micro Mail. Micronet 800... Micro Retailers .......... Microsell ....... Midland Computers.. Mikro-Gen ... Mirrorsoft ..... .......... Database Publications ....... Durell. 40 .94 Elite ..... English Software ........ Euromax.... .96 41 .18 Nowo Ocean... ....OBC, 16, 62 Firebird .28 Shekhana ............ Softek....... System 3 .............. Gargoyle Games. ............. Goodbyte ...... Hewson Consultants........... ***** . . ...... ........... 64 Ultimate .................. Unitsoft...... U.S. Gold ...... Imagine .......... ..........6-7, 84 .............34, 56, 73, IBC "


"NEXT MONT IN Mercenary madness has gripped the nation's gamesters It seems everyone with a C64 or an Atari is trying to outwit the inhabitants of the planet Targ. But lots of you are encountering problems 50 IDEAS CENTRAL contacted the Mercenary masterminds at Novagen and asked for the lowdown on the lowlife on Targ. Next Issue we've got an Illustrated games player's guide to Mercenary, created by Novagen's Bruce Jordan and Mercenary programmer Paul Woakes. If you're a real Mercenary you can't afford to miss it. Check our your nearest IDEAS CORP supplier on February 16th! ON SALE MARCH 16th Born in the U.S.A.1 A special bulletin from over the Pond. Including: The Atari 520 ST and Commodore's Amiga we tako a look at these two super-computers, plus some of the games software available. Will these machines change the face of games playing as we know it? Find out next issue. Yes, the long awaited Scooby Do Competition will appear next issue. Scooby goodies and software up for grabs! PLUS JA special Spectrum mega-listing next issue called the Wizard of Tallyron. It's a D&D style adventure created by Mike Turner of Star Dreams who also wrote the Sandman adventure praised by Keith Campbell. If you don't want to key in the listing and it is a biggie we've got a special offer on tape copies of the game EXCLUSIVE to C+VG readers. More Stuteside sensationalism In Letter from America, plus a look at Star Blazer, the latest sci-fi live action role playing game to rock the U.S. Remember the Atari vcs dedicated games machine? This defunct machine was the item of hardware that changed many a games player's life. Now the Japanese company Nintendo aro breathing lito back Into the dedicated games machine with their brand new Entertainment System. Read all about It next Issue — and prepare to start saving your pennies! Coming soon to a C+VG near you: Tour of the Universe! Zoids and Elite player's guides. The Think! challenge. Amiga games software. The Nintendo Games machine ... and much, much more in the months to come. Why not place a regular order with your newsagent TODAY! TWISTER OFFER T-SHIRT OFFER Twister, System Three's eagerly awaited new game previewed in last month's C+VG, will be released soon. And, thanks to IDEAS CORP and System Three you could save some cash if you want to get your hands on this neat new game for the Spectrum, C64/128, Atari, Amstrad and BBC. If you were sensible and kept last month's Twister Coupon you'll be able to snip out coupon two below and send both of them to Computer and Video Games, Twister offer, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU together with a cheque for  made payable to System Three Software that's a whole  off the .50 shop price! If you missed last issue or decided to spend your 98p on something less sensible than C+VG we'll Want to look cool on the beach this summer? Want to impress your friends as you sip cocktails around your pool in the back garden? Want to achieve instant success with the opposite sex? Then all you need is an exclusive C+VG Big Red designer t-shirt as worn by Melissa Ravenflame and her IDEAS CENTRAL squad. Normally only C+VG prizewinners can get their hands on one of these trendy t-shirts. But now, thanks to the IDEA CORP, other mere mortals will be able to dress to kill in a Big Red shirt. Over the next three Issues we'll be printing special coupons which will entitle you to anything up to  off one of these exclusive items. Snip out the coupon below and keep it until next month when we'll print the second coupon. Then you can send away for a Big Red t-shirt at the special IDEAS CORP price of just .50. C+VG/SYSTEM 3 TWISTER OFFER cheque or postal order for  if you still want to take advantage of the offer. Which only goes to show how sensible it is to book a regular order for C+VG with your newsagent. We not only bring you the best magazine in the world but we also save you money! Name OFFER Address ........... TWISTER COUG/SPECIAL OFFER/L1 OFF I enclose a cheque/PO for C+VG Name...... Address.......... I enclose .................tokens Machine owned .............. COUPON NO.2 Tel. Send to: C+VG T-SHIRT OFFER, WARD LESTER, 14 HERTFORD ROAD, LONDON NI "


"Living on the edge of an Sitting on a mother lode of eternal galaxy battling with rich mining deposits, a new opponents who seem to be quadrant called the Parvin reading your mind, you are Frontier,isamecca for settabout to captain your shiplers; entrepreneurs on both through one of the great sides of the law; and some edge-of-your seat advenof the worst scum in the tures of the 35th Century universe. These space carrions have been the scourge of the shipping lanes; and as things stand now they are on the brink of starving out the entire quadrant and holding it hostage, No wonder the inhabitants of the Parvin Frontier will pay almost anything to anyone who can get through to them with a freight ship full of supplies from the outside world. But it's a tall order to fill, even for the experienced hacCO (FULL) QONER Ack. Heap. Scan. Nay. Eng. Rep. Manual HEAPONS FIRING ORDERS LIST ID Shots Heapon Target Pri Status Missiles at B out-range Blasters at E in-range Cannons at broken Thermos at no power Blasters at in-range Cannons broken OM mmvO0O COM COMPANY captain of the Psi-5 Trading Company; because, needless to say, these marauders are not going to take too kindly to any last ditch efforts to spoil their little intergallactic carnage. So, if you're ripe for a stiff challenge and feel comfortable in the role of Space Freighter Captain your ship just came in. Choose your crew carefully. For 10 years Al Zott the heat of the battle? has been shooting enemy As captain of the Space attack cruisers to smitherFreighter, you must conseens, but will his hot femper tantly delegate authority be your final undoing? Your throughout the mission. choice for weapons expert with space outlaws on the is critical. You have a wealth horizon, what do you repair of talent to choose from; first-the defence shields, but will your pick hold up in or your weapons?  Keyboard or Joystick Controlled  Choice of Specialist Crew  Inter-ship video link  External view port On board Computer Navigational Cockpit Superb weaponry Manufactured under licence by US Gold Lid Unit 10. The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. *Screen as seen on Commodore 64 64 Accolade U.S. GOLD "


"REVEL IN THE THRILLS & SPILLS OF AUTHENTIC AMERICAN FOOTBALL The official NFL authorised computer simulation Bowl Final live on Watch the GAME DELAYED TO FEATURE SUPE Channel 4 on January 26th 1986. BOWL XX TEAMS. RELEASE FEBRUA 1995 FOR THE SPECTRUM 48K, SPECTRUM +, COMMODORE CAST AMSTRAD All Machine Formats NFL Ocea TM +  1941 NFLP Inc. All Rights reserved. JANUARY 26, 1986 Ocean Software Limited authorised user LOUISIANA SUPERDOME, NEW ORLEANS wa lima Acante Street Manchester M 5NS Telanhone: 061-632 6633 Telex 469977 Ocagns G "

