"TER AND FREE! COMPUTER FREE! ERLEM GOL GAMES GALORE! ISSUE 136 MARS-M7993 EO CAM MES CVE-2 HAND-HELD MAG! .95 DM11.00 S$11.70 $5.95 6000L 68.00ASCH STAR WARS FEEL THE FORCE ON GAME BOY! INSIDE ALIEN 30 MACDONALD LAND PREDATOR 2012 ARCADE ROBIN HOOD STRIDER 2 JOUSTO MORE: MORE! MORE DEO GAMES GAME BOY GAME GEAR LYNX GT MEGADRIVE MEGA GAMES! SUPERKICKOFF MICK AND MACK SUPER STAR WARS SUPER NES MASTER SYSTEM NINTENDO SPIDERIUS AND THE AMIGA NEO GEO. PC ENGINE MEGA CD ST/PC  y GAME GEAR LYNX Spider-Man, X-Men: TM &  Marvel Entertainment Group Inc. All rights reserved ISSN 0261-3697 03 > INSIDE: CYBERNATOR PGA TOUR GOLF 2 STREETFIGHTER JIMMY CONNORS TENNIS TINY TOONS INDY 4 FATAL FURY SLEEPWALKER CHAOS ENGINE TERMINATOR 2 ECCO AND MORE! 217702611369055| "


"TM Nintendo ETERTAI SYSTEM\" STOP GAME BOY SIZED IT. A AUSED V000000000000 OOOO0000000 \"If you haven't played Lemmings yet then this is a must buy. A true Classic\". \"Anyone who has played Lemmings will tell you it's possibly the most playable game of all time\". GB ACTION 92% Original Nintendo Seal of Quality Ocean Lemmings is a registered trademark of Psygnosis Limited OCEAN SOFTWARE LIMITED 2 CASTLE STREET CASTLEFIELD MANCHESTER, M3 4LZ TELEPHONE: 061 832 6633 FAX: 061 834 0650 Nintendo and Nintendo Entertainment System are trademarks of Nintendo. "


"0:43 0:42 IC -suuru onter somC SHUT U oner sonic tesn fer pamias chica r sonic t-sca offer sonic t-sl Shirt C-shir soloff njonid t offel t-shit sonsh hirtonic offe t-sh C t-s Soy ONIC X4 o oni B ffel SONIC -shir According to the Chinese calendar 1993 is the Year of the Hedgehog. One hedgehog in particular has his sights set on global domination by the end of this Annus Hedgehogis Segas' very own Sonic. Now you have the opportunity to display your devotion to possibly the grooviest video games character in history with one of five HOW TO ORDER fantastic Sonic T-shirts! U s Please complete the coupon below and return to Sonic Offers, P.O. Box 1842, London N6 5AS. Please ensure Available in Small, Medium, Large or even Extra your cheque/Postal Order is made payable to Home Large for jumbo fatties, each shirt features an eye Entertainment. Postage and packing is charged at catching design guaranteed to be the envy of hedge .00 per item. All t-shirts are 100% cotton and hog fans the world over, and you don't even need to machines washable. This offer applies to UK pur<scour the shops to find one! t olier Schase scour the shops to find one! chasers only. Offer closes 3 Ist May 1993. .er sonic Please enter quantities required in boxes) Item D available in Large and Extra large only Send to: Sonic Offers, PO Box 1842, London N6 5AS. I enclose my cheque (address on back) made payable to: HOME ENTERTAINMENT or please debit my AccessNIA Account with the sum of .. my card number is: ITEM S IZE PRICE EACH & TOTAL t-shiv sedemars Tor m iton shirt offsmi on ice t-shir somiems t-shirt offer solc Tank Fast shirt (10.99 r sonic Card Expiry date. Please use Block Capitals Me/Mrs/Miss... Address.... TA Half Face .99 B Sonic Spin .99 C Think Fast .99 D Chequers .99 E Sonic Machinery $14.99 Please add .00 per item, postage and packing TOTAL Tratame_com Postcode ... Signature Orders are normally despatched within 2 to 3 days, please allow 28 days for delivery. Full money back guarantee on goods returned unworn MM: Ct-shirt offer sonic tushirt a somic t-sh "


"SUPER NINTENDO 16 SUPER STAR WARS Action all the way in Super Star Wars page 16! Luke, Han and the rest of the team hit the Super Nintendo with a vengeance! One of the best games ever has arrived, and The Force is most certainly with it! 20 SPIDERMAN AND THE X-MEN 6 WORD UP! The new Ed is here at last! Garth's nestled comfortably into the hot-seat, ready to spout forth about all things CVG! He's also inviting ten lucky readers to come to CVG and have his job for a day (but not his big, comfy chair). 8 NEWS The big names! The top games! We've got them all and more in the concise yet strangely informative section of the magazine we call News. TJUST HOPE I'M NOT TOO LATE!.. 14 THE MENACER READ ALL ABOUT IT Sega's latest creation, the Menacer light gun, has been available for a couple of months now but just how good is it? We give you the full SP on the hardware AND software in this top feature! Superhero spills in thrills with Spidey and the X-Men page 20! CONTENTS 30 THE CVG QUESTIONNAIRE! It's time, once again, for you to tell us what you want to see in CVG! What's hot? What's not? We want to know the lot! And if you're lucky, you could win a prize blimey! He sticks to ceilings and wears dubious body-stockings, but Spiderman is one smart superhero! Spidey's got to rescue the Uncanny X-Men from the clutches of the evil Arcade in this massive platformer! 32 YOB'S MAILBAG He's loud! He's proud! He's embarrassing in a crowd! He's YOB, and once again the lad's cobbled together another collection of tawdry scribblings for your merriment! 26 JIMMY CONNORS' TENNIS Never too old to coin it in off the back of his name, aging racqueteer Jimmy Connors stars in this latest Super Nintendo tennis sim. Is it Game, Set and Match to James, or does Super Tennis manage to hang on to its crown? 41 THE CVG VALENTINE GAME! Become the CVG boys and attempt to win the attentions of lovely Jenny in this humourous, tounge-in-cheek, board game! It's all in good fun and it's got the approval of Jenny herself, so we should be alright. 28 CYBERNATOR 42 FAB PULL-OUT POSTER Corks! Another fine and dandy poster for you to rip out and stick on your wall! And if you get tired of it, you can always turn it over and play the amusing yet poignant game on the back! 70 CHEAT MODE Our man Anglin's come up with the goods again! He may be prone to losing the odd news file, but young Paul's tops when it comes to supplying only the very best hints and tips what a star! 80 HOTSHOTS You'll pop your cork when you see some of the games coming your way in the coming months! Mutant League Football and Flashback are just two examples of this issue's preview perfection check 'em out! Also known as Valken, here is one blast 'em up par excellence! Big robots and bigger guns make Cybernator a title that's so hot you'll have to wear asbestos gloves to play it! "


"50 THE MAGICAL QUEST STARRING MICKEY MOUSE 46 PGA TOUR GOLF 2 Fore! Play a round on your Megadrive with the sequel to the brilliant PGA Tour Golf! Computer golf comes kicking and screaming into the '90's, courtesy of EA! EDITOR: GARTH SUMPTER There was this girl that I was trying to make jealous by getting her mates to tell her that I fancied this other girl. Trouble is, she didn't get jealous at all. She just came over and smacked me full-on in the teeth. 62 MICK AND MACK GLOBAL GLADIATORS Disney said there'd be days like this! The full story on page page 50. Mickey Mouse debuts on SNES in a graphically stunning platform adventure which also stars some of his Disney chums! Would Walt come out of his cryogenic chamber to play it? Just read the review and find out for yourself! DEPUTY EDITOR: PAUL RAND I fancied this girl like rotten for ages and, one day, I plucked up the courage to ask her out. She said yes and I took her to meet all my mates. Unfortunately, they started calling her a 'Bin Scrounger' and other nasty names. I never saw her again. But at least I didn't get chinned off a lass, like Garth did. McDonalds goes green! See Mick And Mack on page 62 Save the world from pollution in the first eco-friendly Megadrive game! Control cool kids Mick and Mack through dirty old McDonald Land and clean up the town! 54 TINY TOON ADVENTURES 68 T2 THE ARCADE GAME ART EDITOR: JON BILLINGTON I was going out with one of the girls from work. On Valentine's Day, I got this card and I thought that it was from someone else. Imagine my disappointment when it turned out it was from my girly all along. . CPU DESIGNER: JENNY ABROOK I went out with this boy once, and he seemed great. Unfortunately, he was a very sad man who reckoned he knew where we were going but, in actual fact, got us completely lost. He's probably still driving around Prague as we speak! They're tiny! They're toony! They're on page 54! Hasta la Vista, baby! T2's torn apart on page 68. Now the SNES has a version of the fab Steven Spielberg cartoon! Join Buster Bunny and pals for small animal-related shenanigans! AMIGA 58 FATAL FURY Another Neo Geo-to-Super Nintendo convert, is Fatal Fury a right roistering laugh? Or is it crap, like the others? There's only one place to find out that CVG review! 49 STREETFIGHTER 2 Ryu, Ken and the rest of the gang hit the Amiga and how! US Gold's convert of the mega-popular arcade game looks the part, but how does it play without a sixbutton joystick? STAFF WRITER: PAUL ANGLIN I've never had a bad experience in love before. They've all been lovely and great. And I am a lying little sod and daren't tell anyone the truth because they'd laugh at me for a long, long time. MEGADRIVE 24 ECCO THE LPHIN 56 INDIANA JONES AND THE EATE OE ATLANTIS The man with the hat is back! This time, he's searching for the lost city of Atlantis in his finest adventure yet! Gorgeous graphics and engrossing gameplay are the watchwords here! STAFF WRITER: STEVE KEEN I got a Valentine's card off this girl. It was a real rock-and-roll card, and I thought \"Crikey! This is for me!' The card had a telephone number on it, so I phoned and arranged to meet this mystery miss. When she turned up, she had a flowery dress on and ribbons in her hair. I ran away 'cos that's just not my scene. 66 THE CHAOS ENGINE MANAGING EDITOR: STEVE JAMES I've got no time for Valentines or stuff like that. I've got to shuffle the papers while the CVG team get up to all manner of love-related sauciness. Life's just not fair. Hurumph. Ecco splashes onto page 24 Poor Ecco's all alone in the wide, blue ocean, and he's got to track down his family! You're the dolphin star in this, possibly the best arcade adventure ever on the Sega! The Bitmap Bros' latest, Chaos Engine is reviewed on page 66! 36 SUPER KICK OFE Most conversions of the Best Football Game Ever have been less-than excellent, but this Megadrive version is the business! See for yourself when we study its form! The Bitmap Brothers' latest and possibly greatest-release is finally here! Victorian hard men blast seven shades out of everything that moves in an arcade-cum-strategy stunner! ADVERTISING MANAGER: Jim Owens PRODUCTION ASSISTANT: David Nye SECRETARY: Joanne Briar MARKETING MANAGER: Marc Swallow MARKETING EXECS: Sarah Hilliard PUBLISHER: Gary Williams MANAGING DIRECTOR: Terry Pratt SUBSCRIPTION AND BACK ISSUE ENQUIRIES (INCLUDING GO!) CVG Subscriptions, PO Box 500, Leicester LE99 OAA Tel: 0858 810510 Editorial and Advertising Castle: CVG Towers, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU Tel: 071 972 6700 Fax: 071 972 6701 Printed By: Kingfisher Web Ltd, Fengate, Peterborough COLOUR BY: PrePress, London EC1 COVER: Reproduced with kind permission of Marvel Comics DISTRIBUTED BY: BBC Frontline (c) COPYRIGHT: COMPUTER and VIDEO GAMES 1993 ISBN No: 0261-3597 CVG DISCLAIMER: CVG cannot be held responsible for errors, omissions, misprints, mistakes etc, and if there are any it's someone else's fault anyway. They all know who they are. And if anyone wants to reproduce any of the artwork without permission that's fine. We'll sue later! "


"WORD UP! O STUSSY EEWWWAAAY! Flippin' eck, these CVG boys really know how to break in a new editor. It's taken me almost a month of severe arm strain and finger-bustin blasting to get good enough at Streetfighter for the boys to allow me into the sacred CVG games room! But now that I've finally battled my way past the whinging prima donnas and settled down in one of the comfier recesses of the games room, all that's left to do is to say a big hello to all the billions of CVG readers. Oh yes, and DET welcome you to the world's biggest selling computer games magazine. So now I'm finally here, is anything going to change? Well, yes and no. We'll be bringing you all the very best games, the most independent reviews (we've got our own opinions, unlike some other mags) and we'll continue to sort out the rot from what's hot. And CVG's going to get BIGGER! Yes, the biggest and best will be getting even bigger and better adding more REAL reviews than any other computer mag. How can we do it? It's easy. When you're the best you can do anything!!! GARTH COMPETITION WIN A DAY AS THE CVG EDITOR hink it's easy do you? Think it's real simple to produce the world's best games mag AND try to stay ahead of the CVG boys? Well now's your chance to prove just exactly how well you know computer games and the magazine market. We're going to be asking TEN lucky winners to come down to CVG towers for the day and see just how you'd would hack it as the editor. You'll be invited to meetings with all the top EMAP bods (including a visit from Lord EMAP himself if he can make it out of the old peers home!) and be treated to an executive lunch, get to play the boys at a few games and spend the day with all the staff! All expenses are paid for the day and we'll even throw in a few games for good measure and make sure we get all your photos so we tell everyone how good (or crap) you were. ter simply write a Garth-like report detailing why you think you're the best qualified for his job. Stick your name, address and telephone number on it and send it to; IF GARTH CAN DO IT, THEN IT COULDN'T REALLY BE CONSIDERED TO BE HARD WORK, COULD IT? CVG. Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, EC1R 3AU to arrive here no later than the 15th of March. CVG 006 "


"Dixons Dixons Dixons Dixons WANNA WINYERI SASH Dixons Dixons Suoxia Suoxia Suoxia Suoxia EASY! EASY! Dixons TEAR LINE THIS RIP ALONG Ecco, Edmond Honda, Mr Wand Tails are all characters in video games. Which video games are they from? BUY ANY SEGA, NINTENDO OR ATARI GAME CARTRIDGE BEFORE 27th FEBRUARY '93 AND YOU COULD WIN YOUR MONEY BACK! Simply answer the questions in the Entry Form below, then complete the Tie Breaker. Rip out the Entry Form, fill in the details when you buy your next game cartridge at Dixons and post to the competition address below. The 100 lucky winners will be notified by post. Good Luck! Competition Rules: The contest instructions form part of the Rules. Only UK residents unconnected with Dixons Stores Group and their servants or What's your name?. agents are eligible for entry. All parts of the Entry Form must be How old are you?.. correctly completed. The money-back prize will be What's your address?.... awarded to the first 100 entrants with correct forms who, in the opinion of an independent panel of judges, provide the most apt and original completion of the Tie ..................... . . Breaker. The judges' decision is Postcode.. final and no correspondence will be entered into. Competition What's your phone number?. closes 27th February 1993. The winners will be notified by 1st Get the store to fill in this bit: April 1993. Dixons reserve the right to request proof of purchase Title of Game Cartridge from any winner. A list of winners will be available after 1st April by How much it cost..... sending a stamped addressed envelope to the competition When you bought it .... promoter. PROMOTER, Dixons Stores Group Ltd, 46-50 Uxbridge Road, Ealing, London W5 2SU Ecco Edmond Honda Mr W Tails ....... That was easy wasn't it? Now complete the Tie Breaker in 10 words or less. If I won my money back I would What games system do you own? If you're under 16, get your Parents or Guardian to sign 'ere.. Post your stamped entry form to: Home Electronics Marketing, Dixons Stores Group Ltd, 46-50 Uxbridge Road, Ealing, London W5 2SU CVG Dixons Branch stamp Dixons No 1 FOR GAMES SOFTWARE "


"JUNGLE JAPES NEWS\" Hold onto your hat and fasten your goggles, the world's greatest Megadrive shooter is getting a sequel! Yup, Desert Strike 2, or Jungle Strike as it will be known, is currently being programmed by those top folk at EA. The game is well into production and, as you can see, it's looking a bit smart. EA are said to have included a stack of new features such as night missions. Hopefully we'll be able to give you a full preview very soon. MARVELLOUS MEGA MOUSE What with the Mega CD just around the corner, or maybe a couple of corners, joypad makers Ascilware have unveiled their latest creation a smart Megadrive mouse. Although this may seem a little useless, think how helpful it will be when playing all those PC conversions on your Mega CD! I mean, you try playing Indy and the Fate of Atlantis with a joypad! The other advantage is that, by turning the mouse upside down, you can turn it into a trackball, which could be a laugh when playing Kick Off! . On it's back with a ball in the air it's a trackball, Full of coconuts Jungle Strike from EA! MORTAL MEMORABILIA Remember that so-so coin-op called Mortal Kombat? For some reason, it seems to have had a real impact on the arcade world; such an impact in fact that the people behind it, Midway, have decided to launch a vast range of Mortal Kombat goodies. These include such delights as a limited edition comic book, Mortal Kombat mugs, T shirts and all sorts of other Kombat memorabilia! For those of you interested you can get hold of a catalogue from the US by writing to: Mortal Kombat, 1340 W. Irving Park Road, Suite 414, Chicago, II 60613. As if that wasn't enough Mortal Kombat will be appearing on your Megadrive in the near future via Flying Edge! The game is still very much in the early stages but it could be interesting we'll keep you posted. FUNNY PADS! FIGHT.. A lovely little tit-bit to fuel the the minds of all would-be Megadrive Streetfighting champions out there! Sega have just unveiled their sixbutton joypad in Japan. There's no sign of a UK release date yet-in fact, Sega UK haven't even heard of it officially, but here's a CVG sneaky peek at the little feller to prove it! The pad is a touch smaller than a standard Megadrive controller, with the six buttons arranged in exactly the same fashion as the Streetfighter ll coin-op, making play an obscene amount easier. The joypad should be available from importers very soon and a UK release won't be too far behind; expect to pay around .99 for the widget. BUZZ! BUZZ! BUZZ! ON THE TAP The latest shoot 'em up awaiting release on the SNES has to be one of the weirdest yet. Bells and whistles, or Twin Bee as it will be known over here, originally started life in the arcades. After a while it moved onto the PC Engine and then kind of stopped there, Konami have now snapped up the license and are working on the game as we speak! There's no release date as yet, but if the Engine version is anything to go by it'll be worth the wait. From what we've heard, the strange characters and mind-boggling, effects that made the game such a hit will remain. More info as and when! Ever had a load of mates over and they've got a bit peeved 'cos you're hogging the SNES? Well now up to five players can battle away at any one time! The device houses four adaptors which plug into the player two port (the fifth player plugs into port one) and, provided you have enough joypads, it's fun all the way. The first game to make use of the adaptor is Jimmy Connors' Tennis, which allows you to play doubles with each player under human control. Also pencilled in for adaptor compatibility is a five player souped-up version of the PC Engine classic, Bomberman! It's not yet decided whether the adaptor will be sold separately or with Bomberman 93. When we know you'll know. vG 003 "


"MULTISYSTEM THE SEQUEL You may remember a few years ago we reported on a spanky new piece of kit labelled the Konix Multi System, which was never manufactured as Konix ran out of money. However, UK company MSU, in conjunction with Taiwanese firm TXC, are currently working on a totally revamped machine incorporating all the best features from the Konix albatross. And what can you expect this new wonder-gadget to do? Well, the 32-bit 30Mhz unit will be based on existing CD gaming technology and incorporate Full Motion Video, for one! There are already over a dozen games straining at the reins to be released. And just in case you thought those smart Jap lads got all the top goodies, the best news is that the console will be released in the UK before it's seen anywhere else in the world HURRAH! Sega seem ready to strap various bits of their hardware onto anyone else's product who'll have it! First there was the Mega PC, and now the console boys have struck a deal with electronic giants Pioneer. Pioneer are ready to launch their own range of Laserdisc players, but the one attracting most interest is the Mega LD pack. The machine will be able to play Megadrive cartridges, CDs, CD games and Mega Laserdiscs, a new product which stores Sega games on 12 inch Laserdiscs. If that isn't enough, Japanese electronics biggies NEC have produced another plug-in adaptor that will allow you to play TurboGrafx CDs and game cards. Will this be the first CD all-format play station? We'll keep you posted. DEVIL(ISH) RELEASE Following hot on the heels of their massive Amiga success, Zool (which is just about to be released as a coin-op!), Gremlin are releasing Litil Divil for the PC and Amiga. The game stars Mad Mo, a young explorer who stumbles over an ancient portal to a lost city in his cellar! The dim chap drinks from a pool of water and is transformed into a salivating monster who's only chance of returning to his previous form is to find the Fountain of Normality. Graphics look stunning and every one of the huge characters Divil comes across is beautifully animated and coloured. The Underworld is split into five levels, each comprising of ten puzzle rooms connected by tunnels and corridors. During his explorations the hero is pursued by a hideous creature called the Entity: spend too long on a puzzle and the beast will drag him off to a fate worse than death! Litil Devil will be out in April, and we'll be bringing you the full lowdown soon! Football fortunes as Dino Dini transfers from his last club which spawned Kick Off... Devilishly good at having some wicked fun Gremlin's latest! DINO'S KICKED OFF! FLOAT LIKE A BUTTERFLY! STING LIKE A BEE! Dino Dini, of Kick Off fame, has split with his long-time publisher Anco just before the release of the fabled Kick Off 3. The football fanatic, who has been snatched up by Virgin, is now working on the title for the company. Currently under the working title of Dino Dini's Goal!, the new game will be radically different from its predecessors in that players will be able to choose between sideways and vertically scrolling pitches, two sprite sizes and an automatic zoom feature that will allow you to set up camera positions on the pitch to scope in at preset moments and enlarge the action! Dino's stuck the usual ton of European teams and players into the game and given each footballer adaptable statistics like stamina, aggression, resilience, accuracy, shooting, tackling and goal keeping. It should be fab and it's out in April on the Amiga and Atari ST, with a Megadrive version to follow! Virgin have picked up the rights to use Ali's moniker in a brand new boxing game! Muhammed Ali Boxing has been plugged into the office Megadrive for a few days and if the finished version is anything like the early chips we've got, this could shape up to be the best ever game of its type! Featuring both sprites and vector graphics, the player can choose to control any one of ten worldranked fighters, including Ali himself, and take on the best in either an exhibition bout or a full tournament. Featuring extremely classy character animation, two very distinct styles of play and a variety of nice little touches, Muhammed Ali may well be he number one in boxing games. We'll be bringing you the definitive CVG review in the next issue, so don't miss out! CVG 009 Rambler D:SB Hang your portrait from the ropes \"Just look at what you've done!\" "


"NEWS HORNBY ON SNES TRACK MEGA CD SWITCHED ON! There's finally a launch date for the Mega CD! The machine, which was featured in last month's CVG, will be available at the beginning of April and will be bundled with no less than SEVEN games! Only two of the titles featured in the package have been created specifically for the Mega CD; Cobra Command sees you piloting a death-dealing chopper through the streets of the New York, while Sol-Feace is a scrolling shoot 'em up. The other games in the pack started life as Megadrive carts; Streets of Rage, Return of Shinobi, Columns, Super Monaco and Golden Axe have been ripped from their chips and shoehorned onto a single Compact Disc. SUPERDECK So you've got the excellent Super Mario World on SNES, but you want to play the first three Mario games, which only appeared on NES, What do you do? Simple get hold of the Superdeck! Yes, that's right: Hornby's new device allows NES games to be played on Nintendo's 16-bit! Announced at the recent Karl's Court Toy Show, the add-on not only allows you to run any of your NES cartridges on the SNES, but will also act as a convertor for imported games. The Superdeck shown in this picture is a working prototype which only allows you to run British NES games on a British Super Nintendo buty according to Hornby, the completed sys tem will take all configurations Jap NES games on UK SNES, British NES carts on American SNES, etc. Casting less than a Super Nintendo cartridge, the Superdeck System Adaptor is expected to hit the streets around May We'll be keeping you informed about any new developments as they happen Star Fox, the first SNES game to make use of the new FX chip, took to the skies for its first UK test flight at the British International Toy and Hobby Fair. The game uses the special chip, created by British developer Jez San of Starglider and Birds Of Prey fame, to produce fast, 3D polygons something which has previously been impossible to achieve due to the Super Nintendo's slow processor. The all-action airborne blaster is fast and fulsome, so watch out for the full review of the Star Fox next month! is a wo may, the como a British I take ahut, acean British sting lese Nescarte nations STARDY CD KARAOKE Sega are to launch a Karaoke add-on that will plug into its Mega CD! The DIY pop star kit will be supported by an array of Karaoke CDs so that you can sing or rap along to all your fave grooves. The machine is already a bit hit in Japan and may well prove a similar success in this country,too. Paul \"Ithankyou' Rand has already put his name down for one, on the condition that they put some of the King's songs on CD. Elvis Presley died in August 1977, Paul. You are a sad man. "


"than you handle? can THE IDEAL You want to see all the best in games hardware ELECTRONIC and software? GAMES SHOW You want to try out all the latest games for 25-28 MARCH EARLS COURT 2 computers, consoles and hand-helds ? You want to know what's happening in the games market? You want to be at the Ideal Electronic Games Show, Earls Court, March 25th 28th. The most exciting games in Britain's most exciting venue. And if you want to be sure of getting tickets and beating the queues, all you have to do is post the coupon or telephone the credit card hotline on 0733 890155. The Ideal Electronic Games Show. What more do you want? Daily Mail Name ... Address ........ ............... ........... Post Code ideal home plus EARLS COURT, LONDON 18 MARCH-12 APRIL 1993 DAILY MAIL IDEAL HOME EXHIBITION SPONSORED BY DUT PRESS DUTOPRESS Number of tickets required .......... Ticket prices .00 adults, .00 under 16, .00 senior citizens. Please make cheques payable to Angex Limited and crossed \"& Co\". Send to: Ideal Electronic Games Show Tickets, 9 Flag Business Exchange, Peterborough PET 5TX. INTERACTIVE PUBLICATIONS "


"NEWS TOP HOLE BINKY! We've become Medieval warlords! We've become Formula One racers! We've even become massive metal Walkers! But now, thanks to the wonders of Virtual Reality, we and you can jump into the cockpit of a rickety old monoplane and become World War I fighter pilots! The latest Virtuality simulation from W Industries, Flying Aces, is being shipped into arcades as we speak. The game was on show at the recent Gamesmaster Live! Show in Birmingham, and sees four players becoming either an English, American, French or Italian fighter pilot and taking on each other in an airborne dual to the death! W Industries are touting this as 'The world's first immersive, multi-player, interactive flight simulator'. Whatever is meant by immersive, we certainly think it's one hell of a great game. Take a look if you see one in your local Coins R Us! MEET THE DINOSAURS! Video game conversions of comics are nothing new check out this month's review of Spider Man and the X-Men, for instance. Coming soon is a title based on a new comic book, called Dinosaurs For Hire, and it's all about a bunch of big, erm, dinosaurs, that go around kicking seven bells out of an assortment of baddies. The comic is produced by a company called Malibu, whose other big creation. ExMutants, has already featured in digital form. Both games are available for Megadrive: Ex-Mutants should be on the streets now, with Dinosaurs For Hire hitting the shelves in a couple of months time. Sounds like a right laugh! OUT FOR THE COUNT COMPETITION IDEAL FOR GAMES! The world's gone nuts over neckbiters of late! With the release of Francis Ford Copolla's excellent movie, Bram Stoker's Dracula, has followed a flood of tie-ins. Not to be outdone, Psygnosis has snapped up the movie rights and is well into production of the Mega-CD version which should turn out to be one of the first titles to appear when the machine is officially launched in the UK around Easter! You all know the story young Jonathan Harker goes to Transylvania, meets Dracula and participates in all manner of blood-sucking malarkey with the Count and his cronies. Psygnosis is one of the leaders in the field of CD game creation, so we're expecting something extra special to emerge from darkest Liverpool. More news as is comes in don't go away! For the first time ever, the Ideal Home Show is incorporating video games into its makeup! From 25th-28th March, The Ideal Electronic Games Show will feature the hottest stuff available in the world of computers and consoles, as well as all the latest electronic gadgetry from around the world and we're giving away TEN FREE TICKETS to get in for free! To enter, just tell us the most ideal thing you'd like in your home and why you want it! Jot your entry down on a postcard or the back of a sealed-down envelope and send it to: THIS SHOW'S IDEAL FOR ME!, CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. Get your entry in by 14th March though, otherwise you'll not be feeling very ideal at all! GVG 012 "


"On a PGL Adventure Holiday You are now entering a parent free zone. BANISH BOREDOM Over 70 activities from abseiling to white water rafting, ADVENTURE BEYOND YOUR AVERAGE HOLIDAY THE BEST HOLIDAYS FOR AGES 6-18 STRETCH yourself Make friends not beds. YOU'VE SEEN THE AD. GET THE BROCHURE. 8 (0989) 763511 AND BEST ADVENTURE 1993 Or write to PGL Adventure Holidays 319 Penyard Lane, Ross-on-Wye Herefordshire HRS SNR ABTA 46875 "


"E FEATURE MENACEK he Super Nintendo has its Scope, and now Sega is in on the light gun act with its Menacer! The CVG boys have had their hands on the gun for a while, and here's PAUL ANGLIN to tell you just what you do get for your sixty quid. A SEXTET OF SHOOTING SHENANIGANS FOUR WAYS TO PLAY What use would a Menacer be without games? None, that's what. So thankfully Sega have included a cart containing six games. PEST CONTROL FRONT LINE READY AIM TOMATOES Shock horror! Loads of little insects Desert forces are out in strength and The wacky duo, Toejam and Earl, are attacking your slice of pizza! it's down to you to stop them. Shoot take you through this horizontallyUse the Menacer to eliminate them all the tanks, jeeps and helicopters scrolling splat 'em up! You take the all and save your dinner before it's and move onto the next level. Fail role of Toejam while Bog Earl tells too late. and you'll be selling camels for the you how you're doing. rest of your life. Also in the box of delights are the add-ons slide-on stock and binocular sights which allow the Menacer to be set up in four different ways. SURE SHOT The Menacer in it's simplest form, with nothing attached to it. This is best used by those who have used the gun before and possess a fairly steady hand. PROSES SCORE : LS LEFT : 8 SHTE SLORE: 8819 TLFER54 FULL TILT The Menacer in all it's glory, Full Tilt utilises all the add-ons, turning it into one awesome killing instrument. The stock provides the stability while the binoculars provide perfect sight for pinpoint accuracy. The only problem with this is that the binoculars tend to strain your eyes slightly after long periods of play POWER LILIT POLVER BAES: 399 TARGETS SPACE STATION DEFENDER Your home away from home, in this case a space station, is under attack from weird aliens in flying telephone boxes. BT in space? No and they aren't Dr Who either! Blast these baddies before they blast you. WHACKBALL The most unusual of the six. You don't use the trigger at all! Knock the ball around the screen and smash all the tiles before moving on to the next level for more of the same. ROCKMAN'S ZONE Looking a little similar to a scrolling version of Hogan's Alley on the NES, Rockman's Zone has you travelling through different scenarios, blasting standard shooting range targets as they pop up into view. COMMANDO Probably the best set-up, Commando comprises of the gun and the snap-on stock. This provides real stability for accurate shooting. USE INFRA-RED OR YOU'LL BE DEAD! DUAL VISION The gun and the binocular slide-sights. This configuration seems rather defeatist; the idea of the binoculars is to offer greater accuracy but without the stock the gun is prone to wobble, making it difficult to accurately sight. The infra-red sensor plugs into the Megadrive joypad port and picks up the signal sent by the Menacer. To achieve the greatest level of accuracy, the sensor should be placed on top or underneath your TV. cVG 014 "


"ENACING LIHIHI TO UHE LMIHIHN TU FEH T2 the best Menacer game around! GO FOR YOUR GUN! Shoot that chopper, Arnie! More blasting laughs with T2 The Arcade Game. The Menacer is constructed of sturdy, grey plastic, inside which is housed the infra-red beam. The gun takes six AAA batteries and resembles something from the last series of V! The fire button is positioned for easy trigger finger operation and three other buttons, on the front handle of the gun, offer different functions depending upon the game you're playing; for example, in T2 The Arcade Game they are used to operate the rocket launchers and also to pause the game. We've been waiting for the Menacer for what seem like ages now, but it's finally here and seems to have made quite an impact. Like Nintendo's Super Scope, the Menacer has been launched with a cartridge containing six games, all specially developed for use with the gun. The only other game available for the Menacer is T2 The Arcade Game, but if that sells well (and if you check out this month's review you'll see that it deserves to) no doubt that will be followed by plenty of other hot titles. There's even rumour of Menacer games coming out on the Mega CD! Mad Dog McCree would be a good one, wouldn't you agree? HOW DOES IT FARE? THE GUN The Menacer has to go down as one of the best light guns yet. While it may not be quite as accurate as the Super Scope (although you'd have to be very picky to really notice the difference) it's certainly much more comfortable to use and feels like a real gun, and the different set-ups provide some scope for changing your style of play. A job well done by Sega. THE GAMES What a sad first outing for the Menacer range! I'm sorry, but I fail to see one good game in the entire package. The only slightly redeeming feature is that it is free! You really must get hold of T2 The Arcade Game (see page 68) to realise the Menacer's potential. MENACER LIGHT GUN. FROM: SEGA. PRICE: .99 AVAILABLE FROM: EVERY MAJOR RETAIL OUTLET WORTH ITS SOCKS AND MOST IMPORTERS. cVG 015 "


"GVG PAGOREV CVC SUPER NINTENDO ARCADE BY JVC/LUCASFILM .00 alat plans intes to propri It's been a long, long time coming, but finally we get our sweaty mitts on one of the most publicised Super Nintendo games ever Super Star Wars! Created by JVC and Lucasfilm, Super Star Wars pays homage to the greatest sci-fi movie ever! The Empire are closing in on the rebels, who have just stolen the blueprints for the most powerful weapon in the universe, The Death Star. Before being taken prisoner by Darth Vader, Princess Leia Organa manages to program the Death Star plans into an R2 unit and eject it, along with its robot companion C3-PO, into space. They land on the desert planet of Tatooine from where the fun really begins, because the Empire is hot on the rebels' trail! To begin the game, you control Luke Skywalker, young farm-hand and son of Jedi Knight Annakin Skywalker, who was turned by Vader and forced to submit to the dark side of The Force. Luke thought it was going to be just another day think again young Jedi!! Super Star Wars is an amazing game. I can say that with hand on heart because from beginning to end it's a sensation; hit the Start button and there's an almost perfect reproduction of the movie's intro! The SNES has been used to full effect to create the most amazing effects ever seen in a console game most impressive are the stages which use Mode 7 to create such delights as the landspeeder levels and Death Star battle sequences; simply awesome. A special mention has to go to THE best music ever heard in a video game. JVC have converted the Star Wars tunes note for note, with instruments sounding so real you'll want to whack up the volume, shut your eyes and pretend you're at the cinema! Super Star Wars is platform action ahoy with bits bolted on. Sprites and backdrops are perfect, there are lots of levels and none of them are a pushover and because you're only given three continues it's going to take some serious That's not Obi Wan-it's Alec Guiness lightly wrapped in an old blanket! Don't look now, but Obi Wan Kenobi is right in front of you. WHICH ONE WILL YOU CHOOSE? You've seen the film countless times and wished that you could be Han, Chewie, Luke or even Princess Leia. In Super Star Wars, you can do just that! Beginning the game with Luke, the further into the proceedings you get the more characters become available to you. Chewbacca is the first hero you'll meet he's at the Cantina in Mos Eisley spaceport, and you can choose to beat up the patrons using either the Wookie or young Luke Skywalker. And the Sandperson is toast! The light sabre is actually bet ter in this situation than a blaster. "


"DESERT RATS The first nasties you'll encounter are Womp Rats which, if you're an avid fan of the movie, you'll remember as the creatures Luke used to builseye in Devil's Canyon! As you progress, you'll come face-to-face with evermore weird and wonderful nasties, from scorpions that split in two when you blast them, to Jawas on jetbikes. Sandpeople and the Empire's crack Stormtroopers. Some are more dangerous than others, especially the lads that carry heavy armoury with them, so watch your step! USE THE ICONS. LUKE! GUN: Powers up your blaster. If a twelve-foot womp Rat was exploding in front of you. wouldn't you be legging it out of there? LIGHT SABRE: Lengthens your energy bar. Yuk! \"Help me Obi Wan Kenobi, you're my only hope.' HEART: Replaces lost energy. LET'S LOOK AT THE LEVELS! El BIG HEART: As small heart, but adds more energy. SHIELD: Short-term invincibility. DETONATOR: Clears screen of enemies. While the programmers have used a bit of artistic license, Super Star Wars actually follows the plot of the movie quite closely. Starting on foot in the Dune Sea, you then pick up your landspeeder and head toward the Jawas' Sandcrawler inside which R2-D2 is held captive. Following this you must scuffle with the Sandpeople and their Banthas before picking up Obi Wan Kenobi and heading for Mos Eisley and the Cantina where you hire Han Solo, Chewbacca and their ship, the Millennium Falcon. Blast your way through the Death Star and jump into the cockpit of an X-Wing fighter as you attempt to destroy the Emperor's deadliest weapon in a stunning 3D shoot-outthe graphics may look good in these shots, but Super Star Wars has graphics that really have to be seen to be believed! Blimey, that's big! DARTH VADER HELMET: Bonus points. SO No-one messes with Chewie especially not these low-life Cantina patrons. TIMER: Increases time left to complete level. MODE SEVEN HEAVEN! Thank the Lord for the Super Nintendo's Mode 7! Those computer whizkids down JVC way have pushed those custom chips to their limit, to give some amazing levels of into-the screen action and excitement! Blow up Jawas in your landspeeder as you attempt to make it first to the Sandcrawler and then the Cantina at Mos Eisley, and be awe-struck by the incredible end stage as you hurtle down a canal in the Death Star while pursued by TIE-Fighters. Brilliant! SOLID C OLOR soge93 Not long to go before the ventilation shaft comes into view: ready your torpedoes and watch out for those TIE Fighters! *Look at the size of that thing! GVG 017 "


"AVG KDT DIDE Daun Look out Stormtroopers! I don't ever remember any game getting me in such a frenzy since I first bought a SNES. I've never seen as many people move so fast as when I first turned this on. Super Star Wars got the whole of CVG towers into the games room as everyone fought to get a look at what was making such brilliant noises! So it's fair to say that Super Star Wars made quite an impression on us, and so it should. The game features some of the best graphics yet seen on the SNES, especially on the amazing X-Wing level! As for the most important aspect of the game gameplay there's no worries there at all. It's absolutely rocks! You've got a stack of levels to get through and it will take you ages to get anywhere. But the difficulty level has been pitched just right you get that little bit further every time and it's sooo addictive! Some importers may be charging outrageous prices for this but I'd recommend you get it whatever the cost! PAUL ANGLIN There's Mos Elsley, on the horizon. Now the fun REALLY starts! KILL 'EM ALL! At the end of each level is a guardian who bars the way to the next stage of the game. First up is a Sarlac Pit Monster a bit strange, considering that it didn't make an appearance until the last film in the trilogy, Return Of The Jedi. From here, you'll run into all manner of beasties, from Banthas to big robots; each of which has an energy bar which must be fully depleted before it will eventually roll over and allow you to get to the next level. Gumph! NOW HERE'S A REAL LIGHT GUN! Luke begins with his trusty blaster, but after meeting up with Obi Wan Kenobi young Skywalker inherits his father's Light Sabre the weapon of a Jedi Knight. You can switch between both, and the blaster can be powered up by picking up the gun icon which is occasionally dropped by baddies. Super Star Wars is an ultra movie-like experience. From the opening intro, with its booming Star Wars soundtrack and laser effects, to the animation sequences that separate the levels, you know your money has been well spent. The game is as entertaining as it is challenging; the action flows along logically and scrolling is near-perfect. Special effects, previously only seen in Axelay, make the backdrops as mesmerising as the scores of sampled sound effects that include Chewbacca's howl, scorching gun noises and Jawas' screeching. It's a little hard at first, but only in a couple of places are you unfairly robbed of life, and even then you'll find a way around the problem. The game even incorporates a feature that lets you scroll around the surrounding area before making a vital eleap, to see what's below. This is the best platform/arcade adventure I've played for a long while and, at , it's almost worth it! STEVE KEEN The band won't give up that easily. THANKS... ..to Shekhana Consoles (081 889 9412) for the Review cartridge. A pair of likely lads, If ever there were. STRATEGY SKILL CVG 93 98 GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE GVG 018 % 92 % CVG ACTION REFLEXES "


"THE @J TopFighter DON'T GET MAD... THE FIRST TRULY PROGRAMMABLE JOYSTICK U0C AZ U A3 DIGITAL ACHON LEARNING SYSTEM OpFighter GET EVEN. At last you can program any combination of moves onto one fire button to give you the power to beat the best of today's video games such as Streetfighter 2 by Capcom. AVAILABLE ONLY FOR THE SUPER NINTENDO ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM Main Features Include...  Action Sequence Learning Facility Solid Steel Steel Shaft  LCD Display Robust Metal Cabinet Autofire  Arcade Quality Switches  Slow motion Extra Long Connector Cable SUGGESTED RETAIL PRICE .99 INC. VAT. ACTRA Another winning product from. -VIDEO TEL. 081-902 2211 AVAILABLE FROM ALL GOOD COMPUTER STOCKISTS Nintendo and Nintendo Entertainment System are trademarks of Nintendo Kabushiki Karsha/Nintendo Company Ltd (Japan) "


"EVA 3 PAGE REVIEW SUPER NINTENDO Charging up for the big one, Juggernaut-style! ANN. PLATFORM BY NINTENDO .99 BY NESTENDO Il but one of the notorious Super-Hero team, the X-Men, have mysteriously disappeared and only Gambit remains at liberty. On a routine night crawl, Spidey spies Gambit's shady silhouette in a back street. Just as the webbed wonder is about to swing down for a chat, a garbage truck pulis up alongside and sucks the last X-Man into its belly! The quick thinking crawler speedily attaches a Spider-tracer onto the truck and swings off into the night, hot on Gambit's trail. It turns out the whole gang's been imprisoned by the kooky assassin, Arcade. He's manufactured a massive million-dollar fun fair and filled it with diabolical traps, games and deadly toys. It's here that you pick up the scent and begin your adventure! Are you man or spider enough to rescue the team and escape the arcade? ARCADE'S REVENGE SPIDERMAL This is the Spider Man game we've all been waiting for! Not only can you control your favourite wall-weber, but his buddies as well! Each character is excellently drawn and animated, but it's Parker who steals the show with his arachnid acrobatics. With five heroes to choose from, all with their own special abilities, it's hard to see how this can fail. And there are hordes of baddies, not to mention ten super-villains, to ensure a Marvel-ous time! With the five different characters comes five different playing styles. This might put you off at first as one or two of them are quite slow moying, but don't let this dissuade you from playing right through. Other sections will more than make up for these minor short comings. Spiderman and the X-Men remains stylish and bright and if you can put up with the annoyance of only having four lives to play with, you'll have a riot. CORE 85600 LET THE GAMES BEGIN ou INZWISTON bright y After finding the trapped SuperHeroes, the fun really starts! Arcade challenges each of the captives to two events inside his amusement park. Each stage is designed to test their particular strengths and weaknesses: you can select any character in any order, but you only have four lives which must be shared between the whole crew. STEVE KEEN Low on oxygen and no sign of an air pocketthings are looking rough! GVG 020 "


"REVIEW EVE Spidey in full swing. SPECIAL TREATMENT Spidey's got an extra special treat waiting for him. The 'Spider-Slayers' are hurling bags of exploding cement on his head, welding droids blast him with lasers and the steel reinforcement bars are charged with electricity. Up in the girders it's a super-villain party! Shocker is waiting to shake your hand. with N'Astirh waiting in the wings for seconds! Carnage and Rhino are just around the corner, and all that is before you face the final fight with Arcade. Let's hope you're wearing stain resistant undies today! PICKING YOUR PICK-UPS CYCLOPS Watch those backdrops; they may look pretty, but they pack a punch. BONUS LIFEAdds one life. EXTRA ENERGY Increases your energy level. ENERGY BONUS . Blast the cart for full energy. POWER BLAST Defeat any enemy with one optic blast. WELCOME TO MY NIGHTMARE! APOCALYPSE The intelligence of a genius, the reflexes of a machine and the strength of an ox! Apocalypse is like a Canadian Mountie he always gets his man. JUGGERNAUT This manmountain hates nothing more in the world than Professor X and his gifted youngsters. Weighing in at 900 pounds, you'd better keep well out of his path! SENTINELS Robotic terminators of the future. These Omega Series Hunters are said to be responsible for the death of the X-Men in years to come. Their hyper-tough shielding makes them nearly indestructible, but they aren't invented until the 21st century! STORM BONUS LIFEAdds one life. AIR SUPPLY. Increase your supply of air bubbles. LIGHTNING STORM Gives the power to release streaks of lightning in every direction. WHIRLWIND Blast the oysters and pick up pearls for this protective shield. CARNAGE Another creature of incredible strength, Carnage is the result of a psychic fusion between man and sociopath! He can turn his skin into solid darts, which he uses to pepper the enemies. MASTER MOLD A huge robotic creature that houses Scott Summers, a prisoner of his own metal shell. Master Mold holds Cyclops responsible for his state and, with his monstrous size and weaponry, seeks to destroy the X-Men. GAMBIT EXTRA ENERGY Increases your energy level. LUCKY STAR-An extra life for 100 stars. BALL BONUS Rolls the Doom Ball backwards. FULL DECK Gives you a complete deck to play with! PLAYING CARD Increases your stock of cards by seven. BONUS 'B' Gives 26 cards and half your energy. DIAMOND . 500 points. SHOCKER Wears a foamlined synthetic costume capable of deflecting the mightiest blows. His vibro shock-units create a series of high-pressure blasts that cause major damage to the human body. O2 * WOLVERINE BONUS LIFE Adds one life. EXTRA ENERGY Increases your energy level. SPIDER-MAN BONUS LIFEAdds one life. EXTRA ENERGY Increases your energy level. SILVER SPIDER 50 points. GOLD SPIDER 100 points. RED SPIDER 500 points. DIAMOND 100 points. BLACK QUEEN This babe's between two and three thousand years old, but she can trade blows with the best of 'em. Her strength, speed and stamina are many times greater than normal. She can also move objects with her psionic powers. N'ASTIRH Black magic is this creature's speciality, but he can also fly and hold his own in a fight! RHINO Mutagenic chemical and radiation treatments provided this guy with superhuman abilities. The result: a colossal super-villain with a nasty reputation for always attacking problems head-on! Ya, boo, sucks! EDOWE This box has been made 'safe' but others hide all manner of surprises. Swing out, sister! CVG 021 "


"GVE 3 PAGE REVIEW HOUSE OF HORRORS SCORE S Chasing Arcade. Even Toys 'R' Us don't stock gadgets like these! Just a few of the traps and terrors that await the team are giant buzz-saws, huge toy soldiers and crazy cackling, clowns that hound Wolverine. Spider-Man has to deal with bomb and concrete-throwing monsters, scaffolding, and metal mesh girders that entangle him. Where as Storm's in the water fending off razor-toothed piranha and spear-firing scuba-divers! Bazookoid-blowing mutants and plasma-shooting droids hassle Cyclops whilst massive spiked pinballs, manic chess pieces and revolving platforms abound for Gambit. And that's just for starters! Get to the top of a level and you've then got to rumble with the super-villains! It's a pity these guys just can't see eye to eye. GOODY GOODY YUM YUM! DEAL PENSausa SEX PHOTOCYPHE SSSYRTINERRUC When you've run out of road, climb the walls. Bitten by a radioactive spider, Peter Parker gained the strength and agility of said creepy crawley! He can stick to walls, spin webs and detect danger with his advanced 'Spider Sense. With the ferocity of a beast and the skills of an international secret agent, Wolverine is one of the most dangerous men alive! Some time in his murky history his skeleton was laced with Adamantium, and with claws installed in his forearms, he can even cut through solid rock. Scott has the awesome ability to fire beams of devastating energy from his eyes. He is the leader of the XMen's Blue Strike Force and, without the special rubyquartz visor, he can never open his eyes without endangering those around him The elemental marvel can control the weather to the point of generating awesome lightning bolts. But it's her strength of character and understanding that makes her the admired leader of the XMen's Gold Strike Force. The cunning Cajun has speed that defies logic and a smile to warm the fiercest heart. If that doesn't work he also has the power to energise objects and deepfry any target crazy enough to get in his way! Kaaa-Boooom! LEVEL IT OUT This is no time for clowning around. Spider-Man and the X-Men takes the form of a platform adventure starring some of the most successful SuperHeroes of all time. The game's great strength is its depth of gameplay. You start the game controlling the webslinger himself and you move on to controlling the X-Men. The beauty of it is that all the levels change according to who you control. The only gripe that I have with Spider-Man is that the graphics don't look too impressive. They're a little small, but well detailed and brilliantly animated, so there's no real problem. When I first sat down to play Spider-Man I was horrified. The first level seemed crap! But once you make it into the game properly it's action all the way with the Uncanny X-Men. PAUL ANGLIN CORE With Peter Parker first seeing Arcade's truck, it's only natural that you start the game with Spider-Man. The first task is to disable the security system by swinging from platform to platform and webbing the gun emplacements. Once inside Arcade's base, you can choose any of the heroes to continue the challenge with. Cyclops' challenge takes him underground into a mining shaft, eventually battling hand-tohand with Master Mold. Arcade knows the X-Men's powers very well and, because Storm can fly, places her in a series of flooded compartments which are difficult to move around in. She must avoid the perilous pets and find the valves to flood the right rooms. Gambit's task is much more manic. He must find his way through the level whilst being chased by a huge spiked pinball! Get through that and he'll face the Black Queen. Wolverine is imprisoned in the fun house. Slashing, through his enemies will be easy at first, but once at the top he'll have to deal with Juggernaut and a ton of trouble! 22 Naaa, na, di, na, na! THANKS... ...to Console Plus (0532 500445) for the review cartridge CVG STRATEGY SKILL % GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE % % CVG CVG 022 ACTION REFLEXES "


"ction Zone WIN  WORTH OF GAMES 0839 406066 AMIGA 600 or AMIGA 1200 CHOOSE BETWEEN THE NEW 36 BIT A1200 OR THE TRUSTY A600 INFRA RED JOYSTICK OR STREETFIGHTER JOYSTICK Your choice! The control of the arcade machine or the cable free infra red. 0839 406064 0839 406065 WIN IGHED THEDGEHOG MEGADRIVE + MEGA CD + CD GAMES WIN ALL OF THESE!!! 0839 406062 0839 406061 WIN WIN WIN STAR TREK Every episode of the origional series worth over  THEDGEHOGE ACTION REPLAY FOR YOUR MACHINE Infinite lives, infinite power, become invincible 0839 406067 0839 406068 PLUS TV TUNER 0839 406063 WIN!! The mountain bike of your choice upto  0839 406069 IMS Ltd, PO Box 28, Northampton NN1 5DS. Calls cost 36p (Cheap) 48p per min (all other times). Format: Multi choice questions with decider. Max call time 7.5 mins. Please be sure that you have permission to make this call. Nintendo, Sega, Street Fighter II, Sonic 2 And Action Replay are all registered trademarks of thier respected companies. We are not related or endorsed by them. "


"GVG CVE REVIEW MEGADR ARCADE BY SEGA .99 TAKE A DEEP BREATH Il was silent in the big -blue. The only noise to be heard was the sound of the waves crashing against the base of the cliffs. Then suddenly Ecco appeared into the emptiness. He had been searching for his family for days, ever since they had been mysteriously whisked away by a huge wall of water that had swept all life out of the ocean. Somehow, Ecco had managed to escape the disaster and had been searching for any other survivors all this time. He had sung all the songs he could remember to try and call to others but the silence remained unbroken. Ecco had to keep moving: he had to find his family. But he was all alone in a big ocean that was new and unfamiliar to him... As anyone who has ever seen an episode of Flipper will know, dolphins cannot breathe underwater they must constantly come to the surface for air. Ecco is no different; if you leave him underwater for too long his oxygen meter will run out. If this does happen Ecco will simply draw off his life meter until that is gone and he becomes an ex-dolphin. You can fill Ecco's lungs in two ways if there is enough space, Ecco can jump out of the water and fill his lungs with air but if there are only tiny little gaps Ecco can just poke his nose out and take a few deep breaths. Also, if Ecco manages to find a secret underwater air pocket he can refill from there. These are shown on the map as air bubbles, and there are that many around so plan your route wisely. Look at all those jellyfish! IT'S OUT THERE SOMEWHERE Dolphins emit a high-pitched sound which they use to talk to each other and also as a kind of sonar. Ecco uses this ability to view the layout of the area he is in. This is extremely useful when you're trying to locate certain objects, as they will all appear on the screen in map form. The sonar also comes in handy when you find other lost creatures, such as other dolphins and the odd killer whale. By firing a sonar at these, Ecco can chat to them and gain useful information about his quest. Ahh, that's better. Phew! Just made it. THANKS The first thing to hit you about Ecco is its incredible graphics. They really are stunning; animation is beautiful and the ocean atmosphere has been captured perfectly. The music is suitably soothing and, although some of the sound effects aren't the best ever, they add a fathomable depth. In terms of gameplay, Ecco stands head and dorsals above anything seen in recent months. It starts off difficult and gets harder, but you'll be so pleased when you eventually work out the puzzles. Some will have you swimming round in circles for ages as you try to figure out such things as how to rescue the little dolphin without going past the Octopus! Ecco may seem a bit wet at first, but believe me, once you've dived into its amazing depths, you'll never look back! to Shekhana Consoles (081 889 9412) for the review cartridge. If you ask nicely, it'll tell you a secret. CRYSTAL BALLS PAUL ANGLIN During his travels, Ecco will come across Glyphs special crystals that contain vital information about your quest. They can offer information or give you the power to move other Glyphs out of the way. You can use Glyphs in two ways those that give you powers have to be barged, but others that give you messages must be contacted using your sonar. The Glyph will then give you it's message and the info that you get can be that important bit you've been searching for for ages or as useful to Ecco as knitted gloves. But don't forget a lot of the secrets to levels are hidden inside Glyphs. GVG 024 A typical Sunday afternoon for Ecco. "


"REVIEW GVC Ecco and pal swim to safety. ALL ALONE IN THE BIG BLUE So why do they call you Eight Arms? During the search for his family, Ecco will come across a number of young dolphins that have also become lost due to the storms. It is your job to rescue them and get them safely back to their pods (just in case you don't know, a pod is a group of dolphins). When you see a lost dolphin, fire your sonar at it and it will ask you for help. Swim slowly in front and it will follow you. You have to be extra careful when swimming through tight hazards though, because the youngsters can't take much of a battering. Games about dolphins are nothing new. Actually, they are; to my mind, this is the first video game featuring a dolphin as the main character. I approached Ecco with some reservations; after watching Anglin playing for a short time, it seemed to me that the action was minimal and slightly tedious. And wasn't I wrong! This is one of the best games you'll play on the Megadrive, or any other format for that matter. Graphically you can't fault it; definition and animation is first class, and there's a stunning shimmering water effect which has to be seen to be believed and even then you won't believe it! There's a bit of map-making in there, as well as a bit of puzzle-solving, a hint of arcade action, a touch of rescuing in fact, there's a whole heap of different genres lumped into this one classy package. Looks can be deceiving, and if you think Ecco looks dull you'd be right. But buy the game, settle down with your joypad and prepare to be amazed! PAUL RAND got to be worth ten points. Is anybody there? STRATEGY SKILL Push that rock down there to swim through the current. It's really quiet down here. Clever, eh? ACTION REFLEXES GRAPHICS SOUND % 96 % 89 CURRENT AFFAIRS GAMEPLAY VALUE Ecco meets Orca. CVG Ecco's biggest obstacles are strong currents. You'll spend ages hitting the speed button frantically, trying to get through the current, but don't bother because you can't. If you look at the map you will see orange dots on the screen these represent movable rocks. If you want to swim down a chasm and there's a strong current pushing upwards, the only way to get through it is to find one of the movable rocks. Push it into the current and swim behind easy when you know how. CVG CVG 025 Ooh! Aah! That tickles! "


"AVA  REVIEW Soo SNES JIMMY CONNORS PRO TENNIS TOURE SPORT SIM Four player fun is fast and furious. MENU EN  START CONT TRAS There are scores of menus, tournaments and options to go through. One of the most useful is Training. A choice selection of pro tennis players are on hand to practice with you. Everything from backhand to net-play is covered, including that all-impor tant service instructed by none other than Garth! We hope you prove to be a better player than the CVG Ed! And here's your host, the young Jim and boy has he got a challenge for you! HOT SHOTS TOUR MENU JANUARY BY UBI SOFT .99 Limp-wristed tennis action from the pros! There have been a lot of famous tennis champs over the years and although Jimmy Connors is well known you could hardly say that he's more famous than John McEnroe or Bjorn Borg. After all, both of them had computer games named after them years ago. Even Jahangir Kahn, the squash king, has licensed his name. So it's about time that Jimmy got in on the racket. And Looking good and feelit's only fitting that Jimbo takes ing fine. A nice line his place with the rest of the service coming up! greats with a game that outclasses all his contemporaries'! At last there's a serious contender to Super Tennis on the SUPER NINTENDO! Jimmy Connors' Tennis has more shots and more potential than any other tennis game you've ever seen! The sprites are perfectly animated, the scrolling and accuracy of shots spot on and the tons of world-ranked players as intelligent as Net play of the fiercest Albert Einstein on caffeine! All this brilkind these boys are liance is wrapped up in a fabulously ruthless! presented package; some of the menus are a chore to get around, but Mode FUNNY Seven makes the tournament screens a joy to behold. Buy the multi-player adapFRIENDS tor and you've got a cart that'll be used One of the hottest aspects of Jimmy Connors' Tennis is the ability to play for life! It's fast, it's fun, it's simply brilagainst three other human oppoliant even the music nents! Every combination of play has scores are fierce! Jimmy been thought of; human and comConnors might not be as puter against human and human for doubles matches, human and comimmediately playable as puter against computer and Super Tennis, but there's computer and so on. The four-player far more mileage in it. If option is achieved by plugging in a you want a real challenge special multi-adaptor. Unfortunately, buy this game now it you can't get your hands on this bit of kit yet! It'll be bundled with Ubi serves up what is the best Soft's next SUPER NINTENDO cart, tennis game on the SNES. Dyna Blaster not at all a reason to make you buy more games! Serving's a bit of an incident, with six different types available including slice serve, soft serve and just plain, full-force smack into the opponent's court! Hold down the selected button and steer the lightning fast cursor into the proper section of the court before releasing the ball at the desired position. Some incredibly sneaky shots can be achieved, the most notable being those scorching aces. Master a good serving technique and you'll be the scourge of the tennis circuit! RANKING EGIN TOURNAM MAIN MENU Blue Byte ERARTE Enter into the world of top-ranking tennis stars and travel the globe. ON YOUR TOES! Timing is vital in tennis games and the difference between swishing pathetically at thin air and sending a red-hot demon of a shot down the tram lines is considerable. You can often gauge where you opponent's shot is going to land and, if you can get to the spot before the ball, you can pull back your racket, hold it to increase the strength of shot and release a return with more power than that stored on the National Grid! WHAT DOES WHAT? UP: Next line move up/deeper shot L: Slice serve/slice shot to the left R: Slice serve/slice shot to the right X: Strong serve/lob Y: Normal serve/drop shot 2 SUPERIORRENDO LEFT: Option modification/ move left/shot directed to the left +.COM A: Normal serve/power shot/safe volley DOWN: Next line/move down/shorter shot B: Easy serve/normal shot/volley RIGHT: Option modification/move right/shot directed to the right SELECT: Return to the previous menu/access the statistics and quit screens START: Validate the selected options/return to the game STEVE KEEN CVG STRATEGY SKILL 3093 GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY % % 85 % 93 VALUE CVG ACTION REFLEXES HIT "


"SAL ORDER ZAP COMPUTER GAMES TECHNO HOUSE.LOW LANE:HORSFORTH LS18 4DF MAIL ORDER SIZZLINGLY HOT LINE WATENDED en PPS 0 532 5.9.0.0-7-7 LOW LOW PRICES ALL THE LATEST GAMES & MACHINES SUPER QUICK DELIVERY NO SILLY MEMBERSHIP FEES REQUIRED TO BUY. OUR MOST FRIENDLY STAFF ARE WAITING FOR YOUR CALL. ZAP HOURS: 9am-7pm Mon-Fri 9am-1.30pm Sat. and Sun. FAX NO: 0532 586523 OPEN TM FOR SERVICE AND PRICE DAYS A WEEK SUPER NES USA FAMICOM JAPAN MEGADRIVE USA FINAL FIGHT II....... NAXAT SUPER PINBALL NOSFERAT U...... DEVASTATOR JUNGLE WARS. BATTLE GRAND PRIX.... SUPER FI CIRCUS.... ADVENTURE ISLAND... PSYCHO DREAM ..... SOLSTICE II ... SUPER GOLDEN FIGHTER ..... TOP RACER II. VIDEO KIDS.. ...CALL .99 .CALL CALL CALL ..99 .99 .99 CALL .CALL CALL CALL .CALL BART VS SPACE MUTANTS .................99 TASK FORCE HARRIER.... ... .99 WINTER CHALLENGE................... .99 OLYMPIC GOLD .................................. ...99 YS III. .99 BULLS VS LAKERS.. ......99 GALAHAD. ........99 TERMINATOR I.. ..99 MEGA-LO-MANIA. ....99 SMASH T.V........ .99 MARBLE MADNESS.......... ........99 SUPER VOLLEYBALL.. .99 MEGADRIVE PAL+ NEO-GEO UK SONIC .00 MEGADRIVE USA (+P&P) STAR WARS.. ........99 MICKEY'S MYSTIC QUEST. ..99 STREETFIGHTER II ........... .......99 J MADDEN 93. .99 NHLPA HOCKEY 93 .....99 FATAL FURY... .CALL MARIO KART .. .99 IREM SKINS GOLF...... .99 ALIEN TIT. CALL ALIEN VS PREDATOR .... .CALL DESERT STRIKE.. .99 WARP SPEED..... .99 COMBATRIBES.... .CALL TERMINATOR 2. .CALL T2 JUDGMENT DAY. ...........CALL SPIDERMAN X-MEN. .99 OUT OF THIS WORLD ..99 NCAA BASKETBALL ..... .99 ZELDA MIT ..99 ACTRAISER.... .99 SOUL BLADER. .99 COOL WORLD ..CALL TINY TOONS.. ..CALL ROAD RUNNER. ...99 CHUCK ROCK. .99 KING OF THE MONSTERS .99 POWER MOVES..... .99 LEMMINGS... .99 ROBOCOP MI... ..99 BEST OF THE REST.... .99 BLAZE ON............ .99 SUPER ALESTE... .99 WORLD LEAGUE SOCCER .99 SIM CITY.. .99 AXELAY.... .99 IMPERIUM ..99 KA-BLOOEY .99 SUPER PLAY ACTION FOOTBALL. ...99 RACE DRIVIN THQ... .99 RAMPART ......... .99 BART'S NIGHTMARE. ..99 MAGIC SWORD .99 PRINCE OF PERSIA .99 GUN FORCE... .99 WINGS II .......... .99 GHOULS & GHOSTS. .99 SUPER BATTLE TANK... .99 KRUSTY'S FUN HOUSE.. .99 CONTRA III.... .99 Q-BERT 3..... .99 POPULOUS. .99 HOOK... .99 SKULJAGGER ..... .99 CASTLEVANIA .99 EQUINOX... .CALL MYSTICAL NINJA......... .99 ROAD RIOT........ .99 PHALANX .... .99 DOUBLE DRAGON .......... .99 FACEBALL 2000.......... .99 JIMMY CONNORS TENNIS. .99 STRIKE GUNNER.......... .99 NIGEL MANSELL GRAND PRIX...... VIEWPOINT ...... ...CALL SENGOKU IT ...... .CALL SIDE KICK SOCCER ..CALL FATAL FURY II .... ...CALL ART OF FIGHTING. ...00 WORLD HEROES. .................99 BASEBALL STARS II ................ .....99 KING OF THE MONSTERS II... THRASH RALLY. .......99 LAST RESORT... -....99 ROBO ARMY. ..............99 SENGOKU. ..99 MUTATION NATION... .99 SOCCER BRAWL.. ..99 ASO II....... .00 KING OF THE MONSTERS .00 BURNING FIGHT .00 MAGICIAN LORD.. .00 2020 BASEBALL.... .00 NAM 75.... .00 BLUES JOURNEY .00 BASEBALL ..00 CYBERLIP ..00 LEAGUE BOWLING .... .00 TOP PLAYERS GOLF. .00 12.99 .99 SHINOBI M. ..CALL POWER MONGER...... .99 ROLO TO THE RESCUE....... .99 CHAKAN THE FOREVER MAN...... ..CALL OUT OF THIS WORLD. ..99 PGA II. .99 STREETS OF RAGE II ..... MICKEY'S WORLD OF ILLUSION.........99 ROAD RASH II.... . ....... ...99 ECCO. .................99 FLASHBACK. .99 LOTUS TURBO CHALLENGE............. .99 TERMINATOR II THE ARCADE ....... ..99 BATMAN RETURNS ..... ..99 SONIC II.. .................99 WWF. .99 RISKY WOODS --------.......99 BIO HAZARD BATTLE. .99 SHADOW OF THE BEAST 2 .............. ....99 TOXIC CRUSADERS.. .99 STEEL TALONS...... .99 LHX ATTACK CHOPPER .............. .99 CAPTAIN AMERICA.... .99 UNIVERSAL SOLDIER..................... .99 PREDATOR II.... .99 TEAM USA BASKETBALL .....................99 GREEN DOG.. .99 GAME GENIE ...99 SUPER HIGH IMPACT................... ..99 SPORTS TALK 93.. .99 J. MADDEN 93 .... .....99 CYBERCOP... .99 THUNDER FOX. ....99 ATOMIC RUNNER .99 SUPERMAN... .99 ALIENS VS PREDATOR .99 SIDE POCKET .99 AQUATIC GAMES .99 DRAGON'S FURY .... .99 TEST DRIVE II .. .99 ROAD RASH.. .99 ROLLING THUNDER II.. ..99 US SUPER NES + GAME OF YOUR CHOICE UP TO .99 (+P&P) SPECIAL OFFER WHEN BUYING A UK SNES CONVERTOR FOR .50 AND A US/JAP NINTENDO GAME YOU CAN KNOCK A WHOLE  OFF THE PRICE OF THE GAME. NOW THAT'S WHAT I CALL AN OFFER!! EXAMPLE IF YOU BUY THE CONVERTOR & AREA 88 THE TOTAL COST WOULD BE A MERE .50 (+PG OUCH!!! SAID OUR BANK MANAGER. NEO-GEO PAL OR s . .99 18............ CUT HERE SCART .99 (+P&P) .CALL FAMICOM JAPAN POSTCODE RDER FORM NAME Send to this address: ZAP ADDRESS TECHNO HOUSE LOW LANE, HORSFORTH LEEDS LS18 4DF Please rush me the following TELEPHONE NO. ITEM PRICE POST/P TOTAL TINY TOONS ..... STAR WARS.... RUSHING BEAT II.. COMBATRIBES....... RANMA\": II. HUMAN RACING..... FATAL FURY............. PARODIUS .............. STREETFIGHTER II ......... 2020 BASEBALL....... BATTLE TECH....... Credit card number ...99 .99 ..99 ..99 .99 .CALL ..99 ..99 ..99 .99 ...CALL Expiry Date Cheque Credit Card Postal Order $20.99 FATAL FURY (FAMICOM) Our premises are bulging with games, so if you don't see what you want do not despair Just call! All Postal orders and credit card purchases will be whisked to you the same day. All prices subject to change and availability. Post and packaging Games 41 Handhelds $5 Consoles .50 VISA (+P&P) GRAND TOTAL Please make cheques/PO's payable to ZAP Post and packaging Games 21 Handhelds &5 Consoles 27.50 "


"GVE REVIEW SUPER NINTENDO REVIEW 11 3. CYBERNA SHOOT 'EM UP BY NINTENDO .00 THE VULCAN IN ALL ITS GLORY BODY SHIELD The Valken suit can take one hell of a battering, but to preserve its energy even longer, put up the Body Shield to protect you from heavy fire. Aybernator sees future earth running out of the fossil fuels that power Earth's generators and heat the world's homes. Things look bleak but luckily, in our near future astronauts discovered a distant moon that was rich in fuel and began mining it to ship back to Earth. However, a rival world had designs on the energy themselves and sent a massive task force to the moon to grab the goodies. That's when the Valken were created; huge armour-plated, blast-resistant body suits, small enough to infiltrate the enemy's massive carriers yet powerful enough to blow eight types of crap out of them! Years later, the war is still raging and a young Marinetrained Valken warrior is about to embark on his debut mission that warrior is you! BODY GLOVE Cast from purest granite with a titanium covering, the Body Glove can reduce the strongest of metals, rock and compounds to rubble with a few blows. It is for use in restricted areas and close combat. THE VULCAN Your combat chassis is equipped with the latest in high powered, armour piercing artillery. The vulcan is auto-loading, fully automatic and capable of firing ten rounds per second before reloading. The standard spraying effect has been Incorporated for blanketing effects and sporadic fire. JET PACK As you'd imagine it takes an enormous amount of power to manoeuvre the Valken and the machine can produce quite a jump when the need arises. For extra lift the latest models have been fitted with a jet pack that kicks into action for a few seconds with a press of the button. There's tons to tear apart in this game and it's hard; harder than Paul Anglin's head! The Valken sprite issized to give a good perception of its true weight and power. The animation's great too, as the beast stomps backwards and forwards, swinging its massive arms in wide circles, peppering the decks with bullets. Some enemy marines will eject from their doomed suits, get up and start running around your ankles! On later levels they try and grenade you from under neath, but you can rip the midgets to shreds with machine gun fire excellent! Everyone else has gone completely ape over this cart, but I don't like it as much as, say, Axelay or Super Aleste. For one, there are only three credits and if you fail a level you'll go way back to the beginning. Also, the constant interruption by needless text, often four or five paragraphs fong, drags the game down. However, the feel of controlling the huge robot and the pace of action make Cybernator one of the best blasts available. FOOT BOOSTERS Subtlety and surprise of attack are achieved by using the Dash. These tiny rockets in the Valken suit's heels whisk the huge frame across platform surfaces at a rapid pace so that you can fire on opponents before they even know you're there. BRIDGING THE LANGUAGE BARRIER If you're going to get hold of a copy of the game, make sure you get a UK or USA version. It's loaded with onscreen text and, unless you've got a degree in Japanese, the oriental cart will be a real disappointment. Character story lines crop up everywhere to tell you the latest in interplanetary news and how the war is going. The plot changes with your actions, so if you can't understand the text you'll be up the creek without a boat! (Left) One-on (Right) Bombarded one; my money's by unripe banana on the grey boy! skins whatever next! STEVE KEEN CMG 028 "


"EVIEW GVG MOVIE MAGIC HOW ABOUT A PICK-ME-UP? Anyone who's into top Jap cartoons like Akira will probably be gagging at Trouble in the roof-tops. the sight of Cybernator. The huge robot is almost certainly based on the characters that appear in Gundam, an ultra-violent Japanese. movie and comic in the style of the Shuffling around in a $7 million combat suit, the last thing you want to do is aforementioned flick. In the film, the run out of juice! Power-ups are scarce, but tend to come along just as you nations of the world are engaged in need them. You can get your hands on them by blasting special metal boxes war, but instead of fighting with on the platforms or by smashing certain robotic foe. The three types are: tanks they use the massive [H] Restores a mild amount of energy and laser protection to the suit. machines featured in this game. The [P] Powers up your chosen weapon to inflict even more damage.(seven (PJ battles take place in space with capsules will add one extra pulse of fire-power to your arms). rockets, lasers, cannons and even [W] Gives you an extra weapon to use in sticky situations. Samurai swords, just like here! Although I do agree with Steve on the \"too many text interruptions.\" front, it has to be said that he's nitpicking slightly. Cybernator is excellent! The main sprite robot has been heavily influenced by Gundam robots from the vast range of Super Deformer games available for the SNES. The game takes the form of an out-and-out blast frenzy, the like of which you've never seen before. The action starts off hard and gets ridiculously more so by level three in fact you'll be frothing at the mouth by the time you eventually get through to the end. The graphics are brilliant, with explosions bursting out of the screen at you, and the action never lets up; it seems to play at two speeds one hundred miles an hour or stop! Gameplay is slick and horribly addictive and would be even more so if it wasn't for the unnecessary amount of interruptions. If you only buy one blaster this year make sure you buy this I have! PAUL ANGLIN STRATEGY SKILL Meet Jake the hero and his romantic interest, Miss Thingamie! A JOY TO (BE)HOLD! Manipulation of the Valken suit can be quite mind-boggling at first. Some stages like the platforms will be a doddle, but on others, it can be a real handful. The pad's not redefinable but there are four different control selections. Here's our fave: ACTION REFLEXES You can even chew up the concrete floor! GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE % 89 % 83 % START Picking up the power can be as hazardous as leaving it! % Dash. Scream along the level's surface in a cloud of dust. Shoot. Say no more, but remember you have to reload at the end of a magazine. CVG Press once to jump and twice to kick in that jet-pack. 0 Holds the angle of your gun steady and locks it in place. R y Weapon Select. Do you wanna pop-gun or a thermonuclear heat-seeking rocket launcher? This is where you make that decision! Activates the Valken suit's shield. START Pauses the game and lets you peruse a map of the level at your leisure. THANKS... to Console Concepts (0782 712759) for the review cartridge. CVG GVG 029 "


"The GREAT CVG 1993 QUESTIONNAIRE HAVE YOUR SAY IN THE WORLD'S BEST MAGAZINE Don't think that this is lust another questionnaire! Read closely, because we're giv ing away a FREE game to the first TWENTY people picked out of the CV mail sa So, find a pen, nestle in a favourite arm-chair, snuggle up for two minutes with a 30 of CVG and you could grab yourself a new cart or gamedisk, absolutely FREE! last 6 months? Reggae Techno Other Good OOK Poor been playing computer games? 1-2 years U 3-4 years U 4-5 years Over 5 years What are your likes and dislikes about CVG's coverage of games and video entertainment? Here's a chance to be heard and make a difference. Crap tions increased Which one would you choose? Reviews Yob Hotshots Cheat Mode News .. High Scores Reader Challenges Competitions Player's Guides GO! 25 Do you remove GO! from CVG? Yes No 5 How long do you spend playing games each day? U Less than 1 hour 2-3 hours U 3-4 hours over 4 hours 10 Where do you buy your games from? Local Computer Shop Dixons U Virgin Woolworth Boots Comet Toys R Us WH Smith Microbyte U Game Mail Order HMV Our Price Other 18 What else do you do in your spare time? Play Sports Ride Bikes Watch TV Watch Videos Listen To Music Play Arcade Machines Go To The Cinema Are you: Male Female? 2 How old are you? Under:10 10 How many of your friends will buy their games on your recommendation? None 19 Do you have your own bank account? Yes No 24 When you receive your pocket money what do you mostly spend it on? Records Tapes Videos Computer Games Sweets Magazines Cinema Arcades Others (Please specify) 11 12 02 OOOOOODDDDD 15 Do you buy other magazines? If Yes please indicate which ones you buy and your order of preference by putting numbers in the boxes.... GamesMaster Bad Influence Total NMS ON Force Super Play Mean Machines Sega Power O GB Action v Super Play 11 Who pays for your games? You Your Parents 3 more than 3 19 20 or over If Yes with which bank is it held? Barclay Nat West Midland Lloyds Abbey National TSB Britannia Building Society Halifax Other 12 How many people read your copy of CVG? Which machine do you want to buy next? SNES U Amiga Megadrive Master System NES U Gameboy Game Gear OLynx Neo Geo UPC Other (please state) UDDD WN 3. What machines do you own? If you own more than one machine, indicate your favourite format with numbers, e.g. SNES 1, Amiga 2 Gameboy 3 etc) SNES Amiga Megadrive Master System UNES Gameboy Game Gear Lynx Neo Geo PC Other (please state) More than 4 16 How many of the following have you bought in the last 6 months? Records Tapes Videos O CDS 20 Do you own any of the following? Video Recorder Personal Stereo Satellite TV Mountain Bike 8 How many games do you own for your preferred machine? U 5 or less U 6-8 9-12 13-15 16-20 More than 20 13 What are your favourite bits of CVG? (Use numbers to indicate your preferences.. Reviews Yob Hotshots Cheat Mode News High Scores Reader Challenges Competitions Player's Guides GO! Right, simply fold up your questionnaire and whip it off to: YOU'RE A NOSY OLD BUNCH AT CVG YOU ARE! CVG TOWERS, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, PRIORY COURT, LONDON ECIR 3AU. And the first twenty pollsters out of the sack will win a FREE game for their machine whatever it is! Why? Because we feel like it! Post that poll now! Please don't foget to include your name, address and telephone number. 2. Do you watch the Games Master programme? 17 What is your favourite type of music? Rave Pop Rap Thrash Rock Soul Yes No 22 How do you rate the Games Master Show? Excellent 4 How long have you 9 How many games have you bought in the 14 If you could have two of the above secCVG 030 "


"SUPER BRICK SUPER NINTENDO TOP TEN SUPERSCOPE & GAMES STREETFIGHTER 2 FANTASTIC SEGA MEGADRIVE NEO GEO + MEGA CD PC ENGINE + CD ROM 4-IN-1 DEMO LOADS or NEGA PREZES MUST BE WOW ALL YOU HAVE TO DO IS ANSWER 5 SIMPLE QUESTIONS TO WON OUR TOP PRIZES SUPER BRICK **ORDER NOW**SPECIAL PRICE** .99 Including P&P 4in1 STREETFIGHTER 2 ARCADE MACHINE AMIGA 500 CARTOON PACK TICKETS TO SEE THE GLADIATORS GAMEBOY + ACCESSORIES + GAMES OF YOUR CHOICE 0891 876 816 ROSS INTERNATIONAL PO BOX 1586, WIMBORNE, DORSET BH21 7YJ TEL 0258 840102 FAX 0258 840956 ALL CHEQUES TO BE MADE PAYABLE TO 'ROSS INTERNATIONAL Calls cost 36p a min cheap rate/48p a min all other times, ALX, Box 33. M5 4GY. Please ask the permission of the person who pays the phone bill before you ring Average length of call is 5 mins which will cost 1.80 cheap rate and .40 all other times Callers are requested to answer 5 questions and leave a tiebreak answer all competitions close on the 31st April 1993 >Tel : 081 340 8565 VISA Retall Store : 2 Gladstone House, High Road, London N22 OAA Tel : 081 889 9412 Fax: 081 889 9413 We also retall at : 257/258 Tottenham Court Road, London W1 9AB Tel : 071 631 4627 Wholesale & Export : 081 341 9110 SUPER NINTENDO SEGA MEGADRIVE UNVERSAL USA (SCART) USA SCART MEGADRIVE JAP VERSION CONVERTOR RUNS UK/US/JAP PLUS SONIC USA (PALI) RUNS UK/US/JAP .99 P.O.A. .99 .99 .99 ACCESSORIES USALUS EP.O.A. MENACER LIGHT GUN 254.99 MEGADRIVE + SONIC 1 & 2 STREETFIGHTERII SOFTWARE 7199 ..8.99 USA 44.99 34.99 Plympic Gold Tazmani Pitflour God 10, 24.99.... Menopolysketball pindixy World 39.99 Rapari F1 ROC. GAME 41.99 .41.99 29.99 WWW ACCESSORIES PAL I Booster ... .34.99 .... Stealth Joystick .......................29.99 SN Pro Clear Pad............ ..... ..14.99 Arcade Power Stick......... .34.99 6 Button Turbo Pad... 9.99 Scart Lead ..... ..14.99 ... Control Pad................ Appollo Joystick.......................69.99 Action Replay............................49.99 Clutch Joystick......... .7.99 Mini Stick.. Audio Lead ......... . ..9.99 Games Convertor ........ Supercon 2 Pad.... S.F.11 Joystick .... 14.99 Stealth Joystick.......... 29.99 Action Replay 4400 USA/JAP Convertor ....... Cap Com Joystick... .-89.99 SG Clear Pad. Scope Gun............... ..59.99UK/US/JAP Joypad........ ...14.99 SOFTWARE SOFTWARE Aliens 3........ .. 34.99 34.99 Cybercop.. James Pond II........ 41.99 Side Pockets JAP Imperium... Radio Flyer ..................44.99 Aquatic Games...... 29.99 Death Dual ......... 39.99 J Madden 92 ............ Silme World.... Actralser. 41.99 39.99 James Bond Jnr...........41.99 Rampart 41.99 ..... Atomic Runner... 29.99 Desert Strike... 34.99 Kid Chameleon....... Splatterhouse Il..... Amazing Tennis..... 39.99 39.99 John Madden '93..........44.99.. ....41.99 Road Riot............... ..44.99 A. Agassi Tennis.. Dragon Fury Lemmings......... Smash TV ........... Axelay 39.99 King of the Monsters...41.99 39.99 Road Runner ..... 41.99 Bare Knuckles 2... Dungeons & Dragons.....44.99 LHX Attack...... Sonic 2............ Battle Clash .............. 41.99 Lemmings... .41.99 39.99 Skins Game Golf.. 41.99 Batman.... Euro Club Soccer... NHL Hockey 1993. Spiderman. Chuck Rock..................44.99 Magic Sword .44.99.. 39.99 Soul Blazer ...................44.99 Batman Returns... 34.99 EA Hockey.... 29.99 S Monaco GP 2 Clue... ..41.99 Mario Kart .. 44.99 Bulls Vs Lakers .... -2.44.99 Space Megaforce ........41.99 E Hollyfield Boxing..... 34.99 Contra.... ..41.99... ....39.99 Mario Paint... 49.99.........49.99 Spiderman & The X-Men..44.99 Cadash 29.99 F22 Interceptor... 34.99 Pitfighter Team USA Basketball Dinasaurs ..41.99 41.99 .49.99.........49.99 Galahad Mickey Mouse...... 34.99 California Games Predator 1 Sim City Terminator Caparatti Tennis Gem Fire 44.99 Rampart Double Dragon.... .44.99 Twisted Flipper 44.99 cabtain America Green Dog 34 98 34.99 Dungeon Master...........49.99 41.99 Star Wars. 44.99 WWF Wrestling .............. Chuck Rock... 34.99 Home Alone... 34.99 Faceball 2000 ............ Shadow Beast l..... 34.99 59.99 ...41.99 Streetfighter II .............59.99..... NHL Hockey '93............44.99 Fatal Fury... .. ...64.99 Ninja Boy... 41.99 Super Soccer Champ..41.99.........41.99 41.99 Out Of This World.... ....44.99.........44.99 TKO Super Champ.......41.99..... ...39.99 G EAR Final Fight.....................44.99.........44.99 Parodious... 44.99 Turtles ... 41.99 Gunforce.................41.99 Pilot Wings ...44.99 Warp Speed.......... ...41.99.........39.99 SOFTWARE Prince of Persia...........44.99.........44.99 G Foreman Boxing......41.99 GAME GEAR W ins Home Alone Il...............41.99 Pro Soccer Football....... GAME GEAR WWF Wrestling.........39.99.........39.99 + SONIC Aliens 3 Pacman Spiderman Hook.. .... ............41.99.........41.99 Race Driving .................41.99 .99 .99 Bart Vs Mutants Smash TV Foreman Boxing GAME BOY Batman Returns Sonic 1 or 2 Monaco GP 2 ACCESSORIES ACCESSORIES Chuck Rock Tazmania GAMEBOY, TETRIS AS OTHER Master Adaptor ..... .14.99 Action Replay Humans Wide Gear.. Replacement Lens... Terminator .8.99 BATTERIES All Games OFFER PLUS .6.99 Replacement Joystick.. TV Tuner PALI.................59.99 Big Window ll....... ......14.99 Kick off Wheel of Fortune HEADPHONES, Amplifier.... 8.99 ANY GAME AC/DC Power Supply .........6.99 G. Gear Protector ........7.99 .99 2 PLAYER LEAD Battery Pack L513 14.99 Car Adaptor -LG566...........5.99 G. Gear Traveller.......... Olympic Gold Indiana Jones .99 .99 2.99 G. Boy Protector Deluxe Carry Case ...........19.99 Sonic Dolls...... 7.99 Time Boy Watch....... .9.99 Car Adaptor L516 Outrun Europa Axe Battler Each SOFTWARE NEO 4 In 1 Fun Pack Tennis Simpsons II WWF 2 Ghostbusters Neo Geo King of the Monsters 2.....134.99 Fatal Fury.................. 119.99 2020 Super Baseball.......89.99 Adams Family Double Dragon 3 Mouse Trap Hotel Speedball 2 Xenon II Boxing System Inc Last Resort.................139.99 Soccer Brawl.............. 119.99 Ninja Combat................89.99 Allens 3 NBA Challenge 2 Dr Frankin Star Wars Megaman 2 Controller & PSU........299.99 Ninja Commando .......134.99 Alpha Mission 2...........89.99 Nam 75....................64.99 Barbie Dragons Lair Ninja Gaiden Swamp Thing Loony Toons Bart Simpson G. Forman Ninja Taro T-2 Arcade Garne Controller..................49.99 Thrash Rally ...........129.99 King of the Monster .....89.99 Blues Journey ..............64.99 World Heroes ............. 134.99 Boxing Batman Joker Terminator 2 ..89.99 Prince of Persia Memory Card................19.99 Baseball........................64.99 Spy Vs Spy Burning Flight ............ All .99Each, Best of the Best Home Alone 2 Robocop 2 Tom & Jerry Cross Sword.................89.99 Ultima 2 For .99 Art of Fighting ............ 179.99 Robo Army ................ 129.99 29.99 Cross Sword....... .......89.99 Cyberlip ........................64.99 Bionic Humans Rocky Bulllwinkle Track & Field 3 For .99 Baseball 2................... 134.99 Sengoku........... ....... 129.99 Ghost Pilot...... .......89.99 League Bowling............64.99 Commando Hunchback Roger Clements Track Meet Eight Man...................134.99 Andros Dunos ............129.99 Super Spy.... ........89.99 Top Players Golf ..........64.99 Crash Dummies J. Conners Rolands Curse il Turtle il Nicholas Golf Football Frenzy ..........134.99 Mutation Nation..........119.99 Magician Lord ..............89.99 Above prices are mail order only. Cheques/PO's to SCS, (CVG) 655 Green Lanes, London N8 OQY Tel : 081 340 8565 P&P Add  per software title,  for machines 3-5 days. Next day delivery add . We reserve the right to change prices without prior notice. E&OE. .34.99 AC/DC Ming p Hyperboy Time Boy Bandy Bow 5.99 ELLE Lazio Toxic Grand "


"A SLAP HAPPY CHAPPII Another month, another worthless batch of cretinous witterings to wade through, laugh at and regurgitate in the pages of CVG. Some mags make up their letters not CVG; we're not scared of showing just how half-witted our readers really are. That's what the boys tell me, anyway  they only have to see the letters that are lucky enough to get printed. If you want to waste my time by asking for the  prize, why not write to: YOB'S INANE MAILBAG, CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. Dear Yob, Do you think your mag is so ace? Well I've got some ra sad news for you and your Crew. In part 2 of your Streetfighter Guide, in the section called 'Beating Vega' you notice that you missed out the motorbike man, E Ho and printed Blanka twice! What is the world coming to wr can't even sit down in my armchair and read how to batte Vega with the blubber butt? I think you've all got mad Cow disease! You may think I'm over-reacting, but I'm not. And you disagree I'll come over to your cardboard box of a hous and kick your head in, so don't mess with me. Daniel Bertram, Leeds SONG OF THE W(H)ALES YOB: You're absolutely right Daniel, we were wondering when some eagle-eyed clever clogs would spot that one. Then again, Vega is the easiest character to beat with Honda, so you shouldn't really need any help. Simply jump up and down on the spot and slap him when he comes close with a high fierce punch. It could take some time, but you'll get him eventually. Thanks for pointing it outnow get a life, will yah! ars are fat, spod Gareth are always ch I think is very rude Dear Yob, In issue 133 there was a sad git called Trystan Nichols who wrote in saying that all computer players are fat, spotty chunks of crap. But writes 'l play games on my C64 (blah blah blah) my friends Luke and Gareth are always talking about their SNES in class and Streetfighter 2, not paying attention to the teacher, which I think is very rude.'I mean, what kind of a prannie is this guy to write something like that?! But even worse, he insults himself and his friends! However, you can't really blame him; he is from Wales after all! Adam Perkins, Cambridge YOB: Never underestimate the dark side of Wales! Huge, sinewy men roam the countryside, terrifying tourists with their close harmony singing and leek dancing! All that vegetable-bashing is bound to take its toll in the end! YOB'SY A LYNX THAT'S GONE CRAPPY ANY TIME ANY PLAICE Dear Yob, I am getting a SNES with Streetfighter 2 and I need the answers to these questions: 1. Which game do you think I should buy next Lemmings, Sim City or Super R-Type? 2. Is Streetfighter 2 Championship Edition going to be released on the SNES? 3. Is the Streetfighter 2 cartridge that comes with the machine the English version? 4. I have heard that the English version of SF2 runs faster than the US one is that true? Neil Skinner, West Sussex Dear Yob, How about giving me a break and not throwing any insults at me, just give me some proper answers? First of all I want to save up for a Megadrive and I see that Japanese Megadrives are cheaper-great, but I also want to buy a Mega CD. Now, would an official Mega CD work with a Japanese Megadrive ? Also would the Jap Mega CD play UK and USA games as well as Japanese disks? On another note, have an Atari Lynx that has gone wonky the screen is white and occasionally it buzzes. I've checked the games so I know it's the Lynx. I bought it less than four months ago, but have misplaced the receipt and the serial number has rubbed off the bottom. What can do about it? Please help! Ross Elliott, Loughborough YOB: 1. How should I know? It's a question of taste! My vote would go to Super R-Type though. 2. I doubt it. As we revealed exclusively in the January issue, we have it from a very reliable source that Capcom's next release in the Streetfighter saga will be Streetfighter Turbo, with souped-up moves and weapons, but you'll have to wait and see! 3. Double Doh! With a side salad of complete ineptitude to go! Of course it is, you dim git! 4. Any cartridge that uses an adaptor to run will probably seem a little slower, but not significantly so. Anyway, there's a cheat that you can stick into the Action Replay cartridge to make the game run at a superfast speed, so if you're worried snatch up a copy of that! YOB:Tough questions to answer, seeing as the Mega CD isn't even released over here yet! I'd guess that an official CD won't work with a Japanese Megadrive. Getting another country's cart to work on your Megadrive only involves shaving off a piece of plastic inside the hull, but CD is totally different. Once again you'll have to wait and see what clever jiggery pokery the Japs stick onto their disks. As for your Lynx, all machines are guaranteed for a year. Losing your receipt was a sad move but it doesn't affect your rights. Any proof of purchase will do, cheque numbers, bank statements, credit card vouchers and so on. Even if you pay cash, many shops will keep copies of receipts. Always talk to someone with the authority to make the decision to return your Lynx. If after all of this, you still have no joy, then write a letter to their boss. "


"ONE-SIDED FIGHT SEEDY ROM PROBS Dear Yob, Don't slag me off or I will sue your ass! If you are smart you will print the answers to my questions. 1. Will Streetfighter 2 be the Champion Edition for Commodore? 2. Which will be better the SNES or the Megadrive version? 3. Have you got any cheats for Streetfighter 2 on the SNES? Aidan Wallace, Frelano Dear Yob, Now, I have a UK SNES and don't know what to do about all this CD-ROM business coming out for it. I was reading that Sony will be producing a video games system that can play both SNES carts and the new CD-based software. Would it be wise to sell my SNES and buy this Sony CD-ROM? Will it be 32-bit? Are there any soccer games planned for it? And when will you be getting any information about Sony's CD-ROM in CVG? Danny C, London YOB: YOB: Sony have got together with Nintendo to produce a CD-based Play Station, but details are very sketchy at the moment. Nintendo seem to think that they'll have a fully functioning standalone CD unit for the SNES in UK stores by September, but it could be even earlier if Sega gets its Mega CD onto the streets by Spring, so I think you'd be very unwise to sell your SNES now wait and see what's coming up during the next few months. s streets by Spring September, they'll have a tation 1. Dumb-assed, monkey-brained, orangutanfaced, rodent-breathed maggot! 2. Flea-infested, wig-wearing, garlic-smelling, wart-ridden skunk! 3. You festering pile of alligator's puke, you Pot Noodle-loving insect eater, you pubescent cockroach on the backside of life! Have you had enough or do yah want some more? If you have any more questions, kindly cut out the middle man and drop them straight in the bin! AUBAG WHITE CHRISTMAS Dear Yob, Get a life! Is insulting other peoples' letters the best you can do with your pathetic existence? I just bought a Megadrive for R700 (that's South African Rand to you) and, since you're too stupid to know the current exchange rate, that's a hell of a lotta money. As you're an all-wise butt-head, tell me why it's so damn expensive (shipping can't cost that much). Jason Roos, South Africa PS You make me sick. YOB:It's probably due to the fact that only about 2% of the people who live in your country can afford to have electricity in their homes, let alone a Megadrive. If you can't sell the units in bulk you have to make a profit somewhere along the line! And as for the exchange rate, it's currently R4.5 to the pound if you're buying and R5.2 to sell. So stick that up your water cannon and smoke it! PS If I make you sick you should have seen what I had for breakfast; I can send you the regurgitated samples if you insist! CVG SCAPEGOATI TO PC OR NOT PC Dear Yob, What's up? I'm writing on behalf of all PC owners, because you're totally fabulous and clever. I just thought I'd mention that PCs aren't getting enough good games. Okay so we have X-Wing, Monkey Island and Fate Of Atlantis, but what about Turrican 2, Chase HQ, Lotus 2 and 3, Jaguar XJ220? The list is almost endless. It's just not fair; Amiga and ST owners get loads of software, but PCs only get a third of what is released on those machines. I'm sure there are twice as many people with PCs as Amigas. If there is a reason behind this I would love to hear it. I'm not complaining, I just think that you are the games geni of the universe and you should be doing Gamesmaster! Rory O'Kelly, Ireland YOB:Firstly the games that you mentioned are all arcade-based and the PC has great difficulty handling these types of games. Slap in an aircraft sim or adventure and it can't be beaten, but give it massive arcade-type sprites and it freaks! Yes, there are more games for the Amiga, but usually the games you get for a PC will beat those on other formats in quality and presentation. Lastly, although the rest of the world is going PC crazy the UK sells far more Amigas and STs for games use than PCs at present but things are set to change, not least with the launch of Amstrad's Mega-PC. "


"EXCLUSIVE YOB CLUB A SACKFUL OF PRAISE! Dear Yob, Your mag is brill and I'd first like to say how sad all the readers that try to insult you are. They never get away with it and if you take my advice and have the addresses of idiots like Aman Kundraw in issue 133 you'll go to his house and give him a huge kick in the happy sacks and one from me, too! Andrew Wallace (YOB Fan), Wales Dear Yob, 1. What is the best hand-held available? 2. Is the JB King joystick compatible with the official SNES? 3. Why are you such an excellent bodacious person? 4. Do you have a fan club and can I join? 5. What is Axelay like? 6. Can I go with Jazza to the next CES show in America? 7. Any chance of a job? P.S. Why don't you go on Gamesmaster David Skull, Hull YOB:I doubt if he has any happy sacks to kick, but thanks for the thought! CRETIN CONVENTION YOB: 1. The PC Engine GT, if you can afford it. 2. No. 3. Beats the hell out of me! I brush my teeth three times a year, only pass wind in other people's company and eat the best refuse that money can't buy! Now if that isn't the action of a divine being I don't know what is! 4. Yeah! Membership's three and a half thousand quid (cash only) and a year's subscription to Cheer Leaders Monthly. 5. The monkey's nuts! 6. Too late he's already gone! 7. If Paul Anglin messes up another Reader Challenge you might just be in with a chance! PS The crew regularly appear on Gamesmaster even though the TV show has its own rag, it can't do without the expertise of the CVG Boys! Dear Yob, Why do all the cretinous smeg-heads on the face of this jolly little planet keep bothering you with useless crap about how brilliant their new console is? Just because they lash out their carefully hoarded pennies on a spanking new console, they think that no one else in the console world has the dosh to do the same! And as if that wasn't enough, they crack some stupid jokes and think they're funny! Could you please take all the letters that these cretins write, ram them down their throats and tell them that if they think they're going to win Yob's elusive  star prize they must be in dream land. Instead you should steamroll over them while they are lying on a bed of nails, scoop up the resulting soggy mess and stick it in their cartridge slots. I am a SNES owner who's on a mission to wipe out cretins who choose to show off their new hardware by writing to Yob with their cretinous drivel. Keep up the good insults. Kenny Bukerstaff, N. Ireland YOB:Naff Off! BS NEO GAME-OS Dear Yob, I have some questions for you to answer and print in your amazing mag. 1. What are the best five games on the Neo Geo? 2. Are there any good platform games for the Neo Geo? 3. When is Streetfighter 2 going to be released on the Neo Geo? 4. When will the prices for Neo Geo games fall? 5. Please please please will you send me  to help me buy a Neo Geo? Phil Hewitt, Scarborough YOB: 1. It's hard enough to find five games on the Neo Geo, but here are mine. View Point (when it's released), Soccer Brawl and Sengoku. I know it's only three, but I said it was tough! 2. Sengoku. 3. It isn't. 4. When Nelson gets his eye back. 5. No. DERRANGED DRIBBLINGS JEALOUS MINDS Dear Yob, Yes, yes, YES! It's coming soon the new turbo charged GX4000, called the GX4500/P1. This hot bit of kit plugs straight into the back of the GX4000 and then starts cooking! Not only does this essential item allow super scaling and real rotation, it also adds a few billion colours, umpteen layers of parallax, wobble-otion rasters, 64-bit, 10-squillion channel CPU clocked at 196 MHZ-it even has its own built-in VIC-20 emulator! So forget about Amigas, Segas, VIC 20s and even Nintendos and purchase a GX4000 plus the new GX4500/P1. But be quick-stocks won't last, especially with this weather. Alan Mstrad, Brouhahas Dear Yob, Just answer my questions and don't give me any lip, yah hear! 1. Is Probotector any good? 2. Please tell me the code on Streetfighter 2 for SNES to make it turn into Streetfighter 92. 3. Why is Yob's mailbag so good? 4. Please make sure you tell me the Streetfighter 2 code so that I can make my mate jealous, because he says he has it but I don't believe him. David Lauton, Duffryn YOB: 1. Yes. 2. No. 3. 'Cos I write it! 4. Oh, alright then. Just press XXXXXXXXXXXXXX YOB:Please close the door on your way out. "


"* KRAZY KONSOLES * CIG CONSOLE V CONCEPTS V VISA of .00 NINTENDO SUPER FAMICOM SOFTWARE No 1 FOR SERVICE...No 1 FOR NEW GAMES PLEASE CALL FOR LATEST PRICE DUE TO EXCHANGE RATE FLUCTUATIONS Mail Order/Shop address THE SUPERGUN Console Concepts PLAY ARCADE PCB BOARDS ON SCART TV OR MONITOR INCLUDES The Village BUILT-IN POWER SUPPLY Newcastle-u-Lyme  2 X APOLLO 6 BUTTON JOYSTICKS Staffs ST5 1QB @IX SCARI LEAD Access  + P&P (0782) 712759 ARCADE BOARDS AVAILABLE INCLUDE SHOP HOURS STREETFIGHTER II 92, TRACK & FIELD, DRAGON Sat/Weekdays 9.00 5.30pm NINJA, MIDNIGHT RESISTANCE Thursdays 9.00 1.00pm RING FOR PRICES TURBO EXPRESS COLOUR HANDHELD SNES SCART USA PACK (USA) CONSOLE INCLUDES HANDHELD CONSOLE, PLAYS ALL USA GAMES AND JAP PC @SNES SCART CONSOLE  1 STANDARD JOYPAD ENGINE GAMES WITH CONVERTOR CARTRIDGE . 1 AUTOFIRE JOYPAD ONLY $175 + P&P . STREETFIGHTER II  1 SCART LEAD JAP CONVERTOR  TUK POWER SUPPLY  RUNS JAP/USA TURBOCHIP GAMES IN STOCK INCLUDE: SPLATTERHOUSE, FALCON, PARA GAMES SOL STARS JACKIE CHAN, DEVIL CRUSH, YO BRO. WE ALSO SELL EXTRA JOYPADS, MULTIPAD ADAPTOR AND CARRY CASES  946 139 SONIC BLAST HP 30 32 BIT. 142 ONLY  + P&P   GOAL  AMAZING TURBO DUO CD ROM SYSTEM NEW TURBO DUO CD ROM (USA)  SCART LEAD & POWER SUPPLY  3 GAMES ON CD (BONKS ADV, YS I & II, GATE THUNDER TWO GAMES ON TURBO CARD (BONKS REVENGE & NINJA SPIRIT) O PLAYS USA CARDS + CD ROMS ONLY  P&P [25 32 .:35 SUPER OFF ROAD.. CALL ROLLING THUNDER 2, CALL RISKY WOODS CALL ROAD RASHI. CALL SHADOW OF BEASTI CALL TALESPIN ..CALL STEEL TALONS. CALL SMASH TV a CALL CALL SIDE POCKET kanala SPLATTERHOUSE 2 ..CALL PGA TOUR GOLF 2 SPEEDBALL 2 THUNDERFORCE IV. CALL CAPRIATI TENNIS... CALL PRO QUARTERBACK. CALL RBI 3 BASEBALL CALL RBI 4 BASEBALL.... CALL DESERT STRIKE TERMINATOR 2 THE ARCADE . CALL UNIVERSAL SOLDIER CALL WRESTLEMANIA.... XENON 2...... WORLD TROPHY SOCCER.. .CALL EUROPEAN CLUB SOCCER...........CALL CALL UNIVERSAL ADAPTER SUPER FAMICOM 2 Joypads. All Leads The universal adaptor will UK Power Supply Unit allow you to play any game Scart........................... on any machine. Plus Mario & Axeley.... *Play Jap/American games on your UK SNES... SUPER NES(US)+MARIO \"Plays Mario Kart, Pllot Wings 2 Joypads. All Leads and other Scart games. Takes Jap & USA Carts PO BOX 200 \"The universal adaptor is a Scart. 155 HALIFAX Top Quality product, supplied Without Mario/1Pad..... WEST YORKSHIRE with full instructions. only: N.B. Scart Machines are 17% faster than PAL H X 1 3LY APPOLLO PRO JOYSTICK... SN PRO PAD. 18 TEL: 0422 342 901 CAPCOM STREET FIGHTER 11 STICK..... 69 OFFICE HOURS: MON TO SAT 9-5.30PM SCART LEADS ALL TYPES ONLY  CLOSED THURSDAY AM (STOCKTAKING) TEL: 0422 367 730 EVENINGS 5.30 10PM & ALL DAY SUNDAY ALIEN VS PREDATOR (FIGHTINGNATOR ASSAULT SUITS VALKENCYBERNATOR........ SNES USA SOFTWARE AXELAY............... BATMAN RETURNS ................. 452 CAVEMAN NINJA 2/CONGOS CAPER. .847 ADDAMS FAMILY ... CONTRA SPIRIT... $39 AMAZING TENNIS .......... F1-EXHAUST HEAT.......... AMERICAN GLADIATORS .242 F1-EXHAUST HEAT 2........... CALL BART'S NIGHTMARE .E39 FATAL FURY (12 MEG)... 655 BATTLETOADS.... GOLDEN FIGHTER (12 Meg).... .242 BEST OF THE BEST (FIGHTING) HUMAN GRAND PRIX .....  BULLS VS BLAZERS..  KING OF THE MONSTERS . BUSBY THE BOBCAT. MARIO WORLD 4............ . MICKEYS MAGICAL QUEST...  CALIFORNIA GAMES II NORTH STAR KEN 6.... . CHESTER CHEETAH..  PARODIUS CHUCK ROCK.... .. RANMA NIBUNNOICHI 12 16 MEG) COMBAT TRIBES ...... RIVAL TURF 2/RUSHING BEAT 2 16 MEG) COOL WORLD.. CALL SKY MISSION WINGS II ACES HIGH. DEATH VALLEY RALLY... ..242 DESERT STRIKE.............. STAR FOX (FX-CHIP 3D 32 BIT) GODS....  SUPER PINBALL JAKI CRASH. . IREM SKINS GOLF ................  SUPER STAR WARS ........ TINY TOONS ADVENTURES JIMMY CONNERS' PRO TENNIS TOUR.. ..:49 TOP RACER 2.... JOHN MADDEN 93..... CALL KRUSTYS SUPER FUN HOUSE 939 SUPER SPECIALS MARIO KART .......  MVP (US) FOOTBALL... . ACTRAISER... 527 MICKEY MAGICAL QUEST... AREA 88/UN SQUADRON..... MYSTICAL NINJA......  ASTRAL BOUT-KICK BOXING NCAA BASKETBALL-SLAM DUNK CASTLEVANIA 4..... NHLPA HOCKEY '93..... LEMMINGS... ON THE BALLICAMELTRY 99 LEVELS! METAL JACK-CYBER POLICE.... OUT OF THIS WORLD...... PHALANX THE ENFORCE FIGHTER Q-BERT 3.... ROBOCOP 3 (USA)... 534 RAMPART ................... SOUL BLAZER..... 9.29 SOUL BLAZER..... SUPER BOWLING.. ... ... SPACE MEGAFORCE SUPER ALESTE SUPER BATTLETANK (USA)....... SPANKY'S QUEST... . SUPER GHOULS & GHOSTS..... 35 SPIDERMAN & THE X-MEN.  SUPER PANG/SUPER BUSTER BROS STREET FIGHTER II 432  SUPER SMASH TV TOP RACER/TOP GEAR ......... . SUPER STAR WARS....... CALL TURTLES IN TIME......... SUPER STRIKE EAGLE .... ... WALALAE COUNTRY CLUB GOLF (3D).. 35 WING COMMANDER WWF SUPER WRESTLEMANIA. ZELDA H.. E39 * KRAZY KONSOLES *KRAZY PRICES CALL US NOW! * MEGA DRIVE ALL PRODUCTS MEGA DRIVE PAL TV VERSION MEGA TAKES ALL CARTS. ENGLISH INSTRUCTIONS, ALL LEADS | ARE NEW AND POWER SUPPLY & JOYPAD DESPATCHED ON ONLY.. DRIVE PLUS SONIC, ESWAT OR RECEIPT OF WONDERBOY 3... John Madden 93 ..... YOUR ORDER. JAP SOFTWARE UK/US SOFTWARE Jordon Vs Bird........ Lemmings ............... Allen Storm ............. Alien 3.......................35 LHX Attack Choppper  Alisia Dragoon ........ JAPANESE ADAPTORS: Ariel the Little Mermaid. Allows use of Jap games ana Leaderboard Golf ... Bad Omen .............. Aquabatic Games ... Bare Knuckle .......... Lotus Turbo UK Mega Drive Am Gladiators ......... TOP QUALITY ONLY.........28 Challenge ................ Bare Knuckle H (16/9... 43 Andre Agassi .......... Atomic Runner........ Marble Madness ..... Bart vs Mutants ...... Megalomania........... Crude Buster........... 62 || Micro Macines......... MEGA ACCESSORIES D.Robinson S.Court Buck Rodgers .........|| Bulls Vs Lakers....... | $26 Out Of This World... D Duck Quackshot . TURBO/SLO-MO JOYPAD  29 PGA Tour Golf .........32 California Games....22 ESWAT.............. .. PGA Tour Golf 2 .....139 RGB SCART LEAD ...... Capt America ...........3 Pitfighter.................. Fighting Masters..... MAGS Chuck Rock.............P Gynoug... . EGM (USA) MAG........95 ... Chakan-Forever Man.537 || Populous... Hellfire ....... . ELECTRIC BRAIN Chester Cheetah.. $35 || Powermonger .......... Jewel Master.  HYPER FANZINE ........00 Crue ball .................. ca|Predator 2...... .. Kid Chameleon Rampart............ Dark Castle...............19 MEGA-CD ... Ninja Gaiden PLUS 2 GAMES Risky Woods ........... Desert Strike ............ Olympic Gold.. MEGA-CD ROM(PAL/SCART) Dragon's Fury .........||Road Rash............... Populous ............ ONLY.- ons 542|Road Rash 2............ Dungeons & Dragons..  Steel Empire.............19 ECCO The Dolphin .||Robocod (J Pond Strider.... ........ .... CD-SOFTWARE Euro Club Soccer ... Rolling Thunder II... Sonic 2.... . SOL FEACE... Rolo To The Rescue .. . F-22 Interceptor ...... Stormlord ................. EARNEST EVANS ........... Fatal Fury................Call Side Pocket Pool .... Super Monaco GP2  BLACK HOLE ASSAUT Flashback (12 meg)...Call Super Smash TV..... Super Shinobi II ...... THUNDERSTORM FX..... Gadget Twins ..........||Splatterhouse 2 ...... Thunder Force IV.... || RANMA 3....... I WONDERDOG........ Taz Mania ................ Galahad...................135 Trouble Shooter...... || TIME GAL............ Green Dog............... Terminator............... Twinkle Tale ............ || ANNET AGAIN... Hockey (EA/NHL)....E29|T 2 Arcade ............... IL AFTERBURNER II Wonder Boy 3.......... LININJA ALESTE Hockey NHL '93...... Toxic Crusaders ..... World of Illusion ..... ROADBLASTERS FX Humans...................Call Wonder Boy 5......... AFTERBURNER Immortal .................. | WWF Wrestlemania  OVER 100 TITLES IN I CLASSIC COLLECTION 4 J Capriati Tennis ....||X-Men ....................... Call STOCK ON THE NIGHT STRIKER 30... John Madden '92 .... Menacer + 6 Games . MEGADRIVE! MAX 330 MEGA PRO-GEAR SPEC 290 Baseball... Magician Lord....... Andro Dunos Mutation Nation 85 Alpha Mission 2 OFFICIAL NAM 1975, anh An of Fighting  Ninja Combat... UK VERSION Baseball Stars Ninja Commando Baseball Stars 2 Puzzled............ TAL, SCART, Blues Journey Robo-Army...... Burning Fight .... Sengoko. JOYSTICK, PSL Crossed Swords... Sengoko 2... Cyber Lip ....... Soccer Brawl..... & ILADS... Super Side Kick. ONLY... Feb Super Sgy Football Frenzy .....  Thrash Rally King of the Monsters Top Players Golf King of the Monsters 2..... League Bowling .............  World Heroes.... Memory Card..... Joystick.. NEO-GEO T-SHIRTS PLEASE ADD ,50 PER GAME FOR 1st CLASS RECORDED DELIVERY MACHINES  COURIER DELIVERY .646 CALL PACKAGE DETAILS SNES SCART USA. 1 PAD  SNES USA SCART 2 PADS MARIOWORLD...... CALL TURBOGRAFX USA SCARTGAME..165 ATARILYNX || ANY GAME. . 199 GAVE GEAR SONCEPSU-GALAGA 90...2140 MEGADRIVE CONSOLE PSU + 1 JOYPADS +SONIC HEDGEHOG..............120 NEO GEO+2X 4 BUTTON JOYSTICKS PSU ANY GAME UP TO 2700380P&P JAPANESE SUPER FAMICOM ASSAULT SUIT VALKEN CYBERNATOR). CALL STAR WARS CALL JAKI CRUSH PINBALL. COMBATRIBES.... TINY TOONS. CALL RANMA 1/2 PART 2 KING OF RALLY CALL SUPER FI HERO CALL FLYING HERO.... CALL SUPER VOLLEYBALL I FATAL FURY CALL MICKEY MOUSE... ...CALL TETRIS 2 BUMBLISS CALL RUSHING BEAT 2. CALL TURTLES IV. CALL DRAGON QUEST V... CALL STREET FIGHTER I CALL HUMAN GRAND PRIX... ...CALL TOWER ATHLETE...... CALL SUPER SHANGHAI CALL COSMO GANG..... .. CALL MAGIC SWORD.... . AXELAY... CALL SEGA MEGADRIVE US/UK ECCO THE DOLPHIN CALL ALIEN ... CALL AQUATIC GAMES.... CALL BULLS & LAKERS..... BATMAN RETURNS CYBERCOP CORPORATION CALL CAPTAIN AMERICA..... DUNGEONS & DRAGONS... DROBINSONS BASKETBALL. CALL DEVILISH... WORLD OF ILLUSION MICKEY DONALD CALL GALAHAD.. GADGET TWINS... INDIANA JONES... JOE MONTANA 93. CALL LEMMINGS.... CALL LHX ATTACK CHOPPER. LOTUS TURBO CHALLENGE........ NHLPA ICE HOCKEY 93 JOHN MADDEN 93.... PIGSKIN FOOTBALL.. .... ....CALL FIRE POWER 2000 (SWIV)... CALL F1 HOC. CALL GUNFORCE CALL JIMMY CONNORS TENNIS... .......CALL JOE & MAC ret CALL IMPERIUM ...CALL KAUSTYS FUNHOUSE.. MYSTICAL NINJA LEMMINGS CALL TEAM USA B'BALL MICKEYS MYSTICAL QUEST... CALL ON THE BALL CALL NCAA BASKETBALL......... CALL OUT OF THIS WORLD..... NBA ALL STAR BASKETBALL . ...CALL JOHN MADDEN 93.... ...CALL NHLPA ICE HOCKEY..... PRINCE OF PERSIA..... CALL SUPER HIGH IMPACT PUSHOVER PILOTWINGS CALL AXELAY CALL CHESTER CHEETAH... STAR WARS... Q BERT 3..... ....CALL ROBOCOP 3 CALL ALIEN GHOULS & GHOSTS.... CALL SUPER SOCCER CHAMP......... CALL SUPER MARIOWORLD...... SIM CITY ..CALL SKULL JAGGER SUPER BOWLING... CALL SPIDERMAN & X MEN ..CALL SPACE MEGAFORCE CALL SUPER BATTLETANK SMASH TV... S. MARIOKART CALL STREETFIGHTER II...... CALL TOP GEAR CALL TURTLES IN TIME...... UN SQUADRON......... CALL TKO BOXING....... CALL WORDTRIS.... ..CALL SMASH TV WING COMMANDER.... CALL WRESTLEMANIA... CALL WINGS IREM SKINS GOLF........ ...... CALL ZELDA CALL HOCK. KING OF MONSTERS... FACEBALL 2000 CALL TURTLES IN TIME RAMPART........ CALL FINAL FANTASY L. . CALL DINO CITY CALL FINAL FIGHT..... CALL PRO QUARTERBACK.... . CALL ALL US GAMES NEED CONVERTOR FOR THUNDERSTORM EX USE ON UK SNES, OUR CONVERTOR PLAYS ALL GAMES RELEASED SO FAR INC MARIO KART, ONLY  CALL AEROBLASTERS, ANDRE PANZA KICK BOXING, BLOODY WOLF, BOMBERMAN BONKS REVENGE, DEVIL CRUSH, FINAL LAPTWIN, GALAGA 88. GUNBOAT, JACKIE CHAN, NIGHT CREATURES PARASOL STARS, RAIDEN. SPLATTERHOUSE. SUPER STAR SOLDIER. TALESPIN, R TYPE (COMPLETE), SOLDIER BLADE NEUTOPIA II. IMPOSSAMOLE GAMES FROM 3S TOLS CALL FOR DETALS GAME GEAR SONIC L...... CALL PRINCE OF PERSIA... CALL ALIENS ....... ..CALL SUPER OFF ROAD.......... CALL SHINOBIL... CALL BATMAN RETURNS ...... CALL INDIANA JONES... CALL KLAX.. CALL LEMMINGS..... CALL BART VS SPACE MUTANTS ..CALL GAMEBOY MARIOWORLD IL.. CALL LEMMINGS...... STAR WARS CALL T2 THE ARCADE............ CALL HUMANS. HUMANS. CALL WWF WRESTLING II..... CALL DRACULA.......... . ... CALL MISSILE COMMAND... DIRTY LARRY CALL CALL US SUPER NINTENDO AMAZING TENNIS... CALL BEST OF BEST (KICK BOXING) BULLS VS BLAZERS CALL BARTS NIGHTMARE... CALL CHUCK ROCK..... CALL CYBERSPIN...... CALL CONTRAIT. DESERT STRIKE..... CALL DOUBLE DRAGON............. CALL DEATH VALLEY RALLY ROAD RUNNER .....CALL CALL PRINCE OF PERSIA... WE HAVE FAR MORE GAMES ON ALL CONSOLES THAN WE CAN PRINT IN THIS ADVERT..IF YOU CAN NOT SEE A TITLE YOU REQUIRE PLEASE CALL US NOW. sances PREDATOR 1 WE ALSO STOCK LYNX GAMEBOY, PC ENGINETURBOGRAFX, SUPER NINTENDO SUPER FAMICOM CONSOLES AND GAMES, SHOP PRICES MAY VARY. ALL GOODS SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY CALL SUPER SONG TERMINATOR ...185 Last Resort 04EDIDERUP ORDER DETAILS: All consoles are despatched Parcel Force Next Day Delivery (Saturday delivery is extra .00) Cheques Please allow 5 working days for clearance. P+P: Consoles .00, Joysticks .50, Each game .50 Please state if you are a new customer or please quote your customer number. All machines and games are Japanese unless otherwise stated. EURO Fatal Fury Viewpoint. 19 SEGA GENESIS GAME GEAR MEGA DRIVE, NEO GEO SUPER FAMICOM, PC ENGINE, NINTENDO GAME BOY TURBO GRAFX LYNX & THEIR LOGOS ARE REGISTERED TRADEMARKS OF THEIR RESPECTIVE COMPANIES AND WE ARE NOT RELATED NOR ENDORSED BY THEM. WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO ALTER PRICES WITHOUT NOTIFICATION OVER 15,000 SATISFIED CUSTOMERS!!! IF YOU CANT SEE WHAT YOU WANT CALL PLEASE CALL FOR AVAILABILTY BEFORE ORDERING!!! ORDER HOTLINE 9AM TO 6.30PM TEL 0782 712759 "


"ZUG PAGE REVIEW IVE SUPER TRICK-OFF MEGADRIVE SPORTS SIM BY US GOLD .99 HELP! I'M CORNERED! TIEKTE ver the last three years, the football genre has seen one real benchmark game Kick Off 2 on the Amiga and ST. Quite simply, Anco's classic is one of the most playable, exciting and addictive titles ever. It's already been converted to a vast amount of different formats, from Super Nintendo to Game Gear, with varying degrees of success. With a pitiful amount of soccer sims on the Megadrive, let alone good ones, 16-bit Sega owners have been crying out for a decent version of our national sport on their systems; US Gold reckon that their Kick Off 2 convert, cleverly dubbed Super Kick Off, is just such a game. Are they right? Is it Premiere League stuff or ready for relegation? All the best footy teams are wellsmart at taking corners, and it's important that you learn this skill as it could save your bacon when you're a goal down and time is fast running out! Unlike all other versions of Kick Off, the Megadrive game does not furnish the player with an eight-direction box all you've got to do is push the joystick to the position you see fit and hit that button! The ball will sail in whatever direction you have chosen ready to search out your striker and bang a goal off. Corners Made Simple. Lesson One kick. JUST A TOUCH It's as though every soccer sim these days lets you curl the ball in mid-flight, but it was Kick Off 2 which successfully introduced the feature. Simple to perform, just push the directional control left or right immediately after you've kicked the ball to bend in the direction you choose very handy if the opposition keeper's a bit tasty. Having played more versions of Kick Off than most I can say that some have been the bee's knees, others have turned out a disaster. I'd heard that the Megadrive convert was shaping up well, so obviously expectations were running high when I shoved the cartridge into the slot. There are two questions which need to be asked here. The first, and most important, has to be 'Is Super Kick Off a good game?' Yes it is I'd say the best football sim currently available on the Megadrive. There's a wealth of options allowing the player to tailor practically the entire game to suit his skills, and when you get into the action proper it's pleasing to note that the graphics are impressive the game fairly zips along and the controls are easy to learn it you've played a version of Kick Off before. Then you've got to ask yourself 'Is this a good interpretation of Kick Off?' I have to admit that it is; playing against an international-level computer side is too difficult to beat, and Kick Off is, by its very nature, more playable with a joystick than a pad (so grab a good Megadrive-compatible stick), but generally this is a sound title which looks good, plays well and really comes into its own in two-player mode. Hurrah Super Kick Off is king on the big Sega! PAUL RAND HAIR CVG 036 RAISING MONEY FOR NOTHING, KICKS FOR Lesson Two control and aim. Football is about kicking a ball with your foot, not smacking the nearest available opponent in the shins with your size nines, which is why there's a referee always at hand to sort out the bad boys. If you get flattened by a member of the other team you are awarded a free kick; this can be especially useful if you're near to his goal area, as it's possible to bend the ball around the wall which the opposition forms and catch the goalie unawares to score the odd stunner! Lesson Three-shoot. GOAL! "


"HVG o+:+T CHRISTIAN Who'll get there first if it's Christian, the Reds go one up! IWAS NEVER OFFSIDE, From here it looks as though nothing's available... REFT which is why Super Kick Off features a couple of cup competitions! Take on some of the best sides in the country to ultimately carry away the FA Cup or, if your skills are sufficiently high, Here's a feature that's rare in combattle it out with the cream of the puter football the offside rule! It European crop to pick up the UEFA has been used before in Kick Off Cup. There's also an international the Amiga version had a data disk competition included, featuring released called \"The Final Whistle teams such as West Germany and which included an option to let you Holland the supreme test of a choose offsides but the programplayer's mettle. mers also fiddled about with the handling of the players and ruined the overall feel of the game. If you're unfamiliar with the rules of soccer, a player is offside if, when the ball is played by a member of your team, there are no opposition As well as the various cup tournaplayers between you and their goal ments, players can participate in a (not including the goalkeeper). league competition in which each Simple, eh? player selects a team and plays his way through the season, taking on both human (if more than one player is taking part) and Megadrive-controlled opponents, with the goal of finishing at the top of the table. A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN 608222 THE CUP THAT CHEERS ...but a simple pass... Friendly games are all well and good, but there's nothing better than carrying away the odd trophy, Which one shall you practice control, free kicks or penalties? SIPEM KAKO ..can mean the difference between winning or losing! GVG 037 "


"GVC LOADS OF MODES TERTEXTOS Not everyone wants to play against the Megadrive all the timeindeed, Kick Off is famed as being one of the ultimate two-player games so US Gold have included a number of player combinations to tantalise and amaze! Go up against another human in bogstandard two-piayer mode, or even team up with a pal and take on a console-controlled team with the pair of you sharing control of the same side. And if you just want to put your feet up and watch two sides slug it out on the pitch without you having to lift a finger, select the Computer vs Computer option, make a cuppa and become an armchair supporter! I've only ever played Kick Off a few times and that was against Rand. After those attempts I kind of gave up on it for a while; the idea of being constantly thrashed 8-0 by some Northern arm chair supporter soon lost its appeal after a few weeks. Kick Off has always been a bit of a strange game in terms of conversions; there was the brilliant Master System version and the appalling Super Nintendo version! But what of the latest incarnation from US Gold? It's the biz! I could never quite get to grips with the Amiga version due to it's outrageous speed, but on the Megadrive version you're given the choice of three speed settings. The joy. pad seems to control the ball really nicely and although the ball doesn't stick to your feet, it is a little easier to control than the original. There are a stack of options to choose from, and all the rules have made it in even the offsides! The game is addictive enough in one-player mode but if there's two of you, you'll be playing into the early hours of the morning! A brilliant version of Kick Off that shouldn't be missed and it won't be long before I'm banging eight goals past Rand, just you wait and see! PAUL ANGLIN L HOFFMANN Phew! What a fine save from the boy Hoffman. ENGLAND SPAIN TRANCE GERMANY ITALY SHLDEN NETHERLANDS STATI AND XE THI SHITZERLAND FINLAND FORE PORTUGAL C.1.5. UENMARK WALES RELETIIM ENGLAND GERMANY STRATEGY SKILL The clash of the titans. And Germany. DEJ L HOFFMANN ACTION REFLEXES GRAPHICS HACK AND YOU'RE It's too powerful for the defender GOAL! KNACKED! Should you be chopped down in the FULL TIME eighteen-yard box, you'll be awarded a penalty that'll give you the LIVERPOOL MANCHESTER opportunity to put one past the 'keeper in a one-on-one, striker versus goalie situation. A moving arrow appears between the posts, and what you've got to do is stop the arrow where you think will be the best place for the ball to go to. Of course, it's not that simple the goalkeeper may well save your shot. And the tables can be turned, too, with you in goal and the Megadrive having a crack at goal. INT. % 89 % 92 SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE CVG Sign on! Sign on! With a pen! In your hand! And you'll never work again! You'll nee-verr wo-ork ag-aiiin! samanstendur sem REFEREE RUUD PESKE BECERESKE CVG CVG 038 "


"CVG VISA SALES HOTLINE 081 471 4810 SUPER NINTENDO LONLILC LTD  ALIEN 3... .. FINAL FIGHT ............... ... OUT OF THIS WORLD .......... TERMINATOR .. AMERICAN GLADIATORS CALL GOAL ............ ............... OUTLANDER ...................... TECHMO SUPER AMAZING TENNIS. .. HUMANS.......... .. PRINCE OF PERSIA.............. NBA BASKETBALL ..... . BATMAN (ROJ) .......... . IREM SKINS.... . PGA TOUR GOLF.................. TINY TOONS  BEST OF THE BEST ............. JOHN MADDEN '93............... ROAD RUNNER................. TOM & JERRY .....  BLUES BROTHERS .............. SIM EARTH............................ TOXIC CRUSADERS.........  CHUCK ROCK LOST VIKINGS SPIDERMAN & THE X-MEN.. UN SQUADRON .. CONTRA III. MARIO KART.... STREET COMBAT.............CALL WAYNES WORLD........... . COOL WORLD............... .. MICKEY'S MAGICAL QUEST STREETFIGHTER II.............. WAILALAE GOLF................  CYBERNATOR ...... .. MYSTICAL NINJA.................. SUPER DOUBLE DRAGON........ WING COMMANDER .............. .. DUNGEON MASTER ....... ...  NCAA BASKETBALL............ SUPER STAR WARS ..........CALL FATAL FURY ........ ... NHLPA HOCKEY 93............. SUPER SOCCER CHAMP....... ... ...  ***............ UNIVERSAL ADAPTOR UK/USA/JAP  ACTION REPLAY ADAPTOR UK/USA/JAP  MEGADRIVE ALIEN 3....... ...................00 HUMANS............................00 OUTLANDER ...... ..............CALL SUPER KICK OFF ...............CALL AMAZING TENNIS ............00 KING OF THE MONSTERS.00 OUT OF THIS WORLD.......00 TAZ MANIA......... .......00 ARIEL THE MERMAID .......00 KING SALMON... ....00 PGA TOUR GOLF .................. TINY TOONS ...............00 AMERICAN GLADIATORS.CALL LEMMINGS..................00 POPULOUS ............. ..00 WWF WRESTLEMANIA.....00 ATOMIC RUNNER.............00 LHX ATTACK CHOPPER...00 SIDE POCKET ...................00 WORLD OF ILLUSION.......00 ECCO DOLPHIN............00 LOTUS TURBO CHALLENGE...00 SONIC 2..........................00 FATAL FURY .....................CALL MOHAMMED ALI BOXING.00 STRIDER II........ ...........CALL HIT THE ICE .......................00 NBA ALL STAR CHALLENGE...00 SUPER BATTLE TANK......00 ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT ALL GAMES +  P&P ALL CONSOLES + .50 P&P ALL HANDHELDS +  P&P CALL ON 081 471 4810 (10 LINES)  . NOZWEWOO  GAMEBOY GAME GEAR GAMEBOY + TETRIS + LINK LEAD + KRUSTY'S FUNHOUSE ......... . ALIEN 3. .. PRINCE OF PERSIA. HEAD PHONES + BATTERIES LETHAL WEAPON.  SPECIAL PRICE. ... LOONY TOONS..... ARIEL THE LITTLE MERMAID ...... SUPER OFF ROAD. ............. MICKEYS DANGEROUS CHASE..  ALIEN 3. . CHUCK ROCK .. SONIC 2 STAR WARS...  BLUES BROTHERS . SUPER MARIO LAND 2.. . EVANDER HOLYFIELD BOXING ... TAZMANIA.. COOL WORLD.... . TERMINATOR 2..... . EMPIRE STRIKES BACK......... .. TOP GUN GUTS & GLORY... LEMMINGS .. TERMINATOR. . JOE & MACK... .. WWF SUPERSTARS II.... . PREDATOR 2 ..... .......... .... THE HUMANS..    IF YOU DON'T SEE THE GAMES YOU WANT CALL!!! TRADE ENQURIES WELCOME TEL: 081 503 5875 FAX: 081 471 4537 WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO CHANGE PRICES E & OE. ALL TITLES ARE USA UNLESS OTHERWISE STATED ORDER FORM EITHER 1....CALL ON 081-471 4810 (10 LINES) OR 2....FILL THIS IN GAME PRICE P&P TOTAL NAME Mr/Mrs/Miss. ADDRESS. POSTCODE PHONE C/CARD TTTTTTT EXPIRY DATE ODDD SIGNATURE GRAND TOTAL  ONLILC LTD Please make cheques & Postal Orders out to ZONETEC LTD Send order to: ZONETEC LTD, DEVER HOUSE, 764 BARKING ROAD, LONDON E13 9PJ CVGMAR "


"LL COMPUTER WHIZZ KIDS. CALLINGOWDOWN ON ALLESED SOCCE GET TILHE LATEST SIMULATE 360 US 12.75 THE ALL-NEW UK'S NO.1 FOOTBALL MAG! SAYA, JA 04409550264656 ION IN MATCH-THE U No. 1 FOOTBALL MAGAZ IT'S ALSO IT'S ALSO THE ALL-NEW UKS NO T MATCH IS PACKED CONSOLE WITH GREAT CRAZY WITH A ACTION WEEKLY POSTERS OF HINTS, TIPS TODAY'S BIG AND CHEATS NAME STARS PLAYFEATURE FOR ALONG WITH GROUND SOCCER FACTS, FUN, GAMES AS FEATURES, WELL AS PUZZLES, SONIC AND PRIZES AND STREETFIGHER PREVIEWS. INSIDE POSTER POWER! HOW MUCH CAN YOU HANDLE? FA CUP TEAM CHALLENGE NEW! BIG TIME Boro's Craig Hignett! SHERON UMBRO HEROES Spotlight on Manchester City's Maine man! mitsmadie Man. Utel's Paul Incewho did he pretend to be? AIER LE YOUR VERY LAST CHANCE TO MEET GARY LINEKER! PLUS QUASER GOODIES! MATCH FACTS STV AND MATCH FACTS PLUS! FISONS IT'S GOT FACTS. STATS, PREVIEWS AND FIXTURES PLUS ALL YOUR NELLY FOOTY. ME NOW ON SALE EVERY TUR     1 OF THE No. 1  SURE YOU PICK PICK UP A COPY EEK "


"46 THE CVG VALENTINE GAMES * Steve's latest illness. If you hold the sickly Steve counter, throw a six to continue. 12 You find a tenner in the street use it to buy a big bunch of roses for Jenny and move forward three places. Oh no! A software house didn't like the review which you gave its game. Miss a turn while you get back into their good books Love is in the air! The CVG boys are the business when it comes to games hilarity, but who comes out on top when it comes to wooing fine girlies? Are the boys hot? Or just rot? You can find out, by playing this special CVG Valentine Game! 15 Jen bui the move unti five 13 LOVER'S LEAP 17 You woo Jen. with some fre concert tickets. Take extra throw. START! 2 A top new game comes in for review. Miss a turn to play the game 18 The Mean Machines team tell Jenny that you're crap at Sonic The Hedgehog. Move back two places. All the lads moon over the lovely Jenny all day. The Nintendo Magazine Sysevery day, but she's only got time for one lucky tem boys ask young feller. Who could it be Garth? Randy? Jenny out for a date. Go back one place. Jon? Steve? Or even, heaven forbid, Anglin? You and up to four players can become one of the CVG lads and attempt to win the attentions of our Jen! Simply cut out the counters, choose which of the boys you want to be, and get ready to play! You realise Jenny's been looking at the RULES bogey hanging from your nose. Go back Each player rolls the die the first to two places throw a six begins the game by throwing again for his move, with turns *Garth's Meeting! If being taken in a clockwise direction. you hold the The first player to get to the finish Garth counter, throw a six to continue wins the hand of GO!'s alluring Art Editor but beware of the perils and pitfalls along the way! 44 THE LOVER'S LEAP! Dotted around the game board, you'll notice a number of Lover's Leaps. To cross them, the player must throw the appropriate number to land on the lover's leap square (for example, were you three squares away from the start of the leap, you'd have to throw a three). If the wrong number is thrown, the player must wait until his next go for another try. Throwing a correct number only entitles the player to move onto the lover's leap square he cannot cross until his next turn. 19 Jenny gives you the eye from across the room. Move forward three places. * Anglin's shop run! If you hold the Anglin counter, Throw a six to continue You're the worst Streetfighter player ever. Miss two turns while Jenny laughs at you. A software hous well-pleased w your rave revie of Shoot'Em Up Move forward t places. CVG 041 "


"OMPUTER CVE TERMINATOR 2 13940770 "


NA


"48 THE COUNTERS Here's your chance to decapitate the boys! Just cut off their heads and use your favourite Rambo-esque Romeo as your counter. (Or use photocopies if you don't want to spoil the poster on the reverse). Jenny offers to go out with you! Move forward one place. WVG Jenny laughs at you for being so gullible go back four places. GARTH The new Ed! He's got the power Bs which should impress Jenny, but will his hectic meeting schedules be his downfall? YOU WIN! JENNY GOES OUT WITH YOU! HURRAH! 36 LOVER'S LEAP OVER LOA the RANDY Strawberry-blond Elvis impersonator Rand has crooned his way to the top of the pile but his love of karaoke could scupper his chances! Your football team has just been slaughtered by a lowe division side! Lord EMAP takes the Mickey go back five places. 24 to not wa 34 38 23 You win first prize in a reviewing competition! Jenny is well-impressed. Take another throw. 2. You've just smashed 33 the office Tetris record! As Tetris is Jenny's favourite game, move forward two places. LOVER'S LEAP ANGLIN Our lad's youthful charms could tempt Jenny out for a date! That's if the boys don't make him go to the shop first. 22 You are beaten in a reader challenge at a game you reckon you were best at! Go back to the start of the game. 26 31 Jenny is talking to a young man on the telephone! Miss a turn as she chats away. Ted rather 27 STEVE Pick The long-haired Judo expert my nose. might have the skills to persuade Jenny to be his belle but he may fall ill at the most inopportune moment! 28 Rand's 29 30 Karaoke Competition! If you hold the Rand counter throw a six to continue. *Jon's Business Lunch! If you hold the Jon counter, throw a six to continue. JON CVG's crayonpusher has the advantage of being a designer like Jenny but he does have an eye for the ladies! PHOTOGRAPHY LEE BUSHEN 40 41 cvG 044 "


"SURFCLIFF LTD GOOD SNOGGING GUIDE CONFESSION LINE NAUGHTY JOKELINE 0898 800 242 SMUTYA 34 NORTON ROAD, SOUTHBOROUGH TUNBRIDGE WELLS, KENT TN4 OHE 0892 517727 NEO GEO SWAP SHOP, USED CARTS + CONSOLES, PART EXCHANGE PLEASE PHONE FOR UP TO DATE INFO ULTRA 0898 800 207 0898 800 209 CHAT-UP LINES Your ideal on ULTRA AIRROR LOVE NAUGHTY PARTNER JOKELINE 0898 800 205 0898 800 208 0898 800 SOUNDS OF TORTURE 0898 212 800 213 0898 800 214       ,   W40HP MEGADRIVE + SONIC + PSU .99 NEO GEO + 1 CONTROL + RF CABLE .99 SNES US SCART .99 MEGADRIVE ALL TITLES NEO GEO ACCESSORIES US SNES ALL TILTLES FOR EXAMPLE SONIC II ............32.99 ROAD RASH 11..34.99 CONTROLLER.49.99 MEM CARD ......19.99 PSU.. ..... 14.99 ALL TITLES BEST PRICES SOUTH COAST CONSOLES  100% VIDEO GAMES  NEO-GEO | SEGA Nintendo PC-ENGINE  NEW AND USED GAMES. PART EXCHANGE WELCOME LATEST RELEASES SNES AS YOU WILL APPRECIATE, IT IS NOT POSSIBLE FOR US TO LIST ALL OUR SOFTWARE TITLES SO IF YOU DONT SEE WHAT YOU WANT PLEASE GIVE US A CALL WE ALSO STOCK ALL THE HARDWARE FOR THE ABOVE GAMES INCLUDING ATARI, NEO GEO AND AMIGA. WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO CHANGE PRICES WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE E&OE. 49.99 47.99 AMAZING TENNIS...... RANMA 1/2 2........ ALIEN VS PREDATOR... SPIDERMAN & THE X-MEN... OUT OF THIS WORLD................ STAR WARS (AP)... FATAL FURY (JAP). MICKEY MOUSE (JAP)... ...47.99 54.99 .54.99 47.99 .47.99 ..59.99 THE BLUES BROTHERS.. TOHN MADDEN '93 DEATH VALLEY RALLY.. TINY TOONS DESERT STRIKE..... LETHAL WEAPON. URADAPTOR ABOVE GAMES (USA) UNLESS STATED 54.99 47.99 ...47.99 12.99 .44.99 ADD .50 PER GAME AND .00 PER CONSOLE FOR POSTAGE & PACKAGING. CHEQUES MADE PAYABLE TO 'SURFCLIFF LTD'. NEXT DAY DELIVERY AVAILABLE AT EXTRA COST. CALL OUR MAIL-ORDER HOTLINE ON 0705 819269 OR VISIT OUR NEW PREMISES AT UNIT   TRICORN CENTRE, PORTSMOUTH, PO 4 AN WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO CHANGE PRICES WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE. E&OE. MICRO TRONICS V VISA DOLL 8888 27A MARKET STREET, TAMWORTH, STAFFS MAKE CHEQUES & OPEN MONDAY TO SATURDAY 9.30am TO 5.00pm WEDNESDAY CLOSED P.O'S PAYABLE TO TEL : 0827 66818 OR 082751480 FAX: 082766818 MICRO-TRONICS SEGA NINTENDO COMMODORE IBM COMPUTER AMIGA SOFTWARE SEGA MEGADRIVE OFFICIAL STREETFIGHTER II. SONIC 2 ..... NINTENDO SOFTWARE ALIEN 3 PGA TOUR GOLF 2 MARIO KART ...... BATMAN RETURNS ZOOL.. DREAM TEAM PACK... BARTS NIGHTMARE ROAD RASH 2 15.00 INDY 4 THE ADVENTURE TOP GEAR....... THUNDERFORCE 4 28.00 DESERT STRIKE..... SUPER PROPROTECTORMEN JOHN MADDEN 93 17.99 SPIDERMAN AND THE X-MEN ROAD RASH............. TERMINATOR 2 ARCADE 17.99 PILOT WINGS TURTLES 2 COIN OP ..8.00 ECCO... LEMMINGS 2. MICKEY & DONALD..... PRINCE OF PERSIA... MAN UNITED EUROPE STREETS OF RAGE 2. SUPER MARIO WORLD SUPER KICK OFF.... LEMMINGS..... LEMMINGS.... LOTUS TURBO CHALLENG FLASH BACK SUPER ADVENTURE ISLAND EA HOCKEY 93.. JOHN BARNES. HOME ALONE. TURTLES 4 MANY MORE TITLES SUPER MONACO GP 2 ROBOCOP 3 ACTRAISER... GREEN DOG... AVAILABLE PLEASE RING CHAKAN.. RIVAL TURF BATTLE CLASH SCOPE GAME HARDWARE TAILSPIN......... MANY MORE OFFICIALTITLES AVAILABLE AMIGA 600..... TENNIS...... 299.99 (WITH 4 GAMES AND ART PACKAGE) POWERMONGER... SUPER NINTENDO ALSO AVAILABLE WITH MARIO 4....... 129.00 SEGA GAME GEAR WITH STREETFIGHTER IL WORLD CLASS LEADERBOARD 159.00 SEGA GAMEGEAR WITH INDY JONES AND THE LAST CRUSAD COLUMNS, SONIC 2 & PSU. AMERICAN TEAM BASKETBALL. 119.00 SONIC 2. 25.00 SEGA MEGADRIVE CAPTAIN AMERICA LEMMINGS 25.00 WITH SONIC & 2 PADS........ ..120.00 LITTLE MERMAID ALIEN 3 .......... WITH SONIC & ANY GAME. CHUCK ROCK.. 149.00 GAMEBOY PACK.... WORLD CUP SOCCER ....... TERMINATOR SEGA MENACER WITH 6 GAMES...49.95 SEGA PSU...9.00 MANY MORE TITLES GAME BOY, C64, IBM COMPATIBLE, ATARI SC PROPAD...11.00 MAVERICK 3 JOYSTICK...14.99 SUPER NINTENDO JOYTICK...49.99 SN PROPADS... 11.00 ST, SOFTWARE & HARDWARE AVAILABLE PLEASE RING SEGA NINTENDO COMMODORE IBM COMPUTER oooo ROBO BACK.. m20003300 ODZm-12-2 Doma  8888888888888888888888888888 88888888888 MW 2-2wzoo UOEEODOW SESERT STRI ROLO TO THE RESTPRO AM 25.00 25.00 .......69.99 ABOVE PRICES ARE MAIL ORDER, SHOP PRICES MAY VARY. PLEASE NOTE WE ARE NOT JUST A MAIL ORDER COMPANY COME AND SEE US AT OUR ABOVE ADDRESS AND SEE OUR FULL RANGE OF CONSOLES AND COMPUTERS ON DESPLAY. P&PLI ON GAMES SEND FOR A FULL LIST OF OUR ITEMS "


"GVG MEGADRIVE b ) SPORT SIM BY ELECTRONIC ARTS .99 ver the last five years or so, we've seen a massive growth of interest in golf. British players such as Woosnam, Montgomerie and current world number one Nick Faldo regularly top the players' charts. Consequently, this country is constantly glued to the telly to see our boys stuff Yank golfers around the world. PGA Tour Golf 2 is an updated version of the classic Amiga and Megadrive title, PGA Tour Golf, and whilst the programmers have failed to include any European players in the cart, we've still decided to have a look and see just how much of an improvement this is over the original. Is it still a winner or is going to come in under par? PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Not up to the challenge of immediately hurling yourself into a round? Don't despair; PGA Tour Golf 2 allows you to practice both putting and driving until you're confident enough to go for the real thing. There's a practice ground for each, and you can thwack 'n smack away to your heart's content. und Drive Hole * Par 4 + [ Stroke 1 Distance:384 yds. Club: Driver 2001 100% 157 902. 257 Tee for two? No there's only one here! Stapha 110 yards? Better use a nine iron for this shot! Hole * 6 381 yards Par 4 Why oh why do Electronic Arts keep on producing the same games over and over again? We've complained about this before they did it with EA Hockey, they've done it twice with John Madden Football and here they are doing it again, this time with PGA Tour Golf. Granted, PGA 2 is an excellent title, with a couple of new features, extra courses and slightly nippier play, not to mention lots more sampled sound effects and speech, but at the end of the day are you willing to fork out forty quid for what basically amounts to a few cosmetic alterations? Of cool, course, if you BaBy, missed out on PGA Tour Golf the first time round, you're laughing this is a definite improvement over the original and a great game to play. But if you've already got the original cart, y then you'd have to be pretty bored with the original courses to want to shell out the dosh for the sequel. TPC at Sawgrass Distance: 110 yards Blimey, that's long! Par 4 Hole *7 439 wards DRIVING ME CRAZY Listen to this man he knows what he's talking about! Some might think that driving is simply a case of jumping into a seat with the steering wheel in front of it and turning the ignition key. If that's you, you must be stupid because we're referring to the hitting of a golf ball. The art of hitting a ball with a piece of metal is an acquired one-sure, you might be able to smack it for miles, but that's no good if you're on a par three hole which requires immense accuracy. Club selection is vitally important a two-wood will send the ball flying out of sight, while a pitching wedge is used for short smacks, with various woods and irons inbetween. Practice makes perfect, and you'll get to know instinctively which is the best club for a particular situation; if you don't, you're well up the creek! PAUL RAND TPC at Sawgrass \"There's water it uou go too far left and a tough upproach shot over several hozords if you go too far right.\" Bruce Lietzke GVG 046 "


"GVG Steve Jones Makes It Look Easu Steve Jones just soored An eagle on hole 16 to go G under per and move up to 2nd place Poft Barn Putt 253 110% 757 All right, there's no need to boast about it. Brilliant shot! And it was my idea to play a shot like that! DON'T FEEL PUTT OUT Hole *5 453 yards Par Once the ball is on the green, it's time to put those woods and irons away and whip out yer putter! The view will switch to a three-dimensional layout showing your distance from the cup and the undulating ground between your ball and said hole in the turf. Returning to the play screen, taking the shot is similar to driving alter your direction if necessary, gauge the power you'll need to hole out and pray! Electronic Arts' PGA Golf Tour was an excellent game. It has been on just about every format now and with the exception of the very dodgy SNES version, has maintained its position as the best arcade golf game available. Having been all around the formats, the next progression just had to be the sequel. In this case however, EA have been hard pushed to find any way to improve on a game that offers more playability and lastibility than a toilet roll offers the Andrex dog! Consequently, EA have only managed to add three new courses and enhanced the sound and play. This certainly doesn't constitute a sequel. It's really like having course disks for anyone who already has the game. So if you've already got PGA Tour Golf, forget it! However, if you missed your chance for some top, G3 bunker action the first time around then you just can't go wrong with this. It's the plus four of all golf games and if you don't have it? get it or you'll end up being really teed off! GARTH SUMPTER TPC of Scottsdale \"This long par his most difficult when there, is a strong prevailing wind.\" HOHE OF [Park PicCurnber Yeah, but what would he know. STRATEGY SKILL OV SOUTHWIND Memphis, Tn FAB NEW FEATURES Memphis home of fine rock 'n roll; not to mention rather smart golf courses. ACTION REFLEXES Just how can EA improve upon the original PGA Tour Golf? By incorporating three brand new courses, for one! Only Sawgrass has survived the trip over to the sequel; the new entries are Southwind, Eagle Trace and Scottsdale. Anything else besides that? There's a Draw/Fade option to select, which is useful for controlling the ball when slicing or hooking around obstacles. There's also a multiplayer Skins game too, where two or more players can fight it out for ever-increasing amounts of cash! GRAPHICS SOUND % 88 % 88 % % Hole 13 Par 5 Stroke 3 + 1 Distance:232 yds. club: 2 wood GAMEPLAY VALUE Shoot 1H7pm 2 198 L S 507 25L Particularly fine shots can earn an action replay just like this one here!!!!!! CVG RANKING DREAD Wind Each tournament comprises of four rounds, and you must 'make the cut' to progress to each sucessive round. Basically, to make the cut for round two you must finish in the top fortyeight, and for the third you must complete the round in the top thirty-two. Make it to the fourth and final round and you could be in with a crack of winning a lot of dosh! K  . 179 0 1107 15% 507 257 SH CVG cvG 047 "


"CASH WIN WIN! Win in 2 mins! WY ,000 Band in 2 SUPER NINTENDO WITH mins TELEPHONE 0839 44 22 71 BINGO WIN! SEGA MEGA DRIVE 0839 03 03 36 in 2 mins 0839 44 22 67 IF AN ADVERT IS WRONG, WHO PUTS IT RIGHT? 21 I NIKE AIR JORDANS in 2 mins 0839 44 22 68 43 44 WIN  IN 2 MINUTES! CASHCADE 0839 03 03 20 Calls cost 36p per min cheap rate 48p all other times. Questel PO Box 3000 N20 9RB You will be advised of other games 51 52 5557 Mosta. Mbius Games Sega & Nintendo Machines & Cartridges (UK, US, Japanese) Part Exchange, Repairs, Conversions, New & Used Board, Card & Role Playing Games 5 Leigham Court Road, Streatham HII London SW16 2ND Opposite Streatham HIII BR Mail Order: 081 677 9657 Shop: 081 677 7228 Shop Open Weeklat 9am 6pm We do. The Advertising Standards Authority ensures advertisements meet with the strict Code of Advertising Practice. So if you question an advertiser, they have to answer to us. To find out more about the ASA, please write to Advertising Standards Authority, Dept. X, Brook House, Torrington Place, London WC1E 7HN. This space is donated in the Interests of high standards in advertisemeats. Sat 9am P6.30 pm MERICA 0403 752156 $44-88 b Force Riobal Gladiators..... Gods   Alien 3... Call Call PemWeopan. Call .99 FIRST WITH THE LATEST GAMES NEW GAMES ARRIVING WEEKLY SEE OUR USED MEGADRIVE AND SUPER NES SECTION FOR SALE OR SWAP SUPER NES MEGA DRIVE QUALITY SUPER NES NEW & TOP TITLES USED GAMES FOR SALE OR SWAP QUALITY USED GAMES FOR SWAP Allen 3..... Top Gear ... .99 SWAP CONDITIONS SWAP CONDITIONS Axelay Ultraman. ..99 1. Your game must be in good condition, 1. Your game must be in good condition. Barts Nightmare... .99 Wing Commander . ...99 2. It MUST have handbook and origional box. 2. It MUST have handbook and origional box. Batman Return of the Joker X-Zone ..99 3. Send with your cart your list of 1st, 2nd and 3rd choice 3. Send with your cart your list of 1st, 2nd and 3rd choice Best of the Best......... Chester Cheetah Zelda 3...... game, or call game, or call Chuck Rock... ALL OF THE ABOVE ARE USA GAMES 4. Include your name, address and telephone number. 4. Include your name, address and telephone number Contra um Propotedor) MEGA DRIVE GROUP A ALL GAMES FOR SALE AT JUST All games for swap at  .99 OR SWAP FOR  PLUS  P&P NEW AND TOP TITLES Afterburner Revenge Shinobi Populous Arcause Paperboy .99 Altered Beast Space Harrier Xardion F Zero' Arrow Flash Star Control Musha American Gladiators ..... Pit fighter Buster Douglas Super Hang On Spanky's Quest Crackdown Gun Force .99 Batman Return of the Joker. Thunder Forcell Boxing YS II Ratan Sagall S Ghouls n Ghosts Hunt for Hedetabe Captain America...  Decap Aliack S Thunder Blade Shadow Dancer Home Alone Gradius III Kablooey. 41.99 Deadly Moves .......... ESWAT Techno Cop Shadow Beast S Castlevania 4 Earth Defense Last Viking ........ Desert Strike...... .99 Faery Tale Truxton Splatterhouse 2 * Rocketeer Xardion Lemmings Final Zone Arch Rivals Star Flight Dolphin (Ecco)....... .....Call Baseball Simulator Forgotten Worlds Raiden Strider Double Dragon ........ Metal Jacket...... .99 Ghostbusters Zoom Super Hyolide Drakken Ultra Man Mickeys Magical Dungeons & Dragons... 41.99 Joe Montana Around Palmer Golf Super Monaco GP Darius Twins Populous Mystical Ninja... Humans.... ........ Football Centurion Sword of Sodan Bill Lambert Basketball s Soccer Baperboy ..... Indy Jones Last Crusade 41.99 John Madden Dick Tracy Thundarforce 1 S R-Type Joe & Mac John Madden '93. 41.99 Kings Bounty Fatal Rewind Bring to Persia T. Lasorda Baseball PGA Golf F1 Lemmings ..99 Lakers Vs Celtics Fatal Labyrinth Twin Cobra Bohovec Marble Madness.......... Mano Lemieux lce Hook $34.99 Fre Shark Super Tennis World Cup B.P.M. Racing Hockey 3699 Ghouls n Ghosts NUH.L.P.A. Hockey Olympic Gold Bampart, Golden Axe Predator ll ..... . . Pat Riley Basketball Mystic Defender Aquatic Games CONSOLES Robocop III Sonic 2. ..99 Rocketeer Spiderman + the X-Men ... ..Call GROUP B ALL GAMES FOR SALE AT JUST Spankys Quest.. Streets of Rage 2.......... .99 OR SWAP FOR  WITH TOP TITLES Sbiderman & the Sunset Riders .... Super NES Scart system 60hz..................99 Star Fox .......... 688 Attack Chopper Turbo Outrun Super Baseball.. $36.99 Super Battle Tank ........... .99 Super Shinobi 2......... Kid Chameleon Krusty's Fun House ...Call Super Mario Kart Super NES Scart System 50/60hz ............00 Super Star Wars Tazmanla $34.99 Joe Montana Aquatic Games Terminator Terminator i Arcade... ..99 Desert Strike Turbo Outrun Megadrive with Sonic 1 & 2.......................00 Tiny Toons. Universal Soldier .......... Immortal Sonic 2 Thunderspirits.... X-Men....... .....Call ONLY TOP TITLES ACCEPTED FOR THESE CALL FOR AVAILABUTY Megadrive without game ...........................00 SALES HOTLINE PLEASE PRINT PLEASE SEND ME THE FOLLOWING CYG JOYSTICKS UNIVERSAL 0403 752156 ............. AT .....................EACH CONVERTOR SEGA ....AT .....................EACH .... EACH VISA Runs 1. PRO 2 PROFESSIONAL JOYPAD TOTAL ENCLOSED INC P&P ... US/UK/JAP HOW TO ORDER (TURBO AND SLOW).. .. ACCESS/VISA NO.... games on any CALL OUT HOTLINE GIVING YOUR 2. REMOTE CONTROL PAD VISA/ACCESS NUMBER AND THE TITLE EXPIRY DATE.. console... YOU WANT OR SEND ATTACHED ORDER NAME... (NO CABLES).................................. .99 FORM WITH YOUR CHEQUE OR POSTAL ORDER. ADDRESS..... SNES P&P GAMES , CONSOLES .50 ...............PHONE NO.............. 1. DYNA-1 SUPER JOYPAD............99 VIDEO GAMES OF AMERICA (UK) LTD HALE FARM EST. LOXWOOD ROAD, RUDGWICK, W. SUSSEX. RH12 3BP FOR IRELAND PHONE DUBLIN 284 5098 ASSO Call .99 239.99 "


"GVC GVE REVIEW AMIGA BEAT 'EM UP You've got a little mole on your leg. OBRES BY US GOLD .99 The elephants look very bored. STREETFIGHTER IN THE GREAT EIGHT D. eople constantly declare their extreme hardness. But, as with anything, there can only be one supreme champion so a competition was set up to sort out the warriors from the wives. The original Streetfighter tournament saw the boy Ryu waltzing off with the trophy. Now the hard lads have begun to get restless again, so a new challenge has been thought up. This time the eight hardest folk from around the globe have decided to butt heads to see who can call themselves the World Warrior. The stage is set and you've got nothing to lose except maybe your life! As I'm sure you all know by now, Streetfighter Il consists of eight selectable characters and four computer-controlled bosses. The eight characters range from the superior skills of the great Guile, to the sadness of dodgy Dhalsim. If you want to be a real hard boy you'll have to pick yourself a character and learn all his moves. But if you want to be a real CVG type warrior you'll have to master all eight! C'mon, fat boy. Ow ya doing, mate? | Boo! TAKE CONTROL I wasn't sure what to expect from the Amiga version of Streetfighter II. Could the Amiga cope with all the different moves? The graphics have been really well recreated, with the onus on the character sprites rather than the elaborate backdrops. The fighters are fine until they move! Then you see how bad the animation is; they jump through the air as though under the influence of a disco Very Poor. disco strobe light. Moves are difficult to master, but the option to use a Megadrive joypad helps gameplay. But, unfair as it may be, any home version of Streetfighter II is always going to be compared to the SNES game. Even so, the Amiga version of Streetfighter II is a valiant effort. PAUL ANGLIN The main talking point of Streetfighter II on the Amiga was the control method. How on earth would the Amiga cope with six buttons? There was talk of special joypads being developed, or shock horror dropping some of the moves! In the end US Gold opted for a choice of five different control methods. You can use a joystick and just have punches, you can use a joystick and have only kick moves, you can have some moves on joystick and some on keyboard, you can use just the keyboard or, if you have one, you can use a Megadrive joypad! As they say, more is better than less. Now that's a smart move. Streetfighter II was hailed as the greatest two-player game of all time and the Amiga version caters for dual duelling very well. Versus mode has been lifted straight from the SNES version, letting you play in two-player mode while the computer performs such tasks as automatically keeping the score. You can also give one player a handicap (which means that Randy might be able to beat someone at last), change the location of your scrap or give yourself an infinite time limit so you're forced into a scrap to the death! Missed me, rubber boy. STRATEGY SKILL CVG 2078 GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE % 68 % 75 ACTION REFLEXES CVG CVG 049 "


"HE cu 3 PAGE REVIEW SNES PLATFORM BY CAPCOM .99 starring MICKEY On You know how your mother nags you about playing in deserted, out-of-the-way places? Well, Mickey must have had his ears firmly sellotaped on backwards when he was told because the foolish lad still went out with his pals Goofy and Pluto to play a game of catch in the mountains. Now Pluto's not the brightest of canines, so when Mickey lobs an extra hard toss the mutt gives chase right off the edge of a cliff!! All's not lost though, as Pluto is actually whisked away by the evil Emperor Pete before he hit the deck he's been locked up in Pete's castle and Mickey's got to rescue him! Go Mickey, go! Hit the bozo in the head and move in for the kill. FANCY A DRESS? Mickey's a bit of a thespian at heart he loves to get dressed up and act out different roles. So when a wizard-type geezer materialises in front of his eyes to offer him a change of clothes, he jumps at the chance! With each change comes a whole new set of abilities; there's a fireman's outfit, magician's garb and Robin Hood get-up. You can change whenever you like, and to spare his blushes Mickey pulls a set of curtains from out of nowhere to change behind, so you never get to see his naughty mouse bits! PAUSE and mocked 'e hit He may look happy now, but wait until his ears get pierced by those nasty looking spikes! Water torture of pant-wetting proportions! HENERAL STORS SCRUMPTIOUSNESS ON A STICK! Just one gander at the screenshots will tell you that Mickey's Quest is a stunning-looking game. You'd have to have the eyesight of a myxomatosed rabbit not to notice the gorgeous colours and Disney-like attention to detail. Throughout the levels you'll be treated to some of the most impressive parallax effects and atmospheric backdrops you've ever seen! Most stunning is the Dark Forest, with its huge, menacing, twisted trees that look as though they were lifted straight out of the Snow White and The Seven Dwarfs classic cartoon! Don't blow all your money too early magic's a precious thing in this town. SE SOLD MMM TUH UCTO THE ITEMS Mickey's Magical Quest is one of the best-looking games you'll ever see on the SNES. Each world looks as though it's been snatched straight out of a movie! The attention to detail is astounding and each Mickey sprite comes complete with its own characteristics and animation. Small details like the turban slipping over Mick's face when he falls down a cliff and the curtain that he whips out to change clothes behind make this a class act. Having said that, the gameplay can be a little tame and despite the difficulty settings you'll finish it in a day or two! Even the many huge guardians turn out to be less than challenging. Most of the time it's just a case of shooting animals and collecting stuff, but around the third level Mickey can manoeuvre blocks with the hose, and a puzzle element is introduced with you having to create your own steps to climb to higher goody levels. Overall, a graphically stunning game that's far too easyyou can get better value for money elsewhere, but for presentation and graphics little else beats it! STEVE KEEN GVG 050 mosto Bi IS THERE A MOUSE IN THE HOUSE? Mickey Mouse The traditional bog-standard mouse can jump on beasties' heads and daze them a la Mario and also leap up to grab special boxes to hurl at the pests. Fireman Mickey Mickey's been a lot of things in his time and a bumbling fireman's just one of them. This one's extra good for the fire levels as he can shoot huge jets of water at the flames. Magician Mickey Another useful character, especially in the Dark Forest. As a magician you can flick tiny bolts of magic at nasties or hold on for one huge ball of angel dust. Magician Mickey can also breathe underwater. Robin Hood Mickey Great for jumping from platform to platform with his grappling hook. You'll find that you just can't get by some of the guardians without wearing this costume. "


"REVIEW EVE Even the tree tops hate me! Keep above and over these clubs! How handy; an emergency fireman's outfit behind glass! IN CASE OF FIRE BREAK GLASS! MOUSE MOUSE P-SCORE DU P-SCORE SCOA 11828 U YTYY GSTE ******* YA is og Now this guy means business. Just keep your distance, Blast everything in sight you never know what you'll find. TOP WORLD TIPS Tree Tops Pick up the fruit and double-grab it to reach unobtainable heights! You don't have to use the fruit where you found it try moving on to a different location first. Dark Forest Make a jump of faith off to the right of the last menacing tree on one of the levels and you'll drift right into a shop! Pete's Castle The blocks you find around Pete's home are not the ones you've come to know. With some skill and co-ordination they'll take you for a special ride. LEVELS UP The magical quest will take you over six totally different levels, each divided into four sub-levels. After Mickey's brief encounter with the good wizard he'll be chucked head first into Treetops. You have the power of 'action', letting Mickey grab onto things and either lift them up to throw them or pull levers to reveal bonuses. The baddies change considerably from level to level with bumble bees, flying fruit that can be clung onto for a helicopter ride to reach extra platforms, disappearing cloud walkways and huge rolling fruit that pursue you, Raiders Of The Lost Ark-style! PICK ME UP Although there are many items for Mickey to fill his ski-pants with, the most important are hearts and coins. In normal mode our hero receives three hearts per life but, by scooping up the specials, he can increase his quota dramatically. Coins are won by smashing blocks or killing certain animals but the majority of dosh comes from the big golden boxes Mickey comes across. Pull the handle and a cascade of goodies, ranging from lives and coins to hearts and fruit, come tumbling down. Fire Grotto. Mickey can move nearly all of the blocks on this level If you create your own platforms you'll find loads of surprise goodies in the ceilings. Snowy Valley Change Mickey into the fireman's outfit and use his hose to form platforms with the frozen water to reach loads of coins, extra lives and other goodies! Pete's Peak Once at the very top of Pete's Peak use the Robin Hood garb to cling onto the supports. After the bird has flown over head and its offspring comes down, use its eggs to your advantage. CG 051 "


"CVG EVE REVIEW SECRET AGENTS None of Mickey's special powers last long, but you can find extra water hydrants and magic lanterns for top ups. Alternatively, by experimenting you'll discover a number of secret doors behind blocks or in hidden chambers at the bottom of cliffs. These lead to bonus rooms or General Stores where Mickey can spend his cash on most of the items available during the game if they're in stock! I've been looking forward to this game for ages now and, when it first came in, it looked like my patience had been rewarded. Mickey's Magical Quest is easily the best-looking Disney game to date, and is even a strong contender for best graphics ever! Unfortunately in this case, beauty's only skin deep. When the amazing cosmetics of Mickey are peeled away you feel that there is something decidedly lacking gameplay! Although it's instantly playable, Magical Quest offers little challenge to anyone who can play games (Rand should have a probl em, then). The action starts better off simple and doesn't really shift up a gear at all. The main levels are pretty repetitive and the end-of-level baddies offer nothing in the way of challenge. You should be able to rescue Pluto in about three days and for fifty quid that's not really what you're after, is it? PAUL ANGLIN Here's one hot-head who's a blast to be with. Goofy's always close at hand with a change of undies! C SE THES MONSTER MADNESS NAZZY CLIMBIN On average there are not one but RITCHES two guardians on every level. Most are dead easy to kill but others are IN THIS ROPE a tad more tricky. The first is a purple snake that suddenly drops out of the trees and splits apart when you hit him on the bonce! One of the hardest baddies is found at the end of the fire level, where a hammerwielding, fire breathing demon smashes the ground from underneath you with an massive mallet. Hot stuff! See what we mean! Hold on for the flight or fright-of your life! There's no doubting the quality and feel of this game it plays well, looks more stunning than Cindy Crawford and should've been a classic. Hold on a moshould've? Cartoon games should contain humour and superb graphics and Mickey has all the Disney magic one would expect from anything with that name on it. What you shouldn't expect though, is to have to fork out fifty sovs for a game that any reasonable player will finish in a couple of days. Great value for the under-eights and novice gamers, but anyone with an ounce of skill should spend their money more wisely. GARTH SUMPTER Mode 7 Heaven! This guy must be related to Big Bird! ANIMATED ANIMAL ANTICS When you think of Disney you automatically think of quality and, as the company is world famous for its animations, you'd expect nothing less than fab movement in this game. It's not only the four different Mickeys that have been given the Disney work over though; all the animals and insects are equally swish. From huge toads that hop onto your head and bobbing barrels in the water, right down to beavers and stars that flit about as you progress throughout the world all are fantastic to watch! Snow trouble for our lad Mickey! CVG STRATEGY SKILL % 95 85 GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE % O CVG CVN 052 ACTION REFLEXES "


"Commodore OFF PREVIOUS SILICA PRICE OF  AMIGA 500 \\ SALE! KIEK CARTOON CLASSICS PACK INCLUDES:  1Mb AMIGA 500 PLUS.... .99  BUILT-IN 1M DRIVE........ FREE A520 TV MODULATOR FREE . THE SIMPSONS ............... .99 CAPTAIN PLANET & THE PLANETEERS ........ .99 LEMMINGS ......................... .99  DELUXE PAINT II........... .99 PLUSI FREE FROM SILICA: ZOOL PACK ...................... .92 PHOTON PAINT V2.0...... .95 GFA BASIC V3.5 .............. .00 PACK VALUE: .82 PACK SAVING: .82 SILICA PRICE: .00 INTTO PLUS) A500 MODEL DPAINT III We are pleased to offer the original 1Mb Amiga 500 Plus (Kickstart/Workbench V2.04), including a built-in 18-key numeric keypad and Cartoon Classics software at a new low sale price of only . The Amiga 500 Plus can be upgraded, using any of the hundreds of peripherals that are now available, which include the award winning GVP range. In addition to the 1Mb version of the Cartoon Classics pack at only , we are pleased to offer a specially upgraded version with 2Mb RAM for only . And, when you buy an Amiga 500 Cartoon Classics Pack from Silica (1Mb or 2Mb version), we will give you a ZOOL PACK plus GFA BASIC and PHOTON PAINT II worth over , absolutely FREE! 1Mb A500 PLUS CARTOON CLASSICS FREE! 70L SOFTWARE PACK 249 ZOOL STRIKER TRANSWRITE PLUS! PINBALL DREAMS GFA BASIC AND PHOTON PAINT 2.0 TOTAL VALUE: .87 WITH THE AMIGA 500 INC VAT Ref: AMC 0592 RAM INC VAT AMC 0592 IVID VERSION + RAM 0592 INCLUDES BUILT-IN 18-KEY NUMERIC KEYPAD RETURN THE COUPON FOR YOUR FREE COPY OF SILICA'S 2 Mb RAM  ore RAETHEO COUPONGI ECR NEW 64PAGE AMIGA CATALOGUE! (CDTV MULTIMEDIA | AMIGA CDTV CDTV AMIGA A570 ADD-ON M SALE! S con C CATALOGUE FREE! every corty mu FREE! FROM SILICA with the A570 Sim City... SAVE ! RRP OF * 2349 MULTIMEDIA LON SYSTEM WUE PARTY HACE PARTE FOR AMIGA 500 OWNERS  Easy to use home entertainment system  OFF RRP!  Enables your Amiga to run CDTV software  Infrared Remote Control  OF VOUCHERS!  Plays normal audio CD discs  Sleek black design FREE SIM CITY  Keyboard, disk drive and mouse  Storage capacity equal to 600 floppy disks included  Based on the best selling Amiga Internal RAM expansion option Coming Soon) computer  Internal hard drive option Coming Soon  Plays CD audio discs  Compatible with CD+G & Compatible with CD+G and CD + MIDI CD+MIDI formats MONITOR  Over 100 CDTV titles available formats  Compatible with 100s of Amiga A complete CDTV environment. With  Transfer time 153Kb/second programs Fred Fish CDPD is a collection keyboard and disk drive it is fully software . Compatible with CD-ROM industry of 680 disks of public domain compatible with the Amiga 500, and able to software. It includes utilities, run all Amiga games and application software. standard ISO9660 applications, games  of CDTV software vouchers PLUS Sim and tools. City (worth .99) are included FREE with Comes with Fred Fish CDPD collection every CDTV Multimedia System from Silica. + Sim City FREE from Silica CDTV Player ......... ... ... .99 Note: 1 of Chip RAMFAT Agnus is required for full compatibility with CDTV Keyboard all CDTV software. Silica offer an upgrade service. Please call The A570 is an essential add-on for your Amiga 500. CDCDTV Disk Drive .. ......... ... .99 ROM is set to replace disks as the standard format for and quote REA 1000 Fred Fish CDPD ........... .99 games and serious titles in the not too distant future. .99 Most software companies have already announced A n a OFF NORMAL Software Vouchers plans to release CD versions of their software! RRP OF  . .00 ... The sheer storage size of a CD (600 disks) means that Total Pack Value: .95 using CD software is faster, graphics are enhanced Less Pack Saving: .95 and game play is increased with bigger levels, more complex problems to solve and larger areas to Silica Price: .00 explore! And, being compatible with audio CDs, the sound quality from CD games is unrivalled! Sim City for instance has over 10Mb of data for its graphics alone and has music recorded in a studio! Silica's special sale price of  means that there is no better time to buy the A570 and, with the award winning Sim City included FREE with every A570 Ref: CCD 0588 Ref: CCD 1250 from Silica Systems, there's no better place to buy it from! ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT DELIVERY IS FREE OF CHARGE IN THE UK MAINLAND MAIL ORDER: 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 081-309 1111 Order Lines Open: Mon-Sat 9.00am-6.00pm No Late Night Opening Fax No081-308 0608 LONDON SHOP: 52 Tottenham Court Road, London, W1P OBA Tel: 071-580 4000 Opening Hours Mon-Sat 9.30am-6.00pm No Late Night Opening Fax No: 071-323 4737 FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY: On all hardware orders shipped in the UK mainland, LONDON SHOP: Selfridnes Selfridges (1st Floor), Oxford Street, London, W1A 1AB Tel: 071-629 1234  TECHNICAL SUPPORT HELPLINE: Team of technical experts at your service. Opening Hours: Mon-Fri 9.30am-7.00pm Sat close 6.30pm) Late Night: Thursday 8pm Extension: 3914  PRICE MATCH: We normally match competitors on a \"Same product Same price\" basis. SIDCUP SHOP: 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 081-302 8811 ESTABLISHED 14 YEARS: Proven track record in professional computer sales Opening Hours: Mon-Sat 9.00am-5.30pm Late Night: Friday 7pm Fax No: 081-309 0017   MILLION TURNOVER (with 60 staff): Solid, reliable and profitable. ESSEX SHOP: Keddies (2nd Floor), High Street, Southend-on-Sea, Essex, SS1 1LA Tel: 0702 468039  BUSINESS EDUCATION + GOVERNMENT: Volume discounts available 081-308 0888. Opening Hours: Mon-Fri 9.30am-5.30pm (Sat 9.00am-8.00pm) No Late Night Opening Fax No: 0702 462363 SHOWROOMS: Demonstration and training facilities at our London & Sidcup branches THE FULL STOCK RANGE: All of your requirements from one supplier. To: Silica Systems, CVG-0393-100, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup. Kent, DA14 4DX FREE CATALOGUES: Will be mailed to you with offers + software and peripheral details. PLEASE SEND A 64 PAGE AMIGA COLOUR CATALOGUE  PAYMENT: Major credit cards, cash, cheque or monthly terms. Before you decide when to buy your new Amiga computer, we suggest you think very carefully about WHERE you buy it. Consider what it will be like a few months after buying your Amiga, when you may Mr/Mrs/Miss/MS: ....... Initials:.... .............. Surname: require additional peripherals or software, or help and advice with your new purchase. And, will the company you buy from contact you with details of new products? At Silica Systems, we ensure that you Company Name (if applicable): ... will have nothing to worry about. We have been established for almost 14 years and, with our unrivalled experience and expertise, we can now claim to meet our customers' requirements with an understanding Address: which is second to none. But don't just take our word for it. Complete and return the coupon now for our latest FREE literature and begin to experience the \"Silica Systems Service\". MAIL ORDER HOTLINE Postcode: Tel (Home): ....... .. . Tel ( Work): Which computer(s), if any, do you own?........ E&OE Advertised prices and specifications may change Please return the coupon for the latest information FROM SILICA with the CDTV Multimedia System SIM CITY ENHANCED CD VERSION  of CDTV SOFTWARE VOUCHERS SIM CITY  of CDTV SOFTWARE VOUCHERS WORTH    more than WORTH NEARLY  WORTH NEARLY 110193-1600 SILICA SYSTEMS OFFER YOU a few months after es or software. or will any you buy from c 081-309 1111 SYSTEMS SILICA ..... 100A "


"GVG GVG REVIEW TINYTOON SNES PLATFORM BY KONAMI .99 Demember those great Saturday mornings spent doing nothing but watching kiddies cartoons? Well get ready to break out the SNES 'cos those days are back. From the mind of Steven Spielberg comes the Tiny Toons, offspring of various celluloid superstars. They've had their own TV show and now star in their first SNES game. Tiny Toon Adventures casts you as Buster Bunny, the son of carrotmunching Bugs. He's having a few problems though, as the Tiny Toons home, usually a peaceful place, has fallen foul of a nasty element who have brought chaos and commotion. Buster, sets off to put them straight about a few things. Help is at hand as his friends help him out along the way. THEY'RE TINY... Buster Bunny is going to have a real hard time, trying to get through all the different levels of Toon Land. Luckily, he can make use of the one thing that no platform game should be without extra lives! The easiest way for Buster to get these is to collect the stars that appear throughout the different landscapes. Stars act in exactly the same way as coins do in Mario games; when you pick up more than a hundred you gain an extra life. They perform no other purpose, but that's a damned handy one in itself. PICKY PICKY There are a number of different pick-ups in Tiny Toons, some of which only appear on certain levels. Here's the full list: I'm an avid viewer of the Tiny Toons cartoon and this game will convert all hardened blast boys into cutesy freaks! The graphics are top notch; you're not going to find anything with a better cartoon look anywhere. Characters are brilliant I haven't seen this amount of detail since Super Mario World! All the levels have a very different look to them and the tasks change dramatically, which means that there's no way you're going to get bored with this. The American Football stage really is worth playing over and over again just for the sheer hell of it, and the squash bonus game, with the huge and brilliantly drawn Furrball, is a sight to behold. Tiny Toons on NES and Game Boy was too easy, but that's not something you can say about this. The difficulty level is set just right, allowing you to get just that little bit further every time and, with six big levels to wade through, you can expect to be playing this well after Easter. They may be tiny, they may be toony and they may even be a little loony, but I tell you what they're bloody brill! No net can hold this bunny. STAR: When you kill an enemy a star will appear (more than one if it's an end-of-level baddy). Collect 100 and you'll get an extra life. GOLD CARROT: Buster's favourite pick-up. This refills your energy bar. SILVER CARROT: Refills one energy heart. GOLD GOGO DODO: This little feller will make you invincible for a while. Use the catapult to bounce up to the next platform. TOLEDO CRYSTAL CARROT: Adds one heart, up to maximum capacity. SILVER GOGO DODO: Fills up your dash gauge. CRYSTAL GOGO DODO: Kills all onscreen enemies. BUSTER DOLL: Gives you an extra life. PAUL ANGLIN CVG 054 Duck! Nah, they're vultures. "


"12:48 12.03 2ND DOWNLOYDS ON 1795 LUB LOONY LEVELS BIG TROUBLE AT ACME LOONIVERSITY The action starts at the Toons' school with Buster trying to track down his pal, Hamton Pig. I've already told you once. It's Hopalong Cassidy! THEY'RE TOONY.. THE WESTERN MOVIE Buster becomes Sheriff in an attempt to stop the ruthless Montana Max from ruining the town. Unfortunately, you won't have a gun to stop him. Bunny rabbits have dead strong legs and Buster has mastered a technique to put paid to his enemies using this strength. By pressing the X button Buster will perform a somersault dropkick manoeuvre. As violent as it may be, this is just a case of jumping on the baddies' heads. Good timing is needed to perfect this move, but once you've got it down to an art you'll be able to take out two bad guys at a time. You can land on a baddy at any time during the bounce, so it shouldn't be long before you've got your opponents hopping mad! first saw the Tiny Toons cartoon in Hong Kong, ages before it came over to the UK, and thought it was 2absolutely brilliant even with the crap foreign translation! The NES and Game Boy conversions were good, if a little easy, but after seeing early shots of the SNES game I has high hopes for the 16-bit version. And have my hopes been dashed? No siree Bob; this is one of the best platformers you can buy for the Super Nintendo! Stuffed to the gills with classy graphics, demanding gameplay and loads of levels, Tiny Toons is a cart that'll keep you glued to the joypad for some time, if only to see the gorgeous reproductions of those oh-so cute Toons! The many bonus games add to the longevity of the cart, the best of the bunch for me being Squash, starring the massively excellent Furrball! Tiny Toons is a top title; grab it while it's hot! SPOOK MANSION Poor Buster Bunny is stuck in Spook Mansion and must get out before he is trapped forever! THEY'RE ALL A LITTLE LOONY There's an absolute stack of SEESAW: At the beginning you bonus stages to tackle get a quick look at the five charthroughout the game. Here's acters that the computer has a rundown on what they are and chosen, and then you have to how they work: select five of your own which you BINGO: Donning a waistcoat and think weigh more than the the computer's selection. It's not as a rather natty dickie bow, young hard as it sounds because, once Plucky Duck will call out bingo you know all the characters, numbers; press one of the you'll quickly figure out their coloured buttons on your joypad sizes. Not for beginners this one to get a certain coloured ball. If though 'cos it's a bit tough. you fill a line you'll be rewarded with an extra life. PAUL RAND LOONIVERSITY FOOTBALL This stage sees you at Acme Acres Stadium, guiding Buster Bunny through a rather heated quarter of the all-American sport. STRATEGY SKILL 14: 4203 MAZE: Someone has locked up all of Babs' pals and it's up to her to get them out. You have one minute to rescue as many of the animals as you can to gain extra lives. But you'll have to be careful, because young Elmyra is intent on getting Babs back into her cage. olm ACTION SQUASH: This game stars Furrball, son of Sylvester the cat. The object is to hit the ball against the wall to gain as many extra lives as possible within the time limit. Every time you hit the wall a bar on your counter lights up, and when your counter is full you receive an extra life. Occasionally, Tiny Toons characters will run along the back wall. If you hit them, one of a number of things will happen, from stopping the timer clock to slowing down the speed of the ball. REFLEXES BUSTER'S SKY JINKS Take to the skies in search of Calamity Coyote's hidden treasure. Be careful though; it's a long way up. % 93 % 92 GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE % 94 SPACE OPERA Princess Babs has been kidnapped! It's down to Buster to defeat the might of the Milky Way Imperial Army and save the Kingdom of Acme. JUNCTION: Guide Hamton Pig along the tracks to collect apples. Not a tricky task, except that parts of the track disappear! Wait until the black square moves and creates a bit of track for you. Oh yeah, to make it trickier, you can't stop Hammy from moving so you'll need to work quickly. CVG ROULETTE WHEEL: Spin the wheel and fate will choose your bonus stage. HIT GVG 055 "


"CVG CVE REVIEW AMIGA WPIANATONES GRAPHIC ADVENTURE AND THE FATE OF ATLANTIS I'd 'shelve' that bookcase-moving idea if I were you! EEEEE BY US GOLD/LUCASARTS .99 And you all thought that Indy had participated in his last archaeologyrelated romp in the Last Crusade, it being the final movie and all. But oh no; everyone enjoyed Lucasarts' adventures so much, they've only gone and created a totally original game starring our man Jonesy! As you might guess, Indiana's on the trail of the fabled lost city of Atlantis, and must find it before the Nazis. If not, they'll steal the entire stock of a previously unheard-of ore which can be found only in the sunken remains of the city. With the help of his friends, as well as the odd ancient artifact and a lorra, lorra luck, old Indy might just discover what scholars have spoken of for centuries. Then again, he might end up in the grip of Adolf's lads; it's entirely up to you! The new Indy adventure, eh? I didn't think this would ever make it to the Amiga it's a massive game. But here it is, all eleven (count 'em) disks full of fine Lucasarts adventuring! Little has changed during the switch from PC to Commodore including the solution so steer clear of the solution we printed a few months ago if you want to reap maximum enjoyment. Graphics are great; probably the best ever seen in a game like this although I'm not too keen on the full-screen stills. They serve little purpose and hold up the game. The iMUSE music system is a cracker. It changes tempo as the action dips and soars just like a real movie soundtrack. But it's the humour and taxing puzzles that really make this game; Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis is full of both. Unfortunately, with eleven disks to juggle with there's a lot and I must stress a LOT of swapping to be done, but at least there's the bare minimum of waiting time between shoving the disk in and the action starting up again. Overall, the best the Amiga can do with a game such as this; a smashing game in its own right, and those lucky enough to own a hard drive will be laughing! There's a lot of statues in here, but only one offers a way out very peculiar! Wo ist Fritz? VERY IMUSE ING! This time around, Indy doesn't just have to rely on his own skills to survive and prosper he's got a girl to help him! Sophia Hapgood was a trainee archaeologist with Indy on his first big excavation, but swapped that profession for a life as a psychic, of all things! Indy needs her assistance in this quest not only for her dazzling good looks and womanly charm, but also because she's got a few artifacts from that first big dig which, it just so happens, will come in very handy when looking for Atlantis! Indiana Jones and The Fate Of Atlantis is the first Amiga game to feature Lucasarts now almost legendary Wo indeed. IMUSE system. If you've never heard of it, IMUSE has been created by Mr Lucas' computer musicians and what it does is subtly alter the mood of the background music as and when various plot changes occur for instance, if the game is quietly plodding along the music will do likewise, but were something dramatic to happen, such as Indy being confronted by one of the Nazis, the tune builds up to match the on-screen action. The system went down a storm when it was first introduced on the PC in Secret Of Monkey Island II, and is set to achieve the same effect with Indy! relandic Antiquitie SWT PAUL RAND They certainly go in for big pictures on Icelandic Antiquities Monthly! CVG Atlantean salt cellars were much more ornate than today's offerings, weren't they. "


"REVIEW GUE GVG Well, why else would he be hanging around dark alleyways? I'm here to enjoy Madame's outrageou I'm here to fix the lights, Let me inuou Darwinian nightmare Wait a minute if this bloke's a Nazi spy stationed in America, what's he doing carrying his German passport around with him? Klaus Kerner, huh? Being a self-confessed joypadonly man I was a bit peeved at the prospect of swapping a total of eleven disks just to get Indy to put his hat on, but that's a small price to pay for a game this involving and brilliant! I may have been a sceptic at first but now can safely say that I would seriously consider turning down laser-related death in favour of a few hours puzzle solving on my Amiga. Why? Well it's really just the brilliant graphics coupled with the completely engrossing gameplay. The action starts off pretty simple but quickly draws you in and, before you realise it, it's 3am in the morning and you still can't find that rare Atlantean artifact! In fact, that's probably the only real bummer about this game you will not sleep until you find Atlantis and that's a promise. If a laserdeath junkie like me can appreciate Indy and The Fate Of Atlantis, so can you it's a stunner! PAUL ANGLIN STRATEGY SKILL There's no denying that George Lucas' Indiana Jones is one of the most dynamic movie heroes of all time. In the original Indy adventure, Raiders Of The Lost Ark, Jones took on the Nazis in his search for the Ark Of The Covenant, the vessel which held the Ten Commandments when they were brought down from Mt. Sinai by Moses. Film two, Indiana Jones and The Temple Of Doom, although packed with spectacular stunts and stunning special effects, is something of a lacklustre affair in Walk to jungle rodent which Indy rescues children from a Give Pick up Use horde of voodoo doctors. The best of the Indy film trilogy was the last Open Talk to Push one made. Indiana Jones and The Close Look at Pull Last Crusade reintroduced the nasty Nazis and threw in a new character Aah, that poor jungle rodent. Still, it leaves Aah, that poor jungle rodent. Still, it leaves Indy free to climb that free! for good measure Indy's dad, Dr Henry Jones. The father and son duo team up to find another Bible-related artifact the Holy Grail. Where would Indy be without his trusty whip? In it deep, that's where. Have whip. will travel is Jones' motto, and it's a good thing he does carry it with him at all times, because it comes into play quite early in the proceedings. Reach the jungle and you'll come across a snake wrapped around a tree remember, Indy hates snakes. But he hasn't got to whip the serpent; no, our boy Jonesy's got to go into the jungle and use his fave weapon to scare a rodent found there Chuck yer joystick away and make it run out of make sure you've got a nice, the correct opening clean surface to play on Indiin the forest and it'li Not feeling very friendly today, ana Jones and The Fate Of be attacked by the are we? Atlantis is mouse controlled! snake, allowing Indy Almost every action is performed to climb the tree and by clicking on various verbs and cross what would choosing an object-for examotherwise be an ple, if you select the word 'Open impassable ravine. and click on a door, Indy will, That's not the sort of funnily enough, open the door! question you should That's not all, though. Should ask an Icelandic Jones come into contact with archaeologist Nazis and other enemies, he has standing on a box. the opportunity to beat them up using the keyboard; certain keys allow Indy to throw certain punches. Alternatively, he can try to talk his way out of trouble. When indulging LAME in conversation, a number of lines of speech are shown; simply select the one which you think most suitable to the situation. How on earth can Indy make all of these long journeys on a lecturer's salary? Let's hope the tax man isn't informed. ACTION REFLEXES GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE % 93 % 95 % % CVG CVG GVG 057 "


"FUE REVIEW Andy Bogard is one of two brothers fighting for their lives on the main island. He's a Kung Fu master and can perform incredible acrobatics. The fastest of the three characters, his moves are the Dash, Spinning Dervish, Back-flip and Shield Of Force. SNES BEAT 'EM UP BY SNK .99 Dash. Turns Andy's body into a distorted blur to collide with his adversary and inflict massive damage. Push diagonal down-left, then right and hit Y. CORP NES conversions of Neo Geo games are appearing in abundance, and Fatal Fury is the latest such title. Yet another in an increasingly long line of Streetfighter clones, three fighters pit their skills against eight brutal back-street warriors before coming face-to-face with the vicious overlord, Geese Howard. Howard resides on his infamous isle, linked to the main island area by a bridge. All you've gotta do is clear the mainland of henchmen, pack up your toothbrush, grab a spare pair of trousers and hit Geese's base nay problem! CHOOSE YOUR WEAPON Each of the battling brawlers has four special moves. Here's the lowdown on what they do and how to perform them. Joe Higashi's a talented young kick-boxing champion. His four moves include the Flaming Kick, the Furious Fist, the Dashing Knee and Tornado Punch. Spinning Dervish. A great move if you can pull it off. Andy spins through the air, throwing his arms about like flails. Hit down, diagonal down-right, right, diagonal up-right and Y. Flaming Kick. A deadly move which involves striking at the opponent's head whilst forcing him backwards. It's performed by pressing diagonal downleft then pushing diagonal up-right and hitting B. Furious Fist. Only use this when in close quarter combat or when your opponent is trapped in the corner. The Flaming Fist lets Joe perform tons of lightning-fast jabs, followed by an uppercut for huge damage. Repeatedly press Y for this move. Fatal Fury is no match for Streetfighter 2. Controls are slow to react, there's the bare minimum of animation and even a little corruption of graphics during some special moves. Although the game is an adequate conversion, let's face it, Fatal Fury was never a top choice game on the Neo Geo. You can defeat nearly all the bad guys in no time by stringing a couple of good combinations together and the computer is shamefully predictable. It's a great laugh to watch Michael Max flounder about as you jump over his head time and time again, I'd rather before ripping him Pick apart he just my note doesn't know what to do! The best thing about the game is its presentation, with some very nice maps and intros sprucing up the overall package, but the deformed backdrop characters with their stupid faces and bodies ruin the whole effect. Sound's just as tame, especially when you finish a character off; the machine just babbles a bit, leaving the sprites bouncing up and down like fish out of water. That Streetfighter-beater has yet to come. Back-flip. The human spring! Mildly amusing but not very effective. Diagonal downleft, diagonal up-right and B are the keys to press. Dashing Knee. This sends Joe hurtling forward in a blur of speed to land a crushing blow to the luckless enemy. Push down, diagonal down-right, left, diagonal up-right and B for this little number. Tornado Punch. The sheer speed of Joe's uppercut as he lifts his fist from the ground is enough to generate a huge tornado of wind which can sweep an opponent off his feet. Per. form a semi circular move on the bottom half of the joy pad and hit Y for this incredible attacking manoeuvre. STEVE KEEN Shield of Force. Summoning up all his mystical powers, Andy thrusts a huge shield of plasma from his fists major damage! Push down, diagonal down-left, right and Y. Fierce! cVG 058 "


"REVIEW GUG HVA Terry Bogard is the best all round fighter. His moves are the easiest to master and execute, so pick him for top winning fisticuffs. Flaming Fist, Inverted Spinning Punch, Flaming Flip and Wall Of Fire are his forte. ISLAND HOPPING Flaming Fist. One of the most devastating moves on offer, this sends Terry shooting for ward with his fist outstretched in a sizzling bolt of speed. Down, diagonal down-left, left and Y to perform this attack. Inverted Spinning Punch. The hard hitting hero turns on his head to lash out at the villains with repeated smacks to the gob! It doesn't last very long, though. Push down, up and Y. There are eight different locations spread around the main combat island. Each location features one of seven different opponents, simply aching to take you on. Also, tucked away to one side is the bonus arena where contenders have to burst tyres for extra points. Just over the bridge lies a smaller isle the home of the King Of Fighters, Geese Howard. It's him you're really after, so go for it! STREAL BOUT THE SIMILARITY ENDS HERE Fatal Fury, the coin-op, burst into the arcades after Streetfighter had already taken everyone's spare cash away. Consequently, it failed to offer any real improvements on the Grand Daddy of all arcade machines. And so with the SNES conversion we see Streetfighter's poorer cousin once again arrive too late to make any lasting impressions. Graphics, whilst faithful to the original, are garish and at times confusing. Even the large selection of special Pmoves still leave the game without any real variety and l Stasy the sluggish controls make e precision fighting as posI sible as Stevie Wonder going four rounds with Chris Ewbank. Whilst most games pale into insignificance against Streetfighter, Fatal Fury does do better than most but once you've seen the best, you can see why this is just one of the rest. The main part of the game involves you picking one of the three principle characters and fighting towards Geese at the end. However, you'll be pleased to know that there is a oneon-one option called Street Fight (original, huh!). Don't go gaga yet though. You can only choose to be one of the original three characters all those lovely baddies remain out of your control. Aaaaargh! WHAT'S THE OPTION Flaming Flip. Our man spins over onto his back and trails out a single flaming leg for brain-busting damage! Hit down, diagonal down-left, left. diagonal up-left and B. Flaming Wall. A fire wall of increasing size that scorches toward your opponent before dying away a real match winner! Down, diagonal down-right and right. GARTH SUMPTER There are huge chasms to negotiate in Fatal Fury's option screen. There's a difficulty setting of one to nine, four different match lengths, four continues and a complete joypad programming facility. Phew! STRATEGY SKILL Home of Richard Myer, the back-flipping acrobatic karate king! He is Incredibly fast, lashing out in all directions. Burst as many tyres as you can within the time limit. OF FIG AREA SELET ACTION Duck King may sound like a dumb name but the Mohlcan-sporting punk is one tough ass! REFLEXES The bridge to Geese's Island is protected by Billy Kane,  super-fast, staff-wielding thug who will use his stick to smash you to pieces. GRAPHICS % 78 FAOPAQ CAFE THE WEST SUBUAY HORED R SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE VALUE HE HRPDU U ORERM AMUSEMENTARK SOUND BERCH GEESE BUILDING % 69 % 73 CVG Jung Fue Rue fools you into thinking he's a decrepit old man only to change into a huge, firespreading monster! Who else would you expect to find here but a complete muscle-head! This is the turf of Michael Max, a huge boxer. Don't sweat it out, though; you're more than a match in speed for this bozo! Not for you it isn't! This is the domain of Hwa Jai, a Dhalsimlike character who can turn his body into a smouldering fireball by drinking potions that fly onto the screen. This is it, the big one. Geese Howard is clearly head and shoulders above the other fighters, but he's not invincible. You should lick him in time-a lot of time! Raiden, the star of this show, spends most of his time trying to puff in tourists with his strange feats, one of which includes blowing sand which he incorporates into his fighting technique. CVG GVG 0059 "


"CM CTV COMPUTERS Unit 2. The Shopping Arcade, 96 George Lane, South Woodford, London E18 IAD TEL: 081 532 9324 KONSOLS C C 0847 66949 AFTER 6PM: 0847 62946 26 PRINCESS STREET, THURSO, CAITHNESS KT14 7BQ James Pood Jor 29.99 39.99 UK SNES Streetfighter II Pack Now In Stock!!! .99 UK Super SNES Including Mario 4 .99 UK SNES Action Pack Ine Scope Six .99 US & Jap Converter for UK SNES .99 MEGADRIVE NEO GEO SNES 45.99 PGA Tour Golf Jack Nicholas Golf Pebble Beach Golf Home Alone 2 Castlevania NHL PA Hockey Amazing Tennis Desert Strike Mystic Quest Road Runner On The Rail Space Megaforce King of the Monsters. Joe & Mac 2 Skal Jagger Ascii Pad SFC Capcom Joystick Control Pad (UK Pal). Jotcard (Turbo) SF RGB The Terminator Chuck Rock Splatter House ... Super Monaco GP IT. Tarmania Krustys Fun House Bart vs Space Mutants Warriors of Rome Joe Montana European Club Soccer E Halifield Boxing Aliens 3 James Pond II John Madden 92. David Robinson Supreme Court KA Chameleon Immortal Deuble Dragon EA Hockey Mario Llux Hockey Sonic 2 Zenson 2 Speedball 2 WWF Wrestlemania LHX Attack Chopper Iniversal Soldier Capt Ameria Ecco the Dolphin UK MEGADRIVE + SONIC + 2 JOYPADS  NEO GEO, PSU, 2 JOYSTICKS, MEMORY CARD + GAME  SNES (USA) + 1 JOYPAD + ALL LEADS  Out Of This Werk Rest of the Best Jinet Conners Tennis Push Over NBA Baskethall Wing Commander SEC King of the Monde SFC Hool. SFC Perodine SFC Prince of Persia SFC AslaySFC FF Gay SFC Mickey Mystical Quest SFC Power Athlete SFC Sonic Blastman SFC Tiny Toons999999999999999999999999999999999 32.99 UK PAL SYSTEM Krusty's Fun House Syper R-Type. Super Tennis 39.90 Smash TV Super Soccer WWF ............. Castle of Illusion... Gadget Twins Talespin Championship Pro Am Indiana Jones 199332999999999999999999333333333333 Sonic 2 Batman Returns NHL PA Hockey 93. Lemmings... John Madden '93. Leaderboard ....... Road Rash 2...... Streets of Rage 2. Mick & Mac.... Strider 2... .... Rolo to the Rescue Powermonger.... Ecco the Dolphin.. Chakan. World of Illusion... Sunset Riders...  Art of Fighting World Heroes Viewpoint.......... Last Resort.... Ninja Commando ..........120 Football Frenzy..............120 King of Monsters 2....... Baseball Stars 2........... Pioneer Range.. Senguko.............. Senguko 2. Fatal Fury... Side Kick Magician Lord 2... Street Fighter L. KO Bonding Super Double Dragon Skins Golf Roger Clements B/Ball Simpsons Barts Nightman Spankys Quest Facehall 2000 Smart Ball Race Drivia NCAA Racketball Super Bowling Super Action Football R Racing Top Gear Streetfighter ........ Spiderman/X-Men. Mario Kart............ Barts Nightmare John Madden '93. Desert Strike Wing Commander Mickey Mouse. Super Star Wars. Tiny Toons... Joe & Mack 2 Super Pinball Cybernator....... Alien 3. Alien Vs Predator Lethal Weapon. Batman Returns ....... 39.99 LATEST GAMEBOY TITLES iko Benin Super Marie land Blazing Skies Robocop Super fleste Ghouls & Ghosts Street Fighter IT Terminator 2 Dig Dug Swamp thing Battle Tead an Special op Racer PLUS Jap UKUS 9 Stash TV  VERY LARGE SECOND-HAND STOCKS FOR SALE AND EXCHANGE AT AFFORDABLE PRICES  ALL MACHINES CATERED FOR! Joe & Mac Sp Ghakes Mario Kart Racing Robocop 3Turtles 4 Barts Nightmare UN Squadro. WWF 2 SEGA 4 in 1 Fun Pack... Sega UK Megadrive Spiderman 2 + Sonic +2 Pads Toxic Crusaders or Olympic Gold Dr Franken Jap Megadrive + Sonic #UK PSU... The Flash Super High Impact. All Star Challenge Side Pocket Spy Vs Spy Predator II Super Mario 2 Smash TV Corporation 19.99 Desert Strike 32.99 OVER 100 GAME GEAR CARTS ALWAYS IN Dungeons & Dragons 44.99 STOCK PHONE FOR LATEST RELEASES. Phantasy Star II NHL PA Hockeymins 499 PLEASE CALL FOR TITLES NOT LISTED, OVER Leto The Dolphin 1090 TITLES ALWAYS IN STOCK FOR 16 BIT, 8 BIT AND HAND HELD CONSOLES SUNDAY BLACK BUSHE SUNDAY MARKET MOBILE: 0850 723528 FAX: 081 989 3153 293153 BLACK BUSHE, SURREY 9999999 Package Deals Available On Machines Wanted Games For Cash Or Part Exchange Call For Honest Advice On Games -Game Exchange Service Neo Geo, Snes, Megadrive, 8-Bit Consoles & Hand Helds. -Fast Service Guaranteed For Mail Order For Further Details Please Call PC Engine Carts & CD's Now Available Please Call New & Second Hand WEMBLEY MARKET WEMBLEY STADIUM New SHOP Now OPEN ACCESS GVG Select consoles VISA UNIT 4 MILL YARD, MILL STREET, BEDFORD MK40 3HD MANY USED TITLES IN STOCK PHONE FOR DETAILS OPEN 9AM 7PM MON SAT NEW AND FORTH COMING TITLES * FAST EFFICIENT + FRIENDLY SERVICE * NEW AND FORTH COMING TITLES ALL GAMES SENT OUT FIRST CLASS * RECORDED DELIVERY * NO CLUB TO JOIN * UK Super Nintendo inc Streetfighter I ..........99 Actraiser ....................242.95 Adventure Island........95 Axelay ........... ..95 Castlevania 4............ .:42.95 Contra HI ............ .95 Final Fight............. ..95 F1 Exhaust Heat....... ..95 Ghouls N' Ghosts.......95 Gun Force.. ..95 Joe & Mac... .....95 Lemmings. .95 Mario Kart .. .95 NCAA Basketball ... ..95 Parodius ......... ..95 Prince of Persia...... ..95 Smash TV ............. ..95 Streetfighter II ...... .95 Super Aleste......... .95 Top Gear .......... ..95 Turtles 4 ..95 UN Squadron.... ..95 Wings IL.... $42.95 Zelda III ...... .95 Batman Returns Bubsy (16 meg) Combat Tribes Cool World Cybernator Death Vally Rally Dragons Lair Equinox Fatal Fury Gods Mickeys Magical Quest Out Of This World Spiderman & The X-Men Super Star Wars Terminator 2 Tiny Toons Tom & Jerry Total Carnage Wing Commander 2020 Baseball UK Mega Drive Including Sonic ........99 Alien 3.. ...95 Aquabatics... ....95 Atomic Runner ...95 Bulls Vs Lakers ..95 Chuck Rock... ....95 Crude Busters .... ..95 Desert Strike.... ..95 Dragons Fury .............95 Euro Club Soccer.......95 Green Dog .. ..95 Hellfire.... ...95 Lemmings .....95 LHX Attack Chopper..95 NHL Hockey... ....95 Predator 2 ..95 Rampart ......... ..95 Rolling Thunder II .. ....95 Side Pocket ... ..95 Smash TV ............ ..95 Sonic II. .95 Steel Empire ...95 Super High Impact .....95 Tazmania .. ..95 Terminator ............. ..95 Batman Returns Captain America Chakan The Forever Man Ecco The Dolphin Flintstones Gadget Twins Global Gladiators Indiana Jones Out Of This World Powermonger Road Rash II Shinobi II Streets of Rage (16 meg) Sunset Riders Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Thunder Force Tiny Toons T2 Arcade Game World Of Illusion WWF Wrestlemania * ADVANCE ORDERS TAKEN * ALL TITLES STOCKED * PART EXCHANGE WELCOME PHONE NOW GIVE US A TRY! . WE ALSO STOCK NES, MASTER SYSTEM, LYNX & NEO GEO CONSOLES & GAMES ALL CONSOLES CARRY A 12 MONTH GUARENTEE 0234 3259950234 325674 PLEASE ADD .50 P&P ON GAMES .00 ON CONSOLES/HANDHELDS NEXT DAY DELIVERY AVAILABLE PLEASE MAKE CHEQUES POSTAL ORDERS TO SELECT CONSOLES WE ALSO ACCEPT ALL MAJOR CREDIT CARDS. PHONE NOW!!! "


"COMPETINON WIN A WIDE-SCREEN TV WORTH OVER  1000!! o you've got all the latest games for your machine, but you've got to play them on a nasty little portable telly 'cos your mum won't let you plug into the 22\" set in the living room. Do you get all annoyed and storm around the house until she gives in? No enter the CVG Hotline Comp and you could be blasting away on the latest in Wide Screen television technology! Worth well over ONE THOUSAND POUNDS, you'd have to be rather an unfortunate case to miss out on the chance to waltz off with this truly amazing bit of kit and there couldn't be a simpler way of entering! Just phone the special Hotline Number and answer the oh-so easy questions, then leave your name and address and, if yours is the correct entry which we pull out of the draw, the telly's yours! Good luck! REDAHODS SPECIAL NOTE This competition runs from February 15th, 1993 until 14th March, 1993. Your call will cost 36p per minute (cheap rate) or 48p per minute (all other times). Your call will last no longer than four minutes. Make sure you have the permission of whoever pays the phone bill before you call. 10839 1500 1842 PHONE NUMBER PHILIPS GVG 061 "


"AVG zug REVIEW DIATOR MEGADRIVE PLATFORM BY VIRGIN .99 GLOR visit to McDonalds makes your day. That's how the saying goes, but we always thought they were talking about the burgers (which, incidentally, were officially classed as the healthiest around in a recent report blimey!). Young Mick and Mack were sat in their local Mac Dees reading a strange comic about pollution, when who should appear out of the blue but Ronald McDonald himself! Needless to say, the lads were somewhat surprised; even more so when Ronnie magically teleports them into the comic! McDonald Land is in danger of being polluted beyond repair, and Mick 'n Mack, armed with detergent guns, have been given the clean-up job. So pick up your joypad and do your bit for ecology! Mick and Mack AND Not only is our kiddo going to miss the gunge machine from there, he's also going to fall right into the slime below. FRIENDS OF THE EARTH Mick and Mack Global Gladiators should certainly impress the greenies out there with its good, wholesome \"Clean up for the kids' message. What's more important though, is the fact that it's actually a damn good game, too! The first thing to hit you is the quality of the graphics; Virgin's artists just get better and better with each new release! The detail put into the sprites is staggering little touches such as the boys blowing bubbles with their chewing gum and swivelling their guns around is a hoot! Sound is of a very high quality: sampled speech, a host of funky in-game ditties and a cracker of a dance track accompanying the bonus game keep the adrenalin flowing. But not as much as the game itself! A race against time and the plethora of enemies that dog you all the way, Mick and Mack Global Gladiators is yet another hit for Virgin. I'm forever blowing bubbles... Detergent guns in hands, our boys Mick and Mack have a big task ahead of them. The young dirtbusters must tackle the trash across a multitude of landscapes, starting in the Slime World and moving on to the Mystical Forest, packed with killer squirrels and man-eating plant life! If you survive all this, there's still Toxi Town and Ice World to clean up and, as each level is made up of three stages, you can imagine that the anti-pollution business is going to be a long and arduous one! PAUL RAND Hey! No-one said anything about these invisible platforms! GVG 062 Jump on the launch pad and you'll soar! "


"REVIEW EVE The best gag sent in which includes the word 'snowballs' wins a game! GREENPEACE The aim of the game is point accumulation, and Mick and Mack can score plenty if they know where to look! Dotted around the play area are little McDonalds logos which, if collected, add to your score. Some are easy to reach, but others especially those that are grouped together in bunches can only be reached by leaping onto launch pads. These, predictably enough, launch the player high into the air, enabling him to pick up scores of extra points and reach the higher levels. Visit this place it'll make your day, apparently. After almost a decade of chucking out fast food, American nippy nosh giants Mac Dee have finally made it on to console. Will the game have a nice day? Or is this just mass produced fodder for the masses? Well, strike me Ronald if Mick and Mack isn't one top game. First off, I've never seen sprites with as much personality as these fellers. The two lads bob around the screen shooting off huge blobs of slime like troopers, and even when you're not controlling them they can't stay still! The game's sooo smooth; the temptation to jump around and just let the guys glide through the jungle is overwhelming, and if that's the way you play it you'll probably not get much enjoyment from Global Gladiators. However, when you get down to some serious padthrashing you soon find out that there's a great game in there. A joy to watch and a thrill to play. The next time I get the urge for a Big Mac I'll plug this cart in instead. Well worth  of anyone's money! ILOESQUE Comical farting skunk capers abound in Mick and Mack Global Gladiators! Oi! Are you two going to sit there with empty trays all day? THE GREEN 250 Being an environmental game, you'd expect there to be a few hideously mutated creatures to kick in. Mick And Mack Global Gladiators gives you a plethora of polluted punks to pound, from bloated gunge monsters to big rubbishspreading machines. Armed with the latest in detergent gun technology, you're more than equipped to tackle these problems, but watch out! Some baddies sneak up behind you while you're happily blasting away and deplete your energy like nobody's business! STEVE KEEN STRATEGY SKILL The bonus game! Grab the trash, put it in the bins provided and don't get hit by the anvil! TOIS NOT-SENSIBLE DAVID ICKE ACTION REFLEXES It's not all platforms, shooting and destruction in Mick and Mack Global Gladiators! Collect over forty McDonalds logos and you reach the bonus stage, where you're given the opportunity to do your bit for world cleanliness in the form of a tidy-up campaign! Three bins are shown on-screen one for bottles, another for cans and the third for old bits of newspaper. All three types of object fall down the screen, and it's up to you to pick up the rubbish and put it in the relevant waste receptacle. Allow the litter to settle on the floor, or put the wrong item in the wrong bin, and you lose. It's also bonus game over time if you're hit on the head by the rogue anvils that also hurtle from the skies! ELEFRIENDS Global Gladiators that they are, Mick and Mack are a pair of cool kids. You can choose to control either character and, although they perform the same functions, they do have one major difference one's black, the other's white! These two are so cool their mums get them to keep frozen turkeys down their trousers! Just leave them alone for a second or two and they'll blow massive gum bubbles, wink at you and spin their guns around their fingers like Clint Eastwood! GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE % 92 % 93 % 91 % 89 Toxi Town? Looks more like Hartlepool! Snow' joke fighting the little abominable snowmen in Ice World. CVG HIT GVG 063 "


"WIN SUPER NINTENDO WIN WIN A SUPER NINTENDO AND  WORTH OF GAMES JUST CALL 0839 36 39 50 HUNDREDS OF RUNNER UP GAME BOY. WIN A GAMEBOY RIGHT NOW! CALL 0839 36 39 51 WIN A SEGA MEGA DRIVE PLUS  WORTH OF GAMES! CALL 0839 36 39 52 WIN YOUR TOP TEN SEGA or NINTENDO GAMES FAVOURITE For any System Call Now on 0839 36 39 53 Call Charges: Calls are charged at 36p per min cheap rate and 48p per min all other times. Make sure you ask your parents' permission before you call. Maximum call cost .40, maximum call length 5 mins. Multiple choice competition. For further information & list of previous prize winners write to Awesome PO Box 1650 B1 1AA Nintendo, Mario Brothers, Gameboy, Super Nintendo, Sega, Sega Megadrive are all registered trademarks of their respective companies. We are not related to or endorsed by them. "


"CVG GVE REVIEW AMIGA Es Sleepwalker PLATFORM BY OCEAN $25.99 ROLE REVERSAL Vour dad may snore louder than a wilderbeast with sinus trouble when he's asleep, but I bet he doesn't get out of bed and do three laps around the living room before the toil of the next day! However, our lad Lee has just that problem. During a routine snooze he jumped out of bed and landed right on the head of his faithful dog, Ralph. The old mutt woke up just in time to spy the boy leaping straight out of the open window and screeched in horror! There's only one thing the hound could do and that was to bound out after him and make sure that he came to no harm! Lee's not far from being one of the walking dead, but Ralph's talents seem to be limitless. In order to get Lee over gaps in the rooftops, the dog can kick him up the rump or jump into the space and make a bridge with his body, Superman style! Ralph can turn Lee around, push him along to speed him up, switch places and is even armed with a club to knock seven bells out of any nightclub bouncers who are giving Lee a hard time. Good to see the lad wears undies at night! HE'S GOT THE MOVES Both master and mutt can collect a bag full of objects to make the night time adventure more interesting. Sleepwalker, being linked firmly with the Comic Relief Charity, leans heavily on slapstick humour, so the pick-ups are suitably comical. Whoopee Cushions give invulnerability, false beards drop a hint to completing the level, ear muffs put Lee into a deeper sleep, dunce's hats complete your level map and custard pies build bridges over water. In addition the five letters to COMIC are scattered around the stages and if you complete the word you'll get the chance to play a bonus stage. Watch your back! WHO'S THE MASTER A shocking time for Ralph, and there's not a Turtle in sight! Sleepwalker has such a massive media push behind the charitable release I really thought that the game would be dross. Instead it's turned out to be one of the most original games Ocean has put out since Robocop 3! The animated intro is brilliant, even incorporating Lenny Henry's voice for Ralph the dog, and the tiny touches of detail to the characters during the game really get you engrossed. Lee's nightshirt billows up around his knees when he falls off ledges and Ralph doggy-paddles with style! Although six levels doesn't sound like much they are pretty hard, but the animation's so excellent you'll be hooked for hours without takeing a breakand hey! It's for Cher-arity As Lee's in the deepest of sleeps it's up to you, as Ralph, to guide him safely through six levels of cityscape over ledges, telephone wires, skylights, perilous drops, roads and sewers. Certain obstacles, such as water-hydrants and hazardous waste, will wake the youngster up straight away, killing him with shock. So, using Ralph, you must prod the lad in the right direction and run ahead where necessary to clear a safe path. This is harder than it sounds as you can't always keep Lee in eyesight and if he hits a brick wall he's likely to turn around and walk off a cliff! Doh! Mate! Doggy-paddling for your life. Don't look back it's behind you! STEVE KEEN % STRATEGY SKILL CVG GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE % % 80 ACTION REFLEXES CVG GVG 065 "


"CVG EWS REVIEW CHHOTENSTE AMIGA ARCADE BY RENEGADE .99 0 . You scratch my back and I'II watch yours! It got a red hot preview back in November and, after what seems like decades, the Engine is set to be released on Amiga! Way back in the mists of time well, the late 19th Century the Victorians built a huge machine, a sort of primitive computer, that over the years acquired a life of it's own. The machine produced all kinds of mutants and now wants to take over the world! However, it didn't reckon on you and your team of hard-assed mercenaries giving it a kick up the sprockets! Heading a team of two, or simultaneously playing with a friend, you've got to find your way to the Chaos Engine's world and shut the monolithic mother down and fast! Jules Verne, eat yer heart out. 000160 E   Just one of the 'nodes' that have to be found. Welcome to Toad City. The boys have cleaned up the town now, but this is where its warts were. TWO'S COMPANY To get anywhere in Chaos Engine, your characters must work as a team. That's not to say you can't be ruthlessly competitive two players can set out together and divide all the spoils equally, or maniacally grab anything they can get their hands on first. If you're really sad, (like Lord EMAP) and don't have a friend to play against, the computer does more than a fair job of controlling the other player. In fact, it's only in two player mode that you have to start to worry about cash distribution. You'll need lots of wonga to stay in the game, so make sure that you keep up with your partner in the dosh stakes. At the end of each level the cash collected is totted up and a percentage of how much of the level each player has completed is shown. If you're on speaking terms with your partner it's advisable for one to cover whilst the other grabs the lute. SKILL Do you have enough of the right stuff to bump up your other attributes or bring powerups and special abilities into play? STAMINA When the juice runs dry on this baby you're just history! SPEED Are | | you as fast as the wind or slow as a slug? INTELLIGENCE Only applies to computer controlled characters. If there's not enough in the bucket you can bet that the blockhead would be last choice in a game of five-a-side! GHARAGTERS | HIRED The two members of your all-night party. CIPE CE ACT CHARACTER PORTRAIT Can your man pull the birds? It's taken long enough to materialise, but I'm happy to say that Chaos Engine is a winner from start to finish. Renegade have packed in the detail tighter than an elephant in a Christmas cracker! Sprawling over sixteen massive levels, the action is fast and furious with just the right blend of gory monster-bashing and brain-draining puzzle solving. You couldn't want for more weapons, more pick-ups, more monsters or more surprises than are available in this game. The graphics are near-perfect, with more attention to detail than I've seen in most console games; the characters' ponytails sway as they scuttle around the screen, waterfalls stream from rock crevasses, lights flicker from behind windows and flashes shoot from the barrels of guns as they power into victims. Well worth the overly long wait, get Chaos Engine now and make those console kids green with envy! STEVE KEEN COST OF GHARAGTER You start with a sack of cash, but bodies don't come cheap and it'll soon be eaten up by these mer cenaries. KIS AVVIE CHARAGIERS NAME There are six different characters to choose from, and picking a wellbalanced team is vital for a realistic attempt at getting to the Chaos Engine. CHARACTERS FOR HIRE There are six of the meanest hombres on the planet available for hire. Even the Preacher chews baccy 'n' spits lead! GASH BALANGE The party's stash at a glance. WEAPON HELD Each character has a weapon with different qualities. Depending on the character you can collect power-ups for your man which increase the number of shots, damage inflicted or whether the puises go through monsters or not. The colour of a shot depends on the level It's been powered to red is total devastation! SPEGIAL ABILITY INVENTORY Eachman can carry up to six of these goodies. Here you'll find the ones you've Bequired. WEAPON POWER The level your chosen weapon has reached with power ups. SPECIAL ABILITY POWER Exactly as it suggests! SPECIAL ABILITY HELD You can only hold one in your hand at a time. They may be bought or found. To swap between the one you're holding and those you carry, press the Space bar. GVG 066 "


"REVIEW CV63) The game can be played on two levels, and some guys can drop bombs off ledges. Just one of the evil Engine's creations. MEET THE GANG COS THE BOYS ARE HERE! Six of the scummiest earth crawlers on the planet are offering their services to you and no two serve the same shots! The Nawie is one of the most powerful characters, being able to power up his weapons to incredible levels, while the Priest can only carry light armaments. He moves very quickly though, and can heal people without the need of a first aid kit. The weaker the character, the cheaper they are to hire; the Mercenary has a massive Gatling gun that carpets the area with bullets and the Gentleman sports the latest in flame-throwers, whilst the Brigand is endowed with double shots. Last, but by no means least, is the Thug who carries a devastating shotgun that scatters up to six death-dealing shells at a time! Boy, it looks as though those Renegades have done it again! Chaos Engine has something for everyone; there are so many avenues of gameplay it'll turn your head inside out! Play the game as a straight shoot 'em up, frying everything in sight, or get stuck into some real Sherlock shenanigans by hunting out all the secret passages and rooms hidden throughout the complex. Either way, it'll take you months to get bored with this one! Renegade have just completed their own sound system and this is its first gig. Similar to Lucasarts' iMUSE, it adds an unseen depth to Amiga games by making the music react to the action on the screen. As you walk toward streams, the sound of running water gets louder; walk away from the danger or an exit and the music loses it's pace, turn back and it builds to frantic proportions! If you thought you'd had your fill of shoot 'em ups, check out the world of the Chaos Engine you'll never want to leave! GARTH SUMPTER Donn 02 nn0741 Multi-platform action with a side salad of death! THE NAME OF THE GAME STRATEGY SKILL To get through all sixteen levels you'll need all your reflexes and wits about you. Throughout each stage is hidden a group of 'nodes' which, once hit, open the exit to the next world. A counter tells you how many nodes are on each stage and the minimum needed to open the gate. Things start out easy enough, with everything pretty obviously positioned. However, some levels have more than one exit. If you've only shot a few of the nodes and your exit's already open, it's a fair bet that hidden somewhere else is another, as yet undiscovered, route. Not only that, but there are a ton of puzzles to solve before you can get out. Moving blocks, sliding panels and false statues are just a few of the secrets that await explorers. Quite often you'll find yourself completely stuck, but by shooting some of the more oddly-shaped pieces of rock you might find keys that'll move the scenery, revealing secret areas, or stairways to other stages. SPECIAL POWERS Smooth 'n' hardand that's just the cut of his gun! I bet you wouldn't like to meet this guy on a dark night. ACTION REFLEXES MOLOTOV A ring of fireballs which shoot out all over the place in the direction the cocktail was thrown. DYNAMITE When it goes up all the monsters in the surrounding area will be toasted! GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY VALUE CVG % 90 % 90 % 88 % 87 MAP Shows an overhead view with a three screens radius from the central character. The Clint Eastwood of the Chaos world. The Preacher has a direct line to the divine. BOMB This beauty kills everything in sight and shakes the whole screen! 30 SHOT BURST Very powerful shots fire out in all directions around the character. FIRST AID KITIE the Friest isn't in your party, these are the most preclous Specials you can find They heal both members of the party to full Sta. mina. HIT Is this a gun in my pocket or etc, etc. A handsome chap and no mistake. GVG 067 "


"GVG MEGADRIVE ARCADE BY ARENA .00 GUN DAMN! The T-800 may be as hard as a very hard thing indeed, but it has to be said that his gun is verging on the 'not very good' side. It's supposed to be rapid fire, and when you first start shooting it lets those bullets loose at a frightening speed, but prolonged use will overheat your weapon, allowing the enemy to regroup and kick your metal ass. Picking up the rapid fire recharge icons, stored in boxes which appear at various positions throughout the levels (usually when there are millions of baddies onscreen!) will bring your gun up to full strength, allowing you to blast the bolts off the Endoskeletons and HKs once more. Double the fun and they've both got a great big gun. BACK TO THE FUTURE The battle against Skynet and its ultimate creation, the practically-indestructible T1000, begins in the year 2029, out on the battlefield defending the humans against the onslaught of Endoskeletons and Hunter-Killers. From here, move to the humans' HQ, which has been infiltrated by T-800s like yourself. Defeat these and you're riding shotgun for John Connor, who's being attacked by airborne HKs. Should you keep Connor alive, you are teleported to the year 1994 where you must first destroy the Cyberdyne building the place where Skynet was created and then freeze-dry the T-1000 by covering him with liquid hydrogen. It may look dead, but the T-1000 quickly thaws out, leaving you to knock him into a vat of molten steel before he gets his hands on the ten-year old John. Exciting stuff, eh? You've got to promise not to kill anyone. BODY SHIELD ime travel, eh? Causes all sorts of problems, doesn't it. The Skynet computer, for all its intelligence almost wiped out the entire human race. Now, a cyborg assassin is journeying through the Time Field Generator to get rid of John Connor, the leader of the humans and the man who, unless the course of history is altered, will wipe out Skynet's very existence. To cut a long story short, you're a re-programmed Terminator who's firstly got to destroy Skynet in the 21st Century, before travelling back to 1994 to protect the ten year-old Connor from the T-1000 the liquid metal successor to the Terminator. The coin-op of the film was a cracker but how does the Megadrive version fare? The coin-op was one of the most impressive around less than an year ago and had some of the most stunning visuals ever seen. The Megadrive game replicates those graphics almost to a tee. All the baddies are excellently drawn, move around as well as they do in the real thing, and there are stacks of them onscreen at a time without the game slowing down. All the tunes, effects and samples have been shoe-horned into the cart too, giving even more of a 'real feel to the home version. However, one of the biggest gripes of the game was that it Awas 'just another Op Wolf clone' and had little to woffer apart from the cabinet-mounted gun. But I'm a massive fan of Op Wolf games, as long as they're good and this one most certainly is. Designed specifically for play with the Menacer, you get much op more enjoyment from T2 using the gun. It's even not too bad at all with a joypad either. If this is the shape of games to come for the Menacer then future blasting action will be excellent! PAUL RAND GVG 068 0 Temporarily protects you from enemy fire GRENADE LAUNCHER 0 Ch Concentrate on the HKs if you want to complete this stage. o te the cabiGives you an M-79 grenade launcher for a short time CREDIT 0 Don't let the airborne T-1000 smash into your van! FLYI 2) TEAMINATED ACCURACAT 1:17 Extra continue RAPID FIRE RECHARGE BONUS O270000 0 TOTAL BONUS Restores your gun to maximum efficiency 00295000 Excellent. "


"| CVG EXTRAS CHARACTER ASSASSINATION  TOP GUN T2The Arcade Game is the first commercial cart to make use of the Menacer, Sega's Megadrive light gun. We'll not write a load of bumph about the gun here you can read all about it on page 14 but we will tell you that you can play with either one Menacer, one joypad or, if you're playing with a friend, two Menacers or one gun and one pad. | Adds a randomlychosen power to your inventory T-800 Skynet created these cybernetic organisms to destroy all human life; you are a T-800, reprogrammed by John Connor, to assist the rebels. MINI-GUN Gives you a sixbarrel mini-gun for a short time The Menacer got off to a rather bad start with the very sad six game pack, so it was up to T2 to rescue the gun. And luckily, Sega can breathe a huge sigh of relief. In T2, Arena Entertainment have turned in not only one of the best conversions for ages, but also easily the best Op Wolfstyle game. There have been many previous attempts to recreate the feel of blasting baddies with a pivot-based Uzi, all of which have fallen well and truly by the wayside. The superb graphics of the original have been squeezed into the Megadrive cart with a vengeance. There's only been a slight compromise in the brilliant effects, such as when the T-1000's head splits in two. The T-800s run around the screen letting off hundreds of bullets, at a blistering pace which never lets up. One reason that the coin-op wasn't an instant hit was that it was just too l hard! Well, it's exactly the same here! Although T2 isn't frustrating. ly hard, you'll have many sleepless nights trying to blast the hordes of vicious Terminators. If you've got a Menacer, this is the game for you! PAUL ANGLIN PLASMA PULSE ENERGISER ENDO-SKELETON A T-800 Terminator unit without flesh, you'll encounter more of these throughout the game than any other enemy He's down but not out. Increases the power of your gun ROCKETS HUNTER-KILLER Both air and ground-based, HKs fire missiles at you and need to be quickly put out of action. Each rocket adds three to your supply JOHN CONNOR 45 YEARS The leader of the rebels in the year 2029 guard him against attack. STRATEGY SKILL SHOTGUN SHELL Eye-eye! Each shell adds three to your supply RECHARGE ACTION REFLEXES JOHN CONNOR 10 YEARS Protect young John from the T-1000 in the 20th Century. C % 92 Recharges your energy GRAPHICS SOUND GAMEPLAY SARAH CONNOR John's mother; she assists you in the 20th Century by handing out extra weapons. It's fair to say that the T-1000's not in the best of states. EXTENDED RAPID FIRE COOLANT VALUE 88 D CVG Plus Stops your gun from overheating SMART BOMB T-1000 Made of liquid metal and virtually indestructible, the new prototype Terminator is after young Connor and must be stopped. E Big holes in the tanker spell limited doom for the T-1000! Destroys all onscreen enemies HIT GVG 069 "


"  It's been a strange old month, all things considered. People have been blaming video games for everything from violence to burning the morning's toast. And it's been a sad month for football, but we won't go into that. But let's look on the lighter side of things. It's been a great time for tips of all sorts, and I've finally managed to bring together all the amazing tricks you can perform with an Action Replay cart and Streetfighter II, so if you haven't got an Action Replay Id advise you to get one. And Question Corner gets off to a flying start this issue, too! So forget about your troubles, smile and enjoy Cheat Mode. When you're finished, send all your cheats off to: PAUL ANGLIN'S EXCELLENTLY PUNCTUATED CHEAT MODE, CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU. And don't forget, if your tips are really good, you could win a prize! ANOTHER WORLD Stuck in Another World? So is Adam Doy. Well okay, he's actually living it up in Norwich but who cares? Just hope he keeps sending me these top tips. SUPER MARIO KARTI SNES HTDC Trapped in the cage. CLLO Pipe Maze. XDOJ In the cave with the water. KLFB After the cave. DDRX Massive hole filled with water. HRTB Swam through the water and shot the power line. BRTO Running through the doors, being shot at. TFBB Mate helps you with the men. TXHF Inside the building mate hanging from the cloth. CKUL Inside the tank in the arena. LFCK Eject from the tank final level. Scott Taylor from Dewsbury, West Yorkshire was one of many to send me this cheat for Mario Kart. To access the Special Cup easily go to either Time Trial or Match Race. Then move the cursor up to Mushroom Cup and press: L, R, L, R, L, L, R, R. JUT SUPER STAR WARS 102 The mysterious M E Potters from Rotterdam has found a way to listen to the brilliant music in this equally brilliant game of the legendary movie. Here's how to get the sound test. (By the way, you'll need an SN Pro Pad for the cheat to work). Turn all the switches off. Pause the game, switch to slow motion play and move all the switches to auto. Now switch back to normal play and turn all the switches off again. Loads of people have sent in this top tip but James Jarvis and Tony's letter was the first that I put my hand on, and it wasn't at all my being biased towards the fact that they just happen to live in Liverpool football capital of the world. To get 99 lives, fight to the The Land Of The Sand People. When you get to the second part of the jumping stones, just before you get to Ben Kenobi, walk off the left side of the cliff and push left you should land in a special secret room. Jump onto the platform in the middle of the room to stop the rocks from falling and then blast away at the rocks to find the extra lives. You'll find seven at a time keep leaving and re-entering to get that magic 99! LUK Doh! One of the few people to leave their name of their cheat this month. Oh well, no fame and for tune for you. For players OT CVG quality who want to try the ultra-hard difficulty setting, select difficulty on the options menu with joypad one. Whilst selecting press buttons A and X on joypad two ati the same time. The word Gamer should appear. GVG 070 "


"ECCO THE DOLPHIN DRAGON'S FURY Wayne Perry who hails all the way from Thaxted in Essex has put his can of tuna aside to bring you each and every password for this fine game. And just out of interest, does anyone know how you pronounce the word Ecco? Richard Taylor has dragged himself away from playing long enough to send me this, and I think you should all thank him. If you type LIBYFWJID3 you will receive a score of 999,999,990. Then, if you fire the ball back into play you will be transported to the final stage. MICKEY AND DONALD Undercaves: MZJXKFBH The Vents: FMCBLFBL The Lagoon: JTWELFBT Island Zone: EEJZUREF Ridgewater: ATWDVREI Open Ocean: VJCPREL Ice Zone: WTFEYRER Hard Water: CONAYREW Cold Water: HRUWXREG Deep Water: JNYGVREQ The Marble Sea: AEXIXRED The Library: MJROXRES Deep City: UMGHXREL City Of Forever: JGMSXREL Tura Scis Beach: HLKSAPEN Pterandon Pond: HUDWAPET Origin Beach: ODXZAPEG Trilobite Circle: LRRDBPEQ Dark Water: VBKIBPEI Ryan Meikle from Ingle Farm, Australia has managed to get his head out of the flower pot and send me the passwords for Disney's great platform romp. Tie me kangaroo down, sport... DONALD Level 2: King of Spades. King of Diamonds. King of Clubs. Queen of Spades. Level 3: King of Clubs. King of Hearts. Queen of Hearts. King of Spades. Level 4: Queen of Hearts. King of Diamonds. King of Hearts. King of Spades, Level 5: King of Spades. King of Hearts, King of Clubs.King of Diamonds. MICKEY Level 2: King of Clubs. Queen of Hearts. King of Hearts.King of Diamonds. Level 3: King of Hearts. King of Spades. King of Diamonds. Queen of Spades. Level 4: Queen of Hearts. King of Diamonds. King of Spades. King of Clubs. Level 5: King of Diamonds. King of Clubs. King of Hearts.King of Spades. MICKEY AND DONALD Level 2: King of Spades. Queen of Hearts. King of Hearts. King of Dia monds. Level 3: King of Hearts. King of Spades. King of Diamonds.Queen of Spades. \"If you say the magic word, Level 4: Queen of Hearts. King of Dia'ALAKAZAM, and then press any one monds. King of Spades. King of Clubs. of the buttons, a flying carpet Level 5: King of Diamonds. King of will appear. Clubs. King of Hearts. King of Spades. MEGADRIVE SONIC 2 Coming all the way from a fax machine somewhere in Denmark courtesy of Nikolaj Rokke, is this scorcher of a cheat Go to the option screen and listen to the following sound tests, 19 -65-09-17. They have to be played in this order for the cheat to work. After you have played the four tests, go back to the tide screen. Now hold A and press Start to access level select LOTUS TURBO CHALLENGE Fancy flying around in a smart Lotus? Well have a word with Dave Smith from Longsight Manchester; he knows how. Type in SLUGPACE as your password and you will have unlimited turbos. GS 32 TAILS RINGS 17 SONICOS 32 THE HEDGEHOG 28 THUNDER FORCE 4 Having trouble with that little maniac they call Taz? Not any longer, thanks to Aaron Sheed from Upminster. Hold A,B,C and Start on both joypads a noise will sound. When you start the game, walk to the left, press Start on joypad one and press C you can now choose your level. Once you have done this press Start and B and you'll be invincible. This may be one of the toughest blasters on the Megadrive but you can make it a little easier thanks to Nicholas Woods from Clwyd. To obtain 99 lives select O stock ship on the options screen. The 99 lives will apply on any continues. "


"STREETFIGHTER 2 MEGA ACTION REPLAY CODES W e all know that Streetfighter 2 is the top cart to own for the SNES, but the whopping 16 Megabyte cartridge hides a whole host of features and special effects that give you almost an entirely new game! And how do you access these incredible moves and weird fighting techniques? By reading our Streetfighter 2 Action Replay special, that's how! So don't hang about. Whip out your Action Replay cartridge and unleash the beast just waiting in your SNES. JUST THE TICKETT Here are a few useful little numbers to get you started. You can combine up to four cheats for unrivalled Streetfighting euphoria! ZEOCO 300 Auto Fireballs turn off once you win and then come back on again during the next round. TEOC0010 No punches, kicks or physical contact. Only grabs and Fireballs have any effect. TEOC2BBO Infinite energy for player one. 7EOCODOO Change player one's colour. 7EOEODOO Change player two's colour. Enter this and the above to have both characters the same colour. 7EQED000 Player two continues to play until he has won two rounds. Player two never wins. TEOCDO00 Player two continues to play until he wins two fights. Player one never wins. ZEOCD002 Player one only needs one win to go through to the next round. TEQEDO02 Player two only needs one win to go through to the next round. 7E0C35BO Throws player one high in the air. Turn Action Replay off if you wnat to bring him down again. 7E0E35BO Throws player two high in the air. Turn the Action Replay off to bring him down again. BOOTIFUL, JUST BOOTIFUL CHEAT MODE FIRE FIGHTER ZEOD8000 Allows combinations of two special moves to be perNow these are the little beauties that'll (temporarily change your cart beyond all formed at the same time, i.e. a Hundred Foot Kick and Spinning Bird Kick, Fireball and recognition! Remember to combine some of the more choice codes for some really spectacular battles! CAMOUFLAGE FIGHTER 7E04B3(x)(X) Change (X)(x) to any TWIN FIGHTER ZEOBF220 Lets both players be the same character. number to change the colour of Ryu's Fireballs. SLIDE FIGHTER 7E0E2E30 Allows Ken and Ryu to perform Dragon Punches whilst sliding sideways. FAST FIGHTER 7EOCO30C For a constant stream of high and low Fireballs. NEW FIGHTER ZEOCD 105 Put this code in but don't turn the Action Replay on. Select Blanka and wait until he appears on the screen. Now allow yourself to be thrown and you'll turn into a weird beast with strange powers! SLOW FIGHTER 7EOODA09 Slows the game down. MUTE FIGHTER ZETADE00 No music (press START). BONUS FIGHTER 7E1A5AOD SPEEDFIGHTER ZEOC6001 Speeds the game up to twice the speed! Allows you to fight on the bonus AIR FIGHTER T ZEOCB200 Lets player one perform all their special moves stages. in mid-air! SLOTH FIGHTER TE102000 AIR FIGHTER 2 7E0EB200 Slows your magic down so that you Lets player two perform all can walk through it. their special moves in mid-air! FAST FIGHTER 1. ZEOCB909 Fast magic for player one. CHOICE FIGHTER FAST FIGHTER 2 ZEOEB909 ZEQED 100X Allows player Fast magic for player two. one to choose any character to UNSEEN FIGHTER 7E101602 play in the game. Use the numInvisible magic player one. bers 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9, A and SPRING FIGHTER 1 ZEOC3035 Super jump player one. B in place of the (x) to choose. SPRING FIGHTER 2 ZEOE3035 Super jump player two. AND FINALLY If that little lot's not enough for you, then take a look at these. They're not really that useful for games playing, but worth a look. DEMO 7E1A5DOO Then: ZEOCD 1(x)(x) + 7EQED 1(X)(X) Watch any of the characters fight by changing the (X)'s including all the bosses! BACKWARDS MAGIC TE101401 Release your magic and watch it fly backwards. SCENERY SHIFTER 7E0C16OF Fight behind the scenery on Ryu's stage. REVERSE FIGHTER 7E0C16FF Fight upside down on the ceiling! GVG 072 "


"FREE! SILICA FROM SILICA ATARI TENSTAR GAMES PACK OLIVE KATARI HARDWARE: Mb RAM 520ST-E..... .99 BMHz 16-Bit 68000 CPU, 512K RAM Mouse, TV Modulator, Internal PSU. 1 Mb Disk Drive SOFTWARE ARCADE GAMES: Final Fight Street fighting game...  9 Lives Help save Claudette....... E24 Robot Monsters Arcade Shoot Up  Sim City Ccontrol your own city...  SOFTWARE PRODUCTIVITY: Neochrome. Art package ... 1st Word Word processor FIST BASIC Programming lang ST Tour Tutorial Disk ANIST Animation Package...  PLUS! FREE FROM SILICA: Silica Productivity Pack............ TenStar Games Pack.................. .78 Total Value: .59 Less Pack Saving: .59 SILICA PRICE: $249.00 88888888  amb RAM 520ST-E DISCOVERY XTRA Plus PLUS! BONUS BATTLEZONE CRYSTAL CASTLES MISSILE COMMAND ARCADE GAMES WITH FREE GIFTS FROM SILICA (SEE PANEL TO LEFT) SUPER BROMMAND When you buy your new Atari 520 or 1040ST-E computer from Silica Systems, we will give you an additional .75 worth of software FREE OF CHARGE, including some great entertainment and productivity programs. Plus, with every ST and TT, we will give you 16 nights holiday hotel accommodation for you and your family to enjoy a break. TENSTAR PACK: ASTERIX....... .99 CHESS PLAYER 2150 .95 DRIVIN' FORCE .95 LIVE AND LET DIE .99 ONSLAUGHT ................. $24.99 PIPE MANIA .99 RICK DANGEROUS... .99 ROCK 'N' ROLL .. .99 SKWEEK......................... .99 TRIVIAL PURSUIT... .95 PRODUCTIVITY PACK: 1st WORD ....... .99 Word processing package from GST SPELL IT........... . ..... ..........99 Spelling checker to complement 1st Word ST BASIC.... ....... 124.99 Basic programming language with tutorial TOTAL VALUE: .75 WORTH NEARLY INCLUDING INCLUDING 1Mb RAM UPGRADE TO 1Mb RAM WORTH $39.96 M 12Mb RAM   worm 2325. I ATARI ST MORE THAN JUST GREAT GAMES! ATARI TT NEW! ATARI FALCONJI ATARI 1040ST-E Inc VAT Ref: STC 6300 Inc VAT Ref: STC 6311 FAMILY CURRICULUM II KATARII ni The Falcon for a more powercation softwar MUSIC MASTER FAMILY CURRICULUM || MADARILA       NEW! 12\" MONITOR FOR ST OWNERS  164 32-bit 68030 Processor . 32 Motorola DSP and NEW THE NEW BLITTER CO-processors LOW ATARI  DSP capabilities for voice recognition, speech synthesis PRICE GENERATION and numerous audio special effects  True colour display: 768 x 480  65,000+ colours on screen at once  Record 8 channel, 16-Bit stereo sound and play back 4 channel, 16-bit stereo simultaneously  SCSI II, DMA, MIDI IN & MIDI OUT, Stereo audio & microphone ports  1.44Floppy Disk MONITOR OPTIONAL EXTRA MONTIGREOPTIONAL EXTRA  1.4 or 14 RAM Configurations The new Atari Falcon 030 is expected into stock soon. It Optional 65 Hard Disk  32MHz 32-Bit 68030 Processor is a powerful. versatile, multipurpose home computer, Built-in ADC & DAC convertors FREE GIFTS  3% 1.44M Double Sided Disk Drive offering unmatched performance for its price. Included in  2/4/8Mb RAM Versions its advanced specification are multiple co-processors for ATARI FALCON 030 FROM SILICA  Stereo 8-Bit PCM Sound Output sound and graphics, true colour displays from a pallet of 1032-Bit 68030 CPU, IM RAM WITH THIS PRODUCT 3 1.44 FOD  4096 Colour Palette over a quarter of a million colours and 16-bit stereo SEE TOP LEFT NEWI REVISED PACK HARDWARE:  Built-in 68882 Maths Co-Processor sound input for speech recognition and sound sampling. These all combine to provide a new computer capable of SOFTWARE:  Up to 1280 x 960 Resolution running unrivalled sound, graphics and multimedia CALAPPT Personal information Manager  VME+SCSI Expansion Ports applications. The Falcon is an ideal upgrade for Atari ST Enhanced version Calendar alowing porsport  Expandable to 36MB RAM owners who are looking for a more powerful model, as it PROCALC.  Hard Drive Expansion Options is compatible with the majority of ST application software. SYSTEM-AUDIO-MANAGER An Auto Folder FREE GIFTS HARDWARE:  FREE 16 Nights Holiday accommodation Call for details of availability. Desk Accessory combination that the user to SEE ABOVE 1040ST-E COMPUTER .99 record sounds from a crophone and assig various BMHz 16-B 68000 CPU. TMD RAM Mouse 2Mb RAM 4MB RAM 8MB RAM 1 Mb RAM-Mb HD4Mb RAM OMD HD 4Mb RAM 65Mb HD system functions TV Modulator, Internal PSU, 1Mb Disk Drive TALKING CLOCK Anorom time at presenten AUDIO FUN MACHINE A revolutionary audio SOFTWARE MODULES: program using DSP PLAY AND LEARNA Game with Words and Sentences , .59 NGA STC 22NYAT. STC W T. STC BTT STG 7000 CASTC40 NWT STG 7046 LANDMINES & BREAKOUT -Two Tully featured games JUNIOR SCHOOL Spelling, Primary Maths .......58.54 Answer Back/General Knowledge Quiz GCSE Micro Maths, French, and Geography Quiz .........54 This pack combines the 1040ST-E with the HYPER PAINT Full Colour Paint Package ........99 renowned MIDI package PRO 24 lll to provide a perfect environment for novice and MUSIC MAKER II Music Creation Software ...... .99 professional alike. Using any MIDI keyboard. FIRST BASIC Powerful Programming language...... 249.99  12\" Greyscale Monitor The ViewTek VT12 12\" Monitors offers high quality PRO 24 offers the ability to write and compose 1st WORD Very easy-to-use Word Processor ... .99 monitor output at an affordable price. It is ideal for  Represents Colour in unlimited music to a very high standard. You can record Viewiek ANI ST Animation Package .95 text applications using the free high resolution up to 24 tracks simultaneously, and then apply Shades of Grey emulation software supplied. It can also be used in real time editing GAMES low  Works in Low (320 x 200) + and medium resolution mode to produce HARDWARE: 9 LIVES ....... .99 stunning greyscale graphics for entertainment 1040ST-E COMPUTER ... 299.99 The ultimate in playability! help Bob Cat save Claudette Medium (640 x 200) Resolution software. At only  (ref: MON 3012) the View Tek 8MHz 16-B 6000 CPU. IV RAM Mouse PRINCE... .95 ST Modes VT12 offers exceptional value for money. And, when TV Modulator, Internal PSU 1Mb Disk Drive Do battle in this tenth century game of warfare you buy a View Tek monitor from Silica, we will give SOFTWARE:  Free High-Res (640 x 400) you a cable to connect it to your Atari ST FREE OF PRO 24 .... PLUS! FREE FROM SILICA: .00 Emulation Software for ST-ST-E Silica Productivity Pack .............................98 CHARGE! When ordering, please specify whether PLUS! FREE FROM SILICA: TenStar Games Pack .78 Stereo Speakers Built-in you have a ST-FM or an ST-E computer, so that the Silica Productivity Pack .97 correct cable can be included free with your monitor. TenStar Games Pack .78 Total Value: .27  Small Footprint Total Value: 2774.74 Less Pack Saving: .27  Case Colour Compliments FREE CABLE Loss Pack Saving: .74 SILICA PRICE: .00 ST Housing Please Specity SILICA PRICE: 299.00  Tilt & Swivel Base Available STFM Mono CAB 5912 (Ref: MOA 5500 .99) INCLUDES FREE CABLE Easy Access to Controls for: ST-E-Stereo CAB 5920 Volume, Brightness, Contrast INC VAT MON 3012 Inc VAT-Ref: STC 1261 Inc VAT Ref: STC 1272 ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT FREE OVERNIGHT COURIER DELIVERY IN THE UK MAINLAND 11013 TROO MAIL ORDER: 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 081-309 1111 Order Lines Open: Mon-Sat 9.00am-6.00pm No Late Night Opening Fax No: 081-308 0608 SILICA SYSTEMS OFFER YOU LONDON SHOP: 52 Tottenham Court Road, London, W1P OBA 59 Tottenham Court Tel: 071-580 4000 Opening Hours Mon-Sat 9.30am-6.00pm No Late Night Opening Fax No: 071-323 4737  FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY: On all hardware orders shipped in the UK mainland. LONDON SHOP: Selfridges (1st Floor), Oxford Street, London, W1A 1AB Tel: 071-629 1234 TECHNICAL SUPPORT HELPLINE: Team of technical experts at your service. Opening Hours: Mon-Fr 9.30am-7.00pm (Sat Close 6.30pm) Late Night: Thursday Bom Extension: 3914 PRICE MATCH: We normally match competitors on a \"Same product Same price\" basis. SIDCUP SHOP: 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX Tel: 081-302 8811 ESTABLISHED 14 YEARS: Proven track record in professional computer sales. Opening Hours: Mon-Sat 9.00am-5.30pm Late Night Friday 7pm Fax No: 081-309 0017  MILLION TURNOVER (with 60 staff): Solid, reliable and profitable. ESSEX SHOP: Keddies (2nd Floor), High Street, Southend-on-Sea, Essex, SS1 1LA Tel: 0702 468039  BUSINESS + EDUCATION + GOVERNMENT: Volume discounts available 081-308 0888. Opening Hours: Mon-Fri 9.30am-5.30pm (Sat 9.00am-8.00pm) No Late Night Opening Fax No: 0702 462363 SHOWROOMS: Demonstration and training facilities at our London & Sidcup branches  THE FULL STOCK RANGE: All of your requirements from one supplier. To: Silica Systems, CVG-0393-79, 1-4 The Mews, Hatherley Rd, Sidcup, Kent, DA14 4DX FREE CATALOGUES: Will be mailed to you with offers + software and peripheral details.  PAYMENT: Major credit cards, cash, cheque or monthly terms. PLEASE SEND A BROCHURE ON THE ST RANGE Before you decide when to buy your new computer, we suggest you think very carefully about WHERE you buy it. Consider what it will be like a few months after you have made your purchase, when you may Mr/Mrs/Miss/MS: ....... Initials: ...... ..... Surname: require additional peripherals and software, or help and advice with your new purchase. And, will the company you buy from contact you with details of new products? At Silica Systems, we ensure that you Company Name (if applicable): will have nothing to worry about. We have been established for almost 14 years and, with our unrivalled experience and expertise, we can now claim to meet our customers' requirements with an understanding Address: ........ which is second to none. But don't just take our word for it. Complete and return the coupon now for our latest FREE literature and begin to experience the \"Silica Systems Service\" MAIL ORDER HOTLINE Postcode: ........ Tel (Home): Tel (Work): .............. Which computer(s), if any, do you own?......... E&OE Advertised prices and specifications may change Please return the coupon for the latest information 469  9 081-309 1111 SYSTEMS SILICA .....79H "


"sega sega FOR YOUR SEGA CHOOSE FASTRAM u.s. genesis carts u.s. snes carts SHERTON SALES HOTLINE TEL : 081 766 0087 MAIL ORDER ONLY. FAX: 081 761 8053 MON FRI 9.30AM 9PM SAT SUN 12 NOON 6PM COMPETITION!! EACH CONSOLE/GAME PURCHASED ENTERS YOU IN OUR  SOFTWARE COMPETITION. CLOSING DATE 30.3.93. WINNERS WILL BE NOTIFIED BY POST. MEGADRIVE CONVERTOR  SNES CONVERTOR ALIEN 3... E34 AXELAY.............. BATMAN RETURNS. BEST OF THE BEST 538 CRUE BALL. E30 BLAZEON DINOLAND....... GALL CONTRA III ECCO THE DOLPHIN. 35 DESERT STRIKE..... . GLOBAL GLADIATORS.  FINAL FIGHT GUY (JAP)  JOE MONTANA 3.  JOHN MADDEN 93 JOHN MADDEN 93  KING OF THE MONSTE KRUSTYS FUN HOUSE MARIO KART ......... RASTAN SAGA 2.. PILOT WINGS........ RBI BASEBALL IV  PRINCE OF PERSIA SHADOW OF THE BEAST 2... 35 ROAD RUNNER SUPER WRESTLEMANIA................. 36 STREETFIGHTER II... UNIVERSAL SOLDIER. E36 SUPER STAR WARS... WORLD TROPHEY SOCCER..  FACEBALL 2000 ........... Y'S IIT... E35 WING COMMANDER  U.S.A. GENESIS CORE... 675 USA. SNES CORE 985 WE ARE THE US SPECIALISTS WHEN IT COMES TO YOUR CONSOLE AND GAMES CHOICE. WE ALSO STOCK NEOGEO, GAMEBOY AND GAME GEAR. PLEASE MAKE CHEQUES & POSTAL ORDERS PAYABLE TO FASTRAM. PLEASE ALSO ADD .50 PER GAME FOR POSTAGE AND PACKAGING. QUOTE CVG1 FOR YOUR FREE CATALOGUE. POSTAL ADDRESS : 31 BRISTOW ROAD UPPER NORWOOD LONDON SE19 1JX * AMIGA* ATARI * NEO GEO * NINTENDO * SEGA * MACHINES * GAMES * ACCESSORIES Business, Education and Entertainment shareware software packs only .95 WINGINES CORE AMIGA 1200 + FREE ZOOL PACK .00 UK MEGADRIVE + STREETS OF RAGE + SONIC .99 SONIC 2  8  T-2 ARCADE ROAD RASH 2 STREETS OF RAGE SNES + STREETFIGHTER II .99 SUPER MARIO KART SUPER STAR WARS STREET FIGHTER II J CONNERS TENNIS ECCO THE DOLPHIN SECOND HAND CONVERSIONS CALL FOR DETAILS! sega FASTRAM SOFTWARE, 296a WALLISDOWN ROAD BOURNE MOUTH, DORSET BH11 SPN TEL: 0202 548095 (11am 6pm) MAIL ORDER ONLY sega Many more titles available please call. Free Zool software pack worth over  with any Amiga computer. P&P ,50 consoles. .00 handhelds and Neo Geo games. .50 Joysticks. 11.50 games. Please make cheques & PO's payable to Sherton Computers. We reserve the right to change prices without prior notice E & OE. SWOP YOUR OLD VIDEO GAME FOR Swop a Game (UK) ONLY .45 (Incl. 1st Class Post) WE SWOP SEGA, NINTENDO, GAMEBOY, GAMEGEAR, LYNX : UK, US, JAPANESE : CARTRIDGES ONLY Name.... ......Address................................. GAME TO SWOP SWOP OPTION 1 SWOP OPTION 2 SWOP OPTION 3 .45 .45 .45 .45 .45 INSTRUCTION: Fill in order form for up to 4 games. Choose swops of same value. Send game to us with instructions and cheque/PO for .45/.45/.45/.45. Don't forget to tell us your name and address. SWOPAGAME (UK), 23 MELLOR ROAD, CHEADLE HULME, SK8 5AT FOR SWOPS AVAILABLE/TERMS OF TRADE CALL 061 485 3482 (1pm-8pm Mon-Fri. 10am-1pm Sat) (CVG) NDIAL A TIP tel: 081 561,2422 console en SHOP : 361 UXBRIDGE ROAD, HAYES. JIDDLESEX UBA OSE MAIL ORDER PRICES SHOP PRICES MAY VARY USA SNES PAD + PSU .00 GAME GEAR SONIC + PSU .00 MEGADRIVE SONIC + 2 PADS .00 Second Hand Games always available PART EXCHANGES WELCOME HINTS 'N' TIPS 'N' CHEATS 'N' POKES CHEATS GALORE (Say 'yes' for your format ...0891 101 234 NINTENDO CHEATS 'N' TIPS .............0891 445 913 AMIGA GAMESLINE........................0891 445 786 SEGA CHEATS 'N' TIPS .................0891 445 933 ST GAMESLINE...........................0891 445 787 CONSOLE CHEATS 'N' TIPS ................0891 445 991 ALL CHEAT-LINES UPDATED EVERY WEEK COMING SOON ON ATLANTIC 252 THE DIAL-A-TIP VIDEO GAMES SHOW INTERACTIVE GAME SOLUTIONS SONIC 1 & 2 8 BIT & 16 BIT................0891 866 001 SUPER MARIO WORLD.......................0891 445 924 SHADOW OF THE BEAST 1, 2 & 3.......0891 442 022 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER..................0891 442 030 FIRST SAMURAI.................................0891 445 926 MAGIC POCKETS/RODLAND............0891 445 928 FOR INFORMATION ON ALL OUR GAMES DIAL 0891 445 904 GUIDING LIGHT COMPUTER SERVICES LTD PO BOX17 ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE OL7 WW Calls cost 36p/min cheap rate and 48p/min all other times ...Call Call Game Gear Game Boy NES Master System Games Seeessories always in stock Streetfighter .... 55.99 Star Wars...... 65.00 Magical Quest 47.99 Gods. 43.99 Mario Kart 39.99 Combat Tribes. Nigel Mansell ... .. Desert Strike.... .43.99 Tiny Toons. Goal.......... ....44.99 Lethal Weapon. Top Gear II. Call Addams Family II. ...Call Firepower 2000 Ranma Part 2 Call Skins Golf ..... ...43.99 Contra II Best of the Best .......43.99 NCCA Basketball .....39.99 Star Fox.. ..Call Road Runner ... .42.99 Sonic 2... 34.99 Ecco the Dolphin ....36.99 Road Rash I....... 36.99 Streets of Rage Il... 32.00 P.G.A.I. W.W.F.... .. ..36.99 Rollo/Rescue ........30.99 Strider ....................Call Capt. America..........39.99 Toxic Crusader........32.99 Chakan..... . 37.99 Humans Batman.. . 36.99 Lotus Turbo. 34.99 Two Crude Dudes....34.99 Terminator II. 36.99 Outlander ........... ..Call 36.99 Gadget Twins .. 39.99 Tale Spin.... ... .-34.99 Risky Woods .... ...37.99 VANY MORE TITLES AVAILABLE ...Call SNES & MEGA DRIVE Large range of accessories always in stock Galahad. SECOND HAND GAMES WANTED CALL US!!! * ACCESS / VISA CARDS WELCOME Add .00 postage & packing (Games) .00 (Consoles All cheques payable to 'Console Elite' Tel: 081 561 2422 "


"STREETFIGHTER 2 MR HELT On the title screen type STREET CHEAT then when you start the game in the match press the Help key and you will skip the match. To turn it into the Championship Edition select a two player game, pause it and type 7 KIDS and hey presto. Thanks to David Scott from Deptford for that. Oh no! Some top Engine boy has sent me a tip for Irem's cutesy heli blast minus a name ard address! All you Engine fans are finally starting to get your act together with some cheats, but we need more; I mean come on, it's not as if there's a lack of decent software, is it? Press 1,2,1,2 and an option menu will appear. Or press 1,2,1,2 and select and you will get 99 lives. ROBOCOP EPIC Johnathon O'Neill from Cheshire has dug out this crusty old game in order to give all Robo-sads a little help. Pause the game and type (BEST KEPT SECRET) to become invincible. Jonathan O'Neill has sent all the codes for this superb game so, without further ado, I give you Jonny! GUNHED WARNING CHETICLE ALIEN 3 1 Auriga 2 Cepheus 3 Musca 4 Puxis 5 Cetus 6 Formax 7 Caelum 8Corvus A cheat for the finest blaster around makes its way to me all the way from Martin Norman in Maidenhead, Berkshire. To make the game harder, hold down Select on the title screen and turn on autofire I and II until the screen changes to mode select, then press Select and reset the game. If you have done it correctly the Gunhed logo will turn gold. Chris Dow and Stewart Jones from way up in Scotland have got a good cheat for Alien 3. Honest. Go to the configuration screen select two players then go to start when both players' lives are gone go back to the configuration screen and select continue; both players will receive infinite lives. Y'S BOOKI & II Despite the fair sprinkling of Engine cheats this month I've still had to enter a few myself. This is for the CD Rom version of Ys. Enter this code to start with 99,999 experience points and 65,535 gold: *Q2eb/bbbCF/ijhghgh/ghghg/hghghgh/ghghghg yQy/QyQyQyQ/yQyQzPz/PzA. MASTER SYSTEM PC AMIGA PC ENGINE have QUESTIONS Dear Paul, I know this is very sad and by the time you answer this I'll probably have worked it out for myself, but no matter what I do I just cannot place my Papal magnet on Populous. What am I doing wrong? Steve Besall, Dublin, Ireland. Dear Paul, I am stuck in Monkey Island on the PC. The problem is that I cannot get the banana picker. How do I do it? Graham Carr, Birmingham. CORNER Paul: Before you can place your Papal Magnet you must have designated a leader in your tribe. To nominate a leader simply go to the \"Make Leader icon. Doh! Paul: To get the banana picker you must first have the Wimpy idol. Go to the monkey at the south side of Monkey Island. Give him the five bananas and he will follow you. Then go to the clearing and pull the nose on the statue. The monkey will then copy you as you walk through. Go to the little Wimpy Idol and get it. Go back to the vil lage and give the idol to the villagers. Dear Paul, I am having real trouble beating Big Bad Pete on Quack, shot. Are there any cheats to help me? Paul Beckford, Romford, Essex. L i there and welcome to the all-new Question Corner. There have been a fair few decent questions this month but I'm sure that even more of you are stuck in games. Remember that, unless you say exactly where you're having difficulty, I can't help. So let's have less of this \"Are there any cheats for Sonic 2?\" nonsense. Send your posers to: IF I HAD ANY MORE QUESTIONS I'D BE THAT BAMBER GASCOIGNE CHAP I WOULD, CVG, PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON ECIR 3AU. Dear Paul, On the Caveman level of PC Kid I can't get past the quicksand. Are there any cheats to make it easier? Michael Pane, Gwynned, South Wales, Paul: Go to the right straight away and shoot the helper on the right of the screen using the Bubblegum/Popcorn, then jump up to the platform in the centre of the screen, shooting the second helper on your way. Let loose with the Plungers whenever you can; hit Pete in the face nine times and he will wave a white flag. When he is dead, go to the bottom of the screen and use the library book. Paul: There are no cheats as such but if you headbutt one of the trees it will walk along the floor allowing you to travel on it. If the tree is walking the wrong way simply nut it again. CVG 075 "


"SoosaadisBSsaasDSORIOODaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa8888aaaaaaaaaa daa3a23aODDE MICROSELLS 0839 500 848 To place your classified ad ring this number calls cost 36p (Cheap rate) and 48p (All other times) per minute. If you don't pay the bill ask for permission aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaoooOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOoooooaaaaaaaaaaaa AMIGA 500 boxed with manuals, PSU modulator, mouse, joy sticks and other accessories, sell for . Phone 081 361 2539 SEGA MEGADRIVE FOR SALE with 1 game, sell for  ono. Phone Darren on 0252 860983 MEGADRIVE FOR SALE with 2 joy pad and 8 games. Phone Jamie on 0572 821463 WANTED MEGADRIVE with Sonic and 1 joy pad, will pay . Phone Peter on 0844 352126 ATARI ST 520 STSM FOR SALE, and Phillips SMM 833, plus 2 monitor,  worth of software, joy sticks, and word processor, sell for  ono. Phone 0865 881818 after 4pm ATARI ST 520 STE FOR SALE with joy sticks and mouse, over 100 games, sell for  ono. Phone Martin on 0582 767665 SUPER NINTENDO FOR SALE incl. Console, two controller and two games all for . Phone Bobby on 0483 62205 FOR SALE PC Engine with three games GAMEBOY FOR SALE with 7 games for  ono. Also for sale another eight magnifier, light, carry case and more, sell ATARI LYNX FOR SALE with 7 games, PC Engine games and the odd bit of PC for . Phone Kerry on 081 459 0342 sell for . Phone Angela on 0353 Engine hardware. Will consider selling 24546 any of this separately if you ask nicely. ATARI LYNX GAMES FOR SALE  Also for sale the odd Amiga or PC title each. Phone on 0220 52274 GAMEBOY FOR SALE with games, ac (while they last) and some Amiga adaptor, sell for , swap for Megdrive hardware. Call Paul Anglin on 071 972 SUPERMARIO LAND for sale for with 3 games. Phone Peter on 0896 6700. Gameboy. Phone 081 741 5499 56993 SEGA MEGADRIVE with Sonic 1 and 2, MEGADRIVE with 4 games, 2 joy pad, GAMEBOY with 3 games, joy sticks, sell sell for . Phone James on 0989 sell for . Phone Keith on 0844 for . Phone 0582 488664. 65184 353277 AMIGA DEMO DISC FOR SALE sell for SWAP GAMEBOY with 4 games, 2 SEGA GAME GEAR with 6 game, in , with disc box, also special forces adaptors leads and headphones for a good condition, sell for  ono. Phone games for Amiga, never used. Phone Gamegear with at least 2 to 3 games or 0706 524820 081 660 7245 evenings only sell for . Phone Admand on 0869 253650 ATARI LYNX GAMES FOR SALE, sell MAGAZINES for sale. Phone Martin on for  each. Phone 081 449 1279 081 660 7245 evenings only. SEGA GAMEGEAR FOR SALE with 4 games, new tv tuner, adaptor sell for SWAP MY NINTENDO GAMEBOY with 5 GAMEBOY FOR SALE, sell for , or . Phone Simon on 0473 828130 games and more, for a Sega Megadrive swap for 3 Super Nes games, either Suffolk area with 1 game and 1 joy pad. Phone 081 Super Tennis, Super Soccer Champ. or 304 8978 Super Mario Card. Phone Nick on 0443 FOR SALE COMMODORE 64 451096 Terminator 2 pck, with tape deck and joy GAMEGEAR WANTED. Sell for  or sticks, 24 games, sell for . Phone 061 Swap for Super Mario Land on Gameboy SUPER NINTENDO GAMES WANTED 486 0029 and 6 games. Phone 081 741 5499 URGENTLY. Phone Tony after 6pm on 0271 46155 WANTED GAMEBOY with Tetrus, will SWAP GAMEGEAR GAMES with pay up to . Phone Chris on 0761 instructions. Phone Andrew on 0483 NINTENDO FOR SALE with 6 games, 414789 421067 sell for , or swap for Super Nes with 1 game or more. Phone Gazza on 0785 GAMEBOY GAMES FOR SALE, sell for SWAP GAMEBOY and accessories swap 850849  each. Phone Ailsa on 0236 821581 for a Sega Game Gear. Phone James 0223 21221 WANTED PC, call Ali on 0923 254603 GAMEGEAR FOR SALE with tv tuner, converter, ac adaptor, 6 games and more. ATARI LYNX FOR SALE with mains MASTERSYSTEM PLUS for sale, with 7 Sell for  mint condition. Phone adaptor, sell for . Phone 061 491 games, all boxed, sell for  ono. Graham on 0277 211416 after 5pm 1185 after 4.30pm Phone Stuart on 0223 276879 SWAP ATARI LYNX 2 with 4 great NES AND MASTERSYSTEM both with 6 NINTENDO FOR SALE with 5 great games, still boxed, power unit, swap for a games, swap for a Gamegear with 6 games, sell for  or swap for Super Megadrive with 2 games. Phone Mark on games. Phone 0785 215234 Nintendo with Street Fighter 2, Call 0245 469237 Davine on 0533 666209 ATARI LYNX FOR SALE with duluxe SEGA GAMEGEAR with 6 games, ac carry case, power adaptor and 8 games. C64 COMPUTER, incl. Joy Sticks, and adaptor, battery pack, sell for  ono. Phone Mr T Mitchell 0252 542345 Software. Phone John on 071 435 1730 Phone Jamie on 0924 279108 ATARI LYNX 2 with 5 games and more, AMSTRAD 464 FOR SALE, incl. color GAMEBOY with 5 games and a carrier sell for . Phone on 081 524 5443 monitor, with 3 games built in, and 3 joy case, sell for . Phone Edward 0277 sticks, sell for . Phone Shoane on 228858 PC ENGINE hand held GT for sale with 0708 752631 mains adaptor, 1 week old, sell for . LYNX FOR SALE with 4 great games, Phone 0354 694089 SWAP AMIGA 1000 with over 120 conlynx cable, PSU, sell for  ono. games, 2 joy sticks and a mouse, swap Phone Stuart on 0753 541234 SUPER NES for sale with 4 games, for a Super Nes with Street Fighter 2 and boxed, 2 joy pad, universal adaptor, sell at least 5 games and joy pad. Phone 041 GAMEBOY GAMES FOR SALE, all for . Phone Gary on 0494 483434 332 5849 after 5pm priced at  each, 3 different carring cases. Phone Dillon on 0245 31380 ATARI STSM FOR SALE with 20 games, NEO GEO with 1 game for sale, sell for second disk drive, all boxed. Phone Gary  or swap for Super Famicom plus a GAMEGEAR FOR SALE with mains on 0494 483434 few games. Phone Richard 0509 415055 adaptor, tv tuner, games, sell for  ono. Phone 0204 883135 after 4.30pm GAMEBOY with 3 games. Phone David 4 POPULAR MEGADRIVE GAMES, sell on 0923 672028 for #20 each. Phone 081 599 1941 WANTED GAMEGEAR, will pay  each. Phone 0959 575177 SEGA GAMEGEAR FOR SALE with 2 AMIGA 500 with 50 games, mouse, 1 joy games. Phone 0734 340678 sticks, sell for . Phone 081 599 1941 SUPER NINTENDO GAMES FOR SALE Phone 071 262 3869 AMSTRAD CPC 464 with Joy Sticks and #300 worth of games, sell for . Phone Mark on 061 430 3262 WANTED SUPER NINTENDO GAMES. Phone Daniel on 081 599 9302 MASTERSYSTEM with 3 games, plus Light Fraser, Control Pads, sell for . Phone Salet 0222 223473 COMMODORE 64 FOR SALE with  worth of games, magazines, software, Joy Sticks, sell for  ono. Phone 0252 843186 AMIGA 500 for sale in excellent condition, over  worth of games, Demo, 2 joy sticks and mouse, disc box, sell for . Phone Dean on 081 958 2788 NEO GEO FOR SALE with 2 joy sticks, 3 games, sell for  or swap for Commodore Amiga 200 with accessories. Phone Dean 0274 856216 3 SUPER NES GAMES to swap for English games incl. Street Fighter 2 or Super Mario Card. Phone 061 866 8470 GAMEBOY EXCELLENT CONDITION for sale, 4 months old, lead, 2 great games, sell for ono. Phone on 0253 "


"AMIGA A500 with hard drive plus software, will swap for a Neo geo with 2 games. Phone 0908 225944 th 2 controllers, 4 games, sell for . Phone Graham on 0284 762361 595496 upgrade, mouse, joy sticks, cover and several games, sell for . Phone SWAP 6 TOP MEGADRIVE GAMES, Will Graham on 0734 416870 swap for Super Nes games. Phone Muhammad on 061 866 8470 SPECTRUM 128K + 2A with 40 games, joy stick, power pack, sell for  ono. GAMEBOY FOR SALE with 3 games, Phone Mat on 021 550 0962 sell for . Phone 0823 698694 ATARI 2600 FOR SALE with 2 games, SEGA MEGADRIVE with 6 games. Phone Matthew on 021 550 0962 Phone Muhammad on 061 866 8470 UK SUPER NINTENDO FOR SALE fully SWAP SUPER NINTENDO GAME. boxed, few weeks old, 2 games, sell for Phone 081 672 0597 . Call Paul on 0689 826551 SWAP RADIO CONTROLLED CAR for a Game Gear with games, Birmingham area only. Phone lan on 021 353 2377 PANASONIC KXP1123 20 pen dot matrix printer, 5 fonts, 240 CPS print spin, boxed and under warranty, sell for . Phone Dave on 0332 559533 SWAP NINTENDO ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM for 24 Black and White Printer. Phone Christian on 0326 290003 SEGA MASTERSYSTEM FOR SALE, or swap for Super NES incl. sonic 2, Micky Mouse and other games, 2 joy pad, 2 joy sticks. Phone Lisa on 0420 89130 WANTED SEGA MEGADRIVE and Super Nintendo games. Phone Steve on 0527 32230 SUPER FAMICOM with 14 games, sell for . Phone John 0977 684601 WANTED MEGADRIVE with 1 game, swap for Atari Lynx with 5 games. Phone Haymish 0925 263799 SUPER NES FOR SALE with 17 games, sell for , or swap for Neo Geo with 3 games. Phone on 061 491 0961 LOTS OF USA AND JAPANESE Nes games for sale, sell for   each. Phone Chris on 0908 367236 MEGADRIVE GAMES FOR SALE. Phone Tom on 0733 557546 SUPER FAMICOM FOR SALE, and Super Nintendo games for sale. Phone Quentin on 0769 3239 UK SUPER NES FOR SALE all leads, fully boxed, with 1 controller. Phone Chris on 0202 748660 MEGADRIVE FOR SALE with 6 games, 2 joy pads, all necessary leads. Phone Charlie on 0427 880112 WANTED SUPER NINTENDO will pay up to , with 7 games, or swap for a Atari STSM with lots of games. Phone Peter on 0935 754248 SPECTRUM PLUS 3 FOR SALE with over 50 games, sell for . Phone 0526 860385 UK MEGADRIVE FOR SALE with 2 games, all boxed, sell for . Phone Darren 0322 863656 RAGE, FRENCH JOY PAD and C & VG Magazine in VCG starts form 1985 86 sell for from 50p each. Phone 0843 588736 GAMES FOR SALE incl. Street Fighter 2 for , Super Double Dragon for  and Universal Converter  or  the lot. Phone on 0922 493290 SUPER FAMICOM FOR SALE with 2 control pads, power supply, socket, sell for  ono. Phone 0376 320511 AMERICAN VERSION OF TURTLES 4 for sale, sell for  ono. Phone Alex on 081 886 7634 NEO GEO FOR SALE with 2 controllers, 8 games, boxed as new, sell for . Phone lan on 0298 844943 MEGADRIVE FOR SALE with 8 games, sell for  ono. Phone Mrs Cooper 081 550 2867 NINTENDO FOR SALE with 3 games. Phone 0425 653449 SEGA MEGADRIVE JAPANESE SCARP. Phone 081 993 3280 ATARI 520STEM FOR SALE with 25 games, Printer, Programming Disc, Mouse, Joy Sticks, sell for . Phone 0982 552519 MEGADRIVE FOR SALE with 5 games, sell for . Phone 0276 25949 after 8.30 pm GAME GEAR FOR SALE with 5 games, Magnifier, ac adaptor, sell for  or swap for Super Nintendo with games. Phone 0296 27695 NINTENDO NES FOR SALE with 2 joy pads, light gun and 15 games, sell for  $200. Contact Nicholas on 081 940 0159 NES FOR SALE with 3 games, sell for #100. Phone 0276 25949 after 8.30pm UK SUPER NINTENDO with action replay, 10 games, sell for . Phone Carl on 0706 31127 ENGLISH SMES FOR SALE with Super Mario World, 2 joy pads, perfect condition, sell for  ono. Phone Matthew on 071 229 1271 JAPANESE MEGADRIVE FOR SALE with 4 games, sell for . Phone James 0742 749389 SEGA MEGADRIVE FOR SALE 10 games, 1 control pad, 1 joy stick, sell for #300 ono. Phone 0532 600169 BOXED PC ENGINE FOR SALE with 11 games, sell for , also swap for Super Nintendo with games. Phone Gee 071 328 9058 after 5pm ROAD RUNNER FOR SUPER NINTENDO sell for . Call Dave after 5pm on 0403 77374 SWAP GAMEBOY good quality, with 3 games, swap for Super Mastersystem 2 with 1 game. Phone Amber 071 274 2240 ATARI 520 STE with joy stick, disk box, all boxed, sell for . Phone Daniel 0272 683491 after 4.30pm NES ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM FOR SALE with 2 hand controllers, advantage joy stick, control pad, 10 games, sell for . Phone 0202 430714 50 GAMES CARTRIDGE FOR THE GAMEBOY, sell for . Phone 0306 885003 UK MEGADRIVE GAMES TO SWAP Phone Ross 0709 241375 JAPANESE MEGADRIVE FOR SALE with 3 games, sell for  ono. Phone 061 436 4979 SUPER NES GAMES FOR SALE sell for around . Phone Gavin on 0708 340054 MASTERSYSTEM 2 FOR SALE with built in games plus 2 more games, 2 control pads, sell for . Phone 061 333 1814 phone between 3.30pm 4.30pm week days only. SEGA MEGADRIVE with 12 games, 2 joy pads, swap for Amiga 500. Phone Lee on 091 276 6668 SEGA MEGADRIVE with 16 games, sell for  ono. Phone Neil on 0925 764214 AMSTRAD CPC464 FOR SALE with lots of games, joy sticks and modulator swap or buy. If interested phone 0494 527117 NES FOR SALE with 5 games, Nes can be played on American and Japanese games, in excellent condition. Phone Saser 081 646 1036 SWAP SUPER NINTENDO GAMES for different ones, for just . Phone 021 422 4159 COMMODORE 64 FOR SALE with keyboard, 2 joy sticks and 50 games, sell for . Phone Steve on 071 515 1359 SWAP GAMES, Phone Sandy on 0767 682012 GAMEBOY FOR SALE, sell for , 2 games . Phone on 0483 424610 2 JAPANESE NES GAMES for sale, sell for  each. Phone Tim on 0572 85214 GAMEBOY FOR SALE with 8 games, all boxed, sell for  ono. Phone 0205 79595 SWAP COMMODORE 64 with 3 games, for a Nintendo with 4 games. Phone James on 021 705 2381 COMMODORE 64 with joy sticks for sale, 18 games. Phone Mark 021 223 5659 NINTENDO FOR SALE, with 2 control pads, 3 games, boxed. Phone Michael 081 452 0716 SEGA MEGADRIVE FOR SALE excellent condition, with 5 games, 1 joy pad, sell for  ono. Phone 051 228 6534 SEGA MASTERSYSTEM FOR SALE with a few games. Contact Steve on 0706 512997 MASTERSYSTEM FOR SALE, with Alex Kid Controllers. Phone Chris on 081 979 9860 NINTENDO NES with 7 games, sell for , 2 control pads. Phone 081 977 9573 NINTENDO FOR SALE with 4 great games. Contact Clay on 071 373 4996 GAMEBOY FOR SALE with head phones, magnifier, 4 games. Phone James on 0633 49367 WANTED AMERICAN SUPER NINTENDO with 1 game, Swap for Atari Lynx 2 with adaptor and 4 games, excellent condition, sell for . Phone Dean on 0404 814296 STREET FIGHTER FOR SALE sell for , Phone 0753 864453 ATARI 520ST FOR SALE with over 50 games, 3 joy sticks, mouse and mat. Phone Tom on 0277 372726 NEO GEO GAMES TO EXCHANGE swap 2 unwanted games for any 1 of mine. Phone Rich on 0509 415055 GAME GEAR with 3 games, sell for  ono. Phone Ross 0782 269381 SUPER NES GAMES WANTED, Phone 0633 880922 after 9pm GAMEBOY with 4 games for sale, sell for  ono, or swap for Super Nintendo or Megadrive with 1 game. Phone Ben on 0533 350118 SEGA MASTERSYSTEM 2 FOR SALE with 6 games, 2 pads, light gun, leads, instructions, boxed, sell for . Phone Matthew on 0865 735952 SEGA MEGADRIVE runs all games, with 4 games, sell for . Phone Russell on 0844 352470 SEGA MEGADRIVE with remote control, Japanese Converter, 7 games, all boxed, sell for . Call Hasan on 0267 235157 after 5pm ATARI ST FOR SALE 20 top games, disk, mouse, 2 joy sticks, sell for  ono. Phone Michael on 0494 676261 NINTENDO GAMES FOR SALE. Phone Henry on 0935 872534 WANTED SUPER NINTENDO with Street Fighter 2, swap for a Nintendo with Zapper, 2 controllers, Mario 1, and Converter. Phone 081 966 3017 SWAP KEYBOARD AND MONITOR for Commodore C64 or an Amstrad. Phone Little Charlie on 071 237 8144 AMIGA 500 FOR SALE in good condition, with 1 meg upgrade, mouse, mouse mat, tv modulator, 30 games, sell for . Phone Paul on 0689 826551 AMIGA A500 FOR SALE with mouse, joy sticks, 10 blank disc, 50 blank disc labels, 10 top games, sell for  ono. Phone Michael 0742 746775 SPECTRUM PLUS 2 FOR SALE with light gun, joy stick, adaptor and 120 games, sell for . Phone Jonathon on 0959 575737 SWAP SPIDER MAN on the Megadrive, for almost any other good games. Phone Jamie on 0202 889717 after 6pm SEGA MASTERSYSTEM with 2 games. 2 controllers. Call Simon on 081 393 9960 AMIGA 500 FOR SALE plus memory SEGA MEGADRIVE with 2 Sega "


" ono. Phone 0883 626801 WANTED SUPER NINTENDO with 1 game, pay up to . Phone 0293 773896 SWAP NINTENDO with 1 Megadrive, 3 games. Phone 071 767 6279 MEGADRIVE FOR SALE with 3 games, 2 controllers, all boxed, sell for #130. Phone 0432 358360 SUPER SCOOP with 6 games for sale, boxed, excellent condition, sell for .50. Phone 0462 671693 SEGA MASTERSYSTEM 2 for sale, with 3 games, 1 controller and all the leads, sell for  ono. Phone Ben on 038 17471 NINTENDO FOR SALE with 3 games, sell for  ono. Phone Lee on 0388 775335 AMIGA 600 FOR SALE with 1 mega bite, 3 joy sticks, modulator, 8 games, 5 Amiga magazines, sell for . Call Alex on 0284 704312 COMMODORE 64 FOR SALE with 70 games, 2 joy sticks, excellent condition, sell for . Phone 0376 514223 WANTED MEGADRIVE phone Rupart on 0703 558704 SUPER NINTENDO GAMES WANTED call Fraser on 0779 812732 9 AMIGA GAMES FOR SALE sell for  each or  for the lot. Phone Henry on 0935 872534 AMIGA 500 FOR SALE with 1 meg upgrade, 2 zip sticks, 50 games, mouse, sell for . Phone Madge on 0554 754479 ATARI LYNX 2 with 3 games, with battery pack, boxed with instructions, sell for  ono. Phone 0268 758682 AMSTRAD GX4000 FOR SALE with 1 game, sell for  ono. Phone Leone 0533 351432 SEGA MASTERSYSTEM 2 with 4 games, 1 joy pad and 1 joy sticks, sell for . Phone Alex on 081 366 8275 SUPER NES FOR SALE with super scoop. Phone Crowdon 0703 321864 AMIGA 500 with 1 meg for sale, with manuals and 10 months guarantee, lots of games, sell for . Phone 0905 51455 SPECTRUM PLUS 2A with light gun, with built in tape deck, light gun games, Amstrad GX4000 and a remote controlled car, sell for . Phone Colly on 0533 661068 SWAP COLOUR PRINTER for a Megadrive with 4 games, 2 joy pad and a joy sticks. Phone on 081 642 2315 after 6pm SWAP GAME GEAR with 8 games. adaptors, for 5 Super Nes games. Phone 0222 703071 SWAP SUPER NES mint condition, for Amiga 500. Contact Charlott on 0405 762126 UK SUPER NINTENDO with 4 games, 3 months old, sell for . Phone Richard on 0924 494432 NEO GEO FOR SALE with 2 joy sticks, memory card, 2 games, no swap or splits. Phone Jay on 0223 881006 SUPER NES with Mario and Super Tenis, sell for  ono. Phone John on 0784 257399 SWAP SUPER NES GAMES. Phone 0744 55395 NES GAMES FOR SALE, Phone Adam on 031 332 2194 SUPER NINTENDO with 11 games, 2 control pads, universal adaptor, sell for , swap accepted. Phone John on 0707 321473 SEGA MEGADRIVE FOR SALE with 1 control pads, fully boxed, sell for . Phone lee on 0685 874959 SEGA GAME GEAR TV TUNER excellent condition, boxed, sell for . Phone 0462 671693 (Herts) PC ENGINE FOR SALE with 4 games, sell for  ono. Phone Kevin on 0922 55745 ATARI STSM 1040 external disk drive, business software, 600 worth of software, 2 joy sticks, sell for . Phone 0544 78852 AMIGA 500 with 2 joy sticks, disk box, and games, boxed with instructions. Phone Antony on 0606 76858 SEGA MEGADRIVE with 10 games, sell for . Phone Gareth on 061 860 6295 NINTENDO NES FOR SALE with 2 control pads, a light gun, joy sticks, 8 games. Phone Paul on 0787 227829 MEGADRIVE FOR SALE with 5 games, sell for  ono. Phone 051 228 6534 MEGADRIVE with Sonic 2 and others, sell for . Phone Richard on 0820 627485 BRITISH SUPER NINTENDO FOR SALE, with 11 games, 2 joy pad, sell , or swap for Neo Geo with 2 games. Phone Steven on 0286 673126 NINTENDO NES FOR SALE with 4 games, 2 controllers and light gun, sell for . Phone Simon on 0734 712326 SWAP MEGADRIVE with 5 games, joy pad for Super Famicom with 1 game. Phone 051 228 6534 SUPER NINTENDO GAMES FOR SALE, all boxed, sell for  . Phone Andrew on 0706 818685 COMMODORE 64 FOR SALE with 40 games, sell for , 3 joy sticks, 1 cassette player. Phone 0252 87761 NEO GEO FOR SALE with 2 games, or swap for British Super Nintendo with 5 games. Ring Roy 0603 623957 SUPER NINTENDO GAMES for sale and swap. Phone Andrew on 0222 620763 UK SUPER NINTENDO with all leads, 2 UK games, swap for a Amiga. Phone Russel on 081 642 2315 SEGA MEGADRIVE FOR SALE with 4 games, sell for . Phone Paul on 0474 323816 PC ENGINE with 12 games, sell for . Phone 0932 352915 ATARI LYNX 2 FOR SALE with 4 games, adaptor, still boxed, swap Megadrive with games. Phone 0245 469237 after 4pm SUPER NINTENDO FOR SALE, sell for , with Street Fighter 2. Phone 081 301 3136 STREET FIGHTER 2 for sale phone Gary on 071 237 8596 SWAP MEGADRIVE with 2 pads, 9 games, swap for a Amiga. Phone Lee on 0272 637908 BRITISH MEGADRIVE WANTED with 1 game, 2 controllers, sell for  ono. Phone Ann on 0368 62079 AMSTRAD CPC 464 FOR SALE with green screen monitor, 67 games, sell for . Phone 071 793 3946 AMIGA WITH excellent LX Printer, upgraded to 1 meg, worth of games, sell for . Phone 081 946 8026 SUPER NINTENDO GAMES FOR SALE. Phone Paul on 0474 323816 SUPER NES FOR SALE, Phone Greg on 081 584 8532 WANTED PC ENGINE GAMES. Phone Lee on 0742 349161 COMMODORE AMIGA 500+ with 1 meg, complete cartoon classics pack, sell for . Call Robert 0246 410681 SONIC THE HEDGEHOG for Game Gear for sale, sell for  ono. Phone Roberts 0709 543308 SWAP OR SALE NINTENDO with 2 games, laser gun, fully boxed, sell for  ono or swap for Sega Mastersystem 2 with Sonic. Phone Steven on 0602 764324 PC 80286 ENGINE with lots of games, disk drive, sell for . Phone Carl on 0772 453425 SWAP JAPANESE MEGADRIVE with 5 games. Phone Paul on 081 645 8844 SWAP SEGA GAME GEAR with 6 games, swap for Super Nes or Megadrive with or without games. Phone Malcolm on 0255 506789 after 6pm MARIO, SUPER TENNIS and other games for sale. Phone John on 0784 257399 SUPER FAMICOM GAMES FOR SALE, Phone Brian on 031 552 9196 SUPER NINTENDO FOR SALE with 3 games, sell for , or swap for Gameboy with 3 games. Phone Aran on 021 523 9766 ATARI STE with games, programming disk, disk box. Phone 0475 82812 SWAP SUPER NINTENDO GAMES, swap for any game. Phone 0204 73320 MEAN MACHINE SEGA October issue, sell for . Phone 081450 1133 GAMEBOY FOR SALE with 7 games, game light, magnifier and carry case, sell for  ono. Phone Mrs Lewis 0525 372942 AMERICAN SUPER NINTENDO GAME, work with adaptors, sell for  each. Phone Lawrence on 0243 603526 SEGA MASTERSYSTEM 2 FOR SALE with joy sticks, 5 games. Phone Antony after 5 pm on 081 676 0862 SUPER NES AND FAMICOM PACKAGES wanted. Phone Elan on 0269 593935 after 6pm SEGA MASTERSYSTEM 2 FOR SALE with 3 games, 1 control pads, sell for . Phone Brian on 0698 842160 WANTED NES GAMES exchange for Megadrive games. Phone John 0253 43561 ATARI 2600 with lots of games, all the accessories included. Phone 071 738 6589 SEGA MASTERSYSTEM 2 FOR SALE with 8 games, light gun, sell for  ono. Phone Nick on 071 263 8193 between 49 pm AMSTRAD CPC 464 Excellent condition with colour monitor, 2 joysticks and 48 games. New  sell for . Phone H/W (0494) 445377. AMIGA 500 PLUS with 17 boxed games, all original manual, 1 mega bite, tv modulator, sell for . Phone John on 0425 614252 NES GAMES FOR SALE. Phone Andy on 0789 268693 AMIGA 500 mint condition,  worth of disc, modulator, joy sticks, mouse and leads, sell for  ono. Phone Matthew on 0484 425000 SEGA MASTERSYSTEM GAMES FOR SALE, sell for  each. Phone Henry on 081 840 5567 BRITISH POWER Super Nintendo for sale, with 2 joy pad, 11 games, sell for . Phone Steven on 0286 673126 MEGADRIVE with 5 games for sale, 1 joy pads, all boxed. Swap for Amiga with games or sell for . Phone Chris on 0832 272727 MEGADRIVE GAMES FOR SALE, Phone 0223 329621 COMMODORE AMIGA 500 with 14 games, sell for  ono. Phone Kevin on 0268 768640 after 4pm FOR SALE Double Dragon coin-op arcade machine. Reconditioned comax cabinet, 20\" monitor, 2 coin mechanisms, 2 player. Accepts all coin-op game boards including Streetfighter II. I will sell for  or will consider an exchange, particularly Neo-Geo, Mega-CD and PC Engine. Contact David on Maidstone 0732 846524 Anytime. Buyer must collect GAMEBOY FOR SALE with 11 games, light magnifier, all in good condition, sell for . Phone David on 0353 663361 SWAP MEGADRIVE GAMES. Phone Daniel 0582 603613 SUPER NES WANTED Phone Neil on 071 402 7077 after 6pm NINTENDO NES FOR SALE with 6 games, zapper, 2 control pads, sell for AMIGA A500 with 1 meg, with all accessorie, sell for  ono. Phone 061 620 1723 AMIGA 500 with upgrade, accessories included, external drive, many games. Phone Daniel on 0522 522415 "


"PVC GOYERS CVG LOCAL BUYERS GUIDE CORNWALL SOUTH YORKS VISA CONSOLE CONNECTIONS ACCESS TEL / FAX 0736 331131 10AM 6PM SHOP & MAIL ORDER VIDEO GAME CENTER NO 1 IN THE SOUTH WEST FOR: Mega Drive, SNES, Famicom, Neo Geo, PC Engine, Game Gear Game Boy, Lynx & Accessories -HUNDREDS OF NEW & USED GAMES IN STOCK AT THE LOWEST POSSIBLE PRICES LATEST IMPORTED TITLES AVAILABLE FROM JAPAN & AMERICA PART EXCHANGE WELCOME ON ALL TITLES GAME EXCANGE SERVICE Bring or send on your used games We can exchange them for other titles from our extensive range Reasonable Charges RANDOM EXCHANGE Send any fully boxed game +.50 & we will return a different game of the same value (No Sonic or A Beast (MD) Include a list of games owned. MEGADRIVE *** SPECIAL OFFERS *** GAME BOY PROTECTION X-E8 JOYSTICK .99 TURBO PAD.... ....99 SNES COVER.......................99 QUICKJOY PRO PAD.........99 JAP ADAPTOR. ....99 US & JAP ADAPTOR ATARI LYNX 2 MENACER GUN (inc p&p)....99 RUNS ALL GAMES.............00 ACTION REPLAY PRO.........99 ACTION REPLAY PRO.....00 + BATMAN...............99 SHOP & MAIL ORDER ADDRESS UNIT 2, OLD BAKE HOUSE LANE, CHAPEL STREET, PENZANCE, CORNWALL TR18 4AE F.A.B. news for all Sega & Nintendo owners living around Rotherham, Grimsby & Cleethorpes! You no longer have to pay top prices for top titles. At F.A.B. you can excange you old games for new or second hand games or secondhand games cheaply and easily. CLEETHORPES MARKET EVERY SUNDAY OR PHONE 0709 838282 FOR FURTHER DETAILS. DEAD ALIVE WANTED TO WINEA-SEGA TERMINATION cm CASH MEGARDRIVE Survive or PRIZES I win Game Continental Style Shopping comes to Birmingham & The Inhouse your 2 P VOICE des USE YOUR WANTED Game Gear $ TO OUTDRAW JUST ANSWER FIVE THE SIMPLE QUESTIONS GUN FIGHTER Business minded entrepreneurs REWARD An opportunity to put your ideas and skills to work in Central Birmingham's only leisure and retail development. This exciting development is fast becoming a little village right next to the heart of the city centre. 40897 meter 2089 0891 313577313582313581 Nyou cre under 18 years of age plecse obtain permission of whoever poys the phone bil. Max cost of coll $2.70 Cheap .60 Al Other Tmes INFODIAL PO BOX 36 LSI 4TN Col charges 360 Per Min Cheap 480 Per Vin Al Other Times. SOFTSCAN WILL PAY CASH FOR YOUR UNWANTED GAMES AND CONSOLES!!! We urgently require: Megadrive, Master System, Game Gear, NES, SNS, Lynx and Neo Geo N .G THOSE WHO SAW FIRST KNOW... 1.0 .C . Low start up costs CADIAN Flexible terms For further details contact Sandy Paskins Ashley Hancox Hurst St. Grimler JR Eve JAMES LISTERLEN 021-200 1100 42 Bull Street, Birmingham B46AF Send us a list of you unwanted games/consoles, indicating which items are JAP/UK/US and their condition, enclosing a SAE for a full written quotation for your unwanted equipment. NEO GEO OWNERSELUB NEO Gas 021.23 5 8 136 1 ST UPS RACE ANGKAH 3 200 THE U.K'S FIRST FREE MEMBERSHIP FOR FCAT DETAILS ENEOGEOP WE PAY CASH AND DO NOT REQUIRE YOU TO BUY GAMES IN EXCHANGE Softscan, PO Box 84, Station Approach, Hereford HR4 9YU We have used games for sale or exchange. Send an SAE for a list "


"a HOTSHOTS GS2. AMIGA BY PSYGNOSIS TBA hey just had to come back! Yes, you've guessed it those loony Lemmings are on the warpath again, with a completely new set of adventures to tackle! Lemmings 2 The Tribes is set to be released on an Amiga near you very shortly, with twelve new Lemmings and one hundred new levels. Space Lemmings, Polar Lemmings, Sports Lemmings and Circus Lemmings are just a few of the new batch and the traps and obstacles these little guys must face promise to be the most challenging and fiendish yet. The story goes that the Talisman that's protected Lemming Island all these years has been broken up into twelve pieces, and the little guys have to find all the bits before they can build a vessel and relocate on a new isle. The exploding stoppers have been replaced by groovy heavy metal guitar freaks and any Lemming in earshot is captivated by the sound! There are bombers, blasters, diggers, divers, snake-charmers, bongo-players and a strongman who throws Lemmings about the screen to reach new heights. Sounds great, looks great and, with a little bit of luck, should play great. This one will be reviewed very soon peel those eyelids back! As you can see from the helmets, this is no ordinary American Football game! AHAY TEAM MAN SNES BY KANEKO TBA hester Cheetah promises to be a surprise hit on the SNES. As you can see, the cartoon graphics are pretty impressive and the ton of big, cute characters some of the best ever! Chester lives in the Four Corners Zoo and, like all caged beasts, he wants to escape. However, the crummy keeper, Mean Eugene, has nicked the cool cat's motor, a bright pink motorbike, and hidden the parts around the complex! All you've got to do is find the bits, put the bike back together and escape! Simple, huh? Oh no! There are six levels to go through and not all the animals are on our cat's side, although Chester can enlist some help from his numerous buddies. As we said before, the game is stunning to look at and, of course, there'll be loads of the usual pick-ups and special powers to help our Chester. Tune in next month for the full review! SIXTY WHINERS SEGA HOME TEAM PAD 1 GAME MODE OTR LENGTH STADIUM SEE MORE SINGLE GAME 1:29 HINKY STINK PARK PAGE 2 MUTANT LEAGUE FOOTBALL MEGADRIVE BY EA TBA If you thought that American Football was tough wait until you get a load of Mutant League Football! The game is similar to John Madden's Football, but instead of great hulking humans the teams are made up of bloodthirsty mutant monsters! Take control of such teams as Slay City Brawlers, Terminator Trolls, The Sixty Whiners and Killer Convicts and become such stars as Assassin, Killer, Rott, Hellfire, Rumble and Snake. It all sounds more like a crazy version of the Gladiators, but these muthas really mean it! Even the stadiums which the boys wage war in are suitably diabolical, with venues such as the Cemetery, Butcher Dome and Pentonville Park! Each location has its own obstacles on the pitch, with huge boulders and lava/fire pits etc. In addition, if things aren't going quite your way, you may bribe the ref or even kill him! The whole thing looks a riot, with all the playability of EA's other top American Football sims packed in there, but you'll just have to wait 'til next month for the CVG final verdict! cG 080 "


"CVG US GOLD MEGADRIVE TBA Just one of the many animated cut-scenes in Flashback. oming soon on Megadrive is a game that promises to be one of the most spectacular graphic adventures ever seen on consoles. Flashback, created by the designers of CVG's January cover game, the incredible Another World, is the first twelve-meg cart for the 16-bit Sega and is being hailed as the thebe-all-and-end-all in game and graphic design. We've got our mitts on the latest Beta ROMs to bring you an up-to-the-minute preview, so read on! IT'S ON FLOPPY, TOO! As we mentioned earlier, we've got the latest version of Megadrive Flashback in the office, and to say we're impressed is, something of an understatement! And what's more, it isn't just the console boys who will get the chance to have a crack at saving the world from alien infiltration! Flashback is also coming to Amiga and PC and will even include new features not available on the Megadrive version, the most impressive being the ability to zoom right into the action! POLYGONS AHOY! Haven't the combatants noticed that there's a solid steel door between them? LORDY LORDY! As in Another World, Flashback makes use of polygons to display a wide array of animated cut-scenes. Polygons save massive amounts of memory and, because they use minimal processing power, can run at a fast pace. The scenes in Flashback are heavily influenced by action feature films such as Total Recall and believe us, they look, great when in full flow! Flashback uses a graphic process called Rotoscoping. If you've never heard the term before, it involves the video-taping of live actors performing various movements and turning them into animations in this case, computer graphics. You may have seen the process used in animated feature films; Lord Of The Rings and Disney's Beauty And The Beast were both created by rotoscoping. Conrad grabs the key card. CONRAD POOS AND HIS DANCING TEETH! The story centres on research scientist Conrad B Hart and his latest invention, a device that can analyse the molecular structure of any life form. Using this device, Conrad discovers that a large proportion of high-ranking public figures are, in fact, alien beings in disguise! Aliens being aliens, they're soon onto Conrad and kidnap him, wiping his memory and dumping him on their home planet in the process. Conrad's task is to remember who he is and what he had learnt previous to his abduction, then find a way back to Earth and spill the beans! The hero can even needlessly hurl objects away! "


"Next Month DON'T BE A DUMMY! GRAB THE NEXT ISSUE OF CVG AND CHECK OUT ALL THE TOP STUFF THAT'S CRASHING IN! COOL COLLECTORS ISSUEL Yes! The APRIL ISSue will be the last CLG VOU'LL see... Until the all new, Ligger better and kionic May issue! Dear Newsagent, Were I to miss the next, or indeed any other, issue of CVG I would truly be a sad man. So please reserve a copy for me each month, if you will. My name is: My address is: MARCH 15TH Parent's signature: "


"O BE HRST **** With the latestgames, M A O SAVE 4:3 *** Wihour membership scheme O EXCHANGE CLUB Parixchange your oldigamos \"THE UKS NOI VIDEO GAME CLUB SUPER NES MEGADRIVE TITLE TITLE FREE SELL SELL 43.00 33.00 ALIEN V PREDATOR AMERICAN GLADIATORS B-BOMB BATMAN RETURNS BIO HAZARD BATTLE BLACK CRYPT...... BREACH MEMBERSHIP 19.00 21.00 NEW SECONDHAND DUE BUY 27.00 ........ 20.00........ 40.00 27.00 ........ 20.00 45.00 26,00 35.00 22.00 15.00 43.00 26.00 45.00 26.00 45.00 33.00 26.00 43.00 31.00 24.00 43.00 27.00 20.00 27.00 20.00 45.00 23.00 43.00 28.00 21.00 40.00 ......30.00 ....... 23.00..... 40.00 28.00 21.00 40.00 23.00 16.00 40.00 26.00 19.00 .. 16.00 26.00 CHAKANI AFTER YOUR FIRST PURCHASE OF OVER . MEMBERSHIP ENTITLES YOU TO: CONSOLE HANDHELD GAMES FF GAMES ...30.00 FF CASES FF HANDIELD WE WANT YOUR GAMES CHASE HQ CHESTER CHEETAH ECCO THE DOLPHIN G-LOC GADGET TWINS INDIANA JONES UTTLE MERMAID LOTUS TURBO CHALLENGE METAL FANGS NINJA GAIDEN PGA TOUR GOLF II .. NEW SECONDHAND DUE BUY 24,00 18.00 40.00 24.00 18.00 35.00 24.00 18.00 35.00 27.00 21.00 35.00 24.00 18.00 40.00 27.00 35.00 24.00 8.00 35.00.. 25.00 19.00 35.00 19.00 40.00 26.00 35.00 24.00 18.00 22.00 FEB 35.00 18.00 30.00 17.00 35.00 18.00 35.00 26.00 20.00 ....... 30.00 22.00 ....... 16.00 35.00 26.00 ........ 20.00...... 26.00 ....... 20.00 35.00 24.00 18.00 35.00 26.00 20.00 18.00 22.00 21.00 18.00 22.00 16.00 35.00 26.00 20,00 26.00 20.00 35.00 ......26.00 ....... 20.00 35.00 ....... 26.00 20.00 30.00 .....22.00 ....... 16.00 Why pay full price for older titles? Buy second-hand or part-exchange your old games. We also buy games. .00 handling charge per game. When you send us your games for part-exchange or sale we are acting as your agent until they are sold. POWERMONGER 23.00 28.00 ALIEN V PREDATOR ALIENS 3. BATMAN RETURN OF JOKER BIO HAZARD BATTLE BLAZE ON BLUES BROTHERS CHESTER CHEETAH COOL WORLD CYBERNATOR.... DEADLY MOVES DRAGONS LAIR DUNGEONS AND DRAGONS FOOTBALL FURY GODS GUN FORCE HIT THE ICE... HUMANS... KAWASAKI CHALLENGE.. KING ARTHURS WORLD ... LETHAL WEAPON MAGICAL QUEST (MICKY MOUSE) NBA ALLSTARS ON THE BALL RADIO FLYER ROBOSAURUS ROCKY & BULLWINKLE SHADOW OF THE BEAST SIM EARTH SONIC BLASTMAN SPELLCRAFT SPINDIZZY WORLD STAR WARS SUPER POWER PUNCH SWAMP THING TERMINATOR II ARCADE....... TERMINATOR II JUDGEMENT..... TINY TOONS. TOM AND JERRY TOXIC CRUSADERS ULTIMA FALSE PROPHET UNIVERSAL SOLDIER VIKINGS ... WARP SPEED WING COMMANDER......... 35.00 . ADVANCE ORDERS 888 FEB 88 RACE DRIVIN ROAD RASH II ROAD RIOT 4WD STREETS OF RAGE II. STRIDER II SUPERMAN ..... TALESPIN........ TERMINATOR I ARCADE TERMINATOR II JUDGEMENT THUNDERFORCE IV. WORLD OF ILLUSION X-MEN ....... Top selling titles are always in short supply. Place your order in advance, and it will be sent to you ON DAY OF ARRIVAL PLEASE NOTE Cheques will not be cashed and credit cards will not be debited until day of despatch. 30.00 35.00 24.00 POSTAGE & SHIPPING 33.00 30.00 23.00 27.00 20.00 FEB 28.00 ........ 21.00 28.00 ....... 21.00 43,00 30.00 23.00 33.00 ........ 26.00 13.00 30.00 ....... 23.00 17.00 FEB 23.00 ...... 16.00 26.00 43.00 27.00 20.00 27.00 20.00.. 43.00 ...... 31.00 ....... 24.00 31.00 24.00 31.00 24.00 ....... 31.00 ........ 24.00 43.00 27.00 20.00 50.00 33,00 26.00 40.00 ...... 27.00 ....... 20.00 45.00 ....... 31.00 ........ 24.00...... 43.00 ....... 24.00...... 17.00 .......50.00 ...... 33.00 ....... 26.00 UK MAINLAND: .00 for each game .00 for accessories. GAMEGEAR OVERSEAS CUSTOMERS: Shipping quoted with each order. TITLE DUE FREE CATALOGUE Send a S.A.E. for our FREE COLOUR CATALOGUE. Free catalogue and release schedule with every order. 14.00 GAMEBOY ALIEN 3 CHAKAN DAVE ROBINSON BASKETBALL DOUBLE DRAGON EVANDER HOLYFIELDS BOXING G.P. RIDER LEMMINGS LITTLE MERMAID PHANTASY STAR PRINCE OF PERSIA... SHINOBI II. STREETS OF RAGE STRIDER II TALESPIN SECONDHAND SELL BUY 25.00 18.00 ....... 14.00 25.00 ...... 16.00 ....... 12.00 25.00 18.00 ........ 14.00 25.00 18.00..... 14.00 18.00...... 25.00 .. 16.00... 12.00 20.00 16.00 16.00 18.00 20.00 25.00 16.00 25.00 14.00 25.00 18.00 14.00 25.00 ...... 20.00... 16.00 ALL PRICES QUOTED ARE FOR MEMBERS ONLY TITLE -... 20.00 18.00 Non members add: .00 Console Games 3.00 Handheld Games .00 Used Games All prices subject to change All games subject to availability NEW SECONDHAND DUE SELL BUY 22.00 .. 14.00 ....... 10.00 22.00 ...... 14.00 ....... 10.00 24.00 ... 16.00 ....... 12.00 22.00 ... 12.00 ........ 8.00 ....... FEB 22.00 ...... 14.00....10.00 22.00 ... 14.00 ...... 10.00 22.00 ... 14.00....10.00 COOL WORLD DARK WING DUCK EMPIRE STIKES BACK... FLINTSTONES HUMANS JOE AND MAC. LETHAL WEAPON UTTLE MERMAID MEGAMAN INI......... RAMPART........ SWORD OF HOPE II TALESPIN TOP GUN GUTS N GLORY UNIVERSAL SOLDIER. ZEN. 22.00 1000 ORDER FORM 22.00 22.00 22.00 22.00 22.00 22.00 14.00 14.00 1400 14.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 Name Address WHIZZ-KID GAMES LTD 22 STATION SQUARE PETTS WOOD KENT BR5 INA Tel: 0689 891000 Member No III Cheque Postal Order Credit Card No III Expiry Date Town County Post Code Tel SALES HOTLINE 0689 891000 Game Machine Price Jam 7pm Weekdays 9am Opm Weekends RETAIL SHOPS TERRI'S GROUP PLC Pan's Woud 1689 627810 Beckanital 081-050 1205 Urpinglon 0689 821515 Walderslade 0634362010 italian 0634 235641 MEMBERS SAVE UP TO $2.50 IN OUR RETAIL SHOPS Postage Total All cheques must be supplied with a valid cheque card number. Please telephone to confirm before ordering. All games are UK or USA versions. Signature "


"THIS IS NOT EARTH. 2 A freak accident has thrown Brilliant young particle physicist Lester Chaykin's particle physics experiments into chaos... and Lester into a different dimension He materialises, dazed and confused in unfamiliar surroundings This was not Earth, this was... ANOTHER WORLD. The fight for survival had begun. Bridging the gap between arcade and adventure, ANOTHER WORLD features the use of Rotoscoping -a revolutionary technique creating a unique fluid animated display and a genuine cinematic feel for the first time on the Sega Mega Drive. It's like being at the Movies! ANOTHER WORLD includes... ROTOSCOPING ZOOM, PANORAMA AND CLOSE UP SHOTS STUNNING ANIMATION A SOPHISTICATED COMBINATION OF ARCADE AND ADVENTURE ACTION GAMES Exceptional games for your ANOTHER WORLD Another immaculate concept from Virgin Games. SEGA  1991 Delphine Software. Another Worlds a registered trademark of Delphine Software and 1992 Virgin Games Ltd. All Rights Reserved. Sega Mega Drive Master System are Trademarks of Sega Enterprises Ltd. "

