"98p June 1986 S$4.60 Dm6 285pta WIN A COMPUTER CA FED CAULDRON TI TROPHY! +VIDEO GAMES INTIITITITUTIITIT FREE EIGHT PAGE ARCADE SPECIAL EXCLUSIVE: BATMAN'S BATMAP/GHOST 'N' GOBLINS PREVIEW WIN A CUSTOMISED SPECTRUM!/FOOTBALL GAMES ROUNDUP FREE GET DEXTER! GAMES GUIDE/ROB HUBBARD INTERVIEW "


"Spectrum.95 Commodore 64/128 .95 (cass) .95 (disc) Amstrad/Schneider .95 (cass) .95 (disc) BBC.95 (cass) .95 (disc) Commodore C16 .95 (cass) ROU Spectrum Screen Shot Commodore Screen Acess VISA Take to the skies as you play the part of our intrepid hero \"BOMBJACK\", the man without fear, as he indulges his incurable hobby of Bomb collecting. \"BOMBJACK\" is the only game that will take you around the world from Greece to Egypt, sunsoaked beaches to the skies of New York City, but don't expect a holiday in this game. Danger threatens from every side in the form of deadly robots, rogue satellites and even killer-sparrows! Your only chance is to eat the power pill which drains your enemies of power and leaves them easy prey to \"BOMBJACK\". But look out the pills effects won't last forever, unlike \"BOMBJACK'S\" strange urge for collecting Bombs. Addictive, High Flying, Bomb-Bustin' Fun and the Quality you've come to expect from Elite. MAIL ORDER: Just send a cheque order payable to quote your Visia o no., to get BOMBJACK or PAP THERE'S MORE TO EASTER TH UNWRAP AN ARCA "


"SSIC SSE ERROY * PREORDER Hot Pot Spectrum.95 Commodore 64/128 .95 (cass) .95 (disc) Amstrad/Schneider .95 (cass) .95 (disc) BBC.95 (cass) .95 (disc) Commodore C16 .95 (cass) UDD COMING SOON 15.00 15.00 SCORE 15.00 W: IHM ATARI Te Screen Shot Acdless checue or postal ble to Elite, or Visa or Access et a copy of or PAPERBOY. Get ready for the \"official\" home computer version of the Arcade blockbuster, Paperboy. Pick up your old push-bike, put on your peaked cap and imagine yourself braving the street of an American suburb. Only superb riding skills and a steady throwing arm can get you through your seven day week of hilarious action. On your travels, avoid cars, fighting neighbours and fiendish Hells Angels, all out to obstruct you in your pursuit of excellence. You score points by delivering to all your usual customers, but you can get sneaky bonus points by breaking the windows of non-subscribers. It's a difficult task, but your employer believes that \"practice makes perfect\" and generously provides a Paperboy practice BMX track where you can score valuable extra points. Whether you choose \"Easy street\" or go the \"Hard Way\", get ready for the ride of your life. THAN CHOCOLATE EGGS. CADE MASTERPIECE FROM Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall, West Midlands, England. Tel: Aldridge 0922 59165 "


"FEATURES ROBIN! CONTENTS 42 CAULDRON COMPETITION 46 C+VG TOP 30 CHARTS 49 IDEAS CENTRAL'S ARCADE SPECIAL 53 ARCADE HIGH SCORES 54 PLAYERS GUIDE TO NEMESIS 56 LICENCED TO THRILL! 58 GHOSTS 'N' GOBLINS PREVIEW 61 PROGRAM LISTING: BOUNCER (BBC) 66 GET DEXTER! MAP 70 FOOTBALL CRAZY 72 ROB HUBBARD INTERVIEW 74 DATAHITS COMPETITION 76 EAST MEETS WEST 80 IDEAS CENTRAL 85 ADVENTURE NEWS 86 ADVENTURE HELPLINE 88 ADVENTURE REVIEWS 95 AMIGA SOFTWARE 96 LETTER FROM AMERICA 99 CUSTOMIZED COMPUTER COMPETITION 01 THE BUG HUNTERS 06 THE BAT-MAP 10 BAT-TIPS 12 MAILBAG 14 NEXT MONTH BAT-TIPS/109 NEWS & REVIEWS 14 REVIEWS THIS ISSUE: Game of the Month: Cauldron II. C+VG HITS! Quazatron, Heavy on the Magick, Karate ComTHE BATMAP/10 bat, Attack of the Killer Tomatoes, Green Beret, TIL DAIM Golf, Alien Highway. Plus more! 72 ADVENTURE Keith Campbell brings you all the news and reviews that are fit to print. Plus the one and only C+VG Adventure Helpline (tm)! This issue, C+VG's review team looks at Ultima IV, The Case of the Mandarin Murder, Pilgrim and Return to Ithaca, plus the start of the search for C+VG's Adventurer of the Year 8 NEWS Mikro-Gen look set to cause a stir with Equinox and Stainless Steel. Wild Bill Steeley, boss of Microprose, always causes a stir wherever he goes and so do his games. We look at some new releases from the flight ace. Plus a sneak look at CRL's new Cyborg! CAULDRON TI/P14 "


"INSIDE STORY  Excuse me. But are you going to buy this copy of C+VG, or what? Because if you aren't there's a whole bunch of people waiting to grab it out of your ungrateful paws. Why? Well, for starters they want to read our special Arcade Supplement. It's packed full of news about the latest games to grace your local coin-op, plus details on the games that will be coming to the screens of your home machines. Then there's our exclusive customised computer competition. YOU could be the fortunate owner of a Spectrum Plus custom painted to your own design by artist Steinar Lund. And that's not all. John Ritman, the incredibly talented programmer who brought you the smash-hit Batman game tells you some of his Bat-secrets along with our exclusive Dimension Graphics map of the Amstrad version of the Bat-game. You can go completely Fitba Crazee with Simon Inglis as he brings you a league table of the best soccer simulations around, just in time for the World Cup. Last, but by no means least, there's our cover feature competition. Win the amazing Cauldron II Golden Pumpkin Trophy! To find out how you'll just have to buy the magazine, OK? Plus all the usual features, news reviews and the best adventure section in the known universe from the Master Adventurer himself, Keith Campbell. Now, either cough-up or cop-out. We just want to get on with the rest of the magazine! REVIEWS/14 REVIEWS ROB HUBBARD/72 ARCADE SPECIAL/49 EDITOR Tim Metcalfe DEPUTY EDITOR Paul Boughton EDITORIAL ASSISTANT Lesly Walker SUB-EDITOR Seamus St John DESIGN Craig Kennedy ADVENTURE WRITERS Keith Campbell Paul Coppins Stove Donoghue Jim Douglas AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT Marshal M. Rosenthal ARCADES Clare Edgoley SOFTWARE CONSULTANT Tony Takoushi PUBLICITY Marcus Rich ADVERTISEMENT MANAGER Loulse Matthews ASSISTANT AD MANAGER Garry William PUBLISHER Rita Lowls COVER Steve Brown lan Watson .. and the Bug Hunters  Jerry Paris EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISEMENT OFFICES Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR 3AU Tel: 01-251 6222 July-December 98,258 ABC AMIGA SOFTWARE/95 THE BUGS/101 "


" THE ACTION BANK  THE ACTION BANK  THE ACTION BANK Available from 19 May. NatWest B ONLINE With a book for paying savings into your NatWest On Line Account.  THE ACTION BANK  THE ACTION BANK. THE ACTION BANK THE ACTION BANK Natye The regular On Line Magazine. ONTINUOUS MEMORY AUTO SHUT OP NOS A calculator to help you add INIT NO NatWest Account opening requirements and conditions must be complied with Terms and conditions may vary Seven days notice of withdrawal is required to avoid loss of interest. Registered office to your account. You must have a minimum of  in your account when applying for a Servicecard. You can apply when opening your account with a minimum of  of which t goes  THE ACTION BANK. THE ACTION BANK. THE ACTION BANK "


"K THE ACTION BANK  THE ACTION BANK  THE ACTION BANK . Isn't it time you e placed your piggy bank? E CARD ON LA Expires last day of ) APR 88 THE ACTION BANK . THE ACTION BANK. THE ACTION BANK . THE ACTION BANK at West MR P ALEXANDER 609999 12345677 SOON This Servicecard, for those 14 or over, lets you withdraw up to  per week from your savings. ONDO 0-0-0-01 add up your interest. National Wes A statement folder and pen to keep your account in line. On Line. What are you waiting for? 147 LOWER STF UFPER DOWNTO NORTHFIELOS SOUTH YORKS N16 SAB ONILINE 678 5432 office: El goes 41 Lothbury. London EC2P2BP. Account is available to anyone under 19. A minimum of 3 opens an account of which El goes towards the cost of the opening pack and the remainder is credited towards the account opening pack. Calculator made in Taiwan Na West reserves the right to change the specification of the calculator. The one you receive may not be the one illustrated THE ACTION BANK. THE ACTION BANK. "


"Remember Mike Oldfield's Tubular Bells, the massively successful instrumental LP which helped found Richard Branson's Virgin records empire? Well, now you can get a C64 generated version of Murder on the Missippi is world in Dynamite Dan. Oldfield's music complete with in the pipeline from Activision. Well he's now back in pretty graphics thanks to the It's a 'rather different kind of Mirrorsoft's Dr Blitzen and innovative folk at Nu-Wave adventure.\" according to the Islands of Arcanum, still Software. Tubular Bells is Andrew Wright. The man behind intent on imposing his will on the apparently a bit like Minter's the project is Adam Bellin, who world. Psychedelia in that it's a light was part of the team who But Dan's back as well, to try show-but this time it's got produced the controversial and put an end to these devilish built-in music. You can either sit Ghostbusters doings as he battles through back and watch the pretty In the game which is disk screens of lava-filled labyrinths, which take place in January. graphics or get stuck in and do only you take the role of Sir shark-infested lagoons, snake The picture shows (l-r) lan your own thing. No release date pits and voodoo temples. Bell, Colin, David Braben and or price yet but watch this Dr Blitzen will be released Firebird boss Herbert Wright. space. on the Spectrum, .95, and on the Commodore 64 and  The year is 2001AD. The 100,000 credits and it would be Amstrad, priced .95. Planetary Law Federation has a good opportunity to use the officially endorsed you as a Mantronix that you had bought Bounty Hunter. With your in the Do-Monic Sector. android helper, Mantronix, you Equipped with a sophisticated Who Dares Wins II, the set out for the planet Zybor, pulse lazer and a Mk. 1 Commando clone from where an advanced race of autoscan camera, the Mantronix Charles Foxworth. While on an Alligata, is now available on humanoids are programmed to can be controlled from your exploratory trip up the Missippi, the Spectrum at .95. It's lost protect four planetary criminals. own combat craft. with his trusty manservant Regis, none of the action packed thrills Many Bounty Hunters have You must find and terminate Charley stumbles across a dead of the 64 and Amstrad versions tried and many have failed to the four criminals before their body. He must discover whose and some gamesters still rate it reap the rewards held in Zybor, humanoids kill your Mantronix. corpse it is and, eventually, who as better than Elite's and each has received the same However, the Mantronix must did the dirty deed! The graphics Commando as a conversion of fate ... death. You activate your also find eight power cubes are presented side-on; with you the arcade classic. AutoDock System and the which are necessary to reverse and the ever-present Regis combat craft slowly lands on the the direction of the conveyor moving around the screen. planet surface with a graceful belts and essential as fuel for Everything is controlled with the elegance. your homeward flight. joystick. Even talking to the Suddenly, you receive a Pulsators are a vital life passengers and examining message from the Galaxy Police source to the criminals and may evidence is controlled with left, on your communications only be destroyed if you possess right, up, down and fire. console: the correct equipment. Zybor TERMINATION WARRANT holds many riches such as TERM: LICENCE! diamonds, money, machinery, The youth of the world is ALIAS: XTRO II firearms and spare parts for under threat. Their brains are CRIME: SLAVE TRADER your Mantronix being sucked dry. Who is CREDITS: 100,000 cr. Mantronix is released by responsible for this dastardly Never before had you turned Probe Software on the Spectrum act? Is it Crash or Zap 642 What Who is the BEST Elite player down the chance to gain 48k/128k, price .95. about Sinclair User? No, it's pop records. McLinton from Belfast, that's Someone has been corrupting who. Colin, pictured holding the the vinyl with subliminal champagne, beat off a mind-destroying messages. It's challenge from eleven other none other than Dr Blitzen, Elite aces. who first tried to dominate the The finalists came from top scorers who had entered Firebird's monthly Elite competitions. And ALL eleven had reached Elite status. A formidable collection! In the four hour competition Colin registered 539 kills a full 15 ahead of his nearest rival. Now Colin goes on to compete in the 194050 0 0 0 13:00 UW Elite World Championships holdsorrect equid if you pe "


"The asteroid has been Ricky Steel, the teenage hollowed out into a huge mining superhero, and his flying car complex sectioned into eight Nightwind in its stuggle to levels. Inter-level travel can only defend the remaining earth be achieved using trans-level inhabitants, against the teleporters. onslaught of android troops Each level is comprised of 16 controlled by the infamous rooms, connected by doors, Doctor Dimension. His twin teleporter terminals, conveyer booster, hyper alloy combat belts etc. chassis, class A101 car, It's your job as a Nightwind, is Ricky's only hope dedicated-disposal-droid to of stopping Dimension from remove the canisters before they achieving his ultimate goalbecome critical and explode. conquering earth. Each level has a single canister The game boasts the fastest which must be thown into a and smoothest two directional Programmed by Raffaele disposal chute that leads replacement inertia scrolling yet Cecco and Chris Hinsley, directly to the lead-lined seen on the Spectrum. While Equinox is set on a large containment room. flying Nightwind he has the asteroid awaiting human mining the game has extremely capability to spin and fire staff to dig holes in it. colourful graphics and promises double barrelled antimatter It has been polluted by to be equally addictive. plasma bolts through 16 radio-active storage canisters Also coming soon from different directions. To destroy which must be rendered Mikro-Gen is an exciting key targets, magnetic uranium harmless before the human staff Spectrum scolling shoot-em upthunderbombs have to be used arrive. called Stainless Steel starring to insure total annihilation. MIKRO-GEN Mikro-Gen take a mighty leap away from Wally with a couple of neat new releases — heading your way very soon. The first is a must for Amstrad owners. It's called Equinox and is a mixture of Sorcery/Starquake/Strangeloop and it looks truly wonderful. sprites, new animation, even genetically engineered beings more locations, an enhanced created simply to fight and version of the music and new destroy. And he's the star of the game play features. Available latest game from 15-year-old from the middle of May, The Paul Hargreaves who also Rocky Horror Show will cost brought you the graphically .95. exciting shoot'em up, called Glass, last year. It looks very pretty, although the Here's what you can do with a Now the original icon controlled Commodore Amiga and the strategy is available for the C+VG logo. If you are a would Amstrad. be Salvidore Dali, C+VG writer You control the Enigma team, and part time artist called Zark Montor, the team leader, David Bishop. What we are Syylk, Sevrina Maris and Torik. trying to tell you is this. In the Shadowfire picked up a August issue of C+VG you'll commendation at C+VG's find a special 68000 supplement recent Golden Joystick Awards which will tell you all about the Doomdark's Revenge, the ceremony. Shadowfire will cost latest developments in the world sequel to Mike Singleton's at .95. of supercomputers like the Mac, award winning Lords of theme of the game is a bit the Apple the Atari ST and the Midnight. Mike has enhanced laboured these days. Amiga which was launched in his unique landscaping Watch out-here comes Nonetheless, Tantalus looks the UK at the Commodore techniques that were first seen in Spike! Spike is a nasty little very playable. Watch for the Show on May 9-11th. Lords of Midnight, so that punk-person, one of a team of review. Doomdark's Revenge consists of an astonishing 6,144 locations and 48,000 views Doomdark's Revenge is an adventure/war game set in a fantasy medieval world. All moves can be made by pressing one key. You play the part of Luxor, the Moonprice of Midnight in his battles with Shareth the Heartstealer and Doomdark. To CRL's arcade adventure successfully complete your based on Richard O'Brien's adventure you must manipulate Rocky Horror Show will whole armies and explore the soon be available for the vast land of Midnight. Commodore 128. The version promises to be the most exciting Just in case you've felt starved of pictures of our cheeky cockney to date, utilises the extra Shadowfire, produced by sex-killen Samantha Fox, here 5 another one. happy now memory available, offering high leading development house This is from Martech's now infamous Strip Poker game the definition graphics, brand new Denton Designs for Beyond. 64 version "


"SYSTEM SYSTEM 3 SYSTEM3 SYSTEMSYSTEMSSYSTEMSSYSTEMSSYSTEMS SYSTEMS SYSTEM SYSTEM 3 SYSTEM3SYSTEMS SYSTEMS SYSTEMS SYSTEM 3 SYSTEM3 SYSTEMS SYSTEM3 SYSTEM SYSTEM SYSTEMS SYSTEMS SYSTEMS SYSTEMS SYSTEMS SYSTEMS SYSTEMS SYSTEMS SYSTEM3 SYSTEM SYSTEMS TIKVITETCD SYSTEMS SYSTEM 3 SYSTEMS SYSTEMS SYST EM SYSTEMS ENG SYSTEMS SYS Y STE M3 urne,STEMSSYSTEM 3 59 STEM3 SYSTEMT SYST \"Twister has all the vital ingredients excellent graphics, good game play, varied tactics and Sinclair User C. Bourne, an addictive theme.\" March '86,5 star rating 86 E2035 \"If you're after a fast fun arcade Crash, March 86 game, then this could be what you're looking for.' SYSTEM This game is going to cause quite a stir C & VG, April 86, 'Hit Game. 13 SYSTEMS OTHER SYSTEM Available NOW on the Spectrum SYSTEM3 SYSTEM SYSTEMS 13 SYSTEM3 SYSTEMS SYSTEM3 SYSTEM3 SYST STEM 3 SYSTEM 3 | TEM SYSTEM SYS INTERNATIONAL ACTUAL SPECTRUM SCREEN SHOT ACT 13 SYSTEMS SYSTEMS SYSTEMS SYSTE SYSTEW 33 SYSTEM SYSTEMS SYSTEMS KARATE SYSTEM 3 SYSTEM STENT SYSTEM 3 SYSTEMS SYSTEMS SVT SYSTEM SEMISYSTEM3 SYSTEMS SYSTER SYSTEMS SYSSYSTEM MSSYSTEMESYSTEMS System 3 have by far and away the best Karate / Kung Fu game, on the '64'. Absolutely brilliant.\" Commodore Computing International F. Jago, June '86 SYS SYSTEMS SV 5 EM3 SYST INTERNATIONAL KARATE YSTENT SYSTEM 3 SYSTEMS \"More challenging to play than any other fighting game\" Zzap, June '86, Sizzler. SY SYSTEM 3 SY57 SYSTE SYSSYSTEM3 SYS \"International Karate is 'A polished up version of fist', and is, dare I sayit. better on all accounts.\" Commodore User, June '86 SYST3 SYSTEMS SYSTEMSYSTEMS SYS SYSTE SYSTE SYST SYST3 SYSTEM TEN ACTUAL C.64 SCREEN SHOT3 SYSTE SYSTEM 3 SY Commodore 64 OUT NOW SYSTEMS SYSTEM 3 SYSTE STEM SYS YSTEMS SYSTEMS SYSTE SYSTES SYSTEM3 SYSTEM3 SYS SYSTEM3 SYSTEMS Can you program to our standards? If so send a C.V., or a sample of your work to:DE 13 Product Development Manager, Davis House, 29 Hatton Garden EC1N 8DA. Tel. 01-831 7403. | Telex 896691 H675. "


"EGT OSS FUEL 036 So, the worthy judges of the British Micro Awards, cosponsored by the equally worthy Sunday Times newspaper, made Jet Set Willy II 1986 Game of the Year. Where have these people been hiding their heads? This game is so old it has cobwebs on the cassette box-and you could hardly describe it as a state of the art game now, could you? No doubt there're a lot of software houses and programmers out there who were pretty disgusted with the result before they started sniggering behind their hands. Perhaps the judges should either take a proper look at the computer games scene before next year's awards are decided or stick to giving awards to big business machines and spread sheet software which they obviously know more about 35 locked onto a sitting target. You can't help noticing this 38 year old ex-fighter pilot. He buzzes energy. And yet \"Wild\" Bill says he has an image problem in the United Kingdom. The game buying public doesn't really know who he is, or what MicroProse is about. But he's determined to change all that. ZOS Since MicroProse was launched more than three-anda-half years ago it has launched a string of hit games 300100 including Kennedy abo00:05:46 Approach, F-15 Strike playable flight simulator and yet stay on course and you must has a complexity requiring solid build up a feel for the concentration. manoeuvring speed of the jet if The player is faced with you are to make the turns on the numerous play options at game course. start. Four players can compete The actual flying speed can with a choice of ten events. be changed by using the keys 0 The events are Pylon Race, to nine to change thrust and a Slalom Race, Ribbon Cut, speed brake operates from the Inverted Ribbon Cut, Under space bar. I really found it Eagle, Crusade in Europe, Ribbon Roll, Loop Under exhilarating as I zoomed around Decision in the Desert and Ribbon, Under Ribbon Race, my little playground. The jet Solo Flight. Spot Landing, Cuban Eight and swoops, dives and can perform Simulated Flameout. Meanwhile, new simulations the most amazing stunts when You can pick and choose the heading our way out of you have learnt that timing MicroProse's base in Hunt events you wish to play at game factor. Valley, Maryland, are Silent start from four options. Single My favourite events were the Event, Pentathlon, Decathlon Servive, a simulation set in the Ribbon Cut, Spot Landing and and Unlimited. dark depths of the Pacific the Loop under the Ribbon. After the events have been Ocean inside an American The ten events all require a chosen you are presented with good mix of skill, timing and World War Two submarine and Gunship, a helicopter Flight Clearance. This states concentration, but they are your name entered before simulation beautifully interactive, you feel your events -rank and the you are in control and yet are chosen event. You can also doing some very complex change the difficulty levels for moves. the weather and your jet. Doing a roll-out as you go The weather has four options, through obstacles on the course slight wind, breeze, low-wind is a real thriller, it is full of raw and hi-wind. Your jet has easy sensations (a bit like playing (very slow) moderate (slow) fast MACH 3, the arcade jet laser BY TONY TAKOUSHI and real time optional play game for the first-timewhich I was running late and THEY JUST happens to be the latest were waiting for me...I pulled I choose real time to play and addition to my home arcade!!) up to a sharp stop in front of the this is FAST. I really felt I was in (Show off!, ed). aircraft hangar, my tires control but well there had to The game ends when you screeching into the tarmac. be a catch! it is very sensitive finish the course or crashHeads turned, some admired my and you have got to be accurate did a lot of this in the early new Saab Turbo car, others on the stick twiddling to stay in games! A chart then appears looked impatient for I was control. with your time on the course as almost 40 minutes late for the The play screen offers you against the best time and a list show. I donned by flying clothes, four guages, the most important of the difficulty factors you took leapt into the jet cockpit and being the altimeter, air-speed on (weather and jet) with a punched the necessary and articifical horizon. You also score based on them all. manoeuvres into the gel engine power (0 to 100+), If you have a hot score it is navi-computer ... engine temperature and entered in the Hall of Fame As I looped the loop my head remaining fuel units. alonside the event. If you were The event can be started competing in more than one my face pulled tight. I was either on the ground or in the air event then a league table is pulling close on two G's but to and your position is shown in a shown of each event completed the audience below it was just little map of the course in the so far with the appropriate thrill-a-minute stuff. If only THEY bottom right corner. score. knew ... Each event has a set sequence Bearing in mind that I don't This month's hot game is of moves you must complete normally enjoy playing Acrojet a flight-sim from followed by a landing back at simulations or adventures, this Microprose the US simulator the airstrip. The course is was a real treat. It was almost experts. It will soon be available mapped out for you by a trail of instantly playable but yet had in the UK through US Gold on dots around the map and you me coming back to master the the Commodore 64 at a retail must fly and I mean fly-as intricacies and touches the price of around . close to the trail as possible programmers had hidden in the If you are a fan of Solo whilst maintaining the correct gameplay. Flight, which is another product height, speed, engine If you fancy a quality change from Microprose, then you will temperature and pitch! from alien zapping then go for simply drool over this hot little Frequent reference to the this one, I promise you will NOT number. Acroject is a very compass is crucial if you are to be disappointed! Great news for Commodore 64/128 Users!!! Compunet, the network for 64/128 users is developing a new multi-user game following the success of their previous game M.U.D. (Multi-User-Dungeon). The new game is entitled Federation II and will be about galactic trading and travelling and will have an impressive 6,000 plus locations, in contrast to M.U.D. which has only 400 in its basic form. One of the authors, Mr Alan Lenton, said, \"Just as M.U.D. arose from Dungeons and Dragons, Federation Il is a development of the role playing game Traveller. It will be very different from M.U.D. in concept.\" Some 700 locations of the new game will be on display at the Commodore Show in May, and they will be on a walk-through basis. The bad news is that we can't play it until early '87. Watch this space for more news on Federation II ... \"Wild\" Bill Stealey, boss of MicroProse, the American specialists in computer simulations programs, is about the last person to have an image problem. He's about as laidback as an Exocet missile "


"Then a headmaster reported Prepare youself for a flood of his school had \"broken their game of the film titles! Here are Basic.\" They had got a syntax just a few coming your way from error message. the combined might of Best of all was the school Activision and Electric where staff took exception to the Dreams. Alien II, QWERTY arrangement and Ghostbusters II, Big rearranged the keys to read Trouble in Little Shining and ABCD etc. To their consternation Howard the Duck. the character on the key which Plus a top secret movie tie-in had been hit did not then which is coming from the correspond to what appeared Lucasfilm stable and promises on the screen. to be a massive hit at Christmas! The adviser was greeted, on Alien Il is, as you'd suspect, the his arrival, by an eight-year-old sequel to that sci-fi scare film boy saying: \"Thank goodness you've come. They don't know Sigourney Weaver stars. what they're doing here. I told Big Trouble in Little them they had to change the switches underneath as well but they wouldn't take any notice of me.\" Have any of you had funny experiences like this? If you have, let us know. The weirdest gets a Big Red t-shirt! been trapped inside his computer's \"real life\" facility. Is this a feature of the Spectrum 128 Sinclair haven't told us about? To rescue Martin, Bobby had undertaken a perilous quest to become a computer warrior and part of this involves playing a real life part in the world of Psi-5. The blurb which introduces the comic says this is Bobby's eighth test. Anyone out there know about the other seven? We'd be interested to hear from Eagle and Tiger readers about these strips. With a mighty shout of \"Kwah!\" Kevin Oliver becomes superhero Redhawk and embarks on the fight against evil in Melbourne House's new \"comic strip\" computer adventure. The game is presented as a continuous comic strip which unfolds as the adventure is played. The basic aim is to find out who planted a bomb at a power station which, if it explodes, is In the last month's C+VG we reviewed Ariolasoft's Starship Andromeda game for the Commodore 64/128. From previews we had seen, the game looked very impressive. But when it came down to playing it, our reviewer didn't get very far. And no wonder, Ariolasoft had not supplied a few vital bits of information on the game. Armed with this help, the game becomes very playable and good fun but, unfortunately, it was too late to update our review. We are assured these extra instructions will be available to the public. Starship Andromeda costs .95 on disk Watch out for Ram Jam's latest adventure soon to be released on the Ariolasoft label for the Spectrum. Called The Terrors of Trantoss the game is set in the region of Hapshal. A shadow of great dread has fallen upon a small village. Although the terrified villagers lock themselves securely into their houses every night, come daybreak, they often find that one or two of their number have vanished. capable of blowing up half the city. Kevin/Redhawk must investigate the game's characters, interact with them to find the guilty person. Redhawk will be released on the Spectrum 48K/128K, Commodore 64/128 and Amstrad, priced .95. Tanlon Shining is being directed by John Carpenter of Halloween and The Thing fame and is set in San Francisco. Frisco is noted for it's big Chinese population and the movie and the game have an Oriental theme. It concerns a Chinese godfather who has this unnerving habit of turning into a big floating eye and kidnapping blondes! Howard the Duck is based on the Marvel comic character who has become a cult hero. Howard has been warped from Duckworld into a world he never made-Earth. And the story follows his efforts to come to grips with the human race. The movie is being directed by-you guessed it-Stephen Spielberg with music by Thomas Dolby All of you who are lucky enough to be able to look at cable television should check out a new series of Tech Talk on The Children's Channel. The six minute programmes cover all sorts of computer-related topics including games. The new series is being presented by Gian Sammarco who played Adrian Mole in the hit television series. And a guest on two of the programmes will be Paul Boughton, Deputy Editor of Computer+Video Games. In the first programme of the series Paul will be demonstrating Uridium, one of the best shoot 'em up games to be released for ages, and chatting about the revival of the C16. In a later programme he will be demonstrating Knight Tyme, Mastertronic's new Magic Knight game for the 128K Spectrum. The wise men of the village fear that servants of Trantoss have at last succeeded in collecting together the pieces of the mace and raising their master once more. They want a brave man to journey into the mountains. Unsurprisingly, no one was willing to go; until one morning two young brothers woke to find d the rest of their family taken from them. Your task is to guide them along their route, tell them what hot to do and where to go. SE WITH Here's a glimpse of CRL's Cyborg-featuring the first black computer game hero. It's set inside a mysterious complex somewhere in space and the hero has to achieve a mysterious goal. The programmers are being all mysterious about it! The picture shows a corridor in the complex. . Gilsoft have just released their adventure-writing utility The Quill on the BBC and Electron. By clever use of menus, and filing techniques, you can create your own adventure. Despite the delay in releasing the products, there are very few obvious enhancements to the basic programs. Now here's a funny thing. It was originally printed in a recent edition of Guardian newspaper. Read on and wonder ... \"An adviser was called to a school where they were having trouble with their new disc drive. He arrived to find a C15 tape cassette tape wedged firmly in the slot. . Good news for Amstrad money-makers! Leisure Genius have just released their version of computerised Monopoly. You'll never have to worry about losing the tiny metal boot from the set again! The game costs .95 on tape, and .95 on disc: not particularly cheap, but you can recoup your losses in no time! Coming soon from the Leisurely types are Cluedo, Scrabble and Monopoly for the MSX You've played the gamenow read the comic. U.S. Gold's latest Psi-5 Trading Company has be turned into a comic strip which will appear in Eagle and Tiger comics. Psi-5 features in a strip called The Computer Warrior which has as its hero an ace gamester called Bobby Patterson. Bobby's best friend Martin French has . Uridium, Hewson's number one Commodore smash, sold more than ANY other game so far this year in just one week after its release. This info comes from Gallup, the people who put the C+VG Top 30 Chart together. And guess which magazine had Uridium on the front cover then? C+VG of course. The number one magazine picks the number one games! "


"NENT V E THE GRAPHIC ADVENTURC CREATOR THE GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR BARCLWARD The amazing, combined text and graphics adventure generator enables you to produce fast, compactadventure games with the minimum ofeffort and the maximum of creativity. Stunning graphics can be created quickly and easily with the powerful picture generator that has many features including:dot, circle, elastic line, ellipse, fast fill, shading, step by step review, easy editing and the ability to merge pictures. The comprehensive, intelligent command interpreter can handle complex sentences and multiple input commands. There is also an extensive text compression facility that allows you to produce far more detailed and numerous location descriptions. Plus a full function editor, automatic word formatting, a logical command interpreter and an abbreviated input acceptance facility. So unleash the power of your imagination now with The Graphic Adventure Creator, for your Spectrum, Commodore 64, BBC B or Amstrad. Available from all leading retailers or direct from Incentive on 0734591678. INCENTIVE SOFTWARE LTD. 54 London Street, Reading RG1 4SQ. Please rush me, THE GRAPHIC ADVENTURE CREATOR Commodore 64 Spectrum BBCB Amstrad ! Cassette .95 Disc .95 (All formats except Spectrum) I endlose Cheque/PO forf or please debit my Credit Card No. Name Address "


"C+VGILIN software REVIEWS 1 Software R com GAME OF THE MONTH Machine: Spectrum 48/128 dedicated to the domination and Supplier: Hewson elimination of us humans. The smooth-running of the city is in Price: .95 the mechanised hands of a Well, it looks like Hewsons have number of battalions of Battle done it again. Got a number one Droids, Service, Robots and on their hands, that is! After Repair Mobiles who trundle Uridium comes Quazatron from around the ramps and pyramids Steve Turner, the Dragontorc of the many levels of the city in man. Quazatron is quite a execution of their mysterious departure from Steve's previous duties. games it's more arcade Unknown to the Logic Robots oriented than his earlier who control Quazatron, the city offerings for a start and it's has been targeted for guaranteed free of wizards! subversive attack by a human If you've played Paradroid on controlled Meknotechdroid. the 64 by Steve's mate Andrew You control KLP-2 Klepto) the Braybrook, you'll recognise the wayward Meknotech droid basic idea of the game. In fact assigned to deactivate hostile Steve set out to recreate alien droids which inhabit the Paradroid on the Spectrum. But underground city of Ouazatron don't think this is just a copy KLP has a prototype grapple far from it. Quazatron features device enabling the alien robots some neat 3D Marble Madness/ to be stopped and dismantled. Gyroscope style Pyramids for a Klepto can add the parts start. But let's take a look at the recovered from the aliens scenario ir himself-his facilities and You find yourself in the endurance. subterranean city of Quazatron E ach alien Droid has a range on the planet Quartech, home of of equipment at its disposal the Daglath, a droid culture lasers, disruptors, shields and ram thrusters. Klepto must destroy these Droids in a laser battle or by dismantling his opponent piece by piece. Anti-tamper and other security devices make grappling at close quarters a difficult procedure. But the reward for success if the pick of the 91 hardware removed from the vanquished Droid. Intelligence reports on the strength and disposition of the enemy can be obtained from control consoles of the Eogic Robots also dotted around the complex. Travel around the city is by means of elevated ramps with lifts to links the various levels. Both of these units can be activated using the fire button Many different weapons can be taken from enemy droids and the data library contains hints on which weapons are most useful. Weapons can only be used while KLP-2 is moving. To successfully grapple with a droid you must engage its security circuit. This is the subcompts also does of the this)s jupestrum. Billeder to deactischdroid the far from This is C+VG's highest honour. It's granted to the game which, in our honest opinion, is the most playable, original and exciting game released during the month. We look for all the key points listed below -but also that extra added ingredient which makes the game stand head and shoulders above the best of the rest. stakaa look for a Repropped and eaten robot Scenario CHVG C+VG HIT! This symbol is C+VG's way of telling you a game is the BUSINESS! GRAPHICS reveal its terrible power at the end of road. Both the Vorton and the Terratron must be energised along the road by contacting Seven hourglass shaped regeneration stations. This is vital-you simply won't make it to the end if you don't. The Vorton's energy levels displayed at the left hand side of the screen are depleted by contact with the alien Zeds and nasty Kamikaze droids. And even the sides of the highway are deadly this time! Game action is very similar to Highway Encounter, controlling Is the game graphically greator do the graphics grate? This mark puts you in the picture and lets you know if all things are sprite and beautiful. SOUND Is the sound loud and proud-or does it sound like you've got your head stuck in a bucket of mud? VALUE Should you beg, borrow or even steal the cash to get your hands on the game and be the envy of your friends? Or will it be better to wait until the game appears in the bargain bin? Find out here. PLAYABILITY Will you be dragged screaming from the joystick after 24 hours continuous play-or will the mere sight of the loading screen send you running to switch off the machine? Machine: Spectrum/ Amstrad Supplier: Vortex Price: .95 (Spectrum) .95 (Amstrad/.95 disc) We're back on the road again thanks to the Vortex crew. They've just released the sequel to their totally addictive Highway Encounter. The dustbin-like Vortons are backas are the dreaded Aliens-on a new highway twice as deadly as the original. The aliens were defeated at the end of Highway Encounter that's if you were good enough to actually finish the original gamel Now the Vortons are out to exact their revenge on the Aliens' home planet. But this time you only get one Vorton instead of four! His mission is to strike at the heart of the alien Empire which lies at the end of the Alien Highway. The Vorton is pushing along a device deadly to the Aliens called a Terratron which, according to the blurb, will ENERG4  If you're one of those people who likes percentages instead of marks out of ten, the solution to your problem is simple just add a zero and a % sign to our marks. Easy, isn't it? ZONEN:21 EDO HII EDO O STARTS HERE "


"software REVIEWS 2 CAULDRON II THE MPKIN STRIKES BACK W SCORE C game first seen in Paradroid. To change levels within the city complex you must find a lift square. Press your fire button and a side view of the city is displayed. Move up/down to the required level and left to right to exit the lift Enemy logic robot control consoles are useful tools. They are easy to locate as they look just like blank TV screens dotted around the map. Your energy is shown by the rotation of the head of the KLP-2 His expression changes from happy to upset as he runs out of energy. Quazatron is one of those games you start playing at lunchtime and still be at itat midnight! Addictive isn't the word. The combination of strategy and arcade action will have you hooked instantly. Graphics Sound C+VG Value HIT! Playability Machine: CBM 64/128 Supplier: Palace Software Price: .99 \"...And it came to pass that the witch reclaimed the golden broomstick and rid the land of all the pumpkins... except onel It's taken well over a year for Palace Software to come up with a successor to the wickedly complicated Cauldron. But Cauldron ll The Pumpkin Strikes Back is well worth the wait. With great graphics, sensational sound and game play which at times borders on being frustrating but nevertheless addictivePumpkin is a winner. you to open closed doors. Then there are scissors vital to snipping off a lock of the witch's hair. The crown will come in useful when--orrather if you manage to find her bedroom. It will protect you against the \"guard magic\" protecting her. A shield is necessary to defeat the skeleton guarding the cauldron. And finally there is a Book of Spells. The book doesn't actually do anthing in particular but you have to have it to complete the game. Co C+VG the game thot spiders to the pumpkin your Vorton is just as tricky and there are lots of graphically interesting traps and barriers along the way. Graphics are as good as the original, and game play just as addictive. After you've loaded the game you get a neat guide to all the aliens and obstacles you'll come across on your mission. Unfortunately you can't call this up again once you've hit the enter key to get to the control option screen. Sometimes you really need to check out what's attacking you during the game-especially during your first efforts. Although it's pretty similar to Highway Encounter, this game is still fun and challenging to play. But all your old winning techniques have to go out of the window, I'm afraid! Another winner from Vortex. In the original Cauldron you It's vital to master the played the part of a witch trying bouncing pumpkin. The height to rid her world of pesky of his bouncing is controlled by pumpkins. In the follow up the the firebutton. One of the nice roles are reversed. The witch things about the game is that it's has pulverised all the poor quite good fun just bouncing pumpkins except one. And that around without really getting sole survivor is out for revenge. anywhere. To complete the game the Lurking around the palace are pumpkin must collect a lock of spiders and skeletons. These are the witch's hair and drop it into a deadly to the pumpkin. The bubbling cauldron. Sounds easy witch's cackle when you lose a when you read it quickly. Of life is excellent. But after a time course there are a vast variety of you begin to resent it, but that creatures to dodge or kill, just renews your determination puzzles to solve, and a whole to beat the game. palace to explore: Other creatures sap your magic. But you can top up on the potent powers by leaping on sparkles. These also give the ability to do a bit of zapping. Also watch out for the dismembered hands lurking around. Touch one of these and your joystick controls are reversed. That's sneaky and very confusing when it happens. To complete the game there are six objects to be collected. The goblet will restore normal joystick control after a brush with the hand. The axe will allow Conversions are on the way for the Spectrum and Amstrad, so most people will eventually be able to enjoy this delightful game. Don't delay, buy it today. Graphics Sound Value Playability CHVG Graphics Sound Value Playability "


"ADVERTISEMENT NEW LOOK Programming Get more from your Commodore by typing in one of our free programs. Plus, learn how to make your 64 do two things at the same time with the first of our twoparter on a smart technique called \"interrupts\". PERSTARNBP The June issue of Commodore User has had a summer facelift. Goodbye to dullsville and hello to a sharper. brighter mag with more colour and well simply more style. LAMA bubble Bus BYSTEPHANIE Let's Get Serious Make your 64 earn its keep — we check out the latest, budget priced database, home finance package, spreadsheet, and wordprocessor. Viza Star users don't miss our exclusive «Get More From\" feature in June. SCORE w w OC 16 Gamers Ever heard of Jet Set Willy or Manic Miner? No? Where've you been for the last two years? These two 64 el classicos are now set for stardom on the 16. Will they get the G-Force vote? All this and our unbeatable regular features: Tommy's Tips, US Hotline, Hotshots, and Into the Valley At , we're still the best around. Get down to your newsagent on the 26th May and for a golden sov it's all yours. OCCO G-Force tackles Paper Boy, 'V; Starquake FREE — Play Better II RE ERRE Gene We've got a players guide to Paper Boy next issue, plus Cauldron II, Jet, Sublogic's great flight sim and of course a final review of Green Beret. We've also got the longawaited Vand Starquake. There's more for the money. Next month we're giving away another great supplement Play Better | featuring playing tips on the hottest games around like Zoids. Uridium and Fairlight. "


"EQUINOX Spectrum/Amstrad .95 MIKRO-GEN Unit 15 The Western Centre Western Road Bracknell Berks. "


"Software R REVIEWS 3 <XO en 13 Machine: for more than Stamina, or Spectrum/Amstrad/C64 perhaps you just feel lucky! When Saving or Restoring a Supplier: Gargoyle Games game, you will be asked for a Price: .95 version letter this is to Prepare yourself for one of the ensure that the right game is most original and exciting restored, so keep a note of games you're ever likely to version letters. experience. Gargoyle's Heavy Communicating with the on the Magick is a real step program is all done though the forward in game play. It's an middle window. Here you see interactive adventure with big all the commands you input. cartoon style graphics, Your Stamina, Skill and Luck beautiful animation and 255 are a reflection of your current locations packed with weird abilities. If you run out of and wonderful monsters, Stamina, you die. Your including Wyverns, goblins, Stamina and Skill together trolls and the enigmatic Apex affect the outcome of conflicts: the Ogre. your Luck will influence all your SOUTH-WEST The adventure stars Axil the actions. RIGHT Able who has been cast into Combat will reduce your PICK UP BAG a dank dungeon network Stamina a lot, most other You TAKE THE BAG beneath a dreary castle called actions will reduce it a little, but APEXTHANKS Collodon's Pile by Master taking food or drink may well Therion—the cleverest wizard increase it. Other special in all Graumerphy. Axil should objects will enhance your Skill often the status of a creature dungeon speak Merphish, a really have known better and Luck. will give you a clue to how to language similar to English but practicing his favourite pastime As you progress through the deal with it. more compact, if not terse. All of wizard baiting in The Golden adventure you will gain in Sometimes you come across commands take the form of a Thurible of all places. Still what experience, this will not only locked doors. Most locks that keyword followed by a was done was done -and enhance your status you encounter are magical and Return/Enter. now his job was to get out! characteristics, but, therefore are opened magically Keywords are entered as just Once the neat loading screen exceptionally, advance your by magical key's! Naturally, the first letter. The name of has disappeared it gives you Magical grade, which will allow they might not immediately be both animate and inanimate sneak previews of the screens you access to items and recognised as keys but they objects must be entered in full, from the game you get a knowledge not available to the need only be dropped by a lock Unrecognised keywords are screen which gives you a few lower grades. to be effective. Other locks can queried. general tips shame you can't All combat is Magical be opened by magical Commands can also be get back to this once you've physical encounters with other passwords. Remember, you entered as a string, with each entered the game and then creatures are often fatal. If you have to \"drop\" objects for command separated by a the option screen appears. decide to engage in a macho t hem to be effective with doors. comma, and the final When the option screen is bout of blasting, check your Just having them in your command followed by a Return displayed, you may notice that own and the monster's status pouch isn't good enough. like the system used in Lord the program has already before each round it may be one of the most exciting of the Rings. generated values for Stamina, capable of hurting you more things about the game, apart Apex the Ogre will help you Skill and Luck. While you can't than you can hurt it! from the depth of the thing, is out if you talk to him nicely. alter the values themselves, Blasting is not the only way the command system which Remember to enter your you can re-allocate them out of a tight situation. Some allows one key inputs together conversation like so. \"Apex, select option 6 and the values monsters, and all demons, may with more traditional text (object). The first quote mark will be realigned. It depends on have information on objects instructions. and the comma are crucial if whether you think Skill counts which may prove useful, and All the inhabitants of the old Apex is to understand what * 13 FAIRLIGHT BOUNCES Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Beyond Price: .95 Bounces is a nice idea but, unfortunately, falls a little flat. There's just not enough depth to the game to keep any interest going The game is set in, apparently a futuristic sports chamber, where two knights battle it out. The knights -Ashley and Erik are attached to what appears to be energy sapping elastic bands which the combatants must fight against A ball drops into the chamber and bounces around. In their hands the knights carry \"ball snatchers\", a stick-like weapon for catching and hitting the ball. Basically, the game can be described as a sort of futuristic squash on elastic bands. Good fun, but over-priced. Graphics 8 Sound 7 Value Playability Machine: Amstrad/CBM64 Supplier: The Edge Price: .95 Bo Jangeborg's Spectrum smash about the Land of Fairlight, a 3D extravaganza in the best Ultimate style. And the magic lingers on in both these conversions The basic plot is for the hero Isvar to find the Book of Light and save the land of Fairlight. Strange figures, knights, winds and a host of other mysterious creatures conspire to thwart Isvar. Add to this a large number of graphically great screens and you have a real puzzler to test your skills Isvar, sword-in-hand, can BOUNCES CONTINUED FROM PAGE 15 LINE "


"C+VG JUN Software REVIEWSIA btware R CO DOO you want help with. He may look fierce but he's nice really. You don't need a joystick to control Axil he moves at your command. Tell him to go north by hitting the N key and our hero moves to the nearest northern exit and moves into the next location. You can move him about within a location by using the left/right commands. This is used to get him near objects you want him to examine or pick up. Always remember to pick up the Grimoire or book of spellsyou'll find in your starting location. If you don't you won't be armed with the useful array of magic you'll need to combat creatures in the dungeon. You can blast them, freeze them or invoke a demon-but all this requires stamina. Don't try it if your stamina rating is low or you'll die a slow painful death. Gargoyle say that they'll be bringing out add-on modules for the game. You'll be able to transfer your saved character into new scenario's like Collondon's Pile, the castle above the dungeons, the Tombs of Taro and the mysterious Paradise regiossed! Heavy on the Magick is a brilliant game -but it will appeal to arcade adventurers and D&D freaks alike. And, just maybe, it will introduce arcade adventure addicts to a whole new area of games playing. Miss this at your peril. Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Ariolasoft Price: .95 disk/.95 twin cassette Down in the bunker things are not looking good. I've been hacking away at this golf ball with my sand wedge and getting nowhere fast. My opponent, out of trouble on the green, laughs. My only previous experience of golf has been on the crazy golf course or pitch 'n' putt. I don't even like watching it on television. So why am I playing Ariolasoft's new golf simulation program? The answer is simple I like it. It allows you to play four of Britain's top championship courses The Belfry, Wentworth Old Course, Sunningdale and Royal St George's. You can also design and create your own courses. They can be as simple or as complicated as you want. Up to four people can play. Each starts with a 28 handicap. The right hand side of the was programmed in Hungary screen is taken with a plan view by people who had never of the hole in play showing the seen or played golf! tee, fairway and green Like Ariolasoft's other The top left hand part of the home-grown game Think?, Golf screen gives a 3D view of the Construction Set is better than hole. Below this is a window most of their American giving information of clubs imports. available, position of the feet Graphics etc. C+VG Sound For the actual shot, an HIT! animated man appears on the Value screen. Pressing the fire button Playability makes him swing the club. Pressing the button at the appropriate point during the swing will decide the strength of the shot. Wind speed, temperature and ground conditions can all be selected. Ariolasoft launched the game at Wentworth where the club stalwarts, after what appeared to be a few suspicious glances at the computer, were soon playing the game. The odd thing about Golf Construction Set is that, although it was designed in Britain by Tigress Marketing, it dea to hang onto the apcom's all conquering c o Graphics Sound C+VG Value Playability move in all directions, jump. pick up objects, store them in pockets. The worse thing about the game is having to read the \"mystical\" blurb at the beginning. All in all, Fairlight is as pretty as a picture on both machines. Enjoy it. Amstrad/CBM 64 Graphics 9/9 Sound 7/8 Machines: Spectrum 48K the missile base, the harbour, good-especially on the Spectrum. The Spectrum Green + 128/C64/Amstrad camp where your buddies are Beret and enemy troops are Supplier: Imagine waiting to be freed. drawn in black and white Price: .95 (Spectrum) At the end of each stage the cartoon styles but are extremely .95 (C64/Amstrad) enemy throws everything they well animated. The C64 version have at you-with stuff like features full colour \"filled-in\" helicopters coming in from the characters, as you'd expect, and Will you please bid a warm air to cause you even more better sound. Although the welcome to son of Commando, Green Beret! This was Konami's problems. That's why it's a good Spectrum sound effects aren't idea to hang onto the extra bad. arcade answer to Capcom's all firepower until the end! Green Beret continues the conquering Commando coinSome troops will fire at you warlike theme of Commando/ slot game--and it's destined to get all you warlike gamesters SUITE foaming at the mouth! Green Beretis a mixture of STAGE 01 Commando and Rambo. Instead of horizontally scrolling play area, this one scrolls left to right. Like Commando you have to fight off the enemy and there are masses of them-while attempting to release your captured buddies. Like Rambo you can collect extra armaments along the way by killing off the enemy commanders. And you'll need them all you get to start with is a simple knife. These weapons are a flamethrower-found on the first of the four stagesgrenades and a rocket launcher. These have limited powers so use them wisely. For example, you only get three shots with the flamethrower, so it's best to wait until you are in a really tight but their bullets move so slowly Rambo-and if you like this spot before using it. that it's pretty easy to leap over style of game you'll enjoy GB. Unlike either Rambo or them. The bullets are about the It's fast furious and terribly Commando your Green Beret only thing that do move addictive. Shoot'em up fans can jump and climb and throw slowly. The rest of the game is should apply for their call up himself on the ground to avoid really fasta real challenge to papers today! the enemy. Platforms and joystick bashers and ace ladders abound to help him gamesters everywhere. but you'll have to move fast as A few gripes. You have to use Spectrum/C64 the enemy troops are always on the keyboard to fire the extra Graphics your tail. weapon when you've got it Sound You have to advance Green the joystick fire-button only Value 9/9 Beret through four enemy controls your knife. defence stages. It begins with The graphic backgrounds are playability 9/9 CONTINUES ON PAGE 21 Value 8/8 Playability 8/8 8/8 7/8 "


"EBRATE IN STYLE CELEBRATI WITH MESSE CELEBRATE IN STYLE WITH THE OFFICIAL VOM.CYS AVIVAL Amstrad Tape .95 .95 Disk Commodore Tape 64/128 Disk .95 .95 Ceplegable and klobal competition Sefdhesive World Cup bags Full colour World Cup league table Full colour World Cup Facts postes CBM64/ Commodore 16 Tape Spectrum 48K Tape chance Hus FREE competition to win a Comped Disc Player .95 .95 gue FIFA NEXICO86 Com A Word FIFA FIFA/DEYHLE 1977 Enjoy the excitement of the world's premier sporting! occasion as the whole of the globe focuses attention on the ultimate in football achievement World Cup victory Follow the action as it happens with your own computer progress chart, play out the drama of real match encounters, nation versus nation in your own computer football game and capture the spirit of this momentous competition and its Latin American setting famous for its carnivals, the passion of its people and the fervour and enthusiasm they demonstrate for their sport World Cup Carnival. The ONLY official football supporters computer game. The ONLY way for a computer enthusiast to follow the World Cup Programmed by AS Designs SPORT-BILLY PRODUCTIONS 1994 PIQUE Official mascot FIFA World Cup 1986 U.S. GOLD U.S. GOLD U.S. Gold Ltd., Unit 10 The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Tel : 021-359 8881 "


"C+VG JUN Software REVIEWS Machine: CBM 6.4.. 53 S i t COMPUTER KITS VOL 2 Supplier: Bubblebus Price: .95 Stephen Crow, winner of the C+VG Golden Joystick Award for best programmer of the year, has converted his Spectrum classic Starquake for the 64, and it's definitely been worth waiting for. You are BLOB! Oh yes, you'd better believe it. It means Bio-Logically Operated Being. You must stop an unstable planet from exploding and taking another thousandplanets with it. Not an easy task, as a few million nasty creatures don't seem to see it your way. know what I mean The game action is set over 500 screens, and I'm sure the aliens get meaner on each one. As for the graphics, well they are fantastic. It is very comical watching BLOB prancing about. There are some really ace tunes there as well. The game is extremely addictive it had me glued to the '64 for hours. A must for Commodore owners. If you wonder why you Spectrum owning friends have not been around lately, I bet they've bought Starquake! It's BRILL!!!!! Machine: BBCB Supplier: Beau Jolly Price: .95 A wonderful ten original games on one cassette! That's what you get on Computer Hits Vol Two. The games on the cassette are: Frenzy (Micropower) Smash'n'Grab (Superior Software), Jetpower Jack (Micropower), Circus a classic from Adventure Soft), Video's Revenge (Alligata), Starstriker (Superior Softwarel, Jet Boot Jack (English Software) Webwar (Artic), Kissin' Kousins (English Software), and the infamous Evil Dead from Palace, My favourite game on this tape has to be Starstriker, which is a great version of the arcade classic Moon Cresta. It contains all the features of the original, including multistage rockets, bonus docking, asteroids and even the old FAR OUT message when you complete the level. Definitely good value. TA Machine: Spectrum 48k precious substance. But other Supplier: Ultimate galaxies will be out to stop you. At least I think that's what it's Price: .95 about. The storylines have in the This is it. The game we've been past always been an interesting Es waiting for. Cyberun was read on Ultimate games. This to rumoured to be the game that one is a little confusing. One partie would put Ultimate back on reads \"civilisations have top. Wrong. Cyberun should be devoted their entire resources to the remaned Alsoran. prying off one of the smaller I first glimpsed Cyberun with a outerplanets from the main programmer whoshal 1 cluster . What does prying\" remain nameless who is mean? To pry means to peer and a destined to have a numberone peep into something which is hit with his latest game. His big private. It doesn't make much fear would be that Cyberun sense at all. would come out and steal all his right, to play the game. thunder. I've never seen Because of the size of the Crystal someone more happy than him ship it has had to be constructed 3 after a few seconds of looking at in stages and these have been Ultimate's latest. \"There must shipped off to the Zebarema be more to it than that,\" he said. system. Now the plot. There exists in You start off with the the dark outer reaches of space a command module and must cluster of dark stars and planets, find two sets of rockets and bound together by \"plasmic boosters. energy and composed of an Zapping aliens boosts your anti-element called Cybertron score but at the same timelgot Cybertron can be crysalised destroyed with infuriating into the hardest and most frequency. There may be a valuable element in the universe dynamite game lurking Cybernite. It is, therefore, very somewhere in Cyberun. But the valuable and everyone wants it more one plays, the more you To get at the Cybernite, an get the impression there isn't. 21 almost unbeatable 12 \"magnetronic\" pull must be Graphics overcome. Sound The construction Crystal ship, Value an enormous cargo carrier, has axbeen undertaken to get the Playability Graphics Sound Value Playability C+VG HIT! Graphics Sound Value Playability CK OF THE KILLER   TOMATO Machine: Spectrum Supplier: Global Software Price: .95 Last month we warned of the imminent arrival of Attack of the Killer Tomatoes, a game apparently based on a film which was once voted the \"Worst Vegetable Movie of AllTime\". Well the game has now arrived and a pretty tasty dish it is. We won't quibble over the fact that a tomato is a fruit and not a vegetable. In concept the game is not startlingly original. It's very \"Ultimate\" in style but none the worse for that. But it is a departure in style for Global who are better known for straight forward adventure games rather than arcade adventure. Attack of the Killer Tomatoes chronicles the predicament of Wimp Plasbot --he's trapped the Pura Tom processing plant, The game is packed with undeniably silly things, salad bowls, sauce bottles and rampaging tomatoes. All good fun. And what's more, Globalis planning to release more games based on silly films. They include Curse of the Mushroom People, which will be released in two parts, and The Wild Women of Wongo Graphics Sound Value Playability COCO O CO 13 09000 CONTINUED FROM PAGE 17 CONTINUES ON PAGE 22 "


"C+VG JUN software REVIEWS 6 role of C Machine: Spectrum 48/128K (Also for Amstrad, MSX and CBM64/128) Supplier: Gremlin Graphics Price: .95 The two tapes that come with this package contain four programs; three combat \"modules\" and one master program, within which the others run. After the uninteresting title page has removed itself, you're presented with a list of options regarding how you wait to progress through the programs. You can either try to fight your way through all the stages, or practice each one in turn For some reason, neither the unarmed combat or the pole fighting wanted to load the first time i tried. On the second 6ft pole, you have a very good attempt, though, they worked chance of falling into the river without any problems. beneath the log! In this game, you take the Samurai Sword Fighting is role of The Avenger, battling the final event, and the most against Evil\"... in defence of difficult. Here you are your faith, and protection of the presented with a stereotype weak.. Samurai warrior, complete with As soon as stage 1 armour and spikey helmet. Unarmed Combat begins, Something I found a little worrying was the fact that I hurl yourself out of harm's could deliver a batch of \"head way. The scrolling is smooth splitters\" to my opponent with and sensible and definitely apparently no effect. He, adds to the enjoyment of the however, could despatch me game. with one blow. This may have Control is via the joystick or something to do with the fact keyboard, and includes many that I wasn't wearing a spikey similar movements to Fist (in helmet the first stage). The response is the key to the game's appeal a little slow at times, and it is is variety. Each stage provides possible to get caught in a an original challange, and you you will notice the detailed constant barrage of your can really feel yourself graphics. Although not as fast, opponent's blows. becoming more competent they are much more realistic The next stage is Pole with the pole and the sword. At than Fist. The background has Fighting, in which you find .95 the game is hardly cheap. animation too, with various yourself standing on a log with but bearing in mind the quality birds and very short orientals -surprise, surprise a pole. of some other products costing scurrying about You are immediately the same it's good value. After a couple of seconds, confronted by a tall character, you'll notice that the vaguely resembling a skeleton background seems to have a ina kilt. By using the same Graphics life of its own! The screen not joystick movements, the Sound C+VG only scrolls left and right, as appropriate moves can be Value HIT! you batter your opponents, but achieved. Of course, if you're up and down as you duck and swinging wildly around with a Playability NEOUS Securhuset anginoon AR OOOOOO HIT RSS ROMADY SABOTEUR DSWDOWNTAX Machine: Amstrad your way up the rickety Supplier: Durell wooden structure, toward the enemy base Price: .95 The sound couldn't be In Saboteur, another blood 'n' described as \"great, but is guts game, you take the role of adequate, with some fairly a highly trained mercenary. convincing sound effects. with a suitably destructive The game is a race against mission; you have to break into time. You must time your way a building, disguised as a around the maze, picking up warehouse (the building, that objects with which you can kill is), and steal a disk. The disk the defending guards. contains the names of various To climb a ladder, you have rebel leaders who will to be under it obviously. presumably come to a rather Unfortunately, you have to be sticky end, once in the hands of DIRECTLY under it. This isn't your \"employer\". Then you very easy to achieve when have to escape. there is a hungry dog at your Loading the game was no heels. mean feat in itself. The naff title The items you need are all page took an absolute aeon to hidden away behind crates or form, and the rest of the barrels. As you pass one, you'll program took even longer, be shown a picture and told it causing the screen to is \"nearby\". By pressing fire disintegrate before admitting you can pick it up, although that it was ready to go! only one object at a time is Some horrible music permitted. \"plunks\" away in the Despite some quirks with background while you are movement, and the animation being asked to select becoming a little jerky at times, joystick/keyboard options, and it's a good game, and a whole your skill level (1-Extremely lot more preferable than a poke easy/9-Extremely hard). in the eye with a sharp stick. Eventually, the game gets going, and pretty good it is too. Graphics Your character glides across the water in a yellow dinghy Sound and waits by a jetty. All in Playability black, you leap out and make Value CONTINUED FROM PAGE 21 CONTINUES ON PAGE 24 "


"Ifyou go down to the wods today... youre sure of a swift demise... CAULDRON I THE PUMPKIN STRIKES BACK Actual screen shots from the Commodore ANDRO DO Cers From Page Software 275 Hantar o nal London NTS AC: Date and is p o 2780751 PALACE software "


"C+VG JUN sobtware REVIEWS KARATE COMBAT V Machine: BBC Supplier: Superior Software Price: .95 (tape .95 (disk) Machine: BBC Supplier: Imagine Software Fu, now available on the BBC. Price: .95 (tape Superior's Karate Combatis .95 (disk) a superb karate simulation which seems pretty realistic to In a bloodthirsty wave of Bruce me, although I'm no Grand Lee fervour, martial arts Master. All that's missing are games are flooding on to the the sharp grunts and bloodmarket. Superior Software is curdling shrieks as arms and hoping to follow up the legs flail and combatants Success of games like Repton hurtle through the air. with Karate Combat, while Using the keyboard or Imagine has come up with its joystick, you must master six own eccentric version of kung basic moves to defeat your 16 oO600 O10000 RESU DOLOHG adversaries, and topple the dreaded Master. You can punch high or low, leap through the air in a flying kick, kick high, kick low, or spin round in a sweep. Most of these are achieved using a combination of keys, or moving the joystick while pressing the button. You can also walk left and right, roll, turn, and use your arm to block your opponent's moves. Each bout lasts until either you or your adversary drops from exhaustion. Your own energy level is displayed on the screen, but your computercontrolled opponent sneakily keeps its energy, or lack of it, to itself. You can use practice mode to perfect your technique before moving on to play the computer, or you can compete against a friend. There's only one location and your opponents tend to look the same, although their style is subtly different. But the graphics are superbsmooth, simple, with extremely realistic movement. I particularly liked the way each new opponent hurtles on to the screen in a flying roll. The sound isn't too bad either, with a most satisfying thunk! as you land a kick or punch. Yie Ar Kung Fu is almost as much fun but lacks the unmistakable Superior touch of class. Here you are Oolong, challenging ten fiendish opponents to become Grand Master in honour of your father. And boy, are they fiendish. There's huge, ugly Buchu, who specializes in hurtling at you through the air. If you can beat him, you have to cope with deadly Star, who starts by chucking lethal pointed things at you. Then there's Pole, who attacks with an ancient rod, Feedie, who slings woks and all sorts of junk at you, Sword, who carries (surprise! surprise!) a sword, Chain, who wields a deadly you've guessed it-chain, and so on and so on. Like Karate Combat, you have a variety of moves at your command. Using various combinations of keys (there's no joystick option) you can kick and punch in four ways, jump, duck, and move left, right, and diagonally. SAI Machine: Spectrum 48K Supplier: Mirrorsoft Price: .95 Yet another martial arts game and probably one of the best for the Spectrum yet. This one centres on the ancient art of Sai karate. It involves the use of a special sai weapon. Basically this a big stick with which you bash your opponent. And for good measure you can also kick him. The idea of the game is a familiar one. You have to progress through eight levels COMBAT whizz across the screen. Points are scored for successful blows. Energy-or Chi level is measured on a dragon's head on the scoreboard. Sai Combat is good fun, graphically excellent and, if you've so far steered clear of all martial arts games, this could be the one to get you hooked. Graphics Sound C+VG Value HIT! Playability from white to black belt, and then through another eight levels to become a Sai master. The fighting figures are wonderful very big and smoothly animated. You don't have to sit right on top of the screen to see them. If you managed to reach the higher levels of the game there are extra hazards to face, including Ninja stars which OT CONTINUED FROM PAGE 22 "


"C+VG JUN software REVIEWS 8 369 1213 Machine: Specrum 48K It's inevitable that the dragons Supplier: Bug Byte will get into the castle. There's just too many of them. But you, Price: .99 the sorceror, can dash out to Apart from the silly pun in the save your apprentice and collect title, which is so bad we refuse to a few gold coins. Unless you get use it in our headline, this isn't a roasted by a dragon, that is! bad little game. This is a two screen game. Sodov indeed! the One inside the castle and an Sorceror is defending his castle interesting 3D screen outside and his apprentices from some the castle. Points are scored by nasty attacking dragons. The collecting gold. dragons have one aim in life This game was originally to steal away with the sorceror's released by an American apprentices. They do this by company called Tymac for the attacking his castle, opening the 64 way back in '84. This portcullis and rushing in conversion looks pretty and is The Sorceror can stop them playable if not long on lasting by zapping them with a spell appeal. from his battlements which has the added fortunate effect of Graphics creating a whole bunch of gold Sound CHVG coins. The spell transforms a Value dead dragon into gold. A neat trick if you can do it. Playability THE SORCEROR The fun takes place in two locations, in front of a waterfall, and at the Martial Arts Academy in the Bamboo Pagoda. It's varied, easy to pick up and play, and the graphics are lively enough, although not a patch on Karate Combat. But there's no sense of realism, and not much subtly in the action, which at times degenerates into arcade-type action as you leap and dodge flying objects. Worst of all, my version of the game had a tendency to crash in mid-fight for no apparent reason, which is particularly teeth-grinding when you're using tape and you've got to load all over again. If you're a martial arts freak, you'll probably enjoy both these efforts. But if you decide there's only room on your shelves for one, my money has to be on Superior Software. Karate Combat Graphics Sound Value Playability Yie Ar Kung-Fu Graphics Sound Value Playability STARSTRIKEITE Machine: Spectrum 48K transports the Starstrike fighter space where you have to fly Supplier: Realtime around the Outsider systems, through special openings in and enables refuelling and Outsider force fields which Price: .95 repair to shield systems. surround each planet. Timing is The Outsiders' planets are vital to avoid collisions which At last! The sequel to the grouped around five stars. weaken your shields. Once amazing Spectrum Star Wars There are 22 planets in all and through a series of grid like force clone Starstrike which took the they must all be neutralised by fields, it's out into clear space games world by surprise many knocking out the central control where Outsider fighters wait in a months ago. Starstrike Il takes reactor which runs each planet's second line of defence. the story a bit further. But it systems. The planets range in Two Elite-style scanners sacrifices speed for frills status from agricultural through appear on your view screen to which may upset arcade addicts, industrial to military and all have enable you to track the enemy The basic theme of the game varying defences to contend ships and disappear when goes like this. The Outsiders with you've got him in your sights. have been driven from A basic Starstrike Il mission Starstrikell features some Federation space by the original goes like this. You are in the nice ideas and pretty graphics. It Starstrike squadrons. Now support module and have to will certainly take some time Federation Commandis choose which star system you before you finally pacify all the launching a major offensive wish to attack from an illustrated Outsider planet systems. against the Outsiders' home menu. This ranges from the However the speed of the planets with the next generation Alpha system through to the game leaves a lot to be desired. of Starstrike ships. Epsilon system. Once done, you It's relatively slow and this takes To enable the Starstrike Il then see a star chart of that away some of the edge and ships to move around the system and you have to select urgency essential in a good Outsiders' planetary systems which planet you wish to attack arcade shoot-'em-up. they have now been equipped It's best to start with the There're now lots of \"filled in\" with a support module which agricultural planets which are 3D graphics which look nice. But carries an interstellar hyperdrive relatively poorly defended. Hit do they add much to playability? unit and extra fuel supplies. This the fire button and it's off into Having said that, there's lots to do and explore. And now there's an added element of strategy to work with. Between each action section you're allowed to transfer fuel energy to your shields so you can boost your defences--but have you got enough fuel to complete your mission? The decision is yours. Overall Starstrikell is a nice looking, well presented and thought out game--but it needs to be faster. Graphics Sound Value Playability  CONTINUES ON PAGE 27 "


"B.B.B.BOUND TO BE A HIT: \"10 levels of fun make this torture excellent value for money. Nova rating. Definitely one of those \"just another go' games. Game of the month February\" Computer Gamer **The most compulsive game I've ever played. If you don't buy it you'll never know what you've missed.\" says Gary Penn, Zzap! 64. Gold Medal Award. 97% overall. CBM64/128 SPECTRUM48K CASSETTE DISC CASSETTE .95 .95 .95 AMSTRAD MSX CASSETTE DISC CASSETTE .95 .95 .95 Gremlin Graphics Software Limited, Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield S1 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 L FB:B.B:B.BOUNDER FREE! with Bounder Metabolis CBM 64/128 version only "


"C+VG JUN Software REVIEWS 9 (R.M.S. TITANIC TITANIC DISASTER GREAT LOSS OF LIFE: EVENING NEWS Machine: CMB 64 Supplier: Electric Dreams Price: .95 The world's most famous wreck is the subject of this novel new submersible attached eight decide who will hear your reply release from Electric Dreams flotation bags to the hull of the either one reporter or all of the company based in Titanic. Due to a fault in its those present. Southampton, the port which memory, the positions of the You can please the press by RMS Titantic sailed from on her bags were not recorded. sending back photographs of doomed maiden voyage. The object of your search is your finds using your subs Your job is to raise the wreck. to locate the eight buttons that on-board camera. Some Sounds simple, but this will inflate the bags and bring pictures please certain papers addictive game involves the Titanic back to the surface more than others however. For solving over 100 problems for the first time in over 70 example the Stun really loves some with tortuous multi-level years. the picture of the whalebone solutions. There are four main screens corset you'll discover in the At 2.20 am on April 15th, featured in the game. There's stewardesses room! But be 1912, the greatest passenger the Calendar Screen which careful some pictures, if liner in history struck an iceberg contains a calendar of published, could offend some of and sank beneath the Atlantic course and icons which your sponsors. Which brings us taking with her 1,500 allow you to access other areas neatly to the Finance Room. passengers and crew. The of the game. Like the Press In the Finance Room you are disaster has gripped the world Room, the Finance Room and given information on the ever since. Rumours of her last but by no means least, the current state of your bank precious cargo have inspired screen which displays the balance and receive from your many to think about a salvage interior of your salvage-sub. sponsors their feelings on your bid. And have thus inspired this The Calendar screen merely progress. These feelings will be new game. displays the month and date expressed as an alteration to As the owner/director of the just to give you an idea of the their weekly contribution to the Titantic Salvage Company. passage of time. There's no limit salvage operation. your sole aim is to raise the to the game by the way. You The Finance Room is entered mighty Titantic from the sea can keep going as long as you by selecting the appropriate bed. To aid you in your have enough money to finance icon from the Calendar Screen. mission, your research and your activities. The icons along inside the room your current development department has the top of this screen are your balance, a list of your sponsors produced the T.S.1 an gateway to other parts of the and their weekly donations, an advanced deepwater game. analysis of repair costs and submersible. Your activities in the Press repair time for the last dive and To finance this epic voyage Room are of vital importance to a monitor for receiving you have convinced some rich your finances. You must messages are accessible. and powerful sponsors to back answer the questions put to Messages may be received your venture. However, money you in the manner you judge from your sponsors or from is in short supply and you will the most likely to satisfy the your accountant. have to raise more during the particular publication. You can call a sponsor in expedition. Press conferences may be order to request more money There are a number of ways called by you or by the press in by selecting the telephone icon. to accomplish this: favourable which case the mother ship will then use the joystick to light reports in the newspaper may send a message down to T.S.1. the picture of the sponsor you lead to an increase in You do not have to attend a wish to contact and press the sponsorship: pleasing the conference, but if you don't, fire button. reporters could result in cash reporters are likely to invent a Whether or not the sponsor gifts, objects found in the story. Should you call your grants your request, or even Titanic may be sold. own conference there is no replies, depends on many Your well equipped guarantee that any reporters factors. It is definitely not mothership is bobbing about will attend. recommended that you make on the Atlantic almost two Once a conference has been requests too often! miles above the watery grave called and attended you will Selecting the \"dive\" icon of the world's most famous see a number of reporters on from the Calendar Screen puts cruise liner. television screens in front of you in T.S.1 ready for the On a previous unsuccessful you. One of them will then descent. You will see a play of salvage mission an automated address you by identifying his the Titanic in the viewscreen. or her newspaper and then The first thing you must do is asking a question. You then select one of five possible entry DECE Tolle points. Once you are inside the  CONTINUED TALL RLE TI EI DDARLLER DELTAT "


"C+VG JUN Software REVIEWS 10 (.R.M.S. TITANIC 0000W 3935 Titanic you may begin to move Problems may be solved by around and explore. You will manipulating the objects to be notice that some walls have found in the Titanic. The doors in them, Open doors are objects required to solve a filled whlist locked doors are in problem and the room in which outline only in order to move the problem must be solved though an open door position are all linked together in some your submersible in front of the way. door and press the fire button. It may be sufficient to drop If you try to move through a two objects near to each other locked door, or f you miss the in a certain room, some objects open door, T.S. 1 kill hit the combine to produce more wall causing damage and loss objects when brought into of power. The sub has a selt: contact in the correct room, centring device and you will other objects merely need to be always finish up in the middice touched to produce results. It is of the next room. up to you to discover the In certain rooms you will be correct way to open the doors able to move up or down and progress through the between the decks. Titantic to your goal. Each time you enter a room How ever strange some of its name or purpose will be the objects you come across displayed on the message within the rooms of the screen. There is no need to Titanic's five brain decks they enter the room to discover its were actually part of the ship's name or purpose. You can use real cargo whengt saak. Even the on-board scanner. odd items like a Mechanicat Locked doors may only be Camel! opened by solving problems. The graphics depicting your O 04 view of the ship use a novel Titanic in some way. approach. You have to Some of the problems are illuminate the room with your distinctly humorous in a sub's light which gives a sort of crossword sort of style. The \"snowstorm\" appearance to message window on the dive the rooms. As your power runs screen which describes objects down it gets harder to see and, will often give you clues to unless you move quickly, you what they are useful for. could end up trapped and You'll need arcade and require an expensive rescue. strategy skills to succeed in this You can also drop sonar buoys game. And be prepared to aspund the wreck which will spend some time on it. An holp you work out your expert with all the clues at his position in an emergency. disposal takes around six to Occasionally you will need seven hours to complete the the help of your laboratories on game. board the mother ship to solve Titanic is a very playable, problems. The labs can entertaining and stimulating examine, combine or repair game. If you enjoy a challenge, objects sent to them don't miss it. One of the best The sub's robot arm is your Electric Dreams releases yet. means of manipulating objects. It is very sensitive and rather delicate, so be careful with it. If you wish to grasp an object C+VG you must position the open HIT! jaws of the robot arm around. : the object and then close them. When you do this the name of the object will appear on the Graphics message line. Not all objects Sound may be picked up, some are Value too heavy for the robot arm whilst others are fixed to the Playability four levels. A map is essential to available for the Commodore get into the vast, complex and and Amstrad. challenging game. Graphics Thankfully, it includes a save Sound game option. There's no way to complete this game in one Value sitting. CORE will also be Playability Oo C.O.R.E. LOGO on 0:01 Machine: Spectrum memory Supplier: A'n'F Software By returning the complete Price: .95 \"memory\" to the mothership, a suitable defence strategy can be Is this Mission Impossible? found to combat future alien Distress signals have been attacks. received from Eroc 1, a deep. There are many objects to be mined asteroid settlement. An found which prove handy for alien attack is suspected. Andy. There are a number of Enter Commander Andrew tools, --some hidden, some Angello under orders to find out buried, which will help him. what has happened. But on Andy can travel around the arrival at the Asteroid, he finds mines by walking or using the all 720 service personel are anti-gravity lifts or teleports. dead. But why? A display panel at the top of Angello's only hope of finding the screen shows direction, time out is to find the biological and power. Descriptions and memory cells left on the verbal prompts are also shown. asteroid, and re-assemble the There are more than 1,000 parts to re-create the colony's locations in the game, split into HOME THAT SABTS+++++++ "


"Post Haste Software fata POST HASTE: WHAT THEY SAY! GET DEXTER (PSS) C&VG Game Of The Month and highly praised by many other reviewers. Your Amstrad will dazzle you with this terrific arcade adventure! Amstrad (C) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 The total postal software service! Post Haste is part of GB Microland, the South of England's unique computer shop. Thousands of software titles. Lots of experience. The place that gave new meaning to the word \"friendly\". But not everyone lives nearby. So Post Haste Software was born. To bring the best to your door. With top service. Here's how. No \"Club\" to join, no \"subscription\" to pay You come in our shop for free, Why pay to buy by BATMAN (Ocean) Rated at 10 out of 10 for value and 10 out of 10 for playability by C&VG. \"A game that's destined to become an all-time classic Spectrum (C) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 Other computer versions imminent mail? Unique \"double-your-money\" voucher with the 40-page catalogue. Check the box in this advertisement! Software for other computers? No problem. QL, Apple and IBM. Ask for lists. Post Haste has the THE POST HASTE SERVICE We can supply any program you've seen advertised. If it's released, you'll usually get it by retum. If it's not you'll get it faster when it does come out. Simply order it and sit back That's Post Haste service! lot! Postage free in the UK Europe? Add 95p Elsewhere? Add .50. For the whole order, not each program. Order by post or phone, day or night. Check the coupon for details. Then relax. It's fast! Pay by cheque, bank draft, PO, Access, Visa, Mastercard. Eurocard. Post Haste is convenient! It's only a few months since Post Haste was born. Now, thousands of customer orders later, we've a compliment collection to make us proud! Here are just a few..... \"This time I'm not just surprised but completely amazed at the speed of your response expect plenty of orders from me!\" KB Haslingfield, Cambridgeshire \"Thanks for a fast service please keep it up!\" FR Beisfjord, Norway \"I'm amazed at the speed you work! I received the disk just 4 days after I sent off to you and that includes a Sunday! That's what I call service!\" RH. Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands. \"Congratulations on your excellent service! For BFPO addresses, you re the best way of obtaining up-to-date software. In my case, you're the only way! Keep up the good work!\" -C.B.. BFPO 36. \"Many thanks for a superb service!\" JO.. Andover, Hampshire \"The last order I placed with you was received just over a week from the date I mailed it two weeks faster than any other firm I've dealt with!\"-RE, Kleppe, Norway \"I've just received your catalogue and I'm amazed at the quality!\"-PD. Torpoint, Comwall \"The programs I ordered arrived in 8 days. Considering this included Easter and an air strike in Australia, that's fantastic!\" AK. Morphetr Vale, South Australia ALREADY SEEN SOMETHING YOU WANT ON THIS PAGE? GO RIGHT AHEAD AND ORDER NOW! Use the coupon or write on your own paper. Be sure to include all the details from the coupon Cross cheques and POs for safety. Your software will be on its way by retum. So will your catalogue. And your unique \"double-yourmoney\" voucher! Phone Orders (24 hrs) (0705) 269333 TO GET YOUR CATALOGUE WITH THE \"DOUBLE-YOUR-MONEY\" VOUCHER OR TO ORDER SOFTWARE, USE THIS COUPONI 1. Send your catalogue I've enclosed 90p Dont forget my  80 \"Double Your Money\" voucher for me to use with my first order! Send your catalogue and I want to order software too The details are below I've added 90p for the catalogue to the value of my order so don't forget my .80 Double Your Money\" voucher! My name is My address is Our thanks to everyone who's written from everywhere in the UK and all over the world. We appreciate it and we'll go right on working poste haste at Post Haste! ................... Post code ADVENTURERS! SPECIAL EXTRA SECTION! There are dozens of adventures in the Post Haste catalogue from virtually every major producer. Just about all the superb Infocom range is there and many others too! And Post Haste carries the Infocom Invisiclues, plus hint and guide books to other adventures too! Answers to the problems that keep you awake at night? The catalogue lists them all! My computer is: Can we contact you by phone if there's a PAPERBOY (Elite) query? The top arcade game on your own computer screen! The eagerly awaited official version! Spectrum (C) .95 BBC/Electron (C) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 BBC (D) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 Comm C16/Pis 41C) .95 Comm 64/128 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (D) .95 STD/Exchange ......Number....... IF YOU'RE ORDERING SOFTWARE PLEASE PRINT DETAILS OF THE PROGRAMS YOU WANT! PROGRAM NAME I PRICE PERRY MASON (Telarium) A tremendous graphic adventure. The Case Of The Mandarin Murderer and you re the famous detective Perry Mason Zzap 64 says \"definitely recommended Comm 64/128 (D) .95 THE POST HASTE CATALOGUE The Post Haste catalogue is just 90p with a unique \"Double Your Money\" voucher tucked inside! Yes, the Post Haste catalogue contains a .80 voucher to use for your first order! How's that for value? Recreation. utility, strategy, adventure, arcade they're all there! And so is your f1.80 \"Double Your Money\" voucher! Programs for five microsAmstrad Atari BBC, Commodore 64/128 and Spectrum. You re spoilt for choice with Post Haste! And your catalogue is the gateway to a huge program range from Post Haste Over 4,000 titles spanning 10 major micros! Where else is there such a choice? MOVIEMAKER (Ariolasoft) A stunning program! Lets you quickly and easily create and save long and hugely impressive animated action sequences using your own creative talents Comm 64/128 (D) .95 Atari (D) .95 GHOSTS'N'GOBLINS (Elite) Another officially licensed arcade smash-hit from the team that produced Commando\"! Spectrum (C) .95 BBC/Electron (C) .95 Amstrad (C) .95 BBC (D) .95 Amstrad (D) .95 Comm C16/Pis 4 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (D) .95 Catalogue with .80 voucher Add .90 Postage is totally free in the UK Add .00 Europe postage for whole order Add .95 Airmail elsewhere for whole order Add .50 TOTAL AMOUNT ENCLOSED  PAYING BY CHEQUE OR POSTAL ORDER? Please make it payable to Post Haste Software and cross it for safety's sake! Don't send cash! CHARGING IT TO YOUR VISA, ACCESS. MASTERCARD, EUROCARD? May we have your card number. expiry date and signature? IIIIIIIIIII Expiry date_ Signature I Now mail your order to POST HASTE SOFTWARE GB MICROLAND, 7 QUEENS PARADE LONDON ROAD, WATERLOOVILLE HAMPSHIRE PO7 7EB, UNITED KINGDOM Orphone (24 hours) 0705 269333 BIGGER RANGE! The Post Haste range now includes programs for the Commodore C16 and the Atari ST. Send for lists! GAMEMAKER (Activision) One of the most astonishing programs we've seen! Create your own games and make them as complicated as you like \"An excellent package Zzap 64 Comm 64/128 (C) .95 Comm 64/128 (D) .95 -"


"C+VG JUN Software REVIEWS W Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Activision Price: .99 I'm so cut up I can hardly write. I've just gone through a particularly traumatic and painful divorce yes, it was decisions The game can be started at any life stage you want, but whatever that is, one thing is certain you are going to get older. You can't be a child or to not answer these (but I bet you all do). The Alter Ego under review game. Peter J Favaro, the man who conceived and created it, deserves the highest praise. Right, how can I propose to what I hope will be my next wife? Over dinner? And when my alter ego reaches the end of its days I'll probably look back and say: \"Regrets, I had a few -but I did it my way ALTER EGO N/A N/A was a Male version but a Female oriented one is also to be released. The game is intriguing, enthralling, funny, witty and thoroughly enjoyable Graphics Sound Value Playability ODB ALTER EGO LIFE SPHERE STATUS  teenager forever. In real life there are no Peter Pans. my fault and my life is in The game is controlled by a ruins. Still, perhaps I can make series of icons. Selecting these a go of my next marriage. After puts you in a variety of all, I'm only 90 and the golden situations, problems and years are still ahead of me. circumstances Alter Ego, Activision's The symbols are: Social: brilliant, original and totally This covers etiquette, manners, addictive role-playing game, making friends and social skills gives you life as it is livedor Intellectual: Test your rather life as you might like to knowledge and commonsense. live it. Questions asked in this section At some stage everybody are very American biased. You wonders \"What if I had done could end up looking very that?\" or \"If only that had dumb. happened\". In real life you'll Emotional: Covers calmness, never know, but Alter Ego confidence and expressiveness gives you the chance to find Physical: Self-care and out. physical health. Avoid drink It allows you to work through and drugs for a high rating seven stages of life — birth and Familial: Experiences with infancy, childhood, mother, father, brothers and adolescence, young adulthood, sisters. middle adulthood and old age. Vocational: The joys and All the time you can make problems of work. decisions-sensible or stupid High School: Experiences and then learn to live with about the so called \"best days the consequences. of your life\" In the Alter Ego life stages Risks: Are you sensible or you can experience the stupid? Take a risk and reap the following: Birth and Infancy consequences. love and support from parents, Relationships: Make or break ways of getting attention, dates, find romance and controlling aggression, perhaps a mate for life. learning to crawl, walk and Work: One of life's sleep. necessities. Find the right job, Childhood moves towards for success and happiness independence, school, making College: Educational fun or friends, opposite sex misery relationships. Major Purchase: Flash your Adolescence peer group cash on homes, cars, boats and acceptance, dating, career other material goods decisions, money, rebelling Marriage: Settle down to a against authority life of marital bliss, or will it Young adulthood career, end in divorce? opposite sex relationships, Family: How will you cope buying a home, marriage with a bouncing bundle of joy? decisions There is also a screen on Adulthood long term which you can continually relationships, toleration, job check your status throughout and marriage stresses, the game. children, illness. As the game progresses you Middle adulthood -family literally build up an Alter Ego. problems, raising children and The experiences are very career. realistic and, in some cases, Old age physical quite explicit problems, illness, death, For instance, everyone Before starting the game you knows young children should can select a \"personality not get into cars with strangers profile\" by answering a series no matter how nice they of True of False questions. If appear. But what if...? Want you want, the computer will to try? The result is you are select it for you. The profile tortured, killed and your body cannot be changed once the is never found. Life can be game is in progress and it nasty and Alter Ego reflects it. forms the basis of how the Alter Ego also has some computer monitors and reacts sexually explicit experiences. to your moods, actions and But there is an option for you CONTINUED FROM PAGE 28 Decupation: Relationship status: CONTINUE you, and your companion have to the hong ited to you and you you notice tye the dress the People CRHON Peak differenti, under the MU CONTINUE "


"The 4th official N ow on The 4th official s! AMSTRAD lloors: COMPUTER SHOWI Organised by Database Exhibitions The next show is doubled in size and that means... * TWICE as much to see! * TWICE as much to try! * TWICE as much to buy! The summer Amstrad Computer Show is the biggest ever held, with many more exhibitors presenting all their latest products, including a large number on display for the first time. THER EVE HOME USERS! See the versatile Amstrad CPC range stretched to its very limit with the latest megagames, hardware add-ons, speech chips, graphics packages, languages, simulators, utilities. . and it lasts for THREE days instead of two! BUSINESS USERS! See the new word processors, spreadsheets, databases, accounting and other financial programs plus communications packages that enable the CPC and PCW ranges to talk to the outside world. Champagne Suite and Exhibition Centre, NOVOTEL, HAMMERSMITH, LONDON W6 Friday, June 13, 10am-6pm Saturday, June 14, 10am-6pm Sunday, June 15, 10am-4pm EDUCATIONAL USERS! Find out why Amstrad computers are entering educational establishments in ever-increasing numbers, helped by their low cost, adaptability and networking facilities. Avoid the Advance ticket order queues! Get your ticket in advance and... Please supply: Adult tickets at  (save ).............  Under-16s tickets at  (save ) .....  Total  Cheque enclosed made payable to Database Publications Ltd. Please debit my credit card account: AMSTRAD Champ Champagne Suite & Exhibition Centre, Novotel, Hammersmith, W6 June 13-15, 1986 Post to: Amstrad Show Tickets, Europa House, 68 Chester Road, Hazel Grove, Stockport SK7 5NY. Name Address... ...  Access SAVE  Signed .... PHONE ORDERS: Ring Show Hotline: 061-429 7931 PRESTEL ORDERS: KEY *89, THEN 614568383 MICROLINK ORDERS: MAILBOX 72:MAG001 Please quote credit card number and full address + Ref. CVG 6 Visa ULU Admission at door:  (adults).  (under 16s) A HEAD! "


"BUG-BYTE TEATER 2 hot games on one tape. First Mission and Final Assault. Ace action, with graphics and sonics straight from the arcades. CBM 64 .953 JOURNEY TO THE CENTRE OF THE EARTH 4 graphic adventures on one tape. Based on the book by Jules Verne. Mastodons, Batlegroms and Volcanos, are you brave enough to make it through? MSX 64k SODOV THE SORCERER Magical 3D animation with the latest YOPS course, sorcery. Fast, furious and the mythical Batlegroms to cope with. Spectrum 48k SAVAGE POND Face monsters more ferocious than the Batlegrom from Vragus IV. The only arcade game with a sticky tongue at the end. BBC/Electron Atari SOLO The Di-Planium, Wars rage on. 16 alien craft to defeat with fantastic sounds and sonics. C16 JACK ATTAC A great arcade adventure, an epic struggle, beabstalks, and cartoon animation. BBC/Electron Argus Press Software Group Liberty House 222 Regent Street LONDON W1R 7DB 01-439 0666 For mail order and Byte me T-shirts (small, med, large: ) "


"C+VG JUN software REVIEWS 12 THE COMET GAME OXHDO O does what you think it does. I didn't, and the pilot's bladder burst. It's an awful way to go. There's nothing particulary wrong with The Comet Game, but then again, there's nothing to get really excited about. Graphics Sound Value Playability oooo Machine: Spectrum and what do you get? Yes, it's Supplier: Firebird The Comet Game, Firebird's latest in the hot range, and an Price: .95 almost topical game (well, There seems to be an Halley's Comet has now unhealthy obsession with disappeared from the Northern germs developing at Firebird. Hemisphere). First there was Gerry the The bad news is that toxic Germ Goes Body germs, lethal to all life on earth, Poppin' and now has been identified on the germ bags in comet, and with huge lumps of space. ice travelling towards earth at Add Halley's 200,000 kilometres an hour. Comet that spells bad news flight. You, therefore, play the Your mission is to get to the part of the ship's computer, comet, fly low and fast over its which must look after the pilot, surface and blast the deadly cope with various emergencies germ bags into oblivion. Machine: which crop up -such as the The pilot of the space Interplanetary Safeguard Amstrad craft sent out to System which can be activated Spectrum intercept the comet causing other planets to launch Supplier: Mikro-Gen is in suspended missiles at you. animation for If you make a rendezvous Price: .95 the with the comet, the ship is If you've got an Amstrad and duration placed in a low orbit and it's you haven't got a copy of of the time for a spot of zapping at Equinox from Mikro-Gen, you the germ bags. must be stark. staring mad! minerals, Included in the flight to the Simple as that. Equinox is the has been has been comet is the intriguing coffee best thing this side of Sorcery. hollowed out game. The pilot's well-being It's the first major project for into a huge level must be kept as high new programmer Raffaele mining complex. i as possible by drinking Cecco. And it looks as if he's The complex is got a bright future as bright sectioned into eight Har This part of the as the excellent graphics levels. game involved featured in the game Gaining access to the the unlikely In the interminable depths of different levels is achieved with space, Asteroid Sury-Ani 7 numbered level passes. P. It floats majestically in a 400 In order to obtain canisters hundred year orbit. and level passes, your energy, Radio-active canisters that dedicated disposal droid must prolonged were due for disposal now lie use various tools, machines contact with exposed in Sury-Ani 7's mining and components which are an alien will complex. The human scattered around the complex. result in the loss of inhabitants have now departed You'll need to be able to one of these lives. and only you a disposal survive the harmful aliens on Each level contains a droid — remain to dispose of each of the numerous levels, canister, Disposal Chute the canisters before they and collect a pass on each onei and Level Pass. You will become critical and annihilate You begin the game with have to collect the level pass in the whole complex three lives and any contact with order to access the next level. Asteroid Sury-Ani 7, rich in an alien will reduce your As you search each level for these items your time will elapse. To enable you to find the Radio-Active Canisters and Level Passes you will need to use the tools and objects that have been scattered around each level. BE coffee. in command The usual combination of arcade adventure and shoot 'em up had this reviewer hooked right from the start But blasting everything in sight won't get you very far. You have to learn the right combination of objects. Graphics Sound  Value Playability C+VG8 C+VG HIT! MIKRO-GEN MEKRO-GEN CONTINUED FROM PAGE 30 CONTINUES ON PAGE 35 "


"Another great new game from Bubble Bus VARLAKS By Stephen Crow Author of Wizard's Lair SPECTRUM 48K COMMODORE & AMSTRAD Stephen Crow Programmer of the Year C+VG Golden Joysticks GAME THE MONTH bubble bus software 87 High Street, Tonbridge, Kent TN9 1RX Telephone: 0732 355962 Telex: 95151 "


"|C+VG JUN software REVIEWS 13 PSI 5 TRADING COMPANY MED SER DA ? Cance Bant Examine PolarP6RFP8X! Fone Heapons Department Candidates elements of an adventure game. But graphically they are quite different. However, both are fiendishly difficult to play and vastly entertaining. Graphics Sound Value Playability 20 92 A Bestick 18 Selesarsanas nalfie unt of Machine: CBM 64 qualifications, background and Supplier: US Gold/ experience. But make a wise choice. Each crew member will Accolade react differently under pressure. Price: .95/.95 disk As Captain you sit at the It's the 35th Century and space starfreighter's console. The pirates and marauders have ship's view of space-either almost brought the Parvin fore or aft is displayed in a Frontier to the brink of window at the top left-hand starvation. Supplies must get corner of the screen. Another through to the settlers and window at the top right displays entrepreneurs who are the various crew members and exploiting the rich mining their departments. deposits in this wild space The bottom half of the screen frontier. is taken up with a vast amount of As the captain of a information about the ship and starfreighter belonging to the messages from crew members PSI5 Trading Company you are flashed up on screen. must make sure supplies get As the starfreighter sets out through on its hazardous journey, it's not First you have to choose your long before hostile ships are course, cargo and payment for launching an attack. the job. The higher the price for Not only must you monitor all the job, the more danger and the controls but also keep in difficulty you'll face. constant contact with all Next you have to get a crew of departments, issue orders, react five together. They are a to crises and above all KEEP weapons expert, chief engineer, CALM, even when your crew are repair expert, navigation officer air expert navigation officer panicking. and scanner. The crew can be PS/5 Trading Company selected from 30 different sounds a little bit like Elite. applicants, each with his, her or Both are space shoot 'em its own identity. ups, involving The faces of the six candidates trading and for each department are have displayed on the screen. You can check each one's name, age, BARRETTI SPEAB INTRUDER ALERT Kare 100ting) STOPONE TEST on Titanio SEBE Machine: CBM 64 Supplier: Ocean Price: .95 This, according to Ocean, is \"an all out attack\" by the little green men from our favourite TV series. Just in case you were one of the few people \"unfortunate\" enough to have missed the show, the plot is utterly elementary Far, far away, there was a planet which was inhabited by green creatures with an enormous appetite. After a couple of thousand years of munching away, the food suddenly ran out. Not being the sort of race to go without elevenses, the lizards decided to go out for a meal. Trouble is, \"out\" is Earth, and the human race the main course! You take on the role of Donovan-reluctant hero and leader of the infamous however resistance organisation. Being the hero type reluctant-you decide that it'd be a fairly reasonable idea to get onto the aliens' mother ship and disable it. The game has some good if not exactly attractivegraphics, and some nice sound effects. The first obstacle had this reviewer thoroughly stumped. You begin the game stuck between two yellow flashing SECURITY RED walls, and there you stay, unless you can figure out exactly what you have to do. (I couldn't). letters from the \"V\"-ian On the lower half of the screen alphabet. This made everything is a panel displaying various ratherless accurate than trialspecial functions and messages. and-error. This is really the crux of the The thought of the Editor whole game. By using the finding me in such a sorry joystick to select certain icons, position gave me enough you can break the security codes courage to phone Ocean. which keep doors locked, and Apparently, by moving to a operate the bomb timing certain icon, and pressing the devices. The problem is that the icons mode\" You are then presented don't have anything as helpful as a diagram of a bomb on by a series of seven digits. By them. Instead, they are made up of fire button, you enter a \"security using the joystick in another strange way, you are supposedly-able to align all of these digits so they look the same. This, hopefully will open the door. If you are a codecracking type of genius, you'll probably enjoy the game. =   Graphics Sound Value Playability CONTINUED FROM PAGE 33  CONTINUES ON PAGE 37 "


"C+VG JUN software REVIEWS 14 BBCBBCBBCBBCBBCBBC O p erating person Machine: BBC Supplier: Blue Ribbon Price: .50 Astro Plumber is one of four new games from Blue Ribbon which, together with a drawing program, are also available together on a disk costing .95. In Astro Plumber you must fly around a cavern sealing leaks in the air pipes with your plasma laser gun. You mustn't run out of air or fuel in the process, and you have to dodge the hostile inhabitants of the cave. You aren't told which keys control the game and you're likely to lose several lives while you work out that in addition to right, left, up and down you can also jump pressing Return, and that leaks are sealed using Shift. It's not an easy game to play. You have to work out your route round each screen carefully and you run very quickly out of air. But the graphics are only average and it's the sort of arcade action you've seen many times before. Frankly, even for .50, it's dull BBCBBC BBCBBC VASTRO PLUMBERV RAVAGE V Machine: BBC Supplier: Blue Ribbon Price: .50 You are innocently cruising through space, doing no harm to anyone, when suddenly your scanner warns you that spaceships are approaching fast. You look ahead and see them soaring towards you. In another second, fireballs are hurtling straight at your ship... In this relaxed space adventure, you choose your own level of play, from dead easy at level 1 all the way up to fast and furious at 9. You can also choose your own keys, although you will probably feel most comfortable with the default keys: 1, Z, X and Return In the slower modes, you virtually have to go out and find the hostile spaceships by looking for them on the scanner then steering towards them. Once in sight, you must manoeuvre until they are centred in your gunsights, then you hit Return to fire and destroy them. Graphics Sound Value Playability JOEY -eBBCBBCBBCBBC Machine: BBC Supplier: Blue Ribbon Price: .50 Joey is a kangaroo at considerable risk from aggressive aboriginals throwing boomerangs at him and nasty things (which look like more of Blue Ribbon's favourite moving eyes) roaming at large. Joey can fight back by hopping about the screen destroying boomerangs. The game can be played at slow, medium or fast speed, and you can choose to start at any of the nine screens. According to Blue Ribbon, once you've completed all the screens, boulders start to fall, but I used up my five lives before I could find out exactly what this meant. The graphics are only average, except for Joey, an endearing little chap who hops and scurries about the screen in a very kangaroo-like way and looks at you with reproachful eyes and despondent flattened ears when he loses a life. Graphics Sound Value Playability 00 Graphics Sound Value Playability ON COCO00 CO BBC BBCBBCBBCBBC BBC 10 COMPUTER KITS VOL II don't like some of them. But ten games for .95 isn't bad, is it? Machine: Amstrad Supplier: Beau Jolly Price: .95 Realtime, Tasket and Hewson are just three of the famous names on this, the second, Computer Hits tape. The Amstrad machine have been starved of good games lately. but this stops that The games on this double cassette pack are: 3D Starstrike (Realtime), Super Pipelinell (Taskset), Technician Ted (Hewson), Android II (Vortex). Mutant Monty (Artic,) Codename MAT (Micromega) Moon Buggy (Anirog), World Cup (Artic), Gauntlet (Micropower), and last but not least Fantasia Diamond (Hewson). A real bargain even if you n/a n/a Graphics Sound Value Playability TECHNICIAN TED KELAYER: 1-4 00215 SCREEN: 1 MUDL MUDL MUDL MUDL 59999996 The Photocopier Ft + +++++++++++++++ +++ tetetet++++++++++++++ Tasks Completed @ Time @9:41 CONTINUED FROM PAGE 33 CONTINUES ON PAGE 40 "


"GAMES REALTIME SOFTWARE STARSTRIKE I SHADED 3D RET SPECTRUM / AMSTRAD .95 Mail order or Access telephone orders Tel: 0532 458948 Cheques, P.O.s payable to: Realtime Games Software Ltd., Prospect House, 32 Sovereign Street, Leeds LS1 4BJ Send for product list for: Spectrum * C64 * Amstrad * QL "


"by Jon Williams w Swordfight 1 Crossbow,, Quarterstaff_ Ball & Chain, A Pike Staff Archery Axe Man Swordfight 2 COMMODORE 64/128 .95 Cassette .95 Diskette able for Amstrad Also available 5416128 164/664 / 61 A Glorious Feast of Medieval Combat iombat mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmly ENGLISH SOFTWARE... 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gardens, Manchester M60 1BX. Tel: 061-835 1358 TELEX: 8950511 ONEONEG Ref: 14797001 Distributed by U.S. Gold 021-359 8881 WALIOCHAGU "


"SHEKHANA COMPUTER SERVICES Present the following special offers to C+VG readers E Our Price Our Price  DEB Our Price 9.98 9.98 BATMAN 7.95  ERRERO 7.95 Games at top Disks at bottom SPECTRUM+++ RRP QUAZATRON 8.95 MAX HEADROOM 9.95 BOMB JACK 7.95 ELITE 14.95 COMMANDO 7.95 LORD OF THE WINGS 15.95 FAIRLIGHT 9.95 BACK TO SCHOOL 6.95 DIARY OF ADRIAN MOLE 9.95 TOMAHAWK 9.95 SWORDS AND SORCERY SWEEVO'S WORLD 7.95 EXLPLODING FIST 8.95 ROCK AND WRESTLE 8.95 WHO DARES WINS 2 8.95 CYBERUN GUN FRIGHT 9.85 GYROSCOPE 8.95 STAR STRIKE IT 7.95 SOUTHERN BELLE BOUNDER ARTISTII 14.95 FIGHTER PILOT BLOCKBUSTERS GD. RUN 9.95 PING PONG 7.95 THE PLANETS SPITFIRE 40 WORM IN PARADISE PRICE OF MAGIC SOLD A MILLION 2 SKYFOX BATMAN SUPERBOWL RED HAWK BIGGLES TURBO ESPRIT ALIEN HIGHWAY ENIGMA FORCE SABOTEUR CRITICAL MASS WAY OF THE TICED STRIKE FORCE HARRIER \"GHOST AND GOBBLINS EMPIRE QUESTPROBE THE ART STUDIO (OCP) YIE AR KUNG FU YOUNG ONES MOVIE *COMIC BAKERY WINTER GAMES B. MCGUIGANS BOXING KUNG FU MASTER HEAVY ON THE MAGICK CRASH SMASHERS (4 Games) REBEL PLANET CAULDRON II BOUNCES R  2  ER8888888 EIODLON n g- 8888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888888 --= = ==== =nnut-it-itFIGHT NIGHT 14.95 LAW OF THE WEST 14.95 MASQUARADE 14.95 BOUNCES Games at top Disks at bottom AMSTRAD*** RRP BOUNDER 9.95 SPINDIZZY TAU CETI 9.95 MONOPOLY 9.95 TOMAHAWKS BOMB JACK ELITE SOLD A MILLION 2 MELTDOWN THE PRICE OF MAGICK SWORDS AND SORCERY \"GHOST AND GOBBLINS HEAVY ON THE MAGICK ROCK AND WRESTLE TURBO ESPRIT SABATEUR CRITICAL MASS ALIEN HIGHWAY CONTAMINATION ZOIDS GREEN BERET SKYFOX HITCH-HIKERS (6128 or 8256) LORD OF THE RINGS 16.95 WINTER GAMES 9.95 LASER BASIC 14.95 COMMANDO 9.95 MINI OFFICE 2 14.95 WAY OF THE TIGER *KUNG FU MASTER 9.95 BATMAN REBEL PLANET RED HAWK 9.95 TOMAHAWKS (d) MONOPOLY (d) ELITE (d) 17.96 3D CLOCK CHESS (8256) 19.95 BRIDGE PLAYER (d) (8256) 19.95 SPIN DIZZY (d) 14.95 BBC ELECTRON*** RRP FLEET ST. EDITOR (40 OR 80T) COMMANDO BBC ELEC BOMB JACK (BBC)  Games at top Disks ar bottom COMMODORE*** RRP THE PRICE OF MAGICK 9.95 SIZZLER (4 Games) 9.95 LAW OF THE WEST SILENT SERVICE MAX HEADROOM KNIGHT GAMES BOMB JACK \"GHOST AND GOBBLINS LORD OF THE RINGS BIGGLES SPINDIZZY EMPIRE REBEL PLANET HEAVY ON THE MAGICK GOLF CONS SET (C) QUESTPROBE ROCK AND WRESTLE SUMMER GAMES 2 BOUNDER FAIRLIGHT URIDIUM RED HAWK DOOMS DARK REVENGE STARSHIP ANDROMEADA GREEN BERET STAR QUAKE HARD BALL ZOIDS SOUTHERN BELLE CRUSADE IN EUROPE CAULDRON II ABC PANDORA STRIKE FORCE HARRIER 9.95 HOCUS FOCUS 8.96 ELITE 14.99 ASYLUM 9.96 INTER SOCCER 14.98 PS15 TRADING COMPANY WORM IN PARADISE AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT SUPERBOWL WAY OF THE TIGER WINTER GAMES SPY V. SPY 2 SKYFOX FIGHTER PILOT SPITFIRE 40 FIGHT NIGHT CRITICAL MASS B. MCGUIGAN BOXING ANY MASTERTRONIC TITLE QUICK SHOT IT GOONIES KORONIS RIFT ACE DESERT FOX SOLD A MILLION I EXPLODING FIST MERCENARY YIE AR KUNG FU F-15 STRIKE EAGLE COLOSSUS CHESS 4.0 AMAZON WOMEN 9.95 ALTERNATE REALITY TIGERS IN THE SNOW 9.98 **DISKS *** ALTERNATE REALITY 19.95 GAME MAKER 19.95 STARSHIP ANDROMEADA 14.95 GOLF CONSTRUCTION SET 14.95 \"GHOST AND GOBBLIN ARCHON II CRUSADE IN EUROPE ALTER EGO LORD OF THE RINGS BOMB JACK KUNG FU MASTER HITCHKIKERS GUIDE PSI-5 TRADING COMPANY TEMPLE OF ASPHAI TRIOLOGY 14.95 ELITE WINTER GAMES 14.95 SUMMER GAMES I EXODUS (ULTIMA IIT) NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN Our Price oooooooooooo 88888888888888888888888888 Goccio ONNON BB 888888 SABOTIREAN BOXING Our Price RRP 9.95 9.95 IMPOSSIBLE MISSION co SSR 19.95 EXPLODING FIST BBCELES) LORD OF THE RINGS (BBC) COMMANDO (d). THE PRICE OF MAGICK BRUCE LEE (BBC) ATARIE TALES OF BETA LYRA THE PRICE OF MAGICK STEVE DAVIES SNOOKER WORM IN PARADISE MERCENARY SIDE WINDER SPY V SPY SPY HUNTER TIGERS IN THE SNOW (d) TALES OF BETA LYRA d) THE PAWN IST ONIT ALTERNATE REALITY d) KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT (d) KORONIS RIFT (d) SIDE WINDER d. SUMMER GAMES 1 (d) MSX+++ WAY OF THE TIGER ALIEN & NIGHTSHADE KNIGHT LORE BOUNDER THE PRICE OF MAGICK ANY KONAMI CARTRIGE C16: COMMANDO BOMB JACK KUNG FU KID WINTER EVENTS WINTER SPORTS  -*- 14.95 14.95 14.95 Our Price 14.99 14.95 SHEKHANA the best mail order service available 88888888888888888888 ZOIDS SociON NON 888888888888 HARD RAILING COMPANY Our 17.98 82 Enchong Access and Visa card hotline ring: 01-631 4627 For MAIL ORDER please send cheque/PO to: S.C.S. (Dept C+VG) PO Box 394 London N15 6JL Telephone: 01-800 3156 P&P included in UK. Europe add l per tape. Elsewhere at cost. SAE for list. If you would like to pick up your discount software please bring your copy of this advert to: Compucentre, Unit 5 221 Tottenham Court Road London W1 (near Goodge St tube station) Open six days a week 10.00am 18.00pm Credit card orders despatched same day subject to availability. * Please ring to confirm availablity. "


"C+VG JUN Software REVIEWS 15 SPINDIZZY BUT Machine: CMB64 Supplier: Activision Price: .95/.95 (tape/disc) Spindizzy was originally an Amstrad only release. Now, though, Paul \"Confuzion\" Shirley has converted the program for the 64 and Spectrum. An off-shoot of the popular Marble Madness style game found in arcades, Spindizzy provides fast and furious stick-waggling, along with some fairly sticky \"lateral thinking\" problems! After loading, the screen displays a list of options, such as fast or slow movement and one or two players. You are Gerald the Upside-Down Pyramid honestly! However, you can transform youself into a pink ball or gyroscope at a touch of the \"I\" button. Your aim in life is to collect as many jewels as possible. They are scattered all over a attempt at the troublesome bizarre land, made from blocks, part! wafer-thin water and lots of In a frantic attempt to get out traps! Everything is against the of trouble, you may be tempted clock to use the incredible A useful feature, which could acceleration offered by the fire easily have been omitted, i. the button. way in which yo can change The maze which can be your viewpoint. The screen is viewed from the \"map\" option presented in much the same contains lots of puzzles, way as the familiar Ultimate including lifts, jumps and the layout; a view from a point rather wonderful lakes. There slightly above and away from are rooms which sit atop a the action. As there are so deep blue \"sheet\". They're many different types of room probably the toughest part of many with a large and the whole game, as precise complex arrangements of movement is essential if you're blocks inside it's extremely going to make it through. helpful to be able to check the Spindizzy is a great situation from four angles. conversion. With the interest of When your character dies, it a decent challenge, and will re-appear on the last block entertaining game-play, it you reached safely. This makes should be a hit game play a little easier; when you are trying to negotiate a Graphics sticky corner, nothing is worse Sound than having to complete the Value first half of a puzzle every time you die, before having another Playability DU BOOM -KIREL HOCUS FOCUS Machine: Spectrum/C64 Machine: Spectrum There are various objects Supplier: Quicksilva Supplier: Activision Kirel should collect. Price: .95 Price: .95 Cakes help him to destroy After producing the highly After a relatively quite time, monsters, arrows give him successful Max Headroom, Addictive Games are back on extra bridges, sweets and bags Electronic Pencil split up and a the scene with the excellent of sugar restore stamina and new company emerged, Binary Kirel, a nifty 70 screen, three collecting balls give extra time Design dimensional arcade offering But beware the This is Binary Design's first Sources at Addictive say this stamina-sapping monsters that I have seen and it's all is the first of what is hoped to which infest the screens, and about Jeremy the 'Glowing be one new game released the pyramids which are punk reporter. The basic idea is each month. If the same impassable. that the paper you work for standard is kept up it should beA nice part of the game is the called the \"Shocker,\" hasn't an interesting summer. way you can rotate screens had a great story for weeks, so The idea is to move Kirel, a through 90 and 180 degrees. the bottom left hand corner. when the Ed hears about a cute little chap, around the Pressing the space bar finds The squiggly line coming from nutty Professor's inventions, he screens to find the transporter Kirel for you (assuming you've the main graphics is the time sends Jeremy out. networks, grab energy supplies lost him) fuse. The screen layout is clear Simple? Oh no, because the and defuse bombs. Professor has created some By moving blocks around, and uncluttered. The screen Graphics mutants which try their best to Kirel can build staircases, move number is in the top lelt corner Sound hinder your quest by pinching obstructions, and make holes and block indicator top right. your film. This means you have to enable him to exit from the Value Lives, cakes, bridges and screen and onto the next. to go back to the darkroom, energy levels can be found in Playability reload your camera and start again. But, you don't seem to be told when your films have gone, so it makes it a bit harder The graphics in this game made by eyes pop out. Good? No, terrible. The punk looks more like a mutant than the mutants do. Overall this game is not what I expected it looks like something that was written in 1982 rather than 1986, Graphics Sound Value  Playability  CONTINUED FROM PAGE 36 CONTINUES ON PAGE 43  5  "


"THE TOP PEOPLES CHOICE MAIL-SOFT 125 6.50 7.25 550 725 725 5.75 7.25 7.25 725 725 725 OOPS 7.25 125 125 725 725 650 550 7.25 * COMMODORE * SPECTRUM + AMSTRAD + Yle Ar Kung Fu 6.50 Turbo Esprit 6.50 Bounder Kung Fu Master 7.25 Critical Mass 6.50 Tomahawk Bomb Jack 7.25 Sabateur Green Beret Elite 1125 Quazatron 650 Elite-Cass. 11.00 Hard Ball 7.25 Worm In Paradise 7.25 Spin Dizzy 7.25 Skyfox The Planets Critical Mass 6.50 Undium Batman Sold A Million il 7.25 Superman Skytox 5.50 Batman 6.20 Biggles Lord Of Rings 11.25 Price of Magick Lord of the Rings 1120 Sweevos World 575 Ghost + Goblin 6.70 Mugsy Revenge 7.25 Enigma Force 2.25 Swords and Sorcery 7.50 Starship Andromeda 7.25 Spitfire 40 725 Sabatour 7.25 Sold A Million 2 Who Dares Wins II Tomahawk Disk 11.95 Desert Fox Artisti 11.25 Monopoly 725 Silent Service Bomb Jack 5.75 Heavy on the Magick Soyv Spy 2 West Bank 5.75 Bomb Jack Winter Games 7.25 Red Hawks 7.25 Commando Max Headroom 7.25 Elite 1125 * BBC * The Price of Magic Winter Games 5.75 Strike Force Harrier 7.40 Sold A Million 7.25 Commando 5.75 Commando 7.40 Commando 7.25 Transformers 5.75 Bruce Lee 7.40 Rock n Wrestle Gun Fright 7.25 Exploding Fist 740 Heavy on the Magick Tau Ceti 7.25 Vip A/ |  Fu Paradroid 5.75 Tomahawk 7.25 Combat Lynxs Electra Glide The Price of Magic 725 Dr Who 10.50 Superbowl Rebel Planet 7.25 Fleet St Editor 29.95 Law of the West Fighter Pilot 5.75 Lord Of The Rings Bounder Biggles 725 Beach Head 6.99 Empire 7.25 Max Headroom 7.25 ATARI Alter Ego-Disk Southern Belle 5.75 Mercenary 7.25 The Force BlockGold Run 7.25 Mercenary Disk 9.75 The Way Of The Tiger Yie Ar Kung Fu 575 Spyv Spy 7.25 PSI-5 Trading Desert Rats 225 Alternate Reality Disk 16.95 Knight Games 7.25 Sold A Million 2 7.25 Tales of Beta Lyra 7.25 Fairlight 725 Way 01 Tiger 7.25 Price of the Magick Hard Ball Disk 11.25 Ramba 5.75 Worm in Paradise Southern Belle 5.95 Mugsys Revenge Diary Of Adnan Mole Saboteur Superbowl 7.25 * MSX * Golf Cons Set 10.50 B. McGuigans Boxing 5.75 Bounder 725 Critical Mass 6.50 Bounder 5.75 Way Of Tiger Rambo 550 Heavy on the Magick Alien 8 Colossus Chess 4.0 7.25 Rock n Wrestle 5.50 Knightlore Lord Of Rings Disk 1495 Ghost + Goblin 5.75 The Price of Magic 750 Mercenary Fairlight 725 Hypershot Joystick 14.95 Ghost Goblins 725 Questprobe C16* Kung Fu Master-Disk 11.25 Gyroscope Steve Davis Snooker 5.75 Spitfire 40 725 Impossible Mission 5.75 Beach Head 5.75 Laser Basic 11 25 Exploding Fist 6.75 Thai Boxing 4.99 FA Cup 5.75 Beach Head Il 5.75 Kung Fu Kid 4.99 Red Hawk 725 Star Quake 5.75 Commando 5.75 Spin Dizzy 7.25 Star Strike II 5.95 Airwolf 5.75 Post & Packing included in UK Europe add  per tape. Cheques/P.O. to: MAIL-SOFT.PO Box 589. London N15 6JJ. Access and Visa card orders accepted 7.25 7.25 16.95 725 7.25 The Explosive Joystick from Cheetah 650 725  Compatible with ZX Spectrum, Commodore 64, Vic 20. Amstrad, Atari, MSX, etc.  Four extremely sensitive ONLY fire buttons  Uniquely styled hand grip.  Auto fire switch Value at .75 . 12 months warranty Pecand VAT Douage paring event E s co Design Chain products Home 28.95 Cheetah Marketing CHEETAH MARKETING LTD I WILLOWBROOK SCIENCE PARK CRICKHOWELL ROAD ST MELLONS CARDIFF TEL CARDIFF10222) 77733 TELEX 497455 SOMETIMES A CONCEPTUALISATION CRISIS CAN SPOIL YOUR WHOLE AFTERNOON The key to taut, intrusive advertising is an exact yet stimulating brief. Strutt, Whelk, Pozer, Sousé Incorporated Practitioners in Advertising FIRST, IDENTIFY THE KEY ADVERTISING MESSAGES THE SNOW QUEEN An unusually intriguing illustrated text adventure Program by St Bride's Available for Spectrum and Commodore Release date: May 1986 Price: .95 (cassette pack) PS: Client MD-Vicky Came wants us to include her dog. I told her there's no way you stick client's bloody dog in bloody ad, but she kept going on about Dulux. Disabuse her nicely, would you? RUNDI Dominic We got the Mosaic account. They're the software Good news! people who did Enk the Viking and Adnan Mole. Apparently in the autumn they're launching & Mole follow-up (the first one's sold over 100,000 copies to date) and a game based on The Archers here's the tricky Meanwhile, we need to rush out an ad about their new game which launches in May It's based on The Snow Queen, that rather sister Hans Andersen tale about the little lad with the shard of evil mirror in his heart. It's an illustrated text adventure (whatever that is) and the player has to help this girl Gerda rescue the boy. But she's not easy to advise because she's only young and sometimes bit gets the fatty end of the stick Inckove, eh? The program (programme) has been written by St Bride's, a distinctly eccentric bunch of people in Ireland who have a reputation for producing rather intriguing software staff and also run a sort of fake boarding school Evidently they're laterale, which I gather is quite a plus in this field Anyway, could you throw together some concepts while I'm in Cannes? Art Department are looking out some whirry assbrushed robot pics, so basically once you've knocked the foregoing into 30 or 40 compelling words we're in business Fama Ciaou THE SNOW QUEEN MANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN MOSAIC 44 Don't wait for the ad. THE SNOW QUEEN is available now. PUBLISHING I Dunbuted by WHS Distributors. St John's House, East Street Leicester LEI ENE 05:33 551/06) and available nationwide from stores of class and distaction "


"C+VG COMPETITION CALLDRON TE The entries will be judged by Steve Brown, the man who created the model for our front cover, designed the graphics for the Cauldron games AND who uses the very same Windsor and Newton paints the winners will be getting Closing date for the contest is June 16th, normalC+VG rules apply and the editor's decision is final. DONT forget to lix the entry coupon to your entry, tell us your age, and what computer your own. Now get on with it! ubble Bubble! The Pumpkin is back and looking for trouble! Yes, the long awaited follow up to Palace Software's Cauldron is out now on the 64 -with other versions following along soon. You can read the review elsewhere in this issue--and we've got a special pull out poster map of the game next issuebut right here and now we're offering you the chance to win a VERY special Cauldron II prize. This is an amazing thing. It comes in the shape of a golden Pumpkin mounted on a nicely polished wooden base with a plaque, which could soon be engraved with YOUR name if you're our overall winner. The overall winner will also get a Windsor and Newton acrylic paint kit complete with brushes. There will be other winners in three different age groups, Under-10,10-15 and 15 and over. These lucky people will also get a Windsor and Newton outfit. 20 runners-up will get the special Palace Software package -containing Cauldron and Cauldron II. What do you have to do to win one of these amazing prizes? Simple. Just draw or paint us a scene inspired by the Cauldron games. There's only one rule--you've got to get a Pumpkin into your drawing! C+VG/PALACE SOFTWARE CAULDRON COMPETITION Name Address Age. Computer owned (tick box) Spectrum Amstrad C640 "


"ACTIONS ACTION: ACTIOR: Pages Packed with all the action and atmosphere of the movie, Biggles is a multipart game that'll keep you on the edge of your seat right to the end of your mission. Spectrum. Commodore 64. Amstrad CPC .95 tape Commodore disk .95 . Amstrad disk .95 SPENDER 87302 Biggles t-shirts, pot's scarves, button badges and Eckers available ask your retailer or call us 22803 81898 DYNAMITE DAN DYNAMITE DAN II Dynamite Dan's back-and how! There's 200 screens of challenging gameplay, simply crawling with intelligent aliens out to trap you, to keep you on your toes (which will be tapping like mad to the amazing music, too!) Spectrum .95 tape SCOREC00029 Los SIGGU LECT||||||| A stron ACTION REFLEX The brand-new, all action, Medusa label launches out with a real smasher! It's a frantic, multilevel. Beat the clock ball game-and where did you see that red-and-white chequered ball before...? Spectrum .95 tape ---------O <<<<<<<<>>>>>>>> T O ARRIE STRIKE FORCE HARRIER Fly by the seat of your pants at the controls of the Harrier, one of the world's most exciting combat aircraft. But beware of enemy ground and air attack as you battle your way to your ultimate target. Spectrum Amstrad CPC.BBC/Electron .95 tape BBC disk .95 . Amstrad disk .95 ORGAS Purnell Book Centre, Paulton, Bristol BS18 5LQ Tel: (0761) 413301, "


"YOU READ THE BOOK NOW PLAY THE GAME! 3 : 5 PLANET Based on a concept by Steve Jackson & Tan Livingstone and story by Robin Waterfield Available on Commodore 64, .95 Amstrad and Spectrum 48K 4.95 Cassette S Disk & Disk $ 14\" Game written bs.denturesoft Distributed by U.S. Gold BBC Electron (Text Only) .95 Cassette S Available from your local Computer Store in May As the might of the alien Arcadian Empire tightens its hold on our galaxy, the leaders of the secret Earth organization. SAROS, gather their slender resources into one last daring and foolhardy mission to strike at the heart of the invaders home planet. YOU are their last hope. Equipped with a forbidden laser sword, your mission is to seek out the underground resistance and piece together the vital code you need to destroy the enemy. But time is running out and only YOU stand in the way of the Arcadians' complete domination U.S. Gold Limited. Unit 10. The Parkway Industrial Centre, of the galaxy! Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 ILY. Telephone: 021-359 8881 Telex: 337268 TM denotes a trademark of Penn Books Ltd Produced under line from Steve Jackson and lan is in the "


"C+VG JUN Software REVIEWS 6 OF THE STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER EGGS OF | PHANTOM DEATH ASTEROIDS Machine: Enterprise Supplier: Entiesoft Price: .95 The Eggs of Death aren't those horrible pickled things you see in pubs but are found in the hatching chambers of Mortuus Ova, the second stage of this game. The first stage is getting down to the planet Natch-and the aliens don't intend to make it easy for you. If you shoot the first one you're safe to proceed, but let it slip by and you face two of them. As each alien has a different attack plan it makes for a lively zap'em up. The chambers are the main course, a variation on the classic Panic as you run around trying to hammer hatching eggs, but instead of ladders there are sliding floor sections which can be moved in any of four directions to link levels. There are also power doors but you can only recharge when a monster is about to emerge, and if it escapes, you'll have to dodge it as it leaves. For dessert there's a Defender-style flight to the next chamber through the Rainbow Caverns, a sort of Jeff Minter candy stripe fantasy. At last an original Enterprise game that really cuts it. Graphics Sound Value Playability Machine: CBM 64/128 Supplier: Mastertronic Price: .99 The plot of Phantom of the Asteroids is about as threadbare as they come. But the game is fun to play and the music by Rob Hubbard is great. For .99 it's got to be a hit. But first the plot. An asteroid is hurtling towards the earth. Our precious planet is at risk. Your mission is to destroy the asteroid and the bloodthirsty phantoms which infest it. To destroy this lump of space rock you must collect 36 crates of uranium which are scattered around. Once you have collected these in one place you have five minutes to reach the teleport to escape the ensuing explosion You control a spaceman through the cavernous asteroid, zapping the phantoms who attack you, and avoiding the three types of force wall which bar your way. Poisonous plants also lurk in the asteroid. Avoid them at all costs. Energy and oxygen supplies are scattered throughout the asteroid Good fun, fair graphics and great music. Phantom of the Asteroids is a neat and cheap treat. Graphics Sound Value Playability Machine: BBC move a +, using the usual up. Supplier: CDS down, left and right keys, to the exact spot where you mean to Price: .95 hit it, after due consideration of Snooker might, like darts, seem all the angles. Then you select an unpromising subject for a type of spin, the power of the computer game. How can you shot, and press Space for fire! substitute screen and keyboard Off zooms the white ball, fortable and cue? cannoning into your target ball, Undaunted, CDS has come up which, if you're a novice, with a pretty good attempt promptly bounces off at a which retains the need for some completely unexpected angle. basic skills, like an eye for angles Then, if you're playing against and knowledge of the effect of 'Steve', you sit back and admire top and bottom spin. It's not his well-judged and wellperfect I doubt that any home executed shot. comuter's graphics capabilities The normal rules of snooker could cope with the fine angles apply, and there's even an of real-life snooker but it's option for making your more than adequate for a opponent play again if he or she computer game, and at the very commits a foul stroke. The game least it teaches you the rules. keeps a running tally of both The snooker table, complete players' scores, plus the current with pockets, and balls, is break.. displayed on the screen. You The graphics aren't bad, the have the option of playing balls knock against each other against Steve Davis (The and off the cushion in a computer. Apt, don't you reasonably convincing manner, think?), a human opponent, although the computer makes a yourself, or even setting Steve sad job of the clunk! you would to play Steve. normally expect to hear.. Next, you select skill level If you're hooked on Pot Black (1-9), and table speed (slow, but can't afford a table of your normal or fast). At the lower skill own, this is probably the next levels, Steve makes an best thing astonishing number of foul shots, obviously assuming that Graphics as a beginner you need a bit of Sound encouragement. Value To play, you select the ball you want to hit with the cue ball and Playability ONGO con IROBOTO IWO JIMA Machine: CBM 64 insensitivity inevitably arise. the American forces and the With the Falklands conflict so computer the Japanese. You Supplier: PSS fresh in many people's minds. take it in turns with the computer Price: .99 especially those who lost to give orders, move units The first thing which strikes you relatives, it might have been in around and attack about Iwo Jima is the wonderful better taste if John Bethall and The screen display is a map of artwork on the cassette cover. If PSS had steered clear of the the island showing airfields, you've been wracking your subject. Still, everybody makes mountains, villages, minefields brains wondering where you've money out of war. and scrubland. Various seen it before, just go back In 1945 US Marines fought a windows display specific through your collection of costly and bloody battle with the information about the state of C+VGs. We originally Japanese to capture the Pacific play. commissioned the artwork for island of Iwo Jima. The death To be honest I found reading our December cover to illustrate toll and casualty statistics on the author's notes about the a totally different game. both sides were shocking About game more interesting than Iwo Jimais designed and 7,000 Americans died and more playing it. written by John Bethell, whose than 17,000 wounded in 36 days last offering was Falklands '82 of fighting. Of the 22,000 Graphics It's always difficult deciding Japanese troops defending the Sound what is suitable for a war game, island, just 216 survived. Value computer or otherwide. Iwo Jima is a simulation of Questions of taste and that battle in which you control Playability Machine: Spectrum Suppplier: Bug-Byte Price: .95 At first I thought it was a deliberate plot to confuse me. It said quite clearly use the Zand X keys to move left and righton the cassette inlay. But it would not work. It was only when I checked the instruction on the game itself that I discovered it was the Q and W keys. A bad mark Having said that, Roboto is quite an entertaining little game. The idea is to guide Roboto, a laser armed robot, through 51 rooms of a power station, destroying power orbs and solving puzzles and tricks Good fun for an hour or two. co Graphics Sound Value Playability NO CO "


"THE SOFTWARE CHART +0 Hot off the presses is the latest C + VG Gallup Software Top 30. It's the most accurate and up to date chart currently published in Britain. Just one look through the latest C + VG charts will tell you which top name games are selling the quickest — making it easier for you to choose the shoot-em-up, karate game or boxing program you want. It's a knock-out. CM30 IL FORSEITS DIE THIS MONTH LAST MONTH NE  MACHINE SP, CO, MS . WEEKS IN CHART NE SP SP, AM, MS NE WOCOW EESN82  GAME Superbowl Green Beret Way of the Tiger Bomb Jack Ping Pong Last V8 Uridium Commando FA Cup Football One Man and His Droid Yie Ar Kung Fu Action Biker Rambo Comp. Hits 10 Vol 2 Formula One Simulator Computer Hits (10) Turbo Esprit Hardball BMX Racers Winter Olympics Incredible Shrinking Fireman Fairlight Winter Games Barry McGuigan World Champions Football Manager SP, CO, AM MS CO, AM CO SP CO BB C16 SP, CO, AM SP.CO, AM C16 AT SP, CO, AM BB, MS EL SP.CO, C16 AT SP, CO, AM SP, CO, AM BB, EL SP, CO, AM, MS, C16 SP, CO, AM, BB, EL  MANUFACTURER Ocean Imagine Gremlin Graphics Elite Imagine Mastertronic Hewson Consultants Elite Virgin Mastertronic Imagine Mastertronic Ocean Beau Jolly Mastertronic Beau Jolly Durell US Gold Mastertronic Tynesoft Mastertronic The Edge Epyx/US Gold Activision Addictive Games CO SP, CO, AM, C16 BB, EL C16 SP ZZ SP, CO, AM SP, CO, AM SP, CO, AM SP, CO, AM, BB, EL, C16, AT V20, DR AM CO SP SP, CO, AM SP, CO, AM, MS, C16 Spindizzy Zapp Sizzlers Movie Sky Fox Finders Keepers 25 Electric Dreams Gremlin Graphics Imagine Ariolasoft Mastertronic 15 30 22 AMSTRAD/TOP 10 SPECTRUM/TOP 10 MACHINE KEY SP SPECTRUM BB = BBC CO = COMMODORE 64 AT ATARI AM AMSTRAD EL ELECTRON C1 C16 ENT = ENTERPRISE V20 Vic 20 DR=Dragon 1 Spindizzy/Electric Dreams 2 Last V8/Mastertronic 3 Way of the Tiger/Gremlin Graphics 4 Rambo/Ocean 5 Comp Hits 10 Vol 2/Beau Jolly 6 Fairlight. The Edge 7 They Sold a Million/Hit Squad 8 Formula One/Mostertronic 9Yie Ar Kung Fu Imagine 10 Soul of a Robot/Mastertronic 1 Green Beret/Imagine 2 Superbowl/Ocean 3 Way of the Tiger/Imagine 4 Bomb Jack/Elite 5 Ping Pong/Imagine 6 Turbo Esprit Durell 7 FA Cup Football/Virgin 8 Shrinking Fireman/Mastertronic 9 Movie/Imagine 10 Barry McGuigan/Activision ATARI/TOP 10 BBC/TOP 10 CBM 64/TOP 8 1 Superbowl/Ocean 2 Uridium/Hewson Consultants 3 Hardball/US Gold 4 Ping Pong/Imagine 5 Zapp Sizzlers/Gremlin Graphics 6 FA Cup Football Virgin 7 Kane/Mastertronic 8 Phantom of the Asteroids/M'tronic 9 Fairlight/The Edge 10 Yle Ar Kung Fu/Imagine 1 Last V8/Mastertronic 2 One Man and His Droid/Mastertronic 3 Action Biker/Mastertronic 4 Chimera/Firebird 5 Fighter Pilot/Digital Integratio 6 Football Manager/Addictive Games 7 Steve Davis' Snooker/CDS 8 Spy Vs Spy 2/Databyte 9 Yie Ar Kung Fu/Imagine 10 Soul of a Robot/M'tronic 1 Commando/Elite Karate Combat/Superior 3 Winter Olympics/Tynesoft 4 Exploding Fist Melbourne House 5 Phanton Combat Doctor Soft 6 Comp Hits 10 Vol 2/Beau Jolly 7 Citadel/Superior 8 Computer Hits (10/Beau Jolly 9 Yle Ar Kung Fu/Imagine 10 Lord of the Rings/MH COMPILED BY GALLUP "


"cascade CASSETTE cascade PLUS Io SPECIAL FREE WATCH OFFER... ES cascade Sassos COMPUTER GAMES ON ONE CASSETTE YOURS fg 95 FOR COMMODORE 64 FOR .95 FDFE Only you can save Europe from destruction! Its ROCKET LAUNCH the thrilling war game that reproduces a European map More ambitious? Try rescuing your crew under an ultratast GALACTIC ATTACK and escaping back to your spaceship! Just two of the great games on your Cassette 50 featuring high resolution and user defined graphics, sprites sound and music 11 Boles 26 Dear Bark Wee 2 Galactic tac 10 Pantoon 3 Space Mission 15 S Jump 4 lutanding 16 Hanna including FREE Watch and Postage AMSTRAD CPC 464 T hin ILE 20 KEY, MULTIFUNCTION CALCULATOR WATCH 20 Motorway Avoid the rockets and anti aircraft guns and DYNAMITE the dam, only the most skilful pilots succeed. NEMESIS a sophisticated version of Othello with many colourful options and levels of play Amstrad Cassette 50 includes arcade type games, war games adventure games, logical tactical, and educational games, a flight Simulator and a business Strategy game 13 The DB 15 Trucking with every order for a Cassette 50 3-59 33 MOTOT  Normal 12 and 24 hour time mode  Calendar mode  Calculator mode  Alarm mode WORTH OVER  25 Caseball Battle 1 Plants ELECTRON Can your FORCE FIELD protect the city from Alien Attack or maybe you have the skill to DYNAMITE the dam and flood enemy headquarters Fifty different games with high speed, high resolution colour graphics user defined graphics and excellent sound and music Not to mention full use of screen modes. Fifty fast paced, fascinating games ORIC ATMOS Have a go at GALACTIC ATTACK You'll need tast reactions to beat the invaders in this all time favourite or if you prefer you can travel through space at warp factor in SPACE MISSION a realistic 3 D version of space warfare as seen from the cockpit of a spacecral. Everyone has a favourite game on Cassette 50 With fifty classic and original games featuring user defined graphics. sound effects and increasing levels of play 51 Targe X1 Even a small computer gets more from Cassette 50! You can run 39 games on just the basic 1K ZX81 while 11 more will play with the addition of a 16K expansion pack Where else could you watch your radar instruments and judge your final approach in games like RADAR LANDING a realtime flight simulator of enjoy the thrill of PSION ATTACK Logical tactical maze arcade all kinds of games on just one tape! VIC-20 SPECTRUM 16k/48k or + BBC A/B An advanced computer like the BBC demands a sophisticated games cassette That's why Cassette 50 gives you full use of screen modes with high resolution colour graphics user detined graphics excellent sound and music joystick compatibility and many high speed games HIGH RISE gives you the chance to beat a realistic roulette wheel with all the extras, and you'll need the fastest reactions of all to beat EVASIVE ACTION as you trail across the screen in a frantic search for oxygen With multilevels and superb graphics this game is totally addictive Incredibly frustrating that's the verdict on Cassette 50's FROGGER Satisfied users tellus it's one of the most challenging you'll find it's almost as good as the arcade version! CARGO has you trying desperately to complete your helicopter mission under attack Plus 48 other tactical logical and adventure games featuring multi coloured and user defined graphics, scrolling and full use of the Spectrum sound capabilities Munther 11 M ay Will it be BALLOON ODOGERS or the prize winning DUSTMAN DAN? Play these and 40 other fabulous games including many automatic double loaders on your unexpanded 3.5K VIC 20. And with an BK or 16K expansion cartridge you can choose from Badditional games like STARTREK or SKULL CASTLE Special effects user defined graphics, super sound and music ORIC 1 Cassette 50 includes PLASMA BOLTS. # superb high speed version of the classic arcade Centipede game. Watch out it's really tough! 41 Slech Pad ATARI DRAGON 32 ES Galaxy Defence Munch Munch it's the MAZE EATER! Can you eat the ghosts before they eat you? Or would you rather chance it on the MOTORWAY? Your Cassette 50 is compatible with the 400 800 and 600XL B00XL series ATARI computers Advanced features include high resolution graphics, sound music and mixed mode Screens Many games are joystick compatible If you like the light cycles of TRON, you'll love JETMOBILE a thrilling 2 player game featuring high speed graphics APPLE Cassette 50 gives you 50 great games to choose from including a classic STARTREK and BLAZING INFERNO 10 Ales Arc 21 Siop 16 Dragold 1. Internt 5D Space Mission calculator watch with every Cassette 50 EXPRESS DELIVERY-ORDER NOW! -ONLY .95 Postage FREE in UK Add .00 for overseas orders Free watch and tape will be despatched within 14 days I enclose a cheque made payable to postal order for Cascade Games Ltd or through any Post Office by TRANSCASH (Giro No. 655 6655) For even faster ordering when charging to Access, Barclaycard and Trustcard Visa use our 24 hour service. (0423) 504663. Name Address COMMODORE 64 ORIC 1 BBC AB SPECTRUM VIC 20 ZX 81 APPLE AMSTRAD ATMOS DRAGON ELECTRON Cascade Games Ltd, 13 Haywra Crescent. Harrogate, North Yorkshire, HG1 5BG, England Telephone: (0423) 504663 Registered Number 1755554 Post Code Country CVG 686 "


"ARCADE INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE JR SOFTWARE 5 Brookes Court, Baldwin Gardens, London EC1 Telephone: 01-242 5409 BEST DISCOUNTS IN BRITAIN SPECTRUM THIS MONTHS NEW NDOOR SOCCER THIS MONTH'S NEW RELEASES COMMODORE 64 30 GAMES ROCH H er Coaster MOTOR Young Dres Elektra Your unes Beach Heat Winter Olympis SPECTRUM Pago Pete Commande GREEN HET ELECTRON Suce C d h i ri) E7  RES BOMBACH SU Propong SUPERBOWL POSITRON H Slippery Sid all Lase CYBERTRON MISSION RASPUTIN 000MS DAR REVENGE CYBERIN COPTER HITS I Hunch BLAN ATARI Futte of the West \"Am Women Matum da G PACK TO THE FUTURE FA CUP VECTHON Fighter Pro GAUNTLET There HAPA ingotting FREN WINTER CAUS Bet LEGEN AMAZON WOS ROCK WESTLE 15 Str Red Moon SOLDA MILLION Psir DRYFLECTRON AT FOR WINTER GAMES HVERSPORT Technicolour Dream 12.50 Hey the Our Prati ELITE COMMAp0 MSY HYPERSPORTS 5.20 6 60 7.40 Count Down TIME TUNNEL SPIDERMAN SIMO \"Ghost Cabins The Price 6.70 6.79 Wote Street SABOTEUR COSMIC WARTBAR CORALLO FARO HYPER RALLY SCRABBLE HYPERSPORTS HYPERSPORTS Cuida Strike Force Wet Zone Wrer Olympic Treasure Hunt Monet SUPERTEST COMMANDO BONGO HAPHIRE COMMODORE WooCup Lord of the Ring Romani 6.60 9.90 110 Winter Games 7.40 Bulls Eye These titles were not released at the time of going to press. Your cheque will not be asked til they are Comp Pro o Speed Shot Analystick for Revo Con E300 JR Software Dept CVG6, 5 Brookes Court, Baldwins Gardens, EC1 Send SAE for full list stating machine All prices shown above are also our shop prices. Give us a visit in East London Overseas Orders Cheque only sterling: Europe add  per tape, elsewhere add  per tape. Send cheques postal orders to: ARCADE INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE (C&VG) 202 SHOPPING HALL, MYTRLE ROAD, EAST HAM, LONDON E6 Please do not send off for games not shown in our Ad. They may not have been released We only advertise games that are in stock GRAND SALE ES 95 VS PACVAN CARTI 15.95 DEFENDER CARTI 5 95 MOON PATROL CARTI 1595 COMMODORE ASSEMBLER TUTOR .95 MASTERMIND DATA TAPES .00 each GENERAL KNOWLEDGE 1 FILMS & TV GENERAL KNOWLEDGE 2 SPORTS GENERAL KNOWLEDGE 3 MUSIC HERBERTS DUMMY RUN .50 | -HUNCHBACK .95 .95 FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD .95 DECATHLON OCEAN 495 COMMODORE 64 SOFTWARE GANDALF [1.95 ARCADIA  95 PENETRATOR 1250 PSYTRON .50 CHUCKIE EGG .95 CHUCKIE EGG .95 ESPIONAGE ISLAND [2.95 .95 PLANET OF DEATH 0295 SHIP OF DOON LAZY.ONES 1295 SUICIDE EXPRESS [2.95 BREAK FEVER [2.95 STELLAR 7 .95 QUO VARIS E 325 ULTISYNTH f 495 1995 COMMODORE MODEMS .95 BREDENS BASIC .95 N CROSOFT MULTIPLAN .95 WICO TRACKER BALLS E14.95 EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE PHYSICS OSALEVE. MATHS DE  LOGIC SALES LTD 6 Midgate. Peterborough. Cambs 24 hour ordering on 0733 313870 SUBTERRANEAN STRYKER 1 95 GT SPACE RACE E250 CONFUZION [250 6295 CYCLONE  CODENAME MATTI  SON OF BLAGGER  M CODER I BY PSS TASWORD TWO DEVS EX MACHINA CIFT FROM THE GODS UNDERWORLDE BLOCKBUSTERS  SELECT 1 12 GAMES .95 DECATHLON OCEAN PACVAN ATARISOFT LAZY JONES BACKPACKERS GUIDE PENETRATOR GREMLINS 25.95 05 COLLINS PACK $ 11 YEARS COLLINS PADDINGTON PACK INC CAROEN GAME POONGTON A E HILL McGIBBON PACK INC COMMODORE 64 PACKS EDUCATIONAL BMX NUMBER JUMP 3D HYPER MATHS WORD WOBBLER [5.95 HILL MCGIBBON PK INC CARE JOURNEY BALLOON NG PUNCTUATION PETE SPECIAL AGENT QUANY DELIA AGE LONGMAN SOFTWARE 6 10 YEARS 695 UP N DOWN COVBAT LEADER DIG OUG PACMAN SPYS DEMI SE SPY STRIK TALLEDEGA WHIRLNURD BOUNTY BOB GROGS REVENGE DOUGHBOY FLYER FOX TONY HARTS ART MASTER MUSIC COMPOSER CART BEACH HEAD SPY SPY INTERNATIONAL SOCCER CARTI ZORK DISC ZORK (DISC ZORK DISCI STARCROSS DISC WIZARD OF WORCdo CODENAVE VATT SUSPENDED DEADLINE DISC BLACKWYTCH SPIRIT OF STONES CASSETTE 13.50 .50 .50 .95 .95 3.95 395 .95 13.95 .95 3.95   .95 305 .95 24.95 4.95 COLLINS SOFT PACK INC WHATS THE TIME KNOW YOUR TABLES FIRST NUMBERS 7.95 COLLINS SOFT PACK INC PADOINGTONS GARDEN GAME PADDINGTONS EARLY VISIT PADDINGTON AND THE DISAPPEARING IN 795 UTILITIES & PERIPHERALS ASSEMBLER 64 350 INTRO TO BASIC PT 1 CASSETTEL INTRO TO BASIC PT 2 CASSETTE E 5.95 TOUCH TYPE FUTURE FINANCE DISCI .95 ASSEMBLER DEVELOPMENT .95 1995 PROGRAMMERS REF GUIDE [ 5.00 DISC BOX LOCKABLE HOLDS 50 .95 TOGO  6.95  6.95 64 DOCTOR 500 AZIMUTH HEAD ALIGNMENT 795 WORDS ABCF OFF TRIPODS GRIFFIN SOFTWARE PACKS INC SKOOLDAZE 5 YRS & OVER BEACH HEAD WORDSPELL FAIRSHARE WORDGAMES FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD BLUE MAX GRIFFIN SOFTWARE PACK INC 5 YRS & OVER SAARE WULF TABLESUMS SUVBERFUN GEY SET 1695 SPECTRUM UTILITIES & PERIPHERALS GRIFFIN PYTHAGORAS PACK INC 10 15 YRS THEORUN OF PYTHAGORAS FORMULA SCOPE II GAMES DESIGNER 5.95 & COMPOUNDS FUNDAMENTAL ALGEBRA MICROL WORD PROCESSOR 1695  MICROL DATABASE .95 GRIFFIN MATHS & CHEMISTRY PACK 10 15 MICROL USE & LEARN OCP-80 ADDRESS MANAGER \"RIGONOMETRY MENTAL ARITHMETIC  95 OCP. BO VAY MANAGER E 8.95 SPECDRUM DIGITAL DRUM SYSTEM E2500 SPECTRUM SOFTWARE TIMEX SINCLAIR 2040 PRINTER SEIKOSHA GP 50'PRINTERS .95 JASPER PROTEX SWITCHABLE JOYSTICK INT 9.95 ALPHACOMT VEX PAPER S ROUISE 8.95 HEROES OF KARN 0295 DK TRONICS KEYB DS .95 200 papi JEWELS OF BABYLON SAGA ELITE KEYB DS 67.95 +2.00 p&p BRIAN JACKS SUPERSTARS SAGA EMPORER KEYBOS  95  pa EDDIE KIND JUMP CHALLENGE .95 p&p 75p all orders Overseas 75p per tape .50 per pack WIZARDS LAIR .95 .00 per peripherals 14.95 4.95 .50 1495 .95 SCOPE GAMES DESIGNER "


"ARCADE ACTION **SPECIAL ** Arcade Action has always been one of our most popular sections, today interest in new arcade machines is higher than ever. So, due to popular demand, Clare Edgeley and her secret arcade spies have produced an extra special, bumper Arcade Action this month There is a great competition, games players guide to beating Nemesis anda preview of Elite's latest conversion -Ghosts N' Goblins. We've also compiled a list of hi-scores on the most popular games for you to try to beat and taken a look at the increasing trend towards arcade licensing. Opps, I almost forgot to mention that Clare Edgeley has brought us her usual round of the hottest games to enter the arcades. OMPETITION SPECIAL Classics below are in one or perfind them, ARCADE ACTIONS True Right, how can you win a copy of Arcade Dig Dug, Mr Do!, Pole Position and Pac-Man -four all time classics from the arcades. Printed below are the names of well Oldies but goldies. A must for any collection. known arcade games. One or perhaps And now it's your chance to win these four several are false. It's your task to find them. greats in one compilation for the first time. Send your answers, together with the Thanks to US Gold and Datasoft, we've got Classics? Just read on. printed coupon, to Arcade Classics 50 of the Arcade Classics as competition Competition, Computer+Video Games, prizes to kick-off our special Arcade Action Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, supplement. London ECIR 3AU. The closing date is June For those who don't know about these 16th and the editor's decision is final. games-what have you been doing for the False past few years?-here's a run down of what you get. C+VG/US GOLD/DATASOFT COMPETITION Dig-Dug: Here you must tunnel through the earth, capturing tasty treasures for points. But watch out for your encounter Galaxians with Pooka, a big, round monster, and Asteroids Frygar, a fire-breathing dragon. They Moon Patrol aren't at all friendly. Tunnel under them and Earthquake crush these baddies with falling rocks. Stargate Mr Do!: Guide Mr Do! around the cherry Pac-Man fields eating cherries and defending him Lunchpack with a super powerball against four types of monsters. Pole Position: The race game to end all race games. Three races to enter, each with different levels of difficulty. You'll need Address quick wits and fast reactions to survive. Pac-Man: Guide Pac-Man around the maze eating up the dots for points and avoiding the goblins. Touch one and you'll dissolve. You can only attack them after eating energy dots. 0000000 1000000 Name Commodore 64 Atario "


"TARIES *ARCAL O WORLD CUP OIKARI C+VG's Arcade Spy, Clare Edgeley, has pulled on her WARRIORS football shirt and joined the latest craze in the arcadesWorld Cup Football. She also casts her eye over the two Alone figure runs stealthily most recent war games-Ikari Warriors and Mighty Guy. through the jungle taking out the enemy as he comes across them. He has no friends and for that power and can knock out whole maller he hasn't much in the way platoons and enemy installations of clothes. Dressed only in a pair with no trouble, or danger to If you aspire to the dizzy heights of ragged trousers with a piece of yourself. of lon Rush or do not get onto the cloth round his head, this man The tank stage lasts for only a football pitch as often as you'd could be anyone Rambo's twin limited period and in that time like, you could get some training brother, perhaps? you must make sure that it has in at your local arcade. It would seem that SNK is the plenty of fuel. Gas can be picked Football, that internationally first to capitalise on the success of pen route by running over ier popular game, is about to reach the movie, and its tattily dressed cans, the same goes for hand its climax with the World Cup in hero, with Ikari Warriors-an grenades and ammunition. Mexico City this summer. And in odd name, but as I saw an early Should you run out of fuel, order not to miss an opportunity version it's possible that the abandon the tank, as it will blow while football fever is at a pitch, English name hasn't been added Thekan is launching World Cup and take you will yet. Although the lanks are a great a simulation which is both You play a Rambo lookalike, help, the main danger comes realistic and exciting. The game and true to the film there isn't from enemy bullets and this is is for one or two players, but fake michaelatist storm through where your evasive skills come lo my advice: challenge someone to the jungle knocking off the enemy the fore. The eight-way agameit's more fun than without getting killed. directional controls ensure that playing against an infernally clever and unemotional The start is impressive. An you can run backwards as well as computer. aeroplane drones across the dodge from side to side. This is PUSHE YO 101N And so the crowd roars, the screen only to crashland with a essential when you get near a teams run onio the pitch and the bellyflop. You crawl out, the only gateway or a heavily guarded Ikari Warriors has borrowed a two players take their places survivor, and immediately grab enemy outpost. couple of features from Atari's opposite each other. The whistle your gun and start blasting The gateways nearly always lie Gauntlet. A second player can sounds and they're off, spinning Various objects and weaponry at the end of a narrow corridor join in at any time and the two the controlling track ball for all lying ready to hand on the jungle which has to be negotiated sately Rambos can then fight and help they're worth, watching as iheir floor help in your guest. If you see before you can pass to the next each other through the game. respective teams dodge, dribble a tank and it has 'IN' flashing on section. That means despatching You can't accidentally kill your and weave round the pitch, using it, jumpin. You now have an the enemy-of course it's much partner or exit one stage without cunning and strategy to get the enormous amount of blasting easier if you have a tank... ball past the goalie and into the him. When two are playing, it's back of the net. the first player to the flashing tank SCORE Corners, throw-ins, and fouls. who gains the advantage. The The ref keeps an eye on the game 800 tank then takes on that player's and will call any player to book if colours, red or blue. these rules are broken World Like Gauntlet, the game Cup is as realistic as possible doesn't depend solely on having considering the boundaries of the two players, so a stranger could machine. The game scrolls in all join you at the machine for a directions as you race across the while, then leave without altering pitch, and just in case you need your chances of winning. help recognising the sector However, if you are very bad, you're playing in, your position is pin-pointed on a miniature sized you might hold up your partner as pitch to one side of the screen. the computer judges the skill of The player controlling the ball the players and alters the game is marked by two arrows as is the accordingly player nearest to the ball on the The scenery is realistic-if it is opposing team. It's up to you to supposed to represent the Far use these players to tackle and East as I suspect and you will take control of the ball. It's a find yourself swimming rivers, great feeling if you pull off a fighting on and trying to cross really successful tackle as the rickety bamboo bridges, and unfortunate marker may well find crossing swamp. Extra points are himself face down in the mud scored for picking up the fuel and And when you get the ball into the ammunition which lie in your goal area, your opponent can path. take control of the goalkeeper Ikari Warriors is an exciting who will fling himself from one game and very similar to side to another to stop the ball Commando and Green Beret in flying past those posts. theme. However, it has one Once you've got used to the idea of switching controllo feature which really grates-the enemy tanks have a swastika painted on the top. It's very crude and not at all necessary. PUSH TO JOIN "


"DE ACTION MIGHTY GUY he ake GET STAR eto different players as you kick and pass it, you can then start to use the shadow on the ball to determine height and distance thot il's travelling. The higher it is, the smaller its shadow and, of course, the further it will travel. Football simulations are by no means a new idea, but at least World Cup is distinguished by the fact that it is probably the most professional attempt to put the game onto a computer screen. And if you think it might be a walk-over, try it and see. Keeping that trackball rolling at speed requires stamina. In three and a half minules, I saw World Cup reduce several teams to sweaty, exhausted replicas of their former selves. Perhaps Bobby Robson and his World Cup team ought to do a training stint on it. __ ng As the numbers of Commando style games continues to increase, it was with a sigh that! started playing Mighty Guy Timagined the market to be almost saturated with this type of game, though they still seem to be making their way into the arcades. Some are excellent, notably Green Berel and Ikari Warriors. I would not, however, recommend Mighty Guy The game starts, rather predictably, with Mighty Guy charging onto the screen. As he dodges round clumps of sparse vegetation you realise that his one natural weapon is his kicking power, though he does carrya laser gun which is more helpful. Anyway, Mighty Guy charges forward and, lo and behold, a squadron of tanks appearfrom the top of the screen throwing what look like daggers at him. Dodging these slow moving knives, Mighty Guy lets loose one or two well timed kicks and the tanks hurtle backwards leaving the imprint of a man in the sandy floor. It is only then that you realise how confusing the graphics are. What look like tanks are really the heads and shoulders of similar, but opposing, Mighty Guys. The game is viewed from an aerial standpoint, but rather thon giving a lower angle so that the objects can be identified, the graphics have been programmed so that you are looking directly downwards. Very confusing. Having sorted out the tank problem and, in fact, there are some tanks further on in the game (they still look like soldiers) it's time to sort out the weapons power. Your gun's laser is far reaching and it's far easier to blast your opponents before they gel within spitting distance. To make sure you don't run out of bullets, collect the weapons which lie around. These will give more fire power. Some attempt has been made to change the scenery. You don't have to travel far before you reach the town. I've no idea what pleasures await you after that because, to be honest, I couldn't be bothered to find out If you want a military style game, there are better ones available than Mighty Guy. must build up if you are to deteat the monster at the end of each The aliens are taking over the screen. solar system and only you can At the end of each screen is a help. A familiar task maybe, but giant sized monster, several sizes as a robot you are virtually larger than those you have got indestructible and the powers used to destroying. It is at this Thalbe have ordered you to clean point inal your energy is rapidly up all the aliens in the system's depleted. If you're successful the five planets, and then to destroy monster will blow up and you'll their motherland the sixth star. be whisked to the second planel li's a daunting task as you face where the going is a little harder Night-Spider, the first planet It is on this second planet, you've been beamed onto. which is currently in the throes of Travelling from left to right you anice age, that you discover take your first tentative steps and weapon power. Across appears almost immediately. come across a random. Jump and collect it some creatures which look very before il disappears and you'll like the Ewoks from Star Wars. As find yourself equipped for a short This is the first planel, you don't lime with a machine gun. have to work very hard to knock Gel Star from Tailois a pretty them out. Just a few well timed average game with good fast punches or kicks and they movement and some excellent disappear in a puff of smoke. graphics Further on you'll come across Much thought has gone into the some snakes uncoiling and graphics. For example, each of slithering out of trees. Jump up the planets has a different colour, and punch them in their head to vegetation and monsters from its destroy them. neighbours. As you travel deeper into the Gameplay itself is exciting but planet you'll notice a number of not stunning. Get Star will features which when collected probably end up being used as a give either extra weapons or brief interlude between games greater speed when punching or which require more firing. Speed is one feature you concentration ne <if the ne BUCH ENERY TE 2 EDT:00 "


"QUETERORE HUMENTHING FEATURING ANA Y   ALNaXQUOTESCO OPY OVO MARINGA 2019 LOUIS C G N by SCOTT ADAMS with art by RON WILSON AND JOE SINNOTT OG Can you control the awesome powers of two Marvel Super Heroes at the same time, and rescue Alicia Masters from the grip of the evil De Doom? In this the third of the highly acclaimed Questprobe series, written by Scott Adams, the undisputed master of the art of adventure writing you have to control both The Thing and The Human Torch in their mission, set by the Chief Examiner, to rescue Alicia Masters from the evil terror of Dr. Doom Al American ADVENTURES CBM 64 DISK .95 CASS. .95 AMSTRAD DISK .95 CASS. .95 SPECTRUM 48K CASS. .95 ATARI DISK ONLY E14.95 BBC/ELECTRON (TEXT ONLY) CASS. ONLY .95 ******************* "


"ARCADE | GOT A WHOPPER.. ACTION Get your trigger fingers into Scoreboard in the States. training and loosen some of those So get cracking as we want to creaking muscles. Yes, there's hear from anyone who can beat good news for all you these scores. Write into High intergalactic record breakers. Scores, Arcade Action, Computer We've put together the world high and Video Games, 30-32 scores on all your favourite Farringdon Lane, London ECIR games as compiled by Twin 3AU. Please include some hints'n' Galaxies International tips if you can. WORLD HIGH SCORES Amidar Armor Attack Asteroids Astro Blaster Battlezone Berzerk Bosconian Buck Rogers Burnin' Rubber Circus Charlie Cosmic Avenger Crystal Castles Dig Dug Donkey Kong Jr Dragon's Lair Eyes Fast Freddie Frenzy Front Line Galaxians Gravitar Inter-Steller Joust Jungle King Kickman Looping M.A.C.H.3 or H Megazone Monaco G.P. Moon Patrol Mr Do Ms Pac-Man Pac-Man Phoenix Pole Position Pole Position 11 Popeye Q Bert Rally X Rip Off Satan's Hollow Sinistar Solar Quest Space Duel Space Fury Space Invaders ! Space Panic Stargate Star Trek Subroc 3-D Super Pac-Man Tac-Scan Tempest Tip-Top Tron Track & Field Anteater 19,225,630 2,009,000 40,101,910 29,100 21,851,000 91,070 2,913,510 1,016,495 2,413,182 300,000 117,290 869,441 4,129,600 1,259,200 558,724 23,222,220 22,269,540 4,804,440 999,990 389,770 4,722,200 248,000 102,192,000 1,510,220 4,875,665 1,469,970 465,900 1,477 478 2,288,850 10,000 1,214,600 5,555,550 820,320 197,360 10,271,090 67,260 87,530 1,439,430 33,273,520 1,202, 730 92,890 25,326,225 791,000 200,860 623, 720 222,599 425,230 48,960 71,473,400 100,060,500 605,500 558,000 100,574,200 1,728,329 888,000 12,883,638 2,654,970 215,230 Arabian Asteroids Deluxe Astro Fighter Bega's Battle Blueprint Bubbles Burger Time Centipede Cliff Hanger Crossbow Defender Donkey Kong Donkey Kong 3 Elevator Action Fantasy Foodfight Frogger Galaga Gorf Gyruss Juno First Jump Bug Kangaroo Lady Bug Lunar Lander Mad Planets Marvin's Maze Missile Command Moon Cresta Monster Bash Mr Do's Castle Omega Race Pleiades Pleic Professor Pac-Man Qix Reactor Robotron Scramble SnapJack Space Ace Space Dungeon Space Odyssey Star Castle Star Rider Star Wars Super Cobra Super Zaxxon Tazz-Mania Time Pilot Traverse U.S.A. Tutankham Vanguard Venture Wild Western Wizard of Wor Xevious Zaxxon Zoo Keeper 10 Yard Fight Discs of Tron Punch Out Spy Hunter 159,750 2,269,230 18,280 120,000 126,900 1,566,960 5,944,700 16,384,547 1,180,000 4,300,000 72,999,975 874,300 1,500,500 60,500 269,920 101,103,300 442,330 22,220,000 2,220,000 41,090,450 80,000,000 850,330 921,800 609,900 3,470 198,000 330,000 69,739,020 152,100 228,400 421,780 2,809,750 1,164,900 999,990 1,666,604 10,156,922 348,000,000 999,250 58,080 770,866 10,555,520 2,599,000 7,842,950 309,830 155,000,000 198,470 339,750 1,325,180 11,548,400 2,058,300 1,736,000 3,111,000 325,020 803,900 1,215,000 9,999,990 3,839,950 14,337,220 99,450 388,000 4,200,000 640,000 w-NE 1242 "


"SPECIAL All who enter the world of Nemesis do so at their own risk, though thanks to Tommy Man and Jim McClure they stand a greater chance of survival. NEMESISARCADE ACTION emesis, based on you'll be met by a fleet Defender, is a game Wp which has to which requires be destroyed before you can patience and cunning. Its move to the next level. At the devious strategy has toiled end of stage seven, you have many an intrepid explorer. To to pass through narrow help, we have put together passages and destroy the detailed hints and tips which brain which then destructs the should put you well on the mothership. way to victory and the destruction of the mothership. STAGE At the bottom of the screen lies six boxes bearing the You start off in deep space legends Speed, Missiles, were you make your way to Double, Laser, Multiple and the top right hand side of the Your next and final challenge in this stage is the fleet ship. This can be destroyed by maximum penetration into the mouth of the ship using the Lasers in a circular movement and avoiding missiles being fired at you. After all the bars in the mouth have been broken, and the jewel in the centre of the ship has been blasted, the ship explodes and the background fades away. STAGE 2 screen doing the same kind of thing. Your priority now Your priority now should be to get Missiles and Laser by the time you get to the first set of caverns. Reaching the caverns after variations of the first part, you are confronted with aliens firing at you from the ground. Bomb them using your missile button and at the same time keep firing at the space craft. We found this extremely difficult to master, but discovered that by sticking a match to wedge the left hand player's missile button it continued firing the bombs. While moving through the caverns, keep back to gain the full use of the Laser and try to collect Multiple every time it is displayed, you should be able to get three by the time you reach the volcanoes. When the background stops make sure your space crattis at the left hand side of the screen with all three Lasers pointing into one beam at the tip of the volcanoes. This will enable you to blast every meteor that comes out of them. Probably putting your score in the region of 80,000. -ken You find yourself in a space scene looking very familiar to stage one. Your first line of discs appears from the bottom this time and at a faster pace. Your priority now faster pace Your priority is to get your fourth and final Multiple. Reaching the stone maze there are pink balls which are stacked up blocking your path in certain directions. There are also some more of the familiar characters seen in the first section. It is a good idea to remain in the centre of the screen as you will find it more difficult to manoeuvre the ship out of tight spots. Towards the end of this section you'll find a whole wall of these pink balls to destroy shame you don't gain any points for it). Once you have a passage established, go as far forward as possible and back on your self as soon as some snow flake like aliens come towards you. Firing your Lasers should get them all. The background becomes still again and you know that something's going to happen. The snow flakes come at you this time at random from all over the screen. The best position to be in is the middle '?'. These are the weapons boxes, and are vital to your status. As you enter the world of Nemesis, you are met by a number of challenging obstacles -aliens in fleets and domed launchers which fire rocks and ships at you. These reappear throughout the game, though each stage has its own peculiar aliens and obstructions. At this early stage, shoot the orange aliens and pick up the power packs which appear in their place. Speed is self explantory, Missile allows you to knock out ground artillery. Double allows you to fire at 45, as well as straight ahead, though you can't have Laser as well, Laser wipes out anything in your line of fire, Multiple increases your firepower by four times, '?' gives you a shield which deflects missiles but fades after continuous bombardment. The best combination is to have two Speed, three Multiple, Laser and Missile to get you through to the end of stage one. At the end of each stage 54 SSB00 HILO screen to be confronted by your first obstacle-a line of disc shaped objects hurtling at you. Open fire on them, remaining in the same position, otherwise you will miss one of the discs and lose one power point and the confidence you need to win the game. When you have collected the power point, take the option of Speed you are going to need it. Now, quickly make your way to the bottom of the 1 "


"THE PLAYERS GUIDEJ STAGE 6 In this stage you enter a electrified web that you have to blast in order to get through-at the end of this section there is a cannon shaped object firing hundreds of orange balls, it is important at this stage to remain still in the centre, firing your laser into the opening of the control of the web. there is an electrified fence which is only penetrable by going round, making sure that you don't get sandwiched by an alien coming from the opposite direction down the passage. Soon enough the fence will fade away and you are clear to attack the brain. The brain controls of Nemesis and if it's destroyed it will distruct the whole planet. This is achieved by shooting free the chains tying the brain down. Once of the left hand side of the remain at the left hand side of screen with two Lasers above the screen as this allows you you and two below. This to manoeuvre backwards to should act as a shield as long allow more time to collect as your finger is pressed more points and avoid being continuously on the fire bombed by alien ships. button. Yes, you guessed it, When you get to the final back to the fleet command stage of this section, it is ship for this section, necessary to knock out the launch domes in the roof of STAGE 3 the cavern and return to the left hand side of the screen in You're back in the familiar the centre as the claw like space scene. In this section ships follow a pattern around your power point timing is the screen from the top right essential because you have to along to the top left, down opt for Double-it means and across to the right, up that you lose your Lasers, but half way and towards you. it is very convenient to be able to shoot the statues firing STAGE 5 circular discs out of their mouths. At the end of this section, In this stage you go back in having returned to Laser, space. Your first priority is to position your space craft regain your Lasers as these towards the right hand side of will be needed to destroy pink the screen where space craft clouds with tentacles that will appear in fleets, await you. These can be launching missiles at you. destroyed by shooting the They cannot be destroyed, dark beads in the tentacles but the space craft that are and then directing your fire launching them can. Then power at the cloud--there there is the fleet command are a number of these clouds ship which again seems to get before reaching the harder and faster as the command ship. stages progress. STAGE 4 Back to space again. Right now we have reached some caverns pretty similar to the first ones. The difference is that there are more difficult disasters to overcome. The first is an upside down volcano throwing out meteors. To get past this, remember the principle used before (stay back to the left and fire at the cone) but remember all the other objects firing at you from the ground. Passing this you will find that it is important to complete, there is a distant view of a floating city exploding. Then it's back to the beginning... ow you've got these tips, why don't you put them into practice? Zoom along to your nearest arcade and get zapping. We've got a high score for you to beat, too. Tommy Man one of London's most ardent Nemesis bashers can complete the game STAGE 7 and start again. His high score is a mere This is the final section. If you 450,000. Can you beat that? Write in to High lose one of the eight extra men at this stage you might as Scores, Arcade well give up. Action, if you can. The setting is a green Happy zapping ... landing bay with gun ships on and good luck. top and bottom. These are Tommy's not the easy enough to destroy, the only arcade king out difficult ones to reach are in the trenches-it is necessary there. Why not send to go back to Double for this us your tips on your final part. favourite game and About halfway through, get named in C+VG. "


"SPECIAL Have you ever wondered where the ideas for computer games come from? It would be hard to miss the fact that a great deal of computer software is based on arcade games. C+VG's arcade spy CLARE EDGELEY reports. S RIP-OFF ARCADE ACTION The track, with all its chicanes unfolds in front of you as you race round the qualifying lap, dodging and overtaking other cars while attempting to notch up a good time to gain pole position in the race itself. Atarisoft's Pole Position for the BBC was released early last year and did not come up to scratch. There's no excuse as Atarisoft is part of Atari and shouldn't have experienced any difficulties in producing a first class game. It is a half-baked effort, the graphics are flickery and there is no challenge to speak of. Datasoft released the Spectrum versiona few months later. It proved an average game, though more successful than the BBC attempt. Sega's Spy Hunter, however, is a highly successful conversion, and US Gold has produced very good versions of the game for the Commodore, Spectrum and Atari. Spy Hunter is a high speed car chase through unknown level!), try to catch the empties as they slide back up the bar and send fresh drinks to your impatient customers. Let a glass crash to the floor or serve too many drinks and you'll lose a life. It's no fun serving a load of drunkards. The graphics are simple and colourful and do ample justice to the original. Well done US Gold the blame for the flood of Kung-Fu games both in the arcades and on home computers can probably be laid at frem Corporation's door. Kung Fu Master was one of the first martial arts simulations way back at the beginning of last year. It was instantly successful, unusual ver the last two years a before moving on. huge number of However, it's most similar Successful and popular feature, other than the scoring games have found their way onto system, is the way the opponents home computers, either through fight. Like Punch Out!! your licensing deals, ideas and themes player has his back to the screen that have been borrowed. The facing his opponent. A clever similarities between Atari's piece of programming, giving a Marble Madness and Melbourne good 3D ettect. House's Gyroscope cannot be Two other games were missed. released at the same time as The whole idea of using arcade Frank Bruno-Rocco from games as a basis for computer Gremlin Graphics and Knockout games exploded in the summer of from Alligata, Rocco is very 1984 Olympic year with similar to Punch Out!! in almost Track & Field, Konami's highly all aspects. Your player even has Successful arcade game had you his back to the screen with the playing a number of sporting opponent facing towards you. events including the hurdles, long Knockout is awful, and bears jump and 100 metres. Punch the no resemblance to any of the fire buttons to make you go faster games mentioned above. and qualify for each event first. However, it is no coincidence that Sounds familiar? It should. Hot these three games were released on the heels of Track & Field saw simultaneously soon after Punch arun of similar games on the Outl/hit the streets. Spectrum, BBC, and Pole Position seems to be one Commodore. Ocean was first to game which has not lived up to the tape with Daley Thompson's the excellent original. Released Decathlon which is played in by Atari, Pole Position the arcade much the same way, only this time game has proved a winner. It is you have to pump your joystick several years old and yet is still a from side to side. \"steady earner\" you'll find it, And, of course, Daley's or the updated mark ll version, in Decathlon led to character most arcades. A shame the licensing. It soon appeared that computer versions were nonevery man and his dog-well, starters. famous sporting personalities at The arcade game is a any rate were lending their simulation of a Formula One namesto sporting simulations of race, and has you seated at the every kind. Nick Faldo's Golf controls of a racing car while Steve Davis Snooker, Brian charging round the track at top Jacks Superstar Challenge-a speed. You need a steady hand compilation of sporting events on the steering wheel and a similar to Hypersports. The list is knowledge of when to use the endless. brakes, or when to change gear. Another in the list is Frank Bruno's Boxing which originated from Nintendo's innovative and challenging Punch Out!! Elite has established quite a name for itself with some excellent licensed games Frank Bruno was probably the first. It follows Punch Out!! closely and, like the original, has you fighting a number of opponents each more vicious than the last. A knockout must be obtained PLAYER0 000 Discs of Tron NOVICE Karate Champ 3308 Discs of Death lands with a possé of bad guys on at the time and very playable. your tail. They'll try to ram you, You take the part of Thomas, shoot you and, in short, will stop anxious to rescue his kidnapped at nothing to destroy you. Shades girlfriend Sylvia from the Devil's of The Italian Job creep into the palace Kick your way through a game at this point. If you number of screens, defeating a manoeuvre your car to drive up master of a certain aspect of the the ramps of a moving lorry and art on each level into the back of it, you can pick up W ay of the Exploding Fist from special weapons-rockets Melbourne House was one of the smoke screens and oil slicks. At first games to follow. Beautifully times you'll be called upon to presented with much graphic make split second decisions on detail, it proved a walk-over for your route-ifa section of road most adepts at high scores. is closed, take to the water. Spy System 3's International Karate Hunter is fast, addictive and very followed some time later and enjoyable in both formats. proved just as easy. It is played Tapperis another US Gold against different backdrops of conversion for the Spectrum and, famous skylines Sydney again, closely follows the Opera House, for instance -original as far as is possible and is a comprehensive game given the limitations of the with 16 different actions, as is Spectrum sound and memory. Fist. Perhaps if less detail had You find yourself playing barman been given to the backdrops and while trying to keep up with the more to action, both games drinking habits of your would have been more of a customers. They drink like fish, challenge. and demand to be served Imagine's Yie Ar Kung Fuisa immediately. With four barsto direct descendent of the Konami look after and this is the easy game of the same name. Exploding Fist "


"FOR SPIN-OFF ? get a message to your elusive Rambo is a puny character with girlfriend a large arsenal of weapons and And now it's time to catch up sparse graphics. His mission is to once again with Elite. Over the rescue his friend Banks from a last few months it has gone into POW camp set to the north of the licensing in a big way and has start point. Blast your way into the produced some excellent games camp, rescue Banks, take him to One such is Bombjack for the the waiting chopper, go back to Spectrum, Amstrad and rescue the remaining prisoners, Commodore 64. Originally return to the chopper and home. licensed by Tehkan, Bombjack with a character license this did very well for itself a couple of large felt very disappointed years ago in the arcades. when I saw the computer game. You play the part of a caped Last but not least is Imagine's bear-that's what he looks like! Green Beret based on Konami's and must collect bombs which arcade game of the same name. are dotted around the screen, It's great fun, follows the original while avoiding an assorted implicitly and is very playable. bunch of nasties. Collect the You play a crack commando and bombs by flying into the air and have to rescue some prisoners The original Commando WORLD RECORDS H60 0002 OON 000 000 MISSED One! Released for the Amstrad, Discs of Tron-a successful Commodore and Spectrum, the arcade game in its time. The sad game is an almost perfect replica fact is that if Artic had spent a bit of the original, though the more time on the game they could Spectrum version's a little have turned out a winner basic Asit is, the graphics are You play the part of Oolong sketchy, though the animation is who has to battle his way pasta smooth. number of honourable masters As in the film, and arcade before becoming the Grand game, the idea is to fling discs at Master. This all takes place your opponent and kill him against some highly coloured before he gets you. Balancing on and detailed backgrounds, a floating platform, you can leap although, to my mind, the to two adjacent platforms to Spectrum version at least is too dodge the discs being thrown at easy. It is harder on the arcade you. Artic has got the game right, machine, but there are other but there is something missinggames which offer a greater addictiveness, perhaps. Anyway, challenge. Kung Fu Master for Discs of Tron has been around for about three years, so why did The tale of Indiana Jones Daley's Super Test Artic choose to release its version ANGLE differs from other games in that this year? leaping trom ledge to ledge. two companies have come up To pretend that Gyroscope has One of the most remarkable with two different games using nothing to do with Atari's Marble features of the game is the the globetrotting archaeologist's Madness is a bit of a joke. background graphics which are name. In March last year, Marble Madness is a relatively colourful and detailed, and Mindscape/US Gold released new arcade game and is include backdrops of the Sphynx, Indiana Jones in the Lost extremely unusual. The a fairy tale castle, a Greek Kingdom for the Commodore 64 landscape is 3D, angular and temple and skyscrapers. Elite has an average game on all dissected into grids with lots of managed to produce the same accounts. Help Indiana find hisslopes and ledges. Controla effects both graphically and in way through the six screens of the rolling ball down the slopes game play-on the Spectrum Lost Kingdom to find a priceless without going over the edge. The programmers should be artifact, while solving puzzles in Control is by a trackball which congratulated. A simple and order to move from screen to adds to the fun as the ball seems addictive game. screen, It doesn't sound like that to have a mind of its own. And now for the battle of the racy hero from the film that we all Melbourne House's reactionary rebel forces. It is all know and love. This one sounds a Gyroscope on the Spectrum and the fault of Capcom's original bit wet. Commodore 64 is almost exactly game Commando that we have Now take Atari's version the same, though the controls now got a situation where there is Indiana Jones in the Temple of obviously differ. This too is an almost a glut of one-manDoom. It's an arcade game which excellent piece of programming, against-an-army type games. has taken features from the and play is as near to the original Probably the most popular craze movie and incorporated them as possible, though there are one since sports simulations, arcade into a well designed, active or two changes in the graphics. manufacturers and software game. Help Indiana free five The 3D grid-style landscape houses alike are leaping on the children from the cages and seems to have caught on though band wagon. Elite got there first escape in coal carts in a hair. Hewson Consultant's Quazatron with its version of Commando. A raising ride. Finally, open a looks, at a glance, very similar. very good replica of the original, secret entrance behind the statue Almost a year after Mikie the The idea is to storm through and make good your escape arcade game was released, enemy territory and eliminate the Much more fun than rusty old Imagine got round to releasing its rebel forces. Equipped with only artifacts version for the Spectrum. Anda a machine gun, tactics are One game which suggests that reasonable one it is too, though needed if you are to prove Artic was desperate for a good it's a bit too wet for my taste. yourself a hero. idea is their Discs of Death. One This absurd game takes you The game seems universally look at the game will tell any back to the classroom-a place popular, more so than Ramboarcade connoisseur that this is a which most of us are keen to Ocean's offering based on the pretty awful attempt to parody escape. You play Mikie and must film Track & Field held captive four levels into the game. Rebel stormtroopers do all they can to kill you, but persevere, you might even get as far as the missile launchers! A difficult game and highly playable. Imagine's programmers must be praised on their close attention to detail whenever they put out a licensed game. The same point must also be made on behalf of Elite programmers. Elite is about to launch a version of Atari's Paperboyan unusual game concerning the antics of a frustrated paperboy This long list of games shows that close attention is paid to new releases in the arcades by software houses. Let's hope that rather than drawing custom away this swing towards licensed games will encourage more people to visit their local arcades to play the original versions of their favourite games. "


"Ghosts Heading your way is a right knight fright Ghosts'n' Goblins, the latest arcade conversion from Elite. And to help you survive these blood-chilling knights of armour, those gallant gentlemen of Elite have provided us with a preview of the game and a few hints as to what to expect in later levels. If you go down the woods The opening scene is a tonight, you're making a big graveyard. The atmosmistake. For you'll meet phere is sinister and eerie. fiendish creatures of the dark A princess who has been with evil on their minds. tending the wounds of a loyal Ghosts, goblins, the walking knight is abducted by an dead and all manner of nasties emissary of hell. are out to prevent our hero The knight dressed only in knight rescuing his damsel in his undies no, they're not distress. made of chain mail sets off Capcom's original Ghosts to rescue her. 'n Goblins game in the As he sets out, he finds a suit arcades was a vast creation of armour. On he moves into There were so many screens the graveyard. Almost to this epic, it was doubtful if immediately the undead rise anybody managed to from out of the ground and complete the game. And even close in on the knight, if they had, it would have cost Let these gruesome them a small fortune. creatures touch you For the computer version of once again and the Ghosts 'n' Goblins, Elite has knight is unclothed. taken a selection of the very Let the evil best screens. creatures "


"1 Goblins touch our hero again and he upwards, facing elves, crumbles into a pile of bones. zombies, orgres and dragons. There are four levels of the But you can't give up. The game to complete before you princess is still in peril. can enter the castle and try Ghosts 'n' Goblins is the and rescue the Princess. latest in a successful series of Level 1: The game starts in a Elite games culled from the graveyard. The main hazards arcades. to avoid here are the First there was Commando, zombies. Of course the all action blast-'em-to-hell there may be one or and back game, which was two other nasties voted the best arcade-style lurking. It's then into a game in the Computer+Video deep dark forest Games Golden Joystick where forest demons Awards. It was the Christmas lurk. An ogre guards number one best seller. the door to the next customers. Goblins in battle with some of Heading up the charts right level. now is BombJack, another Now here's your chance to the evil creatures of the game. Send your entries together Level 2: It's into the Capcom game. Jumping Jack. win a package of three of land of the elves. a cute caped crusader, has to Elite's converted arcade with the printed coupon to Watch out for the Ghosts 'n Goblins collect a series of bombs while games --Commando, orges. Bombjack and Ghosts 'n Competition, avoiding nasty knights and Level 3: The undead robo-birds with a powerful Goblins. There will be ten top Computer+Video Games, rise from the winners. peck. The action takes place Priory Court, 30-32 ground again to hinder the What you have to do is draw Farringdon Lane, London against four splendid knight's progress. Evil devils recreations of the arcade or paint a picture of the EC1R 3AU. The closing date is are also encountered and a backdrops. gallant knight from Ghosts 'n' June 16th. dragon guards the way to the Next in line for the Elite next level. treatment is Paperboy. This is Level 4: A perilous bridge a great game but didn't really and another dragon get the exposure it deserved in must be faced before the arcades, mainly because C+VG/ELITE GHOSTS 'N' GOBLINS COMPETITION you can enter the game required a special the castle. machine with handlebars on. Name_ The Castle: Your And they're expensive. Stask now is The game involves you Address to climb playing the part of a ever paperboy, braving life and limb on a bike in the American suburbs. The action is spread over seven days of deliveries. You must avoid cars, fighting Please tick the appropriate box. neighbours, Hells Angels Spectrum Amstrado Commodore 64 etc. You score points by hurling papers to your regular "


"PLAY THE GAME Ocean Iriey solda US. (GOLD HULINIT They olda BRUCE LEE MONSTER HITS IN match point GIANT PACK SQUAD STRIKES AGAIN * SCUAD ALL THESE BLOCKBUSTERS TOGETHER ON ONE GIANT COMPILATION SPECTRUM .95 AMSTRAD .95 COMMODORE 64 .95 DISC .95 (COMMODORE and AMSTRAD] Stocked at Selected Branches of WH Smith, Boots, John Menzies Voolworth, Greens, Laskys and Rumbelows ENTOMBED REPLACES THE COMMODORE 64 from. rom. SQUAD MORE FOR LESS 6 CENTRAL STREET, MANCHESTERM2 SNS TELEPHONE: 061-832 6633 TELEX: 669977 "


"VT BBC B BOUNCER Variables and Procedures P used to generate a sound when dropping By Paul Maddison Q% used to print side walls R% random number used to print Bounce into summer with Bouncer platforms for the BBC B. It's a game in which RR%, RRR% — used to print keys you'll drop until you pop. T% — time limit Using the Z and x keys to move left X% — X co-ordinate of the ball and right, you must control a ball Y% Y co-ordinate of the ball which bounces downwards from KEY% — number of keys collected ledge to ledge in a factory chimney. DROP% — checks to see if ball is On the way down you must collect dropping. If it is then it disables ten keys. movement Once these have been collected you DURATION% duration of note for enter the final screen in which a tune. spider lurks. You have to dodge this DIRECT% — sends spider up or lethal leggy to complete the game. All down this is done against the clock. PITCH% — pitch of note for tune There are three ways in which the SCORE% score bouncing ball can be popped by SCROLL% — how far the ball has dropping too far, running out of time dropped and by the spider. SPX X co-ordinate of spider Although the game is against the SPY% — Y co-ordinate of spider clock and the natural reaction is to FLAG% determines whether to go as fast as possible, we find it's best print a platform or a space to take things carefully in order to SAFE$ — the final exit graphics collect the keys. SP$ — string of 20 spaces used to Advice: If a disk interface is fitted scroll the screen upwards type in the following: For 1%-PAGE PROCTITLE used to print initial TO TOP: ? (1%+&400-PAGE) = ? screen 1%:NEXT (RETURN) PROCINSTRUCT instructions PAGE = &EOO (RETURN) PROCSCREEN — draws initial * TAPE (RETURN) chimney screen, walls and ball CHAIN» » (RETURN) PROCDROP-scrolls the screen up"


"wards and prints new platforms and perhaps a key PROCKEY -registers you have a key and adds 10 to score PROCDIE — flashes screen on death PROCEND asks you for another go PROCDROPZdrops the ball when in warehouse PROCFINITO — plays a tune and displays your score if you complete the game. UR 128 180 GOTO 50 190 DEFPROCDROP 200 LET SCROLL%=SCROLL%+1: LET FLAG%AF LAG%+1:IF FLAG%-2 THEN LET FLAG%=0 210 LASTY%Y%: VDU5: MOVEX%, LASTY%: GCOL 0.0: VDU228: MOVEX%, LASTY%: GCOLO. 6: VDU228: VDU: COLOUR1 220 IF FLAG%=0 THEN PRINTTAB (R%. 31):S TRING $ (4. CHR$ 229 ) ELSE PRINTTAB (R%. 31 ) :\" BOUNCER 10 MODE2: PROCTITLE: SOUND1.-15.100.2 20 COLOUR5: PRINT TAB(4.13): \"INSTRUCT IONS?\"; : G$=GET$:IF G$=\"Y\" THEN MODE 7: PRO CINSTRUCT ELSE PROCDEFINE 30 MODE2: PROCDEFINE 40 PROCSCREEN 50 RX=RND (15) 60 IF INKEY-98 AND X%>64 AND DROP%=1 VDU 5: MOVEX%, Y%: GCOLO, O: VDU228: VDU4: LET X%=X%-32: VDU5: MOVEXX, Y%: GCOLO.6: VDU228:V DUL 70 IF INKEY-67 AND XX<1088 AND DROPX =1 VDU5: MOVEXX, Y%: GCOLO.0: VDU228: VDUL: LE TX%=X%+32: VDU 5: MOVEXX, Y%:GCOLO.6: VDU228 : VDUU 80 COLOUR 7: COLOUR 128: PRINT TAB (17. 0):T%:IF T%<100 THEN PRINT TAB (19.0):\" \" 90 TX=T%-1 100 IF POINT (X%+16. Y%-12) =3 OR POINT X%+48. Y%-16)=3 THEN PROCKEY 110 IF POINT (XX, Y%-36 ) =O AND POINT (X% +56. Y%-36 ) = 0 THEN PROCDROP 120 IF POINT (X%, Y%-36 ) = 1 AND POINT (X% +56, Y%-36 )=1 AND SCROLLX<= 15 THEN SCROLL % =0 ELSE IF POINT (X%, Y%-36 ) = 1 AND POINT X%+56. Y%-36 ) = 1 AND SCROLL%>15 THEN PROCD IE: PROCEND:RUN 130 IF T%= 0 THEN PROCDIE: PROCEND: RUN 140 IF KEY%=10 THEN LET SCORE%-SCOREX +T%: GOTO 590 150 IF POINT (X%, Y%-36 ) = 0 AND POINT (X% +56. Y%-36 ) = 0 THEN DROP%= 0 ELSE DROP%=1 160 IF DROP% = 1 THEN P=0 170 0%=30: COLOUR 1: COLOUR 135: PRINT T AB (O. Q%): CHR$230; TAB(18,2%): CHR$ 230: COLO 230 RR%=R%*64: RRR%=64* (RND (4)-1):IF R ND (100) <20 AND FLAG%=0 VDU5: MOVERRX+RRR% .96: GCOLO, 3: VDU231: VDU 210 SOUND1.-15.100+P.1: P=P-5: VDU5: MOV EX%, Y%+32: GCOLO, O: VDU228: MOVEX%. Y%: GCOLO .6: VDU 2 28: VDU4 250 COLOUR 7: COLOUR 128: PRINT TAB( 17. O): T%:IF T%<100 THEN PRINT TAB (19.0):\"\" 260 END PROC 270 DEFPROCDEFINE 280 VDU23. 228.60, 126.231.223.221.255. 126.60 290 VDU23. 229.255.255.191,237,239.75. 1.0 300 VDU23. 230. 247,247.247.0.255.255.2 55.0 310 VDU23.231.0.0.0.229.191.224.0.0 320 VDU23.232,0, 24, 36, 126, 189, 126, 129 129 330 VDU23: 8202:0:0:0: 340 ENVELOPE1.3.0.0.0.0.0.0, 121.-10.5.-2, 120, 120 350 ENVELOPE2.2.0.0.0.0.0.255.3.0.0.125. 125.0 360 SCORE%0: T%=500: KEYX=0: SCROLLX=0: FLAGX=0: DROP%=1: P=0:X%=640: Y%=512: SP$=ST RING$ (19.\" \"): SAFE$=\" \"+CHR$10+CHR$ 8+CH R$8.\" 370 ENDPROC 380 DEFPROCSCREEN 390 FOR X=0 TO 15: COLOUR 1: PRINT TAB RND (14).31):STRING$(4. CHR$229): PRINT TAB (RND (14).31):\" \": NEXT 400 FOR 2%=0 TO 30: COLOUR 1: COLOUR 13 5: PRINT TAB(0,0%): CHR$ 230: TAB(18.0%): CHR $230: NEXT: COLOUR 128 410 VDU5: MOVEX%. Y%: GCOLO. 6: VDU 228: VDU 420 VDU5: MOVEX%, Y%-36: GCOLO, 1: VDU 229: VDU 4 430 ENDPROC "


"400 DEFPROCKEY 450 SOUND 2.1.60.20 460 VDU5: MOVEX%, Y%: GCOLO, O: VDU231: MOV EX%-32. Y%:GCOLO.0: VDU231 : MOVEX%+32. Y%: GC OLO. 0:VDU231: MOVEX%, Y%:GCOLO. 6: VDU228:VD U4 470 LET KEY%=KEY% +1: LET SCOREX-SCORE% +10 480 END PROC 490 DEFPROCDIE 500 TIME=0: REPEAT: FOR I%=1 TO 15: VDU 1 9.1%, RND (15):0:: SOUND 1.-15.1%, 1: NEXT: UN TIL TIME>500 510 END PROC 520 DEFPROCEND 530 SOUNDO.2.4.18: FOR 1%-1 TO 150 STE P 5: VDU 19.0.0:0:: PRINT TAB(0, 31); STRING$ (20,\"\"): NEXT 540 VDU19.11.6:0;: COLOUR11: PRINT TAB 4.14): \"Another go?\" 550 REPEAT:G-GET:UNTIL G-89 560 VDU 19.10.1:0:: COLOUR10: PRINT TAB 15.14): \"Y\" 570 FOR 1%-1 TO 10000: NEXT 580 END PROC 590 VDU19.13. 1:0:: COLOUR 101: CLS: VDU 2 8.4.19.16.11: COLOUR 128: CLS: VDU 19.15.15: 0 :: COLOUR15: PRINT\" WELL DONE!!\": VDU19.14 .6:0;: COLOUR14: PRINT\" Prepa re yourself for the final screen! 740 PRINT TAB(0.31 ) : SP$ 750 PRINT TAB(8.31): CHR$229+CHR$229 760 PRINT TAB(0.31): SP$ 770 PRINT TAB( 7.31): CHR$229+\" \"+CHR$ 229+CHR$229 780 PRINT TAB(12.31) : CHR$229 +CHR$ 229 CHR$229.\" \"+CHR$229+CHR$229+CHR$229 790 PRINT TAB(2.31 ) : CHR$ 229 +CHR$ 229 C HR$229 +CHR$229-CHR$ 229 800 PRINT TAB(0.31 ): SP$ 810 PRINT TAB (15.31); CHR$229 820 PRINT TAB(14.31): CHR$229+\" \".CHR$ 229 830 PRINT TAB(0.31 ): SP$ 840 PRINT TAB(13.31 ) : CHR$ 229+\" \"+CH R$229+CHR$ 229 850 PRINT TAB(1,31); CHR$229+\" \"CHR$ 229+CHR$ 229 +CHR$ 229 860 PRINT TAB(14.31): CHR$229+CHR$ 229 870 PRINT TAB(0.31); SP$: SP$: SP$ 880 PRINT TAB(0.31 ) : STRING$ (20. CHR$22 BOUNCER 890 PRINT TAB(0.31); STRINGS (5. SP$) 900 COLOUR1: COLOUR135: FOR Q=0 TO 23:P RINT TAB(0,0); CHR$ 230; TAB(19.Q): CHR$230: NEXT: COLOUR 128 910 COLOUR132: PRINT TAB(1,22): SAFE$: C OLOUR128 920 X%64:Y%=928: SPX%-4: SPY%20:DIREC T%=1 930 VDU5: MOVEX%, Y%: GCOLO. 6: VDU228: VDU 600 MOVE 240, 376: GCOLO. 4: DRAW 1096.37 6: DRAW 1096.676: DRAW 240.676: DRAW 240.37 610 RESTORE 660 620 FOR I %=1 TO 12:READ PITCH%, DURATI ON%: IF PITCH%=OTHEN SOUND1, 0, PITCH%. DURA TION%: GOTO 640 630 SOUND1.-15. PITCH%. DURATION% 640 NEXT 650 GOTO670 660 DATA89.4.89.4. 109.4.109,4, 117.3.1 21.3. 117.3.121.3.117.6.0.3.129.6, 137.3 670 VDU 28.0.31, 19.0 680 COLOUR128: COLOURI 690 PRINT TAB(0.31 ) : STRING$ (100,\" \") 700 PRINT TAB(1.31 ) : CHR$229+CHR$229 710 PRINT TAB(0.31): SP$ 720 PRINT TAB (3.31 ) : CHR$229 730 PRINT TAB(4.31 ); CHR$229 +CHR$229+C HR$229+CHR$229 940 IF INKEY-98 AND X%>64 AND DROP%= 1 VDU5: MOVEX%. Y%: GCOLO.0: VDU228: VDU 4: LET X%=X%-32: VDU5: MOVEXX, Y%: GCOLO.6: VDU228:V DUL 950 IF INKEY-67 AND X%<1152 AND DROP% 1 VDUS: MOVEX%.Y\":GCOLO. 0:VDU 228: VD14: LE TX%=X%+32: VD15: MOVEX%. Y%:GCOLO.6: VDU228 : VDU 960 IF POINT (X%. Y%-36 )=0 AND POINT (XX 56. Y%-36 ) = 0 THEN DROP%=0 ELSE DROP%=1 970 IF POINT (X%, Y%-36 ) 0 AND POINT (X% +56. Y%-36 ) = 0 THEN PROCDROP2 980 IF POINT (X%. Y%-36 ) = 1 AND POINT (X% +56. Y%-36 ) = 1 AND SCROLL%<=8 THEN SCROLL% = 0 ELSE IF POINT (XX, Y%-36 )=1 AND POINT (X %+56. Y%-36 )=1 AND SCROLL%>8 THEN PROCDIE : PROCEND: RUN 990 IF POINT (X%. Y%-36)=0 AND POINT (X% +56. Y%-36 ) = 0 THEN DROP%-O ELSE DROP%=1:1 "


"HR$141\" BOUNCER F DROP%=1 THEN P=0 1000 IF POINT (X%+16, Y%-12) = 4 OR POINT X%+48. Y%-16 ) = 4 THEN PROCFINITO: PROCEND:R UN 1010 IF POINT (X%+16. Y%-12)=7 OR POINT X%+48. Y%-16 ) = 7 THEN PROCDIE: PROCEND:RUN 1020 COLOUR7: PRINT TAB (SPX%. SPY%); CHR$ 232: TAB (SPX%, SPY%-1):\" \"; TAB (SPX%, SPY%+1 1260 PRINT NAMES' NAMES 1270 PRINT!!\" You control BOUNCER.a beach ball stuck in a factory chimne 1280 PRINT\" However, you must colle at 10 keys before your time limit run Sout.\" 1290 PRINT\" IP you run out of time. or drop too far. BOUNCER burstand yo u must start again.\" 1300 PRINT\" If you manage to collec t 10 keys, youwill encounter the WAREHOU SE . Beware!! There is only one way down 1310 PRINT\"\" avoid the At the bottom, you must SPIDER and finally escape | BOUNCER 1030 LET SPY%=SPY%+DIRECT% 1040 IF SPY%=23 OR SPY%= 20 THEN LET DI RECT%-DIRECT% 1050 COLOUR1: PRINT TAB(4.24) : CHR$229 1060 GOTO 940 1070 DEFPROCDROP2 1080 LET SCROLL%=SCROLL%+1 1090 LASTY%=Y%: VDUS: MOVEX%, LASTY%: GCOL 0,0:VDU228:Y%=Y%-16: MOVEX%, Y%: GCOLO. 6:VD U228: VDU4 1100 SOUNDI, -15.100+P. 1: P=P-5: VDU5: MOV EX%, Y%+16: GCOLO,0:VDU228: MOVEX%, Y%: GCOLO .6: VDU228: VDU 1110 END PROC 1120 DEFPROCFINITO 1130 RESTORE 1230 1110 FOR LOOP%=1 TO 7 1150 READ PITCH%, DURATION% 1160 SOUNDI.-15. PITCH%, DURATION% 1170 NEXT 1180 CLS: COLOUR15 1190 PRINT TAB(4.8):\"BRILLIANT!!\" 1200 COLOUR6: PRINT TAB(2.12);\"YOU SCOR ED-\": SCORE% 1210 FOR WAIT%=1 TO 20000: NEXT 1220 ENDPROC 1230 DATA 61.5.53.2.49.4.53.3.49.3.41. 3.33.7 1210 DEFPROCINSTRUCT 1250 NAMES CHR$(129) +CHR$157 +CHR$135+CD 1320 PRINT' 'TAB(7) \"PRESS (SPACE) TO C ONTINUE\":REPEAT: UNTIL GET $\"\" 1330 CLS: PRINT NAME$' NAME$ 1340 PRINT!!\" KEYS...\" 1350 PRINT'TAB(12)\" z. ... ... LEFT\" 1360 PRINT'TAB (12)\" X.:....RIGHT\" 1370 PRINT''': PRINT TAB( 11.12); CHR$ 141 : CHR$131; CHR$136: \"GOOD LUCK!\": TAB(11,13) : CHR$141; CHR$130: CHR$136: \"GOOD LUCK!\" 1380 PRINT TAB(9.20): \"PRESS (SPACE) TO PLAY\" 1390 REPEAT: UNTIL GET $=\"\" 1400 END PROC 1410 DEFPROCTITLE 1420 COLOURI: PRINT TAB(1.1): \"B\": COLOUR 2: PRINT TAB(4.3);\"O\": COLOUR3: PRINT TAB( 6 .5): \"U\": COLOUR 4: PRINT TAB(9.7):\"N\": COLOU R5: PRINT TAB (12.5): \"C\": COLOUR 6: PRINT TAB (14.3): \"E\": COLOUR7: PRINT TAB (17, 1): \"R\" 1430 END PROC "


"Can You Write Games? If you can, Superior Software has something important to say to you. Introducing Ourselves sold, calculated and sent out promptly every three months. In certain cases advances are also paid. Tim Tyler's Repton games have earnt him over ,000 in less than a year quite a sum for a 17 year old, and Deathstar author Peter Johnson has earnt almost ,000 with us Marketing Advantage hree years ago Richard Hanson set up Superior Software to meet the growing demand for high quality games and educational programs. Now, 88 releases further on, Superior has established itself as the leading software house for BBC and Electron computers with topselling releases such as Repton. Deathstar, Citadel and SPEECH! ur royalty payments show that our authors have benefitted from professional packaging, point-ofsale material for retailers, carefully placed full-colour advertising and effective communication with both trade and consumer magazines to get the maximum coverage, Exciting Opportunities FREE Guidebook s part of its continuing program of expansion, Superior is looking for top programmers of ALL home computers to write original software and to produce conversions. We are also looking for games designers, graphics artists and computer musicians who would like to be involved in some fascinating projects. f you would like to be part of our continuing success, please call Richard Hanson in confidence on 0532 459457 or 459453. Or write to the address below for a FREE copy of \"Superior Software's Top Tips for Games Authors\". This informative and useful booklet is in limited supply, so send for your copy now. Top Payments ur authors are paid on a royalty basis, receiving 80p for every cassette 7 SUPERIOR SOFTWARE Limited Richard Hanson Managing Director Superior Software Ltd Dept.RA4, Regent House Skinner Lane, Leeds LS7 1AX "


"C+VG MAP M ake the French Connection with our excluIVIsive Get Dexter map snatched from across the channel by our undercover Ideas Central operatives. Dexter is a super android on a top secret mission to save the earth by infiltrating the research centre which houses Zarxas-the galactic central control computer. Dexter has to contact several professors to learn parts of a special computer room code. To help Amsters everywhere Get Dexter into the control room, we've smuggled out this photo-map of the game with the help of those nice guys at PSS. SCORE 006500 CORE 00 9000 ENERGY 94%. CO SCORE 002000 ODDDDDD ENERGY 52% SCORE 004 500 ENERGY 84 -SCORE 005000 "


" 406320 00000064 0.66 ENERGY 90% SCORE 003000 87% CODE -----SCORE 004000 RRA?) OA SCORE 00650D SCORE 11000 P = PROFESSOR ENERGY SCORE 009508 ENERGY MERLO SR SCORE 007000 "


"Wifits FANCY CHANCING YOUR ARM AT BASKBATT. OR MAYBE YOU WA T B A HERO.OF  OLD WEST OR WHAT ABOUT ANY PRENEUR OF THE 3575 oth CENTURY PSI 5 Trading Company You are about to captain your ship through one of the great edge-of-your-seat adventures of the 35th Century Sitting on a mother lode of rich mining deposits. the Parvin Frontier is a mecca for settlers, entrepreneurs on both sides of the law, and some of the worst scum of the universe. The inhabitants are on the brink of starvation and will pay anything to anyone who can get through to them with a ship of supplies from the outside world. If you're ripe for a challenge and feel comfortable in the role of Space Freighter Captain. your ship just came in. Choose your crew from a collection of human and inhuman characters. Sharpen your management skills and man the bridge. Take command with detailed graphics, realistic sound and the finest bridge instrumentation the 35th Century has to offer. Keyboard or joystick controlled. Law of the West Law of the West's astounding interactive adventure puts you in the midst of turbulent Old West action. As the Sheriff of Gold Gulch -as tough a Wild West town as there ever was you'll have all you can do to survive til sundown. If you've ever wanted to pin a tin star to your chest and match the exploits of a Bat Masterson or Wyatt Earp, then here's your chance. Ultra-large graphics, lifelike action, and natural playability deliver excitement so real you can almost smell the gunpowder. Entirely joystick controlled. Hardball Batter up! The most graphically stunning computer baseball game ever developed! HardBall puts you on the field and in the dugout as both player and manager of a baseball team. It'll put you in the big leagues. Here's computer baseball so real that you'll be reaching for your rosin bag before each pitch. Each field has 3-D perspective. Full-sized animation brings the game action to life as you play against the computer or another human baseball fan. HardBall gives you command of the physical interactions and strategic decisions of baseball. Test your game strategy from a manager's point of view. Hit and run. Steal. Sacrifice. Leap for long fly balls or dive for grounders. Play ball! Entirely joystick controlled. DISK .95 CASSETTE .95 DISK Commodore 64/128: WE BESTOW ON YOU THE ULTIMATE U.S. GOLD TM Accolade YOU TOO CAN BE A KNIGHT OF THE COMPUTER! U.S. Gold Ltd, Unit 10 Parkway Industrial Estate, Heneage Street, Birmingham, B7 4LY. Tel: 021 3598881 "


"BARGAIN SOFTWARE: FREEPOST Dept.C+VG 1, Unit 1, 1 Esmond Road, London W41BR PRICE PROMISE If you wish to purchase any product from our list and find that you can buy the same product cheaper from another mail order company, Simply enclose the lower amount, stating the name of the other company and where you saw the advert. (It must be a current issue), Price Promise does not apply to other companies \"Special Offers\". ORDERS OVER DEDUCT 10%  BUY BY PHONE RING 01-995 2763 SPECTRUM REC. PRICE OUR PRICE REC PRICE OUR PRICE SPECTRUM BEACH HEAD 11 GYROSCOPE GEOFF CAPES STRONGMAN IMPOSSIBLE MISSION BOUNTY BOB STRIKES BACK 93823 5.90 5.90 11.95 8.25 COMPILATIONS REC PRICE OUR PRICE 8.95 8.95 6.70 7.40 7.40 THEY SOLD A MILLION II BRUCE LEE KNIGHTLORE MATCH POINT MATCH DAY SPECTRUM WORM IN PARADISE CRITICAL MASS PANZADROME SURF CHAMP FORBIDDEN PLANET FIGHTING WARIOR TERRORMOLINOS WAY OF THE EXPLODING FIST WINTER SPORTS SWORD & SORCERY NEVER ENDING STORY ASTRO CLONE THEIR FINEST HOUR WORLD SERIES BASKETBALL SPY VS SPY F. BRUNO'S BOXING DAMBUSTERS SOUTHERN BELLE MONOPOLY CLUEDO SCALETRIX FAIRLIGHT 9.95 7.45 SONUNNAR 5.90 7.95 5.90 7.95 5.90 9.95 ARCADE HALL OF FAME 9.95 7.40 THE PLANETS SAI COMBAT GREEN BERET BOMB JACK PAPER BOY EMPIRE THE PAWN SUPERBOWL SKYFOX BOUNCERS SUPERMAN STREETHAWK KNIGHT RIDER PING PONG SHOWJUMPING ENIGMA FORCE SIR FRED BATTLE OF THE PLANETS COMMANDO BARRY MCGUIGAN'S BOXING LORD OF THE RINGS THINK THREE WEEKS IN PARADISE TURBO SPORT YIE AR KUNG FU ROLLER COASTER SWEEVO'S WORLD SABOTEUR COSMIC WARTOAD GUNFRIGHT TOMAHAWK MOVIE ROCK 'N' WRESTLE TRANSFORMERS WINTER GAMES GLADIATOR TWISTER FRIDAY 13th MILKIE BLUE MAX ROCCO FLAK HUNCHBACK 11 7.95 9.95 9.95 7.45 7.45 7.45 7.45 7.99 15.95 7.95 9.95 5.95 11.90 8.95 7.95 6.70 5.90 5,20 5.90 6.95 7.95 SPORTS PACK SNOOKER ON THE OCHE WORLD CUP FOOTBALL OLYMPICS (14 events) 36.00 : SPECTRUM SPECIAL OFFERS VIEW TO A KILL CODE NAME MATI ALIEN 9.95 GREAT SPACE RACE 1495 VALHALLA 1496 1495 DEATH STAR 7.95 88888 5.90 7.45 7.45 DERBY DAY 9.95 7.95 5.90 6.70 5.90 7.95 7.50 8.95 COMMODORE SPECIAL OFFER INTERNATIONAL SOCCEH Cart) 1499499 5.45 6.70 COMPUTER HITS II CODE NAME MAT WIZARDS LAIR TECHNICIAN TED MUTANT MONTY SNOOKER ANDROID II ON THE RUN COVENANT SUPER PIPLINE 2 CIRCUS 14.95 11.20 5.90 SAS 9.95 7.45 5.90 7.45 HOT SHOTS MINDSHADOW FIGHTING WARRIOR SHADOWFIRE GYRON COMMODORE 64 Ghost and Goblins Empire Bomb Jack Paper Boy Fairlight Superbowl Biggles Way of the Tiger Rebel Planet Silent Service Green Beret Uridium BACK TO THE FUTURE WEST BANK N.O.M.A.D. RAMBO TAU CETI BACK TO SKOOL ROBIN OF THE WOOD LEGEND OF THE AMAZON WOMEN CYBERUN ZOIDS BALL BLAZER BLADE RUNNER ZORRO THE GOONIES STARSTRIKE I HUNCHBACK THE ADVENTURE ARC OF YESOD RUNESTONE WAY OF THE TIGER 7.45 9.95 7.45 8.95 6.70 5.90 5.90 5.90 5.90 NOW.GAMES 2 CHUCKIE EGG 2 AIRWOLF TIR NA NOG WORLD CUP CAULDRON 8.95 9.95 6.70 Asylum Hardball Saboteur Game Killer (Cart.) 5.90 11.20 BARGAIN SOFTWARE ORDER FORM (No stamp necessary inside British Isles) Please send me the following titles. BLOCK capitals please! Name Type of computer Address Title: Amount 474A Chiswick High Road, VISIT OUR SHOP London Total Enclosed  Tel. No. Please make cheques or postal orders payable to BARGAIN SOFTWARE. Prices include P&P within the U.K: Europe please add .75 per tape: Elsewhere please add .00 extra per tape W4 "


"0000000000000 FITBA CRAZIE! Two, four, six, eight, who do we appreciate? Well, C+VG, of course. As the world is gripped by football fever, Simon Inglis proves to be on the ball with a special round-up of all the computer football games available. ith so much attention lavished on this Big League Soccer from Viper, which arrived month's World Cup in Mexico you last year, has clearer graphics but goes to the other might think there's enough football on extreme by undervaluing players -Gary Bailey for our screens at the moment without harping on ,000! Surely he's not that bad? about football computer games. And what a tedious format. Playing 42 games per But the fact is that although games Season may be realistic but it takes an age to play manufacturers continue trying to milk the national especially as you have to select each team from sport another three this year takes the total to scratch for every match over 20 --most of them aren't much more fun than Football Manager scores because it has a good a goalless draw at Arsenal. And very often the ones balance of challenge and reward. If we're honest, no that are worth trying are the ones least publicised one would play any game for long it, like most Take managerial games for instance. Everyone football managers, you end up nowhere having won has heard of Kevin Toms Football Manager, nothing all season. mainly because Addictive Games has a strong With Football Manager you have to be pretty marketing instinct. Reported sales of over 150,000 awful not to do well at beginner's level. Alone make it easily the best seller in this field. amongst the managerial games each match has its Yetits lesser known rivals are actually more own graphic display. Others just show minute by challenging and amusing minute scores. The Boss from Peaksoft, for example, with The trouble with this however is that you can claimed sales of over 90,000. You must tackle only sit back and watch the action-like a real realistic financial problems familiar to any soccer manager--and after the first few matches it's buff -like repairs from riot damage, rate demands tempting to keep nipping out for a Bovrilor from the council and so on, while favourable apee comments from pundits like Jimmy Hill play havoc None of the players ever with your team's morale. get sent off But then the game spoils itself by allowing you to buy any player you want from your next week's opponents, a gambit not even tried by Malcolm Allison in his heyday! The trickiest managerial game is United from C.C.S. which has horribly inflated prices for players- million for a sweeper would deter even Ron Atkinson these days but allows you to play cleanor dirty on a scale of 1-10, ano you can pitch in apprentices and sell them off fora quick profit. or fined for drunken driving, which makes it all horribly idealistic. The latest managerial game on the market is Virgin's Official F.A. Cup Game, which is great for a crowd to play-well, eight people anyway -but on your own is somewhat less demanding than finding room on the terraces at Torquay. Once you ve selected ten teams to manage the only other decisions to make are to choose between three sets of tactics and in later rounds answer a few fatuous questions Meanwhile, in between rounds, the computer churns out a load of ridiculous newsflashes which are supposed to affect your team's morale. Flashes such as \"There is no news about your team in the press this week\" and \"The club's oldest surviving player is 100 years old today.\"Big deal! Unless of course the centenarian is still playing But the biggest anti-climax is the Final itself Having teased you with a rendition of Abide with Meand a picture of Wembley, once the Final is over the game stops--no cheering, no presentation, no wildly ecstatic graphics. Now if you really wish to avoid excitement, buy Liverpool (mail order only) possibly the slowest and least rewarding game on the entire market and an insult to the name of that great football club. If, like Tommy Docherty, you can't cope with managerial games for very long, Rothman's Football Quick Quiz, with questions by the yearbook's editor Peter Dunk, is packed full of toughies, although the version played had somehow managed to get all the categories mixed up. The non-League section was all about the FA Cup, and the European section was full of soccer trivia For sheer enjoyment Imuch preferred Answer Back Sport from Kosmo, which not only includes questions on cricket, rugby, boxing, golf and tennis 25 well as soccer, but also has two action games of soccer and tennis in between quiz rounds For this reason I can just forgive them for misspelling the name of Liverpool's immortal manager Bil Shankly. A cheaple quiz game available by mail order from Marksman Software, The Ultimate Soccer Quiz, is ultimately rather simple and dull, which might explain why the makers felt bound to slip in totally irrelevant scoreflashes from a fictitious game between Spursand Ever Of course the hardest part of soccer to simulate is the actual game itself-hard enough for real professionals nowadays--and in this respect some of the software 800.00090 "


"0060808080808 Our boys in Mexico. Long may they be needed to endorse the next crop of football computer games. MANAGERIAL GAMES * FOOTBALL MANAGER Addictive Games. 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth Tel: 0202 296404 BBC, Electron, Dragon Amstrad, C64, Vic 20, Spectrum, ZX8/ THE BOSS (also The Champions) Peaksoft. 48 Queen Street, Balderton, Notes Tel:0636 705230 C64, 16, Amstrad MX, BBC, Electron, Dragon Tandy, Spectrum .95-28.95 UNITED CCS, 14 Langton Way, London SE37TL Tel:01-8580763 Spectrum .95 * BIG LEAGUE SOCCER Viper Software, Eardley House, 182-4 Campden Hill Road, London W8 7AS Amstrad .95 * LIVERPOOL P.M. Corbishley, 212 Walmersley Old Road. Bury Tet061-7640229 Spectrum Atari 18.45 (E14.95 Atari disk) +OFFICIALFA. CUP GAME Virgin Games, 2-4 Vernon Yard, Portobello Road, London WII 2DX Tel:01-727 8070 Amstrad, C64/128, Spectrum .95 Amstrad, BBC, Spectrum .9519.95 *BOBBY CHARLTON SOCCER D.A.C.C. Ltd., 172 Finney Lane, Heald Green, Cheadle. Cheshire SK8 3PU BRC Electron.95 inc &p GLENN HODDLE SOCCER Amsoft. Brentwood House, 169 King's Road Brentwood, Essex CM144EF Tel: 027 228888 Amstrad .95 (.95 disk) + SPOT THE BALL Thorn EMI, 296 Farnborough Road, Farnborough Hampshire GUI47NF Tel: 0252 543333 Atari.95 * FIVE-A-SIDE FOOTBALL Anirog Software, Unit 10. Victoria Industrial Park, Victoria Road, Dartford, Kent Tel: 0322 92513/8 C64.95 (.95 disc) #FIVE-A-SIDE SOCCA IJK Software, Unit 3c, Moorfields, Moor Park Avenue, Bisham, Blackpool, Lancs LY20JY Tel:025355282 BBC Electron FOOTBALL QUIZZES * ANSWER BACK SPORT Kosmo Software, I Pilgrims Close, Harlington, Dunstable, Bedfordshire, LU56LX Tel:05255 3942 BBC, Electron .95 * ULTIMATE FOOTBALL QUIZ Marksmen Software, Temple Chambers, 4a Abbey Road, Grimsby DN32 OHF Spectrum .95 * ROTHMANS FOOTBALL QUIZ Cassell Ltd., I St Anne's Road, Eastbourne, East Sussex BN21 3UN Tel:0323638221 Spectrum .95 *CLUB FILE/TABLES Spartan Sports Association, 29 Feltham Avenue. East Molesey, Surrey KT898) Tel: 01-941 3253 Spectrum +TABLES J. Moore, Football Software, 26 Trembear Road, St. Austell, Cornwall Spectrum .95 END houses have come closest to scoring own goals. Glenn Hoddle's Soccer from Amsoft offers routine entertainment but little more. It was far too easy just to walk the ball into the opponent's net-not one of Glenn's specialities. For no discernible reason the goalkeepers wore the same shirts as the rest of the team, a practice which was banned a mere 77 years ago The ball in Bobby Charlton's Soccer created by D.A.C.C. was so tiny control was so hard and the instructions so lacking in one vital point that! had to turn to Bobby's very self-conscious message on the other side of the cassette for encouragement, before ringing the makers to find out how to proceed. If you too get stuck, the way out is by pressing Qtwice. World Cup Football, like the FA Cup game, is good for a whole crowd, especially those old enough to remember Bobby Moore, who is still featured on the cover. Hasn't anyone told Artic that Bryan Robson is the current England captain! Or that great footballing nations like Portugal and at lootaning nations like Portugal and Hungary deserve inclusion rather more than Guyana and Tasmania. A quick scan of the rule book would also inform Artic that a player cannot throw the ball into himself. Which is where Andrew Spencer comes in. He apparently knew nothing about football until he read the rule book and then proceeded to write International Football from Commodore which outscores its rivals in almost every respect. You can really hurl your keeper about the goalmouth, as well as getting your men to head the ball The graphics and sound are outstanding and the player's movements easily recognisable. My only criticism is that both teams wear black shorts International Soccer's closest rival is Match Day from Ocean which also sports good graphics and the Match of the Day theme tune Unfortunately the computer seems to play some odd tricks, the oddest being to make its players turn away from open goals and kick the ball into touch. This might just be sour grapes on my part however, since I seemed to be totally incapable of beating the computer in the tackle. If you don't have a Commodore for International Football, Match Day for the Amstrad, BBC or Spectrum is the best of the rest. Not all of us see soccer as a mere game however. There are some of us who delight in pouring over statistics and records, and some who use computers to help run their own leagues. Yes, people do still actually play the real game. For such people two Spectrum programs from the Spartan Sports Association-Club File and Tables-are valuable aids. I also liked League Table and Champions, both from Football Follower, which workout past form and list winners (useful for pools punters) and another Spectrum home-produced program called Tables which enable you to keep up-to-date records for the entire Football League and Scottish League, from Football Software fear that none of these information packages will help you wina fortune on the pools, and I'm pretty sure none of them will make their creators very rich either. We'll leave that side of soccer to ACTION GAMES WORLD CUP FOOTBALL Artic Computing Ltd., Main Street, Brandesburton, Driffield, North Humberside YO25 8RL Tel: 0401 43553 C64, Amstrad Spectrum .95-.95 * KICK OFF Bubble Software, 87 High Street, Tonbridge, Kent Tel: 0732 355962 C64.99 INTERNATIONAL FOOTBALL Commodore, I Hunters Road, Weldon Borby, Northants Tel: 0536 205555 C64.99 * MATCH DAY Ocean Software, 6 Central Street, Manchester M2 5NS Tel: 061-8326633 * LEAGUE TABLE/CHAMPIONS Football Follower, 4 Brampton Court, Bowerhill, Melksham, Wilts SN126TH Spectrum .95,.95 (or .50 both) Simon Inglis writes on football for the Guardian and Observer. He has written three books on football and is currently the official historian for the Football League's Centenary History. His second book. The Football Grounds of England and Wales, has sold over 20,000 copies to date and has been widely acclaimed. His latest book a history of British football scandals, has also aroused great interest. Both are published by Collins Willow. He writes on a BBC B computer and his record score at Hopper is 28,540 080808080808 "


"Bilete de 18, ef WAP-BOP-A-LULARE A-WAM BAM BOO D Rarely rising before midday, C+VG jet-setter JIM DOUGLAS broke the habits of a lifetime and headed for parts unknown... Newcastle. Why? To discover the secrets of a man, a micro and his music. stood alone on the platform, which hopeful adjectives over the phone from was shrouded in mist. I blinked a software house, or a couple of photos. away the dawn and boarded the Sometimes, he actually gets to see the train. I had all the necessary equipment. game...! Notebook, tape-recorder and Geordie One of his newer projects, Master of phrase book. Magic, the excellent Mastertronic D&D Three hours later I was confronted by game,contains a piece over five minutes the horrible realisation that I wasn't long, yet Rob managed to fit it into 3K. going to need the latter item after all How long would something like that The people here actually spoke take to program? comprehensible English. \"About four days.\" 'chunks, rather than voices. He says This friends, is Newcastle. The basis Solid? that if you complete one sound channel. of a thoroughly baffling cliche about \"No. It'd be spread over-hopefully or 'voice' it's very hard to make sure the \"coals\" and, more importantly, home of about two weeks. Even so, it'd be four other channels are in time. If you do it Mr Rob Hubbard -musician days of pretty hard graft. piece by piece, perfecting each couple of extraordinaire. \"I like to work so that I can, like, doa seconds of music at a time with all three For the uninitiated, Robis probably certain amount and then leave it, and go channels going at once, it's easier to the man behind that infuriatingly back after a while to see what's wrong handle. catchy theme tune on your favourite with it, and what's right with it. If you A word familiar to BBC users will be arcade game. His list of game sound work in a long stretch, you lose your procedure. This is how the Forth'idea tracks are as long as your arm. critical facilities. Know what I mean? works. It's really quite simple. Rob's \"workshop\" is a large room Like any writer, Robis a little If your music is going to play the same with a back wall which seems to be protective about his work. Hasa set of notes more than once, write a constructed with very thick books. A software company ever decided that his procedure. It's easier to call it twice than brief perusal of the titles show they are music isn't right for a certain game? to store the data twice. The more notes not wholly unconnected with his \"No. Reviewers have thought that, but you fit into a procedure, the more space programming. nobody else! you save. Rob likes to get the \"mood\" of a piece \"But you know what reviewers are What with conversions, rushed of work. For a recent project he bought like...\" deadlines and out-of-the-blue requests books and records on the subject of His programs are all of course) for certain items, it sounds like a fullRussian Balalaika music, and for a machine code, and extremely confusing time job. karate game he worked on, he played to look at for the simpleton interviewer. \"Well, I play in a band as well. Doing the Merry Christmas, Mr Lawrence He works with sub-routines and tables cover versions of other groups' records. soundtrack incessantly, before and raster interrupts. I play keyboards. Doing clubs and that.\" realising it was \"rubbish\", and This was all a bit beyond me-being Which presumably helps to forget the composing his own piece! something to do with 'fitting it onto the computer for a while? The name of the game for Robis space. time it takes to cross the screen'. When \"Yeh. For a few hours I'm in a Sometimes he is given a handful of visible, they make the Commodore look completely different place with kilobytes to play around with. Other rather like a Spectrum whilst loading different people. It's a break to get on times, however, he isn't so lucky, and his Rob's music is structured. The way he stage and play with the band.\" tune has to go through several stages of explained it made his system sound Rob works on at least a couple of compression before fitting into the rather like Forth. One command projects at a time. When I was there, he ridiculous space left over after an branching to another, which in turn, had just about finished the theme for extravagant programmer has finished. calls another and so on. International Karate for System 3, and His brief\" can be as vague as a few When writing the tune, he works in Proteus, for a company of the same name, in Norwich. After searching through his disgustingly orderly box of discs, he loaded one-\"You have to wait ages for this.\"-and gave me a demo. A fairly tame 'ching started the tune, and then mixed with a woooo' a 'tcheee' and some others I can't spell, until the poor old Commodore was busting a gut and sounding eerily like a soundtrack for a rather up-market martial arts movie. It's frighteningly good. How long did it take to do this one? \"Oh, I spent quite a long time on this, er a couple of weeks.\" used up at a ferocious rate, I sat on the train home, wondering how long it will be before people start writing games around Rob's soundtracks. THE ROB HUBBARD FILE Favourite Food: Steak & Kidney pre Lasagne a decent one.\" Favourite Drink:Coffee Most disliked TV show: \"Anything with Terry Woganin. Favourite TV show: Fowl Towers Favourite Music: Chick Corea Favourite Movie: Veer Ending Story.\" was quite good.\" Countries Visited: Belgium Austria Italy Denmark Norway Sweden Jersey Pet Hate: Baseless my computer is better than yours\" debates' 611.pn y in the past "


"Heavy on the Magick CONVERSATIONS WITH APEX THE DOUBT OF RABAK Magi ** OLD TROLL! BEFORE THE GATES OF WOLFDORP Magick Heavy on the Magick er SCREEN SHOTS FROM THE SPECTRUM VERSION BEWARE OF THE WEREWOLF! MAGOT THE PRINCE From GARGOYLE -the GAMEMASTERS SPECTRUM 48/128K (AVAILABLE NOW AMSTRAD (AVAILABLE MAY 1986) CBM 64/128 (AVAILABLE SOON) CBM 64/128 .95 www.edu GARGOYLE GAMES LTD., 74 KING STREET, DUDLEY, WEST MIDLANDS DY2 8QB Telephone: (Sales) 0384 238777 (General) 0384 237222 "


"C+VG COMPETITION WWW VY SINGALONGARAMBO! Ever wished that you could get all your favourite computer game tunes on one tape? Of course you have! And now you CAN thanks to the ace computer musicians at Mupados They've produced a special audio tape called Datahits complete with special disco mixes of tunes like Rambo, Ghostbusters, Crazy Comets and the theme from Chariots of Fire which graced Hypersports runner up in the arcade section of our Golden Joystick Awards. On the B side is a useful database which you can use to index your games tapes, or even your record collection. The Softwhere? database runs on C64 and Spectrum computers but Datahits will run on any cassette recorder orghettoblaster! We've got 50 Datahits Softwhere to give away thanks to Mupados-25 for the Spectrum and 25 for the 64. All you have to do to get your hands on one is call up our special C+VG Datahit-line and identity the THREE tunes on the tape. Once you've done that just fill in the coupon and rush it to Computer + Video Games, Datahits Competition. Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR 3AU. Closing date for the competition is June 16th, the editor's decision is final, and normal C+VG rules apply. The number to ring is 01-251-5633. Don't give up if you don't get through right away, this is an answerphone service and you'll have to wait your turn SINGALONGARAMBO! C+VG/DATAHITS COMPETITION Name Address Tune One is Tune Twois Tune Three is Computerowned: 6401 Spectrum (tick box) "


"MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY A SUBSIDIARY OF PLATINUM GOLD Compumart ECLD 10 mitosis Blank Disks Quality 59. 5 Single Sided Double Denary  OVER 8.000 different titles available for hire for the COMMODORE, SPECTRUM, BBC, AMSTRAD.ATARI, MSX, ELECTRON, IBM and APRICOT * ARCADE, ADVENTURE, EDUCATIONAL and BUSINESS software too. * HIRE PRICES from only 75p INC P&P  20% DISCOUNT off all purchase software. * FREE CATALOGUES.  FREE HINTS AND TIPS  FAST RETURN OF POST SERVICE (if reserves are given). * ALL GAMES manufactures ORIGINALS with full documentation.  OVER 12,000 satisfied members,  EUROPEAN members welcome. Life Membership .00. * Fully computerised system keeps track of your order. We pride ourselves in being the most professional Hire Library in the United Kingdom, with staff of 14 who know what the word service means. Backed by our own software company and programmers. I  Double Sided 1 10 Bouble Density .      23 Plastic Library Case GOODS DESPATCHED Same day Quality Blank Disks 50 . 50 .    Class Post Compumart MONEY BACK Guarantee MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY CVG 28 COLLEGE STREET, WORCESTER WR1 2LS TEL: 0905 611072 Please rush me my free catalogue stating machine. Name ........... Address Please send cheques postal orders to: Compumart Dept CV 71 Gracedieu Road, Loughborough Leics, U1100F 050 UNE ... Compumart.... Comp 0509-262259 Compu UNE HOTLINE. HOY MEGASAVE FANTASTIC SAVINGS SPECTRUM 7.50 Atari 400/600/800/XL 130XE Atari 520ST Commodore 64/Vic20/C16/Plus 4 Spectrum/BBC/Amstrad Hardware Software Peripherals Mediatech 544 Discs (SS/DD) 11.95 Mediatech 5°/4 Discs (DS/SS) 12.95 LOCKABLE 100 DISC BOXES 9.95 PHONE OR WRITE FOR PRICES LIVINGSTON COMPUTER CENTRE 17 THE MALL, CRAIGSHILL LIVINGSTON. (0506) 36978 FREE POSTAGE AND PACKING ON ORDERS OVER  Callers Welcome 5.95 550 SUPA SOFT DISCOUNT SOFTWARE Batman 5.95 Ping Pong............. 5.95 Comet Flintstones..... 5.95 Exploding Fist..........6.95 Paper Boy 5.95 Fairlight Superman... 7.50 Crash Smashes. 50 Time Tunnel... .. 7.50 Sai Combat ....5.50 Desert Fox 7 .50 Elite 11.25 Green Beret 5.95 Superbowl..... 7.50 5.95 Fighting Warrior.. Price of Magick Hardball 7.50 Zoids Quaratron 6.75 Wild West Critical Mass... 6.75 Bounder 7.50 Lords of the West 7.50 7.50 Sold a Million Hocus FOCUS Laser Basic 12.50 3 Weeks in Paradise 7.50 7.50 Bounder 7.50 Lord of the Rings 12.50 Strike Force Harrier 7.50 Back to the Future 7.50 Commando...... 7.50 Alien Highway ..... 5.95 Uridium ..... 6.75 Back to Skool... 5.25 Questprobe 7.50 Kung Fu Master... 7.50 Swords & Sorcery 7.50 Spindi 7.50 Law of West 7.50 Rock 'n' Wrestle... 6.75 Bad Hawk Amazon Woman 7.50 Tomahawk 7.50 Core 750 Nightshade...... . 7.50 Cyberun... 7.50 Max Headroom 750 Friday the 13th 6.75 Starstrike Eidolon 8.00 Saboteur 5.95 Bomb Jack.. 750 Roller Coaster.........5.25 Ghost'n Goblins 5.95 The Force 750 Young Ones ... 5.95 Empire.......... ....... 7.50 30 Games 7.50 Who Dares Wins .....5.95 Twister Yio Ar Kung Fu......5.95 Rebel Planet.............. 7.50 Way of the Tiger ........750 Rambo... 5.95 FA Cup Spitfire 40.. 7.50 COMMODORE 64 Asylum Ping Pong PSI 5 Trading 750 Gladiator Elite Finest Hour... Fantaght Exploding Fist. 7.50 7.50 Gun Starship Andromeda 750 Fright.......... Summer Games I 7.50 7.50 Green Beret 6.25 Nomad.................. 5.95 Sky Fox..............7.50 Flintstones......... 5.95 Mercenary.........7.50 Zzap Sizzlers........ ..750 Tigers in the Snow... 7.50 Terromolinos Winter Games...........5.95 Of the Hook... Desert Rat....7.50 .6.75 7.50 Superbowl............. 7.50 Geoft Capes....... .6.75 Tubular Bells 5.95 Art Studio 12.50 Battle of Britain 7.50 Archon 7.50 Turbo Esprit.............6.75 Spy vs Spy 7.50 Golf Construction Laser Basic..... ... 12.50 Summer Games L.. 7.50 6.75 Hocus Focus...... West Bank 5.95 Winter Games........7.50 Sky Fox..............6.75 Goonies.................7.50 7.50 5.95 Movie Empire... Sold a Million... 7.50 Amazon Woman 5.95 Who Dares Wins....5.95 Commando Way of the Tiger.......... 7.50 7.50 7.50 Max Headroom 7.50 Lord of the Rings... 12.50 War Play Doomsdarks Revenge 7.50 30 Games 750 Bomb Jack Enigma Force......7.50 Price of Magic FA Cup....................... 5.95 Mugsy's Revenge....6.75 550 Twister..... Rock & Wrestle....... 7.50 Ghost'n Goblins 750 Heavy on Magick....... 750 Roller Coaster....... 5.95 750 Sam Fox Striptease 5.95 Silent Service ........ Young Ones..........5.95 Core......... 750 Hot Shots ........5.95 Arc of Yesod... 7.50 Postage included UK. Please state which micro. Fast service. Send cheque/P0 to: MEGASAVE, Dept CVG, 49H Sutherland Street Victoria, London Wi MAIL ORDER ONLY ACCESS 6.75 11.00 RRP Price Commodore RRP Price Astra the Match A Spin Duis way Hawaids Ano Way of the Tiger 1 0 00 Turn on 2.50 Banan Wrestle Surtout COMO Sold Mion 2 Zap Smashes Siest Seni PSRS Tra Cites Cuesos night Games 750 CS Green Bere! Price of Magic Heavy on the Magick Price Mao San Fox Far W ars Wir Cheque and PO Sterling only made payable to Discount Software Dept 3.210 Nicholls Tower Harlow. Essex "


"East and West are separated by the mythical Iron Curtain and numerous ideological differences. But when it comes to creating computer entertainments, people on both sides of the great divide have remarkably similar ideas. Here C+VG looks at two well known software development teams in the USA and Hungary. California's glitzy LUCASFILM operation and ANDROMEDA SOFTWARE, behind the Iron Curtain in Budapest. EAST ow do a bunch of programmers who've never seen a golf course, let alone held a golf club, create the ultimate golf simulation? C+VG editor, Tim Metcalfe, visited the Hungarian Andromeda Software team in Budapest to discover just how they did it. adventure with the 25,000 prize tag called Eureka! They also created games for the Creative Sparks label Bird Mother probably being the best known and the defunct K-Tel lable. Then came Tour De France an excellent simulation of the classic cycle race which was produced for Activision. More recently the collaboration with Ariolasoft has produced the excellent Wild West graphic interactive adventure, Starship Andromeda a space strategy game, plus Golf of course. Ironically there just isn't a games culture in Hungary. C16's Ariolasoft's superb Golf simulation has been under development for many months in different locations in and around Budapest. Not that it had to be done in secret for fear of police raids on ideologically unsound him on one of his numerous trips programmers. It's just how the to the Hungarian capital. Andromeda operation works. David had designed the game to Groups of programmers work feature four of Britain's top together on games designs using championship golf courses, the Andromeda offices in a including The Belfry, Wentworth Budapest backstreet as a meeting Old Course, Sunningdale and place where thorny programming Royal St Georges, Sandwich, plus problems are hammered out with a Golf Construction Program Andromeda boss Donat Kiss and which enables the player to create his team his own course. Either something The Golf group were just one of resembling a crazy golf course or several teams of programmers their local course. developing games for Andromeda The programming team went to and the UK software labels. work on the design and came up Golf was the brainchild of games with the superb simulation which designer David Bishop who heads was launched on an unsuspecting the Tigress Marketing concern world last month. and Ariolasoft's Ashley Grey. The main problem areas Their aim was to create the appeared to be judging the power perfect golf simulation. Getting the of the players' swing and how the game perfect has taken time. After ball bounced. Early versions were all, C+VG first saw the game in a a novice golfer's delight. The ball completely working form last flew for miles with just a tap of the September. It's taken since then to club and the ball bounced around simply get the fine tuning of the like one of those compressed program done to the satisfaction of rubber Superballs! Messers Bishop and Grey. That's where the videos came in So how did the Andromeda useful giving the programmers a programmers get to grips with a feel for the real thing. game they've never seen or even Golf is just the latest in a long played? To begin with they were line of games from the relatively supplied with videotapes of the unknown Andromeda team. golf classics ferried over by David Probably their most famous game Bishop who also supplied to date came out of the details of the courses, and even collaboration between Domark an took a golf club and golf balls with Ian Livingstone which created the "


"meets WEST OO TOO Danger! Guardian Saucers Approaching are used in schools but the Hungary has a long tradition in Commodore 64 is regarded a cartoon animation and the Czasar business machine and only used Studio is taking it into the for games by very few owners. micro-chip age. This is probably due to the Like David Fox at Lucasfilm, extremely high price of machines Czasar is talking about games that in Hungary. You can get a are more interactive and that suck Spectrum but it will cost you in the player into an event or the region of C350-! situation. Computer shops are in evidence Great minds think alike they say in shopping areas -some owned what could happen if East ever by the government and some by gets to meet West? individual companies sponsored by the State. Novatrade, Andromeda's parent company, has T Torrible aliens and recently opened a new computer charismatic heroes. Space shop which would look at home in 1 ships streaking across London's Tottenham Court Road multi-coloured galaxies with their thanks to its hi-tech design and lasers blazing. These are just a range of hardware and software few of the images that come to available. But again its mostly mind when you mention the name business oriented George Lucas. One of the most interesting Founded by the smash Star groups associated with Andromeda Wars movie his LUCASFILM is Czasar studio. It was Czasar's empire is a company expert in team who produced Wild West and stunning special effects and Starship Andromeda and heart-stopping action. The same Mirrorsoft's Ceasar the Cat game. goes for CUCASFILM GAMES, Under the eagle eve of Czasar's a fully-fledged member of the LF the team are producing some family, interesting stull. Like the C+VG's American animation system they use in their correspondent Marshal M. games which works a bit like a Rosenthal paid a visit to sunny jigsaw puzzle. The computer pulls San Rafael, California to discover the bits of graphic it needs into the a few secrets. He took the screen at the appropriate time. pictures too... avid Fox was so impressed by the special effects used in the movie Star Wars he decided that one day he would work for the company that created Lucasfilm. In September 1982 he was hired as one of the first programmers games designers of the then very new Lucasfilm Games division. Fox became involved in developing two new games to be marketed by Atari. They were to be \"super\" carts, 32K programs that fooled the Atari computers 16K limit for cartridges (a technique called bank-switching). \"The atmosphere was open with no set rules,\" says Fox. \"We were free to experiement and play around.\" The two projects became Ballblazer and Rescue on Fractalus. Ballblaser had a split screen with three-dimensional views to enhance a futuristic version of soccer. Fractalus flew you around a planet in search of downed pilots, fighting off gun emplacements, and even encountering aliens-in-sheep's clothing! Fractal graphics created quite a stir. Imagine, three-dimensional scenery which never repeated itself, yet was consistent and believable. Atari was planning to release both programs sometime in late 1984, but then the house fell in. Atari went under, and both games went into limbo \"What we did then,\" says Fox, \"was coordinate with the Epyx company. We decided on a disk based product. Now we could use more memory for refinements like opening graphics and a high score table.\" Fox mentions that a program goes through many changes before it is finished. \"George Lucas) came in one day and saw something the rest of us didn't notice about Rescue Continued on page 78  Budapest "


"that it had no \"action\" to resolve. We were so excited about the flying effect, with all the mountains and sound, that we hadn't considered adding \"shoot-em-up\" elements. But by looking at the game with a fresh eye, we could see that the player needed to do more than just fly around. Though it is pretty neat! Having a weapons system improved the game play. \"Meanwhile, Ballblaser was almost finished, in fact it almost seemed that it leapt fully grown from concept to software reality.\" light that evokes a sense of wonder. The program features a number of innovations, not the least being the music that plays during loading sequences helping to remove that \"waiting\" syndrome. But the most interesting of all is the large size of the onscreen characters. \"We got tired of all those tiny, tiny figures,\" says Fox, \"so we developed ACE (Animation Cell Editor). This program lets us create cell animation similar to that of hand-drawn cartoons. We can create \"bits\" of animation, like a  Koronis Rift Protective devices flit to and fro on the planet, trying to fry you. Careful planning is necessary, for only experience can tell what equipment will lead to success. \"A number of changes were incorporated in Rift,\" says games designer Ron Gilbert. \"We like what the fractual effect did for Rescue, but wanted the mountains to have a sense of distance, not just popping up on you. We created a better feeling of depth by having the landscape enlarge gradually.\" Gilbert notes that this realism is also enhanced by a shading technique they developed. The game requires strategic thinking as well as a quick trigger finger. There are controls to monitor, directions to search, and artifacts to find and inspect. \"We're very happy with the speed of the game-play too,\" Gilbert adds. \"All that onscreen action requires a program that moves along as fast as your reflexes. Rift is really great.\" New projects at Lucasfilm Games are shrouded in mystery. But C+VG can reveal that at least one new game is going to be based on a new movie starring an amazingly famous puppeteer. Watch these pages for more details nearer Christmas! Author's bio: When not operating his commercial photography studio, Marshal M. Rosenthal is a journalist for a number of domestic and overseas publications. SSCOD osed  Ballblazer  San Francisco  The Eidolon New ideas becoming reality. You wonder about this as you enter the dusty old mansion, and peer at the crumbling diary left within a secret workshop. It reveals a world of wonder that can only be penetrated by a strange device, the Eidolon.   The machine sits there, adorned with ornate symbols and dials. dragon's head, and merge it in Entering, you push the lever and place with other segments also are engulfed within a mesh of animated. So the dragon can twist power as the room whirls and spins his neck, blink his eyes and move about. The dizziness ends to find his wings all at once. Additionally, you staring out at a seemingly each animated segment moves endless cavern of tunnels and along with the other sections for a passages. fluid look.\" Strange balls of fire career off Koronis Rift takes you out of the walls, as colourful gems tempt the sky and puts you behind the your eye. A myriad of creatures steering wheel of a land rover. You pass by, some humorous while are a space scavenger, searching others seem not too friendly. And the many levels of the fabled all the while there's the feeling that Koronis Rift for valuable deserted something is sneaking up behind devices. you. Pilot along zig-zagging terrain in You must gather the gems and search of artifacts, using the face the dragon of the cave, in tech-robot to break them down order to move onward to the next into portable components. Bring level. How this is done is a back as many as you can to your mystery that each person must ship, where a highly skilled robot solve for himself. translates the booty into cash, ship The Eidolon is more than just stores or systems to carry on the fractals turned upside down. Therover. walls twinkle with an intermittent Sounds easy, but there's a catch. mum "


"DRIVER ERICANA MPG MICROPOWER PER  GAME Americana Software, all American action at a superb value for money price of only .99 COMING SOON SLAMBALL COMMODORE 64/128 NEW YORK CITY COMMODORE 64/128 . ATARI BREAKDANCE COMMODORE 64/128 SHAMUS COMMODORE 64/128 . ATARI SCOOTER COMMODORE 64/128 ATARI OLLIES FOLLIES COMMODORE 64/128 ATARI LICENSED TO THRILL AMERICANA SOFTWARE AMERICANA SOFTWARE, UNIT 10. PIENEAGE STREET BIRMI B/ 4LX. TEL: 021-359 8881 "


"(NERVE CENTRE OF IDEAS CORP) Welcome to IDEAS CENTRAL. My name is Melissa Ravenflame, I.C. co-ordinator. IDEAS CENTRAL is where you'll find the Bug Hunters' HQ and the man who keeps those rogue robots in order Jackson T. Kalliber. Jackson makes sure OTISS, Big Red, X and B-Con get out there to find the hints, tips and pokes you all so desperately need for a happy existence. Don't tell them but I can't rely on them to make a good job of it. So the IDEAS CORPORATION and yours truly, Melissa R., need YOUR help. Remember, the IDEAS CORP will pay a large amount of credits to anyone assisting our enquiries. So, send your hints and cheats to Melissa Ravenflame, IDEAS CENTRAL, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. COMMODORE 40 DATA 238, 32, 208, 169,1, 170, 168, 133, 183, G Elliott of South Shields has 50 DATA 32.186,255,169.0. set in this poke for Gremlin 60 DATA 32,213,255, 169,76, Graphics' Thing on a Spring. 141,209 Once the pokes have been 70 DATA 3,169,102, 141,210,3, entered, you will not run out of oil 169 when you touch any sprites and 80 DATA 254, 141,210,3,76, when a piece of puzzle, a switch or 174,2 son to the screen Make sure there are no errors you can pick it up. Rewind tape to then type RUN (return). When the the start and type LOAD'' when program has loaded enter these ready tape POKE1010,141: pokes:POKE1011,5: POKE1012,128 RUN Who Dares Wins 1 Loading will commence as usual POKE 5748-number of lives then the computer will reset after 1-255. loading. Type: POKE 5569-number of POKE 18001,255 Return grenades 1-255. SYS 16384 SYS 16384 to start To disable the lasers on levels two, three and four you should Who Dares Wins il hold down these keys while on the POKE 5702-number of lives title page T,HING INST/ 1-255. DEL. From Simon Hegarty we have POKE5513-number of pokes for Strangeloop and grenades 1-255. Who Dares Wins on the 64. SYS 16384 to start Strangeloop Load as normal, then start game SPECTRUM and get onto save game position Commando pokes for the and press run/stop restore. Now Spectrum comes from David enter these pokes. Warner of Temple Cloud. POKE 45486,173 for infinite lives. 10 CLEAR 40000 POKE 44217,173 for infinite fuel. 20 LOADCODE: POKE 65524, SYS865 for restart game. 201 30 RANDOMIZE USR 65485 WHO DARES WINS 1 and 2 40 FOR X = 23296 TO 23312: 10 PRINT CHR$ (147) READY: POKEX, Y NEXTX 20 FORA=272T0306: READB: 50 DATA 33,255,254,1,206,0, POKEA, B: NEXTA 126,238, 170, 119,35,11,120 30 SYS272 177,32,246,201 60 RANDOMIZE USR 2329 70 POKE65441,239: POKE 65442,254 80 FOR X=65263 TO 65278: READY: POKEX,Y:NEXTX when you fall too far and best of 90 DATA 62,0,50, 253, 236,50, all it will allow you to jumpin 254, 236, 62,200,50, 131,121, mid-air. To save time put it onto a 195, 199, 255 blank tape. Rewind the tape and 100 RANDOMIZE USR 65279 run the listing at the bottom of the Type this in before you play the page. tape. When you have finished typing it in press Run and Enter Overdrive then just start the tape as normal. Before loading the game type, 7&FE45=10, giving almost triple AMSTRAD the score. Richard Alpin, who is better VIC 20 known as Gremlin to readers of The following routine running on Ideas Central, has sent in this the unexpanded Vic 20 will allow players of DUCKSHOOT to allow you 255 lives, you won't die obtain infinite bullets. 1J on error goto 2010 penin 20 call sbc65:init unui border winx 1.2 ink 2.12. ink . 3 ckfor t=23050 to 160: read a $ poket, val a $ici oktpeek tinext if ck(x4377 then print \" . :end su locate 1.10. node l:call 305 60 data 21.50.80.13.50.00.01.56. ,0,43.5.w.21.43.0.7.27. 28.06.20.5.83.23.18.0 5 .2.3, 1.60, 3 .22. , 3. , 77.6.22. 3,3,0,0,0,0.7, bu, ,21, ,02,ww, 3,0,21, , , , ,3. 38,77.32,01,09,21,12,15,0w, B,0,21, ,lo, , , 70 WTA 22,22,08,00,B,00,22,2,01,11,55,20.01.lu.ww,.,20,21,0. 02,22,86,20,63.20.07.36,0,23.36,00 23.30.0.09.53.62.750,20,0 66,20,61,20, 52,67,62,67.7.20,-3.72,01,03,06,65,64,20,42,43,40,40, 58.58.58.55,49,20,62,27,20,20,20,23,42.22.45. BOTA 40,49,45,25,20,20,47.72,55.50.56,69,63,20.63.72,61,63.b. 73.20.24.58.65.20,67.61.60,65.73.20. 0 4.08.05.7,60,0,0.6.05. 72,73,20,63,61,65,27.74,20,72,65,51,63,60,21, ,UR,W,01,03,3.. 41.43.43,45.4.20.46.59.20.-7.20.5.20.45.20,40,20 90 LATA 40,20,49,20,45,20,20,07,01,A,1,2,2,0,0,0 .1.5. 40,30,49,0.79.57.00,23,33,7A, 30.6 ..37,7,7,40.90.10.12 "


"VERFIY the loader and then 845-takes off her gloves. 40PAGE=85200 50-RUN YIE 3. LOAD in the main part. Now ?&301B-&FF and CALL 84522 645 she has her dress on. enter POKE 5611,40: RUN. The Save this as \"'YIEO\". Load Yie-Ar This will give the maximum 445 she removes her dress. and YIE-AR normally. Then load bullet eating ducks will not cause number of lives, 255 or &FF, but 245-she undoes her bra. the above program and then the any more trouble, as you will 45-she goes topless. this can be changed to any other have an endless supply of bullets. rest of the game normally. number below 255 if you don't One other hint is if you are Thanks to Mario Richard of And now to the game itself. certain that you are going to win fancy playing all day. Rochdale. Bunchu-To get past him jump then bet as much as you can. Sam to either end of the screen and MR. EL HELP mostly goes for straights when wait for him to fly at you. Jump so Leon Mooney of Greenock needs she has got the chance. To make yourself invincible that he does not hit you and punch LOAD the first programme in the help on three games. On Rambo FAIRLIGHT and kick him. Keep kicking and normal way (LOAD\"), then list he wants to know if it is possible punching until his KO has gone. it. Type REN. and then enter this to escape from the POW camp First of all take the scroll near the Star-To beat her you must line, 95 ?&1ECB=&EA. Now all and get killed finding himself start, and then pick up the crown jump so that you are in front of you have to do is type RUN and back inside again? In Back to from the top of the doorway (you her. She cannot hit back if you the programme will continue in Skool, how do you persuade the will have to stack some objects to stay close. Only attempt a kick the normal way, only the loading frog to enter the cup in the girls' reach it). Now go back to the when she has one block left. chequered room which contains title page won't appear, and school and finally on Frank Nuncha-Switch to kick mode when you die you get an extra life Bruno's Boxing he would like to a throne, avoid the monk and as he is dangerous when he to replenish the lost one. have the codes for boxers fourpush the nearest panel to reveala Swings his sticks. hole which contains a cross and Another one for the BBC B from eight. Pole He is one of the easiest. John Melling of St Helens has store this somewhere safe. Stephen Coventry, for infinite Just keep kicking him. Go to the caves and search the had Knightlore for the last 12 lives on Ghouls. Type in Page = Chain He is the hardest to & 2200, then LOAD''GHOULS2 months and would like to know of walls using the crown, this should kill. You must wait till he is Once loaded, type in List 35 any pokes. swinging his chain around his leads to a blue tomb room.Move head. Jump on hm and then start Finally a reader from Kent change where to LI=99999. Then head. Jump on hm and then start would like some help on Jet Set the body and push one of the List 60. Edit the line changing kicking and punching him. Jump FOR F-Oto 32 STEP 16: etc) then Willy. He has had the game for a panels on the top to reveal a help, back before his chain gets you. List 2055 2055 NEXT and finally few weeks and can't get very far fall down the hole and you will be Fan-Similar to Star. LOAD''???\" due to the fact he doesn't know in a white tomb which contains Sword Watch out for his the book of light, take the book what the codes are. Can anyone A cheat move for Three Weeks sword. and use the scroll. Store the book help? He has the Commodore in Paradise from Nick Gitsham Clone-Very hard to beat. Pull version along with the cross. out all your punches for him. for the Spectrum. Make Wally lose one life and while he is Now you must collect two STRIKE FORCE potions. The first is in a ZALAGA dazed on the floor hold down the chequered room with two keys Symbol Shift, PandD HARRIER To get extra lives (up to 255) whirlwinds, the second is in a simultaneously to give infinite *LOAD the main section of code, Some help from Mirrorsoft for lives. room with whirlwinds and a located after the title page would be pilots who cannot monk-freeze them with a programme, (This might be a bit locate and destroy the enemy HQ. hourglass and then get the difficult for users new to the BBC Do you keep getting a red potion. Taking the cross, potions system as the code is LOCKED for screen even though you are and book of light, go to the protection against piracy, so a completely under control and outdoor location with routine to unlock it will come in your landing sites are secure? carnivorous plants and kill the handy here.) then enter Could be that a mountain got in guard, take his key. Enter the the way. If you are anywhere near fower and pass the monks by a mountain and go into a steep dropping the appropriate objects dive or turn, the collision in front of each monk and detection equipment can start to pushing it into him. At the top of malfunction. So be careful. the tower you will find two nasty Don't perform steep dives or guards and a locked trapdoor turns in the vicinity of mountains which will be opened by the book until you have got to know your of light. limitations. When calling up a Go through the trapdoor to landing site, you don't get the find a room with the Wizard tied \"Over GS\"message, take off to the wall and a key. First take again vertically. Then use the the key and go back to the exit, homer to locate the exact landing drop the book of light nearby and site and land again. One last you will see the wizard change to piece of help-it must be a Monk. Quickly drop down the vertical takeoff as you are on hole and make you way back to unprepared ground. If you need the beginning, where the key you any more help here is a Harrier have just found will open the Hot Line 01 377 4837. double doors and you have completed the game. Thanks to SAMANTHA FOX Blakeley of Leeds. STRIP POKER David Mason has been playing YIE AR KUNG FU TIC poker non stop with Samantha Here is a poke for the BBCB even since he bought the game version of Yie Ar Kung Fu sentin and finally managed to beat her!! by V. Spanner. Type in the Here he tells you what happens following: 10-LOAD\"YIEI\" with the following amount of 20*LOAD YIE2\" Sam's pounds: 30?&11C4-&14(you can change 1045 She is wearing everything. this to allow more energy) "


"CHIG SURVEY very month Computer + Video Games tries to bring you the most comprehensive, informative and fun-packed look at the world of computer games. Most of the time we're pretty pleased with the way things turn out. But we're not that big-headed to think everything is perfect. That's why we're asking you to tell us what you think of C+VG. Go on, tell the truth, we're tough enough to take it. What we want you to do is answer the following questions and send them to Computer + Video Games, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. The survey is divided up into sections based on the regular features in the magazine. Most will involve straightforward Yes/No answers with space for a brief comment. But there is also the chance for you to give your opinions on the magazine in general. So help us to help you by taking part in our survey. TOP 30 SOFTWARE CHARTS Are the charts of any interest? YES/NO Comment MAILBAG/PEN PALS Should more letters be printed? YES/NO Are those that are printed interesting? YES/NO Comment REVIEWS What do you think of the reviews? Comment HOT SHOTS/HALL OF FAME Could these two features be improved YES/NO Comment NEWS/HOT GOSSIP What do you think of the news and Hot Gossip? Comment FEATURES C+VG publishes a variety of different features, letters from America, films, videos etc. Do you enjoy these? YES/NO Do they have a place in a computer magazine? YES/NO What other sort of features would you like to read? BUGHUNTERS CARTOON Do you enjoy the comic strip? YES/NO Comment MAPS Are these useful? YES/NO Comment DEAR BUGHUNTERS Is the Dear Bughunters column and telephone service useful? YES/NO Comment GENERAL Do you prefer the new look C+VG to the old one? YES/NO Comment IDEAS CENTRAL Are the hints, tips and pokes useful? YES/NO Comment Is there anything you would like to see in the magazine that isn't in now? LISTINGS Are the program listings interesting to you? YES/NO Comment What other computer magazines do you read? Besides computer games, what other hobbies or interest do you have? CHIG SIBU ARCADE ACTION Do you like Arcade Action? YES/NO Should it be longer? YES/NO CommentCHIG SURVEY Name Address ADVENTURE What do you think of the Adventure pages? Comment ANG SURVEY "


"OMICRO ADS 400/806 NOW ATARI 400/600/800/800XL/XEISTI LOOKI ST XLUXE ATARI OWNERS Are you having difficulty finding suitable software.If so, then look no further. We have available for both hire and purchase one of the largest selections of both UK and American titles to choose from. Games and Utilities for all ages. Hardware and add-on utilities at discount prices and special deals regularly being offered. If you would like further information please send a large s.a.e. to:CHARNWOOD PRODUCTS AND GAMES 30A Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Loughborough Leicestershire LE12 8HD Tel: 0509 412604 Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with the MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY. The greatest, biggest and best Atari Club on the market Now incorporating ST software into our stocks MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY: The company who nearly 4 years ago first conceived the idea of a software library Now over 1,400 titles on disc cassette and Rom (games, business, education and utilities) Often purchasing popular programs in multiples of five or six to give all our members a fair chance. Always adding approximately 40 new programs monthly Approaching 2.000 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland Sweden, West Germany. Holland, Denmark and Eire A last, efficient and friendly service operating a computerized system to keep track of all your records. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates plus other inter-club activities Important: Midland Games Library are in no way connected with or responsible for Midland Computers Ltd. of Worcester. SEND LARGE S.A.E. TO: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve Cheltenham, Glos Tel: 0242-67 4960 9 30.4.30 All our programmes are originals with full docom UK SOFTWARE EXCHANGE Swap your used software. Free membership. Huge program base for the Spectrum and Commodore 64. Send s.a.e. for fast response and details to: UK Software Exchange Club (CVG), 15 Tunwell Greave, Sheffield S5 9GB ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE We have an all round selection of disks, Cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE Apply now and hire your first four games free. Around 1.000 different original titles. Fortu detais send large stamped addressed anvelope or telephone evenings 7pm-10pm or weekends LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC DRIVE 0131.90 post from 130 XES (127. pont free 130 XES 1050 Drive 1257.90 post free Antic and Analog magazines available BEST QUALITY DISCS Unlabelled D.D.S.S. 111.95 for 10 pont free ATTENTION ATARI 400/800/XLXE owners D.O.S. 4 Atari spent $100.000 developing this new DOS which is compatible with D2, D2-5, D3 and both 1050 enchanced and true D/D drives. Comes with 100 screen help system. Plus 3 times faster than DOS 2.5. Master Diskette Only  post free Memorex 3% discs S.SJD.D. Boxes of 10 (20.92 1050 Happy Enhancements with full double density warp speed and compaction [149.95 rest free GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept CSVG 35 Tilbury Road Thorney con Sederland SRI 4PD. Tel: 0783 286351 GAMES TEN PACKS Allonal arcade games are including the classic Spacewars 42 and the highly addictive Battle Boat Amstrad CPC454 Pack Sharp M2200 Pack 1295 Sectrum Pack 1295 Please state which we computer your games packs for when ordering Make cheques Postal Orders payable to Digit The latest in computer Technology. Real faces, Places, Nudes digitalised and stored on a double sided disk.  post free. PACE SOFTWARE 40 Baton Grove Cihan Nottingham NGI BLG LISTING SERVICE for BBC and Electron Users. Also Screendumps, Wordwise, View. S.A.E. or phone Scorpiosoft, Dept C&VG2, 18 Dragon Drive, Liverpool L35 3QW. Tel: 051-426 2091 Arcade Classics Mr Do, Pac-Man, Dig Dug, Pole Position 4 games on cassette 48K. Only  post free. Games on disk from . Games on tape from . Full lists send s.a.e. Mail order only. Seven days delivery STOCKSOFT 15 Woodbrooke Road Birmingham B30 1UE FREE MEMBERSHIP SOFTWARE HIRE  VIC-20 COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM Send an sae for your hirekitto: VSH (CV), PO Box 65, Nottingham NG1 Please state which micro HINTS--POKES-MAPS Monthly handbooks Tipspokesmas packed with competitions hundreds of and software Adventurers Handbook specC54-128) Amstrad Handbook BBC Handbook Commodore Arcade Handbook (64/1281 Commodore Games Review Handbook (64128) 1100 C100 E100 C100 0.75 CI DO 0.75 Spectrum Software Hire (C&VG) 21 Chaceley Way, Nottingham NG11 7EG. Free membership, wide range of games and utilities, prompt personal service. Send SAE for details. Spectrum Arcade Handbook Spectrum Games Review Handbook Sand cheque or PO10 HSD Services (CSVG). 13:38 Ashton On Road Higher Openshaw, Manchester M11 1JG OM I CRO ADS "


"MICRO RE TAILERS BERKSHIRE LOGIC SALES 19 The Broadway SURREY BRACKNELL COMPUTERS The Bourne SOFTWARE CITY 44 Broadway Southgate 14 Thames Street Bracknell 0344 427317 London N14 01 882 4942 Kingston SOFTWARE CITY SHEKANA COMPUTERS Surrey KTI PE 01-541 4911 47 Cheap Street 221 Tottenham Court Road Newbury London W1 01-800 3156 STAFFORDSHIRE Berks RGI 45BX 0635 31696 SOFTWARE CITY COMPUTER WORLD 382 Kings Road CHESHIRE 42 Marker Street London SW3 5UZ 01-352 9220 Longton NORTHWICH HOME COMPUTERS SOFTWARE STORE Stoke-on-Trent 79A Witton Street Staffs. 35 London Road 0782319144 Northwich London SW17 Cheshire 01-685 1476 0606 47883 SCOTLAND DERBYSHIRE LIVINGSTONE COMPUTER CENTRE 17 The Mall FIRST BYTE COMPUTERS Craigs Hill Shopping Centre 10 Main Centre MANCHESTER Livingstone London Road West Lothian EH54 5DZ BUDGET SOFTWARE CENTRE Derby 050636978 0332 365 280 51 Fennel Street Manchester M4 3DY 061-834 2808 WEST MIDLANDS ESSEX MBC COMPUTER CENTRE 17-19 Lichfield Street MINNIE MICRO COMPUTER CENTRE Wolverhampton 0902 29907 29021 11/12 Eastern Esplanade Southend MERSEYSIDE YORKSHIRE Essex 0702 615809 62033 BLUE CHIP COMPUTERS JUST MICRO 77 Allerton Road 22 Carver Street HEREFORDSHIRE Liverpool L18 2DA 051-722 3037 Sheffield S1 455 0742 752732 HONEYSETT COMPUTERS LOOK & SEE 17 Union Street 45 Belmont Bridge 0432 279404 MIDDLESEX Skipton 0756 60078 MICRO BYTE INNOVATIONS, COMPUTER & VIDEO 36 County Arcade LONDON 9 Harmondsworth Road Leeds 0532 450 529 West Drayton RECORDMANIA ARCADE SOFTWARE Middlesex UB7 9JS 0895 420457 14 Davy Gate Centre Unit 202, Shopping Hall JENNINGS STORE York 0904 33993 Myrtle Road 248 Hertford Road RECORDMANIA East Ham Enfield Units 5/6, In-Shops London E6 01-471 8900 Middlesex 01-804 1767 Market Cross, Selby 0757 700988 DEALERS: If you would like to see your shop included in this new service, please call 01 251 6222 EXT 2461 MI CROS E IL MICROSELLS It costs only 1 to advertise in Microsell! Swap Atari 800XL 1010 recorder joystick and lots of games for sun lamp bed, or sell C16 and Plus 4 owners wanted for exchange of ideas, information and software. I have a lot of good games and utilities Please write with your list, all letters answered. Aldo Bordieri, Via Maiocchi, 20129 Milano, Italy 48K Spectrum in Saga 1 keyboard, recorder, joystick interface and joystick, ZX printer At least 70 games all originals About 6 tapes including Tasword 2 Omnicalc etc. Value over  Will take . R. H. Grout (0440) 705079 Atari 800, 410 recorder, and joystick, basic cartridge, some software and manuals all boxed as new. Bargain at  ono. Tel: (evenings) Beaconsfield, Bucks 04946 6561 Spectrum 48K, mint condition with over  of software, joystick. Cursor joystick data recorder and Extra's. 2 programmable interfaces. Costs  take . Also a modem which gives access to all mainframe terminals cost  Take . Ring Jon on Ingrobourn (Essex) 74289. Commodore 64/128 software to swap send your list for mine to Brendon Bird, 80 Highburgh Road, Glasgow, G12 9EN, Scotland. Tel: 041-339 5498. Greetings to Frankie!! Wanted for Atari 2600-VCS cartridges. Especially Activision titles. Also copies of the now defunct magazine, TV Gamer. Tel: 01-452 0189 anytime. Prism VTX5000 modem for spectrum. Mint condition, never used. PLUS every issue of Telelink, plus Telelink binder, plus 'Micronet Book plus bonus of \"Hobbit', . Phone: Sheffield (0742) 375418 Atari games for sale. Cartridge: Defender . Donkey Kong . Cassettes: Zaxxon , Solo Flight . Tel: Sheffield 480296.4 Hazel Avenue, Killamarsh, Sheffield Acorn Electron and data recorder with games and magazines, games include Elite. Computer and data recorder are under guarantee. Tel: 021-384 3855 BBC B for sale, complete with a built in Acorn DFS, interface, Acorn data recorder and lots of software, and a dust cover and leads. 45 fun games plus 6 educational games and 2 books full of listings and some blank tapes All worth  selling for . For more details contact Downland 55433. Brother HR5 (serial) printer with power pack and lead works direct from interface 1. Hardly used . R. H. Grout (0440) 705079 Wanted MB Vectrex control console. Reasonable price paid. also any Vectrex games cartridges. Please phone with price. Mr Lee, St. Ives (0480) 68734 Pen palsneeded. I am looking for pen pals who like swapping games. I have over 300 Spectrum games. Write to: Mark Allan, 20 Holmer Green Road, Hazelmere, High Wycombe, Bucks. HP157BL. New titles every week C64 user wishes to exchange programs and tips with people all over the world. Send list to Graeme Muir, 32 Bracken Street, Glasgow, G22 6LY. All letters replied to "


"C+VG ADVENTURE NEWS Commodore 64 initially, with an Amstrad version to follow. Mosaic's summer titles will include Story of the Amulet, based on the book by E. Nesbitt, and written by the Ram Jam Corporation, and Growing Pains of Adrian Mole, from Level 9. The new Mole will, says Mosaic's Vicky Carne, have more decisions for the player to make than the original game. DELTA4 SILVERSOFT SPLIT! In his penthouse apartment in the IDEAs Central building Keith Campbell, one of the few survivors of the corporate purges which swept through the software industry when the IDEAS Corp was establishing itself, busies himself with an intricate and time consuming task. His job is to collect and collate all the data relevant to adventure games and dispense words of wisdom to people with problems. This month the Adventure Helpline brings much needed help, advice and hints to the troubled and tormented adventure games player. personal rating often from C+VG reviewers C+VG READERS TASTELESS..? What judges? C+VG's readers C+VG readers have decide who gets the no taste! And that's awards in postal ballot! official. This, anyway, Come on Micronet was the news story get your facts right. carried by Micronet 800, the \"magazine\" within Prestel. SECRETS OF THE Reporting on the CAVE REVEALED C+VG Golden Joystick Awards ceremony, Micronet The unbelievable secrets of the commented: \"The little twisty passages of Colossal aging comic's readers Caves are about to be revealed by displayed their usual those busy lady teachers from St. Bride's. The Very Big Cave lack of taste in Adventure is released by CRL. plumping for Watch for our review! Also from Commando by Elite as CRL, comes an Amstrad version of the arcade game of the the spoof Delta 4 game, Robin of year.\" Sherlock (reviewed C+VG April) priced .95 The adventure awards-Red Moon from Level 9 was voted MORE FROM Adventure of the Year MOSAIC ---came in for a special mention: \"The judges pointed out that Snow Queen, originally to have although the adventure been released by the ladies of St (Red Moon) did not Bride's School some months ago perform spectacularly will be in the shops during May in the charts, it still under the Mosaic label. At .95, this illustrated Quilled adventure, managed to get a will be available for Spectrum and What's this? The wacky guys at Delta 4 have decided to go it alone and split from their business partner Silversoft. Rumours are rife as to the exact circumstances of the split. Delta 4 make it sound somewhat complex In fact, the departure of the two companies seems to be a good opportunity for a reminder of their products. Who needs reminding of the wickedly funny Bored of the Rings? Apparently Delta 4 seem to think so, as we are reminded of this and, more blatantly, Robin of Sherlock The games will still be available. They have been re-launched by Delta 4. However, just in case you thought you were going to be able to get back to some fairly normal adventuring, Delta 4 plan to return with The Boggit..! Watch out! MAILBAG A funny thing happened to Bilbo on his way to Smaug. He was trying to get Thorin into the barrel (and stay there) when two goblins entered and captured him. They captured the elf too, who then captured Bilbo which sent him back to the elfs dungeon where the goblins were waiting to capture him, etc. This could have gone on forever. but Thorin got fed up and killed the elf. Thorin then decided he didn't want to go back to the elfs dungeon, and wouldn't go back through the magic door when Bilbo got him back there. If there is a prize for the strangest unforseen program event (that isn't a crash) then it must go the disk version of Hobbit. The cassette version never did this! KG Taylor Brecon Here is an offer you can't refuse. The fact that you give away t-shirts had never entered my thoughts before I read a recent issue. It was only reading the drivel you printed from a loony from Gwent, that I realised that such things existed. Brown paper bags from Tesco's indeed! Only complete idiots don't know that Tesco's bags are white. If I were you, which I'm not, thank goodness, I would send him a brown paper bag and drop some potato salad in first, just to teach him a lesson! But I digress. Send me a t-shirt, oh confused one, and I promise faithfully to send you a picture of myself wearing it! Shock! Horror! Probe! Is The Fiend about to be unmasked? The answer lies in your own sweaty palms. Shh. Yu no hoo! Faringdon. Keith's reply: OK-I've wiped of the release of Pawn in the column. my sweaty palms on one, and popped it in a jiffy bag! Try not to I've been in your honours list (for crack the lens, won't you? giving clues) three times, so don't I get a t-shirt for all the clues I've sent I was very interested to read your over the years? Pawn feature. The graphics must At home, I've got my own book be really special to get the \"Text full of tips I've collected and I'm Only Adventurer\" raving about well known at school as the them. It's a shame that few users Walking Helpline. will have the opportunity to see the I've had kids knocking on my pictures, but with a command door asking for help, as well as interpreter and location grown ups that's fame for you! descriptions as good as you made Jason Nicholls, them sound, it more than makes up Bradford for this! I'd be interested to know when Keith's reply: Sorry Jason, you're the game is going to be released on quite right, you deserve a t-shirt! S the CBM Seems I've been taking you for Des Gunn, granted too long. And you're just Hounslow. the sort of person who should think of entering for the title of Keith's reply: Thanks for your C+VG's Adventurer of the Year. letter, Des. We'll report any news See next issue! "


"C+VG ADVENTURE HELPLIN HELP ME PLEASE! Languishing in that favourite of adventurers places, a dungeon, is Jonathan Lee. He tried to kill a princess. Serves him right! Mugging princesses in an occupation likely to get us adventurers a bad name! If anyone can get him out. Jonathan promises to turn over a new leaf. The game is Adventure, by Micropower, and played on a Beeb. Andrew Bethel of Walsall, has come up with some Ultima 3 clues this month, but also seeks help further on in the game. He is trying to find the Lord of Time, and the Mark of the Snake. What, I ask, is Iris Storey up to, trying to get into a gents' toilet? Assuming she was really desperate. I helped her across the road, and prayed that I was not too late, in her Pub Quest! The answers to Mrs McKinnell's plea on Fourth Protocol, has come from Cpl D W Marshall of BFPO 39. Proof: Fingerprints. Traitor recruited: False Flag. The rest are in the translation department in the University, to find out what SVETOFOR means,\" says David Stinson of Smethwick. Mark Ivess lives in Gisbourne in New Zealand, and has been a C+VG reader since the second issue, back in 1981. And he is stuck in Asylum-who isn't?! He's got pills from the sick inmate, and that's about it! The Institute, from the same stable, is also baffling him. Having got the scalpel and piece of mirror, he can't leave with the bottle Also in New Zealand, is Andrew Dame of Wellington, who cannot open the treasure chest in Zim Sala Bim Nearer home, in March, Cambridgeshire, there is a bean crying out for water, and Ian Fleming isn't giving it any! Who can save us having to send him a bottle of Perrier, and help with Ring of Power? \"It's all a question of tickets,\" explains Neil Davies of Wirral, in reply to Mark Evans' problem in leaving the Emerald Isle beach \"He must have got there by train, and that is the way he must return. The best thing to have, of course, is a season ticket. On the other hand, if he wants to get through the spider's cave at the end of the beach, he should examine the stands.\" What must it be like to be a lone adventurer, with no-one to discuss your problems with? That's the problem facing Neil, who continues: \"Sorry to go on so, but (object) is entered, is because the superficiality of the play-testing no one else in my family plays first three letters of the word are that led to these, has come in for adventurers, so I've got to tell used in a different way, elsewhere much criticism. somebody!\" in the game, says Mr. Crispin. LoR bugs show strong signs of Come on, the Davies family That may be so, but it is no becoming a feature all of their own give it a try, that's an order! excuse! The credibility of the game in the Helpline mail! For example, A family that DOES join in, are is spoiled by this ridiculous, and, if you light a match you can smoke the Lilleys, of Belfast. Robert sent apparently, ignorant reply. it, says Pedro Loureiro, of Setubal me a rundown of part of Worm in \"Surely anyone with a nine to five in Portugal, and when you come Paradise. \"These clues were made job and four adventure reviews to down from the top of a tree, the possible by many hours of hard complete each month would solve computer says \"YOU CLIMB work. My Dad did most of it, so Neverending Story in a week,\" he DOWN THE MAP.\" blame him if they're wrong!\" ends, implying that I am not exactly Two readers took time out to Hmmm! Thanks a lot, Robert's Dad! conscientious Hmm, wonder how question our ratings for the game, Stephen Mulcahy of Co. he knows so much about my and given vent to strong feelings Limerick cannot kill the wizard in workload...? about the game: Sinbad and the Golden Ship. Any Despite the criticisms leveled at  Bearing in mind the quality of the help with this, or how to get the Sherlock and Hobbit, for their Hobbit, and the source material data to save for part two would be bugs, there is one thing that can be being drawn on, this should have welcome, says Stephen. said about the adventures. The been the best adventure game to Mrs Quinn has come to the flexibility of commanding other date. It isn't. rescue of fellow Macbeth player characters to do things, lends itself So many players already own Ann Stevens. Her message is to some interesting possibilities and know the Tolkien books, that simple: \"Go jump in the pond, Ann.\" and sometimes these have Melbourne House's decision to But before you do that Ann, could inexpected results. package the game in a ludicrously you let R. Jennings know how to Sunil Manghani of Mitcham has large box with a copy of the book, get a mummy out of the sarcophagi come up with an ingenious way of at a very high price, can only be in the previous scene? not paying the cab fare in seen as gross exploitation of the The Macbeth quest continues Sherlock, and getting away with it! customers. with R. Guest of Sheffield Simply tell Watson to hail the cab, It is not a particularly complex desperately in search of herbs in and he will be charged the fare adventure, it has been a long time part two, and not knowing who lies instead of you!\"You can also get in the writing, and it has been like truth in part four. money from Lestrade and the released without the debugginga Hey, what's that buzzing sound? cabbie, just by asking them!\" he work of this importance deserves. It's Peter Jones of Caterham, trying adds, slyly! You cunning old devil, Were it a car, it would be recalled to get on a bus with little success in Sunil! for modifications. Zzzzz Who says Scott Adams'original S. G. Mitchell What's this, computer games in a series is \"old hat\" and not worth Basingstoke. considering these days? At long jumble sale? Bound to lead to Keith's reply: To be fair to trouble-as Andrew Rust of last I've got it Ghost Town for the BBC.\" writes Guy Wilkinson. \"1 package the game with the books Melbourne House, they HAVE to Cambridge discovered, when he tried to get into Castle Oops in have to use the school's computer, as part of the licensing deal with Hewson's Quest, one of the games but who cares? I am finally walking the people who control the rights in his job lot! This problem was down that deserted street as you to Tolkien's work. having its heyday well before I and countless other adventurers  At first I was impressed with the have done. The wait has been a started recording clues on the database! Open South seems package, but I am writing this letter long one, but it looks worth it! familiar, but is there more to it than Too many adventures are being to tell you how disappointed lam. let down with poor programming, Graphics: What graphics? that? bugs, slowness, and poor, illogical Text: Quite long, but what are A tramp and a Black Guardian puzzles, naff scenarious, etc., photos and gramophones doing in are holding up Neil Tilleyu of thinks John Yeates, our perennial middle earth? This destroys the Mitcham. In Pub Quest he is atmostphere that should be loony from Jersey. looking for things to give the tramp. whilst the Guardian is causing him Snowball or spoofs like Bored of Animation: Worse than the Hobbit: untold misery, in Seeka of Assiah. characters don't understand as And finally, what is the password \"Haven't we got enough versions much. When I typed SAM \"GIVE \"Haven't we got enough versions needed by the Droid, in Mordon's of Colossal Caves now? As for ME THE FOOD\"the answer was: Quest? Somebody? Anybody?! illogical puzzles, just take a tiptoe \"The me is too heavy for Sam to through Philosopher's Quest. How rr. are you supposed to guess you Response Time: Nearly as long as NEVERENDING must rub the ruby? And I HATE the text, and even longer if you mazes, especially the unmappable have to wait for other people to MOANS! ones where you don't have a clue catch up with you. on how to do them!\" he complains. Problems: What problems? Some tiny and boring problems in part Well, you can't win 'em all! A letter one, and I was unable to find any in of disgust at my Neverending part two except how to enter Story review came from Mr.P. LORD OF THE RINGS Moria Crispin of Dubba in Australia. In YOUR VIEWS Bugs: CLIMB TREE, a natural action particular, he defends the lack of when in a forest, causes the game vocabulary, which I criticised, to crash. This should never happen because it is mentioned in the Lord of the Rings has leaped into after such an obvious command. instructions the charts, but many adventurers I hope that the second game will In particular, the reply \"There is remain unimpressed by the game. be MUCH better than this. no verb in that sentence\" obtained It seems as bug-ridden as Amdreus Schnodewind, when the command THROW Sherlock, and the apparent Monchengladbach "


"ADVENTURE CLUES Squeal. Get frisky twice, and press at the MASQUERADE: to cross the road. Sandman at the igloo. Thumb a lift Ring the bell, and give it to the ZZZZZ: via the marsh. the abbey-then GO from abbey Purchase a boat before going into ARTHURIAN: EUREKA clobberin'! around a bit, and do some At the depths of despair, feel FANTASTIC FOUR: correct key for unlocking. Make sure you have only one MUNROE MANOR: MYSTERY OF mansion memo and report, to enter the For wedding bells, drive with HAMPSTEAD: the thief first. To speed the whole game up, kill ZORK 1: Aramaic translation. wearing the jester's hat, for an Read the piece of paper whilst HOLY GRAIL: QUEST FOR THE Svetofor is Russian for Traffic Light PROTOCOL: FOURTH polish! Normal Fowler wants the boot GLASS: THE DRINKING DENIS THROUGH the tourists have left. under the tradclads, and do it after dagget's batpak, wear the leotard To get Kim's helmet, put it in the To leave the ET system, say EXIT. taken back to your habidome. Say HOME in a public place to be PARADISE: WORM IN what he is carrying. from the start of the game. Notice Virgil is over the river and south INFERNO: you won't stay that way for long! about quickly, then walk up, for not necessarily the best! Ferret The obvious way into the castle is CASTLE: CLAYMORGUE SORCEROR OF place. for diving guidance in a suitable hidden in the mountains, and pray Seek the ancient city of Yew, whirlpool to Ambrosia. possible to travel beyond the With the Mark of Kings, it is EXODUS ULTIMA 3: digging. Pause for reflection before Have a mark for a drink. resistance. Use the mirror to answer the EUREKA GERMAN: combination is on the terminal. crushed, use the pump. The When you are feeling nearly CARIBBEAN: EUREKA a wand for a big leap. to find Khadim. Get a hero to wave crucifix on the contents of a coffin lead to a chesty Khadim. Use a Haldir's music and oiled hinges will HEROES OF KARN: Below the griffin, and-KAZAM! THE HELM: JOIN THE C+VG ADVENTURE CLUB! ADVENTURER OF THE YEAR! few years I have read your section eagerly looking for clues to help me, and quite often they have. So I would like to return the help in the form of a present.\" Play by phone adventuring seems to be Bob's speciality, as he has had help in his task from two friends, Rod Jones from Derby. and Nick Carter from Southampton. \"We have finished a few other adventures, but I will be putting these in volume two!\" promises Bob! Thanks Bob, Rod, and Nick, and at-shirt to all three of you is the least I can do! Here's your chance to join the everdesigned Adventure t-shirt growing band of adventurers who absolutely free! These will be the are members of C+VG's Club! shirts that will be sent out to We started the club just over a readers who offer exceptional help year ago and the demand for to the Helpline. membership exceeded our wildest If you are not already a member, expectations. During the year so simply fill out the form, and post it, many readers have written asking together with a cheque or Postal how to join we've decided to Order for , to C+VG Adventure improve our service to club Club, Computer + Video Games, members and offer YOU the Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon chance to join them. Lane London ECIR3AU. The club offers members: Access to our phone-in C+VG ADVENTURE CLUB Adventure Helpline MEMBERSHIP FORM Quarterly Newsletter posted to your own address Name Distinctive Club Badge. Software discount offers. Address SURPRISES! The particular surprise offered to all existing members, is that their subscription for 1986/87 will be renewed automatically, and Micro entirely FREE! All members joining this year, T-shirt Size: Large Medium we are offering a new, exclusively Small (Tick box) Age: 10-12) 13-14 15-17 ( 18-20 20-30 (Tick box) Next month I will be revealing our plans to find the C+VG Adventurer of the Year! It has struck us all at C+VG that we have a tremendous amount of adventuring talent amongst our readers, and many are very generous with their time, in writing in to provide help for others. There will be a fantastic prize for the winner, so don't miss July's Adventure pages! Meanwhile, read on to see just how helpful and adventurous our readers are! Could they win the title? Will you accept the challenge, and try to beat them? I received an astonishing folder from Bob Shepherd, of Whitwick in Leicester this month. It contains solutions in the form of lists of commands, for 65 adventures! \"I am sending this book binder to you, as I consider your magazine to have the best adventure section,\" writes Bob. Over the past ADVENTURE CLUES This month's clues come with some help from: Andrew Bethel, Walsall; J. Barnsley, Stafford; R. Jennings, Kenton; Christopher Waite, Chelmsford; R. Strange, Chelmsford; Daveid Stinson, Smethwick; Mark Chan, East Sheen: John May, Rochdale; John Manifold, Ulceby, Marco Kelly, Bathgate; Jason Nicholls, Bradford; and Guy Coleman, Stratford. "


"C+VG ADVENTURE REVIEWS/1 MARIE CELESTE Machine: Spectrum 48k Supplier: Atlantis Price: .99 The Marie Celeste of this adventure is a deserted pirate spacecraft orbitinga nearby planet. You board the pirate ship with three main objectives to find the treasures hidden aboard, locate the energy crystals with which to replenish your own ship's depleted fuel supply and to find out what became of the vessel screw As you begin to explore, it soon becomes apparent that although, at first, the ship seemed deserted, you are not alone. Eventually a two metre high android appears, hypnotises you, and throws you in the brig. Your first problem is to figure out how to escape. Once you have regained your freedom, a means must be found to keep it as sooner or later that android will be back. The solution may eventually come as a shot in the dark! One or two unusual items have their home abroad the ship. What would you make of a picture hanging in the captain's cabin? A holographic image of his mother, a sight so ugly that even the most seasoned pirate would be space sick! Not that the crew's quarters are any better, as the smell in there is enough to turn your stomach over. Treasures are found in the most unusual places. Obviously the crew's mutual distrust of each other caused them to hide their valuables where they hoped no one else would find them. But even so, where has everyone gone? Described as a graphic adventure, Marie Celeste has only crude graphics, but the game benefits from fast execution The other unusual aspect of the game is its ability to accept whole sentences as commands. This feature is not documented, and caused me quite a headache with one problem, untill discovered its existence. On a final note, if you've played Strange Odyssey by Scott Adams, you may experience a little Deja Vuthere are some striking similarities, Steve Donoghue 0  Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal THE TERRORS OF TRANTOSS Machine: Spectrum 48k Supplier: Ariolasoft Ram Jam Corporation Price: .95 Villagers in Hapshall, south of the mountains of Mortran, are disappearing nightly, and it is thought that an evil Xyradd called Trantoss (Oh no! Nota Xyradd!) is spiriting them away. His powers must be stopped by destroying his mace, but no one is keen to carry out this dangerous quest. So a local thicko called Lobo and Scam, a shady character, are persuaded You are they, in this game. As well as being able to SWAP between the two characters, there are some novel commands in the increasingly popular adventure format of interchangeable roles. PART lets the two move around independently, whilst JOIN makes them move together, provided they are in the same place when the command is given At the start it soon becomes apparent that there will be some frustration in managing to carry all the objects required. In fact, kitting up is somewhat reminiscent of Lord of the Rings especially as there is a type-ahead buffer of one character, and a nasty delay before input is accepted, after the text has screened. This quirk succeeds in preventing the fast-thinking adventurer from getting into any sort of typing rhythm, and causes lots of PARDON?s. Eventually, the adventurer is set on his way with the help of a stranger, who drags the party at high speed through the forest to the edge of a ravine, and promptly disappears. The forest turns out to be a maze, with self-sealing exits. If the text is slow, then it is compensated by the speed of the graphics. These are held in memory. and flash on the screen instantly. What's more, they are very effective and detailed -as good as you are likely to encounter on a Spectrum. The whole screen design is attractive, with the graphics occupying a vertical third of the screen to the left of the text area. The problems are not easy, and whilst I would not complain about that, the vocabularly, both input recognised and make for a good, and somewhat unusual messages output, has a lot to answer for adventure, NOT NOW is received all too frequently, Keith Campbell and it is unclear whether this means that the command is invalid, or the action can Vocabulary be performed later Atmosphere The poorer features of the game are a Personal pity, for the problems look as if they OO OD PROJECT THESIUS Machine: BBC B and Electron Supplier: Robico Software Price: .95 Cassette, .95 Disk Project Thesius is the sequel to Rick Hanson (reviewed in C+VGas Assassin). Taking the title role, you become the toughest agent known to British Intelligence. \"The enemy\" are up to their old tricks again. They've got a team of boffins working away on an island, to perfect the Advanced Weapons System. If completed, who knows WHAT damage it could do.. There are three mazes in the game. Your orders are brief: find the AWS The first is through a decaying, though development centre, gather as much populated, village. You will be told the information on the project as possible, route through the second maze if you and escape-presumably to enable the make it to a rendezvous in time. \"good guys\" to work on an anti-AWS The program runs in mode six, and system the player can tailor the screen and text The game has a rather violent feel in colours. There is a vast amount of text places--the author is very proficient at each location has upwards of five lines writing you are dead messages. In the of description first fifteen minutes I'd been dashed to And the third maze? That comes in the pieces by rocks, blown to bits by a final stages of the game. Whilst being booby-trapped chest, and shot by a chased by an armed guard with tracker trigger-happy woman with a rocket dogs, you must cross a mined beach to launcher! reach a jetty. My lungs were bursting as Icareered along the rickety wooded platform, which suddenly ENDED! The dogs were gaining fast. In true Rick Hanson fashion I crossed my fingers and jumped... The game is thoroughly polished. It has a slick feel, and more importantly is fun to play. I never felt that the task ahead was impossible. Jim Douglas Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal "


"IIR SOFTWARE SERVICE FREE GAME SOFTWARE SATISFACTION WITH ORDERS OVER 720 UIT OVERRS  S.S. 7.40 5.90 5.90 5.90 5.90 5.90 5.90 5.90 6.95 7.40 HARDWARE Competition Pro 13.00 Quickshot il Konix Speedking ATARI Cass Disk CBM 54 Cass The Edelon The Eldeon 7.30 11.00 Rockfords Riot B.Dash 7.20 Spy Vs Spy Il 7.30 11.00 Bomb Jack Rescue on Fractalus 730 11.00 Mercenary 730 9.50 Superman Bas Blazet 730 11.00 Great American Road Race 730 11.00 They Sold a Million 7.20 Seven Ctes of Gold 11.00 Siarquake........ 6.40 Hacker 7.30 11.00 5.70 Steve Davis Snooker 730 9.50 They Sold a Milan 720 Red Moon 5.00 7.20 Alternative Reality 16.00 6.40 Chimera 3.50 Iwo Jima 7.00 Smash Hits 4 7.30 11.00 Hard Ball Kennedy Accroach 11.00 14.50 The Never Ending Story 7.00 Mercenary 7.20 Mr Robot 730 11.00 Superbowl 7.20 Elektragide 6.50 9.50 Zoids 6.40 Boulde dahil 7.30 11.00 Knight Gues 6.40 Now Games Tal of Beta Lyrae 7.30 11.00 The Transformers Arcade Classics 7.30 11.00 The Arc of Yesod Upin Down Bounder 7.20 9.50 King of the Ring 730 9.50 Uridium Tigers in the Snow 11.00 Dragon Skulle 720 AMSTRAD SPECTRUM Get Dexter 7.20 Movie Lord of the Rings 11.00 Gladiator ........ ......... Lords of Midnight 7.00 Max Haddrm. 7.20 Spitfire 40 Winter Games 720 7.20 9.50 Saboteur 720 Soy Vs Say The Way of the Tiger 7.20 Tau Ceti Never Ending Story.... 7.20 Sweevos World... Transformers Exploding Fist Turbo Esprit Spindizzy Saboteur Guntright Frank Brunas Boxing 6.40 10.50 Enigma Force 5.70 Bomb Jack 5.70 Nightshade 750 Tomahawk 7.20 Hyper Rally 11.80 Soy Vs Spy Hyper Sports 3 11.80 Fighting Warrior 5.40 Soccer 12.30 Twister 720 Alen 8 7.50 Impossible Mission 5.70 Boulder 5.95 NOMAD Sorcery 5.00 Guntat Batman Please state name, address, title and micro clearly with order Overseas add  per item. Cheques/POs payable to: J.J.B. SOFTWARE SERVICES FREEPOST (no stamp UK) 14 Loraine Crescent (overseas) Darlington Darlington Co. Durham DL1 5XE Co. Durham DL1 5FT Tel: (0325) 288102 SPECTRUM Biggles Hunchback of the adventure Bounder Batman Heavy on the Magick Who Dares Wins il Green Beret Mugsy's Revenge Paperboy Bombjack Kung Fu Master Sold A Million il Starquake Rock'N'Wrestle Twister Yie Ar Kung Fu Rebel Planet 5.90 888111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 COMMODORE 64 SS Biggles 7.40 Biggles Di 9.99 Hunchback ll Adventure Bounder Asylum Way of the Tiger 7.40 Silent Service Electraglide 5.70 Ticers in the Snow Paperboy Bomback Kung Fu Master Kung Fu Master ID 1250 Sold A Million il Superbowl Starquake 6.70 RMS Titanic Rebel Planet Uridium 7.36 Koronis Ritt 7.40 Mugsy's Revenge 6.70 Back to the Future Comic Bakery Yabba Dabba Doo Time Tunnel 7.40 ATARI S.S Fighter Pilot 7.40 Spy'V' Spy 7.40 Super Zaxxon 7.40 The Goonies 6.70 Mercenary Mercenary (D) 9.99 PERIPHERALS S.S. C16 Plus 4 joystick adaptor 3.50 Gunshot Il autofire) joystick 7.50 570 6.40 5.50 5.90 740 6.70 5.89 7.40 5,90 5.90 450 6.60 5.90 Tau Ceti Way of the Tiger M| kie Ping Pong International Karate Gunfright Impossible Mission Alien Highway Encounter 2 C16 & Plus/4 Manic Miner Commando D. Thompson's Star Events Kung Fu Kid Winter Events World Series Baseball C16 Classics ll (4 games) Winter Olympics Space Pilot S.S. 5.15 5.90 5.20 5.20 5.90 7.40 5.20 5.20 5.70 700 When ordering state name, address software and micro Postage included UK O d d 750 per tape Cheques Postal orders made payable to SOFTWARE SATISFACTION Payment made in Sterling only 144 BARLANARK ROAD BARLANARK GLASGOW G33 4PJ For less than the price of one game You could get your hands on over 500 great titles! (not to mention pop videos) Please tick the appropriate box Please send me more details about the Matrix Club Please enrolme as a Matrix member. I enclose a cheque for  made payable to Metrica Agencies My interest is Spectrum Commodore Amstrad Pop videos Name With top titles costing anything from  upwards to buy renting your software from the Matrix Club makes very good sense Our once only enrolment fee of  gives you access to over 500 titles on the Spectrum, Commodore and Amstrad systems including all your latest favourites. Added to that is the opportunity to hire top pop videos at similar low rates, and using the same fast, easy to operate system Use the coupon on the left to receive full details of membership with no obligation or enrol right now to get a weeks free hire of one of our classic titles. Address MIUNDON III MATRIX Post to: Matrix Membership. 271 Stansted Road, Bishops Stortford, Herts CV3 "


"ADVENTURE REVIEWS/2 PERRY MASON ERLE STANLEY GARDNER THE CASE OF THE MANDARIN MURDER Machine: Commodore 64, Apple, IBM PC Supplier: Telarium Price: .95 (disk only) Restaurateur Victor Kapp is found murdered in his luxury apartment, the day after his wife is released from an institution. His wife Laura is found in a delirious state, a gun close by. And only the day before, she had been to see me, and asked for a consultation. 1, of course, am Perry Mason, the world-famous criminal lawyer. I now have to clear my client in the ensuing court case. Luckily, I have the help of Della Street, my legal assistant, and Paul Drake, a topnotch private-eye. So I head for the scene of the crime, and spot some useful evidence that the DA's men have missed. I sneak them into my pocket, unnoticed by the antagonistic Holcomb. Being a thorough sort, I not only examine the toilet for clues, I flush it, and get the reply: \"Water flushes couterclockwise, as it does with all toilets in the northern hemisphere!\" A visit to the prison, where Laura Kapp is held pending trial, is not very rewarding. Heavily sedated, Laura is somewhat incoherent, and has only vague memories of her visit to Victor's apartment that night. Meanwhile, Paul has been working hard on my behalf, and comes up with some useful details, back at the office. There is certainly no shortage of suspects. Could the murderer have been one of the six on the guestlist for the apartments that night? Could it have been Victor's business partner, or the selfopinionated restaurant critic who gave his food a personal rating of one? Or perhaps the attractive French cook, who seems to have been spending a lot of time with him during his wife's absence? Time to go to court, and this is the real test. First, the expert witnesses are introduced the police chief who conducted the investigation, ballistics expert, and medic. Then come the personal friends and associates of the deceased It is the trial that forms the main part of this unusual game. I hesitate to use the word 'adventure, for although the game is very definitely in adventure format, it is not the type where you move from place to place at will, solving many different problems. There is no point in drawing a map, but notere-printed in the same pamphlet: separate \"genuine\" documents of the Infocom style would have enhanced the authenticity of the package. The vocabulary used at the trial is as complex as you are likely to find in an interactive fiction and it is not a question of using two or perhaps three words. Questions like: \"Burns, how many guests visited Victor on Friday night?\" must be asked To guide you in the syntax of these sentences, there is a comprehensive vocabulary list, plus a guide which indicates, in different columns, the sequence in which you can enter each class of word Unfortunately, the sentences used are so long that, on some occasions, there is an extraordinarily long delay in response. This manifests itself as an ominous silence, before even the disk starts whirring, indicating that the computer is first chewing over what you have just said. I suppose that is inevitable in a game of this complexity, and, if a little trying at times, is far more tolerable than in a conventional adventure where action is the keyword. Here, you need time to think, and the atmosphere of the courtroom comes over extremely well. This is a graphics game, but the pictures change fairly infrequently There are thin wide-screen views of the apartment rooms, and top to bottom close-ups of each witness as he or she is being crossexamined. Throughout the trial, you can call on Paul to work away behind the scenes to gather last-minute information and evidence, whilst Della is on hand to advise you on how to tackle each particular witness So how am I making out as a lawyer? So far I have managed to get my client convicted twice! Although I have a couple of very strong suspicions as to whodunnit, I have a horrible feeling that I have only begun to scratch the surface of the case. Perry Mason comes on two double sided disks, and is a thoroughly entertaining program, coming as it does, with incidental music to heighten the atmosphere and drama. Keith Campbell Vocabularly Atmosphere Personal EXANINE UUR DS Sean 23 iulent LIEUTEEN TEALL INVESTELY SIUS E Dibrata PUNE arer ned statue OH Ca t he Eers by the front door. TENETht and taking is essential. The objective is to get an acquittal, and, hopefully discover the true identity of the murderer. Thus the game takes a very narrative form, and much of the time you are gently guided where to go next. This does not spoil things, in fact, at the trial you will certainly need your wits about you, not only to ask the right questions as each witness is presented, but also to raise objections when the D.A. is asking questions he shouldn't. This brings us to the packaging. The disks come in the usual lavishly illustrated Telarium double-openings flat folder, complete with lawyer's handbook This contains a playing guide, details of cross-examination procedures, restaurant reviews from \"Epicure Today, and even a student-lawyer's examination paper. It is a pity that these are all 9 "


"PILGRIM Machine: Commodore 64 the game. Supplier: CRL Pilgrim makes good use of the command EXAMINE, and this is Price: .95 what gives any adventure one of its Pilgrim is an original machine essential ingredients the code adventure with plenty of text, element of surprise! It also teaches and over 70 locations. It has a range the adventurer to be observant. of interesting puzzles, some to be fail to examine things thoroughly taken in one's stride, others more in this game at your peril! baffling. The text is very descriptive, and The land of Meridian has been tries hard to build the atmosphere. invaded by a warlike race from In this, it almost succeeds, but Sylvian, a distant neighbour. You, a tends to overdo the narrative in lad whose village has been \"empty places\". Thus the player pillaged, vow to seek out the can easily become convinced Guardian of Meridian, said to live there is something sinister behind deep in a mountain. You awake in a particular description, only to your room, straight into the find that it is just a \"walk-through\" problem of how to get out. location. Not difficult, nor particularly This, coupled with a tendency to original, but enough to start take itself just a little too seriously, building the adventurer's lacking that vital thread of humour confidence, and give him the which adds so much to any game, general drift of how to approach makes Pilgrim a little the problems to get the most out of disappointing. Setting out, then, our hero must first explore his village. There are quite a number of potentially fatal events lurking around, and these are well handled, for good warning is given, and repeated for some moves before death finally strikes. With a bit of quick thinking. there is a chance that the danger will be overcome before the player dies, and finds he has to reload a saved game, or start all over again For example, an injury sustained whilst escaping the first room, becomes a problem, and our hero is warned of this time and again, before the wound finally takes its toll. There is time enough to look around and get a remedy, if he is quick! On through the village, and into the forest, in search of the Guardian. Soon enough you find that you are not alone another survivor of the raid also has the same thoughts as you! There is a particularly nicely worked puzzle with a built-in pitfall around the lake, and a logical but, perhaps slightly obscure one near a cliff. All in all this is a game that should please those who enjoys a text adventure. It is a rare event, these days, to see a new text-only adventure, (unless it has been Quilled) and rarer still, to see one on the shelf in a big store. Let's hope the store buyers, who seem to have a horror of anything without pictures, and who influence adventure playing far more than reviewers simply by restricting availability, will have the sense to stock this one! Keith Campbell Vocabularly Atmosphere Personal N00 ULTIMA IV QUEST OF AVATAR ay is He vet, there is Machine: Commodore 64, Disk Supplier: US Gold All American Adventures Price: .95 This is the game currently taking America by storm! Ultima IV cannot strictly be labelled an adventure game or an arcade-style game-it's really a blend of the two. The setting is the Empire of Britannia, ruled by Lord British, to whom the authorship of this game is attributed. The Quest of Avatar is the search for a new standard of life for which the people of Britannia may strive. The search, warns his Lordship, will be arduous. Your quest opens on a warm sunny day, when walking along by a stream, you sit down to rest, under the shade of a willow, and close your eyes. There is a high pitched cascading noise, and a glowing portal appears. Almost as quickly, it is gone, leaving a circle of stones in its place. Among the stones you discover an ankh, and a book wrapped in cloth, on which is printed a map. This opening sequence is in narrative form, and it continues by instructing you to read the book, the History of Britannia. The book is real-it is part of the package. Back at the computer, you continue your pleasant walk, and come across a Renaissance fair, where a gypsy invites you to have your future predicted. Here is the player's first interaction with the game. Laying down tarot-like cards in pairs, the old lady asks you questions that cause inner conflict. From your answers your character is assessed, and then you move into the game proper, which is played in real time. Here is a vast land, with towns and castles dotted around. You have a graphics window of a small part of the map. You move around by control keys. You are always pictured in the centre, and the map moves under you Commands that can be entered with a single character keystroke. Among these are attack, descend, enter, wear armour and talk Talk is a command that initiates a text exchange between the player and a character in the game. To do this, you move alongside, and type followed by the direction in which the character stands. The character will tell you something about himself, and ask you what your interest is. There is plenty to do in Ultima IV, so much, in fact, that it is contained on two double sided disks, which you are prompted to change over when necessary. As well as a certain amount of animation, there are sound effects to accompany your actions. It can be turned on or off instantly by a single keystroke, should you tire of This is an absorbing game with plenty of depth, that should please those who enjoy quest-type adventures, and dedicated purists who are partial to straying occasionally from the orthodox text/graphics adventure format. Keith Campbell Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal ind your "


"ADVENTURE REVIEWS/4 RETURN TO ITHACA Machine: Spectrum 48k Supplier: Atlantis Price: .99 At .99 this adventure is a good buy, there is no doubt. So bear in mind the low price, as you read on, for a review must be a critical assessment, irrespective of price. This is a game that typifies Quilled games at their worst. The recognised vocabularly is patchy, and the quality of replies to the player is taken into account in the vocab rating, too. \"I can't\" is just not good enough without some sort of explanation as to why. Quite often a player will have a perfectly reasonable theory as to why a particular command should produce results, but it is the incorrect one. Some sort of explanation command itself. ten years. As Odysseus, you must is required, or the player is left The plot covers the journey of set sail in a galley anchored off a wondering whether it is the vocab Odysseus back to Greece after the beach near a burning Troy, and he entered that is lacking, or the fall of Troy, a journey which took your journey takes you to various islands, with tasks to perform and problems to solve on the way. The game plays quite well. The problems are quite logical, and fairly easy but are just enough to make you pause and think awhile. Thinking perhaps the branch was meant to blind the cyclops, barring my exit, I tried, many ways. Whether this was vocabulary or the wrong answer. I could not tell, for I CAN'T was the only response I could get. Pity -could have been a really good game. I suspect that had it been programmed by the authors, instead of Quilled, a lot more of the detail would have been covered. But it's still good value at the price. Keith Campbell Vocabulary Atmosphere Personal ou THE VERY BI ADVEN Oh, what a jolly wheeze. Those frightfully good eggs at CRL and St Bride's have come up with absolutely spiffing prizes for all you chaps and female chaps out their in C+VG land. The Very Big Cave Adventure is a cracking spoof on Level 9's Colossal Adventure. It's lots of fun to play and is packed with jokes, terrible puns and lots of devious puzzles. If you've played Bored of the Rings, you'll know what sort of thing to expect. First prize is the original artwork for the game plus a copy of the adventure. The next 30 runners-up will get C64 copies of the game plus a special promotional poster. Right, here's what you have to do to win. In The Very Big Cave Adventure, Trixie Trinian, the schoolgirl heroine of the Secret of St Bride's, is your escort through the twisty passages. We want you to draw or paint what you think Trixie Trinian looks like. C+VG CRL The Very Big Cave Adventure Competition Name Address The closing date for the competition is June 16th and the editor's decision is final. Send your entries to The Very Big Cave Adventure Competition, Computer + Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, ECIR 3AU. "


"MICROS E IL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! TI Owners I know you're out there. Top games at low clearance price of  each Kong, Pengi. Roo. TNT, and plenty more. Basic and extended games available. Send SAE to: SP. 16 Russell Avenue, Dunchurch, Rugby, CV22 6XP CBM 64, will swap games for CBM with people everywhere. Disc only! Send list to: Ivar Frolich. Alle Gaten 11.5000 Bergen, Norway. Write soon! Atari Owners!Be certain that you don't erase those valuable disk games. Buy 'The Chip Now! The Chip' backs up protected disks. speeds your drive up, and ensures double density. Better than an archiver Available at .95. Phone Mark 0744 56206 for further details T199/4A games for sale. Munchman, Tombstone City,  each. Oldies but Goodies 1 and 2. Race Time , each and tape of 5 games , tape of 3 games .99. also joysticks . Tel: 01-428 0635 after 5pm Commodore 64 plus cassette recorder and  worth of software including Paradroid, Ballblazer and Fightnight for sale. Price  ono. Write to: Steve, 2 Lonsdale Road, Newton Abbot, Devon. 25 BBC games plus joystick for sale. Includes many greats. Perfect condition. Worth over . selling for only  ono For the full list and more details contact Tarquin (after 7pm) on 01-764 7232 64K MSX computer plus 17 games including Yie Ar Kung Fu 1 and 2 on cartridge plus Alien 8, Nightlore plus joystick plus  data recorder plus magazines, will sell quick for . Tel: Ashstead, Surrey on 72003 after 6pm or to see computer come to 35 Darcy Road, Ashstead, Surrey. Atari Games for sale or swap. Hacker, Last Starfighter. Last V8, GT American Road Race, Chimera, Mercenary and many more (cass.). Phone 01-328 2246 for lan or Mike. Look!!! 48K Spectrum with manuals, Kempston joystick and interface, cassette recorder magazines and over  worth of software, including Winter Games, Saboteur, Exploding Fist, Aliens and Nightshade. All in mint condition. All worth . Sell for . Phone Coventry (0203) 662611. Ask for Daniel 48K Spectrum plus DK Tronics keyboard plus tape recorder plus  worth of original games. Worth . For quick sale  ono. Tel: 01-979 7631 Amstrad penpals wanted to swap software. Write to Dave Harrison, 2 Russell Street, Bishopl Auckland, Co. Durham, DL14 7PT T199/4A modules (TI Invaders, Munchman, Attack. Othello. Hunt the Wumpus, Extended Basic with manual) Basic tutor cassette with manual, cassette ofm various games. Texas program book, cassette leads. joysticks, dust cover. Cost , sell . Write to M Rankin, 276 Woodhall Avenue, Coatbridge, Strathclyde, M15 5DF MSX Toshiba home computer with cassette recorder and over  worth of software  ono. For details phone Harlow (0279) 39338 after 4pm and ask for Daniel Commodore Software: Koronis Rift , BBC Emulator , Hypersports . Frak . Now Games I. . Cartridges: Donkey Kong. Centipede. Moon Patrol (.50 each), send cheque, SAE plus 40p recorded delivery charge to Richard Downer, 35 Alexandra Road, Rayleigh, Essex, SS6 8HS Amstrad CPC 464 computer Amsoft software package also included in the offer are top games: Raid, Yle Ar Kung Fu. Sold a Million DT Supertest, Bruce Lee plus 22 other good games. All of this worth over , will accept  (no offers). Cash only plus buyer collects. Tel: 01-767 1864 between 10.30am-5.30pm. Spectrum 48K, VTX 5000 modem, programmable joystick interface, quickshot 2 joystick and over 30 software titles. All in original boxes. A few months old, worth over . For sale  ono. Phone: 01-729 2014 after 6pm anytime weekends. Ask for Jason BBC BDFS, 100K disk drive, 452 Cub Monitor, Tape Deck, Blank Disks + Cabinet, over 100 games. Many books + Mags + Speech Syn, dust cover, monitor plinth + leads. Offers around . Tel: (0727) 23540 Wanted a microdrive and interface I or a Wafadrive or a disc system. Will swap tons of unboxed space lego, speccy software including Shadowfire, Combat Lynx, Halls of the Things, Cruising, Leonardo, Hunter Killer, Penetrator plus software 6 pack plus 2 books plus load of magazines. Phone or write, will sell for  ono, Matthew French, 8 Birchall, Pixley, Ledbury, Herefordshire, HR8 2RJ. Tel: 0531 83224 Wanted software for Spectrum 48K and Commodore 64. Send list and I'll make an offer Software must be original. Write to: John Quinn, 3 Oxford Close Hensingham, Whitehaven, Cumbria, CA28 8JW. Bargains galore! Atari Computer software cassettes and cartridges. Antic and Analog magazines, Atari books atsnip prices. SAE to Alan Watson, 38 Hummersknott Avenue, Darlington, Co. Durham, DL3 8LG for lists. Free! CBM64 modem, send your best 20 CBM64 games on tape or disc (preferably disc). The best selection wins the modem. Make sure the games are good if you want a modem! Alan Rawlins, 21 Vicarage Fields, Durrington, Worthing. West Sussex, BN13 2PF. Also if anybody is interested in swapping games please write to the above address, Spectrum 'High Score magazine. Fifty A4 pages of pokes, tips, scores, etc. Send  to Anthony Marshall, 41 Loders Green, Eastfield, Scarborough, N. Yorks, YO11 Sell 48K Spectrum  software, hackers pack, cassette recorder, joystick on/off switch, interface and magazines. Value  sell for  ono. Write to Scott Fillies. Keepers Cottage, Scarinish. 3LB For Sale over 65 Commodore 64 original games. Over 70 per cent well below half price! Send SAE for list to: N. Green, 32 Catholic Lane, Sedgley, West Midlands. DY3 3UG. Or Phone Sedgley 5231 and ask for Neil. Spectrum owners. Buy a booklet of 70 infinate lives poke routines. It includes full instructions and many new releases like Commando and Starquake for only . Please send to Robert Burgess, 1 Middlefield Road, Rotherham, South Yorkshire. S60 3JH. 48K Spectrum for sale, tape recorder (as new) Proteck interface, Quickshot Il joystick and 42 original games including Alien 8. Commando, Supertest, Starquake and many other superb titles. All this for  ono. Phone (0942) 674045 Commodore 64 games to swap or to sell. I have new software. Yie Ar Kung Fu Death Wake, Outlaws etc. If you are interested write including your game list to Robert Drost, Twaluwhof 19. 9502 tt. Stadskanaal, Netherlands. Phone: 05990 22439. Newer software is impossible. BBC B computer for sale. Complete with Kempston joystick, tape recorder and many games . Tel: Banbury 720176. Atari HCS software for sale or swap (disks only), Phone: (01) 266326 or contact 192 Landen Road, Ballyfermot, Dublin 10. Ireland ZX Spectrum 48K, with professional Saga One keyboard, only six months old. data recorder, computer compatible television, ,000 worth of top-titled software, books and magazines. All fully guaranteed for six months. Will post to any part of the United Kingdom free. Total value over ,250, offers around , on Sheffield (0742) 331729 Commodore moden for use with Compunet, Prestel. Micronet, etc. in original box, . Phone/ Rotherham (0709) 892995 Atari games for sale. Disks and cassettes. Up to date releases Very reasonably priced. Send SAE for list to S. Johnson 2 Torrington Road, Liscard. Wallasey, Merseyside. L44 4EF. CBM 64 games to swap. My games include Mercenary. Winter Games, Commando. Rambo, Robin of the Wood, Transformers, Never Ending Story, Scarabeus, Monty on the Run, Batalyx. Phone: (0663) 45245 ask for Danny "


"MI CROS E LI MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! 1 For Sale Spectrum plus Data recorder and  of software,  ono. Tel: 061-798 8241 Atari User group invites other Users and groups to contact them with a view to exchanging ideas and software on disk. We particularly would like to hear from users in USA and around the world. Contact: John, 26 Bromley Gardens, Parkside, Houghton Regis, Dunstable, Bedfordshire, England, LU5 5RL Wanted Silent Service on cass/disk for Commodore 64. Will swap for Hardball on disk or Koronis Rift, Bouncer, Yie Ar Kung Fu on cassette. Phone Wolverhampton (0902) 733910 and ask for Neil American software for CBM64, Track 'n Field, Gyruss, Park Patrol, Zone Ranger, Star Wars, Jungle Hunt, Dino Eggs, Genesis, Battlezone, Karate Devils and The Heist.  each from US imports. 26 Hillside Road, Marlow, Bucks. SL7 3JE, Wanted Commodore 64 software to swap, disk only. Send list to: Ronald Kendrick, 8205 Sandridge Drive, Louisville, Kentucky YO228. For Sale!! 48K Sinclair ZX Spectrum with brand new Alba R-170 tape player plus brand new Saga Emperor keyboard plus D.K. Tronics light pen for on-screen drawing plus Currah Microspeech Unit with software plus Kempston Pro joystick interface plus Kempston Flexi Extender Board plus another Kempston interface plus over 50 original games including FGTH, NOMAD, WHAM, DYNAMITE DAN, GYROSCOPE, TAU DETI, MONTY ON THE RUN, PANZADROME, ROBIN OF THE WOOD and 8 MASTERTRONIC titles. Sell for  or swap for Commodore 128 with disk or cassette (prefer disk). Tel: MK (0908) 648189 QL super game and sprite generator by digital precision on cartridge, cost . Also the QL Compendium , featuring over 30 games, cost . Both items are brand new, never used, and in perfect condition, Offers please on Sheffield (0742) 331729. ask for Richard Spectrum 48K quickshot one and two joysticks proteck interface plus small collection of original games. Selling at  Phone: (0462) 685175 and ask for Craig All Atari owners with a cassette unit living near to Stoke-on-Trent 536661 after 6pm. Ask for Carl At last system 15000 answers on one sheet. All telephone and code numbers supplied to solve this game. Send 50p postal order plus sta mp to: T. Scrivener. 14 Upton Dene, Grange Road, Sutton, Surrey, SM2 6TA Spectrum software for sale, including US Golds: Tapper and Buck Rogers, Cascades cassette 50. Tower of Evil, Doomsday Castle, Space Warp Digger Dan, Metro Storm, Zip Zap. Monkey Bizness, Terrahawkes, Bug a Boo, 3D Tanx, Spectral Invaders, Humpty Dumpty, Mecapede, Repulsar, Ostron, 1994 Ten Years After, Submarine Strike, Frog 5 and Show Dowsn, and Mastertronics Soul of a Robot, Space Hunter, Alien Kill. All these superb titles worth , for just half that price at . Write to: Mr D. Britton, 10 Cicely Street, Liverpool. 7 1DQ. Merseyside. Amstrad games for sale 20 originals. Titles include Elite. Hypersports, Exploding Fist. Brian Jacks, Baseball Gyroscope, Fighter Pilot American Football and many more from .50 to .50. Phone George on (0274) 607104 after 4pm Will swop 40 top Spectrum games for VTX 5000 modem or Microdive or Wafadrive with interfaces or 20 games for Microspeech or light pen or 5 games for Microslot. Also 3 games VOF Elite. Will swop games. Write to: Jonathan King 9 Porthminster Terrace, St. Ives, Cornwall, TR26 2DQ. TI-99-4A computer tape deck with leads parsec and three cassette games, joystick interface, excellent for beginners  ono. Phone 01-654 6719. Croydon CBM64/Vic 20 software to buy/sell/swap. Disc or cassette Write for details to: D. I. Nassur. 25 Esplanade Gardens, Scarborough, YO11 2AP. For Sale Microvitec Colour Cub Monitor, . Phone: 01-272 2629 Commodore 64 plus Atari tape software to swap or sell. Many new British and American titles. Write or Phone Andy on: (0606) 552568. 52 Ashton Avenue, Winsford, Cheshire, CW7 2HX. Commodore 1541 disk drive, absolutely brand new and unused. Boxed, unwanted gift. sell for  ono. Phone: Wyeman at 01-724 2240 Atari picture disc packed with brilliant graphics screens, includes auto picture fader. Also amazing digitized music disc, you won't believe your ears! This disc includes two extra amazing graphics demos, both discs double-sided, four sides full for .95 post free. P. Cunningham, 11 Berwyn Avenue, Penyffordd, Chester, CH4 OHS. MSX games to swap or sell. I have over 50 games including \"Yie Ar Kung Fu 'Ghostbusters, 'Hypersports 1 & 2' and many more. Write to Kevin Walsh, Clashganny. Portlaw, Co. Waterford, Ireland. Spectrum 48K cassettee recorder, Lo profile keyboard, programmable interface, 2 joysticks, sound amplifier, 35 games, will swap for Amstrad 464 plus monitor. Tel: Bradford 0274 612725 Atari Software wanted to swap or sell contact Win on 0628 26411 after 4pm weekdays or write to Win, 1 Arkley Court, Holport, Maidenhead, Berks. SL6 2YR Atari games needed urgently. Disk only. Send your list to 55 Princes Drive, Colwyn Bay. Clwyd, LL29 BPW or phone (0492) 33641 and ask for Mark BBC games for sale, very cheap! Beach Head . Matchday. Frak, Jet-Pac .50. Zalaga . Mr Whizz, Monaco, Rocket-Raid. Ghouls , and many more games for . Tel: 643461 (Walsall). BBC B+ brand new Guaranteed until February 87 First reasonable offer accepted. Tel: John 0742 375418 (Sheffield) Great new Archery program for the C16/Plus 4, includes free doodle utility. Tape .50, also new gardening utility for CBM64/C128. Tape .50 send cheques/postal orders to Andrew Hamilton, 1 Mimosa Drive, Fairoak, Eastleigh, Hants, SO5 7LG Atari software to swap or sell all top titles like Hacked, Goonies, Road Race, King of the Ring and many more. Write to: 6 Rushmoor Avenue, Ashton in MakerField, Nr Wigan, Gtr Manchester, WN4 8XH or Tel: 728979 and ask for Greg after 6pm. Spectrum games for sale/exchange. Ex. Fist, F. B. Boxing, Zoids, G. G. Test Cricket, Archon, Return to Eden plus others. Wanted Tau Ceti, Fairlight, Battlecars, Redcoats Adventures etc. Send SAE to T. Cripps, 85 Samuel Lewis Trust, Dalston Lane, London E8. Atari 400 48K with 410 program recorder, Quickshot 11 joystick, light pen, DE-RE Atari manual, memory map. Basic manual, assembler cartridge and manual and software ono. Phone: 0536 200038 Commodore 64 software to swap or sell. We have it all. Write to: Gerry Vermeulen, Hoornstraat 42, 5702 RX Helmond, or ring 04920-34238 (after 6pm) Spectrum Plus computer together with fox programmable Quickshot 1 joystick, tape recorder and 80 games.  ono. Tel: 01-863 8394. Commodore 64 software to swap new and oldies on disk and cassette. Please send your full list to Neil, 21 Albert Street, Nelson. Lancs. BB9 7EY. Tryx and Zephoid two original games for the BBC B 1.2 OS played in 100% MC. Available on 40 track disk only. Send PO for  to: J. O'Dowd. 8 Hall Street, Oldswinford, Stourbridge, West Midlands, DY DJE. Please allow 26 days for delivery CBM64 software for sale (cassette) including Commando, Elite, Fist, B. McGuigan Boxing and many more, all half price or less. Phone: (03987) 207 after 6pm. No swaps please For Sale Toshiba HX-10 64K home computer with quantity of software, and joystick, boxed, . Tel: Stevenage (0438 356686) after 5pm. 94 "


"The Apple Macintosh and Atari ST can use their 68000 processors to create marvellous feats of computing, but only the Amiga has Daphne, Agnes and Portia. These three special hardware chips control graphics. The Amiga was originally designed to we a super-game machine. Marshal M. Rosenthal takes a look at what it can do. number of their popular programs Borrowed Time lets you for the Amiga. Hacker delves into become Sam Harlow, ace the mysterious world of hidden American private eye. One of computers and spies. You have your clients wants you dead, and been able to gain control over a you can bet it's your primary job strange subterranean device to stop that from happening. developed by a mysterious Both games features a power, and must try to recover mouse-activated compass for information in order to save the movement. Objects can also be world. picked up onscreen and kept in a Those familiar with the game special viewing window until will be astounded at the detail needed. rattacus is an interactive and depth of the images on Commands can be typed, or cartoon. You play Kyne, screen joined together from a list also hunted by police and felons Character animation is smoothplaced onscreen. For instance, alike, whose only chance for and quite realistic, owing in part you can show the gun\" by freedom is to brave the harsh to the hardware sprites as well as pointing to SHOW (or typing it) world of Brattacus the multi-colour shadings. Sound and then pointing to the gun. Kyne is controlled by the effects are excellent and Those looking for high-quality mouse in combination with contribute well to the feeling that text adventurers will be happy to hear that many of Infocom's line is becoming available. One of the first to come out is the 128K A Mind Forever Voyaging. This gives you the opportunity to become a human-like computer and explore a futuristic \"what if world. The usual great collection of paraphernalia enclosed in a book-styled box makes this a game to really sink your teeth in. Electronic Arts has made a A DEMO OF THE significant commitment to the AMIGA'S GRAPHICS Amiga, releasing a near-flood of game software. Those programs various movements and the two buttons. Walk, run draw your sword and fight. There are over 30 different characters, including assassins, technicians and guards. Various screens depict control rooms, passageways and... but more would be telling. The characters are large, about ten times that of the small pixel-folk we've grown peeper, heard the latest he accustomed to. Everyone speaks through word balloons, and  BORROWED TIME different personalities require varying tactics there's something bizarre going translated include Skyfox, Seven Sound effects are minimal, but on. This is one game best played Cities Of Gold, and Archon strategically placed to do the most at night. Skyfox puts you behind the good. The folks at Psygnosis Mindshadow and Borrowed cockpit of a supersonic jet fighter have thoughtfully added a HELP Time are both text graphic You've a full complement of menu that lets you change adventures featuring limited controls to aid you as you take on parameters such as type of animation and a good though far enemy fighters before going head control (joystick mouse), save the from great) parser to understand to head with the mother-ship. game in process or even let the your typed-in commands. Seven Cities places you more computer control the whole game Mindshadow has you deserted firmly on earth as you must in \"movie mode\" upon a desert island. Far worse, assume the duties of an emplorer Activision has translated a you've lost your memory! and conquer unknown lands for King and country. There are ships to outfit and territories to map. Besides historical missions, you can also create your own world to explore. Archon is a combination of battle and chess. To win the right to a square on the board requires you to defeat your opponents piece with your own. Strange creatures possessing weird powers live here. Beware the fiery phoenix, or the brief and fatal touch of the sorcerer. In all cases, graphics seem to pop right off the screen and into your eager little eyes. The speed of animation is amazing, Wait till you see those jets pass by, or take on one of the players in the game arena. Sound taken to the max really makes you part of the action here, and can't be emphasized enough. These programs have been reviewed in the past, so the best way to describe what the Amiga versions do is to take all the best said about them and multiply it by a factor of 100 Arctic Fox is new, and continues the tradition of its flying elder sibling mentioned above. Again, animation moves at a breathless pace, with better than arcade quality. Explosions echo around you (stereo), and you had better not take your eyes off the viewscreen for even a second Of course there are other programs coming out for use with telecommunications, design and art. But considering the amazing capabilities of the Amiga, it's no wonder that games should be in the forefront Manufacturers Information: Activision Post Office Box 7286 Mountain View, California 94039 Electronic Arts 2755 Campus Drive San Mateo, California 944039 Indocom 125 Cambridge Park Drive Cambridge, Massachusits 02140 Psygnosis, Limited Port of Liverpool Building Pier Head, Liverpool L3 IBY "


"* Letter from AMERICA * * * * * Here at C+VG we think the Atari ST is the recessed slots in the front. Or into the telephone line. It's sexiest thing to happen to computers since use one of the spaces for a Hayes compatible (a Samantha Fox. Marshal M. Rosenthal, C+VG's hard disk instead. semi-standard here in the The wire frames make the states), and retails for just Stateside spy, is pretty impressed with the unit appear to float serenely, $199.99. machine too. Here he looks at some extra bits and consider what you could Hippopotamus Software is for this extra special machine. do with all that free space releasing their ST Video now that you've got your desk Digitizer. This is a self D uying a new computer is consider the ease in which back. The Work Station retails contained device that attaches often the start, not the you can access information, for $95.00. to any composite NTSC, PAL end of hardware with the equivalent of 20 If a rose is a rose is a rose, or SECAM video source, such purchases. It may have double-sided double density why settle for a mouse that as a t.v. camera or video amazing software, but a lack disks right there at your looks like a lump of plastic? cassette recorder. of peripherals can eventually mouse/fingertips. The Mouse House (also from The Digitizer then creates a lead to a ho-hum attitude. One justifiable complaint American Covers) envelopes 1/60th of a second The Atari 520 ST possesses about the ST is that it doesn't your rodent in a warm \"snapshot\" by locking onto a a very small price tag when know what day it is until you covering complete with a pair single video frame, which is you consider what you're tell it. The internal clock that of beady eyes and whiskers. kept in memory. getting. A disk drive and stores this information, as well You'll never have to tell The Digitizer plugs into the monitor. The new 1040 even as the time, goes dead every anyone what to call it again. ST's printer port and so adds more memory (1 time you turn it off. Retail cost for both Mouse and requires no special, or costly, megabyte) and puts a It can, with a little help from Mat is $9.95. (What!?! Ed) interface. double-sided drive inside the Soft Logik's LogiKhron clock Those who prefer an The black and white unit computer. cartridge. uncluttered workspace will will retail at $139.95, with the But what about add-ons? take to the Mouse Pocket, colour model to probably be The sword of low price is from Kensington Microwave. under $300.00. double-edged, for few will be The plastic pocket attaches Hippo's ST Sound Digitizer willing to pay for a peripheral the velcro to the side of the also plugs into the printer that costs more than the monitor, making for a safe port, with a microphone computer did. storage spot for your mouse p lugging into the device. Fortunately, companies are between sessions. The Pocket Sounds can be modified and developing hardware that retails for $15.00. played back as high quality doesn't strain your There are a number of \"digital\" files. pocketbook. Exciting telecommunication programs Before and after. A one-megabyte ST will products that enhance the ST, out for the ST, but they're support up to 40 seconds of without sacrificing quality for The ST checks to see if pretty useless if the computer continuous sounds. cost. The first proof of this there is a card inserted when isn't hooked up to a phone The unit comes with all comes from Atari in the form it's turned on, and loads in the le modem. hardware and software of their 20 megabyte hard correct time and date before needed, and retails for disk drive. displaying the GEM desktop. $139.95. A hard disk is akin to Retail cost is $49.95. Who knows what will come trading in your bicycle for a One of the advantages of next? Some products are just rocket car. The case contains the ST machines is their around the corner, like a magnetically coated platter compactness. No bulky Hippo's household appliance which spins in excess of secondary box containing controller that enables the ST 20,000 revolutions per minute. circuit boards, RAM chips, to automatically control just This enables information to be disk drives and the like. But about everything around you. located and accesssed it's also true that your desk Others, like CD-ROM players incredibly fast, in fact you can get a bit messy, what with A nude mouse! and colour plotters, are on the could fill up the entire the many wires from the You could shop around and horizon. But it's safe to bet memory of an 520 ST in less various components and their try to adapt some model to that they too will succumb to than one second. power supplies dangling your needs, but a better \"Power Without the Price.\" \"Power Without the Price\" every which way. So to the solution would be to use still holds court. Most drives rescue comes the ST Work QMI's 520 ST Modem. of this type sell in the Station (Miller Computer This plugs directly into the thousand range, but Atari's Products). modem port and, surprise, the retails for $600.00 The first thing you'll notice connecting cable is included The drive doesn't need any is that now you've a stand for (eliminating one of the usual add-on controller or interface your monitor, as well as a \"extras\" you're forced to card either, because this has shelf which the ST can slide purchase). already been built into the ST. under for the night. The modem operates either It also takes its power from Two disk drives, and their in 300 or 1200 baud, has L.E.D. the computer as well.  Fully clothed. displays, and attaches directly power supplies, fit into IL * * * eeced * * Team "


"MI CROS E IL MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Atari Games, eg. Mercenary. The Goonies and more. Brand new unwanted gifts. Wanted: Vectrex and Vectrex Games Missile Command for Atari computer. Any VCS games Also stuck on Dallas Quest, Mercenery, Goonies or the early part of Hitch Hikers Guide (Infocom) Help for less than 50p (or free). Jonathan Browning 18 Wilkinson Close, Wylde Green, Sutton Coldfield, W. Midlands, B73 500. Bedfordshire Atari User Group wishes to contact others in UK and overseas. Swap programmes and ideas. Write to John, 26 Bromley Gardens, Parkside, Houghton Regis, Dunstable, Beds. LU55RL England Atri ST version of Zork 1 by Infocom for sale. Hardly used Write to J. William Hern. Woodside of Horner, Kemnay. Inverurie, ABS OXT, or phone 0467 42536 (evenings). Lord of the Rings need help? Send just  for complete solutions and map to parts and Il includes two alterantive approaches for each part) to: Lee Hodgson, 54 Church Street, Tewkesbury. Glos, GL20 5RZ (cheques to M. G. Hodgson) CBM64 wanted Quill and manuals to swap with Revs tape originals only please. Write to: lan, 12 Clewer Avenue, Windsor, Berks, SL4 3BQ I want you to swap your brand new Commodore 64 software against mine. English, American and many other games and utilities on tape or disk. Write, send lists to Thomas Holzner, Linkstrasse 13, 8000 Muenchen 45. West Germany Commodore 64 owner wants to swap software. Large collection, disk only. No time wasters please. Send your latest list to Eddie Hall, 28 Welbeck Street, Princes Avenue. Hull, HU5 350 All the top C64/128 games to swap against even newest software (I want Midi Soft) or sell on disk or tape. Write to T. Blanchot, 57 Rue Des Fougeres, 57070 Metz, France, For sale: Spectrum 48K Murphy data recorder, Kempston interface and Quickshot Il joystick. Lots of software. Altogether worth voer , will sell for  ono. Will sell as one or as seperate items. Phone: Wakefield (0942) 376563 after 4pm weekdays or anytime weekends and ask for Anthony CBM64 I have the newest games from the USA and Holland to swap. (Disk only) Write to Sune Pajtersen, Matias Claudius STR 9. 2390 Flensburg, West Germany Amstrad CPC 464 owner willing to swap software with anyone. Girls don't be shy, a friend reckons I won't get a single reply from a girl. Write to Stephen at 34 Alicia Avenue, Kenton, Harrow, Middlesex, HA3 8HS. Please send list. Spectrum Software swaps and sales. (Originals) JSW. Jet Pac, Trashman, Tizer, Astro Blaster. Vu-File, Starstrike. Plus about 100 more Great games! Cheap! Don't miss this. For a list send a tape to David Duffy, Main Street, Headford, Co. Galway, Ireland Atari 800XL, 1050 program recorder, two joysticks, and games, sell for  ring 01-640 4883. Mon to Sat ask for Richard Atari software wanted disk or cassette also some software on cassette to swap. Tel: 031-661 3411 before 8pm. Also swop Atari 800XL recorder software for QL, BBC cash equivalent. Atari software to swap Especially interested in Demo's. Games including Eidolon, Karateca G.A.D. Write to Aaron Hardwick, 171 Bulkington Road, Bedworth, Warks, CV12 9ED. Hello, this is SIF. Send me your list of games for the Spectrum 48 or CBM64. Every letter will be answered, write to Thor Klokk, Hellig Olausgt 55, 6000 Aalesund, Norway. Hurry Up! BBC B OS 1.2. Boxed with cassette recorder, Kempston joystick, light pen with all leads. Also with books, magazines and 40 originals including Knight Lore, Alien 8, Repton, Hobbit, Manic Miner and many more. Worth + will sell for . Phone: 0383 725903 For saleBBC B OS 1.2 with Ferguson Datacorder and voltmace 3B joystick, various software including Tapper, Top Ten hits,  ono. Tel: West Drayton 440622 BBC micro owner wishes to exchange information and ideas on software etc. I have approx 200 titles on disk and tape. Write to Mark, 5 Sunnyside Walk, Aberdeen, AB2 3NZ. Commodore 64 games International Soccer .99 International Tennis .50. International Basketball .50 Dreibs .50, Spirit of the Stones .50, Racing with P. O'Sullivan .50, Fire Quest .50, Pinball .50. Wizard of War .00. A. Biggs, Staverton Road, Hornchurch, Essex, RM11 2DH Commodore 64 osftware to swap many British and American titles to swap. Phone Kieran on 061-776 1370 or Craig on 061-775 2778, only decent offers please. Atari 800XL 64K computer plus 410 data recorder plus 822 Thermal Printer plus Touch tablet with cartridge software plus joystick (USA Champ I) software including Bruce Lee, Chop Suey. Goonies etc Educational software, cartridge software and books. Good condition, boxed as new. manuals included, complete with AC adapters and I/O leads. For only . Tel: 01-228 8890, ask about computer for sale. Atari user wants to exchange software with user in European countries, UK and USA. Send list to Jose Francisco Callejas, C/Albalate Del Arzobispo. No. 2. Madrid 28018. Spain Atari disk owners, super Zaxxon on disk, no packaging or literature hence only . Cheques made payable to S. Chell, 5 Marsh's Paddock, Hickling, Melton Mowbray. Leics. LE14 3AQ For sale CBM64, C2N tape deck, 1541 disk drive, MP S801 printer, joysticks, Currah Speech Unit plus over  worth of software,  ono. Tel: Mike Plowman, Bicester 245711 during office hours CBM 64 games to swap on tape, including Rambo. Hacker, Winter Games, Frank Bruno's Boxing, Commando, elite. Spy Vs Spy II. Christer Henriksson, Flemingsgatan 20, 10600 Ekenas, Finland CBM 64, will swap games for CBM with people everywhere. Disc only! Send list to: Ivar Frolich. Alle Gaten 11. 5000 Bergen, Norway. Write soon! For sale Epson LX80 printer in excellent condition with Atari interface but will work with almost any computer. Also Atari 810 disc drive. Call Robert on Rossendale (0706) 214449. Commodore 64 with data recorder and joystick, over  worth of excellent games, including Kung Fu Master, Commando, Bounty Bob, etc. Everything in mint condition Cost , sell for . Phone: 096784 225 evenings. Spectrum Games for sale in one large batch. Total retail price . Will sell for . Titles include Mikie, Robin of the Wood, Rambo, Fairlight, Sweevo's World etc (23 in all). All in their own cases. Phone: Pete Ramsden on Leek (Staffs) 385219 Spectrum 48K software. large range, from 99p, many popular tities all new. Send SAE for list. 32 Staverton Road, Hornchurch, Essex Commodore 64 plus cassette recorder and  worth of software including Paradroid, Ballblazer and Fightnight for sale. Price  ono. Write to: Steve, 2 Lonsdale Road, Newton Abbot, Devon. Spectgrum software club hire games for as little as  membership,  life. SAE for details. Camelot Software Club Cae Ymryson. Caernarvon, Gwynedd, LL55 2LR. Commodore 16 for sale. Including colour printer-paper roll, spare set of pens, cassette unit, flowchart stencil Intro to basic tapes 1 & 2.  worth of software. All manuals for printer, computer, cassette. Very good condition. Cost over . Will sell for . Tel: 061-790 5528 after 6pm. Atari 400/800/XL XE Cassette games to sell or to swap if interested write to R. A. Long, 14 Dorset Drive, Edgeware. Middx, HA8 7NT (England) Atari games for sale or swap. Hacker, Last Starfighter. Last V8, GT American Road Race, Chimera, Mercenary and many more (cass.). Tel: 01-328 2246 for lan or Mike. "


"MICROS E I MICROSELLS It costs only  to advertise in Microsell! Amstrad penpals wanted to swap software. Write to Dave Harrison, 2 Russell Street, Bishop Auckland, Co. Durham, DL 14 7PT Spectrum 48K ZX printer and 6 rolls of paper, magazines, books, cases.  of software including Yie Ar Kung Fu, Movie Marsport etc. Joystick and programmable interface all for . Tel: 051-334 4111. Write to 19 Athelstan Close. Bromborough, Wirral. L62 2EX topics over 17,000 words, 2 levels of play. Each game .95 incl. p&p Write to: Alan Hudd, Microteknix Software, 71 Park Road, Downend, Bristol, BS16 5LQ Shadowhire, Decathlon, Fist, Skooldaze, Scrabble. JSW.M Mole and many more Mastertronics all half price or less Phone: 0733 208615 Swap Commodore 64 software for Atari software disk and tape. all the latest and best American Software, write with list to: Stuart McCrae. 14 Lister Crescent. Fairfield, Liverpool L7 OHP Atari games, to swap. Lots of titles. Send disk and/or tape lists to: Nick, 2 Ambleside Road, Whitby. Ellesmere Port. South Wirral, L65 9DQ. For C64 users, many new titles on disk and tape. Prefers disk but will take tape. Please write to me at: 17 Sandon Grove, Rainford, St. Helens, Merseyside. M.S.X. Toshiba home computer with cassette recorder and over  worth of software  ono. For details phone Harlow (0279) 39338 after 4pm and ask for Daniel Amiga!!! I have this maga-fantastic dream computer and have already a great software collection but I want more. So I'm interested in swapping programs with other owners worldwide. Roger Zens. Hunsdorfer Weg 27, 4224 Huenxe 2, West Germany. Vic-20, C2N, 16K RAM (switchable) Quickshot Il plus thirteen! cartridges -Omega & Rat Race, 4 Adventures, Sargon, Machine Code Monitor Many tapes Sub & Tank Commander Matrix, Star Defender, Arcadia, Rockman, plus Mastering the Vic 20 (book). Cost +. Sell for  ono. Call Clive on Luton 0582 505840 6pm-8pm. Win the Pools! Our fantastic program will help you to predict the Winners Spectrum 48K only .95. MSX Art plus many features .99. BBC B software Sella Strategy game on disk .95. Send cheque PO to Sycosoft, 13 Herne Rise, Ilminster. Somerset. XV Spectrum 48K, VTX 5000 modem, programmable joystick interface, quickshot 2 joyustick and over 30 software titles. All in original boxes. A few months old worth over  for sale  ono. Phone: 01-729 2014 after 6pm anytime weekends. Ask for Jason Spectrum + 48K with cassette and printer and  of software = . MSX. Toshiba HX10 64K computer with cassette recorder = . Phillips colour 14\" remote control TV. Ideal for computers . Tel: 01-501 3616. Atari 600XL Memory module 64K never used for sale . Also for Atari. Back up tape make backups of your programs. .50 each. Write to Stephen Quigley, 4 Fortfield Avenue. Racecourse Road, Derry, NI BT48 8DN. Spectrum 48K for sale complete with joystick interface and software, including Gyroscope, Way of the Exploding Fist, Commando, and Monty on the Run, only  ono. Tel: 0243 692128. Atari cassette software, all original, Huck, Spiderman, Attack of the Mutant Camels,  each. Super Zaxxon. Blue Max 2001, Bounty Bob Strikes Back Smash Hits 4,  each. Phone: Bedford (0234) 768569. BBC 32Kgames for sale including Frak! Zalaga Blagger, Manic Miner, Nutkraka, Golf, Chukie Egg and more worth . Accept  the lot or  each. Ring (0274) 602670 after 5pm and ask for Matthew. Commodore 64 software to sell or swap. Very updated games. Please Phone: 04907-2933 Heeze Holland Want to swap hot software with tware with people around the world. Sell also good hardware like Speed or the new Dolphin Dos to fair prices. If interested just write or order hardware list from Stefan Winter, Witthausstrabe 4-10, 4600 Dortmund 41. West Germany. All letters will be answered! , CBM 64 games to swap or sell. Games include: Raid on Bungling Bay . Boulderdash, Poke Position, Monopoly. Galexians, Motormania, Pyjamarama, Indiana Jones . Indiana Jones . Kong Strikes Back . Dangermouse In Do . Whole lot for . Will swap for 2 well known titles. Phone: Manchester 795 4017 after 6 and ask for Adil Fareed. Spectrumgames. Shadowfire, Dun Darach, Movie, Monty on the Run, Saboteur, Exploding First, Three Weeks in Paradise .50 each or all for . Tel: Warren, Kings Langley 65104 after 6pm. Atari 64K 600XL, 1010 recorder, joystick, games ie. Pole Position, Computer War etc., lots of other games, books, mags plus touch tablet, light pen. Worth over  sell for  lot, Phone: (Blantyre, Glasgow 828777) ask for Allan. Atari programs for sale from .50, disks cassettes, and cartridges also US Doubler Chip. Tel: 0926 315612 Spectrum 48K, cassette recorder, 36 titles, manuals, leads etc. Worth . sell for . Tel: Warren, Kings Langley (09277) 65104 after 6pm Commodore 64 owner wants to swap or sell the latest software. I have many excellent titles. Send your reaction to: B. Goes, Kardinaal De Jong Straat 30. Amstelveent, 1181 MH. Holland Commodore 64 for sale with C2N tape player and an micro chip joystick worth . also includes about 25 magazines, the computer is boxed as new complete with manual and all leads, will sell for  ono. Please Phone: Framinham Earl (9936) 3517. Ask for Vincent please I am an Atari owner with cassette recorder and disc drive. I have hundreds of titles on both cassette and disk and would like to contact other Atari owners to swap games etc. Phone: Mark Topping Bath (0225) 29778 T1/994A computer. Complete plus program book. Ext. Basic book and tapes, . Speech Synthesizer, . Extended Basic cartridge . Donkey Kon. Car Wars, Munchman connect Four, Indoor Soccor. Parsec, TI Invaders, Alpiner, A Mazing, Attack Defender all boxed and  each or  the lot Tel: 0904 708496 Atari 800XL, 1050 disc drive, 1010 program recorder, Quickshot IV, utilities, 7 issues of Atari User and 40 games  ono. Tel: (031) 663 6278 evenings and weekends. Sharp M2700, Amstrad, Spectrum, new exciting games ten pack, priced .95 Cheques payable to Scott Carey, Pacetapes, 40 Bainton Grove, Clifton, Nottingham, NG11 BLG CBM64, 5 months old plus data recorder plus Kempston joystick plus dust cover plus  worth of original software including: Elite, Mercenary 2, Summer Games II, Pitstop II. Exploding Fist, Spy Vs Spy II. Commando, Paradroid, Little Computer People, Impossible Mission plus 33 others. Worth , sell for  or swap for Amstrad CPC464 colour or CPC 128 (colour or Green Screen) plus games. Phone Tring (044282) 2936 and ask for Michael evenings only MSX software new games from Microteknix dominoes — first out and traditional threes and fives. Beginner to expert levels of play. Genograms-general knowledge anagrams. A competitive game for 1 to 4 players rearranging the letters lof randomly shuffled words. 31 CBM 64 software for sale, Sherlock, 4th Protocol, Red Moon, Super Huey, Bounty Bob, Tir Na Nog, Empire of Khan, Falcon Patrol II, Crystals all prices negotiable. Tel: Castor 336 Spectrum software for sale tiltes include Gunfright, Westbank Commando, Hypersports, Spy Vs Spy Ghostbusters, Gremlins. "


"Steinar Lund is an artist with a very odd sideline. He paints computers. Not pictures of computers stupid! He actually paints the machines themselves. Here Steiner tells you how it's done and we give you a chance to win a Lund original of your very own! CUSTOMISED COMPUTERS WE top, having cut any masks hen starting to separately so as not to mark the customise a computer surface of the computer work out a design in Enamel paints take quite a few accordance with the clients hours to dry, so plenty of time requirements, and submit it to must be allowed before using any paper. Once a design has been masking film, otherwise the initial finalised, I transfer it to the coats of paint can come off when computer using transfer paper the masking film is removed which can be bought from art When airbrushing I always use shops a face mask to protect my lungs Before starting to paint i mask from the dust. I got mine from an off all the connectors and cover all industrial supplier, although some the electronic components with hardware stores also carry paper and masking tape, and protective masks remove the section to be painted. When I paint a computer I use As enamel paints are opaque! Humbrol enamel gloss paints do the backgrounds first then which can be bought from paint symbols or other subjects on modelling shops. When airbrushing I thin the colours with Humbrol cellulose thinners and use the clear sticky film which is often used for protecting paperbacks as a masking film. Standard airbrush masking film is not sticky enough. I use a Devilbiss Aerograph Super 63 airbrush, and fit a splatter-cap to achieve a stone' effect. To finish off, I spray several layers of Humbrol Clear Polyurethane to ZZZZZ LLLLL provide a protective cover. To clean my brushes and airbrush, use lighter fuel COMPETITION ZX Spectrum Singiair :17: = 10 teinar Lind was born (well almost) in Bergen, Norway, in the wonderful year of 1954. After running a home for lost wooly hats for ten years he moved with his family to the port of Southampton In 1981 Steinar became involved with the computer games industry when he was commissioned to do the first covers for Rod Cousen's Quicksilva Company. He then attended computer shows in order to introduce himself to other game companies, one of which was Llamasoft. After a further meeting. Jeff Minter comissioned Steinar to illustrate the cover for Sheep in Space. While at a Dio concert (Heavy Metal), Jeff noticed that the lead guitarist had a custom painted guitar... why not custom paint computers too? So in the summer of '85 Jeff asked Steinar to paint an Atari 130XE with suitable subject matter camels, stars etc. This was followed by an Atari 520ST, two disk drives. monitor, and mouse, with special attention to Colourspace which Jeff was developing for the 520. You could win your very own customised Spectrum Plus, customised by Steinar Lund himself! All we want you to do is illustrate how you would paint a Spectrum. Use the special C+VG Spectrum keyboard to draw your designs on. Go mad. Let your imagination run riot. And if you're the winner, Steinar will attempt to transfer your design to the C+VG Spectrum Send your design to Computer + Video Games, Customised Computer Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing date is June 16th, normal C+VG competition rules apply, and the editor's decision is final. Don't delaystart designing today! C+VG CUSTOMISED COMPUTER COMPETITION Name Address: Age T-shirt size; Med Large: "


"COMPUTER GAMES I BUY C+VG EVERY MONTH. IT COVERS ALL COMPUTERS. THERE'S MORE GAMES REVIEWS, BETTER COMPETITIONS, FREE POSTERS. GREAT HINTS & TIPS AND THE BEST ADVENTURE COLUMN IN THE WORLD... OH AND IT'S GOT MY PICTURE IN IT! COMPUTR COMPUTER GAMES 1ES COMMANDO WON A GENUINE ARCADE MACHINE! BIG RED CAN'T BE WRONG. COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES. THE BIGGEST SELLING GAMES MAG IN THE WORLD ON SALE 15th OF EVERY MONTH. Big Red has either stamped on my local newsagent or Mellissa has run off with him. Either way I'm having trouble getting hold of my monthly copy of C+VG. Please help. Signed Please start me a subscription to Tick Box Computer & Video Games U.K.  Europe  a (Surface Mail) Rest of World  (Airmail) Rest of World  Tenclose a cheque/P.O. for  Please debit my Access/Visa A/C: Amount Number Expiry Date Signed Name Addres Editor's Reply, I'm afraid Big Red can get a bit out of hand, and as for Mellissa well there's no accounting for taste. To ensure you don't miss a single copy of C+VG, why not take out a subscription. We guarantee that you'll receive 12 months'issues, posted direct to your door on the 15th of every month. Postcode Please make cheques payable to Computer & Video Games. Return to: Carl Dunne, C+VG, Magazine Services, EMAP, I 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Telephone: 01-251 6222. COMPU DICLUSIVE PREVIEW TROVE FREE INSIDE: BOOK OF ADVENTURE WIN A METEOR PIN DOS DAN DARE Pilot of the future WINLA.B. THUNDERBY COMPUTER GAMES "


"DISCOVERING THAT IDEAS CORPORATION IS BEHIND THE ILLEGAL OPERATION OF GOD , AN OUTLAWED ADDICTIVE 7.5.7. GAME,* MELISSA RAVENFLAME IS DETERMINED TO CONFRONT THE MAN AT THE TOP...AND THE ONLY THING IN HER WAY IS AN ENTIRE ARMY... WELL... WE'RE ELWHERE THE HELL ARE THEY ALL COMING 77 WRITTEN & DRAWN ERRY Paris 6 T1986 LD *T.5.1.TOTAL SENSORY IMMERSION GAME-ED. "


"THBUTE WELCOMING COMMITTEE... ID START WORRYING WHEN WE REACH THE 67\"FLOOR,.. WHY WHY THEN..? EXPERIMENTAL WEAPONS SECTION... I DON'T KNOW WHAT THEY'VE GOT UP THERE... BUT I KNOW WE AIN'T GONNA LIKE IT! SSSKKHHO0000 EXCUSE ME PEOPLE... THT M T HAVE CLEARED THE WAY... AHEM... BEHIND YOU, SWEETCAKES... WHA-JUST You FREEZE IT THERE, MISTER... WHOA, NOW... EASY WITH THAT PIECE... E GO..? YOU DON'T WANNA SHOOT OL' FATS NOW, DO YA HONEY... SEEMS YOU'VE ALL BECOME A LITTLE BIT OF AN EMBARRASSMENT TO HIM...SAYS YA LEFT HIM WITH NO CHOICES... 50 WHY NOT SAVE YOURSELVES ALOT OF UNNECESSARY PAIN... 5TREPORT O) BASEMENT SIX... PERSONALLY, I THINK THE MAN'S BEING VERY REASONABLE... AND WHO KNOWS. HONEY... NOT WHEN HE'S GOT A MESSAGE FOR YA FROM THE MAW... SAYS HE'S GOTTA BE SEEN TO DO SOMETHING... I'M SURE YA UNDERSTAND EMPLOYEES OWN CREMATORIUM... JUST THINK OF IT AS..ER... EARLY RETIREMENT! MAYBE YOU AND ME CAN HAVE SOME FUN ON THE WAY DOWN... WADDAYA SAY..? I SAY.. SHOVE IT, DAMMIT! WE'VE GOT COMPANY... MORE "


"EVERYONE INTO THAT LIFT X OVERRIDE    CONTROL OF THE SERVO SYSTEMS... THIS FLAME-THROWER SHOULD KEEP 'EM BUSY DOWN HERE... WERE ON OUR WAY UP. SIR... YOU FOLKS ARE IN BIS TROUBLE BY THE TIME THEY PUT THAT FIRE OUT, WE SHOULD BE -SIR... KYKLA WE'VE BEEN STOPPED ON THE 67THFLOOR... THEY MUST BE OVERRIDING THE SOVERRIDE... VERY SWEAKY! THE 67TH... THAT'S WHERE YOU SAID WE SHOULD START TO WORRY, 15N'T IT..? YEP. TO BE CONTINUED! "


"C+VG COMPETITION COLOSSUS COMPETITION Pawn, Bishop, King, Vicar, Prince, Queen, Knight Rook, Crow, C+VGACDS Colossus Chess 4 Competition Name It's your move in the CDS/C+VG Colossus Chess 4 Competition. And top prize is a replica of the famous Lewis Chess set and board worth more than . The ten runners-up will get copies of Colossus Chess 4, one of the best chess game simulations available, either on cassette or disc. The Lewis chess ser, made of walrus ivory, was found at Uig, Isle of Lewis, in the Outer Hebrides, in 1983 Made in the 12th Century AD, they are the largest collection of early chessman found in Europe and have been described as the \"Outstanding ancient chessmen in the world\" The 67 pieces of the set can now be seen in the British Museum. Each of the human figures were originally thought to have been made in Britain or Scandinavia. The resin replica is molded from the originals. The pawns are 2 inches high and the other pieces vary in size between 3.25 inches and 4 inches. Here's what you have to do to win. Printed on the left are the names of varous chess pieces, most genuine, some not. We want you to circle the false ones and send your answers, together with the printed coupon, to Colossus Chess 4 Competition, Computer+Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London, ECIR 3AU. The closing date for the competition is June 16th and the editor's decision is final. Address Please say which computer you own and whether you want cassette or disk Commodore 640 Cassette Disko Amstrado Cassetted Disco "


"10% OFF ANY ORDERS OVER  * NEW MANAGEMENT * NEW FAST SERVICE * NEW EASY ORDERING BY ACCESS + NEW GUARANTEE: ALL GAMES IN STOCK * NEW PRICE LIST AVAILABLE MONTHLY FREE ON REQUEST SOME OF THIS MONTH'S SPECIAL OFFERS! AMSTRAD S60 Soda Milion 2 06.70 16.70 Rock n Wrestle LOOKING FOR KICKS IN 86? THEN DON'T MISS Blockbusters Cornute Hits 2 Doomsday Blues Friday the 13th Fantasia Diamond E7 45 Super Test 670 Saboteur (6 70 Sode 16.70 7.45 (5 99 Superbow Superman Spitfire 40 mita 17.45 Turbo Est Hyper Sports Moon Cresta Rock n Wrestle 6 70 SUPER VALUF 6 Young Ones War Play Ve Ar Kung Fu E6 70 22an Sizzlers 17.45 COMMODORE 16+4 12.45 SPECTRUM Amazing Amon Women 5595 Commando MATE Sabot Samantha Fox Soka Milion 2 Turo ESO 0670 06.70 66 95 399 Berry View to ak Way of the ter Ye Al Kung Fu 06.70 16.70 Barry Moucan Bom Jack Cyberun Commande Computer Clash Smash Comput2 1595 Kung Fu Kid $5.95 St Even Thompson 499 15 95 Thai Borg 14.99 6.0 Winter Olympics E5 99 ES 95 All prices inc pap COMMODORE 64 1670 Britain's top soccer magazine brings you all the excitement of soccer every week.  SUPER COLOUR POSTERS OF THE TOP STARS  MATCH FACTS THE WORLD'S GREATEST RESULTS SERVICE WITH RATINGS FOR EVERY PLAYER  FABULOUS FEATURES THAT ARE BANG UP-TO-DATE  UP-TO-THE-MINUTE NEWS AND VIEWS FROM YOUR FAVOURITE PLAYERS. AND ALL FOR 42p AVAILABLE AT YOUR NEWSAGENTS NOW! Check us out you'll find we're on the ball! 17.45 1745  45 CH 70 Doomsdan Revenge Emre Era Glide 30 Games Hyper Sports Hard Ball Korons Kung Fu Nase Max Headroom PSIS Trading Ghi 25% Discount on any new 30 Games 1745 advertised titles notiste Hyper Sports 95 above. Subject loose Heavy on the Mac Human Toe Thing 5595 GOODBYTE ES 95 25 CROMWELL COURT 1595 EALING ROAD Rambo 5595 ALPERTON, WEMBLEY Superbowl 670 MIDDX HAO 1JT Samantha Fox 1670 ENGLAND 765 1745 1670 TELEPHONE OUR HOTLINE NUMBER 03744 63161 CUT PRICE SOFTWARE ADVERTISEMENT INDEX Amstrad Show QUR OUR SPECTRUM Quaratrone RRP PRICE COMMODORE OUR BRP PRICE RRP PRICE AMSTRAD 9.95 725 Movie 995 725 Rock n Wrestle Arcade Solda Million Rambo Shadowtire il Any US Gold Any Ultimate Lord of the Rings Rock N Wrestle Skyfox 995 745 RMS Titanic 1695 1100 Bomb Jack 7.95 5.90 Game Maker idisk) 995 745 Sold a Million il 7.95 $90 Elite 995 745 Any Ultimate 1995 1295 Any US Gold 395 650 Any Activision 995 115 Any Arolasoft 995 725 1999 1495 9.95 7.45 14.95 11.00 995 745 Monopoly Scrabble Sorcery disk only! Any Ultunate Transact 1395 10 20 995 745 29.959.95 83 999 7.50 Salta on il 995 745 Spate 40 995 725 105 Bargain Bubble Bus Bug Byte Cascade Charnwood Cheetah Compumart Cut Price Elite English Software GB Microland Gargoyle Games Gremlin Graphics Goodbyte Incentive JJB JR Software IFC,3 Superbowl 995 125 Lord of the Rings 1595 1295 Lord of the Rings 15% 12.95 Ping Pong 795 540 Rock N Wrestle 9.95 125 Cyruss (0) 1395 10.95 Turbo Esprit 8.95690Hard Ball 9.95 725 Tau Ceti Bomb Jack 795 550 Superbowl 9.95 5.95 Tau Cetid) 1495 11.95 Way of the Tiger 995 725 Yie Ar Kung Fu 8.95 5.50 Winter Games 995 745 Movie 795540 Undium 8.95 6.25 Elite Scooby Doo 795 550 Freeze Frame 39 95 35.95 Way of the Tiger 995 725 Way of the Tiger 995 725 Way of the Tiger 995 725 Faith 995 725 Magsys Revenge 995 725 Frankie Goes to Hwood 395 25 Amstrad blank disks 39.95 per 10. This i s a small collection from our stock, please ring for more details Mail order prices only. P&P included. Overseas orders add 75p per tape. Make cheques payable to CPS Visa/Access orders welcome by phone CUT PRICE SOFTWARE, 4 Slacksbury Hatch, Harlow, Essex CM19 4ET Tel: (0279) 24433 (24 hr ansaphone) 38 Livingstone Logic Sales Mailsoft Match Matrix Mega Save Midland Computers Midland Games Mikrogen Mirrorsoft Mosaic National Westminster Bank 83 17 THE LATEST ABC FIGURE 98,258 C+VG IS THE BIGGEST SELLING MAGAZINE IN THIS INDUSTRY MANY THANKS TO ALL OUR READERS 6,7 IBC, 60 Ocean Palace Realtime Shekhana Software Satisfaction Supasoft Superior System 3 US Gold 65 10 OBC, 20, 44,52, 69, 79 "


"C+VG MAP Holy Helpless Heroes! Batman's best buddy Robin has been kidnapped by some vile and vicious villain. But never fear, C+VG is here to help the Caped Crusader in his bid to rescue the Boy wonder with this 151 screen mega-map of Ocean's fiendishly fantastic Batman game. Ideas Central arranged for Batman's programmer, Jon Ritman, to journey to deepest Buckinghamshire, hideout of Dimension Graphics, to help create this vast and complex map. Jon has also come up with some helpful hints and advice to make sure all you Batman fans help Truth, Justice and the C+VG way to triumph over this complex game. To the Bat Cave... LEVEL 2 LEVEL 3 LEVEL O LEVEL 1 LEVEL 2 "


"LEVEL 2 suasana LEVEL 3 LUX IT'S JUSTAS I FEARED... "


"CHVG MAP Free LEVEL 4 LEVEL 4 IM LEVEL5 LEVEL 5 mother and "


"W POWW LEVEL 6 LEVEL 8 LEVEL 7 NO! ROBIN!... WHERE ARE you? "


"HINTS AND TIPS away. Some of the advice is very general and should help you at different stages of the game. First the plot. Boy Wonder has been kidnapped. Was it the Joker, the Penguin or the Riddler who was responsible? Before Batman can find Batman is the game which out out, he must find and collect the Ultimates Ultimate-151 screens of amazing graphics, packed with SEVEN parts of his Bat Craft which puzzles, problems and devious tricks. have been scattered through the Jon Ritman, the man responsible for screens. So it's off to the Bat Cave to start the game. this marvellous offering, has taken pity on all you Batmans about to be driven Batty by giving some hints and tips to help you progress through the Bungling Butlers game. It was really amazing to see how Alfred, Batman's faithful butler, has readily Jon agreed to help after Big b ungled. He's hidden Batman's Red threatened to sit on him. special gear. Without these four items But he's not giving the whole game neither you nor Batman will get very far. They are Bat Boots, to help Batman jump, the Bat Bag, for carrying items, the Low Gravity Belt, which allows the Caped Crusader to fall slowly without killing himself, and the Bat Thruster, which allows Batman to move sideways as he falls. Each item is in a different screen, protected by a Bat Guardian. Batman must dodge these to get the items. can pick them up and use them for a further advantage. To do this you must stand on a brick next to the effigy. You can then walk onto it and pick it up. If you then press Crafty Bat Craft Clues Take a good look at the exploded view of the Bat Craft at the beginning of the game. Make sure you can recognise the individual pieces. They are hidden in some awkward and apparently inaccessible places. One section is totally hidden from view. Everytime you manage to collect a piece of the craft it is transported to a launch pad and automatically assembled. Once all seven pieces have been found, Batman must find the launch pad situated at the top of the tallest building and get in the craft and face forward. Name: Jon Ritman Born: Edmonton 1956 Game: Batman Disgust for the standard of games available for the ZX-81 turned former television engineer Jon Ritman into a games programmer. «I thought I've got to be able to do better than this,\" he says. Within two months of buying the ZX 81 Jon had written his first game. \"I released two more before I left work. At the time I was earning more off computers than I was on wages at work. I decided it wasn't worth it.\" Games to Jon's credit now include Namtir Raiders, Bear Bovver, Match Day and now Batman, on which Jon worked with Bernie Drummond who designed the graphics. It took Jon and Bernie around ten months to create Batman and it gives Ocean one of its best games for ages. Favourite Music: Kate Bush. Favourite Food: Pizza. Favourite drink: \"I hardly ever drink, but if I do, it's wine.\" The thing most hated about the computer industry: Bad reviews and mis-leading hype. Other games: Seven in all-including Namtir Raiders, Bear Bover and Match Day. Invaluable Effigies Scattered around the game are many miniature Batman effigies. They all look the same but each gives Batman special powers. One increases Batman's jumping powers but only for a total of ten jumps. Another gives Batman invulnerability against the avaricious creatures and perils of the game but only for 99 seconds. There's also an effigy which gives extra lives. Another gives the Caped Crusader an extra turn of speed for 99 steps. So keep a careful count. But beware false effigies. The fiend who kidnapped Robin scattered a few nasties around. These will rob you of all your special powers. You'll quickly discover that when you touch a Batman effigy it will explode. But, if you're careful, you "


"all your lives you restart the game from the point. In other words, when you get killed you don't have to start the game from the beginning again. Bat-Man ( Copyright DC Comics) was created back in the 1940s by comic artist Bob Kane. Since then Batman became the hero of DC's best selling comics and drawn by many top comic artists. Drop and Jump at the same time, it gives you the power to double the height of your jump. But if you're having a terrible time with the effigies and their powers, don't worry. They are not absolutely necessary to complete the game. They just make things a whole lot easier. Baffling Bricks In many screen you'll come across bricks that move up and down. These can be jammed by putting something in their path. Sensational Switches Throughout the game there are three or four switches. And guess what? They switch things off. But they are hard to spot. So keep a careful watch for them. Pass the Parcel Beware the surprise package. They will explode and take a life. Look for something to explode them with rather than getting Batman to touch them. Curious Questions There are many curious balls with question marks on them. All explode when touched, but some will kill but others are harmless. Experience will tell you which is which. A Room with No View In some screens there will apparently be nothing to do and no way out. Don't be fooled. Examine the walls carefully. There's usually a hidden exit. Life After Death Reincarnation stones. These prove very useful. Touch one and it will store the state of the game. Should you lose e've got 20 copies of Ocean's smash hit Batman VV game to give away ten for the Amstrad and ten for the Spectrum to the lucky winners of our Bat-Comp. All you have to do is answer the easy Bat-Quiz below and rush your coupons off to us in the nearest Bat-mobile! Send your completed coupon to Computer and Video Games, Batman Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. Closing date for the competition is June 16th, normal C+VG rules apply and the editor's decision is final. THE BAT QUIZ 1. What was the name of Batman's trusty butler? 2. What are Batman and Robin's REAL names? 3. Name ONE of Batman's arch-enemies. C+VG/OCEAN BATMAN COMPETITION Name Address Computer owned: Amstrad My answers are: Spectrum WN "


"Mairbag, COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU Uh... they can't threat me like this. Just cos of not seen any in our local an unfortunate accident when I destroyed the computer shops. Could you tell me when they will be available. C+VG swimming pool by diving straight into S Wadrassi the 3ft end, they think they can give me all the Blackpool Big Red rotton jobs. Mailbag! Pah! Fancy getting me to replies: My answer letters. I can't even read. spies tell me the 1542 has been  I have a complaint about your karate games I have been scrapped magazine. I have been buying it waiting eight-nine months for. for the past four years and I was The poster states AVAILABLE delighted with all the great SOON! By the way the name of competitions you have been the game is International Karate. having lately. I had a chance to In April's issue of C+VGI win a Commando machine, read the review and found out  Paul Philips and P Thacker are copies of games like Fighting that it hasn't been completed both right, C+VG is worth more Warrior and Gyroscope. yet. After banging by head on than 98p. Here in Holland I pay I waited months on end for a the wall a few times, I read on .75 and it's worth it. But, if reply or to read something in and found out it knocks all the you were to raise the price to the magazine to see if I had others for six. Would you please .50 it would mean it would been one of the lucky winners, give me a release for this game. cost .60 which if far, far too bu, still I wait! Carl Fame, much for us here. I have noticed that other Manchester After the letter from A magazines print the winners Big Red Oskarsson I compared software names, so, why don't C +VG? replies: Don't prices here with mail-order This has led me to the ask me, ask software prices in England, and conclusion that perhaps there System 3. The from now on I will only buy were no prizes in the first place only thing software in this way. Take for and you were using it as an International example Winter Games -.20 excuse for people to buy the Karate doesn't by mail order and .75 in the magazine knock for six is shops in Holland, Karateka Hugh Donnelly me. would cost .80. Why do we Belfast have to pay over the top prices Big Red for these games? replies: Just Erwin Blank what are you  Now, we have a reply to a The Hague saying, Buster? letter which we published in our The reason April issue from Stuart Yalden,  Not so long ago in the Hot we don't print who was complaining about a Gossip section of C+VG, you all the certain company made the now-infamous competition May I set the record straight, statement of winners is the lack further to the comments of Mr Acornsoft/Firebird's Elite being of space. We run a lot Yalden, regarding Vic-20 available on the Atari and, of of competitions with lots of Software Hire and the course, you later printed a short winners. If we printed all their non-delivery of his order. notice to the effect that you had names, there would't be any No order was every received made a mistake\". space left for the good things in from Mr Yalden. When he I was rather annoyed by the C+VG such as me and the telephoned me complaining at style of the original statement; Bug Hunters. the lack of service, I assumed you were obviously having a that his order had gone missing subtle dig at Atari User. I I am a member of a small in the post. In these cases I telephoned Firebird and was group of Atari owners in provide a hire free of charge. told that Elite would possibly\" Manchester. We spotted a karate A cassette was posted to Mr become available. game in C+VG about seven Yalden on September 23rd and HOWEVER! Here is a piece of months ago. I saved up .50, to date I am still waiting for it to news that you may or may not but, at that time there wasn't be returned.\" know. I am acquainted with a that many shops in the Stuart Tomanek programmer who used to work Manchester area where you Maringer for a large Atari software could buy Atari games. So, we Vic 2 Software Hire company, and as a result he thought we would let it wait for Nottingham. knows quite a few of the \"star\" a month for it to appear, but, Atari programmers Archer D that month is still dragging on . I was going to buy a disc drive MacLean of 'Dropzone\" fame At least one good thing has at Christmas, but my friend said for example and he retains happened a new shop has that they were slow. After many ties with the software just opened in Manchester Christmas, my other friend industry. He told me a rather devoted to the Atari, it is called brought into school an article interesting story concerning the Atari World. It gets all the new from an old C+VG, which said mysterious Atari \"Elite\": releases, but still on one of its there was a new faster 1542 disc Firebird were to produce an walls is a poster for the same drive being launched, but I have Atari version of Elite. Due to contractual terms between Acornsoft and themselves, they have to produce a demonstration version of the game, that has to be approved by Acornsoft before the game proper can be written. This Firebird duly did, utilising the full graphical and audio facilities of the Atari, such as page flipping, colour indirection, Vertical Blank Interrupts and Display List Interrupts. That was where they slipped up. The demonstration version, although taking up relatively little memory, surpassed all the previous demo versions. Acorn soft took it into their heads that they could not allow a \"heathen\" American computer run a commercially-available version of \"Elite\" that was better than their beloved BBC original, or that surpassed the relatively slow and sound-wise) appalling Commodore or Spectrum versions. They therefore refused permission for a full game to be produced quite frankly, because it showed their BBC up so much. The proof of this story is in the currently available versions themselves. When it comes down to the bottom line, no visible attempts have been made to increase speed or reduce screen flicker or generally \"tart the game up\". One would have thought that they would have taken advantage of the CBM-64's capabilities to do so. From what I have heard, the Atari version did not flicker at all and I wouldn't be surprised If you plan to print any of this letter, I wish you to withhold my name and address and not to mention even the area when I live. I am not a pirate; I simply don't want Acornsoft/Firebird breathing down my neck for divulging potentially embarrassing information However, I feel that this \"'scandal\" should be made public, Name and address supplied  Recently, my mother wanted to get a magazine for the Amstrad. But, I stopped her and purchased Computer + Video Games instead. Now, to the point of this letter, I have a few complaints. The screens of the games you review seem to be getting smaller and in black and white. My second complaint is about the readers' listings, what 112 "


"COMPUTER + VIDEO GAMES 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON, EC1R 3AU has happened to them? I enjoy typing in programs even though half of them don't load. By the way, is there anything wrong with the program Asteroid Lander from the October issue? David Naughton Dublin 14 Big Red replies: Are you trying to pick a fight? Screen shots getting smaller? think you're imagining it. As for listings, we're never going to print another one. Never, never, never. Over my rusting body. What? All right so we've printed a listing this month. I'm not perfect. I get things wrong. local stockist, seemed to me to be wrong In my opinion not only did it not help promote the Atari name, it was of positive detriment to it, and I for one shall certainly consider another system when I decide to update my computer Come on, Atari pull your socks up .. Bing Herts  I noticed a letter from Sunil Abbi in which he asked about the compatibility of the Commodore 128 with the Commodore 64. I own a C128, and in the reply to this letter you claimed that all C64 software works on the C128. I have found this not to be true, as some games I have tried do not work. These include Hypersports, Frankie Goes to Hollytoood, Mr Do and the Flintstones. I would be happy if 12 you could tell me why these games don't work. Most '64 games will work, but software companys should make sure their games are '64/128 compatible and more people are buying a With reference to your reply to C128 Sunil Abbi's question about In reply to Anthony Kemp's whether CBM64 programmes letter, asking how to find the will all run on the 128 in 64 other P.O.Ws in Rambo here is mode, let me tell you from the solution:personal experience that they do After getting to the chopper, not you must fly down towards the While most of my CBM64 P.O.W.s camp and land on the games and utilities (including 'H' sign (by the lookout post). this word processor) do work, at Now you select knives and go to least two of the games in my the bottom left hand corner (by collection do not. As these are the box of grenades), where you the truly awful Mig Alley Ace will see a hut. Walking into this, and the almost as dreadul Jump will result in the door opening let, I am not unduly worried but and the P.O.W's walking out readers should take note that it You must then make your way is the turbo loader on Jump Jet to the helicopter and fly up which causes the trouble it towards the river. On your way works well enough on my C64) you will be attacked by a while it is the actual program gunship(s) which you must that corrupts on Mig Alley Ace. I shoot at until it retreats. Now believe that the Anirog Turbo carry on until you reach a wall used on Jump Jet is used on (killing any gunships that other games as well and so happen to attack you) with an would suggest that prospective 'H' sign near it. Land on this purchasers insist on a demo on a and you have completed the CBM128 before parting with any game. I hope these tips come in money useful AH McLean Mark Hammond Doncaster Wores . I have been an Atari fan since 1979 but over the past couple of years have been disillusioned by the lack of support from software manufacturers. Seeing the Atari Show at Hammersmith advertised, I believed this to be the great revival. Alas no. To charge admission to what was not much better than a market, without anything special laid on by Atari, just a handful of software companies selling items available from any as more Koyu BIG RED is  COPYRIGHT 1985 JERRY PARIS. "


"Don't say we never give you anything! So far C+VG readers have enjoyed free posters, free pull-out maps, free pull-out games guides and even a free giant sized C+VG calendar poster, not to mention the free Book of Games. If you've missed ALL of them, well, where have you been? But next issue we've got something coming your way that will overshadow all the C+VG freebies that have boldly gone before. It's the FREE 24-page, full-colour IDEAS CENTRAL HANDBOOK. Inside this incredible free gift you'll find glorious technicolour maps, games tips straight from the programmers, lots of pokes and some pretty amazing competitions. Our Ideas Central operatives, under the direction of the lovely Melissa Ravenflame, have been out interviewing the programmers of all the best games around and bringing back invaluable playing hints to help you get the most out of your games collection. 1066 and all that comes to the pages of C+VG next issue. We take a look at the new Domesday Book Project and ask You just what you'd like to see in the C+VG time capsule. NERTH I spy with my little eye something that looks like goodies. Yes, C+VG goes undercover to bring you top secret prizes in our Project Thesius competition. We've got 20 copies of Robico's spy adventure up for grabs. Rememeber we like spies and spies like us. And, of course, we've got lots of other super prizes lined up. War-what is it good for? Find out next issue as Dr Stephen Badsy a researcher for BBC TV's Soldiers series brings you his own, very individual, view of the current computer wargames in the first of our new Fifth Column strategy game supplements. Master Adventurer Keith Campbell ventures forth to the mysterious West Country to bring back news of the latest Level 9 adventures. Find out what's going on in deepest Weston-super-Mare in the BEST adventure column anywhere next issue. per vizet Onze hond )Oim ii et lite bread i _ Videos SPOT the DOG The Electric Pencil Co. tell you their Zoids secrets, Steve Turner tells you how to beat his latest Spectrum smash Quazatron, while Pete Cooke digs up some info from the Gal-Corp computers about surving a trip to Tau Ceti. Big Red goes ape and ends up on a free full colour poster inside the July issue of C+VG! It's the biggest thing you'll stick on your wall this year! I want my mummy! You do? Then get hold of C+VG next issue and you'll find a preview of Hewson's latest game called Pyra Curse. It's set in an Egyptian tomb and promises to set new standards in arcade adventuring. Pop down to your nearest pyramid on June 16th and dig up a copy of C+VG. You'll curse yourself if you miss it. Are you tough enough to take on the C+VG Green Beret Combat Zone Challenge? High scorers should collect their call-up papers next issue C+VG's joystick jockey Jim Douglas brings you an indepth play test of the newest sticks around. Which stick will come out on top in C+VG's super-test? Find out on June 16th. "


"gol NO other WAK BLIN NOW YOU HOLD THE KEY TO GOTHAM CITY AND THE WORLD OF THE CAPED CRUSADER Central sense of origin O c e an SPECTRUM 48K AMSTRAD 7.95 20 5 Ocean Software Limited. 6 Central Street, Manchester M2 5NS Telephone: 061 832 6633 Telex 669977 Oceans G TM &  DC Cercle 1986. All Rights Reserved "


"FIRST FROM MICO MICROPROST ANOTHER FIDS SILENT Available for commodore CDULO Written by Sid MeierAuthor of the highly acclaimed F-15 Strike Eagle Versions for SPECTRUM & AMSTRAD Soon! SILENT SERWICE THE SA 0 SPEEDE BETHANES. IND: 145 CASSETTE DISK  FIVE AUTHENTIC BATTLE STATION SCREENS FIVE PACIFIC SCENARIOS  SUPERB DOCUMENTATION .95 .95 Thrill to the initial sighting of the enemy's strike force in your periscope as their ships come into your range. But watch out-the enemy's escorts have just siphted you. You're the hunter-but suddenly-you've become the hunted! As Commander, you must sink their ships and keep your submarine from being destroyed-If you can. Will you select a quiet patrol sector in the Maranas Islands or choose the dangerous waters of the coast of Japan? Is a submerged daylight periscope attack best or do you change in on the surface at night using only radar bearings to puide you? Do you fire a spread of your precious torpedoes or can you close the range and pick of the enemy with a single torpedo shot! These decisions and many more are yours to make as you take your place among the elite ranks of the SILENT SERVICE: Manufactured in the U.K. under licence from MICRO-PROSE SOFTWARE by U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 8881. Photo courtesy Baltimore Maritime Museum. THE FIRST AUTHENTIC E SUBMARINE SIMULATION MICRO PROSE "

