"APRIL 1985 95p S$4.70 Dm6 EXCLUSIVE! DEATH STAR COMPUTER WINAN AMSTRAD IN OUR GREAT DRAGONTORC COMPETITION WETTET THAR COMPETITION GAMES AND LISTINGS FOR COMMODORE 64 SPECTRUM VIC-20 ATARI MSX JOIN THE C&VG ADVENTURE CLUB PISCOVERIREASURE TRAP CAG "


"MSXAMSTRAD SPECTRUM ELECTRON. BBC Sally RONS BULVARE CHRYSALIS... Super smooth full colour classic arcade action. BBC....95 Electron....95 MSX....95 Spectrum....95 BUG-EYES FRANKENSTEIN 2000... Multi-screen fantasy micro voyage through monsters body. BBC....95 MSX....95 Spectrum....95 Amstrad....95 48KSPECTRUM CONTRAPTION... Zany Hi-res all action arcade extravaganza BBC....95 Electron....95 MSX....95 Spectrum....95 CAVEMAN CAPERS Addictive smooth scrolling fast action arcade fun. BBC....95 Electron....95 MSX....95 Spectrum....95 Available from most major stockists, all good computer shops or direct from us To order direct from us: Send cheque or P.O. payable to ICON or quote your Access No. VAT/ Incl. Tel: (091) 2846966 ICON SOFTWARE 65 HIGH STREET, GOSFORTH, TYNE & WEAR, NE34AA. NEW! "


".......5 BAGONTOR TESTERS FEATURES MAILBAG. Our reviews certainly are controversial! Find out why. PROBLEM PAGE.............. Have you got problems? Bug Hunter's got the solutions. AVALON COMPETITION. 22 The Dragontorc of Avalon the sequel to Avalon forms the basis of this great competition. COMPETITION..... 28 Test your knowledge of James Bond in our Grand Larceny competition ADVENTURE CLUB. 49 Adventurers need never feel alone any more. Join the club! I JOZHOZ Cover: Susan Rowe The continuing adventures of ace wizard Maroc the Mage feature in our amazing Avalon competition. Turn to page 22 to find out more. ...97 PROFESSOR VIDEO'S WORKSHOP......60 The Prof has some hot tips on the game that's driving everybody mad Ghostbusters! Plus a Backpacker's Guide to Playing the Game direct from Fantasy. ADVENTURE HELPLINE.. Meet the super sleuths who got the better of Sherlock. ADVENTURE.............. Check up on Swiss Family Robinson from Spinnaker plus Keith's quick round-up. THE TREASURE TRAP CASTLE............ 100 You've heard of Ghostbusters ... wait till you find out about Orcbusters! NEXT ISSUE ON SALE 16th APRIL EUREKA COMPETITION.... ... 104 Applications are invited for five map makers. Only the best need apply! EUREKA MAP. .. 106 We want to see if you can do better than this -the Prehistoric Adventure map by Frank Fearns. BUG HUNTER....... ... 108 FIFTH COLUMN.. .. 113 More news from the front plus the next stage in Seldon's Game. MEGA HITS SPECIAL OFFER............... 116 HALL OF FAME.... ur FAME..................................... 119 LISTINGS STARSHIP VICTORY/VIC 20..... The Federation's supply of Cyanite crystals is in danger from Clingon destroyer ships. Can you fend them off? STUNTMAN/MSX.. 50 He flies through the air with the greatest of ease but he could come to a sticky end if you're not careful! HELICOPTER/CBM 64.... 58 You've got to rescue the men from a crippled oil rig in the North Sea but gale force winds and mountainous seas aren't making your task any easier. PORTRAIT DUNGEONIATARI.................64 A listing tailor-made for adventurers! The Portrait Dungeon holds many treasures for you to locate and store. CREEPY CRAWLYI SPECTRUM .......... 74 This caterpillar is in danger! He's ravenously hungry but he'll soon find out that rocks and skeletons aren't very edible. NEWS AND REVIEWS Editor Tim Metcalfe Deputy Editor Wendie Pearson Editorial Assistant Lesley Walker Staff WriterReader Services Seamus St. John Designers Brian Cookman Jerry Webb Production Editor Mary Morton Advertisement Manager Louise Matthews Assistant Advertisement Manager Bernard Dugdale Advertising Executive Sean Brennan Production Assistant Melanie Paulo Publisher Rita Lewis Editorial and Advertisement Offices: Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane London ECIR 3AU Tel: 01 251 6222 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES POSTAL SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE. By using the special Postal Subscription Service, copies of COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES can be mailed direct from our offices each month to any address throughout the world. All subscription applications should be sent for processing to COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES (Subscription Department Competition House, Fanndon Road, Market Harborough, Leicestershire. All orders should include the appropriate remittance, made payable to COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES. Annual subscription rates (12 issues): UK and Eire E15. Additional service information, including individual overseas airmail rates, available upon request. Circulation Department: EMAP National Publications Published and distributed by EMAP National Publications ..........50 GAMES NEWS........... A big welcome to Tony Takoushi, super software spy, and his Hot Gossip page. REVIEWS. .29/83 We couldn't resist impossible Mission, our Game of the Month not to mention Sorcery, Alien 8 and many others. ARCADE ACTION... ............92 The Evil Eye is here and who'd have thought a game about chickens laying eggs could be so exciting! Game of the Month NEXT MONTH... 120 Impossible Mission Printed by Severn Valley Press. Typeset by In-Step Ltd. "


"SAMUEY SUPER WAKELIA SOLO FLIGHT-Computer controlled flight training teaches the techniques of flying and familiarization with instruments, RESCUE Your assignment is to locate and attempt pick up of stranded military personnel. EXPLORE -Fly a survey mission over previously unexplored territory and map the terrain. COMBAT-Use your rockets and machine guns to defend a secret desert installation from unknown hostile forces. U.S . HELICOPTER FLIGHT SIMULATOR Cassette .95 Disk .95 Amei ban Softwa U.S. Gold Ltd., Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Tel: 021-359 3020. ATARI "


"lain THE GREAT ALIEN THE GREAT ALIEN a faulty piece of longer So, while the the price. I also have Mind programming and that damage to Alien has Games' American Football, CONTROVERSY — 1 the real reason for the lack already been done, I ask probably the most of results was because you to make some amends accurate a Dear Sir ou to make some amends accurate and carefully your reviewer could not by publicly programmed strategy The attention of your be bothered to read the acknowledging that the game on the UK market for readers will no doubt have manual which review was grossly unjust. any computer. been drawn to the accompanies the game. As Paul Clansey, Your ill-considered outstandingly a result, he did not have a Waterloo, review could cost a uncomplimentary review clue what he was doing? Liverpool. of Alien for the CBM64, in reputable company a small He didn't understand Editor's reply: Reviews fortune in sales. the February edition of any of the screen displays, are an extremely personal any of the screen displays, Quite frankly, if I were C&VG. As designer and he could not operate the thing but we do attempt Mind Games I would programmer of that game, controls, he didn't know expect a prominent I would like to make a few who he was meant to be look at a fair chance. Two printed aplogy in your points concerning the controlling, or to what people actually looked at next issue at the very review: intent. He even decided the game for us and I least. That the review is grossly that the sound effects felt that this gave Alien If I were you, I should misleading, containing were meant to be that chance. However take more care to ensure many false statements. background music! several of our readers that such extreme reviews That C&VG should make His most common and also disliked the review are subjected to a second it their responsibility to most offensive criticisms and liked the game SO opinion. ensure that any reviews concerned the behaviour we've printed their views for myself, I may just they print are a fair of the Alien. That's not the below. Here at C&VG invest future 85ps in Mind comment on the product Alien he's describing, we're always willing to Games' products rather concerned, and are not a though he has in fact reflect both points of than continue my previous reflection of the reviewer's been locked in mortal view. two years' subscription to lack of interest in, or struggle with his own your magazine unless of comprehension of the movement cursor! course, you now product. I can hardly believe that reconsider and review the To demonstrate my first anyone could fail so totally CONTROVERSY 2 program in question both two points, I turn to the to comprehend the game thoroughly and fairly. review: \"very little even if a person is Dear Sir, Mr P.R. Borland, action\"; \"the characters foolish enough not to read I was disgusted and Leigh-on-Sea, have a habit of lodging the instructions first, I appalled to read your Essex themselves in one place would have thought that review of Mind Games' Editor's reply: Sorry you and not budging an inch, even the most meagre Alien for the Commodore were disappointed with no matter what you do share of common sense 64 in your issue of our review, Mr Borland. ...\"; \"You are supposed would have been enough February 1985. However, a good deal of to be able to move your to let them achieve some It is patently obvious that thought and consideration characters through the response from the game. your reviewer has failed to is given to each one, and three decks... the only In view of the powerful read and understand the this was no exception. problem is that if you influence a review exerts game instructions Remember that a review select \"MIDDLE DECK\" on the success of a game, properly. Having is one person's opinion you are liable to find C&VG should make it their misunderstood the nothing more, nothing yourself on \"LOWER job to see that reviews are principles and become less and we aim to give DECK\" instead; \"Your objective and contain confused as a result, his an honest assessment of characters have a habit of constructive cristicism distastefully-toned review everything that appears disappearing without trace reviewers should be made has been vetted, accepted in the review pages. ...\"; \"... for some reason, to justify the comments and published by your the characters in the game that they make, editorial staff. PROGRAMMER'S are practically immobile particularly when I have a copy of this ...\",\"... if you're in the expressing strong game. It is original and PLEA FOR HELP Lab or Living Quarters and opinions. ingenious. I have no remove the grille, your I do not think that C&VG problem with moving the Dear Sir, character will disappear could have been entirely characters, nor do I I have been reading your altogether...\" unaware of the malicious consider that the graphics magazine for about a year, How could anyone be so unfairness of the Alien deserve the criticism or so. I think that it is the certain that a major review when they chose to given. It is not my best publication but I do professional software print itthey certainly favourite game, but it is have one small complaint. house would release such shouldn't be unaware any very good and, well worth Many programmers have Please drop us a line at: Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. "


"ZER little or no knowledge of HAVE THE BUGS strip starting very November edition of your games writing, so I shortly! If you look back magazine (great way to thought that your magazine BEEN SQUASHED? through your back issues, start, eh?) should have a you are sure to find a But now on to the programming tips page, Dear Sir, software form. serious side of this letter. for all computers, teaching When I received my The reason why I decided and answering readers' December issue of C&VG, IS IL A BIRD? to write this letter was queries. This is the only a little late as usual since I because I read your Film column that your magazine live in Spain, I noticed at IS IL A PLANE? Fantasy article and you lacks. once that the magazine wanted our (the readers) Please take this into Dear Sir, didn't feel right. It just options on the films. In consideration as many of wasn't the old C&VGI I've received the C&VG particular, I am going to us programmers don't know. A couple of days December issue and I'm pick on your review of really understand the later, I realized the terribles le surprised at what Keith Campbell actually looks mumbo-jumbo that we're Gremlins. Your review fact there was no Bugs totally ripped it apart a typing in. like. I thought he would page! Darren Michael, fate it doesn't deserve. look overbearing, wear Also, although far less You state that it is Palmers Green, important, the number of robes and have a beard. bloodthirsty and sadistic. London. games listings had Instead, I discovered that You also state that it Editor's reply: Funny you he looks like that mild dropped from the usual should say that, Darren. shouldn't have been a mannered reporter famous seven or eight to just four. \"15\", but an \"X\" rated film Keep watching this space I didn't write until now, in comics and three What absolute baloney! for the regular feature hoping that the omission movies. you've asked for To compare Gremlins with Unfortunately, the was only to be in that such \"X\" rated material as coming soon! issue, but then the January picture hid part of Paul The Thing and The Evil Coppins face. Could you one was the same! Dead is madness. MYSTERY OF THE Have you gone mad? I'm send me pictures of Keith, Paul and Simon? They may Gremlins is like Snow not saying that everybody White compared to those MISSING GAME buys your magazine just give me inspiration in sticky parts of an two films. In fact, the only for the sake of the Bugs Dear Sir, Adventure, and give me scene in Gremlins which cartoon, but it does add In July 1984 I sent a was anywhere near scary something to vent my that little something that cassette tape and frustrations on! was the final melting helps propel C&VG to the documentation of a game Soh Kam Yung, scene of the Gremlin. to you for consideration number one position Kuala Kangsar, Even this, though, was for publication in amongst computer and Perak, very funny. The only Computer & Video Games, games mags. I wouldn't be West Malaysia. reason for you to hold The game was called Wolf surprised if you had Keith Campbell replies: your stomach was through Legion, and ran on a 48 or already experienced some It's surprising what we laughter. 16k ZX Spectrum. You sent decrease in sales. Get The Bar scene in journalists get up to in our me a postcard those Bugs back as soon spare time, Soh! Didn't particular was one of the acknowledging receipt of as you can! you notice that my initials Is funniest things ever to be the game. Since that time, Also, what happened to are C.K. in reverse? seen on celluloid. I have heard nothing at all the program entry form? And finally, the part That's not just from you. I'm thinking of sending in coincidence! As for the about catapulting old Paul O'Brien, a program. Can I send it lower half of Paul's ladies through windows. It Andover, without the form? should be said that the old features, we were Hants. Do you know the lady wasn't your normal thinking of running a Editor's reply: Sorry for meaning of the strange fish sweet innocent person. competition for a drawing the delay, Paul, but we do and dagger graphic that She was the villainess of of the best likeness, but receive hundreds of tapes appears when you the film, whose only instead decided to give each week and each of complete Manic Miner you a whole collection of interest was in selling off them are tried and tested without the cheating photos (see Orc Busters) all the town's real estate to by our team of reviewers. code? Or is it just Matthew the highest bidder. to throw darts at! If they like your game, it Smith trying to mystify us Right, now I've got that goes into our to be all? out of my system, I can say published\" file and you Dugan Porter, FILM FANTASY that it was the only thing should see it in the Spain. wrong with that edition. magazine in due course. Editor's reply: We're FEEDBACK Mark Eldridge, However, I'm afraid we giving the Bugs a rest for Dear Sir, Laindon, can't return your tapes to a while, Dugan, but watch I have just finished Essex you. out for our new comic reading the excellent Please drop us a line at: Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. "


"MOON CRESTA OFFICIAL LICENCE FROM NICHIBUTSU MCX2 TRIP TO THE SPACE WAR! THE CLASSIC MOON CRESTA MANUFACTURED UNDER EXCLUSIVE LICENCE SPECTRUM/SPECTRUM + .95 COMMODORE 64 .95 TRADE AND CREDIT CARD ORDERS TELEPHONE (0734) 591678 INCENTIVE 54 London Street, Reading RG14SQ "


"Instead of computers catc technology now has to ca ENTERPRISE The way we see it, technology has suddenly got quite a race on its hands. There's no other home computer in the world that's so expandable or so updatable as the new Enterprise 64. And if you're wondering quite how we've managed that, kindly take a closer look at the outputs on our remarkable new machine. You'll notice that amongst all the usual sockets and terminals, we've gone and incorporated a special 66-way expansion port. This will accept a whole range of new peripherals that are in the pipeline. Including those that are a mere twinkle in the eyes of our hardware designers. We thought this expandability principle was such a good idea, we applied it to the Enterprise's memory, too. Even in its most basic 64K form, this puts more user RAM at your disposal than almost any other competitor. But plug in our special Rampacks to the base unit, and you can progressively increase that figure to a truly extraordinary 3,900K "


"Whing up with technology, atch up with a computer. NEUSE Not that that's the only challenge we present to today's ambitious programmers. With a screen resolution of up to 672 x 512 pixels, 256 colours and a high speed video processor, the Enterprise will outgun all but the highest quality TV monitors. And the sophisticated sound chip generates no fewer than 4 voices across 8 octaves in full stereo. Combine the two and you can create effects that leave today's games looking like pub video tennis of the mid-seventies. For anyone with literary aspirations, the Enterprise also comes complete with an integrated word processor. Whilst the really serious user will be delighted to discover analogue RGB and TV outputs, as well as parallel, RS423 serial and network ports. Both Cobol and 'C' will be available with CP/M running, and you can even use Lisp, Forth and Z80 assembly language on cartridge without encroaching on user RAM. The new Enterprise 64. It hasn't just overtaken technology. It's left every other home computer straggling in the distance. ENTERPRISE COMPUTERS WITH OBSOLESCENCE BUILT-OUT "


"Cute. Clever. Mischievous. Intelligent. Dangerous. GREMLINS DIJAdventure nukenture INTERNATIONAL Gremlins the Adventure, available early April on Spectrum, Commodore 64, C16, BBC and Electron. Dealers contact: Nigel Banford, Adventure International 85 New Summer Street, Birmingham. Telephone: 021-359 0801  WARNER BROS INC 1983 "


"GAMES NEWS G.A.M.ES NEWS IT IS SOFT AID I.N.B.R.I.E.F  Soft Aid, a pack of ten best selling games from companies such as Quicksilva and Ocean, is selling for .99 and all proceeds will go to Ethiopia CHALLENGE WINNERS The idea was started by Quicksilva's Rod Cousens, who Stunt superstar Eddie Kidd conaratulates the hopes Band Aid's Bob Geldof two two lucky winners of his Jump Challenge competition. The contest, sponsored by Softventure. Soft Aid will run on the ware Communications, the people behind the Spectrum and Commodore 64 Eddie Kidd Jump Challenge game released for a and Rod Cousens hopes sales whole bunch of top home computers last year, will raise over ,000 with challenged games players to leap the most cars Micro Dealer distributing from the safety of their arm-chair! Lastly, cast your mind back to last month's C&VG. We, in Craig Billington, left, from Birkenhead conjunction with Computer jumped 25 cars on his Spectrum while Jason Trade Weekly (CTW), are Ellis, from Dunton Green, right, cleared 33 cars continuing to appeal for money on his BBC! for the crisis in central Africa, and cheques should be made Their efforts won both Craig and Jason payble to the C&VG Central Toshiba MXS machines presented by the man Africa Appeal. who holds the world record for leaping cars for real, Eddie Kidd. AVALON — THE SEQUEL ORAGONTOR What is a Dragontorc? What do This time our hero, Maroc the you mean you don't know! Come Mage, is out to discover the five on you'll need to brush up on crowns of Britain, destroy Morag your history if you want to play the the Shape Shifter, Witch Queen of long awaited sequel to Avalon from the North, and free that most Hewson Consultant's top famous of all magicians, Merlin, programmer Steve Turner. from her evil enchantments. Called The Dragontorc of Avalon But what is a Dragontorc? Well, the game stars Maroc the Mage in a torc is apparently an item of another mysterious jewellery which ancient Britons arcade adventure set in the Dark used to use to pin their cloaks Ages together Latest releases from Ocean are Hunchback 11 Quasimodo's Revenge for the CBM 64 and Spectrum, prices .95 and .95 respectively. Also for the Spectrum is Match Day at .95, and Kong Strikes Back at .95. This is also on the CBM 64 at .95 Fans of the Rocky Horror Show will be catered for later this year when a game based on the famous production comes out. Surprises are guaranteed for all by CRL and Richard O'Brien, who are being held responsible for this development Two Level 9 adventures, Emerald Isle watch for review next issuel and Prince of Magir are due out now, but you'll have to wait for the final part of the Silicon Dream trilogy, called Worm in Paradise due out at Easter. These will run on most popular home micros including MSX. Scott Adams Adventures are on the way for the Amstrad, MSX, Commodore 16 and Atari XL range, thanks to Adventure International Following the demise of Camputers, Anston Technology has taken over the Lynx range of products and can be reached on 0223 62026. All Currah speech synthesis products will now be sold by Welwyn Electronics on 0670 822181 New goodies for the CBM 64 include Palace Software's Valkyrie 17, .99 and CRL's Glider Race, a 19.95 flight simulator, while new Spectrum games are Underworld The Village, from Orpheus at .95 and The Rocky Horror Show, .95 from CRL Richard Shepherd's Ski Star 2000 runs on both and is .95. BBC owners who like chasing up ladders with a sword, chasing trolls and entering competitions this could be for you. Castle Ouest was launched in a blaze of glory by Micropower last month, but will take a large bite out of your pocket at .95 for a tape or .95 for the disc. However, one consolation is the competition they're offering  for the person who gets the highest score on the game before June 30 The game uses something called the MP4 Xcrollerama system and is supposed to encourage \"creative thinking\". If that wasn't enough, Micropower is even offering a whole  to anyone who can crack the program within three months of buying it any offers? A follow-up to Ocean's chart topping game, called Daley Thompson's Super Test will be launched in May. It will feature ten of Daley's favourite Olympic events including cycling Swimming, canoeing and clay pigeon shooting. Daley Thompson's Super Test will be released initially for the Spectrum (.95) and Commodore (.95) Atari and Amstrad versions are also planned. Royalties from the sale of the game will go to the British Amateur Athletic Board. Commodore has announced the availability of 18 new software titles on cassette, cartridge and disc for the Commodore 16 and Plus4. Prices range from .99 for cassette based software to .99 for cartridge and disc based programs C ENDURANCE ENDURANCE EVERYONE'S A WALLY! Wally Week, the star of such great games as Automania and Pyjamarama, has introduced his family for the first time in his new adventure — entitled Everyone's a Wally! Micro-Gen, the creators of Wally, say that this game is every bit as good as Pyjamarama but with even better graphics. And it features a unique multi-role play you choose which of the five characters in the game you wish to control Spectrum, Amstrad and C64 versions will all cost $9.95 "


"G.A.M.E.S NEWS ( L title in Bantam and Imagic's trying to solve baffling guests were invited to joint venture in the living mysteries at every turn. solve the mystery. literature series. The Adventure is not SUSPE SUSPECT SCOOP! MORE MUSIC based on any of the 50 odd Infocom of Zork game is Conan Doyle classics but bringing out a new game The current trend in softbased on a new story by called Suspect in which ware in this country is Bantam Books. In there you play a newspaper towards music composition news release, they say reporter caught up in a programs. Companies such \"The software gives murder at an elegant as Sight & Sound and players an opportunity to masquerade ball. Suspect Broderbund have new join the legendary master is a fully interactive music software. However, of detective fiction and his detective program on the only the well known softcomrade, Dr Watson, for an same lines as their previous ware houses survived the adventure aboard the SS detective game, Deadline, 1984 shake out. Destiny after the close of but this time round you Most arcade games that World War II\". \"In this must prove your innocence are still selling are conmeticulously researched as well as who dunnit versions from the coin-op adventure-mystery\" claims Infocom's party at the machines. The platform Imagic/Bantam \"the player CES show was a lavish games so popular in the UK moves about as Holmes, affair. A troop of actors are non existent in the US with Watson beside him, staged a mock murder and today. a o DESIGNER OF THE MONTH Th. HOBBIT HOUSE A spokeswoman for Addison Wesley at the CES show said that they have obtained the rights to market software for JR Tolkien's Hobbit in the US and will be selling Melbourne House's version from this summer. The Hobbit was initially launched in 1982 but, due to legal technicalities, it was never launched in the States despite the huge popularity in Britain. Addison Wesley will be selling the Commodore 64 version this summer and are also working on an Apple II version. Apple II is still the best games machine in the United States. MONTY SOFT! Mastertronic is going to invade the United States. That's official. They have announced a range of arcade games on disc for the Commodore 64 at the Winter Consumer Electronics show in Las Vegas. The price is set at $9.99 which is expensive by British standards but in the United States it is seen as a major price breakthrough for computer software. In the US most games were sold for around $25. The first 10 games to be launched in the US include Chiller (with Michael Jackson's Thriller removed) and Monty Python's The Quest for the Holy Grail. They also have the rights to distribute Mirrorsoft's programs such as Games Creator. It's nice to see some British companies doing well. SHERLOCK USA British Sherlock Holmes fans will be shocked to hear that there is another computer Adventure game released by Bantam/ Imagic. Sherlock Holmes in Another Bow is the second NAME: Dave Chapman BORN: South Shields, Tyne and Wear, 1965 GAMES: Sorcery, Sam Spade 2o Dave Chapman was born and grew up in South Shields. Unfortunately, Dave, like So many other young people in the depressed north east of England, was unable to find a job for several months in his home town. After touting his talents around several software companies in the North he eventually came to London to work for Virgin Games. Dave first encountered a computer during his last two years at school and says of Commodore's old series of Pet of memory constraints, weren't possible. Computers: \"They are the best Favourite Food: Baked potatoes. computers ever built.\" The first computer Favourite Drink: Lager. he bought was a Sinclair Spectrum, on Favourite TV Programme: I don't really which he learnt to program. And Dave have one. says, quite modestly: \"Learning machine Favourite Computer Game: Knight Lore code is quite easy if you try to learn it in Pets: None. the right way by starting on small Countries visited: Scotland. simple programs and then moving onto Favourite Pop Group: Big Country bigger things.\" Ambitions: To own my own software He is happy about the way his latest house some day. creation, Sorcery, has turned out. The one thing about computing that although he admits he would have liked makes me want to throw up: Companies to include several more complex who release games full of bugs. They additions he had in mind which, because can't be bothered to test games. 12 "


"single 'ELITE Available Saturday 23rd March Every guarantee of quality. Grand National Holographic Sticker Make sure your copy does, it's your the unique 'ELITE product carries Tam OFFICIALLY ENDORSED BY THE AINTREE RACECOURSE COMPANY 1985 GRA ONAL NATIO Now you can enjoy the thrills and spills of the World's Greatest Steeplechase every day of the year.  Strategy You study the form  Planning You choose your napp  Tension You place your bet  Action You ride your mount  Reward The acclaim of winning the World's Greatest Steeplechase The Grand National For the Thrill of a Lifetime! Mail Order: Just send a cheque or P.O. payable to 'ELITE' or quote your visa card number. 48K SPECTRUM .95 COMMODORE 64 57.95 slite "


"Now Amstrad gives you over  to play with Ansoft Ansoft NSO AEA EASIAMSWORD A ANIMAL VEGETABLE MINERAL HANGO Computer wordprocesser 777 ES Software 'over  value BRIDGE-IT Roland at the Ropes PERCOMPUTING AMS Ansoft ner OM MIIMMY ANO Galactic Siciguie OZ SULTAN'S MATE Whic. WE Now 888888888eee Sad when purchasing an AMSTRAD CPC464 Roland ist the Caves Soused assomasiswa "


"20 22 complete with green screen VDU (GT64)  complete with colour monitor (CTM640) SCORE 7 LIVES Join in the fun. Our CPC 464 User Club is a must for all owners. As a member, you'll be the first to know about the additions to the CPC464 range. Hardware and software. complete We'll provide you with your own with privilege card and send you free, a monitor year's subscription to the Amstrad datacorder User magazine packed with programs, features and information. You can enter competitions for valuable prizes and keep up with all the latest Amstrad developments. And with the free software pack, we think that's pretty good for starters. CPC464 US The OFFICIAL Miero Magazine 16 First issue on general 464 sale MEMBERSHIP NUMBER Free software worth over  is revision for exams, cataloguing and the name of the game. budgeting Along with your new CPC 464 And it comes complete and ready(colour monitor or green screen to-go. VDU) you'll receive a software starter pack of 12 (yes, twelve) Amsoft. A ton of software. cassettes absolutely free. There's something for everyone. Yes. Now there are over 100 titles From Roland-on-the-Ropes to Easifrom Amsoft and independent pubAmsword word processing. lishers. And the list is still growing. That's one good reason for making Arcade games, educational proAmstrad's CPC 464 your new home grams and business applications computer they're all designed to make the most of the CPC 464's impressive graphics, stereo sound and processing abilities. And with Amstrad's speedloading AMSTRAD User User club capability, even complex programs can be loaded quickly. The optional CPC 464 disc system will load a game in around 6 seconds. REGISTERED NAME When you feel the need to upgrade EXPIRY DATE your Amstrad system to disc drive, just send your favourite Amsoft cassettes to us and we'll send you back CPC 464 green screen VDU (GT64) the same Amsoft proHere are the others. grams on Amsoft disc for just .95 The CPC 464 comes complete with per cassette, the price of a blank disc. ONE GREAT IDEA AFTER ANOTHER its own colour monitor or green BOOTS COMET Currys Dixons screen VDU and built-in cassette data recorder. (Optional disc drives Greens John Menzies RUL RELOTTS Spectrum are now available with CP/M* and AND OTHER DR. LOGO* supplied as standard.) WHSMITH WIGFALLS WOOLWORTH COMPUTER It has a typewriter-style keyboard STORES and numeric keypad. 64K of RAM, *CP/M and DR LOGO are Trade Marks of Digital Research 32K of ROM and a very fast extended I'd like to know more about the exciting CPC 464 complete computer system. Please send me literature right away. BASIC with real time features. NAME And it costs a great deal less than ADDRESS the price of a comparable system. The CPC 464 can handle the trickPOSTCODE iest computer games (if you can), To: Amstrad Consumer Electronics PLC, Brentwood House, 169 King's Road, Brentwood, Essex CM14 4EF. PRICES CORRECT AT TIME OF GOING TO PRESS.NOT ALL STORES STOCK ALL PRODUCTS. CVG 4/85 NO TRASFERRELSEF WEMBERSHIP CONHTIONS FOR TERUSOFIE "


"H-O-T G-O-S-S-I-P ridge, ), Fire Ant, Purple Turtles and Mayhem which are available on cassette priced at .99. In coming months I will be bringing you exclusive reviews of games about to be released in the UK from top software houses. They will cover a broad range of micros and they will always be the very best of what is about to be released. Next issue I'll be previewing a game with some of the fastest 3D graphics ever seen on a micro. You have to see it to believe it! Will you please welcome that To use the door as an exit ace software Spy, TONY to the labyrinth below, you TAKOUSHI, to the pages of must first pick up keys C&VG. Each issue from now on defended by those ever Tony will be bringing you present ghouls who just exclusive sneak previews of don't want to stay away. the hottest games around plus To ward off their a bit of games gossip from the advances, you can cast weird and wonderful world of spells at them but this costs computer games. Read on for you one per cent of your magic for each spell news of a great graphic extrathrown, so use them wisely. vaganza from the Evil Dead Below the surface there people ... are three main sections. The Lava Caverns, The Hearken Witches Plant Rooms and The Crypt. Everywhere, I don't intend to spoil those Take the challenge if you little surprises for you but dare, there are some really Tomorrow night 'tis sneaky touches! Halloween. When you have all the When only one shall be ingredients, you can steady Witch-Queen. yourself for the final three screens where you face Six ingredients thou devilishly evil Munchkins must take, intend on stopping you And in the cauldron boil reaching their Daddy and bake, Munchkin on that third Juice of toad, eye of newt, of the earth to discover crucial screen ... wing of bat their location. Cauldron has stunning And Hemlock root. As you recover each graphics designed by Mouldy piece of splintered ingredient you must take it White Dwarf artist, Steve bone back to the cottage you Brown, programmed by Found from deep in musty started from Richard \"Evil Dead\" Leintomb, But your task is not as fellner, with suitable Molten lava, cooled awhile easy as it sounds as the measures of zapping and taken from ingredients have to be strategy to ensure many The smoking isle. retrieved in a certain way devoted hours play before and they are situated a it is mastered by 64 owners. Then the spell shall be at long, long way from your If you enjoy quality hand, cottage. arcade-adventures then To rid the Pumpkin from There are over 20 alien this is recommended. All the land. nasties trying to destroy you mega-zappers with you, all capable of blood lust should take a r mysterious openvenomous attacks! You are peek too you could be A ing to an intrigiven four lives to start pleasantly surprised! guing new arcade with, with another possible The game will be adventure, called five to be picked up along available on cassette for the Cauldron, from Palace Softthe way believe me Commodore 64 and the ware, the people who you'll be needing them! As Spectrum priced at .99. brought you the controyou are attacked, your versial Evil Dead. magical strength decreases A lot of people have been In Cauldron you take the and a life is lost if you hit very frustrated looking for part of a witch trying to rid zero per cent. Commodore C16 software. your world from the You can fly around your There is some about but it is Pumpkins. planet it has one contigenerally very poor. A call To do this a cauldron nent and two volcanic to Commodore soon must be filled with the right islands or you can travel brightened up my day. ingredients. These ingreabout by simply walking Commodore have just dients are scattered around through some of the released some quality conyour world, so you have to coloured doors situated at versions from titles on the travel across oceans, strategic locations on the 64 format, pick of the bunch forests and into the bowels planet's surface. being Jack Attack (cartA lot of people tend to shop in the big retail outlets like Boots and W.H. Smith for their software these days. However the coming of the chain stores has not been all good. Certain games have been overlooked as they are considered as sub-standard or below par. These include such \"poor\" games as Boulderdash and Ancipital to name but two. With the recent announcement that US Gold will be marketing Pole Position, Mr Do, DigDug and Pacman for the 64, I wondered how much of the original stocks Atari still held of those titles? Atari tell me the whole case is currently being decided in the American courts and no comment can be made. Watch this space. A Mole called Monty tells me that Tony Crowther (he of Monty Mole, Black Thunder, Son of Blagger, Gryphon et al) has gone potty and dyed his hair yellow!! But WHY? \"I just felt like doing it. My girlfriend will murder me!!\" 16 "


". THERE ARE JOY. AND THERE ARE YAN CURLS LTD. JO STICK ELECTRONICS LTD. EUROMAX TURBO Top and bottom fire buttons. * Extremely responsive and positive. Built to last. EUROMAX ARCADE * Rated by 'BIG K as 'The cheapest stick one can get really enthusiastic about'. * Positive micro switched action. * Fully self-centering. EUROMAX COMP PRO *Top U.K. micro switched joystick. *Very responsive. Highly rated by 'Crash'. ELECTRONICS LTD. Pinfold Lane, Bridlington, North Humberside Y016 5XR, England. Telephone: 0262 601006/602541 Telex: 527381 EMAX G DONT GET LOST IN THE JOYSTICK JUNGLE DO AS THE PROFESSIONAL PROGRAMMERS DO USE EUROMAX JOYSTICKS SUITABLE FOR CBM 64, AMSTRAD, VIC 20, SPECTRUM 16/48K WITH INTERFACE "


"GAMES WORKSHOP The New Force in Software vare BV CHADS THE GAME OF DEADLY DRIVING BATTLECARS 48K SPECTRUM 48K SPECTRUM .95 C .95 WEWZ \"You know you've got a winner the instant you open the package-go out and buy it today!\"-P.CN The only Real-Time simultaneous action 2 player Spectrum game. 25 Magic and death on the plane of limbo for 1-8 sorcerers Over 50 animated creatures and spells to summon from the depths of hell and beyond! * Y ALISMAN 48K SPECTRUM .95 NEW A brilliant interactive arcade adventure for 1-4 players. 50 locations full of beautiful graphics and deadly foes the crown of command awaits! "


"Tower of Despair 18K SPECTRUM .95 NEW Z <ON C64 4.955 **Tower' is a classic... It refines the traditional adventure to perfection.\" Popular Computing Weekly \"A startlingly original and fresh approach. Fantasy fans will love this game.\" CRASH \"It lives up to all the claims made for it.\" Micro Adventurer. EUR NEW Towerll Key of Hope 48K SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64 .95 .95 48K SPECTRUM .95 THE SPECTACULAR GRAPHIC SEQUEL TO THE CLASSIC ADVENTURE QL .95 \"An excellent and detailed wargame with graphics to match at last!\" CRASH The acclaimed wargame is now on C64 and QL-contains over 200K! Games Workshop games available from all good shops or direct from GAMES WORKSHOP MAIL ORDER, 27/29 SUNBEAM ROAD, LONDON NW10 with tiis coupon. Please Rush Me (tick boxes): Battlecars (48 Spectrum) ....... Chaos (48K Spectrum) ................. Talisman (48K Spectrum) ............... .. .95 D-Day (48K Spectrum) ........ ... .95 D-Day (C-64) ............ ... .95 D-Day (OL) ............ .... .95 Tower of Despair (48K Spectrum) .......... .95 Tower of Despair (C64) ........ Key of Hope (48K Spectrum) .................. .95 Cheques/POs made payable to Games Workshop Ltd, Post & Packing free in UK. Overseas add 15% to total cost, a "


"VD Dear BH, I am thinking of buying a disc drive for use with my Commodore 64. But the Commodore drive is so slow. Is there another one I can buy and how much is it? Andrew Wood The Commodore 1541 disc drive is slow. Even Commodore admit that which is why they almost brought out the 1542 to replace it. But high production costs mean that no 1542s will arrive over here. The 1541 drive is actually slower than turbo-loaded cassettes! Ram Electronics may have come up with the answer, though. They have a cartridge called the 1541 Express which speeds up loading and saving by around three times. The black box costs  and Ram are in Fleet, Hampshire. Dear BH, Please can you tell me if there are any graphical Adventures available for the BBC? Many of the popular Adventures are text only. Richard Russum As you know, the Beeb only has 32k of memory in which to store programs. Drawing pictures takes up a lot of space in the program and using the high resolution screen takes up even more. So, until the new Beeb with more memory comes along, there will be very few good graphical Adventures for the machine. The Hobbit, as you know, is text only although it has full graphics on the Spectrum. One program worth buying is Underwurlde, though. This has all the graphics of the Spectrum original. Dear BH I am writing to ask you if you could give me a list of the modems available for the Spectrum and approximate prices. Gavin Walsh To get into Micronet and Prestel, you'll need either a VTX 5000 modem from Prism or the acoustic modem from Protek. The Prism version costs  and plugs into the user port on the Spectrum (16k or 48k). All the software is built in. So you just turn on your Spectrum and a menu appears. You press one button for Micronet and another if you want to use the Spectrum as normal. The Protek modem is an acoustic coupler. This means that, instead of plugging the modem straight into a phone socket, as is the case with the VTX 5000, you plug the telephone handset into the coupler. This coupler is battery operated and comes with software on cassette. However, the quality of the software leaves a lot to be desired and I'd recommend that you go for a VTX 5000. If it's 300 baud bulletin boards that you want to contact, you'll need a full RS232 interface on your computer. The one on the Interface 1 isn't good enough. Then, any modem will connect to the interface. Once again, you'll have to buy some special software on cassette. Dear BH, I hope that you can help me with my problem. I wish to write a very short program which will predict a future event from a list of possibilities. One of four choices would be selected at random, with each being used only once. I can't seem to generate a random choice. Can you help? PJ Bradley What you're after, Mr Bradley, is a way of picking things from a list at random without repetitions. The long way round this problem is to keep a record of which ones have been picked. Then, after a random number is generated, check to make sure that that number hasn't been used before. There is a quicker way, though. Just imagine that the list of events is a pack of cards that we want to deal from. The way we'd handle the cards is to shuffle them first. Then, just take the top card from the pack each time we need one. So, back to your problem. First, store all the possibilities in an array numbered, perhaps, A(1) to A(10). Then use a FOR-NEXT loop and an RND statement to shuffle the array. Go through the loop a few hundred times. Each time, generate a random number between 0 and 1. If the number is 0.5 or less, swap a couple of elements of the array. After the loop has finished, the array will be totally shuffled. Then, just pull off the elements in order. You'll find that they are totally random and that you won't get any repetitions. Hope this helps. Dear BH, I am writing to ask whether it is possible to insert the TV aerial lead from a computer into the back of a video recorder so that a game can be played and recorded at the same time. Mark Laing Yes, Mark. Normally, the TV aerial goes into the back of the video recorder, and the recorder is then connected to the TV. Pull out the TV aerial lead and plug the lead from the computer into the back of the video. You can now play your favourite game and watch it as normal on the TV. Dear BH, I have a Spectrum with Microdrive. I normally buy games on cassette and transfer them straight to Microdrive. Transferring BASIC games is OK, but I have problems with machine code. It is easy enough to find the starting address, but is there a simple PEEK which will tell me how long a program is, or where it finishes? Alan Harbour When you load in a program, be it from cassette or Microdrive, the program first loads a header which tells the computer how long the program is, whether it is in BASIC or machine code and where the program starts. Also included is the auto-start line number for BASIC programs. What you need is a program to read the header from a tape. This will then tell you the start address and length of the machine code, so that you can save it to Microdrive. However, long machine code programs can't be transferred to Microdrive directly as they take up some of the memory that the Microdrive system actually uses. The way round this is to load the program in two parts, or load it to a lower address to the place where it will actually run. There are various header-reading routines around. Keep an eye out for an advert in the back of C&VG. OOO OOOO! 20 Actua "


"A Tony Crowther/Quicksilva Production GRYPHON UPHONI ODOO0600  RATA  * Disk .955 ORE 64 Available exclusively from QUICKSILVA COMMODO SOMME  in association with The Wizard Development Company Ltd. sette .95  Actual screen shots  Quicksilva Mail Order, P.O.Box 6, Wimbome, Dorset BA24 7PY. Telephone (0202) 891744. "


"THE DRAGONTORC OF AVALON When sons of Troy did win this land There lived a mighty king called Bran. He carved a realm from shore to shore, Strong in peace and feared in war. But all things change. All men must die As time and seasons pass us by. So he summoned to his side The Lords of Lore from far and wide And bade they forge for his weak son The Dragontorc of Avalon any years have passed since shores of his besieged lands. Maroc vanquished the Lord For several years the Saxons of Chaos from his earthly fiercely defended the British realm, realm and freed the soul entombed but Morag the Shape-Shifter, Witchwithin Avalon Wraithbane. The Rod Queen of the North, was twisting of Power and the Servant Ring are his their hearts, weaving webs of only reminders of his terrible treachery and deceit. At a great feast encounter. given by the Saxons for Vortigern and The fragile peace of Britain had his warrior lords, the hosts turned been threatened by many dark and treacherously murdered the king forces ever since the last legions of and his followers. The night of the Rome left to shore up their crumbling long knives threw t empire. Vortigern, Lord of the Five into turmoil and the Saxons prepared Kingdoms of Britain, struggled to to conquer them each in turn. hold his Lands united in the face of Morag the Shape-Shifter cared not the onslaught of the barbarian nations for Britons or Saxons. Her purpose sweeping across the North Sea from was to recover the five crowns made the troubled plains of Europe. In for the legendary Dragontorc of desperation he employed a Saxon Avalon so that she might remake the army, recruited from the very forces Torc of Power. She rejoiced when of his enemies to guard his eastern her evil plan succeeded in giving her With utmost skill ne'er since displayed The Dragontorc was wrought as bade And when Bran's mighty soul did pass To dwell within the Isle of Glass A powerful force he gave his son: The Dragontorc of Avalon THREE STUMP OF ARROWS or AAAows HEHE WASP 22 "


"LOST VAULTS OF LOCRIS RUBBISH, TEAPOT BALL OF FIRE 100IS SKELETON the first part, Vortigern's crown, the Crown of Dumnovia. One night, not long after the night of the long knives, Maroc sat gazing into the glowing embers of his camp fire, hypnotised by the dancing patterns as the cold night wind fanned the ashes. As he watched, a strange numbness overcame him and he felt touched by some magical presence which faded away as quickly as it had come. He started, thinking he had heard a voice, but no-one emerged from the gloom. He lay down to sleep but he was restless and could not settle, feeling as if someone or something were trying to break into his consciousness. In the cold hours before the dawn, he surrendered to the alien disturbance, packed his sack and started walking. For many days and nights he travelled, sleeping and resting little. The giddy alien sensation grew each day. He did not know why or where he was going. He travelled until he came to a clearing deep within a great forest. He sensed power emanating from an old tree stump. It was hollow, filled with the sodden leaves of autumn. He dug amongst the leaves and his hand touched metal, not cool dead metal, but warm vibrating steel with the unmistakable energy of magic. He stared at the artifact he had been drawn to and trembled. It was the great seal of Merlyn, last of the Lore Lords, guardian of the Dragon heir. As he peered into the emblem of the great Dragon, the power passed through his shaking arm, stirring his nerves until it seemed as if he were floating on a bed of warm air. Again he heard a voice. This time it was recognizable, though faint. It was the SCROLL SKELETON 31 SKELETONS LIVE SKELETON U PEDESTAL FOUNTAIN CHALICE SKELETON POOL MOOG Oxon SKELETON SCROLL CHEST 20 CHEST CHEST DEAD SKELETO CHALICE 25 PS SKELETON DEAD "


"IT IS FOREVER WINTER ... ICE PALACE A REAL-TIME ACTION ADVENTURE FEATURING OVER 1200 LOCATIONS WITH 7 LEVELS FOR C64 .95 CREATIVE SPARKS AVAILABLE FROM ALL LEADING SOFTWARE STOCKISTS OR DIRECT FROM CREATIVE SPARKS DEPARTMENT MO THOMSON HOUSE, 296 FARNBOROUGH ROAD, FARNBOROUGH,HANTS GU 14 7NU. "


"voice of Merlyn, his old tutor. Dragontorc is a must for adventurers we want you to discover. There are \"Maroc, at last... you are the only and arcade gamesters alike — well two types of mistake. Either the one who can help me... listen...\" worth .95 and remember, you also viewing arrow for a particular room He told Maroc the terrible deeds of get a chance to win that Amstrad! points the wrong way, or there is an Morag, concluding: \"For many years extra object shown on the map which I have been her prisoner.\" is not present in the location in the Merlyn's voice was weak and his THE COMPETITION actual game. The viewing arrow last words as it faded to a murmur The Dragontorc of Avalon is Steve represents the way you \"see\" the were, \"Seek the Ley Rod...\" Turner's eagerly awaited sequel to room on screen. Maroc could hear only the rustling last year's big arcade adventure, But it's not as easy as that! Just to of the leaves. He shivered, suddenly Avalon. It continues the adventures make things a little more interesting aware of the cold damp air. His knees of ace wizard, Maroc the Mage, and we have left out many objects from weakened and he slumped to the his quest to find the magical five the map which are present in the ground. As he lay recovering, he crowns of the ancient kingdoms of game. These DO NOT count as wondered what lay before him... Britain and destroy evil Morag, the mistakes. Shape-Shifter. When you've found all the errors in THE GAME Computer & Video Games and the C&VG maps fill in the competiThe Dragontorc of Avalon features a Hewson Consultants are proud to tion coupon and send it to Computer new innovation in arcade adventures announce a very special Dragontorc & Video Games, Dragontorc called Sensory Animation. This competition — with a very special Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 means that the many characters you first prize. The winner will get an Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. and Maroc discover along the way Amstrad CPC 464 computer, Normal C&VG competition rules will react to how you deal with them. complete with colour monitor! apply and the editor's decision is For instance, be nice to the elves and What do you have to do to conjure final. Closing date for the competithey will help Maroc in his quest up this amazing prize in your living tion is April 16th — so get cracking! be nasty to them and you could end room? Well, first you must recruit Fifty runners up will be able to up in big trouble! Maroc to your cause and get hold of choose copies of Hewson This is just one of the fascinations of Dragontorc! Consultants' other hit games as Dragontorc — which includes many Once you've got a copy of the consolation prizes. The games are more Adventure elements than Dragontorc of Avalon, we want you toAvalon, Technician Ted and Avalon. Dragontorc is a much more play the game and then look at the Heathrow Air Traffic Control, complex game definitely in the maps we've printed here. They available for a wide range of Knight Lore mould. represent Wispwood and the Lost machines. The graphics are also an Vaults of Locris, both important Don't forget to tell us which improvement on Avalon. There are locations in the game. computer you own — if any — and lots more nasty creatures to battle We've included ten DELIBERATEwhich of the three games you'd like with — well drawn and animated. MISTAKES in these two maps which on the competition form. C&VG/HEWSON CONSULTANTS DRAGONTORC COMPETITION The differences I've spotted are: 1) Room number............ .......... Extra object is..... or viewing arrow wrong* or viewing arrow wrong* 2) Room number........... 3) Room number............ ...or viewing arrow wrong* ...or viewing arrow wrong* ....or viewing arrow wrong* 4) Room number...... 5) Room number... 6) Room number... 7) Room number.... 8) Room number.. 9) Room number............... 10) Room number............... .Extra object is. .Extra object is... .Extra object is... ..Extra object is.... ..Extra object is.... ..............Extra object is....... ..............Extra object is............... ..............Extra object is................. ..............Extra object is............ or viewing arrow wrong* ........... ..or viewing arrow wrong* ...............or viewing arrow wrong* ber.. ....... .............or viewing arrow wrong* .............or viewing arrow wrong* *Delete where applicable Name. Address.............. Computer I own:... 1 Consolation prize I would like: Technician Ted D Avalon Air Traffic Control (Tick box). "


"CBSI ELECTRONICS SOFTWARE EPYX t64 tee "


"THINK FAST, YOU'LL LAPUP-PITSTOPIL 'Pitstop II' is here. And with it comes all the thrills, spills and nerve-jangling action of competitive motor racing. But there's much more to Pitstop II than just foot down, flat out and hope for the best. Because «Pitstop Il' demands fast thinking as well as fast driving. You've got to watch your tyres; watch your fuel; watch that car coming up behind. You've got to decide whether you can afford to make a pit stop. Or whether you can afford not to. With «Pitstop II' you not only drive your race, you plan it as well. And the pressure's really on. If you think you've got action games licked, try a few laps with 'Pitstop II. You may have to think again. ICBS Also out now on Epyx: IMPOSSIBLE MISSION  PITSTOP I BREAKDANCE. TEMPLE OF APSHAI SILICON WARRIOR. JUMPMAN DRAGONRIDERS OF PERN LUNAR OUTPOST Plus new releases: STARFIRE AND FIRE ONE MURDER BY THE DOZEN ELECTRONICS SOFTWARE FOR COMMODORE 64 Available from all good software outlets. Authorised dealers order from: The Software Sales Service. Tel: 01-636 643374. CBS Computer Software, Ashbrook House, 3-5 Rathbone Place, London W1. EPYX COMPUTER SOFTWARE "


"OMSTIETO CROSSWORD 8. The pot in a gambling game (5) losers are eliminated (3) 9. Game, film and a hit single for 13. TV signal receiver (6) Ray Parker Jnr. (12) 14. Eight note interval (6) 12. R and A as in RAM (6,6) 15. The god of time (6) 17. BASIC statement in writing (5) 16. Plan often devious (6) 18. Though tea is needed, it's essential for games of strategy (7) FEBRUARY'S SOLUTION 19. It gets played in an amusement arcade (5,4) L ALLAS 20. Acornsoft game for \"la crème de la crème\" (5) WAROFTHA O AV BV CLUES DOWN PRESEBUGBY 19 E LHAS 1. Espionage work (6) 2. Joins together two programs or files (6) 3. They take you down where AS TUT ladders take you up (6) 4. Type of scan on a screen (6) RAUNGA_92 7. Story within a story U-Boat conspiracy? (7) 10. Not exactly divisible by two (3) 11. Tournament match in which the BRACON DO CLUES ACROSS 3. A high one gets entered in the Hall of Fame (5) 5. MARVELlous arachnid (9) 6. Hallucinations of French fighterbombers? (7) 2012 GRAND LARCENY ON SAFARI BEST PE 25.4 TIME 01:27 attempt to crack our great Grand Ever been had? Well it appears Larceny quiz. A copy of the game C&VG has! Back in December we ran could be yours if you fill in the a competition based on a new coupon and rush it to Computer & joystick-controlled Adventure game Video Games, Grand Larceny called African Safari from a company Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 called Interdisc. We offered 25 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. copies of the game as prizes and many hundreds of our readers   THE QUESTIONS entered. S. 1. Who was the author who created However when we came to ask Grand Larceny is the latest in a series the James Bond character? Interdisc for the prizes, we just 2. Name three James Bond films. of joystick-controlled animated couldn't get in touch with them. Their Adventure games from Melbourne 3. Which two actors are best known phones just kept on ringing and House, the people behind The for playing the role of Bond in the ringing. No prizes appeared in the Hobbit and Sherlock Holmes. movies? C&VG offices and we were sitting Grand Larceny for the Commodore Now crack this code and tell us the around wondering just what to do. secret message! Here's a clue 1=A, 64, has a James Bond espionage Then those wonderful people at 2=B.. setting and your task is to smuggle Melbourne House came to our 20-8-5/6-21-14/3-15-13-16-21-20-5-187some top secret plans from a hotel rescue and offered to provide 25 13-1-7-1-26-9-14-5/ deep inside a hostile country. copies of the first joystick-controlled Enemy agents have stolen the plans MELBOURNE HOUSE/GRAND Adventure game ever released, and you have until midnight to LARCENY COMPETITION called Zim Sala Bim. recover them and the agents will My answers are: This game was actually written by stop at nothing to get those plans out 1... the same programmer who of the country! developed African Safari and 2.............. Every location in the game is features many exciting innovations. illustrated with 3D graphics. The 3. ............. We'd like to thank Melbourne characters are all animated and can House for helping us out and our be moved using a joystick or key. The secret message is................ 25 winners can be sure that they will board. You also use Adventure style be getting a high quality prize. commands to obtain more informMeanwhile, if you like joystick ation. All this and a great soundtrack Name. Adventures, why not enter our great too! Melbourne House Grand Larceny So spy fans, slip on your shoulder ulder Address.... competition which you'll find next holster, grab your dark glasses and .............. door on this page. 28 "


"Satore R-EVIEWS Graphics: Are they really as mind-blowing as the adverts say they are? Does the screen scroll effectively? Do those aliens really leap out of the screen at you? This is how this category is judged from each end and, at odd IMP. MISSION occasions, meeting in the middle. Standing at the edge, MACHINE: CBM 64 jump to grab the rope. Move SUPPLIER: CBS just that bit too far forward, PRICE: $11.95 and you are in it up to your Impossible Mission, CBS neck. Catching a rope, you Software's latest release can swing back and forward for the Commodore 64, is for ever or, by pressing the very aptly named it's firebutton on the joystick, or damn impossible to masthe spacebar, can land on a ter, almost impossible to leaf floating from one end of beat and it's absolutely the pond to the other. impossible to turn it off. Timing is of the essence Every computer has its since the leaf starts running \"state of the art\" game. The out of synchronisation with Spectrum has Manic Miner the rope at the other end. and Knight Lore and the BBC Since each stage is running has Elite. Personally, up to against time shown on a now that is, I haven't seen a decreasing colour bar at the game originally written for the top, you can't afford to hang Commodore 64 which stands around. Jumping over head and shoulders above the bouncing balls, small ponds, rest of the 64's software, but trampolines and springing Impossible Mission, in my over fountains sounds easy eyes, is simply one of the best but, on scene two each of computer games I have ever these combine with other played. hazards to make progression The sound effects are more difficult. The small outstanding. Realistic running ponds previously mentioned and jumping noises are have erratic fish jumping out produced throughout the at high speed which all adds program and Impossible to the fun. Mission also contains some Super smooth graphics, of the most astonishing voice good use of sounds and (a synthesis ever produced on nice little detail) the shadow a home computer. of our lad showing on the Commands from your enemy ground all go to make are clear — not at all tinny or this highly enjoyable. Incimuffled by hissing and the dentally, when you think you've got this licked playing screams from the characters when they die are spinethe screens from left to right, tinglingly lifelike. try it from right to left — it The graphics and becomes more interesting, animation are of the same are the only means of with the hazards approaching high quality. The somersaults shutting down the computer's ATHLETIC LAND from the rear. and gymnastic displays of the central mechanism. Bonus points are awarded character you control will MACHINE: All MSX at the completion of each impossible Mission is one really show other software of the precious few games SUPPLIER: Konami stage with additional lives. companies how their games that any serious games player PRICE: .00 Scores shown are for one or should look and play. This game would have two players and a hi-score. should have in his or her To beat the game, you collection. been better titled You can play with either must search through the Funpark. Fun it is It would be a huge injustice joysticks or keyboard. — underground fortress of a if this The simple and light theme game didn't reach guiding a lad through a mad professor and shut down number one and stay there series of obstacles and of this game shows that his computer which is only for a very long time. challenges in park and things don't necessarily need hours away from cracking the to be complex to make good countryside. The simplicity of entertainment. entry codes to all the military this game does not detract computer centres and  Graphics from the playability, though.  Graphics starting a nuclear war.  Sound Let's take scene one for Sound But to stop the computer  Value example. You are at the edge  Value you must find the pieces to  Playability of a pond, with two ropes —  Playability the electronic puzzles which one swinging out and over * CANDY owo 00 Ovo "


"A R:E:V.T.E.W.S. 0000  Value ing gamester happy for hours. from Atari, is excellent. The this shows your current STAFF OF KARNATH Overall, Staff of Karnath is little tune which plays along skill level and decides which MACHINE: CBM 64 a good solid game can't as you roll across the moon is of the sectors of the Lurgon SUPPLIER: Ultimate GANE STAR wait to see more for the 64 good to. base you are talented enough from Ultimate. The game is horribly to attack next. The mother PRICE: .95 addictive — and well worth ship's computer automaticThe first official release adding to your software ally launches you into the for the 64 from Ultimate  Graphics collection.  Sound is all you'd expect from right sector. the leading Spectrum As I've already mentioned,  Value  Playability software house. the graphics are really nice.  Graphics Staff of Karnath The launch sequence from  Sound the mothership will be familiar foliows Ultimate's arcade adventure style, much loved to all of you who used to 3 MOON PATROL  Playability watch Battlestar Galactica on by Spectrum owners. You play the part of Sir MACHINE: Atari 800 TV. Arthur Pendragon, ace adven SUPPLIER: Atari BUGGY BLAST turer, on a mission to find and PRICE: N/A destroy the Staff of Karnath, a A reader answered our MACHINE: Spectrum magical staff which once plea for new Atari games SUPPLIER: Firebird belonged to an evil sorceror by sending us a cartridge PRICE: .95 called, surprisingly, Karnath. version of the official Want an interesting Before his death, Karnath Moon Patrol arcade space shoot out with lots cast an evil spell over his game — which he dis of action? Then look no staff. A spell which would covered inside a Donkey further! allow an evil race of alien Kong box! Firebird's Buggy Blast The \"corridor\" is similar to creatures called Sarnathians The game follows the features great graphics, the Star Wars trench to escape from the Realm of arcade original very closely. If good sound, multi-level play except it is inhabited by nicely drawn Lurgons, who are robot like creatures, and other hazards. Lots of action, lots of variety and plenty of fun! My only criticism is that Buggy Blast isn't joystick compatible which means lots of fingertangling moments! OOOO  Graphics Sound  Value Unreality and invade earth. you've seen any Moon Buggy and a fairly original plot. And  Playability Karnath hid his staff within type game, you'll know what all for a reasonable price. a mysterious obelisk and we're talking about! You have You are the pilot of the locked it with a special key in to drive your moon buggy space Buggy, a spacecraft DEATH STAR the form of a magical pentaover the rugged surface of specially designed for an gram. Then Karnath smashed the planet — leaping rocks attack on the Lurgon base on MACHINE: Spectrum the key and scattered the 16 and craters while fighting off the planet Endra. SUPPLIER: System 3 (CLUSIVE fragments around the many attacking aliens who swoop The ultimate mission is to PRICE: .95 rooms of his isolated castle on you from above. fly along the central Lurgon Star Wars was a move Pendragon's task is to The Atari cartridge version corridor and destroy enough that spawned a hundred explore the castle, find the 16 is divided up into sectors — Lurgons to cause a power games and the latest bits of the magical key, open these are timed, so if you beat reversal that will destroy the is Death Star Interceptor the obelisk and destroy the the record you'll get a bonus. entire Lurgon race! from System 3. The staff before Karnath's evil This version has a But before you do that, you game, originally written spell can work! \"continue\" feature, so if you must prove yourself capable for the CBM 64, features nice The graphics are up to get wiped out you don't have of the task by flying qualifying 3D style graphics, and a new standard for the 64 but I to go right back to the beginmissions which test your gimmick not found on the was expecting more from the ning again. There is a two skills. original speech! people who have worked player option too plus a After each mission, you The sounds were provided such wonders on the beginner level if you've never must return to the mother by the same program Spectrum come across the game ship in time to refuel and get created the effects for ActiGame play is excellent before. essential repairs carried out vision's Spectrum Ghostmore than enough puzzles to the graphics are good and on your Buggy. After each busters game and pretty keep even the most demandthe scrolling, as you'd expect run, you get a Cycredit Rating good they are too! 30 "


"REVIEW.S 329 HH3. NO Listen to a terrific rendition and drag him out of his nightof the Star Wars theme, mare. then your Spectrum shouts All the while, the hours tick \"Prepare to Launch!\" and by and Wally still isn't at work. you are off on a mission to He's more likely to be running destroy the Death Star. up ornate stairs or crashing Tie Fighters streak toward into chandeliers. You get your craft with characteristic reprimanded for this with \"scream\" sound direct from periodic uncouth messages the movie as you attempt to appearing on the screen. blast them. Meanwhile the Meanwhile, Wally Death Star is getting nearer continues to get lashed by and nearer. axes, scissors and rabid Soon you find yourself in chickens (fortunately not the trench with laser barriers accompanied by roast and yet more Tie Fighters potatoes and all the trimcoming at you. Time to take a mings). Small wonder that his tight grip on your joystick! glass of milk tends to give out Zap along the trench, Sinclair owners as it has been Graphics are good and the and reduce his sleeptime place a well aimed shot into among those of you lucky sound isn't bad either — and energy. After all, if you were the reactor shaft and then you enough to have a 64. most importantly you'll have running round a house all can breath easily again. The game follows the fun playing the game. Ghostnight, you'd get tired too. One criticism is that Commodore format faithfully busters is simply great value! If the enemy succeeds in System 3 have retained the — even down to a brave It is already available for the removing his three lives, you fiddly launch sequence. You attempt at speech synthesis. Commodore 64 (C&VG, will see a sad little form, lookmust position yourself The game features three January) and should soon be ing very dead, rising up the correctly to squeeze through screens. The city screen available for the Amstrad. screen into Wally heaven. a \"star-gate\" which can get which shows which buildings You'll go from room to irritating when you want to are haunted, the driving  Graphics room at an alarming speedget straight back to the screen in which you pilot your 1. Sound kitchen (complete with action. ghostbusting vehicle to the 1. Value cereal, milk jug and coffee The Tie-fighters are haunted place sucking up  Playability cup), living room, bathroom, animated and drawn very well roaming spirits along the way you name it. The bathroom you get a \"3D\" side view and finally the ghostwas my personal favourite, of the attacking craft as they busting screen where you but Wally for some reason turn away from your starhave to help your team of doesn't go there very often. fighter after an attack run. ghost hunters actually catch The approaching Death Star a ghost. looks good too! Before you get to the ! Death Star Interceptor is action, however, you must an all-action shoot-out with pick a mode of transport and some nice new features load it up with ghostbusting like the neat sound effects. If gear using the cash loaned to you like all-out action games you by the bank. then you'll love it! If you've seen the film you'll know just what to do anyhow! PYJAMARAMA  Graphics The game also features the  Sound nasty Marshmallow Man who MACHINE: Amstrad Perhaps he doesn't wash. All  Value appears from time to time and SUPPLIER: Micro-Gen the while, horrific looking  Playability stomps on buildings unless PRICE: .95 hands will rise from the floor you can drop some bait to If you're a wally who has to grab you. trap him and earn a big bonus nightmares about being. The graphics are truly from the city mayor! trapped in beautiful amazing and the game itself GHOSTBUSTERS If you manage to earn houses and chased by is excellent. Its addictive MACHINE: Spectrum/keyenough cash, you'll get a frozen chickens which qualities are high and it's well crack at closing the spirit slide off nearby tables, worth the money for the board or joystick gates at the evil Temple of then here's your dream amount of enjoyment you'll SUPPLIER: Activision Zuul — the source of all the game. get. Full marks! PRICE: .99 ghosts. You also get a GhostIt really is a dream, too, or At last! Those crazy busters account number — at least a nightmare for the ghost hunters have made which means you can play the central character, Wally. In Graphics it onto the Spectrum and game on any Spectrum order to get him to work, you  Sound the game is bound to be anywhere in the world. If you must first find his alarm clock:  Value just as big among want to that is!  Playability (a needle in a haystack job) 131 3356 co "


"GOLD IF YOUI YOU H NOOKER START PLAYING MUSIC MAKER USERS GLIDE e THESEX TUTOR It's a range of top quality software from Commodore designed to make the most of your Commodore 64's capabilities. New packages will be s Commodore Gold introduced to the Gold Medallion Medallion range every so often, Software but only if they are really exceptional. They'll definitely be hard soft to beat. Miss any of them, and you really will be missing out MUSIC MAKER Whether you're an accomplished musician or an out-and-out beginner, Music Maker strikes exactly the right note. No matter if you've never played a note before, so long as you can hum and you know your ABC, you can start to play famous popular tunes immediately. And it won't be long before you appreciate Music Maker's many advanced capabilities: you can synthesise many musical instruments, even create your own 'synth' electronic sounds, choose between monophonic or polyphonic play, summon up pre-programmed rhythms and bass accompaniments, and more. Music Maker is the first in a series of packages which will fully exploit the Commodore 64's outstanding musical capabilities. On disk or cassette, with music keyboard, a clear and concise manual, and song book, for just .95. SPIRIT OF THE STONES It's a treasure hunt for 41 real diamonds hidden somewhere on the Isle of Wight. Only one man knows where they are, and he's not saying. All that he has to say he's said already bo but in the form of riddles, clues and puzzles. Solve the puzzles in the Spirit of the Stones program and you'll shapes 30533. find it much easier to solve the puzzles in the Spirit of the Stones book. SPIR Solve the thoSTONES puzzles in the book and one (or more) of the diamonds can be yours. Whoever discovers a diamond SPIRIT can also claim his or her share of the Royalty Fund, which could grow to a maximum of  million. It's a game that's as entertaining as it can be rewarding. On cassette or disk, .99 TNTERNATIONAL FOOTBALL Already it's recognised as the best football game ever seen outside of Wembley. It's startlingly life-like, and gives you near perfect control of the players. You can kick the ball, dribble it, pass it, FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT: COMMODORE INFORMATION CENTRE, 1 HUNTERS ROAD, WELDON, CORBY, NORTHAMPTON NN7 10X. TEL: CORBY (0536) 206252 SELE "


"MEDALLION. HAVEN'T GOT IT AVENT GOT IT. | VACKE head it or even throw addictive game, a game of strategy and cunning. it in from the touchWe can almost guarantee it will turn you into a line. And every time head-case. you belt the ball into To stay alive, the net, the crowd Jack must leap cheer wildly. aside from collapsing How often you bridges and crashing score depends on how good you are, and also at blocks, and at the what level you choose to play. same time he must INTERNATIONAL There are 9 levels Jack Attack make sure ne doesnt fall ack make sure he doesn't fall into the water... you can play against the and drown. computer. Or you can play And that's the easy bit. a friend. ATTACK Because everywhere International FootJack goes he's dogged by jolly ball is a real test of skill, bouncing sadistic heads that dexterity and speed. It is are out to nut him. certain to drive you football crazy. He has to squash their On cartridge, .99. Ca commodor heads before his is squashed. JACK ATTACK And Jack can't afford to lose his There's no other game like it. It has been head because we've only given him three, and voted by the U.S. magazine 'Electronic Games when they've gone, he's gone... Hotline' as a 'must buy! commodore Jack Attack is available Jack Attac Jack Attack is Jack Attack is UARN CNT TO REAL for both the Commodore 16 about squashing heads. It's an and Plus/4. On cartridge .99. commodore it, 6252 SELECTED TITLES AVAILABLE FROM BOOTS, WH SMITH, WOOLWORTH, SPECTRUM, JOHN MENZIES, OTHER LEADING RETAILERS AND SPECIALIST COMPUTER STORES, "


"REVTEW:S www OOC Back, Captain Sticky's Gold CONAN and Hyperblast! Volume 2 95.88 LIVES 5 MACHINE: Atari 800/C64 TOREB349 HI has JBJ, Airstrike II, Batty Builders, Breath of the SUPPLIER: US Gold PRICE: $14.95 disc/.95 Dragon a previously unreleased game and cass. Neptune's Daughters. \"Know, O prince, that Volume 3 consists of JBJ. between the years when Stranded, Diamonds, Robin the oceans drank Atlantis Hood and Citadel Warrior. and the gleaming cities, Great games, great value. and the years of the rise of the sons of Aryas, there  Graphics was an age undreamed of Sound when shining kingdoms lay Value spread across the world like  Playability blue mantels beneath the stars. Hither came Conan the Cimmerian, black haired and sullen-eyed, sword in hand, a GRYPHON thief, a reaver, a slayer, with giant melancholies and MACHINE: CBM 64 gigantic mirth, to tread the SUPPLIER: Quicksilva jeweled thrones of the Earth PRICE: .95 cass./ under his sandaled feet.\" The .95 disc Nemedian Chronicles. Beware! Gryphon isn't \"And so it came to pass in an easy game to get to the age of the technocrats grips with. But it's well that this mighty barbarian worth the effort! Tony warrior fell in with the Silicon Crowther's latest Wizards who enchanted him features a Gryphon, a with weird spells and sent him magical mythical beast who on a mission in a land must fight the evil Id Monsters haunted by keyboards and who are after his gold bars. video monitors ...\" The The Id monsters are the Silicon Chronicles. creation of sleeping humans Just how do you convert a and they are turning the muscle-bound man-monster Gryphon's peaceful Dreaminto a bunch of sprites? Well, jumping and hacking away scape world into a land of DataSoft have had a brave try with your mighty broadsword. ATARI HITS nightmares! at it and come up with an Luckily Cimmerians are well The graphics are typically interesting and challenging known for their athletic MACHINE: Atari (all Crowther-esque lots of platform/arcade Adventure abilities. models) chunky 3D buildings and game in the process. The main object in each SUPPLIER: English forests. Tony has also If you've never heard of level is to find a mystic gem, Software squeezed in a nice line in Conan the Barbarian just place it in a gem holder and PRICE: $14.95 cass./ perspective as the Gryphon where have you been? He is find the key to the next level. .95 disc and monsters can be hidden the star of numerous comic Some of those screens are Here's a must for all Atari by buildings etc as they zap books, two feature films very puzzling believe me! owners old and new through the landscape. and, of course, the books Conan is a real treat for alike. Three volumes of The game is basically a penned by fantasy author games-starved Atari owners five hit games featuring scrolling shoot out but the Robert E. Howard who origin-and a good bet for CBM 64 hits like Jet Boot Jack, Gryphon also has to carry ally created the character platform fans. Neptune's Daughters and gold bars to build bridges over way back in the 1930s. But if playing the game Diamonds festering rivers full of polluNow, at last, someone has sparks off an interest in our Each tape or disc has five tion to reach different stages come up with the first Conan barbarian hero check out games on it all three of the game. computer game. As Conan, the paperbacks, read the volumes have Jet Boot Jack Don't expect it to be easy you must find and destroy the comics and see the movies. for some strange reason, it isn't. But Gryphon is a lot villainous Volta who is hiding You won't regret it! however. Atari Smash Hits of fun if you are prepared to somewhere inside a very Volumes One, Two and Three give it a chance! strange castle. are simply great value for You and Conan must fight  Graphics money even if you don't  Graphics your way through seven  Sound like all the games on one  Sound levels, packed with different  Value tape.  Value foes and monsters  Playability Volume One has Jet Boot  Playability avoiding dangers by leaping. Jack, Fire Fleet, Dan Strikes 00003300 DON D OO DODOSBDO 0 0 0 34 "


"R.E.V.I.E.W.S S522A contact with them is fatal. packed full of minotaurs and Here, however, Sam is THE QUADRA The graphics are up to an evil reptile creature called out to help his mate Monty MACHINE: Vic 20+8k/ standard for the Vic and the the Assassin — who att joystick only game as we've said to practise his art on you! some time among the low life SUPPLIER: Software already is extremely if you manage to negotiate of Scudmore Prison for an act addictive. A worthwhile buy the minotaurs, the fireballs no more dastardly Projects than for game-starved Vicsters and reach the maze which borrowing a bucket of coal. PRICE: .99 everywhere. features Ant Attack style Sam has to collect keys Revenge of the Quadra is graphics — you are well on from the Governor's office one of Software Projects your way to reaching the and explore the cells of the interesting new range of  Graphics  Sound Elysium Fields where you'll prison in order to help Monty Super Saver Software,  Value be able to rest for a while! escape. just released. Quadra is a fast  Playability However the maze is packed Monty is innocent is a arcade-style shoot-out — a full of nasties and Ulysses novel mixture of maze and combination of Defender and must fight them off using his arcade adventure games with good old Space Invaders. You HELLFIRE mace. No easy task. have to shoot waves of alien a few platforms style screens Hellfire is an interesting thrown in. attackers who are after the MACHINE: Spectrum/keydevelopment of the platform Graphics are colourful and pods at the bottom of the game. It features nice the characters well animated screen. Your space craft can board or joystick graphics and a pretty good but I didn't find the game SUPPLIER: Melbourne move up and down as well as line in playability. House met the high standard set by side to side as you blast the However, I found the game Monty's first release. aliens. PRICE: .95 difficult to get into. Climbing Having said that, Gremlin Quadra has some simple Hot on the heels of Gift up the Olympian slopes is no are building up a nice set of but effective graphics, good from the Gods comes easy task, but if you are a computer characters I'll sound and fast action. Good another game with its platform fan and like a be waiting for the further value for money if you are a theme set firmly in the challenge, take a look at exploits of Monty Mole and Vic owning arcade addict. heart of Greek mythology. Hellfire Sam Stoat with interest. You must re-enact the  Graphics trials of Ulysses as he seeks  Graphics  Graphics  Sound 8 to prove his worth to the Gods  Sound  Sound  Value who are a tough bunch if  Value Value  Playability 8 this game is anything to go  Playability  Playability by! 8 SQUISH! ROLLER KONG MACHINE: Vic-20 MACHINE: CBM 64 SUPPLIER: Palace SUPPLIER: Melbourne Software House PRICE: .99 PRICE: .95 Squish is quite simply the Another cosy Kong-type most addictive game for macho fantasy for those the Vic we've seen for of you who like running ages. And it's quite a around buildings in all simple game too. You weathers rescuing young have to move a spider-like women. So what's new, we character around in a maze of hear you shout. what looks like frog-spawn Basically, the idea is to squashing bugs! You push the \"frog-spawn\" avoid firebombs, barrels and around Pengo-fashion to kill little monsters (known as spinks) which Kong will throw off the bugs which inhabit the The game features three screen, squashing them levels or \"tasks\". The first MONTY IS INNOCENT at you, and you get extra against the walls or between task involves climbing the points for collecting flowers the \"spawn\". slopes of Mount Olympus, MACHINE: Spectrum/ for the girl. But the bugs have a sting in home of the Gods, while keyboard or joystick Generally a good laugh and their tails. They can shoot avoiding tumbling boulders SUPPLIER: Gremlin certainly very easy, this game bug-bombs at you if you let and the gaze of the Gorgon, Graphics is a really good bet if you have them get an empty space which can prove quite deadly. PRICE: .95 a joystick between them and you. Ulysses must use his shield The adventures of Monty The game has 20 difficulty to protect himself from the  Graphics Mole continue in levels, each harder than the Gorgon's glare. Once through Gremlin's latest release  Sound first. the cave entrance at the top which also features a  Value On some the bugs are of the slopes you'll find yournew hero, Sam Stoat, star of  Playability invisible which is nasty as self in the temple of Knossos, his own Gremlin game. continued on page 83 35 "


"Instead of ten aliens, Ci for his Commodo What happened no throughout Europe and the U.S.A.* This is what home computing's all about. Sunday morning : Saturday morning. Waltzed into my local computer shop. Packed as usual with masses of kids enjoying the arcade games. Surely I could put my Commodore 64 to better use. Helpful assistant suggests a Commodore Communications Modem. Tells me it comes with a year's free subscription to Compunet, a new network service, saving me a cool thirty quid. A bargain not to be missed, so I bought a Modem. If I knew then, what I know now, I'd have thanked that assistant more. Raining Tapped in my Compunet I.D. and personal password. Wow, what a directory! Decide to pit my wits against other Modem users by entering Multi User Dungeon, an interactive on-line game. Should stretch the old grey matter a bit. Then a quick look in 'The Jungle. This is an open area where other Modem owners display messages. See a Commodore user in Fife wants to sell 'U-boat' for $3.00. Leave message offering him 'Mighty Gork' on a straight swap. Saturday (one week later). Monday evening. Fantastic My Compunet membership came through this morning. Hurriedly plugged the Modem into my 64's cartridge port, and hooked up to the telephone line Can't wait At last I can communicate with other Commodore 64 Modem owners and giant mainframes. What's more, I can also access databases Move on to the Compunet Software Park What a choice. Loads of high quality bargain programs. Particularly interested in educational software, so I call up \"The Study.' Download free physics package to help with my exams. "


"Clive bought a Modem lore 64. Lext changed his life. She's disappointed. Couldn't find Simon le Bon's private number. Tuesday evening Dad's turn. I don't get a look in as he's busy teleshopping Actually it's amazing what bargains turn up. He even finds a new house. Mum said she doesn't want to move and anyway his dinner's getting cold. SILENCE Wednesday evening. Friday evening Yippee! Receive a reply from the guy in Fife. He fancies taking on Gork. What's more he's written a program hed like my opinion on. He transfers it direct, using the free user to user software. I've made my first computer pal. What a week. Best one I've had since getting my Commodore 64. Sure am glad I got the Modem instead of all those aliens. The Commodore 64 Communications Modem comes as a complete package with a year's free subscription to Compunet, for just $99.99 inc. VAT. Find out how a Modem can change your life. See it now at Spectrum, Curry's, Comet and selected Commodore dealers. Discover I can join BLAISE the computer service for the British Library. Their catalogue of books dates way back to 1950. Should give me an interesting edge over my school chums. Thursday evening. commodore For further information phone or write to: Commodore Communications Modem. 1 Hunters Road, Weldon, Corby, Northamptonshire NN171QX, Tel: 0536 205252. Sis has a go. She keys into Prestel* Imagine, over 300,000 pages of information and news. What does she choose? The lonely hearts section. \"Require additional subscriber charges. Prestel is a regd.trademark of British Telecom. "


"We'll take you bey 001 'QUICKSHOT II AUTO RAPID-FIRE JOYSTICK SPECTRUM INTERFACE ISANT HHHHHHHHHHILLEHHHH "


"yond the Spectrum. Four great new add-ons from Ram, Number One in everything for the Spectrum... TURBO INTERFACE Our unique Turbo Interface outperforms any Spectrum interface it works with ROM cartridges, 2 standard joysticks, and there's a full expansion bus at the rear. The Turbo supports Kempston, Protek and Interface 2 software and loads from cassette or instantly from a ROM cartridge. It really makes the most of the Quickshot Il's rapid-fire action, and with a unique built-in power safety device, it's amazing value at just .95. QUICKSHOT II AUTO RAPID-FIRE JOYSTICK The famous Quickshot Il is the top games joystick, with a sleek trigger fire button for quick reactions, an auto fire switch for continuous shooting and a new, improved grip. Revolutionary built-in stabilising suction cups mean a sure, firm grip-a snip at .95 SPECTRUM INTERFACE Boost the power of your Spectrum, or Spectrum +. This Kempston-compatible interface gets the most from your games electrify your enemies with real power and lightning-fast reactions right under your fingertips. Costs just .95. SPECTRUM UPGRADE KIT If you've a 16K Spectrum micro, this handy and inexpensive add-in kit boosts the RAM memory to a powerful 48K, so you can run the latest and greatest software, the most exciting games around and expand your own programming possibilities! Only .95. Where can you get your hands on Ram's amazing Spectrum add-ons? You can see them at branches of Boots, Menzies, Spectrum Group computer centres, and good computer stores everywhere. Or return the coupon below. To: RAM Electronics (Fleet) Ltd (Dept CVG), 106 Fleet Road, Fleet, Hampshire GU13 8PA. Credit Card hot line: 02514 25252. (Access & Visa). SPECTRUM UPGRADE KIT TURBO INTERFACE Please send me Spectrum Turbo Interface(s) at .95. Quickshot II Joystick(s) at .95. Spectrum Interface(s) at .95. Spectrum Upgrade Kit(s) at .95. (Please state issue 20 o 30) +l per order P+P ( Overseas) TOTAL  Dl enclose cheque/postal order charge my Access/Visa AZITIIIIIIIIIII Expiry Date_ 1_ _ Name Address Postcode Telephone 24 Hour despatch for credit cards and postal orders (7 days for cheques.) All products are fully compatible with the Spectrum, Spectrum + and Sinclair Microdrives. Ram Electronics (Fleet) Ltd (Dept CVG), 106 Fleet Road, Fleet, Hampshire GU13 8PA CVG Trade and export enquiries welcome "


"BOUNTY BOS STRIKES BACK Twenty-five all-new levels Multi-channel music Automatic Demo Mode Level Warp' ability Yukon Yohan SJARRING BOUNTY BOB. togu Bounty Bob returns in this new and exciting follow-up adventure to Miner 2049er. This time around it's even tougher than before and Bob needs your help more than ever to guide him through the mine. The mutant organisms have multiplied and over-run the mine entirely, making it extremely difficult to survive the hazards of the underground passageways. Using the high-powered special equipment in the twenty-five new caverns is Bob's only hope of achieving his objective of securing the mine and defeating the plans of the evil Yukon Yohan!\" CASSETTE .95 U.S. GOLD DISK .95 U Softwa "


"AN mm BAINO 747 El sem 'Engines on...check... flaps to 10 degrees... check...increase throttle, release brakes. Increase throttle to full power ...watch air speed indicator. Aircraft taxiing, increasing speed...170 knots... rotate, observe vertical speed indicator... increase elevator angle. Take off achieved!' The excitement of a DACC 747 take off fires the adrenalin like no other computer simulation. The 3D pilot's view and full array of instrumentation challenges you to take the role of piloting a Jumbo Jet...and once in control and taxiing down the runway, there's no turning back. Take off achieved. Full flying control at your fingertips and seven British Airports to fly to...the drama of landing is waiting to unfold as you sit in the hot seat of a 247 flight deck. 18: Over 45 dials and indicators to control with simulated emergencies, systems folures, and audible alarms. Runways visible in true perspective on toke off and landing Optional use of oysticks 100% Machine Code on Commodore 64k and Spectrum 48k versions Also available for Dragon 32/64 Tondy C/C 32, BBC Model/B, Acorn Electron Alor 400/600/800/485 Cassette Price .95 including VAT and postage. Spectrum Price .95. Commodore on Disk Price  95 LIMITED 747 FLIGHT daca SIMULATOR LIMITED. FROM DACC To: DACC Ltd. (Dept. SU4), 23 Waverley Road, Hindley, Wigan, Lancashire WN2 3BN. Name (BLOCK LETTERS) Address County Postcode Please send me .. ... .........copies of the DACC 747 Flight Simulator at ........ .......... . .. ............... I enclose cheque/Postol Order for ..... ... enclose cheque/P the total of ... My computer is a You may order by Access, either by post or 24 hr. Telephone (0942522002 Despatch within 48hrs. Please debit my Access account III TT MIT ID, The leaders in Flight Simulation. All dealer enguiries to sole distributor: MICRO AIDS. Beech House, Hob Hey Lane, Colcheth, Warrington Tel: 092 576 2613/5930 "


"HIRE SPECTRUM SOFTWARE for Commodore 64 SAVE .00!! For a limited period, we are offering HALF-PRICE membership to readers of this magazine. Join now, LIFE membership is only .00 (normally .00) AQUA RACER 3D Speed Boat Race OVER 280 different tapes for hire including ARCADE, ADVENTURE, BUSINESS, EDUCATIONAL, etc. --even an m/c Compiler. FREE 26 page catalogue. FREE newsletter, with hints, tips and our top tape chart OVER 3000 tapes in stock, with up to 60 copies of each title for fast service. All tapes sent by 1st class post. LOWEST PRICES hire up to 3 tapes at a time, from 63p each for two weeks hire. (Plus p&p and VAT). European members welcome Tapes for sale at DISCOUNT prices. Telephone 01-661 9240 (9am 5pm) or write for further details, or complete the coupon and JOIN TODAY-you've nothing to lose! for Spectrum RASTA SWOP SHOP A new service from N.S.L. SWOP your unwanted tapes with tapes from other members for a small handling charge of only 60p (plus p&p and VAT) M for MSX Arcade Adventure NATIONAL SOFTWARE LIBRARY 42 Harefield Avenue, Cheam, Surrey SM2 7NE. lenclose cheque/postal order for .00 for LIFE membership. Please rush my membership kit to me. If, within 28 days, I'm not delighted with your service you'll refund my membership fee.. BOARDELLO Original Skilful Board Game bubble bus software Name Address CVG 385 87 High Street, Tonbridge Kent TNS 1RX Tel: 0732 355962 Telex: 95151 100's GREAT GAMES ECO SION MILES BETTER SOFTWARE 221 CANNOCK ROAD, CHADSMOOR, CANNOCK, STAFFS WS11 2DD TEL: (05435) 3577 US GOLD SOFTWARE CASS DISK 12.95 11.95 CBM 64 Amstrad 12.05 1295 CBM 64 CBM 54 including River Raid, Decathlon, Football, Beamrider, Zenji, Pitfall, Pitfall II, Q Bert Front Line etc. etc. Decathlon, Gyruss, Frogger II, ATARI Star Wars the Arcade Game etc. INTELIVISION Trukin, Pinball, River Raid Treasures of Tarmin etc.   12.95 12.95 12.95 12.95 11.95 CRM 64 Atan CBM 64 ENTER THE 11.95 GAMER CRM 64 11.95 BEACH HEAD BEACH HEAD BEACH HEAD BEACH HEAD CONAN CONAN POLE POSITION POLE POSITION MR DO MR DO PACMAN PACMAN DIG DUG DIG DUG DROPZONE DROPZONE RAID OVER MOSCOW RAID OVER MOSCOW AZTEC CHALLENGE FORBIDDEN FOREST SLINKY CAVERNS OF KHAFKA SUPER HUEY TALLADEGA BRUCE LEE BRUCE LEE DALLAS QUEST DALLAS QUEST STELLAR 7 SOLO FLIGHT SOLO FLIGHT F15 STRIKE EAGLE F15 STRIKE EAGLE NATO COMMANDER NATO COMMANDER INDIANA JONES TAPPER TAPPER CONGO BONGO CONGO BONGO SPY HUNTER SPY HUNTER 7.95 OF THE YEAR FANTASTIC PRIZES COMPETITION COLECO S.a.e. for details INTELLIVISION ATARI +673 Ilik 12.95 CBM 64 CBM 64 CBM 64 12.95 12.95 12.95 12.95    64 CBM 64 * 8.95 CBM 54 B.95 *  64 CBM 14 CBM 64 ATARI GAMES FROM .95 INTELLIVISION FROM .95 11.95 11.95 11.95 11.95 11.95 11.95 11.95 12.95 UP 'N DOWN BUCK ROGERS BUCK ROGERS WIZARD & THE PRINCESS MISSION ASTEROID EXODUS ULTIMATA IN DOUGH BOY     CBM 64 CRM 64 17.95 8.95 M5 Computer and software all reduced WIGSTON. LEICESTER, LES ITE. TEL. (0533) 880445/8806264. Look out for more new titles for Atar CRM 64, Spectrum and Amstrad, Please phone for stock availability on all items Add  per item for overseas orders Access/Visa "


"THE FUTURE OF MANKIND IS IN YOUR HANDS! It's the year 2085. Only a handful of people have survived the robot wars that rocked the Solar System. In a final desperate bid for survival a Tacheon propelled star cruiser has been developed on Earth to transport survivors to new star system. But the cruiser relies on rare lonian crystals tor its power: crystals which are only abundant on Jupiter's second moon lo. A moonbase established on lo is under constant attack by aliens from Jupiter. It is your mission to escort the men and their precious crystals safely from the surface of lo to the Dropzone where the landing pad is located. You are equipped with the latest pulse-laser back-pack system which will make you invisible and indestructible for short periods of time. You must. succeed, the future of the human race depends on you alone! Super smooth scrolling screen High resolution graphics Nine different alien attackers Scrolling high speed scanning Exploding volcanoes Ultra fast action Cassette .95 Disk  WAZY SA Rann  U.S. GOLD DO U.S. GOLD Ltd., Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268. "


"N GAME OF THE MONTH. WMN o Clingon destroyer ships are cruising at warp speed to a cluster of inhabited planets in a remote quadrant of the galaxy. Their aim is to decimate the major cities and take over mining of the valuable mineral ores that only occur on these four planets. If the Clingons succeed in capturing the planet, they will have sealed off the Federation's only supply of Cyanite crystals, an essential component of warp drive engines. As captain of the Federation's Special Emergencies Squadron, you have been sent to intercept the attacking forces and destroy them before they capture the planet system. If you become hopelessly surrounded, you can hyperspace your ship out of trouble, although the hull of your spaceship can only take the strain of five hyperjumps. Control keys and instructions are included in the program. VICTORY RUNS ON AN UNEXPANDED VIC 20 PART 1 BY STUART HANSCOMBE 165, 189.255 37.55 GOSUB208 1 FORI=7168 T07579 POKE 1 PEEK (I +25600) : NE XT POKE36869.255 : POKE52.28 : POKE56.28 10 FORI=7168 T07335 READD POKEI, D: NEXT 20 DATAB, 60. 126. 126. 126, 126.52,1,0,68,12 6 126. 126. 126, 124, 128 38 DATA1,62 126. 125, 126, 125.68,, 128, 124 126, 126, 126, 126.68. 48 DATA 195, 255, 102.98.90.162.255, 195 58 DATA252, 24, 124.55 55.124 24,252,63,24 62.236 236,62,24,63 68 DATA24,24,189,231,255, 189, 165, 129, 129 231 189.24.24 70 DATA66, 153, 165,219 219.165.153,66,0, . . 127, 127,0,0,0,0,0..254.254,@.@.@ 80 DATA24.24.24.24.24 24, 24.0.0.24,24,24 24 24, 24, 24,@.@.@.24.24.0.0,8 9 DATA73, 42,0.99 0.42,73.0 91 DATA68.68.98.189.153.66.36.24,24,36 6 6.153.189.90.62.60.24.36,75.159.159 75,3 92 DATA24.36.210,249,249.210.36.24,255,2 55,255,255,255,255,255,255 106 PRINT PRESS SPACE BAR 110 GETA$ :IFA$( \"THEN 110 115 GOTO308 116 GETA$IFA$(\"\" THEN116 120 POKE36879.8 : PRINTELOAD\" 138 POKE 199,3 : POKE632.19: POKE633, 13 : POKE 634.13 148 END 200 PRINT\" ***RSTARSHIP VICTORY****\" 218 PRINT A R BATTLE STAR..10 211 PRINT\"BC\" 212 PRINTEE YOUR SHIP 213 PRINT \" 214 PRINTIRGUIDE YOUR SHIP AROUND THE U I HENEMY SHIP...12\" NIVERSE 2:5 PRINT DESTROYING\"; THE BATTLE SHIPS\" 216 PRINT BUT WATCH OUT FOR THE ENEMY S HIPS WHICH WILLDESTROY YOU ON CONTACT\":R E TURN 388 POKE36869,248 310 PRINT\" 328 PRINT' CONTROLS: P=THRUST\" 339 PRINT =FIRE\" 348 PRINT\" =ROTATE LEFT\" 35 PRINT\" 368 PRINT1+=HYPOSPACE\" =ROTATE RIGHT 378 PRINT YOU ONLY GET FIVE CES PER LIFE.\" HYPOSPA 388 PRINT\"EXTRA MAN EVERYTIME ROY FOUR STARSHIPS YOU DEST 398 PRINT APRESS F1\":GOTO116 READY. 6.24 Illustration: Dave McTaggart "


"816 IFQ=1 THENQ=22: W=3 GO TO240 328 IFQ=-22 THENO=1: W=5G070240 338 IFQ=-1 THENQ=-22 W=GOT0248 480 IFPEEKS1 +52 +22+k+ 3 32 THENLIELIPOKEM18: GO TO 798 424 POKEM1,128 POKES1-52*22-K 32 402 S=S1 +222 + KIFPEEK 5-0)=RTHENPOKESPART 2 I of IFW=6 THENR=19 Si=51-1 94 IFW=7 THENR=16:52=S2-1 485 IFW=3 THENR=17:52=52+1 426 IFW=5 THENR=18:51=51+1 411 S=31 +32*22+K:POKES W POKES -55,POKE 3-0.:POKES-Q+SS 2 GO TO 148 500 IFPEEK (S1+52 +22+k+Q) 0.32 THEN148 501 U=S1 +52*22+K: POKEM2.128: IFW=5 THENY= 1 POKE 36869.255 :POKE 36879.5:59=3072e:M2 36875 =4 H POKE36878,5 MI=36877k=7682 L1=3 = -22 W=7 BS 28 51 = 10:52= 10 PRINT 2. =21 F 1)==0 2 =2 + 2) = 1:0(3)=2 :P 3)=28:0(4)=21 P (4=28 22 IFLI=D THEN900 23 IFLI 6 THENL I = 5 3@ FORT=7782T08164S TEP22 POKET.20: NEXT.FI ORT=8164 T08185 POKET 20 NEXT 48 FORT=7723T08185STEP22 POKET 20 NEXT FI ORT=77@2T07723 : POKET, 20: NEXT WS= 58 $=\"SEOTTOMATYTATOTTOTETOMIAST JANRD C \" 3$=\" 66 PRINTLEFT$($.6) LEFT (W$, 4) S$ 7@ PRINTLEFT$ (0$,5) LEFT#W$, 12),S$ 16) LEFTW$.3). SE BB PRINTLEF T$ ( 98 PRINTLEFT$ (0$, 15) LEF 2*22-K-59.7 9: POKES1 +222 +KT POKES1-5 52 FORT=1109 Z+-22 327 IFPEER 39 ZEINT (RND (1) *483 HENB3 94 POKEZ+K+22,14 : NEXT R LI 108 PRINTSRES C=\"50 PRINT S = 'LI 18: IFPEEK (197) = 13 THEN4BB 102 POKEM1,0 103 S=51 +52 22 + KIFPEEK (5-0)=RTHENPOKES0.32 125 1F PEEK (197)=5ANDHP O 2 THEN700 118 IFPEEK (197)=37 THEN308 128 IFPEEK (197) = 29 THEN22B 13e IFPEEK (197) = 45 THEN502 148 FORT=1T04: POKEP (T) +0(T) 22+, 32 141 IFO (T) (S2 THENOT)= (+1 J= 1 = O(T)-1.J=-1 1-2 IFOCT)S2 THENOT 1-3 IFPCT) +O (T) *22-K=51 +5222 +K THENLIELI -1 POKEM1.:GOT0790 32 THENO (T)=0 144 IFPEEK<P(T) +0(T) 22+) 582 IFW=6 THENY= 11 IFW=7 THENY= 12 504 IFW=3 THENY=13 505 S=S1+S2*22+K: POKEU, 32 POKES K: U=U+Q 506 IFPEEK (U) =9 THEN6BB 507 IFPEEK (U) = 4 THENPOKEM2,0 GO TO808 528 IF PEEKU) 32 THENPOKEM2,0 GOTO 148 528 POKEU, Y: POKEUS OT0585 4 : FORT=1T018 : NEXTG 88 IFU=P (1) +0 (1) *22-K THENP (1) = 1:0 (1) =2 IFU=P (2) +0 (2) 22+KTHENP (2) = 1:0 (2) =21 622 IFU=P (3) +0 (3) *22-KTHENP (3)=20:0(3)=2 683 IFU=P (4) + (4) *22+KTHENP (4) =28:0 (4) = 2 564 SC=SC +10 695 POKEU, 15 : POKEU+S5,4 POKEM1,200 FORT= 0288 : NEXT : POKEM1,POKEM2. POKEU 32 G OTO 140 28 POKES 1 +S2*22+K, 32 HP=HP-1 785 5=91 +92 +22+KIFPEEK (S-2)=RTHENPOKESKE 10 0 0 146 IFP (T)>S1 THENP (T) =P (T)-1: J= -1 :47 IFP (T) CS1 THENP (T) =P (T+ 1 J= 1 148 IFP (T) + (T) *22 -K=51 +52 +22+KTHENLIELI -1 : POKEM1,0: GOT0790 249 IFPEEK (P (T) +0 (1) *22+R) 32 THENP (T) =P 199 POKEP (T) +0 (T) *22+K,9 POKEP (T) +0 (T) #2 2+K+S8,5 : NEXT : GOT0100 208 POKEM2,210 IFQ=-22 THENO=-1. W=6 GOTO2 218 IFO=-1 THENO=22: W=:GOTO248 228 IFQ=22 THENQ=1W=5 GOTO248 238 IF Q=1 THENG=-22 W=7 248 POKEM2, POKES,W FORT=1T0280: NEXT:GO TO140 = 5 GOTO24 388 POKEM2.212: IFQ=22 THENO=-1 7:6 51= INT(RND (1) *19 +1 52=INTCRND (1) *19 -2 IFPEEK(S1+52 +22-K) 715 FORT=255 T0127STEP-1 POKEN2, T: NEXT 32 THEN718 728 POKES 1 +S222+K,WPOKES1 +52 +22+k+S8,7 30 TO 140 790 S=51 +52*22+K: IFPEEK (5-0)=RTHENPOKES79: POKES1+S2*22+K. 15 FORL=255 T0127STEP1 POKEM1, L: NEXT GOTO20 802 POKEU, 15 : POKEU+21 15 : POKEU+23.15: POK EU-21.15 : POKEU-23,15 818 POKEM1, 150 : FORL=1T05 STEP-.5: POKE368 78.1 FORT=1 TO 180: NEXT : NEXT: POKEM1, 32@ POKEU.32 : POKEU+21 32 : POKEU+23.32 : POK EU-21.32 : POKEU-23.32 SC=SC +100 330 BS=BS-1 IFBS=@THENLI=L1+1 GOT0990 84 GO TO 100 988 POKE 36869,242 FOKE36879.25 :PRINT'SYO U SCORED\"SC 901 FORT=128T0255 : POKEM2.T:NEXT POKEM2 @ 918 PRINT ANOTHER GO?\" 920 GETAS: IFA$=Y\"THENRUN 938 IFA$=\"N\" THENEND 940 GOTO920 998 FORL=128T0227 POKEM2 L SC=SC +18 991 PRINTSESC=\"SC 992 NEXT: POKEM2, FORT=170308 : NEXT:GOTO2 45 "


"THE LIVING ADVENTURE MOVE SENSORY ANIMATION DRAGONTORCA THE LOST REALMS OF THE LOST KINGDOM OF BRIGA THE DRUIDS LAST SANCTUARY TROLLSTONES WHERE THE LOST VAULTS OF LOCS ARE HEDEN gu STONEWAYS WITCHWOODS WEIRDHENGE 1328 novic D HE DRAGA TEETH DREAMPOWNS OF THE CANTI LOST REALM TORHENGE ADAUGA  HIDDENLIES THE SANCTUARY OF HALGOR THEOREAT WOD OF THE WEST LOST KINGDOM 4 the CANTI THE CURSED CRYPT OF THE WESTERN NOS LAY WITHIN Morag the Shapeshifter has siezed the Crown Merlyn from her evil spell of Dumnovia and is out to find the other four on your travels through the strife tom crowns that make up the Kingdom of Britain kingdoms you can develop magical powers to The five crowns were struck from the help you understand and master the legendary Dragontorc of Avalon in the mysteries of landmarks like the Giant Ring of distant past, and if brought together again Stones, and the Secret Crypts. will allow the keeper fantastic power. Morag The leylines, which can be plotted on the interids to control this Torc of Power and accompanying map, will be your main route subject Saxon Britain to decades of tyranny to the crowns However, you can take the role of Maroc and And for the first time in any adventure game Mage, seek out the remaining crowns, you'll encounter Sensory Animationl This combat Morag and release your old tutor programming break-through has given lifelike emotions to the multitude of characters in the game cross them too often and any chance you have of beating Morag to the crowns may be dashed forever. Add to this a FREE map and scenario full of clues, hundreds of locations, all in 3D, over 200 different discoveries to make, and you have a stunning adventure it could take you a lifetime to completel Dragontorc of Avalon The Living Adventure Movie-Avaliable for the 48K Spectrum and Spectrum +. Only .95. (GSH Arcade Adventure with AVALON The 3D Adventure TECHNICIAN TED Movie Try to work through 50 screens of varying complexity. OVALA Can you get your astral projection Maroc past but watch out for the most unhelpful workmates you the Gate House Level, through the Mines of ever came across. Remember, you are working in a Madness, and onwards to meet the Lord of factory where nothing is quite what it seems Chaos himself? A unique animated loading screen with perfected Astounding 3D graphics over 223 rooms, 27 colison detection plus detailed and colourful graphics spells and over 100 animated characters make has made Technician Ted one of 1985's top games. HEWSON CONSULTANTS this the adventure game of the decade. Clock in with Ted now Can you master it sooner? For the 48K Spectrum and Spectrum + 45.95. 568 Milton Trading Estate, Milton, Abingdon, Oxon. OX 14 4RX For the 48K Spectrum and For the Amstrad CPC 464, 67.95. Spectrum +, 67.95 As part of our contruing development of innovative software we are always happy to evaluate software sent to us with a view to publication "


"PERS allenges Winning's not the most important thing it's the only thing\" Brian Jacks, world famous Judo and TV Superstars champion made it very clear. \"It better be good,\" he said. We didn't feel like arguing the point, so we just got to work. The result is one of the most exciting addictive and challenging games you will ever have attempted. We feel it only fair to wam you though-challenge Brian Jacks to anything and YOU'D better be good! Brian Jacks challenges you to these eight events: *ARM DIPS * SQUAT THRUSTS * CANOEING CYCLING * FOOTBALL SWIMMING * ARCHERY 100 METRES Available from all leading software retailers OR order today by mail. CBM-64 68 95 fast load cassette  disc 48K Spectrum BBC-B/Electron/Amstrad 1795 prices include VAT & PIP Martech is the registered trade mark of Software Communications Limited Martech House, Bay Terrace, Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME. PHONE: (0323) 768456 TELEX: 87465 EXIM Brighton 48K SPECTRUM COMMODORE 64. BBC 'B' ELECTRON. AMSTRAD, "


"THE WAITING IS OVER! The long awaited follow-up to FOOTBALL MANAGER by KEVIN TOMS is now available SOFTWARE STAR Available SPECTRUM 48K .95 COMMODORE 64 .95 NOW for AMSTRAD CPC 464 .95 SOFTWARE STAR is the NEW game from Kevin Toms, who designed the Software Classic FOOTBALL MANAGER. SOFTWARE STAR allows you to try your hand at running a successful software company. You have to cope with staff problems, game launches, advertising, financial problems and more while trying to produce chart topping successful games. One other thing, SOFTWARE STAR has that gripping Addictive quality that all Kevin's games have! NOW AVAILABLE FOR YOUR COMPUTER! , MANAGER by KEVIN TOMS FOOTBALL MANAGER \"Absorbing and realistic Highly recommended\" Sunday Times, February 1984 \"Completely fantastic I want one!\" Charlie Nicholas, Arsenal sriker in Big K, April 1984 Some outstanding features of the game  Transfer market Promotion and relegation FOOTBALL MANAGER  FA Cup matches  Injury problems Full league tables is available for the following  Four Divisions  Pick your own team for each match As many seasons as you like Managerial rating computers: 7 skill levels. Save game facility. Financial manipulations AMSTRAD CPC 464... .95  You can even be sacked! COMMODORE 64.. .95 SPECTRUM 48K .95 NEED WE SAY MORE ELECTRON... .95 BBC MODEL B..... .95 ORIC 48K & ATMOS .95 DRAGON.. .95 ZX81 16K... .95 VIC 20+16K... .95 (soon for MSX) STERECTOME OF THE GOLDEN JOYSTICK AWARD KEVIN TOMS Available from SND WHSMITH and John Moraes (selected titles) In case of difficulty buy by mail order. Send Cheques/PO.s to:ADDICTIVE GAMES 7a Richmond Hill, Bournemouth, Dorset BH2 6HE. "


"INNS JOIN THE COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES ADVENTURE CLUB Stuck in a dungeon you can't escape from? Faced with a dragon you can't kill? Portcullis keeps falling on you when you try to enter the castle? Well, you can always write to our Special discount offers including ADVENTURE CLUB, C&VG, PRIORY Adventure Helpline as a last resort! up to l off some of the latest and COURT, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, But perhaps you'd rather join forces greatest games. LONDON ECIR 3AU. with another Adventurer, stuck in the Phone-in Helpline Service. Don't forget to cut out and keep the same position? At certain times each week you will Adventure Club Token in this and From now on you've no need to be be able to ring the C&VG Adventure each issue of C&VG. You will need a lone Adventurer! Join the C&VG Helpline for immediate relief! these to take advantage of the special Adventure Club and contact other  C&VG Adventure Club Badge. offers for members! members through a bi-monthly club On joining, you receive an attractive newsletter. high-quality badge. Wear it and be Here're some of the goodies that recognised by fellow members! will be available to you if you join So join now, to receive the very first C&VG's Adventure Club members: edition of the Newsletter. In it you .A bi-monthly newsletter by post, will see how to take advantage of bringing you: membership to become a member of The latest news from the Adventure Treasure Trap with 10% reduction in software scene. subscription, plus details of some Members' contact page. fantastic seven-day holidays they will Members' letters. be running this summer. News of forthcoming reviews in To join, simply fill in the form C&VG below, and send it with a postal order The current members' pass-code. for  (membership fee) to: APPLICATION FOR MEMBERSHIP FULL NAME: ! COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES ADVENTURE CLUB TOKEN NO. 1 FOR USE WITH TOKEN NO. 2 IN MEMBERS' NEWSLETTER APRIL 85 ADDRESS: TELEPHONE: YEAR OF BIRTH: I enclose PO for  and hereby apply to become a member Signed OFFICE USE ONLY No: Entered: Sent: SO "


"  $ ha Initialise 1 2 3 REM RUN MACHINE CODE REM SUPPORT PROGRAM REM SEE APPENDICES SCREEN 1, 2 : KEY OFF : CLS PRINT AANMAASTUNTMAN \" : PRINT : PRINT : PRINT FOR I = I TO 8: READ Q: AS = A$ + CHR$ (Q): NEXT : SPRITES ( 0) = A$ : A = ** FOR I = 1 TO 32 : READ O: AS = A$ CHR$ (Q): NEXT : SPRITE$( 1 ) = A$ FOR I = 1088 TO 1095 : READ Q: VPOKE I,Q: NEXT : FOR I = 1152 TO 1191 : READ Q : VPOKE I, Q : NEXT : FOR I = 1216 TO 1223 : READ Q: VPOKE I,Q! NEXT : FOR I = 1280 TO 1287 : READ O VPOKE I, O NEXT DEFUSR 60118! : POKE 59997!,! POKE 59998!, 1 ON STRIG GOSUB 900 NM = 3: SC = 100 PRINT \"Level of Difficultya (1-4)?\"; K$ = INKEYS: IF K$ = \"\" THEN 65 LD = VALI K$) IF LD I ORLD > 4 THEN 65 ELSE PRINT LD POKE 59999!, LD PRINT PRINT PRINT : PRINT PRINT : PRINT MAAR Hit any key to Start\" IF INKEYS = \"\" THEN 95 38 40 IIDAAN 69 65 78 90 95 New Round T 108 105 110 115 120 STRIGO ) ON : CLS : COLOR 1, 5, 5 IF NM = 0 THEN 600 FOR I = 6816 TO 6847 : VPOKE I, 23 : NEXT PRINT : PRINT \"ANAMA\" CHR$( 160 ) AAAAAAAAAAAAAAA CHR$( 160 ) PRINT : PRINT : PRINT \"AAAAAAAAAAAAAA CHR$( 160 ): PRINT \"A\" CHR$( 160 ) \"AAAA!!\": PRINT AAAA!!!\": PRINT \"AAA!!!!\" PRINT \"ARA!!!\": PRINT \"A!!!!\": PRINT \"A!!!!\": PRINT \"!!!!!\": PRINT \"!!!A MAA\" CHR$( 146 ) CHR$ 146 ) CHR$ 146) CHR$( 146 ) CHR$( 146 ) \"A \" CHR$( 148 ) CHR$( 148 ) CHR$( 148 ) CHR$( 148 ) CHR$ 148) PRINT\":IIAMAA\" CHR$( 144 ) CHR$( 136 ) CHR$ 136) CHR$( 136 ) CHR$( 136 ) CHR$ ( 136 ) CHR$( 145 ) PRINT \"AA\" CHR$( 147 ) CHR$( 148 ) CHR$( 147 ) CHR${ 147 ) CHR$( 147 ) CHR$( 148 ) : PRINT\"!!AAAAA\" CHRI144 ) CHRI( 136 ) CHR$(136) CHR$ 136) CHR1 152) CHR$ 136 ) CHR$( 136 ) CHR$ 136) CHR$ 145 ) : PRINT \"A\" CHR$( 147 ) CHR$( 148 ) \"A\" CHR$( 147 ) CHR$ 148): PRINT \" A\" CHR$ 144 ) FOR Illustration: Terry Rogers RUNSINA BY MELBOURNE A team of daredevils is attempting dari onto a trampoline. To make a daredevil jump. press te SPA speed and the height! You lose points for hitting the grond or man dies if he lands on the high-volige w You can alter the effect of the wid on W speed by changing the use of variabis Ws VARIABLES LD Level of difficulty WS-Wind speed T-Time parameter F Flying? NW, NM Number of wounds, number of ron "


"STUNTMAN This listing can be found in the MSX Games Book by Melbourne House available in all good bookshops MSX GAMES BOOK price .95 130 I= 1 TO 9: PRINT CHR$( 136); NEXT: PRINT CHR$ ( 145 ) \"A\" CHR$( 147 ) CHR$( 148 ) PRINT \"HAAAAA!!!!!!!!!!!! \" CHR$( 147 ) CHR$ 147) ; : FOR I = 1 TO 5: PRINT CHR$ 148) NEXT : PRINT: PRINT \"AAAAAAAAAAAAAA! \" FOR I = 1 TO 7 : PRINT CHRI( 147 ) ; : NEXT : PRINT PRINT \"AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAALAAAA\"; : FOR I = I TO 5 : PRINT CHR$( 147 ) ; : NEXT : PRINT : PRINT \"AMARAAN \": PRINT: PRINT : PRINT : PRINT \"!!!::>: CHR$ 11); WS = 5: FEO: T=0: NW = 0: GOSUB 1000 PUT SPRITE I, I 255, 40), 1 VPOKE 8194, 229 : VPOKE 8209, 165 : VPOKE 8210, 229 : VPOKE 8211, 149 : VPOKE 8212, 197 140 150 160 Control 200 205 210 220 230 248 252 262 270 280 D = USRD ) IF VPEEK ( 6917) > 1 255 LD ) THEN VPOKE 6916, INT( RND 1) 85 ) : SC = SC 10 GOSUB 1000 IF F = 0 THEN 200 GOSUB 300 IF X < 5 OR X 250 THEN 550 IF Y 105 THEN 200 IF X > 85 AND X 140 THEN GOSUB 350 : GOTO 200 IF X > 160 AND X 210 THEN GOSUB 450 : GOTO 200 IF X (30 THEN 400 GOSUB 500 : GOTO 200 Move Man 300 31 8 320 XV = 3 + LDI 3: M = 50 = + 1 = WS | 1 XV I :  = 4.9.TITIM + YI X = INTEX): Y = INTE Y ): A$ = 'n' STR$(N)  IF T I 3: INTO TI 3) THEN PLAY \"*6508615s1 Oxa$;\": N =N1 IF X) 255 THEN X 255 IF X ( 0 THEN Y= PUT SPRITE , (X,Y), 10 RETURN UNS (N AN MSX OURIE HOUSE pting daring leap from an aeroplane ress th SPACE bar but watch the wind te grond or the picket fence and your ih-voltge wires. the wid on the man's flight path and variabls WS and T in line 310. 325 327 349 Man Hits Target 350 355 360 IF X > 105 AND X (117 THEN SC SC 200 M$ = \"SUPERB!!!!! \": PLAY \"18n501 8n 451 2n50\" GOTO 360 SC SC + 100 M$ = \"GOODAJUMPAMA\" WS INTERND( 1 ) . 10) : GOSUB 1000 : GOSUB 1300 : FEO: T=0 RETURN MS Message X, Y Man's co-ordinates RN, SC Round number, score XI, YI Initial co-ordinates 378 er of m 51 .. "


"Man Hits Wires 400 , ( 100, 200) : PUT SPRITE GOSUB 1200 : CLS : PRINT ALASTUNT MAN ELECTROCUTED!!\": NM = NM -.: PUT SPRITE 1, (255, 200) FOR TM = 1 TO 3000 : NEXT : SC SC 100 : GOTO 160 410 Man Hits Fence 450 460 : M$=\"HITA THE FENCE!!\": SC = SC 50 : PLAY \"1546120851 on 7 4r 2 on 74\" WS INT( RND( 1 ) +10)GOSUB 1600 : FE NW + 1 : GOSUB 1300 T = : NW IF NW > 2 THEN 700 RETURN 470 480 Man Hits Ground 580 510 M$ = \"OUCH TRY AGAIN!\": SC SC 30 : NW = NM + 1: PLAY \"12n7\" WS = INT( RND( 1 ) 10)GOSUB 1000 : GOSUB 1300 : F = 0;TE IF NW > 2 THEN 700 RETURN \": 520 530 Man Out Side 550 GOSUB 1200 : CLS : PRINT \"STUNTAMAN, DROWNEDAINASWAMP PRINT \"ALONG WAY FROM THE ATARGET!!\" PUT SPRITE 0, (200, 200) : PUT SPRITE 1, (200, 200): FOR TM = 1 TO 3000 : NEXT NM = NM 1: GOTO 100 570 Game Over 608 618 PRINT : GAME OVER\": PRINT CLS : PRINT PRINT A YOUR SCORE WAS\"; SC PRINT PUT SPRITE I, (100, 200) : PUT SPRITE O, ( 160, 200) END 628 Man Out of Action 638 700 \": F-1: CLS : PRINT \"STUNTMAN,OUT OF ACTION 200, 200) : PUT SPRITE 1, (200, PRINT TOO MANY ACCIDENTS PUT SPRITE , 200) : NM: NM 1: FOR TM 1 TO 3000 : NEXT GOTO 100 710 720 Space Bar Pressed 990 910 K2 = VPEEK 6917). PUT SPRITE O : M$ = GERONIMOOO!! IF F = 1 THEN RETURN K1 = VPEEK 6916) , (K2, K1), 10 : FEIT AMA: GOSUB 1JOB YI = K1 : XI = K2: N: 58 : RETURN 928 Update Score Live at 1000 NEXT : PRINT \"Wind Speed\": FOR I = 1 TO 22: PRINT WSTAB( 13); \"Total Score', SC; CHR$( 11 ) FOR J = 6895 TO 6910 : VPOKEJ, 32 : NEXT RETURN 1018 1020 "


"A message from ENGLISH SOFTWARE to all owners of ATARI, COMMODORE 64, BBCB, ACORN ELECTRON and AMSTRAD Computers... of the Nick Hole 5.8.95 Software companies grow on trees ... at least that's the way it seems from the number of new companies springing up every ATARI week! SMASH HITS NATARI ENGLISH SOFTWARE was launched three years ago with a SMASH HITS SATARI SMASH HITS smashing little game for Atari Computers called AIRSTRIKE 1, which quickly became one of the most popular U.K. programmed games for the Atari. Then, as now, Atari Computers were amongst the most advanced on the planet, but they were a TRIFLE expensive! But we knew that prices would come down, and that more $14.95 people would soon appreciate the great range of 32K Cas .95 EACH 48K Disk Atari software produced by ENGLISH SOFTWARE. EACH But Atari owners used to be a funny lot, being heard to utter such gems as: \"It can't be any cop, if it costs less than \" Honestly, that's what they used to sayl Anyway, .95 in the face of this rather strange attitude, we went 48K Disk) ahead and committed the ultimate sin: ATARI GAMES AT .95! .95 We expected some slight resistance to these 48K Cas prices from Atari owners who only equated high .95 quality with high prices, but we were wrong: CBM64 Everybody thought the prices were great, and the games too! We even produced the fantastic ATARI CASSETTE ENHANCER at .95, a superb utility program for Fortune BASIC programmers. So now, for those of you who might have missed out on all our excellent Atari titles, we are releasing something very, very special: ATARI SMASH HITS Volumes 1, 2 and 3 from ENGLISH SOFTWARE. .95 .95 .95 Five great games on one cassette for only .95, auf14 95 CBM64 CBM64 CBM 64 or on disk at f17.95! Each cassette features our top-rated JET-BOOT JACK plus four other popular titles. So now you have no excuse to miss out on the best range of U.K. produced Atari 400/800/600XL/800XL software for 32R machines. If your dealer does not yet have them in stock, ask him to order them from his nearest Atari wholesaler. It will be the best Atari buy YOU will make all year! We have also just released COLOSSUS CHESS 3.0, the best chess program available anywhere for Atari 400/800/600XL/800XL computers with 48K. Very powerful, with lots of excellent features For our good friends with other home computers, our programmers are busy producing original games for you as well. They are all illustrated on this page. HENRY'S HOUSE on the Commodore 64, and JET-BOOT JACK on the Electron are now available at selected branches of W.H. SMITH. Selected English Software titles are available at: HARRODS and Soloicto STORES, CO-OP STORES, THE SILICA SHOP Mail Order and Retail and all good software stores ENGLISH SOFTWARE. selected branches of: LASKY'S, BOOTS, GRANADA COMPUTER ENGLISH SOFTWARE... ENGLISH SOFTWARE, ENGLISH SOFTWARE TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME: 061-835 1358 ENGLISH SOFTWARE.. THE ENGLISH SOFTWARE COMPANY 1 North Parade, Parsonage Gardens, Manchester M60 1BX ENCUSH SOFTWA "


"BEYOND CHALLENGING SOFTWARE WARRIOR ORIGINALITY 10  ORIGINALITY 10  ORIGINALITY 10 ORIGINALITY GRAPHICS_10.GRAPHICS 10. GRAPHICS 10. GRAPHICS 10.GRAPI SOUND 10  SOUND 10 SOUND 10 SOUND 10 SOUND 10. SO LASTING INTEREST 10  LASTING INTEREST 10 LASTING INTEREST ANIMATION 1012  ANIMATION 1012  ANIMATION 1012  ANIM OVERALL 11  OVERALL 11 OVERALL 11  OVERALL 11 OVERALL 11 ( COULDIT EUER HAPPEN? 54 "


"MONVIS VOCEV HOME D Harian wsp .95 SPECTRUM 48K A cry of national outrage! Poor Monty banished to a life amongst murderers, arsonists, the lowest of the low. Fear not this Mole is innocent and plans are in hand to rescue your Superhero Who is the mysterious masked rodent willing to challenge death for his life-long friend? What are the evil forces working in Scudmore Prison? To find out get your copy NOW. AVAILABLE AT ALL GOOD SOFTWARE DEALERS Gremlin Graphics, Alpha House, 10 Carver Street, Sheffield si 4FS. Tel: (0742) 753423 Gapnas Tel: (0742) 753423 "


"HOT FROM SEGA THE ARCADE WINNERS released *NOW* SPY HUNTER B HUNTER SPY NEW MIDWAY. U.S. Gold is stocked by Bw.John Menzies WILDINGS WOOLWORTH, WHSMITH Rumbelows and Spectrum Shops NEW! IE OFFICIAL HOME VERSION OF ILLY MIDWAY'S ARCADE HIT fou control the turbo charged race r/hydro spy boat. fou control a deadly arsenal of ssiles, machine guns, oil slicks and 1oke screens. Sophisticated spy-challenging aphics. LARCA DE GAM Bally/MIDWAY ) NEW! OBUCKROGERS OFFICIAL ARCADE Sally/MIDWAY OFFICIAL SEGA SOCARE NEW OFFICIAL SOV COMMODORE CASSETTE 9.95 12.95 DISK SPECTRUM CASSETTE GOLDEN Exclusive manufacturers for ERA and Rally DWAY. 7.95 OFFICIAL ARCADE SEGA For release schedule and trade detalls contact: Centre Soft, Unit 10 The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268. "


"1288 Man Dead CLS : PLAY *19-1000s 14n3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3n33': FOR I = 15 TO 1 STEP -!: FOR T = 1 TO 108 : NEXT 1 COLOR 15, 1, 1: NEXT RETURN 132 Message 1312 PRINT Cup PRINT CHR$ FOR I = I TO 13 : PRINT CHR$( 28 ) ; 11); PRINT M$ ; CHR$ FOR I = I TO 23: : PRINT 1 NEXT : 11) RETURN NEXT 18008 1001 Sprite Data DATA 153, 255, 60, 24, 60, 36, 102, 195 DATA 0, 0, 0, 112, 120, 60, 30, 127, 255, 255, 127, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 4, 255, 254, 254, 240, 120, 60, 28 14, 30, 62, 254, 255, Character Data 10188 10182 10184 10106 1818 18118 10112 DATA 170, 85, 178, 85, 170, 85, 170, 85 DATA 1, 2, 4, 16, 17, 34, 85, 138 DATA 128, 64, 12, 80, 136, 68, 170, 81 DATA DATA 56, 56, 56, 56, 56, 56, 56, 56 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 255, DATA 16, 56, 56, 56, 56, 56, 56, 56 DATA 24, 60, 126, 126, 126, 60, 24, o DATA 16, 56, 84, 186, 84, 186, 84, 16 36 18114 DATA , 56, 58, 56, s. 255, 3 A 21, 60, 56, 56, 58, 56, 56, 56 DATA 170, & Euthanaty  ChexSum Table = @ = 6423 o  OD 205 212 220 230 24 250 260 270 280 300 MNON NOSSO wa 75 90 95 100 105 110 115 = 3283 = 4011 = 3483 = 9710 = 2571 = 864 = 1002 = 2672 1572 = 3287 = 855 3579 1034 = 1329 = 892 = 1768 11684 15549 = 6294 = 14521 = 13949 = 12354 = 9326 2280 = 975 = 2998 = 691 320 325 327 330 340 350 355 362 378 400 412 450 460 5451 921  207 = 1634 # 1043 = 2529 2797 = 916 1069 1562 = 5718 7813 1564 = 1074 832 143 = 6462 2357 = 3386 143 6920 = 2884 = 4400 4468 = 1001  143 = 4350 = 3386 3306 = 1001 = 143 620 630 = 129 700 + 5121 710 = 4739 720 489 988 = 835 910 6864 920 = 1800 1000 5591 1018 1883 1020 143 1200 = 7838 1250 143 1300 3966 1310 = 1111 10880 1632 1891 7656 10100 1648 10182 1289 10104  1575 10106 1084 10108 = 1424 18110 1428 10112 = 1516 10114 1525 120 Sprite Shapes 125 127 129 130 135 142 150 160 200 480 508 518 12 520 538 Total = 287396 PLANE STUNTMAN "


"RUNS ON A COMMODORE 64 A massive disaster on one of the North Sea's largest oil rigs has endangered the lives of hundreds of men. One of the superstructure's metal legs has already collapsed. and a second is almost at breaking point. As the pilot of an air-sea rescue helicopter, it is up to you to fly into the disaster zone and airlift the men to a waiting cargo ship, which will then take them back to dry land. Gale force winds and huge waves make flying difficult, and landing almost impossible. One wrong push of the joystick can send you, and your passengers, crashing into the sea or the bridge of the ship. Full instructions are included in the listing. BY CHRISTOPHER NEEDHAM 2 LILIT wu. 1 SON 01519619 AAALLLL FOOOXO E12 In | POD 2022 15 | | | | | | 0 | ILUI! ! . !!!!! I' HELICOPTER 1984 C. NEED 2.23 24.-2.78 E 155 156 PRINT'S POWE5828: 19 ORE53232 35 84 60 470 198 2603 -= 3 FRINTI PORE53 52041:2 FORN=7062 READO POKE:2239-NQ NEXTN POKEW+37 @ POKE: +33 FOXE -40 12 25_:00 2DATAB.@.@.8888 2 20. 0 93.3 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 28 DATA: 85, 85 8 128 10 120 160 42 178 179 168 42 170,163 21 16a ORX=11016 250 DATAB.3.2.2.1.8 FRINT E POKE2047,193 297 FORN=8T062 READO POKE 12852-N, NEXTN SETA 28 POKEV +370 POKEY 38 POKE/ -46 30 DATAB 8.0.0.0.2 .2.22 0.22 1798 176 148, 19, 170, 1610 254 1 aaa 292 2 8 2923 :: DATA43 254 168 43 17: 252 096 2:58 27 178.172.43.1921684 42.18.78+ 28 DATA11254 254.18 25 2.278.8.8..8.8.8.8.8.8.8 18. 2 .@ POKE2644,195 POKE2845 32 FORN=T062 FEADO POKE1 O NEXTN SE POKEV +43.6 POKEY +44 2 2 READORE:2224NONEXT 299 POKEV +21,247 19: POE-2 PARE-25 28 A=B=48: Y= 160 a FOREBOKE-59 28 FORX=870182 GOSUB588 . IN . Illustration: Ivan Allen DIRI TONI 119 . .. 58 "


"50 GOTO399 990 FORN=TO1503 NEXTN -800 POKEV +21,0 PRINT POKE53281 3 POK E53238,8: POKE646,0 1818 PRINT 1200 ELL DONE 1015 PRINT YOU HAVE LANDED YOUR H ELICOPTER\" 1820 PRINT SAFELY ON THE BOAT 1838 PRINT\" Q A ND YOU HAVE COMPLETED THE GAME 1035 FORF=TO2000 NEXTF 1840 IFSC=> HCTHENSCEHO 1958 PRINT\" POKE53288.8 POKE53281 B 960 PRINT\" .. . HALL OF FAME 279 PRINT\"........... 838 PRINT E NTES YOUR INITIA 698 PRINT NO MORE THAN 3 LETTE EDISINS THONIT 115 3)  INPUT stated t o IFLEN (A$) THEN 188 PRINT -IGOURER...\" PRINT'O DO YOU WANT ANOTHER GAM L=1 RUN 48 SETB$IFBS= HENS = IFB$ ONT-EN: 148 999 STOP pas PRINTSOTTOGTCUTO G AME OVER N W ill 11 UH YNN In DTI NZZ 91 til OKEY POKE-2 +58 POHEV 988: FORF=TO1568: NETF 2005 POKEV +21,6 PRINT FOR E53281 5. POR 53238,6 : POKE646. 19 FRINTCHR$ 14 CARE 9 10 0 L HAVE RASHED 3 HELICOPTERS PRINT YO. WANT ANOTHER 6 POKEV + 14 AFORE, -15.2 POKEV + S POKEV T.SHE, +10, E PONEY 1. ? 48 THENB=48 IFB) 17 3 THENB=173 A-3 IFAX 240 THENA is AAAHHHZADA DI Ti l l T.1. T111 TT TT AUDIVISION .4.1 . ill. in 11. OS 1997 il XXIXIT mmmm 411 (101CX 4276, POKE54 27POKE542728 54276 17 4295 15 POR OKE54273 10 POLE 542-2 255 POKE54278 O 30 GETAS IFAIN -ENRLN 948 FA T HENS 30 999 STOP 8888 PRINTS POKEF 3289 POKE53281 @ 646 1 2018 PRINT TO VICT-E100STERS) 1984 CH ISTOPHER NEEDHAM 8888 PRINTTANY UNAUTHORISED COPYING HIS PROGRAM 18848 PRINT S FORBIDDEN. I OKEV-38, F PES V-39 AND 183 = 133 52 POKEV +30, IF PEER -30AND 138 = 18 HEN 54 POKEV +30, IF FEE -98 AND 144 = 14. Nee 558 POKEV-30 @ IF SEE (V+39 AND 168 = 160T EN560 B RETURN HEHPRINT A IS THEN9600 OF=370173 POKE-1-OP EV +15 ONE 0950 PRINT R ESS ANY KE TO BEGIN 2068 GETAS: IFAE=\"THEN18868 28980 PRINTS POKE53298, POKE53281 13 POKE 646, 20805 PRINTCHRE (14) CHR$( 12 2 -\" 29918 PRINT 28028 PRINT O U ARE THE PILOT OF A HE 100PTER AND\" 28938 PRINT YOU HAVE TO TRY TO LAND IT ON THE SHIP\" 28848 PRINTOU HAVE S PE_ICOPTERS AND WHEN YOU 28858 PRINT _AND HOU GET MYSTERY BONUS POINTS AND 29858 PRINT YOU TO THE NEXT, HARD ER LEVEL.\" 28878 PRINT EUSEM PORT 2) TOG OUP AND DOWN 2868@ PRINT OU MUST LAND ON THE 20 h STRIP-ONTH 2798 PRINTCRASH INTO THE BRIDGE OF T HE BOAT, THE 28188 PRINT AIR-SHIPS OR THE WA TER.\" 20118 PRINT\" n_/ 8 FORN=T0500: NEXT 60 T0399 308 =C+INT(RND *5*18-PRINT 50 80. H=50 PRINT HS 80 L=L*1 IFL=3 THEN299 2:2 POKEV-21, PRINTS 229 PRINTS E L DONE! 8: PRINT YOU HAVE LANDED YOUR PRINTJ ELICOPTER SAFELY ON THE PRINT BOAT FOPN=T02580 NEXTN POKE/ +46.13 POKEY 2 POKEV +44 5 8 PRINT SOTTO E PRINT 8 PRINT DO PRINT S=125 T=150 E=70D=7 940 FL=> 3 THEN 1000 LIII!! ISTAS ! LIKO... ILOINT 20120 GETA$: IFA3= \"\" THEN28129 20130 RETURN READY. 59 "


"PROFESSOR VIDEO SONG BACKPACKER'S Hi there! It's time for the latest lesson in Prof The Stoly spell shuts down the electric door Video's teach yourself-how-to-get-hi-scores long enough for you to sneak through. course. This issue we kick off the class with The Prof expects every Karnath player to do his tips on the number one game of the moment, duty and let him know a few more tricks! Ghostbusters! The tips come from Neil Palihakkara, from Harrow, who has been busting ghosts on the 64, and Michael King, Meanwhile, the people at Fantasy have cottoned from Hertfordshire who is a spectral Spec. on to the Prof and sent him a brief Backpacker's trum gamester. The tips apply to both Guide to Playing the Game.  USE OF TNT versions. TNT is used to gain access to keys that are GHOSTBUSTERS diagonally below the brickwork when reaching a dead end.  The best/most economical franchise is best Different colours of TNT have different values made up in this way: 1963 Hearse, Marshmallow the colour to use depends upon the thickness of Sensor Image Intensifier, three ghost traps, ghost rock. The colour sequence is the same as on the bait, ghost vacuum. Spectrum keyboard . Don't waste time going out of your way to To use TNT, you must drop it into the cavity and To use TNT, you must drop it into freeze Roamers on your way to the red flashing walk completely off the brickwork. The screen buildings. will then flash blue and you can return to see if the . Don't waste time waiting for the buildings to value of TNT was correct. start flashing red go back to Ghostbusters HQ  USE OF KEYS for more men and traps. Keys are used to open doors and the correct  When the city's PK energy reaches around colour to use depends on the colour of the ground 5000, the Marshmallow Man will appear. When a work in which the door lies. The colours are as Marshmallow Alert sounds, quickly press follows: BLUE 2 keys (1 not used red herring!) Run/Stop this freezes the action and allows you GREEN 5 keys, YELLOW 5 keys, MAGENTA 2 to get ready to hit the \"B\" for bait key. When you keys, (1 is the exit/entry key). ready, hit the Run/Stop key again and quickly In some cases you must have the correct yellow hit \"B\". Neil says this is a guaranteed way of getkey to open yellow doors etc. The keys do look ting the Marshmallow Man and the extra cash! different So if it doesn't work, blame him!  USE OF DISKS . When the city's PK energy reaches 9999, and if Disks are put into the direction indicator so that you've earned enough cash to carry on, you'll get one of the arrows lights up. This arrow points to the command \"Go to Zuul!\" Here you must sneak the general direction of the exit key. past the Marshmallow Man, who is guarding the  USE OF CRYSTALS entrance to the temple. Wait until old MM is as far These are used to transfer Ziggy from one area of to the left as he will go and then slip two Ghost the map to another (sort of secret passage). busters through the door. Remember you must  BACKPACK STATUS have at least three busters in your ghostmobile. It The Backpack Status displays the current you lose one and you don't have a back-up, then conditions of any creatures in the Backpack. The all your efforts to close the portal to the spirit Status changes from normal through to critical world will be in vain. when Ziggy has suffered many hits from aliens in  There are many techniques for actually cat the cavems. ching a ghost. But Prof Video reckons the best way goes like this. Once your first buster is out on Q*BERT the street, make sure he drops the ghost-trap Mitchell Reynolds has come up with a way to get roughly in the centre of the screen, then move extra lives on Superior Software's Q Bert for him over to the far left hand side before getting the Beeb. Once you've played the game once, buster number two out of the car. Don't panic and press the BREAK key and, while this is still rush about this only leads to mistakes, like get depressed, hit the ESCAPE key. After releasing ting your ghostbusters facing in the wrong both, the program can be listed and by changing direction! the value of MEN% on line 2900 you can get more lives. GAMES WORKSH STAFF OF KARNATH PARSEC & ALPINER Staff of Karnath is the first game for the 64 from the mysterious Ultimate see our review next issue. Jim Donnelly from Belfast has passed on some early hints and tips about spells. The Ibrahim spell stops large trolls for a second and destroys smaller ones. The Throbin spell makes things levitate. To reach the part of the pentacle in the Timeless Room, hit the carpet with the Throbin spell then quickly walk onto it. One flying carpet! This spell can also be used on the serpent. Finally some tips on TI games from Adam Sotheran from Cheshire, who is a Parsec addict. To kill Dramites, Adam says you must go to the bottom of the screen and go to Lift 2. Wait for it to come down, enter and then go up the screen firing all the time. On Alpiner, if you want to stop, but don't want to lose any time, try stopping and pressing the fire button. This will fool your TI into thinking you are moving but will not deduct any time. "


"SADCPCNcethe thrilor ForMULCONC Wotor Racing ID DUI. MSHION! A ATARI EAT AT DELLORCO This genuine reproduction of one of the worlds most popular arcade classics gives you the chance to experience the thrill of Formula One motor racing! Enter the practice sessions. Race against the clock to quality. Dice with other drivers for the lead. Only your skill and endurance see you to the chequered flag first! CASSETTE -95 DISK.95 US GOLD Premier Arcades\" from pa Software "


"MATCH Dont missal red-hot wit OCEA WINTERC MATCH DAY SPECTRUM48k 7-95 — X— S BACK KONG STRIKES BACK SPECTRUM 48K COMMODORE 64 7-90 Ocean House 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone 061 8326633 Ocean Software "


"UNBKK at you s all the otaction vith EAN'S R GAMES REVENGETI QUASIMODOS REVEN \"DALEY THOMPSO DECATHLON HUNCHBACKII SPECTRUM 48k COMMODORE 64 7-90 DALEY THOMPSON'S DECATHLON SPECTRUM 48k COMMODORE 64 eon. Ocean Software is available from selected branches of: WOOLWORTH, WHSMITH,Bab John Menzies , LASKYS, Rumbelows, COMET, Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries welcome. "


"BL N(LS) *RE AS 7D 8 C*** _x-N1, .** NEXT NI TREAD R$t088 OR\" 10 POKE 9,255 +POKE 2,55:POKE 3,195 : TRAP 202501POKE 537 4.84 +POKE 32,1:POKE 33, 3 POKE 710,160 :POKE 703, 10:GOTO 20 15 J-N+FOR X-N1 TO LEN XS) STEP STIF A3S-XSCX,X+ST-NI) THEN J=(X-NI) /ST+N1 RETU $(394) RN 18 NEXT XTRETURN 20 DIM R$(152), LS(1405), E5(132),0$(334), 085(807) GTS(20), (2).VBS(23), NO$(325 ). EXS(30).Ovs(450),05(35), X$(320) 25 DIMAS40), A15(4),A25(4), A3$(4), LC(47.1), LB(74,1).00(7),1) 10$(1)-\" \" $ + \" $(2) -$E$ 30 READ PN.M.1,RT, IN, HE,PT,DR.CH.LT,TI.N.N...3..4.5,3,9Y.ST.CRTHFI.EM,BT, 11 35 DATA 0,39,75,455,0,0,0,0,0,0,-,-,1,3,4,53,93,9.9,.,..N4) R$ 40 FOR X-NI TO 431LCOX-NL.N)-LEN(LS)+NL 1READ RSILSLENCI.S)+N1 )=RSLCCX-NLNL)-LE N(LS) READ R$:$ CX N4-N3, -7.X*9) R$ : NEXT X 50 READ R$D$(x 60 FOR X-44 TO 49LCCX-NIN)=LC(42,N) LC(X-NINI ) LC(42.N1 ):READ R$:ES(X*N4-N3.X *N4) R$: READ R$D$(X*3-7,X8) R$:NEXT X 70 FOR X-N1 TO 751LB (X-NL.NO-LENCOR$)+NI+READ R$100$CLENCOBS) *N1) -R$+L8 (X-N.NL) LENCOB$) READ Z.Z110CCX-NI,N)Z 75 OCCX-N1, N1 )-1 NEXT X1R$(NL)\" \"R$(114)\" \"R$(2) R$t0T9-\"NESVDABCFGHIJKLMOP INVE 90 G$\"NORTEASTSOUTWESTDOWNPAINSHOPALLESHED TREECAVEHOLEPASSSTATROPEDOOROPENBOATT UNNDUNGLAKEROADWELL\" S W 30 CLIMENTECROSWALKRUN LOOK EXAMTAKEGET DROPI D 90 VBS-\"N E HELPSCORREADOPENCLOSUNLOLOCKGIVEDIG CLEA\" 100 VB$(113)-\"WASHBLOWTIE UNTIPULLMOVEFILLEMPTBUY REPLSHAKKILLATTAREMOWI SHPRAYST ANEAT LIGHTHROSLEEKNEEINSEQUITSAVELOAD\" 105 VB$(217) -\"POURUNSCINV 110 NOS-\"PAINSHOPALLESHEDTREELAKECAVEHOLEPASSSTAIWELLDOORROADBOATTUNNDUNGROPEEND ALTASPHESHELBINSSIGNLEVESCAR\" ROCKGRAFMAN DEMOTROLKEEPSTATZOMBLAMPSCRESHOVNE 120 NO$(109)-\"WALLTAPEBUTTCIRC STSANDSWORFLINBAR HANDMONEBOOKSCROCARD\" 130 NOS(213)\"KEY MIRRTHROPED ECHESSACKSTONCOINCRYSBAG SCEPRINGMEDACROWIDOLHORNCH ALNECRAMULBRACDAGGDIAMSELFPOCK\" in a alley, 135 NO$(309) -\"LEFTRIGHWATE\" 140 DATA in a small room, Ew,2*1*7*, in a store room,8,0, in a hallway, NW,30*, on a street, SB,2.4. 150 DATA Inside a do-it yourself shop,W,3*.on a empty street,50,3*3 160 DATA standing before the entrance to a very unpleasant looking Dungeon, ERP, *158, inside a wooden shed, 5.7 170 DATA standing on the shore of a misty lake. I can just make out the outline of a cliff on it's far shore, W30,7101312 190 DATA in an open field,NE,9.11.In a corn field, W.10, on a sandy beach at the f oot of a uncl imbable cliff, HP, 149. 190 DATA standing on a branch. From here I can see the cliff more clearly and I can see a cave at its base, .9 200 DATA in a dry cave, W, 12, in a vast chamber,NESW,7*181723, in the Juard room, W. 15, at a function with four passages, NESW 210 DATA 15191837, in a short passage blocked to the south by fallon rocks. Which are warm to the touch, N, 17 220 DATA In a empty room, Ew, 2017, in a twisting passage which seems very warm at which are glowing red hot!, EI,2022, in It's south end,NS, 1921 230 DATA in a small cave. The walls of from the rock,NE,2415, in a tunnel,sw. a small chamber,N,21 240 DATA in a tunnel which has been cut 250 DATA at a small function. To the north is a hall which seeme very quiet,NER, 260 DATA in a alcove over looking the hall,0.25, in a large hall, ES,292335, in a o ourtyard, W, 2729 Welcome adventurer to PORTRAIT DUNGEON. Your mission is to locate and safely store the treasures of the dungeon. To help you achieve this, I shall act as your puppet and tell you of all that I see and hear around me. You can tell me what to do by using simple two-word commands like GO NORTH or READ BOOK. If you should at any time type a command which I do not understand, try rephrasing it using a different verb or noun. Before entering this program type POKE 82,0:POKE 38,39 and then press RETURN. Also, to enter some of the longer logic lines it will be necessary to use the abbreviation for commands shown in the Basic Reference Manual. It may, in some cases, be necessary to close some of the gaps between command statements to get the program line to fit. Lines 580, 2430, 20000,200020, 20050, 20070, 20090, 20100, 20110, 20130, 20140, 20150, 20160, 20180, 20190., 20230 and 20265 all start with clear screen commands. The text in lines 470.610 and 20,200 should be typed in inverse video. When entering line 600, type the following between the quotation marks, press the ESC key, then hold down the CTRL key and press key. Then hold down the CTRL key and press the R key 40 times. To save both programs on tape, use SAVE:C, saving the title programs first, then to load and run this Adventure from tape, type RUN\"C:. Illustration: Dorian Cross 2325 272426 PORTRALEON cew Sunt CE "


".W.35 honova 270 DATA at the bottom of a deep well. en passage, s. 2731 290 DATA at a stone functioNESW.3-53032, in a small room. 8.31, in a stone passa ge,NS, 3431, in the royal treasure chamber 290 DATA S, 33, in a room which has been cut from the rock, EW.3831, in a round room Standing knew deep in mud... in a hidd 300 DATA in a large hall full of pillars,NESW.45174743, in the temple of the God H20, NS, 4233, at the Altar, N.39 310 DATA in a large chamber. The roof of forth along it's length, N. 4442 320 DATA in a secret chamber.W.40, lost among the pillars,NESW.45421333. NESW.4343 4346, NESW,43 0 447. NESW, 7454742 330 DATA NESW, 43454 which has long slot's runt back 340 DATA Painting.o.4. Shop 3.2. Alley.5.1.Shed, 7.1.0ak tree,,,Lake, .1.Cave, 12, 1. hole, 21.1. Opening. 3.1. Stairs, 25,1 . NESW, 45473745 350 DATA Wishing well,23,1,Closed door,39,1 Road, 3.2.Boat with skeleton at oars, 13.3.Tunel, 29.1. Dark Dungeon, 7.1, Rope, 15.0 380 DATA End of rope, 92.0.Rope tied to lever, 9.,.Tied rope descendie Into the well, 19.1. Altar, 39.1. Crystal sphere.0.0 370 DATA Shelf.4.1.Dust bins,6,7,Sign.7.1. Lever.35.1,Scarecrow. 11.0.Wallpainting ,24,1, Tapestry, 40.1.Butterflys of Death 330 DATA 97,6.Blue circle,1,1, Red circle,33,1,Rocks, 19,1 Graffiti,32.1, Wise man, 14.2. Fire Demon.21.2.Troll, 3.2 390 DATA Shop keopor.4.2.Stone statue of God's,49,3,Zombie (holding a bow),23,2. Lamp... Screwdriver, 3.0, Shovel.3.0 400 DATA Nest.13.0.Dragon meat sandwich 3,0 Water sword, 23.0.51int 9 ste 1.3.0.4 inc stel bar, 19.0, Door handle, 93.0 420 DAT Money,.. Magic book..0.Scro11,99.0,Card, ..Key 2.0. Mirro,2,0,1 hrone, 27.3. 420 DATA Empty sack, 2.0.Dirty stone, 31,5,Gold coins.3.0.3lowing crystal destal, 2,3,Locked chest.34,3 10. Bae of gold coins.9.0. Scepter.. 30,0 430 DATA Strange ring.2.0.13old medallion 94.0,*Silver crown,... *Platinum idol.41,0, Silver horn, 43,0 4.0 DATA Empty gold chalice,?,0,Broken Necklace 2.0 *Skull amulet.?.0.9 iamond bracelet.29.0 450 DATA \"Sapphire incrusted dageer..92.0. Huge o 45. IF PN-23 AND OC(39,N-PN THE 457 IF PN-25 AND OC(33.N)>25 THEN RS5,152) \"I've got a bad feline about this R$( 1 1 d ) \"The zombie Cowers back!\" 22 480 IF PN-25 AND OC(39.N)-PN AND OC(54.N)<5 THEY 2015 451 IF PN-27 AND OC(33,N)-25 THEN 2370 452 IF PNP12 THEN OC(13.N)PN:BLES(40 483 IF OC(17.N) 5 AND PNC 35 THEN OC(17.N)-35:RS,M2) \"Ths rone lips from ands.\":IN-IN-1 455 IF BYNI AND OC(42,N)-15 AND P 470 IF OC(51,N) < >NS AND OC(81.N) <>PN AND PN 14 THEN ? ) SEE!\":LTELT NI:0010 305 490 LTEN: EX$\"\":FOR XENI TO NA:P3-PN 4 THE 500 IF E$(P3, PG) 23 510 IF ES (P3, P3)-\"S\" THEN SXSLEN(EX$)+N1 ) \"South,\" 520 IF E$( P \" THEN EXSLEN(EX$)+NI) \"East,\" 4+X:IF ES(P3.93) \"\" THEN 530 IF E$(P3,P3)-\"\" PO)-\"W\" THEN EXS(LEN(EX$)+NI) \"West,\" IT'S TO DARK TO 540 NEXT XIF LEN(EX$)< 530 2-33:0V$-\"I can se: \":FOR XEN TO 74:IF OC(X.N)PN THE 08-08$(13 (X.N) LBCX, THEN \"X$(LEN(EX$)+NI)=\"Down. X$=\"North.\" N100:0 553 GOTO 390 THEN EX$(LEN(EX$)) LE (0$) + 1) =\" \";3D TO BE 580 IF LENCOVS)+LEN(OS)<Z THEN OVS (LENCOVS)+NI ) -05:2070 530 .\" 570 FOR XILENCOV$)+N2 TO 2:0V$(x1,x)\" \":NEXT X1 Z-2 +38:GOTO 530 530 NEXT X!? \" \"? \"I'm \":1$(LC(PN,N), LCCPN.NI));\".\":? :IF LENCOVS) >11 THEN ? OV 590 IF EX$<>\" THEN ? 12 \"Some exits are: \":EX$ X -> RUNS ON AN ATARI 800 MULDUZ22 BY PAUL COPPINS 44... 7 Ke 2 Casa . . . *) "


"3 Y: 600 POKE 82.N:POKE 93,39:? :? :POKE 92.NI : POKE 33,33:? 505 IF A$< THEN ? \"You said: \";A$ 610 ? :? R$TAS\"\"A1 $A$:A2A$:R$(NI)\" \"R$(152)\" \"R$(2) R$!? \"WHAT SHOULD I DO\":POKE 752.N:INPUT A$ 620 POKE 53774.84 +POKE 752,N IF LEN(AS)<N! THEN 2009 630 IF A$(N1 N1 )=\"\" THEN 3000 540 FOR XENI TO LEN(AS) IF A$(x,x)=\"\" THEN A1$-A$(NIX-N1):30T0 330 650 NEXT X:A1 -A$ 880 IF X-N1 <>LEN(A$) THEN A2$A$(X+NI, LEN(A$))IF A2 $(N.NI)\" \" THEN 393) 670 IF LEN(A1$) <N4 THEN A1$(LENA1$)+N1 ) -\" \"GOTO 670 690 IF LEN(A2$) <NG THEN A2$(LEN(A2$)+NI ) -\" \":GOTO 630 690 STN4:X$V$:A35=A13:30SUB 15:K1-:IF K N THEN 2010 700 IF Kl< THEN K2=1-N1:30TO 750 705 K1-K1-5:IF Kl< THEN X$-$:A3 S-A2 $:GOSUB 151K2-J-NI:30TO 720 710 X$-NOSTA3$A2$:30SUB 15:2=JN IF K2--NI THEN 3020 720 ON KI GOTO 750,750,750,750,750,750,950,950,1090.1080,1159, 1199,1139,125,129 0,1320,1390,1430,1470.1510, 1540,1580 730 ON K1-22 GOTO 1530,1830,1576,1710,1750,1800,1900,1350,1330,1345,1975,2039,20 60,2060,2110,2140.2160,2200,2220,2250,2290 740 ON KI-43 GOTO 2330,2340,2350,2390 2440,2470,1920,2110,1130 750 IF K2=-N1 THEN 9030 755 IF SI-NI THEN R$(M.MI)-\"What on my knees!\":GOTO RT 760 IF PN-29 AND K2-22 THEN 20110 770 IF PN-3 AND K2-21 THEN 20020 790 IF (PN=9 OR PN=12) AND K2=20 THEN 20100 790 IF PN=21 AND K2=11 AND OC (35.N)=PN THEN 20140 795 IF K2-11 AND PN< >21 OR K2>20 THEN 9030 800 IF PN-33 AND K2N AND OC(35,N)-PN THEN 3110 910 IF LT >=2 THEN 20090 930 ST-N1 1X5=E$(PN*N4+N1.PNN4+14) A35-GT$(K 2+NI, K 2 4N1 ) : GOSUB 15:53PN*3+NI+(J-1 )*2:IF JEN THEN 9030 935 IF K2-17 THEN R$(M.MI)\" ! He rows me across I climbed out.\":IF PN-12 THE N R$(77.114-\"He then rows away.\" 837 IF K2=14 THEN R$(77)-\"I climb to the end of the rope & drop the remaining te n feet to the floor.\" 840 PN-VAL(D$(S3,53 +N1 )):GOTO 9120 850 IF K2-19 THEN 9120 851 IF PN-N3 AND K2 76 AND K2<79 THEN CR-CR+K2 R$(M.MI) -\"The road looks clear.\": GOTO 8000 853 CRN:IF K2=75 AND OC(50.N)-N THEN R$CM.M1)-\"There's something in my pocket. \":GOTO RT 955 IF K2=75 AND OC(50,N) EN3 THEN OC(50,N)=PN10C(49,N) -PN:GOTO 3045 356 IP K2 >74 THEN 1070 957 IF OC (K2.N)<>PN AND OC (K2.N) < >N5 THEN 9060 360 IF K2=32 AND OC (73.N) -N9 THEN OC(73.N) =PN+GOTO 9040 970 IF K2-43 AND OC (65,N)-N3 THEN OC(65.N)-PN:GOTO 9049 990 IF K256 AND OC (64.N)=N3 THEN OC(64,N)=PN:GOTO 9040 890 IF K2-39 AND OC(74.N)=N3 THEN OC(74.N)-PN:R$(M.MI)=\"There's something in it s hands.\":GOTO RT 900 IF K2=20 AND OC(54,N) N9 THEN OC(54.N)=PNOC (63.N) =PN1R$(77.114)=\"There's so mething else\":GOTO 3040 905 IF K2-20 THEN R$(M.MI)-\"There a impression for a sword.\":30TO RT 210 IF K2-23 AND OC(59,N)=N9 THEN OC(59.N)-PN:OC (70.N)=PN:GOTO 3540 920 IF K2-57 AND CH-N1 AND OC(63,N)-N9 THEN OC(83.N) =PN:GOTO 2540 930 IF K222 AND OC(41,N)=N9 THEN OC(41.N)-PN:GOTO 9040 940 IF K2N THEN R$(MM)-\"It depicts the entrance to a Dungeon.\":30TORT 950 IF K2=27 THEN R$(X.M1)-\"It shows a man on his death bed.\":R$(77,114) -\"surrou nded by butterflies of Death!\":3OTO RT 360 IF K2=29 THEN R$(M.M1)-\"It shows a man on this death bed.\":20TORT 285 IF K2-11 AND OC(49.N) < >NS AND OC(47.N)<80 THEN R$(M. 1)-\"Ther's a hole.\":3 OTO RT 957 IF K2-11 AND OC (47.N)-83 AND OC(49.N) < >N3 THEN R$(M.K1) -\"The stel bar sit's in the hole.\":3OTO RT 90 IF K2=11 THEN R$(MMI)=\"It's green.\":30TO RT 1000 IF K2-25 THEN R$C.M1)-\"It has a steel ring fixed to the top.\":3OTO RT 1010 IF K2-34 THEN R$(M.N1) -\"He looks hungry!\":30TORT 1020 IF K2=10 THEN R$(M1)-\"Wooden pillars support the roof.\":3OTO RT 1030 IF K2-64 THEN R$(M.MI)-\"It has the power to kep the\":R$(77.114)=\"Undead at bay.\":GOTO RT 1040 IF K247 THEN R$(M, MI)-\"There's is some green paint on it.\":30TO RT 1045 IF K2-30 THEN R$(MI)-\"He look's real mean.\":30TORT 105) IF K2-21 THEN R$CM, 1)-\"There's a strange mist inside.\":30T RT 10 IS KN5 THEN 3150 103 I Ke-4 THEN R$(M. l)-\"The wick looks a bit odd!\":GOTO RT 1065 IF K2-54 THEN R$(M.M1)-\"Ye Jod's, something horrible\":R$(77.114) \"is lookin g back.\":GOTO RT 1070 R$(M.-1)-\"I sea nothing special.\":30TO RT 1090 IF K2-73 THEN 1950 1093 IF K2 >74 THEN 305 1095 IF OC(K2,N)<>PN THEN 9050 1030 ON OC(K2.N1) SOTO 905.29.3,910,9143,2014,2015 1130 IF IN-5 THEN R$(M)=\"Sorry I can't ca ry any more.\":30 TO RT 1135 IF K2-60 THEN R$( M 1) -\"They slip through my fingers.\":30T RI 1140 OC(K2, 15:ININ+1:30 TO 3120 1150 IF K2-79 THEN 1990 1155 IF OC (K2.N)< >NS THEN 3070 1150 IF K2-54 THEN 2013 1170 IF K2-21 THEN 3110 1190 OC(K2.N)=PN:I !:-1:30T0 3120 1139 2-39:R$ \"I am carrying: \":FOR X-15 TO 74:IF OCCX.N THE 0-09012(X.N). LB (X,NI) 10$ (LEN(0$)+N1) -\".\":30 TO 1210 1 200 30T 1230 1210 IF LEN(R$)+LENCOS)<Z THEN R$(LEN (R$) *N1)-0$:30T 1235 120 FOR XILEN(R$) +N1 TO Z:R$(x1,x1) =\" \" NEXT X1 :ZeZ+39:3OTO 1210 1230 NEXT XIF LEN(R$) -15 THEN R$(LEN(R$) 4N1 -\"Nothing at 3111\":R$(1)\" \": 301 450 1240 R$(152)\" \":GOTO 480 1250 IF K2< >19 THEN 9050 tuma.\" y V.. . 66 lich "


"1255 IF HEN Then he vanishes.\" Goro Keith appera: poir Lampbell Cast THEN RAND OC( KN) Iz uka EM 1253 IF PN-25 AND OC(33.N)=25 THEN R$=\"Keith appearst points at the stairs s beware the Zom.. he vanishes.\":GOTO RT 1255 IF HEN THEN shirt he drops something N1:00(52.N)PN:R$-\"A man 1270 R$-\"A man appears leaves.\":GOTO RT poears wearing a HELP INSsay to meat HELPLINE, he then vanishes.\" says: Hello I'm Keith,for further adventure help write 1280 30TORT 1290 R$\"\" SC-N:FOR X=61 TO 74:IF OCCX,N) 13.0 NEXT X:R$( ) -STR$(X): R$(LEN(R$) *N1) \"\" M)=\"Out of the possible 1J0 I have::XINT(SC 120/16):R$(70.72 1305 R$(77)\" \"IF SC-14 AND PXEN2 THEN 20190 THM SR S NL 1310 GOTO RT 1320 IF OC(K2.N)<>PN AND OC(K2.N) < >NS THEN 3060 2330 IF K2 -24 THEN R$=\"Watch your favourite computer magazinefor The Mystery of Campbell Castle 1340 IF K233 THEN R$(N.MI) \"Naver fear BUS HUNTER WOZ here!\" coming soon!\" 1350 IF K2-50 THEN R$(NI.39) \"I read a spell called portrait portal!\":IF PNEN AN DPTEN THEN 9010 1360 IF K251 THEN R$(M.MI)-\"It's a prayer to the God H20\" 1370 IF K2-52 THEN R$-\"It's an Adventure Helpline card. It back, shall take more away.\" 1380 GOTO RT 1390 IF OCCK2. N 1400 IF K2-11 AND DREN AND OC(47.N)-63 AND OC(49.N)=N3 THEN 30SUB 1425DR-NI :$ PN THEN 9080 reads: He who gives 122,122)=\"M\":GOTO RT 1405 IF K2-11 AND OC(49.N)< >N 1410 IF K2-11 AND OC(47.N)<>56 AND OC(49,N) N3 THEN R$1.M1) \"The handle turns b ut the door\":R$(77,114)-\"remains shut.\":30TO RT THEN R$(M.ML)-\"The handle is missing.\":30T5 RT 1425 IF K2=57 AND CHEN THEN R$(M.M1)-\"It's locked.\":3OTO RT 1420 GOTO 9050 1425 LB (11.N)-LB(11,N) +2:00$(LB (11.N), LB (11.N1 ) )=\"Open door\": RETURN 1430 IF OC (K2.N)< PN THEN 9060 1440 IF K2-11 AND DR-N1 THEN LB (11,N)-LB (11.N)-2:00$(LB(11,N), LA (11,NI))\"Closed door\":DRENIE$(122,122)\" \":GOTO 9120 1450 IF K2557 THEN 1520 1460 GOTO 9050 1470 IF OC(K2.N) < >PN THEN 9060 1490 IF K2-57 AND OC(53.N)-N5 AND CHEN THEN LB(57,N)=LB (57.N) +2:00$(LB (57.N).LBC 57.N1))\"Open chest\":CH-NL:GOTO RT 1430 IF K2-57 AND OC(53.N)< >N5 THEN R$(M.MI)=\"What with no key!\":3OTO RT 1495 IF K2-11 THEN R$(M.M1) = \"There's no keyhole.\":GOTO RT 1500 GOTO 9050 1510 IF OC(K2,N)<PN THEN 9050 1520 IF K2-57 AND CH=N1 THEN LB (57,N)-LB (57,N) -2:08$(1B (57,N), LB (57.N2) =\"Locked chest\":CH-N:GOTO 9150 1530 GOTO 9050 1540 IF OC(K2.N) < >NS THEN 9070 1550 IF K2-44 AND OC (34,N)-PN THEN OC(44.N) -N9:0C(51.N) -N5 : R$(M.M1)-\"He eat's it & hands me a scroll.\":GOTO RT 1555 IF K2=40 OR K2-46 THEN OC(K2.N)-77:ININ-NI: R$(M.M1)-\"Is that all.\":30T0 91 1589 IF OC(34,N)=PN OR OC(33.N)-PN AND K2<>44 THEN R$(M.M1)-\"No thank you!\":GOTO 1570 GOTO 3050 1590 IF K2<>19 THEN 9050 1530 IF PN-12 AND OC(53,N)=N3 THEN OC(53,N)=PN:GOTO 9040 1500 IF PN-10 AND OC(59.N)-N3 THEN OC(59,N)-PN:GOTO 9040 1610 IF PN-29 AND OC (60,N)=N 1815 IF PN-12 OR PN-10 OR PN-29 THEN R$(M.M1)-\"OK I find nothing else!\":30 TO RT 1820 R$(M.MI) \"The grounds to hard to dig.\":GOTO RT THEN OC(60. N 1630 IF OC (K2.N) < >NS THEN 9070 PN:GOTO 9040 1840 IF K2-59 AND OC(59.N)-NS AND PN-THEN OC(59,N)-7710C(61,N) -N5 :R$(M.MI) \"Th e stone starts to glow.\":GOTO RT 1850 IF K2-59 AND OC(59.N)-N5 THEN R$(M, MI)-\"There's no water here!\":3OTO RT 1680 GOTO 9050 1670 IF OC(K2,N)< >NS THEN 9070 1890 IF 62-69 AND PN-9 AND BLEN THEN OC(13.N)PN:E$(40,40) \"p\":R$(M. 1)-\"The hor n sounds 1830 IF K2-59 THEN R$(M. 1)-\"It makes a deep sound.\":30 TO RT a boat appears.\":BL-N :GOTO RT 1700 GOTO 9050 1710 IF OC(K2.N) 1720 IE K2-16 AND PN=29 AND TIN THEN OC(15.N)-N3:0C(19.N)PN:E$(114,111)-\"L\":IN N5 THEN 3075 IN-NITI NI3OTO 9120 1730 IF K2-16 AND PN-35 AND TIEN THEN OC(18.N)-N9:0C(18.N)PN:OC(17.N)-PNIN-INNT :TI 1740 18 K2513 THAN 333 : TO 2120 1750 GOTO 9050 1750 IF K2-16 AND PN=23 AND TIENI THEN OC(15,N)-PN:OC(13.)IN:GOTO 9120 1770 IF K2-16 AND PN-35 AND TIEN1 THEN OC(13.N)=PN10C(13.N)=N3:30SUS 173580C(17, N-N:TIEN:GOTO 3120 1730 IF K2-16 THEN 3030 :E$(114,114) -\" \":T 1730 GOTO 3050 1795 IF OC(17,N) -N5 THEN INSIN-NI 1798 RETURN 1900 IF OC(K2.N)<>PN AND OC(K2,N)<>5 AND OC(17.N) < >NS THEN 3070 1810 IF K2 -NS AND THEN THEN OC(14.)=PN:ESO 1915 IF K2-NS A 1320 TIN: THITE 333 1930 IF K K=15 AND TIENI AND 1)\"0\":THENI:OTO 9345 -N1:T ENZ 25 OR (K2513 AND TION) THEN FOR X-31 TO 74:19 OC(X.N) 35 THEN OCCX,N 33 THEN P 1940 NEXT 1 :0C(17,N) 35: ININ-11T1N1 1345 GOTO 9090 IF TEN THEN TAN:R$(M. 1) =\"Something hap en d.\":30TRT 1950 IF K2-79 THEN K2=53:IF OC(K2,N) < >N 1955 IF OC(K2,N)< >NS THEN 9070 1980 IF K2-69 AND FIEN AND PNE OR PN=12 THEN FIN 13 (33.N)=L(37,N)+N1:03$(L ( THE.. 303 63,N), LB(69.NL))\"sull gold chalice\":3OTO 2120 1855 IF K2-59 AND OC (80.N)-PN THEN OC(59,N) 7/10C(33.N)-7 0C(2,N)=5:30T3 2120 20 RT 1700 GOTO 3050 THEN R$(M. 1)-N:COTO RT\" EN: E$(40,40) \"peper 67 "


"1370 IF K253 OR K2=53 OR K2262 THEN 9233 1330 COTO 305 1990 IP K273 THEN K2-6311F IN THE 1932 1895 IF OC(K2.)<>NS THEN ) 70 1990 IF K2=32 AND PN-3) AND IN THEX FIENExN1:30SUB 303 R$(M. 1).\"The water fills the impression.\":0. TORT 1910 IF K2-89 AND FIND THEN FIEN:30SUS 303: R$(M. 1).\"The water sonks into the ground.\":30 TO RT 1920 IF K2-63 THEN 3090 1930 TO 9050 1340 IF OCCK2.N) <W AND OC(K2.N)< >PN THE.. 303 1945 IF K2-41 AND BYN AND OC(43.) NS THEN OC(43.N) 7:INT-NI:BY-NI:R$( M )= \"I pay for the screwdriver.\":3OTO RT 1950 IF OC(49.N)< >NS AND BYEN THEN R$(X.M1)-\"I have no money.\":33TO RT 1930 GOTO 9050 1970 IF OC(K2 N) < >N5 THEN 3070 1990 IF K2-49 AND PN-30 THEN OC(K2.N) N IN-IN-1130TO 9120 1990 IF K2-49 AND PN-30 AND OC (41,N)<NS THEN 9100 2000 IF K2-74 AND PN40 AND SINI AND BTEN THEN OC(74.N)-PN:0C(2,N)-PN:0C(3.N)= PN:BT=N1: INFIN-NI:E$(182,182)=\"0\":30TO 9040 2010 IF K2-74 AND PN-40 AND SIEN AND OC(9.N)<>PN THEN 2013 2020 GOTO 9080 2033 IF K2-19 THEN R$(M.MI) -\"Shake, Rattle Roll.\"130TORT 2035 IF OC (K2,N) (N5 THEN 9070 2040 IF K2-28 AND OC(47.N)-NO THEN OC(47.N)=PN: R$(M.M1)-\"Something fell out!\":50 TORT 2050 GOTO 9030 2060 IF OC(K2,N) < >PN THEN 3063 2070 IF K2=35 AND OC(45,N)-N5 THEN OC(K2,N)-ND:0C(45,N)=771IN-IN-N1:30T0 3530 2075 IF K2=35 THEN 9090 2080 IF K2=39 THEN R$(MMI)-\"I can't it's already dead!\":GOTO RT 2090 IF OC(K2,NI)-2 THEN R$(M.MI) -\"That's not very nice.\":30TO RT 2100 GOTO 9050 2110 IF K2=43 AND PN=30 AND OC(49.N)=NS AND OC(41.N) -N5 THEN OC(43.N)-PN:30T0 31 20 2120 IF K2-49 AND PN-30 AND OC(49.N N3 AND OC(41,N) < >N5 THEN 2100 2125 IF K2-47 AND KI-37 AND OC (47.N) -66 AND OC(43N)<>N9 AND PN-30 THEN OC(47.N) -PN:00 TO 9120 2127 IF K2=49 OR (K2=47 AND KI-37) THEN 9090 2130 GOTO 9050 2140 IF K2<>18 OR PN< >29 THEN R$(M.MI) -\"I wish, I was a wish well.\":R$(77,114)\" then wish's I could give.\":GOTO RT 2145 PN-281R$CM.ML) -\"How on earth did I get hers.\":30TORT 2150 GOTO 9090 2160 IF PN< >39 THEN 9090 2165 IF PN-33 AND EM-NI AND SI-NI AND OC(45,N) -N9 AND OC(51.N) -N5 THEN EM-NEOC(4 5.N)-PN:GOTO 8090 2170 IF PN-39 AND SI-N THEN R$(M.M1)-\"I don't think this is going to work\":R$(77 .114)-\"standing up.\":GOTO RT 2130 IF EMN OR OC(51,N) < >N5 THEN IF PN-33 THEN R$CM.MI)-\"There seems to be some thing missing.\":GOTO RT 2190 GOTO 20230 2200 IF K2<>18 THEN 9050 2205 IF SINNI THEN SIEN:00T0 9120 2210 GOTO 9090 2220 IF OC (K2.N) < >NS THEN 9070 2230 IF K2-44 THEN OC(K2,N)-77:IN=IN-NI R$(M.MI) -\"That was delicious.\":30TO RT 2240 GOTO 9050 2250 IF OC(K2,N)< >NS THEN 9070 2260 IF K2=40 AND OC(46.N) N5 THEN 20180 2270 IF K2=40 THEN R$(M.MI)-\"I have nothing to light it with.\":30TORT 2290 GOTO 9050 2290 IF K2 >74 THEN 9050 2295 IF OC(K2,N) < >NS THEN 9070 2300 IF K2-21 AND PN-23 THEN OC(K2,N)=7710C(39.N)=770C(71.N) -PN + IN-IN-NI 130TO 3 100 2310 IF K2-21 THEN 3110 2320 R$(M.M1)-\"If you say so.\":0C(K2.N)-PN: IN-IN-1 GOTO RT 2330 R$(M.M1)-\"Sorry I don't foel sleepy\":GOTO RT 2340 IF K2>13 THEN 3050 2345 IF SIEN THEN SI-N1:00TO 9120 2350 3OTO 3095 2360 IF OC(K2,N) < >NS THEN 3070 2370 IF K2-47 AND PN-30 AND OC(48,N) < >N9 THEN OC(47.N)=631IN-IN-N1:30T0 9120 2330 3310 3050 2330? \"Are you sure you want to QUIT (Y/N)?\" :OPEN W , 14.,\"xt\"+3ET #N1,K+CLOSE #NI:IEK-79 THEN GOTO RT 2395 IF KC >99 THEN 2390 2400 RT-2410:30 TO 1230 2410 POKE 752 N2:? R$:? :? \"Would you like another game (Y/N)?\" :OPEN #NI.N.N. \"K ::GET #N1,K:CLOSE #NI:IF K<>89 THEN 2410 2430 ?\" \":POSITION 14.10:? \"PLEASE WAIT\":RUN 2440 ? :? \"Do you what to save game?\" :OPEN #N1, N4.N. \"K:\":GET #N1,K:IF KC 33 THEN CLOSE #NI:3OTO RT 2413 ? ? \"Insert game save tape & press any key when ready.\":3ET #NI,KICLOSE #N 2445 POKE 764,12:OPEN #N1,9.N,\"C:\":FOR XEN1 TO LENCOB$):2=ASC (OB$(x,x)) :PUT #NI, Z:NEXT XFOR X=1 TO LEN(E$):Z-ASC($(x,x)) 2450 PUT #NI Z NEXT X:FOR X-N TO 73:PUT #N1.00(X.N): NEXT X1PUT #NI, PN:PUT #NI, IN :PUT #NI,HE:PUT #NI,PT:PUT #NI, DR 2450 PUT #NI, CHE PUT #NI, TI:PUT #NI, BY:PUT #N, SIPUT #NI,TH:PUT INI,FI:PUT #NI, E MIPUT #N1, BTPUT #N1, BL.CLOSE #NI :3OTO 9120 2470 ? !? \"Do you what to restore saved game?:OPEN 1.4., \"K:\":3ET #NI,KIFK 993 THEN CLOSE #N1:30TO RT 2475 ? :? \"Insert tape with saved game press any key when ready.\":JET #NIK CLOSE #1 TRAP 2520 2430 POKE 764,12 :OPEN #NI, 4., \":\":FOR X-NI TO LEN (OBS):3ET #NI, Z:09$(x,x)=CHR$ (2) INEXT XFOR X-N1 TO LEN(ES) 13ET #NI.Z "


"SOFTWARE DURELL SNHOAAD EES Zi. Doo COMMODORE 64 A fully animated 3D adventure for 1 to 4 players extending over 64 colourful locations. REQUIRES A JOYSTICK. R.R.P. .95 ILULILULIIIIIIII  .A& MUUTTUIIIIIIIII DURELL sales dept., Castle Lodge, Castle Green, Taunton, Somerset,TA14AB "


"48K SINCLAIR ZX SPECTRUM BE \"ALIEN 8\" recommended retail price .95 inc VAT Available from W.H.SMITHS, BOOTS, J.MENZIES, WOOLWORTHS and all good software retail outlets. Also available from ULTIMATE PLAY THE GAME, The Green, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire LE6 5JU, (P&P included) Tel: 0530 411485 "


"F-15 Multiple Combat scenarios Full Aerobatics 3-D Graphics E American an Software ATRIKE EAGALE MicroProse Software 64 ATAR F-15 Strike Eagle features superb 3-D graphics, F-15 manoeuvreability, computer assisted targetting including modes fighter Heads Up Display, airborne radar, air to air missiles, surface to air missile defence, ground target bombing, full aero. batics, and multiple combat scenarios. DISK/CASSETTE $1495  PoER FLIGHT COMMANDER SOLO FLIGHT: Take off with this user friendly flight simulator which includes 3-D graphics, full cockpit instrumentation, dual VORS, ILS, 21 different airports, and real life challenges from weather and mechanical emergencies. DISK/CASSETTE $14.95 SPITFIRE ACE: Save London during the Blitz in your RAF Spitfire! Outstanding out-of-the-cockpit 3-D graphics: 14 different combat senarios. DISK .95, CASSETTE .95 NATO COMMANDER: Defend Europe in an accelerated real-time war situation! Full scrolling battle map.includes infantry, armour helicopters, airforces and tactical nuclear weapons. DISK .95, CASSETTE .95 U.S. Gold is stocked by all leading Poola John Menzies WHSMITH WILDINGS WOOLWORTH computer stores including: U.S. Gold Limited, Unit 10, The Parkway Industrial Centre, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. Telex: 337268. "


"Prom The Gift in me quality Tods is a From g ram from ovemeis per scon BELGELTOLLE cs THEREVIEWERS ARE RAVING... GIFT FROM ture to Stimate's s, created of former grammers. ancien nas you co Orestes in of an uw labyrint nd colle familia neon STES RASA problem. Mum S are tough, but the ailed, and the movemes es are Ey realistic beca s datings SW 48K. FOTT .9 ocean Is is Ocean's st and it's her better in the dispointing folw-ups to Hunlback the role of Ju think that's your mother's th COL wo sod ers lice estra. re to spa aate's you this graphic ledon the Greek Which Orestes, ds, must regain Ingdom from his do this he has to Electra whom his ened in the cian Tec an anin Ten colo and fro 'T mi. The for Se Gry C Clytemnestra-> nother, no le. teals shapes hakes a nuis sce erself. There are al pakes, spiders, threeeaded serpents, itting skulle Pick of s Z the week The Gods ***** and rating: Gif Type: Arcade adventure. Computer: Spectrum Format and price: Cassette, .95. Publisher: Ocean. In brief: Classic romp. AN epic advr challenge recent rel by a gr Imagir created Fros former class rammers. which A has you conthe ' ancient of 8 Orestes in 2 of an under. ms. a en wit ad labyrinth to and collect 12 nture yo Spes familiar from Gods, a ect beg idean geometry. spirit of Electra and telp comes from rd with hindrance the l yoursel Clytemnestra-your may also, mother, no less-who her, obtain from ughout the steals shapes and tra' who'll makes a nuisance of apes. herself. There are also snakes, spiders, threeheaded spitting skulls and serpents, other horrors to deal sk is to with. doublil Likely to be the first big hit of 1985. adventures aindrance ectra and shed by arance from can leave A gift from the inir ue strat ple ch! ould be if it Taemnestr feek, we take a new game for Spectrum, which w standards of hce in on-screen with horskuipents NEWLY 825 task. phics and Rol from live rom the Gods\" e. Sub ffering from Frect m from co Aly to of the hic advg If Der ont p anies scre Likely to be the big hit of 1985. on Greek BOULD s a to prevent various le grap ary. AL II Prevent disdanger lurks in the form of tered about the maze and are various puzzles monsters and the evil Clytaemestra who will do what she can ponfuse you and kill Eles help you find od the folScores im is to guide Orestes the labyrinth beneath Lace of Mycena to find corpo dden objects which they ha will sentori its screen al palace in I follows the ulations of der the direcve grape mate and the action tri groutines are ge more advanced used a counter how long a to load. The software houses wrotef ce for the Commodo Novaload or se s and Apoud der of his What's Ocean House 6 Central Street. Manchester M2 5NS. Telephone 061 832 6633. Telex 669977 Ocean Software is available from selected branches of WOOLWORTH. WHSMITH, Bob John Menzies, LASKYS, Rumbelows. COMET, Spectrum Shops and all good software dealers. Trade enquiries welcome. "


"2510 GENTBYISET #NUSEIN:GET #NZ HE: 7313 ET #N1, 2: 3005 F CR-232 OROM, MI) BadCETNI, EM:9 9007 BOT CR-233 THEN R$(77.11.08-?) THEN CR-NERSCM sain\":20To RTN 20T3120 ed mer ers. cier bu cg 3 in rint nilia eon OTO RY\":COTO RT 3090 RSCM MID=\"don't see y\":GOTO F Gif um 2430 E$(x,x) -CHR$(2) NEXT X:FOR XEN TO 73:3ET #NI, Z:00 (X.N 2500 GET #NI, PN:GET #NI, IN:GET #NI,HE:3ET #NI.PT:GET #NI.DR:ET #N1.CH: JET FNI. T I GET #N1,BY13ET #NI.SI 2510 GET #NI, TH:GET #N1,FI:GET #NI, EM3ET #N1, BT13ET #NI,BL:CLOSE #N1:30T2120 ZINEXT 2520 CLOSE #2:R$(M.MI) -\"Bad save file please try again.\":30TORT 9000 IF CR-232 OR CR=155 OR CR=77 THEN CRON:R$(MM)-\"A car goes roaring past!\" 3005 IF CR-233 THEN R$(77.114)-\"I walk across the road safely.\":PN-5. CR-N 9007 GOTO RT 3010 R$(M. 1) \"As I read the poll the painting\":R$(7.1 )\"lows hrichtly. th n stops.\":PT-N1: E$(NS, N3) \"A\" 3020 GOTO RT 9030 LB (69.N) -LB (69.N)-Nl:08$(LB (63.N).LB(83,NI))\"Empty gold chalice\":RETURN U RT 8340 R$\"The butterflys of Death swing down settle an opening appeares.\":30TO RT 3080 R$(M.2) \"There is an ear spliting scream are gone.\":30TO RT from the slots but miss, as they 3030 R$=\"As I read the prayer a strange glow er seems to become soiled.\":3OTO RT :R$(77.114) -\"both sword 9100 R$=\"It breaks, the mist envelops the til all that remains is an aumlet.\":GOTO RT Demon appears above the altar 3110 R$=\"The troll blocks my way into my dark life?\":GOTO RT zombie who starts to rot away, un the wat 3120 IF OC(40,N)-77 AND OC(46,N)-77 THEN OC(36.N)-77:PN=31:30TO 3149 says: What will you give me, to bring light 9130 GOTO RT 3140 R$\"Fool did you really think I would let you pass. The troll kicks me out. There's an explosion near by.\":GOTO RT 8150 R$=\"The letters P.C are embroider on the back. Also around it's base the f loor has been deeply scratched.\":GOTO RT 9000 R$(MML) -\"Please don't leave unnecessary spaces. +3OTO RT 9010 R$(M.M1) -\"Sorry I don't know what you mean.\":30 TO RT 9020 R$(M.MI)-\"What are you talking about?\":GOTO RT 9030 R$(M.M1)-\"I can't go in that direction\":GOTO RT 9040 R$(M.ML)-\"I can see something!\":GOTO RT 9050 R$(M.ML)-\"That's silly!\":GOTO RT 3060 R$(M.MI) -\"I don't see that here!\":GOTO RT 9070 R$(M.MI) \"I'm not carrying it!\":GOTO RT 3090 R$(M.MI) -\"I can't do that now!\":GOTO RT 3090 R$(M.MI) \"OK Nothing happens.\":30TO RT 9100 R$(M.M1)=\"Sorry I'm not carrying the right tool.\":GOTO RT 9110 R$(M.ML)-\"It breaks & the mist vanishes.\" OC(K2.N) -N9:IN-IN-NI 130TORT 9120 R$(M,M1)-\"OK\":GOTO RT 9130 R$(M.MI) -\"It's much to heavy to lift!\":GOTO RT 9140 R$(M.MI)-\"It's built into the wall!\":GOTO RT 9150 R$CM,MI) -\"The chest closes & locks.\":GOTO RT 20000 ? \" As I try to leave with out paying for the goods the shop keeper grabs me & has me arrested for : 20010 ? \"shop lifting.\":GOSUB 21010:GOTO 2400 20020 ? \" As I step into the road, I hear the \":GOTO 21000 20030 ?\" As I try to take the \":B$(LB (K2,N), LB (K2.N1)) 20040 ? \"he leaps at me squeal of Car breaks. S-P-L-I-T. \"GOTO 21000 20050 7 \" As I enter the room a Zombie attacks Gbit's me on the hand a few secon with one blow, I'm ds later, a new zombie stands\": sent spining into the next world. 20060 ?\" guarding 20070 ? \" As I enter the royal Hall an arrow the room.\":GOTO 21000 ough 20080 ? \" heart!\":GOTO 21000 the air strikes me in the\": 20090 ?\" I tripped in the dark from some unseen hand, wings thr 20100 ?\" I dived into the lake & split my head open on a submerage rock!\":30TO broke my neck!\":GOTO 21000 20110?\" For some reason the 100 feet drop to re 20130 ?\" The butterfiles of Death swing down than my body could stand.\":30 TO 21000 only I was 'nt so tall.\":GOTO 21000 the bottom, seem to have been mo 20140 ?\" The Demon with one wave of his hand am burned to a crisp.\":GOTO 21000 cut me up into little pieces. If 20150?\" I cut myself on their sharp wings & 20160?\" It breaks in pieces and my seven yearsbad luck starts with me falling sends flames pouring over me. I on thebroken glass\": 20170 ? \"& cutting my throat!!\":GOTO 21000 bleed to death.\":GOTO 21000 20180 ?\" B-0-0-0-0-M-M.\":? \"Bits of me fly in all directions.\":30TO 21 20190 ?\" As I stand back to admire the great 20200 ? \"I adjoining room. On investigating\": ONS on find a crate with a noted attached. riches, I hear a noise from the 20210 ? \"DUNGEON. It also completing PORTRAIT\": adventure.\" The note reads, CONGRATULATI goes on to say this is the gateway to your next great 20220 ? :?\" 20230 ?\" The strange elow appears again but THE MYSTERY OF CAMPBELL CASTLE.\":GOSUB 21010:30TO 2410 eems to come from the very \": 20240 ? \"heart of the ten, for that you this time I hear a voice which s 20250 ? \"the last word fad's, my body is riped apart by some unseen altar. Mortal you have abused my DIE!. Then as \": OTO 21000 20260 POKE 53774,64 TRAP 20250: POKE 32,1:POKE 93,39 :POKE 710,150 powers once to of 20265 ?\" Suddenly every things changes @ I findmyself in a small courtyard.\": 20270 ? \"Even force!\":3 by three man who tie me to a stake\": before I have a chance to have a good look round, I am jumped 20280 ? \"at one end of a scroll in his hands\": 20290 ? \"he beings to read. You have been foundguilty of trying to gain access t the courtyard. Then out of the shadowssteps a man with o this program, the penalty\": 20300 ? \"for this thunder.\" action is death by firing squard. 2100 ?!? 21010 :?\" I'M DEAD!!!\":30SUB 21010100T 2400 There is a sound like *00 RETURN Fros class hich fo 21000 task beg Te yo arsell by eave th also, tain 000 O'll if it Destr to Publi we che adu ies a scroll in one end of neto a stakehce to have a rin a small ce 20290 ? he his hands\", the courtve\": The otef sodo "


"Y 28359 ERINE S 18 15 28 JUL 14 2009-119Tin 0 4. CORO OHIN -: 08 DECIZ ..ZHEO ZU Hoor PRINT AT 4X; INK 6; \"A\": FO OTO STEP -.5: BEEP,005 LET KEPEEK 23560: PRINT AT NK 5; CHR$(ik +100AND K 5 52): LET X=X + (K =561 (K = 5 + CK = 54) (x =55): POKE ..: LET = +2: LET IF 50000 THEN GO RUNS ON A SPECTRUM IN 48K Creepy Crawly, the fastest caterpillar in the garden, is feeling very hungry this morning, and is rushing around the garden looking for some food to eat. Apples, mushrooms and other vegetables abound in their hundreds. It looks like Creepy Crawly is in for a feast fit for a king this lunchtime. There are, however, a few teeny weeny problems that might give Creepy Crawly more than a touch of indigestion. Skulls and rocks are strewn all over the garden and if Creepy, in his confusion, swallows one of them he'll die. The same is true if he runs into his own body or the wall surrounding the garden. The cursor keys are used to control the caterpillar. HYMEN? LN 5,06: PRINT AT 4X; HT 1: \"A PRINT AT P -), PEEK [+1) ;\" *: IF > THEN GO TO 1080 1050 GO TO 1040 1070 PRINT #1: AT 3.0; INK 2: INK 6; BRIGHTS 1:\"50 E \"; SLAT 1.9: INK 3 \"LI \"LI\" INR IN HI I IZ M S 9 | 0 + 0.01 | I+0000 000 SEH DIX IlIZIL = JOHON 1 S O ZD+ XOLZX ON QO9OX-OOIZOZIX FOO ZOO D S 909XH WC (EuZHO HH HHXXH 00 ++ WE W HOO 11.TX HQ 001-IZON 000-UZ OWE on X 0 I 2. Hir ZE DD OX HZ HINOSO HO . !! to * J HZEN NJOU + U 0000 UH HOCH ILIH .-L. UwU O Olu9. ZIZ 1 WOU . EXHAUWHOOO --ZLI . U. 0 000Z . OOO DI ZUX.H $ 119.0.H IL HYOE . EOLOO-H + O . x .O OZ JOOOOOO 0000 N 4.0 QUI LIH. II W DOU EH a m AID= WI . W0uDu 0 W OOI UIL IO J 90 . 00 . 0900 EMU POUR MOT O BEEP. HEN GO TO 1 + 12+10): FOR O_T L = +2: LET O NGO TO 1040 a = 1 TO 9 XT : BEEB .31. BEES .01.+1 NEX 1110 INPUT : LET 00-) AND <45500): PR 2: FOR = TO 21POKE PRINT : NEXT a: PRINT INK 3; \"BONUS: \"; INK 6  FOR a = TO 30: B XT : FOR a=30 TO 019: NEXT : LET S F set>8 THEN LET set = 1 bogor 20 IDA Z DDEXO -TO X D OD ODBO au ZOITO HOO CREEPY HO 7 CRAWLY 9 + 0 12 27 3 IOT OLS LET S CES C + bon: LET LET X = 8: LET Y =X : GO SUB 146 310: GO SUB 1420: GO TO 12 OUT 254, a K USR \"a\" + a) /20: 10 LET (i=li-1 000 THEN PRINT # 1; INK 4; OUT OF TI 102 -2: FOR a = TO 01. RND+10: PRINT AT la +1); X =PEEK 1310: IF IN GO TO 1010 70 CLS; PRINT AT 10.10; INK 4 GAME OVER\": IF Schi THEN LET 1180 FOR a =5 TO 2 STEP -1: BEEP .3, a: PAUSE 2: NEXT a: BEEP 1, 1: BEEP 1,-10 1190 CLSPOKE 235600 LET X H O TH ILL. aug DUX H INSTRUERTO TOFORAS = 1 TO 7: PRINT AT PRINT AT FB CREEPY CRAWLY Illustration: Terry Rogers EMZHOME DE AT 18,5 INK 4;\" I FO CTIONS\". INK 3: TAB 10 : \" PRINT AT 2,0 PAUSE 5 NEXT a: IF < > 115 AND PEEK 23560 < > 1 5 THEN GO TO 1228 1230 FOR =0 TO 10 BEEP.01, a. IF PEEK 23560 RINT AT 0.1 \"INSTRUCTIONS\", TAB 10; INK 3 10; INK 3;\" ELLO! I WOULD 9. ZOU MOOTHIEUW WOH HOZY XLZ aino.ZO OZHOX OF Doin HEIA 00: DOHC VO0O.TH LOZ IZ EERS THEN GO TO SPRINT CAT 9: 1200 PRINT AT 7, 12; INK 5; KE \": FOR a = 1 TO 4 PRINT TAB 1 INK 5; CHR$ (165-al; INK a +2: =\"; CHR$ (52+a): NEXT TEODO4 "


"SG. NT AT a. || Hà Secccccccco SEO 1255 1 . | | | | || R set=6 THEN PRIN THEN PRINT HEN PRINT AT 6:4; OR & t=5 THEN PRIN 3 IF Set LIKE YOU\" TO GUIDE THE MUL 1250 PRINT \" CREEPY CRAWLY AROU ND THE HERB GARDEN. NOW AS A LL EDUCATED FOLK\".* SHOULD KNOU HERB GARDENS TSURROUNDED BY TALL STONE 1260 PRINT #O, AT 10 INK 6;\" H TA KEY (NOT TOO HARD PLEASE) PAUSE : INPUT ** POKE 23692, PRINT INK 5; THESE ALONG ITH THE CREATURES\". OWN BODY AND THE SKULL ARE/ LETHALT HE OTHER OBJECTS CAN\" TAB 10\" BE CONSUMED.\" 1270 PRINT I NK 2; TAB 13; \"SCOR ES\" FOR a = 1 TO 4 PRINT ; TAB 14; INK a; CHR$ (146+a); INK 7; = \"; (a +10) NEXT a PRINT \"TAB 14; INK S I\" INK 7; =60 1190 1290 INK 0 CLS: LET X = 3: LET Y =: LET 1510 LET =40000+: Go SUB 1460 LET set=1: LET oe=0 L ET leva: LET b=100 1300 LET SC=0 LET (i=5: GO SUB 1310 : GOSUB 1420 GO TO 1010 on L] tr | ono S IAT 1 II SHOL MO HO CO O 0 OF TOO -OHOMO -1 OU WOO WO. OG LOOOO O : Mont OHCXOO QOZ: DOROHO OF9 001 00 O. E QUA Q ft 0 JUU H YOGESHO O E WOODLIWwwA+W.COVOU FO WS IE . ZH . AT w In E : ZOOHILOLSL SOLLE LE-LOC OF 0 F C .IDCO NEU00AT: C D : HGH HIS HO: ETHIO: HZHO ll0Z O.. DOC: It . HOE HE IX 0 OZOFEA 100 DO WHOFEN : TOZU E: O 0 10.H ONO 0 ZZO ID DE FO 0 OFO: . . O DI ..0 .. HOH OH VIO 01 000 . OO9OZ 909 DOCU HE . . .. X IS D PO..DOW 0 T 3-4 GO 1699 PAUSE || -L 0 Hà 1 BY PETER LORD THEN FOR a = 1 TO 15; \"CONEXT a THEN PRINT AT 19, 1 \"cccccccccccc\" FOR a = 1 TO 5 à, 12; \"C\"; AT a 19; \"C\": N 1410 INK : PAPER : RETURN 1420 FOR d = 1 TO 6 1430 LET a EINT (RND+20) +1: LET b =INT (RND+30) +1: IF (ATTR (a, b) 0 OR (a=3 AND b=8) THEN GO TO 1 430 1440 PRINT AT a,b; INK di CHR$ 11 46+0) 1460 FOR a 44900 TO 45000+! STEP 2POKE , : POKE a +1,X: NEXT a LET =45600+L: RETURN 49' NEXT : RETURN 1470 DATE, 5.12.-21541e7:12:9:9 40 = = DO + SOOOOO 001 m. omga LL. IO Z inX -O0QZ EES W 1 DEM . PO RETURN 219, 126, 153,247,23 255, 148, 255,73,255 145.255, 36 1510 DATA \"0\",0, 124, 78. 125,93,12 \", 12,24,60,110,90,12 30 DATA \"F\",5024, 24,60,78, 125 DATA \"9\" , 81,54, 152, 111, 251 1550 DATA \"A\", 189, 126,90, 102, 125 1560 DATA \"1\" 60.94, 191,255, 153, 4,24,60 TA \"j\", 73, 145,255,85,178, ass 146,73 ATAK\", 173, 118,44 , 181, 110 DATA \"L\", 110, 181, 44, 118, 173 22111101 1600 DATA \", 146, 73,255,85,170, \"P\", 8, 12,254, 255, 254, 1 DATA \"5\", 16,56, 124, 254, 56, 5 O DATA \"t\",56,56,56,56, 254, 12 DATA \"U\", 16, 48,127, 255, 127, 48, 16,0 |SAVE \"Creepy....\" L INE 10 HAHAHAH. HOIDI "


NA


"Herbie Briggs has just destroyed the myth that all floppy discs are created equal. floppy stiffer. Stronger. And your data safer. To resist bulging, warping, puckering, or opening up. MEMOREX SOLID-SEAM BONDING: Every inch of every seam is sealed shut. Tight as a drum. They seem equal. Until you look at the seams. That's where equality ends. Most companies seal their discs with a spot here, a spot there. Leaving most of each seam not sealed at all. Sooner or later, the seams might do what comes naturally: they bulge. Warp. Pucker. Open up. Pens, pencils, fingernails-even a fouryear-old's, like Herbie-can catch and snag in those wide open spaces. That's sloppy. And dangerous. Because if you put a sloppy floppy into your disc drive, it can jam your drive. Ruin your drive head. Lose your data. So much for their seams. Ours are different. THE SLOPPY FLOPPY: Sealed with a spot here, a spot there. Leaving unsealed seams everywhere. To resist all the things that can jam your drive, ruin your drive head, or lose your data. Which proves that a Memorex floppy disc isn't equal to all the others. It's better. Solid-Seam Bonding is just one example of the extra care that goes into every Memorex floppy disc. Be it 8 524\" or the new 372\" Extra care that lets us guarantee every Memorex disc to be 100% error-free. The next time you're buving a floppy disc-or a few hundred of them-just remember this: It's always better to be safe than sloppy. For more information on the full line of Memorex quality computer media products, including computer MEMOREX tape, call Memorex U.K. Ltd. 96-104 Church Street, Staines, Middlesex. Tel: 0784 51488 Memorex uses a process we developed, called Solid-Seam Bonding. Solid-Seam Bonding seals shut every inch of every seam of every Memorex\"floppy disc. Tight as a drum. That makes the Memorex MEMOREX Your Data. When it matters, make it Memorex MEMOREX Memorex is a registered trademark of Memorex Corporation 1984 Memorex Corporation A Burroughs Company "


"Meet the Gang! Wilma Tom Dick Herbert Everyone's a la ST EVER MULTI-ROLE ARCADE ADVENTURE Includes Hit Single on reverse \"Everyone's A Wally\" performed by Mike Berry Spectrum 48K .95 Commodore 64 .95 Available shortly on Amstrad CPC 464 44 The Broadway, Bracknell, Berks. 0344 427317 MIKRO-GEN "


"The first QL adventures from TALENT!   >h 70 Explore the ancient dwelling-place of the Dwarves where the Wizard guards the last precious secret. A classic and complex text adventure with hundreds of locations and a huge vocabulary. Set in real-time with traps, tasks, puzzles and mazes-and a special note-pad feature to aid you. \"the quality of the game is superb Micro Adventurer PRICE .95 + 50p postage and packing WEST You are on the track of a notorious gang of bank robbers who have gone to ground near an abandoned mining town deep in Indian territory. Your task-to outwit and outgun the robbers, collect as much loot as possible and piece together clues on how to escape. A demanding and exciting text adventure for the experienced games-player, using over 200 words and as many phrases. There are over 130 locations to search-not all of them easy to find. Events happen in real-time outside your control Indians charge, rattle-snakes slither past and robbers appear and shoot at you. How long can you survive? PRICE .95 + 50p postage and packing (Also on CBM 64, BBC & Electron) Available from selected branches of: John Menzies WHSMITHRA COMPUTER SYSTEMS CURRAN BUILDING, 101 ST JAMES ROAD, GLASGOW G4 ONS 24 HOUR CREDIT CARD HOT-LINE 041-552 2128 "


NA


"You should see what he's just seen. For only  a quarter and just a local telephone call whenever you want to connect up (that's only 22p per half hour at cheap rates) you could be part of Micronet. The only accessory you need is a Modem. A small price to pay to join the other visionaries on this exciting new system. Fill in the coupon for more details and send to Micronet 800, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill, London ECIR 5EJ. But be warned, Micronet 800's features are almost limitless and constantly updating. So maybe you'd be better to call in at Laskys, John Lewis, main Boots or your local Micronet 800 Action Station. To feast your eyes on all the amazing things it can do. Micronet 800. Stretching the mind of your micro far beyond its limits. Micro evolution continues with this unique communications, information and software system. Set on our mainframes nationwide. Includes 30,000 pages and access to Prestel with its full range of services. A tremendous Communications section that networks you to thousands of other members across the country. Send and receive electronic messages and graphics at a touch of a button. And there's the Chatline service, Swapshop and Teleshopping. Check with daily updates on the very latest computer news. Micronet also has its own huge facts data base. And a choice of up-to-the-minute software to download absolutely free, Micronet To: MICRONET 800, Durrant House, 8 Herbal Hill. London ECIR SEJ. Telephone 01-278 3143. Please send me the full facts about Micronet 800. Name Make/Model of Micro Address Telephone ephone \"F975. CVGA Prestel is a trademark of the munications On Prestel "


"See Micronet 800 in action. sky 1826 High er Centre Hoteles AVON DEVON KENT Bath, Boots, 1 Marchants Passage, Exeter. Boots, 251 High Street, MERSEYSIDE SURREY Southgate. Tel: 0225 64402. Tel: 0634 405471. Bristol Avon Computer Rentals, Heswall Thornguard Computer Tel 0392 32244 Gravesend. Gravesend Home Woking. Harpers, 71-73 Exeter. Open Channel Systems, 46 Pensby Road. 16 West Street, Old Market Computers, 39 The Terrace. Central Station, Queen Street Commercial Way. Tel: 0486 225657. Tel: 051-342 7516. Tel 0272 550600. Tel: 0474 23871. Liverpool Hargreaves, 31-37 Tel: 0392 218187. SUSSEX Bristol Boots, 59 Broadmead. Gillingham. Regal Software Paignton. Computer Systems Ltd, Supplies, 49 High Street. Warbreck Moor, Walton Bexhill-on-Sea. Computerware Tel: 0272 293631. Bristol Laskys 16-20 Penn Street 35 Hyde Road. Tel: 0803 524284. Tel: 0634 579634. Tel: 051-525 1782 22 St Leonards Road Plymouth. Syntax, 76 Cornwall Liverpool Laskys, Dale Street Tel: 0272 20421. Tel: 0424 223340. Street. Tet 0752 28705. Maidstone. Kent Micros, 51 Union Tel: 031-236 3298 Keynsham.Key Computer Systems Brighton Boots, 129 North Street Street. Tel: 0622 52784. Liverpool Laskys, St. Johns Seaton. Curtis Computer Services, 426 High Street Tel: 02756 5575. Tel 0273 27088. Rainham. Microway Computers, Seaton Computer Shop Weston-super-Mare. K&K Precinct. TeL: 051-708 5871. 39 High Street. Tel: 0634 376702. Brighton Gamer, 71 East Street. 51c Harbour Road. Tel 0297 22347. Sevenoaks. Emest Fielder St. Helens. Microman Computers. TeL: 0273 728681. Computers, 32 Alfred Street. Tiverton. Actron Microcomputers Rainford Industrial Estate, Mill Tel: 0934 419324. Computers, Dorset Street Brighton. Laskys, 151-152 Westem 37 Bampton Street. Tel: 0884 252854 Tel: 0732 456800 Lane Rainford Tel: 0744 885242 BEDFORDSHIRE Road. Tel: 0273 725625 Southport Central Studios, Crawley. Gatwick Computers Bedford. Boots, The Harpur Centre, Bournemouth. Brook Computers, DORSET Shortlands. The Village House of Computers, 87 Beckenham Lane. 38 Eastbank Street. TeL: 0704 31881. 62 The Boulevard. Tel 0293 37842. Harpur Street. Tel: 0234'56231. 370 Charminster Road. MIDDLESEX Dunstable. Dormans, 7-11 Broad Tel: 01-460 7122. Crawley. Laskys, 6-8 Queensway. Tel: 0202 533054. Enfield. Laskys, 44 48 Palace Walk. Tel: 0582 38302. Tel: 0293 544622. Sittingbourne. Computer Plus, Bournemouth. Lansdowne Garden Shopping Centre Leighton Buzzard. Datasin, 65 High Street. TeL0795 25677. Eastbourne. Boots, 15 Eastboume Computer Centre, 1 Lansdowne 59 North Street. Tel: 0525 374200. Tel: 01-363 6627. Amdale Centre. Tel: Tunbridge Wells. Modata. Leighton Buzzard. Milton Keynes Crescent, Lansdowne. Computer Centre, 28-30 St Johns Harrow. Camera Arts, 42 St. Anns TYNE & WEAR Tel: 0202 20165. Road. TeL: 0892 41555. Music & Computers, 17 Bridge Road. Tel: 01-427 5469. Gateshead. DP Supplies, Dorchester. The Paper Shop Street. TeL: 055 382504. Harrow. Harrow Micro, 24 LANCASHIRE SL Andrews House, Westfield Kings Road. Tel: 030564564. Luton. Hobbyte, Unit 16, The Blackburn. Tempo Computers Springfield Road Tel: 01-427 0098. Terrace Tel 0632 785068 Poole. Lansdowne Computer Hounslow. Boots, 193-199 High Amdale Centre. Tel: 0582 457195. 9 Railway Road. Tel 0254 691333. Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Boots Centre, 14 Arndale Centre Luton. Laskys, 190-192 Arndale Street. TeL01-570 0156. Blackpool Blackpool Computer Eldon Square Tel: 0632 329844. Centre. Tel 0582 38302. Tel: 0202 670901. Southall. Twillstar Computers Ltd Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Laskys, Store, 179 Church Street. 7 Regina Road. Tel: 01-574 5271. 6 Northumberland Street Luton. Terry More, 49 George Tel: 0253 20239. ESSEX Basildon. Basildon Software Teddington. Andrews, Broad Street. Tel: 0582 23391. Tel: 0632617224 Burnley. IMO Business Systems, Centre, 78-80 Liberty Shopping Street. Tel: 01-997 4716. BERKSHIRE Newcastle-upon-Tyne. 39-43 Standish Street Hall, East Square. Tel: 0268 27922. Twickenham, Twickenham RE Computing, 12 Jesmond Road. Reading. Laskys, 118-119 Priar St Tel 0282 54299 Chelmsford. Maxton Hayman, Computer Centre, 72 Heath Road Tel: 0632 815580. Tel 0734 595459. Preston. 4Mat Computing S Broomfield Road. Tel: 0245 354595 67 Friargate. tel: 0772 561952. Tel 01-892 7896. WALES Slough. Data Supplies, Chelmsford. Way In Computers, Uxbridge. JKL Computers Templewood Lane, Preston. Laskys, 1-4 Guildhall Aberdare. Inkey Computer 7 Village Square, Chelmer Village. Arcade. Tel: 077224558. 7 Windsor Street. TeL: 0895 $1815. Farham Common. Tet 2 820004. Services, 70 Mill Street, The Square, Tel: 0245 467858 Slough. Laskys 75 Queensmere NORFOLK Wigan, Wildings Computer Centre, Norwich. Adams, 125-129 King Trecynon. TeL: 0685 881828 Centre. Tel: 0753 78269. Colchester. Boots, 5-6 Lion Walk Aberystwyth. Aberdata at 11 Mesnes Street Tet 0942 22382. Street. Tel: 0603 22129. Tel: 0206 577303. Slough. MV Games, 245 High Galloways, 23 Pier Street. LEICESTERSHIRE Grays. H. Reynolds 28a Southend Leicester. Boots, 30-36 Gallowtree Sutton in Ashfield. HN & L Fisher. Street. Tel: 75 21594. NOTTINGHAMSHIRE Tel 0970 615522. Road. Tel 0375 31641. Cardift. Boots, 26 Queens Street BUCKINGHAMSHIRE Harlow. Harlow Computer Centre, Market Harborough. Harborough Nottingham. Laskys, 1-4 Smithy Gate. Tel: 0533 21641. 87 Outram Street. Tel: 0623 54734. & 105 Frederick Street Bletchley. RAMS Computer Tel: 0222 31291. 17 Staple Tye. Tel: 0279 22846. Centre, 117 Queensway. Home Computers, 7 Church Street Harlow. Lskys, 19 The Harvey Tel 0858 63056 Row. TeL: 0602 413049. Cardiff. P & P Computers. Tel: 0908 647744. Centre. Tel 0279443495. 41 The Hayes. Tel: 0222 26666. Chesham. Reed Photo & OXFORDSHIRE Hornchurch. Comptel Computer W1. Computers of Wigmore LONDON Abingdon. Ivor Fields Computers Swansea Boots, 17 St Marys Computers, 113 High Street. Systems, 112a North Street. Arcade, The Quadrant Shopping Tel 0494 783373. 21 Stern Street, tel: 0235 21207. Street, 104 Wigmore Street Tel: 0402 446741. Centre. TeL: 0792 43461. Banbury. Computer Plus CAMBRIDGESHIRE Ilford. Boots, 177-185 High Road. W1. HMV, 363 Oxford Street Tel: 01 486 0373. 2 Church lane. Tel: 0295 55890. WARWICKSHIRE Cambridge. Boots, 65-67 Sidney Tel: 01-553 2116. Oxford. Absolute Sound & Video Coventry. Coventry Micro Centre, Street and 28 Petty Curry Street Tel: 01-629 1240. Romford. Software Plus, 19 Old High Street, Headington. W1. Laskys, 42 Tottenham Court 33 Far Gosford Street Tel: 0223 350213 72 North Street. Tel 7065271. Tel: 0865 65661. Tel: 0203 58942 Cambridge. Cambridge Computer Southend-on-Sea. Computerama W1. Lion House, 227 Tottenham Road. Te 01-636 0845. Coventry. Impulse Computer Store, 4 Emmanuel Street. 88 London Road. Tel: 0702 335443. Oxford. Science Studio, 7 Little Tel: 0223 358264 World, 60 Hertford Street Precinct. Clarendon Street. Tel: 0865 54022. Court Road Tel: 01-637 1601. Southend-on-Sea. Computer Cambridge. Heffers Stationers W1. Sonic Foto Micro Center, Tel: 0203 553701. SCOTLAND Centre, 336 London Road 19 Sidney Street. Tel: 0223 358241. Aberdeen. Boots, 133-141 Union 256 Tottenham Court Road. Coventry. JBC Micro Services, 200 Tel: 0702 337161. Peterborough Boots, Southend-on-Sea. Estuary Earlsdon Avenue, North Earlsdon. Tel 01-580 5826. Street. Tel: 0224 585349. 40-42 Bridge Street, Queensgate Personal Computers, 318 Chartwell 27 Oxford Street. Tel: 01-439 7799. W1. Tomorrows World Today, Tel: 0203 73813. Edinburgh. Boots, 101-103 Princes Tel: 0733 6$352. Coventry. Laskys, Lower Precinct North, Victoria Circus Shopping 27 Oxford Street. Tet 01-43999. Street. Tel 031-225 8331. W1. Walters Computers, DH Evans Centre. Tel: 0702 614131. Edinburgh. Laskys, 4 St. James Tel: 0203 27712. CHESHIRE Centre. TeL: 031-556 1864. Leamington Spa. IC Computers Oxford Street. Tel: 01-629 8800. Chester. Boots, 47-55 Foregate GLOUCESTER WC1. Transam Micro Systems, Glasgow. Boots, 200 Sauchichall 43 Russell Street Tel: 0926 36244. Street. TeL: 0244 28421 Cheltenham. Laskys, 206 High Street. Tel: 041-332 1925. 59-61 Theobalds Road Leamington Spa. Leamington Chester. Computer Link, 21 St Street. Tel: 0242 570282. Strect. Tel: 0242 570282. Tel 01-405 5240 Glasgow. Boots, Union Street Hobby Centre, 121 Regent Street Werburgh Street. TeL: 0244 316516. Cheltenham. Screen Scene, 144 W8. Walters Computers, Barkers, and Argyle Street. Tel: 041-2487387. Tel: 0926 29211. Chester. Laskys, 7 The Forum, St. Georges Road Tel: 0242 528979. Kensington High Street Glasgow. Tom Dixon Cameras, Nuneaton. Micro City, la Queens Northgate Street. Tel: 0244 317667. Gloucester. Boots, 38-46 Eastgate 15-17 Queen Street Road. Tel: 0203 382049. Tel 01-937 5432. Crewe. Midshires Computer Street. Tel: 0452 423501. SE7. Vic Oddens Micros, Tel: 041-204 0826. Rugby. O.E.M, 9-11 Regent Street. Centre, 68-78 Nantwich Road Tel 0788 70522 Tel: 0270 211086 SHAMPSHIRE 5 London Bridge Walk SHROPSHIRE Basingstoke. Fishers, 2-3 Market Tel: 01-403 1988. Ellesmere Port. RFR TV & Audio, WEST MIDLANDS Shrewsbury. Clairmont Place. Tel 0256 22079 SE9. Square Deal, 1 Pooltown Road, Whitby. Birmingham. Boots, City Centre Enterprises, Hills Lane. Southampton. Business 373-375 Footscray Road, Tel 3647 52949. House, 16-17 New Street. TeL051-356 4150. Electronics, Micromagic At Atkins, Hyde. C Tech Computers, 184 New Eltham. Tel 01-859 1516. Shrewsbury. Computerama, 13 Tel: 021-643 7582 Lewisham. Laskys, 164 High 7 Civic Centre Road. Tel 0703 25903. Market Street. Tel: 061-366 8223. Birmingham. Laskys, 19-21 Castlegate. Tel 0743 60528 Street. Tel: 01-852 1375. Waterlooville. GB Microland, Macclesfield. Camera Computer 7 Queens Parade, London Road Corporation Street Telford. Computer Village Lid SE15. Castlehurst Ltd, 152 Rye Tel 021-632 6303. Centre, 118 Mill Street. 0625 27468 2/3 Hazeldine House, Central Tel 0705 259911. Lane, Peckham. Tel: 01-639 2205. Square. Tel: 0952 506771. Dudley. Central Computers, Macclesfield. Computer Centre, EC2. Devron Computer centre, HERTFORD 35 Churchill Precinct Telford. Telford Electronics, 68 Chestergate. Tel: 0625 618827. Marple. Marple Computer Centre 13 Bucklesbury, Tel: 0462 36757 Hitchin. County Computers 155 Moorgate, tel: 01-638 3339. 38 Mall 4. Tel 0952 504911. Tel: 0384 238169. N14. Logic Sales, 19 The Bourne, Stourbridge. Walters Computer 30-32 Market Street. STAFFORDSHIRE Potters Bar, the Computer Shop, Tel: 061-427 4328 The Broadway, Southgate. Systems. 12 Hagley Road Newcastle-under-Lyme. Tet 01-882 4942. Tel 0384 370811. Stockport. National Micro Centres 107 High Street. Tel: 0707 44417. Computer Cabin, 24 The Parade, N22. Boots, 38-40 High Road, port. National Micro Centres Stevenage. DJ Computers Walsall New Horizon, 1 Goodall 36 St Petersgate. Tel: 061-429 8080 | 11 Town Square. Tel 0438 65501 Wood Green. Tel: 01-881 0101. Silverdale. Tel: 0782 636911. Street. Tel: 0922 24821. Stockport. Stockport Micro Centre, Watford. Laskys 18 Charter Place NW3. Maycraft Micros, Stafford. Computerama, 59 Watford. Laskys, 18 Charter Place 58 Rosslyn Hill, Hampstead 4-6 Brown Street Tel 061-477 0248. TeL: 0923 31905. West Bromwich. DS Peakman, Foregate Street Tel: 0785 41899. 7 Queens Square. Tel 021-525 7910 Stoke-on-Trent. Computerama, Widnes. Computer City, 78 Tel 01-431 1300. Watford. SRS Microsystems, Wolverhampton. Laskys Victoria Road. Tel: 051-420 3333. NW4. Davinci Computer Store, 11 Market Square Arcade, Hanley. | 94 The Parade, High Street Wilmslow. Wilmslow Micro 2 Wulfrum Square. Tel:0902 714568 Tel: 0782 268524. 112 Brent Street, Hendon. Tel: 0923 26602. Centre. 62 Grove Street. YORKSHIRE Watford. Watford Electronics, Tel: 01-202 2272 SUFFOLK Tel: 0625 530890. Bradford. Boots, 11 Darley Street NW7. Computers Inc, 86 Golders Bury St Edmunds. Boots Cardiff Road Tel: 0923 405588. Tel: 0274 390891. CLEVELAND 11-13 Cornhill Tel 0284 701516. Green. TeL01209 0401. Welwyn Garden City. DJ Leeds. Boots, 19 Albion Arcade, Middlesbrough. Boots NW10. Technomatic, 17 Burnley Computers, 40 Fretherne Road. Bury St Edmunds. The 88-90 Linthorpe Road, Bond Street Centre. Road, Wembley. Tel: 01-208 1177. Tel: 96 28444. Computer Centre, 1-3 Garland The Cleveland Centre. Tel: 0532 33551. Street Tel: 0284 705503. MANCHESTER Sheffield. Laskys, 58 Leopold HUMBERSIDE Tel: 0642 249616. Ipswich. Brainwave Micros, Beverley. Computing World, Bolton, Computer World UK Ltd, 24 Crown Street. Tel 047 350965. Street Tel 0742 750971. CUMBRIA 208 Chorley Old Road 10 Swabys Yard, Dyer Lane. York. York Computer Centre, Kendal. The Kendal Computer Tel: 0204 494304. SURREY Tel: 0482 881831. 7 Stonegate Arcade Centre, Stramongate. Manchester. Boots, 32 Market Bagshot. P & H Electronics, 22-24 Tel: 0934 641862. Tel: 0539 22559. KENT Street. Tel: 061-8326533. Guildford Road. Tel: 0276 73078. Ashford. DGH, 10 North Street. Penrith. Penrith Communications Tel 0233 32597 Manchester. Laskys, 61 Arndale Croydon. Laskys, 77-81 North End 14 Castlegate. Tel: 0768 67146. Centre. Tel: 061-833 9149. Tel 01-681 8443. Whitehaven. PD Hendren, Ashford. Geerings of Ashford, Croydon. The Vision Store, Manchester. Laskys, 12-14 St 80 High Street. Tel 0233 33366. 15 King Street. Tel: 0946 2063. Marys Gate. Tel: 061-833 0268. 53-59 High Street. Tel 01-686 6362 Workington. Technology Store, Bexley heath. Laskys Croydon. The Vision Store, Manchester. Mighty Micro 15-16 Broadway Shopping Centre, 12 Finkle Street. Tel: 0900 66972 96-98 North End Tel: 01-681 7539. Tel: 01-301 3478. Sherwood Centre, 268 Wilmslow South Croydon. Concise DERBYSHIRE Road, Fallow field. Tel: 061-2248117. Bromley. Boots, 148-154 High Alfreton. Gordon Harwood, Manchester. NSC Computer Computer Consultants, 1 Carlton 67-71 High Street. Tel: 0733 836781. Bromley. Computers Today. Street. Tel 01-460 6688 Shops, 29 Hanging Ditch Road. Tel 01-681 6842. Chesterfield. Boots, 35-37 Low Tel 061-832 2269. 31 Market Square. Tel 01-290 5652 Epsom. The Micro Workshop Pavement, Market Place. 12 Station Approach Bromley. Laskys, 22 Market Manchester. Walters Computers, Tel: 0246 203591 Kendal Milne, Deansgate. Tel: 0372 721333. Square. TeL: 01.464 7829. Guildford. Walters Computers Chesterfield. Computer Stores Bromley. Walters Computers Tel: 061-832 3414. Army & Navy, 105-111 High Street. 14 Stephenson Place. Army & Navy, 64 High Street Oldham Home & Business Tel: 0483 68171. Tel: 0246 208802 Computers, 54 Yorkshire Street Derby. Hoots, 1 Devonshire Tel: 01 460 9991. Wallington Surrey Micro Tel: 061-633 1608 Walk Tel 0322 45886. Chatham. Hoots, 30-34 Wilmott Swinton. Mr Micro, 69 Partington Square, Pentagon Centre Systems 53 Woodcote Lane. Tel: 061-728 2282. Road Tel: 01-647 5636 Micronet BOO "


"sapore R-E-V.T.E.W.S om Sound: Does the game sound like a Duran Duran LP played at half speed — or does the noise from your micro knock you half-way across the room? The C&VG review team don't judge games with their ears plugged up, we can tell you! continued from page 35 version is kept to a BRIAN BLOODAXE minimum MACHINE: Spectrum STAR There are lots of strange nasties to deal with — like SUPPLIER: The Edge GAME savage filing cabinets and PRICE: .95 furious fire extinguishers At last, a game that lives all the oddness you've come up to all the pre-release to expect from these platform publicity! Brian Bloodgames! axe, latest from The If you've been holding your Edge, is simply terrific! breath waiting for JSW II and Bloodaxe takes the can't hold out any longer, Manic Miner/Jet Set Willy RRRRRR-22122222 take a look at Technician Ted. style of game one and a half It will keep platform freaks -.. steps further with an array of and map makers busy for 100 screens and 300 nasties weeks. plus a feature called ''primary imbalance\". I've still to work =c000000 Graphics out quite what that is!  Sound Brian Bloodaxe is a cute RI 002400  Value looking Viking, complete with  Playability a horned helmet which he uses to dispatch attacking 12 nasties. The helmet comes in THE HACKER useful in tight corners too — MACHINE: BBC he can use the horns to stick himself to the roof and avoid SUPPLIER: Firebird his enemies! PRICE: .50 Our hero has to travel A lot of very odd through a \"Miner\" style world companies have jumped where each screen reprehead first into the sents somewhere in the computer games market. British Isles. For example, a One of these, British pool table = Poole, geddit? Telecom, although an Each screen also repreunlikely entrant in the home sents a considerable computer market, is one of challenge even to the The Froteccfier the more successful \"big seasoned member of the Jet business competitors. Set fan club. There are Their Silver range of games objects to be found and budget priced software in puzzles to be solved but the mould of Mastertronic watch out for hidden traps. is on a par with most And rampaging rhinos! commercially available softGraphics are great, ware selling for around . especially Brian — and the And The Hacker, their latest rampaging rhinos! The soundSilver release, is no track, a version of the famous exception Monty Python TV show theme Still, Ted likes to get stuck The Hacker is an arcade 12 TECHNICIAN TED tune, is fun and the game will into his work and is soon style game, in the same vein demand all your computer MACHINE: leaping around the Chip as Manic Miner and Program time for the next few weeks Factory in an effort to find just Power's Ghouls, and is sure Spectrum/Amstrad or months. what he needs to complete to be welcomed by all BBC Brian Bloodaxe, just as the SUPPLIER: Hewson the job although he's not climbing fanatics. It features PRICE: .95 (Spec) .95 blurb says, takes Jet Set Willy quite sure just what he does 16 levels of fantastically one stage further. Don't fail to (Amstrad) need! varying screen arrangements check this one out! But what The race is on to create a Technician Ted is a workwhich incorporate more than is \"primary imbalance''? true successor to the manlike platform game with their fair share of obstacles Answers on a postcard infamous Jet Set Willy! over 40 hi-res screens and and traps. please...And Professor Technician Ted is a front lots of puzzles. The first level proved just Video can't wait to get his runner along with Brian The graphics are well too difficult for this reviewer. hands on a map! Bloodaxe! drawn — although some of unfortunately, but thanks to a Ted is a young computer the features come just a bit system where you can jump  Graphics hacker who works at a Chip too close to Jet Set for to any screen I was able to  Sound 8 Factory. He has an awkward comfort, I feel play more than the first level  Value boss who has this annoying Animation is smooth and Strangely. I managed to  Playability habit of setting him almost flicker free and colour complete the second ano impossible jobs. clashing on the Spectrum third levels but then all my CCF 83 "


"REVlEW:S 10 OOO 00 DOO efforts floundered on the There are lots of Knight the smaller sized screen each level, the fearsome latter screens. Lore style tasks to be being the only major caveman is transported to the True, the game is similar to performed in order to keep difference. This presents a next level. Manic Miner. You do have to the cryonauts alive. Your problem in any type of game I managed to complete the run along platforms, pick up friendly Alien 8 robot is a nice but is a positive nuisance in a first level after tearing most of and jump across gaping little chap and lends an air of scrolling game like Frak. This the hair from my head, but I chasms, but the strategy and humour to the game. is, apparently, intentional and could never get more than a planning needed to complete Alien 8 is another classic allows \"off screen action' to few footsteps in the second each screen is greater arcade adventure from take place while you are play. level. It takes some time to Ultimate superb graphics, ing. \"Off screen action\" Frak for the Commodore 64 realise what you have to do good sound and ... well, just basically means that you can is a well written and produced and then a great deal more rush out and get it. Seeing is destroy obstacles and kill game. It has quite a few time before you have believing! monsters that aren't in the original, and amusing, ideas perfected the technique for Even as we write maps of part of the maze which is However, cute little cavemen that particular level the game are zapping across being displayed on your and furry monsters aren't No doubt there are plenty the universe on route for the television. enought to make a top selling of whizz kids around who will C&VG offices. Don't miss Apart from my small gripe game and I have to put be able to complete this game next month's issue for the about the screen layout, the Frak well down my list of in half an hour. But for most of Alien 8 map extravaganza! game has been hardly favourite Commodore us, The Hacker should prove changed at all, although the games! to be a challenging game with  Graphics graphics are larger and a long lasting appeal.  Sound slightly better defined than  Graphics  Value the BBC. One big disappoint  Sound  Graphics  Playability 10 ment with Frak are the sound Value  Sound effects, or rather the lack of  Playability  Value them. The only sounds are  Playability FRAK those of his footsteps and his yo-yo, the weapon he carries SOFTWARE STAR MACHINE: CBM 64 everywhere with him and SUPPLIER: Statesoft ALIEN 8 uses with MACHINE: Spectrum/ great effect to PRICE: .95 knock monsters off narrow CBM 64/Amstrad MACHINE: Spectrum STAR One of my favourite ledges. SUPPLIER: Addictive SUPPLIER: Ultimate GAME games of last year was The aim of the game is to PRICE: .95 Spec./.95 PRICE: .95 Aardvark Software's guide Frak, a hulking, bad CBM 64/Amstrad Sabre Man in Space! Frak for the BBC. The tempered caveman, through Ever wondered how to go That's Ultimate's new hit rights to the game have several dangerous levels. about setting up your game Alien 8. Knight been bought up by the killing all the monsters with own software company? Lore-style graphics and Stevenage-based company, his yo-yo and collecting as Ever wanted to experiUltimate's unique 3D 3D Statesoft, and released on the many of the gold chalices he ence all the hassles of raising Filmation technique plus lus Commodore 64. can find. cash, programming games, lots of perplexing puzzles will Will The new game is very Once he has reached the advertising and distributing make Alien 8 another instant similar to the BBC original, secret ledge at the end of your product? Ever wondered classic. Alien 8 is a very special robot the guardian of the frozen cargo of a starship. The ship is a sort of Noah's Ark from another world packed with the knowledge and a few frozen members of a highly developed alien race escaping from a dead planet. Near the end of the trip to another, safer, world, nasty aliens intrude into the dusty silent environment and threaten the success of the mission. Alien 8 must protect the frozen inhabitants of his ship to ensure a safe landing on the new planet -and reactiGO vate certain areas of the craft during the approach to the new world. RosliteT YERES sia 84 "


"REVIEW.STOT FINDERS KEEPERS ROOM 20% CASH aaa OBJECTS E 36. 16 STRENGTH ne samo 11111111111111111 what it would really be like to be a software star? Kevin Toms, designer of that classic soccer strategy game Football Manager, could be onto another winner with Software Star a game which challenges you to become a computer whizzkid. Instead of facing relegation to Division Three, here you might become a bankrupt if you fail to read the market properly. produce the right games and waste your money advertising in any other magazine than Computer & Video Games! Kevin's game challenges you to get a game to number one in the charts and stay there for 10 months while at the same time making a pretax profit of ,000. Easy? Just like real life, it definitely isn't easy. The bank manager is always around the corner threatening you with a rolled up copy of your overdraft! with your booty -or you can Software Star is an original appropriate key some return to the king and join the strategy style game which costs just .99?\" objects react with others in famous Knights of the could catch on. It will I'd say the software strange ways which you'll Polygon table! certainly make any would-be th company had a mega-hit on discover as you play. Mastertronic have a real hit software supremo think twice their hands, mate!\" There are mazes to be on their hands with Finders about starting up his or her \"So Mastertronic games solved and puzzles to be keepers. A number one? You own business. Now, where can't be all that bad then?\" puzzled over in this original bet! did I put that bank statement. \"Pardon?\" combination of platform and \"Yes, Finders Keepers is the Atic Atac. latest budget release from There are two ways to play.  Graphics Mastertronic. And I found it You can either collect as  Graphics  Sound so I'm keeping it!\"  Sound  Value much treasure as possible n/a Finders Keepers features a from the castle and escape  Value  Playability  Playability neat new video character called Magic Knight — who by, all rights, should star in a few more games. He's such a FINDERS KEEPERS nice guy! MACHINE: Spectrum/ STAR king to find a gift for the prinHe has been sent by the 14 keyboard or joystick GAME cess who will soon be celeSUPPLIER: Mastertronic brating her birthday. Our PRICE: .99 mate Magic finds himself in \"Ere, I thought you said the Castle of Spriteland which Mastertronic games is packed with treasures — CRSN were a load of rubbish\" and energy-draining \"Yes, I cannot tell a lie. It monsters. has been known for me The game features more 136. 16 to pass a judgement of that than a touch of Adventure too kind in the past.\" as you can trade items \"Well, what would you say to with ghostly traders who are a game which has excellent more than willing to bargain graphics, loads of screens, with you. beats the pants off a lot of the You can also examine current hit games — and objects you find by hitting the no 3 FUNDERS 85 "


"Before R E.V.T.E.W.Ssangue Playability: Will the game keep you up until the early hours of the morning, as you attempt to complete just one more screen in a desperate attempt to beat it? Or does it send you to sleep the moment the introscreen appears? Could you spend hours locked away in your bedroom with it? STAR GAME turn... SORCERY MACHINE: Amstrad SUPPLIER: Virgin PRICE: .95 What's THE BEST game around for the Amstrad right now? Sorcery that's what. C&VG's review team move the Chare . you are in the woods. voted this the best game LORDE BOTTLE. um a Lore BTTLE. ever for this machine so far nera...74% energy....67% after spending hours playing it! I was the unlucky one who had to drop the joystick long enough to write this review. eye. Our screen shots can't Sorcery follows the current hope to do it justice. Oh, and arcade adventure trend — the sound is pretty neat too but does it with style. The idea especially when you fall is to help the last Free into a pool or river! Sorceror free all his mates Game play is absorbing imprisoned by the evil Necroan and totally addictive. Not a that will game you can get away from Overlord. easily. And with that your To do this, the Free reviewer rushed back into the Sorceror must solve puzzles, computer room, pushed aside find objects and destroy the the the crowd around the Necromancer's evil assistants — and all before the time limit runs out! Don't waste any more time The graphics are stunning reading this. Just go out and beautifully drawn and go d get Sorcery you'll be animated you are in the Chatea. enchanted! showing just what can be done with the CARRYING nothing. Graphics Amstrad. There are 40  Sound energy....76% screens to wend your way  Value through — each one with  Playability something new to delight the causing havoc in the city. 16 AUTOMAN 16 At the bottom of each screen there is a read-out MACHINE: CBM 64 telling you just where you are SUPPLIER: Bug Byte in the city and how much PRICE: .50 evidence you have collected Automan is the third among other things. game out to claim the A novel twist are the stages JSW Il crown. It stars the of the game which take the hero of the TV series form of a 3D maze style car Automan, the Tron-style chase complete with the computer generated super Autocar! — through super-sleuth who uses a the city streets as old Auto glowing cursor to create closes in on the villains. super-cars and superPackaging and docucopters. ESELLEERDE mentation are good as In the Bug Byte game, you'd expect from Bug Byte Automan is out to destroy an game. The graphics just not awe inspiring either. but the .50 price tag evil Automan clone aren't up to the standard There are a series of woiuld make me think twice created by an underworld expected on the 64 these platform screens inhabited by about this game. crime organisation who have days. various nasties. My favourite stolen a copy of the program However once you've got was the mutant shirt and tie!  Graphics used to generate our used to seeing SpectrumAutoman has to collect bits of  Sound computerised hero. style graphics on the evidence from each screen  Playability Great scenario shame Commodore, actually playing that will lead him to the  Value about the execution of the the game isn't that bad but Automan clone which is Ono 86 "


"SIES PIELINE EM SPECTRUM 48K .90 K & commodore 64 .95 .95 Taskset TASKSET LTD 3 HIGH STREET BRIDLINGTON O6 PR TEL:(0262) 673798/60268 "


"A PERFECT COUPLE COMMODORE Ve Conguins Volume Idem DU Just like ham and eggs and peaches and cream, Commodore User is the perfect companion for your 64 or Vic 20. Every month Commodore User is packed full of the latest new games reviews, special projects and business computing, plus the latest software charts, Tommy's Tips for your tricky computer problems, and much much more. Commodore User, the perfect magazine for Commodore owners, at your newsagent on the first of every month. All for only 85p. MU THE SX BUTTERFIELD DISK GAMES COMMODORE User Reviews Nothing will affect you (and your school or college) more than... A TAX ON THE PRESS IS A TAX ON YOU Dr There are strong reasons to believe the Chancellor of the Exchequer is planning to impose VAT on your magazine. Such a move would turn the clock back 130 years the last tax on the Press was repealed in 1855. Since then 'No tax on knowledge' has been a principle agreed by all Governments, even in the darkest days of war. A free Press is a tax-free Press. No Government should be given the power to impose financial pressure on a Press it may not like. Write to your MP insisting that he says 'NO' to any tax on reading. We'll send you a sample copy of EDUCATIONAL COMPUTING for just .00 write to: Valerie Day EDUCATIONAL COMPUTING Durrant House 8 Herbal Hill London ECI SEJ EDUCATIONAL COMPUTNG Cheques made payable to EDUCATIONAL COMPUTING) NGATAS "


"The next move is up to you... * * * * * All American Adventures Ltd., Unit 10, Parkway Industrial Estate, Heneage Street, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. "


"ATARI SINGLE disk drive owners. How to write on side two of disk. Send  for full details to: Mr B Sweeney, 176 Lytham Road, Preston, Lancashire PR2 2ER. BBC 'B' PLUS Teletext Adapter and cassette recorder plus 33 games worth  bargain at  phone 0302 537409 between 6pm and 10pm. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE for sale. Great Space Race, White Lightning . Sabre Wulf .50 Pictureesque Assembler . Monitor . Dark Star, Skool Daze, Doomsday Castle, Jetset Willy, Zombie Zombie .50. Lot for .00 Telephone (0700) 3493 after 4.15pm ask for Robin. DOWNSWAY PROGRAMMABLE joystick interface for Spectrum 16 or 48K . Write to N. Ball, 71 Hoveringham Drive, Bucknall, Stoke on Trent, Staffs ST2 9PS or phone (0282) 262693 after 4pm and ask for Neil. ATARI GAMES disc or cassette sell or swap many American titles eg. Dimension X MAS.H. etc. Phone 0642 315924 after 4pm ask for Robert VIC 20 + CN2 cassette, 16K expansion, 12 games including The Perils of Willy, Arcadia and Race Run. 8 cartridges including The Count Mole Attack.  ono. Phone Walsall 29218. ORIC ATMOS 48K computer, keyboards, games, magazines  ono. Tel Paul-Orton 413 weekdays after 5pm. ANIROG KONG. For the solution to the Commodore 64 game send cheque or postal order for  to Colin Davis, 24 Carrickburn Road, Carrickfergus, County Antrim, Northern Ireland BT38 7ND and include a large s.a.e. all screens are fully mapped. ATARI 600XL (brand new) , 1010 recorder , Pole Position , Zaxxon , Airstrike II , Defender , and many more books and games at bargain prices. 0685 813664. EXTERNAL ROM box for BBC Micro 32K. Houses up to 8 individual roms and connects direct to micro. Unwanted prize Superb condition  ono. Burton-on-Trent 791009. All necessary leads supplied. 48K SPECTRUM, tape recorder, turbo interface, joystick and eighty games including all ultimate and most top titles worth  in total sell for  ono. Tel: Chris 0222-625375 after 6pm COLECOVISION WITH Cosmic Avenger, Smurf, Donkey Kong and Venture. Almost brand new and still boxed with all instructions. Bought for , an absolute giveaway at ! Contact (0382) 739393 before 6pm QUALITY ORIGINAL games for sale including Space Race, Doomdark's Revenge, Stage Coach, Codename Mat etc. Send sae for list to Trevor Wood, 4 Cenerals Wood, Washington, Tyne & Wear NE38 9BL. WE ARE a group of Italian Spectrum's users who would like to undertake an initiative of exchange of ideas, experience and software with some English users. If you are interested in it, please write to: Spectrumclub Desenzano, clo Piervittorio Trebucchi, via Castello 1, 25015 Desenzano (BS) Italy. WANTED COLOUR Amstrad. Will swap for two month old Commodore 64 data recorder, games magazines. May accept green screen Amstrad and games. Phone Belfast 776891 ask for Andy. Northern Ireland offer preferred. ATARI 400 (16K, cassette recorder, orginal software. Donkey Kong, Dig Dug and Space Shuttle also basic cartridge and manuals, reference cards and Quickshot Il joystick. Only  Tel Southend (0702) 645172 LYNX 48K perfect condition, used once. . Call Wendie Pearson on 01-251 6222 (day). T199/4A PLUS cassette, leads, joystick . Extended basic plus Teach Yourself Extended Basic . Parsec . Adventure module plus two adventures . Plus assorted games, books and listings  or  the lot. Tel (051) 639 6072 FOR SALE Commodore 64 + C2N cassette unit +  of software including: Hunchback II, International Soccer, Decathlon + Speech Synthesiser + reset switch.  not for sale separately. Tel 0290 22005. SHARP MZ-8OK built in printer port, software, cassette recorder extra chips excellent condition  ono. Maidstone (0622) 671634 BBC OR MSX owners. Wanted to exchange software. I have over 500 BBC and 20 MSX titles. Phone (05827) 69152 or write to Ranjan, 3 Wensley Close, Harpenden, Herts ALS 1RS. COMMODORE 64 Spectrum software: Up to 60% off, all unused. S.A.E. for lists to Edgar Rose, 2 Butts Square, Sholing, Southampton. Please no phone calls. 48K SPECTRUM ramturbo joystick interface, Quickshot Il joystick, magazines, software worth . V.G.C. all together worth  sell for . Software includes Underwurde, Knighloe, Ghostbusters, Skooldaze, Matchday and Decathlon. Phone Shoreham 3219. VIC 20, C2N cassette unit, software, magazines, VGC, buyer collects  ono. Tel 0243 602857 evenings. COMMODORE 64 games to swap or sell over 100. Phone 0752 665200 or write to Carl 13 Lipton Vale, Plymouth, Devon, PL4 7HF. BBC 'B' used once,  ono, perfect condition. Also Cumana 3%\"double disk drive unwanted present, never used  (worth .95). Call Wendie Pearson on 01 251 6222 (DAY). TEXAS T199/4A consol  ono. Joysticks  ono. Invaders  ono. Cassette leads, cassette games, good books for T199/4A plus more all going cheap. Phone Maidstone 63592. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE for sale including Match Day, Automania and Kosmic Kanga, 20 in all .50 each or  all. Will also swap. Ring Lymm 5727 after 4.30pm ask for Michael. ATARI VCS plus joysticks and five games including Space Invaders  ono. Telephone Brentwood (0277) 222573. ZX SPECTRUM, Protek switchable interface + joystick tape recorder and  worth of software. Total value new  sell for . Write to J. E. Fryer, 67 Coquet, Ricleton, Washington, Tyne & Wear. If interested. TI-99/4A, 65 games on cassette, 3 modules, Munchman, Hunt to Wumple, Connect Four. 3 teach yourself Basic cassette, cassette lead, cassette recorder, dustcover.  ono, Phone Sunbury on Thames 80882. ATARI 600XL, 16K, recorder, joystick, 4 books and  worth of software. Excellent graphics and sound, as new. Worth over , a bargain at  ono. Tel 01 508 2098. SPECTRUM 48K with  of software + Sinclare and Kempston joystick interface + Quickshot Ijoystick + WH Smith tape recorder with  yours for  phone (01) 381 5072 SPECTRUM SOFTWARE Jet Set Willy. Trashman, Tiler, VU-File plus many others. Price: .50 each. For more details write to David Duffy, Headford, Co. Galway, Ireland. ORIC ATMOS 48K, brand new, unused, still in box, full one year guarantee. . Tel: 01 654 1588 after 6pm (Eddie). T199/4A Pole Position, 3D Racing games, Caterpillar, Cavern Shooter, Sniper, all TI basic .50 all on 1 tape. S.J.M. Bindoff, 43 Westbourne Grove, Hessle, N Humberside HU13 OGG also wanted minimum module + assember manual (0482) 643659. COMMODORE 64 software to sell or swap Ghostbusters, Raid Over Moscow, Zaxxon, Tapper, Hunchback II, Summer Games, Beachead over 80 more contact Brendan on (0923) 720695 or write for listings. 115 Hornhill Road, Maple Cross, Rickmansworth, Watford. Send sae prices from . T199/4A for sale with Speech Synthesizer, joysticks, Parsec, TI Invaders, Munchman, and Tombstone City and cassette games all in original packing and cables only . Tel Amersham 28539 EUREKA HELP wanted to solve this challenge 75% on first session 50% on second 50% on third will swap secrets or lets work together. Phone Shaun on Newcastle 2662617 HELP! COMMODORE 64 software wanted. Buy or swap. Write to Stephen Birds, Overhide, Biggin by Hartington, Buxton, Derbyshire SK17 ODQ. TEXAS TI-99/4A, with all leads, Speech Synthesizer, Terminal Emulator 1, Buck Rogers, Defender, Adventure/Pirate cartridges. Joystick Adaptor, Cassette Lead 35 games/utilities on cassettes all boxed with manuals and magazines etc.  ono. Phone Simond (0664) 822835 (Melton Mowbray) evenings. FOR SALE 48K Spectrum games Space Shuttle, Skooldaze, Zombie Zombie, Stonkers, Flight Simulation, Urgan Upstart, Zigzag. Espionage, Island, Dark Star, Hulk, Velnor's Lair, Space Station, Zebra. All only .50. Contact Neil Williams, 711 Borough Road, Tranmere, Birkenhead L42 606. C64 SOFTWARE for sale. All originals at less than half price. E. G. Psi Warrior .50, Quasimodos Revengue .50. Send sae for list to P Carrick, Kildare, Morton Road, Brading, Isle of Wight PO36 OBJ. 48K SPECTRUM Kempston interface joystick, Sanyo tape recorder  worth of software including Decathlon, Ghostbusters, Matchday, Bruce Lee, Beachead etc worth  sell  ono. Tel Manchester 969 8867. ATARI. Send sae for list of software and books. Silly prices disks, cartridges, cassettes. 75 Stonleigh Avenue, Enfield, Middx. SPECTRUM 48K including cassette and  software inclduing Sherlock, Fighter Pilot, Jet Set Willy. All genuine  ono. Tel 061 980 8030 after 6pm. SHARP MZ-80 A/K listings. Any length. Fast service. Send tape and  (postal orders only). Made payable to L D Thomas, 9 Crossfields, Croespenmaen, Crumlin, Gwent NP1 4DD. VANSOFT presents for 48K Atari's Scramble Fighter 100% M/C game. Cassette for disk only .99 send cheque, P.O. to 108 Mayfield Grove, Harrogate, N Yorks H91 4EY. COMMODORE 64, C2N cassette unit, over 150 games including Ghostbusters, Bruce Lee, Valhalla and International Soccer, Joysticks, Magazines etc. Phone (0883) 843777 after 6pm Monday Friday for details. RACEHORSE. (48K Spectrum). Try to win money with your horses from Folkestone to Epsom. Features buying and selling horses. Hiring jockeys, choice of training ground, much more. Send  cheque or write to S. A. Jeffery, 84 Saddlers Walk, Blackpole, Worcester. 48K SPECTRUM, 70 top named games worth over . Lots of magazines. Total cost is . Still boxed. Sell at only . Tel (021) 783 0884. After 5pm call Darren COMMODORE 64 Koalapad and Kolasoftware 1 month old . Also American software to swap or sell including latest titles. Epyx Synapse, Electronic Arts, Datasoft, Atarisoft, Activision Sublogic and more. Write to David Wood, 1 Windle Royd Lane, Burnley Road, Halifax, w Yorkshire HX2 7L4. 48K SPECTRUM, tape deck, both still under guarantee, Kempston Interface and joystick, over  of software, including Sabre Wulf, Pyjamarama, Jetset Willy etc. Books and magazines. All for  ono. Phone Wimborne 0202 883044. COLECO VISION for sale including Turbo, Donkey Kong, Donkey Kong Junior, Zaxxon, Looping Time, Pilot, Mr Dol All new and boxed  the lot or swap for Commodore 64. Phone Dave 01 858 5190 after 7pm. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE for sale. All originals: Pitfall 2, Beamrider, Matchday, River Rescue, plus others all . Send sae to Sean Rice, 47 Priory Oak, Brackla, Bridgent, Mid Glamorgan CF31 2HY URGENT! URGENT! Atari 600XL computer, books and magazines for sale now! Bought November, good condition so hurry now and ring first come first served for  cost . DRAGON 32 joystick, dustcover, tape recorder, complete collection of Dragon User  worth of software including Cuthbert Collection. Cost . Give away bargain price  ono. Phone 021 556 0467. VIC 20 and cassette recorder, super expander 3K worth .  of education software.  of cartridge games. Quickshot 1 joystick. Introduction to Basic parts 1 & 2,  each over  cassette games. 's magazines. Ring 021 554 6493 4-Bpm. War, Cavern Shoe S.J.M. umberside SPECTRUM 48K. Eleven month guarantee, Turbo interface and Quickshot II, TV, tape recorder and  of software including Knightlore and Underwurde worth  sell for . Phone (0494) 785223 ask for Mark (evenings only) 90 "


"Imposames Black one (0582 ERS. unhe namerything 48K SPECTRUM plus eleven games, joystick and interface, 20 computer magazines, two program books. Excellent condition. Swap for Commdore 64 or sell lot  ono. Tel 0908 642987. 48K SPECTRUM and tape recorder and 20 games including Knighlore, Atic Atac and many others worth . Sell for  or swap for Commodore 64. Excllent condition 01-886 3159. ATARI 400 48K + cassette recorder, joysticks, leads, manuals, basic, + cartridges Including Star Raiders, Pacman and cassettes, Blue Max, Bruce Lee. All boxed and in excellent condition. Still under guarantee. COMMODORE 64. to swap only, 300 on disc, 300 on tape. Send you list to Ray Reardon, 23 Cadogan Drive, Winstanley, Wigan, Lancashire WN36JH or Telephone Wigan 213788. BBC B SOFTWARE Elite , Jet Pack , Zalaga , Mr EE! , Son of Blagger , Missile Base, Space Fighter, Galaxy Wars  each (0829) CBM 64 games to swap. Many British and American titles send lists to N Boak, 4 Farm Field Court, Thorplands, Northants NN3 1YF. Cassette only. CBM 64 SOFTWARE to swap or sell. Tape and Disk. Over 2000 top titles including Archon II Ghostbuster, Bruce Lee, Pitfall II, Spy Vs Spy. Send sae for list to: Kennwart Felix, Postlargernd, 4300 Essex N, West Germany. ATARI. Interested in exchange of software, disc preferred, especially with users abroad, Germany, France, USA and of course Great Britain. Send your list to T. Smith, 15 Tansley Hill Avenue, Dudley, West Midlands. SHARP MZ-700 data recorder and game, excellent condition,  ono. Tel Ynysynwl 790120. ACETRONIC GAMES CONSUL, two joysticks, Golf, Electronic Pinball, Air Sea Attack, Tank Battle, Olympics, Space War, Chess, Circus, Super Knockout, Horse Racing, bargain sale  or split. 0252 331821. SHARP MZ-700. Immaculate condition. Hardley used. Including 22 games SpeechSynth and MZ-BOA-BOK + MZ-700 basics + manual. New tape deck. Everything boxed and guaranteed. Would cost . For quick sale 190. Tel 041 333 0319 (after 4.30pm). DRAGON 32.  worth of software includes King Shuttle, Pedro etc. Two joysticks. Good condition. Boxed. All for only  ono. Tel Simond 85.2285 (Plymouth area). Between 6-9pm. FOR SALE 48K Spectrum, Joystick and inter. face, Ferguson, Datarecorder, light pen. Plus  worth of top original software. Also games tapes with nearly 100 games plus over 30 magazines. Total value. COMMODORE VIC 20 + 16 switchable Ram with Database unit +  worth of software. Will sell for . Phone 061 336 7475 ask for lan after 4pm. COMMODORE 64 games all originals  to . Telephone 061 432 1164 after 6pm ask for David or ring 061 432 4710 ask for lan. SPECTRUM 48K with D K Tronics keyboard, Fuller amplifier, Quickshot ll joystick and interface, zx printer with 10 rolls of paper, Ferguson cassette recorder, books and magazines, over 250 games and utilities.  ono. Tel 061 620 2598. ORIC 1 computer with over  worth of software plus membership to Oric owner magazines plus books and tape recorder. Sell for  or nearest offer. Phone Birmingham 770 0047 ATARI 400 32K, 410 recorder, joystick, and 58 games including 13 roms (Encounter Popeye Necromancer) worth +, sell for  ono. Phone 0908 563888, 9-5pm, ask for Chris. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE for sale or swap all zals available including Blue Max, Cyclone, Hunchback II, Technician Ted, Boulder Dash, Spiderman, Airwolf, Starstrike. Phone Chaz or Bondy on Leigh (0942) 672250 or 674773. 48K SPECTRUM, ZX Printer, Kempston Interface, Cassette Recorder. Latest software including Lords of Midnight etc. over 20 titles. All in excellent condition with manuals, leads etc,  ono. Telephone Swansea 68952. ACORN ELECTRON 5 months old. New cassette recorder. Top magazine +  of great software including Micro Olympics. Total price  Will sell for  ono. Tel Peter on Burford (0993) 3511. COMMODORE 64 software for sale or swap. All latest. Including Tapper, Falk, Hesgames, Raid on Bungelling Bay, Moscow, Impossible Mission, Conan, Frak 64, Black Thunder, Spy Hunter, etc. Phone (05827) 5232 DRAGON 32, joysticks, books, magazines and software including Backtrack, Megamaze, Horace, Avenger, Superbowl, Morbid Mansion Belsl, Franklins Tomb, Ring of Darkness, Pettigrews Diary, Space Shuttle, Leggit, Mined-Out worth hundreds of pounds. . J. Birley, Eyri Dons, Mona Terrace, Criccegth, Gwynedd. Afternoons or evenings. COMMODORE VIC 20, with cassette 16K ram pack (switchable) books and software for . Write to Stuart Smith, 330 Banbury Road, Oxford 50249 after 6.30pm. ATARI 600 XL, new program recorder, Quickshot II joysticks, many games including Zaxxon. Crazycopter and many more. Worth over  sell for a bargain  ono. 10 games on 1 cassette , or one planet game for  on cassette. Telephone Ashok, Shropshire (0952 614107) after 4pm. WANTED Commodore 64 or 16 computer. In exchange for large quantity of Hornby. including Three Engine's, Controller, Buildings Booking Hall etc, Carriages, Wagons and large quantity of track and accessories. Apply 64 Regent Road, Mablethorpe, Lincs. Tel Mablethorpe (0521) 72584. CBS COLECOVISION with 8 cartridges cost . Sell for . Phone (025587) 850. 20 INTELLIVISION games plus 3 voice games, only  each. Send sae for full list. 11 Lindfield Road, Reddish, Stockport, Cheshire SK5 6SD. T199/4A COMPUTER complete with data recorder, all leads, two joysticks, Teach Yourself Basic package, 20+ games, 25+ listings,  worth of magazines, . Contact Jon (0452) 855274 after 4pm. BBC 'B' 1.2 OSfor sale with cassette recorder, 'view' word processor chip, Atari joystick interface and 20 original games including Elite, Manic Miner, Aviator, Ghouls. Excellent condition. Bargain . Tel Marlow 73422. COMMODORE 64, cassette, joystick, programmers reference guide, selection of games and books. . Silver End 83273. 48K SPECTRUM + F.D.S. keyboard + Fuller master unit + Kempston joystick interface +  latest software + Mags. Total worth . Sell for . Tel: 0742 556659 after 4pm. ATARI Vcs, seventeen games including Decathlon, Space Shuttle and Pitfall complete with joysticks worth  will sell for . Contact Stephen Holford, 35 Stonelea Cam, Glos GL 11 6LG. ATARI GAMES wanted. Disk or cassette, buy or swap, mine for yours. R Conway, 9 Berry Leys, Luton, Beds. ATARI 400 48K with keyboard, cassette recorder, joystick, basic, manuals and over  worth games bought for over  will consider offers. Tel 0272 663475 ask for Paul. ATARI 400/800XL games for sale or swap Cassettes: Preppie, Sea Dragon, Jaw Breaker, Desmonds Dungeon, Space Shuttle; Disks: Canyon Climber, Race in Space: Cartridges: Centipede, Carnival, Massacre, Missle Command. Phone 01-777 1842 anytime. T19914A SOFTWARE from only . Games Pack 1:  TI Pontoon:  Nuclear Pods:  Jungle Jim (Ex basic): .50 or send sae for list. Send to: Dean Garraghty, 62 Thomson Ave, Balby. Doncaster, DN4 ONU. ATARI 400 48K + basic cartridge, tape recorder, joystick, games, Zaxxon, Submarine, Commander, Orc Attack, Computer War, Preppie Il and manuals, leads and original box. Worth  sell for  ono. Tel Wells 73212. SPECTRUM SOFTWARE. Swap your used software.  membership. .25 per exhange. Over 70 titles. We also purchase you unwanted software. S.A.E. to \"Swapwares\" 76 Denison Road, Colliers Wood, London SW19. AMSTRAD STOCK MARKET. In response to world events you must shrewdly buy and sell shares to maximise your earnings, 2-6 players. Only .95. Gary Burmiston, 19 Hereford Avenue, Ollerton, Notts NG22 9AE. ATARI 400 16K Quickshot II Joystick, Program Recorder Manuals, Leads, Magazines and over 100 games including cartridges. All boxed and in excellent condition. Selling for . Telephone Dundee (0382) 28915. ACORN ELECTRON, 9 months old, data recorder, plus 1 expansion module, Quickshot 1 joystick, stacks of books and magazines, only  ono. Tel Maidenhead (0628) 28348, after 6pm. VIC 20 for quick sale at bargain price of . Includes data recorder switchable 16K ram and many games. Also four cartridgues and books. Phone Harlow 23623. BBC MODLER + 2 Cumana Disc Drives, Seikosha GP-100AMK printer. 4 roms and expansion Romsocket + over 100 programs worth over  only  the lot. Phone Basingstoke (0256) 478446 after 6pm. VIC 20 starter pack 16K switchable expansion 5 year guarantee joystick leads various games, Frogger, War Games, Frantic etc. Sell for  or swap for 48K Spectrum. Phone 729 1554. TEXAS INSTRUMENTS, extended basic good condition as new with manual  if interested telephone (0283) 813879. COMMODORE 64 software for sale or swap. All latest including Tapper, Flak, Ghostbusters, Matchpoint, Seven Cities of Gold, Hesgames, Impossible Mission, Danger Mouse, Conan, etc. Phone (05827) 5232. 48K SPECTRUM, good condition. Kempston Interface and joystick, tape recorder, Currah microspeech magazines etc. Software worth over  includes Lords of Midnight, Doomdarks Revenge, Quill. Tel Churchdown (Glos) 714394 write to 14 Springfield Close, The Reddings, Cheltenham, Glos GL51 6SE  ono. SPECTRUM 48K, tape recorder, joystick, lightpen, interface, console desk, TV, many books, over forty latest games, bargain . Brighton 595730. COMMODORE 64. C2N cassette unit, two joy. sticks and software. All new . Commodore 1541 disk drive with software also new . Telephone Halifax (0422) 55851. 48K SPECTRUM, 6 games, programmable interface, Bush cassette recorder, Kempston joystick. All for . Ross Devlin, 61 Cecil Street, Hillhead, Glasgow, G12 8RW. COMMODORE OWNERS. Unwanted tape collections? Write giving me the names and price required for whole lot. Everything considered. I. McAuliffe, 15 West Common Grove, Harpenden, Herts ALS 2LL. COMMODORE 64 software to sell or swap. Disk and cassette. Many software titles including Impossible Mission, Doodle, Hesgames, Empire of Karn, Black Thunder and many more. Tel 0254 852779 Simon. COMMODORE 64 software for sale or swap. All latest including Hesgames, Spy Hunter, Frak! Impossible Mission, Tapper, Raid On Bungling Bay, Moscow, Dallas, Conan, Strike Eagle, etc. Phone (05827) 5232. VIC 20 for sale 16K expansin, C2N recorder, Quickshot II joystick, lots of software. Excellent condition. Worth  selling for  ono. Tel 01 864 3697 after 5.30pm. DRAGON 32 for sale includes joysticks recorder and  of cassette software including Chuckie Egg, Pedro, Kriegspeil and other top games cost  accept  ono. Tel Peterborough (0733) 45052. CBM 64 user wants to swap software, tape or disk, send list to De Buf, Post Bus 19, 8240 Gistel, Belgium SPECTRUM AND COMMODORE owners. Solution to the fund game by Mikrogen, Pyjamarama. Send SAE and 50p to Richard Happer, Johns Hill House, Duddingston Village, Edinburgh EH 15 3PZ. Scotland. COMMODORE 64 DISCOPIER. Discatac, copies error protected discs. Other features include: -52K Buffer, 1 or 2 Drives, Multipart or single files copied. Errors 20, 21, 22, 23, 29. 100% M/C. Only .95. Ian Beevis, 12 Leicester Road, Maidstone, Kent, ME15. ARCADE SOFTWARE. FOR THE LARGEST STOCK OF GAMES IN LONDON. Now we can be reached elsewhere in the UK. We stock Commodore 64 Spectrum Atari Amstrad. Send stamped address envelope for our price list. Please state micro. Arcade Software, 210/212 Shopping Hall, Myrtle Road, East Ham, London E6. 91 "


"ARCADE By Clare Edgeley You play the part of Thomas whose girlfriend Sylvia has been abducted the first you know of her whereabouts is from the information contained in an anonymous note. Thomas rushes off to the temple, only to find that he has to kick and punch his way through hordes of the Devil's hatchetmen to reach Sylvia. He starts off on the ground Stern Electronics have floor, knowing that she is, in released their first pin for ONE IN THE EYE die, he will be thrown all probability, being held on around three years. Lazer backwards into a space the fifth. Each floor is Lord is a copy of one of their FOR THE EYE! wave and a life will be lost. guarded by one Kung-Fu older games, Quicksilver. After the Eye has been Master, specialising in a Stern decided to quit pinball Space, the Final Frontier, and destroyed, the robot will particular area of the art, and production in favour of a the year is Stardate 1984. then be free to travel through his trainees. Thomas knows larger output of video games The year in which I Robot space liberating other planets he has to conserve his well we all make mistakes. from Atari destroyed the Evil where the process must be strength if he is to see Sylvia I hope that Lazer Lord will be Eye and returned his galaxy repeated, though each again. the first of a new run the to democratic rule. attempt increases in He fights like the demon only problem is that Stern Determined to rid their difficulty. himself a whirling, kicking, have filed for Chapter planet of this terrible scourge Whilst travelling through jumping, fighting machine Eleven, a process in US bank--for the Eye has gained full space, it is possible to gain controlled in his anger by an ruptcy. power and rules their lives bonus points from shooting eight-way joystick and punch The good news concerning mercilessly the inhabiall tetrahedrons and you can and kick buttons. The Devil's the demise of D. Gottlieb, as tants band together and also earn an extra life by men fall like ninepins but reported in the February choose an unhappy interface shooting the individual there always seem to be issue, is that the pinball side robot to lead the fight against letters of 1 ROBOT as they more to take their places. At of the company has been Big Brother. appear in space waves. last he reaches the staircase taken over. Two former The game rules are simple Once the game is in play, it and, at the top, the Master of directors of Mylstar have no jumping! And that is is possible to view the terrain the first floor. The fight is bought the pinball production the only way in which I at different angles by hard and draining but line and are currently Robot is ever going to get pressing the start button a Thomas wins through and producing two machines. near enough to assassinate nice touch and one that makes his way upward. The new company is called the Eye which glows a allows you a bird's eye view Premier Technology and demonic red as it casts its .of the positioning of the red haven't been able to find out gaze over the planets. zones. if the new pins will bear this However, at certain times it The graphics are perhaps name, or that of Gottlieb. changes colour as it blinks or the most unusual of any The aforementioned games looks away and on these arcade game around a are Touchdown and El occasions the robot can cubist's delight. Control is by Dorado, the latter being a advance forward by way of joystick and two fire buttons. remake of a 1975 electrothe red zones thus Good luck to all who are mechanical destroying the Eye's courageous enough to fight The latest offering from protective shields. the Evil Eye. Your life Bally is Spy Hunter, yet Once the shields are expectancy is short but oh another \"Pin of the Video\", destroyed, he can go in for boy! the satisfaction on One of the first things that the kill. But the Eye has other killing the Eye. If he receives too many struck me was a rather nice means of defence and the punches, his energy levels cabinet design, a feature not robot will be assailed by CAN YOU RESIST ed by CAN YOU RESIST drop to a fatal level. often given too much attack waves of beach balls, However, it is possible for attention by manufacturers. I pyramid mines and, in later THE TEMPTATION? him to absorb a large number think this is the only machine levels, space sharks all of of hits and to wriggle out of I've seen where the flippers which must be avoided or \"Go to the Devil's temple trouble more often than not. are not dead in the centre of destroyed. here the sons of the Devil To regain his energy, he has the playfield. The game is a The robot will find a red will entertain you...\" and if only to knock a few of the Back To Basics, but with a pyramid on every third it's entertainment you're henchmen down but should very interesting playfield screen which must be after, you'll certainly get it in they succeed in draining his layout. Features include: entered after the Eye's Kung-Fu Master from Irem energy he will lose a life. shooter lane rollovers, four destruction. Inside is a cache Corporation one of the The pace of the game is flippers, drop targets and the of jewels to collect although most hard-hitting, breathvery fast and the illusion of interesting Boop-a-Ball\" there is time for only one taking fast games for Kung. speed is enhanced by a feature. attempt. Should the robot Fu adepts. catchy jingle which really 11:11 3035 92 "


"ACTION CHICKEN Shift lends itself to the action. The always connect half the Chicken Shift is one of way to enjoy the thrills and graphics are smooth and chutes together, there are those games whose very spills of the race track picturesque and Thomas' always sections left hanging simplicity makes it without friends and family movements are lifelike. in mid-air. thoroughly addictive and dragging you off to see your Although the names Thomas As the eggs start to roll, it enjoyable. local psychiatrist. and Sylvia don't sound very is vital for the farmer to be on Attack Rush from Konami Japanese, don't worry as the hand to switch the sections is one of the new releases music isn't either. But the and so ensure a safe landing and is surprisingly great fun. action is! for the eggs. The aim is to get round the If you thought that Karate This is very easy at the course in one piece within Champ was good wait 'til beginner's level and it's easy the time limit allowed and to you try this one! to grow complacent as you forget all about the rules and juggle the eggs to their regulations of racing. journey's end. The chickens You are allowed in fact, sense your feelings of \"it's a it would be foolish not to sinch!\" and start laying to bump into, crash into, faster. It soon becomes jump onto your opponents' almost too much for your cars and generally do to them reflexes as fast as one egg FAST & FURIOUS what they are doing to you travels down one chute, TADI QrURIOUS trying to stop you reaching another will be taking the FREE. FOR ALL the finishing tape. Your car other chute and the sections can turn somersaults and will not be joined. There can Games designers seem to jump into the adjoining lane be several eggs rolling at have reverted to the days of splat! on top of your once which tends to make their childhood when they opponent's car, effectively life really hectic. enjoyed playing with their squashing him. At this point you tend to Dinky cars and racing round Various obstacles litter the ALL YOUR EGGS lose concentration, forget to a Scalextric. track including huge oil IN TWO BASKETS! flip the sections over and the There is a vast amount of drums which it is wise to eggs fall off and smash. The driving and racing games avoid. Arcade Action in the chicken chickens' eyes almost already on the market and If you manage to destroy coop! The egg-laying cycle of twinkle and they start to lay more keep streaming in to all your fellow competitors, a chicken is a highly unusual at an even greater rate. join the ranks. you will gain extra fuel and theme on which to base a The graphics are beautiThey do make money so it can forge ahead to more game after all, chickens fully portrayed, bright and could be assumed that men destruction. aren't that interesting and colourful and there is an are just little boys at heart Attack Rush is a fast and one tends to think of them, option for a two player game and would play with their toy exciting game you will more often than not, as part where you can choose to cars if society wasn't so disneed cat-like reflexes and no of one's Sunday dinner. play either as partners approving of such activities. sense of fair play. Well worth However, Bally/Sente have against the computer or as However, playing on the spending a few 10ps on this come up with Chicken Shift, opponents. video screen is an acceptable one. the story of a couple of bored battery hens, and turned the Join the Professionals! Carl manage to qualify on 2m36, idea into an unusual game Lyons from Huddersfield in a mole sticks its head out of which calls for quick Yorkshire shows how you the ground giving you 1,000 reactions. too can beat Luke Skywalker more points. The two chickens, in and Daley Thompson at their SUPER LOCOMOTIVE: cahoots to thwart the egg Jown games. If you have any Conserving Fuel collecting farmer, have tips on how to make the On round four, and every predecided to lay so many eggs most of your favourite game, ceeding round which is a so quickly that most will please send them in to multiple of four, chug smash on the ground before Arcade Action, C&VG, through the first tunnel he can catch them. Two 30-32 Farringdon Lane, where you will see an oil train narrow, convoluted chutes London, EC1R 3AU. when you get to the other run and cross each other STAR WARS: Using the side. Collect it and reverse from the nests to the Force back into the tunnel until the collecting baskets and the You will be awarded 5,000 exit is well out of sight. Move eggs usually run down these points for using the force screen and hit a hoverina bird to the middle track and shoot to land quite safely. if you don't fire whilst going which will fall to the ground the mail train which is behind However, where the down the trench givina vou 1.000 bonus you. The whole process can chutes cross, there are TRACK & FIELD: The Javelin points. be repeated for ever you'll moveable sections of pipe in the Javelin event, get a TRACK & FIELD: The High never run out of fuel and this which switch through 180 speed of more than 1180 Jump process can be used to give degrees to connect one cm/s and an angle of 80 in the High Jump, deliberyou a \"hit\" of 99 which will chute to another. There are degrees. Your javelin will ately fail twice at the first give you a huge bonus when several of these connecting then fly out of the top of the height (2m15). If you then you get to the station. sections and, whereas they "


"From the latest Adventure Range commodore DISK .95 ** *** zuen Upon escaping the crumbling ruins of Shadowguard, the black fortress of Minax. you lay your weary body on the now-sacred ground. As you rest, you remember your first encounter with the evil wizard of Mondain, whom you later tracked down and destroyed. The existence of his apprentice. Minax, was soon revealed and the crusade was begun again. Younger and more cunning than her mentor, she has been much more difficult to vanquish. But now your sense of accomplishment is touched by a chilling fear. Have all vestiges of evil been removed? Somehow. you sense that your treacherous foes have not been eliminated. Without further feats of skill. daring, and perseverance, all of your past accomplishments may be lost. You stand up. prepare your armour, and walk to the dimension door. Stepping in the hunt resumes. **** XXXXXXXXXXXXX******** All American Adventures Ltd., Unit 10, Parkway Industrial Estate, reet, Birmingham B7 4LY. Telephone: 021-359 3020. "


"ENGLISH SOFTWARE'S GREAT ATARI AMAZING OFFERS SAVE  Atari 800 XL Computer plus Atari 1050 disk drive only..................95 SAVE  Atari 1050 disk drive plus 10 blank disks (worth ) for only... .........95 All prices include VAT For FREE tast delivery please send cheques/PO to: S.J.B. DISK SUPPLIES (Dept 01) 11 Oundle Drive, Nottingham NGS 1BN ATARI RANGE IS NOW THE SOFTWARE LENDING AND EXCHANGE LIBRARY SPECTRUM, COMMODORE 64, DRAGON, VIC 20. BBC & ZX-81 YES! We have programs for your computer We hire programs from 50p. IZX-811. Two weeks. 15.00 LIFE MEMBERSHIP Less than the cost of a single game brings You our membership kit, including hire listings, software exchange catalogue and introductory letter. We now have OVER 300 HIRE TITLES, and 500 EXCHANGE TITLES with large Spectrum and Commodore sections Al mai dealt with on a daily basis and OVERSEAS MEMBERS VERY WELCOME New software discounted to our members at impressive AVAILABLE AT SELECTED BRANCHES OF W.H. SMITH (SEE PAGE 53) Send cheque/PO for .00 to: THE SOFTWARE LENDING LIBRARY PO Box 3. CASTLEFORD WEST YORKSHIRE WF10 1UX Stating name, address and computer type, FORGET THE REST AND JOIN THE BEST! ATARIAMSTRAD LIVERPOOL SECOND T199/4A USERS SHOW 28th April 1985 11am-5pm Corn Exchange, Royal Pavillion, Brighton. Extensive range of hardware, software and books. See the demo. Meet fellow users. Share in the swop shop and special show offers. Refreshments and meals available. Organised by the nationwide user group. T199/4A EXCHANGE, 40 BARRHILL, PATCHAM, BRIGHTON BN1 SUF. Tel: 0273 503968. SAE for details of advance admission and bumper quarterly magazine. Become your own astrologer. Astrological chart programs, 100% accurate and reliable for professional or beginner. Tapes for  including P&P or SAE for details of Disc Systems to: S.A.C. SOFTWARE 14 Longdown Lawn Lane, Hythe, Southampton S04 5GW THE FOOTBALL MANAGER GAME FOR ANY 48K ATARI FEATURING: The full first division programme, together with all F.A. Cup, Milk Cup, and European Cup games Varying skill and stamina levels, scouts reports, injuries, team and tactics selection, full league table, managerial rating and save game facility. ON CASSETTE ONLY AT .45 From D. Corbishley, 212 Walmersley Old Road, Bury, BL9 6SA. SO GD PERSONAL SOFTWARE USERS ASSOCIATION Benefit from our huge library of cassettes for exchange or hire. More than 1000 titles for the Spectrum, CBM 64, Vic 20, BBC, Dragon, Atari, T.I., and Oric. Cheap hires and exchanges and special sale lines. For details send large SAE to P.S.U.A., 19 Lammerton Terrace, Dundee DD4 7BR stating which micro. ARCADE SOFTWARE (UK) No. 1 Mail Order in UK For Commodore 16 and 16+4; Commodore 64; Spectrum; MSX; BBC 'B' Electron; Amstrad; Dragon; Tandy; Vic 20; Atari 2600 Cartidges. Prices start from .99 Fast service Over 6,000 titles in stock Send large stamped addressed envelope (please state micro). Arcade Software (UK) 202/203 Shopping Hall Myrtle Road, East Ham London E6. Tel: 01-4725726 O *PANCOM ATARI SOFTWARE ATARI SOFTWARE  THE LATEST * THE BEST ATARI 400/600/800/800XL OWNERS AT discounted prices Send stamp for current catalogue REMEMBER MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY Boast nearly 1,000 original programmes for hire. The first. The best, write to us before the rest. Send large s.a.e. to: MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve. Cheltenham. Glos. Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 PANCOM PO Box 49, Grimsby DN32 8QN Tel: (0472) 694196 UPDATE LENDING LIBRARY SPECTRUM/BBC HIRING & DISCOUNT SOFTWARE CLUB Send SAE 24 HUNTINGTOWER PARK, GLENROTHES, FIFE KY6 3QF. P.J.S. DESIGNS TEL 0782 29321 A new peripheral for Spectrum, Spectrum plus users. THE NEW PORKYPINE WHY DO SPECTRUM USERS FROM LONDON DEVON ESSEX & CAMBRIDGE SEND THEIR MICROS TO US FOR REPAIR? Average price  Only Co. in all UK offering while you wait service. Gor 24 hour turnaround every micro insured for return journey Ophone or send for free estimate ens. E1.80 UK, L.O.M., Eire, C.I. ONO hidden handling charges Ospecial rates for schools. MANCOMP LTD. Printworks Lane, Levenshulme. Manchester M19 3.JP Tel: 051 224 1888 cs FAST COMPUTER REPAIRS Video Vault International Repair Service A Spectrums repaired for .95 inc. parts, Insurance and P & P No Hidden Extras ONLY GENUINE SINCLAIR PARTS USED Phone today for your free estimate or send your computer to us with .75 (UK EIRE 1.O.M.C.I.) or .50 (Europe/ Scandinavia) we will contact you the same day by phone or 1st class Mail should you require quotation first. TRADE ENQUIRIES MOST WELCOME Video Vault Ltd (Dept R8) Video Vault Viudo Vault Tel: Glossop (STD 04574) 66555 140 High St, West, Glossop Access Derbyshire, England, Welcomed Take your Spectrum on holiday with you, in a caravan, boat or wherever there is a 12v DC supply le.g. car battery) and portable TV. Compatible with all Spectrum-powered interfaces e.g. joystick. Auto switch off to prevent excessive battery run down. Indicators to show battery condition. Computer reset switch Dimensions 4 X4%x2\" Simply connects to battery supply PLEASE SEND PORKYPINE AT .55 + .00 PAP EACH. NAME ADDRESS ZOOMSOFT FOR THE VERY BEST SPECTRUM, COMMODORE 64 AND ATARI GAMES (including U.S. SOFTWARE) See page 105 CHEQUE/POSTAL ORDER NO. Cheques made payble to P.J.S. Designs. Allow 28 days delivery Post to: P.J.S. Designs 35 Barry Avenue, Bucknall, Stoke-on-Trent ST2 8AE. 95 "


"VIC-20/CBM-64 SOFTWARE HIRE FREE MEMBERSHIP, 300 TITLES. SEND 2X 17p STAMPS FOR YOUR HIRE KIT TO: VIC-20 SOFTWARE HIRE (CV), 35 NORTH AUDLEY STREET, LONDON W1Y 1WG. PLEASE STATE MACHINE. SPECIAL DEAL FOR ATARI 400/600/800 OWNERS ATARI UTILITIES AUTOMENU-Automatically lists every file on disc (Basic or binary) and will run them at the press of a button . HOWSEN DOS-A new disc file management system 7 functions inc. tape to disc (single/double), disc to tape, disc to disc, tape to tape .95. DISK DOKTOR-With this utility you can examine and alter the contents of any Atari disk .95 TAPE INSPECTOR-With this utility you can examine and alter the contents of any Atari tape .95 Also KT4-.95: DD2-.95; KK-.95. For full details of this range of tapeldisc/cartridge utilities send large sae to: AWG 145 Bankside, West Houghton, Bolton, Lancs No. 1. Hire your first 2 games FREE from our extensive range of software. Up to the minute releases available. No. 2 Buy all the latest software titles at best possible prices (New releases available direct from US) Atari hardware and modems now available at discount prices. For further details send s.a.s. to: BLANK DISKS SPECIAL OFFERS 5\" BLANK DISKS (40 track) Prices for box of 10 All prices include VAT, P&P is FREE VERBATIM single sided double density.......18.95 SCOTCH 3M single sided double density.....16.95 DYSAN single sided double density.............19.95 SJB SUPER SAVERS 50 single sided double density 514* blank disks perspex storage box only........ .95 CHARNWOOD GAMES 27 Warwick Avenue, Quorn, Leicestershire Tel: 0509 412604 50 double sided double density 5% blank disks in a perspex storage box only......................95 FOR FREE FAST DELIVERY-Please send cheques. Po to: SJB DISK SUPPLIES (DEPT 01) 11 Oundle Drive, Nottingham NGB 1BN Tel: (0602) 782310 ATARI 400/600/800 XL SOFTWARE REPAIRS For all computers + T.V. games. Good rates. Insured delivery. Fast turnaround. Trust the people who know Parts replacement despatch, MERLIN GAMES 111 DOVER RD., DEAL, KENT. Telephone: 0304-361541. We have an all round selection of disks, cassettes and cartridges FOR HIRE, Apply now and hire your first 4 games free. Well over 800 different original titles. For full details send stamped addressed envelope or tele phone evenings 7pm 10pm or weekends. LOW ATARI PRICES 1050 DISC ORIVES E 192.95 Purchasers of the above receive free membership BEST QUALITY DISCS, BOXES OF 10 Single density discs (16.50 Double density discs [18.00 Antic & Analog magazines available GAMES & SOFTWARE CLUB Dept C&VG, 35 Tilbury Road, Thorney Close Sunderland SRJ 4PO. Tel: 0783 286351 free CARTRIDGE CITY Simply the best cartridge rental service for Atari Computers. E-Oes e Ees SO THE COMMODORE 64/AMSTEAD/MSX USERS MIDLAND COMPUTER LIBRARY The first and the largest Commodore 64 library in the world. Often copied but never equalled. 1) All the latest titles on cassette disc and cartridge 2) Hire your first games absolutely 3) Life membership  4) Hire charge from only .25 inc p&p for full 7 days. 5) No limit to the amount of games you can hire. 6) All games originals with full documentation, 7) Games, Business and Educational software. 8) Return of post service 9) Lowest new hard and software prices in the UK. 10) Join now on 14 day money back guarantee Over 1050 different titles in stock. Send cheque or postal order for  with your two selections or large SAE for further details to: Computer Library, Dept CVG. 172 Studley Road, Redditch,  TELEPHONE: 0527 23584 E MAGAZINE FOR ALL ATARI COMPUTER OWNERS Full information pack from CARTRIDGE CITY 25 Gaitside Drive, Aberdeen, AB1 7BH. Tel. (0224) 37348 ATARI THE BEST PROGRAM *400/800 800X1/900XL NEWS LISTINGS TIPS REVIEWS from USA TUTORIALS UK UTILITIES AUSTRALIA PUBLIC HINTS & DOMAIN SOFTWARE plus more LIBRARY SPECIAL OFFERS PAGE 6 is published bi-monthly. Annual Subscription is .00. Send TODAY to: PAGE 6, P.O.BOX 54, STAFFORD, ST16 1DR Tel. 0785 41153 ATARI COMPUTR OWNERS FUZE FUZED DEFUZED CONFUZED CONFUZION Make the most of your Atari 400/600/800 by hiring from our Software Library. We offer a wide selection of the many games and adventures on the market for your computer For full details send a S.A.E to: Star Hire, P.O. Box 48, Bracknell, Berks. RG12 4WD. CG69 ATARI 400/600/800/XL OWNERS UTILITIES EXPRESS JOYSTICK REPAIRS Joysticks repaired and returned within 24 hours. e.g. Atari, Vic, Quickshot, Triga Command etc. Send joystick and .95 + 50p. ATARI/COMMODORE SPARES Strong replacement joystick handle inserts at .50 pair. Atari [2.75 pair Commodore Joystick handle top fire button kit, includes insert and grip at .95 each Atari or Commodore JOYSTICK FOR OL Plugs straight into control port 1 or 2. No interface required. .99 each or two for . Add 50p p&p BULK JOYSTICK PURCHASE Shop soiled, as new. E14.95 for 5, .95 for 10 inclusive! COMPUTER SUPPLIES, 146 CHURCH ROAD BOSTON, LINCS PE21 OJX BACK-UPS Tapes or Disks. SAE for Lists. WINTER GAMES 6 Scrolling Ski Games. Disk only SKI CONSTRUCTION SET  Post Free This utility was written to construct \"Winter Games and allows you to construct your own Arcade games within 1hr Disk only 15 PICTURE DISKS 4 Disks crammed with graphics, pictures and demo's to show the world Atari's No. 1 comes on two double sided disks at only THE TRANS-PAC Bought a disk-drive, stuck with programs on tape? THE TRANS-PAC solves it. Multi tape to disk, disk to tape, tape to disk, disk to disk, multi mover. etc. Comes on two double sided Memorex disks  All orders post free. Mail order only. 24 hour despatch. STOCKSOFT 15 Woodbrooke Road, Birmingham B30 1UE [15 T199/4A MODULE BARGAIN Only .95 each: Munchman, Tombstone Ciry, Wumpus, Invaders, Amazing, odd/sub. Only .95 each: Parsec, Indoor Soccer. Send cheque/P.O. to: COMPUTER HOME SERVICE 40 BARRHILL, PATCHAM, BRIGHTON BNI SUT. See us at the TI Users Show on 28th April. SAE for details. 96 "


"DON'T LET THE GREMLINS GET THE BETTER OF YOU, WRITE TO... EUREKA! belongings. Sure enough, there were the pock-markings of bullets in the walls, a fine collection of old pipes and Sherlock's deer-stalker and Eureka is getting its share of the cloak hanging on the door. By the questions these days. With ,000 at old-fashioned fireplace Keith prestake, perhaps it's not surprising! sented the two lads with piles of Philip Knight of Wolverhampton \"goodies\" from Melbourne House, wants to know what tune must be C&VG and himself. Two bulging played to crack the quartz rock? carrier bags changed hands, packed Another with the same problem is with magazines, T-shirts, books and Kelly Medori of Milan who has the HOLMESIANA software, including Keith's own Book musical instrument in game three, of Adventure and game The Pen and but cannot crack the crystal. If Super-sleuths David and Paul Cunthe Dark. anyone cares to ring Milan 6705052 ningham of Morpeth in NorthumberOver lunch the conversation for a chat with Kelly about this and land surprised Melbourne House centred around David's and Paul's other problems, Kelly will be very when they contacted Paula Byrne, efforts to reach a complete solution to pleased to hear from them! Melbourne's Publicity Manager, the mystery. \"We started it about Thanks for clues this month to: claiming to have solved Sherlock three months ago,\"explained David, Geoff Davis of Bridgewater, David \"Send us your solution!\" challenged \"and we've played every weekend Lennil of Northampton and Kevin Paula and the two brothers did just since then.\" Hicks who wins this month's topthat. \"Only weekends?\" asked Keith. tipster T-shirt for System 15000 clues. \"We were absolutely astounded \"We weren't allowed to play it when we received it, because they'd exayi oj lex ay sex aun ur yoins during the week, because of our y Kauno Poloxy ay sprou feino! Y. got it absolutely right!\" Paula told me. homework!\" said Paul. HONOS \"We were fairly confident that it David, 18, is hoping to go into Ayerel would be at least a year before anypharmacy and is studying A-level d e \"Tepuomuodn JepuoM 10. one successfully completed the biology, maths and chemistry at Wall YINH quer e se days peap e joj buny game,\" she confessed. End Technical School whilst Paul, 17, aq TOM SE JOIN cobea ue Uitm aqnost. Urgent telex messages flashed is in the sixth form at King Edward ONIXIA JHL X3 back and forth from Richmond to School, Morpeth on his first year of an do ay le jooys pas aq e uaxei i usem Melbourne in Australia. Although no A-level course in biology, maths and C. dois sued, sureur JEUD prize was ever offered for the first economics. \"  s   M  solution, Melbourne House were so Asked what other Adventures they jouT sn u impressed with the boys' efforts that had played, David said of course, S.Nous yseur au teyoue sajey MON NYWaids Paula invited David and Paul to lunch, Hobbit was one of them. They didn't atay Jo no jeb all expenses paid, at the Sherlock reckon much on Mugsy, but were nok uwym kuo mjesn sauodeq enueur Restaurant above the Sherlock Inn very impressed by Melbourney ur ono ou no Sem , snoraqoun, ue near Charing Cross in London. House's latest release. Castle of To burroos pue dun/ ueyy 'prebpw oju jeb o mo asn 'IWOYS 196 OL. David and Paul, being super. Terror. HYTTYHIVA Adventurers are, of course, regular Keith adds: It was a great pleasure Pons buot readers of C&VGand so Paula invited for Simon and I to meet the very first BIM bugnen an 'ous ay ssos OL. Keith Campbell and Simon Marsh people to solve Sherlock! At the  jury e burddorp aq pnom (who played Sherlock \"live\" on same time as sending in the solution deya 'no prol II eleewed Bo Y. Radio Sussex) along to meet the two to Melbourne House, they sent one to STLSV 30DUOWAVTO JO JONHOS brothers. the Adventure Helpline. L EINE The Sherlock has a Holmes The solution is far more complex uo abesseur ay ssed jou lym segundos Professi Aud   museum, normally viewed through a and extended than is commonly ooosWOLSAS large plate glass window set into one imagined. Believe me, if I told you, abueuroped woun e YILM of the walls of the restaurant. you'd never believe me! noi doy wybru Apnisiepun poob P 'bes However, as this was a special Starting next month, though, I'll be    re  . 41 o 1° bur e Vana occasion, Paula fixed things for the bringing you a series of \"upsideapeuowa 10J party to actually enter Sherlock's down\" clues all thanks to David doosep Indbuu pue urejunos uosiod. room and browse through his and Paul Cunningham! ZI GIULYTA KEITH CAMPBELL GOMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES PRIORY CT. 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE LONDON EGIR SAU 97 "


"MRS ROBINSON AND FAMILY! To the sound of south sea island which add to the realism. SECOND TIME music, I found myself on the deck of Unfortunately, the mode of input a boat with my family, a cow and a somewhat spoils an otherwise AROUND dog. The timbers below the deck excellent game. What happens is creaked as the waves beat against this. As soon as you type a space, the Level 9 are now producing all their the smashed hull. program checks to see if the games for the MSX, so I decided to Thinking we had better abandon previously entered characters form have another look at the oldest ship before it completely disinte part or whole of a word it knows. If Adventure in the newest computer. grated, I set about gathering our they do, it completes the word if an On power up, the MSX displays the possessions before we made for abbreviation and reverse videos it. uses for the special function keys on nearby land. Thus you can check whether the the bottom line of the screen. Level 9 Once safely on terra firma, my word is known before proceeding have retained this display in the brother Franz and I set about any further. When you press game and reprogrammed the keys exploring, whilst Mum and Dad set RETURN, the same happens to the for the four compass directions plus up a camp. There's plenty of interestlast word and the nearest match is inventory. Pressing SHIFT reveals ing places to go, so I think I shall like printed. So if you type TAKE TO, you and operates their alternate uses: NE, it here! get TAKE TOOLCHEST, but TAKE T NW, SE, SW and LOOK. Swiss Family Robinson is a returns TAKE TURTLE. On the other A comparison with the BBC \"Windham Classic\", one of the latest hand, TAKE B gives TAKE BOOK, but seemed called for, since both micros in the fast-growing range of fiction. GO B gives GO BELOW! Clever, isn't have a 40 column screen. The text based Adventures from Spinnaker it? layout is slightly different, but the Software in the USA. These run on But just like people who are too wording is identical. I played part of Apple and Commodore 64, both on clever, it can be very annoying! I the game on both micros, pressing disc. wanted to type \"Put rope in boat\", RETURN simultaneously and found SFR comes with a 16-page but when I typed the space after that some responses were noticeably instruction booklet giving full details \"rope\", the word IN was supplied for faster on the MSX. of loading and playing, with me. This can be severely disruptive My only complaint was that the examples and some background when typing at speed and it takes a default screen colours are used, a information on the classic book. while to adjust to omitting certain rather Commodore-like wishy-washy There is also a \"nature-key\" poster words when in full flow. It is almost white on blue. This is best overcome which depicts and describes the like speaking to someone who by turning the colour right down to wildlife, flora and fauna and natural interrupts by finishing the end of black and white and adjusting features on the island. This is all each sentence for you. contrast and brightness to suit. contained in a box masquerading as Your objective is to survive until Sherlock's release on the a book. rescued. The classic story doesn't Commodore 64 prompted me to put Talking of books, if you open one place too much emphasis on being on my deer-stalker once more and found aboard the wreck and type in rescued, indeed, in the book the make for Leatherhead. Unlike the FIND, followed by, say ALBATROSS, parents elect to stay behind on the Colossal BBC/MSX comparison, a page of the book will be displayed island when rescue comes. In the there is a world of difference graphically, with a text entry full of game, however, to be rescued between Spectrum Sherlock and his facts about the Albatross. becomes a high priority and part of younger brother. Every location has graphics the challenge is to discover the The text is more plentiful, and I instantaneous and sometimes quickest way to achieve this. mean text of the useful variety. On interactive. If a monkey up a tree SFR is worth playing despite the commencing the game, the first should take it into his head to throw a input methods for, once you get used location includes details of the plain coconut at you, the missile can be to it, you will find an excellent game door, and \"my\" door. In the seen hurtling across the screen! designed for the younger Spectrum version, doors are not There are some sound effects too adventurer. mentioned here and I spent two frustrating hours trying to leave the room Full marks to Melbourne House for Once TRS-80 dominated, the club is before hitting upon the description the improvements which turn now heavily BBC biased, with a \"MY\". Sherlock into a first class Adventure sprinkling of Spectra. Thanks to the Melbourne House have also added game. I won't comment on the good offices of Mike Woodroffe, I a couple of extras to the package \"music\" I just turned it right down! managed to get hold of some an extract from a railway timetable I recently made a visit to my old Spidermen just prior to release. On which includes a list of station Computer Club at Hythe in Kent, to the appointed evening, 1 Spectrum addresses and four sample session stage an Adventure Competition. I and 10 BBC teams arrived. listings designed to give the \"feel\" of had started these some years ago, the I had quite happily played Inglish as it is typed, plus a few clues. idea being that a number of teams of Spiderman on a graphics-free TRS-80, The game seems to play slightly three or four play the same unseen and enjoyed it. The BBC version, too, differently as well. Did I imagine it, or game simultaneously with someone is text only. But on the Spectrum the was that train just a little harder to on hand to give a few hints, and to graphics are superb. Not only are the catch? adjudicate. pictures startling and interactive, but 98 "


"de QUICK REVIEW ROUNDUP they are held in memory and zapped to the screen in less time than it takes to say LDIR. Even I, a confirmed textaholic, was impressed. Now BBC types tend to be rather contemptuous of \"toy\" Spectrum owners, SO when the game was underway I casually announced that anyone who wanted to see what was actually going on should take a look over the shoulder of Reg, our Spectrum player. They were so taken with the pictures that we nearly ended up with one team of forty players! One note about tape versions of Spiderman. Contrary to the instructions, there is no full-sentence interpreter only, as Mike Woodroffe put it, \"pseudo-fill-sentence\". Thus many of the examples in the booklet, such as \"Go all the way up\" do not work. Unfortunately the printing was done before the conversions were completed, says Mike. ADVENTURE CHAT Here are some more Adventure funnies, sent in by Michael Spiteri of Victoria, Australia, who has been having a laugh with Deadline. Look under bed: \"No doubt you are looking for the bogeyman you are out of luck!\" CLEAN something: \"Cleanliness is next in line to godliness but in this case it is next to uselessness!\" Sick of Thorin and his quest for gold? Want some peace? Try climbing into the wooden chest and closing it, says Philip Knight, who reckons you should now be safe. There is no way he has discovered of getting out. If you want to risk a broken neck, he adds, you can walk around inside. \"I know the correct usage of every spell I have so far found in Claymorgue, including the crafty use of Permeability to get you into the crate,\" writes John English, of Northfield, Birmingham. I smiled smugly, and give you permission to do the same if you know why! Carry on, John, don't let me interrupt! (Why on earth does he want to get inside the crate, I wonder? Scott's solution is much loftier than that!) Upper Gumtree is the most boring Clingwood is the quest. How did I place in the known universe, where fare? I managed to find seven baked beans for tea is a Big Event, locations, one object, and die twice says the inlay. Sounds like Scarthorpe before I grew too bored to continue all over again, and well it might, for it and my poor old Beeb pleaded to be too comes from Richard Shepherd loaded with something more Software. interesting. Your mission is to stop the mad Personal Rating: 3 Professor Blowitovitz (see what I Not my Beeb's lucky month, I'm mean?) who has set up a secret afraid, for I next unwittingly fed it laboratory in Gumtree and perfected with with something even more horrific. a fiendish plan to dominate the Escape le Escape from Mansion Beta Minor has world. The fast graphics are quite good, and kill the bug that makes the game as one of its first problems how to find but there are some mentioned unplayable. features that appear not to exist when Unfortunately, no score points are examined awarded for this. Altogether a vast improvement on Your space ship has crashed on an their last offering Urban Upstart, alien planet and after travelling Upper Gumtree is for the around, you spot a rocket behind a Commodore 64, priced at .50. All country mansion. You must use your those U's intrigue me! Wonder what INTELLECT to buy the rocket from the next title will be? the natives and return safely to earth. Personal Rating: 7 The only acceptable currency on the The Key to Time, dedicated to the P the planet is FRUIT! memory of William Hartnell, is a Dr. Nevertheless, I'll try anything once. Who game that should please all fans se Starting in the courtyard of the of the series. Looking very Quilled, uilled mansion, I was faced with four doors. but a worthwhile game for all that, it 4The first puzzle is to open them and, comes from Lumpsoft and runs on a a Spectrum. discovered that the subtle secret was You will first have to learn to to use the key lying overtly in the operate the Tardis, and a few devices e courtyard. UNLOCK DOOR, I commanded, within it, and then you can begin to explore in search of the pieces of the whereupon a message flashed up to lost key to time. ask which one and the program immediately went back to \"Continue What endeared the game to me a saved game?\" For anyone unlucky was the response when I typed WAIT: enough to have spent money on this Time passes game already, here's what to do. The infinite sounds of time trickle Press BREAK and ESCAPE repeatedly until you break the through the cosmic hourglass. I can't keep this up all night. program. Type OLD. If you are not resqueamish, you can try listing the I never wanted to be an Adventure sque program from line 15 otherwise game. just delete line 20 (ON ERROR RUN) I wanted to be an arcade game. as insurances and then change the I wanted to be ... A Lumberjack! semicolon after the INPUT statement (music starts) in line 2450 to a comma. Obviously Personal Rating: 7 someone used to a standard Basic Holy Horrors is the very appropriate wrote this, forgot which machine title of a BBC Adventure from Romik. they were on and then forgot to play The cassette inlay is nicely illustrated it. with a werewolf, a fanged Dracula Type RUN, now, and you're away. and a macho adventurer clad only in You will be able to sample the boots, straps and a casual but delights of opening the wrong door strategically placed piece of tatty in the courtyard. Ha ha ha!!! rag. I saw none of these on the Not bad for a schoolboy effort, but graphics screens. commercially just rubbish, from Finding the golden goblet stolen Britannia Software Ltd. from the church in the village of Personal Rating: 1 "


"M hus it was, that Paul, Simon and described how to turn them to dust. myself rose early one freezing At any time Mark or Helen, who morning in January, to meet up would accompany us but be at Euston Station. \"invisible\", might call \"TIME OUT\" A quick coffee and a bacon butty in and at this point the Adventure would the buffet, and we boarded the train be suspended for the assessment of for Crewe. We were on our way to wounds and the calculation of the Treasure Trap Castle or, to give it strength. its proper name, Peckforton Castle, Wounds would be counted as near Tarporley in Cheshire. marks made by the sticky red dye on We had expected the castle to be the ends of the Orcs' swords. TIME almost deserted at this time of year. IN would signal the resumption of the How wrong we were! We entered by game, whilst TIME FREEZE would climbing up a spiral stone staircase mean that we must all stop dead in and found ourselves in a large hall our tracks, to allow some re-arrangepacked with characters from a ment of the room to take place. bygone era. Usually we would be told to close Dressed in odd costumes, they our eyes during a freeze and by this carried swords and shields and device objects might be \"telegathered in groups, muttering darkly ported\" into our room. and talking tactics while waiting for We were next taken to another Only just in time! For a couple of the start of their Adventures. large hall and issued with rigid foam Orcs leaped nimbly from behind a We were introduced to our plastic swords and round wooden huge oak, menacing us, swords at the referee, who asked us if we would shields. Mark instructed us on ready. mind being joined by two others swordsmanship, stressing that we With one accord we attacked, Daikin Marsh aged 13 and Martin were here to enjoy ourselves but driving them off, watching as they Foulger aged 14, two schoolfriends safely! We spent a short time scampered, wounded, into a hitherto from Marple Hall School in Stockport. practising against one another, until unnoticed dark opening in the castle Both, we soon discovered, were we got the feel for the art. wall. \"There!\" breathed Prospero, computer owners. Daikin had a Before we left the hall, we elected \"That must be the secret way into the Dragon and Martin a BBC. Martin as our leader and then Mark Dungeons!\" Moving off into a side room, Mark entered our \"names\" on a chart on Beyond the hidden portal it was Roberts our referee and his assistant his clipboard. Paul had adopted the pitch black. Our Scout felt his way in Helen Davies spent 10 minutes or so pseudonym \"Thor\", Simon, as ever, and nervously we followed him down explaining the rules. called himself \"Pink Fairy\" (enough a flight of stone steps. \"Stop!\" We were but peasants they told us, to make the bravest of Orcs run a commanded Daikin, our leader, as and, like all novices, had to mile!) whilst I modestly took the we reached the bottom. \"Let our undertake the Basic Adventure name \"Supremo\". Tim, Daikin and eyes become accustomed to the dark before being able to participate in Martin thought their own names were before we proceed!\" Before long, we more specialised and advanced strange enough for the dungeon! could just discern a faint shaft of light ones. At last we were ready to begin! We feebly escaping through the narrow The mode of play would be similar made our way outside the castle slit of a partly-closed door. to Dungeons and Dragons, except precincts, from where our real-life Putting our eyes to the slit, a dimly that we would actually BE the characAdventure would commence! lit picture of confusion could be seen ters. We would act the part as if we within. Strange creatures were were the figures being moved bobbing around amidst rotting around a table-top dungeon. Only THE debris and bones. this was for real! Whilst we waited, Prospero Because this was an introductory fumbled in his pocket to produce the Adventure, we could take on varying Te stood shivering by the dog-end of an unlit candle. \"Ignite!\" roles and decide later which characdrawbridge in the gathering exclaimed Thor, using up his ter to adopt in future Adventures. dusk, our swords clattering precious spell. The candle lit and by The characters were a Guardian, against our shields. Our tremblingits dim glow we could just see that fighter and defender of the group; may have been due to the icy we were in a dungeon corridor in the Scout, who goes ahead to detect weather. More likely it was caused bowels of the earth. We formed a hidden traps and dangers; Element by the foreboding sight of the castle tight group, and with the gigantic alist, the reader of runes and caster of itself, silhouetted against the sky. An Supremo up front, a ploy designed to magic; and Lore Warden. arch here, a window there, was cause panic amongst the Orcs within We were each allowed to use one picked out by an eerie light reflectedwe kicked the door open. A fierce spell and one miracle should we by the frozen snow. battle ensued until we felled all the wish. Once across the bridge we knew Orcs. We could \"light\" a dark area for a we would be in mortal danger, so we We were not without our own short while, ignite\" a candle, huddled together in a small group. casualties. One of our number was \"cure\" a wound, and so on. shields outwards, and crossed into bleeding profusely from one arm and The dungeon we were to enter was the unknown. Before us appeared, as in imminent danger of death. Without known to be populated with Ores, if from nowhere, a tall figure in a hesitation, Supremo, putting his hand small creatures who were basically flowing blue robe. to the injury, said \"Cure\" and Pink cowards, but could prove dangerous \"I am the Wizard Prospero,\" he Fairy was cured as if by a miracle. if tackled single-handed. intoned. \"For 500 years my daughter Posting a guard at the door, we If we stuck together in a group, we has been imprisoned within and my thoroughly searched the room. but should have little trouble in dealing magic wand stolen. For how many gaining nothing more than a few with them, for, like Norwegian gold pieces will you brave Advencandles, we made a careful exit and parrots, they tended to stun easily. turers sell your services to help me?\" ventured further along the corridor. Zombies might also be After some hard bargaining, a deal As we turned a corner, Prospero encountered, explained Mark and he was struck. sensed magic. In a small alcove we ADVENTURE 100 "


"RCBUSTERS! 1000 «There's something strange in your neighbourhood. Who you gonna call?\" \"ORCBUSTERS!\" This is the story of how the C&VG Adventure Team entered a dank and gloomy dungeon and were confronted by some of the nastiest creatures known to man Orcs! In the flicker of candlelight, these Orcs looked remarkably like 10-year old boys, making them even more deadly. Before attempting to tackle these vile Orcs, we had to be briefed in swordsmanship. So trying to act like Arnold Schwarzenegger in the Conan films, I set about swinging my sword round and promptly hit myself in the face! (Well, Arnold has had more practice!) My mother did tell me that there would be things in this job I wouldn't like but, before you read the full account of our ordeals, I want once and for all to squash a rumour. It is not true that when Keith and I were put in the front line, even though having the advantage of height, we knelt down and said: \"Look, we're shorter than you lot!\" (OK Keith, you can stand up now!) Every adventure has its heroes and what better account of courage and bravery than when Tim and I, heavily outnumbered, charged in pursuit of three Orcs? How were we to know that there were 15 more lurking round the corner? With amazing speed and dexterity we turned around and Tim passed me at about Mach 1 as we made our retreat! Treasure Trap is an excellent place to visit if you're a budding warrior. Watch out for the monsters though and if you get into a tight spot, call us! We're experts now! We are ... THE ORCBUSTERS! Simon Marsh malevolent odour of an Orc's pharrt. Since by now three of our number had been badly wounded and were weakening to the point of death, we had to use our logic and cunning to decide which jar held the cure. Thus, all members of our band of Adventurers restored to full health, we puzzled awhile, and discovered the secret of escaping the room, using the power which we, and we alone, possessed. But we still lacked the wand of Prospero! Further down the endless corridor Encounter with a Zombie! we came across a room with a deep pit, a narrow and precarious route leading across it and down to an alcove from which came the faintest flickering of light. Tim led one of the maidens across, but their passage dislodged the bridge and they became stranded on the other side. But they had discovered a hidden room, where the poor miller's son was imprisoned. Tim freed the poor lad for the price of the scroll the miller's son had Simon searches a dead Adventurer. Supremo and his band. spotted something. But it was too late, for charging down the almost endless corridor now before us came a large band of Orcs, brandishing their swords. From behind they came, as well, and we fought bitterly on two flanks, trying at the same time to examine the magic object and determine whether or not it was safe to handle. At length we came upon the Alchemist's room, its decor completely black save for a red drape across the ceiling, a pentagram and strange runes written on the walls. As we entered, a strange throbbing could be heard, at some times almost inaudible, at others nearly deafening. Here we found the Alchemist in the company of Prospero's daughter and her handmaiden Within the room were two large jars, each filled with a murky liquid, one red, the other green. Wisps of mist were rising from the necks of the jars. \"Therein lies a cure and a poison — which is which we know not,\" explained the maidens. Sniffing the contents revealed that whilst one had a sweet, intoxicating fragrance, the other had the COMPETITION If you get your hands on a copy of Macbeth you could win a very special prize. Together with Creative Sparks we've come up with a new and original competition idea but you have to have a copy of the Macbeth adventure to enter. Complete the adventure and you could win a holiday weekend at the Treasure Trap Caste! Two winners of the C&VG/Creative Sparks Macbeth Competition will go to the Treasure Trap Castle and 25 runners-up will receive copies of a brand new and as yet unnamed Creative Sparks Adventure series. 101 "


"THE SCORE hidden about his person (the boss way!\" they replied. \"professional level Adventure, never does something for nothing!). \"Kill their leader!\" he hissed at already in progress, and due to The scroll was to prove invaluable Supremo and unthinking, robot-like, continue throughout the night. later but for now it was back to the Supremo crossed the drawbridge to We spoke to Alan Collins, one of Orc-haunted corridors after Tim and do battle. the directors, who told us that at the Prospero's daughter had used magic The Adventurers gasped. \"Stop! outset, they had reckoned on to cross the pit. Stop! You are one of us!\" they yelled, attracting 500 or so members. Now, On, on, and ever onward, we came their eyes full of uncomprehending about 60 people undertake the basic across a chamber with a low arched horror. Adventure every weekend and brick ceiling. Two Zombies arose But in no time the leader was lying membership is running at somefrom coffins as we entered and in a bloody pool in the snow! where between 2,500 and 3,000. moved stiffly in our direction. We What sort of people come to acted quickly casting spells that Peckforton and get hooked? \"We turned them to dust before they have members of both sexes, aged 12 could do any damage. We searched ut we had succeeded in our to 55, from all walks of life,\" claimed and discovered two icon-niches. One quest the daughter was free Alan. \"They range from the contained an ancient multi-coloured and the wand returned to its unemployed, to bank managers and cube, unrecognisable to us, but to rightful owner. estate agents. They come from the become a cult object in a future As soon as the Adventure was over, north and south of the country and as century. The other a string of red Mark announced that we had all far afield as the Shetlands, America beads and the inscription \"With succeeded in reaching the grade of and Australia. There is no other place Courage\". Level 1 Adventurers. in the world that has the same faciliWe were pondering over these two This meant that henceforth we ties and does it so realistically as we finds, unable to exit the room through could take part in more difficult, do here.\" That, I can quite believe! a red portal which repulsed us, when exciting epics. So do you have to become a slowly and inexorably, the ceiling The Basic Adventure had lasted a member to try it out? The answer is began to descend. In no time it was couple of hours we could now no a very sensible system touching Supremo's head and before embark on more ambitious ones, operates, since you must first, in any long the whole gathering was in a some lasting up to 24 or even 48 case, complete the basic Adventure, prone position on the cold stone hours. you pay $10 to enter it. If you hate the floor, about to be crushed. Elated, we made our way back to whole thing, then that's that. But if \"The scroll, the scroll!\" shouted the coffee bar for a cup of strong you want to go back for more you Prospero. Tim, the least crushed of us coffee and a warm-up. Daikin and must at this stage become a member. all, managed to unravel it and read: Martin were soon to depart. They, as the subscription is about  per \"Hand in hand and red to red we, were now qualified to do a bit of year. However, the  you have Through the door before you're \"Monstering\" and were shortly due already paid is treated as a downdead.\" to get their own back as Orcs against payment, so you end up paying the We only just made it, with the help a new set of peasants! balance of  to join. of the mystic cube, slithering and Which led us to the question — . This year, Alan told us, there will crawling as we went. Suddenly, our where do the monsters come from? be week-long Adventure holidays, candles were extinguished as a The Treasure Trap venture at Peck run at their new location at Chislemighty blast of air hit us and, working forton depends very much on hurst Caves in Kent. The holidays will our way now through a low narrow enthusiasts and there is certainly feature a number of different games. passage, a white flashing light part no shortage of volunteers to act out There will be shorter Adventures, blinded us so that we saw each other the various characters and monsters and outdoor ones as well. as if frozen, even though we moved. in the games. How did we feel about it? Personal \"I sense my wa Rating: 10. Fast response, superb breathed Prospero, \"Let's grab it and stereoscopic colour graphics, run, run, RUN!\" realistic sound effects and played in Into the vast round chamber ahead real time. But we did miss the flashing we rushed, Orcs everywhere. And cursor and the immortal words: \"Tell only the flashing light to see them by! me what to do?''!! An Adventure that Hastening towards the safety of the we all thoroughly enjoyed we can't drawbridge, we were again set upon wait to play the next in the series! by Orcs they were all around us. Seriously, though, if you can't wait Rushing to Tim's rescue, Supremo to join up at Treasure Trap, look at was caught up in the battle, whilst the our special \"Adventure Club\" page. rest of our party ran on, carrying Through the C&VG Adventure Club, treasures, wand and the two you can get a 10% discount on your maidens. membership fee. Organised C&VG Suddenly and viciously, the Orcs visits are a possibility, too. lost interest in Tim, rounding on Or if you prefer, you can get further Supremo. Our Alchemist, for example, was details for yourself by writing to Supremo fought like a fiend, but the Dan Walmsley, up for the weekend Fantasy Experience (Wargames) Ltd., Orcs were relentless and he was from Cambridge, where his alter-ego Peckforton Castle, Peckforton, Nr. overwhelmed and captured. As if was a member of the RAF. The Tarporley, Cheshire, enclosing a from nowhere, an apparition weekend? Perhaps I should explain large stamped addressed envelope. appeared and possessed Supremo's that it is possible, for a nominal fee, to By the way, don't bank on picking very soul, taking him to face the stay overnight in the castle. Bring up any clues from our Adventure. group of Adventurers now safely your own sleeping bag and kip down The Basic Adventure is changed over the drawbridge. on the floor in the sleeping hall. Most every few months and yours will \"For the return of Supremo and of the Adventurers present were probably be entirely different! your own lives, I demand the there for the weekend. \"It all adds to If you do take up the challenge, treasures you have stolen from the the atmosphere,\" they said. Many watch out for us WE may be the Dungeon!\" he proclaimed. \"No were engaged in a 24-hour monsters! 102 "


"now showing in copies of SINCLAIR PROGRAMS 9 & the Cavernat of Fine, se AT YOUR NEWSAGENTONLY 95p YAT YOUR NEWSAGENT=1 AT LAST... AMAGAZINE GEARED ESPECIALLY FOR THE QL USER. SUPRISINGLY ITS CALLEDQL USER. Unlocking Sinclair's Supermicro For the latest information on every QL hardware and software release, turn to QL USER. Every month we review the latest games, educational and business packages, together with program listings, book reviews and your readers' letters. Plus, of course, hints and tips on how to get the most from your QL. If you're a QL user, choose the magazine written exclusively for your machine QL USER. Available from all good newsagents. 103 "


"Eurka! So you reckon YOUR maps of Bureka! and you could win one are better than ours do you! Well prove it of five limited odition framed prints, signed by the artists, of the Illustra. tions foatured in the Euroka! handbook! These highly desirable prizes will be and the won by the five map makers judged to have produced the best map of any Eurokal modulo by C&V Video peoplo behind the ,000 prize adventure game, Domark. Just send your maps to Computer & Games, Eureka! Competition, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London ECIR 3AU. Closing dato for the competition is April 16th and normal CAVO competition rules apply. Get cracking you could soon be admiring an exclusive Surakal painting hanging in pride of place on your bedroom wallt Turn to page 106 for our map of the Prehistoric Adventure 104 "


"ZOOMSOFT COMPUTER SOFTWARE SPECIALISTS ATARI 400/800/XL ATARI 400/800/XL COMMODORE 64 cass Telelink COMMODORE 64 Pacman Pole Position Zark L Zark L Zark StarCross 14.95 12.95 11.95 11.95 11.95 ROM 14.95 14.95 14.95 disk 2095 29.95 23.00 23.00 Lade Runner Mask of the Sun Star Bowl Football Sur League Baseball Cutthroats Enchanter Q Bert 23.00 23.00 Jungle Hunt 9.95 37.95 35.95 2875 11.95 14.95 Deadline Mask of the Son Qurthroats Donkey Kong Juni Graphics Art Department Arcade Construction Set 2995 39.95 14.95 14.95 9.95 725 7.25 9.95 Pole Position Raborton Dancing Fents music utility Flip Flop Dig Dug Pitstop L 9.95 47.95 21 55 14.95 33.95 14 95 NIA 14.95 Dig Dug 14.95 8.95 Miner 0429 Oil's Well... BC's Ouest for Tyres 18.95 Encounter 14.95 37.95 41.95 25.95 14.95 14.95 9.95 12.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 12.95 12.95 24.95 Decathlon Space Shuttle Bounty Bob Strikes Back Buck Rogers Jaw Breaker Battle for Normandy Combat Leader Knights of the Desert Shamus I Spelunker Lode Runner.... Davids Midnight Magic Operation Whirlwind... Raid on Bungeling Bay Choplifter.. Hard Hat Mack Realm of impossibility Archon Murder on the Zindereuf. One on One MULE 50 Mission Crush Rails West Flight Simulator 1 SAM speechi... PM Animator Dark Crystal Night Mission Pinball U.S. Double Sparta Des Basic Debugger... Basic Commander Data Manager Data Manager Data Perfect Atari Writer Home Word Basic XL 14.95 9.99 49.95 19.95 14.95 disk 7.95...........NIA 12 55 10.05 9.95 12.55... ...1255 1255 12 60 8.45 24.95 89.75 39.95 25.95 25.95 34,95 1995 12.95 12.95 A.C.E. Enhancer For Apocalypse Shamus Protector Bruce Lee Dallas Ouest... Solo Flight. Spitfe Ace.. Nato Commander 23.75 39 95 9.95 14.95 12.95 ACTION 9.95 8.45 ROM Pisto 11.95 8.95 9.95 11.95 Mae 65 Mac 65 with OSIA. Atari 850 Interface The Protect write to both sides of disk Disk Collector Catalogue disks 14.95 Dragon Riders of Perm Juman Impossible Mission Flyer F . Jetboat Jack 11.95 1195 14.95 6.25 9.95 Mr. Robot Boulder Dash Attack of the Mutant Camel Encounter Ghostbusters Conan The Barbarian F15 Strik Eagle 14.95 14.95 84 95 Flight Simulator L ATARI AND COMMODORE PROGRAMMERS Original games and utility programs wanted for the Ataland Commodore 64 home computers. Top royalties paid. We can distribute your software world wide. For further information please write or telephone Master Type Master Type 41 95 3275 32 75 12.59 14.95 9.95 14 95 .12.55 Colossus Chess 30 Combat Ladder 14.95 1255 14.95 Tale of Beraya ZOOMSOFT 46 HUNTSWORTH MEWS, LONDON NW1 6DB P/O made payable to Zoomsoft. Plus 100's more titles available. Send S.A.E. for free catalogue or telephone 01-723 0562 between 10am and 7pm. All cheques, EUROPES LEADING 'ATARI MAIL ORDER SPECIALISTS SOFTWARE EXPRESS HOTLINE (121) 384 5080 800XL + 1050 DISK DRIVE INCLUDES DISK OPERATING SYSTEM PACK SOUND & GRAPHICS DEMO CREE HOME FILING MANAGER THE 'PAYOFF ADVENTURE NORMAL OUR SAVE PRICE .00  96 PRICE 800XL + 1010 PROGRAM RECORDER INCLUDES SOUND & GRAPHICS DEMO PACK E INVITATION TO PROGRAMING FREE + POLE POSITION NORMAL OUR PRICE .96 PRICE .99 sayo INFOCOMS ADVENTURE INVISICLUES .10 THE ATARI XL HANDBOOK  95 NOW OPEN DE RE ATARI  MAPPING THE ATARI  60 ATARI SPECIAL U.S. IMPORT YOUR ATARI COMPUTER INCLXL) .50 SERVICE DEPARTMENT MINER 2049 er .95 AOM TECHNICAL REFERENCE NOTES  THE XL GRAPHICS HANDBOOK .95 NEW 'U.S. GOLD' TITLES DROP ZONE C/D .95/12.95 PERSONAL WS2000 MODEM MR DO C/D .95/14.95 IMPORT SPECIAL OFFER.. BI APPROVED .99 50P.P COMBAT LEADER C/D... .95 5 \" DISKETTES .50 ea (Min 10) DIG DUG C/D .95/.95 EXPORT QUICKSHOT 11 JOYSTICKS .95 PAC-MAN C/D .95/.95 SERVICE F15-STRIKE EAGLE C/D .95 AVAILABLE SEND SAE FOR PRICE LIST 1020 + EPSOM PRINTER DUMP .99 ATARIWRITER PRINTER DRIVER .99 ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTIONS TO 31 STONEYHURST RD SENTINELL COLOURED DISKS... ANTIC + ANALOG .20. P.P ERDINGTON .75 SOP BIRMINGHAM B24 8HA ADD .00 P+P TO BOOXL PACKS AND 75p TO BOOKS P+P REG ATARI CORPORATION (U.K.) LTD 105 "


"MPREHISTORIE VIADVENTURE location 63 in location 58 and cover it with tar. Take it some advice while you are in to location 66 and light it his hut if you let the time limit otherwise you could be left in 1. In the jungle you will en4. The Brachiosaurus will run out. Unfortunately he the dark! counter a Tyrannosaurus step on you if you try to leave doesn't speak English! 16. Location 68 is rather who would like to make a location 21 unless you are 10. Fill your pot with water in confusing. You must go meal out of you! This is the patient. Just hang around a location 42 and head for the south a couple of times to reason for the time limit. In while and wait and see what desert. When you get to the get to location 69. However location six there is a pit happens. edge of the desert, you move this doesn't work somewhich you must jump the 5. Elephants are supposed to south east, then south. As times. Maybe it's the bats Tyrannosaurus will fall to its be afraid of mice so what you move further into the that cause you to go round in death. It's well worth killing about Mammoths? Try desert you will get thirsty — a circle. this beast as soon as something with the mouse! once you get very thirsty you 17. Don't forget to take the possible. 6. In location 35 you meet a MUST drink. ladder after you have used it! 2. With the flint and the bone. Neanderthal man who says 11. In location 48 you meet USEFUL TIPS you can make an axe. \"Kong Ka, Bong ka. He is another rampaging dinosaur.  Don't waste time typing in Making the raft in location 14 simply asking you if you are To kill him make some gunfull commands. You can use simply increases your perfriend or foe. Try answering powder and a commands like \"T\" to take centage score slightly -\"Kong ka.\" 12. Remember what the everything. This saves there's no value in using the 7. In locations 37 and 38 vou dinosaur says! precious seconds in time raft. Just leave it. will see a pot and a ladder. 13. After you throw the axe limit locations. 3. You can get to the bottom You need both but you in location 53 you MUST  You can enter the Neanof the lake at location 20 by don't need the necklace or wait until it hits the man in derthal village and collect going down at either the ruby so offer them in black. Then go east. If you go what you need without being locations 18 or 19. When exchange. too quickly, you will die! friendly but you must be you come back up, you will 8. In location 39 why not 14. In location 54 you only quick! only be able to get to location have a drink? need the rope.  It's quite safe to drink any 19. 9. The shaman will give you 15. Use the branch from water you find. 1 Start-rocky gulley. 2 On Savannah, near to jungle's edge time limit-take mouse. 3 Patch of gravel strewn with boulders take flint. 4 Hot, humid jungle-time limit see hints no. 1. 5 Hot, humid jungle time limit see hints no. 1. Hot, humid jungle suspiciouslooking depression always jump-time limit see hints no. 7 Hot, humid jungle time limit take creeper see hints no. 1. 8 Hot, humit jungle see hints no. 2. 9 Base of some mountains. 10 Standing amongst Pterodactyl nests -take saltpetre crystals time limit. Mammoth's graveyard take rib bone. 12 Eastern end of a murky swamp take some coal. 13 Northern bank of a river. 14 Northern bank of a swiftly flowing river cut tree make raft see hint no. 2. 15 Hot, humid jungle-time limit see hints no. 1. 106 "


"E inta T H 16—157 DE H cho 34—33432-29 37-384 38 28 2 5 15. 16 Hot, humid jungle-time limit 49 Vast, sandy desert — see hints see hints no. 1. no. 10. 17 The top of a vast, tall waterfall 50 Vast, sandy desert see hints use look for hidden steps. no. 10. 18 Slab of rock on the northern bank 51 Oasis-throw stick see hints of a clear lake see hints no. 3. no. 12. 19 Surface of a clear lake see 52 Narrow gully. hints no. 3. 53 Rocky outcrop in the desert 20 Bottom of a clear lake time man in black-throw axe see limit take large bright ruby. hints no. 13 time limit. 21 Marshy, swampy region south of 54 East end of a rocky outcrop 31—30 23 the great lake Brachiosaurus take rifle, rope, stone axe see munching on the vegetation hints no. 14. take hollow log -see hints no. 4. 55 North side of a deep, wide ca22 Base of a tall vulcano. nyon use rope. 23 Standing at the edge of the crater 56 Bottom of a deep canyon. of an active vulcano-time limit 57 East end of a deep canyon take some sulpher. cobra suck wound. 24 Savannah, near a blasted tree 58 Bubbling tar pit see hints no. 39 Triceratops here time limit. 25 Savannah near to a clump of 59 South edge of a deep canyon. trees. 60 Bottom of some tall mountains. 26 Savannah near to a dinosaur 61 Narrow ledge half way up a skeleton. mountain. 27 Savannah near a small pond. 62 Entrance to a dark cave. 28 Savannah near a large boulder 63 Far Western end of the mountain Stegosaurus here time limit. ledge take tree branch see 29 Savannah, near a dried-up water hints no. 15. hole mammoths time limit 64 Dark and gloomy cave giant drop mouse — see hints no. 5. cave bear time limit. 30 Grassy plain which forms the 65 Outside a cave on the mountain south bank of a river Sabre ledge. tooth Tiger time limit. 66 Extreme eastern end of the ledge 31 South bank of a river in the -rub twigs light branch see jungle. hints no. 15. 32 Small clearing in the jungle 67 Large cave primitive time limit. paintings. 52 51 5354 33 Tunnel in the jungle vegetation. 68 Large cave full of bats see 34 Clearing in the jungle gigantic hints no. 16. spider here time limit -take 69 Small cave take diamonds. necklace. 70 Myriad caverns of the Sacred 35 Grasslands just south of the Caves. jungle time limit see hints 71 Myriad caves of the Sacred no. 6. Caverns. 36 Centre of the Neanderthal 72 Myriad tunnels of the Sacred village time limit take round Caves. stone see hint no. 6. 73 Many caverns of the Sacred 37 Hut of Smig the Neanderthal Caves. offer the necklace see hints no. 74 Myriad caverns of the Sacred 636261 Caves Caesar written on wall. 38 Hut of Kogo the Neanderthal 75 Myriad caverns of the Sacred offer ruby see hints no. 7. Caves. 39 Outside the Shaman's hut pot 76 Bottom of a sheer rock face use of sweet smelling liquid drink ladder — see hints no. 17. liquid see hints no. 8 time 77 Top of a sheer rock face. 72 73 74 limit. 78 Edge of a deep pit use ladder. 40 In the Shaman's hut time limit 79 Bottom of the deep pit take a see hints no. 9. few large fungi. 41 Fork in the trail. 80 West bank of the river of molten 42 Muddy watering hole-fill pot rock use fungi. see hints no. 10. 81 East bank of the river of molten 43 Edge of a vast, sandy desert. rock. DOWN 44 DO NOT ENTER QUICKSAND 82 Cavern with a single exit. 79 80 81 83 45 Vast, sandy desert — see hints 83 Icy water at the bottom of the no. 10. pool. 86 85 46 Vast, sandy desert — see hints 84 Do not enter killed on no. 10. waterfall 47 Vast, sandy desert — see hints 85 Vast cavern lit by phosphoNOTE no. 10. rescent rocks. All directions correspond with the 48 Vast, sandy desert rampaging 86 Western end of a large phosphocompass unless otherwise shown. dinosaur use gun see hints rescent cavern giant snake -indicates one-way directions. no. 10. use diamond take Talisman. 56 57 downx BO 676 LE 78 77 82 84 DOWN UP 107 "


"BUG HUNTER WRITE THE AT: COMPUTER& VIDEOGAMES PRIORY COURT, 30-32 FARRING DON LANE, LONDON ECIR 3AU.OR PHONE ME ON:Q1-2516222. WATCH THAT SLIME disappear. It can only be obtained again by completing the event VIC/64 Simon Haynes is currently jumping without a pole or by waiting until the PROOFREADER up and down in excitement in Stoke game ends and then pressing the demo key. Thanks, Mr Percival. Here's a handy little proofreading street to find a bug in Ghostbusters Maybe the pole is actually still there, program for Vics and 64s. for the 64. but jumping over a 16 foor bar To enable, type SYS 886. Every When you go to trap a ghost, he without one has affected your vision! time you finish the line and hit says, move your ghostbuster to the far left of the screen. Press the fire MORE MUD RETURN, the checksum will appear. button to release the second man and RUN/STOP and RESTORE or using move him directly over the first so Our MUD feature from last year is still the cassette will cancel it. that only one of them is visible. With generating letters asking how you the trap in the middle of the screen, can get hooked up to this game. So, if 100 PRINT CLR]PLEASE WAIT fire the guns. The ghost will be you're still in the dark, read on. FORI = 8860 TO 1018:READA: caught every time. If only it was as MUD runs on a DEC-10 mainframe CK = CK + A:POKEIA:NEXT easy as that in the film. at Essex University. You access it via 110 IF CK<>17539 THEN the telephone lines, using your micro PRINT''{DOWN) YOU MADE and a modem. You'll also need some SPACE) AN ERROR\":PRINTIN CUT THE RED WIRE special software to give your terminal DATA STATEMENT\":END a scrolling display. If you have a BBC, 120 SYS886:PRINT''(CLR) (2 DOWN) Here's yet another tip for Quickshot PROOFREADER ACTIVATED.\": II users. If you use the Cambridge use a comms ROM such as TERMI or Computing joystick interface, you COMMUNICATOR. If you have a NEW 886 DATA 173.036.003.201.150.208 will find that the auto fire facility on Spectrum, you'll find a program on 892 DATA 001,096,141,151,003,173 the joystick is always activated by the the Spectrum telesoftware section 898 DATA 037,003,141.152,003,169 interface. You can disable the auto which gives your computer a 904 DATA 150,141,036,003,169,003 fire mechanism quite simply. But 40-column scrolling display. 910 DATA 141,037,003,169,000,133 before you break into your joystick, Next, you need a PSS account. PSS 916 DATA 254,096,032,087,241,133 remember that this will invalidate any is the British Telecom data system 922 DATA 251,134,252,132,253,008 guarantee. Also, C&VG can not be which MUD is connected to. Setting 928 DATA 201,013,240,017,201,032 responsible if you damage your joyup a PSS account costs  and 934 DATA 240,005,024,101,254,133 stick by performing this modification. details can be had on 01 020 0661. 940 DATA 254,165,251,166,252,164 Right, now you're sure that it's safe 946 DATA 253,040,096,169,013,032 to continue, remove the handle from OUT OF CTRL? 952 DATA 210,255,165,214,141.251 the joystick and take the stick apart. 958 DATA 003,206,251,003,169,000 964 DATA 133,216,169,019,032,210 Inside, you'll find a circuit board with Jettinder Kumar wants to know about 970 DATA 255,169,018,032,210,255 seven wires connecting to it. The red the CTRL key on his Texas micro. 976 DATA 169,058,032,210,255,166 wire is the offending one and needs What's it for? he asks. Some | 982 DATA 254,169,000,133,254,172 to be disconnected. Just unplug it programs use the CTRL (or Control) 988 DATA 151,003,192,087,208,006 from the connection on the circuit key as an extra shift key. Hold it down 994 DATA 032,205,189,076,235,003 board. To stop it touching any other and press another key and it will 1000 DATA 032,205,221,169,032,032 connectors when you use the joyproduce certain effects. CTRL-C, for 1006 DATA 210,255,032,210,255,173 stick, put a little Sellotape over the example, will usually allow you to 1012 DATA 251,003,133,214,076,173 wire. Now, all that's left is to replace stop a BASIC program that is running. | 1018 DATA 003 the cover and handle and make sure Not all micros have this key and, that all is working. even if they do, not all use it. If you Next month, I'll be telling you how want to write a program to detect it, ALL THE NUMBERS to make a garage for your Sinclair C5 CTRL-A has an ASCII code of 1, out of two washing up liquid bottles CTRL-B is 2... and CTRL-Z is 26. That's all for this month. To contact and the inside of an egg-box. Bug Hunter, leave a message on my answering machine on 01 251 5633. UP THE POLE! VIC HUNCHBACK Or on Prestel mailbox 012786556. Or on VISA bulletin board, if you have January's issue contained a listing for a Micronet-type modem the phone Next, Decathlon fans, a bug in Daley the Vic called Hunchback. Line 2016 number is 01 958 7098. If you're into Thompson's version. JS Percival from said GOTO 2014, but there isn't a line American databases, reach me on Ashford in Kent reckons that he's 2014 in the listing. This is all right and Compuserve on 74106,1637 or on tracked one. If you fall off the pole the program will still work without People/Link as Hex Maniac. As a during the pole vault (by releasing line 2014. the jump key), the pole will totally last resort, you could always send me a letter through the post! BY ROBERT SCHIFREEN 108 "


"Minder Available across a range of micro computers, KITODICS the games name Minder is a Euston Films Production for THAMES TELEVISION  Created by Leon Griffiths . Produced by Lloyd Shirley and George Taylor 109 "


"...SO I SAID-NO NEED FOR THAT, DIRID JUST BUY ME A COPY OF COMPUTER . 250 "


"RKDEAR. -X/IDEO GAMES YEARBOOK. Available at Only .65 our newsagent now! "


"GOOD BYTE ARCADE HARDWARE 211 HORTON ROAD FALLOWFIELD, MANCHESTER, M14 70E. FOR ACCESS AND ENQUIRIES TELEPHONE 061 225 2248 SPECTRUM FLIGHT PATH 737 GAME TYNESOFT GAMES PACK SPOERMAN  RASPASSAGE COMMODORE 64 UNDERWORLDE WORLD SERES BASEBALL SUICIDE EXPRESS ALL OTHER ACTIVISION 1995 GERT PYJAMARAMA QUAS MODOS AIVING AT HET WILLY COMBAT LYNX AVALON THROTTLE TEXAS TIGERVISION SERIOUS STUFF MANUFACTURED GAMES MINER 2049 er TI-LOGO PARSEC 1150 requires 32K RAM TOMBSTONE CITY (9.95 EDITOR ASSEMBLER 4500 TIINVADERS requires 32K RAM disc MUNCHMAN system CAR WARS (995 MULTIPLAN 7495 CONNECT FOUR 1995 requires 32K RAM& disc HOPPER 14.95 system FROM PARKER BROS TI WRITER SOCCER 7495 requires 3 RAM & disc MICROSURGEON 2495 RS232 & printeri DEMON ATTACK (1995 TERMINAL EMULATOR NEW MODULES 2995 MOONSWEEPER (19.95 FACE CHASE BUCK ROGERS  E39 95 DISC FIXER 2995 cartridge requires disc & 32 BIGFOOT IMBXI 1995 SPACE PATROL 29.95 RAM SEWERMANIA MBX 1 995 STAR TRAP NAVARONE CONSOLE 4995 SUPERFLY MBX E1995 Powie by the time you read this WRITER Cartridge based METEOR BELT IMBX 1 9.95 INTRODUCING THE BIGGEST 201 word processor requiring SPACE BANDITS IM 1995 GAME EVER nothing more than a printer HONEY HUNT IM 1999 ARCTURUS 4800 S/DTRACK TROLLEY 1995 NAVARONE DATABASE DATABASE ENTRY 5495 MILTON BRADLEYS MBX DATABASE SORT 5495 Or buy the two together 26500 1995 MORTE MASON BOROTON WEF BEACHHEAD WHITE LIGHTNING RAID OVER MOSCOW.... BATTLE FOR MIOWAY. FIGHTER PLOT KONG STRIKES BACK SHOOT THE RAPOS ANCIPITAL PROJECT FUTURE WHITE LI I SION INTERNATIONAL SOCCER ADVENTURES ADVENTURE PIRATE 199s Allows the basic programmer RETURN TO PIRATE IS 1995 using the Editor Assembler to program in Basic and then ADVENTURE TAPES convert the program to GOLDEN VOYAGE r995 Assembley language Requires GHOST TOWN (995 Disc system 32 RAM & TI'S VOODOO CASTLE +995 Editor Assembler MYSTERY FUN HOUSE (995 STRANGE COVSSEY SOY HUNTER COMBAT LEADER EMERALD ISLE .... IN BLOODANE RAID OVER MOSCOW COMMODORE 16 f1600 TAPE BASED LOCO INTI BASIC AMSTRAD GAME ADVENTURE QUEST BUNGEON ADVENTURE MOONBEAM SOFTWARE tapes All tapes require ExBas BOOKS INTRODUCTION TO ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE FOR THE TI HOME CONDUTER Steve Davis Dub MBX, BASEBALL & I'M HIDING .00 AI MB gamesearepr Bebal Hiding and Terry Turtle can be played on just 1199/4A with little or not loss of features SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY OLYMPAD POEA HOUSE OF USHER STEVE DAVIS SNOOKER ASTROMANIA CAVERN QUEST ZERO ZONE ROBOT RUNNER MOONBEAM EXPRESS 795 (795 PROGRAMS FOR THE TI NOME 1795 COMPUTER Steve Davis pub E7 95 You THE SMALL PRINT PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE PLEASE BY PRIOR ARRANGEMENT C&VG. ONLY ONLY .00 MICROSELL COUPON Twins TO ADVERTISE IN C&VG MICROADS TEL: 01-251 6222 0.0co 27 30 PLEASE PRINT IN BLOCK CAPITALS ONLY ONE INSERTION PER COUPON TERMS AND CONDITIONS 1. Trade advertisers will appear in the MicroAds section, private advertisers in the Microsell Section. 2. All free MicroSell ads are subject to space availability The Publishers reserve the right to refuse an advertisement Minimum number of words is 15. maximum 40 (continue on a separate sheet where necessary TOTAL number of words for ALL insertions ... (i.e. 15 words per advertisement to appear in two months 30 words in total) COST: MicroSell (Private) MicroAds (Trade) .00 40p per word 50p per additional bold word I enclose a cheque/P.O. for ............. made payable to Computer & Video Games Name ... Address ........ POST TO: AD. DEPT, C&VG, 30-32 FARRINGDON LANE, LONDON EC1R 3AU 112 "


"MIKE SINGLETON'S PLAYER'S GUIDE TO STRATEGY AND WARGAMES LESS WAR, MORE GAME BORED GAME It just so happens that the next game I APOCALYPSE LATER I have a friend who, whenever I decided to dip into after poor old Air \"REUTERS... BERLIN: All access mention board wargames, chooses to Defence was another CCS product, routes to the city of Berlin have been interpret it as bored wargames. I this time called War Zone. I loaded it closed by the East German Governmust admit that for CCS's Air with some trepidation. So, it was with ment. American and British outposts Defence, it is an apt enough descripgurgles of glee (and lashings of report contact with Russian tion. Air Defence is one of those poetic licence) that I realised, after a mechanised forces. The Soviet games where the player would really few minutes' play, that War Zone was government refused to acknowledge do much better if he were a a little gem. the outbreak of hostilities but noted computer himself he would War Zone makes no pretence at that 'appropriate measures were probably enjoy it more too! being an ultra-realistic simulation being taken.\" Upon loading, the game looks quite the pieces are actually called pieces This is the chilling scenario that interesting. The map is fictional and in the rules, rather than the usual introduces the US Gold wargame, depicts a section of coastline that you units or divisions wargamers are by must defend. Most of the elements of now accustomed to, squares are 64 plays the part of the Warsaw Pact, you squares, not hexes, and turns are directing a flood of armoured must defend the radar station or turns rather than battle phases or divisions and mechanised infantry you'll be fighting blind; you must whatever. War Zone makes a virtue across the Iron Curtain — you have defend your factory complex or your of simplicity. The board consists of the unenviable task of stopping them. squadrons won't be able to rearm; nine 10x10 sectors. At your disposal are 24 NATO you must defend your headquarters The three types of piece at your divisions, surface to air missile units, for fear of losing communications disposal tanks, infantry and assault helicopter units, air wings and with your forces. You even have a artillery all have their clearly two groups of Pershing tactical naval unit (which never seems to defined functions. Somewhat nuclear missiles. move) equipped with SAM missiles, illogically, infantry move faster than Just so it doesn't become a piece of not to mention two airborne early tanks but this works well in game cake, the game proceeds in warning squadrons and a couple of terms. The artillery moves slowly but \"accelerated\" time minutes tick in-flight refuelling tankers. has a long range for firing, the tanks away like seconds and, as they do so, Like NATO Commander, the game move at a medium pace and have a the Soviet attack rolls forward. is played in a sort of real-time fashion medium range for firing while the It is at this point that NATO but without the luxury of a freeze infantry move swiftly but can only Commander truly lives up to its command. As the first waves of engage in hand-to-hand combat. name. Each unit has its own built-in enemy bombers appear over the When it is your turn, you can move intelligence and it will not only horizon, you have no trouble all your pieces. Those that can fire choose its own \"best path\" from its scrambling a few squadrons to head can do so before or after movement. current position to the location them off but as more and more If you score a hit, the enemy piece is you've ordered it to, it will also make squadrons follow, Air Defence removed immediately. If you don't, it its own decision to retreat if attacked rapidly becomes an exercise in gets the opportunity to fire back. If in overwhelming strength. This hitting keys quickly enough. To say you move a piece next to an enemy leaves you free to concentrate on the game doesn't demand thought piece, hand-to-hand combat those things a supreme commander would be unfair logistical immediately starts and there will only is really there for — strategy and problems mount very swiftly after the be one survivor. There are no intactics. The day-to-day problems of tactics. The day-to-day problems of first few easy kills but the sort of betweens, no damaged or resting the unit commanders are all handled thought demanded frankly leaves me units it is simply life or death by the computer. cold. All you need to do is make sure Finally, when the computer takes The hard-pressed Berlin garrison is you intercept each target with a its turn, you can sit back and watch soon forced to retreat or surrender. squadron of fighters and make sure the enemy tanks, infantry and By the second day, you get news that they can get back to an undamaged artillery tramp across the sectors you the French have joined the battle (on airfield without running out of fuel. are allowed to see, looking on help your side, that is). The Italians can be The enemy bombers come in on lessly as your own pieces get cruelly relied upon to surrender shortly randomly assigned and independent zapped. Nothing works up a good afterwards. Finland struggles bravely flight paths, so concocting any rage better than having to watch your on but finally succumbs to the sheer devious master plan is not on at all. carefully deployed lines being weight of the Soviet onslaught. To keep you on the edge of your reduced to tatters. The realism of this game is frightenseat, the game instructions fail to tell War Zone is not a game that will ing and the battle for Europe unfolds you how either side can win! In the appeal to fans of realistic simulation, just as the professional scenarioend, I got so fed up with the neverbut for those of you who like strategic makers say that it will. Day three is ending procession of enemy problems, without distraction of likely to see you reaching bombers that I grounded all my massive tactical fuss and detail, I can desperately for your tactical nukes as fighters and sat, waiting calmly for recommend War Zone highly. It's for the Soviet pressure becomes undefeat. the 48k Spectrum watch out for it! bearable. 113 "


"STAR SYSTEM PROCYON GROUTH CENTRALIZATION : STRENGTH BEING STAR STARS RULED ACNOU SOCIOTYPE ZERO NORMAL  IMPERIAL PHASE 6 STAR SYSTEM SCORPIUS changes during the course of a game but what \"epoch\" it is governed by does change. A Zero Normal star, for instance, can be in one of two epochs, Imperial or Communal. The key point about an epoch is that it directly influences the way a star's growth rate and centralisation factor change over time. In the next 5th Column, we shall see how changes in epoch occur in accord with sociotype. This month, for simplicity, the epochs are constant. Your brief is to explore the intricacies of galactic power and to observe how a star's epoch is crucial to its rise or fall. You might also pause to consider an interesting question: which of the two epochs has the best chance of seizing ultimate power, Imperial or Communal? I'm sure the Kremlin would like to know but, failing that, you can always send me the answer don't forget to say why! GENHEALIZATION STRENGTH BOLER BEING RULES SOCIOTYPE ZERO NORMAL  COMMUNAL PHASE 6 STAR SYSTEM ICARUS THE EIZATION STRENGTH POUER RULING STAR SCORPIUS STARS RULED 10 DEF FNL -107 INT (LN NL 11 DEF F I NT (.5+/FN 20 B B9 e nan 50CIOTYPE ZERO NORMAL EPOCH COMMUNAL PHASE  25 NEXT 30 LET n=2 REHno. Pochs 31 Mes ne he REME REMEOch na 38 FOR TONE 9 .TO 2000 6 REM Print to NT.CHS 54. 3 2 THEN PRET THEN PRI 51 70 DRINT AT 12 10 SEZO INK Lei n. ENDER 21 IR NOTHEN LET ABS PRINT -PN SI RETURN L ST FOR 1 520 GO SUD TO 5 300-. einHDD BOOZON OQOL on-OUGDUNGUR ETURN Seed SELDON'S GAME Seldon's Game, this month, reaches the point where all you would-be psycho-historians can begin to study the course of galactic history in full detail. The Spectrum listing printed here is to be added to the listing provided in the last 5th Column, so you should take care to get the line numbers exactly right or nasty things may happen! The new routines allow you to check the vital statistics of individual stars as the game progresses and also enable the calculations which influence a star's growth rate and centralisation factor. The game has now been limited to 26 stars (one for each letter of the alphabet) to make star identification simpler. Now, however, you must enter a random seed number at the beginning of the game. This should be between 1 and 65535. Use the same number again and you will get the same galactic set-up. Enter 0 for a truly random set-up. During processing, the border colour becomes red when it turns black again, you can check on individual stars before initiating the next phase. Press \"1\" to label each star by letter on the galactic map. Press \"l\" again to redraw a label-free map. Press any of the letter keys to access details of an individual star. Press \"O\" to initiate the next phase of the game. These key presses are valid in galactic map mode or individual star mode. A star's read-out gives you its name, its growth, centralisation, strength and power, its ruling star and the code letters of the stars it rules. Also listed are its sociotype and its epoch. However, if the star rules other stars, its power may be swelled due to the centralisation factor. Centralisation indicates what proportion of a subordinate star's strength the ruling star takes to add to its own strength and use as power. A star with a centralisation factor of 0.9 will grab 90% of the strength of the stars it rules, all of which will go to swell its power. Finally, we come to \"sociotype\" and \"epoch\". For this month, I've give all the stars the same sociotype Zero Normal. More types will follow soon! A star's sociotype never ......60 TO 2220 8301 REM Display Options LET ns =26 INPUT Rana rnd RANDOMIZE DIM Eins DIM eins PORKE TO REM 50 u lu READ SEK 2350 TH OR THEN GO 9960GOLUL tily Stars 2378 2 KS THEN GO SUB 2000 2560 20 TO 2310 3810 00 SUB 2800 5858 08:1. BORDER 2 ato PRINT AT INK 60 CHANGES OF EPOCH 2210 PAPER INKBORDER OC LuoL ZOOLOOMULULLLLLLLL LLLLL L 5002 REM EPOCH EFFECTS tu 12.8 i BEAU 6:10 DA 4T rn IF 88.894 AU THEN GO 8008 REMIMPERIAL r\"  2088 CATA ZERO NORMAL\" 2 BELLATRIX 2250 PESTE BLATININKO 2233 PRINT \"CENTRALIZATION\",\" 2234 PRINT \"STRENGTH\",2239 PRINT POWER 2236 PRINT \"RULING STAR\", 2237 PRINT \"STARS RULED\", 2238 PRINT PRIN AT 19. 10. SOCIOTYPE 2515 PRINT AT 15:18. EPOCH INT AT 21.28 INK 4 PHAS BEINT AT 2.25 LET PRINTAT 3 18 LET DE ERENTSATSER PRINT AT 5.26 LET NEEDS INT AT 2 IF ESTREN PRINT \"NONE SOMALHAUT ICARUS O vogo DATA SCORPIUS SATA BANTOR DATA XERXES 114 "


"THE SMASH HIT COMPUTER GAMES PACK GREAT HIT GAMES ALL GAMES FAST LOAD SPECTRUM 48K COMMODORE 64  3D STARSTRIKE Realtime Software BLUE THUNDER SON OF BLAGGER Aligata AUTOMANIA Mare Gent BUGA-BOO Quicksilva   PSYTRON Beyond WHEELIE Microsphere FALL GUYER BLADE ALLEY PSS PENETRATOR Melbourse House TAPE A TALES OF THE ARABIAN NIGHTS Interest Micro POSTER PASTER Taskunt Lod FLIGHT PATH 737 Aninog PSYTRON Beyond SON OF BLAGGER Aligota   SUPER PIPELINE Tankset Lad) TROLLIE WALLIE Interceptor Micro AUTOMANIA MG GHOULS Micropower BOOGA-BOO Quicksilve! BEAU-JOLLY) AVAILABLE AT: WHSMITH BOOTS MENZIES FW WOOLWORTH GREENS RUMBELOWS LASKY'S CURRY'S H.M.V. ASDA TESCO GRANADA CO-OP TIGER DEALERS AND ALL GOOD COMPUTER SHOPS "


"COMMODORE 64 10 MEGA HITS | GREAT HIT MEGA HITS GAMES EGA MECA PECTRUM 48K MEGA HITS ZMAT PT 757-AUTOMAT WIGHTS POSTER PASTE GREAT HIT GAMES MEGA HITS SPECIAL Have OFFER WEEZEere's an offer you just can't refuse. C&VG, your favourite computer games magazine, has teamed up with Beau Jolly to bring you an EXCLUSIVE money saving offer. Beau-Jolly are releasing sphere. All the games order/credit card number Flight Path 737, Psytron, two tapes, for the have featured highly in the to the address shown. Son of Blagger, Super Commodore 64 and the C&VG Top 30 charts. Then just 28 days later a Pipeline, Trollie Wallie, Spectrum, called Mega And we're offering you bumper bundle of the top Automania, Ghouls and Hits. Each games tape the chance to get your games of 84 will come Booga-Boo. features 10 top games hands on one of these crashing through your Games on the Spectrum from top software houses tapes for the special letter-box. Don't delay Mega Hits tape are: 3D like Quicksilva, Beyond, C&VG reader's price of rush your order form off Starstrike, Blue Thunder, Alligata, Anirog. Interjust .49! A genuine today! Son of Blagger, Autoceptor, Taskset, Microbargain! Games on the Commomania, Booga-Boo, power, Micro-Gen, Elite. All you have to do is fill dore 64 Mega Hits tape Psytron, Wheelie, Fall Melbourne House, PSS, in the coupon and send it are: Tales of the Arabian Guy, Blade Alley, and Realtime and Microwith your cheque/postal Nights, Poster Paster, Penetrator. To: Mega Hits Special Offer, Computer & Video Games, Priory Court, 30-32 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU. BLOCK CAPITALS PLEASE Please send me: Qty Total Mega Hits Machine @ .49 I enclose a cheque/postal order for .......... ...made payable to Computer & Video Games magazine. Please debity my Access/Visa account no. for .... Date.. Signed.. Name. Address... Tel. Offer applies to UK readers only. Allow 28 days for delivery. Offer applies while stocks last. 116 "


"CRL SOFTWARE PRESENT RICHARD O'BRIEN'S MSTER HORROR SHPM PLAY IT! CRL CRL House, 9 Kings Yard, Carpenters Road, London E15 2HD. Tel: 01-533 2918 "


"O.K. GANG! HERE IT IS MASSIVE SALE! TOP GAMES/EX CHART! EVERY GAME GENUINELY REDUCED! Mr Wongs Laundry EXPORT ZX SPECTRUM HI-TECH Frog Run SOLAR SOFT RRP Sal pee 5.9 8.95 5.95 ew Bore Destes 5000 Monkey Business 1.99 1.99 Robinte Resc Mucho Bogeyman 30 Combat Zone 30 D ube M u nce Cable 5.95 1.99 6.85 195 BES 199 695 199 6.95 1.99 6.95 1.99 Earth Light Cycle Deep Space LLAMASOFT RRP Sale 8.95 2.99 Abducta Gedure Meta Lamas 6.95 199 395 299 8.95 29 AND OVERSEAS VISITORS ALL MAKES OF MICRO COMPUTERS, PRINTERS. PERIPHERALS AND SOFTWARE SUPPLIED AT DISCOUNT PRICES. AMSTRAD ORIC  SINCLAIR  BBC MICRO  ELECTRON  COMMODORE AQUARIUS  EPSON  BROTHER AND ALL POPULAR MAKES. MOGUI 8,95 199 Al Chenger Man 695 199 6.95 1.99 5.95 1.99 599 199 5.99 199 and Cup Football Hunty Garden Hungty Free Humpty Engineer LLAMASOFT Attack of M an Earthquake Patty Per Las Vegas Lady Adder Attack Mushroom Aley LOTNLORLAR Gary Bucks 5.99 1.99 895 2.99 895 2.99 Tour 595 1.99 595 199 596 199 5.95 1.99 5.95 1.99 5.95 1.99 595 1.99 SSSSSS 488 SOLAR SOFT Realm of Undead Reda B 5.99 1.99 5.99 1.99 5.99 1.99 QUICKSILVA Pue Ture Out Warna Asiero QUICKSILVA 795 199 COMMODORE 14 Alec Tomb At Grid Timegate 6.95 1.99 6.95 1.99 6.95 1.99 8.98 199 Treasure of Phoes 8.95 1.99 6.95 199 CRYSTAL MICRO POWER 395 199 MICROGOLD On the Oche 7.50 195 Med Cod Nyheder 595 199 Westworld TECH 595 199 595 1.99 595 199 ARIRIG Buy Squad 5.95 199 Indian Anak Revelation DEDUCT 10% on all orders for 10 games or more!!! TEE-VEE'S, 96-98 Cannock Rd, The Scotlands, Wolverhampton WV10 OAE. Tel: (0902) 731685 Established 10 years. P&P: Add 75p to total order Send SAE for list. Trade enquiries welcome. Cheques/PO's made payable to Tee Vee's. 6.95 1.99 7.95 1.99 7.95 1.99 7.95 1.99 7.95 1.99 7.55 199 Chess Chess Tutor UNICOM HOUSE 182 ROYAL COLLEGE STREET, LONDON NW1 9NN TELEX: 295932 UNICOM G TELEPHONE: 01-482 1711 SOFTWARE WORLD 12, ETHEL STREET, BIRMINGHAM B2 TEL: 021 643 7559 FOR ALL POPULAR MICRO HARDWARE, PERIPHERALS & SOFTWARE BIRMINGHAM'S LARGEST STOCKISTS OF: AMSTRAD, ATARI, BBC, COMMODORE, DRAGON, ELECTRON, MSX, ORIC, SPECTRUM AND TEXAS. SOFTWARE AT AMAZING PRICES! (i.e. Atari from .00) SEND S.A.E. FOR FREE LISTS (SPECIFY MACHINE) ATARI ATARI ATARI PACKAGES BOOKS & MAGAZINES SELECTED CARTRIDGES e.g. Star Raiders, Pac Man BOOXL 800XL ANTIC .50 each 1010 RECORDER 1050 DRIVE ANALOG .00 for two + SOFTWARE + SOFTWARE PAGE 6 .00 for three .99 .99 (inc back issues) (please phone) Latest issues from U.S. Place your regular order with us now. ALL LATEST ATARI SOFTWARE IN STOCK IN OUR NEW 1ST PRICE REDUCTIONS FLOOR ATARI CENTRE. AMSTRAD & TEXAS NEW STOCKS ZX SPECTRUM .00 SPECTRUM + .99 NOW AVAILABLE. ACORN ELECTRON .99 PLEASE PHONE TO CHECK STOCK AVAILABILITY BEFORE SENDING MONEY REMEMBER IF WE DO NOT HAVE WHAT YOU REQUIRE IN STOCK WE CAN NORMALLY 'OBTAIN IT FAST! U.K. & AMERICAN SOFTWARE IS AVAILABLE MAIL ORDER U.K. POST FREE Cheques payable to \"Software World\" GOODS DESPATCHED BY RETURN POST, SEND FOR UP TO DATE LISTS ALL ITEMS AVAILABLE MAIL ORDER 118 "


"SABRE WULF 1) D. Britz, Abergavenny, Gwent, Wales 9,636,965 2) Jonathon Lock, Bromley, Kent 499,630 3) Jens chr Skyttle, Vanlose, Denmark 442,005 4) Stuart Giblin, Manchester, Lancs 433,620 PYJAMARAMA 1) Trevor Prior, Heybridge, Essex 3,245 paces (100%) 2) Matthew Leach, Leeds, North Yorkshire 5,111 paces (100%) 3) Alan Hobbs, Haywards Heath, West Sussex 6,241 paces (100%) 4) Neil Mellor, Basford, Nottingham 6,898 paces (100%) 5) Sib and Mac, Dagenham, Essex 7,373 paces (100%) * * GHOSTBUSTERS 1) R. Smith, Tunbridge Wells, Kent -79,250 2) Michael Burgess, Rochdale, Lancs 77,100 3) Mike Stocktons, Kendal, Cumbria 63,600 4) Davis White, Colwyn Bay, Wales 39,200 5) Jonathan Perry, County Durham 36,000 STAR COMMAND 1) George McClelland, Co. Antrim, N. Ireland 303,750 2) GL Wheeler, Bath, Avon — 314,210 3) Ron Barlow, Crewe, Cheshire 248,250 4) S W Upton, Telford, Shropshire — 224,980 5) Andrew Ellis, Boultammoor, Lincoln 208,250 MANIC MINER 1) Paul McLeish, Abram, Wigan — 39,833,497 2) Peter Marsden, Oswestry, Shropshire 32,648,4565 3) Chris Nind, Worcester 30,346,236 4) Craig Atkins, Rugeley, Staffs — 19,656,230 5) Ivor Melia, Co. Kerry, Eire 16,907,232 DALEY THOMPSON'S DECATHLON 1) Stephen Eadis, Wanstead, London 1,504,004 2) Chris Hall, North Humberside 1,299,489 * 3) Lee Stevens, Biggleswade, Beds * 396,550 4) S. Taylor, Leasingham, Sleaford — 270,669 5) Garry Palmer, Bedford, Beds — 107,700 * PARSEC 1) Chris Rock, Chesterfield, Derbyshire 895,200 2) Gary Cook, Yate, Bristol 753,100 3) Andrew Scott, Sheffield 519,800 4) Satish Patel, Bromwich, West Midlands 311,900 5) James Corcoran, Paisley, Scotland 298,000 * * OUR HALL OF FAME GAMES Since we relaunched our Hall of Fame with some new games, your hiscores have been flooding in. Keep it up! If you look below, you'll see we've added a few more new games for you to try your skill at. There's Starbike the space game with a difference from The Edge-Acornsoft's Elite, a very sophisticated trading game and Micro-Gen's Pyjamarama a sort of Jet Set Wally! JET BOOT JACK English Software's excellent platform adventure starring the man with the jet. powered boots. STARSTRIKE Classic space shoot-out based on the Star Wars theme. For ace blasters only! JET PAC Fly Jet Man around the screen collecting the three sections of his space ship. DONKEY KONG The king of climbing games. The ape, the carpenter, and the blonde are now available on Atari, Vic 20, 64, and T1-99/4a from Atarisoft. MANIC MINER The zany 20-screen climbing game that introduced Miner Willy. JET SET WILLY What Miner Willy did next. This time there are 60 screens. THE PYRAMID The Pyramid has Fantasy's unique high score verification system. ZALAGA Splendid arcade clone for the BBC. SABRE WULF Similar to Atic Atac but twice as tough and thrice as pretty. PSYTRON Beyond's first big hit for the Spectrum. The Psytron is a computerised defence system for the planet Betula 5. ELITE Acornsoft's sophisticated space trading game. Great graphics and action. STARBIKE The Edge promise a gold BMX bike to the highest scorer on their new game. JUMP CHALLENGE Eddie Kidd's brand new computer game which features buses, barrels and bikes. Even Eddie found it difficult! PYJAMARAMA Wally steps into a nightmare and into C&VG's Hall of Fame. illall GARY COOK * * * * CHRIS HALL ELITE 1) Robin Pickles, Sulby, Isle of Man (Elite) 1,167,072 2) Richard Beardsley, Brinsley, Nottingham (Elite) 500,463 3) Thomas Bancroft, Camberley, Surrey (Elite) 118,241 4) Matthew Huddleston, Portslade 114,204 HALL OF FAME Name. STARBIKE 1) Jason Guth, Loughton 1,863,290 2) Tim Peggs, Scarborough 424,400 3) Scott Morrisey, Hayes 393,180 4) Steven Routledge, Hayes 246,385 PLANETOID 1) Keith May, Skegness, Lincolnshire 1,950,360 2) Martin Spencer, Ledbury, Herefordshire 353,720 3) Paul French, Radley, Oxfordshire 197,800 4) Neil Mackie, Fife, Scotland 127,900 5) David Potter, Alton, Hampshire 103,625 Address Ige T-shirt size sm med I scored. Time taken.. Game. .......... Computer....................... Witness's signature...... PSYTRON 1) Clive Richards, Monkton, Pembrokeshire — 254% 2) Stuart McIntosh, Bishopsbriggs, Glasgow — 248% 3) Clive Richards, Monkton, Pembrokeshire 206% AA "


"-N-EX.T M-O-N-TH N -EX.T. AMAZING AMSTRAD EXTRAVAGANZA! Switch on your favourite magazine next issue and you'll find a very special add-on inside. It's an Amstrad extravaganza everything you wanted to know about this exciting new machine but were afraid to ask. Competitions, listings and games reviews plus lots more. Kerrrang! Kapow! Kersplat! The superheroes are back. And we've got exclusive news of Scott Adams latest Marvel-lous Adventure based on the Fantastic Four. Keith Campbell takes on The Thing, Human Torch and the rest of the FF team and survives! Ask for the magazine with the Fantastic Four on the cover. ALIEN -NT-H. N-E:X-T M-O-N-T-H WW Plus a great Brian Hip Hop! Bee-Bop! Don't Jacks Superstar stop! Check out all the competition, games crucial moves in C&VG's listings, reviews all in one great package. hip-hopping Break Fever You just can't afford Competition. Win to miss it! clothes and videos. Don't worry we won't be asking you to do any | Soon, one of the world's headspins — but if you most famous special don't want to get wacked agents will be starring in out, bounce down to your a very special computer local newsagent and ask game. Find out more in for C&VG, the magazine C&VG, the magazine that that's really got the juice! is licensed to thrill! 0 M-ON-T-H: NEX-I U M-ON! Want to see a map of Ultimate's latest instant classic, Alien 8? Don't miss 8 May's Computer & Video Games when Prof Video ventures into the lost starship from a distant planet to bring you hints on how to guide it safely to a new world. TM-ON-THH NEX-TM-ON-T-HZ LATE RESULTS The 50 winners of the Legend of the Wakeman, Clwyd; Kevin Noble, Punton, Fife; Andrew Perry, Knuckerhole competition will each Warwickshire; R Pettigrew, Crawley; Mrs Bastin, Truro; Dagmar receive copies of the game from Cheshire; Duncan Amstrong, Schuster, West Germany. English Software. They are:Laarbruch; Stuart Birch, Bahrain; Simon Willingham, Birmingham; Thomas Martin, South Shields; Scott Weeks, Aylesbury; CS Michael Plester, Cambs; Blake 25 winners each receive a copy of the Browton, Herne Bay; PM Lovelock, Huebner, Belgium; Peter Willis, W Stranglers Adventure game for their Chelmsford; Sascha Burden, Glamorgan; Mike Eastgate, Surrey: Spectrum Llantwitt Major, S Wales; Lindsey Daniel Tobe, Kenton; Ray Rehansah, They are:Pedro Loureiro, Paton, Godalming, Surrey; Simon Abu Dhabi, Thomas Naylor, London; Portugal; Kusic Alexander, France; Reid, London: Colin Hutt, Lowestoft: Malcolm Bergh, Enfield; Cameron Lee Brown, London; J Greenhalf, Iain Slack, Manchester; Damian Smith, Lancs; Carl Wetton, Qatar; Morley: Gerard Madden, Jones, Bradford; Michael Jason Leyland, Nottingham; A Warrington; Andrew Dalli, Hastings: Georgiades, London; Kelvin Leese, Renshawe-Strack, Surrey: J Willox, Wayne Smith, Hull; A Dais, St Stoke-on-Trent; Steve Cantle, Peterborough; Maurice Collins, Co. Albans; Ceri Williams, Aberdare; I Bagshot, Surrey; Steven Crane, Nr Limerick; Rajesh Thakerar, Newson, Chelmsford; Lynda Heaton, Wakefield; Paul Servert, Harrogate; Wembley; Chris Fitch, London. West Yorks; Tom McGuiness, David Shryane, High Wycombe; A Broadstairs; SG Mitchell, Davis, Herts; Peter Gill, Essex; Basingstoke; Alan Paul, Co. Derry; Binoy James, Qatar; Robert Yeung, The correct frame for the Spy vs Spy Neil Collier, Birmingham; Jason Birmingham; Steven Trick, Chorley competition was number four. The Tucker, Gwent; Stephen Wetten, Wood; Hugh Wills, Blackpool; first 10 out of the box are as follows:London; C Greenhall, Blackpool; MJ Andrew Smith, Stroud; P Hall, Hull; Ian Urquhart, London; Jason Davies, Dyfed; PM Lovelock, Robert Stock, S Glamorgan; James Hayward, Brighton; Lee Russell, Chelmsford; Kevin Edwards, Moore, Blackburn; Thomas London; Frederid Lundborg, Abu Wiltshire; Shaun Holmes, Suffolk; McDermid, Greenock; Chris Dhabi; Michel Bonset, Holland; Stuart Walsh, Letchworth; Stephen Nicholls, Co. Durham; Neil Richard Wilson, Cheshire; Neil Smith, Lincs; Deno Hewson, Bahrain. 120 "


"| At 21.15 hours on the night of May 16th 1943 a flight of specially prepared Lancaster Bombers led by Wing Commander Guy Gibson of 617 Squadron left Scampton Airfield for a mission so daring, that if successful, would do immense damage to the German war machine and change the course of World War II. e 'Dambusters' Lancaster Bomber reproduced by kind permission of the Royal Air Force Museum, Hendon. On May 16th 1985, a computer program will be launched, so full of excitement and realism that it will change the course of games software production. THE THE DAY . RIGTERS You will relive the spine chilling experience of this famous raid as you take the place of some of the bravest men in recent history. You will play the role of pilot, navigator, gunner and bomb-aimer in this real-time multiscreen, arcade/strategy game which is an authentic recreation of that fateful flight. "


"ATARI 400/600/800/800XL Megasave Fantastic Savings SPECTRUM Monty's Innocent San Stout in Dan Trouble 5.85 5.85 Witches Couleras Football Manager Sherlock Holmes 5.85 Post Finder Hyper Circuit Pole Position Emerald Isle Suicide Express Celene Why not compliment the greatest home computer on the market by obtaining membership with MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY The greatest, biggest and best Atari library on the market. An ideal present for old and new Atari owners. MIDLANDS GAMES LIBRARY: The company who over 2 years ago, first conceived the idea of a software library. Now approaching nearly 1.000 titles on disc, cassette and Ram games, business educational and utilities). Often purchasing popular programmers in multiples of 5 or 6 to give all our members a fair change. Always adding approximately 40 new programmes monthly Over 1,000 very satisfied members, many as far away as Iceland, Sweden, West Germany. Holland, Denmark and Eire A fast, efficient and friendly service. Requests are attended to immediately virtually assuring you a 24 hour return of service. Regular newsletters and programme updates, plus other inter-club activities. Send large s.a.e. to: Software Sta Gift From The Gods Backpackers Guide American Football Costariat Tasmer Penetrator Tir Na Nog 8.50 Dalys Decathie 8.00 COMMODORE 54 Slap Shot MIDLAND GAMES LIBRARY 48 Readway, Bishops Cleeve, Cheltenham, Glos, Tel: 0242-67-4960 9.30-4.30 All our programmes are originals with full documentation Demark's Revenge Space Shuttle Knight lore Ghostbusters Lords of Midnight Dig Dug Tapper Hunchback Stall $9999 999 999 999933:9 39 333 : 9339 34888! Regards Oriental Express SpyHunt Emerald Well Fire 999999999999999999930: 999 999 99999!! ! ! ! J, AHHcii! 5.85 Fotball Software Star Cange Bange Fighter Pilet Ethiopian Famine Appeal Fund Softaid 8.50 Subterranean Stryker Investment Monitor 885 5.85 10.50 Football 8C sust Spirit of the M Buck Rogers Up Denn Super Huey 850 Barbarian Chape Summer Games CMH Hanger COMPUTER & VIDEO GAMES ABC FIGURE JULY-DEC 1984 94,247 Alicia Word Bell Deus Ex Machine white Lightning 1150 Bungaling Bay Hard Hot Mac Lade Runner Death Star Cerrah Speech ÉSE 8.50 Free post, please state which micro Send cheque or PO to: Megasave Dept CVG, 76, Westbourne Terrace, London W2 ADVERTISEMENT INDEX 10 Adventure International ... Addictive Games Amstrad.. Anirog.. . Arcade Hardware... No Martech. Megasave, Memorex... Micro-ads..... Micro Gold Micronet.. Microsell Midland Games Library Mikrogen. Miles Better .. ..47 . 122 76-77 .95-96 ... 118 .80-82 .90-91 15 Beau Jolly Beyond Bubble Bus 122 .26-27 32-33 CBS Computer Games Commodore ........ Commodore User.. Compunet.. Creative Sparks... CRL .88 36-37 ... 24 .. 117 National Software Library ........... Ocean ...... ................62-63,72 Quicksilva ................21 Ram Electronics .....................38-39 Dacc.. DK Tronics... Educational Computing .... Elite English.... Enterprise Euromax Sinclair Programs.. Software Express.. Software World... 103 105 118 .87 Games Workshop.. Goodbyte ..... Gremlin Graphics Talent.. Taskset. Telegames..... Tee Vee's..... 118 ..35 Hewson ....46 Incentive..... Icon.... US Gold...............4,40,43,56,61,71 89,94,121 Zoomsoft .... ........ 105 ..7,IBC .1FC 122 "


"INCENTIVE CONFUZION THE FUZION OF MIND AND MACHINE * AMSTRAD * SPECTRUM * COMMODORE 64 * BBCB * ELECTRON * Price .95 Trade and Credit Card orders: Telephone (0734) 591678, INCENTIVE, 54 London Street, Reading RG1 4SQ "


"SUPER SKETCH A Remarkable Innovation in Video Graphics Until now, creating computer graphics in colour has been both a demanding and expensive endeavor. The Super Sketch Graphics Tablet provides a totally unique and simple medium for creating video graphics at a surprisingly low cost. By simply moving the stylus control arm, as you would a pencil, Super Sketch reproduces the movement on the video screen. Four control buttons at the top of the tablet assist in operating the graphic functions of the software. Graphics may be created by \"free hand\" or by «tracing\" from drawings clipped to the pad. Compared with other computer graphic products, it is much easier to use than keyboard controls, does more than joysticks, paddle controllers and mouse controllers, and is less expensive than touch pad products. A brief demonstration instantly proves the remarkable features of Super Sketch. This product makes an excellent \"Demo Display\" in retail stores because anyone can immediately produce graphics with little or no instructions SUPER SKETCH  Cassette Software Includes Printer Utility and Starter Art Programs  Tracing & Free Hand Drawing On One To One Ratio To Video Screen NOW f4995  Four Easy To Use Menus: Main, Brush, Design, Expert  Custom Brush & Design Capability  Keyboard Text Entry Capability  Easy To Use Push Button Controls  Graphics Can Be Saved To Cassette And Reproduced On A Printer  Zoom Window  Creates Super Video Graphics  Absolutely Simple To Use  Cassette Software Included Printer Utility Included  Starter Kit Included te 9 Compatibility Screen Resolution Color Selection Unit Dimensions (In Gift Box) Commodore 64 160 x 200 16 16/\"x124\"x21/2\" ANIROG Trade Enquiries Unit 10 Victoria Industrial Park, Victoria Road, Dartford, Kent DA15AJ Tel: 032292538 "

