"ZD ZIFF-DAVIS The #1 Computer Game Magazine Computer On MMX Gaming Loyd Case World MAY 1997 NO.154 EXCLUSIVE! StarCraft Best Strategy Game Yet! Never-before-seen screenshots, secret designs, plus hands-on coverage of Blizzard's stunning new Sci-Fi mega-hit dla Game of the Year Awards Our Premier Awards And Readers' Choice Winners Which is the Best? DIABLO LONGBOW QUAKE NBA LIVE 97 www.computergaming.com "


"Blc? "


"It's in your veins. It's on your hands. And you're screaming for it. It's a tidal wave of first-person shooter carnage... um ARMOR O 32 500 Who to kill: zombies. Cultists, gargoyles, hellhounds, mimes, bats, rats and more Where to kill: graveyards, crematoriums, mausoleums, slaughterhouses and more Broker How to Kill: voodoo dolls, flamethrowers, pitchforks, dual tormyguns, TNT and more You Carved your soul to shreds in servitude to a dark god, but false promises and betrayal were your only reward. Now you've got a score to settle, and it will be measured in ... BLOOD Spill some. sharellare available in stores non Download the demo at www.gtinteractive.com/blood MATURE Vm DOSIPC CD-ROM R GT Interactive Software www.lith.com 1997 Monolith Productions, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Blood is a trademark of Monolith Productions, Inc. PO Box 3268. Kirkland, WA 98083. This game uses the Build engine and tools by Ken Silverman. Published and distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies "


"you're soaking in it. "


NA


"1996 National Le On Base Percentas Plaver, Team ng Average Che Team Ha Sheffield, FLATE FUL Trade HOME HIERI LTANT SOLUTION BANOR HIHTEERTAITHE A R RING ALL NEW 3D GAMEPLAY! OVER 800 MOTION-CAPTURED POLYGON MAJOR LEAGUE PLAYERS ALL 28 MAJOR LEAGUE TEAMS Grace Sheffield Batting HardBi ogistered trademark of Accolade, Inc. Hardball 6 1997 Accolade, Inc. Created By MindSpan. Officially licensed by Major League Baseball Players Association OMLSPA Officially licensed by Major League Baseball (OMLB. "


"je Batting Leaders COMING THIS SUMMER Team. AVG cal 376 HARDBALL 6 LLEST A WHOLE NEW BALL GAME! 293 547 308. Player Team 613 392 E Burks. 324 519 465 Fla G Sheffield, 546 339 46. K Caminiti. 517 318 376 «One of the top five most anticipated new titles of 1997\" 3 George Jones, C/Net HOU 517 Ci B Larkih498 ch S Sosa, 408 M Piazza, 571 321 \"HardBall 6 looks hot... the biggest HardBall by far\" C Gamer ine Percentage Player Team 613. 392. FEATURING E Burks, Fla G Sheffield 546 339 Enhanced Fielding Model SD K Canvinit 517 318 SF. Over 30 fully rendered 3D stadiums B Bonds, A Galarraga, 568 3:24 Custom League and Schedule Generator Hou Bagwell. Consecutive Season Play with lifetime stat-tracking 281 498 547 Head-to-Head Action via Network, Modem and Serial Cable NYN The Draft, minors, free-agents, trading, active and disabled lists Slugging Percentage. AB 517 ACCOUDE Pia PC CD-ROM Register on-line to receive the latest updates and information on HardBall 6 at: www.accolade.com E Bur WINDOWS 95 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #293 PLAYERS MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL www.majorleaguebaseball.com "


"South Peak www www.southpeak.com Interactive "


"CHANGE THE WAY YOU GAME Ever tried to play one of those games with so called \"complete 360° mobility\"? You know, the ones that let you look everywhere But really only move forward, backward, and 90° left or right? NEVER AGAIN. Introducing SouthPeak Interactive's Video Reality, It isn't a game. It's the driving force behind a new breed of games. Immerse yourself in 360° of insanely realistic, completely seamless, VIDEO REALITY motion picture-quality gaming. Coming soon to CD-ROM games near you. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #291 SouthPeak and Video Reality are trademarks licensed to SouthPeak Interactive LLC, Cary, NC, USA "


"The H1 ComputerGame Magazine n COVER STORY StarCraft World In less than two years, Blizzard has taken the gaming world by storm with their mega-hits WARCRAFT II and DIABLO. Now they're coming back with STARCRAFT, a game that promises to raise the bar again on real-time strategy games. FEATURE Premier CGW 1997 Premier Awards U Yes, gamers, it's that time of y ear again, when we hand out the hotly-contested awards for the best games of the year--and you either nod your head in passionate agreement or scream aloud in rabid fury at our choices. But like them or loathe them, here are the final verdicts for 1996. Are we geniuses or morons? The answer lies within you, dear readers... HARDWARE HARDWARE Sim Controllers If you're a serious simulations fanatic, you want the best equipment for the job. To help get you in gear, Simulations Editor Denny Atkin looks at the best in high-end joysticks, throttles, and rudder pedals. 116 Review Creative Labs AWE 64 Gold PnP CGW CGW MAY 1997 MAY 1997 "


"SNEAK PREVIEWS 44 46 50 Meat Puppet iF-22 Air Superiority Fighter The Space Bar REVIEWS ADVENTUREIROLE-PLAYING 122 Obsidian 128 Realms of the Haunting GAMER'S EDGE 212 Master of Orion II 222 Diablo, Part III 228 Wizardy Nemesis tips 234 CG Tips! SELECT RACE Alban Buimthi Mman Carack ACTION 132 Powerslave 136 Banzai Bug 140 Krazy Ivan Elerinde kare Caalanews Tumbas T IADA Tom Custom PUZZLEICLASSICS 144 Clue 97 Technology COLUMNS Loyd Case Says Intel's MMX Chip Packs a Few Surprises Scorpia Dances With Death in Discworld II Dennis McCauley Chats With Sports Game Designer Dave Holt 183 187 Adventure/RPG Sports SPORTS 146 Pro League Baseball '97 150 The Art of Fly Fishing, Vol. 1 SIMULATION 152 Flying Corps 189 Simulations Denny Atkin Says Multiplayer Sims Are Getting Better and Easier to Access 193 Strategy/Wargames Terry Coleman's First Annual Golden Hex Awards 250 Martin Cirulis What's the Deal With Psycho Geeks? DEPARTMENTS STRATEGYIWARGAMES 158 Magic The Gathering: Battlemage 166 M.A.X. 174 Emperor of the Fading Suns 12 Just the FAQS Answers to Frequently Asked Questions 18 Johnny Wilson The Hot Rod Syndrome 22 Letters Our Readers Speak Out 28 READ.ME News, Views and the Latest Releases 246 Hall of Fame Greatest Games of All Time 247 Patches Game Fixes That Kill Bugs Dead 248 Top 100 Subscribers Rate the Top Games Special MMX Advertising Supplement Pg. 196 MAY 1997 CGW CCW "


"In Showrooms The Limited Edition Vigilante Package Trackless environments give a rush more driving than a funkadelic beat. Over 30 wicked missions, plus LAN and modem combat meaner than an icy head freeze. Multi-camera angles offer views wider than Groove's lapels. -Groove Champion, Auto Vigilante "


"ACTIVISION. Now! Fully-Loaded Arsenal Over 25 armaments with enough firepower to create your own Death Valley. Killer Instrument Panel Targeting, systems damage and radar gauges help you watch your rear and burn theirs. CB included. Anti-Mercenary Weapons Systems Forward, rear and dropped weaponry plus a reinforced chassis for all-out hood-to-hood combat. Lethally Smooth Handling Dead-on vehicle dynamics courtesy of all-terrain tires and customizable brake and suspension systems. Shocks guaranteed. Built funk-tough on Windows 95. terstate 19. Drive strafely. www.activision.com Activision is a rogistered trademark and Interstate 76 is a trademark of Activision, Inc, 1997 Activision, Inc. All other trademarks and trade names are the properties of their respective owners. All rights reserved I nrann crni a "


"IT LEAVES PARIS WITH PASSENGERS, I \"An abundance of real-time puzzles and challenges awaits.? -CNET Gamecenter.com It's 1914. The world is on the brink of war, and this train could push it over the edge. I En up to you to untangle a complex web of political intrigue, suspense, romance and betray Available for Windows 95, DOS and PowerPC. 01997 Broderbund Software, Inc. Windows Is a U.S. repistered trademark of Microsoft Corp. The Last Express and Broderbund are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of Bruderbund Software CIRCLE READER SERVICE #370 "


"REACHES CONSTANTINOPLE WITH SURVIVORS. Broderbund aboard The Last Express, a real-time adventure game by Jordan Mechner. AST EXPRESS Bon voyage. www.lastexpress.com "


"JUST THE FAQS What's On The CD? PUPPE DEMOSI PLUS Pamit Amanda . Cuteng glow Wor that The PD Taload MWAWM Mere's UNo 30  WW2 Uning MEA And The winner is... in addition to our regular lineup of interactive demos, this month's CG-ROM features the Premier Award winners. Look out for interactive demos, game highlights, or custom scenarios for the winners of the nine genres, along with three special achieve ment awards, and the Game of the Year. Exclusive demos this month include EA Sports' NBA LIVE '97, and MEAT PUPPET by Playmates Interactive Entertainment. CGW contributor Patrick Miller presents part two of his historical Vietnam trilogy: the Armored Green Dragons scenario, for SSI'S STEEL PANTHERS 2. DIABLO makes a return appearance with custom walk-throughs for two of its more difficult quests: The Black Mushroom and Archbishop Lazarus, created by CGW's own DIABLO-phile, Greg Fortune. And if you're still having trouble navigating the AH-64D LONGBOW Cockpit (from Jane's Combat + Action + Adapur Simulations/EA), + Classe/Pazala + Role Playing be sure to check *  + San Simulatlas out the tutorial + Sporls + Strategy created by CGW + Warganet + Speelal Bahlavement contributor Came of iho Ver Robin Kim Other playable demos include: Sierra Online's 3D ULTRA MINIGOLF; BLOOD, the gruesome and bloody spawn from DUKE NUKEM creators, and the first esteemed interactive movie/game, THE PANDORA DIRECTIVE. Now, let the ceremony begin! AL How Do I Use It? If you have Windows 95, installation is simple: The CD is Autoplay enabled-just lock-n-load. Otherwise, from Windows 3.x, select Run from the Program Manager menu, and type D:\\RUN-ME (where D is the letter of your CD-ROM drive) to run it straight from the CD. Then type D:\\INSTALL GAMES AND GOODIES ON THE CG-ROM DEMOS AND STUFF Aaron vs Ruth AH-64D Longbow Walk-through AirWarrior 2 Online Baku Baku Battleground: Shiloh Blood Chasm Civilization II: Jihad Scenario Daggerfall Diablo Quests Engage Front-end PLATFORM 95 N/A 95 95 WIN/95 DOS DOS 95/DOS WIN/95 N/A 95 95 95/DOS or WIN 95 95/DOS 95/DOS 95 95 NIA N/A DIRECTORY AVRDEMO LONGBOW AIRWAR2 BAKU BGS_DEMO BLOOD CHASM JIHAD DAGGER N/A ENGAGE KALIW95 MDK EXECUTABLE AVRDEMO.EXE via CD interface AIRWAR2.EXE SETUP.EXE SETUP.EXE INSTALL.EXE CHASM.EXE NIA DAGGER.AVI via CD interface ENGAGE.EXE KALIW95.EXE MDKZIP95.EXE or MDKZIP.EXE MEATPUPP/SETUP.EXE SETUP.EXE NBADEMO.EXE NIA SIMCOPTE.EXE NIA via CD interface Kali MDK Meat Puppet MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries NBA Live 97 Quake SimCopter SpaceOrb 360 Steel Panthers 2 scenario: Armored Green Dragons TEN Front-end The Neverhood The Pandora Directive Tigershark 3D Ultra Minigolf X-Car MEAT MECH2 LIVEDEMO via TEN COPTER SPACEORB S2SCEN TEN 95 95 95/DOS 95 95 95/DOS NEVERH2 PANDORA TSHARK MINIGOLF XCARDEMO SETUP.EXE NEVDEMO.EXE SETUP.EXE GO.EXE SETUP.EXE INSTALL.BAT CGW MAY 1997 "


"Damn, another near miss, but you've managed to keep your head for another few seconds. This morning you were just another archeologist, exploring an ancient pyramid. You didn't expect this. The secrets of the past await you in the future as you embark on a mysterious, danger-ridden journey into this ancient pyramid. Spectacular 3-D images and animations come to life as you go through corridors full of devious traps and puzzles in a race against time to save the future from a mad man trying to destroy the sun. NEWMEDIA Call 1-888-MOJAVE 1 for the retailer nearest you. MADE WITH 801-652-5300 or http://www.mogames.com Available on CD-ROM for Mac and PC STRATA Raz AWARD CIRCLE READER SERVICE #280 Copyright 1996 Mojave, All rights reserved. Mojave is a registered trademark. LUXOR is a registered trademark of Ramparts, Inc., a subsidiary of 1993 Circus Circus Enterprises, Inc. All other IX VISION AWARDS MOJAVE "


"The fil computerGame Magazines JUST THE FAQS computer Gaming Action shots and spoker cooldecis.poul View player to create a CGW program group on your Windows desktop. If you have installed previ. ous versions of the CG-ROM, this disc will use the program group already on your desktop. PUBLISHER Dale Strang slottehore G IWAN 09 traded from drafted 4th over ATT 9.-96 che 94-95 MA 904 LE 02-03 91-92. a BOHUS G63 112 FA1304 How Do I Play The Demos? To view the demos, first click on Editors' Hot Picks, Special Features, or Product Demos. Then click on the title of interest. Each demo has its own instructions for installation. NBA Live 97 (EA Sports) How Do I Get The Patch Files? Click on Patches under the CGW Features, and then read the text window that has instruc. tions on copying the files to your hard drive. You can also access the patches from a DOS prompt by typing D:\\PATCHES (where D: is the letter of your CD-ROM drive) and copying them directly to your hard drive. We strongly recommend that you back up any previously saved games before installing a patch, as this may overwrite your existing program. EDITORIAL Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Managing Editor Ken Brown Features Editor Denny Atkin (Simulations) Reviews Editor Terry Coleman (Wargames. Classics/Puzzle Games) Technical Editor Dave Salvator (Hardware) CD-ROM Editor JHI M. Anderson Associate Editors Jeff Green (Adventure, Sports) Elliott Chin (Action, Strategy) On-Line Editor Kate Hedstrom News Editor Charlotte Panther Assistant Editor Allen Greenberg Copy Editor Joe Vallina Editorial Assistant Matthew Schaefer Contributing Editors Scorpia (Adventure Games) Charles Ardal (Interactive Fiction) Loyd Case (Technology) Martin Cirulis (Science Fiction) Rusel De Maria (Online Editor-at-Large) Founder Russell Sipe DESIGN Art Director Dan Fitzpatrick Web Commander Jack Rodrigues 3D Ultra Minigolf (Sierra Online) 1002 PRODUCTION Production Director Carlos Lugo Assistant Production Mgr. Martin Walthall Electronic Prepress Michele Kellogg Tamara Gargus Roger Drake How Can I Get The CG-ROM Delivered Each Month? To subscribe to the CD-Rom version of the magazine, call (303) 665-8930, and specify that you want the CD-ROM version. Please note that if you already receive the magazine without the CD, you must wait until your current subscrip. tion expires before receiving the CD version. If you subscribe to the CD version, but you have not received a disc with your magazine, contact us on our Web site at www.zdnet. com/zdsubs/gaming/service. Diablo (Blizzard) Where Can I Buy The CDs? Copies of CGW with the CD are available in most major retailers where magazines are sold. If you can't find the magazine with the CD, encourage your retailer to carry it. Unfortunately, we can not fulfill requests for back issues of CD-ROMs at this time. HOW TO CONTACT THE EDITORS Address questions and feedback to CGW Editorial, 135 Main St. 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105. Or you may contact us via: Phone: (415) 357-4900 Editorial Fax: (415) 357 4977 CompuServe: (76703,622) Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com Web site: www.computergaming.com ADVERTISING SALES Associate Publisher Lee Uniacke (415) 357-4915 East Coast District Sales Manager Laura Salerno (212) 503 4851 East Coast Sales Assistant Audrey DeJesus (212) 503 3926 North West Territory Sales Manager Cathy Conway (415) 357-4925 SouthWest Territory Sales Manager Pat Walsh (714) 851-2556 Senior Account Executive Marci Yamaguchi (415) 357-4920 Advertising Coordinator Linda Philapil (415) 357-4930 Administrative Assistant Linda Fan (415) 357-5425 Sales Assistant Tallie Conner (415) 357-5398 HOW TO CONTACT ADVERTISING SALES Address inquiries to CGW Advertising, 135 Main St., 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105; or call (415) 357-5425, fax (415) 357-4999. SUBSCRIPTION INQUIRIESIADDRESS CHANGES For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering information call (303) 665-8930 or fax (303) 604-7455 within the U.S. and Canada. All other countries call (303) 604-7445 or fax (303) 604 0540, or write to Computer Gaming, PO Box 57167. Boulder CO 80322 3131 The subscription rate is $27.94 for one year (12 issues). Additional postage for orders outside the U.S.: add US$16 per year for surface mail. Payment must be in U.S. dollars made by check or money order drawn upon a U.S. bank Visa, MasterCard, AMEX accepted. BACK ISSUES For back issues send $7 per issue (S8 outside the United States) by check or money order to Back Issues Dept. Zift Davis Publishing Co., P.O. Box 53131. Boulder, CO 80322 3131 Blood (GT Interactive) Disclosure As a matter of record, CGW voluntarily maintains a list of companies in which SoftBank, the parent company of Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., has an interest. It is available online at www.computergaming.com/ disclaim.html and is updated when we become aware of such investments. MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries (Activision) CGW MAY 1997 "


"The Nexus is calling a madman.. Only you can stop him.. GENERATIONS The Star Trek universe has just exploded into intense 3-D action! Assume the roles of the Star Trek: The Next Generation crew in a pulse-pounding race to defeat the obsessed scientist Soran before he destroys millions of innocent beings. Explore 12 mind-blowing Star Trek 3-D worlds, Featuring the voices of the movie cast! MEME Pilot the Enterprise in over 20 blistering space combat scenarios. Plot your strategy to stop Soran's scheme using Stellar Cartography, STAR TREK GENERATIONS AND 1997 Parament Pictures. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. STAR TREK and Reland Marks are trademarks of Para Picas. Moerose is an authorurd wer. Underlying computer code and manual 1997 Motprose Software, loc. MICROPROSE tered trademark of Morprese Software, Inc. Al other trademarks at the property of their respectae holders GR 1-800-771-7 for Game Rating information HIEROPROSE Available on Windows 95 Visit your local retailer or call 24 hours 1-800-695-GAME (U.S. and Canada) www.microprose.com OR "


"01997 ENGAGE ganes online. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective holders. Some games not available on soe services. FOOD (Equally effective on humans.) Descent Warcraft II: Tides of Darkness, Rolemaster: Magestorm\", Splatterball Darkness Fall Billboard Live! Trivia, Rolemaster: The Bladelands and Neverwinter Nights the world to come now available on ENGAGE games online. All with no monthly subscription fee We're a community of gamers of all levels, with real-time chat rooms and bulletin boarAvailable on: America Online CompuServe Concentric Earthlinke Prodigy and the Intern "


"ENGAGE \"irtual Pool Castles II\": Siege and Conquest, nost popular multi-player games, with many more NGAGE is more than just an online games service. og on today and conduct a few tests of your own. ENGAGE games online www.engagegames.com Food and sleep optional. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #044 "


"JOHNNY WILSON edito iu The Hot Rod Syndrome Why Gamers Are Caught in the Upgrade Race ometimes, even the smartest people you know say the most ridiculous things. In a recent meeting with one of the smartest CEOs in computer gaming, I was dumbfounded by one of his comments. Confronted by a bug report, he protested that if we could give him a standard platform that would quit changing, he would put out a bug-free product. He com plained that even my prediction, when I had espoused in 1995 how DirectX and Plugn-Play would make life easier for gamers, was flawed. I had failed to anticipate how hardware manufacturers and programmers would deliberately make their prod ucts non-standard in order to be able to make claims that their technology was proprietary and superior to other products. His analogy was to the greed of Thomas Edison during the nasty \"Patent Wars\" of the early days of the motion picture industry. He lauded the concept of a standardized platform and seemed surprised when I went into cynical mode. dream.\" We almost need to write a with the upgrade cycle?\" parody of that lyric, \"There will never There is a corollary to be a standardized machine, for Moore's Law called nobody can paint a dream.\" Parkinson's Law of Data. This one physics guarantee that the latter The first and most obvious argu follows the cynical cannot continue indefinitely.\" ment against a completely standard economist/philosopher C. Now, let's add some Wilsonian ized platform is, of course, Moore's Northcote Parkinson in stating, cynicism to this. Note that the averLaw, coined by computer pioneer \"Data expands to fill the space age computer game has a develop Gordon Moore. We've briefly referred available for storage.\" As the site ment cycle of 18-24 months. This to this postulate in the past, but it is for computer jargon on the Web means that the computer game vital to understand it in this context. (www.fwi.uva.nl/mes/ developer is faced with the decision Moore's Law (which can be found jargon/p/Parkinsons Lawof of choosing what baseline machine at www.intel.com/intel/museumi Data.html) observes, \"Buying to support, with full knowledge that 25anniv/html/hof/moore.htm) more memory encourages the use both memory capacity and proces. states that since 1962, the logic den of more memory-intensive tech sor intensity (what you expect the sity of silicon integrated circuits has niques. It has been observed over CPU to do with that memory capaciclosely followed a curve where the last 10 years that the memory ty) will have doubled by the time the X = 2(t-1962) (x = the number of bits usage of evolving systems tends to product is released. The developer is per square inch of silicon and double roughly once every 18 further faced with the reality that 1 = time in years since 1962). In months. Fortunately, memory den some developer, somewhere among terms an editor can understand, the sity available for constant dollars his competitors, is going to go all out amount of information you can put on also tends to double about once for that advanced machine and add the same size chip has almost douevery 12 months (see Moore's features that he can't support with bled every year since silicon technolo Law); unfortunately, the laws of existing technology. Since the develgy was invented. Year In 25 years, 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 as Moore's Law predicted, the 10M 2000 500 number of tran sistors on a chip has increased Pentium Pro Processor 25 more than 2,300 80486 MIPS times, from 80386 2,300 on the 4004 in 1971 to 80286 5.5 million on today's Pentium 8086 Pro processor 8080 \"Okay,\" you may well say, 4004 Reprinted with permission from Intel Inc \"but what does IT'S THE LAW Moore's Law shows that the amount of information you can cram on a that have to do computer chip doubles every year. Micro 500 ransistors 100% 1.01 10k INDUSTRIAL EVOLUTION The idea that we'll ever have a completely standardized platform seems counterintuitive to what I know of both high-tech competition and consumption. It reminds me of a lyric from a really old song that goes, \"There will never be a portrait of my love, for nobody can paint a CGW MAY 1997 "


"COREL CORE Family Tree suite SUIT ET CORET The ultimate Way to Showcase your Family Tree CREATIVE GENEALOGY ON CD-ROM COREL Family Tree Includes: COREL FAMILY TREET COREL PHOTO HOUSE COREL FAMILY PUBLISHER NETSCAPE NAVIGATOR 2.01  ANCESTRAL GENEALOGY LIBRARY WITH OVER 55 MILLION NAMES OVER 175,000 SURNAME HISTORIES  OVER 2,000 BACKGROUNDS AND BORDERS OVER 250 PHOTOS  150 FONTS $6500* From the creators of the award-winning CerelDRAW EE lor Reporte Corel Family Tree Suite\" is an ideal way to trace your roots and display and print them professionally in a variety of charts and reports. Research more than 175,000 surname histories, track medical information and addresses, and create family photo albums with this versatile program. A comprehensive genealogy library contains over 55 million names and additional references. Photoediting capabilities allow you to retouch old photographs, remove red eye and add dazzling special effects. Plus, with the program's Internet support you can create and publish your family Web page. Reach back in history with Corel Family Tree Suite, a graphically sophisticated and easy-to-use genealogy program on CD-ROM. DET FAMILYTREE.COREL.COM ComputAbility KUR-0342-US COREL Corel, the Corel Balloon logo and Corel Family Tree Suile are either trademarks or registered trademarks ol Corel Corporation. Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. All other product and company names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective companies Your PC Discount Specialists 1-800-554-1635 WA Corel, Omeinl World Title Sponsor of the COREL WTA TOUR www.corel.com Call now for faxed literature! 1-613-728-0826 ext. 3080 Document # 1199 *USS plus applicable taxes and shipping. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #42 "


"JOHNNY WILSON ZIFF-DAVIS PUBLISHING COMPANY CHAIRMAN AND CEO Eric Hippeau oper knows from past experience that games which take advantage of new technology often have an edge in sales (just so that gamers can have bragging rights over these showcase features), he decides he can't risk letting his competitor get the jump on him. He raises his sights upon a new baseline machine-a higher standard which is not quite there, a moving target. Consumer Media Group President J. Scott Briggs Vice President 3. Thomas Cortingham Executive Director, Research Randy Cohen Business Manager Cynthia Mason Assistant to the President Francesca Koe willing to pay for performance. For years, the price pattern has been that the average price of a high-end computer was somewhere in the mid$3,000 range and the bargain computer between $1,500 and $2,000. TO be sure, the latest, greatest, proces sor was always somewhat higher, but as it moved up in price, the other processors came down and kept the average roughly the same. Some gamers (and I think they all write to me) are fed up with the constant upgrade cycle. They complain vociferously that it isn't fair. Yet, look how much more they're getting for this year's $3,500 than the last $3,500 they paid (I know because I just bought a Micron Home MPC with Pentium 200 and Package B). I'm amazed at how much difference my new modem, larger monitor screen, 32MB of RAM, and Diamond Monster 3D card make for gaming enjoyment. I can tell you that the difference between my P.90 and this one is considerable. And yes, I'm dreading the expense of my next upgrade, but I'll probably bite the bullet easier because I'm so satisfied with this one. If we look at computer buying patterns, I'm not alone in this thinking. Ziff-Davis Publishing President, U.S. Publications Ronn Sonnenberg President, Interactive Media And Development Group Jellrey Balowe President, International Media Group J.B. Holston President, Computer Intelligence/Infocorp Bob Brown President, Training & Support Publishing Group William Rosenthal Vice President, Chlef Financial Office Timothy O'Brien Vice President, General Counsel, And Secretary J. Malcolm Morris Vice President, Human Resources Rayna Brown Vice President, Planning Daryl R. Otte Vice President, Production Roger Herrmann Vice President, Controller Mark Moyer Treasurer Thomas L. Wright The idea that we'll ever have a standardized platform flies in the face of market reality. 72 U.S. Publications Group President, U.S. Publications Ronni Sonnenberg President, Business Media Group Claude Sheer President, Consumer Media Group J. Scott Briggs Senior Vice President, Circulation Baird Davis Executive Vice President, Business Media Group Don Byrnes Assistant to the Chairman Tom McGrade Vice President, Marketing Services Jim Manning Vice President, Central Advertising Sales Bob Bader Vice President, Product Testing Mark Van Name Vice President, Circulation Services James E. Ramaley Executive Vice President/ Group Publisher Al DiGuido Vice President Daniel Farber Vice President Michael Miller Vice President Paul Somerson Executive Director, Licensing Gertrud Borchardt Director of Zo Labs Mark Hall Director, Benchmark Operation Bil Catchings Ziff-Davis Magazine Network Vice President/Managing Director Joe Gillespie Executive Director Alicia Saribalis Marketing Director Mike Perkowski Directors Ken Beach Michael Bird, Jett Bruce, Kelly Lowman, Melinda Maginn, Debbie Moss, Julie Tuttle Director of Public Relations Gregory Jarboe RACING FOR PINKS Will the customer, the gamer, actually buy that upgraded technology? Past experience says \"Yes.\" I am reminded of a meeting I attended with another CEO who shared that he had placed his Calloway automobile into the shop because the makers of the high-performance automobile had discovered a way to get another 30 horsepower out of the car. Now, happen to be impressed enough with the baseline performance of a Calloway, but here's an individual who is willing to upgrade for power he will seldom be able to use. The average driver may insist that he is able to get a speeding ticket even without that horsepower, but it's worth it to the executive to know that the power is there when he wants it. Apparently, computer owners want to know that it's there, also. They're THE COMPLEAT CURMUDGEON The bottom line is that I don't believe we'll ever have the platform. Without the platform, we'll never have even a reasonable chance at bug-free games. So, we have, essentially, two options. We can either adopt the attitude that we will always be pioneers who are charting new realms of technological performance, or we can consider our selves to be victims of the upgrade cycle, who are condemned to more and more bugs every year. personally, I'd rather focus on the great graphics, fast frame rates, and marvelous sounds in today's games than the bugs we have to swat. PERMISSIONS AND REPRINTS COMPUTER GAMING WORLD (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Zit-Davis Publishing Division. Copyright  1997 Ziff Davis Publishing Division. All Rights Reserved. Material in this publication may not be reproduced in any form without permission. It you want to quote from an article, write to Chantal Tucker, One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016-5802, or 7 fax 212-503-5420 Computer Gaming For reprints, please call Ziff-Davis reprints at (800) 825-4237. Reprints We periodically make lists of our customers available to carefully screened mail ers of quality goods and services If you do not wish to receive such mailings, let us know by writing to Computer Gaming World, PO Box 57167. Boulder, CO 80322 7167. Computer Gaming World is not affiliated with IDG. This issue dedicated to Fred Rodgers, neighbor, friend and hard core gamer s0 FT BANK ZD ZIFF-DAVIS A ABC Audit Bureau of Circulations Member AUDITED CGW MAY 1997 "


"TUN COMING IN MARCH '97 Many have attempted World Domination HistoryowWorld OST Drom the beginnings of I recorded time despots have tried to rule the world. Many have come close only to be swept away by the tides of history. Are you the one to achieve world domination? We don't think so... but we dare you to try! It's based on the top-selling multi-player board game with computer enhanced features like perpetual score keeping plus tips and help on demand. 1 to 7 players, Compete against friends or the game's crafty Artificial Intelligence. You plan the strategy. Do you try to expand or stand still to adlieve advantage later? If you choose to be aggressive, which nations will you attempt to conquer? The Avalon Hill Game Company DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON INC.  When do you deploy your secret weapons? 1997 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Anna FiesHistory of the World for Windows 95 and Windows 3.1 is available wherever great games are sold or contact us at: ROM 4517 Harford Road, Baltimore, MD 21214 800-999-3222  FAX 410-254-0991 http://www.avalonhill.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #169 "


"LETTERS LETTER OF THE MONTH ON THE CASE A huge thank you to Loyd Case for his \"Ultimate Gaming Machine Series,\" and, in particular, Part 4 I've subscribed to your magazine since 1993, and I am pleased to see the increase in hardware coverage have never regretted following any of your hardware suggestions. My only complaint had been that they were few and far between. Things have greatly improved, but I would still like to see more conerage, and more frequently I would love to see a monthly upgrade column. Ideally it would have your recommendations of the month for each of the hardware categories covered in Mr. Case's latest article (motherboard, CPU, graphics board, etc.). There could be two recommendations for cach category, one price-conscious and the other strictly performance-based, as with March's \"turbo\" and \"nitro\" distinctions. I'm not suggesting a new recommendation each month, but a list of the best product in each category at that point in time. If a reader decided it was time to upgrade a particular component, he or she could simply look up the recommendation for that component in the current months issue. This would eliminate half the upgrade decision, leaving only when\" for the reader. This is only a suggestion, but if it turns out to be feasible, it would be worth twice the cost of your magazine in itself, at least in my opinion. In any case, keep up the good work. You have consistently been the best computer gaming magazine on the market hands down (in my opinion, and I would imagine many others). Phil Romano via the Internet We like your idea so much that we're planning to put it on our Web site with a brand new wrinkle. We hope it will be up and running by the time you read this in print. Check out www.computergaming.com for details. also the last time! bought an entire computer system. In my opinion, the only effective way to remain in this hobby is to gradually upgrade, one piece at a time. Otherwise, you spend half your time really happy (just after buying a new system) and the other half miserable (until you break down and buy a new system). I'm well aware of how much work it takes to plan and implement an effective upgrade strategy. At times, I have wanted to consulta psychic. I subscribe to two other gaming magazines, as well as your two sister publications PC Magazine and Computer Shopper. While these two fill out part of the upgrade puzzle, they have been consistently biased towards the business user. On the other hand, I times which are very honest, clear, and concise. Please make your advertise ments the same Joseph N. Norris Buffalo, NY AD VIBES I just wanted to write and let you know that I haved totally enjoyed your magazine up until the last year or so. The problem is not with the articles, since I believe that they are the best in any computer games magazine. I have tried them all since 1993 and still find the articles in your magazine to be the best. The problem that I have is the sick and perverse advertisements that you have in the magazine. Like I said, I have been reading CGWsince 1993 and I always found the advertisements that you used to have to be clean and tasteful. I do not find it necessary to show contraceptives or pages of blood just to sell a game. In fact, I have taken many of them and flushed them in the toilet, literally. I ask you to please clean up the advertisements and make them on par with your articles. I do appreciate your articles which helped me out many Surprisingly enough, we agree. Unfortunately, they're not \"our\" ads. We have no creative control over the advertisements. In fact, the editorial staff doesn't see the ads before they are printed in the magazine. The only way those types of ads will be stopped is when they don't work anymore. Then, they'll swing back toward normalcy. flawed. Computer wargames must not be reviewed for just the usual criteria of any computer game playability, bugs. etc.) but for historical accuracy as well. I feel that Mr. Coleman must know this. Yet, there is a major gaffe here. The baltle of Borodino was fought the 7th of September. This was not the winter, it was not even yet fall, but the tag end of summer, so why the title, \"Winter Wonderland\"? Why does. \"The Russian winter affect..the troops quality ratings of both sides,\" and why is it that \"Some crecks and streams are frozen\"? Why, we even read that, «other areas are rendered impassable by the snows\"! Yet it did not snow until the 15th of October Either Mr. Coleman is misled by a misunderstanding of the course of the 1812 Invasion of Russia, or Talonsofts new game has serious historical flaws. James D. Gray via the Internet BITTER BLUNDERLAND I just read Terry Colemans column (\"Winter Wonderland,\" March '97) on the upcoming Talonsoft game, NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA, and I was disappointed. Mr. Coleman's reviews have been good previously, but this one is CGW MAY 1997 "


"TOMB RAIDER Have you got yourS YET? Action Game of the Year Best Graphics of the Year 95% Rating -PC Gamer If you know Tomb Raider, you know why Lara Croft is the #1 cover girl in gaming. No other game has won more awards, delivered more actionpacked realism, or kicked more ass. Hardcore gamers have made Tomb Raider the undisputed megahit of the year. Have your got yours yet? Game of the Year Rated 5 out of 5 Stars -Computer Games Strategy Plus Game of the Year Rated 10 out of 10 Computer and Net Player EIDOS HECK OUT BRONQUEST EERTH www.conquestearth.com INTERACTIVE www.eidosinteractive.com www.tombraider.com DESIGN INC. Tomb Raider, Lara Croft and her likeness, CORE ond Eidos Interactive are trademarks of Eidos, Pic 1997 Eidos.Conquest Earth is a trademark of Data Design and Eidos Interactive, Lara Croft, gaming's #1 covergirl. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #279 "


"LETTERS added a top-notch copy editor to our staff, and were passed an ordnance to keep such problems from happening again. NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA COvers both the first Battle of Borodino, which took place in September, and the second Battle of Borodino, which took place in the dead of winter as Napoleon was retreating back from Moscow. We regret causing confusion by not spelling out that this is more than a random weather feature. WARPED WARTHOG I just read the review of A-10 CUBA! in the March issue, and I would like to point out that the A-10 cannot carry 50 percent more ordinance (sic) than a B-1.\" What's the point of printing half-baked \"facts» like that? The B-I's maximum bomb-load is around 48,000 pounds, whereas the A-105 max ordnance loadout is 16,000 pounds not even 50 percent of REMEMBER JOE-486 PACK In these days of limbo for 486-playable games, it is interesting to note which games will actually run decently on a 486, and which will not. Surprisingly, the actual minimum system requirements do not often match the truc minimum system requirements. This is a problem which works both ways. Some games which say they will run on a 486 do so only very poorly, while some games that supposedly require a Pentium will run just fine on a fast enough 486. Cases-in-point: CRUSADER: NO RECRET is supposed to run on a \"C\" rating in the movies. Tangential to this: DirectX is death on a 486. Microsoft really pulled the wool over our eyes regarding the value of Windows 95 on a \"low end\" system, didn't they? Remember when we were told it would realize the 32-bit potential of the 486? In fact, Windows 95 might just as well be a Pentium-only game platform. For 486 owners, DOS is still the OS of choice. We can run the demos off of a CDROM, such as yours, to see if a game is playable on a 486, but that doesn't always correspond to the released version of the game. It would help those of us who haven't yet upgraded if you could clue us in when a game will run on a 486. Since the two best games of this last quarter, PRIVATEER 2: THE DARKENING and TOMB RAIDER are 486 capable, there's still plenty of reason for 486 owners to be interested in what their systems can do, even if the publishers won't admit it. Clyde Dodge via the Intemel that of the B-1 (this figure is reduced even further, to about 14,300 lbs, if the A-10 is carrying maximum internal fuel). Mike Marunchak, 7Sgt. USAF (Retd.) Mountain View, CA In the original article submitted by Robin C. Kim, that line read \"50 percent more ordinance than a B-17.\"Given that the B-17 could carry only 6,000 pounds of bombs, even that's not giving the A-10 Hog quite enough credit. Somewhere in the editing process we lost a \"7\" and gained 42,000 pounds of bombload. We apologize for the confusion. As for \"ordinance, \"we can only plead that we do know the difference between an ordinance\" and \"ordnance,\" but we missed that one due to our overreliance on spelling checkers. However, we've recently If you've read Johnny Wilson's editorial this month on \"The Hot Rod Syndrome,\" 486/75, but it drips through you already know some of the causes of a 486/100 system like sludge the speed race in computer games. You've On the other hand, PRIVATEER 2: THE already hinted at one reason a 486DARKENING from the same publisher sup capable game might be listed as Pentium posedly requires a Pentium 75, but in fact only. Most likely, however, different runs quite crisply on a 486/100, gamers have different tolerance levels for Z is supposed to run on a 486/66, but it different types of games. Neither the drips through a 486/100 like hardening game publishers nor CCW know how to concrete. This is a game which uses Directiest tolerance levels fast and efficiently. X On the other hand, TOMB RAIDER, another \"Pentium only\" game, gives a very smooth ride (at the lower resolution, yes, but full screen) on a 486/100. Firing Line Why do publishers provide crroneous or We prefer that you email us at misleading system requirement informaone of these addresses: tion? In the case of those selling games CompuServe: 76703,622 that really don't perform on a 486, it seems Intemel: 76703.622@ comobvious: the motivation must be greed. puserve.com But why not list a 486 on top-notch or write to: games? I suspect this may have something CGW. Letter To The Editor to do with the laughable macho mentality 135 Main Street, 14th Floor of far too many PC gamers who like to San Francisco, CA 94105 claim, \"My gaming rig is bigger and faster We reserve the right to edit all than your gaming rig.\" To such a crowd a letters for space or clarity. \"Minimum: 486\" sticker might be like a CGW CGW MAY 1997 MAY 1997 "


"Winston is such a girl. Always opting for diplomacy when he could just bombard his enemy from space with orbiting dreadnoughts, Yeah. A big fat girl. EMPEROR JADI SUNS A military strategy game in space. 000 000 HOME DO ANDISIGOTO Battle for territory and forge strategic alliances to secure the crown. Explore new planets, research forbidden technologies and control the growth of an empire Epic storyline in the Fading Suns Universe. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #266 Deset 1. SEGASOFT For a free Windows '95 demo or to order Emperor direct, call 1.888.Segasolt Microsoft L Emperor of the Fedry Sure, Fadro Sunsarde Fading Sro Universe and its stod chwacher, good marks are c l ose sign We 1997. SogaSot and Season boyo wa chemata Sagascam D1017 Alright and Windows'95 DA . www.segasoft.com "


"\"MDK promises 3-D technology so cool and action so...realistic that it will send everything else running for cover.\" PC GAMER \"The ability to zoom in from a mile away within the sniper mode is remarkable.\" ELECTRONIC GAMING MONTHLY THE WORLD WILL END IN 1999. THE \"One of the most innovative games ever created.\" GAMEFAN \"Futuristic 3-D action/ adventure that could set a new standard for PC Gaming.\" PC GAMER RATING PENDING PC CD-ROM Created by Shiny Entertainment, Inc. 1997 Shiny Entertainment, Inc. MDK is a trademark of Shiny Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Artwork and design 1997 Playmates Interactive Entertainment Inc. PIEM Is a registered trademark of Playmates Interactive Entertainment Inc. All rights reserved. \"While supplies last. LATERTAWET NIE RATING BOARD "


"Your planet is being bulldozed by the ton. Alien controlled mobile mining cities are strip-mining the earth's surface overrunning and crushing anything in their path... Unless you can stop them. BATTLE TO SAVE IT WILL BEGIN SOON.  Fully 3-D rendered graphics unlike anything you have ever before seen.  Over 60 arenas spread out over 6 cities.  Never before seen \"sniper mode\" that allows you to zoom in on the enemy and pick it off with astounding accuracy. The most sophisticated enemy artificial intelligence ever created. Fully reactive \"smart enemies\" think, listen, and communicate. in a calculated assault on your life.  An arsenal of totally innovative weapons and equipment including: A helmet-mounted sniper rifle that targets enemies from over two miles away. A living polymer suit that protects from piercing projectiles. A high-tech reusable parachute. Bombs... decoys... homing sniper grenades... and many more.  Two styles of adrenalinepumping game dynamics featuring first and third person point of view. IT THINKS. THEREFORE IT KILLS. Windows'95 and DOS CIRCLE READER SERVICE #134 Contact www.playmatestoys.com to receive a free playable demo by mail* NAMENT PIE www.shiny.com 2002 "


"READ.ME Edited by Charlotte Panther (CPanther@zd.com) Man Behaving Relatively Well ot long ago, star Nonetheless, he ring in a computdescribes the experier game seemedence as a Herculean to be the last task. \"I'll have to think «I've been successfully avoiding a resort for lading twice about doing it day job for over 15 years now. has beens des again, because it perately trying to hang on to demands a lot.\" you dig around you'll uncover tle hand calculator--that's about their stardom, but not any more. Schneider likens FORK IN THE as complicated as I get. I'm the Suddenly it's respectable-posi. TALE to a Bob Hope-Bing Crosby Of all his roles, Schneider last of the dinosaurs,\" he jokes. tively hip, in fact-for a road movie. \"It was perfect admits his \"Men Behaving He doesn't even keep writing Hollywood celeb to delve into comedic fodder. The guy's kind Badly\" character, Jamie, is the tools on hand. \"If you have a pad CD-ROM-dom. of a coward, and wants to meet one he best relates to. He adds around, then you write down \"Men Behaving Badly\" star Rob Schneider told us about his recent encounter with the tech. nology in Any River's comedic Action/Adventure game A FORK IN THE TALE. Schneider provides the voice of the hero-the character that you, the gamer, will play girls and stuff.\" He winds up hid that unlike Jamie, he's made the anything, but if you have to run Schneider's interest in ing from bad guys, escaping turn from being a complete to get paper, and write it on a the project was piqued from dungeons, and avoiding slacker, though he does confess napkin, then it has to be funny.\" when a couple of other terrifying fates-all in the to have \"been successfully avoid he quips. If the others involved in acquaintances, both name of saving the day. Along i ng a day job for over 15 years.\" FORK IN THE TALE follow that same avtos comedy writers work. with giggles throughout the Does technology play a part theory, we should be in for a lot ing on FORK, told him game, Schneider promises that if in Schneider's daily life? \"My lit of laughs. -Charlotte Panther they'd never seen a really funny CD-ROM. \"That's what made me want to hit it,\" he recalls. Short takes on games released just prior to press time. Making the game was a gargantuan feat: Schneider had SOULTRAP THE DARK and Quake, but gameplay is decided 6,000 lines and used 50 different With a hoard of 3D games fightly below.par Nintendo. You battle your way voices throughout the game. In a ing for shelf-space, SOULTRAP may through eleven levels reflecting your phobias, movie, although he may think up be one of the first to get the elbow. The look of What may have been an okay premise is rapidfive different ways to do a scene, the game lies somewhere between ALONE IN ly destroyed by jerkily animated foes, an only one will be used. But the annoying soundtrack, and awkward controls. nature of an interactive game Endless platform-hopping with an unforgiving allows all five versions to be used 3D twist turn this occasionally buggy program in the final product. into little more than a dull exercise in saving Schneider estimates a third of and restoring games. SOULTRAP? More like the material was improvised.\" Money Trap.Robert Coffey was able to do all the things that Microforum Inc., (800) 685-3863 I can do-a bunch of jokes, difWin 95 CD-ROM ferent characters, and a lot of difReader Service #: 301 ferent impressions.\" THIS JUST IN 28 CGW MAY 1997 "


"READ.ME Mpath Announces Free Online Gaming ver wondered who the high-rollers are in the wonderful world of retail game sales? This chart shows how well the top ten software companies fared from retail sales of their PC Games over last two years. These numbers represent revenue from retail sell through only. They do not include any profit accumulated from direct sales (this accounts for id's low representation in 1995, and sudden per centage gain in 1996, when id began selling via retail outlets). -Charlotte Panther Company Gross Revenue 1996 CUc | Davidson 192,108,725 Electronic Arts 120,766,140 GT Interactive 88,960,736 Microsoft 75,560,747 Virgin 66,696,538 LucasArts 56,869,969 Activision 47,737,720 Maxis 39,274,101 Broderbund 36,237,178 id Software 13,158,207 Statistical information provided by PC Dala Gross Revenue 1995 131,034,168 76,043,480 65,874,209 53,740,152 44,079,149 78,376,720 26,016,449 48,335,765 56,626,961 2,215,300 46 Change +47% +59% +35% + 40% +50% -27% + 83% -18% -30% +494% -he growing number of online services battling to woo customers must account for Mpath Interactive's surprising announcement that access to their multiplayer Internet gaming service, Mplayer, is now available free of charge. The Mplayer Free Zone will allow gamers to enjoy unlimited access to games like QUAKE, MECHWARRIOR 2 and WARWIND. PANZER GENERAL will also be available, for a free 30-day trial period. Mpath will also offer Mplayer Plus, a premium zone, providing unique content, tourna. ments, competitions, as well as high profile games like DIABLO, COMMAND AND CONQUER, and RED ALERT, for just $29.95 per year. Under a new advertiser-supported business model, Mpath has initially signed agreements with Intel and intuit's Parsons Technologies, and is hoping to announce more mainstream advertisers in the near future. Check out Mplayer at www.mplayer.com -Charlotte Panther QUOTE OF THE MONTH The current TV ratings system is a little bit like putting a sign up in front of shark-infested waters that says: 'Be careful when swimming! -Senator Joseph Lieberman, a Connecticut Democrat, complaining that the industry's new age-based television ratings system is ineffective-after endorsing the agegraded ESRB ratings system for computer games in 1996. Free-Fire Zone Gamers now get unlimited free access to QUAKE, WARWIND, and MECHWARRIOR 2 on Mplayer. DUKE IT OUT IN D.C. The newest installment of the DUKE Nukem line takes our hero to the 5 nation's capital in another bid to quell alien invaders intent on taking over the WARN Earth. This add-on pack for Duke Nukem 3D fea tures 10 new levels that take you through various Washington landmarks, including the Washington Monument, the Capitol building, the F.B.I. headquarters, and the Smithsonian museum. These levels feature the same aliens; interactive environments; amusing quips: and, somewhat disappointingly, the same weapons as the old Duke-just wrapped in a different setting. Should be good fun for serious Duke-heads. ---Joe Vallina Wizard Works/GT Interactive, (800) 229-2714 PC-CD-ROM Reader Service #: 302 KOALA LUMPUR: JOURNEY TO THE EDGE Searching for enlightenment, Koala Lumpur unwittingly utters an incantation that triggers the threat of the Comedy Apocalypse. As Koala's spirit guide, Fly, you'll travel to four puzzle-filled worlds in WARM MAY 1997 CGW "


"READ.ME Putting MMX Into OverDrive Intel's Next MMX de Soon f you've been wanting to add MMX capability to your PC, you may have been frustrated by the fact that only the newest motherboards supply the dual voltages used by MMX processors. Intel has come to the rescue with the over-named Pentium OverDrive Processor with MMX Technology. inite 316268 Singh FICHE ISHTER SICHES ntel recently divulged the name of their next processor with MMX, and it's a doozy. The new name is-brace yourself-Pentium II. OK, so the name is about as flashy as day-old bread, but this new chip, internally code.named Klamath, will bring several interesting performance enhancements over current Pentium Pros, and because of less expensive manufacturing processes, Pentium II's price should dip below that of the Pro's fairly quickly. Guesstimates indicate the Pentium II will be available in late spring or early summer of this year. Intel has reduced the part's cost by stripping out the onboard 256KB Level 2 (L2) cache, leaving system vendors free to decide 48 501 how much L2 cache to put in their systems. In addition to having MMX support, Intel has also made some plumbing improvements to help its 16-bit performance, an area where the P-Pro initially disappointed. Also new for Pentium II is its form factor. Rather than using a single socket, Pentium II will come on a \"daughterboard\" configuration that plugs into a slot on the motherboard. Top-end clock speeds for Pentium II are anticipated to be 266 MHz.-Dave Salvator Hi! HANKS Designed to upgrade 75., 90., and 100MHz Pentiums (they can be used in faster machines if you're looking to add MMX), the MMX OverDrives feature a voltage regulator that adapts the 3.3v system voltage to the 2.8V required by the MMX chip; added capacitors to ensure compatibility with .early, noise-sensitive motherboards; and a built-in fan and heat sink. In addition to boosting the computer's clock Price Availability TOP 10 REJECTED NAMES FOR THE PENTIUM II CHIP: Now Original Processor 75MHz 90MHz 100MHz 120MHz* 133MHz* OverDrive Speed 125MHz 150MHz 166MHz 180MHZ 200MHZ Now $399 $399 $499 TBA TBA Now 2nd Half '97 2nd Half '97 These chips haven't yet been officially announced by Intel 10. Intel's Next Soon-To-Be-Obsolescent Processor (TM) 9. Pentium Gigahauler 8. XJ-12 7. Monty Pentium 6. Pentium Envy 5. Intel 685.99999998 4. Front Page Sports Pentium Pro 97 3. 8088 Version 6.0 2. Good and Plentium And the number one name Intel rejected for the Pentium II is... rate (see chart), the OverDrive chips also add the enhancements found in MMX Pentiums, including a larger 32K L1 cache. These provide a 10-15 percent speedup over standard Pentiums at the same clock rate on all appli cations, and up to 150 percent on some graphics applications. Our testing has shown great speedups on applications such as PHOTOSHOP, while the improvements in the first MMX games are less dramatic, consisting mainly of enhanced colored lighting, improved sound effects, and slightly faster Direct3D on systems without a 3D card. -Denny Atkin 1. The Pentium Royale (with cheese) CGW CGW MAY 1997 MAY 1997 "


"In-your-face gaming action right on your big-screen TV. So How Big is Yours? Why do you suppose big guys like IBM. Sony, NEC Gateway and Acer chose ATI 3D for their hottest new systems Could it be quality? How about performance! SUPERIOR HARDWARE ACCELERATION ANI 30 XPRESSION + PCZTY MATROX MYSTIQUE BHUNEAR TEXTURE FILTERING FOG ESFECIS PERSPECTIVE CORRECT TEXTURE MAPS TRANSPARENCY (ALPHA BLENDING) TRUE COLOR VIDEO IN ANY MODE We pack more features into hardware than anyone, so naturally nobody can touch our performance. STANDARD VERSION ATI 3D Move up to ATI 3D and get realistic 3D textures, brilliant colors and lifelike detail. 2n1 I PRO FLO 1 30 XPRESSION+ 1421 ATIT With ATI 3D game cards, you get the best combination of 3D, 2D and silky-smooth, full-screen, full-motion video acceleration. And you get PC2TV. Just plug your PC into the biggest TV you can find for supremely intense big screen gaming action like you've never seen before. For multiplayer and shared Wand gaming, everyone gets to watch. You can record your game playing directly to tape (just in case someone dares doubt your scores). And when you buy a new PC, you might just save the price of another monitor. Who said size doesn't matter? Get ATI 3D game cards for as little as $169* Go to a store, hit www.atitech.com or call 905 882-2600 (press 2 and we'll fax you info). New ATI 3D XPRESSION+PQTV (2M8 upgradable or 4MB) is the ultimate gamer's graphics upgrade and comes with the hottest 3D games and VRML web browser. The higher end ATI 3D PRO TURBO POTY (AMB upgradable of 8MB) comes with Extreme 3D. Both products support the incredible ATI TV addon card the best TV tuner and video capture card ***RATED ***RATED BPC WORLD BYTE All Technologies Inc., 1997. AT 3D PRO TURBO POTV, 3D XPRESSIONE PCTV and Now You See It are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of All Technologies Inc. All other product mapes are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of their respective owners. Assault Rigs screen appears courtesy Psygnosis trd MechWarrior 2 screen appears courtesy of Activklon Inc. ESP for 3D XPRESSION.POZTV with 2MB. For implementation and features tomuto Uit EGGHEAD WIE rificant 1.800.945-199 1-800-4494323 1-614-850-5000 1-800-253 0886 tonni E GGHEAD MICRO CENCE wie Now You See It. Ai "


"THE QUEST FOR TRUE The Price of Loyalty introduces 4 new campaigns and a slew of enhancements to the Heroes of Might and Magic II world. Control the course of an expanding empire in @ah Descendants, or try your tactics against a horde of spell crafters in The Wizards Isle. Discover new heroes and artifacts as you explore and conquer 24 new campaign maps. Log in and go head-to-head or team up with friends in 20 new stand alone scenarios. of Two New Full Length Campaigns ok Plus Two New Mini' Campaigns h New Cinematic Scenes Bring The Battles And Their Aftermath To Stunning Life * Dozens Of Enhancements Including New Heroes, Events, And Artifacts 83)SIP 1 EROES of Might and Magic THE PRICE OF LOYALTY EXPANSION PACK REQUIRES FULL VERSION OF HEROES OF MIGHT AND MAGICIMII TO PLAY "


"HEROES RAGES ON... of Might and Magic THE PRICE OF LOYALTY EROEST NEW WORLD COMPUTING STUDIO 3 DO For more information call 1-800-251-9607 Outside U.S. call: 415-261-3227 or check out http://www.nwcomputing.com New World Oxroatina, Studio 300 the New World Computing and 300 logox ard Heroes of Might and Magic the walls arelur replikered trademarks The 300 Gamarry.01666.1972 All rights reserved. Al other trademarks belong to the respective holders. Now Waga computing is a dreun e The 300 Company EXPANSION PACK "


"READ.ME Armored Fist 2 PLAYING LATELY CGW Survey Last Month Months on Chart 1 4 1. Diablo (Blizzard) 2. Red Alert (Westwood/Vigin) 3. Heroes II (New World Computing) 4. Daggerfall (Bethesda) 4. Daggerfall (Bethesda) 5. Civilization II (MicroProse) 6. Quake (id Software) 6. Quake (id Software) 7. Duke Nukem 3D (3D Realms) 8. WarCraft II (Blizzard) 9. NASCAR 2 (Sierra) 10. MechWarrior 2 (Activision) 9 5 he original ARMORED FIST was perhaps Novalogic's only truly disappointing title. The Voxel Space terrain that looked so good in the original COMANCHE fell apart at ground level, and the resulting blobby appearance made this action game a graphic disaster. Don't let that first effort dissuade you from checking out ARMORED FIST 2, however. The improved Voxel Space 2 engine makes for extremely realistic In the works terrain-1 was very impressed by the sample areas provided in the Alpha version, which were by far the best-looking graphics I've seen in a ground combat sim. Translucent smoke and detailed 3D opponents heighten the sense of realism. The missions promise NovaLogic's trademark fast action, and I'm especially anxious to try out the eight-player network support. -Denny Atkin so ON 17 *Check your mailbox: We mail a survey to 1,500 randomly chosen subscribers each month. The results of Playing Lately indicate what games readers are blowing the most time on, as opposed to the reader's overall quality ranking in the Top 100. PC Data Best-Sellers** 1. Diablo (Blizzard) 2. Myst (Broderbund) 3. Red Alert (Westwood/Virgin) 4. Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) 2 5. Quake (id Software) 6. WarCraft Battle Chest (Blizzard), 7. NASCAR 2 (Sierra On-Line) 7 8. Tomb Raider (Eidos) 9. Lords of the Realm II (Sierra) 10. Privateer 2 (EA/Origin) ** This list indicates what the top-selling PC games were, as calculated by PC Data, during January, 1997 THIS JUST IN search of the lost scroll pieces. You'll face a tribe of wild dogs, the land of lost things,\" the lonely Annie Body, and one very bitter bunny, all in the name of saving the comic universet KOALA's most distinct feature is its cartoon-style graphics. Visually creative and unusual, the good aspects of the game are nearly nullified by its rather lame attempts at being much hipper and funnier than it actually is. -Dawn Jepsen Broderbund (415) 382-4700 Windows CD-ROM Reader Service #:303 SCOURGE OF ARMAGON Hipnotic has given us another reason to keep Quakin! Published by Activision, SCOURGE OF ARMAGON is the first of two new mission packs, and brings three new episodes, three new DIARIES, is a vast improvement over their first effort, Mc KENZIE & Co. While THE VAMPIRE DIARIES features charact ers from the popular teen novels by the same name (author L. J. Smith also wrote the script), the plot takes a somewhat different tack. Popular high school student Elena must defeat the evil forces that are attacking chil dren in her small Virginia town. While the catty dialog between Elena and her classmates is too tedious for adult players, the intended market will probably enjoy this creepy, starter-level adventure. -Kale Hedstrom her Interactive, (505) 880-1718 Win 95 CD-ROM Reader Service #: 308 THE VAMPIRE DIARIES The second release from the American Laser Games' her Interactive division, THE VAMPIRE WARM CGW MAY 1997 "


"The Great Wall of China. At over 2,000 miles long, it stands as one of man's greatest architectural achievements. CIRCLE READER SERVICE "


"From the Great Wall of China to Speed Bay and Snow Ride. Moto Racer GP is the one game that tests you or both motocross and Grand Prix tracks. The ultimate goal: Win all 8 tracks and snag the Championship Trophy. to do it, you'll have to beat 24 of the world's toughest on and off-road racers. You've got 16 different Grand Prix and motocross bikes to choose from. Each accelerates differently. Each turns differently. Bach crashes differently Race head-to-head with a modem or against up to 7 others with a Local Area Network. Moto Racer GP also supports most 3D accelerator cards which crank the already hot graphics up another notch. "


"tien ne Hella not cross Moto Racer GP. Plug your PC straight into your adrenal gland. PC Windows 95 KIDS 70 ADULTS www.mracer.com bot.com M 30 DI BMG ESA BMG INTERACTIVE ICGFLETATOS  Delphine Software International, Delphine Software International and the Delphine softwan logo are registered trademarks of Delphine Software International. The BMG logo is a trademark of DMG Musica All rights reserved. The ratings icon is a trademark of the Interactive Digital Software Association "


"READ.ME New 3D Iron in the Works POWERY o one in the 3D world can Pricing will be about $299 list. afford to sit still, and we've We tried out CYBERGLADIATORS, just received pre-release ver MONSTER TRUCK MADNESS, a beta versions of two new, very sion of TERRACIDE, and HELLBENDER (all promising 3D-graphics accelerators. Direct3D titles), and put the Hercules Internally code-named PCX 2, board through some 2D duties in both NECNideoLogic's secondgeneration PowerVR adds an important feature-bilinear filtering. VideoLogic is striving to make PCX 2 work smoothly with Microsoft's Direct3D Application Programming Interface (API). overcoming some compatibility issues the first-generation chip had. Like its predecessor, PCX 2 will ship with 4MB of SDRAM for texture storage, and will use your 2D board's frame buffer for renKalistos' ULTIM@TE RACE dering to screen. Pricing, at $199, will Win 95 and DOS. The new PowerVR remain the same as the first-generalooked fairly solid overall, and ran all tion PowerVR boards. four titles with few snags (some are Hercules is working on their Stingray to be expected with beta drivers). The 128/3D, a 2D/3D board based on bilinear filtering is a welcome addition, 3Dfx's Voodoo Rush chipset, coupled improving overall image quality in all with Alliance's AT3D chip which handles titles, all but eliminating the 2D chores. Shipping in a 6MB EDO «sparkling\" effect that point-sampled DRAM configuration, this board offers textures can produce. 3Dfx's killer 3D performance, and what ULTIM@TE RACE, a visually impressive looks to be a pretty good 2D contender. racing title by Kalistos, is written to talk to PowerVR's SGL, a chip-specific API developers use to squeeze a little more performance out of PowerVR. This title, along with the PowerVR version of MECHWARRIOR 2, also took advantage of bilinear filtering, For its part, the Hercules Stingray 128/3D tore up the Direct3D titles we threw at it, with clean rendering and smooth frame rates. On the 3D side, this featurerich board will support both OpenGL and 3Dfx's own Glide API, which has curried favor among game developers. As for 2D, the Alliance chip turned in some encouraging numbers in both DOS and Win 95. For comparison, we pitted the Stingray 128/3D against its Hercules sibling, the Dynamite 128, a very able 2D performer based on Tseng Labs' ET-6000 chip. In Winbench 97 tests, the Stingray's beta driver was not too far behind the Dynamite 128, at 1024x768 resolution with 16-bit color. In DOS, the Stingray was only about 3 frames per second behind the Dynamite in QUAKE'S TimeDemo tests.-Dave Salvator NI ISNC SIHI G NOME 7th Level's attempt to win the crown of the giant robot genre implements some cool features, including the ability to get out of your \"HAWC\" and run around as a foot soldier. You can even steal enemy vehicles, then use them to kill their weapons, and two new foes -just for starters. Hipnotic has added environ mental traps, like fall-away floors and exploding mines. On one level with a deep cavern, be careful or you'll find yourself \"Jones-ed\" (flattened by a huge, tumbling boulder). Also included in this new mission pack is a wicked new DeathMatch level with scads of great sniper nooks, and large floor areas for closer combat. The high-quality level-design in Armagon should make for hours of macabre mirth.-Dave Salvator Hipnotic/Activision, (800) 477-3650 PC CD-ROM Reader Service #: 304 rightful owners. Sadly, though, your cock pit view never lets you feel you're inside four stories of walking badness. Warped and pixelated textures, even in high-res, leave you feeling trapped in a bad cartoon, and the bungling Al has you wondering if you're fighting the Three Stooges. \"Bot Jacking\" is cool, but not cool enough to carry the rest of the game. ---Greg Fortune 7th Level, (214) 437-4858 Win 95 CD-ROM Reader Service #: 305 AIR WARRIOR II Finally, a new World War II air combat game! AIR WARRIOR II is a standAPRIL 1997 "


"READ.ME Gamer's Paradise? The last zone, The Loft, offers a relaxing environment with a variety of classic games (Pac Man, Pong, Asteroids, and the like), where players can cool down and meet other people, on-line or face-toface. Eventually, players will be able to challenge people in GameWorks centers worldwide--in real time. Will this revolutionary new entertainment environment take off? Only time will tell if reality matches the excitement of the concept, but from what I've seen, GameWorks looks like a dream come true for gamers. Kelly Rickards aming may not strike you as a particularly social activity, but GameWorks, the new entertainment venture from DreamWorks, Sega, and Universal Studios, plans to catapult gamers into a com pletely new dimension. Part upscale amusement center, part arcade, the first GameWorks site opened recently in Seattle. Other sites will open in Las Vegas and Ontario, Canada, later this year, with plans to build over 100 centers worldwide before 2002. GameWorks has many Hollywood names behind it, but was largely inspired by Steven Spielberg's dream for an entertain ment center unlike any other. Representatives at GameWorks are quick to point out how hands-on Spielberg is with the project, and from what I saw on my recent behind-the-scenes visit, this indeed seems to be the case. Design and concept work is handled at GameWorks' self-proclaimed \"skunkworks,\" on the Universal Studios' back lot. Each and every detaillighting, music, game placement, viewing angles, and interior design-must be tested and approved here before being placed in a GameWorks center. More than just your everyday arcade, GameWorks centers have the potential to be a pleasant place for social interaction; safe, sophisticated entertainment; and a unique competitive environ. ment. Dubbed \"Spielberg's Three-Ring Circus,\" each multi-million dollar center will feature three main zones, each with its own dis. tinct look, sound, and feel. Zone 1, the Loading Dock, is an intense, competitive area featuring the latest coin-op games, designed to appeal to the twitch gamer. Zone 2 is the Arena, a high-energy area featuring several signature GameWorks games, including Vertical Reality, a 24-feet high four-player shooting game. KILI GARVONS arenas. Unfortunately, although the sim's engine is greatly improved over previous AIR WARRIOR releases, its graphic look is still very 1992.-Denny Atkin Interactive Magic, (888) 232-5836 PC CD-ROM Reader Service #: 306 gives you the ability to buy and somewhat customize your ship, STARGUNNER has too much of a \"been there, done that\" feel to it. Unless you are really into side-scrolling shooters, STARGUNNER doesn't have enough to make a name for itself. -Thierry Nguyen Apogee/WizardWorks, (800) 229.2714 PC CD-ROM Reader Service #: 307 alone version of the classic online flight sim. Over 300 solo missions are included, spanning from WWI to Korea, but the emphasis is on WWII com bat, with campaigns included for both Allied and Axis forces. In addition to solo play, you can play head-to-head over modem, network, or TCP/IP, or against hundreds of other humans in the online STARGUNNER From the clichéd side-scrolling action to the scrolling words at the beginning of every episode, STARGUNNER is, at most, a rehash of the side-scrolling shooters of old. Not long ago, Apogee released a modest little overhead shooter called RAPTOR. It seems that STARGUNNER IS Apogee's next step in reviving an old genre. Though it sports a nice soundtrack and MAY 1997 CGW "


"READ.ME PIPELINE BETHESDA PUTS X-FACTOR INTO X-CAR: EXPERIMENTAL RACING Whether you're solving for X in Algebra, watching \"The X-Files\" on television, or reading the X-Men comic book, X stands for that certain something--that X-fac tor-which hasn't quite been defined. Bethesda Softworks' X-CAR models 16 of the latest experimental racing cars on ten different tracks. Gamers will compete over five realistic tracks from test tracks to a detailed model of Seattle's highway system, as well as five fantasy tracks from the Mayan jungle to a twisting mountain road. Even in SVGA 800x600 in the works resolution, X-Car has a very fast frame rate, and it also features the most robust telemetry model I've ever seen. You race the car on the telemetry test track (a high-speed oval) or the skid pad, and record dozens of data points. These can be played back VCR-style and allow you to loosen or tighten the suspension, adjust the steering, swap out metalmetal for carbon fiber brakes, or tune the engine. Gamers not into the detailed physics model and elaborate car set-up routines can simply boot up the game and zoom around the tracks in a arcade mode. Finally, arcade gamers and sim fans alike should appreciate such details as the elaborate doppler effect heard when the powerful cars zoom through tunnels, and the nifty weather model that allows you to race in all types of conditions. Indeed, X-CAR may well rush past the current pole sitters in racing sim. ulations and take the checkered flag. --Johnny Wilson 10th Planet Bethesda 11.97 6300 2D/3D Chip Set Tseng Labs Summer 97 Achtung: Spitfirel Avalon HR 6 97 Agents of Justice MicroProse Summer 97 Aide De Camp 2 HPS Simulations Summer 97 Armored Fist 2 Novalogic 6/97 Battle Spire Bethesda 9/97 Blade Runner Virgin/Westwood 10/97 Blood 3D Realms/GT Spring 97 Boggle Hasbro Interactive 8/97 Buccaneer SSI 9/97 Demon Isle Sierra 10/97 Descent To Undermountain Interplay 8/97 Dungeon Keeper EA/Bullfrog Summer 97 Ecstatica | PsyQoosis 5/97 European Air War MicroProse Fall 97 Fallout nterplay Summer 97 Freedom 5600 Audio Adapter Diamond Summer 97 Front Page Sports Baseball 97 Sierra 6197 Front Page Sports Skiing Sierra 10/97 Flying Nightmares Il Eidos Summer 97 Flying Saucer EA/Any River 7/97 Golgotha crack.com Fall 97 Grand Slam Virgin Spring 97 Hardball 6 Accolade iF22 Interactive Magic 6/97 Imperialism SS1 Interactive Gamepad (USB) Alps Summer 97 Island of Dr. Moreau Psyanosis 8/97 Journeyman Project III Broderbund Fall 97 Last Blitzkrieg SSISSG 6197 MicroLeague Baseball 6.0 MicroLeague 6/97 Mig Alley Empire Summer 97 Myst 2: Riven Broderbund Summer 97 Napoleon In Russia Talonsoft Spring 97 NFL Legends Accolade 9/97 Ouarterback Club 98 Aodlam a 97 Pacific General SSI 7/97 Panzer General II SSI 11/97 Pentium II Intel Summer 97 Pictionary Hasbro Interactive 9/97 Pyramid 3D Accelerator Tritech Spring 97 Reach for the Stars II SSG Microsoft Summer 97 Red Baron Il Sierra 9/97 Redguard Bethesda 1097 Return to Krondor 7th Level Summer 97 Sabre Ace Virgin 9/97 Semper Fi Interactive Magic 9/97 Shadows of Riva Si-Tech Sorino 97 Spider Man: Venom Factor Byron Preiss Spring 97 StarCraft Bizzard 6.97 Starfleet Academy Interplay Spring 97 Steel Panthers II SSE 11/97 TEX 3 DID Summer 97 thunder Truck Rally PSMODOSIS YR 6 975 Tone Rebellion Broderbund Fall 97 Triple Play 98 EA Sports Soring 97 Twinsen II Activision 6/97 Ultima On-Line Origin Summer 97 Unreal Epic 5/97 IVR Baseball VA Sports Summer 97 War Inc. Interactive Magic 7/97 Warlords III SSG Broderbund Wes Craven...Fear Cyberdreams 10/97 X-Car Bethesda Soring 972 X-COM: The Apocalypse MicroProse Summer 97 Zork: Grand Inquisitor Activision Fa: 97 XID00 8 07 "


"Sure, there are cheaper PC and Mac game controllers. | Butif nuire reads get serious, Lou need the high-quali, built-to-play-rough peripherals from CH Products. When you're meady to get serious, you're ready. alur joysticks, throttles, flight yokes, rudder pedals, and other controllers are born in the USA, and made to take the heat of any battle, race or game you throw their way. So put on your game face, get down to your computer dealer and grab the game controllers made for serious players. Flight Stick Pro (PC & Mac) FlightStick Force FX CH Gamepad (PC & Mac) CH Pedals (PC & Mac*) Pro Pedals F-16 Fighter Stick (PC & Mac*) F-16 CombatStick -16 FlightStick Pro Throttle (PC & Mac*) CH Throttle Virtual Pilot Pro (PC & Mac*) Virtual Pilot Gamecard 3 Automatic *Coming soon. Visit our web site! http://www.chproducts.com/ CH PRODUCTS 970 Park Center Drive Vista, CA 92083 Phone 619 598 2518 . Fax 619 598 2524 http://www.chproducts.com/ America OnLine: Keyword: CH Products CompuServe: Go GAMEDPUB PRODUCTS Available at: American ADO Inc.. American TV. Best Buy Bits & PC's Circuit City Computer City  Computer Express. Comp USA. Computerware  Egghead. Electronics Boutique. Elek-Tek. Fry's Electronics  The Good Guys. Incredible Universe. Infolel. Ingram Micro J & R Computer World Jetstream Lechmere Media Play. Micro Center  Montgomery Wards Electric Avenue . Nobody Beats the Wiz. Office Max  PC Connection, Inc.. PC Tronic. Ricom Electronics Ltd. Sears Software & More Software PIU  Susteen. Ultimate Electronics United CD-ROM. Wal-Mart "


"ACCESS SOFTWARE INCORPORATED putu Planta Bolalar 398 June «Can I challenge Arnold Palmer and my buddy in Tibet to a skins game on Maui in heavy fog at 3 AM?\" an I golf in 16.7 million colors? Can I play against Arnold Palmer at Latrobe? Can I play against my friend in bet? Can either of them beat me? Can I take a 3-D tour of the U Kapalua Plantation Clubhouse? Can I play macch play? Best ball? Skins? Can I add in my own sounds? Can position a camera over the ocean? Can I place a camera right in front of the ball? Won't that break the camera lens? Can I still play all the Links Championship Courses? Can I add fog? Can I play with WIN 95? Can I get 1600X1200 resolution? Can I make a higharching wedge shot back up on the green? Can I watch Arnie react to a good shot? A bad shot? Can I resize the viewing windows? Can I see the tees break off? Can I choose from different golfers? Both male and female? Can I use the mowing stripes to read the contour of the green? Can I take a Virtual Reality tour of Arnie's workshop? Can I golf in Hawaii, Pennsylvania and Chicago on the same day? Can I get a 3AM tee time? Can I hear the birds and waves in 3D stereo? Can I hit my ball 1/2 mile out of bounds? Can I play from there? Can I watch aerial fly-bys of every hole? Can I choose from more than 15 add-on courses? Can I watch an instant replay of my swing? Are there multiple camera views? Can I challenge an artificially-intelligent computer opponent? Can I retract the control panel? Can I call toll-free for support? Can I take multimedia tours of Kapalua and Latrobe? Can I save a round in progress, go to dinner, and finish it later? Can I send and receive text messages during a round on the modem? If I lived on the course could I find my house? Is Links LS the most realistic golf simulation «Yes.\" PELICAN HILL ever? The NEW Links LS add-on courses Celery Curly Unless 5 Corslinary 1 ?ff/ 2 LINKS ELS f The NEW Links 5-Course Libraries Vol. 1, 2 & 3: Playable with Links LS, Links Pro CD, Microsoft Golf, & Links Pro CD Macintosh www.accesssoftware.com. Code: 010-CGW For a FREE Links LS Trial-Size version CD, call 1.800.800.4880 Call 1.800.800.4880 for a FREE Pandora Directive Demo CD CIRCLE READER SERVICE #248 "


"READ.ME Digging, Fallout on 'GURPS Fallout' chewing, E MOST TUULE APPIATUR fter weeks of haggling, Interplay finally made it official in midMarch: GURPS FALLOUT IS dead. Long live FALLOUT. For those just tuning in to the soap opera, here's the story: Interplay has spent the last three years working on a post-nucelar RPG based on Steve Jackson Games' GURPS (Generic Universal Role Playing System) penshedding ed on his Web site that he didn't consider GURPS FALLOUT to be dead yet, and Interplay affirmed that they were indeed still negotiating. In a phone interview conducted before Interplay gave GURPS the axe, Jackson told CGW that he felt that he had made many compromises with Interplay, and was anx. ious to see the project move forward, but was worried that the decision to go on without GURPS has taken on a life of its own.\" As it turns out, Jackson's worries were correct. Now Interplay must proceed with the game with a brand new system, created in-house, to replace GURPS. We took a look at the new system, dubbed \"SPE: CIAL\" by the Interplay team, and while it lacks some of GURPS' complexities, such as character disadvantages, it functions similarly enough that it should help keep the project interesting. The sad thing is, all the parties involved seemed to want to make a GURPS product, but couldn't work out a decent compromise. FALLOUT project leader Tim Cain said (before the and drooling. Not included. INTRODUCING and paper role playing system. This is a system widely admired by RPG fans for its rich complex ity and flexibility, and FALLOUT was to be the first computer game to incorporate it. After years of work, however, relations between the interplay design team and Steve Jackson began to deteriorate earlier this year when Jackson began to veto some of the design decisions-a contractually allowable action that was nevertheless giving Interplay an industrial strength migraine. So, in midFebruary, Interplay announced that, due to \"creative differences,\" they were forsaking the GURPS license and creating their own rule system for their upcoming FALLOUT. Soon after, however, Steve Jackson commentcyber Companion final decision was made). \"I was the one who wanted GURPS in the first place. I set out to make a GURPS game, so I don't want people to get the idea that I want to toss GURPS out.\" Interplay also stressed to us that this turn of events does not necessarily mean that there won't be a future GURPS RPG coming from them, since they still have the license. Jackson, for his part, seemed far less convinced about the possibility. \"What would you do if you were me?\" he asked. \"I work on it with them for three years, and then they decide not to go with GURPS. Why would I want to go through that again?\" -Jell Green Now there's a breed of dog that virtually can't be anything but the perfect pet. These fun hounds grow from puppies to adults. And as they do, all three of them learn more and get better at doing their tricks. You can even take your K-9 Companion to vivid 3-D places like the beach. Hot dog! Call toll-free 1-888-992-5433 or visit the software retailer nearest you. Our web site is at www.fujitsu-interactive.com Go fetch it soon. FUJITSU Interactive It's a big world. Get to know it. CD-ROM for Windows 95 Copyright 1996 1997 Na Solare le Allrahmrd Fi nd the Faulo are regalare trademarks of Fupts Limited Fustu leteractive and the Fute Interactar la ramof Futunate in M ins95 rytmetrarb of Microsoft Copa CGW CIRCLE READER SERVICE #184 "


"PREVIEWS MEAT PUPPET Target Release Date June, 1997 Developer Kronos Publisher Playmates Interactive Meat Is Murder MEAT PUPPET'S Macabre, Violent Atmosphere Casts Its Shadow on CRUSADER by Elliott Chin ny time you get a blockbuster in the computer gaming industry, you're sure to see a flood of clones following in hot pursuit. We saw it when a dozen Doom clones tried to cash in on the first-person shooting craze, and we're seeing it now with the deluge of real-time strat egy games trying to mimic COMMAND & CONQUER's success. We also saw a similar phenom. enon when CRUSADER: No REMORSE seized the market. Here was an exciting departure from first-person shootPlay the MEAT PUPPET ers, with an isometric look month's CD! and platform-style gaming. Sure enough, a raft of clones followed, including GENDER WARS, TOTAL MAYHEM, and BEDLAMall of which flopped. Now, finally, we might actually see the first successful, fun CRUSADER Clone grace the PC. Why will it be successful? Because it isn't a clone at all, but a welldesigned, dark, over-the-top project that was actually started before CRUSADER even came out. her evil master's whims. But as the game progresses, you soon discover that a friendly robotic companion, Dumaine, will help Lotos fight the Martinet. Together with Dumaine, she'll finish the Martinet's dirty work and then come back for him. MEAT PUPPET will remind many of CRUSADER, as the perspective is an isometric, three-quarters view. However, the size of objects in the gameplay Screen is much smaller than in CRUSADER, which means the main character and enemies aren't as large, but that you see more of the level. Visually, MEAT PUPPET is more impressive than CRUSADER. Action moves smoothly, even at resolu. tions of 800x600 and 1024x768. Though the palette is sometimes dark, there is still incredible detail in the environment and creatures. Lotos moves beautifully, as do her enemies, as the game sports over 20,000 frames of character animation, and over 35,000 frames of object animation. If you sit in a corner, you'll see monsters fighting each other, nibbling on body parts, and engaging in real-life actions. This, combined with the game's lush graphics, breathes a life into the game that hasn't been seen in any CRUSADER Clones. byli the world use assassins called Meat Puppet to mur. der their rivals. Once these killers complete their assignments, they are lobotomized and discarded. Our heroine, Lotos Abstraction, has been accidentally induct ed as a Meat Puppet. Now, an evil entity called the Martinet is using her to slay six ambassadors of the world's leading embassies (the future's equivalent of ruling corporations). As Lotos says in the intro movie, \"I don't want to kill any one...\" But she can't refuse the Martinet's dic tums, because embedded in her skin are sacks of poisonous gel that the Martinet can release at will. So, she has to carry out DARK NIGHTS MEAT PUPPET IS moody and filled with dark humor, like a computer game version of Blade Runner. In this universe, leaders of LOTOS ABSTRACTION Our heroine is an asskicking assassin who is trying to get even with her master, the Martinet, and end his mysterious reign of terror. COUSIN CICERO He's one of the six ambassadors on your hit list. Actually, you'll have to extract information from him before tossing him into a meat grinder CGW MAY 1997 "


"PREVIEWS Mu for use as cannon fodder when The enemies will likewise have personalities. you appear. Those same nan. In the Eugenics Clinic, one boss character you'll nies, the Nurses Mucklewrath, have to fight is Cousin Cicero, a huge headed are bitter spinsters who, if left fetus whose head is so large he needs to be alone, will start gossiping and supported in a tank of fluid. When you shatter smoking cigarettes while the his tank, he'll spill out and start flopping around children loiter. like a fish, pleading with you for mercy in his The sewer levels, where near wimpy little voice. mindless abominations dwell, is Everything Kronos is doing with MEAT PUPPET filled with grungy brick walls, seems to be geared towards creating a believ. dripping ceilings, pipes, and able environment, as well as a fun, ultra-violent muddy water. It's here that you'll game. At one point, David Sears, producer for DITULINETHRONER see these abominations feast on MEAT PUPPET, wanted to go for a dark and seri. the torsos of bodies that were ous game, but when he saw just how extreme CEREBRAL CHALLENGE Not all the levels of Meat PUPPET will flushed down the upperworld's the game was in terms of bleakness and viobe shooting sprees. In this level you push Cicero--the brain toilets, only to lay festering in the lence, he decided to take it one step further and boy-into the meat grinder. mutants' sewer homes. make it outrageously silly. The look and feel of Sometimes, if you're quiet the game certainly achieves that goal, and the enough, you'll even see them level designs and sophisticated Al appear play catch with the torsos they're extremely successful at creating a real world munching on. environment. Judging from the beta I played, There are of course, many think you'll get a good glimpse at a dark world other levels, each with their own with some hilarious (and violent) action. strange and menacing atmosphere and peculiar inhabitants. You can be sure though, that they will all be hostile. The Al of the enemies in MEAT PUPPET will be varied and sophisticated, and they'll react to your actions. If you gun down one kid LIGHT MY FIRE The abominations are wandering zombies that in the Eugenics level, the others feed on humans. Like the other enemies of MP they all have their will get scared and run own personalities. away. But if they encounter their nanny, she'll IT BURNS round them up, give them a Like CRUSADER, MEAT PUPPET offers highly morale boost and send them towards combustible environments, and there will literal you. In those cases, you'd want to kill the ly be hundreds of objects to manipulate and nanny and scatter the pesky kids. In the sewers, destroy. Adding to the mayhem is MEAT PUPPET'S you might want to just blow up one abomination 360-degree globe of fire, which allows you to and then run away and then let them feast on target any single pixel on the screen and fire at each other's putrid flesh. it. Basically, this means that anything you can see, regardless of elevation, can be targeted and LOTOS POSITIONS attacked. However, only those objects that turn Gamers will also notice that Lotos CYBER GHOST your targeting reticle red will have a satisfying has a lot of character. If you waste her Dumaine is a tech animated explosion. gunfire and she runs out of ammo, puppeteer who will In addition to violent shootouts, gameplay she'll mumble, \"Shit!\" and then throw help you topple the consists of standard platform conventions. The her hands up in frustration. When she Martinet. In certain levels are cleverly designed, with each one hav. enters the Eugenics level and sees all levels, he'll help ing a particular dark theme. In the Eugenics the knife wielding kids descending you open locked Clinic, for example, you'll see evil children play. upon her, a loathsome \"I hate kids\" will rooms and locate ing while needle hurling nannies round them up escape her breath. items MAY 1997 CGW "


"PREVIEWS IF-22 AIR SUPERIORITY FIGHTER Target Release Date June, 1997 Developer Interactive Magic Publisher Interactive Magic Raptor Attack Could This Be the First Serious Lightning Il Simulator? by Denny Atkin nown by Lockheed as the Lightning II and nicknamed \"Raptor\" by the pilots who will fly it, the F-22 promises to redefine air combat. With stealth, the ability A to cruise at supersonic speed without afterburner, and next-generation avionics that will take much of the workload off the pilot, the F-22 should help the U.S. regain a clear tech. nological edge in the air combat arena. It seems the software industry is a step ahead of the Air Force: By the time the first pre-production F-22 enters full-scale testing later this year, there will already be four F-22 simulators on the market. The first two, Novalogic's F-22 LIGHTNING Il and Mission Studios' JETFIGHTER III, which concentrate more on the action side of the spectrum, are already on the market. In a few months, sim owners will be treated to the more authentic TFX3, from DID, and IF-22 AIR SUPERIORITY FIGHTER (ASF), from Interactive Magic While TFX3 is still under wraps, Interactive Magic recently supplied us with a late alpha version of IF-22 ASF. While this first home-grown sim from IM promises to keep the action fans happy, it also looks to have the right stuff to satisfy the serious sim pilot. FULLY LOADED Glancing at the specifications for ASF, it looks like a flight sim fan's laundry list: flight models ranging from arcade to realistic, authentic aircraft systems, three believable conflict theaters, 3D. card support, and a variety of viewing options. ASF should be as much a jump over previous jet sims as the real F-22 is over its predecessors. Designed for Pentium 90 and faster machines (a P120 is preferred, with a P133 or faster listed as \"ideal\"), ASF features both single and multiplayer missions. Solo mode offers instant action, single missions, and a dynamic campaign. You'll fly in four combat theaters: Fort Collins (used for training), Bosnia, the Persian Gulf, and Ukraine. The backstories for each of these conflicts are well done and convincing enough to draw you in. ASF has no canned missions-instead, the pro. gram has a situation generator that looks at the current state of the battlefield and dynamically creates a series of missions. In single mission mode, you're given a choice of 10 or so missions, ranging from combat air patrols to ground-support to suppression of enemy air defenses. While there's no greater campaign picture to worry about, your success does affect your pilot's status-you can earn promotions and awards or go MIA or die. Although the targets and mission objectives are fixed, you do have the ability to alter the weapons loadouts of aircraft in your flight, and to add or change waypoints to and from the target. More intriguing is the campaign mode, which presents you with a similar set of missions, but where your success or failure has far-reaching consequences. Each mission influences the overall success of your country's forces, and targets that are destroyed remain down in future missions-at least until enough time has passed for the target to be repaired. Three conditions will conclude a campaign: if you push the enemy out of the combat area, survive long enough for peace negotiations to conclude the war with a stalemate, or are pushed out yourself by superior forces. One innovative feature that I hope will become de riguer for simulations with dynamic campaign GREEN ACRES The satellite-mapped imagery in 1F-22 ASF looks great when you're flying at medium and high altitude, even without a 3D card. CGW CGW MAY 1997 MAY 1997 "


"JF you want to motivate. POWERRAMP hockey seam knew Wax to buttons to push. POWERRAMP BLETE ENTER SPACE MACRO 1: NHL 97 MACRO 2: FIFA SOCCER 97 EQUIPPED WITH 16 HYPER MACRO 3: TOMB RAIDER LINE CHANGES ON THE FLY MACRO 4: QUAKE MACRO 0 1 2 3 4 INSERT PROGRAMMABLE BUTTONS, ACT LABS' POWERRAMP MITE EXECUTES PLAYS LIKE A PRO. HYPER PROGRAMMABLE TECHNOLOGY TEAMS UP TO 10 KEYBOARD MOVES INTO ONE HOT BUTTON. STAY-IN-PLAY CTRL CTRL There DELETE E ENTER POWERRAMP I M SPACE WHEN YOU PROGRAM AND SAVE YOUR CUSTOM CONFIGURATIONS INTO FOUR SEPARATE GAME MACROS. PROGRAM A GIVE 'N' GO TO EXECUTE A 2-ON-1 TO PERFECTION DEADLY DEKE MOVE SKATE LEFT, THEN RIGHT AND HITHE.. TOP SHELF WITH A WRIST SHOTS QUADRUPLE SPEED BURST FOR AN END-TO-END RUSH ACT LABS E EXPERIENCE aliable at: Electronics Boutique, Best Buy, Lechmere 1997 ACT Laboratory Lid. All rights reserved. PowerRamp MITE and ACT Labs are trademarks of ACT Laboratory Ltd. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. http://www.actlab.com/gamegear 1-800-980-9997 "


"PREVIEWS IF-22 AIR SUPERIORITY FIGHTER generators is the ability to save individual missions-before or after flying themfor later play. If you're issued the strike mission from Hell, you can pass it on to your friends and see if they can survive it, or keep it around to replay when you're looking for a serious challenge. But, in the preliminary version, there doesn't seem to be a method for creat ing a mission entirely from scratch. frequency, and of checking multiple dis. plays to get a full picture of the combat zone. The F-22 has four Multi-Function Displays (MFDs) which give you an overview of defense, tactical, attack, and stores status. Although the \"big picture\" provided by these displays-often with 360-degree radar coverage-may seem unrealistically complete, it's not. In fact, the F-22's advanced capabilities por trayed here all mesh well with published information in journals such as Aviation Week and Space Technology. The real F-22's IFDL data link allows it to combine information from other fight ers, AWACS, and ground stations on its status displays. This allows you to enter a combat zone without your active radar broadcasting your position. Stealth should play a big part of ASF missions. This data link also works well for coordinating attacks with other aircraft. You can have your offensive systems create an automatic \"shootlist\" of the highest priority targets, and you can define a shootlist for your wingmen as well. MIG ALERT The MiG-29 is no technological match for the F-22, but it's still a challenging opponent in a knife fight. IP FORMATION FLYING You're not alone in the skies, however. To excel at ASF, you'll need to engage the cooperation of wingmen, either comput er-controlled or human. Communications are handled at three levels: you can talk to wingmen on a specific UHF channel, broadcast on a guard frequency monitored by all aircraft, or stealthily share data with friendly planes over your InFlight Data Link (IFDL). In addition to typed chat messages in multiplayer mode, there are also a series of canned messages you can send in both single. and multiplayer missions. ASF has three styles of multiplayer action. There's a simple free for all dog. fight mode, as well as a Capture the Flag scenario. In the latter scenario, players face off in two teams, with one airfield for the Red team, one for the Blue team, and one neutral airfield. Along with human pilots, each side has computer-controlled scramble aircraft and SAMIAAA defenses The goal is to reduce your opponent's defensive capabilities to the point where your computer-controlled C-17 transport can safely land on his base and seize it. Both scenarios allow players (except the host) to enter and leave the mission at will. The final multiplayer mode of play is the cooperative mission. These are essentially the same as single missions in solo mode, except your flight is composed of human-controlled aircraft. BUTTONED UP Forgot which key lowers the gear? All the relevant switches and buttons in the cockpit can be operated with the mouse. SATELLITE VIEW This sim promises to be a real dazzler in the graphics department. The early alpha had quirky Direct 3D support, so we were only able to run it on a standard 2D graphics card. Even so, the satellite photo-based landscapes looked fantastic at altitude. And despite the level of detail, I was averaging nearly 30fps on a P166 system at 640x480 resolution in the alpha version-a nice change from other recent titles that bog down to 12fps or less on the same machine. Unfortunately, while the terrain looks fantastic at dog. fight altitudes, the effect falls apart at ground level in the alpha version, degrading to a mess of big pixels. Hopefully the development team will be able to address this before the product ships. F-22 ASF looks to be an impressive effort, especially for a freshman entry in the sim arena. If all the parts come together as planned, this could be the first F-22 sim to really satisfy novice and expert pilots alike. ALL SYSTEMS GO ASF has the best re-creation I've seen so far of the F-22's advanced avionics systems. As in the real F-22, gone are the days of adjusting radar azimuth and TANK EATER You'll find a full complement of modern allied and Eastem Bloc aircraft in the skies, including the A-10 Warthog. CGW MAY 1997 "


"  , WHAT YHA > Hall you <SPARIN AX? Duckman, private dick and family man, is once again down on his luck, having lost both his show and his family. Help guide our favorite duck-detective through this off-beat, zany adventure in order to get his life back!  Interact with characters from the popular syndicated television show like Cornfed, Bernice, Ajax, Charles and Mambo, and King Chicken.  featuring the voices of Tim Curry, Nancy Travis, Dweezil Zappa, and Gregg Berger.  More than 10,000 frames of awesome hand drawn animation.  Solve puzzles, avoid traps, and explore over 40 locations and 80 different scenes. PECK http://www.playmatestoys.com RATING PENDING TENT PIE IN WINTER RATINGE BRAND PC CD-ROM Duckman and 1997 Paramount Pictures. All rights reserved. Software created by Illusions Gaming Company. Art and design 1997 Playmates Interactive Entertainment Inc. PIE is a registered trademark of Playmates Interactive Entertainment Inc. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #137 NZ ZAB ov Illusions "


"PREVIEWS THE SPACE BAR Target Release Date May, 1997 Developer Boffo Games and Rocket Science Publisher SegaSoft Sloshed in Space Experience Close Encounters of the Weird Kind in Steve Meretsky's THE SPACE BAR by Jeff Green ver the past 14 years, game of talent at work, the game, due for designer Steve Meretsky has release this May, has the poten: created some of the funniest, tial to be one of the year's most memorable, and most strongest adventures challenging adventure games of all time, including the classic STEP INTO MY SHOES text adventures HITCHHIKER'S You play the role of Alias Node, a GUIDE TO THE GALAXY, PLANETFALL, and LEATHER human detective on the planet GODDESSES OF PHOBOS. Now he's back with a new Armpit VI, assigned by adventure, THE SPACE BAR, which retains the goofy Amalgamated Vacuum to spirit of his older games but takes a quantum apprehend a shape-shift. leap forward in the graphics department. ing alien fiend who has HOWDY, DUMBO This ugly fellow, known by the name of Click Snap Meretsky and his company Boffo Games devel. stolen secret government Snap Rattle, is an Auditon, a creature who can only \"see\" things via oped THE SPACE BAR with the resurgent Rocket technology, murdered a his sense of hearing. Science, whose recent OBSIDIAN was one of the fellow officer, and kidbest adventure games of the year (see review in napped your partner in the this issue). THE SPACE BAR'S conceptual design is process. The killer has been tracked to a space THE SPACE BAR contains eight of these flashby Rocket Science visual designer Ron Cobb, best port bar called The Thirsty Tentacle, where a host back sections, in which you will inhabit the bodknown for his legendary alien creatures in the Mos of interplanetary species are hanging out and ies and assume the perspective of eight wildly Eisley cantina scene in Star Wars. With an A-Team whetting their whistles (or whatever it is that they different alien races. Each section is effectively its have). You must discover own mini-adventure game, with its own unique which of the many aliens in look, goals, puzzle type, and structure. This abilithe bar is the killer before he ty to switch character perspectives has been escapes the planet. done before, most recently in The Residents' Catching a shape-shifting under-appreciated BAD DAY ON THE MIDWAY, but alien would be no easy task, THE SPACE BAR takes this idea to a much more but you possess a very spe radical and creative extreme. Meretsky and Cobb cial ability: You can mind let their imaginations run wild to give gamers a meld (or perform \"empathy series of challenging, witty, and totally unique telepathy\") with other crea gaming experiences. tures. This allows you to For example, in one section of the game, you enter into the brains and assume the persona of an alien called an bodies of those you are inter. Auditon, which is a sightless, bat-like creature rogating, and flash back that can only \"see\" things that make sounds. from a first-person perspec. Thus, your screen remains totally black except for FLY BOY In one of the more challenging sections of THE SPACE tive--into events in their past; spots from which sounds emanate (where a BAR, you'll assume the first-person perspective of an insect-like which will ultimately provide clock would be, for example). In another section, creature called a Zzazzl, complete with more eyeballs than you'll you with clues to the game's you play a large insectoid creature called a know what to do with. big mystery. Zzazzl, so your screen perspective looks like that CGW MAY 1997 "


"MOTEL WELCOME TO CYCLONE, ARIZONA. POPULATION: 43 AND FALLING. VACANCY OFENCE SHIVERS Something has gone terribly Developed by the award-winning wrong in Cyclone. You've come team that brought you the original here to meet your friends only to R T OT O Shivers. Harvest of Souls tal find everyone gone. #2 IN THE ACCLAIMED SERIES the suspense to the next level: It's just you, a dying desert  Infinite replayability with town, and the eerie feeling you're being watched. Soon, three completely different endings. a frightening tale of murder, accidental death and Indian  Pulsing musical score that's integral to the game. lore begins to unfold. A dark, complex mystery that only  Quick mapping feature lets you jump instantly to any you can unravel. place in town without back tracking. Hey, no pressure. If you fail, your friends die. So come to Cyclone. You'll find it's a lot easier to get here than it is to leave. Call toll-free 1-888-SHIVER2 for a free preview or interact with the evil at http://www.sierra.com/Shivers 2 TEEN. A SIERRA AGLO 19 Vision360\" . Panoramic views aid game play by allowing you to scan the scene in any direction.  Sierra On-Line, Inc.  and / or designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #153 "


"PREVIEWS THE SPACE BAR Pull Leg Off or Kick. Again, many of the lengthy dialog trees you can follow have no point other than to entertain. In this respect, the game is spiri tually closer to the old text adventures than to modern adventure games, with an environment that rewards any action you take-whether brilliant or stupid-with some kind of humorous response. Onun I'M WITH STUPID Meet Fleebix (left) and Thud (right), the most co-dependent aliens you'll ever be likely to encounter. You'll inhabit both characters' bodies in the course of the game, BUT SERIOUSLY Despite its lighthearted atmosphere, though, THE SPACE BAR is an extremely complicated and bizarre game that is likely to appeal best to hard-core adventurers used to a serious mental challenge. Newbies, faced with things like a multi-eyeballed screen, are likely to find themselves in over their heads very early on. Games tend to get a lot less funny when you can't fig. ure out how to play them. But I say bring it on. Ever since Myst, the adventure genre has been glutted with one pretentious, artsy-fartsy coffee table game after another. Fortunately, fans of humor-based adventure games have been getting a respite of sorts, with games like TOONSTRUCK, LEISURE SUIT LARRY 7, and DISCWORLD II. Now, with Steve Meretsky, one of the genre's masters, returning to the fold, it feels like we have a real renaissance on our hands. If you're looking for an entertaining adventure game, belly up to THE SPACE BAR. From what I've seen, you should get a good buzz. of a multi-eyeballed fly. Other forms you will take include that of a robot, a limbless alien who lives in a jar, a moron, and a potted plant. Yes, a pot ted plant. And you thought BAD Mojo was weird. weird gadgetry such as the Mister DrinkMaster 2000, a drink machine with no functional pur. pose in the game other than to let you order drinks that will kill you. Interaction with the game's many characters is also refreshingly lighthearted. Along with standard actions to choose from (such as Examine or Chat), depending on who (or what) you're talking to, you might also get choices such as Smell or HELLO SAILOR THE SPACE BAR is non-linear, so you can feel free to explore the bar and work on any of the flashback sections at will; getting stuck in one place won't stop the game completely. The nonlinearity does have one drawback, though, at least on the beta I played: constant disc-swapping. It would be nice if the game could warn you ahead of time when a disc-swap would be necessary. The game's 3D graphics, reminiscent of those in OBSIDIAN, are quite stunning. Ron Cobb's alien creations are as funny and weird as the ones he created for Star Wars, giving solid form to Meretsky's oddball ideas. The game also employs 360-degree panning, similar to ZORK NEMESIS, in order to create a deeply immersive environment. Finally, whereas most adventure games these days leave gamers desperately clicking all over their screens in search of something to do, THE SPACE BAR is loaded with active areas to explore. Meretsky knows that gamers like and will always try to do, stupid things just to see what happens. THE SPACE BAR encourages such behavior throughout. The game is crammed with gratuitous jokes, sight gags, useless information, and Dance Floor DONT DRINK THE WATER Though you might be tempted to take a drink here, be forewarned that this is actually Ambassador My and Ty, and they'll take such an act as a serious insult. CGW MAY 1997 "


"AVAILABLE NOW PAG be Adventure Game that challenges your moral fibre \"A journey of a lifetime awaits you in this marvelous adventure. The world of Fable combines stunning animations with progressive puzzles, curious characters and outlandish events, all topped off with a twisted sense of humor.\" \"A game to rival the Lucas Art's Adventures.\" LEE BROWN, CD-ROM MAGAZINE \"Reminiscent of the King's Quest series.\" MARK ULYATT, PC POWER PLAY TECH To order, visit your retailer, or call: (800) 447-1230. Developed by: TELSTAR Electronic Studios Copyright Telstar Electronic Studios Ltd. Tel: (315) 393-6633 Fax: (315) 393-1525 E-mail: webmaster@sir-tech.com www.sir-tech.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #125 For Windows 95 and DOS "


"Y'ALL SHOULD SEE All The KILLIN Twice The HUMOR... Half The INTELLIGENCE. Ever fire live rounds at Ever use a crowbar to uitoes and chickens.. whup an old coot? Ever hack down a bunch a good ol' boys with a power saw gone haywire? Ever hit the broadside of a tornado-wrecked trailer park with a .454 Casull Pistol? Ever launch TNT at pig-stealin' aliens and turd minions... (yep, I said \"turd minions\") and watch 'em fry?! Heck! Available for PC-DOS Y'all Will Now! MATURE AGES 17 us. We By Rednecks. Fer Rednecks. XATRIX XATRIX entrent 1997 Xatrix Interactive Design. All rights reserved. Redneck Rampage and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Product "


"THE PII! WALICE RAZTU 18 200  Gin-u-wine redneck dialogue and humor 14 levels of 3D SVGA graphics featuring mortuaries, trailer parks, chicken processing plants and tons more fighting locations F 10 brutal weapons including crowbars, dynamite, double-barrel shotguns, ripsaws, and an alien arm gun (yank the tendon to fire!)  Gas up with pork rinds, whiskey, and beer a-plenty  8 player multi-player, death-match action and modem play Rockabilly soundtrack featuring Mojo Nixon, The Beat Farmers, The Reverend Horton Heat, and Cement Pond RUDNICU Down Load the Interactive Preview at: www.interplay.com ROMAG All rights reserved. Interplay is the sole publisher and distributor. All other trademarks and copyrights are property of their respective owners. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #122 "


"COVER STORY Reaching For The Stars Blizzard's Strategy Blockbuster STARCRAFT Features a New Design, Incredible Artwork, and an All-New Enginethis WON'T Be WARCRAFT II in Space by Elliott Chin CGW MAY 1997 "


"t last year's E3, Blizzard unveiled what it hopes will be its next real-time hit: STARCRAFT. The demo was hastily assembled, and it looked very much like WARCRAFT II with new art in an outer space setting. But Blizzard's designers didn't want the game to merely copy WARCRAFT II, and right after E3 they scrapped the demo and started work on a completely new engine and an all-new design. Now, most of the million-plus gamers eagerly awaiting STARCRAFT have come to realize that it will be very different from WARCRAFT II. ome folks at Blizzard still worry that gamers will think of STARCRAFT as just \"Orcs in space.\" Given the superficial previews in other game maga. zines, they have cause for concern. To overcome the misconceptions, Blizzard invited us to take an exclusive look at the project, and from what we've seen, we think you'll be blown away. How big will STARCRAFT be? Blizzard wants to make STARCRAFT as LOST IN SPACE STARCRAFT will have a greater sense of scale big a leap over WARCRAFT II as (see the Protoss carrier versus the tiny interceptors), and WARCRAFT II was over cool special effects, such as the ships' lon trails. the original WARCRAFT. They're adding better Now, they're moving towards a final confrontation. art, more special effects, more Caught in the middle are the scattered nations of realism, revolutionary multiplayer the Terrans, a nomadic people trying to scavenge options, and a laundry list of game their way to a meager living among the stars. play enhancements that many other realtime games still have yet to implement. Here's Where You Come In Alien Family Feud Unlike the WARCRAFT Like other Blizzard titles, STARCRAFT has an series, where the two camintriguing story that brings the game to life. The paigns were mirror images game chronicles the conflict between the Protoss of each other, each of and the Zerg, two rival alien races genetically engi STARCRAFT's campaigns are unique neered to near-perfection by the same alien fathers and tell a single act of a three-part story. Craft Your Own Games BLIZZARD INCLUDED A GREAT SCENARIO editor in WARCRAFT II, but they're doing even more for STARCRAFT, with the proposed inclusion of a campaign editor. Not only will the editor have better function ality, but you'll also be able to create multiple scenarios and string them together into a minicampaign. You'll be able to record your own mission briefings, create your own NPCs for recurring roles in each scenario and also record your own voices. Even better, you'll be able to define your own victory conditions, rather than just killing everyone. LANDING GEAR This is one of the tilesets for STARCRAFT's ground scenarios. Notice the transparent water and detailed terrain. MAY 1997 CCW "


"COVER STORY First you'll play from the role of a Terran. When you finish that campaign, you'll understand their role in the story and get a glimpse of the larger story chronicling the Zerg-Protoss conflict. The second campaign is from the role of the Zerg, where you attempt to assimilate the Terrans and defeat the Protoss. After this campaign, more of the story will be revealed. After completing the third campaign as the Protoss, the story comes to a close. Each campaign is slated for 10 scenarios, which will be a mixture of space, ground, and installation combat. Space combat will include asteroid land masses and wide stretches of outer space, ground combat will be similar in feel to WARCRAFT II scenarios, and installation scenarios will be fights in enclosed areas, such as space stations, similar to Luke and Han's rescue of Leia aboard the Death Star in Star Wars. Visual Realism The campaign and scenario design are the least of STARCRAFT's features. Where Blizzard is investing most of its resources is on art and gameplay. Blizzard is striving to create the most realistic environment ever seen in a real-time strat egy game, so the look will be hi-tech, hi-res, and sophisticated. It has a more isometric perspective than WARCRAFT II in order to provide greater visual The Races Of StarCraft only be buildable adjacent to Creep, so it will thus become a necessity for Zerg territorial expansion. An added bonus will be that Protoss and Terrans won't be able to build where the Creep has taken hold. units will be the cheapest and most plentiful. To simulate the horde, you'll be able to group more Zerg units together than any other race, Zerg units also won't cast any light, so they'll often have the element of surprise, and they might even have the ability to burrow underground or through walls. Zerg units will increase in size and strength as they age. The Zerg hydralisk, for example, would start with 120 hit points, but then add one additional hit point every few seconds to top out at 130. TERRAN The Terrans will be the most familiar race for WARCRAFT II veterans, because they play like the humans from that game. Their biggest advantage will be their nomadic nature. Most major Terran facilities will be mobile, so you can actually pick up a Terran barracks or research lab and move it after you've built it. Not only can you confuse your enemies, you can also move your settlement after you deplete a mine. Terran facilities will also be upgradeable. Primary buildings will be able to host add-on buildings. The research lab, for example, might be able to house a genetics wing, which would allow new units or an upgrade. However, these additions won't be mobile, so you'll have to leave them behind if you move. If an enemy Terran flees an area and leaves behind building additions, you'll be able to swoop in and use the discarded add-on buildings. Terrans will also be able to use alien wreckage as a secondary source of resources, so while the Zerg and Protoss will only be able to use mines, Terrans will be able to worm a few more crystals, out of the wreckage they spot on the maps. Blizzard is also discussing allowing Terrans to form industrial blocks so they can link structures to be more efficient than the constituent parts. ZERG The Zerg are being designed as an organic swarm of melee monsters. Though individually weak compared with Terran or Protoss units, Zerg The Protoss are the most advanced beings in STARCRAFT, born with incredible psionic powers. They will have the fewest units, but will have the strongest individual troops in the game. Most Protoss units will have shields, providing an extra layer of defense. The opposite of the Zerg. you might be able to group only half as many Protoss together. The Protoss psionics will operate similar to WARCRAFT I spells. The list of psionics isn't com plete yet, but Protoss should have the ability to teleport across the map, cloak their units, create Illusionary units, and combine their troops to cre, ate a more powerful being. The Protoss templars, for example, will have the ability to merge into an Archon unit, the most powerful Protoss unit avail able. Grouped Protoss zealots might be able to channel all their energies into one of their num ber, giving that one unit bonus attributes (like a mega-bloodlust that's targeted at a single unit). Like the Zerg, the Protoss will also be restrict ed in their growth. The Protoss derive their psionic power from their homeworld. So, Protoss commanders will need to first build a Nexus which provides a psionic link to their homeworld. Other Zerg abilities will include regeneration for all their units and buildings, as well as the ability to have premature births. So, If you're under sudden attack, you could just hatch that hydralisk even at only 50 percent completion. It will have reduced stats, but it will be available immediately, The most interesting aspect of the Zerg is that they need a substance called the Creep to thrive. Each Zerg building, beginning with the hatchery (the Zerg town hall), will emanate a radius of Creep that coats the ground. Zerg buildings will CGW MAY 1997 "


"You can almost smell the freshly cut grass. The hot dogs. The pine tar. "


"AMD Exclusive Pitching Meter lets you control your wind-up and release like an ace reliever. Feel the pressure on the mound that it takes to throw big-league pitches. CN. SUNAMI CD Unique Batting Meter lets you keep your eye on the ball and control the power in your swing ...everything it takes to find the sweet spot and \"park one.\" On-the-fly 3-D environment and free-moving camera give you the action from field level in 28 authentic stadiums. Accelerated animation provides the smoothest, fastest graphics for the most realistic baseball action. \"...unprecedented control.\" -ELECTRONIC CHIYINC MONTHLY The most realistic gameplay ever. OS TOMBULIS Superior Artificial Intelligence creates over 800 MLBPA players and prospects who think, move and play like the pros, based on up-todate player statistics by STATS Inc. It's your average against theirs. And they didn't come to the majors to lose. INTERACTIVE entertainment STAISING 01.02 PLAYERS PAD PLAYERS 1997 Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Grand Slam is a trademark of Virgin Interactive is a trademark of Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. Official Licensee Major League Baseball Players Association "


"The fear. GRAND SLAM PLAY FOR REA www.vie.com 2 5 Available for: Designed for SEGA SATURN PlayStation GRAND SLAM GRAND SLAM Microsoft PlayStation L www.vie.com SEGA SATURN Entertainment, Inc. Virgin Is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd. Burst MLBPA. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Wews GRAND SLAM ON "


"COVER STORY depth and more animation in the buildings. For lights before you actually example, the Zerg hatchery has four tubes that see the unit. This will give pulse and spit out squirming larva. Units will also you the opportunity to be animated, so you'll see the Zerg cocoon when create some interesting it mutates, pulsing and wriggling ever more vio deception tactics. lently until a new lifeform bursts from the egg. You can also expect Expect more detail in the unit displays, as well. more visual realism in Every unit has a wireframe to indicate damage, as combat. For instance, well as an outline for shielded units that changes when Terran robot units color when damaged. Zerg units, being organic move to attack enemies have a heat outline that changes color when hurt. laterally, their legs will Spectacular special effects are also in the move one way while their works, including transparent smoke and translu turret torsos swivel to cent lighting. Some ships will have cloaking tech face the enemy before firALIEN ATTACK The Zerg are designed to be an overwhelming horde. nology, which has a rippled effect when activated, ing. If it hits its Protoss While the Zerg will have the weakest ranged attacks, they will have similar to the alien's movement in Predator. target head-on, you'll see the most powerful melee attacks of any race, The lighting model features a slightly enhanced the Protoss front shields fog of war. Most units will have a light radius, so in light up. If it gets hit in the back, you'll see the aft Terrain Dav most cases you'll be able to see a ship's head. shields explode Blizzard's quest for visual realism also extends to the terrain and environment. You'll see transparent water and lapping waves on the land, and many WarCraft: The Adventure Continues objects will be interactive, such as operable eleva. tors and destructible pipes and barrels. Weather GREAT NEWS FOR WARCRAFT FANS: the \"One of the things we really wanted to do will also play a role. The designers are trying to Orcish hordes are coming back for more. with the adventure title,\" said Director Bill include periodic storms, fog, and even nebulae in Blizzard's first project after STARCRAFT will Roper, \"was take a good, long look at some space combat. These environmental effects will bring gamers back once more of the things we've always known probably affect gameplay, for example, by limiting to the lands of Azeroth and about the Orcs when writing the visibility. There won't be any harmful effects, such beyond—but in a different form story lines for the (strategy] as earthquakes or meteor showers, but having reg. than you might expect. Instead games but didn't explore.\" ular Weather patterns will definitely add realism. of WARCRAFT III, Blizzard is divBlizzard isn't ready to discuss In addition, Blizzard will be adding more tactical ing head-first into a completely actual gameplay yet, but said that realism to combat. In WARCRAFT II, elevation didn't different genre-adventure it's being modeled after such affect battles. In STARCRAFT, though, if a ground unit games-to continue their story. LucasArts adventures as FULL is attacking a unit that has higher ground, he'll be WARCRAFT ADVENTURES: LORD THROTTLE and THE DIG. \"Right now at a disadvantage. The ground unit will still be able OF THE CLANS is set in the time we're working the most on creat to fire, but its chances will be lessened since it's period immediately following ing an enthralling story and con harder to hit something above you. the WARCRAFT II: BEYOND THE tinuing the WarCraft universe, The computer will also take obstacles into affect DARK PORTAL expansion set. The said Roper. \"We're making sure in determining your hit percentage. With terrain Orcs have now been beaten that anyone who played WarCraft being a factor, getting straight down twice, and, in the words of lead will feel at home in the adventure game.\" lines of sight and proper facdesigner Chris Metzen, \"are not doing very To tell the story, Blizzard has enlisted ing will be even more imporwell.\" You are Thrall, a young Orc slave Clancy Brown (Lex Luthor on the animated tant in STARCRAFT than in who's been raised by humans since infancy. \"Superman\" TV series) as Thrall, Peter other real-time games Over the course of the game, Thrall will Cullen (the voice of Transformers' Optimus Combat debris will also escape from his bondage and set upon a Prime), and a host of others. Roper, the affect gameplay. Debris will drift off into quest to relearn what it means to be an original Orc voice, has promised to con space, and ground-based combat will result in per Orc, with the goal of reuniting the Orc clans tribute the occasional \"zug zug\" as well. sistent debris that impedes movement. In the case and returning them to their former glory, Look for LORD OF THE CLANS this December of the scavenging Terrans, they'll even provide a few resource units for you to strip. IRS TheaLL CGW MAY 1997 "


"zen LEVEL. BOT-JACKING, WHAT THE *@#! IS THE WORLD COMING TO? \\ ..state of the art.\" -PC MAGAZINE ..kick-ass first person mech gameplay.\" -PC GAMES ...literally stomping out the competition.\" -CNET.COM .action-packed...\" -PC GAMER ONLINE ..intriguing new gameplay concepts.\" -CNET.COM G-NOME upsets the balance of power on the 3D battlefield. Has your vehicle taken a pounding? No problem, steal another. On this world, nothing's sacredso watch your back. You could be yanked from your killing machine in a heartbeat. Just run like hell, jack yourself another 'bot, then rip into anything that moves. G-NOME: where man does not live and die by one 'bot alone. MULI-PLATER HEADY GNOME + Uses MMXT Technoloy Available NOW at: Best Buy. CompUSA, and Computer City 01997 All rights reserved. All products are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of their respective owners. www.7thlevel.com PLAYER "


"COVER STORY Crafty Multiplay each upgrade. If you're five levels higher than your enemy, you won't necessarily be five times stronger. ONE OF THE AREAS WHERE STARCRAFT will really blow away the competition is in its multiplayer support. STARCRAFT will have team play, allowing you and your teammates to com bine armies, and more robust alliance options, giving you the ability to trade resources, units and information on fog of war. STARCRAFT MULTIPLAYER MAYHEM STARCRAFT will have increased battle.net support. See CGW's Web site for more information. A Dab of Diablo Blizzard plans to make the worlds richer by populating areas with inhabitants, so you might have neutral trading outposts, as well as pirates that will attack any playerboth human and artificial. Blizzard PROTOSS JUICE The crystal spikes next to the Nexus are will also expand on the Legendary pylons, channeling psionic energy to all Protoss buildings. If Heroes concept and add more destroyed, connected buildings will lose functionality. unique hero units. Heroes will have the requisite pumped stats, and some will have But if anyone can pull off such an ambitious pro. recurring roles in all three campaigns. ject, it would be Blizzard. As their presentation was There will also be specialized units in the game wrapping up, I mulled over my first question when I for use in specific missions. For example, you initially sat down to see STARCRAFT. Will STARCRAFT might have to access data from an enemy comput simply be WARCRAFT Il in space? The answer is no, er, but only a specific hero can operate the termi it will be infinitely better. In fact, it looks as if al. In these cases, you'll have to escort him with STARCRAFT has the potential to revolutionize the marines and then use him to complete the mission. crowded world of real-time gaming. Every unit in STARCRAFT will have an inventory limited to one item. There will be loads of special items, some that will be the object of scenarios, and others that will be lying in alien wreckage about the map. Terrans will be able to strip the wreckage for these artifacts, but the Protoss and Zerg will have to blow up the wreckage to get at it. STARCRAFT WILL BOAST SIGNIFICANTLY Some of these items will give hit points or enhanced controls, the biggest being the abiliweapons bonuses, while others might improve ty to save groupings, up to a maximum of 10overall crystal mining. Special items won't die with just as in RED ALERT. Another addition will be their owner, so if you covet an enemy unit's arti waypoint movement. You'll also be able to cre. fact, you can kill him and take it. ate a production queue for your barracks and other buildings, so you can order several units What's Left? at once and then move on to other tasks. Resource management is still to be determined. Blizzard will also allow gamers to hotkey At this point, Blizzard only knows that there will be buildings. If you want to jump to your barracks, two types of resources and that all mines will either press a key. If you use more than one, the be full or collapsed. When a mine is full, it operates hotkey will cycle through all your barracks. like a gold mine in WARCRAFT II. However, when it is STARCRAFT'S minimap will also blink to sig. depleted, it reaches a collapsed state, meaning it nal events and messages. If you're being can still be mined, but will yield considerably less. attacked, you'll see a rapid red flashing on the Unit cost is also unresolved. However, in keep minimap showing the location of that attack. If ing with each race's theme, Zerg will be the you complete construction of a unit, you'll get cheapest, Protoss will be the most expensive, and a white flash at your barrack's coordinates. Terrans will straddle the middle line. You'll also have a hotkey to cycle through mul There were so many compelling features in tiple event coordinates. STARCRAFT that the game was almost overwhelming. Blizzard also plans to give the computer a more active role, with noutral outposts to defend and capture, pirates to fight, and Al opponents with whom you can negotiate. Another great feature is handicapping, which allows novices to play experts by limiting tech levels, production, and resource gathering. These are only some of STARCRAFT's multiplayer innovations. For more on Blizzard's mul tiplayer STARCRAFT plans, visit our Web site at www.computergaming.com. Controlling the Craft Technically Speaking Blizzard plans to make technology an integral part of STARCRAFT, allowing gamers near-limitless upgrades for weapons and armor. The designers want technology to play a larger role than it did in WARCRAFT II, where research really only occupies a short, albeit tense, portion of gameplay. After you've acquired certain technologies, you can upgrade all your units with the appropriate improve ment. Because of the greater number and flexibility of upgrades, units will be more easily customized Though the number of upgrades will be greatly increased, you'll see diminishing returns with CGW MAY 1997 "


"Win 95 is cool, but sucks with DOS games! STONEKEET wing c an QUAKE MECH WARRION2 Gamnes run best on the operating system they were designed for! You've got great DOS games, but you really want to try that new Win 95 game. You want it all. But, if you upgrade to Win 95, it will really hose your DOS games. With System Commander you can play each game the way it was meant to be played ... on the OS it was designed for. Get it and play it fast! System Commander's automatic installation will have your PC ready to add OSes in less than 5 minutes. And, unlike some utilities, it uses less than 1 MB of hard disk space and no RAM! You'll be up and playing your favorite games in minutes! 18 Now you can in more than one operating system on your PCI XINLANIB System Commander allows you to boot both DOS and Win 95 on the same PC. In fact, with System Commander you can run up to 100 different Oses on your machine! You just turn on your computer, pick the OS you want from the menu, and let System Commander do the rest. GET SYSTEM COMMANDER FOR ONLY $9995 and that includes our unconditional 60-day money back guarantee! WINDOW DOS LINIX CALL TODAY AND PLAY YOUR BRAINS OUT TOMORROW! COMMANDER Easy installation even your parents could do! As you install new OSes, System Commander automatically copies key files and adds each new OS to its menu. System Commander manages unique copies of configuration files for each installation of DOS, Windows 95 or any other OS. 800-648-8266 www.v-com.com Mention this ad and get FREE overnight shipping! Look for System Commander in the utilities section of most major software stores, including: 1905 BYTE Babbages BEST COMPUSA somie, VITA 32 EGGHEAD. TOE MIGOGNE software ETC MAGAZINE BEST OF April 1996 1996 L V Communications. 2290 North First St., Suite 101CGW  San Jose, CA 95131 . (408) 965-4000 Jan 7, 1997 Orders received after 12:00 pm PST will be shipped the next business day. No Saturday delivery. Standard shipping outside US. CA res. add $7.25 sales tax! Offer subject to change without notice. All logos and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective companies. VISA/MC/Amex  CIDCIG DCAND SERVICE H204 "


"AND THE CHOSEN ONE SHALL BEAR THE MARK "


"THE APOCALYPSE HAS BEGUN All seven seals have been broken. Every evil that plagued the earth has become incarnate, disturbing the balancing force between good and evil, man and spirit. FRIGHTENINGLY DETAILED JD ENVIRONMENT WITH INTERACTIVE OBJECTS AND PREDATORY DEMONS Not only have you stumbled blindly into a nightmare, you've set the stage for the Apocalypse. And now only one can stop it. He who bears the mark. The chosen one. You. Presenting a terrifying.3D adventure unlike anything you've experienced before. Realms of the Haunting. The forces of darkness are gathering for the final : showdown. ROOM UPON ROOM OF QUESTS, PUZZLES, BATTLES AND CHALLENGES. * OVER 600 INTERACTIVE OBJECTS INCLUDING MORE THAN 155 POSSIBLE INVENTORY ITEMS MAPS, WEAPONS, AND MAGICAL OBJECTS. USER-DEFINED CONTROLS ALLOW CUSTOMIZATION OF ADVENTURE AND COMBAT LEVELS. FULL MOTION VIDEO, COMPLEX AND INTELLIGENT PLOT BRANCHING AND MULTIPLE ENDINGS SOPHISTICATED CHARACTER INTERACTION WITH A REAL-TIME, FIRST-PERSON, 360° 3-D ENVIRONMENT. Team SEGE Realms, rile Haunting THE MORE FURIA. Realmsinile Haun ing Haun ing Realms, lk. THE BATTLEGROUND BETWEEN ULTIMATE, GOOD & EVIL. DIE LITIN MININE LE Tiberplants Gremlin AVAILABLE FOR PC CD-ROM 2 BY GAMERS, FOR GAMERS. ESRD 1996 Gremlin Interactive. Lid. Nl rights reserved. Realms of the Haunting and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Interplay is the sole publisher and distributor Licensed from and developed by Gremlin Interactive. Ltd. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners CIRCLF RFADFR SFRVICE #269 "


"The Computer Gaming World 1997 Premier Awards Mini = = = ach year, prior to the Electronic Entertainment Expo, our editors assemble for the daunting task of assessing the best games of the previous year. We're not alone. Our awards issue will hit between the Software Publishers Association's Codies (Excellence in Software Awards) and the awards from the Computer Game Developers Association. Some will suggest that our awards are (fill in the blank with \"superfluous,\" \"too political,\" or some other criticism of your own choosing), Frankly, we don't believe that our awards are superfluous in any way. We take seriously the task of determining the best in each game genre, not to mention the difficult task of choosing the Game of the Year--the one game in a given year that transcends any particular genre classification. If nothing else, the awards process allows us to look at games from a different perspective and weigh them with more rigorous criteria than in our initial review. If you can honestly say that you never considered seeing a movie after it won attention at the Academy Awards, and that you never bought a science fiction novel based on a Hugo or Nebula nomination or award, then these awards are not for you. But if you want to know what our editors, with their widely differing tastes and expertise, believe are the great products from 1996, then read on. THIVID GUUUU INTUI NU JULUI1U CGW MAY 1997 MAY 197 "


"THE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 1997 PREMIER AWARDS Game of the Year DIABLO Blizzard Entertainment he 1997 Premier Game of the Year is Blizzard Entertainment's DIABLO, designed by Erich Schaefer and David Brevik. In a secret ballot vote held prior to any deliberation on the genre nominees, the editors selected DIABLO as the clear-cut Premier Game of the Year. As such, DIABLO is the perfect example of a game that transcends its genre. As a pure role-playing game, it offers limited interaction with non-player characters, extremely simple quests, and \"Monte Haul\" level advancement. As a great game in general, DIABLO offers a simple learning curve, an intuitive interface that never gets in the way, and near-perfect play balance with artiDIENUE LV QUEST LA SNO DI ficial opponents that get stronger, smarter, more active, and more organized as you progress through the game. If you add to these accolades the fact that each of the three potential protagonists (warrior, sorcerer, or rogue) offers a distinctly different gaming experience (hand-to-hand, spellcasting, or ranged combat), you get an idea of how clever DIABLO'S design really is. The skill, attribute, and level enhancement is just rapid enough to keep you coming back for more. The randomly spawned artifacts add spicy new wrinkles to each new level. The game looks great, with its beautifully rendered monsters (taken from Gothic archetypes) and its excellent use of light sources. Then, as if all this wasn't enough, Blizzard opened a free multiplayer environment called battle.net that has already set new records in online registration. We firmly believe that DIABLO will become a major role-model for game design and implementation. For this year, DIABLO is the game that everyone will remember. CON GLINE Go online for a CGW exclusive interview with Blizzard President Allen Adham at our Web site: www.computergaming.com MAY 1997 CGW "


"THE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 1997 PREMIER AWARDS Action Game of the Year QUAKE Cid Software 1000 here were a number of good action titles this year, but none of them ushered in the future like id Software's Quake. No other game even came close to creating such a believable, immersive experience, The fully 3D, real-time engine was so good at recreating environments that when Shamblers came hurling lightning bolts at us, we actually dodged in our chairs, It's not only the graphics and dark atmosphere that draw you into QUAKE, it's the use of 3D to create situations where you must react to enemies from all three planes. In other games, you can plod through a level knowing that all the enemies will be coming at you from eye level. But in QUAKE, many nasty surprises await you from overhead arches and dark crevices. And the all-encompassing action never lets up because QUAKE has surprises as a rule, not as an exception. We could go on, but when you add the unparalleled multiplayer support (with Internet play and dynamic entry), and Quake C, the editable game code that lets you craft your own QUAKE games, you can see why Quake walked away from this contest as the undisputed winner. here were other contenders in this category, and Raider was a strong runner-up. A fresh change of pace with great 3D graphics, it gave us a strong female heroine in a game that reminded us of PRINCE OF PERSIA. Too bad TOMB RAIDER'S pacing and minor technical problems kept this contest from being a closer race. Readers' ehdice: Quake Adventure Game of the Year THE PANDORA DIRECTIVE Aocess Software ooking back on this year's adventure games, we see a genre drowning in uninspired Myst clones and dreadful \"interactive movies,\" with little innovation or creative spark. It was enough to turn an adventure gamer to QUAKE. This year's best adventures, while not particularly genre-busting, at least attempted to provide some new twists. And no game achieved as much as this year's Adventure Game of the Year, THE PANDORA DIRECTIVE. Access Software's sequel to UNDER A KILLING MOON improved on the original game in every way, offering gamers a thoroughly entertaining, well-written mystery with ample humor. Along with a better script, better acting, and better puzzles than the first game, THE PANDORA DIRECTIVE is most notable for its depth of gameplay. It's a huge, generous game, with three different paths that lead to seven possible endings. Because your choices really affect how the game proceeds, this is, for once, an interactive movie that truly is interactive. And the coup de grace is a great online hint system, which lets gamers of all types enjoy the game at whatever level of complexity they choose. nbsidian, our runner-up, was a late-entry Myst clone from Rocket Science and SegaSoft-could anything sound less promising? But with a great story, clever puzzles, psychedelic graphics, and an irreverent sense of humor, this futuristic paranoid fantasy is an unexpected delight. See our review this issue. Readers' Choice: Spycraft CGW MAY 1997 "


"WITH OVER 1.8 MILLION COPIES SOLD. COMMAND & CONQUER RED ALERT\" WAS A DIRECT HIT. THIS IS THE COUNTERSTRIKE. MISSIONS COMMAND CONCOUER RED ALERT COUNTERSTRIKE, Westwa WIN 95 & DOS CD ROM COMPANION DISK TO THE MILLION-SELLING COMMAND & CONQUER RED ALERT Counterstrike the official missions disc for Command & Conquer Red Alert. Now available. 22 Available at retailers or call 1-800-874-4607 Westwood Commandes conquer is a registered trademark of, and Command & Conquer Red Alert and Counterstrike ato hrademarks of Westwood Studios, Inc. 1997 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved STU www.westwood.com "


"THE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 1997 PREMIER AWARDS Role-Playing Game of the Year THE ELDER SCROLLS: DAGGERFALL Bethesda Softworks his year's Premier RolePlaying Game of the Year is not perfect, but it is revolutionary. Earlier computer role-playing games have had traces of what makes THE ELDER SCROLLS: DAGGERFALL great, but none have offered quite so much. Bethesda Softworks' DAGGERFALL, designed by Julian LeFay, Bruce Nesmith, and Ted Peterson, offers authentic replayability. You can randomly generate characters using a questionnaire or customize a character according to your wishes. Different character classes make for alternate routes of advancement and really make a difference in gameplay style. DAGGERFALL's first-person world also gives you visual cues for weather and time so that game time really matters. The game, comes alive as non-player characters respond to you, quests become accessible, and memberships in guilds remain available to you based on your actions. Though the game has an overarching plot, DAGGERFALL has enough imaginative mini-quests to keep devoted role-players going for a hundred hours or more without ever advancing within the main story. Even the dungeon designs are imaginative. There are curved walls, secret passages, stairways, ramps, caves complete with stalactites and stalagmites, ponds, and hidden doors galore. Each dungeon offers something different. \"he runner-up in this category is, ironically, our Game of the Year. Although it doesn't offer the depth of DAGGERFALL, Diablo provides the most exceptional \"hack and slash\" roleplaying ever and appeals to gamers outside the genre. Readers' Choice: Diablo Simulation Game of the Year JANE'S AH-64D LONGBOW Origin Systems he best simulations must strike a balance between convincing realism and entertaining gameplay, between providing a rich environment to please the experts and making this environment accessible to new players. This year's winner, Jane's AH-64D LONGBOW, strikes that magic balance. notch graphics and sound, as well as fast-reacting enemies, will have you sweating as you enter combat zones. The sim truly shines, though, with the FLASHPOINT KOREA expansion disc which adds 140+ new missions, tougher enemies, individual soldiers, the ability to fly from the Co-Pilot/Gunner seat, and better avionics. LONGBOW Gold includes both the game and the add-on disc. Veteran designer Andy Hollis and his Origin Skunkworks team not only managed to create the first truly realistic combat helicopter simulation, but they also packed it so full of realism options and tutorial information that it should please fliers of all experience levels. By itself, LONGBow does a great job of modeling both the systems of an AH-64D and the combat environment it flies in. TopThis year's runner-up came as a surprise--Empire's Flying Corps. Previous efforts from Rowan, developers of this World War sim, were heavy on graphics and light on realism. FLYING CORPS, on the other hand, sports perhaps the best flight models ever seen on a prop-based sim; only quirky views and steep performance requirements kept it from the crown. Readers' Choice: AH-G4D Longbow CGW MAY 1997 "


"ACTIVISION 7 Enter the Muscle of Sweepstakes Grand Prize 25 First Prizes: Microsoft SideWinder 3D Pro Joysticks OFFICIAL INTERSTATE 76 MUSCLE CAR! SI PLACE Electronics Boutique Exclusive! Purchase Interstate '76 at Electronics Boutique for your chance to win! Look for official sweepstakes entry forms in specially marked boxes. 25 Second Prizes: CGW Prize Packages Come to Activision on Us! compues Gaminy PLACE Three lucky entrants will visit the birthplace of Interstate '76 for the chance to win the muscle. But only one lucky winner will go home stylin'! Do Los Angeles Interstate 76 style! 50 Third Prizes: Interstate '76 Soundtrack CDs All three drawing winners (and guests) will receive round-trip coach airfare and transfers, hotel accommodations, admission to Universal Studios and dinner at the Hard Rock Cafe with members of the Interstate '76 production team! BRD PLACE Coming to a garage near you. Interstate Drive strafely. Built funk-tough on Windows 95. www.activision.com Ir Na purchase necessary. 2. Open to residents of the US and Canada, 16 years of age or older 3! Void where prohibited. 41 Enter by completing the official entry form or by sending a 3X 5* card with your name, address and phone number to. Muscle of 76 Sweepstakes, PO Box 670021, Los Angeles, CA 90067.9545.5) Entries must be received by September 5, 1997 61 One entry per household. 71 For official rules, sendo self-addressed, stomped envelope to Muscle of 76 Sweepstakes Rules, c/o Activision 11601 Wilshire Blvd. Suite 300, Los Angeles, CA 90025 Car is intended for show only and is not suitable for highway or city driving Action is a registered trademark and Interstate 76 is a trademark of Activision, Inc. 1997 Activision, Inc. Al other trademarks and trade names are the properties of their respective owners. All rights reserved. "


"THE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 1997 PREMIER AWARDS Space Simulation Game of the Year MECHWARRIOR 2: MERCENARIES Activision Muiden 996 won't be remembered as the heyday of space simulations. Our Premier Award winner and runner-up were also the only nominees. Few space combat sims were released, and most of the entries in the giant robot subgenre couldn't stand up to the 1996 winner MECHWARRIOR 2. In fact, the sequel to that game, MECHWARRIOR 2: MERCENARIES, takes the Premier Award this year. Not revolutionary by any means, MERCENARIES takes the MECH 2 formula and fine-tunes it. Designers Tim Morten and Jack Mamais set this game in the BattleMech universe's Inner Sphere, putting you in the role of a mercenary pilot for whom profit is as big a concern as basic survival. New features include texture-mapped graphics, fine-tuned combat and Al, smarter \"wingmen,\" and air support. Other additions, such as a halfhearted attempt to add a salvage element, don't quite succeed, but overall MERCENARIES is a more satisfying experience than MECH 2. MERCENARIES is also notable as one of the first major games to support free Internet play, through its MERCNET module. Although it's not as accessible as Blizzard's DIABLO, it was a bold, customer-oriented move for Activision to make. his year's runner up is Wing Commander lv: The Price of Freedom. While the between-mission video interaction has been heralded as the best attempt yet at creating a true \"interactive movie,\" the space combat scenes felt too much like playing WING COMMANDER III for the game to take the crown. Readers' Choice: MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries Sports Game of the Year NBA LIVE 97 EA Sports he Yankees, the Green Bay Packers, the Bulls, Tiger Woods, the 100th Summer Olympics-it was a great year for sports fans. The same goes for the computer sports world, where a number of companies succeeded in delivering some of the best-looking, most realistic sports simulations we've ever seen. EA Sports continues its dominance of this genre, and though this year's lineup was more flawed than usual, it did produce a couple of jewels, including our Sports from the ground up with astounding 3D graphics, a new interface, more believable stats, and best of all-multiplayer gaming, over modems and LANs, NBA LIVE 97 is an action-packed, crowd-pleasing hoops extravaganza. The game is too offense-oriented and it could use deeper player controls, but no other sports game this year (except, perhaps, NHL 97) came close to simulating the thrills of athletic competition in such an addictive and entertaining way. 6) Game of the Year, NBA LIVE 97. NBA LIVE 96 won the award last year, but the new version is actually more deserving. Rewritten ur runner up was Access Software's Links LS, which is the best-looking golf game we've seen. LINKS LS features three new courses and great new competitive options. Its screen redraws are very slow, but that didn't matter to most golf fans. Rearers' Choice: NASCAR 2 CGW MAY 1997 "


"If your software could dream... it would dream of running on a MACH V Falcon Northwest's MACH V series of custom built PCs hand crafted silicon for those who accept only the best \"Falcon Northwest took top honors in CGW's review last year, and rightfully so. Overall, the MACH V is once again about the fastest rig of the bunch this year. Windows performance was rock-solid across the board, with wins in just about every category, including 3D graphics.\" Computer Gaming World \"The Falcon MACH V provides nocompromise audio and video performance that will knock you out of your seat.\" Family PC Recommended' \"A welcome by-product of the component choices is the MACH V's excellent businessapplication performance\" \"The MACH V's Winstone 32 score[beat all 8 other 166 MHz machines, and even a Pentium 200) for first place. The Falcon beat out its 166MHz Pentium competitors on hard drive and graphics performance as well.\" Computer Shopper cu ej al al CALL TOLL FREE: 1-888-FALCON-1 or 1-800-258-6778 FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS http://www.falcon-nw.com Custom built PCs starting at $2,495 for game playing, graphics, game design or even getting some work done CIRCLE READER SERVICE #257 "


"THE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 1997 PREMIER AWARDS UU Strategy Game of the Year CIVILIZATION II Scroprosa Gap Gerry W ed ith the success of COMMAND & CONQUER and WARCRAFT II, we expected a flood of real-time strategy games, and we got them. But with a few notable exceptions, the real-time games were tepid, silly, or downright boring. Ironically, it was the and the Al was much better. From the near-impossible Deity level to the numerous help functions and elegant interface, Civ II is that rarest of games: truly accessible to both the serious or casual gamer. It sets a new standard for how to do a sequel right. turnbased games that T shone most brightly, with none more brilliant than the epic CIVILIZATION II. Sid & and Dhan Reynolds It was more than the new SVGA graphics or the deft use of multimedia film clips that held us hostage: New Wonders of the World brought different challenges, maximizing trade became more than shuffling camels, new military units were balanced by greater diplomatic options, he runner-up this year is Heroes of Might & Magic ll. The simplicity of the KING'S BOUNTY-style tactical combat is the perfect counterpoint to the surprising depth of the strategic game, and unlike HEROES I, the campaign is much more satisfying. There are more troop classes, special artifacts, larger maps, and multiplayer support for Internet as well as modem/LAN play. It was deft use of Readers' Choice: Command & Conquer: Red Alert Wargame of the Year BATTLEGROUND: SHILOH Talonsol ing of terrain features to highlight tension, such as at the Hornet's Nest; the quirky but effective gunboats; and the confusion of sending green troops into battle. In one of the best years ever for wargames, the field ultimately belonged to Talonsoft, who almost single-handedly put Civil War gaming back on the map. t wasn't long ago that serious wargames were supposedly in decline. Worse, games based on the 19th century were supposedly passé-not enough high-tech toys, you understand. It's a good thing that the folks at Talonsoft refused to jump into the sea with the rest of the lemmings, or we'd never have the joy of the BATTLEGROUND series, or this year's Wargame of the Year, BATTLEGROUND: SHILOH. Sure, there's micromanaging. And yes, there's complexity, too. But the learning curve is justified, because this is simply the best 19th-century system ever designed for a wargame-realistic, challenging, and eminently replayable. An improvement from earlier games in the series, SHILOH is quintessential BATTLEGROUND. Note the exquisite modelmaharlie Moylan moves beyond his earlier FLIGHT COMMANDER 2 with runner-up Over The Reich, a superb recreation of WWII aerial combat. Despite some quirks, the turn-based system realistically shows the capabilities of each aircraft. Dogfights are fun, particularly over the Internet, but the real appeal of this game lies in the campaigns, where developing your individual pilots is almost a role-playing game in itself. Readers' Choice: Age of Rifles CGW MAY 1997 "


"Weve got youtve got the balls Time travel and pinball m one table Thorman timeshockl empire RO PINBALL INTERACTIVE EMPIRE INTERACTIVE: 13220 WISTERIA DRIVE, BAY N-2, GERMANTOWN, MD 20874 TEL. NO. 800-216-9706 www.empire.us.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #362 "


"THE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 1997 PREMIER AWARDS DIE Baku Baku Animal pton Heb O Classic/Puzzle Game of the Year BAKU BAKU Sega AKU BAKu took a bite out of our productivity when it first arrived, and has managed to gobble several weekends since. The game has you frantically matching up clamoring animals with their favorite chow, thus clearing blocks off the board. Whatever you remove is then dumped on your opponent. Playing against the computer fine-tunes your skills, but nothing beats stomping all over your real-life buddies in two-player mode. BAKU BAKU gains points for reinventing a classic game (TETRIS), with an amusing new spin. The beauty of this game, however, lies in its ability to suck you in and keep you coming back for more and more. If you haven't already tried it, beware: BAKU BAKU will eat up your time, ur runner up, Smart Games, OFSED Inc.'s Smart Games Challenge #1, is an inspired collection of every brain teaser imaginable. Puzzles include old favorites-word searches, anagrams, sliding tiles, and pegjumping games-along with innovative word translation exercises and brain-busting IQ tests. The graphics, while not particularly flashy, do their job well, spicing up the oldies and adding originality to the whole package. SMART Games promises puzzle fans an excellent mental work-out. Readers' Choice: Monty Python, Quest for the Holy Grail Best Enhancement of an Existing Game WARCRAFT II: BEYOND THE DARK PORTAL two campaigns very Blizzard Entertainment different—and much harder. There were a number of excellent enhancements this year, What really cinched it for us, though, were the Legendary but WARCRAFT II: BEYOND THE DARK PORTAL was the best. A Heroes, who added new strategies and excitement to the game. million-plus WARCRAFT II fans wanted harder missions and more multiplayer maps, and Blizzard delivered with two icroProse's Civilization | Scenarios: Conflicts in entirely new campaigns, Civilization added some a slew of multiplayer very challenging and scenarios, and the exciting scenarios to bonus Legendary this great strategy Heroes. Blizzard even title, and offered addressed the primary even more flexiconcerns of WARCRAFT ble game veterans by making the options. eta Hardware Achievement of the Year (TIE) DIAMOND'S MONSTER 3D & ORCHID'S RIGHTEOUS 3D goes to the two graphics boards based on 3Dfx's Voodoo chipset, Diamond's Monster 3D and Orchid's Righteous 3D. These boards' superlative performance left us wowed. in 1996 PC gaming hardware set new standards for graphic realism, in most cases surpassing the console versions of the same games. 3Dfx has been instrumental in taking 3D graphics to the next level, delivering both a well-rounded 3D rendering feature set and outstanding performance for a wide variety of gaming titles. Along with co-nominee Rendition, 3Dfx has set the Monster 3D standard by which all other 3D graphics hardware will be measured in 1997. For overall no-holds-barred blistering 3D performance, our awards Monster 3D DIAMOND Ady Kirse orce-feedback for game controllers was the other major hardware innovation of 1996. Our runner-up is the CH Prouucts Force FIX Righteous 3D Joystick, which brings yet another level of immersion to titles like WARBIRDS, AIR WARRIOR II, JETFIGHTER III, and NEED FOR SPEED SE. CGW MAY 1997 "


"Are you ready for the Apocalypse? = \"This card most certainly rocks.\" -Boot, April '97 \"...Apocalypse 3D is the most powerful, affordable and downright desirable 3D games technology...\" -CGW, Jan '97(UK) \"The VideoLogic Apocalypse 3D will revolutionize your games playing.\" --PC Answers, Jan '97 \"Apocalypse 3D from VideoLogic really sets the standard.\" -PC Advisor, Feb '97 \"An awesome card.\" -PC Home, Jan '97 Apocalypse 3D \"Apocalypse 3D delivers incredible 3D performance.\" -Boot, Mar '97 \"*****\" -Computer Life, Mar '97(UK) Explosive Acceleration for 3D Games $199 MSRP Arcade So you have an awesome gaming PC; but you re still looking at pathetic 2D or free D? Supercharge your games with Apocalypse 3D. The hottest PCI 3D graphics accelerator, period. 4 MB MECUWARB/0821 pocalypse 3D This is the dawn of high-res and high frame rates with full z-buffered 32-bit on chip hidden surface removal, real time shadows, light volume rendering, transparency and fogging effects. Ultim@te Race\" by Kalisto Get MechWarrior 2 and Ultim@te Race FREE WITH YOUR PURCHASE! Awesome 4 MB o dedicated 3D Texture Memory totally rocks all Direct 3D and PowerVR games! Videologic VideoLogic Tiger Direct (800) 578-5644 (800) 292-7218 MechWarrior2 by Activision WWW.VIDEOLOGIC.COM CIRCLE READER SERVICE #292 POWERVR "


"THE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 1997 PREMIER AWARDS Special Award for Artistic Achievement THE NEVERHOOD DreamWorks Interactive he one game this year that we couldn't wait to show our friends and family was a refreshing and charming THE NEVERHOOD. Quite simply, this was the coolest-looking change of pace-a game game of the year. Developed by Doug TenNapel (creator that reveled in its own exagof EARTHWORM JIM) and The Neverhood design group, and pubgerated, fantastically goofy lished by DreamWorks Interactive, THE style, with no NEVERHOOD is a monumental artistic concession achievement--a wondrous, self-conwhatsoever to tained universe sculpted from more real life. Adding to the game's charm was one of than three tons of clay. Clay! In a year the best musical scores of the year, a jazzy/bluesy when everyone in the industry was soundtrack that perfectly complemented the touting 3D realism, THE NEVERHOOD was game's graphic look. Viva Klaymen! Special Award for Online-Enabling Technology KALI t started as a little www.kali.net, pay a oneproject to enable gamers to play Doom over the Internet. It time $20 registration fee, and you can play most DOS and, grew into Kali, perhaps the most significant milestone so Windows 95 games that support local-area networks over the far in the nascent online gaming industry. There are no serInternet. You're also entitled to a lifetime of free upgrades. vices to sign up for, no Of course, one of the big challenges in multiplayer gaming is BONDEGAN monthly charges, no finding someone to play with. Kali's chat interface makes the watching the clock process simpler by letting you \"talk\" with potential allies and during a game, and no victims. KALI servers have popped up all over the world, many searching for a service geared towards specific games such as MECHWARRIOR 2 or spethat has the games cific genres such as flight sims. you want to play. The technical aspects of Kali alone are enough to earn our Simply download the award, but the low price free upgrades, and unlimited play program from cement the decision. Hats off to creator Jay Cotton! Special Award for Technological Achievement QUAKE ENGINE id Software Then you've written engines for WOLFENSTEIN 3D and Doom, what weapons to an A-10 you can fly around in do you do for an encore? Simple, you do QUAKE. to pick off fellow DeathMatchers. The amazing complexity of QUAKE's engine is any Mercenary hackers aren't the only ones thing but simple, but not only did John to take the QUAKE engine Carmack and Mike Abrash deliver the most HROBOTSCHCUO ON LTVELLOW-BOT to new places. Several comJohn Camack visually stunning first-person shooter ever, panies including Raven, Rogue, Hipnotic they wrote an engine whose extensibility and John Romero's lon Storm have games seems limited only by the imagination of the in development based on Quake's engine, hackers creating new levels, models, skins, The engine has also seen enhancements and sounds for QUAKE. We've seen add-ons thanks to 3D hardware from Rendition and on the various QUAKE sites that have sprung 3Dfx. Id's recent version of GLQUAKE has up on the Web ranging from new diabolical spectacular 3D graphics features. BROWN_BOT CHERED ON REDOUT HOOMSTICK CGW MAY 1997 "


"ACTIVISION ACTIVISION PRESENTS "


"DoN'T L  . SOMETHING IMMENSE LOOMS ON THE HORIZON. A FUTURE MORE DEVASTATING THAN THE SURROUNDING CIVIL WAR. A HISTORY GRANDER THAN THE HEAVY GEAR WAR MACHINE. A UNIVERSE ONLY THE PRODUCERS OF THE #1 -SELLING, 3-D COMBAT SIM CAN TAKE YOU TO. DON'T LOOK BACK. WHAT LIES AHEAD IS FAR TOO IMMENSE. O 1997 DREAM POD 9. INC. AND TARGET GAMES. AB. BASED ON THE HEAVY GEAR UNIVERSE CREATED AND OWNED BY DREAM POD 9. INC. ACTIVISION IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARE "


"ACIVISION THE NEW BREED. HEAVY GEAR 1 COMING THIS WINTER. OFFICIAL HEAVY GEAR UNTYERSE -CTIVISION, INC.  1997 ACTIVISION, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. ACTIVISION, INC.  1997 AUCTIVISION.COM HHH. ACTIVISION.  CIRCLE READER SERVICE #140 "


"HER 1997 Raven Software Corporation. All Rights Reserved. Id Software Code contained within HEXFYA NO 1996 id Software, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Daycloped by Raven Software Corporation Published by Md Software, Inc. Distributed by Activision, Inc. under sublicense. HEKENT is a trademark of Raven Software Corporation. The id Software name is a trademark of software, Inc. The id Software logo is a registered trademark of id Software, Inc. Quake is a registered trademark of ld Soliware, Inc. Activision is a registered trademark of Activision, Inc. All other trademarks and trade memes are the properties of their respective owners. a tres "


"ACTIVISION All the evil of Hexen,\" built on all the power of Quake. Hexen \". CIRCLE READER SERVICE #141 "


">YOU ARE STANDING IN AN OPEN FIELD WEST OF R WHITE HOUSE... since 1979, Millions of adventurers have become LOST In the creat underground Empire OF Zork. THEY Haven't been sane since. "


"ACTIVISION EIGHTeen years later, The magic Lives on... unless the grand inquisitor Destroys magic forever. ZORK crand inQUISITOR Grand Openinc. Fali. 1997 Arlivisional Zorkaren aksaml Zarko 2002 HIVision Inc. All right red, www.activision.com TORINO math of All In CIRCLE READER SERVICE #142 "


"ONLY ONE WILL DOMINATE THE STRATEGY WARS PLAYERCONTROLLABLE UNIT R1 Give specific orders to each unit. Determine each unit's behavior in combat. Place a unit on sentry duty or have it harass the enemy. Preset complex pathways and waypoints to coordinate several different attacks all at once. BATTLEGROUNC REALISM Hide units behind hills or in dense forests. Climt to higher terrain to improve your view of surrounding territory. Realistic terrain dynamically affects unit movement, so units mov faster downhill and slowe through swamps. "


"ACTIVISION PREPARE FOR THE REIGN. DARK REIGO THE FUTURE OF WAR WBARK REIGN: ACTIVISION'S NEW CEC KILLER.\" -Computer Gaming World See the future this Spring. www.activision.com REVOLUTIONARY FEHTURES Create your own maps and missions with the advanced construction kit. Create multiplayer alliances on the Internet by sharing resources, units and intelligence. Other features include gigantic playing maps and never-beforeseen units. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #148 SABUNLEYE Activision is a registered trademark and Dark Reign: The Future of War is a trademark of Activision, Inc. O 1997 Activision, Inc. All rights reserved. All other trademarks and trade names are the properties of their respective owners, "


"Toda y... I will fortify my island. I will... annihilate opposing forces. I will... rule the skies. "


"ACTIVISION It's really different out here. NETSTORM ISLANDS WAR This Summer, real-time action strategy reaches new heights — with groundbreaking Internet warfare. Activision is a registered trademark and NetSom is a trademark of Activision, Inc.  1997 Activision, Inc. Titanic and the Titanic logo are trademarks ol Titanic Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. www.activision.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #147 "


"XXXXX H STUDENT -XXXXX-Mnchen Glodbach n A Roelting Neerpelt XXXX BR. SECOND DEMPSEY Antwerp XIS ALPERT CANAL Heinsberg XXXX Linnich CAN FIRST CRERAR Wulich LXXXI Ghen (16 Dec. 16 Noosilch XXXX NINTH EMPSON Brussels Louring O XXXXX Tongres XXXX FIRST NWETSEN atsevmidt 21 MONTGOMERY 129 Des HODGES ** Eupen agem Woire 20 Vervies for chau . Schle X Gembloux Mexie_R LXVII BRY HORROCKS Andenne VII COLLINS os Sisserts Ciney Honor Dinant wyorche r s Celtes 32 20 s Maubeuge Roche Moe, en Laroche BecumontHoullelis Noosburg 2012 Xxxxx (20 Dec ) Neufchateau Martelangs 2261-) Bouillon MIDOLETON MILLIKU Semois Arlon EDDY XXX Erieren Sedon Luzombour Moalcorne! Virion THIRD PATTON Monimedy SHAEF EISENHOWER 92 fle-19 Dec.) Longuyon -XXXX Thionville XXXXX AO xy 12 BRADLEY . Reims verdun ACTIVISION IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF ACTIVISION, INC. O 1997 ACTIVISION, INC. SCREAMIN' DEMONS OTER EUROPE IS A TRADEMARK OF PARSOFT INTERACTIVE "


"ACTIVISION THE ARDENNES AREA O THE ARDENNES AREA 1944 PRECISION FLYING. AUTHENTIC MANEUVERS. EXACT COORDINATES. SCALE OF ONLY YOUR DEATH IS SIMULATED. Shado siegburg M i egels Never before has a physics model duplicated military piloting so accurately to create a WWII Hohn Remager Remagere LINK flight sim that screams precision. With realistic Neuweid in buco DIETRICH XXXXX S Coblenz flight dynamics and revolutionary \"live\" environOB WEST RUNDSTEDT Mayer 1 e ments, the experience is as authentic as hell. UFFEL Screamin' Demons the next elevation in flight Sex Binge realism from Eric \"Hellcats\" Parker. Boa KIVI nocna XXXX SEVENTH NDENFESSER XXXXX BALCK WE HUNSRCK MTS Keiserlautern LI XXXX FIRST OBSTFELDER erzia SCREAMIN' DEMONS OVER EUROPE Homburg Sporlautern TM Soorbrcken Pirmasens Sarreguemines wold/ ULTRA-REALISTIC WWII DOGFIGHT SIM CONFRONT YOUR DEMONS THIS SUMMER. PS MERACITE 97 PARSOFT INTERACTIVE. ALL RIGUTS RESERVED. ALL OTHER TRADEMARKS AND TRADE NAMES ARE THE PROPERTIES OF THEIR RESPECTIVE OWNERS. WWW.ACTIVISION.COM CIRCLE READER SERYICE #144 "


"V ou desire vengeance. You lust for 1 blood. You are Kain. Your enemies killed you in the ultimate act of treachery. But through the blackest of sorcery, you have returned...as a vampire. For sustenance, you must Feast upon the blood of the living. For revenge, you will exach the darkest of fates upon your murderers. Indulge Your Morbid Fantasies... Journey hundreds of miles through the depraved lands of Nosgoth as you hungrily slaughter your adversaries in real-time combat. Morpl into Woll, Bat, Vampire or Mist in the epic RPG that will satiate even your most disturbing appetites. Submit to the hunger. Surrender to Blood Omen. Activision is a registered trademark of Activision, Inc. Blood Omen: Legacy of Kain and Crystal Dynamics are tradum "


"ACTIVISION You Sick Bastard, BLOOD OMEN LEGACY KAIN (CRYSTAL DYNAMICS The Epic Role Playing Game. Coming this fall. Dynamics, Inc.  1996. 1997 Crystal Dynamics, Inc. Distributed by Activision under license. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #145 explore the carnage at www.athiuisim.com or www.crystate.com "


"ACTIVISION thebest trip. You Can and still remember how you got home \"Perhaps the most desperately anticipated sequel since Civilization 2.\" -Noxt Generation Take a mind-altering voyage to the bizarro planet Twinsun as the quixolc alien-adventurer, Twinsen. Converse with elephants, assault hot-dog people and save the planet from the Dark Monk in bedullfully hallucinogenic environments. Try it. It's the most fun you can have without a designated driver In orbit this Summer. twinsen's dyssey The sequel to Relentless (Little Big Adventuro) from the creator of Alone In The Dark and Time Commando. Activision is tegistered trademark of Activision, Inc. Adeline Software International and Twinsen's Odymoy w/o lrodenils Adilen Sollwereldernotional.  1997 Adeline Sollware International. All tights reserved. Published and distributed by Activision, Inc. Al other trademarks and trade names are the properties of their respective owners. www.activision.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #146 "


"LOYD CASE TECHNOLOGY tech LOCE MMX: Stand and Deliver ach Real Performance Gains Despite a Heap of Hype by Loyd Case What's is easy to become jaded and cynical when you hang around the technology game for a long time. Every year is the year of the almighty hype,\" where something appears on the horizon with great fanfare, only to either be perpetually delayed or slink off into the Sargasso Sea of dead technology trends. Every now and then, though, I'm caught off guard and (pleasantly) surprised when something that's been launched with great expectations comes close to actually meeting them. One such technology is MMX even more interesting about P55C is the overall performance improvement, not just the addition of MMX. pentium GAMING FOR THE MASSES There has been a lot of discussion, both positive and negative, about MMX. For hard-core gamers with lots of clisposable income to spend on the latest and greatest hardware, MMX may not bring that much to the table. What's exciting to me, though, is what MMX does for the ordinary gamer. While I'm personally always pushing the edge of the envelope in my own systems, I also like to see really cool, high performance games with great graphics and effects run on your everyday, off-the-shelf PC. I've always thought that people such as my brotherin-law, who would blanch at the idea of opening his PC to install a 3D graphics accelerator, should still be able to have a good time with NASCAR 2. That's what MMX allows you to do NEW PLUMBING EXAMINED Let's dive into some of the innards of an MMX processor and see just what makes it tick. The official moniker is the Pentium Processor with MMX Technology-quite a mouthful so I usually refer to it by the Intel part code: P55C (the classic, preMMX Pentium Processor was the P54C). The P55C has 4.5 million transistors in a low-power, CMOS chip. The classic Pentium had 3.3 million transistors, and used a semiconductor technology called BiCMOS, which tends to run a bit warmer than CMOS. The P55C is a split voltage CPU, meaning that it runs internally at 2.8 volts while the external connections run at 3.3 volts. Older Pentiums run at 33 volts inside and out (laptop CPUs are a bit different, but I'll ignore them here). This means that older motherboards won't support a P55C, even with a BIOS update. If you have an older motherboard, however, you're not out of luck, since Intel will be shipping MMX overdrive chips with built-in voltage regulation for older systems fairly soon. But MMX aside, P55C offers several notable architectural enhancements which will help speed overall performance: MAY 1997 CGW "


"LOYD CASE WinBench 97 High-End Graphics Winmark at 1024x768 P54C/200 Winheirishwa maghan 1024x768-P54C/200D P55C/200 TECHNOLOGY Speed Freak 25.6 Depth 8-Bit 31.9 22.4 16-Bit 0103 26.6 0 30 5 10 15 20 25 Graphics WinMarks Because of its architectural enhancements, the P55C with MMX outpaces the P54C in CPU performance. It also delivers a favorable bump in 2D graphics performance. The P55C doubles the Level 1 cache from 16KB to 32KB, which keeps more data close at hand for faster access. It also adds another stage to the instruction pipeline, which allows an additional instruction to be pipelined for execution. WinBench 97 CPUMark Scores IP54C/200 P55C/200 379 CPU Mark32 418     383 CPU Mark16 424 100 400 500 200 300 CPU Marks The internal (also known as Level 1) cache size has been doubled to 32KB, from the previous size of 16KB. In addition, the instruction pipeline has been increased one step, which allows CPU instructions to line up, ready for execution, rather than having to be fetched from memory every time the next one is needed for use. Deeper write buffers have also been added, which improve performance when writing to memory. Finally, the P55C has better branch prediction, meaning that it's better able to predict what the next instruction will be. All of these changes have yielded improved performance when compared to the classic Pentium running at the same clock rate. Table I shows that CPUMark 16 and CPUMark 32 performance increases about 10 percent going from a P54C to a P55C. Graphics Winmarks are even more interesting, with Winbench 97 results boosted between 25-32 percent. BUT WHAT DOES MMX DO FOR GAMES? Intel has added 57 new instructions that make matrix math instruction much easier to use. Matrix math is often used in various multimedia applications, such as graphics, video, and audio. More importantly, though, is Intel's use of Single Instruction, Multiple Data, or SIMD (pronounced \"sim-d\"), which allows a single MMX instruction to operate on several pieces of data that are loaded in a packed format into the MMX registers. In order to speed up the process of bringing the P55C to market, Intel chose to have MMX instructions share the registers in the Pentiums floating point unit, which can theoretically cause delays when switching from MMX mode to floating point mode. But most game developers ! spoke with who used both MMX and floating point code said the mode switch was a minor problem at worst. I spoke with several developers about the process of developing MMX games. On the issuc of mixing floating point with MMX code, Neall Verheyde of Radical Games noted that a lot of floating point code is used in the 3D routines for THE DIVIDE's software reenderer, but then the data is converted to fixed point data and rendered using MMX-or standard Pentium instructions, if MMX isn't available. THE DIVIDE can use 3D hardware accelerators via Direct3D, and actually lets you specify which rendering engine to use in its setup program. So, 1 was able to check out performance and image quality between the various renderers. The P55C without 3D acceleration seemed to run quite well, with good frame rates during action scenes (although there wasn't a built-in frame rate counter). The image quality of the 3D accelerated version, using either a Rendition Vérité-based card or a 3Dfx accelerator, was much better, however. One casily noticed difference in image quality was the use of bilinear filtering when using hardware acceleration 98 CGW MAY 1997 "


"MIETINIE Arcade powo at 30+ fps MATROX 2D Speed Terracide 011MYSTIQUE (2015 d \"The fastest, most complete low cost 3D card you can PC Computing buy. Period.\"PC Computing Dec '96. WINBENCH 97 Business Graphics Test 10242768 @ 8 bit TX0002 de 20) 199 910 081709 10 Matraz Mystique Diomond Stealth 30 2000XL ATI 30 Xpressica+PCZTY Creative 3D Blester Pan Moltox Mystique Creative 30 Blaster POS ATI 30 Xpressica+PC2TY Free Destruction Derby 2 oors puolito 110110 Do you crave over 30 fps bone crushing speed for your 3D games? Looking for the fastest Windows and video performance? Then power up your Pentium with the award winning Matrox Mystique graphics accelerator now with a new low price and the option to upgrade to 8 MB! Highest performance for MMX Mystique's mind altering speed is a combination of fast SGRAM memory, unique scatter gather PCI bus mastering and a fully optimized 64-bit design. With all these advanced features, you'll be ready to fly, blast or tunnel your way through exciting 3D game titles, like Tomb Raider at over 30 fps. Be sure to check out our web site for the latest speed tested games! What's more your DOS games will also be faster than ever. And your most demanding Windows and video applications will scream onto your screen at hallucinogenic speed. Free Mech Warrior 2 And now, Mystique pushes the limits even further with its new Matrox Rainbow Runner Studio companion card. Play your favorite PC games on a big screen TV. Edit your home movies right on your PC. Grab or send video images over the Net, and much more! Matrox's over 200 awards and twenty years experience in delivering breakthrough technology to customers such as Compag, Dell, Hewlett Packard and IBM means you're getting the most innovative and reliable solution for your home. Matrox Mystique is what you need to power your PC into the 21st century. Now Free Scorched Planet  $149* Free software. $200 value!\" MYSTIQUE DESTRUCTION LUILLA MECH WARRIOR2 SCORCHED ME MPLE ACTIVISION CRITERION PSYGNOSIS 600 matrox 1-800-362-9349 http://www.matrox.com/mga mation * Estimated street price for 2 MB. **Game bundle available with retail version only. Winbench 97 tests conducted by Matrox Graphics Inc. on a Gateway 200Mhz MMX system with 32 MB of SDRAM and 512K caclou. WinBonch 97 Business Graphics conducted at 1024x768 @ 8bit with 75Hz vertical refresh under Microsoft Windows 95. Matrox Mystique, ATI 30 Xpression + PC2TV, Diamond Stealth 30 2000XL and Creative 30 Blaster PCI were configured with 4 MB of memory for the PCI bus using driver release 3.41, 3.03, 4.03.00.3105 and 1.01 respectively. Terracide test performed on Pentium 200Mhz system, 16MB SDRAM, 256k cache. Average frame rate using Comdex Bela version of Terracide. 640x480 @16bpo, bilinear filtering off. Same scene used for all tests. Terracido is a trademark of Endos Interactive, CIRCLE READER SERVICE #259 "


"T COMMAND, YOU OBEY EVERYBODY GETS WHAT THEY DESERVE. PUPPET Asu http://www.playmatestoys.com Created by Kronos Digital Entertainment, Inc. 1997 Kronos Digital Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Artwork and design  1997 Playmates Interactive Entertainment, Inc. PIE is a registered trademark of Playmates Interactive Entertainment Inc. All rights reserved. "


"SPENDIS MATES PIE PC CD-ROM 220* OR MONOS GALEMAK SU CIRCLE READER SERVICE #136 "


"LOYD CASE TECHNOLOGY LAB NOTES mixing MMX and floating point code, Sweeney scoffed at the idea \"I am actually surprised about the amount of fuss over this issue, because MMX is a paradigm shift (scalar to SIMD programming) and developers should be exploring its new possibilities, rather than whining about it not supporting their favorite old programming tricks.\" One area of confusion is 3D accelerators. Here's the word: Don't throw away that 3D accelerator. In the upcoming title from Epic, UNREAL, Tim Sweeney noted that the frame rates would be about 25percent slower than the Rendition-based accelerators and about half the speed of a 3Dfx accelerator. However, he also suggested that the image quality of the software-only version would be nearly as good. Almost every game programmer! spoke with said that MMX would complement a good 3D accelerator. ic lighting effects. For example, FASTVID: YOU ASKED FOR IT, YOU GOT IT an orange glow around a corner We've been getting pegged with tons of requests in the dark might indicate that for John Hinckley's FastVid utility for Pentium Pro an enemy using a jetpack was systems, which turns on certain Pro-specific feanearby. Implementing these tures to boost graphic performance. John's currentkinds of effects in software ly working on a commercial version of FastVid, due without using 3D acceleration out sometime soon, and we'll post the demo on our would have been impossible, as Web site. Meanwhile, you can download the current the non-MMX frame rates indiFastVid from the Hacks Utilities and Bargains (HUB) cate. Fenris is also using MMX area of our Web site (www.zdnet.com/gaming/ to add a new twist to RMR. library/hub.html). Check out the HUB for the skinny speech recognition. You'll be on emerging technologies, tons of other really cool able to speak basic commands utilities, and pointers to the latest drivers for your into your sound card's microhardware peripherals. phone for weapons changes, level status, and other comHowever, Servan Keondjian, Direct3D's mands. Again, without MMX technology, chief architect, noted that in the future, this feature could well drag RMR's frame the MMX renderer will be capable of rate to a crawl. bilinear filtering in software. In addition, Using MMX doesn't always buy the MMX Direct3D rendering algo increased performance, because the posrithms allow support for 16-bit, RGB sible performance gain is dependent on color, rather than the current software what you're trying to accomplish. For renderer's \"ramp\" mode, which doesn't example, TIGERSHARK is a 3D action handle color well. game being ported from the PlayStation The project leader for the science ficto the PC. Erik Dyke, project manager tion racing game POD noted that MMX for TIGERSHARK, noted that they initially enabled them to do a whole host of addibrought over 8-bit (256-color) graphics tional effects in software. For example, all for the PC port. Porting the 256-color of the audio effects, including full Dolby version to MMX code bought them no Surround Sound, are done with MMX increase in frame rate, and seemed a code. In addition, using MMX technolo waste of time. Then they redid their artgy enabled the project group to squeeze a work in 16-bit color--and the frame rate 20 percent faster frame rate out of their stayed the same. In other words, they graphics engine. paid no performance penalty when Another MMX-enhanced game is increasing the color depth to get better Fenris Wolf's REBEL MOON RISING, a 3D looking graphics. shooter which handles 3D animation in Tim Sweeney, chairman of Epic much the style of DUKE NUKEM 3D and Megagames, noted that using MMX other Doom-like games. On the means programmers really need to P55C/200 system, we were seeing frame rethink the way they write code. He rates ranging from 14-24 frames per sec noted that «An asscmbly programmer ond (fps), depending on the action and would rarely think of multiplying numscene complexity. However, when we bers, since adding is much faster. MMX turned off MMX support, the frame rate changes all of that, because the MMX dropped down to 6-7 fps, making the instructions are inherently both fast and game unplayable. complex. For example, PMULADD perTheodore Beale, lead designer for forms four multiplications and two addiREBEL MOON RISING, noted that, unlike tions, all in 12 clock cycle, if properly DUKE and many other 3D action games, pipelined. The equivalent instruction RMR uses full 16-bit color throughout sequence on a non-MMX machine and runs at a minimum resolution of would require almost 50 clock cycles.\" 640x400. Using 65,000 colors allowed the When asked to comment about the programmers to implement some dramatpotential performance penalty when RAISING THE BAR My first look at these carly games was encouraging in another respect: gameplay. While not all of the games using MMX technology are in genres I'm fond of, they seem to be well done and play pretty well. REBEL MOON RISING adds some innovative touches to the 3D shooter genre, with more complex missions (hostage rescue missions, escort missions, and defend area missions) than the classic if-it-moves-kill-it 3D shooter. Pods atmospheric effects make the game a reasonably entertaining racing game. THE DIVIDE takes a classic genre, the action side-scroller, and reformulates it in 3D, complete with moving camera and slick animation on the part of the 'Mech-style main character. These may not be the best of class in their respective genres, but they are at least solid efforts. By the end of 1997, all new systems sold-ranging from laptops to multiprocessor Pentium Pros will have MMX-technology embedded. On top of that, Intel's competition, in the form of Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) and Cyrix, will be building MMX into their next generation processors as well, all of which bodes well for gamers of every stripe and budget. the CGW MAY 1997 "


"of Graphics Memory 4 MB Order Intense 3D 100 Direct! Call 1-800-692-8069 INTENSE TM 100 BY INTERGRAPH Unleash a BY 3D Graphics Meltdown! BEFORE FTER Graphics options for ~30fps Fast action and stunning realism that's the promise of new 3D games and edutainment software. But if your Super Star Fighter jerks along instead of zooming and your \"terrifying monsters are glaringly pixelated — face it. You're not having much fun. Don't just play it... Live it! With an Intergraph Intense 3D 100 graphics accelerator on your PC, expect 'a fabulous new interactive experience! Free! Full version of Rendition Ready\" IndyCar Il, CD-ROM shareware version of Rendition Ready Quake\", and trial versions of Monster Truck Madness and Hellbender\" 300 03953 18000 16357 300 3955 012535 185 IndyCar Il with SVGA Graphics Notice the jagged lines and edges and the flat, dull colors. Where's the crowd? What are those blocky things in the background? Are you really into this race? IndyCar II with Intense 3D 100 Graphics Now you're racing! See the detail on the next car. Watch those rearview mirrors that's real 3D! Notice the crowd in the stands and the mountains in the background. And how about that sky! Want to know more? Call 1-800-763-0242 or reach us on the Internet at www.intergraph.com/ics/i3d100. rendition pie... Y Internal and the l eadiloare o ral trademarks and Case 3 satrakmark fuprapli Metester Truck dues and Idendor are trade marks of Microsoft Casquette Nation Ready batranko Rendition oc u lis registered trademark of Paris ketralanarki Soare Oder brands and product names are trademarks of their respective owners. O rigt 1977 Interruph Cuprato, alle 1.550KL AX970018 INTERGRAPH "


"THERE ARE SOME THINGS FASTER THAN A MICRON MILLENNIA. Jinside) pentium POWER RESET MICRON MILLENNIA MKE "


"THE LATEST TECHNOLOGY AT THE BEST PRICES. From high-end, workstation-level performance. To dazzling displays of multimedia power. To full-featured desktops with built-in affordability. The Millennial family offers you an enlightening combination of stand-out performance and the most sought-after features to suit any budget. On top of all that, your Millennia comes with the Micron commitment to product excellence. One that's been honored with over 200 awards in the past two years, including PC World's Best Overall PC Company for Service and Reliability. Add to this an industry-leading 5-year warranty, and you'll know why Micron PCs are made to move-very, very quickly. Call or visit our Web site today. MMX intel MICRON MILLENNIA Mxe P166 512KB pipeline burst cache, flash BIOS 16V EIDE variable speed CD ROM drive, 3.5 floppy drive 100MB Tomega Zip drive 32 voice wavetable stereo sound card and speakers PCI 64 bit 3D video, MPEG, 4MB EDO RAM Toohree minitower or desktop Microsoft Mouse, 104 key keyboard Microsoft Windows 95 and MS Plus! CD Multimedia Xcitement Pak: POD, Adobe PhotoDeluxe, Billboard Music Guide, Blockbuster Entertainment Guide and Eraser Tumabout 5-year/3-year limited Micron Powerwarranty MICRON MILLENNIA Mxe P200 PLUS 512KB pipeline burst cache, flash BIOS PCI 32 bit Ultra SCSI Fast-20 controller 12X SCSI CD ROM drive, 3.5\" floppy drive 100MB lomega Zip drive 32 voice wavetable stereo sound card and speakers PCI 64-bit 3D video, MPEG, 4MB EDO RAM TooHfree minitower or desktop Microsoft Mouse, 104-key keyboard Microsoft Windows 95 and MS Plus! CD Multimedia Xcitement Pak: POD, Adobe PhotoDeluxe, Billboard Music Guide, Blockbuster Entertainment Guide and Eraser Tumabout 5-year/3-year limited Micron Power warranty inside pentium $1.899 Bus.lease $65/mo. Bus. lease $88/mo. GHT FOR INSTANCE Intel 166MHz Pentium processor with MMXTM technology 16MB EDO RAM 2.1GB EIDE hard drive 15\" Micron 15FGx, .28dp (13.7\" display) Microsoft Office CDs Intel 166MHZ Pentium processor with MMX 32MB EDO RAM 3.1GB EIDE hard drive 15\" Micron 15FGx, 28dp (13.7\" display) Microsoft Office CDs Intel 166MHz Pentium processor with MMX 64MB EDO RAM 4.1GB EIDE hard drive 17\" Micron 17FGx,.26dp (15.8\"display) Microsoft Office CDs Intel 200MHz Pentium processor with MMX 16MB EDO RAM 2GB Ultra SCSI hard drive 15\" Micron 15FGx, .28dp (13.7\" display) Microsoft Office CDs Intel 200MHz Pentium processor with MMX 32MB EDO RAM 4GB Ultra SCSI hard drive 15\" Micron 15FGx, 28dp (13.7'display) Microsoft Office CDs Intel 200MHz Pentium processor with MMX 64MB EDO RAM 9GB Fast SCS-2 hard drive 17\" Micron 17FGx,.26dp (15.8' display) Microsoft Office CDs Bus.lease S102/mo. Bus, lease $71/mo. $2,599 Bus. lease $139/mo. Bus, lease $88/mo. MICRON MILLENNIALXA P166 512KB pipeline burst cache, flash BIOS 12X EIDE CD-ROM drive, 3.5' floppy drive 16-bit stereo sound card and speakers PCI 64-bit 3D video, MPEG, 2MB EDO RAM Tool-free minitower or desktop Microsoft Mouse, 104-key keyboard Microsoft Windows 95 and MS Plus! CD Microsoft Works CD 5-year/3-year limited Micron Power warranty pentium MICRON MILLENNIA PRO2 200 Supports dual Intel 200MHz Pentium Pro processors 256KB internal L2 cache, flash BIOS 12X EIDE CD ROM drive. 3.5\" floppy drive 16-bit stereo sound and speakers PCI 64-bit 3D video, MPEG, 4MB EDO RAM Tool-free minitower or desktop PENTIUM:PRO Microsoft Mouse, 104-key keyboard Microsoft Windows 95 and MS Plus! CD 5-year/3-year limited Micron Power warranty Intel 200MHz Pentium Pro processor 16MB EDO RAM 3.1GB EIDE hard drive 15\" Micron 15FGx, .28dp (13.7\" display) Bus. lease $75/mo. Microsoft Office CDs Intel 200MHz Pentium Pro processor 32MB EDO RAM 4.1GB EIDE hard drive 17\" Micron 17FGx, .26dp (15.8' display) Bus. lease $88/mo. Microsoft Office CDs $2,199 Bus, lease $51/mo. Intel 166MHz Pentium processor 16MB EDO RAM 2.1GB EIDE hard drive 15\" Micron 15FGx, .28dp (13.7\" display) Intel 166MHz Pentium processor 32MB EDO RAM 4.1GB EIDE hard drive 17\" Micron 17FGX, 26dp (15.8\" display) $1,499 $1,999 $2.599 Bus. lease $68/mo. MICRON POWER WARRANTY  SWITCITY  3 y rysten . 120 3 yecto Maronttinen  30 M .coles Cocinas con NON sonry  30 26 .cort CALL NOW FOR DETAILED PRICING AND OPTIONS Maron Sales Hours: Mon-Fri 6am-10pm Sat 7am-5pm (MT). Technical Support Available 24 Hours A Day 7 Days A Week Tolfree from Mexico: 95-800-708-1755 Tolfree from Canada 800-708-1758. Tolfree from Puerto Rico: 800-708-1756 international Sales:208-693-8970. International Fax 208-893-7393 C1997 Mor Electronics me Marie Merc usot oberostors Fotorcyratgacy Alpucases are subject b y Prices and specification may be charged wtortor, pres donde strandtanding 3day money back picy does not hudentun tegtandangrasinghending characoles y Morrad products and begin om te of shipment Al sales estipt to Micron Electronics' curette and conds of sale Lease prices based on more Theorielago and Pertunan e d trademarks and MMX sa trademark of the Corporation Marit Windows. Wrows NT andre Wrows logo are registered trademark of Men Carport Alt m Tadeu d stedtidensate property respective companies MICRON r ELECTRONICS Designed for 888.669.0969 PC WORLD EXISTEE Microsoft Windows 95 FEBRUARY 1997 MICRON MILLENNIA Une P200 www.micronpc.com DECEMBER 1995 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #100 "


"LAUNGEN FLIR VHF112.35 UHF1t+5.2 by Denny Atkin by Denny Atkin WI N of the 7 Controllers f American pilots in World War II had been flying with the equipment many flight sim fans use, we'd all be eating Bratwurst for lunch and pledging allegiance to the Rising Sun. Because no matter how well trained they were, they'd invariably have been shot down as they fumbled for the correct keys on their plane's keyboard. Thrustmaster and CH Products Battle It Out for the Title of Best Flight Sim Controller. Find Out Who Sticks It to Whom. 11 You'll be amazed at the difference the right equipment can make in your combat performance and situational awareness. If you're willing to suffer a fairly significant financial investment, you can even put together an authentic HOTAS (Hands On Throttle And Stick) setup that will allow you to handle virtually every aircraft function without touching the keyboard. In this article, I consider top-quality controllers that are available in full HOTAS setups. Low-end controllers were covered in Loyd Case's \"Control Fetish» feature last month, and we excluded solutions such as the newly resurrected Suncom's F-15 Eagle series joysticks, which don't have accompanying throttle components. This narrowed the consideration down to the two long-time market leaders, CH Products and Thrustmaster. TUUUU MHUI NU JUUNU CGW MAY 1997 "


"FLYING WITH FLARE programmable, multi-function joystick is a must-have for the serious sim pilot. With the ability to program 20 or more functions into the stick, you get instant access to every option you'll need in combat. Joysticks F-16 Fighterstick CH Products' FlightStick was one of the first joy. sticks designed specifically as a flight controller, and thus the company has maintained a strong following amongst sim fans. The Fighterstick is the high-end stick in the You don't want to be fumbling for the flare key when a heat-seeking missile's on your tail-use a programmable joystick to put chaff and flares at your fingertips. Combatstick, but with a heavier base and two of that stick's six buttons replaced by four-way hat switches. Unfortunately, the second fire button has been moved from the Combatstick's conve nient thumb position to a difficult to-reach posi. tion near the top of the stick (in CH's defense, this is where it's found on an actual F-16's stick). I usually program one of the thumb switch's positions to fire missiles to compensate for the difficulty in hitting the second button. The Fighterstick is programmed using the fairly easy-to-use DOS utility. Unfortunately, this utility works only in exclusive MS-DOS mode, and won't function in a DOS box under Windows 95. A shortcut is provided which will exit Win 95, load the CHSetup utility in DOS mode, and then return to Win 95 when you've finished editing and downloading your custom stick file; this process is reli able enough, but it is time-consuming and inconvenient. Even if it remains a DOS application, the program could use a graphic makeover to simplify programming-for example, it's often difficult to remember if the hat position you want is button function 14 or 16. Each button and hat switch position can be programmed to output a string of characters, a key being held down, or one of the four standard joystick buttons; they can also emulate the \"chord. ed\" extra buttons or hat switches found on earlier CH joysticks. This is fine for basic replacement of keyboard functions, but gamers who want to cre. ate sophisticated macros with time delays or con ditional output will have to look towards Thrustmaster's offerings. Because the Fighterstick is capable of sending all the codes of earlier CH joysticks, it's easy to set up a default program file that emulates a Combatstick. This is handy for trying out programs without having to program configuration files for them first-most recent sims support the Combatstick, as does Windows 95. However, the Fighterstick eliminates the biggest gripe about the Combatstick-the inability to read simultaneous button presses. Because the standard IBM joystick interface includes the ability to read only four buttons and four joystick axes, earlier CH joysticks continued on page 108 company's new F-16 series, which features a more authentic look and much-improved ergonomics. The Fighterstick is also the company's first programmable stick. It sports one eight-way hat switch, three four-way hat switches, four fire but tons, and a throttle wheel. The design is similar to the company's non-programmable F-16 throu f you fly sims without using a throttle Throttles control, you probably keep the engine firewalled and rely on stick movements for your survival. Varying your throttle can help keep you alive by keeping your plane at the speed where it turns best, but it's just too hard to do using a keyboard. Adding a throttle control not only gives you instant control over your plane's power, but also another set of programmable switches which, in conjunction with a programmable stick, can put nearly all your sim's controls at a finger's reach. Throttle Quadrant System Thrustmaster's Throttle Quadrant System (TQS) was designed as a companion for the F-16 FLCS joystick, and it requires that stick or the F-22 Pro to function. This replica of an actual F-16 throttle sports a unique combination of controls. The throttle itself moves smoothly and has two detents (small notches) that signify when it has been moved to idle or afterburner settings. The throttle can function in analog mode, or can send a series of keypresses for sims that don't have throttle support. There are two three position switches, a four-direction radio switch, and two programmable dials. The dials can be used for any function that allows a range of settings-you might use them to change radio frequencies or control flap deployment. The most innovative feature of the TQS, though, is the cursor control. Similar to the Trackpoint eraser-head pointers found on many laptops, this duplicates the functionality of your mouse (which continues to function normally), and is extremely handy for designating targets in BACK TO BAGHDAD or selecting fire zones in AH-64D LONGBOW. Programming is handled by incorporating throttle-control statements in your FLCS or F-22 Pro files. The TQS has the same flexibility, and complexity-as the parent joystick. continued on page 108 MAY 1997 CGW "


"Clash of the 'Sticks from page 107 had the hats send combinations of multiple but tons. This worked well enough, but prevented you from, for example, firing cannons and machine guns simultaneously in some sims. The Fighterstick can read simultaneous presses of combinations of buttons and hat switches. On the base of the stick you'll find an analog throttle wheel (non-programmable) and a trim wheel for each access. Trim wheels are handy for fine-tuning joystick calibration, or for trim ming aircraft in flight to deal with prop torque or tail-heaviness. The F-16 Fighterstick provides good basic functionality for the type of user who shuns learn ing even simple macro languages, and the inclu sion of a throttle wheel makes it a good all-in-one solution for gamers who don't need the added functionality of a separate throttle controller. F-22 Pro Thrustmaster has a tradition of building sturdy, sophisticated controllers for the hard-core simulation crowd. The F-22 Pro, the company's latest offering, is very likely the most powerful, config urable controller ever offered by anyone to the consumer market. At first glance the stick resembles the compa. ny's earlier F-16 FLCS joystick, but appearances can be deceiving. A heavy, metal base helps the F-22 Pro sit firmly planted on your desk. It's a good thing, because the controller's high-tension spring and gimbal system means you'll be using a lot of force to move the stick around. The light plastic handle used on the FLCS has been replaced by a sturdy glass-filled unit. I've seen controllers in real military jets that didn't look as sturdy as the F-22 Pro. On the handle you'll find four four-way hat switches, three buttons, a pinky switch, and a dual-stage trigger. The trigger can be programmed to output one command when pressed lightly and a different command when pulled all the way in. This is handy for many applications, for example, firing machine guns with a light press, and both machine guns and cannon with a full press. Unlike the Fighterstick, the F-22 Pro has no built-in throttle. It also lacks trim adjustment con. trols-a problem endemic to all Thrustmaster joysticks. This can cause problems with sims that don't have an in-game centering function, as the center position drifts a bit on some systems after they heat up. Happily missing, though, is the FLCS's download switch--you can now transmit new programs to the stick automatically, without touching a thing. Like CH, Thrustmaster includes a DOS programming interface with the F-22 Pro. However, Thrustmaster's Command and Control Center software runs fine in a DOS window under Win 95, and you won't have to reboot back to DOS to download a new set of commands to the stick (a Windows 95 programming interface is currently in the works) The F-22 Pro sports unprecedented programmability. Of course, you can program simple key. presses, text strings, or button functions for each of the stick's functions. But that's just the start of it. You can also program delays, repeating char. acters, sophisticated macros, and multi-switch combinations. Various buttons can have multiple continued on page 112 PROS: Easy to configure; comfortable feel; trim wheels allow fine centering adjustment: built-in throttle. CONS: Win 95 users must drop back to DOS mode to download configuration files, very basic programmability compared to Thrustmaster's offerings. CG CHOICE RATED FIRE CONTROL Throttles from page 107 The cursor control on the TQS lets you set Priority Fire Zones in AH-64D LONGBOW without reaching for the keyboard. TAUS PROS: Realistic; comfortable; packs a unique set of controls; allows digital programming of rudder pedals. The innovative cursor control keeps you from having to reach for your mouse in combat. CONS: Works only with the F-16 FLCS or F-22 Pro; same significant study required for programming as those sticks. detent, which makes precise control more difficult in jet sims. The throttle supports both ana. log and digital (keypress) output. The Pro Throttle sports four four-way switches and four push buttons, for a total of 20 functions. Programming functionality and method ology is identical to the F-16 Fighterstick. Plus, you save both the joystick and throttle programming in the same file. In conjunction with the Pro Throttle, the less-expensive Combatstick is nearly as versatile as the Fighterstick, other than the lack of support for simultaneous button press es. The Pro Throttle isn't limited to working with Pro Throttle CH Products Pro Throttle isn't styled after an actual fighter jet throttle. Instead of the arcing move. ment found in the Thrustmaster throttles, it simply slides forward and back. Missing is an afterburner CH joysticks, although CH compatibility is neces. sary to take advantage of a stick's view hat. PROS: Easy to program; works with third-party Joysticks. CONS: Only simple programming options offered; no afterburner detent. TALEN CGW MAY 1997 "


"STEALTH 3D 2000 & 3000 ACCELERATORS. Things will never look the same. Diamond Multimedia's Stealth 3D family of plug & play accelerators deliver ultra-fast 2D, smooth MPEG video playback, and Direct 3D compatibility. Stealth 3D 2000XL is the affordable solution for entertainment and productivity, while Stealth 3D 3000XL is ideal for high-res graphics or data-intensive processing. And both include free business applications and games. So visit us at www.diamondmm.com/stealthzd for all the facts and the location of your nearest Diamond retailer. Because there's no better way to accelerate your world. Stealth 3D i Sieahl 31. DIAMOND Stealth 3D DIAMOND Better graphics, sharper video and the occasional hallucination. Visit us at www.diamondmm.com/stealth3d for a chance to win a Stealth 3D accelerator! DIAMOND MULTIMEDIA Accelerate your world. CHOICE Stealth 1 3D Elter Stealth 3D is a trademark of Diamond Multimedia Systems, Incorporated, 2880 Junction Avenue, San Jose, CA 95134. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. 01997 Diamond Multimedia Systems, Incorporated. All rights reserved. "


"THE SNAP ROLL Clash of the Controllers If you have an enemy on your tail, a \"snap roll\" can allow you to change direction with amazing speed. It's a life-saving evasive maneuver, and a good reason ta own a set of rudder pedals. Rudder Pedals or jet sims, rudder pedals are a nice frill that come in handy for quick course corrections; but if you fly prop sims, they're a must-have. In WWI and WWII aircraft, the rudder is used for turning, for evasion, for fighting engine torque, for lining up shots, and for performing life-saving maneuvers such as snap rolls. PROS: Comfortable pedal placement; can be used for racing sims as well. CONS: The extra hardware you need to use the toe brake feature isn't readily available. 1. To begin the maneuver, pull back on the joy stick until your plane approaches an accelerated stall. 2. Kick hard left ruddet. As the plane yaws to the left, the right wing moves through the air a bi faster, generating more lift. Meanwhile, the left wing is getting less airflow, and is generating almost no lift. As the left wing stalls, the plane will roll very quickly to the left. 3. Your plane is now corkscrewing through the air, and is a very difficult target to hit. To exit the rall, ease off the rudder and elevator. Note that if you roll too long, you are likely to end up in a potentially deadly spin. RATED Pro Pedals The CH Pro Pedals are made of heavy-duty plastic. Set only a few inches apart, they're very comfortable to use in a desk setting. Unlike the less expen sive CH Pedals, which press down like a car accelerator and brake, the Pro Pedals realistically slide back and forth. The unit also features a loe brake capabili ty, but while some sims such as FIGHTER DUEL support this option, nobody has released the special joystick card necessary to allow you to use this feature. If you spend some of your sim time driving ground vehicles, you have the option of switching the pedals to driving mode, dropping in a couple of small plastic chocks and using the pedals as gas and brake pedals. movement. Used in conjunction with a TQS throttle, they can be programmed in digital mode. Thrustmaster has announced an RCS Pro model which will include toe brakes and possibly, a game card that enables the brakes. Rudder Control System The Thrustmaster Rudder Control System (RCS) has a sturdy metal frame with plastic pedals. Set much farther apart than their CH counterparts, the RCS pedals are per haps more realistic, but not as comfort able to use for long periods of time in a desk environment. The pedals feature extremely smooth PROS: Sturdy construction; smooth movement. CONS: No support for driving sims; some may find pedal spacing a bit wide. RATED * CH Force FX CH Products' Force FX is the first consumer PRI force-feedback joystick to hit the market, and early adopters won't be disappointed. The handle is the same F-16 handle used on the Combatstick, with two four-way hat switches and six fire buttons. The Combatstick's small base is replaced by a huge heavy bottom with the motors used to provide the force feedback. You won't have to worry about the Force FX sliding around your desk, but you may have to worry about finding room for it. in a force feedback-enabled game, the Force FX can provide feedback such as stick resistance when trying to maneuver at high speed, shaking when your plane nears a stall, bumps when you taxi over a rough surface, and jolts when you fire weapons. The Force FX uses Immersion's ! Force API, the current stan dard for force feedback (although Microsoft is planning to muck up the works with a standard of its own, called \"Jolt\"). A number of games, including WARBIRDS, AIR WARRIOR II, JETFIGHTER III, FIGHTER DUEL, and NEED FOR SPEED SE already support the Immersion API. Because the Force FX omits a throttle, you'll want to use it in conjunction with a Pro Throttle; this also adds programmability. (Without the Pro Throttle, it emulates a Combatstick.) A switch on the bottom allows you to switch the buttons from chorded to discrete mode, allowing the stick to support simultane. ous button presses when attached to a Pro Throttle. Trim wheels are included for both axes. After using the Force FX, I'm convinced that Force Feedback is the wave of the future, and I imagine support will soon be mandatory in sims and driving games. PROGRAMMING CLASS Thrustmaster's Command and Control Center offers thorough online help to assist you as you learn the con trollers' sophisticat ed macro language PROS: Force feedback effect makes sims much more immersive; easy to set up; Includes drivers to add basic effects to games without force feedback support. CONS: Bulky; no throttle; requires Pro Throttle for programmability. CG CHOICE cew MAY 1997 "


"Monster Sund MONSTER SOUND. Listen up. If you're not experiencing Diamond Multimedia's outrageous Monster Sound 3D PCI sound card, you're really missing something. Monster Sound provides true CD-quality 3D positional audio with up to 24 independent audio streamsand support for Microsoft's DirectSound and DirectSound 3D APIs. It also comes bundled with a suite of advanced audio applications. Monster Sound will do for your ears what Monster 3D did for your PC graphics. So visit us on the Web at www.diamondmm.com/monstersound for all the facts and the location of your nearest Diamond retailer. Because hearing is believing. MOST Sind DIAMOND Don't 4 il leave your ears behind. Visit us at www.diamondmm.com/monstersound for a chance to win a Monster Sound 3D sound card! GNOWVID Monster Sound 730 DIAMOND MULTIMEDIA Accelerate your world. Monster Sound is a trademark of Diamond Multimedia Systems, Incorporated, 2090 Junction Avenue, San Jose, California 95134. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.  Diamond Multimedia Systems, Incorporated. All rights roserved, "


"Clash of the Controllers Ithough some comExecutive Officer's Summary ponents can be mixed (both companies' rudder pedals work equally well with the other's joysticks, for instance), for the most part you'll want to stick with a single-company solution to get the most out of the controller set's capabilities. CH Products The CH Products combination (F-16 Fighterstick, Pro Throttle, and Pro Pedals) is the simplest set detent. This combo is most appropriate for gamers who want to spend as much time in the air-and as little time programming—as possible. It's also the best choice if you can't afford the entire system ini. tially, thanks to the throttle on the Fighterstick. Thrustmaster support files are commonly found on program discs and the Web, helping to make up for the system's lack of generic configurability. This is one of those cases where the sum is greater than the value of the individual parts. Alone, the F-22 Pro is lacking some basic capabilities, but when paired with the TQS, it makes for an amazing. ly flexible control setup. PROS: Easiest controller system to configure; lends itself to being purchased in steps. CONS: Only basic programmability is offered; not as many support files out there as compared to Thrustmaster sticks. RATE PROS: Unmatched for realism and programmability; most sims ship with Thrustmaster configuration files right on the CD. CONS: You'll want to purchase the F-22 Pro and TQS together (more expensive); RATED it takes lots of time to get the most out of the devices. CG CHOICE <**** to quickly get up and running, and can more easily be configured as a \"generic\" setup for use with sims you haven't yet programmed. Programming capabilities are somewhat limited, however, and you may be frustrated if you want to set up complicated control setups. The Fighterstick is very comfortable to use for long sim sessions, although some may find its easy movement a bit mushy. The Throttle is capable enough, but I wish it had an afterburner Thrustmaster The Thrustmaster setup (F-22 Pro, F.16 TQS, and RCS) is the clear choice for the hard-core sim pilot who'll take the time to learn a system in order to maximize the realism of the sim experience. The system looks and feels like it was ripped out of the cockpit of an F-16. The programming interface, while intimidating, opens up infinite possibilities for automating difficult combat operations. Plus PRICE LIST CH Products Vista, CA (800) 624-5804 www.chproducts.com 'Sticks from page 108 ble, the F-22 Pro is a winner for the sim player who demands the ultimate in programmability Because it lacks a throttle, though, you'll want to pair it with an F-16 TQS to get full HOTAS capa. bility. Also, the stick throw is extremely stiff, and if you're prone to sore wrists you might want to go check out the F22 Pro's lightweight cousin, the F-16 FLCS. Product F-16 Fighterstick Pro Throttle Pro Pedals Force FX Retail $190 $190 $140 $250 Street $120 $120 $80 $180 Thrustmaster Hillsboro, OR (503) 615-3200 www.thrustmaster.com functions depending on the states of other switches. You might switch to a left view when a hat switch is held left, or left and up if button three is also pressed. The programming interface is intimidating at first, but extremely complete online help explains the syntax of each command as you type. Program files from the F-16 FLCS can be used with a few extremely minor changes. A number of sample files are included for various older sims, and most newer sims ship with sample program files for the FLCS or F-22 Pro. Definable macro names for various functions (ie: FIRECAN NON) make it easy to alter files without diving back into your sim's manual. Built like an A-10, and eminently programma Product F-22 Pro F-16 TQS Retail $220 $200 $150 Street $140 $130 $120 RCS PROS: Unparalleled programmability: comfortable grip; built like a tank. CONS: The stick's plethora of programming options means you won't be able to start using it without cracking the manual; no throttle wheel or trim adjustments. ***** Street prices are approximate, and are included for general reference because the retail prices for these products don't reflect the actual prices you'll find at your local retailer. CGW MAY 1997 "


"Bazooka MS5 multimedia subwoofer lets you hear thiplings in the CD-ROM Drowned God you never heard before sweeping, pulsing, heart-pounding lows you simply can't hear with ordinary computer speakers. Call 1-800-The-Tube for your nearest deater, and hear the difference our patented Bass Tubes enclosure makes. Then get ready for a subwoofer so amazing, you'd swear it was reverse-engineered from e achnology. In Canada, call: Trends Electronics (604) 9822966. SAS, Bazooka, Bass Tubes,@, and Listen To Your Ears are registered trademarks of Southern Audio Services Inc. w usasbazooie.com. Game graphics courtesy of EMG and Inscapgc Drowned God We Conspiracy and Inscape. Aurigita reserved noht. \"s100010 GBUH 301 055 090VEA NAJ you had a wrapped microphone. recorded it with a condominto the studio toilet and an eight-inch plastic straw designers blew through Drowned God sound sound for Horus, the To create the perfect CONSPIRACY OF THE AGES DP OWNED COD da Bazooka Ready heard that You already BAZOUHR "


"MANIFESTO OF THE NEW 3D REALITY A movement is brewing. And with its birth, the PowerVR architecture begins the awesome struggle against conventional 3D; and against the technobourgeoisie who attempt to enslave the gamer masses. These kaki technologists are turning their machines of propaganda against GAMERS, desperately trying to make them believe that their 3D performance is good enough. Well, it is not! This naked, sametess exploitation of gamers has gone on far too long. Rise up! For we have created the ultimate instrument of change: the PowerVR technology. And we declare that the true console game experience on the PC will be our domain. SEGA Erstattet ACTIVISION COMP COMPAQ PSYGNOSIS namco kalisto VideoLogic Nasort orating forth and edhe binar 2018 D IR March Gremlin * . N "


"Now is the time to question reality. The age of conventional 3D graphics is coming to a close. Withering, decaying and exhausting itseli. An incredible technology has emerged from the ruins. It is a hammer, PowerVR is more than a new 3D solution. ready to smash the stale PC game experience. experience. un eroun oi gamers perience. Gamers, hoist up your joystick. Rage against the stagnant sensory experience. Unite around this new 3D reality. You will be the first group of gamers in history to transcend the bleakness of the existing 3D experience. We are pouring gasoline on the lires of creation. Don't play the game. Be in the game. Intense 3D graphics is not a gilt. It's a birthright. The world's leading computer makers are building a PowerVR future. More are quickly joining the movement. You'll know they're one of us if they flash the PowerVR Ready sign. Namco, Sega Entertainment, Kalisto, Vic Tokai and others are bringing forth the most awesomely intoxicating games. Accelerated, Enhanced and Extreme certiiications demonstrate support. This is the dawn of high res and high frame rates. POWERVR Buy PowerVR Ready Systems. Buy PowerVR Ready add-in cards: These are the machines that will drive the revolution. READY Revolt against hardware that doesn't carry the PowerVR Ready sign. (1-800-366-9782) www.powervr.com The Neo Realitarian Movement has begun. Tree yourself irom the tyranny oi their interior 3D experience. NEC 1997 ZTEC Biectronic Inc. 121 trademario and Togos are the property of their respective holder CIRCLE READER SERVICE #260 "


"**** REVIEW CREATIVE LABS AWE64 GOLD PNP TECHNOLOGY Now Hear This... New AWE64 Delivers Clean Sound and Some Cool Extras by Dave Salvator BLASTER AWE la Pursult for Perfect Fidelity realive Labs has been venturing into new territories pretty successfully over the last year or so, branching out to include 2D and 3D graphics, modems, and speakers. But with the AWE64 Gold, they've returned to their audio roots, delivering a sound card that makes significant improvements over its predecessor, the AWE32. Those improvements include a much cleaner and more realistic General MIDI patch set; SP/DIF (Sony Philips Digital Interface Format) digital audio output; accelerated 3D positional audio; and less noisy RCA (standard stereo patch cable) jacks for line-level output, which make connecting the AWE64 Gold to your home sterco a much easier task. Creative has also shipped another version of this board called the AWE64 Value. Priced about $50 less, the AWE64 Value is built on a two-layer board (the Gold is a four-layer board), has 512KB of sample RAM (the Cold has 4MB), has a 4-watt amplifier for unpowered speakcrs, and lacks the Golds RCA connectors and SPDIF output. Though the Gold is a bit more expensive, with fcatures that gamers may never use, it's still worth the $50 to go with Gold, both for its superior General MIDI patch set, and its somewhat cleaner overall output The 64 in the AWE64 Gold's name comes out of its 64-note polyphony (the number of notes that the AWE's synthesizer can play simultancously). The AWE64 has basically the same E-mu 8000 synth engine as the AWE32, whose updated General MIDI patch set is much improved. To gain these extra 32 voices, the AWE64 uses Creative's software-based Wave Synth/ WG synthesizer, which means that you can select either wavetable patches or WaveGuide patches. NO MUSS, NO FUSS Sound card installations used to be cruel and unusual punishment, but AWE64's PnP implementation makes the installation painless. Our test system. a P166 Cateway, detected the new board on startup: asked for AWES driver CD; and, after pointing to the drivers directory, the drivers were installed and the board worked --sans reboot. For DOS usage, Creative's Configuration Manager (CTCM) utility loads in the AUTOEXEC.BAT, though we had to manually copy it over to Win 95's DOSSTARTBAT (used when rebooting into MS-DOS mode). CTCM obtains the I/O resource seltings and writes a Blaster environment string that DOS titles read when they first \"talk\" to a Sound Blaster-compatible card. CTCM leaves no memory foolprint a major improvement over the AWE32. Creative's documentation was thorough and will guide the novice through any needed details. Some Creative sound cards in the past have suffered from excessive ambient hiss when sitting idle, the AWE64 Gold sounded very clean. When we cranked up the speakers and adjusted the mixer there was no discemible noise or cracklingeven with all faders at maximum. We took the AWE64 Gold for a spin through several DOS titles: EF2000, REDNECK RAMPAGE, and QUAKE, and the board never faltered in delivering clean audio. In EF-2000s setup, which uses the Miles audio drivers, EF2000 detected AWE64's I/O resource settings without a hitch. In Windows 95 we threw three DirectX games at AWE-64: HELLBENDER, MECHWARRIOR 2: MERCENARIES, and CYBERGLADIATORS. Again the AWE64 performed with aplomb, with clean auclio and no setup problems. In addition to DirectSound support, AWE64 Gold also supports and accelerates DirectSound 3D, so game developers can add realtime 3D positional audio to games, All told, the AWE64 Cold delivers the goods, though its priccy and some features aren't aimed specifically at gamers, but rather at budding Beethovens. But if you have reached a point where snap, crackle, and pop are fine for breakfast but not your PC audio-the AWE64 Cold is a strong candidate. Price: AWE64 Gold PnP $249 AWE64 PnP $199 System Requirements: Pentium 90 or higher processor 8MB system RAM (16MB recommended) DOS 5.0; Windows 3.1 or Windows 95; Open, half-length 16-bit ISA slot: Speakers or headphones: CD-ROM drive for software installation Vendor: Creative Labs Milpitas, CA (800) 998-1000 www.soundblaster.com Reader Service #: 316 APPEAL: Gamers who moonlight as musicians and need a single sound card for both jonses. >PROS: Versatile. Clean sound, very good General MIDI, no memory footprint in DOS mode, decent bundleware. CONS: It's expensive, and some features may be extraneous for non-musician gamers. \" T) RATE 116 CGW MAY 1997 "


"GATEWAY 2000 \"You've got a friend in the business.\" "


"WARNING: Proper attire is recommended during enhanced multimedia adventures. "


"MMX inside Ahoy, matey. Set sail for intense multimedia adventure aboard a GATEWAY PC. Your voyage will take you through amazing graphics and animation thanks to the Intel Pentium processor with MMX technology. Fuel your Gateway PC with the new generation of MMX technology-enhanced software and batten down the hatches for raw multimedia power. The underlying Pentium pentium chip can also enhance performance of your current software. Best of all, Gateway insists you be the captain of your ship. You decide what goes into your Gateway PC. Just call and our sales representatives will explain your options and help you custom configure a PC to fit your unique needs. One phone call is all you need to chart a course toward adventure. Hail us today! GATEWAY 2000 \"You've got a friend in the business.\" 8 8 8 8 4 6 0 0 0 9 WWW.gw2k.com "


"Family PC Multimedia Systems P5-166 FAMILY PC P5-200 FAMILY PC Intel 166MHz Pentium Processor with MMX Technology 32MB Synchronous DRAM 256K Pipelined Burst Cache CrystalScan.28dp Monitor (15.95 viewable area) 2MB SGRAM, 3-D 64-Bit PCI Graphics 2.5GB 1lms EIDE Hard Drive 12X CD-ROM/3.5\" Diskette Drives 16-Bit GATEWAY Sound Altec Lansing ACS-41 Speakers TelePath 33.6 Data /14.4 Fax Modem for Windows with Speakerphone Mini Tower Case 104+ Keyboard & MS IntelliMouse Microsoft Windows 95 MS Office 97, Small Business Edition plus Encarta 97 MMX Technology-Enhanced Software Bundle Intel 200MHz Pentium Processor with MMX Technology 32MB Synchronous DRAM 512K Pipelined Burst Cache CrystalScan700.28dp Monitor (15.9\" viewable area) 2MB SGRAM, 3-D 64-Bit PCI Graphics 2.5GB Ilms EIDE Hard Drive 12X min/16X max CD-ROM Drive 3.5\" Diskette Drive 16-Bit Ensoniq Wavetable Sound Card Altec Lansing ACS-41 Speakers TelePath 33.6 Data/14.4 Fax Modem for Windows with Speakerphone Mini Tower Case 104+ Keyboard & MS IntelliMouse MS Windows 95 MS Office 97, Small Business Edition plus Encarta 97 MMX Technology-Enhanced Software Bundle As Low As $76/mo. $2499 As Low As' $87/mo. Maximum data transfer rate dependent on certain wariables including particular modems with which you are communicating, telephone lines, communications software and communications protocols. Pod\" MMX Technology-Enhanced MS Office 97 Small Business Software Bundle Edition plus Encarta 97 MS Word 97 MS Encarta 97 Eraser — Turn About MS Excel 97 MS Automap The Ultimate Human Body Version 2.0 MS Publisher 97 Streets The Third Dimension MS Outlook 97 Games and Entertainment Pack II (Available to new and existing Gateway customers.) Includes Bug!\". Deadlock. MechWarrior»2: Mercenaries. 9. Pitfall\": The Mayan Adventure. SPOR: The Empire's Darkest Hour. and PC ProPad gaming device. $99 MMX GATEWAY 2000 \"You've got a friend in the business.\" intel inside 8 8 8 8 4 6 0 0 0 9 pentium Www.gw2k.com 1997 Gateway 2000, Inc. GATEWAY 2000, CrystalScan, black-and-white spot design, \"G\" logo. TelePath and \"You've got a friend in the business\" slogan are registered trademarks, and Family C. and GATEWAY are trademarks of Gateway 2000, Inc. The Intel Inside Logo, Intel and Pentium are registered trademarks and MMX is a trademark of Intel Corporation. All other brands and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective companies. All prices and configurations are subject to change without notice or obligation. Prices do not include shipping or applicable sales tax. Many Gateway 2x products are custom engineered to Gateway 20XX) specifications, which may vary from retail versions of the software and/or hardware in functionality, performance or compatibility. 'Financing available on approved credit issued and administered by MENA AmericaBank, N.A. Payments based on 36-month term at 14.9% Annual Percentage Rate. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #105 "


"The Most Respected Reviews in the Industry for 15 Years COASTER OF THE MONTH CG Choice Games This Month: REALMS OF THE HAUNTING DISCWORLD II: MORTALITY BYTES! Clue p.144 p. 128 p.183 READER QUOTES not a more-of-the-same sequel.\"-R. Jesser, Marietta GA PRIVATEER 2: \"To say the least, the game is a big letdown. The heavy English accent is sometimes impossible to understand. The videos are not consistent. Space combat is fair at best. The manual is garbage. Naturally, I found a good use for the game's three CDs: they make excellent coasters.\" --MAX, via the Internet ness and freedom of gameplay with an intriguing and well-developed plot. Quantity of gameplay does not necessarily make a good game.\" -Jason Rabin, via the Internet RPGs: \"I feel that role-playing games have begun to lose any sense of coherant plot. DAGGERFALL has thousands of towns, temples and dungeons, hundreds of spells, superb graphics-and a plot as thin as tissue paper. Perhaps companies like Bethesda and Blizzard should look to games like the Ultima series and BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR, which managed to combine an open endedReview Quote of the Month \"It's been too long since I could unreservedly recommend a game, but I can do it now.\" -Scorpia, reviewing DiscwORLD II CGW: \"Why don't game developers hire all you guys as consultants for their games? Your advice would be invaluable. It seems to me that you could do more good before a game comes out then reviewing it after it comes out.' --ZippyDan@aol.com HEROES OF MIGHT AND MAGIC II: \"HEROES II is a rich game with numerous undocumented secrets-certainly Hey, you're right! The CGW editorial staff is now available to the highest bidder. What? Conflict of interest? Well, never mind. HOW DO WE RATE? We only review finished products, not pre-release versions. The ratings are as follows: Outstanding: The rare game that gets it all right. The graphics, sound, and gameplay come together to form a Transcendent Gaming Experience. Our strongest buying recommendation. Very Good: A high-quality game that succeeds in many areas. It may have minor problems, but is still worth your money, especially if you're interested in the subject matter or genre. Average: A mixed bag. It can be a game that reaches for the stars, but falls short in several ways. It can also be a game that does what it does well, but lacks flair or originality. Weak: A game with serious problems. Usually buggy seriously lacking in play value, or just a poorly-conceived game design-you should think long and hard before buying it Abysmal: The rare game that gets it all wrong. This is reserved for those prod ucts so buggy, ill conceived, or valueless that you wonder why they were ever released in the first place. MAY 1997 CGW "


"**** REVIEW. OBSIDIAN ADVENTURE IL Get Stoned DIFFICULTY LEVEL OBSIDIAN Is a Flashback-Inducing, Skull-Busting Puzzlefest by Petra Schlunk BSIDIAN is the latest in a growing line ES of adventure games that have evolved through the haze of MYST and THE 7TH CUEST and focus more on puzzle-solving than plot development. But OBSIDIAN pulls this off better than most of its ilk by hanging its gallery of puzzles in a series of truly bizarre universes, and by successfully instilling a sense of style and wit throughout the game, which should keep you amused even when the puzzles MEET THE NEW BOSS, SAME AS THE OLD BOSS Face to face with the bureau chief at long have you confounded The game takes place in the last, you're in for a lecture on playing by the rules! year 2066. Tivo researchers, Lilah and Max, concerned about the in. The rest of the game involves Lilah's essential to its function. Each collection relentless decimation of the Earth's envieffort to rescue Max, discover and reach involves solving one or more complex ronment, have developed and launched the force behind the Obsidian, and and truly bizarre puzzles. As is true a satellite called Ceres, which uses nanmake a decision upon which depends throughout the game, in this world its as otechnology to scrub the pollution out of the fate of the Earth. Its hardly just hard to figure out what each puzzle is the Earth's atmosphere. Ceres has another vacation day. about as it is to solve it once you know. recently been switched to full machine The first world that Lilah enters is After traversing the two dream control, allowing it to make its own decibased on her recorded dream of a realms, Lilah must enter a realm of sions on what to clean up-and this is bureaucratic nightmare. This Ceres' own devising, which symbolizes Price: $59.99 where the trouble begins. Escheresque world is a cube in which all and celebrates Ceres' birth of creativity. Minimum System sides function as both floor and wall. But After traversing this world, Lilal will Requirements: P90, 16MB RAM, 17MB A ROCK AND A HARD PLACE finding a way to reorient the world (or enter a realm where she can rescue Max hard drive space, The game opens in a forest where the oneself) is only one aspect of the puzzleand confront Ceres. SVGA graphics, 2MB researchers have gone for a vacation. solving here. Lilah must reach the video RAM recomYour character, Lilah, returns to the burcau chicf, cutting through a myriad DAZED AND CONFUSED mended, 4x CD-ROM, Windows 95, mouse; campsite, and spends some time reading of red tape as she goes, to find out what OBSIDIAN's point-and-click interface supports Sound her computer journal, which contains has happened to Max. Because several is simple to use and familiar to most Blaster 16. important information about the Ceres of the puzzles in this area are very diffi adventure gamers. The cursor changes Multiplayer Support: project, some bizarre dreams that she cult to solve, it's a blessing that the game's into an arrow when you can move someNone Designer: Rocket and Max have had, and most omi manual comes with strong hints and where, a double arrow when you can Science Games nously reports on a strange, rapidly solutions to this first part of the game. shift viewpoints, or a green diamond Publisher: growing obsidian-based mountain that \"The second world that Lilah enters is when you can interact with something Segasoft, Inc. has mysteriously appeared near their from Max's dream. Taking place in what There are a few times when you will pick Redwood City, CA campsite. Lilah hears a scream, and disappears to be an industrial complex, up an object and lug it around for some (888) 734-2763 www.segasoft.com covers that Max has disappeared into the Lilah must animate a giant mechanical purpose, but there isn't an inventory as Reader Service #: 318 | Obsidian. Undaunted, she follows him s pider by collecting several elements such-so don't expect to find the CGW MAY 1997 "


"Dragon Lore 11 The reart of the Dragun Hla 3335320 ILUS CRYO AFFILIATE PARTNERSEI Windows 95 and DOS. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #1.30 Available soon at retailers OR CA 1200-4068378 San Francisco, CA 94109 Irvine, CA 92606 O 1997 Cryo Entertaintoont. All rights regarded "


"REVIEW  OBSIDIAN ADVENTURE + + object-combination puzzles that litter many other adventure games. One of the really ccric facets of OBSIDIAN is that you have no clue, especially at the beginning of each of the worlds, what you're supposed to do or where you're supposed to go. Along with this lack of direction, OBSIDIAN'S graphics and first-person perspective contribute to a strongly surrealistic atmosphere. This atmosphere is enhanced (or needlessly overworked, depending on your viewpoint) by the inclusion of a lot of dead space that is, many beautiful scenes and vicws where the gamer does nothing except move around. Traipsing through these otherwise useless areas, where every click of the mouse slowly displays another scene, is very time-consuming, and will wear thin on the gamer who just wants to get down to the business of solving puzzles. While there is no way to die in OBSIDIAN, obviating the need for lots of saved game positions, you can save as many games as your hard drive has space for. I recommend that you save before tackling some of the big puzzles, CHEMISTRY CLASS A basic lesson in weird science is necessary to solve this simple chemistry problem. OBSIDIAN's puzzles can get pretty intense. so that you can restart and reset the pieces by reloading your game. Also, the game has more than one ending, which is another nice feature. STONE DEAF OBSIDIAN's puzzles are about as challenging as they get in the adventure game genre -especially since it's often a struggle just to figure out what you're Getting a Clue supposed to do-and the game doesn't provide a lot of clues. Unfortunately, some of the clues and information that do exist are only delivered orally (from various characters or objects). For some reason, the sound in my game was choppy, and I frequently had difficulty understanding what was said. Since the game does not include any on-screen text, I often had to replay sections several times to figure out what was being said. While OBSIDIAN does have a few drawbacks, most notably a surfeit of dead areas and the annoying necessity of changing the Windows display to 16-bit color (which isn't compatible with almost anything else you might wish to run), this game has many strong features. It contains approximately 20 interesting and original puzzles presented in a series of unusual and beautiful worlds; and it possesses a nice, edgy intelligence thats often lacking in games of this type. For gamers who enjoy puzzle-solving, OBSIDIAN should provide a similar level of enjoyment as do MysT or THE 7TH GUEST, and probably a greater level of challenge & In the second realm, when you're mixing colors, remember that you're trying to find something that will mix with green to make orange. In the church of the machine, make use of the symbols in the square loop at the bottom of the circuit so you can imprint the microchip at each of the three areas at the top of the circuit. In the third dream realm, you'll be confronted with a strange board game. The objective in this game of hide-and-seek is to force \"true inspiration\" into the upper-right square. You can find this character by looking at the pieces on the board. \"True inspiration needs to have a place to hide or it cannot move. This board game is also the basis for the final puzzle in this area, in which you will try to reach the frame in the sky. When you follow your copilot's directions, punch D2 instead of B2 and then play the game you played on the board (flip up the covers to find the red light that you're chasing). APPEAL: Fans of MYST-like games, and puzzle fans of all types. >PROS: An intuitive interface; difficult and original puzzles; and strong, surrealistic graphics. CONS: Lots of dead space and lengthy transitions make movement through the game's worlds tedious. Some puzzling puzzles, indeed. CGW MAY 1997 "


"If you play only one real RPG this year, it will have to be... Fallent. AVOST KUGLLAR LUE PLATING CR \"Fallout has everything necessary to be the best roleplaying game of all time\" — Next Generation ING PENDING MACPLAY P Coming Soon for Win 95/DOS and Mac CO-OH BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS.\" www.Interplay.com  1997 Interplay Productions. Fallout and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. All other trademarks and copyrights are the properties of their respective owners. "


NA


"#-MORE THAN YOU EVER IMAGINED. WLANDS OF LORE GUARDIANS OF DESTINYTM Westwood S T U D I S www.westwood.com Lands of Lore: Guardians of Destiny is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc. 1996 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved "


"**** REVIEW  REALMS OF THE HAUNTING ADVENTURE DIFFICULTY LEVEL Apocalypse Wow It's the End of the World in REALMS OF THE HAUNTING, and We Feel Fine by Robert Coffey ou never know what you're going to get when you combine two seemingly different things. Sometimes you succeed, as with Reese's Peanut Butter Cups; other times, you get something like Pat Boone's new marrowcurclling heavy metal album. Blending different gaming elements is no less risky, but REALMS OF THE HAUNTINC (ROTH) is more than up to the task, deftly mixing first-person action with traditional adventure game problem-solving and exploration. With a compelling, complex plot; smooth-scrolling 3D graphics; and a bucketful of challenging puzzles and deadly monsters; ROTH covers all the bases, ably managing to be both a little bit country and a little bit rock 'n' roll --all the while forging a grim personality all its own. DYNAMIC DUO Meet the Scully and Mulder of the Apocalypse, your heroes Adam Randall and Rebecca Trevisard. Realms na CHAUn ing the doors, enormous secret mausoleums and temples reveal a building much larger than the outside would lead you to believe, and a bunch of demons try to kill you. Plus, the ghost of you father appears and beseeches you to help free him from the torment he is enduring in the afterlife. Obviously, you've got your work cut out for you. Fortunately, you are soon joined by Rebecca Trevisard, an attractive young Rebecca Trevisard, an attractive young psychic. Though you only control Adam, Rebecca is an invaluable asset, noticing and interpreting mystical information that Adam misses or cannot comprehend. Together you begin to make sense of the myriad clues and mysteries that comprise the game's strong, intricate plot. While there are scarcely enough pages in this entire magazine to detail ROTH's epic story; in a nutshell, it concerns a centuries-old plot to loose chaos upon the earth through the evil machinations of the ageless Florentine and the demon Belial. With the help of Rebecca and some ghostly knights, you'll travel through the four realms of time and space (Earth, Paradise, Hell, and Limbo) to thwart Florentine and Belials plans while struggling to resolve FINAL COUNTDOWN Price: $49.00 You play the role of Adam Randall, a Minimum System twentysomething expatriate Englishman man Requirements: returning home after the sudden death 486DX2/66 (P75 recommended), 16MB of your father, pastor of a small Cornish RAM. 20MB hard disk village. Upon arrival, you meet a space. VGA or SVGA strange priest, who claims to be a graphics, 2x CD-ROM friend of your father and who MS-DOS 5.0, mouse; supports Sound hands you a box of Blaster and shattered seals. compatibles. When you arrive Multiplayer Support: at your None father's Designer: Gremlin Interactive house, Publisher: Interplay your trouProductions ble really Irvine, CA 714-553-6655 begins. www.interplay.com Eerie sigils Reader Service #: 319 | glow on many of CGW MAY 1997 "


"Die. Die. Die. FREE Ultra rare DRACON MASTER Die In Every Dragon Dice CD-ROM TE Survival comes down to two things, the role of strategy. And the roll of the die. DRAGON DICE A lewe watch DRAGON DICE INTRODUCING DRAGON DICE ON CD-ROM. Not since the invention of the broadsword has there been a more realistic way to experience the pace of battle. The new CD-ROM version of TSR's blockbuster hit, DRAGON DICE, takes you on a dangerously realistic journey into one of the most challenging and popular fantasy dice games ever. This animated DRAGON DICE adventure, begins in cons past, when the strength of the sword or the spell power of a sorcerer was the only difference between a glorious life, and a vicious, terrible death. You'll have to use all 128 of the games built-in computer dice lo build your own dice armies, to scout enemies, and to avoid traps. Plus, each DRAGON DICE CD-ROM comes with a limited and collectible, TSR sanctioned DRAGON MASTER die. It's the most true-to-life dice battle of strategy you've ever encountered. But beware, because only the extremely talented, or the unbelievably lucky will survive. BASED ON TSR'S BLOCKBUSTER STRATEGY MUT, DRAGON DICE. CUSTOMIZE ENDLESS ARMIES FROM EVERY DIE AVAILABLE FOR TSR'S ORIGINAL DRACON DICE (ALL 128) SINGLE PLAYER OR A 4 PLAYER NETWORK MODE DRAWS YOU INTO THE RICH HISTORY AND STORYLINE OF AN ANCIENT AD&D UNIVERSE BEAUTIFUL ARTWORK AND DICE-TO-CHARACTER ANIMATION BRING THE POPULAR DICE GAME TO LITE, CREATING A RICH GAME PLAYING EXPERIENCE Coming soon for Windows 95 Download the interactive preview at www.interplay.dragonplay.com Check out TSR'S DRAGON DICE game available now. DRAGON DCE\" 1995 TSR I Used by Interplay Pictions or license from TSRI. INTERPLAYS a trademark of literolas Productors. All rights reserved. AD&D and the TSA logo are trademarks of TSR IC Wadors 950s atrademark Corporation. All rights red BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS.\" "


"REVIEW. REALMS OF THE HAUNTING ADVENTURE your prophesied role in the dawning of the Apocalypse. Though much of the story is told through discovered journals, letters, and scrolls, the meat of it is revealed in full motion video sequences liberally interspersed throughout the games 20 chap ters. The acting in these sequences is simply some of the best I've ever seen in a computer game. Stately and believable, the actors bring a clelicate gravity to the game that serves the story well. BALANCING ACT While games that try to offer both gum-slinging action and more ruminative puzzle-solving have mostly been heavily lopsided in favor of one or the othcr, this is not the case in ROTH. Both elements are exceptionally well-balanced and they matically put whatever item you need right in your hand, while playing the hard way forces you to figure it out yourself. All of the puzzles are plotand game-related --even the logic puzzles, some of which are almost Myst-like in their reliance on your having to operate machinery While most of the puz HATCHET MAN You'll need to sharpen both puzzlezles are good, challenging solving and combat skills to beat the game. Now it's fun, there are a few time for this axe-wielding demon to eat some fireball that...wellaren't. Most of these involve mazes. There's an annoying blurry figures at even medium range, mirror maze that changes shape after and some of the underground environyou press a button; a maze made of ments are just too dark. I'm all for creatchangeable walls of light (which has an ing a creepy atmosphere, but not at the unpleasant number of variables); and, the expense of my eyes. worst of the lot, a huge, convoluted net The compartmentalized inventory work of cavens where you must find 16 system, while probably the best approach brains to put into a machine. to dealing with the up to 155 inventory items, takes some getting used to and it GOING THROUGH HELL can be awkward at times. The designers ROTHs game engine and interface added an annoying extra step when you make travel through the game world a want to use an object: You must first fairly simple affair. You can move with place it in your right hand bcfore exiting either the keyboard or the mouse, but the inventory and then click where you since mouse movement ceases whenev want to use it. This can get tediouser you happen upon clickable items, the especially when you've got sixteen soggy keyboard is definitely the way to go. brains to dump into a machine-one at Opening doors and interacting with a time. Also, while most of the maps you objects is handled via the mouse cursor. find are helpful, it's definitely not helpful Highlights on the cursor indicate avail to have the opened map blot out the able actions: Agreen light denotes an main part of the screen. object that can be picked up or used, a Still, these quibbles are hardlly gamered light indicates a target, and a blue killers. With its deep plot, carefully ballight appears when a usable object is anced blending of action and adventure, under the cursor, but out of range. and a well-designed, graphically rich Additionally, an eyeball icon will appear game world, REALMS OF THE HAUNTING when an objects description is available. is a unique, immersive gaming experiMovement is smooth-scrolling, with cnce. Interplay took a chance with this 360 degrees of freedom. In order to unusual hybrid title, and they've sucensure that your journey through the ceeded-in spades realms isn't hampered by a slow, jerky frame rate, ROTH has screen setting APPEAL: Action gamers looking options running from VCA at 320x200 to for some adventure, adventure SVGA with a 640x480 resolution. While gamers ready for some action. the game is very playable at the lower >PROS: Compelling story, gameplay sellings, I found that even at the highest expertly balanced between action settings the detail and beauty of many of and adventure, good variety of qualithe huge environments was remarkable. ty puzzles. In comparison to ROTH, DACCERFALLS >CONS: world looks kind of grungy as it lopes by Inventory system can be unwieldy, with its frequent disc reads. too many mazes, The graphics aren't without their movement somedrawbacks, however. Most of the mon times awkward. sters quickly degenerate into jagged, FLOOR SHOW Richly designed environments add to the immersive nature of REALMS OF THE HAUNTING. Check out the detail in the floor mosaic. work to enhance the plot, as well as cach other. Transitions from adveniure gaming to action and back again are seamless. The twitch-reflex components of the game should be familiar to veterans of any shooter. While the emphasis is definitely on killing the assorted demons there are points where you'll need to suc cessfully run and jump your way through the perils of the realms, such as fireball traps and floating platforms. If you're a die-hard adventure gamer who is leery of hot and heavy combat, ROTI offers four different skill levels for the action parts of the game, ranging from easy to very hard. Similarly, the game has two difficulty settings for the puzzles. Since many of the puzzles are concerned with finding and using objects, the easy setting will autoCGW MAY 1997 "


"THINK FMV SUCKSP THINK AGAIN. adventure, puzzles and special effects! It's all in A Fork In The Tale Think about fast, seamless 15 frames per second videoeven on a 2x drive! Think about an Immersion Engine projecting live action so fast you'll make split second decisions just to stay alive. Think about 5 CD's the new game that's so fast, so interactive you're killed 6 times in the first 10 minutes. If this game doesn't change the way you think about packed with FMV* nothing will! * Full Motion Video NOT CONVINCED? GET THE FREE DEMO. YOU'LL MEET THIS GUY. HE'D LOVE TO REARRANGE YOUR JAW WHILE SETTING YOU STRAIGHT. CALL 1-888-GET-DEMO WHILE SUPPLIES LAST! Yeah, they're beautiful babes in fur bikinis. (Unfortunately, they want to kill you!) These marauding kingsmen need a hand. (Your hand! And then they'll kill you.) Up for a little face stomping? (Before Geebo yeah you guessed it-kills you.) Thanks to ine and half a dozen other outrageous stand-up comedians, there are so many laughs in A Fork In The Tale that FMV now stands for Funny with My Voice!\" A FORK IN THE TALE. A HILARIOUS LIVE ACTION ADVENTURE. TILLIN Starring funnyman Rob Schneider as the voice of the hero. PZ ENTERTAINMENT River Call 1-800-771-3772 for Game Rating Information. www.anyriver.com AnyRiver Entertainment and Fork In The Tale are trademarks of AnyRiver Entertainment Inc Immerein Endine trademark at Aduance Realita te "


"***** REVIEW POWERSLAVE NOTIV DIFFICULTY LEVEL Ramses Reeks Playmates' Egyptian Romp POWERSLAVE Is Just Another Bad Run-of-the-Crypt Shooter POWERSLAVE by Robert Coffey fit only took novelty to with just one life. You can collect a make a good game, then all few extra lives along the way, but those shareware Doom levmany are secreted in areas that will els featuring Homer kill you when you retrieve them. Simpson and Barney This, coupled with countless jumps instead of demons would be over lethal lava and some ambushes enshrined in this magazine's guaranteed to kill you the first time Hall of Fame. They aren't, you encounter them, make and I'm willing to bet POWERSLAVE almost mean-spirited POWERSLAVE won't be HAVE WE MET BEFORE? This boss is big, ugly, and in its unforgiving nature. cither, in spite of its Egypt-invadedvery boring. Like all the other monsters, bosses are by-alicns motif. In a staggering disTERROR OF THE NILE? tepid creatures that hardly inspire fear or dread. play of boncheaded game design, \"Thic rocesses of Ruscs' tomb are POWERSLAVE manages to botch chock-full of hostile creatures that almost every aspect of gameplay die with a satisfying wet crunch. through unwelcome \"features,\" Too bad they look better dead than limp imitation, and an imexplainalive. Boss monsters look silly and able inability to fully utilize DUKE move like wind-up toys, and everyNUKEM's outstanding Build engine. thing devolves into a jumbled mass of pixels when viewed up close. The THE GOMER PYLE OF only creature certain to inspire fear SPACE MARINES is the Omenwasp, which makes a In case you haven't guessed, sound so monumentally irritating you're the lone, highly-trained you're assured a headache. killing machine that can save WHAT THE HELL ARE YOU? Monsters are so pixe. POWERSLAVE may have some mankind from pyramid-snatching lated up close, you'll think you're blasting away at a value as a multiplayer game (when extraterrestrials. What you might jumble of twitching Legos. you've lost every other disc in your collection) but I don't see it topping not have guessed is that you have Price: $49.99 Minimum System multiple personalities, including a DUKE or QUAKE. When you look at Requirements: foul-mouthed soldier, a Comer Pyle POWERSLAVE is a skimpy tangle of lines a game like REDNECK RAMPAGE, which 486DX/66 (Pentium recsoundalike that gurgles \"See ya!\" and a that can barely be seen when superimuses the Build engine wonderfully, there ommended), 8MB RAM gargling ape. It's as if the governments of posed over many of the game's complex is just no excuse for a game as bad as (16MB recommended). the world decided to send Sybil to deal 30MB hard disk space POWERSLAVE environments. SVGA-video card, 2x with the enemy menace. Quips in DUKE \"To its credit, POWERSLAVE does have a CD-ROM drive (4x rec added character to the game, but in number of intricate levels with truly chalAPPEAL: Action junkies who've ommended), DOS 5.0, POWERSLAVE they only befuddle. lenging puzzles and obstacles, but thanks never met a first person shooter mouse: Sound Comparisons to DUKE are especially Blaster-compatible they didn't like. to the lousy save function, you'll end up sound card. valid since POWERSI AVE uses that game's repeating those puzzles until you scream PROS: Huge, complex levels. Multiplayer Support: Multiplayer Support: Build engine. Sure, there are dynamic in frustration. That's because you can't CONS: Miserable save game LAN (1-4, One CD per ligliting effects and the environments save the game anytime and anywhere feature, bad use of the Build player) look good (if uninspired); but why wasn't you want. Instead, the game automatical engine, ridiculous and annoying Designer: Lobotomy the game engine fully utilized? Unlike Software ly saves only upon completion of a level. monsters, it's the kind of Publisher: Playmates DUKE, the game world is mostly non Waypoints in each level note your game that's Interactive interactive: Bullets leave walls unblem progress; and when you die, your game is been done a Entertainment, Inc. ished, and grenade blasts don't touch restorcd at the last waypoint you thousand times Costa Mesa, CA (714) 428-2112 ancient urns. reached...provided you haven't used up before and a thousand times And where are the excellent map www.playmatesloys.com your limited number of lives. If you have, RATED better. Reader Service #: 320 l options from DUKE? The automap in you start at the beginning of the level CGW MAY 1997 "


"BOMBERMAN \"The Best Multiplayer Game Ever\" Next Generation March Cover Story \"It Will Rock\" Electronic Gaming Monthly \"Editors' Top Ten\" Ultra Game Players YOU'RE TOAST! THE BLAST   & MORE CHAOTIC THAN EVER! T : G emeente BLOW ME! Since 1989 Bomberman has been defined by gamers as the ultimate multiplayer game. Now \"the man\" is available in an enhanced 20-player multiplayer package complete with 3D *endered graphics, new Character animations, and a vast -epertoire of spiteful canned and custom Faunts. Keeping true to the original addictive gameplay, you better think fast as you vie for Headly power-ups, race against the clock and blow your opponents to Smithereens. NOW EXPLODING OUR PU BOMBERMAN BERMIN Com IPIAVER RATING PERDINS Designed for BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS. www.interplay.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #126 1997 Hudson Soft Co. Ltd. All rights reserved. Atomic Bomberman is a trademark of Hudson Son Co.Ltd. All rights reserved. Interplay is a faster trademarotterplay Productions. Alleghts reserved JUDSON RP ESAB Microsoft Windows 95 s the kit publisher and distributor "


"Create and Breed Your Own Artificial Life creat MINDSCAPE ENTERTAINMENT Creatures and  1996 CyberLife Technology Ltd. All rights reserved. Publis Mindsoane is a registered trademark of Mindscape loc. All tradem "


"Call it a game if you like, but this i is the most impressive example of artificial life I have seen. Richard Dawkins, Oxford University zoologist and author TM ures GG I first saw this program in the same week that evidence was discovered of life on Mars. This is more exciting. L Douglas Adams, Author of Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy Hatching May 14th for Windows and Macintosh CD-ROM mindscapegames.com KIDS TO ADULTS CIRCLE READER SERVICE #131 listributed by Mindscape, Inc. under exclusive license from CyberLife Technology. egistered trademarks are the property of their respective holders. CyberLife CONTENT RATED BY ESRB "


"***** REVIEW  BANZAI BUG NOTI)V DIFFICULTY LEVEL Buzz Off Fly Like a Butterfly and Sting Like a Bee in Grolier's Bug Simulator by Scott A. May enough in the garage, where your primao ahead, admit it-you've r y goal is to locale and consume pieces always secretly wondered of food while punching and spitting your what it would be like to be a way past robotic insect guardians. bug. Well, wonder no more. Succeed and you'll meet Poolio, a Grab your insect instincts friendly little pest with a Cheech Marin and think small when you accent and wisecracks galore. With enter the world of BANZAI Poolio as your guide, you'll soon join Buc, a unique blend of forces with a merry band of creepy flight-sim action and arcade crawlers, whose revolutionary idea is to adventure. build the \"Stinkulator,\" an anti-human bomb. Your job is to retrieve bomb comA FLY ON THE WALL ponents while avoiding Moms bug spray, As the ham-fisted, venom-spitting Dad's robotic defense system, and little BANZAI BUG, you're trapped in what is Bobby's sadistic, wing-tearing clutches. surely insect hell: an exterminator's The game features three skill settings house. Your adventure begins innocently and seven levels of increasing challenge, which are differentiated by the type of obstacles in each room, the number and tenacity of your enemies, and the difficulty in locating your target objects. However, gameplay is still basically a matter of hide and seek, defend and escape. As with most 3D shooters, it can get tedious over time. surroundings. Crolier overplays the flight sim aspect of the game, jokingly comparing your aerial maneuvers to aircraft such as the Homet, Cobra, and Tomcat. Truth be told, in this altered reality, BANZAIs aerobatics are more akin to his real-life insect brethren's -slightly spasmodic and disorienting. Although the learning curve for flight dynamics isn't particularly high, mastering the techniques required to swoop, lover, allack, and pick up objects can be frustrating, especially at higher levels when you're constantly under attack. It's easy to lose your bearings, fly upside-down, and mistake floors for ceilings A LITTLE BUGGY? Hardware requirements are a little stecp, but the game offers several options for customizing display details to increase the frame rate on slower systems. Although the game supports DirectX technology, it flatly refused to recognize my Rendition-based 3D Blaster video card. Neither the publisher's Web site nor their tech support line provided any solutions. Despite the funky controls and slightly repetitive gameplay, Banzai Buchas enough originality and offbeat style to be declared a winner. If you're looking for something out of the ordinary that has a bent sense of humor, this bugs for you. BUG-EYED WORLD BANZAI BUG's environments are unrestricted 3D, but the flight model is a bit tough to master, and the gameplay gets a little repetitive. Price: $39.99 Minimum System Requirements: Pentium 90, 8MB RAM, 20MB hard drive space, 2x CD-ROM, Windows 95, mouse; supports all Win 95compatible sound cards, joysticks, and some 3D accelerated video cards. Multiplayer Support: None Designers: Gravity, Inc. Publisher: Grolier Interactive Danbury, CT (203) 797-3530 www.grolier.com Reader Service #: 321 I A SURREAL DEAL The game's main strength is its ability to immerse players in a surreal environment, where ventilation ducts become claustrophobic caverns, and everyday objects like tables, lamps, and chairs are part of the towering terrain. For the most part, movement through out this 3D realm is unrestricted, allowing you to fly under or around most solid objects. The polygonal. shapes are boxy, but nicely shaded, and drawn with a future-retro look (particularly in the case of your human adversaries). The overall effect gives you outlandishly large, cartoony objects which are still instantly recognizable. BANZAI is played from a chase-view perspective, with a choice of two flight modes: plane and helicopter. A third mode look around allows you to pitch and rotate to scan your APPEAL: Arcade buffs and 3D virtual world aficionados. PROS: Surreal twists on everyday settings, offbeat humor and tasty sound, unique design. CONS: Gameplay eventually becomes tedious and repetitive, the flight mechan G ics are a little (dare we say it) \"buggy.\" MATCHING WITS Here Banzai retrieves a matchstick from Dad's workshop, one of many items needed to build the Stinkulator anti-human bomb CGW MAY 1997 "


"TUNE IN TO THE ONLY NIGHTLY SHOW ABOUT COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY AND THE INTERNET. SITE Every Night on MSNBC 7PM, 1AM & 4AM et 4PM, 10PM & 1 AM pt Free Davale Emmy Award-Winning Host, Soledad O'Brien Www.thesite.com "


"The Most Dangerous Man is the One with Nothing Left to Lose. When outlaws murdered your wife, and took your daughter, everything, you had was gone. Your gut aches for blood and sweet revenge. Dvin's too good or em now. Ride back into the wild west as the gun-slinging WISH MX Marshall James Anderson you'll encounter a dusty town, an ndoned mine, a runaway We train, and the orneriest cowpokes this side The Mississippi as you uncover a twisted plot of greed and corruption. Wan With weapons like your .45 six-shooter, your 44 rifle, your 10-gauge shotgun and your in good ol' sawed off 12-gauge you'll be packin' i plenty of fire power. Nothing warms the heart of a cold blooded killer like hot lead. It's Payback Time. Three Game Variations Spaghetti Western Shooter Bounty Hunter Action Multiplaver Shootouts Challenges the wit Multiplayer Games as well the trigger finger Supports 2 to 8 players over Shooting the civilians may leave modem, network or Internet. Form WATERPARKASTRALES MERREL voll swinging from a rope. your own gang and hit the trail. "


"3D shooter and graphic adventure fans should be equally impressed...Should clean up when it moseys into town.\"* -PC Camer \"This may be the first 3D shooter with a real plot...\" -Computer Caming World \"LucasArts seems to have stacked the gaming deck in its favor...Outlaws appears to be yet another winning hand.» —Computer Player TEEN LUCAS AGES 13+ CONTENT RATED BY E S R B 1997 LucasArts Entertainment Ampany. All Rights Reserved. Outlaws is a trademark of LucasArts Entertainment Company. The LucasArblogo registered trademark of Cucosim Ud used under authorization www.lucasarts.com. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #117 "


"***** REVIEW KRAZY IVAN ACTION DIFFICULTY LEVEL Doomed Clone Psygnosis' PlayStation Port Is a Bad Mix of Doom and MECHWARRIOR 2 by Thierry Nguyen Boo 2:3940 amin 250 SULFA SCYTREN et another console in under three minport strikes the PC utes, so the Black platform. Straight Knight really never from the Play shows up, and even Station comes when he does, he's KRAZY IVAN, a port nothing but another that can be best annoying Sentient described as yet Enemies are stananother clone. dard texture-mapped, And, like so many low-res fare. They're similar games, this is one clone not too bad looking, you won't want to play. and they sure look a lot better than the terID4, RUSSIAN STYLE rain, which is nothing KRAZY IVAN takes place in the more than a jumble of THE BIGGER THEY ARE... Here is a typical KRAZY IVAN moment, as year 2018, when the Earth is badly-textured polyattacked by --you guessed ilyou stare from your 'Mech-style HUD at a decent-looking enemy gons. Even worse, it's menacing aliens. They've created on the ultra-bland terrain. the same bad looking gigantic energy fields in five locajumble from level to tions around the world, and someone some Sentients to light. If you dawdle level; the only difference between Saudi needs to dismantle these ficls. Enter loo long (about three minutes), the Black Arabia and Russia is that Russia has green Krazy Ivan, a schizophrenic Russian sol Knight an uber-powersuit will come ground, while Saudi Arabia has brown. dier who happens to hallucinate about by to hurry you along on your mission. Also, the box claims that you fight in 25 aliens on a daily basis. You'll have to get him out of your face levels, but actually, you fight 25 Sentients Your role as Krazy Ivan is to pilot the and resume your hunt for the Sentients in a mere five worlds. Steel Cossack power suit, a not-so or else he'll appear in another three min mighty Mech-type robot. Throughout ules (every time you kill a Sentient, the KRAZY ENOUGH TO BUY? the game, you will battle three to five timer resets). I can see the desire to add a In the end, Krazy IVAN is simply Sentients (mini-bosses), before you walk sense of urgency to the game, but it's another bad action game port. It brings up to the power generator and take it out never successfully conveyed. This game almost nothing new to the genre (except as well. The game is a mix of DOOM is so simple, you can find each Sentient for maybe showing how not to attempt type action and MECHWARRIOR 2-type to meld genres), and in fact has some sim, as you roam around each level with (3925 30 0:00.0 serious weaknesses that hinder it. At DOOM-style controls, while also conmost, it will be bought, laughed at tending with MECHWARRIOR 2-like (because of its unintended B-movie characteristics such as shield strength value), and then forgotten. and overheating APPEAL: Action gamers who would like a little Doom/MECHWARRIOR FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE 2-type action (or just a good laugh). From the hammy acting and Boris PROS: Easy to get into; hammy, and Natasha-style accents in the FMV intro to the actual game itself, IVAN The Black Knight yet amusing, FMV. CONS: Bland shows itself to be yet another Playstation The uber-powersuit arrives after terrain, lack of port that lost something in the journey to wait out my time limit. For those real depth, lots PC land. The terrain is bland, dotted looking for 'Mech-type depth, there of brainless with an occasional tree or shrub, and shooting, Black isn't any. Unlike in MECHWARRIOR 2, enemies always mysteriously appear out Knight threat not shooting this guy in the legs makes threatening of thin air to harass you. You then have to no difference at all. enough. wander around the level looking for IVAMX Price: $34.99 (street price) Minimum System Requirements: Pentium 60 (P120 recommended), 16MB RAM, 3MB hard drive space, SVGA Graphics, 2x CD-ROM, Windows 95, Windows 95-compatible sound cards. Multiplayer Support: Internet (1-2, 1 CD per player), LAN (1-2, One CD per player) Designer: Perfect Entertainment Publisher: Psygnosis Foster City, CA (800) 438-7794 www.psygnosis.com Reader Service #: 322 CGW MAY 1997 "


"** In the far distant future, an epic war for survival takes place...\" TM STARGUNNER MED CELET FACE FUEGO 200B ESHTEL TRUKE COL Coming Soon to your favorite reseller, or by calling 800-229-2714 WIZARD Works APOGEEN RSAC ADVISORY VIOLENCE Sted THE WIZARDWORKS GROUP/A GT INTERACTIVE SOFTWARE COMPANY MINNEAPOLIS, MN 55441 www.wizworks.com 1996 by Apogee Software Ltd. Marketed by The WizardWorks Group. All other trademarks are property of their respective owners. Microsoft Windows and Windows 95 are trademarks of Microsoft Corporation, VERACTIVE SOFTW PC CD-ROM Stargunner apogee Software Ltd, Morten "


"PO 16 17 The Fastest High-Speed, Internet Direct Racing Game on this Planet...or Any Other: ---the most explosive, hypersonic, nitro-burning, futuristic game ever is driving cutting edge technology to the outer limits: 32 QD2ouc 2) 63 Raze 3 02\" 22-0. An Incorporates state-of-the-art MMXTM technology. Also runs on Pentium processors with MMXTM technology and Pentium processors 100 MHz and higher. Neck-jerking speed...playable at up to 32 frames per second! (up to 80 fps with a 3-D accelerator card)! 16 tracks (plus new tracks downloadable over the Internet), variable damage control, customizable cars and three levels of difficulty. Revolutionary Online AMLICPAwer Features... SPLIT Mix and Match multi-player options with up to eight players (local area network; modem; two computer direct link; direct player connection over the Internet; and two player split screen option). LINK Vodox CALL KNSWER NETWORK Race others over the Internet, against highly advanced artificial intelligence, your own recorded \"ghost\" or someone else's. INTERNET CALL ANSWER Pre-calculated position engineering reduces latency over the Internet! 878 Lap Revolutionary website includes player matching, chat rooms, ranking lists, downloadable and uploadable ghosts, tracks, cars...and more. 02'04-26 On the Street NOW! Check Out the POD UNIVERSE for Amazing Contests, Turbo-Charged Shareware and More: 02.0498 Www.ubisoft.com "


"Ubi Soft by Ubi Soft KIDS TO ADULTS  Ubi Soft Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved Pentium is a registered trademark and MMX and the MMX logo are trademarks of Intel Corporation. Dolby and the Double-D symbol are trademarks of Bolby Laboratories Licensing Corporation. All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders. incorporate Intel MMX STADE Designed for Windows 95 DOLBY SURROUND 010 NOHO CIRCLE READER SERVICE #271 "


"* ** REVIEW. CLUE DIFFICULTY LEVEL Clueless CLASSICS & PUZZLES Hasbro's Detective Game Holds Unsavory Surprises by Charlotte Panther Charlotte reached its peak when the program cnter a crashed just as I was trying to save my rowing up in England, I room, the current game. spent many a summer starfirst serious So, is it worth persevering through ing dolefully out of the winproblem becomes these glitches? As a single-player detective dow, wondering if the rain apparent: Navigation is game Clue brings nothing new to the would stop long enough for painfully slow. Moving within genre. And, while up to six players can me to go outside. My fruseach room becomes a feat in itself: hotseat, the game does not have Internet, tration at being stuck Click away at the directional arrow, and LAN, or modem capabilities-a real indoors was somewhat watch the screen appeased by the enjoyment I discovered pan, slowly and playing Cluedo-or Clue to you Yanks. jerkily revealing Having had a fine time with Hasbro's new sections of computer adaptations of SCRABBLE, the room. For MONOPOLY, and Risk, I expected CLUE best perforCD-ROM to provide me with a pleas mance results, ant bit of nostalgia. Sadly, once you get Hasbro suggests past the opening full-motion video playing CLUE sequences, the experience proves even on a Pentium 75. more frustrating than being stranded in I experienced the house on a rainy day severe speed deficiencies on POINTLESS AND CLICK my P90, so Once you're inside the mansion, the reinstalled the WHITE OUT How trustworthy is the late Mr. Body's faithful houseidea is to scarch every room for clues, game on a P166. keeper, Mrs. White? Does anyone care, given the constant crashes? uncovering information that will auto It ran a little matically be recorded in your notebook better but was still disappointing. The shame, since an online chat feature could Playing against other people, you may problem continues as you question sushave added some spice to this dull game. complete two actions per tum (move pecls. Click on a character and you'll You can huddle a bunch of friends around into a room, question a witness, and so experience a two or three second delay one computer for hotseat play, but you're forth). Playing alone, you simply search, before anything happens. The atmosbetter off playing the boardgame-it's a point, and click until you have enough pheric music, while adding to the generlot more fun. The game is designed to information to make an accusation, al ambiance of the game, appears to provide replay value it has three differIf you've played other detective/ contribute to the speed problem, and ent plots, each with four difficulty adventure games, you'll find CLUES unfortunately there is no option to turn levelsbut we have a feeling that if you interface run-of-the-mill. Once you it off. Although you can customize your make it through one game, you'll be too install depending on your avail frustrated to care. able hard drive space, players The Key adhering to Hasbros minimum APPEAL: Sleuths with the patience of a Saint. hardware requirements (486/66 Beddy had promised and 2x CD), will nonetheless be PROS: Attractive FMV sequences. greatly clisappointed. CONS: Constant crashes; poor perDespite these setbacks, I conformance (even on PCs way above the recommendtinued on the trail of the murderer. ed requirements); Then, for no apparent reason, the no morlem, LAN, game locked up. Not one to be or Internet play. beaten, I started again...and Turns a classic boardgame into ELEMENTARY, MY DEAR WATSON A detecagain...and again. I tested the a bad adventure game on different PCs but it just tive's most important tool is his notebook. game. kept locking up. My frustration It all flashback Groothenght Price: $39.99 Minimum System Requirements: 486/66 (P75 recommended), 8MB RAM (12MB for Win 95), 5MB hard drive space, 2x CDROM (4x recommended), SVGA Graphics (16 bit recommended). mouse; Sound Blastercompatible sound card. Multiplayer Support: Hotseat (1-6 players). Designer: 3T Productions Publisher: Hasbro Interactive Beverly, Massachusetts (508) 921-3700 www.hasbro.com Reader Service #: 323 to porcost of oby coles for helpin patenting for me with corrup! Ceheiter. Bodd, threatened Groor in all with loyd Tre Green (wached wine bottle as he left RATED MAY 1997 "


"RECAS LUMMERS Aaron&Ruth are back and they're bringing a few of their friends! Aaron vs. Ruth: Battle of the Big Bats combines the greatest-ever collection of baseball superstars with action-packed realism and grandslammin' gameplay. Breakthrough features and stunningly accurate detail bring the heroes of past and present to life like never before. No doubt about it, you're playing with the big boys now. Aaron Po is Ruth S PlayStation in Available this spring on PlayStation\" and Windows PC. 95 KIDS TO ADULTE Windows EXSA. DD 95 www.aaronruth.com www.mindscapegames.com Www.majorleaguevasevall.com 1997 Mindscape, Inc. All rights reserved. Mindscape is a registered trademark and Mindscape Sports Advantage and the MSA logo are trademarks of Mindscape, Inc. Major League Baseball trademarks and copyrights are used with permission of Major League Baseball Properties Inc, Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. Playstation and the Playstation logos are trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective holders. MINDSCAPE SPORTS ADVANTAGE PlayStation CD-ROM "


"***** REVIEW PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL '97 SPORTS DIFFICULTY LEVEL Playing the Numbers PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL '97: Serious Fun for Hardball Stat-Heads by Jim Gindin 93 F110 Options Game Stats Jin Gillian Substituto Camera View Window Help Whitey Ford Fly out to Le BKNSS AUG 2821 RDI PLAY ROUR OR) aseball's numbers represent one of America's purest art forms. Batting averages, home runs, earned run averages, strikeouts, and on-base percentages meld into a system simple enough to attract small children, yet elaborate in all its relationships. People watch hockey, basketbsall, and football to see a sporting event. Baseball is more than that, it's a series of individual challenges that make up the framework of a season. The standings reflect the sport; the numbers underline individual achievements. Can Mark McGwire beat Roger Maris' 6l-home run total? Can Greg Maddux finish with less than a 200 ERA, despite all the run-producing fireworks abundant in mid-90s baseball? Dave Holt, founder of Micro Sports, is someone who loves those numbers as much as any statistical maven, and over the years, his PRO LEAGUE series of baseball simulations has allowed gamers to share in his love of the game. His latest work, PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL '97, is another fine effort. SLIDER FAST CHANGE CURVE KNUCKLE STRATEGY BKN55 R ALGIELA IN S ON INYASS RUBBELBI1Qoc de PITCHER BATTER PROFILE LOCATION TELE INSIDE! THE RIGHT STUFF? Choose between five pitches to set your game in motion, and then let 'er rip. Once the ball is in play, the computer takes over Price: $19.95 Minimum System Requirements: P60 (P100 recommended), 8MB RAM (16MB recommended), 32MB hard disk space, VGA/SVGA graphics, 2x CD-ROM, DOS 6.0 or higher, mouse; supports Sound Blaster-compatible sound cards. Multiplayer Support: hotseat (1-2 players). modem (1-2 players) Designer: Dave Holt Publisher: General Admission Gold Lancaster, PA (800) 334-2722 www.mmi.com Reader Service #: 324 SEASON'S GREETINGS PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL's strength lies in its ability to simulate luge quantities of baseball games in a very short amount of time. To enhance this effort, every Major Leaguc team from 1904-95 is part of the roster database. There's also a set schedule available for each season. On a P75, PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL can simulate the 1934 season in less than three minutes. Only a couple of competitors even approach this speed, and they do so with much less accuracy. In fact, Holt's algorithms give PLB a raw simulation accuracy close to that of the leaders in the genre, DIAMOND MIND BASEBALL and STRATO-MATIC BASEBALL. PLB is actually a little better in some areas, such as being able to simulate unusual performances. Il a hitler has a high walk total along with a very low number of strikeouts, PLB handles his performance far more accurately than the competition. The simulation is also better at dealing with the differences between older generations and today's players. Pitchers from the '30s completed a third of their games, while last year's barely completed one-tenth. PLB has little trouble working with either time period. The simulation is a little less cxact in other areas. Defense is handled in a more team-like manner, so putouts and assists are assigned after the simulation determines that an out has taken place. A good fielding team will perform much better than a poor fielding team, but individual assist and putout totals won't reflect those abilities. Shortstops, second basemen, and center fielders don't make nearly as many plays as they do in real lifc. Even though the core of any defense is the range of these players, excellence in those positions does not translate into an excellent ficlding team. As a result, a team can gel away with playing Albert Belle at shortstop and not face much of a penalty (especially since suspensions for abusing fans were not built into the game). PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL also has a little trouble with extra basc hits. Doubles and triples only appear at about 85 percent of their real-life rates, and home runs are a bit lower for the bottom-cnd players. This lowers league slugging percentage by about.020 and on-base percentage by about.010, and reduces offense a small amount from real life. It isn't, however, enough to ruin a good simulation, CGW MAY 1997 "


"OVER 50 DUNK ANIMATIONS. Bring MORE THAN 10 CAMERA ANGLES & DOZENS OF PLAY OPTIONS. RUN-N-GUN WITH 1-4 PLAYERS ON PC, 1-8 PLAYERS ON PLAYSTATION CREATE & CUSTOMIZE YOUR OWN TEAMS. OVER 64 TEAMS & STADIUMS TO CHOOSE FROM TOP 20 NATIONAL CHAMPIONSHIP TEAMS OF ALL-TIME. PLAY CALLING ON THE FLY. REAL STATS. S HOT GAMES GET WIRED WITH ONE CLICK TO OUR WEBSITE. SWEEPSTAKES * mindscapegames.com THE ONLY HOOP GAME THAT FEELS AS GOOD AS IT LOOKS. NCAA 9PlayStation FA97 95 ... DUNK YOU Very Much! AVAILABLE IN MARCH Windows KS TO ORTS 959 19 KCA INCAA) OANGER HIGH VOLTAGE SOFTWARE CO-ROM PlayStation TRUTH ZYSA 1996 Mindscape. Inc. All rights reserved. Mindscape is a registered trademark and Mindscape Sports Atvantage and the MSA logo are trademarks of Mindscape, Inc. The NCAA and Final Four are registered trademarks of the National Collegiate Athletic Association and are used under license by Mindscape. Inc, Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation PlayStation and the PlayStation logo are trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective holders. MINDSCAPE SPORTS ADVANTAGE CIRCLE READER SERVICE #133 "


"REVIEW PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL '97 SPORTS Fleit Help Data NAME Medulch mize,J TEAU G SUK37 LF 14 SU37 IB PI137 RF BY 3R CIN32 20 1225 5 Iarnan. Denare, 7 March CHANZ NF HIT AND RUN regular starting rotation, but pitchers who out of the strike zone, you'll miss the ball. Other than the unusual approach to started 15—25 games often end up throwTiming is a little more difficult because defense, PRO LEACUE BASEBALL handlesing once every two weeks. you have to watch both the bar and the raw simulation as well as any stat-based For head-to-head games, PLB offers a zone, but after a short while, you'll be game. Arcade games like HARDBALL and graphic interface, complete with multiaveraging one to two hits per inning. TONY LARUSSA BASEBALL. aren't in the screen representations of every Major same ballpark, and despite its marketing, League ballpark. Even the Polo Grounds, LEAGUE LEADER FRONT PAGE SPORTS: BASEBALL is less with its unusual dimensions, is available, Overall, PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL. '97 accurate than even the LARUSSA game. although someone needs to tell the artists offers an interesting alternative to the The strength of the other stat-based that the team from Washington was statistic-based games, with more emphagames, however, isn't just in statistical known as the Senators rather than the sis on user control, nice graphics, and accuracy. With DIAMOND MIND, STRAT Redskins. The players are well detailed, speed. And I can't stress enough how O-MATIC, and Lance Haffners games including some neat extras like old-style nice it is to have every team from you're able to configure each team accord uniforms for the older teams and quite a 1904-95 available for simulation. ing to your likes and dislikes. You have a lot bit of dirt-kicking and range of motion. However, the game is a little buggy. It of control over pitching rotations, relief The graphics, however, don't compete often crashes in league management pitching roles, batting orders, and platoons with the top arcade games. mode and during player drafts when the That control really doesn't exist in There's also an arcade mode, though pool is out of a particular type of player, PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL. You only have this isn't intended to rival the efforts of and you may experience some trouble if one tool available to modify a season HARDBALL or TONY LARUSSA BASEBALL. you're using a Sound Blaster 16 card. There's also a problem SIAT CENTRAL with end-game management of head-to-head File Option View Help games that carries over lo Horace Clarke League Leaders the simulation. In one case, the run scored from Horace Clarke what should have been a game-ending 10th-inning single was completely ignored. Also, the losing pitcher will usually be incorrectly assigned if 260 23 S 2 there was a pitching change in the middle of an inning when the lead New York (A) 270 run was scored. There's work to be PUMP YOU UP PLAY BALL done, but this effort is far, You can use the Team Editor to beef up (or tone At PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL '97's core is a huge, fast datafar better than the initial down the statistics of any real-life player in the 90 base of statistics. The League Leaders screen lets you 1994 release of PRO years' worth of teams included in the game. sort and print stats in every conceivable category. LEAGUE BASEBALL, which couldn't be recomiendsimulation: adjusting the number of On defense, you can position fielders and ed under any circumstances. And it's cergames played at each position. If you throw one of five pitches. Select the tainly enough to make me look forward want Belle to start half of Chicago's pitch, choose a location, and then try to t o Holt's next effort, MICROLEAGUE games at shortstop, you assign him 81 time the release based on a moving color B ASEBALL 6.0, due later this spring, games played at that position. If you bar, like a golf swing meter. If you're close want Maddux to start one out of every to the target line when you release the APPEAL: Statistical aficionados five games Atlanta plays, assign him a 33 ball, it's always a strike. Even if you throw who want to play fast seasons within the Games Started category. Relief the same fastball to the same location for out tweaking the lineups. pitching works in a similar manner, with nine straight innings, the computer has a PROS: Excellent statistical accucloser situations allocated through a perlot of trouble scoring runs. And, once a racy, access to every Major League team from centage of team saves a pitcher earned, ball is hil, everything's automatic. 1905-95. and appearances allocated through a On offense, you control a similar CONS: Weak percentage of overall games pitched in color bar when the pitch appears. There's arcade mode, relief. As a result, a pitcher who both a small strike zone at the bottom of the crashes in other starts and relieves will often appear as a screen that indicates where the pitch will modes, lack of reliever in one game, then a starter in the end up. If you swing at a pitch in the flexibility in season simulation. next game. There's an attempt to follow a strike zone, you will make contact. If it's SERESSE SSAGESSERE THIET? CH PITU? EG NYIZ CF BESAR LG x 9 Vauxhan. 80 Hipple. 11 Canll11.D 12 Auto 13 floare, 14 Bartoll, 15 Tod.A HVA IMO PITS? C UN37 CIN7 30 130 G16 17 Hacks 10 Jurget. 405 NYGO? RF N IUE RANCE 21 Thor G Page 4 & Press (ESC) to exit edit ande. Sort Batting av CGW MAY 1997 "


"Sega Rally Championship.\" The arcade racing hit. Now available on PC. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #180 "


"** * REVIEW THE ART OF FLY FISHING, VOL. 1 SPORTS DIFFICULTY LEVEL r Something THE ART OF FLY FISHING IS Just All Wet by Scott A. May but has absolutely no correlation with the actual act of casting. Once in the water, you must wait for a fish to swim by and admire your lure. This action, viewed in a little pop-up window, requires that you press the mouse button to initiate a strike. Timing is critical. After too many failed strikes, the fish get wise to your game and find other spots to swim. If you do land a fish, you have to play with it by applying and releasing line tension, slowly reeling it in close enough to net. Fly Fishing ierra has proven that fishOne\" in a series. Whether we'll ever see ing simulations have subsequent volumes is a good question, become a lucrative gaming though. Forget those exciting scenes market with their best from A River Runs Through It--if this selling TROPHY BASS game were any more laid back, gamers series. Now Cametek adds would literally be sleeping with the fishes. an even more specialized outing, THE ART OF FLY HERE FISHY FISHY FISHING. One part interac It all begins promisingly enough. THE tive game and two parts ART OF FLY FISHING provides access to reference guide, this peculiar little title three of the best fly-fishing rivers and offers its share of rewards, but you'll have streams in Great Britain: thc Test, Spey, to be a hard-core angler to be lured by and Blackwater. In practice mode, you the game's bone-dry presentation have a choice of six fishing hotspots on Created by Britain's Arc Develop each river, typically located at scenic ment, this game is billed as «Volume bends, where the current creates a series of shallows, ridges, and gullies. Most spots offer a choice of fishing positions, either on the bank or in the shallows. Where you stand helps determine your angle to several unseen factors lurking below the surface, such as eddies, vegetation, and other underwater habitats. An overhead view gives a clear indication of fish locations and traps to avoid The strategies and mechanics of fly CATCH OF THE DAY Beautiful backgrounds fishing are much different than lake help distract players from overly simple fishing in terms of equipment choice game mechanics. and casting styles. Although the game box boasts \"hundreds of tips and techniques,\" most have to be pieced KI together by the player, who must read between the lines of the detailed online reference library. The skimpy manual traipses through the basics of gameplay, but is woefully short on tips for improving your skills. Casting is a simple matter of targeting a spot on the river-either up or downstream-followed by a dubious FISH SCHOOL The online reference library three-step process of moving and contains almost everything you'd ever want to clicking the mouse in time with a barknow about fish, except how to catch them. style casting meter. It's easy to pick up, SORRY, CHARLIE Fishing spots are displayed as static, auginented by some nice spot animation to suggest a flowing river. Other graphics are extremely simple (almost shareware quality). Options include choice of rod, line, and artificial flies (wet or dry). Fish alone or in competition with up to six computer-controlled or human anglers. The only thing the manual and online reference guide do well is explain the significance of each lure. Otherwise, these guides are mostly a collection of superfluous information. You'll be hard-pressed to land any game-enhancing tips here. Overall, THE ART OF FLY FISHINC is somewhat engaging, but its held back by its dull interface and lack of useful instructions. This one is definitely catch-and-relcasc. Price: $50.00 Minimum System Requirements: 486 DX4 (P90 recommended) 8MB RAM (16MB recommended), 16MB swap file, SVGA graphics, 4x CD-ROM, Windows 95 or 3.1, mouse; supports Sound Blaster 16-compatible sound cards. Multiplayer Support: hotseat (1-6 players) Designer: Arc Development Publisher: Gametek Sausalito, CA (415) 289-0220 www.gametek.com Reader Service #: 325 APPEAL: Fly fishing fanatics. PROS: Easy to learn, nice blend of high-res photography and spot animation, runs entirely from CD. CONS: This game's presenta tion is so dry, it makes TROPHY Bass look like QUAKE. RATED CGW MAY 1997 "


"And hey, it's networkable. 45 13/15 Cette 112173 225.15 22 13/16 0°45 70 A.133 SEGA RALLY SEGA RALLY CAMPION  Racing You're sitting at your desk. And you're bored, Bored, bored, bored. Now imagine you're sitting at your desk taking hairpin turns through dirt and mud. Massive bumps send you flying into orbit. And you better anticipate the next curve or you're gonna get to know the side of a mountain a little too well. Ahhh... there's nothing quite like the offroad racing experience of Sega Rally Championship for the PC. There's even head-to-head network play. So, c'mon, you get a little time off for lunch go find some buddies and let them eat your dust. SEGYPing DOSTLASTI KA SEGA Ch Check out our demo at www.sega.com/segapo SEGA is registered in the U.S. Patent of Trademark Office, (prolly impressive, huh). SEGA Entertainment, SEGA Racing and Sega Rally Championship are trademarks of SEGA. SEGA, P.O. Box 8097, Redwood City, CA 94063. All rights reserved. Every single one of 'em. Order a game by calling 1-888-SEGA SALES for just call to say \"hi,\" our operators love that ntertainment CIRCLE READER SERVICE #180 "


"**** REVIEW . FLYING CORPS DIFFICULTY LEVEL Aces High SIMULATIONISPACE The New King of WWI Games, if You Have the Hardware Horsepower by Robin G. Kim level. ark back to the dawn of up can force military aviation-the war you to use to end all wars. It was instruments there, high above the batjust to keep tle-scarred fields of France, straight and that the axioms of air combat were first conceived by Predictably, resourceful men piloting these eye-popfragile constructions of ping graphics wood and fabric. Rowan do not come Software and Empire Interactive take for free. At you back to this pioneering era with 640x480 resoFLYING CORPS, a simulation whose TANK BUSTING Ground attack missions offer a variety of target lution, I had to impressive realism and level of detail types, from ammo dumps to moving tanks and trucks. turn down mark a clear break from the companies some detail previous arcade-like sim offerings ture mapping to good effect in rendering options to sustain 10 frames/second on Eight instant-action missions help you the subtly rolling French countryside. my P5-166 running DOS; the Win 95 get up to speed for four lengthy cam Roads, rivers, and other landmarks are version included on the same CD runs paigns, which are the main focus of the shown in enough detail to enable visual even slower. Fortunately, the game supgame. Mission types vary widely and navigation using the included paper ports any VESA resolution your video incorporate a random factor that keeps maps, though an impenetrable haze BIOS is capable of, from 320x240 up to you on your toes. Some campaigns put restricts visibility to about 4km. While 1600x1200. Dropping down to 512x384 you in charge of managing an entire this distance is sufficient at low altitudes, or 400x300 should allow most PCs to squadron and let you to decide the numthe lack of a distinct horizon when higher attain a reasonable frame rate. Direct 3D ber and type of planes to take up, who will fly in what formation, THE CAMPAIGNS and the tactics pilots will use if engaged. Of the 19 aircraft types MISSION represented in the gaine, the 6 PLANNING Only you can pilot are the French the Tank Battle Waypoint 1 Spad XIII and Nieuport 28, campaign allows British SE5a and Sopwith you to alter your Camcl, and German Albatros flight plan and DIII and Fokker Del Triplane. choose targets. FLYING COLORS The planning map As squadron leader, you can shows friendly have planes painted with unique casualties and the designs to make identification extent of the easieror just to show off your enemy advance. impeccable fashion sense. No matter how they're painted, the our late-war (1917-18) cam beyond just the setting, available equiptextured aircraft graphics are paigns are included in FLYING ment, and uniform of the enemy, each also simply gorgeous. Surface detail CORPS. Two have you flying for offers a unique combination of mission is thankfully not shown for disthe German Air Service, one for types and leadership responsibilities. This tant aircraft, resulting in sharp the British Royal Flying Corps, and one for variety helps keep every new campaign images that show a target's atti a newly formed American squadron. fresh, improving long-term playability. tude at remarkably long ranges. Differences between the campaigns extend The 1918 Spring Offensive campaign FLYING CORPS also uses tex>Continued on pg 154 Target: Action: Afritude Tank Convoy Attack 3280Ft Price: $49.95 Minimum Requirements: P90, 16MB RAM, 6MB hard drive space, 4x CDROM drive, MS-DOS or Window 95, mouse. Multiplayer: None (internet and LAN planned for 20 '97 patch) Designer: Rowan Software Publisher: Empire Interactive Germantown, MD (301) 916-9303 www.empire-us.com Reader Service #: 326 CGW MAY 1997 "


"RAX IMPERIA EMINENT DOMAIN ARRIVING SUMMER 1997 i'r Explore up to 800 unique worlds Engage in real-time tactical combat Exploit hundreds of research and development technologies Go head-to-head against up to 16 LAN or Internet players WWW.PAXIMPERIA.COM M Designed for THQ Microsoft Windows 96 Mac OS 11.00 ASOUND CIRCLE READER SERVICE #127 "


"REVIEW . FLYING CORPS * SIMULATION/SPACE ples are used throughout, with clever stereo effects telling you which way to look to find the plane that just whizzed by or the tanks trundling along below. In-flight music can be played, but it slows the game down and causes lockups on some machines. STATUS CHECK If your situational awareness needs a AERIAL MELEES Dogfights can involve dozens of THE BELL CURVE boost, a 1-3 line status panel can be brought up at the planes in a chaotic, swirling mass; mid-air collisions are computer pilots in FLYING CORPS vary widetop of the screen, with each line showing a successive as threatening as enemy bullets. ly in skill level. Novices ly greater level of information. ational awareness. The padlock views are may panic and spin out of control when support has been promised for owners of quirky, but would work well enough if they see you, while more experienced 3D accelerator cards, and may be availthey didn't suffer from a similar blind adversaries coolly maneuver for advanable in a patch by the time you read this spot problem. Empire has released an tage before engaging In contrast to the excellent external update that fixes the overly fast manualYour wingmen respond erratically to graphics, the sims cockpit view system is panning mode and adds 14 fixed views, commands you issue, but that's undera disappointment. The only way to shift but it does nothing about the blind spots. standable given that WWI scouts didn't the view is to pan manually or to use one carry radios. Very low-flying targets of several padlock modes which rotate to SNAP ROLLS AND MORE reveal the Al's biggest weakness: It's track objects automatically. Manual panOne area that doesn't disappoint is unable to attack such aircraft without ning is less than effective because, the sims exceptionally accurate flight inevitably augering in. Other than this depending on the panning speed you model. Though options can be tweaked one exploitable fault, computer pilots are employ, it's either too slow to be useful in to tone things down for novices, hard fairly capable in both air-to-air and a fast-paced dogfight or too fast to concore sim pilots can treat themselves to a ground-attack roles. Those wanting to trol. Also, it leaves a huge blind spot wide variety of realistic effects such as test their skills against human opponents extending from straight above to directly gyroscopic precession, adverse yaw, will have to wait; a free Win 95-only mulbehind the pilot; this greatly reduces situtorque, and even snap rolls (rapid rolls tiplayer patch is still in the works. that result when large elevator and Despite its flaws, FLYING CORPS THE CAMPAIGNS rudder inputs cause one wing to does an outstanding job of capturing stall while the other generates the visceral up-close-and-personal flaContinued from pg 152 near-maximum lift). vor of WWI air combat. This, in combistarts you out as a rookie RFC Richthofen—the infamous Stall and overspeed buffeting nation with the game's depth of realism pilot during a major German Red Baron-is away on leave contribute to an outstanding feeland mission variety, yields an impresground offensive. The better you after putting you, his brother ing of flight that varics convincingsive package that's almost sure to please do, the faster you will be pro Lothar, in charge of the elite ly from plane to plave. Handling sim fans who have hardware fast moted to positions of leader Jasta 11. Three mission remains believable even when an enough to run it. & ship. All missions are chosen choices are available for aircraft loses a wing or tail section APPEAL: WWI sim fans whose for you, but do vary slightly over each flight. to enemy fire-a common occurcopies of RED BARON are becoming multiple playings. Your By far the most elaborate rence with the sims detailed damthreadbare. Pentium owners looksquadron's cumulative perfor and difficult campaign of the age modeling ing for a fun and realistic prop mance will determine the out bunch, Tank Battle forces you Though some minor short plane sim that offers as much to come of the battle. to consider strategy as well as comings do exist-planes someexperts as to novices. Hat-in-the-Ring puts you in tactics as you manage your times get stuck in weird nose PROS: Excellent flight model, Eddie Rickenbacker's shoes as squadron of German pilots in high attitudes if abused, and good graphics and sound, a large variety of missions to fly, and he strives to become America's a delaying action against a stress failures from excessive Gs plenty of gameplay tuning options. Ace of Aces. Once promoted to determined British assault. are not modeled the flight CONS: Gamers squadron leader, you'll be able Any ground units destroyed in model is surely the best that has must turn down to choose among several misone mission are gone for the ever been seen in a prop-plane resolution to sion types, such as balloon duration, so the outcome of air combat simulation. achieve a good busting or escort duty. each sortie has an immediate Another area where FLYING frame rate on As the Flying Circus cam and lasting effect on the CORPS rises above the pack is its today's PCs, clunky view paign begins, Manfred von course of the battle. wonderfully immersive sound system. effects. Authentic digitized samRATEN CCW MAY 1997 "


"hand it to Spacetec there ented SpaceOrb360 GAME spa the Sp Was the The SnaceOrbwill make you a at stuit. Itmakes great stuff. It makes Circle Strating a breeze. controller to So good, everyone will hate you.» BYAN DEI RIzzo, BOOT MAGAZINE Come here that did not end up \"...the movement is so smooth, precise intuitive. The SpaceOrb 360 is the best game controller around for Descent (the SpaceOrh36o is an incredibli intuitive controller ...the ONLY Controller for 3D games in the wall. AMERICAN MCGEE ...my new SpaceOrbis incredibly SWEET It blows my Wingman Extreme out of the ...the motion is so fluid and real, I alm puked the first time I used it. )  TER 1azing how easy it is to dance around my opponents effortles oppon sending loads of buckshots roldevice STRONG www.spaceorb.com atProduct! I can RRETT ALEXANDER Unique Six-Axis PowerSensor Technology Allows You To Strate, Rotate Freelook and Create Complex Moves 9 On Any AxisInstantly! :) Available in the We Major Computer and Game Retailers Everywhere "


"IN X-WING VS. TIE FIGHTER YOU WILL BATTLE HEAD-TO-HEAD AGAINST . AN ENEMY MORE RUTHLESS THAN JABBA THE HUTT AND MORE.SINISTER THAN DARTH VADER. Today it's Floyd. Tomorrow, the greatest pilot in the Star Wars universe could be a dentist in New Jersey. That's the beauty of X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter'\". It allows you to engage in head-to-head combat against real people over modem, network and the internet. It's a real first, and it's in real time. The graphics have been galactically enhanced. The flight "


"(Floyd from Accounting.) engine is phenomenal. The new missions are masterstrokes of space mayhem. There's even single player campaigns for an all-new explosive experience. No wonder Computer Gaming World proclaims X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter \"number one on every space sim-er's wish list.\" And if you don't believe them, just ask Floyd. http://www.lucasarts.com C3 19 1213 X-WING US. TIG FIGHTER ETTE K-216 LUCAS Aris AN 1996 Lucasfilm Ltd. All Rights Reserved. Used Under Authorization. Star Wars X-Wing. TIE Fighter and the LucasArts logo are registered trademarks of Lucasfilm Ltd. The ratings icon is a trademark of the Interactive Digital Software Association. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #118 "


"***** REVIEW MAGIC THE GATHERING: BATTLEMAGE DIFFICULTY LEVEL STRATEGYZWARGAMES Magic In The Fast Lane Acclaim's Clumsy BATTLEMAGE Will Leave You With a Need for Less Speed getCTINOS, DLANIVALCA. AH TERCEL, AND JUST AS YOU ABE A VISITOR TO THE LAND. t At LttAto Top VISITO CORONDOQI THE CITY OF ABATNOXIA OTANOS DOUBT YOU VILL FIND YOUR POVEEL ARE AT A MADIN, AND YOU'LL HAVE TO JOIN VITH THE LAND TO FIND TREEN MAOIO. TO MOX IEACON THAT DOEV YOU HERE BELONGS TO ONE RAVIDEL. AND IT IS NE VHO HAS BOUDED WELCOME TO THE CAMPAION FOR CORONDOR by Bob Proctor Leshrac ans of the card game trolled by another wizard and Magic: The the dueling will begin. Gathering have been The artists and programwaiting eagerly for a mers did a spectacular job on computer version ever the BATTLEMAGE graphics. since Microprose The screens are filled with rich announced it over two textures and sparkling gems, years ago. After many each land is represented by an delays, it looked like it absolutely gorgeous picture, would be out in time and the animation of wizards for Christmas. Then Acclaim and creatures is clever and appeared with their own MTG enormously varied. Grizzly title and confused everyone. WHAT'S UP, TEFERI? In the campaign, you'll meet other bears rear up on their hind legs Rumors and lawsuits flew, but the wizards. Depending on your attitude-which shouldn't to fight, goblins swing their companies have since settled the always be nice--you could be gifted with some new spells. swords, the lightning bolt confusion over their respective cloud slowly drifts over the vicgames. Amidst the legal entanglements, SAY THREE NICE THINGS... tim before zapping him. Unfortunately, Acclaim has managed to ship their And yet, if you persevere, the game is about the only time you can savor these MAGIC game first. So while we'll have to not so bad. There is even a lot to like. The gems is when you're waiting for that wait a few more weeks for MicroProses strategy game is simple and intuitive: mammoth to trample the life out of you. version of Magic, we can at least try out You're striving for control over the contiAcclaims more loose translation, MAGIC nent of Corondor. The game is divided \"THE GATHERING: BATTLEMAGE. into 31 lands. Each player starts BATTLEMAGE is not the card game with control of a single land, it is a real-time strategy game using the and you attempt to spread your Magic system for combat, with some control over neighboring role-playing elements added for good lands, which are populatmeasure. All duels are done in real cd by characters and Price: $59.95 time-which would seem to eliminate creatures straight out of Minimum System ex timing issues that make the the cards. You can trade Requirements: P75, card game so complicated for beginners insults with an ogress (P90 recommended) Sounds like a great concept to me! befriend an elf, or get the 16MB RAM, 90MB hard drive space, 2x CD-ROM Sadly, the execution falls short. It fails scavenging folk to do your drive, Windows 95, 2MB in only one area, but that area is the heart laundry. The point of these DirectX compatible PCI of the game: the duel. The problems encounters is to acquire video card, mouse. stem from a weak user interface and new spells to make you a Multiplayer Support: from a clock set so fast that it's hard to Modem (1-2) more powerful wizard. IPX LAN (1-4) know what's happening. Every player Success comes from Designers: Realtime I've talked to had the same first experi being nice, pitiful, Productions ence. They frantically tap the keys and mean, and awe Publisher: Acclaim click the mouse and their commands inspiring at the right Entertainment Inc. Glen Cove, NY execute slowly or not at all. By the time times. You will www.acclaimnation.com they manage to summon one creature, cventually enter a Reader Service #: 327 | the enemy has five or six on the attack. land already conAklaim Ger CGW MAY 1997 "


"Master the unknown before it masters you. \"The eagerly awaited sequel to one of the most popular space-conguest games of all time.\" COMPUTER PLAYER \"...the ultimate game of galactic conquest.\" -COMPUTER GAMING WORLD MASTER OF ORION II BATTLE AT ANTARES\" EUR 1731 Versace Loose Trilu Pjok Treat Baron Oiler: trengen Dagorelor Sudio dod Ryt The gicat nalaman k another por o metant for ust moment history SIE LITLANE RETURN KIDS TO ADULTS MICROPROSE In your strategic quest for galactic supremacy, the Antarans eagerly await to exact their vengeance. Play it solitaire. Play it with friends over a network. Play a hot-seat game or via modem. Just play it.\" Visit your local retailer or call 24 hours: 1-800-695-GAME (U.S. and Canada). CIRCLE READER SERVICE #217 www.microprose.com Available on PC/Windows 95 CD-ROM ERIS AD 1996 MicroProse Software Inc. MASTER OF ORION and BATTLE AT ANTARES are trademarks and MICROPROSE is a registered trademark of MicroProse Sollware, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders. Call 1-800-771-3772 for information on Game Ratings CIRCLE READER SERVICE #217 "


"REVIEW  MAGIC THE GATHERING: BATTLEMAGE Where Is This Gathering, Anyway? STRATEGY / WARGAMES hen Magic: The Gathering hit the shelves in the summer of 1993, it was the first collectible card game (CCG) and it remains, after three years, the most popular. The concept of a CCG was so successful that there are now dozens on the market. In Magic, each card represents either a spell or a land (lands provide the points of mana that power the spells). There are five colors of magic and each has a certain flavor: Red does direct damage, green gives fast mana, blue counters your opponent's spells, black brings dead creatures back to life, and white is for healing and protection. Each player is a wizard who assembles a deck of 60 cards from the over 2000 available and challenges another wizard to a duel. Both wizards start with 20 points of life and the most basic way to win is to reduce your opponent to zero life. What makes most CCGs different from other card games is the concept of deck design: Each duel has elements of luck (created by shuffling the cards), but a player can greatly influence chance by choosing which spells to include and which to leave out. Adding copies of a key spell greatly increases the odds of drawing it: leaving out spells that don't support your strategy is just as important. Different themes and strategies for winning are possible and the combinations of all these different decks give enormous variety. New cards come along three or four times a year so the process of discovering new combinations never stops. DUEL TO THE DEATH Here is a typical game where you duel with other wizards. The excessively fast pace and some interface problems keep this game from being fun. ... BEFORE SAYING ANYTHING CRITICAL Duels are conducted on a map of one of the lands, viewed from overhead. The two wizards are never on the screen at the same time, and this means you have to constantly jump back and forth to see each one. One keystroke (W) does it, but if both wizards were onscreen at the same time, it would eliminate this hassle. Another problem with the layout is that you can only see your top card. You have to move cach card to the top of the pile before you can cast it. So, you spend another great number of keystrokes cycling cards. Timing problems cause even more confusion. There's an enormous irony in this because timing is the source of 90 percent of the questions and confusion in the card game. In realtime, if I'm quicker on the draw than you are, my spell resolves first. No more taking turns. In MTG, spells are cast as a reaction. Your opponent tries to attack with a lion, you paralyze the lion. THUNDERSEAT \"A DOUBLE MUST-HAVE. Anyone who plays computer games will want this AMAZING CHAIR!\" Marc Spiwak POPULAR ELECTRONICS \"I could actually FEEL the punch of the afterburner!\" Ed Dille, ELECTRONIC GAMES Feedback System Used in Real F-16 Simulators SEVIRTUAL UTOPIA! COMPUTER SHOPPER Now Available to the Public HOW IT WORKS A 100 watt subwoofer built into the base generates low frequency sound that resonates through the wave chamber hidden inside the chair. Thus you not only hear but FEEL your simulation. Paired with your amplifier, the ThunderSeat makes your favorite flight sim as realistic as it can be without a motion simulator! 950 L OPTIONAL SIDE CONSOLES Put your favorite joystick controls and mouse at a convenient position. Add a keyboard holder and you have the perfect setup for both flight simulation and office work. Shake Rattle and Roll for as little as $159.95! For a FREE CATALOGUE CALL 1.800. 8-THUNDER Whether it be fumble of your NASCAR o recoil of your Chain Gun, the ThunderSeat lets you blast off to a new level of realism. ThunderSeat Technologies 17835 Sky Park Circle Suite C Irvine, CA 92614-6106 714851-1230 Fax: 714.851-1185 CIRCIF READER SERVICE #161 "


"Get MORE of what you PLAY for! CAMPAIGI LIST PATAMUISIE WION SCENARIO EDITOR 2 PATROL ZONES. 15 SCENARIOS DAIGNS AND 40 SCENARIOS! PATHOLUNSK | PATROL DISK CAMPAIGN DISK TAMPAIGN CAMDALAM DICT 3 CAMPAIGNS AND 30 SCENARIOS! 3 CAMPAIGNS AND 30 SCENARIOS! 3 CAMPAIGNS AND 35 SCENARIOS! 2 PATROL ZONES AND 15 SCENARIOS! For exclusive We atla Tuduhese with Forexclusive use with: For cuclusive use with: STIHL OTO SILENT HUNTER EEL SAEL SPIL SPEEL Battlefield Expansion Disks From SSI. CAMPAIGN DISKS for use with STEEL PANTHERS. CAMPAIGN DISK for use with STEEL PANTERS II. This disk comes loaded with 30 scenarios and 3 campaigns: KOREA 1998, BATTLE FOR THE LOW COUNTRIES & DRIVE INTO THE RHINELAND. Disk #1 features 35 scenarios and 3 campaigns: BATTLE FOR NORTH AFRICA, OPERATION BARBAROSSA & PATTON'S 3RD ARMY. PATROL DISKS for use with SILENT HUNTER. Disk #1 features 15 scenarios and 2 patrol zones: SULU SEA & MALAYSIA. Disk #2 adds a powerful Scenario Editor, 15 scenarios plus 2 more patrol zones: VIETNAM & HONG KONG. CAMPAIGN DISK for use with AGE OF RIFLES. This disk is packed with 30 scenarios and 3 campaigns: THE BRITISH COLONIAL INDIAN MUTINY, THE WARS OF ITALIAN UNIFICATION & Hood's DRIVE NORTH. BE TO ADUERTE Disk #2 adds 40 scenarios plus 3 more campaigns: DRIVE TO BERLIN 1943-45, RISING SUN 1938-44 & PANZER COMMAND 1939-45. DOS CD-ROM www.ssionline.com AGE OF RIFLES, SILENT HUNTER and STEEL PANTHERS are trademarks of Strategic Simulations, Inc. 1997 Strategic Simulations Inc. a Mindscape Company. All rights reserved. For exclusive use with these award-winning wargames from SSI: SILENT NUNTER BER AGE SAMWEL BE E REUS SEL | sk shri ni in A RIFLES LESY A MINDSCAPE COMPANY "


"POWER COMPUTER GAMING WORLD, The Computer Game Magazine za confirmed Kim Sports Game All-Stars We Pick the Best in Football, Basketball, Baseball & Hockey Go Online. Meet New People. and Fill Them With Lead in Domark/ICI'S Air Combat Arena What's Your Pick for Game of the Year? See Our Winners Inside... UJAR Furdai  PLAY to win. Frenzy  SUBSCRIBE to save. Here's the move that'll blow'em away: Call 1-800-827-4450 And grab the rock-bottom rate other gamers would virtually die for! ARTINELLI MIGCAR Racing Wing Commander III "


"MAGIC THE GATHERING: BATTLEMAGE  REVIEW DOG WITH CURED LAND 0486 LITUAL DEATH DRIE LIFE DOUBOE SVELETONE (VIL PRETHSE TAL THAROO Foot MADE out bs to HTYNOTIC SPECIES KALYEK KEX ROR OF THE PIT MINO TUTT DONTHARE. T   O CREATURE, BAROLE DURING YOVE UPEEEP. TACERE OF THE LI TOU CANNOT 1080 OR TE PUI DOLE 1 Danaot TO YOU to cycle through cards and creatures. There just isn't enough time to watch your opponent too. Although both players are casting simultaneously, BATILEMACE still has a limited version of tums. They are 10-15 seconds long and act as a restraint on actions which can only be done once per turn in LORD OF THE PIT Battlemage does have an archive the card game, like playing a where you can learn about all the cards, such as land or attacking When you this Lord of the Pit card, but you can't refer to it play a land, the rest of the lands when you're in gameplay. in your hand go dim and you can't play any more until the She tries to fireball you, you counterspell time limit elapses. One thing that would the fireball. These reactions make the help this game a lot is a variable speed game much more interesting than just a clock. A slower clock (longer tums) would race to get out the biggest or the most make the game much easier for novices. creatures. When you try to react in The current setting seems to be too fast BATILEMAGE, though, you discover that for normal people to play-it is often you don't know when to cast your spells. impossible to perform all legal actions The computer announces spells after they within the time span of a single turn. But are successfully cast, but by the time you the computer, with reflexes measured in hear that cue, it's already too late to nanoseconds, doesn't seem to have troucounter. Your hands are already full trying ble reacting to your spells. A LACK OF MAGIC One final frustration comes from the poor feedback you get after a duel-all you know is whether you have won or lost. In the campaign game, you start with about 40 cards, and if you lose some lo a thicfor another magician, you will run out of cards and lose quickly, even with 15 or 20 life left. Magic players may notice the lost cards, but there isn't a clue to help you if you don't know what to look for. While veteran Magic players might want to sample Acclaims offering, most of us will want to wait to see if MicroProse does a better job with their title STRATEGY / WARGAMES APPEAL: M:TG fans who like real-time action. PROS: Beautiful graphics, clever animation, good overall concept. CONS: Clumsy Interface and lack of time during turns lead to a high level of frustration, no variable speed clock. RATED ARE STRATEGY GAMES TOO CIVILIZED? IMPERIALISM COMING THIS FALL STEEL A MINDSCAPE COMPANY IMPERIALISM is a trademark of Stratogle Simulations, Inc.  Stratoglo Simulations, Inc. a MINDSCAPE Company. All rights reserved CIRCLE READER SERVICE #239 "


"Join the tip of this triangle with the tip of the triangle on the opposite page. YOU'RE AN ALIEN. CONQUEST EERTH You can play either side in this intergalactic war. Instantly morph yourself into a weapon, a battle tank, or even take on human form. Vary your strategy to keep your opponents guessing. Keep track by monitoring them through your interface portals. And with over 65,00 colors, the action will come to life like never before. www.CONQUESTEARTH.COM "


"Join the tip of this triangle with the tip of the triangle on the opposite page. GET USED TO IT. WHERE STRATEGY TAKES ON NEW FORM The intensity of Conquest Earth will have you using the first-ever \"direct-control\" feature which allows you to jump right in and go head-to-head against your opponents. Once your position is discovered, you'll want to go undercover using the blackness of night as your cloak LIELIETTEE EIDOS Conquest Earth and Eidos Interactive are trademarks of EIDOS, PLC. 1997 Eidos CIRCLF RFADFR SERVICF #275 "


"**** REVIEW  M.A.X. DIFFICULTY LEVEL STRATEGYZWARGAMES Can M.A.X. Bridge the Gap Between Real-Time and Turn-Based Games? IF I ONLY HAD A... In M.A.X.. your brain has been removed from your body and placed in a robot. In these battles, flesh is a liability Terrain is either blocked or unblocked and there are no differences in elevation. A wide range of zoom options is available for viewing the maps. The only glaring omission from the game is a scenario editor for players to create their own maps and missions. Tremy M e A Aircraft Altro Price: $54.95 Minimum System Requirements: 486/66 (Pentium recommended), 8MB RAM (16MB recommended), 22MB hard disk space (64MB recommended), SVGA graphics, 2x CD-ROM (4x recommended), DOS 5.0 or higher (Windows 95 compatible), mouse; supports Sound Blaster-compatible sound cards. Multiplayer Support: Hotseat (1-4), Direct Connect (1-2) Modem (1-2), LAN (1-4). Designers: Ali Atabek. Paul Kellner, Gus Smedstad Publisher: Interplay Irvine, CA (714) 553-6678 www.interplay.com Reader Service #: 328 by Patrick C. Miller nterplay is stepping into the body. As commander of a mechanized arena of turn-based and real-time army, you must establish colonies on farstrategy games with MAX, a scioff planets while defending your claims fi strategy game of inter-planetary against other human clans. The games exploration, conquest, and colovictory conditions depend on establishing nization. But this game has a new ecospheres (domed facilities that house twist: It gives players the option of your clans population). Therefore, buildlusing either simultaneous turns ing friendly ecospheres and eliminating or the traditional turn-based systhe enemy's is your primary objective, tem. Although MAX (MECHANIZED ASSAULT AND INTERFACE OVERLOAD EXPLORATION) falls short of its lofty ideal \"The game's intuitive point-and-click of offering a choice of good turn-based interface is outstanding, providing instant access to a wealth of information, ranging from the status of individual units to total resource utilization and overall victory conditions. This is good because the manual is not as complete as it should be (for example, it fails to explain the difference between placing a unit in sentry, manual, or KISS 'EM GOODBYE The best tactics use the strengths of attack modes). At least all your units. Here, infiltrators disable an enemy anti-airthe game's tutorial scecraft unit, making it an easy target for scout vehicles. narios are useful; they Airstrikes will follow shortly. give a step-by-step introduction to the or real-time play, it still offers an uncomgame's basic features, as well as its more monly high quality game with excellent complex aspects. gameplay; challenging artificial intelli The SVGA graphics are playable gence, and considerable depth, variety, under DOS or Windows 95, and are well and replay value. done. Plus, the sound effects are some of The player steps into the role of a the best I've heard in a game of this type. MAX. commander at a time in the The obligatory cut-scenes during the future when machines co most of the campaign game are excellent, but the fighting 'To survive the rigors of hyper maps are something of a disappointspace travel, your human brain has been ment. They use a square gric and, for the removed, pickled, and placed in a robotic most part, are flat and featureless. TOYS A PLENTY By far, the best part of MAX. is the 50-plus units available for construction and destruction. Air units include fighters, bombers, transports, and radar surveillance aircraft. Ground forces include tanks, scout vehicles, rocket launchers, assault guns, armored personnel carriers, anti-aircraft vehicles, and mines. Infantry includes conventional anti-tank troops and stealthy infiltrators, the latter of which are capable of penetrating enemy defenses to disable and steal weaponry. At sea, there are escorts, corvettes, gunboats, submarines, missile cruisers, transports, mine layers, and mines. Engineers and constructors build the facilities necessary to create and sustain your war machine. Buildings include power plants, storage units, mines, factories, docks, hangers, and depots. Also available are facilities for living, training, and research. Bases can be protected with walls and static defensive weapons. Repair and supply vehicles provide CGW MAY 1997 "


"SURRENDER IS NOT AN OPTION One of the Hottest Selling PC Games Ever! COMMAND CONQUER. REDENEER All the power. None of the responsibility. \"The real deal in real time.\" -CGW INERALERT. \"Red Alert has set a standard by which other strategy games are now judged.» -Happy Puppy \"A new landmark in the annals of gaming.\" -Gameslice «C&C is back, bigger and badder than ever.\" --PC Gamer U.S. \"One of the best you'll find in the world of PC games.\" -Gamespot AT RETAILERS EVERYWHERE OR CALL 1-800-874-4607 \"Don't expect to sleep much after you boot up this one.\" -PC Week Available Now for Windows 95 & DOS CD-ROM Wesivood WWW Westwood.com Command & Conquer is a registered trademark and Command & Conquer Red Alert is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc. 1995, 1996 Westwood Studios loc. Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved "


"REVIEW  M.A.X. Antarkt Infantry Attack Resim advantages are well cost tur Li p ol guy. And once they arr only hers And Antialera Constructor STRATEGYZ WARGAMES FEARTACK E D USSO HLALTELLI e speed o one Top GOLD STANDARD Gold must be discovered, mined, and refined before it can be used to upgrade your units. Though expensive, those upgrades are vital to victory. PLANE AND SIMPLE M.A.X. has a very friendly interface. To get the low-down on any friendly or enemy unit, right click for a unit status screen. logistical support in the field. Specialized customized battles, selecting from four units include long-range mobile scanners different planets with six maps per planand surveyors. These locate the gold, ct. In these battles, you can choose to fuel, and raw materials needed to create, play against 1-3 opponents. You start repair, power, and upgrade units. from scratch, with the bare essentials, and build your way up. In the preMaking M.A.X. Better sct battles, the games Al, which can be set to six degrees of difficulty, provides worthy opposition. s is the case with most new games, the initial MAX. supports head-to-head version of M.A.X. contained a few bugs. The play via modem and over a LAN most notable problems were with the Matrox (up to four players). Mystique video card and connection failures dur The choice of whether to play ing network and modem play. There was also a glitch that froze simultaneous turns or the more the timer at the end of a turn. To its credit, Interplay quickly traditional sequential turns is a released a patch that fixed these problems and updates the personal one. Against the computgame to version 1.03. er, I found simultaneous play to be Gamers' complaints about the Al's lack of aggressiveness in more than a little frustrating. custom scenarios is also being addressed. By the time you Consider that the player must surread this, Interplay should have released version 1.04 which will vey for minerals, allocate solve the Al problem and additional gameplay issues. resources, build new facilities, repair and resupply units, manuUnits are rated for attack, clefense, facture new units and upgrade old ones, weapon range, spotting range, ammuni give standing orders, conduct fire, and tion, movement, and rate of fire. By min maneuver during combat all while ing gold and conducting research, unit keeping an eye on what the opposition is upgrades can be purchased to improve doing. There's simply too much for one these characteristics. For example, if you person to do when facing a computer find that your tanks are too easily opponent who can accomplish these destroyed, you can significantly upgrade tasks in nanoseconds. their defensive value. With enough R&D Inevitably, I would run out of time to and money, you can make your scouts see do everything I wanted or forget to perfarther and your artillery shoot longer disform some key action that would cost tances. If you get too far behind the techme dearly. Only when I opted for turnnology curve, you'll usually find that unit based play with no time limits did I realquantity comes in second best to quality. marvel at ils tremendous depth and MAKE WAR, NOT LOVE variety. In time, I might enjoy the chal'Three styles of play are available. In lenge of simultaneous turns, but for addition to the 15 training scenarios, now, even as a player who normally there are 24 individual scenarios and a enjoys real-time games, I found them linear campaign. Players can also create too intimidating, MAXIMUM APPEAL Can MAX. lure turn-based gamers into the real-time world? Probably not. Instead, MAX. is essentially a tum-based game with a good turn design for multiplayer gaming. With simultaneous tums, MAX avoids the common pitfall of multiplayer turn-based games: requiring playcrs to wait for each other to finish their moves. Simultaneous turns undoubtedly make more sense for multiplayer games than they do for solitary play. Because MAX offers a turn-based option, turn-based gaming fans can always fall back on that style of play. The larger question is if real-time gamers will find the optional simultaneous tum syslem an acceptable substitute for true realtime play. That's hard to say. The bottom line is that anyone who cnjoys the intellectual challenge of a good strategy game will appreciate MAXs depth, complexity, variability, and successful integration of resource management with strategic planning and tactical warfare. APPEAL: War and strategy gamers who don't mind adding some micro-management to their mechanized mayhem. PROS: Great sound, nice graphics, exceptional interface, strong AI, multi-player capabilities, and a huge variety of units and facilities add up to an engrossing gaming experience. CONS: Simultaneous turns overwhelming, micromanagement may put off some gamers. Incomplete manual, no scenario editor, and no terrain features. CGW MAY 1997 "


"All the legendary games, all the magnificent stories... Pansion Duncan Dahgeons & Dragons CORGOTTON RALINE All 12 FORGOTTEN REALMS Titles in a 4 CD Collector's Edition TO ADULT CONTI TRATTATI Telpas FILE PLAY for the 1first time. 7 ANS POOL OF RADIANCE CURSE OF THE AZURE BONDS SECRET OF THE SILVER BLADES POOLS OF DARKNESS EYE OF THE BEHOLDER EYE OF THE BEHOLDER II EYE OF THE BEHOLDER HIT DUNGEON HACKIM. GATEWAY TO THE RSSAVAGE FRONTIER TREASURES OF THE MENZOBERRANZANT SAVAGE FRONTIERT, HILLSFART ntroducing The FORGOTTEN REALMS Archives the I the magical and mystical world of the FORGOTTEN REALMS, ultimate ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS PC the most popular of the AD&D worlds. Whether you are a die game collection. Twelve of the greatest role playing, hard AD&D enthusiast, or a newcomer looking to begin your fantasy adventures ever created are gathered together in one first adventure, this compilation set is sure to become a collecincredible boxed set. Each exciting adventure takes you deep into tor's item and provide months of entertainment value. Dungeons & Dragons ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS. AD&D. FORGOTTEN REALMS and the TSR logo are registered trade marks owned by TSR. Inc. POOL OF RADIANCE. CURSE OF THE AZURE BONOS. HILLSFAR, SECRET OF THE SILVER BLADES POOLS OF DARKNESS, EYE OF THE BEHOLDER. EYE OF THE BEHOLDER II, EYE OF THE BEHOLDER III. DUNGEON HACK. GATEWAY TO THE SAVAGE FRONTIER. TREASURES OF THE SAVAGE FRONTIER, MENZOBERRANZAN. BLOOD & MAGIC, DESCENT TO UNDERMOUNTAIN and DRACON DICE are trademarks owned by TSR. Inc. and used under license. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #261 SSI and Strategic Simulations, Inc. are trademarks of Strategic Simulations, Inc., a Mindscape company. Computer game code SSI and Strategic Simulations, Inc. Used under sublicense. Interplay is a trademark of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. All other trademarks are property of their respective owners. By Games For Camcn "


"Pardon me, is this the road to Moscow? NAPOLEON D. IN JUSSIA Diabolical Carnivores of Free Timera Play Head Head via modem BATTLEGROUND 6 TalonSoft's award winning Battleground series returns to the era of Napoleon and the titanic clash with General Kutuzov and his glorious Russian Army of the Czar at Borodino, September 7, 1812. Can you push the Old Guard forward and march on Moscow? www.talonsoft.com Orders only 1-800-211-6504  Copyright 1995 1996 1997 TalonSoft Inc. P.O. Box 632 Forest Hill, MD 21050 (410) 933-9191 Play by E-Mail TALON 6 Esco "


"The Ultimate in Civil War gaming! Battleground Series Awards computer Gaming RATED ***** COMPUTER GAMES STRATEGY PLUS STAMP OF APPROVAL \"A brilliant design...I just can't stop playing!\" -Johnny Wilson, Computer Gaming World\"One of the best renditions of a battlefield ever seen in a PC game! -Phil Thé, Computer Games Strategy Plus\"One of the best wargame series we've seen in years!\" Computer & Net Player\"No Civil War fan will be disappoint -William Trotter, PC GamerPC GAMER EDITORS CHOICE TER P Includes the battles of 1st Manassas and 2nd Manassas! BULL RUN BATTLEGROUND 7 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #276 Available at fine Software retailers Worldwide! To order direct call 1-800-211-6504 (orders only please) or visit our web site at www.talonsoft.com Excellence in Copyright 1995, 1996 1997 TalonSoft Inc. P.O. Box 632. Forest Hill, MD 21050 GETTYSBURG,  BULL RUN "


"To those million fans who are addicted to Command & Conquer. Me just upped  dosage. COMMAND CONDUER FOR WINDOWS 95 "


"Command & Conquer Gold Edition for Windows 95! ALL-NEW GOLD EDITION FEATURES Super VGA Graphics intensify realism and excitement Internet Head-to-Head play Play against competitors across the world with Westwood Chat* New Command & Conquer Theme Pack includes screen savers, icons and desktop patterns GAME OF THE ( 2157 STRATIGY GANI LLLLLLLL Now Available For Windows 95. Available at retailers everywhere or call 1-800-874-4607 *Requires existing Internet access Westwood S IUDIOS WWW.Westwood.com Command & Conquer is a registered trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc. 1997 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. Windows 95 is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. "


"***** REVIEW  EMPEROR OF THE FADING SUNS DIFFICULTY LEVEL L Throne of Stars STRATEGYZ WARGAMES SegaSoft Boldly Challenges MASTER OF ORION // for the Spaceploitation Crown by Martin E. Cirulis in the past six months there has been a renaissance in sci-fi strategy gaming. After nearly a twoyear dry spell, during which we were offered only the weakest of games, spaceploitation is suddenly fashionable again-with nearly 10 titles released in the past cight months. Leading the pack is undoubtedly MOO II, but some think that the crew at Sim Tex didn't do quite enough with their flashy scqucl..and so, despite the embarrassment of sci-fi riches, there is still a quiet yearning for a truly epic sci-fi strategy game that delivers complexity and playability in one great package. THOU SHALT NOT RESEARCH The Church is a powerful influence that controls what you can and cannot leam. Research forbidden technology, and your scientists might get visited by the clergy. \"Despite the fact that I wouldn't recommend this to a single player without some serious patches to the AI and processor routines, I can't help liking EFS as a multiplayer game.\" Price: $49.99 Minimum System Requirements: 486DX/66, 16MB Memory, 40MB hard drive space, 2x CDROM, Windows 95, directX-compatible video and sound cards. Multiplayer Support: Hotseat (1-5), Play-byemail (1-5) Designer: Holistic Design Publisher: SegaSoft San Francisco, CA (888) SEGASOFT www.segasoft.com Reader Service #: 329 Oddly enough, its a company with the that there might be good reason for the name Sega in the title that has delivered a buzz surrounding it, especially since it possible underdog challenger to the MOO embodies much of what I like to see in an dynasty, giving us a moody, stylized space sci-fi game. EFS is a successful design (no ploitation game with a mouthful for a title: doubt owing much to Holistic's previous EMPEROR OF THE PADING SUNS (EFS). quirky hit MERCHANT PRINCE Once I looked inside this game I realized MACHIAVELLI), and its prennise is actually based upon interesting source material (instead of the dubious writing talents of overworked programmers). In this case, the computer game is based upon the gothic sci-fi RPG of the same title. Unfortunately, despite all the promise and reputation, spending a long time with this game will reveal a couple of big cracks in the gem. LA RADIO DARK SUNS, DARK AGES MULTI VS. SOLO PLAY EMPEROR OF THE FADING EFS is undoubtedly the Suns suffers some acute problems in single-player most stylish game to come out mode, and is best only as a multiplayer game. of the new spaceploitation boom. It takes place in a future where humanity has fallen back into repressive religions, monarchy, and barbarism. Your job isn't so much exploring brave new worlds, but exploring old ones, bringing them back into the fold, and uniting them under your leadership until you can declare yourself emperor. Opposing your plans are four other noble houses (with much the same agenda) and the Holy Church, which has its own ideas about what technologies humanity should be using. Alien threats also loom: These include a mutant race called the Symbiots, who are bent on swallowing everything in sight, and the Vau, who are peaceful-until annoyed, that is. Where some games decide to abstract ground combat in favor of space battles, or vice-versa, EFS covers both in a satisfying, if not exactly flashy, way. Players must build starships of various kinds to extend their will, but where games like MOO II treat planets as if they were single cities, EP'S turns each of the 35 worlds in your little chunk of the galaxy into a virtual game of EMPIRE in and of itself. Worlds are entirely fleshed out, with separate cities that have single CGW MAY 1997 "


"Twinkle twinkle little star.... URU "


"Can Shadow Warrior kick ass Shuriken The silent assassin will emerge from the shadows by the light of his Uzi. Bodies will drop like lotus blossoms. Spent cartridges will fall like ripe cherries from the tree. Flesh will return to Nothingness. The Yin of Death and the Yang of Life balanced in the hands of one sick ninja puppy. Meditate. Annihilate. Meditate. Mutilate. Meditate. Detonate. Shadow Warrior. Reach for the stars. 100000 118 I 100 000 CETTE 100 075 0,00 This one's a no-brainer. 4 barrel rampage in roomS-Duer-rooms. Tanks, Joyride 'em or trash 'em! "


"FRESH FROM THE CREATORS OF DUKE NUKEM 3D COMES I BLODOV BARREL OF FUN VISIT US ONLINE LILL.Sal a r .CITR FOR MORE GAMING TOFU PC CD-RDI in the cranium so very far. SHANDS WARIO CIRCLE READER SERVICE #365 developed by WIDUS i 100000 MEALM. GT Interactive Software www.ten.net www.3drealms.com www.gtinteractive.com Sticky situations call for sticku lumus. Shadow Warrior 1997 3D Realms Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Published and distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp. TENIM and the TENIM Ingo are trademarks of the TF Network Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their resnective comnanies "


"REVIEW  EMPEROR OF THE FADING SUNS STRATEGY / WARGAMES of an Empire, there is already a power structure in place, and players must cast their ballots every few years to decide who will bc Regent for the next period. As Regent, you have the enviable job of handing out three powerful positions to yourself and the other houses, namely the Imperial Eye (the intelligence wing of government, which holds fortified areas on many worlds), the Fleet (giving a player access to a large supply of units based at the throne world) and the Stigmata forces (another large collection of units based in cities on various worlds, whose job is to stem the Symbiottide) These powerful organizations are completely at the disposal of whoever is entrusted with command, and since you can only give yourself one post, politicking becomes a very real part of this game, in a way unparalleled by any other spaceploitation title seen yet. and the WHAT DO YOU WANT? FADING SUNS' expansive gameplay includes a detailed model of political intrigue for dealing with other noble houses, aliens, and the ever-present Church longer, the chances of a complete crash somewhere during the process seem to increase, and it isn't any fun to realize that you are going to have to wait another hour to finish that same tum. Another problem is that, despite its scope, the game can feel a bit cramped at times, especially when it comes to technology. Most EFS games will still be going strong after all the players have researched every tech the game has to offer, meaning their lab cities will sit around gathering dust. Also, most of the political intrigues in this game, such as appcasing church and state, only become truly relevant when you play at the highest skill levels. That means beginners might miss most of the cooler parts of this game, and may pack it all in before they discover all the meat. Despite these problems, and the fact that I wouldn't recommend this to a single player without some serious patches to the AI and processor routines, I can't help liking EFS as a multiplayer game. Make no mistake: This is a no-frills, scriOus wargamer kind of experience, and should probably not be attempted by the newcomer. On the other hand, if you have a few Machiavellian friends, and I suggest at least three, then I would heartily recommend giving FADING SUNS another chance for glory. Even if this is not quite the end-all space wargame many of us have been waiting to sink our teeth into, at the very least, it is a big step in the right direction. KA MAA 2. STACKED Combat in EFS is resolved on the strategic level, but many factors go into deciding the outcome. functions such as producing raw materials, constructing units, or researching forgotten technology. Terrain ranges from deserts to tundra to mountains, and everything in between-even oceanbased naval combat-is represented. Combat itself is a relatively simple matter, and very much a traditional boardgaming affair, where units stacked together in a single hex attack other stacks. Not much effort is wasted on pretty graphics or cool animation. In fact, this game is downright primitive by today's SVGA standards. Instead, all the effort has been put into creating a huge collection of different land, sea, air, and space units; all with their own strengths and weaknesses. Combined arms is a complex reality in this game. But despite all of these drawbacks, the one thing that EFS provides which nobody else even comes close to providing is an intricate and interesting political game. Since the five major houses are vying for control of the taltered remains \"SHE CANNA' HOLD IT, CAP'N!\" The real problem with EFS is that it's almost too much game, not only for the players, but for the designers themselves. Given its land, space, and political the aters, EFS qualifies as a monster gameand sometimes it appears that the programmers really didn't realize how monstrous it could get. There is no doubt that the artificial opponcnt, while adequate at times, is just not up to the task of running such a complex game. I suspect that most players will become fairly bored of watching the computer players squander their advantages, refuse to press attacks, make occasional oddball offensives, and generally pile up defensive units until they starve themselves to death. Without a human opponent, this game has little replay value. Fortunately, EFS provides for hotseating and PBEM. Even worse than the Al's stupidity, though, is its delays in completing a turn. By the time you're at tumn 150, (which isn't much, considering it can take 30 or 40 turns to conquer a developed world) the computer can take up to 45 minutes on a P150 to generate turns, simply because of the incredible number of units involved. A patch is desperately needed here, either to convince the computer players to build less and play more, or to provide a whole new movement algorithm, as most people don't have a sparc computer they can walk away from for an hour at a time. Also, as lums get APPEAL: Hard-core wargamers who want a complex multiplayer spaceploitation game that simulates everything from military intelligence to political intrigue. PROS: A spaceploitation game that is large and complex enough to deserve the title. An extremely good backdrop, combined with political as well as strategic warfare, gives this game the feel of a real imperial struggle. CONS: The Al, interface, and technology tree are not up to how large this game can get. Players on slower systems will be on life support before they reach turn 150. Annoying install program overwrites your drivers without asking. III/ CGW MAY 1997 "


"YOUR ADVERSARY has thREE THOUSAND KNIGHTS, A THOUSAND HORSES, AND SEVEN FORTIFIED CASTLES. COLLECT THEM ALL. 19 decent Woffolds Ill Renta l d o Brasbund Sommer Patogracke 19 The Albeute of Chic a Reserved WarLORDS 111REIGN OF HEROES This SUMMER Www.MARLORDS3.COM CIRCLF RFADFR SERVICF #294 "


"GRAB YOUR STICK 7th LEVEL. TECHNOLOGY EDUTAINMENT NETWORK Laboratory co.,LTD PARAGON VISUAL SYSTEMS INC 1996 HELICOPS, HELICOPS is eenistered tradeshark HELICOPS.  7th Level. Inc. 7th Level is a registered trademark of 7th Level, Inc. All other products are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of one respective genel All rights reserved. 7th Level, Inc., Richardson, Texas 75081 B "


"2.DHOOD ACTUAL No Pilot's License Required.  Attack the Nemesys crime syndicate as any one of five pissed-off cops.  Five choppers. Strap one on and command your air space.  Blast your way through 20+ in-your-face missions.  Annihilate your so-called friends in multi-player death matches. E . 11111 --SC GAME SHOTS KOOD SPECIAL OFFER! Play the Demo. Win the Game. www.happypuppy.com A Happy Puppy Exclusive! CUZ ODE AND O000 HELICOPS MOST CALL FOR BACKUP YOU CALL FOR CLEANUPI "


"The ideal joystick should give you fast response, pinpoint accuracy, and enough money leftovero buy the games GRAVIS Fackhawk introducing the The new Blackhawk gives you the look and feel of the most expensive joysticks on the market. But at 29 bucks, you don't have to be the Sultan of Brunei to afford it. And once you own it, all you have to do to play is plug it in. Then play any joystick controlled PC game you want. For as long as you want. Because the Blackhawk is specially designed for comfort and durability, even while you're furiously blasting away at the enemy. So get Blackhawk. And start playing games the way they were meant to be played. Go to your favorite store or call us at 1-800-257-0061 or visit our web site at www.gravis.com. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #351 1997 Advanced Gravis Computer Technology Lid. All rights reserved. Gravis and Bloekhowk are trademarks of Advonted Gravis. All trademarks are the property of their respective owners. GRAVIS I gaming for the 21st century "


"SCORPIA ADVENTURE/RPG Death and the Moron adven turn cus, fut part undertak tion A It's been too long since I could unreservedly recommend a game; I can do it now. CRYSTAL BALL Rincewind Returns in DISCWORLD II, a Funny, Challenging, Old-School Adventure he first playing, Shakespeare, and the inanity of SPARKLING INTERFACE DISCWORLD, object-gathering and puzzle-solving (a As in the first version, game mechanics based on Terry running theme throughout the game). are fairly simple. The \"sparkles» cursor is Pratchett's Rincewind is by no means unaware of back, and acts as the main interface. humorous the silliness of what he's forced to do, and Moving it around the screen lights up hot book series, takes the opportunity to say so on more spots (items or people Rincewind can was as zany as than one occasion. interact with in various ways). Clicking on the novels, and a tough advenGABRIEL KNIGHT 2: THE ture besides. BEAST WITHIN. Jane Jensen Now we have DISCWORLD II: MORTALITY has reportedly begun BYIES!, and its cut from much the same working on GABRIEL KNIGHT cloth as the previous game. Once again, 3, which will be a non-linRincewind, the inept wizard wannabe, is ear, real-time 3D-polygon called upon to save the day, or rather, the based affair. Full producdead. The dead are not really, really dead, tion begins in April with just kinda sorta in a state of demise. the production team of That's because Death himself, that SHIVERS 2, and the game is spooky skeletal character with black robe currently slated for a sumand sharp scythe, has vanished. No one mer or fall 1998 release. knows why, and no one knows where. Killed everything in Without him around to separate soul from DIABLO twice over already? body, those who die are stuck in a state of Activision is now working undeath, or maybe living death. The wizon a PC port of Crystal ards know a spell to summon him back Dynamics' Blood OMEN: from wherever, but first, naturally, they LEGACY OF KAIN, the popuneed the ingredients, and guess who has lar Playstation action-orito go get them. Right, our boy Rincewind. ented RPG. The game It doesn't end there, of course, that's puts you in the role of just Act 1 of a five-act game. Before long, Kain, a noble who is bruour hero gets involved with making lowtally murdered and then budget movies, traipsing after wise herresurrected as a bloodmits in the desert, proving himself worthy thirsty vampire. In your KAIN to take Death's place, saving Death himquest for revenge, self from, er, death (don't ask), and endyou'll have 13 spells ing up with a gratuitous takeoff on a As reported last month, Sierra and the ability to morph into a famous movie finale. is swearing off FMV adventure wolf, bat, or mist as you hunt In between, there is much fun poking, games, and this policy is being down and kill bad guys and both blatant and obscure, at various extended to the follow-up to innocent victims alike. Look for aspects of modern culture, physics, role CGW's 1996 Game of the Year, it this summer. MAY 1997 CGW "


"SCORPIA ADVENTURE/RPG an object takes it (if it can be problems of any kind surfaced, taken), or uses it in some way, such and that's with two complete as to open a door or pull a lever. playthroughs. This is definitely a Objects can also be combined. For tight product (although keep in example, you can put a hook and a mind that I played it under DOS; rope together to make a grapple. with Win 95, who knows what Clicking on people usually might happen). begins a conversation. \"To talk to another character, you click on difTHE WAY THINGS USED TO BE ferent icons: a mouth for a general In regard to the puzzles, grecting, a jester's wand for a sarDISCWORLD II might be a little castic remark, a question mark for a RINCEWIND REDUX Inept, cowardly Rincewind is back, bit easier than the first game, but question, and a waving hand to say and so is his magical walking luggage, to solve (and comnot by too much. This is traditiongoodbye. In addition, there is a litplain about all those typical adventure game puzzles. al adventuring, where the puzzles tle thought balloon that represents have object-oriented solutions, Rincewinds own private thoughts. There are no «puzzle puzzles», Other icons may appear as conversuch as solving four-color tile sation topics, depending on what enigmas or playing variants of Rincewind has previously learned Concentration. I'd call it straightor done elsewhere in the game. forward, but that's not a word to Moving Rincewind around is uise in DiscwORLD (heh!). Still, it also simple; you just place the curwas good to get back to gaming sor where you want him to go, and as it used to be click. It's important to walk around If I have any quarrels with the every scene, as most of them are game, it's that some of the autolarger than they first appear, and it's mated scenes went on longer casy to miss something if you just GET A HAIRCUT! You'll find the bellows you need in the High than they should have. This was stay in one spot. Energy Facility of Unseen University. Just don't ask the '60s also true of some conversations, Outdoors, you move around on leftovers inside too many questions—they won't shut up. which seemed to drag on forever, maps of the overall area. Each map and lost a good deal of their has several locations Rincewind can visit; sound), so you won't miss much. humor in the process. In those instances, clicking on one sends him there immedi However, if you can gel sound, do put it the less is more\" principle really should ately. Some places are available only dur on, as the conversations are a highlight of have been applied. ing certain portions of the game, while the game, and are much funnier with the Overall, though, DISCWORLD II was a others may require some puzzle-solving voice-overs. The speech is very good, and treat to play it was funny, clever, clean-runbefore they appear. When a new area comes through clearly. The voices ning, and a good mental workout. It's been opens up, however, it is displayed right including ex-Monty Pythonite Eric Idle as too long since I could unreservedly recomthen on the map so that you know it's Rincewind are excellently done. This is mend a game, but I can do it now. If you opena nice touch. one instance where voice adds a lot to the need a break from serious adventures, if enjoyment of play you yearn for traditional gaming, if you'd SHOP TALK The minimum specs say you need a like to play something that won't be over in Saving and restoring can be done at DX-100, but I found the game ran accepta couple of days, this is the one to get. almost any time, and you have a generous ably on a 486/66 with 20MB RAM. I sus30 save game slots, While Rincewind isn't pect the extra RAM helped, as the manual Fable update in much danger, and can't use items inap notes at least 8MB are required for playing In last month's issue, my review propriately, it's still a good idea to save under MS-DOS. You will also need of FABLE noted that Sir-Tech was creoften anyway. Some conversations or 640x480 256 color SVGA. Should you ating a new ending for the American puzzle-solving can be lengthy, and you have problems with that, the UNIVBE version of the game, to replace the wouldn't want to redo them a second video driver is included on the CD. It original atrocious conclusion. I have now played through the revised time if it can be avoided. works well with many brands of video FABLE, and am happy to say that SirDISCWORLD) Il supports a variety of cards (in fact, I use the registered version Tech lived up to their promise. The sound cards, but if yours isn't mentioned, myself; it's quite good). new ending is far more acceptable, don't despair. The game comes with text The game played cleanly from start to and there is now no reason to avoid subtitles you can turn on (with or without finish. No crashes, no bugs, no technical playing the game. DISCWORLD II Price: $40.00 Minimum System Requirements: 486DX4/100 (P90 recommended), 16MB RAM (8MB for MSDOS). 20MB hard disk space, 640x480 SVGA graphics, 2x CD-ROM Windows 95 or MSDOS 6.0, supports all major sound cards (Sound Blaster-compatible card recommended) Multiplayer Support: None Designer: Perfect Entertainment Publisher: Psygnosis Foster City, CA (415) 655-8000 www.psygnosis.com Reader Service #: 330 CGW MAY 1997 "


"Losing. suzks Microsoft Monster Truck Madness Close Combat Indo Winning Tips and Strategies Straight from the Source a sellers bas es who act like Post Winning Tips an SURN NULUULU Winning To and stetega. LINNAS Microsoft Press A S Down & Dirty Racing! SNS Microsoft Press Vince Matthews Be cool and in control as you challenge car-crushing tourneys and rallies for the checkered flag, repel alien invaders beneath the waves, gain victory \"in the hedgerows of Hell,\" take to the sky in a 737, or face relentless space combat action. The Microsoft Press Inside Moves series arms you with Microsoft Monster Truck Madness: Inside Moves 1-57231-530-X $16.99 ($22.99 Canada) Close Combat: Inside Moves 1-57231-308-0 $16.95 ($22.95 Canada) Microsoft Deadly Tide\": Inside Moves 1-57231-306-4 $16.95 ($22.95 Canada) Microsoft Hellbender\": Inside Moves 1-57231-363-3 $16.95 ($22.95 Canada) Microsoft Flight Simulator for Windows 95: Inside Moves 1-57231-362-5 $16.95 ($22.95 Canada) hints, strategies, and secrets—some straight from the developersthat aren't available anywhere else. Microsoft Press Designed to Available in quality bookstores and computer stores worldwide. To locate your nearest source for Microsoft Press products, reach us at 1-800-MSPRESS in the U.S., or www.microsoft.com/mspress/ Microsoft Windows95 "


"For owners of LinksLS! PGA Tour REBATE* or Microsoft Golf $10 You've faced off against the legends in PGA Tour... Teed-off on the toughest courses with Links LS... But you haven't played in a real championship until... LOOKING GLASS ECHNOLOGIES THELOPEN be Only British Open Championship Golf puts you right in the middle of the action in golf's greatest championship. Compete as one of eight featured pros against a full field of top professionals. Get advice from the first-ever fully interactive caddie. See and hear the crowd react to your every shot. Get play-by-play announcing from ABC's Jim McKay. Battle Scotland's infamous weather on photorealistic 3D simulations of two of the world's most challenging courses — The Old Course at St Andrews and Royal Troon. Any way you slice it (or hook it), no other game gives you the sheer adrenaline rush of real championship play like British Open Championship Golf. ZAMA BRITISH OPEN  Reactive Crowds OR V ZGOPEN THE OPEN Intense Tournament Play. Live Announcers CHAMPIONSHIP BRITISH OPEN CHAMPIONSHIP WWW.BRITOPEN.COM For a limited time owners of LinksLSTM PGA Tour 96 and Microsoft Golf can get a $10 rebate with the purchase of British Open Championship Golf. Offer lasts until June 30, 1992. See package for details for details GOLE Available in major retail outlets or order direct 1-800-360-7455 LOOKING GLASS TECHNOLOGIES 100 Cambodge Park Drive, Suite 300. Cambridge, MA 02140 GET INTO THE OPEN 1997 Looking Class Technologies, Inc Licensor and the Software Product is distributed under the authorization of the Royal and Ancient Colf Club of St Andrews. The Old Course at St Andrews and Royal Troon Courses are used by permission of St Andrews Links Trust & Royal Troon Golf Club The Open Championship logo is used under license from \"The Championship Committee Merchandising Ltd All other trademarks and trade names are properties of their respective owners. All rights reserved CIRCLE READER SERVICE #065 "


"DENNIS MCCAULEY  SPORTS Sport Sport DIS Pro League Prophet usula An Exclusive Interview With Game Designer and Online Pioneer Dave Holt Holt was the first sports designer to understand the excitement of head-to-head play. U ig-time sports games like FRONT PAGE SPORTS: FOOTBALL and NBA LIVE may get all the attention, but one of the best sports games I ever played PRO LEAGUE FOOTBALL — was from a much smaller player in the design game, Dave Holt of Micro Sports. What wowed me five years ago-and still clocs today -was the games groundbreaking modem play, which enabled you to dial up your buddies and play a not-so-friendly game of block and tackle. Ever since then, I've been a fan of Dave Holt and his football sims. In fact, PLF made my list of the Top 15 Sports Games of All Time in CGWS 15th Anniversary issue (November '96). With MicroLeague Multimedia Inc.'s late-1996 purchase of Micro Sports, and their recent relcasc of MICROLEAGUE PRO FOOTBALL, '97 (reviewed last month) and MICROLEAGUE PRO BASEBALL. '97 (see review this issue), Dave Holt is again at the forefront of sports gaming. And now that he no longer has to run Micro Sports, he cnjoys life more too, since he gets to do more of what really cxcites him-create games. \"Things they are a-changing,\" Holt says. \"Its hard to be the president of Micro Sports and find time to be putting in a lot of the code. Now I'm back to doing the games again.\" A veteran designer and self-taught programmer, Holt got his start in 1984, when puter opponent, but modem play and impressive multiplayer leagues via the nowdefunct USA Today Sports Network \"We were the first ones to really do online,\" He says. \"We're getting back to that.\" His new Dave Holt and partnership with ML PRO FOOTBALL '97 MicroLeague is in good measure based he created MAC PRO FOOTBALL, which around a major commitment to multiwas published by Avalon Hill. His next player Internet gaming game, in 1986, was MSFL PRO LEAGUE \"That's where we had the most fun. FOOTBALL, which he distributed from his Being able to play against a human oppohome, mostly through word-of-mouth. nent is the ultimate thing. The whole \"This was back when one person did everyprincipal behind our games is for people thing—the box design, the manuals. My to get together and have a good time.\" manuals were noted for having the most As we're speaking, Holt is tinkering misspellings,\" he says with a grin. with a career league for the long-anticiHolt finally landed a distribution deal pated MICROLEAGUE BASEBALL 6.0. with Electronics Boutique that provided Since it ran away with my Sports some steady cash flow. Then, in one of Vaporware Award for 1996, I'm eager to those lucky breaks that make careers, he see what Holt has up his sleeve. He made a contact at USA Today. The result assures me that the game will arrive early became an annual feature in which in the '97 baseball season. \"Americas Paper\" picks the Super Bowl Perhaps history will record Dave Holt winner using Holt's game. as a visionary. He certainly was the first to \"USA Today was running some stories understand the excitement head-to-head about us,\" Holt recalls.\"An investor read it, play brings to sports gaming. In fact, he got excited, and decided to beef up the recalls the day his PLF crew got modem marketing effort. We got tied into the play working as one of the high points of National Football League and the NFL his career. But for all his ups and downs, Players Association.\" he hasn't lost sight of his mission. «I just try This led to the breakthrough 1991 ver to create the best game I can,\" he says. sion of NFL PRO LEAGUE FOOTBALL-a And whenever he finishes them, we'll game that not only featured a solid combe ready to play MAY 1997 CGW "


"The Great — BATTLES of A L E X AN DER DOWNLOAD THE DEMO TODAY AT www.imagicgames.com You're outnumbered. Your troops are exhausted. You face an intensely fierce Persian army. Yet you have one strength that overcomes all weakness, You are Alexander the Great. Windows 95 CD-ROM Game BATTLES 11.1. XANDER MAGIC For more information or to obtain a copy, visit your local retailer or call 1-800-348-5061. P.O. Box 13491. Research Triangle Park NC 27709. www.imagicgames.com The Great Battles of Alexander is a trademark of Interactive Magic, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. "


"DENNY ATKIN SIMULATION/SPACE Living Targets sim uctio wing sim Ythat The Roadblocks to Multiplayer Simulation are Coming Down people It's never been this easy to reach out and shoot someone down... ultiplayer work. Once you download the program can talk to users and find simulafrom www.kali.net and pay a $20 registraother players interested in tion is all tion fee, you can play online with no flying your sim of choice. so much hourly charge (other than what you pay Unfortunately, al times it hype. your Internet provider), and you're enti can be difficult to find other sim players, Very few tled to free upgrades. Kali have works very well access to with a number of a local flight sims, area network where games are allowed, including A-10 it's hard to find people to play against via CUBA!, ATE, modem, and if you do they're usually a EF2000, long-distance call. Hooking up over the FIGHTER DUEL Internet is complex and expensive. (with the free At least, that's how many gamers, NET DUEL modincluding me--felt this time last year. It's ule), and Su-27 amazing how quickly things change. Now FLANKER. The it's easier than ever to set up virtual dogoriginal release fights with multiple human players, and of Kali was a FREE KILLS As of version 1.11, WARBIRDS lets you battle a single thanks to the Internet, you can even do so DOS utility, but friend over the Internet at no charge. without incurring any kind of hourly you'll find Kali charges-which is a big plus. 95, the Windows 95 version, is more flexias many of the Kali server chatlines seem ble, easier to set up, and is compatible to be populated mostly with young \"kew! KALI AND KAHN with all the above-listed sims except ATF doodz\" looking for a quick DUKE NUKEM You've read about Kali in these pages and EF2000 (both of which refuse to run 3D fragfest. If you're having trouble findbefore. This handy utility lets you take under Win 95). ing sim players, try different Kali servers; most games that support local area net Kali also addresses the other major Sim-Net, for instance, is a favorite of works and play them over the Internet obstacle to online gaming it gives you a FIGHTER DUEL players. Some players it essentially fools the games into think place to find other players. The Chat feaalso change their nickname to reflect ing that the Internet is a local IPX netture gives you a text window where you their game of choice. Someone named «EF-Mitty\" is probably looking for a  We recently received some intel! You can upgrade aircraft as the game of EF2000. ligence on MIG ALLEY, the new campaign progresses; for example, Another method for avoiding the crowds Korean War sim coming this you can move from an F-86A to is to try Kalis competitor, Kalm. This proChristmas from Empire. Set in the the improved F-86F. gram is similar in functionality, but isn't yet spring and summer of 1951, the  Commanding four flights of as polished or full-featured as Kali. It's also sim will feature a dynamic camfour aircraft each, you'll define not as well-known, so you don't find the paign, where the strike packages the strike packages for each day chat-lines as crowded with cursing you set up in the full mission ediand then take a plane up yourteenagers, but you will find many knowl tor can affect the movement of the self. While in the air, you'll be edgeable sim players haunting Kaln front lines. Flyable planes include realistically vectored towards tarservers. Its especially popular with Su-27 the F-80, F-84, F-86, and F-51 on gets via radio calls. Look for FLANKER players. If this alternative interests the U.S. side, and the MiG-15 and multiplayer support and Direct 3D you, check it out at www.teleport.com/ MiG-15bis on the communist side. graphics as well. -nbright/home.html ON THE RADAR MAY 1997 CGW "


"DENNY ATKIN I Col Wied RA man SIMULATIONISPACE These registered to gets were found Choose i bylet ckcking and prettet LUNII Nick i n Los Eau 289252Ciom. Pod David A. Add User To Corilact DA U 20mn has been success added to you contact Int 100 Servers A Worm you when he is one 13.900 Syriem cari More Ulemino Send Melissa Clasic Moda <Back Next> Corcel NET GAINS The free patch to USNF 97 adds the ability to play remarkably warp-free over the Internet. I SEEK YOU Finding out which of your opponents are online is a snap with the help of Mirabilis' ICQ. IN THE NAVY If you have Jane's US NAVY FIGHTERS 97, you won't even need Kali or Kahn for Internet play. EA has released a patch for the program (at www.janes.ea.com) that adds Internet connectivity. You can fly head-to-head scenarios created with the quick mission creator, built-in missions in competitive or cooperative mode, or mission-builder scenarios. Custom missions are transmitted on the fly as the mission starts, so your opponents don't have to download any files. I've flown missions with four human pilots from all across the country and the action was very smooth, with almost no warp in movement from Internet delays. However, EA did omit one major feature-a program along the lines of the Westwood Chat module (included with RED ALERT) that makes it easy to find opponents. You could use Kalis chat feature to look for USNF 97 opponents, even though Kali isn't needed for the actual connection. You can also find players by browsing the bulletin boards on the Jane's Combat Simulations Web pages, but then you need to email potential opponents and set up a time to meet them online. A better solution is to grab the neat new Internet utility called ICQ from www.mirabilis. com. Similar to AOL's Buddy Lists feature, ICQ will watch for members on a list of Internet friends (or potential combat enemies), and then send messages or chat requests to those people. For instance, last weekend I logged on to set up a four-playcr USNF 97 melec. I found Hangtime and Shortfork (who I'd added to my ICQ seek list) were online, and invited them into a chat. Hangtime spotted aCIDman, who was on his ICQ list, and brought him in as well. We then agreed on mission parameters, launched USNF 97, and flew Phantoms vs. MiGs. tic flight models download a copy of Interactive Magic Online's WARBIRDS from www.icigames.com. Even if you have no desire to pay $2 an hour to fly in the multiplayer arena, you can always fly WARBIRDS offline and practice your flying and shooting techniques against invulnerable, sitting-duck drone aircraft, Plus, as of release 1.11, you can practice techniques against intelligent opponents without racking up online charges. The sims front-end program now supports head-to-head play over a modem, network, or serial cable. You can dogfight head-tohead against a single opponent free of charge using the Internet or a local phone call (of course, the developers hope you'll get hooked and try the multiplayer arena). You can enjoy the thrills of multiplayer air combat by paying $20 (Kali), downloading a patch to an existing program (USNF 97), or downloading a free online front end (WARBIRDS). If you have an Intemet account and who doesn't?) you no longer have any excuse for playing alone. & FREE WARBIRDS I've often recommended that gamers who want to learn to fly planes with realisAdvanced Port Settings UTO FIFO bullets (reguvor 16550 corros.ble UARTI Select we selling to correct connection problemi Select higher seltings for lauter performance. Cancel Delaull: CONNECTION TIPS Beceive Bulet. Low (1) High (14)  If you find Internet play to Isorted Butter. Low (1) High (16) be jerky on your Win 95 machine, set up a new Dial-Up Networking icon just for Internet play. Under the Transmit Buffer sliders to one notch away modem settings, click Configure, and from the left-most setting. Click OK, then under General set Maximum Speed to click Advanced, and be sure Error Control 38400. Then click Connection, then Port and Compress Data aren't checked, and Settings, and move the Receive and that Hardware Flow Control is on x Some online games require you to know your IP Address, which identifies your location on the Internet. Depending on your Internet provider, this number may change each time you log on. To check your IP Address, click the Start button, choose Run, and type WINIPCFG. A window will pop up with information about your Internet connection, includng the IP address i CGW MAY 1997 "


"From the best-selling 3-0 Ultra Pinball Series! iT'S GOT THE WINDMILL, THE BiG SHOE AND THEN OUR IMAGINATIONS GOT THE BEST OF US. ANTHUNYO is all the fun you'd expect from the game of mini golf with a little something extra. A wild ride through the right side of the braih. You get two, nine-hole courses. One with classic mini golf holes like the big shoe, the windmill. The other hine holes are totally nutty. There's the space port where you cah putt on the moon, the volcano where your ball can be incinerated in molten lava and a prehistoric jungle where the Tyrahhosaurus Rex has developed a taste for golf balls. It's weird, wild and more fun than a whoopee cushion. 3-0 Ultra Mini Golf gives you incredibly Srealistic ball physics that make even the most radical bank-shots possible. You can play it TRA main maun alone or with as many as four players. ITA 3-0 Ultra Mini Golf. Call it cool. Call it amazing. Just don't call it normal. U SI ERRA\" 1-800-757-7707. http://www.sierra.com 01797 Sivrra On-Line. Inc. and/or om du that trodimarks of, or licensed in Sorra On-Lihu, Inc. All rights reservd, MINIGOLE "


"ZDNet. All the computing information you need, packed into one dynamic Web site. World-famous software library. Get ready to download! ZDNet has thousands of the highest-rated shareware programs, all virustested and reviewed and the latest commercial demos, too! The latest news 24 hours a day. From breaking technology news to your own FREE customized news feed, ZDNet delivers the in-depth coverage you need, from the sources you can trust. Enroll in ZDNet University. Be one of the first to join our online university and take courses in Java, C++, HTML, and more! Learn from expert instructors in the comfort of your own home or office. Powerful search engine. No time to browse? Use ZDNet Find It to quickly locate the specific computing informa tion you need. MAGINE HTML DEST OF THE YEAR 000006 20000 1000000 ZDNet Community Center. Join in! With 500+ journalists and more than 3 million users, ZDNet is an active community with unmatched computing expertise. Industry-standard product reviews. Which products are best for you? Turn to ZDNet for expert product reviews of everything from the latest tools for power users to the best software for kids. JAVA & ACTIVES Explore ZDNet today at www.zdnet.com! No matter what you use your computer for, you need a source of comprehensive computing information you can count on. When you log on to ZDNet, you'll find the latest news, product reviews, top-rated shareware, lively discussions and more. It's all brought to you by Ziff-Davis, the world's leading provider of computing and Internet information. Visit ZDNet today at www.zdnet.com and explore the world's most trusted computing site! ZD Net www.zdnet.com www.zdnet.com The world's most trusted computing site. VZD ZIFF DAVIS All companies, products and services are registered trademarks of their respective companies "


"TERRY COLEMAN STRATEGY/WARGAMES gen s ele s The Golden Hex Awards COL A Tribute to the Best and Worst Strategy/Wargames of '96 GOLDEN HEX very year, as it has done for the past 15 years, CCW hands out awards to deserving games in every genre, along with special awards for technical achievement and artistic merit. While I participate in this awards process, and take my responsibilities therein seriously, I am also a columnist. So, for what it's worth, here are the first annual Golden Hex awards for those achieve ments however notable, however clubious -that took place in strategy wargames, the genre that equally prizes innovation, depth, freshness, ease of play, complexity, and outright stodginess. Avalon Hill from bringing more of their classic tabletop games to the computer, they've learned a lot in the past year. Which brings us to Most Pleasant Surprise of the year: WOODEN SHIPS & IRON MEN. This follow-up to 5th FLEET took over two years to develop, and could have easily sunk when leaving port. But the Al was solid, the scenarios were challenging, and the campaign game is random cnough to make this very replayable. Easily the best game ever on the Age of Sail. Best Revival of a Broadway Play: Lets give a big hand to TCERS ON THE PROW.2.0, which now boasts the graphics, interface improvements, and enhanced Al of PANTHERS IN THE SHADOWS. Many scenarios are well-balanced for email play, so no serious tread-head should be without it. Honorable Mention: HARPOON CLASSIC 97. The Good Things Come in Small Packages award has no real contender other than ZULUWAR! While not up to the high standard set by Incredible Simulations previous CUSTER'S LAST To reach the Golden Age of strategy games, you have to sort through a load of crap. game summed up the essence of that already-tired sub-genre more than Virgin's Z. Instead of adding sophistication to real-time, it was too busy being vanilla. All the technical sophistication in the world doesn't help much when your maps are cookie-cutter and your scenarios are uninspired. That said, the Biggest Disappointment of the year remains COMPUTER THIRD REICH. While the game did finally emerge from vaporware, the three-year process of translation from the paper classic left an overly carclboard aftertaste. This wouldn't have been so bad, except that the 1974vintage boardgame is still more robust. Let's hope this setback doesn't prevent AND THE ENVELOPE PLEASE... Most Tepid: It was the year of the COMMAND & CONQUER clone, and no BRIEFINGS Yes, it's true: Avalon Hill is finally doing ADVANCED SQUAD LEADER. Despite the myriad rumors circulating, the game is not being done by Atomic Games (they are working on a deal with Microsoft to do CLOSE COMBAT II based on the Arnhem campaign). Computer ASL will be developed by Charlie Moylan, of Big Time Software and OVER THE REICH fame. At the earliest, ASL will be completed late in 1988— Charlie still has to complete ACHTUNG! SPITFIRE for Avalon Hill in 1997. The only thing for sure is that the ASL design will be turn-based like the boardgame, but will probably include additional sophisticated algorithms for even greater realism. After the success of ROBERT E. LEE and LORDS OF THE REALM II, the Impressions division of Sierra has experienced a bit of a shakeup. While Lee designer Jeff Fiske is reportedly at work on \"secret projects,\" Chris Foster has resigned, and Impressions founder David Lester has evidently moved back to England. We'll fill you in on the details as this situation develops. MAY 1997 CGW "


"TERRY COLEMAN Que Son Ye D il Y De Didaceda delali Buch STRATEGY Z WARGAMES SDN Game Ever. It took long enough, but somebody finally surpassed the venerable BATTLES OF NAPOLEON. Although I heartily agree with CGWS selection of the WARCRAFT II add-on pack as best overall of the year, the Best Individual Scenario nod goes to JIHAD from SID MEIER'S CIVILIZATION II SCENARIOS: CONFLICTS IN CIVILIZATION (which could also win for most unnecessarily long game title). Complete with mounted men-atarms, religious fanatics, the rise of Islam, shaky alliances, and the always interesting political machinations of the Byzantine Empire, JIHAD offers a tense and intriguing campaign (cocky Civ-meisters are advised to try this at Deity level). Kudos to Mick Uhl and his team at MicroProse, who show why buying a few well-designed scenarios from the original publisher is often a better bargain than hundreds of canned scenarios from a third party B argument over the comprehensiveness of the simulation. If you think winning the battle of Antietam was hard in ROBERT E. LEE, try surviving on the toughest Al level here! Music isn't generally considered an integral part of strategy games, but SID MEER'S CIVILIZATION II would win for the Best Soundtrack in any historical and Chill BERTS era. The old familiar Civ JIHAD WARCRAFT II won the add-on war, but this Civ II scenario tunes are nicely remixed, and takes the battle. along with the new classically-tinged piano turns, chcesy COMMAND, ZULUWAR! strikes a nice balorgan tones, and a surprisingly good rendiance between historicity, play balance, tion of Northumbrian pipes, they add simplicity, and fun. immeasurably to the gaming experience. The WinDoze award goes to Decline of a Creat Series award goes Interactive Magic's AMERICAN CIVIL WAR. to STAR GENERAL, which, despite its ACW's still the only strategic-level Civil seemingly ambitious design, leaves out War game worth buying, but it's pretty sad basically everything that made PANZER when a turn-based 19th century game is GENERAL and FANTASY CENERAL great. the slowest Win 95 application I've seen Hopefully the improvements we've seen this year. That's too much General thus far for Pacific GENERAL will keep McClellan emulation even for me. me from presenting a «Decline and Fall\" In the opposite vein, the Force-Feeding award next year. Gamers Win 95 award goes to Westwood A lot of famous and not-so-famous game designers and programmers MOST work for love as much as (or more PLEASANT than) money in this industry. But Brian SURPRISE Reynolds receives our medal for going Stanley Beyond the Call of Duty for his Associates and incredible support of SID MEIER'S AH scored a CIVILIZATION II. Brian's name isn't broadside even above the title, but he continued with WS&IM. to put out patches and additions to the game well after he and Sid had moved on from MicroProse to Firaxis. Studios for their C&C: RED ALERT impleThe dreaded Vaporware award goes to mentation. Running RED ALERT in Win Spectrum HoloByles MAGIC: THE 95 with SVCA graphics is a visual treat, GATHERING. It's been through so many and a most impressive programming design changes that Acclaim, of all comachievement. But guys, did you really panies, has managed to produce a game think we'd let you off the hook for that on the license in shorter time--and low-res DOS palette? Ugh. Acclaim's game is probably closer to the The Persistence Pays Off award has a original Wizards of the Coast collectible lot of competition, but Norm Koger gets card game in spirit, if not mechanics! the nod. After the uneven WARGAME Talonsoft walked off with the big CONSTRUCTION SET TANKS, Norm hits wargame award (see the Premier awards the bulls-eye with ACE OF RIFLES. And section in this issue), but it's hard to resist while some might quibble over scale or the giving out another. BATTLEGROUND: admittedly high casualty rates, there's little WATERLOO is simply the Best Napoleonic SOME FINAL THOUGHTS In the past year, the best of real-time and turn-based games offered better interfaces and tutorials, while at the same time improving game sophistication. You need look no farther than OVER THE REICH to see that a simple learning curve doesn't have to mean simplistic, limited play. The worst example of a game that couldn't figure out what it wanted to be when it grew up, multiplayer or solitary, and winner of my award for Will the Real Game Please Stand Up? is none other than Accolades DEADLOCK. This could have been SIMCriy meets Civ in space, but came close to matching neither classic because much of the single-player potential was stripped to make the game's pace more suitable for multiplayer play. Maybe with DEADLOCK II they'll bother to put everything in, and let us toggle off what we don't like. Truth is, to reach the tantalizingly close Golden Era of strategy games, you still have to sort through a load of crap. Which brings me to my final award: Coaster of the Year for strategy games was bitterly contested, but ultimately goes to Interactive Magics DESTINY, the most confused, incomplete design I've seen in a long, long time. Rest in peace.& CGW MAY 1997 "


"http://www.zdu.com Register Now! Only $4.95 a month! ZD Net University the Online Computing University The Newest, Fastest, and Most Convenient Way to Update Your Computing Skills LLANTS Join ZD Net University on the Web-the Ivy League of computing schools in cyberspace. Our distinguished faculty of prominent industry experts and Net savvy instructors teaches you skills you can use to advance your career. At your convenience. From any PC. And for a fraction of the cost of traditional continuing Choose from dozens of fun and interesting computing classes: education courses. Introduction to Webscaping: Learning to Code in HTML For only $4.95 a month: Beginning Visual Basic 4.0  ENROLL in as many classes as you want  Implementing Intranets  Visit the ALUMNI LOUNGE where students trade tips and get advice Hotdogging the Web: Build a Web Page with Hot Dog Pro  Use the ZDU Library of CGI SCRIPTS to enhance your Web publishing projects WebWorlds: Introduction to VRML  Take advantage of special DISCOUNTS on books and software C++ from Scratch  And much more! Build Your Own Duke Nukem 3D Level  Introduction to Java Applets Visit our campus on the Web to learn more about ZDU and how to register. But hurry... classes fill up early!  Web Graphics with Paint Shop Pro New classes added all the time! tiffftttt F. ZDNet ZUL UNIVERSITY www.zdu.com "


"SPECIAL ADVERTISING SECTION inside pentium les a Whole New Bal Game intel pentium If you've been waiting for technology to catch up with your vision of what a high-performance, multimedia home computer should be, your wait is over. Intel Corporation's new Pentium processor with MMXTM technologycombined with new leading-edge software specifically designed for the technology-lets consumers experience the newest level in computing on desktop and mobile computers that provide a richer, more lifelike multimedia experience. And leading manufacturers are stepping up to the plate with the high-performance systems and the multimedia features you neednew systems based on the Pentium processor with MMX technology come bundled with Intel MMX Technology Enhances the Multimedia Experience "


"SPECIAL ADVERTISING SECTION The MMX Technology FAQ Sheet components such as large color monitors, stereo speakers, high-speed modems and CD-ROM drives, plenty of storage and memory, graphics accelerator cards, and videophone capability. If you want to start experiencing superior video, graphics, sound, and communications without having to spend a lot of time installing cards and peripherals to realize your dream machine, MMXTM technology is real and it's here right now to see, hear, and experience. What is the official name of this new Intel processor? The \"MMX processor\" is called the Pentium processor with MMX technology, What are its key benefits? When combined with software designed for MMX technology, the Pentium processor with MMX technology improves multimedia and communications applications with high-speed performance; high-quality, full-color visuals; smoother video; and richer audio.* The new processor also provides higher performance for existing software because of a larger on-processor cache memory and certain other architectural improvements. Do I really need MMX media enhancement technology? If you use a computer in your home, you're in the market for one based on the Pentium processor with MMX technology. These computers make the dream of high-performance, easy-to-use multimedia systems a reality. They run existing applications faster, they run applications designed for MMX technology much faster, and they offer the highest-performance Pentium processor-based system on the market today.\" Why should I buy MMX media enhancement technology? Multimedia applications place a much greater demand on PCs than word processors or spreadsheets do. Intel developed MMX technology to answer this challenge. With a Pentium processor with MMX technology powering your PC, you can explore a broader range of multimedia applications and enjoy a richer, higher-quality multimedia experience with no need for additional hardware. Does this mean that the Pentium processor with MMX technology is faster than previous Pentium processors? The Pentium Processor with MMX technology is the highest-performance Pentium processor available today.** The Pentium Processor with MMX technology is more than 60 percent faster on Intel's Media Benchmark, which measures MMX technology multimedia performance, and can also run existing software 10 to 20 percent faster as measured by industry-standard benchmarks.*** A Happy New Year The Pentium processor with MMX technology was announced in January 1997. With clock speeds of 166MHz and 200MHZ for desktop systems and 150 and 166MHz for mobile computers, the Pentium processor with MMX technology is the highest performance Pentium processor available and the first Intel processor in more than a decade to offer a change of this significance. The new microprocessor features 57 new instructions that allow software developers to optimize their multimedia applications. Yet even with the addition of these new instructions, the Pentium processor with MMX technology maintains complete compatibility with the Intel architecture and with widely used operating systems, such as Windows 95TM, and applications software, The idea for MMX technology and its eventual integration with the processor itself, arose several years ago in response to the growing use of multimedia in personal computing and its demand on processor performance in generating high-quality graphics, video, and sound. And as this trend of more media-intensive software accelerates, Intel plans to make MMX technology a part of every new processor design in the future. Each generation of Intel processors has followed Moore's Law, which states that transistor density will double approximately every 18 months. The benefit of Moore's Law is simple: As users and the industry demand more and more capabilities, these capabilities can be added to speedier How many transistors are there in the Pentium processor with MMX technology? This microprocessor is built with 4.5 million transistors on 0.35-micron CMOS technology. Is MMX media enhancement technology a one-time release from Intel? No, MMX technology will be integrated in all new Intel processor designs. It increases a PC's overall functionality today and provides a platform for tomorrow. Is MMX technology available for mobile computers as well as desktop systems? Yes, the technology is available in both desktop and mobile versions of the new processor. The initial desktop processors run at either 166MHz or 200MHz. The initial mobile processors run at either 150MHz or 166MHz. Systems that are that fast use a lot of power, don't they? No, the Pentium processor with MMX technology consumes less power than previous Pentium processors. The desktop processor's core draws only 2.8 volts, while the mobile processor draws 2.45 volts. The processors are rated at less than 15.7w maximum power on the desktop. 7.8w thermal design power for the mobile systems. Do I have to wait for systems and software that take advantage of MMX media enhancement technology? Many systems based on the Pentium processor with MMX technology are available now, and many exciting applications designed for Intel MMX technology to provide maximum performance are available bundled in these systems or for separate purchase at retailers. Can I upgrade my current Pentium processor-based system to take advantage of MMX techmology? Intel recently introduced a Pentium Overdrive processor with MMX technology, which, if your current system is upgradable, can provide both optimal performance on software designed for MMX technology, and a 10 to 15 percent performance boost on all existing software. Of course, as with any modification to your system, you should always contact the system manufacturer for details and complete information. *As compared with a Pentium processor at same speed running Intel's Media Benchmark. Intel's Pentium Pro processor, although not a Pentium processor generation processor, is faster, but does not incorporate MMX technology. \"All comparisons are between Pentium processor with MMX technology and Pentium processor at same speed. "


"The Best PC with MMX Technology on the Block MMX intele inside price out a system pentium www. quantex .com QP5/200 SM-3 $2449 Business lease: $85/Mo That's right. In April, PC Computing awarded our QP5/SM-3 with MMX technology the coveted 5-star ***** rating. As one of the first companies to introduce the power 200MHZ Pentium Processor w/MMX Technology 2 Universal Serial Bus (USB) Ports 32MB EDO Memory / 512KB Pipelined Burst Cache 4GB EIDE Mode 4 HD/3.5\" 1.44MB Floppy Drive Upgrade to 5.7GB EIDE Hard Drive for $79) Matrox Millennium 3D w/4MB WRAM 17\" Digital Monitor (16.1\" viewable) 33.6 Kbps Fax/Modem w/Voice Mail and Speakerphone Toshiba 16X Max 95ms EIDE CD-ROM Drive (Upgrade from 16x Max to Panasonic PO/CD ROM for $149) Ensonig 32-bit Wavetable Sound Card Altec Lansing ACS-45 Speakers w/subwoofer Mid-Tower Case 104-Key Keyboard With MS PS/2 Mouse MS Windows 95 With MS Plus Ouantex Software Bundle (Including Corel WordPerfect Suite 3-year limited warranty, 24-hr./7-day Technical Support of MMX technology into our systems, Quantex guarantees you blazing speed and acceleration for all your communications, sound, 3D modeling and multimedia applications. When you buy a Quantex, you're guaranteed the very latest in technology, Quantex PC's set new standards for performance too. We use nothing but the highestquality, name-brand components. Rigorous quality assurance and a meticulous QP5/166 SM-3 (W/MMX Technology)........$224 QP6/200 SM-3 (w/Pentium Pro processor) ...$249 includes 256KB Internal L2 Cache) engineering process ensures that every PC we build is unrivaled in reliability and performance. To top it off, all Quantex systems are built in ISO 9002 certified manufacturing facilities so quality is assured. Want to know more? To find out more about Quantex products, give us a call today or visit our Web Site. PC Computing 4/97 ***** rating \"The best-priced MMX technology) machine you'll find and it's loaded with extras.\" QUANTEX GOOD CHOICE 1.800.380.8091 Computer Life 3/97 \"...you'd be hard pressed to find a better all-around value.» www.quantex.com 1997 Quantex Microsystems, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 4008 Pierce Strut Seert NJ 08873. Sales los 9 a 12 (ET) St.9am-6pa All sales are subject to Quintes limited wartesanatos and conditions of sale For det on our warranty or oy back guarantee call or write is Three limited want industatal parts and libit Send and this parts only limi ty Outras T a ilable in certain areas and is available only dete c ur in the sale Eind out thnicians S ettlesesatto dungand cannot be used a s based on them. All prices and configurations are subject to cung without stor roligation and do not includes Canada Puerto Rico purgoals Allotmed items that me et y Camarindke in onginal packaging 90 day money back policy does not indude tum o rgnal shaping handing durgs (uanto 1-800-793-4167 1-800-793-4185 not ble for alvor photography I Intim MMX Intel and the intende lope r mark Intel Mirrot and Windows dramatic Microgation Alle Company talents are trade of each respective company "


"SPECIAL ADVERTISING SECTION iCOMP Index 2.0 Ratings 182 technology. For example, the space limitations of notebook computers had prevented the use of a lot of add-in hardware. MMX technology instructions can now handle many of these functions, so mobile users can have videoconferencing over standard telephone lines, software-based video, and high-quality 3-D graphics. 142 iCOMP Index processors. As the use of multimedia functions in software grew and users came to expect a more sophisticated multimedia experience, Intel responded by making multimedia functions the next beneficiary of Moore's Law-just as it did with integrating the math coprocessor function in moving from the Intel i386TM to the Intel 1486T processor \"We believe the combined capabilities of Intel MMX media enhancement technology will appeal to the broadest range of consumers yet,\" says Dennis Carter, Vice-President of Marketing at Intel. \"The PC experience will be enhanced through a new wave of systems and software that provide lifelike color; full-screen, fullmotion video and graphics; real-time animation and manipulation of images; and 3-D capabilities.\" 200 MHz 165 MHz 200 MHz 166 MHZ 150 MHz 133 MHZ Intel Pentium Processor Intel Pentium Processor with MMX Technology frame rates, and surround sound.\" Her company and many others-including Intel and its Video Phone application, have created high-performance titles that deliver a truly lifelike multimedia PC experience without the need for additional hardware. In addition to Ubi Soft, more than 100 software developers-including Microsoft, Adobe Systems, Yamaha A New Generation of Software Emerges When you run software applications designed for MMX technology on PCs powered by the Pentium processor with MMX technology, you'll see a more than 60 percent performance boost for key types of complex multimedia data.* As a result, you'll be able to view more lifelike photos and smoother video, listen to enhanced audio, and experience 3-D games with better response times and arcade-quality graphics. Broad support for Intel MMX media enhancement technology in the software community has led to the development of new educational, reference, game, and communications applications. The first of this new generation of software titles is available now; many more are expected to be announced throughout this year. Developers are enthusiastic. \"Ubi Soft [creator of podTM wanted to create a product that was really focused on cuttingedge technology,\" says Ubi Soft Marketing Manager Carrie Tice. \"MMX technology allows us to have redirected use of light and shadow effect, rich textures, high It's a Must-Have Results of a new nationwide survey of U.S. adults and teenagers, sponsored by Intel Corp. and conducted by Yankelovich Partners Inc., show that Americans believe the personal computer is a \"musthave\" technology that plays a positive role in our everyday lives and helps us address broader social issues. According to this survey, people are expecting new capabilities and opportunities from their personal computers, and they believe that we have only begun to tap computers' potential. Survey respondents have ambitious goals for their systems, too. More than half indicate that they look to the computer to expand their capabilities and possibilities by helping them to accomplish new things rather than merely enabling them to do current things better. MMX technology meets these needs. \"To satisfy the demand for MMX technology, Intel and leading industry hardware and software companies are executing one of the fastest product ramp-ups in the history of the personal computer industry. To make test-driving these new systems as easy as possible, computer buyers will find software designed for MMX technology available on demonstration models and promoted on displays and through special events in retail locations across the country. Consumers can obtain additional information about the new Pentium processor with MMX technology at Intel's site on the World Wide Web at URL http://mmx.com. Consumers now have the opportunity like never before to see, hear, and experience firsthand the l'entium processor with MMX technology and software designed for MMX technology.. and Intel itselfhave applications specifically designed for MMX technology. Many of these applications contain a built-in Internet connection, combining the capabilities of highperformance multimedia CD-ROMs with the breadth, immediacy, and communication benefits of the Internet. Business professionals and students who use notebook computers can also benefit from new capabilities made possible by the Pentium processor with MMX *As compared with a Pentium processor at same speed running Intel's Media Benchmark. "


"de 1997 Intel Corporatiu. \"As compared to a lentium processor without MMX technology at same speed measured on Intel's Media Benchmark Catch a few rays of rich, brilliant color. And while you're at it, go for fuller sound, smoother video and faster graphics.* You can get it all from a PC that has a Pentium processor with MMX technology. Combine it with software designed for MMX technology and you'll get the most from your multimedia experience. Intel's MMX media enhancement technology. It's the technical term for fun. www.intel.com intel The Computer Inside. "


"MMX intel inside pentium CU Need a little more color? "


"STELLADVERTISIKO SECTION Inology in Action MMX technology uses high-performance \"single instruction, multiple data\" (SIMD) technology and incorporates 57 new instructions that were developed with multimedia applications in mind. The instructions assist in processing video, audio, and graphics more efficiently. These instructions allow software developers to code for faster video frame rates, making for smoother, more realistic video. And they give them the ability to create more lifelike audio, thanks to improved noise reduction and music synthesis for compressed audio files. MMX technology also makes advanced applications such as videoconferencing, which previously required complex hardware add-ons, more practical and better looking on the PC. MMX technology operates 64 bits at a time-general-purpose registers on Intel processors have only 32 bits-but maintains full compatibility with existing applications and software. The Pentium processor with MMX technology also has a larger primary on-processor cache to boost performance on standard applications. This approach ensures compatibility while maximizing performance. The Pentium processor with MMX technology is the latest example of how Intel continues to increase microprocessor performance by combining advanced manufacturing processes with innovative designs. In recent years the company has been able to shrink the width of the circuit lines on its processors to 0.35 micronsabout 1/300 the width of a human hair. This means that more transistors, and new features such as MMX technology, can fit on each processor-there are more than 4.5 million transistors on each Pentium processor with MMX technology -at lower manufacturing costs. centrate on delivering 24-bit true color; smoother video playback; more realistic 3-D graphics and animations; and clear, rich sound. Intel has worked closely with leading software developers to clearly demonstrate and deliver the benefits of MMX technology. Many leading-edge, high-performance applications are now available for systems based on the Pentium processor with MMX technology (see \"Software Completes the Multimedia Picture\"), and the number will increase throughout the year as the Pentium processor with MMX technology becomes the standard for high-performance personal computing. For people who want access to the latest game and education titles, surf the World Wide Web effectively, talk to family and friends using videophone technology, or perhaps design their dream home or compose the next great modern symphony, the Pentium processor with MMX technology delivers the performance they need-today and in the future. The Proof is in the Software Because the 57 new instructions focus on multimedia, MMX technology keeps the central processor from getting bogged down. Normal housekeeping functions are performed more quickly than ever before, and new programs written specifically for MMX technology can perform at higher levels to ensure a great multimedia experience! Software developers can con"


"It Starts With Your Photo August Create our own osters Make your own calendars F AMELY You can create hoto greeting cards HAPPY BRTHDAY Have fun with faces using special effects With MGI PhotoSuite NUMBER ONLY $49.95 Pini Suite SOBRASSES me Photo Suite IN WEL Cesar, Cind your snapshot is just the beginning... now it's se dolor time to have fun with photographs on your FRES HED computer! With MGI Photo Suite and just a few mouse clicks, you can fix red eye, retouch images, crop unwanted areas or brighten dark photos. Apply special effects to create a masterpiece, then with MGI PhotoSuite's huge library of templates, make your own customized greeting cards, posters, calendars and more! You It's a Snap! The Easiest way to Edit, Capture, can even send your photos over the Internet or Catalog and Transform Your Photos! make Web photo catalogs. All for only $49.95*! \"Designed for Intel MMXTM technology.\" Visit your local retailer or for more information, contact MGI Software Corp. at 1-888-MGI-SOFT Flashpix W 10 HOME or visit www.mgisoft.com (Priority Code: PS107) ERTS AN Small Business MGI PhotoSuite is available at Best Buy, CompUSA, Computer City, Egghead, Future Shop, Media Play and other fine software retailers. \"Estimated street price in U.S. dollars, 41 Best Seller based on retail unit sales in the U.S. of Windows-based home photo editing software from PC Data Reports, Jan. Des. 1996 1989-1997 MGI Software Corp all rights reserved. MGI and MGI Photo Suite are trademarks or registered trademarks of MGI Software Corp. All products mentioned are trademarks or registered trademarks of their cospective companies mgi CIRCLE READER SERYICE #76 "


"In Touch Module for casy access to 71, radio, CD, speakerphone and answering machine Sleep button with Instant On MMX OPIS 02 A type inside WW2 e n DE ENCYGACREDA Science Project und -Dos and use pentium 20011: Pentium processor with MMXchnology: 256KB law 2 cache 3.1 billion byte (=3.0GB) hard drier A very long titt CESCO there were not st Bonus \" Vo The eating habits of the 321/B EDO DRAN. expandable 10 128MB C otes ate meat and o ss ruled the car of the great creatures 1 O S i Wed Dr. TOSHIBA 12X CD-ROM S3 VRGE DX 3D graphics accelerator, 211B 50ns EDO DRAN SoundBlaster Pro audio system with SRS 3D Sound * 15. 33.6kbps modem Full-duplex speakerphone Digital answering machine Internet-really Introducing the new Infinia with InTouch. Your idea of home computing is about to change. Just watch your kids. The Infinia home PC from Toshiba lets them talk to Grandpa over the speakerphone while they're doing homework. It's a cinch. But Infinia is definitely not kids stuff. Packed with power, it offers excellent multimedia enhancements \"The model shown is the Infinix 7201 with optional monitor "


"Modem Print. Fax. Call Grandpa. When you're ready for a different computer. like a 3D graphics accelerator. Plus, the new In Touch Module lets you jump between functions with the touch of a button. And Infinia has a wealth of expansion capabilities--including full-length PCI and ISA slots, three additional drive bays, and two universal serial bus ports for easy plug-and-play of peripherals. And Infinia is from Toshiba, the number one name in portable computers. To learn more, visit the Toshiba Web site at http://computers.toshiba.com or call 1-800-457-7777. In Touch with Tomorrow TOSHIBA 01997 Tshila America Information Systems, Inc. Infinia is a trademark of inhiba America Information Systems, Inc Product ecificationis vary will perifications and availability at subt to change All products indicated his trademark symbs are trademark alor stered by their respective comunics, Intel Inside and l'entium Pre Registered trademarks and MIMX is a trademark of Intel Corporation, CIRCLE READER SERVICE #077 "


"SPECIAL ADVERTISING SECTION Guide to Computer Systems Based on Pentiuni Procesor with MMX Media Enhancement Technology MMXTM work with friends, or otherwise sending lots of data back and forth, a fast modem is a must, so all Pentium processor with MMX technology desktop systems offer 33.6Kbps data modems, with a few going up to 56Kbps. MMXT intel When you're ready to purchase a system based on the Pentium processor with MMX technology, you have a wide choice from many vendors, including desktop and notebook models. The information in this section is designed to give you an overview of basic system configurations, as well as a few representative systems. Actual prices and configurations will vary. Your best source for a complete, updated list of desktop and notebook systems can be found at Intel's mmx.com Web site. inside pentium SEE IT! Sound Systems High-quality sound complements graphics, video, and images, so these systems feature speakers and other sound system components that enable the most sophisticated stereo soundscapes. AR ITI EXPERIENCE ENCE IT! Desktop Systems Look for this to know which computers have the Pentium processor with MMX technology inside. Telephony and Communications in addition to useful telephone features such as PC-based dialing, faxing, and multiuser answering machine functions, many of the new Pentium processor with MMX technology-based systems come preloaded with Intel Video Phone capability to allow you to see as well as hear the person with whom you're talking. Desktop systems are readily available at speeds of 166MHz or 200MHz, and have features and peripherals that, when combined with software designed for MMX technology, give you a compelling, lifelike multimedia PC experience enriched with enhanced imaging, video, audio, and graphics. Although desktop prices range from slightly under $2,000 to nearly $4,000, what you get and what you pay are determined by processor speed, CD-ROM speed, memory size, sound quality, and other factors. Because these systems are designed to run multimedia applications, most offer these key features: memory requirements. With those requirements in mind, most Pentium processor with MMX technology desktop systems come standard with 32 megabytes of RAM and can be expanded. If you're serious about multimedia applications, you may want to avoid 16MB systems and start with a baseline of 32MB. On the Desktop Large-Capacity Disk Drives Just as multimedia applications require a lot of memory, the resulting images and files can quickly consume a lot of disk space storage. That's why most of these systems give you at least three gigabytes that's 3,000MB-of storage space. Large Monitors Visually rich applications such as imaging programs and games require a broad can vas on which to paint and play. With few exceptions, Pentium processor with MMX technology desktop systems come with 17-inch displays that help pull you into the action onscreen. Ultra-fast CD-ROM Drives CD-ROM-based games and other applications depend on fast response times to make the action lifelike and keep it moving. Depending on how fast you like your action, these systems offer drives from 8X all the way up to 16X. Compaq Presario Series Compaq has added MMX technology to its Presario line of desktop computers, with configurations dependent on the target audience. The 4000 Series, for example, brings 3-D graphics, stereo sound, fast Internet access, videophone receiving capability, up to 16X CD-ROM drives, and Pentium processors to home PC users. Compaq notes that Presario models that incorporate the Intel Pentium processor with MMX technology offer up to a 20 percent performance advantage in traditional computing applications and will dramatically enhance the multimedia experience for software applications designed for MMX technology. The Model 4764 Minitower features a 166MHz Pentium processor with MMX technology and Plenty of RAM Today's sophisticated multimedia applications are not small in ambition or in Fast Modems Whether you're downloading a favorite new program, playing games over a net"


"SPECIAL ADVERTISING SECTION sound and smoother video in your persuasive presentations. 0 .24MB of RAM  2.5GB hard drive 16X CD-ROM drive  JBL Pro speakers Price: $1,899 On the Road Dentium The first Pentium processor with MMX technology-based notebooks to debut included the: The Model 4770 Minitower offers a 200MHz Pentium processor with MMX technology, 32MB of RAM, and 3.8GB hard drive. Price: $2,299. The $2,399 Model 4784 Minitower also features a 200MHz Pentium processor with MMX technology The slightly more expensive Compaq Presario 8000 Series is designed for multimedia enthusiasts who demand state-of-the-art entertainment capabilities. The Minitower 8772 comes with: ages designed for MMX technology packages by 40 percent. To ensure that you experience that performance boost, IBM bundles the following titles: POD, The Ultimate Human Body, and The Third Dimension (see \"Software Completes the Multimedia Picture\" for details). Both models come standard with: .48MB of RAM  6.5GB hard drive  16X CD-ROM drive  56Kbps upgradable modem  Power VR Arcade 3-D Graphics  6MB of graphics memory. Price: $2,999  Acer AcerNote Nuovo 975 (priced at $4,600)  Digital HiNote VP 545 (54,800)  Gateway 2000 Solo 2100 P5-150MMX ($4,199)  Micron Transport XPE ($4,999)  NEC Versa 6050MH ($4699)  Toshiba Tecra 740CDT (S6,740). This system provides a first in display technology in this group, an XGA resolution screen that provides the same display space as a 15-inch CRT monitor. Even with this highperformance display, the Tecra manages more than three hours of battery time. The Tecra also offers built-in videoconferencing with data sharing and whiteboard capability that can be performed over a standard telephone line. Compaq Presario 1080 This is the high end of the 1000 mobile PC series and the only system in that series to date to feature Pentium processor with MMX technology, the 166MHz version. Some of the features of this unit demonstrate how mobile PCs are catching up with desktops:  32MB of RAM, expandable to 128MB  Up to 3.2GB capacity hard drives  8X CD-ROM drive Compaq has also released a line of notebook systems with MMX technology (see \"On the Road\"). The Pentium processor with MMX technology models include software titles such as POD and Ultimate Human Body II. The new models also feature comprehensive Internet and videophone communications, providing Internet access and videoconferencing capabilities over standard phone lines. As an added benefit for you game players, IBM bundles some Aptiva systems with an IBM joystick and a cordless mouse. The Aptiva series is built to support future technologies, including DVD and USB peripherals, to enable you to take advantage of future innovations in home multimedia computing. List Prices: $2,399 to $2,599 (monitors sold separately) Similar, slightly less expensive systems are PC 330 and PC 350. HP Pavilion 7370v Hewlett-Packard's Pavilion 7370V minitower system is designed for true arcade-style gaming experience in your living room. Based on a 200MHz Pentium processor with MMX technology, the 7307V comes bundled with 50 software titles, including MechWarrior 2, Whiplash, Gremlin, Trip Maker, Billboard Music Guide, and Blockbuster Entertainment Guide to Movies. Other features include:  12-inch display  16MB of RAM  1.44GB hard drive  10X CD-ROM drive  33.6Kbps modem  Stereo speakers with Premier Sound Audio  Joystick game port  Integrated 16-bit stereo sound  MPEG, specially tuned for MMX technology Price: $4,499 Packard Bell Platinum Packard Bell features the powerful 200MHz version of Intel Pentium processor with MMX technology in its premium Platinum computer systems. And with the added value of hot new MMX technology software titles, these new products wow consumers with a total multimedia experience that puts more fun than ever into owning a new PC Other features:  32MB of RAM  3.2GB capacity hard drive  16X CD-ROM drive . 33.6Kbps modem Approximate street price: $2,200 . 32MB of RAM  4GB hard drive .6MB of video memory for high-resolution graphics  MPEG for full-screen, full-motion digital video  17-inch monitor  16X CD-ROM drive Street Price: $3,550 Mobile PCs AMS Tech Travel Pro Series AMS's Travel Pro 188 and 2010 each feature the 166MHz version of the Pentium processor with MMX technology. The 188 model comes with:  16MB of RAM, expandable to 64MB  12-inch display  2GB hard drive  Sound Blaster Pro-compatible sound and stereo speakers  Up to 1.5MB of video RAM  NeoMagic Accelerated Video MMX technology adds a new dimension to the mobile PC experience at no substantial increase in price over traditional models. Because mobile PCs are more self-contained than desktop units, the number of configuration options is smaller. For complete, up-to-date information, check the mmx.com Web site. IBM Aptiva Series Designated by IBM as home computers, the Aptiva series features two models: the 166MHZ Aptiva S80 and the 200MHz Aptiva S90. IBM says that these models improve standard multimedia applications by 10 to 20 percent and boost packMobile PCs featuring Pentium processors with MMX technology are available at speeds of 150 or 166MHz. Larger displays, fast CD-ROM drives, and MMX technology combine to make this new crop of mobile PCs impressive multimedia systems. These new capabilities enable richer "


"anuary 1996 Tue Wed Thu Sun Mon Fri Sat IN t in It's a part 1 RAZRESERVE TED STATES ON ge  2 2008 TODAY "


"PICTURE THIS. INTRODUCING ADOBE PHOTO DELUXE\" Touch Up Photo Collage Fun Art Cool Internet Transform Photo Cards & More Disguise Your Main Funny Money Face Change Background Body Switch HELP UNDO With Adobe's help, you can open the old family album to a new world 100% 100% of exciting possibilities. See Dad with hair and Mom bald. Try little Jimmy with the body of a weightlifter. Relocate Sis to the Great Wall of China. Remove the red-eye that hit the entire family on Christmas Day, 1986. Or just remove your Uncle Scott from the picture altogether. All you need is Adobe PhotoDeluxe and a little inspiration to have fun 9 with your photos in ways you've never imagined. Create LAYERS greeting cards, calendars or magazine covers. Retouch old photos. Dress up school work or correspondence. Or just PhotoDeluxe pho treat Grandma to a facelift and then use PhotoDeluxe to WINDOWS AND MAC get her photo ready for delivery on the Internet. If you $49.00 can point a camera and click a mouse, you can do this. 0 Original ORDER TODAY And a lot more. Adobe PhotoDeluxe, from the people who Shadow pioneered the digital image. Now the picture is complete. 888-6293 Background Ney Delete Adobe for you: If you can dream it, you can do it.\" Microsoft Family PC Rating **** FamilyPC Score Recommended 92 CDE 24305 The hoxe n Windows 3.1, Windows 05 Macintosh Al The Adale For You lo, Adobe Photos and the tagline, can damit ander watermarket Allah Systems In t el All other maths and trai n the pa t h tespective companies 1996 Mie Stems and All right red CIRCLE READER SERVICE #075 "


"SPECIAL ADVERTISING SECTION Intel MMX\" Look for this to know which software is designed for Intel MMX technology. Software Completes the Multimedia Picture into high-speed battle in this robot fighting game. To help you vanquish your foes, Intel MMX technology gives you 16-bit color at 30 frames per second, multiplayer network combat, and two-player split-screen mode. Some things were made to go together, and that's the case with Pentium processor with MMXTM technology and many of today's hot multimedia titles. Major software developers have recognized the benefits of MMX media enhancement technology and are now offering applications that take advantage of them. This guide is just a partial listing of the software designed for MMX technology to help you select applications that exploit the power and features of your Pentium with MMX technology-based system. G-NOMET 7th Level Inc. G-NOME pushes real-time simulation over the edge with the clash of man and machine as you face the armored giant. G-NOME is a networked multiplayer game that combines fast action, brilliant images, sound, and graphics to give players an exhilarating multimedia experience. Games/Entertainment pod Ubi Soft Entertainment Inc. pod is a real-time racing simulation game in which your challenge is to be the first to escape a planet where a deadly virus is rapidly destroying all life. Playable both locally and over the Internet, pod was designed to achieve amaz. ing graphics, video, picture processing, and sound perfor mance that heighten your overall experience of the game. Jonny Quest The Real Adventures: Cover-Up at Roswell VirginSound and Vision Something has crash landed on Earth-a satellite, according to the government. But the Quest Team knows better. An alien craft, strange alien objects, and a dangerous quest all beckon you to come inside as you use cool technogadgets to solve the mystery. Education Rebel Moon Rising Fenris Wolf Ltd. This multiplayer interactive action game pits you against earth forces in the First Lunar War. Twenty distinct levels of simulated combat, taking place in four different locales, provide a constant challenge. Maximizing the capabilities of Intel's MMX technology, Rebel Moon Rising features advanced color lighting to immerse you in a realistic environment. Visual Home Deluxe Books That Work Now you can visualize and experiment with home design by using the new Internet-enhanced version of Books That Work's home-design tool Visual Home. Use the 3-D rendering engine designed for Intel's MMX technology to experience fast walkthroughs of homes/models either alone or with someone else over through Internet-enabled design sharing Eraser-Turnabout Imagination Pilots Entertainment In this interactive video sequel to the Arnold Schwarzenegger movie Eraser, you are an agent fighting the forces of corruption as you search for a traitor in your midst. Amid realistic, interactive settings and an array of characters played by professional actors, you must uncover who is working against you and why. The Timetables of Technology  Byron Preiss Multimedia Company Inc. Copublished with Simon & Schuster Interactive, The Timetables of Technology uses 3-D navigation to let you explore and view the history of technology by topic, eras, and years. Designed for MMX technology, this title features Cyber Troopers Virtual On Sega Entertainment Inc. Choose from eight \"Virtualoid\" opponents as you charge *Some applications come preinstalled on new systems, while others are available for separate purchase at retail. As always, make sure to check system requirements on the box before purchasing any software that is not preinstalled "


"SPECIAL ADVERTISING SECTION the latest in rendered 3-D spaces, a true 3-D audio environment and voice-over narration to all 1,460 of the timeline's entries. smoother, clearer picture while maintaining overall system responsiveness.* Adobe PhotoDeluxe Adobe Systems Inc. PhotoDeluxe lets you customize photos and images by following either built-in activities or your imagination through the process of modifying, personalizing, and enhancing digital images. Intel's MMX technology improves your ability to add special effects to your photos, such as soft lighting and fog. The Ultimate Human Body 2.0 with MMX Technology DK Multimedia Thanks to Intel's MMX technology, DK Multimedia's major upgrade of The Ultimate Human Body lets you look beneath the skin; take a guided tour of the structure, systems, and organs of the body, and learn about every part. View and manipulate fully textured and lit 3-D models of the skeleton and major body parts. To further improve your viewing experience, Intel's MMX technology provides full-screen video, smooth animation at 25 frames per second, and 16-bit color. Intel Smart Video Recorder III and Indeo Video Software Intel Corp. If seeing is believing, then nothing brings more power to communications than video. The Intel Smart Video Recorder III lets you create digital videos to enhance e-mail, or to include on your Web site. Anyone with a Pentium processorbased PC can play the videos back without additional special hardware. Intel Indeo video software eliminates the need for add-on hardware by letting you play back video in software. Kai's Photo Soap Meta Tools Inc. Kai's Photo Soap lets you clean up your digital photos, easily fixing common problems such as \"red eye,\" color casts, scratches, and fuzziness. Soap will also remove wrinkles and scars and rotate and resize, all in real-time. Sound Space Station SimulatorTM Maris Multimedia Employing Intel's MMX technology, Space Station Simulator provides a 3-D world that lets you design, construct, and explore your own model of the International Space Station currently under construction by several countries. MMX technology gives you detailed, high-resolution views of the earth, advanced simulation, 16-bit color, and rich texture. Easy PhotoTM Reader Storm Technology EasyPhoto Reader lets you store, organize, find, enhance, and use photos on your PC. Designed for MMX technology, built-in EasyPhoto software improves JPEG compression/decompression, greatly reducing wait times for opening, saving, using, or printing any size photo, even at high resolution. Photos can then be used in word-processing, imaging, creativity, and presentation applications. S-YXGC Software Wavetable Synthesizer Yamaha Systems Techmology Inc. By combining Yamaha's synthesizer technology with Intel's MMX technology, you get an inexpensive, high-quality application that lets you compose and edit music on the desktop, without having to buy additional hardware. MMX technology makes it all possible by providing digital signal processing while still maintaining abundant processor bandwidth to play software synthesizer music. Logic Quest The Learning Company This dynamic medieval adventure with challenging mazes, puzzles, and construction activities brings the past to life to help curious explorers develop thinking, problem-solving and creativity skills. Picture It! Microsoft Corp. Picture It! imaging software lets you manipulate photos and create personalized cards, calendars, and other projects on your PC. Being the first Flashpix product designed for MMX technology and with built-in Internet capabilities, users will enjoy greater than 30 percent performance improvement in key imaging tasks. Kurzweil Voice for Windows Personal Edition Release 2.6 Kurzweil Use voice input to create an easy and natural approach to personal computing. Using Intel MMX technology, advanced discrete speech recognition technology creates letters, reports, and e-mails more easily and efficiently by voice. Other Cool Stuff Frank Lloyd Wright's Fallingwater Omniview Studios Roam the house and grounds of Fallingwater, the famous architect's masterpiece. No other tour, on video or through still photography, can offer the 360-degree in-depth coverage that Omniview's Photobubbles deliver. Intel's MMX technology gives you faster frame rates, smoother operation, and higher resolution. MGI Video Wave MGI Software Corp. VideoWave is a complete video publishing program featuring an intuitive design for easily capturing, editing, and creating full-motion video for home, office, and Internet use. Video Wave takes advantage of today's most advanced multimedia PC technologies including MPEG, QuickTime Intel Indeo, and Microsoft Active MovieTM and supports a variety of inputs sources including video cameras, VCRs, and video-capture boards. Director 5 and Shockwave Macromedia Inc. Director 5 is an authoring tool for multimedia and the Internet. Shockwave provides clickable animations, graphics, and audio from within Web browsers. Both applications have been designed for Intel's MMX technology. Imaging The Third Dimension Davidson & Associates With this combination toy and tool, adults and kids alike can easily create and manipulate an endless variety of animated worlds. Innovative and entertaining tools allow you to import your own backgrounds, textures, and objects, or use those that come with the software. Graphics and audio libraries designed for Intel's MMX technology provide smooth animation and excellent sound. Intel Video Phone with Proshare Technology Intel Corp. Intel Video Phone technology, preconfigured on many newer systems, lets family and friends talk to and see each other over standard phone lines while they talk. MMX technology improves the viewing experience through better video signal compression, allowing you to present a Realistic Display Mixer (RDX) and Realistic Sound Experience (RSX) Intel Corp. Realistic Display Mixer lets you quickly mix 2-D graphics, animation, and video with 8-bit or 16-bit color. Realistic Sound Experience lets you create 3-D positional sound in software. *Performance may vary based on actual hardware and software configuration as well as quality of phone line connection "


"GAMER'S EDGE Your Source for Ruthless Strategies, Tips, Cheats, and Hacks STRATEGY & TIPS MOO II How to Make the Galactic Cream Rise to the Top by Tim Carter SELECT RACE Alkari Meklars Bulrathi Darlocks Psilons Elerians Sakkra nolams Sirali o, you'd like to be a galactic demagogue, but just can't seem to get your conquests off the ground. Or, perhaps your best-laic plans for universal tyranny consistently fall flat before you've dominated a paltry cight star systems. Like all good strategy games, MOO II takes planning to win, particularly at the higher levels of difficulty. At the Impossible level of difficulty, your strategy will have to be dictated somewhat by the basic characteristics of the game. To begin with, fighting wars early in the game is a complete waste of time. Also, building a stable, prosperous empire requires investment in economics and research carly on. These investments pay off quite a bit later in the game (and a lot later than in MOO 1), but they are essential to winning consistently, Because of the unique lechnology tree (see chart), players must tailor their economic, military, and rescarch strategies to the rhythm of the game. A typical game of MOO II can be subdivided by the problems that confront aspiring emperors as their empire expands. Humans Tritarians Klackan KLAK ON, KLAK OFF Picking your race is your first crucial step. If you plan to select a custom race, Subterran, Charismatic, and Creative are powerful bonuses to have. Trade Goods Cost lleret M . Cast: 1 Did Timon HDD Freighter Fleet Calony Ship Dutpast Ship Housing Armor Barracks Automated Factory Biospheres Fighter Garrison Hydroponic Farm Marine Darracks Missild Base Research Lati Space Academy Sonceport Star Base Icts de carry trai troops for and Invasion pott . De h arina In the trailery 5 to the planet's maximum pot i Eines tawalnutave Scout Wasp VI Hornet! Spider IV Scorun VII BUILDING AN INTERSTELLAR ECONOMY When you begin, you are faced with a production and expansion problem: Your economy is simply too weak to build the number of colony ships Marie Barracks colony Base you require, and too much shipbuilding will leave you with a stultified research effort and an underdeveloped : infrastructure. DESD Once you overcome this GO ON AND BUY IT Early on, you shouldn't wait problem, you the full 20 turns for colony ships and essential structures to be built before buying factories. This may encounter some territorial way you'll produce more in fewer turns. difficulties, as few space empires tend to have nice straight borders, and those nasty computer opponents will be moving into your territory faster than a Silicoid swallows a granite sandwich. Speaking of food, any fast-growing empire will either run out of food or spend far too much money and industry on freighters and farmersunless you plan in advance, that is. With these issues in mind, lets consider a few racial characteristics. Any race can win the game, and usually players will begin customizing their race carly on. When customizing, remember that Genetic Mutation allows you to completely rework you race roughly halfway through the game. Thus, your initial characteristics should be tailored to your most immediate problems, rather than those you will face later. In general, its a good idea to trade combat disadvantages for economic advantages. How you approach this is mostly a question of personal preference. Only Charismatic is essential, as the diplomacy bonus is often crucial to peaceful relations with your neighbors, which you must maintain at all costs until the middle of the game. Personally, I like Subterran. The ability to raise your overall population by about a third is, after Creativewhich is tantamount to cheating in my book -the single greatest advantage in the game. Bulld I Ist lar Yes Wall Marine Harracks Hydroponicare Auleatedl aclary AURO Dud CGW MAY 1997 "


"STRATEGY & TIPS MOO II GAMER'S EDGE Industrial Colony Or William Holden Prime P op 31. Et 81 131 CO lugu 3** Ha 7 1122 SIIIII. After you have picked a race, you are ready to begin. To maximize production, I suggest selecting hydroponic farms for your first technology, as this will free up your population for work in the factories. Also, while cngine speed and range are key start-up technologies, the sooner you get some industrial assistance, the sooner your economy can start growing, For instance, an abundant planet with a single worker and no bonuses or penalties will generate three production points per turn. Buy an automated factory for this planet soon after colonizing it and this figure jumps to nine points per turn, effectively tripling your initial growth. RETURA GROWING PAINS Once cities get huge, you'll encounter food shortages. Make sure you research terraforming and subterranean farms early on in order to head off this disaster. R&D'S THE LIFE FOR ME Micromanagement is your friend. Research the right technology, then buy aggressively at the planetary level. Don't wait 20 turns for a colony ship to be finished before building that factory either. Switch production, buy the factory, then go to the ship. If you check the times on your building queue, you'll see that even though you switched back and forth, your colony ship will still be finished faster. If you colonize a gaia planet early, buy freighters, switch several extra population units to the new colony, and have them all produce food. The extra harvest will free up population elsewhere to build ships. On the exploration side, you obviously want to visit as many systems as possible as quickly as possible, and then colonize the best ones as quickly as you can build the ships. To ensure that you get the planets you want (and needl), establish viable boundaries for your empire from the very start of the game. While black holes and long gaps between planets can act as buffers, you will need to aggressively use outposts to guaranlee your fair share of space. Outposts are cheap to build, and can secure a star system for you until your big plancts can afford to build a colony ship. At the start of the game, build two or three outpost ships for every colony ship, and use them to stake out your territory, Computer opponents will generally leave systems you claim via outposts alone, at least until a war breaks out. MOO IL Technology_Charts Automated USING THE CHART All of the information presented here is any aspiring Ming the Merciless plan his effective trading and minimal investment also included in the instruction manual. We galactic conquest. Unless your race has the in obsolescence. When trading, consider have recast it here in chart form to help Creative trait, you will have to choose the following questions: whether or not between the options you need a particular technology: and, if Construction, for each level of trading for this tech allow you to research Path A Path B Path C technology another, equally important technology 1. Colony Base Star Base Marine Barracks Two keys to opti when you get to the next level. Use the 2. Anti-Missile Fighter Bays Reinforced Hull Rockets mum technology chart to compare the tech level of what 3. Automated Missile Base Heavy Armor management are the computer opponent is offering against Factories >>Continued on pg 214 4. Battle Pods Troops Survival Pods 5. Spaceport Armor Barracks Fighter Garrison PO Wer 6. Robo-Miner Plant Battle Station Powered Armor Path A Path B Path C 7. Fast Missile Advanced Assault Shuttles 1. Nuclear Drive Nuclear Bomb Racks Damage Control 2. Colony Ship Freighters Outposts 8. Titan Construction Ground Batteries Battleoids Transports = 9. Recylcotron Automated Artificial Planet 3. Fusion Drive Fusion Bomb Augmented Engines Repair Unit Construction on 4. Ion Drive Ion Pulse Cannon Shield Capacitator 10. Robotic Factory Bomber Bays 5. Anti-Matter Drive Anti-Matter Torpedo Anti-Matter Bomb 11. Deep Core Mine Care Waste Dumps E 6. Transporters Food Replicators 12. Star Fortress Advanced City Heavy Fighters 7. High-Energy Focus Energy Absorber Megafluxers 13. Doom Star Artemis 8. Proton Torpedos Hyper Drive Hyper X Capacitators Construction System Net 9. Interphased Drive Plasma Torpedo Neutronium Bomb an hnology O al ADOLU Planning MAY 1997 CCW "


"GAMER'S EDGE STRATEGY & TIPS: MOO II Technology Level MOO. IL Technology_Charts >Continued from pg 213 what it wants in return, and also to see if you are under attack and rely heavily on Spaceport and wait until later to research the trade will open up other research pos missile bases for defense, you may wish to the Currency Exchange and Stock Exchange sibilities for your scientists in subsequent avoid a few missile techs, and get economito boost your revenue. technology levels. cally useful advances instead. Also, nuclear Finally, remember to plan ahead. Use There is no point in researching a partic missiles can be MIRVed on your ships, giv the chart to plot three or four research ular advance if you are going to research a ing them a considerable shelf life. choices ahead, so that you can be sure superior advance in the same area before Similarly, if you are in a good cash posi that you are meeting your empire's most you need either one. For instance, unless tion, you may wish to bypass the important needs first. SOCIOLO gy Chemistry Path A Path B Path A Path B Path C 1. Space Academy 1. Nuclear Missile Standard Fuel Cell Extended Titanium Armor Fuel Tanks 2. Xeno Psychology Alien Management Center 2. Deuterium Tritanium Armor > 3. Planetary Stock Exchange Fuel Cell Astro University 3. Merculite Missile Pollution Processor 5. Advanced Government 4. Pulson Missile Atmospheric Iridium Fuel Cell (depends on race government) Renewer 6. Galactic Currency Exchange 5. Nano Dissemblers Microlite Zortium Armor Construction 6. Zeon Missiles Neutronium Armor Uridium Computers Fuel Cells Path A Path B Path C 7. Thorium Adamantium Armor Fuel Cells Electronic Computer Optronic Research BIOIogy Dauntless Laboratory Computer Guidance System Path A Path B Path C 3. Neural Scanner Scout Lab Security Stations 1. Hydroponic Farm Biospheres Positronic Planetary Holo Simulator 2. Cloning Center Soil Enrichment Death Spores Computer Supercomputer 3. Telepathic Training Microbiotics 5. Emissions Rangemaster Cyber Guidance System Targeting System Security Link 4. Terraforming 6. Cybertronic Autolab Structural 5. Subterranean Weather Controller Computer Analyzer Farms 7. Android Farmers Android Workers Android Scientists 6. Psionics Heightened Intelligence ~ 8. Virtual Reality Galactic Cybernet Network 7. Bio Terminator Universal Antidote 9. Pleasure Dome Moleculartronic Achilles 8. Biomorph Fungi Gaia Evolutionary Computer Targeting Unit Transformation Mutation Technology Level 0 A 1  6 0 | 0 4 4 3 81 Technology Level NOCONTACTS ESTIONALE SALLALE I INILA. S IE HIER ANO-CONTACT KIPINASARIALES RASAHETATII *NO CONTACT TRAVEHET16 Once you have made contact with your neighbors, immediately begin to settle the outermost plancts in your territory. If you build from the inside out you will give the computer a chance to snatch the systems that lie between you and it. If, on the other hand, you quickly occupy your \"frontier,\" the computer will have to look in other directions to expand, leaving you to colonize the rest of your empire in relative peace. Always put the outpost on the best planet in the system, as when you build a colony on top of an outpost you get a free marine barracks. Its one less builling to buy, and can help your morale under some types of government Don't hesitate to build outposts in useless systems (no colonizable planets) either. Provided the system is not within the boundaries of your cmpire, you can later \"give it to a computer opponent as a gift. This costs you nothing, benefits your opponent nothing, and gains you considerable goodwill, which makes deals easier and helps you win votes in the election. Also, outposts can act as early warning posts, as the computer will generally attack them first during a war, giving you additional time to organize your defenses. TESPIONAL MARITAGE TINKLESABLOTTAGE BONUKENTURY213 ISSIONS NO CONTACT AUUNTERS REPORT DELLARE WARTENCIME RETURN KARENAGE SALOJALICHO HELLO NEIGHBORS To keep in good graces with your neighbors, sign non-aggression pacts and then give them gifts, such as useless systems you can't colonize. CCW MAY 1997 "


"If you want to  Zorioles you'd better know tittons to push. IBMPC COMPATIBLE POWERRAMP HYPER PROGRAMMA AMMABLE IONI FULL CONTROL OVER YOUR LOADED WITH 14 HYPER CHARACTER'S VIEW PROGRAMMABLE BUTTONS, THE POWERRAMP ARCADE STICK BRINGS THE ARCADE EXPERIENCE TO YOUR PC. ACT LABS' HYPER STORE TAUNT MESSAGES PROGRAMMABLE TECHNOLOGY FUSES FOR DEATHMATCH PLAY UP TO 10 KEYBOARD COMMANDS INTO A SINGLE POWERFUL BUTTON. PROGRAM POWERRAMP WHILE YOU ARE IN YOUR GAME AND SAVE YOUR PROGRAM SHORTCUTS TO YOUR FAVORITE WEAPONS BUTTON SETTINGS INTO FOUR SEPARATE GAME MACROS PERFORM UNDERWATER STRAFE HYDER AND LAUNCH A SERIES OF ROCKETS MACRO 1: QUAKE MACRO 2: MDK Wali PROGRAM MACRO 3: VIRTUA FIGHTER PC MACRO 4: CYBERGLADIATORS ACT LABS MAX THE EXPERIENCE Available at: Electronics Boutique, Best Buy Lechmere 1997 ACT Laboratory Ltd. All rights reserved. http://www.actlab.com PoworRamp and ACT Labs are trademarks of ACT Laboratory Ltd. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #192 All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. 1-800-980-9997 "


".. meticulously modeled and rendered, boot magazine > Fully detailed. Fully interactive. Fully lethal universe. >> Multiple environmen keep the danger frest SYN FACTOR It's a beautiful world. Someone's gotta scre with it. » Killer 3-D rendered graphics **SOON the synthetic implant will be a factor in all our lives.\" NUUT TEEN » Do yourself a favor, go to the store and buy it! Piranha Interactive Publishing, Inc. 1839 West Drake, Suite B Tempe, Arizona 85283 Tele: (602) 491-0500 Fax: (602) 491-8990 http://www.piranhainteractive.com 1-800-PIRANHA MED PIRANHA AGES 134 CONTENT RATEDDY WINDOWS & WINDOWS 95 INTERACTIVE PUBLISHING MACINTOSH E "


"TRATEGY & TIPS: MOO II AUTO OTRE SCAN ACERAT 2411 BOT As you can't sustain a serious war in the SPACE WARS carly going, diplomacy is crucial. Make nonaggression pacts with everyone you can, and back them up with trade and research deals. When possible, it's a good idea to give gifts to the aliens as well as noted, useless systems are the best gifts. Never, ever, start You can build a great infrastructure through econa dispute with a comomy, but wars will eventually occur. Next month, puter opponent unless we'll explore tactical tips for ultimate victory in you are ready and will your war to conquer the galaxy. ing to go to war. Early in the game everyone but you missile bases are crucial to defending your will engage in espionage. As spying is a empire. Take the deal. good way to incite a war, I don't recommend it. However, it should free up your LET THEM EAT GREEN CHEESE trading. After all, if the opposition is Eventually, you will end up with a going to steal your technology anyway, food shortage. Because so many good you might as well see what you can get planets cannot initially grow much you for it on the open market must invest in biology technology early The computer will rarely offer you a and often. Otherwise, your few fertile fair deal for your technology, but don't let planets will end up being used for nothithis deter you from making trades anyway. ing but farming, and half your income When deciding on an apparently lopsided will be going to pay for freighters. trade, define the worth of a technology in Instead, get to terraforming and subterms of what it can do for you, not what terranean farms as quickly as possibleit cost to research. For instance, the com generally at the expense of most other puter will typically offer missile base tech technologies. These two technologies in return for, say, terraforming. While this should remove the burden food supply seems unfair, terraforming won't really places on your economy, and will have help the computer much because it tends the added benefit of making most to handle food inefficiently anyway, while colonies starvation-proof in the event of a blockade. In the long run, farmers are a waste of population, and the sooner you can switch them more towards scientific or industrial roles the better Eventuall. EXTREME (ikstrm) adj: exceeding the ordinary, average or expected. LT (-solt) n: a violent physical attack. U GAMES SCOUTING REPORT Expand quickly early on. But build outposts to secure your rights to a planet in case you can't (or don't want to) colonize it right away. TIMING IS EVERYTHING Here is something to remember about technology Keep your long-term strategy in mind when choosing which technology to select. If you are not going to fight early in the game--and I again strongly suggest that you shouldn't A MAY 1997 MAY 1997 CGW CGW CIRCLE READER SERVICE #175 "


"THE A R R.I. V. AI .CD-ROM ADVENTURE ACTUAL GAME PLAY YOU'VE BEEN ABDUCTED!!! Your assignment is to escape without alien detection, so play a game of \"cat and mouse\" and work your way through the maze of the alien space station, moon base (mining colony) and three out stations. As you explore intricate environments and challenging puzzles, you will encounter multiple routes with hundreds of variable story lines. Your mission is to decode the alien safeguards, take control of the alien space station, and find a way back to earth TO WARN THEM!!! Stop Watching The Skies... Start Watching Your Back! GAME FEATURES  FIRST PERSON FULL 360° POV  HUNDREDS OF HIGH-RESOLUTION 3-D ENVIRONMENTS THOUSANDS OF DETAILED SPRITE ANIMATIONS OF ALIENS, ROBOTS AND HUMANOIDS HIGHLY COMPLEX FULL SCREEN PUZZLES BASED ON ALIEN TECHNOLOGIES  NONLINEAR MULTITHREADED STORY LINE WITH MULTIPLE ENDINGS AVAILABLE ON WINDOWS 95 (PENTIUM) AND MACINTOSH CD-ROM THE ARRIVAL CD-ROM ADVENTURE SPECIAL REBATE OFFER WITH PURCHASE OF \"THE ARRIVAL\" AND \"STARGATE\" OR \"TERMINATOR 2\" HOME VIDEOS Make contact at: WWW.Live-entertainment.com or call 1_800 760 66 67 for a free demo ENERATION Distributed by LIVE \"The Arrival Co-Rom Adventure Interactivo \"The Arrival\" Motion Picture and Artwork UVE Film and Meditworks Inc. 1998. All Rights Reserved. 1897 Enteraktion Inc. All Rights Reserved. Adapted from the original motion pleture \"The Arrival\". An Enteraktion-HavokWare Production LIVE. INTERACTIVE "


"\"RATEGY & TIPS: MOO II ma VE GUNE DOUNT RESEARCH LLAC Advance geringAdminica Fustan AMD Rocket ITO. Fichier I! Fun Drive A RESTALEPO Metalurgy try tactics Il Sure Acony Optics TASI Diagy Hydrang Fusion Physics Advanced Mignotism Heste CANCEL use diplomacy to keep your neighbors happy and build, build, build. Sure, in the beginning you'll be behind in technology and military power, but if you can keep pace in terms of buillings and population, you will be on the correct path to success, and you'll also be in store for much bigger rewards TECHNICAL KNOW-HOW Early in the game, in the long run. In next month's Gamer's research hydroponic farms and other growth bonus sciences in order to maximize production. Edge, we'll look at warfare in MOO II, and give specific put your effort into economic selections information about how to build a fleet, Because many new inventions replace old how to fight and win tactical combat, and technology, try to gauge when you will need how to (ultimately) conquer the entire what. For instance, most beam weapons are galaxy. So, until then, build up your infrauseless without a clecent targeting computstructure and get ready for war! r. But, bect yo1 are not going to fight MOO II until late in the game Technology Charts anyway, you may want to skip the hysics Optronic and Path A Path B Path C 1. Laser Cannon Laser Rifle Positronic computSpace Scanner 2. Fusion Beam Fusion Rifle ers-getting 3. Tachyon Tachyon Scanner Battle Scanner Research Labs and Communications Supercomputers > 4. Neutron Blaster Neutron Scanner instead, and then 5. Tractor Beam Graviton Beam Planetary Gravity Generator research the 6. Sub-space Jump Gate Cybertronic comput Communications er when it will be of 7. Phasors Phasor Rifle Multi-phased Shields some use to you. = 8. Plasma Cannon Plasma Rifle Plasma Web Following the same 9. Disruptor Cannon Dimensional Portal logic, you may want to 10. Hyperspace Sensors Mauler Device Communications skip Battlestations in 11. Time Warp Stellar Converter Star Gate favor of Robo-miners Facilitator and then rush straight to Star l'ortresses FO.Pce Fields In conclusion, Path A Path B Path C remember that 1. Class I Shields Mass Driver ECM Jammer 2. Anti-Grav Harness Inertial Stabilizer MOO II rewards Gyro Destabilizer 3. Class III Shields Planetary long-term investment. Warp Dissipator Radiation Shield \"The bonuses from 4. Stealth Field Personal Shield Stealth Suit morale, industrial 5. Pulsar Warp Field Lightning Field Interdictor building, and research 6. Class V Shields Multi-Wave ECM Gauss Cannon facilities pay much Jammer higher dividends than = 7. Cloaking Device Stasis Field Hard Shields a small, relatively 8. Class VII Shields Planetary Wide-Area Flux Shield Jammer powerless military 9. Displacement Subspace Inertial Nullifier force. While you are Device Teleporter slowly amassing your 10. Class X Shield Planetary Barrier Phasing Cloak Shield own personal empire, We definitely got the name right! Available June 1997 For more information and playable demos call: (800) 933-2983 Mention Source Code CGW597 echnol . 1601 Techno MAY 1997 CCW CIRCLE READER SERVICE #175 "


"We Need More n 1872, J. Sterling Morton gave the world a great idea. He created a holiday unlike any other, Arbor Day. free brochure, write: Trees for America, The National Arbor Day Foundation, Nebraska City, NE 68410. ANNIVERS This is the 125th Anniversary of Arbor Day, the tree planters' holiday. This year The National Arbor Day Foundation asks you to plant Trees for America, and provide for their care. 18721997 APIE TRDAY National Arb Nebraska Arbor Day Found Foundation Trees Make a World of Difference. Trees make our cities and neighborhoods more liveable. They create quiet places to enjoy, give wildlife a home, and increase property values. The National Arbor Day Foundation www.arborday.org This year, plant Trees for America. For your "


"..... Play to win and save yourself some money. Covering interactive & Multimedia Entertainment ME MACAZUNG GAME COMPUT GAMES RATED EXCLUSIVE COVERAGE! DOOM II SAVE UP TO Feature Reviews Pagan Ultima qull Dragonspliere Great Naval Bottles 11 AEGIS In-Depth Strategies F-14 Fleet Defender Aces Over Europe Merchant Prince Sneak Preview, Aces of the Deep Secrets of the Computer Game Developers Make the ultimate move I for serious gamers who know the score when it comes to buying computer gaming magazines. Subscribe to Computer Gaming World now and save up to 47%! Score points and cosmic savings now with Computer Gaming World. We're worlds apart from any other computer game magazine.  One year/12 issues $27.94. YOU SAVE 41%!  Two years/24 issues $49.97. YOU SAVE 47%! Savings based on annual cover price of $47.40. Every monthly issue brings you exclusive first looks at the hottest, newest games... the latest in multimedia, CD-ROM and interactive environments. Plus winning strategies, master clues, in-depth reviews all the help you need to pump up your system and play out your fantasies on this planet and beyond. CALL NOW TO SAVE UP TO 47% 1-800-827-4450 To ensure savings, mention this code to the operator who answers your call: 4295. "


"GAMER'S EDGE STRATEGY & TIPS Diablo Tips and Strategies for Defeating the Last Levels of Hell by Elliott Chin and Greg Fortune his months strategy guide is the last single player strategy for DIABLO, and it's a guided tour of the Lord of Terror's home plane: Hell. In these pages, we'll tell you how to defeat the different Hell-clwelling creatures, as well as give you some tips on spell use and equipment. We'll also reveal the solutions for the final six quests in the game, with three in these pages, and the rest on our CG-ROM and Web site (www.computergaming.com). Bairog | The Hosts of Hell Running Away CON GLINE The monsters in Hell are a much scarier lot than those found in the caves. The five Hell-class creatures are: succubi, black knights, counselors, cave vipers, and balrogs. These are simply the base creatures, and each base creature has three more variants that are stronger and deadlier than their parent. So, how do you win in brutal contests against these Hell creatures? That depends on who you're fighting In Hell, you'll often run into rooms filled with melee monsters and, sometimes, range-attack demons. In these cases, run away and go around a corner. The melee monsters will follow you but their ranks will thin out, as some monsters move faster than others. We reveal three quest solutions in these pages, along with tips on spells, equipment, and staying alive in Hell. Visit our Web site or CGROM for even more quests solutions. The Heavy Hitters: Knights, Drakes, and Balrogs The three melee monsters in Hell (those that engage in hand-to-hand combat), are the knights, crakes, and balrogs. Technically, the balrog variants have a ranged attack: the infemo spell which they employ as a breath weapon. But the range of this attack is short, and they almost always use it as a prelude to hand-to-hand combat. Considering their awesome physical strength, you need to thin these melce monsters out and attack them one at a time. Letting them surround you is suicide. Unfortunately, in Hell, you can't dispatch monsters as they march through a door single-file, since there are no doors and the smallest corridor is at least four monsters wide. What you should do, though, is use a combination of retreat and magic to thin out the ranks of the melee hordes so you can fight with more even odds. Wait at the comer and start hacking the first monster that shows up. Because the monsters move at different speeds, one or two will come at you at a time, rather than surround you on eight sides. Repeat the run if you get surrounded again. TOE TO TOE WITH THE WARRIOR Assuming fast recovery and fast hit items, a warrior can probably hold his own when surrounded by up to three melee monsters. However, against more than three opponents, it's time to exercise the better part of valor (see the Running Away sidebar for details on the warrior's best retreat strategy). Another tactic to consider in order to thin out the ranks of surrounding monsters is to use stone curse on the horde. With this spell, if surrounded, you can stone one or two monsters, run away, and just pick off the few that follow. If you want to stand your ground, stone all your attackers, and attack them freely, you had better have a fast attack weapon-stone curse has a very limited duration. If you're a rogue or sorcerer, you should fall back several paces to leave ample space between you and the corner. If you hug the wall. the demons will tend to march up the wall single-file at you. This is a good way of lining them up for easy shots with bow and spells. CGW MAY 1997 "


"GAMER'S EDGE Qests, Quests, Quests! Quest: Warlord of Blood What is the object? Kill the Warlord and rob the armories of Hell! Where do I find him? On level 13, the first level of Hell. How do I kill the Warlord? As you explore, you'll find the Steel Tome, which unlocks the Warlord of Blood's armory. If Blood Knight you have the telekinesis spell, you can walk around the outside of the armory and retrieve the weapons stored there before entering. Inside the armory are several blood knights and the Warlord of Blood. If you walk in front of the entrance while staying out of visual range of the Warlord, you can dispatch a few blood knights before dealing with their boss. The Warlord of Blood is immune to fire, magic, and lightning spells, but can be stone cursed. Golem BLOODY HELL This is the Warlord of Blood's also works against armory. You'll need to deal with his steel lord him; two should guards first. He is immune to magic, fire, finish him off. and lightning, but not stone curse. What do I get? The armory contains two sets of magic armor and four weapon racks. The Warlord will also drop a random magic weapon. SONO MAGIC INITIE chieve the and be sure to fire the appropriate spells. The blast radius of fireball comes in handy for killing succubi, because all variants usually bunch together to attack. You can also use fire wave to clear out passages before marching into them, but that spell isn't as reliable as fireball. Magistrate variants are slightly deceptive in their immunities and resistances. See the Hell Monsters chart for their vulnerabilities. ROGUES AND SORCERERS Rogues and sorcerers should never face more than two opponents in melec range. Using ranged attacks, always run away from monstrous hordes and pick off monsters as they thin out while they're in chase. The warrior's strategy of running away and waiting around the corner works well for rogues and sorcerers, loo. Stone cursing members of a rushing horde also works. If you're a sorcerer who has chain lightning and the monsters facing you are vulnerable to lightning, let the monsters surround you and then unleash a rapid succession of chain lightning spells. This spell can usually eliminate all of the surrounding creatures. This spell also works well for rogues. Rogues, and especially sorcerers, should always cast mana shield when entering each Hell level; it increases survivability THE WARRIOR'S HELL Warriors are pretty much at a loss when to trying to engage ranged monsters in melee. Succubi will run before you get to them, and it is hard to catch up to them. Magistrates teleport away from you, and are just as hard to kill. Never simply click on a succubi and follow her in order to attack. She will always lead you to a room with more succubi, more magistrates, more black knights...you get the idea. For these kinds of creatures, you're better off using magic. Invest the money in fireball and chain lightning spellbooks, and keep an artifact of wizardry handy so you can equip it and fire off decently-powered spells when facing these vile creatures. In Hell, no one survives without using magic. The Warrior's Bane: Advocates and Succubi The most annoying and difficult monsters to kill in DIABLO have to be the ranged monsters of Hell. They not only launch devastating attacks from afar, but they're also excruciatingly difficult to catch, much less kill. THE ROGUE'S FIELD DAY For the rogue, it's a simple matter to just fire arrows at these monsters and slay them. Succubi won't run away, even when hit by arrows, and neither will advocates. All the rogue needs to worry about is eliminating the melec monsters guarding ranged creatures before attacking them. To do that, use the corner retreat tactic. Then return to kill the ranged monsters. Rogues can also use fireballs and chain lightning to eliminate ranged monsters from afar. A FINAL WORD FOR THE HELL-BOUND The monsters of Hell tend to attack with combined arms; when you traipse into a room, typically two classes of monsters, always requiring two different methods of attack, will converge on you. Always flee from those rooms that hold melee and ranged monsters. Deal with the melee monsters first and then re-enter those rooms to confront the ranged creatures. It's also a good idea to lay down a golem spell before you flee monster-infested rooms. Perhaps when you come back, those pesky advocates will have been eliminated by your magically-created friend. We hope these tips help you in Hell. Next month, we'll be tackling multiplayer tips for gaming on battle.net. SORCERERS SUPREME It is likewise easy for the sorcerer to use ranged spells, namely fireball and chain lightning, to slay these demons. Just be mindful of their resistances MAY 1997 CGW "


"STRATEGY & TIPS: DIABLO GAMER'S EDGE Quests Galore Quest: Lachdanan What is the object? Save Lachdanan's soul by finding the Golden Elixir and returning it to him. Where do I find him? Lachdanan is found in Hell, on level 14. What do I do for Lachdanan? Lachdanan will not attack you. To save him, find the Golden Elixir, which will be randomly located on level 15, and return it to him. His soul will be saved and he'll leave you his helmet. What do I get? The Veil of Steel is Lachdanan's helmet. It has an AC of 18, adds +50% resist all, -20% light radius, +60% armor, -30 to mana, +15 to strength, and +15 to vitality. Griswold will buy it for 15,950 gold. DOK LACHDANAN   PLEASE, HELP HIM Lachdanan needs you to find his Golden Elixir or he will stay trapped in Hell. Free his soul and he'll give you his magic helmet. Advocate Type 100 M, L A HELL OF A LIST The monsters of Hell are powerful custodians of evil, but they can be defeated. Here is a quick fact sheet on the vital statistics of your Hellish opponents. Monster HP* Resists Immune Notes Cave Viper Drake 50-75 none Fire Drake Drake 60-85 Gold Viper Drake 70-90 Azure Drake Drake 80-100 F, L none Kill with bloodstar Black Knight Knight M, L none Kill with fireball (FB) Doom Guard Knight M, F none Kill with chain lightning (CL) Steel Lord Knight M, L Kill with CL Blood Knight Knight Kill with FB Succubus Succubi 60-75 none Fire bloodstars, kill with FB Snow Witch Succubi 67-87 Fire bloodstars, kill with FB Hellspawn Succubi 75-100 Fire bloodstars, kill with FB Soul Burner Succubi 100-112 M, L Fires bloodstars, kill with CL Slayer Balrog 60-70 Spit infernos, kill with CL Guardian Balrog 70-80 Spit infernos, kill with CL Vortex Lord 80-90 MI Spit infernos, kill with CL Balrog Balrog 90-100 M Spit infernos, kill with CL Counselor Counselor M, L, F none Casts firebolt, teleports Magistrate Counselor Casts charged bolt, teleports, kill with CL Cabalist Counselor Casts lightning, teleports, kill with FB Advocate Counselor M. Casts fireball, teleports, kill with FB M=Magic, F=Fire, L=Lightning 'hit points are doubled in normal multiplayer mode none  --ézzz  Balrog TITI M, L 60 M, F CGW MAY 1997 "


"WIN THE BY VIRTUAL I O FREE! 30 VIRTUAL i glasses stop playing with Yourself! start playing with the world ArenA DIABLOLM WARCRAFT II \"DESCENT JONLINE ROLEMASTER: MAGESTORM CASTLES 1: SIEGE AND CONQUES SPLATTERBALL\" VIRTUAL POOL AIR WARRIOR AIR WARRIOR II MULTIPLAYER BATTLETECH CASINO POKER LEGENDS OF KESMAIO BILLBOARD LIVE! CLASSIC CARD GAMES DARKNESS FALLS CASINO POKER (PC & MAC) enter the arena at www.earthlink.net/thearena THE MOST MULTIPLAYER GAMES ON THE INTERNET THE ARENA IS BROUGHT TO YOU BY EARTHLINK NETWORK, INC., PROVIDER OF THE COOLEST, EASIEST INTERNET ACCESS ON EARTH. CALL TODAY TO SIGN UP AND RECEIVE YOUR FREE EARTHLINK NETWORK TOTALACCESS\" PACKAGE EarthLink Network WITH EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO GET ON THE INTERNET IN MINUTES. SMART LULU QUIAD IT'S YOUR INTERNETM 01996 EarthLink Network, Inc. Trademarks are property of their respoctive owners. The Arena is a registered trademark of Earthlink Notwork, Inc. All rights Reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #233 PRIZES CHAT ON-LINE TOURNAMENTS ONE USERNAME ONE PASSWORD ONE ACCOUNT ** 1-800-395-8425 "


"STRATEGY & TIPS: DIABLO GAMER'S EDGE The Final Questa Diablo What is the object? Slay the big boss himself. Where do I find him? The entrance to Diablo's level is in the center of the huge, glowing pentagram on level 15. How do I kill Diablo? There are three chambers you'll have to clear out before you get to Diablo. You will find this level crawling with advocates and blood knights, so be careful. First, clear the top right corner of the level and pull the skeleton lever. Next is the lower right corner, which is a spiral structure with another switch at the center. That opens the third structure, which is in the top left corner of the level. Inside the third structure are two switches. Pull both levers and head to the lower left corner of the level. Here, surrounded by advocates and knights, is Diablo. He is affected by fireand lightningbased spells, but he cannot be stone cursed. Diablo has about 1,600 HP, and attacks you with the apocalypse spell. What do I get? You get to shove a crystal into your head! What more could you ask for besides unique ending scenes for the different characters? A725 LIGHTS OUT, HELL-BOY After you lure Diablo out from the protective watch of his advocates, let him have it with fireball, bow, or melee weapon. Proper Equipment is Half the Battle 99 Warriors must have the proper equipment to wander the halls of Hell. Because monsters strike fast in Hell, you need some form of armor of recovery and a weapon of fast attack. With these two items, you'll be able to strike faster than the monsters, sometimes killing them before they can even attack you, and you'll recover quickly anytime multiple monsters hit you (otherwise, you'll always be reeling). For rogues, priority should be on getting a damage-enhancing bow, since normal bows do far less damage than melee weapons. Always go for bows that increase damage (such as Merciless Bows of Gore) over bows that enhance your to hit rate. Also, look for a bow that knocks your opponent back, such as a Bow of the Bear or the unique Windforce. In case you do get surrounded, wear armor of fast recovery. Since rogues will use magic frequently, including mana shield, acquire magic-enhancing rings and amulets. For sorcerers, the first rule of Hell is to never engage in melee. Don't bother with weapons or armor that enhance your ability to stay and fight. Just make sure you wear as many items as possible that enhance your magic, mana, and armor class. All classes should buy elixirs from Adria and Pepin to improve their strength, magic, and dexterity. fer a quarter of the How Long Do Duration Spells Last? damage. If you do Spell Duration in seconds 240-320 damage with Wall of fire 10 + 10 per spell level your fireball, and Infravision shoot one at a blood Stone curse 6+1 per spell level knight with fire resis Guardian Character level x 2 + 1 tance, you'll actually per spell level do 60-80 damage. Which spells count towards magic immunity? The following are spells that a monster would be immune to if it had magic immunity: flash, bloodstar, bone spirit, and telekinesis. Who is immune to stone curse? No one is immune to stone curse, except for Diablo and other player characters. Even unique boss monsters, such as the Butcher, Skeleton King, and Warlord of Blood are vulnerable to stone curse. In most cases, it's the best way to kill those boss monsters. What are the fourth level or fourth page spells? There are four fourth level spells you can learn and put in your spellbook: golem, teleport, bone spirit, and blood star. The two other fourth level spells, nova and apocalypse, are only available as scrolls or staves. The Diablo Spell FAQ How does spell resistance work? The number in your resistance entry is the percentage of damage you do not suffer. For example, if you have 50 percent resistance to lightning, you shrug off 50 percent and only suffer half damage from a lightning spell. According to Blizzard, all monsters with a resistance are considered to have the maximum score, which is 75 percent. So, anytime you face a creature in DIABLO that has a resistance to fire or lightning, it will only sufMistakes Are Hell In our March DIABLO strategy guide, we mistakenly reported that the Butcher was immune to fire and lightning and that the Skeleton King was immune to holy bolt. Both statements were untrue. Our strategies for both quests were thus incorrect. You can defeat the Butcher with fire spells, and a sorcerer's best bet is to stone curse him and then plant a fire wall on him. The Skeleton King's weakness is holy bolt, which will kill him easily. We apologize for the errors, and will work harder in the future to ensure that mistakes like that never happen again. For the full, corrected strategy guide, visit our Web site at www.computergaming.com. To all those reading these pages for our Diablo tips, thanks for your vigilance. CGW MAY 1997 "


"AWE OH SOUNDS OF WAR 1. Kaboom! 2. Grenades. 3. Deafening Silence. 4.64mm Shells. 5. The Crackle Of Uzi Fire 6. \"Incoming!\" 7. \"That Was A Close One.\" 8. Random Gunfire.. 9. \"Private Curtis Jones, 51st Airborne\" 10. Anti-Tank Guns. 11. The Clink Of An Aluminum Mess Kit 12. Dangling Dog Tags 13. Ricocheting Bullets. 14. Sigh Of Relief. 15. A Harmonica Playing Yankee Doodle. 16. Give peace a chance. 17. Flight of the Valkyrie. 18. Shovels Diggin Trenches. 19. Prayer. 20. Dirty Jokes. 21. \"Sniffle.\" 22. Nervous Laughter. 23: Letters From Children 24. Bombs bursting in air. 25. Battle Plans. 26. \"Over The Top, Boys!\" 27. The Battle Hymn Of The Republic. 28. Bullets Whizzing Past Your Helmet. 29. Random Snipers. 30. Surface To Air Missiles. 31. Anti-Aircraft Fire. 32. The Doors Playing \"The End.\" CM 33. The Whistle Of Tracers 34. \"Medic Medic!\" 35. The Star Spangled Banner. 36. The Thunder Of An Air Strike. 37. \"Hit The Dirt.\" 38. A Rain Of Debris Landing All Around You. 39. Taps. 40. \"Uurrrrpp!\" 41. Low Flying Sidewinders 42. Strafing From The Air. 43. Ak-47 Assault Rifles. 44. Standard Issue M-16's. 45. The Sharpening Of Bayonets. 46. The Hiss Of Mustard Gas. 47. A Declaration Of Peace. 48. Rain. 49. Howitzers. 50. The Cheer Of Victory 51. Quiet. 52. The Low Rumble Of Bombs In The Distance. 53. The Squawk Of A Radio Call For Help 54. Com chatter. 55. \"Surrender Now!\" 56. Troops Marching. 57., Jungle Animals. 58. \"The Biscuits In The Army. They Say Are Mighty Fine.\" 59. The Angry Croak Of Your Commander. 60. A Tropical Storm. 61. A Blazing Oil Well Fire. 62. Unrolling Adhesive Bandages. 63. \"Ugh!\" 64. \"I Wanna Go Home.\" CLEAN At war with your PC? Take command, with the new Sound Blaster AWE64 Gold\", the only advanced audio card designed to upgrade your Pentium PC. Awesome audio-with up BLASTER AWE6 to 64 unique sounds all playing simultaneously. It's the best sounding Sound Blaster ever, thanks to our unique WaveGuide The Uncommised Pursuit of Perfect Fidelity and WaveSynth technology. It also offers full duplex support and CD quality recording and playback, an explosive 4MB of memory for SoundFonts, true 3D Positional Audio and even a selection of the hottest Internet software. To learn more about the Sound Blaster AWE64 Gold contact us at: CREATIVE www.SoundBlaster.com/sound/AWE64Gold. www.SOUNDBLASTER.COM CIRCLE READER SERVICE #078 Copyright 1997 Creative Technology Ltd. Sound Blaster and the Creative logo are registered trademarks and AWE61 Gold. Creative WaveSynth/VG and Emu 3D Position Audio are trademarks of Creative Technology Ltd. All other names are property of their respective owners. All specifications are subject to change without prior notice. All rights reserved. "


"GAMER'S EDGE STRATEGY & TIPS Wizardry Nemesis Trapped by the Tour Guide? Scorpia Charts the Paths Less Traveled by Scorpia hose of you who Before you go runvar stores in its szake her caught my ning off to any dunrecent column Andr pab of the balisman er geons, I suggest on NEMESIS spending some time know that I did in the forest, beating n't exactly give up on the Orcs to this latest Fire and is said to always gain experience and WIZARDRY sherylb of arrefoonsand more hit points. Its dull Am farms all blows and dad was svexon by the adventure work, but reaching 7 Proleh risksadil sam akcior to the Ukash & bat glowing accolevel two before hitlades (ahem). Still, I know um of lawomira udi wwert w of Bongo wa ting the Hargani people will play it. And while did not remain Desirwboy Cars about the cawmowman The Underworld will be the Tour Guide furnished by w a hawe koning like a deadly of talismans was helpful in the long run. Sir-Tech is pretty good for the By the way, your life in most part, it doesn't tell you every READ ANY GOOD BOOKS LATELY? I hope not, as they really don't help your the Underworld will be thing. For instance, combat techcause. When in the library, search for the kris sword instead. much easier if you don't colniques and monsters are conspiculapse the bridge ously absent from the text. Here are some tips to help you through some After you've been out of Calican for awhile, tread carefully when you of the trickier parts of the game. return to town. Eventually, Shadow Beasts will start showing up there. They will also appear in all the dungeons, just to make your life happier Hit-and-Run (heh!). You really want room to deal with these things; the way they jump The main principle of combat is to keep moving! Almost everything in around in combat makes them hard to hit. this game hits harder than you do. If you stand still, you're toast. Of course, there will be times when movement is very restricted or impossible, but for First Floor, Underworld the most part, you should be dancing around, not standling flat-footed. Second Floor, Swimwear That means learning how to maneuver with your off-hand, especially for the first level of the Underworld, the Tour Guide is fairly thorough. quick side-steps. Galican, at the start, is safc; take some time out to pracIt doesn't mention the bug creatures, though, and these are quite nasty tice movement and combat strikes in the town square. One type can throw a sort of spell at you, and the other kind can poison Ideally, combat should take place in an unobstructed 22 (or larger) area. you. Avoid the first type as much as you can. If you must fight, get in close This allows you to fight using the basic technique of swinging as the critter quickly to avoid the spells. Don't try dancing with these things. approaches, and then, whether or not you hit it, stepping away. The swing On the second level, you'll run into merman-type critters. From these, should begin before you see its lit point bar. By doing this, you can attack you will finally get a decent sword. They have no distance attacks, so the and retreat without taking hits in return-most of the time, at least. Waltz of Death works well, when you have room. Some areas, like the sewers, don't allow enough room for waltzing. In The danger point here is the room with the magic mirror. If you linger places like that, you'll have to hope you've got room enough to back up too long, you'll end up fighting an endless stream of monsters, including after each attack, or enough distance to cast a spell. Othervise, its stand Shadow Beasts. You'll want to move fast here. Step into the room; sidle and duke it out, and hope you survive. left; go forward; then sidle right, to the mirror. Do what needs to be done, CGW MAY 1997 "


"CREATIVE TOULS della \"ROIL 1. Cars Taking Off. 2. Breaks Screeching. 3. Hubcaps Scraping. 4. Crowd Cheering. 5. \"Place Your Bets!\" 6. Engine Seizing. 7. Hearts Pounding. 8. Refueling. 9. Wheels Peeling. 10. Breaths Of Anticipation. 11. \"That Was A Close Shave.\" 12. Cars Colliding. 13. Backfires. 14. Engines Revving. 15. The Roar Of A Crowd. 16. Fiery Explosions. 17. Skidding Into The Pit. 18. Engine Problems. 19. Shrieks Of Excitement. 20. Vrrrrroooooom. 21. \"Low Fuel.\" 22. Jamming On The Brakes. 23. Gears Shifting. 24. Ambulance Siren. 25. Sighs Of Relief. 26. Engines Restarting. 27. Traction Of Bald Tires. 28. Crowd Going Wild. 29. \"Last Lap!\" 30. Starting Gun Firing. 31. Hubcaps Flying Across The Track. 32. Tires Blowing. 33. \"Hurry! Fill 'Er Up!\" 34. Engines Choking. 35. Tires Being Changed. 36. Nuts And Bolts Flying. 37. Grandstand Cheering. 38. Gears Grinding. 39. Slamming On The Breaks. 40. Turning Swiftly. 41. Pile-Ups. 42. Tires Rolling Off. 43. Skidding Uncontrollably. 44. Loud Screams. 45. Crowds Falling Silent. 46. Collision. 47. Thunderous Booms. 48. Deatening Cries. 49. Quick Turns. 50. Sudden Stops. 51. Reflex Braking. 52. \"Gentlemen, Start Your Engines!\" 53. Engines Sputtering. 54. Drop Of The Checkered AWE SOUNDS OF Racing  Flag. Put the pedal to the metal with the new Sound Blaster AWE64 Gold\", the only sound card created to upgrade your Pentium PC's multimedia audio system. With 64 available voices BLASTER AWE6 playing simultaneously and the new Wave Guide technology, music playback will never be the same. And don't worry about compatibility issues, because it's a genuine Sound Blaster. Also, DirectSound and DirectSound3D\" hardware acceleration is included. For more details and a demonstration of the Sound Blaster AWE64 Gold contact us at: CREATIVE www.SoundBlaster.com/sound/AWE64Gold. word Purpuit of Perfect 55. Head Gasket Exploding. 56. Hitting The Wall On Turn 3. 57. Chanting A Winner's Name. 58. Creaking Of The Chassis. 59. Radio Static. 60. Loosing Your Hood. 61. Accelerating Past The Finish Line. 62. Champagne Cork Popping. 63. Congratulatory Slaps. 64. Wizzing Past. WWW.SOUNDBLASTER.COM Copyright 1997 Creative Technology Ltd. Sand Blaster and the Creative logo are registerel indemarks and AWF64 Gold, Creative WaveSynth/WG and E-mu 3D Positional Audio are trademarks of Creative Technology Ltd. All other names are property of their respective owners. All specifications are subject to change without prior notice. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #078 "


"STRATEGY & TIPS: WIZARDRY NEMESIS GAMER'S EDGE Jaran's Keep: This is a safe place, as long as you don't mess around with the skeleton. The runic tablet in the desk is for the GOT MY SWORD, end game, so you can leave it alone until then. AAA CARD, AND A POWER BAR Swamp: A tiny area. You'll have to fight a couple of the plants for tentacles. In this case, slugging it out is the fastest method. Expect to be poisoned by this. Don't cure yourself right away, however, because the tentacles are poisonous, too. Run to the Keep quickly to de-poison them. If you have enough hit points, you can probably outlast the poisons effects. If not, heal yourself in the interim, and use cure poison later. Crypts: The gargoyles are mean opponents. I found it best to clispatch them from a distance, using the crossbow. You can pick up the unbroken arrows and use them again, without getting close to these nasty critters. Inside, the only thing to worry about are the skeletons, but they're nasty. Like the mudmen, they assemble only when you step on their spots, and fall apart when you move away. Not only do they hit hard, they can leech your magic points and use those to heal themselves. Quick back and forth movements are the only way to deal with these things. Proper inventory management is a must. Don't go grabbing At the inner crypts, you'll have to fight Tas. He is very tough. I everything you see. In Jaran's Keep, leave the runic tablet in began by using up my remaining arrows. Fortunately, I had a lot of the desk until the end game. them, and they whittled him down to 28 lps. The fight (back and forth) wasn't too bad, especially with Enhanced Attack active. and retreat the same way. Don't go around by the right side, because In the maze, just walk around while the walls change (every time that's where the monsters come from. Then repeat the process. Seldin's ghost appears) until the way to the room of bones opens up In the third level, you'll deal with alligators and mulmen. The alligaTedious stuff, but at least there's nothing to fight. However, expect a shadtors are standard, the mudmen aren't. Mudmen are tough because they ow critter to show up soon after you find Seldin's bones. only assemble when you step on their square, and fall apart when you step off of it. Thus, the only way to fight them is to do just that: step up. Burned to the Bone swing, and back off. Tower/Burned Bone Corridors: After descending through the You will need to search all the barrels down here. Some have red tower in the swamp, you'll be in leeches in them. These can be removed by sticking your arm into a barthe Burned Bone Corridors. rel of salt. One treatment removes the leech. This will also keep any There is nothing to fight in the more lecches from bothering you. rooms until you get to the One danger here is the Sword Destructica (which you do need), Minotaur, who easily makes up After figuring out the orbs and skull, be sure you are empty-handed for the lack of monsters in the when taking the sword. If you have any weapon equipped, even your other rooms. You should not amulet, the sword will kill you. Until the sword is uncursed, it's the only come here until after the crypts, weapon you have as the Enhanced Protection spell Dancing with Dragons: 'To reach the dragon, you'll need to jam the is vital to surviving combat with Jaw Traps. Try the lower left side, about the second tooth in. This will the Minotaur. There is no room to take awhile. Before passing the second trap, turn right and sidle the rest move at all in here. Cast protecof the way until you're facing the dragon. Then use the basic combat tion, using all your points, just technique to take it out this is a 2x2 area, so you shouldn't have much before going in. It won't last for trouble, if you're careful). the whole fight, but with a little Sewers: This is actually a small area. The four-anned fishmen are luck, you should be able to kill the Minotaur before he does you in. tough customers. Try to have room bchind you when you fight them. The Fire/Mushroom Tunnels: Just get through these as quickly as you ceiling snakes can usually be avoided by just walking right by them. Before can When you exit the Fire Tunnels, don't stop. Keep going forward to heading to the talisman area, you'll want to find the button that opens up the end and turn right, to the Desolate Castle. Fighting the sorceresses is secret part of the sewers. You'll find some goodies there, as well as the a losing proposition fountain that shows you clues to the color lock at the sewer exit. Desolate Castle: Except for one stair guardian, there is nothing to CGW "


"AWEI Reasons To Upgrade Your Multimedia PC BLASTER AWE 1. 64 simultaneous voices. 2. Advanced WavEffects Synthesis. 3. Pure gold plating to inspire the envy of your friends. 4. Hands-free microphone included. 20-bit SPDIF output. Full duplex support. 7. The perfect audio upgrade for any Pentium PC. 8. The thunk of your old sound card hitting the trash. 9. 90dB signal-noise ratio (analog). 10. Not your grandmother's sound card. 11. 120dB signal-noise ratio (digital). 12. SoundFont technology. 13. Yelling, shoving as over 30 million Sound Blaster users all upgrade at once. 14. E-mu 3D Positional Audio. 15. 4MB of RAM, upgradable to 28MB. 16. Multipoint Interpolation. 17. New WaveGuide Technology. 18. The best sounding Sound Blaster ever. 19. Creative WebPhone software. 20. Supported by 99% applications. 21. Easy plug-and-play Installation. 22. CD-quality, 16-bit audio fidelity. 23. Genuine Sound Blaster. 24. Integrated MIDI/Joystick port. 25. 8/16 bit stereo sampling from 5kHz to 44.1kHz. 26. MIDI cable. 27. Recording from microphone, CD or line-in. 28. Liquid, psychedelic guitar solos. 29. Advanced 16-bit real-time audio compression. 30. Crystal clear recordings. 31. Gold RCA connectors. 32. Completely user customizable. 33. Automatic dynamic filtering. 34. Instant bass, treble, master volume control. 35. 2, 3.5 and 4MB SoundFont banks. 36. Two CD audio-in connectors. 37. Awesome audio. 38. Powerful percussions. 39. Superior strings. 41. Microsoft Internet Explorer software. 42. Microsoft NetMeeting software. 43. Rockin' quitar riffs. 44. RealAudioM Player software. 45. Magic Carpet TM 2 software. 46. Screams from Eradicator software. 47. 128 general MIDI instruments. 48. New Creative WaveSynth/WG software. 49. Creative 3D Copter software. 50. Total harmonic distortion (0.01). 51. Creative TextAssist software. 52. Lilting Irish tenor. 53. Creative VoiceAssistTM software. 54. Creative Multimedia Deck software. 55. Creative WaveStudio software. 56. Cool samples included. 57. Creative Soundo'le software. 58. Direct sound hardware acceleration. 59. Vienna SoundFont StudioM software. 60. Direct sound 3D hardware acceleration. 61. 32-level control for mixing recordings. 62. Talk over the Internet in real time. 63. 32-level control for mixing output. 64. MIDI Orchestrator Plus software. The Uncompromised Pursuit of Perfect Fidelity MAMA Show are C Palere AVION Gn Introducing the new Sound Blaster AWE64 Gold, the uncompromised pursuit of perfect fidelity. the unc Incredibly smooth, expressive and realistic audio with 64 voices of advanced WavEffects and Wave Guide Synthesis. Professional sound editing and sequencing software included.  20-bit S/PDIF digital output. . 120dB dynamic range.  4MB onboard RAM for high quality SoundFonts and 3D Positional Audio.  Ultra high-performance, low-noise, CD-quality record and playback.  Definitive upgrade for your PC's multimedia audio system. CREATIVE www.5OUNDBLASTER.COM Copyright 1997 Creative Technology Ltd, Sound Blaster and the Creative logo are registered trademarks and AWE64 Gold, Creative WaveSynth WG and Esmu 3D Positional Audio are trademarks of Creative Technology Ltd. All other names are property of their respective owners. All specifications are subject to change without prior notice. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #078 "


"STRATEGY & TIPS: WIZARDRY NEMESIS GAMER'S EDGE fight. The guardian is casy to kill, as it doesn't move. On the second level, you must look at the book on the rickety table; it has the translations of the runes. Something else on this level will help you read the book without burning it. The runes are copied into your journal, so you don't have to do it by hand. Ystalin's Lair: You can't get in here until you've spoken to Zalena. Co past the door, stand on the edge, and cast the appropriate spell (as indicated by the whispering voice). The gear door is simple, provided you have all the parts; con't overlook the desk area. For the puzzle door, the Tour Cuide should be sufficient. And remember, CAST A SPELL ON ME Against tough opponents, especially the demon, it's best to use the smart adventurers don't take what isn't theirs (but amulet to whittle them down before charging in. it's okay to read the two notes). Nithera: A nasty place, with four-armed demons (must be related to the sewer guys, heh!) and shadow beasts. Be Once More, With Feeling sure you find the sextant before going inside the complex. Dancing With Dragons, Part II: This dragon is much nastier than Dagger Room: You don't have to go here if you'd rather not. All you the other one. In the end, I opted for Enhanced Attack, ran right up into get are a couple its face, and just smacked away until it was dead. It took more than one of potions and a try. You may want to use the Massive Strength Talisman for this one, too, wand. The first or maybe even Invulnerability. time through, End Game: Spelling out the right word on the rune tablet allows you to you must walk ficlelle the skeletons head and open the way below. There isn't much to between the find down there, aside from the key to the final door. The electric room daggers; the and fog room just generate endless combat to no purpose. control is at the Duking With Demons: The ridiculously easy way to get through here altar, so you real is to use the basilisk talisman, then immediately go through the door, ly have no other bypass the cut scenes, and watch the demon die. choice in the The hard way is to prepare first. Use Heal All to give yourself extra hit matter. The points. Cast Enhanced Protection, using all your energy. Use Restore secret passage in Energy to bring magic points up to 255. Go through the door. Bypass this room is the scenes. Cet right up to the demon so he doesn't cast spells. Use the OUT ON THE FRINGES When you enter an area opened by the amulet to weaken him a bit. Use the amulet again to cast Ice Storm to with restricted movement--the Swamp or Forest, fountain; you the maximum. Then swing away. Good luck! for example-cast healing and any close combat want all three Until next time, happy adventuring! % spells before entering combat. pedestals at the bottom. How to Reach Scorpia Library: Be careful what books you read (you can get away without reading any of them, as they only provide background info). A cursed It is with much sadness and regret that I announce my departure tome will bring your evil twin Skippy to fight you. There is another luuk from both GEnie and Delphi. As of this month, I can no longer be that can help prevent that. The important thing to find here, if you want it, reached on either of those systems. However, you can still get in is the kris sword. Look for it on the upper level, where you find the book touch with me in the following ways: on the floor. When you come to the blue gate, I recommend using AOL: Scorpia's Lair (keyword: scorpia) Enhanced Protection before passing through. Internet: scorpia@aol.com Fire Wall: This is the really important part. The control is downstairs U.S. Mail: (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you in the main hall, not too far from the Horn (you can't do anything with live in the U.S.) the Horn). The Pentagram Door can indeed be opened with a spell; if Scorpia, PO Box 338 your wits have deserted you, that's a good way to feel. Think about it. Just Gracie Station remember you have to be right up by the door for this to work New York, NY 10028 T10N lyrweb.com CGW CGW MAY 1997 "


"The ultimate computing resource online TM ZD Net http://www.zdnet.com From the sources you trust: PC Magazine PC Week PC Computing Be sure to sign up for Personal View ZD Net's FREE news service that you can easily configure to track only the companies and products that interest you most. Computer Shopper Click into ZD Net's worldrenowned Shareware Library and start downloading! Over 10,000 programs — all tested, rated and reviewed by ZD Net editors. Windows Sources MacUser Join in! There's a lot going on = from wide-ranging discussions with industry leaders, to topical weekly chats with editors and ZD Net personalities there's always something new, exciting and insightful happening at www.zdnet.com MacWEEK Inter@ctive Week Computer Life FamilyPC Computer Gaming World Yahoo! Internet Life See You Online! "


"IPS Action Strategy/Wargames Magic the Gathering: Battlemage BTWORK. OCTADSOME OHARA Powerslave Although Playmates' POWERSLAVE isn't a game you'd want to spend much time on, some of ere is a quick tip for those just beginning you were unfortunate enough to purchase it. Here are a few cheats that will allow you to Acclaim's MAGIC THE GATHERING: finish it quickly so you can move on to a better game. Just type these codes in at any time. BATILEMACE computer game. (Look for more Lobocop All weapons Holly (continued) tips in the full game review in this issue.) Lobodeity God mode Creature (Creature #) Always use plenty of land. This is good Lobosway All items Places any of the following advice for any Magic player, but is even more creatures at your location Lobopick All keys important in BATILEMACE, where you want to 0 Anubis Lobosphere Entire map keep your hand from filling up. Unlike the card 1 Spider Lobolite Removes flash from game, where you can choose your least valuexplosions and gunfire 2 Mummy able card to discard, BATTLEMAGE automati Loboxy Displays coordinates 3 Piranha cally selects a discard for you at random. And Holly Calls up a taskbar that 4 Basset since you draw a card automatically every allows you to type the 5 Magmantis following cheats: 10-15 seconds, your hand fills up quickly! 6 Am-nit Level (level #) Instead of the normal one-third rule, try mak7 Set Jumps you to any level ing 40 percent of your cards land cards. Land 8 Kilmatikhan Doors cards are the quickest type of cards to put into Activates all switches 9 Alien Worker play, so keep putting one in play as soon as they Exit 10 Alien Worker become bright again. This should also give you Finish current level 11 Omen Wasp plenty of mana for spells. hard El Phase White Mglee Beirforce Status Display Special Quliont Hebo Battleground: Antietam If you have trouble remembering that Col. Alfred Cumming is an E/C ranked leader in BATILEGROUND: ANTIETAM, help is no further away than Talonsoft's Web site (www.talonsoft.com). Glenn Saunders has created a complete BATTLEGROUND-style Order of Battle for both the Army of the Potomac and the Army of Northem Virginia. The file is zipped in Word for Windows format. NEZAKEN CGW MAY 1997 "


"TIPS! Simulation/Space EF2000 Tactcom There's a bug in the SmartView feature, which is supposed to let you view various hot spots in the WarGen war zone. If you set the filter to view Enemy or Neutral aircraft and there are no such aircraft in range, returning to the cockpit will crash the game to the DOS prompt. To avoid this problem, be sure to return the SmartView setting to All Aircraft before returning to the cockpit view. Also, if you come across a particularly interesting mission using RUSSIAN MISSION I CAP SmartView, you can hit the H key to hold the view on the currently selected aircraft. If you're having trouble getting a decent hit rate with long-range S225 and AMRAAM missiles, try the shoot and run\" tactic. Fire a missile at your target, and then make an immediate 180 degree course change. If you have plenty of altitude, roll inverted and pull back on the stick; if you're low to the ground, then pull up until you've reversed course and then roll out. Your missiles are more effective when tracking an enemy head-on than from the side, where doppler effect can affect tracking. By reversing course in the vertical plane, the enemy continues flying directly towards you, keeping its nose to you—and your missile. If you try to do a 180 by turning in the horizontal plane, the enemy's course will change and your missile is less likely to hit Adventure RPG RAMA ierra's RAMA is a pretty tough adventure game right from the start. If you find yourself stumped early on, the following tips should lielp set you on your way: 1. As soon as you descend into the base camp, the lights will go on. You might be tempted to go outside and explore -but don't Instead, head back upstairs and go to the lockers, where you'll see a ladder leading downward. Descend, and then grab the key ring hanging to the right of the \"Inactive\" sign, which hangs on the bomb-like device. This key will allow you to access a few crucial items still left in the lockers. 2. Once outsicle, travel to every region of the Central Plains, and scour each screen carefully for tiles and puzzle pieces laying around. You should be able to find seven puzzle pieces. 3. Go to the \"London\" area (at approximately 12 o'clock on your radar), get past the force field (it pauses after every nine pulses), and then insert the missing tile to get in the door. Once inside, hunt for five more puzzle pieces, and then press the yellow button on the RAMA display to open the two puzzle boards. The screen shot here shows the solution to the more difficult puzzle MAY 1997 CCW "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD mail Order Mladi Save Time and Money Ordering Games by Phone Local Stores don't always have the games your looking for or the pri atvice you need). Take a few minutes to shop the courteous and experience: salespeople in the pages of Computer laming / Mail Order Mall, "


"CHIPS&BITSINC. www.cdmag.com/chips.html or call 1-800-699-4263 On Line Ordering Customer Service \"OB 234 DEPT 10877 ROCHESTER, VT 05767 INT'L 802-767-3033 FAX 802-767-3382 Source Code 10877 'OUTLAWS' You are the loner who rides into town seeking vengeance and uncovers the twisted plot of a powerful railroad baron and his outlaw thugs. This game will deliver all the components of a 60's western in an exciting 3D format. LucasArts Release Date: NOW CD $48 * OUTRA \"KRUSH, KILL N' DESTROY Set in the 25th century, mission briefings makes your objectives perfectly clear, it is up to you to direct history and save the future of your planet Electronic Arts Release Date: NOW CD $38 TE RELEASE PRICE 330 RR/Abbr Baron NOW $34 h Legion 05/97 348 den Magic NOW $39 Amiral Sea Battles NOW $41 vancd Civilization NOW $39 terlife NOW $46 ge of Empires NOW $48 e of Wonders 08/97 547 gents at Justice NOW $43 tiphibius Assault 07/97 548 es Rising 11/97 S46 my Men 06.97 $46 scendancy NOW $35 httlecruiser 3000 NOW $25 thright W05 NOW 348 ood & Magic NOW 546 & CRA Countr Strke NOW $21 & C Red Alert NOW $48 & C Red Alert W95 NOW $48 mesar 2 NOW $48 mpitalism NOW $42 pitalism Plus NOW $46 mve Wars NOW $39 eltic Tales NOW $34 mos Overlords W95 NOW $19 tiz Bckwt Atte NOW $42 vilization 2 NOW 542 vilization 2 Scen NOW $26 vilization Network NOW $25 planization NOW $40 mm Cong Curt Ops NOW $22 ommand & Conquer NOW $47 COMPUTER GAMES: STRATEGY TITLE RHIASI PECE RELEASE PRICE TITLE RELEASE PRICE Command & Conquer 2 11/07 548 Jaond Aling Day Game NOW $44 Sm City 2000 W95 Net NOW $47 Cmmnd & Congr W95 NOW $40 Jagged Alliance NOW $19 Simile NOW $35 Cong of New Wild DI NOW $48 Jutland NOW $19 SimPark W95/W3 NOW $34 Conquered Kingdoms NOW $19 KKND NOW $38 SimTown NOW $33 Conquest Earth NOW $44 Lords of the Realm 2 NOW $48 Sole Survivor NOW $48 Conquest New World NOW $34 M Gathmng Battemage NOW $42 Spaceward Hol 4 W95 NOW $24 Dark Earth Singy W95 NOW $45 MAX. NOW $48 Star Command NOW $40 Dark Regn Future War 05/97 $48 Machiavelli the Prince NOW $19 Star Control 3 NOW $28 Darklight Contact NOW $42 Master of Magic NOW $41 Star General NOW $43 Deadlock NOW $27 Master of Orion NOW $19 Star Nations NOW $46 Destiny W95 NOW $45 Master of Orion 2 NOW $44 07/97 $46 Dominion NOW S14 Mechcommander NOW $48 Starship Troopers 06.97 $46 Dune 2 NOW $29 Mighty Machines W95 NOW $32 Steel Legions 08/97 $42 Dungeon Keeper NOW $46 M ission Force NOW S18 Syndicate Wars NOW $46 Emperor of Fadng Sns NOW 538 Navy Strike NOW $34 Tranport Tycoon Dix NOW $42 Empire 2 W95 NOW $24 New Horizons NOW $34 Transport Tycoon NOW 524 Empire Dix Mstr Ed NOW $19 New Order 05/97 $48 Uprising 10/97 548 Enemy Nations W95 NOW $44 Oulpost 2 07/97 $48 Wages of War W95 NOW $29 Entrepreneur NOW $44 Pax Imperia 2 W95 05/97 $48 War Gods W95 NOW $28 Exploration NOW $40 Pirates Gold NOW $19 Warcraft 2 NOW $42 Fallen Haven W95 NOW $47 Populous 3 08/97 $48 Warcrall 2 70 Levels NOW $19 Flight Commander 2 NOW $39 Railroad Tycoon NOW $24 Warcraft 2 Add On NOW $20 Forbes Corp Rder Gme NOW $45 Reach for Stars 2 W95 NOW $48 Warcraft 3 10/97 $47 Fragile Allegiance NOW $46 Rebellion W95 0 6/97 $52Warcraft Orc/Humns NOW $29 Free Enterprise NOW $45 Risk W95 NOW $41 Warlords 2 DIK HOW $11 Galactic Mirage W95 06/97 541 Romans 3 Kingdoms 4 NOW $34 Warlords 3 0 8/97 542 Heroes M&M W95 NOW $29 Settlers 2 NOW $39 Warwind W95 NOW $43 Heroes of M&M2 NOW $35 Settlers 2 Missions NOW $12 Wooden Ship fronten NOW $39 History of World NOW $40 Shadow of the Emperr NOW 535 X-Com Apocalypse 05.97 545 Imperialism NOW $34 Shattered Nations NOW 546 X-Com Terr frm Deep NOW $29 Imperium Galactica NOW $34 SimCity 2000 Collectn NOW $51 X-Com UFO Defensa NOW $19 Into the Void HOW $44 SimCity 2000 W95 NOW $47 Z NOW $43 FORKELLE 'A FORK IN THE TALE' starring Rob Schneider as your alter ego, an ordinary guy in an extraordinary adventure, that takes you into a parallel world called Eseveron. You battle dudes in cheap polyester suits and babes wearing for bikinis Any River Entertainment Release Date: NOW CD $45 X-BING US VE FIGHTER \"X-WING VS. TIE FIGHTER. Join the heat of the battle between the Rebel Alliance and the Imperial Navy for the control of the galaxy. This stand alone games features all new missions, over a dozen new spacecraft and incredible infight graphics LucasArts Release Date: NOW CD $52 IS SCENARIOS AND 2 MIROL TONEN IUNIER rika Korps NOW $42 Je of Ironclads 07/97 542 ge of Oars 08/97 542 We of Sail NOW $42 lied General NOW $28 attle of Bulge NOW 542 attlegrnd Gettysburg NOW $32 Atleground Antistam NOW 541 Hleground Bull Run 05/97 542 Meground Mid East NOW $42 attleground Shiloh NOW $39 COMPUTER GAMES: WAR Battleground Waterloo NOW $32 Harpoon 97 W95 NOW $44 Blitzkrieg NOW $39 Last Blitzkrieg NOW $41 Broken Alliance NOW $24 Man of War 05/97 842 Close Combat W95 NOW $38 Myth 06/97 $50 Custers Last Command NOW $28 Nam 07/97 $42 East Front 06/97 $42 Napoleon in Russia NOW $42 Fantasy General NOW $35 Operation Crusader NOW $39 Flight Commander 2 NOW $38 Over the Reich NOW $39 Great Battles Alexndr NOW $44 Pacific General W95 0597 545 Harpoon 2 Admirals Ed NOW $25 Panthers in Shadows NOW $42 Harpoon 2 Deluxe NOW $25 Panzer General 2 08/97 $42 Panzerblitz NOW $42 R E Lee CW Gon W95 NOW $48 Road to Moscow W95 NOW $43 Steel Panthers NOW $37 Steel Panthers Cmogn NOW 15 Steel Pnths 2 NOW $43 TACOPS NOW $44 Third Reich NOW $39 V Victory Bundle NOW $28 Wargame CS3 Rifles NOW $43 Zukov s Campaigns 05/97 $37 \"SILENT HUNTER PATROL 2 Add 2 patrol zones (Malaysia and The Sulu Sea) and 15 new scenarios (Drum visits Japan, Grenadier bags the big one,' Tullibee goes down, Growler's last battle, and more) to Silent Hunter Mindscape Release Date: NOW CD $15 ERA ALEGIANCE \"FRAGILE ALLIANCE In the year 2380. Sector K240 was made available for colonization. The Empire must expand and it's your job to colonize the asteroids and the empire from financial and political ruin Interplay Release Date: NOW CD $46 BOARD GAMES 'AXIS & ALLIES' Decide the fate of a nation and the destiny of the world. The Balkans have fallen. Pearl Harbor has been attacked, Wake Island is in Japanese hands and Rommel has the British on the run! Millon Bradley Release Date: NOW $33 avanced Squad Ldr NOW $38 vanced Third Reich NOW $38 e of Renaissance NOW $42 Baron NOW $27 scient Empires NOW $29 myful Green Things NOW $17 wis & Allies NOW $33 is & Allies Cntrl PwiSNOW $30 KIS & Allies Max Adv NOW $10 mittetech 4th Ed. NOW 519 tain Stand Alone NOW $23 itannia NOW $19 Wars Deluxe NOW $21 cus Maximus NOW $11 vilization NOW $29 plonial Diplomacy NOW $42 osmic Encounter NOW $30 isis Korea 1995 NOW $29 Isis Sinai 1973 NOW $25 mys of Decision 2 NOW $42 Decision in France NOW $15 Lunch Money NOW $15 Deluxe Diplomacy NOW $42 Magic Realm NOW $23 Diplomacy . NOW $19 Marvel Super Dice NOW $13 Dragon Dice NOW $9 Modern Art NOW $25 Dungeon NOW $16 Napoleons Later Batis NOW $22 Eurorails NOW $25 Necromunda NOW $44 Express NOW S11 Pain Doctor NOW $25 Federation & Empire NOW $38 Power Lunch NOW $13 Feudal NOW S18 Rail Baron NOW $19 Geronimo NOW $32 Rats NOW $24 Go NOW $22 Rebels & Redcoats 1 NOW $25 Grand Prix NOW S19 Risk NOW $27 Great War at Sea 1 NOW $32 Robo Rally NOW $33 Hannibal NOW $32 Robo Rally Crash Burn NOW $9 History of the World NOW $27 Roboty Armd & Drgs NOW $25 Hobbit Adventure NOW $29 Run Silent Hun Deep NOW $24 India Rails NOW $20 Sam Grant NOW $42 Krieg! NOW $32 Samurai NOW $37 La Bata Mnt St Jn Dix NOW $62 Settlers of Catan NOW $30 La Bata de Wavre NOW $22 Sherlock Holmes NOW $20 HINT BOOKS SilentDeath DIY NOW $42 Silverton N OW $32 Space Chess 3D NOW $35 Space Hulk NOW $50 Spices of the World NOW S18 Squad Leader NOW $23 Star Fleet Battles NOW $25 Star Wars Monopoly NOW $10 Statik 1st Contot Borg NOW $13 Starlk 1st Contet fed NOW $13 NOW S14 Texas Revolution NOW $18 Viceroys NOW $22 Victory in West Frnce NOW 526 Viking Raiders NOW $25 Volga Front NOW $17 Wad et NOW $50 Warhammer 40KNOW $50 Warhammer Fantasy NOW $50 Warhammer Ouest NOW $50 Stratego ADVANCED CIVILIZATION' retains the essential elements of civilization, and can be learned quickly. The additional cards ensure a greater diversity of cultures, while the new Calam-ities make the game even more challenging Avalon Hill Release Date: NOW $25 AIR WARRIOR 11 \"AIR WARRIOR II Practice maneuvers and fly with the same skill and strategies that real life fighter pilots use. These tactical flight practices and exposure to various aircraft options prepare you to defeat even the most seasoned on-line veterans. Interactive Magic Release Date: NOW CD $46 Master of Orion 2 NOW $16 Star Control 3 NOW $16 Mech2 Mercenaries NOW $16 Star General NOW S12 Mechwarrior 3 09/97 $16 Star Trek Star Fit AcadNOW $16 Might & Magic Compn NOW $16 Star Trek Voyager NOW $16 Obsidian NOW $16 Starcraft NOW $16 Outlaws NOW $16 The Darkening NOW $16 Phantasmagoria 2 NOW $16 Tomb Raider NOW S10 Ouake Game Strategy NOW $16 Wicett 2 Bynd Dik Pit NOW $13 Rebellion 06/97 $16 Wing Commander 4 NOW S18 Romance 3 Kingdns 4 NOW $16 X-wing vs Tie Fight NOW $16 SimCopter NOW $16Zork Nemesis Guide NOW $18 \"M1A2 ABRAMS' The player commands a platoon of four tanks, or an entire company team with other vehides, artillery, helicopters and artillery attached all from a variety of external views and a multi zoom map view. Interactive Magic Release Date: 05/97 CD $45 ge of Empire 07/97 $16 Diablo NOW $16 gents of Justice NOW $16 Duke Nukem 3D NOW $12 trayal in Antarae NOW $16 Elder Scrolls 2 NOW $13 C Red Alert NOW S16 Enemy Nations NOW $16 NOW $16 Final Fantasy 4 0 6/97 $12 2 Adv Strategies NOW $13 Heroes of M&M2 NOW $16 valuation NOW $16 Jet Fighter 3 NOW $16 vilization 2 NOW $16 Land Lore 2 NOW $16 35e Combat NOW $16 Leisure Suit Larry 7 NOW $16 aggertali Chronicles NOW $19 Lords of Realm 2 NOW $16 ark Forces 2 05.97 $16 Magic the Gathering NOW $16 COMPUTER GAMES: ARCADE Uit Poll Crp Nght NOW $42 Pro Pinball Timeslock 06/97 $37 Ultra Pinball NOW $29 Re-Loaded NOW $33 en Rampage 05/97 $34 Rebel Assault 2 NOW $25 alls of Steel W9505/97 $32 Road Rash W95NOW $42 arthworm Jim 182 NOW $25 Rocket Jockey NOW $47 co the Dolphin NOW $38 Tiger Shark NOW $40 angle Pinball 05/97 530 Toh Shin Den NOW $27 aty Pythons Wee Time NOW 532 Virtua Fighter W95 NOW $42 ortal Kombat 3 W95 NOW $32 Virtin Squad NOW $42 all W95 NOW $34 WWF-In Your House NOW $40 o Pinball NOW $37 Worms NOW $34 COMPUTER GAMES: TRADITIONAL Barbie Designer NOW $42 Monty Pythn Holy Grl NOW $38 Battleship W95 NOW $41 Muppet Treast Island NOW $37 Budge Dix 2 Om Shri NOW $29 Puzzls of Titsyte W9S NOW $19 Bridge Olympiad NOW $16 Scrabble NOW $24 Chessmstr 5000 W95 NOW $35 Shanghai Git Mom W95 NOW $26 Clue NOW $40 Tri Tryst NOW $24 Dragon Dice NOW $44 Ultimate Yahtzee NOW 519 Hong Kong Mahjong NOW $25 Universal Neverlock NOW $19 Jeopardy Platinum NOW 528 Vegas Games 95 W95 NOW $19 Magic Gathering W95 NOW $48 Virtual Pool W95 NOW $40 Monopoly NOW $40 You Don't Know Jack 2 NOW $31 \"STARCRAFT' Wasteful, short sighted and quarrel some humans pillage world after world. You must gather your resources to accomplish your goals, either freedom or galactic domination. Blizzard Release Date: 07/97 CD $46 SER (ERNO AIDATOCADCncrodaco "


"CHIPS & BITS INC. POB 234 DEPT 10877 ROCHESTER. VT 05767 INT'L 802-767-3033 FAX 802-767-3382 Fabulous Selections World Wide Shipping Overnight Great Prices ikrakich \"BIRTHRIGHT\" You are the leader of your own kingdom and domain. It's up to you to wage war or preserve peace. At a single command, armles march and kingdoms fall. With the blood abilities of a bom king, you command heroes, Wizards and might armies. But will it be enough? Sierra Release Date: NOW CD $48 'THRUSTMASTER F-22 PRO' With a powder coated metal base, glass filled ABS handle, metal gimbal mechanism, and heavy gauge spring tension, the F-22 PRO gives you the edge you need in advanced tactical warfare. Thrustmaster Release Date: NOW $128 COMPUTER GAMES: SIMULATION TITLE RELEASE PRICE TALE RELLAS PRE me RELEAST PRICE TITLE RELEASE PA 1943 Euro Air War 06/97 544 Falcon 3.0 TIOW $16 Mechwar Mercnries NOW S48 Super Motocross 06/97 $ 688: Hunter Killer NOW $45 Falcon 4.0 08/97 $52 Monste Trck Monss NOW $40 TFX EF 2000 NOW $ AH-64D Longbow Gold NOW $46 Falcon Gold .. NOW $29 Muzzle Velocity 05/97 548 TEX:X-22 NOW SE AH64 Flash Pnt Korea NOW $25 Fighter Duel 2 W95 08/97 $39 Mwarrior 2 Battlepk NOW $48 Team Apache 06/97 SATF Nato Fighters NOW $22 Fighter Duel Pro Net NOW $38 Nascar Racing 2 NOW $48 Test Drive: Off Road NOW $ Across Desett 1941 05/97 $48 Flight Sim Toolkit NOW $16 Naser Rong W Trk Pck NOW $47 The Darkening NOW $. Air Warrior 2 W95 NOW $46 Flight Unlimited 2 06/97 $44 Need Speed Gold W95 NOW $45 Thunder Truck Rally 06/97 $ Apache NOW $19 Flying Corp NOW $41 Need for Speed 2 NOW $46 Trophy Bass 2 NOW SArchimedean Dynsty NOW $40 Flying Nightmares 2 06/97 $42 Power F1 NOW $42 U-Boat 2 NOW $ Armored Fis! 2 N OW $49 Formula 1 Post Seasn 05/97 $44 Rally Championship NOW $42 VMX Racing W95 NOW $Battle of Ironclads 05.97 $46 Formula 1 W95 0 5.97 545R ed Baron 2 W95 06/97 $48 Viper Oper Red Sect NOW $ Comanche 3 NOW 549 Havoc W95 0 5/97 $36 Sarace NOW $48 Werewol Vs Cornche 2 NOW $ Descnt Innte Abyss NOW $48 Hell Cats Over Paci! 06/97 $44 Sail 95 NOW $36 Wing Commander 4 NOW SE Destruction Derby 2 NOW $47 Hell Cats: Leyte Gull 08/97 $24 Sand Warriors NOW $46 Wing Commander 5 08/97 $ Dreadnaught W9509/97 $12 Hund Helicopter NOW S44 Scorcher NOW S46 Wipe Out XL 06/97 SEF 2000 Tactcom NOW $38 Indy Car Racing 2 NOW $48 Screamer 2 NOW $24 World Rally Fever NOW $ Extreme Assault 05/97 $45 Indy Car Reng 2 W95 NOW $48 Ship of the Line W95 NOW $44 Wild Circ Gran Prix 2 NOW $ F-22 Lightning 2 NOW $49 Jet Fighter 3 NOW 549 Silent Hunter NOW $39 X-Car Exprmni Ron NOW $ F16 Fightng Falcon 08/97 S48 M1A2 Abrams W95 05/97 $45 Sint Hunt Patrl 1-2 ea NOW $15 X-Wng V Tie Fghter NOW $ FA 18 Hornet 3 W95 NOW $45M echWarrior 2 W95 NOW $47 Super EF 2000 W95 NOW $46 F-22 NOW $ COMPUTER GAMES: 3D ACTION Alphasterm NOW $32 Doom 2 W95 NOW $32 Hexen W95 NOW $21 Shadow Warrior 05/97 S Area 51 W95 NOW $46 Duke Nukem 3D NOW $37 League of Pain W95 NOW $44 SkyNET NOWS Blood 05/97 $46 Duke Nukem 3D Alom NOW $46 MDK NOW S44 Star Trek Gemins 06/97 S Chasen NOW $44 Duke Flukin 3D Plut Pk NOW $25 Necrodome W95 NOW $39 Terrafova NOWS Colliderz W95 NOW $40 Eradicator NOW $36 Normandy 97 09/97 536 Tomb Raider NOW $ Crusader: No Regret NOW $34 Final Doom NOW $46 Powerslave NOW $39 Tomb Raider 2 09/97 S Dark Forces NOW $30 Firefight NOW $38 Prey 06/97 $50 Unreal 08/97 S Dark Fices 2 Jedi 05/97 $53 Freelancer 11/97 $44 Ouake NOW $53 Weekend Warrior 05/97 Dark Vengeance 0597 $45 Gun Metal NOW $44 Ouake Mssn Pak 1-2ea NOW $29 XS NOWS Die Hard Tlogy NOW $46 Hard Boiled W95 NOW $40 Rebel Moon Rising 05/97 540 Zombleville NOW 5 COMPUTER GAMES: SPORTS \"DARK REIGN' In the 27th century, the Imperium with control of precious water resources commands the fate of a 1.000 worlds. The Freedom Guard attempts to break the Imperium's grip on the galaxy and the water supply Activision Release Date: 05/97 CD $48 SMORE THAN YOU EVER IMAGINED. LANDS OF LORE \"LANDS OF LORE II'You are Luther, cursed son of the Sorceress of Darkness, exploring treacherous lands in search of ancient magic, a super power that will release you from your vile birthright. Virgin Release Date: NOW CD $48 \"REALMS OF ARKANIA III Something sinister is happening in the seaside town of Arkania. Brave, honored warriors refuse to fight, while an evil mind preys upon their minds and souls. Can your band of heroes defeat it in time? Sir Tech Release Date: NOW CD $45 Adidas Power Soccer NOW $32 British Open Golf NOW 544 Extreme Street Hockey NOW $42 FIFA Soccer 97 NOW $45 Fint Pge Spts Git Bnd NOW $48 Frnt Pre Fall 97 W95 NOW S18 Front Page Golf W95 NOW $18 Golt NOW $34 Grand Slam '97 W95 NOW $43 Hardball 6 07/97 $42 Hoowes Thunder W9S NOW $35 Tom Landry FB NOW Tony LaRsa B82 TD 93 NOW Tony LaRussa BB NOW Top of the Key 05/97 $ Total Control Football NOW S Triple Play 97 NOW $ VR Baseball 97 NOWS VR Soccer NOWS World Hockey 95 NOW World Series Baseball NOW S World Cup Golf Dor Bch NOW \"COMMANCHE 3' Missiles away! The helicopter itself is fully light-sourced, shaded and rendered with 3D real-time animation while easier to get into and handle. Night time maybe the right time for many of Commanche 's missions. Electronic Arts Release Date: NOW CD $49 AMD JOYSWITCH' Now you can jump from joystick to joystick game to game with the speed and ease of tuming a switch. No more reaching behind your computer to swap jaystick cables on the game port Jayswitch does it all Lead Pursuit Release Date: NOW $39 30 Magic Accelerator NOW $126 CH F16 Combatstick NOW $60 CH F16 Fighterstick NOW $100 CH Flight Stick Pro NOW $50 CH Force FX NOW $169 CH Game Card 3 Auto NOW $26 CH PC Gamepad NOW $19 CH Pro Pedals NOW S80 CH Pro Throttle NOW $102 CH Virtual Pilot ProNOW 75 CH Y Cable NOW S10 TM Flight Contr Pro NOWS TM Game Card NOWS TM Pro Play Golt Sys NOW $4 TM Rudder Cont Sys NOW $ TM Weapon Cont Sys NOW $ TM Wiz Pinball Cntrl NOW $ TM X-Fighter Jystck now $ TM Phazer Pad NOW $ TM GPI NOW $ TM Top Gun Joystick NOW S Verbal Commander NOW $1 *FANTASCENES' Create countless personal visual fantasies with five of the most beautiful women in the world! Bring your imagination to life, from hours of interaction with those sensual, lustful ladies Digital Playground Release Date: NOW CD $34 Hyperlinde NOW $40 PGA Tour 96 Sawgrass NOW $19 Jack Nicklaus Golf 97 NOW $42 PGA Tour 96 Spinsh By NOW S19 Legends FB 97 W95 NOW $43 PGA Tour 96 Wentwrth NOW $19 NOW $46 PGA Tour Goll 96 W95 NOW $37 Links Pro 15 Pelun Hill NOW $19 Phoenx Soccr Arud NOW $40 Links Pro 16 Val Hala NOW $19 Pro Golf 05/97 542 Lunar Goll NOW $44 SinGol! NOW $40 Madden Football 97 NOW $45 Sohd Ice NOW $38 NBA Live 97 NOW $45 Strange Golf W95 NOW $39 NCAA Bball Final 497 NOW $44 Ten Pin Alley W95 NOW $40 NHL Hockey 97 NOW $46 Tie Break Tennis NOW $6 COMPUTER GAMES: HARDWARE Game View NOW $99 Labtec LCS 2612 Spks NOW $112 Gravis Firebird 2 NOW $65Lgitech WngMn Wmor NOW $85 Gravis Grip Controllit NOW $85 MS Sowdr Pr W ide NOW $89 Gravis GHIP Pad 2 Pak NOW $24 Msoft Sidwndr Pro Pa NOW $39 Gravis PC Game Pad NOW $19 Sound Blaster 32 PNP NOW $152 Gravis PC Gamepd Pro NOW $27 Sound Blaster 64 AWE NOW $179 Grwis Phoenix Joysik NOW $83 Space Orb 360 NOW $75 Gravis Thunderbird NOW $43 TM Driving Control T2 NOW $108 Ona Zp Drv 100M Ext NOW $199 TM F16 TOS NOW $108 Oga Zp Drv 100M Int NOW $199 TM F22 Pro NOW $128 Joyswitch NOW $39 TM FLC F16 System NOW $108 COMPUTER GAMES: ADULT Eros NOW S19 Penetration NOW S16 Fantascenes NOW $34 Penthouse IA 2 NOW $32 Fantascenes Anal NOW $39 Penthouse IA 3 NOW $32 Fun House NOW $39 Penthouse IA 4 N OW $32 Girlfriend Donna TIOW $19 Penthouse IA5 OW $49 Girlfriend Teni NOW $39 Penthouse 1A 5 NOW $52 Girlfriend Tracy NOW $39 Penthouse Interactive NOW $32 Heidi's House NOW $36 Playboy Interviews NOW $32 Hot Leather 2 NOW $25 Pleasure Zones NOW $29 Hot Slots NOW $37 Poker Party NOW $45 tiump Towers NOW $39 Porn Mania NOW $29 Interact Seymore Bt 2 NOW $49 Porno Poker NOW $32 Interact Seymore Buts NOW $39 Porntris NOW $24 Intimate Journey NOW $24 Private Investigator NOW $49 Intimate Possbits NOW $39 Private Plst Park 2 NOW $49 Island Girl Resort NOW $39 Private Prison NOW $44 Japan Interactive NOW $46 Rodney Rubber Show NOW $39 Latex NOW $44 Samural Pervert 2 NOW $64 Luscious Lady Lingerie NOW $19 Scissors N Stones NOW S19 Lust Connection NOW $39 Sex Castle NOW $29 Maddams Family NOW $19 Sex TV 2 NOW $25 Mystik Mistress NOW $36 Sux With Jena NOW $49 Nasty Parts NOW 529 Sex The Game NOW $49 Net Erotique NOW $22 Sexy Sports Trivia NOW $17 Neurodancer NOW $39 Shock The Game NOW $49 Nice & Hard NOW S32 Sorority Sex KittnN OW $29 light Ow 20 NOW $29 Space Sirens NOW $29 Nightwatch Int 2 NOW $39 Space Sirens 2 NOW 529 Nightwatch Int 3 NOW $46 Spy Club NOW $25 Nightwatch Inter NOW $39 Strip Fighter NOW $40 Oriental Ecst Exposed NOW $39 Strip Poker Pro N OW $24 Outpost 69 NOW $40 Strip Poker Pro 2 NOW $36 Pandora's Poker Palace NOW $35 Strip Tease NOW $24 Passion Poker NOW $29 Texas Table Dance NOW $24 DIVA X \"DIVA X:REBECCA\"Do you know how to get to the Avalon Agency?\" She asks in a sexy French accent. You kindly offer her a ride to her destination. Her eyes engage in silent conversation with yours. From there the adventure begins! Pixis AWEK Release Date: NOW CD $38 Alleycats NOW $39 Anal Blackjack HOW $28 Anal Rom 2 NOW $42 Asinis in Wonderland NOW 546 AssTraids NOW S40 Buster Cherry NOW $45 Casting Couch NOW $39 Chameleons NOW $29 Circus NOW $29 Club 21 NOW $35 Club Caterina NOW $16 Come Play With Me NOW $39 Crystal Fantasy NOW $25 Cyber Photographer NOW $29 Cyber Peep Int NOW S12 CyberStrip Black Jack NOW $36 CyberStrip Poker NOW $36 CyberXperence NOW $36 Cyberpcep 2 Nurse NOW $20 Cyberpeep 2 Sch Gel NOW $20 Cyberpoep 2 Wattss NOW $20 Cyberpeep Cheeride NOW $20 Dark Tunnels NOW $18 Desktop Vuyeur 1 NOW $29 Dirty Debutantes 2 NOW $39 Dirty Tricks NOW 539 Diva X Ariana NOW $38 Diva X Rebecca NOW $38 Doll House NOW S39 Dream Machine 2 NOW $49 Dream Machine NOW $36 Duke Screw'em NOW $46 Eros 2 NOW $19 Eros 3 NOW $24 'STRIP POKER PROFESSIONAL VOL. 2 combines the action of 5 Card Draw with some very different table stakes, 4 gorgeous opponents who are willing & able to bet it all for the chance to beat the pants off you! Art Worx Release Date: NOW CD FLY NERIC \"ROMSOFT 6 PACK Double Down. Doors of Passion 2 Sensuous Girls in 3D, Massive Melons, Touch Me, Feel Me and SLIPER PINTADULT 6 PAKI Private Screenings are what you'll gel in this sexy 6 pack! Romsoft Release Date: NOW 6-CD $32 Time Warp NOW $. Ultra Slots NOW $ Ultra Vixen NOW $ VCA 6-Pack NOW $ VCA'S Sex NOW $ Vampire's Kiss NOW $ Venus Playhouse NOW $ Virth Las Vegas Nite 2 NOW $ Vitti Las Vegs Nit NOW $ Virtual Director NOW $ Virtual Golden Eye NOWS Virtual Sex 2 NOWS Virtual Sex NOWS Virtual Sex Shoot NOW $ Virtual Valerie 2 NOW $ Virtual Veronica NOW $ Virtual Victor NOW $ Virtual Vixens NOW $ Virtually Yours 2 NOW $ Virtually Yours NOW $ What's Your Name NOW S Wheel of Fantasy NOW 5 You're the Director Zoom NOW $ GAY Bacchus Six Pack NOW $ Bike Bang NOW S Boyfriends NOWS Boys Next Door NOWS Boys of Paris NOWS Cruising Ground NOWS Manhunt NOW S Men In Motion NOW $ Men In Uniform NOW $ 01997 CHIPS & 115 "


"24 Hour Customer Service Newest Releases On Line Ordering Customer Service www.cdmag.com/chips.html or call 1-800-699-4263 Source Code 10877 ESAIL X.COM APOCAVESE COMPUTER GAMES: ADVENTURE STAR TREK FLEET ACADEMY' Before Captain Kirk, Commander TE RELEASE PRE TITLE RELEASE PRICE THE RELEASE PRICE THE RELEASE Pea 10th Planet STARFLEET NOW $44 Gabriel Knight 2 NOW $40 Chekov and Captain Sulu were legends, they were cadets at the Nemesis NOW $44 Silverload NOW $34 7th Guest 2 W95 ACADEMY NOW $44 most celebrated school in the universe, the Star Fleet Academy Hunter Hunted W95 NOW $45 Neverhood NOW $50 Simon Sorcerer 2 NOW $40 Aden Quest W95 0 6/97 $43 Iner Shrinking Hero NOW $43 Obsidian W95 Test your ingenuity, leadership and courage and determine if you NOW $49 Solar Crusade 07/97 $44 Advntres on Lego Isle 06/97 $35 Indestructibles NOW $44 Outlaws W95 NOW $48 Space Bar W95 NOW $46 have what it takes to graduate 1st in your class Albion Interplay Interstate 76 W95 NOW $48 Pandemonium NOW $50 Star Trek Judg Rt Coll NOW $38 Release Date:NOW CD $55 Amber Journeys Beynd NOW $44 Island of Dr Moreau 05/97 $40 Phantasmagoria 2 NOW $54 Star Trek Voyager 11/97 $48 Athanor 05/97 $40 KGB Files 05/97 $43 Plague 07/97 $42 Star Trk Str Fit Acad NOW $55 ADENE Azraels Tear NOW $39 KO7 Princeless Bride NOW $25 Planetfali W95 05/97 $44 Stars NOW $38 \"F/A-18 HORNET There's 28 different Persian Black Dahlia 06.97 $49 Kings Ouest 8 10/97 $48 Police Cust 5 SWAT NOW $47 Surreal W95 08197 $42 Gulf combat missions to test your skills, you can Curse of Monkey Isle NOW 548 Knights Chase NOW $38 Oin Tomb Mid King NOW $39 The Arrival NOW $46 blow up everything from am-munition depots Dark Earth W95 NOW $46 Knights Xent NR18 UG NOW $7 Quest for Glory 5 06/97 $48 The Last Express NOW $48 using the M61 Vulcan cannon to Mig fighters with Dawn of Darkness NOW $44 Leisure Suit Larry 7 NOW $48 Rama NOW $48 Third Millenium W95 NOW $44 an AlM9 Side-winder! Death Trap Dungeon 06/97 844 Light and Darkness NOW $44 Redneck Rampage 08/97 $48 Time Warriors 06/97 $26 Graphic Simulations Delirium NOW $46 Lighthouse NOW $48 Return to Krondor 05/97 $45 Timelapse Anc Civil NOW $46 Release Date: NOW CD $45 Ecstatica 2 NOW $47 Magic of Xanth NOW 542 Reverence 05/97 543 Titanic Jiny Out Time Now $44 ER Moon Murder NOW $26 Metal Works NOW $38 Rivers of Dawn NOW S41 Ime Wrp Dr Bram NOW $33 Fable NOW $48 Mission Ooze Control 05/97 $29 Riverworld 05/97 545 Trespass Jessic Park 10/97 $48 \"AGE OF SAIL 1775-1820' Delivers an excellent blend of Fighting Fantasy 05/97 $40 Mummy NOW $42 SCARAB NOW $38 Under Killing Moon NOW $19 exciting Real Time 3-D perspective naval combat along with Full Throttle NOW $28 Myst NOW $41 SPOR NOW $45 Zork: Gind Inquisitor 10/97 $50 pageantry and grandeur of those beautifully rendered sail. Glome NOW $43 Myst 2 07/97 $52 Sign of the Sun 07/97 $34 Zork.Nemesis NOW $53 ing vessels from the Tall Ships era! Empire COMPUTER GAMES: ROLE PLAYING Release Date: NOW CD $42 Alien Legacy NOW $29 Dark Sun Online W95 NOW $15 Pools of Darkness NOW $19 Star Trek TNG Fl Unity NOW $46 Anvil of Dawn NOW $19 Diablo NOW $39 Raveniott Strand NOW $25 Stonekeep NOW $25 THRUSTMASTER GRAND PRIX 1' Gives you the Atena Deluxe Die By the Sword NOW $48 Ravnitt 2 Sin Prop NOW S19 Terracide 08/97 $42 competitive edge with variable throttle and braking Betrayal in Antara 05/97 $48 Dungeon Master 2 NOW $25 Realms of the Hauntng NOW $52 Thunderscape NOW $19 at your fingertips and lightning fast thumb activated Champions of Krynn NOW $16 Elder Scrolls 2 N OW $56 Riftwar Legacy NOW S19 Ultima 7 Series NOW $15 shifting. Securely clamps to your desktop. Total Cobra Mission NOW $29 FR Descnt to UndertlOW 546 Rims Aik Shadow Riva NOW $45 Ultima 8 Pagan NOW S15 steering range is 180 degrees of travel. Curse of Azure Bonds NOW S16 Fallout NOW $53 Sacred Pools NOW $48 Ultima 9 Ascension NOW $52 Thrustmaster Dark Project 11/97 549 Lands Lore Grdos Dest NOW Lands Lore Grdns Dest NOW $48 $48 Serpent's Kiss NOW $43 Ultima Online 06/97 $42 Release Date: NOW $74 Dark Sun 2 NOW $47 M eridian 59 W95 NOW $19 Skyrealms of Jorune NOW $33 Ultima Undiwid 1 & 2 NOW S15 Dark Sun 2 NOW $19 Of Light & Darkness 05/97 $48 Star Trail NOW $29 Wizardry Gold W95 NOW $32 \"X-COM APOCALYPSE' You command the elite X-COM troops as they investigate and repel an ROLE PLAYING/PEN & PAPER alien invasion of Earth. You research and manuAD&D Gore Rules NOW $54 Champions Deluxe NOW $42 GURPS Goblins NOW $18 Rifts NOW $21 facture weapons, armor and vehicles. Destroy AD&D Combat & Tactics NOW $17 Changeling NOW $21 GURPS Mecha NOW $15 Rifts Hardbound NOW $28 the aliens before it is too late, AD&D DM Guide NOW $16 Changeling Screen NOW $15 GURPS Robots NOW $14 Robotech NOW $11 Spectrum Holobyte AD&D Monstr Manual NOW $20 Freshold & Hidden Glans NOW $13 GURPS Warehouse 23 NOW $15 Rune Ouest 4th Ed NOW $19 Release Date: 05/97 CD $45 AD&D Players Handbk NOW $20 Immortal Eyes 1 NOW $13 Heavy Gear NOW $25 Rune Ouest Deluxe Book NOW $19 AD&D Skills & Powers NOW $17 Immortal Eyes 2 NOW $13 Hidden Invasion NOW $17 Ru s t Standard Ed NOW $12 'SHIVERS II' Harvest of Souls. This time you find AD&D Spells & Magic NOW $19 Immortal Eyes 3 NOW $13 in Nomine NOW $25 Senzar NOW $21 yourself stuck in Cyclone, the most bizarre town AD&D Player Pack NOW $16 Isle of the Mighty NOW S19 Indiana Jones NOW $25 Shadowrun 2nd Ed NOW $20 south of the 48th parallel. You try not to worry to AD&D World Bidr Gde NOW $17 Kithbook. Sluagh NOW $10 MERP NOW $17 Skyteams Jorune ROW $17 much about that feeling of paranoia, but somebody AD&D Birthnght Coon NOW $25 Kithbook Trolls NOW 511 Macross 2 NOW $11 Species NOW $21 actually is stalking you AD&D Dark Sun Cpan NOW $25 Nobles Shining Host NOW $12 Mage 2nd Ed. NOW $21 Star Wars Hardcover NOW $25 Sierra AD&D Forgotten Alms NOW $25 Changeling Player Gde NOW $19 Mechwarnor NOW $13 Star Wars Revised NOW $25 Release Date: NOW CD $42 AD&D Tale of Comet NOW $25 Chill NOW $19 Millenium's End 2.0 NOW $17 Toon Deluxe NOW $16 AD&D Planescape NOW $25 Conspiracy X NOW $20 Mutation NOW $30 Torg Possibility Wars NOW $25 AD&D Ravenloft Cogn NOW $25 Cosmic Enforcers NOW $16 Nephilim NOW S18 Traveller NOW $24 \"BETRAYAL IN ANTARA' An empire over time has fallen Albedo NOW $18 Cybergeneration NOW $18 Nexus NOW $18 Underground NOW $19 pry to corruption and decay. Today a well-meaning Emperor Ars Magica 4th Ed NOW $26 Cyberpunk 2020 NOW $17 Nightspawn NOW $16Vampire 2nd Ed. NOW $24 faces a crumbling infrastructure where bribery, intrigue. Bloodshadows NOW $25 Dragonlance 5th Age NOW $21 Of Gods And Men NOW $22 Warhammer Fantasy NOW $19 nepotism. deceit and assassination run rampant. Call of Cthulhu NOW $18 GURPS Aliens NOW $14 Once Upon a Time NOW $14 Werewolf NOW $24 Sierra Cthulhu Live NOW $15 GURPS Autoduel NOW $15P aranoia Boxed Set NOW $15 Witchcrat NOW $20 Release Date: 05/97 CD $48 03 DUNGEON MUSTIK GU Castle Falk NOW $19 GURPS Compendium 2 NOW $18 Paranoia Fifth Ed. NOW $20 World Necroscope NOW $25 Dans & Dragons Champions 4th Ed. NOW $22 GURPS Rulebook NOW $20 Pendragon 4th Ed. NOW $19 Wealth NOW $24 COLLECTIBLE CARD GAMES 'ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS GUIDE REVISED' The essential manual for all the inforBattletech Booster NOW $2 Illuminati SD NOW $10 Middle Earth Wizard SD NOW $9 SimCity SD Ltd. Ed. NOW $5 mation you need to create and run thrilling Battletech Starter NOW $8 MTG 5th Ed NOW $2 Monty Python SD NOW 69 SimCity SD Unltd. Ed. NOW S8 swords and sorcery adventures is clearly laid Die Bull Run 1861 NOW $6 MTG 5th Ed NOW $7 Monty Python BP N OW $3 Star Trek Booster NOW $2 out Dixie. Gettysburg NOW $9 MTG Mirage Booster NOW $2 Netrunner Booster NOW $2 Star Trek NG BP NOW $2 TSR, Inc. Doom Trooper SD NOW $6 MTG Mirage Starter NOW $8 Netrunner Starter NOW S15 Star Trek Starter NOW $8 Release Date: NOW S16 A Richard Garfield Game Or Who Booster NOW SZ MTG Visions NOW 52 Rage BP NOW $2 Star Trek TNG SD NOW GIC Dr Who Starter NOW $8 Magic Fallen Empirs NOW $1 Rage Umbra BP NOW $2 Star Wars BP NOW Great Dalmuti NOW $5 Magic Gathering BP NOW $1 Rage Werewolf SD NOW $5 Star Wars SD NOW $7 'MAGIC THE GATHERING BOOSTER PAK' The majestic Heresy SO NOW $9 Magic Gthing Chron BPNOW $1 Rage Wyrm BP NOW $2 X-Files Booster NOW $2 civilization within boast magical traditions dating back Illuminati BP NOW $2 Middle Earth Wizard BPNOW $3 SimCity BP Lid Ed. NOW $1 X-Files Starter NOW $9 countless eons. Beneath the burning sun, what power SONY PLAYSTATION SEGA SATURN can you draw from the potent forces. Wizards of Coast Armed 06/97 $50 Fade to Black NOW $50 3-Decathaton NOW $50 Daytona USA NOW $49 Release Date: NOW $8 DRAGON FORURA Assassin 2015 NOW $52 Final Doom NOW $52 3D Baseball NOW $52 Destruction Derby 2 NOW $54 Batman Forever Arcade NOW $42 Final Fantasy 4 06/97 $72 4x4 Gears & Guts NOW $51 Die Hard Trilogy NOW $49 'DRAGON FORCE The world of Legendra has tallen Beyond the Beyond NOW $50 D4 Independence Day NOW $52 AD&D Iran & Bload NOW $46 FIFA Soccer 97 NOW $49 prey to the frightening reign of Madurk His Big Bass Wild Champ NOW $51 Kings Field 2 N OW $51 Abuse NOW $54 Golden Axe The Duel NOW $26 unquenchiable thirst for power las replaced tranquil Blades of Rage NOW $52 M echwarrior 2 NOW $49 Andrette Racing 97 NOW $48 104 Independence DayNOW $52 lity with terror and honor with treachery. Alas, the soliBogey Dead 6 NOW 550 Monster Truck Rally NOW $54 Arcades Greatest NOW $47 Incredible Hulk NOW $50 tary hope for redemption has been reduced to 8 powerBreath of Fire 3 09/97 $54 Mortal Kombat Tiosy NOW $52 Area 51 NOW $51 Legend of Oasis NOW $46 ful warlords! Bubsy 3.0 NOW $50 NASCAR Racing NOW $46 Assassin 2015 NOW $52Mechwarnor 2 NOW $49 Working Designs Castlevania Blooding NOW $42 NFL Game Day 97 NOW $50 Assault Rigs NOW $52 Mortal Kombat Tnlosy 08/97 $52 Release Date: NOW SAT $42 Command & Conquer NOW $46 Need for Speed 2 NOW $49 Battle Monsters NOW $34 NFL 97 NOW $54 Contra:Legacy of War Now $46 Pandemonium NOW $49 Battle Sport NOW $42 Need for Speed 2 NOW $54 Crash Bandicoot SOUL EDGE' This is a tale of souls and NOW $52 Panzer General NOW $32 Battlestations NOW $46 08/97 $52 Resident Evil swords, transcending the world and all its Crusader No Remorse NOW $49 Rebel Assault 2 NOW $49 Blades of Rage NOW S52 Shining Wisdom NOW $52 Crypt Killer w/Gun NOW $69 R idge Racer Revolutn NOW $44 Bubsy 3-D NOW $50 Sonic X-treme 10/97 history. Choose from 10 unique characters $46 Dark Forces NOW $49 Soul Edge NOW $45 Bug Too! NOW $42 Soviet Strike NOW with their owns weapons and fighting style, $49 Destruction Derby 2 NOW $52 Tekken 2 NOW 544 Castlevania Bloodtog NOW $42 Space Jam NOW $42 in amazing 3D, spectacular graphics. Namco Die Hard Trilogy NOW $50 Toh Shin Den 2 NOW $46 Command & Conquer NOW $52 Syndicate Wars NOW $46 Release Date: NOW PSX $45 Dragon Heart NOW $42 Twisted Metal 2 NOW $50 Contra Legacy of War NOW $46 Ultimate Mort Komb 3 NOW $54 Duke Nukem 3D 05/97 $54 Wipeout 2 NOW $50 Crusader: No Remorse NOW $49 Wipeout 2 NOW $50 Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. MONEY ORDERS UNDER $200 SAME AS CASH. COD $8 Price, availability, offer subject to change at any time. Release schedules Over Mail Tot al To U.S. Mail U.S. Ms Canada The World and shipping times are approximate, not guaranteed, and subject to change at any time. Hardware orders may require additional shipping and handling charges Detectives replaced with 7.10 Days 2.3 Das same product. All sales final. Call for details. Shipping and handling charges calculated on a per order, per shipment, and perifem basis. The \"per order charge is charged once per order I Por Onder 2 Day 4-7 DIZA $1.00 $2.00 $2.00 $200 olaced and the per item\" charge is charged once for each item ordered and the \"per shipment charge is charged once for each shipment we make to you. Each United States order will put soment $1.25 $1.00 $3.00 57.00 $2.00 $2.00 include a 12-month subscription to Computer Games Strategy Plus Magazine, for which $10.00 of the order cost will be allocated. Per item $ 25 $1 m $1.00 $2.00 $200 $6.00 CIRCIE READER SERVICE #068 CGW97P3 RA $2.00 "


"At last count, it takes about 217 people to design, produce and market la killer game. However, it still only takes one conference. Register for the Computer Game Developers' Conference, April 25-30, 1997, Silicon Valley Cranking out state-of-the-art games is becoming more complicated every day. Luckily, choosing the best place to gather inspiration, skills and tools is still a no-brainer. Whether your company has 200 people, or two people doing the work of 200, our conference could be your launching pad to creating the next mega-game. In our 200 beefed-up conference classes and tutorials, you'll learn from the masters how to design for sensational game play. Unleash blazing 3-D graphics. Add multi-player functionality. Produce screaming audio. Squeeze the most out of the Internet. Even conquer the cutthroat business of games in our new programs on project management and marketing & distribution. At every turn, you'll exchange tips and techniques with hotshot producers, programmers, product managers, writers, sound designers, artists and musicians who are pushing the outer limits of game technology. WWW.cgdc.com this thing sells out, so register today by phone at 1.800.441.8826, by e-mail at cgdc@mfi.com, or by visiting our web site. You'll see, the more intense your games get, the more intense our conference gets. COMPUT=R G.ME DEVELOPERS CONFERENCE where killer games are born CIRCLE READER SERVICE #102 "


"computer World FREE PRODUCT INFORMATION 100 IT'S AS EASY AS 1,2,3 1. Fill in your name and address and check off 2. Circle the numbers on the card that correspond to 3. The literature will be mailed to you from your answers to the seven research questions the ads or articles you'd like more information about the advertiser free of charge. CIRCLE FOR FREE INFORMATION Void after August 31, 1997 001 002 003 004 005 006 007 008 009 010 011 012 013 014 015 016 017 018 019 020 021 022 023 024 025 026 027 028 029 030 031 032 033 034 035 036 037 038 039 040 041 042 043 044 045 046 047 048 049 050 051 052 053 054 055 056 057 058 059 060 061 062 063 064 065 066 067 068 069 070 071 072 073 074 075 076 077 078 079 080 081 082 083 084 085 086 087 088 089 090 091 092 093 094 095 096 097 098 099 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155 156 157 158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 199 200 205 206 207 208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 221 222 223 224 225 226 227 228 229 230 231 232 233 234 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 243 244 245 246 247 248 249 250 251 252 253 254 255 256 257 258 259 260 261 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 272 273 274 275 276 277 278 279 280 281 282 283 284 285 286 287 288 289 290 291 292 293 294 295 296 297 298 299 300 301 302 303 304 305 306 307 308 309 310 311 312 313 314 315 316 317 318 319 320 321 322 323 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 331 332 333 334 335 336 337 338 339 340 341 342 343 344 345 346 347 348 349 350 351 352 353 354 355 356 357 358 359 360 361 362 363 364 365 366 367 368 369 370 371 372 373 374 375 376 377 378 379 380 381 382 383 384 385 386 387 388 389 390 391 392 393 394 395 396 397 398 399 400 1. What is the highest level of education that 5. How often do you usually buy computer games? Name CGW 5/97-4 you completed? (Check one only) (Check one only) 01. Some high school or less 01. Once a week 02. Graduated High School 02. Once every two to three weeks 03. Some College of Technical school 03. Once a month Title Telephone 04. Graduated College 04. Once every two to three months 05. Post Graduate school 05. Once every four to six months 06. Once a year UTILITIILILIT 2. Computer currently owned is: (Check all that apply) 6. Where are you most likely to purchase games? Company Name 01. IBM compatible (Intel standard) (Check all that apply) 02. Macintosh 01. Independent computer store 04. Computer store chain UNTII 03. Amiga 02. Consumer electronic store 05 Direct from vendor 04. Dedicated game machine 03. Mass merchandising store 06. Mail order Address 05. None 7. What is your (and others in household) favorite type 3. Il Intel, what level? (Check one only) of game? (Check one in each column) UTILI 01. Power PC Yourself Other 1 Other 2 01. Strategy 02. State City Zip Pentium (586) 03. 486 02. War/Military 04. 386 03. Role Playing 05. 286 04. Brain Teasers 05. Card 4. Please send me a one-year (12.Issue) subscription to Computer Gaming World for $27.94 4. Do you own (or plan to buy in next 6 months) 06. Sport a CD-ROM? (Check one only) (U.S. price): all other countries add $16.00 for additional postage. 07. Action Arcade 01. Own 08. Educational 02. Plan to buy (6 months) ng Adventure In a Hurry? Fax This Card To: 609-829-0692 "


"FOR QUICKER RESPONSE FAX TO (609) 829-0692 NO POSTAGE NECESSARY IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES Free Product Information BUSINESS REPLY MAIL FIRST-CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO. 433 RIVERTON, NJ POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY ADDRESSEE Compute PO BOX 10126 RIVERTON, NJ 08076-8626 IIIllluLlLull "


"ADVERTISER INDEX -FREE .S.# COMPANY 7th Level, Inc. 7th Level, Inc. Access Software, Inc. Accolade Accolade ACT Laboratory Ltd. ACT Laboratory Ltd. Activision Activision Activision Activision 9 215 SES. 141 84-85 Activision Activision Activision 145 Activision 92-93 114 146 Activision 230 wa 266 10-11 FREE PRODUCT PAGE R.S.# COMPANY PRODUCT PAGE G-Nome 122 Interplay Productions, Inc. Redneck Rampage 54-55 Helicops ISO-181 164 Live Entertainment The Arrival CD ROM Adventure 218 Links LS 42 Looking Glass Technologies British Open Golf 186 Hard Ball 6 LucasArts Entertainment Co. Outlaws 138-139 Jack Nicklaus Lucaslrts Entertainment Co. X-Wing vs. Tie Fighter 156-157 Mite Matrox Graphics, Inc. Mystique Power Ranp MGI Software Corporation Photo Editing Software Dark Reign 88-89 MGM/UA Interactive MCMUA Interactive Heavy Gear 82-83 Micron Electronics, Inc. Millennia 104-105 lexen ll MicroProse Master of Orion II Interstate 76 8-9 MicroProse Star Trek Generations Interstate 76 Sweepstakes Microsoft Inside Moves Blood Omen: Legacy of Kain 94-95 Mindscape Aaron vs. Ruth Netstorn 90-91 Mindscape Creatures 134-135 Screamin' Demons Mindscape NCAA Final Four 97 147 Twinsen's Odyssey 196 Mojave Secrets of the Luxor 13 Zork-Grand Inquisitor 86-87 260 NEC Power VR 114-115 Mail Order Products 244 New World Computing Heroes Il Expansion 32-33 PhotoDeluxe 208-209 ORICIN Systems, Inc. Ultima Online The Blackhawk Piranha Interactive Publishing SYN-L'actor A Fork in the Tale Playmates Interactive Entertainment Duckman PC & TV Playmates Interactive Entertainment MDK 26-27 History of the World Playmates Interactive Entertainment Meat Puppet 100-101 iter Group Quantex MMX System 198 Extreme Assult 217,219 R&C Games Used Came Software 244 Moto Racer 35-37 SegaSoft Emperor of the Fading Sun 25 \"The Last Express Sega Entertainment Sega Rally Warlords 179 Sierra On-Line 3D Ultra Mini Golf Computer Game Developers' Conference 240 Sierra On-Line Shivers II Family Ad Sir-Tech www.cdrug.com/chips.html 237.239 SouthPeak Interactive Video Reality Family Tree Suite Spacetec IMC Corporation Spaccorb Sound Blaster AWE64 227,229,231 Strategic Simulations, Inc. Imperialism Dragon Lore II 238 Strategic Simulations, Inc. SSI Add-Ons Monster Sound Talonsoft Bull Run Stealth 3D 2000 & 3000 Accelerators Talonsoft Napolcon in Russia Arena THQ Pax Imperia Conquest Earth 164-165 161 ThunderSeat Technologies ThunderSeat Tomb Raider 23 Toshiba Infinia Line 204-205 Pro Pinball UBI Soft, Inc. Pod 142-143 Online Gaming United CD-ROM Mail Order Products Falcon MACHV V Communications System Commander K-9 Screen Saver Videolagic, Inc Graphics Hardware/3D Games Family PC Multimedia Systems 117-120 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Command & Conquer Red Alert Blood C2-CHIP Virgin Interactive Entertainment Command & Conquet: Red Alert Missions Disk 71 Shadow Warrior 175-177 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Command & Conquer: Win 95 172-173 MMX Pentium 200-201 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Grand Slam 59-61 Battles Of Alexander Virgin Interactive Entertainment Lands of Lore: Cuardians of Destiny 126-127 Intense 3D WizardWorks Group, Inc. Star Gunner Atomic Bomberman ZDNet ZD Net Briefcase Ad Dragon Dice ZDNet ZD Net University Fallout ZD Net /ZDIV The Site Forgotten Realms Archives MMX Section Realms of the Haunting 66-67 ISO 149,151 Fable www.www&p8w,,www.wwwww Activision ActSoft, Inc. Adobe Systems Inc Advanced Gravis AnyRiver Entertainment ATI Technologies Avalon Hill Cane Company Bazooka(SAS) Blue Byte Software BMG Interactive Entertainment Broderbund Broderbund CCDC CH Products Chips & Bits Corel Corporation Creative Labs Cryo Interactive Entertainment Diamond Multimedia Diamond Multimedia Earth Link Eidos Eidos empire Interactive Entertainment Engage Cames Falcon-Northwest Fujitsu Interactive Gateway 2000 GT Interactive Software GT Interactive Software Intel Corp. Interactive Magic Intergraph Computer Systems Interplay Productions, Inc. Interplay Productions, Inc. Interplay Productions, Inc. Interplay Productions, Inc. Interplay Productions, Inc. 5 55 E5 Emmm E 5.EE 160 5 . 5 188 Sea 1007 "


"R&G GAMES MOVING? PO BOX 5008 Glendale Hts, IL 60139 We Buy & Sell New & Used IBM Games Call fax or email request for prices before sending games Call 1-800-525-GAME Canada 630-930-9995 Fax 630-980-9996. Email rggames@aol.com More games in stock cal for prices. ***Used Games Quest for Glory Anthology $28 7\" Guest CD $19 Shivers CD $23 11 Hour CD $26 Silent Thunder CD 526 Angel Davoid CD $16 Silent Hunter CD American Civ War CD $29 SpaceQuest Collection CD Age of Rifles CD $29 Spycraft CD Cacsar 2 CD $22 Star Control 3 CD Civilization 2 CD 528 Strife CD Command&Conquer CD $29 Torrin's Passage CD Conquest of New WorldCD $22 Under a Kiing Moon CD Crusader No Regret CD $27 VR Soccer 96 CD Crusader No Romorse CD $20 Wages of War CD Cyberstorm CD $22 Warcraft 2 CD Diablo CD $29 Warwind CD Dig CD $22 Wing Commander 4 CD Daggerfall CD $30 Woodruff & Schnibble CD Dark Forces CD $22 Z CD Deadlock CD $25 New Games Eradicalor CD $25 Afterlife CD Exploration CD $18 Battleship CD Fit Pg Sp Baseball 96 CD $22 Deadlock CD Full Throttle CD $22 Diablo CD Gene Wars CD $15 F-22 Lightening 2 CD Grand Prix 2 CD $25 Final Doom CD Heroes Might & Magic CD $22 Heroes Might&Magic 2 CD Lighthouse CD $26 Nascar Racing 2 CD Madden 97 CD $32 NBA Live 97 CD Mechiwanior 2 CD $26 Privaloer 2 CD Mission Critical CD $18 Road Rash CD Mummy Tomb Pharoh CD $27 Steel Panthers 2 CD Myst CD $22 Timo Commando CD Normality CD $26 Tomb Raider CD Pandora's Directivo CD $29 Trophy Bass 2 CD $39 Free UPS Shipping with purchase of $75 or more Hours M-F 9am-9pm http://members.aol.com/RGGAMES/ndex.html Major Credit Card, Cashier Check, Money Order Accepted NO COD All games must have original boxes, CD's manuals (NO COPIES) in good condition, working, Scratch & virus free. Any unacceptable games will be returned at your expense $5 ups per box Prices subject to change & availability. Please write to: Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167. Include your mailing label from a recent issue or call 1-800-827-4450 for faster service. Please allow up to 60 days for change of address to take place. FACT $38.95 ACTION ON CD ROM $35.95 More 21 & Over $29.95 in Interactive $26.95 DMUS $34.95 $39.95 Dream Machine 2 $38.95 Duke Screwem $38.95 Fantascones $34.95 $36.95 Hot-Leather 2 $32.95 Latex $36.95 $23.95 Masque tble Game 538.95 $49.95 Nightwatch 3 $29.95 $36.95 Outpost 69 $36.95 Pandora's Poker Palace $29.95 $38.95 Porno Poker 534.95 Private Investigator $36.95 Private Pleasure Park 1 of 2 $36.95 Room for Rent $28.95 Sex T.V. Yol. 2 $34.95 Sex Sustel $26.95 Seymore Butts 2 $37.95 $36.95 Snakes & Ladders $26.95 $38.95 Space Sirens 2 $34.95 > News AN HON Games 3D Ultra Pinball Creepnight $29.95 Age of Rifles $34.95 AH-64 Longbow $39.95 Albion $37.95 Anvil of Dawn $34.95 More Games Toon Struck Indy Car Racing 2 Dos, Ultimate Doom Win 95, Mac $29.95 Under a Killing Moon US Navy Fighters 97 Leisure Suit Larry 1 $39.95 Wages of More Leisure Suit Larry Warcraft 2 Collection $28.95 Warcraft 2 Expansion Light House $29.95 Warcraft Battle Chess Warlords 2 Deluxe Lords of the Realm 2 $39.95_Wing Commander IV Master of Magic $26.95 21&Over Mech Warrior 2 Pentium $29.95 Bundles MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries $39.95 Deep Throot Girls 1 4 Dirty Debutantes 6 pack Megarace 2 $29.95 New Machine 6 pk Might & Magic Trilogy $26.95 Tor 2 Platinum Six Pack Monopoly $43.95 Romsoft 3 pk Mpeg Mortal Kombat 3 $29.95 Romsolfo Pk 1 or Sexy Six Pack Seymore Six Pack Nascar Racing 2 $41.95 Up & Cupimers Six Pack VCA Six Pack (Plug-if in) NBA Live 97 $39.95 21 & Over Need for Speed SE $36.95 Interactives Phantasmagoria 2 $42.95 Grcos, Club 21 Clob Eslarina Privateer 2 $41.95 Syberotica 2 Quake $38.95 Cyberxperience Diva X Ariana or Rebecca HUNDREDS OF TITLES IN STOCK CATALOGS & DEALER'S LISTINGS AVAILABLE HOURS: MON-FRI. 9-9 DUCATI WA C.O.D. Pesona EASTERN STANDARD TIME WE DONOT SELL OR BUY USED PRODUCTS CIRCLE READER SERVICE #245 $41.95 $38.95 Battleship Beavis & Butthead Virtual Stupidity C&C Red Alert Civilization 2 $38.95 $39.95 $38.95 Civilization 2 Scenarios $28.95 $36.95 Vampire's Kiss $29.95 $38.95 Virtual Director $28.95 $29.95 Vertual Golden Eye $32.95 Virtual Las Vegas, Nights 2 $29.95 $38.95 Virtual Sex 2 $36.95 $38.95 Virtual Sex Shoot $36.95 $36.95 Virtual Victor $34.95 $38.95 Virtual Valerie 2 $38.95 21 & Over Photos $29.95 Adult Gith Library $19.95 $29.95 Amateur Debutantes $19.95 $28.95 Asian Pearls 3 $21.95 $34.95 Dr. Hooter $18.95 $48.95 Elite Models 1, 2 or 3 $21.95 $38.95 Mead Pitt Mega Pixxx $19.95 MUST BE 21 TO ORDER ADULT CDS 1-800-560-6234 Fax: 908-359-0833 $39.95 Command & Conquer $38.95 Daggerfall Deadlock $36.95 Duke Nukem 3D Atomic Ed $34.95 Duke Nukem Plutonium Pack$29.95 F-22 Lightning 2 $39.95 FLEA 9 DER NOW "


"Thousands of Entertainment Titles Available www. CHECK OUT OUR HOT WEBSITE AT UNITED CD ROM OVER 10,000 TITLES IN STOCK DAILY! .com FREE SOFTWARE WITH EVERY PURCHASE! SAME DAY SHIPPING!** www.ogr.com Online Gaming Review: For all the hottest computer gaming news & best reviews, demos, previews & more, visit www.ogr.com Check it out today! FREE CALL US NOW FOR A FREE CATALOG! 1-800-864.8334 EN EK ACTURE PERFECT Enemy Nations $ ENEMY NATIONS LOST PLANET: The time is the future. The human population has increased to the point where the Earth is unable to sustain it. A new planet must be found. TOONSTRUCK: Starring Christopher Lloyd. Your boss has it in for you & you've lost all self-respect doing work even a half-witted monkey would balk at LITTLE THINGIES: Embark on a quest for coolness by helping Beavis & Butthead avoid things that suck & find things that are cool. Toonstruck 45118 Little Thingies 53131 $ Waal arloaf 4 OCE DAY Simpsons $4 Die Hard 50335 D4 51499 3 IN 1 GOLF BUNDLE Includes Picture Perfect Golf Harbour Town Golf Links, Picture Perfect Golf The Coeur d'Alene & o video entitled 10 Fundamentals of the Modern Golf Swing SIMPSON'S CARTOON STUDIO: Create your very own Simpsons extravaganzo choosing from over 35 backgrounds, 250 props, 50 special effects & hundreds of sounds & voices. DIE HARD TRILOGY: Three exciting games on one action packed CD: Die Hard, Die Hard 2-Die Harder & Die Hard With A Vengeance. ID4: Make your way through fully-rendered 3D environments in this flight light quest to destroy the aliens' mothership, by planting a virus in its computer system PICTURE PERFECT GOLF SUGAR LOAF Experience the thrill of playing the world's finest courses. Features thousands of real photographs. The most realistic golfing experience available. RA HAR Z 54651 $24 54397 $15 A MOK o are the Scorcher SCORCHER: Screaming through a white knuckled world of shodows & danger, you must pit your skills against a pack of high-speed rivals where ultimately, only one will survive AMOK: With the best graphics, fastest gameplay & most diverse replayability in its genre this 3D shooter puts you in control of a hi tech battle mech SPQR: As the apprentice of a gifted inventor, you find yourself in the midst of a tangled web of deceit & intrigue as you attempt to uncover the plot to destroy Rome. AREA 51: As a soldier in the elite S.TAAR. forces, you must penetrate alien forces at Area 51 & eliminate the threat of the deadly alien infection that has spread through the base. Scorcher SA Amok SA 51305 51304 SPOR SA Area 51 WAS $44 Z 23 54532 ONLY NECRODOME: In the future racing has become a deadly blood sport where staying alive is the only prizel Drive an incredibly MINDSCAPE powerful amored vehicle bristling with hightech weaponry. STAR GENERAL: You are in control of a multiplanetory force to take back the galaxy from six steadily encroaching races. The fate of hundreds of worlds is in your hands STEEL PANTHERS II MODERN BATTLES: Get ready to rumble. Gome play is fun, easy & exciting. Explosive SVGA graphics & intense animation help you feel the destruction DEFINITIVE WARGAMES II: An entire collection of wargame classics in 1 box 15 top hits from 5 different publishers including the titles Harpoon ll, Street Panthers, Genghis Kahn II & mn mr. Necrodome $ Steel Panthers $ 1 50441 50450 Star General$ 41 Wargames $33 50452 53200 PO FACA 3 Titles 51974 NOW $ SEBAS TECA SELA Daytona 49919 Baseball 49917 Baseball $4 WhO82 1 ASEBAST DAYTONA USA: This wild high speed stock car racing game allows you to choose from four dynamic viewpoints on the fly to get a true racing perspective. WORLD SERIES BASEBALL: Packed with updated stats, amazing game play, real teams & real players. Play a full season & World Series All Star Game or practice your swing in the Home Run Derby BUG: The gnat-brained action hero with a litle talent, a lot of style & a huge ego has got to save his insect friends before they're eaten for lunch Bug VIRTUAL SNOWBOARDING by Multimedia Productions For those interested in the rapidly growing sport of snowboarding With Quicktime VR on snowboarding RUS 53918 49915 USA DIES OS Soetartrated $ 12 Sports Ilustrated OUTAOUE BASEBALL OF While supplies lost. Shipping charges opply to free offers. **Orders received as late os 9:30 pm (CST) for 2nd day oir. Call for other deadline limes. Special offers, item availability and prices may vary according to format and are subject to change without notice. All prices in US dollars. Not responsible for inadvertent S. Au MAJOR CREDIT VISA ...PUCOVER CODE W05 CARDS ACCEPTED Business Hours: Mon-Fri 8am-10pm; Sat 8am-5pm; Sun 12pm-5pm. Mail Orders to: 800 United CD ROM Drive, Urbana, IL 61802 CONTACT US! CompuServe: 76043,1605 http://www.unitedcdrom.com America On-line: UNITEDCD Fax back 1-217-352-8123 BBS 1-217-352-9654 Fax orders 1-217-337-8531 SI BASEBALL '97 by Microleague With over 10,000 stats per player, including hitting, fielding & running, it really puts you in the game. 44956 $33 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #040 "


"HALL OF FAME elcome to the Cooperstown of Computer Games. Here you'll find, raised upon pedestals, the games that broke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for untold hours. INDUCTION CEREMONY Wing COMMANDER Master of Magic Wing Commander III MicroProse, 1994 Origin, 1994 hen SimTex followed up the Hall of hris Roberts was the first designer to Fame hit, MASTER OF ORION, with a pull off the \"interactive movie\" con 4X (explore, expand, exploit, and cept with Wing COMMANDER III. With exterminate) game set in a fantasy previously unmatched cinematics environment, we were skeptical. We pictured a wrapped around a groundbreaking 3D space rehash of SSG's brilliant WARLORDS, but when we played MASTER OF sim, Origin managed to delicately balance gameplay and story. MAGIC, what we experienced was a mixture of Sio METER'S CIVILIZATION, MAGIC: With a cadre of familiar actors including Mark Hamill (Star Wars), Malcom THE GATHERING, and MOO, with a bit of a wargaming and role playing thrown in. McDowell (Star Trek: Generations), and Ginger Lynn Allen (On Golden The map, exploration, and city construction sequences functioned like Civ's, Blonde), Wing Ill's video sequences actually ranked up there with the best so experienced gamers could jump right in. Creating a sorcerer was gratify B.movie sci-fi. Sure, the Kilrathi suits looked a bit too cuddly, like Maine ing, and the development of the sorcerer's magical abilities was far more sat Coon Cats who'd had one can too many of Beef & Liver, but overall the isfying than most level advancement schemes in real role-playing games. movie sequences did a great job of pulling you into the story and giving you Using and researching differing strands of magical studies made the game the feeling that you had a vested interest in winning the Kilrathi war. very replayable, as sorcerers built their spellbooks instead of using the card And unlike previous interactive movies, the gameplay didn't suffer in the decks found in Magic: THE GATHERING. Plus, the research trees underlying the name of art.\" WING III's interactive space combat segments were different schools of magic created enough interesting trade-offs that players unmatched-two years later there was still little room for improvement in felt their decisions really changed the way the game played. WING IV. Fast, 3D space combat; good pilot Al; and crisp hi-res graphics Tactical combat was clean, efficient, and colorful-with enough maneuverability made for some very intense missions. But the real key was the association to satisfy most wargamers. Both the art used for tactical combat units and the of your performance in space combat with what was happening back on special effects for the spells were visually at the forefront, countering the slight your ship-losing a wingman could have a significant effect on the storyline. ly dated look of the strategic map and limited animation in some screens. WING COMMANDER III still holds its own against competing titles more than Although MASTER OF MAGIC's original release regularly crashed, it was promptly two years later-a testament to its top-notch production values. patched and became a masterpiece of play balance, discovery, replayability, Modern Inductees and gaming challenge ALONE IN THE DARK MASTER OF ORION (I-Motion, 1992) (MicroProse, 1993) Inductees Prior to 1989 BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR RAILROAD TYCOON (Dynamix, 1993) (MicroProse, 1990) BATTLE CHESS (Interplay Productions, 1988) DAY OF THE TENTACLE RED BARON CHESSMASTER (The Software Toolworks, 1986) (LucasArts, 1993) (Dynamix, 1990) DUNGEON MASTER (FTL SOFTWARE, 1987) DOOM Sid Meier's CIVILIZATION EARL WEAVER BASEBALL (Electronic Arts, 1986) (id Software, 1993) (MicroProse, 1991) EMPIRE (Interstel, 1978) FALCON 3.0 THEIR FINEST HOUR F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER (MicroProse, 1988) (Spectrum HoloByte, 1991) (LucasArts, 1989) GETTYSBURG: THE TURNING POINT (SSI, 1986) FRONT PAGE SPORTS FOOTBALL PRO THE SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND KAMPFGRUPPE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) (Dynamix, 1993) (LucasArts, 1990) MECH BRIGADE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) GUNSHIP TIE FIGHTER MIGHT & MAGIC (New World Computing, 1986) (MicroProse, 1989) (LucasArts, 1994) M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) HARPOON ULTIMA VI PIRATES (MicroProse, 1987) (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) (Origin Systems, 1990) SIM CITY (Maxis, 1987) KING'S QUEST V ULTIMA UNDERWORLD STARFLIGHT (Electronic Arts, 1986) (Sierra On-Line, 1990) (Origin Systems, 1992) THE BARD'S TALE (Electronic Arts, 1985) LEMMINGS WING COMMANDER I & II ULTIMA III (Origin Systems, 1983) (Psygnosis, 1991) (Origin Systems, 1990-91) ULTIMA IV (Origin Systems, 1985) LINKS 386 PRO WOLFENSTEIN 3-D WAR IN RUSSIA (Strategic Simulations, 1984) (Access Software, 1992) (id Software, 1992) WASTELAND (Interplay Productions, 1986) M-1 TANK PLATOON X-COM WIZARDRY (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) (MicroProse, 1989) (MicroProse, 1994) ZORK (Infocom, 1981) CGW MAY 1997 "


"PATCHES omputer game programs have grown so massive and the number of hardware configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities and glitches are frustratingly common. Software fixes, or \"patches,\" for buggy programs have become I a necessary evil until we reach the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs. New patches are in red. 1830 V1.4: Your rail empire will build more smoothly with enhanced Al (plus a truly \"easy\" option). The lesser memory requirements allow would-be Vanderbilts to run the program with a mere 4MB of RAM. Several new tog. gles enhance gameplay. Links LS V 1.30: Tee off without worrying about the ball flight bug, sound script bug, or match play bug. Use only if you have V 1.0-this patch is not for the European version! Total Mayhem Patch: Improved walking in groups, revised map layouts, and a new SETTINGS.EXE file make for more mayhem, less frustration. Check for new patches on the demo disc. Wages of War 1.28: Several minor fixes for New World's mercenary strategy game Lord of the Realms 2: Milord, with this patched sword, you may slay the Internet Explorer scourge, without reinstalling yon Microsoft application. Age of Rifles V1.3: Commanders will find campaigning much facilitated by the variety of command control tweaks, scenario enhancements, and casualty rate adjustments, among other fixes. Be sure to reconnoiter the exhaustive READ.ME file. MechWarrior 2 For Mac: Mac \"Mech-meisters now enjoy support for 603e and 604e processors and additional joysticks ZDNet War Wind V1.2: Multiplayer strug. gles for Yavaun are greatly enhanced by this upgrade, which works with both LAN and Internet. This patch has been tested for KALI compatibility as well. Make sure that you have DirectX 3.0 properly installed, and that all players are running the same version of WAR WIND. Also, saved games from earlier versions of WAR WIND will not work with V1.2 Age of Sail V1.02: A host of improvements for Talonsoft's real-time wargame. Installing this patch should not overwrite your saved games. MOO II V 1.2: Just when you thought Antares was safe to conquer, intelligent aliens arrive bearing this patch, which promises many fixes. Patches can usually be downloaded from online networks (such as CompuServe and ZDNet), from CGW's Web site (www. computergaming.com), or from the individual software publisher's Web site (see listing below). Battleship V1.1: Hasbro's ship finally sails as it should have, with many of the multiplayer and timing issues solved by this patch. Wooden Ships & Iron Men V1.02: Sailing into battle with 8MB RAM is now a breeze. NBA Full Court: Nets are animated on made shots, and the 24-second shot clock now resets correctly after all defensive fouls and illegal defenses. Alley oop passes occur less frequently, and the Al is slightly improved. Blood & Magic V1.01: As Aleric the Avenger on Level 3, you should no longer have a problem when the Brigand is attacked after the game is saved. Modem and Direct Link per formance is improved as well. Over the Reich V1.01: Gameplay hits a higher ceiling, with several adjust ments to bomber defensive fire, frequency of reinforcements, angle of interceptions, high-G maneuvering, and banking, Daggerfall V1.06.200: Installing a patch for Bethesda's acclaimed, but buggy, RPG is an adventure in itself, but this patch does correct many of the game's flaws. Phantasmagoria 2: If you insist on finishing the game--and avoiding video lockups and other crashes-you'll need this patch. Be warned, however: this fix is only for DOS versions Harpoon Classic 97 V1.62c: From clearer Caribbean-blue water to database additions, this patch fights hard to make a complex game more accessible. Risk: Finally, you can play the game hotseat! Publisher Web Sites Many patches are available from the publishers at the following sites: Accolade: www.accolade.com Activision: wwwactivision.com Apogee/3d Realms: www.apogee1.com Avalon Hill: www.avalonhill.com Bethesda: www.bethsoft.com Blizzard: www.blizzard.com Bullfrog: www.ea.com/bullfrog.html Domark: www.domark.com EA: www.ea.com EA Sports: www.easports.com Epic MegaGames: www.epicgames.com id Software: www.idsoftware.com Interactive Magic: www.imagicgames.com Interplay: www.interplay.com LucasArts: www.lucasarts.com MicroProse/Spectrum HoloByte: www.microprose.com Microsoft: www.microsoft.com New World Computing: www.nwcomputing.com Ocean: www.ef2000.com Origin: www.ea.com/origin Papyrus: www.sierra.com/papyrus Panasonic Interactive Media: www.panasonic.com/cool Philips: www.aimla.com/games Sierra On-Line: www.sierra.com Spectrum HoloByte: www.microprose.com SSI: www.ssionline.com Take 2: www.takeagames.com/main.html Talonsoft: www.talonsoft.com Virgin: www.vie.com Star General V1.01: Patches for both DOS and Win 95 are out, featuring a number of multiplayer and Al issues. Heroes of Might & Magic II: (DOS and Windows versions) This pow. erful patch spell adds a random map generator in the World Editor, fixes numerous small bugs, and clears up anomalies from the documentation. Steel Panthers V1.2: A compilation of updates from 1.1 to 1.19, featuring many clarifications, modifications and bug fixes for SSI's popular modern Warfare game. Hind Win 95 Patch: New WSO operation modes, an audible under carriage, optional wimp mode land ing cushion, better keyboard controls, and provision for two player R-60 flights are but a few of the welcome improvements to this popular sim. Tomb Raider: The 3DTX support patch is now final, and shows off Lara Croft's attributes in stunning high-resolution, complete with mip-mapping and more hotkeys MAY 1997 CGW "


"THE COMPUTER GAMING POLL A MONTHLY SURVEY OF CGW SUBSCRIBERS each month, 2,000 CGW subscribers are selected at random to rate 100 computer games. The results of that poll are combined with the results of previous months to yield a cumulative average for the best plays in gaming. If you receive a ballot, please return it with your ratings so that other gamers and game publishers can benefit from your experience. GAME 1 3 TOP ACTION GAMES GAME COMPANY Tomb Raider Eidos Duke Nukem 3D Apogee/3D Realms Crusader: No Remorse EA/Origin The Need For Speed SE EA Quake id Software Crusader: No Regret EA/Origin The Need For Speed EA Descent II Interplay Syndicate Wars Bullfrog Magic Carpet 2 Bullfrog TOP ADVENTURE GAMES COMPANY Pandora Directive Access Gabriel Knight 2 Sierra Leisure Suit Larry 7 Sierra The Neverhood DreamWorks Phantasmagoria 2 Sierra Spycraft Activision Lighthouse Sierra Full Throttle LucasArts Titanic GTE Entertainment Under A Killing Moon Access SCORE 8.54 8.53 8.25 8.11 8.07 7.99 7.62 7.35 7.23 7.22 5 6 7 8 9 10 SCORE 8.36 8.36 8.12 8.11 7.81 7.73 7.63 7.54 7.41 7.31 6 9 10 2 3 TOP CLASSIC/PUZZLE GAMES GAME COMPANY You Don't Know Jack Berkeley Systems Incredible Toons Sierra Incredible Machine 2 Sierra Virgin/Westwood Risk Hasbro Baku Baku Sega Battleship Hasbro Mind Grind Microforum SCORE 8.14 7.25 7.10 6.86 6.55 6.15 l TOP SIMULATION/SPACE COMBAT GAMES GAME COMPANY SCORE Wing Commander IV EA/Origin 8.52 MechWarrior 2 Activision 8.29 AH-64 Longbow EA/Origin 8.15 EF2000 Ocean 7.95 U.S. Marine Fighters EA 7.92 Silent Hunter SSI 7.91 Privateer 2 EA/Origin 7.90 Advanced Tactical Fighters EA 7.69 F-22 Lightning Novalogic 7.66 10 U.S. Navy Fighters 7.63 6.14 6.00 9 EA WARCRAFT 2 TOP SPORTS GAMES GAME COMPANY Links LS Access Nascar 2 Sierra NHL '97 EA Sports Grand Prix 2 MicroProse FPS Football Pro '97 Sierra Nascar Racing Sierra FPS Football Pro '96 Sierra Triple Play '97 EA Sports NBA Live '96 EA Sports NHL Hockey '96 EA Sports SCORE 8.79 8.75 8.48 8.31 7.73 7.73 7.68 7.66 7.63 7.61 TOP STRATEGY GAMES GAME SIASI COMPANY WarCraft II Expansion Disk Blizzard WarCraft 11 Blizzard Red Alert Virgin/Westwood Heroes 11 New World Computing Civilization II MicroProse C&C: Covert Operations Virgin/Westwood Command & Conquer Virgin/Westwood Heroes Of Might & Magic New World Computing Jagged Alliance: Deadly Games Sir-Tech Lords Of The Realm II Sierra SCORE 9.05 8.92 8.91 8.81 8.81 8.48 8.41 7.98 7.94 7 9 10 10 7.85 GAME SSI 2 TOP ROLE-PLAYING GAMES GAME COMPANY Diablo Blizzard Daggerfall Bethesda Anvil Of Dawn New World Computing Stonekeep Interplay Albion Blue Byte SCORE 8.91 7.65 7.31 6.94 6.28    covoaWN TOP WARGAMES COMPANY Steel Panthers Campaign Disk Steel Panthers SSI Panzer General SSI Battleground: Shiloh TalonSoft Battleground: Antietam TalonSoft Battleground: Waterloo TalonSoft Robert E. Lee: Civil War General Sierra Battleground: Gettysburg TalonSoft Age Of Sail TalonSoft Harpoon Classic 97 Interactive Magic SCORE 8.71 8.50 8.31 8.13 8.11 7.76 7.53 7.47 7.04 7.04   ILI 9 10 CGW MAY 1997 "


"TOP 100 GAMES 1 * 1 2 3 51 52 * 0 5 55 56 57 58 * 7 8 * 9 10 11 * 12 13 14 60 61 62 63 1585552999358135598 16 * 17 65 66 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 19 o Sierra 21 22 23 * 24 25 26 27 GAME COMPANY WarCraft II Expansion Disk Blizzard WarCraft II Blizzard Red Alert Virgin/Westwood Diablo Blizzard Heroes II New World Computing Civilization 11 MicroProse Links LS Access Nascar 2 Sierra Steel Panthers Campaign Disk Tomb Raider Eidos Duke Nukem 3D Apogee/3D Realms Wing Commander IV EA/Origin Steel Panthers SSI NHL '97 EA Sports C&C: Covert Operations Virgin/Westwood Command & Conquer Virgin/Westwood Pandora Directive Access Gabriel Knight 2 Sierra Panzer General SSI Grand Prix 2 MicroProse MechWarrior 2 Activision Crusader: No Remorse EA/Origin AH-64 Longbow EA/Origin You Don't Know Jack Berkeley Systems Battleground: Shiloh TalonSoft Leisure Suit Larry 7 Sierra The Neverhood DreamWorks Battleground: Antietam TalonSoft The Need For Speed SE EA Quake id Software Crusader: No Regret EA/Origin Heroes of Might & Magic New World Computing EF2000 Ocean Jagged Alliance: Deadly Games Sir-Tech U.S. Marine Fighters Silent Hunter Privateer 2 EA/Origin Lords Of The Realm II Sierra Phantasmagoria 2 Sierra Battleground: Waterloo TalonSoft WarCraft Blizzard Nascar Racing Sierra FPS Football Pro '97 Sierra Spycraft Activision Warlords II Deluxe SSG Jagged Alliance Sir-Tech Advanced Tactical Fighters FPS Football Pro '96 Sierra Triple Play '97 EA Sports F-22 Lightning NovaLogic TYPE SCORE ST 9.05 ST 8.92 ST 8.91 RP 8.91 ST 8.81 ST 8.81 SP 8.79 SP 8.75 WG 8.71 AC 8.54 AC 8.53 8.52 WG 8.50 SP 8.48 ST 8.48 ST 8.41 8.41 AD 8.36 ADR36 WG 8.31 SP 8.31 SI 8.29 AC 8.25 8.15 8.14 8.13 AD 8.12 AD 8.11 WG 8.11 AC 8.11 AC 8.07 8.07 AC 7.99 ST 7.98 SI 7.95 ST 7.94 7.92 SI 7.91 SI 7.90 ST 7.85 AD 7.81 WG 7.76 ST 7.74 SP 7.73 SP 7.73 AD 7.73 ST 7.72 ST 7.72 SI 7.69 7.69 SP 7.68 SP 7.66 SI 7.66 74 75 76 77 GAME COMPANY Daggerfall Bethesda NBA Live '96 EA Sports Lighthouse Sierra U.S. Navy Fighters EA The Need For Speed EA NHL Hockey '96 EA Sports Fantasy General Sierra Full Throttle LucasArts NBA Live '95 EA Sports Robert E. Lee: Civil War General Sierra PGA Tour Golf 486 EA Sports CivNet MicroProse Battleground: Gettysburg TalonSoft Jetfighter III Mission Studios FIFA '97 EA Sports Titanic Titanic GTE Entertainment Tony LaRussa 3 '96 Stormfront Studios FPS Football '95 Sierra Descent II Interplay MissionForce Cyberstorm Sim City CD-ROM Maxis Under A Killing Moon Access Anvil Of Dawn New World Computing Zork Nemesis Activision Incredible Toons Sierra Virtual Pool Interplay Syndicate Wars Magic Carpet 2 Bullfrog Hexen id/raven Madden '97 EA Sports Phantasmagoria Sierra NHL Powerplay Hind Interactive Magic Terra Nova: Strike Force Centauri Looking Glass Virtua Squad Sega Relentless Star Control 3 Accolade Legends Of Kyrandia 3 Virgin/Westwood Incredible Machine 2 Sierra System Shock EA/Origin Flight Unlimited Looking Glass Hyper 3D Pinball Virgin Age Of Sail TalonSoft Star Trek: TNG, Final Unity Spectrum Holobyte Harpoon Classic 97 Interactive Magic The Dig LucasArts Road Rash EA Caesar 11 Sierra Sierra Hardball 5 Accolade Virtua Fighter PC Sega TYPE SCORE RP 7.65 SP 7.63 AD 7.63 7.63 AC 7.62 SP 7.61 ST 7.56 AD 7.54 SP 7.54 WG 7.53 SP 7.51 ST 7.49 WG 7.47 SI 7.44 SP 7.43 AD 7.41 SP 7.37 7.36 AC 7.35 7.35 ST 7.34 ST 7.32 AD 7.31 RP 7.31 AD 7.28 CP 7.25 SP7.24 7.23 AC 7.22 AC 7.21 SP 7.21 AD 7.20 SP7.20 SI 7.19 AC 7.17 AC 7.13 AD 7.12 AD 7.10 AD 7.10 CP 7.10 AC 7.09 SI 7.09 AC 7.06 WG 7.04 AD 7.04 WG 7.04 AD 7.01 AC 6.99 ST 6.98 SP 6.97 AC 6.96 Bullfrog 78 Magic ba 79 30 31 32 81 Virgin 33 83 EA 84 85 86 87 SSI EA 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 90 92 93 45 EA 47 48 96 97 98 99 100 49 Games on unnumbered lines are tied with game on line above. * = Top game of type. Red = New Game, AD = Adventure, RP = Role-Playing, SI = Simulation/Space Combat, ST = Strategy, WG = Wargame, AC = Action, SP = Sports, CP = Classic/Puzzle. Games are retired after two years and become eligible for the Hall of Fame. MAY 1997 CGW "


"MARTIN CIRULIS what hwor, IME What's The man na Deal With.. Psycho Geeks? castles seems to manifest itself in three variations on the theme: Crashers, Cheats, and Killers. The Crasher looks to be some kind of pathetic descendant of the Evil Hacker, and for some reason gels great pleasure in joining online f you aren't interested in playing online games, then you can skip this column-it will be another episode of \"Martin of Omaha's Wild Netscape.\" Today I'll be stalking and tagging the new pest that currently grips the online world: the dreaded Psycho-Geek. Yes folks, this virulent and malefic mutation of the NetWit strain (the Net brings great power with no responsibility) has found a large and fertile hunting ground in the explosion of Web-based multiplayer gaming arenas. And, while tormenting the socially inept is always good for a laugh in my book, there is a slightly more serious aspect to these bitter loners of the online world. Now, I am not talking about the annoying 12-year-olds who keep using Caps Lock in the chat rooms, or the insecure guy who ties up C&C by sending inane gloats every time he kills a rifleman. No, these two types are titans of maturity and consideration when compared to the newest member of the Internet's Dysfunctional Freak Show: the Game Wrecker. These are wretches so pathetic that winning-or even sheer obnoxiousness-doesn't quite deliver that shred of importance they seem to need. They can only have fun by making sure nobody else can. This virtual version of kicking over sand IL A few pathetic freaks are turning online gaming into a serial-killer pre-school.\" the little freaks who can't just wreck one game at a time, they actually devote their energy to bringing down entire servers at once, so that dozens of us can appreciate their talents. Then there is the Cheater. The online gaming Cheater isn't much different from his board gaming counterpart, but since most of the mechanics of a computer game are not apparent, the use of cheating hacks in the online arena seems both more myste rious and immoral. They would be rel atively easy to ignore, except for the fact that designers of online games seem to expend a disproportionate amount of time countering them, and creating all sorts of silliness like the annoying watchdog system in VGAPLANETS OF STARS!, or the silly lack of a \"save dungeon\" ability in multiplayer DIABLO. The designer of Monopoly didn't waste his effort try. ing to make sure there was no way the banker could skim money from the tray; he just assumed you would notice sooner or later and reach across the board to smack your sibling upside the head. There has to be an analogous act for the online ser vices to perform as well. The final (and most psychological ly disturbing) Psycho-Geek is the Killer. This junior-league misanthrope takes great pleasure in creaming newbies in combat games, or, even worse, he stalks normally cooperative games like MUDs with the sole intent of killing off fellow players--the weak er the better. It was one thing to watch pathetic wretches sneak up on new players in MERIDIAN 59 and then gloat about it as if they were doing anything except embarrassing the human race, but when I heard about freaks signing into DIABLO ON BattleNet so they can kill other play. ers, grab their stuff and exit the game, I finally had enough. What motivates a little freak like this? Is this behavior some sort of compensation for being utterly powerless in real life, or is it some kind of serial killer pre. school for those specimens so pitiful that pulling the wings off of flies seems too close to a fair fight? Only Mrs. Bates knows for sure, I guess. Some of you out there reading this must be Psycho-Geeks--so c'mon, grab your crayons and let us know what the rationale is. Why do you get pumped doing this, and why do you lack the human faculty to be embarrassed by your own behavior? You are supposedly sentient beings, so tell us how you feel in the dark of the night, when you tell yourself that you are so un-likable that being hated is preferable to being ignored. in the meantime, now that I have established the existence and behavior patterns of this annoying species, I will spend the next month figuring out some of the serious implications they have and what, if anything, needs to be done about them. & games, usually complex multiplayer strat games like DEADLOCK, CivNet, or MOO II, and then deliberately doing things to crash the game after a few minutes or half an hour. Often, this seems to be precipitated by some body daring to outplay them; crash ing the game is some sort of pout. going home and taking the game with them, so to speak. Their revenge for being beaten is to make sure nobody finishes the game and all are left in awe of their magnificent computer knowledge. The more serious and annoying variety of Crashers are Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Zift-Davis Publishing Company. One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016. Subscription rate is $27.97 for a one-year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $16.00 for surface mail. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, PO Box 57167. Boulder, CO 80322-7167. Canadian GST registration number is 89371 0442 RT Canada Post International Pub's Mail Product (Canada Distribution) Sales Agreement No. 1058649. Periodicals postage paid at New York, NY 10016 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Printed in the U.S.A. CGW MAY 1997 "


"introducing Jack Nicklaus 4 \"The Course Designer is a landmark!» -T. Liam McDonald PC Gamer \"...gives Links LS a run for its money.\" Strategy Plus \"A truly revolutionary product. Links finally has some stiff competition. A Course Designer so easy to use, that you'll quickly find yourself addicted. 16.7 million colors with one major improvement: virtually no redraw wait.\" Computer and Net Player \"...promises to be among the greatest achievements yet on the electronic links.\" PC Games \"...impressive...\" GOLFWEEK The Course Designer n. Tee to Green This is the Course Designer that created all 5 Nicklaus-designed courses in the game! Use the Designer to re-create your favorite course! Import, modify, and play courses from previous Nicklaus games! Challenge golfing legend Jack Nicklaus The Golfer of the Century on one of his own signature courses! Play with friends across the room or around the world via serial, modem, LAN, and the Internet! "


"Featuring Colleton River Plantation, Country Club of the South, Muirfield Village, Cabo del Sol, and Winding Springs. The Course Designer BORE Holztisiin Cred Hub di : Input the basic details of a course from a real scorecard-the \"Wizard\" automatically routes each hole. Click and drag on its shape Choose from a variety of templates, or create your own shapes. Changing terrain is as easy as click-and-drag. 171 The result: a new bunker \"Is it live or is it...?\" Our Course Designer is so true-to-life, it's hard to tell the difference! This image is of the 3rd Green at Country Club of the South. The left half of the image is from the Course Designer; the right half of the image is an actual photo. N YAK 232 radite W. X139 Gem 177 X Choose from over 100 different types of trees, bushes, rocks, and other objects! The Hole View of the new bunker. "


"From Tee to Green The Tee Shot The Approach Shot New \"Intensity Control reproduces the dynamics that shape the shot. \"Club up and swing easy\" for control or a low trajectory: \"swing hard\" when you want spin and distance. Pop-up displays are optionalleave them off for the purest golfing experience, Every shot flies, bounces, and rolls true to the game, with the best ball physics model in existence. Courses are accurate to within 6 inches! The fastest screen redraw times on the PC allow the camera to automatically switch to the landing in full-screen, from varying viewpoints! Multiplayer play is fully supported, including recorded rounds, shared keyboard, serial, modem, LAN and Internet play. Around The Green Weather can change in the middle of the round, and natural wind variations and every possible turf condition add to the challenge! Our new approach makes putting more realistic. Mow lines on the green help you read the contour. Call 1-800-245-7744 to order direct Separate chipping and putting meters maximize control around the green. Look for the Jack Nicklaus 4 playable demos in select magazines, online at http://www.accolade.com or at your local retailer. For hints and tips on Accolade products, call Accolade Direct 1-900-454-HINT. $0.99/minute. If you are under 18, please get your parents' permission before making this call. Jack Nicklaus 4 For enhanced gameplay, this optional grid floats down and drapes itself over the green, clearly showing all high and low spots. PC CO-RON SOLO PLUS THE ACCOLADE WILLOWS 95 Jack Nicklaus 4. Accolade, and the Solo Plus logos are trademarks of Accolade, Inc, 01996 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved. All other trademarks are of their respective owners. Screenshots from pre-Alpha version of the game. Actual screen shots may vary. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #290 "


"Lady Marrietta Baroness, City of Magincia Prefers white wine. Loves to slay dragons. U ? www.ultimaonline.com ORIGIN We create worlds.\" lede Arte Company CIRCLE READER SERVICE #230 O 1997 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Are you with w?, Ultima Online, Origin, We treate worlds and notiated logos are trademarks or registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Int. In the U.S. and/or other countries. All rights reserved "

