"ZD ZIFF-DAVIS www.zdnet.com ZD \"ZIFF-DAVIS QUAKE II: WE GET THE SCOOP! The #1 Computer Game Magazine computer Gaming SEPTEMBER 1997 NO. 158 Super Fall Preview! Which Is E3 Best of Show? 100 Quake II Wing Commander: Prophecy StarCraft Hot New Games Longbow 2.0 (And 10 Major Disappointments) "


"Welcome to the new landscape of War. "


"CAVEDOG ENTERTAINMENT PRESENTS... Giant 3D environments, including extra large maps for 32 meg users. ANNIHILATION The New Landscape Of War In a distant part of the Galaxy, the Core and the Arm continue a thousand year battle over long forgotten ideals, destroying everything in their path... Over 150 units and 50 missions. TOTAL ANNIHILATION is a real-time war game featuring true 3D terrain and run-time generated 3D units. Tanks drive up and over hills, tilting and rocking with each bump in the landscape and impact with enemy weapons. Battle on diverse landscapes, including lava worlds, ice planets, desert valleys, alien tundra, towering mountain peaks and vast island-dotted oceans. Build, defenses high in the hills for a better view and a better shot. Giant Bertha cannons pound the enemy from across the world. Planes bank and dive in intense air-to-air combat. Amphibious tanks drive into and dive under water for surprise, attacks. Download new reinforcements from the web and swarm the enemy with hundreds of ever evolving units. Full complement of land, air and sea units. TOTAL ANNIHILATION'S 3D landscape is a revolution that demands deeper strategy and generates more realistic game play. Mobilize your forces and experience the new landscape of war! Extensive multi-player support including 'Watch and Join modes'. KAVEA   www.cavedog.com LATIRE PERDEN Designed ter 01097 Humongous Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Created and Published by Credo Entertainment a division of humongous Entertainment Inc. Distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp. Cvetog Entertainment and Total Annihilation are trademarks of Humorous Entertainment, Inc. GT is a trademark and the G ood is a registered trademark of Gr interactive Soltware Corp. Microsoft and Windows are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies ESAR Microsoft Windows 95 a GT Interactive company CIRCLE READER SERVICE #368 "


"Take out a radar tower to cripple the enemy's intelligence. Blast the opposition into smoking fragments, leaving the world scattered with burnt out wreckage. Control the high ground. True 3D terrain. Send in high altitude bombers. to take out enemy encampments. "


"Launch an invasion from the sea. The forest provides perfect cover for surprise invasions. Bombard the enemy from the safety of the sea. 3D tanks move smoothly over the hill as they move into position.. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #368 "


"Taid Auvertsmg: Keprint of Actual CGW Review ***** REVIEW JACK NICKLAUS 4 SPORTS DIFFICULTY LEVEL Double Eagle Accolade Drives to Perfection With the Stunning, Deep JACK NICKLAUS 4 By Scott A. May ubbed by many as the \"golfer of the century,\" Jack Nicklaus is truly a legend in his own time. So it's only fitting that the latest computer game to bear his name, Accolade's JACK NICKLAUS 4, should be the preeminent golf simulation of our time. Nearly every thing you could ever hope for in a golf game is included in this comprehensive package. It's an absolute model of perfection. deep breatl): five 18-hole courses (Colleton River Plantation, Country Club of the South, Muirfeld Village, Calxo del Sol, and the fictional Winding Springs), cight play styles, a full-blown course designer, a course converter (for importing JNSE courses), and a choice of four multiplayer modes (serial, modem, LAN, and Internet). The only thing missing is post-game cocktails at the club house. Pre-game options include course, game length, golfing buddies (with updated stats), a choice of caddies, gimmes, mulligans, and weather conditions (rain, fog, or clear). Three of these options can be further defined clearing fog, maximum distance for gimmics, and total number of mulligans allowed per round The real kicker is the variety of available game styles, the most of any golf sim on the market. These include Best Score Championship, Best Score Handicap, Stroke Play, Match Play, Sudden Death, SI Million Skins Challenge, Bingo Bango Bongo, and Certified Game (recorded Stroke Play for deferred mail or email matchups). Craphically, JN4 meets or exceeds anything on the market, including Access Software's LINKS LS. Accolade uses a proprietary height-mapping engine to achieve incredible terrain realHOCOL DE PRO SHOP PRO SHOP www.accolade.com Here's what you get in JN4 (take a Roll Your Own Can Besar DA 100 loc Pida al and Jack Nicklaus 4 Jack Nicklaus and the Golden Bear symbol are registered trademarks of Golden Bear International. Accolade is a trademark of Accolade, Inc. All other product names, corporate names, and trademarks are of their respective owners. Produced in association with Jack Nicklaus Productions, Inc. Published under license by Accolade, Inc. 1997 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved PACKIN' THE TOOLS Everything you need to design new links—or modify existing ones—is at your disposal in JN4's unsurpassed course architect. reason, Accolade devotes about two-thirds of the game manual to course design, including tips, tricks, and a step-by-step tutorial. There's also a built-in design wizard, which automates many of the tedious tasks for beginners. Starting with a flat piece of land, you build your course from the inside out, applying fairway shapes and greens, setting pars and handicaps, and arranging your overall layout with an eye for natural continuity. Next, fine-tune each hole with variations in shape, elevation and terrain type. From there, a plethora of tool palettes are available to customize your basic design: trees, bushes, rocks, bunkers, lakes, streams, cart paths, objects, sky, and horizon. Using CAD-style boundary points, everything on the screen can be moved or resized using simple dragand-drop mouse commands. Auto-rendering lets you see in precise detail how your designs will appear during play. Not only that, but every change is instantly updated in the rendering window. Every square foot of your course can be viewed from virt ually any distance or angle. A few faults are readily apparent: There's no option for importing user-created objects or sounds, and no way to automatically tile view windows on the screen. Finally, there's no provision for testing your design as you go, except to save, exit, and load the unfinished course into the game. These detractions aside, however, the course designer is a powerful, versatile tool guaranteed to give this product long legs in the marketplace. in real life, Jack Nicklaus is in semi-retirement, playing only select senior tournaments. Far from inac tive, however, St. Nick devotes much of his energy to course designs. To this end, I can't think of a better testament to his architectural prowess than JACK NICLAUS 4's superb course designer. Modeled after Nicklaus Productions' own CAD system, the course architect is amazingly robust. It can also be daunting, particularly for first-time designers eager to duplicate their favorite links. For this "


"Talu AUVERLISIS! Reprint UT ACAI UGW Review REVIEW  JACK NICKLAUS 4 A News Hufe V optimal hardware can decrease graphic detail, and nm the game in a window using 16-or 8-bit color. SPORTS ism. For the real-world courses, aerial flybys enabled the designers to accurately detect land elevations within six inches of sea level at 1x1 foot intervals. The underlying engine then calculates variables such as light source shacling, shadows, and reflections, resulting in the most organic-looking terrain I've ever seen. In fact, look closely and you'll see that the terrain even shades itself-proof positive of the game's subtle but utterly mind-blowing attention to detail. Because golf is such a fast-paced sport OK, I'm being sarcastic -JN4's screen redraws are markedly quick. Technically, it's incredible, considering that nearly two-thirds of what you see is 3D-rendered terrain, unlike LINKS LS, which relies much more on a 2D painting horizon to fill the screen. Of course, overall speed is still reliant on hardware factors, such as processor speed, system and video RAM, graphic detail, and screen resolution. JN4 rewards gamers with more than 20MB system RAM, and will run at whatever maximum resolution and color depth your video card supports. Those with less-thanCourse Conversions and Web Sites alk about getting your money's worth! If you're an avid golfer, JACK NICKLAUS 4 may well be the deal of your dreams. Not only do you get five courses and a built-in designer, but you'll also inherit what amounts to an instant library of thousands of custom-designed links. JN4 has the ability to import and convert courses created with its predecessor, JACK NICKLAUS SIGNATURE EDITION. All you need is a modem and access to the Internet or other major online services, including America Online, Compuserve, and Delphi. There you'll find enough courses to make your putter flutter indefinitely. The conversion process only transfers terrain shapes and elevations, so you'll have to add objects such as trees and bushes. But that's a minor chore and a heck of a lot easier than starting from scratch. Below is a list of only a few top Web sites offering hundreds of JNSE courses, available as free downloads. Each site was confirmed as active at the time of this writing: JNSE Fantasyland http://users.aol.com/td4729/jnse.htm The Linksland http://quancon.com/~brent.blackburn/jnse.htm The Wild Onion http://www.onion.com/jnse.htm Golf Paradise http://www.geocities.com/The Tropics/1113/ Steve Opfer's JNSE Golf Page http://www.infi.net/opfer/golf.htm Chris Furgerson's JNSE Courses http://www2.netquest.com/reolakes/cfjnse.html Brian Silvernail's Golf Course Designs http://members.aol.com/bsilvrnail/index.htm ON THE GREEN Cameplay offers maximum control with minimum interference. Each stroke consists of three casy steps: Click once for the onscreen aiming arrow; click again to set; and again to start the swing meter in SWING TIME Unlike other golf sims, JN4's conmotion. The designers use an trols are unobtrusive and easy to learn. overlaid swing meter with visual sweet spots» for both power (backswing) and accuracy contact point). Player stance is automatically calculated in the aiming process, which allows you to manually adjust for distance, trajectory, and swing intensity. The swing meter also reflects whether the shot is a drive, chip, or putt. The game's physics model is incredibly flexible, automatically adjusts to atmospheric conditions for the flight path, and ALL NATURAL, NO FILLER JN4's proprietary realistically reacts to objects height-mapping engine yields unparalleled realism. and terrain upon landling. For example, a ball striking the trunk of a tree will the box or in the manual. Also, cach 18-hole react differently than one hitting the branchcourse you create raps an aclclitional IOMB es. For a dramatic demonstration of the or more. game's physics model, try designing a hole Minor quibbles also include the animated using cart path as the primary surface, then grid overlay used to gange terrain gracles. watch as a 100-yard drive bounces clear into The grid turns off between shots-an the next county. annoying oversight. And «animated\"? Slowly Although JN4 doesn't utilize Direct-Draw craping over the ground isn't a feature worth for graphics, it employs both DirectPlay for bragging about its multiplayer modes, and DirectSound for Still, from play mechanics and graphics its rich aural ambiance. The sound is so rendering to course design and multiplayer detailed (about 32MB worth) that the capabilities, JACK NICKIAUS 4 is one of the designers are able to assign the correct bird most well-crafted games-of any genrecalls to cach region. that I've seen in years. Other goodies include the ability to best your low score by playing against previously APPEAL: Computer golfers of all recorded rounds. Adjustable views also let experience levels. you see the course from any angle, down to PROS: The best graphics of any one meter above the ball, which is helpful for golf sim to date; the user interface lining up difficult putts. and course editor are models of perfection; excellent choice of multiHOOK SHOT player modes; free custom courses Unfettered kudos asicle, there's a few dark galore. clouds on JN4's horizon. 'Talk about system CONS: High system require shock: Typical installation requires a whopments; typical ping 171MB chunk of your hard drive. As if installation eats anticipating consumer resistance, Accolade 171MB from makes absolutely no mention of this fact on your hard drive. RATED CIRCLE READER SERVICE #290 "


"3 of the most powerful forces in the Q0 "


"Free* Internet Competition Battle alone or challenge up.to 8 players with one-click, free, access to Battle.nets Enhanced Internet features include: worldwide player rankings. tournaments and player handicapping universe are about to collide... From the Creators of the 1995 and 1996 Games of the Year \"Best strategy game yet\" Computer Gaming World \"If StarCraft doesn't live up to expectations, we'll eat an orch PC Gamer 3 Alien Races Command any of 3 alien races each boasting a unique set of skills and abllities 3 Theaters of Battle A deadly mix of space combat, planetary assault and covert base infiltration 3 Epic Chapters 3 separate storylines intertwine within 30 scenarios to tell the epic saga of a universe on the brink of destruction Spectacular Special Effects Real-time light-sourcing, environmental effects, and interactive terrain are only the beginning 1997 Blizzard Entertainment *Free access to Battle.net requires access to the Internet. Player is responsable for all applicable internet oos Tablo Game of the Year Computer Gaming World, 1996. WarCraft II Game of the Year: PC Gamer. 1995. StarCraft to trademark and Blzzard is a registered trademark of Davidson & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved. * Campaign Editor Create full campaigns from custom designed scenarios. Define la victory conditions, record voiees and much, much more... WARCRAFT E ARE Dins is a NZURA BIZZARD ENTERTAINMENT www.blizzard.com 1-800-953-SNOW   | CIRCLE READER SERVICE N266 "


"The #1 Computer Game Magazine World Gaming COVER STORY Game or Fall CGW's infiltration of the Electronic Entertainment Expo yielded a 28page bonanza on the hottest new titles heading your way. We've separated the coolness from the crap, and herein present the ultimate insider briefing on the best titles in every genre. Even through our jaded eyes, we were very impressed with the overall quality of new titles in the channel. But since there are 1,500 games coming your way, we'll focus on the best ones for the bucks. 92 Quake II You're obviously not a Quake fanatic, because if you were you would have already turned to the story. So we're wondering, do you know what QUAKE is? Are you into reading magazine contents pages? Need to add more fiber to your diet? CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"SNEAK PREVIEWS 56 Myth: The Fallen Lords 62 Fallout 68 F-16 74 Deathtrap Dungeon REVIEWS ADVENTURE/ROLE-PLAYING 178 Callahan's Crosstime Saloon Star Trek: Generations 186 maar HARDWARE 168 Plextor 12/20 CD-ROM Drive 168 Quantum Fireball ST 3.2 Hard Drive 170 Thrustmaster Top Gun USB Joystick 170 Diamond FireGL 1000 ACTION 194 Extreme Assault 200 Rebel Moon Rising 208 Norse by Norsewest 209 3D-Ultra Mini Golf 210 Deathmatch Maker GAMER'S EDGE 270 Theme Hospital Strategies 274 Scorpia's Mail 280 CG Tips! SPORTS 214 Triple Play 98 218 Front Page Sports: Golf COLUMNS 6236 161 Loyd Case 249 Scorpia 255 Charles Ardai 257 Denny Atkin CLASSIC/PUZZLES 224 Hoyle Poker 224 Golden Nugget Windows 95 on Trial A Review of Sirtech's SHADOWS OVER RIVA When Will Computer Games Grow Up? Microsoft's FIGHTER ACE vs. Interactive Magic's WARBIRDS 2.0 Where Are All the X-COM Clones? What's the Deal With Killing Reality? 263 Terry Coleman 298 Martin Cirulis DEPARTMENTS 12 On the CG-ROM 17 Johnny Wilson 20 Letters 26 READ.ME 294 Hall of Fame 295 Patches 296 Top 100 234 242 STRATEGYZWARGAMES 228 Great Battles of Alexander History of the World Heroes of Might and Magic II: The Price of Loyalty Cool Stuff on the Demo Disc & How to Use It Will Online Gamers Pay to Play? Our Readers Speak Out 'News, Views and the Latest Releases Greatest Games of All Time Game Files to Kill Bugs Dead Readers Rate the Top Games SITE Exclusive! Dennis \"Call Me Daddy\" Hopper Talks Games...pg. 26 SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"NTN HE MEDIEVAL CATHEDRAL OFTEN SERVED AS A CENTER FOR LEARNING. THIS IS GOING TO BE A VERY  PAINFUL LESSON. * The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypsc lurk in the shadows before you. And they are not alone. Eidolon, the last-known Serpent Rider, lives. All of humanity has fallen to the archfiend and his Hell-spawned hordes. As the Necromancer, the Assassin, the Crusader, or the Paladin, you must put an end to this ravenous onslaught. But first, you must defeat the Dark Generals. Each of theth awaits your arrival separately in one of four demon-infested worlds. You will know them when you see them. They will be Death, Pestilence, Famine and War. Will you be the teacher? Or the student? Possess distinct spells, powers and weapons. With cxpcrience, gain levels: more hit points and certain abilities that apply to your specific character class, such as increased speed, fire power and jump distaoco. Lose yourself in lightning storms, blowing leaves, carthquakes, spraying fountains and pouring rain. Bludgeon your way through four demon-infested worlds — Medieval. Egyptian, Mesoamerican and Roman. Smash stained glass windows, collapse structural bcams, pulverize trcs and shatter egos. WUAKC HEXENT THE BEGONING OF THE OUD. ENGINE "


"CIRCLE READER SERVICE #141 Published by AVEN Developed by Windows 95 CD-ROM Coming Soon on ACTIVISION. www.activision.com Hexon II 1997 Raven Soltware Corporation. All Rights Reserved. Jo Software Codo contained within Hoxen I 1996 Id Software, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Developed by Raven Software Corpomon Published by lo Software, Ino, Desired byActivision Inc. under Sub.com H marko Raven Sarware Corporation. Thield Software name is a trademark ob Software Inc. The id Software logo is a registered trademark of Id Soliwon, Inc. Activ a registered trademark of Action, Inc. Al other trademands and trudo names are the properts a r e i s a todo como "


"DEATH is NOTHING Play as one of 4 death-dealing Mageslayers across dozens of hellish levels. n would be too easy. Too little to repay a thousand year old debt. Too quick to satisfy the hunger of one you betrayed and left to the ravages of the Mages in another millennium. Soul-destroying 3-D environments heaving with diabolical traps and mysteries. Before LORE THANE extracts his terrible price on your body and soul, you are bound to wander through five worlds of atrocity. Stoking your powers. Solving infernal mysteries, Gathering magic and arcane knowledge. Fighting your way through FEAR into MADNESS for one last, desperate struggle against Evil, hinisell. Only then will he anoint you with the last sacraments of your torment. No, Death would be too easy. An all-powerful war chest of magical attacks like Chain Lighting and the Firewhip. Modern A malevolent 3D fantasy quest from the creators of HEXEN and HEXEN II: Windows 95 RATING PAINE Spread the Evil with several modes of MultiSlayer action for up to 16 players. GT Interactive Software CONTEST AARD R AVEN MaceSlayer 1997 Raven Software Inc. All Rights ReservedPublished and distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp is a trademark and the GLOCO2 is a registered trademark of GT Interactive Software Comp.Widows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies www.gtgames.com "


"WITHOUT TORMENT. MALESUMIR CIRCLE READER SERVICE #281 "


"ON THE CG-ROM Delicious Demos and Spy Photos Undercover CGW Operatives Bring You Covert Recon on 38 Cool Games in Development PRESS F-10 FOR PRELERENCES CLICK TO CONTINUI Tichounterlaluan World X 1997 Ziff-Bas WARLORDS III ....... MAIN MENU Welcome CGW Special Feature Fall Preview Editors' Hot Picks GreenSpook Product Demos Patches EXTREME ASSAULT in addition to 14 great playable demos, this month's CD features 76 top-secret screen I shots on games under construction at 29 different companies. So check out the screens of the games you're looking forward to, and have a ball with our awesome lineup of the hottest available demos! CYDONIA REGION TRANSMISSION BLTECTED... CONTIRAING CO-ORBIMITES BON LASIKS TRANSMISSION.... Internets you wil to landinger Lars. Here are your orders aalaler.se We have recently discared IE 10 L EI W hat Di AED -Leuken DARK COLONY BETRAYAL AT ANTARA @ MONDAY NIGHT FOOTBALL 98 CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"Look for Trophy Bass 2's NEW Add-On Pack! 5 New Fish, 5 New Lakes, & New Tournament Types. FORCAT PE SETS TROPHY BASS 2 AOD ON.CACS NORTHERN LAKES [Bass ] [Bass on line] FROST PACE SPORTS TROPHY BASS 2 Thu SERE TROPHY DASS 2010 [On line Bass] Only one experience comes close to the excitement of hooking a trophy-size bass. And that's landing a 19-pounder in Trophy Bass 2M, the most addictive fishing simulation ever. Now with Internet, modem and network play, you can compete with neighbors or in worldwide tournaments. Get tips from the pros. Select from thousands of realistic items the gear, the lake, the weather-but be forewarned, you're the one who'll get hooked. L MULTI-PLAYERSIERRA Visit us at http://www.sierra.com, AOL, or Compuserve. To order Trophy Bass 2\"call 1-800-757-7707 01997 Sierra On Line and/or designate trademarks of, or licemed to Serra On-Line, Inc. All Rights Reserved CIRCLE READER SERVICE #371 "


"se concorso ON THE CG-ROM HTWAREN 10 05 joy nentis TOT 000 DOGDAY IMPERIALISM SHADOW WARRIOR ..................... How Do I Use the Disc? We strongly recommend that you back up any previously saved games before installing a patch, as this may overwrite your existing program. How Do I Play the Demos? To view the demos, first click on Editors' Hot Picks, Special Features, or Product Demos. Then click on the title of interest. Each demo has its own instructions for installation. he CD is Autoplay enabled and should begin when you load it into the CD. ROM drive. Otherwise, select Run from the Program Manager in Windows 3.x, or Start Menu in Windows 95, and type D:\\RUN-ME (where D is the letter of your CD-ROM drive) to run it straight from the CD. You may type D:\\INSTALL to create a CGW program group on your Windows desk. top for future fun. Many demos require the disc to be in the CD-ROM drive in order to run; therefore, we recommend installing the demos from our disc. How Do I Get the Patch Files? Click on Patches under the CGW Features, and then read the text window that has instructions on copying the files to your hard drive. You can also access the patches from a DOS prompt by typing D:\\PATCHES (where D is the letter of your CD-ROM drive) and copying them directly to your hard drive. How Can I Get the CG-ROM Delivered Each Month? To subscribe to the CD-ROM version of the magazine, call (303) 665-8930, and specify that you want the CD-ROM version. Please note that if you already receive the magazine without the CD, you must wait until your current subscription expires before you can order the CD version. If you have a problem receiving the CD version, send an email with your name, address, phone number, and subscriber number to cgw@neodata.com. Neodata is a magazine fulfillment house that is not owned or operated by Ziff-Davis. AUGUST CG-ROM TITLES TITLE PLATFORM DIRECTORY Betrayal at Antara WIN/95 ANT DEMO Black Dahlia DOS/WIN DAHLIA Catchword WIN/95 CATCHWRD Chron X 95/NT CHRONX Dark Colony 95 DirectX 3.a 95 DIRECTX Dog Day DOGDEMO Extreme Assault DOS ASSAULT Fallout FALLDEMO Heat HEAT Imperialism IMPERIAL Machine Hunter MACHINE Monday Night Football 98 ABCMNF98 Muzzle Velocity DOS only MUZZLE Patches n/a PATCHES Shadow Warrior DOS SHADOW Warlords !!! WAR3DEMO DC Where Can I Buy the CDs? Copies of CGW with the CD are available in most major retailers where magazines are sold. If you can't find the magazine with the CD, encourage your retailer to carry it. To find out where CGW can be purchased near you, or to suggest that it be carried at your local retailer, please email Gerry at: getsmart@ils.net. Unfortunately, we can not fulfill requests for back issues of CD-ROMs at this time. EXECUTABLE BIADEMO.EXE SETUP.EXE CAEWO27A.EXE CHRONX.EXE SETUP.EXE DXSETUP.EXE SETUP.EXE SETUP.EXE FALLDEMO.EXE SETUP.EXE SETUP.EXE MACHHUNT.EXE ABCMNF98.EXE RUN.BAT n/a INSTALL.EXE SETUP.EXE 95 95 95 Disclosure As a matter of record, CGW voluntarily maintains a list of companies in which SoftBank, the parent company of Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., has an interest. It is available online at www.computergaming. com/disclaim.html and is updated when we become aware of such investments. 95 SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"DEFIANCE Defiance \"...destined to nchieve noteworthy status.\" Computer Game Entertainment (preview) \"... sharp 3D engine that looks like it could stand toe to toe with QuakeTM. the structure and flow of gameplay is more interesting than most shooters ...\" -PC Gamer (preview) BITE ME! If it's battle you want, it's battle you'll get CIRCLE READER SERVICE #167 GET IT THIS FALL  Visceral Productions, Baltimore, MD. A DIVISION OF AVALON HILL GAME COMPANY 4517 Harlord Road, Baltimore, MD 21214 W PRODUCTIONS GAMES WITH GUTS www.avalonhill.com 1-800-999-3222 "


"MAILL YOU EXPLORE NEW LANDS? OR WILL YOU AMASS GREAT RICHES? OR WILL YOU CONQUER EVERYTHING IN YOUR PATH? Ahh ...YES. AGE EMPIRES Choose your favorite form of world domination. Coming this fall. www.microsoft.com/games/empires TEEN  1997 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft is a registered trademark and Age of Empires is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation. 23R3 "


"JOHNNY WILSON edito Charge of the Online Brigade tele 1 There Are Many Ways to Pay for Play one thing we know for certain about the online gaming crowd, it's that they don't like the meter running. Online game services and companies who season. Fantasy sports owners have paid by the season for years, so it's a natural for online sports leagues. In the same way, imagine a war. gamer signing on and paying by the campaign or a fantasy role-play. er signing up for a hunting license that is good for a one or two-week dragon season. Of course, some games will simply enable you to pay by the day or month, as well. Since you know how much you'll pay before you sign up, you don't have to worry about the meter. This would also work when pack. aged games are sold through retail channels and game publishers want to publish the cyber. equivalent of add-on disks. The major difference is that these addons (or, to use the marketing term, razor blades) wouldn't incur the costs of marketing them at retail. have always been skeptical of the idea that a solid online-gaming business could be built around flat rate pricing. Even AOL just threw in the towel and established a $2-perhour fee for certain games. I know TEN believes that there is still a business there, but I also know that it's working on some pretty creative ways to bring in more subscribers and encourage gamers to pay to play. Mpath gave up on the flat-rate model. Now, it's trying the advertising-subsidized model along with some premium subscription games. That's not far from Microsoft's tiered-pricing model for Internet Gaming Zone, where some games are free and some are at a premium. I also don't think services and publishers can depend upon adver tising as their primary revenue. Advertising agencies may be will. ing to take chances on the Web this year, but next year, they're going to be looking more at click: through than impressions. That bodes poorly for advertising that is placed within the game context or even in frames around a game. Even in something as simple as a trivia game, players aren't going to want to click away from the game and onto an advertising page. They want to have as much time as pos. sible to answer the next question. Which pricing model will win? Will gamers want to pay to play? If there is ( Advertising agencies may be willing to take chances on the Web this year, but next year, they're going to be looking more at click-through than impressions. 2 TOURNAMENTS Would you pay extra to play in a tournament in which you could earn money or prizes? Some services are betting that you would Nolan Bushnell's PlayNet is plan ning to pay real money and award prizes to gamers who win in their weekly or monthly tournaments. Other services are considering the same structure if gambling laws don't prohibit it. MICROTRANSACTIONAL This alternative is really theoretical, but interesting. Publishers always want to put additional weapons, vehicles, powers, maps, and objects into their games, but often run out of time, CD space, or financial resources to include them. If Digicash or E-cash were a reality, gamers might be willing to pay $2 for a hot classic car for LEGENDS OF GRAND PRIX, pony up $1 for that special halberd for their fantasy game, or pay $1.50 to get a spiffy custom uniform for their AGENTS OF JUSTICE superhero. Custom publishing for microtrans. actions might not only provide an additional revenue stream for products, but also give legs to existing products. The next 18 months will offer plenty of experimentation in pricing models for online gaming. I'll wager that you'll see all of these and more. I'll also wager that the winner will use a combination of methods to match the pricing scheme to the game publish online games are going to have to figure out creative ways to gar: ner revenue. Here are a few of the alternate pricing structures that you are likely to see: TRANSACTIONAL Some games are ideal for limited expansion. Gamers could learn the mechanics of a system absolutely free and play free as long as they stay in the newbie area or the novice arena. Once they wanted to feel their oats, however, they would download (for a charge) the terrain for the next military campaign, flight mission, puzzle filled adventuring environment, golf course, racetrack, or RPG quest. mary SEASONAL Sports gamers can readily understand the idea of paying by the SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"   I we \\h + »  "


"IF YOU WERE  S M AND  R T ENOUGH TO KNOW IT. YOU'D FEEL LIKE TI T   S  ME ONE TO 0. B 100 KIL ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE HAS GIVEN HIM A GOOD HEAD ON HIS SHOULDERS. AND HE'D LIKE TO TEAR THE ONE OFF YOURS. WELCOME TO HALF-LIFE, WHERE ENEMIES ARE SO SMART THEY DON'T JUST CHASE YOU. THEY HUNT YOU, ALONE OR IN PACKS. SORRY. NO MORE SUICIDE SQUADS. THESE MONSTERS DON'T WANT TO DIE. SMOOTH SKELETAL ANIMATION, 16-BIT COLOR, AND THE MOST ADVANCED GAMING ENGINE MAKE THE HUNT FRIGHTENINGLY REAL. ADD A 3-D CARD AND IT'S KILLER. HALF-LIFE HAS ADDED ANOTHER LEVEL TO THE FOOD CHAIN. ARE YOU SMART ENOUGH HALF-LIFE TO AVOID BECOMING LUNCH? FIND OUT FOR YOURSELF AT www.sierra.com/half-life VALVE SIERRA CIRCLE READER SERVICE 156 "


"LETTERS LETTER OF THE MONTH little April Fools' joke that Slipgate Central would be joining up with Yahoo! Okay, I'm done, now. I will now reaffirm that this is the best issue I've seen in a long time and that I love your mag. If that seems weird, consider this, I only point out the flaws in things I like, if I didn't like the mag I would say to myself,\"This sucks» and never waste my time writing this. I subscribe to the idea that if it's good, it's worth constructive criticism to make it that much better. I hope I've helped. Isaac Dawson from the Internet KILLER MAGAZINE Ilike your mag a lot, otherwise I wouldn't be writing, but there are some things...well.. there are things... 1. QUAKE: Killers: Every even semi-lips gamer knows that is bull; the only reason to use that title in your June issue is because you know that the name QUAKE attracts attention. Not even QUAKE II will kill QUAKE. Its the original. I'm gonna play every new 3D game that comes down the pike, but you can bet your ass I'm gonna go back to good old EIMI every once in a while for a trip down memory lane. a. By the way, despite the title, I found that article (or group of articles, depending on how you look at) to be one of the best I've seen in a long time. Also, I give you an A+ on the layout 2. Loyd Cases tech column was a nice general overall article. I just want to point out some exceptions to the rule: a. Changing one thing at a time.... Recently, with my modem, I had to change both the settings for com2 and the settings for the modem before restarting Changing only one would have just made more problems. b. 48 hours, bah humbug! It took me 3-4 days to get the modem working exactly right A corrupt passwords file, by the way, can be a serious pain. c. Note: writing error messages down is excellent. However, if possible, a screenshot is even better. Also, screenshots of current system settings that work will help if you happen to mess with them and want to put them back the way you had them. 3. QUAKE as Pentium only?! Where do you get your info? I ran QUAKE for six months on a 486/33mhz with 8MB of RAM, and it really wasn't all that bad. I first beat the shareware version on my old 486 and I have to tell ya'. Cthon rising out of that lava is even more breathtaking at a slightly slower speed (he seems to drip lava). Well, that and the fact that it was 3 a.m.! 4. QUAKERALLY is not out yet, so the article mentioning it was a tad premature. And that \"Yahool for QUAKE\" that McGee said. Well, granted that's about the right term, however I believe that was used in conjunction with a   Great games can be surpassed. So, we try to alert you to potential great game \"Killers\" on the horizon whenever we see some great games that may potentially surpass the hottest games of the present. As for machine recommendations, we've pointed out in the past that every gamer has a different tolerance with regard to frame rate and game speed. To you, a slow Cthon was impressive. To others, it would be a slide show. We appreciate your criticism and decided to share it. L.A. STORY As I flipped through your magazine the other day I read with great excitement your «Escape to LA\" preview. I was appalled to see that you did not say a word about HiCAVY CFAR, which is to be released this summer (supposedly). I was further horrified when I looked at the \"Pipeline\" section and it did not have a relcasc cate for MECHWARRIOR 3. Come on, clo you have something against robots? D. Wilson from the Internet Since we had devoted several pages to HEAVY GEAR (our April 97 cover story) in a recent issue, we opted to cover other Activision games in the \"Escape to L.A\"story. Also, because FASA Interactive hadn't set a date for the MECH WARRIOR 3 release when we went to press (it's still not definite), we did not put it in the Pipeline. We estimate MW3's release to be in the first quarter of next year, even though FASA's goal is to get it out before the end of '97. A FISTFUL OF RATING Though I have been reading CGWfor more than a few years now, this is the first time I have felt compelled to write in response to an article that I have read. I have just finished reading Mark Clarkson's review of OUILAWS, and for the most part I agree with his assessment of the game's strengths and weaknesses, but I feel he overlooks some very subtle, but important points: The game has the most believable premise that I have yet to see in a firstperson shooter. Its a nice change of pace from your demon/alien du jour. I like the fact that you can't run indefinitely. It's still not realistic, considering the 250 pounds of ammo/weapons you're carting around, but it's a start. The way the game models gun drift and settling was a nice change also. If it wasn't the first time it was modeled, it was the first time I have noticed this implemented. Though some may say that DUKE 3D modeled reloading of a weapon, I don't ever remember ducking around a comer, heart thumping and sweating rivers as I pumped shells into the old Winchester or .45. FEEDING OUR MECH BIAS We not only like the traditional style of giant robot games, but we're impressed with FASA's real-time strategy game, too. CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"SOUTHPEAK\" INTERACTIVE TEMUIN THE CAPRICORN COLLECTION BY THE TIME THIS EXHIBIT'S UNVEILED, YOUR SOUL MIGHT BE ONE OF THE ARTIFACTS. RED BY A mysterious, centuries-old Capricorn head has found a new home inside the famed Stevenson Museum. If you can't solve the puzzles surrounding it, your soul may soon join the exhibit. POWER Coming fall 97. Temjin\" is the world's first game powered by Video Reality technology. It's a psychological thriller VINER REALITY that will immerse you in 360° of completely seamless, incredibly realistic, motion picture-quality gaming. For a free demo CD, visit us at www.southpeak.com. EN duba CIRCLE READER SERVICE #297 To The Capricom Collection, South Peak, and the South Peak logo are trademarks of SouthPeak Interactive LLC. Video Reality and the Video Roality lopo are trademarks of SAS Institute Inc. used under license. Call 1-800-7713771 for Game Rating information ESR "


"L omputercomcllogarine LETTERS World Also, I would like to add more emphasis to the interesting level designs. The train was a bit simplistic, but it was one of the most entertaining settings I have ever shot my way through Since this was a rehash of the DARK FORCES engine, I didn't expect the graphies to be stupendous, but I have seen the 3Dfx-enabled patch, and it helps! On the weapons not being easily distinguished from one another while lying on the ground, I have to agree. Yet, in the end, are you not going to pick it up, because you're not sure if its the rifle or the shotgun? There is one last thing: When you turn up the difficulty, it doesn't just increase the number of bad guys, it models damage by having you die from just a bullet or two, rather than twenty. This can make for some extended gun battles from storefronts and the like, where you lise every piece of cover available to stay alive. I hope that more games start to model some of these finer details. Bob Coates SSI Webmaster caught up in the multiplayer rage that they don't realize some games just don't need multiplayer fcatures!! The QFC series is adventure, for God's sake! What on earth could multiple players do for it? Now, let me tell you that I have been a huge fan of the series. QUEST FOR GLORY I (originally HERO'S QUEST) was the first computer game I ever played, and I have religiously picked up every new QFG game as they arrived in stores, but I'm thinking twice about this one. Sierra seems totally clueless about this whole thing too. They are mindlessly cramming multiplayer support in all of their games. If it doesn't work, they find some other way to include the Internet in the game (SHIVERS 2). I have a message for all you game designers out there: Go ahead and add multiplayer support to some games. Action, strategy, sports, and even role playing. But think twice before adding it to games that require multiple sittings, puzzles, character interaction, or a storyline that's actually part of the game. \"Think of DISCWORLD, THE BEAST WITHIN, or TOONSTRUCK with multiplayer support. It just doesn't work! Erik Wahlstrom from the Internet You raised some good points, Bob. But our mail is mixed on this subject. Check out the following response. PUBLISHER Dale Strang EDITORIAL Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Executive Editor Ken Brown Features Editor Denny Alkin (Simulations) Reviews Editor Terry Coleman (Wargames, Classics Puzzle Games) Technical Editor Dave Salvator (Hardware) CD-ROM Editor Jil M. Anderson Associate Editors Jeff Green (Adventure, Sports) Elliott Chin (Action, Strategy) Web Czarina Kale Hedstrom News Editor Charlotte Panther Assistant Editor Allen Greenberg Copy Editor Joe Vallina Editorial Assistant Malthew Schaefer Contributing Editors Scorpia (Adventure Games) Charles Ardal (Interactive Fiction) Loyd Case (Hardware) Martin Cirulls (Science Fiction) Founder Russell Sipe DESIGN Art Director Dan Fitzpatrick Associate Art Director Steven Wanczyk Web Commander Jack Rodrigues PRODUCTION Production Director Carlos Lugo Assistant Production Mgr. Martin Walthall Electronic Prepress Michele Kellogg Tamara Gargus Roger Drake HOW TO CONTACT THE EDITORS Address questions and feedback to CGW Editorial, 135 Main St. 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105. Or you may contact us via: Phone: (415) 357-4900 Editorial Fax: (415) 357-4977 CompuServe: (76703,622) Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com Web site: www.computergaming.com ADVERTISING SALES Associate Publisher Lee Uniacke (415) 357-4915 East Coast District Sales Manager Laura Salerno (212) 503-4851 East Coast Sales Assistant Audrey DeJesus (212) 503-3926 North West Territory Sales Manager Cathy Conway (415) 357-4925 South West Territory Sales Manager Pat Walsh (714) 851 2556 Midwest Territory Sales Manager Marci Yamaguchi (415) 357-4944 Marketing Manager Sat Sharma (415) 357-4935 National Account Representative Joann Casey (415) 357-4920 Advertising Coordinator Linda Philapil (415) 357-4930 Administrative Assistant Linda Fan (415) 357-5425 Sales Assistant Tallie Conner (415) 357-5398 HOW TO CONTACT ADVERTISING SALES Address inquiries to CGW Advertising, 135 Main St., 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105; or call (415) 357-5398, fax (415) 357-4999. SUBSCRIPTION INQUIRIESIADDRESS CHANGES For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering information, call (303) 665-8930 or lax (303) 604-7455 within the U.S. and Canada. All other countries call (303) 604-7445 or fax (303) 604-0540, or write to Computer Gaming, P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-3131. The subscription rate is $27.94 for one year (12 issues). Additional postage for orders outside the U.S.: add US$16 per year for surface mail. Payment must be in U.S. dollars made by check or money order drawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, AMEX accepted. BACK ISSUES For back issues send $7 per issue ($8 outside the United States) by check or money order to Back Issues Dep't, Ziff Davis Publishing Co., PO Box 53131, Boulder, CO 80322-3131. Your review of OUTLAWS in July rates the game too high (three stars). I have tricd to play this game and it is very poor. I play using a three-button mouse and followed the directions for setting the buttons, but the center button always defaults to the same function as the left mouse button. I have been on the Netto LucasArts, but they would give no help. It will be a long time before I buy another product made by this company. Keep up the good reviews but please give more details of how the game being reviewed does not live up to expectations. Robert Clover from the Internet Assuming that an adventure game is, by definition, merely a story gated by puzzles, you are correct. Multiplayer fcatures won't add anything. If, however, part of the heart and soul of an adventure game is conversation, QFG 5's multiplayer additions may give extra depth to the universe. We'll be watching to see how it works and salute Sierra for being willing to take risks, but we thought your perspective was interesting and would resonate with a lot of our readers. mpany. HEROES WITH WEB FEAT I'm writing about Sierras decision to add multiplayer support to QUEST FOR GLORY 5. In my opinion, this is an incredibly stupid thing to do. It seems that game designers have become so ViRGE OF HORROR I really don't know what to expect from the new wave of 3D games, accelerator cards, and the like. One thing that makes me question such a thing is the fact that the 3D graphics on MDK...well...suck. Is it just that the game doesn't use Direct3D too well, or is it my graphics card (S3 VIRGENX with 4MB)? I know, I know CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"NOT YOUR EVERY DAY VARY OUT OF BODY EXPERIENCE THIS FALL COMING ARML) Delirious Granny noticed that things were getting, well, a little strange. Even her loyal sausage could tell that something was wrong. When she found out her family had been swallowed into space by the Mad Rabbit, she decided that enough was enough. No more games: it was time to kick some lupine butt. And so this delirious but determined lady set out on the adventure of a lifetime.  Visit five planets and fourteen worlds in a huge, hilarious graphic adventure that spans 5 CDs. Solve scads of ingenious puzzles, each with its own To order, visit your retailer or call 1 800 447 1230 illogical logic. Order leads to chaos, sense turns to nonsense, credible becomes... well, you get the drift.  Meet dozens of curious characters. Wander the reaches of BOBSLED SIRTECH inner space. Defy the laws of time and space. Go shopping with aliens. And be back in time for tea. Tel: (315) 393 6633 Fax: (315) 393 1525 E-mail: webmaster@sir-tech.com www.sir-tech.com You have to PLA Pit to USBELIA CIRCLE READER SERVICE #126 Blegtennie Sudios "


"LETTERS CON-VIRGE-ANCE The transparency test failed (red zones) and anti-aliasing (jaggies on the doorway) didn't work well on MDK with the ViRGE card. the card isn't great but still, the graphics were terrible. The enemies were way too pixelized, and it made my Pentium Pro 200MHz run like a Pentium 90, at least according to the performance test. Without Direct3D my machine had the 109 mark under performance compared to the 100 that it said a P-Pro 200MHZ would run like. Is it my card? Though it probably is, I just bought this machine in February with the card preinstalled. Does this mean the true 3D cards haven't come out yet? Too many questions and not enough answers. I have been using computers for only about two years now and am not that technically proficient. So when you start busting out with PCs, ports, and ISAs, I'm lost. I try and read other magazines that focus more on the hardware part of the computer to see what they say about 3D cards. So, when they have the Best Products of 1996 stamped all over their covers, and I look for the best 3D card, they say something like this: This is most definitely the best 2D3D card out there for now. For now? What the hell does that mean?! What the hell are we waiting for?! Just responding to this could clear up a few things for me. By the way, June's demos were the best set of cemos you've put out so far. Keep up the great work. Paul Karczewski from the Internet It's a breath mint and a candy mint! What you're seeing is a combination of factors. We tested MDK in D3D with both a 3dfx-based card and an S3 ViRGE GX card. With both cards, we noticed that the textures were chunkier than we like. Chalk that up to the softw are engine. However, the ViRGE failed at the transparency test and didn't support anti-aliasing. So, the MDK experience with the ViRCE had lots of big ugly places where one dominant color would replace a cool transparency effect; it also had some jagged edges you wouldn't expect with 3D card support. Since the D3D drivers worked finc on the 3dfx card, we presume that the problem is with the way the card works with D3D, not with D3D itself. CZIFF-DAVIS PUBLISHING COMPANY CHAIRMAN AND CEO Eric Hippeau Consumer Media Group President Lawrence C Burstein Vice President J. Thomas Cottingham Executive Director, Research Randy Cohen Business Manager Cynthia Mason Creative Services Manager Francesca Koe Ziff-Davis Publishing President, U.S. Publications Ronin Sonnenberg President, Interactive Media and Development Group Jeitrey Ballowe President, International Media Group J.B Holston II Executive Vice President, President of ZDNet Dan Rosenswelg President Computer Intelligence/Infocorp Bob Brown President, Training/Support Publishing Group William Rosenthal Vice President, Chief Financial Office Timoby O'Brien Vice President, General Counsel, and Secretary J. Malcolm Morris Vice President, Human Resources Rayna Brown Vice President, Planning Daryl Olte Vice President, Production Roger Herrmann Vice President, Controller Mark Moyer Treasurer Thomas L Wright Director of Public Relations Gregory Jarboe U.S. Publications Group President, U.S. Publications Roon Sonnenberg President, Business Media Group Claude Sheer President, Consumer Media Group Lawrence C Burstein Senior Vice President, Circulation Baird Davis Executive Vice President, Business Media Group Don Bymes Executive Vice President, Business Media Group Jack Dolce Assistant to the Chairman Tom McGrade Vice President, Marketing Services Jim Manning Vice President, Central Advertising Sales Bob Bader Vice President, Product Testing Mark Van Name Vice President, Circulation Services James F. Ramaley Executive Vice President/Group Publisher Al DiGuido Vice President Cluis Dobbrow Vice President Daniel Farber Vice President Jint Louderback Vice President Michael Miller Vice President Nancy Newman Vice President Paul Somerson Vice President Sam Whitmore Executive Director, Licensing Gertrud Borchardt Director of ZD Labs Mark Hall Director, Benchmark Operation Bill Catchings Ziff-Davis Magazine Network Vice President/Managing Director Joe Gillesple Executive Director Alicia Saribalis Marketing Director Mike Perkowski Directors Ken Beach, Michael Bird, Jeff Bruce, Kelly Lowman, Melinda Maginn, Debbie Moss, Julie Tortile PERMISSIONS AND REPRINTS FIRING LINE We prefer that you email us at one of these addresses: CompuServe: 76703,622 Internet: 76703.622@ compuserve.com or write to: CCW, Letter To The Editor 135 Main Street, 14th Floor San Francisco, CA 94105 We reserve the right to edit all letters for space or clarity. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD (ISSN 0744 6667) is published monthly by ZDavis. Copyright 1997 ZDavis. All Rights Reserved. Material in this publication may not be reproduced in any form without permission. If you want to quote from an article write to Chantal lacker, One Park Avenue, New York, NY 100165802, or lax 212 503 5420. 2 For reprints, please call Ziff-Davis reprints at (800) 825-4237. Computer Santa We periodically male lists of our customers avalatie to carefully screened Reprints mailers of quality goods and services. If you do not wish to receive such mailings, let us know by writing to Computer Gaming World, PO Box 57167. Boulder, CO B0322.7167. Computer Gaming World is not affiliated with IDG. SOFT BANK ZIFF-DAVIS Audit Bureau of Circulations ABC Member AUDITED CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"15000 The meek shall inherit squat. m an elcome to the blood pits where you kill, claw, scream and die, battle after battle, to become Warlord of the Dragon Gate. Fight alone or with up to three other players online either way, you'll encounter hideous creatures attacking from all angles rendered in skull-crushing 3D. Add in 54,000 different playing combinations and you could play this game forever. Assuming you don't die first. Developed by: de TM Drachen For SEE SOUTHPEAK\" INTERACTIVE Call 1-800-771-3172 far Game Rating information. Drachen Zot, SouthPeak. and the South Peak logo are trademarks South Peak Interactive LLC. BERB WWW.Southpeak.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #295 "


"READ.ME Edited by Charlotte Panther (CPanther@zd.com) Dennis the Menace Hopper Unravels the Mystery of the Black Dahlia in Take 2's New Adventure ennis Hopper is a Hollywood legend. He boasts a film career that spans over four decades and he has captured and maintained the interest of each new generation. Hopper has starred in movies that not only proved significant in their own day, but later achieved recognition as cult classics. In the fifties it was Rebel Without a Cause; in the sixties, Easy Rider, in the seventies, Apocalypse Now, and in the eighties, Blue Velvet. BLACK DAHLIA This decade, Hopper is truly ubiquitous. We've seen him in blockbuster hits (Speed), lackluster hits (WaterWorld), and Gen-X cult flicks (True Romance). We've even switched on our television sets to be greeted by his menacing stare as he enticed us to buy Nikes. Most surprising, though, was Hopper's decision to venture into the medium of computer gaming. BLACK DAHLIA, his second CD-ROM project with game developer Take 2 Interactive, is due to ship next month. Some may recall Hopper's first foray into the medium: He did a voice-over in Take 2's less-than-stellar HELL: A CYBERPUNK THRILLER, which received a one-star review from CGW in 1995. Why would an actor of Hopper's caliber commit to another PC game after the first project was considered (at least critically) a disappointment? Hopper is very honest about his involvement with Take 2. He took on the first project, HELL, at the request of CEO Ryan Brant, who is the son of one of Hopper's good friends, Peter Brant. \"I got involved [through) the family and I did the first CD-ROM, which I enjoyed,\" Hopper explains. He also stands to gain from Take 2's success: \"I have stock in the company, which makes me more interested. Short takes on games and hardware released just prior to press time. THIS JUST IN MEAT PUPPET MEAT PUPPET's three-quarters, isometric view and rampant gunplay may remind gamers of the CRUSADER series of games, but MEAT PUPPET is its own twisted, highly enjoyable animal. As Lotos Abstraction, reluc tant assas sin, you'll shoot, gas, and explode your way through a highly detailed landscape of rotting urban blight. MEAT PUPPET's wicked sense of humor, exemplified by truly warped monsters and a day-care center from Hell, sets it far apart from the pack. Remarkably fluid animation (at even the highest resolutions) keeps the action rolling as Lotos mows down scores of bad guys en route to cutting her puppet strings.Robert Coffey Playmates Interactive, (714) 428-2000 Win 95 CD-ROM Reader Service #: 301 STAR WARPED STAR WARPED, the second parody title from the wacky folks at G CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"READ.ME The Black Dahlia While the financial reward may be less substantial, Hopper claims that, for him, the process of making a CDROM is actually no different Take 2's upcoming mystery adventure game, BLACK from making a movie.\"[In] DAHLIA, was inspired by the unsolved murder of the first one I was merely a aspiring actress Elizabeth Short, nicknamed the voice, and (my character] was Black Dahlia by a newspaper reporter who covered animated. And in this one, I'm her case in the '40s. Short's death was thought to be on camera, but the blue connected to the brutal murders of a vicious serialscreen process is the same killer known as the Cleveland Torso Murderer, who was I've been using since never apprehended. was 18 years old.\" Take 2 has also intertwined another historical element Hopper plays a fairly small, but signifiinto this fascinating plot: the rise of Fascism in Europe. cant, part in BLACK DAHLIA. As an agent for Some suspected that the Nazi victory was the result of the CIO (the precursor to the CIA), he finds supernatural assistance, since many of the Fhrer's inner himself kicked off the case he's been circle were fascinated with mysticism, astrology, pagan working on, deemed unstable, and Germanic ritual, and Norse myth. It's doing very well...so I'm a happy placed in a government-controlled saniBLACK DAHLIA combines each of these elements to form an camper,\" he adds with a smile. tarium. Yes, it's another psycho role, \"occult mystery,\" in which you play a rookie detective. Your Hopper admits that working on CD-ROMS but this time he's on our side. investigation of a pro-German subversive group turns into a manon a regular basis is not worth his while, and After years of being cast as the hunt for the notorious Torso Killer. Sucked into the nightmarish he wouldn't do it for anymenacing nut-case, does Hopper world of the supernatural, you must catch the killer before he comone other than long to play the good guy? \"Well, pletes a bloody occult ritual. Ryan Brant. If I've played some nice guysThe game is set in the '40s, and combines FMV with gorgeously \"I've played some you're won Frank Booth in Blue Velvet is rendered backgrounds that can be fully explored. It wonderfully recredering, then, nice guys---Frank a nice guy,\" he jokes ates the feel of the era with authentic costumes, furnishings, and how Take 2 referring to his role as the decor. While this proved somewhat restrictive for artists who had managed to Booth in Blue Velvet sadistic gangster in worked on earlier Take 2 projects (where they had been allowed to let David Lynch's disturbing their creative juices flow freely in designing futuristic settings without is a nice guy.\" Victoria's Secret movie. \"I've played different limits), the final result of the BLACK DAHLIA design is stunning. model Stephanie kinds of roles, but I'm known Although we've yet to see the most important ingredient-actual Seymour for HELL, it's for my heavies. I've made my livgameplay-Take 2 promises that the puzzles in BLACK DAHLIA will be because Ryan's father, Peter, just happens to ing playing those kind of heavies. I plot-based. Add that to the intriguing storyline and sumptuous be married to her enjoy it.\" Charlotte Panther graphics, and the company should have a recipe for success. LIIDID NOTDITO snag It should be no sur prise to fans of the FRONT Parroty Interactive, actually mixes some gameplay with the humor. (Then again, some might argue that Pyst had at least as much gameplay as Myst...) You explore a basement belonging to two dorky brothers from Modesto who've collected so much Star Wars paraphernalia that, in comparison, even those of us with fullblown flight-sim cockpits feel pretty cool. Along the way you'll watch hidden video from Skywalker Ranch, read rejected scripts (the Pulp Fiction meets Star Wars scripts alone are well worth the program's under $20 price tag), mix the genes of your favorite characters, and play the U Don't No Jedi trivia game. There's also a 3D Asteroids game; X. Schwing, a fighting game; Flawed Fighters, and Death Star Destructo, an amusingly simple shooter. Sure to be everyone's favorite? Whack the Ewok, of course. But buy it for the humor, not the gameplay.Denny Atkin Parroty Interactive, (800) 910-2696 Win 95/Mac CD-ROM Reader Service #: 302 series that FPS: BASE BALL PRO '98 has the most robust league management module of any computer baseball game. You can conduct custom drafts, assign players to work on individual facets of their games; run career leagues where players improve and diminish over the simulated years; and choose from managing only to playing part of the game to playing all aspects of the game. It should also be FRONT PAGE SPORTS: BASEBALL PRO '98 WARN SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"TAKE THE GALAXY BY FORCE: Conquer the galaxy through military action, diplomacy or covert operations. With Star Wars Rebellion, those are just a few of the ways to implement strategy and tactics on a grand scale with control of the Star Wars galaxy as the prize. Command the Rebel Alliance or the Galactic Empire. Engage in spectacular battles. Earn the loyalty (or resentment) of some 200 planets. Play in real-time, in single play mode or two player mode over a network, the Internet or direct connect. Is the Force with you? Discover for yourself. e Re NL A . SINO WOO a BB a "


"ARWARS REBELLION TO CONTROL A WORLD-TO COMMAND A GALAXY ZONE LUCAS play it on zone.com Aris for 2 players only For Windows 95 CD-ROM www.lucasarts.com TM &  1997 Lucaslim. Ltd. All rights reserved. Used under authorization CIRCLE READER SERVICE #123 "


"READ.ME A Gamer's Fantasy Will the Greatest Console Role-Playing Series Win Over PC Owners? FINAL FANTASY ranks as one of the most sucmore copies than the cessful franchises in all of electronic entertainCIVILIZATION and Doom franchisment. Squaresoft, the creator of the series, is es combined. legendary in its native Japan, and its premier The FINAL FANTASY games FINAL FANTASY RPG line has sold Super are epic role-playing games Nintendos and now PlayStations. Seven role offering scores of hours of playing games have been created under this gameplay over hundreds of franchise, three of which have been ported to locations and worlds with sometimes dozens the United States. In total, the series has sold of playable characters per game-and that's Final Fantasy Gone Fistin\" With at least five games currently in development using the Quake engine, there's no denying the impact that QUAKE has had on gamers and on gam ing. We're the first to admit that we've spent many a lost weekend indulging in the sheer pleasure of one brutal frag-fest after another. But is there such a thing as going too far? Our latest discovery proves that people will use the Quake engine for anything. QUAKE FISHING, an unofficial patch currently in the works for QUAKE, allows gamers to play the game as fishermen. In single player mode, you can wade through freshwater lakes in search of trout, or track down barracudas in tropical climes. In multiplayer mode, you can choose to be fisherman or fish, and DeathMatches will include underwater combat with scuba gear and spear guns, and even a battle with a great white shark. For more information, swim on over to http://home.att.netlosblancol qfishing/qfishing.html.-Charlotte Panther just on a 16-bit SNES cartridge, the medium of the first six FINAL FANTASY titles. These games break new ground not because of their near endless gameplay, but because of their unparalleled storytelling and drama. PC owners may be skeptical, but we'll soon have a chance to sample Squaresoft's finest. FINAL FANTASY VII, which centers on the worldspanning conflict between a corrupt governiment and a resistance movement, is the latest in the series--and it's set to arrive in the U.S. this September, for the PlayStation. As the first FINAL FANTASY game to use CDs, it could be the grandest of them all. Computer gamers will finally be able to see what all the furor is about when FFVII gets ported to Windows 95 sometime in early '98. It will be an exact port of the U.S. PlayStation version. We'll reveal more about FINAL FANTASY VII in our role-playing forecast next month.-Elliott Chin QUAKE HSHING THIS JUST IN no surprise that the menu-driven system is one of the most arcane and non-intuitive league management modules I've seen. The good news is that it's much faster to run through a season in fast mode than it was in last year's product ---Johnny Wilson Sierra On-Line, (800) 757-7707 PC CD-ROM Reader Service #: 303 history lesson but an afterthought of a game. Robert Coffey Cryo Interactive Entertainment, (888) 557-2796 PC/Mac CD-ROM Reader Service #: 304 the palace of Louis XIV. Painstakingly researched and developed with the landmark's curators, VERSAILLES uses lush graphics, a smooth 3D-engine, and beautiful baroque music to re-create the splendor of the palace. It's too bad that such a well-intentioned prod uct employs only the most hackneyed, uninvolving adventure game conventions and simple, inventory-based puzzles that are unlikely to challenge even casual gamers. A wealth of online historical documentation and an option to tour the palace make VERSAILLES 1685 a nifty HOT 0703 VERSAILLES 1685 VERSAILLES 1685 casts you as a valet charged with foiling a madman's plot to destroy CARMAGEDDON In Europe, CARMAGEDDON's free form, kill-thepedestrians splatterfest is already making censors see red. But if you look beyond the game's unapologetically grotesque premise—the winner leaves the longest trail of entrails-you'll find 36 wicked stunt tracks (when was the last time you did a loop-de-loop in a driving game?); a strong CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"READ.ME Princess Maker 2 PLAYING LATELY CGW Survey 16 NA on Last Months on Month Chart 1. Diablo (Blizzard) 5 2. Civilization II (MicroProse) 3. Duke Nukem 3D (3D Realms) 17 4. Red Alert (Westwood Virgin) 5. Quake (id Software) 6. Heroes II (New World Computing) 7. X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter (LucasArts) 8. WarCraft II (Blizzard) 9. Daggerfall (Bethesda) 10. Magic: The Gathering (MicroProse) 10. Tomb Raider (Eidos) 4 Check your mailbar Wamala survey to 1.500 randomly chosen subscribers each mawh. The results of Playing Lately indicate whal games readers are blowing the most ime or as good to the readers overall quality taking in the 700 700 oc . w 19 c Celeste ACEST Vior S70G Hornal del rent f you think there are no original concepts in computer role-playing, you may want to check out PRINCESS MAKER 2. In PM2, you play the role of a medieval Japanese hero who is trying to raise a heroic daughter. You manage her schedule to determine her skill-set in an extended phase of character generation. Then, when you think she's strong enough, you take her on adventures in a world reminiscent of the In the works console role-playing games. The graphics and sound aren't enhanced from the suc. cessful Japanese console games and prove to be rather monotonous, but the fascinating part of the game is that you are balancing resources and attributes very differi Princess Maker 2 www7 ently from the typical dun. 121023 Wilson geon crawl. Do you send your daughter off to school to study Theology or lido (109129/2130 Martial Arts? Does she TIe results of 2 days of enter the Harvest Festival bake-off, the martial arts tourney, or the dance contest? What personage should she try to impress 2000000S NON OR YOOOooox when she visits the palace? The dialogue and narration are somewhat repetitive, but the style of gameplay is different from any. thing I've ever played. The graphics contain some anachronisms, which may disrupt some gamers' suspended disbelief. Also, since PM2 is set in another culture and another time, some of its obvious sexist assumptions didn't offend me as much as they would have if the game had been set in the modern period. However, being male, I may have a higher threshold of acceptance than a female gamer. Still, if Ignite brings this game into distribution at a reasonable price, it's worth looking at just for its fresh subject matter.Johnny Wilson scellar Art Is u l pull! Gurisaa is so 2 rolnts! Constitutlan Is y 2 points Duris Now . PC Data Best-Sellers 1. X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter (LucasArts) 2. Diablo (Blizzard) 3. Myst (Broderbund) 4. Red Alert (Westwood Virgin) 5. Need For Speed II (Electronic Arts) 6. Microsoft Flight Sim (Microsoft) 7. Redneck Rampage (Interplay) 8. C&C: Counterstrike (Westwood/Virgin) 5 9. MDK (Playmates Interactive) 10. NASCAR II (Sierra On-Line) ** This list indicales which PC games were the top-sellers, as calculated by PC Data, during May, 1997 o Honster physics model; spec tacular acci dents; clever power-ups and awards for stylishly committed mayhem; an instant-replay mode that draws out the comedy in this graphic gore-fest: and brawny, wide-open environments. It's DEATH RACE 2000 with a save game function and the (regrettably) odd bug. And it's killer.Peter Olafson Interplay Productions, (800) INTERPLA Win 95/DOS CD-ROM Reader Service #: 305 SOLDIER BOYZ This just might be the game that drives a stake into the heart of FMV. SOLDIER Boyz, which is basically a shoot ing gallery on video, features actors emoting in a ludicrously overwrought, scenery-chewing style generally reserved for community college productions of Twelve Angry Men. Limp gameplay is hampered by controls that redefine sluggish and unresponsive. Adding to the lameness, this all. video albatross seems to have been shot through a scuba mask smeared with Vaseline, resulting in blurry, Mr. Magoo-like visuals, where enemies are indistinguishable from trees and airplanes. Such sloppy, thoughtless design dooms you to con stant reloading of saved games.--Robert Coffey Bagin DreamCatcher Interactive, (888) 611-9999 Win 95/DOS 5.0 CD-ROM Reader Service #: 306 CAPITALISM PLUS Interactive Magic may have had trouble putting out a good strategy game lately, SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"| THE CARMAGEDDON XV5: «Snapact Car of the Year» Car & Pedestrian Magazine «Best road-kil compacter in th class. J.D. Couver @ Asociates «It slices, it dices, it wipes clean in a jiffy.» Consumer. Contorts TRUE 3D, 360° GRAPHICS ENGINE FEATURES USERDEFINABLE CAMERA ANGLES, INSTANT REPLAY AND SVGA OPTIONS 25 DIFFERENT VEHICLES, EACH FEATURING ACCURATE DRIVING PHYSICS AND REALISTIC COLLISION DAMAGE 36 RACE TBACKS AND 5 DIFFERENT RACE ENVIRONMENTS FEATURE COMPLETE FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT *Shown with optional hood ornament. Some race for glory. Some for money. Then there are those who drive for the sheer ecstasy of crunching bones against their bumper. Introducing Carmageddon. The racing game that separates the men from the grease spots on the road. Drive whatever you want, wherever you want, over whoever you want. You make the rules. THEISEUM _NETWORK PLAY INCLUDES 7 MODES AND 3 UNIQUE TRACKS PEDESTRIANG=\"0/NTS! ARRIVING | JULY 1997! Available on PC CD-ROM Test drive the demo at www.interplay.com, STOMACH-CHURNING REALISM. CRASH, CHUMPLE, BUBIN, SKID, AND JUMP IN GLORIOUS 3D! BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS.TW "


"520 HORSES UNDER THE HOOD. EVEN MORE PEDESTRIANS ON TOP. +1:31 2250 CREDITS six coMBO BONUS! POWER-ASSISTED 4-WHEEL DISC BRAKES, FOR MANEUVERING THROUGH PILE-UPS.. OR CAUSING THEM. SHIFT-ON-THE-FLY 4-WHEEL DRIVE MEANS YOU'LL NEVER MISS THE BIG BEACH PARTY AGAIN. CARMAGEDDON HIGH-TENSILE-STRENGTH STEEL BODY PANELS PROVIDE THE DURABILITY YOU NEED, IMPACT AFTER IMPACT. MATURE THE RACING GAME FOR THE CHEMICALLY IMBALANCED. mo 1987 and trademark SCI. All rights reserved. Interplay is the trademark of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Exclusively published and distributed by Interplay Productions. All other copyrights and trademarks are the property of their respective owners. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #067 STANLES Sci "


" READ.ME 3D Iron Works in this edition of the Works, we've got early data on NVIDIA's Riva 128 board, as well as early specs on new parts from Trident, Chromatic Research, and Oak. We put an NVIDIA Riva 128 reference board with beta 4 drivers through some initial tests, comparing it to Diamond's Monster 3D (which uses 3Dfx's Voodoo chipset) and VideoLogic's Grafix Star 600 (which uses Tseng Labs' ET 6000 chip), running on a Gateway Pentium 166 (no MMX) with 16MB of RAM. In QUAKE's Time Demo tests at 320x200 and 640x480, the Riva 128 goes neck and neck with the ET 6000 board, an impressive feat. On the 3D side, Riva 128's 3D WinBench score is only two-yes, two-WinMarks behind the score posted by the Monster 3D. Given that the Riva's drivers are beta-again, an impressive feat. STB will most likely be shipping a Riva 128-based board as you're reading this, and we've heard that another large boardmaker is also working on a Riva 128 board. STB's board, the Lightspeed 128/3D, will hit the street at $199 with 4MB of SGRAM. Trident, which was among several 2D chip A 3D scene rendered with Oak Technology's makers to team up with Warp 5 chip. 3Dfx and its Voodoo Rush part, has announced details on the 3D Image 985DVD, a full-featured 2D/3D part that will support the 2X AGP interface. Like several second-generation designs, the 985DVD sports an on-chip setup engine, and supports subpixel positioning for more accurate rendering. Although no boardmakers have announced products using the 985DVD, Trident has announced demo ports of Eidos' TOMB RAIDER, TERRACIDE, and APACHE. Chromatic Research is working on its Mpact 2 media processor, the successor to the first-generation Mpact/3000 chip. Chromatic's Mpact does have some 3D acceleration functionality, but the chip's design emphasis is to be a media processor first and a 3D accelerator second. The second-generation Mpact 2, which uses Rambus memory technology, adds circuitry to bring Mpact 2's fea. ture-complete 3D acceleration abilities more on par with the competition. Mpact 2-based boards will most likely be shipping later this year. Oak Technology showed its Warp 5 chip at E3, and this could be a very interesting 2D/3D part. As is the case with VideoLogic/NEC's PowerVR, Warp 5 has a chunk-based 3D rendering engine, and supports on-the-fly z buffering, but Warp 5 also supports on-the-fly trilinear filtering. The initial demo looks very impressive, but Warp 5 will only initially interface with the PCI bus, with an AGP version to follow. Last, but by no means least, Intergraph has announced a 3Dfx Voodoo Rush-based board called the Intense 3D Voodoo, which should be shipping soon after you read this.-Dave Salvator THIS JUST IN ness world. Only hard-core Cyber-Magnates need apply.--Martin E. Cirulis Interactive Magic, (800) 789.1534 PC CD-ROM Reader Service #: 307 but they know a win ner when they see one. CAPITALISM was the best business game ever made, and this latest installment can only make arm chair market analysts happier. While C+ doesn't offer enough to be a full-fledged sequel, it is certainly a power upgrade (l-Magic is offer ing a $20 rebate to CAPITALISM Owners) and brings the new options, graphics, and markets that make a big game bigger...and better. Despite the excellent tutorial, this game still isn't for those with only a casual interest in the busi games, and maze games. Compounding the poor gameplay is lame humor. The jokes just don't have enough action to be slapstick and not enough ideas to be conceptual. The only \"goofy\" component of the X-DECATHLON will be the folks uninformed enough to buy it.Matthew Schaefer Microforum, (800) 465-CDCD PC CD-ROM Reader Service #: 308 COLD GOOCH GRUNDY'S GOOFY X-DECATHLON Do you find the humor of the Police Academy movies a little highbrow? Then GOOCH GRUNDY'S GOOFY X-DECATHLON may suit you just fine. Attempting to be a wacky sports game, it seems closer to ten early '80s-style arcade games with snappy graphics, all sold in one package. Events include variations of running games, jumping CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"ATI Takes Xcitement to Xtremes MORE FEATURES FEATURE XPERTOPY Creative 3D Blaster Diamond Monster 3D (RAGE PRO) (Verite 1000) (304) Triangle Setup Engine 4KB Texture Cache Binea/Trilinear Filtering Special Effects Tentare Comasing Specular Highlights, Texture Decompression Alpha Bindeglio . 2D Acceleration Ray Is Fak  True Colour Video in any Mode If you can see it, you can be it when you're an ATI XPERT@Play  Unequaled 3D features and powerful acceleration for immersive 3D that blows away game consoles  High performance 3D, 2D, MPEG-2/ DVD ready video with big screen TV-out display in one card  Brute force 3D horsepower with setup engine texture cache, edge anti-aliasing, texture with decompression and more: -1.2 million triangles/second -75 million textured pixels/second  Optimized for MMX processors for full screen, full motion MPEG-2 playback  Balanced performance for the best in Direct 3D, DirectDraw and DOS gaming  Up to 8MB of high performance \\SGRAM for 1280 x 1024 fully textured 3D resolution  XPERT@Play supports the award-winning ATI-TV add on card the best TV tuner and video capture card Indudes FORMULA 1 and Terracide FREE Check out www.atitech.com or call (905) 882-2600 KILLER 3D PERFORMANCE AT XPERT Play Matrox Mystique Gedfire 30 Bluser Gedire Gisley Higher wimbers are better STANDARD VERSION ATI 3D VERSION DEST TUME 8:29.919 S:20.8 \"EDS EN L 624 TOTAL TOTAL SHUP 2 AEIPERTEPloy A XPERT@Play  TI-TyaCopyright 1997. All iechilogies Inc. 471. XPERT & Play, All-TV, and 30 RAGE PRO are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of All Technologies Inc Al other company and/or product names are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of their respective manufacturers. Features, performance, and Specifications may vary by operating environment and are subject to change without notice. Products may not be as exactly shoan 3D WinBench 97. ona Pu 266 Mhz, 512K cache 32MB SDRAM, PCI bus at 640x480x16553 7513.2 Screen shot examples from FORMULA L. FORMULA 1 is the creation of PSYGNOSIS. Terracide is a registered trademark of Eidos Interactive. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #106 Now You See It. "


"BETHESDA SOFTWORKS presents EXPERIMENTAL RACING \"Outstanding..., Car should rush past die uurrent pole-sitters and lake the checkered flag.\" Computer Gaming World \"Not only does XGar use Bethesda's impressive 30 X.Gines to deliver stunning graphics, but there are also more options, tracks and tweakable features than most racing games could ever hope to deliver.\" PC Gamer \"Superb graphics and realism...pure releitor the terminally gridlocked.\" -Strategy Plus XCar redefines lie Pacing sim. Deslied wjecome a =-Sim Baking News POWERED) 37, Test drive XCar at WWW.xcar.com XCaro, XGine, Bad Dog logo and Bethesda Softworks are trademarks of Media Technology Limited, 1996 Media Technology Limited. All Rights Reserved. All other trademarks. Innos orfanhics are the pronerly of their respective owners. "


"Pursue your passion! dih AWAM, SHAMPVOY 19 Race one of 16 prototype XCars. The latest experimental racing vehicles! Road Pilot... Wheel Jockey... Speed Demon... You defy all descriptions. As a sports prototype racer, you're a study in extremes: part engineer, part daredevil. You alone command the reins of auto racing's new thoroughbred prototype The XCar. Forged in a high-tech machine lab, the XCar experimental prototype is the pinnacle of automotive racing science. \"Drivers, start your engines...\" The words ring in your ears like a childhood dare. Craving speed, you gun the engine. Punching the accelerator, you launch down the track like a bat out of hell. Exploding from the pack, you muse, 'Speed Demon' isn't so bad after all... Includes Network and : Modem support for multi-player racing 42 The first true hard core racing simulation with an arcade mode for those who just want to experience the pure fun of racing FAST! 2-3) SPA SP/ liritti Actual IBM screens shown Edel Experience brilliant high res ISVGA) graphics at sustained frame rates. X Car is the most beautiful and fastest racing game on the market! SAVE Test drive your prototype and customize every aspect of your car's performance using cutting-edge racing technology We Q EMC mid Olio GrottORICO BUL TI TORTILLRT mutnam and Scotland.pn verture Includes a library of real racing circuits and fantasy tracks. You can race Lime Rock, the streets of Seattle or around Mayan temples! UEFHESDA SOFTl034S PENTINITTKEVINERI TV PINK King To Mom 18. MID-OHIO SPORTS CAR COURSE 1370 Piccard Drive, Suite 120 Rockville, MD 20850-4304 BBS: 301 990-7552 Fax: 301 926-8010 Website: http://www.bethsoft.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #372 V ESRE THRUSTIVIESTER. "


"READ.ME RED STORMDIQNIDE Tom Clancy's New Company Wants To Bring Multiplayer Gaming to the Masses ccording to an author He cut his gaming teeth on Avalon Red Storm Entertain acquaintance of Hill and Strategy & Tactics ment's battle plan calls for mine, \"Everyone boardgames, and he has also crafting games that are simthinks that technoplayed a number of computer titles, ple mechanically, but deep in thrillers comprise a including THE COLONY by Dave execution, like Chess or Go. hot genre, but that Smith-a complex, late '80s Mac The first release is TOM really isn't the case. Tom Clancy is hit, which opened Clancy's eyes to CLANCY'S POLITIKA, specifia hot genre pretty much by himself. the possibilities of computercally designed for online If he stopped writing, most of the games. Through Smith, Clancy play. This game focuses on rest of those novels would go the teamed up with the Virtus e the political free-for-all that way of the dinosaurs.\" One could Corporation to form Red Storm. would ensue in Russia say the same about the techno. According to Clancy, \"The PC should Boris Yeltsin step thriller as game it's been several platform isn't where it needs to be down, and it employs a turn. years since RED STORM RISING although Windows 95 helps. What based motif-actually (MicroProse) topped the PC best we want is to be on the cutting playtested as a boardgameseller lists. So, why is Tom Clancy edge of multiplayer gaming.\" that allows for plenty of chat moving full-bore into interactive . When Tom Clancy says that Red sessions between turns. The entertainment? According to Clancy. Storm will eventually bring PC result is sort of Diplomacy TOM CLANCY Author as game the short answer is, \"It's fun.\" gaming to the mainstream-the with dice, complete with designer: Can he succeed where so many have failed? The long answer is that it's also Holy Grail for all computer game hard-line KGB operatives, potentially very lucrative. Red companies-you have to believe it idealistic reformers, the ously. Our only regret is that Red Storm Entertainment is much more has a better chance than most, if resurgent power of the Church, and Storm evidently won't be doing any than your typical venture capitalist only because Clancy's name on even the Russian mafia. Random Jack Ryan games: Paramount computer-game startup. Unlike the box ensures a certain degree political events crop up to keep Studios owns those character rights many authors, Clancy is a gamer of market interest. replays from becoming stale. But the gaming industry, like techno Lest you think that Red thrillers, often has plot twists you Storm simply wants to rein can't foresee.... Terry Coleman POLITICAL ATTACK TAYMYRIA vent the boardgame on the CHALLENGER Internet, remember that POLITIKA will be one of the Amy OK, wat dla do bokep from bosing my blen in DEFENDER first major Java gaming Na Hrmm. Everything bolas so good How scout space of releases. Also in the works is Amy Wrar? No way. Ti son you chole on the bodies of my boyal a top-secret project, code. NB: Tsk K Guess Pillave crush you fete bug you . named POTEMKIN, that both Clancy and Red Storm CEO 15 150,000 F Doug Littlejohns hint will rev. OMISK KHAKASSIA olutionize traditional computDOUG LITTLEJOHNS This decorated PUTES NOD er strategy gaming. When Royal Navy Commodore brings a W W Has anyone noticed low fat dopy the you consider the military and wealth of military knowledge game design contacts that personnel-handling skills, and Hey! Back cft I think you should be more Clancy has, including his for respectability to his position as r 2017 15 9 3300,000 Nationalists Red Storm Entertainment's presi00:25 / 011203 NatWhat mer coauthor Larry Bond sound consund, dent and CEO. He also makes a TOM CLANCY'S POLITIKA Soviet political upheaval breeds good-natured ed (HARPOON), it's hard not to good foil for Clancy. Internet gaming conspiracies. take this new company seri. Hanow? MOSCO Gretroceni support for Are So you in Vol Ba Guy MGB You resort me. Rot the doo, kuretest SNNOVAEM MS Noticias e gatting? Cheche Ooco. Good cat Hadit roced the world scout the WGB. Ref. Of coutse you do, Beb. Here your worst prebi KGB's Tumn: rack Phase   Amy in Moscow UWM Waduator corre curd for you it CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"READ.ME ACES OVER ATLANTA Pipeline 11/97 10/97 THIS AIN'T NO SIM: CGW simulation writers Robin \"Sandman\" Kim (silver plane) and Denny \"Mitty\" Atkin (rear aircraft) fly formation over Atlanta in ex-military T-34A trainers. In the week preceding E3, Microsoft held a contest in which players took to the virtual skies in a pre-beta version of its FIGHTER ACE online flight sim. The top six players would win the chance to engage in real combat over Atlanta in Skywarriors' laser-equipped T-34A trainers. When the scores were tallied, three of the top four slots went to CGW stalwarts: contributors Tom \"Thunk\" Basham and Robin \"Sandman\" Kim, and Features/Simulations Editor Denny \"Mitty\" Atkin. We'll have a full report on the Sandman vs. Mitty flight in next month's issue. Fall 97 CARMACK KISSES HIS FERRARI GOODBYE Early 98 10th Planet Bethesda Aces: X-Fighters Sierra Christmas 97 Age of Empires Microsoft 10/97 Agents of Justice MicroProse 1/97 AH-64D Longbow 2.0 EA/Jane's Winter 97-98 Banshee 3DIX Fall 97 Bass Masters Classic THQ 11/97 Black Dahlia Take 2 Fall 97 Blade Runner Westwood 11/97 Byzantine: The Betrayal Discovery Channel 10/97 Challenge # 2 Smart Games 10197 Close Combat Il Microsoft 11/97 Confirmed Kill Eidos Fall 97 Curse of Monkey Island LucasArts Fall 97 Daikatana lon Storm 11/97 Demon Isle Sierra Die by the Sword Interplay Summer 97 Earthsiege 3 Sierra Late 97 Epic Warhammer 40K: Redemption SSI Christmas 97 European Air War MicroProse Christmas 97 F-16 Aggressor Virgin Fall 97 F-22 Air Dominance Fighter DID 10/97 F-22 Raptor NovaLogic Christmas 97 Falcon 4.0 MicroProse Spring 98 Fallout Interplay Fall 97 Fighter Squadron Activision 11/97 Flight Unlimited II Looking Glass FPS Football 98 Sierra 11/97 FPS Skiing Sierra 10197 Golgotha crack.com Fall 97 Half-Life Sierra Valve Fall 97 Heavy Gear Activision Fall 97 iF-16 Viper Interactive Magic Fall 97 Intel740 3D Chip Intel Christmas 97 Jane's F-15 EAJane's Joint Strike Fighter Eidos 10/97 King's Quest: Mask of Eternity Sierra Legends '98 Football Accolade 9/97 Madden NFL 98 EA Sports 1/98 Microsoft Baseball 3D Microsoft 10/97 MIG Alley Empire 10197 Might & Magic VI New World 10/97 Myst 2: Riven Broderbund NHL 98 EA Sports 11/97 NHL Powerplay 98 Virgin 10/97 Pacific Tide Star Fall 97 Panzer General II SSI 11/97 Populous III EA/Bullfrog Fall 97 Prelude to Waterloo TalonSoft 9197 Prey Apogee/3D Realms Spring 98 Quake II Id/Activision 10/97 Quest For Glory V Sierra 11/97 Redguard Bethesda Late 97 Return to Krondor 7th Level Early 98 Screamin' Demons Activision Winter 97-98 SimCity 3000 Maxis Christmas 97 SODA Off-Road Racing Papyrus Fall 97 StarCraft Blizzard 10/97 Starship Titanic Simon & Schuster Steel Panthers III SSI 11/97 Su-27 Flanker 2.0 SSI Winter 97-98 TFX 3 DID Late 97 Tomb Raider 11 Eidos 11/97 Tone Rebellion Logic Factory Fall 97 Trespasser: Jurassic Park DreamWorks Winter 97-98 Unreal Epic GT Interactive Fall 97 WarCraft Adventures Blizzard 12/97 Warhammer II: Dark Omen SSI 11/97 You Don't Know Jack TV Berkeley Systems 10/97 Zork: Grand Inquisitor Activision Fall 97 erra 12197 Fall 97 Dennis Fong, also known as Thresh, of the Legends Clan, was crowned DeathMatch king, after battling it out against 15 other finalists in the Red Annihilation Tournament at E3. The tourney-sponsored by Intergraph, id, Rendition, Mplayer, and ClanRing-began back in April, with almost 2000 contestants competing in preliminary DeathMatches over the Internet. After an intense battle with runner-up Elvin Kimzey, a.k.a. Entropy9, Thresh walked away with the grand prize, a red 1987 Ferrari 328 GTS, donated by id's John Carmack. (Carmack viewed the gift as a way to give something back to the gamers who have contributed to his own success.) Thresh also won an Intergraph TD-20 3D Ultimate Game System-the machine used by the sixteen finalists in the DeathMatch competition. THE GRAND PRIZE: John Carmack's 1987 -Charlotte Panther Ferrari 328 GTS. Image used by permission of Xtreme Prejudice at www.xtremeprejudice.com The Winner of the Red Annihilation Tournament, Dennis Fong, a.k.a. Thresh. SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"The Baron TUOROV 13070 ullets riddle your plane, shattering wood and shredding canvas. The sky screams with red tracers, smoke and explosions. And as the Red Baron himself blasts out of the sun's glare... as your palms start to sweat and your pulse races... as you hear the ominous groan of stressed wings the instant before they shatter... you realize that this is much more than just a game. This is a taste of history. And your next move will determine whether you become a legend... or another kill in the Baron's book. Eight years ago we set the standard for flight simulation with a product so timeless and revolutionary that it has remained unchallenged... until now. The Baron is Back Visit our website and download the original Red Baron for free! www.sierra.com/RB2 A SIERRA. Dynamix 1997 Sierra On-Line, Bellevue, WA 98007. and/or TM designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. Windows 95 is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. 006713000 "


"is Back PAINT PLANE Folcker Dr.1 Plane Part pat tep ver three years in the making, Red Baron II is an epic achievement. From gamer directed features to state-of-the art technology, it is the ultimate recreation of the men, machines and experience that marked the birth of aerial combat. Anny Loa Plane List Cance! Export Import Du The Dynamix Mission Builder\" allows players to completely customize their missions. Dynamix's revolutionary new ACE AI system recreates the skills, tactics and personalities of historical and non-historical pilots with unbelievable realism. Dynamix's revolutionary new 3Space 2.0\" engine takes a giant leap ahead of the competition with unmatched realism in terrain modelling. User-definable difficulty levels for players of all skill levels. Multiplayer dogfighting action featuring internet, network and head-to-head modem support. Fly single missions for quick action or select Campaign play for a full tour of duty. The Plane Paintshop' allows players to customize the colors, insignias and look of their planes, using either provided patterns or by importing artwork of their own from any standard paint program. Over 40 unique aircraft with 22 lyable planes, Red Baron Red Varoni CIRCLE READER SERVICE #370 "


"You're being spanked big-time in deathmatch, dodging a barrage of rockets. What are you going to do... run and hide like a little kid frantically searching for the right key? Get Real... Real 6D... Space Orb 360! www.spaceorb.com WORLD LEADER IN 6D MOTION CONTROL COPYRIGHT 1997 DELIMA VISIT THE SPACETEC IMC WEB SITE: WWW.SPACETEC.COM CIRCLE READER SERVICE #247 "


"READ.ME PLUG IN. THINK FAST. PLAY FOR All Aboard the Real-time Bandwagon REAL INTRODUCING ... nce in a while a game company comes along with a winning formula and, suddenly, everyone else jumps on the \"me too\" bandwagon. After the success of COMMAND AND CONQUER, We were hardly surprised that every other title we saw at this year's E3 just happened to be a real-time strategy game. Here's a quick look at the ones you can expect to see on store shelves before Christmas. And this is just the tip of the iceberg. In our November issue, we'll have a comprehensive guide to all the real-time strategy games in the works, so that you can find out which games are really worth shelling out for. Discovery Channel Games WarGames that you can ....... Prepare your imagination for the real world. Netstorm Age of Empires Army Men Captives Close Combat 2 Conquest Earth Constructor Dark Colony Dark Omen Dark Reign Dominion Dungeon Keeper Evolution Gettysburg MAX 2 Myth Netstorm Outpost 2 Pax 2 Populous III Rebellion SimCity 3000 StarCraft Stratosphere Total Annihilation WarGames War Wind II alalalalalalallll. Microsoft 3DO Sierra Microsoft Eidos Acclaim SSI SSI Activision 7th Level Bullfrog Discovery Firaxis Interplay Bungie Activision Conquest Earth Sierra THQ Bullfrog LucasArts Maxis Blizzard Acclaim GT Interactive MGM Interactive SSI Total Annihilation NES BUCU ELLELE Coming this fall from Discovery CHANNEL MULTIMEDIA SimCity 3000 Outpost 2 SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW CIRCLE READER SERVICE #062 "


"IF THE THOUGHT OF Please mention Special Offer NC1736 Call (800) 757-7707 Only $49.95 90,000 LBS. OF DOOR-TO-DOOR ROLLING THUNDER THRILLS YOU, WAIT 'TIL IT'S IN YOUR LIVING ROOMRace door to door with Dale Earnhardt or other favorite NASCAR drivers! 3 W NASCAR 300 ... PC Gamer called NASCAR Racing \"...simply the best racing sim ever created.\" Here's what makes NASCAR Racing 2 even better: 1996 season cars, drivers and 16 tracks provide up-to-the-minute realism Crew chief and spotter audio alert you to track conditions Fast and easy Arcade Mode lets you jump in and start driving New, easier mouse-driven interface Network play for up to 8 drivers Faster graphics/frame rate in SVGA Officially licensed by NASCAR Print Load Save Delete Return NASCAR Racing is also available for the Mac Change tires, gears, suspension, and more to and the PlayStation Game Console In-car view puts you in the middle of the racing customize your car to your driving style in Sim mode NASCAR action. Ten KIDS TO ADULTS SIERRA See your local software dealer or for a taste of the action, PAPYRUS download our demo from http:/www.sierra.com/papyrus Sierra On-Line, Inc. and/or TM designato trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. NASCAR Racing 2 is officially licensed by NASCAR. Papyrus and Papyrus logo are trademarks of Papyrus Design Group Inc, PlayStation and the PlayStation logos are trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. The name and likeness and marks of 3 GM Goodwrench Service stock car and Dale Earnhardt, are licensed with Date Earnhardt. Inc, CIRCLE READER SERVICE #363    "


"READ.ME MAKE ONE MISTAKE AND YOU'RE where can HISTORY. Where f these titles sound familiar, that's because we've been talking about them for more than a year. Yes, these are the games we were looking at in our post-E3 fall forecast last year, while we were still going under the assumption that each would ship by Christmas 1996. At press time, a few of the games were close to release, some of them were still a long way off, and others had disappeared altogether. Can you say Vapor Ware? PLANET EXPLORER Genre Strategy Adventure RPG Adventure Sim THE BETRAY AL RPG Title Agents of Justice Blade Runner Dark Earth Dog Eat Dog Falcon 4.0 The Indestructibles Into the Shadows The Island of Dr. Moreau Lands of Lore II NFL Legends Football Planetfall Return to Krondor Space Bunnies Must Die Star Fleet Academy StarCraft Ultima Online Company MicroProse Westwood Kalisto Trilobyte MicroProse EA/Bullfrog Scavenger/GT Psygnosis Westwood Accolade Activision 7th Level Flux Interplay Blizzard Origin Ship Date November 197 November '97 September '97 On hold Spring '98 Dead Dead Fall '97 October '97 September '97 Dead January '98 Dead Summer '97 October '97 Fall '97 Action Adventure RPG Sports Adventure RPG Action Space Sim Strategy Adventure RPG A dangerously authentic world where the characters, places and mysteries are so real...you may never solve your way out. Agents of Justice Falcon 4.0 Coming this fall from Discovery CHANNEL Lands of Lore II MULTIMEDIA StarCraft www.planetexplorer.com SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW CIRCLE READER SERVICE #063 "


"PC GAMER EDITORS Upgrade your standards. CHOICE June 1997 CHOICE July 1997 *** July 1997 coic EDITORS AWARDS GAMES 1.9.97 January 1997 Computer & Net PLAYER RED PEFER June 1997 Tamuly RECOMMENDED February 1997 Start FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS CALL TOLL FREE: 1-888-FALCON-1 or 1-800-258-6778 ... www.falcon-nw.com Falcon Northwest's MACH V series of custom bulitros hand crafted silicon for those who accept only the best Custom built PGs starting at $2,495 for game playing, graphics, game design or even getting me work done CIRCLE READER SERVICE #257 "


"READ.ME EVOLVE OR DIE News Flash >> Hipnotic Interactive, developer of QUAKE Mission PACK No.1: SCOURGE OF ARMAGON, recently announced that it has changed its name to Ritual Entertainment, following a trademark dispute. The old name was too simi lar to one already being used by another game developer, Hypnotix (which developed WETLANDS for New World Computing). Despite the different spelling of its name, Hipnotic was unable get around the trademark issue. Ritual is currently developing Sin, a first person 3D action game using the QUAKE engine, to be published by Activision. and Windows NT games. The group, which included id Software's John Carmack and John Romero from lon Storm, indicated that they would find the means to use OpenGL as the hardware API in many upcoming products, whether or not Microsoft supported it. Because of Microsoft's control over the operating systems, however, it would make life easier for developers if Microsoft agreed to work with them to provide OpenGL on its platforms. As of press time, Microsoft had not responded to the letter. Evolution TILE GAME OF INTELLIGENT LIFE A Darwinian strategy >> Electronic Arts recently entered into an agreement with SimCity developer Maxis to acquire the company for approximately $125 million in stock. Maxis stands to benefit greatly from EA's extensive worldwide distribution agree. ments, while EA can look forward to adding the highly successful franchise of SIM products, including the flagship title SimCity, to its line-up. The merger is expected to be completed by the end of August 1997. Electronic Arts also recently announced the appointment of former Virgin Interactive executives Neil Young and Chris Yates to manage the company's Texas-based studio, Origin. Young will serve as vice president and general manager of Origin. Yates has been named vice president and chief technology officer. Prior to working at Virgin, Yales was vice president of research and development at Westwood Studios. >> Forgotten Realms' popular AD&D role. playing game NEVERWINTER NIGHTS, which has been available free to subscribers on AOL'S Games Channel, may be removed from the service when WorldPlay (formerly ImagiNation Network) becomes the primary programmer for premium games on the Games Channel. Responding to the cries of disappointed gamers, Engage Games, which owns the online license to NEVERWINTER NIGHTS, is looking into ways to bring the game back to the Web. The transition will not be easy, as the game's code is five or six years old and will require a considerable overhaul to make it sta: ble. Another option is to revamp the product completely, but either solution could result in a loss of continuity within the game. GEMSTONE III, another popular role playing game that faced the same dilemma, has been moved to the Web and is now available through Simutronics. As of press time, the future of NEVERWINTER NIGHTS was still in question. game where you either get smart... or go extinct. Virgin Interactive has announced a new domestic publishing agreement with Capcom that will enable it to publish the best-selling PlayStation title, RESIDENT EVIL, on the PC. Available from Virgin this summer, the PC version of the contemporary horror story promises to deliver the same intense gameplay as the PlayStation title, and will have 3D-acceleration support for Rendition, 3Dfx, and PowerVR. among others. >>> Red Orb recently announced the name of the next installment in its JOURNEYMAN PROJECT series. THE JOURNEYMAN PROJECT 3 will be subtitled LEGACY OF TIME, and will continue where its predecessor, BURIED IN TIME, left off, following the heroic exploits of Agent 5, Gage Blackwood. As you travel through the ages to investigate a historical time dis. tortion, you'll find yourself untangling an intricate web of puzzles, on your search for clues critical to the survival of mankind. LEGACY OF TIME is scheduled for release right after this Christmas. Coming this fall from Discovery >>> Some of the industry's best known game developers recently released an open letter to Microsoft, urging the company to actively support the OpenGL 3D API for Windows 95 CHANNEL MULTIMEDIA evolution.discovery.com SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW CIRCLE READER SERVICE #064 "


"YOU'VE LOOKED Even your high school yearbook picture was more becoming than this. But as an alien, glamour is not high on your agenda. So, bust out of the traditional strategy game mold, morph into a human and make enemies with your friends. Conquest Earth is a world you'll want to step into very carefully. 0 AMAZING GRAPHIC EFFECTS COMPUTER PLAYER RIOUSLY UA DETAILED REAL-TIME ACTION\" PC GAMER CONQUESTEARTH WHERE STRATEGY TA KES ON A NEW FORM "


"B ETT E R. You can play either side in this intergalactic strategy game. Instantly morph into a weapon or battle tankeven a human being. When playing the alien side, you'll experience a unique interface with different rules and capabilities. You'll employ never before-seen tactics and strategies to foil your human counterparts. FDZE Vary your strategy to keep your opponents guessing. Keep track by monitoring them through your interface portals. With over 65,000 colors, the action will come to life like never before. Playing the human side, you'll need to manage your resources wisely. Thwart the aliens' attempt to mine oxygen from the atmosphere. Only one race will remain standing after this war. Make sure its yours. www.CONQUESTEARTH.COM EIDOS Conquest Earth and Eidos Interactive are trademarks of EIDOS, PLC. 1997 Eidos CIRCLE READER SERVICE #275 INTERACTIVE "


"A NEW KIND OF FLIGHT SIM IS EXPLODING ON THE SCENE. Flying Nightmares 2 isn't just the next great flight sim. It's a new kind of flight sim. One where you'll need a lot more than quick reflexes to survive. And with so much air and ground action, you may need help. Lots of help. So we designed the most extensive multi-player capabilities ever seen in a flight sim. Up to 16 players over a LAN or internet connection. So don't get left in the blast. Reserve a copy of FN2 now. Full strategy war game 65,000 color, high-resolution graphics Supports up to 16 players Fly both Harriers and Cobras "


"FLYING NIGHTMARES WHERE STRATEGY TAKES FLIGHT www.fin2.com \"FN2 will dazzle you ... an intriguing mix of simulation and strategy... with the potential to redefine the two genres.\" Computer Gaming World RED TEAM READY ROOM ELLENEUVIEW ROSTER HUNTER C KOTION VIEW RED TEAM READY ROOM ELISETUP VIEW HRADOUROSTU O MO 2012 S TOME ARTTA onnan NA DODTIE T ACTION VIEW x DO na33 EIDOS DITO mons 000000 RADION INTERACTIV PARA TENTURE ARTILLERY INFANTRY IMOBIL AASTATIC AA ENGINEER SPECAFOR RECONCAC AIRGROUND CIRCLE READER SERVICE #274 "


"Y here's only one thing more torturous than playing Deathtrap Dungeon. LAN LIVINGSTONE'S DE AT HTR A P.  19eat me: Whip me. Just don't hit that . Quit button.» Consider it your battle cry: Then bring,on the skeletal warriors, zombies and countless other undead denizens. Each one is another chance to slice and dice like a Ginsu\" knife gone bad. Or simply cast a spell "


"Not playing it. www.deathrapdungeon.com Deachtrap Dungeon and Eidos Interactive are trademarks of Edes Interactive, @ 1997 Eidos, Ginsu is a registered trademark of Scott Petzer Company, which is no affiliation with Eidos Intoractive. S on the evil priestess who's done you wrong. Because in this cavernous maze of devious traps, it's all about cheating death at every. : tuin, blurring that firie line between pleasure and pain. And just when you think you can't take it anymore, consider the alternative. . .. . CIRCLE READER SERVICE #276 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #276 ES EIDOS EIDOS NTERACTIVE You've been warned. PlayStation "


"TOMB RAIDER Have yo got yours yet? Action Game of the Year Best Graphics of the Year 95% Rating -PC Gamer If you know Tomb Raider, you know why Lara Croft is the #1 cover girl in gaming. No other game has won more awards, delivered more actionpacked realism, or kicked more ass. Hardcore gamers have made Tomb Raider the undisputed megahit of the year. year. Have your got yours yet? Game of the Year Rated 5 out of 5 Stars -Computer Games Strategy Plus Game of the Year Rated 10 out of 10 -Computer and Net Player CHECK OUT EIDOS INTERACTIVE www.eidosinteractive.com www.tombraider.com EERTH www.conquestearth.com 26 ORE DESIGN INC. Tomb Raider, Lara Croft and her likeness, CORE and Eidos Interactive are trademarks of Eklos, Plc. 1997 Eidos.Conquest Earth is a trademark of Data Design and Eidos Interactive Lara Croft, gaming's #1 covergirl. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #279 "


"FROM THE COMPANY THAT PUSHES YOUR 3D CARD TO THE LIMIT TERRACIDE Terracide is the new technological feast from EIDOS Interactive that exploits the latest 3D acceleration technology. FEATURES INCLUDE: Space-based and interior full 3D 360° flight and combat Card specific effects such as translucency, distance fogging, full colored strobing lights and color-morphing Over 20 lethal weapons, from rapid fire photon cannons to gravity bombs OSTO Network play for up to 16 players with LAN and Internet support 20 Levels spread across 7 ships If you buy only one game on a 3D card this year, it should be Terracide. SE COF SPECIAL EFFECT BEST USE OF Computer Game Dev Developers Confere Compatible with the following chipsets: D EIDOS SIMIS Terracide is a trademark of SIMIS and EIDOS Interactive . Www.eidosinteractive.com You've been warned. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #273 "


"PREVIEWS MYTH: THE FALLEN LORDS Target Release Date: Fourth Quarter 1997 Developer: Bungie Publisher: Bungie Fantasy for Grown-Ups Bungie Plans To Take Real-time Strategy Gaming Into the Third Dimension by Martin E. Cirulis o, folks, this article's title doesn't refer to a game that involves helping supermodels figure out how to get out of their wet cheerleader outfits. It's about a thing rarely found in the realm of computer games: High Fantasy that doesn't insult one's intelligence or maturi ty. While your next assumption might be that! am talking about a CRPG or adventure game, the reality is that MYTH: THE FALLEN LORDS is a tactical level wargame. Previous journeys into the realm of real-time fantasy games have yielded such simple giants as WARCRAFT and such underappreciated gems as WARHAMMER. In actual game mechanics and tone, MYTH resembles the latter, being a real time tactical battle game with a taste of traditional tabletop miniatures wargaming--but it combines serious attitude and style with some of the slickest and most detailed graphics I've ever seen in a strategy game. If Bungie (of Mac MARATHON fame), the company bringing us this potential gem, can keep up the stan. dard of quality and not fall prey to trivializing the dark drama of its subject matter, Myth may just be the kind of breakthrough title for \"serious\" fantasy wargames that Doom was for first-person shooters. Ell/Dwarf/Orc universes, where the rationale for everything is basically \"They fight because Tolkien said so.\" Myth, in contrast, seems to draw its inspiration from darker, more complex and realistic fantasy fiction, to provide a gaming uniVerse that makes you want to play the game as much as it makes you want to plunge into the battles themselves. While there is no official credit given, it's obvious that someone on the design team was a fan of Glen Cook's Black Company series, as this game carries with it that same blend of politics, com. bat, and twisted dark magic. Scenarios and campaigns are the most real: istic I have seen so far, and have a complexity that includes everything from betrayal to winter storms. And these things are not simply props to hang a battle on; they are dynamic processes within the scenario, which beg gamer reaction THE GHOL A minion of the evil Fallen. The Forces of Light must try to stop their unrelenting expansion. I wasn't able to play through the complete set of scenarios that will be included in the final edition of the game, but the ones I did play were up to the highest standards of the genre. The traditional Light vs. Darkness motif moves the action in MYTH, but the units AN INTERVIEW WITH BUNGIE 'he revolutionary 3D engine isn't the only surprise Bungie has in store for gamers. They hope to create a more compelling single-player campaign, with storyand performance-driven scenarios. We were able to ask Bungie to expound on their ideas. CGW: What will the singleplayer campaign be like? Will performance in one mission influence the next scenario? Bungie: Absolutely. We will allow experienced units from one level to advance and replace green units that you would have begun with on the next. That's the first part of the continuity planned for the game; the other is having unkilled enemies show up on subsequent levels, and this is also in the works. IT'S NOT YOUR FATHER'S D&D The first thing you notice about Myth is that it isn't another one of those clichéd CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"PREVIEWS involved are nicely varied and drawn from more esoteric sources than those in your usual fanta sy game. The Forces of Darkness are big on the undead, but instead of the standard zombies and vampires, there are beings that spread rot and corruption when killed, floating undead held aloft by their own decomposition gases, and possessed spearmen who throw poisoned barbs, just to name a few. The Forces of Light have somewhat more traditional troopsarchers, armored warriors, and such-but they are so stylized and detailed that they fit right in alongside the Treemen and Dwarven grenadiers. No fantasy game is complete without magic. artifacts, enchanted weapons, and heroes, and MYTH is no exception. Once again, the design ers have deftly sidestepped tired clichés by lifting some of the more interesting and obscure items from classic mythology and combining them with ideas of their own. I especially like the Evil Heroes, who hover somewhere between champion and demigod and have a fascinating resemblance to Cook's Ten-Who-Were-Taken. morale means that you won't be seeing any fantasy versions of the Battles of Alexander (.e., fights involving 80,000 men).midsize skirmishes of all kinds abound. Although WARHAMMER tried to cover the same tactical base, it was slow and the graphics were a little uninspiring. MYTH narrows the focus a bit, while increasing speed and jumping the graphics up to the same 3D level that only QUAKE gamers have been enjoying so far. Bungie has done such a good job with terrain and atmospher ic effects that they are more like characters in the game than special effects. The ground is changeable, craters form, grass gets scorched and burns away, tracks are left in MYTHING IN ACTION Seasons will change in the campaign, and the terrain will be interactive. Limbs will stay on the ground, and snow will cover tracks. IT CAME FROM THE DEEP Among the cool features is one that allows you to hide in the water. BLOOD ON THE SNOW Of course, all this would be so much window dressing without one of the best combat and graphics engines yet seen in a realtime wargame. Every individual is fully represented and can be commanded through your basic point-andclick interface. You can use reference keys to set groups of units in certain formations and, even more important-unlike other games of this type-the formations actually work. Forming a wedge of swordsmen backed by a line of Fir-Bolg archers works in the game as it would in real life. While the fact that each unit is modeled down to factors such as facing and BLOODY HELL The 3D engine will allow for terrain bonuses. These archers receive attack and range bonuses for being on higher ground, enabling them to paint the ground red with their enemies' blood. CGW: What's innovative or new in your campaign design? Bungie: One unconventional aspect is that gamers will have to figure out for themselves how to finish levels, sometimes despite the instructions they're given. For example, on level 4, Return to Covenant, the Light has sent a band of scouts to retrieve The Total Codex, a tome of great Power. The scouts are besieged by the forces of one of the Fallen and are in danger of losing the Codex to him. At the beginning of the level, the gamer is told that the plan is to fight through the siege lines, secure the Codex, and bring it back to safety through a World Knot (basically a magical teleporter). But, once the gamer has managed to get the Codex and starts running for the knot, he'll find irresistible waves of Thrall blocking his way. He'll probably try a couple of times to kill or divert all of the Thrall, but it won't work. The only way to live is to turn and run, escaping via a road along the Chalk Cliffs, whereupon the level will end and the gamer will advance. After this has happened a few times a gamer will figure out that the world he's in is more complex SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


">YOU ARE STANDING IN ON OPEN FIELD WST OF A WHITE HOUSE... YOU'LL ALWays remember your FIRST TIme underground. Actual 360° views from the game. "


"ACTIVISION ZORK Grand InQUISITOR Since 1979, millions have fought for the love of magic in the Great Underground Empire of Zork. Now the Grand Inquisitor would love to see magic destroyed...and you totemized (a very bad thing) Rock-eating Brogmoids. gondola rides through Hades, and a bored Dungeon Master who lives inside your lantern... It can only happen Underground. Grand opening, FALL 1997 WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM Min d n c 190 Arrivision. Inc. All rights reserved owners. www.CUVINION.com Zuckare mergesteldemarks and Zark Grundquistar is a remarhu I Allar nadam da rade trottinul ther e CIRCLE READER SERVICE #142 "


"PREVIEWS MYTH: THE FALLEN LORDS, the snow and can be followed, and even snow. fall is modeled as it fills in those tracks. The moment when the enemy emerges from the translucent fog is enough to convince you that you are fighting a tactical wargame with a whole new level of environmental realism. Units struggle through rough terrain or up slopes, archers have greater range from the heights, units can hide behind trees, and body parts even roll downhill. LOOKING GOOD At this point, the only major reservation ! have about Myth is that there seems to be no plan for a dynamic mission builder, something a game like this desperately needs, both to increase replay value and to let gamers get the most out of the battle engine. Without this, the current number of set scenarios seems a bit small. Bungie compensates for this somewhat with the excellent multiplayer suite and its own version of battle.net, where gamers will be able to create large multiplayer battles to their heart's content. Perhaps a later expansion could introduce a mission builder, along with a terrain editor and some new units. While there are 20 different types of units at the moment, MYTH seems like the type of game that deserves as much variety as possible. The interface is smooth, and the only quibble I have is that the game needs one more level of zoom-as it is, your eye seems to hover 20 or 30 feet from the surface, and that can be a problem in trees or steep terrain. Unless an unforeseen disaster should strike in the form of Murphy's Law-or Bungie tries to sanitize its wonderfully dark world to attract a younger audience--I feel confident in setting my hopes on this one. Certainly if you have any interest in fantasy wargaming, minia. tures battles, or tactical simulations that are slightly off the beaten track, then start saving your pennies, because if Bungie stays on course, MYTH will land squarely in your must-buy sights. STUMPED Here is a look at one of the Light side's Treemen-giant, treelike humanoids. MY TURN Among the many features of the full 3D engine is a free camera that can rotate and zoom at the gamer's whim, which benefits your observation of the game and helps immensely in forming your strategy, and variable than what's been laid out in the brief instructions to each level. Finally, on a couple of levels the game is not strictly linear There are at least two levels where if the gamer wins with a comfortable margin, he'll have the option of skipping the next level and moving on with the story. CGW: How do you acquire units in the game? Are some restricted in the beginning of the game and will there be units that become available only as you advance in the campaign? Bungie: Each level begins with a preset number of units, which are appropriate to the region you're fighting in and the difficulty level you're playing on-more difficulty, fewer units. You'll start out with basic units like Warriors and Fir-Bolg archers; gradually, stronger ones like Berserks and Avatara will become part of your forces. On some levels you'll get reinforcements when you've progressed enough. In the net game, we're planning on a \"draft\" system of allocating units, giving each gamer points to spend on acquiring units of various strengths, in order to eliminate the monotony of battling against a predictable adversary. CGW: How does the experience point system work? Bungie: Units get markers in their status bar every time they get a kill: For the Light, the markers are shields; for the Dark, skulls. Every kill earned allows the unit to attack more quickly, with greater accuracy and the ability to inflict more damage. Thus, highly experienced units are the best attackers and are also the most important to protect. When they're inexperienced, units are interchangeable, but once an archer has, say, 10 kills, he hits nearly everything he shoots at and is far more devastating than a standard archer. CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"AWE 1. \"We Come In Peace.\" 2. Blasting Ray Guns. 3. People Screaming. 4. \"You Must Believe Mel\" 5. Exploding Buildings. 6. Whirring Space Ships. 7. Brains Being Sucked. 8. Bones Crunching. 9. Aliens Phoning Home. 10. Metallic Scraping. 11. Cars Crashing. 12. Kidneys Bursting. 13. Insertion of Probes. 14. Heads Exploding. 15. \"Run for Cover!\" 16. \"Warning.\" 17. Aliens Melting. 18. Pods Hatching. 19. Destroying the Monster. 20. Buildings Imploding. 21. Spaceships Docking. 22. Boiling Flesh. 23. \"Mayday, Mayday!\" 24. Exploding Spaceship. 25. People Running. 26. \"I saw a UFO!\" 27. Planes Taking Off. 28. \"We're at DefCon 4.\" 29. Aliens Communicating. 30. Children Crying. 31. Slurp. 32. Clinking of Autopsy Instruments. 33. Laser Swords Crashing. 34. \"Hyperspace!\" 35. Flesh Being Torn Off Bones. 36. \"They're coming.\" 37. Wailing Sirens. 38. \"You Must Die.\" 39. \"Beam Me Up.\" 40. Zap!!! 41. Air Locks Closing. 42. \"Oh, My God!\" 43. Lasers Charging Up. 44. \"We Need More Power!\" 45. Ray Guns Blasting. 46. Calling the Mothership. 47. Horns Blaring. 48. \"We Won!\" 49. \"Lock on Targetl\" 50. Crystals Charging. 51. Area 51 Guard: \"No Admittance.\" 52. Zap-Zap! 53. Warning Alarms. 54. Air Locks Opening. 55. \"Set to Stun!\" 56. \"Red Alert!\" 57. Shields Up. 58. Warp Speed. 59. \"Blast 'em!\" 60. Eyeballs Squishing. 61. Spaceships Cloaking. 62. Radar Ping. 63. \"Fire at Will!\" 64. \"Take Me to Your Leader.\" SOUNDS INVASION Sound Blaster AWE64 Value Lapura w lewy The latest Sound Blaster technology is ready to invade your multimedia PC. At an out of this world price, $99.99 (estimated street price), Sound Blaster BLASTER AWE 4 AWE64 Value is your logical upgrade to high-fidelity audio. Hear every eerie sound with frightening clarity with up to 64 simultaneous voices of Advanced WavEffects\" & WaveGuide Synthesis. 512K onboard RAM for SoundFont MORALE samples and high performance, lets you add your own alien sounds. Also included, the hottest Internet software. To learn more about the Sound Blaster AWE64 Value, contact us at: www.soundblaster.com/sound/AWE. C R L A T hogy last sund luster and the Centky a mejorand interests and abune intihar end Creatie IV E WWW.SOUNDBLASTER.COM CIRCLE READER SERVICE #078 C u 1977 Genelechnology Sund Blaster and the Creative legate registered trademarks and Advanced WavEffects and Creative Wendy W are trademarks of Creative Technology and in the United States and/or other countries. Sundfont is a registered trademark of Ema Systems, Inc. in the United States allor other countries. All other name a progetty of their respective owners. All specifications are sub ject to change without prior notice. All rights i nvad. "


"PREVIEWS FALLOUT Target Release Date: Fall 1997 Developer: Interplay Publisher: Interplay Boyz II Mutantz Interplay's \"Spiritual Successor\" to WASTELANDS Looks Promising by Thierry Nguyen Me uur tun t te Groter ? of Lny loss Con Un to stay and Ton. I do? md. The or you? ere's the situa Adjusting your attributes tion: I'm just determines the general percent. wandering ages for skills, which is the around, minding heart of the game. Every characmy own busi ter has the same set of skills; it ness. Then, this is how proficient they are at punk walks by individual skills that makes each and starts yammering about how character unique. The skills I'm trespassing on private properrange from handling different ty. Of course, I ignore him. So weapons to abilities such as then he decides to whip out his stealthiness and lock-picking. 9mm and start taking potshots at When you create your character, me. By that time, I already have you pick three skills to \"boost\" REVIEW mine out, and I just shoot him in and gain some proficiency in. the kneecaps. Then I end his exisWhenever you level up, you get tence with a bullet to the head. YOU TALKIN' TO ME? Dialogues such as this one indicate that a quest is points and can distribute them Such is a typical scene in upcoming. Be careful what you say, as the character will react to your words. among skills. So, a fighter Interplay's new RPG: FALLOUT, a would concentrate on the comcharacter-driven game that takes place in a sider it the unofficial sequel to the ten-year-old bat-intensive skills, while the lawyer would post-nuclear holocaust California. Using the classic, WASTELANDS, and it could be one of opt to improve skills such as speech, bartervision of postapocalyptic life propagated by the better RPGs to be released this year. ing, and gambling. 1950s America, rather than the vision in the After skills come character traits. You get Terminator films (which games so commonly ISN'T THAT S.P.E.C.I.A.L. to choose 2 traits from a menu of 16, and use), FALLOUT already gives us a unique style One thing that FALLOUT Concentrates on is these traits will further round out your charand setting, which is just the start. People concharacter definition. You can choose to play acter. Traits range from mundane ones such the game with three pregenerated charas \"bruiser\" (bigger and stronger but slower) acters (a fighter, a thief, and a diplo t o interesting ones such as \"drug addict\" (the mat), or you can craft your own charac drugs last longer and better, but you need ter. While it doesn't have DAGGERFALL'S them like water). staggering complexity of classes, One trait that I found amusing, though not TAG SKIES 00 races, and skills, FALLOUT manages to very useful in actual character development, make a pretty good skills-based char was \"bloody mess,\" in which you kill people CRAR POINTS 00 acter system. in the most violent ways. 02710XACYRANTS S.P.E.C.L.A.L. is the acronym that lists Finally, the last customization of your char. all the generally static attributes. It stands acter comes in \"perks.\" Every three or four OPTIONS CAL OON for Strength, Perception, Endurance, levels (depending on which traits you adopt), Charisma, Intelligence, Agility, and Luck. you get to pick a perk that will hone some of I'M SO S.P.E.C.I.A.L. Here, I'm focusing on a combatThese attributes form the foundation of your skills even further. Among the numerous intensive character-concentrating on combat skills, your character. In fact, you can modify perks are awareness\" for better perception, buffing up my physique via traits and attributes, and them only during creation. Once you start \"explorer\" for wandering the gameworld, and making myself a \"bloody mess.\" the game, the stats you pick stay that way. \"master trader\" for bartering. SCOOTERS CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"heroin 5 & m unfiltered cigs binge drinking Creamed COFA one night standshell, what's left APULALYS VE APOCALYPSE CSOPOSE X-COM: APOCALYPSE the most addictive (and still good for you) beat the crap out of aliens\" strategy game MICROPROSES www.microprose.com Available on PC CD-ROM. Visit your local retailer or call: 1-800-695-GAME day or night (US. and CAROR] 1907 Mer Gwarg. Ito. A is one on olype . Microproco Software e cher trainiere m ay be repro CIROLE.READER SERVÇE #071 "


"PREVIEWS FALLOUT AS S056 AGLIEK 626 026 TRAPS BR37 A1B 039 DOCTOR 810 KIINE 033 DREA 024 CALIFORNIA DREAMIN' The world of FALLOUT IS the decimated region of Southern California. This map will serve as your primary interface as you wander the world. BELOW THE BELT Targeting in FALLOUT is quite good, as each region can have different effects on your enemy, and you have different chances of hitting it. I GOTS SKILLS Use of the skills outlined in character generation is simply a matter of pulling up a menu and making the skill active. NPC conversations range from simple one-lin e rs that appear over the person's head to full facial dialogues. The facial dialogues usually are reserved for characters with a quest for you, and one of FALLOUT'S selling points are the facial expressions, which change based on what you say and how you act. It is actually pretty enter taining to see someone greet you with a friendly \"Hello,\" and then get angry when you say some thing to the effect of \"You're a complete wuss.\" A BLOODIER DIABLO Once you make your character, you step out of the Vault and into a game world similar to that of DIABLO. That is, you get a three-quar ter perspective on your surroundings in SVGA-graphics. This is the dominant view point system of the game, as exploration, dia: logue, and combat take place in this view. point. But the view system is the only mirror of DIABLO here. Combat is where FALLOUT shows its gritty vio lence. If you have both the game option of \"maximum blood\" plus the character trait of \"bloody mess,\" expect to see instances like punching someone's stomach out, or shooting them into bloody chunks with your machine gun. Even when I killed a giant rat with the simple pistol you get in the beginning, the extra gory touch resulted in one side of its head being completely blown off and its brains flying out. FALLOUT could even surpass CRUSADER in graphic violence. quests, there are some genuinely intriguing ones as well. From what I've played, the best quest so far was where I had to join the Brotherhood of Steel in order to go undercover and see if they were behind the attacks on a certain town. Other quests include: assassina. tion, getting someone to incriminate himself, and either solving or causing a city crisis. And while things do get more complicated than finding a simple chip, I don't want to ruin the plot for you yet. The only real negatives for FALLOUT are some minor quibbles, which will hopefully be corrected by the time it's released, and its graphic violence, but that can be tweaked to make the game less blood-drenched. All in all, FALLOUT looks to be a promising RPG, with a nice emphasis on character development, a good take on setting (the first nuclear holo. caust with doo-wop playing in the background) and more quest variety than the typical quests of many recent RPGs. ONWARD WITH A QUEST... FALLOUT begins with the simple quest: You have to retrieve a replacement water-chip for your Vault. The Overseer gives you 150 days to finish this quest, and you are sent on your merry way. While this is the main quest of the game, there are numerous side-quests you can take. The ones I've actually seen are typi cal item retrievals, like \"Get rad-scorpion tail to make antivenom with\" or \"Rescue hostage from bandits.\" While there will be many boring X-COM Meets DIABLO even though FALLOUT has the look of DIABLO, it has the combat of X-COM. The turn-based combat here is based on the movement point system, where you have a lim. ited number of points and each action costs you a certain amount of points. Combat is initi: ated when an enemy spots you and walks up to you, or when you take a potshot at an enemy. While at first disconcerting, the turnbased combat is pretty good. It gave me time to think through my options before doing anything rash. One cool aspect of combat is the aimed shot, where instead of just hitting someone, you target a specific place. Certain places cause critical damage (like hitting a guy \"below the belt\"), while others will usually cripple them (hitting the legs or the eyes). Also, sometimes you may have an NPC who will tag along and help you in various tasks. During combat, you have no control over your NPC, however. He will simply do his own thing in combat. Currently, the Al is decent, as the NPC will go for the biggest threat based on the NPC's current condition (for example, if the NPC is wounded, it won't go after a scorpion) Also, the NPC can some times get the last shot in for the kill. The enemy Al is smart enough to attempt retreat when the going gets tough. All in all, the combat is good, even though it's a bit foreign. thanks to DIABLO conditioning us to realtime. CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"Nations will rise against nations, and there shall be famines, pestilence and earthquakes in divers places. When these things come to pass, then know that woe has come upon man. joanna Southcott 1800 AD HIGHT. DARKNESS the prophecy Coming this Fall. BY GAMERS, FOR GAMERS www.interplay.com tribaldrcams 01997 Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Artwork @1997 Gil Bruvel. All rights reserved. Of Light and Darkness and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. All other copyrights and trademarks are the properties of their rospective owners. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #077 "


"CLONING SHEEN'T MEAN JACK. 1997 VIRGIN INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT, Inc. All rigtits reserved NITI POWERPLAY is a trademark of the National Hockey League. All NHL logos and marks and team logos and marks depicted herein are the property of the Association NHLIA and MIPA D ant landemaks of the NHLPA and are used under license, by Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc, NHLPA Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, lid, PlayStation and the "


"SBDUER interactivo WE CLONED THE \"DOMINATOR. NTT POWERPLAYOR USA TNPN o 0459 O While pretty close to a gosh-darn miracle, Dolly that cloned sheep really doesn't understand the nuances of the butterfly style. In fact, she's a lot like those other hockey games the ones where all the little computer guys play the same. Claude Lemieux doesn't check like Brindamour in real life, and he doesn't in NHL Powerplay '98 either. Our Patrick Roy doesn't make glove saves like the Dominator, and you'll have a tough time beating our Beezer through the five hole. We use the actual styles and abilities of guys like Fedorov, Shanahan, Leetch and every other player in the NHL to deliver the most realistic hockey game ever created. It's real skating, real physics and real action and it's a helluva lot cooler than cloning sheep. www.vie.com  O 04:20 a EDI 10 9 05 Microsoft Windows PayStation FERRO NHL and the respective teams and may not be reproduced without the prior written consent of WHL Enterprises, LP 1997 NHL. National Hockey League Players PlayStation logos are trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. Microsoft Windows and the Windows logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation, CIRCLE READER SERVICE #246 "


"PREVIEWS IF-16 Target Release Date: September 1997 Developer: Digital Integration Publisher: Interactive Magic Mid-air Precision 1F-16 Aims Squarely at the Middle of the Flight Sim Road by Denny Atkin riginally slated for release last year, this F-16 Fighting Falcon sim comes from the creators of F-16 COMBAT PILOT, an early standard-setter on EGA and Amiga systems. Delays in developer Digital Integration's previous product, HIND, as well as the decision to upgrade the sim's graphics engine, resulted in 1F-16's delivery date slipping to this fall. Unfortunately, the delayed product is no longer state-of-the-art. Still, indications from our pre. view copy are that the game, while not a standard-setter, has plenty to offer the sim fan DDDD NATO FIGHTER Instead of simulating a fresh-from-the-factory plane, IF-16 simulates an early-model F-16 that's been through the Mid-Life Update (MLU) program. Among other enhancements, this adds color Multi-Function Displays (MFDs) and Low-Altitude Navigation and Targeting Infra-Red system for Night (LAN TIRN) pods. Some of the MLU updates haven't even been pur chased by the U.S. Air Force yet (although they're slated to go into some European F 16s), so the virtual fighter you fly will in FLIGHT PLAN The some respects be betMission Planner lets ter equipped than the you alter waypoints and real thing adjust wingman comThe MFDs have mands before flight seven modes: flight information, weapons management, moving map, radar, LANTIRN targeting, autopilot, and aircraft fault status. The real F-16 has an overwhelming number of radar modes, but IF-16 chooses to keep things simple by modeling just two each of the air-to-air and air-to-ground modes. In air combat, Track While Scan (TWS), which can track up to 10 targets, and Air Combat Mode (ACM). designed for homing in on the nearest threat, are available. While the radar systems are somewhat simplified, there's plenty here for the experienced pilot who wants to play with options such as NEW PANELING IF-16 simulates the MLU instrument package, which enabling Raid Cluster includes color multi-function displays. Resolution or adjusting the radar scan azimuth. ments, including AIM-9 Sidewinder and AIMThe LANTIRN system not only gives you 120 AMRAAM air-to-air missiles; laser-guided laser targeting capabilities and night vision, it and IR Maverick air-to-ground missiles; HARM also adds a terrain-following autopilot mode antiradar missiles; and general-purpose, retardthat makes it much easier to slip ed, and laser guided bombs. You'll also find below enemy radar coverage. All Durandel antirunway bombs, rocket pods, clusthe available instruments and tar. ter bombs, a mine dispenser, and an external geting tools are explained in 30mm cannon pod for those stressful days detail in the sim's manual. when 20mm just isn't enough. Basically, if Your F-16 is equipped with a there's something you want to blow up, you full complement of modern arma have the necessary equipment to do the job. You have full control of your weapons load, and you can also adjust default salvo sizes for bombs before taking off. Cockpit viewing systems weren't complete in the beta I tested. The current version has a vir tual cockpit, but the exact implementation of a padlock and fixed views remains to be seen. Damage modeling is very good. While some simpler sims display just a percentage of dam. age, 1F-16 models individual system failures. NIGHT RIDER The F-16's LANTIRN allows Engine damage can result in a loss of thrust; you to fly night-attack missions. radar, ECM, and FLIR systems can be knocked CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"PREVIEWS out; and even cockpit pressurization can be lost (at which point you'll need to descend below 12,000 feet or lose consciousness). Even in its preliminary form, flight modeling looks good, with performance varying with different weapons loads and at various altitudes. CAMPAIGN PROMISES The sim includes three scenarios, all of which seem possible in today's political envi ronment: an Israeli-Syrian conflict, a Turkish Greek conflict over Cyprus, and a North Korean invasion of South Korea. In each area, you can choose to fly single missions, or a nondynamic campaign consisting of a series of scripted missions. In addition, there are training and instant action modes. Missions are varied, with a real istic mix of air-to-air, close support, air-toground, and even reconnaissance scenarios. While there's no way to create your own mis. sions from scratch-an unfortunate omission in a sim with a canned campaign-you can use the mission planner screen to alter your flight's waypoints and actions on both ingress and egress. In addition to setting their pre-takeoff orders, you can give wingmen basic orders in the air, including \"Attack my target,\" \"Help me,\" \"Follow me,\" and \"Resume flight plan.\" 1F-16 promises both head-to-head modem play and 16-player network combat, although it wasn't fully implemented in the version I tested. In head-to-head mode, you can fly cooperative single missions or engage in a duel. Network mode supports deathmatch, \"every pilot for himself\" play, or a capture-the-flag mode in which your team must destroy the enemy's headquarters while protecting your own. appealing to these players, Dl updated the graphics engine to display much more detailed texture maps. Unfortunately, while these improved graphics would have been impressive had the game shipped in 1996 as planned, they're only likely to seem average to the eye-candy crowd that's been spoiled by the likes of F-22 LIGHTNING I or even Interactive Magic's own F.22. Frame rates in the beta were slug. gish at the higher details on a P166, with the DOS version outpacing the Windows 95 exe: cutable. Of course, graphics speed is likely to improve as the game is optimized before ship. ping. If the sim does seem too slow on your system, you can decrease the texture detail and viewable distance to speed things up. While 1F-16 isn't a standard setter, it does look like it's going to be an entertaining and convincing simulation. More in the vein of APACHE and Hind than Di's earlier TORNADO, the sim should appeal to fans of those helicopter sims looking for faster action. It should also be a tasty morsel for sim fans starving for F-16 action, who've been waiting for years for the waiter to deliver FALCON 4.0 to their tables. LAST YEAR'S FASHIONS Although the very simply textured polygons in Di's earlier HIND made for speedy frame rates on all but the slowest systems, some gamers aren't willing to sacrifice flash and dazzle for gameplay. In order to make the game more DETAILS, DETAILS You can vary 1F-16's texture detail and visual viewing range to get the best possible frame rate on your system. SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"(that's the way it is in BUSLAESS, one day you're ceo 19736902 pel es SEN BREZSEBENBzees BEI CNDS fis 111a CallNat CellGenesys CEGE 6 the CELG Caleno 6 2013 Dalast/Soasig CTEA CLTK Coloritak FLIMA MA Ta No a Diojection $ 1915 2812 Blade 1 1813 001 Biotelei E SPARROW John both CEO for Major Fortune 500 Company. Cause of death is perdre stigation Me Spa enes behind mirati Bosco Funeral schna will be held at ver 2.00 at the Church oth ImmaculatoMisconcep thon, South Atlantic Bhd No phone calls. Must have excellent and thorough military knowledge, and an MBA in finance. Also must look good in bul. let-proof vest. Fax resumes to Granite Corp. Personnel Dept. at 555-1212. BIOTECH ANAL r HD die REAL ESTATE ACOUISITION POSITIONS SIE BENTUACQUESTIONS in d MARKETE IHRE SILUL the next |_you're DOA, CAFC 295 Paroles 1212 Caroline OD CENG Bandary A BUJICA 1912 10 SHIN 318412 311n BelmoniHim 1011 105 Galuthexp! BELW benso UDHE 10 GEA BE: ci: 5: ÉSERBIS:3&_=BERG Seca 1:11. Ononim :53 WAR 186 198! DAN DIG Pille VIDEO 0e21 EUCE 1992 Real-time strategy th SCENE tell 2. That gets down to business nel ! Bu 11. BV 2074 Bawwan 58 21a Ho Dattery ich B Ballenas WL BATSW "


"INTERNET Xl 10 *** 100 Uuelles do tego 157000 i ana elay war, inc., win prizes, mag drive a hummer. ATV 9931) Siseuse 9730 elavije Mano buscasseje, 0186 As if buying a copy of War, Inc. wasn't enough, 1.091. Inow you can play the interactive magic **WL COLL G AMLELMETULL 23. Fag b erg 193 Cilt S e [war, inc. Hummer of 198 contest) n 1912 Ni Bioali! Blocryst 2097 BS Bigures 14 et Und Meta Lo for a chance to win weekly prizes. You could HOUSULED uneven win our Grand Prize a new Hummel TEL. FREE for one year! FREE for one year! as Each copy of War, Inc. purchased between now and December 31st, will contain a [KEY) with Ne na possible winning number. Check our Website SE STASIE Eme (http://www.imagicgames.com/eguuarinc) SCHLESED and compare your number. If it matches, you could win Interactive Magic games, clothes, and 1613 904 Baniha 2013 G14 Bhatimu ** cash, with new prizes awarded each week! , IR DIREZ el 91 483 GALO S o c!!ccll2 21 to bel El ( 3 ) | LUJU) : 10 c t Da 01 Tauerung LGL Look for your winning / S Mikey, and visit your local ALSE e software retailer for offiFor now, just imagine yourself in a brand new ERZBEBUBE =58SES: POSTB Yes -=835833_EBBE Hummer. Pick up a copy of the game, and UU WAUNAS I contest rules, or visit 192 Bremember:shoot Low, sell High, U ** KLSS VOUcu olducar_goodbye! 118 11o Darati C T http://www.imagicgames.com/egw/waring 0.9 CHICO ROZOLOTO No purchase necessary: . ..... 1215 Ortlysal Diag (VDL 1 113 31 1 USI 301 1.6 10 Cardiothor 2 6170 1921. Cardiomints OFLO 91 10 20 1.1 ... GOP Gartliogen 337 338 1152 skg podojshaq 2 041736 Cartina Billy CRS CarlinalBash CARL 2011 .13 291 2958 12 .12 525 901 a 29 a 2959 1 .252590 = 48 13 11 12 20 0 20.57 1:2 00 2010 i 17 333 3 310 1747 BetBath BUTL12 1913 614 Beaulici DVFS 46 2014 Sav/wCao 915 Baliarvich ETOF 21 Galleries WC BATSW + 2 33 100_ SIN SIVA INTERACTIVE Mua WEUPE D E U 12S MAGIC OPTIK JBL SP..Box 13491 tResearch Triangle Park NC 27709 Visit your local retailer or call toll free 1-800-448-5261 to order a copy today! WAR, Inc is a trademark of Interactive Magic, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Hummer is a registered trademark of AM General Corporation. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #173 "


"o 1997 Bungie Software Products Corporation. Myth: The Fallen Lords is a trademark of Bungie Software Products Corporation. Myth Sports A 3D Engi Renders Other Strat Now you can go hand-to-hand with the enemy on a smoothly rolling 3D landscape the way you've always imagined. The environment of Myth: The Fallen Lords is so real that every bloody limb, every scattered sword, every unexploded charge tossed by a ground-rippling explosion remains a live element ready to be seized and used by or against you. Not limited to a simple overhead view, you'll rotate around the heads of your troops, follow the arc of a burning arrow and zoom in on the slaughter. BUNGIE Get an eyeful of stunning detail: reflections in the water, lightning frying the enemy to cinders, smoking craters ringed with the heads of the inept and every ounce of blood remaining on the scarred battlefield. "


"ne So Advanced II Even egy Games Obsolete. But don't stare too long. Learn the art of war and the importance of physics as you move fast to seize the high ground where the archers have greater range and pyromaniac dwarves can shower targets with explosives. Multiplayer games include classic scenarios like King of the Hill and Capture the Flag, and uniquely challenging variants like Assassin and Steal the Bacon, even in teams! Play over the Internet for free using bungie.net or turn your local network into your own personal war zone. So call 800-295-0060 or surf to www.bungie.com for the only strategy game where «uphill battle» is more than a figure of speech. MYCH THE FALLEN LORDS CIRCLE READER SERVICE #264 "


"PREVIEWS DEATHTRAP DUNGEON Target Release Date: September 1997 Developer: Eidos Publisher: Eidos Hack and Slash Lara Lends Her Look to Eidos' Upcoming Fantasy Dungeon Romp by Elliott Chin ntil Lara Croft came along and gave us a peek at her adventurous lifestyle in TOMB RAIDER, Eidos was a relative unknown, a merger of two companies-Domark and US Gold-that weren't always synonymous with quality software. But the third-person action-adventure in TOMB RAIDER changed all that. Instantly, Eidos had a global spokeswoman and a hit game. TOMB RAIDER made people wake up to the potential at Eidos, and it also rekindled developers' trust in thirdperson 3D (to be fair, the other great third-person game that sparked this renaissance was Miyamoto's MARIO 64). At this year's E3, I saw more than a dozen third-person games. Some were serious action affairs, such as TOMB RAIDER 2; others were cutesy animal adventures like CROC; while still others took the TOMB RAIDER look and gave it a fantasy twist. One of these was none other than Eidos' very own DEATHTRAP DUNGEON, a game that was in development REX IN EFFECT The boss creatures in DEATHTRAP are great. In addition to dragons and Hydras, you'll face a T. rex so huge that its head dwarfs your character when parts of Eidos were still known as Domark. DEATHTRAP DUNGEON Shares much with TOMB RAIDER, and the resemblance is def. initely more than skin deep. DUNGEON HACK DEATHTRAP DUNGEON is a third-person action game that plays through person camera that lets you see things from your character's standpoint. I found that the first-person view wasn't very well implemented, even though many times I wanted to be able to use it to get a better look at my surroundings. You can play as one of two characters: a fully armored, muscled warrior or a scantily clad amazon. Now, I have to take a time out to say how disappointed I am in the depiction of the female character. Her \"armor\" makes Lara's outfit seem prudish: All she has is a chain attached to her nipples and a scaled thong. I'm no expert, but I doubt that any sane warrior would march into battle wearing nothing but metal butt floss. I'm tired of seeing female heroes who look more like sluts than warriors. Come on, Eidos, give the amazon some real armor. geons, and monster filled corridors. Whereas TOMB RAIDER had a healthy dose of adventure elements to keep you thinking, DEATHTRAP is really a hack-and-slash ride. The game is played from third-person view, though there is a firstFLASH ATTACK Is the amazon's outfit not ridiculous? Is the enemy admiring her attack or her armor? INSTRUMENTS OF DESTRUCTION Since DEATHTRAP DUNGEON really is all about slaughtering your way through monster. CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"We Just Started Dating 3 Weeks Ago. He seemed So Happy. LIVE What Went Wrong? POSTAL Find out at www.gopostal.com Download the free mini demo on our website or call 1-888-797-5867 for a fully loaded demo disk (use the code words \"solitary confinement\"). And yeah, there is a charge but don't go Postal it's only 5 bucks. RATING PENDING RUNNING WITH SCISSORS ripcord CONTENT RATED BY ESRB GAMES "


"PREVIEWS DEATHTRAP DUNGEON Fighting Fantasy FIGHTING FANTASY is a series of chooseyour-own-adventure fantasy books written by Eidos Chairman lan Livingston, who is the founder of Games Workshop (of Warhammer fame). The books are pseudo role-playing games you play alone. At critical junctures in the story, such as when you face a monster, you'll be given two choices. If you choose to run, you turn to one page and read how the story progresses. If you stay and fight, you skip to another page to witness the consequences of your decision. The jump from paperback to computer is something Livingston has been planning for the series for some time. Livingston wrote the Fighting Fantasy series long before he joined Eidos, and DEATHTRAP DUNGEON is his extension of the series into the silicon arena. never directly at me. As I said, though, played a beta, and I'm sure the monsters will be a little more intelligent in the final version. Speaking of monsters, there are lots of them, both in terms of type and number. You'll fight a gamut of fantasy mainstays: nagas, orcs, mummies, and zombies, just to name a few. The level bosses are quite impressive. The three headed Hydra, a crea. ture that fills the screen, attacks by rearing back its heads and spitting torrents of flame. The purple dragon is likewise awe-inspiring, gnashing at you with its toothy maw and spewing fireballs in your direction. FLYING PURPLE PEOPLE-EATER Here is the monstrous purple dragon. He isn't too smart now, but he'll be a tough boss to beat in the final version. packed dungeons, you get a treasure trove of nasty weapons at your disposal. There are close combat weapons, ranged weapons, and spells. You have short swords, long swords, axes, halberds, and war hammers for bashing and slashing enemies up close and personal. If you want to play it safe and dispatch monsters from a distance, you can pull out a blun. derbuss, a primitive gun, or even a medieval rocket launcher-basically a giant firecracker on a sling. Each spell has a different cosmetic look, but all basically produce the same result: the annihilation of the enemy in a shower of magical energy. FINAL THOUGHTS This rough version of DEATHTRAP DUNGEON lacks the polish and style of TOMB RAIDER, but DEATHTRAP will have multiplayer and Direct3D support-two things TOMB RAIDER sorely need. ed. I wasn't able to test the multiplayer fea. ture, but it should be good for modem and network play. If the camera angle problem can be fixed, deathmatches could be fun. The version I played was a good game have a soft spot for fantasy games, so hacking COME GET SOME DEATHTRAP offers a third-person 3D away at orcs and dragons proved an ideal way look like TOMB RAIDER, but also has dynamic lighting and to spend my gaming hours. However, the levels Direct3D support in this current version seem to be sparsely populated; they start with minimal action. I hope there will be more action in the final version. Also, the camera angle kept thwarting me. I had no control over my third-person camera; sometimes I would direct my character around a corner without being able to see what was there. The third time an ax came fly. ing out of the corner before I could see it, gave up. After I cooled down, I went back in, but the poor camera angles still made for moments of frustration. If Eidos can create an option for controlling the camera in third-perORC-KEBOB Weapons abound in DEATHTRAP, including son (as does MARIO 64), then this game will melee weapons and fantastic ranged weapons, such as move up several notches on my playlist. this medieval flamethrower. TOMB RAIDER proved that Eidos can create a killer game. Now, they hope to repeat the sucIn the version I played, the AI didn't seem to cess with DEATHTRAP DUNGEON, a game with a be implemented, so clowns would just rush up similar look and gameplay, but with a fantasy to me, even after I had killed waves of their theme. Can they succeed? If they fix some comrades. The Hydra and the purple dragon minor problems and the game gets the same (the latter is the final boss in the game) didn't polish as Lara Croft's maiden voyage, there is a even put up much of an intelligent fight, some good chance that Eidos could add another times spewing fire to either side of me but jewel to their crown. VISCERAL REWARDS As you might expect in a hack-and-slash game of this type, you are rewarded for every kill. Heads will fly off shoulders at the strike of a sword, and legs will come cleanly off the joint when met by a jagged ax. Surprisingly, though, there is little blood. Perhaps it was because my beta version played only in low res, but the infrequent blood that would spurt from wounded enemies was simply a small clump of red pixels. CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"A new world has been discovered. Here's the proof. "


"ZOMBIES MOKE GREAT scepPING STONES. REDORB 01997 SSG. All rights reserved. Warlords is a trademark of SSG. Reign of Heroes and Red Orb Entertainment are trademarks and or registered trademarks of Broderbund Sollware. Ing "


"«Warlords' Al not only blows away the immediate fantasy-based competition, but other strategic wargames as well.\" --PC Games \"For this gaming series, third time's a charm!\" PC Gamer L aRLORDS I REIGN OF HEROES \"Warlords III pushes the envelope forward for turn-based games especially for internet play.\" -Computer Gaming World 2008 BESO Unique simultancous movement mode for up to 8 players in multiplayer games reveals cach player's eactions in real time. Test your strategies with more than 80 different animated creatures and warriors. plus countless spelis, abilities and rewards over multiple terrains. Struggle against computer opponents whose Al monitors your every teodeocy aud plots elaborate strategics against you and your allies. Hordes of the Undead overrun the Selentine Empire, leaving utter devastation in their wake. From the ashes, a powerful new reign of heroes arises to contend for power and build a new empire. Arrayed against zombies, elementals and other unspeakables, you must arrange alliances, cast horrific spells and lead your armies to victory... or be crushed beneath the enemy's merciless heel., W w W.WARLORDS3.COM CIRCLE READER SERVICE #294 "


NA


"249 the most tik su se TERO, cIRCLE READER SERVICE #110 "


"A new perspective on 3D action from the creators of Heretic and Hexen WAMALUDWUDULU DEMOS 6 unique multiplayer games for up to 8 players, including Assassin, Arsonnl, Kill at will. ETETT 22 twisted enemies, each with unique combat behavior, plus 21 bone-shredding weapons, 20 non-linear territories: no set path; explore different territories before completing previous ones. Zoners, Radioactive waste. Psychos with Gauss Guns Welcome to post-apocalyptic hell on Earth Your only chance to see tomorrow is to fight your way into the Dome and steal the secrets of survival. At least you've got one thing going for you: unique overhead views that allow you to see the entire 3D world and everyone in it. So now you can blow away enemies whether they are on a catwalk above or on the ground, below. But watch your back because death is all around you. Coming this October for Windows 95. Download demo at www.takenoprisoners.com REDORB SEO-ETWARE hestutamente under the market tnm ednaidt       "


"NOW YOU CAN SEE THE EXIT WOUND, TOO. TwinTV EKONOWWASABWAWWAAARINA www MMWWWWW kidney stones yesterday's burrito pancreas lower intostine 8th thoracic Vertebra CIRCLE READER SERVICE #153 "


"THE MEEK SHALL INHERIT THE EARTH. THIS ISN'T EARTH. 1997 Broderbund Safware, Inc. All rights reserved. WorBreeds and Red Orb Entertainment are trademarks of Broderbund Software, Inc. "


"WARBREEDS Spectacular animation Leaders of the fallen Yedda Empire describe the events leading to their down all. Customize your units. Acquire genetic knowledge from conquered enemies to create new, better-equipped fighting units. View more terrain. Place units in formation and monitor strategic movement with the unique 2001 mode. Centuries ago, in another world, a great civilization crumbles. And in the ensuing void, four former slave clans are set free to battle for rule of the planet. Now you command one of the alien clans and create your own customized units in a brutal struggle for power. In this real-time strategy game, the strong survive. The meek die. Coming winter 1998. www.warbreeds.com REDORB CIRCLE READER SERVICE #289 "


"THE ONLY HOPE FOR THE FUTURE LIES 3,700 YEARS IN THE PAST. PROJECT 31 EGACY THE JOURNEYMAN PROJECT\"3 Embark on an urgent time-travel mission and visit the lost worlds of Shangri-La, El Dorado and Atlantis in a quest to save mankind. OF TIM Legacy of Time, a new CD-ROM adventure coming in December. REDORB STUDIOS www.Journeyman Project3.com 1997 Broderbund Software, Inc. All rights reserved. The Journeyman Project is a trademark of Presto Studios. Presto Studios is a registered trademark of Presto Studios, Inc. Legacy of Time and Red Orb Entertainment are trademarks of Broderbund Software, Inc. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #198 "


"WARLORDS ITI\" REIGN OF HEROES The epic fantasy game of strategy and conquest from SSG. Now available. A whole new world RIVEN THE SEQUEL TO MYST The eagerly awaited follow-up to the all-time best seller from Cyan. Coming this fall. of gaming. 02U A new overhead perspective on 3D action in a post-nuclear world from Raven Software, Coming this October REDORB WARBRBEDS entertainment a division of Brderbund Software, Inc. www.redorb.com A real-time strategy game of genetic conquest where only the strongest survive. Coming winter 1998. TMC JOURNEYMAN PROIECT LEGACY OF TIME The next thrilling installment in the highly acclaimed time-travel adventure series from Presto Studios. Coming this winter. 1997 Broderbund Software, Inc. All rights reserved. Red Orb Entertainment is a trademark of Broderbund Software, Inc. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #197 "


"1997 = REPORT 9 9 E 3 E FOR YOUR EYES ONLY CGW Gives You All the Top-Secret Info on the Removing my trenchcoat, I sat down at the PC and clicked on the .WAV file icon. \"Good morning, Mr. Atkin. Your mission, should you choose to accept it, is to infiltrate the Electronic Entertainment Expo, also known as E3. Go behind the scenes, enter the back rooms, and tag along closely behind key developers as parties wear on and lips begin to loosen. You must bring back the scoop on what's in store for gamers this fall and beyond. As always, should you or any of your CGW force be captured or killed, your superiors will disavow any knowledge of your existence. Good luck, Denny. This hard drive will format in five seconds.\" Johnny's assignments were always a mixed bag. Certainly, we had an exciting mission ahead of us but, as my drive started grinding away, I steeled myself to install Windows 95 yet again I gathered the team and made plans to go to Atlanta. If anyone could pull it off, it was this group. Agent Chin, action and strategy expert, had the youthful energy to check out the more than 50 real-time strategy games on display in only three days. Agent Green, master of vocal dis. guise, could slip into adventure/RPG and sports presentations unnoticed. Agent Salvator, the hardware expert and undercover mole, would dig into cases and see what gamers would expect in next year's game rigs. Agent Panther, our operative from MI5, could ferret out even the most puzzling games. Our multimedia expert, Operative Anderson, would seek the demos CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"New Games for Fall-Nobody Does It Better that would show the real truth. General Coleman would gather military intelligence. I'd provide air coverage, and the infamous Mr. Wilson would be out front, using his fame and wit to distract the crowds while the rest of the team worked its magic. Upon our arrival at the show, we found that our mission was going to be so easy that it would be difficult. That is, the number of enticing games on which to gather information seemed to be at an all-time high. Although there were few standouts, for once there were also very few obvious dogs. Instead, dozens of quality games were in the works. It was going to be an interesting show, and an interesting year ahead for CGW readers. The trends were easy to pick out. A large percentage of games were being shown on 3D cards, especially 3Dfx cards. Games with multiplayer support were abundant, some of which even had a good balance of single and multiplayer features. First-person action, real-time strategy, and simulations were the genres of choice, far outnumbering the rest. And people were still trying to determine the formula for making money from Internet gamers. The usual company shifts had occurred as well. Activision, a company seemingly fading away only two E3s ago, had a huge booth that was packed with attendees and a life-size giant robot. Eidos Interactive, a bit player in its days as Domark, stole the show with its Lara Croft look alikes, 3D sims, and action games. And MicroProse, a company that's had a rough few years, hit the show with its strongest lineup since its heyday in the late 1980s. In all, it was a successful information grab. The folders that follow provide the vitals on more than 100 of the hottest titles shipping in coming months. The only possible gaps in our data are the ETAS. Previous missions have shown that even our most informed sources are sometimes too optimistic, and a game planned to ship in November is just as likely to be available just in time for spring break. The intelligence that follows is broken down by genre. This magazine will biodegrade in 73 years. -Denny Atkin SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"Rever Activision is a registered trademark of Activision, Inc. Blood Omen: Legacy of Kain and Crystal Dynamies are trademarks of Crystal Dynamics, Inc.  1996, 1997 Crystal Dynamics, Inc. Distributed by Activision under license. All rights reserved. All other trademarks and trade names are properties of their respective owners. Gory Combat Action: Brimming with 170 horrifying enemies and 21 demented spells each with a unique bloody graphic. Epic Production: A staggering 100,000-plus screens and 120 hours of blood-spraying adventure enhanced with 25 grisly minutes of full-motion, 3-D animation. "


"ACTIVISION L. 5 You can almost taste it. You were once an innocent man. But having been brutally slain and banished to Hell has put a bad taste in your mouth... You are Kain damned to the savage existence of a vampire for all eternity. Revenge consumes you as you journey through the depraved lands of Nosgoth in search of your murderers. Quench your desire for vengeance with the blood of innocents in real-time. Morph into Wolf, Bat, Vampire or Mist to slaughter those who stand between you and those who wronged you. Revenge...nothing is sweeter than the blood of your enemies. BLOOD OMEN LEGACY Explore the carnage at www.uctivision.com or www.crystald.com OF OF KAIN Vampire Bloodfest: Drink the blood of your victims, then morph into one of four sinister forms to escape -vampire, wolf, bat or mist. CRYSTA DYNAMICS Epic RPG for the PC. Coming this Fall. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #145 "


"E3 REPORT QUAKE II Target Release Date: November 1997 Developer: id Software Publisher: id Software SNEAK PREVIEW: QUAKE II The Big One V Id Strikes Back With What Could Be Its Best Game Yet by Elliott Chin and V. Long MOVE ALONG Getting through this subway is an intriguing puzzle. How do you sneak into the tube without getting fried by the electric rail? The answer might lie in the power station level's control room. FOR YOUR EYES ONLY his year, we scoured the E3 show floors with a mission: to strip away the chaff and find the best upcoming games to feed your gaming hunger for fall. What we found was a bevy of fantasticlooking games spread throughout the genres, but the game we kept coming back to-the PC game with the biggest crowds at the show-was id's QWAKE II. Without a doubt, it was the Game of the Show. From all indications, both from the E3 demo we played and from talks with the id designers, Quake II will push the envelope of immersion light years beyond QUAKE, exceeding all our expectations. True, the single player expectations might have been get through. As your pod crashes onto the low to begin with, but we're confident that planet your adventure begins.\" id's latest masterpiece will be so good that The game isn't broken into episodes, it will restore the company's prominence in but rather into three chapters that chroni. both technology and gameplay. cle your attempt to disable the alien defense system. Chapter one involves ONCE MORE INTO THE BREACH... eliminating the security grid that protects QUAKE II, in contrast to QUAKE, has a the industrial defense complex; chapter tighter plot and story-driven missions. Kevin two deals with destroying the defense sysCloud, Quake Il's project leader, describes tem; and chapter three is the final show the plot as an aliens vs. humans affair: down with the alien bosses. \"Earth is at war with an alien race. We have been beaten down for years, and now it's REAL WORLDS, REAL LEVELS time to launch a counterstrike The levels, far from being against the aliens' planlinear marathon et). Unfortunately, QUAKE II from id... sessions to the alien race eradicate every etary defense enemy in system that pre sight, are vents us from sending designed to fit the in any large attack ships. Our chapters. There are approxstrategy is to send in thousands of one-man imately 28-30 levels, categorized into pods in the desperate hope that some will \"units\" consisting of 1-6 levels (although most units have only 3 or 4). All levels within a unit will be connected, so you can travel back and forth between the unit's levels. What's most compelling is that you'll have to travel between levels to solve certain puzzles, such as deactivating power grids and unlocking doors. To guide you through the puzzles, there may be a portable computer that pops up to provide in-game hints. Among the different units are an abandoned base, a warehouse, a detention center, a security complex, a mine, a factory, a power station, a hanger, and a lab. These areas will be more functional than those in Quake, meaning that a hangar will look like a hangar, complete with aircraft in storage, and a detention center will have cells and guard stations, ld is also going for a unified look in QUAKE II. Gone are the schizophrenic levels typical of QUAKE. We're on an alien planet now, and everything will be mechanical, has a large plan. Without a doubt...the Game of the Show CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"Smart Monsters Duck arsenal. There will be a black hole generator, called the disinId is improving their monsters' Al to provide a tegrator, that shoots out a black greater challenge. Certain monsters, such as the hole that casts dynamic darkGunner, will duck when fired upon. Some will be ness, which is essentially able to use the same weapons as you, and some dynamic lighting in reverse won't stop chasing you. The Berserker, in particuTargets hit by the disintegrator lar, is as fast as you, and will hunt you down will fade in and out; successive throughout the level. They'll track you down by hits will make them disappear sight or sound. Even if they can't see you in the forever. No word yet on how it darkness, will work in DeathMatch. they'll find The second weapon is There will also be a grenade launcher you if you make noise. That also means you an uzi-like machine gun. and a rocket launcher, just as in QUAKE. can hide from a monFiring it on full-auto makes Though \"rocket jumping\" was an accident in the muzzle climb skyward, QUAKE, id is keeping it for QUAKE II. There are ster if you keep still That's in contrast to causing your shots to go also plans to include pipe bombs or proximiQUAKE, where the monhigh. Accordingly, you Buty mines, as in DUKE and SCOURGE OF sters had an omniscient need to compensate by ARMAGON. QUAKE II'S BFG is still undecided. awareness of you. pushing your aim down. QUAKE I will have a new inventory system The third weapon is to organize the collected weapons and items. the shotgun, which now looks like a You can stick with the default configuration or futuristic bullpup streetsweeper. You see your define your own keys for each item. Multiple technological, and futuristic. Quake II is every hands pump the gun to chamber the next copies of an item can be picked up and bit as dark and moody as Quake, but the shell and, yes, the magazine drum actually dropped. In DeathMatch, if you already have a look is much more consistent, both internal spins as the shell gets chambered. rocket launcher, you can pick up a second one ly and with respect to the story. The fourth weapon is a Doom favorite: the and give it to a teammate. chain gun. The longer you fire at full-auto, the MORE GORE faster the six barrels spin. At top speed, the CREATURE FEATURES QUAKE I will have story, consistency, and barrels glow white and spew a blistering 2,400 We saw four monsters in the E3 version well-designed missions, but what about rounds per minute. Id plans to reduce the of the game, all half-organic and half destruction and mayhem? At E3, five weapons cyclic rate in the final version, though. machine. There was the standard Infantry were working. QUAKE II has no melee weapon: The most impressive weapon included at the grunt who employed a blaster, and a sleeker A laser-spitting blaster will take the axe's place show was the rail gun. It fires a high-powered proand taller cyborg called the Gunner. When as default weapon. The blaster has unlimited jectile that trails a spiral of transparent blue light h e fired, his right forearm split into three ammo, but if you shoot it too quickly, it won't behind it, which slowly fades away (like in the plates that pulled back to expose a blazing cause as much damage on successive shots. movie Eraser). The projectile is so powerful that it three-barrel chain gun. The most intimidat can punch ing monster was the ogre-sized robotic Tank. through multiple it had four attacks: a laser gun and machine 100 targets, killing gun on either hand, a rotating rocket launchthem all and er mounted on his right shoulder, and a fist stopping only attack. When it's in melee range or under when it hits a duress, the Tank will hammer the ground with his fist, creating a small earthquake that wall. 1999 TAB These will shake the floor and cause major dam999 Weapons are age. The last monster we saw was a cyborg only the torso mounted on a pair of mech-type legs. beginning of There are more monsters planned for QUAKE QUAKE IT'S II than were in QUAKE, including a medic who can heal the other monsters. RAIL AWAY This is the rail gun, Not only are the monsters better looking than one of Quake Il's more impresthose in Quake, they behave more realistically. sive weapons. Notice the faint There are realistic animations for each monster spiral of blue light when it gets attacked. The animation is so fluid FOR YOUR EYES ONLY CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"that the monsters seem alive. It was great to see the Gunner grab his left side, drop to one knee and break his fall with his left arm when shot. When the Tank was shot, his head snapped back, and when it came back up, it was bloody and-even cooler-it was missing flesh. < Indeed, if you keep shooting at a monster, it will start to bleed, sport bullet holes, and then grimace. All the monsters show different levels of damage. This not only adds to the realism of the game, but it also gives you a visual cue for how damaged an enemy is. When a Gunner starts to grimace and bleed as bullet holes ventilate his flesh, you know he isn't long for this world. BLACK LIGHT Here is a look at some the enhanced lighting for QUAKE II. QUAKE's dark moodiness is maintained, but the look will be more consistent ENGINE UPDATES The engine is also undergoing an extreme upgrade. There are transparencies (in the water and in special effects such as the rail gun): glass and certain other items can be broken; and there will be new physics, so that when a monster is hit by a rail gun, you'll see him explode away from you in a shower of chunks, not just in an omni-directional shower as in QUAKE. You'll also be able to push monsters and objects. Gamers and monsters are now able to duck, crouch, and crawl. The sky can now have orbiting objects (this is key in the space station levels). Surface attributes can be speci fied, so a particular patch of ground can be slippery or rough. There are rotating brushes for spinning hallways, rotating doors, and more flexible and realistic environments. There is also ambient sound for each type of room, and much of the music is done by the same people who put together the Methods of Destruction CD (their Web site is www. cyber-age.com/qcdmain.html). Designer John Carmack is working to implement sound radiosity for a more realistic feel. QUAKE II may even support the new 3D sound cards. The engine should also allow id to place demos within the game, in similar fashion to 4 FOR YOUR EYES ONLY the end cut-scenes in the QUAKE mission packs. Carmack hopes to incorporate in-game \"movies\" at critical junctures in the story (like when your squadmales get overrun by the aliens) for a totally immersive experience. QUAKE I also uses an updated version of the QUAKEWORLD multiplayer code, meaning there will be support for 32 player modem, LAN, and Internet DeathMatches, and a Netscape plug-in for joining QUAKE Servers via Navigator. Added to all this, QUAKE Il is Win 95 only. Also, there is a female character in QUAKE II. We don't know the details at this point, except that id wants to depict her as a combat-ready soldier, not an obscenely proportioned bimbo. With all these improvements, it's no longer possible to dismiss id as the has been of action gaming. Ask most anyone who was at the show what they thought was the most impressive game, and they'll utter an emphatic \"QUAKE II.\" With a real plot; logically grouped and story-driven lev. els; single player puzzles; more realistically rendered, animated, and thinking monsters; and a 3D engine that is second to none, id's next game could very well be their best 999 20 LERE PE 215 25 999 FONDO TANKS A LOT The mammoth Tank here is firing the machine gun, one of his four weapons. Id has now added hands to the weapons for a more immersive feel. CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"STEEL YOURSELF FOR ADVENTURE DragonRealms attoos VADO01 O Newidionhed/odda Where Welt dragonrealms.net/go/cgw88 IMMERSE YOURSELF Acquire skills by doing. Customize your character, build your rank, status and powers. Immerse yourself in this fantasy world's vivid atmosphere and compelling details, its weather and phases of the moon. It's not about rolling dice, it's about roleplaying. YOU HAVE FRIENDS YOU HAVEN'T MET DragonRealms is a place inhabited by thousands of friends. They'll share information and help you on your way. As you explore the paths and promises, the dark forests and abandoned castles, in your journeys and your battles you will never be alone. YOU'RE ONLY FIVE MINUTES AWAY Download the free software now. In five minutes, you can take up your sword and venture forth into the magic of Dragon Realms. Only $9.95 for a month of play. Try it now and play FREE for your first two weeks. the War F C Macro Se Dong Be Width DragonRealms You now have fair skin. play 2 weeks for The surface of the mirror boils yoursell changed.... ne liquid fire. You feel your skin tingle and FIN You now have tanned skin. >go arch You have yet to finish choosing an Eye color. You must do so before passing through. fuer READ BLUE HIEROR for instructions. Trub blue mirror go are ine surface of the mirror ripples 11e a Cala Blue lake disturbed, and you find yourself changed.... You now have clear colored eges. (To change beth your eyes color: TOOCH BLOC MIRROR) (Ta change one eye's color! TAP OLUR HIBBERS FREE Created by MUTROnics INCORPORATION CIRCLE READER SERVICE #149  1997 by Simutronics Corp., all rights reserved. Simutronics and DragonRealms are trademarks of Simutronics Corp. All rights reserved. Ghich con nonser "


"F-16 TM The Definitive Simulation of the F-16 Fighting Falcon DOS and WINDOWS 95 P.O.Box 13491 Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 (919) 461-0722 iF-16 is a trademark and Interactive Magic is a registered trademark of Interactive Magic Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Copyright 1997 Interactive Magic, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"EXPERIENCE NINE G'S AT YOUR DESK! From the developers of Apache OL ODOGU AR16 The Definitive Simulation of the T 16 Fighting Falcosa Published by: Visit your local retailer to obtain a copy or visit the Developed by: Interactive Magic Web site for additional information. http://www.imagicgames.com/cgw/f16 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #171 Digital Integration | INTERACTIVE MAGIC "


"QUAKE DOSSIER ONE: ACTION Briefing: In our undercover hunt for the hottest games at E3, the most surprising discovery was the QUAKE Il file. Id, very mindful of the criticisms leveled at QUAKE, is trying to make this version a better sin gle player game. Carmack and company are also attempting to make this a true sequel, unlike Doom II, which was an expansion, at best. Graphically, the game is a drastic enhancement over QUAKE. There are better lighting effects, more animations for the monsters, amazing special effects, and all around improved graphics. All the monsters in Quake II are new, as are the weapons and levels. Nothing remains from QUAKE. The game is also more mission-based. Rather than having linear levels, as in QUAKE, where the object was to simply run full-tilt through a level and blast everything in sight, Quake II's levels are more flexible. You can go back and forth between levels, so you can leave a level even if you haven't finished it-and go back later if you want to clear it out or look for an item. QUAKE I has the QUAKEWORLD multiplayer code, which allows for 32 player Death Matches and modem, serial, LAN, and Internet play. It also has built-in support for joining QUAKE servers via your web browser. For more on QUAKE II's amazing new graphics, effects, and all-new monsters, levels, and weapons, check out our Game of the Show preview for an in-depth first look from E3. Contact: id Software/Activision, (310) 255-2000, www.activision.com ETA: October '97 HALF-LIFE HEXEN II FOR YOUR EYES ONLY Briefing: HALF-LIFE was a surprising gem at this year's E3. It is the debut game from Valve, a startup company whose members have worked on DUKE NUKEM 3D and QUAKE mods. HALF-LIFE uses the enhanced Quake engine, which, combined with Valve's own enhancements, gives it a beautiful look, on a par with SIN. The game boasts real-world environments and an exception al Al. In one of the game's rooms in the E3 demo, we saw a scientist and security guard having an argument. During the game, eavesdropping on such conversations provides you with valuable information. More characters populate the world in order to simu late a more realistic environment. Except for a few restricted areas, HALFLIFE's game world is also free-roaming, rather than broken into linear levels. HALF-LIFE'S Al is impressive. In one demo, we saw a fourman commando squad employ surround tac tics to trap our player. When one commando was hit, he cried for a medic and ducked behind some crates for cover. Watch for a full preview in an upcoming issue of Computer Gaming World. Contact: Sierra Online, (800) 757-7707, www.sierra.com ETA: November '97 Briefing: Hexen II is an amazing game, with beautiful graphics and environments that appear as real-life as you can get. In this continuation of the Hexen Saga, you can play as Necromancer, Assassin, Crusader, or Paladin as you try to conquer or destroy the evil ser pent rider Eidolos. You'll travel to four different worlds with levels arranged in hubs, as in previ ous Hexen games. The game features such graphic improvements as transparent mon. sters, stained glass windows, and a host of other enhancements that all the QUAKE based games share, such as rotating brushes. Breakable objects are also abundant in HEXEN II; everything from windows to barrels to carts to grazing sheep can be targeted and destroyed. In some cases, clues and objects might be hidden behind bookcases or in vases. With its amazing graphics, incredibly gory weapons, highly interactive environments, and requisite QUAKE multiplayer support, Hexen I looks ready to possess the rabid spirits of action gamers this fall. For a more in-depth preview, check out our June 1997 QUAKE Killers issue. Contact: Activision, (310) 255-2000, www.activision.com ETA: September '97 CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"SIN JEDIKNIGHT TEMPERATURA CONTRO Briefing: Ritual Entertainment, formerly known as Hipnotic, exploded onto the gaming scene several months ago with the release of the QUAKE Mission PACK No. 1: SCOURGE OF ARMAGON. IL added obvious improvements to the QUAKE theme, such as more traps and better level design, and subtle enhancements such as dynamic bullet holes in walls, great new weapons, and better Al. Now, Ritual is licensing the enhanced Quake engine to create its own game: SIN. Ritual is making its own enhancements to the Quake engine, including 16-bit lighting, that make Sin look every bit as good as QUAKE II. Also, Sin is designed along mission, rather than level, lines. That means you are given goals that require you to traverse several levels before completion. The story behind Sie has you tangling with an evil corpo. rate tycoon named Alexis Sinclair. You also have a hacker sidekick who tags along and provides you with clues on your missions. If ARMAGON is any indication, Sin could be a must-have action hit. Stay tuned for a full preview in an upcoming issue of CGW. Contact: Activision, (310) 255-2000, www.activision.com ETA: 01 '98 Briefing: This game was one of the highlights of last year's show, with 3D support and graphics that surpassed the unaccelerated QUAKE. Unfortunately, this year, JEDI KNIGHT Sports that same engine, which means its graphics have now been surpassed by 3D-accelerated UNREAL, QUAKE II, and the other Quake-based games. However, between this year and last, LucasArts has been improving gameplay and finalizing the code, as well as implementing Internet play. As a Jedi in training, you play through levels as they are unveiled through cut scenes. You face such familiar enemies as Storm Troopers and Gamorran pig guards, and you can employ various Star Wars weapons, including the ultimate weapon: the lightsaber. Plus, up to 12 Force powers are available, which range from invisibility to superspeed to Darth Vader's infamous choke. JEDI KNIGHT comes with Internet play, in addition to the standard multiplayer options. The game can be played in either first or third-person view, and in third-person the breadth of animation is extensive, with animation for everything-including looking up, side-straling, and sideways swimming. Contact: LucasArts, (800) 985-8227, www.lucasarts.com ETA: September '97 UNREAL TRESPASSER Briefing: Our agents report that UNREAL is indeed close to completion. The engine is running smoothly, with great animation for the monsters, impressive lighting effects, and transparencies in stained glass windows and murky water. The game looks good, but is as dark and moody as QUAKE was. As either a female or male character, you start out imprisoned on a slave ship. After escaping, you travel to lev. els that range from the innards of derelict space ships to alien cloud cities to mine shafts. Epic plans to implement multiple puzzles and a variety of cool weapons. The best weapon in UNREAL'S E3-arsenal is a two-pronged weapon that fires a spinning blade that can be guided with a flick of the mouse. UNREAL'S game editor is perhaps the game's coolest feature. The editor will ship with the game, and is an object-oriented editor that gives you the ability to create the same caliber of levels as the UNREAL designers. Unfortunately, only the shareware editor will be released with the game. The full UNREAL editor will retail separately. Contact: GT Interactive, (212) 726-6500, www.gtinteractive.com ETA: Fall '97 Briefing: Dreamworks is reviving Site B as the backdrop to their JURASSIC Park-based action/adventure title. Steven Spielberg himself heralds TRESPASSER AS the digital sequel to The Lost World. You are stranded on Site B (the island where all Ham mond's dinos are bred), and your goal is to get off the island. In the process, you'll face many dinosaurs and real-world puzzles and environments. You only have what is available on the island to fend off the saurian men. aces. But everything in the environment is available, just as in real-life. You can break off a branch from a tree for a club or roll a barrel down a hill to stop a chasing raptor. Dinosaurs act (and react) with intelligence, which means you might not have to fight them if you can out wit them. TRESPASSER promises to deliver not only a visceral gaming experience, but also the most realistic environment of any game world, where thinking and observing are every bit as important as playing. For a full preview, read our March 1997 CGW cover story. Contact: Dreamworks Interactive, (310) 234.7000. www.dreamworksgames.com ETA: Winter '97-'98 FOR YOUR EYES ONLY SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"ADDITIONAL INTELLIGENCE DAIKATANA Briefing: DAIKATANA's gameplay is story-driven, with puzzles and interactive environments, as well as dia. logue (courtesy of your two traveling companions, Mikiko Ebihara and Superfly Johnson). You play Hiro Miyamoto, a Japanese sword-swinger who wields a mystical daikatana that has time-traveling properties and a host of combat abilities. The game is split into four episodes crossing four time periods: far future, ancient Greece, Middle Ages, and near future. Each time period has its own distinct look, monsters, weapons, and level design. There is an experience system of sorts in the game, as your abilities with the daikatana will increase the more you use the sword. You are also awarded experience points as you advance in the game, which can be distrib. uted across various abilities, such as speed and strength. Designer John Romero hopes to make this the best single player experience yet in an action game, but he also is determined to bring innovation to the multiplayer arena. For more on DAIKATANA, read our June 1997 QUAKE Killers issue. Contact: Eidos, (415) 547-1200, www.eidosinteractive.com ETA: November '97 TWINSEN'S ODYSSEY TWINSEN's is the sequel to RELENTLESS, the 3D action/adventure from Adeline that was CGW's 1994 adventure game of the year. Whether you consider Twinsen's action or adventure (it has heavy elements of both), it is an undeni ably fun game. You converse with a variety of characters and jump and fight your way through dozens of levels in this Mario-esque platformer. See our June 1997 issue for a full preview. TOMB RAIDER 2 TWINSEN'S ODDYSEY Briefing: Lara Croft is back for her second adventure in TOMB RAIDER 2. This time, she is after the Dagger of Xian, a Chinese artifact that will bestow the \"power of the Dragon\" onto any who plunge the blade into their heart. To retrieve this artifact, Lara has to battle Tibetan monks, the Chinese emperor's guards, and the cult members of Fiama Nera, who worship the dagger. There are more human opponents in TOMB RAIDER 2, rather than animals, as was the case in TOMB RAIDER. The new game features outdoor settings, including Tibet, the Great Wall of China, and the city of Venice. The changes to the game's look are mostly cosmetic, since the engine stays the same. Lara now sports different clothes depending on her locale: a coat in Tibet and a wetsuit in the underwater levels. She also has new weapons, new moves, and all new levels through which to traipse. Contact: Eidos, (415) 547-1200, www.eidosinteractive.com ETA: November '97 FOR YOUR EYES ONLY Croc Fox Entertainment's 3D platformgame Croc is nearly identical to Nintendo's masterpiece Mario 64. As a lovable little crocodile, you waddle, jump, and tail-slap your way through 50 levels, facing puzzles, traps, and monsters in a variety of terrain. You need a 3D card to savor this game's most sumptuous graphics. FIRST CONTACT FIRST CONTACT is a game that Trekkies and action fans will want to play. MicroProse is putting out the game, which is based on the movie and uses the UNREAL engine. As a more action-oriented game (as opposed to GENERATIONS, the adventure game), you have to retake the Enterprise E after it's been boarded by the Borg. SHADOWS OF THE EMPIRE SHADOWS, a Nintendo 64 title arriving this fall on the PC, has nearly a dozen levels of varying game: play that run the gamut from Doom-style shooting to rail sequences to snowspeeder shoot-'em-up action. It requires a 3D accelerator to play, but has gorgeous graphics equal to the N64 version, ODDWORLD: ABE's ODDYSEE ABE's ODDYSEE should turn side-scrolling on its head with a highly imaginative story, charac ters, and gameplay. You control Abe, who negotiates a vivid 3D environment filled with nasties using audio queues and the power of possession. The game features beautiful art and animation, and it should appeal to a variety of players. INTERSTATE '77 Briefing: Taurus is on the road again in Activision's upcoming INTERSTATE '77, \"an epilogue\" to INTERSTATE '76. The engine remains the same, but the premise and storyline are different. In the aftermath of 1.76, the U.S. economy is still in ruins, and a Vietnam vet named The General is pushing to instigate World War III by using Mexico's illegal oil smuggling as an excuse. As Taurus, you'll have to thwart The General and end the illegal oil trafficking. Improvements in the game include faster frame rate, incremental saves (to allow you to save at any time), and Direct3D support for all major 3D cards. There are also new cars and new weapons. The new multiplayer maps also include several all-racing maps for those who would rather match speed than guns. l-'77 will ship at a low price point, like an expansion set, but won't require you to own INTERSTATE '76. Contact: Activision, (310) 255-2000, www.activision.com ETA: Fall '97 CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"WE DIDN'T SET OUT TO CHANGE THE WORLD. JUST A SMALL PART OF IT CALLED THE SKY. "


"It takes more than a team of computer engineers to create the ultimate flight simulator. It takes a sense of childlike wonder, forever gazing skyward, to go beyond mere flight re-creation and capture the magic of flight itself. Never before has a single flight simulator captured this experience so INTRODUCING INTRODUCING S completely. Here, you'll find the broad strokes and the fine touches. You'll 10 ABUS choose from a hangar of five civilian aircraft, ranging from the introSRH ductory Cessna 172 Skyhawk to the dual-throttled thrill of PRE-FLIGHT CHECKLIST CROSS-COUNTRY NAVAID COVERAGE N FLIGHT TUTORIAL GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM OVER 3,000 AIRPORTS/100'S OF CITIES AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL DUAL THROTTLES FOR MULTI-ENGINE AIRCRAFT EVALUATION FLIGHT ASSIGNMENTS LIVE ON-LINE MAP DISPLAY PHOTOREALISTIC PANELS 27 MILLION ELEVATION POINTS D a Citation Jet. At the other end of the runway are 29 photoPynamix "


"realistic cities and over 3,000 airports, each rendered in exacting detail. All major rivers, forests and canyons are afforded such faithful geographic representation they could double as a map. Within 25 nautical miles of any city, the flying world is rendered with lifelike realism. You'll hear from Air Traffic ERRA PRO PILOT\". IERRA ODONT PhUTILUL SHE UNDER Control and other pilots, and learn to navigate the sky with the close company of other planes. Then, upon touchdown, debrief and compare your performance to over 30 full-motion training videos. This is Sierra Pro Pilot: The Complete Flight Simulator. Both a statement of what a flight sim should be today, and the promise of what one can be tomorrow. SIERRA www.sierra.com  1997 Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved.  and TM designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Lino, Inc. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #359 "


"SOME KILL FOR SPORT.SOME KILL FOR GLORY. YOU KILL FOR POWER. MACHINE HUNTER 16 MULTI-LAYERED ARENAS OF COMBAT contain hidden rooms and secret levels for a vicious challenge at every turn TRANSFORM INTO YOUR KILLS and steal their powers for any hope of survival GA 3D blast fest.\" A FUTURISTIC WEAPONS ARSENAL housing the most lethal weaponry ever made PC Zone LAN/MODEM/INTERNET SUPPORT ON PC AND 2-PLAYER SPLIT-SCREEN DEATHMATCH OR COOPERATIVE MODE ON PLAYSTATION SANET Play MACHINE HUNTER\" on the Internet PLAYER Download the demo at www.machinehunter.com TEEN 10 DEADLY CLASSES OF DROIOS each one more THE ULTIMATE COMBAT CHALLENGE you must first 3-0 ENVIRONMENT WITH FULL 360° ATTACK MOBILITY devastating than the last waste the enemy then take over their bodies and use their powers to crush even deadliei opponents EUROCOM Developed by Eurocom Windows 95 Licensed by Sony Computer Entertainment America for use with the PlayStation game console. PlayStation and the Playstation logo cr.trademarks of Sony Computer CD-ROM Entertainment Inc. Windows is a registered trademark of MICROSOFT CORP. MACHINE HUNTER 1997 Eurocom Developments tid. All Rights Reserved Design. 1997 MGM Home Entertainment Inc. All Rights Reserved. Distributed by MGM Home Entertainment Inc., 2500 Broadway Street, Santa Monica, CA 90404.3061. TER M OMINELLI PlayStation CIRCLE READER SERVICE #163 "


"THE CURSE OF MONKEY ISLAND Briefing: The pretenders come and go, Dalt nobody makes graphic adventure games like LucasArts. Now, just in time to revive the gam ing world's most troubled genre, LucasArts is back with THE CURSE OF MONKEY ISLAND, their first adventure game since 1995's FULL THROTTLE. This, the third installment of the classic MONKEY ISLAND Series (last visited in 1992), puts you once again in the role of mild-mannered pirate Guybrush Threepwood, who must remove a curse from Elaine Marley, his true love, and save her from the clutches of the evil ghost pirate LeChuck. Though Ron Gilbert, designer of the first two games, is gone, CURSE is in the able hands of longtime LucasArts developers Jonathan Ackley and Larry Ahern, who most recently worked on THE DIG and FULL THROTTLE, respec. tively. Based on what we've seen so far, THE CURSE OF MONKEY ISLAND looks like it will deliver everything we've come to expect from a LucasArts adventure: outstanding animation (in glorious 2D!), clever story-based puzzles, great voice work DOSSIER TWO: ADVENTURE (including some from former child-star Gary Coleman), and, of course, hilarious dialogue. While most games' branching conversation trees tend to be exercises in torture, conversa tion is always the highlight of LucasArts adventures, and THE CURSE OF MONKEY ISLAND will be no exception. If you're as bummed as we are about the current state of adventure games, cheer up: This promises to be a great one. Contact: LucasArts (800) 985-8227, www.lucasarts.com ETA: Fall '97 STAR TREK: SECRET OF VULCAN FURY WARCRAFT ADVENTURES LORD OF THE CLANS Briefing: Fans of the original Star Trek will be thrilled to know that not only are Kirk, Spock, and the rest of the crew coming back for seven more episodes--in the form of a graphic adventure game-but the sto ries are actually being penned by D.C. Fontana, the writer of a number of classic Trek episodes. Set in the 23rd century, SECRET OF VULCAN FURY centers around a Vulcan-Romulan reunification, with each episode focusing on (and allowing you to play) a different member of the crew: Kirk, Spock, McCoy, Sulu (whom you play twice), Chekov, and Scotty. The game will be completely 3D-rendered (no video), with voice. acting from all of the original cast. This is an opportunity, in the words of one of the game's designers, for Fontana to \"write the episodes she never got to write\" for the TV show. For Trekkers, it sounds too good to be true. Here's hoping that Interplay can pull it off. Contact: Interplay (714) 553-6655, www.interplay.com ETA: Classified Briefing: They've conquered the strategy and RPG genres, and now the Blizzard wunderkinds are taking on adventure games in their newest title--and only a fool would bet against them. As most gamers know by now, WARCRAFT ADVENTURES: LORD OF THE CLANS CON tinues the story of the epic clash between orcs and humans, as told in the WARCRAFT Strategy games. But CLANS shifts the battle to an adventure game setting. The game picks up where WARCRAFT II: BEYOND THE DARK PORTAL left off on the human side), with the orcs completely beaten down. You play the part of Thrall, a young orc slave who must escape his human captors, reunite the scattered orcish clans, and lead them once more to triumph. Featuring classic LucasArts-inspired 2D animation and professional voice talent, LORD OF THE CLANS promises to flesh out the world of Azeroth in a way a strategy game couldn't have done. It's a bold move by Blizzard-and we can't wait to see it. Contact: Blizzard (310) 793-0600, www.blizzard.com ETA: Christmas '97 FOR YOUR EYES ONLY SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"ADDITIONAL INTELLIGENCE BLADE RUNNER Briefing: The movie is 15 years old, and the game has been in development for a while, but now it looks as though Westwood is finally making some serious progress on BLADE RUNNER-which was the most stun ning looking adventure game we previewed at E3. Set in Los Angeles in 2019, BLADE RUNNER puts you in the role of a blade runner named Ray McCoy (not Harrison Ford's character), who's attempting to deal with a mysterious upsurge of replicants. Whether to kill the replicants or help extend their lifespan is just one of the many choices you'll make throughout the game. Characters are randomly assigned as human or replicant every time you play, meaning the game won't play the same way twice-a rarity for an adventure game. Like the film, though, the highlight of the game, at least from what we saw at this point, is its amazing visual look. The awesome 3D graphics, replete with realistic lighting and environmental effects like smoke and steam, perfectly recreate the film's futuristic, noirish look. Contact: Westwood Studios (702) 228-4040, www.westwood.com ETA: November '97 ZORK GRAND INQUISITOR Briefing: Activision's latest entry in the long-running Zork saga has the makings of being the best since the series' conversion from text to graphic adventures earlier this decade. While RETURN TO ZORK was just too goofy, and ZORK NEMESIS was overly serious, ZORK GRAND INQUISITOR may hit just the right balance, as the development team tries to recapture the essence of what made the old text adventures so great: brain-wrenching puzzles coupled with a comic, yet engrossing, story. ZORK GRAND INQUISITOR returns you to the Great Underground Empire in the year 1067, where you find that an evil dude calling himself the \"Grand Inquisitor\" has taken over and banished the practice of magic. You'll need to travel back in time, along with the Dungeon Master (now imprisoned in a lantern) to sites from previous Zork games to recover legendary treasures that will help restore magic to the land. With superb graphics, a new spellbook, and a strong tie-in to previous games, ZORK GRAND INQUISITOR should appeal to old and new fans alike. The best news is that this is just the first in a projected trilogy of games. Long live the Great Underground Empire! Contact: Activision (310) 255-2712, www.activision.com ETA: Fall '97 Sierra is calling MASK OF ETERNITY the latest in the KING'S QUEST series, and it is being written by Roberta Williams, but we're not sure how much of an adventure game it is. In an attempt to expand the game's audience, Sierra is transforming one of the oldest adventure series into a 3D-adventure action game, complete with combat. The engine looks extremely cool, and Roberta Williams always tells a great story -so who knows? They just might pull this off, Take Two has taken on Jack The Ripper and Derek Smart-now they're ready for another horror Story In BLACK DAHLIA Inspired by the real-life, unsolved murder of Elizabeth Short in Los Angeles in 1947, BLACK DAHLIA puts you in the role of an agent on a global search for a barbarous serial killer. The video based adventure tea. tures the acting talent of Dennis Hopper, and since we're scared of him, we'll say we like the game for now. Virgin's CIRCLE OF BLOOD was one of our favorite adventures last year, but it never seemed to catch on. Fortunately, Virgin is trying again with a sequel, BROKEN SWORD: THE SMOKING MIRROR, which brings back George Stobbard and Nico for another sound of international intrigue in stunning 2D animation Finally, we can't get away without men tioning RIVEN: THE SEQUEL TO MYST. Love it or hate it, Myst is a computer gaming phenomenon, and we, along with a everyone else, will boot up the sequel when it finally ships this winter. What can the Miller brothers do with ten times the budget of Myst? And will CGW give the game a fair chance? Stay tuned for answers to these and other mysteries. STARSHIP TITANIC FOR YOUR EYES ONLY Briefing: After making a couple of classic text adventures for Infocom in the early 1980s, world class author Douglas Adams hitchhiked straight out of the computer gaming galaxy, seemingly for good. At long last, he's resurfaced-and not a minute too soon. Adams' return to gaming is STARSHIP TITANIC, a goofy science-fiction romp that would make Arthur Dent feel right at home. Penned entirely by Adams, the story involves a gigantic starship from an unknown galaxy that takes off on its maiden voyage--and crashes right into your home. You board the ship and encounter all sorts of characters, including malfunctioning robots and a deranged parrot (played by Monty Python alum Terry Jones!). With beautiful graphics, STARSHIP TITANIC transports Adams squarely into the '90s, but isn't without some old-school gaming, either. The game features a comprehensive text parser that lets you type in conversations with the game's characters-a perfect showcase for Adams' gargantuan wit. Contact: Simon & Schuster Interactive, www.simonsays.com ETA: October 97 Black Dahlia SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"Who Wants Some Wang? URT CIRCLE READER SERVICE #365 "


"More levels than a Tokyo skyscraper Tanks, bulldozers, boals, farklills: Orfue lo kill Hand to face tomhat mutle: Kirk lusti karate-style 100 000 100 049 03. Shadam illarrior is here. Lo llany. #1 Assassin. #1 Yakuza abuser. ul Freak franger #1 Mutant mutilatur. #1 reason to be scared of the dark. #1 Son-of-a-Hitch. So say Sayonara to all the Ninja wannahes that have gone before and put on your combat sandals... Lo Wang is coming to the Land of the Rising Sun to turn out the lights. Shadow Warrior. The Zen is going to hit the fan. \"There's no doubt that Shadow Warrior Eremates the competition.\" bameSlice Weekly 100 003 Tag, multi-colored ligtiting, transparent water..tatal immerSETETT, More li-links, Lo-wang speak, and tutal interactiun than Duke lukem 3D 2-Mayer langbang (deathmatch), Co-Op and Team Play mules with all-nem landicapping option. "


"Taming stars, Uzis, 4-Banesluntquas al mare Suim, tlima, trive, gju anywhere, do anything! Rotating 30 gun turrets to murdun enemies 100 050 100 049 100 049 100 049 2. FRESH FROM THE CREATORS OF DUKE NUKEM 3D Lo Wangis Shadow Warrior GET YOURSELF A SLICE OF THE ACTION IN STORES...NOW! or download the shareware at WWW.Shadowwarrior.com developed by RATING PENDING Ten REALM) GT Interactive Software 1001019 * -new Build Elitar for designing and testeijing your un environments ESRE www.len.net www.3drealms.com www.gtinteractive.com Shadow Warrior 1997 3D Realms Entertainment, Inc. Lo Wang and his likeness are tademarks of 3D Realms Entertainment, Inc., All rights reserved. Published and distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp. TENT and the TENT logo are trademarks of the T.E. Network, Inc. All other trademarks are the properly or their respective companies CIRCLE READER SERVICE #365 "


"ULTIMA ONLINE DOSSIER THREE: RPG Briefing: Chances are you've heard of this one before. The great news is that despite all sorts of rumors, setbacks, technical hurdles, and demands from impatient gamers and game journalists, ULTIMA ONLINE is forging ahead at full speed. Where it will be by the time you read this is hard to say but, at press time, Phase 1 of the public beta test had just been completed, and Richard Garriott-Lord British to you-was more than satisfied with the results. Though ULTIMA ONLINE won't be the first (or last) multiplayer online RPG on the market, it's by far the most highly anticipated, and the one most likely to really take over our lives. The online world of Brittania is going to feel so much like a real world-with a dynamic environ. mental and economic system, a continuously evolving social structure, and more-that many of us aren't going to be able to tell the difference. At E3, we watched our character improve his tailoring skill, find some cloth, and then make his own shirt. This is a tiny thing, of course, but it's an example of the level of detail that Origin is investing in this game. The skill-based character sys. tem (with 44 skills), the 64 spells, the macro system (which lets you automate virtually any action in the game, such as setting standard text strings)-it's all coming together beautifully. ULTIMA ONLINE is by far the most anticipated role playing game in years. We can't wait to see you there. Contact: EA/Origin, (800) 245-4525, www.ultimaonline.com ETA: Classified RETURN TO KRONDOR MIGHT & MAGIC VI FOR YOUR EYES ONLY Briefing: The official sequel to Raymond E. Feist's classic BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR was our top pick in last year's E3 roundupbut now it looks like it's finally back on track for an early '98 release. Set in the fantasy world of Feist's bestselling novels, KRONDOR's best feature is the author himself. Unlike some game licenses managed by clueless market ing weasels, Feist-a hardcore gamer himself-is directly involved in almost every aspect of the game's creation. RETURN TO KRONDOR takes us back to Midkemia, where you must recover an ancient religious artifact, the Tear of the Gods, stolen from the Ishapian Church. The game features a brand-new 3D engine, a detailed turn-based combat system, an alchemy system for creating spells, and a trap system that will test your thievery skills. The 10 chapter story promises to tell the kind of engrossing fantasy tale that Feist fans have come to expect. Let's just hope the ship date isn't a fantasy too. Contact: 7th Level, (972) 498-8100, www.7thlevel.com ETA: January '98 Briefing: Over the last two years, New World Computing had taken a break from their franchise RPG series to develop the addictive HEROES strategy games. Now series creator John van Caneghem and the New World team are returning to their roots with MIGHT AND MAGIC VI: THE MANDATE OF 2219 HEAVEN, the most ambitious entry to date. Set in the HEROES world of Enroth, MIGHT AND MAGIC VI concerns the disappearance of King Roland and the subsequent chaos that befalls the land. You'll man a party of up to six characters, attempting to put things right. New World has built a new 3D engine that will provide a completely immersive, first-person perspective. MIGHT AND MAGIC VI's world will be a constantly evolving one, with events occur ring whether you act or not. The game will include dozens of nonlin. ear quests, hundreds of NPCs who will freely travel through the world, and dungeons and forest that will repopulate with monsters. If WORLD OF Xeen looked a little dated to you, fear not: MiGHT AND MAGIC VI is right on the cutting edge. Contact: New World Computing, (818) 889-5600, www.nwcomputing.com ETA: October '97 CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"ADDITIONAL INTELLIGENCE WIZARDRY VI11 While ULTIMA ONLINE gets all the headlines for finally almost maybe shipping, 3D0's online world, MERIDIAN 59, is a year old already and is gelling ready for a major upgrade this fall. MERIDIAN 59: REVELATION will be a completely new ver. sion, with new graphics, interface, quests, spells, weapons, and NPCs. The world is being greatly enlarged, including the cre. ation of a new island city open to more experienced characters. Meanwhile, Bill Gates, not content to own most of the real world, is getting set to conquer the online RPG world as well. Microsoft's ASHERON'S CALL; due to debut in early 1998, will be another massive Internet RPG=playable on Microsoft's Internet Gaming Zone-with a continuing, persistent world. The game will utilize a first-person perspective and combat will be real-time. One question remains. Will Bill Gates roam the world as Lord Windowsia? experienced characters open to more Briefing: Like ULTIMA and MIGHT AND MAGIC, Sirtech's WIZARDRY series is another longtime roleplaying favorite that is making a grand return in the coming year. And like those other games, WIZARDRY VIII is going to be showing off a whole new look, with a brand-new high-res 3D engine. WIZARDRY VIII will complete the storyline from the previous two games, BANE OF THE COSMIC FORGE and CRUSADERS OF THE DARK SAVANT. You'll still lead a party of six on your adventures, which you can either create from scratch or import from CRUSADERS or WIZARDRY GOLD). Sirtech isn't saying a whole lot about the plot yet, but what they are saying is that they've totally revised the combat engine to include facing, ranged attacks, and phased turns (no, not real-time). They've also added area and ranged effects to the spell system, and created new professions and skills to master. Check our RPG feature next month, when we hope to get Sirtech to spill more about this major release Contact: Sirtech (315) 393-6451, www.sir-tech.com ETA: Classified LANDS OF LORE 11: GUARDIANS OF DESTINY Briefing: Here's another RPG that we wrote about in last year's E3 roundup that never shipped. But, like RETURN TO KRONDOR, it looks like we actually might get to play it very soon. Westwood's sequel to their popular LANDS OF LORE game will again be more of an adventure/RPG hybrid, where you take on the role of one character and follow his particular story. GUARDIANS OF DESTINY concerns the plight of Luther, son of the evil Scotia, who suffers from an uncontrollable shape shifting curse, and must travel through the Lands to seek out the magic cure. Throughout the game you'll learn to master the shape-shifting-which can turn you into, among other things, a giant beast and a tiny lizardand use your new forms to your advantage. The game's combal and spell system look great (the intelligent enemy Al is particularly cool), but the graphics, due to the game's long delay, are now a tad behind the times. (Call this the DAGGERFALL Syndrome.) Still, the story and gameplay look strong enough to make GUARDIANS OF DESTINY Worth watching. Contact: Westwood Studios, (702) 228-4040, www.westwood.com ETA: October '97 ASHERON'S CALL QUEST FOR GLORY 5 DRAGON FIRE By the time you read this, Interplay should have their post apocalyptic RPG FALLOUT Out the door, and will be shifting gears to a more traditional RPG setting: TSR'S AD&D world of Forgotten Realms. The game, called BALDUR'S GATE, uses a DIABLO-like isometric perspective, combat is real-time, and the story (which we're keeping mum about right now) will unfold over eight chapters Finally, the game that many of us are drooling for is Square's FINAL FANTASY VII, the first PC port of the RPG series that is a phenomenon in the console gaming world. At press time, FFVII was just on the verge of making its American debut on the PlayStation, but a Square spokesperson at E3 swore we'd see the PC port sometime in early '98. Briefing: Yet another longtime series returns, looking better than ever. Like LANDS OF LORE, the QUEST FOR GLORY series has always been more of an adventure/RPG hybrid, and the new version, created by the series' designer Lori Cole (along with Terry Robinson) promises more of the same gameplay that has enthralled legions of fans for years. You play the role of either a warrior, mage, or thief who has been summoned to Silmaria, a city on the island kingdom of Marete. Your mission is to help discover who has assassinated the king, and to help deal with the horde of monsters, mercenaries, and-rumor has it-a giant dragon that will soon besiege the land. You'll also need to battle four other competitors in a \"challenge of seven rites\" to prove yourself worthy of taking the assassinated king's place. QFG 5's new features include a new 3D engine, a more flexible real-time combat system, and most surprisingly, multiplayer support for up to eight players over a LAN, modem, or the Internet. Contact: Sierra On-Line, (206) 649-9800, www.sierra.com ETA: November '97 FOR YOUR EYES ONLY  SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"Je Et interactive Copyright  1996 301x Interactive, Inc. The 3Dfx Interactive logo and Voodoo Graphics are trademarks of 3Dfx Interactive, Inc. Images courtesy of Eidos. Ubi Soft. Criterion Studios, Activision, and Shiny Entertainment. Deathtrap Dungeon, Flying Nightmares 2. Tomb Raider. Lara Croft and her likeness are trademarks of EIDO Entertainment.  1997 Shiny Entertainment. Activision is a registered trademark of Activision, Inc. 1996 Activision, Inc. MechWarrior, BattleTech, BattleMech and 'Mech are registered trademarks and "


"Get Voodoo. PLC. 1997 Eidos. Subculture images are trademark of Criterion Studios.  1997 Criterion Studios. Pod images are trademark of Ubi Soft.  1997 Ubi Soft. MDK images are trademark of Shiny MechWarrior 2, MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries and MercNet are trademarks of FASA Corporation. All rights reserved. All other trademarks and trade names are the properties of their respective owners. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #120 "


"ACCELERATE FORMULAI WORLD LIPGOUT FOR WINDOWS 95 QIROX TA FOR WINDOWS 95 3D ACCELERATION REQUIRED DERY TIME 229.00 bang CHE PSYGNOSIS POS TOTAL TOTAL Stoele LAP lor2 1399 Wipeout XL and Formula 1. The most blistering 3D arcade race experiences available for the PC, coded specifically for the explosive graphics processing power of today's hottest 3D accelerator cards. Packed with all-action features, they represent the ultimate synergy of gameplay and design. No other game are optimized to get more razor-sharp graphics from your 3D accelerator card. So strap in, and see if you can keep the pace. 03 SOF 2 tae HERBERT 2 FINISH LINE 5 BENETTON RENAULT 237.909 TAG HEUER Official Timing Bora 20:50. 20'57. 0:56.9 FERRARI ALESI 27 THUS LAP 7.4 U TAG HEUER Official Timing Cutting-edge 3D graphics supported by the following cards: WIPEOUT XL FORMULA 1  Video Logic Power VR  Matrox Mystique  3DFX Card  3DFx Card  3D Labs Permedia  3D Labs Permedia  Rendition Verite  Rendition Verite  ATI Rage Mk2 KIDS TO ADULTS Check out downloadable demos and quick time videos at www.psygnosis.com 10152. @: 42 ES FORMULA1 PSYGNOSIS WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP Licensed by FOCA 10 Fuji television. Wipeoul XL, Psygnosis and the Psygnosis logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of Psygnosis Ltd.  1997 Psygnosis Ltd. The ratings icon is a trademark of the Interactive Digital Software Association. Windows is either a registered trademark or a trademark of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and or other countries. Check out downloadable demos and quick time videos at www.psygnosis.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #284 ROM BESTANDEN "


"LEGENDS '98 FOOTBALL Briefing: We wrote about this game in last year's E3 roundup (when it had \"97\" in its title), and we've talked repeatedly about how great it's going to be-and now our sources say Accolade is finally serious about releas. ing it this fall. We hope so, because when it's released, it has the potential to be the most exciting and original sports game of the year. At a time when virtually every sports developer is striving to make the same game-characterized by the sim guys adding arcade play and the arcade guys adding better stats-Accolade is taking its football game to a completely different playing field. Here's the deal: In addition to all 30 1997 NFL teams, you get to play with all the teams from three other key years in NFL history. 1932, 1950, and 1968. Not only can you play older teams, but you can play in their era, with their rules and their roster sizes. Are the '97 Packers tough enough to take on the '32 Bears? And, as coach, which 25 Packers are you going to cut to fit the 1932 roster limit? Along DOSSIER FOUR: SPORTS with limitless fantasy play, you can also manage one team over multiple seasons, design custom playbooks, and, of course, play football-in crisp, beautiful 3D. We've been playing beta versions of LEGENDS for months--now we're ready for the real deal. Hey Accolade, enough already: In the immortal words of Keyshawn Johnson-just give us the damn ball! Contact: Accolade, (408) 985-1700, www.accolade.com ETA: September '97 MICROSOFT BASEBALL 3D NHL 98 oc Briefing: Strike one--it's Microsoft. Strike two-a 3D accelera. tor card is required. But on the third pitch, MICROSOFT BASEBALL 3D takes a Mark McGwire-like swing and belts one way deep. With a ton of baseball games on the market, this one is drawing our attention because, thanks to Uncle Bill's bottom less pocket book, it's a showcase title for emerging gaming technologies--in addition to the fact that it looks like a lot of fun to play. The 3D acceleration will be worth it, as the players are amazingly fluid and life. like-unlike some other games, this is not Quake ball. Microsoft is also texture-mapping real player faces on the bodies (cool or creepy-we're not sure yet) and providing force feedback sup. port to enhance the feel of hitting or fielding a ball. Finally, the game will be playable in arcade mode over the Internet through Microsoft's Internet Gaming Zone. With full licensing and a topnotch interface, the game looks slick. Now let's just hope Microsoft knows its baseball. Contact: Microsoft, (206) 882-8080, www.microsoft.com ETA: October '97 NHL DR Briefing: EA Sports NHL 97 was almost universally hailed for its beautiful, cutting edge 3D graphics, but the game's Al (and bugs) left something to be desired, especially for those who actually knew something about hockey. This year, the company hopes to spruce up the brains of its winter beauty with an entirely new Al. Marc Crawford, coach of the Colorado Avalanche, was brought in to give the design team a Hockey 101 class, and it is hoped that this will be reflected in NHL 98's gameplay, with more realistic offensive and defensive coaching strategies. Other new features include an Olympic-style international tournament, dubbed \"Winter Break 98,\" that will let you play with 14 international teams; new signature moves from the REST top players from each NHL team; stadium-specific audio and visuals, and the por traits of over 500 players texture mapped onto their bodies. EA is also providing 3D acceleration and beefing up its gamepad support. If EA really succeeds in making this game as smart as it is beautiful, NHL 98 will be one killer game. Contact: EA Sports (415) 571-7171, www.easports.com ETA: November '97 FOR YOUR EYES ONLY SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


NA


"ACTIVISION THE NEW BREED HEAVY GEAR. COMING THIS FALL ON WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM OFFICIAL HEAVY GEAR. WWW.ACTIVISION.COM CIRCLE READER SERVICE #140 "


"JACK NICKLAUS ONLINE GOLF TOUR ADDITIONAL INTELLIGENCE Briefing: While role playing gamers congre. gate in Brittania this fall, golf nuts will have the opportunity to hang out in a different part of the online world. Accolade's JACK NICKLAUS ONLINE GOLF TOUR will be a downloadable only golf game based on the JACK NICKLAUS 4 engine. The game will let desktop duffers compete in open competition. This is not a matter of mailing in your score: This is live, online tourna. ment play, where hundreds of foursomes can compete in realtime. Accolade will sponsor regular weekend-long tournaments, complete with prizes, and will keep your scoring history in an open database, giving you bragging rights to prove yourself as the world's best desktop golfer. New courses will be uploaded on a regular basis, and Accolade will also accept user-created courses with the JACK 4 Course Designer. Let's just hope that Tiger-who is a big-time gamer-doesn't get wind of this one. That just wouldn't be fair. Contact: Accolade, (408) 985-1700, www.accolade.com ETA: Fall '97 By the time you read this, Access should have LINKS LS '98 on the shelves The game is now Win-95 native, and includes a number of visual enhancements, more camera angles, more golfers, Internet tournament play, and what everyone's been waiting for-much, much faster screen updates. er Microsoft is turning a lot of heads with their upcoming CART PRECISION RACING, which promises to deliver thrillingly realistic Indy car racing action in the setting of 17 Championship Auto Racing Teams tracks. With tracks electronically surveyed to within inches of accuracy, detailed 3D car-models, and built-in support for force feedback joy. sticks, CART PRECISION RACING may be the year's most exciting racing game. NHL POWERPLAY 98 0 04:20 POWERPLAY 15 000.00 Lapata ZOOS Briefing: Virgin Interactive's NHL POWERPLAY '96 debuted last year to surprisingly good reviews, and became the game for serious hockey fans who felt burned by market godzilla NHL 97. The one bummer with the PC version was that it was 2D-only, while the Sega Saturn version offered 3D polygo nal players. This year's model, NHL POWERPLAY 98, will bring the 3D action to the PC (including optional hardware acceleration) and, with belter name recognition, should give EA's game another run for its money. What POWERPLAY has going for it is a strong hockey Al, with players who look like they know what they're doing. For the '98 version, Virgin motion-captured hundreds of new moves, including fake shots, hooking, deflections, and fights. The players have been scaled larger, and additional camera angles should also up the glitz factor. Other improvements include the ability to select powerplay strategies, simulate seasons, and track player stats throughout a season. Contact: Virgin Interactive, (714) 833-8710, www.vie.com ETA: October '97 400 132342 RDD 1212 MPH  CART PRECISION RACING FOR YOUR EYES ONLY MADDEN NFL 98 Jiwa Briefing: Sure, we dissed last year's version of EA's most popular sports franchise--but that's only because we're real fans, and that version was really showing its age. Which is why we're as happy as Ilmu anybody to tell you that MADDEN NFL 98 has the potential to return the franchise to glory. EA Sports Test Sell told us that all of the previous code has been tossed, and they're starting from scratch to create a native Win-95 product, which is a huge relief for those of us who could barely get last year's kludgey code to run. Along with a new interface and 3D-polygonal players (with optional hardware acceleration), MADDEN NFL 98 is getting a new brain with a new player Al; 110-play, teamspecific playbooks; and an editor for creating offensive, defensive, and special-team plays. EA is promising live Internet play and stat updates after each week's real-world games. Contact: EA Sports, (415) 571-7171, www.easports.com ETA: January '98 Sierra's perennial heavyweight, FPS: FOOTBALL PRO, returns to the gridiron with a \"98 version, but this year's edition, priced at just $29.95, will have more cosmetic enhancements than anything else, as well as a brand-new, more user-friendly interface. Also look for FPS: TROPHY RIVERS, a fly. fishing sim based on their phenomenally successful TROPHY Bass, and FPS: SKI RACING, previewed in the August '97 CGW. Acclaim surprised many people last year with NFL QUARTERBACK CLUB, a strong arcade-style game that became the de facto choice for those disappointed in the sea son's other players. NFL QUARTERBACK CLUB '98 promises major improvements over the original, including more robust roster management options, network and modem play, statistical tracking with down loadable roster updates, and playbooks that include plays designed by the game's new poster-boy, Brett Favre. All this plus the biting commentary of Marv Albert! CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"REAL "


NA


"& DOLLS Your ship has crash landed on an unknown planet Look around. Crystal clear water shimmers. Shadows shift. Alien architecture fades into the horizon. Darkness falls. Walkways glow. Godless temples beckon. You are afraid. You are in the real world...but it is like no world you have ever known. You are an uninvited guest in the fastest, sleekest, most beautiful 3D world ever created. Live it. Breathe it. Survive it. Unreal. Alter your reality...forever. Unreat LATIME PERSONE GT Interactive Software Na RP DE WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM Primed for Pentium Maximized for MMX Technology Digital Extremes www.unreal.com unreal.gtgames.com Unreal LOOK FOR THE NOVEL FROM POCKET BOOKS 1997 Epic Megagames, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Created by Epic Megagames, Inc. in collaboration with Digital Extremes. Published and distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp. Microsoft trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. MMX and the MMX Logo are trademarks of Intel Corporation. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies and Windows are registered CIRCLE READER SERVICE #367 "


"PICTIONARY 160 Person, Place or Animal DOSSIER FIVE: PUZZLES Jeff Dana I A Dave 6/ Briefing: Hasbro is secretly plotting with the original Pictionary creators to ensure that the game of quick draw retains its style and personality in the transition to silicon. of the six different game types, our agents found the \"you-draw\" cate. gory the most enjoyable: Unleash the artist within you and hope that your friends can guess what you're drawing. Sources reveal, however, that if you're lousy at drawing with a pen and paper, you'll be no better with a mouse. The artistically challenged can pick up points during the other five games. In one, you have to figure out that the last word of each picture.phrase is the first word of the next, there's also a fast-buzzer round of matching words and pictures, and you can also guess what the computer's drawing for you. The game, which is set in an art gallery, with background music and party banter to enhance the ambiance, offers single-player, multiplayer, and team play with hotseat, Internet, and LAN capabilities. Contact: Hasbro Interactive, (508) 921-3700, www.hasbro.com ETA: September '97 SMART GAMES CHALLENGE #2 ADDITIONAL INTELLIGENCE Briefing: Try though they might, the brainiacs at Smart Games, Inc. were unable to keep their plans secret from our operatives. CHALLENGE #2 will feature 20 brand new puzzles, each with 30 levels. Among the 600 brain-busters are Odyssey, in which you must discover the correct path across a grid, or get stuck on a never-ending journey; Pipeline, a strategy puzzle for cerebral plumbers; and The Fool's Jewels, a spatial puzzle in which you must remove all the pieces of coal, leaving behind only jewels. Other hidden delights are jumbled picture puzzles, scrambled soundbytes, and over 800 trivia questions. Contact: Smart Games Inc., (800) 788-8815, www.smartgames.com ETA: October '97 FOR YOUR EYES ONLY Our operatives unmasked Lose YOUR MARBLES as a clever TETRIS-clone in which you clear your marbles (before your oppo nent can clear his) by lining up three or more of the same color. Lose YOUR MARBLEs will be available from SegaSoft in September, and is playable hotseat or LAN. Other top secret Hasbro projects include BOGGLE (October), SORRY! (November). and for those who just can't get enough of Luke, Leia, and Co., a Star Wars edition of MONOPOLY -complete with footage from the recently restored Star Wars trilogy. Finally, the chess wars continue, with Mindscape's CHESSMASTER 5500 and Sierra's innovative POWER CHESS '98. YOU DON'T KNOW JACK 3 & YOU DON'T KNOW JACK TV Briefing: Data intercepted from Berkeley Systems reveals that JACK 3's new question types include Threesomes, a multiplayer version of the Dis or Dat question; Impossible Questions; Fiber Optic Field Trips To The Dead; and a What Is This? picture question (a picture of an everyday object taken from a unusual angle). Level-10 couch potatoes take note: JACK TV features renovated graphics and greater customization. If you decide to play on a weekend, for example, your host may greet you with remarks like \"Hey loser, why are you staying home on a Saturday Night?\" Agents are encour I'd like to Buy a Bowel aged to investigate in parties of two or more to ensure sufficient backup. My Bologna Has a First Name Contact: Berkeley Systems, (510) 540-5535, To Russia with Yuks www.berkeleysystems.com ETA: September/October '97 MONUPOLY STAR WARS CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"Monster 3D graphics! Monster 3D sound! (Gaming has never been so fierce.) DUpg JAUDIO MONSTER SOUND: THE FIRST PCI BASED SOUND CARD ACCELERATES DIRECTSOUND, THE NEW MICROSOFT AUDIO STANDARD IDEAL FOR HEADPHONES OR 2-4 SPEAKERS FREE FULL-VERSION GAMES INCLUDED DIAMOND Monster Sound Ker sound for DIAMOND MONSTER 3D:  WICKED DIRECT 3D AND GLIDE GAMING ACTION AWARD-WINNING, REALISTIC 3D PERFORMANCE WORKS WITH YOUR EXISTING GRAPHICS CARD BUNDLED WITH MORE THAN 20 FREE GAMES It doesn't just surround you. It swallows you with realistic, heart-pounding 3D sound. And now, when you ter Someo Camanet combine the amazing new Monster Sound PCI-based 3D audio card with our award-winning Monster 3D graphics accelerator, you'll have the ultimate gaming system for your Windows 95 PC. Using ground-breaking A3D Interactive technology from Aureal-initially developed for NASA virtual reality simulators Monster Sound provides stunning, digital-quality 3D positional sound. And, according to Computer Gaming World, the Monster 3D graphics card is the ideal solution \"for no-holds-barred blistering 3D performance.\" Separately, they bring the absolute best out of today's most outrageous games and Web sites. Together, they deliver performance that blows everything else away. DIAMOND    Accelerate your world. **** CALE A Monster Sound fease ASD cv 30 ia technology IP Computing D 3D by A Visit www.diamondmm.com/monstersound for your chance to win Monster Sound and Monster 3D! Monster 3D is a trademark of Diamond Multimedia Systems, Incorporated, 2880 Junction Avenue, San Jose, CA 95134. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.  Diamond Multimedia Systems, Incorporated. All rights reserved. "


"As a ceder you have the chance to fanid aralye Academy. As a pilor you have the Chance to barile hostile eenis. As a captain you have \"ile chançe, to establish an alliance, Wirk alias you don'really, qui in order to save the universe. \" \"Obviously, this is NOT A Game of chance. \", The Great Intergalactic War has left the Galaxy in chaos. And a stedily increasing barrage of attacks on human ships leaves you with only one choice. YOU MUST set out on a series of covert missions to defeat the enemy. Everything you do, every enemy you ikill or let get away, every decision you make will have an effect on the ever-changing plor. For PC CD-ROM. Available late September. To purchase Forced Alliance visit your local software retailer, or call 1-888-797-5867. Downloadable demo available at www.Ripcordgames.com "


"CONSEQUENCE ol Rank As you progress from the rank of Cadet to Captain, you'll go from taking orders to giving them. The POWER & the Responsibility of commanding AN ENTIRE (leer of ships will be yours. CONSEQUENCE of Action li's not just il you win or lose, OR EVEN how you play the game. Everyling you do determine diow the game is EVEN played at all. forced an area Roshiambo Combat STRATEGY Space Combat willi wisi. YOUR ship is a rock. Another is paper. Anoilier is scissors. YOU CAN' bean them all & they can't all bear you. Plan your attacks Accordingly. A Thickening Plon Willi an unparalleled depili of play, SEL AGAINST Out-ofthis-world Sol Grapliics, figure out A Constanily clinging STORY AS YOU MANEU, VER & master four lighters, while dealing with three different alien RACES. RATING PENDING Orbital Studios Inc. RP CONTENT RATED BY GAMES lipcord WWW.Ripcord GAMES.COM 01997 Ripcord GAMLorena Alliance: The Glanious Mandant is a trademark of Omblial Studios Inc. Distributed by Panasonic INTACT Media Company. "


"M1 TANK ALATOON II DOSSIER SIX: SIMULATIONS Briefing: MicroProse kept the surprise sim hit of the E3 show under need-to-know security throughout its development in an effort to make a big splash when it was revealed, and all that secrecy had its desired effect. Due in the first half of 1998, M1 TANK PLATOON II is a worthy successor to the original, maintaining its parent's feature set and platoon management system, all the while adding modern Al and all the requisite bells and whistles. PLATOON Il sports glorious graphics (what we thought was the 3D-hardware version of the game was, in fact, the 2D version) in addition to beefed up gameplay. Written on P90s, it's aimed at mid-range machines with 2D cards, but even better imagery awaits 3D-card owners. Viewing distance extends to an unprecedented 10km, allowing realistic engagement ranges. PLATOON Il sports five dynamic campaigns that follow actual military doctrine. In addition, a dozen scripted missions recreate Gulf War and other historic battles. In the campaign, you act as a platoon sergeant, and you can set waypoints (with wait time, action state, and formation settings) in the battle builder. You can also create scripted battles with this tool. Crew management is important; you'll promote and transfer crewmembers as neces. sary. Sevenly vehicles, more than 80 weapons systems, and eight types of ground troops are modeled. Eight-player network support features head-to-head battles as well as co-op play. In this mode, players can drive Challengers, Warriors, Leopards, and Martyrs as well as M1A2s. Contact: MicroProse, (800) 695-4263, www.microprose.com ETA: First half of '98 LONGBOW 2.0 F-22 AIR DOMINANCE FIGHTER FOR YOUR EYES ONLY Briefing: Gathering intelligence on LONGBOW 2.0 was a snap-it was the buzz of E3. On display in full-size replicas of AH64D cockpits, the helicopter sim wowed showgoers with its all-new 3Dfx-supporting graphics engine. You can now fly the OH-58D Kiowa scout and UH-60L Blackhawk utility helicopters in addition to the AH-64D; cooperative and antagonistic multiplayer support allows a pilot and gunner to fly in a single helicopter. (QUAKE fans will love the Blackhawk's door gun.) The game looks particularly good dur ing night missions, with dynamic lighting from missiles, explosions, and flames illuminating the landscape. Plus, this title sports the most convincing night vision.goggles display seen yet. Day missions are just as impressive, with four times the graphics detail of the original and a virtual cockpit from which to view that rich detail. LONGBOW 2.0 isn't just about graph ics, though. The game features an entirely new dynamic cam paign engine with battles set in Iraq/Azerbaijan and at the Army's National Training Center. Contact: Jane's Combat Simulations, (415) 571.7171, www.janes.ea.com ETA: Fall '97 Briefing: The subject code named TFX3:F-22 has been split into two products: DID F. 22 AIR DOMINANCE FIGHTER (ADF) and F-22 TOTAL AIR WAR (TAW). Apparently the campaign in this EF2000 sequel was so ambitious, the developers determined they wouldn't be able to get it finished in time for the October '97 ship date. So, they split the original $60 product into two, the $40 ADF sim and the $20 TAW add-on. ADF, which features the most impressive terrain graphics of any jet sim we've seen, lets you fly the F-22 and send orders to aircraft from an AWACS station. ADF will feature three tours of duty, single missions, and an instant-action setup, as well as multiplayer combat. Thorough ACM combat replays are available. No more static ground targets here-look for tanks kicking up dust as they move across the desert to take ground objectives. The TAW expansion pack, due out a couple of months after ADF, will add a fully dynamic, real-time campaign, as well as an enhanced mission planner. Contact: Digital Image Design, (301) 916-9302, www.did.com ETA: October '97 (ADF), January '98 (TAW) CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"I A10 WARTHOG JOINT STRIKE FIGHTER Briefing: Our investigators weren't able to ferret out many details on this follow-up to Interactive Magic's F-22, as IA 10 WARTHOG isn't slated to ship until the first quarter of '98. A mole within the company told us that the sim will feature an improved version of the graphics engine introduced in 1F 22. This time around, human-drawn art will be used instead of satellite imagery, since the latter pixelates at the low altitudes at which the A-10 attack jet flies. Campaigns will be dynamic, in the vein of 1F-22, but with more control over mission orders and target selection; you'll be able to manage attacks at the squadron comman der level. You'll fly missions over Kuwait, as well as two of the F-22 combat theaters (which are yet to be determined). It appears that \"Wild Bill Stealey is on the way to creating an electronic battlefield on the Internet, although Interactive Magic has yet to announce any intentions to do so. But with the F-22, A-10, and M1A2 Abrams modeled, and con sidering the company's ambitious plans for its l-Magic Online division, plus the fact that all these sims sport multiplayer capabilities, the idea doesn't seem that farfetched. Contact: Interactive Magic (919) 461-0722, www.imagicgames.com ETA: First quarter '98 Briefing: The Joint Strike Fighter (usually referred to as JSF) is slated to go into service soon after the turn of the century. This stealthy jet will replace F-16, FIA 18, and Harrier aircraft in the Navy, Air Force, Marines, and UK Royal Navy. Currently, both Lockheed Martin and Boeing are building prototype aircraft to compete for the JSF contract. This new sim from Eidos will let you engage in your own flyoff between the two models in five different dynamic campaigns. The terrain is absolutely breathtaking in detail, with smooth hills, trees scattered about, and hundreds of structures in cities-yet it runs at a silky smooth frame rate at 512x384 resolution with no 3D card on a P166. The smoothness of the graphics has to be seen to be believed. JSF seems targeted more at the action simmer than the hard-core; this is backed up by the developers giving the JSF prototypes bogus X-32 and X 35 designations. Still, if you're looking for fast aerial action in an immersive environment, JSF should be worth close investigation. Contact: Eidos Interactive, (415) 547-1200, www.eidosinteractive.com ETA: October '97 JANE'S F-15 F-16 AGGRESSOR Briefing: Just hours before E3 started, Virgin signed the new F-16 sim from General Simulations, Inc., a company launched by DID cofounder Phil Allsop. F-16 AGGRESSOR features an odd combination of realistic flight dynamics and a storyline straight out of Hollywood. You play a near future mercenary pilot flying missions in various African states. (This isn't that wild; a recent issue of World Air Power Journal documented mercenary pilots flying modern jets and helicopters in African conflicts.) You've been hired by a Greenpeace-style organization to further its causes through the use of a little force. Despite the fanciful premise, the devel: opers are striving for dead-on realism in the plane's performance. The flight model is being designed by a team that has done simulation work for the U.S. military. Joystick response is designed to precisely simulate the stick in the real F-16, where a certain amount of stick movement applies a precise G force to the plane's movement. Color depths up to 32 bits will be supported on 3D cards. Contact: Virgin Interactive, (714) 833-8710, www.vie.com ETA: Fall '97 Briefing: Although the game was featured in-depth in CGW's July '97 cover story, we were able to get more details on this realistic F-15E simulation. Perhaps the biggest news is that multiplayer and 3D cards will be supported in the release version. Because 3D support is being implemented late in the game, you'll still be able to fly at a smooth frame rate even without hardware acceleration. Depending on available time and the complexity of coordinating hundreds of targets across a network, multiplayer may be limited to head-to-head combat in the initial release; we wouldn't be sur prised to see coopera tive play in an add-on pack, though. We also got a look at some of the minutiae that will please detail hounds: accurate tail insignia for each squadron, all the way down to the proper serial numbers for each aircraft: optional resource manage ment in the war, forcing you to decide whether you really need to bring along those expensive laser-guided bombs, and flight modeling that's already the most impressive we've seen in a jet sim. Contact: Jane's Combat Simulations, (415)571-7171, www.janes.ea.com ETA: First quarter '98 FOR YOUR EYES ONLY SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"A GOOD 7TH LEGION RECRUIT COS SELE 1907 MicroProw, Inc. All rights reserved. U London is a trade ATA ME Mega Ganes, lac, MicroProse is a resistered trademark of MicroProse, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders. ACTION. MMX technology delivers feverish, finger-blistering combat with action faster than any other real-time strategy game. ATTITUDE. Your voracious band of ruthless mercenaries gets smarter as they collect mutilated bodies for cold hard cash. ANARCHY. Wage war with up to 6 legions via modem, LAN or Internet-then deploy action element cards to wreak havoc on enemies. "


"ALWAYS SALUTES HIS VICTIM. SCREAM through combat strategy and savor every GUT-WRENCHING moment of annihilating your enemy. With rage in your veins and ASSASSINATION on the brain, be prepared to command this 7th Legion\" battalion in the ultimate UNTAMED DEATH FEST. Because once you're in-it's all about balls-to-the-wall real-time combat action where \"paying your respects\" is done with a dignified SINGLE FINGER SALUTE. MAO PROSE WWW.microprose.com T LEWON NDIL RP EPIC 74 LEGON AVAILABLE ON WINDOWS 95. VISIT YOUR LOCAL RETAILER OR CALL: 1.800.695.GAME 24 HOURS (U.S. AND CANADA) CIRCLE READER SERVICE #196 "


"ADDITIONAL INTELLIGENCE FALCON 4.0 Briefing: We've had FALCON 4.0 under surveil. lance since late 1995, and our latest intelligence indicates that the product is indeed in danger of actually shipping sometime after the holiday sea. son. The feature set for this serious F-16C simula: tion continues to come together, with its fully dynamic campaign up and running, many of the plane's systems implemented (we saw impressive air-to-air radar modes, although air-to-ground systems are still being developed), and numerous highly detailed ground objects in place at airbases. Given the ambitiousness of the game's multiplayer campaign, which lets pilots jump into missions in progress on a LAN or via the Ten online gaming service, our impression is that FALCON 4.0's developers could end up spending a lot of time debugging the multiplayer aspects of the game. Still, a worst case scenario is probably first quarter 1998. The game promises to be worth the wait, with the realism and Al you'd expect from the FALCON series, innovative multiplayer features, and breathtaking visuals and sound effects. Contact: MicroProse, (800) 695-4263, www.microprose.com ETA: First Quarter '98 With at least 23 flight sims alone on display at E3 and more than 30 in develop ment, it's going to be a great year for simulation fans. (Although perhaps not as good a year for those fighting for their share of the market's dollars.) Dynamix looks ready to remake its name as a top-notch sim designer with Red Baron II. Aces X-Fighters (which was running at the show in 3Dfx splendor), and Sierra Pro Pilot Along with iF-16 (previewed in this issue) and IA-10 Warthog Interactive Magic was also showing iPanzer '44. This FIGHTER SQUADRON: SCREAMIN DEMONS OVER EUROPE IPANZER '44 Briefing: Take a flight and physics model that makes the acclaimed modeling in A-10 CUBA! look primitive, layer on a two-years-in-the-making 3D engine, and finish off with a mis. sion planner that gives you complete control over the air war, and you already have the potential for a standout sim. Add an Open Plane Interface that lets technically savvy users import their own aircraft in addition to the nine meticulously mod eled planes included with the sim, and you have the Quake of flight simulations. FIGHTER SQUADRON should address all the complaints about A-10 CUBA! with its mission editor, textured graphics, and thick, paper manual. It features three combat regions over which to fly: the English Channel, North Africa, and Germany. Aircraft include the P-51 Mustang, B-17 Flying Fortress, P-38 Lightning, Hawker Typhoon, Avro Lancaster, De Havilland Mosquito, Messerscmitt Bf-109 and Me 262, and the Junkers Ju 88. Realism maniacs be warned: Although the physics should be right on, the combat arenas have been compressed to allow you to get right into the action, eliminating the need to fly in real-time to the target. Contact: Activision, (310) 255-2000, www.activision.com ETA: November '97 FOR YOUR EYES ONLY World War II tank sim comes from the designers of IM1A2 ABRAMS and will feature infantry, trees, and a wide variety of WWII tanks and support vehicles. Sixteen bit color graphics and a multiplayer mode with Sherman, Panzer and Russian T-34 tanks round out this title Virgin's Sabre Ace was one of many new sims on display with support for force feedback joysticks, and Looking Glass pleased sim fans by confirming Direct 3D support in Flight Unlimited 11. (Even the early 3D version was disturbingly real on a 3Dix card.) MicroProse's European Air War has also received the 3D treatment, it will support 3Dfx Voodoo and Rendition Verite-based cards. Another bonus in EAW is the capability to modify your plane's nose art. Along with JSF Eidos had Flying Nightmares 2 and Team Apache on dis play, the latter helicopter sim had spectacular graphics, but had HUD features which made it look a bit less seriously modeled than LONGBOW 2. Notably absent from the floor was the Confirmed kill online sim. For into on Microsoft's Fighter Ace and Flight Simulator 98. see Denny Atkin's column elsewhere in this issue, FLYING CORPS GOLD Briefing: Developer Rowan is slated to have released both 3D and multiplayer patches for Empire's FLYING CORPS sim by the time you read this. Those aren't the only enhancements in store for this WWI sim, though. A new version, FLYING CORPS GOLD, will incorporate those improvements and a number of others. These include a mission editor that allows you to create your own scenarios; place aircraft, balloons, tanks, AAA, and buildings throughout the world; and direct ground and air activity across the front. The game will feature new aircraft, including the Fokker D-VII, as well as support for force feedback joysticks such as the CH Products Force FX. Also, the artificial intelligence is being fine-tuned (this improvement should also be present in the patch), equipping your wingmen with better performance-and a clue. Contact: Empire Interactive, (301) 916-9302, www.empire-us.com ETA: October '97 CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"Congratulations. You Just Gave Birth to a Bouncing Baby Norn Named Toby! Creatures WARNING DIGITAL PLAY with your Norns as they explore. ENCLOSED TEACH your Norns to eat, speak and interact with you and other creatures. tures creatures creatures orns Create Real Life on Your PC Create & Breed Your Own Noras ENCOURAGE your creatures to breed. PROTECT your Norns from Nasty Grendels. EXCHANGE new generations of creatures with other proud parents over the Internet. LETTOLS 191 MIRISCAPI Visit me at our WebNest Now! www.creatures.mindscape.com Windows 95 Windows 3.1 Macintosh CD-ROM Create Real Life on Your PC HATCHING JULY 15th CyberLife MINDSCAPE at Software Retailers Everywhere or call us at 1-800-234-3088 ENTERTAINMENT Creatures TM and -97 CyberLife Technologies Ltd. All rights reserved. Published and distributed by Mindscape, Inc, under exclusive license from CyberLife Technologies. Produced under exclusive license from GT Interactive Software Europe) Limited. Mindscape is a registered trademark and the Mindscape Logo is a trademark of Mindscape, Inc. Windows and Microsoft are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. Macintosh is a registered trademark and Mac is a trademark of Apple Computer, Inc. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective holders. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #131 "


"IMPERIA THE FINE ART OF CONQUERING THE WORLD management, economic trade, exploration, diplomatic maneuvering and military conquest, this multi-faceted strategy game allows you to attempt what few in history have dared: unify the world under one leader! To achieve victory you must develop your country's infrastructure through deft manipulation of delicate economic, diplomatic and military resources. Then, skillfully maneuver it to a position of dominance in the Council of Governors. Easy to say. Difficult to accomplish. Your Cabinet Ministers will, of course, offer varying amounts of advice. t's one thing to create a working civilization, quite another to lead that civilization to world dominance. IMPERIALISM\" inspires you to do both. Combining elements of resource 902 NORTH POLEN:D :/ KIVIceland RE OR . MEI TON RT OLYN . Azores Islands 1977 IMORE SAN FRANO  RLESTORY) Zermudas or some JT Z ANT Lelanda ATMINDSCAPE COMPANY COVERE Seabominica RADER Martinique TAD Guate. 2.CENTRAR daribbean Sea 5Radache Chair daliek Chain TOYENNE out "


"Se, M LISM O 000 D300 But ultimate control over the fate of your nation is yours and yours alone. However you handle it, the vigorous climb to the top of this earth-like world is a challenge with no equal! SS 3: 09 IMPERIALISM. The World is Within Your Grasp. www.imperialism.com Developed by Frog City. To Order: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-234-3088 (USA & Canada) with Visu or MasterCard. Trade Book DAS OPTER SHER IMPERIALISM is a trademark of Strategic Simulations, Inc. 1997 Strategic Simulations, Inc., a Mindscape Company All rights reserved. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective holders. Haxaco offer 4 units of Steel @ 8339 / unit. Purchase a units No more offers of Steel BAB 3 902 NORTH POLE LITECTS IMPERIALISM THE FINE ART OF CONQUERING THE WORLD VOEA. V BRIGUSReist L800 TV IMPERIALISM THE FINE ART OF CONQUERING THE WORLD Aloro ALGED 43 Chand WINDOWS 95 & MACTMOS CD-ROM T SAN Fazanas L. Cance Shes IS Mourzo. STRATEGIES. SIMULATIONS RI KURIR Amdur RABIANDRU stand BongoMadre Sodorra Pontos CIRCLE Maldiveste "


"WING COMMANDER: PROPHECY DOSSIER SEVEN: SPACE SIMS KINO SIXI UNOX HON Briefing: WING COMMANDER: PROPHECY (don't call it WING COMMANDER V in front of the development team) was a single vote away from winning our \"Best of Show\" crown, which was snagged by QUAKE II. And if we were a bit more wimpy, we'd have called it a tie. Because while QUAKE II takes a popular game concept and fine-tunes it into something wonderful, WING COMMANDER: PROPHECY takes a popular game concept, blows it to smithereens, and reassem. bles the parts into a new archetype that redefines and refreshes a stagnating space-simula. tion genre. Fear not, WING COMMANDER fans, this game still has the proper flavor. This time around, though, you're not \"Old Bluehair\" or Mark Hamill (although you do get to interact with Blair in the game). But while the character has changed, you're still a pilot for the Confederation, Tom Wilson's Maniac is still around to make life annoying, Ginger Lynn Allen's mechanic is still around to make life exciting, and the universe is still counting on your piloting skills and charm to keep it intact. The big difference is that this time the game is more about the game than about the movies. Cinematics take the back seat to a new game engine that immerses you like never before in the battle to save the Confederation. Certainly, there are still video interludes, but as the develop ment team put it, \"Before, the movies drove the game. This time, the game drives the movies.\" It seems the Prophets of Kilrah had predicted the end of their world. Unfortunately, they also predicted that evil would devour the universe soon after the destruction of Kilrah. Origin is still staying mum on the name and look of the alien race you'll face, but the game's designers assure us that they're not big, cute kitties this time around. In fact, the designers enlisted Sid Mead, the designer behind the looks of Blade Runner and 2010, to create an alien race so frightening, so disgusting, that you'll take special pleasure in disintegrating it. We did see the alien ships in action, and we were impressed with their Babylon 5.esque organic appearance, Look for more dynamic mission branching as the game progresses-you're not as likely to feel as if you're being pulled down a path (as was the case in previous games). In addition, missions don't always end in victory or defeat; there can be degrees of win/loss. Finally, look for missions of more realistic scope and length. A capital ship won't be knocked out by a sin gle torpedo (no matter what Col. Blair tells you about his experiences in a past life): you may need five missions to get past its defenders and take the ship out. Along with the primary plot, look for multiplayer combat. Multiplayer mode features dynamic entry, so you can join a mission already in progress: optional power-ups, so you can pick up missiles and other enhancements as you battle; and a spectator camera that lets you watch the action if the game you want to join is full, or if you want to see how the masters do it. A variety of new ships will spice up both single and mul tiplayer combat with very different flying characteristics, which should prevent boring turning-fights. The Panther, for instance, vectors its thrust from side to side, so it's very maneuverable in the yaw plane. The Vampire, on the other hand, excels in pitch response. The game engine itself shows major tuning. We witnessed it running at smooth frame rates with glorious dynamic lighting and 16-bit color. Yet both systems were running vanilla P133s, and only one had a 3D card. Numerous enhancements have also been made to the interface to remove combat annoy. ances-look for one button adjustments for power reallocations, shield adjustment, and so on. Origin may have pulled off the unlikely here, creating a game with enough WING COMMANDER flavor to keep fans satisfied, but providing a very different, gameplay-oriented experience that will engage even those Wing Ill fans who wrote off Wing IV as just being more of the same. Contact: Origin, (415) 571.7171, www.origin.ea.com ETA: Fall '97 CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"EARTHSIEGE 3 MECHWARRIOR III Briefing: Sierra's Dynamix division pioneered the PC giant robot sim genre when it created the original MECHWARRIOR for Activision. Now they're back with a vengeance, no longer content to allow the EARTHSIEGE series to play second fiddle to the competition. EARTHSIEGE 3 promises a better storyline, an enriched environment, and a top-notch graphics engine In addition to Hercs (giant robots) and fliers, you can also pilot tanks, armored scouts, and hovercraft. Over 50 components are available for vehicle customization. Cybrid vehicles now feature an eerie, biomechanical appearance, and you'll fight them on dazzling 16-bit color rolling scenery, Plus, the transition to combat in interior locations is seamless. Other features include comprehensive 3D-graphics card support, 3D sound, and Windows NT and multiprocessor support. The EARTHSIEGE series has been accused of being \"lighter\" than MECHWARRIOR in part due to its less developed backstory. Dynamix hired science fiction author David Bischoff, whose credits include coauthoring Tin Man (one of the best episodes of Star Trek: The Next Gen eration), to pen a background bible for the series. The mission structure is nonlinear; there are plot-focused missions, but between them you can take any number of other missions to fill your coffers and upgrade your forces. Contact: Sierra/Dynamix, (800) 757-7707, www.sierra.com ETA: November '97 Briefing: The MECHWARRIOR series' third developer is the company that created the BATTLETECH universe, FASA. Because of that, indications are that this game will be the truest to the universe's lore. And although the game isn't slated to ship until next year, it's already looking well-armed for the upcoming market battle. MECHWARRIOR III will feature 18 Mech chassis, 4 of which were designed by FASA specifically for this game. Of course, each Mech can be completely customized-not only in equipment, but in paint job as well. You'll even be able to create your own decals. The Mechs them selves will offer new flexibility-articulated arms that let you fire to the side when looking to the side, without having to twist your Mech's torso. Look for a universe with better physical modeling than in previous MECHWARRIOR games. You'll not only traverse hills and valleys, but also fight battles in small towns and big cities. Trees and infantry are other welcome additions. Your Mech can enter the water, and doing so will give you a cooling advantage. Equipment modeling sees new detail as well. For instance, lasers actually act like lasers instead of the \"energy projectile\" weapons common in computer games. Firing is instanta neous, allowing slicing attacks. The campaign will be fully dynamic. As a Lance Commander, you'll be able to set all mission parameters and waypoints. A random mission generator and several canned missions will be available as well. Contact: MicroProse, (800) 695-4263, www.microprose.com ETA: First half '98 HEAVY GEAR THE 10TH PLANET Briefing: With the MECHWARRIOR license passing to MicroProse, Activision was forced to look for a new universe for its giant robot series. HEAVY GEAR, the resulting game, is an intriguing mix of the familiar and the new. The game's engine has elements which smack of the MECHWARRIOR series, but it's seen massive updating. On standard graphics cards, the textures look much better than before, although the game really shines on a 3D card. The deformable terrain features rolling hills that should make for valuable cover in multiplayer games. Play is a bit different, since the Gears actually carry their weapons. (Yes, a giant EN robot carrying a giant gun seems quite silly, but Gears were originally designed as construction machines and don't have room for internal weapon ry.) Control is much more fluid than in MECHWARRIOR II; your Gears can crouch, sidestep, and are maneuverable enough to perform their own version of the QUAKE strafing maneuver. Contact: Activision, (310) 255-2000, www.activision.com ETA: Fall '97 Briefing: THE 10TH PLANET features strategic elements new to the space sim genre. Refreshingly, instead of zooming through deep space, you'll actually be defending Earth from alien invasion this time around. It's up to you, the lone survivor of an alien attack, to help save your home planet. The ability to fully customize your spaceship is an exciting feature in THE 10TH PLANET. You can install more than 100 pieces of equipmentengines, weapons, computers, shields, and the like. This should make the game's multiplayer mode particularly popular. The game is nonlinear. Instead of being led through a series of missions, you'll be able to utilize a strategic simulation and base man. agement system to make your own plan of attack. You'll also be able to research and use alien technology to get the jump on the bad guys. Although the game is far more than just a space shooter, it excels at good old-fashioned combat. The game sports 3D card and force-feedback joystick support and a particle sys: tem for flying debris. Contact: Bethesda Softworks, (800) 677-0700, www.bethsoft.com ETA: Fourth quarter '97 FOR YOUR EYES ONLY SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"Dungeons & Dragons COMPUTER GAME AD+DC . An UNBEATABLE COMBIATION The AD&D game's most famous world, the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting, is now powered by the award-winning Descent engine. SAME INTRODUCING DESCENT TO UNDERMOUNTAIN, THE MOST REVOLUTIONARY NEW AD&D FORGOTTEN REALMS COMPUTER GAME EVER. BASED ON AN ENHANCED, SVGA VERSION OF THE AWARD-WINNING DESCENT ENGINE, YOU ARE CHALLENGED TO BUILD AN AUTHENTIC ADED CHARACTER AND PLUNGE DEEP INTO UNDERMOUNTAIN — A TWISTING DUNGEON LABYRINTH LOCATED BENEATH THE CITY OF WATERDEEP. HERE YOU WILL ENCOUNTER AN INCREDIBLE 360° WORLD FILLED WITH SHADOWY HALLS, ANCIENT CRYPTS AND ABANDONED TEMPLES NOT TO MENTION A TERRIFYING ASSORTMENT OF CREATURES WHO CALL UNDERMOUNTAIN THEIR HOME. SOLVE THE RIDDLE OF UNDERMOUNTAIN AND YOU WILL CERTAINLY AMASS A PILE OF GOLD. FAIL AND YOU WILL BECOME A MERE PILE OF BONES. EITHER WAY, YOU'RE GOING DOWN LIKE NEVER BEFORE. DESGENT TOK || NDERMOUN "


"SORGOTTEN REALING SETTING UND UNDERMOUNTAIN TRERUINS OF REALIT UNDERMOUNTAIN UNDERMO LEVEL STAD ELEHEF# 3 Experience more than 25 different levels that come alive in full 3D 360° detail, from a dwarven temple to an ancient Egyptian crypt. ROUE PURVING BERO US 4927 AFIS ESCENT Build your character using true AD&D role-playing elements 6 different races and single or multi-classed options. Your choice of character class leads to unique abilities and will also affect the way the game plays if you choose a thief character you can climb walls! DERMOUN Dungeons & Dragons Battle more than 50 different 3D monsters — skeletons, mummies, giant insects and more... Seek out and utilize more then 160 magical items and 40 different spells, including the powerful magic missile that homes in on its targets and the fireball that engulls its target in a shroud of flames! UNDERMDUN UTING PENDURS Tabiplan CANON TEN GANDIA BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS.\" www.interplay.com ROLE PLAY A CLIO CD ROM Coming this September! 1997 Interplay Productions. All nights reserved. Descent 1997 Parallax Software. All rights reserved. Descent to Undermountain is a trademark of TSR. Inc Forgotten Realms, Advanced Dungeons & Dragons, AD&D, and the TSR logo are the trademarks of TSA Inc. Interplay is the trademark of Interplay Productions, CIRCLE READER SERVICE #079 All rights reserved. All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners. "


"STARCRAFT DOSSIER EIGHT: STRATEGY Briefing: Leading the charge in this year's overwhelm. ingly real-time strategy lineup is Blizzard's STARCRAFT, the heir to WARCRAFT II. Our spies report that the game is inching closer to completion and, at this stage, the campaign scenarios and play balancing are the two major issues Blizzard has yet to work on. Most of the units and special abilities of the Terrans and Zerg are finished; the Protoss, the most powerful and complicat ed race to play, are being implemented last. Blizzard has decided on a style of resource man. agement. Players will mine one resource, but will then be able to refine that mineral and create a second resource. However, when raw resources are refined at the factory our word, not Blizzard's), the refined materials will automatically appear around your factory as they are finished. This will make for interesting resource wars, since you, or the Al, will be free to invade enemy territories and steal their refined resources, which will, of course, be more valuable than the raw variety. Blizzard is also making the interface more intuitive. Now, context-sensitive help will be available for every building option. If you move your cursor over a research lab, for instance, a little help window will pop up at your cursor listing the prerequisite buildings. The cloaking, improved fog of war, lighting, translucencies, and other visual effects look even better than when we last snuck a peek at this game. For a more in-depth look at STARCRAFT, and more information on its innovations in gameplay, see our May '97 CGW cover story. Contact: Blizzard Entertainment, (800) 953-SNOW, www.blizzard.com ETA: October '97 AGE OF EMPIRES DARK REIGN SE54 23 cord FOR YOUR EYES ONLY Briefing: Among the real-time juggernauts this year, Microsoft's AGE OF EMPIRES is perhaps the most sophisticated, and the one most likely to seduce the turn-based lovers of CIVILIZATION and MASTER OF ORION. Co-designed by Bruce Shelley (who was the cocreator of Cv), AGE OF EMPIRES resembles an abbreviated, real-time version of CIVILIZATION. You can play as one of twelve ancient civi lizations, from the Minoans to the Shang Chinese dynasty. The game stretches through four ages-Stone, Tool, Bronze, and Iron-you advance by building a certain number and type of build. ings and acquiring different tech nologies. The gameplay is much more diverse than the typical tactical real-time wargame; you have to explore your surroundings, hunt for game, harvest food, research technologies, build cities, and wage war against your opponents. In short, it's a fun game that com. bines the depth of a turn-based 4x game and the adrenaline and multiplayer advantages of real-time. Next month, we'll bring you a full sneak preview of AGE OF EMPIRES. Contact: Microsoft, (206) 882-8080, www.microsoft.com ETA: Fall '97 Briefing: Activision leaps into real-time strategy this fall with DARK REIGN, an ambitious title that hopes to challenge Blizzard's STARCRAFT for the real-time crown. Combat will be more realistic than in the previous generations' real-time games, with terrain effects governing to hit percentages, damage, and firing rates. Now, units on higher ground will have superior attack bonuses, while troops ambushed at the bottom of a ravine will be at a tactical disadvantage. The terrain features will also make for more interesting map designs, as you can place bases on plateaus restrict ed to all but air units, meaning that an offensive to take this base could be done only by airlifting ground units, a costly endeavor indeed. DARK REIGN's other innovations include customizable Al and behaviors, so you can tell troops when to retreat and how far to pur. sue fleeing units. Add Internet play over Activision's new, free onlinegaming service and multiplayer options like resource trading, and you have a real-time force that will demand attention. Contact: Activision, (310) 255-2000, www.activision.com ETA: September '97 CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"POPULOUS 111 Briefing: POPULOUS: THE THIRD COMING is the second follow-up to POPULOUS, the god game that launched Bullfrog into gaming stardom. The original Populous gave you the powers of a god, which allowed you to create and shape a world, and also to control both the population and nature of that world. In THE THIRD COMING, you are again on a quest to conquer and shape worlds, but this time, you can do so from a per sonal level, viewing things from only a short distance above the ground, or from an omniscient level, viewing the entire globe on your screen. You are also represented in the game as the Shaman. Through him, you recruit the wild men living about the worlds, train them into useful minions, research tech, and build structures. The game will have multiplayer capability, so you and friends can hurl civilizations of wild men and spells of destruction at each other. Coupled with a steady stream of worlds to conquer, POPULOUS: THE THIRD COMING should provide endless fun for controlling strategy gamers. Contact: EA/Bullfrog, (800) 245-4525, www.bullfrog.com ETA: Fall '97 REBELLION Briefing: While previous Star Wars games put you in the role of a participant in the epic conflict between Empire and Alliance, REBELLION gives you full control of the conflict. It is much broader in scope than all the other real-time games, including AGE OF EMPIRES, as you rule an entire half of a galaxy, controlling all aspects of its management, from diplomatic envoys to space exploration to ship and building production to tactical com mand. The goal, of course, is to bring victory to your side: You'll either crush the Rebellion or free the galaxy. You can achieve that through violence-which is played out in full-3D tactical space battles-or diplomacy. Sending Princess Leia to a planet on a mission of peace might work just as well as sending in Admiral Thrawn's star destroyers. The victory conditions are unique: You have to capture key enemy leaders and destroy their base of opera. tions. There will be an emphasis on characters, who can influence diplomatic, scientific, and tactical endeavors, and multiplayer support. Read our January '97 cover story for a full preview. Contact: LucasArts, (800) 985-8227, www.lucasarts.com ETA: Fall '97 O Cerrat 5 IMCITY 3000 Briefing: SIMCITY is one of the grandfathers of the strategy genre, and is no less influential and important a work than CIVILIZATION. It had not only the depth to appeal to hard-core gamers, but also the fun and ease of use to seduce nongamers. Now, Maxis is set to deliver a sequel, one that hopefully will restore the fun and easy play, as well as add new twists to the game play. SIMCITY 3000 isn't set in the future; the title simply indicates that it is third in the SIMCITY line. The game will be 3D, with improved graphics and a host of new build ings. What is particularly innovative is that you can now walk the streets of your city and query your citizens on the city's status, asking for feedback on the crime, pollution, or transportation situation. SIMCITY 3000 will also allow you to micromanage individual buildings. There are even more new features-including one that lets you design your own build ings and disasters-which we'll cover in an upcoming preview. Contact: Maxis, (800) 33-MAXIS, www.maxis.com ETA: Fourth Quarter '97 MYTH: THE FALLEN LORDS Briefing: While some games like AGE OF EMPIRES are adding political and economic aspects to their tactical engines, Myth is taking the opposite tack and abandoning all resource management in order to have a full tactical wargame. That isn't to say that the new game isn't as sophisticated, it's just a different direction, as complex in its tactical gameplay as AGE OF EMPIRES is in its economic gameplay. As a warrior on the side of the Light, you have to battle through intelligently crafted and dynamic scenarios as you battle the undead legions of the Fallen Lords. In each scenario you'll be bequeathed a set number of units, and depending on your 2 performance in the campaign, that num. ber could grow or dwindle. Myth's engine is technically impressive, fully 3D and interactive Dwarven explosives will warp the terrain, and objects will persist in the terrain (so you can leave a dwarven bomb lying on the ground and set it off later in the game). Read this month's MYTH preview for more information. Contact: Bungie, (312) 563-6200, www.bungie.com ETA: Fourth Quarter '97 FOR YOUR EYES ONLY SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"1997 Sun Microsysters, Inc. All rights reserved. Sun, San Microsystems, the Sun logo, Java, TOVE Pare Java and the Los Pure Java logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of Sun Microsystems, Inc in the Inited States and other countries Jack said, «I am sorry, Don. Your Java\" is not 100% Pure Java\" So your data is not safe. Anyone can get to it. Anyone.\" «Oh, no!» said Don. «What about my trade secrets?» «They are not so secret anymore,» said Jack. "


"built-in file protection no non Java code complete da ta se.cu.ri.ty PURE 100 % JAVA Pure and Simple. To see how leading banks, freight carriers and telecom firms use 100% Pure Java, visit http://java.sun.com/100percent/benefits.html or simply call us at 1-800-JAVASOFT. BREWED BY * Sun microsystems CIRCLE READER SERVICE #104 "


"WARLORDS THI: REIGN OF HEROES Briefing: Before the advent of HEROES and WARCRAFT, the WARLORDS series was the most successful fantasy strategy franchise in the industry. After a two-year hiatus, it's coming back to try to reclaim the crown. WARLORDS III is a turn-based wargame. The emphasis isn't on resource management or discovery so much as it is on combat. You command armies of mythical creatures, such as dragons and minotaurs, hurling them at your opponents' holdings in an attempt to conquer the world. To lead your troops, you can find and hire heroes who command amazing spells and special abilities. There is a bit of role playing in WARLORDS III as well; your heroes will grow in experience and ability and be free to embark on personal quests. WARLORDS III will offer simultaneous turns for multiplay, with support for email, modem, LAN, and Internet play. Red Orb will also offer a free matching service, called Red Orb Zone, for finding available WARLORDS III games. For more information, read our June sneak preview. Contact: Red Orb Entertainment, (800) 548-1798, www.redorb.com ETA: Fall '97 WARHAMMER: DARK OMEN Briefing: The original WARHAMMER, SHADOW OF THE HORNED RAT, was a real-time fantasy strategy game from Mindscape that had cool role play ing elements and a true 3D engine, but suffered from slow speed, interface problems, and the occasional bug. SSI is overseeing the sequel, DARK OMEN, and the crew at SSI is determined to iron out those mis. takes. DARK OMEN Sports a gorgeously updated 3D engine with faster frame rate, more detail, and 3D card support. The engine also allows for a free camera with rotate and zoom options. Plus, the interface has been simplified, making commands only one or two clicks away. The best fea. ture of the first WARHAMMER, the role playing aspect, is just as strong in DARK 1991 OMEN, with more characters and units, more magic, and more items. The original's branching missions, which gave players a limited sense of control over their own destinies, is also in DARK OMEN. WARHAMMER'S lack of multiplayer support is also being addressed with head-to-head modem, serial, and LAN play. Contact: SSI, (800) 234-3088, www.ssionline.com ETA: Winter '97-'98 MECHCOMMANDER IMPERIALISM FOR YOUR EYES ONLY Briefing: FASA's BATTLETECH universe is rich with story and depth, and MicroProse is hoping to leverage that into a real-time strategy game, MECHCOMMANDER puts you in command of a 12-Mech unit, as you battle enemy Mechs and Elementals in a branching campaign to take Port Arthur from the Smoke Jaguar Clan. Your troops will gain experience as you advance through the scenarios, moving from cadets to Mechwarriors. The conditions of your Mechs, vehicles, and troops will also carry over into successive scenarios in the campaign. The campaign will have branching missions, which when coupled with the carryover of troops and experience, create an evolving and dynamic campaign that has been lacking in strategy games. Like the game play in JAGGED ALLIANCE, your individual Mech Warriors will have their own skills, which will improve in tandem with experience. In the campaign, you'll manage supplies and resources, as well as outfit your Mechs and command them in battle. MECHCOMMANDER will have multiplayer support over LAN and modem. Contact: MicroProse, (800) 695-GAME, www.microprose.com ETA: First half '98 Briefing: Perhaps the most ambitious of all the strategy games this fall is SSI's turn based IMPERIALISM. In it, you must conquer the world through military, economic, or diplomatic means. As one of more than a dozen major and minor powers in a fictitious 19th-century world, you control every cog of your national machine. There are armies to com mand and civilian workers to order about. These you use to build your nation's infrastructure, which provides you with the necessary buildings and farms to establish economic and scientific supremacy. There are a number of diplomatic options to carry out with respect to your neighbors, including trade agree ments, alliances, and non-aggression treaties. Commerce is a big part of this game, and as this is a simulation of a global economy, every nation will have needs (which can be met by importing goods) and excesses (which can be exported for profit). With strong Al and multiplayer support, IMPERIALISM will provide an excellent lesson in what it means to exploit a world. Contact: SSI, (800) 234-3088, www.ssionline.com ETA: Winter '97-'98 CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"Compulan Gamli o li One of the We came Most Wysterical Games In Years The Funniest Gameete Played tiis Wear Y'alla Happy Puppy \"The Bastest Thing TONA The Souther tratar-plus AVAILABLE NOW An Ass-Kickin' Gun-Totin.' All The KILLEN Twice The . Half The INTELLIGENCE. 30 Romp Through Hickston, USA Keep Yer Eyes Open For Official Redneck Rampage Levels Comin' Soon! Download the Interactive Preview at: www.interplay.com M e PLAY IT ON ENGAGE ngam * WGS Ey Rebeke goes online www.engagegames.com XATRIX 1997 Xatru Entertainment Inc. All rights reserved. Redneck Rampage and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved interplay is the sole publisher and distributor All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #122 "


"ADDITIONAL INTELLIGENCE GUARDIANS: AGENTS OF JUSTICE MicroProse's third X-Com game, XCOM APOCALYPSE, reduces the scale and now encompasses Earth's last megacity, rather than the entire planet. Aliens are now infiltrating corporations, and you'll have to root them out and battle them in classic turn-based X-Com fashion or in a new real-time mode. Briefing: Our agents have discovered that SimTex, the developers behind such hits as MASTER OF MAGIC and MASTER OF ORION, are busy at work on GUARDIANS: AGENTS OF JUSTICE, a turnbased strategy game that puts you in command of a team of superheroes. Unlike its MASTER series, SimTex's GUARDIANS is small in scope. You choose from among 14 heroes (or design your own) to form a band of heroes who then must move and battle through randomly generated isometric maps. Your heroes must explore cities, destroy terrain, and battle supervillains. The look is akin to X-Com, and is a change from the galactic proportions of previous SimTex games. The game's best feature is the more than 80 superpowers that can be combined and altered to create a variety of unique heroes. GUARDIANS will have multiplayer support for play over modem, LAN, or Internet. Contact: MicroProse, (800) 695-GAME, Www.microprose.com ETA: Winter '97-'98 X-COM APOCALYPSE PAX IMPERIA: EMINENT DOMAIN Briefing: After being dumped by Blizzard, PAX IMPERIA 2 found a new home and a new name with THQ, which has turned this game into a compelling, real-time space strategy epic. The gameplay is in the same vein as MASTER OF ORION. As part of a budding galactic civilization, you must explore the galaxy, expand your empire, exterminate your rivals, and exploit new technologies. You'll start with one planet and then, as you research technologies, upgrade your ships and colonization abilities until you can strike out into the stars and settle more planets. Once you meet alien races, you'll be able to negotiate with them, attack them in a separate real-time tactical setting, or engage in espionage to undermine their holdings and steal their tech. In a season when epic space games are lacking, Pax IMPERIA could attract the MOO crowd. Contact: THQ, (818) 591-1310, www.thq.com ETA: Fall '97 FOR YOUR EYES ONLY CONQUEST EARTH is one of the more visually impressive real-time games, with 16-bit color and picture-in-picture movies that run while you play. The two sideshuman and Martian--have different abili: ties and units, and even different interfaces. Action fans will be happy to know that you can control individual units in arcade fashion. 11 While we wait for Civ III, MicroProse is offering ULTIMATE Crv II, which is basical. ly Civ II with a collection of new scenarios and an intuitive scenario editor that makes creating your own games much easier than before. The original M.A.X. was a turn-based game with great depth and a simultaneous turns option for faster multiplay. M.A.X. 2 now adds a real-time option, and has curtailed a bit of the depth to make the game easier to digest and more workable in realtime. Look for it this fall. OUTPOST 2 is slated for arrival later this year, and it is (thankfully) nothing like the original. It's now real-time strategy, as you attempt to establish your colony on a hostile planet occupied by an enemy outpost. DUNGEON KEEPER, Bullfrog's real-time fantasy strategy game, should be out by the time you read this, offering you the chance to play the evil dungeon master who must ward off intrusive do-gooders intent on stealing your loot. TOTAL ANNIHILATION Briefing: It's easy to get jaded when develop ers start describing their real-time strategy game as the second coming of the genre, but TOTAL ANNIHILATION certainly has much to recommend it. The most obvious innovation is the 3D terrain, which translates into more realistic com. YULON bat. Line of sight now becomes an issue-ele. vation heavily influences attack factors, and terrain can be used as obstacles. Per the game's attention to detail, when a tank moves up a steep incline, you'll see it struggle up the cliff, inching up slowly and then cresting the top before returning to a faster speed. TOTAL ANNIHILATION will offer dozens of single-player scenarios, in which you'll command more than a hundred possible units. GT Interactive also hopes to make new units available weekly to keep the game interesting. With the requisite multiplayer support in tow, TOTAL ANNIHILATION stands a very good chance of living up to its hype. Contact: GT Interactive, (212) 726-6500, www.gtinteractive.com ETA: September '97 CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"71M CRUCIBLE BEGINST HIS FALL. 11 E VER E 11 DS. www.CRUCIBLE-GAME.COM O 1997 Mars, Inc. All rights reserved. Crucible is a trademark and Maxis is a registered trademark of Maxis, Inc. All other trademarks or registered trademarks are the properties of their respective owners. For productor ordering information, contact your local retailer or call 800-33-MAXIS. Available for Windows 95. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #253 "


"The next generation of War Gaming! TalonSoft's FRONT *** All-Star Contributing Designers *** GODE John Tiller Bob McNamara Charlie Kibler Jim Dunnigan Dana Lombardy Richard Berg TalonSoft's ASL-Advanced Squad ASL-Red Barricades. Panzerblitz Streets of Terrible Swift Sword Battleground Series Leadere TalonSoft's Talon Soft's Founder of SPL Stalingrad Great Battles of BattlegroundTM Series Battleground\" Series Alexander, Blackbeard BattlegroundTM is a registered trademark of TalonSoft Inc. All other trademarks are property of their respective holders. Fast paced WWII platoon-level combat on the steppes of Russia 1941-1945! Lead a lightning Blitzkrieg through the Red Army, or defend Mother Russia from the German invaders! Set in a new, unique campaign format, EAST FRONT puts you in charge as company commander, in either the Wehrmacht or the Red Army. Replacement shortages, mud, snow, endless river crossings and all those fun things from the Russian Front are just a mouse click away! EAST FRONT features a totally new engine, a full-blown scenario/map editor and many preset scenarios, such as Kursk and Stalingrad! Available Fall '97 at Software Retailers World Wide! Reserve your copy today. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #243 Call (410) 933-9191 or visit our web site at www.talonsoft.com Copyright 1995-1997 TalonSoft Inc. P.O. Box 632, Forest Hill, MD 21050 TALONSOFT "


"PRELUDE BEST 1 Wargame Series 1996 Computer Games Strategy Plus Waterloo BATTLEGROUND 8 Simply the best 19th-century system ever designed! -Computer Gaming WorldPCD CROM Computer & Net ful PC GAMER EDITORS COMPUTER GAMES STRATEGY PLUS TWARE WUS CHOICE. Computer Games RATED PREV TALANSOE. Available Fall '97 at Software Retailers World Wide! Reserve your copy today Call (410) 933-9191 or visit our web site at www.talonsoft.com  Copyright 1995-1997 TalonSoft Inc. P.O.Box 632, Forest Hill, MD 21050 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #242 "


"e PANZER GENERAL II Dostin 349 & DOSSIER NINE: WARGAMES Briefing: I evaded the alarms, expertly picked the multiple locks, and dosed the guard's coffee with a sleeping aid of my own concoction. I then quietly opened the dossier, read it, and let out a long, low whistle. Our operatives had already warned us of the improved Al and the more robust cam paigns-including mini-campaigns from the Allied side--but HQ had dealt adequately with those factors. The breathtaking graphics, which are attained without any compromise of the elegant interface, are more likely to overwhelm our wargaming chums back home. As I delved farther into the robust combat system, I noticed several improvements: ranged fire for heavy hardware; the elimi: nation of strategic bombers; and overhauled ambushes and airfield rules. Yet, at its core, the game was still the PANZER GENERAL we had been hypnotized by heretofore. Shaking my head, lest 1 fall too deeply under the game's insidious spell, I removed the impressive array of \"what if\" scenarios, that I might study them from the safety of the hard drive in my secret hideout. As I stealthily made my way out of the SSI complex, 1 resolved to test the interactive impulse turns and time limits, both on and off the Internet-for research purposes only, you understand. (Agents wishing to access the full declassified report should request clearance to review last month's in-depth PANZER GENERAL Il feature.) Contact: SSI, (800) 601-7529, www.ssionline.com ETA: November '97 SID MEIER'S GETTYSBURG FOR YOUR EYES ONLY Briefing: Our scouts inform us that this is no mere marketing bivouac. Led by none other than General Meier, EA intends to do us some real-time harm. No twitch and flex, mind you, but a serious bit of campaigning, including plausible historical alter natives. Should we whip their powerful Al, human generals shall fight us, even o'er the Internet! This is hardly the most detailed tactical simulation, yet it presses home the attack on the flank of fun, with sufficient historical flavor. We can find fault with neither the morale system nor the manner in which the combat manifests itself, seemingly as sophisticated as the cus tomary turn based tactics. The greatest fear is that after we master the campaigns from both sides, we'll fall prey to the randomly gener ated scenarios, which our foe holds in unlimited reserve. So if you will excuse us, sir, we go now to prepare for the unrelenting assault of this awe-inspiring example of martial beauty. (For a full battle plan, see last month's cover story.) Contact: EA, (800) 245-4525, www.ea.com ETA: September '97 ACHTUNG! SPITFIRE Briefing: All right, lads-through use of Her Majesty's new tech nology, radar, we have spotted yet another wave of turn-based aircraft poised on the horizon. But this time, you must first intercept the opposing squadrons in an overarch ing real-time operational manner before moving into OVER THE REICH style tactical combat. Right. All pilots are reminded that these 1940-era aircraft are not as maneuverable as the planes to which anyone familiar with this sys. tem is accustomed. Thus, they will require that you master different tactics in order to survive. Furthermore, we have broken the Internet code, and may now pursue the enemy even in stormy weather areas, such as AOL. In addition to defending the homeland in the Battle of Britain, you may also fight in the skies of our French allies, or even coordinate and lead Jerry's attack. Finally, keep in mind that all we have to fear is fear itself, and possibly our pilots succumbing to fatigue-which is an element new to this simulation. Questions? No? Time for tea, then. Contact: Avalon Hill, (800) 999-3222, www.avalonhill.com ETA: August/September '97 CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"ADDITIONAL INTELLIGENCE EASTFRONT Briefing: Comrade, I have escaped from the front with alarming news! The forces of Talon Soft are massing on the borders with a terrifying new engine. Da, it is beyond anything they have done before on the battlefield. I have reconnoitered their tall buildings and SVGAgraphics soldiers, and I have uncovered the hexagons underneath. But tovarisch, they are huge-enough to hold an entire Soviet rocket battalion with no degradation in graphicscomplete with multiple zoom levels! And the sequence of play is so streamlined it is like the finest vodka on a cold Leningrad evening, yet it still manages to deliver a potent WWII punch. Whether climbing Mamayev Kurgayen or struggling through all the streets of Stalingrad, you may fight from platoon all the way to corps level. Never have I seen a turnbased assault quite like this one, as it strives to bring the great battles of the Eastern Front to modem, email, and Internet alike. Contact: TalonSoft, (800) 211-6504, www.talonsoft.com ETA: Fall '97 CLOSE COMBAT 11 Just because TalonSoft has developed its new WWII engine, don't think that the old one won't go out with a big bang, InBATTLEGROUND 8: PRELUDE TO WATERLOO, you face the quintessential Napoleonic dilemma: How can the French forces defeat two major armies before Wellington and Blucher unite their forces? In addition to the battles of Quatre Bras and Ligny. TalonSoft plans to let would-be Bonapartes carry their results over to the campaign game of BATTLEGROUND: WATERLOO. If they can pull it off, the result would be the most fulfilling campaign ever for Napoleonicera gaming. Sierra should be putting the finishing touches on CIVIL WAR GENERALS this fall, complete with battle and map editors. Sierra wants to do for generals Grant and Sherman what the first game did for Lee. Marse Robert is still around in the sequel, with the addition of (finally) the Seven Days' Battles. Another sequel, STEEL PANTHERS III, moves to a larger scale, somewhere between the original STEEL PANTHERS and PANZER GENERAL II. It will include new sce. narios for battles from both STEEL. I & II, as well as new systems for artillery and air support. Don't expect this one until late fall, at the earliest. GREAT BATTLES OF HANNIBAL, the sequel to ALEXANDER (see the review this issue). promises to spruce up the game engine. It will be interesting to see if Erudite Software and Interactive Magic can continue to improve the already challenging Al. This game should make its late fall shipping date, but don't expect the third game in the series, JULIUS CAESAR, until next spring or summer. Briefing: The recon pilot asks if I need to make another pass over the target. I decline. I've been a trained observer too long to deny evidence right before my eyes. It's hard to believe, but this sequel leaves the original in an abandoned foxhole. It's more realistic, more interesting-Market-Garden rather than France '44-and it finally has a dynamic campaign, as opposed to a bunch of scenarios gerrymandered together. Line-of-sight and field-of-fire have a dramatically improved feel as opposed to the original game, and are enhanced by the new visuals for multilevel buildings. The maps of Arnhem are probably the most detailed and accurate of any game ever published, and they give the impression of being in a real city. Best of all, CLOSE COMBAT II is actually a game this time around. If it isn't one of the most popular Internet strategy titles around, I'll swallow my stogie. Contact: Microsoft, (206) 882-8080, www.microsoft.com/games ETA: November '97 SIEGE Briefing: Milord, I have returned from the witches' cave, where the old hag has divined the particulars of Sir-Tech's plan. It is much like the tactical combat of LORDS OF THE REALM, complete with boiling oil with which to fricassee one's enemies. But where that game faltered upon the open fields of battle, SIEGE wisely restricts the conflict to the confines of the castle walls. You may build siege engines and train archers, knights, and even peasants-for, alas, someone must hold the assault ladders. The castles themselves are not strictly historical, though they are indeed inspired by great walled towns, and crafted so exquisitely as to give the most seasoned stone mason pause. The real-time fighting moves at a stately pace-the weight of armor, we suppose-that seems ideal for Internet clashes of sword upon shield. We await yon flaming arrow, or perhaps a finely tuned catapult, with heightened expectation. Contact: Sir-Tech Software, (315) 393-6633, www.sir-tech.com ETA: Fall '97 FOR YOUR EYES ONLY BATTLEGROUND 8: PRELUDE TO WATERLOO SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"THE HEAT.NET 5-POINT PLAN. HOW CREATING THE ULTIMATE COMPETITIVE ARENA ON THE INTERNET CAN ACHIEVE WORLD PEACE. W WASPROSLASKITAL. PANAMKESM E SE V S ALL MAKE INTERNET GAMING EASY. (THE MORE PEOPLE LOG ON, THE LESS REAL-LIFE VIOLENCE THERE WILL BEI: THIS IS THE HEAT MULETEA INTERNET I SAKIETYORN HEAT.NET is the easiest internet game network to get started playing. You can log on to HEAT.NET, get the free HEAT software and play. Or soon, you can go to the store and buy the retail package, which includes six months' premium membership, a HEAT CD and a month's free internet access. Alte Scolleat Sale Wut WEAR CREATE THE FASTEST GAMING ON THE INTERNET. (FOR THE FASTEST ROAD TO PEACE!): HEAT.NET uses the Mpath foundation technology to deliver the fastest gameplay achievable over the internet. The faster the gameplay, the faster Reptilian urges are diverted, the faster aggression is quelled and the faster world peace becomes a reality. "


"HEAT.NET is compatible with nearly every multi(TO GIVE PEOPLE MORE OUTLETS FOR THEIR AGGRESSIONS!): player PC game including Blood Quake and the Quake Scud: Industrial Evolution new Scud: Industrial Evolution Plus, the first in a long line of games, HEAT Warz,\" Alien Race\" and Net Fighter have been designed exclusively for HEAT (with maximum Reptilian Complex dispersion in mind) and are available for free on the network. . Com FOR THE FLIEK Celihat has todas las Baumanis.. OFFER REWARDS FOR FREQUENT PLAYERS. (THE MORE ONE PERSON PLAYS, THE SAFER EVERYONE ELSE IS!): V ERKET CIRCLE READER SERVICE #267 HEAT is the only network with frequent player points (Degrees) that can be used for purchase discounts and redeemed for prizes. These incentives increase the frequency of play and, hence, decrease the likelihood of real-life aggression rearing its ugly head. BRAUNVERTRET E CREATE TOURNAMENTS AND LADDERS FOR MORE COMPETITION. (AS ONE MAN RISES, ALL MANKIND RISES!): BLUE SNAKE HEAT offers huge, automated and secure tournaments and the ability to rise to the top against the best competition the world has to offer-creating the ultimate competitive arena on the internet. But more importantly, a place that nurtures the safe, death-free release of primal urges. SNAKE PHAT CAT HEAT IS THE ANSWER! PHAT CAT PLEASE SUPPORT THE HEAT.NET FIVE-POINT PLAN BY CONTACTING YOUR LOCAL CONGRESSMAN AND BY LOGGING ON TO HEAT.NET NOW! "


"BOCK 'N' RIDE DOSSIER TEN: HARDWARE Briefing: Though our operatives were well within the inner sanctums, we had them scout the outer perimeter to verify unconfirmed reports we'd had about a dastardly new device. Sure enough, there it was--bright red painted girders, sinister black plastic seat, with tubes leading to a hidden power source beneath the platform: the Rock 'n' Ride. The Rock 'n' Ride is a compressed-air-operated, \"full motion\" seat that responds to joystick inputs. It optionally ships with an air compressor, but can use any compressor that delivers at least 2 cubic feet per minute. Although the pistons generate a slightly jerky motion, the whole thing is a hoot to play with, as it tilts you 60 degrees in any direction. You strap your monitor to a platform, which also has a swing-out joystick tray. There's also a footrest and, most importantly, an optional, gimbaled beer-can holder. Normally pulling back on the joystick generates a backward motion, but you can reverse the axis with a switch so that push ing forward on the stick pushes the seat back-just the thing for driving titles. And while the Rock 'n' Ride's not dirt-cheap, it does come in at a fairly reasonable $800. Rock 'n' Ride does have some limitations, the monitor rack only supports up to 30 pounds-definitely a problem for 17inch monitors. There's currently no second joystick rack for a throttle, although the footrest for the final product may support pedals. If you're yearning for a true full-motion experience with your sim, arcade flight game, or driving game, check this out. Just don't forget the Dramamine. Contact: Rock 'n' Ride, (888) 431-9893, www.rocknride.com ETA: Available Now THRUSTMASTER RAGE 3D SAITEK PC DASH 0000 00001 100% LEO FOR YOUR EYES ONLY Briefing: We've uncovered a plot by Thrustmaster to deliver a digital gamepad that's comfortable for large-handed gamers (and you know what that means: big gloves). This new con troller, dubbed the Rage 3D, uses a \"lizard-eye\" thumb pad in lieu of the more traditional thumb dish. The result is much easi. er operation and reduced fatigue from prolonged usage. Though the Rage 3D is a digital gamepad, it offers an analog setting as well. The analog setting provides better granularity for minute movement, but is somewhat less responsive to drastic movement, whereas the digital setting shortens the thumb pad's overall throw, and provides much quicker response. Rage 3D also makes use of Thrustmaster's new Direct Connect technology, which assigns controllers an ID, SO when that controller is con. nected, the driver will know which control panel to invoke. DirectConnect driver will also allow you to choose which controller (or controllers) you want to be active (gamepad, stick/pedals/throttle), and also allows you to configure them. DirectConnect devices will need little or no calibration. Rage 3D should be shipping now. Contact: Thrustmaster, (503) 615-3200, www.thrustmaster.com ETA: Available Now Briefing: Slipping unno ticed into the foyer, and using the cardkey he'd removed from the unconscious guard, our agent was able to uncover details on UK manufac turer Saitek's new PC-Dash. And from what he found out, it looks like the Brits have done a nice job on this one. This touchpad device can partially replace keyboards. Unlike Quickshot's Masterpilot, a similar product, PC-Dash is a program. mable device that can either be programmed via direct download from a Windows-based utility or through a built-in bar-code reader that can be printed out and saved with the software utility. You can design your own templates and even assign graphics or text to the template buttons Templates designed by Saitek can be downloaded from their web site, and a number of game companies will be including templates in their boxes. The only thing that seems to be lacking now is a support to allow the PC-Dash to stand vertically, but Saitek is studying that possibility. Contact: Saitek, (310) 212-5412, www.saitek.com ETA: Available Now CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"1998 Edition LinksLS THEART GOLF THE a n d t be SCIENCE of WA BACOMM Introducing the Links LS 1998 Edition. The forces of art and science have combined to produce a golfa experience like never before. This new version of the Codie Award winning golf simulation is packed with over 25 new features! Here's just a few: OMANIA R sibel ASY Notice the new waving flags, birds. airplanes and other background animations with up to 8 of your friends over expanded internet play! S OAS Brace yourself for lightening fast redraws, main vicw in a window capability, and up to 8 additional \"smart\" camera views. Our course designers have given even more attention to detail including new water reflections, improved textures and cnhanced sky backgrounds. IS Kombi Kapa Phone Toll-Free 800.800.4880  Fax 801.359.2968 Website-http://www.Access Software.com Available for the PC Links LS _1998 Edition SOFTWARE INCORPORATED S 22 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #248 "


"ADDITIONAL INTELLIGENCE HX1 TL XITEL STORM 3D Briefing: Xitel is sounding off in 3D with their new Storm PCI sound card, which is based on Oak's OTI. 611 chip. This new chip incorporates Aureal Semiconductor's 3D positional audio technology, the most impressive we've heard to date. Now you're probably thinking, \"Diamond's Monster Sound, which also uses Aureal's technology, has been shipping for several months now, so what's the big deal?\" The big deal is that Xitel's Storm will hit the streets for about $100, half the price of the Monster Sound. To pull this off, Xitel has made some trade-offs: Storm has no Sound-Blaster support (it leaves those chores to an already installed Sound Blaster), doesn't come standard with a hardware wavetable synthesizer, and ships with no bundled titles. Still, Storm does bring convincing positional 3D-audio technology at a very affordable price that will round out any gamer's audio sub-system. Contact: Xitel. (512) 331-5544, www.xitel.com ETA: Available Now VIESI GATEWAY DESTINATION After the raid on Saitek, our people had a tough time making an escape. Everywhere they turned, they were sur rounded by force feedback gear which was practically popping out of the woodwork. Escape proved to be a challenge Thrustmaster, CH, SC&T, and ACT Labs were all showing force feedback steering wheels. The Thrusty is a very early prototype, but the wheel and shifter looked much like the Formula T2. CH'S Wheel is very compact, with a single clamp holding the body of the wheel down. The ACT wheel looks like a minia ture dashboard. It also has a cartridge slot for upgrades. If you get the PC Wheel for $99, you can add a $20 cartridge and presto-you have a PlayStation wheel. Other cartridges will be available for other platforms. The SC&T wheel wasn't as striking in its appearance, but seemed functional Force feedback joysticks are in evidence, too. There is a secret prototype of the Logitech stick from Immersion Technology, Microsoft's Sidewinder Force Feedback seems to be every where. The good news is that Immersion's version 2.0 technology will be part of DirectX 5.0. Finally, Cybernet has its force feed back flight yoke. This should be just the ticket for civil aviation buffs who had been eyeing force-feedback combat sticks with envy. It's looking like 1998 will be the year force feedback makes its show of force. Briefing: Our mole (disguised as a prairie dog) infiltrated Gateway 2000's encampment to reveal that Gateway's latest Destination Big Screen PC/TV will now be equipped with a Toshiba DVD-ROM, which is a logical evolution for this living room home subversion, er...entertainment device. Gateway is using Chromatic Research's Mpact media proces sor as their MPEG-2 decoder, which will also decode DVD's Dolby AC-35-channel audio. This welcome addition of a DVD drive and decoder will allow you to get a big eyeful of DVD movie titles and play DVD game titles as they begin to ship. For gamers, our mole reports that the Destination will soon also have a long missing component: a 3D graphics accelerator. The transmission trailed off with some mention of stampeding mad Cows closing in, and there's been no word since. So while details are currently sketchy, a 3D accelerator will comprise a very important piece of the puzzle to make the Destination more appealing for hard-core gamers. Contact: Gateway, (800) 864.0552, www.gw2k.com ETA: Available Now FOR YOUR EYES ONLY CREATIVE LABS PC-DVD ENCATIVE Briefing: Also making waves on the DVD front is Creative Labs, with its PC-DVD upgrade kit. One thing that's kept the DVD party from really roaring ENCORE has been the kits' prices, which usually ran between $500-800. Stand-alone DVD players haven't been any less expensive, coming in around $600-800. Our deep cover man informs us that Creative has just the fix: a DVD upgrade kit for $379, which includes an MPEG 2 decoder board. This more attractive price makes the decision between upgrading to a fast CD-ROM versus DVD a good bit more interesting. And while 1997 has, so far, been wanting for DVD game titles, 1998 will have a number of DVD titles hitting store shelves. Currently in the works for release later this year is an enhanced version of Origin's WING COMMANDER IV. Contact: Creative Labs, (408) 434-5700, www.soundblaster.com ETA: Available Now ACT FORCE-FEEDBACK CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"A Bazooka MS5 multimedia subwoofer lets you hear things in the CD-ROM Drowned God\" you never heard before sweeping, pulsing, heart-pounding lows you simply can't hear with ordinary computer speakers. Call 1-800-The-Tube for your nearest deater, and hear the difference our patented Bass Tubes enclosure makes. Then get ready for a subwoofer so athazing, you'd swear it was reverse-engineered fro n ology. In Canada, call: Trends Electronics (604) 988-2966. SAS, Bazooka, Bass Tubes. , and Listen To YounEars are registered trademarks of Southern Audio Services Inc. Wausasbazooka.com Game graphics courtesy of EMG and Inscapocowwned God: Conspiro n and Inscape. All rights resered THAN iumi unoht! fsjooo CIRCLE READER SERVICE #082 Wrapped microphone. recorded it with a condominto the studio toilet and an eight-inch plastic straw ybnovy+ mlq Saub sp Drowned Gact sound sound for Horus, the To create the perfect CONSPIRACY OF THE AGES a Bazookas ready heard that, you alrea | | | 0 0 0 1 1 "


"DOSSIER ELEVEN: WORST TRENDS Trends at E30 FOR YOUR EYES ONLY female is going to buy exploring Aztec keep rehashing a Russian invasion of ruins in short-shorts and a halter top. the Ukraine. C'mon, folks, you'll spend Don't these development teams realize a million on a cool 3D-engine. Ever 1. ME TOO-1 SM it's possible to be sexy without being notice how cheaply writers work? We saw well over 100 impressive half-naked? From what we saw at E3, new titles at the E3 show. And we saw though, look for even more pneumati 8. HOLIDAY OVERLOAD only about 10 new ideas. Too many cally enhanced females attempting to The industry has fixated so hard marketing weenies see a hit game and grab the attention of young male on the admittedly active holiday buying think the best road to a hit is to copy gamers who get their kicks from big, season that a disturbing majority of (and try to improve upon) it. So look for bouncing polygons games are released between October the current wave of real-time games to and March (counting all the ones make way for a line of TOMB RAIDER 4. 3D-CARD CONFUS I ON which miss Christmas and thus ship at clones, before the inevitable transition Developers are jumping on the 3D the end of the first financial quarter). to DIABLO-alikes card bandwagon, but they're all choos What do they expect us to do in the ing different ways to ride. One game summer, go to the beach? 2. REAL-TIME supports Direct3D, the next has only STRATEGY OVERLOAD custom drivers for Rendition and 3Dfx 7. GRATUITOUS PHYSICS A corollary to the last entry. There cards, while the next supports OpenGL. Everyone's claiming \"real physics.\" are more than 50 games in the works It's as bad as the early days of sound It's one thing when it's a flight sim or a that are variations on the COMMAND AND cards, and gamers are stuck having to driving game. But we're seeing such CONQUER and WARCRAFT models. Even if get their Masters in Driver-ology in claims in space sims and even first-perthere are 15 real winners in the bunch, order to figure out which standards are son shooters. What's next, Pac Man 3D? many are doomed to failure simply supported by their home PCs. because gamers won't be able to pick 8. HALF-ASSED them out of the horde. 5. BAD WRITING ONLINE GAMES In days past, Infocom alone put Is ASTEROIDS really that much bet 3. THE BIMBO FACTOR out more good stories each year than ter a game with other players around We're ecstatic to finally see some the industry as a whole manages to do you shooting at rocks too? female heroes in today. The major games previously ity of fantasy sto 9. HUGE HARD DRIVE dominated by ries are AD&D INSTALLS males. But the clichés, most We kept hearing 50-75MB miniones we've seen new science fic mum install figures for new games. Hey so far aren't going tion plots would guys, new systems are coming with 16x to do anything to have been reject and 24x CD-ROMs. At least give us the get our wives, girl ed by the pulp option to try running the game from CD. friends, or daugh mags of the '30s ters interested in and flight sims 10. BLINDLY gaming: No OPTIMISTIC SHIP DATES No matter how many ship dates they miss, developers and marketing dweebs still don't seem to be able to realistically tell how much time it takes to do a topnotch game today. Look for lots of HEROES OR BIMBOS? With RIANA ROUGE, DEATHTRAP DUNGEON, and games slated for November to be TOMB RAIDER 2 on its plate, Eidos Interactive seems to be getting available just in time for the inspiration for its heroines from visits to strip clubs. Easter holiday. CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"great gamer sever die GATEWAY 2000 KGATEWAY2000 \"You've got a friend in the business.\" "


"WINNER 11:00 HMOTORE Axle Finished in First Place CESTINATION DESTINATION TIL MMX 2010 intel inside) pentium II "


"Her justova so a Higher leve! When Gateway created the Destination Big Screen PC/TV in April 1996, a whole new form of nirvana descended upon the world — PC gaming from the comfort of your couch. Now, just as other companies start to follow, we're raising the stakes again firing out second-stage rocket booster: dvd. The newest evolution of the Big Screen PC/TV features DVD's pristine digital graphics and video splashing around the Destination system's 31-inch monitor. A high-test graphics card. The raw power of an Intel Pentium processor with MMX technology or a thumping Intel Pentium II processor with MMX technology and the power of 32-bit processing. Engulfing sounds of Boston Acoustics or harman/kardon speaker systems. One test flight and you'll know your computer gaming has moved to a higher level. Invite your favorite wingmen and women over and deal harshly with the alien hordes. The wireless keyboard and Field Mouse remote convert your couch to a cockpit. Thrill to the prowess of your kids as they feast on educational software. Share the moment with the grandparents. With configurations starting at $2,899 and literally thousands of options, the worldwide Web becomes your family's oyster. Add DVD and you've got the most heavenly big screen in the industry. OO Multimedia and video are your playthings. All the functions of a standard TV are just one click away. Call us today or surf to www.gateway.com for the original big screen PC/TV. Rejoice. The future has arrived. GATEWAY 2000 \"You've got a friend in the business.\" 8 0 0 8 4 6 8 5 7 1 www.destination.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #105 "


"Gateway Destination\" Big Screen PC/TVs D6-233 Intel 166MHz Pentium Processor with MMX Technology 32MB SDRAM 512K Pipelined Burst Cache Destination 31\" VGA Color Monitor STB 2MB Graphics Accelerator with Cable-Ready TV Tuner 3.2GB 12ms EIDE Hard Drive 12X min/24X max CD-ROM Drive 3.5\" Diskette Drive Ensonig Wavetable Audio Boston Acoustics MicroMedia\" 3-Piece Speaker System TelePath Modem for Windows with x2 Technology 7-Bay Charcoal-Colored PC Case  Wireless Keyboard w/ Integrated EZ Pad Pointing Device Wireless Field Mouse Remote Four-Channel RF Receiver Microsoft Windows 95 Home Software Gallery MMX Technology-Enhanced Software Bundle Gateway Gold Service and Support for Big Screen PC/TVS $2699 As low as* $94/mo. Intel 233MHz Pentium II Processor with 512K Cache 32MB EDO DRAM Destination 31\" VGA Color Monitor STB 2MB Graphics Accelerator with Cable-Ready TV Tuner 6.4GB 10ms EIDE Hard Drive DVD-ROM Drive DVD Decoder Card 3.5\" Diskette Drive Ensoniq Wavetable Audio harman/kardon High-Fidelity Sound System TelePath Modem for Windows with x2 Technology 7-Bay Charcoal-Colored PC Case Wireless Keyboard w/ Integrated EZ Pad Pointing Device Wireless Field Mouse Remote Four-Channel RF Receiver MS Windows 95 Home Software Gallery\" MMX Technology-Enhanced Software Bundle Gateway Gold Service and Support for Big Screen PC/TVs $3999 As low as $139/mo. **The Home Software Gallery features popular titles like Road Rash, Dream Works Interactive: The Neverhood, Earthworm Jim,\"Launch Magazine, Issue 13 and more! MMX GATEWAY 2000 intel 8 0 0 8 4 6 8 5 7 1 inside *Maximum data transfer rate dependent on certain wariables including particular modems with which you are communicating, telephone lines, communications software and communications protocols. \"You've got a friend in the business.\" *The Destination 31\" VGA monitor is covered by a one-year limited warranty Call or write for a free copy. www.destination.com 610 Gateway Drive, P.O.Box 2000. North Sioux City. S.D. 57049-2000 Phone 605-232-2000. Fax 605-232-2023 1997 Gateway 2000, Inc. GATEWAY 2000, black-and-white spot design, Field Mouse. \"G\"logo. TelePath, \"You've got a friend in the business slogan and EZ Pad are registered trademarks, and Destination and Gateway Gold are trademarks of Gateway 2000. Inc. The Intel Inside Logo, Intel and Pentium are registered trademarks and MMX is a trademark of Intel Corporation. Not all Gateway Destination Big Screen PC/TVs contain the Pentium II processor. All other brands and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective companies. All prices and configurations are subject to change without notice o obligation. Prices do not include shipping or applicable sales tax. Many Gateway 2000 products are custom engineered to Gateway 2000 specifications, which may vary from retail versions of the software and/or hardware in functionality, performance or compatibility. \"Financing available on approved credit issued and administered by MBNA America Bank. N.A. Payments based on 36-month term at an Annual Percentage Rate as low as 14.9%. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #105 pentium II "


"LOYD CASE TECHNOLOGY tech LOCO Performance on Trial vachi Windows 95: Boon or Bust for Gamers? What if Windows 95 versions of popular DOS titles. Let's look at them one by one. Rowan's FLYING CORPS shipped with both a Windows 95 version and a DOS version on the same CD, and simply put, the Windows 95 version runs abysmally. We tested it on a Pentium 200, and here are the results: it's much easier to use under Windows 95—whether it's the DOS version or the WINQUAKE version-than to try to set up networking under DOS. Prosecution: Setup, schmetup. The fact is, there's still a big performance hit. And hard-core gamers know how to load a few measly networking drivers. In fact, let's take a look at another popular game: EASATE We set up a \"blank mission\" (one plane only) on a runway and checked out the frame rate. Note that we used ATFGOLD for the Windows 95 test, since Windows 95 chokes on ATE Here, then, are the cold, stark numbers: ATF (640x480, sky and water textures tumed off) Frame Rate ATF (DOS) ........................18fps ATF Gold (Windows 95)....13.5fps was actually put on trial for its 'crimes' against FLYING CORPS, 640x480, all details tumed up Frame Rate Windows 95 Native . .......5-6fps DOS version, under DOS........9-10fps DOS version, under Win 95.....8-9fps gamers? t's been said that the jurys still out on Windows 95 for games. What if Windows 95 was actually put on trial for its crimes\" against gamers? How would that jury find? Here's a transcript from the gamers trial of the century. Prosecution: Your honor, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, we are here today to show that running games under Windows 95 is a ludicrous idea. Performance of DOS games on Windows 95 simply doesn't pass muster. The Windows 95 versions of popular games can't keep up, and Windows 95 simply hasn't lived up to its hype as a gaming platform. Defense: We will show today, your honor, that these charges are unfounded and baseless. Windows 95 has proven to be a boon to gamers everywhere. Came developers no longer have to write their own device driveProsecution: Objection! We're not talking about game developers! We're talking about game players! Judge: Objection sustained. Relevancy, Counselor. Defense: Your honor, I do wish the prosecution would stick to the facts and not throw out random objections because it sounds cool on TV. Prosecution (incensed): Very well, here are some facts. During the discovery process, we took a look at DOS games running under DOS and Windows. We examined Windows 95 As you can sce, the Windows 95 version doesn't hold a candle to the DOS version even when the DOS version is running under Windows 95! Defense: Your honor, we believe the Windows 95 version is poorly programmed, and would submit our own example: QUAKE. The defense wishes to enter into evidence our findings testing the DOS version of QUAKE, both under Windows and Windows 95, as well as the newly released WINQUAKE. Here's what we found: Timebemos 320x200 640x480 WINQUAKE ..........40.7fps 16fps QUAKE in DOS ....43.9fps 16.8fps Quake in Win 95 DOS box ..........41.6fps 16.5fps Please note, your honor, that although the DOS version is faster under DOS, the overall performance difference is about 10 percent, as Microsoft has always claimed, and that the differences at the higher resolution are much less. And since QUAKE is a multiplayer game, I would submit your honor, that the difference here is vastly greater than a mere 10 percent. Defense: We have two issues with the prosecution's technique. First, they're stacking the deck by using only ports of DOS games. Although we couldn't capture a frame rate mumber from these two games, it's clear after extensive gameplay that both EARTHSIECE 2 and X-WINC VS. TIE FIGHTER run very smoothly on even Pentium 100s-certainly no worse than if they had been DOS games. Prosecution: We strenuously object to this tactic, your honor! This is merely anecdotal evidence! Can the defense offer any real numbers? Judge: Objection sustained. Counselor, do you have any data? Defense (vexed): Yes, you ignorant SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW 16 "


"LOYD CASE TECHNOLOGY And given the increasing popularity of multiplayer games, we would also submit that Windows 95 is far simpler to configure than DOS. Lastly, Windows 95 games are embracing new technologies like 3D-positional audio and 3D-accelerated, high-resolution graphics; these are features that DOS games aren't willing to address. As game developers improve their understanding of Windows 95 game development, the games will only get better. The defense rests. twit-er, sorry, your honor, I meant the prosecutor, not you. At any rate, back to the whole DOS games under Windows 95 issue, we would like to offer into evidence DESCENTII: DESCENT II (DOS game only) Frame Rate at Start of Level 1 MS-DOS Mode.............. .32fps From Windows 95 ..............30fps As you can see, the difference is trivial. If you couple that with the ease of setup-DESCENT I uses Auto Runthen games become much more accessible. We feel Prosecution (indignantly): Your honor, the defense has raised a very salient issue. We've received numerous complaints of Windows 95 game installations rendering systems completely unusable unless the disk is formatted and Windows 95 is reinstalled. Games like the ill-fated WING COMMANDER KILRATHI PACK would install DirectX without first asking the user. Defense (coldly): And to think that the prosecution excoriated us for using anecdotal evidence. We acknowledge that some Windows 95 games have been, shall we say, poor citizens. However, things have improved greatly. The latest versions of DirectX carefully check version numbers before installing, and if it thinks DirectX needs to be installed, it asks first. Prosecution: Your honor, the sctup issue is a red herring. In fact, setup for DOS games was improving when this Windows 95 juggernaut rolled into town. The performance of Windows 95 games is highly dependent upon the graphics card and the card drivers. In fact, SVGATWEAKBIOS graphics performance under DOS was very consistentDefense: Objection! SVGA-graphics performance under DOS is very dependent on the installed graphics chip, VESA implementations, and other issues. It was at least as confusing as dealing with the graphics cards under Windows 95-perhaps more so. Consider also the new generation of Windows 95 games 3D titles that will take advantage of 3D accelerators. Judge: Objection sustained. Seems like six of one, half-dozen of the other, Mr. Prosecutor. Lets move this debate along. Present your closing arguments. Prosecution: Windows 95 has proven to be the bane of gamers everywhere. Poor performance of DOS games and the inability to even run some DOS games have caused great frustration and headaches for users everywhere. We submit that game developers should return to the well-known principles of DOS game development and ignore the dictates of the Redmond rabble-rousers YOU BE THE JUDGE The case now goes over to the most demanding jury of all: gamers. Ultimately, you have to decide whether Windows 95 games are better than their DOS counterparts. Speaking as one juror/gamer, I've evolved my system to the point where ! rarely boot to the DOS prompt anymorc, even for DOS games. And almost all of the hot titles currently in the works are Windows 95 titles. I do believe game developers and Microsoft are trying to atone for the sins of the recent past. Some new games, like X-WING VS. TIE FIGHTER, install easily and perform pretty well. In the end, though, you must decide whether this brave new world is for you. Change is never casy, but with titles such as JEDI KNIGHT, SEMPER FI, IF-22, and others coming down the pike, I know that it's the titles that count. If they're good games and good PC\"citizens,\" then all I care about is how they immerse me. Let me know what your experiences are and how you, the jury, lind. Return your verclict to: Icase@pacbell.net perform only half as well as their DOS versions, should gamers have to keep paying for faster and faster hardware, just to try to keep up with the ravenous demands of Windows 95? We think not. We rest our case Defense: As usual, the prosecution tries to pass off inmiendo and nomor as fact. Do game developers really want to retum to the arcane intricacies of DOS gaming? Do they really want to spend time developing drivers for multiple pieces of hardware? We think not. version from Wikgren's Web site at www.helsinke.fi/-wikgren/tweakbiosl. LAB NOTES The true measure of a PC hardware geek is whether or not they try to mess around with their BIOS. (Okay, so I do it a bit, too.) However, many BIOSes are \"dumbed down\" and don't allow much tweaking at all. To the rescue of geeks everywhere rides Miro Wikgren, who has written a nifty little BIOS tweaking utility appropriately named TweakBIOS. Download a shareware EZBUILD FOR WINDOWS 95 If you're the proud owner of one of Thrustmaster's programmable sticks, you're also probably one of the vast majority who simply download existing templates. These templates are helpful, especially because programming Thrustmaster's sticks is an arcane art at best. Marlo Casabar thought so too, so he wrote EZBuild for Windows 95, a shareware front-end for programming Thrustmaster gear. It's especially handy for the more complex setups, like the FLCS/TQS combo. To run EZBuild, you'll also need the latest set of Thrustmaster files. Get a copy of EZBuild on the Web at heml.passagen.se/kallesel/ Make sure you send Marlo the shareware fee. CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"YOU CAN SEE IT. YOU CAN HEAR IT YOU CAN FE TE empire ROPINBALL EX (KOPINBALL timeshock! BUT CAN YOU HANDLE ITA ....... Steel yourself for the assault of total vision and sound that is Pro Pinball Timeshock is the fastest most colourful Silicon Graphics game you've ever experienced. And the most alive, win tayar upon layer of fiendish challenges through four different time zones, xooming out at you in gleaming 3-D. Forget the days when you had to scroll pinball games up and down.. Forget two-dimensional graphics. With a full 3-D pinball table in a single screen and shockingly detailed graphics and special effects Pro Pinball Timeshockl is the only pinball game that's ready to take on the real thing..............And beat it! I L UULI PRO PINBALL TIMESHOCK! AVAILABLE NOW ON PC CD-ROM. sional timeshock! ROPINBALI 2 ACTUAL TABLE SHOTS CIRCLE READER SERVICE #293 EMPIRE INTERACTIVE 800-216-9706 www.empire-us.com "


"ONE EIGHT EIGHT SIX SIX NINE ZERO NINE SIX NINE IF YOU ARE HUNGRY FOR POWER! "


"Check out these powerful PCs. Available now: MICRON MILLENNIA MME P200 Intel 200MHz Pentium processor with MMX technology 512KB pipeline burst cache, flash BIOS 48MB SDRAM 4GB Ultra ATA hard drive 24X EIDE variable speed CD-ROM drive 3.5\" floppy drive 100MB lomega Zip drive 32 voice wavetable stereo sound with speakers U.S. Robotics Sportster 56K 22 internal data/fax modem PCI 64-bit 30 video, MPEG, 4MB EDO DRAM 17\" Micron 700FGx, .260p(16.0\" display) Tool-free minitower Microsoft Intellimouse, 104-key keyboard Microsoft Windows 95 and MS Plus! CD Microsoft Office 97 SBE CDS Multimedia Xcitement Pak: (Comprised of MMX technology-based software) Universal Serial Bus connections 5-year/3-year Micron Power\" Inited warranty MICRON MILLENNIA MME WITH FUSION 3D Intel 233MHz Pentium processor with MMX technology 512KB pipeline burst cache, flash BIOS 48MB SDRAM 4GB Ultra ATA hard drive Diamond Stealth Pro DX 30 video, MPEG, 4MB EDO RAM Monster 3D graphics card with 4MB memory 17\" Micron 700FGx, 260p(16.0\" display) 24X EIDE variable speed CD-ROM drive 3.5\" floppy drive 100MB lomega Zip drive 32 voice wayetable stereo sound Advent 370's speakers/subwoofer system U.S. Robotics Sportster 56K x2 internal data/fax modem Tool-free minitower or desktop Fusion 3D game pack. Mech Warrior 2: Mercenaries 3Dfx version, AH-64D Longbow, U.S. Navy Fighters '97, Conimand & Conquer, Popular 3Dfx Racing Sim Microsoft Intellimouse, 104-key keyboard Microsoft Windows 95 and MS Pius! CD Microsoft Office 97 SBE CDS Universal Serial Bus connections MS Sidewinder Pro Joystick 5-yea/3-year Micron Power limited warranty Bus. Lease 95/mo. Are you ready to dish up computer entertainment real entertainment like graphics-intense games or video-packed Internet sites? Check out our Millennia models featuring Fusion 3D. Our Millennia XRU and MME models are built with Intel Pentium processors featuring MMX technology, 3D video, USB connectors, MPEG and 24X EIDE CD-ROM. That means you get unsurpassed speed, performance and easy upgrades. Visit our Web site or call today get a Millennia at a price that will have you licking your chops, and everyone else eating their hearts out. $2.299 $2.799 Bus Lease '78/mo MICRON MILLENNIA XRU MICRON MILLENNIA XRU WITH FUSION 3D Intel 233MHz Pentium Il processor (features MMX technology) 512KB internal L2 cache, 2MB BIOS 48MB EDO RAM 4GB EIDE hard drive 24X EIDE variable speed CD-ROM drive 3.5\" floppy drive 100MB lomega Zip drive 32 voice wavetable stereo sound U.S. Robotics Sportster 56K 2 internal data/fax modem PCI 64-bit 3D video, MPEG, 4MB EDO RAM 17\" Micron 700FGx, .26dp(16.0\" display) Tool-free minitower or desktop Microsoft Intellimouse, 104-key keyboard Microsoft Windows 95 and MS Plus! CD Microsoft Office 97 SBE CDs Multimedia Xcitement Pak: (Comprised of MMX technology-based software) Universal Serial Bus connections 5-year/3-year Micron Power limited warranty Intel 266MHz Pentium Il processor (features MMX technology) 512KB internal L2 cache, 2MB BIOS 64MB EDO RAM 6.4GB EIDE hard drive Diamond Stealth Pro DX 3D video, MPEG, 4MB EDO RAM Monster 3D graphics card with 4MB memory 19\" Hitachi SuperScan CM751.26dp(18.0\" display) 100MB lomega Zip drive DVD-ROM drive DVD software list, 3.5\" floppy drive E4 Cool DVD PCI decoder card U.S. Robotics Sportster 56Kx2 internal data/fax modem AWE 64 sound card, Cambridge SoundWorks/MicroWorks (2 speaker satellite with subwoofer stereo system) Tool-free minitoner or desktop Fusion 30 gante pack Mech Warrior2: Mercenaries 3Dfx version, AM-64D Longbow, U.S. Navy Fighters '97, Command & Conquer, Popular 30fx Racing Sim Microsoft Intellimouse, 101-key keyboard Microsoft Windows 95 and MS Plus! CO Microsoft Office 97 SBE CDS Universal Serial Bus connections MS Sidewinder Pro Joystick 5-year/3-year Micron Power limited warranty Bus: Lease '136/mo. $2.699 $3,999 Bus. Lease '92/mo. *Maximum transmission speed of up to 56Kbps when downloading data and 33.6Kbps when uploading. However, actual performance is dependent upon numerous factors and observed transfer rates may be less than the maximum potentials. * The CD ROM drive will be removed upon the purchase of the DVD upgrade. MICRON POWER call to order WWW 11 www www HP PRINTER OPTIONS HP Desklet 692c printer ....... HP LaserJet 6Lui printer ..................... 1.888.669.0969 tayo .............129 w B a wwww by calling Vem MMX inside Micron Sales Hours: Mon-Fri 6am-10pm, Sat 7am-5pm (MT) Technical Support Available 24 Hours A Day 7 Days A Week Tollfree from Mexico: 95 800-708-1755. Tollfree from Canada: 800-708-1758 Tollfree from Puerto Rico: 800-708-1756. International Sales:208-893-8970 International Fax: 208-893-7393 pentium  Micron Electronics, Inc. All rights reserved. Micron Electronics is not responsible for omissions or errors in typography or photography Al purchases are subject to avait ability Prices and specifications may be changed without notice, prices do not include shipping and handing and any applicable taus 30-day money back policy does not Include retur freight and original shipping handing charges, applies only to Micron brand products and begins from date of shipment. Al sales are subject to Micron Electronics' current terms and conditions de sale. Lease prices based on 36-month lease. The Intel Inside Logo and Pentium are registered trademarks and MX is a trademark of Intel Corporation Microsoft Windows, Windows NT and the Windows logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation Other service marks trademarks and regis tered trademarks are the property of their respective companies MICRON ELECTRONICS www.micronpe.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #100 "


"Intense 3D 100... power-game performance at an entry-level price! Choose your Here's your weapon if you demand outrageous 3D and 2D performance. Based on Rendition's Vérité graphics technology, the Intense 3D 100 delivers mind-stunning frame rates and intense images from games like Tomb Rainders, IndyCar II, Quake, mdk, Duke Nuken and many more. The critics have chosen Intense 3D 100, too. And awards like PC Magazine's Editor's Choice, Family PC's Best Buy, HomePC's Reviewer's Choice, CG's 4-Star Rating, Windows Stellar Award and Computer Life's 4 Star Rating, mean you'll have the winning edge. Key features to help you crush your opponents include 4MB of RAM, bi-linear and tri-linear filtering for smooth, realistic surface and blood textures; anti-aliasing to remove jagged edges from flat foes; and, gouraud shading to provide photo-realistic shading effects which you can't live without. Also included with every Intense 3D 100 accelerator are four accelerated 3D games so you can massacre your enemies...and friends...in style. Sunda edib we Mary Widges So race to your local computer retailer and demand Intense 3D 100. Tell them the world will end if you don't get it. But tell them with a smile! UTENSE Intense 3D 100... it's made by Intergraph Computer Systems, so it's got to be great! BY INTERGRAPH Unleasha 3D RASH rendition ready Call for your nearest retailer 1-800-763-0242 Visit Intergraph on-line at www.intergraph.com lateries and the later tashley are bored trademarks and latense 3D is a trademark of Interesash Corp . Menster Truck Modasond Halbeder die trademarks of Microsoft Corporation, Rendition Ready a trosemark of Rendition, Inc., IndyCar il is a registered trademark of Papyrus. Quale is girademark old Sattere Vodes and 3Din laterattive are registered Prademarks of 3Cl Interactive. Other brends and produd noms de tredemarks of their respective owners. Copyright 1997 Latergraph Corporation. Hasile, AL 35891-OOD, MC9704627/92 "


"weapon! You're in it to win.. Intense 3D Voodoo... the most powerful 3D graphics accelerator available! Here's the weapon of choice for Voodoo fans wanting to teach those with inferior gear a major lesson. And because Intense 3D Voodoo is based on Voodoo Rush technology from 3Dfx Interactive, you totally dominate your opponents with the absolute finest 3D performance and...get true, accelerated 2D for Windows for when you're feeling a little less dimensional. So now you can have the ultimate game thrill along with stunning performance for all your other PC needs like Web surfing, real-time video, multimedia, standard Windows applications and more! With features like 6MB of RAM, S-video and composite video out, anti-aliasing and full blending, the Intense 3D Voodoo is an unbeatable weapon. Don't wait! Get to your local computer retailer and tell them you want the Intense 3D Voodoo graphics accelerator. Tell them you've got to have it to win! TEISE Intense 3D Voodoo... it's made by Intergraph Computer Systems, so it's got to be great! Voodoo 6MB 20/21 RAN FORAPH A SYSTEMS INTERGRAPH COMPUTER SYSTEMS CIRCLE READER SERVICE #073 "


"***** REVIEW  PLEXTOR 12/20 CD-ROM DRIVE Spin City 12/201EY HARDWARE by Loyd Case feature is its support for reading the new CD/RW (erasable) CDs. Given the combination of lower price and barn-burning performance, this is a terrific CD-ROM drive if you want a SCSI device. Given that DVD drives will probably come of age in the next 12-18 months, the 12/20 may be the last CD-ROM drive you'll ever need. the effort to increase the speed in CD-ROM drives has resulted in a shift from CLV (constant linear velocity) to CAV (constant angular velocity) CD-ROM drives. CLV drives move data under the head at the same rate and constantly change rolational speed, whereas CAV drives keep rotational speed constant, producing a variable data rate, depending on the location of the head. Plextor has taken a slightly different tack with its new drive. The 12/20 is a partial CAV drive, meaning it changes speed, but only in discrete intervals on the disk. In other words, it shifts gears depending on whether the head is closer to the inside or the outside of the disk. The \"12/20\" refers to the minimum and maximum speeds (relative to a single-speed drive). This is a refreshing bit of honesty in the midst of all the marketing hype about high-speed CDROM drives. Like all Plextor drives, the 12/20 is a SCSI device, but unlike earlier Plextor products, its offered only in a tray version. The 12/20's street price is lower than that of earlier Plextor products -around $225 (sans SCSI host adapter). Looking at the numbers, this is one fast drive-it easily outpaces some 24x» drives, and it comes in with a WinBench 97 CD WinMark of 1400 on a Micron Millenia 166MHZ Pentium system. Most EIDE 24x drives come in at roughly 1200-1250 WinMarks. Sequential throughput seems better, too, probably due to the large 512KB buffer. One other nice Price: $225 (street price w/o SCSI host adapter) Manufacturer: Plextor (800) 886-3935 www.plextor.com Reader Service #: 316 APPEAL: Those wanting the ultimate in CD-ROM drive performance. PROS: Fast, fast, fast; reads CD/RW. CONS: Requires SCSI host adapter; still more expensive than EIDE offerings. **** REVIEW  QUANTUM FIREBALL ST 3.2 HARDWARE More Storage in Less Space by Loyd Case based system, you'll need either a 430TXbased system or a PCI-based Ultra DMA/33 drive controller. But if you've outgrown your current drive, or want better performance from an EIDE drive, take a good look at the Fireball ST. the new Fireball ST represents the leading edge of EIDE hard drives, and has all the spiffy features you'd expect in modern hard disks: magneto-resistive (MR) heads (which can read more tightly packed, smaller tracks) and Partial Read Maximum Likelihood (PRML) read channels (for predicted read-ahead caching). Because its MR heads allow for reduced individual track size, it can pack 3.2GB into a l inch-high form factor. Most important ly, it supports the new Ultra DMA/33 (a.k.a. Ultra ATA) EIDE standard. Ultra DMA 33 doubles the theoretical maximum throughput of EIDE from 16.6MB/sec to 33MB/sec. Islipped the drive into a Pentium MMX system with the new Intel 430TX chipset, which supports Ultra DMA/33. Using WinBench 97, the drive posted a score of 966 with Ultra DMA/33 disabled, and just shy of 1,000 with Ultra DMA/33 enabled. This seems like a fairly minor speed improvement, but the overall feel of the drive was certainly different. I'm used to running systems with high-speed, wide SCSI drives and, u nlike other EIDE systems I've used, this one seemed quick and responsive. The Fireball ST can be found as low as $279 mail order-certainly not a bad price for a leading-edge, high-capacity EIDE hard drive. Although the Fireball ST will run just fine in a standard EIDEAPPEAL: Those wanting fast, cost-effective hard-drive performance. PROS: Small; fast; relatively easy to install. >CONS: Needs a new motherboard or a new disk controller for maximum performance. Price: $279 (approximate street) Manufacturer: Quantum Corp. (408) 894-4000 www.quantum.com Reader Service #: 333 RATED CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"Jane's COMBAT STICK BYCH PRODUCTS welcome to the next level. MADE THE BEST JUST GOT BETTER, Jane's Combat Stick from CH Products. The Best Value. Superior quality. Total Realism. Three reasons to get your hands on CH Products' new Jane's Combat Stick and a full version of Advanced Tactica! Fighters\" For one low price. Jane's combat Stick is built for Jane's Combat Simulations. Plus you can play other games with it too. And of course you get the three-year warraniy. Two great products. One great price. Jane's COMBAT SIMULATIONS WE BUILD SIMS BY THE BOOK www.chproducts.com www.janes, ea.com Advanced Tactical figlitary and We Build Sluts by ty Book\" are trademarks 201 Electron n e is a registered trademark of Jane's Information GroupLtd. Jane's Combat Simulations is a lectronic Arts Brand, CIRCLE READER SERVICE #061 **1997 CH Products, A Joystick Technologies in "


"** REVIEW THRUSTMASTER TOP GUN USB JOYSTICK Highway to the USB Zone HARDWARE have native DOS support, and since not all DOS titles are well-behaved when run within Windows 95, USB isn't quite the savior we had hoped. Thrustmaster also makes a joystick port version of Top Gun, which is alxout $20 cheaper, supports DOS titles, and works with a throttle and pedals. And while the USB version is a fine perfomer, consider its limitations before making the investment. by Dave Salvator espite great advances in processors, graphics, audio, and other architectural improvements, PCs still have a frequently used wart: the 15-pin joystick port. Camers who want to use multiple controllers have had to buy a switch-box or invest in Advanced Gravis GRiP. Then there are calibration headaches and thermal drift, owing to sound card vendors'use of cheap A/D converters. Digital controllers have solved this problem somewhat, but you can still use only one at a time. The Universal Serial Bus (USB) will soon go a long way to solving this problem, allowing digital controllers to be attached/detached sans Price: $50 System Requirements: reboot, and with a hub, support four or System with USB-aware moth more controllers simultaneously. erboard and BIOS USB Patch Thrustmasters first USB offering is its Top or Windows 95 One USB port. Gun stick, an entry-level stick which turns Vendor: Thrustmaster out be a solid Win-95 performer. (503) 615-3200 www.thrustmaster.com | The first remarkable thing with this Reader Service #: 317 | Top Gun is how simple the installation is, though you'll need to have a USBaware BIOS and Microsoft's USB patch for Windows 95 before getting started. Because USB devices are hot-swappable, Windows 95 immediately finds the Top Gun when you plug it in, and prompts you for a driver. One floppy later, Top Gun was ready to roll. Because Top Gun is a digital stick, it holds calibration very well, with no noticeable drift. We took the Top Gun for a spin through USNF 97 and INTERSTATE 76, and in both titles, it was a very able performer, delivering Thrustmaster's usual taut feel. Unfortunately, Top Gun USB can't be used with a separate throttle or pedals, so serious flight jockeys may want to look elsewhere. Tuming to DOS, the driver we used didn't yet have support for DOS titles in a Windows 95 box. At press time, Thrustmaster stated this support would be in an updated driver. USBs serious ckwnsicle is that not all USB implementations will APPEAL: Part-time fly-boys partial to Windows 95. PROS: Stupid-simple installation; good feel in Windows 95 titles; solid calibration, cheap. CONS: No onboard throttle; DOS titles supported only with in Windows 95; can't be used with throttle or pedals. ***** REVIEW . DIAMOND FIREGL 1000 21000 So Where's the Fire? Fire GL DIAMOND HARDWARE by Loyd Case tuned to the needs of CAD and 3D modcling professionals. It's also capable of high refresh rates at high resolutions. If you're looking for a graphics card that is primarily a 3D CAD card at a low price, with gaming as a secondary fealure, then FireGL is a contender. However, it's pricey, and the Direct3D performance and image quality aren't great, so it's not a good answer for hard-core 3D gaming & he 3D Labs Permedia chip is one of the long-awaited 3D-accelerafor chipsets. When coupled with the 3D Labs Delta chip-a floating point setup engine--it becomes the core of a moderately priced, professional 3D-accelerator. Diamond's FireGL 1000 is just such a card, but for gamers, 3D Studio Max performance probably isn't of interest, rather, they should pay attention to how well it handles games. On the surface, the specs are relatively impressive, but when you dig deeper, you find a few holes in the architecture. For example, to do bilinear filtering, Permedia uses only 3-bit precision-and it shows. In the 3D WinBench quality tests, the image quality of the FireCL 1000s filtering leaves a lot to be desired, producing visible, chunky pixelization. Performance is a mixed bag. We tested the card on a ABIT ITSH with a Pentium P54C/200 with 64MB of EDO DRAM. WinBench 97's business graphics WinMarks comes in at 58.1 (1024x768x16) and 57.1 (800x600x24). On 3D WinBench 97, FireGL posts a score of 53.1, well below the 120 posted by Diamond's 3Dfx-based Monster 3D. DOS performance is weak, with the DUKE NUKEM 3D benchmark showing 28fps versus the 45fps from STB's ET6000-based Lightspeed 128. QUAKE is a little slower as well, with a score in Time Demo 1 of 44.1fps at 320x200 versus 48.1 for the ET6000 card. Finally, there's no VESA 2.0 support in ROM, so you'll need to get a utility like Display Doctor. FireGL 1000 supports up to 8MB of SGRAM, and comes with a set of utilities Price: $299 with 4MB SGRAM Manufacturer: Diamond FireGL 1000 Distributor: Diamond Multimedia, San Jose, CA (800) 468-5846 www.diamondmm.com Reader Service #: 318 APPEAL: 3D CAD designers who moonlight as part-time 3D gamers. PROS: High memory capacity; good 2D Windows performance. CONS: Poor 3D image quality; expensive; SO-SO DOS performance CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


" TH  YOU SOON WILL BE TIME IS RUNNING OUT INCUBATION \"It's Terrifying! It's Turn-Based. It's Tactical. Route Available 4th Quarter 1997 Visit our web site at http://www.bluebyte.com or call (800) 933-2983 for more information.  1997 Blue Byte Software. All rights reserved. Source Code: INCCGW997 CIRCLE READER SERVICE =176 "


"Want it. B Get it. Live it. W MMX inside pentium 233 MHz TD-25 NEW! 166 MHz TD-22  Intel 166 MHz Pentium Processor . 16 MB Synchronous DRAM  512K Pipelined Burst Cache  Intergraph Intense 3DTM 100 Graphics w/ 4 MB EDO RAM  1.7 GB 10ms EIDE Hard Drive  12X EIDE CD-ROM  Microsoft IntelliMouse  2 USB Ports, 2 Serial Ports, 1 Parallel Port  15sd67 Monitor (14.0\"viewable) 200 MHz TD-25  Intel 200 MHz Pentium Processor with MMXTM Technology  32 MB Synchronous DRAM  512K Pipelined Burst Cache  Intergraph Intense 30100 Graphics w/ 4 MB EDO RAM  5.2 GB 10ms EIDE Hard Drive  128 EIDE CD-ROM  Ensonig M30 Wavetable Card plus Amp. Speakers & Mic  Microsoft IntelliMouse  2 USB Ports, 2 Seriol Ports, 1 Parallel Port  175d69 Monitor (16.0\"viewable)  Intel 233 MHz Pentium Processor with MMX Technology  32 MB Synchronous DRAM  512K Pipelined Burst Cache  Intergraph Intense 3D 100 Graphics w/ 4 MB EDO RAM  5.2 GB 10ms EIDE Hard Drive  12X EIDE CD-ROM  Ensonig\" 3D Wavetable Card plus Amp, Speakers & Mic  Microsoft IntelliMouse  2 USB Ports, 2 Serial Ports, 1 Parallel Port  17sd69 Monitor (16.0\"viewable) 33.6 Baud Fax/Modem model #475 model #473 model #568 $1,559 mode 4915 $2,329 47 $2,639 Systems include: 30-day money-back guarantee, 3 year limited warranty, one year on site, Windows 95*w/30 Days Free Phone Support, Windows 95 ready 104-key keyboard, tool-free mini tower case "


"Live the 3D experience. This is no game. Our PCs are serious 3D graphics machines. The kind that make your eyeballs jitter with ecstasy. And our direct prices are really low. But the best part — these systems have the Intergraph name on them. A name that means graphics. Go ahead, compare our 3D PC prices with other manufacturers' PCs without 3D. You'll see. Buying Intergraph is like getting 3D for FREE. No Lie! So, live the 3D experience. Immerse yourself in the new and vivid universe of 3D. Let it caress your imagination and excite your soul.  3D Graphics. Unbelievable at these prices! You get real 3D acceleration for Direct3D apps, mind-blowing 3D games and multimedia. It's a world of 3D realism with correct textures, Gouraud shading, It's where environment mapping serious stuff. you're going.  3D Sound. Totally 3D. We'll take Our Ensonig 3D sound card, you there. mic and speakers deliver stereo surround, wrap-around effects and wavetable synthesis, plunging you into a realm of 3D sight and sound.  Spectacular Video. Of course! Intergraph PCs give you MPEG and AVI compatibility, full-screen, smooth-motion video at 30 frames per second at resolutions up to 800 x 600. And you can scale, zoom and stretch in real time. This is it! The 3D PC you want. Got to have. And the 3D is FREE! Don't wait. Get it NOW. Get Intergraph. INTERGRAPH COMPUTER SYSTEMS ODER LUN 266 MHz TD-225 NEW!  Intel 266 MHz Pentium II Processor with MMX Technology .64 MB EDO DRAM  512K Pipelined Burst Cache  Intergraph Intense 3D 100 Graphics w/4 MB EDO RAM  5.2 GB 10ms EIDE Hard Drive  12X EIDE CD-ROM  Ensonig\" 3D Wavetable Card plus Multimedia Keyboard  Microsoft IntelliMouse  2 USB Ports, 2 Serial Ports, 1 Parallel Port  175069 Monitor (16.0\" viewable) Order Direct Now! 1-800-692-8069 or order on-line www.intergraph.com/express Next-day shipment available. model #499 $3,119 model 19 \"Senice provided by tenergioph Loportion. On se service noroot be available in certain role locations. 30-day manw-back policy does not include signal turn shipping and handing charges and begins hondured shimet. For conduta cod curlemod conditions deler United Waruia plus write Interproph. One Modson Industrial Park, Mal Stop CROO, Huntville, AL 3390.0001. aromedia treme 30 cible while wollt. Hices and you fications on valid for the U.S.enly ander wbic to change without notice. Prices do not indude shipping and landing Alpurches are subject to tvalebit laterpopherd the Intergh luga are put todenals and Disad arka Integraph Corporation. The land was toga, Attun Pro, P o nd AMK trengsbered hofenols of the Coperchios, Madons is a registered trademark of self (tepartian 10970472 Intergraph Computer Systems 1-205-730-5441 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #074 "


"YET ANOTHER EVIL PLOT TO UNDERMINE THE PRODUCTIVITY OF THE AMERICAN WORKER. S Super addictive multiplayer action! CNET Cancer Lose Your Marbles. Bringing America to a grinding halt this September. ONO Free Demo available now at www.segasoft.com Work fast to match up marbles and make them disappear. System requirements: Windows 95 IBM PC or compatible with P60 MHZ processor, CD-ROM, I MB SVGA, 8 MB RAM, Direct X 3.0. Lockable door. Disconnectable phone. Authority to cancel prior commitments. KA LOS TO ABILIE Designed for SEGASOFT SEGASOFT 19 2 Microsoft Windows 95 To win you have to Lose Your Marbles. 1997 SugaSoft, Inc. All rights reserved. SegaSolt, Lose Your Marbles and the SegaSoft logo are trademarks of Sega Solt IncWindows 95 is a registered tradomark of the Microsoft Corporation. The ratings icon is a trademark of the Interactive Digital Software Association CIRCLE READER SERVICE #360 "


"The best REVIEWS The Most Respected Reviews in the Industry for 15 Years CG Choice Games This Month CALLAHAN'S CROSSTIME SALOON EXTREME ASSAULT GREAT BATTLES OF ALEXANDER 0000 p. 178 p.194 p.228 SCORPIA'S REVIEW SHADOWS OVER RIVA p.249 HEROES II EXPANSION DISK dancers/naked captives; LEGACY OF KAIN'S chained-up babes waiting to be drained by our vampire hero (why only women captives?); and TOMB RAIDER's Lara Croft. We finally get a strong woman central character, but she's been given a physique that's definitely Barbie-esque. Is this because the target audience is not only 97 percent male but also males who have never gone on a date? Reader Quote What can be done? How about a 1 (agree) with Sandra Allison's letter. first-person 3D shooter like QUAKE that Too many games do have women killed, gives you the option of \"sex of player\" maimed, beaten, and naked. Don't get along with \"your name\" in the multime wrong. I'm the guy who thinks player setup? Thus, triggering the WOLFENSTEIN 3-D should have included appropriate male or female voice when more than a few grateful frauleins for ourvou jump. are wounded, killed, and the hero to find, liberate, and thus get some like. Could id issue it as a patch? well-earned R&R (if you know what I Also, thanks for the Myst explanation. mean). Still, in my limited gaming experiKeep up the good work. ence I still can't figure out: DUKE NUKEM'S -Howard Hopkirk Review Quote of the Month \"CALLAHAN'S CROSSTIME SALOON is the funniest game I have played in four years.\" — Charles Ardai HOW DO WE RATE? We only review finished products, not pre-release versions. The ratings are as follows: Outstanding: Very Good: The rare game A high-quality that gets it all game that suc right. The graph ceeds in many ics, sound, and areas. It may gameplay come have minor prob together to form a lems, but is still worth Transcendent Gaming your money, especially if Experience. Our strongest you're interested in the buying recommendation. 'subject matter or genre. Average: Weak: Abysmal: A mixed bag. It A game with seri The rare game can be a game ous problems. that gets it all that reaches for Usually buggy, wrong. This is the stars, but seriously lacking reserved for those falls short in sev. in play value, or products so eral ways. It can also be just a poorly conceived buggy, ill-conceived, or a game that does what game design ---you valueless that you won it does well, but lacks should think long and der why they were ever flair or originality. i hard before buying it. I released in the first place. SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"DARK GOLONY There is life on Mars. And in the twilight of the 21st century, it raises its ugly head. Dark Colony transports you to that not-so-distant future where warring corporations have plundered Mars and unearthed a horrific secret, Now, all must suffer the consequences. This is real-time tactical combat smart, visual, and violent. The animation? Flawless. Feel the heat and toxic gases singe your eyes with each fiery explosion and massive eruption. Windows 95 and RP Macintosh CD-ROM LAST SEPTEMBER, NASA SHOWED YOU MICROBES FROM MARS. "


"The aliens? Revolting. Leave your pre-conceived notions about ET at the space dock these are anything but humanoid and everything you fear. Dark Colony. A superior real-time strategy experience now, and well into the future. That is, if we still have one. Call 800-234-3088 to order or visit your local retailer www.darkcolony.com GAMES ZOFONU sa va 40 Dark is of Ga 01997 SM S alon C A nis mer PREME lic A Muscle SRL A MINDSCAPE. COMPANY TODAY, WE'D LIKE TO SHOW YOU HOW NICELY THEY'VE GROWN UP. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #234 "


"***** REVIEW CALLAHAN'S CROSSTIME SALOON DIFFICULTY LEVEL Puns of Steel ADVENTURE/RPG Belly-laugh up to the Bar in Legend's Hilarious Romp by Charles Ardai Gllahan have a confession to series of interesting probmake: Despite this maglems to solve, and a cenazine's enthusiastic sneak tral location to retum to preview, I didn't expect between every two legs of much from CALLAHAN'S the adventure. The stories CROSSTIME SALOON. I have obvious adventure don't know why. Spider game potential, and they Robinson is a very good, inchide keeping a lonely very funny, science-ficvampire from killing himtion writer. Josh Mandel, self by reuniting him with the games designer, coauthored his lost love, rescuing a one of my all-time favorite kidnapped bar buddy who games, Sierra's FREDDY happens to be a talking PHARKAS, FRONTIER PHARdog, and so on. MACIST: The publisher, Legend, has done some good work and STRANGE BREW At Callahan's, you'll meet all sorts of creatures, GAG ME some great work, but never any such as the incomprehensible, multilimbed Squish. Still, it all would fall thing really bad. apart if the jokes were But...games adapted from works of runs a friendly neighborhood joint, but the lame. Thankfully, they aren't. Here there science fiction so rarely work, Robinson neighborhood he serves spans galaxies be wit! Actual, honest-to-god wit! Funny wasn't writing the game, and Mandel and eons. Time travelers, aliens, robots, remarks, clever puns, relentless running had also coauthored Sierra's SPACE vampircs, and the occasional scruffy gagsand plenty of them. How often QUEST VI, which was weak even by that human all take their place at the rail. does a computer game make you laugh series' declining standards. Plus, comedy. Now, this notion is not unique to out loud even once? This one had me which is probably the hardest thing to get CALIAHAN'S -Lawrence Watt-Evans laughing from start to finish. right in science fiction, is even harder to award-winning story\"Why I Left Harry's You can spend hours just clicking on get right in a computer game. So, I went All Night Hamburgers\" told of a similar one objcct after another simply to see in prepared for the worst. I came out, joint, and George Lucas cantina in Star what jokes you uncover. There aren't a many hours later, with what might mod Wars seemed Callahanian, at least in its lot of locations in the gamefewer than estly be called a changed opinion. biological diversity, Steve Meretzky's a dozen in cach of the game's six«misnew game, THE SPACE BAR, has a little sions\" but you can examine each 360BAR NONE CALLAHAN'S to it as well. degree view, and there are gags packed Price: $39.95 CALLAHAN'S CROSSTIME SALOON IS But what sets Callahan's apart from into every corner. Minimum System Requirements: 486/66, the funniest game I have played in four the other exotic watering holes, and what Onan airstrip in Brazil (where you go to DOS 5.0 or Win 95, 8MB years. 1993 was the year that not only keeps readers coming back, is its oversave the best chocolate in the world from a RAM, 2x CD-ROM drive, FREDDY PHARKAS but also LucasArts whelming good nature. No blaster duels clear-cutting industrialist), you see a guard's VESA-compatible or hilarious DAY OF THE TENTACLE came hierethe weapons of choice in the shack in front of you, a man working on a SVGA-graphics card, mouse; supports all out. Since then, there have been sequels nightly showclowns are puns, not guns, jeep, and the plane you flew in on All you Sound Blaster-compatible lo almost every game you can name, but Not that Callahan's is some sort of sissihave to do is knock the guard out with a litand other major never a FREDDY PHARKAS 2 or a RETURN fied feel-good yuk parlor; it's just that the tle morphine, stcal some supplies, and sound cards. OF THE TENTACLE; and although people and other critters) who go there head off into the jungle-but if that's all Multiplayer Support: attempts at comedy have been reported all have enormous affection for one you do, you're missing all the fun. None. another, sort of like Cliff, Norm, and the from time to time, the sound of actual Designer: Legend Click on the shack and your character, Entertainment laughter has been scarce indeed. rest of the gang at Cheers. scruffy human Jake Stonebender, remarks Publisher: Take 2 This game, as in the Callahan books, The universe they inhabit is often a hosthat it looks ready to keel over-which Interactive gives us a peek inside a Long Island bar tile one but, by working together, they beat would be particularly funny if the guards New York, NY (212) 941-2988 that is rather more unusual on the inside the threats every time. What better name was \"Neal,\" since then you'd get to www.kaizen.net/legendl than you'd expect from its conventional premise for an adventure game? You've see the shack keel on Neal.\" A groaner, Reader Service #: 319 l exterior. Mike Callahan, the proprietor, got a wide range of colorful characters, a yes-well, maybe you'd rather pay more CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"Its time to see what the critics and gamers are all talking about. Realmsrile Haun ng THE BATTLEGROUND BETWEEN ULTIMATE GOOD AND EVIL 5 out of 5 stars Computer Life May 1997 \"...offers one of the most fluid, absorbing fantasy-horror game experiences available.\". . , 4°/2 out of 5 stars CGW May 1997. ' \"ROTH covers all the bases.\" 4 out of 5 stars Computer Games Strategy Plus May 1997 Stamp of Approval 4.5 rating out of 5 Game Pro April 1997. \"You'll have a fine time playing in this Realm.\" ...over 50 hours of riveting gameplay.. Ultra Game Players April 1997 Realmsink Haning Lant Edim9 Realinsic Windows ta CONTENT RATED ET Gremlin BY GAMERS, FOR GAMERS. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #269 WWW.interplay.com 0190 Gremlin Interaktive Ltd. All rights reserved. Realms of the Haunting and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserva. Interplay is the sole publisher and distributor Licensed from and developed by Gremlin Interactive, Ltd. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. "


"REVIEW  CALLAHAN'S CROSSTIME SALOON ADVENTURE/RPG the funniest is). There are also delicious dialogues, such as an argument you have in Transylvania with a coachman who grows more convinced that you're really a closet vampire the more you protest that you're not. Even the obligatory Star Trekjokes are a cut above-instead of some weary Spock or Scotty shtick, Mandel tosses in subtle gags about Losira (from the episode \"That Which Survives\") and the white-horned mugato. as typos (\"Slipts\" for«splits, \" \"Your are in the pot\" for \"Your beans are in the pot\"), others of which include bugs that cause the game to crash completely. That the final version of a game this good still contains abundant crash bugs is embarrassing. But make no mistake: CALLAHAN's is a wonderful, wonderful, wonderful game, and I'm not just saying that because I get paid by the word. CALLAHAN's left me with one of the biggest damn smiles a computer game has ever put on my face. And I'd come back in a heartbeat. STREET MART To get to Brazil and save Josie's beloved cacao trees, you're going to need a passport. Maybe this hip '70s leftover can help you. attention to the jeep? Click on the spare tire on the ground beside it and the narrator will point out, \"The gentleman with the jeep is obviously not working tirelessly.\" Click on the jeep itself and you're told, \"That old wreck is getting a spare tire. And so is the jeep le's working on. Sorry, that was a jeep shot.\" And not all of the comedy is of the punny one-liner variety (though some of PARTY CRASHING? CALLAHAN'S doesn't slow down for a second. If you don't know what a mugato is, then you miss that particular joke, but it doesn't matter because there are another dozen racing at you at all times (jokes, not mugatos). That the stories are well told and the puzzles intricate and satisfying is almost beside the pointthere is plenty to praise here, but it's the comedy that makes the experience. Maybe the most impressive thing about this game is that the comedy is so good, it even makes up for a number of really shocking flubs, some of which are as small APPEAL: Not just Spider Robinson's readers or sci-fi fansanyone who finds Leslie Nielsen's movies funny will love this game. >PROS: Densely packed with wit and nonsense-there's more laughout-loud jokes in any one scene than in most entire games. CONS: A number of flaws; ranging from typos to gamecrashing bugs. RATED IHUNDERSEA \"A DOUBLE MUST-HAVE. Anyone who plays computer games will want this AMAZING CHAIR!\" Marc Spiwak POPULAR ELECTRONICS \"I could actually FEEL the punch of the afterburner!\" Ed Dille, ELECTRONIC GAMES Feedback System Used in Real F-16 Simulators VIRTUAL UTOPIA!\" www.thunderseat.net COMPUTER SHOPPER Summer Special ThunderSeat Ace Only $119.95 HOW IT WORKS A 100 watt subwoofer built into the base generates low frequency sound that resonates through the wave chamber hidden inside the chair. Thus you not only hear but FEEL your simulation. Paired with your amplifier, the ThunderSeat makes your favorite flight sim as realistic as it can be without a motion simulator! OPTIONAL SIDE CONSOLES Put your favorite joystick controls and mouse at a convenient position. Add a keyboard holder and you have the perfect setup for both flight simulation and office work Shake Rattle and Roll for as little as $159.95! For a FREE CATALOGUE CALL 1.800. 8-THUNDER WYROBE Wiother its die Fumble of your NASCAR or recoil of your Chain Gun, the ThunderSeat lets you blast off to a new level of realism. ThunderSeat Technologies 17835 Sky Park Circle . Suite C Irvine, CA 92614-6106 714.851-1230 Fax: 714. 851-1185 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #161 "


"TM DOGDAT AN ADVENTURE You're a dog in a dog eat dog world. Where getting drunk as a dog and defeating the top dog, is so real your friends may have to stop you from chasing cats and drinking from the toilet bowl... EENLIIT HOGDAY IL Features  64,000 color gaming world 360 degree seamless animated display Realistic style puzzles with sensible interaction Fully animated inventory system  Incredible atmosphere that encompasses sight and sound Grab a Demo here www.impactgames.com Published by \"gameplay in Dogday is an exceptional piece of work\" \"the atmosphere sucks you right in\". \"real world style puzzles\" \"sensible interaction\" \"beautifully rendered\" PC PowerPlay IMPACT Interactive Publishing Pty Ltd Doing it is better than watching it! To place an order, contac To place an order contact your local retailer or call 1-888-351-5969 Copyright 1996 Impact Interactive Publishing Pty Ltd. All rights reserved. Dogday is a trademark of Impact Interactive Publishing Pty Ltd. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #081 "


"...JOIN OR "


"IJIET FUTURE WAR IMMERSION FOR THE PC. WWW.300.COM PC CD-ROM UPRISING is a trademark of Tho 3DO Company. 1997 Tho 3DO Company. All rights reserved, CIRCLE READER SERVICE #113 "


"Lands of Lore is a registered trademark of, and Guardians of Destiny is a trade  1997 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserve "


"TS ento WESTWOOD STUDIOS INTRODUCES THE MOST FANTASTIC EXPERIENCE IN THE HISTORY OF ROLE PLAYING GAMES. HIGHLY REACTIVE ENVIRONMENT, FULL 360° MOVEMENT DYNAMIC LIGHTING AN AWESOME ARRAY OF SPELLS AND INVENTORY ITEMS FEATURED IN 15 CHALLENGING AND ENCHANTING REALMS LANDS OF LORE GUARDIANS OF DESTINY.. FULL SCREEN 256 COLOR HIGH RESOLUTION GAME PLAY AWESOME MONSTER AT THEY FIGHT, HIDE AND GET REINFORCEMENTS Westwood www.westwood.com wood Studios, Inc. "


"***** REVIEW  STAR TREK: GENERATIONS DIFFICULTY LEVEL ADVENTUREZRPG Make It So-SO STAR TREK: GENERATIONS Blandly Goes Where Others Have Gone Before by Robert Coffey ANARCOSA hat makes a grcat Star Trek episode? Is it the exciting forays into treacherous alien worlds? The frequently thoughtful messagedriven plots? The cut of Counselor Trois velour jumpsuit? The most enduring episodes have deftly blended all these elements, resulting in television that quickens pulses as ably as it tickles cerebral neurons. STAR TREK: GENERATIONS aspires to master a similarly delicate balancing act, mixing puzzle-solving adventure fare, phaser-blasting shooter action, and a smattering of ship-to-ship space combat. Unfortunately, GENERATIONS' ambition is unfulfilled, culminating in a game likely to disappoint all but the most rabid Star Trek fans with its tepid play. AMALCOSA SURE SYSTEM VIEW SET COURSE 2 BILLION YEAR OLD T-1YPE STAR WITH TOTAL LUMINOSITY STARDATE:NB623.6 COMPUTER I LOOD TARLION TERAWATTS. LONG RANGE SCAM DPT1045 tyto LOCATION OF ME PEAMED KATSE SIT. APPARENTLY. THE WEAPON COME FROTTON SPASS MI MAP OF THE STARS Lots of time is spent in Stellar Cartography scanning planets and ships, plotting courses, searching for Soran, and reloading saved games. and renegade Klingons with whom he has allied himself. All of this is set up in the opening film sequence, which uses AOONOPRON Price: $48.99 Minimum System Requirements: Windows 95, Pentium 90 or faster (P166 recommended), 16MB RAM (32MB recommended) 75MB hard drive space. high-color graphics for 640x480 16-bit color (2MB video RAM minimum and must be compatible with DirectX), 4x CD-ROM drive, DirectX-compatible sound card, MMX supported, mouse. Multiplayer Support: None. Designer/Publisher: MicroProse Alameda, CA Phone: (510) 522-3584 www.microprose.com Reader Service #: 321 SHOOTING STARS GENERATIONS takes its plot from the similarly titled film of a couple years ago. A twisted scientist named Soran is trying to get swept up once again in the Nexus, a galaxy-swimming ribbon of energy that creates unique paradises for every individual it engulfs. Soran has a problem, though: 'To reunite with the Nexus he will have to alter its course through the universe. The good news is he has a plan. The bad news is it involves imploding assorted suns with trilithium missiles. Not surprisingly, the Federation boy scouts decide that the wholesale destruction of entire solar systems complete with all the life forms contained therein is probably a bad thing, so Captain Picard and crew are dispatched to thwart the efforts of Soran and the Romulans 'That footage and the quality voiceacting do a great job in giving CENERATTONS that special Star Trek flavor. The sneering malevolence of Malcolm McDowell as Soran, the dignity and determination of Patrick Stewart as Picard, and the lighthearted whimsy of Data intoxicated by his new emotion chip) all highlight the gameplay. If anyone falls short of the thespian mark, it's William Shatner. His vocal performance as Kirk borders on a preening parody of himself, the nadir coming with the teddy-bear-in-a-pillow-fight sounds he makes when hit by phaser fire. game. From here you conduct both longand short-range scans of planets and enemy vessels, searching for Sorans biosignature in order to pursue him and foil his machinations. Using a straightforward, mouse-driven interface, scanning plancts and setting courses for the Enterprise is a snap. Scanning planets rightly consumes game time but none of the information is saved, forcing you to perform redundant, time-wasting scans when following up clues for specific planets. Why a computer system as highly evolved as the Enterprises is incapable of retaining such basic information is patently illogical. Once Soran is located, Picard will order a crew member to beam down for a solo away mission, and the meat of the game begins. Away missions take place in a first-person perspective in 3D worlds with sprite-based objects and creatures. Fully half of the screen is taken up by a needlessly huge inventory/automap/ health status display. With the gameworld passing by only in the letterboxed NEEDLE IN AN INTERSTELLAR HAYSTACK Play begins with Picard and Dala in Stellar Cartography. This interactive planetarium-cum-atlas is the hub of the CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"YOUR MIDDLE FINGER HAS BEEN YOUR ONLY WEAPON FOR TOO LONG EAT LED E STREETS OF SIMCITY. STREETS OF .\" 196 On the Streets of Sim City, itis KILL or be RoankIL. So forget the CRUDE hand gesture & try a Flaming missile up the tail pipe. Drive one of 5 fully loaded Deat H machines. Hurl Smoke screens from a MUSCLE car. Toast your enemies with machine gun blasts from a LETHAL bread truck. And turn Opposing road warriors into SCRAP METAL in Query city scenario-even imported Sim Cities. Or give them to a crash course in Head-on network play. Because on the Streets of Sim City, you've got to DRIVE to SURVIVE them STRER SEDA HTTP://www.MAXIS.COM 1997 Maxis, Inc. All rights reserved. Streets of SimCity is a trademark and SimCity and Maxis are registered trademarks of Maxis, Inc. All other trademarks or registered trademarks are properties of their respective owners. For product or ordering information contact your local retailer or call 800-33-MAXIS. Available for Windows 95. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #256 "


"REVIEW  STAR TREK: GENERATIONS ADVENTURE/RPG CAPTAIN COURAGEOUS Picard's efforts to stop Soran on the Enterprise are thrilling, but replaying the entire mission because you couldn't find the deflector controls isn't 1 PISTOL-PACKING BETAZOID Deanna Troi goes undercover as a Romulan to stop Soran. Avoiding confrontation at all costs. she carries a disruptor, and is stunning in her Romulan getup top portion of your monitor, the effect is similar to squinting through a mail slot. Items lying on the floor are easy to miss. Why GENERATIONS requires a Pentium 90 and recommends a P166 is beyond me. Graphically, the game is nothing special, with worlds constructed in woefully limited palettes with precious little in the way of animation, and no interaction. Movement is uniformly sluggish, and attacking creatures and aliens move as stiffly and naturally as the characters in Disneyland's Pirates of the Caribbean. Missions can take nearly two minutes to load, and textures grow pixelated at just medium range. Where is all that horsepower going? *********************** the away missions something special by utilizing the characters' personal attributes. Why can't Geordi use his enhanced vision to his advantage? Why can't Toi use her empathic abilities? Granted, Troi would probably just say, \"I sense something, but it's so alien I'm not sure,\" but still... The ship-to-ship tactical combat sounds promising, but is essentially an exercise in choosing one of a very limited selection of commands in order to destroy a distant target during unexciting battles. The Enterprise is often drastically outnumbered and outgunned, but most of these conflicts can be viewed as simple harassment sorties, since just showing up and then warping out before even engaging the enemy is sufficient to stop Soran from destroying a sun-which allows the game to continue apacc. you're stuck running-often right off the pillar or platform you just leapt ontounless you take a quick, sprint-stopping step backward. Seemingly constant disc reads disrupt your jumping efforts and compound your aggravation. But CENERATIONS' biggest downfall is its save feature. You can save only in Stellar Cartography, never during away missions, which forces you to start every failed mission from the beginning. Aside from having you thwarted by enemies, GENERATIONS packs other ways to ruin a mission: The chief offenders are deadend areas and alien machines that you must figure out inside of a minute at the end of a mission. GENERATIONS' save feature is a blatant attempt to pad the playing time of a game that most gamers would finish quickly. Had the designers provided more game than frustration, GENERATIONS could have been a winner. As it is, it fails to provide an engaging Star Trek experience and it should fail to get your gaming dollars. & MIXED BAG Even though it bills itself as an action game, GENERATIONS is really an adventure game with sporadic action elements. Every away mission requires some fairly unchallenging puzzle-solving to complete, but many of the missions actually encourage you to avoid firing your weapon. Gamers looking for the Star Trek equivalent of QUAKE aren't going to find it hcrc. Mission design is pretty uniform in its lack of inspiration, and missions demand that very little be done. When Worf infiltrates a renegade Klingon base, for example, he merely needs to find a security pass in order to access a ship, which he then casily sabotages. Many of the missions take place in fairly restricted worlds. Those that have larger areas to explore have nothing in them to make exploration worthwhile--no plot, no powerups, and no fun. With all the different characters, the designers missed a real chance to make STAR TREK: THE NEXT FRUSTRATION Although some missions do start to draw you in (abetted greatly by the voice-acting), the enjoyment is quickly squelched by two things: sloppy controls and an abysmal save feature. The mouse easily aims your weapon, but keyboard keys control your movement. Though the keys can be reconfigured, the traditional Doom setup isn't possible and you end up with something awkward instead. Trying to run is the biggest problem. Holding down the Shift key starts you running, but only in a straight lineStarfleet may want to add turning while running to Academy curriculum. Even worse are the jumping sequences that pepper the game. Running jumps are often required, but once you start running APPEAL: Only those Star Trek fans with phaser sound-effects keychains. PROS: Great voice-acting that brings characters to life. CONS: Poor game engine; simple, boring missions; first-person and ship-to-ship action is sporadic and unexciting; sloppy, game-thwarting controls; lack of incremental save ensures the constant reloading of games. CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"1.800.747.2642 ext. 300 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #138 "


"DEL!!  Sier Tu ChLike, Trek. All right: 1:54rved. "


"how do you measure courage? by the pint or by the gallon? www.sierra.com/mask. "


"A NEW BREED OF RPG EVERYTHING ELSE R DYING CA ERS MACPLAY Designed for MATURE AXOR CASA CI ROM Microsoft Windows 95 AGES 17+ CONTENT RATED BY "


"natural nation and th out wa fields. In latt when ro Meticulous turn-based combat system lets you target specific body parts to wound, cripple, or kill as you see fit. State-of-the-art digital animation lets you see the emotions of the people you talk to. Watch someone smile at your compliment or grow angry at your insults! Your decisions will have significant moral implications. emotions of the non 36, China attacks Alaska over at drops of oil in the world. force, but it will be ten years er. In a desperate maneuver, mreighboring countries in Ingredling resources. The plnded by late 2076. S military ly 2077. Over 50 mini-quests with multiple solutions take you through devastated wastelands such as Rad Scorpion dens, Junktown, and the Brotherhood of Steel. gay, October missiles. fter two Lit to the jeople Victims don't just perish they get cut in half, melt into a pile of goo, and explode like a blood sausage into chunks of flesh. ARRIVING AUGUST 1997  Interplay Productions. All rinhts reserved. Fallout, MacPlay and Interplay 95 are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Windows Is a renistered trademark of Microsofl Corporation. All rights reserved. AMIST RUGTAS NOT PLAYING CAKT I CIRCLE READER SERVICE #354 "


"***** REVIEW  EXTREME ASSAULT NOTIV DIFFICULTY LEVEL Extreme Gaming Blue Byte Assaults the Senses With an Action-Packed 3D Heli-thriller by Gordon Goble HEME voice screamed from within me, \"Now you've done it! You've assaulted me for the last time. Sensory overload was not part of the arrangement.\" And with that, my brain tried to make a run for it. Seems that it had been exposed to a little too much stimuli recently, and it put the blame for its weakened condition squarely on Blue Byte Software's explosive 3D arcade-thriller 00:00 EXTREME ASSAULT SCORE 0731205 DSE ASSHOLES RECOVEA FAOM THAT Luckily, we struck a last-minute deal, and the old cerebellum BRIGHT LIGHT The pyrotechnic displays in EXTREME ASSAULT are awesome. In fact, the remained intact. But it was a deal game boasts some of the best 3D graphics of any game. with a heavy price. Sure, no more headaches and game hangovers, but no as the fighting begins. From your first-perings of a monstrous alien vessel. Should more Blue Byte games as well? I mean, son perspective you see a pair of chop you venture outside the sometimes-small that's torture, man! pers approaching in the distance. Target confines of each theatre of operation, the Although by strict definition EXTREME the first, wait for radar lock, begin shoot game brands you a deserter, and ends ASSAULT' is a 3D action shooter, you can ing, then repeat this procedure. It's slow your current mission, but these restrictake your definitions and stick 'em where going, but later, things get interesting tions are outlined on your radar screen the sun don't shine, because this baby's so Each mission thereafter is prefaced and are rarely annoying. good that genres just don't matter. Unless with instructions from the robot-like big At high resolution with detail options you're completely opposed to heavy boss. Yet his robotic tonal qualities are cranked, EXTREME ASSAULT is smooth, artillery, EXTREME ASSAULT will tingle offset by the urgency of this enigmatic solid, and floater-free, with crystal-clear Price: $49.99 your spine, raise your hair, and thrill your situation. \"Find their stinking hole in the objects and lighting that are above Minimum System soul in a way that very few games can. ground and smoke the bastards out,\" is reproach. Convoys roll down highways, litRequirements: the sentiment that I remember best. tle trains (which, of course, you can blow Pentium 90 (P133 recSLOW START up) run over realistic little bridges, ommended), VLB-compatible graphics card It's curious, then, that this extravagant THREE-DIMENSIONAL JOYRIDE branched trees sprout from mountainsides, (PCI card recommend affair opens in such an unassuming manWhile computer shooting has rarely and rivers run through it all. Underground, ed), 16MB RAM, 2x ner, without ostentatious introduction or been this much fun, the environment for you'll dart in and out of the light amongst CD-ROM; supports fanfare. You'll start off by customizing your activities is darn near revolutionary: pillars and rails and machinery Sound Blaster-compatible sound cards and your controls (I had some temporary 3D worlds are nothing new, of course, Shoot at anything, and the bullets most joysticks. problems configuring multibutton CH but 3D this convincing, this interactive, leave an authentic impression. Fire a barMultiplayer support: sticks, although the Thrustmaster equivathis colorful, this detailed, and this varied rage at a building and you'll see a plume LAN (1-4 players, one lents are directly supported) and then is. I, for one, am hard-pressed to rememof smoke, then a wonderful depiction of CD per player) picking a pilot. Four are available, repreber any 3D action game that looks and flames, and finally, an explosion of Designer: Blue Byte Software Inc. senting casy, normal, difficult, and sounds this good, and that covers sucha immense graphic and aural ferocity Publisher: Blue Byte extremc gameplay (but only the latter two wide range of locales. Your reasonably intelligent opponents, Software Inc. will see you through all six campaigns). In the cockpit, you'll have a full-screen meanwhile, are varied to the point of disSchaumburg, IL You are in charge of the futuristic Sioux view of what lies ahead, which could be traction. Blue Byte says there are almost (847) 995-9951 www.bluebyte.com AH-23 attack helicopter, and your anything from stcamy jungle to ice floc to 20 in all, but it certainly seems like more. Reader Service #: 322 | upcoming challenge is a mystery to you underground cave to the intemal workBasic helicopters are prevalent at first, folCGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"EXTREME ASSAULT  REVIEW ACTION lowed by other airbome attack craft; evil paws on. Even the concussions and tank\" Blue Byte has included as an altematanks; horizontal and vertical gun place debris from nearby explosions can take tive to the Al 1-23. The idea is to find it, hop ments; rotating lurrets; creaking mechanitheir toll on your craft. It's a stunning in, and enjoy a new perspective on things cal spiders; converted RVs; and watercraft pyrotechnic display, though some of the Unfortunately, the 'Tl is damned hard to of all shapes, sizes, and capabilities. weaker weapons often look like little glowlocate, has nowhere near the fun factor of ing diamonds-a bit hokey, but forgivable the chopper and, in single-player mode, is READY...AIM...FIREFIGHT in the grand scheme of things. supported on very few levels. Apart from These mechanical menaces will hit you Naturally, you'll locate some firefights multiplayer modes, where it can be selectwith rockets, lasers, illuminating death along the way as well. Bigger and better ed as the vehicle of choice, it's more a rays, and anything else they can get their stuff is available throughout the game, curiosity than anything else and certainly both as a reward for successful kills and doesn't spawn the «2 games in l\" scenario ASSAULT LIKE A PRO as a bonus, tucked away in secret depots. some carly rumors have suggested. Smart bombs are especially impressive, During installation, EXTREME There's no doubt about it-in order to make it through to the and divide into several separate and ASSAULT will run a test on your equipmind-blowing EXTREME ASSAULT CONpowerful shells to home in on every tarment to determine which of its many clusion, you'll have to shoot get within range supported video modes are right for you. everything-Including neutral Those who enjoy supervising mass A host of graphic options, including structures, crates, trees, and even destruction from alternate viewpoints MMX support, the ability to turn transyour own hase (in the opening will find a number of exceptional exter parencies on or off, viewing distance, mission)! Bonuses and upgrades nal views, each featuring correct pcr and ground detail will further tailor the are everywhere spectives and accurate movement. The look to suit your computing power. Avert your eyes if you want to game reaches its visual pinnacle with If you've got a fast Pentium, with or do it honestly, but hare are some one of the most showy and rewardling without MMX or a 3D accelerator, get specific early hot spots that conclusions I've ever had the pleasure to ready to be blown away. Just don't forget Should get you a quick munition witness. to tell your brain that it's just a game advantage. Blast away at the fol EXTREME ASSAULT lowing: the hangar floor in doesn't allow for manMission One, the church steeple in ual saves. Instead, it Mission Three, and the tunnel fan auto-saves at the last in Missige Six. By the way, check completed level, or out the clock tower while you're gives you the option of hamnering the church-it works. automatic replay, It's also important to remember that your Sloux AH-23 is an should you fail. The extremely durable craft, especially game sports six camwhen you tangle with scenery. paigns and nearly 60 diverse missions in all, Mow, you don't want to go around smacking into walls or mountainrunning the gamut sides, but dragging the wing from all-out attack to across the ground causes no ilam. surveillance and age whatsasvet and gives you a exploration to defenSO SIOUX ME This is the Sioux AH-23, your vehicle in stabuity advantage in tight situa sive assignments. EXTREME ASSAULT, as seen from one of the game's many tions, all the while building you from Whichever is the case, useful external views. the prying eyes at enemy radar, the action gets contin3 Finally, EXTREME ASSAULT has a ually more frenzied and difficult as the penchant for alunking you down game progresses. APPEAL: Arcade helicopter in the heart of the action, a place pilots; anyone who appreciates great Adeling to this frenzy, or so you would 3D and skull-crushing explosions. you don'? want to be night of the think, is the next generation Tl battle bat. There's notizing PROS: Superb 3D environment; lovely visual effects that don't require wrong with baciang ofta 1700 an accelerator card; pounding audio; Sit, moving out of the variety of missions in an amazing cange of enemy radang array of outdoor and indoor locations. and surveying the situa >CONS: Some controller problems flon before beginning when configuring; viewing hats only YEUR pageAnd dont work with tezee Youre In a helt Thrustmaster or Fopter nu a jet pane programmable units; some misUse your citopper to its sions are short; stealthy advantage T1 tank a nonONE LESS CONVOY In this game, shoot at anything and everything. These smart factor; no manuRAUEU* al save feature. bombs, which divide into multiple warheads, mop up the battlefield quickly GET TOYOT SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"lights reserved. Licensed and distributed exclusively by interplay Productions. 01997 Treyarch lovention. All rights reserved. Die By The Sword and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Production All other copyrights and trademarks are property of their respective owners, Freeform control method allows you to target specific body parts Watch Out! Or end up fighting for your life while hanging upside down from a rope or being ambushed from all sides Coming This Fall! DIE SWORD com RATINE PERSONE RP **Promises to Revolutionize The World of PC Fighting Games\" --Computer Player CIRCLE READER SERVICE #262 TREYARCH BY CAMERS, FOR GAMER www.interplay.c "


"1997 Treyarch Invention. All rights reserved. Die By The Sword and Interplay are tradema All other copyrights and trademarks are property of their respective owners. Lop off heads, sever limbs and bring YOUT Cnemy to his knees (literally). Coming Comingo his Eall Enemics will learn, adapt and fight together to kill you the prize hcing your head DIE SWOPD Interplay RATING PERTAN \"Fans Of Fighting And Blood will Need This The Second It Hits The Store Shelves.» -Computer Player CIRCLE READER SERVICE #262 TKEYSKOR BY GAMERS, FOR GAMERS.\" www.interplay.com "


"YOU'RE DASH RENDAR QUICK ON THE TRIGGER OF A BLASTER. IT'S YOU AND YOUR TINY SNOW SPEEDER VERSUS A GIANT, WALKING A.T.A.T. SPEEDER BIKE MODE FAST-PACED ACTION WITH A KICK START. "


"THERE'S A NEW FACE OF EVIL IN THE UNIVERSE. (AND YOU THOUGHT IT COULDN'T GET ANY UGLIER.) SHALIWSHIMPIKE 3. Side. In Shadows of the Empire, you'll encounter STAR WARS REQUIRES Enter Prince Xizor the newest villain of the Dark Side. In Shadows of the Empire, you'll encounter ACCELERATOR him along with a host of new Star Wars characters, vehicles and locations. With your 3D accelerator, it's a fast, sharp, colorful universe so detailed, in fact, you can see the trigger of a blaster. Enter the fray in 5 gameplay modes; ground shooter, space combat, speeder bike, jet pack and snow speeder all in an effort to protect Luke from the evil clutches of Xizor a face LUCAS nar of evil so dark, you'll only find him in the shadows. W W WIOCasaris.com O 1997 Lucasllim Lid. All Rights Reserved. Star Wars and the LucasArts logo are registered trademarks, and Shadows of the Empire is a trademark of Lucasfilm Lid.. used under authorization. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #121 "


"***** REVIEW  REBEL MOON RISING ACTION DIFFICULTY LEVEL Lunar Travels Liberate the Moon in Fenris Wolf's First-Person REBEL Moon Sequel by Loyd Case lighting effects, which add some nice cues to the game. The mix of weapons is There's an old aphorism that's often said about weddings, something old, something new. You need a bit of each for good luck. REBEL. MOON RISING is a 3D shooter that is also a mix of the old and the new-both in terms of gameplay and technology. chat, rather than having to hunt for keyboard commands something especially handy for Internet play, which the game also supports. Of course, the vocabulary that's actually put on the screen may vary a bit from whats spoken into the microphone-let's just say that colorful language translates into a more refined choice of phrases. Where REBEL. MOON RISING doesn't break new ground is in graphics. Although it does use 16-bit color, the style is still 2 1/2D,\" in the style of DUKE NUKEM 3D. The characters and some of the scenery are rendered as sprites with limited viewing angles, not as real 3D shapes. The textures look a bit better, though, and don't pixelate until you are right up against the wall. REBEL MOON RISING is that too much time is spent hunting for hidden switches or secret doors. Another potentially interesting part of the game that ends up being a bit flawed is oxygen management. Since you're on the moon or a space station for most of the mission, O, is a limited resource. Nearly every mission starts you out with a small amount of oxygen. Either you complete the mission very quickly, or you spend a lot of time THE STORY SO FAR REBEL MOON RISING is actually the second in a planned trilogy of games. The first game, REBEL MOON, was only available bundled in the Creative Labs 3D-Blaster line of graphics accelerators. The series covers the eventual revolution and secession of a lunar colony from Earth. Your character is a soldier in the Lunar Defense l'orce, taking on the blue suits of the United Nations. not to mention the real baddies from NDE (which is really Germany, reborn as a military power). REBEL MOON RISING HUNT THE WUMPUS REBEL. MOON RISING is conceived as a fairly difficult game-one for experienced players of 3D shooters. So, it's a bit surprising that the first several of missions are really training missions. Once you launch into the meat of the game (after mission four) the true nature of the game emerges. Once you get used to the relative darkness of the environment (the game takes place on a lunar colony and space station for most of the time), you begin to really appreciate the THE HYPE AND THE GLORY First, let's cover the technology issues so we can leave them behind and check out gameplay. REBEL MOON RISING makes use of Intel's new MMX technology. Fenris Wolf used MMX to gain a reaA sonable frame rate at high resolutions Price: $42.99 with 16-bit color. This let them create Minimum System dynamic lighting effects that could Requirements: MMX Pentium processor change on the fly and even move with 16MB RAM, 35MB hard the different characters. For example, a drive space, Windows moving orange glow might indicate a 95, 4x CD-ROM drive, nearby enemy jump trooper. 16-bit PCI video card, Windows 95-compatible Another new technology feature is sound card. voice recognition. One early Windows Multiplayer Support: 95 game, ACES OF THE DEEP, used Modem, direct connect speech recognition, but the implementa(2 players), LAN, tion was very limited. In REBEL. MOON Internet (2-8 players). Designer: Fenris Wolf RISING, the list of usable words is quite Publisher: GT large. While you can actually give orders Interactive to Al squad mates in a limited way, its New York, NY mostly used to communicate with (212) 726-6500 www.gtinteractive.com other players in multiplayer games. Reader Service #: 323 | You can speak into the microphone to Sometimes the regenerators are in plain view, and you just have to figure out how to reach them. Okay, I'll grant you that oxygen will be in scarce supply (particularly early on in the game). But as you become one of the elite LDF commandos, you'd think your commander would give you an O, recycling unit -especially since you've found a few by the later parts of the game. And having limited oxygen on a supposedly pressurized space station borders on the silly. Some of the level layouts are quite difficult, and they force you to test every wall and jump on every platform you can GALACTIC CIVIL WAR REBEL Moon Rising has some nice innovations in technology and gameplay, but also suffers from some repetition and a dated look. CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"The LDF Journal ACTION reach. It all gets old after awhile. This game harks back to adventure games that seem longer just because the puzzles are arbitrary and difficult, not because the game is really that much bigger For some quick cheats for REBEL MOON RISING, check out this month's CG Tips, where we list the codes to give you weapons, jump levels, and gain invulnerability, among other goodies. For a complete walkthrough of the game, visit Fenris Wolf's Web site at www.fenriswolf.com. When he asks for a donut MISSION PLAUSIBLE Where REBEL. MOON RISING does break new ground in 3D-action shooters is in mission design (as opposed to level design). There are a couple of missions in which you defend a location. You can either choose to run around frantically, trying to defend against multiple attackers as they teleport in, or you can find the switch that will bring in reinforcements. The reinforcements are about as dumb as the Al opponents, but they do help buffer the target against the opposing forces. BABY-SITTING Here we're escorting an alien baby, as laser blasts light up the environment. This is an example of the more creative mission design. Thic two best missions in the game are ones where you escort prisoners -in one case, alien babies -to a handoff point. The suspense gets pretty intense as you move with your charge and try to keep the enemies from picking them off. It's also somehow more personal than similar missions in flight sims. When one of the alien babies was killed, I felt a very real sense of outrage and emptied most of a magazine into the enemy that had shot it. Some of the other missions which involve searching for and destroying a specific set of objectives are more creative than the \"if it moves, shoot it\" philosophy in most 3D-action games. All of this takes place in the context of a relatively interesting story. It's too bad that Fenris Wolls budget didn't enable them to do some animated cut-scenes between some of the missions. Also, it would have been interesting on occasion to have squad mates along for the whole mission, much like in Bungies MARATHON series. SD THE DIVINE ENEMY Like most 3D shooters, RMR supports multiplayer play, either over a local area network (IPX or SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW CIRCLE READER SERVICE =286 G Police, Psypnosis and the Psygnosis logo are trademarks of Psypnosis, Ltd. 1997 Psygnosis, Ltd. All rights reserved. "


"Send a chain letter on your lunch hour HE Ntaw idrothee/ddddWitte Welt gemstone.net/go/cgw11 You are not alone Join the most popular game online. Day or night, you'll find thousands of other players eager to quest for treasure, romance, magic, monsters and adventure. Limitless as your imagination GemStone III is a vast, MUD-style game specifically designed to bring thousands of players together in a continuously evolving adventure. The world inside GemStone III is so rich in inventions and possibilities, your game may never end. All you have to do is begin. Play it right now Five minutes is all it takes to download the free software. Then the giant doors swing open into a fascinating fantasy world already alive, thriving and filled with new friends. Only $9.95 for a month of play. Try it now and play FREE for your first two weeks. BOE Www OAI CA MOSHI Flera Carbon S M Dragoro S Wind Me Maoni play 2 weeks for > \"h Silinder just arrived. FREE Tandrer just went wst. nell's Army. Forge) O od pieces of armor adorn the walls leather an one and metal on the facing wall. Scraps of leather and metal are littered across the floor, thickest near the You also see a large counter with the closeness of the farge press in arcand you. SON stuff en It. Also in the room: Cheals obvious PitStout. Mithun just arrived. Created by SMUTRONICS CIRCLE READER SERVICE 4250 CORPORATION  1997 by Simutronics Corp., all rights reserved. Simutronics and Gemstone are trademarks of Simutronics Corp. All rights reserved. "


"BE NOTI)V give it. WATCH MY BACK More clever gameplay includes the ability to call in reinforcements, as well as fight at the squad level in deathmatch. to him. TCP/IP). Internet TCP/IP, modem, or direct connect. The scenarios arc combat (deathmatchstyle), squad (team deathmatch), and capture the flag, In capture the flag, getting the flag back to your own base is worth 10 fragsbut to get credit, your own flag needs to be at your base as well. In both squad and capture-the-flag play, you can call for Al assistance (but only once, until all teams have done so), but Al kills don't count toward the team total. In an interesting twist, you can switch sides at any time, thus making new friends and new enemies in a single keystroke. Internet play has the usual latency problems, though not as bad as in some games. It's very easy to set up an Internet game-RMR will even run winipcfg (an IP configuration utility built into Windows 95) for you, which enables you to get your current IP address. MAKING THE GRADE REBEL MOON RISING is a reasonably good, entertaining game that uses new technology in interesting ways. While it's not outstanding, it has an interesting story and some highly creative missions. If you have an MMX system, it's certainly worth giving the shareware version a try-but remember, the first four missions aren't really the game. This game is almost worth having just for the escort missions. Multiplayer is nicely implemented, and while the sprite-based look is a little dated, it makes for some fun multiAPPEAL: 3D-action gamers player action. It's who want to see what MMX can just loo bad that really do. most of the time is PROS: Interesting back story; spent liunting several creative missions; good mulswitches and oxytiplayer action. gen recyclers; CONS: Some these artificial levels are frustrating hunts for puzzles add a jarswitches and O2 ring and frustrat supply; requires ing element to an MMX system; otherwise the graphics are a bit dated. solid game S.police SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW CIRCLE READER SERVICE #284 PSYGNOSIS G Police, Psygnosis and the Psyanosis logo are trademarks of Psyanosis, Lid. 1997 Psygnosis, Ltd. All rights reserved "


"DESIGNED FOR Intel MM EXTREME VASSAULT Pause for a breather... Supports Pentium and Pentium || Processors Fly a chopper that makes the AH-64D look like a broken blender.\" Gamespot On-line 66...with graphical details that puts Tomb Raider to shame.\" PC Gamer 6 Non-stop action are the words that best sum up this latest offering from Blue Byte.\" Computer & Net Player 66...a total kick to play, and looks better than anything like it now on the market.\" Computer Games Strategy Plus Download the demo at: http://www.bluebyte.com TEEN ...and it'll be the last breath you take! V Intense action game demanding quick reflexes and aggressive gameplay! Stunning real time 3D graphics that don't require any expensive 3D accelerator cards!  Spectacular transparent effects including holograms, explosions and laser barriers!  Easy-to-use controls allow you to jump right into the action! V Supports 3Dfx, Force Feedback joysticks, and the Kali Internet gaming network! V Six enormous above and below ground operation zones, complete with secret caves and tunnels! "


"WILL LEAVE YOU OVER $40,000 IN COOL STUFF. in the Strike the enemy hard and fast with a powerful 21st century attack helicopter! AVTREMELY COOL SWEEDOM sends 12/31/977 Sweepstakes en Hurry, Swee 1 GRAND PRIZE ENTRY IN EVERY GAME! Extremely Cool Falcon Northwest Mach V Computer System (Approx. retail value $5000) ) 11 Pound the alien invaders with a heavily armed, state-of-the-art battle tank! OMPE The COMPUTER SUPERSTORE MATGE 200 MHz Pentium Processor with MMX technology  32MB RAM 3.1 GIG Hard Drive 21\" Monitor  16X CD-ROM drive Oversized speakers with Dolby Surround Sound 1 FIRST PRIZE 5 SECOND PRIZES $2500 Shopping Spree $1,000 in Extremely at CompUSA Cool Cash 5 THIRD PRIZES 100 FOURTH PRIZES $500 Shopping Spree Thrustmaster at Electronics Boutique Millennium 3D Inceptor\" 250 FIFTH PRIZES 500 SIXTH PRIZES Extreme Assault\" Embroidered Flight Jacket Extreme Assault T-Shirt The battemely Cool Sweepstakes' Officis Rules Na Puchose Necessory 1. To Enter. Handipainit name, address & zip code on official entry form or use 325 poput & bandgrit the words. \"The Entremely Cool Sweepstakes with name, address & zip code. Include name & address of you fovente software retail stou. Tirst che entry pa envelope. Molto: \"The Extremely Cool Sweepstokus, PO Box 1011, Skokie, IL 60076-8011. Entries must be received by 12/31/97, sweepstakes and Entries become Blue Byte Softwarg, Inc. (Sponsor property, none wil be returned. Sponsor not responsible for lost/ote/mishanded mailllegible/domoged entries 2. Eligibility: Open only to US residents 16 years or older Sponsor's employees, its affiliates, distrutors, sales representatives, advertising promotion/publicity gencies, judging organization ond immediate fornicios not eligible. Void where prohibited by low. Al federd/stol/lxcellows/regulations cool... 3. Prizes: 1 Grand Felton Northwest Mach Y Computer System ARV $5000.1 First $2500 Shopping Spece of CompUSA ARV $2500, 5 Second: S1000 Cash. 5 Thed: 5500 Shopping Sprees of Electronics Boutique ARV $500 e 100 Fourtho: ThrustMaster Millennium 3D Inceptor Joysticks ARY $100 ca. 250 Fifth: Extreme Assoul Embroidered Flight Jackets ARV S55 eo. So0 South: Externa Assoult Tshuts ARV $10 eo. Totol price value: $43,750. Shopping Sprues worded os Gift Certificates. Flight Jackets & Ishirts awarded only in Mult Large size 4. Drawing Wintes Selected in random drawing on or about 1/19/98 by GIN & Associates, independent judging organization, whose decisions are final in all moters relating to the sweepstakes. Winning odds depend on tool tumber of entries received Potential winners must respond to required Affidavit of Elgbility/Prize Acceptance Form(s) within 21 days of ottempted delivery of some. No compliance within this period will result in disqualification and on alternate will be selected Winnes notified by mal by 2/23/98. Prire notification returned undeliverable to Sponsor will result in word to alternate prize is won by minot, prize may be awarded to parent of legal guardian. No prize substitution of fronster permitted, unless prize a generally unavoid of sweepstokes' end, when Sponsor's choice of an equal or grecter volued prue w be substd. Al federal/50 /locol foxes induding sales taxes in warding shopping Spees plus transportation 10/from Spree locations de winners' sole responsibility Prize acceptance constitutes permission to use winner's come and/orkeness for overtising/tode purposes without further compensation, unless prohibited by low and releases Sponsor (and others listed in 2) from any and of bability, coins/actions of any kind to persons and proporty which may be sustained with receipt, ownership, or use of poves. 5. Winners List for major prize winness list, send SAS s lope ofte 1/19/98 10 \"Cool Weers,\" PO Box 1245 Dept. A Skokie, IL 60076-8245. Sponsor Blue Byte Software, Inc. Schomburg, IL 60173. Blue Byte Software, Inc. 870 E Higgins Rood, Ste. 143. Schaumburg, IL 60173 Phone (800) 933-2983  Fax (847) 995-9956 http://www.bluebyte.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #175 Battle up to three of your friends in the unique multi-player levels! EXTREME ASSAULT IS AVAILABLE NOW! For more information call (800) 933-2983 Please mention source code SWPCGW997  1997 Blue Byte Software: Al rights reserved 'Externe Assault\" is a trademark of Blue Byte Software. MAX and the MWMX Logo are trademarks of Intel Corporation. All other company and product comes used in this publication are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective companies, Bute "


"OUTLAWS. A GAME OF THE OLD WEST. WHEN GUN CONTROL a mcm 989 NN 1994 Cara The gameplay's packed with strategy, puzzles, and plenty of gun fighting action. First person shooter action lets you set your sights and pull the trigger. After you gun down the last outlaw, you'll ride off triumphantly into the sunset. "


"MEANT LOADING QUICKLY AND SHOOTING STRAIGHT. OUTARS Get ready for the good, the bad, and the even worse. As Marshall James Anderson, you'll face a horde of ornery, gun-slinging outlaws. You'll shoot your way through a twisted plot of greed and revenge. You'll arm yourself with firearms, as well as your wits. You'll fight alone, or engage in multi-player gameplay over modem, A LAN or Internet. So go ahead, and make your day. TEEN LUCAS ZONE Arts play it on zone.com http://www.lucasarts.com 1997 Lucists Erbertairment Company. All rights reserved Outlaws is a trademark of Listasaris Entertainment Company Tho LucasArts logo is a tejstred trademark of Licas Fim Lu used under a hormation. The radinosioon is a tradererk of the reactive Dental Software Association CIRCLE READER SERVICE #119 "


"*** REVIEW . NORSE BY NORSEWEST ACTION DIFFICULTY LEVEL Lost in 2D The Lost Vikings Return in Interplay's 2D-Action Platform Sequel by Kelly Rickards n a market that embraces all things 3D-especially action games it is refreshing to see a solid 2D title like NORSE BY NORSEWEST. In a nutshell, NBN (the sequel to the platform game THE LOST VIKINCS) is a 2D, sidescrolling action/puzzle game. You play three bumbling Vikings who are set adrift in time and must find the evil Tomator's time-travel machine to get back home. UNDER FIRE This falling lava (which Olaf has to block so the others can pass) is the first easy puzzle you encounter. The latter ones get exponentially harder. SCANDINAVIAN TROIKA Each Viking has specific abilities and attributes that the gamer must master in order to complete each level. Eric the Swift is the fastest-moving character, and he is the only one who can swim, so you need to use him to activate underwater switches and grab sunken items. Eric is also the only Viking who can jump. Baleog the lierce has a sword and, more importantly, an extending bionic arm, which he can use for swinging (PrIFALL HARRY-style), attacking faraway enemies, or grabbing out-of-reach items. Olaf the Stout is useful for holding enemies at bay with his shield. He also has the abilily to, alem, fart to destroy unstable floors or to give him an extra lift while gliding. In the later levels, the gamer can also control two additional characters, lang the Werewolf and Scorch the firebreathing Dragon. | NORSE BY NORSEWEST is basically one of those \"items\" games. Get all the items (keys, switches, power-ups) and you progress to the next level. If you miss an item, you won't advance to the next level. Also, you cannot complete the level if any of your Vikings die. shorter, more predictable levels but, as you progress, the puzzles become increasingly difficult, with later levels introducing twists to previous puzzles or, in some cases, new puzzle clements entirely The big problem with the game is that you can control only one Viking at a time and you sometimes must trade items between Vikings, which in effect, pauses the gameplay. While this presents less of a problem in the carlier levels, later in the game some of the puzzles and items are so spread out that it really becomes \"stop and go\" gameplay. At times, it seems as if you spend a third of your time switching between Vikings, another third moving your Vikings across the level one at a time, and only one third of the time actually playing the game. To be fair, this doesn't happen all the time, and it's a relatively minor gripe. Overall, NORSE BY NORSEWEST is a well-designed game. The character animation is smooth as silk, the artwork is easy on the cyes, and the gameplay is challenging, with brain-busting puzzles. For those who are looking for a unique and fun 2D-action game that massages the brain and doesn't take itself seriously, NORSE BY NORSEWEST is it. If you're looking for a game with good replay value, however, look elsewhere. Price: $39.95 Minimum System Requirements: 486/100 for DOS play, Pentium 60 for Win95 play, 16MB RAM, 4MB hard drive space, Windows 95 or DOS 5.0, 2x CD-ROM drive, SVGA graphics, 100-percent Microsoftcompatible mouse. Sound Blaster-compatible sound card. Multiplayer Support: Hotseat (2 players) Designer: Silicon & Synapses Inc. Publisher: Interplay Irvine, CA (714) 553-6678 www.interplay.com Reader Service #: 325 LOST VIKINGS II NORSE is the sequel to Interplay's 16-bit platformer, LOST VIKINGS. It has nice graphics, good 2D gameplay, and the Lost VIKINGS humor. APPEAL: Action fans looking for a smart and fun 2D platform-game. PROS: Good graphics and animation; challenging puzzles; fun 2D gameplay. CONS: TOO much switching between Vikings in later levels; gameplay is a bit too linear; some puzzles are awkward. ACTION OR ADVENTURE? I look at NORSE BY NORSEWEST as an action game with environmental puzzles. It's the way each level is designed and how the items are placed that give the game its puzzle element. The game starts out with CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"3-D ULTRA MINIGOLF REVIEW * * Par-tee Time DIFFICULTY LEVEL P ACTION Sierra's Mini Golf Is a Fun-Filled Frolic for the Whole Family by Charlotte Panther DCORE Ciabat MINIGOLF fyou're looking for an enticing whole host of new surway to lure your Luddite father or prises. Each hole has your technophobic granny into background music playing computer games, 3-D that can be toggled on ULTRA MINIGOLF could well be and off, along with the way to win them over. Sierra's crazy sound effects, simple, yet captivating. electronic animation, and great version of the popular pastime commentary (check (which translates surprisingly well out the Valley Girl in to the PC), combines traditional Neptunes Kingdom, elements of mini golf with the wacky who chides, \"Hey blue, originality and high jinx we've come to get a clue\") that made expect from the 3-D ULTRA series. the other 3-D ULTRA titles hits. DAILY GRIND While Mr. Dino labors away, you must TEE TIME On your quest to hit shoot the ball through the hollow log. The game is made up of two nine a hole-in-one, you'll hole courses which can be played sepa joumey from the North Pole to the junA COURSE TOO SHORT rately or together as an eighteen-hole gle; from Fairy Land to the Jurassic age. While the game offers two skill levels in course. Or, if you're in a real hurry, you Frogs and bats will carry your ball toward the form of putting options-Easy Putt, can play just one hole at a time. the hole, while other creatures will throw which requires just a click of the mouse to MINIGOLF offers three styles of game it back to your starting point. You'll meet get the ball rolling, and \"True Putt, which play. Normal Minigolf follows the same penguins, polar bears, even the allows you to control the force and angle of basic premise as the outdoor version Abominable Snowman on paths laced the putt with your mouse--expcrienced hit the ball in the hole, and do it under with obstacles. Lasers inside The Rocket gamers will not find MINIGOLF too diffipar. Hole-By-Hole is a do-or-die competwill zap your ball to dust. And beware: cult to master. It took me less than an hour itive round, for 2-4 players, in which the Flowing rivers of water and lava cost to complete the whole course the first time first person to sink the ball wins the penalty points. around, and while the challenge lies in point, regardless of par. The final option On the downside, although all this replaying the game to lower your par, the Race Play, allows you (and up to three flotsam and jetsam definitely adds to novelty of the holes soon wears thin. competitors) to play against the clock the game, it can, at times, prove overly the game, it can, at times, prove overly Though not as challenging as the carlier The MINIGOLF mixes a few familiar holes frustrating. More than once, my ball 3-D ULTRA titles, (3-DULMA PINBALL and (The Windmill, The Lighthouse) with a got stuck beneath a pile of stones in CREEPNICHT), MINIGOLF is nonetlxless a Jungle Ruins. Unfor well thought-out, original, entertaining tunately, unlike in real game that will appeal to more than just the mini golf, in which you mini-golf fanatic. can use your club to poke the ball out of a APPEAL: Families who want a game that will appeal to everyone; tight spot, the only solunewbies and veteran gamers looking tion here is to restart for desktop distraction. the hole. PROS: Easy to pick up; mainAnother disappoint tains humor and personality of the ment was the absence 3-D ULTRA line; great graphics and of Internet, modem, animation. Charlotte and LAN play. While >CONS: Holes hot-sealing works well are too easy and too few; low the game seems like it GK ARCHAEOLOGIST WANTED It may look easy, but replayability; no would be an ideal candigging through the rubble to reach this hole is Internet, modem, didate for these other or LAN play. quite a challenge. multiplayer options. well to Price: $44.95 Minimum System Requirements: 486DX2/66 (Pentium recommended), 8MB RAM (16MB recommended). 2x CD-ROM (4x recommended), 12MB hard disk space, 30MB swap file for small install, Windows 3.1 or higher, 640x480 graphics with 256 colors Sound Blaster 16 or 100percent compatible, Microsoft-compatible mouse. Multiplayer Support: Hotseat (1-4 players) Designer: Dynamix Publisher: Sierra On-Line Bellevue, WA (800) 757-7707 www.sierra.com Reader Service #: 326 SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"***** REVIEW . DEATHMATCH MAKER ACTION DIFFICULTY LEVEL r Maps R Us DEATHMATCH MAKER Makes QUAKE Level Design Easier Than Shooting Fish in a Barrel by V. Long single-player levels as easily as it does multi-player, and levels created with it will also work with GLQUAKE. ny time id Software, the creator of QUAKE, does something whether it be an announcement or a release-gamers sit up and take notice. So Virtus Corporation, best known for its 3D-CAD tools, was thrust into the spotlight when id gave the nod for Virtus' DEATHMATCH MAKER to be the first authorized QUAKE level cditor. Indeed, what makes DEATTIMATCH MAKER stand out from the other level editing programs is its relative case of use. American McGee, an id level designer, remarked, \"This (program) makes QUAKE editing available to everyone.\" modify it as you please. Veterans will appreciate the various time and effortsaving capabilities, such as hulling (for creating hollow objects like rooms, shafts, and corridors), layering (for controlling the complexity of the displayed objects), and vertex manipulation (for generating a convex object of any size or shape by clicking and connecting points in space). The QBSP, LICHT, and VIS utilities (required for compiling, lighting, and visually optimizing your creations into bona fide QUAKE levels) are fully integrated into DEATHMATCH MAKER. DEATHMATCH MAKER can generate 3D IS 3D Making sense of 2D maps on a 2D computer monitor à la DOOM or DUKE NUKEM is fairly easy for most people. However, everything gets complicated extremely quickly when you try depicting and manipulating 3D objects and spaces on that flat 2D display. So even the best tools won't do the trick unless there's some guidance to help the firsttimer up the steep part of the 3Ddesign learning curve. More Tools twa DEATHMATCH MAKER WIRE THE DEVIL'S TOOLBOX The main interface consists of four parts: tabs for the galleries and textures, an cnlargement of the selected item or texture, the design window (where the actual editing takes place), and the walk window (where you can actually walk through the level in realtime as you are constructing it). DEATHMATCH MAKER includes a variety of prefabricated templates Price: $29.95 for rooms, hallways, and sloping Minimum System walkways under the gallery tab. The Requirements: Pentium gallery tab also includes other readyprocessor, 8MB RAM (16MB made objects, such as bad guys. RAM recommended), 40MB hard disk space, Windows guns and ammo, lights, slipgates, 95, SVGA graphics, CD-ROM power-ups, and more. Simply drag drive, registered version of and drop the selected rooms and QUAKE (additional 80MB objects to the design window, where hard-disk space), mouse. you can manipulate them to your Multiplayer Support: n/a Designer: Virtus Corporation liearts content. It doesn't get much Publisher: Macmillan Digital easier than this. Publishing USA To give novices a flying start on Indianapolis, IN level design, DEATHMATCH MAKER (800) 716-0044 www.deathmatchmaker.com also includes templates for ten Reader Service #: 327 | entire levels just pick one and ! The success of almost any project depends heavily on the tools used, When it comes to level editing, experienced enthusiasts each have their own preferences, and rabidly stand by their choices. Many of the current shareware and freeware editors-like BSP, GED, QUATK, Stoneless, Thred, and Worldcraft (see ta February 1997, CGW, p.160)—are quite powerful, but suit different styles. Fortunately, it won't cost you $29.95 to find out whether DEATHMATCH MAKER IS for you. Test-drive it for free by downloading the demo version from www.deathmatchmaker.com EDITING MADE EASY DEATHMATCH MAKER is perfect for easy level editing; it has an intuitive drag-and-drop interface, and an info-packed manual. CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"The Nexus is calling a madman. Only you can stop him. : STERTREK\". GENERATIONSThe Star Trek universe has just exploded into intense 3-D action! Assume the roles of the Star Trek: The Next Generation crew in a pulse-pounding race to defeat the obsessed scientist Soran before he destroys millions of innocent beings. Explore 12 mind-blowing Star Trek 3-D worlds. Imm featuring the voices of the movie cast! 30.1 SARIES Pilot the Enterprise in over 20 blistering space combat scenarios. Plot your strategy to stop Soran's scheme using Stellar Cartography, STARTER GENERATIONS AND 1997 Paramount Pictures. ALL NIGHTS RESERTED, STAR TRER and Related Marks are trademarks of Paramount Pictures. MicroProie is an authorized user. Underlying computer code and manual 1997 Microprose Software, Inc. MICROPROSE is a registered trademark of MicroProse Software, Inc. Mother trademarks are the property of their respective holders. Call 1-800-771377 for Game Larisz information. MICROPROSE Available on Windows 95 Visit your local retailer or call 24 hours 1-800-695-GAME (U.S. and Canada) www.microprose.com R CIRCLE READER SERVICE #193 "


"REVIEW . DEATHMATCH MAKER ACTION Fortunately, Virtus pm vidoe an excellent manual, BEFORE... On the top you'll see which includes thorough the editing environment, with explanations of everything your gallery, design window, you'll need to know to get and walk window, where a spiral started with confidence. The staircase is being built. manual shows you how to plan a level shares tips inicks and describes all functions tools, menus, and interfaces in DEATHMATCH MAKER. It also includes a tutorial that will have you building your first functional level within 30 minutes. As easy as DEATHMATCH MAKER is to use, keep in mind placing the players start that the design and implementation of position partially or totallarge, richly detailed environments likely inside a solid object, or the kind you find in QUAKE or its miscompletely forgetting to sion packs requires a lot of time and include the player start skill(which only comes with even position at all. ...AND AFTER On the bottom is the finished product. more time) No matter how easy any level editor ALL'S NOT WELL dard object-creation tools. I found only makes the design process, so far, none can Although DEATTIMATCH MAKER protwo object-creation tools: one for recsave you from the two common mistakes vides extensive capabilities for maniptangular objects, and the other for conthat are not entirely exclusive to newbies: ulating objects, it could use more stanvex, irregularly shaped objects. DEATHMATCH MAKER requires a lot of hard-drive real estate for the full installation, primarily because Virtus had to include its own textures. Also, unless you have a lot of RAM, make sure you have enough swap space on your Multimedia Products & Accessories drive left after the installation or DEATHMATCH MAKER might refuse to run. So the next time you hunger for $35.00 some mayhem in the hallways of OFF MSRP your school or office, try your hand at recreating those killzones with DEATHMATCH MAKER. Maybe it'll help you work off some steam before you do some real damage SOUND SPEAKERS APPEAL: Novice and veteran level designers looking for a fast, easy Quake level editor. $30.00 PROS: Intuitive drag and drop OFF MSRP interface; prefabricated levels, objects, and textures; excellent manual. CONS: Hard-disk hog; could use more standard objectcreation options. Looking for GREAT DEALS in Cyberspace? MPACT COTO71.. Discover the savings and convenience of ordering direct at waw.mia ctdirect.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #045 "


"JE SPORTS abc THISINT A CAMERA ROBINSIY «GOFISH\" IS A GAME. This is ABC's Monday Night Football '98 CD-ROM game, ra realistic simulation of what it feels like to suit up and walk onto the field with the strains of Hank Williams Jr. stinging in your ears. (And let's face it, it's the only way you'll ever be on Monday Night Football, pal.) It's crammed with stats, strategy and 36 years of ABC Sports experience. The only things missing are the commercials. Experience the experience of ABC's Monday Night Football '98. 09 NIGHT abo CUBA www.abcinteractive.com EMELY LIVE: abcis INTER Developed for Windows 95 01997 OT Sports. L.L.C. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. All trademarks are owned by their respective companios. Ollicially licensed product of Players Inc. The Players Inc logo is a trademark of the NFL Players. NFL leam names, logos, helmet designs and uniforma no registered trademarks of the toam Indiculed. NFL and the NFL shield drevegistered trademarks of the NFL 1996 NFLP. INTER 2 ACTIVE PLAYERS Y CIRCLE READER SERVICE 1244 "


"*** * REVIEW  TRIPLE PLAY 98 Or Crowd Pleaser DIFFICULTY LEVEL TRIPLE PLAY 98 Ups the Ante for Arcade Play, But Realism Still Strikes Out by Jim Gindin PITCH OUT Don't let yourself get behind in the count--you'll pay with either a walk or a higher ERA. hen it comes to knowing the marketplace, EA Sports is tough to beat Over the last few years, the folks in San Mateo, Calif., have compiled a series of actionoriented sports games that have dazzled the eyes and dominated the charts. Last years TRIPLE PLAY 97 was no exception, and easily ranked as the best of the arcade-style baseball games. Now, in maybe the most competitive season ever, EA is attempt ing to hold onto the crown with a sequel. TRIPLE PLAY 98 is a true EA sports game. Attention to visual detail is the EA hallmark, and this game pays attention. Players fill one-fourth of the screen in some camera angles, and, as EA leads the trend toward polygon-based figures, these players are beautifully detailed. Even at lower resolutions, you can read uniform numbers and the players' names across their backs. You can modify player height and weight, and even choose from two different styles of goatee. Touches like having infielders throw underhand when they're within a few feet of their target lend a nice quality of visual realism. EA provides each major-league ballpark in great detail, including the Dome in Tampa Bay and the soon-to-beconstructed retractable-roof stadium in Arizona. You can play from several camera heights, either facing the pitcher or the batter. You can choose to play the game from a fielders perspective as well. EA has built a flexible stadium world and gives you many ways to use it. Price: $54.95 Minimum System Requirements: P90 Windows 95,16MB RAM, high-color capable 1MB PCI video card with DirectDraw support, 20MB hard drive space, 4x CD-ROM drive, mouse, keyboard, sound card with DirectX support; supports Gravis gamepads and other joysticks. Multiplayer Support: Modem, serial link (2-4 players on 2 computers, 1 CD per computer), Hotseat (2-4 players), LAN (2-4 players on 2 computers, 1 CD per computer) Designer/Publisher: EA Sports San Mateo, CA (800) 245-4525 www.easports.com Reader Service #: 328 pitching, and pitchers are rated from 50-99 in one or more of eight available pitches. Unlike in many other games, these pitches are realistically depicted, even though the ratings don't translate well into performance. After selecting a pitch, you choose the general location and whether you want the pitch aimed inside or outside the strike zone. After throwing the pitch, you can guide it toward the plate. Obviously, you can't do this in real life, but this is becoming the norm for arcade baseball, and it gives you more of a feeling that you're affecting the result. Pitching success seems almost random, except that throwing pitches down the middle of the plate without alteration is almost always rewarded with a stinging line drive straight into the outfield. I've found that mixing up pitches and keeping them down leads to lower scores. But getting bchind in the count often leads to troubleespecially since I didn't throw a called strike even once, and most pitches not thrown to the center of the plate will be called balls. On the field, you can choose to play with dark circles on the ground marking the point whicre the ball will hit. If you can field without them, you're a far better arcade ballplayer than I'll ever be. The camera angles don't provide the full trajectory of a hit ball, especially when it's launched near the foul lines. I've found fielding with the right or left fielder to be quite challenging, and doing anything with the first or third basemen downright impossible. The viewpoints don't give you enough time or control over the infielders in ground ball situations, making anything but a grounder right at the highlighted fielder an exercise in frustration. It's also too easy to throw to the wrong base, and while the infielders do a good job covering for overthrows, liltle things like the pitcher covering first base on a ground ball to the right side aren't implemented properly. There's also no infield fly rule. ON THE FIELD Like most EA games, TRIPLE PLAY IS geared for use with a four-button gamepad. The game centers around BAT MAN EA decided to continue its practice of implementing hitting without forcing the batter to choose where to swing the CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"abc SPORTS THIS ISN'T A GAME. NE 15 PAT-A-CAKE ISA GAME RACING TEAM This is ABC Sports Indy Racing: Road to the Indianapolis 500, CD-ROM game, a realistic simulation of what it feels like to drive a million-dollar car at 220 miles an hour. It's full of twists, turns and split-second life-or-death decisions, It's 36 years worth of ABC Sports experience stuffed into a CD-ROM.\"You wanna play? Play marbles, You wanna know what it feels like to do Indy? Do this. ROAD 10 THE INDIANAPOLIS 500 www.abclnteractive.com EXTREMELY LIVE: abc o Developed for Windows 95 INTER ACTIVE 01997 OT Sports, LLC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. All trademarks are owned by their respective companies. Indianapolis 500, Indy 500, Indy and the Indy Racing League logos are registered trademarks of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway Corporation, used under license from IMS Properties. Drivers' names, likenesses and images are the property of each driver used under license trom IMS Properties. Team names and race car likenesses are the property of each rospective team'owner, used under license from IMS Properties. CIRCLE.READER SERVICE #245 CURÇLE.READER SERVICE 4245 "


"REVIEW  TRIPLE PLAY 98 SPORTS cu bat. Until truc 3D graphics starts, while all the relievers exist, I think this is an excelhave horrendous records. lent decision. Hitting in There's always something hapTRIPLE PLAY 98 is an exerpening in the ninth inning, so cise in timing. If you time even the best closers have your swing properly, and the ERAs near 5,00. Norm ball is in the strike zone, you Charlton, who is kind of in the will make contact with the middle among relievers, posted ball. The better the timing, a 10.44 ERA despite 29 saves in the farther it travels. You 83 appearances. Each team has can choose one of three a middle reliever who has buttons to start the swing, 25-35 decisions, mostly losses, One hits normally, one hits and a lot of innings pitched. for power (while sacrificing This is not a game for those quality of contact), and one interested in statistical accurabunts. You can also choose BATTER UP A successful batting average in TRIPLE PLAY is all a cy. Nor is it for those interested the direction of contact and matter of timing. Get it just right, and you'll have a Ken Griffey in in-game strategy. When playwhether you're trying for a Jr. kind of year. ing single games against the fly ball, line drive, or ground computer, you can often ball by moving the directional controller. The garne also provides Arizona and change only the computer team's roster, In real baseball, you'd be penalized for Tampa Bay for individual game play. not your own. TRIPLE PLAY 98 doesn't trying to pull an outside fastball, but, like These teams will even hold an expansion understand how to assign a fielder's the pitching aftereffects, it helps the draft from the frec-agent pool. The pool choice, so you'll see lots of infield hits arcade feel of the game. is made up of relievers and utility players scored as outs. The game saves league Baserunning is not well designed, who are barely holding on to majorstatistics, but only creates leader lists for because the outfielders all have Raul league jobs, however, which makes these the 1996 real-life statistics in its database, Mondesi cannonlike arms, and your only two teams unusually bad. They can perso finding league leaders in your own real control is to push up or down on the form adequately in arcade mode, if you leagues is next to impossible. game pad. Sometimes all the runners don't mind the computer Al switching respond, and sometimes they don't. You pitchers every few pitches because of the BOX SCORE often end up with two base runners on strangely implemented fatigue factor. All in all, TRIPLE PLAY 98s graphics the same base. Needless to say, that Commentary comes from sessions and gameplay should keep arcade fans doesn't help your offensive game. You with Jim Flughson and Buck Martinez. happy, although some of the gameplay also have to choose to slide and time it It's the requisite baseball cliché talk, with quirks may cause frustration. If you're properly, making it a little more difficult some nice pre-game noles on the home interested in simulating baseball seasons, to steal bases or to take an extra base. team starting pitcher. But the comments however, the lack of a reasonable statisare repetitive and random. For instance, tics compiler and the problems with STRIKE OUT you can slap a single on the first pitch managing lineups make TRIPLE PLAY With all the detail put into gameplay, and hear, \"He really worked the count to very difficult to recommend, even to the rest of TRIPLE PLAY 98 suffers. You can get the pitch he wanted,\" as a reward. those of you least interested in the nummanage a league of sorts, but it's very diffiSeason play is possible, although it bers. This is a real step backward even cult to add or trade players. You can crctakes TRIPLE PLAY 98 about two hours from last year's version. And, of course, ate 25 of your own players, but you can't to simulate a full season. The numbers there's still the Home Run Derby, where really translate the ratings you're asked to aren't worth the wait, as there's little difyou can set the opposing pitcher to use a enter into any sort of perspective. ferentiation among players. While Ken \"tomado-style\" delivery. Now that's Griffey Jr. can liit 50 home runs, tcamknowing the marketplace. Just The Facts mates Rich Amaral and Joey Cora, who have 22 home runs between them APPEAL: Baseball enthusiasts who like to play (rather than manTRIPLE PLAY 98 has a running series of baseball trivia in a combined 16 seasons of big-league age) the game. facts scrolling through all game menus, which, in theory, experience, cach reached the 30s in a PROS: Crisp, polygon-based playis a nice touch. I found mistakes, however, in at least single season. Most teams end up with ers; attention to visual detail; enterseven of these facts, including one reference to Reggie about 300 home runs, well above the taining arcade action. Jackson as the only man to hit three home runs in a major-league record, during the course CONS: As staWorld Series game (Babe Ruth's career is not that hard of a season. Backup players are hardly tistically accuto research, if you're going to check that fact) and ever used, many going the entire sca rate as a politianother reference that says the Florida Marlins began son without playing. cian behind in the polls; diffiplay in 1991, a year before they even participated in their Pitching is even stranger, with each cult, if not expansion draft. This game's graphics are awesome—it's team assigned an unchanging four-man impossible, to too bad they didn't have a better fact-checker. rotation. The starters universally have handle league records like 15-0 and 17-2 in their 40 simulation. RATED CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"abc THIS ISN'T A GAME. UMU WWW . MMUM \"HOPSCOTCH\" IS AGAME. abc SPORTS PROM come serialistide me COLLEGE ha presentation FOOTBAL This is ABC Sports College Football: Heroes of the Gridiron CD-ROM game, a realistic simulation of what it feels like to go head-to-helmet against the best players to ever attend the school of hard knocks. It's not some plaything, it's the real thing. It's what happens when you cram entire team rosters, cheerleaders, mascots, rabid fans and 36 years of ABC Sports experience into a little plastic disc. What happens? You wind up with Dan Marino and Tony Dorsett playing for Pitt against Notre Dame's Paul Hornung and Rocket Ismail. Awesome, huh? Awesome, then some. www.abcinteractive.com EXTREMELY LIVE: abc 10 A UCUS HEROES Developed for Windows 95 PLATERS: OF THE GRIDIRON CIRCLE READER SERVICE #249 01997 OT Sports. L.L.C. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. All trademarks are owned by their respective companies. Officially licensed product of Players Inc. The Players Inc logo is a trademark of the NFL Players. The Officially Licensed Collegiate Products labol is the exclusive property of The Collegiate Licensing Company. The \"Collegiate Licensed Product labelis the property of the Independent Labeling Group. All names, logos, and mascots associated with the universities are the exclusive property of their respective universities. INTER ACTIVE "


"***** REVIEW FRONT PAGE SPORTS: GOLF SPORTS DIFFICULTY LEVEL Let's Swing In a Great Rookie Effort, Sierra's FPS: GOLF Debuts Near the Top of the Leaderboard onal coll by Scott A. May ot long after Sierra christened its FRONT PAGE SPORTS line, golf was supposedly near the top of the wish list for future titles. Several years down the road, it's finally happened. Fortunately, the resulting package turns out to have been worth the wait. of its competition, the game uses polyg. onal golfers instead of video-captured images. Though they are less lifelike, the payoff comes with faster animation and a much wider range of motions (and emotions). The game looks great in standard SVGA-graphics resolution (640x480, 256 colors), but is downright stunning when bumped to 1024x768 and 64K color depth. to 64 players can compete in a single tournament). Unusual options in player setup include variable scaling of shot distance and ball direction. This is not so much a cheat as a technique for helping beginners to improve their game. Another terrific option lets computercontrolled players actually learn from every stroke, ensuring tough competition for even the hardiest pro. Scott Scott Bale NICE VIEW, ROUGH LIE Here's a good example of FPS: GOLF's superb mix of graphic styles and 3D visual effects. FORM FACTOR An intuitive interface offers precision adjustments of stance and club loft. PENKISES GOLF The driving force behind FPS: GOLF is Vance Cook, who is best known for his work on Access Software's WORLD CLASS LEADERBOARD and LINKS series. Price: $54.95 Cook's love of golf gives this simulation a Minimum System distinct personality, and permeates its Requirements: Pentium 60 (P90 recommended), and Windows 95, 16MB RAM ball flight dynamics. There's a unique (32MB recommended). tactile quality to gameplay that's readily SVGA graphics, 25MB apparent when you connect club to ball. hard drive space (65MB In a word: realism. recommended), 2x CDROM (4x recommended), mouse: Win 95-compatiTHE HOLE TRUTH ble sound card. Modem, The game ships with two professionLAN, or ISP connection al 18-hole courses: the challenging Pete needed for multiplayer Dyc Golf Club and Hawaiis scenic games Multiplayer Support: hotPrince Course. So far, add-on courses seat (1-4 players, 1 CD include Coeur d'Alene and Black per player), modem (2 Diamond Ranch. It also offers 12 types players, 1 CD per player). of playthe most of any golf sim LAN (1-8 players, 1 CD per player), Internet (1-64 yet including team variations of players. 1 CD per player). medal, match, Stableford, skins, Designer: Vance Cook scramble, and best ball. Publisher: Sierra On-Line Graphics are photorealistic, and utiBellevue, WA (800) 757-7707 lize a combination of digitized bitmaps, www.sierra.com 3D-rendered objects, and textureReader Service #: 329 | mapped polygonal terrain. Unlike most 'The game's biggest innovation is a new style of swing mechanics dubbed TrueSwing. Using the mouse as a virtual club, True Swing offers players real-time interactive control of backswing, power, and ball contact. Simply move the mouse backward to raise the club, and forward to strike. This technique feels natural and is easy to pick up, but like the real thing, it takes practice to master subtleties such as fades, draws, and spin (which is accomplished with sideways motion at the end of your swing). \"To be fair, Maxis beat Sierra to the punch with its Mouse Swing in SIMGOLF But it was still a latent approach to interactivity, with several technical drawbacks. Put through a grueling 72-hole marathon, True Swing proves a rousing success, delivering tangible, hands-on control. Diehard mouseclickers take heart TrucSwing can be switched off in favor of the traditional triple-twitch swing meter. Multiplayer modes include modemto-modem, LAN, and Internet gaming (via Sierra's free online service, where up HOT LINKS Whats missing? Beyond a course architect-granted, Accolades JACK NICKLAUS 4 has that feature sewn uptheres little fault to be found with FPS: GOLE If I had to be picky, the following would be the game's biggest fault: Balls are nearly impossible to visually track following a hit. Sure, theres a ball-tracer option, and a drive window view, but a more dynamic ball tracker, similar to that in Interplays VR GOLF, is sorely needed. But overall, Sierras first golf sim is a winner, with key features like 'TheSwing elevating it above the fray in an increasingly crowded genre. APPEAL: Golf nuts of all skill levels. PROS: Superb graphics and intuitive interface; TrueSwing is the best alternative yet to traditional swing meter; multiplayer options wellimplemented. >CONS: No course editor; balls can be difficult to track. RATE 218 CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"KDO abc !! ODO SPORTS PAR STOP PLAYING BY YOURSELF PLAY HEAD-TO-HEAD ON THE INTERNET ab NIGHT FOO ZRALL 96 ANDY RAGING Obc SPORTS COLLEGE FOOTBALL ROAD MINDIANAPOLIS 500 HEROES abc SPORTS abc SPORTS ob SPORTS INTERNET CHAMPIONSHIPS WIN $$10,000 DETAILS IN EVERY GAME !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! H 3 GREAT GAMES! 3 WAYS TO WIN! Now you can play ABC Interactive's extremely live sports CD-ROM games in a live competition on the Internet. It's the Quest for the Best Internet Championships, Huddle up with thousands of sports sim players from across the country and play head-to-head sports sims in real time. Here's how to play: Purchase any or all three games: ABC's Monday Night Football '98)\" ABC Sports Indy Racing or ABC Sports College Football.\" Register at www.abcinteractive.com Compete in qualification rounds. Advance to the finals and compete for the $10,000 grand prize for each title, 2 Finalists in each competition are flown to the ultimate on-site location: ABC's Monday Night Football '98 at Super Bowl XXXII in San Diego, ABC Sports Indy Racing at the Indy 200\"at Walt Disney World or ABC Sports College Football at The Rose Bowl in Pasadena. 10 22 . !walinimum So pick up ABC Interactive's CD-ROM games and practice, practice, practice. Because this isn't a game, it's a competition. If you're not ready to compete, stay home and play something less challenging. Jacks, anyone? EXTREMELY LIVE: Competition vold in AK. OR. MD. ND. VT and PR and where prohibited by law. See ABC's Monday Night Football '98. ABC Sports College Football and ABC Sports Indy Racing CD-ROM games for details. Contest subject to full rules on-line at www.abcinteractive.com or by sending a sell-addressed, stamped #10 envelope to: QUEST FOR THE BEST RULES REQUEST. P.O. Box 7981. Melville, NY 11775-7981 Qualification for ABC's Monday Night Football 198 ends 12/V97, ABC Sports College Football ends 1122/97 ABC Sports Indy Racing ends 12/6/97. U.S. residents 18 or older only. Four winners will be selected each week to advance to the playoffs (two for Indy Racing), Dates and terms subject to change. See website for details. 01997 OT Sports, LLC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. All trademarks are owned by their respective companies HEROES Developed for Windows 95 NET CLE CIRCLE READER SERVICE #250 INFL PLATERIE PLAYERS INDY RACING LEAGUE ON . R E CIRCLE READER SERVICE #250 L oma A mananais p PLAYER OUS OF THE GRIDIRON D INS LEAGUE N "


"IT'S JUST LIKE YOUR REAL SWING. IS THIS A GOOD THING OR A BAD THING? "


"You love the game. You hate the game. You exalt when you knock Choose from an array of fine golf apparel. Be the first, and quite possibly the last, to don the plaid pant and striped print shirt combo. your eight iron stiff, then blubber like a baby when you three-putt the hole. Ah, True Swing replicates the natural physics of your swing right down to pitches and putts.Bite,baby.Bite! the beauty of True Swing\" by Front Page Sports. With the handy assistance of your mouse, you can re-create the natural physics of your swing — good, bad and ugly. Hook your shot. Slice your shot. Smoke it straight down the fairway. It's all about concentration. No video golfer here. Our exclusive real. time 30 polygonal golfer moves however, whenever and wherever you choose. Along the way you'll tee up at The Prince Course in Kauai, Hawaii, Join the on-line tour and play against the Pete Dye Golf Club in West Virginia, and amidst the others via the Internet, LAN or modem. natural splendor of Northern Idaho on the course at Coeur d'Alene. FRONT PAGE SPORTS Bring your golf glove, your favorite hat, any good luck charms you wish to carry on your person, and we'll supply the rest. Here, it is all about the finer points. The courses FORSIL look exactly like the courses. The players act precisely like FROST BAZ SHARES BASEBALL ES BASEBALL PRO 67 GOLF ir players. And the ball flies, bounces, rolls, spins and GOLF 2146 Think you've mastered hitting a tiny little ball with a funny little stick? ricochets just like the real-life ball. FPS: Golf, smell the grass, moving at your head at 90 miles per hour. Next stop, the Big Unit and Front Page Sports: Baseball Pro 98. hear the sprinklers, crush the ball. SIER R A  Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. and TM designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On Line, Inc. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #361 www.sierra.com/golf "


"SHOEMEX LOS ANGELES 09:58 All 26 NHL Teams and over 600 Players Plus historic NHL team logos and jerseys Proprietary Motion Capture Graphics Momentum-based checking and goaltender specific play styles DETROILO 9:19 Actual NHL Playbook-Based A.I. Team scouting reports by Keith Tkachuk Hi-Res Polygonal 3D Graphics Numbers on sleeves, names on sweaters and teams' third jerseys Total Team Management Create, trade, develop, sign and release players BOETTEL Variable Player Sizes From mammoth defensemen to speedy wingers Omtal STAMPA SAYO BREAKAWAY\" 98 PPT Veurs Le MILLET Play Style: Handet The difference between winning and losing is in the details. Tape to tape passing. Penalty killing. Checking. Finding the five hole. Keeping your skates out of the crease. Line changes. You think our game should be any different? NHL Breakaway '98 is a powerhouse of freeze-frame detail: from advanced coaching strategies to season and playoff stat tracking. This is a whole new level of hockey. Play it. Points Remainint: 70 Oostened for NINTENDO 64 Sweat the details Microsoft Windows 95 PlayStation SEBS "


"For more information on mering contacte ESAB at 1 800 771 3772 The NHL Shield is ratered trademark and NHL Breaway is a trademark of the National Hockey Loaque AMHL logos and the marks and team 203 and man depicted here are the property of the NHL and the respect to ans and may not be reproduced without the poor wie consent of ML Enterprises LPO 1907 16HL Alghts reserved National Hockey League Players' Association NHLPA and HLPA logo are trademarks of the NLPA and are used under conse, by Acclain Entotainment Inc. TELPA Matendo 6 and the DN logo a trademarks of t oda Amecane 19 Martondo America Inc, PlayStation and the PlayStation are trademarks of Sony Cour Entw i ne Soad Sega Saturn tratare SEGA ENTERPRISES. LTDAll ros reserved. Windows Dategistered trademark of Microsoft Corporate 1966 Meros Corporation Al other trademarks are trademarks of Acclaim Entertainment Inc TVB 1997 Acc Entertainment Inc A lghts reserved Screenshots shown were taken from the PlayStation version of the videogame ACCLAIM UTINE PENE PO ASPORA COSTA NHLA www.acclaimsports.com Keith Tkachuk 1996-97 NHL\" Goal Scoring Champion CIRCLE READER SERVICE #157 "


"*** REVIEW HOYLE POKER E.ES DIFFICULTY LEVEL Ante Matter by Charles Ardai PO 590 5 Gard Draw de Dama EU SEGMENTO SNOSTI Betting Check T-Bone CLASSICS & PUZZLES APRIX fter HOYLE CASINO and HOYLE BLACKJACK, it was inevitable that Sierra would further milk the venerable Hoyle name with HOYLE POKER. No one should own all three, and probably not even two. But if poker is your game, and you've always wanted a spiffy computer version that features many of your favorite variations, HOYLE POKER mostly delivers the goods. you can't casily replace the artificial opponents with Inuman one's over the Intemet, given Sierras buggy link. The two dozen different poker variations, including Baseball, Omaha, and Cincinnati, give you a decent way to practice for your real-world games with friends, but how many hands of simulated poker can a person sit through? I wonder whether Sierra could publish a lic-tac-toe game under the Hoyle license and still get $25 for it? At this rate, we're sure to find out. Check 2D FOUR-FLUSHERS At least the stereotypical computer opponents play better than they banter Price: $24.95 Format: Windows 95. Multiplayer Support: Internet (1-7 players). Publisher: Sierra OnLine, Inc. Bellevue, WA (800) 757-7707 www.sierra.com Reader Service #: 330 POKER FACES Of course, so do 20 other poker games published over the past dozen years, as do hundreds of shareware titles. What sets Sierra's retilling of this wellworked soil apart is its trademark slickness. From the TV-commercial-quality opening animation of dancing cards and poker chips to the impeccably laid-out interface and the breadth of gameplay choices, you know you're in good hands from the very beginning It's almost too slick, though, the high gloss seems intended to distract you from the basic fact that this is just a poker game. Also, poker is a multiplayer game, and the computer players you have to deal with here are extremely annoying, both because of their Central Casting appearance (the old lady in lace, the homeboy in a leather jacket, the southemer in string tie and goatee) and because of their puerile comments. While you can turn the comments off, APPEAL: Poker enthusiasts who found HOYLE CASINO tame. PROS: Stylish visuals; dead-on sound effects; plenty of options. CONS: Annoying Al; unreliable Internet competition. ** REVIEW  GOLDEN NUGGET DIFFICULTY LEVE Iron Pyrite by Charles Ardai CLASSICS & PUZZLES ith all the assistance Virgin received from the actual Golden Nugget casino while producing this game, they should have been able to make it stand out from all the other casino games that have recently appeared. Where they were successful is in the incidentals: For instance, the process of choosing which game to play feels more like walking through a real casino than in there's the pointlessness of a computer game vers ion of a slot machine. (You pull the handle. The wheels spin. Thats it.) If you have a hankering for simulated gambling, you could do worse than GOLDEN NUGGET. Just don't expect it to be any better than your average shareware casino title—at a higher price most competing titles. Placing a bet is a graphically rich (and needlessly complicatcd) affair. In addition to the usual spinning roulette wheels and rolling clice, there are card dealers who deal out and then pick up each hand of cards. There is also a storyline that plays out in F'MV between rounds. But the games are the usual games, without much of note to recommend them. In addition to roulette and craps, you have several variations on poker and blackjack, Keno and«Big Six,\" and a variety of slot machines. These are all games you've played before; here, they're no better and no worse than usual--and that's only as long as you tum off all the fancy animation before playing, since leaving it on slows down the gameplay intolerably. Don't get me started on the paralyzingly awful FMV sequences, which star Adam (Batman) West, and contain lines like«Crime never folds its hand when justice is showing a pair of deuces!\" Then APPEAL: Did you see Honeymoon in Vegas and call your travel agent the next day? PROS: Authentic Vegas sets and sounds give these very bland games a little flavor. CONS: Gameplay slow with animation on, boring otherwise; cinematic sequences and dopey plot are almost beneath criticism. Price: $19.95 Format: Windows 95. Multiplayer Support: None. Publisher: Virgin Irvine, CA (800) 874-4607 www.vie.com Reader Service #: 331 HOLY BAD SCRIPT, BATMAN! Adam West, trapped in a needless plotline, utters lines devoid of any intentional parody. CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"Some Say Role Playing Is Dead. "


"Experience the NEW WORLO COMPUTING = A DIVISION OF THE 3DO COMPANY "


"Rebirth of a Legend. HE IRONFIST DYNASTY TOTTERS ON THE BRINK OF DESTRUCTION. EMBARK ON A PERILOUS ADVENTURE TO SAVE PRINCE NIKOLAI'S KINGDOM FROM TOTAL RUIN. FROM THE DEPTHS OF THE DEEPEST DUNGEONS TO THE INTRIGUES OF THE ROYAL COURT YOU WILL LEAD A BAND OF ADVENTURERS ON AN AMAZING JOURNEY OF DEPTH AND INTELLIGENCE. CONTROL YOUR OWN DESTINY IN A NON-LINEAR FANTASY WORLD WHERE NOTHING IS PREORDAINED. CHOOSE WHETHER TO PLAY IN REAL-TIME OR TURN-BASED COMBAT MODE. 06. sa 090 Sole ol olleeee ENGAGE IN HUNDREDS OF ENTERTAINING MINIQUESTS THAT BRANCH OFF FROM THE MAIN SAGA. EXPERIENCE BREATHTAKING 16-BIT, 65,000-COLOR GRAPHICS IN A SMOOTH-SCROLLING, HIGH-RES ENVIRONMENT. Might and Magic: VI THE MANDATE OF HEAVEN LIRE PRORE www.3DO.COM 800-251-9563 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #144 New World Computing, tho New World Computing logo, and Might and Magic are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of The 3D0 Company, 1997 The 3DO Company. All rights reserved. ESAR "


"***** REVIEW GREAT BATTLES OF ALEXANDER DIFFICULTY LEVEL Truly Great STRATEGY Z WARGAMES l-Magic Charges With the Best Ancients Game Yet by Jim Cobb BATTLES le omputer games that cover initiative) to the troops that are in his splintered control. Knowing when to use a ancient tactical warfare have command range, command to maintain control is as imporfallen victims to the topic's In a typical phased-movement game, tant as attacking seeming simplicity: Basically, the initiative would then pass to the other Alex has ten different types of units you just line 'em up and side. In Alex, however, whenever a leader representing infantry, cavalry, and auxilcharge. Yet anyone who has has finished, the computer checks to see if iaries. Each unit has a troop quality read of Caesar's exploits in that leader gains momentum. (TQ), cohesion hit number, size, and Caul or the campaigns of Momentum allows the same leader to movement points, all varying by type Alexander the Great knows keep going for one or two more phases and nationality, TQ is simply a measure that ancient warfare had its rather than end his turn. Thus, its possible of training and weapons, while cohesion hits are the amount of A MERE SPEAR'S THROW AWAY damage a unit can take Here is an overview of the battle of before being routed. Size FEEDER EISS ER is measured in increments Granicus, complete with strategic of 70-100 men. map and running commentary. Movement points are expended per terrain type The close-up view and zones of control. shows Alexander If managing all of these E stab and the troops factors reminds you why he directly com you gave up boardgaming, mands near the never fear: ALEX presents famous river. them all painlessly. The values of selected units, active leaders, and units share of twists and complexities. GMT the cursor is over are represented in a bar Cames' Great Battles of Alexander has below the map. A leader's command always been the foremost game in capturfor the Macedonians, since their leaders range shows on the map, as does the area ing the many nuances of command conhave relatively high initiative, to over in which an unit may move. This area is trol and combined arms in ancient war whelm their enemies and consolidate diminished as the unit moves or pivots. To fare. So, instead of reinventing the chariot positions quickly, before the other side has designate shock combat, the cursor turns wheel, Interactive Magic brought the a chance to react. Also, it doesn't hurt that into a sword over a possible target. Missile acclaimed boardgame to the PC. In fact, Alex can trumpenemy initiative attempts fire is designated by clicking on the approInteractive Magic was so happy with the twice per game-guess that's why they priate icon and getting a spear cursor over results that the company is already hard at call him Alexander the Great highlighted targets. An optional window work on GREAT BAI'ILES games covering A command can encompass more gives a running commentary of cohesion Hannibal and Julius Caesar. After playing than one action. One ALEX, there's a good chance you'll be as command can allow an happy with the results as I-Magic Founder unit to move, pivot, fire \"Wild Bill\" Stealey himself. missiles, and target an cnemy for shock. To rally, IT'S YOUR MOVE-MAYBE restore a unit's cohesion, or At the core of ALEX are leaders, who move a leader, your active have two facets: initiative and command leader must spend a comrange. The computer checks to see mand for each. Obviously, which commander goes first, with the you must coordinate comprobabilities weighted by each leader's mands with each leader's HURRY, CLOSE THE TRUNK! Elephant charges are initiative. The activated leader then initiative rating and unit common, and include pachyderm trumpeting and the issues a number of orders (equal to his status, or you'll suffer screams of men trying to escape. Price: $49.95 Minimum System Requirements: 486DX/100 (Pentium 100 or better strongly recommended). Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 51MB hard drive space, SVGA graphics, 2x CD-ROM, mouse; supports Win 95-compatible sound cards. Multiplayer Support: Modem, LAN, or Internet (1-2 players). Design: Erudite Software with Mark Herman and Gene Billingsley Original Boardgame Design: Mark Herman and Richard Berg Publisher: Interactive Magic Research Triangle Park, NC (800) 789-1534 www.imagicgames.com Reader Service #: 332 CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"GREAT BATTLES OF ALEXANDER  REVIEW CLASH OF SPEARS (and Unit Types Elephants They paralyze cavalry and have good missile and shock value. However, when they rampage (and they will), they inflict casualties on friend and foe alike until killed. Chariots Obsolete for 700 years by Alexander the Great's era, chariots are hard to maneuver, limited to certain terrain, and cannot be rallied; perfect infantry targets. Heavy Cavalry Peculiar to the Macedonians during the ancient period, heavy cavalry has tremendous shock values. All cavalry can perform an \"orderly withdrawal\" from most units by passing a TQ check. Double Phalanx These représent large disciplined Greek infantry units. They cover two hexes and pivot like a gate. Phalanxes are the only units that can about face, STRATEGYZ WARGAMES effects of movement and missile fire gives them an advantage in this, received during movement. A small although the Al's play for either side is overview map gives the big picture even if more than adequate. Unlike many the game is played in the closest of three phased-based games, ALIX works well possible views. Being able to rotate the over modem and Internet. map 180 degrees greatly aids your plotting The 10 battles of ALEX range from of movement and tactics. Chaeronea (with Alexander as a lieutenant to his father) to his last battle at COHESIVE WARFARE Hydaspes in India. In most battles, the Combat is divided into missile and Macedonians win by routing the enemy shock action. Missile-equipped units can or killing Darius, the Persian commander, fire anytime during movement at a range within ten turns. By playing the other side, of one or two hexes; the computer handles victory can be had by staving off defeat, defensive fire automatically. Although miskilling Alexander, or routing the sile fire is the only way to kill leaders, it Macedonians. Major exceptions to this doesn't cause much damage and primarily format are the unlimited slaughters of softens up a target for shock combat. The Granicus and Hydaspes. A campaign real damage is done by shock, performed game gives a player ten rounds to match after a leader is finished. A unit's shock or better Alexanders world conquest by value is a function of its weapons (superi fighting all ten battles, garrisoning ority), facing relative to its target (clash of provinces, and abstractly subjugating spears), TQ, size, and terrain. Egypt and Persia. Combat results aren't just dead bodies; hits are taken as unit cohesion losses. CHIPPED SPEARPOINT When accumulated hits equal one less Alex's primary problem is that the than the units TQ, the computer«rolls a graphics slow down gameplay. Ona die\" and the unit is routed if the roll is equal P150 with 16MB of RAM, a normal to or larger than the TQ. (Cohesion hits (51MB) install rivals the speed of are also taken for moving over certain termolasses while a full install (131MB) is rain.) Each unit can be rallied once per playable but still annoyingly slow. game. Unrallied units leave the field and Turning off options helps, but.... count against that side's victory level. Historically, Alexander led charges Combat animation is terrific, with and tried to duel his counterparts. weapons jabbing, riderless horses bolting, Giving leaders combat modifiers when and bodies falling or drifting down a they are personally involved in combat river. The game automatically zooms to would be easy to do. Finally, a fog-of-war close-up for gory details. Routed units option is needed. All troop and leader flee, victors advance, and a battle win values can be gained from the board and dow describes results in terms of cohe the manual, giving the player more inforsion hits. The key to tactical success is mation than a historical commander maintaining a cohesive line while apply had. Hiding or changing some values ing pressure at the enemy's weak points. would add replay value. The Macedonian unity of command Petty as these criticisms may seem, these shortcomings detract from an otherwise flawless product. The scamless interface, useful graphics, great history, and wellwritten and thorough manual make ALEX simply the best-ever ancients system. It's also one of the most innovative DISMEMBERING YOU Even though it's phased combat, ALEX strategy games is plenty bloody. Note the severed arm floating down the river. about any era. and their high TQ values count double for rout purposes, These are the defensive backbone and offensive hammer of Alexander's army. Skirmishers These are nimble little missile units, such as archers and slingers. With the exception of the two Macedonian Agrianian units, they cannot indulge in shock combat. You move them up, fire, and pray they can get back. Skirmishers can perform an orderly withdrawal from heavy infantry. Oxybele These long-range bolt throwers represent the only artillery in the game. Oxybele may fire without expending a command, and are often devastating APPEAL: Any gamer remotely interested in ancients, or who just wants a great strategy game. >PROS: An elegant interface and rich, accessible combat system. Good historical accuracy and flavor, with a nice campaign mode and tough Al. The best ancients game yet on the computer. CONS: Slow engine; no leader vs. leader duels; where's the fog-of-war option? SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"The first ever STAR TREK space battle simulator. Translucent texture mapping for unprecedented cloaking effects. Real-time color light sourcing for startling realism. Enemy artificial intelligence that learns and adapts to your battle style. No one this side of Kirk has flown anything this advanced. Until now. \"The most anticipated space sim of the year\" ---Computer Gaming World \"Starfleet Academy promises to be the flagship of MacPlay's immensely successful Star Trek line of games\" -Mac Home Journal \"STAR TREK fans are finally about to get a simulation worthy of Starfleet itself.\" PC Gamer FLY UP TO FOUR FEDERATION STARSHIPS AGAINST 30 AMAZING 3-D POLYGON ALIEN SHIPS OVER 20 CHALLENGING MISSIONS IN SPECTACULAR 3-D ENVIRONMENTS STARRING WILLIAM SHATNER, WALTER KOENIG AND SPECIAL APPEARANCE BY GEORGE TAKEI IN THEIR LEGENDARY ROLES OF CAPTAIN KIRK, COMMANDER CHEKOV AND CAPTAIN SULU "


"STAR TREK STARFLEET ACADEMY Enroll this September! STABELECT ACADEMY AVAILABLE THIS JUNE FOR WIN95/DOS AND MACINTOSH. COMING SOON FOR PLAYSTATION GAME CONSOLE, Developed and Published by MAL. PLAY IS TO LOS Designed for WWW.INTERPLAY.COM WWW.MACPLAY.COM Microsoft Windows 95 PlayStation CO-OK BY GAMERS POR CAMIKS Stariluet Aladiny Sultwc 01997 Interplay Products and mark and 01997 Paramount Pictures. All nyhts reserved Star Trek Latest are trademarks of Paramount Pictures Mac Play and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved I'layStation of Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. All wybits reserved Window s is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. All rights V R CIRCLE READER SERVICE #059 "


"Beyond the world of Krondor Betrayal has just begun. Stores Now! "


"INTERACT WITH OVER 200 UNIQUE CHARACTERS. TRAVERSE THE BREATHTAKINGLY IMMENSE 3D REALM. 21 FAMILIAR AND INTUITIVE INTERFACE TAKES YOU THROUGH A WORLD OF MYSTERY, INTRIGUE AND DANGER. CUSTOMIZE YOUR CHARACTERS' SKILLS, POWERS AND ATTRIBUTES AS YOU UNRAVEL ANTARA'S ABSORBING MYSTERY. ACTIVATE SPELLS AND OTHER UNIQUE WEAPONS. CHECK YOUR CONDITION RING Swing Everedge Damage: 79 Accuracy: 1850 Enemy Defense A GOOD REST IS ALL YOU NEED TO RESTORE FLAGGING HEALTH. TO SEE HOW BADLY YOU'RE INJURED. The HACK, SLASH AND COMBAT OVER 50 NEW ADVERSARIES. RESEARCH AND CREATE OVER 40 POWERFUL SPELLS WITH THE ENHANCED SPELL-CASTING SYSTEM. BETRAYAL IN ANTARA» IS HERE. A COMPLEX WORLD OF SORCERY AND VILLAINS, IT SURPASSES EVEN ITS PREDECESSOR, THE AWARD WINNING BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR. NO OTHER ROLE-PLAYING GAME COMES CLOSE TO ANTARA'S ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND ENGROSSING PLOT LINES. EXPERIENCE THE THRILLS, CHALLENGES AND DANGERS OF THIS ALL-NEW FANTASY REALM. SEE YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE DEALER OR CALL 1-800-757-7707. DOWNLOAD YOUR FREE DEMO AT: www.SIERRA.COM/ANTARA TEEN BETRAYALTN AGES 13+ CONTENT RATED BY ESRB SIERRA FROM THE MAKERS OF BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR 01997 Sierra On-Line, Inc. and/or designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc., Bellevue, WA 98007. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #155 "


"*** REVIEW HISTORY OF THE WORLD DIFFICULTY LEVEL Rise & Fall AH Fails To Make History With Its Latest Boardgame Conversion SINF ONVM/NOBIVUIS SIZE 805193.113 129 Sen of Japan Rerug Builds 19 ATTIS Fleets Capitals Forts Fortesses History Monte by Bob Proctor Strategic Map Epoch 5: 750-1300 AD Game Options View Map Encyclopedia He istory of the QO0201107 com over the network can World is one be one of the best of the allcxperiences in gamtime great ing. So, why isn't a multiplayer Ereventive company that proboardgames. duces some of the Its premise is best multiplayer to take 56 of games in the world the greatest trying to convert empires in them into the best history, divide them Monuments multiplayer computchronologically into seven er games? Epochs of eight empires HISTORY has no each, and let cach player provision for netplay one empire in each work or modem Epoch. When they're all HISTORIC OVERVIEW While it's too small to show terrain features, the play, and in 1997, done, the one with the strategic map does show units and has all the controls needed to play the this is inexcusable most points wins. While game. Here in Epoch five, the Mongols are deciding whether to take China for a multiplayer the premise has classic or go for Europe. Notice how little has happened in the New World, game. Hotseat play simplicity, the greatness is may work for two in the details. The flow of play requires settle old scores, the middle of the gamers, but I can't see it for six or many small decisions, each of which pack campaign to get the leader,\" and seven. To be fair, email play does work, will affect at least one other player. the leader tries to convince everyone though you lose the spontaneity and This promotes interaction. There is an that he or she is not the real threat. passion that happen when all players inevitable progression from imagined Great stuff. are simultaneously engaged. injuries to small paybacks followed by Avalon Hill seems to feel that hurt feelings, implacable grudges, and History, like its other boardgame con I CAME, I SAW, wholesale back-stabbing. While those versions, must be an accurate imple I FLASHED IN THE PAN who feel out of the running attempt to mentation that lets you learn to play or HISTORY has some good things going practice strategies. for it. It is an accurate re-creation of the The assumption is popular boardgame. The graphics are that you will be colorful and functional, with large, easy playing the to read maps. The game plays very boardgame in the quickly and easily. In fact, with a fast future; indeed, Pentium system you can play a game that you would versus six computer-controlled players in prefer to be playless than an hour on the fastest setting! ing the board This is a lot faster than any group of game. Playing a seven humans could play, for the obvigood game with a ous reason: No chitchat, negotiation, or group of friends politics is going on. Afterward, you'll around the table have only the foggiest notion of why the can be one of the final standings turned out the way they 4( | |  J best experiences did. 'This reveals a second reason for the WINDOWS TO THE PAST During play you will have several winin gaming. But I quick play and another problem with the dows open. The largest is the map: smaller ones show the curalso believe that design. You're not getting any informarent empire in play, the current event in play, and a thumbnail tion about the other players except their playing a good game with a score. Now, it's certainly possible to | map that can be used to jump anywhere on the big map. group of friends select a slower rate of play and watch INOKWESSIE GIOCATOLA Price: $59.95 Minimum System Requirements: 48633, Windows 3.1 or better, 8MB RAM, minimal hard drive space VESA 1.2 compliant SVGA graphics, 2x CDROM, mouse; supports Windows-compatible sound cards. Multiplayer support: 1-7 players, hot seat or email. Developer: Colorado Computer Creations Original Boardgame Design: Ragnar Brothers Publisher: The Avalon Hill Game Company Baltimore, MD (800) 999-3222 www.avalonhill.com Reader Service #: 335 co CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Trapped between good and evil, you'll find yourself at... Baldur's Gate \"...one of the most anticipated RPG titles for the PC\" Next Generation Online The Adventure Begins this October. BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS.\" www.interplay.com Degred for ORGOTTEN Rconchang BOOSTRE RP 2 BIOWARE Microsoft Wadows 95 ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, FORGOTTEN REALMS and the TSR logo are registered trademarks owned by TSR. Inc. BALDUR'S GATE is a trademark owned by TSR. Inc. Trademarks are used under license from TSR, Inc. Interplay is a trademark of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #076 "


"REVIEW  HISTORY OF THE WORLD Parameter to Plot Score can build a Monument. Monuments, Cities, and Seas under your control add more points to the total. 220 PO ws shwa STRATEGY / WARGAMES Pisos Epoch poch Horizontal Orid Lines vertice Ord Les Gomo History change from epoch to epoch as some areas (such as North Players to Plot America) become more important and others like the RO Middle East) become less so. At the end of each of your turns, you score EPOCH EVALUATION There are a few reports you can summon the value of each about the game in progress. Here's a line chart showing how area if you occuscores have fluctuated epoch by epoch. py at least one Land in it. This is carefully to see where the computer called having a Presence. If you occupy players attack and what event cards they more Lands than any other player (but at play, but what's completely missing are least three), then you Dominate the area the details of scoring and score double. If you occupy every Let me briefly explain scoring. The map Land in the area then you Control it and of the world is divided into 13 areas and score triple. Some Lands are resource-rich each is worth 0—4 points. This value can and for every pair of these you occupy, you DATA AT YOUR FINGERTIPS... NOT! In the boardgame, scores are counted out loud and all players at the table are aware of the details. The computer, of course, is great at handling all the bookkeepingbut hiding the mechanics is one thing, and hiding the results is another. You will find, for example, that the Blue player suddenly has 30 more points than you; until you become very familiar with the scoring system, you will be hard put to know where those points are coming from. Knowing, for example, that Blue is getting six points per turn for Domination of India is critical information to the decision making process that elevates good HISTORY players to the top. The game really needs a summary report at the end of each player-turn that shows how each scored. Even better would be to have an Advisor that actually teaches you something about the game and the scoring system. Instead, we get an inane little window that pops up to confirm the event card you've just selected or to tell you to retreat a unit; in effect, just a glorified information box. There are several bugs in these routines, as the Advisor will sometimes pop up when other players are playing. In the end, HISTORY OF THE WORLD is both a good game and a disappointment. It's challenging, and a good tool for the next boardgame tournament or casual session around the dining room table. Still, you can't help but wonder why this wasn't turned into a killer network game. FORGE A LASTING EMPIRE THROUGH PLAY BALANCE KOP Action Puer Receved from Score! Surength 140:54h SANS Sri ZAUS 114:54 13T 60 171:57 Apollo Mars Baler Dast 10452 1306Z MINOR POWERS NEED NOT APPLY At the beginning of each epoch, empires are assigned. Here Apollo has drawn the United States, a minor empire in 19th-century terms, and can either keep it or pass it to someone without an empire. Mars (blue) is 30 points ahead of all other players and would be a good candidate except that he has already been given an empire. Looks like Hermes (purple) gets it. 134.85 Ecke Strength Capital N ation Macho Dynasty Nederlands FINICO Apollo You Drawe Uted States. Turn You Can Keup The Empire Or Pass Und Stes Der 89 Yoo ISTORY OF THE WORLD is not an easy game the order for drawing empires in each epoch. to win. Trying to get out in front and The lowest total goes first and this is an advanstay there almost never succeeds. tage because you can either keep the empire Instead, think like a bicycle sprint racer or pass it to any player that does not have one in the Olympics. In the early laps, position is yet. So if you draw the Romans in Epoch entirely unimportant, and as you get close to the three, you should keep it. If you draw the Celts last lap, being in front is actually a disadvantage! Instead (strength 8), you should pass it. This is due partly to the \"get the leader\" Who would you pass it to? Probably the leader syndrome but also to a clever design for decidafter two epochs-unless that happened to be ing which player will play which empire. Every the player who drew the Persians. This is empire has a strength rating that is the number because the Persians are the largest empire in of armies brought into play. The numbers Epoch two (strength 15) and play last while the reflect how powerful or large the historical Celts go first in Epoch three. So this player would empire was and ranges from 4-25 (the still occupy all of the lands from Epoch two, Romans). Each player keeps a cumulative total could add a few more in Northern Europe with of the strength of all the empires over the the Celts, and then score all of them again! Such course of the game and this total determines are the intricacies of HISTORY. APPEAL: Devotees of the boardgame, or light strategy enthusiasts. PROS: Colorful graphics; snappy performance; competent Al; faithful to the original. CONS: Minimal multiplayer interaction and too much hidden information; a good game that should have been better. RATED CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"( W A R I S H E L L. (ALTHOUGH WITH THE RIGHT GAME, IT'S ALSO SORT OF FUN.) CIVIL SED ALD CIVIL WAR inte stinale wer How do you outgun a great game like Civil War Generals II comes combat-ready This war isn't just hell. It's MATIN PERSIAN Robert E. Lee: Civil War General? With with 40 legendary battles from both the history. And you'll experience it P D Civil War Generals Il you can now com Eastern and Western theatres. But if you as never before with an insightmand Confederate or Union Armies. want to wage your own wars, use the map ful new collection of Mort mm A SIERRA And you can put yourself in the boots editor to create terrain, armies, and Knstler paintings and all-new multiof Lee, Grant, or Sherman as you commanders. Then go online to test media mini-documentaries on the men, attempt to rewrite history. your cunning in head-to-head battles. weapons, and tactics of the Civil War. http://www.Sierra.com FROM THE CREATORS OF ROBERT E. LEE: CIVIL WAR GENERAL CIRCLE READER SERVICE #366 "


"The New ANZER GENERAL II. More than I a sequel. An entire generation beyond anything yet seen in strategy games. And seeing is believing. Witness the LIVING BATTLEFIELD\" a new standard for strategy game artwork. Featuring the heightened realism of hand-rendered maps thirty painstakingly crafted battlefields that are faithful to the real ones of WWII -the LIVING BATTLEFIELD also showcases detailed 3D-rendered combat units with six facings. Of course, this beauty is beyond skin deep. The phenomenal game play of the second generation PANZER GENERAL game engine is truly DEKO 20 + EDS Fue130 Anna WID0S  CD-ROM THE LIVING BATTLEFIELD SERIES features the enhanced realism of hand-crafted maps and photo-realistic 3D-rendered combat units. www.panzergeneral.com "


"Face of Strategy Gaming. THE LIVING awesome. Battles rage through WWII's Eastern and Western Fronts, North Africa, even the continental USA, Play one large campaign and three mini-campaigns — some of which are playable as either Axis or Allied forces. Edit scenario and unit data with the powerful Battle Editor for enhanced gameplay and extended replay. And with full multiplayer support, battles can include up to four players. PANZER GENERAL TUINIO UAZNVd El PANZER GENERAL II. The New Face of Strategy Gaming. SOVULATIONS STRATEGIC INC NIIN SALIN LGS 10 ANT To Order: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-234-3088 (USA & Canada) with VISA or MasterCard. WATER ERE Urpur (14120 DOC0BQ2ECOE ED 0 + 2 DET 20+ 2 KU 1/39 KUFue130 A 13 Panther M4 Aro 11 EDS TO ALLIS Developed by the SSI Special Projects Group. SEE SRT A MANDSCAPE COMPANY PANZER GENERAL is a registered trademark of Strategic Simulations, Inc. LIVING BATTLEFIELD is a trademark of Strategic Simulations, Inc.  Strategic Simulations, Inc. a Mindscape Company. All rights reserved. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective holders CIRCLE READER SERVICE #236 "


"Elements: New [Centauri Galaxy] Feap 1.0082 EX SUZ) Extinetion .0140 Suffocation 1.002 R8 III Gm Mpsy. TC Ad Kobollion fototoel Robollion lotolleet Global Laps Multiplayop Supvival om wapsunidlayer S 703 V Taetles 11005 T Adropallo .0202 1.299 cm Sa CITEV Analco ISE Command Slsmic Eva da! 13011490 16.000 1.302 1:04009 19105*\"\" (505* * M FI Mo Vc Wr Cni IMS Morale Wrockage Confrontation Missions 408 1,002 1.0840 Holy            ,    QORDO UND SIERRA ON-LINE, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. AND/OR MARE TRADEMARKS OP, ORUCENSED TO SIERRA ONLINE INC. "


"Terra > Outpost 2 Si In Ae Selalea flellaa Tactuslaros Atmosphora ! Pante TORTOP119 blooists Real-time Action 10.900 ation 302 Disastop 0400 .011 0408 agma Miepobe Psychosis COUPS, O Van Of Sad 200 UJOP MEDIDO DISCOVBPY Desperation Balance 1.1003 Day and 1.055 I Elomant of Certain Death Conspiracy Strategy Technology AMICK 02.34 Earth is a distant memory. All that remains is a handful of humans who chose to follow you. to the stars. Getting here was the easy pant. Now you must battle time, nature and half the human race to save your people from certain annihilation. Survival is just the ginning OUTTOSTZ DIVIDED DESTINY SIERRA See your retailer or call 1-800-575-7707. Download the demo at www.terra.com/outpost2/ CIRCLE READER SERVICE #369 "


"***** REVIEW HEROES OF MIGHT AND MAGIC II: THE PRICE OF LOYALTY DIFFICULTY LEVEL Heroic Encore STRATEGY Z WARGAMES Get Ready for More Addictive Strategy Gameplay From New World Computing by Elliott Chin fever there was a game that deserved to be labeled an addictive substance, HEROES OF MIGHT AND MACIC II would be it. At the height of my HEROES IIbinge, I could never get enough of it and, in fact, I played it so much that my girlfriend once threatened to throw the disk away. Sadly, after I finished both campaigns in the original game, there was nothing left to do in the HEROES II world, and I was forced to play other games. But thanks to New World's HEROES II expansion sct, PRICE OF LOYALTY, I've got an excuse to boot up my favorite turn-based strategy game again and relive my addiction. 1.EROES II There is a good mix of scenarios in all of the campaigns, as well. In some, you have to build a typical empire, extensively explore your environment, amass troops, and conquer the enemy In others, you have to PBB capture a town or retrieve an artifact while being timed. Some scenarios are built like mazes, with time NEW HORIZONS Cyberlore has outdone itself with this enough only to explore Heroes Il expansion set, adding four new campaigns, new one of the several possi artifacts, and new structures (like the barrier at top). ble routes through them. The addition of two new struc character who could not be lost (as in tures to the game-tents and barri the knight lost at sca). Some of the new ers--aids in the more clever scenario artifacts are garden-variety magic items design. In the expansion scenarios, that add bonuses to attack or spell magic colored barriers block certain power, but some, like the suit of areas. To break through them, you have Anduran, are great. This artifact is to find the corresponding tent, usually actually a combination of three lesser located on the other side of the map, artifacts (all powerful in their own where you are given a password that right) that conveys additional bonuses will dissipate the barrier. The idea isn't and spellcasting ability, bad, but in some scenarios, the barriers Though the multiplayer problems are superfluous, and act as tedious from HEROES II are still there (such as a impediments to nothing more than a lack of simultaneous tums, and the store of gold or resources. inability to view your territory when it is not your turn), the expansion disk is EXTRA GOODIES pure, classic HEROES fun. If you are a In addition to the tents and barriers, strategy fan, I would heartily recomCyberlore (the developers) has added a mend THE PRICE OF LOYALTY. slew of new artifacts, several new APPEAL: Anyone who likes stratheroes, and new structures. There are egy games, role-players who want to now structures on the map for recruittry some strategy. ing elementals and even ghosts (potenPROS: All the great Heroes II tially game unbalancing, but they so gameplay; well-done new campaigns rarely occur that they hardly impair the and scenarios; balance of a scenario). The alchemist's some cool new hut, missing from HEROES II, is here, artifacts and structures. allowing unlucky heroes to rid themselves of cursed items like the Fizbin of CONS: The same multiplayer Misfortune. I didn't take much notice faults from of the new heroes, except in those sceHEROES II. narios where one was a central A SWEET DRUG As I played the expansion set, I remembered why HEROES II was so addictive. You always want to play that one last turn, and because you get so lost in the many things to do, you never realize that your one last turn has turned into two hours of gameplay (until its too late, of course). In THE PRICE OF LOYALTY, this is ever more the case, especially since there are four new campaigns that are much more challenging than the originals. There are two short campaigns, composed of four scenarios each, and two longer campaigns, which have eight scenarios apiece. The campaigns are as well designed as the originals, and have a logical progression of connected missions. In one of the missions, you have to shepherd a shipwrecked knight back to his home. You start out with the lone knight, and have to fight your way through a hostile island to capture a shipbuilding town. In the next scenario, you're actually sailing through an archipelago on your way home. In another scenario, you arrive home to a civil war, in which you have to choose sides, Price: $29.95 Minimum System Requirements: 486/66, 8MB RAM, 5MB hard drive space, 2x CD-ROM drive, DOS 5.0 or Win95, SVGA-graphics card, mouse; supports all major sound cards. Multiplayer Support: Modem, serial link (2 players), Hotseat, LAN, Internet (2-6 players). Designer: Cyberlore Publisher: New World Computing/3DO Woodland Hills, CA (800) 325-8898 www.nwcomputing.com Reader Service #: 336 CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"Operation Market Garden Casualties: 16,822 troops, 97 tanks, 118 planes Oh yeah, like you could do any better, Sir Bernard Law Montgomery Commander-in-Chief Operation Market Garden Change history this fall. www.microsoft.com/games/closecombat CLOSE COMBAT   TOO FAR 19 51997 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoh Isis registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. "


"For more information on game tating contact the ESRB 41 1.800771-3772: Constructor TM & 01097 Acclaim Entertainment Inc. All Rights Reserved THE SIMULATION WITH STREET SMARTS is a trademark of Acclaim \"One of those games that keeps us at the office late.\" Ultra Game Players (June '97) ORE FOTO \"Constructor is fun and challenging on so many levels.\" GameSpot (June '97) est Oops! Your Psycho Clown lit a match and took out an enemy block. Manage your finances or bean-counting bankers will descend like vultures! \"Constructor takes the Sim game idea to the Nth degree.\" EGM (April (97) Just when you thought it was safe... enemy zombies invade your turf! \"Constructor grabs you with its humor and keeps you glued to your seat with its well balanced and compelling resource management aspect\" Computer & Net Player (July '97) EX Master resources, control territories, build empires. It's all in a day's work. SEX OCTO Dat RI OOO CE \"The humor is sharp, the graphics are well-composed, and the gameplay is intelligent without being dull.\" GameSpot (June '97) Hooligans are down for a 4 player network (or modem) party! Mess with the mob and you'll be taken out with the trash! download demo at www.acclaimnation.com B Klaim RP DOS UTIRER Microsoft Windows95 "


"NIIIIIII Entertainment, Inc. ACCLAIM is a registered trademark of Acclaim Entertainment, Inc. Original concept developed by System Windows is registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation, 1998 Microsoft Corporation WARNING URBAN UNREST AHEAD Another day, another mobster to pay off, another drunken rave to bust up, another commune to fumigate. This is no ordinary sim. This is a city where the foremen take graft, unlicensed repairmen screw up your apartment buildings and psychos roam the streets. We gave life to your simulation in all its funky, misbegotten, low-down glory. So if you want to build sprawling utopias, get rich and rule the world you're gonna have to get your hands dirty. HEY, IT'S YOUR CITY...DEAL WITH IT! CONSTRUCTOR ROLE READER SERVICE252 "


"Scudo INDUSTRIAL EVOLUTION O ATTENTION! SCUD DISPOSABLE ROBOT ASSASSIN: HEART BREAKER SERIES 1373 THIS UNIT WILL SELF-DESTRUCT UPON TERMINATION OF TARGET Disposable, like a diaper. But he doesn't take any crap. 10 Multiple missions plt Scud against a bizarre, collection of villains and enemy Scuds. Oblicerate up to 16 opponents over LAN or HEAT.NET. Top down view and easy to master controls keep action fast and furious www.scud.com "


"Scud is the coolest robot assassin to ever be dispensed from a Vending machine. He's programmed to self destruct, but intent on sticking around quite a bit longer. He's a coin operated killer hellbent on customer satisfaction, but there's always one sick twisted freak who won't listen to reason Gee, The Fatsucking Abdomax 9000_or what should I Scud: Industrial Evolution spend my minimum wage paycheck on? TAP! VESI TAP! FATSUCKINGS ABDOMAX Z 9000 It's the kind of senseless violence that makes You feel warm and fuzzy inside. That's easy, get Scudo Industrial Evolution You get to wreak bloody havoc With a ton of power ups and Weapons. Compared to this game. Your Fatsucking Abdomax is weaker than Kenny G. Go on multiple missions! Be one ? of three different characters! Destroy up to 16 of your freak friends in multiplayer competition! PC games are Wack. I'd rather tune my tummY. bringen Svam Another hopeless case. FAT ABDA B 33.9000 g MS MY HAIR! Sweet mother of Ghandi! PUA MUAMYBAMI MY WAR MARIAM & Sales \"Illustration by Edvis\"  Tons of powerups! Multiple Weapons! Single player, multiplayer, or compete on HEAT.NETI APETE Includes 3 months free premium membership on HEAT.NET CAT.NU Designed for FIRE SEGASOFT SEGASOFT Stop by www.segasoft.com or call 1-888-SEGASOFT DET RP RY Microsofs Windows 95 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #268 1997 Rob Schrab. SogaSoft and the SegaSoft logo are trademarks of SegaSoft Inc. Scud Industrial Evolution and the Soud characters are trademarks of Rob Schrab. Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corp, 1997 SonSoft Inc. All rights reserved. Seud character "


"There Goes the Neighborhood FINAL CONFLICT The most lethal aliens in the universe are on a manhunt and your star system is their next stop. Experience real-time combat strategy in Final Conflict, the ultimate intergalactic battle. Resource management, arsenal development and technological research feature in this multiplayer clash, coming home to your PC this Fall. FINAL CONFLICT CONFLICY FRIEUR o RATING PENDING WIN 95 CD-ROM R.I. SOFT SYSTEMS SOUND SOURCE STRATEGY ESA For more information: www.soundsourceinteractive.com Final Conflict TM &  1997 Rhode Island Soft Systems. All Rights Reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #374 "


"SCORPIA ADVENTURE/RPG Leave It to Riva adventun: yus, fut ar Indery tion A2 Return to the Land of Traditional CRPGS in Sirtech's SHADOWS OVER RIVA public. HADOWS OVER RIVAIS the third entry in Sirtech's REALMS OF ARKANIA series, and the conclusion of the Northlands Trilogy. Of course, you don't need to have played either of the two previous games (BLADE OF DESTINY and STAR TRAIL.) to play this one. Like its predecessors, Riva isa stand-alone product, equally playable if you start a new team or if you bring your favorites over from STAR TRAIL. While some changes have been made to the ARKANIA model, Riva still uses basically the same engine and mechanics as before. Much will be familiar to those who have played any of the earlier games. The biggest difference is the size of the game world, which, in some ways, is smaller. There are still plenty of places to visit and dungeons to explore, but everything happens in and around the town of Riva. No long tramps through the countryside, worrying about starvation or disease. No need to visit multiple towns and run all over to find the right person to talk to. The magic word is convenience, and it has made the game much more playable. By reducing the world to this one particular spot, redundancy is climinated, and while the game itself is large, it doesn't become boring. That's usually a problem with large-scale RPGs: After awhile, everything become repetitious. This is one flaw Riva doesn't have. is not right here, and it's up to your party \"To do it all yourself, you of characters to find out what's going first go through a series of die on. The beginning of the game is a bit rolls for the character stats vague, and it remains that way for until you have what you want, then do awhile. After a time, however, that all the point distributions. Naturally, this SHADOWS changes, and the party's actions is time-consuming, but is well worth the become more directed by various effort; you get the best characters this OVER RIVA is people and groups. way, whatever their class. It gives the game an odd feel, going manna for a from poking around looking for some LEVEL UP CRPG-starved thing to do to riding the Quest Express. Because the opposition will be tough, On the other hand, just about every any character under sixth level-creat gaming thing you have to accomplish is related ed or transferred--automatically goes in some way to the main plotline, which through several level increases when makes for tighter construction. added to the party. Brand-new ones thus The game really starts with your party, VRAN and here you have Das Schwarze Auge four choices. The LE first is to bring over your group from STAR TRAIL. They will transfer relatively intact, though some items may not make it across. The second choice is to go with the characters already created Yazinda Durin Arva | Tjalf T Melina Caldrinu beforehand, who are PARTY OF SIX Don't travel alone. You can create new characters for Riva, or you can actually in the party carry over your party from STAR TRAIL or WIZARDRY GOLD. when the game begins in the Travia Temple. They are a reasonably decent get five free level increases right at the bunch, and you can probably finish the start. This holds true throughout the game with them. game: If you decide to drop someone The final two possibilities are to create from your party and replace him with your own characters, cither completely someone new, the replacement also gets by hand or by letting the computer do it the increases when he joins up. for you. Using computer generation, you You need to make the most of these simply pick the class you want and let free increases. While there is much to the software do all the rolls and skill/spell do in the game, experience is on the point allocations, cheap side. Very likely, your characters GO QUEST, YOUNG MAN So what are you doing in Riva? At the start, all you know is that something SEPTEMBER 1997 CCW "


"SCORPIA ADVENTURE/RPG opponent. The view changes from a first-person perspective to overhead, with all combatants displayed individually. The floor is marked off in squares. for calculating movement, and attack lines for spells and missiles. On a character's turn, he or she has a number of choices: move, attack, cast a spell, use an item (must be in hand), switch weapons, and so on. The game waits until you've decided what to do and have actually done it before going on to the next participant. This is good, as you have time at the start to plan out a strategy for the fight. And, if you're in over your head, or your party is getting creamed by the opposition, you don't have to wait for the inevitable; you can restore to a previous save in the middle of combat. DRAGON ME DOWN The world of Riva is full of dangersdon't go outside or underground until you're prepared to do battle with critters of all shapes and sizes. imya von Harben FEELIN' HEXY RIVA'S combat system is turn-based, and switches you into a third-person, overhead perspective. levels. There is absolutely no reason for this to be in the game. Far worse, though, is the endgame. First, you go into it with nothing. No weapons, no armor, no potions, nada. You do get to pick up some third-rate stuff along the way to the big battle, but none of that compares with what you bad to leave behind. The whole point of acquiring Neat Items, or even just good ordinary equipment, is to prepare yourself for the inevitable Foozle encounter at the conclusion. For the toughest fight in the game, you want the best possible weapons and armor, not cheap substitutes of little value. And the Queen is tough. She hits multiple opponents simultaneously for serious damage, and she can cast spells. With junk for equipment, your fighters are reduced to being a buffer for the mages, who do the actual work of killing her off with spells. It doesn't get better afterward. When the party returns to Riva, the god Rohal appears to them and says, in so many words: \"Ya done good. But no one's going to remember what's happened. So you're still wanted for murder, and you better get out of town while you can.\" \"This is not a great ending. It isn't even satisfactory, particularly when you consider this is a series conclusion. Slinking out of town branded as cutthroats and murderers is not exactly in the heroic tradition. It is unfortunately, in the tradition of far too many game designers. Perhaps, by the time they finish a game, designers are too mentally exhausted to come up with something worthwhile. I personally believe they should start with the end of a game and work their way to the front. It just might make getting to the conclusion more rewarding for gamers. Riva is yet another of those products that aggravate me more than outright turkeys. It is the game with many good features and a large flaw that takes the edge off enjoyment. Arggh!! But, for all that, SHADOWS OVER RIVA is still manna for a CRPC-starved gaming public. If you can live with (or overlook) the downbeat ending, you can have a good time with this one. MY OLD SCHOOL While it doesn't feature super-highres art, the games graphics are adequate (except for many of the character faces, which could have used some work). The two best points about RivA are having a full party of characters and turn-based combat. We have not had either of those features in a CRPG since THUNDERSCAPE, two years ago. In fact, there haven't been many CRPGs at all in recent times -and those that did come out were all of the soloadventurer, real-time combat variety Those are all well and good, but it gets to be a bit much after awhile. It was a great joy to play again in the traditional mode of CRPCs. The game ran smoothly and without problems on my 486/66. It's not surprising, as the minimum computer listed is a 486/33. Not something you come across too often in these days of \"Pentium supermachine required.\" will only be about ninth level at the end, so how you set up your group at the start is very important. The town of Riva itself is safe to walk around in, at least until your party is framed for murder. Then walking the streets is a bit chancy, as you might be attacked by guards. Until that point though, you don't have to worry about hostile encounters. Outside of town is another matter, Whether you're in the tiny wilderness Minimum System area past the gates or a dungeon, you Requirements: 486/33 can expect to meet any number of or faster processor 8MB RAM, 2x CD-ROM, unfriendly critters. Sometimes, it's posMS-DOS 5.0 or higher sible to avoid immediate combat, 60MB free hard drive either by a bribe or by being stealthy space, mouse, sound card, 256-color VESA (or even, on occasion, by running or PCI local bus video. away). When you can't do that, or if Multiplayer Support: your bloodlust is up and you want to None. Developer/Publisher: fight, combat begins. Sirtech Fighting is turn-based, tactical comOgdensburg, NY bat. Who goes when is determined by (315) 393-6451 www.sir-tech.com hidden initiative rolls. It might be some Reader Service #: 337 | one on your side or it might be an BAD TIDINGS For all its good points, however, Riva is not without some flaws. In the Minor Idiocy Department, there is one place in the Magician's Tower where you have to leave behind one member of your party. 'This unfortunate soul thus loses out on all the experience available on the upper CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"(In Elder Scrolls Legend ESPIRA From the world of the awardwinning role-playing game DAGGERFALL comes a desperate tale of mortal conflict. The Celestial Citadel of Battlespire has fallen to the armies of a blackhearted Daedra Lord. Challenge the Prince of Destruction alone or as a team in multiplayer mode. Engage in mass destruction in team vs. team. Create your character. Conspire withand betray your enemies. Storm castles. Face fiends so sinister that they smell your blood, and track you like prey. VRINDORE TXILLY FCELLY TUISTE WOUNDY ESCUMOCRASTOS AUTOTIU STUM POWERED BY BETHESDA SOFTWORKS WWW.BETHSOFT.COM en sedan RP Bethesda Sa Bit t e X'ind A The Elder Scrolls and trademarks of Med Technology Limited Count 1007 Media Technology Limited. All rights reserved CIRCLE READER SERVICE #373 "


"D-TO-HEAD Today it's Floyd. Tomorrow, the greatest pilot in the Star Wars\" universe could be a dentist in New Jersey. That's the beauty of X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter'\". It allows you to engage in head-to-head combat against real people over modem, network and the internet . It's a real first, and it's in real time, The graphics have been galactically enhanced. The flight "


"(Floyd from Accounting.) engine is phenomenal. The new missions are masterstrokes of space mayhem. There's even single player campaigns for an all-new explosive experience. No wonder Computer Gaming World proclaims X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter \"number one on every space sim-er's wish list.\" And if you don't believe them, just ask Floyd. http://www.lucasarts.com S1 AM w 3-WING US. TIE FIGHTER ICMS LUCAS 1996 Lucasfilm Ltd. All Rights Reserved. Used Under Authorization Star Wars X-Wing. TIE Fighter and the LucasArts logo are registered trademarks of Lucasfilm Lid. The ratings icon is a trademark of the Interactive Digital Software Association CIRCLE READER SERVICE #118 "


"THE IMMORTAL FIGHTERS HAVE RETURNED TO CLAIM THEIR RIGHT TO WORLD  Wide variety of fighting moves and Dazzling rapid-fire combos Multiple camera angles and Powerful sound effects One or two-player modes including network support RRIORU BUT ONLY ONE CAN RULE. R A victorious product from malofilm | MYSTIQUE To find out where to buy Time Warriors, call 1-888-438-2556 Supported by: CIRCLE READER SERVICE #174 "


"CHARLES ARDAI  CRITIC AT LARGE crit. Toys for Boys When Will Computer Games Grow Up? eople are always surprised when I tell them that the average reader of this magazine is a man in his thirties. They Why do so many computer games display the sensibility not not only of a preteen, but of a particulrl creepy one? shouldn't be: One tends to have more disposable income, both for purchasing magazines and for purchasing computer games (not to mention purchasing computers), as an adult than as a youth. But surprised they are, and I can't pretend that their surprise surprises mc. Why? Because to a casual observer, computer games seem mostly to be pitched at an audience of young boys: what with their never-ending litany of baseball games, car races, swooping spaceships, broadsword-wielding barbarians, and giant clanking robots. These are the metaphors of preadolescence, a phase boys go through when they haven't yet discovered girls and still think«gross\" and \"cool\" are synonyms. It's a phase during which adrenaline is still the bodily fluid they prize most, and the most fun they can have involves blowing something up. It's also a phase most of them leave behind. Though an Indiana Jones flick can still stir the old yearnings, as can a ball game or a car race, a thirty-year-old's fantasies and tastes tend to differ from those of a preteen. Wly, then, do so many computer games display the sensibility not only of a preteen, but of a particularly creepy onc? A BLOODY BUSINESS It's not the baseball, or even the explosions, but the blood that so aptly illustrates my point. Lately, an awful lot of the stuff has been seeping into com puter games, and even more into the marketing campaigns that sell the games. I suppose this is thanks to MORTAL KOMBAT and Doom, those hallmarks of bloodletting by the bucket But recently, the emphasis has shifted the focus is not merely on the violent, but on the repulsively so. Look at the gatefold ad (in CGWand other magazines) for SHADOW WARRIOR, featuring a skull with a shuriken embedded between its eyes, another character with his brains splattered against a wall, and an exhortation to the player to annihilate» and «mutilate.\" Later in the same issue you see a bloody skull impaled on stakes (SECRETS OF THE LUXOR), a fanged monster in a sort of SS uniform stepping on the throat of a bloody corpse (CAVEWARS), an IV drip bag filled with blood (PROFESSIONAL UNDERGROUND LEAGUE OF PAIN), and a man soaking in a bathtub full of blood (BLOOD). While it's easy to pick on the ads, the real problem is that this repulsive attitude pervades the games as well: BIOFORGE, for instance, opens with a mutilation (yours); DREAMWEB contains several bloody homicides (performed by you); HELL features all sorts of writhing torture victims; and this doesn't even count Sierras PHANTASMACORIA games, or any of the Doom clones. Some people say that this material is inappropriate for kids. I would argue that it's inappropriate for anyone. Kids have an inexhaustible tolerance for blood, never having spilled any of their own; they enjoy these games at an abstract level and forget about them before reaching adulthood. Adults, on the other hand, should know better, and those who are attracted to this sort of gore worry me. We expect different levels of discrimination from children than from adults. The nine-year-old who giggles when confronted with extreme screen violence does so in innocence; the twenty-nineyear-old who does so is, at best, immature and, at worst, sociopathic. I prefer to assume that game publishers and their ad agencies think they are reaching nine-year-olds. This is better than assuming that they think they are reaching sociopaths. But either way, they are wrong -just as the people who do a doubletake when I tell them our average reader's age are wrong. Unfortunately, one reinforces the other in a nasty feedback loop. There is nothing wrong with making games that will appeal to kids (though it would also be nice to see more titles that target adult tastes). There is something wrong with making games that appeal to the worst in our kids and in ourselves, and something more subtly wrong with perpetuating the public misconception of computer gaming as a hobby for the Faces of Death wing of the Dungeons and Dragons set. We owe it to ourselves not to give people an excuse to sneer at us. I urge computer game publishers to use better judgment the next time their ad men say, «Let's show some gouged-out eyes-gamers eat that stuff up.\" SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"Eve Be Nimble, Eye Be Quick Or Eve Be Sliced by Gore's Big Stick TEEN AGES 13+ CONTENT RATED BY ESRB SERTOM DORDRIFT Call for Win 95 Demo. Supplies Limited Dark Rift brings out the best in people. Eve works her butt off to turn Gore into a meaty pin cushion. Gore busts his gut to move Eve into the path of his axe. And you'll need your best, because Dark Rift gives it up. Dark Rift delivers more fight, more often with more speed than you have ever seen before. Check out Dark Rift for N64 or Win 95 and get flesh scorching .projectiles, hyper quick ten hit combos, blazing frame rates and some very unpleasant surprises for the competition. DLL NINTENDO 64 PC-CD ROM N64 N64 Nintendo and N64 are trademarks of NINTENDO OF AMERICA INC. Dark Rift Kronos, their logos and characters are trademarks of and Q 1996 Kronos Digital Entertainment. Inc. All rights reserved. Distributed by VIC TOKAI INC, h 18.1996 Kronos Available 1997 N64 CVIC TOKALINC 22904 Lockness Avenue Torrance, CA 90501 (310) 326-8880 RONOS LAGIIAL ENTERTAINMENT CRC CIRCLE READER SERVICE #107 "


"DENNY ATKIN SIMULATION/SPACE simulatio Battling Over the Net simon that ares The First Newcomer Takes On the Online Sim World WARBIRDS nc of the things that has held back online sims for so long has been their inaccessibility to the less hard-core computer gamer. The software itself has had a fairly tough learning curve, and the regular players are borderline fanatical in both enthusiasm and ability. Now, two new entries in the market, Microsofts FICHIER ACE and CONFIRMED KILL from Eidos, are aiming across the spectrum of users, work ing to be accessible to beginners while providing a feature set that will appeal to established online-sim fans. The established sims aren't content to sit and be passed by the new guys, however. The Kesmai Air WARRIOR developis no longer the new kid on the block, but it's steeled to handle the competition. BATTLE OF BRITAIN WARBIRDS 2.0 includes the Bf-110, as well as early Spitfires, Hurricanes, and Bf-1095. ment team is working to add Direct 3D graphics support, as well as a new online scenario setup that will allow players to fly more historical missions profiles. I-Magic Online's WARBIRDS is also soon to undergo the 3D treatment, and it's getting an interface-lift that should make the game less intimidating to newbie pilots. ISO ON THE RADAR RESTOR RESTORING WARBIRDS WARBIRDS 2.0, duc out by the time you read this, will feature a revamped interface that aims to end the days of having to learn commands like \".ord 3\" just to load your plane with bombs and rockets. (The dot commands will still be there for old-timers.) You'll now be able to select a plane from a pull-down list. If you're familiar with all the craft in the game, you'll see a list of specifications as well as an external view of the plane. You'll also be one click away from detailed historical information on each plane. From the portions in place in my preview copy, it seems l-Magic Online has made the interface both attractive and accessible, without making it unwieldy. One of the biggest improvements to the game isn't exactly new. Early beta versions of the game featured rolling terrain, which not only allowed for interesting low-level dogfights, but also made low-altitude sneak attacks a possibility. Alas, this was lost when still no combat, but Microsoft hopes players will want to organize events such as virtual air shows and fly-ins. Other new features will include a Bell 206 helicopter, improved flight modeling, force-feedback joystick support, better instrument panels, more cities, and 3,000 airports. Best of all, the creaky graphics engine is get 1 ting a Direct3D update, which promises better scenery and faster frame rates for owners of 3D cards. Flight Simulator 198 Even the oldest flight sim around is jumping on the multiplayer bandwagon. Set for release in November, Microsoft's FLIGHT SIMULATOR '98 will support free play via the Internet Gaming Zone. There's SEPTEMBER 1997 CCW "


"DENNY ATKIN SIMULATIONISPACE F CONVERGENCE Bombo BE110G B111032 Racket Nalodu You'll find the some real improvements in ground armament as well. Instead of the overly deadly, too-accurate A guns found in earlier versions, WARBIRDS 2.0 will feature a variety of ground-based defenders, including individual soldiers brandishing machine guns, as well as fixed 20mm and 40mm guns. In addition, flak bursts now appear at high altitude, giving Buff (bomber) driROLLIN', ROLLIN', ROLLIN' vers something else to worry about Rolling terrain makes sneak attacks possible in WARBIRDS besides patrolling fighters. 2.0. Graphics are kept simple to ensure high frame rate; the You'll find more structures on upcoming 3Dfx version should be more visually exciting, the ground now, along with improvements to existing strucPLANE SELECTOR JE tures and vehicles. Torpedo a ship Prane in WARBIRDS 2.0 and it does more than just catch fire: It lists, begins to sink, and eventually goes down ORDNANCE LOADOUT with its screw being the last thing NaLed you see. The scenery has likely been made more populous in preparation for adding a strategic war in the near future. Other recent improwements include voice support and free head-to-head play. FACELIFT While the interface graphics WARBIRDS 2.0 features a new point-and-click interface that have seen dramatic improvements, eliminates the need to memorize obscure dot commands. the flight engine is still based on detailed, non-texture-mapped polygons to ensure the best frame rate. Still, there are some nice improvements evident, such as hazing in the distance. Look for WARBIRDS to get a dramatic supercharging in the graphics department soon after version 2.0 is released, when the company releases a special version designed to run on 3Dfx Voodoo-based graphics cards. Check www.icigames.com for VIRTUALLY DEAD the latest update. Even if you have FIGHTER ACE includes a superb padlock and virtual cockpit no desire to spend the hourly fee feature that makes it easy to track targets. for online play, you can take advantage of head-to-head modem or the developers switched to a new Internet play at no charge. graphics engine. Well, say goodbye to tabletop terrain, because in ACES OVER REDMOND WARBIRDS 2.0 rolling terrain is back, Microsoft's entry into the online sim and the hills are alive with the sound fray advances the genre in a number of of 20mm gunfire respects, in both technical and financial models. The preview version of RICHTER ACE that members of the press could compete on just prior to the E3 still needed quite a bit of fine-tuning, however. Perhaps the most revolutionary aspect of FICHTER ACE is its pricing model. Instead of the hourly rates charged by Air WARRIOR II and WARBIRDS, FICHIER ACE will allow players to pay by the day or month on the Internet Caming Zone. Removing the pressure of the clock ticking away at your credit card is a superb feature, and I'd imagine that Kesmai and I-Magic Online will have to reevaluate their pricing models. FIGHTER ACE is the first online flight sim to feature a modern graphics engine. But this turns out to be a mixed blessing. On the plus side, battling detailed aircraft over realistic terrain does immerse you in the game. However, the detail of the terrain makes it very difficult to pick out aircraft at a distance. Thus, you end up turning on player name and range displays, which are easy to pick out, but you spend more time chasing flying words than aircraft Because the version we played was preliminary, without all its features implemented, it was too early to judge the flight models. If things remain as when we competed, though, you'll find the planes a bit easier to fly than the current crop of online sims. \"The combat was amusingly one-sided, with a flying mix of both dedicated sim journalists and less-specialized game writers. Hard-core sim pilots like Robin \"Sandman\" Kim and Tom \"Thunk\" Basham racked up kills right and left against hapless beginners. When the game goes live, it will feature a variety of arenas, so expert players will quickly progress to the more advanced arenas. This should keep the hotshots from preyi ng on newbies. This preliminary version wasn't fully play-balanced yet (if you were damaged, it was way too easy to just exit the game to avoid being killed, for instance), so a full evaluation will have to wait for the game to go live. You should be able to check it out for yourself now at www.zone.com 09/0-0 AGAS Flops Retracted CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"DIVERS AID IN TORSO HUNT Divers will be employed by Cleve land detectives today to 2331st in the search for the head and limbs. missing from a man's corso found yester. day in Kingsbury Run at e. 37th. btrect. Twelve detectives worked with a meager set or claws last night to identity through missing person report this sixth victim eca pltation crimes which have con. ued since last September rappling in the murky deep pool was unsuccessful yesof a series of . although a force under Sergt. Hogan homtelde head and harles G. Elsenhart. Are resfifteen. drugkod and poked around cks all the afternoon, ered by Translent... thur J. Poarse will go this morning to da 1 diven cannot work rocky pool, he will by dynamiting ald last night. ok was discov. noon by Jerry MAN'S HEAD FOUND IN KINGSBURY RUN Schoolboys Make-Discovery Near Spot Where-Behead ed Bodies were found ho bn. He Hadison 18 clerk quum 011 Undere willow bush a shor from the apot where Han of two me luegytam ound yesterda brown halreo W 50 YEARS AGO, THE HORROR WAS REAL... POLICE HUNT A MANIAC KILLER Beeking to a bilin the Danuty of the Afb victim of suppoed do sepelton murder la Oreher eand in these yer police ut atrat took per n old TD In County Longuo ad Orched mlesing personnes of the thamanho thrro da No other trace: Of Detectives ha d through my unde ked bloodWrapped with the dark brown canhn Tho btindio w bury Run a boul o Kinoman Ra Rapid Transit Central Syste Last Sept. Edward "


"TODAY IT IS YOUR DESTINY! short where the "


"A baffling string of horrific serial murders. A shadowy brotherhood in pursuit of unimaginable power. An unholy ritual revived from the distant past. This is Black Dahlia; America's most sensational unsolved murder case, now becomes a haunting adventure of occult mystery.  A superb storyline from the creators of Ripper and inspired by actual events.  A stunningly rendered, amazingly real 3-Dimensional gane world that includes over 80 locations on tivo continents.  More than 70 challenging and seamlessly integraleil puzzles.  A unique interface immerses you in the ultimate adventure game experience.  An outstanding cast of professional actors starring Dennis Hopper, Terri Garr and Darren Elicker. TAKE 2 www.bdahlia.com 1997 Black Dahlia and the Tako 21000 are registered trademarks of Take-Two Interactive Softw.wo, Inc. All rights reserved CIRCLE READER SERVICE #254 "


"\"CONFLICT«MYAS SSMR They called it the Korean \"Conflict.\" But we'll let you be the judge. Put yourself in the pilot seat of an F-86 Sabre jet, fly one of its 45 missions ripped directly from the pages of history, and engage in brutal combat with a MIG-15 while a pack of bogeys blast away at your tail. Then tell us if you think it's still a \"Conflict.\" CONFLIC ICT OVER R KOREA USAF SABRE ACE: Conflict over Korea is a trademark of Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc.  1996, 1997 Virgin Interactive Entertainment is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd. Microsoft, Windows and the Windows logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. 18061 Fitch Avenue: Irvine, CA 92614 U.S.A. visit us on the web: www.vie.com INTER active "


"TERRY COLEMAN STRATEGY/WARGAMES Alien in Sheep's as a Clothing Where Are All the X-COM Clones? Whether or strategy gamers, the most beloved sci-fi hit of the past decade was XCOM, which dominated the CGW readers' poll for more than two years. This sleeper won CGWs overall game of the year by blending CivILIZATION-style research and a real-time strategy game with the best tactical combat squad-level system to date--somehow managing to perfectly capture the bizarre mix of fact, myth, and wonder that makes up UFO mania. However, what X-COM didn't do, despite its success, was spawn a host of imitators. nal X-COM was so much fun. Their lack of personality and focus mired them in their own mediocrity. Even the X-COM designers themselves seem to have fallen prey to this insidious alien plot. Months ago, when I tried to divine where they were going with APOCALYPSE, they answered, \"This virtual city is really where we've wanted to take the design all along It's the only real direction for the universe to grow.\" When I asked why they wouldn't let gamers play the aliens this time around, they replied, \"Why would anyone want to do that?\" The designers further hedged their bets by giving X-COM: APOCALYPSE both real-time and turn-based play (see Martin Cirulis' sneak preview in the July, 1997, CCW). One has to wonder why this is so: Either the market is there for a true X-COM sequel or it isn't. Personally, I look forward to a real-time X-COM about as much as a turn-based WARCRAFT II, or a roasted tofu burger. Clearly, if the originators of X-COM aren't too enthused about their original game system, the rest of the industry is less likely to take up the turn-based torch. Could it be that the advent of real-time strategy games has passed the X-COM system by? The evidence doesn't really support such a contention. X-COM: UFO DEFENSE and X-COM: TERROR OF THE DEEP together sold over a million units worldwide in a competitive strategy-gaming market. And since this was achieved with budgets that comprised mere fractions of say, RED ALERT or WING COMMANDER III-IV. it's fair to assume that the return on investment for the X-COM duo was more than satisfactory. For whatever it's worth, MicroProse seems to still enjoy publishing turn-based games, especially since Civ II has evidently sold more than three-quarters of a million units. So, given that the jury is still out on XCOM: APOCALYPSE (although rumors you shoot Germans or slug it out with supervillains rather than greenskinned aliens, these games promise a refreshing change. LU SECRET ALIEN PACTS? The most recent cloning attempts, such as FALLEN HAVEN and WAGES OF WAR, failed to understand why the origi000 000 DOO MEN IN TIGHTS AGENTS OF JUSTICE has such an authentic comics flavor that you can almost feel your superhero musculature beneath the spandex. STREETS OF SAARBRUCKEN The view in SOLDIERS AT WAR may be typical of X-Com clones, but the WWII European streets are gritty and realistic. SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"you want to fit you want to fly like an   EAGLEMAX HYPER PROGRAMMABLE 10 IN 1 Vou have to know what o 'buttons to push. CHECK YOUR SIX! PROGRAM ROCKER SWITCH TO ZOOM IN/OUT OF YOUR RADAR HUD MACRO 1: INDEPENDENCE DAY MACRO 2: F-22 LIGHTNING II\" MACRO 3: AH-64D LONGBOW MACRO 4: JETFIGHTER III \"THIS IS A WELL-CRAFTED, WELL-DESIGNED FLIGHT STICK\" 1997 BOOTWORTHY GAME CONTROLLER boot Magazine «PROGRAMMING IS WONDERFULLY EASY AND CAN BE DONE WITHOUT A SOFTWARE INTERFACE\" PC Gamer FAGLEMAX \"DECENT STICK OFFERS ON-THE-FLY PROGRAMMABILITY FOR A SONG\" Computer Gaming World «A VERY POWERFUL CONTROLLER FOR USE WITH GAMES THAT ARE BETTER SUITED TO STICK CONTROL\" Computer & Net Player LAUNCH 3 MISSILES, THEN RELEASE'A BOMB LOWER FLAPS, LOWER LANDING GEAR, DECREASE TO ENSURE DESTRUCTION HYPERY THROTTLE AND BRING 'ER IN FOR A LANDING SET FORMATION, ENGAGE TARGET AND FIRE ACT LABS MAX THE EXPERIENCE CIRCLE READER SERVICE #194 Available at: Electronics Boutique, Future Shop  1997 ACT Laboratory Ltd. All rights reserved. EagleMAX and ACT LABS are trademarks of ACT Laboratory Ltd. All other trademarks and rogistered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. http://www.actlab.com 1-800-980-9997 "


"TERRY COLEMAN BENDUM abound that a deal for X-COM 4 is very close), where do fans of the system go from here? Ironically, the best X-COM clone isn't science fiction, but a contemporary-era game that focuses on mercenary actions. Sir-Tech's JAGGED ALLIANCE: DEADLY GAMES captures more than just the mechanics of XCOM. The psychological profiles of the various mercs range from loyal and intelligent to bloodthirsty and paranoid, but they all manage to be interesting. And while the missions in JAGGED ALLIANCE: DEADLY CAMES aren't quite up to the night terror excursions of X-COM, they're still plenty tense and enjoyable. Best of all, it's multiplayer, something the X-COM folks haven't yet managed. On the other hand, if you've already played JACCED ALLIANCE to death, or simply can't go back to the dated graphic look, what can you do? The bad news is that there just aren't many X-COM clones in the works. The good news is that those just over the horizon are looking very nice indeed. STRATEGYI WARGAMES VE ARE READY TO LAUNCH One of the best missions in SOLDIERS AT WAR requires that you take out an enemy V-2 site. AND JUSTICE FOR ALL of the year. Nearly two years of developThose who believe that comics are justm ent have streamlined the design in some for kids probably think HARPOON is priareas for accessibility, while simultaneousmarily played by adolescents. Well, it's ly enriching the gaming environment. their loss if they pass up ACENTS OF AGENTS OF JUSTICE creates a futurisJUSTICE, one of the freshest-looking titles tic world where mutant beings of Welcome aboard the STARSHIP TITANIC. Fair CON GAME By the time you read this, most of the summer gaming conventions, including Origins and AvalonCon, will be history, but you might possibly squeeze into GenCon. Taking place this year from August 7-10, the oldest role-playing convention celebrates its 30th year with an increased emphasis on boardand computer gaming. SSI has confirmed that they will be making the trip, and also will debut new products at the show. If you can't attend the convention in person this year, check out reports from yours truly and other CGW editors on www.computergaming.com and www.gamespot.com. Fentible: Personable and charming DoorBot. On hand to welcome passengers aboard the STARSHIP TITANIC, as long as he remembers where the gangway is. AN EPIC ADVENTURE FROM DOUGLAS ADAMS MADAM FROM :// JANT THE DIGITAL reserve your berth now at http://www.starshiptitanic.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #251 SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"PACIFIC GENERAL Land, Air & Sea Combat That Spans the Globe! DREPT STEREO S.STAR SERIES STRON Ata ATOES ISLANDS PONAPE ATOLUSUS WORL MARIL AYOLL We s Star Welcome to the Pacific, one of World War II's most magnificent battlefields. Welcome also, to PACIFIC GENERAL \"one of the world's most magnificent strategy games! Built around a significantly modified 5-STAR Series\". game engine, PACIFIC GENERAL features a newly created naval combat model for high-seas realism. Campaigns and scenarios playable as Japanese WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM , @a or American forces. True head-to-head play www.pacilicgeneral.com via modem or network. And an all-inclusive 9268 Battle Generator that goes beyond war in the Pacific — it comes fully-loaded with maps 26. and units from PANZER GENERAL\" and ALLIED GENERAL.\" 1 01:1::: OSO E O E EDC 1 .0 ! Le Do 60 GROUP SANOTENCH YSLAND EW HANDOVER LANDS TADAR TALANDS JAUL ISLAND PELAGO LIMIR GROUP NUGUR A TANDA ISLANDS W LANDS RNRWIRELAND ISLAND Imagine the possibilities! TO ORDER: Visit your retailer pano su or call 1-800-234-3088. WITU ISLANDS O ESIA ISLANOS CER WIE ISLAND DO00101010 RENDOVA ISLAND SOLOMON ISLAND MOLEVO 10 ADULTE X2 21DELOC FEF 127 Pavilio General is a trademarks ollomom of Sirilegic Simulations, Inc. Booon 1997 Strategic Simulations, Inc., Mindscape Company, All r ing resurved. TROBRIAND ISLANDS CUSLANDS GOODENOVAN ORGIA A MINDSCAPE COMPANY MISIMA ISLAND LOUISIADE ARCHIPELAGO \" tan entering ISLAND SAN CRISTOVAL ISLAND ROSSELISLANO CIRCLE READER SERVICE #235 "


"TERRY COLEMAN BRIEFINGS FEEDING FRENZY Quick: How many Myst-clones can you remember that you liked at all, much less recommended to your friends? Well, the same thing is happening in strategy/wargames, except it's worse. The conservative estimate at CGW has more than three dozen real-time strategy games shipping this year, with three to four times that number slated for 1998. If the majority of them were anywhere near as good as WARCRAFT II or C&C: RED ALERT, you'd get no complaints from me. But most of these designs are simply poor derivatives trying to cash in on the recent real-time craze. Here's an example of how out of control industry marketers are: In a product demo for a racing game I recently attended, every few seconds, the words \"real-time racing\" would flash on the screen in 34-point type. I was so irritated that I finally raised my hand and asked, \"I'm confused. Was this originally a turn-based racing design?\" The worst part was that the marketing people didn't get the joke. The next thing you know, we'll be getting demos of \"real-time\" flight sims. The worst thing about the glut of real-time strategy product is that some good games are going to get lost, simply because the market can't support them all. I saw two really good turnbased games at the recent Computer Game Developer's Conference and asked the designers why they were still doing \"dinosaur games. Their reply was that there were, at most, 12 good turn-based games a year: \"We can compete against a dozen games in our category. If you're doing real-time strategy games, you compete against 112.\" Six months ago I would have considered that comment an exaggeration; don't anymore. Continued on pg 269 STRATEGYZ WARGAMES recent graphic novels. Fans of the original X-Men will thrill to the mental attack possibilities, some of which put the Ethereals of X-COM to shame. Modifying your own superhero is a mini-game in itself, reminiscent of the joy derived from designing your own ships in MASTER OF ORION. With hundreds of nefarious plots that are randomized with cach new game, ACENTS fantastic powers vie for world dominance. The Tech Lords sport fabulous gadgets that could make Iron Man jealOus, while the Shadowyn use their ninja powers in more subtly evil fashions, and the Claw seem to be the 21st century's version of egomaniacal super-thugs. You lead the Star Council, fighting for truth, justice, and...you get the picture. The X-COM similarity comes from the tactical isometric turn-based combat, but AGENTS features heroes and villains whose graphic splendor strikes a nice balance between the classic style of Stan Lee and the dark knights of f you don't see it aboard the STARSHIP TITANIC, just ask. JAGGERNICE GAMES Marsinta Drewbish: Irrascible but efficient DeskBot 'Not known for her soft and compliant tone, but she can get you what you want, if you know how to ask. SIRTECH  Wh JAGGED ALLIANCE: DEADLY GAMES is currently the best X-COM clone, but contenders are actively seeking its crown. AN EPIC ADVENTURE FROM DOUGLAS ADAMS reserve your berth now at http://www.starshiptitanic.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #251 SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"THE BEST GAME ON THIS OR ANY OTHER WORLD -10222 BILLINGEYER LOADABICE FET , CREOITT ONLINE MEBLE HEEERENDES NEXT GAME PLAY SOLO CHOOSE SIDES in an all-out battle for the future of an entire planet. CONTROL UP TO FOUR COMMANDOS as you rampage through level after level of carnage. ARM YOURSELF TO THE TEETH with weapons and powerups. BLAST hundreds of items into tiny pieces. Forge your way through TWO FULL CAMPAIGNS. PLAY ONLINE Take on your friends via NETWORK OR MODEM. Log into the FREE XFire server for unsurpassed Internet play. Vaporize people from ALL OVER THE WORLD. Participate in TOURNAMENTS, TRADE items, DOWNLOAD new levels and graphics, or just engage in a fast and furious eight player FREE-FOR-ALL! USA BOBSLED To order, visit your retailer or call 1 800 447 1230 XFire is a registered trademark of Sir-tech Software, Inc. Tel: (315) 393 6633 Fax: (315) 393 1525 E-mail: webmaster@sir-tech.com www.sir-tech.com SIRTECH CIRCLE READER SERVICE #125 "


"TERRY COLEMAN BRIEFINGS >>Continued from pg 267 In any case, having watched a scintillating Kentucky Derby mere weeks before press time, I couldn't resist doing my own handicapping of upcoming real-time strategy games. Keep in mind that CGW accepts no responsibility for late injuries to mounts or for programming jockeys jumping to rival stables: STRATEGYZ WARGAMES 2:5 Against All Odds: The Real-time Wars Game Company Racing Notes Odds StarCraft Blizzard A thoroughbred trained by the best 1:2 Command & Conquer !! Westwood/Virgin Going for the real-time Triple Crown Sid Meier's Gettysburg Firaxis/EA Master jockey still has great hands Even Dark Reign Activision Best-looking relative of C&C/WarCraft, and it's hungry 3:2 Rebellion LucasArts Delays are worrisome, but it's still a prime stable 2:1 SimCity 3000 The original real-time stud is still tough down the stretch 5:2 Pax Imperia: Eminent Domain Heliotrope/THQ Trimmed down filly could set early pace Close Combat II Atomic/Microsoft A much improved breed Age of Empires Microsoft Bruce Shelley-trained mount looks fresh Tone Rebellion Logic Factory Beautiful steed, can it go the distance? 10:1 WarBreeds Broderbund Sci-fi stallion has spirit, may not be enough vs. comp 15:1 WarWind II SSI It is a sequel driven business... 25:1 Warhammer II: Dark Omen Will Will 3D support be enough? 50:1 Outpost II Sierra Never underestimate Sierra's retail muscle, or Pat Cook 75:1 Field anyone & everyone Don't be the farm 1000:1 Maxis OF JUSTICE will keep you bashing bad guys until the Comics Code comes home to roost. So, even if you have to shoot Germans and slug it out with supervillains rather than green-skinned aliens, these games promise a refreshing changer. By this time next year, we may even get some sci-fi XCOM clones, who knows? Fortillian can't fix it, you shouldn't be drinking it. NO SARGE REQUIRED If you've ever watched old episodes of Combat! on late-night TV, you already know the plotline of SSI's upcoming SOLDIERS AT WAR. The streets arc dusty, the buildings are often cracked and reduced to rubble, and the whole effect of this X-COM clone is gritty, and it gets down to business in WWII Europe in a way that'd make Sgt. Rock proud. The three-quarter SVGA-graphics view works very well with the fog of war to keep you wondering whether there really is a German sniper in the church tower over yonder. The game is intended to be about as realistic as PANZER GENERAL on a small-unit scale, but the morale system has a lot of the correct feel. Plus, the scenarios are a riot; everything from night infiltration missions to blowing up V-2 rocket sites is included. If the AI turns out as nicely as we expect and if the likely modem play works, too-this should be a very big hit for SSI. Fortillian Bantoburn: BarBot, a master mixologist when it comes to matching the right lifeuform with the appropriate tonic. Like any good barkeep Fortilian can talk ...and talk..and talk. AN EPIC ADVENTURE FROM DOUGLAS ADAMS @ Wh JANIC THE DIGITAL reserve your berth now at http://www.starshiptitanic.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE 1251 SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"Your Source for Ruthless Strategies, Tips, Cheats, and Hacks GAMER'S EDGE Theme Hospital STRATEGY & TIPS Get Your Virtual Hospital Running Smoothly, Stat! by Dawn Jepsen he last shreds of your already pathetic life are slipping away. Your diet of late has consisted of whatever nonperishables can be kept within arms length. Your lower back is throbbing. Your mouse hand is cramped and clawlike from ovcrusc. Your eyes, glazed and scratchy, look like a \"before\" picture for Visine. If all of this sounds a bit too familiar, stay calm. The bloody Brits from Bullfrog have made a THEME HOSPITAL addict of you. And just when you thought there was a light at the end of the tunnel, along comes a patch that adds new features. The only possible cure is to win. Our prescription? Take two of these tips every four hours and you'll be up and walking away a victor in no time. The X-ray has been erhanced try the Research Department TE66513. 27 Jun na, F, C# MORALE BOOSTERS In diagnostic rooms, wards, and facilities you can add plants, fire extinguishers, and extra furniture to increase the morale of the staff and the overall value of the hospital. Don't bother making treatment clinics too elaboratelittle time is spent there. When All Else Fails Admissions When you start any new level, especially Level 6 and higher, it's important to scan the layout of the hospital and the town map. On higher levels, additional buildings you purchase might be connected to the main hospital, so it's important not to block off future halls with treatment rooms At more difficult levels, you should alter the game speed to Slow during the initial building phase, so that you can set up the basics of your hospital without the distractions of emergencies or impending epidemics. While you're building, your less-talented doctors can acquire new and better skills under the advisement of a consultant Because doctors are on the job market for only a limited amount of time, you'll want to hire all available physicians at the beginning of the game especially surgeons, researchers, and psychiatrists -and place the ones with minimal skills in the training room. Always be on the lookout for good employees, especially those described as \"careful and dependable in an emergency.\" Don't worry about having too many doctors at first, they'll be needed when you have eight different treatment clinics up and running Hospital layout is important. On every level, its a good idea to begin with at least two general practitioner's offices, since all patients must be seen there first. You'll also want to put at least one pharmacy as near as possible to the main entrance of the hospital. Many emergencies require immediate treatment from either the pharmacy or f you're suffering from an epidemic of losses, you can always cheat. To enable the cheat mode, you must enter a code on the fax machine screen. (Build a receptionist and a general practitioner's office, and the machine will appear when the first patient comes in.) When the machine appears, enter the number 24328 on the fax machine keypad and click on the green Send button. The following cheats will now work: Shift-C Get $10,000 Ctrl-C All research completed Ctrl-M Go to the end of the month Ctrl-Y Go to the end of the year You'll then need to respond to the fax normally. Also, if you enter 7287 on the keypad, you will go to a rat-shooting level after you win the current level. SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"It's coming for you... ...and it wants your blood. CRYPTIC PASSAGE for BLOOD» EXPERIENCE THE MOST EXPERIENCE THE MOST GRUESOME CARNAGE EVER IMAGINED ON YOUR JOURNEY OF REVENGE MASSIVE BLOODY LEVELS FOR BLOOD Blood Developed by SHUDDERINGLY EVIL BLOODBATH LEVELS Cryptic Passage \"Developed by WIZARD Works SUNSTORM AGT INTERACTIVE SOFTWARE COMPANY MINNEAPOLIS, MN 55441 .lth.com INTERACTIVE 'Run to your nearest retailer... Cryptic Passa96 1997 WizardWorks, Inc. All rights reserved. Published and distributed by WizardWorks, Inc. Blood 01997 Monolith Productions, Inc. Blood is a trademark of Monolith Productions, Inc. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corporation. All trademarks are property of their respective companies. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #072 Printed in USA "


"STRATEGY & TIPS: THEME HOSPITAL GAMER'S EDGE satisfaction level or you may find this tactic being used against you. When placing litter bombs, look for a narrow, horizontal hallway. Bombs are hardest to sce here and are more likely to go off before your opponent can find them, because there's no option to peek through obstructing walls. Hold bombs in your hospital for as long as possible, then drop them off, giving your opponent less time to discover them and drop them back into your hospital. & On the Level psychiatry, so make these rooms easily acces epidemic breaks out, vaccinate all infected sible, with plenty of nearby seating, patients before sending them home. Not Arrange your rooms so they can be handoing so will result in a very large fine. dled by the fewest possible staff members. Speaking of cash flow, be sure to click on the For example, one nurse can effectively manvarious awards and statuettes that appear at age the ward, the pharmacy, and the fracture times on cach level -you'll see nice bonus clinic (if these areas are grouped together). rewards for good performance. During an emergency, drop a doctor or nurse into the proper treatment room to save Group Therapy time. If they have a poor attention to detail\" Crab the THEME HOSPITAL patch from rating, they will often ignore pages asking www.bullfrog.co.uk/themedownload. This their assistance. not only treats some of the games minor bugs, but also adds three difficulty levels and a multiplayer mode that supports serial, modem, and IPX network connections. Multiplayer pits you against up to three human hospital managers in a battle for patients, reputation, and dollars. Gameplay BLOWUPS HAPPEN In later levels, equipment explosions can destroy is essentially the machinery and render rooms useless for the rest of the level. Be sure to same, with the have plenty of handymen with machinery repair as their priority. added elements of bidding for Also, watch for occasional bugs such as expansion buildings, recruiting other gamers people getting stuck in a doorway. If you staff, and planting nasty litter bombs in your suddenly don't see any of your handymen, opponents' hospitals. check the various doorways for a pile of them, Here are some tips for getting ahead of then use your pinchers to pull them out. your opponents in multiplayer mode. Before doing anything else, view the docTreatment tors available for hire. Your opponents will Once the hospital is laid out according to be hiring from the same pool, so you should your liking, increase the game speed to its ideally hire all of the good ones for yourself fastest setting. This will speed up the training of and leave them the dregs. If they get the the junior doctors and bring more patients in good staffers, wait until the game gets the door. Also, go to the research screen and rolling, then liberally poach your opponents increase the priority of diagnostic machinery staff. If you click on a doctor who's unhappy, and medications, all the while decreasing spe he'll make an outrageous pay demand of his cialization until later in the game. current employer. If it's not met, he'll come During emergencies, slow the game down work for you. Either you end up with a new until you see where the emergency patients staff member or your opponent ends up need to go and ensure that the appropriate with higher costs. A win-win situation. But doctors or nurses are in place. When an pay close attention to your own staff's If there's a level you just can't get past, you can use a command-line switch to force THEME HOSPITAL to go directly to a certain level. If you're running the MS-DOS version, simply start the program using the command HOSPITAL -Lx, where x is the number of the level in which you want to start. This procedure also works in the Windows 95 version, but it's a bit more complicated, as you have to modify the command contained in the program's icon. First, click with the right mouse button on Windows 95's Start button, then choose Explore. Work your way down the directory until you find the THEME HOSPITAL Icon (by default it will be under Programs/Bullfrog). Now right-click on the icon and choose Copy. Right-click again and choose Paste. Right click on the new copy of the icon and choose Properties, then click the Shortcut tab. At the end of the Target line (which should read something along the lines of \"C:\\Program Files\\Bullfrog\\Hospital\\Hospital.EXE\"). add a space and then -Lx, where x is the level number you want to play. (Note that the portion you add should be outside the quotation marks.) Now you can just double-click that icon to go directly to the chosen level. To alter the level, simply repeat the procedure above, changing the level number after the L. Or, make multiple copies of the icon and set a different level for each one. CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"Dragon Lorem The heart of the Dragu Hilan RE OXY5120 CRYO AFFILIATE PARTNERSHIP INTERACTIVE CIRCLE READER SERVICE #129 Windows and DOS. . Avarkibiascon at retailers RCTI TH00-4 San Emncisco, CA 94109 Irvine, CA 92606 1997 Crvo Entertainment. Au niontroue "


"GAMER'S EDGE STRATEGY & TIPS Scorpia's Mail Scorpia Reaches Into the Mailbag Once More to Help Puzzled Adventurers However, don't be in a hurry to burn your bridges; sometimes, it's better to look under them instead. ell, as I suspected last time, there aren't many new adventure or role-playing games to be found on the racks right now. Of course, as I write this, SHADOWS OVER Riva has just come out, and there are mysterious murmurings about BETRAYAL AT ANTARA, which may be released by the time you read this..or maybe not what with the way games get pushed back these days. Aside from that, the prospect for anything good coming out before autumn is rather bleak. So, whatever you're playing, try to make it last a while, because we're probably in for another long, dry summer. In the meantime, let's get to the mailbag. Crusaders of the Dark Savant One of the more roundabout tasks here is finding out the names of the four witches. First, you'll need to pay a visit to the Giants (no relation to any football team, heh!); they have something of great importance. Then its off to the vicinity of Ukpyr. I've heard the woods around there can be very informative at night, especially for the properly dressed character. Wizardry Nemesis The fire on the second floor in Nithera is an obstacle you have to overcome. Unfortunately, no hoses are available, so you'll have to find a more indirect way of putting it out. Y'know, there might even be a control somewhere for this, if only you could find it. You might want to look somewhere lower down, and try not to butt your head against any walls. Daggerfall If you haven't been keeping up with the patches, you should be. As you likely know from hard experience (heh!), the side-quest dungeons are large, and finding the necessary items can be a pain. Bethesda has changed that now. The most recent patch re-enabled some of the playtester cheat keys. One of them allows you to breeze through the dungeon to the room that has the item you're looking for. Something like that is, of course, a great temptation, but it can certainly help when you're really frustrated. The patch is available from many online services, as well as from Bethesda's Web site, www.bethsoft.com The Pandora Directive Camers in Expert mode may find themselves having a frustrating time in the Mayan pyramids fireball corridor. That's no surprise, because the answer is rather inane. You simply have to make your way across and try all four doors. It doesn't matter which one you start with, or in what order you do it, whichever door is the fourth one you try is the one that will open. This is not one of the better puzzles in the game, alas. Discworld II Here, mousie mousie. Actually, getting the mouse isn't a problem. Getting his blood, well, that's something else again. You really need to sink your teeth (or someone's teeth) into the matter. A little help from a fly-by-night is certainly necessary. A pity that dawn is so far off, it's nothing to crow about. Or is it? Dark Sun II After a long hiatus, this one is showing up again (love them shovelware CDs By the way, just as an asicle, if you're suffering from CRPG withdrawal, you may want to check out some of the collections on the racks these days). Anyway, down in those mines, you have to find the killers before you can proceed to the main event. I suggest a quick trip to Luckout Tunnels, and then a quick tour of the other mine levels (but not as far up as the entry level). Move fast, because the killers won't be waiting around for you. Once they're cleac, a secret door opens elsewhere, and you'll soon be on your Reach Scorpia at way to a romp in Mind Email: scorpia@scorpia.com Flayer country (just Internet: Scorpia's Domain at what you've always Www.scorpia.com wanted!). U.S. Mail: (enclose a self-addressed, That's about it for stamped envelope if you live in the U.S.) this look into the mailScorpia, P.O. Box 338 bag. Until next time, Gracie Station happy adventuring! New York, NY 10028 Fable Getting started in the Land of Mists may be a bit difficult for some gamers. There doesn't seem to be a lot to work with, and there seems to be no way past the tower guard or the woman in the swamp. CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"Some people lose their car keys. These people lost a whole continent Atlantis THEV LE UNE PER OMNI 1997 CRYO Interactive Entertainment 1592 Union Street 1155, San Francisco, CA 94123 www.cryo-interactive.fr OMNI SYNC Interplay Productions. 1-800-INTERPLAY. Windows 95 and Mac. See your local retailer or call 1-800-468-3775. RARE AFFILIATE PARTNERSEI Uncover the mysteries of an advanced civilization in this epic game of adventure. Breathtaking visuals. Exotic locations. Plot twists and intrigue. All to be found in Atlantis. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #133 "


"IT'S ABOUT PC GAMER \"TURN OFF THE LIGHTS, CRANK P A THE SUBWOOFER, AND ( 19 GO FOR IT. SEE \"The game is much more . than satisfactory, it is one of the RA m) best of the year.\" COMPUTER GAMES ENTERTAINMENT «The best aspect of 'The Arrival' is its beautifully rendered 3-D graphics, containing well-drawn, figh-resolution environments, with thousands of detailed sprites.\" OOO COMPUTER GAMES ENTERTAINMENT GAMESPOT "


"THE GAME. IT'S NOT ABOUT THE MOVIE. «MYST MEETS THE ALIENS.\" Z. \"'The Arrival has -top-notch sound effects and atmospheric noises.\" WINDOWS SOURCES COMPUTER S NET PLAYER THE ARRIVAL CD-ROM ADVENTURE NOW AVAILABLE ON WIN 95 AND MAC CHNO MATURE LIVE ENERAKIEN JUTVISION INTERACTIVE Blstributed by LIVE Interactive. \"The Arrival\" Motion Picture and Artwork  LIVE Film and Mediaworks Inc. 1996. All Rights Reserved. \"The Arrival CD-Rom Adventure\"  1997 Enteraktion Inc. All Rights Reserved. Adapted from the original motion picture \"The Arrival.\" An Enteraklion-HavokWare Production Make contact at: www.live-entertainment.com AGES 17. CONTENT RATED BT www.livecame contact at: MINERALEON CIRCLE READER SERVICE #292 "


"POWER COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Game Magazine ZDL confirmed kill Furbali Frenzy! Sports Game All-Stars We Pick the Best in Football, Basketball, Baseball & Hockey Go Online, Meet New People, and Fill Them with Lead in Domark/ICI'S Air Combat Arena What's Your Pick for Game of the Year? See Our Winners Inside... JA ARTINSVILL  PLAY to win. . SUBSCRIBE to save. Here's the move that'll blow'em away: Call 1-800-827-4450 And grab the rock-bottom rate other gamers would virtually die for! EX-Com MASCAR Racing Wing Coromander 11 "


"QUARTERDECK UARTERDE Unleash the full power of your memory! QEMM97 SQUEEZE EVERY LAST DROP OF MEMORY OUT OF YOUR SYSTEM FOR ITS SPEEDIEST, MOST POWERFUL GAME PERFORMANCE. QEMM 97 WILL EVEN GET YOUR DOS GAMES MORE MEMORY, SO THAT YOU CAN PLAY FASTER AND OVERALL FEEL JUST A LITTLE BIT, WELL, JUICED. TO LOOK INTO MAKING WINDOWS 95's MEMORY MANAGEMENT GAME FRIENDLY, VISIT US AT WWW.QUARTERDECK.COM, OR CALL 800-683-6696 AND MENTION CODE #01006. QEMM 97 IS AVAILABLE AT THESE FINE RETAILERS: COMPUSA, COMPUTER CITY, BEST BUY, STAPLES, OFFICE DEPOT, OFFICE Max, EGGHEAD COMPUTER, ELECTRONICS BOUTIQUE, FRY'S ELECTRONICS, AND MICRO CENTER.  Quarterdeck Corporation. All rights reserved. Quarterdeck and QEMM are registered trademarks and the Quarterdeck \"Q\" symbol is a trademark of Quarterdeck Corporation or its subsidiaries. All other products are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #169 "


"TIPS! Action TELAH Need for Speed Il Cheats WAhile NFS II might not be the sequel V we'd all hoped for, it's still a fun racing game. Here are some codes to unlock secret vehicles. Type these codes while you're in the main menu. redracer: Enables Indigo bonus car bus: Enables school bus vwbug: Enables Volkswagen Beetle vwfb: Enables Volkswagen fastback semi: Enables semi truck cab miata: Enables Mazda Miata mercedes: Enables Mercedes-Benz Simulation/Space COMANCHE 3  Although COMANCHE 3 has commendable flight modeling and challenging missions, your teammate (the Army's term for wingman) exhibits an amazing level of stupidity. When you send him to a larget, he often seems to lose his instinct for self-preservation and goes for the Kamikaze run. Of course, you can try to keep him alive by not sending him ahead against targets, but that can be detrimental to your own health. It seems that your teammate, Griffon 2-7, not only skipped combat training, but is also oblivious to your existence. If he's behind you and he spots a target in front of you, he'll fire on il-more than likely hitting you instead. So make liberal use of the N key, and go on and send Griffon 2-7 in against the tough targets. His early demise means you'll probably live longer.  If you're behind Griffon 2-7, be careful not to follow him too closely. He seems to be flying a Super-Comanche that can slice through trees without a scratch. You're not so well-equipped.  If you're having problems getting smooth response from your helicopter's collective control, use the Options menu to turn off the vertical stabilizer. This will keep your collective valucs from jumping all over the place. volvo: Enables Volvo station wagon bmw: Enables BMW armytruck: Enables Mercedes Unimog army truck snowtruck: Enables Mercedes Unimog snow truck vanagon: Enables Volkswagen combi van jeepyj: Enables Jeep YJ landcruiser: Enables Toyota Landcruiser quattro: Enables Audi Quattro commanche: Enables Commanche pickup truck And here is a cheat for a secret track: hollywood: Enables Monolithic Studios: Hollywood track REBEL MOON RISING w ith a good mix of missions and squad-level gameplay, REBEL MOON is a breath of fresh air in the 3D-shooter category. Here are some cheat codes to help you win independence for the moon. These codes only work during single player mode fwmiga = Gives all weapons fwmarit = Gives health and oxygen fwwarp01-21 = Warps to different levels fwbert = Gives jet pack fwmithra = Gives invulnerability fwigiveup = Gives win current level and advance level fwjack = Toggles MMX hooks fw0, then fwcount = Measures frame rate fwplay01-05 = Plays demos pf = Captures a screen shot Sports FRONT PAGE SPORTS FOOTBALL '97 The latest patch now final — has solved a lot of problems with modem play, and renewed interest in this game for online play. Of course, it might also have something to do with the fact that pro football training camps have begun in the real world, and FPS FOOTBALL '98 is still months away...but we digress. Before you try to emulate your favorite coaches against a human opponent, keep a few things in mind: CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"TIPS! Puzzles/Classics HoyLE POKER Tips  Our first tip is that you install the hard-drive only version of the game, so that you can listen to your favorite Pat $125 Texas Hold'em Betting Bankroll: music CD while playing, instead of the inane comments of your computer opponents.  When you play wildcard saturated games like Murder, don't waste your time on a Straight or Flushthe winning hand is almost always a Full House or better, and Five of a Kind hands are common. Elayne Open S500 Help Mrs. O'Shes High Card HOW TO BEAT AI OPPONENTS: Anna: Be very conservative; don't call her bluff often. Bart: Bret Maverick he isn't, squeeze him with small raises. Elayne: When she winks at you, she's nervous; bluff her. Kathryn: Good at wild-card, unsteady in standard poker. Mrs. O'Shea: She's good at stud, lousy at most everything else. Rick: Scruff-boy is the best of the bunch; play him straight. Sterling: He's too clever for his own good; call his bluff often. T-Bone (the dog): Man's best friend bets too much; give him a long leash. Rick $1,000 Strategy/Wargames HEROES OF MIGHT AND MAGIC II ne of the most addictive If that same town has a level games ever designed, three mage tower, its ballista HEROES II requires patience and attacks as 10 archers with +3 in-depth strategic and tactical attack. Each turret attacks as half planning to achieve victory. that many archers (thus 5 archers), with the same attack CASTLE DEFENSE bonus (+3). The maximum When defending your castle, power your main ballista could make sure you've built as many have then is 20 archers at +5 structures as possible and that attack. The two turrets would be you've upgraded your mage at 10 archers and +5 attack. tower. Your main ballista strikes Upgrades do not count, but you with the force of as many archers get one extra archer each for your as you have buildings. So, if castle and mage tower. you've got 10 buildings in alla your town, The Ballista fires with the your ballista strength archers attacks as 10 their attack XAL archers. Your Dhe left ucret fire with ballistae are ich with a 15 banus to hole attack skIIL then modiThe Right Correl firve fied for every   12 strng of 9 archers, each with a 15 honus t heir ach s  level of your mage tower. cach With a 5 han to T-Bone $1,000 I tho strmath of 9 Archoc. Bart $1,000  Responding to criticism that FPS FOOTBALL, '96 was too lenient on Agility ratings, the designers downgraded those ratings severely for non-skill\" positions in FPS FOOTBALL '97. So, make sure that when selecting your team, your linemen have both high Agility and high Endurance ratings. This is particularly crucial for your Center, since he must deal with agile nose tackles and blitzes coming up the middle. So, given the mediocre ratings for Tim Ruddy, you're better off picking a team other than the Dolphins unless you want to see Marino miss more games than he did in the real NFL.  One problem in FPS FOOTBALL'96 was that receivers didn't extend properly, and often had to tum around to catch passes. This meant that «possession receivers\" were deprived of their greatest assets: great moves and clutch hands. This problem is fixed in FPS Football '97, so use it to your advantage. Especially in thircl-down passing situations, an extra slot receiver with Hands rated at 72 or better is a must especially if he has a Speed of 68 or better, which will often enable him to find scams in your opponent's deep zones.  One tactic that often works against the computer is to design comerback blitzes that exploit the gaps between the guard and tackle. Don't try this against an experienced human coach! If he alters his blocking schemes to compensate, you'll soon find that your safeties won't be able to rotate fast enough to cover the hole in coverage left by your blitzing corner.  Finally, it's sometimes boring, and even cliché, but pick a team with a banger» running back and a big, obnoxious offensive line, so that you can run the ball consistently. It's worth it just to hear the whining of opponents who can't run their passhappy attacks for several minutes. Often, your opponent will be so frustrated by lack of offensive activity that he'll try for too much, and maybe even provide you with a gift-wrapped turnover. SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Mail Order Mann Save Time and Money Ordering Games by Phone A  Local Stores don't always have the games your looking for or the expert advice you need. Take a few minutes to shop the courteous and experience: salespeople in the pages of Computer laming World's Mail Order Mall. "


"ad Gamers o Online Thousands of Entertainment Titles Available WwW. CHECK OUT OUR HOT WEBSITE AT Unified UNITED CD ROM UGO OVER 10,000 TITLES IN STOCK DAILY FREE SOFTWARE WITH EVERY PURCHASE!\" --com CALL US NOW FOR A FREE CATALOG! 1.800.864.8334 UGO IS YOUR GATEWAY TO GAMES ONLINE. WITH DIRECT ACCESS TO THE TOP ONLINE GAMING SERVICES & OVER 25 UNIQUE GAMING WEBSITES. Check it out today & enter the UGO MEGA CONTEST! SAME DAY SHIPPING! http://www.ugo.net The Ledwars PRINT SASINATED STOPI BOOTS BERG Internet Zapirisa Deluxe 23 W INTERNET VOICE MAIL INTERNET PHONE lets users send & Lets you talk for free receive voice mail over the Internet over the Internet for using your Internet free to anyone with connection to route an internet long distance email address. VOCALTEC calls. Offers all As easy and the features of a versatile as regular phone. e-mail. So 59306 593014 HERCULES PRINT STUDIO Filled with heroic images of Hercules plus larger than life charac ters and mythological CABIN FEVER STRIP POKER 11 Sizzling full motion video with four gorgeous opponents with an opponents who are award-winning poker willing & able to bet engine, interactive story it all for the chance elements & a point of to \"beat the pants view\" interface that off you.\" puts you into the Artworx action. 57648 ZAPITALISM DELUXE LED WARS Match wits with five The world is dominated other companies in by mighty multinationals a race to build a who each have their commercial empire. own private army. You If you're smart, you have been given a very win. If not, look simple task by your for a new CEO: Eliminate Occupation! ionos ON HERCULES ANIMATED STORYBOOK Hercules must prove h imself a true hero to regain his rightful place among the gods on Mount Olympus. monsters, this Disare INTER ACTIVE new Print Studio will make your Creations shine. $9306 $25 regular phone. into the 59301 $42 57648 $2951060 $25 51066 58719 $2958720 $29 57591 $23 57592 $36 HALLS DEAD NAISTENZA SLO.czty e MATHEMAGICS SLOPE STYLE: The definitive journey into the extreme world of snow. Slope Style $ boarding, Features 27 comprehensive lessons. Included is the Slam 50944 section featuring crash'n'burn footages of your favorite pro rides Mathemagics $1 MATHEMAGICS: This is the unique tool you've been waiting for to 50946 master mental math. After learning the simple yet amazing methGarage ods you'll never need a calculator again GARAGE BAND: Your backstage pass into the music business. An insider's look at what bands need to know in order to advance their careers while playing the music they love. Festa is GOLF 526989 $29 BRAIN The G SA EVE BY PETER GABRIEL HALLS OF THE DEAD: Adam & Eve have FAIRY TALE ADVENTURE 2 been parted. Paradise Batle medieval creo has been lost. Solve tures including gob puxxles, create music lins, & dark elves & explore telo using weapons tionships as you wit & magical attempt to save spells in this fan the world! IGNITE tosy RPG 59286 $37 37 44741 $39 EXPLORING LOST MAYA WILD AFRICA 2 Covering over 40 Visit Africa's national sites in four countries, parks & the endan you can explore the gered animals that history, evolution, cut inhabit them. See ture, & demise of the Botswana, Zimbabwe, ancient & beautiful national Mayan parks people. SUMERIA 49937 $24 5949424 FRONT PAGE SPORTS GOLF BIRTHRIGHT Two championship golf Set in a 3D courses included: The medieval world of Prince course in Kauai political intrigue, Hawaii, and the Pete strange alien races, Dye Golf Club mogic & sword in Bridgeport, West swinging, armored Virginia battle SIERRA BRAIN FOOD GAMES VEGAS FEVER Feed your brain what Discover how to il craves! Smart master the art of win Games Word Puzzles, ning. 26 exciting Wheel of Fortune, games include: Jeopardy! Texas Hold'em Othello, Zoop. Keno, Slots and You Don't ENCORE Roulette, Poker, Know Jock. & more! 59285 $35 60094 $27 BLOOD by GT Interactive You carved your soul to shreds in servitude to a dark god, but betrayal was your only reward Now you've got a score to settle. 57571 heroes. HORARI 55704 55704 $47 5191 $29 57571 $47 AVERY CARDOZAS CASIN While supplies last. Shipping charges apply to free offers. ** Orders received as late as 9:30 pm (CST) for 2nd day air. Business Hours: Mon 8am-8pm, Tues-Fri 9am-8pm, Satllam-5pm, Sun 12pm-5pm. Call for other deadline times. Special offers, item availability and prices may vary Mail Orders to: 800 United CD ROM Drive, Urbana, IL 61802 according to format and are subject to change without notice All prices in U.S. dollars. Not responsible for inadvertent CONTACT US! erfors Au. MAJOR CREDIT VISAN Int'l orders 1-217-337-8532 Phone Orders 1-800-864-8334 http://www.unitedcdrom.com Fax orders 1-217-337-8531 AVERY CARDOZA'S CASINO by Simon & Schuster Learn and play with master gambler Avery Cardoza. Includes video poker, slots, roulette, blackjack, keno, crops & more. CODE W08 CARDS ACCEPTED 60162 $35 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #040 "


"his is the 125th Anniversary of Arbor Day, the tree planters' holiday. This year The National Arbor Day Foundation asks you to plant Trees for America, and provide for their care. Trees Make a World of Difference. Thanks to trees we enjoy shadier streets, greener city parks, and friendlier neighborhoods. Trees also produce oxygen, absorb carbon dioxide, and help keep the atmosphere in balance. This year, plant Trees for America. For your free brochure, write: Trees for America, The National Arbor Day Foundation, Nebraska City, NE 68410. Plant Trees For America SECRTY 1872-1997 438gnal Arbor ucbrska ay Foundation The National Arbor Day Foundation www.arborday.org Wu Software Source MONEDEL GASTE SYSTEMS CALL NOW 3 OF Onek <TESNSDUCE CALL NOW 2 W Re ww GETAGECK 3 HOURS FOX GAMES Up For A Challenge? ZW TITION @ e . S 3003 South 83rd Street Omaha, NE 68124 Phone 402-398-0223 Fax 402-398-0928 CHECK OUT OUR GREAT SELECTION INSIDE GAME DOCTORS STORES OMAHA Mit Receive Cash in 24 Hours for Used Games CREDIT CARD ORDERS CALL NOW 402-398-0223 Receive 15% More in Credit For Your Games Now!! PC CD PCCL PLAYSTATION 11TH HOUR 17.95 M1A2 ABRAMS 29.25 ANDRETTI 1942 PACIFIC AIR WAR 24.95 MECH 2 MERCENARIES 24.95 BEYOND/BEY AGE OF RIFI.ES 24.95 MYST 15.25 BUSTMOVE 2 AGE OF SAIL 24.95 MYST? 32.95 COM/CONQR A-10 2 24.95 NASCAR 19.95 CRASH BAN ALLIED GENERAL 18.95 NASCAR 2 28.95 DEST DERBY BETRAYAL IN ANTARA 33.25 NBA LIVE 97 26.95 DOOM BEAST WITHIN 16.95 NEED 4 SPEED 2 27.95 JET MOTO BLOOD 29.95 NHL 97 26.95 LEGCY KAIN CLOSE COMBAT 18.95 NEW HORIZONS 23.95 MECHWOR 2 CIVILIZATION 2 27.95 PANDORA DIRECTIVE 28.95 NAMCO 1-4 CAND CONO RED ALERT 28.25 PANZER GENERAL 14,95 NASCAR CONQUEST NEW WORLD 19.95 PHANTASMAGORIA 2 28.95 NBA LIVE 97 DIABLO 29.95 PRIVATEER 2 28.95 ND4SPEED2 DEADLOCK 19.95 QUAKE 29.95 PANZER GEN DAGGERFALL 27.95 RETURN TO KRONDOR 29.95 PGA 97 DARK FORCES 2 33.95 REBELLIONISTAR WARS 33.95 RES EVIL DUNGEON MASTER 2 14.95 ROMANCE 3 KNGDOM4 28.95 SOUL BLADE DESCENT 2 19.95 SHIVERS 2 22.25 SUIKODEN DUKE 3D 23.95 SIM CITY 2000 19.95 TEKKEN 2 EF 2000 18.95 STEEL PANTHERS 2 27.95 TOMB RAIDER F22 LIGHTNING 2 28.95 STONE KEEP 17.95 TNN BASS97 FULL THROTTLE 14.95 SU27 FLANKER 24.95 VANDAL HRT GRAND PRIX 2 2395 TEX 3 24.95 VR POOL HEROS M&MAGIC 2 28.95 TOMB RAIDER 22.95 WARHAMMER INDY CAR 24.95 TROPHY BASS 2 29.95 WILD ARMS JANES ATF GOLD 32.25 US NAVY FTR 97 29.95 NINTENDO 64 LONGBOW GOLD 32.25 WARCRAFT 2 27.95 MARIO 64 JOHN MADDEN 97 24.95 WARHAMMER 19.95 MARIO KART LEISURE SUIT LARRY 7 29.95 X COM TERROR 19.95 TUROK 64 LORDS OF THE REALM 2 28.25 WING COMM 4 27.95 WAVE RACE MASTER OF ORION 2 27.25 X COM: APOCALYPSE 29.95 BLAST CORP 32.25 32.25 32.25 32.95 29.95 29.95 33.25 33.25 33.25 33.25 29.95 33.25 33.25 33.25 29.95 33.25 34.25 31.95 31.95 31.95 34.25 39.95 33.25 34.25 34.25 33.95 bawla EGRE S \"Are You Qualifies A Auto Simulatios Game Programmer Or 3D Artist: Launch Into A New Project:  Solve Unique Design Challenges Travel To Or Reside In N. Orange County, CA  Work Where Your Talents Are Appreciated! Discover Why We're called Motion Software 47.95 49,95 53.25 49.95 49.95 1 SEND US 4 GAMES FOR TRADE AND GET AN ADDITIONAL $10.00 IN CREDIT WITH THIS COUPON EXPIRES 9/31/97 BUY 3 TITLES BY MAIL AND GET FREE SHIPPING ON YOUR ENTIRE ORDER! EXPIRES 9/31/97 THOUSANDS OF OTHER TITLES CALL NOW! TO BUY: Please fill out your order ona regular picce of paper, include any previous or current credit, total shipping charges and method of payment. We accept check/moncy orders/credit cards. Please send telephone number. TO SELL: Please fill out a list of the games you are sending, all games must include original retail box, all packing and original instructions. Send to above address. All defective or unboxed games will be returned at customer's expense. Please include your telephone number when buying or selling, Motion Software, Inc. 535 West Lambert, Bldg. E Brea, California 92821-3911 Voice: 714-255-2931 Fax: 714-255-7956 Email: info@motionsoftware.com Website: www.motionsoftware.com SHIPPING CHARGES $7.00 FIRST TITLE $1.00 EA ADDITIONAL ALL PRICES GOOD THROUGH SEPTEMBER 30TH, 1997 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #185 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #134 "


"CHIPS & BITSINC. On Line Ordering www.cdmag.com/chips.html or call 1-800-699-4263 POB 234 DEPT 10917 ROCHESTER, VT 05767 INT'L 802-767-3033 FAX 802-767-3382 Source Code 10917 UPENDA 'IF-22 RAPTOR'Soar over more than 160,000 square miles of photorealistic terrain. Strap yourself into an active cockpit where everything you see, every switch and button actually works, where you can simply click on the controls, right there on the screen Interactive Magic (Simuation) Release Date: NOW PC CD $49 WAR INC \"WAR INC. In the 21st Century, private security forces have evolved into powerful armies under corporate control. Take command of your own corporation and its armies, assume control of R&D. production, and strategic and tactical combat... Interactive Magic (War) Release Date: NOW PC CD $46 shoot sell Hugh ORLD: ABE'S DDDYSEE TITLE RELEASE PRICE 10 Sox 11/97 $35 Achtung Spitfire NOW $40 Admiral Ancient Ships NOW $44 Admiral Sea Battins NOW $41 Advanced Civilization NOW $39 Age of Empires NOW $48 Age of Wonders NOW $47 Agents of Justice NOW $48 Ares Rising 11/97 $46 Army Men 11/97 $46 Bndt Knos Anc Chn 2 11/97 $39 C&C RA Countr Strk NOW $21 C&C Red Alert W95 NOW $48 Caesar 2 NOW $48 Capitalism Plus NOW $43 Cave Wars NOW $39 Civilization 2 NOW $40 Civilization 2 Scen NOW $26 Clay Warfare 12/97 $45 Close Combat 2 NOW $44 Comm Cong Cvrt Ops NOW $22 Command & Conquer NOW 529 Command & Congr 2 11/97 $48 Cong of New Wrid Dby NOW $48 Conquest Earth NOW $44 Constructor NOW $44 Corsairs 10/97 $43 Creatures NOW $34 D-Day 99 NOW $38 Dark Colony NOW $43 Dark Reign Future W NOW $48 Dark Reign MP 1 NOW $29 COMPUTER GAMES: STRATEGY TITLE RELEASE PRICE TITLE RAASI PAKET RELEASE PRICE Deadlock 2 12/97 $46 Master of Orion NOW $19 Star Command NOW 540 Dominion NOW 540 Master of Onion 2 NOW $24 Star Control 3 NOW 528 Dungeon Keeper NOW $46 Mechcommander 10/97 548 Star General NOW $43 Emperor of Fong Sns NOW $29 Mighty Machines NOW $32 Star Nations 11/97 $46 Empire of the Ants 03/98 $43 Mission Force NOW $48 Starcraft Expansion 12/97 $30 Enemy Nations NOW $29 Mission to Nexs Prme 12/97 $48 Starcraft NOW $46 Extreme Tactics 12/97 $49 Mssn Frce:Cybrstrm 2 NOW $42 Stars NOW $38 Fallen Haven NOW $44 New Order NOW $48 Starship Troopers 10/97 $46 Fallen Heroes NOW $46 Outpost 2 NOW $47 Steel Legions 11/97 $42 Fragile Allegiance NOW $46 Pax Imperia 2 Submarine Titans NOW $44 Frenzy 12/97 $44 Pirates Gold NOW $19 Syndicate Wars NOW $46 Galactic Mirage NOW $41 Populous 3 NOW $48 Theme Hospital NOW $12 Gallactic Challenge NOW $19 Ragged Earth 11/97 $34 Total Annihilation NOW $47 Get Bitis of Hannibal 11/97 $48 Reach for Stars 2 NOW $48 Tranport Tycoon Dix NOW $42 Helst 02/98 $44 Rebellion 10/97 $52 Tycho Rising 10/97 $44 Hroes M & M 2 Ex Pk NOW $25 Respect Inc NOW $45 Uprising 10/97 $48 Heroes of M&M2 NOW $35 Return Fire NOW $37 WarBreeds NOW $48 Hidden Wars 10/97 $48 Rising Lands 10/97 $44 Warcraft 2 NOW $37 History of World NOW $39 Risk NOW $41 Warcraft 2 Add On NOW $20 Imperialism NOW $43 Semper Fi NOW $46 Wimmr 2 Dark Omn 11/97 $46 Incubation 11/97 544 Sentinel Returns 03/98 $45 Wartords 2 Olx NOW $41 Into the Void NOW $28 Settlers 2 Gold NOW $38 Warlords 3 NOW $48 Jagod Alinc Ddly Gme NOW $19 Shadow of Emperor NOW $35 Warwind 2 11/97 $42 Jagged Alliance 2 NOW $48 Siege 11/97 $48 Wheel of Time 10/97 $46 Koumeiden 02/98 $45 SimCity 2000 Net NOW $47 Wisdom of the Kings 10/97 546 Lords Realm 2 Exp Pk NOW $28 SimSafari 12/97 544 Wooden Ship Iron Mn NOW $39 Lords of Magic 10/97 $47 Simcity 2000 Spec Ed NOW $40 Worms 2 11/97 $14 Lords of the Realm 2 NOW $39 Simcity 3000 11/97 554 X-Com Apocalypse NOW $46 M Gathrng BattlemapeNOW $35 Soldiers at War 02/99 $43 X-Com Terrom Deep NOW S19 MAX NOW $48 Space Trading 11/97 546 X-Com UFO Defense NOW $19 Mass Destruction NOW $38 Spaceward Ho! 4 NOW $24 X-Fire 01/98 $45 Master of Magic NOW $41 Speed Tribes 04/98 $48 Z NOW $33 COMPUTER GAMES: WAR ABES ODYSEE ODDWORLD' Take on the ugliest bunch of carnivorous crustaceans, from slave latior al Rupture Farms to Liberator of the Mudokon Blow away your enemies, solve wicked situations, as you take your loincloth butt and claim your destiny GT Interactive (Adventure) Release Date: NOW PC C $42 \"IF16' contains an easy to use quick start mode as well as detailed missions and campaigns. Jump into combat and experience incredible graphics and high energy explosions without ever opening the manual Interactive Magic (Simulation) Release Date: NOW PC CD $48 EXTREME VASSAULT Afrika Korns 04/98 $42 Age of Sail NOW $42 Alde de Camp 2 12/97 544 American Civil War NOW $45 Battle of Bulge 03/98 $42 Battlegrnd Gettysburg NOW $32 Battlegrnd Antietam NOW $41 Battleground Bulge NOW $28 Battleground Bull Run NOW 542 Battleground Shiloh NOW $30 Battlegrnd Waterloo NOW $32 C ivil War Generals NOW $48 Close Combat NOW $38 Decse Battls of WWII NOW 548 East Front 10/97 $42 Fantasy General NOW $35 Great Battles Alexndr NOW $44 Harpoon 2 NOW 514 Harpoon 97 W95 NOW $44 Man of War NOW $42 Mare Nostrum NOW $22 Myth 10/97 $48 Napoleon in Russia NOW $42 Over the Reich NOW $39 PTO 2 NOW $34 Pacific General NOW $43 Pacific Tide 10/97 $45 Panzer Commander 06/93 $45 Panzer General 2 10/97 $42 Panzerblitz 03/98 $42 Road to MOSCOW 10/97 $43 Sid Meier's Gettysbro 11/97 $48 Steel Panthers 3 11/97 $45 Steel Pnths 2 Cmpn INOW $15 Steel Pnthrs 2 NOW $43 TACOPS NOW $44 Tank Resistance 2024 NOW $39 Third Reich NOW $39 Tigers on the Prowl 2 NOW $42 V Victory Bundle NOW $28 War College NOW $19 War Inc NOW $46 Wargame CS3 Rifles NOW $19 Zulu War NOW $29 \"EXTREME ASSAULT puts you at the controls of a powerful attack helicopter. Maneuver into position over a military convoy. As you start blasting, the aircraft is rocked by hostile fire from an enemy helicopter. Do you have what it takes to survive against this and other seemingly insurmountable odds? Bluebyte (Simulation) Release Date: NOW CD $45 'CONQUEST EARTH' You must fight for the Earth, warding off the unexpected attack by a superior alien race, on land, sea and air and deploy them into combat, launching missiles, satellites and sir purifiers to dissolve the poisonous sulphur douds threatening to pollute your land. Eidos (Strategy) Release Date: NOW PC CD $44 AXIS & ALLIES' Decide the fate of a nation and the destiny of the world. The Balkans have fallen Pearl Harbor has been attacked, Wake Island is in Japanese hands and Rommel has the British on the run! Milton Bradley Release Date: NOW BG $33 CONQUEST SERTH BOARD GAMES Axis Allies \"BATTLETECH' Where the U. S. League once reigned, 5 successor states now battle for control fighting over water, machines & spare parts factories. Control of these elements will lead to final victory and the domination of space. FASA Release Date: NOW BG $19 HDSOPLORE NS OF OUSTINY \"LANDS OF LORE II' You are Luther, cursed son of the Sorceress of Darkness, exploring treacherous lands in search of ancient magic, a super power that will release you from your vile birthright. Virgin (Roleplaying) Release Date: 08/97 PC CD $48 ASL Code Bushido NOW $29 Car Wars Deluxe Great War at Sea 1 NOW $32 Rebels & Redcoats 1 NOW $25 ASL Jatkosota N OW $10 Chancellorsville NOW $34 Hannibal NOW $32 Republic of Rome NOW $29 ASL Kamp Peiper 1 NOW $27 Circus Maximus NOW S11 Harpoon Box Set NOW $41 Risk NOW $27 ASL Leatherneck NOW $9 Civilization NOW $29 History of the World NOW $27 Robo Rally NOW $33 ASL Pegasus Bridge NOW $24 Colonial Diplomacy NOW $42 Hobbit Adventure NOW $29 Sam Grant NOW $42 ASL Solo Rules NOW $29 Crisis Sinai 1973 NOW $25 Ironclads NOW $32 Settlers of Catan NOW $30 Advanced Civilization NOW $25 D-Day NOW S16 Jena NOW $38 Sherlock Holmes NOW $20 Advanced Squad Ldr NOW $38 Days of Decision 2 NOW $42 Knightmare Chess NOW $13 SilentDeath DI NOW $42 Age of Renaissance NOW 542 Decision in France NOW $15 Kneg! NOW $32 Space Chess 3D NOW $35 Air Baron NOW $27 Deluxe Diplomacy NOW $42 La Bata de Wavre NOW $22 Star Fleet Battles NOW $25 Alamo NOW $15 Die Hanse NOW $55 Lords of Sierra Madre NOW $34 Texas Revolution NOW $18 Ancient Empires NOW $29 Dragon Lords N OW $29 Lunch Money NOW $15 The '45 NOW $25 Axis & Allies NOW $35 Empire Builder NOW $25 Magic Realm NOW $23 Third Reich NOW $19 Axis & Allies Cntri PWNOW $30 Empire of Rising Sun NOW $41 Napoleon's First BattleNOW $24 Three Days GettysburgNOW $49 Axis & Ally WW2 Exp NOW $14 Empires in Arms NOW $27 Napoleon's Last Battle NOW $25 Viceroys NOW $22 Battle Dresden 1813 NOW $25 Federation & Empire NOW $38 Pain Doctor NOW $25 Victory in West Frnce NOW $26 Battles Forgotten War NOW $42 Feudal NOW $18 Platoon NOW $15 We the People NOW $29 Battles of Waterloo NOW $33 Field Command NOW 530 Quebec 1759 NOW $22 World War One NOW $11 Battlespace NOW $26 Go NOW $22 Rail Baron NOW 519 World in Flames Dix NOW $90 Battletech 4th Ed. NOW $19 Grand Prix NOW $19 Rats NOW $24 Zorndor! NOW $36 HINT BOOKS 6881 HK Attack Sub NOW $16 Earthsiege 3 11/97 $16 Mask of Eternity 12/97 $16 SWAT 2 11/97 $16 AH 64D Longbow 2 NOW S16 F-22 Raptor NOW $18 Master of Orion 2 NOW $16 Simcity 3000 NOW $16 Age of Empire 10/97 $16 Falcon 4.0 11/97 516 Mechcommander 11/97 $16 Star Trek Star Fit AcadNow $18 Agents of Justice NOW S16 Fallout NOW 516 Mechwarrior 3 11/97 $16 Starcraft NOW $16 Betrayal in Antara N OW $16 Flying Nightmares 2 NOW $16 Might & Magic 6 10/97 $16 Steel Panthers 3 11/97 $16 Curse of Monkey Isle NOW $16 Heavy Gear 11/97 $18 Myst 2: Riven NOW S16 Tomb Raider 2 11/97 $10 Dark Forces 2 NOW $16 Heroes of M&M2 NOW S16 Myth 11/97 S16 Ultima Online NOW $16 Dark Reign NOW $16 Hexen 2 NOW S16 Pax Imperia 2 NOW S16 Unreal 10/97 $16 Death Trap Dungeon 10/97 $16 King's Quest 8 12/97 $16 Rebellion 10/97 $16X.COM. Apocalypse NOW $16 Diablo NOW $16 Land Lore2 NOW $16 Red Baron 2 NOW $16 X-wing vs Tie Fight NOW $16 Dungeon Keeper NOW $13 Lords of Magic 10/97 $16 Return to Krondor 11/97 $16 Zork Nemesis NOW $18 COMPUTER GAMES: ARCADE COMPUTER GAMES: TRADITIONAL 3D Ultr Pbil Cep Nght NOW $36 Joe Blow 10/97 $44 Battleship NOW $41 Monty Pythn Holy Grl NOW $38 3D Ultra Phil St Cnt NOW $35 Overboard 10/97 $44 Chessmaster 5500 NOW $43 Pictionary NOW $38 3D Ultra Pinball NOW $29 Pro Pinball Timeshock NOW meshock NOW $28 $28 Dragon Dice NOW $46 Power Chess 98 11/97 $45 Balls of Steel NOW $32 Puzz 3-D NOW $28 Hong Kong Mahjong NOW $21 Shanghai Double Pack NOW $28 Bomberman NOW $32 Tanktics NOW $35 Hot Wheels Car Dsgn NOW $40 Shanghai Dynasty 12/97 $39 Crucible 11/97 $44 Thunder Gun NOW $19 Hoyle Board Games NOW $29 Shanghaii 98 12/97 $39 Drachen Zor 10/97 $44 Virtua Fighter 2 NOW $39 Hoyle Casino 98 11/97 $29 Sorry 11/97 $28 Frogger 11/97 $38 WWF Wrestling 3D 12/97 $48 Mgc Gthng Armodan 10/97 $44 You ont Kw Jck XXXL 10/97 $39 Full Tilt Pinball 2 NOW $24 WWF-In Your House NOW $40 Magic Gathering NOW $37 You Dnt knw Jck Mvs NOW $39 H.E.O.Z. 10/97 $38 Youngblood 11/97 $45 Mnty Pythn Mng Lite 10/97 $45 You Dnt Know Jack 3 10/97 $29 Hyper 3D Pinball NOW $22 Zoop NOW S19 Monopoly Star Wars 10/97 548 You Dnt Know Jck TV 10/97 $29 01997 CHIPS & BITS, INC Re Baron \"RED BARON II' You will become immersed in World War I and the career of the brave young men who pilot the flying machines in the dangerous dawn of aviation. Engage in deadly dog fights, strate an enemy aerodrome as you line up your nemesis in your sights Sierra (Simulation) Release Date: NOW PC CD $52 Dark Forces Jedi Knight DARK FORCES JEDI KNIGHT' In your serach for Jerec, the man who murdered your father you go to the Valley of the Jedi, where 1000's of Jedi are trapped. You can fight as a Jedi or embrace the Dark Side. Which ever role you choose, you will need all the Power of the Force yaou can summon. when you encounter the seven Dark Jedi. LucasArts (Action) Release Date:NOW PC CD $53 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #068 DOW207P1 "


"CHIPS&BITS INC. World Wide POB 234 DEPT 10917 ROCHESTER, VT 05767 INT'L 802-767-3033 FAX 802-767-3382 Huge Selections Shipping Great Prices STARFLEET ACADEMY STAR TREK FLEET ACADEMY' Before Captain Kirk, Commander Chekov and Captain Sulu were legends, they were cadets at the most celebrated school in the universe, the Star Fleet Acadently Test your ingenuity, leadership and courage and determine if you have what it takes to graduate 1st in your class Interplay (Adventure) Release Date:NOW PC CD $55 PACIFIC GENERAL 'PACIFIC GENERAL' With full Japanese and Allied Campaigns to choose from, a Scenario Editor and Battle Generator, you will command the Pacific as no other general has. Victory conditions are based on capturing enemy hexes, losses to your own forces and enemy casualties. Night scenarios reflect the Japanese penchant for surprise night attacks. SSI (War) Release Date: NOW PC CD $45 TITLE RELEASE PRICE 1943 Euro Air War NOW $44 688 Hunter Killer NOW $46 ATE 98 NOW $46 AH-64D Longbow 2 10/97 $46 AHX-1 NOW $47 Aces: X-Fighters 11/97 $49 Air Warrior 2 NOW $43 Andretti Racing 10/97 $46 Armored Fist 2 NOW $49 Carmageddon NOW $45 Comanche 3 NOW $39 Daytona USA DI NOW $42 Earth siege 3 11/97 549 Extreme Assault NOW 545 F-15 11/97 548 F-22 Lightning 2 NOW 539 FA 18 Korea NOW $46 F15 Fightng Falcon NOW $48 FA 18 Hornet 3 NOW $44 FPS Fly Fishing 10.97 548 FORMULA 1 '97' You can race as any dri ver or team on any of the world's Formula 1 courses, with each track modeled from life in inch-perfect detail Psygnosis (Simulation) Release Date: NOW PC CD $48 FORMULATO 'THRUSTMASTER NASCAR PRO STEERING WHEEL' features wheel mounted buttons used for shifting, rev limiting or other racing functions. separate gas and brake pedals, positive-throw shift lever with tactilelaudible feedback and more. Thrustmaster (Hardware) Release Date: NOW PC $108 Blood NOW $43 Buels 11,97 545 C&C Sole Survivor 1097 546 Chasm NOW 54: Chromofon 11/97 $46 Critical Depth NOW $48 Daskatas 12/97 548 Dark Frces 2 Jedi NOW $53 Defiance 10.97 $40 Dreams 10.97 $48 COMPUTER GAMES: SIMULATION TIL RELEASE PRICE TITLE RELEASE PRICE TITLE RELEASE PRICE Falcon 4.0 NOW $52 Manx IT NOW 542 Sand Warriors NOW $46 F ghtng Flen Bck Bodd NOW $36 MechWarrior 3 12/97 $52 Scrmn Omns Our Erp 11/97 $52 Fighter Duel 2 NOW $39 Mechwrrior Mercuries NOW $48 Sierra Pro Pilot NOW $48 Flight Unlimited 2 NOW $44 Microsoft FS 6 NOW $53 Silent Hunter 2 09/98 $46 Flying Corp NOW $41 Midnight Run NOW $46 Silent Hunter CE NOW $43 Flying Nightmares 2 NOW $42 Moto Racer GP N OW $45 Spearhead 11/97 549 Flying Tigers 09/98 $48 Mwarrior 2 Battlepk NOW $42 Spearhead Exp Pack 12/97 529 Forced Alliance 10/97 $45 Nascar Racing 2 Mngr 11/97 $25 TFX:X-22 ADF 1097 546 Glider Wars 01/98 $32 Need for Speed 2 N OW $46 TIN Motr Spits Hdcre NOW $38 Heavy Gear 10/97 $48 Neer Reng 2 Bsch Srs 11/97 $30 Team Apache 12/97 544 Hind Helicopter NOW $44 Off-Road Racing 10.97 $48 Thunder Truck Rally NOW $45 Indy Car Racing 2 NOW $26 Outlaw Racers 1 297 $39 Virus 10/97 $48 Interstate 77 10/97 518 Profiteer 03.98 $45 Wing Commander 5 NOW $55 Interstate 78 Racing Days NOW $44 Wings of Destiny 02/98 $49 Jet Fighter 3 NOW $39 Red Baron 2 W95 NOW $52 Wrecking Crew NOW $48 Jetfighter 3 Mission NOW 525 SODA Off-Road Racing NOW 548 X-Car Exprmnti Ron NOW $44 Jetfighter Full Burn 11/97 $44 SU-27 Flanker 2 11/97 546 X-Wng V Tie Fighter NOW $50 Joint Strike Fighter 10/97 $44 SU-27 Flanker Msn #1 NOW $15 F-16 Viper NOW $48 Jight Lightning Stik 11/97 $43 Sabrace NOW $48 F-22 Raptor NOW $49 M1A2 Abrams NOW $35 Sail 2000 NOW $38 Panzer 44 1297 $48 COMPUTER GAMES: 3D ACTION Duke Nukem 3D Atmc NOW $46 Meat Puppets NOW $42 Shadow Warrior NOW $47 Enigma 11/97 $39 Montezumas Return 12/97 $45 Star Trk Frst Contact 11/97 $48 Flesh Feast 02/98 544 Mortal Revenge 11/97 $44 Terra Victus 02/98 $48 G-Police NOW $46 Nightfall 11/97 $44 Tomb Raider NOW $42 Gatherer 10/97 $42 Normandy 97 NOW 536 Tomb Raider 2 11/97 $48 Golgotha NOW $48 Postal 10/97 $48 Trespasst Jrssic Prk 12/97 $48 Hexen 2 NOW $52 Quake NOW 549 Turok Dinese Huntr 2 12/97 548 invasion 10/97 $44 Quake 2 11/97 $52 Unreal 10/97 $48 Jungle Bors 11/97 $38 Ouake Mssn PK 1-2 ea NOW $29 Vigilance 11/97 $42 MDK NOW $45 Redneck Rampage NOW $46 GED for Quake NOW $19 COMPUTER GAMES: SPORTS FPS Football 98 NOW $29 Links LS Oakind Hills NOW $19 NFL OB Club 98 NOW $46 Fint Pge Sports Skiing 10/97 $47 Links LS Valderrama NOW $19 NHL Breakaway 98 10/97 $44 Ft Poe Spts GI Bnd NOW $48 Links Pro 11 Devils is NOW $19 NHL Hockey 98 10/97 $47 Grand Slam '97 NOW $43 Lunar Golf 10/97 $39 NHL Power Play 98 NOW $48 Hardball 6 NOW $46 Madden FB 98 10/97 $46 PBA Bowling 2 NOW $35 Jack Nicklaus Golf 97 NOW $46 Micrleague Basebil 6 NOW $34 PGA Tour Pro W95 NOW $50 Kick OR 97 NOW $44 Mleague Footbil 3 NOW $34 Triple Play 98 NOW $45 Links LS NOW $46 NBA Jam 98 10/98 $44 VR Baseball 97 NOW $44 Links LS 98 NOW $45 NBA Live '98 10/97 $46 WILD. 10/97 $42 Links LS Cng Ctry Clb NOW $19 NCAA Bball Final 4 97 NOW $40 World Series BBall 98 NOW $42 Links LS Davis Love NOW $25 NCAA Football 98 NOW $46 Wild Cup Gif Dor Bch NOW COMPUTER GAMES: HARDWARE CH PC Gamepad CH Pro Pedals NOW $80 MS Sidewinder Pro NOW $85 TM Flight Contr Pro NOW 599 CH Pro Throttle NOW $102 MS Sidewinder FF ProNOW $99 TM Flight Control Sys NOW $59 Gravis Firebird 2 NOW $65 Msoft Sidwndr Pro PdNOW $39 TM GP1 NOW $74 Gravis Grip Controll NOW $85 Saitek X35 Wpns ContNOW $60 TM Game Card N OW $25 Gravis Grip Pad 2 Pak NOW $24 Saitek X36 Fight Cont NOW $75 TM Milm 3D Intreptor 10/97 $79 Gravis Grp Std Alne NOW $69 Sound Blaster 64 Val NOW $149TM Nser Pro Rong WI NOW $108 Gravis PC Gmepd Pro NOW $27 Space Orb 360 NOW $75 TM Joyswitch NOW $42 TM Driving Control T2NOW $108 TM Weapon Cont Sys NOW $88 Labtec LCS 2612 Spkt NOW $112 TMF16 TOS NOW $108 Verbal Commander NOW $85 Leitch Wng Mn Wrior NOW $85 TM F22 Pro N OW $128 Yamaha SBS 300 NOW $88 Digital 3D Joystick THRUSTMASTER MILLENNIUM 3D' Raise shields, identity your target, and with the exclusive 3D pitch-over grip, swing around and wipe out your opponent, as you watch the explosions tip through your enemy's hull Thrustmaster (Hardware) Release Date: 10/97 PC $79 3D Ultra Mini Golf NOW $42 APBA Pro Boxing NOW $38 Aaron vs Ruth W95 NOW $39 All Star Baseball 98 10/97 $44 Bass Mstrs Cissic Pro 04/98 $42 British Open Golf NOW $43 Crush! Deluxe NOW $44 Extreme Street Hckey NOW $42 FIFA Road Wild Cp 98 NOW $46 FIFA Soccer 98 10/97 $46 FPS Baseball 98 NOW $28 MILLEN TRIPLE \"TRIPLE PLAY 98 ups the ante with an advanced real-time rendered 3D game engine, bringing you all the Major League teams and players, interleague play and the new expansion Diamond Backs and Devil Rays Franchises. Electronic Arts (Sports) Release Date: NOW PC CD $45 Sona CREST 'STARCRAFT' Wasteful, short sighted and quarrelsome humans pillage world after world. You must gather your resources to accomplish your goals, either freedom or galactic domination Blizzard (Strategy) Release Date: NOW CD $46 ACI Powerramp Cont NOW $36 ACT Psychopdjr Cont NOW $19 Alto ACS55 Spker Sys NOW $152 Assassin 3D Contit NOW $59 Assassn 3D. WngmnNOW 99 CHF16 Combatstick NOW $60 CH F16 Fighterstick NOW S100 CH Flight Stick Pro NOW $50 CH Force FX NOW $169 CH Game Card 3 Auto NOW 526 CH Jane's Cmbt Stick NOW $7: 'STRIP POKER PROFESSIONAL VOL. 2' combines the action of 5 Card Draw with some very different table stakes, 4 gorgeous opponents who are willing & able to bet it all for the chance to beat the pants off you! Art Worx (Adult) Release Date: NOW CD $39 rest Virtual Sowpanion \"GIRLFRIEND DONNA' With your new girlfriend game, you can get to talk to one of the cutest women in the world IN PLAIN ENGLISH! Our game features and artificial intelligence breakthrough. Watch her respond like a real woman Treasure Chest (Adult) Release Date: NOW PC CD $49 FOTO Dora's PRELE JECE DIVA X DIVA X:REBECCA\"Do you know how to get to the Avalon Agency?\". She asks in a sexy French accent. You kindly offer her a ride to her destination. Her eyes engage in silent Conversation with yours From rebecca there the adventure begins! Pixis (Adult) Release Date: NOW PC CD $39 INILATES INTERACTIVE 2009 Orient Sexos NOW $50 Asans in Wonderland NOW $39 BJ Babes NOW $25 Buster Cherry NOW $45 Casting Couch NOW $39 Circus NOW 524 Crystal Fantasy NOW $34 Cyber Photographer NOW $32 CyberXperience NOW 529 Diva X Ariana NOW $38 Diva XN NOW $39 Diva X Rebecca NOW $39 Doll House NOW $29 Dream Machine 2 NOW $49 Dream Machine NOW $36 Duke Screwem NOW $46 Face Jam NOW $27 Fantascenes NOW $36 Fantascenes 3 NOW $39 Fantascenes Anal NOW $39 Fun House NOW $39 Girlfriend Donna NOW $49 Giriftiend Teri NOW $39 Hot Leather 2 NOW $25 Hot Slots NOW $37 Interact Seymure Bt2 NOW $49 Japan Interactive NOW $46 Latex NOW 544 Lust Connection NOW $39 Nightwatch Int 3 NOW $46 Outpost 69 NOW $40 Passion Poker NOW $29 Penetration NOW $16 COMPUTER GAMES: ADULT INTERACTIVE  Playboy Interviews NOW $32 101 Sex Positions NOW $24 Pleasure Zones NOW $29 Porn Mania NOW $29 Asian Silk NOW 516 Porno Poker NOW $36 Bad Girls 2 NOW $12 Portis NOW $24 Bangkok Nights NOW $19 Private Investigator NOW $49 Black Book NOW $34 Private Pisr Park 2 NOW $49 Blond Justice 3 NOW $16 Private Prison NOW $44 Bonnie and Clyde NOW $12 Samurai Pervert 2 NOW $64 Borderline NOW $19 Sex Castle NOW $29 Cyberotica 2 NOW $25 Sex TV 2 NOW $25 Deep Throat Girls 5 NOW $25 Sex With Jena NOW $49 Deep Thit Grls 4Pk NOW $49 Sex The Game NOW $39 From Asia With Love NOW $15 Shock The Game NOW $49 Geisha's Secrets NOW $12 Space Sitens 2 NOW $34 Girls Doin Girls 2 NOW $19 Strip Fighter NOW $40 Girls Doin Gitis NOW $19 Time Warp NOW $44 Hawaii NOW S16 Ultra Slots NOW $28 Heidi's Girls Exposed NOW $19 Uitra Vixen NOW $49 Immortal Desire NOW $19 VCA 6-Pack NOW 539 InDefense of Savanah NOW $16 VCA S Sex NOW $29 Insatiable NOW $18 Vampires Kiss NOW $36 Internal Affairs NOW $16 Venus Playhouse NOW $29 Jade Palace NOW $19 Virtual Sex 2 NOW $39 Kama Sutra NOW $24 Virtual Sex Shoot NOW 544 La Blue Girl 4 NOW $22 Virtual Valerie 2 NOW $36 La Blue Gri Scm Sve NOW $25 Virtual Veronica NOW $48 Last Act NOW $16 Virtual Victor NOW S12Legend 4 NOW $16 Virtually Yours 2 NOW $39 Made In Japan NOW $16 What's Your Name NOW $29 Mata Hari NOW $22 Wheel of Fantasy NOW $29M ax Dominn & Felsh NOW $35 You Don't Know Dick NOW $35 Maximum Moments 1 NOW $29 Zoom NOW $36 Maximum Moments 2 NOW $29 MOTION Model's Memoirs NOW $19 Mystique Orient 2 NOW $24 Naked Reunion NOW 512 Natural Instinct NOW 518 New Machine 6 PK 2 NOW $44 New Machine 6 Pk NOW $42 Night Nurses NOW $16 Night at the Drive-In NOW $19 Nikki at Nite NOW $19 Oriental Action NOW $19 Oriental Diaries NOW $19 Oriental Syndrome NOW $22 Pandor...AAAH'S NOW $16 Peep Show 2 Girl GameNOW $32 Peeping Tom NOW $24 Platinum Six Pack NOW $44 Private Collctn 2 NOW $22 RX For a Gang Bang NOW $39 Racquelle in Wild NOW $24 Romsoft MPEG 3 Pk NOW $29 Romsoft Six Pack NOW $36 Samurai Pervert NOW $42 Savannah Superstar NOW $24 Secret Garden 2 NOW $19 Sex in Public Places NOW $16 Swedish Erotica NOW $19 Tokyo Nightlife NOW $48 Tokyo Nymphs NOW $19 Twin Angels 2 NOW $28 Ultimate Teasers NOW $12 Ultimate Tokyo NOW $29 Venus 5 NOW $20 Virgins Vol 3 NOW $39 1997 CHIPS & BITS.INC \"ROMSOFT 6 PACK Double Down, Doors of Passion 2 Sensuous Girls in 3D, Massive Melons, Touch Me, Feel Me and SUPER PINTADUILT 6 PAK! Private Screenings are what you'll get in this sexy 6 pack! Romsoft (Adult) Release Date: NOW PC 6-CD $32 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #068 CGW997P2 "


"Newest Releases Serving Since 1989 Open 24 Hours www.cdmag.com/chips.html or call 1-800-699-4263 Source Code 10917 COMPUTER GAMES: ADVENTURE \"X-COM APOCALYPSE' Earth 2084:Mega-Primus is the Tout RELEASE PRICE TOILE RELEASE PRICE RELEASE PRICE THE RELEASE PRICE 10th Planet 11/97 $48 Excalibur 2555 NOW $48 Patriot Games NOW $48 only habitable place left on the planet. For decades, life has Star Trk Judg Rt Coll NOW $38 7th Guest 2 W95 NOW $29 Gundam NOW $44 Phantasmagoria 2 NOW $54 Star Trek Voyager 11/97 $48 been idyllic until now. Violence, crime and missing persons COM Abe's Odysee NOW $42 Half Life 10.97 are up. Rumors of UFO Sightings and alien corpses are too $48 Plague 10/97 $12 Star Tre Str Fit Acad NOW $55 Aden Quest 01/98 $43 Iner Shrinking Hero NOW $43 NOW Planetfall $14 Starship Titanic 10/97 numerous to ignore. Mega-primus is under attack and you $46 PUSALPSE Adtertix Crisis 01/98 $45 Police Quest 5 SWAT NOW Incrdble ldts in Spce 10/97 $38 $47 Super Stardust NOW are it's only hope. $31 Advntres on Lego Isle NOW $35 Island of Dr Moreau NOW $40 Microprose (Strategy) Principles of Fear NOW $47 Temuji NOW $48 Release Date: NOW PC CD 546 Alien Earth 03.98 $45 lenogoud 10/97 $42 Quest for Glory 5 10/97 548 The Dig NOW $26 Armed and Delirious NOW $46 Journeyman Proct 3 01/98 $48 Rama NOW $39 The Last Express NOW $39 \"FALLOUT Set in the aftermath of a world-wide nuclear Atlantis NOW $40 Kings Ouest 8 12/97 $48 Redguard 10.97 554 The Trial NOW $44 war, it is your challenge to survive, as a person who Badlands 02/98 $48 Leisure Suit Larry 7 NOW $48 Return to Kronder 01/98 $45 Timelapse And Civil NOW $40 has grown up in a seduded, underground survival vault Beavis Butthd Virt St. NOW $31 Lst Fls Shrik Hlms 2 NOW $42 SWAT 2 10/97 $48 Titanic Jiny Out Time NOW $44 Circumstances force you outside, to a strange world 80 Black Dahlia 10/97 $13 Magic of Xanth NOW $42 Secret Mission 10/97 $44 Tone Rebellion NOW $52 years after the end of modem civilization. A world of Blade Runner 10/97 348 Metal Works NOW $38 Secret of Black Onyx 10/97 546 Twinsen's Odyssey NOW $47 mutants, radiation, gangs and violence Byzantine 10/97 546 Myst NOW $24 Secret of Vulcan Fury 12/97 548 Ubik 10/97 $42 Interplay (Roleplaying) Curse of Monkey Isle NOW $48 Myst 2 NOW $52 Shivers 2 W95 NOW $48 Under Killing Moon NOW $19 Release Date: NOW PC CD $48 Dark Hall 03/98 $44 Netstorm NOW $48 Siege of Stormhaven 10/98 $48 Versaille NOW $44 Death frap Dungeon 10/97 $48 Neverhood NOW $50 Sign of the Sun 11/97 $34 Warcraft Lord of Cins 11/97 $46 DARK REIGN In the 27th century, the Imperium with con Delirium NOW $46 Outlaws NOW $48 Sin 02/98 $49 Zombieville NOW $40 trol of precious water resources commands the fate of a Ecstatica 2 NOW $47 Overseer 12/97 $54 Space Bar NOW $46 Zork Gend Inquisitor 10/97 548 1,000 worlds. The Freedom Guard attempts to break the Evidence 10/97 $42 Pandora Directive NOW $46 Space Quest 3000 NOW $45 Zork Nemesis NOW $29 Imperium's grip on the galaxy and the water supply Activision (Strategy) COMPUTER: ROLE PLAYING Release Date: NOW PC CD $48 Alien Legacy NOW $29 Diablo NOW $37 Lands Lore Grdns Dst NOW $48 Serpent's Kiss NOW $43 NOW Arena Deluxe S17 Die By the Sword NOW $48 Locy of Kain Bld Omn NOW $40 Shadows of Death 'ULTIMA ONLINE allows literally thousands of peo03/98 $45 Baldur's Gate 11/97 $48 Dragon Lore2 NOW $39 Mageslayer NOW $39 Star Trk ING Fnl Unty NOW $32 ple to exist simultaneously in the same fantasy Battlespite NOW 549 Dungeon Master 2 NOW 518 Meridian 59 W95 NOW $19 Swords of Heroes 10,98 $46 game world over the Internet. Engage in battles with Betrayal in Antara NOW $47 Elder Scrolls 2 NOW $56 Might & Magic 6 11/97 $47 The Forsaken 04/98 $48 other players, take on perilous quests or chat in a tavern over a goblet of virtual wine. Pre-order now Broken Sword 11/97 $45 Elder Scrolls M wind 02/98 $54 Of Light & Darkness NOW $48 Ultima 7 Series NOW $15 Buccaneer NOW $46 Elric 11/97 $45 Ravnift 2 Sin Prop NOW $16 Ultima 8 Pagan N OW $15 and receive free man print and keychain. Cobra Mission NOW $29 NOW EverQuest $14 Realms of the Hinting NOW Origin (Roleplaying) $44 Ultima Online NOW $45 RIVEN Release Date: NOW PC CD $45 Dark Project 11/97 $49 FR Descent Undimin 10.97 $46 Redemption 02/98 $43 Ultima Undrwid 1 & 2 NOW $15 Dark Sun Online NOW $15 Fallout NOW $48 Rilms Atk Shadw Aiva NOW $36 Wizardry Gold W95 NOW 525 'MYST 2' will provide an exploration experience through a ROLE PLAYING GAMES new world filled with 7,000 images, over an hour of aniAD&D Core Rules NOW $36 Ars Magica 4th Ed NOW $26 GURPS Rulebook NOW $20 Nightspawn N OW $16 mation and original music, requiring acute skills of obserAD&D Supplmnt Rule NOW $59 Bloodshadows NOW $25 GURPS Goblins NOW $18O! Gods And Men NOW $22 vation AD&D Combat & Tact NOW $17 Bubblegum Crisis NOW $20 GURPS Grimoire NOW $15 Once Upon a Time NOW $14 Broderbund (Adventure) ADXD DM Guide NOW $16 Call of Cthulhu NOW $18 GURPS Illuminati NOW 516 Paranoia Fifth Ed NOW $20 Release Date: NOW PC CD $52 ARMORED AD&D Monstr Manual NOW $20 Cthulhu Live NOW $15 GURPS Mecha NOW $15 Pendragon 4th Ed. NOW $19 PAST AD&D Players HandbkNOW $20 Champions 4th Ed. NOW $22 GURPS Religion NOW $17 Psychosis Ship Fools NOW $13 'ARMORED FIST 2 Experience ground combat AD&D Skills & PowersNOW $17 Changeling NOW $21 GURPS Robots NOW $14 Ritts NOW $21 as the Army's newest tanks tear across 3D Voxel AD&D Spells & Magic NOW 519 Changeling Screen NOW $15 GURPS Vehicles NOW $16 Ritts Hardbound NOW $28 Space where the sense of realism and accuracy AD&D Charct Sheets NOW $9 Conspiracy X NOW $20 GURPS Voodoo N OW $14 Robotech NOW $11 will not be duplicated. Sit in on live action misAD&D Player Packs NOW $16 Cyberpunk 2020 NOW $17 GURPS Warehouse 23 NOW $15 RuneQuest 4th Ed. NOW $19 sion briefings and actual footage of armored AD&D Sea Devils NOW $17 Dragonlance 5th Age NOW $21 Heavy Gear NOW $25 Shadowrun 2nd Ed. NOW $20 vehicles. World Bldt Guide NOW $17 Earthidawn NOW $18 in Nomine NOW $25 Skyrealms Jorune NOW $17 Novalogic (Simulation) AD&D Rod of 7 Pets NOW $27 Earthdawn Compnion NOW $15 In Nomine GM Pack NOW $13 Star Wars Revised NOW $25 Release Date: NOW PC CD $49 AD&D Faith & Avatar NOW $18 Earthdawn GM Pack NOW $11 In Nomine Limited Ed NOW $28 Traveller NOW $24 AD&D 4 from Commy NOW $17 Fading Suns NOW $22 Macross 2 NOW $11 Vampire Clan Books NOW $10 \"BETRAYAL IN ANTARA' An Emperor faces a crumbling AD&D Night Below NOW $25 GURPS Aliens NOW $14 Mage 2nd Ed. NOW $21 Vampire 2nd Ed. NOW $24 infrastructure where bribery, intrigue, nepotism, deceit AD&D Dark Lords NOW S10 GURPS Atomic Horrorow $14 Mage Chronicles 1 NOW $19 Vampire Player Guide NOW $19 and assassination run rampant. Command four main AD&D Ravenloft NOW $25 GURPS Autoduel NOW $15 Mechwarrior NOW $13 Warhammer Fantasy NOW $19 characters and develop their skills as you talk with, fight, AD&D Requiem NOW $25 GURPS Celtic Myth NOW $15 Mechwarrior Comp NOW $12 Werewolf NOW $24 help, and hinder various Empire inhabitants. AD&D Jakandor NOW $17 GURPS Cthulhupunk NOW $16 Millenium's End 20 NOW $17 Witchcraft NOW $20 Sierra (Roleplaying) Albedo GURPS Dinosaurs NOW $15 Mutation CD NOW $30 World Necroscope NOW $25 Release Date: NOW PC CD $47 Albedo Bonus Pack NOW $30 GURPS Compendium INOW 518 Nephilim NOW $18 Wraith NOW $24 COLLECTIBLE CARD GAMES \"GURPS' The most flexible roleplaying game system ever. You can adventure in any world you can BattleTech BP Mercs NOW $2 MTG Chronicles BP NOW $1 Magic Gathering BP NOW $1 Mythos BP Misku NOW $2 imagine. All rules are carefully organized, indexed Battfetech Booster NOW $2 MTG Mirage BP NOW $2 Magic Ice Age BP NOW $2 Star Trek Booster NOW $2 and cross-referenced. You can create the exact Battletech Starter NOW $8 MTG Mirage SD NOW $8 Magic Ice Age SD NOW $7 Star Trek NG BP NOW $2 character you want to play. Dr Who Booster NOW $2 MTG Starter NOW $7 Middle Earth Dragons BPNOW $2 Star Trek NG Q-Contin NOW $2 Steve Jackson Games Dr Who Starter NOW $8 MTG Tempest BP NOW $2 Middle Earth Dok Minion NOW $2 Star Trek Starter NOW $8 Release Date: NOW RPG $20 Great Dalmuti NOW $5 MTG Tempest SD NOW $8 Middle Earth W B P NOW 53 Star Trek TNG SD NOW $7 Hiluminati BP NOW $2 MIG Visions NOW $2 Middle Earth Wind SD NOW 59 Star Wars BP NOW $2 iluminati SD NOW $8 MIG Weatherlight NOW $2 Monty Python Starter NOW $9 Star Wars SD NOW 57 \"MAGIC THE GATHERING 5TH EDITION' This deck contains 60 The Gather MTG 5th Ed BP NOW $2 MTG BP Homends NOW 51 Monty Python Booster NOW $3 X-Files Booster NOW $2 tradable game cards, randomly assorted, plus a rule book. Each MTG 5th Ed SD NOW $7 MTG BP Falten Empire NOW $1 Mythos BP Cthulhu NOW $2 X-Files Starter NOW $9 player must have a deck. This deck may be enhanced with more SEGA SATURN cards sold in booster packs, SONY PLAYSTATION Wizards of the Coast ASCII Sphere 360 11/97 569 Flying Saucer NOW $52 Albert Odyssey NOW $52 Lunar Directors Cut 11/97 $46 Release Date: NOW CG $7 Alundra 10/97 549 Freak'n Fast 10/97 546 Blades of Rage NOW $46 Bugrider's 10/97 549 Frogger 11/97 $46 Blast Chamber NOW $49 NBA Live 98 11/97 $49 'SHINING THE HOLY ARK' You play Arthur, a Bushido Blade NOW $50 Grand Theft Auto 10/97 $51 Bomberman NOW $52 NHL Hockey 99 10/97 $49 mercenary sword fighter, sent with his companC&C Red Alert 10/97 $49 H ardball 6 NOW $50 Command & Conquer NOW $52 Ninja 01/98 $50 lons, in to a cursed mine to capture the evil ninja Cardinal Syn 12/97 $49 Hell Racer 10/97 849 Courier Crisis 11/97 $49 Panzer Dragon Saga 03/98 $49 Rodi. You encounter malicious monsters, hauntCastle of Damned 11/97 554 Joust Epic 10/97 $49 Crypt Killer NOW S46 Pitfall 10/97 $52 ed forests and three riddies, if answered correctSATURN Clock Tower NOW 514 MK Mythos Subzero NOW $46 Dark Legend NOW $39 Propaganda 02/98 $54 ly, uncover three sacred treasures College Football 93 10.97 549 Mace: The Dark Age 11/97 $45 Darklight Conflict NOW $44 Quake NOW 554 Sega (Roleplaying) Cool Boarders 2 11/97 546 Mage Slayer 10/97 $49 Darkstalkers 3 11/97 $19 Racers Megamix NOW $54 Release Date: NOW SAT $46 Courier Crisis 1097 549 Monster Rancher NOW $49 Diablo 11/97 $54 Rampage World Tour 11/97 $46 Crash Bandicoot 2 1097 554 NFL Game Day '98 NOW $49 Dream Knight NOW $52 Sacred Pools NOW $52 'MAGIC THE GATHERING: BATTLEMAGE' A devastating Croc GIC NHL Hockey 98 1097 $49 11/97 549 FIFA Soccer 98 11/98 $49 Sega Ages planeswalker war rages across the continent of NOW $40 Dead or Alive 11/97 546 Ogre Battle NOW $49 Fighters Megamix NOW $52 Shining Holy Ark NOW $45 Corondor. Ravidel has gone insane from grief and The Gathering Death Keep TLEMAGE NOW $52 Psybadek 11/97 $46 Free Runner NOW S52 Sonic The Fighters NOW betrayal, seeking the destruction of all other planeswalk$54 Dablo 11/97 $54 Suikoden 2 11/97 $49 Heir of Zendor NOW $52 Speed Freak 10/97 $54 ers and the conquest of land itself. Duke Nukem 3D 12/97 554 Toh Shin Den 3 NOW $46 Herc's Adventures NOW $42 Tenka 10/97 $49 Acclaim (Roleplaying) Dynasty Warriors NOW $46 Vandal Hearts Release Date: NOW Psx $50 NOW $46 10/97 Last Bronx $54 Tomb Raider 2 11/97 $54 Final Fantasy Tactics 01/98 556 Warcraft 2 NOW $44 Layersection NOW $54 Worldwide Soccer 9811/97 549 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #068 Final Fantasy VII NOW $72 Wild Arms NOW $44 Legend of Oasis NOW $46XMen vs. Streetfight 1097 $54 Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. MONEY ORDERS UNDER $200 SAME AS CASH, COD $8. Price, availability, offer subject to change at any time. Release schedules Standard Priority USUS M In Canada The World and shipping times are approximate, not guaranteed, and subject to change at any time Hardware orders may require additional shipping and handling charges, Detectives replaced with Z-10 DO 22 Days 1 Day 7 Days 7:14 same product. All sales final. Call for details Shipping and handling charges calculated on a per order, per shipment, and per item basis. The \"per order charge is charged once per order perder 51.00 $200 $2.00 $2.00 $2.00 placed and the per item\" charge is charged once for each item ordered and the per shipment charge is charged once for each shipment we make to you. Each United States order will be sho t $1.25 $100 $300 $7.00 $2.00 $200 include a 12-month subscription to Computer Games Strategy Plus Magazine, for which $10.00 of the order cost will be allocated $0.75 S101 S100 $200 $2.00 01997 CHAPS & HTS, ING CLWIP BEANTAR GURPS STEVE SHININGHOLYART 2 PlayStatione "


"Can You Reveal the Secret Behind the Mask? Search the for their ancient secret of and win a new, 1998 a multi media or an all-expense paid MOS in the Mask of Eternity INTERNET SCAVENGER HUNT are being revealed now! Join at http://www.sierra.com/mask to win! TERNIT) ETE Complete contest rules at www.sierra.com/mask  1997 Sierra On-Line, Inc. and/or TM designate trademarks of, or licensed to, Sierra On-Line, Inc., Bellevue, WA 98007. All rights reserved. "


"Computer Gaming FREE PRODUCT INFORMATION -182 221 -----1. Fill in your name and address and check off 3. The literature will be mailed to you from 2. Circle the numbers on the card that correspond to IT'S AS EASY AS 1,2,3 your answers to the seven research questions. the ads or articles you'd like more information about the advertiser free of charge. CIRCLE FOR FREE INFORMATION Vold after December 31, 1997 001 002 003 004 005 006 007 008 009 010 011 012 013 014 015 016 017 018 019 020 021 022 023 024 025 026 027 028 029 030 031 032 033 034 035 036 037 038 039 040 041 042 043 044 045 046 047 048 049 050 051 052 053 054 055 056 057 058 059 060 061 062 063 064 065 066 067 068 069 070 071 072 073 074 075 076 077 078 079 080 081 082 083 084 085 086 087 088 089 090 091 092 093 094 095 096 097 098 099 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155 156 157 158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181 183 184 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 198 199 200 201 202 203 204 205 206 207 208 209 210 211 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 223 224 225 226 227 228 229 230 231 232 233 234 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 243 244 245 246 248 249 250 251 252 253 254 255 256 257 258 259 260 261 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 273 274 275 276 277 278 279 280 281 282 283 284 285 286 287 288 289 290 291 292 293 294 295 296 297 298 299 300 301 302 303 304 305 306 307 308 309 310 311 312 313 314 315 316 317 318 319 320 321 322 323 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 331 332 333 334 335 336 337 338 339 340 341 342 343 344 345 346 347 348 349 350 351 352 353 354 355 356 357 358 359 360 361 362 363 364 365 366 367 368 369 370 371 372 373 374 375 376 377 378 379 380 381 382 383 384 385 386 387 388 389 390 391 392 393 394 395 396 397 398 399 400 1. What is the highest level of education that 5. How often do you usually buy computer games? Name CGW 9/97-4 you completed? (Check one only) (Check one only) 01. Some high school or less 01. Once a week 02. Graduated High School 02. Once every two to three weeks 03. Some College of Technical school 03. Once a month Title Telephone 04. Graduated College 04. Once every two to three months 05. Post Graduate school 05. Once every four to six months 06 BOri a year LILIT 2. Computer currently owned is: (Check all that apply) 6. Where are you most likely to purchase games? Company Name 01. IBM compatible (Intel standard) (Check all that apply) 02. Macintosh 01. Independent computer store 04. Computer store chain TUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUU 03. Amiga 02. Consumer electronic store 05. Direct from vendor 04. Dedicated game machine 03. Mass merchandising store 06. Mail order Address 05. None 7. What is your (and others in household) favorite type 3. Il Intel, what level? (Check one only) of game? (Check one in each column) U UUUUUUUUUUUUUUU 01. Power PC Yourself Other 1 Other 2 02. 01. Strategy State | Pentium (586) Zip City 03. 486 02. War/Military 04. 386 03. Role Playing 05. 286 04. Brain Teasers 05. Card 4. Please send me a one-year (12-issue) subscription to Computer Gaming World for $27.94 4. Do you own (or plan to buy in next 6 months) 06. Sport a CD-ROM? (Check one only) (U.S. price); all other countries add US$16.00 for additional postage. 07 Action Arcade 01. Own 08. Educational 02. Plan to buy (6 months) In a Hurry? Fax This Card To: 609-829-0692 09. Adventure "


"FOR QUICKER RESPONSE FAX TO (609) 829-0692 NO POSTAGE NECESSARY IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES Free Product Information BUSINESS REPLY MAIL FIRST-CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO. 816 RIVERTON, NJ POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY ADDRESSEE Computer Gaminy PO BOX 10126 RIVERTON, NJ 08076-8626 III/ LI...II "


"ADVERTISER INDEX 120 249 Haa 104 ww LES 90-91 89 C8 %BBm Q2 189 284 114 III IESELBER 17 80-81 169 299 78.79 174 FREE R.S.# COMPANY PRODUCT 3DFX Voodoo ABC Interactive College Football ABC Interactive Indy Racing ABC Interactive Monday Night Fox tlxall ABC Interactive Questforthe Best Access Software, Inc Links IS Acclaim Constructor Acclaim NHL Accokacke Jack Nicklaus Accolade Legends ACTLaboratorylid EagleMAX Activision Blood Omni Activision Heavy Car Activision Heven II Activision Zork ATI Technologies, Inc. Playing for Keeps Avalon Hill Game Company Defiance Bazooka SAS) Drowned God Behaviour (Malo Film Interactive) Time Wamiors Bethesda Softworks Battlespire Bethesda Softworks X-Car Blizzard Entertainment Star Craft Blue Byte Software Extreme Assault Blue Byte Software Incubation Bungie Software Myth CH Products Jane's Comixt Slick Chiprs & Bits M.O. Proxlucts Creative lals, Inc. AWE Value Cryo Interactive Entertainment Atlantis CroInteractive Entertainment Dragon Lorell Cyclone Studios Uprising Diamond Diamond3D Audio Discovery Communications, Inc. Discovery CD-ROM Eidos Conquest Earth Eados Deathtrap Dungeon Eidos Fhing Nightmares II Eicks Terracick Eicks Tomb Raicker empire Interactive Entertainment Time Sharks Falcon-Northwest Falcon MACHV Cateway 2000 FamilyPC Multimedia GT Interactive Software Mage Slyer GT Interactive Software Shadow Warrior GT Interactive Software Total Annihilation GT Interactive Software Unreal Impact Interactive Publishing Dog Day Interactive Magic iF-16 Interactive Magic Intergraph Computer Systems lutense 3D Intergraph Computer Systems Interyrapl Computer Systems Interplay Productions, Inc. Bakhur's Gate Interplay Productions, Inc. Cannagedan Interplay Productions, Inc. Descent to Unxker Mountain Interplay Proxluctions, Inc. Dic Bythe Sword Interplay Productions, Inc. Fallout Interplay Prochuctions, Inc. OfLight and Darkness Interplay Proxhxctions, Inc. Realmsofthe Haunting Interplay Prexhuctions, Inc. Redneck Rampage 59 Interplay Prochuctions, Inc. StarfleetAcademy JavaSoft Trade Secrets Jazz Spxarkers MPACT LIVEEntertainment The Amal Lakayuts Entertainment Compuy Rebellion LaicasArts Entertainment Company Ouns LancasArts Entertainment Company Shadows of the limpire FREE PAGE R.S.# COMPANY PRODUCT PAGE 112-113 IIS Lawasts Entertainment Company X-Wing Vs Tie Fighter 252-253 Minis Crucible 145 Mavis Streets of SimCity 187 MEDIAON Meclia On Computer Systems 292-293 MGM/A Interactive Machine Hunter Micron Electronics, Inc. Millennia 164-165 244-245 MicroProse 7th Legion 128-129 222-223 MicroProse Star Trek Generations MicroProse XCOMApocalypse CSC7 Microsoft Age of Empires 264 Microsoft Close Combat:A Brichge Too Far Minxscape Creatures 116-117 Motion Software Recruitment New Wodd Computing Might & Magic VI 225-227 58-59 ORIGINSystems, Inc. Ultima Online Panasonic Forced Alliance 124-125 Panasonic PostalCD-Rom Piranha Interactive Publishing Psygnosis Fomu ipe Out XL Psygnosis GPolice 201203 Quaterdeck Entertainment Company QEMM 4-5 RedOrb Entertainment JouncyMan 3: Legacy of Time 2014-2015 RedOb Entertainment Red Orb Entertainment Red Orb Entertainment Raven 72-73 RedOrb Entertainment Take No Prisoners 82-83 RedOrb Entertainment Warbreeds 84-85 285-287 RedOto Entertainment Warlords III SegaSoft Heat 150-151 SegaSoft Love Your Marbles 268 SegaSoft Scud 246-247 182-183 Sierra On-Line Betrayalat Antara 232-233 Sierra On-Line Civil War: General 43.45,47 Sierra On-Line Front Page Sports Golf 220 48-49 Sierra On-Line Half Life 18-19 Sierra On-Line Maskof Etemity 190-191 50-51 Sierra On-Line Maskof Etematy Contest Page Sierra On-Line Nascar2 Sierra On-Line Outpost II 240-241 Sierra On-Line Pro Pilot 101-103 Sierra On-Line Red Barron 2 40-41 157-160 Sierra On-Line Trophy Bass 10-11 Simon & Schuster Starship Titanic 265267 269 107-109 Simatronics Dragon Realms C2C41 Smultronics GemStone III 119-121 Sir-Tech Amxd & Delinous Sir-Tech XFire 96-97 Software Source PC CD-ROM Cames 70-71 Sound Source Interactive Final Conflict 166-167 SouthPeak Interactive Drachen Zor 172-173 South Peak Interactive Temujin 235 Spacetec IMC Corporation SpaceOrb 32-33 Strategic Simulations, Inc. Dark Colony 176-177 136-137 Strategic Simulations, Inc. Imperialism 132-133 196-197 Strategic Simulations, Inc. Pacific General 192-193 Strategic Simulations, Inc. Panzer General II 238-239 Take 2 Interactive Software Black Dahlia 259-261 179 Talonsoft East Front Talonsoft Prelude 230-231 161 ThunderSeat Technologies ThunderSeat 140-141 United CD-ROM Mail Order Products 212 Vic Tokai, Inc. Dark Rift 276-277 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Lands of Lore: Guardians of Destiny 184-185 28-29 246 Virgin Interactive Entertainment NHL Power Play 66-67 206207 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Sabre Ace 198-199 72 WizardWorks, Inc. Cryptic Passage 52-53 SERS & 191 Var Inc. 297 247 239 SEEREERS S & S2 266 254 143 E "


"Media On« Game Extreme MGPX166 Featuring: MGPX200 Featuring:  Intel 166MHz Pentium Processor with MMX Technology  Intel TC 430HX Motherboard with 512K cache 16 MB EDO RAM/1.44MB Floppy  2.1GB EIDE Hard Drive S3 ViRGE w/4MB EDO RAM Yamaha Sound on board 12X CDROM 104 Win95 Keyboard & Mouse  Mini-ATX CASE with 235 Watt Power Supply $ 999 Microsoft windows 95 & McAfee Virus Scan Monitor Sold Separately For 200MHZ W/MMXTM add $145  Intel 200MHz Pentium Processor with MMXTM Technology  Intel TC 430HX Motherboard with 512K cache  32 MB EDO RAM/1.44MB Floppy  2.5GB EIDE Hard Drive  S3 VIRGE 3D with 4MB EDO RAM  Yamaha Sound on board  16X CDROM  104 Win95 Keyboard & Mouse  Mini-ATX CASE with 235 Watt Power Supply $1.299  Microsoft windows 95  Media On Game PAK For 233MHz w/MMXTM add $125 Nole. Intel Inside Logo and Pentium are registered trademarks and MMX is a trademark or Intel Corporation. All other names are properties of their respective corporations. Price and specifications are subject to change without notice. Not responsible for typographic errors. Good only while supplies last. "


"MEDIA ON  Media OnTM Graphic Extreme MEPX200 Featuring: Expert II Featuring:  Intel 200MHz Pentium Processor with MMXTM Technology  Intel TC 430HX Motherboard with 512K cache  32 MB EDO RAM/1.44MB Floppy  4.5 GB Ultra Wide SCSI W/UW SCSI Controller  MATROX 3D with 4MB SGRAM Yamaha Sound on board 16X CDROM 100MB SCSI internal ZIP Drive 104 Win95 Keyboard & Mouse $2.155 Mini-ATX CASE with 235 Watt Power Supply  Microsoft windows 95  McAfee Virus Scan For 233MHZ W/MMXTM add $125 Intel 233MHz Pentium II Processor with MMXTM Technology Intel PT440FX Motherboard  32 MB EDO RAM/1.44MB Floppy 4.5 GB Ultra Wide SCSI w/UW SCSI Controller MATROX 3D with 4MB EDO RAM  Yamaha Sound on board 16X SCSI CDROM 104 Win95 Keyboard & Mouse  Mini-ATX CASE with 235 Watt Power Supply $ 2399 Microsoft windows 95 McAfee Virus Scan For Pentium II 266MHz w/MMXTM add $175 MMX intel inside  2 years limited warranty 12 years Labor To order call: 888-U-GAME-IT (888-842-6348) pentium II CIRCLE READER SERVICE #102 "


"HALL OF FAME W elcome to the operatovenes forum pe r elcome to the Cooperstown of Computer Games. Here you'll find, raised upon pedestals, the games that broke roke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for hours untold. HIGHLIGHTS TYCO S PRATESI Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon Sid Meier's Pirates! MicroProse, Inc., 1990 MicroProse, 1987 id Meier, inspired by SIMCITY, envisioned an ID MEIER'S PIRATES! is one of those games accelerated real-time strategy game in that broke the mold. It debuted on the which would-be railroad tycoons could Commodore 64 and reached its apex in test their skills on multiple levels. In So the Amiga version, with its great graphMeier's RAILROAD TYCOON, you started with tiled topographical ics and Jeff Briggs' soundtrack. At times, it was and natural resource maps of North America or Europe. After examining the hard to tell whether it was an adventure game, an action possible routes and cargoes, you could build an infrastructure of rail lines, game, or a strategy game. The game required exploration, as you traveled rolling stock, support services, and ancillary businesses to exploit the terrain from one port to another in search of enemies and valuable cargo; featured where you were building your system. action sequences, as you dueled rival captains and mutinous crew members The only catch was that the system of interlocking businesses (no Sherman via horizontal scrolling fencing; and incorporated real-time strategy, as you or Clayton antitrust laws here) had to make enough profit to keep Al stock. tried to outmaneuver opposing vessels in tactical combat holders interested. If your taste ran more toward the robber baron, it was pos Gamers who liked resource management could handle ship's inventories sible to focus on stock manipulation and speculation. The only disappoint and pore over virtual charts at their leisure before leaving port, but once the ment was that the competition was not multiplayer. anchor was raised, the game kept moving. Conversation with various gover: If you were more interested in railroad operations, you might have found your nors and functionaries, not to mention the governors' beautiful daughters, self setting up a series of milk runs and playing for hours primarily as a dis. was handled via a multiple-choice menu, as were most conversational trees patcher. Most of us found ourselves balancing our capacity for building, invest during that era. Sid Meier's PIRATES! may well be considered the most suc. ment, and operations in an exciting challenge. By offering the elements of a cessful hybrid game in computer game history. \"software toy\" and a game with intense economic competition, So METER'S Modern Inductees RAILROAD TYCOON proved that it is possiALONE IN THE DARK MASTER OF ORION ble to create both an open-ended and (1-Motion, 1992) (MicroProse, 1993) competitive game. BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR PANZER GENERAL (Dynamix, 1993) (SSI, 1994) Inductees Prior to 1989 DAY OF THE TENTACLE RED BARON (LucasArts, 1993) (Dynamix, 1990) BATTLE CHESS (Interplay Productions, 1988) DOOM SID MEIER'S CIVILIZATION CHESSMASTER (The Software Toolworks, 1986) (id Software, 1993) (MicroProse, 1991) DUNGEON MASTER (FTL SOFTWARE, 1987) FALCON 3.0 Sto MEIER's RAILROAD TYCOON EARL WEAVER BASEBALL (Electronic Arts, 1986) (Spectrum HoloByte, 1991) (MicroProse, 1990) EMPIRE (Interstel, 1978) FRONT PAGE SPORTS FOOTBALL PRO THE SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER (MicroProse, 1988) (Dynamix, 1993) (LucasArts, 1990) GETTYSBURG: THE TURNING POINT (SSI, 1986) GUNSHIP THEIR FINEST HOUR KAMPFGRUPPE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) (MicroProse, 1989) (LucasArts, 1989) MECH BRIGADE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) HARPOON TIE FIGHTER MIGHT & MAGIC (New World Computing, 1986) (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) (LucasArts, 1994) M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) KING'S QUEST V ULTIMA VI SID MEIER'S PIRATES! (MicroProse, 1987) (Sierra On-Line, 1990) (Origin Systems, 1990) SIMCITY (Maxis, 1987) LEMMINGS ULTIMA UNDERWORLD STARFLIGHT (Electronic Arts, 1986) (Psygnosis, 1991) (Origin Systems, 1992) THE BARD'S TALE (Electronic Arts, 1985) LINICS 386 PRO WING COMMANDER I, II, & III ULTIMA III (Origin Systems, 1983) (Access Software, 1992) (Origin Systems, 1990-91) ULTIMA IV (Origin Systems, 1985) WAR IN RUSSIA (Strategic Simulations, 1984) M-1 TANK PLATOON WOLFENSTEIN 3-D (MicroProse, 1989) (id Software, 1992) WASTELAND (Interplay Productions, 1986) WIZARDAY (Sir Tech Software, 1981) MASTER OF MAGIC X-COM (MicroProse, 1994) (MicroProse, 1994) ZORK (Infocom, 1981) CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"PATCHES omputer game programs have grown so massive, and the number of hardware configurations has become so huge, that incompatibilities and glitches are frustratingly common. Software fixes, or \"patches,\" for buggy programs have become a necessary evil until we reach the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs. New patches are in red. issues over the Internet are also much improved. that are experiencing lock-ups will find this more refreshing than a 30. second timeout. A-10 Cuba! V1.2: Faster frame rates, better messaging and better joystick controls are but a few of the improvements to keep you in the air longer. Beware: This works only if you have the previous 1.01 patch installed! Dragons in the Mist V1.01: Patch in the Pacific, WWII. Outlaws V1.1: The new 3DIX support makes this faster on the draw than Jesse James Check for new patches on the demo disc. Harpoon Classic '97 V1.63d: The latest Win 95 executable to make your favorite fleet more seaworthy. Age of Rifles V1.4: Commanders may now name playby email files and go into combat with greater confidence that the dreaded system freeze enemy will not harass their flanks. For other fixes, be sure to reconnoiter the exhaustive READ.ME file. Privateer 2 The Darkening: Since the movie is the best part of the game, it's nice that this patch solves most of the video difficulties. ZDNet Ghost Bear's Legacy V1.1: Mechs will now move through their normal range of motion using various rudder pedal input devices. Joystick throttle commands should work as well. US Navy Fighters '97 V1.3: You'll fly faster with fewer 3D complaints. This also enables dogfights over TCP/IP Age of Sail V1.05: Bowlstern chasers no longer reload after being destroyed. There are also improve ments to the ship repair rules. iM1A2 Abrams for Win 95 V1.10: New treads for Interactive Magic's tank simulator. X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter V1.10: Your fighters now handle better than a wet womprat in an ice storm on Hoth during multiplayer games. Patches can usually be downloaded from online networks (such as CompuServe and ZDNet), from CGW's Web site (www. computergaming.com) or from the individual software publisher's Web site (see listing below). AH-64D Longbow Gold V1.04: Fixes movie player and garbled speech problem for the gold version of this Jane's combat sim only. Interstate '76 V1.06: More than a dozen fixes make this the hippest baddest multi-melee around-espe. cially since the host no longer gets double kills, and \"partial deaths\" are no more Air Warrior II V1.01a: For better multiplayer furballs. Battleground Shiloh V1.1: Winner of CGW's best wargame is improved even more by this latest upgrade, which includes Al tweaks and more realistic casualty rates. Magic The Gathering V1.1: Better Al, sound, and animation are but a few of the fixes in MicroProse's version of the Wizards of the Coast classic Broken Alliance V1.02: Latest upgrade for HPS Simulations' addon to PANTHERS IN THE SHADOWS. MechWarrior Mercenaries V1.06: Regardless of clan affilia. tion, all will benefit from this latest upgrade, which repairs more 'mech deficiencies. Civilization Il Scenarios V1.1: Mostly tweaking to balance scenarios and to stiffen the challenge of this commendable add-on pack. Master of Orion II V 1.31: This latest in galactic technology evidently repairs much of the damage to the diplomacy model, as well as adding an initiative-based system for i s hip combat. There is a separate upgrade file available in German. Publisher Web Sites Many patches are available from the publishers at the following sites: Accolade: www.accolade.com Activision: www.activision.com Apogee/3d Realms: www.apogee1.com Avalon Hill: www.avalonhill.com Bethesda: www.bethsoft.com Big Time Software: www.bigtimesoftware.com Blizzard: www.blizzard.com Eidos: www.eidos.com EA: www.ea.com Epic MegaGames: www.epicgames.com HPS Simulations: www.hpssims.com Id Software: www.idsoftware.com Interactive Magic: www.imagicgames.com Interplay: www.interplay.com Jane's Combat Simulations: www.janes.ea.com LucasArts: www.lucasarts.com MicroProse/Spectrum HoloByte: www.microprose.com Microsoft: www.microsoft.com New World Computing: www.nwcomputing.com Origin: www.origin.ea.com Papyrus: www.sierra.com/papyrus Sierra On-Line: www.sierra.com SSI: www.ssionline.com Talonsoft: www.talonsoft.com Virgin: www.vie.com Daggerfall V1.07.213: Another welcome patch for Bethesda's awardwinning RPG. MDK Video Patches: If you thought the mayhem was merry before, wait until you see the SVGA carnage with these new patches for 3Dfx and Rendition based cards! Diablo V1.03: Dungeon delvers of all persuasions will benefit from this upgrade. No longer can illegal spells be cast in town, and this patch ends duplicate item genera. tion at the Blacksmith and Witch within the same game. Game speed, latency, and packet loss NCAA Championship Basketball: NEC Systems with Alliance Pro Motion Video Cards SEPTEMBER 1997 CCW "


"THE COMPUTER GAMING POLL A MONTHLY SURVEY OF CGW SUBSCRIBERS ach month, 2,000 CGW subscribers are selected at random to rate 100 computer games. The results of that poll are combined with the results of previous months to yield a cumulative average for the best plays in gaming. If you receive a ballot, please return it with your ratings so that other gamers and game publishers can benefit from your feedback. GAME S TOP ACTION GAMES COMPANY Quake Pack 1: Scourge of Armagon id Software/Hipnotic Tomb Raider Eidos Duke Nukem 3D Apogee/3DRealms Interstate '76 Activision Crusader: No Remorse EA/Origin The Need for Speed SE EA Quake id Software Crusader: No Regret EA/Origin Outlaws LucasArts The Need for Speed EA SCORE 9.32 8.40 8.40 8.16 8.16 8.11 8.03 7.89 7.84 7.56 3 4 5 6 7 8 TOP ADVENTURE GAMES GAMES COMPANY Pandora Directive Access Gabriel Knight 2 Sierra Rama Sierra The Neverhood Dreamworks Spycraft Activision Circle of Blood Virgin Full Throttle LucasArts Lighthouse Sierra Leisure Suit Larry 7 Sierra Zork Nemesis Activision SCORE 8.39 8.30 7.94 7.74 7.60 7.56 7.52 7.47 7.47 7.27 6 7 8 9 10 10 JACK TOP CLASSIC/PUZZLE GAMES GAME COMPANY You Don't Know Jack II Berkeley Systems You Don't Know Jack Sports Berkeley Systems You Don't Know Jack Berkeley Systems Power Chess Sierra Mind Grind Microforum Incredible Toons Sierra Incredible Machine 2 Sierra Monopoly Virgin/Westwood Baku Baku Sega Trivial Pursuit Hasbro SCORE 8.22 8.19 8.18 7.28 7.27 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 cown TOP SIMULATION/SPACE COMBAT GAMES GAME COMPANY SCORE Wing Commander IV EA/Origin 8.42 MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries Activision 8.24 MechWarrior 2 Activision 8.20 AH-64 Longbow EA/Origin 8.13 X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter LucasArts 8.12 U.S. Marine Fighters EA 7.90 Silent Hunter 7.88 EF2000 Ocean 7.71 Flying Corps Empire 7.59 U.S. Navy Fighters 7.58 7.23 SSI 7.06 6.90 5.98 5.23 10 EA WARCRAFT GAME SCORE 8.69 8.32 8.32 8.29 TOP SPORTS GAMES GAME COMPANY Links LS Access Nascar 2 Sierra NBA Live '97 EA Sports NHL '97 EA Sports Grand Prix 2 MicroProse Triple Play '97 EA Sports Nascar Racing Sierra FPS Football Pro '97 Sierra NHL Hockey '96 EA Sports FPS Football Pro '96 Sierra TOP STRATEGY GAMES COMPANY WarCraft II Expansion Disk Blizzard Red Alert Virgin/Westwood WarCraft II Blizzard Heroes II New World Computing Civilization II MicroProse C&C: Covert Operations Virgin/Westwood Command & Conquer Virgin/Westwood Civilization II: Scenarios MicroProse Red Alert: Counterstrike Virgin/Westwood Heroes of Might & Magic New World Computing 8.17 Gen DO NOWN SCORE 8.89 8.83 8.82 8.81 8.77 8.34 8.30 8.18 8.02 7.91 7.62 7.62 7.58 7.54 7.50 TOP ROLE-PLAYING GAMES GAME COMPANY SCORE Diablo Blizzard 8.80 Daggerfall Bethesda 7.48 Anvil of Dawn New World Computing 7.22 Albion Blue Byte 6.15 owcown ULUI! VOWN TOP WARGAMES GAMES COMPANY Steel Panthers Campaign Disk SSI Steel Panthers 11 SSI Steel Panthers SSI Battleground: Shiloh TalonSoft Battleground: Antietam TalonSoft Tigers on the Prowl 2.0 HPS Simulations Battleground: Waterloo TalonSoft Battleground: Gettysburg TalonSoft Robert E. Lee: Civil War General Sierra Age of Sail TalonSoft SCORE 8.69 8.51 8.43 8.12 8.08 7.83 7.70 7.53 7.34 6.94 CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"TOP 100 GAMES Eidos Sierra GAME COMPANY TYPE SCORE * 1 Quake Pack 1: Scourge of Armagon id Software/Hipnotic AC 9.32 2 WarCraft II Expansion Disk Blizzard ST 8.89 3 Red Alert Virgin/Westwood ST 8.83 4 Warcraft II Blizzard ST 8.82 5 Heroes II New World Computing ST 8.81 6 Diablo Blizzard RP 8.80 7 Civilization 11 MicroProse ST 8.77 8 Links LS Access SP 8.69 * Steel Panthers Campaign Disk SSI WG 8.69 10 Steel Panthers II SSI WG 8.51 11 Steel Panthers SSI WG 8.43 A 12 Wing Commander IV EA/Origin SI 8.42 13 Tomb Raider AC 8.40 Duke Nukem 3D Apogee/30Realms AC 8.40 * 15 Pandora Directive Access AD 8.39 16 C&C: Covert Operations Virgin/Westwood ST 8.34 17 Nascar 2 Sierra SP 8.32 NBA Live '97 EA Sports SP 8.32 19 Command & Conquer Virgin/Westwood ST 8.30 Gabriel Knight 2 Sierra AD 8.30 21 NHL Hockey '97 EA Sports SP 8.29 22 MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries Activision SI 824 * 23 You Don't Know Jack II Berkeley Systems CP 8.22 24 MechWarrior 2 Activision S8.20 25 You Don't Know Jack Sports Berkeley Systems CP 8.19 26 Civilization II: Scenarios MicroProse ST 8.18 You Don't Know Jack Berkeley Systems CP 8.18 28 Grand Prix 2 MicroProse SP 8.17 29 Interstate '76 Activision AC 8.16 Crusader: No Remorse EA/Origin AC 8.16 31 AH-64 Longbow EA/Origin SI 8.13 32 X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter EucasArts Battleground: Shiloh TalonSoft WG 8.12 34 The Need for Speed SE AC 8.11 35 Battleground: Antietam TalonSoft WG 8.08 36 Quake id Software AC 8.03 37 Red Alert: Counterstrike Virgin/Westwood ST 8.02 38 Rama Sierra AD 7.94 39 Heroes of Might & Magic New World Computing ST 7.91 40 U.S. Marine Fighters SI 7.90 41 Crusader: No Regret EA/Origin AC 7.89 42 Silent Hunter SSI Si 7.88 43 Outlaws LucasArts AC 7.84 44 Tigers on the Prowl 2.0 HPS Simulations WG 7.83 45 The Neverhood Dreamworks AD 7.74 Jagged Alliance: Deadly Games Sir-Tech ST 7.74 47 EF2000 Ocean SI 7.71 48 Battleground: Waterloo TalonSoft WG 7.70 49 Triple Play '97 EA Sports SP 7.62 Nascar Racing Sierra SP 7.62 GAME 51 Spycraft 52 Flying Corps 53 U.S. Navy Fighters FPS Football Pro '97 55 Lords of the Realm II 56 Circle of Blood The Need for Speed 58 Pro Pinball 59 NHL Hockey '96 60 Battleground: Gettysburg MDK 62 Full Throttle 63 FPS Football Pro '96 Privateer 2 65 NBA Live '96 Fantasy General 67 Advanced Tactical Fighters Daggerfall 69 Lighthouse Larry 7 71 Warbirds 72 F-22 Lightning 11 73 Jack Nicklaus 4 FIFA 97 75 CivNet PGA Tour Golf 486 77 Tony LaRussa 3 '96 78 Magic The Gathering 79 Robert E. Lee: Civil War General 80 M.A.X. 81 Power Chess 82 Road Rash Mind Grind Zork Nemesis Toonstruck 86 Incredible Toons 87 Descent II Anvil of Dawn 89 Missionforce Cyberstorm Virtual Pool Syndicate Wars 92 System Shock 93 Jetfighter III 94 Terra Nova: Strike Force Centauri 95 Hexen 96 Magic Carpet 2 97 Incredible Machine 2 98 Legends of Kyrandia 3 99 Phantasmagoria 100 Flight Unlimited COMPANY TYPE SCORE Activision AD 7.60 Empire SI 7.59 EA SI 7.58 Sierra SP 7.58 Sierra ST 7.57 Virgin AD 7.56 EA AC 7.56 Empire AC 7.55 EA Sports SP 7.54 TalonSoft WG 7.53 Playmates/Shiny AC 7.53 LucasArts AD 7.52 Sierra SP 7.50 EA/Origin SI 7.50 EA Sports SP 7.49 SSI ST 7.49 EA SI 7.48 Bethesda RP 7.48 AD 7.47 Sierra AD 7.47 SI 7.46 Novalogic SI 7.45 Accolade SP 7.44 EA Sports SP 7.44 MicroProse ST 7.43 EA Sports SP 7.43 Stormfront Studios SP 7.42 MicroProse ST 7.36 Sierra WG 7.34 Interplay ST 7.32 Sierra CP 7.28 EA AC 7.27 MicroForum CP 7.27 Activision AD 7.27 Virgin AD 7.27 Sierra CP 7.23 Interplay AC 7.22 New World Computing RP 7.22 Sierra ST 7.21 Interplay SP 7.21 EA/Bullfrog AC 7.21 EA/Origin AC 7.19 Mission Studios SI 7.17 Looking Glass AC 7.14 id Software/Raven AC 7.09 Bullfrog AC 7.08 Sierra CP 7.06 Virgin/Westwood AD 7.04 Sierra AD 6.99 Looking Glass SI 6.98 EA Games on unnumbered lines are tied with game on line above. Top game of type. Red = New Game, AD = Adventure, RP Role-Playing. SI = Simulation/Space Combat. ST = Strategy, WG = Wargame, AC = Action, SP = Sports, CP = Classic/Puzzle. Games are retired after two years and become eligible for the Hall of Fame SEPTEMBER 1997 CGW "


"MARTIN CIRULIS whatshot ma What's the Deal with... Killing Reality? be \"allowed\" to kill each other. Instead, it's a matter of what steps game administrators have to take to keep their RPGs from spiraling into pathetic sub-versions of Doom, where a few people get to play and the rest of the players get to be moving targets-with new players constantly replacing old players who get sick of the BS and quit. The ULTIMA ONLINE folks have stated that they are in favor of player-to-player The \"Psycho Geeks\" column was fairly predictable, with rio support for the Wreckers or Cheaters, and many, many tales from ex-DIABLO and MUD players stating how the psychotic, self-esteem-damaged Killers had made their favorite game pointless. The hand. ful of rabid letters from Psycho Geeks defending their right to kill other players in games not really intended to foster murderous rampages was also predictable, but what was a surprise was the outrageous pretension in their logic. To hear these guys go on, you'd think that sneaking up behind some body who is busy fighting a troll and then stabbing them in the back is as important to the cause of human free. dom as being a co-writer of the Constitution. These self-proclaimed champions see themselves as the dri ving force of realism in online RPGs. Guess what? It's time to stop getting off the bus at the corner of Delusional and insipid. First of all, let's state again that the angry majority of the online (and sadly, the ex-online) community sees Pking as a random act of idiotic vio lence that has little, if anything, to do with what is going on in the game. Pretentious Pkers always seek to drive the argument into all-or-nothing territory, which is patently ridiculous and a surefire way to make sure noth ing changes in their little worlds. The issue is not whether players should ( It's time to stop getting off the bus at the corner of Delusional and Insipid.72 Fantasy so much wholesome fun, and most gamers really don't consider this to be PKing. On the other hand, some little goof sputtering, \"Your broadcasts are too loud. I am going to kill you, dude!\" or running around trying to kill as many lower-level players in one night as he can, is not exactly the next install. ment of the Small Kitchen Implements of Shannarra. And it is exactly the kind of crap that will keep online RPGs utterly marginalized as a form of entertainment. Oh, do I hear the tedious cries that say that players doing every thing and anything they want is the essence of RPGs? Excuse me? Do you have a clue what the letters RPG stand for? I'll give you a hint; they don't stand for Really Pathetic Guy (or Gal) taking out their frus: trations on other players-the ones who are actually trying to role play! The only game that the behavior of most Pkers actually fits into would be LORD OF THE FLIES 2-A NEW BEGINNING. Have any of you people actually thought about what the concept of an RPG is? Have you considered that there are concepts being played out that are more important than pumping up your ego to make up for your boss! parents/teachers treating you like a moron? Given PKer logic, most of the great works of fantasy literature would have been three or four pages, tops. Let's see...instead of defeating the dragon Bilbo Baggins is killed while he's taking out the garbage by some rabid adolescent with a fireball spell. Thomas Covenant is stabbed in the back and tossed off the World Cliff by a young woman who wishes she could assert herself in real life. Oh yes, and the grand and powerful Witches of Darkover are killed from behind, while fighting their true enemy, by a sad 30-year-old guy who is angry because they won't have cybersex with him. Ahhh yes, that's real roleplaying for you! You PKers want to be the champi. ons of reality? Try having enough bloody imagination to start a war where stuff is destroyed forever! Or better yet, be really brave and push for a game where death has real implications, and see how enamored of it you are. How many Pkers would be thrilled with a game that erased characters when they died, and had towns where, if you were caught killing another player at random, you were tossed in a cell and then faced a trial by your peers-where \"guilly\" meant that you were banished from the server for 5-10 years? Not so eager for reality now, eh? There is no doubt that rabid Pkers will continue in their petty ways. I just wish that they would be honest about it, and admit that they are afraid to play a game where violence is expected, and that they have no concern at all (beyond selfgratification) for the reality, wellbeing, or value of the RPG community they prey upon. Thara in violence that adds to the environment, and for the most part, I agree with them. I mean, if I'm sitting in a virtual bar and a Dwarf walks up to a table of Orcs and says, \"Hey, aren't you from the clan that wiped out my village?\" I'll be more than happy to duck and start l aying bets on who'll survive. I'll even go as far as saying there is no harm in walking along a country road and hav ing a guy pop out demanding my stuff or my life. These are all the things petty and violent that make High Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Zift-Davis, Inc. One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016. Subscription rate is $27.97 for a one-year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $16.00 for surface mail. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 57167 Boulder, CO 80328-7167. Canadian GST registration number is 89371 0442 RT Canada Post International Pub's Mail Product (Canada Distribution) Sales Agreement No. 1058649. Periodicals postage paid at New York, NY 10016 and additional mailing offices. Printed in the U.S.A. CGW SEPTEMBER 1997 "


"ETTERS 100 Kes obertes In Stores September 11 SHOP A NEW Brett Favre CHOOSE TEAMS ERA IN FOOTBALL GAMES. BEARS 2 1 RAIDERS7 \"The freshest premise of any computer football game in years. Computer Gaming World ** (Legends) has an incredible look and feel...top-notch... gameplay and game mechanics are cutting edge.\" M3 \"One of the top five most anticipated titles of 1997.\" George Jones C/Net \"Graphically appealing and easy to control...stacks up with the best football sims around! On Line Gaming Review Rice Butkus "


"THE GREAT MODERN LEAGUE LEADERS To All Cow Pa Yards YOZA TO I Rating Quartetuks Sant M Jota Chand Chris Got RRERESCUEESEE Tam, el Amani Toomer Hartouch, Howard Cross You want stats? You got stats! Track over 100 different categories in single game or full season play. Dual David Brown 30 30 40 50 50 4030-2 E111 1998 \"...impressive strategic richness... beautiful graphics and solid gameplay.\" -Computer Gaming World Make your own plays and create your own players with the best Play Construction and Team Editor ever made! LEGENDS98 A Download the demo today at www.accolade.com To order direct, call 1-800-245-7744 "


"GAME... ..Meets Three Legendary Eras Marion Mothy 1950 It's not always sunny on the gridiron-battle it out in snow, sleet, and rain. You'll have to adjust your gameplan to win. 20-man rosters require most of your players to play both offense and defense. Get ready to use Dan Marino as a defensive back or Junior Seau at running back! Rules favor the running game. DRAFT ROUND: 1 49ERS MCK  The football is larger and harder to throw. Do you take a chance on the pass or grind it out with a running attack? Goal posts were placed in the front of the end zone. The \"Post\" pattern was commonly used to run defenders into the posts for an easy touchdown reception. tuckets Chris Jack LL KUT Cla, CHOOSE 1EAMS Build a football dynasty like Dallas or San Francisco. Draft, trade, and manage players throughout entire careers! In Stores September 1st! 1968 JETS 8] [BRONGOS Play a little rougher on the receivers. You can hit them anywhere on the field until the ball is thrown...and it's all legal! Advanced A.I. with team specific styles and coaching strategies Intense multi-player action using the Gravis Grip Multi-player adapter \"Time Travel\" with teams to create fantasy matchups Action and Coach Mode play Players like Dick Butkus ruled the gridiron, paving the way for the modern-day player. LEGEND$98 BE LEGENDS 98 ACCOUDE SALATLAR G reaton PS WILDOS PLAYERSZ Legends Football '98 and Legends Football are trademarks of Accolade, Inc. 1997 Accolado Inc. All Rights Reserved. NFL team names lagos helmet designs, and uniform designs are trademarks of the team indicated NFL and the NFL Shield are registered trademarks of the National Football League The PLAYERS INC logo is a trademark of the National Football League Players. This is an officially licensed product of the National Football League Players NFL Properties Inc. and the NFL Quarterback Club, Inc NFLPA license valid for all modern players and select era players only CIRCLE READER SERVICE #296 "


"What happens when thousands of people are unleashed on a never er ever changing. fantasy w THOUSANDS OF SIMULTANEOUS PLAYERS FULLY-SIMULATED ECOLOGY AND ECONOMY CUSTOM LOOKS AND ABILITIES FOR EACH CHARACTER  REAL-TIME ADVENTURING, COMBAT AND ROLE-PLAYING VISIBLE DIALOG ABOVE SPEAKING CHARACTERS 3D TERRAIN AND DYNAMIC LIGHTING IN 16-BIT COLOR The time has come to enter Ultima Online. You and thousands of people from around the world will live, quest, fight, love or hate in a persistent world, where every action you take affects the lives of others. It's more than a fantasy, because it really exists. It's more than a game because it never ends. And it's a quantum leap beyond anything you've ever seen before. Go beyond life as you know it to an adventure Are more incredible than YOU you can imagine. with. LATINS PEADING RY       ORIGIN We create worlds. ESA 5 Spelare in the plan mondial lages g e red trademarks a B e thSonder her ultimaonline.com "

