From the Editor...
This is the fifth issue of COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. From
the beginning CGW has sought to
provide a forum for the computer
gaming hobby and industry. We are
very pleased with the response you
have made thus far. From letters
and responses to R.I.D. cards it is
apparent that we are providing a
needed service for thousands of computer gamers. We try with each issue
to add new features or twists which
make CGW a better magazine. The
basic information box, Reader Input
Device, Silicon Cerebrum, Atari
Arcade, Real World Gaming, and
screen photos are just some of the
added features. We hope to add more
as time goes along.
For example, we will add more
pages as our advertising income
allows. When you buy a product
which you saw in CGW tell the
company you read about them in
CGW. The effectiveness of advertising
is important to the manufacturers.
They pay a lot more attention to
your input than you might imagine.
Continued on pg. 36

VOL. 2 NO. 4
JULY-AUGUST 1982

Features
THE WARP FACTOR

6

Strategies for Winning Decisive Victories

RENDEZVOUS

7

A Space Shuttle Flight Simulation

WE'RE IN THE MONEY
Economic Simulations For The Apple
CONTROLLER: A REVIEW
Avalon Hill's Air Traffic Control Simulation
PURSUIT OF THE GRAF SPEE: A REVIEW
Strategic Simulations Naval Wargame
STARSHIP COMMANDER: A REVIEW
A Space Combat "Simulation"
ADVENTURES — CHEAPER BY THE DOZEN AND A HALF
Survey of THE CAPTAIN 80 BOOK OF BASIC ADVENTURES
HORSE RACING CLASSIC: A REVIEW
A Horse Race Simulation
SNEAK ATTACK ON KNIGHT OF DIAMONDS
An Unusual Approach to the Second Wizardry Scenario
DNIEPER RIVER LINE
or "How Can You Be Two Places At Once When You're Not Anywhere At All?

CHOPLIFTER'
Rescue the Hostages
REAL WORLD GAMING
New Column by Dan Bunten
CASINO
DataMost's Card Game

9
12
18
20
22
23
23
28
30
31
33

Departments
Letters
Hobby & Industry News
Initial Comments
Silicon Cerebrum
Atari Arcade
Micros
Reader Input Device

2
2
5
14
27
34
40

LETTERS
Dear Editor:
As an Apple III owner, I have
found several problems in game
software designed for the Apple II.
As many may know, the Apple III
can emulate an Apple II, but there
are limitations.
Until recently, the biggest limitation has been the lack of paddles.
Before the new FCC regulations, all
Apple II's were supplied with paddles,
and almost all software manufacturers took advantage of this. Unfortunately, for the first six months
that the Apple III was out, there
were no paddles for them. There was
no easy way to use the paddles
designed for the Apple II either.
Since then, a joystick has come out
for the Apple III, BUT it will only
work in emulation mode IF the software manufacturer uses the standard
Apple paddle read write routines. To
date, only one program, On-Line's
MISSILE DEFENSE, has worked.
This means I don't get to enjoy such
classics as SPACE EGGS or RASTER BLASTER on my Apple III... ever.
More recently, Apple II programs
have been coming out with keyboard
versions. Usually, the keyboard versions are more difficult to play (such
as Sirius' SNEAKERS -my favorite
program, which makes them much
easier to play. Some software houses,
such as Picadilly, have several versions
(Keyboard, Joystick, Paddles, Apple
III Keyboard) on one disk. The Apple
III Keyboard is also laid out differently,
thus causing some problems for the
uninitiated.
The greatest threat lately has been
a change in software protection. Many
of the newer programs have protection
schemes so sophisticated they fool
my emulator. These programs do
not even boot--they just make nasty
noises. I am naming names here-Broederbund, IDSI', and Energy
Games. Broderbund used to be my
favorite software house, but I refuse
to buy games from a company that
doesn't have programs that work on
my computer (No Broderbund software later than APPLE PANIC
will boot). My Christmas package
for my Apple was ruined by two
programs that wouldn't boot-TRICK
SHOT (IDSI) and SANTA'S SLEIGH
RIDE (Energy Games). For those

who think I might be kidding--I
checked on a friend's Apple II, and
all of the above-mentioned disks
booted.
My New Year's Resolution (which
I have kept until now) is: I won't buy
programs that don't say they will
run on my Apple III in emulation
mode (although I will buy programs
that will run in the Apple III native
mode). This means a loss of about
$2000 per year to the computer games
industry from me alone. So long
Broderbund I hope you change
soon. I really enjoyed your games
while I could use them. My favorite
software company at the moment is
Picadilly--mostly because they have
an Apple III keyboard version on all
their games.
Deirdre L. Maloy

MORE STRATEGY FOR
EASTERN FRONT
Dear Editor;
I am an Atari 800 owner and I was
glad to see your recent addition of a
regular Atari column to your magazine. I have also enjoyed your coverage of Eastern Front--my favorite
computer game.
Bob Proctor was clear and readable in "A Beginner's Guide to
Strategy and Tactics in Eastern
Front" but his article did little more
than repeat Chris Crawford's own
playing hints in the Eastern Front
player manual. To whit: surround
the Ruskies, don't try to march
through them.
Interested readers and dedicated
gameplayers are surely able to
garner this information from the
player manual without Bob's helping
hand. Of more use (and more interest) might have been an article
dealing with grander strategies and
tactics which are not immediately
obvious from reading the rules.
The good game, like the good
player, has a specific strategy to
which it tries to adhere. This game
"personality" in Eastern Front is
not very complicated, but it is effective. The German player must
first discover what it is that the
Russian units do, then develop an
effective counter-strategy.
Logically, if Crawford's own notes
in Eastern Front suggest surrounding the Russian units to destroy
them, then his program's strategy must
be to keep those units from being
surrounded. This is indeed what
happens during the game. Whenever

the Russian units are outflanked,
they retreat, trying at all times to
maintain their lines of supply. This
latter is crucial to the Russian units.
They cannot be beaten back during
the winter unless their strength is
diminished. And the only way their
strength can be diminished is by
cutting their supply lines.
Knowing this simple fact, the
German player must find ways to
outflank the Russians. And he has
an excellent tool to use: his superior
mobility.
The German player must forever
be involved in end runs. He must
find clear sailing for his own units
while forcing the Russians to retreat
across water and woods.
High scores are possible using
this strategy even without having to
destroy large numbers of Russian
units. The entire German army can
be shifted north and begin a long
trek eastward (along the northern
bank of the Volga) at about Christmas time, which--with some fighting
--will take the hard pressed German
troops to the eastern edge of the
board by March.
A more realistic and satisfying
tactic is, as Bob Proctor suggested,
to ignore the game score and try to
truly take Russia. This involves
eliminating as many Russian units
as possible. My best game has left a
total of six red squares on the board-all surrounded and facing eminent
destruction in April.
Similar or better results can be
accomplished by completing two
crucial encirclements of the Russian
troops.
The first, which must be completed
by September 28 (before the mud
sets in), brings panzer units northward from Kiev and the Pripet
Marsh through the narrow gap
between the Volga and Don Rivers.
Once in firm position south of Moscow
and moving at all possible speed,
these units can stonewall the Russian retreat from the German
infantry units pressing steadily east.
When successful, this plan destroys
all the Russian encampments in the
woods south of Rahev. Any remaining Russian units will retreat
east of the Volga and will not be able
to return to the Moscow battlefield
until the winter months. (Be sure to
retreat the panzer units before
October or they are likely to be
bogged down and caught before the
winter ice frees their movement
again.) Only a small holding force is

needed in the south around Dnepropetrovsky--five or six infantry
with the Hungarian panzer unit.
The second encirclement must be
carefully timed due to the annoying
tank reinforcements the Russians
receive around Gorky. The Russians
must be allowed to re-cross the Volga
in order to slow their final retreat
back toward the east.
Given that the German player
controls the line from Smolensk to
Moscow to just west of Gorky by
winter, then an east-west line should
be held no further north than Rahev.
The Russians will push north through
the woods east of Smolensk and
west across the Volga toward
Moscow.
While the Russians are on the
offensive, the German player must
run to the far north with his panzer
units and whatever infantry is not
needed in defense. (Some can be sent
to take Leningrad.) These units then
rush east and cross the Volga just
east of Gorky--or perhaps even as far
east as Kazan--and move south. Once
they reach the open Russian plain,
they will cut off supplies for the
Russian counter attack forces around
Moscow. The German units which
were previously shaky in defense
will be able to press attacks with no
fear.
If the German player can also
bring his southern force and reinforcements to bear on the Russians
southern flank, then the entire
Russian army will begin to shrink
and disappear inside the white circle.
Alternatively, these latter German
units can press east and take Stalingrad. But obliterating the Russians is
much more fun than taking a
featureless city.
This second encirclement procedure is satisfying but tricky. The
Russians will desperately attempt
to break through the German armor
and, once out of the trap, they have
an excellent chance to remain at bay
until the end of the game. There are
also a few Russian reinforcements
(cavalry particularly) which arrive
at the eastern edge of the board and
must be drawn westward toward
death.
A picture to keep in mind is the
white German units strung out from
west to east north of the Volga--the
panzers in front, the infantry lagging
behind. The red Russian units press
north to attempt to break this
extending line, but the Volga slows
their movement and effective de-

fensive placement clogs their advances. Eventually this long white
line begins to swing south, like a
door on its hinges. The large red
mass of Russian units is then pricked
by white and slowly shrinks...until
the door slams shut.
Good luck to all Eastern Front
players and Computer Gaming
World. I look forward to more indepth gaming articles and your
continued success.
Ed. — Thank you for some excellent strategic suggestions for
Eastern Front. Your letter seems to
indicate, however, that you did not
take note of the title of Bob's article
or the explicit statement in the third
paragraph of the article; to wit-"This article is written for those
of you with little or no wargaming
experience." Many of our Atari
readers indicate that the article was
helpful to them even with a good
deal of wargaming experience. I
found the article of help to me
(beyond what was offered in the
rulebook). None-the-less your strategic suggestions are appreciated
and I know will be of interest to our
readers.

NOTICE TO ROBOTWAR
ENTHUSIASTS
Robotwar enthusiasts will be
glad to know that there is an
organization being formed to
sponsor Robotwar tournaments
on an ongoing basis. Frank
Krough of North Hollywood, California has formed a Robotwar
club for the purpose of holding
local and postal Robotwar tournaments. If you live in the Southern California area you may want
to get directly involved with the
local tournaments. For those of
you that live elsewhere, check out
the postal Robotwar tournaments
Frank's group will be running.
Entry fee for a tournament will
be $4.00 which will cover handling
charges and prizes. Tournaments
will be classified as either novice,
master, or champion. If you want
more information drop Frank a
note:
Frank Krogh
P.O. Box 5337
North Hollywood, CA 91616

HOBBY AND
INDUSTRY NEWS
Avalon Hill has announced that
they will begin developing game
cartridges for the ATARI VCS and
MATTEL INTELLIVISION game
systems.
Program Design of Greenwich,
Connecticut has released MOONBASE I0 and STARSHIP DUEL
for the Atari 400/800. MI combines
an arcade/adventure format with a
voice narration. Game consists of
disk and voice cassette. SD is a
cassette game of starship combat.
Hayden Book Company (50 Essex
St., Rochelle Park, NJ 07662) announces the release of TETRAD, a
four-level Tic-Tac-Toe game for the
Apple II, and TRS-80 GALAXY
OF GAMES, which includes four
games for the TRS-80 computer (level
II 16K). The four games are Hangman, One Arm Bandit, Skunk,
Jacks.
Acorn Software (634 North Carolina
Ave., S.E., Washington D.C. 20003)
announces a series of machine
language adventures for the TRS-80

Model I/III entitled MYSTERIOUS
ADVENTURERS. Written by a
chap in England the series makes
use of "proper English". The first
release in the series is ARROW OF
DEATH PT. 1.
JON FREEMAN and ANNE
WESTFALL have left Automated
Simulations to form FREE FALL
ASSOCIATES, a game design and
development firm. Jon's credentials
include Rescue at Rigel; Crush,
Crumble, & Chomp; The Playboy
Winner's Guide to Board Games
(book); and The Complete Book of
Wargames (book). Jon was a cofounder of Automated Simulations.
Anne's background includes extensive experience in the programming
field from business to game applications. She was formerly the Senior
Software Engineer at Automated
Simulations. FREE FALL can be
reached at 3888 Corina Way, Palo
Alto, CA 94303.
Computerware (Box 668 Encinitas,
Ca 92024) has released STARSHIP
CHAMELEON for the Radio Shack
Color Computer (disk or cassette,
16K required. SC is a space combat
game in which the player controlling
the starship Chameleon protects a
planet from an aerial attack of enemy
invaders ($29.95).
The Liberty Software Co. (635 Independence Av. S.E., Washington,
D.C., 20003) has released MEDIEVAL
MAGIC, a new adventure game for
the TRS-80 Model I/III. MM was
written "especially as an introduction to the adventure format of game
playing".

Automated Simulations has released several new titles for the Atari
400/800 computer. ALIEN GARDEN
is an arcade game available on ROM
cartridge ($39.95). Four new releases
in the adventure game area by Automated are mentioned in this issue's
installment of Atari Arcade.
Strategic Simulations will be releasing GALACTIC GLADIATORS
(Computer Ambush in space) in Late
June or early July. GG features
individual combat, maps, scenario
designing routines. Speaking of COMPUTER AMBUSH, the long pro
mised updated version is on temporary hold. They hope for a fall
release but winter is more likely.
GUADALCANAL CAMPAIGN is
now slated for a middle of July
release. An improved WARP FACTOR will be released for the IBM PC
in middle July. The IBM version will
feature graphic display of combat.
The computer opponent in the IBM
version will be three times faster
than the Apple version.
The Apple version of CYTRON
MASTERS should be out by the
time you read this. The Atari version
of CM should be out in August or
September. Paul Murray's new space
combat game THE COSMIC
BALANCE (or "Son of Warp
Factor") will be out in mid-July for
the Apple. SSI hopes to have the
Atari version available at the same
time, otherwise look for the Atari
version at the end of summer. TCB
will be a joined later by a strategic
space game in which TCB will be
used to fight tactical battles generated by the strategic game.

INITIAL
COMMENTS
In addition to games mentioned
elsewhere in this issue the following
games have been received by CGW.
Most but not all of these games will
receive more detailed attention in
future issues.
Muse Software
347 North Charles St.
Baltimore, MD 21201
SUPER TEXT 40/80 COLUMN
DISPLAY: SUPER TEXT 40/80
is a new and better version of
Muse's popular SUPER TEXT II
word processor. Features of the
new package include: 40 or 80
column display; page headers and
footers; user definable key; typeahead buffer; counter occurrences
of words/phrases; display of
available disk space; split screen;
multi-file find and replace; and
others. We look forward to using
SUPER TEXT 40/80 as our
regular word processor at CGW
as soon as we get an 80 column
board.
FIREBUG: A game of arson.
Although the fiction of the game
is regrettable, this is one of the
better low-res graphic games
available for the Apple. In FIREBUG you go around dropping gas
cans in order to spread the fire
being fueled by a fuse which
follows you. If you don't move
fast enough the fuse will catch up
and you'll "make an ash" out of
yourself. Can be played with keyboard control or a joystick.
Data Soft Inc.
19519 Business Center Dr.
Northridge, CA 91324
TEXT WIZARD: TW is a word
processor for the Atari 400/800.
Using 50 different commands
Text Wizard can do all the normal
features of a word processor (such
as insert, delete, replace, search,
reposition, etc.). Additionally TW
can print multi-copies, use multiple
type lettering (bold, elongated,
condensed, normal) and provide
for proportional spacing of the
document. Documentation is clear
and easy to follow. TEXT WIZARD
is CGW's Atari 800 word processor.

Data Most
9748 Cozycroft Ave.
Chatsworth, CA 91311

WORLD SERIES BASEBALL:
This is the old Programma Baseball game that first came out
back in 1979. The game is the
same even down to the same colorful introductory sequence which
includes a redention of "Take me
out to the ball game". It is still a
very good "beer-and-pretzels"
baseball game. Written by Charles
Sullivan Jr.

Broderbund Software
1938 Fourth St.
San Rafael, CA 94901
DUELING DIGITS: Here is an
educational game that makes use
of hi-res graphics and can be
played by anyone who can add
1+1. It is interesting as a competitive game and can help teach
younger persons basic math
skills. One or two can play, but
solitaire play is only a shadow of
the two player game.

The New American Library
1633 Broadway
New York, NY 10019
BUYING AND BEATING THE
HOME VIDEO GAMES: A thick
paperback (676 pages) filled with
interesting information on the home
video game field. The book
includes: tips and strategies on
more than 200 games; descriptions
and analysis of five home video
systems (Atari VCS, Intellivision,
Odyssey, Astrocade, Fairchild
Channel F); playability ratings
and skill levels. This SIGNET
paperback sells for $3.95 and is
worth checking out.
Synergistic Software
830 N. Riverside Dr. Suite 201
Renton, WA 98055
NIGHTMARE GALLERY: NG
has a lot of the flavor of the
popular coin-op game CENTIPEDE.
Various creatures parade up, down,
and across the screen as you
attempt to shoot them. If you like
Centipede or Cavalier's BUG
ATTACK you'll like NIGHTMARE
GALLERY. The sound effects
include an amazingly realistic
"scream".

Continued on pg. 39

THE WARP FACTOR:

Strategies for Winning Decisive Victories
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:

SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

The Warp Factor
Tactical Space
Wargame
Apple II, IBM PC (July) —
IBM 64k C or B/W (July)
Diskette
r j
1 or 2
Paul Murray &
Bruce Clayton
539.95
Strategic Simulations Inc.
456 Fairchild Or.,
Suite 108
Mountain View. CA.
94043

If you are like me the first time you
played THE WARP FACTOR you
chose an Alliance Cruiser, which
you named Enterprise, with the
intention of destroying a Klarson
starship. But after being smacked
left and right by drones and stung
time and again by disruptor bolts
and phasers your shields began to
fail with many weapons being put
out of action until, eventually, the
Enterprise was destroyed.
I think I played that scenario
another four times before I finally
destroyed that nasty Gorm, and my
ship was so chewed up that I only
achieved a draw. The fact that the
computer plays a very good defensive strategy, coupled with a few
other factors makes it extremely
difficult to score a decisive victory in
this scenario. But the computer as
an opponent does have weaknesses
which we are going to discuss, along
with a few strategies that will exploit these weaknesses. By using
these strategies you will be able to
win a decisive victory in most any
scenario you want to devise.
***

So why is it so difficult to score a
decisive victory against a Klarson
Cruiser? First the Starship Point
Values are unbalanced, and therefore the scoring system is invalid.
Both Cruisers have a point value of
six. In games where both sides are
about even, the only way to score a
decisive victory is to capture the
enemy ships while sustaining little
or no damage to your own. And it is
very difficult to do that since the
Alliance Cruiser is an inferior ship

when compared to the Klarson
Cruiser. The Klarson has four disruptor bolts that can fire every turn
while the Alliance ship has four
photon torpedoes that can only fire
every other turn. It's true the photon
torpedoes have twice the destructive
power of the disruptors but they
require four times as much energy to
charge and I don't believe they are
as accurate when fired. The Klarson
can turn faster which makes it more
maneuverable. They also have
drones which can reek havoc on
your shield protection. And finally,
the Klarson ships have more transporters than the comparable Alliance version. This makes it very
difficult to capture the Klarson even
in the best of circumstances because
you can't get enough marines aboard
the vessel.
Captured ships are worth twice as
many victory points as destroyed
ships. But capturing ships is much
more difficult than destroying them.
As a result, you should design your
scenarios such that they allow you
to destroy the enemy ships while
still scoring a decisive victory (i.e.
scoring a large number of victory
points). In order to do this you should
give the computer a ship or fleet
with a total point value that is fifty
percent greater than your own. This
may sound like an invitation to
disaster but need not be if the matchups are well thought out. The point
values assigned to various ships are
not always accurate. I've already
shown you that the Cruisers are not
really equal.
An Imperial Raider is worth two
points and a Klarson Cruiser, six. If
you put a Cruiser against three
Imperial ships the computer would
consider the match even. The Imperial ships each have one disrupter
bolt and two light phasers. As a fleet
they have three disrupters against
the Cruisers four, six light phasers
versus nine, three unit shields
against the Cruiser's average shield
strength of twenty, and the Cruiser
also has drones which the Raiders
do not. The Klarson side would win
without a struggle. You could double
the number of Raiders and the
Cruiser would still have the game. I
consider this scenario to be the ultimate mismatch and it demonstrates
that by taking the best ships for the
points allowed, you can overcome at
least some of the enemy's mathematical edge.

by William
Edmunds

Another way to victory is to take
advantage of the enemy's weakness.
In developing our strategy we must
understand how the enemy operates.
You can get a good idea on some of
the tactics the program uses by reading the Operations Manual. One
such tactic, taken from the manual,
is to "maximize your firepower". This
means to coordinate as many weapons as possible to fire in the shortest possible time at the shortest possible distance. This is a good
concept but the program often follows this rule to the extreme. If you
are attacking with a fleet of fighters,
the computer will train all its phasers
on the lead ship and use the "last
instant" command for firing. Suppose these fighters are attacking a
Starbase. Now the Starbase has
enough fire power to destroy the
fleet in a single turn but it would
take the computer one turn for each
ship. Because the computer cannot
distinguish a case of overkill, you
have the ability to sacrifice one ship,
or use it as a decoy, while the rest of
the fleet attacks the enemy with
little fear of being fired upon. This is
the most valuable strategy you have
for fleet operations and will be demonstrated in a number of the
scenarios at the end of this discussion.
If you have only one ship then it is
going to be the object of this maximized fire power with nowhere to
hide. Normally, the computer reinforces and tries to keep its forward
shield facing your ship as long as
possible. If you are trying to maneuver around to one side, it will turn
in that direction thus making it
difficult for you to get a good shot
without risking a good retaliatory
blow. The way the computer determines your course of action is to
examine your position, heading and
speed at the end of a turn. You
telegraph your intentions every turn
by your final position. By sending
false signals at the end of a turn, you
can fool the computer into turning
one way while you go the other once
the next turn starts. Once you leave
the arc of his facing shield, his
weapons will fire and you are then
free to move in close and fire on an
unreinforced shield. This ability to
decoy the enemy ship will prove
most valuable in single ship encounters such as a Cruiser versus a
Dreadnought.
Your basic tactical objective is to
destroy a shield so you can damage

RENDEZVOUS: A Space Shuttle Simulator
by Stanley Greenlaw
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Rendezvous
Space Flight Simulation
Apple 11148K)
Disk
1
Dr. Wes Huntress (JPL)

$39.95
Edu-Ware Services
P.O. Box 22222
Agoura. CA 91301

Sub Logic's FLIGHT SIMULATOR (see May-June 1982 issue
of CGW) and Muse's THREE MILE
ISLAND must make room for
another outstanding example of a
simulator for a microcomputer.
RENDEZVOUS, by Edu-Ware is a
well designed simulation of a space
shuttle flight and space station
rendezvous and docking. From launch
to docking the gamer/student must
learn how to make use of basic
physics to orbit, rendezvous, and
maneuver his shuttle close enough
to dock the shuttle with an orbiting
space station.
The simulation is structured into
four segments, each of which can be
"played" separately as a stand alone
exercise or in sequence to simulate
the flight from launch to docking.
The first segment, Earth Liftoff,
involves launching the shuttle into
a partial orbit. Arbitrary parameters
of 191 kilometers altitude and 7800
Meters per second horizontal speed
must be obtained to cause the program
to transit to the second segment,
Orbital Rendezvous. The initial orbit
path set up by the liftoff must first
be adjusted to an orbit path that
won't carry the shuttle back into the
atmosphere. Then the player must,
through one or usually two engine
firing sequences bring the shuttle
into close proximity of the space
station. At this point the player
must make an approach to the im-

mediate vicinity of the station. Once
the shuttle is within two kilometers
of the station, the program will
switch to the Alignment and Docking
phase. In this final phase the player
attempts to dock the shuttle in a
large landing bay.
The Earth Liftoff phase challenges
the player to attain the minimum
orbit configurations using only the
fuel in the solid fuel boosters and
external fuel tank. Any use of fuel
from the fuel tanks onboard the
shuttle proper takes away from critically needed maneuverability in the
other segments. A successful partial
orbit can be achieved in the following
manner: At about 15 seconds into
the flight begin tipping the nose of
the shuttle off the horizontal, steadily
reduce the angle so that the shuttle
is on a 30 degree angle when the
solid fuel boosters jettison. Continue
to reduce the angle until the shuttle
is only 15 degrees above horizontal.
If you leave the shuttle at 15 degrees,
a partial orbit will be achieved and
the program will switch to the
Orbital Rendezvous.
The Orbital Rendezvous requires
a series of trial and error attempts at
getting the shuttle's orbit to cross
the station's orbit at the same time
that the two crafts pass the intersection. If you blast off at zero
seconds on the mission clock in the
Earth Liftoff mode you will find the
shuttle reaching orbit "ahead" of
the station. You must either slow
down (with the threat of plunging in
the atmosphere) or adopt an orbit
inside the station's orbit (i.e. less
than 1.50 earth radii) and patiently
wait for the shuttle to accomplish
the several orbits necessary to "catch
up" to the station. You may find it
easier simply to wait for 30 seconds
to pass on the mission clock before
lifting off. This will most likely put
you in a desirable position for an

engine burn to rendezvous with the
station (i.e. inside the station's orbit
and slightly behind the station.
After you get the shuttle close
enough to the station to enter the
Approach and Docking mode, you
will be required to use either a joystick or keyboard controls to make
your approach and docking. The key
to success from here on is practice,
practice, practice. Fortunately the
program allows you to save your
position so that you can return for
another approach in case your prior
attempt ends tragically.
The graphics and documentation
are very good. I would have preferred
a better rulebook illustration of the
joystick controls, but with a little
practice you can figure it out. The
direction finder (available in the
approach sequence) faces the wrong
direction for my tastes. It's purpose
is to show the relative location of the
station when not visible out the
shuttle window. The problem is that
the direction finder is orientated in
such a way that the simulated shuttle
in the "finder" is aimed at the viewer
rather than along the line of sight of
the viewer. In other words as you
look at the range finder, the shuttle
is coming at the player thus reversing
"right" and "left". Flying "reverse"
controls should be left to the remote
control flying hobbyists.
RENDEZVOUS is educational
while being entertaining. Teachers
will find it a valuable teaching tool
in the areas of General Science, Earth
Science, and Physics. As entertainment the simulation will appeal to
gamers who enjoy mental challenges
(such as those involved in setting up
the orbital rendezvous) as well as to
gamers who enjoy hand-eye co-ordination challenges (such as will be
faced in the approach and docking
segments). RENDEZVOUS is a
welcome addition to the educational
and entertainment software field.

the ship and knock out its weapons.
If you are using photon torpedoes
don't get too close before you fire
them. If you get within 2Mk. of the
target they become ineffective and
you are left with only your phasers.
It is better to fire your torpedoes and
phasers as close as possible without
running the danger of coming within 2Mk. of your target.
In using drones, unless you can
create a drone swarm, never count
on them to destroy a specific shield.
Drones are unpredictable due to
movement of the target and electronic counter measures. They seldom hit the shield you want or expect. A drone can best be used to
soften the target by knocking out
any general shield support. In this
way it is not important which shield
it hits and it increases the efficiency
of your main weapons.
I believe one of the most important tactical weapons you have, and
one the computer never uses, are
your boarding parties. I cannot
overstress the importance of allocating energy to your transporters.
When attacking a larger ship you
can do enough damage in one turn
to knock out a shield but you will not
normally be able to cripple its weapons. However boarding parties can
sabotage a ship's weapons and make
it possible for you to attack again on
the next turn without sustaining a
lot of damage yourself. How much
damage they do will depend on their
number and the level of damage
already inflicted. This is because the
Marines aboard the enemy vessel
will resist yours. But one of the first
areas to receive casualties are the
Marines. So the more damage you
inflict, the more damage your boarding parties can do.
If you are already in close to a
target and want to fire your weapons on the first time point use the
range command with a range greater than the range to the target. If you
use the time command and the weapon in question will not fire through
the facing shield, then that weapon
will not fire at all during the turn. By
using the range command, the weapon can still fire if you change
course or the enemy should move in
such a way that would bring the
weapon to bear. This is especially
important if you are going to sit and
spin your ship because the program
moves the ships first and then
checks to fire weapons. This brings
up an important defensive tactic. If
you had a shield badly damaged or
destroyed at the end of the last turn,
you can usually reinforce one of the

shields next to it and turn it toward
the enemy before he can fire.

a heading of 030 degrees. Launch a
type one drone on this and the next

Here are a couple of important
technical observations that you
should remember. First, when firing
weapons using the last instant option, the weapon must be capable of
firing through the facing shield at
the start of the turn. If you are
commanding a Dreadnought and
your target is facing shield two, you
cannot fire your siege phaser the
last instant even if you turn and
move toward the target. Second, the
phaser field of fire for the Alliance
and Klarson Cruisers are inaccurately depicted on the Starship Data
Cards. This can be most troublesome when entering firing commands. I've constructed a chart to
cross reference the phasers with the
shields. By reading across you can
see through which shields a phaser
will fire and by selecting a shield
and reading down determine which
phasers will fire through that shield.

turn.
The Dreadnought will assume
you're going to try and move up on
its right side. In the next turn it will
continue to move toward you and
turn slowly to the right in an effort
to keep its forward shield facing
you. Set your speed for 20 Mk., overcharge your disruptor bolts and
energize your transporters. Turn
right to 090 for four time points and
then start turning back toward the
Dreadnought. You want to cross
directly in front of the Dreadnought
at a range of 8 to 10 Mk. with a
heading of about 330. Once you
achieve this continue turning left
for the remainder of the turn. Set
your disruptors and phasers to fire
at a range of 3 Mk.
The Dreadnought's phasers will
fire when you leave its facing shield.
You should still be more than 10 Mk.
away at this point and your shields
will absorb the damage. Your main
blow will hit the Dreadnought in
shield 5 or 6 at a range of 3 Mk. This
will do sufficient damage to get your
boarding parties aboard and knock
out many of its weapons.
On the next turn, hold your position and fire all your weapons in an
effort to destroy another shield and
get more boarding parties transported. The Dreadnought probably won't
move on this turn so next turn you
may be able to shoot at the same
shield. Continue destroying shields
and transporting boarding parties
until the Dreadnought is destroyed.

SCENARIOS
Here are some scenarios which if
executed property against a computer controlled opponent will result
in decisive victories.
Cruiser vs. Dreadnought
In this game you will use the
decoy tactic along with the Klarson's
maneuverability to strike a Dreadnought in the flank and cripple it.
In the first turn set your speed at
12 to 14Mk . Move straight at the
Dreadnought for twelve time points
and then turn and finish the turn on

An interesting variation to this
scenario is to use a Klarson Dreadnought and give the computer two
Alliance Cruisers. You'll need a
little more speed on the first turn
and more moderate turns on the
second Launch type two drones at
the second Cruiser while attacking
the lead ship. With eight transporters you have a good chance of
capturing a Cruiser.
Freighter and Fighter vs. three
Imperial Raiders
This is a short game but you can
make it more challenging by giving
the computer a fourth Raider. You
will use the Freighter with its larger
shields as a screen for the Fighter.
On the first turn move your Freighter straight at the enemy at a speed of
11 Mk. You don't want to decoy on
this turn because your drones will
have a better chance of hitting if the

Continued on pg. 37

WE'RE IN THE MONEY...
Economic Simulations For The Apple
by Bob Proctor
BASIC INFORMATION
Computer Stocks And Bonds Wall Street
NAME:
Stock Market game
Stock Market game
TYPE:
Apple. Atari. Pet. TRS-80. IBM Apple II or Apple II+
SYSTEM:
Diskette
Diskette (also on tape)
FORMAT:
1 to 9
# PLAYERS: 1 to 6
Donald Brown
Bob Garman
AUTHOR:
$24.95
$25.00 ($20 on tape)
PRICE:
CE Software
PUBLISHER: Avalon Hill
801 73rd Street
4517 Harford Rd.
Des Moines, IA 50312
Battimore, MD 21214
(515) 224-1992
(301) 254-5300

Cartels & Cutthroats
NAME:
Business game
TYPE:
Apple II or Apple II+
SYSTEM:
Diskette
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS: 1 to 6
Dan Bunten
AUTHOR:
$39.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations Inc.
465 Fairchild Dr., Suite 108
Mountain View, CA 94043

Conglomerates Collide
Business game
Apple II or Apple II+
Diskette
1 to 4
Mason, Mayne. Siegling
$39.95
RockRoy
7721 E. Gray Rd.
Scottsdale. AZ 85260

The four games reviewed here fall into two
groups. There are two stock market games, where
each player is an investor, and two business
games where each player is the President of a
company.
Stock market games are easy to understand
because they're based on the well known axiom,
"Buy low, sell high." Invariably, the number of
stocks, bonds and other investments available are
much smaller than in real life. Here we have two
well done games; one of which simulates day-to-

day activity and one which simulates year-to-year
decisions.
COMPUTER STOCKS AND BONDS
In COMPUTER STOCKS AND BONDS, each
turn represents a year; a game being ten turns
long (figure about 30 minutes to play with 3 or 4
people). You can't borrow or "leverage" (leveraging is buying something with funds that don't
belong to you) in any way. You have a choice of
nine stocks and one bond. The bond pays a simple
5% dividend, so that if you invest everything in
bonds you'll turn your initial $5000 into $7900 -with no risk! In effect, the bonds are just like a
savings account. If you can't do better than this
then it is a mistake to buy stocks. This lesson, that
additional risk should pay additional dividends, is
the basic lesson to be learned in the game.
The nine stocks are hypothetical companies and
represent a cross-section of different stock types.
There is a growth stock which can usually be
expected to go up but pays very low dividends.
There are risky stocks which offer "high" dividends -- as much as 7%. There are speculative
stocks that offer no dividends at all but may
double (or halve) their value in a single year.
Dividend ratios, growth potential, and risk are the
major factors to consider when you are going to
hang on to stocks for a year or more. However, an
important aspect of long-term investing is absent;
there is no information about the economic climate that would give you a way of judging which

stocks will be best. Plausible reasons are given for
very large gains and losses but these are after the
fact: winning is largely a matter of luck. Two
factors make this game unique: it is the only one of
the four available for computers other than the
Apple and it is the only one which needs only 32K
of RAM (instead of 48K).
WALL STREET
In this game, each turn represents a single day
instead of a year. Five turns make a week and a
game lasts one or more weeks. There are no
dividends here and no other forms of investment
for comparison; just day-to-day trading in common stock. However, there are broker's fees whenever you buy or sell and there are interest payments
on any money you borrow. The interest rate is
about 20% per year, so the game feels very contemporary. You are also allowed to sell short, which
means selling stock you don't have (yet), hoping
that the price will fall before you have to deliver it.
There are 30 stocks from which to choose; all
real companies, most of which are actually listed
on the NYSE. They are grouped into six industries: computers, entertainment, oil, automobiles,
retail, and appliance manufacturers. As with the
real market, certain industries may show prominent trends, though individual stocks in that
group may not follow them. Whereas I have yet to
see a company go bankrupt in STOCKS AND
BONDS, it is a distinct possibility in WALL
STREET: IBM and GM seem as likely to go under
as anybody else. All of your choices, then, are
equally risky. You must "play" the market, speculating on the daily fluctuations (somewhat exaggerated) of the market.
What makes WALL STREET unique is your
ability to buy information about the market.
Knowing what will happen to a particular stock or
industry group on a given day can help you to a
quick fortune or avoid a catastrophic loss. There
are six levels of information in the game. The
lowest costs nothing and provides nothing. The
next costs $10 per week and gives you (according
to the 8-page rulebook) a 10% chance of getting a
tip about any given event. In game terms, this
means into one tip every 6 weeks or so. Each
higher level costs 5 times as much as the next
lower and gives you an additional 10% chance.
Thus the highest, level 5, costs $6250 per week and
gives you a 50% chance. At best, then, there's half
a chance that you won't know about an event
ahead of time. To give you perspective, let's say
that the most common event, a 10% change one
way or the other, will occur to a stock that costs $50
per share. In order to pay for the cost of information, you'd have to have 1250 shares of it -$62,500 worth! It's not likely you'd have this much
unless it were late in a long game; in other words,

tips can cost more than they're worth.
Even if you could buy a large block of stock, it
would certainly attract the attention of the other
players. The order of play is set randomly by the
computer so if you happen to be first then everyone
else can copy you and cash in on your tip without
having to pay for it. This means that if you have to
play before your rivals, it might be better not to
reveal what you know (but you still must pay for
the information). Another type of player interaction concerns breaking codes. Each player's tips
are delivered by means of a 4 to 5-digit number
which is decoded with a "secret" number chosen
by the player. This code is not hard to crack,
particularly when you can see which stocks the
player is buying and selling, so the wise player
will change their secret number occasionally -- it
can be done at the end of any week.
I don't think this game is realistic -- IBM won't
go bankrupt in 2 weeks and real tips are free and
unreliable rather than expensive and 100% reliable -- but the player interaction makes WALL
STREET the most interesting stock market game
yet.
CONGLOMERATES COLLIDE
We now move from the world of private investors to the world of corporations. In CONGLOMERATES COLLIDE, you are an executive of a
large corporation. You are trying to expand your
company by buying up other companies. There are
always 20 companies to be bought, of varying size
and profitability, and when they're gone the game
is over. Basically, it is a very simple game. You
must expand to win, but there are varying levels of
risk to choose from. Low risk means slow growth;
high risk (heavy borrowing and even selling some
of your stock in your own company for extra cash)
means faster growth. Which strategy is best depends upon interest rates, stock prices and timing.
The first two fluctuate wildly and unpredictably.
One would expect the characteristics of the 20
companies to change too, but they remain constant throughout the game.
There are three ways to play this game: two are
solitaire and one is with one to three other people.
Playing by yourself, you can either see how much
you can expand in 15 turns or you can play the
multi-player game against two opponents controlled by the computer. In all versions, the record
high score is kept on the disk.
My greatest complaint with CONGLOMERATES COLLIDE is that the computer-controlled
players apparently get extra help. They get enough
cash every few turns so that you (or I) haven't a
prayer of winning. Since their books can't be
inspected, it's hard to say whether this is a
program bug or a deliberate attempt to make

things "challenging." The other versions are
error-free, but CONGLOMERATES COLLIDE is
only moderately interesting. It does have flashy
graphics but these are not important to the play of
the game.
CARTELS & CUTTHROATS
This game is the best of the four reviewed here
and one of the best available for the Apple. It is the
most realistic, the most educational, and the most
fun -- even my 11-year old son thinks so! Each
player is the President of a small manufacturing
company; all of which just happen to make the
same product. They start out with identical resources and the winner is the player who amasses
the most total income over the game. Each turn is
a quarter year and the players agree how long the
game will be beforehand. To give time for player
interaction to develop, the game length should be
at least eight turns, which takes about two hours.
It is possible to quit at any point if you need to stop
at a certain time. CARTELS & CUTTHROATS
can be played solitaire as the computer will play
one to five "hands"; you can also have a fourhanded game with two people or some other
combination. The game can be "open", where
everyone sees what everybody else is doing, or it
can be "closed", where each player plans secretly.
There is also an option which lets you print everything on a printer, ideal for classroom use.
Each turn, you must decide how much raw
material to buy, how much of your product you
want to manufacture, at what price you will sell it,
how much you will spend upon research and upon
advertising. The computer determines the total
demand for the product from general economic
factors (which are predicted for you, roughly, a
turn ahead) and sales for each firm are calculated.
The public may favor the company with the lowest
price, the best product, or the most advertising
--this will depend on whether the product is a
luxury, a necessity or a little of both. If demand is
high, everyone may be able to sell all they can
make, but if times get hard, the poorly-managed
firms will find themselves losing money.
The players may expand their companies by
buying new factories, can (and sometimes must!)
stockpile raw materials in case of shortages or
strikes, and must try to keep labor and production
costs within reason or they will eat up profits. The
results are presented each turn in the form of a set
of realistic financial reports: profit & loss, balance
sheet, inventory levels and a market summary to
show you how you stack up against the others.
There are also occasional memos and letters about
research breakthroughs, labor disputes, and requests from charities. You can go over these
reports in depth or skim them for the essentials;

the game is enjoyable either way. At the end of
each year, an annual report shows the current
standings of all companies.
Any number of strategies may win but a good
CARTELS & CUTTHROATS player, like a good
manager, will always be aware of what the competition is doing. If you start to lose market share
because ABC lowered their price, should you 1)
drop yours to match; 2) cut back on production but
keep your price up; or 3) gear up for ABC's share
after they go out of business? There is much player
interaction, even in the closed game. Unlike
CARTELS & CUTTHROATS, the computer-controlled players are absolutely fair. They play a
reasonable game, each with a different strategy,
and are challenging to the beginner. As your skill
increases, you'll find they are not too aggressive
and can be beaten easily.
The documentation is excellent. The fifteen
page rulebook explains the rules clearly; giving
you an understanding of what is happening and
includes strategy tips. There is enough information here to qualify this game as an introductory course for Micro-economics; in fact, at a
recent seminar, CARTELS & CUTTHROATS was
shown as an example of Computer-Assisted Instruction. Don't let that fool you; it's a great game!

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Controller
Real Time Simulation
Atari with 32K
Disk
One
Frank D. Kelley
& William Volk
$30
Avalon Hill Game Co.
4517 Harford Road
Baltimore. MD. 21214
301-254-5300

Remember the movie Airplane? Picture the scene
in the control tower exploding with complete
confusion, the controller with mike in hand shouting
out instructions to the pilot, all culminating with a
747 through the window. I felt just like the controller in Airport the first few times I tried my
hand at Avalon Hill's CONTROLLER.
As the name implies, you, as the controller, take
on the awesome task of safely guiding in eight
aircraft before they crash, run out of fuel, or
simply fly away (presumably to find safer facilities). This is a fine example of a game which runs
in real time, but which has the sophistication of a
complex simulation. Unlike most simulations
written in basic, the computer does not just sit and
wait for you to input your next command. If you're
busy thinking, it's busy flying the eight planes.
I've sat looking at the radar scope, frozen with
indecision, getting more and more flustered as
plane after plane crashes, flys away, or shoots
right off the runway.
The disk is self-booting and, after a short wait,
asks you the number of planes you'd like to control
(1 to 8). You then select the type of planes. The
three choices are;
a) Light plane:
b) Jet liner:

slow, maneuverable
fast, ponderous

mce)diuPrspva,tjo:nl

Each type has it's unique characteristics of min
and max speed, rate of turn and climb, ceiling, and
fuel usage. All of these must be considered in order
to successfully issue commands to the pilots.
Once you've picked your airplanes, the game
starts. You're presented with a regularly updated
table on the left side of the screen which gives the
current heading, altitude, and velocity for each of
the eight planes. To the right is a radar scope
showing the location of each plane in relation to

the control tower and two landing strips. This
scope has two scales (10 and 100 mile radius)
which can be toggled between by entering "S". At
the bottom of the screen is data on a specific plane
you have selected. This includes fuel left, last
heading command, last altitude command, and
bearing and range from the control tower.
In order to land an airplane it must be on the
approach markers, have correct heading, be slow
enough, and be low enough. You achieve this by
giving each pilot instructions on altitude "A",
heading "C", and velocity "V". Of course the time
it takes for each of these to occur depends on the
characteristics of the individual plane.
But, it's not as simple as that. If two planes are
too close, you run the risk of mid-air collision. If
you neglect a plane that is flying away from the
tower it will fly away and you will loose contact.
And finally, the toughest problem is running out
of fuel. For example, if you make a private jet take
two passes before it lands it's very likely it will run
out of fuel.
The approach I've adopted is to go through all
planes and head them towards the tower, then

slow them all down to minimum speed to give me
more time to think and to conserve fuel, and then
to stratify all planes to altitudes that will prohibit
collision. I then work on landing the closest to the
field. This simple system does not take into account
who is lowest on fuel, arranging not to have two or
more planes arriving at the same time, or who is
closest or farthest from the field. I have, using this
method, been able to land six planes this way,
three light and three jetliners. My two private
planes ran out of fuel.
CONTROLLER is certainly a challenge. The
closest analogy to the control process in this
original game might be lunar lander in the way
you must plan the effects of your commands in
order to achieve the right results. However, CONTROLLER adds seven more landings not to
mention one more dimension. This game requires
you to learn the aircraft involved and develop
processes to safely land them. After four long
nights I could only land six planes (my average is
four). At 10 to 35 minutes a game, getting CONTROLLER down pat may take a very long time. I
would recommend CONTROLLER to those who
would like a "thinking" game that doesn't let you
dawdle around moving planes like chessmen. The
arcade player, however, may be disappointed with
the slow (real time) action of the game.
There are two items I would like to see investigated on future releases. The first is the real
time command entry. All Basic programmers
know the problem of stopping a program to service
the players keyboard input when we'd rather be
computing away. This can be solved if Basic looks
at the keyboard and only stops to process an entry
if one has occurred. With CONTROLLER, if you
input your commands too fast (when the program
isn't ready for them) some of the entry may be lost.
This can be frustrating with the tension of four or
five planes all vying for the same landing strip
within seconds of each other. Perhaps a small
machine language keyboard handler that is
triggered by the vertical blank display interrupt
might work. This would allow normal keyboard
input while Basic chugs along.
This touches on my second suggestion. Maybe
more of the Atari's great features could have been
included in the game. The Atari sound generator
could supply radar beeps, plane crash explosions,
and successful landing sounds. Also, more colors
would enhance the display and make readability
better. Of course these enhancements make a
game very computer specific which has its obvious
disadvantages when developing software.
As of this writing (May 1982) Avalon Hill has
stated that an updated version of CONTROLLER
is in the works. Perhaps we will see the above
suggestions incorporated into a later version.

(b) decrease it by one for each adjacent
hex containing a negative value.
(3) Copy the new map back into the old one.
(4) Repeat steps (2) and (3) some arbitrary
number of times.
When you're done, each hex will contain some
value. The sign of the value indicates who controls
it (+ = you, - = them), while the magnitude of the
value indicates how strong that influence is.
Values near zero suggest weak control, while large
values (either positive or negative) suggest strong
control.
This technique works fine...assuming that the
pieces don't move, that they all have the same
combat strength, that they can't affect nonadjacent units, and that the map has uniform
terrain. This, of course, leaves out most wargames.
So, to be effective, we need to find some way of
taking these different factors into account. Let's
see how we can modify the algorithm above to
adjust for each of these complications.

MOVEMENT

THE SILICON
CEREBRUM
by Bruce Webster

MAP WEIGHTING (PART

2)

INTRODUCTION
Last issue we discussed an approach for allowing a game program to "look" at a hex map. The
method assigns a value to each hex indicating
who controls that spot and how strongly they
control it. This is the algorithm used:
(1) Assign each map location one of
three values:
(a) if it's empty, assign zero (0);
(b) if it's occupied by your side, assign
some arbitrary value say, 50);
(c) if it's occupied by the enemy,
assign the opposite value
(i.e., -50).
(2) Make a new copy of the map, with each
location receiving its old value modified
by the six hexes surrounding it:
(a) increase it by one for adjacent hex
containing a positive
(non-zero) value;

Given two units of equal strength, the one that
moves faster exerts more influence. More accurately, the speedy unit exerts the same level of
influence, but does it over a wider area. Since our
algorithm is based on immobile units, we need to
make some changes to account for unit movement.
Modifying part (1) of the algorithm is one solution. Originally, we placed an arbitrary value
(positive or negative) in each occupied hex and
zero in each unoccupied one. Now, for each unit,
let's place values (of the appropriate sign) in all
the hexes it can move to. We might want to reduce
the influence by distance. Suppose we have a unit
that can move up to 5 hexes, and we give its
location a value of 50. Here are some possible
assignments for the hexes it could move to:
3
2
1
distance
50.0
40.0
25.0
1 hex
12.5
30.0
16.7
2 hexes
5.6
12.5
20.0
3 hexes
3.1
10.0
10.0
4 hexes
2.0
0.0
8.3
5 hexes
Here are the equations used:
1) value : = 50 / (distance + 1);
2) value : =50 — (distance * 10);
3) value : =50 / (distance * distance);
Which one to use? That depends on the game itself
and will require some experimenting and "tweaking". In fact, you'll probably want to come up with
one of your own; these are just suggestions.
This method leads to another problem: what
Continued on pg. 17

"

about hexes that several units (perhaps from both
sides) can move to? What value goes there? As
before, there are several solutions. The simplest:
the sum of all the values to be placed there.
Another might be the sum of the largest positive
and the largest negative values. Again, you'll need
to experiment to see what works best.
COMBAT STRENGTH
Given two units of equal movement ability, the
one with greater combat strength (CS) exerts more
influence over the same area. How do you show
this? Easy: make the arbitrary value used some
function of the CS. For example, we could just use
the CS itself as the arbitrary value. However, the
CS probably won't be large enough to get the
differentiation that we want. In that case, we can
multiply it by some constant (say, 10) or raise it to
some power (say, 2), or both. If we wanted to get
really tricky, we could multiply it by a varying
amount, such as the number of friendly units
within a certain distance. As before, you need to
experiment to see what works best with your
game.
ATTACK RANGE
Given two units of equal movement ability and
equal combat strength, the one that has a greater
attack range (AR) exerts more influence, since it
can affect a greater area. For each hex to which a
unit can move, there is a surrounding group of
hexes into which that unit can fire. These can
include hexes both within and outside of the unit's
movement range.
Some questions arise when taking attack range
into account. What value should we place in all the
hexes that a unit can fire at from a given position?
Probably the adjusted CS value that we are placing
in the position itself. What should we place in a
hex that a unit can both move into and fire at?
Perhaps the greater of the two values that would
be given to the hex. What about hexes that several
units, possibly from both sides, can move and/or
fire into? The answer to this question is left as an
exercise for the reader.
TERRAIN FACTORS
Given two identical units, the one that is least
hampered by surrounding terrain exerts more
influence. This can happen in several ways. First,
terrain can limit movement. Second, terrain can
affect combat strength, either directly (by lowering actual combat strength) or indirectly (by
increasing defensive strength of enemy units).
Third, terrain can reduce attack range by blocking
line-of-sight (LOS) attacks.
Dealing with terrain factors becomes very messy

very quickly. Consider the problem of determining
all the hexes to which a unit can move. Suppose
that the unit has a movement factor of 5. If we
ignore terrain, then we simply look at all locations
5 or less hexes from the unit's current position. We
can do that easily. Now let's add terrain. The
result? We must try to trace a path to each of those
90 hexes, taking into account the cost of moving
into each hex along the way. There are some welldefined algorithms for doing this, but they're
going to take extra time and memory. And the
terrain effects on combat strength and attack
range can be even harder to handle.
CONCLUSIONS
We can make a game-playing program complicated without much effort. If we really try, we can
make it very complicated. Unfortunately, the improved performance doesn't always justify the
increased time and memory consumption.
In the next few issues, I'll have examples of the
techniques described above, as well as some of the
algorithms needed to carry them out. As always,
I'm happy to hear from you, especially anyone
who would like to submit a column for Silicon
Cerebrum. You can reach me at:
Bruce F. Webster
9264 Grossmont Blvd.
La Mesa, CA 92041.

PURSUIT OF THE GRAF SPEE:
A Review
by William Edmunds

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Pursuit of the Graf Spee
War Game
Apple II w/ ROM Card or Apple II Plus

PURSUIT OF THE GRAF SPEE is a
war game based on one of the early conflicts of
World War II. The Graf Spee, one of Germany's
new pocket battleships, was sent to the South
Atlantic to sink Britain's supply ships. In this
game, twelve Allied ships must find and sink the

Graf Spee as it moves about sinking merchant
ships. The game can be played by two players or
solitaire, with the computer playing the German
side. A complete game can take two hours. Games
can be saved after each turn but require a separate
SSI initialized diskette.
The game is played on a map of the South
Atlantic which is displayed on the Hi-Res screen.
The ocean is sectioned by a grid upon which ship
positions are displayed by identification letters.
There are ports on the coast of Africa and South
America which can be used for refueling and
repairs.
The game starts on December 1, 1939 and ends
on December 25 or sooner if the Graf Spee is sunk.
There are two turns per day and you can move
your ships one space in any direction each turn.
Inputing moves is very simple and you can go
back and change any or all ship moves as often as

you like. If you choose not to move a ship, it will
patrol its location. You can refuel by moving into a
port and patrolling for one turn.
If the Graf Spee is in the same location as one of
the Allied ships then there is a possibility it will be
sighted. That chance is based on weather conditions and the number of ships at that location.
Once the Graf Spee is spotted, the game moves
to a tactical combat phase where each turn represents about three minutes. This phase is much
more detailed and takes place on a featureless
background with the letter designations representing relative position of the ships involved.
Here you can control speed, heading, and targets
for your guns. The ships are rated for speed, type,
and placement of guns, and armor thickness.
Combat continues until all enemy ships are sunk
or visual contact is lost.
The main portion of the game is finding the Graf
Spee. You must deploy your ships to search the
areas where the Graf Spee is likely to show.
Normally you won't know where the ship is unless
a merchant ship is sunk. Then there is a fifty
percent chance the merchant vessel will radio its
location.
The Allied ships you have for searching are
comprised of one battleship, four heavy cruisers,
five light cruisers or destroyers, and two aircraft
carriers. The carriers improve your chance of
finding the Graf Spee, because of their reconnaissance aircraft, and they can launch one air attack
with their torpedo bombers. However, they have
no armament and require an escort to prevent
being sunk. The Graf Spee has larger guns and
more armor than the cruisers, so unless you are
attacking with the battleship Renown, you will
need more than one or two ships in a single
location.
Even with occasional reports of the Graf Spee's
location, finding him is a challenge. Ships that are
patrolling have a better chance of spotting than

when moving into a location. By patrolling in
small clusters off the main shipping lanes, you
should improve your chances of locating the Spee
either by sightings or radio distress reports. There
is a short version of the game that starts on
December 13 with the Exeter, Ajax, and Achilles
sighting the Graf Spee as it leaves the Plate River
area. But starting the game with three cruisers
sighting the Spee is no easy victory, as you will
see.
When the Graf Spee is spotted, the game moves
to a naval battle. The author has done a good job of
simplifying many aspects of the real world while
maintaining those which give you tactical control
over your ships. The player input is simple and the
resolution of a turn is quick. All the ships are rated
for maximum speed, size of guns and their placement, armor thickness, strength of the hull and
superstructure, and torpedoes. There is a chart
which gives maximum range at which the shells
will penetrate the different thicknesses of armor.
This makes for a nice tactical game within the
main strategic game.
Battles are initially set up with the Graf Spee
directly ahead at a range which is dependent upon
weather conditions. The Graf Spee will be running
from the encounter while firing its stern guns at
you. Your ships all have more speed and can
overtake the Spee, but except for the Renown, your
guns are smaller and cannot penetrate the Spee's
armor at long range. If you start your pursuit from
a long range, your ships, one by one, will succumb
to the Spee's larger guns.
The December 13th scenario is a perfect example
of this. The game starts with clear skies which
places you at long range. In this case, I find it is
better to break off the attack and try shadowing
the Spee. According to the formula given in the
manual, with clear skies and three ships you have
a better than eighty percent chance of successfully
shadowing. Then on the next turn, if the weather
is bad and you manage to keep track of the Spee,
you will be able to launch your attack from a
shorter range. You most likely will lose a ship or
two but a torpedo hit will slow the Spee down.
Then you will be able to finish her off with your
remaining ship as the hits come in a fury due to the
targets reduced speed, your closing range, and the
smaller guns' increased fire rate. Of course, if you
lose track of the Spee, then it's back to square one.
The PURSUIT OF THE GRAF SPEE is a good
intermediate level war game. It combines a
strategic game, its anguish of unsuccessful searching, with tactical battles which can produce the
thrill of battle when you're finally closing in for
the kill. This game characterizes many of the
aspects of naval combat while being fast paced
and easy to play.

STARSHIP COMMANDER:
by Bob Proctor
A REVIEW
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Starship Commander
Strategy
Apple II or Apple II+
148K, requires paddle)
FORMAT:
Diskette (DOS 3.3)
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
Gilman Louie
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Voyager Software
P.O. Box 15-518
San Francisco, CA 94114

Is there anyone with an interest in
computer gaming who has never
played STARTREK? You know,
where you dash from quadrant to
quadrant, destroying Klingons
wherever you find them? The game
has been around for over a decade (!)
and there are countless versions,
including the more glamorous offspring such as Atari's STAR
RAIDERS. For those who are
familiar with it (and I assume that
means almost everybody), the most
important thing I have to say about
STARSHIP COMMANDER is that
it is NOT another souped-up version
of STARTREK.
Instead, SC depicts a single battle
with 1 to 3 enemy ships (the baddies
are called Vegans here). To win, you
must destroy them, force their surrender, or force them to run away.
As commander of the USS Ranger,
you must not only give orders about
navigation and weapons, but must

make decisions about how to allocate
energy, when to rest weary crew
members, and when and where to
use your repair droids. The game is
packed with detail but unfortunately the documentation doesn't give
you an over-view of what's happening. For this reason, many may find
that SC is not worth the effort
required to master it; but Trekkies
will love its ability to make you feel
--more than any other game -- like
you're in the Captain's chair of a
Federation starship.

mine had this problem, so maybe it
is not too common. On the other
hand, you would not want to buy
this game and discover that you
couldn't play it.

TAKING OFF
The first thing that strikes you
when you start playing is the way
the paddle is used to control all
game functions. Almost every screen
contains a list of choices. By rotating
the paddle knob, you move an arrow
to the item you want and push the
paddle button to select it. You
NEVER have to touch the keyboard!
While I think this is an excellent
approach, I would still like to have
an option to use the keyboard in
emergencies. For example, the knob
on my old set of Apple paddles would
not turn far enough to let me select
the last item on each list. Unfortunately, this was usually "RETURN"
and I was stuck--unable to continue
the game. Some of the better paddles
have an adjustment screw to correct
this, but I don't know what to tell
you if your pair is non-adjustable.
Perhaps you can devise a test to see
if your paddle (0) has a full range of
settings. Of 3 pairs I've tested, only

Communication

GIVING ORDERS
The list which you will use the
most is called the Command Screen.
From it, you can select any of 7
stations of the Ranger:

Defense
Engineering
Life Support
Navigation
Science
Weapons

— to talk to the Vegan
commander.
— to maintain your
shields.
— to allocate repair
droids and power.
— to change crew or
team assignments.
— to control the ship's
speed and course.
— to "scan" an enemy
vessel's status.
— to fire positrons or
torpedoes.

Each time you return to the Command Screen, there is an asterisk in
front of the stations which you have
selected so far that turn. This keeps
you from overlooking an important
function (like Weapons!) which is an
aggravating mistake. It's a great
touch which makes you feel like the
computer, for once, is on your side.
Besides these stations, there are 2
other choices on the Command

Screen. The first ends the game (with
an option to save it and continue
later) and the other ends the turn.
When the turn ends, you see the
exchange of weaponry on a scanner
screen, get a report of damage, injuries and fatalities, and see the
relative movement of the ships on a
screen called the "Motion Detector."
Then you're back to the Command
Screen and it's time to plan your
next move

GETTING THE PICTURE
There is a lot of information
available from your shipboard computers. There are about 30 different
screens which convey the status of
your ship and as many others which
allow you to perform some action.

ning strategy. I expected to find a
description of what's going on in the
19-page book that comes with the
game. It's not there and I consider
this omission SC's biggest failing.
This is a very complex simulation
and a Commander should understand it, not be learning it on the job.
Take Power, for example. It is obviously being used up -- the rules tell
you how much is needed for some
(but not all) functions. However, nowhere are you told that the engines
are also generating power or that
this amount depends on the efficiency of the team on duty in Engineering. It is possible, if you are
frugal, to generate more power than
you use and thus replenish the batteries a little. In a battle where both
sides are severely crippled, this tactic
may be the game-winner; the extra
energy might allow you to repair
your torpedoes first. The point is
that such subtleties are not obvious
(at first) and are not explained -- you
have to be willing to dig for them.
DELEGATING AUTHORITY

The graphics used to display information are superb. There are bar
charts to compare actual power
usage with allocated power, a graph
to give you the relationship between
speed and distance covered, schematics of the Ranger to show damage,
and plan views showing the relative
position of all ships. If a business
program had these graphics and
ease-of-use, people would rave about
it. It's very nice to see them in a
game; certainly the need to easily
understand a lot of information
exists here too.

As good as the graphics are, there
is so much information that it is not
clear at first what is important and
what is "chrome." This is a mixed
blessing as it adds mystique which
makes role-playing more fun, but it
makes it harder to figure out a win-

In the beginning it seems like
there are too many decisions to
make; so it is nice that you can give
the computer some of your decisionmaking burden. Both the Defense
and Navigation stations have Automatic Control options -- with these
in effect, you only have to worry
about Weapons each turn and Life
Support every 4 turns or so. With
defensive auto-control, the computer
will distribute power to your shields,
keeping most of it in the shields that
are facing the enemy. In Navigation,
you can choose semi-automatic,
where the computer sets the course
but you control speed, or full automatic, where you select a distance
and the computer will attempt to
keep the RANGER that far from the
enemy.
It is necessary to go to Life Support
to rotate the crew teams from Duty
to Sleep to Standby. There ought to
be a way to give orders to have them
rotate automatically but there isn't.
There are, to my way of thinking,
several such features which should
exist but don't. For instance, there
isn't any report that shows you the
power allocations for ALL of the
main systems. Each total is available
on the appropriate report but I would
expect an overview to be available
at Engineering. It isn't -- anywhere.
It's also very hard to get a clear
picture of power consumption. The
amount left in the batteries will give
you an idea of how much you're
using but there is no report to show
you clearly where it's all going.

Another item I miss is a plot of the
enemy's projected position. This is
the point where the Vegan ship(s)
would be at the end of the next turn
at their present course and speed.
The auto-pilots can use this projection, but there is no way to display it
if you want to do your own navigation.
The automatic controls, both in Defense and Navigation, do an adequate job for a novice but will not do
as good a job as an experienced
Commander. If you are going to be
good at SC, you must eventually
take up these duties yourself. It
would also be nice if there was some
indication of ship heading on the
Motion Detector. This would let you
see which shield was facing the
enemy, a crucial factor.
GETTING PROMOTED
At the end of the game you get a
score and a rank based on your
performance. Under 8000 points
earns you the rank of Crewperson,
higher scores earn one of 11 higher
ranks -- all the way up to Fleet
Admiral for more than 38,000 points.
The number of points you get will
depend on several factors but is
primarily a function of how many
Vegan ships you faced and how
strong they were. You can choose to
fight 1, 2, or 3 at the beginning of the
game and select the type (Destroyer,
Cruiser or Dreadnought) of each. At
first, you'll have your hands full
with a single Destroyer but as you
learn, you can increase the challenge
by selecting a stronger force. You
also get an 8000 point bonus if you
can get the Vegans to surrender.
You demand this using the Communication station. The Vegan commander has no sense of humor at all.
CONCLUSIONS
STARSHIP COMMANDER puts
YOU in charge. The level of detail is
extraordinary; you know each crewmember by name and control every
aspect of your ship's operation. In a
game lasting from one to four hours,
you, like STAR TREK'S Captain
Kirk, will not only have to know
good battle-tactics but will have to
manage your ship well enough to
maintain fighting efficiency equal
to the enemy's. The documentation
is weak; it explains the commands
and options but does not provide an
insight into what is happening. This
can only be gained by playing. [Ed.
Note: Please see the designer's notes
for Starship Commander in our next
Issue]. For those who are willing to
dig for this understanding, the game
offers considerable challenge and
satisfaction.

ADVENTURES - Cheaper By The Dozen And A Half
by Dick Mcgrath
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
GENERAL
CONTENT:

The Captain 80 Book of
Basic Adventures
Program design and basic
language coding
technique applied to
adventure-type programs

SPECIAL
FEATURES:

1. A newly-released
adventure program
generator which
creates adventure
programs in basic.
2. Complete program
listings in basic for
eighteen popular adventures
AUTHOR:
Robert Liddil
PRICE:
$19.95
PUBLISHER: 80-Northwest
Publishing, Inc.
3838 South Warner St.
Tacoma, Washington
98409

In addition to software on tape
and disk, there are armloads of books
with program listings which you
can type in yourself. CAPTAIN 80's
BOOK OF BASIC ADVENTURES
is one such volume... and a source of
hours of exciting challenge for the
computer adventurer.
"Captain 80" is the pseudonym of
author Bob Liddil, who writes a
column of the same name for the 80U.S. Journal, a national magazine
devoted solely to the TRS-80 computer.
The book opens with a forward by
that guru of computer adventures,
Scott Adams, president of Adventure
International. As a pioneer of the
computer software industry, his
comments provide a stamp of
approval. He describes the book as
"the world's first anthology of basic
adventurers from some of the best
known writers of micro-computer
software".
The first seven chapters are brief
(2 or 3 page) monographs, possibly
the substance of past or future
Captain 80 columns. The first two
chapters provide a bit of philosophical history on the role of the adventurer in literature, and draw an
interesting comparison between the
adventure hero of the past and his
modern counterpart, the computer
adventurer. The remaining mono-

graphs offer brief suggestions on
how to play, design, write and
market computer adventures. Don't
expect the "complete adventure
garners manual", however. Remember, each chapter is only two or
three pages long.
Chapter 7 is particularly valuable
to the sight-unseen mail order
purchaser of computer adventures...
in fact, this chapter alone could be
worth the price of the book! It
contains capsule descriptions of 27
popular, commercially available adventure programs. A little research
could prevent you from wasting
money on a program that doesn't
appeal to your particular interests.
But the real value bonanzas in
this book are the adventures! Of the
252 pages, 215 are devoted to the
program listings of eighteen basic
language adventures. If you consider that each one retails separately
for about $15.95, you could sell out a
total of about $287.00 for this
collection on disk or tape! You're
getting them for about $1.10 each in
the book. Now that's value!
All the programs are written for
the Model I TRS-80 but should be
easily convertible to other machines
and other versions of basic. All but
one should run in 16K of memory,
although you may need to remove
the remarks statements and compact some of the code to fit.
All have been published previously
and most are still commercially
available. The authors are some of
the best in the business: Scott
Adams, Lance Micklus, Teri Li, Greg
Hassett, Don and Freda Boner, and
others. These adventures represent
a cross-section of some of their early
efforts. Though their current work is
undoubtedly more sophisticated, you
can hardly complain when you're
getting these at about $1.10 each.
All are still great fun, and a few
have become classics.
Let me give you a sampling: One
of Scott Adams' first efforts, Adventureland, was written when all
you could find were Star Trek
imitations. It has a sleeping dragon
(tread lightly), a swamp, a lava flow
and Paul Bunyon's magic axe. This
is the original version, written in
basic. Though it was later rewritten
in machine language, this is still an
excellent introductory adventure for
the novice.

Greg Hassett, the teenage founder
of his own mail order software
business, Adventure World, is also a
prolific computer adventure writer.
Five of his early efforts are included
in Captain 80. "Journey To The Center
Of The Earth" -- designed by a
beginner, for beginners; "House Of
The Seven Gables"; the claustrophobic "King Tut's Tomb"; Voyage
To Atlantis" and the sinister "Sorcerer's Castle". Collectively, they trace
his developing talents as a computer
adventure writer.
Lance Micklus is well known as a
business and utility program writer.
His only currently available adventure program, "Dog Star Adventure" is included as the single
space age theme in the book.
A father-daughter programming
team from Indianapolis, Don and
Freda Boner, have contributed a
tale of Kentucky Moonshine, revenooers, good old boys and southern
sheriffs in Thunder Road. They also
wrote the most recent of the programs, a two part series: Revenge Of
The Balrog and The Fortress At
Times End, fun for dungeon and
dragon fans!
For those of you who like "Big"
adventure, Teri Li's Atlantean
Odyssey, is a full 48K in length. Not
only is it the largest program, it
comes complete with simple graphics
of the adventure locations. Teri, a
professional programmer for Instant
Software, has two other programs in
the book -- Lost Dutchman's Gold
and Spider Mountain.
If you've read this far, you probably
know what is meant by a "Computer
Adventure". But just in case you
don't, let me give you a definition
straight from Captain 80's book; A
computer adventure is... "A semiintelligent, word recognizing computer program which employs a
novelistic style to present an unsolved puzzle." It is a word oriented
game in which the player communicates with the game author through
the computer. The writer has thrown
out a challenge to the player, in the
form of a puzzle. The author's success
is measured not so much by whether
you are able to solve the puzzle, but
by the amount of fun you have in
trying.

Continued on pg. 39

HORSE RACING CLASSIC: A REVIEW
by Barry Austin
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Horse Racing Classic
Sports Game
Apple II
Disk
1 to 9
$36.95
Taaumi Software
International
8 North Grosvenor Ave.
Burnaby. British Columbia
Canada, V5B 1J2
1604)294-2891

[In Howard Cosell's voice] -- It's a
simulation. A pedagogic device without parallel in the annals of digitized
sports games. An electronic derby
party which fetes more equine excitement than my own loquacious
platitudes and perambulations in
covering the May Classic (the
Kentucky Derby for the uninitiated)
in my own nasal and lugubrious
fashion.
Thank you Howard for that nifty
introduction to HORSE RACING
CLASSIC. Yes, we agree with you,
HRC is a good horse racing simulation, a good teaching tool, and just
a darn good party game. There have
been several horse race games
written for the Apple (most were
little more than lo-res programming
exercises), but HRC stands apart.
As a simulation, HRC makes use
of a horse's track record to determine
the potential performance of each
horse on the daily card. For example,
a horse that has a record of coming
from off the pace (according to the
racing form provided for each race)
will have a good chance of closing
on the leaders in any given race.
Anyone who knows how to read a
racing form will feel very comfort-

to "Place" bet? How did I lose my
money so easily? The appendix to
the rulebook has a nice little discussion on understanding odds and
pay-offs.

able with HRC, as the two most
recent performances of each horse
in a race are given for your examination. In addition to the recent
racing history of each horse and
standard racing form data (weight
carried, Odds, fastest time, number
of starts, wins, places, and shows),
HRC gives a rating to the jockey and
trainer assigned to each horse. All of
which adds an amazing degree of
realism to the game.
As a tutorial, HRC can be used to
teach a novice not only how to read
the racing form, but how to make
intelligent choices at the betting
window. When is it best to bet across
the board? Is there really any logic

While HRC performs admirably
as a simulation and tutorial on
thoroughbred wagering it really
shines as a party game. With HRC
at a party, don't be surprised if you
find a room full of otherwise normal
people jumping up and down
screaming for "Spectacular Bid" (or
even "Spectacular Dud") to race
across those last few grueling inches
of the monitor for a well earned
victory. As we have just hinted, you
can change the name of any of the
100 horses stored on the game disk.
This will not change the horses performance record (which is stored by
date and race), but can provide a
humorous touch to the proceedings.
Each bettor is given an initial stake
of $100 which he or she uses to try
and win the most money. The game
stores the ten highest winning totals
on disk. This "Handicapper Hall Of
Fame" adds an additional touch to
the game, evidenced by a recent
incident in which a player refused to
bet on the last 4 races of the daily
card because he had a $1 lead over
the all-time third place total.
From one to nine bettors can buy
the traditional win, place, and show
tickets for any of seven horses in the
four to nine races of the daily card
race. Bettors can also buy tickets in
any combinations such as betting a
horse "across the board". This hi-res
game is very well done and well
worth the $36.95 price tag.

SNEAK ATTACK ON
KNIGHT OF DIAMONDS
By Harry Conover

The chevroned boys, fresh from a
30 day leave after whipping Werdna
in Woodhead/ Greenberg's first
WIZARDRY scenario, PROVING

GROUNDS OF THE MAD OVERLORD, were ready to join forces
again. This time their task was even
more difficult. Find the five items on
Gnilda and return them, along with
the staff of light, to her highness so
that she might regain her throne.

They had been warned by previous
mercenaries that the maze was
guarded by monsters of incredible
strength and that even level 13
veterans had fallen victim to it's
many entrapments. But expedition
leader Prospero knew his men.
Stormtroopers Kirk and Frenchy along
with Akido the Samurai, would lead
with Lord Prospero, Damien and
Lechat in the rear, casting spells

and giving aid when needed
After stocking up with armament

and supplies and a blessing from the
nether worlds, Stoned Sammy (lost
forever !!) the group made their way
into level one.
"Not as bad as I thought", cracked
Kirk, reaching the middle chamber
and receiving instructions from
Gnilda.

"At least there are no creeping
coins", muttered Frenchy.
"Patience, men, patience, our test
is about to begin" counseled Prospero.
And that is why, it took these well
seasoned men hours to find the only
way into level two and hours more to
map that 80% darkened maze.
"I could be home playing Zork",
grumbled Akido.
"We all will be if you don't start
getting in the first hit", suggested
Damien.
"Let us camp now", said Prospero,
"and decide on our strategy. Our
food runs as low as our spirits so we
must devise a plan of expediency."
Around the crackling fire the 6 tossed
ideas back and forth. They kept
coming back to Kirk's idea and
finally agreed on it. They would cast
a Malor spell down to the 5th level
and work their way back up the
stairs, thereby coming up on any
evil-doers or traps from behind.
There was only one hitch.
"What happens if we travel into
solid rock?", asked Akido?

"Well then", laughed Kirk, "it's
time to call in our second generation.
Thank Woodhead for backups".
Using the time honored method of
coordinate selection (10,10) the six
were whisked off into....
"Mon Dieu!", hollered Frenchy.
"We have landed right in the middle
of level five. No rock, no traps no..."
Frenchy's enthusiasm was quickly
abated by a horde of monsters that
dispatched Damien and Lechat to
the other side. Using Prospero's
magical recuperative powers (and
three and a half sets of crossed
fingers), Damien and Lechat were
summoned back from the dead.
"You men have got to remember,
these monsters aren't foolish. They
grew up in the same environment we
did so they know all our spells. Forget
about that dilto stuff, Damien and
Lechat just open the chests please!"
thundered an exhausted Prospero.
Heeding their mentor's advice the
six pushed on, hacking and slaying
their way through levels 5, 4 and 3.
"Hey Kirk", yelled Akido during a
melee against harmless puffballs, "I
think your planned worked!".

"Yeh, sure looks that way", smiled
the stormtrooper, "we've got three of
the five items and avoided some
nasty traps. All in all this is a breeze".
Fighting on with their quest nearly
over, the gallant men realized the 2nd
level and claimed all five items that
made up the Knight of Diamonds.
"And now", intoned Prospero, "for
the real test, we must journey back
to the 5th level for the Staff of Light
for without it our task is incomplete."
Using the Malor spell and overcoming a gauntlet of the deadliest
defenders ever seen in a maze the
prized staff was re-claimed and the
heroes given their due.
Back in the luxury rooms at the
inn the now be-knighted squad
pondered their next adventure. "All
I hear about is Time Zone, Time
Zone", mused Damien," maybe we
should look into this."
"Ah, Mesopotomia in the spring",
sighed Prospero.
"Guess I know where to send my
bags now", chuckled Kirk.
Time Zone, you haven't got a
chance.

❑

by Bill Willett
If you're an Atari gamer like me,
you've probably visited all the software stores within a thirty mile
radius to find that special combination of software and people that can
help you find what you want. Or,
you buy countless magazines and
read the reviews to help you spend
your limited software dollars. Right
now, Atari game software is just
beginning to become abundant. We
garners need two things to make us
happy. We need more games, and
ways to choose what fits our needs.
To get more games, you need more
programmers. To convince these programmers to spend their limited time
on the Atari there must be sufficient
payback for the time invested. The
Atari has inherent capabilities to
make a game programmer's time
more efficient. But more important,
the number of Atari users is growing
into a substantial market. The lack
of software and the potential sales is
drawing programmers to the new
Atari market.
The special capabilities I'm talking
about are the features built into the
hardware to make the game programmer's life so much easier. The
beginner, like me, can now do wonderful things like scroll across maps or
fly needlefighters through defender
type worlds. These capabilities are
even more important to the professional programmer. The time he
saves in developing graphics can be
used in fine tuning and developing
more games.
I'll give some examples of how the
Atari has made my life easier as a
game programmer. I'm working on
a war game right now that I could
not have undertaken with any other
machine on the market. I've incorporated a four screen map (similar
to Eastern Front's six screen map)
in basic. To scroll across this map on
another machine I would have had
to use complex machine code routines
to actually move the map through
the display memory. With the Atari,
this scrolling is done by calling a
fifteen byte machine code user routine
which has to change only a few
memory locations. Yes, I had to
learn some assembly language, but

not like I would have on an Apple or
Color Computer.
To have created this map (40 wide
by 24 deep) on another computer
with graphic blocks would have
required some 15 thousand bytes.
The same resolution on the Atari
can be done using a redefined
character set with only one thousand
bytes. This is done by redefining the
alphabet as pieces (trees, forests,
tanks, etc.) and printing them on the
screen just like text. The 8 by 8
matrix of graphics blocks defining
the piece can be specified with only
one byte.
A final example is the gamers
Godsend, the player missile. In my
game, to move a piece without
players would mean moving the
image of the piece through the map,
restoring the map as I went. With
players, the map is left intact and I
move a player around on the screen.
The computer takes care of who's on
top of who and moves the piece
without disturbing the map.

screen, the playability is excellent.
The detail is superb. The fox's feet
move and he sits down when done.
The chicken flaps her wings and
shuffles her feet. The chicks (the
result of a dropped egg) peep and
bustle realistically. Best of all I like
the little man who boots the chicken
off the screen (the result of stepping
on a chick). Synapse seems to be
producing good games.
Datasoft's Tumblebugs is like the
Apple Dungbeatle. You are pursued
in a large maze by a number of
tumblebugs. You must eat all the
dots before the tumblebugs get you.
The unique thing in this game is the
magnifying glass window which
moves above the maze (which is too
large to see detail) and magnifies
what is below it. Gamma Software's
Hockey is a delight to play. This
two, three or four person game has
three players and one goalie per side
and is quite similar to Intellivision's
soccer.

NEW RELEASES

SSI has released Tigers In The
Snow and The Battle of Shiloh in
Atari versions. Both require the
BASIC cartridge, and either disk or
tape, and cost $40. All versions
require 40K except tape Shiloh which
uses 32K. Both have scrolling maps
The Battle of Shiloh recreates the
famous American Civil War battle,
while Tigers in the Snow simulates
the December 1944 offensive by the
Germans. You can find reviews on
these two games for the Apple in
back issues of CGW, Mar.—Apr. for
Tigers and Jan.—Feb. for Shiloh.

Protector, Chicken, and Dodge Racer
are three designs for the Atari from
Synapse Software. Protector seems
to be very popular and with good
reason, it uses all the Atari's features.
See notes on the game in the Jan.—
Feb. and May-June issues of CGW.
Dodge Racer is the old standby where
the player guides his car around a
number of concentric tracks that
can be switched between. The player
attempts to clear the tracks of dots
while not being hit by the oncoming
computer car. Chicken captivated
me. Although a simple concept of a
chicken catching falling eggs dropped
by the cagey fox at the top of the

EPYX has announced four adventure games to delight we Atarians.
King Arthur's Court sends the player
off fighting dragons and wizards in
order to return the crown. Nightmare
puts you in a magical castle with
gargoyles, headless men and, packs
of very hungry rats, all tempting to
stop you from retaining your sanity.
When shipwrecked on Vulcan's Isle
you'll battle demons and satyrs to
earn freedom. In Crypt of the Undead
you are in a cemetery and must find
your way to the world of the living
before dawn. Although I haven't
seen these games yet, that they all
require joysticks is a good sign.

While there are advantages to programming your game on an Atari,
there are also some negatives. One
is the limited market at this time for
their efforts. Another problem is the
lack of good utilities. We're now
seeing the second generation of
utilities which should provide better
tools for the programmer. Another
problem I've heard of is the slowness
of chaining programs.

lates the problems (and frustrations) of a hypothetical sector commander in the German Army
who sees the writing on the wall.
Some old ideas are re-worked here: fog-of-war
(inadequate or inaccurate information); and inadequate resources desperately trying to do too
much with too little for too long. The result is a
series of scenarios guaranteed to earn the player
(metaphorically speaking) his service decoration,
combat fatigue, and transfer to a quiet sector (like
Normandy).
The physical components are typical of Avalon
Hill's board games: multi-colored mounted mapboard; die-cut counters; 16-page narrative-based
rules booklet, and thick 1" box. As the program
features text only (which must be interfaced with
the mapboard and counters), pirating is rendered
impractical. A pirated version would resemble the
graphics state-of-the-art in wargaming of early
1971, with "paste-your-own" counters in the format
of early zip-lock.

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Dnieper River Line
Wargame
Apple. Atari. Pet, TRS-80
Disk or Tape
1
Bruce A. Ketchledge
$20.00 [tape): $25.00 (disk)
Avalon Hill Game Company

The desperate position of German defensive
strategy on the Eastern Front in 1943-44 was
partially solved with the use of mobile Kampfgruppen (battlegroups) as fire-brigades, scrambling desperately between emergencies with
never enough resources, keeping disaster at arm's
length until the numbers finally caught up with
the German Army. DNIEPER RIVER LINE, a
recent release by Avalon Hill, accurately simu-

The Game System
Dnieper River Line is 8-12 turns long, with each
28

game-turn representing one hour of "real" time.
Each turn is subdivided into five phases: Russian
Movement; Russian Combat; German Movement;
German Combat; and Reinforcements. A savegame option exists at the conclusion of each
game-turn.
The Russian movement phase is exclusively
computer-controlled, with passive interaction necessary for the German player to keep track of
Russian activity and intentions. An average
computer turn takes 2-4 minutes. The usefulness
(completeness) of information available to the
German player is directly related to how well his
units can "see" what's going on. Russian units
move toward fixed objectives (there are six) until
they capture objectives, encounter German units,
run out of movement points, or are disrupted by
German fire.
The combat phases incorporate an algorithm
which includes severity of fighting, disruption
levels, smoke, anti-tank capabilities, percentage
strengths, and combat modes. The computer
displays combat odds as a ratio and immediately
resolves the combat, with defeated forces retreating
up; to squares toward their side's baseline.
The German movement phase presents strategic choices for the player: command (to change
the status and move an individual unit); status (to
check the condition of all German units); reserve
(to request the release as reinforcements of offmap units); artillery (to request off-map artillery
support); objective (to review the ownership of the
objective squares); and quit (to end the German
combat phase).
In the command sub-phase of the German
movement phase, units can be deployed in one of
three combat modes: static (no movement allowed,
limited observation, and defensive strength is
doubled); assault mode (normal movement, combat, and observation); and mobile mode (doubled
movement allowance, normal observation, and
combat strength reduced by one-half).
Disruption levels (displayed during the status
sub-phase of the German movement phase) have a
devastating effect on the combat capabilities of
units, with an adjusted combat strength equal to
1/1(+x), where x=disruption level. Disrupted units
that aren't moved or attacked, or don't participate
in an attack can recuperate in disruption levels.
Each unit has a displayed number, type, strength,
location, mode, and status displayed during the
status sub-phase of the German movement phase.
A check also exists to easily see whether or not a
unit has been moved. Combat, movement, and
Continued on pg. 38

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# OF PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Choplifter!
Arcade
Apple (now): Atari (soon)
Diskette
I
DAN GORLIN
$34.95
BRODERBUND SOFTWARE

CHOPLIFTER! is an outstanding new release
from Broderbund Software. Outstanding in that:
1) 3-D highly animated graphics are the best yet
on the Apple, and ; 2) the game is truly a "new"
game.
You can look at any game that has come out this
year and not find one that is CHOPLIFTER!'s
equal for graphics. A very realistic smooth scrolling
screen with 3-D effects highlights this game which
puts the player at the controls of a helicopter with
the mission of rescuing the hostages from the
Bungelings (a nation of militaristic ideologues).
The first time you play you may well find yourself
muttering "incredible" as you watch the screen.
Photos with this article cannot do justice to the
graphics and animation. The helicopter can appear
to fly across the screen or turn and fire toward the
screen with a nice 3-D effect. The 3-D effect also
comes into play at the border crossing.
The animation is also outstanding. I got tickled
when I saw the hostages wave to me as I flew
overhead. I got even more tickled when I saw how

realistically they ran to my 'copter when I had
landed. But I burst out laughing when I returned
them safely to base and saw them wave good-by as
I left on another mission. The fighter attack
sequence makes good use of the 3-D and animation
which Dan Gorlin put into this game.
While trying to rescue the hostages from their
barracks (which you may have to fire upon in
order to set the hostages free) you are opposed by
tanks, jet fighters, and drone air mines. The tanks
fire at your craft while you are on the ground, and
though not usually accurate on the first shot or
two they become deadly accurate after that. Don't
leave your 'copter on the ground for more than a

Continued on pg. 38

groups. There are arcade games, adventure games,
wargames, business games, sports games, fantasy
games and so on and so on. To be such a small
group (at least for the time being) we surely have
diverse tastes!
As a game designer, I am constantly reminded
of the size of the various "interest groups" that
make up the potential markets for my games.
There is no doubt that the largest number of people
at this point are interested in arcade/action games.
However, I feel there is also a potentially large
group that would be interested in simulation
games if designers could only develop better games.
Real World Gaming will examine the field of
simulation games and offer game designers
thoughts and techniques for better game design.
In this first installment I will attempt to illustrate
some of the vast potential inherent in the simulation gaming field.
Simulation games can let you experience a reallife field of endeavor that is not normally open to
you. Such games, in one form or another, have
always been popular. Monopoly, when it was
introduced in the 1930's, probably derived a large
part of its early success from the fact that people
"down on their luck" from the depression could
wheel and deal like real estate tycoons. Wargames,
in a like manner, have offered many "would be"
military strategists a chance to re-fight the great
battles of history. You could even contend that
many of today's arcade games are a type of "role
playing" simulation game since many give the
participant the chance to, for example, save the
world from some dreaded foe.
However, all of these games have simplified the
real-world to maintain "playability". In fact, this
simplification often leaves nothing but an abstract
shadow of what the real-world is like. Who could
possibly believe that playing Monopoly is a realistic view of the field of land investment and
development? Before the advent of computer
games, most games were either so abstract as to
have only a vague resemblance to reality or were
so complex as to be unplayable for most people.
But the computer offers the possibility of creating
games that make realism playable.

A New Column...

REAL WORLD
GAMING

DanBute

INTRODUCTION
I guess by the fact that we all read this magazine, we share an interest in computer games! But
there are so many different types of games. Also, it
seems that each type only appeals to specific

Computers can reduce the conflict between the
complexity necessary for realism and the simplicity
required for playability. All the information needed
to create a good "model" of a real-world field of
interest can be kept by the computer. All the
charts, probability tables and other paraphernalia
needed previously in simulation games can be
hidden away in a few computer chips. Players
could then concern themselves only with the facts
and decisions which parallel those required in the
particular real-life area being simulated. The computer would do all of the work required for

analyzing the situations and generating results.
Greater realism would still require more sophistication among the players, but this type of "complexity" would be a result of the knowledge needed
to pursue the activity the game is simulating as
opposed to being caused by the mechanics of the
game. For instance, to play a good computer
business management game, you might need to
learn something about making decisions based on
financial reports, but you would not and should
not have to know how to do the bookkeeping and
detailed accounting to prepare those reports.
Good simulation games would allow you to
quarterback a professional football team, manage
a multi-million dollar corporation, dabble in the
stock market, explore for oil, fight glorious battles,
... all from the comfort of your own easy chair.
These games would be "educational" without your
even knowing that you are learning. They would
be exciting in ways that arcade games couldn't
possibly be. There are limits to the challenge of
just coordinating a hand on a joy-stick with an eye
on a video screen. But, since simulation games add
a mental aspect, there are no bounds to the
potential for fulfillment. (It's been said that there
is no toy like the human mind).
So, if simulation games are so great, why aren't
they more successful in the market? We are
currently selling personal computers to the "right"
people (although things may change later). The
great majority of the computer games audience is
made up of a more intelligent, better educated,
relatively affluent elite. Some have proposed the
simple answer that people just don't like to think.
If this were true, humans would be in big trouble
because many of the species we are driving to
extinction can out-DO us but none can out-THINK
us. I am certain this is not the reason why
simulation games don't do very well. We need to
look at the games themselves to get a reasonable
explanation.
It often helps to better understand a muddled
picture (such as computer gaming) for one to
generalize a bit. For the purposes of discussion,
let's say there are two extreme types of games:
abstract and realistic. Checkers would be a good
example of an extremely abstract game and wargames could represent the other end of the
spectrum. However, wargames can vary considerably in their realism versus abstraction
balance. Chess, for instance, could be considered
to be a very abstract wargame. So, instead of two
categories in which we could dump all games,
abstract and realistic are the extreme points on a
line. Checkers would fall very close to the abstract
end of the line and moving toward realism you
might find chess, Monopoly and wargames in that
order

In the case of "board" (or non-computer) games,
the main feature of abstract games is the simplicity
of their mechanics. Likewise, realistic board games
are marked by a high complexity. In fact, the only
reason most board games are so abstract, is
because greater realism always meant more complexity before there were computers. I doubt that
whoever "created" chess would have designed
such arbitrary rules and abstract representations
of feudal power had he had access to a method that
could easily simulate the subject area with much
greater realism. Nonetheless, even if you disregard
this biased view of game design, it is still apparent
that the old rules of "realism equals complexity"
are less constant since the computer became part
of games.
That notwithstanding, the unfortunate fact is
that many computer simulation games are copying
from our predecessors of the pre-computer days.
We are using many game conventions that are no
longer necessary. We don't need to have turns
where each player gets a chance to make their
input when we can allow simultaneous action. We
don't need games built on game maps from the
pre-computer era. In addition, there are capabilities offered by computers that were totally
unavailable previously. The great success of arcade
games should make it obvious that the inclusion of
changing graphics and continuous physical involvement in games are attractive features. But
since board games don't have such things, most
game designers don't even attempt them.
Simulation games have a great potential but
game designers have to go quite a distance towards
new techniques in their programs. In the succeeding articles of this series, I shall describe some
of the methods that can be used to improve games.
Some of what I will write will be based on a formal
education in Industrial Engineering, Operations
Research and Systems Simulation. Other ideas
will be based on experience gained "the hard way"
(by spending many hours on a few games which
netted little better than minimum wage). Finally, I
hope to convey some of the things that others have
discovered. (Towards that end, anyone with
interesting ideas to contribute, please contact me
through Computer Gaming World.) But, even if
you are not interested in designing games, you
should at least be aware of some of the things
which will help you become a more discriminating
consumer of what the marketplace offers.
I look forward to the day when simulation
games will fulfill the potential I believe they have.
I hope you will become a believer too!
Dan Bunten is the author of Computer Quarterback, Cartels and Cutthroats, and Cytron Masters;
all published by Strategic Simulations.

by Stuart Gorrie
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Casino
Card Game
Emulation)
Apple
II (Apple III

FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Diskette
1
Bob Rosen
$39.95
Datamost
9748 Coztcroft Ave
Chatsworth, CA 91311
(213)6-70

For those of you who are interested
in unusual values, here's one that
you should consider. Take a look at
CASINO by Data Most. This is an
unusual value as it contains five
games on one disk. For a mere
$39.95, you receive Blackjack, Keno,
Poker, Roulette and Baccarat.
CASINO provides it's user with a
little personal touch. As you enter
the CASINO, you are greeted and
asked your name. CASINO knows if
you have been here before, as, you
see, it keeps track of it's clientele.
CASINO knows all about you. The
program not only provides you with
a menu of the five game choices, it
also provides you an additional four
utility choices. The New Player
option allows you to complete play
as one person and resume play as
another person. It also allows you to
delete players from the list whom
you are sure will never again return.
Stats allows you to examine the play
record of any client, tracking the
winnings and losses of all games
played. Music simply allows you to
turn on or off the music which
accompanies the play. Finally, Quit
permits you to quit; at which time it
bids you good-by, come again.
The game of Blackjack is fairly
standard. You are playing against a
dealer and may double down on card
totals less than 12 and on soft totals.
You may split any pair or 10 count
cards but may only draw one card
on split aces. The dealer must hit on
totals of 16 or less and stand on
totals of 17 and above. Insurance is
offered and pays two for one along
with blackjack. In terms of the
micro-machine interface, unless you
demand the personal touch, one
dealer is as good as another. This is
a fair game of blackjack. Starting
the round, as you do, with $1000, if

you enjoy playing Blackjack, you
can play this one for hours.
Your next choice is Keno. Here,
again, it appears to be a fairly
standard game. A grid of ten by
eight numbers (80) is displayed. You
may choose from one to fifteen
numbers by moving the cursor to
selected positions on the grid. When
the amount of numbers you indicate
have been selected, the game draws
it's numbers. As it selects it's
numbers, the grid is marked to keep
it's selections separate from yours.
It marks common selections so that
the end result, from Keno's point of
view, is yours, mine and ours. Payoff
is based on an algorithm dependent
on the amount numbers you picked.
If you choose to bet the same card
more than once, simply suffix an
"S" to your bet and your previous
selections will remain in effect.
Moving right along, we find the
next game to be Poker. Mind you
this is not a normal game of poker,
since it has no adversary, as such.
Your competition is the standard
list of resultant hands obtainable in
a game of draw poker. Play begins
with you placing a bet. Already at a disadvantage, because you have not
yet seen your cards, you must determine what to bet. You are then dealt
your five cards and have an opportunity to discard up to three. The
cards are numbered left to right, one
thru five, so you simply select the
discards by their number. Your
discards are replaced with the draw
and there you have it. You have a
standard obtainable hand or you
don't--and therein lies the payoff
determination. The payoffs are $1
for one pair (J thru A), $2 for two
pair, $6 for three of a kind, $11 for a
flush (this game), $26 for a full house,
$101 for four of a kind and $1001 for
a straight flush (ahmen). This style
of poker is sterile, as it has, amongst
other lackings, no allowance for
bluffing. You should at least be
allowed to view your cards before
you place your initial bet.
The next choice is Roulette. It's
standard, easy to play and, graphically, it's fairly well done. The
playing field is displayed to the left
of the screen and the roulette wheel,
called "Roulette Square" because
squares are easier to do graphically,

is displayed to the right of the screen.
Upon game entry, you once again
have a stake of $1000 and are offered
the opportunity to declare the value
of your betting chips. Should you
desire to change the chip value
during the game, you may do so. For
the placement of bets, cursor movement is required. Bets are placed
using the "B" key and multiple bets
per cursor placement are possible
simply by depressing the "B" key
the desired number of times. The
wheel is spun and where she stops
nobody knows. Payoff is thirty-six
to one for a one number bet, eighteen
to one for a two number bet, nine to
one for a four number bet, two to one
for a red/black bet and two to one for
an odd/even bet. The graphics are
fairly well done and the spinning of
the wheel is accurate. For betting
purposes, the cursor movement is a
little slow and the mechanics of it
could be improved. It is, however,
still an enjoyable game; so place
your bets and spin the wheel.
The last choice is Baccarat. Player
and dealer are each dealt two cards
which are then totaled. The value of
the low order digit of the total is
what is important in the game.
Player and dealer each have a
different set of rules for play that are
hierarchical. For a total of zero thru
four, the player must draw a card.
With a total of five, the player has
the option of drawing a card or
passing. Given a total of six or seven,
the player must pass and for totals
of eight or nine he must show his
cards. The dealer rules are a little
easier. For totals of zero thru five,
the dealer must draw a card. The
dealer must stand on totals of six
thru nine. In the environment
presented here, the player must be
quite familiar with the rules as there
is very little player-micro interaction. The game is fairly fast and
automatic except for the circumstances where the player has a five
point total with the option to draw or
pass and the dealer has less than
six. At this point, you have to input
your choice. Aside from that, the
only other time you interact is when
you bet. For the beginner, this game
can be frustrating due to the short
display time for each play. You must
pay strict attention to what goes on
to see how the hierarchy works.

MICRO REVIEWS
DEADLINE
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Deadline
TYPE:
Adventure/Mystery
SYSTEM: Apple II, Atari 400/800.
IBM PC. NEC PC-8000,
CP/M, PDP-11
FORMAT:
Disk
PRICE:
$49.95
PUBLISHER:
Infocom
55 Wheeler St.
Cambridge, MA 02138

Deadline is a classic adventure
program by INFOCOM, the people
currently publishing Zork and Zork
II. Happily, it uses the same type of
command parser as the Zorks, and
it's specialized vocabulary gives you
the feeling of really being there. It is
frustrating, involved, and realistic.
The documentation for this program is excellent, taking such forms
as a lab report, police statements,
coroner findings, and the like. That
gives you the basic evidence you
need to proceed.
Some of the commands available
are new, and are extremely useful.
You can catch someone's attention
(if they are moving away from you)
by calling their name. You can interrogate them by saying something
along the lines of "Glenda, tell me
about Fritz". It can either be a person
or an object you ask about. Also, the
"show me" (as in "Fred, show me
the keys") is useful. There are many
other questions you can ask, too.
Other commands available are:
ACCUSE someone OF something,
ANALYZE something (gets police
lab to check for common things),
ANALYZE something FOR something (more specific and usually
more accurate), ARREST someone(s),
ASK someone ABOUT something,
FINGERPRINT something, LOOK
BEHIND something (LOOK UNDER
also works), and SHOW something
TO someone (usually to provoke a
reaction) all add to the flavor of the
game. The command structure is
also a bit freer than that of their
previous adventures, which makes
the game almost conversational.

Unfortunately, I found the solution
disappointing. There are a lot of
false trails, which is understandable, and even good. A real murder
mystery would have false trails.
There is a lot of evidence which isn't
needed, which would also be true of
a murder mystery. Actually, a person
could stumble on the solution on
their first or second try, but it will
take most people a LONG time. Four
friends and I worked on it as a group
and solved it in about a month.

The recent months have seen
several games come on the market
which try to marry arcade and
strategy game elements. These games,
of which CE -Software's MISSION
ESCAPE and Avalon Hill's GUNS
OF FORT DEFIANCE are good
examples, are games which emphasize
the mental aspect of a strategy game
while also requiring the agility so
important to the arcade game. To a
degree BEZ-MX falls into this hybrid
game category.

On the bright side, this is a
thoroughly intriguing adventure. It
has some very good features that
aren't apparent--for instance, if you
arrest someone, you had better have
evidence--you won't really find out if
you have enough evidence until they
are on trial. Once, I got the correct
murderer, but didn't have the right
evidence, so the person got off free.
You do indeed have to prove they did
it beyond a reasonable doubt, and
had a motive. This is something
many detective shows on TV lack-they don't follow up the case.

BEZ-MX is a two player wargame
in which the players try to destroy
each other's military-industrial strength
while preserving their own. There is
a basic game and an advanced game.
In the basic game players deal with
two variables; the deployment of
their MX missiles and the utilization
of BEZ-1 bombers. The MX missiles
can be moved between silos or fired
at enemy targets. The BEZ-1 bombers
can be used to fly bombing missions
or to intercept enemy planes (which
results in the destruction of both
planes). Bombing missions are executed by entering the coordinates of
the target and sending the bomber
on it's way. Intercept missions can
be flown with the aid of paddles (the
arcade element of the game) or by
entering a flight plan through the
keyboard.

In all, I thoroughly recommend
the adventure, despite my dislike of
the solution. After all, I have no say
in who murdered who, it's merely
my job to find out "who done it."
Much of my recommendation lies on
the excellent command parser, as
well as my love for mysteries. This
made me feel like a detective, frustration and all. I'm waiting for the next
one.
Deirdre Maloy

BEZ-MX

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
BEZ-MX
TYPE:
Wargame/arcade
SYSTEM:
Apple II
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: 1 to 2
John Besnard
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER: BEZ
4790 Irvine Blvd., Box 19633
Irvine, CA. 92714

Movement of MX missiles seems
to serve but one purpose. MX missiles
in launch sites closer to the center of
the country have a better chance of
intercepting enemy planes as they
cross the border (that's right, the
missiles can perform either
ground-to-air missions or strategic bombing
missions). Earthquakes can occur
which can destroy launch sites and/or
roads which lead from site to site.
The real strength of BEZ-MX is in
the advanced game which requires
planning. In addition to the elements
in the basic game, players of the
advanced game must maintain industrial production in a war situation. Players assign the population
of their countries to work on the
farm, factory, airfield, or city. You
can have the people work in these
areas (which will help keep military
goods in production) or you can hide
your population in shelters (perserving population but ending production). Strategy entails keeping
production up while exposing
the smallest amount of population
to destruction as possible. For example,
if you put a large percentage of
population in the factory, you will
increase production but could suffer
a terrible loss if the enemy bombs
the factory that turn.

While BEZ-MX is a two player
game, a solitaire version is available
for human vs. computer play. The
computer opponent is smart enough
to analyze human strategy on prior
turns and plan it's move accordingly.
Therefore a variety of strategies is
needed to successfully compete with
the computer.
Documentation is adequate. The
rule book does a good job of describing
most of what you need to know. The
rules include a page of strategy tips
but there are a lot of techniques left
for the players to discover on their
own. There are still plenty of ideas
that the players will have to develop
on their own. A hardcopy of the map
is included for plotting coordinates
of attack. The physical presentation
of the game (i.e. rule book, zip-lock
bag, intro screen) is not as glossy as
the larger software houses but is
adequate.
The pure arcadist will probably
not find BEZ-MX his cup of tea but
for those of you who like strategy
games with a little arcade flavor, at
$29.95 BEZ-MX is worth considering.
Luther Shaw

GUNS OF FORT DEFIANCE

BASIC INFORMATION
Guns Of Fort Defiance
Strategy/Arcade
APPLE II, TRS-80. PET,
ATARI
FORMAT:
Tape and disk
# OF PLAYERS: 1
David A. Wesely
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
$20.00 to $25.00
Avalon Hill Microcomputer
PUBLISHER:
Games
4517 Harford Road
Baltimore, Maryland 21214

NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

In GUNS OF FORT DEFIANCE
the player commands a gun crew
which protects a partially unfinished
American stockade from the onslaughts of those imperialistic "lobster-bellies" in the War of 1812. The
player may be faced with artillery,

cavalry, or infantry in making his
courageous (defiant?) stand. The
game is simple in game mechanics,
but has some wicked facets to
master.
There are several interesting
variables which keep this from being
just another arcade game. First,
there is a handicap. This number,
ranging from the simplest (1) to the
most difficult (63 on the Apple, 64 on
others) determines how difficult the
scenario will be in terms of ammunition available (type and amount)
and casualties needed to inflict for a
rout. When the player routs the
enemy, the handicap is increased
and, of course, when the player's
crew runs away, the reverse is true.
Although I haven't gotten beyond
53 yet, the computer does seem to
figure in how quickly and efficiently
one deals with a given situation as it
revises the handicap after the conclusion of each scenario. This is a
feature to keep the game challenging,
long after the basics are down pat.
Second, one of the most important
decisions for a gun commander to
make is selecting which type of
rounds to fire. The basic ammunition
is ball and canister. The program
also has allowances for double
canister. Beyond these basic ammo
types, the player may opt for spherical case or shell ammunition. These
last two types add another variable
—fuse length. One can choose the
right ammo and range and the wrong
fuse length will still produce negligible results.
The player can use these ammo
types in conjunction with one another to a good strategic advantage.
For example, the player may fire the
more readily available ball ammunition until he finds the range
and then switch to the more effective, but less plentiful, spherical
case ammunition. Further, experience soon teaches one that ball ammo
is not very effective in counterartillery fire and that it is foolish to
wait for cavalry to reach double
canister range.
Finally, the gun commander must
determine range and deflection (i.e.
aim). As the handicap increases,
this seems to be more and more
important. The cavalry, especially,
have a tendency to be able to close
range faster than my befuddled
fingers can type orders. Hence, one
often has to think ahead in terms of
range estimation.
The "Apple" version has some
interesting differences with the basic

game version. One of the most valu
able is with the infantry attack. When
your fire is effective enough to endanger the morale of the infantry,
they halt, dress ranks and fire off a
volley. This develops a smoke screen
which disrupts your aim for two to
three shots. Then, when you do
successfully rout the infantry, the
figures run away, leaving muskets
and packs behind them. The smokescreens enhance the play of the game
and the graphics enhance the joy of
winning. Another interesting "Apple" graphic is the ability to adjust
the tint so that the player may fight
either British (redcoats) or American
(bluecoats) troops (Anglophiles take
heart!)
Graphics aside, the Apple enables
players to take turns and keep their
handicaps up-to-date by repeating
the briefing prior to each game. Also,
the audible beep when a shot effectively hits the enemy howitzer is
most helpful.
GUNS OF FORT DEFIANCE is
an exciting addition to a game library
because: 1) it offers a challenging
game without tying the player up for
long time periods; 2) it's easy to
teach the mechanics to a beginner;
and 3) the handicap system enables
the game to grow with your own
ability.
by Johnny L. Wilson

TSUNAMI

BASIC INFORMATION
Tsunami
NAME:
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM:
Apple II
FORMAT:
Diskette (DOS 3.3)
# PLAYERS: 1 to 4
AUTHOR:
Rodney McAuley
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER: Creative Computing Software
39 E. Hanover Ave.
Morris Plains, NJ 07950
(800) 631-8112

Here is yet another derivative of

SPACE INVADERS. This one is
actually 12 games in 1; selectable

from a menu that also lets you turn
the sound off and choose either
paddle. Each game consists of a
sequence of "attacks" with the aliens
coming at you in a different pattern
each time. Most of the games use
eight attack patterns (which repeat
predictably); but some use sixteen.
They may move horizontally, they
may bounce, jitter, or weave sine
wave patterns. Sometimes the only
danger is from bombs they drop,
while at other times they come at
you like kamikazes. At other times
the aliens have defensive barriers
which protect them from your shots;
sort of like SPACE INVADERS in
reverse.
While the difficulty level ranges
from very easy to moderate, things
are complicated by the presence of a
timer. If time runs out, you lose your
base anyway so you have to be
quick! The timer resets for each new
wave, with any time left on the timer
after you shoot the last alien converted
into bonus points.
Although you can always abort
the game with RETURN or the
spacebar, there is no pause function.
I don't see this as a drawback since
you always get a pause between
attacks. Perhaps more important is
the inability to play the game without
a paddle.
What is most interesting about
TSUNAMI is the fact that the actions
of the aliens are similar to a number
of different arcade games that fall in
the SPACE INVADER family. The
player will recognize several familiar
patterns in the various attack patterns
of TSUNAMI. Some of those that
will occur are: Centipede, Space Invaders, Galaxian, and Circus. For
those who like "Invader" games,
TSUNAMI will be of great interest
due to it's variety and professional
quality.

exciting and challenging game. The
game is based on miniature golf,
meaning that bounce shots come
into play and are very important.
Play is controlled with paddles or
keys. You control the angle at which
you will hit the ball and how hard
you will hit it. The game comes with
three 18-hole courses, plus the ability
to make your own courses. This is an
excellent feature because you can
really get creative with these courses
and play them in any shape you
want like ships, people's faces, or
whatever.
You can play the game with one to
four players. Playing alone is fun,
but with more players, it can be
really exciting. The program keeps
track of everyone's score and par for
each pole. Of the three courses, two
are miniature golf type shapes with
lots of banking coming into play.
The third course is a really beautiful
course where you play on animalshaped holes, everything from pigs
to dragons. These seem very complex,
but many of them can be scored
hole-in-one with the right angle on
your tee shot.
Creating your own hi-res course is
at first somewhat complex, but it is
not hard to get the hang of it. This is
what will make the game remain
interesting after the time when you
get so you know all of the courses
and how to beat them. You can
create your own courses, making
them as easy or as hard as you wish.
When creating your courses, you
decide where the ball will be to start,
where the cup will be, the position of
any obstacles, and par for the course.
After you have created your masterpieces, you then save it on disk. This
may either be the MICRO GOLF
disk itself or a back-up disk created
by the program. Once you have saved
on disk, you can go to the golf program
itself and try out your hole.

Bob Proctor

MICRO GOLF
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Micro Golf
Arcade sports game
TYPE:
Apple II ((48K)
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
Disk
4 PLAYERS: 1 to 4
PRICE:
$19.95
PUBLISHER: Creative Computing Software
39 E. Hanover Ave.
Morris Plains. NJ 07950

Though the name sounds rather
ordinary, MICRO GOLF is a very

One feature that you have to look
out for — the person who scored the
lowest on the last hole shoots first
on the next. This is in the spirit of
real golf, but if you don't know this
is going on, the score will be all
jumbled.
One of the best features of this
game is that it is not limited to a
special age or interest group. It is
great for showing people your computer because there aren't hefty rules
to learn, you can just start playing,
and it is still very challenging for
everyone.
Bob Boyd

Continued from pg. 1.
The single most common response
on the comment section of the
READER INPUT DEVICE is "please
run more articles on... (you fill in the
blank)". You readers want more adventure articles, more arcade articles,
more wargame articles, more Atari
articles, and on and on. That excites
us and we hope to do more. But the
number of articles is not only limited
by space; to a larger degree it is
limited by the number of good articles
we receive. With each issue we enjoy
a larger supply of good, interesting
articles, but we still need more. Keep
them coming. Write us letters. Fill
out the READER INPUT DEVICES.
Enjoy the magazine.

PLEASE
TAKE TIME
TO FILL OUT
READER INPUT
DEVICE
(P. 40)

Continued from pg. 8
enemy is coming straight at you.
Maneuver your Fighter directly
behind the Freighter and have both
ships launch drones at the enemy's
lead ship.
In the second turn the enemy ships
will swoop down on your Freighter.
The lead ship may hold its position
and reinforce its shield but it can't
defend against two drones. Move
both your ships forward at 8 Mk.
and put all your Freighter's extra
energy into the front shield. Launch
a drone at the two remaining enemy
ships and lock your phasers on the
closer ship. The Freighter should
fire at a range of 5 Mk. and the
Fighter, last instant. If the enemy
eludes the drone then it will take the
Freighter's phasers in the rear as it
flys over. If it peels off it will still get
hit in the side by one of the phasers
along with your Fighter's phasers.
If any of the enemy do get through,
Freighter's front shield may be badly
damaged or destroyed. If there are
any surviving enemy ships then
have your Freighter hold his position and turn around while your
Fighter moves out to intercept.
From here on it will be best to
move your Freighter backwards
while reinforcing its rear shield.
Remember, when you are allocating
energy and moving, it takes fifty
percent more energy to move backwards and you have to input headings that are 180 degrees off from
the direction you want to move.
Dreadnought vs. nine Imperial
Raiders
This should be the easiest victory
you'll ever score. The enemy has
twice as many total Starship points
as your ship and with a little care
you shouldn't even lose a shield. You
can use either Dreadnought but I
prefer the Klarson because you can
attack a fourth ship each turn by
launching a drone.
Maintain a steady speed of 6 to 8
Mk. for the duration of the game.
Start by moving straight at the
enemy and launch a type two drone
at the lead ship.
The computer doesn't handle large
numbers of ships very well and will
probably only mobilize half its fleet.
If this is the case then continue
moving at the enemy and put your
extra energy into the front shield.
Lock your weapons on three ships so
they fire at a range of 5 Mk. If, on the
other hand, it looks like the computer

is going to attack with six or more
ships then it will be better to parry
the blow by turning to a heading of
090 degrees and reinforcing shields
4, 5, and 6.
After this the game becomes a free
for all with ships everywhere. However, because its ships are scattered,
the computer has lost the initiative.
You should just keep moving, turning
and firing. It will be like shooting
fish in a barrel.
Attack on an Outpost by Fighters
In this scenario you will use four
or five Fighters to create a drone
swarm. To achieve a decisive victory
you would use four Fighters, which
will give a higher victory point total,
but I suggest you use five because
the two extra drones can mean the
difference between success and
failure.
Normally you would use fleet
orders, but on the first turn give
individual instructions to your Fighters so you can rendezvous in a tight
cluster about 35 Mk. from the Outpost. On turn two set speed at 11 Mk.
and use any extra energy for reinforcing the front shield. On turn
three, charge one phaser, launch a
drone and set speed to 15 Mk. You
will finish this turn at a range less
than 15 Mk. and will lose one ship to
phaser fire. Don't bother reinforcing
shields because at this range the
effort is futile and the energy wasted.
Now on turn four, charge your
second phaser, launch your last
drone, accelerate to 19 Mk. and fire
your phasers using the last instant
command. Move your fleet on the
heading toward the Outpost for
twelve time points. This should put
you past the Outpost where you
want to make a hard right turn to
bring you facing the Outpost. This
will, hopefully, put you in position
to fire into the open shield on your
next turn.
The drones and perhaps your
phaser fire will not all hit the same
shield, but enough damage should
be done to cripple the Outpost. If you
fail to destroy the Outpost, then use
what fighters you have left to fire at
the beginning of the next turn. If
you hit an open shield you should
destroy the Outpost.
Attack on a Starbase
Attacking a Starbase is a difficult
task if you limit yourself to ships
that have a total starship value of
twenty-four points. You may not
achieve a decisive victory against a
Starbase but your best chance to do so

is to use two Alliance Dreadnoughts
and a Cruiser. Use the Cruiser as
your decoy by moving it slowly
toward the Starbase. All extra energy should go to the front shield.
You'll have to stop about 16 to 17
Mk. from the Starbase which will be
good enough.
While you're positioning your
Cruiser, the Dreadnoughts should
be overcharging their photon torpedoes and picking up speed by
running in a circle. When your
Cruiser is positioned you want to
maneuver your Dreadnoughts so
they finish their turn behind your
Cruiser facing the Starbase about 18
to 23 Mk. away and with a speed of
20 Mk.
In this next turn set the speed of
each Dreadnought so you wind up
just short of the Starbase. Energize
all transporters, including the Cruiser's, and fire your photon torpedoes
at a range of 3 Mk. and your boarding parties aboard. You may also
find the Starbase firing its photon
torpedoes at your lead Dreadnought.
With luck you should knock out
most of the Starbase weapons but
you may still lose one of your Dreadnoughts on this next turn. Hold your
position, recharge your phasers and
transporters and put all additional
energy into your facing shield. Fire
immediately to knock out general
shield support and get your second
wave of boarding parties aboard.
Your Cruiser is no longer in danger
of being fired upon, so you can start
bringing it up to add its fire power to
your attack.
In the next turn you will want to
time your fire to hit the open shield
as it comes around. The Starbase
rotates 200 degrees in a turn and the
same point you hit before will be
facing your ship about time point
12 or 13. Your Cruiser should be in
range by that time to fire its photon
torpedoes. The Starbase will be so
crippled by now that it is only a
matter of time before it is destroyed,
so keep firing your phasers each
turn to destroy a shield and inflict
additional damage.
***

The strategies presented in this
article can be applied to most any
scenario; I hope they lead you to
great victories and increased enjoyment from THE WARP FACTOR.
SSI will be releasing a new space
wargame this summer written by
THE WARP FACTOR'S designer,
Paul Murray. Fans of THE WARP
FACTOR won't want to miss it.

Continued from pg. 29

Continued from pg. 30

anti-tank strengths are printed directly on the
counters, with a review accessible on the back
page of the rules booklet. Mechanized units have
the ability to fire on enemy mechanized units
during the enemy movement phase. Artillery
units can fire indirectly at targets up to five
squares away if they haven't been moved or
attacked, and are in static mode.

couple seconds when a tank is around. Fortunately,
the tanks can only hit you while you are on the
ground. You can take off and begin to fire back.
The trouble is that at times it seems like you have
run into a whole armored division instead of the
few you might expect to meet. Once the immediate
area is cleared of tanks you can land and take on
hostages. The 'copter can hold 16 persons (by
coincidence the same as the number of hostages in
each barrack). When you get as close to a full load
as you can (or want to) you high-tail it back to your
side of the border and disembark the rescued
hostages at the U.S. Postal Service distribution
center (you read it right!--Your helicopter was
smuggled into the center, disguised as a mail
sorting machine).

The Game as Game
The flow of play is fast with victory being won
by possession of geographic objectives. There are
six possible sites that represent strategically vital
areas. The only possible criticism of DNIEPER
RIVER LINE by this reviewer is the exclusively
territorial nature of the victory conditions. A
possible alternative could have been another
algorithm (yet more complex!) incorporating general disruption levels and territorial control for the
victory conditions, reported each turn.
With skill and pluck, victory is possible a
majority of times. Critical decisions have to be
made early, and these decisions have a critical
effect on later play. Infantry-based units have
good defensive abilities, but have difficulty running between emergencies. Mechanized units are
fast and useful for "fire-brigades", but have
limited staying power. Odds of 2 to 1 or better are
necessary for a reasonable chance of success, odds
which (unfortunately for the German player) are
difficult to attain in counterattacks.
The basic problem for the German player is
having to run between emergencies (that are
immediate and unpredictable) with insufficient
forces; or, in other words, "how can you be two
places at once when you're not anywhere at all?"
Often objective sites simply cannot be held with
thinly-dispersed forces, and must be yielded up to
the maws of the Russian juggernaut. The timely
arrival of desperately needed reserves and artillery interdiction can save the situation, however.
A typical level 3 (difficult) or level 4 (very difficult)
game can last the entire 8 turns, with the outcome
completely unpredictable, as German units are
decimated while trying (in vain) to hold major
objective squares. The presence of partisans and
paratroopers can add even greater frustration to
the predicament of the German player, as weak
Russian units slip into ungarrisonned objectives
by the back door (objectives once taken are
irretrievably lost to the Russians).
DNIEPER RIVER LINE incorporates the
elements of historical accuracy, as well as fastpaced situation-in-doubt play to produce a well
developed game which computer wargamers should
"check out".

On your first trip you have only the tanks with
which to contend. After your first trip, however,
the jet fighters come into play and a little later the
drone air mines begin to pursue you. The jet
fighters can either shoot you down with missiles
or bomb you on the ground. You will find they will
be bothersome on your way in if you keep your gun
firing at the edge of the screen where they are
likely to appear. The real tricky part is the flight
back. They seem to be more numerous and more
deadly then. There is nothing more frustrating in
this game than to successfully rescue 16 hostages
on the ground in the midst of hostile tank and
fighter fire only to have all 16 die in a firey crash
on the way back to base. While the fighters are
quite dangerous when you are airboard, they are
less a problem when you are on the ground. When
your 'copter is on the surface the fighters will
make a bombing run. Most of the time they will
miss your plane (although the bomb it drops will
often take out a hostage). I tend to ignore the
planes when they are on their bomb runs which
gives me more time to get hostages aboard.
The drone air mines will pursue your 'copter
once they find you, however they are fairly easily
avoided and can be shot down without too much
trouble. The most dangerous time of mission will
be when you are in transit from the rescue site to
the base (and vice-a-versa). It is very common to be
flying along and have a fighter or a drone streak
in without warning and send you and your would
be survivors to a firey grave (even the burning
'copter is realistic enough to remind one of the U.S.
fiasco in the Iranian desert).
There are 64 hostages each of which is worth one
point if transported safely to the distribution
center. Thus the high score is 64. But don't scoff at
this low "scoring ceiling". Getting all 64 home
safely is a task that few garners are likely to ever
accomplish.

Continued from pg. 5
The Software Farm, Inc.
3901 So. Elkhart St.
Aurora, CO 80014
CRICKETTER: Similar to the
popular arcade game FROGGER,
CRICKETEER involves getting
your cricket safely across a busy
highway and a dangerous river.
Hazards are birds which can swoop
down and eat the cricket, fast
moving vehicles, and flotsam which
doesn't always float. Along the
way your apparently male cricket
can get extra points for pairing
up with a lady cricket and getting
her safely across the river. Additional points can be had for
jumping into a home box containing food particles.
Riverbank Software Inc.
Smith's Landing Road
P.O. Box 128
Denton, MD 21629
INTERNATIONAL GRAN
PRIX: A very well done game of
GRAND PRIX car racing. You sit
behind the wheel while running
any one of five different courses.
Courses include Oulton Park, Warwick Farm, Karlskoga, Monaco,
and one fictional course, Riverbank. We hope to print maps of
the courses in a future issue.
Taaumi Software
8 North Grosvenor Ave.
Burnaby, B.C. V5B 1J2
HORSE RACING CLASSIC:
The best looking horse racing
game on the market. HRC is a
simulation of thoroughbred horse
racing and track betting. The
simulation includes a history of
the most recent races for each
horses in the race (set up like the
racing form). There are 100 horses
in the program's data file. A very
good party game.

Continued from pg. '
If you still have doubt about the
wisdom of buying a book full of
previously published programs,
"Captain 80" offers one more incentive: Part two offers a particularly
unique program. Computer programs
designed to create other programs
are receiving attention throughout
the industry, evidenced by recent
demonstrations at computer fairs
and exhibitions. The "Adventure
Generator", provided in part two, is
an experimental entry in this field.
Authored by freelance programmer
David Huntress, it is a previously
unreleased program which creates a
basic language adventure program

Sentient Software
Box 4929
Aspen, CO 81612
CONGO: You are on a raft in the
Congo River and must avoid
rapids, natives, and other assorted
dangers as you rescue survivors
on the way to saving yourself. In
this arcade game you must make
use of the flow of the river along
with your ability to paddle upriver
to avoid danger and reach your
goal.
GOLD RUSH: A graphic game
in which the player makes his
way from the train station to a
mine. His way is blocked by
several evils including a claim
jumper. The game requires quick
reflexes. To relax even a brief
moment will most liking result in
death.
CYBORG: Written by the author
of the popular Oo-TOPOS adventure, CYBORG is an adventure
game with a twist -- there are no
treasures or scores. CYBORG contains real-time graphics simulation and character development.
You play the character of a
CYBORG, complete with a second
opinion running around in your
head provided by the electronic
brain which NASA II planted in
your brain (thanks, guys). Welldone.
CE Software
801 73rd St.
Des Moines, IA 50312
SWORDTHRUST 6: "The
Eternal Curse" -- Don Brown's
sixth game in the ongoing series.
SWORDTHRUST 7: "The Hall
of Alchemie" -- the seventh game
in the series and the first by a
writer other than Don Brow, Peter
Wityk.
by inputting information into a disk
data file and then reading it back as
basic statement lines.
Admittedly, it's an experimental
design. The finished adventure program which it produces is as bareboned as an underweight Greyhound
and may require debugging. But the
novelty of this generator program
outweighs its handicaps. Even at its
current stage of development, the
"Adventure Generator" can be used
to quickly create a series of simple,
personalized mini-adventures. And
it may provide a glimpse of the
future, when humans will simply
write computer programs which, in
turn, will produce other programs.
It's an interesting and appropriate

6619
Sensible Software

Perham Dr.
West Bloomfield, NI 48033
QUADRANT 6112: This is a
space combat game similar to the
coin-op game Omega Race. Rebel
ships enter space through stargates. Your task is to shoot them
down while patrolling the quadrant.
Scores go up as you complete laps
around the quadrant while blasting
the enemy.
Krell Software Corp.
21 Millbrook Dr.
Stony Brook, NY 11790
SUPER STAR/ALL STAR
BASEBALL: A rather poor
attempt at a stat baseball game.
Players select their team members
from lists of stars, past and
present. Once the teams are
selected the gamers have performed
their primary task in the game.
The computer plays the game
allowing limited user interaction.
Your starting pitcher stays in the
whole game. Runs on the Apple,
PET, and TRS-80.
ISSAC NEWTON + F.G.
NEWTON: ISSAC NEWTON is
a game of logic in which players
must assemble evidence and discern the "Laws of Nature" which
have produced the evidence. FULL
GRAPHICS NEWTON presents
the same game in graphic form
and is suitable for children.
HAL LABS
4074 Midland Rd. Suite 23
Riverside, CA 92505
SHEILA: SHEILA contains adventure game elements in what is
basically an maze-chase type
arcade game. Your task is to fight
through five levels of a castle and
rescue SHEILA who is locked in a
tower. A variety of weapons and
magical items can be found which
can assist you.
addition to this book of adventurers.
Although the $19.95 price tag is a
bit steep (considering the economy
level quality of the printing and
binding), the book is still a great
value if you really intend to make
use of all the program listings. The
bad news, of course, is that it will
take you about three months of
steady typing to input the listings
and another three months to debug
your typographical errors. I'm still
working on this task myself, so I
can't tell you if all of the programs
run as advertised. If I find any
errors, I'll let you know in future
issues. In the meantime, watch out
for sleeping dragons, and have fun
adventuring!

READER INPUT DEVICE #3
GAMES
Rate the following games using a
scale of 1 (terrible) to 9 (outstanding)
for each of the categories below;
PRESENTATION: Rate overall
presentation of the game. This includes such factors as graphics,
sound, packaging, documentation.
GAME DESIGN: Rate the game
design itself. Apart from the presentation is the game well designed,
playable, interesting? Are there problems in the design which make the
game less than it should be?; LIFE:
Does the game wear well? Does one
bore of the game easily or does it still
command interest after multiple plays?
Enter "0" in the first box for any
game which you have not played or
have not played enough to have
formed an opinion.

RESULTS OF

R.I.D. #2
There were 121 Reader Input
Devices turned in by press time for
this issue. Of this number 64% were
Apple users, 26% Atari users, 6%
TRS-80 users, 4% others. All but two
of the 29 games offered for review in
R.I.D. #2 received enough responses
to be included in the results. If a
game is not evaluated by at least
10% of the user group to which the
game belongs (i.e. Apple, Atari,
TRS-80, etc.) it will not be included
in the R.I.D. Results.
The "% Play" column indicates
what percentage of the respondents
which have the appropriate machine
have played the game. For example,
EASTERN FRONT was played and
evaluated by 89% of the respondents
who have an Atari 400/800.
Our special question last issue
had to do with PIRACY. We asked
you to tell us which of the games
listed you had bought and which
you had pirated copies of. The total
percentage of pirated games were
27%. The Apple games were 30%
pirated, the Atari games 9%, and the
TRS-80 games 8%.

MISCELLANEOUS
(Use "PRS" box)

ARTICLES
Rate the articles in this issue on a
scale of 1 (terrible) to 9 (outstanding).
If the article does not interest you
enter 0. Use "PRS" box.

-

