April 1990

Features
Cinemaware's "It Came From The Desert"

Cornerstone's "Battle of Austerlitz"
10

Making A Mountain Out Of An Anthill / Allen L. Greenberg

Sneak Preview: Lucasfilm Games' "Loom"

Scorpia's New Column Looks At "Champions of Krynn"

"Harpoon" Strategy

50

Precision Aerobatics For Computer Pilots / Lt. H. E. Dille

Lyric Software's "Worlds At War"
18

44

A Wargame Complete With "Grognards" / M. Evan Brooks

Accolade's "Blue Angels"
14

"Loom" Weaves A Remarkable Destiny / Johnny L. Wilson

The Scorpion's View

Number 70

54

Naval War In Outer Space / Bob Proctor

"Their Finest Hour" Tournament Rules

60

20

Insights On Naval Doctrine / M. Evan Brooks

A Gamer's Guide To IBM Graphics

22

Steve Witzel's Technology Column: "The Circuit Writer"

Accolade's "The Third Courier"

Departments
24

Pre-Glasnost Paranoia In Cold War Berlin / Dennis Owens

Scorpion's Mail

27

Scorpia Offers Solutions To Adventure Game Puzzles

Omnitrend's "Breach 2"

34

Into The "Breach" Once More / Chris Lombardi

Final Omega Tournament Results

38

The CGW and Origin Sponsored Event Concludes

Abstracts on Computer Game Design
Our Semi-Annual Plagiarism From The JCGD

42

Taking A Peek
Editorial
Contest Results
Rumor Bag
Game Ratings/Hall of Fame
Inside The Industry
Letters
Conversions Received
Reader Input Device

6
8
8
12
32
60
61
64
64

Taking a Peek

Avalon Hill Game Company
4517 Harford Road
Baltimore, MD 21214
LEGENDS OF THE LOST REALM: This is
another fine, fairly standard game of the fantasy role-playing ilk. The graphics are functional, the story is all there, and there are lots of
character classes, skills and spells for you to
vary your strategy with. It's the ease of learning
this game which is so nice, as the documentation was written for the good natured, impatient
average Macintosh user. Lots of potential is
here for a series using this system. Macintosh
with 800K disk drive and 1MB of memory
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #1.

Blue Valley
29 Shepard Street
Walton, NY 13856
THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN: This
hard-to-describe text adventure walks you through a
story which is most unusual. The writing style
is self-proclaimed "peasant Anglo-Saxon", with
an unusual stream of consciousness to it and

plenty of existential plot shifts. The Magic Mountain is a story for women and something of a
computer text fantasy. It's an eerie place where
a particular woman's basic hatred and lust for
men is poignantly spelled out with an odd dash
of female bonding with the near occult. IBM
($24.95). Circle Reader Service #2.

Cinemaware
4165 Thousand Oaks Blvd.
Westlake Village, CA 91362
FEDERATION: Here is a game of deceptive
depth. More than just an arcade shoot-'em-up,
Federation is also a space ship flight simulator.
As if that weren't enough, there is even a
reason for you to be out there dealing death
and destruction for you can also build up your
trading empire and conquer planets! More than
just a joystick jockey's exercise tool, Federation
is a deep space challenge. Good luck, cadet.
Amiga, Atari ST ($49.95).Circle #3.
TV SPORTS BASKETBALL: The players take
on the role as coach and general manager of
an expansion franchise for a professional basketball league. They must raise their teams
from obscurity and turn them into contenders
by careful drafting and training of players. Op-

tionally, players may resolve games arcadestyle to determine wins and losses. Great potential for league play. Amiga ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #4.

Data East USA, Inc.
1850 Little Orchard Street
San Jose, CA 95125
BATMAN: THE MOVIE: Holy arcade games!
This true-to-movie-plot move, zap and duck
game takes you from scene to scene at Axis
Chemicals, the streets of Gotham City, the Batcave, the Gotham City Carnival and ends at the
Gotham Cathedral. This game is exactly what
you'd expect from an official, licensed
Batproduct. C-64 ($29.95), Amiga ($44.95)
and Atari ST ($39.95). Circle #5.

Electronic Arts/UBI Soft
P.O. Box 7578
San Mateo, CA 94403
IRON LORD: This intriguing quest/arcade
game boasts an excellent story line to go with
the graphics. The game certainly has plenty of
challenge to it, as the player must ride around
Continued on page 63

Editorial/Contest

Cardboard and
Circuitry

The State of the Industry: With software publishers beginning
to actually utilize the talents of pen and paper game designers
(i.e. Steve Peterson's upcoming Champions game at Miles Computing, the contributions of Michael Stackpole and Liz Danforth
to recent Interplay products, the work of Liz and Ken St. Andre
on New World Computing's Tunnels and Trolls game, George
MacDonald's work on Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s licenses
from TSR, etc.), it will be interesting to note how certain design
problems are solved. Will "point and click" interfaces solve the
age-old parser question or will the inherent limitations of the interface cause garners to feel more restricted? Does the use of
numerical attributes in CRPGs make the games equivalent, as
one witty GEnie subscriber suggested, " . . . to checkbook
balancing programs . . ."? ("Whoops," he said, "I lost 30 shares of

Put-On Peeks
Contest Results
In January we asked you to write Taking A Peek style reviews of
ten fictional game titles. There were many creative submissions
from all across the country. Thomas Fisken of Highland Park, NJ
had the overall best reviews and is accorded glorious fame by virtue of being declared the winner of our Put On Peeks contest.
We include two of his "reviews" here. So here were our favorite
Put On Peeks:
688 ATTACK TUG
Submitted by Tracy Morgan
Milford, OH
Finally a naval simulation for those who have never developed
the hand-eye coordination necessary for success in arcade action
games. From the moment the player takes command of his tug,
he will be rewarded with beautiful slow moving graphics. As tug
captain, you can increase your crew's efficiency by engaging in
mundane training exercises or going directly to combat. The
realism of this game is unparalleled, and one will quickly believe
that the sweat on his brow is actually ocean mist produced as his
tug pounds through the surf at six knots.
PETE ROSE FEVER
Submitted by Tom Budas
Bolingbrook, IL
It's almost game time. You have to move fast to raise cash for a
bet. So sign autographs and sell them. Next, it's the betting parlor, but dodge that tail, it's the Commissioner's man. Place your
bet based on the odds. You'll need to make $500 to pay off a
bookie or he'll turn you in. Now it's bottom of the 6th, you're
ahead 4-2, men on second and third, 1 out, but you're supposed
to lose by 2. What will you do?

hitpoints, so I have to transfer 45 shares of my funds from my
Magic stock to recover them.") What are the alternatives?
The State of the Magazine: This issue of CGW features
several articles which touch on questions of game design. The
sneak preview of Loom is based on playing the game, as well as
continuing conversations with designer Brian Moriarity and artist
Mark Ferrari. The preview was written from the perspective of
both the underlying philosophy behind and the game design constraints built into the product. In addition, we have summarized
some of the salient points from The Journal of Computer Game
Design articles and presented a new, irregular column on
technology's impact on the gamer, "The Circuit Writer". Finally,
M. Evan Brooks shows how looking at the "real world" model behind Harpoon can make one a better player. We hope that these
types of articles will help our readers appreciate the delicate
craftsmanship required for good game design and hence, enhance the enjoyment of future computer games.
This issue also inaugurates some changes in CGWs editorial
staff. Alan Emrich, former publisher of Fire & Movement, has
been promoted to Assistant Editor in Charge of Spelling Error Implementation and Trash Pick-Up. As co-designer of the Modern
Naval Battles card game for World Wide Wargames and consultant for the redesign of A House Divided (Game Designers'
Workshop's boardgame), the insidious potential of Alan's sometimes controversial wargame reviews looming on the horizon
could strike instant fear into the hearts and minds of wargame
publishers on all continents. The slashing, penetrating observations in 'Taking A Peek" have already caused much consternation among senior editorial staff members.

ANCIENT ART OF WAR AT THREE
Submitted by Thomas Fisken
Highland Park, NJ
This new program from Kinderbund is the ultimate combat
simulation we've been waiting for -- Pre-School. Not for those
with weak stomachs, this game puts you inside the body of a typical three year old and challenges you to make it through one
more day at the Early Earners Day Care and Career Training Program. Fight for those blocks, eat someone else's snack, survive
the grueling nap, and then -- oh no! -- it's potty time again.
MICROSTUFF ACCOUNTANCY SIMULATOR
Submitted by Thomas Fisken
Highland Park, NJ
Fitting nicely into Microstuffs existing product line, this interesting release comes with a five volume set of instructions, a $795
price tag and a grey suit. The electrifying world of certified public
accountants is revealed to the uninitiated for the first time in this
extensively researched and painstakingly detailed simulation. For
the IBM and compatibles, this program is distributed on 23 360K
diskettes.

688 ATTACK TUG (Another View)
Submitted by Arthur Cromwell
Chicago, IL
Polluters in the bay! Freighter blocking the harbor entrance! You
must deal with these and other maritime problems as commander
of the experimental Pelican-class Attack Tugboat. You will go on
a variety of missions in the rivers, bays and harbors of the world.
Speedboats causing a disturbance in the harbor? Let them try to
outrun a Harpoon missile! Partygoers on that yacht spreading garbage in the bay? Use you Phalanx Gatling Gun to spread them
across the water. At higher ranks you may go up against the
giant leaking oil tanker. Don't "Exxon-erate" them this time!
Look for a new contest next month.

Review

It Came from
Out of the Disk Drive
Cinemaware's "It Came From The Desert"
by Allen L. Greenberg
map of the town, he or she must
investigate every odd happening.
Even small, seemingly innocuous
occurrences—such as the cow
which was found with its head bitten off—deserve attention. And,
what was that about a meteor falling nearby the other night?

Among our culture's more
popular paranoias has always
been radiation. Any kid who
grew up in the 50's or 60's practically took a course on the subject at Saturday matinees. Here
he learned that radiation could
summon angry disciplinarians
from another planet, awaken irritable behemoths, or mutate
the family pet into something
which resembled Lon Chaney's
makeup kit.

Naturally, pieces of ant would
also strongly support our hero's
story. To help our protagonist find
some of these, it might be useful
to consult his friend, Dr.(H.G.!)
Wells. He should have some valuable information on how to survive
an encounter with one of
the creatures.

The most frightening lessons
came from movies such as
Them, The Beginning of the
End, or Tarantula—films in
which tiny industrious insects assumed the size of national
monuments and marched
about bearing the demeanor of
an Attila the Hun. It was well
known that a week which
began with a luminous object
falling from the sky would likely
end with chitinous mess covering most of the earth. Such is
the nightmare facing the unsuspecting town of Lizard
Breath, California. Only Dr.
Greg Bradley, as played by the
gamer, of course, is aware of
the danger. Only the player
knows that It Came From
The Desert.
It Came From The Desert
(Desert) follows the familiar
Cinemaware format of strategic
decision-making mixed with various arcade sequences, strung together in a
cinematic plot. The graphics, music and
sounds are of the usual high standards
set by that company, and are nicely
evocative of the atomic-age monsters
which have gnawed out their own niche
in Hollywood history. Desert is one of the
most enjoyable programs yet to emerge
from Cinemaware.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

It Came From The Desert
Amiga
$49.95
Ken Melville
David Riordan
Cinemaware
Westlake Village, CA

Confronting and defeating a mob
of angry ants is Dr. Bradley's next
hurdle. The player's goal is to aim
the doctor's .45-caliber pistol with
the joystick, thus exterminating the
first ant to be seen. If successful,
the view then shifts to an overhead
view, from where the player controls the hero in lobbing explosives
at the approaching hoard.

A Tale So Terrifying
(Plot Synopsis)
The first challenge which faces Dr. Bradley is to convince the other residents of
Lizard Breath that they are in danger of
becoming the residents of a very large
ant farm. If the good doctor should
decide to take a long nap, for example,
the ants will arrive and convince the town
without his effort. Of course, it will be too
late to do anything about them.
The most important person to convince
is the mayor. Unfortunately, he is of that
same breed of mayor who told the swimmers in Jaws that it was safe to stay in
the water. The player's responsibility is to
find strong evidence. So, armed with a

Once Dr. Bradley (or the ants)
have convinced the mayor that a
state of emergency actually exists
in Lizard Breath, the player is given
the responsibility of deploying the
town's slim resources against the
creatures. Members of the army,
police and well-meaning townsfolk
are ready to go into battle. There
are even a limited number of tanks
and jets available. At this point,
one can either direct the doctor to climb
into a tank and participate in the action
or to go elsewhere and be informed of
the results by the police.
Lizard Breath will not be safe until the
queen ant is destroyed. Dr. Bradley must
find and enter the labyrinth which is the
queen's nest. In a climactic sequence, he
must locate the queen's chamber, drop
off timed explosives, and escape.

Characters So Convincing
(Game Challenges)
In addition to the mega-picnic ants, Dr.
Continued on page 58

Rumor Bag

The Rumor Bag
by Sigmund Jung James

"He vill probably juxtapose ze memories of past experiences,
real ones he had und vicarious ones from books und films, mit ze
current problems he is having," said the unknown lecturer. Confuse the past with the present? Not me. How could I confuse the
old arcade game Stellar 7, which Damon Slye of Dynamix
originally published for the Apple II and C-64 machines in 1983,
with the Stellar 7 due to be released by Dynamix in June? The
old one used wireframe graphics and limited color. The new IBM
version will feature fast-scrolling VGA graphics in a 3-Space environment and much more game. Damon would slice me up with
a laser if people confused the two products!
"Ve can expect him to transfer his personality und methods
onto others as a defense mechanism to excuse his anti-social behavior," my unseen analyst continued. Anti-social behavior? Was
he referring to any particular idiosyncrasy? My penchant for digging through the trash cans of software publishers (whenever I
visit them) happens to be an extremely useful device for me, personally. In one trash can, I found a memo indicating that Bob
Bates (formerly of Challenge Software, the company which
developed Sherlock: The Riddle of the Crown Jewels and Arthur:
The Quest for Excalibur for Infocom) has quietly expressed
announced his intention of creating new text-based adventures.
The hastily scribbled notes on the back of a "Girls of Mediagenic"
calendar suggested that he may have obtained financing from a
defense contractor that wished to diversify in order to create a
new adventure game development system (based on what he
learned from using Infocom's Zork Interactive Language). There
was even a note that he might have have hired Steve Meretzky,
author of Leather Goddesses of Phobos, as one of his designers.

(Continued from CGW #69)

T

he

soft and dulcet tones of concerned whispers were a comforting background as I fought against the blackness.
Colored spheres were dancing about in front of me like
those in Accolade's upcoming The Game of Harmony, a new
type of action game where players try to merge the different
colors together in the proper way before they blow up. Randomlygenerated music prompts the player to make the right moves, so
that the "harmony" involved refers to that of both color and
sound. The twist is that you gain points by halting on-screen explosions rather than causing them.
Right now, I felt as if some of those explosions were going off in
my head. To take my mind off the pain, I concentrated on recognizing some of the voices around me: Editors Sipe and Wilson,
my public relations assistant (the buoyantly irrepressible Ann) and
a strange voice with the slightest hint of a Germanic accent. "He
vill come out of it, yen he vants to," said the unidentified voice.
"Right, now, he is suffering from a paranoid reaction to oedipal
frustrations caused by archetypal confusion, undoubtedly traceable to an etiosis in excessive exposure to computer games. Ze
blow to the head vas probably a senseless act of gang violence
vich enabled his subconscious to retreat to the level of
his fantasies."
Fantasies? I know the difference between reality and fantasy.
Dynamix is working on an interactive story in which the player
acts as a futuristic private investigator on the trail of some Oriental street gangs. Apparently, the gangs utilize skin patches to administer genetically mutating drugs to their victims. That's fantasy! Entitled, Blade Hunter: Rise of the Dragon, the adventure
will feature a complete "point and click" interface, as well as placing an emphasis on character interaction and story-telling rather
than arcade sequences. The artwork is by Robert Caracol, a
comic artist on the West Coast (Dark Horse Comics). It is handdrawn and painted, then scanned into the game program with
lots of animation. That's reality!

You never know what you'll find in those wastebaskets.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s most useful source of information
is the wastebasket next to the copy machine. There, right next to
a crumpled drawing of one of the company's employees as a gun
wielding female character in a futuristic role-playing game, was a
proposal for a new War in the Pacific to be designed by Gary
Grigsby. This one would conceivably look quite a bit different
than the Apple II and C-64 version with: game turns representing
a week of action, 100 miles to the hex, and possible inclusion of
nuclear options. There weren't any indications as to whether the
company had "bought" the design or not.
Accolade's treasure trove of trash can be found in the lounge
area. There, underneath the understated ambience of an old burrito wrapper and a plastic cupcake container, were the notes for
a deal in which Accolade would market Ishido in the United
States and Europe. Ishido is the abstract strategy game which
sold out of 1,000 copies in a limited collector's edition and was
originally scheduled to be published by Epyx.
At Electronic Arts, the big news was to be found in a marketing department trashcan. There, I discovered that Caesar, Kellyn
Beeck's game in which the player attempts to advance from ordinary soldier to Emperor of Rome through a series of challenges
for both action and strategy garners, had been renamed, Centurion: Defender of Rome.
Transfer my modus operandi onto someone else? No way! I
opened my eyes and sat up quickly to confront my accuser.
There, in that Las Vegas hospital room, were my editors, my assistant and a strange fellow in a suit. Who's the geek?" I asked
Editor-in-Chief Sipe (That's not what we call him at the office.
There, he's the "Big Guy" and he's married to "Mrs. Big Guy").
We were worried about you," answered "Big Guy", "because
you kept regaining consciousness, but you weren't making any
sense. We thought you'd lost it, so we were consulting with a
psychiatrist the hospital recommended to us. Frankly, it looks like
he knows his stuff."
I looked at the shrink as he quickly scribbled notes in a small
notebook, noticing for the first time that my psychiatrist wore a
paper bag on his head. Maybe there was something to that idea
of transference, after all.

Sneak Preview

The Warp and Woof of
Destiny
Lucasfilm Games'
"Loom"
by Johnny L. Wilson

Guild-Edged Society (The Game's Universe)
Loom takes place in a world of segregated societies, each with
its own specialized function and distinctive look within the game's
universe. The Guild of Shepherds fulfils the food function, while
living in pastures of idyllic bliss. These pastures, thanks to the artistic touch of noted fantasy artist Mark Ferrari, offer an ambience
reminiscent of Disney's Sleeping Beauty. The Guild of Blacksmiths manages to provide the manufacturing function concerned with metal fabrication, while dwelling in a city which Ferrari rendered as a floating anvil. The manufacturing function concerned with glass and crystal takes place in a city made of glass

(Ferrari used a cross between Coca-Cola bottle green and the
dominant hue of the Emerald City of Oz to give the visual reference for this guild) and the Guild of Clerics provides for the
world's "spiritual" needs.
1 he most important guild, however, is the Guild of Weavers.
Like Clothos, Atropos and Lachesis of Greek mythology, these
guardians of destiny protect the grand designs of Fate from the
capricious whims of humanity. The player's character, Bobbin
Threadbare, is an unwelcome strand in the fabric of the Weavers'
understanding. He is "Destiny's Child" according to a myriad of
meanings and players must discover from the opening sounds of
the radio drama (a cassette recording is included with the game)
through the triumphant conclusion of the game, what this appellation really means. Does it mean the end of the world or life as
the Weavers understand it? Does it mean the inevitability of
chaos or the necessity of the heroic? The player will decide.

W

hat if the destiny of every individual was so delicately
woven into the fabric of reality that any attempt to unravel that fate could rend existence into meaninglessness? What if the caretakers of that reality had become so intransigent in their understanding of that fabric of existence that they
began to forbid the noble actions of visionary individuals and
simply protected the status quo? What if a shadow of entropy had
begun to creep inexorably across the landscape of that world, fairly crying out for bold individual initiative and innovation?
No, this is neither a description of the radical right holding the
United States hostage, fundamentalist evangelicals holding the
reins of our educational and religious establishments, nor the last
vestiges of Communist Party members preparing for a counterrevolution. Rather, it is the philosophical underpinning of Loom,
Brian Moriarty's fantasy adventure game. Like all good fantasy,
the story leaves room for the player to draw intriguing sociological, philosophical, political and/or theological conclusions, but
does not overtly demand such reflection. Indeed, it is simply a
smashing good story that beckons its hearer/viewer/reader/player
to reflect on it again and again.

A Pattern Emerges (Design Considerations)
The Loom design, unlike some of Moriarty's earlier designs
(Trinity and Beyond Zork), was structured by a benevolent
creator. By design, Moriarty insists that players cannot get into a
situation which they cannot solve. There are no limitations on
saving the game to frustrate the players, no accusations of unethical gaming and no tacit competition between the designer and
gamer. To the contrary, the author wants players to succeed.
The game is "directive", even if gently so, in that Moriarty uses a
"rubber wall" theory of game design to hem the player into an environment until all the "Must Do"s (actions which must be accomplished in order to advance the plot) are completed. The
player often has the illusion of freedom, while being gently
prodded into finishing his task. In fact, the underlying theory of
the design may state volumes about the philosophy underlying
the story.
Another way the author directs the player can be found in the
way the game treats the magic. Magic is cast by spinning a "draft"
of music (a mixed metaphor from the art of weaving that indiContinued on page 16

Continued from page 14

cates, in this context, a series of four musical notes) upon an object (item, character or creature). Everything is handled by "point
and click". The player simply clicks on an "object", followed by the
four notes of the musical staff with which he wants to transform
the "object". The program will perform the musical run and provide the player with a visual or textual response to the "draft". If
an object can be manipulated by magic, at all, an icon will appear on the screen. "If it's not important," says Brian, "you can't
touch it. If it is important, we won't let you lose it." So, the author
avoids the pitfall of using a restrictive parser or menu system by
simplifying the interface.

In a similar way, the game is quite helpful when one uses magic
in ways other than those which the designer expected players to
use in solving puzzles. When magic is used correctly, blue
sparkles of "Disney Dust" twinkle and the spell's effect is shown
on the screen (Ken Macklin animated the special effects with
some of the neatest twinkles this side of Tinkerbell). When it is
used incorrectly, one gets reddish sparkles of "Disney Dust" and
some surprising messages and/or animations. Alas, one of the
design team's greatest frustrations is the fact that they couldn't
provide more specific animation sequences for players who use
magic in innovative ways.

22.5 minutes of non-looping sound used in the game's
soundtrack. The thematic sequences from Tchaikovsky's "Swan
Lake" is executed so marvelously by George Alistair Sanger's
digitization that it even sounds great on the IBM internal speaker.
Of course, it sounds even better on the Ad Lib, Game Blaster,
Sound Blaster and, with the upgrade (available for $10.00
through Electronic Arts or downloadable from Compuserve
and GEnie), on the Roland MT-32 and LAPC-1.
Why is this romantic musical score vital to the game experience? Moriarty explains that this is because Tchaikovsky's
own melancholia underlies the musical motifs. The player's character is an outcast to all of the guilds, even his own, and must
cope against the onslaughts of a hostile existence, while attempting to reach a satisfying resolution. The score is perfect for suggesting the mood. Of course, one can toggle it off if the
melancholia becomes too pervasive.
Perhaps, the most important use of sound in the game is in the
magic system itself. The player hears the musical/magical themes
endemic to the game world and duplicates these themes to
manipulate other objects, characters and creatures. In fact, the
major difference between difficulty levels has to do with the way
the magic is experienced. At the easiest mode, one "sees" and
hears the musical themes as the notes are written on-screen for
the player's benefit. In the standard mode, one "sees" the notes
flicker on the scale and hears them, but the notes are not written
down on behalf of the player. In the most difficult mode, one only
"hears" the themes and must figure out the notes oneself. Those
with perfect pitch who manage to successfully complete the
game will get to see one animated sequence which no one else
gets to see. Hint: In the game's context, it would be dangerous
to see what successful players get to see!

Why couldn't the team fit in more specific animation sequences? This is because Loom already has three times as much
animation as the Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade graphic adventure. They realized that they had sacrificed game length for
graphic and musical intensity, but they hope the visual and aural
heat will more than compensate for the length of the experience.
Nevertheless, all of this visual heat caused severe consternation
to the design team for two basic reasons. First, they believe that
every available action must be graphically portrayed on the
screen (or referenced with a text message that fits logically into
the fictional parameters surrounding the universe and magic system). That takes up beaucoup memory. Second, as Moriarty told
CGW, they have found that "The biggest sensory failing of interactive story games is the constant battle between the animation
and the text. We're working on it, but it will probably take CDROM to solve it!"

As the player's character progresses in the game, he does not
gain experience points. Rather, he gains new notes on the musical staff available to him. As his musical range increases, he will
have more drafts (spells) at his disposal and become, potentially,
more powerful. This is a more creative way of charting one's
progress than simply having numbers for every characteristic.

The Sound of Magic (Atmosphere)
One way the team attempted to solve this conflict was through
the use of sound. Sound is extremely important in Loom. The
radio drama, included on cassette with each game, is not an
amateurish production thrown into the package to offer the appearance of value added. It is well-acted and technically excellent,
in addition to masterfully setting the stage for the story. No one
should boot their computer and start the game without listening
to the drama. The story wouldn't be the same without it.
Another way that sound enhances the experience is through the

Draft Day (Conclusions)
Loom is a complete entertainment experience. It offers story, exploration, play, puzzle-solving (albeit rather simple puzzles for experienced gamers), outstanding graphics and incredible sound.
In Loom, Moriarty manages to express hope and idealism tainted
by realism. It seems a refreshing use of fantasy and most garners
will not want to miss it.

Scorpia's Column

The Scorpion's View
Scorpia looks at "Champions of Krynn"
by Scorpia

For one thing, not all spells are available to
all wizards. While some spells are shared,
others can only be used by a mage of a particular alignment. As an example, both Red
and White mages have Magic Missile, but
only a Red Mage can cast Enlarge, and only
a White mage can cast Sleep. Red mages
also advance faster in level (they need less
experience than White mages), and obtain
spells sooner.
A further complication is added by the influence of the three moons of Krynn on
magic. Each "branch" of magic (Good,
Neutral, Evil) is governed by one of the
moons. Depending on the phase of the
moon, the effect can be positive, negative,
or nil.

During a waxing moon, a mage can
memorize one extra spell, of any level, that
the mage has in his spell book. At full moon,
a mage can memorize two extra spells, gets
a +1 bonus to saving throws, and is able to
cast spells as though he were one level higher.
During a new moon, however, a mage receives a -1 to saving
throws and his spells are cast as though he were one level lower
(ouch). Fortunately, there is no penalty on spell memorization. A
waning moon has no effect on magic. All mages operate at their
normal levels and with normal saves.
Magic-users aren't the only class that has changed. Clerics have
been modified, too. They also are divided into Good, Neutral, and
Evil, although in this case, there is no difference in what spells
they may use. Instead, it is the choice of which god to serve that
confers certain benefits.
A cleric of Majere, for example, is able to turn undead as
though he were two levels higher (which is very handy), and
receives an extra spell: Silence, 15' Radius. This extra spell is in
addition to all others that the cleric may have memorized. Other
gods provide bestow different abilities on their clerics.
Ah, you found your way here. Good! Don't mind the mess;
we're still decorating the place, but we are open for business. Naturally, you're wondering what this is all about. Well,
have a seat on the packing crate and I'll tell you about it.
This new column format gives me a lot more freedom: I can
review a game, or review and editorialize, or just editorialize, or discuss several games at once. In other words, I can do pretty much
what I please with it, unrestricted by the regular review article
limitations (ahhh, power!!) (grin). So, over the coming months,
you can expect to see almost anything here. What you can expect this time is a look at the latest release in SSI's AD&D series.
Champions of Krynn is a game to boot up when you don't
want to spend weeks or months on an epic adventure. It was
designed to be a quick play and the emphasis is definitely on
combat. There are no puzzles to solve or complicated plots to follow. The action is fairly straightforward, although there are some
complications of another kind.
The game mechanics and interface are pretty much the same
as in Pool of Radiance and Curse of the Azure Bonds. In fact,
Krynn bears some resemblance to Pool, as it is a missionoriented game. However, this adventure takes place in the
Dragonlance world and there are some important differences in
play, particularly with regard to magic.
In the previous games, you simply had a mage, of whatever
alignment, and that was it. Here, magic-users are split out by
alignment, with White Robes (good), Red Robes (neutral) and
Black Robes (evil). These divisions are not superficial. They have
a decided effect on character abilities.

Neutral deities give, on average, fewer "extras" than good ones.
However, Neutral clerics learn regular spells faster than Good
ones, and have more of them. Good clerics advance slower until
5th level, after which they advance faster (but will still be behind
in the matter of spells). The moons of Krynn have no effect on
clerical magic.
Changes in the magic system are not the only new feature.
Some alterations have been made with regard to character races,
as well. In previous games, there were simply Elves and Dwarves.
Now the Elves have been split into Silvanesti and Qualinesti,
while Dwarves are divided into Hill and Mountain varieties.
As far as Elves are concerned, there are no differences between
the two types, except that Silvanestis cannot be thieves. With
Dwarves, the differences are a bit more marked. Hill Dwarves can
be rangers, Mountain Dwarves cannot. Hill Dwarves advance
higher as thieves, while Mountain Dwarves can have a higher
charisma score.
Paladins are missing from the roster, their place being filled by
the Solmanic Knights. The Knights are essentially fighters who
receive the ability to cast a few clerical spells at high levels; otherwise they have nothing in common with Paladins.
The Knights are divided into three orders: Knights of The
Crown, Knights of The Sword, and Knights of The Rose. The last
two orders are the ones which receive clerical spells. All player
characters start as Knights of the Crown, but can apply for the
Sword and Rose orders when they have sufficient experience.
Continued on page 30

Game Hints

Harpoon (Version 1.1)
has been released, virtually bug-free and with
smaller memory requirements. Additional options have been included, e.g. allowing the
player to opt for nuclear
release, more information on Platform Display
(particularly damage
points, allowing one to
determine how many
weapons to fire at a particular target), air-intercept accessibility, etc.

HARPOON:
Tactics & Strategy
by M. Evan Brooks

In this article, emphasis
will be placed on the
three environments: air,
surface, and sub-surface.
The comments herein
refer to the GIUK (Greenland-Iceland-United
Kingdom Battleset); later
Battlesets may yield different decisions (particularly with reference to
naval gunfire), but these
will be covered when the
Battlesets become
available.

Air Operations
Gordon Walton has
described the effective
utilization of aircraft as
being "sixty percent
(60%) of the game". In
this reviewer's opinion,
Mr. Walton has understated the impact of
aircraft—one can be a
poor ship handler and a
novice at submarine
operations, but still be a
strategic success if he
can maximize the potential of his air elements.
Aircraft are particularly fragile instruments. Unable to sustain much damage,
they can be frittered away in poorly-conceived strikes. However, their offensive
power is such that they can literally
destroy all opposition.

Strike/Air Intercept: Soviet air elements have a much greater stand-off
capability than NATO forces. They can
deliver their missiles from over 100 nautical miles (AS-4 Kitchen, AS-5 Kelt, AS-6
Kingfish), while NATO air ordnance has a
much shorter delivery range (Harpoon,
60-80; HARM, 40). This means that
NATO must protect its airfields and bases
by engaging Soviet threat elements at a
greater distance.
While the documentation does not emphasize the defensive use of air platforms,
one must quickly learn that BARCAP (Barrier Combat Air Patrols) must be main-

tained at all times. Mr. Walton prefers to
leave at least 25% of his air superiority elements on CAP. This reviewer is even
more conservative—preferring to have at
least 33% of such platforms airborne.
Note, however, that since certain aircraft
are more properly used in a strike role
and have a limited interceptor role at best
(A-4M Skyhawk, A-6F Intruder, TU-16
Badger, TU-22 Backfire, TU-95 Bear),
this is 33% of the appropriate, not total,
aircraft. A proper perusal of the Platform
Display will reveal which aircraft should
be used in a CAP/air superiority role.
Even a small number of interceptor
aircraft can render a strike ineffective.
While they may not be able to down all
opposition, they can force the strike elements to fire at maximum range or even
abandon the strike attempt. Time is of
the essence, since aircraft speeds are
such that a late-detected incoming strike
may not allow sufficient defensive interceptors to become airborne before the

missiles are incoming.
Even a few "leakers" (missiles which evade antimissiles and strike the
target) are sufficient to
severely degrade future
air operations from
that base.
As an example,
Scenario 6 (Fortress
Keflavik) postulates a
Soviet strike to render
Keflavik ineffective. Offensively, the Soviet
must penetrate NATO's
air defenses and destroy
the base. An optimal
Soviet strategy is to
render Narvik ineffective
early (by strikes from
Bodo) and then mass
his strike aircraft
(Badgers, Backfires and
Bears) in a "Southern
Hook". Overflying
Swedish territory, then
turning east and flying
north to hit Keflavik from
the rear will generally
find an open NATO
"door", which results in
total destruction of the
NATO airfield. Even if
total destruction is not
achieved, enough
weapons, aircraft (on the
ground) and sensor
mounts will be destroyed
that future raids will be
virtually impossible.

Politically, one may
question whether
Sweden would permit
regimental Soviet air elements to overfly its territory. Most analysts
seem to feel that
Sweden would join the
NATO ranks, however, this reviewer
notes that in World War II, Sweden's
neutrality favored the Axis to a large degree. It is not a question of common
goals, but rather a realistic Weltanschauung (world view). Such political
considerations are beyond the scope of
Harpoon, but a sophisticated Soviet
player will take advantage of Sweden's enforced "neutrality".
Correspondingly, the NATO player may
be unable to achieve a 360-degree AEW
(Airborne Early Warning), but he should
place his assets in the most likely threat
axis and then occasionally patrol in the
"back doors" to prevent the Icelandic
Pearl Harbor.
Examine assets carefully, and re-arm
where necessary. For example, Phantom
interceptors may be initially loaded out
for strike missions. Since NATO will have
sufficient time to rearm for strike missions later, such fighters should be used

in their interceptor role. The NATO defensive posture mandates maximization of
CAP and air-to-air superiority missions.
The most dangerous threat to aircraft
are other aircraft. Submarines can do
nothing and surface vessels may have extensive anti-air armaments, but they lack
the speed to seize the initiative. A SAG
(surface action group) may indeed pose a
threat to one's bases, but airpower
should pinpoint it sufficiently removed so
that the defensive air strike elements will
have time for at least three full mission
strikes (returning to base for refueling
and ordnance).

marines. Then, use helicopters to close
upon and destroy the enemy. ASW operations should be planned through use of
the Formation Editor, but remember to
widen the zone size. Airplanes should be
used for multi-sector patrols, since their
endurance allows broader coverage and
detection opportunities, while helicopters
in a multi-sector patrol spend too much
time traversing the area and not enough
time actually "dipping" for enemy subs.
Try to attack enemy submarines with at
least two helicopters. Attempt to close
the range (even if this means cancelling

In the Harpoon environment, all aircraft are FMC
(Fully Mission Capable).
There are no down-times for
maintenance, glitches or
gremlins; thus, one will have
the use of all potentially available aircraft—a somewhat
optimistic rendering.
After a strike, use the unit
menu to determine the actual damage done to the
enemy. If weapons or sensors have been
destroyed/damaged, then a
follow-on strike is that much
easier to accomplish.
Again, remember CAP,
CAP, CAP!! Pulling a MacArthur (i.e. getting caught
with one's planes on the
ground like Douglas MacArthur did in the Philippines on 8 December 1941) is inexcusable.
AEW (Airborne Early Warning):
NATO has a tremendous advantage in
AEW platforms and capabilities; make
sure to use it. In a defensive role (defending a land base), there is no reason to
maintain electronic silence. Use AEW assets (E2C Hawkeye, E-3 Sentry, Nimrod
MR.2 and even P-3C Orion and S-3
Viking) to fly high and radiate loudly
when land-based. It's not as if the Soviets
lack map capabilities; they know where
the base is, and the electronic emissions
will let them know that a route
is "guarded".
Of course, an intelligent Soviet player
will use his interceptors (e.g. SU-24
Fencer, SU-27 Flanker) to destroy the
AEW planes/helos early. The AEW assets
are a high-priority target. Protect them. If
an interceptor is closing, pull the AEW
back and send out an interceptor mission.

Sub-Surface Warfare
ASW (Anti-Submarine Warfare):
While NATO plane assets are long-ranging (Nimrod MR.2, P-3C Orion, S-3
Viking), it is better to use them for patrolling, finding and fixing enemy sub-

proposed firing missions), since a torpedo dropped virtually on top of a submarine allows the enemy little time for
evasive maneuvering.
Submarine Operations: Submarines—
the scourge of the seas! There is no
good defense against a torpedo other
than to destroy the submarine before it
launches. Otherwise, one must utilize fast
evasion and/or thermocline adjustment
(the latter pertains to submarines only).
Once a submarine is detected, it is difficult to escape, although it can be done.
In Harpoon 1.1, CAESAR (the Soviet underwater sensor system), has been "toned
down", since its initial rendition proved
too effective. Scenario 12 (Attack the Bastions) proved extremely difficult for
NATO, since Soviet detections were
usually successful—even when an improved Los Angeles class was creeping at
5 knots! Experienced naval officers feel
that such a vessel would be virtually undetectable by Soviet sensors.
If using nuclear release, it would behoove the NATO player to target Murmansk early. A quick and total destruction of such a base would severely
denigrate Soviet ASW assets.
While the submarine can be directed to
a speed of zero knots, there is no difference in detection between "Stop" and

"Creep" (5 knots). In reality, a submarine
cannot cease movement; like a shark, it
must keep moving in order to maintain
its trim—a complete cessation of movement would force either upward or
downward movement. Since the slowest
an actual submarine would ever move is
3 knots, there is no reason to use the
"Stop" speed selection.
Offensively a single submarine can
destroy an enemy fleet. In Scenario 13
(Duel), this reviewer found a Soviet fleet
that would virtually track over an improved-Los Angeles. Dropping speed to a
minimum, the submarine
waited until the enemy fleet
ranged between 4 and 12
nautical miles, whereupon
every possible missile and torpedo was launched. Net
result: 9 out of 10 Soviet vessels sunk (including a Kirov
battle cruiser) without a
single retaliatory effort. Mr.
Walton has assured this
reviewer that the Al (artificial
intelligence) has been
tightened so that while such
a devastating strike may well
occur, the enemy vessels
would also bring down "a
world of hurt" upon the submarine. Even so, such a correlation-of-forces loss ratio is
extremely attractive!
Note that submarines at
"Deep" level can launch missiles; in reality, such vessels
would have to come to "Shallow" level before achieving launch status.
However, memory limitations prevented
such action (perhaps in Version 2.0 or
the proposed on-line multi-player rendition).

Surface Warfare
Missile Warfare: Missiles are the
weapons of choice. Close to the proper
distance and let fly. However, economy of
force does not apply to naval engagements; the goal is to overload enemy
directors and allow missiles to penetrate
the defensive shields. Firing several
rounds of a few missiles allows the
enemy fleet to mass fires against the incoming missiles, while a massive round
will generate several "leakers".
Gun Warfare: The Harpoon player who
does not know what he is doing will utilize gunfire. It is close-ranged and generally costly to both sides. While the Soviet
navy outguns its NATO counterparts (in
both throw-weight and number/size of
barrels), even they would prefer to
destroy the enemy by missile fire.
A NATO player purposely engaging in a
gun duel is yielding the initiative. There is
no excuse for such action other than the
Continued on page 46

Technical Notes

The Circuit Writer
Who's In Charge Of Graphics
Standards Anyway?
by Steve Witzel

"I'll never need to upgrade my graphics
system again," you think to yourself. Too
bad you weren't aware that some
hardware manufacturers were starting to
release Super VGA graphics cards. 'Well
it's been a year or two since I bought the
VGA card, and it's my duty to keep up
with the latest technology," you sheepishly tell your spouse. So off to the dealer
again for a new Super VGA card with
512K memory. "Now I've got it all," you
think. 'What could be better than
graphics that are an amazing 1024 by
768 in 16 colors!" The only problem now
is that the pictures on the monitor are a
little fuzzy in the Super VGA mode. 'Well,'
you think, "just one last monitor and
there is absolutely nothing more to buy!"
In just eight years you've had five
graphics cards and four different
monitors. That's not too bad for a technology freak, especially since there are
no more graphics standards expected in
the future.

Steve Witzel is primarily responsible
for the technological innovations currently taking place at Access Software. In
this first installment of a limited series,
Steve offers some history and insight
regarding IBM graphics.

I

n the beginning (at least, on the IBM
PC), there were no graphics. Soon
there were several clone machines
available, each with their own colorless
graphic standard [Ed: Or should that be
sub-standard?]. After a short time, there
emerged a de facto monochrome
graphics standard, Hercules graphics. For
game players, monochrome was about
as exciting as watching paint dry.
Unwitting PC owners were about to
begin trading in their old green screens
for "COLOR". Too bad IBM didn't set
their standards any higher. The Color
Graphics Adapter (CGA) had a walloping
four colors on the screen at one time! Although the four colors were useful for
graphs drawn by Lotus' 1-2-3 program,
most game software developers were not
quite ready to take the PC seriously.
After CGA had been around for a
couple of years, it was again time to take
the old monitor and graphics card back
to your favorite retailer for a trade-in, because the Enhanced Graphics Adapter
(EGA) standard had become available.
Once home, it became apparent that the
EGA card you bought had only 64K of
memory on board and couldn't be
upgraded (Too bad no one told you that
there were two sizes of memory banks
available for EGA). So after a few
months, you're back at the dealer's to get

a new 64K EGA card that can be
upgraded to 128K. The dealer installs the
extra memory. Lucky for you, the same
monitor will work with the new card. Now
there are lots of games to use on your
computer. The graphics aren't great, but
they are a significant improvement. Most
software manufacturers are now beginning to convert more and more of their
programs to the PC format.
Things are wonderful in PC game land
until the rumblings begin about VGA
graphics. Well, you say to yourself, it's my
duty to keep up with the latest graphics
standards. You sell your old 128K EGA
card to a friend. You buy a new VGA card
with 128K of memory, expandable to
256K (you assume this is the last time
you'll have to buy a graphics card). Then
you discover that your old monitor
doesn't work with VGA! Back to the store
to buy that new analog VGA monitor,
and you're in business again.
The new graphics look fantastic. Now,
you have a full 256 colors instead of 16.
It looks almost as good as TV (if you
squint and stand back about 10 feet).
You start playing the great new games.
Software manufacturers are now starting
to design games for the PC first, then
convert them to other formats. Things
have changed for the better in PC land,
until a new VGA game you buy doesn't
work on your machine. A call to the
manufacturer confirms your suspicion.
The VGA card needs to be upgraded to
256K of memory. Due to your foresight
when you bought the card, a quick trip
to the dealer for a few RAM chips is all
that is needed.

Meanwhile, unknown to you, something
peculiar was happening at COMDEX.
Several manufacturers were showing the
most spectacular graphics images on
small computers. This standard is different. It doesn't even have a name this
time, only a number: 8514 graphics.
Most VGA monitors don't have the
resolution to handle 8514. Only a few
VGA monitors have the resolution to
handle 8514 graphics with its 1024 by
768 pixels in breathtaking 256 colors. If
you are lucky, you have such a monitor.
Of course, you also have a memory problem. It takes lots of memory to produce
these TV like images and the animations
are consequently slower than VGA images. So, once you get the 8514
graphics card and monitor, you begin to
feel that you need to put them in
a 386 computer!
Back to the computer store. On your
way, you wonder, "who's in charge of
graphics standards anyway?"

Here's my recommendation if you're
back at the computer looking at computers or graphics upgrades.
Graphics Card: Buy a graphics
card that is capable of Super VGA
graphics, not just VGA. The card will
either come with an initial configuration of, or be expandable to, 512K of
memory. Be sure to get at least 256K
of memory.
Monitor: Get a monitor that is
capable of 8514 graphics, right now!
There are several on the market and
they will cost a few dollars more, but
you won't have to upgrade in two
years. In the meantime, the VGA
graphics will look better than on
other monitors.

Review

The Third Courier
by Dennis Owens
Courier supports mouse, joystick or
keyboard interface, the mouse pointer
moves so inexorably slowly toward the
menu that valuable game-minutes just
keep ticking off before the pointer can
even reach the menu in order to access it (This reviewer had the
lugubrious mouse problem, even on a
33 Mhz machine). Meanwhile, muggers, assassins or even beggars can
be pummeling "Moondancer"'s body
or filling it full of laser-targeted holes.

Night. The Templehof District. Rain
was beating on the bricks in the buildings as casually as a KGB agent
might interrogate a suspect.
My right hand rested on my Walther
PPK in my trenchcoat pocket. I was
supposed to meet William Martin,
ex-close friend, ex-co-worker for "The
Company", near the Brandenburg
Gates, at precisely 9:52.
He was nowhere to be seen.

Another problem is that, though a
simple map of West and East Berlin is
provided with the game, the only important location marked on it is that of
the player's character's apartment. It
was, obviously, a conscious design
decision for the player to have to
waste valuable game time by simply exploring the city. There may be some
validity in this decision, but shouldn't
the character have known, at least,
where Mission Support was located?
Why a superspy would not have
known the location of the local headquarters for his organization is absolutely beyond this reviewer.

I saw a man walking toward me.
It wasn't Martin.
He wasn't carrying the briefcase
with the NATO plans.
As he raised what looked like an
umbrella, pointed it in my direction
and sighted along its handle, I heard
the low muffled growl of the silencer
in its tip and dove behind the vacant
hurdy-gurdy man's cart and pulled
out my Walther. I suddenly realized
that Martin probably wouldn't be
showing up. Anywhere. Ever again.
Accolade's The Third Courier is a
slam-bang superspy adventure story
set among the streets of West Berlin,
West Berlin laid out with the kind of
detail used for the streets of Manhattan in the old Amnesia game and
featuring encounters as dangerous as
those to be found in the avenues
of Tangramayne.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

The Third Courier
Apple IIGS, IBM
$49.95
Carol and Ivan Manley
Accolade
San Jose, CA

The player's character (codenamed
"Moondancer") must try to resolve the
mystery of the disappearance of the
three couriers who were carrying,
respectively, critical components of
NATO non-nuclear defense plans to a top-secret conference in
Brussels. While attempting to accomplish this, the player's character must contend with foul-tempered beggars, seedy drunks and
knife-wielding muggers while exploring West Berlin and attempting to pick up the trail of each of the couriers.
Aided by his computer, answering machine, weapons, technological gadgets and very few clues supplied by Mission Support, Moondancer has only seven days (in game time) to recover
the vital components before the scheduled conference in Brussels (ensuring continued world peace). The Third Courier becomes, therefore, a race against that dreaded real-time concept
and forces one to explore the city, make all of the important contacts, and discover and untangle the inevitable red herrings, as
well as threaten and bully one's way past unsuspecting innocents
and not-so unsuspecting bad guys, before the time is up.

Blown Cover (Disappointments)
Although the mystery is tight and the fiction is consistent, the
mechanics of gameplay leave much to be desired. For instance,
much of the game is menu-driven, but even though The Third

At any rate, what this design decision
necessitates is that the player approach the game unrealistically. First,
the player saves the character and
spends a few "lives" in walking around
and figuring out where everything is.
So much for suspension of disbelief.
Frankly, in a game of this type, which
depends so heavily on tight timetables and provides
only a limited amount of time to begin with, such a
design parameter seems nearly unforgivable.
Another questionable design decision relates to the
use of violence in the game. The only efficient way (at
least, without wasting valuable Deutschmarks) to get
rid of a drunk or a beggar is to threaten him and it seems like
this kind of Experience Point fodder confronts one's character all
too frequently. One must wonder why the interaction with NPCs
is so limited to the big four options: run, fight, chat and threaten.

Spy Hooks (Innovations)
The Third Courier does feature some innovative concepts. For
example, it offers the player a chance to fine-tune "Moondancer"
during the character creation segment by choosing from various
character traits, occupations and leisure activities (everything
from partying to woodworking). Four different agents can be
saved to disk (for future play), but only one can be used at a time.
Unfortunately, this writer found little difference in gameplay between being a young farming, hunter/mechanic type or an old
urban card-playing librarian. Though the numerical character
traits (standard intelligence, strength and health gauges, etc.)
vary depending on the character's background, very little else
seems to. Also, although experience points and "grade levels" (i.e.
Continued on page 26

1

Third Courier
Continued from page 24

sleuth, agent, etc.) are important in determining what level of
weaponry sophistication the character can utilize, the seem to
matter very little beyond that.
Another change from the standard CRPG is a simpler and lesseffective one. Movement, instead of being handled by a "key
cluster" (such as i/ j/k/I or w/a/s/d) is via the first letters of each of
the compass directions (i.e. n/s/e/w). While this change might
seem more intuitive, in practice it seems rather clunky and slows
down the character's movement. Experienced gamers will prob-

ably dislike this change, others may prefer it.
Newer versions of The Third Courier support Ad Lib and CMS
sound boards. All IBM versions support hard drives and VGA (requires 512K, however).

Debriefing
In closing, The Third Courier should have been the sophisticated rock and rolling superspy story that it wants to be (indeed,
its fiction is strong and its puzzles are tricky). Instead, its
mechanics make it awkward and slow. It is recommended only
for superspies who cannot wait for the next Robert Ludlum novel
and garners who don't mind "fudging" with the system in order to
have a reasonable chance at succeeding in the game. CGW

Game Hints

Warning: Scorpion's
Mail contains specific
hints on games. Gentle
readers who eschew
hints should avoid this
column.

Leisure Larry III: If
you're having problems
with becoming better acquainted (ahem!) with
Tawni, you might want to
think about what would
appeal to someone who
is an inveterate shopper
(especially when you
don't have any cash on
hand). For those who
can't seem to get a certain locker open, be
aware that (a) the combination is determined
randomly each time (save
the game when you find
it) and (b) the names
have definite relationships
to numbers, and haven't
you seen those names somewhere else?

Scorpion's Mail

O

nce again, we
take a trip into
the back room for
a peek into the old mailbag. It's just as crowded
as ever (someday I'll have
to build an addition to
this place), but I think
there's just enough room
to squeeze in (into the
room, not the mailbag!
grin). Before we get to
the good stuff, though, I
have a few things to say about SASE's.
At the end of every column, I mention
that anyone living in the United States
must enclose a self-addressed, stamped
envelope if they want a reply to their
questions. Yet each month, without fail,
several letters will come in without a
SASE. Those letters just don't get
answered.
Even a SASE, however, is no guarantee
if the address on it is wrong. Jamie E. in
Milwaukee, my reply to you came back to
my box stamped "No such address".
There was no return address on your
original envelope to check against, so
you never received an answer.
There was also one reader who put his
name but my box number on his SASE.
Unfortunately, I didn't catch that, since
usually I only look at the names when inserting replies. A few days later, there it
was in my box. Luckily, he had a return
address on his original envelope and so, I
was able to get his response on its way.
So folks, before you go rushing to the
post office, take a few moments to be
sure everything is right. Make certain that
a SASE is enclosed with your letter and
that your address on it is correct. Also,
put your return address on the original
envelope, just in case (besides, stamps
have been known to fall off, too). Ok?
Now, let's go look in the bag.
Ultima V: Queries keep coming in
about the mysterious glass sword. Yes, it
does exist and no, you don't need it to
finish the game. If you killed something
with the sword and it broke, it isn't the
end of the world. There is a rumor (which
may even be true; I've never checked it
out) that the sword is useful against
Shadowlords. It will not, however, do anything to Blackthorn.
Might & Magic II: A number of people
are having trouble getting the code word

accepted by the machine at the very end
of the game. They have the right word,
but it doesn't seem to work. That word
has to start with a capital letter (don't ask
me why, that's just how it is).
Dragon Wars: There have been many
letters about problems with inventory control, which is not surprising. What to
keep and what to dump is not easy to
decide, especially when the game itself
gives little information on various items.
The first thing to do is to get the object
identified. If it's marked as "priceless", it is
either completely worthless or has some
important function in the game (solving a
puzzle, for instance). If you've found a
use for it, you can usually drop it afterwards. The signet ring is the only item
that is useful in more than one place.
Dead parrots, on the other hand (as any
Monty Python fan knows) aren't good for
anything. With magic items, your only
recourse is to save the game and experiment until you figure out what they do.
Armor is simpler. Wear the best and sell
the rest. The same holds true for
weapons, although there again some experimenting is necessary to determine
which ones work better for you. Don't be
afraid to fool around with the things you
find. After all, that's what saved games
are for! (grin)
Magic Candle: Some folks are in a
rush to get their charisma rating up, and
are encountering difficulties (also known
as extremely nasty critters). Slow down a
little! This is a big game with plenty to do
in it. The charisma teacher won't disappear, nor will all those rude people who
won't talk to you yet. If you go too fast,
you can easily miss something important.
The best thing to do is to take your time
and be thorough. Remember, you can always go back to a town again later. And
for those who have been asking, Dermagud is certainly the first dungeon you
should attempt.

Hero's Quest: Some people are
having a hard time with the secret
entrance to the brigand fortress. First,
you won't be able to get in at all until
you've rescued the baron's son (well, you
could try rushing the front, but I don't
recommend it). Then, you need to read a
certain message (which only appears
after you've rescued him). Finding the
message is the tricky part, as it only
shows up in the morning, so keep your
eye on the time of day. As to where the
baron's son is, well, I don't think I could
bear to tell you.
Wizardry V: Several readers have written to advise me that there is a way of
opening the chained door (originally mentioned in Dec. '89 issue), and that the
needed item is not too far away on the
same level. They are quite right; I had
completely forgotten about that (for
shame, Scorp! You of all people!).
Thanks to all of you who pointed that out
to me.
Wasteland: I've heard from some
people who are having trouble getting
the password for Savage Village. They've
climbed the hill many times, but no
password. Well, I don't know why it won't
show up, but there's something else you
can do: blast the Village gate open with
explosives. That will certainly work, and
save you some time as well.
That's about it for this month's mailbag.
If you need help with an adventure
game, you can reach me in the following
ways: On Delphi, stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie, visit the Games Roundtable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US
Mail (remember what I said above about
SASE's): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie
Station, New York NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Scorpion's View
Continued from page 18

However, while these changes have an effect on the individual
characters, they have none whatsoever in terms of game play.
That is, you don't need a particular type of Dwarf or Elf to talk to
someone, or to get you through an encounter. Knights of all orders are treated exactly the same, although there is one time in
the game where having a Knight (of any order) is an
absolute necessity.
Since a sequel is planned, it may be that the different Elven and
Dwarven races, and the different Knight orders, will be a factor
then. With that in mind, you might want to have one of each Elf
and Dwarf in your party. For this game, though, it isn't all
that important.
Once your party is created, you begin play at an outpost held
by the Solmanic Knights. Here the characters equip themselves, on a somewhat marginal level, as there isn't much for sale. Only
a small selection of weapons and armor are
available. Enough to get you started, but
not much more than that. Better items
come later, either gleaned from defeated opponents or purchased in a large town.
When the group is ready, you begin a
series of missions assigned by the commandants of the outposts (there is more than
one), starting with the investigation of the
nearby town of Throtl. The game is, therefore, somewhat linear in nature. Of course,
you can always poke around where you
haven't yet been sent, but save first, in case
of unpleasant surprises.
Combat, as mentioned earlier, is the major
activity, and boasts a new feature: the ability
to set the difficulty level of the opponents.
The levels range from Novice (very easy) to
Champion (really hard), for a total of five in all. What changing
the level does is to modify the number of hitpoints your opponents have. More hitpoints means they are harder to kill,and
3therefore you get more experience for the battle. Fewer hitpoints makes them easier to kill, and you get less experience.
Aside from that, the basic fighting mechanics have not changed
from the previous games. Spellcasting, movement, attacks, etc.
are all handled in familiar fashion. However, the speed has increased markedly. While the program still polls each monster individually, it is far quicker than before, making combat much
faster, at least in the IBM version.
Most of the critters are familiar ones: hobgoblins, minotaurs, evil
mages and clerics, fighters, ogres, giants, ghouls, and so on.
However, since the game is set in the Dragonlance world, you'd
expect to run across some dragons, and you'd be right: dragons,
mostly evil, pop up now and then to make your life miserable.
More numerous, though, are the Draconians, humanoid dragon
men created from the corrupted eggs of good dragons. There
are five types, all of them nasty and with special abilities to set
your teeth on edge.
Baaz are the most common. They're pretty ordinary, except that
when they die, they turn to stone and might pull a weapon from
a character's hand. Kapaks are worse; they secrete a poison that
can paralyze a character on contact. Bozaks are spell-casters,
especially fond of lightning bolts. They also explode when they
die, damaging anyone, friend or foe, who is next to them. Sivaks
have no special power, but are able to attack three times on
their turn.

Worst of all are the Auraks, of which, fortunately, there are few
in the game. Aside from being spell-casters, they don't die easily.
After being reduced to 0 or less hitpoints, they "come back" in
another form. In this form, they cannot be killed, as it is a type of
energy. Of course, this energy form is perfectly capable of attacking, and does so. All that can be done is to move your characters
around and wait for the Aurak to blow itself up, which will happen after a few rounds.
During the game, several characters from the Dragonlance
novels—Caramon, Tanis, and Tasselhoff—make cameo appearances. None of them joins your party for fighting purposes,
although Tas is with you through much of the endgame. There
are other NPC's you can take on for brief periods, but none of
them will stay with you for very long. In general, you are pretty
much on your own.
While the game is pretty standard fare overall, in spite of the
modifications, it does have a new feature not found in the others:
experience is occasionally given for non-combat activities. While
these instances are few and far between, it's a nice change to be
rewarded for doing something other
than fighting.
On the other hand, there are a few
things that aren't quite so nice. The first
one is that no experience is ever given
to a character who is knocked out in
combat. I don't mean killed and needing resurrection, just brought down to
unconsciousness. Whether it happens
on the first round or the last one makes
no difference: he or she gets nothing.
This violates the spirit of AD&D, in
which all surviving characters share
equally (or as equally as possible) in the
post-combat rewards. There is no justification for denying experience to characters who have otherwise done well
but have had the bad luck to be knocked out during combat. This practice becomes even sillier when you realize that a
character who is paralyzed on the first
round of combat will get experience, even though he has done
absolutely nothing during the fight.
The second blot is the taking away of some items at the end of
the scenario. You don't have any choice in the matter, it's done
automatically. It is generally a mark of poor planning, and of little
regard for the player's satisfaction, to take away hard-won items.
The usual specious explanations for this conduct tend to be
"Well, we don't want the characters to be too powerful" or "You'll
get something better next time". If designers don't want characters to be too powerful, then they should not hand out powerful
items in the first place. An exception can occasionally be made
for very special, one time items, such as the Dragonlance. Other
than that, however, characters should be able to retain what they
have fought so hard to get. If that means fewer special items, this
is still better than losing them all.
By the way, "special items" does not refer to the fairly mundane
magical stuff such as a sword +1 or ring mail +2. The goodies
removed at the end of Krynn include (besides the Footman's
Dragonlance): gauntlets of Ogre Power, a belt of Frost Giant
strength, a cloak of displacement, a periapt of proof vs. poison,
and a mace of disruption. Quite a list of potent items, some of
which should probably not have appeared in a low-level game to
begin with. More thought needs to be given by the designers as
to what specials will appear, keeping particularly in mind that
such specials ought not to be taken away at the end.
Finally, the endgame comes upon you as a surprise, and this
Continued on page 57

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 72

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first person perspectives of
real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take your alter ego
through a storyline or series
of events.
Role-Playing Adventures (RP):
Adventure games that are based
on character development
(usually involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this case,
the first listed category is
considered primary. In order to
be recognized as the "Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of this specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games In
CGW's Hall Of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated By
Our Readers
Over Time.
They Are Worthy
Of Play By All.

Review

The UDP scout ship had fought
valiantly against the FW cruiser,
making the large, poorly
maneuverable ship pay for its weakness with many well-placed laser
shots. In the end, the cruiser won because of its more formidable
strength, trapping the scout in its
tractor beam. Once the beam had
locked on to the squirming scout,
the cruiser reeled it in like an ancient
Terran angler would have played a
struggling trout. Now, the scout sat
defenseless within the cruiser's belly
as welder-bots worked through the
bolts of the sealed power door.

Breach of
Conflict
Omnitrend's "Breach 2"
by Chris Lombardi

Ensign Bardoz and his troops nervously checked equipment as they
waited to board the scout when the
door begrudgingly opened to the
robot's acetylene knock. Bardoz was
as green as a T-Rex's belly, his sum
total of combat experience at around
15 battle minutes with a pitifully
low accuracy rating of 24%, as well.
His men were aware of it and he
was painfully aware of it. He would
have to be the first through the
breached accessway if he hoped to
gain their trust, and a promotion.
The door fell and the troops ran for
the smoke-filled hatchway, their
squad leader at the lead. With laser
rifle blasting aimlessly, Ensign Bardoz burst through the doorway onto
the scout bridge, coming face-to-face
with the oddest alien being he'd ever
seen. Rising to an incredible 12 feet,
the alien turned its full Psionic
powers on the hapless rookie. Bardoz froze, his mind yielding to the
aliens' superior psyche, rifle clattering noisily on the bridge floor, misfiring
into a colorful navigation console. The
last thing Bardoz was aware of was a
strange alien voice whispering mockingly in his head, "Ah, human minds,
what a wonderful thing to waste."

The Sounds of Violence
(Graphics and Sound)
The IBM version supports VGA
graphics, and the Amiga and ST
version take full advantage of their
machine's graphics capabilities.
The IBM version also supports the
Adlib and the CMS music cards. Unfortunately in the IBM version the
only time the sound track is heard
is during the title sequence and at
the end of a successful mission.
The rest of the game sounds are
basic IBM speaker sounds. This is a
familiar trend among IBM sound
support. It is difficult to determine if
it is programming laziness or irreconcilable technical difficulties,
but it would sure be nice if games
took full advantage of sound board
capabilities (The sounds on the
other machines are very well done).

Breach 2 irons out the major
design problems in the original program. One of the largest flaws in
the original was the lack of
diagonal movement, a clumsy omission. Fortunately, Breach 2 allows
diagonal movement, and also allows one to trace a path for each
marine rather than to move them
step by step.

TITLE:
Breach 2
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
REVIEWED ON: IBM
PRICE:
$49.9S
DESIGNER:
Thomas R. Carbone
PUBLISHER:
Omnitrend Software
W. Simsbury, CT

reach 2 is the sequel to the science fiction, squad level
combat game born from the marine boarding sequences
of Omnitrend's Universe 2. In Breach and its new sequel,
the player leads a squad of futuristic marines, a la Aliens, into a
series of campaigns against intelligent enemies, set within
Omnitrend's Universe fiction. Players assume the persona of a
squad leader, fearlessly guiding their marines through battle
scenarios, building the squad leaders experience and abilities in a
role-playing manner. The novelty of the original Breach lay in this
unique blend of tactical combat and role-playing.

B

Though Breach 2 was completely recoded for this sequel, the
game is more of a Breach 2.0—an updated version of the
original, as it takes the original game system and adds a few
needed features, more objects and opponents, and improved
graphics and sound. The game retains the mouse driven, icon interface, though it does implement keyboard commands. A combination of both input methods makes for smooth, elegant play,
and a significant improvement on the original.

Also, the original Breach was unmerciful when it came to squad
leaders. Once a squad leader
entered a scenario, it was all or
nothing, either the squad leader
saw a mission through to its end
(whether it ended in success or
failure) or he died. It was certainly
realistic, but not 'gamer' friendly. If
a clumsy squad leader dropped a live grenade on his toe, he
was gone for good, along with 20 hours of experience.
Gamers handled this the way any self-respecting gamer
would—they made back-ups. Thankfully, Breach 2 avoids
this mess and keeps a copy of a squad leader warm and cozy
while a clone risks his butt in the battlefield. If the squad
leader is 'incapacitated' while on a mission, he is not sent to
game-character heaven. A well-earned plaudit is due this gamer
friendly innovation. Thank you.
Other additions come in the form of new war toys and new opponents. Along with the usual rifles, grenades, and rocket launchers, Breach 2 offers smoke grenades (for extra cover), neutron
bombs (nasty radiation grenades), camouflage suits (renders
wearer somewhat invisible), proximity charges (mines), and foxhole makers. These new items add some additional flavor, as well
as inviting other interesting scenario possibilities with options like
mine fields and heavily entrenched enemy forces.
The new members of the enemy cast now include (in order of
appearance): beasts (actually beasts were in the original game
but they now look like Tyrannosaurus Rexs), terradons (flying
prehistoric creatures), wadgels (sci-fi porcupines), bipeds (minimech warriors), robots (robots) and seekers (weird floating orbs
that fly through walls and are killed only by remote charges). The
basic creatures from the original—marauders, tanks, gun
Continued on page 36

Continued from page 34

emplacements, and aliens—are all here,
but with considerable face-lifts.

Space Cadet Construction Set
(Scenario Builder)
When one begins to know the
enemies to be found in the eleven predesigned scenarios on a first name
basis, it's obviously time to move on to
bigger, brighter things. This is facilitated
by the fact that Breach 2 comes complete with a scenario builder capable of
creating customized computer mayhem.
The scenario builder is flexible enough
to create nearly any sci-fi battle situation
one can conjure. In fact, the introductory fiction describes a playing of "Storm Troopers", a not-so-original yet playable creation of
my own (with apologies to an obvious source). A simple, one
level scenario can easily be assembled in an hour or so.
For those short on time or creativity, Omnitrend plans to
publish additional campaign disks for $14.95 each. Campaign
Disk #1 is already complete and available through Omnitrend
only (not available in stores). Additional scenarios can also be purchased through the Modern Day Publishing Co. These people did
a great job of supporting the original Breach with several campaign disks and a monthly newsletter, VidComm, devoted solely

to Omnitrend software. They're offering a
free (but $4.95 for shipping and handling) "Azarius Incident Scenario Disk", as
well as the "Federation Collection", a
seven disk set of scenarios supported by
some pretty decent fiction for $59.95.

In addition, Omnitrend is planning exciting things with a system they're calling
the Interlocking Game System (IGS).
Using this system, Breathers will be able
to play the ship boarding sequence in an
upcoming product, Rules of Engagement
(a tactical ship-to-ship space navy
scenario), by using the Breach 2 system
with squad leaders created in the Breach
world. Omnitrend is also planning a surface assault game which
would implement the same system.
So, is the Breach 2(.0) 'upgrade' worth the purchase? It certainly is for those who enjoyed the original. This new, improved version is definitely worthwhile in light of the IGS developments.
Melding separate game systems in this way offers a welcome
flexibility that will certainly increase the depth of both games.

Omega Tournament Results

Official Tournament Results

(FROM THE OSI ARCHIVES - FILE DATE 09AUG89)

OSCI DIRECTIVE 234-SC932-89

ALL ENGINEERS ARE INSTRUCTED TO DEMONSTRATE
CYBERNETIC DESIGN AND Al PROGRAMMING SKILLS BY
REPORTING FOR REASSIGNMENT TO THE PROJECT OMEGA
TOURNAMENTS. OSI OMEGA SECURITY CLEARANCE IS SUGGESTED. FAILURE TO COMPLY MAY RESULT IN UNSATISFACTORY PERFORMANCE BEING RECORDED IN PERMANENT PERSONNEL FILES.

OSI recruited two agencies to administer periodic evaluations to
determine the quality of tanks produced. Origin Systems, Inc.
and Computer Gaming World magazine were chosen to oversee
employee evaluations. After review, Origin/CGW determined that
in order to rate design and programming prowess they would
have prototypes battle each other. These monthly battles, called
"Tournament", would provide quantifiable means of rating the engineers who participated. The Origin/CGW plan called for five
preliminary tournaments which would determine 30 designers
who demonstrated exceptional ability. The first tournament was
held in September, 1989. As the tournament began, OSI
employees watched as the cybertanks took the field, striving to
destroy their opponents. When the last laser had been fired, the
cybertank NIMBUS1, designed by Bob Willis had won.

In the months that followed, four other designers achieved victory in the monthly qualifying tournaments. The names of the
five engineers and their winning cybertanks are as follows:

October:
November:
December:
January:

Bob Willis

NIMBUS1

Stuart Eastman SWAN
Steve H us k e y

THE OMEGA TOURNAMENT SYSTEM IS AUTHORIZED
FOR CONTINUATION ACCORDING TO ESTABLISHED
GUIDELINES. ALL ENGINEERS WISHING TO BE INVOLVED ARE INSTRUCTED TO CONTACT OSI HEADQUARTERS IMMEDIATELY.

END DIRECTIVE

In response to the demand for ongoing OMEGA tournaments,
OSI has authorized the creation of official OMEGA Tournament
Centers. Now, an OMEGA engineer can enter not one, but multiple tournaments. OSI will provide listings and phone numbers of
authorized Tournament Centers. Furthermore, there will be an annual OMEGA Grand Tournament with qualifiers from each Tournament Center.

The OMEGA Tournament System can be used by any qualified
group or individual who wants to possess the excitement of
managing an OMEGA tournament. If YOU are interested in becoming an OMEGA Tournament Center, write to OSI at:

HELIVES

Steven Schafer STRYKBK2
Robin Kim

HAVE A PRODUCTIVE DAY.

OSI DIRECTIVE 539-SCO21-90

END DIRECTIVE

September:

ment were amazing. Some would hide behind buildings, waiting
for prey. Others launched a berserk attack, retreating only to
repair vital systems. Ultimately, only one could prevail. In a
decisive manner, the tank REALSWAN designed by Stuart
Eastman, emerged victorious. OSI salutes all engineers who participated in the tournaments and congratulates Stuart Eastman
for a job well done. Mr. Eastman will receive an OMEGA trophy, a
copy of all Origin games, a custom-designed OMEGA jacket, and
a $500 cash prize.

TALON-C

Origin Systems, Inc.
Attn: Omega Tournament Center
P.O. Box 161750

The Grand Tournament would prove who was the top cybernetic tank designer. From the five qualifying tournaments, 30
designers had proven their merit and earned the right to participate in the final event. Deep within the OSI complex, the final
30 prototypes were loaded onto the mainframe and the battles
were begun. The cybertank designs used in the Grand Tourna-

Austin, TX 78746

051 will send you an information kit with all the materials you
need to apply for membership. Please allow 2-4 weeks for delivery.

Design Notes

Abstracts from the Journal
of Computer Game Design
CGW is pleased to be able to print
abstracts from The Journal of Computer Game Design, a seminal publication written, published and read
by computer game designers. JCGD
is published six times per year and
costs $30 per year (The Journal of
Computer Game Design, 5251 Sierra
Rd., San Jose, CA 95132). Back issues are available at $5.00 each. In
this issue of CGW, we will be
abstracting from issues 3.2 and 3.3.

Why Adventure Games Suck
by Ron Gilbert (Maniac Mansion
and Indiana Jones and the Last
Crusade: The Graphics Adventure)
Ron's basic thesis relates to the
necessity of "suspension of disbelief"
in pulling the gamer into the game
and helping them to leave the "real
world" behind as they play. He notes
that the "suspension of disbelief" disappears every time the player has to
restore a saved game or ends up
pounding his or her head on the
desk in frustration. Therefore, Ron
promulgated "Gilbert's Rules of
Thumb" for avoiding this disruption
in game satisfaction.
1. The final objective needs to
be clear: Even if the objective changes in the midst of game, as a result
of something that happens to the
character or his/her environment, the
player needs to be able to have a
clear vision of what he or she is actually trying to accomplish. If this is
not possible, the player ends up
meandering aimlessly and getting
more and more frustrated.
2. Even sub-goals need to be
obvious: Most adventure games are
divided into scenarios with sub-goals.

Players may know that the main goal
of the game is to rescue the prince,
but a player who is trapped on an island may need to be prodded into
realizing that it's okay to get off the island in order to advance the story.
Players who are unaware of this subgoal may wander about aimlessly
looking for the prince on the island
and giving up in frustration because
they do not realize that it is time to
move on. There needs to be a
mechanism (sometimes a supporting
character) to inform the player what
he or she should be doing at a given
point in the game.
3. Live and learn: It is a morale
problem when players can only learn
by "dying" and having to reboot. Although danger is inherent in drama,
note that danger should be survivable if the player is clever enough.
4. Watch out for "backwards
puzzles": It is both more realistic
and more satisfying for garners to
find the solution after they have
found the problem. The problem
should challenge the player to search
for the solution.
5. Avoid the "I forgot to pick it
up" syndrome: Players should not
have to pick up every item they see
and add it to their inventory because
it might help with a later puzzle.
Though this is part of the "backwards
puzzle" problem, Gilbert wanted to
emphasize this point.
6. Make the puzzles advance
the story: Unless solving a puzzle
brings the player closer to understanding both the story and the
game, it is simply "busy work".
7. Real time gaming offers poor
quality drama: Gilbert reasons that
"timing" is a vital ingredient to effective drama. He does not address the

dreaded "real time-dead time" discus
sion in this section, but objects to
time-based puzzles, especially if the
player must fail on several occasions
before getting his timing down.
8. There must be incremental
rewards: Players need some idea of
how they are progressing and they
have to have a feeling that they are
getting somewhere.
9. Avoid arbitrary puzzles: While
puzzles do not have to be obvious,
they should make enough sense that
the player's first thought upon solving
it is, "Of course, why didn't I think of
that sooner!" If the solution can only
be reached by trial and error (or plain
luck), it's a bad puzzle.
10. Reward the player's intent:
The design should give the player the
benefit of the doubt. It should not be
a matter of having a character on
just the right pixel in a graphics
game or guessing just the right word
in a parser-driven game. "If you give
the player the benefit of the doubt,"
Gilbert suggested, "the game will be
right more than wrong."
11. Make the events/puzzles consistent: Some games lock out sections of the game universe until certain "Must Do"s are completed. This
is fine, but all the "Must Do"s should
fit together in a logical way.
12. Give the player lots of options: Gilbert pictures games which
are too linear as being analogous to
a cage with the player locked into the
cage until he or she finds a certain
key to get out. He suggests, instead,
that designers think of the player as
being outside the cage and the puzzles being locked within. This way,
the gamer would have many more options to think about in terms of what
to do next.

The article ends with a telling, if
cynical observation, "The average
American spends most of the day failing at the office, the last thing he
wants to do is come home and fail
while trying to relax and
be entertained."

Toys Versus Puzzles
Versus Games
by Chris Crawford (Balance of
Power: 1990, Balance of the Planet
and Guns & Butter)
In this brief column, Chris Crawford
discusses the differences between
toys, puzzles and games. He notes
that all three have a system, but each
treats it differently. A toy presents the
system alone, encouraging the user
to play with the system in a free-form
exploratory manner. If rules and a
goal are added to the toy, one gets a
puzzle. The puzzle-solver must interact with the system in a more formal
and purposeful manner in order to
reach the defined goal. Finally, if one
adds an opponent who purposefully
seeks to foil that goal-reaching, one
has a game.
To illustrate the point, he says that
a ball is a toy. It rolls and bounces,
depending on the way the user plays
with it. If one adds a goal and some
rules, but no opponent, it becomes a
puzzle. Add an opponent, however,
and one has a game.

Are You a Crook?
by Richard Mulligan (Product
Manager for Games on GEnie)
In this article on software piracy,
Mulligan notes that there are many
people who steal programs without
thinking. He quotes Ralph Bosson,
designer of Under Fire for Avalon
Hill and High Seas for Garde', as
stating, "People who wouldn't take a
candy bar out of a drug store think
nothing of [piracy]." He went on to
say, "We need to redefine the act of
'piracy,' and put the guilt back
into it."
Next, he quotes Tony Van of
Mediagenic's technical support staff.
"If consumers bought the games they
normally get from a friend, we'd
[software publishers] have more

money to put into research and
development and, in turn, produce
better quality games." Assuming
people only give out one copy of
every game they buy, Tony's suggestion would certainly make a big difference in a $300 million per year industry.
Then, after talking about professional pirates who steal in order to
deal in bulk, he reaches the bottom
line. It is an important message,
noting that every copy of a game
which is handed out to a friend or
relative is helping to drive prices of
all games up. While software publishers do not directly add in the estimated cost of piracy to a new
game, they do estimate how many
copies they expect to sell and price
accordingly. It's simple mathematics;
the more games you can sell, the
less you have to charge. One wellplaced, but unidentified source, told
Mulligan that piracy could possibly
add up to $10 to the price of every
new game.
"It might be interesting for you to
remember," Mulligan closed out his
article, "the next time you give a
friend a free copy of a new game,
that you just drove the price of the
next new game up a penny or so."

Review

BATTLE OF
AUSTERLITZ
by M. Evan Brooks

Front (1979). Troops/formations appear
as either figures or military symbology
(the latter is recommended, since it yields
more information as to a unit's status).
Utilizing a low-resolution EGA background, the best that can be said of the
battlefield graphics is that not much is
lost in playing the product on a CGA-laptop machine.
Topography ostensibly had an impact
on the battlefield; however, the graphic
rendition herein is such that one questions the strategic import of the Pratzen
Heights (historically, Napoleon had
secured the "high ground" only to yield it
to his opponents in a classic trap—knowing that his clumsy opponents would
rush to seize such terrain while the superior "Grand Armee" would outmaneuver
and destroy the combined Austrian-Russian forces).
Troop formations are easily discerned
(square, line, column), but overall, BOA
is not a graphics-intensive product. If anything, its mediocre graphic presentation
detracts somewhat from the play value.

Game Play

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
DESIGNERS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

attle of Austerlitz (BOA) is a combined release by Cornerstone
Software (formerly Krentek
Software) and Tevex (best known for
mail order discount software), which is
now seeking to achieve vertical market expansion. BOA is a simulation of the "Battle of the Three Emperors" (Napoleon I
[France] vs. Tsar Alexander I [Russia] and
Francis I [Austria]), the strategic triumph
by Napoleon occurring on December 2,
1805, virtually one year after he assumed
the Imperial title of Emperor of the
French.

B

Designers Beckett and Krenek are
Napoleonic enthusiasts and have previously done Napoleon at Waterloo and
Napoleon at Borodino. Each product is
based on a similar system, utilizes the
same basic graphics, and reflects an examination of grand tactics in the
Napoleonic battlefield.

Battle of Austerlitz
IBM (soon on C-64, Amiga and ST)
1
Stephen M. Beckett
and Steven Krenek
$49.99 ($34.99 from Tevex)
Cornerstone Software/Tevex
Atlanta, GA

Documentation
The documentation is clear and concise. Play mechanics (relatively easy to
grasp) are fully explained, as well as the
basic premise behind the battle. Further,
strategic/tactical guidelines are presented.
This reviewer had previously criticized
Krentek's Napoleonic simulations for
lacking a printed map; BOA includes a
hard copy map, but its "contemporary"
appearance belies much of its intended
usefulness. Nevertheless, since one can
quickly switch to a strategic map while
playing the game, there is no real loss.
Note that the map sheet shows a succinct listing of play commands and input
mechanics (keyboard, joystick or mouse).

Graphics
The graphics of BOA still appear
reminiscent of Chris Crawford's Eastern

While player input can be done via keyboard, mouse, or joystick, this reviewer
found that the keyboard offered the
easiest interface. Joystick and mouse options were difficult to use, with the destination area often missed, involving
numerous retries and frustration; keyboard interface is quick and simple.
Infantry units may assume formations:
line (firepower maximization) or column
(shock melee power optimization), and
also square when threatened by cavalry
(this last formation is automatically
adopted when necessary).
Infantry units from the same Corps may
be merged, thereby allowing one to create the massive Napoleonic offensive
columns for a shock offensive. Historically, these were a characteristic of the later
Napoleonic army, since it required little
expertise (and the veteran infantry lay
dead under a myriad of battles). In 1805,
Napoleon's "Grand Armee" retained a
cadre of veterans and did not have to
resort exclusively to the massed columns.
While the player may individually order
units (brigades), he may also issue corps
orders, which reflect the overall tenor of
Napoleonic combat in a more historical
manner (albeit at a corresponding lack of
player control). Finally, when one deems
the moment correct, he may order the entire army to advance to effect the final
destruction of one's opponent.
The basic terrain "hex" is 275 yards.
Turn duration may be arbitrarily selected
between 1-60 seconds per game minute
(easily selected by using numerals from
"1" to "9"; the lower the number, the
faster the simulation flows).

BOA utilizes leaders, and one may elect
any of six historical personages—so that
one could fight against the French using
Alexander as their leader! Of course, the
enthusiast will attempt to best Napoleon,
the true challenge. Seven scenarios are
available, with three concentrating on portions of the battle (tutorial devices), one
reflecting the battle itself, and three showing alternative orders of battle.
Historically, the French must decisively
defeat the combined Austrian-Russian
army. To do so, they must seize the initiative. Better leadership, morale and formations permit the French to overcome a
numerical inferiority and smash the Allied
right flank. As Napoleon conceived of the
battle, the Allied left would attempt to
penetrate the French lines, but would be
unable to do so. Meanwhile, the main
French forces (center-left) would fall on
the Allied right and collapse the Allied
positions.
Playing the Allied position is a challenge. One's troops and maneuverability
are dismal. Therefore, careful planning is

essential to ensure that assaults are carefully coordinated and massed.
While BOA is a real-time simulation
(time flows inexorably while the player
deliberates his actions), the Designer
Notes are rather hyperbolic when they say:
There is no comparison between
Austerlitz and other wargames. Austerlitz is the first computer wargame to
begin to utilize the computer's abilities
on a Grand Tactical Scale, unlike those
weak, slow, unrealistic board game
clones."—Designer Notes, Page 22
Strategically, Napoleon had defeated
one wing of the Austrian Army at Ulm,
and his dispositions at Austerlitz placed
him half-way toward winning the battle
before the first shot was fired. However,
he required a decisive defeat of the Allied
forces. Otherwise, he would have had to
retire, not being able to logistically sustain his forces on Austrian soil. In game
terms, however, the computer-controlled
French will remain static, even if the Allied forces do nothing. This results in a
"non-decisive battle—a draw". While a
draw may have been tactically non-

decisive, it would have been a strategic
defeat for Napoleon and compensation
for the Austrian capitulation at film.
If the Allied forces had remained on the
defensive, Napoleon would have been
compelled to attack. Napoleon knew his
opponents and their weaknesses, but
that is no reason for the Allied player to
compel himself to act rashly in accordance with "historical results".

Conclusions
BOA is a Napoleonic simulation of introductory/medium complexity. Its
mechanics are dated (and it shows) and it
lacks a Napoleonic panache. Given the
current state-of-the-art, BOA is not "art"!
However, for the true Napoleonic buff,
BOA may be of some entertainment
value.
At the conclusion of the battle,
Napoleon told his army, "Soldats! Je suis
content de vous" ("Soldiers! I am pleased
with you"). Sadly, this reviewer could not
echo the Master's sentiments regarding
BOA.

Harpoon
Continued from page 21
mere experience. The only way it can
occur is for the NATO player to be exceedingly stupid while the Soviet player is
exceedingly lucky.
ASW Warfare: The best deterrence to
an enemy submarine is a helo squarely
on top of it. But if a torpedo is launched,
one may do well to split his group, and
enter a new course leg for evasion purposes. Naval doctrine (ASW school)
teaches that a surface vessel never
moves at a speed under 15 knots. Further speed reductions would reduce its
ability to reach flank speed quickly if an
incoming transient was detected.

Nuclear War At Sea
Merely because one is given "Nuclear
Release" does not mean that such option
has to be used. If one is winning a
scenario, nuclear weapons should not be

introduced. If they are, quickly use the
Formation Editor to maximize dispersal.
A separate module in the "Maritime
Operations" course of the Naval War College is devoted to nuclear war at sea.
The gist of the module is that tactics
have not been really developed for such
an occurrence. Harpoon also does not
simulate EMP (electro-magnetic pulse)
which would damage computers and transistors, but not vacuum tubes (which is
why certain Soviet fighters were using
vacuum tubes, much to the amusement
of Western military analysts until they
thought of the EMP-potentials).
Could a nuclear release be limited to an
at-sea release? Again, a politically
debatable question, but this reviewer
feels that a major fleet loss by NATO
caused by nuclear weapons would
probably generate a nuclear answer on
land (since the Soviet army would be a
cohesive and logical target).

Conclusions
Harpoon is a simulation requiring care-

ful analysis of platforms and their
capabilities. While the novice may feel ini
tially intimidated, a cohesive plan and
ability to react to circumstances will yield
appropriate dividends.
In the larger scenarios, make sure to
avoid micro-management. While a submarine evasion in the south may be better accomplished by a hands-on approach, the concentration thereon may
blind the player to a larger air threat
developing to the north. One must examine the threat potentials and be willing
to cut one's losses in order to achieve
strategic success.
For further reading,:
Harpoon by Larry Bond (GDW), the
pen and paper version of the game; the
Data Annex Book alone is worth the
price of admission; Fleet Tactics by
Wayne Hughes; Sea Power Of The
State by FADM Sergei Gorshkov; The
Price Of Admiralty by John Keegan.

Letters

Letters From Paradise

Prophetic License
I have just received my first subscription copy of Computer
Gaming World. For the past year, I have been buying CGW at
the newstand and I have finally decided to subscribe to your fine
magazine.
What I am writing to you about is the review in your March
issue by M. Evan Brooks and his reference to the drug
marijuana. In his article, "Classic Conversions", Mr. Brooks said,
"Risk—the marijuana of wargaming (i.e. just about every grognard started with this one.)".
This comment seems out of place coming from your magazine.
I do not agree with Mr. Brooks. Playing Risk is not on the same
level as a marijuana high. I do not see the parallel between wargarners starting with Risk and drug users starting with marijuana.
Not only does this comment show me a lack of concern for the
seriousness of drug abuse, it does not add anything to the review
Is this an indication of a trend? Will future articles on computer
games relate the thrill of flying a flight simulator to that of taking
crack or the strangeness of playing an adventure game to an
LSD trip? I hope it is not. If it is, then Mr. Brooks should also explain the dark side of drug abuse. He should explain the
hardships of the drug user, the lives lost to drugs and families
ruined by drug abuse.
have enjoyed reading Computer Gaming World over the past
year. Especially the outstanding articles by Mr. Brooks and other
authors whose quality reviews help me considerably in deciding
what computer games to buy. But I do not appreciate your lack
of concern for drug abuse.

democracy to China must be smoking pot." As for the contention that the metaphor added nothing to the review, it certainly
accomplished several things: 1) it indicated that Risk is an excellent wargame for beginners; 2) it stimulated a controversial discussion; and 3) it provided an opportunity to highlight the drug
problem in a different context.
Funan Dandy
I just returned from a trip to the Far East and observed that
your magazine has been accorded a dubious honor. As you are
doubtless aware, software piracy is rife in that part of the world. In
Funan Mall in Singapore, there are two floors of a mall given
over to computer firms and each one sells pirated software. IBM
is the machine of choice, but all brands from Apple and Amiga to
Atari ST and Commodore 64 are available on one floor. In
several stores, I noticed that a pride of placement was given to
your magazine, which was available for reference in helping
buyers select their software. This speaks volumes for the respect
with which you are held in all areas of the industry. It was interesting to note that IBM software, because of the competition, was
roughly $3.00 U.S. per disk, while Amiga or Atari ST was about
$7.00 U.S. per disk, due to lower demand.

Ernest Claridge
Mississauga, Ontario, CANADA

I

Dan Bailey
Hudson, OH

Figures of speech can be dangerous tools for a writer to use.
Figures of speech derived from social issues can be a twoedged sword. Evan's use of the marijuana metaphor could be
taken several different ways. It was intended to say that Risk
was an engaging wargame that caused many of us to want
more. As such, it was essentially an anti-marijuana statement
which implies that marijuana is addictive and alluded to the
danger of escalating to "harder stuff". Whereas most of us
believe that marijuana does cause a psychological dependence
on the drug and a psycho-social tendency toward addictive
drugs, it is not "technically" an addictive substance in its own
right. The reference was almost edited out because of this technical inaccuracy (combined with the metaphor's implication that
there might be something wrong with Risk and wargames). The
perception that this was a "positive" figure of speech which
trivialized marijuana use (much less encouraged it) was as unexpected as conservative judges disqualified from the U. S.
Supreme Court because of "youthful indiscretions". Frankly,
colorful language tends to take these types of risks, however.
Former President Nixon recently used the same basic image
when he said, "Anyone who thinks Japan is going to export

Were those "published" issues of CGW or "copied" issues?
Seriously, the authoritative nature of our position is certainly
flattering, but it becomes rather bittersweet when it is juxtaposed against such flagrant disregard for the hard work of
our industry's labor.

Spot Approver
I just had to write and tell you that you MADE the recent Consumer Electronics Show for me. Of course, all the press people
who came through our suite were very complimentary about our
upcoming titles. And I was especially confident about Spot. From
the first, I've felt that it's the best thing we've ever done and one
of the best games I've ever played. But your quality standards are
of the very highest—you're critical of mediocrity and slow to
praise unless a product genuinely deserves it.

Your comments on Spot were even more than I had wished for.
When you made the statement that Spot was one of the three
most outstanding games you saw at the show, I felt that we had
finally "arrived" as a games publisher worthy of real notice.
Annette Gerth Childs
Vice President of Marketing
Virgin Mastertronic

We've been noticing!

Review

The NAVY'S ANGELS
Accolade's Formation Flight Simulation
by Lt. H. E. Dille
henever man makes a new
discovery, it is inevitable that
other men will follow with
more bold and daring applications for
the original vision. In the history of
aviation, it is doubtful that the Wright
brothers anticipated the manner in
which their invention would be exploited by the barnstormers and wingwalkers a scant twenty years later.
Many of these pilots were veterans of
the First World War, where their finesse with a control yoke was refined
in life or death situations. In peace
time, these predecessors of the
modern daredevils prided themselves
on pushing their skills and their equipment to the edge of the envelope, for
the purposes of their own gratification
and delighting the hometown spectators. From these simple beginnings,
a tradition of precision and expertise
was born. Such values are so precious to military professionals that it
was inevitable that teams such as the
Air Force's "Thunderbirds" and the
Navy's "Blue Angels" would not only
be formed, but quickly rise to the pinnacle of precision formation
stunt flying.

tablished a logical framework to allow
novice aviators to work up to that
point. After verifying one's credentials
as a prospective Blue Angel, via a
code wheel-based copy protection
scheme, players should start by viewing any of the three types of air shows
(high, low and flat) in the spectator
mode. This is a nice feature that allows
you to watch the show from the
stands, an observation balloon, or in a
chase plane behind any pilot within
the group.

After familiarizing yourself with the
basic flow of events in each of the
shows, it is time to start simulator training. The simulator allows players to
select any of the maneuvers for practice; displays the maneuver in a nicely
conceived three-dimensional rotating
cube; and then, places players at the
starting point of a series of wire frame
rectangles in the sky which indicate
the proper flight path. An autopilot
function plays the maneuver initially,
to provide a first person perspective.
Then, the player may fly it himself,
using either "stop time", "real time" or
no help whatsoever. Instead of the F/A18 instrumentation that might be exThe evolution of aviation simulation
pected, the entire cockpit is relegated
within the computer industry has
essentially to two demand display insimilar parallels. In the beginning,
dicators (DDI's) and a horizon referarmchair aviators were thrilled by simpence. The DDI's are best utilized to disly being able to fly realistic simulations
Title:
Blue Angels:
play the flight evaluator and help info
Formation Flight Simulation
of small aircraft in products like
until one reaches the proficiency of
System:
IBM
Sublogic's Flight Simulator series.
flying an actual air show (where no
Price:
$49.95
Soon, the demand to be able fly more
Designers:
Rick Banks
help is allowed). "Stop time" help autoPaul Butler
powerful, stunt capable aircraft, led to
matically pauses the simulation as one
Publisher:
Accolade
products such as Sierra's Stunt Flyer.
comes to the next rectangle and indiSan Jose, CA
Eventually, players could not resist the
cates the proper control commands
challenge of simulated combat in high
for the maneuver. "Real time" help
performance aircraft. The industry,
provides the same recommendations
especially companies like Microprose, met that demand with
without pausing the maneuver and "No help" is just like it
more products than space permits mentioning.
sounds. Additional aids to beginning pilots include the ability to
practice maneuvers at quarter and half speed, as well as the
Formation-flying was the next logical step in the evolution of aviaability to select easy and medium difficulty settings. The manual
tion simulation and the first product to break the barrier was
states that the "Hard" setting requires extremely precise timing
Chuck Yeager's Advanced Flight Trainer by Electronic Arts.
and the manual does not lie. The most important thing to be acAccolade's offering, Blue Angels, is designed to place the player
complished in the simulation sequences is to memorize the
in the cockpit of an F/A-18 as a member of the world's finest aviatiming and order of key strokes for a given maneuver.
tion performance team. As such, it has been eagerly anticipated
by an increasingly sophisticated generation of computer aviation
Once comfortable with a given maneuver, it's time to practice in
enthusiasts. This reviewer was no different, having become
an actual F/A-18 (sans instrumentation), without benefit of the
enamored with the beauty and aggressive grace of the "Navy's Anrectangles in the sky. Each maneuver is rated for its deviation
gels" while attending the U.S. Naval Academy.
from the perfect path and may be displayed in the aforementioned three-dimensional cube display. After a number of
maneuvers are perfected, one returns to the simulator to fly an
Earning Your Learner's Permit
entire air show, where the sequence of maneuvers is determined
Accolade realized that few, if any, players would be able to boot
Continued on page 52
the game and start right out with an actual air show, so they es-

Navy's Angels
Continued from page 50

by the type of show selected and which formation position is chosen. The player must
now memorize the flight path, control command strokes and the applicable time for
each from the mission chronograph. The latter is vital, even if flying through the proper
rectangles has become easy, because once
play progresses to the next stage (practicing
for an air show in the plane), the
chronograph is the only reference one has,
as to when to begin a given maneuver. The soloist positions are
the most difficult, as a large part of your routine is spent out of
visual contact with the rest of the team.

On Final
In the higher graphic modes, EGA and VGA, Blue Angels is aesthetically pleasing, although a higher degree of ground detail
would have been nice. In CGA mode, the game is fairly disappointing visually. The action is just about right on the 286 or better, but gamers with XT machines should definitely steer clear,

since the frame update is slow
and makes the action jumpy.
For example, when doing a
knife edge pass with the opposing soloist in front of the spectator stands, the other plane is
visible at half a mile then poof,
he's already past. This simply
does not convey the thrill that
one would expect to receive
from two aircraft passing mere
inches apart at over a thousand
miles an hour of closure rate.
Blue Angels emphasizes timing
and pattern repetition, a necessity of formation flying. On that
level, the program succeeds in reaffirming the difficulty inherent
in these types of maneuvers. Whether computer aviation enthusiasts will find this more fun than traditional flight simulators,
in which pilots retain considerable freedom, remains a matter of
personal taste.
This reviewer had trouble maintaining a high degree of interest
throughout the many hours of practice necessary to develop the
required proficiency. Nevertheless, Blue Angels deserves a fair
amount of consideration based on novelty alone. As such, the
product is recommended, with the aforementioned reservations,
to PC pilots seeking a change of pace.

Review

Conflict in the Cosmos
"Worlds At War" From Lyric
By Bob Proctor

Your home base begins
with some large number of
production points which
you allocate to all of the
above features as you see
fit. Besides building up the
home base, you may also
want to set aside a few
points for Task Forces. A
TF is like a planet that
moves; it has all of the
same characteristics except
it does riot generate more
production points as the
game progresses. A TF
has one additional feature,
it can carry marines to
drop as an invasion force
on neutral planets. TF's
have movement factors (in
the same way that missiles,
bombers and scouts do)
and also have unlimited endurance so that they never
have to return for refueling.
Don't think of it as a ship,
think of it as a fleet complete with supply ships to
keep it going.

W

TITLE:
Worlds At War
SYSTEM:
IBM
# PLAYERS:
1-2
PRICE:
$39.95
DESIGNER:
John Almberg
PUBLISHER: Lyric Software Inc.
6 Beach Plum Dr.
Northport, NY 11768

The game is short, 50
turns is the default, so in a
couple of hours you are
going to know how successful your strategy was.
WAW rarely drags on for
many turns after the conclusion becomes obvious.
On the other hand, you
can make some horrible
choices right at the beginning and not realize it for
20 or 30 turns, at which
point it's almost always too
late to correct. It's all part
of learning.

orlds at War (WAW) is a game of planetary conquest.

You and one opponent start at opposite ends of a region
of space that is scattered with neutral planets. You can
play to find and destroy the enemy's home base (this is usually
decisive but hard to do), play to capture and control a majority of
planets, or play to destroy the enemy space fleet. After its annihilation, you can pick up a planet or two and win easily.
I've presented these choices too simply, of course. A "mature"
strategy will not only try for more than one of these goals but will
attempt to adapt to the geography of a particular game.

Base-ics
Your home planet is a "base". It has characteristics such as
defensive power (shields), staying power (damage control), gunnery power (wham-o) and also the capacity to launch missiles
and bombers. Both carry the same punch, missiles are faster and
better for getting in the first strike but bombers have longer
range and can be reused. A base can also handle scout ships—
more on these later. Neutral planets automatically become bases,
if they are captured and held for ten consecutive turns.

Flexing The Galactic Arm
Imagine a grid of 20 by 30 squares. The squares connect at the
sides and corners so from any interior square you can move to
any of its eight neighbors at a cost of one movement factor. This
is the flat or "naval" map (as it is called in the manual).
You can choose to play with it but I recommend opting for the
Space Map. It's what makes WAW unique. Keep that flat map in
your mind and eliminate a few squares at random. Such is the
fabric of Space. Next connect adjacent squares with "hyperspace
tunnels" that require either 1, 2 or 3 movement factors to use.
These are shown on screen simply as single, double or triple
lines connecting the boxes. Some adjacent boxes may not even
be connected!
Things are getting interesting, the shortest path between two
boxes is not always the obvious one any more. Now regenerate
these pathways each and every turn! Space becomes a shifting
uncertainty! A bomber formation that needed 10 MF to reach a
Continued on page 62

Scorpion's View
Continued from page 30

did not seem to me to be very fair. After defeating the extremely
nasty Death Knight, Sir Lebaum, you are suddenly rushed
through a number of sequences that drop you off in Kernen for
the showdown with Myrtani (the main evil baddie).
There are some opportunities to rest and renew spells in between, as well as save the game, and in Kernen you can even
find a trainer. However, there is no place to have any of the objects you may have picked up along the way identified (you will
probably have several) and no place to buy anything. Ergo, you
should stock up on things like magic arrows, potions, and
suchlike before taking on the Death Knight, as you'll have no
chance afterward.
You also need to be prepared for the final combat, as in fact
there are two fights, back to back. After dealing with Myrtani, you
go immediately to a confrontation with three large red dragons
who must be killed, with no chance to save the game in between. If you blow it here, you'll have to restore and fight Myrtani

(who is an Aurak) all over again, and hope you can do better
against the dragons the second time around.
The copy protection is of the "look up a word" type, and SSI
made a mistake in their choice of where to look up the words,
namely in the paragraphs of the adventurer's journal. You aren't
supposed to read them until you reach certain points in the
game. Since there are twenty-five pages of game information in
front of those entries, there is no reason why the paragraphs
should have been used for the copy protection.
Actually, Champions of Krynn is a pretty good game overall,
but you do have to be aware of its failings as noted above. The
manual contains pretty much all the information you need to create a viable party, and has some good tips on play, as well, so do
read it before you start. As long as you know what you're getting
into, and what to expect, you can have a good time with the
game. Just be careful out there!
That's about it for now. If you need help with an adventure
game, you can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs
menu). On GEnie: Stop by the Games Roundtable (type: Scorpia
to reach the Games RT). By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the United States): Scorpia, PO
Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.

Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

saved in progress to a blank disk
(which must be formatted in advance).
The game can also be paused at any
time, even during the arcade sequences. The instructions are brief but quite
adequate. They also include a large,
fold-out map of Lizard Breath which becomes quite useful. Desert comes on
three (Amiga) disks and contains no
copy-protection. It requires one full
megabyte of RAM and may be installed
on a hard disk.

Desert
Continued from page 10
Bradley has several other matters to
worry about. A young, attractive
woman who barely escaped becoming
ant food is now showing a strange interest in the creatures and an even
greater interest in Dr. Bradley. The
doctor already has a girlfriend, who
works at the town radio station
(KBUG) and also happens to be very
quick to become jealous. If the ants
don't get him, one of the girls may!
–
A gang of teenage thrill seekers are
determined to challenge the game's
hero in a game of "chicken" ('a la James
Dean). They emerge from the desert highway as if to drive head-on into the
doctor's car. Imagine what it might take
to stop them.
Finally, there is a hospital sequence
which is even more uproarious than the
one found in Cinemaware's The Three
Stooges game. Each time Dr. Bradley is
struck down, he finds himself in a sickbed, attended by a voluptuous nurse.
The conscientious staff of the Lizard
Breath Hospital will not allow Bradley to
check out of the place a moment short

of his allotted recovery time. So, in order
to get Bradley back on the case, the
player uses an overhead view to control
him as he darts in and out of hospital
rooms, diving in between bed-sheets,
and racing in a wheel-chair towards the
institution's exit, all the while pursued
by the staff.

You Won't Believe Your Eyes
(Conclusions)
In its recent releases, Cinemaware has
made many improvements to their
games. Most important, the game can be

Warning: The hard-disk installation
and booting procedure is the only subject not adequately covered in the
manual. Amiga owners will need to
close all non-essential windows, even if
they possess more than the minimum
memory, or the program will crash.

Unless you disliked past Cinemaware
releases such as Rocket Ranger or Lords
of the Rising Sun, you will undoubtedly
like Desert. Fans of 50's science fiction
films will, of course, be delighted with the
"authentic" atmosphere of the game.
They should not think, however, that this
is just another pretty set of sounds and
graphics. It Came From The Desert is a
very playable and compelling game with
many enjoyable hours to be experienced.

Inside the Industry

Inside The Industry
Healthy 1989
Finish For
Software
Publishers
According to the financial statements of
three publicly held entertainment
software companies, the final quarter of
calendar year 1989 was reasonably healthy. Sierra led the way in terms of sales
growth for the quarter which ended
December 31, 1989. Their sales increased 36% over the same quarter in
1988. For Mediagenic and Electronic
Arts, the growth was a modest 4% and
2% respectively. In spite of Electronic
Arts' modest gain in sales, the net profits
jumped a respectable 21% over the same
quarter in 1988. Total revenue for the
last quarter in 1989 (in millions of dollars)
was as follows:
Electronic Arts Mediagenic Sierra
$63.4
$65.5
$26.1

Konami Finds
New Medium
Although many software publishers
license popular characters from comic
books, television and films, Konami
recently announced that Bayou Billy, the
alligator-wrestlin' cajun hero of the
videogame published by their Ultra
Games division, has been licensed by Archie Comics to star in a new comic
book. TSR, the giant pen and paper
game publisher, has licensed the rights
to its Advanced Dungeons & Dragons
role-playing game to National Periodicals for a comic book series and will
be publishing a TSR Comics series
(featuring Buck Rogers, Intruder and
more) under its own label. However, it is
quite unusual for an original computer
game character to be licensed for comic
book use, as in the case of Bayou Billy.

Lucasfilm Offers
Movie Deal
Customers who purchase either Indiana
Jones and the Last Crusade: The Action
Game or Indiana Jones and the Last
Crusade: The Graphic Adventure between February 1, 1990 and June 30,
1990 have the opportunity to purchase
the movie on videocassette at a special
$10.00 price. The retail price for the
videocassette is $24.95 and details concerning proof of purchase and buying
the film at this special price can be obtained at participating retailers
throughout the U.S. and Canada.

Win A Free Trip To Britain!
In search of the best air combat simulation
player among CGW readers, Lucasfilm
Games and Computer Gaming World announce Their Finest Hour: The Battle of
Britain Competition.
Grand prize is an all-expense paid trip to
England with game designer Lawrence Holland and computer Gaming World
Editor-in-Chief Russell Sipe concurrent with the 50th
Anniversary of the Battle of Britain. Departing
September 1990, the highlight of the twoweek tour is Battle of Britain Day, September 15, 1990 and the 50th Anniversary
ceremony in London. Led by Valor Tours'
Bob Reynolds, Secretary of the Royal Air
Force Association, the trip includes the
Farnborough Air Show, numerous visits to
U.S. WW II air bases in East Anglia, extensive
museum and airfield tours, and even a
Cambridge pub notorious for its RAF patrons;
all to recreate this monumental event 50
years later.
The competition is three-tiered with players
first submitting a qualifying pilot record by
March 15, 1990. If chosen to compete at
Level Two, players submit required campaign
play records and original missions they have
created using the "Mission Builder" feature,
due by May 15, 1990. The five finalists
chosen for Level Three then play each others
original missions on or before June 15, 1990.
Top scorer is then off to England in time for
the 50th Anniversary!

COMPETITION RULES
LEVEL ONE
1. Submit a pilot record saved to disk with
the required qualifying score--a minimum of
1000 points.
• First create a pilot from the roster screen
during flight briefing. Any pilot type is acceptable. Consult page 81 of Their Finest Hour
manual for more information. All types of
pilots are eligible.
• After your qualifying pilot has reached the
minimum requirements of 1000 points, copy
your pilot file onto a 5 1/4" or 3 1/2" floppy
disk.

Note: As a pilot is named, the program
creates a DOS file name using one of the following extensions, based on type of pilot.
This file name should be used in copying.
PLANE

EXTENSION NAME

Spitfire/Hurricane

.RAF

BF 109

.109

BF 110

.110

Stuka

.J87

Ju88/He111/Do17

.BMB

Example: For a Spitfire pilot named Joe
the file name is JOE.RAF.
2. 100 disks will be chose randomly from
those received and reviewed for qualifying requirements.
3. The qualifying pilot disk must have name,

address, and phone clearly labeled on the outside and must contain only one pilot record
file. Disks with more than one file or whose
identifying label is illegible will be disqualified.
Only one entry per person.
4. Send disk to address below. Entry must
be postmarked by March 15, 1990. All disks
received during all three competition levels become property of Lucasfilm Games and cannot be returned.
Battle of Britain COMPETITION
LUCASFILM GAMES
P.O. Box 10307
San Rafael, CA 94912
5. The 100 qualifiers chosen will be notified
by mail and will receive full instructions and requirements for Level Two play at that time.
Employees, contractors, or freelancers of
Lucasfilm Ltd., Electronic Arts, or Golden Empire Publications, are not eligible to enter.
Void where prohibited.

Review

Worlds at War
Continued from page 54

target may now need many more to return. A damaged TF with
only one MF per turn may not be able to move at all!
Scouts, of course, are what you send out to discover the
universe around you. They are light craft with good speed and endurance. The default values are 10 MF for 10 turns and this is
generally enough for them to go from one end of a 20 by 30
map to the other so nothing stays hidden for very long in a
normal game.
Lest you fear that you have to spend a lot of time manipulating
scouts to warn of approaching enemies, there is an auto-scout
feature that makes use of all the scouts which you do not control
manually to screen the space surrounding a planet or TF.

Observations and Tips
• Always give your TF's a Staying Power of "60" or more so
they will have the maximum movement factor (default is 6), just
think of it as buying the finest warp drive available.
• Scouts report the location, but not the strength of an enemy
TF. Therefore, it's a good idea to send in a "barrage" of one missile to determine their defensive power. Then, never attack with

fewer bombers or missiles than this defensive strength or you will
suffer catastrophic losses.
• A successful attack against a base not only reduces it, but
converts it automatically to the opposite side! Defend your own
bases heavily and watch for chances to steal small planets with
big bomber attacks.
• Once you feel you have "mastered" the game, start changing
the default options. Try more production points, a 50 by 50 map
or give TF's an endurance of 30 so that they have to dock at a
base every now and then. This sort of tinkering is so much fun
that we can only hope that John Almberg will open up even
more of the design of the game in future versions. If we could
just change the combat results table and control the randomness
of Space, for example, Worlds At War would almost be a strategy
game construction set.

Assessment
Worlds At War (WAW) is not spectacular but is well done and
workable. The concept isn't novel but it works. The graphics
won't take your breath away but they convey information simply
and quickly. The sounds and the manual will both leave you
unimpressed. What this game has is play-value. Much like the
very popular Empire and its variants, you have several viable
strategies and every new game has a randomly-generated map
that provides fresh challenges.

Continued from page 6

the realm proving his mettle in order to raise
an army to fight the army of chaos at the
game's conclusion. Players must meet and parley with non-player characters, fight, shoot
(archery tournament), drink, gamble and lead
the troops in the desperate battle on the field of
honor (after which, of course, is the obligatory
dungeon adventure!). Amiga, Atari ST, C-64
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #6.

General Quarters Software
P.O. Box 1429
Torrance, CA 90505
ACTION IN THE NORTH ATLANTIC: Much
like its sister game, Battleship Bismarck,
which was peeked last issue, Action in the
North Atlantic is a solid naval strategy wargame for those who do not live and die by
state of the art graphics. Like Battleship Bismarck, the research is there, the strategies are
varied and, fortunately for Action in the North
Atlantic, the scenario is much more flexible.
Walk right in, sit right down, and captain 'till
the subs come home! Apple II, IBM ($35.00).
Circle Reader Service #7.

Innerprise Software, Inc.
128 Cockeysville Road
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
LOST DUTCHMAN MINE: There's more to
this game than you'd think. While fun to play,
the game is also a pretty good simulation of a
lone prospector in Arizona around the turn of
the 20th century. Gambling for your grubstake
(fortunately the town card shark isn't that good
at draw poker), outfitting your mining expedition, worrying about vermin, Indians and bandits, not to mention the ever present dangers
of starvation and dehydration all add to the glitter of this little nugget. The interface is a bit
clunky, but the graphics are better than
average. IBM. Circle Reader Service #8.

Interstel Corporation
P.O. Box 57825
Webster, TX 77598
D.R.AG.O.N. FORCE: This game reminds
one of Omnitrend's Breach. This squad level
combat strategy game is set in present day,
where your "dirty dozen" test their different
specialties (Medic, Scout, Sharpshooter, etc.)
and attributes (Intensity, Guts, Luck, etc.) to
the limit in order to succeed in their various
missions (raiding a cocaine lab, hostage rescue, etc.). It's easy to become attached with
your soldier by name and empathize with them
as they tough it out in some very gritty tactical
combat. Amiga 1Mb ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #9.

Kyodai
58 Mitchell Blvd.
San Rafael, CA 94903
CURSE OF BABYLON: Nintendo meets the C64. This is one of those "serious" Japanese
shoot 'em ups with a soundtrack that draws
you right into the action. Lots of arcade action
is awarded to those who can see past the C-64
level graphics. It's time to go into that famous
computer gamer's trance and become one with
your joystick again ... C-64/128 ($24.95).
Circle Reader Service #10.

Microplay Software
180 Lakefront Drive
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
WEIRD DREAMS: Bizarre mazes of mental anguish will have you feeling a little bit out of your
head every time you play Weird Dreams. The
psycho-bizzaro background of this run, jump
and chase game is an amusing element (bordering on either being a nightmare or "art").
Fortunately, rather than be frustrated, one can
"buy" hints with which to escape the various
traps and puzzles by running up the old
psychiatric bill. (The title song for this game
might be: "They tried to seize my wallet, but
seized my brain instead".). Amiga, Atari ST,
IBM ($39.95), C-64 ($29.95). Circle #11.

Psygnosis, Ltd.
Liverpool, England
STRYX: Okay, okay. Stop us if you've heard
this one before. Your character must run and
jump around the 2-D mazes, zapping and
punching robo-bad guys and other nasties
before being hit for its last bit of life. The
graphics are very nice and there are even elements requiring a bit of strategy. Still, this
cyborg hunt game is true enough to the genre

that you know what you're getting before you
ever open the box. Amiga. Circle #12.

Tiglon Software Systems, Inc.
Traviston Square, #691
4308 S. Peoria Avenue
Tulsa, OK 74105
DECISION AT GETTYSBURG: Subtitled "a
user-friendly strategic simulation", Decision at
Gettysburg lives up to most of that promise.
This richly detailed wargame is fairly easy to
manage, but the trouble is that there may be
too much battle to worry about! You can play
either side as the human player and the
graphics are first rate (almost breathtaking),
clearly indicating the troops, terrain and action
unfolding with panoramic imagery (wargamers
will find it all quite dramatic). With plenty of
nice features, the only real drawback is that
each and every unit must be moved one space
at a time across a huge map, which is quite
tedious. IBM VGA ($49.95). Circle #13.

Reader Input Device

Conversions
Received

Altered Beast (Sega) C64
Blood Money (Psygnosis) IBM
Bride of the Robot (Free Spirit) ST
California Challenge (Accolade) Mac
Champions of Krynn (SSI) C64
Double Dragon II (Mastertronic) ST
Dr. Doom's Revenge (Paragon) ST
The Duel: Test Drive II (Accolade) Mac
Dungeon Masters Assistant Vol 1 (SSI)
Am
Hoyle Book of Games (Sierra) Am
MicroLeague Wrestling (MicroLeague)
Am,IBM
The Muscle Cars (Accolade) Mac
Nevermind (Psygnosis) IBM, ST
Revolution '76 (Britannica) IBM
Rick Davis's World Trophy Soccer (Melbourne) C64
The Supercars (Accolade) Mac
Typhoon Thompson (Broderbund) Am
QIX (Taito) IIGS
War of the Lance (SSI) C64

