.

,

June 1988
Number 48

FEATURES
Inside The Industry

8

News, Notes and Quotes

The Hunt For Red October

14

Tom Clancy's Bestseller on Computer / Hosea Battles

Bard's Tale III

20

The Trilogy Concludes / Scorpia

Wasteland Hints

22

Scorpion's Tale Looks at EA's Latest / Scorpia

Long Lance

24

Tactical Naval Combat / Johnny Wilson

Return To Atlantis

26

EA's "Latest" Release / Douglas Seacat

Project Stealth Fighter

28

Tactics for Computer Pilots / Brad Bombardiere

Universal Military Simulator Modifications

31

Adding Objectives to UMS / D. Ezra Sidran

Wooden Ships and Iron Men

32

A Boardgame Classic Meets The Computer / Joe Sherfy

CGW Contest

34

Win Subscriptions to CGW

Twilight's Ransom

36

Paragon Software's Graphic Adventure / Dennis Owens

Networking The Light Fantastic

39

Gaming On Compuserve and Genie / Patti Fitzgibbons & Scorpia

Video Gaming World

40

Video Games Are Back! / Katz, Kunkel, and Worley

First Clash

46

A Mech Brigade Scenario / Regan Carey & David Thiel

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek
Editorial
Reader Input Device
CGW Hall Of Fame
100 Games Rated

4
50
55
55
56

TAKING A PEEK
Cinemaware Corporation
4165 Thousand Oaks Blvd.
Westlake Village, CA 91362
THE THREE STOOGES: With
digitized sound from the movies and
short subjects themselves, an interface
reminiscent of a family board game, arcade sequences based on scenes from
the films, a mini-trivia game, and plenty
of animation to invoke the essence of
the late comedy team's humor, this is a
delightful way to spend some lighthearted time. Amiga ($49.95), C-64/128
($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #1.
Cosmi Corporation
431 N. Figueroa St.
Wilmington, CA 90744

THE PRESIDENT IS MISSING!: For
those who have always wanted access to
the Central Intelligence Agency's data
banks, this graphics adventure offers the
opportunity. The object of the game is to
solve the mystery of the president's
mysterious kidnapping by terrorists and
the player has all that data needed to
solve it at his command. An audio-cassette is used to enhance the mystery. C64/128 ($24.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #2.
Datasoft
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311
BATTLEDROIDZ: The screens will
remind players of "Marble Madness" and
the fiction behind the game will remind

players of "RobotWar," but the emphasis
is on action and combat rather than
speed or programming. Players weave
their silicon gladiators through 3-D environments and use smart bombs and
photon guns to conquer each warzone
and gather enough energy keys to reach
the next warzone. C-64/128 ($24.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #3.

GLOBAL COMMANDER: This game
set less than a century in our future, assumes a global situation where one man
is responsible for maintaining balance
and order among 16 aggressive, nucleararmed, and deceitful nations. The eclectic design includes diplomatic, economic,
and, on occasion, military options to be
chosen and problems to be faced. The
emphasis is more on management skills
than military strategy. C-64/128 ($19.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #4.
THE RUBICON ALLIANCE: As a starship commander, the player of this

(Continued on page 7)

TAKING A PEEK
(Continued from page 4)
science fiction game must locate the
planet, Nono. Nono is a pirate planet
which migrates along the fringes of the
Hyturian Star System and preys upon
the shipping of the Rubicon Alliance, the
player's employer and the star system's
only hope for peace. The action screens
look like a dozen other space games, but
the game's rationale seems well thought
out. C-64/128 ($19.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #5.
TOBRUK: THE CLASH OF ARMOUR: Intended to be an action/strategy hybrid, this product offers
the option of toggling the arcade sequences (which present "tank's-eyeview" action scenes) and playing the game strictly as a strategy game. The game follows
in the tradition of its predecessor,

"Theatre Europe." C-64/128 ($19.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #6.

Douglas Enterprises
Comerica Bank Bldg. #1105
25 West Michigan Mall
Battle Creek, MI 49017
CASTLE RALF: In this interactive text
adventure, players are supposed to be
themselves, average guys or gals (or in
the case of our readers, outstanding
men or women) who simply want to escape from the castle referenced in the
title (wouldn't you?). The parser uses
specific verbs noted in the manual; the
program offers automapping; and the
puzzles are initially simple, but increasingly difficult. IBM ($32.00). Circle Reader
Service Card #7.

Epyx
P.O. Box 8020
Redwood City, CA 94063
IMPOSSIBLE MISSION II: After

hiding out for five years, Elvin Atombender, that psychotic scientist from "Impossible Mission," has resurfaced with a
despicable and diabolical plot. To foil
him, players become Agent 29 of the
counter-terrorist force, Cobra Blue, and
attempt to infiltrate the immense eight
tower complex in Los Angeles. The action sequences require players to avoid
mobile robots and locking passageways
in order to gain access to and neutralize
the scientist's computer system. Atari ST,
C-64/128, and IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service Card # 8.

First Row Software Publishing
900 East 8th Avenue, Suite 300
King of Prussia, PA 19406
DR. DUMONT'S WILD P.A.R.T.I.: Imagine a world where all the physical laws
which we take for granted are slightly
skewed, apparently a surrealistic
analogue for the physical principles of
the sub-atomic level. From the fecund im-

(Continued on page 10)

INSIDE THE
INDUSTRY
News, Notes and Quotes From the Computer Entertainment Industry

bridge. In successive situations, the platoon must conduct an exhaustive search in
a village; fight through an
underground tunnel network; defend a bunker
during a night action; reach
a foxhole prior to a napalm
strike; and in reaching that
foxhole, neutralize a traitor
who is already there by
using hand grenades. The
players must try to keep
four indicators in balance
(morale, hits, ammunition,
and score) in order to succeed in the game.
The action game will be
available on the Atari ST
($44.95), Commodore
64/128 ($29.95), and IBM
PC ($39.95).

Several New
CRPGs Due
In Second Half
of 1988

Activision
Announces
"Pete Rose
Pennant Fever"
Activision's Gamestar
division has announced an
agreement to create Pete
Rose Pennant Fever. The
game is expected to be action-oriented in the Gamestar tradition, but the object
of the game will be for
players to guide their "expansion team" through a ten
season, 24-team-league
race for the pennant. The
game will offer on-field
perspectives in order to implement the playing
philosophy of the famous
"Charlie Hustle." Rose underscored this intent by stating:
"I want this game to put you
right on the field rather than
in the dugout because the
real difference between winning and losing is not in
what you know, but in what
you do. Statistics don't
mean a thing when you're

standing at the plate facing
a 90-mile-an-hour fastball."
In addition to the action
elements required in the onfield play, the game will expect players to perform as
general managers of their
franchises by means of drafting and acquiring computerized players while keeping the club's finances and
player salaries on an even
keel.

dressed in the original metal
armor used in the movie.
The publisher contends that
the same storyline, action,
and adventure seen in the
movie has been brought to
the gamer's video screen in
the nine levels of play available in the game. The
cartridge will contain 2megabytes of ROM and will
retail for $39.95.

DATA EAST
TO RELEASE
"ROBOCOP"
AND "PLATOON"

Platoon, based on the
popular film, takes the
through six increasingly challenging situations. The object of the game parallels
the film in that the player's
responsibility is to attempt
to have his platoon of five
men survive, keep their
sanity and morale intact,
and return safely to their
base.

The action-oriented
publishers at Data East were
impressed enough with two
successful movies to market
products based on their plot
lines. Robocop, a cartridge
for the Nintendo system, will
be promoted at the Summer Consumer Electronics
Show by having an actor at
their booth who will be

The first action sequence
involves leading the platoon
through a jungle infested
with armed patrols, boobytrapped trip wires, hidden assassins, and deadly snipers.
The platoon's goal is successfully recovering a box of
explosives cached by a previous platoon and using the
explosives to destroy a

First Row Software plans
to promote their first
Twilight Zone graphic adventure at Summer C.E.S. with
a Rod Serling impersonator
The author of the "Zone"
adventure notes that the
first product was, in reality, a
series of short adventures.
Nevertheless, the second
product will deal with one
particular plot line
throughout. This one is
about a mystery writer who
never finishes his stories,
but gets thrust into his fictional environment and cannot get out until he solves
the mysteries themselves.
First Row will also be
promoting another licensed
product at C.E.S., The
Honeymooners, using the
original Honeymooners set
as part of their booth.
In a recent interview with
CGW, Richard Garriott (aka
Lord British) took the wraps
off the long-awaited space
role playing game under
development at Origin Systems. Although the game is
not expected to be released
until after the summer, the
company has given the

product the title, Space
Rogue, and begun to talk
about it. According to Lord
British, author Paul Neurath
(who designed Sir-Tech's
Deep Space) has worked
with Ned Lerner (who
designed Electronic Arts'
Chuck Yeager's Advanced
Flight Trainer) to develop a
system of 3-D graphics.
Around the graphics core,
he has built a role-playing
game which will stress craft
(skill) and equipment
development in addition to
the character's personal
development.
Mindscape is planning to
stimulate the role playing
world with several interesting games during the
second half of 1988. In addition to Citadel, which is expected to debut shortly, an
IBM CRPG called Visions of
the Aftermath is under
development. It is intended
to be set in a post-holocaust
world.
New World Computing
will release Might and Magic
II (Apple II) and an, as yet
untitled, space role playing
game (IBM) in the last
quarter of 1988. Both
games will set new standards in graphics. The doublehi-res graphics and animation of M & M II look almost
like 16-bit products. The
space game picks up where
EA's Starflight left off and
pushes the design envelope
another step.
Broderbund is ready to
announce their upcoming
CRPG by Michael Cranford
of Bard's Tale fame. A
space opera, it is to be
called Centauri Alliance. In
other C.E.S. news, Broderbund is expected to announce a joint project with
themselves, Lucasfilm
Games, and Atari to
produce the home arcade
version of Star Wars. Also,
Accolade is expected to
make the 4th & Inches
Team Construction Disk
available prior to C.E.S. The
disk allows players of the
football game to create their
own football teams. The
product allows personalized
team names and colors, as
well.

MICROPROSE
CAPTURES
"RED BARON"
AS CORPORATE
MOMENTO
After almost one year's
detective work, the fabled
video game machine that
spurred Bill Stealey and Sid
Meier to found Microprose
has been enshrined at the
company's headquarters. In
the summer of 1982, Bill
Stealey was a corporate
strategic planner and Sid
Meier was a computer systems analyst for a Baltimore
company. Neither of the two
men knew the other, but
mutual friends recognized
their common interest in
aviation and arranged for
the two to meet when the
company held a corporate
meeting at the MGM Grand
Hotel in Las Vegas, Nevada.
During a break in the meeting, Sid and Bill challenged
each other to aerial combat
using a video game called,
"Red Baron." Bill, as a
former fighter pilot, was
chagrined that Sid could
beat him handily on every
occasion.
Sid explained that he was
only analyzing the game's
rudimentary programming
and predicting its simple
moves. He boldly asserted
that he could design a better game in one week on
his computer at home. In
order to match Sid's
bravado, Bill responded that
he could sell the game if Sid
could produce it. It took two
months rather than one
week, but when both Bill
and Sid were happy with
Hellcat Ace, Bill managed to
get an order for fifty copies
in his very first sales appointment. The rest is history.
Some Microprose
employees decided to
retrieve the historic arcade
game that spawned their
company. But how were
they to find the old
machine? The MGM Grand
Hotel had changed hands in
1986 and the hotel's video

arcade had been dismantled. Nevertheless, persistent investigation turned
up the fact that the
machines were simply in
storage. They had not been
sold, as would normally
have been supposed. Since
Microprose had some contacts with executives of the
Bally Corporation (current
owners of the Grand), the
employees were able to
negotiate the sale of the
game and present it to the
company founders during a
recent company gathering.

SSI AND EA INK
AFFILIATE PACT
Both Electronic Arts and
Strategic Simulations,
Inc. are excited about their
new Affiliated Label agreement. EA will become SSI's
exclusive U.S. distributor for
the next five years. According to Chuck Kroegel, Vice
President of SSI, EA has become a minority stockholder
in SSI, but since Trip Hawkins, CEO of EA, once
served as a member of SSI's
board of directors and the
Billings family will still have
controlling interest of the
corporation, there is not expected to be any drastic
changes in product
philosophy and development. "We are excited about
the deal. We feel it is a good

strategic alliance and it
should increase sales and
service." The agreement will
not affect European and
Japanese distribution for
SSI. EA's strong distribution
which accounts for almost
25% of their more than $42
million dollars in sales per
year (based on the 1987
figure) and SSI's potential
megahit with the Advanced

Dungeons and Dragons
line, the deal is expected to
be mutually beneficial.

CGW Assistant
Editor Erroneously
Resurrects Dead
Company
In a horrendous publishing
blooper, CGW Assistant
Editor Johnny Wilson typed
the name of long-deceased
Datamost behind every
Datasoft product listed in
the May, 1988 Conversions
Received column. Sam
Poole, President of Datasoft,
gently chided Wilson by
noting, "We've been trying
to disassociate ourselves
from that name confusion
for years." Wilson has
apologized and promised to
undergo outpatient treatment as a mail boy at Soft
Talk. CGW officially
apologizes for perpetuating
the name confusion.

TAKING A PEEK
(Continued from page 7)
aginations of Michael and Muffy Berlyn
("Tass Times in Tonetown," "Oo-Topos,"
"Infidel," "Suspended," and others),
comes this interactive text adventure
where the player's character becomes
the first "Subonaut" and encounters life
on the sub-atomic level. The player experiences this fiction, however, as more
of an Alfred Hitchcock movie or Salvador
Dali painting than "Fantastic Voyage"type adventure. IBM, Macintosh ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #9.
MOSES: "Holy Moses!" you exclaim,
"an interactive text adventure based on a
biblical character." This is an adventure
where the player takes on the role of the
Hebrew leader after his exile in the
desert. The puzzles involve the relatively
simple chore of finding Egypt, along with
the more complex challenges of selecting the right plagues and solving the
dangers of the wilderness. C-64/128, IBM
($29.95). Circle Reader Service Card #10
STAR EMPIRE: The player assumes

the role of a scout ship pilot. Although
the primary emphasis of the game is
space combat simulation, the player
must use his business sense as well as
his reflexes in order to be successful. The
object of the game is to increase the
player's wealth and effectiveness until he
can build a "Frontier Shield" and provide
ultimate protection for his sector. C64/128, IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service Card #11.

HJC Software, Inc.
P.O. Box 51816
Durham, NC 27717
AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL
SIMULATOR: Although the multiple
levels of difficulty make it easy for anyone
to get started in this sophisticated simulation, the simulated stress factor builds
swiftly once one reaches the intermediate
levels of difficulty. Given a realistic-looking radar screen and command instruments, it is the player's job to direct
aircraft around hills, towers, storms, and
restricted zones in order to land safely or
move carefully beyond the player's jurisdiction. Macintosh with 512K ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #12.

Micro Sports, Inc.
P.O. Box 15799
Chattanooga, TN 37415
MSFL PRO LEAGUE FOOTBALL:
The designers of "Mac Pro Football" for
Avalon Hill have introduced a different
product with emphasis on league play.
The new game allows leagues to keep
track of all their statistics and there is
even a "Draft Disk" (available separately)
which allows players to assemble their
teams as though they were general
managers of a professional franchise.
The earlier game was sophisticated, but
this one offers even more. Macintosh
with 1MB ($49.95 - Draft Disk - $39.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #13.

Mindscape, Inc.
3444 Dundee Rd.
Northbrook, IL 60062
HARRIER COMBAT SIMULATOR:
An advanced conversion of the earlier
"High Roller," this is an exciting combat
simulator because the aircraft being
flown is the famous V/STOL (
Vertical/Short Take Off and Landing) plane

(Continued on page 49)

and into the main body of the Atlantic Ocean in
order to head for U.S. waters.

THE HUNT FOR
RED OCTOBER
Tom Clancy's Best Seller Meets
The Computer
Reviewed by Hosea Battles
A
s the most senior Soviet submarine comm
mander, you have been ordered to test the
newest Soviet submarine. It is equipped with
a new revolutionary drive system (Caterpillar Drive)
which is so quiet that it is virtually undetectable.

The Defection

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:

The Hunt for Red October
Amiga, Atari ST, C-64, IBM
(IBM requires CGA)
Solitaire
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
$39.95
DESIGNERS:
Oxford Digital Enterprises
PUBLISHER:
Datasoft
Chatsworth, CA
REVIEWED ON: Atari ST

Dissatisfied with the system that killed your wife,
you decide to defect to the
United States with this valuable vessel. The craft's officers are handpicked by
you and share your beliefs.
The crew, however, knows
nothing of your intentions.
Beyond the crew, though,
there is one other potential
problem. All Soviet vessels
of importance carry a high
ranking KGB political officer. Shortly after departure, it is necessary to kill
him. With fake orders, you
brief your crew that their
mission is to test American
submarine detection
abilities in United States
territorial waters. Unknown
to your crew, however, the
entire Soviet fleet is out to
stop or destroy you. To
cover up, you brief them
that this is also a test of Soviet submarine detection capabilities.
Hence, they must also evade their
own forces.

This is the game based on Tom
Clancy's best selling novel, The
Hunt for Red October. The game
certainly does justice to the book
and is an interesting submarine simulation. The
game actually begins with the Red October heading out of the Reykjanes Ridge. Soviet surface
ships, both Soviet and U.S. attack submarines,
and U.S. captor mines block the only way out of
the "ridge." Captor mines, of course, do not recognize either friend or foe and will pursue you relentlessly. The challenge is to get through the pass

Detection
To complicate matters even more, a fake radiation leak causing nuclear reactor shutdown will
happen later in the game. This will effectively cut
your maximum speed in half, but the fake leak will
actually allow U.S. forces to rescue you and your
crew and help to fake the scuttling of Red October. Why must the scuttling of Red October be
faked? If you simply sailed into a U.S. harbor, the
Soviets could reclaim the submarine under international maritime law. Therefore, it is critical for the
Red October to be in U.S. waters by the time the
reactor goes down.
This is not a standard attack and destroy submarine simulation. The primary goal is to evade
Soviet forces. Attacking is a last resort. The submarine is equipped with offensive weapons such
as homing torpedoes, nuclear missiles (unavailable
for this simulation), and Flack (a noisemaker to distract enemy torpedoes and missiles). Modern subs
do not have to point the bow toward the target as
in World War II. Instead, modern torpedoes will
seek the target once it is locked into the guidance
system. A torpedo will run until it reaches its maximum range and detonates or manages to hit the
target.
Modern torpedoes will not arm their warheads
until they are 1,000 meters away from the firing
sub because detonation in too close a proximity
could damage the firing sub. This can work to
your advantage if an enemy sub fires on you inside this range. This means you can turn toward
the torpedo and let it strike without incurring
damage. Outrunning a torpedo is also an option
that sometimes works.

Execution
On the Amiga and Atari ST, the simulation is entirely mouse-controlled. Game windows on either
side of the screen and a desktop window above
the graphic screen indicate the gamer's options.
Below the graphic screen, there is a message window where the crew acknowledges orders and intercepted communications appear. On the right side
of the graphic depiction, icons for Sonar, Engines,
Weapons, Scope, and Maps appear. Naturally,
each of these screens open a menu for five additional screens. The "Engines" menu allows the
player to select from one of four different types of
propulsion (nuclear, diesel, caterpillar, and
propeller). "Sonar" options include toggling between active or passive sonar or using
Hydrophonics to display the sound signature of
other ships in order to identify them. The
Weapons" display allows the player to select which
torpedo tube to fire, order a torpedo to fire, or lay
flack (the noisemaker). The "Scope" menu allows
for selecting horizon view, attack view, night vision,
and ESM (Electronic Surveillance Manual).
Most submarine simulations require players to
use the scope to sight a target and fire torpedoes.

This simulation allows players to fire manually at a
target without having to use the scope. This is important, since use of the scope makes it easier for
the enemy to sight you visually or on radar. Visually, because the torpedo leaves a trail through the
water. Naturally, use of ESM or firing a torpedo
also gives away your position. One trick which
seems to work in both reality and the simulation is
to fire a torpedo and then, perform a radical heading change. When this occurs, the enemy will
usually rush toward where the torpedo was fired
from.

writer was somewhat disappointed in the ending. It
is not my intent to spoil it for our readers, but it
sure could have used a little more fanfare. Nevertheless, for those who are playing the game, allow
the reviewer to present a few hints.

Graphics utilized in the simulation enhance play,
but do not press the edge of the envelope on the
16-bit machines. Nevertheless, the graphics are
usually clear enough for players to recognize the
ships by cross-referencing the ship recognition
chart packaged with the disk. The only possible
complaint is that the scope picture is grainy. This
aside, when a torpedo strikes a ship, the smoke billows in the wind and blows in the proper direction
according to the wind indicator. Mines, ships, and
submarines appear on sonar as symbols and letters. They track across the screen as Red
October's heading and their own headings change.

Second, never
hesitate to save. It is important to save the
game every time one
gets through a major
obstacle.

Sound also enhances play. It seems authentic
down to the engine's hum and the "ping ping" of
sonar. It can also unnerve the player as the
homing ping of a captor mine or homing torpedo
closes in on his sub.

Fourth, If an attack
submarine fires a torpedo at you, fire two
torpedoes in his direction using manual control. Then, go to
propeller at full speed
since he already knows
where you are. Lay a
noisemaker to distract
his torpedo and head
away from his torpedo
with the noisemaker
towed behind you. This
will work unless you
are surrounded by captor mines.

Imperfections
Several complaints must be noted. First, no matter how many torpedoes successfully strike an
enemy ship, it will not sink. This reviewer placed
three torpedoes into one ship and it simply
smoked. Second, the program is sometimes slow
to recognize mouse commands. In the heat of battle, with five ships firing at and tracking the
reviewer's sub, mouse commands would sometimes have to be repeated up to three times before
the program would acknowledge it. This caused
the demise of Red October in several play sessions. Fortunately, it is possible to save the game.
Finally, the game purports to have a "Hint" option.
Yet, when one clicks on it, no matter what is going
on or how far one is into the simulation, it gives
the same hint about sonar. This is really irritating
because this particular hint is already in the
manual, so it serves no useful purpose

Information
Speaking of the manual, this writer found it extremely useful. It does a good job of describing
everything one needs in order to play the game. It
also includes a strategy and tactics section. In addition, background information from the book helps
the player to establish the setting for the simulation. This reviewer was most impressed with the
manual's section on submarine tactics and
weaponry for modern submarines which gave a
fairly good idea of Soviet tactics and American procedures.
After reaching the endgame victoriously, this

First, torpedo the Soviet trawler at the beginning
of the simulation. If
you do not, it will very
quickly give away your
position to the Soviet
fleet.

Third, (as mentioned
earlier) immediately
change heading after
launching a torpedo.
Once a torpedo is
fired, your position is
compromised.

Fifth, if a surface ship
fires a homing missile,
the tactic just
described will work.
Sixth, you need to
use active sonar every
few minutes or so or
you will be surprised by
a captor mine, enemy
sub, or surface ship.
Seventh, if you activate a captor mine,
lay flack and turn away
from the mine. Then,
go to full speed using '
the propeller. Then, if the mine explodes against
the flack, you can go to the caterpillar drive in
order to avoid detection.
Eighth and finally, when you hit the line of Soviet
ships blocking the pass, use the caterpillar drive to
attempt to sneak through by constantly changing

(Continued on page 18)

The Hunt For
Red October
(Continued from page

15)

heading. If you are sighted, target a ship by scope
and fire a torpedo. If you have time, target and fire
on another ship. Then, dive and change direction.
Go to full propeller drive and lay flack. Then, suddenly switch to caterpillar drive and change heading radically! This will generally confuse the ships
and allow you to sneak past. Watch out for attack
submarines, however.

Indoctrination
Overall, this is an excellent submarine conflict
simulation. No two games will be alike because the
Soviets change strategy and tactics in each game.
It is a worthy addition to any wargamer's library. If
you like naval simulations, especially sub simulations, this game should give you many hours of enjoyment. Even after you successfully defect, you
will come back to play again and again. At least,
that is how it has been for this reviewer.

Old Prophecies
Never Lie . . .
E.A.'s "Bard's Tale III',
Thief of Fate
Reviewed by Scorpia
[Ed. Note: Hints are scattered throughout
this review. Let the reader be warned.]

You will, as usual, have to traverse a number of dungeons, and acquire a variety of special items, before your
quest is complete.

Something Old
As before, you can transfer in characters from Wizardry
or Ultima, or from Bard's Tale I or II. If you don't happen
to have any of those handy, or prefer to start from scratch,
you can create a brand new party instead.
All the character classes from the previous game are
there, as well as two new mage professions: Chronomancer and Geomancer. The Chronomancer is the one who
casts the spells that transport you to the various dungeons. Without this person in the party, you won't get
very far.
Geomancer is optional; you'll have to give up a fighter
type to get this class, and it won't happen until you're well
along in the game (there's only one place where a character can become one). Geomancers have some rather
potent spells of their own, as well as a few nifty non-offensive ones, including a level-wide trap zap.
Aside from the Chronomancer, the one profession you
absolutely must have is a thief (rogue). You cannot win
the game without one. Whether you bring a party over, or
create a new one, make certain that a rogue is a member
of it. Not for the skills of undoing traps or picking locks,
but for their abilities to hide in shadows (sneaking up on
unsuspecting opponents) and make critical hits (backstab
bing).
Bards are good to have along with you, too. They have
some new songs, most of which they know at the start,
and others which must be found (and purchased) in the
Bard's Halls you'll come across in your travels. One of
these songs is Sir Robin's tune. When played while walking around and exploring, it allows the party to run from
any encounter, as long as combat has not started. In essence, with this song operative, you can pretty much pick
and choose your combats.
Since Skara Brae has been destroyed, you begin in the
refugee camp outside the city. The camp functions in
much the same way as the old Adventurers Guild did in
previous games. There is a tavern nearby, and further
away a small shrine (where healing is available). Scattered
around the countryside are various spots where the
Chronomancer can cast the spells that will take the party
to the various dungeons. All of these are shown on the
map on the inner cover of the game folder.

S

Skara Brae lies in ruins. A once-prosperous city, it is now
only a collection of abandoned, half-destroyed buildings,
housing creatures of evil. The inhabitants have all long
fled or been struck down, the surviving remnants existing precariously in a small refugee camp a short disTITLE:
Bard's Tale III:
tance outside in the wilderness. Tarjan, the
The Thief of Fate
Mad God, is on the loose, preparing to
SYSTEMS:
Apple II
# PLAYERS:
Solitaire
destroy worlds without number. Only the
PRICE:
$49.95
heroes of the prophecy can stop him .. .
Interplay Productions
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Bard's Tale Ill, The Thief of Fate, is the
closing chapter of the Bard's trilogy (as Interplay and Electronic Arts have parted, it is not likely there will
be any more in the series). This time around, you're out to stop
Tarjan (you may remember him from Bard's I) from unleashing
a reign of terror and destruction across all of space and time.

This does not mean, however, that you should ignore
Skara Brae. Two buildings yet remain intact: the Review
Board and the Mad God's temple. In the Review Board
you will find the sole surviving guild elder, who performs
all the usual functions of providing advancement, spells,
class changes, etc. He will also send you on quests to
retrieve certain items of power from the dungeons.
The Mad God's temple is the starter dungeon, but even
if your party is high in level, don't ignore it. Each time you
successfully complete a dungeon, the Guild Elder will
award every party member 600,000 experience points in
addition to whatever points were picked up along the way.
The starter dungeon is a simple search-and-destroy mission; you go down into it to destroy Brilhasti ap Tarj.
When that's been accomplished, the party is automatically

transported back to the front door of the Review Board in Skara
Brae (this is the only time it will happen; you have to make your
own way out of all the other dungeons).
The dungeons, sorry to say, have relatively nothing new in
them: the same old spinners, traps, spell cancel areas, hit point
drainers, spell point drainers (lots of those), and darkness spots
await you. This is a bit strange, as the game now has auto-mapping, which reduces a lot of these to nothing more than minor
annoyances.

Something New
Anywhere in a dungeon, you can enter a "?", and get the map,
which appears on the right-hand side of the screen. The dungeon appears as a large black square on a white background,
which gradually fills in as you walk around the area. Thus you
have some idea of how large the level is (they are not all the
same size). In addition, hitting return while the map is up will display a series of dots showing where your party has been so far,
making it easy to see if you've missed anything.
The major problem with auto-mapping is that the game does
not save or remember maps from level to level. If you go from,
say, a fully-mapped level one to level two, then return to level
one, the map will be blank as the first time. This is also the case
when you save in the dungeon: when you restore, the map will
be blank.
Still, the auto-map feature makes the process of going through
the dungeons much easier. Spinners are not much of a bother;
you can always check the map to see which way you actually
went. The same holds true for areas of darkness, as the map
can be called up in those areas as well. Dungeons will thus
present little problem in getting through Bard's III.
After you've killed Brilhasti, the guild elder starts sending you
out to collect the items of power. This is a linear progression,
where you go through one dungeon, complete it, then go on to
the next. Some of the places you'll go to have an outdoors,
others are the dungeons themselves.
A four-part wheel comes with the game; don't lose it or you'll
never finish. This is the copy protection (the disks are not
protected). Each time you are about to go to a new location
away from Skara Brae, you must align certain words on the
wheel (chosen at random) to arrive at a code number you type
in before the spell takes effect. Enter the wrong number, and
you will go nowhere.
Arboria is the first stop. Make sure you go to the town and visit
the King first; he has a little mission for you, too (another
search-and-destroy mission). This dungeon is fairly simple to complete.
After that, you will be able to enter the sacred grove in the center of town to get what you really came for. While in Arboria, it
pays to buy the Gilles Gill spells for underwater breathing.
The next place is Gelidia, and a very cold place it is. After only
a few moves in the outdoors, your party will begin to suffer exposure and lose hit points, so don't dawdle out there. Aside
from the Ice Keep, there is only a small hut in the wilderness, so
don't waste time looking for more when you've found these two
areas. Try to reach the hut first, as it contains some important information.
Inside the Ice Keep you'll find a slab on the floor, which can be
opened only with three lenses. These lenses are in the three
towers, the entrances to which are blocked by powerful magic
wards which must be dispelled. The diary in the hut gives a hint
on how this is to be done, and the inscriptions on the walls next

to the wards are also hints, albeit obscure ones. Keep the
manual handy for spell perusal here.
When you've returned from Gelidia and dropped off the
items, your next destination is Lucencia. Here you will find
the first of the Bard's Halls. In this, and others, make sure
you listen to all the songs, as they contain valuable clues.
There is also a mages guild in town which functions like
the Review Board in Skara Brae, and where you can also
buy the DIVA spell (a handy one to have).
In Lucencia there
are three dungeons
to penetrate. The
first is the Violet
Mountain, where
the dragon resides.
You'll find it necessary to go in there
and kill the beast.
After that, Cyanis'
Tower must be completed before you
can go through
Alliria's Tomb
(where the goodies
are). This is fairly simple. Be advised that it is not necessary to kill Cyanis; remember that the man is, after all, insane.
Alliria's Tomb is also a snap, provided you've listened to
the songs at the Bard's Hall, and brought something away
with you from the dragon's lair, as well as some things
you've collected from the outdoors.
Then it's off to Kinestia, home of the Dwarves and killer
machines (yes,
machines). Kinestia
is only a dungeon.
There is no town or
outdoors. This is
also the place where
(when you find the
right location) you
can create a
Geomancer.
Explore the first
level thoroughly.
Mapping will be
something of a pain
here, as there are tunnels around that lead to other parts
of the level, which are considered new (and thus you will
lose maps as you shuttle back and forth). What you want
are two keys, plus the instructions on how many times to
turn each one in the lock. This will open the door in the
floor of the workshop, to take you down into the dungeon
proper. This dungeon is several levels deep, and there is
one point where the Gill spell will come in handy (aren't
you glad you bought it?). When you get to the final level
(one large building dominates it), remember that killing
isn't always the only answer.
Then it's back to the great outdoors in Tenebrosia,
home of illusions and other strange things. This is also
the place to buy the Nuke spell (just from its name, you
know it's powerful, and as it usually does 2200-2400
points of damage, there is no doubt at all). Don't forget to
stop in at the Bard's Hall, too.

(Continued on page 52)

S

Summer is sneaking up on us (the year
does seem to be moving along, doesn't
it?); time for those long, lazy days of computer gaming under the air conditioning. It
gets pretty hot in the summertime (except, perhaps,
around here), and where you're going, it's hotter yet
. . . in fact, you might even say it's radioactive.
Wasteland was reviewed in the last issue of CGW
(May '88), so what we have here are tips to help you
make it (more-or-less) safely through the dangers of
post-nuclear catastrophe.

This month,
Wasteland takes
center stage as
adventuredom's four
star rated innkeeper
weaves her regular
tale of mystery and
suspense.

The manual is quite vague about your assignment, simply saying that your team of Desert
Rangers is being sent out to investigate disturbances in the desert. That could be almost anything, so
it's best to be prepared for everything, including
mutants, monsters, unfriendly people, voracious
animals, death machines, and other things too horrible to contemplate (like radiation poisoning and
sewer rot).
You can start with the team of four that comes
with the
game, or
create your
own characters. I made
my own, but
other people
have finished
with the
originals, so
do whichever
pleases you.
Either way,
make sure as
you go up in
rank (which
substitutes for
level) to add a
point now and
then to Intelligence.

Skillful
Recruiting
What you're
aiming for is
to get everyone (including the NPC's in the party)
up to an IQ of 23. There are some skills out there
that the manual doesn't tell you about, and one or
two of them are extremely important as you reach
the latter half of the game. These skills do not show
up in libraries unless the character actually has the
necessary IQ.
One problem with the listed skills is that some are
not necessary at all, while others are useful only at
one specific place (as far as I can tell). Metallurgy,
for example, is pretty much a waste. I found only
one spot where it does anything (geology would
have made more sense in that instance), and not
very much even then.
The skills you absolutely want everyone to have
are: clip pistol, submachine gun, rifle, assault rifle,
anti-tank weapons, energy weapons, climbing, and

swimming. Skills that two or three in the group
should have are perception, demolition, medic (very
important), and picklock. Beyond that, it's up to you
what skills to take, although I never found a use for
things like bureaucracy, sleight of hand, forgery,
and gambling.
There is one point in the game where swimming is
extremely important, and this is based not only on
your swimming skill, but also to some degree on
the character's strength and agility. Make sure that
these attributes are not too low for each person in
the party.
Many skills will go up over time as you use them,
so it's generally not necessary to start out with more
than the minimum ability in any particular skill, although you might want to put some extra points
into Medic.

Open Hostility
Once you have your initial party set up, it's off to
the great outdoors of the partly-irradiated deserts of
Arizona and Nevada. Fortunately, you won't need to
do any mapping; the outdoors is actually quite a
small place, in spite of the distances you cover. The
towns and such are also small, and no mapping is
really needed there, either.
You can pretty much expect that anything you run
across in the outdoors is hostile, ready to rip you to
shreds or blow your guts out, so don't hesitate to
shoot first and ask questions later. You won't get
any treasures from these encounters, but the person who gets in the killing hit will receive some experience points.
Indoors (towns and the like) are a bit different.
Most of the inhabitants will be hostile, but not all of
them. Several will give you information. Some can
even be added to your party (good ones to have are
Ace, Christina, Covenant, and Metal Maniac; since
you can only add three, you'll have to make a
choice somewhere along the line).
You also need to be on the alert for clues contained in diaries, scraps of paper, scrawlings on
walls, etc., so it pays to go over an area thoroughly.
Most of the buildings in the towns are abandoned,
however, so you needn't go over them with a finetooth comb. A few steps inside is usually all it takes
to tell you whether or not the place is worth exploring.
Your first stop is likely to be Highpool, followed by
the Agricultural Center (while you can go to the
towns in any order, they become progressively more
difficult, so on your first tour it's best to do em in
order). Highpool doesn't have too much of interest,
but it's a good place to get some practice with the
game, being relatively safe to walk around in. The
Ag Center is another matter, and you probably
won't want to spend much time there until you
have some good weapons and armor.

Mayor Problem
So it's off to Quartz. Plenty of encounters here,
and many opportunities to pick up some good stuff.
Rescuing the mayor and his wife should be high on

your list of things to do, although not the first thing,
as there are a number of clues and hints to pick up
on first. By the way, don't bother about the broken
jeep outside town. While it can be fixed by Ace,
you'll only have it for a short while, and driving is
automatic (only takes you to certain places, whether
you want to go there or not).
There are at least two ways into the building where
the Mayor is held, plus at least three ways of getting
to his actual location, so the rescue itself, when
you're ready, should not be much of a problem.
With the mayor, his wife, and Ace in your merry
band, as well as better weaponry and armor, you
should be in pretty good shape to go back and
clean out the Agricultural Center.
With that taken care of, a jaunt over to Needles is
next. Inhabited by a lot of weirdos, including a
variety of Jerks (yep, that's what they're called) and
a mysterious cult, this is not the healthiest place in
the world. You can be sure that most people are
out to get you, so get them first. Somewhere in
Needles you'll run across Christina; don't make the
mistake of killing her (this is a good place to dump
the mayor's wife).

Terror in the Temple
The major activity in Needles will be snooping
around the Temple of Blood. Be careful here; much
of the area surrounding the Temple is radioactive
(from time to time you may see radiation canisters
on the ground nearby.... DO NOT step on them, unless everyone is in rad suits), although the interior is
fairly safe . . . from radiation, anyway.
There's a lower level to the Temple, which can be
reached only by going across the giant chessboard
pattern. This is essentially a matter of trial and error;
no clues are available to help you find the safe path
through it. Once you've made it across (and
answered the question; you may want to map the
path), be prepared for additional nastiness beyond
and below. Bring lots of ammo with you.
Also bring LOTS of ammo (and rockets, like LAW
rockets and RPG-7's) with you to Las Vegas, home
of the death machines. They're all over the place,
and are extremely unpleasant to meet. Burning full
clips (assault rifle clips) is about the only way to
handle them (although grenades often work well
onlesser devices, like Chopters and such), but save
your rockets for the really mean machines, like the
Scorpitron (no relation to yours truly!), and the Mark
I, II, and III tanks.
Before entering Las Vegas (I recommend coming
in from the NE corner of the city the first time), you
might want to dump the Mayor so you'll have room
for Covenant. Remember to take back everything
the Mayor has first, as Covenant will not come with
any weapons or armor.
Of course there will also be the human element to
deal with, but they are easy to dispose of, compared
to the machines. Eventually you should make it to
Faran Brygo (if the name sounds familiar, it is) and
hear his little tale.

Sewer Thing
Soon after, you'll be taking a little pleasure trip
through the city sewers. For this, make sure you
bring even more than lots of ammo, plus as many
rockets as you can get your hot little hands on: the
sewers are a nasty place, infested by Cyborgs of all
descriptions (none of them friendly). You'll also want
rope and a pickax (the sewers, by the way, is where
swimming skills are essential; be prepared for sewer
rot).
The best way to fight the Cyborgs is the same as
with death machines: using full clips and rockets. As
before, some of the Cyborgs are easier to kill than
others (Tazels, for instance, are real wimps, and the
Cybertrikes are pretty easy, too), so don't waste precious rockets on them. Just spray 'em with hot lead
and keep moving.
While there are a lot of
random Cyborgs wandering
around down below, some
of them are fixed in one
place. These are the ones
that will give you loot after
being defeated. Among the
loot from various encounters you'll come across
odd things like servomotors,
rom boards, power converters, and the like. Make
sure you take all of these items with you, as they are
extremely important.
Now, you'll probably want to investigate the
Sleeper Base, which does not appear until after
you've successfully completed the sewers. It's a pretty safe place; aside from a couple of mechanical
guards, there are no monsters or machines wandering around inside it.
There are some neat things in the place, including
a couple of vaults that hold some very good stuff.
One vault you won't be able to open right away (the
one with the blue barrier inside it), so leave that
alone for awhile. The other one, which contains the
more mundane items, should not be much of a
problem for you, and makes for a nice personal arsenal.

Devolution in Darwin
Around about now you may want to visit the town
of Darwin (if you haven't come across it before).
The one thing you have to keep in mind is that you
should always approach Darwin from the north, as it
is surrounded on the other three sides by radioactive cannisters (which are sometimes visible, and
sometimes not).
Darwin itself isn't all that interesting a place (although the black market there sells a few rockets),
but it will lead you to another area that is much
more important where you can obtain what you
need to open up the second vault at Sleeper Base.
Just watch out for the Humungous Coyote (he's a
mean one!).

(Continued on page 53)

Catching The
Tokyo Express
Tactical Naval Combat in the
Pacific, 1942
by Johnny L. Wilson
13 November, 1942: The plan was simple
enough. We would cruise by Cape Esperance;
. join the four task groups
together at coordinates
27,27; cruise by HenderI son Field; use naval bombardment to soften up the
enemy; and make our escape. Appropriate range
orders to avoid a set battle were given, but we
hadn't counted on being
intercepted in the middle
of Iron Bottom Sound at
0152 hours. Our
destroyer, Akatsuki,
spotted the enemy first
and identified them as
destroyers and cruisers.
They requested permission to open fire and since
the sake was already scorched, I obliged them. . . .
Admiral Wilson-san (Diary
of a "Long Lance" Replay)

L

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

design from Simulations Canada where
fog of war really makes
sense, functions well, and is
Long Lance
Apple II, Atari ST, C-64/128
fun to play. Admittedly, when
Apple version reviewed
this reviewer first booted the
1-2
game, watched the (at least, on
$60.00
W. J. Nichols
the Apple II) interminably long
Simulations Canada
screen with the quotation from
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia, CANADA
Captain Toshikazu Ohmae,
plotted the basic moves and doctrines, and sat
back to wait for things to happen, the first thought
to venture along was, "A person will need a good
book to read while waiting for action." No more incorrect first impression could have been tendered.
This game should keep players on the edge of
their seats from first contact until breaking off action. As in some tactical miniatures rules as well as
computer models, there is some elapsed time prior
to contact, but the battles are worth the wait. Of
course, players can never be sure under this system whether or not more ships await them during
the next simulated minute or so. Simple in design,
this game is intense in execution.
The intensity of this game has little to do with the

graphics presentation, however. Most of the time,
what the player sees is a series of dots along the
left margin of the screen, occasionally interrupted
by a line which prints the simulated time. When
contact is reported, the message is identified as
coming from a particular ship by being displayed
in inverse lettering. Then, the message is typed
across the screen. Also, at this point, a simple (yet,
very effective) sound effect is used. The message
types across the screen with an accompanying
sound that sounds like it is being transmitted by
Teletype. When ships fire, the message that they
have done so appears in inverse form. Also, when
ships are hit, that fact appears in inverse form.
When capital ships bombard a land objective,
however, the bombardment pattern is shown in
shells landing with a * to show each hit.
In addition, the intensity of this game has little to
do with the quality of the playing aids. The manual
has poor production quality, the colored pencil
does not erase well from the coated map and the
box is the same as Simulations Canada used to
package the cardboard playing pieces in. What,
then, makes this a game that makes players want
to play it over and over?
First, it makes for intense competition. The "fog
of war" makes even a mediocre computer opponent into a challenging foe. Since the naval actions simulated in Long Lance are night actions in
the Pacific Theater of World War II, the lack of
graphic representations of ships is not only excusable, but adds to the play value. This reviewer
should know, after nearly sinking my own
destroyer toward the end of one scenario.
Second, it is an intriguing experience because,
as force commander, the player is involved in
making realistic command decisions rather than exercising fire control on every ship in the fleet.
From mission planning to laying out tactical
doctrine, the decisions to be made are those which
are consistent with the position.
Part of the anLongaceis
ticipation of each few simulated minutes is watching to see whether one's ships will actually come
through or not.
Third, it is stimulating to play a game with
scenarios which have well-defined objectives which
involve more than simply reaching a certain coordinate on the map. In Long Lance, the three missions which involve bombarding Henderson Field
will force players to remain in one area, actively
bombarding a target, for almost a full hour. In
other missions, one side or the other must successfully complete a landing. This involves simulating
the 30 minutes to an hour to unload in order for
the mission to be successful. Here is a game that
involves considerably more than simply destroying
the enemy in combat. Of course, if one could completely destroy the enemy, the mission objective
would be that much easier to accomplish.

Mission Planning
and Battle Doctrine
After alerting our fleet, we allowed them to fire
according to the established tactical doctrine. Our

combined big guns and torpedoes sent two
American destroyers to add to the iron at the bottom of the sound by 0156. Both of our capital
ships had been hit, at least, once. Therefore, we
attempted to move on toward our primary objective in a moving firelight. . . Admiral Wilson-san.
Mission Planning is relatively simple. It involves
the selection of ships, assignment of those ships
into groups, and plotting out the intended movement for the course of the battle (subject to
change, of course). The game allows the player to
determine guidelines for opening and closing ranges, establish the rules of engagement, and offer
tactical guidance.
It can be useful to modify the default instructions
with regard to range, especially in bombardment
missions. The default instructions are to close
range on unknown or enemy vessels, unless one
is outnumbered. In a bombardment mission or
Tokyo Express scenario, however, the object is to
get to the target, shell said target or unload troops,
and withdraw. Little is to be accomplished by becoming engaged with an enemy fleet. Therefore, it
seems more useful to order that range be opened
in most cases in order to reach the target more
swiftly. Of course, it is possible for this strategy to
backfire if enough enemy ships converge on your
force in the bombardment zone that you have to
"Cease Bombardment" and chase the Allied ships
away. The program does not allow players to
recommence bombardment once this has taken
place.
Where the player has a destroyer screen,
however, there is certainly much to be gained by
closing on unknown contacts and launching torpedoes should the contacts prove to be hostile.
This reviewer would suggest that not all task
groups follow the same battle plan, but that the
doctrine be adjusted to meet the tactical needs of
the overall mission objective.
Establishing the rules of engagement is integral
to this game (as presumably under authentic battle
conditions). These rules determine whether a ship
will hold or open fire on enemy or unknown ships.
They may also indicate the preferred weaponry of a
given ship. If a commander of more than one task
group in an area is willing to risk firing upon unknown targets, he must be ready to shoulder the
blame if some of those targets turn out to be his
ships. Finally, the player is allowed to modify the
tactical guidance his ships will use for gunnery
range,torpedo range (and minimum approach distance), and standard ship speeds. The game will
most often be won or lost on the basis of these
three areas of planning: range rules, rules of
engagement, and tactical guidance.

Permission to Open Fire
By 0202, an American light cruiser was in
flames, but two larger cruisers had come to the
flaming ship's aid by appearing with guns blazing. Things were looking simple for our side with
the Juneau and two destroyers sinking, but
within that same minute the Hiei and Kirishima
were hit. The Kirishima was struck by two tor-

pedoes, yet somehow managed to stay afloat
and continue the battle. By 0210, the two
American cruisers were ablaze and making tempting targets, but our capital ships continued to be
peppered with shots from the Yankee fleet. Requests came to turn the searchlights on, but we
could not grant permission. The flames made the
Allied ships easy targets. All the searchlights
would do is make our ships easier to hit. Our
valiant patriots sunk the Atlanta prior to breaking
off contact with all but the Helena at 0230. By
0242, we had shaken off the enemy force completely. On to the task at hand. At 0254, we
began the bombardment of Henderson Field. . . .
Admiral Wilson-san
The actual battle is fought by means of a series
of menus. The main menu offers the commander
the opportunity to: review contact reports; check
damage control on the flagship; order changes in
the flagship's course; direct fire control for the flagship; send messages to single ships, groups, or
the entire force; save or end the game; and/or continue the game. The contact reports identify the
range, approximate vessel type, and status of any
ships in contact with the player's force.
As mentioned before, design constraints with
regard to command perspective keep the player
from directing fire control for ships other than the
flagship. He is limited to ordering them to "Commence Fire," "Launch Torpedoes," "Hold Your
Fire," "Commence/Desist Bombardment," or "Disengage and Withdraw." In addition, he can radio individual ships, task groups, or all ships to report
their situation(s) or follow navigational commands.

Fleet Considerations
If the player grows tired of the historical
scenarios, even with the option of free set-up (as
opposed to historical) for one or both sides, the
game comes with a provision to create unique
scenarios. Unfortunately, these new scenarios
must be played using the Iron Bottom Sound
map. There is no facility for editing the map in the
scenario builder.
At 0502, as the sun rose we were still in range
of any surviving bombers at Henderson Field. We
scanned the horizon for any glimpse of the
dreaded Yankee planes. When none appeared, we
knew that one hour of bombardment from two
battleships had been enough to destroy their air
superiority. We watched the sun rise as though it
signified the Empire's ultimate victory. . . . Admiral Wilson-san
Although a $60.00 price tag usually brings with it
plenty of graphic and audio chrome to go with the
gameplay, Long Lance delivers exciting and challenging games without the graphics or sophisticated sound. Some readers may complain that
Long Lance is a "throwback" to the days of Chris
Crawford's Tanktics. This is not necessarily bad.
Some of us liked Tanktics. So, for those readers
who want a challenging wargame with an emphasis on command that effectively gives you a
sense of expectation in waiting for combat results,
Long Lance is worth the price.

e
EA's "Return to Atlantis"
by Douglas Seacat

o most Amiga owners, Return to Atlantis
should sound familiar. The game has been
promised for almost as long as the days of
Marble Madness, Arcticfox, and the advent of the
Amiga itself. Despite this fact, it has only recently
been released to
the general
public. Was it
worth the wait?
You decide.
Return to Atlantis is an odd
blend of computer role-playing
and action
treasure hunt.
Taking place in
various aquatic
areas of the
world, your
character must
perform a series
of progressively
more difficult missions to protect
the ocean.
Throughout the
game, your
character will
(hopefully) grow
in experience and develop essenReturn to Atlantis
tial characteristics for further misAmiga
sions.
Solitaire

T

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

$49.95
Mike Wallace
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Recruited by
"The Foundation"

When the game begins, the player defines a
protagonist by means of several attributes: Psychology, Athletics, Telepathy, Awareness, Programming, Weapons, and Health. This character will
represent the earth's finest graduate from the "The
Foundation's Academy" and, of course, the
player's character. Since these attributes are wellbalanced in importance, it is difficult to single out
any individual trait as most vital, but two general
rules should be used. First of all, since Psychology
is the easiest attribute to raise (simply by talking to
characters), it needn't be very high in the beginning. The other values should be fairly even, with a
slight emphasis on Awareness, Athletics, and
Weapons. Health always starts at 100%.
Once your player character has been defined, the
actual missions may commence. Following a very
linear path, each mission must be completed satis-

factorily and in succession in order to advance to
the next. Each mission (there are 14 in all) begins
with a briefing and a quick consultation of the
manual for details.
From there, a quick chat with your "informants"
is in order. These characters all seem to hang out
at a certain bar and know many clues to help you
on your missions. This is one of the more inane
aspects of the game for two reasons. First, conversation is very limited. Basically, you can speak to
the informants using the commands: Plead,
Threaten, or Bribe. Since "Threaten"ing rarely
works and only a couple of the characters accept
"Bribe"s, this phase of the game is usually reduced
to a repetition of the "Plead" key and waiting for
the speech-synthesis to finish its job. The other
problem is that any time spent talking to the informants is added onto your total time. In a crucial
mission with quick deadlines, this can be quite
frustrating. Despite this, it is necessary to talk to
these people since the clues they provide cannot
always be found elsewhere.
After questioning the informants, you will be sent
out into the world to complete your mission. This
is the main area of the game, where most of the
time will be spent. Any role-playing aspects of the
previous sections should be forgotten at this point,
since this part of the game is primarily graphic action and strategy. On the ocean, time will be
divided between return trips to the Viceroy (your
combination headquarters and airboat) and the
dives themselves.

Audience with the 'Viceroy"
Headquarters is fairly straightforward, being a cutaway view of a futuristic ship. By walking into the
various sections of the ship, different options can
be activated. There is a computer which allows
scanning of the ocean's floor (once again, with a
time penalty), a medical section where the character can swap experience points for health points, a
storage locker where one can supply for the dive,
and the dive itself. This area of the game, while
supposedly an integral part of completing the mission, is rarely so. The computer and storage areas
should be used at the start of any mission, but
return trips almost always should involve only the
utilization of the medical facilities, getting oxygen,
and returning to the deep.
Once in the water, the game picks up a bit and a
wealth of functions can be used to further the mission. This is the main action area of the game
where the player must maneuver his/her character
through a nicely presented 3-D underwater
landscape. In most of the missions, the goal is to
find some predetermined object and then teleport
it up to the ship. To help in this treasure hunt, the
player has the use of the onboard ship computer,
a robotic assistant (RUF - Remote Underwater
Friend), and scanners. The primary obstacles in
the game are the ocean's currents (which are quite
strong in several scenarios), crab-like enemy robot
attackers (crabbots), and (most importantly) time.
While the first mission doesn't have a time limit,
most of the later ones do. Meeting those time

limits is one of the more difficult aspects of the
game.
If all goes well, the mission will be completed successfully and the player will receive a nice message
from home telling him how wonderful he did. In addition, his performance is evaluated and some of
his attributes will be improved. If the player fought
many crabbots, his weapon skills will improve. If he
dealt well with the informants, his psychology will
be raised, etc. Finally, the player will receive some
experience points for doing a good job.
If, on the other hand, the player has not finished
the mission, he will receive a reprimand from
home, telling him the consequences of his failure.
Since there is no such thing as a partial victory, it
is usually not a good idea to save the game after a
failed mission. There is never any improvement
after a failure. In fact, it is usually the opposite,
since health and experience points are likely to
have gone down and the only reason to save
would be if an important tool was found on the
mission, which would be difficult to find again. At
any rate, since the game is entirely linear, the mission must be tried again, and again, until it is successful.

Smooth Sailing
In general, the graphics and sound in the game
are enjoyable. The speech synthesis is a little rusty,
but the rest of the soundtrack is of good quality.
The sound of diver hitting the water is particularly
well-orchestrated, as were many of the other soundeffects. The graphics in the ocean, while simplistic,
still gave one a good feel of the ocean environment. For example, objects which are a distance
away are dim, uncertain, or even, hidden on the
other side of high ridges on the ocean floor. Once
one gets used to the perspective, though, the 3-D
environment works quite well.
Further, the attempt to include a strong storyline
in the game is admirable. While the missions were
too linear for the tastes of this reviewer, that very
linearity did allow all the missions to tie together
nicely into the overall story. Each mission was not
simply finished and forgotten, but had some bearing on the future ones. Tools collected in the earlier missions often became useful in the later ones.
This is a technique that this writer would like to
see utilized in other action/adventure games.

Design Depths
The most frustrating factor is that the mission endings are very inflexible. Either the mission is completed properly and advancement is given or complete failure occurs with no improvement to help
the player do better on the next attempt. In some
missions, this is understandable. The first mission,
for example, is to retrieve a treasure chest. This is,
pardon the pun, an open and shut case. However,
in others, some flexibility would have been appreciated. In this sixth scenario, for example, one
must rescue twelve survivors from a wreck in a
very short period of time. This reviewer spent a harrowing half-hour on the first rescue attempt and ac-

tually managed to rescue eleven of them before
the time limit was up. The twelfth was rescued in
the next thirty seconds. Upon returning to the
Viceroy, my character was informed that he had
failed miserably in the mission, despite the fact that
I had only missed the deadline by thirty seconds,
and had all but succeeded before that. My character was left with no improvement in his stats, a
lower health value than he
started with, and even a
lower experience level from
operating the medical section during the mission.
Naturally, this gave little incentive for saving the
character or worse yet, continuing the mission.
This brings us to the next
problem. The way the
game handles health and
the medical section is
frustrating. Surely there
could have been a better
way of handling medical
treatment than lowering experience points. It is
questionable whether any game with RPG elements should ever take experience away once it is
gained. Yet, in Return to Atlantis, it is almost impossible to survive without using the medical section and thus, losing vital experience points. This
problem is aggravated by the fact that health is not
regained in-between missions. Once health has
been lowered, the only way
to raise it is to lose experience.
Next, the interface is
awkward. While allowing
the use of either mouse or
joystick was a step in the
right direction, the controls
are difficult to master and
not very natural. Gameplay
would have been
smoother if different
devices could be used for
different functions. The
mouse could have controlled the menu bar and
weapon fire (aiming the weapon with the joystick is
nearly impossible), while the joystick or keyboard
could control movement. Such a system would
have operated much more efficiently than the
present one.

Debriefing
All in all, Return to Atlantis is a game which offers mixed signals. It does offer an original blend of
role-playing elements and action, as well as having
many interesting and well-presented features. At
the same time, the overall product is something of
a disappointment. Some of the problems would
have been quite simple to fix and a flexible success
measurement would have greatly improved the
game's replay value. Surely after such a long wait,
the game could have and should have been better.

Imagine yourself as a pilot in a top
secret pilot training program. That is
what our author, a Medal of Honor winner many times over in Gunship, has attempted to do in the following strategy
article. The strategy notes are particularly applicable for Project Stealth Fighter
from
Microprose,
but those
who prefer
subLogic's
Stealth Mission may also
glean some insights.

As F-19 pilots, your missions will consist of lone, deep penetration strikes and
reconnaissance missions. This lecture
should enable you to maximize the full
potential of this aircraft. We will cover
several topics: concentration on objectives, weapons selection, in-flight stealth,

pilots should remember that the only
sure method for avoiding detection is to
avoid radar sites altogether. When possible, pilots should plan a flight path that
will minimize their exposure to enemy
detection.

Weapons
Selection

F LOT BRIEFING FOR
"STEALTH FIGHTER"

he

pilots
gathered
here
today are
among the
most elite in
the world. Up
until now, you
have flown
the best
fighters that
the United
States has
had to offer.
Now, you
have been assigned to the
most unique
and "top
secret" aircraft
in the world,
the F-19
Stealth
Fighter. Keep
in mind that it
does not have
the range,
power, or
weapons
capabilities that many of you are used
to. What does make the F-19 so unique
is the ability to fly into enemy territory virtually undetected. Its design gives it the
ability to be virtually invisible to enemy
radar.

T

Radar, as you should know by now,
only sees what is known as RCS (Radar
Cross Section). The image on the radar
screen only shows the amount of
reflected radar signal. The screen says
nothing about the size of the aircraft. B52s, for example, once carried GAM-72
Quails. These drones would reflect a signal 100 times larger than it actually was.
These signals, in turn, would make the
enemy believe that there were several B52s in the air. The F-19, on the other
hand, has very little reflective surface,
making it difficult for the enemy to even
find.

by Brad Bombardiere

strike attacks, and air-to-air combat.

Concentration on
Objectives
Awareness of one's objective is a major
key to success in any mission. The pilot
who carefully studies the area maps and
finds out exactly what he is flying into
stands a better chance of successfully
reaching his objective than the lazy pilot.
Alert pilots should read their flight
manuals in order to know what each
area has in the way of SAM batteries
and fighter cover. These facts alone may
play a major role in determining the best
way to carry out a mission. If an area
has a preponderance of high altitude
SAMs deployed, a low level strike would
obviously be in order. The converse, of
course, would be true if an area were
defended by low-level SAMs. Finally,

Selection of
appropriate
weapons is
one of the
most critical
aspects of mission planning.
The boys on
the ground
crew will attempt to give
you what
ordnance you
need. In most
cases,
however, you
will want to
modify their
recommendations. Most
pilots find that
the AGM-65D
Maverick is
their best
friend. It
eliminates almost all target
threats.
Beyond this,
the Paveway
and Rockeye II
are laserguided glide
bombs. These
will take out
those that the

Maverick doesn't.
Special care should be taken to organize your weapons in the weapons
bays. Your reaction time in the air can
make or break you. We recommend that
you designate bays 1 and 2 for air-to-air
missiles; use bay 3 for anti-SAM weaponry, and designate bay 4 as your mission
objective bay. In this way, whenever you
line up on your main objective, you will
know that bay 4 has whatever it will take
to knock out that target. A well-grouped
weapons bay allows a prepared pilot the
opportunity to automatically select the
correct weapon for a particular target
without having to stop and think about
it.

In-flight Stealth
Since stealth is the primary reason for

this particular aircraft's existence, success will be determined on how well you
use this feature. A veteran pilot knows
that he will accrue more kills through
carefully planned attacks than by tailburning dogfights. Remember, therefore, that without radar detection, the
enemy has nothing to lock onto. To
avoid detection, we suggest that pilots: maintain
a minimum RCS profile;
use air radar sparingly;
and keep the weapons
bays closed for minimum
profile. Every exposed surface area reflects radar.

turn these missions down!). Even so, additional targets can be taken out by strafing them. Note that lowering flaps
during a strafing run will slow your air
speed and increase your gun accuracy.
Nevertheless, whatever the mission, we
recommend that pilots attempt a low
level escape from the objective, making

Remember, dogfights
put Stealth pilots at a disadvantage due to fuel
constraints and poorer
maneuverability. Use
stealth to your advantage,
much like a submarine,
and position for a better
shot. If an aircraft is on
your tail and you are in a
stealth configuration, he
may fire upon you. Wait
before using ECM
(electronic countermeasures). Ivan's tactics
may only be a ploy to get
you to "surface," so to
speak. ECM reveals your
position to ground radar
and other aircraft. Wait
until the enemy missile is
within 6-12 miles of you
before resorting to ECM.
This is also true for
enemy SAMs. They may
lose track of you before
you have to use ECM.
When necessary, remember that you may fire your
air-to-air missiles while inverted.

Beyond these simple
rules, note that low air
speeds reduce emissions
for infrared tracking. Consider altitudes below 500
feet or above 32,000 feet
as offering maximum
stealth capacity. When
you land, your aircraft recorder will rate your percentage of stealthiness.
Use this as a reference to
learn from (and improve
upon).

Strike Missions
The F-19 is well-suited
for deep penetration
strike missions. Most of
your objectives will be
deep in enemy territory.
Keep in mind the fact
that if you challenge an
enemy aircraft prior to
reaching your objective,
SAM batteries may already be on the alert. The
first priority upon reaching one's objective and
identifying each target is
to take out the SAM
radar. Once this has been
accomplished, all the
SAMs from that site become useless to the
enemy. This will allow you
to turn your attention to
any enemy aircraft that
may have been shadowing you.
Now, with the area cleared of major
threats, it should be simple to take out
the objective. Where possible, however,
one should reserve a Maverick for the
return trip in order to take out that
pesky missile boat or SAM radar.
Reconnaissance missions can be handled in much the same way (Let's face it
though. You didn't buy this game to
learn to take better pictures, usually I

turn on the tracking radar. Achieve lockon and fire. Pilots should return to minimum RCS immediately. Since tracking
radar broadcasts one's position to the
enemy, it should be used sparingly. AIM9M "Sidewinders" are good for close-in
dogfighting and offer the advantage of a
faster lock-on, but AIM-120A
"AMRAAMs" have more
range.

Summary

detection almost impossible.

Air-to-Air Combat
Air-to-air combat can be the most exhilarating part of any mission. You must
use cunning and stealth to effectively
eliminate the enemy. This means you
should flash Migs with radar only when
absolutely necessary. Where possible,
position yourself for a classic tail shot.
When you feel that you are within range,

Never forget that the F19 is an unconventional
aircraft. It is more of a
thinking man's fighter.
You must use your cunning, as well as your flight
skills. Performance points
are awarded by returning
safe and modified by how
deep your mission was into enemy
territory. Ditching top secret aircraft
can be extremely costly. Ejecting
over water is the least damaging, bailing
out over friendly land costs moderate
performance points, and abandoning
the plane over enemy territory costs the
most. Taking death before dishonor (i.e.
augering into the ground) will cost you
very little in points, but it does cost you
your (simulated) life. So, fly fast and fire
one up Ivan's tail for me!

D. Ezra Sidran is the
designer of Firebird's
Universal Military
Simulator and the
production coordinator
and co-programmer of
Britannica Software's
Designasaurus. In this article, Ezra shares how
to instill more awarenPcs of military objectives in certain U.M.S.
scenarios.

OBJECTIVE
OVERRUN

There are two ways to add
Victory Point Areas to UMS
scenarios. When creating
new armies and scenarios,
use the built-in UMS utility
routines to simply define a
Wildcard unit as a Victory
Point Area, give it a
"strength" (value) of 5,000
or so and a firepower of 0.0.
Then, use the "Create Scenario" function to place the Victory Point Area
where desired, when placing the other
army units. This method should be used
when designing new battles.

Modifying ""
U.M.S.
to Include
Victory Point Areas
by D. Ezra Sidran

ear

gentle reader, let me offer
some advice. If you happen to be
working late in your office on the
eve of some national holiday and the
phone rings when you have even the
slightest inkling that it might be Russell
Sipe and/or Johnny Wilson of Computer
Gaming World, do not answer the
phone. After all, it could be Mssrs. Sipe
and Wilson and they might have a great
idea for modifying your new program
(an idea that you agree with) and the
next thing you know, you could be researching and writing all night instead of
enjoying roast holiday beast.

D

Point Areas can certainly
even up a simulation and
make a scenario more interesting.

Now, what Russell and Johnny had
suggested was that Universal Military
Simulator scenarios could be modified
so that certain areas of the battlefield
would be "Victory Point Areas," a technique such as Sid Meier and Ed Bever
used in their excellent "Command
Series" from Microprose. Though military
theory since the middle of the last century has indicated that destruction of the
enemy army should be a commander's
first objective (remember Grant's orders,
"I shall not give my attention so much to
Richmond as to Lee's army, and I want

If, however, you wish to modify one of
the five existing scenarios that are included with UMS, there is an easier way.
Use a word processor to make a few additions to the .ARM and .SIM files. As always, make a back-up copy of any files
before editing in case you make a mistake.

all commanders to feel that hostile armies, and not cities, are to be their objective points." [Horace Porter, Campaigning With Grant (Blue and Grey
Press), p. 37]) the addition of Victory

Important: Victory Point Areas are basically non-functional units. To include a
Victory Point Area for Napoleon at
Hougomont, for example, means adding
an extra unit to Wellington's army. The
Victory Point Area wildcard should always be added to the opposing army, because its capture will cause the appropriate number of casualties (points)
to be counted against the defending
army. Though the Victory Points Areas
will be displayed in an army's Order of
Battle, no movement will be allowed.
Remember, gentle reader, do not
answer the phone or Mssrs. Sipe and
Wilson may cut-off your holiday retreat.

is proportionately reduced. Actions on a ship require crewmen to carry them out. Therefore, as a
ship loses crewmen, it reduces the ship's firepower.
Loss of rigging, of course, reduces the ship's movement capability.

W

ooden Ships and Iron Men (WSIM), the
computer version of Avalon Hill's popular
board game, allows garners to travel back
in time and take command of one of those great
old sailing ships of the
late 18th and early
19th century without
having to worry about
getting seasick. It is a
tactical game of fighting sail which is
designed on a naval
miniatures scale and
allows garners to
design their own
scenarios.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

The game includes
twenty-five different
pre-designed
scenarios. These
range from engagements between single
ships to battles between fleets of up to
ten ships per side. Included in the package
are all the favorites
from the original
boardgame (although
some have been
edited due to limited
computer memory).
These engagements
include, in the main,
American, British, and
French vessels.
Players can build their
fleets from a "shipyard" assortWooden Ships & Iron Mon
ment which runs from the smalC-64
1-2
lest schooners and brigs to the
$35.00
mainstay of the fleet, the ship
S. Craig Taylor Jr.
of the line.
Jim Jacob
The Avalon Hill Game Company
Each ship is rated for key atBaltimore, MD
tributes which include: quality
and number of seamen, firepower, hull strength,
and rigging. During combat, results are measured
in terms of "hits" in each of these areas. For example, a ship of the line with a hull rating of 20
can sustain 20 hits to its hull before sinking. As
ships sustain damage, the effectiveness of the ship

The heart of WSIM is the play sequence. All actions in the game are assumed to occur simultaneously. At the start of each turn, the wind
gauge is checked to determine if there is a change
in the direction in which the wind is blowing. Next,
each commander is given the opportunity to plot
the movement of his ships. Each ship has a
specified number of movement points to expend
each turn. The number of movement points is affected by the size of the ship, the attitude in relation to the wind, the amount of sails that are set,
and prior rigging losses.
Once the moves are plotted, the program executes the moves simultaneously. Usually, the
movement phase is followed by the combat phase
where each commander gets to cut loose with a
broadside or two. Effectiveness of fire is dependent
on a number of factors, including: number of
guns being fired, range, quality of the crew, and
type of ammunition used. After the broadsides are
fired, each crew has the opportunity to reload and
select the type of ammo (round shot, grapeshot,
chain shot, or doubleshot). Each type of ammo, of
course, affects the combat results differently.
During combat, commanders must determine
the best tactics for destroying their opponents. Will
you aim at his hull and sink him or at his rigging
in an attempt to leave him dead in the water? The
chosen tactic has an important impact on the ammunition to be used. Experienced "fighting sail"
aficionados will already recognize that round shot
is effective at long range, grapeshot is used to soften up an enemy at close range (usually prior to a
boarding action), and chain shot is most effective
in destroying an enemy ship's rigging (usually the
French preference during the Napoleonic era).
In most scenarios, each side can only fire a few
rounds from long range before the fleets close on
one another. This is where the engagements get
tricky. Ships that attempt to enter the same hex or
are adjacent can attempt to grapple and take their
opponent with a boarding action. If a commander
is fortunate enough to capture an opponent's ship
in this manner, he can transfer a new crew to the
newly captured vessel and turn the ship against its
original owner.
As a fan of the original boardgame, it was exciting to hear that the game was being converted for
computer play. Many of the good qualities of the
boardgame have been nicely translated into this
version. In addition, the benefits of using a computer allow the gamer to dispense with a lot of the
paper work required to play the boardgame. The
computer saves the gamer the responsibility of
keeping track of the damage each ship has sustained, which ships are subject to drifting or are
eligible for repair. The gamer can also generate
new scenarios, since there is a scenario generation
sub-menu. Reportedly, the IBM version of the

program will be expanded from the C-64 version
reviewed here.
Unfortunately, there are some limitations. While
the program allows for either two player or solitaire
play, the computer
opponent seems to
be about as able a
commander as Captain Peachfuzz from
the old Bullwinkle
shows. In the larger
scenarios, the computer often gets its
ships tangled up and
allows the human
player to bring his entire fleet to battle, while only a few of the enemy
can fire back. One remedy for this is to switch to a
two player game and help the opponent for a turn
or two and then, switch back to a one player game
once things have been sorted out.
Another problem is that the game is set up so
that the computer can only control the "Player 2"
forces. If the gamer wants the computer player to
play the "Player 1" forces, the entire scenario must
be recreated using the scenario generation routine
so that the forces generally assigned to "Player 1"
may now be assigned to "Player 2" and vice-versa.
Limitations on the computer memory also

creates some limitations on available ships per
engagement and ocean area available for the battle. The battlefield does not scroll as the action
moves to the edges of the board. However, this
does not seem to be a problem in most of the
scenarios. Finally, the
computer is not
capable of fighting a
battle in which there
are land masses to
contend with. While
the scenario generation allows you to include islands and
. coastlines in the bat' tle area, you will have
to find a live opponent for these engagements.
All in all, the computer version of WSIM is not to
be slighted, even with the limitations. It should be
recommended to anyone interested in the age of
fighting sail. More importantly, the computer version of WSIM should be convincing enough to indicate that other classic boardgames should be considered for conversion to the computer medium,
especially those that took several evenings to play.
Hopefully, future releases will include a better computer commander. This reviewer is really looking
forward to an evening when it is possible to play a
challenging game of Stalingrad or Borodino on
the computer.

WIN A 2 YEAR
SUBSCRIPTION
TO COMPUTER
GAMING WORLD
All right, what's the catch? There has to be a catch! The catch is (I knew it!)
that you have to win a contest. In 50 to 100 words, you need to send us the
cleverest response to the introductory phrase: "My most humorous experience
while playing a computer game was . . ." The editor's first choice will receive a
two year paid subscription to CGW and the second choice will receive a one
year paid subscription to CGW. Entries must be postmarked no later than July
10, 1988 and should be sent to:

CGW Essay Contest
Post Office Box 4566
Anaheim, CA 92803-4566
The decision of the editors will be, in the words of Lord British, ultimate.

Tales of Terrorism
"Twilight's Ransom":
A Modern Adventure
by Dennis Owens

Ti

he glamor, the glitz, the bright lightsI bought it
all. The Liberty City tourist propagandaI believed
t. A good job, a beautiful Salvadoran, her skin
dusky and excitingI had them. At least, I had them
until . . . earlier tonight, Friday night, Sevenish. I was
decked out with Alexander Hamiltons crowding my wallet, my face awash in my best cologne. I was excited,
happy. That is, until I got to her place. Her front door
was smashed, her place
wrecked. Nothing was recognizable except for her purse,
a shower curtain, and a
small, cryptic note.
Then, the phone rang.
So begins this recent and
topical graphic-text adventure. Twilight's Ransom is a
game in which you have
twelve hours to weave
through the thugs and lowlifes of Liberty City in the
after hours to determine who
could have kidnapped your
girl and why; discover where
she might be; and decide
how you can possibly save
her.

A Tradition
of Adrenaline
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

If the ideas sound familiara
solitary man on a race against
time to discover the truth and a
character having to search a
city to find answersit is only
because they are. This adventure follows in the tradition of
Deadline, Suspect, and Amnesia (to name three which
deal with similar issues) and it performs reasonably well
within the strictures of the genre. The game is neither as
vast as Amnesia nor as claustrophobic as the Infocom
games. It is, however, just as challenging. The puzzles are
mystifying and the situation is frighteningly intense. In addition, the parser is reasonably strong.
Twilight's Ransom
IBM (CGA Required for Graphics)
Solitaire
$34.95
John Antinori
John Boyd, and Thomas Holmes
Paragon Software
Greensburg, PA

The game also shares some of the weaknesses of the
genre. Success often seems to lean more on your ability
to manipulate game saves and to handle all of the objects
than on your ability to deduce answers or remain calm
under pressure. The game package does not include a
map of the city, yet the game offers no valid reason in
either the fiction or documentation for why you should
have to spend so much time in exploring the place. Nevertheless, until you have accomplished this basic exploration, you will not even know where your character lives.

Since there are sites your character must reach before
they close, the game's very design almost guarantees that
players will have to advance by a series of game saves
and restores. After all, how can you know where those
places are until you have gone through and mapped the
city?
That design disrupts the suspension of disbelief in the
very premise which the best games try to support: the illusion that, if you are clever enough, you will be able to
solve the problems confronting you just as you would in
real lifeon the first go-round. Twilight's Ransom never
gives you that chance. After all, if you live and work in a
city, doesn't it make sense that you would know the
layout of the city? What this reviewer perceives as a major
shortcoming in the game (and an irritating distraction
from the real task of finding the kidnappers and rescuing
your beloved) could easily have been avoided with a slight
change in the fiction behind the game. If your character
were simply visiting his girl from another location (maybe
even El Salvador), it would strengthen he premise by adding to the internal logic of the game and the magnitude
of the problem.

A Graphic Shortcoming
Once the city has been mapped, however, you can finally address the real problems in the game and it is in this
portion of the gameplay that this adventure shines. The
writers have apparently learned their lessons well from
their predecessors because the locations of the objects
needed for both Maria and your character to survive the
night are logical and inventive. The uses of various objects are both surprising and practical.
Graphics are only so-so. After the striking title page, the
twenty or so pictures which remain are mundane. They
rarely are of the scenes that are the most striking imaginatively and, even when they are, the graphics frequently
subtract from the moment. Confronted with a snarling
dog, for example, you hear the hum of the disk drive and
wait anxiously. What, then, do you get to see? A white, fat
snow-dog-of-the-north gazing blandly off-screen (toward
other graphics adventures, no doubt). In fact, Maria turns
out to be rather disappointing in her graphic depiction, as
well. She falls short of the wondrous renditions of the fair
ladies in Defender of the Crown (IBM). Frankly, by the
end of the game, this writer was more interested in the
barmaid at "The ICEhouse" ("crystal blue eyes" and "incredibly enchanting," but with no picture provided) than
in the woman my character was supposed to be saving.
We know that women can be presented more appealingly
on the computer screen, so the medium provides no excuse.
Beyond these criticisms, the major problem is that the
graphics lack action. There is no real sense of movement,
depth, or vitality. They reveal no necessary information.

A Textual Commendation
Actually, if Twilight's Ransom had been written three
years ago, I might have strongly recommended it. While
the game has no real mechanical problems (other than
the mapping which weakens the fictional premise), there
is nothing particularly inventive to recommend the game,
either. As long as one recognizes that Twilight's Ransom
is actually more of a serious text game than a graphic
presentation, one should consider purchasing it. It certainly has the capacity to keep you entertained.

Compuserve]
sysop of the Game's Forum on

NETWORKING THE
LIGHT FANTASTIC
Clues and Companions Are
Only a Modem Away
Two of CGW's contributors are intimately involved in an exciting aspect
of computer gaming: computer game
networking via communication networks. Patricia Fitzgibbons and Scorpia
share with us some of the advantages
of networking on Compuserve and
GEnie.

THE GAMERS'
FORUMS ON
COMPUSERVE
by Patricia Fitzgibbons

F

or five and a half years, The

Garners' Forum on CompuServe
has served as an indispensable
helpline to thousands of game players
throughout the world. When the forum
was established in 1982, members were
desperate for hints on how to succeed
in Wizardry and Zork. Now, forum members are still exchanging clues .. .
about the Wizardrys the Zorks, and
every other game imaginable. As long as
these complicated, delightful, and sometimes aggravating games continue to
stump players, The Gamers' Forum will
offer speedy relief.
Game players who join The Gamers'
Forum are often astounded by the
depth and breadth of information available. On a typical day, 350 to 400 messages are posted to the forum's message board. A substantial portion of that
daily total consists of hint requests and
responses, particularly in Section 1
(Text Adventures), Section 2 (Graphic
Adventures), and Section 9 (Computer
RPGs). Regular topics of discussion include Infocom's interactive fiction, Sierra On-Line's various Quest games,
Origin System's Ultima series, and the
Wizardry series from Sir-Tech.
The forum's 10-member staff of game
experts responds quickly to requests for
hints or help. At the same time, forum
members themselves enjoy exchanging
tips and clues with one another. According to Scot Loomis of Hawaii, "The best

thing about the hint service in Garners'
is that it's such a give-and-take thing.
There are always people online who can
help you get unstuck, and there are always people online who need your help."
Frequent questions range from,
"Where can I find food in Ultima V?" to
"How do I get those last few points in
Space Quest II?" Players usually prefer
indirect clues, but for those who are at
their wits' end, the forum's private message function allows the posting of explicit answers.
Game vendors (including program
designers and customer service reps
from Electronic Arts, Infocom, Sierra
On-Line, Activision, Sir-Tech, Origin
Systems, MicroProse, Epyx, Interplay Productions, Datasoft, and New
World Computing) respond to questions and complaints via the message
board and during real-time conferences.
The forum's extensive file libraries contain maps for games such as Wizardry
and Deathlord, and transcripts of online
conferences with game designers Brian
Moriarty (Beyond Zork), Roberta Williams (King's Quest), Jon Van
Caneghem (Might and Magic), and
many others. The companion online
magazine, THE ELECTRONIC GAMER
(tm), publishes detailed reviews, hints,
and step-by-step walkthrus for hundreds
of games.
The Gamers' Forum is certainly vast
and very active, but members are quick
to point out how much they enjoy the
warm and friendly atmosphere; online acquaintances often become good friends,
no matter how great the distances between them. Take, for example, James
Shobert of Commack, New York and
Kazuhiro Narita of Kyoto, Japan, who
helped each other solve "Return of
Werdna" with half-English, half-Japanese
hints and tips. Now they're tackling Warriors of Destiny," and as Kaz said in a
recent forum message to Jim, "We were
Werdna friends. Now we are Ultima
friends."
[Ed. Note: Patricia Fitzgibbons is the

Copyright (c) 1988 by Patricia Fitzgibbons. All rights reserved.

ADVENTURING
ON GENIE
by Scorpia
t's 9:30 PM and you're stuck. You've
gotten through most of the game,
but now you've hit a mental block.
The last puzzle seems insoluble. You've
tried everything you can think of. Nothing worked. A sudden desire to chew on
the disk wells up within you. Smashing
your fist through the monitor seems like
a good idea. Unprintable words make
their way through clenched teeth. You
are in the last stages of AGFAdventure Game Frustration.

I

Ah, but if you're lucky enough to have
a modem hooked up to your computer,
relief is just a phone call away. The
Games RoundTable on GEnie can help
you solve your problems. Game players
from across the nation congregate here,
giving each other hints and tips to make
it past those obstacles. For those who
need a bit more than a gentle nudge,
the online libraries have complete
walkthrus, detailed instructions for finishing an adventure.
That's just the beginning. In the
libraries you can also find reviews,
games to download, transcripts of conferences, and a wealth of other material.
The bulletin board area lets you exchange notes with other garners, or
even play games by message. In the
RTC (Real-Time Conference, or CO),
you can "talk" directly to other members,
or attend a special meeting with a guest
speaker (such as Brian Moriarty of Infocom), or play in the weekly Trivia
game. There's also an informal conference every Thursday night (hosted by
yours truly), where members can get
together and chat about games.
Product support is an important part of
the RoundTable. Many fine companies
have representatives who regularly
check in online to answer questions
from the members, and post information
on the latest releases and conversions.
Currently online for product support are
Electronic Arts, Epyx, Origin Systems, Infocom, Digital Illusions, SirTech, and Interstel, with more to
come. Newly arrived on the RT is Amarillo Design Bureau, publishers of the
popular board games Star Fleet and

(Continued on page 54)

Video Gaming World

S

cience fiction meets

all-out combat action
in Konami's home
edition of the popular coinop game, Contra. Ignore the
atrocious name. This jumping and shooting cartridge
delivers fast-paced excitement for one or two players.
It can be enjoyed solitaire or
two players each can control
a hero in order to combine
against the enemy hordes.
No one took much notice
when the giant meteorite
landed in the Amazon basin
30 years ago, but now there
is a full-fledged alien base in
the jungle under the command of the terrifying Red
Falcon. Political considerations prevent a full assault
by U. S. armed forces, so
our government has dispatched a pair of commandos to penetrate the eight
defense zones and destroy
the extra-terrestrial beachhead and its commander.

Action begins when the
character jumps off the
helicopter and runs across
the scrolling and beautifully
drawn playfield toward the
alien stronghold. The control
pad moves the hero left and
right, while buttons "A" and
"B" govern, respectively,
jumping and firing his
weapon. Each commando
gets three "lives" in which to
reach the final confrontation
with he Red Falcon.
The "Start" button pauses
the action, blessed relief for
those who want to rest between game phases.
Another handy feature is the
ability to continue a game at
the point at which the previous one ended.
Most enemies charge recklessly from the right, but
dangers menace from every
direction. Pill boxes, which
track the commando, are
the most dangerous.
Destroying a flying capsule

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:

Karnov
Nintendo
1
$29.95
DatEs
SanJoseCA

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE
PUBLISHER:

Contra
Nintendo
1-2
$36.95
Konami
Wood Dale, IL,

or pillbox sensor provides an
opportunity to acquire more
power. When one of these
objects explodes, a "powerup" Falcon symbol appears.
If it is captured, one of
seven special weapons
replaces a standard gun.
Depending on the symbol,
the player's character gets
anything from a machine
gun to a fire ball projector.
This extra firepower comes
in might handy, because the
Red Falcon's supply of
henchmen sometimes
seems inexhaustible.
Two-player contests are always in demand, because
most video games are
designed for a solo gamer.
Contra is doubly welcome,
because it is a truly outstanding action epic.
Arnie Katz

N

o,

Karnov is not the
Johnny Carson
character who knows
the answer before anyone
asks the question. He is a
fire-breathing, bald-headed
Russian strongman who is
called on by the peaceloving townspeople of

Creamina to pull their collective chestnuts of the fire
when a dragon comes to
town. The villainous dragon
is named Ryu and he has
stolen the ancient "Treasure
of Babylon" from the
Creaminans and left behind
a legion of geeks, mutants,
and monsters to terrorize
them.
Player-surrogate Karnov is
a former circus strongman
with the ability to hurl
fireballs. This comes in very
handy in this running, jumping, and climbing game,
adapted from the popular
Data East coin-op. Ryu's
minions are a lethal lot and
include such party favorites
as: Gidora, a two-headed
flying dragon; Rock Man,
who hurls gigantic boulders;
Snake Woman; Chicken
Bone; and Lion Keeper,
whose beast shoots deadly
bolts from its mouth while
he, himself, throws knives!
The best thing about Karnov, however, is the variety
of objects salted about the
horizontally-scrolling playfield
which can be used by Karnov to aid him in his quest.
There are boots which
double his leaping ability,
bombs, ladders,
boomerangs, magic glasses,
a swimming mask (for the
underwater action at Level
Five), wings, shields, and "K
marks" (fifty of which are

PUBLISHER:

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Raid on Bungling Bay
Nintendo
1-2
$29.95
Broderbund
San Rafael, CA

good for an extra life). There
is even a magic "clapper"
which, when invoked, will
destroy all on-screen badniks (with the exception of
that level's Boss Monster).
Karnov takes the basic play
mechanic and side-view
visual perspective of Super
Mario Brothers and stages it
in an earth tone netherworld
full of stalking zombies and
other diabolic denizens who
literally spring from mid-air
or, sometimes, mid-earth.
Karnov is an off-beat, fairly
interesting variation on a
familiar videogame play
mechanic.
Bill Kunkel

a

R
aid

on Bungling Bay
a classic computer
game that adapts perfectly to the Nintendo
videogame format. Players
'
control a carrier-based
helicopter which must singlehandedly destroy the war
machine of the conquestminded "Bungling Empire."
The copter, based in Bungling Bay, the heart of the
Bungling military build-up, is
armed with a machine gun
and up to nine bombs. It
can fly in any of 16 directions.
The player's specific goal is
to obliterate the six secret

factories which produce the
Bungling's armaments.
The entire Bungling Empire encompasses 100
screens (10 x 10), laid out
wraparound-style. The variable-speed helicopter moves
over the smoothly-scrolling
playfields encountering radar
installations, tanks, gun turrets, bombers, righter jets,
two kinds of missiles, patrol
boats, and battleships, all of
whose sole purpose is the
protection of the Empire's
six munitions factories.

marketed during the last
videogame craze, but admitted it didn't know how
many of the titles were actually available. Atari agreed
to reword the advertising,
putting a temporary end to
the court battle between the

of 1988. The game combines animated graphics and
action with on-screen text to
develop an ambitious plot
based on the Stallone movie
. . . . Scott Carpenter, one of
the original seven astronauts
and second American to

two videogame companies .
. . ."The Facts On Home
Video Games from the man
who plays games for a
living," a booklet written by
Howard Phillips III, contains
tips on how to select a game
system, plus some information about the benefits of
video gameplay. For a free
copy, write to Nintendo of
America, Inc., P. 0. Box
957, Redmond, WA 98052 .
. . Acclaim Entertainment
won the videogame rights
for Rambo: First Blood Part
II and will market the title, its
sixth for the Nintendo Entertainment System, in Spring

orbit the earth, is orbiting
the U. S. as spokesman for
The Sega Challenge, a five
game-test to encourage
youngsters to develop their
potentials. Two Sega
videogames (Out Run and
Shooting Gallery) test
hand/eye coordination and
reflexes. The Write Stuff (mirror-writing) tests visual perception; the Ring Maze
(manipulate a ring through
an electrified and curvy
course) challenges handsteadiness; and Space Balls
(sorting air-borne colored
balls) requires quick decisionmaking skills. Carpenter is

The impressive graphics
employ an overhead perspective to good effect and the
flawless scrolling program
gives Raid on Bungling Bay
a sense of great fun and
high adventure with realistic
overtones. It is nice to play a
videogame which takes
place in a "real world" environment. Tanks and bombers make for a nice changeof-pace from dragons, ogres,
and elves.
Bill Kunkel

Video Gaming
World's
Newswire
Compiled by Joyce Worley
Sega just unveiled the
world's first four megabyte
cartridge, After Burner.
Based on Sega's own coinsnatcher, it features a white
jet fighter with raked-back
wings, turbocharged engine,
in a dogfight against
camouflaged enemy jets and
helicopter gunships. The
players mans wing-mounted
cannons and homing missiles, through day and night
scenarios, over varied terrain
. . . .Joysticks up, to Nintendo and Atari for stopping
an ugly slug-fest. Nintendo
sued Atari, alleging false and
misleading television advertising for the Atari XE Video
Game System. Atari's initial
ads claimed the new system
plays hundreds of games, although the company currently offered only four dozen
games. Atari produced a list
of 158 third-party cartridges

appearing in malls and
youth centers all over the
country this summer, playing games and talking to
kids about doing their personal best . . . . Activision's
runaway hit, Shanghai, will
be available this summer for
the NES. This puzzler, which
requires players to match
pairs from 144 randomized
picture tiles, topped many
"Year's Best" computer
award lists and promises to
equally entrance Nintendo
gamers . . . . The survival
game craze inspired LJN
Toys to create Gotcha! The
Sport. The settings for the
armed combat game range
from woodlands to ghettoes
to winterscapes. When you
zap one of the armed opponents, the hit is registered
with a bright colored paint
spot . . . . Major League
Baseball (LJN Toys) lets
NESers choose the line-ups
based on actual stats, then
make managerial decisions.
Recreate the World Series,
All Star, and regular season
games, using all 26 major
league teams . . . . The Nintendo NES Advantage joystick (around $50.00) has a
weighted stabilizing base,
plus two turbo adjusters that
adjust the rapid-fire action of
each button, and a slow-mo
feature to retard the action
on some Nintendo game titles. It makes targets easier
to hit, so even a mediocre
player can be an ace.

INVISIBLE
BULLETS:
Software for the
Sega Light
Phaser
by Bill Kunkel and
Arnie Katz
Back in the early '70s, in
the first blush of the
videogame revolution,
manufacturers went crazy
looking for new peripherals
that would distinguish their
systems from the other
hardware choking the
marketplace. They turned to

elaborate paddle controllers,
steering wheels, and eventually, to light guns for the
answer.
Most of those early guns
were poorly-constructed and
proved unsatisfactory, both
in terms of durability and
player enjoyment. For one
thing, the technology to
produce an inexpensive, yet
coherent beam of light
which could be directed at a
small point on a television
screen did not exist at that
point. In most cases, simply
aiming the pistol in the
general direction of the TV
was sufficient to obliterate
anything on-screensort of
a videogame version of
shooting fish in a barrel.

player hones his skill sufficiently to "qualify" at this
range, he moves on and up
into a sky full of balloons
and zeppelins which prove
elusive targets, in spite of
their size. The third range
holds a series of sectioned
pipes with small spaces in
between them. Target balls
move through this tubing
and can only be hit during
the brief period in which
they are exposed as they
travel from pipe to pipe. The

should also appeal to target
shooters. Marksman Shooting & Trap Shooting ($30)
offers a pair of contests
which are both unusual and
well-executed. Marksman
Shooting takes the player to
a police-style range where
targets, in the shape of
human torsos, move along a
series of slots at a variety of
distances. The illusion of
depth is especially well-done
here, with more distant targets smaller than the middle

These video shotguns worsened their impression on
users by breaking down
within the first month of
ownership. After that, the
gun sat in its console
holster, a visible reminder
that no satisfactory alternative to actual target shooting
was available, or seemed likely to be.
Almost two decades later,
the necessary technology
finally arrived, and would-be
video marksmen should now
shrug off any unfavorable
old preconceptions about
the quality of light guns. The
Sega Light Phaser is the
state-of-the-art in computerized target shooting, a
sleekly designed handgun
that fits easily into large or
small hands and, more importantly, shoots the tightest
beam of light this side of
laser technology.
Of course, videogame light
guns are only as viable as
the software they interface
with, but Sega has done a
superb job of providing a
wide range of such
programs.
Shooting Gallery
($30/Sega) blends spectacular visual effects and excellent audio to produce an
extremely satisfying traditional target game. A mountainous backdrop in the
midst of a bird migration is
the first of four shooting ranges through which the
player advances. Once the

final range is, literally, out of
this world. It is an outer
space scene filled with target
ships that are only vulnerable when their shields
are down.
The target objects in this
game are not only beautifully drawn and colored, but actually respond to gunfire in a
realistic manner (the balloons, for example, deflect
shots that are not dead center). The best thing about
Shooting Gallery, though, is
that even misses have an effect. The background paintings, you see, are just that.
They are paintings hung
against a brick wall. When a
shot misses a target, it blasts
away a section of the back-ground painting instead,
revealing the bricks behind.
This is not only satisfying
from an aesthetic point of
view, but lets the user know
exactly where each shot
goes, allowing him to readjust his aim.
Sega's newest addition to
their Light Phaser games

or front ones.
Trap Shooting, however, is
even more interesting, since
the player shoots clay targets
which are launched against
a series of breathtaking backdrops. The traps (which are
launched two-at-a-time) are
fired from the foreground of
the screen toward the background and, again, the illusion of distance is simply
remarkable.
Marksmen who prefer their
action to be less symbolic
should enjoy Gangster
Town ($30). Here, the player
takes on a gang of vicious
thugs as they make their
getaway after a robbery and
head for a gangster version
of Hole-in-the-Wall, the Old
West sanctuary for lawbreakers. The game begins
by establishing the user's
skill level with a series of target boards (similar to those
found in Marksman Shooting). Then, the player sets
off after the gangsters'
1920s style automobile,
shooting at the robbers as

their car swerves from one
side of the road to the other
to avoid your fire. finlike
Shooting Gallery, however,
these targets shoot back
and, as their car nears
Gangster Town, a biplane
appears and starts chucking
bombs at the player. These
missiles must be detonated
by the Light Phaser before
they reach the bottom of the
screen.
Gangster Town takes the
player through several
scenarios once they reach
the town, including
shootouts: on the street
(where innocent hostages
may be captured for use as
human shields by the
thugs); in the saloon headquarters of the mob; and, ultimately, at the docks where
the Big Boss awaits for the
final showdown.
Again, the graphics are first
rate with many cute touches,
such as the gangsters becoming "angels" once they
are shot (the player can then
shoot the angels for extra
points!)
With Missile Defense 3-D
($40), Sega married two of
their special products; the
Light Phaser and the 3-D system. This combination
results in an absolutely spectacular videogame which
takes target shooting to an
entirely new level.
The player is cast in the
role of a god-like being
whose sole objective is to
prevent nuclear armageddon. When an Eastern or
Western nation launches a
salvo of nuclear missiles, the
user dons his 3-D glasses,
readies his Light Phaser, and
starts blasting away, tracking
the bombs across a series of
eye-popping screens which
employ first-person and overhead perspectives.
The Sega Light Phaser and
accompanying software
takes the idea of videogame
target shooting to undreamed-of heights. Each
entertainment offers a unique variation on the
marksmanship them with
state-of-the-art sound and
visuals.
Gentlemen, prepare your
weapons.

g

he

indirect shooting was joined by
aimed fire from 2 Troop's
Leopards' 105 mm guns, concentrating on T-72s before switching to
BMPs--the targets visible to the gunners
through rifts in the smoke and dust.
DND Canada Training Manual B-GL309-006/FT-001

T

In 1984, the Canadian
Department of National
Defense published an interesting training aid. Instead of the usual dry
textbook approach, a fictionalized hypothetical
battle was presented as a
novel. As each phase of
the battle is described,
the "controlling factors"
of the action at that
stage are pointed out to
the reader. It was an experiment in a new instructional technique.
The present writer does
not know how well it
worked, but the book
makes for an extremely
realistic and detailed tale.

provide the battered American Army VII
Corps sufficient time to filter to the rear
and realign the front.

tion 1) for the Soviets. There are 125
points available. The following force will
use 102 points.

The Canadians moved through the
night. Finally, they were able to take up
defensive positions on a ridge overlooking an autobahn. In hastily built

2 Tank Companies (option 38; 10
points each) 2 Motorized Rifle Battalions
(option 39; 34 points each) 1 Recon
Company (option 41; 4 points) 1 Artillery Battalion (option 42;
10 points).

First Clash

NATO: Do not use
auto-select for the NATO
forces. Select West German (option 2) forces.
Use Old Equipment (option 0). Canadian forces,
like West German, use a
mixture of US and German equipment.
There are 100 points
available to the NATO
side. The force mix below
will take 72 of them.
2 Panzergrenadier Companies (option 15; 12
points each) 2 Panzer
Companies (option 13;
17 points each) 1
Jagdpanzer Company
(option 20; 7 points) 1
Recon Company (option
17; 14 points) 1 Artillery
Company (option 18; 10
points).

DND Canada training
manual B-GL-309006/FT-001 was
reprinted by Sterling
Press under the title
First Clash. The present
scenario is based on a
small part of the opening
battle described in that
book.
This scenario is set up
to be played using SSI's
popular modern tactical
system, Mech Brigade. A
new IBM conversion of
Mech Brigade has recently been released. While
the game is largely unchanged from the earlier
versions, the IBM translation includes keypad cursor control and it is not
copy protected, so installation on a hard disk is
possible. As well, a few small problems
with unit changes have been eliminated.
Now, when a unit type is changed, all associated data is altered, including screen
icon and weapons load.

Modern Conventional
Combat Using
Mech Brigade

Background to the Battle
The war was still conventional, but
NATO was under extreme pressure. The
4th Canadian Brigade Group was
rushed into place to hold against advancing Soviet Forces. The objective was to

by Regan Carey and David Thiel
entrenchments they waited .. .

Setting Up the Scenario
Boot up the game normally and select
to Build Your Own scenario with Two
Players. When asked, select a map
without a river and with a terrain density
of 0. This scenario is a Soviet Assault
(option 4) and is a Large battle (option
1).
Soviet: Do not use auto-select for the
Soviet forces. Select Old Equipment (op-

Soviet Unit Adjustment, Deployment,
and Map Creation: Do
not choose auto-deployment for the Soviet forces. The first step is to
build a customized map.
Clear all computer
generated terrain from
the map by changing
any existing terrain to
clear (terrain type 0).
Don't forget to also clear
any terrain that is
enclosed by slopes. Even
though a symbol doesn't
show up on the map, it
is set up as high ground.

Now, change the map as shown in the
accompanying diagram. It is a reasonably accurate rendition of a part of West
Germany where combat is anticipated.
The two parallel slope lines delineate a
ridge line that crosses the area from
north to south. Be sure to specify that
the terrain between the ridge lines is
higher than the surrounding countryside
(terrain type 29).
Once you have built the map, the next
step is to adjust the forces involved. The
assets that are supplied by the game

have to be adjusted to reflect the
weapons systems actually used in the
battle. Make the changes to the equipment listed below. Use the Space Bar to
indicate that a change is desired, not the
"9" key as specified in the documentation.

The Divisional HQ's Zsu 23/4 should
be changed to an SA-8 unit. The artillery should be altered to supply additional mobile assets: change one M1974
unit to BRDM-2s (wpn# 19).
The Soviet units should be deployed

as follows: Divisional HQ and assets in
and around the woods at 55,9. One
Tank Co and one Motorized Rifle Btn in
and around the woods at 51, 5. One
Tank Co and one Motorized Rifle Btn in
and around the northeastern town
squares of Rastatt (coordinates 51,15).

Recon Co along the start line. Artillery
Btn in and around the woods at 55,9.
BRDM-2 Platoon (from changed Arty
unit) with either main group at 51,5 or
51,15.
NATO Unit Adjustment and Deployment: Do not use auto-deployment for
the NATO forces. Make the following
changes. NATO: The Brigade HQ
should have its Gepard unit changed to
M901 (wpn# 16) and its Rolands to
Luchs (wpn# 22). The Pzg Companies
should have their Milans changed to
TOWs (wpn# 55). The Jaguars should
be changed to M150's (wpn# 15). Make
one of the M109 artillery unit into an
M113-M (wpn# 37). Unless they are
deployed carefully, the NATO assets will
almost certainly be annihilated. The
Canadians' only real chance comes from
good positioning of their troops.
The deployment listed below represents that described in the First Clash
narrative. Whenever infantry units are
specified, include their M-113s and
TOWs. You may wish to select your own
start locations. Brigade HQ, Artillery
HQ, 2 Artillery Platoons, and M113-M in

the westernmost city squares of Iffezheim (near coordinates 17,7). One infantry Co dispersed in the three town
squares of Blickheim (coordinates 31,6;
31,7; 32,7). Two infantry Ptns and two
Leopard Ptns in and around Favorite
(coordinates 32,14; 32,15). One Ptn of
infantry held in reserve in the entrenchments at 21,11. One Leopard Platoon
and the Leopard HQ in the woods at
25,9. Recon HQ and a Leopard Ptn in
the woods at 25,8. One Leopard Plt in
the entrenchment at 27,5. One
Leopard Pit in the woods at 32,16.
Luchs Plts scattered through out the orchards, near the start line. Jpz HQ and
a Leopard Co in reserve in the entrenchments at 21,11. One M150 Plt at 27,5,
one M150 Plt at 27,9 and one M150 Ptn
at 27,11.
Once all the preparatory work is done,
save the scenario to disk. It can then be
recalled for two player, solitaire, or computer vs computer play. Good luck.

Notes on Play
Most attacks are not intended to be

balanced. By definition, the attacking
force seeks to defeat the defenders, and
whenever possible waits for numerical
superiority before mounting the attack.
The battles in First Clash are meant to
be realistic, as opposed to fiction where
the good guys always win. The segment
of the battle depicted in the scenario
presented in this article is a case in
point. It is a tough job for the Canadians
to hold out against the Warsaw Pact forces. That is exactly how the Red forces
planned it!
By the way, in the hypothetical battle,
Canadians were forced out of their positions by the Soviets. However, they did
delay the Soviet assault. Realistically,
that is about all they could hope to do.
If you would like to read more about
this hypothetical battle and the events associated with it, try First Clash from
Sterling Press, ISBN 0-85368-736-6.
Used by permission of Sterling Publishing Co., Inc., Two Park Avenue, New
York, NY 10016 from First Clash by Kenneth Macksey, c 1984, 1985 by DND
Canada.

TAKING A PEEK
(Continued from page 10)
known as the "Harrier." The simulated
ability to VIFF (Vector in Forward Flight),
instantly change the direction of air
thrust and decelerate rapidly, makes this
one somewhat different than other
simulators and the Harrier's normal use
in tactical attack missions makes the
scenarios exciting. IBM ($34.95). Circle
Reader Service #14.

Psygnosis Ltd.
1st Floor, Port of Liverpool
Building
Pier Head, Liverpool
Merseyside, United Kingdom, L3
1BY
OBLITERATOR: As Drak, the ultimate
warrior of your civilization, you have infiltrated an alien spaceship in order to
sabotage and disable it. This is an action
game with very sophisticated graphics, a
la the company's "Terrorpods." The
player's "Obliterator" must successfully locate and remove four different shaped

components to cripple the alien ship, as
well as locate and use another component to implement his escape, in
order to win the game. Amiga, Atari ST
(n.p.). Circle Reader Service Card #15.

Silicon Beach Software
P.O. Box 261430
San Diego, CA 92126
APACHE STRIKE: In this arcade
game, players pilot an AH-64 Apache
through an urban environment of 3-D
shapes. The scenario seems reminiscent
of "Blue Thunder" or "Airwolf' in that one
is dogfighting in the midst of a
metropolitan area. Macintosh ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #16.
BEYOND DARK CASTLE: In this sequel to the popular "Dark Castle," Prince
Duncan must defeat the same kinds of
bats, zombies, and other monsters as in
the earlier adventure. The new twists include the negotiation of two mazes with
full-screen scrolling effects and the use
of a jet-pack a la "Rocketeer." Macintosh
($49.95). Circle Reader Service Card #17.

Spectrum Holobyte

2061 Challenger Drive
Alameda, CA 94501
PT-109: Named after the late President
John F. Kennedy's World War II command, this patrol torpedo boat simulation allows the player to combat submarines with depth charges, launch torpedoes against enemy surface ships, attempt to engage ships with surface
guns, and defend against attacks from
the air/sea. The game even allows
players to outfit the boats according to
the point in the war the mission takes
place. Early in the war, the PT-boats carried few weapons. Later, they carried full
arsenals. Macintosh ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #18.

Sports Simulation Software
2100 Tanglewilde #165
Houston, TX 77063
PRO FOOTBALL SIMULATOR: This
sophisticated sports simulation is a
detailed statistical competition (text only)
which allows two players an in-depth approach to professional football. Players

make individual player substitutions for a
full 45 man roster; choose from eight offensive/five defensive formations; and
over 40 offensive/10-35 defensive plays
per formation. IBM with CGA or EGA req.
($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #19.

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
1046 N. Rengstorff Avenue
Mountain View, CA 94043
STELLAR CRUSADE: The People's
Holy Republic (certainly, a cool-headed

bunch of moderates) battles The League
in a game of exploitation and conquest
to decide who controls a small, but richly
endowed, star cluster within their galaxy.
Each turn involves an economic phase,
movement phase, and resolution phase
(where combat takes place and results of
economic decisions are given). Several
different scenarios and a short campaign
should keep this one fresh and playable
for a long time after the mechanics are
mastered. Atari ST, IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #20.

EDITORIAL:

THE
NINTENDO
THREAT?
e realize that many computer owners, software designers, and entertainment
software publishers are concerned
about the perceived Nintendo threat
to the health of the entertainment
software industry. Since we have introduced a Video Gaming World section in our magazine, some hard and
cold facts must be addressed. According to figures presented by Dave
Morse, CEO of Epyx:

W

In 1983, there were 25 1/2 million
hardware systems for video games in
the United States;
In 1984, the market was dead:
In 1985, Nintendo had placed
100,000 units in the United States;
In 1986, Nintendo had 1.4 million
units in the U.S.; and
In 1987, Nintendo had 4.1 million
units in the U.S. The Japanese firm
has 70% of the game system market
and, at the present time, the Nintendo cartridge market is bigger than
the entire home computer software
market. The executive also went on
to say that both Nintendo and Sega

have 16-bit systems which will soon
arrive on the market.
Both optimistic and pessimistic
views are often expressed. Bruce
Davis, CEO of Activision, believes
in the concept of a dedicated game
machines and suggests that they
serve their purpose more efficiently
than the traditional C.P.U.: "If
hardware companies are designing
machines for one purpose, they will
do a better job than on a multi-function machine." He went on to suggest that it is preferable to have a
dedicated game machine in the
home than to risk one's children
damaging a hard disk to install a
game. Doug Carlston, co-founder of
Broderbund, cites the average age
of users [Nintendo users average 813 years old, while the PC user base
averages 28 years old.] and contends: "We assume that the younger
users will grow up and presumably,
turn to the multifunctional machines
and that their Nintendo and Sega experiences will not be negative." On
the other hand, Dave Morse insisted

Titus Software, Inc.
20432 Corisco St.
Chatsworth, CA 91311
CRAZY CARS: This arcade style
racing game allows players to race a Mercedes 560 SEC, Porsche 911 Turbo, Lamborghini Countach, or Ferrari GTO over
six different road courses. Within those
options, there are seventy-two different
levels for driving cars at up to 189 M.P.H.
Amiga, Atari ST, IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #21.

that, "In the long term, we are a computer-oriented industry, not a video
game industry" He stated that Nintendo is already on the "down cycle"
in Japan and observed that there
was an attitudinal difference between the game system consumer
and the computer software consumer. The latter involves enthusiasts and the former involves a
fashion-oriented marketplace. Basically, he believes that the current emphasis on game systems will cause a
confusion with the mature buyer.
In a "No Man's Land" of controversy, where should CGW be? Should
we expand our publication's focus to
meet the needs of a broader constituency? Should we treat the designers and publishers of video games
as anathema or attempt, on this subject as in others, to insist that the ultimate judge of a software product is
an informed marketplace. We want
to help inform those 8-13 year olds
about video games, because we
want to welcome them into the more
sophisticated world of computer
gaming that CGW has tried to support throughout its history. We want
to try to help those youngsters get
enough satisfaction and stimulation
from playing on their game systems
that they become enthusiasts within
the more mature hobby. In short,
anything that builds up the number
of active participants in this global
village we like to call the "computer
gaming world" (consumers, designers, and publishers of entertainment software around the world)
makes each person's special interests in the field that much more likely to survive.

spell handy, as there are many portals to go up and down
in this one. All parts of a level are not accessible from that
level; you'll have to use portals to reach those areas.

Bard's Tale III

(Continued from page 21)

Thief of Fate

You'll come across some old friends (?) in this dungeon
(one on level 1, two on level 2, and three on level 3), and
at each one you must do something. When you have
finished the sixth one, the way to Tarjan will be open.

Tenebrosia has its moments of tedium. There is a large
Shadow Canyon you must walk around in (use that auto-map
feature!) to find a certain object. There is also a tar pit you must
slosh through in order to obtain something that will help you acquire a second object. The tar pit is a nasty place, draining hit
points at each step (except along the perimeter), with spinners
placed around the area you need to reach. Healing spells are
definitely in order here (unless you happen to have found a nospin ring), as teleporting is not possible. You really must walk
through the stuff.

Of course, you'll have to do some fighting before you
reach him. There are several fixed encounters along the
way that cannot be avoided. The most difficult one will
probably be at the lava bridge, where a collection of nasty
monsters await you: some of them are highly resistant to
spells (the Vortexes in particular), so some hand-to-hand
combat will be necessary. Try to keep your mages away
from the Vortexes, as a single hit from one will immediately drain all spell points (non-mages are not affected by
this, of course, but they will take damage from the hit).

After all that, you will be ready to go into the dungeon. Your
opponent here is going to
be frustrating. He's quite immune to spells, and will use
spells of his own to keep
you far away from him.
There's only one way to kill
him, and you've probably
figured out by now what
that is.

Something
Borrowed
Now you're ready for Tarmitia, another underground-only
region, which in some ways is worse then Tenebrosia. There
are, all told, nine levels to this dungeon. Eight of them supposedly represent cities from Earth's past that are under siege
(such as Rome, Troy, Hiroshima, Berlin, etc). There are several
"time portals" in each city that will take you to others (the portals
are two-way).
The only things of interest in any of these dungeons are a
death's-head in each one, and a name. The trick is to connect
up the names you hear with the death's head in the cities; each
one has a different name. Yes, I'm afraid you're in for a lot of
running around in this place.
When you've been all around and correctly identified all the
death's-heads, you will be asked for one more name. The right
answer will transport you to the final level, where you will face an
opponent almost as nasty as the one in Tenebrosia.
One thing to be aware of here is that one of the dungeon messages is a red herring. As you pass by a door, the game will tell
you that you feel great magical power to the south. However,
the room south is actually quite empty; there's nothing in it.
Save yourself some time and just keep going when that message appears.
When you return from Tarmitia, you will walk into an unpleasant surprise: Tarjan has struck down the guild elder. He will
not give any experience for completing the dungeon, nor will he
be able to advance anyone in level. However, he will live long
enough to give you directions to the final dungeon (Malefia),
and tell you where to pick up all the items you've returned to
him so far (and do make sure you take all of them with you!).
Malefia, as you may have guessed, is another underground
area. Fortunately, it is only three levels deep. Keep your levitate

So you finally reach Tarjan the Wimp. Tarjan doesn't do
any fighting of his own, he just calls in other monsters to
do it for him. As you can circumvent that rather easily with
a single spell, Tarjan is not exactly all that formidable an
opponent. On the other hand, there is only one way to kill
him, which you should easily be able to figure out, since
you get a blatant clue somewhere in the earlier part of the
dungeon (it is also, under the circumstances, rather nonsensical). [Ed. Nonsensical? It could be argued that the
method fits the story.]

Something Brute
The actual ending of the game is a little outrageous, although not exactly spectacular. On the other hand, no
other game has ever given out such an enormous reward
(which, alas, you don't get to enjoy, since the game stops
there).
Most of the puzzles in the game are fairly straightforward,
although the magic mouths of previous Tales are pretty
much a thing of the past. In most cases, solutions do not
depend on slogging through dungeons to gather obscure
phrases. Rather, various objects must be found and their
uses determined in order to pass obstacles.
Combat overall is pretty much the same as in Bard's II,
except for the addition of the thief's ability to sneak up on
an opponent from behind. Two new complete sets of
spells have been added for the Chronomancer and
Geomancer, plus three special spells that any mage can
learn.
These spells make your party incredibly powerful. Except
when facing opponents that are highly spell-resistant or
have huge amounts of hit points, your characters can
often blow away herds of monsters in a single round, with
just a couple of spells. The power balance is thus very
much weighted in the party's favor, making the majority of
encounters fairly routine and not very exciting.
Overall, Bard's III is an improvement over II, although
still too heavily oriented towards mega-combat. Puzzles are
certainly better, but the dungeons are not as good or interesting as they could be, since auto-mapping (as well as
the Pathfinder spell) makes them far too easy [Ed.: Easy
for you to say!] to get through.
Bottom line: Better, but hack-and-slash still dominates
more than it should.
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

(Continued from page 23)

Write On!

When you're done with that, you should be about
ready for the Citadel. It is never made entirely clear
as to why it's necessary to assault this place, as
there is nothing to indicate that the Guardians are
particularly evil (strange, yes). However, they too
have a vault, with some very good armor in it, and
you'll be needing that armor for the end game (boy,
will you need it!). Rockets and energy weapons will
be most helpful in dealing with the Citadel denizens.
Don't forget to poke around the other places in the
Citadel; you might find a few interesting items.

One more thing: while the game writes often to
disk, and there are many one-time items, almost
nothing is truly irrevocable. If you make a mistake
on disks 2, 3, or 4, you can always create a new
copy and try again (there is really no reason why
anyone should have to restart the game). The only
time you can run into trouble is if you make a mistake on disk 1.

You'll want as many power packs as you can possibly carry for your journey through the end game,
and these are not for sale anywhere, so don't waste
'em. Use regular weapons (Uzis, assault rifles, etc)
for the piddling monsters in the desert or towns.
Stocking up on rockets is another good idea, and
you'll probably want to bring along some plastic explosives for contrary doors, as well as a rad suit or
two.
The final base (once you get inside) may not seem
to have much, but as we all know, looks can be
deceiving. A perceptive person might just discover
a secret or two that will lead you onwards to destiny
or something. At the penultimate moment, remember that there's a reason for that disband command
and I hope you can run fast. Grin!

Then you might have problems, so it's good practice to backup disk 1 every so often. This can be
done easily (for you Apple owners) with good old
COPYA. While this isn't able to make a new disk
(you have to use the utility that comes with the
game), it works perfectly in creating backups of existing play disks.
Well (peeking at the invisible clock), I see that it's
about that time again. Remember if you need help
with an adventure game, you can reach me in the
following ways:
On The Source: send SMail to ST1030. On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under the Groups and
Clubs menu). On GEnie: Stop by the Games
Roundtable (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
By US Mail (those living in the United States must
enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if they
want a reply): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Grade Station,
New York, NY 10028.
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Networking The
Light Fantastic
(Continued from page 39)
Federation & Empire. Each company
has its own area on the RT, making
them easy to find.
The Games RT also provides areas
where players of GEnie's multi-player online games, such as Stellar Emperor and
the extremely popular Air Warrior (the ultimate in flight simulation/combat) can
exchange hints, brag, or make suggestions for improving the game.
Whatever your gaming interest: adventure games, role-playing games,
war/strategy, action/arcade, multiplayer,
computer or non-computer, the Games
RoundTable on GEnie has it all. Come
visit soon!
Copyright (c) 1988 by Scorpia. All
rights reserved.
[Ed. Note: Scorpia is the SysOp for the
Games RoundTable on GEnie.]

Reader Input Device #48
On this page, a number of games and articles are listed for evaluation, as well as some general interest questions. For each game
which you have played or article which you have read, place a 1
(terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to the appropriate number on
the card provided opposite page 4.

The Computer Gaming World Hall of
Fame honors those games that over the
course of time have proven themselves
to be top rated games by the readers of
CGW. Members of the CGW Hall of
Fame are chosen by the staff of CGW.
Once inducted into the Hall, the game
will be retired from the current Game
Ratings List. As a consumer you can be
assured that any game in the CGW
Hall of Fame is an all-time favorite.

Game Ratings
"Starflight"'s hit points were reduced enough for "Dungeon
Master" to reach the apex of the Action/Adventure ratings.
With "Empire" continuing its conquest of the Strategy side, ST
owners will be pleased to know that they have gotten respect.
In the Action/Adventure category, "Pirates" swashbuckled its

way into third position, giving Microprose and Electronic Arts
three products respectively in the top ten.
On the Strategy side, the top five positions remain unchanged, only the numbers have been changed to respect
the outstanding. The big mystery is, with "Gettysburg," "Rebel
Charge at Chickamauga," and "Battle of Antietam" so highly
rated, why has "Shiloh: The Turning Point" started off so slowly? Have readers been rating the antique "Battle of Shiloh"
rather than the new, improved version? This issue, we offer a
chance to rate this new release, yet again.

