Number 34

January/February 1987

FEATURES
MoonMist
Scorpion's Tale Gives Playing Hints

Robot Rascals
A Review

Defender of The Crown
A Review

Iwo Jima 1945 — Falklands 82
A Review

Amnesia
A Review

Adventure Gaming Conference
A On-Line Conference on Compuserve

Warship
A Review

Designer Profile
Interview with Chris Crawford (Pt.2)

1985-1986 Index

12
Scorpia
32
Jasper Sylvester
36
Wyatt Lee
40
Evan Brooks
44
Scorpia
46
Patricia Fitzgibbons
52
Bob Proctor
56
Frank Boosman
70

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek

4

Screen Photos and Brief Comments

Industry News

10

Atari Playfield

31
Gregg Williams

Major Motion

Commodore Key
Habitat, Shanghai, Spindizzy, Rocky Horror

Amiga Preferences
Balance of Power, The Pawn

Reader Input Device

39
Roy Wagner
42
Roy Wagner
63

Activision, Inc.
2350 Bayshore Parkway
Mountain View, CA 94039
(415) 960-0410
GFL-CHAMPIONSHIP FOOTBALL:
A joystick driven sports strategy game
which relies as much on hand-eye coordination as it does on play calling,
this new release from the Gamestar division of Activision tries to bridge the
gap between straight statistics games
and arcade games. The advantages of
this simulation include a long menu of
different play and defensive formation
selections, as well as an option for
drafting your own teams (by means of
abstracted ability ratings, not actual
NFL players). C-64/128 ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #1.
PORTAL: It's August 14, 2106 and a
message comes from the Chicago node
of Worldnet. The message describes a
deserted planet and reads like something out of the Mercury Theater of
the Air's "War of the Worlds" script in

its plaintive and helpless isolation and
fear. This interactive novel effectively
places the player in the position of the
protagonist in that you are actually
interacting with a computer as you
would be in the fiction. The screens are
in bright colors and interesting graphics and actually remind one of some of
the online information services that
use graphics. The documentation is
interesting and serves to enhance the
plot, as well as playability. In this detailed six disk sided adventure, it's the
player's objective to find out where
everyone has gone and reunite with a
human population before he completely disorients himself. C-64/128
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #2.
Artworx Software Company, Inc.
1844 Penfield Road
Penfield, NY 14526
BAKER STREET DETECTIVE: This
mystery/adventure game uses the familiar grid system of many Sherlock
Holmes role- play in g and computer

games. The player is able to move from
location to location by means of typing
in a number corresponding to the
photocopied grid map in the documentation. There is a helpful address
list on the back of the map with the
important locations cited. When the
player thinks he/she has solved the
mystery, he/she can take the Quiz,
eight questions which test reasoning
skills and fact-finding ability (the
player may take the Quiz up to 3
times, but the earlier the case is
solved, the higher the score). Atari ST.
Circle Reader Service #3.
BEACH BLANKET VOLLEYBALL: If
you enjoy arcade games and you think
of a spike as being something you do
with the ball instead of the way you
wear your hair, you'll be interested in
this game. The game is a simulation of
a "friendly" three on three volleyball at
the beach. It includes provision for
spiking the ball, returning a spike,
Continued on pg. 6

PEEK (cont.)
catching an opponent out of position,
and even allows you to do interesting
angles with your serve. C-64. Circle
Reader Service #4.
POLICE CADET: So, you've seen all
of the "Police Academy" movies and
you'd like to try your hand at stopping
criminals? You'll be intrigued by this
game. This game allows you to portray
a police cadet during that crucial
phase of being "on the streets." It has
two difficulty levels and four semesters
(scenarios) to each level. Catch the
subway killers (or "make your day"),
savor a firefight outside a "safe house,"
apprehend the shadowy criminals in
the park, and capture a shoplifter in
this arcade/adventure. C-64. Circle
Reader Service #5.
THAI BOXING: This is yet another
martial arts game in an arcade format.
It contains both solitaire and two
player modes and a high score table
which saves to disk. There are six different backgrounds and three dimensional effect to enhance player interest.
There are eight optional moves for
each player to choose from, but the
strategy required for victory seems
minimal. Atari ST, C-64/128. Circle
Reader Service #6.
Avalon Hill
4517 Hartford Rd.
Baltimore, MD 21214
(301) 254-5300
MAC PRO FOOTBALL: This is a
statistics based game with forty different Super Bowl teams represented.
It takes advantage of the Mac's capabilities by using four different windows: one to represent field position,
another to function as the scoreboard,
one as the "X"'s and "0"'s of the
playing field as the play takes shape,
and the last as an animated referee to
call the penalties. The game looks as
though it may have a better handle on
game statistics than any to date.
Macintosh. Circle Reader Service #7.
Datasoft
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311
(818) 886-5922
GUNSLINGER: Yup, them Dalton
Brothers have escaped from jail and
they're gunnin' fer ya'. That's the
premise for this graphic adventure set
in the Old West as it never was. The
player takes on the persona of Kip
Starr, ex Texas Ranger, and has two
game days to find and save his true
blue friend, James Badland. There's
plenty of material to work with in this
adventure which takes up four disk
sides. Unfortunately, the parser has
about as much vocabulary as Clint
Eastwood in those early spaghetti
westerns. The game allows for either
joystick or keyboard controls, but even
the joystick option doesn't speed
things up much. Apple II series. Circle
Reader Service #8.
THEATRE EUROPE: This is a grand
strategical game based on a conven-

tional invasion of Western Europe by
the Warsaw Pact countries. The game
is intended to primarily reflect the
"What if?" of conventional armed
warfare in Europe, but has two aces up
its sleeves. If either the NATO or
Warsaw Pact player chooses, strategic
chemical launches or nuclear launches
are available. The game doesn't have
to remain on the strategic level, however. The player has the option of using action screens which allow him/her
to fight the battle in arcade style as
the commander of a smaller unit. The
game requires a joystick for all systems. Apple II, Atari, C-64/128. Circle
Reader Service #9.
Earthware Computer Services
P.O. Box 30039
Eugene, OR 97403
(503) 344-3383
JOURNEY INTO DARKNESS: In this
inexpensive interactive game, the
player takes on the persona of a Ninja
in order to defeat the pernicious and
despicable Dark Lord of Dragongate.
In spite of the low cost ($12.95 initially, but soon to be $19.95), the adventure makes use of graphics and enables characters to develop their skills
throughout the game. 64K and joystick are required. Circle Reader Service #10.
Microprose Software
120 Lakefront Drive
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
(301) 771-1151
GUNSHIP: This AH-64 Apache Attack
Helicopter Simulation contains voluminous documentation, uses numerous
artistically ornamented screens(some
with simulated 3D graphics), and potentially hundreds of different missions
to fly. The game even comes with a
cardboard overlay for the keyboard to
simplify play. See if you can storm an
embassy compound in Iran without
getting your 'copter fouled with sand!
Amiga, Apple II, Atari ST, C-64/128,
IBM, Tandy ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #13.
Master Designer Software, Inc.
5743 Corsa Avenue, Suite 215
Westlake Village, CA 91361
KING OF CHICAGO: Shades of Edward G. Robinson, Humphrey Bogart,
and James Cagney haunt the latest
attraction from Master Designer's
Cinemaware series of software (see

featured review on DEFENDER OF
THE CROWN in this issue). Even
though the Macintosh version lacks the
appeal of the Amiga's
" cinematography" in DEFENDER, you
won't need Ted Turner to colorize this
visually stunning game. The adventure
takes place in 1930's Chicago, ten
years after the assassination of Big Jim
"King of Chicago" Colosimo and immediately after Al Capone's conviction
for tax evasion. As Pinky Callahan,
the player gets a chance to follow in
the legendary Scarface's footsteps (in
ruling the mob, not incarceration). If
you like old gangster flicks, you'll revel
in this chance to cast yourself in the
starring role. Macintosh. Circle Reader
Service #17.
Polarware
521 Hamilton
Box 311
Geneva, Illinois 60134
ELECTRIC CRAYON: This is a series
of software designed to function as a
computer coloring book. Select the
area to be colored, select the color, and
hit a button. Voila! A masterpiece in
the making. The best part, Mom and
Dad, is that the kids can't color on
your walls with this coloring set! The
program helps children learn their
ABC'S, farm animals (FUN ON THE
FARM), and geography (THIS LAND
IS YOUR LAND). Each disk contains
26-30 pictures. Apple II series. Circle
Reader Service #18.

Probase Group
1738 W. La Palma Ave.
Anaheim, CA 92801
(714) 535-2833
PC WORD POWER: This is a vocabulary game which 1-32 people can
play. It is a vocabulary quiz with multiple choice type answers and has six
different levels of difficulty. Level six
looks reminiscent of the Graduate
Record Examination's verbal section.
Each level contains 400 words, so once
you can define the 2,400 words in the
glossary, it isn't a real game anymore.
IBM. Circle Reader Service #19.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
1046 N. Rengstorff Ave.
Mountain View, CA 94043
WARGAME CONSTRUCTION SET:
This program acts as both a utility
and a game. The former (EDITOR)
allows the user to design his own scenarios from historical ancients to futuristic sci-fi battles. The latter
(GAME) allows the user to become a
player at the game/scenario he has
designed. The lack of advantage given
to flanking, vital to pre-Twentieth
Century warfare, diminishes the value
of these scenarios in those periods, but
it's tremendously exciting to have the
capacity to be able to design your own
game without having to learn programming, even if you only play it
once. Atari, C-64 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #20.

INDUSTRY NEWS

MAJOR PLAYERS READY FIRST
QUARTER RELEASES!
January heralds the Consumer Electronics Show, so game manufacturers are
pulling out all the stops to have their
software ready to display at the exposition. Industry sources indicate that translations will take up much of the companies' attention during the first quarter.
Here are some of the items which are not
translations which certain companies hope
to release in the first quarter of 1987.
Accolade: Expects to release their
football game, 4th and Inches, at the show.
The company also plans to release a murder mystery entitled, appropriately
enough, Killed Until Dead. Their
"Advantage Series" will be strengthened
by the addition of Power, loosely described
as a space game. Almost ready for release,
but expecting to be retitled before January, is a new adventure game using
comic/cartoon situations.
Avalon Hill: The microcomputer games
division is expecting to have Dark Horn
ready for both Apple and C-64. This is the
long-awaited fantasy game by Tom
Cleaver, author of Galaxy. Guderian is
still undergoing revision and would be a
longshot for first quarter release.
Electronic Arts: EA's Interplay affiliate is releasing a translation of The Bard's
Tale for the Amiga which is much more
than a port. The new version has six different songs (used in spellcasting) for the
bard with four different instrumentations.

It features 90 different animated graphics
of characters/monsters and 85 different
spells. Bard's Tale II: The Destiny Knight
is nearing completion and features ranged
combat. Also, creatures can be converted
and made a permanent part of the adventurer's team. They also plan to release
Michael Stackpole's (Mercenaries, Spies
and Private Eyes) new roleplaying game,
Wasteland, which is similar to the Mad
Max films.
Mindscape: The distributors of Master
Designer Cinemaware and Balance of
Power aren't simply resting on their laurels. They are pinning positive hopes on
their new Thunder Mountain Division (see
below) of discount software, but aggressively releasing other titles, as well. Parallax, a fast-paced space arcade game with a
three dimensional effect leads the way,
followed by a judo simulation (Uchi-Mata)
and a karate adventure. They are also expected to preview Trailblazer, a bouncing
ball arcade name with some new twists, at
the Consumer Electronics Show. Also possible for the first quarter is the yet untitled, third issue in the Macventure series.
Sir-Tech: The official position at SirTech is that there will be no official release
date on Wizardry IV: The Return of
Werdna or Wizardry V until they are
ready to ship. The company does plan to
release two other titles in January
however: Space Combat Simulator and
The Seven Spirits of Ra. The former will
be similar to Skyfox, but set in space and

featuring 3D shapes with color and
Newtonian physics (suggested $39.95). The
latter, based on Egyptian mythology, is a
mixed adventure/RPG which takes place
inside and outside of pyramids.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.: Gary
Grigsby's War in the South Pacific should
be available on the Apple by the time you
read this and the C-64 version is expected
in late January. This is the only new release definitely set for first quarter, 1987,
but there are over 26 conversions in the
works, including Kampfgruppe for IBM
and Amiga and Rings of Zilfin, Shard of
Spring, and Wizard's Crown for the ST.
Strategic Studies Group: One thing
which is as dependable as death and taxes
is that SSG won't put out a game they're
not pleased with. The good news is that
Road to Appomatox will be an exciting
and revolutionary product. The bad news
is that it's not certain for the first quarter.
Russia, an eastern front game, has been
moved ahead of RTA on the production
schedule and should be available in early
1987.
BRAINWAVE CREATIONS FORMED!
Mike Berlyn, author of Suspended and
other Infocom adventure games (as well as
the recent Tass Times in Tonetown which
he co-authored with Brian Fargo), and his
wife, Muffy, are rumored to be millimeters
away from penning a deal with a major
publisher for a line of text adventures that
Continued on pg. 60

Scorpion's Tale

As told by Scorpia
That's it, step right in and close that door,
quickly! Baby, it's cold outside. Of course, you
wouldn't expect anything else in January. But I
shouldn't keep you standing here like that; you look
a bit frozen in that, ahhh, bronze, umm, costume
of yours. Just sit here by the fire and warm up
your body; Fred's already concocting something to
take care of your insides (not too strong now,
Fred!). Well, after all that jaunting around the solar
system, it's time to get your feet back on the
ground, and I have just the place for you. A nice,
solid, castle in Cornwall.
Moonmist is an introductory-level game, so most
folks shouldn't have too much trouble with it. Still,
the game has some neat features, and takes the
concept introduced in Cutthroats, namely, the replayable game, a step further. There are four
separate games within Moonmist, each controlled
by your choice of color at the beginning of the
adventure: green, blue, yellow, and red.
Actually, you could pick other colors, but you'll
still get one of the same four scenarios. You also
get to decide if you're male or female; this has no
real effect on the game, it just lends a little extra
touch, and some people will react to you differently
depending on whether you're male or female.
While there are four separate games, they are all
based on the same functions: find the hidden
treasure, and discover the secret of the ghost that is
haunting Tresyllian Castle, and making a nervous
wreck of your good friend Tamara. There is a
different treasure and ghost in each scenario.
The one problem with all this is you have to
play every scenario right from the very beginning;
you choose the color when you first arrive at the
castle. Thus you must to go through all the same
motions four times, and considering the amount of
disk access in this game, that can become a bit
much. Only after dinner, when you begin the hunt
for the treasure (and the ghost) do things change.
So the opening is pretty much standard: you
arrive at the castle, meet Tamara and all the guests,
change into your dinner outfit, and go downstairs
for the dinner party. Afterwards, a tape machine
starts playing, setting off the hunt. The first clue is
an indication of the treasure you're looking for, the
second one begins the quest.
One of the really terrific features here is the
ability to 'go to' a place. As long as you know the
name of the room or area you want to visit, you
can go there in a single command. For instance, if

you're in the foyer, and you want to go to the
library, you just say: Go to the library. And off
you go!
Mapping is a breeze, too. A very nice map of
most (although not all) of the castle is provided. It
even shows the secret passages (of course, you'll
have to figure out how to get into them on your
own). I wouldn't want to sleep in this place, myself.
Those passages are everywhere, and peepholes, too.
The castle must have been designed by Big Brother.
Ok, let's take a look at the variations themselves,
starting off with the green one, which is the easiest
of the four. Dinner is over, the tape has played,
and you have the first two clues. What you're
looking for is pretty obvious, especially if you read
the brochure (an absolute must!), paying careful
attention to the description of the Old Great Hall.
The second clue may be a little harder, and
you'll have to poke around in unmapped places.
Remember to examine everything, like the good
detective you are, and the third clue should be in
hand before long. Let's look at it. Hmmm. Sounds
like secret stuff to me. Which reminds me: you'll
want a light source sooner or later, probably sooner
in some cases. Might be a good idea to wander
around and find one.
So now you have the fourth clue. Uh-huh, this
one's not too hard; just look in the write place, and
I'll bet you find the treasure. Nice going, Sherlock!
All that's left is finding out about the ghost. Bet
you know by now who it is, even if you have no
evidence. You don't? Oh tch, breathes there a soul
so dead, who doesn't know the most likely spot for
a secret passage?
You're making progress now! All that's left is a
little snooping in a certain room (keep that aerosol
device handy!), and the case should be wrapped up
in short order.
The blue variation is a bit tricky; there are only
three clues, instead of four, to the treasure. That
should make it easier, but you have to do a bit
more running around with that second clue. As
before, the first one is a hint to what the treasure
is.
That second clue is a looong one. Three parts, in
Continued on pg. 29

Scorpion's Tale (cont.)

fact! Filling in the blanks is pretty easy, but
figuring out where they point to could be another
matter. Let's look at the first part. That one seems
to have a musical air to it. But, what's this? No
clue when you find the right place? That's ok, just
keep going, and all will be clear shortly.
Now, the second part. Watch out here...this one
is a trifle devious! No, don't go running off to the
dungeon! Re-read that brochure! That's better. You
probably have an idea now where you're headed,
but let's look at the third part of the clue, just to
be sure.
This one is simple, and now that you have all
three parts worked out, you know where to go
searching next. Hmmmm. This third clue is also a
fill-in. I never figured out why, myself, because
the parts to fill in don't spell out anything special.
In any case, a few minutes of thought, and the clue
should ring your chimes as to the location of the
hidden goodie.
On to the ghost! Hold on there...you won't find
anything where you did in the last version.
Remember, each one is different. Of course, you
have some ideas as to the identity of the spook;
time for more nosing around someone's room. Gee,
this is pretty easy, huh? Well, the next one is a
trifle harder.
In the red variation, we are back to four clues
again. And the ghost may surprise you. Do make
sure you read the maid's note. In fact, it's a good
idea to read it in all the scenarios, because it's a
little different each time. Now to the treasure hunt.
The second and third clues here are pretty
simple. The fourth one, tho, may give you pause
for thought. What could it mean? Time for that
invaluable brochure again (it must be getting dogeared by now!). Aha! Sneaky, sneaky! Imagine
having to look in a place that doesn't show up in
the room description.

So we come to the ghost. More tricks. You've
searched the guilty party's room, right? And you
didn't find what you were looking for, did you?
Hehehe. What a surprise! Gee....you don't suppose
this means that the ghost is (gasp!) real, do you?
Well, there's only one way to find out. You'll have
to wait for it to show up (yep, the Infocom
hallmark - waiting - has finally reared its ugly
head! Good thing it's only in this variation).
Of course, you're not going to wait in any place
so mundane as a room. That wouldn't be any fun at
all (not to mention, nothing would happen). So
think about it: if you were a ghost, where would
you likely be, especially if you didn't want to be
seen?
Patience wins the day! At least, it should if you
did everything right. And another case has been
brought to a successful conclusion. Even tho it may
not have been thrilling for one person.
And now, we come to the yellow variation,
which may be a bit of a downer. You'll know why
pretty soon into the game. This one is also the
'Edgar Allan Poe' hunt; all the clues are taken from
his poems and stories. Those of you familiar with
Poe's works will breeze through the clues. Even if
you don't know them, all but the fourth clue can
be figured out pretty easily with a little thought.
So we take a peek at the second clue. Yep, that
one's easy. Up you go and grab the third clue.
Hmmmm. Not so easy, at least in figuring out
where to go. Look sharp, my girl, and you'll find
the fourth clue. Now, if you know the story
mentioned in the clue, you know where to go next.
If you don't know the story, think about the legend
of the White Lady, which may suggest something.
All right, we're almost done here. You have the
treasure, only the ghost (sigh) is left. Time to do
the usual snooping. Well, you found something, but
perhaps, again, not quite what you were looking
for, eh? No matter. Check the name on the paper.
Bet you know where to look now. And so the last
variation is finished, although the ending may not
be so happy. Such is life.
I see by the invisible clock on the wall that time
is almost up for this issue. Remember, if you need
a hand with an adventure game, you can reach me
in the following ways:
On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG (under the
Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie: Visit the
Games RoundTable (type: SCORPIA to get there).
On the Source: Send SMail to ST1030.
By U.S. Mail (all correspondents in the U.S.
must include a self-addressed, stamped envelope to
receive a reply): Scorpia, P.O. Box 338, Gracie
Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1986 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

•

The Atari Playfield

by Gregg Williams
"Major Motion" and Williams' Law of
Gaming Relativity
The law is simple and goes like this: "If
you saw the arcade version first, you'll
probably like it better. If you saw the microcomputer version first, you'll probably
like it.
This law came to mind after I had
played Major Motion, an Atari ST game
from MichTron that--shall we say--borrows heavily from the arcade game, Spy
Hunter (The game is $39.95 from
MichTron, 576 S. Telegraph, Pontiac MI
48053, (313)-334-5700). Former CGW
columnist, Bruce Webster, had recommended it in the highest terms. After
playing it for a while, I thought it was
commendable, but except for the fact this
version doesn't gobble quarters, I still
preferred the original.
I asked Bruce via electronic mail how
Major Motion compared to Spy Hunter,
phrasing my question neutrally to include
the possibility that he hadn't seen the
original. In fact, he hadn't. His reply went
something like, "Yeah, I went to an arcade
a few days ago, played Spy Hunter for a
while. It's nice, but I still like Major Motion better." Don't get me wrong; this is a
perfectly valid opinion. The point I'm
making is that game loyalty is a lot like
first love--the first one will always be
special.
Major Motion is a racing game that
lets you indulge, in finest videogame style,
in some very antisocial behavior: killing
bad guys, shooting and sideswiping cars,
and indulging in dirty tricks wherever
possible. The game contains echoes of super-spy movies, the Mad Max films, and
cutthroat gladiator races.
The game's action (for those of you
who haven't seen it or Spy Hunter) is simple enough. You see all the action from a
bird's-eye view. You get a car (and five
spares) that you maneuver right and left
with the mouse; you also roll the mouse
forward and back to control your car's
speed. The left mouse button, which is always enabled, fires bullets forward (Note:
These are only effective against two out of
the five kinds of blue/black bad-guy cars
that, in various ways, try to drive you off
of the road.).
If you last long enough, a red equipment van pulls in front of you and gives
you a chance, while still on the road, to
pull up into it. When it stops on the side
of the road to let you out, it gives you a
super-spy gadget of some sort that is
yours until you either use it three times or
until your car crashes. The extra capabilities, activated by a keypad button or the
right mouse button, are: throwing oil behind you, getting a burst of speed, releas-

themes from "Mission: Impossible,"
"Batman," and a third theme I don't recognize, instead of Spy Hunter's "Peter
Gunn" theme (which is half the Spy
Hunter experience for me). Overall, the
game is laudable.
However, this leads me to an ethical
dilemma. I like the game, but it is, strictly
speaking, about 80% a thinly-disguised
copy of Spy Hunter and 20% unique material. One wonders what the legal minds
at Bally, the owners of Spy Hunter, might
think. Is 20% of original material enough
to make it legally different? I have elsewhere argued for the market's right to improve software by the process of
"incremental evolution" and this would
seem to be such a case. It's a complex issue. What's right? I don't know--it's a
very personal decision. (Editor's Note: See
"Industry News" in CGW #32 for a brief
note on a recent legal decision in this
area.)
ing a smokescreen behind you, launching a
surface-to-air missile (against an obnoxious and otherwise invulnerable enemy helicopter), or activating a temporary sonic
"shield" that causes any car that touches
you to crash. The terrain you drive on includes one large or two small, divided
highways, ice, and gravel.
If you last longer still (somewhere between 20,000 and 30,000 points), you drive
your car into a covered bridge and it
comes out the other end as a speedboat
(just as in Spy Hunter). The game becomes an aquatic version of the
cat-and-mouse car action that preceded it, but
(and this is Major Motion's addition, to
the best of my knowledge) the river becomes as dangerous an opponent as the
blue/black speedboats that pursue you.
The river contains periodic sandbars that
destroy your boat if you run aground, as
well as scattered red and green land mines
(some of which come from enemy boats).
Occasionally, you run into regions
checkerboarded with boat-sized grey areas
(bogs?) that also destroy your boat if you
touch them. I found myself losing boats on
the river much quicker than I ever lost
cars, even in the most unfair situations, on
the road.
Major Motion is different from Spy
Hunter in several ways. The most important is that you can never lose a car from
simply colliding with another vehicle at
high speed (this really changes the way
you play). You have one extra weapon
(sound) and a jet black racer opponent
that can always outrace you and seems to
be sudden death, no matter what you do
to it. The water scenes, as described
above, are also somewhat different. On a
more superficial level, this game plays the

In Brief
Although I'm not much on sports
games, I have to mention briefly that Accolade (20833 Stevens Creek Blvd., Cupertino CA 95014, (408)-446-5757) has
recently translated its Hardball game and
Fight Night boxing game to the Atari 800.
I played briefly with both of them and
they seemed nice enough, although I'm not
current on what other Atari 800 baseball
and boxing games offer. Still, Accolade is
one of the few game companies still releasing new Atari 800 games, so sportsoriented Atari 800 owners should vote with
their dollars.
Also, Electronic Arts has, until now,
ignored the Atari ST in favor of the Commodore Amiga. That has ended, in an indirect sort of way. EA now puts its sticker
on (and distributes) the products of Origin
Systems (340 Harvey Rd., Manchester NH
03103, (603)-640-3360). For those of you
with years of free time, they have just
converted their Ultima III adventure game
to the Atari ST and have more products
on the way. I'll keep you posted.
That's all for this month. Until next
time, remember: "A penny saved used to
be two pennies earned, but the tax laws
have changed all that."
Late News: In my November column, I
recommended Fortress and Cytron Masters, both of which were being discontinued by Strategic Simulations, Inc. Since
then, SSI has announced a new, low-cost
($14.95 list price) line of "SSI Classics,"
which includes the above two titles (which
I have seen and can recommend) and
Gemstone Warrior, Eagles, Combat
Leader, and Computer Baseball (which I
have not seen) in Atari 800 format. --gw

WOOK OUT, YOU WASCALLY WOBOT!
A Look at Robot Rascals
by Jasper Sylvester
Salvage operations on Laustenfownd weren't going well. The "micro-magnifier" showed up on the
mule's scan as being located in the rocky badlands.
"Shouldn't be a problem," thought the chief of
scavenging operations, "we've crossed that rough
terrain before." Unfortunately, the crashing,
crunching and circuit jarring trek across Bunten's
Boulders was to cause the controller on the XJGT
mule to short circuit and follow orders erratically,
at best. It was an infuriating experience. The chief
would signal for the robot to move south on the
map grid and it would wander at a 45 degree angle
to the southwest or even, for that matter, veer
northwest. He hit the control button again, anxiously wishing the robot would move south, but the
contrary mule moved 180 degrees opposite of its
instructions.
Robot Rascals (RR) The latest from Dan Bunten
(along with Alan Watson) is a multi-player, computer moderated scavenger hunt with two card
decks of exterior variables that will, sometimes,
make you feel like you are in the middle of a
Looney Tunes cartoon. At the beginning of each
game, each player is allowed to choose the XJGT
robot model of his choice. There is a familiar Mule
model (a refugee from a former best-seller?), a
classic 1950's sci-fi movie robot called a Belbot, an
all terrain vehicle robot named Trak, a miniature
character with the appropriate moniker of Tiny, a
toy-like character known as Robbo, an octopus-like
mechanoid named Sphero, two female robots with
the names of Liz and Millie, a caricature which
looks like a cross between a frog and an ostrich
(Birt), and a rhythmic mover named Ize. The documentation states that "All robots have the same
abilities:...", but it certainly seemed that the Sphero
model had more of a tendency to break down in
hazardous ground. This seems especially true since
it often had multiple breakdowns while the robots
operated by other players only experienced occasional breakdowns. Also, one wonders why the
profile on the Sphero emphasizes its value in open
terrain if there isn't some difference in probability
regarding damage.
Next, each player is dealt a hand of four
brightly colored cards from the item deck. These
zany objectives contain such neutral items as a
pixel pencil, digital donut, transistor taco, silicon

R
salad, denim disk, and others. If these represented
the extent of the items, the game would be too
straightforward and boring to be of any interest
whatsoever. Fortunately, there is more to the item
deck than that. There are items which cause negative repercussions. These include the infamous action anchor (causes robot to move slower), battery
bug (disables capacity to store energy for future
turns), binary blinders (disables scanning function),
energy eater (reduces amount of energy available),
helpless handbag (removes all shields), and teleport
trap (disrupts any attempt to use teleport pads). Of
course, these are balanced by opposite positive
items. These include the bionic battery (modifies
the robot with extra battery in order to store extra
energy), dynamo diamond (which provides extra
energy), gamma glasses (which gives the robot the
capacity to scan without using energy), portal
passkey (enhances teleport capacity by allowing
teleportation with no energy expense), super shield
(erects higher shield level for defensive purposes),
and velocity vitamin (enables more efficient movement capacity). Obviously, it becomes harder to
win (by retrieving all four items in the player's
hand and returning home safely) if one has to carry
an item with negative characteristics. A player with
the handbag, for example, is easy prey for a fellow
player in a larcenous mood. This means, of course,
that it is desirable to get these bad items out of
one's hand. That's where the other deck of cards
(Luck Deck) comes in (which I will explain later).
After the players choose their robots and examine their four item card hands, the computer will
declare a 'Global Event'. These happenings affect
all players for the duration of one turn. They can
be beneficial or detrimental. For example, a "High
Energy" turn enables all players to accomplish
more, but a "Low Energy" does the opposite; "No

Stealing" keeps everybody honest, while "No new
Shields" makes almost every robot into a victim;
and "Items Reverse" makes all the good items into
negative ones and vice-versa. This can really devastate a player who likes the strategy of going for
the advantageous items whether the item cards are
in his hand or not. In that case, he'll have to drop
what he's worked for like a hot potato. In the advanced game, there's another global event which
can be crucial. Only in the advanced game can
items be hidden (or purposefully dropped by your
fellow players) into the lakes. Since robots rust,
they can't swim and must wait for the "Lakes Dried
Up" event in order to retrieve it. Global events are
significant because they will impact upon the
strategy which is most effective to use each turn.
For example, if it's a slow movement turn and you
are closer to an opponent than your items, you'll
find it much more effective to attempt to steal his
goodies than to waste your energy searching for
your own. If you're slightly ahead in the game, you
might want to save your energy for the "Slow
Movement" turn and convert most of it into better
shielding. "No Scanning" might indicate that stealing
items from other players or building shields is the
most beneficial task to accomplish in that turn. One
must keep his strategy fluid if he is to get the most
done each turn.
Noting the Global Event, each player will then,
in turn, draw a 'Luck Card' and follow the instructions written thereon. This will seem a little like
"Old Maid" to some players, but it serves the purpose of keeping each player's victory conditions in
flux. "Take a Card" enables the player to take an

item card from the top of the item deck or the
discard pile, but he may discard it if he chooses.
"Steal a Card" allows the player to draw a card
from any player's hand, but he may return it if he
does not like it. "Swap a Card" forces a draw between any two players. "Force a Show" requires a
selected player to reveal his hand to all the other
players. "Pass the Trash to the Left" (or "Right") requires every player to pass one item card to the
player on the left or right. "No Luck" requires no
action. It's easy to see how the Luck Cards can affect one's strategy. A player may have spent two
turns scanning and moving toward an item, only to
have its card drawn from his hand prior to finding
it. More significantly, the player may lose the item
card for an item already in his possession. Does the
player keep the item and hope to get the card back
or does he immediately drop the item in the nearest
lake?
Immediately following the draw of the Luck
Card, the player is ready to move his robot
(thought I'd never get there, didn't you?). The
robot may be controlled by either joystick or keyboard. You must stop on occasion because you cannot "Scan" on the move and scanning is how you
find the objects. Pressing the joystick ("B") button
brings up the control options menu. This enables
the player to toggle to "Scan" (which locates items),
"Move" (which enables the player to continue to
move), "Drop" (drop any item which is no longer of
value to the player), or "Quit" (in order to save remaining energy). When scanning, the player is able
to determine by the speed in which the robot scans
whether the item is near (fast scan) or far (slow
scan). If the item is close at hand, the player will
move a slight bit and scan again, move-scan, and
move-scan until the robot is close enough for its
tractor beam to pull the item in. If the item is far
away, the player will probably want to maneuver
the robot to one of the five teleport pads to teleport to a new location.
During his movement phase, the player may
elect to steal another robot's items instead of seeking his own items. Stealing is accomplished by
moving one's own robot so that it collides with another player's robot. If the other robot has shields,
each bump offers a 50% chance of bringing a
shield down. If the opponent's robot has no shields
or his shields have been eliminated, the player will
be presented with a depiction of the items in that
robot's possession and is allowed to take whatever

he pleases. This can be very important if you are
trying to get an item that matches the item card
which has just been passed or swapped to you and
the other player has not dropped the item. It is also
important when someone is close to winning and
you have a chance to steal the items he needs to
win.
In the Beginner level of the game, the player
needn't pay much attention to the terrain, at all.
Movement is slowed somewhat when one crosses
swamps, woods, and rocky badlands, but the shortest distance between two points is still a straight
line in most circumstances. In the Standard level,
the player must pay more attention to the terrain
because the robot stands a better chance of getting
damaged in rough terrain than in open terrain. In
the Advanced level, players need to be especially
wary of rough terrain because the probabilities of
becoming damaged is double that of the Standard
level. Sometimes, it's better to temporarily give up
the search for an item in the swamp or the rocks
than to ask yourself the inimitable question from
Dirty Harry, "Do you feel lucky?" After all, you
might not have that card on the next turn.
Damage does affect each robot's ability to accomplish the task assigned. It can halve movement
points, remove all shields, or as described in the
opening paragraph of this article, cause your robot
to refuse to take instructions. Fortunately, there are
two different ways to remove damage. One is certain and the other has a certain mystique about it.
The former is to return to Home base so that your
mechanoid can be repaired (while the tune to
"There's no place like home plays briefly). The latter is to receive the fortuitous message, "Your robot
picked up a faith healing broadcast and was repaired!" Of course, like saving rolls in a fantasy
game, you rarely get the healing when you really
need it.
There are three 'special' cards in the game.
These are the 'Wild Cards' (there are two of these
cards) and the 'Cosmic Cheat' card. The 'Wild
Cards' allow the player to go after any item in the
game as though the player held that particular item
card in his hand. The 'Cosmic Cheat' card allows
the player to win the game with only three items
instead of the usual four. It's obvious that the existence of these cards creates a certain "fog of war"
with regard to the victory conditions. In one game,
my opponents thought I had the 'Cosmic Cheat'
card because I headed in the direction of home

with only three objects (I was really planning on
stealing one of their items for my Wild Card.). As
if all these elements didn't create enough randomness, the Advanced level includes a 'Killer Kard'
which absolutely precludes a player from winning
as long as it's in the player's hand. Of course, if
you want more randomness, the Advanced level
offers some alternate victory conditions. The player
may decide to ignore all the cards in his hand and
go for four bad items instead (You can even ignore
the 'Killer Kard' under these circumstances). if
that's still not enough variation for you, there are
five other variations included in the rulebook.

STRATEGIC TIPS
Besides the tips listed in the documentation (pp.
17-19), I notice the following procedures to be
beneficial.
Kard Karrying Assassin: I like to hold the 'Killer
Kard' in my hand, letting everyone know that I
have the card, until I have at least three of the
items required to win. This has a tendency to discourage unwanted swaps and taking of cards from
my hand. After I have my initial three items, it's
easy to dump off the 'Killer Kard' and pick up a
new objective. This strategy works even better if
you're going for the four bad item strategy because
you never have to discard the card and others will
be reticent to "hit on" you. It even helps to get as
many bad card items in your hand as you can if
you're trying for this special kind of victory.
How Green Is My Valley?: It seems good to find
one or two green (good items) first, regardless of
what cards you have in your hand, because the
items have their positive effect on your scanning,
shields, movement, energy etc. whether you have
the cards in your hand or not. These effects should
help you find the items you actually do need with
less expenditure of energy in the long run. This
strategy works extremely well in the Standard level
Continued on pg. 66

by Wyatt Lee
'Tis a darke, foreboding time in Englande ande
those who are loyale to the cause are needed.
Heroic names are conjured by the fey ande magickal. 'Tis the era of Ivanhoe, The Black Arrow,
ande Robin Hood ande now, 'ere long 'tis your
chance! Bringe your Saxon brothers together ande
reconquer the homelandes pilfered by those Norman swinne. Aye, woulde that ye coulde roast
Front-de-Boeuf onne a spitt. Woulde that ye ande
Robin of Locksley shoulde shout "Have at you!" on
the fielde of valor.
Master Designer Software has released Defender
of the Crown as the first of its Cinemaware series.
Inspired by thrilling celluloid adventures from
Douglas Fairbanks' Robin to Robert Taylor's Ivanhoe, the creative group at Master Designer has
captured the flavor of the big screen from opening
title shot to the closing banner (a flashing The End
superimposed on a peaceful English village scene).
The graphics are resplendent in color quality and
offer as much improvement over mundane graphics
as technicolor did over black and white. Robin's
sword flickers in the light of his campfire, the castle walls are stained from refuse being disposed out
of the windows and the animation occasionally
gives us a glimpse of this pre-sewage system disposal, and in the event of a successful rescue, the
lovely Saxon maiden looks at the player with all the
feminine wiles of a film heroine as she blushes and

blinks prior to the romantic denouement.
The game begins after the opening credits and
the initial situation explained. The player decides
who the star of the movie is to be. Will you cast
yourself as Wilfred of Ivanhoe, Cedric of Rotherwood, Wolfric the Wild or Geoffrey Longsword.
Each character is rated on Leadership, Jousting
Ability, and Swordplay Ability. Choose well, since
these skills will have bearing upon your success in
the game. If you want to play the game primarily
as a wargame, the Leadership factor will probably
be the most important. If you want to rescue
damsels in distress and raid the Norman castles at
every opportunity, you'll want to consider the
Swordplay factor. if you want to enjoy fame and
fortune at the tournaments, a good Jousting ability
is essential.
After your selection, you visit Sherwood Forest
where Robin of Locksley explains the situation to
you. Then, play commences with a colorful map of
Britain divided into 18 territories (and that lawless
region known as Sherwood Forest). At this point,
six different colored regions will be displayed and
the other territories will reflect a dull neutrality.
The colored regions represent the home regions of
the player and his two Saxon brothers, as well as
the three dastardly Normans. The player has the
opportunity to "Read Map" at this time. By reading
the map, the player can determine which territories
are most advantageous to conquer in terms of gold
and vassals. Later in the game, the color coded map
will allow the player to tell at a glance how he is
faring and who his most dangerous opponent happens to be. Next, the player has the opportunity to
"Build Army." A window which resembles a piece
of parchment with handwritten figures informs you
of the costs of men-at-arms, knights, catapults, and
castles. Unlike many games and governmental budgets, you can save what you don't spend from year
to year so it may be a good idea to hold some back
for future development (see Strategic Notes below).
Next, the player should "Build the Campaign
Army." It doesn't hurt to send all of your army out
on campaign for the first turn, but the player
should remember that the amount of men left in
the Home Army in the future determines the defensive value of ALL his castles. After creating the
campaign army, the player may "Select a Territory

to Conquer" and proceed to the combat phase by
sending forth the campaign army. In the combat
phase, a "parchment" window informs the player of

the strength of the opposition and offers three
combat options: 1) Ferocious Attack, 2) Stand and
Attack, or 3) Wild Retreat. In addition to the basic
strategic decisions of determining the field of battle
(selecting the territory to be conquered) and solving
logistical problems (in this case, simply building the
campaign army and sending them forth with proper
balance and support), the player must decide on
which of three occasions he will enlist Robin
Hood's support. Robin adds the equivalent of five
knights to the player's campaign army and an appropriate ratio of foot soldiers. According to the
folks at Master Designer Software, Robin helps the
player the most in siege situations because his alliance effectively decreases the enemy by 100 men
at arms. If the player is more interested in plunder
than prestige and power, Robin will also improve
the chances of raiding a Norman castle successfully.
THE CAT THAT ROCKED THROUGH WALLS!
Once the player has conquered the intervening
territories, he may want to besiege a Norman castle.
Strategic Note: It seems prudent to suggest that the
Continued on pg. 68

I

Commodore Key

by Roy Wagner

A PREVIEW OF HABITAT
Hopefully by the time you are reading
this column, HABITAT from QuantumLink will be available for online access.
Refreshing your memory, HABITAT is a
real-time, animated world of adventure
available to C64/128 owners. It is a coproduction from QuantumLink and LucasFilms. It has been running a bit late in
becoming available for the public. At last
check, it was still in alpha (development
staff) testing.
If you would like to get somewhat of a
preview of HABITAT without actually
signing up with QuantumLink, there is a
new independent game on the market that
is very similar to some of HABITAT. The
game is LABYRINTH from Activision. The
similarity is not accidental since the game
was done by Lucasfilms Games. It is based
upon the Jim Henson (of Muppet fame)
movie Labyrinth.
The game begins as a pure text, two
word sentence adventure. The sentences
are constructed by using the cursor keys to
select from a list of possible words. Another way to get the word you need is to
enter the first letter or two, and the word
from the list will be accessed. You then
cursor left over to a list of words related to
the first word. A very simple vocabulary
and sentence structure that is easy for
those of any reading age to use. You press
'return' to use your sentence or cursor
back to change it.
The object of this first part is to get
you to the movies, buy some popcorn (to
get quarters) and find your seat. The
"movie" is just about to begin and you will
be playing the leading role. Once the
movie has begun, the game changes to an
animated adventure. Not just text, but
text entry as described above, with static
and animated graphics. Your movement is
done using a joystick. You must now interact with several other characters.
This game is very well done with an
excellent user interface. From what I have
seen of HABITAT, the graphics and particularly the character representation are
very similar. This is a challenging and fun
game. As with other LucasFilm Games,
this one is "state-of-the-art" and highly
recommended.

A GAME OF CHANCE
SHANGHAI from Activision is a game
that is very similar to familiar solitaire
card games. Except in this case, "tiles"
from the Chinese game of Mah Jongg are
used. There are 144 tiles stacked randomly
in a flat, five level pyramid shape. Each
tile has three other similar matching tiles.

The tiles are removed in pairs with the
object being to remove ALL tiles.
In my opinion, the odds are highly
against a perfect game. So the challenge is
to do your best. You can also play against
various time limits or against another
player. There is some strategy involved
and moves can be taken back as far back
as you want to go, but really so much of
the end result is luck. When you think
that you cannot find any more matches,
you can let the computer "find" one or
more. A joystick is used to select the
matches and game options.
Only one game in progress can be
saved. Only with the Tournament option
are the scores saved. This game can be
quite addictive with it being very hard to
"just turn off the machine", but it can
likewise be frustrating since so much of the
end result is based on the stacking of the
tiles. The display on the C64 is
monochrome (white on a red background).
On the C64, the patterns and stacks are
hard to discern (soon your eyes match the
screen). On the Amiga the display is outstanding with the pieces actually looking
very much like colorful, ivory tiles. I think
the game is overpriced ($35 for C64/128,
$40 - $45 for other computers).

OUT FOR A SPIN
In previous issues of this magazine, I
have mentioned that Activision would be
bringing in some of the best games from
other countries under the Electronic
Dreams label. Two of them are now available, SPINDIZZY and ROCKY HORROR
SHOW.
SPINDIZZY has some visual similarity
to MARBLE MADNESS from EA. Each
screen contains a small piece of a much
larger 386 piece maze that represents a
strange artificial world. You use a joystick
to control the movement of your mapping
device that appears on the screen as a
marble, a top, or a gyroscope. The latter is
most accurate for movement. Using the
function keys, you can change your point
of view and the "M" key gives you a map
of the area you have explored. There are
turns and hills and ice and water to make
movement very challenging. There are lifts
(elevators) and other surprises that must
be activated with one or two switches.
Each new screen is very quickly generated by the computer, rather than disk
access. There is a very catchy tune that
plays continuously. Though not offensive,
the only way to silence it is to use your
volume control. You can pause a game in
progress, but not save it and high scores
are not saved. This game has a lot to offer
and is an excellent value.
ROCKY HORROR SHOW is based on
the "ever" popular cult film of the same
name. It has been continuously running at

theaters for over ten years. This game has
been a BIG hit in England. Looking at the
game, it is certainly hard to tell why it has
been so popular. It is rather crudely programmed in a style that is very recognizable as a low priced English game.
The premise of the game is to keep
your clothes on while you try to find and
assemble the parts of a puzzle (the DeMedusa machine) before the mansion turns
into a spacecraft and blasts off. There are
several characters from the movie that will
do their best to prevent you from succeeding. You can play the role of either
Brad or Janet. If you lose your clothes,
you must find them before you can continue towards your goal. The game is a
challenge, but is it worth it? I think not.
The graphics are a rough attempt at
three dimensions and the joystick movement is awkward. I think you'd have more
fun seeing the movie (Friday at Midnight
in most major cities), even if it means
seeing it again. ■

by M. Evan Brooks

Name:
Players:
System:
Price:
Designer:
Publisher:

Iwo Jima 1945/Falklands 82
Solitaire only
Commodore 64/128
$19.95
John Bothell
Firebird Licensees
P.O. Box 49
Ramsey, NJ 07446

This British design is the second in a series
(Battle of Britain/Midway being the first). With a
price under twenty dollars, and offered at discount
for c. $10, its affordability is not in question. But
is the simulation both playable and historically
accurate?
The answer to the former question is a
resounding affirmative; the latter must be answered
in the negative. This is not to say that the games
are to be avoided; rather, it is to suggest that these
games be recommended for the novice. As such,
they provide an interesting and enjoyable
introduction to the hobby of computer wargaming.
Even the grognard tires of complexity, and with
playing times under an hour, these games provide
good value.
This reviewer's initial reaction was to wonder
what similarities the Falklands would have with Iwo
Jima. The answer is that both campaigns involved
an amphibious campaign against an enemy generally
unable or unwilling to contest the beachhead
landings.
With various playability levels and the ability to
save the game in mid-stream, user interface is
relatively clean and easy (Iwo utilizes joystick,
while Falklands uses keystroke inputs). Graphics
are adequate, with terrain and units being relatively
easy to recognize and identify. In both scenarios,
the player must decisively win by a certain turn;

Iwo requires elimination of all Japanese units, while
Falklands requires control of all "major" settlements.
Naval gunfire and air support are handled
abstractly, with little player ability to alter the
consequences thereto.
While both games are eminently playable, their
historical accuracy is admittedly low. Iwo, while
showing the island, never delineates the ground
scale. Furthermore, movement capabilities in
differing terrain types are mentioned but not
detailed as to the exact effect. Even more
important, the designer notes that while over
100,000 American troops were involved in the
subjugation of Iwo, the game only has an American
force of 30,000; this insures playability.
Furthermore, the design notes state that most
indirect fire weapons were capable of firing the
breadth of the island; therefore, ranges have been
curtailed to enhance game value. Naval gunfire is
impacted by kamikaze strikes until the airfields
have been seized; thereafter, a Japanese submarine
stalks the naval vessels and inflicts damage; as the
designer admits, no such submarine attack
developed, but it "could have". Once again,
playability over historicity; this is not malum in se,
and it is laudatory that the designer clearly
expresses his biases and adjustments to history.
Falklands does delineate a distance scale (c. 1.8
miles per movement "hex"), and has the same
defects as llwo. Historical accuracy has been
sacrificed in that Argentine morale has been

increased in order to allow a viable enemy, terrain
access has been made easier for most units
(historically, Argentine forces had the mobility of
quasi-pillboxes), and helicopters have been
excluded as these would totally tip the balance of
the game to the British.
What the Falklands does not really simulate is
the decisive factor in the campaign -- the naval
battle. While hindsight allows one to say of course
the British would win, historically, the naval battle
could have gone the other way. If the British had
suffered the loss of or damage to a carrier, all the
air support could well have been withdrawn. Britain
simply did not have the assets to replace a crippled
carrier.
But so much for historical accuracy. The fact
remains that both simulations are tense battles. The
computer can be beaten at all levels, but the novice
player may well have a tense campaign. With time
constraints and limited forces, one must identify
and prioritize targets before beginning. Moving
without a plan or concept is a sure key to defeat.
Iwo requires extermination of all enemy units; a
landing followed by a general advance to the east is
the best strategy. While two Japanese units are
ensconced in the southwest, leaving one indirect
fire unit and an infantry unit to call in gunfire
support will prove adequate. The key to gunfire
support is to use a relatively weak infantry unit and
keep it out of range; while it cannot fire or be
fired upon, it does have the ability to call down
massive naval gunfire support. Similarly, as
Japanese artillery begins destroying American units,
the player may utilize similar tactics with the
weaker units while the stronger ones close in for
the assault. P.S. pray for good weather! (naval
support is not available in poor weather turns).+
Similarly, in Falklands, one must seize the
settlements. British commandos and SAS units are
capable of reconnaissance; by using one of these
units at San Carlos, it will reveal most units within
5 hexes. These will usually be unwilling to engage
the British unit, so this lone recon unit may well
seize two settlements and be available for a link-up
and assault mission later. While the documentation
cautions against a landing at Port Stanley (since it is
likely to be heavily defended), this reviewer
recommends exactly such an approach. Argentine
units will not come to the assistance of their
beleaguered comrades, and a landing at Cow Bay or
Uranie Sound simply leaves the British with too

much terrain to cover in too few turns. Also, most
Argentine units in Cow Bay may then be cut off
and ignored by the British. Judicious use of air
strikes and naval gunfire should then win the
battle. Again, implementation of gunfire support is
the same as Iwo, and one prays for good weather.
In summary, these games, while not historically
accurate (and in all truth, they do not hold
themselves out as such), have relatively high play
value. Documentation is more complete than one
would expect, although some surplus pages may be
included. The lack of hard copy terrain maps was
missed. Also, this reviewer's copy had the disk
labels reversed; but these marketing errors were
relatively trivial. While Iwo/Falklands may not be
to the taste of the experienced wargamer, they may
prove just the ticket to gaining another convert to
computer conflict simulations. Remember veterans,
you did not begin with campaign for north africa.
Thus, based upon the "bang for the buck" theory,
this program is well justified; if one desires to
learn valid lessons, then one should look elsewhere..
Copyright M. Evan Brooks (c) 1987

Amiga Preferences

by Roy Wagner

BALANCE OF POWER
Balance of Power (BOP) is a
conversion of Chris Crawford's
latest game. It was done originally for the Macintosh. The
time and creative effort put into
this game nearly lead him to financial (and probably other
forms of) bankruptcy. BOP is
distributed by Mindscape which
is establishing an excellent reputation for quality games for the
Amiga.
BOP is an excellent simulation
of world wide, bi-polar (USA vs.
USSR) politics that can end in
nuclear destruction. The emphasis is not on nuclear warfare, but
rather on maintaining political
prestige. This is accomplished by
the affect that your actions have
in influencing the events that
occur within various countries of
the world.
The program contains a
VERY extensive set of data and
uses the techniques of "artificial
intelligence" (computer algorithms) to portray a realistic exchange of political interaction
between the USA and USSR in
62 other countries of the world.
The "global" picture had to be
minimized to fewer countries
and a bi-polar interaction to
make the "game/simulation" more
playable.
It is very much an Amiga
game with excellent use of
menus, windows, and mouse, but
retains much of the appearance
of its Macintosh origins. There is
some slight addition of color.
There is a large quantity of
background data available that
alone gives the game tremendous
educational value. There is far

more to this game than is initially apparent. This is a game of
prestige and influence which

may only be brought about by
the passage of time.
Game play is easy at four
possible levels of difficulty. Each
level introduces more options
that must be considered before
making a political move. The
game comes with outstanding
documentation written by Chris.
He explains many of the development decisions that had to be
made in producing the final version of the game. He has also
written a very extensive book
published by Microsoft that goes
into much greater detail in discussing background information,
designer notes and game strategy.
This game is HIGHLY recommended.

THE PAWN
Distributed in the USA by
Firebird, The Pawn originates
from England and has been made
available for a number of different computers. Though not
utilizing the "standard" Amiga

conventions, it fully uses ALL
the features that make the Amiga
the unequaled computer that it
is.
The Pawn is a graphic text
adventure game. It starts off
with an outstanding four channel
stereo tune that lasts over four
minutes using digitized instruments. Though you can interrupt
the tune to begin the game, it is
enjoyable to let it play on. The
sound is new age and very
pleasant. While the music plays,
an excellent high resolution
graphic is displayed.
The game options are selected
using the mouse from scroll
down menus that are somewhat
different from the standard
Amiga menus. Options let you
toggle between having graphics
pictures displayed or not, between normal size or large text,
and even between having the
computer simply type everything
on the screen or use the synthesizer to speak all the text to you.
The program also allows all text
to be sent to the printer or not.
The parser is very sophisticated and accepts quite complicated sentences. It will also recognize certain one or two letter
commands There are also the
usual options of saving a game to
disk by name or loading one. A
rather interesting new option is
that of being able to define
function keys for commonly entered text sentences, eg. "get all".
There are even some keys that
can be used to edit the commands you have entered.
The graphics are very nice.
They are certainly the best that I
have seen on any graphic ad-

Continued on pg. 55

by Scorpia
You wake in a hotel room. You have no money.
No clothes. No memory. You don't know where you
are or how you got there. You look in the mirror,
and a stranger stares back at you. Is this you? Who
are you, anyway? And then,the phone rings.. .
So begins Amnesia, by Thomas Disch. As you
might imagine, the focal point of the game is
finding out who you really are, what is going on,
and what your relationships are to the various
characters you meet throughout the game. Unlike
many adventures (based on this premise or not),
there are few objects to acquire. Most of your time
will be spent making phone calls, riding the N.Y.
subway system, getting enough to eat, scrounging
up money, and sleeping in a ramshackle tenement.
Although you start in a hotel room, you won't
be staying there for long; events will soon force
you to take to the streets, penniless. Then you're on
your own, trying to survive as a pauper in a city
you don't know, while attempting to piece together
the fragments of your life and identity. Neither of
these is especially easy to do, particularly when it
seems you may be more than one person.
Are you John Cameron, supposed fiance of Alice Dudley, and scheduled to marry her that very
evening in the hotel chapel? Or are you Xavier
Hollings, murderer and escapee from a Texas
prison? Or both? Or someone else entirely? Can
you REALLY trust what people tell you about
yourself? And what about those disjointed flashbacks, of a southwestern jail with merciless guards?

Who is the woman you dream of at night in the
filthy tenement?
The questions buzz around in your head as you
struggle to find the answers. Your only resources
are your own wits and a small address book with a
few telephone numbers, all marked with uninformative and unfamiliar initials. But telephones cost
money. And money is your over-riding concern, at
first. It pays for the calls, the hot dogs, and the
subway tokens. It is not easy to come by.
Right around now, you're probably thinking:
gosh, this game sounds intriguing and exciting!
Unfortunately, it really isn't. Like other adventures
I could mention, but won't, Amnesia begins with a
fascinating premise, then falters in the execution of
it.
One problem is that, from time to time, the
game decides what you will do, and then forces you
to do it, whether you want to or not. You find this
out pretty early in the game, while you're still in
the hotel. You need clothes. There are none in the
hotel room. However, the hotel brochure mentions
a health club on the top floor. Obviously, this is a
good place to look for something to wear.
I'm not giving much away here; during this portion of the adventure, you are practically led
around by the nose, and you'll end up in the club
sooner or later anyway. So you take the elevator up
there, enter the men's locker room, and hunt
around. You find a sweatsuit. Just as you pick it
up, two men enter the room.
Now, what would you do in this situation? Sev-

eral things come to mind: saunter out, and get
dressed back in your room; casually put on the suit,
ignoring the men; wait to see what happens. . . you
get the idea. Unfortunately, the program has an
idea of its own. The moment you try to leave the
locker room, or put on the suit, you panic. That's
right, you panic and run into the sauna, where you
promptly collapse.
There is a reason for this, of course. This is how
you get your little green satchel that contains the
address book. It was in your locker (which you
don't remember), and one of the attendants cuts
open the lock while you're out cold. Without question, this is one of the poorest devices I've come
across in an adventure game in a long time.
There are a few other places in the game where
similar things happen. One to watch out for is
changing clothes after you leave the hotel. Now,
you'd think that the first thing to do is change out
of that eye-catching white tux you're wearing. After all, the police are after you, so the less visible
you are, the better. Well, it's not a very good idea.
Why not? Simple. For plot purposes, the game
requires you to be wearing that tux at a certain
place and time. So, you can't be allowed to change
out of it. Of course, at the beginning, you don't
know this, and you drag your jeans and t-shirt and
sneakers with you to the tenement, and put them
on. Then you walk out the door to the street. Your
zipper splits open. Then the back side of the pants.
In no time at all, a cop is on hand to drag you to
the local police station, where you are recognized as

the escaped convict, and soon go to an ignominious
end.
Now, if you have to be wearing the tux at a
specific time and place, fine. But everything I just
mentioned in the above paragraph happens automatically.
You do NOT get a chance to duck back into the
tenement and change clothes again. Once you step
out the door, you're sunk. No second chances. It's
all over. Time to reboot and restore.
There are further annoyances (to say the least)
in Amnesia. Your character has an energy level,
which tends to drop rapidly if you don't eat something. You can only move around a few hours
(game time), before being warned that you need
rest. At that point, you must eat something soon (if
you have money), or nip back to the tenement and
sleep awhile. The difficulty is that a reasonably
healthy adult male should be able to go most of the
day without having to eat something. You have to
be pretty frail to collapse if you don't have your
morning Wheaties. But that's what will happen
eventually.
In the meantime, you're making phone calls to
the numbers in the address book, at 25 cents a clip,
and riding the subway at a $1 per token, one way.
Money goes fast, all right. Of course, you do have
a few ways of obtaining some, and there are a few
spots in the game where you can pick up some
unexpected bucks. A windfall of $5 can make you
feel rich.

Continued on pg. 64

COMPUTER ROLE-PLAYING GAMES

NEWS AND VIEWS FROM THE GAMERS' FORUM
ON- LINE CONFERENCE
by Patricia Fitzgibbons

Recently, The Garners' Forum on CompuServe
was the site, of a special, real-time, online conference on the subject of computer role-playing games.
Nine game designers and company representatives
spoke out about current and planned products, hard
disks, the Apple //gs, artificial intelligence, program bugs, color graphics, and what they liked
about each other's games.
Conference participants included The Gamers'
Forum sysops and members, and: Robert Woodhead
from Sir-Tech (Wizardry); Rod McConell from Binary Systems (Starflight); Paul Murray and Keith
Brors from Strategic Simulations (Wizard's Crown);
Ken Jordan, Jim Ratcliff and John Butrovich from
Datasoft/Intellicreations (Alternate Reality); Brian
Fargo from Interplay (The Bard's Tale); and Steve
Meuse from Origin Systems (Ultima).

WYVERN: Dungeon Ken and Jim, I am playing
Alternate Reality on a Commodore SX (I know that

After the conference guests introduced themselves, a marathon three-hour question and answer
session commenced. What follows is an edited version of the huge (60K) conference transcript.

FRABBITZ: Robert, I'm curious about the way a
lot of games still come out first on Apple and
Commies, and IBM seems to take a long time for
ports. Is that due to you guys originally being 6502
programmers or is it due to the IBM being more of
a problem for games like these?
ROBERT WOODHEAD: Well, partially it's because we all originally started on the Apple and are
thus more at home on it. And partially it's because
the Apple market is bigger than the PC market.
Also, the development systems that are available for
the Apple are better than those on, say, the C-64.
At RWI (Robert Woodhead, Inc.) we have over the
last few years been developing a different approach. We design our games for a "virtual machine" that is based on UCSD (Apple: Pascal). We
write interpreter and "graphic bios" for each individual machine only once, and then only have to
write the actual program once -- it runs without
changes on all the machines we support. We even
went so far as to move the text outside the program
so it could be converted into other languages easily,
without changing the program. This lets us bring
out a product on a lot of machines at once, without
"version related" bug problems. But on the flipside,
it's taken most of my time for 1.5 years, which is
why certain "un-named" products are so delayed.

is my first mistake). Currently one of my characters
is in a crash loop cycle. I have experienced up to if
not more than 12 crashes in a two-hour session. I
can't get this character out of it. Is it lost? Is there
hope? When will the IBM version and my sanity be
available?
DUNGEON KEN: Once a character's data gets
corrupted it is very hard to recover. We had a lot
of problems with the Commodore disk interface.
This causes the database (character info) to contain
garbage data that totally screws up the menu. The
IBM version should be out soon after Christmas.
DRAGON-RIDER: Ken and Jim: Can you give
us a more definite date on when Alternate Reality
for the ST is going to come out? And what will on
it (i.e., guilds, etc)?
DUNGEON KEN: The 16-bit City (Mac, Atari
ST then later Amiga) should be out by Christmas.
The Dungeon (C-64, Atari 8 bit) should be out at
that time also. Just finishing up monster animations
and tweaking. Both have guilds.
MS. WIZ: To Brian Fargo: Will future releases of
Bard's Tale allow for easier starting of a new
character? Bard's Tale is almost impossible to get a
new character started. In fact, one must "cheat" to
do so.

BRIAN FARGO: I had a feeling someone would
ask me this question. Yes, Destiny Knight (the sequel) and all the new adaptations of Bard's Tale
have been made easier to get started on.
CHRIS CHAPMAN: Ken, I saw the ST version
of City at the summer CES and I was very impressed. I was wondering about your opinion of the
ST as a game machine, and also the progress of
other Alternate Reality modules such as Arena,
Palace, Wilderness, etc.?
DUNGEON KEN: The ST is a very nice game
machine. It is really something when you are used
to 8-bit 64K machines. As far as other modules go,
we are getting the 8-bit Dungeon out first. We will
probably bundle some of the other scenarios together in the future.
TPP: This is to any and all of you. Have any of
you read up on artificial intelligence? And do any
of you plan to put it in any future games?
ROBERT WOODHEAD: Yes, it's easy to fake,
hard to do right, and the machines are getting
powerful enough to support it.
ROD McCONNELL: I think that rather than say
faked you might say low IQ.
SSI: Hear, hear!
BRIAN FARGO: We plan on using AI techniques in our games to create NPCs that have some
personality.
ROBERT WOODHEAD: It's also important to
note that AI isn't appropriate for a lot of things.
DUNGEON KEN: On 8-bit machines you just
fake it.
ROBERT WOODHEAD: In Wizardry #5, we
write up "scripts" for each of the special creatures
that are executed each time you do something
with/to them. They let the player influence the internal state of the NPC. Not AI but flexible enough
to give some startling results. (The stuff in
Starflight is impressive, by the way.)
ROD McCONNELL: We used AI in several portions of Starflight, notably communications. The
aliens will learn about you and change accordingly.
We also plan to use more extensive AI in coming
sequels.
TOR: Will there be an IBM version of Bard's
Tale, and will I be able to use my Wizardry characters with it?

BRIAN FARGO: Yes, we plan on releasing a
version in early '87, and we do plan on supporting
Wizardry characters.
ROBERT WOODHEAD: But we won't be supporting Bard's Tale characters, by the way.
WYVERN: Rod McConnell: My hubby and I are
playing Starflight side by side. Sort of dueling
computers here. I started later than he and am
about a month in game time behind him. I have
already had the notice about Arth's sun flare. He
has never had this notice. What triggers this notice?
(Great game.)
ROD McCONNELL: Hmmmm, are you sure?
All notices are triggered by date.
WYVERN: Absolutely sure! This is not the notice on the notice board, but the notice upon entering the system.
ROD McCONNELL: Nice to know the game's
inspiring togetherness. Well, that's a function of the
science officer's skill level.
GAIL: To Robert and Brian: Do you plan to
have enhanced versions for Amiga and Atari ST in
future games? It's discouraging to see the same
graphics as on the C-64.
ROBERT WOODHEAD: Yes. All Wiz games will
be out on the Amiga and ST with windows and hires graphics. Our machine-independent system lets
us re-do the graphics for particular machines. One
Japanese version, for example, has 640x400 8-color
graphics and we have some amazing graphics for it.
BRIAN FARGO: Most definitely, there's nothing worse than when people do cheap ports. The
Amiga version of Bard's has been in development
for 9 months and features digitized sound, 600K of
graphics, and a complete mouse interface. All the
other versions will also push the machines to their
limits. The GS will be awesome.
SSI: I'd like to poll any Wizard's Crown users on

a question for Wizard's Crown II. Do you prefer
dungeons with separated characters, or do you want
a single character representing the party in the
dungeon?
NIGHTIE/SYSOP: Single character! So slow with
individuals.
FRABBITZ: Single chars for me, too!
LORINI/ASS'T SYSOP: Seen both, and I prefer
single char myself.
WYVERN: I prefer one character to represent all
characters in a dungeon.
GAIL: Single character.
FRABBITZ: Wouldn't mind more than one char
if they were independent.
THE DUFFER: Sounds unanimous!
DRAGON-RIDER: To the Intellicreations/DataSoft team and Robert Woodhead:
Will the ST versions of your games (Wizardry
and Alternate Reality) require color?
INTELLICREATIONS: We will do two versions.
Each will be a separate SKU (a single stock item).
The monochrome version will probably be available
directly from IntelliCreations.
ROBERT WOODHEAD: The new version of
Wizardry we are putting up on all the machines
supports multiple resolutions. We did this because
many machines (especially in Japan) have different
resolution modes. On the IBM PC and ST, you can
choose between color and monochrome by holding
down a key when booting, and you get different,
optimized, character sets and graphics. On the subject of SK Us, we are going to a package that contains versions of Wizardry with 2 different machines in the same package, for example, Apple/IBM. This reduces the stocking costs for dealers, which is becoming a big problem these days.
THE DUFFER: This is for Brian first and then
the others. I'd like to know if you will be supporting true EGA mode (enhanced color graphics) in
future releases of your games. We all would like it
for Starflight also (for Rod).
BRIAN FARGO: With the popularity of EGA
these days we will be supporting it.
ROD MCCONNELL: February '87!
INTELLICREATIONS: Alternate Reality will be
supporting true EGA only if we can get the frame
rate to an acceptable level.
LORINI/ASS'T SYSOP: My question is also to

all of you. I note that D&D is used for the character creation in nearly every computer RPG. Do any
of you have any plans to change this? D&D's emphasis on killing in order to develop the character
frequently gets in the way of real enjoyment of the
game...at least for me.
ROBERT WOODHEAD: Lorini, the problem is
that these games have to have one or more "focuses"
in order to keep you playing. In our games they are
exploration, combat, puzzle-solving, and development of character. Dungeon games are tightly focused because it makes it much easier to actually
do the game on the computer. Without the combat,
there would be no conflict and risk, which is important. If you want to know why we have too
tightly focused, the answer is if we make it too
broad, the game gets boring and "too big." Part of
the problem with space games, for example, is that
their focus is too broad to fit in our computers.
Starflight is the best I've seen, mostly because the

computer it runs on has more power than, say, an
Apple //, and that lets the programmers do more
and expand the focus. In 5 years we will have machines in which a space game can be as tight as a
dungeon game.
BRIAN FARGO: I agree that combat is an integral part of our games, but some RPGs have no
combat. It's all a matter of taste.
SSI: Yes, when EP are given for doing in-character things, normally a GM can decide whether a
player is abusing the system. A computer can't. So,

if, for instance, we gave EP for curing someone,
then players would just cure someone even though
they don't need to be cured.
ROD MCCONNELL: It's much more difficult to
model other kinds of interaction than combat.
Things like conversations branch into countless alternatives much too quickly. What we've tried to do
in Starflight is emphasize problem solving rather
than outright Ramboism. Sometimes it develops
more character to hold your fire when dealing with
aliens.
DEAN: How about letting us play games off our
hard disks?
ROBERT WOODHEAD: Well, part of the problem for me is that we don't run Wizardry under
any one operating system (Starflight runs under
MS-DOS, for example), so supporting hard disks is
a real pain. What we are doing is in the new versions, you can put all of the disks into any disk
drives you have and the program will find them (no
disk swapping) and any extra RAM you have >64K
is used as a cache and so the game speeds up a lot.
BRIAN FARGO: It's sometimes not technically
feasible for us due to the fact some of our programs use direct disk access to gain speed and disk
space.
SSI: We have two reasons: 1) We don't program
on those machines (Keith and I), and 2) if you allow disks to be copied onto hard disks you abandon
copy protections.
ROBERT WOODHEAD: By the way, the copy
protection on Starflight -- the codewheel -- is
brilliant. Can I steal it for one of my games, Rod?
INTELLICREATIONS: I am always uncomfortable with this issue. I am always afraid someone
will damage their hard disk with our software. Alternate Reality/The City (Tandy) runs under 0S9,
therefore, hard disk.
We are thinking about other machines.
WYVERN: Why do most games available for
IBM and compatibles limit themselves to Yuk Yellow, Awful Aqua, and Putrid Pink? I have a compatible just dying for FULL COLOR!
ROBERT WOODHEAD: These are the basic colors available for the PC. You can sometimes do
better, but it takes a lot of effort. We are now using professional computer artists in order to alleviate this problem.

ROD MCCONNELL: I assume that you are referring to RGB monitors only. There are great colors (relative to RGB) to be had using the composite
mode.
FRABBITZ: Rod, thanks again for the codewheel, and what I really like about Starflight is its
playing life...800 planets is a heck of a lot of arrow
hitting! However, right now, Arth has been flared,
the Veloxi are trying to kill me because I tried to
land on their planet, the Elowan don't like me either, and the Gazurtoids are still trying to wipe me
out. Any point in continuing this game, or should I
start over?
ROD MCCONNELL: If Arth has already flared,
it's going to be pretty hard to rescue the system,
isn't it? We suggest you start over. Sorry, but that's
life in the big Universe. But we will consider this
problem in the revs and ports.

NIGHTIE/SYSOP: This is a bit of a recap, but I
would like all the guests to say, very briefly, which
computer role-playing games we can expect to see
very soon from each of their companies.
ROBERT WOODHEAD: Return of Werdna, if
all goes well.
ROD MCCONNELL: Christmas came early for
Binary, but next Christmas you can expect MANY
ports of Starflight.
SSI: Phantasie (Mac and Atari 800). Gemstone
Healer (Apple). Phantasie II (ST). Possibly Rings
of Zilfin II.
INTELLICREATIONS: AR-The Dungeon: 8-bit
(C64, Atari, Apple); AR-The City: 16-bit (Mac,
ST); AR-CoCo, whenever Tandy picks it up.
THE SILICON KNIGHT: I was just wondering
if you are planning to take advantage of the new
capabilities of the Apple //GS.
ROBERT WOODHEAD: Yep.
INTELLICREATIONS: Not until there is a substantial user base.
ROD MCCONNELL: We agree. It isn't positive
that it'll be worth our time. Also, for now we've
got our hands full.
DRAGON-RIDER: Robert, you mentioned that
Wizardry would be out for the Atari 800 soon since

the 800 has only 48K (as opposed to the XLs which
have 64K). Will Wizardry for the 800 have to leave
anything out?
ROBERT WOODHEAD: Well, we hope to get it

to run in 48k, but if we can't, we will have to
make it for XLs only.
LORINI/ASS'T SYSOP: About Starflight to Rod:
You've talked about the AI routines in Starflight
and they are really enjoyable. Is there any randomization involved in those things, or are they all preset? By that I mean, if you talk to the Elowan, let's
say 5 times, will they always say the same thing on
the 5th time? Or is there a chance that they may or
may not?
ROD MCCONNELL: Like the solar winds, the
aliens have their own whims and free will...to some
extent. If you do EXACTLY the same thing each
of those 5 times at EXACTLY the same times,
you'll probably get identical responses, but we've
never tried testing it that far.
ROBERT WOODHEAD: The great god
I:=Random MOD X, eh, Rod?
ROD MCCONNELL: There is a random number

generator used in the % talkativeness of the aliens
to tell them when they should feel like talking; the
chances that you could get it to perform identically
twice are very slim.
LORINI/ASS'T SYSOP: Then there is some randomization involved. The reason I'm asking is because the Mechan 9 told me a location which I later
lost and I was hoping that they would tell me
again, but they haven't, so I had to go back to an
earlier save. (Got Starflight disks everywhere, I'll
tell ya!)
ROD MCCONNELL: Keep on asking them the
same question. Eventually they'll return to the
statement you're looking for.
DRAGON-RIDER: By the way, Robert, have
you fixed the "Bishop bug"?
ROBERT WOODHEAD: No, and we won't...for
reasons of tradition.

[As the conference wound down -- Ken Jordan
left to hit the sack, Brian Fargo left to head out for
a late date -- Steve Meuse of Origin Systems
dropped by to report the latest news about his company's products, including the Ultima series by Lord
British.]
STEVE MEUSE: Ultima V will be out for the
Apple in late summer of '87. Ultima IV will be out
for the IBM and the Mac the 1st quarter of '87.
Moebius (C-64) is shipping. Ogre (IBM/ST) is in
beta test. So is Autoduel (C-64). No word on Ultima IV translations for ST/Amiga, but Ultima III
for those machines is shipping. Ultima V may have
the possibility of transferring Ultima IV characters.
Ultima I for the Apple will ship soon. All games
will be designed for 64K machines, and we are reaffirming our commitment to the Apple //!
Copyright (c) 1986 by Patricia Fitzgibbons. All
rights reserved.

WARSHIP
Name:
System:
Players:
Designer:
Price:
Publisher:

Warship
Apple, Atari, C-64
1 or 2
Gary Grigsby
$59.95
Strategic Simulations Inc.
1046 N. Rengstorff Ave.
Mountain View, CA 94043

by Bob Proctor

Warship is a game of naval surface combat in
the Pacific theater of WWII. When I say surface
combat, I mean MAJOR surface combat. No carriers, no subs, no PT boats, or armed merchantmen,
thank you, just get out there with the heavys and
shoot it up! Airpower is represented only abstractly
so it is best for recreating the night engagements of
the Southwest Pacific.
The basic character of the game makes it sort of
a naval version of Kampfgruppe. They both come
with a few scenarios and allow you to create more
following either historical or hypothetical events.
Both allow two-player games or solitaire with the
computer playing either side. Both do a pretty fair
job of limited intelligence, providing only the information that the commander on the spot would
have had. Both are open-ended; they let you select
the forces, the type of engagement to be fought
and the map on which the battle takes place.
All in all, the game is another good effort by
Grigsby and SSI. It combines realism and playability to a high degree.
The Game System

Warship is played in alternating turns but
through the magic of the computer it seems more
like a real-time game. The sequence is simple: first
an Order Phase where ships are given instructions;
then an Action Phase where these orders are carried
out. The Action Phase represents two minutes of
real time. Most wargames would dump you back
into another Order Phase to start the next turn but

Warship sheds that boardgame-style thinking and
simply continues non-stop with another Action
Phase. If you want to change any orders for your
ships, you've got to ask for an Order Phase. To do
so, hit the "0" key when the message "(0)rders?"
appears on the screen.
The result of this is to greatly speed up play and
provide continuous action over many turns. It also
means you're pretty well stuck at the keyboard to
handle emergencies as they arise. If you duck into
the kitchen for another slice of pizza, you may find
your ships sailing off the map or milling about
aimlessly when you return. You have no Nelsons to
take charge and save the day.
The best and most innovative part of the
Warship system is the inclusion of two different
Command Modes. Ship Mode lets you give orders
to each individual ship: what direction to go, how
fast, and what to shoot at. In Division Mode, you
give orders to groups of ships. This not only simplifies orders and speeds up the battle, it has a
more realistic feel. You wear the hat of the Admiral in charge of the force. You decide on formation, course and speed and you decide when to hold
fire and when to open fire. You don't pick out
targets for each individual ship.
What's great is the way these two modes integrate smoothly. You can switch back and forth
freely during play. You could, for example, switch
to Ship mode to give orders to one ship to launch
torpedoes and then revert to Division mode. In a
two-player game, each person can use either mode.
As you give course and speed to the lead ship in
each division, all of the other ships in the division
follow it's movement. If you've ordered them to
adopt a Line formation, they will automatically sail
so as to form a line behind the lead ship and then
maintain it, matching speed and turning at the same
place the lead ship turns. If you order a Parallel
formation, they match course instantly; all ships
turn at the same time so that if they had been in a
line, they would now be sailing on parallel tracks.
In Ship mode, you can order a ship to follow another and thus create the equivalent of a Line formation.

One of the major tactical concerns you have, as
commander, is watching for ships in a Line formation that get slowed by damage. When this happens,
all of the ships following them slow down to the
same speed, even stop. It's worst if the second or
third ship in line gets hit; the ship (or two) in front
sails off to almost certain annihilation while those
behind mill around uselessly. The solution to this is
to immediately reassign the damaged ship to another division. (I've found that putting all of the
cripples in division 9 works pretty well.) The following ship will then begin to close up with the
ship that is in the lead. You must do this promptly
as soon as you see a gap begin to open in the line. l
always ask for an Orders phase whenever I take a
torpedo hit so that I can check damage and speed
and make corrections right away.
The map is 60,000 yds by 60,000 yds, or about
30 nautical miles square. This is bigger than it
seems since most action will take place at night
with visibility around 5 to 7 miles. The visibility
can be set for each scenario. The map can have
land on it or be Open Sea (all clear). A map of
Savo Sound ("Ironbottom Sound") is included on the
disk and you can create others. Maps are stored independently of scenarios and can be reused. It
would be a fairly simple matter, for instance, to
create a Battle of Savo Island scenario using the
map provided.

There are three types of missions in Warship:
battleline, bombardment, and transport. A battleline
is simply the naval equivalent of the meeting engagement; neither side has any tactical objectives
beyond giving more damage than they receive. In a
bombardment mission, one of the sides is on its
way to perform shore bombardment and can get
points for exiting ships that still have firepower
and ammo off one edge of the map. A transport
mission is similar, points are awarded for exiting
certain cargo vessels or destroyers designated as
doing the transporting.
When playing most scenarios, it is possible for a
ship to sail off any edge of the map. If this happens, the ship is permanently disengaged. You do
this deliberately to score points or to protect a
heavily damaged ship but you don't ever want to
accidentally lose the services of a ship. There is no
warning of an approaching edge in the Action
Phase so it is a good idea to go to Orders every
once in a while just to check on sea room if you
have ships sailing toward the edge. If you are
fighting a battleline engagement (so that exiting
doesn't ever score points) in an open sea, then the
map will automatically adjust to keep ships in play
and ships can only disengage if they get more than
60,000 yards apart.
Scenarios

Warship comes with 4 scenarios. Three of these
are historical, the first and second battles of
Guadalcanal and the battle of Empress Augusta
Bay. All three are Japanese bombardment missions.
The first occurred on the night of 11/13/42. A
USN force of cruisers and destroyers intercepted an
IJN force led by the battleships Kirishima and Hiei
on its way to shoot up Henderson Field. The gutsy
cruisers got cut up badly but prevented the bombardment. They damaged Hiei so badly that she
was unable to get out of aircraft range and was
sunk by planes the following day. This factor is
represented in the game by giving more points for
damage to the side (if any) that has air superiority.
On the following night, the US was waiting with
battleships South Dakota and Washington. The

Japanese returned, with Kirishima again, and ran
into a buzzsaw. This battle, the second Battle of
Guadalcanal, is probably the best scenario to start
with. Let the computer take the IJN; you only have
the two BB's and four destroyers to manage.
The third scenario, Empress Augusta Bay, took
place the night after the invasion of Bougainville
on 11/2/43. The Japanese sent two heavy and two
light cruisers with six destroyers to shell the invasion. They were intercepted by four new Cleveland
class light cruisers and eight destroyers. The IJN
was turned back with the loss of a light cruiser but
this is a very evenly matched battle and the best
for two players.
The fourth scenario represents a battle that
never happened. During the campaign for Leyte,
Halsey was lured away from his position blocking
the mouth of San Bernardino Strait by the Japanese
carrier fleet. Had he stuck around, he would have
intercepted the main body of the Imperial Combined Fleet on its way to Leyte Gulf. The resulting
battle, pitting the most modern battleships of both
fleets, would have been the biggest and possibly
most spectacular surface engagement of the whole
of WWII.
Rolling Your Own
The ship "library" includes 79 classes of ships so
many other scenarios are possible. The Dutch ships
that fought in the Java Sea are here. The British
and Australians are here, so you can fight a
"might-have-been" action against the Prince of
Wales and Repulse. Types are distributed as follows:
Ship Type

IJN

USN

BB and BC

5

7

5

CA

4

5

2

0

CL

7

5

8

3

RN Dutch
0

DD and DE

10

10

5

2

Totals

26

27

20

5

Combat
I won't bother to go into the formulas for calculating accuracy and damage since you never use
them. The computer takes care of it all for you; it
suffices to say that they are satisfactorily realistic.

There are 29 types of guns—from 18 inch to 3
inch—each rated for range, the size of the shell,
and penetrating power. Add to this 5 types of torpedoes and defensive ratings for four types of armor: deck, belt, primary turret and secondary turret. This gives a realistic number of possible outcomes for hits, especially since special damage to
steering, propulsion, bridge, fire control systems,
and torpedo mounts is part of the action. Rarest of
all, but most spectacular, is the hit that penetrates
to the magazine.
During combat, the play is fast and furious.
Each target ship is highlighted briefly by the cursor
while a message at the bottom of the screen indicates the caliber of the gun that is firing. If a hit
or near miss occurs, that too is shown. If an asterisk appears after the hit it means that the shell
penetrated the armor at the point of impact. There
is a Delay Factor that can be set to keep messages
about penetrating hits on the screen longer but the
delay is always zero if there are no hits or they fail
to penetrate. Therefore most of the action reports
go by so rapidly that you cannot easily keep track
of all the data.
If you are used to playing naval miniatures or
boardgames, you may miss the feeling of understanding that comes from knowing who's shooting
at who and where each salvo falls. I must agree that
Warship is far more realistic because of the limited
knowledge and command control but sometimes I
want to analyze an engagement, not relive it. I wish
there was some (optional) way to do this in Warship, even if it made the games much longer.
Another small nitpick concerns watching the
computer play both sides of a battle. In this mode,
you can see the Japanese ships move but not the
Allies unless they just happen to be close enough to
be on the screen. Otherwise, the only time you see
them is when the cursor jumps to them when they
are under fire.
As you can see, there's not much wrong with
this game. The subject may not be of interest to
everyone but this game recreates the feel of nighttime surface combat better than any other game of
any kind. Will we see an Atlantic version of it
next?

Amiga Preferences (cont.)

Continued from pg. 42

venture. The object of the game
is revealed as you play. It becomes quite obvious that the title
of the game is taken from the
role YOU play in the game. The
documentation is exceptional in
keeping with the theme of the

game. Both humor and challenge
are present here, two of the key
elements of any good adventure
(along with an excellent parser
and outstanding presentation).
What more is needed? (Ed. Note:
As the saying goes, "one man's
poison is another man's meat". In
CGW #32 Gregg Williams
panned The Pawn in his Atari
Playfield column. In his C-64

column in CGW #35, Roy Wagner will refer to the excellent job
done in translating The Pawn to
the C-64.)
COMMERCIAL VALUE IN THE
PUBLIC DOMAIN
David Addison is the undisputed master of ABasiC from
Metacomco. This version of
BASIC originally came with the
Amiga. It has now been replaced
with AmigaBasic from Microsoft.
David continues to produce outstanding games that he puts into
the public domain. Public domain means that the games are
readily available to anyone from
User Groups, local and national
BBSs and from Public Domain
distributors (Fred Fish or Amicus). They can be obtained for
the "cost" of transfer to a disk
(between $1.50 and $10).
His games include
MONOPOLY (you against three
computer controlled players),
BACKGAMMON, OTHELLO,
CRIBBAGE, MILESTONE (like
Mille Bourne), SOLITAIRE
(Canfield and Klondike), and
TUNNEL (3D maze). In most of
these games, you play against a
computer opponent. The graphic
displays are outstanding with
some use of sound. All of them
are worth obtaining. The corn-

puter players are not a great
challenge, so these games are
excellent for beginners and also
for those that like to win a few
against the computer.
You will need a copy of
ABasiC to run these games, but
it quite often comes along with
the game. Since you get the game
source, you can easily change
anything you don't like or use it
to improve on the computer algorithm (game strategy). The
games use the mouse for easy
play. For the nominal cost of
obtaining these games, they are
an outstanding bargain. Highly
recommended. [Ed. Note: Roy
tells us that the above mentioned
public domain games can be ordered on disk from P.D.Q.
BACK, 13712 Claremont St.,
Westminster, CA 92683. The cost
is $5.00.] ■

DESIGNER PROFILE:

CHRIS CRAWFORD (Part 2)

Chris: Balance of Power.
CGW: Why?
Chris: It's had a very salutary impact upon the
world; I have had a real effect on the world. Actually, I'm proud of three different games in three
very different ways. I'm very proud of Balance of
Power for what it has done for the world; I feel
Balance of Power has made the world a better
place.

This is second in our two-part interview with
Chris Crawford, designer of games such as Eastern
Front, Excalibur, Balance of Power, and the new
Patton Vs. Rommel. Just as this interview was going
to press, Microsoft Press released Chris's new book,
Balance of Power, an account of the history of the
game, the models of political behavior used in it
and their basis in reality, and strategy for playing
the game. To our knowledge, this is the first book
devoted to one computer game which is not of the
"How to Win at Pac-Man" genre of books.
Balance of Power is an excellent, well-written
book. Chris shows us how he arrived at his underlying assumptions for the game—how he determined
how countries should behave. He also narrates the
process of designing the game—how he tested and
refined Balance of Power—and his troubles finding
a publisher who would accept it. (He almost lost his
home when Random House demanded their $10,000
advance back.) He also plays a sample game, giving
ample hints on how to win along the way.
Computer games are finally receiving serious attention: not as mindless arcade games, but as serious adult pursuits, and Balance of Power has lead
the way. Chris's book is highly-recommended reading, and as the first book of its kind, should secure
a place for his game as one of the most important
in computer gaming history.

CGW: Which game have you done that you're
proudest of?

CGW: Why?
Chris: It has taught people—I think it has made a
small number of people much more realistic in
their appraisal of world affairs. I think most
Americans are pretty unrealistic in the way they
assess world relations. I feel Balance of Power has
done something to make a few of those people
more aware of the complexities of the real world. I
am very proud of Eastern Front for the way it
kicked the industry in the pants on issues... the two
things that Eastern Front were: first, make the
damn interface clean. A lot of games before Eastern Front were either skill and action games that
were very clean because all you did was run back
and forth and shoot someone, or they were more
complex games that were ghastly to talk to, just
really arcane input structures. Eastern Front had a
clean, beautiful input structure. That, I think, influenced the industry. The other thing that Eastern
Front did was that it showed that people will respond to an intelligent game, and that was an important thing for the industry. The wisdom in the
industry before Eastern Front came out was that
people are dummies, all they want are silly
shoot-em-ups, and all of a sudden, here comes Eastern
Front and sells lots and lots of copies.
CGW: Is Eastern Front your most successful
game in terms of profit?
Chris: Yes. In commercial terms, Eastern Front
outstrips everything else I've done by at least a
factor of four.
CGW: Yet you were on salary at Atari at the
time, so...
Chris: I got royalties for Eastern Front. Eastern
Front was done on my own time. I did it at home,
nights and weekends, with my own equipment, using an Atari Assembler/Editor cartridge. I put in a
lot of time at Atari, but I put in a lot of time on
Eastern Front, so... it's funny, the amount of effort
put into Eastern Front is trivial compared to what

we put into games nowadays. Again, I don't think
most users appreciate the enormous escalation in
the amount of effort required to produce a game.
Let me just mention two games that came out in
late 1981. The first was Eastern Front. I worked on
Eastern Front for nine months, from January of
1981 to August of 1981. Working nights and
weekends, my estimate is that I put in 20 to 30
hours a week. So, we're talking about a total investment of 100 hours a month, 800 hours of time
to produce this game that sold 60,000 copies. That's
about one hundred copies sold for every hour of
work. That's ridiculous. I mean, huge results. Similarly, there was another games, Caverns of Mars,
that came out just after Eastern Front, that game
was done by a high school kid in 6 weeks time,
there really wasn't much programming effort in it.
A lot of games in '81 and '82 were that way,
dashed off very quickly. Very little effort goes into
them, they sold lots of copies, profit margins were
fabulous in those days which is why the industry
did so well. Nowadays, a typical game—just your
average, everyday game—will take at least one programmer-year of effort and really, two programmer-years is much more common for a game that
might sell 10,000 copies. Look at the economics and
it's hard to imagine how the games industry can
continue. There are serious problems coming up
with ways to get money to programmers just to
keep them in business. I know very, very few
games programmers who are really making money
in the business, you know, making a lot of money
and getting rich—even the famous ones, the wellknown ones are having problems. I count myself as
fortunate. I know people who are struggling along
with much less income than me. I am also very
fortunate that I have a wife who works at a real
job, and she brings home a very hefty salary. That
allows us to get over the vagaries, the wild ups and
downs of the games biz.

CGW: So your advice to new game designers is
get married?
Chris: (laughs) Get married to a wife with a
good job! There are a lot of husband-and-wife
teams in the games business, and that's really
rough, because the family income goes up and
down wildly. At least mine has a stable base that
we can count on.
CGW: 1 interrupted you while you were talking
about the three games that you are proud of; you

had already talked about Balance of Power and
Eastern Front...
Chris: The third is Excalibur. I am very proud
of that for the artistic attempt I made with it, and
really, when you look at the size and scale of the
game, it's an immensely ambitious design. When
you consider the thing was released in 1983, and
begun in 1982... I began work on this just as PacMan mania was peaking, and when I finished it,
VCS games were still quite common. I am very
proud of it for the ambitiousness of the attempt. It
did not succeed anywhere near as well as I had
hoped, but there's still a lot to be proud of.

CGW: You said in your book that you work on a
game until you're sick of it, and then a month later
you wish you could go back and just tweak one little thing. If you could go back to one of your
games and tweak it, re-do it, whatever, which
game would you choose?
Chris: If you want to talk about a game that is
out there, shipped a particular way... one of my
problems is that I'm willing to let sleeping dogs lie.
Legionnaire, for example, is a pretty dead game.
No one's going to play it anymore, so I wouldn't
want to go back and fix some of the problems in
that game. Legionnaire needed work. So one month
after I release a game, there are a lot of things that
I want to go back and fix, but two years after I
release it, I don't care that much anymore.
COY: So the answer is, you don't really want to
go back and change anything?
Chris: Not now. I suspect I'll want to go back
and tweak on Patton Versus Rommel; right now I'm
just cleaning up bugs. Every now and then I go
back and look at Balance of Power and I say,
"You know, I really could have done this better."
For example, if I—one of my problems is I'm in
such a hurry to get to the future that I don't want
to waste any time messing around in the past—if I
had some time, I'd like to go back and mess with
Balance of Power, especially, why did I do it in
128K? At the time, it seemed like the thing to do,
but nobody has a skinny Mac anymore, and jeez,
that game would have been so much better if I had
designed it for 512K. So that bothers me.

CGW: Some of the people who read CGW are
certainly people who have designed a game, who
maybe have one in their mind, would like to design
a game, maybe they're not sure if their idea is good
enough, they're not sure if they can pull it off, or

they're very unsure of how the game design business works. What is your advice to them?
Chris: I would advise anybody interested in
game design to do it as a hobby for at least one
project, and preferably two. To do two projects
strictly as hobby, and by hobby I mean do not even
consider the possibility that your game will be sold
commercially. Develop your first game for yourself
to play and your friends. If you show it to a lot of
people who aren't your friends and a lot of people
say, "This is a good, fun game; can I have a copy?,"
then go commercial with your second game. Otherwise, do your second game as a hobby; that is, keep
your regular job, work at your regular job during
the day, keep your regular income, and work on
your game nights and weekends. Now if you don't
care enough about game design to work 40 hours a
week at a regular job and nights and weekends on
your game, then you'll fail anyway, because game
design is a murderously difficult job, and you can't
succeed if your attitude is, "Well, I could be writing
programs to balance checkbooks for Bank of
America." You won't survive unless you love it and
you really desperately want to do it. If you're not
willing to do it as a hobby, and you're not patient
enough to do it as a hobby, you won't succeed.
Once you have done a couple of games as an amateur, then do your first real commercial effort. At
this point, about the best I can say is, there are
many options available to you. Don't expect to
make much money on your first professional effort.
If you can make $5,000 out of your first professional effort, you're doing pretty well. Figure your
second professional effort, you might make
$10,000. Oh, and you better figure that it will take
at least a year of your time to do each of these,
because if you're going to compete with the pros
out there who are spending a year of their time
doing it, you're going to have to spend at least as
much time as they do. So it's a pretty gloomy prediction, and the thing is, there are a lot of people
who try to break into the games biz and get badly
hurt by it, and it bothers me to see all of these
people getting hurt so badly. But the industry is
just not a fat, wealthy industry; it's tough.

CGW: It was fat and wealthy at one time,
though.

Chris: It was extremely lucrative at one point;
sinfully so. There are plenty of stories of programmers—I don't want to name any names—there are a
lot of people out there who got very famous and

very wealthy on the basis of some pretty shoddy
work. At least work not deserving of the immense
returns these guys made. Let's look at Eastern
Front: 800 hours of total effort generated a return
to me of, oh, let's say $80,000. That's $100 per
hour. That's obscene. A super consultant...

CGW: You think that's obscene?
Chris: I think so, yeah.
CGW: 1 think that if people like what you do so
much that they're willing to pay you en masse $100
per hour, that's excellent! I think that's great!
Chris: That's good fortune, but is it deserved?
You see, the success was based on a lack of real
competition, and this was a great deal of what happened in the games industry. There were a few
people who got in ahead of anybody else and did
something before anyone else did. If Eastern Front
were still the best wargame in the business, then
yes, I would deserve all of that money. But Eastern
Front's primacy rested to a large extent on the fact
that it was the first game out there that did all sorts
of neat things with display list interrupts, and
scrolling, and it was the first accessible wargame.
Maybe "obscene" is too strong a word. I think
maybe a fairer statement is the immense returns I
got on Eastern Front are a good measure of just
how skewed, unrealistic, and uncompetitive the
games market was in 1981 and 1982. And there
were a lot of people who earned far more money
than I did for other products with no greater merit.

CGW: I heard that the person at Atari who did
the original VCS Pac-Man received a dollar per
copy.
Chris: Ten cents. But it doesn't matter. They
sold ten million games.
CGW: So he got a million dollars.
Chris: Yep. And for a port—not a design, but a
port. And it was generally regarded to be a rather
poor implementation. Later on they came out with
Ms. Pac-Man, which was much better, but the
damage was already done. They had ten million
customers out there who were burned. So it is true
that this person received an awful lot of money.
That's probably the extreme case of financial returns far exceeding contribution, but there are
plenty of others. I would almost go so far as to say
that almost everybody who got rich during that period didn't deserve everything they got. What I'll do
is I'll say that there were maybe one or two people

who deserved it, but I won't name names. That
gives me an easy out if someone buttonholes me
"Damnit, Crawford, what are you saying in that
interview in Computer Gaming World?"
CGW: "I wasn't talking about you!"
Chris: Exactly. "I said there were one or two
notable exceptions, and you're one of them." So
long as they hit me up one at a time, I'm fine.
CGW: If three of them get you at once, you're
done for.
Chris: Yep. "Which two, Crawford?!" I'd pick the
two largest. (laughs)
COP': Are all computer games that are hits
flukes?
Chris: No, I disagree with that assertion. We're
talking shades of meaning here. Let's look at the
two extremes: "You can write a formula that will
determine the success of a computer game." Nope.
Dead wrong. The other extreme is, "All computer
game hits are flukes: completely unexpected and
unpredictable, and no basis for expecting this game
to do it." That is not so. That is, if you walk up to
me with five brand-new computer games from five
new authors no one has ever heard of, and show
them to me, I can at least give you a ranking or
some sort of indication which is most likely to
succeed and which is least likely. I think it is possible for us to make reasonable assertions about
success. I'll then point out the classic line—this is
just a variation on the well-understood history of
book publishing, of movies, of every endeavor like
this—that some of the most successful games of all
time were initially turned down. Some of the good
stories about the things Electronic Arts turned
down, Broderbund turned down... the whole industry turned down Balance of Power. Those stories
are rampant. So it is certainly true that publishers
have great difficulty finding winners. So in that
respect, yes, there is a fluky aspect to success in
the computer game industry.
CGW: Do you think Patton Vs. Rommel will be
a hit?
Chris: No.
CGW: Why not?
Chris: It is not a great game. It is a good game,
it is fun, but I don't feel it has greatness in its
bowels. I feel Patton Vs. Rommel is too explicit an
attempt to please the public rather than myself.
Balance of Power I did for me, I did because I

knew what I had to do to be proud of. And I did
not really attempt to please people. I did make
concessions to what appeared to be absolute needs,
but otherwise, this was my game for me. And the
result was a great game. Patton Vs. Rommel is a
game for the public.
CGW: Do you think your next game will sell
well?
Chris: My next game has a number of outcomes.
The first question is, "Will I fail before I finish it?"
That is, will I hew to the noble course I have plotted for myself, or will I lose my nerve and back
out? Will I simply fail and not achieve what I set
out to achieve? If it gets off the ground, it will
certainly have a tremendous impact on the industry.
Everyone in the industry will look at it and say,
"This is a significant game." Will it succeed commercially? My gut says, "Yes," only because my gut
says, "I want to play this game." When I feel that
fire burning, I project that onto other people.
That's all it is—a projection. I cannot know that rationally. ■

INDUSTRY NEWS (cont.)

will compete with Synapse and Infocom
products. Berlyn states that they have developed their own engine for adventures
that will enable them to release their
products in six or seven machine formats
simultaneously. The first release is entitled
Rager and is tentatively scheduled for a
fall release date.
ALTERNATE REALITY CONTEST RESULTS ANNOUNCED!
The "Awesome AR Character" contest,
sponsored by the Alternate Reality Users
Group, closed on September 15th and the
winners were announced by Datasoft in
late November. Contestants tried to reach
the highest possible level and/or submit a
fictional story depicting the character's
exploits. First Place went to Richard
Carnduff for his fifteenth level adventurer
named Cletis; Second Place was shared by
Marlene Bird of Ames, Iowa for her fourteenth level character, Who Cares? and
Donel Wyman of Oshkosh, Wisconsin for
the level fourteen "Thorex." Deborah
Bickford of Sacramento, California won
the fictional autobiography award for her
story about "Bethel."

MINDSCAPE ESTABLISHES THUNDER
MOUNTAIN DIVISION!
Mindscape, Inc. has formed a new division in order to respond to growing
consumer demand for quality, low-priced
software. The Thunder Mountain line will
carry the suggested retail price of $9.95.
This is possible because many of the programs will have already been published
previously and have been out-of-print
prior to this re-release or were published
in European markets prior to this U.S. release. The software will support the Apple
II, IBM, Macintosh, Commodore 64 and
Atari 800 series. Rambo: First Blood Part
II is scheduled to be the first release.

IN CASE YOU MISSED IT, DEPT.!
SSI is retailing a line of SSI Classics at
a suggested retail price of $14.95. These
include such proven titles as: Combat
Leader, Computer Baseball, Computer
Bismarck, Cytron Masters, Eagles,
Fortress, Galactic Gladiators, Gemstone
Warrior, and Warp Factor. The programs
are available through retailers, as well as
direct from SSI.

READER INPUT DEVICE

R.I.D. UPDATE
Due to the length of the 1985-1986
CGW index we have not included our
game rating page in this issue. The game
ratings will appear again starting with our
March issue (#35). At that time the
results of R.I.D. #32 will be included in
the ratings database. There was no R.I.D.
#33. Below are the games for R.I.D. #34
When evaluating a game consider such
things as PRESENTATION (graphics,
sound, packaging, documentation); GAME
DESIGN (design, playability,
interesting?); and LIFE (does the game
wear well?).
For each game you rate, place a 1
(terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to
the appropriate number. Leave blank any
game which you have not played enough
to have formed a personal opinion.

Continued from pg. 41

The problem with the address book is that most
of the numbers are really not necessary. In fact,
there is only one number that you really have to
call, and once you follow up on it, you are well
along into the game. But it could take a lot of time
and quarters to find that out. Try the entry under
TTTT and see what comes of it.
Another important factor in the game is the
5.25" floppy disk that you must find and read.
That, along with meeting Bette Binet, are the triggers to the end game. The floppy won't tell you all
that much, and you will never be able to read the
last file on the disk. That doesn't really matter; you
just have to boot up the disk and rummage through
the other files.
The end game itself is disappointing. You have
very little do there, although you finally find out
the whole story, getting most of it from Denise,
and the rest later from Alice, who fills in the remaining gaps. A pretty seamy story, in fact, full of
spite, greed, and treachery. And yes, love, too. Poor
Alice. Personally, I still think the best ending is to
marry her back in the chapel, and spend a happy
life shepherding in Australia.
The game reads like a novel, and that is where
the problem lies: it's TOO MUCH like a novel. Often, you have the feeling that you're watching
someone else doing things; there is little sense of
actually participating, of actually being in the adventure. Amnesia is pervaded by an atmosphere of
player non-control. Everything has been set-up
beforehand; you need only do the right thing at the
right time, or be in the right place at the right
time, and the rest comes automatically.
And if you do find yourself struggling nevertheless, that's no problem: all the answers are in the
back of the manual. Yep. You can turn to the back
pages, and find out whatever you need to know.
Sigh.
No doubt, a lot of glowing words will be written
about the achievement of getting all of Manhattan
on the disks. And that IS an amazing feat. The
subway system is entirely accurate, insofar as the
lines are concerned (most subway stations, however,
do not have convenient stairs inside for uptown and
downtown). You can, literally, go anywhere in the
city by subway. At least anywhere in Manhattan;
none of the trains will go any further than that.

Still, that's plenty, and after you've accumulated
some money in the game, you'll probably enjoy
riding around Manhattan just for the heck of it
(having, of course, saved your position first!), just
to see what's there.
Speaking of saving, that's another sore point.
You can save almost anywhere, any time. The save
disk, however, holds only three positions, and the
process of saving is rather slow. Possibly this is due
to the amount of information that needs to be
stored. However, the real pain is restoring. You can
restore ONLY when you first boot up; there is no
way to recall a saved position once play has begun.
The parser is adequate, but has some quirks of
its own. Words recognized in one place may not be
recognized in others. So you might be able to knock
on a door at one location, but not at a different
one. Objects understood by the parser in one area
will not be understood in another. It's all very
strange, and often frustrating.
Amnesia comes on two double-sided disks, and
there is a lot of swapping and disk flipping involved, sometimes when you least expect it. As the
game supports only one drive, this can become tedious after awhile, but it's something you have to
live with.
You also get a dual manual, street and subway
map of Manhattan, and the X-Street Indexer. Half
of the manual has the introductory material about
booting and playing the game; the other half is a
brochure for the Sunderland, with a guide to places
of interest, etc. and the phone numbers found in
the address book.
The subway map (street guide on the reverse) is
accurate; if you ever plan on visiting New York,
bring it with you (just don't expect the trains to
come as fast as they do in the game!). However,
leave the X-Street Indexer home; it is totally inaccurate. Being a native New Yorker, I noticed that
right off. However, it is supposed to be that way,
for game purposes. On occasion, strangers will
come up and ask you for the cross street nearest a
particular address. Using the Indexer, you give
them the answer, which of course is quite wrong,
but they will accept it. Obviously, there can be
only one reason for this: it's an anti-piracy device.
Considering that the Indexer holds 30 blocks and 15
avenues, for a total of 450 possible combinations,
it's probably pretty effective.

Overall, Amnesia is an unsatisfying game. You
can run around here, and run around there, and
work up your triple scores as a detective, a character, and a survivor, but so what? Much of what
you actually do in the game doesn't get you very
far towards the ultimate solution. Boiled down to
the essentials, there are only three things you need
to do here: follow up on the clue from TTTT, get
and read the disk, and meet Bette. There are auxiliary actions associated with them, but those are the
key points. So when you think back on the game as
a whole, you don't see yourself as having done, really, a whole lot; as having been the main character. It's more as though you came to certain places
in a book, and turned a page to get on with the
story.
Bottom line: Terrific prose, nice maps, too much
novel, not enough adventure.
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Continued from pg. 34
game, but can easily backfire with the "Items Reverse" event in the Advanced level.
CONCLUSION

RR is a beautifully designed and packaged game.
Once you understand what's going on, it plays
smoothly and offers opportunity for lots of personal
interaction. As a computer program, its flaws are
relatively minor. I question the randomality of the
turn sequences (at least on the Apple version where
we know that the RND function isn't quite as reliable as other machines). For six out of seven turns
in one game, the same player went last. On six out
of seven occasions in another game, the same player
went first. I also question the wisdom (on the Apple version, at least) of making the Escape key act

as the reset button to start the game over. You can
certainly lose a lot of multi-player games in
progress with no double-checking that that's what
the players want done. As a strategy game, I think
that hardcore wargamers will dislike RR and those
that are expecting a relatively sophisticated simulation will be disappointed in the game. Those who
dislike randomness and find themselves impatient
with traditional games like Uno that depend upon
uncertainty and ordered chaos will also dislike RR.
Those who want a game to play with the whole
family or with the guests who've come over to play
on the computer for the first time will enjoy RR.
Those who enjoy backstabbing will play RR as
ruthlessly as the play Diplomacy or Junta and those
who simply want a pleasant gaming experience will
avoid strategies like dropping another person's item
in the lake. RR is a commendable effort at creating a computer game which is a social event instead
of a puzzle or problem to be solved in solitaire
fashion.

Continued from pg. 37
human player hold back some of his/her gold early
on so that he may purchase a catapult at an early
stage of the game. The computer does not defend
its castles very well during the opening turns. It is
not too difficult to stage a successful siege early in
the game. In besieging the castles, one gets to see
some of the most magnificent graphics ever. The
castle architecture is magnificent, even to delineating the differences between Saxon and Norman
castles. The animation is smooth and aesthetically
pleasing as the rocks arch toward the castle wall.
Here is a game situation that is semi-arcade in nature. The player must use the mouse and cursor to
set the tension on the catapult prior to firing. Most
players catch on rather quickly, however, and here
is where the design didn't quit meet the designer's
original intent. They had intended that the catapult
return to the upright position after each shot, thus
making it more difficult to figure out the setting of
the next shot. As it turns out, the player can simply
reduce the tension on the catapult arm by one
notch after knocking down a section of wall. Even
those of us with gargantuan ineptitude in arcade
efforts can master the settings in one play session.
After the wall is battered down, the statistics are
displayed for a standard battle to occur. If the attack is successful the castle, slightly worse for
wear, but repaired, will be added to the player's
holdings.
RAIDERS OF A LOST ART
As mentioned above, it may be that the player
would rather plunder than conquer. In this case, the
"Raid Castle" selection is toggled on the menu and
another semi-arcade scenario is acted out upon the
screen.
Interior : The darkened courtyard of a castle. A

Saxon invader and his courageous allies are
furtively advancing toward a lighted doorway. They
are discovered by the castle's defenders and a
sword fight ensues. The daring Saxon weaves his
menacing sword in a deadly matrix and drives the
defenders back. The leader of the defenders falls

and the invaders advance over the fallen guard.
CUT! PRINT!
The above scenario is only half of the "Raid
Castle" sequence. After entering the lighted doorway, the characters enter an anteroom complete
with stairs and the Captain of the Guards, a somewhat more formidable swordsman than the recently
dispatched cannonfodder. The stairs give the player
a chance to "Errol Flynn" it up by moving up and
down the stairs for maximum swashbuckling effect.
The documentation indicates, in fact, that this
confuses the computer opponent and makes it possible for the hero to avoid being wounded as often.
The documentation also hints that it is good to
thrust your sword at the opponent immediately after a parried blow in order to reduce his chance of
parrying the follow-up thrust.
It is here that the designers wish they could
have crunched another feature into the program. In
the swordfighting sequence, there is no feedback to
determine how you are doing strengthwise or how
strong your opponent remains. This would certainly
make it easier to become efficient in the swordplay
phase of the game, but alas, the window with
swordplay feedback was deleted by other considerations. To be sure, it is possible to become proficient with game experience, but garners like to
have some idea of how they are doing as the scenario progresses.
DISTRESSED DAMSEL SALE
Those who enjoy the "Raid Castle" scenarios
because of the swordplay will love the sequences
where they can rescue a Saxon maiden in distress.
The swordplay is the same as "Raid Castle" but the
reward is far more interesting. If the player is
successful in defeating the swordsman in the second
sequence, a very romantic sequence unfolds. The

screen uses a narrative still shot to inform the
player that the Saxon maiden has returned to the
home castle. Months unfold and finally, before the
fireplace, one of several different maidens with
bedroom eyes and blushing cheeks approaches her
Saxon hero for the obligatory, but tastefully depicted, love scene. She becomes the Saxon hero's
wife and her name and caricature are depicted on
screen at the beginning of each turn (along with all
the other treasure). This scene in particular accomplishes a great deal in suggesting the cinematic flavor that the designers intended and is great fun to
watch.
JOUST TO KEEP IN TOUCH!
Perhaps the most graphically stunning portion of
the game is the tournament. Not only are the colors
bright, but the animated spectators are artfully
conceived and rendered. Banners blow in the wind
and the lists themselves are a full spectrum of brilliant pigments which suggest a great carnival-like
spectacle. The player is given the option of jousting
for "Fame" or "Land." The object of the jousting
scenario is to place the lance point squarely upon
the shield of your opponent and unhorse him. This
requires much practice before any degree of expertise is certain, so it is definitely advisable to joust
for Fame rather than Land until the skill is mastered. Once the skill is mastered, however, a player
can expand his Land holdings through the tournaments.
SAGE ADVICE FOR STRATEGIC ADVANTAGE
As noted above, it is wise to hold money in reserve to purchase a catapult early in the game.
Since the computer does not defend its castles well
at the beginning, you should take out a Norman
early on. This greatly increases your chances of
conquering enough territory to unite the kingdom
and become king yourself. Further, experienced
wargamers have a tendency to want to fortify at
every opportunity. It isn't cost effective to fortify
territories by building castles in regions without
them. It is much more important to be aggressive
and emphasize the offensive options. It is expressly
important to think offensively since the structure of
the game forces you to take some offensive option
each turn. For example, if a player finds himself in
a weak position, he cannot simply elect to build up
his defense and pass. He must be at risk in some

way (either raiding a castle and losing gold to pay
his ransom if unsuccessful; hosting a tournament
and losing the five gold in costs; or to risk a force
in territorial combat). Pay close attention to the
italicized portions of the documentation (Sage Advice sections) for specific details beyond these general tips.
"THE END" RESULT!
Defender of the Crown is a delightful experience
and an auspicious beginning to what looks to be an
excellent series of software offerings. The graphics
and animation are the most exceptional to date.
If the game has any weakness it is in the fact
that the game play itself (apart from the fabulous
graphics and unique cinematic vehicle in which the
game is couched) is not as complex as many strategy games. Judged strictly as a strategy/action game
Defender of the Crown would be mundane. But it
would be a mistake to judge this program only on
its gaming system. If Defender of the Crown were
the fourth, fifth, or sixth release in the Cinemaware series we would be unhappy with the game
play. But as a first release we are more than
pleased. The amount of energy that was put into
this cutting edge product is evident. You will use it
as a showcase program to demonstrate the power of
the Amiga to your friends. We look forward to
what the folks at Master Designer Software can,
hopefully, do when they turn that energy to producing more detailed games using the wonderful
cinematic vehicle they have created in Defender of
the Crown.

The program is essentially interactive art and
offers a new depth to the digital canvas. As the final horizon is adorned with the closing message,
"The End," the player recognizes that whether he
wins or loses, Cinemaware has accomplished what
they set out to accomplish. This program institutes
a new gaming genre (interactive cinema) with the
player in the starring role. "The King is dead! Long
live the King!".

INDEX 1985-1986

The following index includes listings for articles and games found in CGW 5.1 (Vol. 5 No. 1 dated
January/February 1985) through #33 (December 1986). Issues from 1985 are referenced by their
Vol./No. listing (5.1 through 5.5). Issues from 1986 are referenced by whole numbers (#25 through #33).
Each index listing includes, in order, the following information: Name of game or article, issue number,
page number, type of article.
The article types give you a hint as to how much material you can expect to find on the listing in
question. FA (feature article) means the subject is treated in a major article that is often more than one
page long. MR (micro review) refers to a small review usually 400-800 words long. TP refers to listings in
Taking a Peek which are one or two paragraphs long and usually include a screen photo of the game. DP
refers to mentions of the game found in a regular CGW column such as Commodore Key or Atari Playfield.
refers to a short mention which is most often only one or two sentences long.

FA:
MR:
TP:
DP:
SM:

Feature Review
Micro Review
Taking A Peek
Dept./Column
Short Mention

