"Covering Interactive & Multimedia Entertainment COMPUTER | GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Game Magazine September 1993 Number 110 Strategy Game Section Wargames Surveyed 150 Warsames het Summer CES Part Deux A*** ASYNDICATE Strikes Prince of Persia 2: Cruel and Unmerciful Sneak Preview: GHINI Warlords II $3.95 USA $4.95 Canadian 09 Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.0 ** Reaches New Heights 0129074 1215819 "


"EEEEE EEEEEEE Explore the depths of Fribbulus Xax Journey through dangerous, yet Discover the secrets of the alien Battle horrible aliens and elude in search of your baby sitter! beautiful alien territory! machinery to aid you in your quest! clever traps on the alien base! The arcade adventure hit of the year! 360° VGA Full Screen Smooth \"The best game I've seen on a PC!\" Aliens Ate My Baby Sitter features Scrolling breakthrough graphics technology that \"Amazing graphics...\" Original Sound Track and Sound beats anything you've seen before! Effects for Sound Blaster & Adlib \"'This game is positively addictive!\" Travel through beautiful, but Multiple Play Levels Fun for the \"Great puzzles... terrific humor...\" dangerous alien territory, discovering weird and wonderful new creatures. Whole Family Can you solve the puzzles and locate Arcade Quality Action & Cinematic the treasure that leads to Molly? Sequences Fantastic animation and breathtaking Special Challenges for Advanced music make this fun and exciting Players adventure the best in its class. Circle Reader Service #55 FormGen Corporation P.O. Box 279 North Andover MA USA 01845-0279 (416) 857-4141 (800) 263-2390 arcade Quality Action & Cinematic Form GEN CORPORATION "


"GLOBAL DOMINATION W @..@.0.0.0.1 The Ultimate Multi-Player Conquest Simulation finally, you can conquer your friends in state-of-the-art graphic splendor! Amass armies with your choice of units, then invade! Watch your back, though you'll need to divide your forces with care to avoid being conquered yourself! Global Domination is turn-based and features modem play; a wide variety of historic opponents from which to choose; random world generator; large number of units; spies; diplomacy & subversive activists; by far the best graphics and sound ever seen in a conquest game; and even more fun than Napoleon had at Waterloo! UND Jul 2021 EMPIRE RESOURCE GEVOLUTECH ORAZ Follo Inn SOIRES te viny Take your ego for a rollercoaster ride as you see your empire rise and fall! DAWID TE OLDU KLA Here's where you amass your armies and make your moves! CRWY. MOVES INTOUSENEGAL Take tactical control of a battle in graphically stunning animated combat! 01993 Impressions Software Inc IBM PC VGA Screenshots Impressions impresiones coran, me Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234, Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #64 "


"FEATURES COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JNLD 10 Microsoft's Flight Simulator 5 Tim Trimble Takes The Lift-Off 5 1001 Arabian Bytes Broderbund's Prince of Persia 2 by Charles Ardai 8 Coming Attractions Part II New Games Report From The Summer Consumer Electronics Show 8 EA's Space Hulk Exploring Derelicts in a Dark Future by Jeff James 8 Spectrum HoloByte/MicroProse? CGW Visits Spectrum HoloByte Prior To The Merger 8 Flight Simulator 5 Pg. 10 Cover by Hugh Syme ICOM Solve Clearly Now ICOM's Sherlock Holmes: Consulting Detective, Volume III by Charles Ardai 8 LucasArts' Day of the Tentacle More Manic Moments In The Maniac Mansion by Charles Ardai 8 Capstone's Eternam Allen Greenberg Finds An Eternam Flame 8 Prince of Persia 2 Pg. 14 The SSI School of Dungeon Design Rudy Craft Quests for Unlimited Adventures 8 Sierra's Inca Andean Indians In Space As Experienced By Chuck \"van Daniken\" Miller 8 Cars & Drivers EA and CGW Entertain The Car & Driver Contest Winner by Ken Brown Inca Pg. 64 8 The 7th Guest Visitor's Kit Chuck Miller Offers Technical Help on the CD-ROM Game HET 8 Prophetic Insight Sierra's Prophecy As Foretold By Allen Greenberg 8 Keeping Up With Indiana Jones LucasArts Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis CD-ROM by Charles Ardai Syndicate Pg. 94 8 Challenge of the Five Realms A CRPG Multiverse From MicroProse Explored By Gordon Goble "


"TM Toot: The Creepers are on the move. It's the annual trek to the Butterfly Bowls. But, with over 70 levels of factories, caverns, and forests to cross and with the worst sense of direction in the entire animal kingdom, getting them all there is going to take some doing! Energy 2000 Tool REKLE. Energy 3600 Creepers Features:  Over 70 puzzle levels.  256 colors (PC).  Crazy Creeper animations. Difficulty rating from easy to brutal. Full soundcard support with 16 funky soundtracks. The Creeper-cam with multiple playfield views Energy 300 The mean green creeping machine Look for Creepers crawling in your favorite software store, or call: (800) 438-7794 Psygnosis 29 Saint Mary's Court, Brookline, MA 02146 (617) 731-3553 Circle Reader Service #80 "


"SPECIAL STRATEGY SECTION COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 92 Sneak Preview: Masters of Orion MicroProse Launches a Game of Space Conquest by Alan (Rated-XXXX) Emrich Organized Future Crime Electronic Arts and Bullfrog Form a Syndicate by Wyatt Lee . National Pastime-O-Matic Computer Strat-O-Matic Baseball 4.0 Wallace Poulter Bats Clean-Up \"Interplay\"book For Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space Inside Information on the Space Strategy Game by Erik Anderson and Fritz Bronner Publisher Russell Sipe Editor Johnny Wilson On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Associate Editor Chris Lombardi Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editor Chuck Miller Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Marketing Manager Diane Miller M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Ad Manager Jim Messing Circulation Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks Ad Director Jay Eisenberg 103 COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD Sneak Preview: Warlords II SSG Expects to Conquer More Wargamers with their Latest by Alan Emrich School for Strategists Tim Carter Touts General Principles Of Strategy Not All For Nautical Three-Sixty Pacific's Harpoon Designers' Series II by H. E. Dille Who Wrote The Book Of Wargames? M. Evan Brooks Lists Wargames Covering 1900-1950 128 Mindcraft's Ambush at Sorinor A Burg in the Hand is Worth Two in Ambush by H. E. Dille 130 Greater Naval Battles SSI Expands Great Naval Battles in the Atlantic by H. E. Dille Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Golden Empire Publications, Inc. 130 Chaparral Ct. Suite 260. Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class Postage paid at Erlanger, KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672.910. Contents are copyrighted by Golden Empire Publications, 1993. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, PO Box 601. Mt. Morris. IL 61054-8052 The subscription rate for twelve issues (one year) is $28.00. Canadian and foreign surface subscriptions add S11.00. Foreign air subscriptions are $78.00 per year. All payments must be in U.S. dollars. made by check drawn upon a U.S. bank, Visa, MasterCard, or money order. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnie: CGW MCI Mail 590-8758 Internet CGW@WELL.SE.CA.US Subscription Dept. I (800) 827-4450 Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 Foreign Subscribers: (815) 734-1113 For advertising information only. call: JE Publishers' Representative Company 3415 S. Sepulveda Blvd., Suite 520 Los Angeles, CA 90034 (310) 572-7272 For newsstand circulation, call: Kemco Publishers Services (603) 924-0224 Printed in the U.S.A. 8 28 37 DEPARTMENTS Editorial (Celebrity Designers) 102 CWW Editorial Scorpion's View (Darkside (Tournament Results) of Xeen) 134 Taking A Peek Ad Index 141 CGW Hall of Fame Over There (European 142 The Top 100 (Reader Ratings) Games Report) 144 What's Hot Scorpion's Tale (Shadow of 145 Patches (Computer the Comet) Game Updates) Letters From Paradise 146 Rumor Bag Shareware (Strategy Games) (InfoSurfer Maximus) 60 72 76 "


"ON THE FIELD OF FIRE Bring lou 1966 The First Realistic 3-D Battlefield. Run from hut to hut or hit the dirt and take cover behind trees and rocks. MILO: 74CV506.clined us about pripected Unmatched Depth and Authenticity 80 historical missions based on actual combat reports provided by the UDT-SEAL Museum Association Inc. Leading Edge Simulation Technology Soe tracers and explosions through your own eyes or seven external views. Hear real digitized battlo sounds. Ter m en leihe PCI You and your team jump out of a Huey and belly through 200 yards of mud and darkness toward the village. You signal your team to fan out and take out the guard posts, but your flanker goes down-booby trap! Suddenly rounds from an AK-47 shriek overhead and the night is ablaze with tracers and the shock waves of mortar fire. Welcome to \"Forest of Assassins\", Vietnam's Mekong Delta. Your worst nightmare come true. Available for IBM and compatibles. ELECTRONIC ARTS Seal Team is a trademark ed Electronic Arts. 91933 Electronic Arts. Circle Reader Service #51 "


" Dilavlana's BAKKER'S Ritor's METAL GUIT MARY EMPIRE BUILDER BORONG h 0.9 with PAUSE Celebrity Design Have We Been Misled? by Johnny L. Wilson In the July issue of Computer Gaming the \"Gamblin' Rose\" managed to do so program from special insight given by that World, our staff report on the Computer himself) with a design to which Pete himcelebrity does provide extra value. I Game Developers Conference teed off self admitted he had offered little. Tom It is a three-fold responsibility to assist on one of my favorite speculative fiction Clancy's contribution to the Red Storm d Storm the the gamer/prospective purchaser in knowauthors, Harlan Ellison. Harlan gave the Rising computer game was certainly mining computer game was certainly miniinghe ing how real the celebrity involvement with keynote address at the conference and, true mal, compared to Larry Bond's contribua game is. First, the consumer needs to to the tradition of the previous two years, tion to Harpoon. Some designs, then, have learn to ask. Ask the retailer (who probably managed to rattle quite a few cages (not the been very much a team effort between the has no way of knowing, but is sure to try to least of these, this editor's). We stand by celebrities and the programming team, but find out once gamers opt to ask questions our critique, but our boyhood hero and some have been little more than celebrity first and maybe purchase the game later). member of that clite literati informs us that licenses. Write the publisher (once they know conwe (and lots of other banquet attendees) Does a sports celebrity performing for a sumers really care, they'll do more to publimisunderstood his statement regarding his videotape or scratching out a few player ratcize any actual involvement). contribution to Cyberdreams' I Have Noings cqual celebrity game design? Does a Second, the publisher needs to get the Mouth And I Must Scream. story synopsis or backstory constitute a word out. Electronic Arts did a wonderful What we understood Harlan to say was computer game design? Does job of communicating Garry Kasparrow's that he spent two concentrated weeks on of one's characters or fictional world indiinvolvement with Kasparrov's Gambit by the project. What actually transpired, having Kasparrov himself tell the press and according to both Ellison and the publisher How will consumers assembled V.I.P.s what they were trying to of his upcoming computer game, was that Harlan Ellison collaborated with designer accomplish in the design. Publishers need know if a celebrity actually to make a special effort to communicate the David Sears for months prior to the concontributed to a game's contributions of the celebrities involved centrated two weeks and expects to be design? Does it really make with the design. If the publishers collaboinvolved for months after said period. Aside any difference? rating with the celebrities go the extra mile from this (after all, we had other axes to to communicate what positive involvement grind with Mr. Ellison's address), this situacan be, it may point out the failings of tion offers an appropriate venue for reflect cate that one has designed a game? Would a other publishers who are simply and, persth ing on the celebrity design phenomenon. film director like Francis Ford Coppola or haps disingenuously, using a name. As the entertainment software industry James Cameron (who both use lavish amounts of film) become a game designer Finally, it is the responsibility of the converges with show business, it will press to ask the tough questions. We need become more commonl for companies to by offering a computer game company the use of film footage from off the cutting to specifically ask what the involvement recruit celebrity designers. This is not a new room floor? What if a film producer offered with the game has been (and will be) and phenomenon. Electronic Arts has recruited we need to publish the results. To be honcelebrities from Dr. Timothy Leary to Dr. a script to a game publisher? Does that est, there are times when we are actually J. and Larry Bird, to its latest celebrity signmake the producer a celebrity designer? discouraged about the minimal involveings with Shaquil O'Neal. One of The question is, \"How will the conment which celebrities have had with a Accolade's biggest product lines uses the sumer know whether his/her beloved game which bears their name on the box. expertise of golfer lack Nicklaus, while othhero/heroine actually contributed to the There have been times that we didn't fully ers invoke football coach Mike Ditka, design of a computer game?» Further, communicate ign of a computer game! Further, communicate that disappointment. hockey star Brett Hull, retired soccer lumi\"Does it make any difference?\" Right now, oes it make any difference: Right now, Perhaps Perhaps, we even need to give a few annual nary Pelé and basketball star Charles it is impossible for consumers to tell how \"Name Dropper Barkley. Bethesda tapped Wayne Gretzky's much involvement a celebrity actually had name for their hockey game, but got the with a game, but we think it does make a focus bevand the charlie bulk of their expert advice from other hockdifference. Slapping a celebrity name on a what contribution they really made to the ey players. Mediagenic's old Gamestar product does not make that product any roduct any gaming experience. CGW label once sullied Pete Rose's name (before better. Building the model underneath a Page 8 Computer Gaming World "


"ENTER A WHOLE NEW REALM REALMS SARKANIA urilor ALMS REA Enter a whole new realm of fantasy roleplaying... Enter a rich and detailed gaming system... One that offers all you expect, and more, from a finely woven, carefully crafted epic adventure. One that allows you to choose your level of involvement in the \"behind the scenes\" detail, ideal for both novice and experienced players. One that places you in the midst of an SPIN explosive era of strife and LF turbulence. One providing a true quest to challenge your imagination, a rich adventure to involve your mind, and careful balancing and smooth game play to make sure your time is spent playing, KANIA Sale Via Enter a world of mythical creatures, magic and old legends... Enter a world filled with peril, conflict and uncertainty... ENTER ARKANIA... Cut loose in a world of blazing adventure. Hundreds of hours of game play, exploring a vast continent richly studded with towns, dungeons and endless adventuring opportunities! Your heroic characters must track down every lead and every contact if they are to succeed in their search for the renowned Grimring, the Blade of Destiny. You'll face many hazardous journeys by road and ship as you explore the fantastic realms and cities of Arkania. Of course, you will encounter numerous foes determined to prevent you from succeeding in your quest. Der yaratilgan E Fantasy Role-Playing Sinition ER AVAILABLE CLUE BOOK BIR-TECH Felsteun od IR P2. VARIAS PRODUCT FEATURES  Fully Animated, Isometric 3D Combat  Phased-time Game System  Town & Dungeon Automapping  2 Difficulty Levels for Novice & Experienced Players  True Point & Click Interface  Easy to Use Multiple Choice Dialogues  Impressive Musical Score & Sound Effects  Full 3D \"First Person\" View of Towns & Dungeons A LAND OF CONFLICT A LAND OF ADVENTURE GAME FEATURES  More than 70 Towns, Villages, Dungeons and Ruins  12 Character Archetypes  7 Positive & 7 Negative Character Attributes  Over 50 Skills, adjustable at the player's option  12 Magical Realms with over 80 spells  Auto-Combat Option  Parties of up to 6 Characters may be Split and Regrouped NOUA E TELL YOU THER MELE FINO AVG or UCHTHE OUD BONTAESE WAL DELAS A LAND OF CONVERSATION VIA LAND OF RICHES AVAILABLE FOR: IBM PC & 100% COMPATIBLES (VGA, 640K, 80286 OR BETTER, MS-DOS 3.X, 5.0 OR 6.0) SOUND SUPPORT FOR: AD-LIB, AD-LIB GOLD, SOUND BLASTER, SOUND BLASTER PRO, ROLAND LAPC-1/MT-32, PRO AUDIO SPECTRUM, THUNDERBOARD, PC & TANDY INTERNAL SPEAKER AMIGA (1MB REQUIRED) AVAILABLE AT A SOFTWARE RETAILER NEAR YOU, OR CALL: (800) 447-1230 Circle Reader Service #90 SIR-TECH P.O. BOX 245, OGDENSBURG, NY 13669 FAX# (315) 393-1525 "


"TIME TAKE PROD NO. SCENE DATE DIRECTOR PRODUCED BY çmeak preview If You Build It They Will Fly It TI Photo of Citation jet courtesy of Cessna Aircrail Company NGIOC. Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They are feature articles based on \"works in progress\" that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide the final word on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review coverage when the game is finished. A Preview of Microsoft's Flight Simulator 5 by Tim \"The Timinator\" Trimble 2400 Tmagine... You load up Flight Simulator 5 lated with derailed buildings, on your PC and find your plane where it their shadows stretching across always was in Flight Simulator 4, on the the ground. Pixelated facsimiles end of the runway at Meigs Field, Chicago. of instruments no longer fill Only this time it's a partially cloudy day, with your panel; instead, a textured wispy white puffs drifting across a soft blue instrument panel bears digitized sky. The horizon fades into the haze of the images of authentic instrudistant clouds. The Chicago skyline is popuments. A Learjet taxis into view, flashing its beautifully rendered paint scheme and gradient shading. It departs quickly as you admire the sleek details of the craft. Looking to the right you see the angled instrument panel, a portion of the right seat, door, window and its view. Even at this angle the instruments are still being updated as the engine instruments indicate that the engine is warmed up and ready nd ready to go. After double checking the mixture and constant speed propeller settings, you apply full throttle. The digitized sounds of the engine increase in pitch as the nose of the plane starts to bounce. The plane wants to leave, but you forgot to release the parking brake. After correcring the oversight, the plane accelerates down the strip, runway numbers 36 rolling 1. by. Switching to external view you ogle the sleek lines and shading of the Cessna R182. As the gear goes up to the tune of the motors, you notice the wheels slowly fold back into the belly of the aircraft. Swinging your external view forward of the aircraft and the spinning propeller, you bid adieu to the airport and climb out over Lake Michigan. As Reall Gets No Longer On The Vaportrail By the time you read this article, this scenario will be a reality. Over 12,000 hours of Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"çmeak preuneun Options Wiews World Sim Nay ComScenery 075 development have gone into the creation of Flight Simulator 5, which demonstrates the amount of work that Microsoft and BAO (The Bruce Artwick Organization, developers of the product) have committed to this product. This commitment to leading edge techniques and features can be easily seen in the product itself. The same four aircraft are available: the Cessna Skylane RG R182, the Learjet 35A, the Schweizer 2-32 Sailplane, and the Sopwith Camel. This, however, is where the similarities end. Each of the aircraft are externally rendered in smooth gradient shades and sleek shapes, without any indication of quirky polygons. Each craft has its own digitized instrument panel, characteristic of its design. I can't wait to sit a real pilot behind the instrument panel of the Learjet to see what the facial expressions will be! The Learjet panel simulates the highTEMP,   ANG ATK 200M 1.OOOOO AUTO PA STRODE LIGHTS SPL nog XPDR 020701, ZE >O2 TURN TUBE 102 102 GALEAN Photo Courtesy of Cessna Aircraft Co. tech digital equipment of its real life counterpart. Dual throttles with thrust reversers are a good indication that this simulator is built for some serious flying fun. I can finally fly in to Meigs field like a carrier jock and kick in the thrust reversers, imagining the grimaces on the faces of the tower controllers. The forward view is of the left side of the cockpit only, with the center windscreen support brace on the right side of the screen and a magnetic compass halfway up the post. A press of the Tab key will toggle in the engine instrument gauges over the top of the radio stack. And as in the real Learjet, the view out the front windscreen is a lot smaller than the the Cessna due to the height of the instrument ized scenery currently in the package, but panel. Microsoft has plans to release highly detailed The flight characteristics of the aircraft have scenery of New York and Paris with lots of been greatly improved and have become photo-realistic scenery to look at. more realistic, although I still seem to have a And speaking of Paris, both Paris and Muproblem with recreating a power-on stall into nich have been added to the default scenery a spin. available in the package. The scenery of Paris Making a Scene is beautiful and offers the obligatory buzzing of the Eiffel Tower, Chicago, New York, San The scenery of Flight Simulator 5 is also very impressive. Buildings with unique structures Francisco, Seattle and Los Angeles are also and windows, along with shadow effects, have have included with the enhancements. been added to the cityscapes. The metropolibeen added to the cityscapes. The metropoli. In addition, the tran In addition, the transition between day and tan arcas truly look expansive with the comnight is nothing short of incredible! When plexity of streets and buildings. The view of a a Aving in the evening night will gradually flying in the evening, night will gradually city skyline from 10 miles and 15,000 feer is something that has to be seen to be apprecicreep up as the sky slowly grows darker, the ated. Also, these objects don't just pop up on clouds become pink and then gray, and the the horizon; they can actually be seen from an stars slowly come out. It even seems that BAO extended distance and grow as you approach. has figured out how to have multiple shades Just as in reality, however, the farther away of black for giving a very accurate depiction you are from something, the more it blends of night flight. The red glow on the instru\" in with its surroundings. This is most evident when trying to find when trying to find a small airport on the outskirts of a metropolitan area. (Can you say \"Are we lost yet?\") For those long cross-country flights across areas that were once void of any scenery, there are now \"scenery seeds.\" These seeds will \"bloom\" into random scenery objects to always provide something to look at during the flight. It could be a small town, farm or forest. But the best part of the scenic enhancements is the photo-realistic stuff. Meigs field in Chicago is actually a Sukoy Esluna r Miraf: F/4 Smule digitized photo of the airport. This is the only digitIto 28 Microsoft 1989 September 1993 Page 11 "


"Cheak o review) ment panel against the night sky of stars and city lights below is a sight worth secing. Where there used to be some difficulties flying from Chicago to New York in Flight Simulation 4, this is now no longer the case. Instead of the old custom coordinate system, Flight Simulator 5 now supports a true Longitude and Latitude coordinate system with a precision of 170 thousands of an inch. (The old system is still supported for those that want to use it.) This also means that the entire world is now supported for Flight Simulator 5. In fact, when in map view, it is possible to le to Options World Sio Muycon Seen 141111111 Top zoom out so far that you can see the entire globe of the earth. How's The Weather? The weather system in Flight Simulator 5 is a major enhancement to the product. Not only do the clouds look realistic, but they also act like real clouds. When you fly through them, the screen will go from partial obscurity, to full obscurity, back to partial obscurity, and then you're on top. The view above the clouds is truly represented. Now you can the ci have have wispy clouds floating under you, blocking your view of the ground down below. The weather system will also allow the creation of multiple weather areas. Each area can have its own cloud, wind, temperature and barometric pressure settings. It is LIET RIGHT now possible to depart all\" in beautiful clear COM 000 weather and end up in a raging thunderstorm mon PE 2400 while trying to reach your destination. Within each weather area, multiple wind and temperature layers SmyFalux ft Martinelle mala uno can be created to help simulate the effects of temperature changes and winds aloft. One weather area can also be copied into another weather area and then slightly modified for simulating gradual weather changes. If you want a nice thrill, just turn on the thunderstorms. The sight of the black swirling clouds will make any pilot's hands sweat. HAN PRESS RATTO HALS Feature Presentations Flight Simulator 5 now has replaced the demo recorder with a more functional video IF YOUR IDEA OF A GOOD TIME IS SITTING ALONE IN THE DARK, FIGHTING OFF EVIL FORCES 'TIL THE SUN COMES UP... Circle Reader Service #70 "


"çmeak preview recorder for taping and replaying flights. And for those moments when you forgot to turn on the camera, but would love to review the last minute of the flight (before that incredible three bounce landing), an instant replay feature is available. It even allows a \"slow replay.» For those really special Kodak Moments, a flight photograph can be taken of the entire screen or of the view screen, and then saved as a standard PCX graphic file. Many graphic modes are supported, including VGA and SVGA, along with support for multiple brands of sound cards. It seems Flight Simulator 5 has learned a lot from the Macintosh version of Flight Simulator since the use of the mouse is supported for the menus and for changing settings of the instruments on the panel. One can also control flight with the mouse by toggling the right button berween control mode and standard mouse pointer mode. The support for \"modes\" has been changed to \"situations\" which allows for greater descriptive detail about the situation that is being created or loaded. The installation procedure has been automated (aside from putting in the diskettes), and with this release requires three 3.5 inch diskerres. It is recommended that the computer be a 386sx or better. The memory requirements will actually be less than with Flight Simulator 4, and Microsoft says that FS dows. 5 will run fine as a DOS session under Winmarks another major advancement in flight simulation technology for microcomputers. BAO is also currently working on a newIt is quite evident that Microsoft and BAO version of Aircrafi and Scenery Designer for use have been paying attention to the marketwith FS 5. and a new Air Traffic Control place and have taken their time to produce a simulator, which is rumored to support FS 5. leading edge product. With this release, I has been demonstrated at a few of the recent expect that even the aviation industry will begin to take notice. Cow trade shows. Overall, this release of Flight Simulator 5 ..YOU NEED PROFESSIONAL HELP. CYBERMAN A mouse and keyboard are fine for tackling spreadsheets, not teeming legions of blood-thirsty marauders. Stateof-the-art Cyber Man\" puts an unlimited range of motion within your grasp: three directions (x, y, and z] and three rotations (pitch, yaw, and roll]. 3D INTERACTIVE CONTROLLER Just move or twist it any way you want to go. Plus it's the only controller with vibrating feedback that lets you feel the action. Cyber Man is 100% compatible with conventional mouse applications, and comes with 3D game titles that will pull you into the next dimension in PC entertainment. CyberMan is available now at your local dealer, or call 1-800-732-2928. Th Trademarks belong to their registered owners. LOGITECH The Senseware Company "


"Putting Alladin Danger Broderbund's Prince of Persia 2 by Charles Ardai In the middle of the 18th Century, there revenge. One day, the prince comes ro the was a vogue in England for what were then palace only to be chased out and forced to flee called \"Oriental Tales\"--exotic, magical for his life. Why? Because through the use of adventure-filled yarns about princes and sordark magic, Jaffar has taken on the prince's cerers, flying carpets and cursed amulets, geform and given the prince the appearance of nies (then called \"geniuses\"), eunuchs, a mad beggar. harems and minarets. The rage died down Run out of Persia only a few steps ahead of when the American and French Revolutions the guards' flashing scimitars, the prince is took people's minds off such fanciful pasreduced to a lower state than he had possessed times, but it lasted long enough to leave even at the start of the first game. Stripped of behind a body of literature that has never lost everything-power, physical appearance, his its appeal or its influence. very identity—the prince has to go on a voyIt is these Tales, as much as the original age of discovery straight out of Joseph Camp1001 Arabian Nights, that give us the vocabubell. lary used in stories ranging from the silent Unlike the first game, whose story consisted screen version of The Thief of Bagdad to last of a set-up at the start and a denouement at year's Aladdin. Few people remember parthe end, the story here develops from scene ticular Tales, but everyone knows the characto scene. After a few levels, we discover that ters and plot devices. As evidence, consider it is nor a random walk that the prince is on. Prince of Persia 2. Racher, it is a rerurn to his birthplace, where The original Prince of Persia had a story, but he will uncover secrets about who he is and it was all bones, no flesh. An unnamed peasgain the abilities he needs to best Jaffar. ant visiting Persia falls in love with the daughThis more sophisticated storytelling ter of the Sultan, who is being courted in the Sultan's absence by his treacherous Grand doesn't turn Prince of Persia 2 into something Vizier, Jaffar. When Jaffar learns of our hero's it's not, a subtle and mature exploration of psychological themes. It is still a climbing interest, he hurls the young man into the land's deepest dungeon, from which it is then jumping game in the Nintendo mold, with vicious puzzles to solve and endless hordes of the player's job to escape, or die trying. foes to slay. However, the game does take on a depth and a resonance that its predecessor did not possess. Since I called the first game \"the Star Wars of its field\" (and have lived to regret it, after seeing that giddy phrase plastered all over Broderbund's ads and packaging), what does that make Prince of Persia 2? At the risk of getting blurbed again, I would say that Prince of Persia 2 not only is in every dimension better than Prince of Persia, but that it is the cruelest, most infuriating, least merciful-in That's certainly a good enough narrative to support a climbing-jumping game, especially short, the best game of its type I have ever cha played. when the game is as good as that one was. Yer, as storytelling goes, it's a little thin. When This Time It's Persian-al confronted with the challenge of writing Prince of Persia 2, designer Jordan Mechner The game is divided into three major decided to craft something meatier. So, he chunks, each of which is further divided into roughly five levels. Each level consists of a reached back into our cultural memory and multi-screen environment with an entrance (probably without realizing it) dug up a plor and an exit. The player's goal in cach case is that derives directly from such Tales as to get the prince past all the obstacles that lic Hawkesworth's \"Almoran and Hamet\" and between the two.\" Johnson's \"Rasselas.\" Obstacles range from the obvious (chasms As the game opens, the princess and her to be leapt, sword-wielding warriors to be suitor have been wed, leaving Jaffar to plot fought) to the tricky (blades that slash out of recesses in the wall, spikes that skewer the player a la Raiders of the Lost Ark) and the unspeakable (decapirared heads that fly around and bite the prince to death, animated skeletons that cannot be killed). What makes the game so difficult is that these obstacles do not crop up one at a time, but all at once and in the worst possible combinations. For instance, at one point the prince finds himself on a ledge with a skeleton waiting below. If the prince climbs down, the skeleton will attack. This, by itself, is manageable: Skeletons can usually be disposed of temporarily by striking them often enough that they fall to pieces. However, in this case, the player has a problem: Taking one step back from where he climbs down will cause the prince to step on a tile that will shoot a poisoned dart at him, while two steps back will get him impaled on a set of spikes. Just to make matters worse, the ledge is unstable and apt to collapse on the prince's head. The best solution to this puzzle is to avoid it. There is another way around which, though not easy to survive, at least has the advantage of being possible to survive. Yet the game contains many puzzles such as the one DOTUL ORDON TITLE: Prince of Persia 2 PRICE: $69.95 SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 286-10MHz, 2MB RAM for sound effects, VGA graphics, 7MB hard drive space PROTECTION: Symbol look up in manual DESIGNER: Jordan Mechner PUBLISHER: Broderbund Novato, CA (415) 382-4400 Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"WH IEN TWO ORLDS WAR WWERTO TM nu no Lugernaut M Tech SAPCE: 1 DECORD SIL Rage 5 Torget! Arrur: 1027 Rudar: Trengerti EUILD COST: LOD:7 NINES !12 Power : 25 TU STATS In Service In Production: Ills! Command your entire planet's military resources in an effort to . conquer a hostile neighbouring planet. You control a state of the art workstation from which advanced software tools enable you to design new craft, research new technologies, build new installations & craft, set up highly sophisticated missions and watch the progress of this strategic interplanetary conflict. END Design your own spacecraft for tanks, submarines, jet....)! Battles take place in space & on surface oibothrpfamets Random planet generator for great replay value Designed as a 2 player game! DOODD DDDDD TOGNE Opor GTFITS SYSTEM Send out units on missioppat explore the Unknown enemy planet and wipe out its military capability ssions Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, 7 Melrose Drive, Farmington, CT 06032 Circle Reader Service #65 "


"peyieun 49 A POOOOO MEREDELSERNE described above, only a few of which really are impossible and only a few of which can be avoided. The solutions sometimes demand the timing of a master juggler and the hand diamond cutter, but solutions do exist and, like it or not, the player has to find them or admit defeat. The wonder of it all is that one keeps at it, dying and dying and dying again, until finding the way past each impasse; but the fact is that one does. At least a dozen times while playing the game I threw up my hands and said \"To hell with it!\" But always, a few minutes later, I had rebooted and was ar it again. Prince of Persia 2 has an appeal that is absolutely irresistable. Lots of games have puzzles, but few have puzzles that have been ly to give one the maximum amount of trouble, puzzles that are so ingenious, or puzzles the cracking of which gives one such satisfaction. Anyone with an in the magic force he has learned rather than in mid-battle (or wherever) but at the start of in his conventional weapons. the level on which the save command was \"The debt to Lucas can be seen in the game's executed. Some of the larger levels have midgraphics as well. Visually, the game could be level \"save points\" so that one does not have an Indiana Jones movie: one races across to play the entire way through again and rooftops in a Middle East city, through again, but one still has to re-do huge, difficult booby-trapped caverns, and around a flame chunks of the game long after one is sick of red Temple of Doom. One travels by boat, them. by flying carpet, and on horseback. The Other bits of business also make playing the prince, though young and turban clad, has game unreasonably difficult. For instance, something of a Harrison Ford quality to him drawing one's sword makes the prince take a as he skids to a stop at the very edge of a step forward, even if he is standing on a precipice, catches the edge of a pit just barely narrow pillar and the step forward will send too wide to leap across, hangs by his fingertips him plummeting to his death. It wouldn't over pits of lava, and runs, arms Mailing, with have hurt the game at all, and would have led an army of skeletons at his heels. (Players of to less tooth-gnashing, if this were not the the first game will remember its incredibly case. detailed, realistic animation. Though less Similarly, players learn the hard way to startling the second time around, it is no less ignore the instruction manual's reassuring impressive.) advice about running jumps: \"Don't be afraid The game's combat sequences are as excitThe game's combat sequences are as excitof pressing the '8' keyl too early: of pressing (the '8' key too early; the Prince ing as anything Lucas ever cooked up, not will wait until the last possible moment to only because of the variety of enemies, each jump.\" I cannot count the number of times I with its own strategies and weaknesses, but died as a result of pressing the \"8\" key too also because of the resounding clangs of clashcarly and the Prince's not waiting nearly long ing steel, the grunts of wounded combattants, enough to jump. the invigorating soundtrack in the background, and the ingenious tactics that are available to the player. Yes, the player can thrust and slash and parry his way to success, but he can also use the game's deadly devices and traps to his advantage. For instance, toward the end of the game the prince comes face-to-face with a nastylooking high priest standing just inches away from one of those telltale slashes in the wall that mean a blade is contained within. I immediately thought of the Nazi mechanic The time limit that kicks into effect a fifth julienned in the plane propeller in Raiders of of the way through the game (\"Waste no the Lost Ark. Sure enough, two thrusts was all more time! I am dying!\") is probably also an it took to back the goon into the blade. Rest unnecessary annoyance. The prince can die in pie and be resuscitated an unlimited number of times, but when the timer runs out, the game Good and Evil is over. As a result, the player is encouraged It is worth pointing out, in the interest of to get through each level as quickly as possigiving fair warning to players before they pick ble, often bypassing those sections that don't up a game this addictive, that the same things lead directly to the goal but which contain that make Prince of Persia 2 so good also difficult-to-get, life-enhancing potions. Unsometimes make it hard to take. Prince of fortunately, if one bypasses all those potions, Persia 2 is a very difficult game which is one reaches the endgame with plenty of time finc-but there is merciless and there is merto spare but too few hitpoints to battle Jaffar. ciless. It's one thing to have to replay a scene So, it's back to the beginning. 30 or 40 times until one gets it right. It's Other than that complaint, however, Prince another thing to have to replay scenes 30 or of Persia 2 merits nothing but salaam after 40 times even after one has solved them, salaam. Players looking for a visceral, actionsimply because of a dubious feature of the oriented, Indiana Jones-type experience will save-game function. find it in Prince of Persia 2. It is a virtuoso There are 10 slots on the save-game menu performance by Mechner, one of the field's and the game allows one to save at any time, most devious puzzle constructors, and it even in mid-battle. This seems very generous should provide the field's best gamers a until one discovers to one's horror that when chance for some virtuoso performances of a saved game is restored, it doesn't drop one their own. CGW ounce of game-player in his or her soul will not be able to sleep if it means stranding the prince on an unfinished level. So, one's eyelids get heavier and one's reflexes more sluggish, but one plows ahead anyway. It's a matter of pride. As Good as It Lucas Looking at Prince of Persia 2 with a critical eye, it strikes me that my Star Wars comment was more apt than I realized. At the time, I only meant that, like Star Wars, Prince of Persia was mindless entertainment, but mindless entertainment of a very high order. In fact, the two have more in common than that. Whether it is because Mechner and George Lucas were inspired by the same sources or because Mechner was inspired by Lucas, playing Prince of Persia 2 feels a lot like playing a George Lucas movie. There are many obvious parallels: the prince, a Luke Skywalker type if there ever was one, receives pleading distress messages from his imprisoned princess. The prince drops into a chamber whose walls close in and crush him. The prince gets his father's sword and uses it to battle the forces of evil. In the game's final moments, the prince has to trust Parte 16 Computer Gaming World "


"\"The humor and originality of Zork are always present... its images are the most spectacular in the history of video games\" JOYSTICK MAGAZINE «The interface may be revolutionary [and] allows a richness that has been absent heretofore in graphic adventures.\" -Johnny L. Wilson, COMPUTER GAMING WORLD An epic adventure...underground. RETURN TO ZORK A Cast of Hollywood Actors Over I hour of Spoken Dialouge Revisit Flood Control Dam #3 Try to Outwit Devious Dwarves Suces JASON HERVEY ROBIN LIVELY A.J.LANGER JASON LIVELY EDAN GROSS SAM JONES ARCSINFOCOM Wuschew: ACTIVISION MODERNESS JOE ASPERIN KUNA MICHELE EM INFOCOM. MESNATHAN WANG US TERI MASON CHESS WILLIAM VOLK DOUG BARNETT S REDDIE DOMBROWER BRETEAPETER SPRAGUE ACTIVISION Available for IBM and Compatibles. Enhanced version for CD-ROM also available. To order: See your local retailer or call 1-800-477-3650 Circle Reader Service #40 "


"side the mdustru MER ELECTRONIC :: SUL E Pro TRONICS * ; SANYO Emerson TUNGEN Cortor Leser des PERUSTU ! SHER EFISHER FISHER -GES \"Reports Part II CGW Quests For The Best At The Summer Consumer Electronics Show T ast month's CES Report on the latest ex-Los Angeles Police Chief Daryl Gates and toon-like adventure and directed\" in the trends in game design offered a rundeveloped by television producer Tammy style of the classic Warner Bros. animation L down of CRPGs and wargames to be Dargan. Tammy comes from a solid film director Chuck Jones. The fast-moving anireleased in upcoming months. This month's commercial background and has produced mation cuts are delightful, and cartoon fans report focuses on a genre-by-genre rundown segments for the tabloid television series, everywhere should recognize the style. for action, adventure, simulation, sports and America's Most Wanted. So, in addition to the Legend is another house that adventure strategy. gritty, realistic storyline, the graphics team built. In addition to Companions of Xanth, the was able to use a Kodak DCS 200ci Digital Piers Anthony license sneak previewed in the Gateway To Adventure Camera to shoot most of the background July issue, and Gateway II: Homeworld, the Sierra has always been a leader in the advenscenes. With locations selected by Gates and sequel to their original game based on ture game category and they are introducing camera angles selected by Dargan, the photo camer Frederick Pohl's Heechee saga, they have a Fall lineup that seems sure to build on that realistic look is most distinctive. started work on Steve Meretzky's latest proimage. In addition to Gabriel Knight: Sins of Leisure Suit Larry 6, which will probably beject. Rather than doing another Spellcasting the Father, the psycho-horror suspense advenshipped as a CD-only product, builds upon immediately, Steve will be creating a game ture described in the last report, the company its predecessors with a new artistic touch. Not about a league of superheroes in New Jersey. will offer a King's Quest VI-CD, Goblins 3 and only does it use a \"talker technology» from some new twists on old success with Police Bright Star (Sierra's wholly-owned subsidiQuest IV and Leisure Suit Larry 6. ary) that goes a long way toward synchronizGoblins 3 allows gamers to develop one's ing digitized speech and animation, but it also character and undergo a transformation. incorporates some not-so subtle visual puns Plus, for those true addicts, it has a clock to go with the expected verbal ones. feature to indicate how long the gamer has LucasArts also continues to be prolific in actually played the game. Expect some brag. the publication of graphic adventure games. ging on the networks about how fast the In addition to Sam o Max Hit The Road, the experts solved the puzzles. zany adventure discussed in last issue's sneak Police Quest IV was written by controversial preview, the publisher plans to market The Dig and Day of the Tentacle. The Dig is a SHADOW collaboration between adventure game deThe Dig sign veteran Brian Moriarty (Trinity, Loom) and filmmaker extraordinaire Steven SpielCitizens of the Garden State will want to berg. Originally based on a script from Amazbatten down the hatches for a plethora of ing Stories (the television series) that was never toxic waste jokes and get ready for some of the actually produced, the game features a team weirdest heroes yet. The League of Superheroes of space explorers who are stranded on a of Hoboken is expected for early 1994, and hostile planet and must excavate the ruins of even the design document is hilarious reada lost civilization for the key that allows them ing. to return home. Interplay continues to search for the final wa youtube de deteriora Berter Day of the Tentacle is, as noted in previous frontier with its Star Trek adventure series. SECCOUNT CGW articles, essentially Maniac Mansion II. This year will see the introduction of Star Leisure Suit Larry 6 The big difference is that this time-travel Trek: Judgment Rites, an adventure that is comedy adventure was conceived as a caralmost twice as big as the anniversary game, Tuweden Page 18 Computer Gaming World "


"KORBITEERS ARE NUBKIDZ! They play BETTER with BIGGER characters Use NUBY accessories and you'll be a winner every time! on a BRIGHTER screen and LOUDER sound with NUBY accessories! Find out how ! Watch... 101 PAID PROGRAMMING 305-427-9655 Saturday, August 28th, at 4:30.E.S.T. on CNBC, "


"_  birthday party for his cute little owner, Kayla. Humongous also plans a Fall sequel where Putt-Putt Goes to the Moon after a freak fireworks accident. Clearing For Action Naturally, the success of last year's Wolfenstein 3-D has spawned its imitators in the action category. Beyond Id Software's own successor to the action game crown, Doom, two other games caught our arrention as possible competitors. Bethesda Softworks' Terminator: Rampage looks a lot like Doom in terms of the 3-D play environment, but it builds on the Terminator universe. Isle of the Dead from Merit Software isn't as impressive graphically, but it makes up for the lack with enthusiasm, gore and the spicy addition of a little gratuitous T&A. We see it as \"Total Recall meets The Zombies\" with an art style that looks like MAD magazine artist Don Martin meets the EC Horror Comics that preceded MAD. P game truly bent, but the special effects are bizarre. Broderbund is also venturing into the adventure gaming marketplace. Myst is a CD ROM adventure from Rand and Robin Miller (of Manhole fame). The adventure has even more exploratory qualities than the avcrage game, but there are interesting puzzles and an actual story to tie them together. The graphics, which use full ray-tracing in all locations, are extremely impressive. Further, Star Trek: Judgment Rites the different musical themes are incredibly effective in setting the atmosphere for various has an overall story (as well as individual scenes, as well as helping gamers determine episodes), and features several familiar charwhere each area fits in the plot line. Two acters from the television series. Further, brothers try to influence the gamer into doing gamers can now assign Scotty, Uhura, Chektheir bidding and thus hangs the balance. hov and Sulu to the landing party. Finally, gamers can choose between three levels of The house that licenses built. Capstone, has a few more adventure game licenses up its difficulty in the adventure. sleeves. Wayne's World uses a point and click MicroProse is putting the finishing touches interface to allow the gamer to rescue the on two graphic adventures which build on the tures which build on the lovely Cassandra from the hands of DRAG Rex Nebular engine. Both games feature a (Decency Referendum Against Grossness) scoring system, but the player must ask for the and earn the $50,000 necessary to save their score since the design teams feel that \"scorTV show. Speaking of TV, the publisher also ing\" tends to hinder suspension of disbelief. has a Beverly Hillbillies graphic adventure on One game which uses the engine is Dragontap, as well as a Homey the Clown action/adsphere, a fantasy adventure where the gamer venture. must progress through several different com1 As for European products, Psygnosis is demunities (shapeshifters, nomads, faeries, veloping a graphic adventure that is not an etc.), all graphically distinct, in order to solve action/adventure in their typical style. Inthe major quest. The base story is that an evil sorcerer has been entrapped in a sphere that stead, Innocent Until Caught is heavy on character interaction and puzzle-solving. It also is now cracking. Naturally, the player wants features the kind of humor that is sure to be to ensure that the Ultimate Bad Guy stays appreciated by anyone who has ever dealt trapped. The good news is that the story is not with the IRS. Fortunately, this game is fiction as obvious as it sounds and that even the game, and the story involves the Interstellar Revenue utilities have been worked into the story as Service. logical adjuncts to the game world. The Return of the Phantom is the other game As previewed in the February issue of CGW, which uses the Rex Nebular engine. Using the Activision's Return to Zork uses real actors/acmythos behind the original novel, the gamer tresses to try to bring back the magic of has to solve a mystery which occurs after the Infocom's Great Underground Empire. Activision is also serving up a European import events in the novel. Return is one of several called Simon the Sorcerer that has something adventures for 1993 which will use a timeof the look and humor of a Monkey Island travel theme. game. For example, Electronic Arts' next foray into the graphic adventure genre will be The Finally, a nod to the youngsters is due. Labyrinth. Nor only does the adventure inHumongous Entertainment splashed onto volve time-travel, but it appears to be just the scene with a big hit in Putt-Putt Joins the convoluted enough that gamers will be Parade. Now, Ron Gilbert and Shelley Day thankful for the comprehensive auto-mapare releasing a new junior adventure. Fatty ping utility. Bear's Birthday Surprise allows the gamer to help an animated teddy bear cater a surprise Another time-travel adventure set for Fall release is Kronolog: The Nazi Paradox from Merit Software. As described in the Winter CES Report, Kronolog involves reversing history in order to undo an alternate future where the Nazis won World War II. The adventure features a point and click interface and digitized character dialogue. Pop Rocket's Mac CD-ROM game, Total Distortion, is an adventure game based on traveling through various dimensions and recording one's experiences as music videos. Naturally, the higher the ratings, the higher Dragonsphere one scores. Not only are the encounters in this Terminator: Rampage Another 3-D action game is LucasArts' Rebel Assault on IBM CD-ROM, Sega-CD and CD-I. All of the environments through which the players navigate their vessels are rendered in 3-D perspective. The asteroids are particularly impressive. C yberdreams showed some of its 3-D action game. Cyber Race. CyberRace is Syd Mead's futuristic game of hovercraft racing and it looks like Comanche Overkill with different vehicles. Meanwhile, Bethesda Softworks unveiled Delta-V, a cyber race game where players fly their vessels through tunnels and vortices. Another action game trend is the redesign of classic arcade games to run under Microsoft flassic are Windows. Naturally, one such product is going to be published by Microsoft itself (allegedly to prove to developers that it can be done). The Microsoft Arcade Pak for Windows will feature five classic Atari coin-op games, including: Asteroids, BattleZone, Centipede, Missile Command and Tempest. Several of the games are adjustable for speed and difficulty, using familiar Windows sliders. Further, the team was so determined to have the games look and sound like the coin-op versions that they video-taped the coin-op machines and bit-mapped the graphics frame-by-frame in order to get identical graphics. Then, they Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"We don't know from friendly skies. the-loop, look elsewhere. If you're interested in a career, sign on to Air Warrior only on GEnie. You've beat all the flight sims? A furball doesn't raise a sweat anymore? Ten minutes of WWI combat isn't even challenging? Hmm... Maybe you are ready for Air Warrior That is, if you think you can handle the most realistic combat flying there is. Because Air Warrior does more than correctly model 28 different WWII aircraft, complete with spins, stalls and buffeting. It puts you up against other human beings. Online, in real time, for as long as you care to play. That's why Air Warrior attracts the aces. So if you're just looking to do a friendly loopSign up : 1. Set communication software for 81N or 71E half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369. Immediately upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the Ult=prompt,enter XTX99223, AIRCRAFT then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card ready. In the U.S., you may use your checking account number. (There is a $2 monthly fee for all checking accounts.) For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. Air Warrior 000 GEnie multi-player games Air Warrior is a registered trademark of Kesmai Corporation. GEnie is a registered trademark of General Electric Company. Graphic interface required and available for selected machines. KESMAL 100% Organic Opponents. corporation Circle Reader Service #57 "


"Larry's Big Score digitized the sound effects directly from the coin-op machines. Another product which proves that Windows is a conducive environment for arcade action is from a new Davidson affiliate, 3DI. Their new product, Earth Invasion, is an arcade package of new games reminiscent of Defender, Star Raiders and Space Invaders. All of the games feature 256-colors, midi-sound and 3-D Studio-style rendering of space ships, where appropriate. The games are further enhanced with lots of peripheral animation. Another sign that action classics are making a definire comeback, albeit in rejuvenated and enhanced form, is the fact that Jon Freeman and Anne Westfall are revamping their original FA hir Archon as SSI's new Archon Ultra. The game still begins on a strategic board where gamers try to capture all the enemy pieces (Chess without the Checkmate) or occupy all five \"power points.\" Then, as action occurs, players engage in a fast-paced arcade sequence. The game allows one or two players and features 3-D monsters (pieces) in 256color VGA. Gamers who remember Gauntlet will probably enjoy QQP's Red Crystal, an action/adventure for one or two players in cooperative or competitive mode. Players view the action in side-by-side windows, and the on-screen characters have attributes that range from 1-6 points. The company assures us that the game will feature modem play. Another classic style of action game that is making a comeback is the pinball game. Amtex, makers of Tristan, has signed a distriHockey. Although the IBM version won't ship until 1994, the video game versions featured the dulcet digitized tones of sports commentator Al Michaels and digitized images of Brett Hull. Like other competitors, it will feature names, likenesses and statistics of acrual major league players. Electronic Arts will counter with an IBM version of NHLPA Hockey. This excellent Sega Genesis product is an action gamer's SIERRA dream. If current plans do not change, the IBM version should feature the capacity to Take a Break! Pinball print statistics and create leagues. Football will also be a very competitive foil the cast of villainous slime (Captain Tergenre in the upcoming six-to-twelve months. ror, Snake Oiler and the Gang of Assassins) Accolade will release an upgraded version of and win the race as Trixie, Spridle, Pops and Mike Dirka Ultimate Football II. In addition Racer X cheer or offer warnings in animated to 256-color SVGA graphics and digitized sequences using digitized voice. commentary from Al Michaels, the new verPsygnosis is revamping their Amiga game, sion will allow gamers to edit team logos, Walker (in which the gamer operates a fightplaybooks and uniforms. The new game will ing machine that looks vaguely like an Impealso allow league play. rial Walker and shoots little humanoids) and is calling it ABS: Advanced Battle Systems. The Not to be outdone, Dynamix unveiled game is being developed by the same people Front Page Sports: Football Pro. Not only does who gave us Lemmings, but you wouldn't ho gave us Lemmings, but you wouldn't this gam this game feature new animation, but it inrecognize this one as being \"cute.\" Psygnosis cludes real NFL players and stats, user-created is also planning to release action games based coaching profiles and customized team colon Last Action Hero and Cliffhanger. ors. Now, substitutions are handled easier Command Adventures Starship is Merit and game plans can include 140 plays per Software's entry into the 3-D Studio-style game. ship-to-ship combat genre that also features Merit Software is also upping the ante on some nice landscapes reminiscent of Vistapro. their football game. The Deluxe Edition Tom It is a multiplayer game (on the same comLandry Strategy Football features an enhanced puter or network) that looks like Star Control league editor (allowing gamers to select colIl when one is in space and Dune II when one lege, as well as NFL, rules and change team is battling on land. uniforms, player's names, etc.). It also adds In a similar vein, Gametek's Ashes of Empire more input from Landry himself, new formacombines strategic elements in post-commutions and a season play option. An upgrade nist Europe/Asia to set up some aerial combat will be available to current Landry owners at missions. The designers claim that there are $19.95 and the new game will sell for $49.95. over 6,000 individual characters, 9,000 loca Finally, Micro Prose will enter the stadium tions and 2.8 million square miles in the with NFL Coach's Challenge Football. With game's universe. The game features action, the default playbook based on an actual NFL strategy and exploratory elements. coach's plays and a powerful editor for creatSequels on the action front include: Inca 2, ing one's own plays, this action/strategy game an import for Sierra that builds on their is loaded with features. We like the capacity previous action/adventure where Erich von for customizing coaches by using eight differDaniken's Chariots of the Gods is more truth ent characteristics and the Al's ability to adthan ficrion. Sierra also plans to publish a CD just to the human coach's tendencies. version of the original Inca. Origin's Wing Other sports games announced or shown in Commander Academy is a mission builder very early form include: Accolade's Pelé Socwith new ships. In addition to the new vehicer, Bethesda's NCAA Road to the Final Four cles, It allows players to save up to cight II, and Dynamix's Front Page Sports: Baseball. missions for future play. Finally, Psygnosis plans to release another Lemmings Holiday Version disk to make us all go crazy at Christmas time. BOLSTER Sports Smart COCUFTONGELO Three new hockey games are expected to debut between now and next year's Summer WSW Consumer Electronics Show. One product is B UCANCEL not yet announced and was not shown at the REBE show. The other two were from Accolade and 15 GOED FEMOVE EA, respectively. Accolade was showing the Sega Genesis and SNES versions of Brett Hull Wing Commander Academy Isle of Dead ANGEAN CLEOTION bution agreement with Broderbund Software and plans to release two new pinball titles in their line. One title is a licensed version of Bally's Eiebt Ball Deluxe and the other is a licensed version of Williams' FunHouse. Meanwhile, Dynamix has taken a difdie ferent approach by putting cight different pinball games in the same product, each built around the theme from a Sierra or Dynamix game. Take A Break! Pinball is the name of their Windows-based pinball package. Accolade has licensed one of the most wellknown Japanimation characters in the U.S., Speed Racer, for their new action game Speed Racer in The Challenge of Racer X. The game is basically a racing game with gadgets. As Speed Racer or Racer X, the gamer tries to G na POSITION 119 UDE DIEFICOUTER EXECUTE Pove 22 Computer Gaming World "


"Beyond fantasy. Beyond legends. If you've been looking for the mother of all fantasy role-playing games, we know where you can find it. Online, in GemStone III\". This is no kill-the-dragon-thank-you-verymuch computer game. And it goes far beyond any of the other so-called legends in the online arena. Here in GemStone III, you're joining real people, in real time for your online quests. Some of the best role players and game masters in the country all meeting together in a vast and constantly evolving world, rich with fascinating characters and demanding adventures. It's a place you can play forever. GemStone III makes every other fantasy game history. And your friends are already here. So sign onto GEnie today, and welcome home to GemStone III. Sign up now: 1. Set communication software for 8IN or 71E half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369. Immediately upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U#=prompt, enter XTX99224, FANTASY then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card ready. In the U.S., you may use your checking account number. (There is a $2 monthly fee for all checking accounts.) For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. GemStone III\": Shadow World on GEnie multi-player games GemStone III is a trademark of Simutronics Corp. Shadow World is a registered trademark of Iron Crown Enterprises, Inc. GEnie is a registered trademark of General Electric Company. Optional graphic front-end program available for IBM PC only. SIMUTRONICS 100% Organic Opponents. Circle Reader Service #62 "


"  Mechwarrior 11 The Sim-Fast \"Fly It» Plan keeping realistic schedules, complete with tankers, CAP, and other sorties). Though MicroProse may get stiff comperiOrigin is also working the carrier mode tion for their World Circuit racing game when with its upcoming Pacific Strike. Essentially Papyrus' Indy Car Racing hits the shelves, the Strike Commander in the Pacific, the game company expects to do well in the field it has will feature 20 different aircraft and six cartraditionally led with its new F-14 Defender rier-based missions. Non-humanitarians can simulation. This flight sim will feature careven strafe the life boats as they leave sinking rier-based missions with an emphasis on air ships. tactics with visual ID. Since F-14s do not rely on fly-by-wire technology, there will be more Spectrum Holo Byte plans to enlarge the of a feeling of actually flying within the game. scope of their flagship flight simulator with a Plus, they plan to make things a little tougher MiG-29 Fulcrum add-on disk to Falcon 3.0 with realistic aspects like mid-air refueling and a European import (from Digital Illusions, developers of F-16 Combat Pilot for and a cockpit which, like the airplane's cockEA) called Tornado. Not only does the latter pit itself, is not exactly user friendly. Graphiproduct feature an incredibly large and decally, the night view with the backlit display Tay tailed map, but it features some incredible is impressive, and gamers who like realism mission-planning features, scenarios and, will be delighted with the full carrier model possibilities for head-to-head play. (where lots of computer-controlled planes are Obviously, another fertile area for simula tions is the arena of far-future warfare. LucasArts plans to expand their Star Wars universe of titles with an X-Wing Tour of Duty expansion disk and a product where one can fly against the Rebel Alliance, TIE Fighter Meanwhile, Activision is proving that the company is back with, literally, a vengeance. Their Mechwarrior II comes complete with head-to-head capability and uses ThrustMaster peripherals so well that it is possible for a gamer with enough joysticks and a footpedal MiG-29 Fulcrum unit to get the Battle Tech Center feeling when HAVE YOU EVER WONDERED WHY THOSE OTHER \"SIMULATIONS\" ARE SO UNREAL? PERHAPS, WHILE DOING MORE PICTURES, THEY FORGOT ABOUT RESEARCH. TESTING & DESIGN. playing by modem. The graphics feature texture-mapped overlays and the designers are thinking of unique ways for gamers to be able to customize their own 'mechs, as per the pen and paper game rules and the paint schemes of the Battle Tech universe. Since Dynamix plans to unveil a gigantic robor game in the first quarter of '94 and they did the 3-D engine for the original Mechwarrior, it will be interesting to see how gamers react to both products. Right now, both look very different. As noted last issue, submarine simulations will play an important role in the simulation line-up for Fall. In addition to Graue Wlfe from Dynamix (with its unbelievable wave modeling and the opportunity to command a realistic German U-boat) and EA's Seawolf Not Just Another Roll Of The Dice WE DIDN'T SIMULATIONS CANADA... FOR SERIOUS WARGAMING HYPER BACKGAMMON HYPER-BACKGAMMONTM is an exciting, new, fast-paced, CD-ROM game. But, unlike any other games on the market, HYPER-BACKGAMMON was programmed to calculate over 32 million different playing scenarios and is accurate to +1%. So be forewarned, your opponent is a formidable expert! LAND COMBAT: **New*MAIN BATTLE TANK: MIDDLE EAST. Modern Tactical Armoured Combat. NewBATTLE TANK: KURSK TO BERLIN, Tactical Armour In The East. MBT: NORTH GERMANY, Modern Tactical Armoured Combat. BT: BARBAROSSA TO STALINGRAD, Tactical Armour In The East. MBT: CENTRAL GERMANY, Modern Tactical Armoured Combat ROMMEL ATEL ALAMEIN, Battles For Egypt, 1 July 10 6 November, 1942. MOSCOW CAMPAIGN, Typhoon & White Storm, Aug 1941 to Feb 1942. TO THE RHINE, The Allied Advance In The West, 29 Aug 1o 11 Dec, 1944. ROMMEL AT GAZALA, Battles For Tobruk, 26 May to 27 June 1942. STALINGRAD CAMPAIGN, The Turning Point In Russia, Jun 1942 Feb 1943. KURSK CAMPAIGN, Operation Zitadella, Summer 1943. OPERATION OVERLORD, The Invasion Of Europe, 6 Jung 28 August, 1942. GOLAN FRONT, The 1973 Arab/israeli War In The North FALL GELB, The Fall Of France, Spring 1940. HYPER-BACKGAMMON uses fewer playing pieces than original backgammon, which makes the game faster, more exciting, and much more fun. You can easily master the basic offensive and defensive strategies, and soon you'll be testing your gambling instincts with the doubling cube! So, don't be surprised if you find it impossible to stop playing. But remember, in the lightning-fast world of HYPER-BACKGAMMON\", your fortunes may rise or fall with just one roll of the dice! Available at CompUSA and your local software store, or call 1-310-659-6707. MTWE System Requirements: PC or PS/2 compatible com puter, CD-ROM drive that supports the 150.9660 standard, with interface card, cable, and software,  minimum 640K of RAM with 400K available. IXOS 3.1 or later, VGA card and VGA color monitor, ORDERING INFORMATION, PLEASE READ CAREFULLY: All games are $60.00 each for Americans, $80.00 each for Canadians (GST included), and $65.00 each for purchasers outside North America. We will let cheques clear balore shipping (6 weeks!), so, money orders are proforrad. PLEASE be sure to tell us which computer you own.\"Purchasers from outside of Canada should send payment in U.S. funds.\" Nova Scotia residents must add an extra 10% of the total lor Provincial tax. SIMULATIONS CANADA, P.O. Box 452, Bridgewater, NS, Conado, B4V 2X6. Circle Reader Service #89 Page 24 HYPER BACKGAMMON 1992 ARCTG, INC. All rights reserved. Distributed by ROMTIME, a division of ARCTG. INC. HYPER BACKGAMMON and ROMTIME ate trademarks of ARCTO, INC. All other trademarks are the property of their respective  Circle Reader Service #82 Computer Gaming World "


"Close encounters nightly. There's only one way to find out. Sign up and meet us in Federation II available only on GEnie For the cold reaches of space, there's an awful lot of chummy people here. That's because Federation II isn't one of those shoot-the-ship computer games. This is a universe full of people. Real people, online, working with other real people in real time: busily building their fortunes, planets...nay, empires. And they'd love to throw some work your way so you can do the same. Of course, there's a lot of bargaining, buying and bulling that goes into it. We're social creatures, after all. But if you're one of those special individuals who understands that creating an empire is ever so much more interesting than destroying aliens, maybe you can thrive in our space. Sign up now: 1. Set communication software for 81N or 71E half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369. Immediately upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U#=prompt, enter XTX99225, NIGHTLY then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card ready. In the U.S., you may use your checking account number. (There is a $2 monthly fee for all checking accounts.) For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. Federation II on GEnie multi-player games Federalis SOLAR ORS IT WAS 100% Organic Opponents. GEnic is a registered trademark of General Electric Company. Circle Reader Service #63 "


"(688 Attack Sub with incredible sound, much lows for non-rectangular zoning, but considnant race or major occupation to be found improved interface and more realism), Noers different types of roads, elevation and within the town. vaLogic will unveil a CD-ROM version of power, as well. It also requires transit stations Space seems to be another frontier in the their graphically impressive Wolf Pack game and budgetary trade-offs. We like the fact that strategy genre. In addition to Interplay's re(originally published by Broderbund). one can select which industry cach city will cent Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space, Sierra is specialize in by making certain budgetary and developing a strategy game called Building Winning Strategy zoning decisions. Maxis is also nearing comMankind's Future in Space, and Mallard has pletion on SimFarm, which was discussed in The most obvious trend in the world of re-released a more polished and sophisticated previous CES reports. version of Wesson's Moonbase as Lunar Comstrategy games is that of gambling games. It mand. The former uses 3-D Studio vehicles to seems like everyone has one. QQP plans to unveil Lucky's Casino, New World will feadrive its classy look, and the latter offers imture More Vegas Games, and Villa Crespo will proved play value over its predecessor. do Windows with new versions of Sanford Gametek is releasing two products that may Wong Video Poker for Windows and Dr. bring some fascinating abstract strategy Thorpe's Blackjack for Windows. games to new markets. Tesserae for Windows Lucky's Casino will feature: five variations of takes the well-received Macintosh game (Tetris in an altered consciousness, one might poker, red dog, pai gow poker, three types of video poker, bingo and horse racing (among say) from Inline Design and puts it in an others). Not only do the individual games accessible format for IBM users. King's Table look nice, but in the QQP tradition, there is is the Scandinavian classic, Ragnarok, with TIE Fighter a campaign game where gamers have \"three BattleChess-style graphics, but different game weeks\" to rack up the most possible gameplay. money. The New World package will expand Strategic Simulations, Inc. has added a new Speaking of chess games, Capstone just on their successful Windows version of Vegas twist to the Sim-style strategy game. Under brought their BattleChess-style program to Games by featuring multi-player (at the same their Advanced Dungeons and Dragons limarket, entitled Terminator 2 Judgment Day machine) versions of poker, blackjack, craps, cense, the company has developed Stronghold, Chess Wars. Meanwhile, Electronic Arts anmechanical horse racing and baccarat. sort of a fantasy SimCity with combat and nounced that Kasparov's Gambit will now use Maxis will continue their Sim-line of stratmagic. One must select the right races to the highly sophisticated Socrates chess engine. egy games with a repackaged version of the build cities, exploit natural resources, hold In addition to bringing abstract strategy to original SimCity, SimCity Classic, and an adobjectives and build economics/populations. the computer, the strategy genre has reached vanced version of the planning simulation We especially liked the way that the architecthe point where personnel management is an called SimCity 2000. The latter not only alture in each town was distinctive to the domiimportant part of the strategy mix. Sir-Tech There's Sound... \"vroom, vroom\" 16. Get Rear Sound Man LOGITECH SoundMan 16 delivers sound so real, 85% of the time, people can't tell the difference from live sound. That's because it's packed with the absolute latest in sound board technology: up to 16-bit/44KHz record/playback, Yamaha OPL-3 stereo synthesis 20-voice chip, 100% Circle Dander Seorire #71 "


"ustru Software's Jagged Alliance features an improbable plot for the overall campaign, but features real-time action and requires a delicate mix of artificial personality management in order to succeed. In many ways, it offers some of the same challenges as Electronic Arts' Syndicate, but the personalities of the agents are more developed, and the graphic texture of the world is much \"lighter» than the dark cyberpunk strategy game from Eng land. Incredible Toons outcome. Hence, the personnel management aspect is as important as in Jagged Alliance or Mindcraft's sequel to Mercenaries, Strike Squad. Mindcraft has introduced a splitscreen cooperative mode with smaller squads in the latest Mercenaries product so that gamers get more of a sense of commanding \"people.\" The ever original Jeff Tunnel of Dynamix Th...ver is hard at work on rwo follow up titles to The Incredible Machine. The Even More Incredible Machine will offer 73 new puzzles, several new items (crocodile, boiling kertle, pinball bumpers), and the ability to design one's own puzzies to share with friends. Following this will come a loony variation on the TIM theme, Incredible Toons. The idea remains the same, but now the items in the puzzles will be animated in a wacky cartoon style. With the hairball-hacking Al Cat and his pal Sid Mouse as their guide, and armed with a wild collection of objects, players will be able to contrive contraptions to rival the best of Wilc E. Coyote. Finally, one of the most interesting technological variants on a classic strategy that we saw at CES was Video Cube from ARIS. ARIS isn't really a game publisher; their strength has always been in video and multimedia. Nevertheless, their Video Cube, something like a Rubik's Cube using video clips, looks intriguing. One tries to match up a side of these distinctive video clips and, if successful, gets the reward of a mini-movie using those clips. Kasparov's Gambit Arborea from Psygnosis, offers a similar challenge. Though it is billed as a fantasy adventure, the emphasis of the game is on the characters having relationships with each other. Thus, new assignments and opportunities have to be \"voted» upon, and different team members have different effects upon the The Forecast Business-wise, we don't know what this Fall and Christmas season will bring for the entertainment software industry. We are watching the encroachment of traditional Hollywood studios upon the New Hollywood with great interest. We are curious about the eventual shape of the data highway and its potential impact on game machines like 3DO and Atari's Jaguar. We wonder if CD-ROM will ever reach its full potential. Yet, we know that there seem to be more games coming along that we want to play and that has always been a positive sign, even in unsertling times. Cow CUARANTEED COMPATIBLE ...And There's SoundMan vir OR YOUR MONEY BACK Dhoy Sound Blaster and Ad Lib \"compatibility, and more. in Windows and DOS. From Logitech, the SoundMan brings you the highest CD-quality sound . peripherals leader. At your dealer, or call available for all your games and applications, 1-800-732-3026.mafiatomik lantegerlorent The Senseware Company "


"Scorpion's View CGW's Role-Playing Expert Has Xeen It All Light and M TITLE: Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen PRICE: $69.95 SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 2MB RAM, VGA graphics, 15MB hard drive space PROTECTION: Documentation lookup DESIGNER: Jon Van Caneghem PUBLISHER: New World Computing HollyWHI, CA (800) 325-8898 DOLARA s most role-players know, Darkside of Xeen (Darkside) is the it requires 200,000+ gold to get the entire party up one level, even a add-in/complement to New World's Clouds of Xeen (Clouds). million in gold suddenly looks like a pittance. Since it was designed to be played with Clouds as the second My own team finished at 108th level, and could have gone higher half of the story, the mechanics of Darkside are identical to those in if the money had been available. Scraping up the necessary cash, Clouds. Character creation, spells, combat, etc., are all the same as in particularly in the latter stages, was not easy. My recommendation is the previous game, and nothing new has been added. to stash as much as possible in the bank and let the money build up Of course, taking place in a different part of the world, Darkside interest, right from the very beginning. Think of it as saving up for does have a whole set of new locations, quests, dungeons, monsters your party's higher education. and so forth, and these are on a somewhat rougher scale than Clouds. Beyond that, Darkside is typical of the Might & Magic series. Each My impression was that Darkside was designed more with an eye town has its «monster problem\" that needs to be cleared up. Quests towards being played as part of the full world rather than by itself. of all kinds can be found by wandering in the outdoors. Stat-boosting However, as Darkside can be played as a stand-alone game, we will magic fountains, shrines and wells sit waiting for the party to find first listen to its side of the story. them. All of this is pretty straightforward and will be familiar to The goal of Darkside is to stop the evil Alamar from doing nasty anyone who has played M&M III or Clouds. things to the world. Exactly what those things are is something you A number of puzzles also need to be solved. These, I regret to say, learn as you progress through the game; it's DESSE are almost trivially easy. In fact, the soluenough to know at the start that Alamar has tions are so simple, you might have trouble to be stopped. with some of them by overlooking the obThe player's party of adventurers begins in vious. Even if you do overlook something, the town of Castleview and should not be in the answers are usually nearby. a hurry to leave. Unlike Clouds, entry into SORE! For example, in the Northern Tower of any of the five Darkside towns requires a the Vowelless Knights, there are several pass. The one for Castleview can be pur\"lessons\" to complete. Each completed leschased just outside the town, but the other son provides hundreds of thousands of expasses are more difficult to come by, and 3. 1 G perience points. The answers to all these even the one for Castleview costs more than lessons can be found on the top floor of the the party's initial purse. So, it is best to stay L Tower. This was one of the disappointing inside for awhile and build up some cash. aspects of Darkside: puzzles that could alNote, by the way, that you can't get around the passes with the most be considered «self-solving,\" and hardly worth the designer's Town Portal spell. In Darkside, Town Portal will deposit the team effort to include them. just outside the town gates, rather than inside. So whatever you try, The end game is, for the most part, surprisingly calm. Before you will still need those passes to get into the various towns. Speaking heading out to Castle Alamar, I naturally beefed up the team (espeof portals, the transport mirrors in the towers do not work, at least cially with a visit to the fountain that granted temporary mega-hitnot until a certain quest is completed. Then, once Castle Kalindra has points) and had all the possible protective spells active. I was expecting been fully restored, the only ways to get around are hoofing it or using a rugged time of it and wanted to be prepared for anything. your own spells. As it turned out, the only fighting necessary was down in the The real drive in this game is for money. Where Clouds handed out Where Claude handed out dungeon. The first floor had some nasties that were easily avoided, experience in the thousands, Darkside grants you experience in the the next two floors were puzzles of a sort, and the fourth floor was the hundreds of thousands. This sounds fine, until you consider the costs confrontation with Alamar. co of training the party. Once the characters start reaching the upper However, your team doesn't get to do the fighting. No, this is The levels, training suddenly becomes a very expensive proposition. When Big One, the Last Fight between Corak and Alamar (whose real name UST Page 28 Computer Gaming World "


"You can outfly this guy... But can your COMPUTER? Yesterday's high speed games have pushed your personal computer to its limits. Today's games are breaking them. You need a computer with no limits. You need to fly a FALCON. Introducing the Falcon MACH 5. The latest advance in our line of high speed personal computers, the MACH 5 is the ultimate machine for gaming, personal and business use. It features new VESA Local Bus technology and the fastest 486 processor to produce over 40 VGA frames per second. 30 frames per second is flicker free to the human eye. The MACH 5 is serious hardware for serious players. The MACH 5 comes standard with: VESA Local Bus Motherboard with 256K Cache and Intel 486DX/2-66 Microprocessor VESA Local Bus Graphics Card with 1 Megabyte Video Memory VESA Local Bus Hard Drive Controller Card (4 Megabytes per second transfer rate) 4 Megabytes of RAM Upgradable to 32 1.2 and 1.44 Megabyte Floppy Drives 130 Megabyte 12 ms Hard Drive The MACH 5 Internal Caddyless CD-ROM Drive (350 ms) CTX 14\" Super VGA Color Monitor is Complete Including Mini-Tower Case Creative Labs SoundBlaster Deluxe Shipping For Only Multimedia Speakers Microsoft DOS 6.0 3 Button Serial Mouse 101 Key Keyboard with Dustcover CH Products Flightstick Joystick and High Speed Joystick Port Backed By Our 1 Year Parts and Labor Warranty $2,499 66 UTILITI Fractal landscape created with Vista Pro 3.0. 3D modeling courtesy of Oregon Data Products. Prices subject to change without notice. Optional equipment shown. FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS To Order Call: 1-800-258-6778 VISA & MasterCard Accepted. 263 Sauth Bayshore Dr Coos Bay OR 974201 Circle Reader Senica #53 C  "


"  ninn Ccor world. will be known to anyone who has played any of the previous Might However, this may very well be related to starting the game in & Magic games), and your party is the audience. mid-stream, so to speak. After completing Darkside through the You may feel disappointed by that, but this end sequence is wellunification ending, I went back and started over with a brand-new done and worth getting to. The animations and digitized voices are team. They began in Vertigo, of course, as level one characters. After very good, and there is certainly a sense of drama in this face-off of talking to the Mayor there, I took them over to Castleview and spoke two implacable foes. It is better by far than the bland Clouds ending to a couple of people in that town. of \"The Parade of Monsters Dying.\" Now the Quest recorder was working. It faithfully noted all quests A Whole New World from both sides of the world, just the way it was supposed to do. So, At this point, Darkside, as such, is over. When the fireworks have if you are playing the complere game with a party brought over from Clouds, be sure to check the Auto-Quest Notes and see if it's recording finished, a screen appears with your final score. If you are playing the game as a stand-alone, that's pretty much it. If you've got the full the quests or not. world installed, a second screen will appear with a message from the The other physical problem was a tendency of the game to hang Dragon Pharaoh to see him as soon as possible. This begins the third, ossible. This begins the third from time to time. from time to time. This didn't happen very often and seemed related special quest: unifying the Cloudside and the Darkside into a single in some way to the sound, as the freeze never occurred when the sound world. was off. When it did happen, rebooting the system and Here is where you fiCombat rerunning the game was necessary. Outside of that, the unified \"World of Xeen\" ran cleanly, which is saying a lot nally get to enter Dragon Tower, Darkstone these days, especially considering that one game is being Tower, and the Southern installed into another. Sphinx (bring your widA word or several does need to be said about the get!!), as well as learn the Dungeon of Death northeast of Nightshadow (Cloudpurpose of those mysteriside), which is of concern only for those playing the ous machines sitting in complete world. While you ger the key for this from a lich the four corners of HISKEY | on the Darkside rather early on, Dungeon of Death has Cloudside. Since by this ETJE NE nothing to do with the plot of Clouds, Darkside, or the full time your party is likely world. to be quite powerful, Level one is a giant crossword puzzle of some 70 or so TE there is little in this secwords. The answers to all the definitions are obtained tion that will give you T e from a statue a few steps from the entry. You just write any trouble. The golems in Darkstone can be annoying, though, since them all down, then walk around the level putting them in. Not since they are able to drain spell points, and the dragons in the clouds over the snares of Bard's Tale Il has there been anything so pointless and Dragon Tower are somewhat nasrier than those who live in the Tower boring. itsell. Otherwise, setting up the reunification should prove to be fairly It's the fourth level that's the worst. You see Lord Xeen...and Lord easy. Xeen...and Lord Xeen...and Lord Xeen...a small army of them, and The one sore point in this portion of the game is the walk to the all vulnerable only to the Xeen Slayer Sword. They are created by Lord shrine. As the final step (no pun intended!), the party walks along the Xeen machines in the four corners of the level. Each machine decloudpaths from above Darkstone to the shrine of the Ancients. There stroyed nets the party five million experience points (this is where my is nothing to see, nothing to fight, and nothing to do but walk along team outstripped the cash and never caught up). the paths, which takes several minutes real-time. Teleport doesn't in the center is a control room filled with more Xcens. When you work, and the paths are too far apart for the Jump spell. It is extremely finally get rid of them all and type in the password (obtained in boring, and ought to have been much shorter. Either that, or someDarkstone), a message comes up saying, \"you are a SUPER goober.\" thing should have been added to make the journey more interesting. After thinking it over, I agreed; I had to have been nuts to go through Fortunately, this trudging brings you to the second endgame, which this dungeon. Unfortunately, there was no way of knowing in advance is also well worth seeing. It begins with the marriage of the Darkside that this level, this entire dungeon, had no purpose other than as an Queen and the Cloudside Prince, who then activate together the experience generator. You, on the other hand, have been warned. machinery that unifies the two halves of Xeen into a complete world Graphically, Darkside was a little better than Clouds. Musically, the with a very nice series of special effects—a satisfying ending for the compositions for Darkside were much better; I generally had the game. music on while Darkside and off when the party was Cloudside. Tales from the Darkside of Xeen Sound effects were pretty much the same on either side of the world. \"World of Xeen\" was not without its problems, however. After If you have the room (figure 40MBs with save games), you'll ger the reinstalling Clouds, bringing the save games back from floppy, and most enjoyment from playing the complete world. If you have to then installing Darkside, everything seemed to be fine. I found my make a choice between Clouds or Darkside, pick Darkside, since you advanced party in Vertigo, where I had last saved them, with all their can't use an experienced Clouds team if you're playing Darkside as a equipment, levels, gold, and so forth. stand-alone. Naturally, they went right over to Castleview via the 7 D ias Overall, Darkside is a satisfacpyramid outside town. That worked well, too. Then, tory conclusion to the current they started picking up quests, and I noticed early on, Might & Magic saga. A new Might luckily, that the Auto-Quest Notes were not working. Magie & Magic is promised (by the statIt never recorded a single quest—not one. ues in Darkstone) in 1994. It will ME Now, I haven't heard from anyone else who had this be interesting to see what direcexperience, but I did, so I'm reporting it. I didn't have SEBS rion the series takes, and what any trouble with the Items List that kept track of W EES improvements will be made, now special items (town passes and so on) or the Auto REF that the story, begun so long ago Notes that recorded locations of fountains and clues, 4G with Might & Magic I, has finally but the Quest recorder just didn't do anything. I had come to an end. I'm looking forto keep manual notes of all the quests myself. ward to seeing it. CGW Male SD3 Page 30 Computer Gaming World "


"Bad Day in Bagdad! 00000000 You've been cast out of the palace as a beggar. The princess has turned against you. The palace guards want your head on a skewer. And you haven't even had breakfast yet. This is not good. It gets worse. One minute you're fleeing for your very life across roof tops. The next, you find yourself washed up on a desert island...or amidst ancient ruins, face to face with a disembodied head (and boy is it hungry!). This is really not good. You stumble upon quicksand, serpents, spikes, magic spells, a skeleton with a sick sense of humor, and then...well...things get just a mite tricky. Introducing Prince of Persia 2: The Shadow & the Flame'.' Some call it a dozen Arabian Nights movies rolled into one. Actually, it's your worst Arabian nightmare. So get some sleep. Once this inty Readachund swashbuckler begins, you may never sleep again. V DIVUTI UULIU round PULSE-QUICKENING ACTION RICH MOVIE-LIKE STORY AND SOUNDTRACK INCREDIBLY REALISTIC ANIMATION A CINEMATIC ACTION GAME BY JORDAN MECHNER SUGGESTED RETAIL PRICE: $69.95 (MS-DOS VERSION). SEE YOUR LOCAL DEALER OR CALL 1-800-521-6263 AND REFER TO CODE 262 TO ORDER AT A 25% SAVINGS. REQUIRES 10 MHZ 286 OR FASTER MACHINE. HARD DRIVE AND VGA REQUIRED. 1993 Broderbund Software, Inc. Prince of Persia is a registered trademark and The Shadow & the Flame is a trademark of Broderbund Software. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #39 "


"Deuneu. Nothing Cam Come Betweem Me And My Gemes Electronic Arts' Space Hulk by Jeff James ne of the most popular themes in sciused to fight them—the Terminators. The Death Wing campaign, which offers up to 21 ence fiction is the \"bug-eyed monsters best of the best, these elite soldiers wear powsequential missions. The Space Hulk original invade Earth\" scenario. From H.G. cred combat suits, akin to the battle-suited missions are based on missions used in the Wells to Heinlein, this xenophobic concept grunts described in Heinlein's classic novel actual Space Hulk boardgame, while the has had a profound impact on science fiction Starship Trooper. Since the Genestealers are Death Wing campaign is based upon the art and literarure. The best contemporary unable to travel between the stars on their boardgame's optional Death Wing suppleexample of this is undoubtedly the Alien own, they hitch rides on huge, derelict space ment. Regardless of missions selected, players films, based upon the nightmarish creations craft known as Space Hulks. These craft drift would be well advised to perform the tutorials of artist H.R. Giger. Over the course of the through space, carrying the Genestealers first to master the mechanics of gameplay. Alien film trilogy, audiences thrilled to the life throughout the galaxy. To stop them, squads and death struggle between Lt. Ripley (along of Terminators are injected into these vessels Die, Slimeball! (Gameplay) with her throw-away supporting cast) and a and charged with seeking out and destroying Game play is straightforward, thanks to race of predatory xenoforms. In addition to as many Genestealers as possible. Space Hulk's innovative playing interface. film, other media-namely comic books, After installation, the fight to save the galOnce a mission has begun, the player is prenovels, board games and computer gamesaxy from the Genestealers begins with a par sented with a control screen consisting of five have hopped on the \"man-eating aliens\" bandwagon. In one of the best attempts yet ticularly gruesome introductory animation. viewscreens, corresponding with the helmet After the animation, the player arrives at the A6 cameras on each of the Terminators. The at bringing computer gamers the best in main menu screen of Space Hulk. From here, view in each window is akin to the viewpoint xenophobic science fiction, Electronic Arts offered in such dungeon crawls as Eye of the and Games Workshop have reamed up to the player can choose from a series of tutoribring the latter's popular Space Hulk board als, selecr missions based on Space Hulk origiBeholder and Dungeon Master. A large central nals, or enter the Death Wing campaign viewscreen allows the player to directly congame to the computer screen. option. The tutorials are the best place to trol one Terminator, while the remaining start; two sets of tutorials are available to give four smaller displays reveal what each of the aspiring space marines the chance to master other four Terminators see. An overhead map game controls before being thrown to the Genestealers. The first set of tutorials starts the player off with scenarios that can properly be termed \"baby's first combat missions.\" The first of the basic tutorials is a no-brainer; the player has to simply move one armored grunt from one end of the maze to the other, kace without having to worry about such bothersome dilemmas as getting caten by Genestealers or incinerated by friendly fire. Over the In the board game, one player controls a course of the next four missions, the player squad of valiant space marines while the other will learn how to fire weapons, locate and directs the actions of the aliens, called carry objects, control multiple soldiers, and, \"Genestealers.\" A nasty lot, Genestealers are eventually, how to go about roasting a few a breed of creatures resembling a nightmarish aliens. cross between a Gigeresque horror and a After the five basic tutorials are completed, Lovecraftian abomination all teeth, claws an animated awards ceremony graduates the and burning malevolence. Unable to reproplayer to the advanced tutorials. Whereas the duce by conventional means, Genestealers basic tutorials help the gamer discern which must infect a host creature with their own end of a storm bolter is which, the advanced genetic material to propagate the species. tutorials impart a more important lesson. In Able to survive in the cold vacuum of outer a nutshell, the advanced tutorials will teach space, Genestealers are made of sturdy stuff, the player a valuable lesson: Genestealers love TITLE: Space Hulk with hard, armor-like exoskeletons. They're to kill space marines, and they are extremely PRICE: SYSTEM: IBM also gifted with great speed and strength, proficient at doing so. In addition, the player REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, 260K EMS for sound support making them extremely hard to kill. At will eventually learn how to control up to two (2MB RAM recommended), VGA graphics, 8.5MB hard drive space, 3.5\" 1.44MB HD tempting to stop these creatures from spreadsquads of Terminators (for a total of ten floppy drive, mouse ing across the universe are the space marinestroopers) in a variety of mission settings. All PROTECTION: None of the Imperium, collectively known as the DESIGNERS: Nick Wilson, Kevin Shrapnell and Andy Jones this training prepares the player for the more PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts Legion Astartes. Since the Genestealers are no difficult scenarios found in the Space Hulk San Mateo, CA (415) 571-7171 ordinary foe, the best soldiers of the legion are original missions (16 scenarios in all) and the SPACE HULK IBM $59.95 n ) Commuter Gaminar World "


"Wolfenstein 30 Hottest Shareware Game \"...more like an interactive movie than an arcade game.\" Shareware Update \"Almost single-handedly justifying the existence of shareware... Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"The first game technologically capable of...immersing the player in a threatening environment.\" Computer Gaming World 7777 Imprisoned in a Nazi Fortress In an act of desperation you overpower your cell guard. Standing over his fallen body, you frantically grab for his gun. Deep in the belly of a Nazi dungeon, you must escape or die trying. 967 19 300 JUU A S LEHET SCORES Experience a 256-color, smooth scrolling virtual reality Hear professionally composed music with an AdLibu, Sound BlasterTM, or compatible Four levels of game play make it enjoyable for the novice to the experienced player Battle with knives, pistols, and machine guns Easy to start playing, and instantly absorbing 19253 L 5 ORE UVES 56003 Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME123 For the cost of shipping and handling, only $4.00, you'll receive Episode One, Escape from Wolfenstein. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out our FREE Apogee file section. BBS Phone Lines are:  (508) 365-2359:2400 BAUD (508) 368-7036:2400-9600  (508) 368-4137:2400-14.4K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchased by calling Apogee's toll-free number, shown above. APOGEE P.O. Box 476389 Garland, TX 75047 SOFTWARE Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence Wolfenstein 3-D requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS), Joystick, and mouse are optional. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. Sound Blaster is a registered trademark of Creative Labs, Inc. Adlib is a registered trademark of AdLib, Inc. Circle Reader Service #34 "


"meunei Genestcaler leapt suddenly onto the screen. Gamers who enjoyed the nail-biting anxiety exhibited in the Alien films will undoubtedly appreciate the Space Hulk atmosphere. Beware! (Glitches And Grumbles) As polished as Space Hulk is, a few glitches and program foibles need to be mentioned. Giving Terminators their marching orders via the planning screen is an invaluable program feature. Unfortunately, the dull-witted Terminators will often blunder into simple obstacles, unable to go around them or choose another course of action. Improved AI in this area (such as allowing troopers to walk around obstacles and turn to face approaching enemies) would go a long way to making the space marines a much more effective fighting force. Strangely, there is no post-installation setup utility which would allow players to toggle sound and music. If the game was installed with PC sound and the player later adds a Sound Blaster, the entire game must be re-installed. This user-hostility extends into parts THE EU! the space marines themselves, aspiring commanders will quickly realize that victory depends almost entirely on the rigorous application of sound strategy and tactics. As tough as the Genestealers are, the Terminators aren't totally helpless. A wide array of weapons are available for use, ranging from the standard issue storm bolter (essentially a high-tech machine gun with unlimited ammo) to the alien-shredding auro-cannon. The flamer can be used to lay down a blanket is available on the left of the screen (where the of flame, although it only has a measly six planning screen can be accessed by rightshots of ammunition. For hand to hand comclicking), while a set of directional arrows (a 982 bat, the player can equip, his warriors wit bat, the player can equip his warriors with la Eye of the Beholder) are on the right. Direcpower gloves, power swords, hammers, and a tional arrows on the keyboard are also supwicked device called a chain sword, which is ported, although joysticks are not. essentially an over-sized chainsaw bolted to a Terminators are controlled one at a time; trooper's fist. Most fearsome of all is the lightning claws weapon, which equips a Teridle ones will remain in \"overwatch» mode, firing automatically upon any enemies that minator with electrified gauntlets bristling come within range. To switch between Terwith sharp razors. minators, pressing the appropriate function Fight With Honor! key (F1 through F10) makes the selected terminator the active one, under direct player (Sound And Graphics) control. Using the planning screen, players The most striking aspect of Space Hulk is can direct marines to move, open doors, fire the excellent use of digitized sound. Mission weapons and perform other actions. In misbriefings are accompanied by excellent digirsions where the player must control more ized speech, with a gruff commander barking than one Terminator, the planning screen is orders to the player in heavily accented Enginvaluable. One unique feature of the game lish. Once the game begins, Terminators will is the «Freeze\" feature. Similar to a pause shout out «Let's go!\", \"We bring death!\", function, activating this option will halt «Beware!\", and other appropriate battle cries. gameplay. Unlike a true pause, the freeze Of particular tactical significance is the prooption only works for a limited amount of pensity for Terminators to announce when time. If freeze time runs out, the player is they are being attacked. For example, the dumped unceremoniously back into the third Terminator in the player's squad will game to deal with the Genestealers in real cry out \"Incoming on three!\" when he is time. A true pause option is available, alunder attack by Genestealers. though the player cannot see the map or Graphics are also well done, with the create any orders using the planning screen Genestealers rendered in a sickening purple when paused. Freeze time creates a sense of hue. Although most of the action takes place urgency to the player's actions, making the in the rusting corridors of drifting space game that much more exciting. hulks, several of the missions take place in Ambush! (Terminator Troubles) underground labyrinths and large buildings. In each location, a great deal of ephemeral As fearsome as the Legion Astartes are reanimation is used. Moving a Terminator ported to be, players will find that most down a deserted corridor, the plaver will see troopers-especially when in overwatch and hear a loose wire writhing and sparking mode-behave more like a pack of frightened on the floor, while the distant screams of school girls than a team of the galaxy's best approaching Genestealers can be heard. All of soldiers. Having a Terminator engage in this sound and animation is used very conhand-to-hand combat without special equipvincingly, adding a thrilling sense of danger ment (see below) means almost certain death, to the game. More than once, I nearly jumped he game. More than once. I nearly jumped while weapon jams ensure that even a well-out of my command chair when a armed and positioned marine will have a brutally short lifespan. Moving around their battle brothers is too difficult for some marines. Even after laying out intricate tactical plans for troopers at the planning screen, one may find Terminators blundering into one another, clogging up passageways and blocking avenues of fire. In my experience, some missions were doomed to failure when one Terminator blocked the path of another, engaging in a ludicrous shoving match until both were sliced into lunch meat by a maYou fare command oft end: rauding Genestealer. Given the limitations of of the playing interface as well. Selecting to restart a campaign brings up a new screen with the enigmatic query \"Are you sure?\", making it all too easy to erase a hard-fought campaign when the player thinks he is simply dropping to DOS. A more descriptive display informing the player what exactly is being done would be welcome. Admittedly minor issues, these interface foibles nevertheless place an extra burden upon the gamer. To The Emperor! (Verdict) Gory, exciting and filled with lots of exploding ordnance, Space Hulk is a first-rate game of tactical \"infantry versus xeno\" combat. Nick Wilson and his programming team should be congratulated on one of the best boardgame to computer game conversions yer. The game simply cries out for a sequel equipped with multi-player support, improved trooper Al and more mission options. Scenario disks and a mission builder would also be a nice touch. Wish lists and glitches aside, I found Space Hulk to be an immensely enjoyable journey into the depths of pixelated xenophobia. Gamers looking for an excuse to don a space suit and eradicate a simulated race of hostile aliens should find that Space Hulk suits them well. Cow Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"On final approach to the United States 1320 Developed in cooperation with  Lufthansa and Deutsche Aerospace Airbus Trademarks \"AIRBUS\" and \"A320\" registered (applied for). Circle Reader Service #93 "


"Broadening The Spectrum Spectrum HoloByte Looks To The Future COMPANY REPORT nce upon a time, Spectrum Holo Byte was part of Sphere, Inc. Sphere, in turn, was controlled by a company within the Maxwell media empire of tabloid publisher Robert Maxwell. After Maxwell's death, Spectrum HoloByte founder Gilman Louie managed to get enough venture capital together to buy back the company from the Maxwell interests. As part of that funding, the investors placed their own management team inside Spectrum HoloByte. Another Opening, Another CEO CGW wanted to know what changes that management team would make and how that would affect future product. We were concerned about personnel changes and wondered what the agenda of Spectrum's new investors would be. So, we interviewed new Spectrum-Holo Byte CEO Patrick Feely. Feely immediately expressed his charter in terms of broadening the company's product line. He stated that he considered the company's strong product lines to be Tetris, Falcon, Star Trek: The Next Generation and a \"player to be named later.\" His goal is to build a brand-based identity for the successful lines and add to those lines through acquisition and development. Next, he established that the company's immediate priorities were to: 1) develop the Patrick Feely, Spectrum HoloByte CEO, looks over his plans for expansion. company's strong suits (flight simulators, puzzle gaming); 2) take advantage of the cartridge business (the area where Spectrum expects the greatest sales growth, particularly with their Star Trek: The Next Generation program and with flight programs when SNES and Sega get beefed up); 3) gearing up for Interactive TV projects for both flight sims and Star Trek: TNG products; and, of course, broadening the company's product line through acquisition. We pointed out that many of the items on the agenda required large expenditures and significant ramp-up time to implement, but Feely insisted that 80-85% of Spectrum's fiscal/personnel resources were being invested in markets that can get immediate returns and only ca. 15-20% in new technology. Assuming Feely's percentages are correct, Spectrum will be expanding at a significant rate over the next few years because the \"new technology\" portion of the company's current development is already substantial (with Virtual Reality, storefront attractions, Interactive TV and 3DO products already under development). Spectrum is using some of the most exciting technology around. Unfortunately, we can't write about it, yet. Feely projected a doubling of staff over the next few years and predicted that the focus of the company will shift from \"design house\" to full-scale publisher. In addition to inhouse staff, Spectrum is publishing around five outside projects in the current fiscal year. Within two weeks of our interview with Feely, the first of the acquisitions occurred. To exploit the cartridge market, Spectrum purchased Bullet-Proof Software USA, run by Henk Rogers (long-time friend and colleague of Spectrum HoloByte chairman and founder, Gilman Louic). Bullet-Proof is not only the developer of Tetris for most console platforms, but the developer of Face Ball 2000 and a Mario Bros. title called Yoshi's Cookie. Within four weeks of the interview, CGW began to hear rumors that the company was showing interest in financially-strapped MicroProse (NASDAQ: MPRS). The word was that MPRS was finishing its fiscal year with less than a quarter million in cash and announcing a loss of over $4 million. By press time, Spectrum HoloByte had offered to provide $10 million of much-needed capital into MicroProse by purchasing subordinated debentures (an interest-bearing bond arrangement). In this case, the $10 million from Spectrum allows MicroProse to get below its $3 million debt ceiling to other lenders and gives MicroProse some breathing room. In turn, Spectrum gets interest on the bonds, equal number of directors to those presently serving on the MicroProse board and an opportunity to convert the bonds into more than 1.6 million shares of MPRS stock. In short, Spectrum has put into play a potential SSES 7832 y los 9 10 Science-Fiction author Stephen Goldin assures CGW that his scenarios are true to the Star Trek universe. Director of New Technologies Ron Martinez stands beside the diagram depicting his grand design for Spectrum's future. Computer Gaming World "


"  Advertisers List 33 face technology to be used in 3DO products and some nifty hardware implementations for their amusement park-based virtual reality products. Martinez not only brings his experience in computer game and interactive movie design to the party, but has a keen sense of the value of story and character, as well. «Stories,\" Martinez once commented at a Computer Game Developers Conference, «is when things happen to people we care about.\" Spectrum is ideally prepared to venture into the world of story games. Not only does Martinez know the value of story, but the company tapped novelist Stephen Goldin (author of ca. 30 science fiction novels) to script their Star Trek: The Next Generation CRPG. Goldin wrote A Trek to Madworld based on the original Star Trek series, as well Harvey Lee, Customer Support Manager, spoofs as several of the best books in the Laser Books the gamer's vision of what happens during series of people-oriented science fiction nova customer support call. els. His best-known works, outside of Madmerger by stock swap where each share of world, are The Eternity Brigade and A World Spectrum may be exchanged for 6 shares of Called Solitude. MPRS. This means that Spectrum has virtually \"gone public\" without having to undergo the rigors or vagaries of an IPO (Initial Public Offering). Now, Spectrum has the potential of holding up to 60% of MPRS stock and has, essentially, become the second-largest diskbased entertainment software publisher. What this deal does not make clear is the status of rumors concerning a Spectrum HoloByte purchase of Strategic Simulations, Inc. Due diligence was allegedly being performed for a purchase of SSI when the potential MicroProse merger was announced. As of press time, however, the status of this possible ST: TNG Product Manager Mat Genser has acquisition was in doubt. Nonetheless, Speca little fun at Spock's expense. trum's recent moves underscore the truth in Feely's parting statement to us, \"We want to To enhance the background of the Star increase the base of creativity in our organizaTrek: TNG story, the company has hired tion.\" Andrew Probert. Not only was Andrew one of the designers of the Enterprise (NCCThat's Show Business 1701D), but he designed many of the interior sets for the television series. Now, he's workWhere will Spectrum find this increasing ing with Spectrum on making the 3D backbase of creativity? One answer was to bring in grounds and ships for the computer game, Ron Martinez as Director of New Technolo3DO game, and location-based products. gies. Ron is best known for his work with Jim This is the kind of detail that Star Trek: TNG Gasparini on Simon & Schuster's early Star fans should appreciate in an interactive verTrek text adventures and a paradigm-breaksion of one of their favorite series. ing political strategy game called Hidden Agenda (Springboard Software). For a time, The Show Must Go On he was working on a project called Mammal Club (a bizarre cross between H.G. Well's Of course, Spectrum must build on more Island of Dr. Morcan and a dark cyberpunkthan Star Trek: TNG in order to build the style future) that was originally intended to company to the satisfaction of its new manbe both a film and a computer game. As agement team. The merger with MicroProse usually happens with non-studio film fundseems certain to broaden gamer satisfaction ing, the production was \"put into turnthrough the integration of the flight simulaaround\" (i.e. ran out of funds and backers). tor lines (so F-16s and F-15s can fly together So, Martinez migrated into the world of against MiGs?), and the «story-oriented\" interactive movic-making for CD-I. Unforfolks at Spectrum are sure to enjoy the power tunately, a global base of less than 100,000 of the graphic adventure engine which Mimachines does not make for a viable entercroProse has built. One thing is for sure, tainment market, so he opted to move to Spectrum HoloByte isn't standing still. Spectrum. His vision of products for SpecThey're...well...virtually flying. What clse trum HoloByte includes some very advanced would we expect? cow Access 80-81 Activision 17 Advanced Gravis 61 AldeaLabs 121 Apogee Software Aztech Systems 87 Bare Bones Software 146 Bitwit 119 Broderbund 31 CGW Subscriptions 83 CH Products 113 Cape Cod Connection 121 Chips & Bits 71, 73, 75, 77 Computer Express 108-109 Compsult 132 Computability 135 Creative Labs 101 Disk-Count Software 137 Electronic Arts Electronic Innovative Design Falcon Northwest Flagship Magazine 97 Formgen Gamer's Gold 123 GEnie 21, 23, 25 Genovation 107 Gosselin Computer 132 HPS Simulations 111 Homebase Products Impressions 3, 15 Interplay Keyboard Commander Lance Haffner Games Liberty International Logitech 12-13, 26-27 Mallard Software 69 Mindcraft Software 41, 53, 63 Mission Control 66-67 MPG Net 48-49 Origin Systems 91, 148 Paper Mayhem Psygnosis Rom Time SDJ Entrprises Select Ware Sideline Software Sierra On-Line 39, 45, 51, 79, 147 Simulations Canada Sir-Tech Strategic Simulations 43, 133 Thalion Publishing Thrustmaster Tsunami Twin Engine Gaming Viking Software 58-59 WTDT Planet Kidz Zeros & Ones 123 99 September 1993 "


"OM correspondence Over There wamesa Game News From That Yonder Shore \"I 1 1 le by Robin Matthews ter Mavi hericum se tance will take time to have an effect, so Team Kuwait is in the front-line of the offensive to repel the Iraqi invaders. War in the Gulf uses a similar system to the previous titles with the player simultaneously controlling four groups of four AFVs, including the M1 Abrams Main Battle Tank. The simulation has economic considerations and involves resource management. Gameplay is divided into a series of separate missions, varying from re-claiming the islands to full scale battles in the crucial oil fields. War in the Gulf features over 15 separate tank battles set among actual topographical maps of the area. The geographic region represented is reported to be in excess of 400 square miles. One hopes that this will not be prophetic, but War in the Gulf is currently out on the PC, with both Amiga and ST versions planned. The final product this month is Shadoworlds, Teque's follow-up to the interesting Shadowlands. The original product was distributed by Domark, but this latest release is now published by UK software house, Krisalis. Shadoworlds uses a further development of the Shadowlands isometric view system and also utilizes the unique \"photoscaping» technique which lights up areas as you explore (and conversely darkens them as you leave). The plot moves the Shadowlands interface away from medieval magic and mystery to deep space. The player heads a team of four hand-picked space marines whose job is to explore a massive space station housing a Weapons Research Facility. This space station orbits a planet on the outer limits of the galaxy. As the story goes, decades carlier a virulent form of plant life had been ejected from the Earth. This didn't please the plant a bit, bur it was content to keep its fly-trap shut. That is, until weapons testing really got its leaves ruffled. Gallant space heroes must explore the Space Station and the nearby planets to try and unravel a fairly sophisticated storyline. One's party can be made up of any of 18 characters, including a mutant dog, security androids, and numerous psychopathic astro-mercenarThis month's contributor to the blood The players, genetically engineered with rush of horror games from Microprose different skills and attributes, are immune to 1 UK is Legacy, a superior graphic advenpain and regenerate after each match. ture with strong role-playing features. The player's single character explores a huge, scary house with links to other dimensions and other worlds. It is combat intensive and features auto-mapping and a reasonable magic system. The graphics are strong, and although the rooms are too \"regular\" and lacking in atmosphere, it is certainly an interesting release that many will enjoy. In some ways, the horror aspect of Legacy overlaps with Virgin's 7th Guest, though the free flowing nature of that CD-RO product P3 and its undoubted presence\" cause an unfavorable comparison to be made with the MiMorph croprose release. Matches are either in a League or Cup comCambridge-based Millennium Interactive petition with promotion and grand finals. has not figured in this column for a while, so Possessing strong graphics, it is designed to we are pleased to report on two forthcoming appeal to sports games players and, rather releases. Morph is a scrolling puzzle game that disturbingly, to violence lovers. That aspect will appear on both Amiga and PC formats might rightly cause a stir and is unlikely to in the early summer. The \"plot\" involves an gain much further coverage for that reason eccentric professor and his nephew. The alone. Both formats are duc in November nutty prof has built a teleport machine which 1993. is struck by lightning while using it on the Empire made quite an impact with Team young lad (strange, eh?). The net effect is that Yankee and its sequel Pacific Islands, and now the machine is in bits scattered around a large a third tank sim is to be released. War in The gaming world. Your mission is to collect the Gulf is set in 1995 when Iraq has once again parts and re-assemble the machine. Divided entered Northern Kuwait. Still convinced of into five different sections with lots of puzthe justice of their territorial claims, the Iracis zles, the graphics look promising and good have mounted a limited strike using battalsound support is also claimed. ions of the Republican Guard. They quickly The other Millennium product poised in seize control of the Sabriya and Ar Rawdatayn the starting blocks is a game with a working oilfields, and also invade the two most important off-shore possessions of Kuwait, the isAmiga 1200, it is described as the first in a lands of Failaka and Bubiyan. series of futuristic sport sims. It will be a one Team Kuwait is a crack unit of mercenaries. or two-player fantasy sports game with eleall US veterans from Operation Desert ments of Grid Iron, Tom and Jerry and The Storm, who have been hired as part of KuTerminator.\" wait's local defense forces. International assisies. Beastball After this, the rest is similar to Shadowlands. The movement and object manipulation is done by selecting the head or limbs of a tailor's dummy, where the right leg moves the party as a team and the left leg moves the Paco 28 Computer Gaming World "


"Attention All Registered King's Quest Owners: Get King's Quest VI CD for Half Price! The most critically acclaimed game event of the year. Packed with amazing Multimedia features: A spectacular 50-mey animated introduction sets the stage for adventure.  Nearly four hours of dialog and narration by professional actors!  A stunning 50-megabyte animated introduction, created by Kronos, the special effects masters who brought you Batman Returns and The Lawnmower Man.  High-res 640x400 close-ups of characters, using the critically-acclaimed RAVE lipsynching technology. Includes a special Video for Windows presentation of The Making of King's Quest VI, including interviews with Roberta Williams and rare behind-the-scenes footage shot during production.  Can be played under MS-DOS or Windows. «Bigger and bolder than ever, this is an adventure few can resist.» —Compute \"Sets the standard for all future graphic adventure games.\" Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"Sierra's finest adventure to date... A rich and enjoyable playing experience for gamers of all skill levels.\" -Computer Gaming World \"I urge you to try this game! It's easy to see why this Sierra series is the best selling game series of all time.\" -Computer Game Review «King's Quest V/ is not just good, it is a landmark game. -Quest Busters VAN Revolutionary patented lip-synching technology draws you into the story. Experience an adventure so vast, you may never see it all! Only $39.95* (A $40.00 Savings) at your local retailer or call: 1 (800) 757-7707 \"Proof that the era of CD gaming is upon us.» Prer Spar Quinn RRA Suggested retail price is $79.95. Offer good to registered owners of any King's Quest title, be prepared to tell us your serial number. Offer valid in U.S. & Canada only. Offer #1389 \"Plus $4 U.S.. $5 Canada, shipping and handling. ROBERTA WILLIAMS Wings TOMORROW AR TODAY CON SIERRA (  TODAY, GONE TOMORROW PC Circle Reader Sanrico tag "


"foreign correspondence entire Grand Prix season. There are far more sophisticated driving games around, but at the right price, and accepting its limitations, this is a pleasant enough diversion. Before I say au revoir this month, there's just time to mention a new adventure from Coktel Vision. Lost in Time is already available in a French version and should be converted and released as this column is put to trifle fuzzy headed. She finds herself on a strange boat, wondering what has happened to her, where she is, and why the wall poster is dated 1840. These questions must be answered, but to do this Doralice must confront an arch criminal coming at her from different periods in time. With auto-mapping, auto-notetaking, an all point-and-click mouse-based interface, a special CD-ROM version with digitized sound, full soundtrack, and all manner of clever time parallaxes, Lost in Time could be a biggie and may build on Coktel's rapidly increasing standing. That's all this time. Next month we'll take a close look at Loriciels' D-Day, among othDesobe Bacogimo L682062 selected character only. This works well enough, but the party members' apparent lack of common sense in movement can be frustrating. Though the player may want to go through a door, this does not seem to be communicated effectively to one's characters, who often bang into walls for the thrill of it. This quirkiness could ruin the game for some, but if one copes with it, Shadoworlds is a cracking exploration, puzzle and combat extravaganza. And it's big. I am quite amazed that it fits onto two 720K disks, but this is no lunar week wonder. The graphics are average, the sound is OK, but above all, it's a bit different. Shadowlands is available on both PC and Amiga formats now. He may be missed in the Formula One Grand Prix Championship, but Britain's Nigel Mansell certainly seems to be making an impact (literally, as far as some ovals are concerned!) in Indy car racing, Sheffieldbased Gremlin Graphics have released Nigel Mansell's World Championship on other formats, but it is ironic that as he has left for pastures new, the PC version makes a belated appearance. This is no Geoff Crammond sim, but rather a polished arcade game. The graphics are little more than hi-res EGA, and there is not much subtlety to the controls and steering. The software does allow a driver to practice and receive advice from the old moaner, culminating in either individual races or the reenactment of an 123456 0000 ers. Nigel Mansell's World Championship paper. Starring the attractive Doralice who has previously appeared in Coktel's racy adhas previously appeared in Coktel's racy adventure, Fascination, Lost in Time is yet another product claiming to be the first interactive movie/game. With full motion video, 3-D free motion, and digitized 256color graphics, the software looks terrific and might just deliver the dream. Plotwise our heroine wakes up feeling a The above games and any of the other games mentioned in past columns can be obtained from: Computer Gaming World (not associated in any way with CGW magazine], 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY. Tel: 01144-51-263-6306 Strategic Plus Software, 28 D&E The Courtyard, High Street, Hampton Hill, Middlesex. TW12 1PD, Tel 01144-81-9778088, Fax 01144-81-977-4822, or on Compuserve at 1000014,3466 Robin Matthews can also be contacted on Compuserve at 76004.3456. CGW OI T TIMP D AVS Out Time Days is a Play-By-Mail game of life on a strange world. Emphasizing role playing and inter-player communication, OTD is a game for those who like to join with other players around the world in figuring out puzzles, creating working economies, exploring large sections of worlds, undertaking or tracking criminal activities, or fielding capable armies. The worlds explored are living, vibrant locales that will change through your character's actions. With the ability to journey in many cras (you'll start in a medieval-like location), you'll enjoy adapting to new sets of abilities and restaints or you can focus on a single place and become well established. OTD is a combination Science Fiction-Fantasy game. It is 99% computer moderated to ensure faimess, and 1% GM moderated to allow for creativity. A maximum of I turn per week is allowed. Cost per turn is $5.00. The game is open-ended with each * new character playing a vital role. A special startup is available if you mention this ad. Receive a rule book, startup turn and 5 turns for just $5.00 ($20.00 outside U.S. and Canada), a $35.00 value! Dependable, weekly, error-free turns since 1984 Hit litt DUNGEN Wanna try a tactical space game and pay only $20 for the entire game? Then ask for information on Space Combat. To sign up or for more information write to: Twin Engine Gaming, 3254 Maple Leaf Ct., San Jose, CA 95121 Dan Comuter Gaming World "


"boss OGT 24 13:05 L overgast IAS 999 Ruinar Darat 51 99 OK Ha Tan 43 99 0% 41aka 51 99 OR Borai di :   notes Tak Pass Draw 1.ok quit CAME Forratr Uhisper Sheathe poral draus his Shortsword. An Epic Dwarven Tale EN: 039 Oct 24 13:35 L Overcast 12377.: 099 11. Balat {Darat 51 99 OK 2Porai 43 99 OK 3H41ari 43 99 OR 4Qka 51 99 OR Rocati use Notes Talk Pass Drau Look. flagic Camp Forretni Whisper Sheatte QUit 21624 10:50 12376 37 Elia 1 cur. 3 EN: 013 (Darat 51 99 2porai 03 99 3H410 43 99 OR 51 99 OR tagic pass notes Taik Drau Look Quit Forratr Uhisper Sheathe Oct 24 IV: LU LO C1 ear 1123712.: 067 E: 002 Torongo wanag 51 99 OK 2poral 13 99 3Haari 13 99 4tiaka 51 99 OK cont Greetings, Ir adventurers. Since you are in need of succor, I have a propositiori LESS) 08 Enlist the Aid of Amazon Barbarians. Explore the Untamed Lands of Tarq. Enter Ancient Temples and Towers. Your Choices are Crucial. The Saga's End Depends on You. A tale of magic and treasure, bloodshed and 102S glory! Bloodstone takes you to the earliest days of dwarven history, when the battles between the dwarves of the north and the south threaten the destruction of their awakening cvilization! A young dwarf, orphaned in battle, searches for magical treasures to unite the tribes. With hardy companions, against bloodthirsty foes, you guide the epic quest. You make the decisions that shape the end of the dwarven tale! MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 Actual IBM VGA screen photos Circle Reader Service #73 "


"Deview CDYou Can't Go Holmes Again player can rifle through the directory at will, pull names from it, copy them into \"Holmes notebook», and then, by clicking on the \"horse and carriage\" icon, see what the computer has filed away under a given name (i.e., \"visit the location\"). Names that are germane to the current case will usually produce a short (20-120 second) video clip of either Holmes or Watson quizzing that character about the crime under investigation. Names that are not will usually produce a line drawing of a house with its door closed and a comment on the soundtrack along the lines of \"I don't know why ICOM's Sherlock Holmes, you dragged me out here, Watson.\" The bulk of the game, therefore, is a matter Consulting Detective, Vol. III of sniffing out germane names. One gets one's first leads during the lengthy clip that by Charles Ardai introduces each case; in the course of following up on these, additional names come up yhen Thomas Edison's first movie, jobs masquerading as games, hungry gamers along with facts and clues. When one has The Great Train Robbery, appeared basically have a choice between Virgin's The followed up on all the leads and drawn conin theaters, people went to see it in 7th Guest and ICOM's Sherlock Holmes, CD clusions from all the clues, clicking on the droves despite its grainy, jerky images, crude games. Is it any wonder, then, that ICOM has \"gavel\" icon presents the solution to a judge. performances, and minimal storyline. When circulated almost a quarter of a million copies If any important clues are missing, the player a scrawny desperado faced the camera at the of these games? (It doesn't hurt that Holmes is sent back to the main screen to find them. end of the movie and fired his pistol out at Vol. I comes packed in one of the leading At first glance, there appear to be other the audience, people screamed. multimedia kits as a \"freebie.\") elements to the game, but these are peripheral When the first commercial video game, One might as well say it straight: these at best. Copies of the London Times that are Pong, appeared in barrooms across the coungames don't have to be very good to sell like allegedly packed with clues are available both try, so many people played it that they overhotcakes. ICOM's Holmes, CD games are the on-screen and in identical hard copy, but I filled the coin collection boxes and broke the only games on the market to offer abundant found both versions useless. The Baker Street machines. This was the case despite the full-motion video and spoken word audio. Irregulars, Holmes' band of nosy street urgame's severely limited action, graphics, and Each volume contains more than an hour of chins, can be called in to give their opinion sound, and its lack of a storyline altogether. video. The video is of real, live actors, speak on a character, but more often than not they Both cases show that the first examples of a ing in reasonable facsimiles of British accents. haven't got one. When they do have an opinnew type of entertainment need not be espeIt's like having PBS right there on your PC! ion, it rarely produces information that one cially good in order to be popular. A first try Asking for quality, too, seems downright imhasn't already gotten from the video clips. might turn out a classic, as in the case of the pertinent. first novels (Don Quixote, Pamela), but this is Am I saying that the Holmes, CD games are VOLUMI not necessary in order for the work to be a ! bad? No. In fact, ICOM's may well be the success; and history tells us that a first try is best Holmes games on the market. What I am INTERACTIVE VIDEO MYSTERIES that much less likely to be good when the saying is that they are a first try; and that, artist creating it has to grapple with a new while they do convey an undeniable thrill, technology as well as a new art form. this is mainly the thrill of seeing a new technology used, not of seeing a new technology used well. It is fine to praise these games for what they are, but one must also criticize them for what they are not. I fear that amidst ICOT all the hype, players are not being as demanding as they ought to be about what companies CD-ROM feed them in the name of multimedia entertainment. SHERLOCK HOLMES DE DESEM CONSULTING DETECTIVE Holmes Game Advantage Duc The ACIN AS YOU MATCH Wns Wmmi The Mine Sun Axo Sex Soun To lisz INTRIGUING CASS These days we are frequently told that the One of the nice points about ICOM's Holmultimedia era of computer entertainment is mes, CDgames is that they are, in fact, games. dawning. On the horizon are mountains of The game elements that link all the video clips together may be simple, but at least the product in development, and if enough peoSherlock Holmes Consulting result is readily identifiable as entertainment. Detective, Volume lil ple buy the hardware necessary to use it, we PRICE: $69.95 Peeling away the storyline, what the player IBM, Macintosh may actually see all this product someday. In actually does is access entries from an index, REQUIREMETS: 286-12MHz or better, VGA graphics, the meantime, multimedia gamers have to just as he might when using a multimedia CD-ROM drive with 150K transfer rate, content themselves with what's out there. mouse encyclopedia. In this case, the index goes by PROTECTION: None What's out there is very limited. Aside from the name of \"Holmes' directory,\" an alpha PUBLISHER: ICOM Simulations, Inc. Wheeling II a handful of upgrades to games originally betical listing of some of London's more in(708) 520-4440 designed for floppies and some quickie clip teresting inhabitants and institutions. The Bet TITLE: SYSTEM: D. Computer Gaming World "


"Dragons COMPUTER GAME Lead a Kingdom. Conquer an Empire! PANTASY EM PIRES our country IBM 256-color VGA displays. Create alliances, defeat enemy kingdoms -and rule Mystara! Build your own empire as you play the first D&D game to feature a com TM puter DUNGEON MASTER) who mediates all elements of game play. Thanks to superior animation, 256-color VGA display and sound effects, the DM virtually comes to life on the screen. Face one to four adversaries, either human or chosen from among twenty computer-controlled opponents. Interact with fantastic races, command dozens of troop types, deploy special forces and construct a variety of buildings. Extensive character interaction, utilizing advanced AI and Neural Network technology throughout the game, provides for diplomatic tactics. When combat occurs, the game switches to one of the most spectacular tactical views yet! O Available for IBM/COMPATIBLES. To Order: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-245-4525 (in USA & Canada) with VISNMC. To receive our complete product catalog, send $1.00 to: SSI, 675 Almanor Ave., Suite 201, Sunnyvale, CA 94086. SFEEL DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D. DUNGEON MASTER. FANTASY EMPIRES and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR, Inc. 1993 TSR, Inc. 1993 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"AR DERID) CD-ROM D A E Finally, there are \"Holmes' files,\" which consigns at various points of indulging in the sort tain sketchy background information on The Solicitous Solicitor of hyper-theatrical gestures and intonations some of the game's characters, but what they that Jon Lovitz used to parody in his «Master offer, too, is mostly redundant or superfluThespian» bit on Saturday Night Live. ous. ous. Though dramatizations of Sherlock Holmes There is no time limit in the game, nor is have always tended toward campiness, hamthere any danger. One cannot do anything miness and other forms of overacting (see, for \"wrong,\" other than fail to solve the case. One instance, Jeremy Brett in PBS' recent series), is permitted to save the game, but this is only rarely has it been taken to such extremes. for the sake of picking it up again at a later ICOM will do much better next time if it date, not for testing alternative plot pathways. hires professionals, not just for the acting The word \"interactive\" is prominently discach story is essentially limited to deducing chores, but for writing and directing as well. played on the game's package, but the game the solution to the crime and if this is interThere is only so long that the gaming audiis only interactive in the sense that the player active then so is reading a Sherlock Holmes ence will put up with paying good money determines, to some degree, the order in novel, because one can do the same thing (and not a little of it) to see the work of which the video clips are presented. Which there. amateurs. clips one selects has no impact on the content Holmes Alone of the clips one sees subsequently, and one The Case of the Ersatz Doyle sees the same clip no matter how often a given Readers might be curious as to why, in light character is visited. The three stories one gets in Holmes, CD of the drubbing I've given Holmes, CD II Volume III are, on the whole, no better and above, I said at the start that ICOM's may be The Times no worse than their counterparts in the first the best Sherlock Holmes games on the martwo volumes. As such stories go, they are fairly ker. The answer is twofold. Page 1 Column 2, Article 3 good, neither as good as the stories Conan First, no one has done any better. ICOM's ROY SLADES W2D AFRICAN EXTRAYAGANZA OPENING TO HIGHT.M. Doyle wrote nor the contents of a typical issue games are visually impressive (though one Slade's celebrated SPECTACLE returns from Wihemshaven with Horses, of Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine, but better wishes the clips would contain fewer talking Elephants, Lions, Clowns and performers than one might expect. of all description. OHELL, the great Lion heads and more action) and technologically \"The Thames Murders,\" with its five floatexciting in a way thar Electronic Arts The ing corpses and complicated chain of moLost Files of Sherlock Holmes, for example, is tives, is the best, and the best suited to the not. It is a thrill to see little actors talking to game's structure. It even includes a cameo each other in a window on one's computer Even more distressing, it is possible to view role for Colonel Moran and a final twist screen. the clips out of order, and one occasionally which, though easy to guess, is satisfying. does so by accident. For instance, in one of «The Solicitous Solicitor,\" with its legal loJE SC Confidential Volume IITs three cases (\"The Solicitous Sothario and bevy of languid ladies, provides a Meeks, Sir Jasper Clearly one of the best medical men in licitor\"), poorly planned ordering of the encertain voyeuristic interest, though its subplot tries in Holmes' notebook makes it likely that about property deeds is too dull for words and the player will read the London Library entry its twists are telegraphed. «The Banker's Final General Practitioner. I will always be grateful to Watson for summoning Dr. Meeks to on \"chinaberry\"-including Watson's comDebt,\" with its smashed statues and missing my side when I loy ill. ment that \"H.R. sure knows his poisons!\" jewels, reminds one of Doyle's \"Six Napolebefore visiting H.R. Murray's laboratory and ons, but does not stand up to the comparibeing told to check out the entry on china son especially well. Holmes berry in the library In all three cases, the plot development and The most damning evidence against the the planting of clues seems mechanical and ICOM's Holmes, CD is a first try and enorgame's purported interactivity is that it is crude, more on the order of an episode of mous leaps do remain to be made, but it is possible to go through the game by brute \"Murder, She Wrote\" than the original Holunlike anything else out there and that, at lu clicking on each entry in Holmes stories. Certainly, there is none of least, makes it worth playing. I suspect, and mes' directory in sequence, starting with Doyle's spark of genius or cleverness. One hope, that it will not be state-of-the-art for Abraham Able and ending with Graham begins pondering cases that are roughly as long but for now it Zweiback. Doing so would be equivalent to interesting as the banal real-world crimes not half bad. viewing the clips in a random order, but it found in the newspaper. If there were a fourth would have no detrimental consequence on case on this CD and it were «The Carnal Car This leads to the second reason, which is one's progress through the game, other than Mechanic,\" about Amy Fisher and Joey Burthat even though the stories the game tells are lengthening the playing time and increasing tafuoco, it would not stand out from the not masterpieces, they are solid, fairly conthe number of dead ends one visits. other three. structed mysteries that have actual solutions There is nothing inherently bad about this As for the acting, all of the characters show to be deduced. The game may not be as interactive as one might like, but it is an design, and given the strengths and weakScore improvement over the Clue VCR game of nesses of the CD-ROM as a medium one can several years back or the Dennis Wheatly understand why ICOM made the choices it did. However, gamers accustomed to the le\"interactive mystery books\" of yesteryear. gitimate interactivity of a mystery game like Mystery games are rare enough that a gamer Sierra's Laura Bow adventures should be prewho wants to find a new one can't afford to pared for the tradeoff here between getting to pass one up if it is at least decent. see live actors perform and getting to particiSherlock Holmes, Volume III is, at least, depate in a story in a significant way. Users of cent. It is probably not worth buying all three ICOM's Sherlock Holmes are viewers more volumes, but curious gamers should at least than they are players. Their involvement in take a look at one of them. Cow London. Before he became London's greatest Medical Examiner he was a superb D . Commuter Gaming World "


"Now less The Darkest Knight is Still Ahead GABRIEL weiz See your favorite retailer or call: 1-800-757-7707 SIERRA Circle Reader Service #86 "


"Deuneun GDERO THERE'S A SUCKER BORN EVERY MINUTE In LucasArts' Day of the Tentacle by Charles Ardai works! Malling Day of the Tentacle a sequel to Maniac Mansion, the pioneering 1987 adventure game that introduced both LucasArts' «S.C.U.M.M» game system and many of Tentacle's main characters, is a little like calling the space shuttle a sequel to the slingshot. It is true that both serve the function of hurling objects great distances--space shuttles and slingshots, that is but they have so little else in common and are separated by such an enormous gulf of technical sophistication that mentioning them in the same breath is almost absurd. So it is with Day of the Tentacle and Maniac Mansion. For comparison's sake, note that one room of Day of the Tentacle contains the entire original game, as a gag. That's right: in one of Tentacle's rooms, players will come across a computer that is running Maniac Mansion. If they so choose, they can put Tentacle on hold while they play through Maniac Mansion from start to finish. Anyone who chooses to play the original will be stunned by how far the field of interactive fiction has come in the past six years. The original is there in all its retro glory: chunky, flat graphics; boxy Commodore 64 font; stiff animation; sound effects that are limited to thunks, beeps, and static; and an early point-and-click interface that lacks all the shortcuts and conveniences that make current games so much more comfortable to play. The story and puzzles are strong, but their presentation is downright primitive. Only nostalgia or curiosity will permit today's plots. There's nothing for Green Tentacle to do but call for help. A better connected tentacle might have sent his plea to one of computer gaming's more reliable heroes: Indiana Jones, for instance, or King Graham. Maybe even the Avatar. Those guys are hard to reach, though, so Green Tentacle sends his nore by carrier hamster to the one adventure game hero he knows: Bernard Bernoulli, the geeky, gawky, stoopshouldered protagonist of Maniac Mansion. Bernard promptly enlists the help of two new characters: Hoagic, an appealingly moronic slob with all the brains (and the shape) of a bowling ball, and Laverne, a wild-cyed space cadet whose voice suggests that she has been heavily, but insufficiently, sedated with valium. Together, these three musketeers Menizc Mansich A CARTOON AVENTURES SCHAFT GROSSMAN gamers to suffer through what was once stateof-the-art but is by today's standards crude. Compare this with Day of the Tentacle. Its graphics are lush and colorful, with skewed perspectives and grotesque characters that could have been lifted from vintage Warner Brothers cartoons. Every scene is animated, with characters performing lots of weird, once-in-the-game actions rather than just cycling through a stock series of poses. In the CD-ROM edition, every single line of dialogue in the game is spoken out loud and not only spoken, but spoken in voices that would have done the late Mel Blanc proud. Gameplay is smooth and intuitive, the interface having been designed to give players a minimum of frustration. Even the font in which the game's text appears is custom-designed, angular, wacky, and just right for the game's cartoony atmosphere. So Long, Sucker! Day of the Tentacle begins when a stream of inappropriately disposed toxic waste kills a cute little birdie and causes a self-willed purple tentacle, surly and ill-mannered to begin with, to murate into a super genius with thoughts of world domination. His good-guy companion, Green Tentacle, warns him not to drink the polluted water, but he does it anyway. Then he grows stubby little arms, develops a baritone voice, thunders out an ominous warning to one and all, rises up on his glutinous sucker and hops offscreen to hatch his evil at w 700 TITLE: Day of the Tentacle PRICE: IBM: 559.95, CD-ROM: $69.95 SYSTEM: IBM, IBM CD-ROM REQUIREMENTS: 386 and higher recommended, expanded memory recommended, VGA graphics, 14MB hard drive space (floppy only) PROTECTION: Manual Look up (floppy version only) DESIGNERS: Dave Grossman, Tim Schater PUBLISHER: LucasArts San Rafael, CA (415) 721-3300 Commuter Comin Warl "


"ROM Deview CD-ROM DA WELGOED traipse over to the morel of Dr. Fred Edison, the inept mad scientist who genetically engineered the tentacles in the first place, and whose Sludge-O-Matic is industriously dumping toxic waste into a stream under a spreading kumquat tree. So it begins...and before it ends, our heroes will have to travel farther afield than the kumquat tree. Much farther. In order to undo the mischief he has wrought, Dr. Fred cooks up a plan to send Hoagie, Laverne and Bernard back one day in time to shut off the Sludge-O-Matic before before Purple Tentacle can drink the mutagenic water. However, due to a catastrophic miscal culation, Dr. Fred's time machines go kablooie, stranding Hoagie in Colonial New England, Laverne in a dystopic future in which humans are the pers of their tentacle masters, and Bernard right back where he started, in the present. Before they can get on with the plan to stop Purple Tentacle, they all have to get Back To The Present. This presents some difficulty, in light of the fact that Hoagic has no way to plug in his time machine in the 18th Century and that Laverne is a captive, first in the branches of that darned kumquat tree and then, in the tentacles' electrified kennel. What is to be done? Well, an ancestor of Dr. Fred's can make Hoagie a battery, and Ben Franklin can charge it with electricity, if Oil encourages the players to get into the spirit in every possible way, starting with the strangelooking game box (the CD version is triangular rather than square) and ending with two great punch lines that bring the game to a rousing finale. All that's missing is Porky Pig saying \"Th-th-th-that's all folks!» Purple Reign Op LOOKa+ In order to prevent Purple Tentacle from taking over the world and populating it with guests, they are finally able to go back in time its spawn, Bernard, Hoagie, and Laverne have its spawn one day to shut off the Sludge-O-Matic. First, anedav to shut off the sludge-O-Matic F to interact with each other a good deal, this boweverthey have to face an army of Purple despite being separate Tentacles in a showdown that can only be both physica characterized as epic. (That's not true, actualls heypu ally. It can also be characterized as ridiculous.) of ways, mainly by sending objects to each \"Throughout all the above lunacy, the other by flushing them through time. (Did I game's various threats are made less-thanneglect to mention that Dr. Fred's time mathreatening by the fact that one cannor die. chines are built inside Port-O-San-style toiOne cannot even back one's characters into a lets?) Much of the game's complexity, then, dead end, not even accidentally. This means is means stems from the fact that one never stems from the fact that one never knows, that one is free to try absolutely anything in any situation, without fear of Edison's Super Salad Battery Pat. No. 71718229 the consequences. vinegar gold The impact of this de sign choice is greatest in dialogue sequences, when oroutons the player is interacting with John Hancock, or Thomas Jefferson, or Harold, the primping human pet in a tutu, or whomever. In most games, the dialogue would take the following form: the interlocutor somethe-planshemden mindsthe partent number in your manual and would ask the player a question (\"What do you think of my hair?\"), when one finds an object, in which era it will and the player's options would consist of the turn out to be useful. So, a bucker of paint right answer («It is very nice\") followed by that Hoagie finds just might be the tool Berthree or four funny answers, selecting any of nard needs to trounce the IRS; Laverne's which would get the player executed on the scalpel (she's a medical student) is ineffective spot. I have never understood this. If the against the tentacles but might be handy for point of playing a game is to have fun, why Bernard; and three false sets of teeth make their way back and forth through time, sugdo games punish players for choosing fun gesting the rather unpalatable conclusion that answers over sensible, boring ones? dentures are the one truly universal commodThe designers of Day of the Tentacle scem ity in human history. to have had this question in mind when they As in the original game, the need to scarch wrote their game, since not only are there nothrough what is essentially the same mansion sensible, boring dialogue choices, but the over and over adds to the robustness of the player is never, ever punished for doing some simulation: by the time the game ends, the thing funny. Doing funny things is the whole player feels he really knows that house. To point of Day of the Tentacle, and the game spice things up, the Edison mansion changes ever so slightly over the centuries, forcing the player to do a lot of exploration through rooms and corridors that are simultaneously familiar and unfamiliar. The use of three 33. different cras, each with its own visual characteristics, style of comedy, and set of puzzles, protects Day of the Tentacle against the charge of being too claustrophobic. Some players GW POLO criticized Maniac Mansion because they O P 50 OD LOOKS Let didn't like being stuck in the same house for L (Continued on page 80) lettuce ALE Tai + JA ESISON Gue Peup 19 Opal Look at PLH Hoagie does everything just right. Doing everything just right\" involves pulling three cruel practical jokes on George Washington and one on Betsy Ross, as well as amending the Constitution. Yet that's all a piece of cake compared to what Laverne has to do, which includes disguising herself as a tentacle, suck ing a hamster out of a mousehole, winning a \"best human pet\" contest using a corpse as her entrant, and taking a punch to the kisser from a spring-loaded boxing glove. Meanwhile, Bernard has to contend with a depressed novelty inventor, a laid-back car thief, a home-shopping channel on TV, a semi-lobotomized Weird Ed (another character from the original game in a hilarious cameo appearance), and the IRS, whose agents seize Dr. Fred and tie him up with red tape while they give him an audir. Bernard's task is just as difficult as Hoagie's or Laverne's: he has to fix the main time machine, at an expected cost of two million dollars. Once all three characters complete their o September 1993 Page 47 "


"A New Dimension Tim Tyler a.k.a. 'Tyre\" Toronto, Canada \"Merlin, I'll cast a cure spell on you.\" Ed Avis a.k.a. \"Merlin\" Camden, NJ \"Tyre! Help! I'm wounded.\" TM DRAKKAR STAR CRUISER CRTARR Gai Saus. Heu Dalar, ut don't you open the door and we'll cure the rear. Klupen clocr norih Chat and play games with people from around the world without ever leaving your home. MPG-NET gives you something you can't find on floppy disk; on-line realtime contact with the most puzzling and challenging entity of all time. Another human mind. Play pulse-pounding, intriguing. forever challenging games with stunning graphics and vibrant sound. Games that are constantly improving so they won't get stale. Form strategies, share secrets and solve puzzles with up to 100 folks from around the world, twenty-four hours a day. In addition to our games we have Bulletin Boards so you can write public messages to other players, and Electronic Mail to send private messages. We also have Chat Rooms in which you can shoot the breeze LIVE with people from around the world. All you need is a modem, a phone line, and a computer, IBM-PC compatible, Macintosh, or Amiga. come visit a land where dragons C roam free, rodents grow to unusual size, and adventurers are the endangered species. Team up with players from around the world. Together, explore mysterious lands, armed only with your enchanted weapons, psionic spells, and wits. You'll find untold riches and glory while solving intriguing puzzles, and destroying the mightiest of beasts. MPG-NET brings you the ultimate in fantasy role-playing. The year is 2300 A.D. We've I discovered stardrive and colonized hundreds of new solar systems. In the process, however, we pissed off some very nasty aliens. To say they hate us is an understatement. They'll do anything to eliminate us from space. No compromises. This is all-out interstellar war. We need your help! Based on GDW's classic space combat game, MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Star Cruiser a 3D, multi-player campaign of splitsecond action. 1992 MPG-Net, Inc. Multi-Player Games Network and MPG-Net are service marks of MPG Net, IncThe Kingdom of Drakkar is a trademark of Drakkar Corp. Computer network versions of Empire Builder, Star Cruiser, Operation Market-Garden, and the Kingdom of Drakkar are designed and developed by Tantalus Inc. All other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders. "


"in Entertainment ...Your Multi-Player Games Network. Brad Elk a.k.a. \"Sauer\" Louisville, KY \"If you need some help, just page me.\" Lori Zini a.k.a. \"Diana\" Waco, TX 'What tore you up, Merlin?\" EMPIRE OPERATION MARKET-GARDEN 10:33:25 MPG-NET is accessible from over 600 cities in the United States and over 80 cities internationally. It costs less than you think: $4.00 per hour in the continental US and $3.00 per hour in the N.Y. city area. These costs are all inclusive. There are no hidden communication fees. SEL MODE Dial toll free 800-GET-GAME and we'll send you your account number, password, start-up kit, and 5 free hours right away. For more information call 800-245-0317. Three elite Allied paratroop divisions drop into enemy territory. Their mission, to seize the bridges leading up to the Rhine -the last obstacle of Allied advancement into the heart of Germany. They almost succeed. Scattered remnants of Axis forces already defeated in France must guard the Rhine the first-line of defense for the Third Reich. They almost lose. MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Operation Market-Garden, GDW's classic two-player war game, based on the biggest airborne operation in history. Combining two great American loves: Railroads and Money! Now you can capture the entrepreneurial spirit of America and build your own railroad empire. The wheels of progress are you and up to five other players from around the world, locked in a power struggle of epic proportions. It takes planning and ambition to build a railroad empire. And only the best will endure. Experience MPGNET's on-line version of Mayfair Games award-winning, classic board game. MPG-NET Your Multi-Payer Games Networks 800-GET-GAME 800-438-4263 Circle Reader Service #77 "


"S. neynews TITITI The Many Saves Of Don Jonz Capstone's Eternam by Allen L. Greenberg Thile computer game designers labor to perfect the art of interactive entertainment, they may be unaware that the makers of non-interactive entertainment have spent decades undermining their efforts. For years, movies have depicted the innocuous computer as an evil presence, ready to subjugate the population it was designed to serve and entertain. Fortunately, probably due to their growing dependency on computer-generated special effects, filmmakcrs now seem content to move on to other villains. themselves reaching for the mouse to control Eternam, although any such effort will prove wasted. Nearly the entire game may be controlled from the keyboard using the four directional cursor keys. Six icons line the bottom of the screen representing the commands cake,\" \"use,\" \"speak,\" \"look,\" \"invenforvand disks acec The icone mov activated by pressing a letter key from the keyboard which causes a shockingly realistic human finger to appear on screen and select the appropriate icon. Alternatively, this \"dig. itized digit\" may first be summoned with the tab key and then moved to the desired icon with a direction key. Inside buildings, Don Jonz is seen in a standard two or three dimensional view, around which he may be guided by the four direction keys. Each time Don passes something of interest, a \"line of sight\" appears on screen along with text identifying the item. ULICA ILI It is kell BB0143 Don Jonas, Virtual Adventure Vacation Equipped only for a fantasy week away from work, Don quickly discovers that Eternam is up to its equator in trouble. At one time, the planet belonged to a race of lizard-like crea tures called Dragoons. Scalped out of the rights to this paradise world, they huddle together on one small continent where they have managed to silently take control of the planet's massive computer system, under the direction of their leader, the vile Mikhal Nuke. Don must now navigate this fantasyturned-nightmare world in order to reach the Dragoons, bring Nuke to his knees, and settle the dispute. Helping the hero is Tracy, a drop-dead gorgeous secretary who happens to be putting in overtime from inside the computer's terminals. Eternam features several continents, cach of which is as unique as it is threatening. A medieval land is guarded by a duke whose servants' passions range from sweet-meats to stone statues. Another land mass is occupied by French revolutionaries who are split into a confusing variety of factions and loyalties. A bizarre collection of mismatched machinery dominares a high-tech civilization, while a deadly pyramid overshadows an ancient Egyptian landscape. While initially appearing to be a series of continent-sized, self-contained mini-adventures, Eternam will eventually require Don Jonz to do some fast-paced continent-hopping in order to achieve his ultimate goal. Mapping these places is not absolutely necessary, but it is a simple exercise which will prove valuable as the adventure progresses. The adventures of Don Jonz turn out to be quite an interesting yarn, and are mercilessly laced with hefty doses of humor. Camco appearances by anachronistic personalities abound, including not-quite-the-crew of the original starship Enterprise. Never letting the player forget that this is indeed a fantasy theme park, technicians occasionally wander through the picture, and a passing tourist may supply help at an otherwise hopeless moment. In the tradition of several other popular adventures, two of the programmers have also been given pivotal roles in the adventure. If The View Fits Experienced adventure gamers may find ETERNAME Filmmakers have not, however, expressed any such forgiveness towards other forms of interactive entertainment such as the fantasy theme park. With this summer's release of Jurassic Park, dinosaur recreation centers throughout the world will doubtlessly suffer a decline in business. Other classic films and television shows such as Westworld, Futureworld, Fantasy Island, in addition to all of those malfunctions on the holodeck of the new starship Enterprise, have all preached the dangers connected with entering an artificially generated fantasy environment. While we might expect computer game designers to come to the defense of the fantasy parks, such is not the case. Eternam, an adventure game from the always unusual Infogrames, instead presents a frightening picture of a recreation world whose patrons risk leading exciting, yet dramatically shortened lives. m. Caputo The Story So Far Eternam is a first-rate adventure about a planet-sized amusement park of the same name. The hero is a futuristic vacationer named Don Jonz, whom one might suspect is able to trace his lineage back to \"Indiana.\" TITLE: Eternam PRICE: $59.95 SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 386-16MHZ, VGA graphics, 6MB hard drive space PROTECTION: None DEVELOPER: Infogrames PUBLISHER: Capstone Miami, FL (800) 468-7226 Page 50 Computer Gaming World "


"PICK-UP THE PHONE AND PICK TWO GAMES FREE! SAP Sierra Discovery Series O PRE-READING SKILLS ALPHABE A-CL:S SPACE QUEST. V (We Talk! EMBE The Mentions FRONT PAGESPC Vinos Herr V AL COM 100 SIERRA ROBERTA WILLIAMS SIERRA 1-800-877-1995 Choose any Two Sierra Games when you switch to Sprint directory assistance, customer service, even instant credit for wrong numbers. And we do it 24 hours a day! Sprint long-distance service just became more valuable up to $159.95 more! Now, when you switch your home long-distance service to Sprint, you can select any Sierra game, free! And after enjoying six months of highquality long-distance, you'll receive a second Sierra game or one month of free long-distance service.* Only Sprint can offer you a nationwide 100% digital, fiber optic network that provides the long-distance quality and reliability you need. Experience for yourself Sprint's \"fiber optic\" clarity that makes both your longdistance calls and PC data transmissions crystal clear and error free. But unsurpassed call and data clarity is just one of the many benefits you will enjoy as a Sprint customer... calls each month to whomever they talk to the most, including international calls-even if the called person is with a competitive long-distance carrier. The Most will also provide automatic 20 percent discounts on all calls to Sprint's millions of customers, anytime and anywhere. When the most frequently called number in a given month is a Sprint customer, Sprint will combine both discounts for an effective overall savings of 36 percent on calls to that number.** No Risk Guarantee Your satisfaction is guaranteed: we'll pick up the cost of switching your long distance to Sprint, and will even pay to switch you back if you are not completely satisfied. (Some restrictions, apply.) So why not sign up for Sprint and receive the clarity, savings and service you want while getting two Sierra games you enjoy? Save on Long Distance When You're away from home too! Sprint's FONCARDSM travel card lets you continue to take advantage of clear calling and savings even when you're away from home. Plus the FONCARD is free, with cards available to every member of your family. Sprint SIERRA \"The Mostm\" A Unique Calling Plan Sprint offers an unprecedented longdistance calling plan called \"The Most\" available now for all customers. The Most will save Sprint customers 20 percent on already low rates on their The Service You Deserve At Sprint, we make no compromises when it comes to dependable, personal service we do it all; operator services, Circle Reader Service #87 * Offer valid only in the U.S. and for new Sprint customers. Not valid for FONCARD only orders. Certain restrictions apply. Free month is up to $25 usage on 4th month invoice. To qualify for a second game or free month of long-distance the customer must bill $20 per month in 3 of the first 6 months.. ** THE MOST discounts apply to intra-state calls only where authorized. "


" Dust whatriz bere Thead? Do, sure. That's 11 S 1 see. The dose. .. soul de 09 tion test. However, the answers will be found elsewhere in the program and not in its documentation. Any piece of information which Don comes across should be written down for later reference. Outside buildings, the player views the action as seen through Don's eyes. Exceptionally smooth-flowing three-dimensional scenery (\"virtual reality\" for those who still insist on abusing that term) creates the impression that Don is riding a bicycle or a well-trained futuristic horse. Certain inhospitable reptiles, possibly related to the Dragoons, also travel Eternam's roads in an attempt to mortally end Don's visit. For this, he is equipped with some type of self-aiming weapon, or spell, which is more than adequate for self defense. Don begins his adventure with 100 hit points which may be reduced by encounters with these creatures, or by some of his more dangerous adventures indoors. The points regenerate on their own as long as the player prevents them from reaching zero. Eternam is presented in an entertaining variety of graphic styles. Painted graphics dominate the program, but these are frequently combined with some hilarious cartoon-like sequences. There are also some digitized photographic images to represent Tracy and Mikhal Nuke as they communicate with Don from within Eternam's computer. Nearly every scene includes somc eye-pleasing action or animation. Ad Lib compatible music and Sound Blaster sound effects are available, but the player who so chooses may simply listen to the flatulent noises of the PC's internal speaker. Don would be wise to pick up any item which he is permitted to take. Most items have a use clsewhere in the game, and there is no limit to the number of items he is permitted to include in his inventory. Conversation with other on-screen characters may be initiated by Don or with another character. This conversation is of the multiple-response format, in which the program offers the player two or more choices of dialogue. Unfortunately, the player often has only one chance to select the proper statement. The wrong choice may cost the player some important information or, worse, fail to set certain critical events in motion. Frequently saving the game to disk is about the his problem. Other vital pieces of information are well-hidden throughout the game. Ar more than one point, Don will be forced to take a trivia quiz which seems something like a copy-protecHope Springs Eternam Eternam is a relatively difficult exercise to complete and will provide the player with more than a few tense and confusing moments. Its greatest achievement is clearly its remarkable and compelling story which will keep players exploring until they reach the game's satisfying conclusion. Eternam is clearly a double-edged blade-frightening players away from one type of interactive entertainment while offering them the best of another. CGW DON'T DO IT!!! SIDELINE SOFTWARE D. ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY Calm down. Breath deeply. YOUR EUROPEAN PC CONNECTION NEW TITLES TYPE A320 Airbus USA Flight Sim. Cohort 2 Strategy Sim. Bat, Midwinter, Cadever, Bloodwych ALL FOR D-Day War Sim Daemonsgate RPG History Line 1914-1918 Strategy Sim International Open Golf Champ. Sports Sim Ishar 2 RPG Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix Racing Sim Reach for the Skies Flight Sim. RoboC 0d Arcade Shadow Worlds RPG Strategy Sleepwalker Arcade Strategy Space Crusade RPG Strategy Street Fighter 2 Arcade Tornado Flight Simulator Flight Sim. Transarctica Strategy Sim. WWF, T2, The Simpsons ALL THREE for only World of Legends RPG World Wrestling Federation 2 Simulation EUROMAGS Get the latest news on the best PC titles from Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature a demo-packed playable cover disk with each issue! PC Format, PC Review, PC Zone, or PC Plus, each only $10 SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5.00 .C.O.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges. Defective products exchanged with samailem, Products warrantied through Sideline. FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Into? Call (305) 491-9519 DEALER INQUIRIES INVITED! 840 N.W. 57th Court, Fl. Lauderdale, FL 33309  Relax. GGZGOGOS MPSO F16 Falcon 19.95 Fire Team 2200 16.95 Four Crystals of Trazzar 21.95 Flight of the Intruder 18.95 Floor 13 18.95 Fool's Errand 16.95 GP Unlimited Road & Track 21.95 Greg Norman Golf 18.95 Harpoon 14.95 Heart of China 18.95 Hero Quest 18.95 Hills Street Blues 18.95 Hook 16.95 Imperium 18.95 I Came From the Desert 14.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 16.95 Killing Cloud 16.95 King of Chicago 14.95 Lure of the Temptress 18.95 Mavis Beacon Typing Tutor 18.95 Mig 29 Fulcrum 18.95 Monty Python 16.95 Obitus 18.95 Panza Kick Boxing 18.95 Paperboy 2 16.95 Pl Fighter 18.95 Populous/Promised Lands 24.95 Pushover 18.95 RB1 Baseball 2 14.95 Realms 18.95 Rocket Ranger 16.95 Sargon 5 18.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Shanghai 2 18.95 Shufflepuck Cate 14.95 Sim City Terrain Editor 9.95 Sleeping Gods Lie 16.95 Spacewracked 16.95 Space Crusade 18.95 Special Forces 21.95 Spell Casting 101 18.95 Spol 16.95 Strike Fleet 19.95 Storm Masters 18.95 Slunt Car Racer 16.95 Super Off Road 16,95 Super Space Invaders 16.95 Super Tetris 19.95 Tearn Yankee 21.95 Test Drive 2. all data disks 18.95 The Immortal 19.95 Three Stooges 16.95 T.V. Sports Baseball 21.95 T.V. Sports Basketball 18.95 T.V. Sports Boxing 18.95 T.V. Sports Football 14.95 Trump Casino 2 18.95 Valle 1495 White Death (Raw) 18.95 Winter Super Sports 92 16.95 Wizkid 18.95 Wolfpack 18.95 World Class Leaderboard 14.95 Zool 21.95 There's no need to take club to monitor. CGW's first Hint Disk is the solution to your Tribes troubles. With written solutions and screen shots for all 120 levels in Psygnosis' Lemmings 2, this disk will have you well on your way to a complete gold talisman and the salvation of all Lemming-kind. To order your disk, send a check or money order for $6.00 + $.95 for shipping to: Luv Doze Lemmings Disk Offer c/o Computer Gaming World P.O. Box 730 Yorba Linda, CA 92686-9963 Foreign orders add $1.00. 3.5\" disks only. DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT DEALS! 4-D Sports Boxing18.95 A-Train 26.95 Action Stations 18.95 Advanced Destroyer 16.95 Ashes of the Empire 21.95 Austerlitz 16.95 Backgammon PC 14.95 Bard's Tale 3 18.95 BAT 14.95 Baltlechess 18.95 Balttelech 2 16.95 Bloodwych 16.95 Carner Command Centurion Defender of Rome Collossus Bridge 4 Command HO Conan the Cimmaron Conflict: Europe Crisis in the Kremlin Delender of the Crown Deluxe Stop Poker Deluxe Sirip Poker 2 Drakihan Elvira 2 16.95 18.95 16.95 18.95 18.95 14.95 21.95 16.95 16.95 18.95 18.95 18.95 COM Circle Reader Service #84 Pane 52 Computer Gaming World "


"WALLS OF ROME GB WARFARE IN CLASSICAL TIMES TLUS REUNISULTS Suda STX tns Keywor 220 A494921966544647496969696969AAAALL 444444444444444444AAA.9649477 ST22 De 13 1332 The grandeur that was and modify the Rome is yours to defend or conquer in Mindcraft's troops and maps in Walls of Rome. All the siege techniques of classical antiq myriads of ways. uity are in your hands. Scale the walls with ladders, bombard them with boulders or flaming pitch, or undermine them and watch them collapse. W Unpredictable computer strategies make each battle a new challenge. Armies from a multitude of times and places are under Built-in editor lets you create your own armies, battles your command; fortifications of many types in many and maps. settings are yours to besiege or defend. Stunning graphics, stirring music, Play the ready scenarios, separately or in and lifelike digitized sounds. extended campaigns of conquest and defense, or use the editor to combine 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 Actual IBM VGA screen photos Circle Reader Service #74 MINDCRAFT LALALALALALALALALALALALALALALAL "


"Deynel Neverending Stories OPEFT HALL: 31OFESING HALL HD 19 HT OPEN Create Your Own Fictions with SSI's Unlimited Adventures by Rudy Craft If this review had been written a month struction kit simply by transferring all the no castle exists. In fact, the game will play ago, it would have blasted Strategic Simufiles in the adventure subdirectory. (A cou just as well with a blank map, with a picture lations Unlimited Adventures for its ple of tips: make sure the subdirectory has of a bird, or with any other artwork that fits grossly inadequate documentation. It would *.dsn\" for its suffix, i.e., \"Raven.dsn.\" Also, on the screen. Each wilderness map square have pointed out the total uselessness of an make sure the subdirectory contains its own is designated as passable or impassable. The adventure building product that included \"save\" subdirectory.) designer can place up to 100 events on the programming bugs that render it all but impassable squares, including, of necessity, possible to design a fully playable adventure. Design School transfer events allowing the characters to It would have whined at length about the The process of designing an adventure is enter the various dungeon modules. inadequacies of SSI's Gold Box engine and not quick or easy. It is simple enough to Dungeon modules are significantly more how far removed it was from the cutting edge construct a single dungeon with monsters complicated and more interesting to deof computer gaming technology. Fortuand treasure, but construction of a full sign. Unlimited Adventures provides a very nately, the month has passed, and with it, all fledged adventure with an actual plot is handy dungeon module editor which albut the last criticism. lows the designer to select the dungeon's Unlimited Adventures is SSI's adventure 1 UTILIT) backdrop (essentially, the floor and ceiling construction kit using the familiar Gold types) and to place individual walls, doors, Box Advanced Dungeons & Dragons engine openings, locked doors and secrer doors. A in its latest and up-to-date form. Yet, even limited variety of wall types are available, the latest version of the Gold Box engine is BOSSEDERT HALL: including stone, brick and coral, as well as sorely lacking by comparison with other some outdoor types such as trees and more recent games. Its graphics, for examCOL 9 ROH bushes. Unlike much of the other artwork, ple, do not compare with those in Darkside HEURS TO SKULL C OPERTO HELLES the walls and back drops cannot be replaced of Xeen, Ultima Underworld II and Crusad SKOLL CRHG TOHH with the designer's own art work. Only the ers of the Dark Savant. Obviously, SSI rec MOVEMENT BLOCKED ognizes this problem, as they are putting SELECT LEFT PLACER UHTIRUNDO THAR Advanced Dungeons Dragons the system out to pasture with the release of this construction kit and are developing complicated and time consuming. Anyone a new AD&D game engine, beginning with considering buying Unlimited Adventures the long overdue Dark Sun. to construct adventures should be sure they have the time and devotion required. On the other hand, it requires no special devoPLEASE SELECT HALLAND OBSTRUCTION FANTASY tion to use it to play adventures created by HAULS: OBSTRUCTIONS CONSTRUCTION O OPEN other amateur designers. OPEN SECRET Each adventure can include up to four wilderness modules and up to 36 dungeon modules. However, depending upon how SEE one links the dungeons together, two or more dungeon modules can be combined to form a single larger dungeon, or one dungeon module can be used for two or SELECTICANCELLERIES more smaller dungeons. Moreover, the To be fair to SSI, Unlimited Adventures term «dungeon\" is too restrictive. In Unshould not be compared to state of the art limited Adventures, \"dungeons\" can be citrole-playing games, but to other adventure ies, caves, towns, towers, castles, woods, construction kits. After all, Origin has not deserts or swamps, depending on the artyet released an Ultima Underworld adven work and events selected. ture construction kit, nor are they likely to. Unlimited Adventures Creating a wilderness module is fairly $59.95 Placed in its proper weight-class, then, Unsimple. Each designer can use one of the IBM, Macintosh (Reviewed on IBM) limited Adventures is easily the best advenREQUIREMENTS: IBM VGA graphics, five default maps included or he can create 6MB hard drive space ture construction kit available. his own map. From the point of view of the Mac-B&W, IMB RAM Color, 2MB RAM Unlimited Adventures allows the player to computer, however, the appearance of the PROTECTION: Word look up in manual design and/or plan an essentially unlimited map is irrelevant. It may look like a castle DESIGNERS: Jason Linhart & MicroMagic, Inc. PUBLISHER: SSI number of adventures. Adventures can be on the map, but unless the designer has Alameda, CA transferred between owners of the conplaced the appropriate events on the map, (408) 737-6800 UNLIMITED ADVENTURES KITLOCKEDOOR LOERER STER TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: Page 5 Computer Gaming World "


"DRAGONKONIGHC Cucos Enter a World of Demons and Damsels. If You Dare. For centuries, war has raged among the demons and fairies, devastating this mystical land. Twin brothers, born to mortals, are separated at birth, chosen for the ultimate battle that will decide the fate of heaven and earth. They later meet, never knowing their true relation — or their own dark destiny. Fated to duel your twin to the death, you must fight to stay alive and rescue lovely, innocent maidens from the clutches of menacing foes. And perhaps, become the ruler of all. So the challenge is on! An incomparable role playing fantasy game for your PC, with stunning, hand sculpted graphics throughout, numerous scripts and a thrilling, plot. But be warned — with its voluptuous women and intense action, Dragon Knight III is for mature audiences only. And not for the faint hearted. Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258-MEGA. Or write Megatech, P.O. Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. Visa, Mastercard, checks accepted. System requirements: 286-20 or faster machine (386@ommended) with 640K RAM, hard disk, mouse recommended. Operating Sys.: MS DOS 3.3 of above, Windows 3.1. Graphics compatible with VGA. Sound support: Sound Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro, Thunder Board, Pro Audio Spectrum, Adlib Gold Vond Speed Master This game is not for the faint-hearted. Contains violence For a free demo, call our 24hr. BBS at 310-639-7739. (8N1), and some material inappropriate for minors under 18. Circle Reader Service #69 All companies and oroduct names mentioned are trademarks or registered trademarks of the respective owners MEGA TECH "


"DURI EL SO SKULL HOVERLAND MAPS HERBALCORMYR LEAVETULEHRENHEIMPORT art work provided with Unlimited Adventures can be used. As a result, the dungeons tend to look similar. (If you've seen five dungeons, you've seen them all.) Whatever individual flavor a dungeon might have must arise out of the events placed in that dungeon, nor its appearance, Each module, wilderness or dungeon, can include up to 100 events. \"Event\" is a term in Unlimited Adventures which refers to all of the possible ways the game can interact with the characters. There are a total of 35 different event types including the basic Combat, Give Treasure, or Text Statement and more complicated events, such as the confusing but critical Quest Stage. Even the simplest events, like the text statement event, allow the designer to specify the conditions under which the event will occur. Thus, for example, there can be a text event that will occur only if there is a thief in the party. Events can also be linked together to form complicated branching sequences. For example, a group of ogres could ask the party (via the Question Yes/No event) if they want to undertake a dangerous mission. If the party answers \"No,\" the ogres could attack (via the Combat event). If they say \"Yes,\" a text event could describe the mission. Each of these events can be linked to additional events so long as the 100-events-per-module limit is not exceeded. order. Each adventure can include up to 44 different quests, each with up to 100 steps. However, the use of the Quest Stage event is fairly complicated and confusing, and the manual is of no help in explaining the process. The omission of any explanation from the otherwise excellent tutorial is unforgivable. To some extent, the problems with the manual have been cured by the inclusion of a massive text file with version 1.1. This document explains each and every option for nearly every major game feature. The document also acknowledges and explains the bugs found in version 1.0. With the inclusion of the expanded documentation and the bug fixes in version 1.1, Unlimited Adventures has atoned for many of its sins and emerges as one of the best game creation tools available. However, again, players should know that they are buying a product that will require a STRIP BHALL SETS capable artist with a compatible art program, don't even bother to try. (Unlimited Adventures specifically supports Electronic Arts' Deluxe Paint II and ZSoft's PC Paintbrush). Unfortunately, to protect TSR's copyright, Unlimited Adventures does not allow the designer to edit or change the artwork included in the product. A Game's Got to know Its Limitations Unlimited Adventures also does not allow the designer to create or edit magic items or magic spells. This limitation arises in part out of TSR's desire to protect the \"integrity of its game, but it also arises out of the way the program works. Each monster, magic item and spell is assigned a specific slot in the game. Changing a monster is no big deal because that change will affect only the current adventure. On the other hand, because characters can be transferred between adventures, a modified spell or magic item could be quite confusing, if not program crashing. The most glaring problem with Unlimited Adventures is its 128-page manual (or \"Designer's Journal»). This would appear to provide adequate room to fully explain all of Unlimited Adventures features, but appearances can be deceiving. Fifty-six of its pages are devoted to game rules primarily directed toward a player of the Heirs to Skull Crag adventure included in the product. Skull Crag is nothing special as an adventure, except insofar as it serves as a sample of how to construct one. Admittedly, nearly all of these rules are helpful, if not necessary, to the designer of an adventure, but the significant information could and should have been presented in a more condensed form. For example, the Journal devotes 15 pages to descriptions of monsters and non-player characters. These descriptions are so limited and vague as to be totally useless to an adventure designer. Besides, the monster editor allows all of this information to be changed. These 15 pages could have been used to explain some of the more complicated adventure construction features. In particular, the tutorial should have been expanded to include an explanation of the confusing Quest Stage event. When properly used, this event allows the designer to create a sequence of events that the character must encounter in the proper CORAL HES TO SU, g THE BKS HURDLE LEHDETUTELITRENAME huge investment of their energy. Constructing a good, interesting adventure with Unlimited Adventures will take many, many hours of work, much of it spent at a desk with pencil and paper planning event sequences and drawing maps. Most roleplayers will probably want to leave the labor to the professionals and immerse themselves in pre-created worlds. Still, for the rare breed who likes play that more resembles work, Unlimited Adventures provides unlimited job opportunities. CGW BOTTNGBEETLE LEIRS TO SKULL SPRITES BLUE DRAGON LERUETUTELIORERAMETSIMPORTAURIMPORT BEHOLDEREETLE BLIEK BRADING Unlimited Adventures comes with a library of 127 default monsters and nonplayer characters (NPCs). All of these beings can be edited. Changes can be minor (such as increasing an orc's hit points by one) or major (renaming the monster and changing each and every characteristic, power and ability-in effect, creating a new monster). The default monsters can be restored with one click of the mouse. Included is an extensive art gallery containing five wilderness maps, eight big pictures (covering the upper half of the screen), 127 combat icons, and 38 sprites (pictures used to show monsters approaching the party.) Unlimited Adventures allows the designer to replace any of these graphics with his own art work. However, this art must be created according to certain exacting specifications in either the PCX or .LBM format. Essentially, if you are not a Update Information As of June 11, the most recent version of Unlimited Adventures for the IBM is Version 1.1. This version includes the text file containing the «Designer's Guide Supplement A Technical Manual for Adventure Design.\" SSI will exchange version 1.1 disks for version 1.0 disks. Version 1.1 and the text file are also available on America On-Line, CompuServe, and GEnie, as well as other major networks. Also available are numerous adventures designed by other users, as well as original art work created for use with the product. Pana 56 Computer Gaming World "


"GREED IS GOOD. ATM RAGS TO RICHES e or move thy shakes and takes to a liceu He who ends up with the most toys wins. It can all be yours--the cars, yachts, planes and other big time toys that will make you the righteous ruler of conspicuous consumption. But it does take some savvy moves, a few dirty tricks, and, oh yeah, a little hard work. Welcome to the Financial Markets simulation game of movers, shakers and takers. It's a fastpaced program that lets you become the master of your entrepreneurial destiny as you climb the slippery Wall Street ladder to financial success--the higher you get, the higher the stakes. So go ahead, get bullish on greed-it feels good! RAGS TO RICHES MS ma \" Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 Circle Reader Service #68 1993 Interplay Productions, Inc. All rights reserved. Rags to Riches is a trademark of Interplay Productions, Inc. To order RAGS TO RICHESTM, call 1-800-969-4263, or see your local retailer. "


"VKNG D) SOFTWARE, INC. Adventure/Role-Playing Past IBM Mac IBM Mac REALMS OF RKANU IBM Mac 19 19 ea. 49 Pools of Darkness Prophecy of the Shadow Quest for Glory! (VGA) Quest for Glory II Quest for Glory III Ragnarok Realms Realms of Arkania Red Crystal Return to Zork 19 DQ Ultima VI Ultima VII Forge of Virtue Ultima Vil Part 2 Ultima Trilogy! Ultima Trilogy 2 Ultima Underworld Ultima Underworld 2 Uncharted Waters Warriors of Legend Wizardry Trilogy Wizardry 4 Wizardry 5 Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7 (Crusaders) Wing Commander Secret Mission I & II Wing Commander I Deluxe Wing Commander II Special Operations 1 Special Operations 2 Speech Pack Wing Commander III X-Wing gwa Hint Books 12 10-12 Present A-Train: Official Strat. Guide AD&D Clue Books Avatar Adventures Bard's Tale III Chaos Strikes Back Chuck Yeager Handbook Civilization Clouds of Xeen Dagger of Amon Ra Darklands Dungeon Master Realms of Arkania Sir-Tech breaks off from the Wizardry line & brings another great role playing adveni ture. Utilizes excellent graphics and sound. Very hot item! IBM $37 . Nom 5 Lemmings: Wicompanion disk 15 Lord of the Rings Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes 10 Lucasfilm Air Combat Lucas Arts Adv Game Book Harpoon Battlebook Heaven & Earth: Strat. Guide 12 Magic Candle 2 Martian Dreams Might & Magic Official Guide Might & Magic Ill Patriot Official Surat Guide Planet's Edge Pools of Darkness Powermonger Official Surat Populous 1 & 1 O. Strat. Book 12 Quest for Clues: Book of Orbs 11 Quest for Clues: Man of Swords II Quest for Clues 3 & 4 16 en Railroad Tycoon Ragnarok Strat Guide Rex Nebular Ringworld Run 5 Magazine 1-17 Secret of Monkey Island I & II 10 a Sherlock Holmes Sierra Hint Books Sim Earth Official Strat. Guide 12 Sim Life: Official Strat. Guide 12 Star Control 2 Starflight I & II Sur Trek 25th Anniversary 10 Strike Commander Guide Stunt Island Guide Summoning Ultima: Oficial Book Ultima III-VI 9 es Ultima VII Ultima VII Part 2 Ultima VII & Underworld II Ultima Underworld I & II 10 ca V for Victory #1 Battle Book Vel of Darkness Wing Commander I & II Guide 12 Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7 Hint Book IBM Mac AD&D Starter Kit 31 AD&D Collector's Edition 39 . AD&D Collector's Edit. 2 43 AD&D: Unlimited Advent. 37 5/93 Bards Tale 31 . Bards Tale Constr. Set 32 Betrayal at Krondor Black Crypt Castles Northern Camp Castles!! Challenge of Five Realms 34 . Champions of Kry 19 . Conquests of the Longbow 42 42 Curse of the Azure Bonds 1537 Darklands Art Disk w.HB Darklands MPE Dark Queen of Krynn 3137 Darkside of Xeen 42 . Dark Sun: Shattered Lands 4/93 11/93 Greylles Camp. 4/93 . Daughter of Serpents 32 . Death Knights of Krynn 19 . Dragonlance Collec. Ed. 13 . Eric the Unready Eye of the Beholder Eye of the Beholder 2 37 . Eye of the Beholder 3 42 Four Crystals of Trazere 34 Gateway Savage Frontier 31 . Gemfire Gryphon Master of Havlar 11/93 . Heimdall Inca Inindo King's Quest IV King's Quest V (VGA) King's Quest VI King's Ransom Legacy Legacy of Necromancer Legend of Kyrandia Legends of Drakla Legends of Valor 37 Lord of the Rings Lord of the Rings 2 Lost Vikings Lure of Temptress Magic Candle 2 Magic Candle 3 Martian Dreams Might & Magic 1 &11 Might & Magic III Might & Magic IV M&M Clouds of Xeen Merchant Colony Pirates Gold Pool of Radiance NOON wasasa sasa wanaSSTUNGESSO 37 . . . IBM Mac Alone in the Dark Amazon 38 Batman Returns Blue Force: Next of Kin Spring Carmen San Diego: Past . Carmen San Diego: Europe 34 Carmen San Diego: Time Carmen San Diego: USA 34 Carmen San Diego: World 34 Carmen San Diego: Deluxe 49 Carmen San Diego: Amer. Past 38 Castle of Dr. Brain Champions Classic Adv. Pak (LucasArts) Dapper of Amon Ra Deja Vu 1 & 11 Eco Quest 2 Elvira Elvira 2 Freddy Pharkas Heart of China Indy Jones/Last Crusade Indy Jones/Fate of Atlantis 39 Leisure Suit Larry Trilogy Leisure Suit Larry! Leisure Suit Larry 5 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes 42 Lost Treasures of Infocom 42 Lost Treasures of Infocom ll 37 The Manhole Maniac Mansion 2 SpringOut of this World Police Questi Police Quest 2 Police Quest 3 Rocketeer w/Sound Source Savage Empire Sea Rogue Seal Team We Veil of Darkness This gothic nightmare is not for the faint hearted. Plunge into a maze of vampires, werewolves and zombies accompanied with chilling graphics and sound FIX IBM $37 BBHHHH Spellcasting 301 Strike Commander Speech Pack Uninvited (Windows) Veil of Darkness Waxworks Willy Beamish Wolfenstein/Spear Des. 42 37 Future 37 37 3937 1537 Hardware 37 32  X-Wing Pilot X-wing. A-wing, or Y. wing against the Imperial Empire. Includes combat training tours of duty, promotions, decorations, replay camera. Digitized music and dialogue from the movie. Must have! IBM $42 Savage Empire Secret of Monkey Island Secret of Monkey Island 2 Secret of the Silver Blades Shadowgate Shadowgate (Windows) Shadowlands Shadow Sorcerer Spellerat Spoils of War The Summoning Tales of Magic Treasures Savage Frontier Ultima IV Ultima V 42 5/93 IEGACU 12 Adlib APS 2001 Cobra Joystick 52 CH-Flightstick CH.Virtual Pilot Flight Yoke 2000 Gravis Eliminator Gamecard 29 Gravis Joystick Gravis Pro Gravis Ultrasound 130 Pilot Control Stand 21 Pro Audio Spectrum-16 210 Pro Audio Spectrum Plus 145 Sound Blaster ASP 16 235 SoundBlaster Pro SoundBlaster Pro Basic 150 SoundBlaster Microchannel 269 Thunderboard Thrust Master flight stick 69 Thrust Master Pro 114 Thrust Master Rudder Pedal 109 Thrust Master Throttle 79 Thrust Master TSR's September Specials 180 IBM \"M Dungeon Master Scrolls Elvira 1 & 11 Empire Deluxe Strat. Guide Eye of the Beholder 2 F-15 Strike Eagle III Guide Falcon Air Combat Falcon 3 Strategic Guide Global Conquest: Guide widisk Great War Planes Gunship 2000 Strategy Guide Jetfighter II Strat. Guide Legend of Kyrandia Legends of Valor  ArmourGeddon Bad Blood Battletech Powerhits Buck Rogers Buek Rojus 2 Breach 2 Cyberspace Dune Dune Il Epic Elite Plus Flashback Free DC Gateway 38 . Hard Nova Jonny Crash Fall . Leather Goddesses Phobos 2 46 Legions of Krella/Star Legions 37 6/93 Mantis Speech Pack Martian Memorandum 30 . Mechwarrior 2 Megatraveller Megatraveller 2 Nova 9 Out of this World Planet's Edge Powerhits: Sci-Fi Privateer Protostar: War on Frontier Rex Nebular MPE Ringworld: Revenge Patri Rise of the Dragon (VGA) Space Hulks Space Quest 1-11 Space Quest 111 Space Quest IV Space Quest V Spelljammer Star Control 2 Starflight 1& 1 16 ca. 37 ca Star Trek 25th Anniversary 36 Star Trek Next Generation 30 Strike Commander Speech Pack Terminator 2029 Twilight: 2000 Ultrabots 38 ..... A.T.A.C. A Line in the Sand Champions of Krynn Centurion Death Knights of Krynn Eye of the Beholder F-16 Combat Pilot Int. Sports Challenge Links/Bountiful Course Disk MBT. Cen. Germany . Overrun Secret of Monkey Island I Sim City Add-ons 1 & 2 Space Quest IV Starflight I & II Stratego Test Drive II: Supercars Treasures of Savage Frontier Ultima VI Wing Commander 1 BABBBH.2 Legacy . . You've just inherited a home from your evil ances tors. Explore over 400 rooms of terror in a desperate struggle to stay alive. Excellent graphics and sound FIX IBM $34 Latest and Greatest Battles of Destiny Conquered Kingdoms Dune II F-15 III Front Page Sports: Football Mercenaries Pacific War Star Control II Ultima Underworld II V for Victory Series 16 ea. . aan ... "


"For information and release dates To place orders in U.S. and Canada Fax 1-(404) 840-7925 SAME DAY SHIPPING on items in stock. Hours: Mon-Fri 10am-10pm EST (6am-7pm PST). UPS Rates: Ground: $5.00 3-day Air: $6.00 2-Day Air: 7.00 AK & HI: 12.50 COD Add: 5.00 Overseas: Avail. Mail Rates: AK & HI: 6.00 Canada: 6.00 Overseas: Avail. Prices are subject to change so please call first! PHONE: (404) 840-7906 24 HR. FAX: (404) 840-7925 2890 Lake Colony Drive, Suite 12, Norcross, GA 30071 Please have credit card ready! Open Saturdays 10-5 for your convenience. Strategy Pre-WWII IBM Mac 22 FOA-VICTORY IBM Mac 42 Red Storm Rising Classic Shadow President Shuttle Special Forces Utopia SimLife SimLife (Windows) Solitaire (Windows) Solitaires Journey Spoils of War Stunt Island Super Tetris Super Tetris (Windows) Tristan Utopia Virtual Reality Studio 2 Wacky Funsters Ween: The Prophecy Wordtris Sci-Fi  IBM Mac Ambush Ancient Art of War Skies 37 Blue and the Grey 593 Caesar Centurion Civil War Vol. 1.2 or 3 Cohort 2 Conquered Kingdoms Conquest of Japan Discovery of Columbus Genghis Khan Gettysburg Gold of the Americas L'Empereur Liberty or Death Merchant Colony No Greater Glory Nobunaga's Ambition 2 Paladin Prelude to judand P.T.O. Rampart Red Baron (VGA) Mission Builder Romance of 3 Kingdoms 42Romance of 3 Kingdoms 2 42 . EHHHHBB Sports Empire Deluxe This is the modern version of the award-winning EMPIRE. Now with Super VGA, digitized sound FIX, network & modem capability, scenario editor, and more. A must! IBM $37 37 6/93 28 38 Battlefield 2000 Breach 2 Cyber Empires Fireteam 2200 Global Effect Imperium Mantis Speech Pack Mechamander Mercenaries Mercenaries2 Reach for the Stars Robosport (Windows) Rules of Engagement Rules of Engagement 2 Second Conflict (Windows) Space Inc Spaceward HO! (Windows) Spaceward HO! (DOS) Spectre Star Legions Star Legions 2 Theatre of War SVGA When Two Worlds War 16 37 16 . . 28 37 31 . . 4-D Boxing All Amer. College Ftbl 92 Andretti's Racing Challenge ATP Tennis Bill Elliot Nascar Car and Driver V for Victory: Market Garden The most popular WWII series in gaming software adds another proud product. Simulates Allied airborne invasion of Germany in 1944. SVGA graphics required. IBM/Mac $43 IBM Mac Complete PGA Tour Golf 31 . Earl Weaver Baseball . 31 Earl Weaver Baseball !! 16 . Front Pe Sports Football 42 . Front Pg Sports: Baseball 3793 . Front Pg Sports: Bsktball 93 . Games: Summer Challenge 35 Games: Winter Challenge 35 Grand Prix Grand Slam Bridge 11 Hardball 3 MLBPA Player Disk 15 Stadium Disk Hockey League Sim 1 29 Indy 500 Jack Nicklaus Sig Ed. Golf 42 Course Disk #2 John Madden Football I 31 Jordan Flight Links Links 386 Pro Mauna Kea Crse. Disk 19 MicroLeague Baseball 4 33 NCAA College Football 92 37 NFL Challenge NFL Video Pro Football 47 PGA Tour Golf PGA Tourn. Crse. Dsk. 15 PGA Tour Golf (Windows) 37 PGA Tourn. Crse. Disk 15 Pool Shark Pro League Baseball Power Hits: Sports Tony LaRussa Ult. Baseball 19 Add-On Disks Tony LaRussa 2 92 Stats Disk ALINL Stadiums Fantasy Draft Wayne Gretzky Hockey2 36 Hockey League Sim. Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 37 Wilson Pro Golf World Circuit 32 32 34 6/9337 37 37 . . . 19 Dogs of War Warlords Enhanced Warlords II Waterloo 6/93 IBM Mac 43 20 30 8/93 31 37 . . 32 World War II V for Victory, Mkt. Garden V for Victory: Casserine Pass V for Victory: Stalingrad Victory at Sea Warlords Western Front ww II: Battles of Pacifie ... General 5793 Modern # A Train 4242 Construction Ser 24 24 Air Bucks Are We There Yet! Battles of Destiny Battle Chess 22 32 Battle Chess (Windows) Battle Chess 4000 (VGA) 32 . BattleChess 4000 (SVGA) 37 . Buzz Aldrin's Race to Space 42 . Caesar's Palace Caesar's Palace (Windows) 18 . Chessmaster 3000 34 . Chessmaster 3000 (Windows) 43 Civilization Civilization Master Edition Classic 5 IQ 30 Classic 5 (Windows) Club Racquetball Command HQ Classic Design Your Train Warlords Enhanced This classic wargame has been on top of CGW's Reader Poll for 2 years. Addictive medieval strategy game with 1-8 human computer players. A+ rating. IBM $19 35 IBM Mac Design Your RR Design Your Landscape 57 Dominant Species Dominion 9/93 . Eco Quest 2 El Fish Empire Deluxe Eric The Unready Facetris II Flight Sim 4.0 Sound and Graphics Global Conquest Goblin Grandest Admiral Grand Slam Bridge Heaven and Earth Hong Kong Mahjong Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Hoyles/Classic Incredible Machine Ishido Lemin More Lemmings & Game More Lemmings Lemmings 2 Lexi-Cross Life & Death 11 Lost Admiral Lost Admiral Enhanced 12/93 Moo, Monopoly Deluxe DOS/Win 37 Origin FIX Screen Saver 25 Perfect General 38 WWII Scenario Disk 22 Great Battles 20th Cen. 25 Perfect General Enhanced 8/93 Pinball Windows Pool Shark Populous 16 Populous 2 World Editor 3/93 Powermonger WWI Scenario Disk 3/93 Power Politics Power Hits: Movies RR Tycoon Classic Reach for the Skies Keyboard Overlays A-10 Tank Killer A.T.P. Aces of the Pacific B-17 Flying Fortress C. Yeager Air Combat F-15 Strike Eagle II F-117A Nighthawk Falcon 3.0/3.0.1 Flight Simulator 4.0 Jetfighter I and II Megafortress Secret Weapons Luftwaffe  21 28 CD-ROM   19 42 Aces of the Pacific WWII: 1946! RAF in the Pacific Aces Over Europe IQ Campaign Disk! Action North Atlantic Action Stations v32 Data Disk Air Raid Pearl Harbor Air Warrior B-17 Flying Fortress Banzai Battletank Barbarossa Bismarck Cumpaign 37 Carriers at War Const. Kit 30 Carrier Strike Expansion Disk #1 Clash of Steel 4/932 . Fleet Commander 6193 . Fleet Med German Raiders Atlantic Grand Ficet 39 Great Noal Battles Super Ships Atlantic 19 Scenario Builder America/Atlantic High Command 44 High Cmd. Enhan. SVGA 5/93 In Harm's Way 39 Mala Storm 39 Marianas Turkey Shoot 26 . MBT Central Germany MBT Kursk 39 Midway New World Order 2793 Pacific Theater Op. 5/93 . Pacific War Panzer Burcles 26 29 Patton Strikes Back Reach for the Skies River Plate Rommel North Africa Second Front Secret Weapons Luftwaffe DO-335 plane disk HE 162 P-38 P-80 Seventh Fleet Silent Service 2 Silent Service 2 Classic 22 Task Force 1942 Their Finest Hour/Bulhwks. 44 Third Reich 28 V for Victory Utah Beach 433 7 V for Victory Velikiye Luki 43 43 42 .... 32 47 7th Fleet AT.P. A 10 Warthog 12/93 A Line in the Sand ATAC Air Force Commander Allied Forces Comanche: Max Overkill Expansion Disk Expansion Disk 2 Conflict: Korea Conflict: Middle East Crisis in the Kremlin F-117A Nighthawk (VGA) F-15 Il Classic FISI F.15 Hl Voice Commander F. 19 Voice Commander Falcon 3.0 Operation: Fighting Tiger 25 Falcon MC Flight Sim 40 Flight Planner Sound & Graphics Rescue 911 Scenery Design Global Effect Gunship 2000 Campaign Disk Halls of Montezuma Harpoon v1.3 Battleset 2 or 3 Battleset 4 Harpoon Designer Series Harpoon Scenario Editor 25 Harpoon Challenger Pak SE 49 Harpoon !! Harrier Assault Jet Fighter 2 Add on disk JF2 wladd on disk Jump Jet jump jet \"Ace Pack\" KGB MI Tank Platoon MacArthurs War Megafortress Mission Disk 1 or 2 Megafortress Megapack Pacific Islands II Patriot 47 .  57 57 .   ... Risk 12 Roads to Gettysburg The 7th Guest Amazing Universe Battle Chess Battle Chess Enhanced Blade Buzz Aldrin's Race Space Campaign Case of Cautious Condor Challenge of Five Realms Chessmaster 3000 Conquest of the Longbow Creepy Castle Cyberspace Dagger of Amon Ra Dark Sun Destimation-Mars Dune Eco Quest Great Naval Barcles Gunship/Midwinter Guy Spy Iron Helix Jones in the Fast Lane King's Ransom King's Quest V The Legend of Kyrandia Loom Lost Treasures Infocom Lost Treasures Inlocom il M-1 Tank Platoon Carriers at War Construction Kit This kit allows modification of existing CAW scenarios or the creation of new scenarios. New scenarios includeWake Island, Guadalcanal, and Tarawa. IBM/Mac $37 Risk (Windows) Sargan V Scrabble Deluxe (Windows) Sharif On Bridge Sharif On Bridge (Windows) Shuttle SimAnt . Magnetic Scrolls Maniac Mansion 2 Mantis Manhole Enhanced Murder Makes Strange Deadfellows North American Indians Pacific Islands Pacific Islands II Prince of Persia The Secret of Monkey Island 47 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe 57 Sharif on Bridge Sherlock Holmes Cons. Des. 1 43 Sherlock Holmes Cons. Det 1143 Shutde Spaceship Warlock Space Quest IV Saar Trek 25th Anniv. Edition 47 Tool Baseball Total Distortion Ultima I-V1 Bundle Ultima Undwid/Wing Co. Il Victor and Yondo Where World Carmen Deluxe 52 Willy Beamish Wing Commander+ Secret Missions 1 & 2 Wing Commander II Deluxe 47 Wing Commander/Ultima V1 57 Wolfpack ... SimCity 1. 62 .. .. SimCity (Windows) SimCity Supreme ! SimCity Supreme 11 SimCity 2000 SimEarth SimEarth (Windows) SimFarm 47 47 .... "


"im _ccomprom's Tale Scorpia Lurks In The Shadow of the Comet h, we've almost reached the end of summer. As usual, Fred is careful about whose invitation I accepted. Crash! The window breaks. off this month to the Dark Room of Colossal Cave for the Sounds like a fight outside. Let's go see what's up. Hmmm, two-toI annual grues convention. He always looks forward to this little onc odds, and the kid is taking a pounding. Definitely nor sporting. vacation. Speaking of vacations, I've heard of a nice, picturesque Of course you're going to help him (preferably with a sturdy weapon village in New England where you can spend a quiet few days. Quiet in hand!). How else are you gonna find someone to guide you through by my standards, that is. the forest? Shadow of the Comet is a neat little adventure in the Lovecraft After you pick up your camera it will be night (time of day changes tradition. This is, so to speak, the \"real stuff,\" since the game box by action rather than actual passage of time, which is handy). Too displays the imprint of Chaosium, the folks who bad Webster chickens out and leaves publish the Call of Cthulhu role-playing game. you in the woods. No matter, you can Not that Comet is a CRPG; it's strictly a tradiget to the spot yourself and take the tional adventure, however, the settings and situpictures. ations will be familiar to any Lovecraft fan. Follow the kitty and you'll find anSo, here you are, Dr. John T. Parker, British other spot not quite so congenial. Do astronomer, visiting the New England fishing vilwe hear the words \"Cthulhu\" and lage of Illsmouth in 1910. Halley's Comer is \"R'lyeh\" among others? UH-OH. So I says to him, why not invite SMITH, making its Earth fly-by in three days, but that's the antes ESA. Vou owwhat do? You're in trouble now, Dr. Parker. not the only reason you're in town. During the RUUUUNNNNN!!! comet's last pass in 1834, Lord Boleskine, another Whew! That was close. A rather deBrit, went insane while making a few celestial bilitating experience though, as the observations from the vicinity of Illsmouth. He doctor tells you when you wake in the left behind some cryptic notes (don't they almorning, Go directly to the pharmacy. Anywhere else and you'll drop ways?), and you're in town to find out just what happened. dead in your tracks (not the best ending for the game). Besides, you Illsmouth is a small place, which is just as well since the automap which is just as well since the automap want to develop those plates, right? doesn't work quite the way the manual says. Only those buildings This can be tricky, but it's really simple. You only need the first two already shaded in can be moved to automatically; no matter how from the shelf and the first two from the table (they operate in pairs many times you go to the others, they won't be named on the map, as developer and fixative). Ah, they came out nicely. First one's good. and you can't go to them directly. After taking a look around your Second one's good. Third one...oops! Thump! temporary lodgings and reading Pity the plate broke when you fainted. Then again, everything you can, a stroll maybe it's better that way. Now that you've recovered, through town is in order. The town hall is a good place to pick perhaps you should have a talk with Juggs about all this. Hmmm. He's not at work. Is he home? Why is that up some info, especially if you robed figure leaving the house, and why is the door can get on Juggs' good side. Come back here later for a better locked? Better keep an eye on this one. chance to snoop around. How convenient of him to leave the key. Inside, be sure to find all three statues. When you get to the living Some places (mostly people's room, keep in mind that some things can be replaced homes) you'll never be able to get into, but it's wise to know just with others, while some things need to be put back where everything is anyway. And where they came from. it's such a nice day, how about a Voila! A secrer door opens, and in the next room is walk in the woods? The automap doesn't work here (it's just for the Juggs. No, he isn't dead, yer. He has some final instructions for you town), but while a little confusing, you can't really get lost. Remember before he passes on, poor fellow. Yes, you do have to read the to pick up everything you can during your constitutional. (shudder) Necronomicon, but put it right back when you're done! Back in Illsmouth, be sure to catch the Gypsies' act before Baggs Getting out of here safely is the next priority. Be very careful how (the local police) runs them out of town. Nice guy, Baggs. Well, so you walk through town and do not use your automap. In some much for that. With all the information you've picked up by now, it's by now it's dir directions, you'll run into Baggs, and that will be the end of it for you time to get some stuff out of the steamer trunk and go to work on it. (and maybe the world). The important thing is to mark the right spot on the other) map you Once you've made it safely to your rooms, you don't have to worry have, because that's where Boleskine went last time. It isn't hard, about Baggs for a while. Read the message, then pay a visit to especially if you search carefully. Underhouse, who has even more things to tell you (few of them You've had a busy day; how about relaxing in the local tavern with th cheery). a cold one? Ya might even meet some of the locals there, but I'd be So let's think about getting into the Mayor's safe. First, you'll need Page 60 Computer Gaming World "


"nly the new UltraSound card adds unbelievable audio realism to your PC games, at such a low price. Using Wave Table Synthesis, UltraSound delivers 16-bit, 44.1 kHz true CD quality stereo sound unmatched by all ULTRASOUND ordinary and 16-bit FM based sound cards. Wave Table Synthesis gives you true-to-life instrument CRM sounds and sound effects. Suggested retail price, $199.00. UltraSound can place you in the center of the action with our exclusive Gravis Holographic 3-D sound\". The most realistic and interactive experience that will totally change the way you play the game! So ask for UltraSound with Wave Table Synthesis the ultimate in audio realism. So advanced it sets a new standard for price and performance. UltraSound is compatible with applications supporting Ad Lib, SoundBlaster\", Windows 3.1, MPC, General MIDI, and popular CD ROM titles. In stores now, check with your dealer. Advanced For information call: 1-604-431-5020 1-604-431-5155 (fax) Computer Technology Ltd. All brands and trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Circle Reader Service #35 GRAVIS ULTRASOUND THE HOTTEST SOUND AROUND "


"nem a bible (because the number you're thinkhelp if you say the right thing. ing of is not the right one; some things Once Baggs is gone, you'll would be just a trifle too obvious, eh?). learn about some interesting Know anyone in town who might have this items in Curtis' shed. book? With a little quid pro quo, you could Odd how the place is locked get your hands on it. Then, you have to up, but with the right items deal with the city clerk. you can break in. Poor Curtis. Manipulating the conversation correctly There's no time to mourn will get you upstairs (such a nice view up him, however. Search for the there). The safe is pretty obvious, and you items you came for, then head don't have that many numbers to try, but to the forest. Finding the right fool around too much and you'll be caught. spot to use the feather can be a Wow, there sure is a lot of nastiness drag, but keep at it and it will under the surface of this small town. And work somewhere. guess who's been elected to clean it up? After the Q&A session with Heh! So you better get a move on-to the lighthouse, perhaps? Of the Indian (note: Underhouse is incorrect; the Howler is not Nyarcourse, the guards aren't going to let you through and will kill you if lathotep), it's time to take out the cult leader. This isn't too difficult. you persist. But they aren't very bright, and you might be able to fool Just don't pick up any nitro (boom!). And that puddle in the dark them (you did look over everything you got from the safe, right?). room is there for a purpose. However, they won't stay fooled forever. Once you get to the top. This day passed fast, and it's night again. Now comes the strangest look around carefully and act quickly; you don't have much time. part of the game: convincing Bishop to lend you his boat. The There are a couple of things to pick up here, and then you'd better conversation path to this is not very logical, so after the first couple take off. of exchanges (start with \"looking for you\"), don't go for the obvious. When you get back from the forest, it will be night time, the perfect When you arrive at the island, look around first, then check out the time to visit the cemetery. Someone around town has the key. Brrr. sliding block puzzle. It's not as bad as it looks; only four moves are Sure is a spooky place, and it won't get better. Stroll around and see needed to solve it and open up the cave. (Hint: start with column 3.) what you can find. Then, it's down into the crypts. Inside, you only have to use two gems. Be careful where you stand You may want to map as you go along for future reference. In some and what you use this is what save games are for!). of the rooms are bats, rats or spiders. These must be avoided, as there Now, it's time for the final trip to the second cave. The lamp will is no way to kill them. In other rooms grates block your passage. stay on the second time you use it (odd, but that's how it is). This Gerring them open is part of the fun. (Hint: keep an eye on the floors cave is full of nasty critters that shamble back and forth. You just have in those critter rooms.) to move carefully and avoid getting too close to any of them. It may Two grates open only when a series of floor plates have been lit up. take some doing, but it can be done. Each set of plates has its own pattern, and a little careful experimentIn the third room are some old friends in dire straits. Helping them ing is all you need here. And be is pretty easy (how much unused stuff is left in your careful; some rooms have pits in the inventory?). Interestingly, this somehow gets rid of center. all the critters, too, so you can walk safely through the So, you've reached old Jonas at caves to the second exit that brings you right up to last. Don't just stand there listening the perfect spot for those pics of the comet (remember to him blather! Time is short, so the comer?) grab what you can and get moving. Keep that book from the old house in mind, This is where the map you made is though. You must know which four stones are the helpful. When you have Dagon on proper ones, so do the light act before you take your tail, you don't want to be runpictures of the comet. And right after the comet zips ning into any dead (very dead) by...yes friends, here he is, Mr. Y. Sothoth in person! ends. There is no time to waste here; the ritual has to be That was a little too close for comcomplered quickly. Four items should be used on the fort! It's been a busy night, and will stones. Properly done, the incantation follows autoget busier. The time has come to wipe out the evil cultists once and matically; improperly done...well, let's not think about that. for all. Since tactical nukes aren't available, you'll have to depend on Okay! Yog Sothoth has been dispelled! The world has been saved what you already have and the info you've picked up on how to use (for now). Dr. Parker can go home and astound scientists everywhere! it. (Re-read your journal if your memory needs refreshing.) (In his place, though, I think I'd keep quiet about all this. Who's really The first three are not too hard, but the fourth will take some doing, gonna believe it?) as you have to get into the ruined house. This requires a distraction (here, kitty) and some tricky maneuvering (and running!). Whew! That was a nerve-wracking one. While you rest up from Once you're inside the old place, be careful. Death traps are your exertions, remember if you need help with an adventure game you everywhere. Just keep in mind that whatever you need is always you can reach me in the following ways: somewhere close by (and save often, just in case!). In particular, there On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs is a book to read, and you may want to make your own notes as, for menu). some reason, the info is not recorded in the journal. On Genie: Visit the Games Round Table (type: Scorpia to reach At the top, things look pretty grim for our hero, but don't despair. the Games RT. Remember, second time does it. Then get out of there as fast as you can, because the place is on fire. Yes indeed, it has been a busy night By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live (and Illsmouth is rapidly becoming depopulated, heh). in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New Next morning, Baggs has a few questions for you about last night's York, NY 10028. events. Guess someone noticed all the goings-on. Underhouse can Until next time, happy adventuring! Cow STUHL Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"STRIKE 129415 TATLI. DAT WE HAD SETTE ELBERDI 0:00 RADNU OBRT INTERSTELLAR TRAVEL WDEX 0 un PRACO OTO RA CBUY ARIO W -CAL EXTRAST KLALT HAC-551POPULE DAL OG-F BUYING EQUIPMENT NN OG BEARS Low: EL BARU LAGI TWO-PLAYER PLAY 1 A 120 :15 2 DEAD 633 93 LE22 2 <BRE THREE IN THE SIDES EAT FIRE, BUG-EYED SCUM! THE CONSORTIUM OF WORLDS HAS BEEN OVERRUN BY THE VILE INSECTOID K'KISTIKS. BRUTAL OPPRESSION AND MASS SLAVERY NOW RULE WHERE ONCE THERE WAS PEACE AND HAPPINESS. A DISTRESS CALL FROM THE CONSORTIUM HAS REACHED YOU AND YOUR STRIKE SQUAD-A CREW OF SMUGGLERS, BOUNTY-HUNTERS AND RAPSCALLIONS FROM THE BACKWATERS OF THE UNIVERSE. WITH THE RIGHT SHIP. THE RIGHT TOOLS AND WEAPONS, AND FOR THE RIGHT PAY, THERE'S JUST A CHANCE THAT YOUR STRIKE SQUAD CAN HELP. WILL NOBODY STOP THE KKISTIK SLAVEMASTERS? OR WILL YOU? THIRTY MERCENARIES OF NINE RACES TO CHOOSE FROM. ALL-NEW HIGHLY INTUITIVE GAME INTERFACE. PULSING SOUNDTRACK AND INSANE DIGITIZED SOUNDS. PLAY ALONE OR WITH A FRIEND-OR AN ENEMY. Circle Reader Service #75 MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90601 Actual BM VGA screen photos "


"meuneu Conquistadors In Space Sierra Weighs Anchor With Coktel Vision's Inca by Chuck Miller n 1532, the ill equipped army of Francisco Pizarro undertook the conquest of Peru. With only 170200 conquistadors, he successfully defeated tens of thousands of Incan warriors under the leadership of Atahualpa, emperor of the Tawantinsuyu empire, a kingdom that extended from Chile to the equator. How this feeble Spanish force was able to accomplish such a monumental, though ruthless task forms the basis of the story behind Inca, Sierra's latest import from their \"French connection,\" Coktel Vision. So, Where's Your Cadillac, El Dorado? Inca transports the player back in time to the year 1525. Here one finds Huayna Capac, Atahualpa's father, the one Inca aware of the impending arrival of the conquistadors. Assured that the powers of the Incas will never fall into the hands of vages he has hidden these powers away in a safe place to await the coming of the prophesied golden one, El Dorado, destined to appear 500 years hence. The goal of El Dorado, and the player, is to INCA discover these powers and bring about the rebirth of the Inca empire. Of course, the player must face a powerful opponent in the process of fulfilling this prophecy-Aguirre, symbolizing the Spanish conquistadors, and constantly in search of wealth and material power. Lost Wealth Of The Incas in the game also disrupted the suspension of disbelief. Inca is a game rich in background, steeped in mystique, and yet, unfortunateAs a result, Inca comes across as a loosely ly, unable to fully deliver the goods. While strung together series of action sequences, i found the concept interesting and the mazes and puzzles, resulting in the appearance of a collection of games rather than a story promising, the game failed to achieve its full potential. It repeatedly single title. Yes, the story does emerge, but drew me into the story, mostly mostly between segments of play. through the puzzle segments and dramatic scenes, and then Pen And Inca dropped me abruptly, usually As indicated, Inca's presentation is solid. upon reaching the action Its graphics are of obvious quality, as witportions of the game. nessed by the fact that it was awarded Best The problem, though difGraphics at the Supergames Show Paris, ficult to definc, is definitely 1992. Images, rendered in 256-color VGA, not with Inca's presentaare rich and mood enhancing. Video caption, as it is a visual and tured actors are fluid and lifelike in their audible treat. Where Inca movements on screen, demonstrating some failed to fulfill my expectations of the best video rotoscoping I have seen to was in the general flow of the story. date. Yet, as good as the graphics are, and When it should have smoothly moved with as much space consumed on one's from one segment to the next, I found hard drive as Inca requires (a full 17 MB), instead what I considered abrupt distracthere seemed to be a nota tions. Many arcade portions of the game in imagery. Many of the same animations seemed \"inserted» rather than blended into and scenes are used repeatedly during the the storyline. As such, they detracted from course of the game, especially in the space play rather than adding to it. The \"save combat segments. It would seem that the codes\" (discussed later) that great majority of the system real estate appeared after critical points required is for Inca's soundtracks and digitized audio effects. TITLE: Inca PRICE: $59.95 SYSTEM: IBM Inca Dinka Do REQUIREMENTS: 386-20MHz or better, VGA graphics, 17MB hard drive space, mouse Music and sound effects in PROTECTION: None Inca are sterling, easily making DEVELOPER: Coktel Vision them the most outstanding part PUBLISHER: Sierra On-Line of the game. If one area towers Coarsegold, CA (800) SIERRA-5 above the others in this title, it is that of audio accompaniment. Page 64 Computer Gaming World "


"DBI) Just listening to the game during the first if one starts playing Inca on one computer, few minutes of play will justify the volume and then installs it on another, the previous of space it requires on one's system. codes will be invalid. Actually, I am probably biased as I have been a fan of new-age music for some time Gallons Of Galleons now. Thus, Inca's exceptional new-age, jazz-style soundtrack, created using authenGame play is comprised of puzzles, mazes and action sequences. Puzzles are pritic Inca instruments (pan pipes and drums), provided me with some real listening pleamarily of the logic and object manipulation sure. In fact, the music is so popular overvaricty. For example, using one object on seas that many radio stations in Europe are another (such as a key on a locked cabinet) playing selections from Inca as part of their will achieve the desired results. regular playlist. Fortunately, the mazes The only negative factor I detected with employed in Inca are made the game's audio was that it was not always bearable through a builtin sync with the graphics, especially when in automapping feature. characters were talking. The audio track Just hit the right mouse often ended before the accompanying text button and a map will finished being displayed. appear, indicating all the locations already visited and each doorway Familiar Faces encountered. Inca's interface is well-designed, even if Action sequences also play inadequately explained in the documentaan important role in Inca, comtion, and employs full mouse control with prised of two varieties: space combat and no typing required. If preferred, a joystick ground combat. The space combat may also be used. However, I found control sequences place the player in a Tumi with the mouse more accurate. Fighter with several weapons at his or her One's inventory is manipulated in a disposal. In ground combat, the player has fashion similar to that of Sierra's in-house only a single energy weapon, with all action products, accessed by moving the pointer to occurring in the game's mazes. the top of the screen. This, however, is the With a few exceptions, I found Inca of only interface similarity. Setting game average difficulty. Only two puzzles and options is by hotkey, except when one one arcade sequence were cause for any returns to the main control room between head scratching. \"quests.\" Here one can begin the next quest, receive instruction from Huayna Capac, check out the \"Encyclopedia Incanica» (an on-line reference work explaining the Inca terminology employed), play with the pan pipes (sort of an Incan xylophone), and access the game's soundtracks by means of cueing up an on-screen «tape player.» The save game provision in Inca is, in my estimation, very poor. One can only \"save\" their progress at certain points. This is accomplished by means of a \"save code\" comprised of cight random numbers provided by the game. As such, each installation of Inca will result in a different set of codes. So, Does Inca Stinka? Not necessarily, depending on one's gaming experience and preferences. While Inca is an interesting title, there is not enough substance to satisfy the seasoned gamer (who can expect to derive about eight to twelve hours of play-not much considering its retail price). The story line is weakly implemented, and there is insufficient reward for successfully completing the game (more a sense of relief mingled with some disappointment). Inca is not a dismally boring game by any means, yet it is not all that exciting either. I do admire the respect and appreciation paid to the ancient Incas in this title. It was handled well, increasing the player's awareness of this people's unique heritage and, as mentioned several times before, the soundtrack is superb (I went around for most of the day humming its enchanting music). Still, these factors do not outweigh the inherent weaknesses. In spite of its excellent presentation and strong concept, I really did not find myself challenged by Inca, or sufficiently caught up in its story. To whom then will Inca appeal? Action aficionados will most likely be disappointed with the low level of skill required in the game. On the other hand, the puzzles are also only of modest difficulty. What this amounts to is a game that will not strongly appeal to either action gamers or adventurers. Its main audience will most likely be gaming ncophytes: those who are new to computer games or are only casual players. So, while there are those who have really enjoyed Inca (it does offer a modest degree of gaming pleasure), for most I would recommend investing one's dollars elsewhere, possibly in one of Sierra's other, more satisfying adventures. And, while at it, make sure to get a copy of the Inca soundtrack on music CD (available from Sierra for just $12.99, plus tax, shipping and handling). It offers a listening experience one should not miss. Cow You're tucky, youngster. September 1993 Page 65 "


"Take Advantage of Our $5.00 Off Coupon As Well As Our Super Sales Specials! Remember, We Get Them in First and Get Them Out FAST! Call Us Now! The Original Multi-Media PC Sound Standard! Includes Groliers Encylcopedia on CD Rom! FLIGHTSTICK BLASTER The SoundBlaster Pro Deluxe adds the powerful dimension of stereo sound, CD ROM interface and a multimedia mixer to all the great features of the original SoundBlaster! SoundBlaster Pro Deluxe.. .139. SoundBlaster 16 ASP.... ...$249. Scenery Upgrade: G. Canyon ..22 Scenery Upgrade: Tokyo Japan 22 Scooter's Magic Castle ..........33 Scrabble Deluxe Windows .....30 Seal Team ........................40 Search for the King ............... 27 Secret of Monkey Island Il.....40 Secret Weapons Disk 1 or 2 .22 Shadow Caster.... Shadow President Shanghai li: Dragon's Eye .....32 Sharif on Bridge ....................32 Sharif on Bridge for Windows 32 Shuttle Space Flight Sim Ant ....... Sim Ant Windows Sim City ... IBM DISKS Momononamenomaa ...43 ...25 Rated #1! Readers Choice Winner 1992 The FlightStick is designed to look and feel precisely like a real jet joystick. Its ergo dynamic design and precision engineering help you shoot faster and score higher. Its tough construction makes it the last jetstick you'll ever buy! CH Products $39. 22 37 1.47 4-D Boxing A Train ....... A-Train Construction Set ... A.T.P.: Flight Commander Aces of the Pacific .......... Aces of Pacific:WW2 1946 1 22 Aces over Europe ............. .47 Action Sports Soccer ....... Air Dual Flight Simulator .. Air Force Commander Air Traffic Controller 37 Air Warrior ............. Airbucks 20 ONNOM Sim City Windows Sim Earth Sim Earth Windows Sim Farm. Sim Life .................. Slater & Charlie Go Camping Solitaire's Journey ..... Sound, Graphics Air Upgrade Space Hulk ... Space Quest 5 Spaceward Ho! Spear of Destiny Special Operations 1 Special Operations 2 Spellcasting 301 SPROUTI ......... Star Control 2 Star Trek 25th Anniversary ....37 Starter Kit ..... Storybook Weaver Street Fighter II .. Strike Commander Speech Strip Poker 3 ................... Strip Poker 3 Disk 1 thru 6 Super Jeopardy Super Ships of the Atlantic Super Space Invaders. Super Tetris Windows.... .37 ..43 ...48 37 ..32 37 33 3555333 Perfect GenBattles 20 Century 27 Pilots Power Tools Pinball Windows.. Pirates Gold Police Quest 3 VGA Populous 2 .......... Positronic Bridge ............ SON Animation Studio .............19 Animation Studio/Windows ....79 Armored Fist 33 Ashes of Empire ................. AutoWorks ......................... Bandit Kings of Ancient China 37 Banff Springs BannerMania 25 Barbie's Design Studio .... Barbie's Fashion Design/Color 27 Bart Simpson's Arcade Game 32 Batman Returns ..........43 Battles of Destiny 37 Beat the House 32 Beauty & The Beast Print Kit ..17 Betrayal at Krondor ... 43 Blue Force ........... ....... Body Illustrated Dual..... Bridge 7.0 ... 32 Bridge Master Windows Caesar ....... Campaign Mission Disk 1 ...22 Carmen Space Deluxe ...........50 Carrier Strike ................... Carriers at War .. ........43 Carriers War: Construction Kit 37 Castle of Dr. Brain VGA .32 Castles 2 .......... .... Celtic Legends ........ .......32 Challenge of the 5 Realms ....42 Champions Chess Maniac 5 PC............43 Civilization Master Player's ....47 Clash of Steel ............. Coaster .................. . ...... Cobra Mission ................ Cohorts 2 Comanche: Maximum Overkill Comanche Mission Disk 1. Comanche:Mission Disk 2 ......28 Combat Classics ...............32 Conflict in Korea Conquered Kingdoms .... Conquered Kingdoms Disk 1...27 Creepers Cuckoo Zoo 33 Daemonsgate Dark Lands Dark Size of Xeen .... Dark Sun: Shattered Lands ...50 Darkseed ... Daughter of Serpents ...........33 Deja Vul & II:Casebook of Ace Harding ........ .... . Design Your Own Rallroad ......37 -32 LUND MAYAN 20 Virtual Pilot puts firepower right under your thumbs, gives you advanced aileron and ele. vator trim controls and extra throttle control for high-powered games. Discovery:Steps of Columbus 37 Dune 2: Building of a Dynasty Eagle Eye Mysteries EarthQuest ............. Eco Quest 2 .... Eco-Saurus El-Fish ........... Elvira 2:Jaws of Cerberus Empire Deluxe Eric the Unready European Racer ............ F-117A Stealth VGA ........ Falcon 3.0 ..... . Falcon 3.0 :Fighting Tiger Family Fun Pack ...... . Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise 33 Financial Workshop 2.0 ..... Flashback Flight 685 Flight 701 Freddy Pharkas .. Frederick Pohl's: Gateway Front Page Sports: Football Game Maker Gary Grigsby's Pacific War Gearworks .......... Gods .. . Grammar Gremlins ...... Grand Slam Bridge 2 Graphic Library Sampler Great Britain Scenery ...... Hardball 3 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk ... Hardball III Players Disk ........ Harpoon Harpoon Chall. SIGNATURE Harrier Assault Headline Harry VGA Heaven and Earth Hired Guns .......... .... Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Hoyle's Book of Games 3 Hoyles Classic Card Games ..32 Inca ..42 Incredible Machine 32 Indiana Jones IV Atlantis .......40 Innocent Until Caught ... International Golf Champ. .... Ishido' Pack .............. Island of Dr. Brain VGA .. Jack Nicklaus Tour Disk Jack Nicklaus' Unlimited Golf .37 Jeopardy 25th Anniversary .....14 Jet Fighter 2 Bundle ..47 Jordan In Flight ... Jump Jet Kid Pix .......... Kid Works Kid Works 2... King's Quest 6 VGA King's Ransom.. Koshan Conspiracy .... L'Empereur .........................37 Lands of Lore Throne Chaos ..37 Legacy Realm of Terror ..........43 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA .......27 Life & Death II: The Brain ......32 Links 386 Course Disk Belfry 22 Links 386 Pro ......................36 Links Course Barton Creek ....18 Links Course Bayhill ....22 Links Course Bountiful ..........22 Links Course Firestone Links Course Dorado Beach ..18 Links Course Disk:Pinehurst 22 Links Course: Mauna Kea .....22 Lost Admiral .... Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes 47 Lost in L.A. Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 ..32 Lost Vikings ...... Lunar Command ................. MM 2 Day of the Tentacle Mantis: Experimental Fighter 43 Mario is Missing ...... Mario Teaches Typing... Math Blaster Mystery .... Megalomania ........... Mercenaries ..... 40 Mickey's ABC's 2.0 ........ Might & Magic 4 Clouds Xeen 43 Mike Ditka Football Naval Battles America Atlantic 22 Naval Battles:Scenario Builder 22 New Print Shop ..................... New Print Shop Companion ....32 Ninja Turtles:Arcade Game Ninja Turtles: Manhattan. ....32 Number Munchers Operation Light Storm Operation Neptune ... Out of This World P.T.O. Pacioli 2000 V.2 Patriot PC USA Pack Perfect General Not a Clone! Genuine Soundblaster chipset means 100% SoundBlaster compatability. Includes High Performance Speakers, An Ergonomically Designed Joystick & Gameport. Software includes Voxkit Voice Utilities, Talking Parrot. FM Intelligent Organ, Jukebox for Windows 3.1 & Castle Wolfenstein By Bondwell....... By Bondwell. ..........$99. 22 43 CH Products. $59. Aircraft & Adventure Factory ...32 Aircraft & Scenery Designer Airport & Facilities Directory AU's World of Discovery Algeblaster Plus ............ Alone in the Dark Alphabet Blocks ...... Amazon .... ..39 Ambush at Sorinor American Gladiators ........ Ancient Art of War Ancient Art of War in the Skies 37 Prince of Persia 2 ........... PrintShop Deluxe Windows Privateer Prophecy Putt Putt Joins the Parade Putt Putt's Fun Pack ...... Quest for Glory III Rags to Riches Railroad Tycoon Classic ........ Railroad Tycoon Deluxe ..........43 Syndicate ... Terminator 2029 Terminator Operation Scour Tetris Classic ..... Tetris Classic Windows The Lost Tribe .. The Summoning Theatre of War .. Tony Larussa Baseball 2 ........40 Tony Larussa Fantasy Draft ....16 * .43 40 ....... 18 UNOD NOISSIN Weapons Control Mark II A hands on throttle with seven Independent controls including radar mode, weapons select, way. point select and counter mesures Fully Progamable............$99. Flight Control The best joystick for Flight Simulators. Compatible with all flight simula tor packages as 2 buttonjoystick.... . . ......$69. Flight Control Pro................. $115. Rudder Pedals ............................$115. .....$115. ACM Game Card .....................$35. Thrus Call us and use your MC, Visa or Discover 800-999-7995 International 201-677-1400 Fax 201-677-9484 Methods of Payment: We accept Visa, MC, Discover Card & Money orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to clear. School. State & City purchase orders accepted. Please send $2.00 for our Mission Control Communique 24 Page catalogue (free with order) Shipping: UPS Ground ($5 minimum) / UPS Blue ($7min mum) APO & FPO ( $7 minimum) Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax orders) Send money orders or checks to:  T Rampart .. Reader Rabbit 2. Reading & Me ... Reading Adventures in Oz Realms of Arkania Red Baron VGA Return of the Phantom... RingWorld ................ Rome ..... . Rules of Engagement 2 Savage Empire ....... 40 Scenery Collection Set A Scenery Collection: Set B Scenery Enhancement Editor ..27 Scenery Upgrade Bundle Tropics & Rocks ...... Tony Larussa II AL/NL ..........19 Tony Larussa Il Fantasy Draft .16 Tony Larussa II Player Disk ....16 Tornado ................. Treehouse Tristan Pinball .... U.S. Atlas for Windows ...... Ultima 7: Forge of Virtue Ultima 7: The Serpent Isle ....50 Ultima 7:The Black Gate Ultima Unde Pt 1:Stygian Aby 50 Ultrabots ............ Unlimited Adventures ........... V for Victory Gold Juno Sword 43 V for Victory! V for Victory II:Velikiye Luki ....47 37 MISSION CONTROL, 551 Valley Road Suite 211 Dept. CGW993, Upper Montclair, NJ07043 Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! 37 "


"Order Now 800-999-7995 Now Available in Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico & Canada! International Order Line (201) 677-1400 Fax (201) 677-9484 ACCESSORIES POWERGAME BUNDLE! Over $250. Worth of Software! 5 Tests of Skill and cunning turn you computer into a powerful game machine. machine. Includes: Railroad Tycoon, Grand Prix Racing, PGA Tour Golf, Sargon V and Chuck Yeagers Air Combat! By Activision..........$46. 3.5 Head Cleaner ............... 5 1/4\" Head Cleaner.. Computer Cleaning Kit ...........2 Computer Vaccuum Kit Fax 96 by Freecom ..............69 Miracle Piano Teacher ........269 $5 SAVE! $5 CANIN Ad Lib Gold $99. CD Caddies $7. Groliers CD $99. Dinosaur (D Encylopedia $99. Sci-Fi Fantasy CD $39. 7th Ileaven (D SH1. Sports Best CD $21. S.W.O.L. CD $29. Special of the Month: $5.00 off your order (over $50) Simply send in coupon with your order! Hollobred on Sale Items! Collet papires 1/31/93 SOUNDCARDS/CD V for Victory: Utah Beach .......44 Victory III:Market Garden ........47 Virtual Reality Studio 2.0 ......57 War in the Gulf ......................34 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 .......37 When Two Worlds War Where USA Carmen Deluxe ...47 Where in the World Deluxe .....48 Where in World Carmen Diego 31 Wing Commander/Ultima 6 .....39 Wing Commander Deluxe .......50 Wing Commander ! ............ Wing Commander Speech ......17 World Circuit Grand Prix World Circuit Championship ...45 World Tour Tennis X-Wing Mission Disk 1 Discovery CD 16 bit Bundle...499 Edutainment 16 Bundle ........595 Mitsumi CD Internal Drive....239 Mitsuml w/4 CD Titles ........299 Multi-Media Starter Kit 16.....489 Pro Audio Spectrum 16.........179 Sound Blaster 16 ASP ........249 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe .....139 Sound Machine & PC Sound ..99 UltraSound Board ... .129 ThunderBoard .... IEADQUARTERS ........37 X-Wing... Zool .......... 99 & CONTROLLERS & While Supplies Last! Analog Edge Analog Plus ...... . Analog Pro Joystick ........ Analog Sabre ........... ARMER Reader's Library Reference Library Rimfira Pacific Rodney's Fun Screen Secret of Monkey Island ........ Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe 29 Seedy Rom Movie Disk ...99 Shakespeare's Complete Works 32 Shareware 1993 Shareware Overload Shareware Studio Sherlock Holmes 1, 2 or 3 Shuttle Fidit Simulator Sleeping Beauty For the Best in ADULT CD ROM. Call, write or fax Mission Control 88 So Much Share are 2 So Much Stareware. Softvare Jukebox Space Quest 4...... Star Trek 25th Anniversary 58% BBBBB 1)   a list Holtest Titles and most competitive prices. You must be 21 or over to order. 7th Guest 101 Serial Positions 1 or 2.... Adult Palate Vol. 1.... Adult Reference Library..... .....44 Adventures of Seymore Burtts .....69 Alladin and his Wonderful lamp 33 Amanda Stories CD/MPC America's Premier Shareware... 29 American Business Phonebook 29 Animals MPC Animation Fantasies 1,2 or 3. Arthur's Teacher Trouble Asian Ladies Audubon Manuals Bangkok ... Bare Assets Bamey Bear Goes to Space Bamey Bear goes to School .. Basics Electronic Cookbook Battle Chess Enhanced Beauty and the Beast Best of Vivid Bible Library Bloe Force Britannica's Family Choice Business Master Busty Babes CD PowerBar. Chess Maniac ChessMaster 3000 Classic Book Collection Clip Art Calore. Clip Art Heaven Compton's Family Choice Comptons Encyclopedia Conan the Cimmerian Cybergenic Ranger Desert Storm Desktop Publisher's Dream Disk 34 Dictionaries & Languages Digital Dreams Dinosaur Adrenture... B 999 Cits Galore Girts in Vivid 1 or 2 Goferwinde Adventure Colf Guide:California/Hawaii.......37 Grolier's Encyclopedia Gunship 2000... Hacker ... Hawail Cirts Mel Cab Hidden Obsessions Hot Pix 23 or 4 House of Games House of Sleeping Beauties Indiana Jones 4 Fate of Atlantis Island Cirts.... Jets & Props Jokes & Pranks......... Jones in Fast Lane Just Games ........ Jutland ......... Kama Sutra KGB/CIA World Factbook King's Ransom Kings Quest V Kotski Library European American Art CD 79 Library of the Future. Local Girls... Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 ...47 Lost Treasures of Infocom ... Lovely Ladies 2 ...... ......44 MacMillan Dictionary for Children 40 Mammals:A Encyclopedia ....... Marts: Experimental Fighter ...47 Hats Beacon TypingMayo Clinic Mited-Up Mother Goose MPC ...43 MM 2 Day of Tentade Monster Disk (2 disk set) Moving Fantasies Multimedia Encyclopedia 5.0 Multimedia Grammy Awards Multimedia Music. Vivaldi... My Private Collection 2 ---National Parks... North American Indians..... Officer's Bookcase P.C. Clobe PC Medic PC Pit Vol 1 2 or 3 Pentonino. Phoenit 3.0 Physical Thero Plant Doctor Port WartPrescription Drugs...... Aivate Pictures Vol. 1 .. Protostar War on the Frontier ...43 Putt Putt Joins The Parade ......39 Putt Putt's Fun Pack A Line in the Sand 19 Airbucks Air Force Commander Aircraft Adventure Factory A.T.A.C. Action Station Action Station Scenario Ad Lib Gold 1000 An American Tail Ancient Art of War Skies Auto Map AutoMap Windows AutoMap: Europe B-17 Flying Fortress Bandit Kings of An. China 29 Barbie's Glamorous Quest 19 BattleChess 4000 SVCA 32 BattleChess 4000 VGA 29 Bush Buck Adventure Business Card Maker Delxe 32 Campaign Cashbiz Command HQ Crime Does Hot Pay Crusaders of Dark Savant 29 Dark Half Darkseed Dinosaur Designer Dragon's Lair 3 Dream House Pro Dune 2 Dvorak's Top 30 Eagle Rider Elite Plus Eye of Beholder 3 Expert Pet Care F-15 Strike Eagle 11 F-15 Strike Eage III FailSafe Computer Guardian 29 Femme Fatale Flight Simulator 4 Flight Planner Forge of Virtue Geo Jigsaw Great Naval Battles Greens: Ultimate Colf Cunship 2000 VGA Heroes of the 357th Inspector Gadget 29 Knights of the Sky L'Empereur Land, Sea Air Trilogy 2 Leather Godess Phobos 2 32 Legal Letter Works Legal Letterworks Legend of Kyrandia Lemmings 2 Letter Works Lightspeed Links: Bountiful Links: Dorado Links: Pinehurst Maelstrom Mantis Martian Dreams Martian Memorandum Math Blaster Plus Windows 32 Mavis Beacon 2 Windows 32 Mavis Beacon Typing 2.0 29 Mc Gee Bundle Mickey Jigsaw w/Sound 29 MicroLeague Baseball 4 27 Monopoly Deluxe Windows 32 Mouse Mat NFL Pro League Football Ninja Gaiden II No Greater Glory Oregon Trail Deluxe Origin FX Screen Saver Paperboy 2 Personnel Readyworks Race Into Space Rex Nebular Sailing Simulator III VGA Sales Letter Works Secret Island Dr. Quandary Serpent Isle Space Quest 4 Special Forces Special Operations 2 Spoils of War Storybook Weaver Strike Commander Super Munchers Swap The Humans Timequest Tom Landry Football Time Treks Trolls Trump Castle 3 Ultima Underworld II UltraSound Vaccuum Kit Veil of Darkness What's My Angle Zoo Keeper FM Aviator Yoke....... ... Eliminator Game Card.... Flight Control Yoke ......... Flight Stick ..................... FX 2000 Gameport Automatic MCA.. Gameport Ill Automatic ... G Force Yoke ............ Gravis Analog Joystick .... Icontroller ........ .... .. Icontroller for Laptops Intruder Joystick for ..... Mach I. Mach Ill Maxximum Bundle. Maxximum Pedals.... Merlin ........ Mouse Wheel Mouse Yoke. PC Command Control .. PC Gamepad... PC Joystick Combo QS161 PC Pack Virtual Pilot ... Storm 1, 2 or 3.... Swinware 1993 Swimmware and More Talking Classic Tales Talking Schoolhouses Terrorist Camp Profiles..... The Animals The Jungle BookcKaa's Hunting ..33 The Jungle Book:Mowgli's Brother 33 The White Horse Chald .33 Time Table of Arts/Entertainment 65 Timetable Busin/Politics/Media 65 Timetable of Science & Innovation 65 Too Many Typefaces. Toolworks Reference Library 39 Total Baseball '93 Ed. Tropical Girls Twelve Roads to Gettysburg U.S. Presidents U.S. History U.S. World Atlas Ultima 1 thru 6. Ultima Under/Wing Commander 2 54 US Atas / Automap 57 Vietnam Viets..... .--Visual Fantasies Volcano Where in the World is Carmen 12 Wille Beamish Windowane Windowmaster Windows 1993 Wing Commander & Ultima 6 Wing Commander 2 Delne Wing Commander Deluxe Wing Cornelander Delure Wolfpack Women of Venus ...... World & U.S. Atlas World Atlas Dragon's Lair ........... anaan Ecstasy sk8882 PC Camepa.com Education Master Electronic Home Library Encydopedia of Clip Art Eric the Unready Erotic Encounters ErotiCafe Exotic Girls... FI1ZA Stealth/F15 Strike Engle 2.40 Family Doctor Family Education Collection -29 FAO 1.2, or 3 Future Wars Game Master... Game Pack 2. Game Pack THRUSTMASTER ACM Game Card Flight Control Pro .... Flight Control System ..... Rudder Pedals Weapons Control Mark 2...... je The Pilot's Edge allows you to 'program' your Thrustmaster Flight Control. 19 Version 1. For LucasFilm Version 2 For MicroProse Version 3. For Spectrum Holobyte $12. each or all three for $33. Mitsumi CD Rom Drive Internal 350ms with Groliers. SWOL. Chess 3000 and Family Doctor! Special Price $299. CONTROL Circle Reader Service #76 "


"< specal Report HOT LAPS AT A COOL SCHOOL by Ken Brown Bob Bondurant's 1.6 mile track can be combined with the Firebird International Raceway (at right) to form a 2.6 mile course. VISITS THE BONDURANT SCHOOL t's not everyday that computer game magazine editors get to Meanwhile CGW publisher Russell Sipe agreed to take the trip, drive hor laps at high-performance driving schools. You may and made the easy mistake of choosing me for the story since I recall in our April issue that Electronic Arts sponsored a con have automotive magazine experience and grew up next to the test to promote its Car Driver simulation, with the winner flying Quaker State. But, alas, after working for such magazines as all-expenses-paid to the Bob Bondurant School of High Popular Hot Rodding and Off-Road, I still relegate common maintePerformance Driving in Phoenix. Walter Nikolic from Atlanta, nance items, like testing the engine's PH balance and setting the Ga., was chosen at random from over 225 entries. So he locked radio presets, to the service pros at Stop-N-Go. The Club on his Mouse Wheel and flew to Pheonix for a driver's soon learned that the people at Bondurant know their cars—as ed course in hyperspeed. well they should, after being in the business for 25 years. The school began in Orange County, Calif., moved nearby to Ontario Motor Speedway, then settled for OUR MAN ON TWO WHEELS a long period at Sears Point International Raceway near San Francisco. As the school grew, Bondurant needed more track time than Sears Point allowed. So he \"packed up all his cars, and he moved to AZ.\" OF HIGH PERFORMANCE DRIVING Arizona, that is. Swimmin' pools. Rodeo stars. Cacti. To stock the new facility, Ford gave Bondurant The game's producer, Paul Grace, thought abour a Car  all the vehicles he'd need. The running total is now around 130, Driver player unleashed at a performance driving school in a 5.0 including 65 5.0 liter Mustangs, an assortment of Taurus SHOs, liter Mustang, and decided he'd better go just in case. EA's Fiona SHO-powered Sables, Probe Turbo GTs, T-birds, and Crown Murphy, emphasizing the importance of accident avoidance in Victoria police cars (for law enforcement training). Ford provides public relations, sought to improve her skills as well. the vehicles in exchange for THE ULTIMATE FANTASY DRIVING GAME Bondurant's product testing and endorsement. Other sponsors include Goodyear Tires, Simpson Safety Test Drive Equipment, Koni Ten of the Best shocks, Ronal wheels, Recaro seats and Texaco fuel. Finally, Bondurant has 30 100-hp rear-engined Prop erty Engerdat pe Esetat game che Formula Fords to teach all you Nigel The Car & Driver contest, co-sponsored by EA and CGW, brought one lucky reader to Mansell wannabes Bondurant's school. how to carve a track. You might win in Car & The open-wheeled racers have just 1600cc engines, but a much Driver, but how will you better power-to-weight ratio than street-legal cars. A three-day course including track time in these hornets goes for $1895, less do at a real track? during the summer \"off season\" when the oven is on in Arizona. Alas, the one-day high-performance driving course doesn't allow track time. Still, we did take some hot laps with Instructor Chad Biggerstaff in a full-size Ford van. \"It's important to drive through CAR-DRIVER Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"YOU WON'T BELIEVE YOUR EYES! You've heard about it, you've read about it, now expe. rience the breakthrough of Microsoft's Flight Simulator v.5.0 with the breathtaking photo-realism of Mallard Software's new scenery. Never before seen real-time ray traced images take you over terrain so real you'll be checking for a seat belt. Layers of realistic clouds wisp past your screen just before completely obscuring your vision. Shadows change according to longitudinal and latitudinal position as the seasons and weather change along your course. The new satellite sceneries will take you over our nation's capital, Washington D.C. and the natural vistas of the west coast; Seattle, San Francisco, Los Angeles and San Diego. These images are so detailed and so real, you'll see what it really means to have a bird's eye view. So look for Mallard to bring you the most exciting new products in the coming months that will keep you on the edge of your seat and above all the rest. Mallard. For more information or to order call 1-800-WEB-FEET  1993 Mallard Software, Inc. "


"roet the corners in the straightest possible line,\" he announced, Front-end recovery is a little less enjoyable, because steering approaching a left sweeper from the outside of the track. «Brake control is lost and the car always seems destined for a row of barriinto the corner to load the front end, then accelerate from the apex ers. To recover, simply brake to load the front end which regains to achieve max exit speed.\" We were suddenly mashed into the steering control. Nobody punched any of the plastic barriers on the right side of the van as Biggerstaff rocketed out of the corner. He skid pad, but we did have fun doing doughnuts and 360s for a proceeded to give us an IMSA-style demo with running commenwhile. tary, few of us actually comprehending as he careened around the After lunch, we returned to ground school to discuss cornering, track. then headed out to our next course. The staff had set up cones with Before we could climb into our own machines, we had to spend two straightaways, an increasing radius corner and a normal halfa little time in \"ground school.» These sessions cover the basics of circle corner. As the instructors drove the course, they demonstratproper driver posture, understeer, oversteer, braking and acceleraed where to accelerate, begin braking, increase braking, turn in, tion, etc. All of the theory and techniques mentioned in the classtrail off steering and accelerate out of the corners. room would soon be put to use on the course. We hopped in our own machines and descended on the track. Our first exercise was in a 225-hp SHO-powered Mercury We were soon accelerating to high speeds on the straightaways, Sable. The Throttle Steer Exercise was simple: crank the wheel to then braking before entering the corner, maintaining a line make a righe circle, then accelerate. As the car's speed increased, the through the apex, and accelerating out to the outside of the track. radius grew; decelerating, it quickly returned to the original tight Faster drivers began catching other cars in the straights, necessitatcircle, demonstrating that turning radius can be controlled by varying a brief \"pit stop» to let them play through before rejoining the ing speed. race. The sound of Indy cars started roaring in my head. Exercise two was on the slalom course. Eight cones are set up at Meanwhile, the instructors waved drivers into the pits to join 40 feet intervals to teach handling techniques. Biggerstaff demonthem for personal instruction. Rather than congratulating me for strated the ease of inducing carsickness by weaving through the my superb racing instincts and signing me up for a Can-Am team, cones at 35 mph. The point of the slalom was to teach proper «balmy instructor advised me to delay turning into the tight apex corancing techniques of a moving automobile. If the car is never ner for a few seconds so I could accelerate through a shallower arc allowed to \"settle\" on all four tires, the resulting imbalance on exit. It worked beautifully. It's a trick I continue to use through becomes uncontrollable by the end of the slalom. Drivers can steer my housing complex to shave precious seconds off my commute. through cones faster and with greater control by allowing the car to We then headed over to the accident avoidance course (no, not \"settle\" for a brief moment before steering into the next turn. a figure 8). One lane branches into three with a traffic signal overAfter learning the technique, it was no problem running the head. As your car approaches within 80 feet of the signals, two of course in my Probe GT at 35 mph. It was more difficult at 40, but them change from green to red. You must avoid the red lanes I still managed not to nail any cones. where an accident just occurred or a lady with a stroller just For our next course we traded in our cars for a Tempo \"Skid stepped into the road. The exercise is an excellent test of response Car» equipped with outrigger wheels. The hydraulically-actuated times, but more importantly, shows that avoiding an accident is training wheels enable the car's front or rear end to be raised, easier than braking for it. At 35-40mph, we couldn't stop before inducing understeer or oversteer when cornering. We drove in the «accident.\" But, if sharp, we could steer around it in time. ovals, each student having the opportunity to recover from a seri Finally, we got a chance to do some real performance driving on ous rear-wheel skid. By steering in the direction that the car is skidthe autocross course. This is about a quarter mile course designed ding, and looking where you want to go, the vehicle can be recovto challenge a driver's cornering, braking and acceleration skills. ered and driven out of the spin. The technique is easy to master, There are a number of curved segments, corners and a slalom to but will cost you some tread if you don't have a skid car or a snowwend through, before driving the course again and stopping at a covered parking lor. designated point. We were timed by the instructors to compete for fastest speed. I hiked up my Nomex underwear, set my jaw and revved up to the starting grid, visions of victory-circle girls and rose wreaths dancing in my head. I thought my first time was the new world's record, but, incredibly, my time improved with each pass. I was able to beat all the drivers except one by a wide margin of several hundredths of a second. One driver, though, consistently turned in the best track times. And that man is Paul Grace, wicked nemesis of aspiring racers and suspected demonic collaborator. My only explanation was that if this man could produce a game as excellent as Car & Driver, as well as Chuck Yeager's Air Who says \"It's Combat, Seal Team and only a game\"? the upcoming Seawolf, he Contest winner could hack my car to slow it down. One day Walter Nicolic proves that avid he'll eat my dust, but as Khan said, «revenge is a dish gaming can transcend simulations. best served cold.\" Aside from being a sore loser, I came away from the Hydraulically actuated wheels on course having learned some important lessons. You can the Skid Car help teach students avoid an accident faster than stopping for it. You can skid recovery without shredding control a car in a skid. You can corner through a yellow light at 30 mph. And, despite 100-degree weather, Bob tires or bashing fenders. Bondurant runs a very cool school. CGW Page 70 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Shipping to US PRAK, HI, APO & FPO SA por order. Alr Mall to Canada $6 per order, Handling 51 per shipmont, 2 Business Day Air US $6 por order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea, add'l AK 519 1st Item + $2 ea, add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st Item + $6 ca. add'l Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Item + $6 ea. add. Handling $1 per shipment: IBM ADULT IBM CD ROM IBM ADVENTURE S45 23 $42 S38 Adult Reference CD Busty Babes CD Centerfold Squares Ectasy CD $32 Femme Fatale $26 Femme Fatale DD 1-3 Each $18 Jigsaw Pinups $19 Lovely Ladies CD $38 My Private Collection CD S36 PC-Pix CD $40 Penthouse Jigsaw $24 Planet of Lust S12 Sex Olympics $24 Sex Vixens From Space $12 Strip Poker 3 $21 Strip Poker 3 DD 1-6 Each $19 \"WARLORDS 2 brings the fun and excitement of the first Warlords with 640 x 480 graphics, a hidden map option, and totally new Al system. Features random mapping for infinite replayability, troop transports and warships for amphibious warfare, and a diplomacy option that provides a framework for backstabbing. S42 Legend of Kyrandia $49 Loom $48 Lost Treasures Infocom 1or2 $46 Mantis Experimental Fighter 545 Rebel Asault $45 Return of the Phantom $42 Rodney's Funscreen S46 Secret Weapons Luftwaffe $48 Sherlock Holmes 1 or 2 $44 Spirit of Excaliber $32 Star Child $32 Star Trek 25 Anniversary $46 Stronghold $36 Team Yankee 2 $29 Ultima Bundle $59 Ultima Underworld 1 & 2 $52 Where in World CSD Deluxe $66 Wing Commander 1 Deluxe $48 Wing Commander / Ultima 6 $57 W. Commander / Ultima UW $59 $38 IBM HARDWARE Prince of Persia 2 Putt Putt Joins Parade Return of the Phantom Return to Zork Rex Nebular Cos Gen Ben $39 Rex Nebular Master Edition $52 Riftwar Legacy $39 Ringworld $36 Risky Woods $24 Rome: Pathway to Power S32 Sam & Mac Screen Antics WIN $21 Secret Monkey Island 2 $38 Secret of the 7th Labyrinth $42 Shadow Caster S52 Shadowgate WIN $34 Space Quest 4 $36 Space Quest 5 $39 Spellcasting 101 $19 Spellcasting 201 $36 Spellcasting 301 Spring Brk S34 Star Trek 25th Anniversary $36 Star Trek: Next Generation S46 Starship $38 Terminator 2029 $42 The Dig $45 The Prophecy Uninvited WIN $34 Where in America's Past Where in Europe is Carmen $29 Where in Space Carmen SD $50 Where in Time Carmen S32 Where in USA is Carmen SD $29 Where in USA is Carmen Dix $49 Where in World Carmen SD $32 Where World Carmen Deluxe $52 Zool S34 IBM ADVENTURE $36 MAD  O  GUARDIAN Acoustic Research P22 $79 Acoustic Research P42 $159 Acoustic Research P570 $319 Acoustic Research P622 $239 Adlib Sound Card $39 AdLib Gold Sound Card $149 Adv. Gravis Ultrasound $139 Flight Stick Joystick $36 Flightstick Pro $55 Maxx Cobra Flightstick $54 Media Concept $72 Pilot Control Stand $20 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 $175 Sound Blaster 16 ASP S 219 Sound Blaster Deluxe $89 Sound Blaster MM Upgd Kit $499 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe $129 Sound Galaxy BX2 $65 Sound Galaxy NX2 S89 Sound Galaxy NXPRO S125 Sound Galaxy NXPRO 16 S169 Snd Galxy NXPRO MMedia S450 Snd Galaxy NXPRO 16 MM S575 Sound Machine $99 Thrustmaster FCS $59 Thrustmaster FCS Pro Thrustmaster Game Card $27 Thrustmaster Rudder CS 599 Thrustmaster WCS Mark 2 $99 Virtual Pilot S70 Voice Blaster $69 AMAZON' recaptures the fun and excitement of the 1950's drivein movies. Travel to unexplored regions of the Amazon, fight 10 foot ants, and find emeralds stolen by Cortez. Amazing cinematic effects such as multiple camera angles. flashbacks, pans, and fades. Features full digitized voices & sound effects. $36 $28 IBM ARCADE $99 $32 $38 $24 $24 $25 $34 IBM CD ROM SOUND MACHINE Adventures Willie Beamish $24 Alone in the Dark S36 Amazon $36 Attack Pack $42 Batman Returns S32 Bloodnet $42 Bloodstone $36 Blue Force: Next of Kin $45 Castle Wolfstein-Sper Dstiny $37 Coaster $32 Conquests Robin Hood $36 Cyber Race $42 Cybercon 3 $29 Dark Heart of Uukrul $34 Dark Side Day of the Tentacle $39 Demon's Gate $32 Dominus $39 Dragon Knight 3 $49 Dragon's Sphere $42 Dreamweb $36 Epic Eric the Unready Eternam $36 Flashback $33 Fred Pharkas Frntier Pharm $42 Gateway S29 Gateway 2:Homeworld Havoc for Hire $42 Heaven and Earth $32 Hired Guns $32 Hook $32 Inca $42 Indy Jones 4 Fate Atlantis $36 Inspector Gadget $34 Isle of the Dead $38 Jack the Ripper $39 King's Quest 6 King's Ransom $38 Kronolog : Nazi Paradox S42 Lands of Lore Laura Bow 2 Leather Goddesses $12 Leather Goddesses 2 $42 Legend of Kyrandia Leisure Suit Larry 5 $34 Lords of the Rising Sun $34 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes $44 Lost Treasures of Infocom $42 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 $29 Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $21 Master of Orion $45 Out of this World $36 Pepper's Adventure in Time $29 Police Quest 3 $36 Police Quest 4 $46 Prince of Persia $25 SOUND MACHINE' brings to gether 2 of the most popular computer add-ons in oneinexpensive package. Features a genuine sound blaster chipset, digitized voice input/output full duplex MIDI interface, built in 4W amp, volume control, a pair of 3\" magnetically sheilded speakers, and a Quickshot joystick. $99 12 Roads to Gettysburg 948 7th Guest $56 Adventures Willie Beamish $45 Battle Chess $46 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $59 Campaign $35 Chessmaster 3000 $46 Conquests Robin Hood $42 Curse of Enchantia Cyber Space Day of the Tentacle $45 Don Quixote $32 Dragon's Lair $36 EcoQuest Search for Cetus $42 European Racers $44 Eye of the Beholder 3 $48 Fantasy Empires $36 Guy Spy Terror Deep $36 Hell Cab $52 Hi-Tech Aircraft S43 Indy Jones 4 Fate of Altantis $52 Interactive Storytime 1-3 Ea. S30 Iron Helix $60 King's Quest 5 $42 King's Quest 6 $48 Laura Bow 2 Circle Reader Service #42 Airborne Ranger Aliens Ate My Babysitter $32 Amazing Spiderman $9 Bart Simpson House Wrdnes $31 Bill & Ted's Excellent Adv $19 Combat Classics Cool Croc Twins Crazy Cars Creepers D Generation $28 Dr Doom's Revenge $9 Dragon's Lair 2 or 3 $34 Dragon's L Esc Singe's Cast $34 Eagle's Rider $29 Eight Ball Deluxe $38 Fire & Forget Gauntlet 1 or 2 Gobliiins Gold of the Aztecs Guy Spy Guy Spy Terror Deep Marvel Trilogy Ms Pacman Obliterator Oil's Well Pac Man Pick'n Pile Power Hits: Battletech S32 Punisher S.C. Out $38 Space Ace $32 Space Ace 2 $34 Super PacMan $19 Tengen's Arcade Hits $12 Terminator The Tinies Thexder 1 or 2 $15 Tristan Pinball $29 Wrath of the Demon $21 X-Men 2 $10 SEP CGW1       $34 $29 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to cha subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE PAGE 4 FOR DETAILS S42 "


"Letters from Paradise ESPANA Now, It's In Your Lap where I really want to just play the games or give up the hobby before I get more aggraI just received my July issue, and wanted to vated then what it's worth... I'm not looking express my continued appreciation for your for any more hardware problems. efforts to put out a better and better product. I am fairly new to the \"Gaming world of the Question #3: Is \"3DO» the answer to my 1990's, but sure think it's improved since my quest for pure entertainment? I have stooped last «go-round» back in the early 80's. as low, in my desperation, as buying a Super Nintendo and MicroProse's Super Strike I have a few questions and comments which Eagle. While it's better than nothing, it's a I would appreciate you responding to: poor substitution for the real thing. Will 1) I made the sad mistake of putting about \"3DO» be just a hyped up Super Nintendo, or $3400 into a great Texas Instruments notewill it allow me to play the games the way they book (486 DX/25 MHz with 4 MEG RAM) were meant to be played in their original IBM and a MAG 15 monitor. I thought at the time versions? Falcon 3.0, Strike Eagle, etc.? that I would be able to get a joystick and Ouestion #4: What in your opinion, would external sound card, and all would be well. I you say is the most enjoyable flight simulathought I could use the notebook for both tion game (combat) that you have played? entertainment and business. It hasn't worked out that way. I then ordered an expansion Question #5: Would using \"OS/2\" as the station from Axonix, and attempted to conoperating system make it any easier to play figure a Creative Labs multimedia bundle games without the memory management gan with the hardware. There were of course hassles or would there be other problems to complications (let's just say it didn't work too contend with? well, plus the longest cable Axonix recom Please help. mends using with their expansion station to Daniel Barr the notebook is about 12 inches-not very Palm Beach Gardens, FL comfortable). Forget about getting Creative Well, we're not sure we have all the answers Labs tech support to help. I waited about a for you, but we'll sure give it a try. In answer to week before I spoke to anyone, and then when they called they told me I had five Question #1, we might suggest the following. Genovation offers a joystick adapter for laptops minutes to work it out. I am now in the (Genovation, Inc. 17741 Mitchell, North, Truprocess of trying to sell my notebook. Know ine, CA 92714) and Mediavision offers a sound anybody that would be interested? Know any device that plugs into one of the ports in the way to sell it other than the newspaper? notebook (Mediavision 3185 Laurelview Question #1: Any other ideas to salvage my Court, Fremont, CA 94538). notebook so I can play light sim games, etc. As for Question #2, here are our suggestions: with full sound and CD-ROM capability? ability: 48666MHz DX/2 motherboard (VESA Local Question #2: Could you please tell me, in Bus) EISA your opinion, what would be the current 256K Cache RAM on motherboard \"486\" desktop dream machine for playing AMI BIOS (upgradable with disk) computer games (not a manufacturer, although I'll take that information-I mean 8-16 Megabytes of 70ns or faster RAM the specifications i.e., motherboard, VESA, VESA compatible Local bus Video card with ISA, EISA?, Cache, RAM, VESA Local Bus?, S3 (or other co-processor). Hard Drive, CD-ROM & Sound Card, 250 megabyte and up, SCSI 2 Hard Drive. Graphics Card, Monitor, Keyboard, Joystick, SCSI 2 host adapter with cache memory. etc.). Also, what about a memory manager? (Another mind-blowing hassle.) MPC Level 2 CD-ROM. Unfortunately, my experience has been usSoundBlaster 16 ASP w/ Roland Sound Caning about 75% of my time dealing with hardvas SC-7 module. ware and software problems, and 25% of my Full Thrustmaster Mark II WCS/FCS and time actually playing games. I'm at the point Rudder pedals. 20\" and up CAD monitor Use of a local movie theater with THX or digital sound to jack into and play games in (well, you said \"dream machine\" didn't you?). Actually, the above may change when Pentium rigs and Power PCs are more widespread. As for memory managers, we just tested 386MAX version 7.0 and got 628K of free lower memory. We were initially quite impressed, but need to test it with more games. Question #3 asked about 3DO. It is really too carly to answer your question. There are lots of developers lined up behind 3DO and it has a lot of potential. It still isn't clear how games will be saved on the machine or how many expansion peripherals will be manufactured to support the base machine. We're still watching with great interest. If you want to talk flight simulators (Question #4), most of us still opt for Red Baron. Not only is the Dynamix game still a satisfying gaming experience, but it even works on the 386 Notebook our editors take on business trips!) With regard to Question #5, we don't really know about OS/2. We have not had an opportunity to test it with games. We suspect that memory intense games like Strike Commander would have complications under OS/2, but we are not sure. Maybe some of our other readers can enlighten us. Timeliness) Sometimes Pays If only computer games were as promptly produced and as bug free as CGW! You must get paid a fortune! T. Madden St. Louis, MO We have forwarded your letter to our publisher and picked up brochures on Pentium-based computers and vacation homes in Jamaica, pending his response to your suggestion. The Sci-Fi Panel I'd like to see an issue dedicated to sci-fi games: what's presently out there, what's worthwhile and what's to come. Damien Kupper Anaheim, CA CGW #100 had an annotated list of the science fiction strategy games that were available at that time. Back issues, including #100, are Page 72 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Shipping to US PRAK, HI APO & FPO S4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling S1 per shipment, 6 per order: PA. HI $12 1st Item 4 $2 ea. add. AK $19 is item + $2 ea. add. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st item + $6 ea add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st item + $6 ea, add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM ROLEPLAYING IBM ROLEPLAYING $29 .  $64 $49 $29 THRUSTMASTER WEAPONS CONTROL SYSTEM MARK II Brings the function of the keyboard into your left hand while your right hand controls the joystick. All functions are fully programmable. Plug your Thrustmaster Flight Control System into the back and program allits functions as well. The ultimate con$99 $30 $32 trol! $24 $30 $38 Charge of the LIGHT BRIGADE S19 $24 H 'THE CHARGE OF THE LIGHT BRIGADE' during the Crimean War. was one of the bravest, and sadest incidents in British Military History. Of the 673 men who began the charge only 195 were fit for action at its end. Features a large game area, 2 player mode, animates graphics, strategic and tactical maps. S29 $39 S48 Ace Detective $30 Ace Explorer : Sequencing $36 Ace Inquirer $40 Ace Reporter $36 Ace Reporter Deluxe $48 Auto Map AutoWorks $49 Body Works Boom Box $29 Castle of Dr Brain Cleo is a Dragon Clock Works S19 Comic Book Maker Cuckoo Zoo S32 Eagle Eye Mysteries $32 EcoQuest $32 EcoQuest 2 Lost Scrt Rain $34 Evelyn Wood Dynamic Readr$24 Fatty Bear's Bday Surprise S32 Fay's Word Rally $32 Incredible Machine $29 Island Of Dr Brain $29 Jones Fast Lane Kidworks Kidwriter Gold $32 Land of The Unicorn $39 Mario Teaches Typing $26 Marvin the Moose Vol 1 $30 Marvin the Moose Vol 2 $30 Mavis Teaches Typing $26 Mavis Teaches Typing $29 Milliken Storyteller Vol 1 $30 Milliken Storyteller Vol 2 $30 Mixed Up Faery Tale $29 Mixed-Up Mother Goose $29 Mozart Magical Music Mchne $18 Munchers Bundle $29 Orbits: Voyage Solar Systm $39 Peanuts S9 Phonics Plus $25 Picture Perfect $32 Play Room $35 Power Hits :Kids $19 Print Shop Deluxe $39 Print Shop Deluxe Bus Graph$29 Putt Putts Fun Pak $22 Quarky Quaysoo's Turbo Sci $29 Read \"n Roll $36 Read 'n Roll Data Disk $12 Read & Rhyme $31 Reader Rabbit 1 $37 Reader Rabbit 2 $37 Readr Rabbit's Ready Letter $37 Robot Writer Plus $30 Rodney's Funscreen S32 Scooter's Magic Castle Secert Island Dr. Quandry $38 Snapdragon $29 Speedreader WIN $30 Speedreader DD A-C Each $12 Spell it Plus $31 Spell-a-Saurus $27 Spelling $31 Spelling Wiz $22 Stickybear Opposites $23 Stickybear Parts of Speech $32 Stickybear Reading $24 Stickybear Reading Comp $30 Stickybear Reading Tutor $31 Stickybear Shapes $29 Stickybear Spellgrabber $32 Stickybear Spelling Tutor $32 Story Sketcher $42 Super Munchers S29 Super Solvers:Midnite Rscue $30 Super Solvers:Spellbound $31 Super Spellicopter $21 Treasure Mountain $39 TreeHouse $39 Wacky Funster Weekly Reader Read. Comp $31 Circle Reader Service #42 $42 2400 AD $9 Protostar ADD Collector's Edition 2 $45 Questron 2 ADD Starter Kit Ragnarok Bard's Tale Construction $27 Realms of Arkania Black Crypt $32 Red Crystal Bloodwych $15 Rings of Medusa Buck Rogers $12 Savage Empire Captain Blood $12Sea Rogue Captive $30 Secret Silver Blades Celtic Legends $32 Sentinel Worlds 1 Challenge of 5 Realms $44 Shadow Sorcerer Champions $37 Shadowlands Champions of Krynn $19 Sleeping Gods Lie CHARACTER EDITORS Ea. $16 Space 1889 Cobra Mission $49 Space Inc Companion of Xanth S36 Space Rogue Conan $16 Spacewrecked Corporation Spelljammer Curse of the Azure Bonds $15 Spellcraft:Aspect of Valor Cyber Empire $32 Spirit of Excalibur $9 Cyber Space $39 Star Saga 2 $19 Cybergenic Ranger $6 Starflight 1 or 2 Dark Queen of Krynn $32 Stonekeep Dark Sun $48 Stronghold Dark Sun Grey Isle Exp Pak $34 Summoning Darklands $39 Sword of the Samurai $12 Darklands Master Edition $51 Tales Magic:Prophcy Shdow $29 Darkspyre Tangled Tales $21 Daughter of Serpents Times of Lore $28 Death Knights of Krynn $21 Treasures Savage Frontier $32 Dragon Strike $12 Ultima 4 Quest of Avatar $35 Dragon Wars S12 Ultima 5 Warriors of Destiny $35 Dragons of Flame $9 Ultima 6 False Prophet Drakkhen $37 Ultima 7 Black Gate $48 Dungeon Master $34 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $18 Dusk of the Gods Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle S48 Elvira Mistress Dark $29 Ultima Trilogy Elvira 2 Jaws of Cerberus Ultima Trilogy 2 $48 Eye of the Beholder 1 Ultima Underworld 1 or 2 Eye of the Beholder 2 $38 Uncharted Waters Eye of the Beholder 3 $42 Unlimited Adventures $38 Flames of Freedom MWII $24 Veil of Darkness Four Crystals of Trazere $26 Vengeance of Excalibur Gateway Savage Frontier $32 War of the Lance Gods $26 Waxworks Gryphon Masters of Havlar $38 Wizardry Trilogy (1-3) Hard Nova Wizardry 4 $19 Heaven and Earth $32 Wizardry 5 Heros Quest 1 S24 Wizardry 6 Cosmic Forge $34 Heros Quest 2 $21 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $42 Heros Quest 3 $36 Legacy of the Necromancer $17 Legacy: Realm Of Terror $34 IBM HINTBOOKS Legend $31 Legend of Valor $39 688 Attack Sub $10 Legends of Drakka $38 A-Train $16 Lord of the Rings V1 $32 Adventures Willie Beamish $10 Lord of the Rings V2 $37 Bard's Tale 1-3 Each $10 Loremaster $39 Bargon Attack $10 Lost Tribe $29 Blue Force: Next of kin $10 Lure of the Temptress $37 Buck Rogers Countdown Magic Candle 1 $12 Castle of Dr Brain $10 Magic Candle 2 $19 Champions of Krynn $10 Magic Candle 3 $38 Civilization Martian Dreams $37 Conquests Robin Hood $10 MegaTraveller $9 Conquests of Camelot $10 Mega Traveller 2 $19 Countdown MegaTraveller 3 Curse of the Azure Bonds $10 Metal and Lace $49 Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Might & Magic 2 $33 Darklands $14 Might & Magic 3 S24 Darkspyre $10 Might & Magic 4 Clouds XeenS36 Death Knights of Krynn S10 Might & Magic 5 D Side Xeen $42 Drakkhen $10 Murder S29 Dungeon Master $10 Obitus $19 Dynamix Great War Planes S16 Pirates $9 EcoQuest Search For Cetus $10 Pirates Gold $42 Elvira 1 or 2 $10 Planet's Edge $34 Eye of the Beholder $10 Pool of Radiance $15 Eye of the Beholder 2 $12 Pools of Darkness $38 Eye of the Beholder 3 $10 Prophecy 1 $12 Fred Pharkas Fron Pharm $8 CEDCOM  8 RORKE'S DRIFT LUPRESSIONI  $26 $32 $10 LINKS 386 PRO offers SUPER VGA graphics and advanced features designed for your 386 or 486. New features include computer opponent, save game option that allows your friends to play against you in an existing game. Play at Harbour Town or use the add on course disks for extra fun. S36 $16 $10 $39 LINKS(386 ACCESS $18 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks.Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE PAGE 4 FOR DETAILS "


"Cara that I may stop buying them and start a boycott. I am very much a believer in freedom of speech and freedom of the press. However, I am not a believer in the suppression and exploitation of any group of people, and women are people. If I wanted to view pornography, I would have bought a pornographic magazine. Tina Schumann Seattle, WA The magazine is great, but I wish you could give some kind of score or grade at the end of the reviews for each game you review. It is sometimes hard to read through your writer's babble. Brandon Valeriano La Mirada available for $4.60 each (including shipping and handling). We do hope to take another look at far future games in the near future, but have not currently scheduled the section. Lowest Common Denominator Regarding the editorial in issue 108, I feel that computer games have already reached the lowest common denominator. Why computer games aren't like TV, however, is because the LCD computer gamer has more intelligence and education than the LCD TV audience. As \"interactive\" media and cheaper, casier-to-use computers become more prevalent, these LCD numbers may very well converge. Glen Cox Fort Collins, CO The curious question about this convergence is whether the 500 channels which are regularly predicted by media pundits will offer more variety (because the delivery system of entertainment on demand will allow the information/entertainment providers to monitor the success of individual games/programs more precisely) or less variety. Will the diffusing of interests between 500 channels allow for narrowcasting where special interests are better served or will information providers simply seek out big numbers as in the broadcast model. We hope that the new media will follow the narrowcast model and allow for a wider wriety of interactive programming If the new world of interactive media follows the broadcast model, we are liable to end up with arcade-style \"shooters\" (running, jumping, diea-lot games) that are not suited to the response times of interactive television, interactive movies (that are very likely to be bad movies with artificial choices) or hack 'n slash CRPGs that may use special effects gore to offset their lack of interesting story. With the narrowcast approach, there might be a chance to see truly interesting stories with characters played by real people interwoven into the interactive experience. There might be opportunities for fantasy sports leagues where franchise owners get video replays of what \"their\" players did the night before. There could be electronic villages (cyburbs) where people interact in video in much the same way computer users with modems can interact in on-line games on today's networks. Right now, it just isn't clear. The Pornbroker The article on page 99 of the June 1993 issue, entitled \"Memory Management and System Configuration for MS-DOS Games,\" is accompanied by a still scene from a pornographic film. Besides the fact that I find this personally offensive, it is totally unnecessary to the message of the text, juvenile and extremely sexist. It is obvious that some of your writers and editorial staff do not think that women may be readers (and purchasers) of this magazine. If your publication intends to continue this practice, I would very much like to know, so First, let us be very clear that the screen was from a computer vame and not from a pornographic movie. Second, the scene was supposed to be ironic in that the women involved were supposed to look like they were interested in sexual frolic but were really after Les' knowledge of extended and expanded memory. So, in actuality, the scene was spoofing a sexist position as opposed to exploiting it. Third, the CGW editors and writers do think women are people. We bave several female writers to this magazine and mancine and our art director is a woman. We aren't exactly a bastion of sexism at CGW. but if we ever decide to change the format and start distributing exclusively to small stores with lots of video booths, we'll let you know. Well let Who's The Boss? In the reviews of games, there should be some kind of grade or point scale established. This way, I would be able to tell if the reviewer would really recommend the game. Sometimes, it is hard to read what their overall opinion of the game is. Bryan Wiley Wichita, KS Maybe you need a babble fish? Actually, that's Babel fish (named after the infamous tower in Genesis). Anyway, there are several good reasons why we choose not to let our reviewers use point systems. First and foremost, we respect our readers too much to do so. The job of a reviewer is to critically appraise a game with enough detail and color to allow the reader to decide if that game is for him/her. The reviewer should not be a gaming demigod who decides whether the reader should buy that game or not. Reviewing is entightening opinion and nun is enlightening opinion and numerical evaluations tend to cast that opinion into stone. Second, we value the ratings given by our readers. Hence, the treatment of the Top 100. We would not want to be in a position of putting our reviewers' opinions over the wider sampling of opinion. Third, the use of numerical evaluations tends to discourage reading the reviews themselves. Since we try to take great care in writing these reviews, we certainly don't want to undercut ourselves by providing an incentive for readers to skip the prose. In short, we don't think our readers really need to be told what to think. We just try to provide plenty of substance for them to cogitate upon. That, it seems, is the task of good writing. Cow The 5th Wave By Rich Tennant ORCHTENNANT \"ALRIGHT, STEADY EVERYONE. MARGO, GO OVER TO TOM PC AND PRESS'ESCAPE... VERY CAREFULLY.\" Page 74 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Shipping to US PRAK, HI APO & FPO $4 per order. Air Mail to Canada S6 per order. Handling 51 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US S6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea. addT; AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea. add'l. Handling S1 per shipment. Europo, S. America Alr Mall $19 1st Item + S6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Ar Mall $25 1st item + S6 ea. add'l. Handling S1 per shipment. IBM HINT BOOKS IBM WAR GAMES IBM STRATEGY CONGREU KINGDOS $36 Scooard Disk $37 $10 CONQUERED KINGDOMS SCENARIO DISK 1' gives you 14 captivating new scenarios for novice and expert players. Features island and inland battles, new strategies to employ, modem play, new terrain type, and complete scoring history. If you think dragons are tough, wait until your reach Castle POxbow. $25 $42 $36 $44 $37 $35 $36 S16 Dreadnoughts $10 $37 $12 The sost EXCITING SEA BATTLES ever fought 532 Free DC $10 Gateway Savage Frontier $10 Global Conquest $21 Gobliiins $10 Gunship 2000 $16 Hard Nova Harpoon $16 Hero's Quest 1-3 Each $10 IndyJones 4 Fate Atlantis $10 Island Of Dr Brain $10 Jetfighter 2.0 S16 King's Quest 1-6 Each $10 Laura Bow 2 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 1-5 Each $10 Lemmings $21 Loom $10 Lord of the Rings V1 $10 Lord of the Rings V2 $6 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes $10 LucasArts Adventure Book $16 LucasArts Air Combat $16 Magic Candle 2 or 3 $10 Manhunter N.Y. Or S.F. $10 Might & Magic 3-5 Each $16 Patriot Pepper's Adventure in Time $8 Planet's Edge $16 Police Quest 1-3 Each $10 Pool of Radiance Pools of Darkness Powermonger $10 Protostar $8 Quest For Clues 2-5 Each S21 Quest For Clues 6 Railroad Tycoon $10 Rex Nebular Cos Gen Ben $14 Secret Monkey Island 1 or 2 $10 Secret Silver Blades Shadow Sorcerer $10 Simearth $16 Simlife Official Strategy $16 Space Quest 1-4 Each $10 Spellcasting 101 or 201 $10 Star Trek 25th Anniversay $10 Strategy Plus Issue 10 or 11 $8 Strategy Plus Issue 12-33 Ea. $5 Strike Commander $16 Stunt Island $16 Summoning $16 Tales Magic:Prphecy Shdow $12 Time Quest $10 Treasures Savage Frontier Tunnels & Trolls $16 Ultima 4-6 Each $10 Ultima 7 $12 Ultima 7.5 Balancing Scales $16 Ultima Avatar Adventures $16 Ultima Underworld 1 or 2 $12 V Victory $16 Wizardry 6 Cosmic Forge $12 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $16 Yeager Air Combat $16 $26 $12 Carrier Strike $39 Carrier Strike Exp Pak Charge of the Light Brigade $24 Conflict: Middle East $32 Decision at Gettysburg $19 Dreadnoughts $39 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $29 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $89 Fifth Eskadra $22 Fleet Med $27 Frontline $13 Gary Grigsby Pacific War S48 Gary Grigsby War in Russia S48 Gettysburg: Turning Point $36 Grey Seas, Grey Skies S19 Halls of Montezuma $24 Harpoon Harpoon Battle Set 2 or 3 $19 Harpoon Battle Set 4 Harpoon Challenger Pak SE $49 Harpoon Designer Series $17 Harpoon Designer 2 $25 Harpoon Scenario Editor $27 High Command $45 Line in the Sand $20 MacArthur's War $9 Main Battle Tank C Germany $36 Man of War $36 Mare Nostrum $26 Marianas Turkey Shoot $14 Midway $12 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Overlord $29 Pacific Storm Midway Cpgn S36 Pacific Storm Solomon Cpgn $36 Panzer Battles $12 Patriot $44 Patriot Battle Set 2 $24 Patriot Scenario Editor $27 Patton Strikes Back $12 Prelude to Jutland $26 Rising Sun $26 Road Sumter to Appomattox $45 Rommel Battles For N Africa $24 Second Front $21 Seventh Fleet $36 Storm Across Europe $12 The Great War $36 Third Reich $27 To The Rhine $36 Typhoon of Steel $12 UMS 2 S16 UMS 2 Civil War $24 UMS 2 Desert Storm Scen S24 UMS 2 Planet Editor $16 V Victory: Gold, Juno, Sword $44 V Victory: Market Garden S44 V Victory: Ulah Beach $44 V Victory: Velikye Luki $44 Victory at Sea $37 War in the Falklands Western Front $36 White Death $19 World War 2 $39 DREADNOUGHTS accurately models the looks, specifications and lactics of fighting fleets during the great age of the battleship. Includes 7 scenarios such as; Coronel (1914). Falklands (1914), Jutland (1916) and Dogger Bank (1915). Features a menu interface for entering commands, external 3D view. & hidden movement. $39 $44 $10 Caesar Campaign 2 $36 Capitalist Pig WIN Carriers at War Carriers at War Expansion Carriers at War 2 $50 Castles 2 $36 Civilization $32 Civilization Master Edition $48 Clash of Steel Cohort 2 $18 Conquered Kingdoms $36 Conquered Kingdoms Scen 1 $25 Conqueror for Windows $39 Conquest of Japan $36 Crime City $13 Detroit Diplomacy $12 Discovery Step of Columbus $34 Dune 2 El Fish $41 Empire Deluxe Empire Deluxe WIN Fantasy Empires Fields of Glory $36 Global Conquest $34 Global Domination $36 Gobliiins 2:Princes' Buffoon $24 Inindo Koshan Conspiracy Kye Deluxe WIN Lemmings 2: The Tribes $32 Liberty or Death $37 Lost Admiral $19 Lost Admiral Enhanced Lost Admiral Scenario Disk $23 Mega Lo Mania $31 New World Order $38 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $37 Pacific Theater Ops $42 Paladin 2 $34 Perfect General $32 Perfect General Scen 1 Perfect General Scen 2 Perfect General 2 Populous 2 Powermonger Railroad Tycoon Railroad Tycoon 2 Red Zone $32 Robo Sport WIN $34 Romance 3 Kingdoms 1 or 2 $42 Rules of Engagement 2 $38 Second Conflict WIN Seven Cities Gold 2 Shadow President ShadowGate WIN Sid Meir's Civil War Siege Siege Expansion Disk Siege With Exp Disk $24 Sim City 2000 $43 Simfarm $41 Soldier of Fortune $42 Space Hulk Spaceward Ho! DOS/WIN Star Control 2 $36 Star Legions StarMaster Sub Version Task Force 1942 $39 Tegel's Mercenaries $38 Tegels' Mercenaries 2 $44 Unnatural Selection $32 Vikings Fields of Conquest Visions of Aftermath S24 War in the Gulf Warlords $12 Warlords 2 $42 When Two Worlds War $42 Worlds at War SEP CGW3 $21 $23 893% S10 OP 829332 ESTIN IBM WAR GAMES In 'BATTLES OF DESTINY' you must seek out and destroy up to 3 opponents in order to conquer the world. Features modem play, air, ground and naval combat, challenging artificial intelligence, 22 different units to construct, more than 20 worlds to conquer, campaign style play, and a complete player history. $36 $38 IBM STRATEGY $12 Air Raid Pearl Harbour S22 Ambush at Sorinor $42 American Civil War V1-3 Ea. $22 Battle Stations $20 Battle of Austerlitz Battle of the Atlantic $36 Battles of Napoleon $24 Battleship Bismark S26 Blitzkrieg Ardennes $19 Blood & Iron $52 Blue and the Grey Borodino Napoleon Invades $29 Bravo Romeo Delta $29 CW No Greater Glory ter Glory S21 Campaign S39 Circle Reader Service #42 A Train S34 A Train Construction Set $23 Air Force Commander S19 Airbucks $36 Archon Ultra S30 Armada 2525 $29 Ashes of Empire $48 Battle Isle $32 Battle Isle Scenario Disk Battles of Destiny $36 Breach 3 $36 Buzz Aldrin Race into Space $42 $37 $38 $42 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs 56. Checks Held 4 Wecks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE PAGE 4 FOR DETAILS $19 "


"chareware Best Of The Rest Applying A Little Strategy by Chuck Miller GANE STARS FLEET EMPIRE n ames of strategy take numerous forms, from full-blown warof future releases. All correspondence should be directed to: Siliconis, games to simple coffeetable games. One thing they all have in clo Vu Truong, PO Box 146, Canoga Park, CA 91305. common is that they pur one's mind to the test, forcing the Those desiring extended hours of space wargaming will not be player's gears of logic into motion. Since strategy is the focus of this disappointed with STELCON. It offers this in a sufficient dose. disappointed with STELCO issue, our efforts in this column will be devoted to examining three However, if one prefers more brief mental challenges, the following strategic shareware offerings: STELCON 2469, Search & Destroy 2.4 titles offer a much and Scorched Earth 1.2. Each game has a military theme, though the implementation is significantly varied. So, with gears churning... Hey! You Sunk My... A Game Of Stellar Proportions If one's military gaming is limited to activities more akin to floating ships in the bathtub, Search & Destroy Version 2.1 will be more to Those who enjoy diversions focusing on stellar exploration and one's liking. Primarily a Battleship clone, Search & Destroy offers the conquest will find STELCON 2469, a space strategy/wargame from familiar \"grids\" where the player and his computer opponent place Siliconis, much to their liking. In STELCON, one assumes the role their fleet of five vessels, then attempt to locate and destroy each of the omnipotent emperor of a small but loyal planetary society other's ships without radar. Like the boardgame equivalent, Search o seeking to extend the reach of his authority across the far Destroy requires little time to masreaches of the galaxy (similar to the commercial titles Star ter. Finding and destroying the enCommandand Stellar Crusade). As such, the player's mission emy before being destroyed oneself, is to expand the reaches of his or her power through the however, is a different and more development of new technology and the conquest of neighdifficult matter. boring star systems. Properly managed, one's forces will gain the victor's laurel by the complete eradication of all Search & Destroy offers the player opposing forces in the galaxy. a fair amount of configurability. Since its original release, multiple Currently at version 1.7.1, STELCON offers the warlevels of computer firing logic have gamer a gaggle of features. Graphics are provided in 256been added, as has automatic and color VGA and, while not quite state-of-the-art, provide an repeat ship deployment. Several levattractive playing environment. The interface-employing STELCON els of play are provided, including a combination of mouse, menu and keyboard interactionthose that take into account the size is intuitive and relatively user friendly. of the remaining ships on the board. Sound support is user configurThe greatest development efforts have been invested, appropriately, able, offering traditional sounds for explosions and the like, plus in the mechanics of the system. Though casy to learn, STELCON digitized \"win\" and \"lose\" sound files, along with the option of itself is very complex, with support provided for five players, either employing one's own digitized effects. Level of play and sound computer or human, and with a selection of three levels of computer options are stored each session, negating the need to reset them each difficulty. In addition, six classes of ships are available to would-be time play is resumed. galactic emperors, offering design improvement with the escalation In all, Search & Destroy is a competent digital version of the classic of technology. Documentation, while clearly presented, is quite exBattleship boardgame. For a minimal $10.00 registration fee, it is a tensive and bears careful reading prior to play. real bargain no self-respecting «bathtub admiral should ignore. To While the game does have some weaknesses, the greatest single register Search & Destroy, send a check or money order in US funds drawback in the current version of STELCON is its complete lack of to: Randy Baron, 200 East 89th Street Apt. 25-A, New York, NY audio support. Though space is a relatively \"quier\" place, this does 10128. Upon receipt of the registration fee, the player will be mailed not translate well into exciting play (full Ad Lib and Sound Blaster a code number that disables the shareware reminder) and will be support is promised for future verStarth and Dentry 3,4 ve entitled to receive the next version of the game by mail. sions). Please include the version number (listed in the \"About Requirements for STELCON are Box\") when registering. modest. An MS-DOS compatible machine is necessary,286 or better, Tanks For The Memories with 640K RAM, VGA/MCGA Another \"less demanding\" strategic title, and my favorgraphics, 128K XMS RAM, and a ite of this trio, is Scorched Earth. A modern version of mouse. Shareware registration is one of the oldest computer games around, Scorched Earth $20.00 (US funds), required after is a simple, yet addictive title. The goal is a very basic 20 days of use. With registration, one: destroy the enemy tank(s) before being destroyed. the player will receive the latest verThere is no hassle of troop and vehicle deployment, just sion of STELCON and notification Search & Destroy the simplicity of aiming and firing. You want the Subt OK Computer Ship.Sunk Your Shalunk: Spy Ship Games Won dames Les Level: Random . Hard Ship Deplayment Automate Seundl. ON Submarine Cruiser Battleship BARRAND Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'I 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Shipping to US.PR.AK.HI,APO & FPO S4 per order. Air Mail to Canada $6 per order. Handling S1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 por order; PR, HI $12 1st item + $2 ea. add'l; AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea. add'l Handling S1 per shipment Europe, S. America Air Mall $19 1st Item + $6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st item + $6 ea. add. Handling $1 per shipment, IBM SIMULATION IBM SPORTS IBM TRADITIONAL $79 $7 Hole in One Mini Golf Delux $9 Jack Nicklaus Signature Ed $42 Joe Montana Football 2 $42 Lance Haffner Baseball $36 Lance Haffner Boxing $36 Lance Haffner College BBall $36 Lance Haffner Football $36 Lance Haffner Hockey $36 Links $29 Links Courses 1-7 Each $17 Links Pro 386 Golf $36 Links Pro Course Disk 1 or 2 $19 Links Pro Course 3-6 Each $20 Madden Football 2 $32 Michael Jordan Flight Sim S38 Microleague Baseball 4 $31 Microleague Basketball Microleague Football S20 Microsoft Golf for Windows $39 NFL Challenge Premium Ed $59 NFL Football S31 NFL Pro League Football 92 $24 NFL Video Football $39 NHLPA Hockey $38 QuarterPole $39 Tony La Russa Baseball 2 S36 Tony La Russa 2 '92 Teams $12 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 $39 Wayne Grestky Leag Sim. 2 $29 Wilson Pro Staff Golf $23 World Class Soccer $28 Go Master Ver 5 $39 Go Master Dix Ver 5 WIN Grand Slam Bridge 2 $32 Grandmaster Chess $32 Home Alone 2 $26 Home Casino Spectacular $9 Hong Kong Mah Jong Pro $32 Hoyle's Book Games V4 $29 Jeopardy 1 or 2 Jeopardy 25th Aniversary $15 Jeopardy Sports Edition Jeopardy. Super Talking $21 Monopoly Deluxe DOS/WIN $29 Omar Sharif on Bridge $37 Scrabble Deluxe DOS/WIN $26 Solitaires Journey $36 Super Tetris $29 Terminator Chess $34 Trump Castle 2 $12 Trump Castle 2 DD 1 or 2 $4 Trump Castle 3 $34 Virtual Reality Studio 2 $64 Wheel of Fortune 2 or 3 $9 Wheel of Fortune Gold $15 'CARRIERS AT WAR 2' offers more tension and excitement. Features eight new scenarios, some hypothetical, others controversial; an improved war room intelligence system; and tougher artificial intelligence. $50 FREE GAME OFFER Second Conflict S12 The Galactic Conflict Continues... ATP Flight Simulator 2.0 $29 A.T.A.C $30 A10 Avenger $46 A320 Airbus $44 Aces Over Europe $42 Aces Europe Mission 1 or 2 $27 Aces of the Pacific $42 Aces Pacific Mission Disk $27 Air Combat Classic $45 Air Duel $38 Air Warrior SVGA $35 Das Boot Submarine $12 F117A Stealth Fighter $42 F15 Strike Eagle 3 Aces Pak $52 F15 Strike Eagle III $44 Falcon 3.0 $48 Falcon 3 Scent Fighting Tor $24 Falcon 3 Scen 2 Mig 29 Graue Wolfe $42 Great Naval Battles $44 Great Nav Bat America in Atl $21 Great Nav Bat Super Ships $19 Great Nav Bat Scen Builder $28 Gunship 2000 $37 Gunship 2000 Scenario Disk $24 Iron Helix $49 Jump Jet $39 Land Sea Air Trilogy Land Sea Air 2 $29 Mantis Experimental Ft $39 Maximum Overkill $44 Max Overkill Mission 1 or 2 $28 MegaFortress $12 Megafortress Mega-Pak Megatortress Mission 1 or 2 S26 Pacific Strike $52 Privateer Rags to Riches $36 Red Baron $36 Seal Team $42 Secret Weapons Luftwaffe $34 Strike Commander $48 Strike Commander Spch Pak $24 Stunt Island $37 Sub War 2025 $42 Syndicale $48 Task Force Admirals Pack $52 Tie Fighter $46 Tornado $52 Ultrabots Sanction Earth $39 Voice Commander F117A $18 Voice Commander F15SE3 $18 Wing Commander $19 Wing Commander 1 Deluxe $48 WC Secret Mission 1 & 2 $20 Wing Commander 2 $48 WC 2 Operation 1 or 2 $22 WC 2 Speach Mod $13 Wing Commander Academy $42 World Circuit $32 X-Wing $40 X-Wing Mission Disk 1 $24 Yeager's Air Combat $21 Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from July 15 through September 15 or while supplies last. $38 IBM TRADITIONAL S52 'SECOND CONFLICT' is a game of interstellar strategy & conquest for windows. Control all aspects of the economy, military, and civilian population. Allocate resources to produce battleships, planetary defenses, stealth ships, transports and missiles. Features multiple human & computer players, & a scenario editor. $34 SPEND $75 4th and Inches Airborne Ranger 5.25 Artura Big Business 5.25 Backgammon by George Bravo Romeo Delta Gunship 5.25 Obliterator Pirates 5.25 S.C. Out The Tines Xenocide $12 SPEND $100 3D Pinball $10 3 in 1 Players's Pack S9 3D Pool $12 Amarillo Slim's Poker $12 Amarillo Slims 7 Card Stud $10 An American Tail Coloring Bk $19 Armada Villa Crespo CB $10 Backgammon By George WIN S9 Baseball Card Collector $18 Baseball Facts $10 Battle Chess 4000 SVGA $36 Battle Chess 4000 VGA $32 Battle Chess $19 Blackjack $9 Blackjack WIN Bridge 7 $29 Bridgemaster $29 Caesars Palace $9 Caesars Palace WIN $15 Casino Game Pak WIN $32 Casino Master WIN $25 Casinos of the World $32 Checkmate DOS/WIN $36 Chess Net WIN $9 Chess X Colossus ChessManiac 5 Billion & 1 $46 Chessmaster 3000 WIN $38 Classic 5 DOS/WIN $32 Clue $12 Cribbage King / Gin King $19 Crossword Creator $12 Dealer's Choice $29 Demon Blue $10 Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $22 Dr Thorp's Blackjack Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $10 Dr Wong's Jack & Video Pkr $10 Edward O'Thorpe Black Jack $9 Electric Jigsaw $12 FS-Pro $21 Faces Tetris 3 $15 Family Crossword Puzzles $28 GO Master Ver 5 WIN $39 Gambit $38 Game-Maker $49 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $89 THE ONLY 15 SEDD CAD THE SHORTSSSEND FRAMES $9 SCUT MacArthur's War Dragon Force 5.25 Defender of the Crown Grandmaster Chess Hole in One Mini Golf Deluxe Sentinel Worlds Blackjack for Windows Video Poker for Windows Operation Combat Covert Action Panza Battles War of the Lance Dark Half Patton Strikes Back Railroad Tycoon 3.5 IBM SPORTS $32 SPEND $200 APBA Baseball $24 APBA Basketball $34 APBA Bowling $14 APBA College Basketball APBA Football $34 ATP Tennis $34 Action Sports Soccer $26 Basketball Challenge $28 Daily Double Horse Racing $19 David Robinson NBA Action $44 Front Page Football $39 Front Page Football Pro $42 Greens $34 Hardball 3 $34. 'SOUND GALAXY NX PRO 16' supports the 5 most popular sound cards. Features CD ROM interface, 16 Bit stereo playback with 20 voices at up to 14.4 KHz, volume control, midi interface, game port, 4 watt amp, and software setup. $169 Bridge 7 Cardinal of the Kremlin Lost Admiral Warlords 5.25 Dune Allied Forces Red Storm Rising Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. "


"Chareware One can jump right into Scorched Earth without taking time to read the rather extensive documentation (some 63 pages worth!). It is a simple game to get the hang of playing. However, to gain the fullest amount of enjoyment, one should at least skim the provided material, as there are manifold features hidden within Scorched Earth that make the game easier and more fun to play. To dive right into Scorched Earth, Scorched Earth one simply needs to run it. (If SVGA graphics are available on one's system, by all means select that mode—these higher resolution graphics are quite good.) Play begins with the random generation of the current level, creating the terrain and determining the location of the player's tank and that of the enemy (up to 10 players are supported). Number of opponents, the skill level of each computer player, type of terrain, sound effects, graphic resolution, and a myriad of other options can be selected by the player, with the ability to save one's settings for future sessions. This is definitely the most configurable version of this game I have come across and, I would add, the most playable and addictive. Each game is comprised of ten rounds against one's opponent(s). A winning round provides the victor with a victory purse which may be immediately invested in improved weapons, or accumulated for more substantial purchases later. During play, one's main concern is destroying the enemy as quickly as possible, knocking out his tank before the player's tank can be targeted and destroyed. Success demands accurate adjustment of angle and power of fire, and compensation for wind velocity and intervening objects. A correct determination greers the player with the colorful, fractal-graphic destruction of an opponent's vehicle. Overall, Scorched Earth, is a bargain for its modest $10.00 registration fee, providing the player with his or her password (deluxe registration is available only in the US at $20.00, offering the player the most recent version of the game and a complete loose-leaf copy of the manual. Please specify disk size). A Spanish version is also available for the same price. So, if you want a chance to scorch the enemy in an enjoyable game, register Scorched Earth with Wendell Hicken, 59 Esperanza Apt. M, Sierra Madre, CA 91024. Please send payment in US funds only. That's it for this installment Games reviewed in this column are available through numerous distributors of shareware and public domain software, as well as on many national and private on-line services. If you do not have access to these services, you can usually write or call the game developer for an evaluation copy. And remember, if you find a shareware program enjoyable, please register it with the author. Until the next time, great gaming! Send Us Your Best If you have authored a shareware or public domain game for MS-DOS compatible, Macintosh or Amiga computers and would like to have it considered for review in this column, please send two complete copies (preferably on 3.5\" disks) with documentation and cover letter to: Best of the Rest Computer Gaming World 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260 Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. CGW We've Outdone Our Only Competition... Ourselves. Mark II WCS THE MARK II WCS *User Programmable Functions *Allows Joystick Programmability ThrustMaster Get Real HOTAST ThrustMaster Inc. 10150 SW Nimbus Ave. Suite E-7 Tigard OR 97223 PHONE(503)639-3200 FAX(503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #94 Page 78 Computer Gaming World "


"Interaction, Relaxation, Competition, Cooperation, Recreation, Conversation, Education... Imagination v2.0 Mop LarryLand Join Leisure Suit Larry and adults from all over in the world's first Cyberspace Casino MedievaLand Team up with others to explore the dark caves within an active volcano. Post Office Receive E-mail in your own mailbox or send mail using Sierra Stamps SierraLand Dogfight other Aces in Red Baron, splat 'em in PaintBall Tor just putt around in a game of Mini-Golf. The Mall Get the best prices on all kinds of stuff! ClubHouse A friendly place to play Bridge, Backgammon, Cribbage, Chess and other great games. Destination? ImagiNation! For Your FREE Invitation To ImagiNation, Including 3 Hours Of On-Line Time Call: 1-800-SIERRA-1, Or Fill Out And Return The Coupon Below. Valuable Coupon For your FREE Trial Membership Kit and 3 FREE hours of on-line time, just call: 1-800-SIERRA-1, or fill out this coupon, place it in an envelope, and send it to: The Sierra Network, Offer #410, P.O. BOX 11, Oakhurst, CA 93644 Yes, I have at least a 386 computer, a modem, and a valid major credit card, If I decide to use The Sierra Network after my 3 free trial hours are up, I will become a full member and be billed as little as $12.95 per month Now there's a whole new way to have fun with your personal computer. It's called ImagiNation: The CyberSpace Theme Park and it's only on The Sierra Network. The Sierra Network is on-line games and more, including products for every taste and skill level. Games range from the multi-player version of the award-winning Red Baron and the critically acclaimed fantasy game The Shadow of Yserbius to more relaxing fare like Bridge and Chess. There's even multi-player games for children like Graffiti and Boogers.\" More than 20 great games so far and more to come! But what really makes The Sierra Network special is the sense of community that you get when you visit ImagiNation.\" Each night, thousands of friendly people gather there to play games, meet new friends, and generally have a good time together. If you'd like to try The Sierra Network, all you need is a 386 or better computer, a VGA monitor, a 2400 baud modem, and a valid major credit card. Just send in the coupon, orgive us a call. We'll give you everything you need to enter the land of ImagiNation, and your first 3 hours-FREE ImagiNation on The Sierra Network. There's no place you've ever been that can compare to the fun and friendship of the world's first CyberSpace Theme Park. Name Address City/State/ZIP Day Phone Evening Phone The Sierra Network Card Number: Expiration Date Credit Card: Visa MasterCard American Express Discover * Subject to current rates, terms and conditions. See rate card in membership kit for details. Offer good through December 31, 1993  The Sierra Network Offer #410 PALTO TM designates a trademark of The Sierra Network Your credit card will not be charged unless you use more than 3 hours of on-line time. Red Baron is a registered trademark of Dynamix Offer good until December 31, 1993 Offer available only to first time members 01993 The Sierra Network Offer #410 Circle Reader Service #88 "


"peview) (Continued from page 47) The professional voice actors chosen for the «Blackstar\" rather than the classic animation the entire game. These players should have no various characters are all up to the challenge of old. problem with Tentacle. and, without exception, add to the game. The Day of the Tentacle is like a cartoon in the The handful of other complaints that were cclcbrity of the bunch is Richard Sanders (Les positive sense, however. The cartoons it releveled against Maniac Mansion, whether by Nesman of \"WKRP in Cincinnati\") who sembles are the immortals: the Looney Tunes players or critics, are clearly inapplicable to reads Bernard's lines in the nebbish tremolo gems from the 40's and 50's. It isn't quite as for which he is known. Jane Jacobs plays Tentacle. Every scene in Tentacle has a score anarchically zany, and the characters don't and almost every action is accompanied by Laverne with suitable pathos, and Denny sacrifice everything for a laugh, but if it were some sort of sound effect. The animation is Delk's Hoagie sounds like a distillation of (and if they did it would not be as good a smooth and plentiful, and though the charevery brain-dead metalhead we've ever seen game. acters' outlines are still slightly jagged, they in movies and sitcoms. Unfortunately, I cancanLucasArts plays the tradeoffs well. Day of the Lucas not say who provided the rest of the fine are as minimally jagged as current VGA techTentacle is extremely funny without being voices, because the only credit LucasArts gives nology permits. The command interface has unplayable, logical without sacrificing the is Richard Sanders as Bernard. (I had to hunt through a promotional newsletter that came with the game to get even the other two names.) LucasArts did the same thing in the CD-ROM edition of Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis they credited Doug Lee as Indy and left everyone else anonymous. This practice shortchanges both the actors and the audience, and should be ended. GUA PREXUP Uc GeV TSXCUP Loe ODALORS PIEN Day-O! Opal Look at PLN 1096 KooKOL In the past, when I have said that a game down to the now-standard nine resembles a cartoon, I have meant it in a marvelous illogic of cartoondom, and chalverbs (Give, Talk To, Push, Open, etc.) and pciorative sense. I have reserved this comlenging without losing its sense of whimsy. It hot-spots in the graphic window highlightment for games that resemble the sorts of may not hold up for 50 years, like the carsuitable verbs for ease of selection. None of carroons no one ever watches, no one loves, toons that inspired it, but I expect that this the objects with which one interacts are so and no one will remember a generation down game will keep entertaining people for quite small that it is hard to see them, and the the road. So, when I wrote that a given game some time to come. CGW game's demand for precise cursor placement resembled a cartoon, I meant more that it is extremely lenient. resembled \"Thundarr the Barbarian\" and RUBBER CHIC RUBBER CHIC Rivaled only This all new LINKS 386 Pro version of our award-winning LINKS golf game offers many dramatic improvements that make playing LINKS 386 Pro more enjoyable and gives you exciting new golfing possibilities! Super VGA Graphics and 386 Power! The new LINKS 386 Pro, featuring Harbour Town Golf Links, is Texturing of the first golf game specifically designed for the graphic capabilties fairways, rough. and computing power of your personal 386/486 computer system. sand, and other SUPER VGA 256-color graphics at 640x400 resolution display surfaces adds an extra level of breathtaking views of LINKS Championship Courses. Your friends realism. won't believe that your computer looks so good! A lot of listening went into LINKS 386 Pro. Male and female Many of the new features and improvements were added in golfers. response to direct requests from LINKS users like you! An exciting new feature is our Unique Computer Opponent. Playa You can use any round of golf and save your game. The new LINKS 386 Pro of the 7 existing recorded every shot you made. Send your game off to your buddy LINKS courses or HARBOUR TOWN Skip Address upgrade your BERU and he can play against you right on the screen shot for shot, as if Uraw Gimmle Grid Rotate CLUB Hola: 4 Par: 5 Shots: 1 favorite course to you were right there next to him! We've also included pre-recorded SWING U2 Straight the Super VGA Ball to Pin: 46 YD. Profile Fade games from worthy opponents, statistics, a variety of game play version. Chip Users Menu Setup Top Scores Drop putt User2 ON THE TEE WIN modes and much, much more. Over 345 combinations of Viewing Windows. With the new LINKS 386 Pro you're not stuck with just one standard viewing window. With a few clicks of your mouse you can split the screen giving you a real-time reverse view of your shot to the green or add a scaleable top-view that displays the flight of your ball. Scorecard, club distance chart, terrain profile and other panels give you the flexibility C a lo Be Calon SOFTWARE INCORPORATED to display what you want to view while playing and 4910 W. Amelia Earhart Dr.. SLC, UT 84116 (801)801-359-2900. FAX (801)596-9128 you can change your viewing setup at anytime! *Actual Links 386 Pro Super VGA Scree -10 www.ro Lle "


"_Tech Gupport, Gaming On The ROM In reviewing Trilobyte's The 7th Guest, we observed three new development concerns faced by CD-ROM publishers: \"pressed\" Lmedia, increased system demands, and added hardware compatibility requirements. While it is not our intention to downplay a developer's responsibility to thoroughly test their products, we believe the reader should at least be aware of the increased difficulties encountered with developing for this medium. \"Pressing,\" mastering a program on disc, is similar to that of mastering audio CDs. While a traditional disk-based game can be be copied onto a limited number of floppy disks quite readily for beta-test distribution, transferring a large CD-ROM title to disc is more complicated and costly. CD-based games are developed on systems employing massive hard drives-gigabytes in size-in order to deal with the required volume of data. Thus, until committed to disc, a CD title can only receive limited resting (on systems possessing massive storage). When a product is ready to be pressed for testing on its intended media, a limited run of CDs is produced. At this stage, the game is tested on multiple systems for initial bug stomping. The process is repeated until, ideally, a finished bug-free product is ready for final mastering. Thus, the beta process is more difficult, lengthy and costly to implement successfully. Increased system demands refers to the ever increasing need for more processing power and RAM as a result of the increased amount of graphic and audio data that must be \"moved\" from disk to screen This matter poses a serious question to developers—that of the minimum requirements for a title. Set the minimum too low, and the product suffers; too high, and the number of gamers able to play it is severely limited Added hardware compatibility requirements must also be considcred. Some CD-ROM drives require proprietary controller cards, while others are more generic in their needs. Many sound cards now employ integrated CD-ROM interfaces. Furthermore, new \"standards\" are constantly being established. Thus, testing a product under every conceivable hardware configuration is a daunting, often impossible task. Clearly, we have only scratched the surface of what CD-ROM development entails in added concerns. Yet, just possessing a basic understanding of what's involved in producing a CD title can go far undereta in aiding one's understanding of the delays and problems associated with developing for this media. This article was originally scheduled to run with the review of The 7th Guest in Issue 109. In the meantime, however, we have been able (with the help of Media Vision and Trilobyte) to resolve the DMA conflicts experienced with certain Pro AudioSpectrum 16 (PAS16) sound cards. For most PAS16 owners, the solution may be as simple as changing the DMA channel employed. The PAS16 defaults to DMA #5 on installation. In order to work properly with Guest, the installation software for the PAS16 should be run again, selecting DMA #3 instead. If this does not correct the problem, contact MediaVision technical support to determine if you have a properly functioning card. There have been problems with some PAS16s prior to the current revision #04 boards. Following this \"sound\" advice should enable those with PAS16 cards to fully enjoy Trilobyte's hauntingly entertaining puzzler. Guest provides a must see (and hear) experience for the CD-ROM gamer. It is definitely worth the effort to make one's visit to Stauf's Mansion as pleasant a one as possible. CGW by the game itself. Improved swing indicator to allow for more accurate putting, The Experience Continues... The challenge doesn't end with Harbour Town. You can play each of the original LINKS Championship Courses (sold separately) with LINKS 386 Pro. Seven internationally-acclaimed golf courses on your desktop! Torrey Pines, Firestone South Course, Bay Hill Club, Pinchurst #2, Troon North, Dorado Beach, and Barton Creek with additional courses being released as fast as they are completed. If you're a LINKS owner, you can purchase LINKS 386 Pro at a special introductory price. Call us today for more information. LINKS(386 Lhule 1-800-800-4880 Real-time split Call toll-free, 24-hours a day, Mon-Sat in the U.S. screen views of and Canada or visit your local software dealer Circle Reader Service #32 your shot. Great for making your What Reviewers Are Saying about LINKS 386 Pro: approach shot to the green. Strategy Plus: \"...with LINKS 386 Pro, Access has not so much pushed back the 'envelope as redefined the term SR 19 simulation.' Right from the opening screen it's clear that something special is happening here.\" Vew Features for Links 386 Pro! \"...represents a new generation of computer game. Just play it and love it.\" Seven different viewing windows, with over 345 different combinations. PC Entertainment: Improved club selection feature.. Wide, panoramic views giving you a \"...for sheer, unadulterated realism, no golf simulation equals the performance of LINKS 386 Pro.\" retter feel for the course. Statistics recorded for each player game and course, with optional print out. A \"Saved Shot\" feature. Scaleable \"Top...if you're serious about golf simulations, treat yourself to LINKS 386 Pro. And if you don't own ges in elevation between the ball a 386 to run it on, youi've finally got a real good reason to lay out the money for an upgrade.\" ind the pin.. All new sounds! Supports SoundBlaster, SoundBlaster Pro, Idlib and other compatible sound cards & RealSound. Improved swing Computer Gaming World: ndicator for more reulistic putting. . Male or female golfers, with 10 \"...if you have a fast 386 or 486, think of LINKS 386 Pro as a Ferrari or a Corvette.\" lifferent shirt colors to choose from. Spectacular texturing of fairways, ough, sand, water not offered in other golf games. \"the ground texturing is dramatically realistic.\" lor sheer. In "


"EXPAND YOUR HORIZONS. The SelectWare SystemTM The Ultimate Software Demonstration System, can expand your horizons by providing you with a complete source for accurate software demonstrations on virtually hundreds of products from the leading companies in the industry, including top home & entertainment publishers such as: ACCESS NCCOU DEIM SOFTWARE INCORPORATED GAMES WITH PERSONALITY Antworx COMPTON'S TM WMEDIA Davidson.\" MITROPROSE SIR-TECH Spectrum\" HoloByte SPEEL STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC. STONE & ASSOCIATES  Let the ultimate power of The SelectWare System guide you effortlessly through the selection process. SelectWare SPECIAL BONUS! optiCDigest a CD-ROM on screen magazine designed to keep you updated on the latest in the ever-changing world of CD-ROM and Multimedia. Expand your horizons by calling 1-313 477-7340. Photo: Steven J. Mueller Layout: Randy Kincaid California Polytechnic State University COMPUTER GAMING WORLD FREE CD OFFER! 100 Color Tochnolomon In The Solec Ware S omu nistered trademark ol STI All other trademarks are of their respectivo como "


"ON TARGET A-C# OF THE COMPUTER WORLD GAVING . COMP GAME MPUTER) GANISKORT The Pierre Car m e Mog la 8 PACIFIC LINKSY380 Under WorldNDIANA JONE XXX866 Specialty lider 17 COMPUTER GAMING WORLDP VORLD COMPUTE GAMING WORL I The di computer dame Alogue aic Arts ntra Hot ItraBote Sina 1h3 Interplay's Star Trek: 2510 Anniversary HOT BLAMES Labyrinth Worlds FATE of ATLANTIE STT OS Terce Multimedia Fredert F Foy Frontier Plurmiche CELIN Don't go unarmed to the software store. For more than 12 years, Computer Gaming World has provided game hunters with the best information in the field. CGW is the magazine for gamers who want more than quick overviews of the latest games. We're loaded with the most complete reviews, new strategies, and the best hints for the discerning hunter. Take aim now with Computer Gaming World and save almost $20 off the newsstand price. Only $28 per year (12 issues). Lock and load with your Visa or MasterCard and call UUDI 1-800-827-4450 "


"pevnew As It Was Foretold.. Coktel Vision's The Prophecy by Allen L. Greenberg hil is setting out on a quest-so is Al. and deposit them in a special hourglass, reOn Phil's quest rests the heart, blood ferred to as the Revuss. Why should the temand destiny of all humanity-Al's quest ple, the sand, or the hourglass so affect Kraal too. Along Phil's quest lie the foulest and or the Blue Rock Kingdom? Someone put it most unspeakable horrors waiting to corrupt in a prophecy, so it must be true. his soul and consign it to the most loathsome The Prophecy has the feel of a giant lock. of fates in the deepest pits of hell-Al's quest Piccc by piece, the player manipulates small likewise. Should Phil succeed in his quest, he sections of the lock until a door finally swings will be proclaimed the mightiest of heroes. All open like an old puzzle box. Endless jewelry, of humanity, together with celestial choruses keys, statuettes and other key objects wait It toe.bet cafePaLan the of heaven, will sing his praise, just like Al. behind concealed panels, themselves only acYet. Phil's quest is better! Why? Because, cessible after the right objects have been propone implement to another as they solve each Phil acts in fulfillment of a prophecy, while Alerly manipulated, or ancient buttons have puzzle. merely acrs. Thou, noble adventurer, may been properly pressed. For those who enjoy also fulfill a prophecy. Don't be like Al! The Prophecy also features some eye-popbe like Al! abstract puzzles given physical form, The le from thy local holy Prophecy will prove a real joy. Increasing this ping visuals, along with nice sound effects person, magician or scribe. Prophecies sense of adventuring within a box, at only one and an interesting musical score. Indeed, sevand don't begin thy quest without one.... point during the adventure does Ween veneral of the animations feature characters who ture outside, after which he promptly finds are strikingly life-like yer almost too bizarre himself back inside to face another series of to be human. While the same animated seto be human. W quences are repeated a little too often cryptic devices which form the game's finale. throughout the story, there is no denying the While the various devices are clearly The technical wizardry with which they were conProphecy's main attraction, Ween does enjoy structed. Most of the program contains still the company of several other characters. Two paintings which are rich in both color and prune-faced, dance-happy twins volunteer to detail. Unfortunately, function is often sacricarry Ween's luggage, which they handle ficed to form, as these graphics must be somewhat less than dependably. A wise friend scarched pixel-by-pixel in order to find obnamed Petroy is an expert in obscure lanricordoustne of the recrutemelhet, jects which are vital to the hero's success. guages. Perhaps the most charismatic character in the game is Urm, a domesticated The game uses a mouse-driven interface identical to the one in Coktel Visions' Goblins Prophecies are, of course, a common plot vampire bat whose appetite for fruit long ago replaced his lust for blood. There is also a series. It is not uncommon, however, for an device found in fantasy entertainment of all object to be so well-hidden that it may only ages. This seems odd; a hero's actions should temple guardian suffering from a magically induced case of senility, as well as the mystebe found by a careful, systematic search. The appear no more courageous simply because rious Opale who appears to Ween in occasystem handles object manipulation well unsomeone once predicted them. Indeed, those sional visions. A copper ball becomes Ween's til it becomes necessary to use one object in actions, once predicted, may even seem memure companion, which is capable of transconjunction with another, in which case it chanical rather than heroic. Unfortunately, forming into several useful objects provided becomes somewhat awkward. In many cases, such is the case with Sierra/Coktel Vision's the hero is able to locate the items necessary a command involving two objects may not be The Prophecy, an adventure game in which for it to do so. Players will spend quite a bit accepted at all if the objects are nor named in the hero must mechanically solve a seof time transformthe proper order. ries of elaborate puzzles in order to ing this ball from As was foretold many paragraphs ago, The reach the conclusion. Prophecy has no shortage of mind-taxThe hero of this particular quest is ing puzzles for those who enjoy such Ween. His mystical grandfather, Ohkexercises. Others, who have come to TITLE: The Prophecy ram, has charged him with the defense enjoy adventure games for their stories, PRICE: $59.95 of the Kingdom of the Blue Rocks SYSTEM IBM humor and dialogue, along with a dash REQUIREMENTS: 286-10MHZ, VGA graphics against the evil sorcerer Kraal. Hidden of role-playing, will probably find little PROTECTION: None deep within various levels of a sacred DEVELOPER: Coktel Vision of interest here. Of course, one can PUBLISHER: Sierra On-line temple are three special grains of sand. always wait until the game is complete Coarsegold, CA By slowly gaining entrance to each level (800)SIERRA-5 to decide. Hindsight has always been and facing various dangers within, the most accurate prophetic tool of all. CGW Ween must recover the grains of sand ICTAUPALLY Computer Gaming World Pame "


"TSUNAMI (pronounced soo-nah'-mee) n. A powerful vision BLUE and a fresh approach to an almost forgotten art...the ancient art of storytelling. Look for these premium TSUNAMI titles: RINGWORLO PROTOSTAR 331 CREATED BY: BEST SELLING GAME DESIGNER FUNSTERSI JIM WALLS Actual VGA screens YOU'RE JAKE RYAN, rookie motorcycle officer. Ten years have passed since the unsolved murders of your parents, but a twisted trail of evidence still exists. While patrolling your beat, pieces from the past begin to link with the present. You're treading where you're not wanted and someone wants you to know it! BLUE FORCE... Realize your destiny. Available from your local dealer in 3.5\" disk or CD-ROM FORMAT. Circle Reader Service #95 Tw designates a trademark of Tsunami Media, Inc. "


"O.ROM Deuneun 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE CD Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis by Charles Ardai arrison Ford's voice is not an easy one to imitate. It is one of CD-ROM edition introduces improvements. It also takes steps to LucasArts' many accomplishments in the CD-ROM edition eliminate some of the more annoying features of the original game, Lof Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis that Doug Lee, who such as the tiresome copy protection scheme (unnecessary here, reads Indy's lines, is a true Harrison Ford sound-alike. Throughout obviously). A few sentences of dialogue have been added to the the game, Indy sounds the way Indy ought to sound, as do Marcus by-now-infamous \"How many fingers am I holding up behind my Brody (\"Good Lord, Indy! He's some sort of agent from the Third back\" puzzle to help players realize that there is no solution for them Reich!\") and all the other characters. LucasArts obviously put a lot of to find. Even the game box has been reduced in size, for which care into casting its voice actors, and it shows. Unlike many recent LucasArts gets my thanks. (I am tired of seeing companies use boxes CD-ROM upgrades, which have been embarthe size of two hardcover books to hold rassing and amateurish, Atlantis has the stamp of only a CD and a few sheets of paper.) quality all over it. In all other regards, both good and bad, To be fair, Atlantis was a first-rate game even the game is the same as it ever was. Indy's before this new edition (B.C.D., as it were). The mission is still to locate the Lost City of addition of more than 8,000 lines of spoken Atlantis before the Nazis ger there and dialogue, plus plenty of digitized sound effects, harness the energy of the Atlantean minonly makes it more so. However, the upgrade is eral, orichalcum. He has to get there by much more than just an incremental improveway of Monte Carlo, Crete, and Iceland; ment. It adds a whole new dimension to the Give Pick up. Use by camel, hot air balloon, and submarine; game-like taking a silent film and turning it Open Talk to Push and on the way he has to tangle with into a talkie. Close Look at Pull centuries-old deathtraps, find a copy of Just how significant an improvement this is can be seen especially The Lost Dialogue of Plato, and steal a few kisses from his traveling clearly in scenes that contain extended exposition or dialogue. There companion, Sophia. is a big difference between reading five or six screens full of text at \"There are still three separate plot paths which diverge about a third Sophia Hapgood's slide presentation on Atlantis and hearing Sophia of the way through the game, offering the player a choice among make her speech out loud. There is a huge difference between reading puzzles that emphasize teamwork, independent resourcefulness and Indy and Sophia's banter as it pops on and off the screen and hearing action. Alas, the three paths still overlap with each other sufficiently them sling the same insults back and forth at the top of their simulated that one does get tired of replaying the same scenes again and again, lungs. even with the slight variations between paths. There are also more Another advantage of spoken text: characters who mazes in the game than there ought to be, as well seemed flat in the original game really come to life FREE! as too many \"hunt the pixel\" puzzles in which the when animated aurally, as well as visually. The man player has to find and click on objects that are in the red fez at the market in Algers, who only roughly a single pixel in size. evoked chuckles when mute, now gets real laughs. FATE O ATLANTIS However, changing these elements would have Sternhart, the unctuous archaeologist in Tikal, is required radical revisions in the game. Short of more menacing now that one can hear his loaded making such revisions, LucasArts has done an intonations. Even the game's various Nazis, who impeccable job. Except for its unfortunate tensound like extras from vintage war movies, are more dency to stutter and spit when the CD-ROM substantial now that they are able to bark out a drive has to search for data in mid-sentence, the comment or two before Indy flarrens them. new soundtrack functions without a hitch, and Playing Atlantis on CD spoils a player, not just for the other pieces of the game (graphics, puzzles, playing the non-CD version, but for any silent\" dialogue) are all quite strong. game. It's hard to go back to reading text off a It is worth noting that the CD the game comes monitor after experiencing a game like this. on contains demos of two games that look even More than five years ago, I asked Douglas (Hitchberter, in terms of graphics, sound, and so forth: biker's Guide to the Galaxy) Adams where he Day of the Tentacleand Sam and Max Hit the Road. thought the next major advance in computer game Atlantis also ends with the promise of another technology would take place, and while everyone Indy game coming soon. So, the next Indiana else was talking about virtual reality and artificial Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis 7 Jones game will probably put this one to shame. intelligence he chose sound, saying that im$69.95 No matter. Atlantis CD is still a game to ooh proved sound would be relatively easy to achieve REQUIREMENTS: 386SX, CD-ROM, SOK per saved game and aah over and for CD-owning Indy fans and would improve game quality immeasurably. SoundBlaster or compatible for voice who are suffering the DTs due to ABC's canAs it turns out, he was absolutely right. PROTECTION: DESIGNER: Hal Barwood cellation of The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles, Sound is not the only dimension in which the it is a must-see. CGW San Rafael, CA Met Beek DIANA JONES EIBACETILITIES CD-ROM TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: IBM None PUBLISHER: LucasArts Games Page 86 Computer Gaming World "


"SOUND GALAXY IT WAS AS IF YOU WERE IN THERE! Forget about a primitive game session where gunning down a jet fighter or running away from a fire breathing dragon creates a dumb effect. And you reacted because you see it coming. If not, it's a game over for you. EASE OF INSTALLATION All configuration settings are via software without the hassle of setting jumpers. CD-QUALITY SOUND Sound Galaxy NX PRO Extra change all that See and Do by giving you a whole new generation of sound technology that promises you superb CD-quality sound that match the best amplifiers and full stereo capability. SUPPORT MORE SOUND STANDARDS Let yourself go ga-ga over the full sound support for AdLib, Sound Blaster Pro, Covox Speech Thing and Disney Sound Source. And you find yourself hacking away the jungle of games and entertainment software available under both DOS and Windows environment. VALUE FOR MONEY Topping it all are the bundled software such as Monologue for Windows, Voyetra Audio Station & WINDATIM OLE, just to name a few, so that you can edit audio, animate and create stunning graphics on screen. And not forgetting the free speakers that allow you to blast yourself to glory as you see your scores chalking up. So step into the world of imagination with Sound Galaxy NX PRO Extra. MORE CD-ROM INTERFACE Besides the built in AT-BUS CD-ROM interface support for Mitsumi and Panasonic drives, the NX PRO Extra can also support the Sony AT-BUS CD-ROM drive simply by plugging the SG adaptor to the Mitsumi interface. It can be further upgraded to more powerful SCSI CD-ROM drives. SOUNE Call us : 1-800-886 8859 Circle Reader Service #36 V S GROUP USA Office: AZTECH LABS, INC. 46707 Fremont Boulevard, Fremont, CA 94538. U.S.A. Tel: (510) 623-8988 Fax: (510) 623-8989 Heu Orice: AZTECH SYSTEMS PTE LTD 31 Ubi Road 1, AVS Building, Singapore 1440. Tel: (65) 741-7211 Fax (65) 741-8678/9 TIx: RS36560 AZTECH "


"Deureu Take The Princeling Challenge MicroProse Presents Challenge of the Five Realms E HZZOKOLI by Gordon Goble rn my book, three criteria must be met for a given pursuit to be can apply values and skills accordingly. Inevitably, the prince's dispoconsidered truly challenging. Obviously, there must be an intrinsic sition will lean in one of four directions, that of a magician, warrior, and formidable level of difficulty present at all times. Secondly, it diplomat or thief (and sometimes a little of each). This process is of must burst forth with intrigue, as this builds a respect for the qualities utmost importance to the coming developments, as a magically of the quest in question. Finally, in a computer game, one would hope wimpy prince won't be able to spell his name. that the undertaking would be enjoyable. Generating a character is actually one of the more entertaining Challenge of the Five Realms Spellbound in the World of Nhagardia aspects of Challenge, in that the well-written questions are both by Micro Play/MicroProse succeeds in the former; that is, there are insightful and pretty darn funny. This reviewer was once informed plenty of demanding quests and fearsome foes to best. And though, that my royal alter-ego's most redeeming qualities were drooling, at times, Challenge rates highly on the esteemed fun-o-meter, there belching and farting. Such accurate assessments were indeed a surprise are still several elements of game design — alas, it knew me too well. where Challenge is lacking, and this bodes ill Once the lad has been created and named for the entire quest. Speaking of the quest... to the gamer's liking (let's keep this part clean, The King is dead. Long live the Lizard people!), his visual likeness can be created. King. No, not the venerable, yet expired, Several pre-designed portraits are available, or Doors vocalist, but a profoundly more evil one can be custom-composed with the aid of entity, that of Lord Grimnoth. This dude is the Challenge Face Paint Program (a minione mean scaleface, and it is the player's ature bitmapped drawing package included mission to save the world from Grimnoth's with the game). serpentine hand of doom. As Challenge begins, the prince wanders The world in question does not mean cluelessly around his castle and awaits instrucEarth, and the drama of Challenge unfolds tion. The gamer's view of the action is proon quite a different celestial body. Multi-divided in an overhead blimp-style, and certainly doesn't offer anything mensional Nhagardia is a place of myths and legends, of magic and new. The interface consists of a number of icons situated to the right monsters. Knights abound and damsels are distressed. Gnomes, elves, of the main screen, with player photos appearing on the bottom. mermen and mermaids (make that merpeople), and winged folk are As the prince begins his journey, he will obtain the obligatory also rumored to exist, but in realms other than that of the central, various weaponry, components for sorcery, food, and the like. He will human domain of Alonia. also meet up with many traveling companions, some of questionable Holding Alonia together during this period of time (roughly equivamerit. There is a limit of ten NPCs in the party at any one time, lent to Earth's Middle Ages) is King Clesedor. He is hailed by some although a group of characters may take the part of just one NPC, and reviled by others, but he does his royal best. The game player is giving the gamer a total party greater than ten. his son, the prince and heir to the throne. Of course, not everyone will: 1) offer a positive It is in Challenge's opening animated introduccontribution, or 2) want to join the merry band tion that good ol' dad\" is brutally evaporated by of men and women). Bad guys are plentiful and, the slimy Grimnoth, opening a door to the advenRealms though some may want to toast the prince through tures that follow. Grimnoth wants the crown, and, Spellbound In The World Of Nagardia wizardry, others will choose more accepted forms with a vocal timbre not unlike that of Darth Vadar, of battle. Once one enters the demesne of the gives the prince 100 days to turn it over. If the \"Combar Screen,\" the gamer is presented with a young prince does not comply, Grimnoth will enslow, arduous presentation of phased combat, ilvelop the land in a «plague of darkness.\" lustrated by not only cumbersome but disjointed A plague of darkness in Alonia is just about the graphics where the odd arm may flail blindly into worst thing that could happen. A land without space, but no significant contact occurs. For most nights, Alonia has bred residents who are literally gamers, the alternative \"Quick Combat\" option scared to death of the dark. So, it's a matter of turn may be the mode of choice, even though the over the crown to the evil one; don't hand over the computer will make some odd field-of-battle degoods and witness the end of civilization; or find cisions. At least, the whole process isn't quite so out what this guy's problem is, maybe waste him, drawn out in this mode (although \"quick» it is and save everybody. Naturally, our gutsy prince not). opts for the latter. Worse yer, imagine the following sceMuch of what the prince can or cannot nario. The prince has discovered an imTITLE: Challenge of the Five Realms do throughout his mission will be decided poverished, diseased and blind wisp of a $69.95 in advance of gameplay via a character woman with no magical ability whatsoREQUIREMENTS: 386-12MHZ, VGA graphics, 21 MB hard drive space generation process. A \"quick gencration\" ever holed up in a dilapidated shack on PROTECTION: Documentation look up will spawn one of several default princes, F.I. Lennon, Rick Hall, Marc Miller the edge of town. Casting all moralities PUBLISHER: MicroProse Software, Inc. while a \"manual generation\" will permit aside, he decides to kill her. As the combat the player to answer a number of moral 1800) 879 PLAY screen is entered, the following informaand ethical questions so that the program tion flashes on the screen: \"You are facing PRICE: SYSTEM IBM DESIGNERS: Hun! Valley, MD Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"ZERO'S & ONE'S SUMMER SPECIAL YOU PAY GROUND SHIPPING, WE SHIP 2-DAY ON ALL SUMMER SOFTWARE PURCHASES* (800) 788-2193 *Offer good only for prepaid software purchases in Continental USA for orders received during June, July or Aug, '93. HARDWARE CREATIVE LABS: CD 16 Kit (Business) 635.00 Discovry 8 CDRom Kit 399.00 Discovry 16 CDRom Kit 469.00 Edutnmnt 8 CDRom Kit 449.00 Edutnmnt 16 CDRom Kit 519.00 Snd Blaster 16 218.95 Snd Blaster Pro Dlx 119.95 Video Blaster 329.95 Video Spigot 427.00 MEDIA VISION: Fusion 16 CDRom Kit 499.95 PAS 16 Snd Cd 165.95 Pro Aud Studio 16 189.00 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 MM Kit 929.95 TOSHIBA 3401 200ms Int w/Pas Cable 495.00 AI TECH: Pro PC/TV Plus 309.95 Pro VGA/TV Plus 636.95 Wave Watcher-TV 419.00 Video Surge 615.95 OTHER SND, MM, & VIDEO: ATI Ultra Grph Plus w/2mb 308.00 Computer Eyes RT 434.95 Gravis Ultra Sound 138.95 TelevEyes VGA-TV 229.95 WIN TV 399.95 STICKS & YOKES CH PRODUCTS: Auto III Game Card Flight Stick Mach 11 24.95 Mach III+ 29.95 Virtual Pilot Yoke 62.95 GRAVIS Analog Pro 37.95 Game Card Hi Speed 29.95 THRUSTMASTER: ACM HiSpd Game Card 26.95 Weapons Control 72.95 Weapons Control Mach II 99.95 U-Prom for WCS 26.95 Flight Control 59.95 Flight Control Pro 99.95 Rudder Pedals 99.95 MODEMS Prices too Low to Print: Boca, Sportster, Supra, Zoltrix, Zoom and others FLT SIM/ WAR A Line in Sand 26.95 Air Warrior SVGA 35.95 Ambush 35.95 Armored Fist 42.95 41.95 Jordan in Flight 36.95 Links 386 Pro 39.95 Belfry 19.95 NFL Pro Football 1992 35.95 NFL Video Pro Football 35.95 Sports Adventure 47.95 Tony LaRussa Bsbl 11 37.95 Trouble Shooting Golf 29.95 Wayne Grtzky Hocky 3 35.95 Wilson Pro Golf 24.95 World Circuit Grnd Prix 35.95 World Tour Tennis 31.95 EDUCATIONAL ACT Studyware 29.95 Alge-Blaster 29.95 Auto Works 44.95 Calculus 24.95 Castle of Dr. Brain 29.95 Cuckoo Zoo 31.95 Dinosauer Adventure 32.95 Eagle Eye Mysteries 31.95 Inspector Gadget 34.95 Island Dr. Brain 29.95 Kid Works 2 34.95 Lost Tribes (Soc. Stdy) 24.95 Mario Teacher Typing 24.95 Math Rabbit (New) 29.95 Mickey's ABC's Ench. 19.95 Millie's Math House 29.95 Operation Neptune 34.95 Oregon Trail Dix 35.95 Peter Pan Print Kit 31.95 Playroom 29.95 Putt-Putt Fun Pak 25.95 Ready for Letters 34.95 Rock & Bach 34.95 Scooters Magic Castle 31.95 Time Treks 29.95 Treasure Math Storm 34.95 What's My Angle-Geom 29.95 Sample Listing of Products ATAC 34.95 Design Your Railroad 34.95 Wing Commander 11 47.95 B-17 Flying Fortress 41.95 Discovery:Columbus 35.95 Wizardary VII:Crsaders 41.95 Birds of Prey 31.95 Dragon Lair III 35.95 X-Wing 41.95 Campaign 35.95 Dune 11 35.95 X-Wing Misson Dsk 19.95 Comanche:Maximm Ovrkl 43.95 El Fish 35.95 CD ROM Carrier Strike 41.95 Eric The Unready 35.95 Carriers at War 34.95 Flashback 31.95 7th Guest 52.95 Conquerd Kingdoms 35.95 Freddy Pharkas 41.95 Arthur's Teacher Trbls 41.95 Conquest Japan 35.95 Global Effect 19.95 Chess Maniac-Natl Lampn 34.95 Empire Deluxe 35.95 Goblins 2 24.95 Composer's Qst MPC 54.95 F-15 Stirke Eagle III 43.95 Heimdall 21.95 Compton Interact. Encyc.249.95 Falcon 3.0 44.95 Home Alone 2 27.95 Curse of Enchantia 24.95 Flight Sim 4.0 37.95 Humans 25.95 Daggar of Amon Ra 41.95 Flight Sim Add-Ons call Inca 34.95 Day of Tenacle 41.95 High Command 41.95 Indy Jones 4 35.95 Dinosauer Adventures 41.95 Jetfighter II 39.95 Kings Quest VI 44.95 Eco-Quest 1 41.95 Jump Jet 41.95 Kyrandia (Legend) 34.95 Encarta MM Encycl. 269.95 Liberty or Death 35.95 Legends Valour 37.95 Global Explrer-DeLorme 89.95 Lost Admiral 35.95 Leis. Suit Larry 5 41.95 Indy Jones:Fate Atlantis 41.95 Megafortress Mega Pak 37.95 Lemmings 2 35.95 Inspector Gadget 35.95 Pacific War 47.95 Lost Treas Infocom II 29.95 Iron Helix call Patriot 43.95 Lost Treas. of Rain Forest 29.95 King's Quest VI 41.95 Patton Strikes Back 14.95 Magic Candle 111 37.95 Jutland 52.95 Perfect General 35.95 Maniac Mansion 14.95 Just Grandma & Me 38.95 Secret Weapons Luftwife 29.95 Mantis 31.95 Kodak Photo CD 29.95 Special Forces 29.95 Mario Is Missing! 34.95 Legend of Kyrandia 41.95 Strike Commander 47.95 Mercenaries (Tegel's) 37.95 Mayo Clinis (jewel box) 29.95 Task Force 1942 Might & Magic V MS Cinemania MPC 54.95 Theater of War 19.95 Monkey Island 2 25.95 Monarch Notes 61.95 V Victory 1, 2, or 3 ea 43.95 Out of This World 36.95 Old Testmanet Interact 49.95 ENTERTAINMENT Paladin !! 35.95 Our House-Fam Circus 41.95 PC Karoake Police Quest 3 A-Train 77.95 39.95 41.95 Prophecy by Sierra Playing with Language 24.95 ADD's 29.95 call Populous 11 Prophone 1993 Ed ADD:Unltd Adventure 37.95 129.95 34.95 Prince of Persia 11 Putt Putt Fun Pack 41.95 Action 5-5 Sierra Gms 24.95 26.95 Rodney's Fun Screen Adventre Quest for Glory III 39.95 Starter-Sierra 41.95 19.95 Ringworld 35.95 RoMaterial 19.95 Air Bucks 35.95 Sherlock Holmes 3 Romance 3 Kingdoms 39.95 43.95 Alone in the Dark 35.95 Rome:Pathway to Pwr 29.95 Space Adventure 61.95 Amazons 38.95 SciFi:5 Actvision Games 26.95 Space Quest IV 41.95 Arcade Hits 24.95 Shadow President Who Killed Sam Rupert 41.95 24.95 39.95 Armourgeddon Shadowlands Willy Beamish Ashes of Empire 29.95 34.95 41.95 Sherlock Hims:Lst Files 42.95 Wing Commander II Dix 52.95 Back to Future 11 26.95 Siege 22.95 WCmdr 11/Uit Undrwrld Bart Simpson-Wierdnes 29.95 52.95 Sim Ant World Fact Book '92 Batman Returns 59.95 35.95 41.95 Sim Betrayal at Krondor 39.95 City 29.95 WINDOWS Sim Earth Blue Force 39.95 42.95 Alphabet Blocks 29.95 Sim Life Caesar 35.95 41.95 Audio: Star Trek V. 34.95 Carmen SD-Space Dluxe 47.95 Simpson's Arcade 29.95 Conquered for Windows 44.95 Castles II 35.95 Space Hulk 34.95 MS Golf 42.95 Challenge of 5 Realms Space Quest V 39.95 41.95 Musicator GS 197.95 Spear of Dstiny:Wifnstn 35.95 Civilization: Master Playr 49.95 Origin FX Screen Svr 24.95 Classic Adventure-Lucas 35.95 Star Control II Star Trek Screen Svr 44.95 Conquered Kingdoms 35.95 Star Trek 25th Anniv. 35.95 Take Break:Crossword 22.95 Stunt Island 29.95 Creepers 33.95 Uninvited 35.95 Syndicate Dagger Amon Ra 36.95 Winsense 44.95 Terminator 2029 41.95 Dark Half 34.95 Yobi Magic Spell Tricks 29.95 Dark Seed 41.95 Ultima Underworld II 47.95 SPORTS Darklands Ultima VII Part 2 45.95 Ultrabots Car & Driver Daughter of Serpents 37.95 36.95 32.95 Veil of Darkness Front Page Sports Ftbl 35.95 41.95 Day of Tenacle 34.95 Waxworks 35.95 Jack Nicklaus Sig Golf 41.95 35.95 AND A WIDE RANGE OF OTHER PRODUCTS FROM A...TO Z...! . SALE ITEMS WHILE SUPPLIES LAST. ALL SALES FINAL: Backgammon 10.00 Beating House at BJ 10.00 Castlan Northam Campaign 10.00 Hoyle Games for Laptops 10.00 Lightspeed 10.00 Magnetic Scrolls 15.00 Ono a Day Jokes 5.00 Spellcraft Aspects Valor 15.00 Shadowlands 15.00 Vogas Video Poker 10.00 35.95 41.95 41.95 ALL IBM COMPATIBLE ZERO'S & ONE'S 6472B WINDY RD. LAS VEGAS, NV 89119 ORDER: 800-788-2193 FAX: 702-897-1571 TECH/INFO: 702-897-2797 INTL: 702-897-2797 Prices and availability subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantee compatability. All software is factory fresh and unopened. We are not responsible for manufacturer's defects. Contact publisher regarding defects. Any return subject to 20% restocking fee. Shipping: 1st game $5; add'l games add $1 each inContinental US. 2nd Day Air $6 1st game, add'l games add $1 each in Continental US. COD add $5.00. All prices are US Dollars. WE ACCEPT M/C & VISA. Circle Reader Service #98 "


"Devleu U EI NLeave U I opponents, but their leader is more skilled at warfare than the prince.\" To make matters worse, the ensuing battle rages on for minutes before the prince squeaks out a marginal victory. Complaint #1: Poorly worded generic messages such as this are unacceptable in 20MB worth of game. Complaint #2: There is simply no way that this physical wreck of a woman is \"more skilled at warfare than the prince\", and capable of putting up such a fight. That this scenario could happen at all made this reviewer think twice about Challenge's quality control. And it's a darn good thing our hero did win this battle, as a princely demise will often result in the gamer being boinked right out of the program and left staring at a black DOS screen. As Challenge comes equipped with copy protection, this prospect becomes even less appealing. Triumphant he was, and as the prince continues along his way, it becomes obvious that one thing Challenge has going for it is a solid sense of humor. While quizzing a local drunk on his supposed knowledge of the other four realms of Nhagardia, our boy is told that, \"There's a realm of squirrels, and a realm of naughty prostitutes,\" followed by the slurred threat, «Why if you weren't forty years younger than me, stronger than me, and certainly better with a weapon than me, I'd kick your royal arse from one end of Alonia to the other.\" As in most CRPGs, travel from town to town is conducted through a \"World Map,\" a sort of satellite view of the land, and a beautiful one at that. When in a town, a \"zoom out\" option is accessible, and although this eliminates the need for hand-sketching the city streets, the \"zoom out\" view is patently ugly and reminiscent of circa 1980 Colecovision. Speaking of gamer assistance, Challenge offers a dated note-taking tool that will inevitably be ignored in favor of a pen and paper. The fact that the Challenge notebook is one of precious few elements in which the keyboard is employed at all is unfortunate as mouse mechanics leave something to be desired, and often the cursor is a tad out of sync. Keyboard shortcuts, too, would be a bit more expeditious during tedious segments. Who to maim and kill, who to befriend...as we all know, decisions of this magnitude are never easy in the real world, and aren't in Challenge either. New found acquaintances may well have complex perCRO sonalities and can't be immediately labeled as \"good\" or \"bad.\" This is a nice touch not present in all CRPGs, and character interactions must be invoked with caution (\"truth\" spells don't always solve the problem). Once the prince has the tools, learns a few spells, and assembles a strong supporting cast, he will (hopefully) find that the rumors are true and begin exploring the existence of the other four realms. He will soon find that Alonia is not the only troubled region in Nhagardia, and that the resolution of conflict is a key to the solution of the puzzle. The fact that he has to do it all in 100 days will spell problems for some, but then that's the nature of the world-saving business, isn't it? Challenge is not a simple affair, and the inherent good humor and complexity of characters do, fortunately, add to the interest. Sadly, though, one is left with a general impression that an adequate beta testing program was not conducted—there are simply too many oversights combined with a certain awkwardness to gameplay that shouldn't exist in a finalized version. CGW COMPUTER SPORTS GAMES EKABOARD COMMANDER CORIS* PREMIUM TEMPLATES FALCON COMMANDER UTILITIES ENEW! IBM  APPLE II  C-64 THE MOST REALISTIC STRATEGY/SIMULATION COMPUTER GAMES ON THE MARKET TODAY! www KCC is proud to offer exciting new utilities for Falcon 3.01: Operation Fighting Tiger M!! FALCCALC 3.0: Superb campaign intelligence gathering tool F3 MAPPER 5.0: The famous Red Flag Printable thater map, reports, Kneeboard shextanulmuh mote!! Instant Action, and HUD Customizing utility! F3 REQUISITION 1.0: Pista in command of your SHOWT3 2.0: Allsviewing of teen Shots Costomite pilot replenish appliestiprint met lynkor skills from Fl's own treencapture program!! BORNSTEIN'S COMBAT MISSIONS: Gf-wrenching misions FBMENU 2.0: Fantastic meashell that from the author of the definitive Palm: The Octal Cant Strategy Book that bring it all together!! Keyboard Commander Corps keyboard templates end \"Keyboard Confusion\" and let you concentrate on winning. Our high-quality, color templates turn any AT101 keyboard into a realistic control panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, color-coded layout flattens the learning curve! ..Se Strike Now Avallable Strike Eagle III, Gunship 2000 Maximum Overkill. X-Wing CHECK 3 IN 1 FOOTBALL Unmatched statistical accuracy Stats compiler. Full team and player statistical breakdown. You call the plays and timeouls. Compare scouting reports. Use the two-minute nile  766 teams included, NFL, WFL, USFL, WIAF & College from 1925 to present Trade ,draft or input teams. Standings and League Leaders FULL COUNT BASEBALL You manage all 26 most recent teams and 52 great past teams 45 man roster. Stats compiler. Complete boxscore to screen/ printer . Auto scheduler. Input your own teams, craft or trade players  Wind/Weather Option. You choose starting line-up, batting order, bunt for a hit, steal Standings and League Leaders! ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling. For more information, call or write for a free brochure. 1-800-477-7032 MEINER GAMES PO BOX 100594. NASHVILLE, TN 37224 Falcon 3.0/3.01 A-10 Tank Killer 1.5 Aces of the Pacific F-15 Strike Eagle II Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe F-117A Nighthawk Jetfighter I & II Megafortress PAN B-17 Flying Fortress A.T.P. CY Air Combat Flight Simulator 4.0 EHTE FILHAR * High-Quality, 3-D Graphics * Color-coded Layout * Laminated Stock * *Fits all AT101 Keyboards * Standardized Format * Affixes to Keyboard * Make Payable Keyboard Commander Corp. 4839 SW 148 Ave., 402 Davie, FL 33330 1 $11.95 Please Print Check Enclosed Money Order enclosed. Any 2 $21.50 sler de Any 3 $30.00 4 or more S9.25 each IN amo Country FC Utilities. $19.95 w/F-3.01 Template$24.95 Address Shipping & Handling: All orders add: $3.00 State/Province Zip Postal Code except Utilities only: $1.50 or C.O.D. add $6.00..CALL 1Discounts per order only. Allow 2.4-Week_DEALERS WELCOME 1-800-262-6066 Circle Reader Service #66 Computer Gaming World City rems Circle Reader Service #67 Page 90 "


"con ANEER TM Relentless Space Combat For Naive Rookies or Hardened Vets So 012 RIPOTI 0102 sa student at the TCSN Academy, you customdesign and fly unique combat, rescue, and search and retrieval missions from the CyberSchool's holographic simulator. In the Wing Commander tradition, the game features a dynamic musical score, improved rendered, bit-mapped graphics, and a dazzling array of customizing options. But Wing Commander Academy is not another cinematic extravaganza it's an intense dogfighting marathon. 10 DEL DIDE EBEC DEDE  SCLE ADEQUATE PILOT THEY Custom-design a variety of missions that match your skill level as you place fighters, capital ships, data pods and ejected pilotsup to 10 in each of the four action spheres. Save up to 24 games to disk and trade with your friends or upload them to bulletin boards to challenge others. Request random missions where each action sphere yields an unknown number of enemy ships with pilots of varying skill levels.  Climb into the cockpits of the new Confederation Wraith or Kilrathi Jrathek fighters for a new combat experience. Select a cybernet wingman from a frightened cadet to a hotshot veteran. Fly from the cockpit view or try the chase-plane view for a new perspective on the dogfighting action. Sharpen your combat skills as you compete for high-point honors. Engage the \"Gauntlet\" a dogfighting marathon with 15 progressively difficult levels of attacking ships including three flights of fighters in each level. Build missions so tough that even our professional Wing Commander pilots can't survive. FALU CANCEL TACCO WA EEL EDED SERVE Actual screens may vary. FE EREGUTE RIGIN We create worlds. A Stand Alone Game No previous Wing Commander experience necessary An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 For MS-DOS 386SX, 386, 486 or 100% compatible systems. Sound Support: Ad Lib, Sound Blaster, Roland LAPC-1 or 100% compatible sound card required for music. Requires: 256-color VGA, 2 megs RAM, 5 megs hard drive space free, joystick. Circle Reader Service #99 Copyright 1993 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin, We create worlds and Wing Commander are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Academy is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. "


"Speealgtrategy.gectom MicroProse Strategic Space Opera Is Rated XXXX! )))) A Revealing Sneak Preview by Alan Emrich After choosing a flag color, one can type in his or her leader's Sneak Previews are nor designed to be reviews. They are feature articles based on \"works in progress\" that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of early coverage. name and the name of the home world. It is also possible to These articles are not intended to provide the final more on a product, since we further personalize the game by naming worlds colonized and expect to publish appropriate review coverage when the game is finished. ships designed throughout the game. Suddenly, one is managing their home world into prosperity, complete with on-line de T Thile standing at the greeting card rack at the local scriptions of every window and button (when playing at lower Hallmark store, we've probably all been suckered into difficulty levels). The on-line tutorial even includes advisory text opening a card that had the word \"SEX!\" on the cover that appears at certain important game thresholds. The average only to find the text on the inside reading, \"Now that I have gamer should have no problem picking up the basics, even II, if you were attracted to this article by without picking up the game manual. its title, you've fallen for it again. But now that I have your attention, let me tell you about a strategic space game under Management Behind Bars development that really delivers the best that galactic conquest Planetary management is handled through the allotment of has to offer. resources via slider bars (again, a la Spaceward Ho!) into the five MicroProse's forthcoming Masters of Orion (lovingly known different areas of interest: ship construction, planetary defense, by the development team as \"MOO\") is designed by newcomers industrial expansion, environmental development and technoSteve & Maria Barcia, and Ken Burd of Simtex Software. logical research. A planet spends 100% of its available resources Although it is their first design effort, MOO has that crucial every turn after the proper deductions are automatically resomething that makes for a wonderfully addictive game, a moved, just like a paycheck, for ship maintenance, spy networks, quality which I call «gaming gravity.\" This means that, no counter-espionage and trade. The funds are allocated by sliding matter how busy one is with other matters, it pulls a gamers a bar up or down on one line, while the player can see the body into orbit around it and creates black holes where weekdynamic increases or decreases on another. So, instead of players ends used to be. getting their hands dirty with a lot of numbers, they are working with friendly \"spending ratios» via the slider bars. Quadruple-X? The math in the game is mercifully simple and very logical. I give MOO a XXXX rating because it features the essential Reading in the manual how the exact numbers work (with the four X's of any good strategic conquest game: Explore, Expand, exception of trade, which is more opaque) adds crystal clarity to EXploit and Exterminate. In other words, players must rise one's on-map experiences with MOO. Like Civilization, the from humble beginnings, finding their way around the map game evolves quickly from fun to fascination as one learns more while building up the largest, most efficient empire possible. about how the formula behind it make ir tick. Naturally, the other players will be trying to do the same, therefore their extermination becomes a paramount concern. A A Good World Is Hard To Find classic situation, indeed, and when the various parts are properly designed, other X's seem to follow. Words like Excite, Experi As one explores the map, cach star usually has a single useful ment and Excuses (to one's significant others) must be added planet located there. Each planet is rated for its maximum to a gamer's X-Rating list. population size (I've seen them range from 10 to 125 million) and features one of many possible atmospheres. Half of these A Recipe For Cooking In Space (irradiated, tundra, inferno, etc.) cannot be colonized without first discovering the proper technology necessary to terraform Masters of Orion combines many of the best elements of the planet and settle there. strategic space game classics like SSG's Reach for the Stars and Interstel's Armada 2525. Although the lead designer, Steve Each population point represents one million beings. When a Barcia, stated he had never played these computer titles, his colony ship lands on a new planet and plants the flag, only two grafting of what are essentially the best elements of each of these strategic space games' designs is uncanny. Clearly, Barcia has pur The alien races available in MOO his finger squarely on the pulse of what makes for a great game Alien Race* Description of galactic conquest. Alkaris An avian race of superior pilots Bulrathis A large, bear-like race of superior ground fighters A player begins a game by defining the number of opponents Fellpurrs A catlike race with deadly gunners (from 1-5 computer opponents only there are no multi-hu Humans Outstanding diplomats and traders Klackons Highly productive insect workers man player provisions of any kind), the difficulty level (i.e., how Meklars Cybernetic masters of automated production many explorers and colony ships that one starts with, a la Psilons Brilliant researchers Spaceward, Ho!) and a star map size (ranging from small to Sakkra Prolifically reproducing lizards humongous). Following that, one chooses from among the Shadowmorphs Shape-shifting spies supreme Silicoids Crystalline beings immune to hostile environments several different alien races in the game, each with their own * = Race names are subject to change as the game is developed. unique ability (see sidebar). Page 2 Computer Gaming World "


"coecalcitrate in re ection DESERT 1 EASES C ECILISHIPS RELOR SCOUT ITEANS APO KIANTO points settle there to establish the \"seed\" colony. At that point, deciding on the weapons and special items to put on board a one can either wait for them to grow or, better yet, peel off ship. Fortunately, as one's technology advances, more space people from other worlds and dump them on the new one so becomes available on the hulls, and older technology gets smaller that they'll develop faster. With the proper investments in and cheaper to reflect miniaturization. However, the latest environmental technology, one can discover terraforming, polgoodies will usually fill precious hull space very quickly, as lution reduction, and other techniques that can make even the players will discover when using the ship design screen. most dreadful planets useful. However, nothing is cheap in MOO; economic development is the cornerstone of success in Fire The Gatling Phasers! this game, as in every, «4-X» classic. The tactical space combat system is similar to that of Armada Tick, Tock, Tech, Talk 2525 (and King's Bounty, for all you fantasy world conquerors out there). When ships engage in combat, they line up on After quickly adapting to the easy, mouse-driven interface and opposite sides of the screen and maneuver on an 8x10 square learning the rudiments of the game, what's an aspiring galactic tactical combat map (complete with the planet being fought overlord to do? Peaceful players will over and occasional asteroid want to develop new technologies squares). The ships then proceed to and good relations with their neighDistant Pt maneuver while firing beam and bors. In Masters of Orion, there are missile weapons at each other. Of six different technological areas PGA 33,193 course, special devices such as auto(computers, planetology, weapons, mated repair systems, repulsor etc.), each of which can be pushed beams, srasis cubes, cloaking deup 99 levels. vices, and more come into play on Throughout the first 50 levels of the tactical battle board and can each tech area, the potential for new make for some hairy space battles. discovery abounds. Every aspect of Planers, too, can be bombed or, the game is touched upon by techmuch to the consternation of every nology and every progression is a other civilized alien race, attacked logical step from the one preceding Game Design Fleet Map Races Planets Tech Next by biological weapons. To conquer it. Whether it's a new weapon, dea world, it is generally advisable to fense, special ability, industrial optimization, increase in ship clear the space above it and bomb any defenses on it before speed, expansion of scanning distances, or improvement in attempting to land colonists there. When the ground troops computer capabilities (the viral factor in the success or failure of start to tango, it can be a bloody and costly affair if one does not one's spy and counter-spy nerworks), technology can give playhave a sufficient technological edge in ground battles (body ers an edge every bir as vital as those granted by their special armor and ion rifles, for example) racial characteristics. The real beauty of MOO is that all of the weapons and \"Excuse Me, But Drop Dead» technology work together through such a clean set of simple and logical dictates that it is easy to understand the nuances of Contact with neighboring races soon occurs and diplomatic combat. One does not need to have the computer command relations begin almost instantly. Through a simple, yet highly one's ships in battle (which it will do, if desired) but, instead, diverse set of menu bars, a player can establish non-aggression can command each ship type group with a reasonable confipacts, alliances, various levels of trade, or can threaten, backstab dence that the right targets and weapons are being selected each and otherwise deal with diplomatic matters. Alien emperors will occasionally send their ambassadors around (or, if snubbed, will recall them!), thus initiating their own parleys for peace, war Although this preview is only a cursory look at Masters of against common enemies,\" swapping technologies or other Orion, I can say this: I've played every strategic space game that such matters. I could find in my 20 years as a wargamer, both board and One particularly intriguing aspect of MOO is that players can computer games. Although I haven't heard the final sound establish spy networks and set up defenses against enemy spies. effects, nor seen the latest of the evolving graphics, I can say that Spies always report on the latest alien technological discoveries the various parts of this game are designed and executed better and can either be activated to steal technology or destroy factothan most I've seen. The gameplay elements are expertly ries and planetary defenses. For those players not inclined to melded, and I can see the whole exceeding the sum of its parts sabotage or steal from a particular neighbor (perhaps hoping to when MOO is finally released. curry favor with them), one's spies can always go underground and await further instructions. Civilization In Space? C'mon...! Shoot First, Interrogate Later MicroProse Producer Jeff Johannigman initially described War happens. To prepare, one must design and build ships MOO to me as \"Civilization in space.\" Well, Jeff, it's not. which take advantage of the latest technological discoveries. However, if that's what it takes to get people to take a look at However, as no player may operate with more than six different MOO so that it doesn't get lost in the shuffle of strategic space ship designs on the board at once, care must be taken that a games, I can forgive the marketing hype. (After all, I tried to lure balanced, high-tech fleet is maintained. readers in with an XXXX rating in this article's title). The potential number of combinations of weapons, special Masters of Orion is a fine game in its own right and, while abilities, engines and defenses on the four different available hull comparisons can be made to classic games of strategic conquest, sizes is staggering. One might have Level III battle computers, none are required. Anyone who tries Masters of Orion will see Level IV ECM, Level I shields, crummy duralloy armor (althat it has the right stuff. When the jury comes back on this though it can be doubled hulled\" for those wanting to sacrifice game, I suspect it will find a place near the top of its genre as the ship's interior space for added damage points), all before ever players discover that rare fifth X in its design-Exquisite. CGW September 1993 "


"Specialgkrategicertoon Blade Scummer Electronic Arts' Syndicate Illustration by Eric Gooch to me that the game would have a more exhilarating pace and more satisfying play value if one could challenge the syndicates of one's friends and co-workers. by Wyatt Lee The metal of the elevated walkways was research budgets and manage a team of losing its battle with the acid rain. cyborg agents in order to succeed. Rust flaked from the skeletal framework of the scaffolding as the steps of invadAlso like PowerMonger, the Syndicate ing agents crunched along like boots player attempts to srain an entire world stomping the desiccated remains of a longwith the custom color that symbolizes the dead corpse. Defenders armed with Uzis player's forces. The world map is a dark moved to intercept them, but their efforts future version of our world and there are were doomed to be as ineffective avainst the 50 geographical areas, each with its own invaders' mini guns and lasers as the earlier mission. These missions can be: assassinaefforts of governments to legislate against the tion attempts; covert operations designed megalomaniac onslaught of the megacorpoto \"persuade\" a civilian to join one's rations. The force of the mini gun's heavier cause; evacuation of individuals from a caliber slugs threw the defenders back rival syndicate's control; or a surgical against each other in obscene waves of death, sweep where one weeds out or recruits and soon the crimson of their blood added a rival agents from a city, block by block. richer tint to the rust-red palette of the As in the other games, computer-controlscaffolding led forces (in this case, rival syndicates) compete simultaneously with the human Syndicate is a game of dark future conplayer. flict that might well be described as Ridley Scott (director of Blade Runner) does Also like its predecessors, Syndicate of PowerMonger. It is not a game for the fers a distinct terrain and an ominous squeamish. As in the fictional introducsoundtrack. Slow building chords play tion, it seldom offers a mission where one underneath each mission and add to the is not forced to leave a trail of blood-spewforeboding atmosphere. I even liked the ing corpses across the screen, most of sound effects when one changes from whom die dramatic on-screen deaths. It menu to menu, reminiscent of doors is a world of cyborgs and megacorporawhooshing open in the old Man from tions where crime syndicates compete for U.N.C.L.E. television series. Some of my ny global domination, a world where assassifriends got annoyed with it and toggled nation is as much «strictly business» as the off the sound immediately. Graphically, hits in The Godfather. The player becomes Syndicate offers much more distinctive a sort of far-future \"Godfather» in this terrain than its predecessors. The buildtypical Bullfrog strategy game, but comings are incredibly detailed and have an mands from the safety of a mother ship interesting modern (steel, brick and glass) hovering over the conflict rather than character to them and the animated billfrom a compound on Long Island or near boards are reminiscent of the huge televiLake Tahoe. sions above Tokyo's Shibuya Station. The limited downside to the detailed graphics is that they tend to be almost too The Family Is What's Important pretty for the gray future that the game posits, and the 3-D graphics often obAs in other Bullfrog products, the obscure the characters as they traverse the jective of the game is to take over the map. Don't get me wrong, the artists do world by maneuvering tiny, animated huwonders with a dark palette, but fail to mans across maps of varying terrain types. present the general entropy inherent In Populous, gamers used divine force (in within a world of criminal anomic (i.c.no the form of plagues, natural disasters and one cares enough to keep up the infraworld shaping) to convert the various structure). worlds to their favor. In PowerMonger, gamers directed populations from a god A disappointing difference between like perspective, but added various techSyndicate and its progenitors is that the nologies to improve the production version of the game does not survivability/military capability of the allow for head-to-head competition (as in gamer's chosen people. In Syndicate, one Populous and PowerMonger) between hustill views the action from above, but it is man-controlled syndicates or its natural necessary to manage finances, establish extension, nerwork competition. It seems A Coffer You Can't Refuse When playing the game, the player as syndicate boss controls the game through menus and icon-based point and click options. The former sets up the missions and the latter commands the agents during the missions. The first important menu is actually a world map, a venue menu. The player decides upon his/her initial placement and discovers the mission options available. The player must work through five initial missions as a type of forced tutorial. After that, the pe possibilities open up according to territories controlled. The syndicate boss pushes IDICATA TITLE: Syndicate SYSTEM: Amiga and IBM with 4 MB RAM, VGA SoundBlaster support only PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION: None DEVELOPER: Bullfrog Productions PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA Computer Gaming World "


"coeciallatratea certion the «Briefing\" button and gets a brief text buildings are viewed from an oblique devices and meandering off to play hero description of the mission objective. overhead perspective. One monitors the with others of one's agent corps. Then, accepts or rejects the mission. If action through two constantly changing desired, it is possible to purchase extra \"windows.\" One window features the reNothing Personal, intelligence and get more information alistic (oblique) perspective of the action Strictly Business prior to selecting said mission. just described and the other is a direct I call the next menu the Q Section overhead view where one can readily spor overhead. Indeed, everything about Syndicate is menu (remember lames Bond) In addi approaching dangers (red dots for enemy professional and business-like. I particurion to a silhouerre of the agent being no agents and blue dots for those intrusive Tarly liked the way each new city or comequipped or modified, the Section policepersons). Both are dynamic and I 2 plex had its own logic. Having to use mass menu features on-screen buttons for: 1) 1) To found both useful (the latter is expressly transit to get from one side of the city to assigning research priorities and funding; vital when one's agents are hidden by the other or needing to navigate tunnels obstructions or inside buildings on the 2) selecting new or replacement agents and skywalks added a different dimenfrom the cryogenic chamber; 3) modifygenic chamber: 3) modify act action window). sion. As play progresses, gamers systeming existing agents with cyborg enhanceThe gamer can separate the four agents atically move from mission-to-mission, ments; and 4) equipping active agents in the squad and operate each individuconquering the world, and the missions with ammunition, weapons and tools. ally or can give them orders as a group. get systematically rougher. The delimiting factor, of course, is the To order the agents to move, one merely Unfortunately, the strategy element inamount of funds in the budget. This inclicks on the desired terminus point onvolved in the Research section is limited creases with conquest and taxation, but the action window and they will use their by the randomness discussed earlier. Furdiminishes when one loses territories (i.e. Al to get there. To draw a weapon or gerther, the Al of the enemy agents leaves one's tax base). On occasion, one must an object out of inventory, the player much to be desired. In many scenarios, wait until a simulated day passes before left-clicks on the object in the on-screen one can simply find a protected area with being able to continue funding research inventory for that agent. To drop a a reduced entryway and allow the enemy or equipping a squad for a given mission. weapon or object, one right-clicks on the to come in waves. When one can do so, The Research button brings up the bodies simply pile up in as gruesome a new screen with a dynamic a spectacle as could possibly be expected graph. The player selects the type this side of Nazi atrocities. of weapon to be researched (automatic, heavy, assault or miscellaI also wish that there was an automatic neous) and the amount of centering option on the action window. funding. The graph changes to Admittedly, the scanning window with reflect the speed with which each the direct overhead perspective docs autoadvance can be purchased and, matically center on the spy squad, but it when one returns to the screen, would be nice (at least when one is travhighlights the amount of the reeling in group mode) to have the action search which has already been window do the same. I found scrolling completed. Unfortunately, one around to find the group to be a distrachas to guess which weapon will tion from time to time, but others may object in the inventory. When enemy not find it so. become available in a given category at a agents and police arrive on the scene, one given time. I have had flame throwers merely places the cursor over them and Finally, I wish that the missions did not appear as both assault and automatic the cursor is transformed into a target: seem so repetitive. The missions essenweaponry. I have had mini guns appear white if the target is out of range and red tually boil down to three types: assassinain the same two categories. This takes if it is a viable target. To fire a ready tion, extraction and slaughter. There are away from the product's polish and soweapon, the red target cursor is posioccasional new wrinkles, but the standard phistication. tioned over the targer and the player scenarios provide the bread and butter for The Team button allows players to reright-clicks. The result provides satisfacthe entire game. The option of playing place their fallen agents with new \"blood\" tory sound effects and animation. When against human-controlled syndicates from the cryogenic chamber. A roster an active object (weapon, medikit. perwould enhance the shelf life and play appears and the substitution process is suadertron, etc.) can be picked up, the value of the game, but even that might relatively intuitive. The Mods button alcursor transforms itself into a metallic not get around the design s repetitive nalows a syndicate boss to artificially enclaw to allow the gamer to know that the ture. hance his/her agents with cyborg object may be picked up and added to the constructs (brain, eyes, heart, chest, arms agent's inventory. It's extremely easy. Showing Some Respect and legs). I found the chest to be a nice if the gamer does not want to operate first investment, serving almost as a bulin spite of the negatives, Syndicate is a all of the agents individually, the agents all of the gents individually, the let-proof vest. Then, I followed with arms have according to the game's ficii polished and significant cffort. It seems have (according to the game's fiction) and legs so that my agents could carry two sure to satisfy the real-time strategy CHIP technology implanted in their mini guns rather than one. The Equipbodies so that their Intelligence, Percepgamers who enjoyed Populous and Powerbutton allows one to purchase new weapMonger, but will not satisfy those that are tion and Adrenaline levels can be pumped ons or equipment and to reload the up artificially. So, players can click on looking for a Neuromancer-style cyberartificially So players can punk game nor those who are looking to agents existing arsenals. sliding scales and enhance those qualities test their reflexes against the computer. It Once the visit to the O Section menu is before leaving their agents to act according is impressive as far as it goes and not to be complere, the gamer is ready to take the to the Al algorithms. Indeed, it is a good missed by aficionados of the genre Bullcyborg spies into the mission proper. The idea to \"pump up those flabby agents\" frog built. Unfortunately, it doesn't quite action takes place on a map where tiny before leaving them to the program's own offer the staying power of its predecessors. figures, along with miniature vehicles and Cow September 1993 "


"specalctrategy gectron BATTING CLEAN-UP E L2 Art 122  Strat-O-Matic Computer Baseball Version 4.0 by Wallace Poulter number of years ago I was invited to join an established ing not to miss anything. Once the league was set up, I wished baseball league. Rather than playing with cleats and bats, to play San Francisco's games manually and all the others however, this league was played with cards and dice. The automatically. I finally figured out that one does this by hitting game was Strat-O-Matic, a statistic-intensive re-creation of the \"Out of Town Scoreboard\" option and picking the approAmerica's Favorite Pastime. After a few instructional games, I priate game to play manually. Makes sense to me: Out of Town agreed and parlayed the #1 draft pick, as an expansion franchise, Scoreboard and playing a game manually are an obvious syninto Tony Gwynn and Bill Doran. Round 7 came around and ergy! This information is tucked away on page 26 of the I took a rookie slugger who no one else thought would make it: manual. Jose Canseco. I was hooked and spent the next couple of years So, it's a lousy game too, right? Wrong. Once you get past the playing in several leagues. copy protection and manual (and how many customers has I was fortunate in that the gentleman who ran the league had Strat-O-Matic lost by then?), you get to a wonderful product every Strat-O-Matic card ever made and ran a league of \"All which accurately and enjoyably recreates all the fun I had when Time Greats.\" Here I first learned about Jimmie Foxx, Mickey I first played Strat-O-Matic with the cards. Cochrane, Al Simmons and other true legends of the game. In many ways Strat-O-Matic is two products in one. The first Strat-O-Matic wasn't perfect (Ted Williams R is a straight computer game, while the second didn't make my starting outfield, based on works in conjunction with the board game the numbers), but the sense of control and and playing cards, and acts as the bookkeeper, N S managerial choices kept my interest. As with P I handling all charts, rules and dice. The player most of us who started with board games, cards, and the system they use, are at the heart time (the lack thereof) and family eventually of the product regardless of how you play the intervened and I stopped playing, game. The Advance side of each batter and Then Strat-O-Matic's release of a computpitcher card is split into two. These represent erized version of the game caught my attenperformance versus a right handed or left tion. Here was an opportunity to return to an handed opponent. A grid, 6 columns x 12 Strat-O-Matic without the hassles of the rows, is formed by taking the 1-3 column board game. Unfortunately, my enthusiasm headings from the appropriate side of the position player's card was checked. First impressions are truly dreadful and revolve and the 4-6 column headings from the appropriate side of the almost exclusively around the worst copy protection I have ever pitcher's card. In the board product, three dice are thrown with seen in this industry. This protection scheme, which I have a colored die representing the column to use and two white dice dubbed Lame-O-Matic (TM, ridicule pending), allows one instal representing the row number to be used. While playing with the lation from the Master disk. You must un-install back to the cards the computer now «throws\" the dice. Master disk if you wish to remove the game from your hard This system is casy to use but, as noted earlier, can sometimes drive. What a joke! Strat-O-Matic has the nerve to call this state create abnormal situations where decisions are made purely on of the art.\" In the real world, most of us delete and install numbers versus left/right pitching rather than on overall quality. programs all the time based on our current needs. I must have What is interesting is that usually ball clubs play hitters in the placed Jack Nicklaus golf on my machine at least a half dozen same spot in the line up (Mattingly always hitting third for times, deleting it when I needed more space for a project. Yet, Yankees, etc.) while the Strat-O-Matic numbers imply that a even if one grants the logic involved in creating this protection, player's place in the batting order should change greatly based consider the other problems. on the pitcher's throwing hand. If one's hard disk fails (as minc did the day after I put the game Just about every stat and game situation you can think of is on it) you can get a replacement disk by sending $10, the original covered in Strut-O-Matic, from the standard Hit & Run, disk, and a receipt for the work done on the hard drive!!! I suggest through Balks and Wild Pitches. Errors, as in real baseball, play Strat-O-Matic look up the words «cusan important part of a team's success. For all tomer\" and \"criminal in the dictionary. COMPUTER I BASEBALL of Bonds' offensive stats (and Williams et al), They might find that the words are not ... THE CLOSEST THING TO REAL MAJOR LEAGUE ACTION! the Giants' recent success can be more accusynonyms. rately attributed to the best defense in the Nor do first impressions improve once National League with Clayton and one gets into the product. The menu opThompson (vastly underrated) on the doutions are full of jargon and abbreviations ble play, Williams (a former college SS) at that do not help a first time user. Therefore 3B, Manwaring's gun behind the plate, and we refer to the manual. The 60-page manLewis' errorless streak in Center. Defense, ual has two illustrations, while the rest especially up the middle, can save a is a never-ending stream of poorly orcouple of runs per game. Strat-OStrat-O-Matic Computer Baseball Version 4.0 ganized text. Being the adventurous PRICE: With Strat-O-Matic cards: $70.25; W/o cards: $60 Matic accurately shows this. type, I wanted to jump in immediately SYSTEM: In fact, Strat-O-Matic's star accuracy and start my own league, rename the REQUIREMENTS: VGA graphics, 2MB hard drive space PROTECTION: See review is its biggest strength. While occateams, and move players around. PUBLISHER: Strat-O-Matic Co., Inc. sional weirdness (Will Clark stealing Again the menus were not helpful. I 46 Railroad Plaza Glen Head, N.Y. 11545 21 bases in a 1992 replay) is part and had to wade through the manual try(800) 645-3455 parcel of all baseball simulations, the TITLE: IBM Computer Gaming World "


"Special ctrategy cection ection U numbers generated in over 100 stat categories \"feel\" right. Kruk Leaguc play is, in my opinion, the heart of the product. Here leading the league in hitting, with Bonds, Van Slyke and Shefone can wheel and deal and build the contender that one wishes. field close behind, for example. Schilling leading the league in League set-up can take a while, and I found the best method wins, while it did not happen in 1992, was definitely within the was to import teams from other leagues first. Players may be cut realm of possibility. Strat-O-Matic doesn't just re-create the or traded throughout the running of a league. A nice feature of stats, it uses them in a realistic manner so a player may well Strat-O-Matic is the ability to pick (as in draft) one's own perform better (or worse) than reality, but always within a stadium. A ream with singles hitters might pick Busch Stadium, reasonable range. A good example of this would be my replay for example. Weather is also a factor within the game and can using the Giants of 1992. I thought Roger Craig gave up on affect the outcome of game situations. Remember that when the Darren Lewis too early in 92 and I used him exclusively as a lead wind is blowing out at Wrigley. off hitter. Lewis had 65 steals (one behind the Game set-up is accomplished through a numleader Brett Butler) and consistently perber of menu choices and roggles. Everything formed well. Ironically, a lot of Dusty Baker's from weather and ballpark effects through the moves this year fit the way I thought the DH can be toggled on or off. The game has both Giants should play. The only star I wonder text and VGA screens. The biggest difference about is the Save. While not knowing the rules between the two (other than the pleasant graphinside out (anyone who actually understands ics) is that the menu of choices is displayed on the infield fly rule should get out more often), the text screen, while one must hit the \"M\" key my understanding was that a save was awarded to activate it during VGA play. Once into actual if the man on deck was the tying run. In a couple of instances game play there are small black and white pitcher and batter pitchers who entered different games with 9-0 and 10-2 leads animations superimposed on a colorful representation of each respectively, were awarded saves even though their clubs inpark. It works quire nicely, too. Numerous offensive and defencreased the size of victory (11-3 and 14-2). I think this is wrong, sive choices are available including the standard Steal. Hit & but I'm not certain. Run, Sac Bunt, Squeeze, plus all the defensive alignments one The computer game is split into two further parts. The game would expecr. An optional Quickplay feature allows very speedy playing portion and the stat package. In the latter, a General generation of game results. This can be toggled off at any time Manager function, a Statistical function, and an Accessory after the 5th inning—a nice touch. function are of primary interest. The General Manager option Strat-O-Matic is a faithful recreation of the board game, with includes the Computer Manager function and the respective a good use of the computer to speed up game play. The copy League, Team, Player and Ballpark maintenance programs. The protection is an abomination, and the manual isn't much better, Computer Manager allows the setting of a starting rotation (and yet for all this, the game is excellent and provides many hours spot starters), lineups versus leftor right-handed pitchers, and of fun. Fortunately, that is the criteria upon which I ultimately a number of substitutions. judge a product. CGW THE ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer.. JUST GOT BETTER! 00 Another five major play-by-mail games have joined our unique offer: Cluster Lords (rules and 10 free turns in this deep space opera), Death and Sorrow (rules and 10 free turns in this introductory fast-moving wargame), Perseus Arm (the 170-page rulebook and 3 turns in a massive new space opera), St Valentine's Day Massacre (rules and five turns in PBM's most challenging crime game), World Conquest (rules and 4 turns in this clean strategic wargame). And now all subscriptions are processed by first class mail, ensuring you get the hottest news in the hobby. Play by mail is America's most exciting form of gaming, pitting you against crack players across the country and abroad. (Call (216) 673-2117 for news of the big national PBM convention. Our offer gives you the chance to sample it and decide if it's for you. For those who haven't seen our guaranteed offer before, here it is: Take a $20 (4-issue) subscription to FLAGSHIP, the leading international play-by-mail magazine, and let our reviews, features and player comments help you pick the best of the latest games. We think you'll enjoy our frank, irreverent style. With your first issue we'll send you a $20 coupon for any of the above games and 19 others, with a description of each so you can decide which of these intriguing designs to try. The only condition: that you've not played with the chosen moderator before. But what if you don't like FLAGSHIP? What if you're not intrigued by the game you write for? Haven't you wasted $20? No! Write us within a month of getting your first FLAGSHIP to tell us you were disappointed, and we'll refund you the entire $20. (You can still use the coupon.) So: either you've enhanced your gaming with an exciting new dimension for $20. Or you've explored it and decided it's not for you at a cost of zero! Why not try it? Send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 454, Fair Lawn, NJ 07401-0454. [European readers: Send .99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 1733, Handsworth, Birmingham B20 2PP for the equivalent European offer!) Circle Reader Service #54 September 1993 Page 97 "


"Spea  Moon Landings Made Easy Tips For Interplay's Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space POR PROMEVLANCH by Erik Anderson, With Fritz Bronner, Designer of Race into Space uzz Aldrin's Race Into Space is a the midgame and the endgame. It is ima crucial mission step, and launching a challenging game that places the portant to set goals in each area in order Flyby first means a-3 modificr throughplayer in the position of the leader to plan properly. out the mission! and administrator of a space program. Opening (1957-1961): Buy an Orbital When the Gemini is ready, buy a DockThis was a job big enough to cause the Satellite and an Atlas or A-series. R&D ing Module for it. This should be done resignation of two American administrathem immediately and declare (in Future after accomplishing the Orbital, so dctors, and the death (by heart attack) of a Missions) an Orbital Satellite launch atclare all Gemini missions as Duration, Soviet Chief Designer. While Buzz is a tempt. It will take place at the end of the Docking and EVA missions. Since you've somewhat simplified and abbreviated vernext turn, allowing another set of R&D got the Titan working, Strap-Ons are recsion of the real thing, it is still somewhat attempts before it happens. The plan is to ommended, as is launching the whole daunting. The following is a guide to launch on November 1957, just like his thing in one mission. That would be Misnegotiating the worst of the hazards. tory, but with a little luck some real ad sion #33, Manned Orbital Docking EVA There are three levels of difficulty in the vances can be made. Duration. Note that you can't count on game: hard, difficult and bloody nightdocking with a Docking Module already mare! Some might ponder whether the in orbit, so avoid that. Also, avoid misgame is more difficult than history. In sions with joint launches if you can help recreating history, ncarly everyone has it; they're not as reliable. 20/20 hindsight. If approached with the attitude that \"it was easy since we did it Fly the Gemini on Mission #33 repeatbefore,\" the space program would have edly, gradually increasing Duration levels met with disaster. That is why the design (B, C and then D). If the dockings fail, of the game takes an early view of space don't increase the duration that will exploration. From the late 1950's all the make planning them too difficult). Evenway up to just before the Moon landing, tually, you should raise your Docking to there were literally thousands of dangeraangerKeep R&D'ing and launching satellites around 70% and Duration to at least ous unknowns. Whether man could suruntil successful. Buy a Mercury/Vostok Level vive in a weightless environment was one program in the Spring of 1958 and R&D At some point, think about following of many questions space experts considit continuously. Buy Astronauts/Cosmoup the Lunar Flyby with a Lunar Probe. ered. nauts and put four or five of them in the However, since it's generally OK to skip Rigid safeguards, proper planning, and Mercury (or Vostok) program. If all goes this step, go ahead unless there is a lot of backup contingencies must be made in well, you can declare a Manned Suborbimoney available or the manned program order to overcome the harsh environment tal for Spring of 1960. Follow that as soon is suffering setbacks and needs to do of space. In Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space, as possible with the Manned Orbital and something in the meantime. onc is given the opportunity to handle an EVA (buy and R&D it, of course!) as this stressful job and deal with some bigsoon as it is practical. By the end of 1961, Eventually, one must decide how to it should be time to buy the Titan and best approach the Moon itself. For purtime crises management. A player must face the same difficult unknowns that his Ranger (or Soviet equivalent, which I will RESEARCH I or her historical counterparts had to deal cease to list) and/or the Gemini. with. Hopefully, through these suggesDED tions we may keep you from getting fired, Midgame (1962-1966): R&D the Tior from suffering cardiac arrest. tan, Ranger and Gemini. Get the second group of astronauts and assign them to \"It's One Small Step...\" the Gemini project. Launch a Lunar   Flyby as soon as the Titan and Ranger are The strategy for the game can be broken up to speed, but not before doing a B6 ATIOS US down into three sections: the opening, Manned Orbital. The Manned Orbital is FITTO. CHOEINGESETT IPTURY ROCKE Computer Gaming World "


"coecallctrategu cection ection Your opponent is subject to the same failures, and fail he will. Don't be discouraged if an opponent gers all the \"firsts\" in terms of discoveries. While their progress is not good for your budget, it's important to remember that the game is a moon race. It is akin to a marathon and it does have a finish line. If an opponent gets all the firsts, following suit within a turn or two will keep things approximately even. While a bit demoralizing to trail others, it's just fine as strategy. A mishap by your opponent or a last-minute burst of speed on your part will be enough to steal the lead at a critical moment. Buzz is a deceptively simple game. There are plenty of decisions, and their ramifications have many levels which are difficult to foresee. As with all things, practice makes that easier. Take heartu PE FUTURE MISSIONS and Cricket LEM on time. Later, if the budget improves, get an Apollo program as a backup, in case the Gemini fries. Foregoing the Saturn V and launching all LEM missions as joint missions is an inexpensive option. However, I don't like joint missions with unmanned portions; they seem to fail with alarming regularity. It's tempting to skip LEM tests by taking this option, but it has its risks.... poses of this discussion, let's assume the historical approach, which is a fairly good The minishuttle is great. It's expensive and reasonably safe plan. To take the to start, though it is cheaper in the historical road, you must buy the Apollo endgame than an Apollo, thanks to its capsule in 1964 or 1965 and begin apsule in 1964 1965 and begin reusability feature. It's also extremely rereusab R&D'ing it right away. liable, which is nice. Endgame (1967-): Buy a Lunar ModThe Soyuz Kicker-C option is worth a ule! The Eagle is much more affordable look, too, especially for the Soviet player than the Cricket; not because of initial who's falling behind. cost, but because of its R&D costs as well. The four-man programs change the Fly the Apollo, as the budget bonus for whole midgame and endgame strategies, the first three-person capsule is nice. so make the decision to go with a minOnce Duration has been accomishuttle during the opening. It's not a plished, the Lunar Flyby is done, and the great way, but there's no docking or LEM Lunar Probe (if any) has landed, go ahead tests to worry about. and fly a Manned Lunar Pass! \"Fire In The Spacecraft!» Save the Manned Lunar Orbital until you can combine it with a LEM test. The Astronautics is a dangerous business. prestige bonus is good, but it's a long way Even on the simplest missions, faral disto the Moon. Therefore, don't unnecesasters will occasionally occur. Don't despair; repair the damage or switch to your many steps, any of which could fail. alternate program and continue the race. Buy a Saturn at some point. Note that since the Titan, Atlas and Strap-Ons are all over 75%, just buying the Saturn V nets a safety factor of 60%! That's a year's worth of R&D, so make the Saturn V a final major purchase. \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" The last three missions should be a Do you know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) Manned Earth Orbital LM Test, a gaming is? if you don't, we can help you Manned Lunar Orbital LM Test, and explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper then (ra da!) a historical Manned Lunar Mayhem has been leading the way for Landing. Once your simulated Armover 10 years by informing people about strong puts moonboot to moondust, PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographyou've won! ies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and comOkay, it's never that easy. Setbacks al panies that our readers participate in. ways occur. If the Gemini fails, for exam Paper Mayhem has been improving with ple, one must speed up the Apollo the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming program and have it take over early. If the since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings Manned Lunar Pass fails to make orbit, you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the downgrade the Manned Lunar Orbital fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take adinto a Pass, and reschedule everything vantage of PBM gaming. else. When problems arise, part of the game (and life in general) is dealing with Send subscriptions to: them. PAPER MAYHEM Feel free to improvise solutions in Buzz, Dept CG,1518 Adams St. too. The historical approach is a good Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 one, but if the budget is uncommonly low or high, or if other circumstances dictate US Subscriptions: (like the Apollo keeps blowing up), it can Single issue $5.00 be the worst approach to choose. 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 Hardware Options: Going with a FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00: 1 year to Europe S51.00: 1 year to Australia $57.00. Gemini instead of an Apollo is cheaper, All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid but riskier. The player must decide which in US funds and drawn from US banks. Foreign subscriptions are asked to use International Money to use early on in order to have a Kicker-B Order in US funds. Circle Reader Service #79 September 1993 DRACULA In London a BASED ON BRAM STOKER'S ORIGINAL NOVEL For Windows. Excellent graphics, interface, sounds! Count Dracula is somewhere in London. Use your wits to track down the bloodthirsty vampire and put an end to his evil menace. Assume the role of Prof. Van Helsing, the renowned metaphysician or Mina Harker, the alluring young schoolmistress. Learn the secrets of Renfield, the madman. Explore haunted mansions and much more. S29 cach. Mail check, cash or World Renowned money order to: Requires SDJ Enterprises, Inc. Windows 3.1 1551 Fawn Valley Dr. VGA graphics St. Louis, MO 63131 386 25Mhz or faster Supports Sound Blaster (314) 966-5602 (Evenings Only) Easy to Install Nor available in stores. Satisfaction guaranteed or your money back are to be do Bons are askerown from us Circle Reader Service #83 Page 99 "


"antin POL the computer can be beat if you think ahead, stay smart, fight dirty and remain optimistic. No one was more surprised than the astronauts when we made it all the way to the moon without any in-space P VEHICLE ASSEMBLY PETRA H LAUNCH FACILITVI OLAOLLO 11 CACHTHREE PEOPLC NAVIMUR PAVLORD 2200 CHTE E HISSION HORDHORO SELECT PAVLOADS AND BOOSTER FRDIOVAPOLLO 1641 KICKER HONG LI CAGLCSOX 1 PAVLOND HONG ROCKET LUPTBIL fatalities. (Well, there was the one on the ground.) Having no casualties in space was really a stroke of luck; a statistical fluke, and Buzz reflects that. Odds are, a player will kill people in space. Just try to keep the carnage to a minimum and hope your opponent does worse. LM tests: At least make a Manned some 20-odd steps. Rushing is for Lunar Orbital and take an LM along satellites and Sub-Orbitals, not for for a test. This satisfies two out of Moon walks. Buying a second three LM points; the remaining one launch pad allows for the earlier is just a -3 when using the LM. Get scheduling of missions—without the remaining LM test, if possible. the rushing penalties! Second and Trying to land without any LM tests third launch pads are costly, so conis pretty dangerous. sider carefully when to buy them. Maximized R&D capsule safety facTechnology Bonus ror. Always do this, especially in the case of the Gemini program. Never The following information is not listed launch a manned mission unless the in the original game documents. Want a capsule is up to the max level to leg up on the competition? Read on.... which it can be developed at that ved at that Any program developed to 75% or time. You should maximize the greater will give a reliability bonus to R&D for capsules, not just out of other similar programs. For example, the 5 normal safety concern, but also beMercury is researched and developed to cause the + 1 to the safety factor after 75%. If the Gemini program was pura successful mission is vital for going chased, it would start at 40%. This reabove the max R&D level (as opflects what was learned from the Mercury posed to bringing things up to a level program and helps in the design and dethat would otherwise have to be atvelopment of the Gemini program. tained by spending a couple MegaBucks). You can sometimes break What follows is a list of Technology this rule when racing for the first Transfers. On the left is the current proSub-Orbital, but at no other time! o other timel gram safety and what Tech bonus is received when starting similar programs. A pilot with Capsule Skill of 4. (The Soviet program bonus works the Never consider anything less than 4. same way as these American examples.) Okay, maybe a 3, but not less than that! We hope this additional intelligence will aide you in your race against the \"Evil No rushing: A-3 is too painful, esEmpire\" of vour choice. cow pecially when multiplied out by \"You Are Go For At Least Seven Orbits...» The following is a list of what one's program needs to have accomplished before trying to put people on the Moon. A Docking Skill of at least 80%. Keep trying dockings until obtaining this level. Launching a manned lunar landing and then failing to dock is very frustrating An Endurance through Level D. Do not skip any endurance levels when going to the moon. For each endurance level skipped, it's a -5 throughout the mission! Lunar orbital and lunar landing missions have far too many steps to take such a risk. Historically, the U.S. launched Geminis on ever-increasing durations until passing the two week mark (level D). NASA also practiced dockings on the same missions, which was convenient. Try it. Prior mission milestones: It's dangerous to launch an orbital mission until after completing a suborbiral. However, it's much more dangerous to do a Lunar Landing without having donc a Lunar Orbital first. Why? Because, in the case of the landing itself, that -3 for a skipped step has a lot more mission steps in which to cause you grief! Never skip the Manned Lunar Orbital! When trying for the Manned Lunar Pass, you may be able to skip the Lunar Probe (sometimes), but you should always have at least one successful Lunar Flyby. The Pass is a shorter mission, but even so, that -3 the whole way around makes it quite a whiteknuckler. Manned Programs Program(s) Safety Factor Bonus for other programs Mercury 75% Gemini-20%, Apollo-20%, Jupiter-10% Gemini 75% Mercury-40%, Apollo-30%, Jupiter-15% Apollo 75% Mercury-40%, Gemini-40%, Jupiter-25% Jupiter 75% Mercury-40%, Gemini-40%, Apollo-40% Mercury, Gemini 75% Apollo-40% Mercury, Eagle 75% Jupiter-35% Mercury, Cricket 75% Jupiter-35% Gemini, Eagle 75% Jupiter-35% Gemini, Cricket 75% Jupiter-35% Apollo, Eagle 75% Jupiter-35% Apollo, Cricket 75% Jupiter-35% * The minishuttle gets no bonuses from the capsule programs. It was based on the dyna-soar lifting body, a revolutionary concept at the time. 75% Rockets Program(s) Safety Factor Bonus for other programs Atlas Titan-25%, Saturn-15%, Nova-10%, Booster-30% Titan 75% Atlas-35%, Saturn-35%, Nova-25%, Booster-30% Saturn 75% Atlas-35%, Titan-40%, Nova-25%, Booster-30% Nova 75% Atlas-35%, Titan-40%, Saturn-35%, Booster-30% Booster 75% Atlas-35%, Titan-25%, Saturn-15%, Nova-10% Atlas, Saturn 75% Titan-65%, Nova-35% Atlas, Titan 75% Saturn-60%, Nova-35% Atlas, Nova 75% Titan-65%, Saturn-60% Booster, Saturn 75% Titan-65%, Nova-35% Booster, Nova 75% Titan-65%, Saturn-60% Satellites Program Explorer Ranger Surveyor Safety 75% 75% 75% Bonus Ranger-45%, Surveyor-45% Explorer-50%, Surveyor-50% Explorer-50%, Ranger-50% Computer Gaming World "


"Sound BLASTER BLASTER Whether it's the menacing snarl of a chainsaw or the banshee scream of your F-1 Tomcat, just remember: it isn't real. Until you hear it on a Sound Blaster.\" Sound Blaster fidelity adds a whole new dimension to PC games, not to mention multimedia and other applications. And Sound Blaster is compatible with more of your software BLASTER BLASTER than any other audio card. No wonder it's the best selling sound board of all time. So when you're ready to hear what your games really sound like, get in touch with your Sound Blaster dealer today. Or call us direct at 1-800-998-5227. Or we may just have to CD-quality 16-bit Advanced Signal Processing send Bruno over to persuade you. audio...we've got the Sound Blaster for you, GRCATIVA From yames to stereo multimedia to full-blown, Copyright 1993 Creative Technology Ltd, Sound Blaster and the Sound Blaster and Creative Labs logos are trademarks of Creative Labs, Inc. All specifications subject to change without notice. International inquiries: Creative Technology Ltd., Singapore, TEL 65-773-0233 FAX 65-773-0353. Sound BLASTER Sound\" CREATIVE CREATIVE LABS, INC. You never heard it so real. Circle Reader Service #48 "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD \"I Came, I Played, I Conquered» The Empire Deluxe Tournament Continues! by Alan Emrich Round three of the New World Computing/ Computer Gaming World official Empire Deluxe tournament is under way at this time. Here's the lineup: Art by Rodger MacGowan, Copyright 1993 RBM Graphics Name R. Rutdlege M. Conder Network Prodigy GEnie City, State Seattle, WA Littleton, CO COMPUTER WARGACING WORLD M. Kohn T. Webb CompuServe Prodigy Walnut Creek, CA Reno, NV In this issue... D. Aldrich R. Andrews GEnie TSN Minneapolis, MN Waterville, OH E. Best M. Ellis GEnie Prodigy Carrollton, TX Tupelo, MS SSG's Warlords II Sneak Preview by Alan Emrich 103 B. Marchesani D. Crandell General Principles Of Strategy by Tim Carter Prodigy CompuServe CompuServe GEnie Lyndhurst, NJ Englewood, NJ College Point, NY Westwood, MA 106 B. Brennan H. Gale Three-Sixty Pacific's Harpoon Designers' Series II by H. E. Dille 110 M. Gravel R. Matthews CompuServe GEnie Cranston, RI Assonet, MA Wargames Survey 1900-1950, Part 1 by M. Evan Brooks W. Haberer R. Moser GEnie Prodigy Tucson, AZ (Unavailable), FL 118 Mindcraft's Ambush at Sorinor by H.E. Dille 128 SSI's Great Naval Battles In The Atlantic by H.E. Dille 130 Highlights from round two show that Blue is still the most winning position to play. The average game length was only 67 turns, while only one match went into triple digit length at 130 turns. The quickest match during round two was a stunning 15 turns! As an interesting aside, one tournament player, Darell Phillips (Prodigy: WJXS08A) found his first round opponent was an old friend whom he hadn't seen in over three years. Best of all, he didn't know that friend, Mike Isom, was even a computer gamer! Now, of course, their friendship is closer thanks to playing in the Empire Deluxe tournament. And on that note, I'll close this column by playing the theme to «It's A Small World...\"CGW Page 102 Computer Gaming World "


"ICON TIME TAKE SCENE DATE DIRECTOR PRODUCED BY You've Got To Be Keating Me! sode of Calde New Saew Toni G Pondon, A Sneak Preview Of Warlords II by Alan Emrich Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They are feature articles based on \"works in progress\" that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide the final word on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review coverage when the game is finished. Eames (their is foray into experi T Then Australia-based Strategic Studwas developing. In fact, the Macintosh verthreatening maw of an entryway. Other playies Group (SSG) released Warlordssion of the game, when released in 1991, was ers (the elves, dwarfs, etc.) cach have their V back in 1991, I doubt that they such a vast improvement over the IBM verown distinctive castle architecture. could have anticipated its tremendous sucsion in the eyes of SSG, that a full tilt sequel In addition to improved graphics, players cess, nor its popularity as a «hard core\" fantasy (Warlords II) was planned upon the Mac with a sound card are in for another treat. The wargame. Certainly, the experience from conversion's release. After a long hiatus to computer opponents speak and each snipper SSG's previous foray into fantasy computer launch their Carriers at War game series, of speech is presented with a large portrait of games (their ill-fated Fire King a sort of those Aussies were at it again. With a long list \"the Warlord\" himself, who will greet players, Gauntlet role-playing game run amuck) of things they and outspoken players wanted bid them adieu, and comment on their promight have kept wargamers par excellence lan to see in a sequel product, Warlords II went gress from time-to-time during play. I don't Trout and Roger Keating a safe distance from slowly from the drawing board to the mothknow whose voice is that of the Warlord, but the fantasy genre. However, when Steveerboard. it was mercifully unaccented. Somehow, a Fawkner submitted a game design to them for Paul Hogan sound-alike just wouldn't have a \"real\" fantasy wargame, SSG published Greetings, Warlord! the same impact when making a stern comWarlords with their usual low-key fanfare. Veteran Warlord players will enjoy the new mentary mid-game. The rest is history (well, fantasy actually—if polished look to the game. A new background you take my meaning). Music and sound cues have been added, with the appearance of marble has been too. The music, in particular, works well with Before one could say \"I am destined to added, the army units and heroes are much its mostly low, background intensity. It is conquer Illuria,\" the techno-tinkers at SSG crisper, and improved terrain adds considersubtle enough that I found myself leaving it were busy working on an \"enhanced\" version ably to the game's monitor-bound look. The on while playing (which is unusual for me). on while of Warlords. Released soon afterward, it inambiance of Warlords II is further enhanced The sound effects, while sparse, punctuate corporated some of the many new features by the graphic depicting each individual important points in the game, in particular that the Macintosh conversion of the game player/warlord. While the eight players still sounding a gong to signal the commencepossess the same faSSG Game Order Report Hero Win History Turn Jum 2200000000 ment of a human player's turn. As will be miliar colors, each Army Bonus o noted later, this feature can be quite impornow has a distinctive tant. Build shield emblem and Cities Production an attractive castle New Worlds To Conquer Vectoring design on the map. Ruins Neutral castles retain Afrer getting past the early sizzle, the first Stack their traditional bite of steak comes in the form of new maps. walls-&-turrets The half dozen fixed maps, by themselves, look, while the add so much more variety than the single, Storm Giants casfixed, visible map in the original Warlords. tles, for example, apAdd to this a random map generator (where pear as a mountain players can define the percentages of woods, with clouds and water, hills and cities they desire) and the lightning bolts atopability to save these maps should any particuit. Conquest by the larly interesting ones get rolled up, and reLord Bane warlord playability skyrockets. Granted, the map GEO converts a castle into maker is a processor intensive feature (meanS OMEO 1592 a large, blackened ing that it will take a 286-12MHz computer 200X skull with torches around five minutes to generate a new world dimly lighting the that a 486-50MHz cranks out in about 30 Hems 0003 GER September 1993 Page 103 "


"çmeak preylen wa ONIESELHO seconds), but the end results, I've SSG Garne Order Report Hero View History Turn Jurn 250WUOVOU guise of a ship at sea (or, conversely, convert found, are always well worth the back to a land unit). While I haven't quite wait. Cheltree figured out the nuances of ship-to-ship comBest of all, the maps can now, bat yet, it looks as if sea movement is another Current optionally, be played in discovery\" good way to go exploring, and strong attacks mode. This means that they are from the sea can be conducted against coastal blackened at the start (a la Empire cities with thunderclap surprise. Deluxe or Civilization, and become et Cod: 12 revealed as one's units maneuver Socialis Diplomacy around. Every map is the same, fixed Do Yet another new element in Warlords II is size (large, as in the original Warthe addition of formal diplomacy. Although lords), so it may take several turns of 2 0Z) Dome there can only be three declared diplomatic careful exploration to get a feel for states berween any two players, these suffice. the location of other players and CORP While at peace, the forces of two warlords can continental coastlines, but it does W arp Wrap 340QX cooperate (although they still move sepaadd considerably to the game. rately). Normal hostility allows one's forces To facilitate exploration, two respectively. Having a demon army negates to combat cach other, but no assaults on cheap new unit types have been added. These all non-hero, non-city wall bonuses the enenemy cities are allowed. For that, the third are Scouts, with a special ability that helps a emy stack might be enjoying, while fighting level of diplomacy, \"total war,\" is the option stack of units move through hills and woods with an Archon (arch angel) unit on your side of choice. quickly, and Bars, which can fly over mounwill negate the opponent's hero bonuses. One T ypical for a Roger Keating design, the tains and water, and can carry heroes on their final bit of spice is the effect of elephant units, computer players have long memories and backs. Both of these unit types have only one which will reduce every enemy unit attacked short tempers, so one can casily find themcombar strength point and a high movement by one strength point each. selves surrounded by hostile neighbors. Each allowance—making them perfect for exploUnits ration duties. can now SSG Game Order Report Hero View History Turn Jurn 500KUMUOUD have modified strengths upwards of L . BIDEA Close-In Counters 14 points each, and City History clicking on the Although one can now opt to play with a \"quick start\" feature that divides up all of the \"Show Stack\" menu 0 BM2 line reveals each cities evenly between players before turn one unit's basic and then begins, I expect players will generally want to modified strengths. expand out from their first city and conquer Of course, blessings their way into everlasting glory. In either case, at temples are still units will be mixing it up in battles from the important, and the start, and one soon discovers that combat has \"intense combat\" become a much more interesting event. option still exists. Though it still looks and works similarly to Now however the On tutin 29. hon hadal lg olice! basic combat die roll Juni 29 Done increased diversity in the unit types that a is made against a Di ALUSEL STEBUDE whole new challenge awaits players of the 16 (16-sided die), 10:00 3 00 original game. Consider a sampling of these while intense comnew factors. bat uses a D-20. FiMany battles will still revolve around cities. nally, one can now In city battles, Minotaurs and Spider units change the order in which their units step kingdom also has a diplomatic rating ranging both receive strength bonuses. If the attacker forward to engage in battle. from \"Supreme Diplomat» to «Running has a Catapult, the defender receives no The practical upshot of these changes is that Dog\" (they are also rated for aggressiveness strength bonus for the city walls. In clear it is now more of a challenge to put together and economic efficiency). In all dealings, terrain, Light and Heavy Cavalry units rethose \"special forces\" stacks of units that were one's reputation precedes a player and is facceive a one and two point strength bonus, right for all occasions in the original tored into all diplomacy. SSG Game Order Report Hero View History Turn Jum 0W0OVUW Warlords game. Now, one must optimize different stacks for different purposes. Players will do well to have Charting The Monarchy some cavalry corps to run down enriigi As one becomes more involved in a game of emy scouts probing the neighborTa r tus per hood, a flying wing for crossing Warlords II, the additional charts and graphs mountains or water in force, a siege that can be called up from the various menus stack for assaulting heavily defended prove their worth. It is certainly nice to see, cities, an anti-hero strike force, and both as a graph and in raw numbers, where so on. one stands vis-a-vis a city or army count with It should also be noted that naval their neighbors. Graphs also provide comunits have been completely elimiparative information on wealth and victory OXEN nated. Units now stop when they points, so checking these from time-to-time @ @ @ OWO move through an embarkation point is a must. There is even a \"history» graph 200X (coastal castle, port or bridge) and, which recalls heroic deeds done and the conon the next turn, they take on the quest of cities on a turn-by-turn basis. 2800 Occupy Pillage Sack Raz 6 Page 104 Computer Gaming World "


"çmeak o reuneun Increasing The Value Of Gold for choosing a ranSSG Game Order Report Hero View History Turn Jurn 1000UVODO dom turn order, one Money has become much more important often has to wait in Warlords II, although players can certainly quite a while for the win without being great money managers. In computer players to addition to limiting one's potential army size finish their turns. and attracting mercenary heroes (as before) This can be particumoney can now be spent to increase the prolarly annoying when ductive capabilities of a city. Although the playing with the exotic units (dragons, wizards, elementals, obscrve enemy aretc.) can only be built at cities as a pre-game mies\" option off, option, there are still plenty of other unit such that there is 1.... 21. types to choose from for those wanting to play nothing to watch in the \"more realistic» mode. The cheapest while waiting for anunits to add to a city's potential are the aforeother turn. mentioned Scouts and Bars (at 10 and 30 The reason for this gold, respectively, to add to that city's «allowDoom @ BM allowdelay is that the able builds\"). At the high end of the scale are computer is moving 40 000 CFB Pegasi, Griffins and Elephants (each costing each army or stack 3 ulap atas 2 9 X well over 1,000 gold). individually and Note that these prices just allow a city to fighting the battles build those unit types. They must still be out in the same way as the human players do. gamers will still prefer Conquered Kingdoms built, over time, in the same old way. How. There seem to be no \"quick combat\" routines re seem to be no quick combat\" routines when looking for telegaming fantasy conwhen to ever, city defenses improve when a city can built into the Al at this point, and each player into the Al ar this point, and each player quests quests. However, Warlords II docs work fine produce more unit types, so buying a variety Ty turn was taking about 30 seconds on my with multiple human players on the same not only gives a player production options, 386-33. That means I spent an average of machine, and I've had some three and fourbut also improves a city's chances of withthree minutes between my turns while waitplayer weekend games lately that have been standing a siege. Additionally, the new proing for the computer players to finish theirs. very exciting. duction vectoring system (where a unit I must thank SSG for including the loud In the best traditions of SSG, Warlords II is produced in one city appears two turns later (almost annoying) gong sound to notify a a game where the better strategist will win. in another) is much easier to use. human player that it is his or her turn. This The product is crammed with game play, and The Quest For Heroes allows one to leave the room for a couple of the replay value has been advanced by minutes and be notified when it's time to bounds. For fans of games like Empire Deluxe Heroes take on increased dimensions in come back to play another turn. or Conquered Kingdoms, it is simply impossiWarlords Il as well. Now, they are gender Perhaps the most requested feature for ble to go wrong with the likes of Warlords II. specific and, with each city or enemy army conquered, they earn experience points. When a plateau is reached, that hero rises in strategy games, for that matter), modem play, refinements await as the finishing touches are rank and has their personal combat strength is not to be found in Warlords II. Modem added to this game. CGW and movement allowance increased. This crude role-playing element, however, does Annual COMPUTER GAME DEVELOPERS CONFERENCE not detract from the largely war/strategy Call For Papers! game aspects of Warlords II, but another new clement does add a twist.... The conference will be held April 23-26, 1994 in Santa Clara, California. If you have Heroes who visit temples can now be sent an idea, issue or problem that you'd like to share with your colleagues, the Board of on quests. It might be to raze a city, recover Directors wants to hear from you. an item, or smite another hero. Whatever the FORMAT: All sessions last one hour. We are currently accepting proposals for lectures quest is, it will pay off handsomely in boch (150-300 person sessions with limited audience participation) and seminars (50-75 person wealth/magic items and experience points for sessions with more give and take). the hero that completes it. What these quests TOPIC CATEGORIES: Any material relating to interactive entertainment is welcome, tend to do, however, is to send away both a but should fit in one of the following categories: DESIGN THEORY, DESIGN PRAChero and his/her accompanying armies on TICE, TECHNICAL ISSUES, and BUSINESS/LEGAL ISSUES. some \"damn fool crusade\" while important TO SUBMIT A PROPOSAL: Write a one-page summary of your proposed talk, battles urgently need to be fought. Just how specifying the CATEGORY of your talk and the FORMAT you'd prefer, along with a much a player wants to let such hero-led detailed description of its content. A paragraph will do, but REMEMBER, THE BETTER forces be distracted becomes a new strategic THE PROPOSAL, THE BETTER ITS CHANCES OF ACCEPTANCE. You may mail, consideration. However, cranking up heroes fax or E-mail it to one of the addresses shown below. ALL PROPOSALS MUST BE to demigod-like stature can create a force that RECEIVED BY OCTOBER 15, 1993! no enemy will be able to withstand. U.S. MAIL Fax: (415) 965-0221 Missing Links Anne Westfall Internet: ewadams @netcom.com Sadly, in the beta versions I've previewed, 1440 Cedar Place GEnie: E.ADAMS10 the Al was still very much \"under developLos Altos, CA 94024 CompuServe: 71170,161 ment.\" I could not test much of it out, and therefore, cannot really report on it. One For more information about the Computer Game Developers' Conference, please call glaring nuisance that I must report, however, our Customer Service line at (415) 856-GAME. CGW is the game's speed. Although there is a toggle September 1993 Page 105 "


"Specalcitrategyçectrom Think Like A General, Win Like An Admiral Words of Wisdom For Gaming Warriors by Tim Carter et's face it, no one really wants to lose a game. Yet, there attempting an all out battle of annihilation. In SSG's Warlords, are too many gamers who never bother to prepare to win. \"leader hunting» is an extremely effective tactic, while in the Hacks like myself write articles that give game-specific tips classic Empire, a persistent campaign against the enemy transto help players along, but there are certain general gaming port flect will almost always guarantee victory. principles that can be learned and applied to every game. With an understanding of these general aspects, one can develop their \"The art of war in the narrower sense must own grand strategic plans, rather than relying primarily on the now in its turn be broken down into tactics and game-bound tips uncovered by those of us who spend far too much time with their games. strategy. The first is concerned with the form Success in any strategy game requires that the player have a of the individual engagement, the second with solid grasp of (surprise!) strategy. The question of just what is its use.\" Carl Von Clausewitz strategy has kept a legion of military historians and political Tactics, the maneuvering and operation of forces on the field scientists busy for decades. Fortunately, the boundaries of stratof battle, cannot be overlooked if one wishes to have consistent egy for most computer games are considerably more limited success. Here one's knowledge of the opposing armies and the than in real life. terrain must be combined to create a position of advantage. A good place to start when considering strategy games is one Tactics involve winning the battles between individual units, of the oldest of them all—chess. There are essentially five whatever their size. elements necessary to understanding and winning at chess. In the classic board games, tactics involved achieving the These are the board, the pieces, tactics, strategy, and openings. mythic 3 to 1 odds for attacks, and avoiding these odds on In thinking about strategy for other games, it is useful to think defense. While computer games (and board games) have moved in terms of these five building blocks of strategic thinking away from this simplistic system, the basic principle behind this While the board in chess is simple, properly using it is a key approach still applies. The 3 to 1 ratio was preferred because it to chess strategy. In games where the board is more complicated, minimized risks to the attacking force while increasing the usually reflecting a natural terrain of some kind, understanding chances of victory. the board is often crucial. Terrain modifiers, be they in terms of Where possible, such as in QQP's Conquered Kingdoms and movement, combat or production, are usually of vital imporThe Lost Admiral, it is obviously a good idea to match forces with tance to winning the game. Fortunately, these modifiers are also enemy units which cannot fight back (i.e. lancers vs. cavalry, usually well documented. submarines vs. battleships, etc.). However, given the diversity of On a more subtle level, maps will sometimes channel moveunits involved and the nature of most battles, this is not always ment in a particular direction. This can be very important for possible. A wise tactician therefore must learn how to gain an long range planning. The key here is to understand how the map advantage when the match-ups are not clear or obvious. will affect tactics, strategy and opening moves. In what ways will For instance, in Conquered Kingdoms a combined arms apit make the opposition predictable, thereby making planning proach is often highly effective. Since missile units confronted more simple by an enemy in their square cannot fire for that turn, it is often useful to move a weak and expendable unit into the same square \"So it is said that if you know others and with a high value enemy piece, such as a dragon. Then, you can know yourself, you will not be imperiled in a move up your own missile forces, confident that the enemy will hundred balles.\" Sun Tzu not be able to return fire. Understanding the forces at your disposal goes beyond a \"In ancient times skillful warriors first simple perusal of their description in the game documentation. made themselves invincible, and then watched It is necessary to understand how units interact with one another for vulnerability in their opponents.\" Sun Tzu and with the enemy. For instance, in Three-Sixty's V for Victory series, armored units contribute both their attack strength and Strategy is the art of planning a series of tactical engagements an armor modifier when the odds of any attack are totaled. This that result in a winning position. The key to a successful strategic means that armor is best used in conjunction with a large plan is the exploitation of enemy weaknesses. The corollary to number of other units which can benefit from the modifier. In this, of course, is creating a vulnerable position in the enemy line many cases a massed armor attack is actually a waste of resources. through the proper combination of strategy and tactics. StratFurthermore, armored units with a strength of zero can still egy thus must be systematic. Create and follow a general plan. contribute greatly to the success of an attack by modifying the Establish what is necessary to win and then pursue these goals odds ratio through the use of their armor modifier. single-mindedly. It is also important to understand the forces of the opposition. Strategy also often involves creating the forces to be used. Most integrated military forces are more than the sum of their Games like Civilization and Empire allow players a much greater parts. The same is true of most gaming armies. Removing a degree of strategic freedom because they can control not only single element from an enemy arsenal may make its overall effort how they will use their forces but also what those forces will be. dramatically weaker. When facing an army it is sometimes If this is the case, creating and exploiting an advantage must useful to consider how to disrupt its cohesion rather than be the focal point of force creation. For instance, in Warlords an Page 106 Computer Gaming World "


"Special chrategu.cecinom effective strategy can involve the creation of a fast striking force \"The art of war is simple, everything is a to raid enemy cities behind the front lines. Such a force can be comprised of either flying units, cavalry or slower units transmatter of execution.\" Napoleon Bonaparte ported by boat. Good strategy involves flexibility. The definition of a good strategy game is one in which it is not possible to create a plan at \"A mistake in the original concentration the beginning of the game and then follow it through without of the army can hardly be rectified during modification to the end. While games like this might be gratifying the entire course of the campaign.\" on some base level, they are also usually boring. As long as the goals Helmut Von Molike (the elder) of one's strategy remain fixed, planning should alter with the Openings are an essential element of chess; they are important situation on the ground. (Or on the sea, in the air or wherever.) to strategy for most other games also. A successful opening Often, particularly against a computer opponent, opportuniprovides the player with the initiative and with an advantageous ties will appear in the most bizarre locations. Many players fall position, often by putting the enemy into a vulnerable situation. victim to what I call the \"history trap.\" In other words, because For instance, in SSI's Second Front a useful opening is to move they are playing a historical situation, they tend to create plans all of the German armored corps into Army Groups North and within artificial (for the game) boundaries determined by their Center. This will usually put Moscow and Leningrad in perila understanding of history. month or more sooner than a balanced attack in the north and Don't be afraid to sink the entire Soviet Red Banner Fleer with south. The additional four weeks of good weather can knock the ASW aircraft (Harpoon) or use battleships as aircraft decoys to Russians out before the snows fall. protect your carriers (Carriers at War). True grognards may gasp Openings can be of two essential types: first, a basically tactical in dismay, but few historical battles were ever very evenly opening which seeks to make a quick kill early. In Conquered balanced, so most games are either taking liberties with history Kingdoms setting up a Wizard (with fireball) next to a densely already, in which case why not carry it one step further, or are packed enemy build zone can lead to an early advantage. The so unbalanced that desperate action is required. wizard dies, but so does half the enemy army! Second, an I n conclusion, thinking strategically involves seeing nor just opening can be positional. A positional opening does not necthe parts, but the whole picture. It requires a mind open to essarily depend on the balance of forces, but rather seeks to gain innovation yet focused on goals at hand. Most of all it requires a geographic advantage, such as clearing your home continent planning and analysis. Think through the logical (and in the in Civilization. Your economy may be weak, but with no case of computer Al, the nor so logical) consequences of a course enemies within striking range for a thousand years the foundaof action. Then plan how to link a sequence of these actions tion of a world empire is well set. together to get to an objective. Finally, be prepared for it all to go wrong from the start. As Lord Kitchener said, «We must fight war as we must, not as we should like.\" CGW SAY PARALLEL GAME PORT UNID NOTCDN YUR NUICUUUI TITUTT .. :Portable computers are great except when it comes to playing simulation and action games. That's because they don't come equipped with a gameport. The Parallel Game Port\" (PGP) fixes that problem and lets you connect a joystick, yoke, weapon systems controller or pedals to any portable or desktop MS-DOS computer. And even if your computer already has a game port, the PGP's software features make it an indispensable accessory for any serious gamer. Use it to customize key joystick switches and eliminate inconsistencies between games. Even eliminate the computer speed dependencies of some game ports. PGP's Standard mode is fully compatible with all game software. And an Enhanced mode adds sensitivity and response for most simulation games. Look for the Parallel Game Port in the software section of your computer store. Or call (714) 833-3355 and say: \"Stick it to me!\" TURN YOUR NOTEBOOK COMPUTER INTO A FLYING MACHINE  Connect your joystick to any IBM-compatible computer  Program your joystick switches for specific games AIT GENOVATION GENOVATION Circle Reader Service #60 Sentenker 1993 Dans 197 "


"Pro Audio Spectrum 16 Blue Force PORUPUK UAB COMPUTER TIONS Features true 16 bit stereo sound, a fast SCSI interface, an advanced synthesiz er for great music, a fully MPC compatible mixer, and o joystick port. Compatible with SoundBlaster and Adlib. SCSI interface gives access to CD ROM Drives, hard drives, erasable optical drives and more with OPTIONAL SCSI Cable Kit Includes a stereo waveform editor, MIDI sequencor, text to speech synthesizer, four track sampling applications, multimedia presentation applications and more! Includes 4 operator FM sounds, 16 bit FM DAC, and is generally MIDI compatible Publisher: Media Vision Created by best selling computer game designer Jim Walls. You are Joke Ryon, rookie motorcy clo cop. Ten years have passed since the unsolved murder of your parents, but threads of evidence still exist. Teamed with your father's partner, you begin to weave the all but forgotten Strands together. Will the truth force you over the line? Features digitized sound effects and smooth animation through the use of fully digitized actors. 256 color VGA 800-228-74492 $165 $42 Publisher: Tsunami Soft Karaoke for Windows Ashes of Empire SimCity Classic Beat the House SIM CITY che simulator Turns your PC into a ISOFT full-fledged home KARAOKE karaoke machine Lyrics light up to the right beat. Countless hours of fun for music lovers and professionals Includes five legally licensed top Billboard hits Hundreds of other licensed hits available separately Guarantood to run on Windows 3.1 with your sound board. Compatible with all professional MIDI devices. Plays all standard MIDI files. Access over 128 instruments. Send in your registration card and receive 10 FREE extra songs plus chance to win a FREE microphone! Combines the action of a super fast flight simulator and the intellectu ally stimulating challenge of a political/economic adventure. Bring peace to a war tornland Choose from over 21 differ ont crafts, from jellighters to tanks to submarines Interact with over 6000 unique characters. In a modern world, what happens when empires fall? Full, free movement in a 3-dimensional polygon environment covering 2.8 million square miles and 9000 locations. Includes a free instructional videotape and a keyboard function overlay Publisher: Gametek The original city simulator is a must have for any software collec tion, and has introduced over 600,000 people to the joys of design ing and build ing the city of their dreams Challenges you to manago the basic prin ciples of a successful city Deal with disusters, crime, pollution and public opinion as you build your way to a thriving metropolis. Now includes the SimCity Terrain Editor and supports popular sound cards Now you can join the world et a new low price! Publisher: Maxis Prepare yourself for a casino gaming expetioncel The ultimate gaming tutor and Simulator Includes the 160 page study guide, \"Beat the House Companion Featuring slot machines, blackjack, roulette, video poker and craps. Beginners will learn the rules, rituals and terminology of casino play Seasoned gamblers are schooled in strategic counting techniques as well as profitable betting strategies. One to four people can play against each other, or computer players will fill the empty seats. Anyone can be a High Roller when they know how to \"Beat The House!\" Publisher: Spirit of Discovery $32 $36 $24 Publisher: TUNE 1000 $30 JOYSTICKS/CARDS CD-ROM TITLES RECREATION 34 CD-lauro Bow 11 CD-Learn to Speak Spanish CD-Legend of Kryandia CD-Leisure Suit Larry I Window CD-- CD Lord of the Rings...... CD Lost Treasures Infocom CD MPC Music Mozart ......... CD-MPC Wizard Diagnostic CD Mantis Expertimental CD-Map Expert.. . CD-Mayo Clinic Family Health CD-Murder Strange Follow......... CD Musical Instruments CD PC Karaoke. CD Photo CD Access Windows CD ProPhone 1993 CD-Protostor MPC CD Return of the Phantom ....... CD Scrobble Deluxe CD-Secret Weapons Luftwaffe... CD-Secret of Monkey Island CD Sherlock Detective Volume 1 CD-Sherlock Detective Volume 2 CD Sherlock Detective Volume 3 CD-Slouping Beauty Storybook CD Saltware Jukebox: Arcade CD-Space Quest IV................ CD-Spirit of Excalibur ............ CD-Sports Illustrated... CD Star Trek 25th Enhanced CD Street Atlas USA........... CD-Ultima IV CD Ultima Underworld I & II CD-Where in World Deluxe CD-WinCD Professional CD-Wing /Ultima Under Wid HOME/HOBBIES/FINANCE 28 45 SPEAKERS Analog Plus Joystick Command Control Pad Flight Stick Flight Stick Pro Flight Yoke 2000 G-Force Flight Yoke GameCard 2 Port Programmable GameCard Automatic GameCard MCA Automatic ICONroller for Laptops Intruder 5 Joystick $ 146 MAXX Rudder Pedals... Mach III Joystick Maxx Flight Yokell... Thrust Master Weapon Mill Thrustmaster Weopon Control.... Thrustmaster Flight Control Thrustmaster Pro Flight Ctrl....... Thrustmaster ACM Gome Cord Thrustmastor Rudder Pedals.... Thrustmaster Upgrade F15/F117A Thrustmaster Upgrade Falcon Thunderstick Vital Palat ACS100 Speaker Pair ACS300 Speaker Pai...... Koss HD-6 MPC Speakers Kass Speaker Pair HD4 Koss Speakers Amplified HD-1 Labtec Speakers C5-150.... Labtes Seelers SS3700 CD-AD&D Eye of the Beholder 3 CD Adventures of Willy Beamish... CD Animals MPC VERSION CD Arthur's Teacher Trouble CD-Arts and Entertainment CD-Borney Bear Goes to Space CD-Beauty and the Beast MPC CD-Berlitz Think & Talk French CD Blue Force.. CD Case of Cautious Condor CD-Chessmoster 3000 Window CD Cinemania Movie Guide WIND CD Clinton CD Compton's Enc. Comp. Upg.. CD-Compton's Interactive Eney CD Conan The Cimmerian....... CD Corel Draw 40 CD Curse of Enchantia. CD Dinosaur Adventure CD Dinosaurs Multimedia Ency. CD-Dune CD Eco Quest Search for Celus. CD Elect, Travel California CD Eric the Unready..... CD European Racers CD-F. 15 Strike Eagle III.......... CD Global Explorer CD-Globul Golte...... CD Golf Guide MPC (CA,HI) CD Grammy Awards CD Grolier Encyclopedia Window CD Guinness Disk Records MPC CD Gunship 2000 w/ Scenario CD-Indiana Fate of Atlantis CD Infocom Collection CD-Iron Hols CD Jones in the Fast Lane CD-Just Grandma & Me CD-Jutland CD-KGB/CIA World Factbook CD Kids Dictionary Windows CD King's Quest V CD King's Quest VI RECREATION Playroom 2.0 Ready, Set, Read Rock & Boch Studio SAT Personal Trainer SAT w/Cliff Notes Science Adventure Slater & Charlie... TreeHouse Where in Space is Carmen Delux Wild Science Arcade Auto Insight.... Betty Crocker Cookbook Betty Crocker Cookbook Windows Bible Study Drah & Print Flicks Home Medical Advisor Windows Micro Kitchen Companion......... Micro Kitchen Companion Window Modern Bride Planner Windows Morgi2 Point Power Party Planner Personal Pediatrician Personal Physician Print Power Pro PLUS Print Shop Deluxe.. Print Shop Deluxe Comic Chara Print Shop Deluxe Windows Profit for Windows. Quicken for Windows ......... Quicken USA DOS Your Desk lar Windows 688 Atack Sub ADD Dark Sun Shattered Lands AD&D Eye of the Beholder ll Hint AD&D Eye of the Beholder il AD&D Eye of the Beholder lli ADD Stronghold..... ATAC Secret Wor Against Drugs Aces of the Pacific VGA Aces of Pacific 1946 WWI Miss Aces of Pacific Keyboard Template Adventures of Willy Beamish Air Bucks 1.2 Air Duel.. Air Force Commander Air Warrior SVGA......... ........ Aircraft & Scenery Designer Alone in the Dark ........... Amazon The Guardians of Eden Ambush at Sorino Ancient Art of War in Skies B-17 Flying Fortress VGA... Barbie Glamorous Quest Bard's Tale .... Battles of Destiny Betrayal at Krondor Birds of Prey Bridge Master Buzz Aldrin's Roce into Space Caesar. Caesars Palace Windows Car and Driver Cornier Strike... Carriers of War Construction Comes of War il Costle of Dr. Brain . VGA Castles Campaign Disk Castles il Siege & Conquest Challenge of the 5 Realms. Chessmoster 3000 for Windows Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Civilization Civilization Hint Book...... Civilization Master Player Ed. Clash of Steel: WWII 1939.45 Classic 5 Windows Cognito for Windows Comanche Keyboard Template Comanche:Mission Disk ............... Comanche Mission Disk 1 Comanche:Maximum Overkill Command HQ Classic Conquered Kingdoms...... Conquered Kingdoms Scenario Conquest of Japan... Conquests of longbow. VGA Creepers Doemonsgatel: Dorovans Key ....... Dark Seed Darklands Hint Book w/Disk Darklands VGA Darklands Master Players Ed. Daughter of Serpents. Day of the Tentacle; Maniac I. Dejo Vul & H Windows Dragon's Lair .... Dragon's Lair Singe's Castle Dune... Dune Il Dungeon Master... Eco Quest ll Hint Book Een Quest ll Rainforest Eight Ball Deluxe..... El Fish  Dol  Eric the Unready... Eternam... . F-15 Desert Storm Seenario F-15 Strike Eogle 3 keyboard Temp: F-15 Strike Eogle ll Classic F-15 Strike Eagle I... .. F-19 Stealth Fighter Classic Falcon 3 Keyboard Template Falcon 30 Folcon 3.0 Operation Fight Family Fun Pak w/Free Castaway... Fields of Glory Waterloo FlashBack.. Flight ATP Keyboard Template Flight Assignment ATP.... Flight Sim Keyboard Template Flight Simulator 5.0.... Freddy Phorkas Freddy Pharkas Hint Book Front Page Sports Football G-Force Game Pack III................ Gateway Goblins... Gobliiins Hint Book Goblans Il The Prince Buffoon Grand Canyon Upgrade... Grand Slam Bridge II. Great Naval Battle America............ Great Naval Bottles N Atlantic.... Great Naval Battles Scenario... Great Naval Battles Super Ships Guy Spy Hardball Hardball II Big League Parks Hard Ball Player Disk Hawaii Scenery Upgrade High Command Home Alonell Hong Kong Moh Jong Hoyles Book of Game Classic 538 532 CD DRIVES & UPGRADE KITS 36B 680 CD-ROM TITLES 295 Chinon CDS-435 Internal Drive.... Chinon CDX-435 External Drive Discovery Int. 8-bit Kit Edutainment Int 16 bit K .. Edutainment Int. 8 bitkit... . Explorer Upgrade Kit Fusion CD 16 (internal Fusion CD 16E (External)........... NEC CD Express External IBM NEC CD Express External MAC Procom Ext. 200ms (Toshiba) Procom Ext 375ms Phillip) Procom Int. 200ms (Toshibol Procom Int. 375ms (Phillip) WinSaund 16.CD ROM kil... A-Train Alphabet Blocks for Windows Bailey's Book Houte Barron's Book Notes for Window Body Illustrated... Cakulus for Windows... ... Discover Space.... Facts in Action GMAT w/Cliff Nolos... GRE w/CLIFFS Notes... KidDesk Language Assistant French 5.0 Language Assistant Spanish 50 Logo Writer Math Rabbit Enhanced Mickey's 123's Enhanced Mickey S ABC's Enhanced Millie's Math House Mystery at the Museums Oregon Trail Deluxe VGA... Pepper's Adventure in Time EDUCATION Costles "


"Links 386 Pro Game Modem 2400 Might and Magic Darkside of Xeen Pirates Gold une Championship golf of your fingertips. Featuring Harbour Town Golf Links with Super VGA 256 color graphics for breathtaking VKS 385 different combinaviews. Over 345 tions of viewing windows. Features a club selection, \"saved shor\", and a \"pro file view\" Male or female golfers with 10 different shirt colors to choose from. Statistics recorded for each player and game with optional print-out. Supports SoundBlaster and compatible sounds cards You've got nothing to lose, and so much golfing to gain! An internal half card 2400 baud modem pack aged with the Sierra Network with 30 FREE hours of on-line fun and games! Compatible with all of your home comput ing needs and great for access to all major on-line services or any of the thousands of public bulletin board systems. Includes everything you need to get started. Made in the USA. FREE technical support, lifetime warranty and is fully Hayes compatible 14 4 fax/modems also available in both internal or external models, call for LOW prices Maglite Magic Ever since the \"Night of the Falling Stars things have not been going well for the people of the Darkside of Xoon The Tyrant Alamar appeared shortly after that night, and doposed Queen Kalindra, ruler of the humans. Humans have been confined to the slums of Castleview, and now fate hos elected you to carry a message of vital importance to people who can still make a difference. Install both Clouds of Xeen and Darkside of Xeen on your hard drive to create the World of Xeen. Actually 2 games in one! A fresh new action/adventure in the swashbuckling spirit of the originall Spectacular new adven lures with more cities to explore More opportunities to obtain treasures, power and prestige. Enhanced swordfighting and combat capabilities Players are rewarded for outstanding triumphs. Stunning new Super VGA art and graphics bring to life the untamed era of piracy in the 17th Century Caribbean Publisher: Access Software $42 $42 Publisher: Best Data Products, Inc. Publisher: New World Compuling Publisher: Microprose Seven Cities of Gold Commemorativo Lands of Lore Street Fighter II Aces over Europe The classic game of exploration Explore the 15th Century New World in a revised version of a best solling classic computer game SEVENOUITES Accomplish many tasks on your way from un-proven explorer to viceroy, map uncharted territory, set up out posts in the new world and establish trade relations. In a time when only the doring venture forth, become the world's most notable explorer Unlimited exploration and gameplay with the random mop gener ator Stunning Soundblaster sound effects and music INDS LORE The dark army encroaches. King Richards falls and Scotia beckons you... laughing in her mad quest for power, Scotia has ravaged the Kingdom. She seeks the throne yet it eludes her. She's getting des perate Adventure through ancient keeps and living forests Unearth hidden ruins and hounted caverns. Can you stop her? Features over 20 megabytes of compressed art and special effects. Actually hear the clash of steell Feel the blows of terrorists who slip beneath your guard! The arcade senso tion of the decadel Grants players the powers of one of eight intensely wild street fighter cham pions for a no holds barred, brawl against the other seven. Each fighter hos a unique fighting style and special attack capabilities and features all the speed surprise and sound effects of the original arcade hit. But the biggest bottle of them all comes when players defeat their competition and earn the right to test their skills against the awesome raw power of the Grand Masters! Published by Capcom From the beaches of Normandy to the war torn ruins of Berlin Fly with EUROPE the US Army All Force, the RA For the German Luftwaffe. An accurate and detailed Great War Planes simu lation Experience the intensity of Corial combat in the European Theater of WWII as you patrol the front lines, target supply depots and come face-to-face with moving ground targets and fortified artillery bunkers, Fly more than 20 aircraft in historical com paigns. It's an all new battle covering land Soos and skies. $36 Publisher: Electronic Arts $42 Publisher: Virgin Games Distributor: Hi Tech Expression Publisher: Sierra RECREATION 2000027AAO EXT. FAX: 508-443-5645 323 | Voice: 508-443-6125 Computer Express 31 Union Ave, Sudbury, MA 01776 40WIDO -! #26 FAX:0011-508-443-5645 Xvit.CompuServe ID:70007, 1534 LFH & blan DHT). B1, $11 13 3 9 6 2*6 2 7362 Lt. FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS 39 RECREATION Summoning Syndicate Tahiti Scenery Upgrade...... Take A Break Pinball Windows Task Force 1942... Terminator 2 Chess Wars Terminator 2029............ Tesserne for Windows RECREATION Tetris Tro s trophe... Human's Like You've Nover Seen............ INCA... Incredible Machine Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis Island of Dr. Brain... Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour ! Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 2 Japan Scenery Upgrade...... Jet Fighter II Jet Fighter Il Tactical Bundle Jump Jet KGB. King's Quest V VGA King's Ques! V Hint Book King's QuestVVGA King's Quest VI Hint Book Lolfer Ualities Land. Sea, Air Trilogy II. Laura Bow II VGA Laura Bow II Hint Book Leather Goddesses of Phobos II. Legacy Realm of Terror Legend of Kyrandia...... Legend of Kyrandia Hint book Legends of Valour Legends of Valour Hint Book Leisure Suit Lorry I VGA Leisure Suit Larry V VGA lessure Suit Larry V Hint Book Lemmings. lemmings II. Les Manley lost in LA .. Les Manley in LA Hint Book ....... Life & Death Life & Death II: The Brain.... Links Links 386 Pro Banff Springs...... Links 386 Pro Belfrey Course Links 386 Pro Innsbrook Course Links 386 Pro Pinehurst Spring Lost Admiral..... Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Lost Treasures of Infocom ......... Lost Vikings Luces Arts Classic Collection.... Lunar Commander Lure of the Temptress Mantis Experimental Fighter Montis Speech Pack Master of Orion MechWarrior/BattleTech I & II Michael Jordan Flight Might & Magic Clouds Xeen Hint... Might & Magic Clouds of Xeen ......... Might & Magic lll Monopoly Deluxe for Windows... More Vegas Gomes for Windows..... National Lampoons Chess Maniac ....... Ninja Gaiden II Origin FX Screen Saver. Pacific War. Potnot.... Perfect General....... Perfect General Great Battles Perfect General WWII Scenario Police Questi VGA Police Quest lll VGA Police Quest ll Hint Book........ Powermonger Prince of Persial Prince of Persia ll Strategy Pro Prophecy.. Protostar: War on the Frontier Putt-Putt Fun Pack.... QEMM 386 Game Pack.... Quarterpolo Quest for Glory! VGA Quest for Glory III.... .... Rags to Riches... Railrood Tycoon Classic Railroad Tycoon Deluxe Railrood Tycoon Master Hint... Reach for the Skies Realms of Arbonia Realms of Arkana Hint Back Red Baron VGA Red Baron Mission Builder Red Crystal Red Storm Rising Classic Return of the Phantom..... Rex Nebular VGA Rex Nebular Clue Book w/Disk Rex Nebular Master Players Ed. Road & Track Grand Prix Rome: Pathway to Power Rules of Engagement il SC Out........... Savage Empire:Worlds of Ultima..... Scenery Collection California.............. Scenery Upgrade Bundle............. Secret Woopons Dornier 335..... Secret Weapons HE 162 Volksjage.... Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe..... Secret of Monkey Island VGA Secret of Monkey Island Il... Shadow Cost Shadowgate for Windows Sid Meir's Trilogy Silent Service Classic SimAnt... SimAnt for Windows........ SimEarth .... ... . SimEarth Windows SumFarm Simlife Simlife for Windows... Solitaire for Windows Solitaire's Journey Solitaire's Journey Windows Sound/Graphic Flight Upgrade Space Quest IV. VGA... Space Quest V..... Space Quest V Hint Book SpaceWard Hol for Windows Spectre PC. Spell Casting 301 Spring Break Spellcasting 201.. Star Controll Star Trek: 25th Anniv Hint Bk Star Trek 25th Anniversary Strike Commander VGA Strike Commander Flyers Guide Strike Commander Speech Pack Strip Poker Ill. Strip Poker lil 1 Dato Disk Strip Poker ! #2 Data Disk Strip Poker lil 3 Data Disk Strip Poker II 4 Data Disk Strip Poker S Data Disk Strip Poker II #6 Data Disk Stunt Island RECREATION Tetris Classic for Windows... Tom & Jerry CAT.astrophe...... Tony LaRussa Baseball Tony LoRusso Baseball 1992 Tony LaRussa II: ALENL Stadium Tony LaRusso Il Fantasy Draft Tornado Trump Costleil Two Towers... Ultima Avatar Adventure Hints. Ultima Underworld Ultima Underworld Hint Book Ultima Underworld ll Hint Book Ultima Underworld Il Labyrinth............ Ultima VI Ultima VII Part 2 Serpent Isle..... Ultima VII Forge Virtue Add On Ultima Vil The Black Gole Ultima: Martian Dreams Ultrabots Uncharted Water V for Victory Market Garden V for Victory Vlah Beach V for Victory Velikiyo Luki Vegas Games for Windows Veil of Darkness Veil of Darkness Hint Book. Vengence of Excalibur... Virtual Reality Studio 2.0........... Warlords... SOUND CARDS Warlords Warriors of Legend Wayne's World Wilson Pro Staff Golt..... Wing Commonder... ... Wing Commander Academy..... Wing Commander ll..... Wing Commander Il Speech Disk Wing Commander II.Operation ....... Wizardry Bone of the Cosmic.... Wizardry. Crusader Dark Savant Wizardry Dark Savant Hint Book Wolfenstein I Spear of Destiny.. World Circuit Grand Prix World Tour Tennis..... ..... X-Wing X-Wing Imperial Pursuit X-Wing Keyboard Template X WONG AudioMan Gravis Ultra Sound MultSound Port Able Sound Plus Pro Audio Studio 16...... Sonic Sound 16 bit Sound Blaster 16 Sound Blaster 16 ASP Sound Blaster Deluxe..... Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe Sound Blaster Pro Microchannel Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 Sound Galaxy NX Pro Extra 8 SoundMan lo... ThunderBoard Windows.. ThunderBoard w/FREE F-15 Viva Moestro 16VR. Voice Blaster WinSound 16 Windows Sound System............. 226 126 GALES 105 268 255 186 Orders accepted on our toll free number Mon-Sat 8.30 to 6:30 EST. VISA COVER Same day shipping on in-stock items. Continental US shipments UPS Ground Handling Charge $3, Airborne Overnight $7. International shipments UPS Express cost based on weight Canadian APO FPO shipments US Mail cost based on weight No sales tax except for MA add 5%. Personal checks accepted allow 5 business days for processing. NO CODS Products covered by manufacturer's warranty Detectives replaced immediately. Item availability and price subject to change without notice. All specials and promotions limited while supplies last. Educational government and corporate purchase orders welcome. 15% restocking fee on non-defective returns Populous Populous II Power Politics for Windows ..... 34 "


"Specialgtrategygechon Humbled, But Not Hobbled Three-Sixty's Harpoon Designers Series 1 Surprises Even Veteran Players by Ed Dille through the transducer that they literally boil the water surMr. Dille was commissioned at the U.S. Naval Academy in 1982. Subsequently, he served aboard the USS Knox (FF-1052), out of rounding the dome. As such, a battle group conducting active Yokosuka, Japan, and was part of the commissioning crew of the USS ASW is sending a locator beacon for their position to any Mobile Bay (CG-53), the second Aegis VLS Cruiser. He is a fleet submarine that is listening within a hundred miles or more, qualified Tactical Action Officer depending on ambient conditions. The new sonar model, billed as a slightly scaled down version T Tistorians can testify that isolationist movements usually of the one which will appear in Harpoon II, uses an approach follow major conflicts, and the closing of the cold war is, which more closely approximates reality than its predecessor. All I judging from the current political climate, no exception passive detection calculations are made based upon the same to this rule. Fortunately, or unfortunately depending on one's equation utilized in the fleet, Figure of Merit. Without getting point of view, the designers of Harpoon Designer Series II have into the mechanics of the calculation too deeply, it is based upon adopted a similarly bleak view of upcoming events. While not source level, self noise and ambient noise. Source level is the claiming to be prophets, none of the 48 new scenarios escape decibel rating of the noise generated by the potential contact. It the realm of possibility. may be modified by other HDSI is similar to HDSI, in that the user an Ordere Soi Merpartie factors related to target maobtains 12 new scenarios for cach Harpoon Batneuvers. Speed increases, for tleset owned, but it also contains a comprehenexample, cause extra masive on-line data annex of all the platforms used chinery to start. The noise in all releases to date, a superb printed tactical they make on start up radimanual in the documentation, and Version ates at discrete frequencies 1.32 of the game system. This latest update, known as transients. Other which will be the last before the arrival of Harfactors which can increase poon II, is yet another radical revision of the source level is the rate of original code. As with previous updates, the new   speed. A submarine travelmodel is fully backward compatible. This ing above cavitation speed means that all scenarios written or user-gener(which varies by class will ated before HDSII arrived will operate in accordance with the have air bubbles forming and collapsing in the prop wash. This have ir bubble farming an new model. How much of a difference will users notice in is derected by sonar operators as a sizzling sound. Self noise is scenarios they know very well? Quite a lot, actually. one's own ship noise related to all of the same factors. To relare these terms, if one's self noise is high, due to excessive speed, for The Enemy Below example, it is impossible to detect submarines passively unless The greatest differences between 1.32 and earlier versions of their source level is even higher (unlikely unless one is right on Harpoon concern anti-submarine warfare top of them). Ambient noise is the source level (ASW). The original Harpoon used a very of the ocean itself, and is affected by sea state, simplified system of sonar modeling. Basibiological activity, local shipping, and ice pack cally, for each type of sonar suite, the active or shoal activity where appropriate. High amand passive detection ability was rated as a bient noise lowers the detection ability of both percentage within the maximum detection players. range. Any contact which came within either Passive tracking and classification is a comthe passive or active envelopes was checked for plicated and time consuming process, even for detection every 30 seconds of game time. As professionals. Since it would be unreasonable such, even a diesel boat at full stop (so quiet to expect the average player to learn the nuthat it should not be detected passively at all SIGNERS SERIES I ances of Target Motion Analysis, the design by most platforms) would eventually be deteam artificially induced a delay in calculations tected passively. Though the model was acto replicate the time lag one would expect ceptable for active sonar ops, it wasn't even Includes the Harpoon Data Annexe Tadical between detection and localization of subsurclose for passive ASW. face contacts. Instead of allowing a passive Passive sonar detection is the reality of the detection attempt every 30 seconds, the proday, with active ops dictated only in gram now looks only once every five special circumstances, some of which TITLE: Harpoon Designer's Series It: Post Graduate minutes of game time. This not only will be discussed later. The rationale beNaval Operations and Tactics allows for proper integration time as the PRICE: $39.95 hind this reality is simple. Counter-de SYSTEM: CIC team tries to refine their target sotection ranges may be ten times as much REQUIREMENTS: 386SX with 4MB RAM strongly recommended lution, it also provides submarine skipPROTECTION: None as that in which an active return on a DESIGNERS: Mike Steele, Darrel Dearing, lesse Spears pers a realistic chance to degrade that subsurface contact might register on the PUBLISHER: solution through maneuvering. UnforCampbell, CA gear. Sonar suites put so much power (408) 879-9144 tunately, HDSII does not allow the em12. new scenarius for each arpoon 3. Battle Ser yudun. IBM Commuter Camino Warid "


"erle AIDE DE CAMP AVAILABLE NOW! Too many board games and not enough time or space to play them? Aide De Camp is for you! WETEN DHE LINE C 69880808 4 COLOR ETIN C CRITERICO TOTT GE ARPUR W RM ide De Camp is a revolutionary game assistance program which enables you to take virtually any HEX OR AREA based game and play it on your PC. The secret to Aide De Camp is in its tremendous built-in power and flexibility. YOU create the terrain and unit symbol graphics. YOU set up and edit the map. YOU determine how movement, combat, and other game functions operate. Aide De Camp also opens up new possibilities for playing by mail. Forget about writing (and erasing and rewriting) all of your moves and unit positions down. With Aide De Camp all you do is send a diskette. No errors, no trouble, and no wasted time. Better yet, you can use a modem to transfer your moves instantly. Aide De Camp features: * Capacity to hold maps of up to 30,000 hexes. * No limit on the quantity of units per game. * Placement up to 7 types of terrain in each hex. * Definition of up to 200 custom terrain types per game. * Unconstrained unit stacking, with the ability to create unique stack symbols. * Multiple user defined zoom levels. * Automatic mapsheet and hex numbering. * Save of game set-ups and turns forever. * Opportunity to easily design your BH -* own games, or modify your existing ones. * ADD-ON DISKS FOR MANY GAMES ARE BEING MADE AVAILABLE BY THE BOARD GAME PUBLISHERS. Aide De Camp is a playing aid only. It does not include a computer opponent, or the ability to enter the rules or charts for any specific game. You must first own a copy of the board game in order to enter and play it on Aide De Camp. Aide De Camp requires an IBM or compatible computer, with at least 500K free conventional RAM (additional RAM may be required for large games), VGA display, and a hard disk. A mouse is optional. $79.95 Available only by mail. Please add $4.00 shipping and handling. CA residents add state sales tax. Please specify disk spec when ordering. VISA/MASTERCARD CALL (408)554-8381 Mail checks/money orders to: HPS Simulations P.O. Box 3245 SIMULATIONS Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 Copyright 1993 by Scott Hamilton/HPS Simulations. All rights reserved. IBM is a registered trademark of International Rueinace Machinae Inn CAR USIC RO INTE ROSHE FO 10 SELECT LI TEKUR PRIOR TO ROM China Bea B HPS TABU "


"9 251 EDISONTE DE nin D Class: Arleigh Burke Man Barry Group: ABS ployment of false target cans (independent sonar sources which that they may only be expended on appropriate target types, plus are fired from rorpedo tubes and maneuver to simulate a subtheir salvo size is limited by actual launcher rate of fire conmarine), which confuse the problem even further. On the other straints. Also, all types of inertially guided weapons may now side of the coin, submariners no longer have the luxury of use bearing-only attacks, so players do not have to wait on a \"instant» speed and depth changes. Subs will maneuver to refined targeting solution, if desired. In conjunction with this change their depth gradually, remaining as quiet as possible in change, however, all missiles must actually acquire their targets the process. in the terminal homing phase. If not, the missile will begin a The Active Sonar model now incorporates similar algorithms. search pattern and attack any target that is subsequently dewith the following modifications. Transmission loss of the tected, even if it was not the target of interest. sound signal is doubled and target gain is considered. Target AAW missiles also adhere to real world guidance constraints gain is how much of the transmitted sound wave is actually under the new system. Semi-active homers require the firing reflected back off the target. It is affected by the aspect of the platform to actively illuminate the target throughout the intertarget and the size. Once reflected, the sound waves are still cept. If the guiding radar shuts down for any reason, such as subject to signal loss through reflection and refraction before through sucking up a HARM (homing anti-radiation missile), they return to the transmitting platform in the form of an echo. all defensive missiles in flight self destruct. The exception to this Another aspect of ASW that has been totally revised is torpedo edo rule is the Aegis suites on either Arliegh Burke or l'iconderoga modeling. Previously, class ships, where the missiles have an inertial mode torpedoes were treated which will keep them on their last course update exactly like missiles, until their fuel is expended. which was wholly inaccuHARMs also behave correctly in 1.32, requiring rate. Now, each torpedo an active radiation source to complete their atrack type will behave accordruns, unless it is a model with onboard memory, ing to it's preset characthat can fly to the location where the emitter was teristics. Air launched active at the time of its launch, even if the emitter torpedoes will hit the is subsequently shut down. Because HARMs fly at water and begin an exupwards of Mach 4, they still have a relatively panding spiral search patdecent chance of hitting the platform, though their tern until the target is sir.th warheads are small, being designed exclusively to acquired or the torp runs destroy the sensitive components of a radar array. out of fuel. Similarly, submarine and ship-launched torpedoes Other minor changes that impact the AAW and ASUW mission will follow an intercept course to the targer, receiving continuareas include more aggressive use of surface gunnery, when ous course adjustments (if wire-guided) as long as the firing appropriate, and the ability of properly equipped helicopters to platform does not maneuver and break the wire. If the wire is use blip enhance (a missile counter-targeting feature that allows broken, or the torpedo reaches the calculated intercept point them to appear as big as a CV). Missiles which engage such without acquiring the target, it will begin a snake search pattern. deceptive measures always miss the airframe employing them. Wake homers will follow their firing course until the wake of a When all of these changes are evaluated in the aggregate, astute ship is encountered, at which point they will turn and follow that wake (even if it isn't the best choice, torps are dumb animals, players will note that the entire system plays differently. In remember). In all of these cases, the torpedo must eventually essence, the Al plays a much smarter game and the player is acquire the target with it's seeker head in order to make an attack forced to deal with more real world constraints than ever before. There are still some anomalies which plague the computer run. Other minor modifications include manually deployable aircraft sonobuoys and more appropriate speed selection for dual opponent. Air Strikes, for example, always proceed on a straight intercept from the launching base, allowing knowledgeable speed torpedoes by the Al opponent. players to stack their AAW assets along the threat axis instead of Vampire! Vampire! Bearing 180 Degrees having to worry about 360 degree coverage, as in the real world. These minor glitches, however, do not detract from the authenAnti-Air and Anti-Surface Warfare (AAW and ASUW respecticity of the simulation in any significant fashion. HDSII is one tively) routines have also received a tune up. One of the most big step closer to becoming the definitive simulation of modern significant changes involves heavily laden attack aircraft iettisonnaval warfare. If all of this can be accomplished as revisions to a ing ordnance when engaged by Interceptors or SAMs. This now antiquated model, one's imagination boggles at the allows them to be more maneuverable and survivable as they try thought of what the Harpoon design team has in store for players to make it back to home plate to rearm for a follow up strike. with a completely new engine in Harpoon II. The prior version allowed air strikes to continue inbound kamikaze style, such that one could amass large groups of \"expendSo You Want To Be A Designer? able\" pilots and virtually be assured of obtaining hits on any formation, however formidable. Version 1.32 pilots, like their The Three-Sixty design team employed a lot of the following real world counterparts, jealously protect their own hides. As guidelines in preparing their contributions to HDSII. Budding such, players should now prepare their strikes in waves, as designers would do well to follow their lead when creating new designers opposed to large mixed groups. user scenarios. The elements of good design in this system are diverse, and every single one of them need not be employed each Other changes to aircraft modeling include loiter commands time the player sits down with an idea. What is important, to interceptors who cannot engage their original targets, as however, is that designers keep all of the key factors in mind and opposed to returning them to base, and realistic altitude change employ them where appropriate. delays, just as in submarine depth modeling. Computer control led aircraft will also fly in the altitude band best suited for their Two considerations must remain uppermost in the designer's mission type, and it is now impossible to engage other aircraft mind throughout the process. First, the scenario should illuswith guns unless one is in the same altitude band. trate one or more tactical/strategic principles. Second, it should be accurate with regard to order of battle. The first four scenarios Missiles and munitions routines have now been modified so of the GIUK subset of HDSII are a perfect example of the first Page 112 Computer Gaming World "


". Fly In The Face Of Reality. VIRTUAL PILOT Whether you're diving blind through fog to find a runway or loop-de-looping to save your tail, get your WRTUAL PICOT hands on VIRTUAL PILOT, the flight yoke that looks and feels exactly real... because it is. Designed by an e airplane builder, VIRTUAL PILOT flies any simulation or game that supports a joystick. Works with all IBM and compatibles. And you won't have to fly halfway around the world to buy it. Just buzz your local store. TTM VIRTUAL PILOT PRODUCTS Circle Reader Service #43 970 Park Center Drive. Vista, CA 92083. Phone: 619-598-2518 FAX: 619-598-2524 "


" mecna al trailer m Select Ewy Target Port ! Airrini: UA Sm. Ieri IR 145 of these points. B.I. Hutchinson has depicted a major U.S. in ready 5 status (in the case of short shooters, like maverick assault on the Kola Peninsula in exactly the four phases one equipped aircraft), but the bulk of them will become the responwould expect in the real world: Reconnaissance, Ingress, Strike sibility of formation AAW assets. In this area, the player has a Ops and Egress. The second consideration, that of accuracy, is little latitude tactically. Within the main body, shooters should best accomplished by going to the source. By that, I mean be positioned such that they can provide a layered defense and purchasing one of the comprehensive reference books on the overlapping coverage to protect the high value unit (HVU), subject. The two best are Jane's Fighting Ships which is usually the CV, LPH, of the World and The Naval Institute Guide to LCC, Support ship or merCombat Fleets of the World. -2, chant group. Keeping the aforementioned principles in Each class of AAW ship usumind, the next issue for consideration is balally has several methods of deance. This is a topic which generates a great feating inbound aircraft or deal of debate among designers. Some believe missiles, including either long that every scenario must allow either side an or medium range missile sysequal opportunity at winning. Others, such tems, point defense systems as Jim Dunnigan (The Complete Wargames like Phalanx (which are only Handbook/Quill Press), observe that many TOKI Cancel effective against missiles tarplayers prefer to take the inferior side so losing geted at one's own ship, due to is excusable and any victory obtained is that much sweeter. My doppler restrictions) and electronic countermeasures, such as philosophy embodies a portion of each approach, mainly berange gate pull off. The latter is a method of modifying missile cause the design system allows a lot of latitude in the specificaseeker head radar returns to convince it that the target is actually tion of victory conditions. in a position other than reality. To protect the HVU, however, Equality of forces is not necessary as long as the weaker player one's optimal position is between it and the inbound missile group, since crossing shots are the most difficult intercepts to has challenging but obtainable victory conditions. Allowing the complete. Hence, main body positioning of AAW assers is inferior player a \"stopper\" is often better than actually striving critical. A good rule of thumb is to place Aegis equipped ships for true balance between opposing forces. Examples of other in close proximity to the HVU, while placing lesser shooters types of \"stoppers» might be a couple of rouge submarines for (DDG's and FFG's) in sectors 8,000 to 16,000 yards from the an inferior side against a vastly superior surface/air combined threat with minimal ASW capability. The combinations are as main body on either side of the threat axis. endless as the designer's imagination. More sophisticated tactics involve the use of AAW picket ships in either a missile trap or silent SAM configuration. When the Other design considerations include geography, starting positactical situation dictates that main body assets must adopt an tions and the presence of neutrals on the battlefield. Wherever active emission posture (i.e., their detection and localization is geographical choke points exist, straights or narrows, they are assured to enemy forces), positioning one or two cruisers 100prime points for submarine positioning, particularly for diesel 150 NM from the main body on the threat axis in total emission boats. Compel players who must transit these areas to sanitize silence is ideal. In this configuration, the cruiser(s) can act as a them first, and punish those who don't with a couple of well missile trap, going active with their air search radars only when placed torpedoes. Secondly, don't always start groups in their the incoming raid has been detected by other means and is optimum configuration for the known threar axis. Knowledgewithin their engagement envelope. Silent SAM is similar in able players will check their formations and alter them accordterms of stationing distance, but it is a tactic that never requires ingly. Finally, always throw one or more neutrals on the the shooter to illuminate the target. SM1 ER equipped cruisers battlefield to punish players who shoot first and ask questions can receive targeting data from cruisers in the main body and later. This reinforces restraint, proper target classification and shoot inbound aircraft silently, without putting themselves at refining the solution for impatient \"trigger happy\" captains. risk. If It Flies, It Dies! The final consideration for proper AAW management is airborne early warning. The premier platform for this mission is Although, life is hell in a multi-threar environment, the air war the E-3 AWACs, but it is constrained by being only a land based is usually winnable (at least for the Blue player). The prime asset. If they are available, use these airframes to the maximum directive is to shoot the archer, nor the arrow. In other words, extent possible. If not, E-2 Hawkeyes are the weapon of choice engage airborne missile launch platforms before they reach their to keep savvy CVBG Commanders appraised of the air threat. release points if at all possible. For CVBG's, this is best accomA well positioned E-2 eliminates the need for the CVBG to use plished through Combat Air Patrol (CAP) assets. Position to active emissions altogether, thereby confounding the enemy's units of CAP on either side of the expected threat axis at about targeting efforts. He will know you are in the area, because E-2s 200 nautical miles (NM) from the main body. From this vantage don't materialize out of thin air, but he won't be able to localize point, they will usually be in position to engage incoming groups you well enough to attack without resorting to methods other with AA missiles, in turn causing strike elements to jettison the than ESM. ordnance which actually threatens the surface assets within the group. This equates to a «mission kill\" even if one does not Control Of The Seas actually eliminate all of the inbound aircraft. Players must watch these engagements closely and dispatch relief CAP to the units ASUW is slightly more difficult than AAW, because one must on station as soon as they occur, such that follow up waves of invest more time establishing hostile intent and refining the attack aircraft are not left unmolested. Non CV groups can be over-the-horizon targeting solution. Several factors must be protected with CAP from either nearby CV's or air bases. If the considered when one is contemplating an ASUW strike, includfighters have sufficient range, simply have them loiter ar 200 ing target composition, optimal delivery platforms, supporting NM along the threat axis from the group to be protected. arms and timing. For this discussion, ASUW strikes will include Once inbound aircraft have penetrated the outer defenses, the attacks against bases. player may have a second opportunity to engage them with CAP Surface assets begin with a very limited number of ASUW Computer Gaming World "


"nu cection weapons. So, utilizing air groups to prosecute the attack is more one medium range AAW shooter and, if an ASW threat is desirable. Not any air group constitutes an appropriate strike, present, a couple of towed array/hclo cquipped platforms to however. Proper strike planning requires the player to consider counter the subs. This means four ships of proper capability, nor the enemy's defenses and the amount of ordnance that must be eight total, because each ship class is multi-mission capable. delivered to achieve the objective of the strike. Weapon types Finally, if one wants to appreciate the need for follow-up damage must be matched to target types but, more importantly, the assessment, the animations option should be disabled, increasstrike aircraft must be given a reasonable chance of reaching their ing uncertainty for enemy ships which are damaged, but not launch points. The best method of achieving this objective, destroyed by the player's attack. under the current Harpoon model, is a stream attack. In lieu of launching a massive mixed group of aircraft to execute the Run Silent, Run Deep attack, the player should launch several groups in the order they A s one may have discerned by the discussion up to this point, will engage enemy defenses. ASW is the most difficult of all the mission areas. Enemy Consider a strike against an enemy CVBG, for example. First, submarines, if properly employed, are the most deadly threat to the player should launch 4-8 fighters in two groups on patrol be faced. To minimize this threat, players must employ a missions in the area one would expect to encounter enemy CAP. concept of layered defense similar to that used in AAW planYou cannot launch them on strike missions because their ordning. The ideal method of engagement is to prosecute enemy nance does not match the target type. Immediately following submarines with air assets (invulnerable to counterattack at the this, the player should launch all ARM or HARM capable time of this writing) well in advance of the arrival of friendly aircraft to engage any air scarch radars that go active in the target surface groups. This is known as arca ASW and is best conducted group. Assuming success in blinding the enemy, the rest of the by long range assets which can remain on station for an adequate groups will have a milk run. Follow with the main body of the period of time with large sonobuoy loads, such as the P-3 Orion. strike force, using guided munitions if possible and iron bombs in the North Atlantic Convoy's Scenarios, for example, these as a last resort. This group should be mixed with ECM aircraft, units may be employed to create 30 mile wide sanitized corridors such as the EA-6B, increasing their survivability. If several types for the strategic bridge concept of convoy resupply to the of strike aircraft will be used, each should be launched as a European theater. separate group to maximize the chances of the strike achieving For submarines that escape this outer defensive tactic, prudent its objective. battle group commanders will have stationed ASW picket ships When air assets are unavailable to prosecute the target, surface 16,000-20,000 yards in advance of the battle group's PIM, to forces must consider other factors to maximize their attacks. escape the ambient noise of the main body and provide early First, one must be assured of a refined, complete targeting warning of the leakers through passive sonar contact. Subs that solution prior to committing the limited assets in the magazine. are detected in this manner are best prosecuted using indigenous Second, one must ascertain the composition of the target group. helicopter assets (two dippers and an SH-2 is best for the Blue Are they, in fact, hostile: Will the weapons to be player). In this manner, employed ensure saturation, based on available the firing platforms are intelligence? If the answer to either question is not subject to counter at\"No,\" then hold off on the attack. If one is certain 02.0 Ingress: The Carrera Move Morth tack. that conditions are right to proceed, then the next Failing this, submarines step is to re-evaluate salvo size based upon what which are detected in a you know about the enemy's anti-ship missile convergence zone (CZ) defenses (ASMD) and the PK (Probability of Kill) can be prosecuted by disof the weapon you are employing. patching a Surface Action Assume a missile PK of 80% and a target vessel Unit (SAU). SAU compocapable of firing three AAW missiles (with their sition should be at least New Ganel Saved Cam User Scon Mattiasata Jull Game PK at 60%) in the time that your missiles are in two ASW capable surface the envelope. With a single target vessel, a salvo of four missiles ships that can use Sprint is likely to have two survive and enter the terminal phase of and Drift tactics to close with the datum while the main body guidance. Within that phase, either point defense systems or the turns away. Again, if helo prosecution is available, it should be ECM suire is capable of killing both, but it is likely that at least utilized to avoid endangering the host platforms. If not, close one will survive with an 80% base chance of hiring the target. with the contact until an over the side shot is obtainable. Despite one's best protection, however, an occasional submarine will not Of course, the problem is grossly more complicated when one appear until one of the main body units sucks up a torpedo. In is targeting a formation of ships. There, the overlapping air this instance, the only recourse is to maneuver immediately, go defenses compliment one another, and one must commit a lot active on all sonars, launch all ready ASW aircraft and take every of scarce ASUW missiles to ensure a modicum of success. In action to minimize damage until the unwelcome intruder can such a case, it is best to try to coordinate two or more ASUW be climinated. attacks from different bearings with a simultaneous time on top of target. While not easy to accomplish, players who do so are rewarded with appropriate results. Back At Home Port 01.0Reconna MARIO SELECTION ANCH ELII Hribe Orals: The Cave TN Arri SELECTED SCENARIO DESCRIPTION 1. SITREF: ALL YONCES ARE HOVOR STAYTON NRD KLABY TO COMMERCE OFFENSIVE OPERATIONS. INTERMITTENT CONTACT WITH RUSSIAN SUBMARINES ME ALERTED DETECTIVE TORCES TO OUR FRESENCE 2. ORDERS BEGIN OFTDISIVE OPERATION AT EARLIEST OPPORTUNITY. PRIME TARGET FOR STRIKE OPERATIONS IS RED BANNER FLEET HA. MURMANSK. 3. INTEL MOST MJOR FLEET ASSETS MUE COMPLETED RESUPPLY AND ARE & Where enemy forces have equivalent launch ranges for ASUW If one is fortunate enough to tip a glass of champagne at the weapons, prudent players will dispatch a Surface Action Group end of an arduous campaign, it is an accomplishment worth (SAG) instead of endangering their HVU. SAGs are good for toasting. The fruits of victory are often bittersweet, as one may taking the battle to the enemy. They can transit faster than the leave behind many comrades in the process, but survival and battlegroup and prosecute the attack quicker. One must ensure, mission accomplishment remain the prime directives. Hopehowever, thar SAG composition is both adequate to accomplish fully, this article has allowed a greater harvest of these fruits, and the mission and to defend itself against potential threats. From encouraged a broader appreciation of their cost. Until we meet, the Blue perspective, a good SAG should include at least four either as allies or enemies, here's wishing fair winds and followmedium range ASUV shooters, one long range AAW shooter, ing seas to all! CGW September 1993 "


"WHAT IF THE WORL THEY PUT YOU INCHI "


"NERE AT WAR AND GE OF EVERYTHING? High Command captures WWII in Europe on a grand scale. Spanning the war years 1939 through 1945, you are placed in complete control of all military, economic and political resources. Choose to lead the Allied or Axis war machine. Command all land, sea and air forces, Exercise your diplomatic options. Build up your military or invest in your country's infrastructure. High Command is more than a wargame. It's the ultimate hot seat. Visit your local retailer or call to order 800-653-1360 in the U.S., or 800-697-2360 in Canada. HIGH COMMAND WILL BE AVAILABLE IN JUNE FOR THE IBM PC AND 100% COMPATIBLES HIGH COMMAND EUROPE 193945 IS A TRADEMARK OF THREE SIXTY PACIFIC, INC. 1993 THREESATI PACIFIC INC ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. IBM IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES WWW Circle Reader Service #31 "


"Survey Brooks' Book Of Wargames: 1900-1950, A-P. An Annotated Listing of Games From cow's Wargame. Editor by M. Evan Brooks Aces of the Pacific art Courtesy of Dynamix Then it comes to wargames, World War II continues to produce more titles than any other single period of history. Although this period was previously covered in CGW #37 and CGW #88-89, the rapid pace of releases tends to mandate occasional updates. The computer market is no longer shifting as rapidly among different computer types as it once was. During the 8-bit era, games had to be produced for different machine types, each of which was completely incompatible with its competitors. Today, the MS-DOS machine has gained a virtual domination of the market, but incompatibilities within the MS-DOS marker itself are becoming more varied than the 8-bit market ever was. DOS 5.0 and expanded memory are virtually required: CGA graphics are extinct, and newer games require SVGA graphics cards: clock speeds below 33 MHz are becoming unsupported, and it is likely that the machine of the near future may be the 486-66. The games themselves are growing ever larger, and it is not unusual to have a game with 10 high-density disks. Sound support also causes a disconnect between machine use, and there is no fix likely to appear. Please note platform availability; a five-star game on an Atari 800 that is several years old is not of the same sophistication as a new product designed for a SVGA 486-66 PC. However, it has been given its rating for what it did, ro a lesser extent what it still does, and perhaps for the place it holds in this reviewer's heart and memory. Of course. the designers look askance at these ratings, and often deluge the magazine with voluminous complaints. Again, though, these are intrinsically subjective, and a discriminating reader should be able to temper the ratings with this writer's normal reviews in order to ascertain the inherent biases. In all candor, I have intentionally taken steps to reduce the ratings of older games; the computer marker's \"flavor of the week\" simply cannot sustain an older platform vehicle and product. Prices are difficult to determine for older games, since they are so heavily discounted, assuming they can be found at all. Thus, be aware that the prices are only a rough guideline. Also, since this guide is for reference, one should be aware that prices shift downwards rapidly. We are not omniscient; there are many holes in the data contained. Rather than delete those titles for which we have little information, they have been included for completeness. And now the CHALLENGE: a one-year subscription will be given to the reader filling in the most omissions/corrections. Please send your submissions to me in care of this magazine or via modem (on GEnie, address: M.E. Brooks; on Prodigy, HFTN43A). I will do the judging, and all decisions are final. The deadline for submissions will be three months after this article is published. LEGEND: XXX = Data not available LINE 1: Tid/Rating Ratings: Ratio = Good use as a magner holder + Avoid Marginal = Average to Good = Very Good = Highly Recommended = Not Rated LINE 2: Machine Format [(A)tari/(C)ommodore/(Apple II/(T)RS-80/II(GS)/(Am)iga/(ST)/ (M)acintosh/(I)BM]; Issue of CGW in which that game was mentioned; bold print refers to major article (Company Designer/Date of Publication/Price) (O/P: Out of Print) LINE 3: Difficulty (Beg) inner/(Int)ermediatel (Adv)anced Environment (Land)/(Naval/(Air)/(Dip)lomatic/(Economic Level 1 ac)tical Operational Strategic # of Players (M: modem option) Level Definitions Tactical: man-to-man up to company level (turns represent seconds to hours) Operational: battalion-level to division-level (turns represent hours to weeks) Strategic: corps-level to theater army or higher (turns represent weeks to years) Military Organization: Fire Team Squad 9-12 Platoon 40-50 Company 120-150 Battalion 500-1,000 Brigade 3,000-5,000 Division 10,000-15,000 Corps 20,000-80,000 Army 100,000-up ACE OF ACES (*+) (A/C/T: #32,38) Accolade; Michael Bates and Rich Banks; 1986; $29.95 Beg/Air/Tac/1 A simplistic flight simulator offering a somewhat ahistorical rendition of fighter combat during World War II. ACES OF THE PACIFIC (****) (I; #92,98,99,101) Dynamix; Damon Slye; 1992; $69.95; Int/Air/Tac-Op/1 A World War II flight simulator, reminiscent of Bartlehawks, but in Dynamix's own style. Until Electronic Arts' Chuck Yeager's Air Combat, Lucas Film had claimed World War II aerial operations as its private domain. The situation has obviously changed. Although Aces initial release was plagued with a slow frame rate and other \"undocumented features,\" later fixes have converted it into the flight simulator of World War II. ACES OVER EUROPE (N-R) (1) Dynamix; Damon Slye; 1993; xxx; N-R Ind/Air/Tac-Op/1 Dynamix takes its system into the Western Front. Sadly, while Aces of the Pacific covered the entire war, Aces Over Europe covers only the latter half of June 1944. See Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe for similar coverage. ACTION IN THE NORTH ATLANTIC (N-R) (Ap/1; #70,74) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.; 1989; $35.00 Beg/Nav/Tac-Op/0-2; M World War II and the Murmansk run, with an emphasis on strategy rather than the minimalist graphics, Sink the Scharnhorst! ACTION OFF THE RIVER PLATTE (N-R) (Ap/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.; XXX; $35.00 Beg/Nav/Tac-Op/0-2; M Pursuit and destruction of the German \"pocket battleship\" Graf Spee: ACTION STATIONS (***) (Am/I; #68) RAW; CDR Alan Zimm; 1989; $49.95 Adv/Nav/Tac-Op/1-2 A very comprehensive simulation of surface warfare during World War II (actually 1922-45). Excellent research and complexities are marred by poor graphics and an awkward user interface. Still, it is the most detailed simulation covering this period. Presumably Three-Sixty's Victory at Sea will offer this product competition. ACTION STATIONS SCENARIO DISK (*** ) (Am/I) RAW; CDR Alan Zinim: 1992; $21.95 Adv/Nav/Tac-Op/1-2 More ships and options for Action Stations. AFTER PEARL (***) (A; #4.6,37) Super Ware; George Schwenk; 1984: O/P Beg/Nav/Op-Str/1-2 A strategic simulation of the War in the Pacific Page 118 Computer Gaming World "


"We Will Beat ANY Nationally Advertised Price*. We have more titles not listed. Call for the best prices. .......... $ BIT WIT SOFTWARE .. .... .. ........... A Train .. A Train Construction Set... A10 Tank Killer 1.5. Aces of the Pacific.... Aces of the Pacific: Disk 1 & 2. Alone in the Dark. Ashes of Empire. Batman Returns... Battlechess 4000..... Battles of Destiny........... Betrayal of Krondor............ Buck Roger's: Countdown to Doomsday... Buck Roger's 2: Matrix Cubed....... Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space......... Caesar.. Castles 2: Siege & Conquest ... Powermonger ........ Quest for Glory 3: Wages of War............. Rampart Realms Red Baron... Rex Nebular ....... Kingworld........ Rollerblade Racer....... Rome: Pathway to Power Second Front.... Secrets of Monkey Island 2 Shadow President Siege.. Siege: Dogs of War ................ Sierra Award Winners 3Pk Sierra Family Fun 3pk ......... SimCity......... SimEarth ......... Hours: 9 am to 9 pm Central Standard Time Civilization.... SimLife.... P.O. Box 115023-343 Comanche Maximum Overkill Conquered Kingdoms....... Conquest of Japan ............ Conquests of Longbow......... Creepers ........ Dagger of Amon Ra....... Darklands Daughter of Serpents.... Discovery: In the Steps of Columbus Dune 2...... Eco-Quest 2: Lost Secrets of Rainforest.... Elvira 2: Jaws of Cerberus ........... Empire Deluxe ............ Eric the Unready........ F15 Strike Eagle 3...... F15 Strike Eagle 3: Limited Edition .... Falcon 3.0.... Floor 13..... * Front Page Sports Football Gateway ........ Global Conquest.......... Gobliiins .... Great Naval Battles.. Great Naval Battles: Disk 1-3.. Hardball 3 Hardball 3: Disk 1 Harrier Assault ........... Hong Kong Majong Pro ............. Humans, The ....... Inca.. Indiana Jones 4: Fate of Atlantis Jack Nicholas Signature Golf... King's Quest 5: Absence ....... King's Quest 6: Heir Today Laser Squad..... Leather Godesses of Phobos 2....... Legend of Kyrandia.... Legends of Valor........ Lemmings............. Lemmings 2: Tribes Line in the Sand. Links 386 Pro Links 386 Pro: Disk 1-3... Lord of the Rings 2: Dark Towers... Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes. Lucas Arts Classic Adv. 4 pk..... Maelstrom...... Magic Candle 3............ Mega Lo Mania ......... Megafortress Mega Pack MiG 29 Fulcrum Might & Magic 4: Clouds of Xeen ...... Monopoly Deluxe.... New York Times Crossword Puzzles NFL Football........ No Greater Glory... Out of this world.. Pacific War................ Patriot.... Perfect General.... Perfect General: DDI.... Police Quest 3: Kindred Populous 2.... Power Game Software 5pk. SpaceQuest 4: Roger Wilco. Space Quest 5: Next Mutation Spaceward Ho. Specter ........ Spellcasting 301: Spring Break ..... Star Control 2... Star Legions............ Star Trek: 25th Anniversary ................ Strip Poker 3 Strip Poker 3: Disk 1-5 Stunt Island.... Summoning, The. Take A Break: Crosswords. Task Force 1942... Tegel's Mercenaries.. Terminator 2029... Theater of War...... Tony LaRussa's Ult. Value 5 pk. Trump Castle 3.... Ultima 5: Warriors of Destiny ........ Ultima 6: False Prophet .... Ultima 7: Black Gate.......... Ultima 7 Part 2: Serpent Isle... Ultima Underworld: Stygian Abyss.. Ultima Underworld 2: Labyrinth of World Utopia V for Victory: Ulah Beach V for Victory 2: Velkiye Luki..... V for Victory 3: Winter Garden Valhalla ............. Veil of Darkness.... Western Front....... Wilson Pro Staff Golf ...... Wing Commander Deluxe Wing Commander 2. Wizardry 6: Bane of the Cosmic Forge Wizardry 7: Crusader's of the Dark Sevant. Wizardry Trilogy: 1-3. World Circuit .... X Wing .... Carrollton, Texas 75011 800/259-2453 Joysticks & Game Cards CH Game Card III...... CH Flight Stick.. CH Mach III............ CH Virtual Pilot Flight Yoke......... Quick Shot Game Kit ........ Suncom G-Force Flight Yoke... Thrust Master Joystick.. Thrust Master Weapons Control Thrust Master Pro Joystick. Fax 214/306-9603 Sound Cards & Speakers Gravis Ultra Sound.... Koss HD/1 Speakers...................... Koss HD/4 Speakers.. Media Vision Thunder Board W/F15... Media Vision Pro Audio Spectrum 16 Bit. Sound Blaster Sound Blaster Pro 8 Bit.. .............. Sound Blaster Pro 16 Bit. ............. Sound Blaster Pro Basic 8 Bit ... OUD . ......... cu.. ...... 184 220 154 Most items shipped same day  UPS add $4 per order . 2 Day Air add $6 per order Policies: All sales final. Check compatibility before you buy. We accept Visa/MC, money orders, personal checks (please allow 2 weeks for check to clear). Detectives replaced with same product. Price, availability & shipping times subject to change. Texas residents add 8.25% sales tax. 'Does not include closeouts, liquidations, or limited quantities. "


"(1941-1945), this game bears little resemblance to history. Reminiscent of Avalon Hill's boardgame Victory in the Pacific, it is quick and fun to play. A \"cotton candy game, it may well rot your mind, but this reviewer still likes it. AFRIKA CORPS (N-R) (Am/ST; #87) Impressions; Ken Wright: 1991 Int/Land/Op/1 A British release, this simulation of the North African Campaign was never released in the United States. AIDE DE CAMP (****) (1) HPS; Scott Hamilton; 1993; $79.95 Int/Land-Nav-Air/Tac-Op-Str/1 Not a game as much as a gamer's aid. This utility program will assist one to convert any board wargame to computer output, albeit without the AI. Once files are created, games can be played by e-mail. A library of conversions by dedicated users is already under way. AIRDUEL (N-R) (I; #107) MicroProse; xxx; 1993; $59.95 Int/Air/Tac/1 Covering air warfare from 1915-1990, this is more of a game than a simulation. Somewhat reminiscent of Chuck Yeager's Air Combat, it is the only product that allows a match up of Fokker and Phantom-presumably a one-sided duel. Initially scheduled to be released as Dogfight. AIR RAID PEARL HARBOR (N-R) (Ap/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.: xxx; $35.00 Beg/Nav/Tac-Op/0-2; M Variations on an unplayable theme? Based upon the title and description, this simulation of the Japanese assualt on Pearl Harbor in 1941 must be for either sadists or maschosists (depending on which side is played). AIR WARRIOR (***+) (#63; 67) GEnie; Kesmai; 1988; $6.00/hour Int/Air/Tac/l-multi; M An on-line simulation of tactical air combat from World War I onwards. Continually being revised and updated, it is interesting although it can become an expensive way of life. The learning curve is lengthy, but veteran pilots are often available on-line who are willing to give assistance and tutorials AIR WARRIOR, SVGA (***+) (1: #101, 106) Konami; Kesmai; 1993; $59.95; Int/Air/Tac/1-multi; M commercial stand-alone of Air Warrior, it allows one to practice off-line or simply enjoy a solitaire mission. With front-end graphics and a smooth interface to GEnie, it serves as a conduit to the multi-player version. However, flight me chanics are so realistic that often it becomes «not just an adventure, but a job.\" ANCIENT ART OF WAR IN THE SKIES (** ) (1; #101,103,104) MicroProse; Dave and Barry e; Dave and Darry Murry; 1992; $59.95 Int/Air/Tac-Op/1 Aerial operations of World War I done in a \"cutesy fashion, it is a \"beer and pretzels\" game. Graphics and gameplay are satisfactory, albeit not exemplary. ARNHEM: THE MARKET-GARDEN OP ERATION (N-R) (Am/I; #86) CSS: R. T. Smith: 1991; xxx Int/Land/Op/1-3 \"Monty's Folly\" in hexadecimal. AT THE GATES OF MOSCOW (N-R) (A/C/Ap; #25) SGP; David Heath: 1985; O/P Int/Land/Op/o-multi A computer game released simultaneously with the board game version, it covers the 1941 Axis drive on Moscow. Neither product has withstood the rest of time. B-17 FLYING FORTRESS (***) (Am/I; #101,102) MicroProse; Mike Brunton; 1992; $69.95 Int-Adv/Tac-Op/1 A detailed flight simulation of the B-17, its graphics are both excellent (internal views) and sub-marginal (external views). Bomber operations are inherently dull (somewhat akin to driving an unwieldy bus on a fixed route), and this simulation more than covers the topic. B-24 COMBAT SIMULATOR (**) (C/Ap/I/; #39) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; John Gray; 1987; O/P Int/Air/Tac/1 A simulation of the World War II Ploesti oil raids, the player must join his B-24 to the formation, fly to the target, and inflict maximum damage. While accurate, the game suffers somewhat from a repetitious nature and the fact that a single bomber in raid offers little room for initiative. Superseded by Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe. BANZAI (N-R) (Ap/l: #85) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.; 1991: $35.00 Beg/Nav/Tac/0-2; M The last voyage of the Japanese super-battleship Yamato in a tactical battle simulation of World War II Pacific action. BATTLE COMMAND (N-R) (C: #40:74) Applied Computer Consultants; Bob Sinclair; 1986: O/P Int/Land/Tac/2; M BATTLE CRUISER (**) (A/C/Ap;#37,38) Strategic Simulations. Inc.: Gary Grigsby: 1987: O/P Adv/Nav/Tac/1-2 The sequel to Warship, this simulation covers World War II in the Atlantic and World War I. Similar to its predecessor, it suffers the same strengths and weaknesses. BATTLE FOR MIDWAY (N-R) (C) Firebird; xxx; 1986; O/P In/Nav-Air/Tac-Op/1 Players command the US Pacific Fleet six months after Pearl. BATTLEFRONT (***) (C/Ap; #32,37) Strategic Studies Group; Roger Keating and Ian Trout; 1987; $39.95 Int/Land/Op/0-2 A very flexible game covering corps-level combat and proper use of the chain of command during World War II. Design-your-own scenarios open the bulk of the 20th century to gaming: however, the artificial intelligence of subordinate commanders is notoriously weak. The game system will either attract or repel the player-there is no middle ground. BATTLEGROUND (N-R) (1; #40) MVP Software; xxx: 1987: O/P Int/land/Tac/2 Tactical squad-level operations on the Western Front during WWII. BATTLE GROUP (**) (C/Ap/T; #27,29) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1986; O/P; ** Adv/Land/Tac/1-2 SSI's World War II Western Front sequel to Kampfgruppe, this simulation offers tactical scenarios and the ability to design-your-own. Not as successful as its antecedent, it suffers from the same problems. BATTLE HAWKS 1942 (***) (1: #53,63,64) LucasArts: Noah Falstein and Lawrence Holland: 1988; $29.95 Int/Air/Tac/1 A combat simulator of the major carrier battles of World War II from the cockpit perspective. The graphics, excellent when released, pale in comparison to newer releases; however, excellent documentation and quick play keep this product a real player. There are rumors that LucasArts is considering a newer version, which would bring it up to the state-of-the-art for the faster machines currently available. BATTLE OF BRITAIN (***) (M; #99) Deadly Games: Rene Vidmer: 1992; $54.95: NPR Int/Air/Op/1 Strategic level air warfare. Players command belcaguered RAF against intelligent German raids. BATTLE OF BRITAIN (N-R) (C) Firebird: xxx; 1986; O/P: N-R Int/Air/Op/1 BATTLES OF THE ATLANTIC (N-R) (Ap/ST/1; #5.2,29) Simulations Canada; L. Howie; 1986; $60.00 Adv/Nav/Op/1-2 A World War II simulation. An amalgamation of a board and computer game, it uses map, counters and computer. BATTLE OF THE BULGE (N-R) (I) Ark Royal: Carl Carpenter; 1988; O/P Ind/Land/Op/1-2 BATTLESHIP BISMARCK (N-R) (Ap/l; #74) General Quarters: Owen P. Hall, Jr.; 1991; $35.00 Beg/Nav/Tac-Op/0-2; M. World War II pursuit of the German battleship by British Naval Forces. BATTLESHIP (N-R) (C/ST/A/1: #55) Epyx; xxx; 1988; O/P Beg/Nav/Tac/1-2 The old Milton Bradley Battleship game with a couple of new ideas and twists. BATTLE STATIONS (N-R) (M) TimeLine, Ltd.: M. L. Samford and W. P. Worzel; 1986; O/P Beg/Nav/Tac/1-2 Again, the old Milton Bradley Bantleship game with other new ideas and twists not found in either the computer or boardgame versions. BATTLE STATIONS (N-R) (Ap/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.s xxx; $35.00 Page 120 Computer Gaming World "


" BLITZKRIEG: BATTLE AT THE ARDENNES (*) (Am/1;#67) RAW; AI and Joseph Benincasa; Beg/Nav/Tac-Op/0-2; M. A simulation of the WWII USS Houston, historically a lopsided contest with a few American and Allied forces attempting to stem the Imperial Japanese fleet at its zenith. BATTLE TANK: BARBAROSSA TO STALINGRAD (N-R) (Am/ST/I: #72) Simulations Canada; Stephen Newburg and Stephen St. John; 1990; $60.00 Adv/Land/Op-Tac/1-2 Tactical armored combat in the East, June 1941. May 1943. BATTLE TANK: KURSK TO BERLIN (N-R) (Am/ST/I) Simulations Canada: Stephen Newburg and Stephen St. John; 1991; $60.00 Adv/Land/Op-Tac/1-2 Tactical armored combat in the East, June 1943May 1945. BIG THREE (N-R) (1: #96) SDJ; Steven D. Jones: 1991; $29.95 Int/Land/Str/2-3 A shareware-style version of World War II in Europe, lacking any AI. BISMARCK: THE NORTH SEA CHASE ( +) (C/Ap; #42) DacaSoft; Anthony Sroddart; 1987: O/P Beg/Nav/Tac-Op/1 An arcade-type simulation of the chase for the Bismarck, this product offers little innovation, insight or play value. Adv/Land/Op/1-2 The Battle of the Bulge during World War II. BLUE MAX (*) (: #76 77 78,83) Three Sixty: Rick Banks and Paul Butler; 1990; $49.95 Int/Air/Tac/1-2 First out of the blocks in the 1990-91 World War I air simulator competition, and it shows. Morea game than a representation of reality, it does not really succeed on either level. BLOOD AND IRON: BATTLES OF THE BIG RED ONE (N-R) (1) Twin Dolphins; Paul Meyer; 1993(2): XXX Int/Land/Tac/1-2 A forthcoming release which simulates small unit tactics during World War II. It looks interesting and should mcrit a closer examination upon reInc.; David Landrey and Chuck Kroegel; 1983; O/P Adv/Land/Op/1-2 A follow-on to Operation Market-Garden, this game suffers the same strengths and weaknesses. Better than Tigers in the Snow, it is more complex and obsolescent. BULGE THE BATTLE FOR ANTWERP (*) (C) Green Valley Publishing; Xxx; 1985; O/P Beg/Land/Op/1-2 Real-time Battle of the Bulge game which boasts \"no manual required.\" Player intelligence also appears to be optional. CAMPAIGN (+*+) (Am/ST/I;#102,104) Empire; Jonathan Griffiths: 1992; $59.95 Int/Land/Op-Tac/1 Billed as a strategic/tactical simulation of the World War II Western Front, it is adequate on the former level and almost an arcade rendition of the latter. Some interface inadequacies contribute to the \"vanillaness\" of this product. CARRIER FORCE (**) (A/C/Ap; #4.2.4.6,27,29,37) Strategic Simulations Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1983; O/P Adv/Nav-Air/Op/1-2 A Tactical/operational simulation of the major Pacific carrier battles of World War II. it is marred by extremely slow execution and historical inaccuracy in some areas. Obviously dated, it has been superseded by designer Gary Grigsby's newer treatment of the same subject, Carrier Strike. lease. BOMB ALLEY (*+) (Ap; #3.4) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1982; O/P Adv/Air-Nav/Op-Str/1-2 Gary Grigsby's sequel to Guadalcanal Campaign, this treatment of the World War II Mediterranean Campaign was not a success in its initial release. Time has not revised this judgment. BREAKTHROUGH IN THE ARDENNES (*+) (A/C/Ap/1; #5.1,33,37) Strategic Simulations, Talk to her Talk to a GIRLFRIEND in Your Computer The Software Hobby is EXPENSIVE. CCC'S SOLUTION... We'll take your USED SOFTWARE on CONSIGNMENT and SELL it for you for a reasonable commission. The World's First Artificially Intelligent Virtual Woman! Watch her Order from your favorite dealer or send check or M.O. Add $4 shipping. Add $4 if C.O.D. Girlfriend Lisa $69.95 AldeaLabs, BOX 450971, Garland, TX 75045 (214) 495-6047. Specify 31/2\" or 5 1/4\" HD disk.  Revolutionary new game for PC compatibles  Artificial Intelligence, Interactive Conversation  3000+ word vocabulary, synonyms, idioms  She lives in your computer, and talks to you on the screen  She learns from every conversation!  VGA video of a REAL Woman. no cartoons!  Runs on any 286, 386, 486 (12MHz min.)  Requires 640K RAM and 8Mb hard disk  No nudity, possible mature situations  Ask about Girlfriend Teri and other Personality Kits constantly being released! Call for USED TITLES for sale and info. 1-508-457-0738 Orders for NEW SOFTWARE. 1-800-729-6733 (24 hour) CAPE COD CONNECTION 630 MAIN STREET FALMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS 02540 Circle Reader Service #33 Circle Reader Service #41 September 1993 Page 121 "


"curvey VALUT GARR PATUT UUTUU TIM FCTVGALGA) CARRIERS AT WAR (***) (C/Ap/1; #5.1,5.2,37) Strategic Studies Group; Roger Keating and Ian Trout; 1984; $50.00 Int/Nav-Air/Op/l-2 Similar in coverage to Carrier Force, it excels in its flexibility, options and limited intelligence. It is broader in scope than Carrier Force. Highly recommended for the 8-bit market. CARRIERS AT WAR, 2ND EDITION ***+) (1: #90,100,102) Strategic Studies Group Roger Keating and Ian Trout; 1992; $69.99 Int/Nav-Air/Op/1-2 Upgraded into the current computer technologies, Carriers at War is graphically attractive and offers excellent gameplay. Its major flaw is the lack of a a campaign, and each scenario is a stand-alone operation, allowing the player to \"go-for-broke\" and not worry about conserving assets for future operations. CARRIERS AT WAR CONSTRUCTION KIT (N-R) (1) Strategic Studies Group: Roger Keating and lan Trout; 1993; xxx Inc/Nav-Air/Op/1-2 The other half of Carriers at War, the documenta tion is voluminous and offers a fascinating look into carrier operations during World War II. CARRIER STRIKE (****) (l; #97,98,99) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1992; $59.95/$29.95 Int/Nav-Air/Op/0-2 Gary Grigsby's updated version of Carrier Force, it does not have the graphic capabilities of Carriers at War, but it does have a campaign option. While I consider this to be a worthwhile option, I do have to admit that my 15-year old son would not even bother booting this up, although he was fascinated with Carriers ar War. In summary, I would recommend this to the grognard, while Carriers at War has more appeal to the MTV generation. CARRIER STRIKE Expansion Disk (**) (1; #104) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grig sby; 1992; $29.95 Adv/Nav/Op/1-2 More scenarios and a 1946 campaign offer new play value, albeit the retail cost is somewhat high. CHUCK YEAGER'S AIR COMBAT (***) Ady/Land/Tac/1-2 (I; #85,86) Electronic Arts; Brent Iverson; 1991; A tactical man-to-man simulation of patrolling in $59.95 World War II. The graphics are extremely primiAdv/Air/Tac/1 tive, but the details make up for this deficiency to A flight simulator offering the ability to fly scenar a large extent. Users still plaintively ask for an ios in World War II, Korea or Vietnam, or mixupdated version of this simulation. and-match them. Good game play and an COMPUTER BISMARCK (N-R) excellent post-mission analysis yield a recommen(A) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Joel Billings: 1980; dation. O/P CLASH OF STEEL (****) Int/Nav/Tac/ (1: #109) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Martin The game that started SSI, its age and functional Scholz; 1993; $69.95 obsolescence make this product useful only to the Int/Land-Nav/Str/0-3 collector. More of a computer assist to a A strategic and eminently playable simulation of boardgame than a true computer game. World War Il in the entire European Theater COMPUTER THIRD REICH (N-R) (including both Eastern and Western Theaters). Reminiscent of Avalon Hill's Hitler's War, it is (Am/ST; #62;86,97) Avalon Hill; Thalean Softeverything that Storm Across Europe should have ware; 1992; $39.95 been and wasn't Adv/Land-Nav-Air/Op-Str/0-3 The computer translation of the classic board warCLASH OF WILLS (*) game. Wargamers were expectant, but having been CA/C: #5.4,29,37) DKG; Marc Summerlott; burned by the Avalon Hill software division be1985; O/P fore, the mediocre Al of this product was not a real IndLand/Su/1-3 surprise. A strategic simulation of the war in Europe (1939COMPUTER THIRD REICH 1945), covering both Eastern and Western Fronts. Primitive graphics and poor user interface coupled (1) Avalon Hill; Thalean Software; 1993(?): xxx; with extremely poor documentation will deter N-R most players. Yet, its sheer scope does offer some Adv/Land-Nav-Air/Op-Str/0-3 playability and enjoyment. But for a more current The MS-DOS version has been promised with treatment see Clash of Steel. totally new graphics and a challenging Al. The CLOSE ASSAULT (*) betting line on this one is not high. (A/Ap; #3.3) Avalon Hill; Gary Bedrosian; 1983; CONQUER FOR WINDOWS (N-R) $35.00 (1) Elpin; Harold Habeck; 1993; $69.95; N-R Beg/Land/Tac/1-2 Int/Land-Nav-Air/Str-Op/1-2, M, Network A World War II tactical infantry simulation, with An Empire-clone for Windows offering modem the computer utilized as a board-game assistant and network play. It has fewer unit types than the Using a hex-grid map and counters, it has touches usual Empire \"me too\" and a bit more emphasis on of the boardgames Squad Leader and Panzerblitz. economics. However, it is awkward, clumsy and obsolete. CRUSADE IN EUROPE (****) COMBAT LEADER (*) (C/Ap/1; #5.3,5.5,26,37) MicroProse; Sid Meier (A/C; #37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.: David and Ed Bever; 1985: O/P Hille; 1984; O/P Int/Land/Op-Str/1-2 Beg/Land/Tac/l An operational/strategic simulation of the WestA tactical simulation of armored warfare ern Front during World War II, the scenarios offer (squad/platoon) with built-in as well as designreal value. The campaign suffers from an incomyour-own scenarios, the game offers a myriad of petent computer opponent, but this product has options. Quick playing, but with primitive graphaged well. Now if they would only offer the hard sics (destroyed armored vehicles resemble nothing drive installable version. so much as cockroaches). COMMAND HQ (***) (I/M; #74,76,77,79,80) Micro Prose; Dan Bunren; 1990; $59.95 Int/Land-Nav-Air/Str/1-2; M A product capable of recreating World Wars IIV), this is a modified \"beer and pretzels\" game. Highly recommended for entertainment, alSOUTH PACIFIC 1942-44 though not as a historical learning experience. COMPUTER AIR COMBAT (N-R) (Ap) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Charles Merrow and Jack Avery; 1980; O/P Adv/Air/Tac/1 A computer-clone of Yaquinto's boardgames Air Force and Dauntless, this covers tactical air combat during World War II. One of the first air combat simulations, this sparked the birth of Computer , Gaming World as a forum for serious reviews. COMPUTER AMBUSH (**+) al (A/C/AP/M/ST/I; #3,3,37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Ed Williger and Larry Strawser: 1980; O/P STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC. IN TEMPAT Page 122 Computer Gaming World "


"Curvey DAS BOOT (**) (Am/l: #74.76,82) Three Sixty; Paul Butler and Rick Banks; 1991; $49.95 Ind/Nav/Tac/1 A World War II submarine simulation, it is not as sophisticated as Silent Service II and contains some mindless arcade segments, but it does allow one to play the German side. DAWN PATROL (N-R) (C) Mark of the Falcon; Scott C. Baggs: 1985;O/P Int/Nav/Tac/1 A real-time World War II submarine simulation. DECISION IN THE DESERT (****) (C/Ap/l; #5.5,37) MicroProse: Sid Meier and Ed Bever; 1985; O/P Int/Land/Op/1-2 An operational study of the Desert Campaign in World War II, it offers a fascinating study, which will teach appropriate lessons in armored desert warfare. More accurate than Crusade in Europe, but narrower in scope. Even with age, this game is still enjoyable. DESERT FOX (*) (C; #36) Accolade; Sydney Development Corp.: 1985; $19.95 Beg/Land/Op/1 An operational simulation of the African Campaign, it attempted to mix both arcade play and simulation, and ultimately failed on both levels. DESERT RATS (**) (1; #54,58) CCS; R.T. Smith; 1989; $39.95 Int/Land/Op/1-2 Similar in coverage to Decision in the Desert, it offers a scenario of the entire campaign (in 672 turns!!). Awkward user mechanics and primitive graphics mar this product; age has turned it to vinegar, and it's not even that old. DESERT WAR (N-R) (M: #60) SJP: xxx; 1989, XXX xxx/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 DESTROYER (**) (CIAp/I/GS; #33) Epyx; xxx; 1986; O/P Int/Nav/Tac/1 Graphic-emphasis yields an interesting portrayal of World War II destroyer operations. However, the documentation and scenarios are underdevel oped. Again, age has rendered it obsolescent DESTROYER ESCORT (*+) (C; #62) Medalist; Robert Prescott; 1989; O/P Beg/Nav/Tac/l Very similar to Destroyer, but a newer version. DIPLOMACY, COMPUTER (***) (Am/I/ST: #37,41,75) Avalon Hill; Ron Sutherland; 1984/1992; $50.00 Int/Dip/Str/1-6 A faithful rendition of the classic boardgame, its graphics and computer intelligence are not stateof-the-art. The Amiga and Arari ST versions have recently been revamped, though the IBM version remains untouched and out-dated (though it is being sold in a new box). DIVE BOMBER (0+) (Ap/C/ST/Am/I; #55) Epyx/US Gold; Acme Animation/Gremlin Graphics; 1989; $39.95 Beg/Air/Tac/l A \"Sink the Bismarck\" simulation marred by mediocre graphics, documentation and an overall lack of panache. Similar to Bismarck: The North Sea Chase. DNIEPER RIVER LINE (N-R) (A/Ap) Avalon Hill: Bruce Ketchledge; 1983, O/P Int/Air/Op/1 An Eastern Front battle during World War II, this is not so much a computer game as it is computer assistance to a boardgame (it comes with map and counters). It ultimately didn't succeed on either level. DREADNOUGHTS (*+) (C/Ap/1:#4.5.4.6.26) Avalon Hill: Thomas Dowell; 1984; $30.00 Int/Nav/Tac/1-2 World War II naval action covering the pursuit of the German battleship Bismarck in 1941. Operational and tactical levels, with the latter allowing one to modify and create his own scenarios. However, poor graphics and game play do little to enhance the game. DREADNOUGHTS (**) (1) Turcan Research Systems Ltd.; Peter Turcan; 1992; xxx Int/Nav/Tac-Op/0-2 A \"view-from-the-turret\", this World War I naval simulation offers an interesting, albeit very slow portrayal of tactics during the few World War I encounters. EAGLES (**) (AVC/Ap) Strategic Simulations, Inc.: Robert Raymond; 1983; O/P; Beg/Air/Tac/l TURN YOUR DESKTOP INTO A COCKPIT! HOME BASE GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED IBM GAMES also Nintendo, Super Nintendo, and Sega Genesis We want your current used games* 1-800-377-8578 CONTROL call for authorization before shipping Supports WE SELL USED GAMES IBM, Nintendo, Super Nintendo, Sega Genesis All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked Call for current title availibility AMER'S  Ihrustmaster Ik Flightstic * Gravis Afast any light control-lygo WE ACCEPT VISA, MasterCard Most items shipped same day. S5 UPS/S7 2nd Day Air GAME ADD MORE REALISM TO YOUR SIMS! Clamps firmly to any desk, supporting the joystick out over your lop to more accurately relled the positioning of a red control stick. It also turns your keyboard into a cockpit control panel allowing you to easily access the keys without taking your eyes off the scienIT'S THE ONLY WAY TO FLY! Send check or money order for $28.95 plus S4.00 ICAN 57.001 for shipping and handling to: HOME BASE PRODUCTS 3025 Timberline Dr. Eugene, OR 97405 \"Gomes must be complete with all disks & printed materials and in the original box. Incomplete games will be returned of your expense. GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota  57105 DEALERS CALL FOR DISCOUNT (503) 686-1809 Circle Reader Service #56 Circle Reader Service #62 September 1993 Page 123 "


"Ciruel ity, but it is an interesting introduction to compurer wargaming. FIFTY MISSION CRUSH (+) (C/I/A/Ap;#4.4,35,37) Strategic Simulations, Beg/Air/Op-Str/1 A tactical recreation of the bomber offensive against Germany during World War II. Realistic but dull; superseded by B-17 and Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe in terms of graphics, game play and historical detail. FIGHTER COMMAND (N-R) (Ap; #3.4.4.4,5.1.5.2,26) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Charlie Merrow and Jack Avery; 1983; O/P Adv/Air/Op-Str/1-2 An early operational simulation of the Battle of Britain. FIGHTER DUEL: CORSAIR VERSUS ZERO (N-R) (Am; #94,97) Jaeger Software; Bill Manders; 1991; $49.95 Ady/Air/Tac/1-2; M One of the few detailed flight simulations designed specifically for the Amiga, it has many devoted fans. While CGW's review was less than laudatory, its aficionados were quick to burn the editors in effigy. Perhaps it's an acquired taste? World War I aerial operations, more akin to chess than a flight simulator. However, it can be an enjoyable, albeit unrealistic experience. EASTFRONT (N-R) (1; #101,106) Columbia Games; Craig Besinque: 1992; $39.95 Int/Land/Str-Op/2 A simulation of World War II's Eastern Front, this is a conversion from the designer's boardgame. As such, it is a straight port, and lacks any AL. EASTERN FRONT (**** (A; #37) APX; Chris Crawford; 1982; O/P Int/Land/Op-Suc/1 An operational-strategic simulation of the Ger man invasion of Russia during World War II, this game was the first to show what the computer could do in wargaming. Obsolete by contemporary programming standards, it remains fun to play. The cartridge version offers both beginner and advanced scenarios. EMPIRE (***) (Am/U/ST; #40,41,43,54,60,63,75) Interstel; Walter Bright and Mark Baldwin; 1987; O/P Int/Land-Sea-Air/Op/1-3 A very enhanced version of the public domain product, this offers an intriguing simulation of global-type warfare. Emphasizing aspects of land, sea and air, the simulation is very interesting, although it does take a long time to win. Designyour-own options and easy user interface make this a player. Based upon the combat units, this appears to be a World War I general's concept of how the next war would be fought (battleships remain king!). EMPIRE DELUXE (***) (1; #101,107) New World; Mark Baldwin and Bob Rakowsky; 1993; $59.95 Int/Land-Sea-Air/Op/1-6 The enchanced version of Empire, it has the \"bellsand-whistles\" that all gamers wanted. A scenario disk is being designed with inputs from the \"Who's Who\" of computer gaming design. Yet, as I continue to play, I am frustrated by the premise (after all, one has fighter aircraft and still begins with no knowledge of his geographic environment and the combat (which often tends to World War I attritional assaults). Yet, I keep on playing... EUROPE ABLAZE (**+) (C/Ap; #27.37) Strategic Studies Group: Roger Keating, Eric Baker and lan Trout; 1985; $49.95 Int/Air/Op/1 A simulation re-creating the Battle of Britain and the Bomber Offensive Over Germany during World War II. Design-your-own scenarios and much detail, but Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe has superseded this game to a large degree, al though that product is more tactically-oriented. FALL GELB (N-R) (C/I/AP/ST) Simulations Canada; Les Howie; 1988; $60.00 Int/Land/Op/1-2 The fall of France, Spring 1940. FIELD OF FIRE (**) (C/A/AP/ST/I; #37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Roger Damon; 1984; O/P Int/Land/Tac/1 A tactical situation of squad-level operations on the Western Front during World War II. History and \"lessons learned\" take a back seat to playabil & Wark A tactical simulation of the bomber offensive against Germany during World War II, it is relatively detailed. However, game play becomes somewhat tedious. FLEET MED (N-R) (Am/ST/I) Simulations Canada; J. Baker; 1991; $60.00 Air/Nav/Tac/1-2 A tactical simulation of naval conflict in the Mediterranean (1939-1943), it includes nine scenarios and a \"design-your-own\" feature. FLYING TIGERS (0) (A/Ap; #37) Discovery: David Weseley, 1982; O/P Beg/Air/Tac/1 A tactical air-to-air simulation of World War II in the Pacific. Graphics, realism and play value are sufficient to deter anyone from further play. FOKKER TRIPLANE SIMULATOR (N-R) (M; #66) Bullseye; Donald A. Hill, Jr.; 1986/1989; $69.95 Int/Air/Tac/1 An early World War I flight simulator, it shows its age. GATO (*+) (C/Ap/Am/1; #5.2) Spectrum HoloByte; Ed Dawson and Paul Arlton; 1983; O/P Int/Nav/Tac/1 One of the first World War II submarine simulations, it was adequate in its time, but not exemplary in any regard. Time has not been generous to this product. GERMAN RAIDER ATLANTIS (0+) (Ap/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.: xxx; $35.00 Beg/Nav/Tac/0-2; M Poor graphics, poor documentation and poor gameplay characterize this game of surface naval combat in World War II. GRAND FLEET (+*+) (ST/I; #63) Simulations Canada; J. Baker; 1988; $60.00 Int/Nav/Tac-Op/1 A simulation of fleet tactical operations in World War I actually covering 1906-1920), totally without graphics. However, it remains one of the few products covering this period. It includes seven scenarios and a \"design-your-own option. GREAT NAVAL BATTLES: NORTH ATLANTIC, 1939-1943 (***+) (Am/1; #102) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Roy Gibson & Ed Bever; 1992; $69.95 Adv/Nav/Op-Tac/1-2 A detailed simulation of World War naval operations, it is historically detailed and recommended to the aficionado of the period. While its AI often suffers in the campaign game, it is still the standard-bearer of the genre. While I can recognize its strengths, I must also note that often the game can become somewhat tedious, with vast naval engagements and numerous hits doing little real damage. GREAT NAVAL BATTLES: SUPER SHIPS OF THE ATLANTIC (***) (Am/l; #110) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Roy Gibson & Ed Bever; 1993; $29.95 Adv/Nav/Op-Tac/1-2 The first expansion disk, allowing for ships thar never left the drawing boards, but which could have made a major impact on the war. Interstel FIGHTER DUEL PRO (N-R) (Am; #105) Jaeger Software; Bill Manders & Matt Shaw; 1993; $59.95 Adv/Air/Tac/1-2; M The sequel-new and improved! Considered by some to be the best flight sim (particularly headto-head) on the Amiga. FIRE BRIGADE (+*+) (I/M; #49,63,64,66) Panther; Dave O'Connor, Tony Oliver and Bcn Freasicr; 1989; $39.95 Adv/Land/Op/1 A simulation of the 1943 battles around Kiev on the Eastern Front. Good documentation and excellent packaging have yielded a game that has withstood the rest of time, although the learning curve is somewhat long. FIRST OVER GERMANY (**) (C/1; #58,59) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; John Gray; 1989; O/P Int/Air/Tac/1 Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"çurvey EUROPE 1939-451 NAGLAPACH repede *CO GREAT NAVAL BATTLES: AMERICA IN THE ATLANTIC (***+) (Am/1; #107, 110) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Roy Gibson & Ed Bever; 1992; $29.95 Adv/Nav/Op-Tac/1-2 The United States enters the War in the Atlantic. GREAT NAVAL BATTLES: SCENARIO BUILDER (***+) (Am/; #110) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Roy Gibson & Ed Bever: 1992: $39.95 Adv/Nav/Op-Tac/1-2 An expansion disk allowing for user input and \"design-your-own\" scenarios. GREAT WAR 1914 (**+) (CIA) DKG; Marc Summerlott; 1986; O/P Int/Land/Op-Str/1-2 Primitive graphics and poor user interface mar this examination of the beginning of World War I. On the other hand, there are relatively few simulations covering this period. GUADALCANAL CAMPAIGN (N-R) (Ap; #2.5,5.4) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby: 1982; O/P Adv/Nav-Land/Op/1-2 Perhaps the first monster\" computer wargame, this covered the entire Guadalcanal Campaign, but in a tedious fashion. The subject has been covered in more recent simulations (see Gary Grigsby's own War in the Pacific). GUDERIAN (*+) (A/C/Ap; #38,40) Avalon Hill; Software Associates; 1987; $30 Int/Land/Op/1-2 A faithful adaptation of Jim Dunnigan's famous board game, it suffers from being an almost too literal translation. Slow-moving, the design had potential, but the programming did not achieve its objective HALLS OF MONTEZUMA (***) (C/Ap/Am/I; #42,45) Strategic Studies Group; Roger Kearing and lan Trout; 1988; $39.95 Adv/Land/Op/0-2 The Battlefront system writ once again, this covers the U.S. Marine Corps from the Mexican War through Vietnam, with emphasis on World War II. Battles include Belleau Wood (World War I). Okinawa and Iwo Jima (World War II) on brigade/divisional level operations. Editor Johnny Wilson loved the Halls, this reviewer is not as easily entertained. HELLCAT ACE (*) (A/C) MicroProse; Sid Meier; 1983: O/P Beg/Air/Tac/1 One of the first flight \"simulations from MicroProse, it was entertaining when released. Now it has interest only to the collector. HELLCATS OVER THE PACIFIC (N-R) (M) Graphic Simulations; Eric Parker; 1991; XXX xxx/Air/Tac/xxx A World War II flight simulator for the Mac. HEROES OF THE 357TH (**) (Am/D) Electronic Arts: Brian Hilchie, Dan Hoecke; 1992, $49.95 Int/Air/Tac/1 A relatively new release which was obsolescent before it was released. Mediocre graphics and mediocre gameplay combine to produce a whole less than the sum of its parts. HIDE AND SINK (N-R) (Ap) Mirror Images Software; Philip Koopman; 1983; O/P Beg/Nav/Tac/1 Another Battleship variation. HIGH COMMAND (N-R) (1) Three-Sixty; Gregg Carter and Joey Nonnast; 1993; $49.95 Adv/Land-Nav-Air/Op-Str/1-3 Third Reich the way it should have been done. While the Al has come in for much criticism, the game itself is easy to learn and play. Originally released by Colorado Computer Creations, ThreeSixty has given it SVGA graphics and interface tweaks for a new release. HISTORY LINE: 1914-1918 (N-R) (1: #109) Ubi Soft: Blue Byte: 1993: $59.95 Int/Land/Op/l Agame covering various battles of World War I in a semi-amorphous method, history takes a back seat to playability. Currently available in Britain, it should soon make it to the U.S. market. HURRICANE (N-R) (xxx) Simulations Canada; xxx; XXX; xxx; N-R xxx/xxx IN HARM'S WAY (**+) (C/Ap/Am/ST/I; #52,57) Simulations Canada: Bill Nichols; 1988; $60.00 Adv/Nav/Tac/1-2 Tactical naval combat in the Pacific from 19431944; nine scenarios and a \"build-your-own\" option. A sequel to Long Lance and probably one of the most absorbing games in SimCan's fleer of text-only wargames. IWO JIMA 1945/FALKLANDS 1982 (*) (C: #34,37) Firebird; John Bethell: 1985; O/P Beg/Land-Nav/Op/1 Simulation of the amphibious operation in World War II, it made up in price value what it lacked in historical accuracy. However, it has aged poorly and offers little for the contemporary wargamer in either history or play value. JAGDSTAFFEL (0) (A/AP: #37) Discovery; David Weseley; 1985; O/P Beg/Air/Tac/l A tactical game similar to Flying Tigers, only occurring in the European Theater. Just as bad as Flying Tigers. JUTLAND (N-R) (1/CD; #104) Sorcery Software; xxx; 1993 Int/Nav/Op-Str/1 A derailed simulation of World War i naval operations, it has not yet been released, although it has received full reviews\" from the industry. It looks interesting, but wait for it to \"unvaporize.\" KAMPFGRUPPE (***) (C/I/A/Ap/Am; #5.2,5.4,55,25,37.CGF Winter) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1985; $59.95 Adv/Land/Tac/1-2 A tactical simulation of warfare on the Eastern Front, this game was CGW's Game of the Year in 1985. Multiple options, but marred by lack of joystick input and a stacking anomaly (virtually an entire army can be crammed into a small geographic location). A classic that should be reworked in order to bring it up to contemporary standards. KAMPFGRUPPE SCENARIO DISK #1 (**) (A/C) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1986; O/P Adv/Land/Tac/1-2 Five additional scenarios for Kampfgruppe. His torical accuracy is subject to question in some of the scenarios, and the basic game was capable of designing a player's own scenarios. KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT (*+) (A/C/Ap/l; #3.4,37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.: Tactical Design Group: 1983; O/P Int/Land/Op/1-2 An operational simulation of Rommel's Desert Campaigns in North Africa during World War II, it was one of the first games to offer multiple stacking in the same hex. Slow and ponderous, its re-creation of the African Campaign does not deliver its potential. KNIGHTS OF THE SKY (***+) (1; #74,76,79,83) MicroProse; Jeffrey Briggs: 1991; $59.95 Ind/Air/Tac/1-2; M The modem play option is the greatest strength of this World War I flight simulator. While CGW's review gave it the highest of recommendations. this reviewer found the inability to fly on the German side, the graphic representation of cloud S OF MONTE PLUMA A Battle History of the United States Marine Corps Neating Aliw Tu Male Gregor Wa A Game for the Abarai September 1993 Pama 125 "


"çurvey TACTICAL LEVELCOMAT ON TIE RUSSIA Kamploruppe MALTA STRIKE (N-R) (Ap/T) Discovery; Dave Arneson; 1980; O/P Beg/Air/Tac/1 Tactical combat in the World War II Meditertanean theater. MARE NOSTRUM (N-R) (Ap/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.; xxx; $35.00 Beg/Nav/Tac-Op/0-2: M World War II action between the Royal Navy and the Italian Fleet. MARIANAS TURKEY SHOOT (N-R) (AP/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr., XXX; $35.00 Bat/Nav/Tac-Op/0-2: M The largest air carrier battle in history, as well as SIL the most one-sided. WWII action with the last gasp of the Japanese. cover,\" and flight models/damage to be less than METZ-COBRA (N-R) optimal. Still a fine game, which suffers only by (C/A) DKG; XXX; xxx; O/P comparison (and badly) to Red Baron. Inc/Land/Op/1-2 KRIEGSMARINE (N-R) Break-out from the Normandy Beachhead, 1944. (Am/ST/I; #66,67) Simulations Canada; Steve MIDWAY: THE BATTLE THAT DOOMED Newberg and James Baker; 1989; $60.00 JAPAN (N-R) Adv/Nav/Tac/1-2 (1) General Quarters: Owen P. Hall, Jr.; 1987: Tactical naval combat in the Atlantic between $35.00 1939 and 1944, with nine scenarios and a \"buildInt/Nav/Op-Str/1-2 your-own\" option. MIDWAY CAMPAIGN (*) KURSK CAMPAIGN (N-R) (Ap/A) Avalon Hill; National Microcomputer As(Ap/ST/I; #37) Simulations Canada; Stephen St. sociates; 1980; O/P John; 1986; $60.00 Beg/Nav-Air/Op/1 Adv/Land/Op/1-2 An operational/strategic simulation of the Midway A simulation of the largest tank battle of World Campaign, this game has been superseded by imWar II (Operation Zitadelle, Summer 1943). provements in computer design. Primitive graphics and gameplay do little to enhance its durability, LAFAYETTE ESCADRILLE (N-R) MIGS AND MESSERSCHMITTS (N-R) (T; #3.5) Discovery, David Weseley; 1983: O/P (Ap/T) Discovery; Dave Wesley and Ross Maker: Beg/Air/Tac/1 -1980; O/P World War I air combat. Beg/Air/Tac/1 LONG LANCE (**+ Tactical World War II in the East. To be generous, it may be described as \"obsolete.\" (C/Ap/Am/ST/I; #43,48) Simulations Canada; Bill Nichols; 1988; $60.00 MIRACLE AT MIDWAY (NPR) Adv/Nav/Tac/1-2 (Ap/I; #65,66) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Tactical naval combat in the Pacific in 1942. Jr.; 1989; $35.00 Beg/Nav/Tac-Op/0-2; M LOST ADMIRAL, THE (****) The WWII decisive battle in the Pacific. (1; #86,88,90,99) QQP; Bruce W. Zaccagnino and Thurston Searfoss: $59.95; 1991 MOSCOW CAMPAIGN (N-R) Int/Nav/Tac-Op/1 (I/AP/ST) Simulations Canada; Stephen St. John; 1987: $60.00 Empire goes to sea; quicker than others of this Adv/Land/Op/1-2 genre, it offers a plethora of scenarios and randomization factors. Easy to play and difficult to A simulation of Operation Typhoon and White master, it has the potential for long-term playabil Storm (30 August 1941 13 February 1942). ity, and a newer version is planned. NORMANDY, BATTLES IN (**) M4 TANK SIMULATOR (N-R) (C/Ap;#40,42,54) Strategic Studies Group; (M; #105) Deadly Games: Rene Vidmer; 1993; Roger Keating and Ian Trout: 1987: $39.95 $54.95 Adv/Land/Op/1-2 The Normandy Invasion and Break-Out, this Int/Land/Tac/1 simulation is marred by the utilization of the A World War Il tank simulation, with nice sound, Battlefront system in a situation where it is inappassable graphics and good gameplay. plicable. The historical use of fire and maneuver MALTA STORM (N-R) tends to bog down in a war of attrition; corps (Am/ST/I; #65,72,74) Simulations Canada; maneuverability becomes mired in a morass of Robert Crandall; 1990; $60.00 engagements which yield ahistorical results. Adv/Nav/Op-Str/1-2 NORMANDY, BATTLE FOR (***) A simulation of the battle for the Mediterranean (A/Ap/C/1; #3.4,37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; between December 1941 and August 1942 utilizDavid Landrey; 1984; O/P ing three week turns. Int/Land/Op/1-2 An operational simulation of the Invasion of Normandy, this game is easy to learn, although the documentation covering the actual landings leaves much to be desired. A solid intermediate level game in 1984, it is dated and suffers from a lack of joystick input, yet this reviewer still enjoys it. NORTH ATLANTIC CONVOY RAIDER (N-R) (xxx) Avalon Hill; xxx; xxx; O/P xxx/xxx OBJECTIVE: KURSK (N-R) (A/C: #5.2) DKG: Mark Sommerlott; 1984; O/P Int/Land/Str/1-2 OBJECTIVE: KURSK (**) (A/C; #4.4,37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby: 1984: O/P Adv/ Land/Tac-Op/1-2 A tactical/operational simulation of the largest tank battle in World War II, it is very detailed. However, user input is tedious via keyboard, and the game system overall is somewhar bland. OPERATION COM*BAT (**) (Am; #75) Merit; Scott Lamb; 1990; $49.95 Beg/Land/Tac/1-2; M. An abstract wargame with early modem play, it offers little for the contemporary user. OPERATION KEYSTONE (*) (1; #28,31) Overt Strategic Simulations; T.J. Peto, Jr.; 1986; O/P Int/Nav/Tac/I World War II submarine operations in the Pacific. Similar to both Silent Service and GATO, but perhaps less interesting than either. OPERATION MARKET-GARDEN (+) (A/C/Ap/I; #5.3,5.4.37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; 1986; Chuck Kroegel and David Landrey; O/P Air/Land/Op/1-2 A tactical/operational simulation of the largest airborne operation of World War II, this game suffers from graphic sensory deprivation (derermining the road network is a lesson in frustration). Also, input may not be readjusted in mid-play, and overall, the user interface is both clumsy and unforgiving OPERATION MARKET-GARDEN (N-R) (1) MPG Net; xxx; 1993: $2.00-4.00 per hr. KNICHTS OF THE DESERT THE NORTH AERICANCAMPAIGN OF 1941-43 Commuter Gaming World "


"Curveu   TEST BATTLE TURPATIAT . LOUT D E The simulation of the Pacific. Graphically acceptInt/Land/Tac/1-2; M able, its strength lies in the sheer data and scope of By the designer of Empire, this simulation sacriGENERAL the campaign. In all truth, I find it overwhelming, fices realism for playability. Still, the playability but I can recognize quality when I see it. Highly level is sufficiently high that one can forgive the recommended for retirees, or for those for whom weakness in realism. the expression \"Get a life!\" means something, PERFECT GENERAL WORLD WAR II SCEPANZER BATTLES (***) NARIO DISK (N-R) (C/Ap/M/I; #68,69) Strategic Studies Group: (1; #94,95) QQP, Mark Baldwin; xxx; 1992 Roger Keating and lan Trour, 1989; $39.95 Int/Land/Tac/1-2; M Adv/Land/Tac/0-2 An expansion disk covering many World War II The Battlefront system on the East Front with six battles. scenarios (Minsk, Moscow, Kharkov, Prokhorovka, Kaney and Korsun). Interestingly PERFECT GENERAL GREATEST BATTLES enough, Moscow, Kharkov, Kanev and Korsun OF THE 20th CENTURY (N-R) have all been the subjects of paper wargames, and and (1#108) QOP: Mark Baldwin; $29.95; 1993 the computer offers a different perspective. Int/Land/Tac/1-2; M A second expansion disk-more ranging in PANZER GRENADIER (**) chronological periods, but many of the scenarios (A/C/Ap; #5.5,37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; are within the period covered herein. Roger Damon; 1985; O/P Beg/Land/Tac/1 POWER AT SEA (N-R) A tactical simulation of armored warfare on the (C;#46) Accolade; xxx; 1987; O/P (C;#46) Accolade; xxx; 19 Eastern Front during World War II, it is marred Beg/Nav/Tac-Op/1 An on-line version of \"A Bridge Too Far,\" based by historical inaccuracy. Reconnaissance by fire is The WWII battle of Leyte Gulf. In the vein of on the original SSI design. overemphasized, and opportunity fire is hit-andEpyx's Destroyer, but lacking even that game's OPERATION OVERLORD (N-R) miss. It lacks the panache and clan to vield an sense of realism. (Ap/ST: #32) Simulations Canada: Stephen St. enduring game experience. PRELUDE TO JUTLAND (**) John; 1986; $60.00 PANZERJAGD (*) (Ap/1: #65) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.; Adv/Land/Op/1-2 (A/C; #4.6,37) Avalon Hill; Richard W. Scorup 1986; $35.00 A simulation of the first 11 weeks following D ski; 1984; $30.00 Beg/Nav/Tac-Op/0-2; M Day (6 June 28 August 1942). Beg/Land/Tac/ 1 The preliminary battles 1915 and the Grand Battle OPERATION WHIRLWIND (**+) A tactical simulation of armored warfare during itself. Minimalist conception of graphics and user (A/C:#3.5,37) Broderbund; Roger Damon; 1984; World War II, it is obviously dated by newer clumsy. O/P efforts and has little to recommend it today. PT-109 (**) Beg/Land/Tac/1 PANZER STRIKE (**) (M/I; #48,51) Spectrum HoloByte; Gordon WalAncestor of Field of Fire, Panzer Grenadier, and (C/Ap/ST/I; #45,47) Straregic Simulations, Inc.; ton; 1988; O/P Wargame Construction Set, this tactical simulation Gary Grigsby; 1988: $44.00/$49.95 Adv/Nav/Tac/1 of an urban assault during World War II remains Adv/Land/Tac/0-2 PT boat tactics in the South Pacific: relatively good fun to play, despite its age. However, overall, it has A tactical simulation of World War II small unit graphics and game play on a subject rarely covered. not aged all that gracefully. actions in the West and East Fronts. Very detailed, PURSUIT OF THE GRAF SPEE (N-R) OVERLORD (N-R) but the lack of a battlefield panoramic view often (xxx) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Joel Billings; (ST) CCS; Ken Wright; 1988; O/P pallows one to lose track of objectives, and it may 1982; O/P Int/Land/Op/1 take hours to complete a \"thirty minute\" assault. Int/Nav/Tac/1-2 A divisional-level simulation of the Invasion of PANZER WAR (N-R) Simulation of the early World War II battle off Normandy. (A; #4.6) Windcrest Software; George Schwenk; Montevideo Harbor. Very dated. 1983; O/P P-51 MUSTANG FLIGHT SIMULATOR Beg/Land/Tac/1-2 (N-R) AMME BERUN UNS NUTS THE LASTEN (M; #60) Bullseye; Donald A. Hill, Jr.; 1989; PATTON STRIKES BACK (**+ $59.95 (M/I; #90) Broderbund; Chris Crawford; 1991; Adv/Air/Tac/1-2; M $59.95 Cut from the same cloth as the Fokker Triplane Int/Air/Tac-Op/1-2 Simulator but slightly more detailed. Chris Crawford's entry covering the Battle of the PACIFIC STORM: THE MIDWAY CAMBulge. Designed as a bridge to nonor neophyte PAIGN (N-R) wargamers, it failed to succeed with either that crowd or the wargamer market. Some interesting (Am/ST/1; #94) Simulations Canada; R.C. Cranconcepts and detailed historical analysis failed to dall: 1991; $60.00 remove the \"taint» (i.e., it ain't a game and it ain't Int/Nav/Tac-Op/1-2 a simulation). PACIFIC STORM: THE SOLOMONS CAM-PATTON VS. ROMMEL (**) PAIGN (N-R) (C/M/I; #35) Mindscape; Chris Crawford; 1987; (Am/ST/I; #94) Simulations Canada; R.C. Cran$14.95 dall; 1991; $60.00 Int/Land/Op/1-2 Int/Nav/Tac-Op/1-2 An operational campaign in France, 1944, this An operational simulation of the South Pacific simulation was characterized by innovative play (1942-1943) in two week turns. systems marred by difficult trafficability and pasEL PACIFIC WAR, GARY GRIGSBY'S (****) sage of lines. (1; #103,105) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary PERFECT GENERAL, THE (***) Grigsby; 1992; $79.95 (1; #84,91,94,95) QQP; Mark Baldwin; $59.95; Next month: The thrilling conclusion, \"R-Z.\" Adv/Land-Sea-Air/0-2 1991 CGW STRATEGINULATIONS.INC September 1993 Page 127 "


"Spenal trategygection A Mercenary's Work Is Never Done Mindcraft Lures Players Into An Ambush At Sorinor by H. E. Dille comer SPEED DIE ord TRYGA 30 y ale turned his face to the twilight pulent flesh of the hapless merchants. As he sults of each campaign battle are not saved breeze, scenting for the goblins heran, Grysenwormer spun in a vicious are unless the player elects to do so. As such, could feel on the back of his neck. His above his head, flinging droplets of blood the game does not require incessant disk nose and eyes were his best allies, as he from its tip to mark the passage. Three swapping to retain saved games. Finally, certainly couldn't hear anything over the din bounding strides from the group, Grysenplayers have the option of using a scenario created by the merchant convoy. wormer was spinning fast enough for the editor to create their own missions. \"Lazy fat bastards will get us all killed metal to resonate in the night air. It was with their tinkling purses,\" be thought re Vale's own battle song, and be laughed as Planning a Mission sentfully. the Goblin formation turned to envelop bim. Understanding the scenario editor, PRICE Expanding on the Siege engine, Mindwhich is very easy to master, yields a lot craft's latest installment in the system, of insight into the play model itself. PlayATKY OBUV mara Ambush at Sorinor, chronicles the strugers must first select the Map file they will gles of six rival clans for control of the use as the background for the engagerealm. Players assume the persona of a ment. Next, they determine the positions mercenary leader who organizes warriors of the entry and exit zones, blue and green for missions in support of cach clan. All respectively, that dictate the geographical of the clans seek to avoid open warfare, object objectives of the design. The Ward forces adopting instead a system of diplomatic\" SUURUSTEET It was a mistake to have let the Sernevan offenses against their opponents. These con him into this mission, even if they do pay usually take the form of raids against outwell. It's tough to spend the gold in Valhalla. posts, border skirmishes, economic warAT SORINOR AT SORINOR At that instant, out of the corner of his eye, fare (i.c., looting caravans) and ale saw the lead wagon lift into the air and assassination attempts. The latter can inexplode in a maelstrom of magical fire, in volve dignitaries, diplomats, noblemen cinerating the escorts closest to it. The trap and other personnel important to a clan was sprung and the hideous Goblin war cry for specific reasons. One mission, for exrang out from every bush. The time for ample, involves protecting a group of sacthinking was over. rificial virgins bound for the Zorlim Vale leapt at the nearest ambusher with a Mages. These Acolytes claim that virgins smile on his face, and the Goblin's reverie are in short supply and they need them was interrupted as the broadsword split him desperately for their black rights. from eyeballs to appetite. A second, with his head turned to face other opponents, bad his Sorinorallows several play options. One skull cleanly cracked open with the hilt of may select to pursue a campaign, in which Grysenwormeras Vale extracted his the objective is to accumulate as much weapon, which had jammed in the pelvic money as possible by switching benefacTITLE: Ambush at Sorinor bone of the first assailant. The two bodies tors ofren and maintaining the balance of SYSTEM: IBM fell together in a bloody embrace as Vale power. Also, any mission which appears REQUIREMENTS: 386SX-16MHz with 2MB RAM turned and ran at the flank of a group of in the campaign game may be played as a PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION: None Insuspecting archers. They were intent on single mission. This allows players who DESIGNER: Larry Froistad reloading, as volley after volley of their are having difficulty with a given objecPUBLISHER: Mindcraft Software Torrance, CA deadly barbs found their marks in the cortive to practice off-line, as it were. This (310) 320-5215 really isn't necessary, however, as the rewale Sorinor Computer Gaming World "


" all t amERAT DE EESEEEEE must enter via the blue zone(s) and exit for the player to study the layout of the tend to shift into a column formation, via the green zone(s) to accomplish their map and check the stats of whatever opwhich is the weakest combat formation of objective. Next, the player must specify ponents one has been told will be in them all (ask any Napoleonic wargamer). the number and composition of Ward volved (this is definitely not always Further, with the exception of ranged forces for the scenario, as well as the kill comprehensive intelligence). As Amcombat, which is difficult to execute, acpercentages that the Ambush forces must busher, one of the chief considerations in tual engagements occur only when two achieve to win the scenario. The only purchasing units is speed. It is easy to be opposing units slam up against one anWard units that count toward that perout of position when the Ward units other. This also means that the warriors centage are the VIP units, be they merin the back of the column do not move chants, diplomats, virgins or whatever. forward to envelop their opponents as Killing Ward escort troops is often necesone would hope. Rather, they remain sary to meet that goal, but their death placidly in the rear until all of their comdoes nothing toward fulfillment of one's rades on the front line are slaughtered, contract. then take one step forward to a similar The player does not specify the starting fate. composition of the Ambusher forces, Executing actual flanking maneuvers only the amount of coins they will receive and maintaining some degree of formaif successful and how much of that is tion integrity is possible, but is obnoxprovided up front as a down payment. appear, particularly on maps with multiiously difficult. First, one must keep each Combining the down payment with ple entry and exit zones. When this hapunit size as small as possible (no band of available bank funds enables players to pens, one has to be able to move swiftly 50 marauding barbarians, thank you) and buy their forces. In self-generated scenarto intercept the high value groups before position them perpendicular to likely enios, the computer will always be the Ward they can exit. A secondary considerationemy avenues of approach. When the cnplayer, and the Human will act as Amis attack and defense values. Some unitsemy units appear, one must coordinate busher. This means that most people will have really high attack ratings but defend the assault by stopping the real time simube unlikely to play their own designs, poorly, others are more balanced. The lation at least once every five seconds and because they will always know the starting strategy one intends to pursue directly fine-tuning the movement orders of every composition of their opponent. Finally, affects what the eventual unit mix should the player must specify which clan the be, and failure to appreciate this concept fun, then have at it! The alternate method mission is being performed for, who it is concedes defeat in almost every instance. against, and the relative values their loyalties will change based on the outcome. Players should strive to use no more For example, if the player is acting on than the down payment to complete the behalf of the Rokans against the Twillin, mission or they will never make any successful completion of the mission money. This is not always possible, as some missions are designed specifically to alalSGASSSSSSSSS make the player dip into their coffers, but these are the exception rather than the rule. Players may also purchase and place TESTUESI traps on the map in addition to their mercenary forces. The types of traps vary of control is to use the converge» comfrom simple pitfalls that destroy only the mand to basically say \"Ok, now everyunit that trips them to the magical blast body run here...that's good, now run described in the fictional introduction. over there.\" Unfortunately, this is also The more expensive traps are good in that neither inspiring, tactically correct, nor 2000 LLLLS LLLLLLLL LLL they kill several of the enemy at once, but fun. might raise the former's impression of the they suffer the same limitation as the player by three points, while lowering the cheap traps—the enemy has to be a coop Sorting Through the Ashes same for the Twillin by two. The higher erative victim. Some maps have natural choke points, which virtually ensure that The folks at Mindcraft are a decent lot, one's estimation of player capabilities, the more they are willing to pay. For unsucthe enemy will pass that way. When this who genuinely try to provide gamers with what they want. Given that, one can only cessful missions, the plaver rating should is the case, one can use traps profusely. hope that they go back to the drawing be lowered by a greater amount than he Otherwise, one's money is usually better board with this engine before releasing stood to gain, and it should be applied to spent on troops which can take the battle another title of similar ilk. In addition to both of the involved clans. Even the victo the enemy. the tactical model, they must also invest tims of the intended ambush may employ a lot of time in refining the Al that conthe player later and would be unhappy And Then Things Got Bloody trols the computer opponent. It was not with his demonstrated ineptitude. Since the heart of the game is tactical uncommon for VIP groups to continue blindly into my Ambushers rather than combat, one could rightfully expect its Setting Up the Ambush interface to be the best aspect of the trying to go around or even fleeing until trying to go ar With the pre-generated missions, the model. Unfortunately, nothing could be escort help could arrive. With that kind player can end up as either Ward or Amfarther from the truth. When the player of Al, one wonders who is getting ambusher. Since one should already have a positions units on the map, they begin in bushed in Ambush at Sorinor, the comfeel for the former, let us now examine either a line abreast (for units of five or puter troops or the purchaser of the how the player approaches the role of the less) or a phalanx formation. Each of thesegame: Unfortunately, there are too many latter. After the introduction screen, in formations has actual tactical strengths Occasions when it feels like the latter. Cow which one is given a text explanation of and weaknesses. Whenever the groups are the mission's objectives, it is important given movement orders, however, they 99982912 DESTE GESIO BRETOR3 THE AS September 1993 "


"Special ctrategycectron ATLANTIC BREAKOUT SSI Expands Operations For Great Naval Battles Series by H.E. Dille The sky was an empty gun metal grey, cloudless but without ity, this historic possibility is not as far ferched as it might sound. color. Raymond Sprance bunkered deeper in his chair The mauling of convoy ON-115 alluded to in the introduction I against the biting wind which cut across the bridge wing actually occurred, except that it was conducted exclusively by wishing he had gotten the assignment in Pearl. Instead, the orders U-boats. had read, \"Take immediate command of Cruiser Division After Pearl Harbor, Hitler ordered the Atlantic raiders staFour... rendezvous with DesRon Seven and Convoy HX-122 for tioned at Brest back to German waters, where they never again Murmansk transit...\" He wanted to believe that this assignment became a major factor in the Atlantic campaign. Had Hitler was politically motivated. After all, most officers would have jumped understood how thin U.S. naval forces were spread, and opted at the chance to be on Admiral King's staff, but he knew Washington to coordinate surface and subsurface attacks against convoy would have been the death of him. The other side of his brain told shipping, the entire complexion of the war could have changed. his ego to shut up, the real reason he was here was because the SSI's Great Naval Battles North Atlantic series, as expanded by Canadians had botched it. ON-115 had been ravaged by U-boats the three add on disks discussed herein, allows players the option for five days under their stewardship. Scattered and disorganized, of exploring an endless number of \"what if\" combinations in the remainder of the original 41 ships were easy prey for Scharnhorst their quest for alternative history, and Tirpitz, who killed at leisure until their magazines were empty, then vectored new U-boats to the survivors. It was a disaster for the Expanding Engagement Allies... one they didn't want to see repeated. The latest intelligence Before addressing the unique contents of the expansion disks reports indicated a strong belief that the German raiders bad met exclusive of one another, it is important to note that each also with a mother ship to refuel and rearm. Worse, they had not been contains the upgraded version 1.2 of the original game. The located for the last ten days. His thoughts were interrupted when the README file included with the update documents six full bridge door clanged shut behind him. pages of bug fixes from the original release. Further, the correc\"Commodore, excuse me but I thought you would want to see this tion of these bugs is more than cosmetic. Version 1.2 offers more right away.\" accurate modeling of gunnery and significant enhancements to campaign play. Without expanding on each of these in detail, \"What is it?\", Spruance asked as he studied the strained look on the following section will highlight those of immediate interest the follo the young Lieutenant's face. to current owners of the original game. \"Aerial reconnaissance reports on Kiel, The tactical Al has been rewritren such that Sir... RAF reports no sightings\" the computer fights a better battle. Rather \"What's the significance of that, Lieutenant, than breaking off into a wild melee at the EXPANSION DISK bad weather for the Nazis.\"Spruance was losing beginning of each engagement, ships will now bis patience, SCENARIO try to remain in formation and maneuver \"No Sir... beyging the Commodore's pardon, cohesively unless hindered by damage. FurCREAT ther, the target selection routines have been NAVAL Sir, you're missing the point, \"the Lieutenant said BUILDER BATTLES modified to take advantage of proper squadwincing at being the bearer of bad tidings. ron tactics. No longer will 15\" shells be squan\"Well, what is the point, Son?\" dered targeting destroyers, unless destroyer \"The target area was not obscured, in fact there types are the only units sighted. Further, ships was perfect visibility. It's just that the port was in formation will attempt to spread their fire empty... no ships, Sir.\" among appropriate target types in an oppos. ing formation. Under the old system, many \"When was the last flight before this?\" ships would often be targeting one enemy, «Five days ago, Sir.» which not only wasted a lot of firepower, it \"Thank you Lieutenant, that will be all,\" IBM also reduced cach firing ships gunnery accuracy because spotters could not distinguish Spruance dismissed bim. turning his chair their own shells, and it left other ships around to face the sea once again. The unmolested until the original target entire Kriegsmarine at sea for as many as TITLES: America in the Atlantic, Super Ships of the Atlantic, sank beneath the waves. five days and we don'know where they $39.95 Scenario Builder, $29.95 others are. \"God help us,\" he muttered, his Other improvements include the SYSTEM: addition of accurate minimum armwords swept away in the freshening REQUIREMENTS: 286-16MHz with 2MB RAM, 724K EMS, 11 MB hard drive space for basic game and all expansion clisks North wind. ing distances for all torpedo variants, PROTECTION: Document look up and secondary guns now reflect damRaymond Spruance in the Atlantic, DESIGNER: Roy Gibson PUBLISHER: instead of husbanding the island-hopStrategic Simulations, Inc. age consistent with their calibre. The Sunnyvale, California ballistic calculations made by the proping campaign in the Pacific? In real(408) 737-6800 gram still reflect inaccurate hit perFor exclusive nise with THE ATLANT . SRSI 2 Scenario Builder PRICE: IBM Computer Gaming World "


"   BB uelewa CASETE FETACCIC ULES BAIN PRESSECD BES.Cor. TOTAL FLATS 13556 AIRCRAFT S 18 5.25\" (3 (162 KIAS COLCC U SHIR centages at extremely long and extremely close ranges, but the Hull type Class(es) mid-range band seems fairly accurate. Players seeking to imCV Wasp prove their gunnery accuracy must consider the elements that Texas/Nevada/Pennsylvania/New Mexico/California comprise it and refine their tactics accordingly. The inputs to Maryland/North Carolina South Dakota and lowa CA/CL/CLAA...... Northampton/New Orleans/Brooklyn/Wichita/Atlanta the quality of a targeting solution are: course/speed changes (for ..Bagley/Fletcher either platform), buoyancy profile (is the firing ship heeling in a turn, bouncing in heavy weather or listing from damage), The expansion set comes with ten scenarios built around number of spotting or actual salvos fired, number of shells in a hypothetical engagements with these units, as well as three salvo, visibility for spotters, and whether or not other ships are options for campaign play. The scenarios range in complexity firing at the same target, which degrades the ability of all the from single ship encounters, such as the Hipper vs. the Philaspotters to distinguish the fall of shot. Some of these factors may delphia (CA vs. CA), to an all out classic line of battle confronbe easily manipulated, such as maintaining course/speed whileration between all of the capital ships ever afloat in the refining a targeting solution. Others, like weather conditions, Krieesmarine and an American Task Force consisting of 4 BBs, are beyond player control. The secret of good gunnery is to 2 Cs and 3 DDs. All of the scenarios are designed to allow consider all of the factors and take whatever action is necessary manipulation by the tactically oriented \"what if' gamers, but an to maximize one's accuracy percentage. even greater satisfaction comes from exploration of strategic Damage resolution and damage control routines are also more possibilities with the new campaign games. realistic. Rudder and propeller hits from shellfire are now very The first campaign runs from February 8th, 1942 to April 7th, rare. Ships may regain speed after damage has been repaired. 1942. and explores what might have happened had Hitler not Fires are now more difficult to localize and control, counterordered the Prinz Eugen Scharnhors and Gneisenan to make flooding occurs properly, and the order in which flooded comthe infamous Channel Dash, after which they were crippled for partments are picked by the Al to be pumped is now more the remainder of the war by RAF bombing. Camlogical. paign Two presupposes that Hitler never shifted his Another area of restructurcapital ships to the «Zone of Destiny\" in Northern ing is the Campaign Game. A CHOOSE SHIP Norway and forces the Allied player to deal with the major improvement is that, if triple threat posed by the bases of Brest, Tromso and the Allied player does not Kiel. Historical purists may question the absence of have enough escort ships asHull and Wilhelmshaven on the base list, but SSI signed to convoy duty, which compensated for their absence by beefing up the keeps them from being used DU CADD CY other bases correspondingly. The final campaign, by offensively, ships will autofar the most interesting of them all, is based on the matically be lost to U-boats. premise that Germany invaded Britain in early Additionally, convoy com1941, losing much of its navy, but transforming position has been altered to England from an implacable enemy into a reluctant, reflect the combined German surface/subsurface threat, allowweakened ally. Subsequently, Germany invades Iceing players to assign 1CV, 1BB, ICA and 2DD's to any particuland, which had been occupied by U.S. Marines. The Marines lar convoy, if desired. The Al player now repairs damaged ships are forced to withdraw and the campaign focuses on American on escort dury, rather than sending them back to sea. Destroyers efforts to affect that withdrawal in the face of a resurgent lose 40% more efficiency than Battleships over an equivalent Anglo-German fleet. time, Cruise 10% more, and bad weather conditions now increase efficiency loss rates for all units. Finally, new construcSuper Ships in the Atlantic tion ships start the campaign at 75% efficiency vice 100% to The Super Ships in the Atlantic expansion disk allows players reflect a green crew and lack of actual experience. to sample operations with German and British ships which were Finally, most of the blatant bugs that plagued the original have either under construction or on the drawing board when the war ended. The three campaigns contained on this disk are set in been corrected. Keyboard lock ups may still occur, but they are 1942, '44 and 46 respectively. The first two presuppose exmuch more rare than before, and most may be cleared up by panded construction programs and carly developments during hitting the Escape key. Because the lock ups do exist, no matter the pre-war period that come into play during the historical time how infrequent, players are advised to save games often. frame. The third campaign operates on the premise that Hitler, SSI has a good history of responding to consumer feedback after being blocked from further expansion in the Czech crisis and upgrading accordingly. As such, players are advised to do of 1938, opted to modernize all of his forces and actually execute their part and contact SSI directly whenever one of the few the master plan in 1946. As in the other expansion disk, the third remaining glitches appears; it will help their tech support staff campaign opens the most fascinating possibilities for player localize and correct the problem for all users. Having said that, experimentation. The new ship types are summarized in the it must be noted that the 1.2 version alone is worth the asking following table: price of any of the expansion disks. The rest of what cach has to offer, which will now be addressed, could be considered icing Class/Type Side Main Secondary Tons on the cake. \"H\" Class BB 8-16in/47 12-5.9in/55 55,453 \"P\" Class Pocket BB 6-15in/47 8-5.9in/55 30,500 Vanguard Class BB 8-15in/42 16-5.25in/50 44,500 America in the Atlantic Lion Class BB 9-16in/45 16-5.25in/50 40,550 \"M\" Class CL 8-5.9in/55 7.800 America in the Atlantic is built on the premise explored at the Bellona Class CL 8-5.25in/50 none 5,950 Swiftsure Class CL 9-in/50 none beginning of this article, that expanded operations by the Kri8.800 \"Z\" 1940 DD 6-5.9in/55 none 6.300 egsmarine would have forced the diversion of U.S. assets from Battle Class DD 4-4.5in/45 none 2,325 the Pacific to the Atlantic theater of operations. Players may now opt to command any or all the following Although none of these ships would be a match for the American ship types: owing Yamato, improvements in radar and gunnery make the mom none September 1993 "


"Special.çtrategu cectrom DU!OTI KOM1 914 KAKELETKISTAN BRCY. CA B P/CU 419000 28000 24300 CAD D 32000 3200 25000 1500 21001 213001 heavyweights superior to any other player must earn them through prowess ships of equivalent size, while the new in battle. Further, the system incorpodestroyers are swifter and more maneurates a modifier that makes long term verable that their predecessors. For survival difficult if the flagship goes those who can't afford the time it takes down. For example, at the starting rank, to play out the campaign options, the there is a 100% chance that the player disk also has ten pre-generated scenarcharacter will be rescued if his ship is ios, ranging from simple to complex, as sunk (as often happened to Destroyers ED = 0 before. in those days). With each increase in rank, the percentage for rescue is lowThe Scenario Builder ered by 10%. Hence, as one becomes As if all this wasn't enough to keep fairly senior, it is a good idea to stay armchair Admirals busy for months to afloat. come, SSI also offers a Scenario Builder expansion set. As the title Finally, every engagement generated by the Captain's Camstates, the program offers players a palette and construction setpaign is completely random. This not only serves the purpose from which they can edit existing scenarios from the original or of keeping replay value at an infinite level, it also contributes to either expansion set already discussed, plus manually create new the fog of war the player experiences as each engagement begins. scenarios, either for themselves or to swap with others. The latter At times, one will blunder into some wonderful mismatches. At option will surely generate new user groups on many of the others, one will be the focus of attention in the mismatch. In national BBSs. But wait, that's not all...as they are fond of the second case, there is still honor in cutting and running when saying on the infomercial circuit. The expansion set also introthe situation warrants it. Either way, the uncertainty generated duces an entirely new element to the system, role-playing! by the system will only enhance the experience of set piece Opting for a career in the military isn't just for silicon pilots players and appease those who abhor complete intelligence in a anymore. wargame. The scenario player portion of the program operates like the SSI's efforts in refining and expanding this series are to be normal GNBN, interface for all single scenarios, whatever their commended. This praise is offered with the full knowledge that origin, but it does not allow standard campaign play. Instead, it will not cause the programmers to rest on their laurels. The there is an option called Captain's Campaign. Here, the player Great Naval Battles series is not at its zenith, but with continued elects to sign up in either the Royal Navy or the Kriegsmarine user feedback and support, on-line and otherwise, it has the for the duration of hostilities. One begins as a lowly Sub-Lieupotential of becoming the recognized placebo for practitioners tenant or Leutnant zur See, and strives to become Admiral of of historical naval combat in this theater. Cow the Fleet. Promotions and medals are far from automatic; the SOFTWARE CLOSEOUTS IBM, AMIGA, APPLE, COMMODORE 64/128, ATARI ST, MAC & MORE IBM BARGAINS $10 & UNDERBM/MS-DOS BARCAINS UNDER $20 MINESCAPE/THUNDER MOUNTAIN IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 2 $500 Sub Battle Simulator $10.00 SUPER BUNDLE FOR C-64/128 S 10.00 I Star Trek S: Final Frontier $20,00 DONT GO ALONE, Accolade 10. GAMES FOR $14.50 Microleague Football $14.50 OUTRUN, Sega $5.00 GM Includes: Demolition Mission, Army Microleague Baseball $14.50 SPACE HARRIER, Sega $5.00 F-29 Retaliator Moves, Bad Street Brawler, Tai-Pan, GUNSHIP, Microprose $ 10.00 Solo Flight $14,50 Fist, Tai-Ceti, Mutants, Cyrus Chess. CROSSBOW, Absolute $5.00 Tomahawk $14.50 Doc the Destroyer, & Uridium Star Glider 11 $14.50 MIND DANCE, Mindscape $2.50 Xiphos $14.50 SIERRA GAME BUNDLE FOR IBM NIGHT HUNTER, UBISOFT 510.00 MEGAFORTRESS $10.00 Includes: MAGIC JOHNSON BASKETBALL S 5.00 Carrier Command $14.50 CALIFORNIA GAMES, EPYX S 5.00 Sky Chase $14.50 A-10 TANK KILLER, HEART THIRD COURIER, ACCOLADE S 500David Wolf Secret Agent $14.50 OF CHINA & STELLAR 7 WORLD GAMES, EPYX $5.00 Blue Angels $14.50 Rocket Ranger $14.50 Only $30 SILENT SERVICE $5.00 Air Strike U.S.A. $14.50 BAT., UBI-SOFT $10.00 BATTLECHESS 2 $19.50 Dark Heart of U $16.50 MARVEL TRILOGY Buck Rogers 1, SSI SIERRA for IBM_$20 EACH $19.50 Buck Rogers 2. SS! FROM MICROPROSE for IBM QUEST FOR GLORY 2. FIREHAWK. Heroes of Lanos, SSI $10.00 Includes: CODENAME ICEMAN, HEART OF Dragons of Flare, SSI $10.00 The Punisher, X.men CHINA, KING'S QUEST 1 -of-4, Questron II, SSI $10.00 & Dr. Doom's Revenge. OIL'S WELL. COLONEL'S BEQUEST Hill, SSI $10.00 MEDIEVAL LORDS, SSI $10.00 Only $20!! LEISURE SUIT LARRY 1 -or-3. ALLIED FORCES BUNDLE RISE OF THE DRAGON, THEXDER POOL OF RADIANCE, SSI $10.00 MIXED UP MOTHER GOOSE, DAS BOOT $14.50 STAR COLLECTION for IBM SPACE QUEST 1 -or-2-01. 3. MANHUNTER NEW YORK $14.50 10 GAME BUNDLE CALL FOR OTHER TITLES! X-MEN 2 $19.50 PUNISHER $19.50 from Electronic Zoo DR DOOMS REVENGE $14.50 LAND, SEA & AIR TRILOGY AMAZING SPIDERMAN $14.50 SUPER SALE $19.50 SUPER CONTRA 314.50 by Microprose. 3 GAMES $20 $14.50 Includes: Paris-Dakar, Skidoo, LIGHTSPEED 5145 Includes: AIRBORNE RANGER. 20.000 Leagues under the Sea, COVERT ACTION $14 50 Legend of Djel, Mouldy Old PIRATESI & GUNSHIP. FOR IBM Dough, Balloon Lagoon, Mechanic MICROPROSE SPECIALS..$25 each Panic, Plasma Pilot, Space Scape, F-117A STEALTH FIGHTER VGA Hoyle's Book of Games Vol. 2 & best selling TREASURE TRAPI! GUNSHIP 2000 VGA SOLITAIRE, by Sierra. $15 Available for IBM on 525 diskotlos only TROIKA 3-pack Includes:28 Solitaire games with ADULT FUN FORIBM FROM FREE SPIRIT from Paragon Software for IBM. mouse support. Tons of fun!! SEX VIXENS FROM SPACE 315.50 SEX OLYMPICS (VGA cry ......SALE...... $14.50...... For IBM on 3.5\" disks only SOLD ONLY TO ADULTS 21 & OVER Indlade REBEL PLANETS, IVAN & METAL Tus more items for al HEARTS. Al are Windows 3 compatible with VISA/MC ORDERS CALL TOLL-FREE different computer... Apple, VGA mouse & sound card supporti Fast paced 1-800-676-6616 Atarl, Amiga, C64128, MAC, muli vel arcade action with 100's of levels of Credit Card Orders Only 11 ( 325 minimum & lots more IBMMS-DOS II editing play. Strategy & quick referequired COMPSUIT TO ORDER: Send chock or money order including shipping charges of $5 for U.SA. $8 for Canada, S16 all others. Californians must include 7.25% sales P.O. BOX 5160 tax To receive our catalog with 1000's of closeouts for all computer types, SAN LUIS OBISPO send $2 in cash or U.S. postage stamps..DO NOT CALL FOR A CATALOGIII CA 93403 To check for an item not listed here, call (805) 544-6616. Circle Reader Service #45 Page 132 THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit most of the games listed below (including all of the Might and Magics, all of the Ultimas, all of the SSI games, all of the Bard's Tales, and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting approximately 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1, 2, 3 or 4), Drakkhen, Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3), Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3), Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5. Bane ol Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thiel, Darklands, Escape from Hell, Ultima (3, 4, 5, 6 or 7). Dark Heart of Uukrul, Savage Empire, Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2). Countdown to Doomsday, Martian Dreams, Eye of the Beholder (1 or 2). Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1 or 2). Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld, Twilight 2000, Planet's Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, and Prophecy of the Shadow. 1 HINT BOOKS $9.95 each Might and Magic 1. Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders). Eye of the Beholder 2. Might and Magic 3 (12.95). IBM listed. Apple, C64 and Amiga versions also available. Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. Open from 9AM 9PM every day for your convenience VISA GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS 4 P.O. Box 1083 Brighton, MI 48116 (313) 229-2453 Circle Reader Service #61 Computer Gaming World "


"The Eastern Front, Gary Grigsby style. BY ELIE SAYS WAR RUSSIA 11th we STEROLI DORCIMI SONO STOR A Warta Wne Il SIMULATION, 19610 w KU SSL ary Grigsby's WAR IN RUSSIA is the most comprehensive simulation of the World War II campaign that pitted Hitler's superior forces against Stalin's 5 million-man army from 1941 to 1945. One or two players can re-enact this epic struggle with four campaigns, eight historical scenarios and one hypothetical scenario. An all-new Scenario Editor allows you to revise the existing maps, units and equipment — creating the potential for unlimited play. This massive game offers unmatched complexity in scale and detail as you would expect of Gary Grigsby; however, the mouse driven interface makes it a breeze to play! WAR IN RUSSIA is an advanced game, but novices can enjoy it too three difficulty settings make this simulation accessible to players of all skill levels. Available for IBM/COMPATIBLES. To Order: Visit your retailer or call SSI Direct Sales at (408) 737-6800. To receive our complete product catalog, send $1.00 to: SSI, 675 Almanor Ave., Suite 201, Sunnyvale, CA 94086.  Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved SRL "


" THE S IS IS FOTOS.CSS ships), it does underscore economics and long range planning. The board must be conquered square-by-square, with each square contributing either food or gold to one's war effort. Cities are constructed with funds from the gold and they, in turn, can produce more units. Players will have to adopt some new tactics to win at Conquer for Windows. However, one might do well to take a look at it. IBM with Windows ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #3. 47 Terminator 2: Judgment Day ZX CASOS Capstone 7200 Corporate Center Dr., Suite 500 Miami, FL 33126 (800) 468-7226 TERMINATOR 2: JUDGMENT DAY CHESS WARS: Animated chess programs are trendy right now. The latest company to make its move, Capstone has acquired another title to add to their long list of \"box office\" licenses. This time, it is Skynet (the computer) against the Resistance (the player) featuring the characters from the film Terminator 2. Similar in many regards to the recent Spectrum HoloByte release, Chess Maniac 5 Billion and 1, Terminator 2: Judgment Day Chess Wars offers the player an animated approach to this time honored classic, with a graphic depiction of each chess piece's demise upon being, in this case, terminated. Featuring an Al that learns as it plays, this title allows the user to experience chess in an apocalyptic milieu. While many features are available, including SVGA graphics and major sound board support, overall quality is not up to that exhibited in Interplay's excellent Battle Chess titles. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #1. WAYNE'S WORLD: Whoa! Wayne & Garth need your help, dudes! Total drag, their show's getting pulled if they don't raise some serious cashola in three days. Exsqueeze me? No more babes? Bogus! Time for a Pizza-Thon. Cruise the town in the Mirthmobile and check out all the hot spots in Aurora. Use the way cool graphic interface to point and click your way to fame and mondo dinero. Colorful VGA graphics and digitized voices from the movie help set the mood. There's also a \"No hurl guarantee on the game, because the anorexic manual will leave you hungry. Is it worthy? If this game were a babe, you'd take her home. But after a week, you'd be out cruising again. IBM ($44.95). Circle Reader Service #2. Fantasy Sports Properties, Inc. PO Box 9805 McLean, VA 22102 (800) 872-0335 FRANCHISE FOOTBALL LEAGUE FANTASY-FOOTBALL: Couch coaches, beware: you have no more excuses. For football fans who want to get into the action, Franchise Football League lets you form your own NFL team and compete against up to 15 other owners» in a rotisserie-style league. The program has a huge list of current NFL players to draft from, tallies scores for weekly and YTD winners, and has many user-definable options. The package includes a 270-page book with instructions, team reviews, player info, and strategy galore. Weekly scoring updates can be downloaded from Prodigy and fed right into the program (a Prodigy Membership Kit is included). Franchise Football League looks like a perfect play for fantasy football fans. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #4. Wayne's World SECONOUERWeat Conft Det M MANKAKAKKU MARRAK MARAMUKA 29 RE SIZE SIDE Conquer For Windows To foise Total s. 1910 11 E NON Publu TUNUD. MInpol QADW. Trou LB LADO. Lan Houston LE DO LE, Carl DO LEE. Mark ON LEL. Zeyh DU LEWIS. A rt San Nimeota Green Bay LA Raiders Franchise Football League Fantasy-football Impressions Software, Inc. 7 Melrose Dr. Farmington, CT 06032-9812 (617) 225-0500 RULES OF ENGAGEMENT 2: For those who prefer their required doses of starship combat more in the style of Star Trek: The Next Generation, waged on computer touch panels, rather than from the traditional cockpit of a space fighter as in Wing Commander, Impressions may have just the prescription for your strategic malnutrition. Rules of Engagement 2 follows in the footsteps (or is that gravity boots) of its predecessor with noticeable graphic improvements. The newest module of the Interlocking Game System (IGS), Rules of Engagement 2 allows the player to scamlessly link games with Breach 2 and Breach 3 for incorporating land-based battles with the space combat missions. In addition, this title features its own Construction Kit, enabling the player to fully customize virtually every component of the game: create one's own missions; construct fleets, fabricare captains, fashion solar systems and alien races; even design animations using PC Animate Plus (program not included) Elpin 45 South Park Victoria, Suite 401 Milpitas, CA 95035 (408) 956-0720 CONQUER FOR WINDOWS: This colorful conquer-the-world clone will find a place beside Empire Deluxe, Battles of Destiny and Strategic Conquest. Designed expressly for Windows, this 2 4 sided contest can be played by network (with a full complement of four players) or modem (for two players only, with up to two computer players joining in if desired). Although the game de-emphasizes having a variety of units types (there are only four: infantry, armor, planes and Prired PEPLOT 16101 Rules Of Engagement 2 Pope 134 Computer Gaming World "


"CGW 9-93 Since 1982 fomput Ability Ability__Tovesteerithe Top Titles at the Lowest Prices! Consumer Electronics Call Us On Our US/Canadian Toll Free Number! HRS (CST): M-F 8am-8pm, Sat 11am-5pm FAX: (414) 357-7814 P.O. Box 17882 Milwaukee, WI 53217 > SOUND CARDS CRETIVE SOUND $ 215 BLASTER.16 ASP CREATIVE LABS. ING. FA  16-Bit Stereo Sampling & Playback for Voice Channel  Enhanced 4-Operator, 20-Voice Stereo FM Music Synthesizer  MIDI & CD-ROM Interfaces  Windows 3.1. SB & SB Pro Compatible VIDEO BOARDS Presents... The Award-Winning Line of Video Boards MEDIA W VISION PRO AUDIO Multimedia Fahrenheit $195 VLB Version $209 ahrenheit VAI CALL! 6. DIAMOND J65 NEW NEW NEW Pro Audio Studio 16 $205 MODEMS Number Nine FREE Prodigy Starter Kit with purchase of any ZOOM Lost Treasures of Infocom 39.95 Where Carmen World Deluxe.....44.95 World War II Battles of South Pacific 34.95 IBM 24.95 LOST Vikings Wild Science Arcade 39 95 34.95 XWing Lunar Command...... 34,95 Wilson Pro Stall Golf 2495 XWing Mission 1......... 19.95 Aces of the Pacific 4495 Magic Candle lll... ...........37.95 Wing Commander il 4795 YOBI Spell Tricks ... 29.95 WWII 1946 add on disk 1995 Maniac Mansion 2 (Day of Tentacle) 34.95 Speech Accessory Pack... 15.95 Aces Over Europe 44.95 Mantis / Speech Pack 39.95/1995 Special Operations or 2 20.95 Software available only AD&D Dark Sun. Shattered Lands ...47.95 Mario is Missing ..............................3495 Wing Commander Deluxe ...... 47.95 on 3.5\" disk or AD & D Stronghold 37.95 Nath Rabbit Enhanced 29.95 Wizardry Chusaders Dark Savant 39 95 AD&D Unlimited Adventures premium packs. 3 7.95 Mozart's Magical Music Machine 20.95 39.95 World Circuit Champ Edition Adventures of Pinocchio 45.95 MS Golf for Windows . 42.95 World Science Arcade............ 34,95 No Individual 5.25\" disks Air Traffic Controller.. .... ..34.95 Mystery at the Museum . 34 95 World Circuit Grand Prix................. 34.95 are available Aircraft & Adventure Factory .... 24.95 National Lampoon's Chess Maniac ...39.95 Airforce Flight Assignment... 39.95 News of the Past...... .... Alone in the back 34.95 No Greater Glory .......... 39.95 Am0200 3995 Omar Sharif on Bridge Win.29.95/29.95 Ambush at Sorina. 37.95 Origin FX Screen Saver 25 95 Archon Ultra... Out of this World 34 95 Ashes of Empire. Pacific Theater of Operations. 39.95 Aspects of Valor 59.95 Paladin 2 34.95 AT Air Command 3495 Patriot 42.95 B-17 Flying Fortress 39.95 Pathway to Power 29.95 ORCHID Battles of Destiny 34.95 Pepper's Adventure in Time 29.95 BittleChess 4000/Super VGA 29953495 Perfect General 34.95 Fahrenheit 1280 Plus, 1MB $165 Baleteld 2000 37.95 Picture Wizard 4495 VLB version... $179 Beitrey 386 19.95 Pinball for Windows 29.95 ProDesigner 11/s. 1MB $135 Betrayal at Krondor 39.95 Pirates of Gold 39 95 Celcius VLB 1MB (expandable to 2MB) $215 Bloodstone 2595 Prince of Persia il 39.95 Blue Force 39.95 PrintShop Deluxe DOS or Win 44 95/44.95 Buzz Aldnin's Race into Space Graphics Libraries Business 29.95 Campaign 34.95 Graphics Libraries: Sampler ..... 29.95 Car & Driver Print Shop Deluxe Comic Characters 29.95 Carrier Strike: South Pacific 39.95 Privateer 47.95 Cartiers of War 34.95 Proto Star: War on the Frontier 39.95 Carriers of War Construction Kit 34.95 Ouest for Glory 3 39.95 Castles or il 34.93 Red Crystal 34.95 Caesars Palace 1995 Rags to Riches 34.95 Challenge of the Five Realms 3495 Realms of Atkania 34 95 Champions...... 34,95 Return of the Phantom 34.95 Children's Writing and Publish1 5 39 95 Ring World, Patriarch's Revenge.. 34.95 Civilization 44.95 Rock and Bach Studio 34.95 Speedstar 24X 1MG, 24bit, 1280x1024 $155 Comanche: Maximum Overkill 42.95 Rome 29.95 Siealth 24 ISA/VLB ........ ... $155/$155 Mission Disk 1 or 12 25.95 Rules of Engagement II 39 95 Stealth IMG 32.000 col. 1024x768... $199 Conquered Kingdoms 34.95 SCOUT 34.95 Scenario Disk 24.95 Stealth Pro SVGA ISA, 1280x1024, 16 color Seal Team 37.95 1MB/2MB... $235/$329 Creepers 29.95 Secret Weapons Lufttwalte 39.95 Crusaders of the Dark Savant Stealth Pro VLB 1MB/2MB.... $245/5329 41.95 Expansion Disk 1.23 or 4 1995 Cyber Empires Serpent Isie (U7 part 2) 47.95 Daemonsgate VGA .3495 Seven Cities of Gold... 31.95 Dagger of Amonra 39.95 Shadowgate for Windows... 31.95 Dark Hall.... 34.95 9GXE, 1230 x 1024 NI, SVGA: Shadowlands 29.95 $239 Dark Side of Xeen..... 39.95 ....... LVL 10, 1MB, FREE DELIVERY Sharif on Bridge Enhanced 59.95 $349  Dark Sun.... LVL 11, 2MB, FREE DELIVERY .. ... 47.95 .. Serge Dogs of War Bundle 20.95 Daughter of Serpentis ... $419 ...... 31.95 LVL 12.3 MB, FREE DELIVERY Sim Ant DOS/Windows........34.95/34.95 Deja Vul or II, Windows... 37 95 Sim City DOS Windows 29.95/34.95 Discover Space 34.95 Graphics Set 1 of 2 13.95 Dr. Floyds Desktop Toys 24.95 Sim Earth / Windows 29.95/29.95 Dunell... 3495 Sun Farm 3495 Ecoquesti 29.95 Sun Life 39.95 Eight Bail Deluxe 3995 Solitaires Journey 3495 GRAPHICS ULTRAF El Fish/Electronic Aquarium 34.95 Sound Graphics, Aircraft 2495 Graphics Ultra Plus Empire Deluxe 3495 Space Hulk 37.95 Eric the Unratty 3495 Space Quest 5 39.95 No compromise Graphics for Eye of the Beholder til 4295 Special Forces 29 95 Windows & Multimedia Video! Falcon 3.0 44.95 Selmer Pirates of Realmstare Spellmer Pirates of Realmspace 37.95 Disk 1. Operation Fighting Tiger 2495 Star Legions 23.95 1 MB / 2MB.........$209 / S315 Flashback 31.95 Star Control 34,95 Graphics Ultra Pro 2MB Flight Assignment Air Force 39.95 Strike Commander 47.95 Flight Simulator 4.0 39.95 Strike Squad 3795 Professional Graphics & Multimedia Video for the Pilot's Power Tools 24.95 Strip Poker 3/data disks 2-5 ... 29.95/15.95 Uncompromising User! ............. Freddy Pharkas........ ....... 39.95 Summoning 37.95 Front Page Football 39.95 39.95 Syndicate 36.95 Gambit ....... 37.95 TA Break Pinball 29.95 Gary Grisby's Pacific War. 44.95 TA Break Pool 29.95 Gateway Il Homeworld........... ...34.95 Tales of Magic. Proph, Shadow......37.95 Global Effect 17.95 Task Force 1942 39.95 Grand Slam Bridge II 31.95 Task Force Admirals Pack 44.95 Great Naval Battles 42.95 Terminator 2029 39.95 Scen Builder/ExpanDisks 25.95/20.95 The Blue and the Gray...... 39.95 America in the Altantic 20.95 The Prophecy 24.95 Harpoon Signature Edition... 47 95 . One of Wisconsin's Top 10 of Software Available. The Legacy 39.95 Harrier Assult 3495 Tom Landry Football 29.95 Women Owned Businesses.  All Products Sold Heaven & Earth 29.95 Tony LaRussa Baseball il 30.95  Comparate, Government & Curry Manufacturers Heroes of the 357th ............... School POS Welcome Full Warranties & High Command... 41.95 Ultima 1.6 59.95 Hockey League Simulator il 29.95 Documentation Ultima VII. 49.95 VISA Mastercard INGA ..... 34.95 Forge of Virture Data Disk 20.95  APO, FPO HI. AK Incredible Machine 29.95 Ultima Underworld Il 47.95 No Surcharge Puerto Rico & Canadian J. Nicklaus Sign Tour 2.. 17.95 Ultrabots 37.95 on Credit Cards Orders welcome: 6%Jack and the Beanstalk 35.95 Uninvited for Windows... 31.95 Jump Jet 39.95 Unlimited Adventures  Most Orders Shipped Min. $6. International 31.95 King's Quest 5 Enhanced 39.95 V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword ... 42.95 within 48 Hours. Orders Shipped First Class King's Quest 6 44.95 V for Victory: Market Garden 42.95  Software Shipping only Mail Insured: Lands of Lore 34.95 V for Victory Utah Beach 42.95 $5 per order, not per title. 15%-Min. $15. If mail cost La Russa Baseball II. 37.95 V for Victory it: Velikiye Luki 42.95 Legacy, The 39.95 Veil of Darkness Hardware: 5% Min. $5. exceeds calculated amount. 37.95 Legacy Realm of Terror ....... 34.95 Vikings. Field of Conquest 3495 .C.O.D orders welcome. you'll be billed additional Legends of Valour 3795 War in the Guit 26.95 with only a $6.00 Charge.  Call for Free Catalog Leisure Suit Larry 5 39 95 Warriors of Legend 19.95 . We Ship Latest Version lenis Not Listed Lemmings 29.95 When Two Worlds War 34 95 Personal or company checks allow 14 wurking days to clear Price fluctuate Lemmings 3495 Where Carmen San Diego. Each 29.95 beyonder control & may change for the terowo Iclective teams must have Links 386 Pro 3995 Where. Carmen Past 29.95 a Return Authorization number. Callout le tehtain a Return Authorization Mauna Kea 1995 Where Carmen Space 44.95 of your return will not be accepted. Shipping & lunding are non-refundable. All Banff Springs 1995 Where Carmen Space Deluxe. 44 95 sales are final. All returns are subject to a restacking fee. Lord of the Rings Two Towers 3495 Where. Carmen USA Deluxe 4495 P ATI Technologies V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 for Windows Internal / External .........$179 / $199 V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 for DOS Internal / External ..........$179/5199 Supra Corporation Supra Fax Modem V.32 bis, Internal Fax Software, DOS/Windows $179 / $179 SupraFaxModem V.32 bis, Ext, alone$229 Fax Software, DOS/Win S239/S239 ..................... S349 JOYSTICKS 800-554-9925 ..... 17.95 Tornado $39 S19 Advanced Gravis: Analog Joystick $32 Eliminator Game Card .................. $30 PC MouseStick ...... $75 CH Products: Virtual Pilot / Virtual Pilot Pro$69/$89 Flight Stick... Hi Speed Adaptor Gamecard 3-Aut/Gamecard 3-PS/ MACH 3 Joystick ................. S29 Maximum: MAXX Flight Yoke ....... MAXX Pedal ............ .................... Kraft: Kraft KC3 .... Kraft Trackball w/Foot Controler .... $55 Kraft Thunderstick ............. Thrustmaster: Flight Control ..... $75 Weapons Control Mark II....... $99 Rudder Pedals S119 Thrustmater Pro... ........ $119 $39 Circle Reader Service #46 "


"_  IEC to link with campaigns. Players new to this series, however, can anticipate a stiff learning curve. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #5. Rags To Riches Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Ave. Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6655 RAGS TO RICHES: If one believes that \"greed is good,\" and delving into finances is more fun than dealing with fantasy, then the player of this new title from Interplay may be well on his or her way from Rags to Riches. Based on today's news and trading relationships, Rags to Riches allows the player to dabble in the exciting world of stocks, commodities and securities. One can play in the present, beginning his or her fiscal year on January 1, 1993, or commence their wheeling and dealing in the era of the 1929 Stock Market Crash. Beginner, intermediate and advanced levels of play are provided in this financial simulation sporting high quality SVGA images. Have the secretary screen incoming calls, send the pit runner on his way, hire an assistant, and don't forget to call Mom every day. She has a great deal of market savvy, not to mention money to loan. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #6. MicroProse 180 Lakefront Dr. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 (800) 879-PLAY RETURN OF THE PHANTOM: Gamers with a flair for the dramatic need nor mask their enthusiasm for MicroProse's newest animated adventure release, Return of the Phantom. Based upon the same game engine employed in Rex Nebular, Phantom takes a more sinister, melodramatic approach to adventure gaming. As French detective Raoul Montand, the player must investigate a series of unexplained events, all pointing to the return of the famed Phantom of the Paris Opera House, thought to have died around the turn of the century. Has the Phantom of the Opera returned, in ghostly form, to exact his revenge? Has he somehow managed to traverse time itself? Or, is someone else responsible for the strange occurrences plaguing this famous structure. This is the mystery the player must solve as he or she investigates the Opera House and the labyrinth of catacombs hidden below. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #8. LEDE la Lunar Command Halli to comfy chair Return Of The Phantom UNT Mallard Software, Inc. 3207 Justin Rd. Flower Mound, TX 75028 (214) 539-2575 LUNAR COMMAND: Beginning life as Moonbase from Wesson International, this lunar colony simulator has just been re-released by Mallard Software under the appellation Lunar Command. While some additions have been made in this upgraded title—including sound, VGA graphics and some scoring enhancements this simulation is basically the same as that of its earlier incarnation. Allowing one to design, plan, build, lead, motivate and control a lunar colony, Lunar Command challenges the player to maintain a proper balance between financial prosperity and self-sufficiency. Establishing shelters and life-support facilities, excavating minerals and dealing with catastrophes all play a vital role in the lunar equation. Fail in any regard and the results could be fatal. (Running out of oxygen, for instance, does little to endear the lunar commander to those under his authority.) Strong leadership and planning abilities are the keys to success when one is over a quarter of a million miles away from home. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #7. Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. 1046 River Ave. Flemington, NJ 08822 (908) 788-2799 CONQUERED KINGDOMS SCENARIO DISK #1: If, like Alexander the Great, you've run out of kingdoms to conquer, don't sit down and weep. Pick up QQP's Conquered Kingdoms Scenario Disk #1 instead. This handy little addition to the original Conquered Kingdoms (game required) offers the player an additional 14 new scenarios, including novice and expert maps, and new terrain types (a booklet of attractive four-color maps is enclosed). Two-player modem support is available, as is traditional competition against computerized opponents. Twenty-one difficulty levels are provided for increasing one's combat pleasure. If warfare in a fantasy setting fulfills one's longings for excitement, Conquered Kingdoms will supply amply. Though not state-of-the-art in presentation, this game of geographical conquest makes up for any visual and audible lack in its playability. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #9. Conquered Kingdoms Scenario Disk #1 AUTOMATIKUME KUWAIT UIMIC U ailILUULI SK 0092 102 ReadySoft 30 Wertheim Ct., Suite 2 Richmond Hill, Ontario L4B 1B9 Canada (416) 731-4175 VARIABRONCOURS War In The Guli WAR IN THE GULF: This repackaged Team Yankee tank battle simulator offers Page 36 Commuter framing World "


"Lowest delivered prices with great customer service. DICOVER J .Card MasterCard VSA 15 800-448-6658. DISK-COUNT SOFTWARE ANTILLIK OTV Publ 39 Paris 39 Tools 24 PC Pix Vol 1 or 2 65 Magic Mansion 1135. Clash of Steel Head Set Read2925 35\" Scenery Enhn Ed 23 42° 45 39 A Train 35  19 59 30 NO SURCHARGE SHIPPING IS ONLY $4.00 PER ORDER, NOT PER HOURS: M-F 9 AM-8 PM SAT 10 AM-3 PM EST ITEM PRODUCTINFO & OTHER BUSINESS: 908-396-8880 HARDWARE INCLUDEDII CD ROM Just Grandma & Me36 Wing Comm & Miss 45 Ceasar 3 5 Great Britian 37 Lost Treas Infocom 42 Quarter Pole 29\" Studyware for ACT 33 Jutland 54\" Aesops Fables Wing Com/Ultima 6 45 Chalinge 5 Realm 33% Hawaii Quest for Glory 1 19 Lost Treasures 2 29 22 GMAT,GRE,SAT 30 Aircraft Encyclopda 45 Kings Quest 5 42 Wing Comm 2 57 Champions 35% Instant Fact Loc. 19 Lost Tribe 25 Quest for Glor 3 39 Studyware Biology. Aloha Hawaii 45 Land Of Lore 34 W C 2/Ulti. Undrwld 57 Chemistry Works 38 Japan Scenery 19\" Lunar Command 35 Rags to Riches 35% Calc.,Chem.,Econ., Amer Bus. Phnbk. 39 Languages of World99 World Atlas 42 Chessmaster 300029% New York 29\" 29 Lost Vikings Reach for Skies 19 Physics, Statistic 25 Learn to Speak Spn59 Adults Only Must be 21 Children Writ & Publ 39 Paris Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 29 Maelstom Reader Rabbit 35° Studyware LSAT 37 42 Animation Fantasy 65 Civilization 37 Magic Candle 3 Pilots Pwer Tools 24 Arthur Teacher Trbl 41 Leisure Suit Larry 37\" Reader Rabbit 2 35 Syndicate S37 Audubon Mammals 37 Libry of Art:Renaisn 65 PC Pix Vol 1 or 2 65 Rescue Air 911 17 Maniac Mansion 1135 Ready for Letter 35\" Take a break X-Word29 Autodesk Explorer 119 Libry of Art:Overview65 Porkware Clash of Steel 39 Scenery SI A or B 37 Mantis 39 Ready Set Read 29 Pinball Library of Futuro 99 Private Collection Barney Bear Goes 65 Coaster Scenery Enbn Ed 25 Speech Disk 17 Reading Adv In Oz 36 Task Force 1942 37\" 39 Loom Priv. Pictures 1 or 2 65 Cobra Mission 398 Sound & Graphic 25 Mario is Missing 35 Reading Comp 32 Admiral Edit to School 43 26 Lovely Ladies II 49 Seedy Vol 1-7 ea. 65 Comanche Tahiti 19 Mano Teach Type 25 Ready Set Read 29\" Terminator 2029 39\" into Space 26 Mac Millian Child Dict49 Storm 1 or 2 65 Mission Disk 25% West Europe 19 Math Blastr Mystry 29 Realms of Arcadia 35\" Tesserae Batik Designs 45 Manhole 49 Visual Fantasy 65 Comic Bk Creator 17 Freddy Pharkas 39 Math Blastr Plus 29 Red Baron 39 Tmnt 2 Cybrchess 35 Battlechess 49 Magazine Rack 45 Caddies 7.95éa. 3/$ 19 Cohort 2 19% Front Page Sports 39\" Math Blaster Wind 36 Mission Disk 17 Tetris Classic 31 Beauty & Beast 49 Conquest of Japan 35 Fun School Fred Frog Math Rabbit 29 Return Of Phantom 33\" Time Riders Amer. 35 Beethoven Ninth 59 SOFTWARE Marketing Master 39 Contraption Zak 25 Sam Spy. Teddy Br 17 Mavis Beacon 29\" Rex Nebular 37 Tony LaRussa Base.17 Berlitz Think & Talk Mavis Beacon 39 Crusader Drk Savnt39 39 G-Force 19 Mega Lo Mania 29\" 34\" Ring World Tony LaRussa II 37\" French 105 Mixed Up Mothr Gse37 Construction Set 22 Cuckoo Zoo 31% Games:Summer Chi35 Mental Math Games 37 Robosports Wind 25 Expansion Disk 19 Spanish 105 75 Monarch Notes Acos Over Europe 44 Cyber Space 29 Gearworks Michl Jordon Fight 37 Bible Library Rock & Bach Studo35 49 Top Class Series ea 16 Monkey Island 39 Aces of the Pacific42 Daemonsgate Gobblins 1 or 2 22 Micro Cookbook 4. 31 Rodney Fun Screen31 Tornado 454 Bibles & Religon 30 MS DOS Archives 35 Mission Disk 25 Darklands 38 Microsoft Golf 39 Rome Grand Slam Bridg II 32 29\" 35 Transartica Bookshelf 129 MM Music: Mozart 33 AD&D Collect 2 42 Darkseed 39 Great Naval Battle 43% Midnight Rescue 35 Rule Engagment 239 Treasure Cove 35 Bintanica Family Chc/5 MM Miele Vivaldi 31 AD&D Starter Kit 42 Darkside of Xeen 39 Surer Shins 30 2005 Might & Magic 4 40 Science Adventure 42 Treasur Math Storm 35 Business Master 32 North Amer Fax Bk 55 AD&D Unlimited 3756 Dark Sun 47 Great Works Might & Magc 5 39 Scooter Magic Cast/32 Treasure Mountain 35 Buzz Aldrin Hace 59 North Amer Indians 57 Adibou&Junior 1 348 Daughter of Serpnt31\" Gunship 2000 29 Millies Math House 31 Scrable Delx 32 Treehouse Carmen World Dixe 65 Officers Bookcase 50 50 Air Bucks 34s Design your Railrd. 35 Scenario Disk 24 Mixed-Up Fairy Tal 30 Seal Team 37 Tristan Pinball Career Opportunities42 Our Solar System Air Bus A320 45 Diet Pro DOS/Win 25/36 Hardball 3 Mixed-Up Mother Gs30 29 Sat Weapn Luftwf 29 Turbo Science Cautious Condor 45 PC Game Room Air Duel 33 Dinosaur Adventure 34 Money Clocks Wrk 19 Data Disk (ca.) 17\" 49 Tour of Duty ea. 20 Turtle Tools CD Game Pack 55 2 Peter & Wolf 45 Air Warrior SVGA 35 Dog Fight 37\" Harrier Assault 34\" Monkey Island 1/2 23 Seven Cities Gold 38 Ultima 7 . CD Speedway 57 AlgeBlaster Plus 30 Dr Floyd Desktop 19% Monopoly Deluxe Headline Harry Pool Shark 34 Shadow President 39 Forge of Virtue 17 Challenge 5 Realms Headline Harry 3 7 Presdnt:lt Surt Geo 105 Algebra Made Easy 25 Mutanoid Challenge 31 Shadowlands Dr Jam Window 59% Health & Diet Pro 26 29\" Ultima 7 Part 2 Christmas Carol 35 Programmers ROM 59 Alone in The Dark 356 Dr. Quandry 31 High Command 42 Mystery at Museum 35 Sierra Action Five 25 Ultima Trilogy CIA World Fact 39 Publish it! Alphabet Blocks 29 Dragon Sphere Nigel's World 31 Sierra Award Winner47 Ultima Trilogy 2 47 CIA World Fact M/M42 Reference Library 59 Hong Kong Mahjong32 No Amazon 386 Dragon Lair 3 No Greater Glory 20°5 Sierra Family Fun 32 Ultima Underworld 47 39 Hoyle Bk Game 1/3 30 Clipart Goliath 30 Rotor Airball/Time 35 Ambush 37 Dreadnoughts 40* Omar Shariff Bridge 37 Sierra Starter Bndl 39 Part 2 47 Conan Cimerion Humans 36 Ancient Art War Sky35 San Diego Zoo 49 Dune 2 36 24 Operation Neptune 35 19 Silent Service 2 Ultrabots Inca Corel Draw Upgd 139 Ancient Empires Secret Weapons 29 30 59 Sim AntS Dungeon Master 29 34 Uninvited Window 31\" Incredible Machine 29 Crossword Cracker Oregon Trail Delx 34 Animal Adventure 47\" Sim City 19\" U.S.Atas DOS Seventh Guest 31 Dynamix Bundle 42 Indiana Jones 4 37 Curse of Enchantia25% 39 Animation Studio 75 Origin FX Sherlock Holme Eagle Eye Mystery 31% 25 Sim Ant French 35 Utopia Deathstar Arcade 30 Sherl Holmes 2 42 Armored Fist 37 Eco-Quest 1 or 2 29% Out of This World 36 Sim City Windows 34 V for Victory (ea) 42 Island of Dr. Brain 29 Dictionaries & Lang 30 Sleeping Beauty Ashes of Empire S4 Sleeping Beauty 45% Outnumbered Eight Ball Delx 37 35 Sim Earth 39 Vegas Games Jetfighter 2 3 9 Don Quixote 33 S Pacific Wars 47 Sim Life Dos/Wind 39 Virtual Realty St 2 59 Education Master 32 Space Quest 4 33 Sound Works 35 Adv Mission Disk 19 Automap Empire Deluxe Adv Mission Disk 19 35% Paladin 2 Paladin 2 37 Bundle Package 49 35 Sing a Long Wind 31 Vista Pro Electronic Cookbook75 S Automap Europe 74 Paperboy 2 Entimt Pak Win (ea.)28 John Madden 2 27 Snap Dragon Space Series-Apollo49 32 Vocabulary Devi 32 Elect. Home Library 49 31\" Patriot Spirit of Excalibur B-17 Flying Fortress 39. Eric the Unready 35\" 42\" Snoopy Game Club 29 Wacky Funsters 19 37 Elctn Traveler:Call 33 Johnny Quest 29\" PC Study Bible Bailey's Bookhouse29\" Eternam 42 Solitaire Window 29War in Gulf Stellar 7 296 35% Jump Jet Peppers Adventure 29\" Solitaires Journey 35 Warrior of Legend 19\" Encarta Encyclpd249\" Strange Bedfellows 39 Bane Cosmic Forge 36 Eye of Beholder 20 MPE Version 48% European Monarchs49 Star Child Barbie Design 16 Eye Beholder 2 Perfect General 36 Space Ace 2:Bort 36 Wayne Gretzky 3 35 38 Kid Cuts 35 Family Doctor 59 Siar Trek Enhanced g Pirtale's Gold 38\" Space Adventure 42 What's My Angle 30 Battlochoss 4000 SVGA36 Eye of Beholder 3 42 Hd Desk 25 Font Master Playroom w/ Sound 31 Space Hulk 37 When Worlds War35 Street Atlas 99 Battlefield 37 EZ Cosmos 4 2 Kid Pictures 19 Food Analyst Police Quest 3 39\" Space Quest 5 39 Where Crmn San Diego Talking Classic Tale75 Battle Toads 24 Ez Language Series Kid Pw Fresh Arte Pool Shark 19\" Spaceward Ho America Past 34 Talkng Jungle Safari75 Battle of Destiny 35 Fr Gri Sp.jp, Rs 31% Kid Pic Companion 25 Front Page News 29 37 4 29 Populous 2 Spear of Destiny 39 Time Mag Almanac 49 Beat the House F 15 11 4 Europe 44 Kid Works 2 G Force Power Hits Kids31 Special Forces 29 Space Time Table Science 59 Betrayal of Krondor39\" Master Edition 49 Kings Ransom 34 Game Master 32 Movies 25 Spectre Time Botty Crocker Cook Call Too Many Typefonts35 F117a Stealth 29\" Game Pack 2 King's Quest 6 39 45 Sports 25 Spellbound 31 USA Ultima 16 4 9 Black Crypt 31 Falcon 3.0 Gettysburg:MM Hist43 Ultimate Shareware 59 45 Sa-Fi Knowledge Advent 42 B 32 35 Blueforce Spellcasting 301 USA Deluxe 446 39 Oper Fight Tiger 25 Gofer Winkles Ady 33 US Land Of Lore 34\" Battletech-Mech 47\" 32 Spell-it Plus 30 World Deluxe 44 42 : US Atlas Body Illustrated Family Tree Maker 42 Golden Immortal 28 Legacy Powermonger 32 SpellJammer 37\" Wild Science Arcad35\" 42 US Aulas w/Automap49 Bodyworks Far Creativity Kit 18 Great Cities Vol 1 Legacy Necromnar 19\" 49 Prince of Persia 2 39 Sports Adventure 33 Ween:Prophecy 34 US History 39 Bug Bunny WrkShp 31 Fatty Bear Birthday31% Legion's of Krella 37 Print Shop Deluxe 45 Star Control 2 35% Wing Comandr2 47 Guinness Book Rec59 US Presidents 49 Buzz Aldnin Fields of Glory 336 Lemmings 29 Graphic Coll. (ea) 30 Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 World Circuit 34\" Guy Spy 32 USA State Fact Bk 45 Campaign Flashback 32 Lemmings 2 49 Print Shop, New 35 Star Trek AudioClip 34% MPE Edition Ham Call 44 USA Wars:Civil War49 Capitalist Pig 38 Flight Simul A.T.P. 37 Lethal Weapon 35 Graphics (ea) 22 Inspector Gadget 37 Next Generation 386 World Tour Tennis32 USA Wars Korea 49 Car and Unver Flight Simulator 5 41 Liberty or Death 35\" Print Shp Compion 31 Star Trek Screen Sav37 X Wing Interactive Old Test 52 USA Wars:Vietnam 49 Carrier Strik 12 USA Wars:Vietnam 49 Carrier Strike 39 Line in the Sand Privateer 47\" Stickybr Math Tutor 30 Mission Disk 1985 Interactive Storytime45 USA Wars: WW II 49 Expansion Disk 19 Arct/Scen Dsgn 28 Links 25 Pro League Basebal35 Stickty Pre-School 30 Yobi Spelling Trick29 Intl Bus & Econ Atlas 39 Voyage Planet 1-3ea.69 Carriers awar 37\" Aircraft Adv Factry 25 Links 386 Pro Prophecy 25 Stickybr Read Tutor 30 Your Deck 45 Intro Games Fr/Sp 79 Voyage Planet l-3ea.69 Carriers at War White Horse Child 33 Construction Kit 31% #685 Course Disk ea 16 Prophecy of Shadw 38 Jazz:Multimedia Histo9 Who Killed Sam Rup25 Stickbr Spell Tutor 30 Your Prsnl Train SAT30 #701 31 7 01 17 de Sam Rup25 Casio Kids 386 Courses ea 19\" Protostar 39% Storm Across Eurp 38 Zodiac Signs Jets & Props 55 Wille 39 3, Willy Beamish 37 Castle 2 Airport Facty Loc 17 Lord of Rings 2 37 Putt Putt Parade 32 Storybook Weaver299 Zoo Keeper 36 Jones in Fast Lane 37 Win CD 3 2 Caste Castle of Dr. Brain 30 California California Pult Putt Fun Pack 26 Strike Commander 45 Zug's Spelling Adv 22 Sound Cards SB ProT6 ASP 2090 Speech Disk 17 Ady of Eco Island 22 MIDI Software CD DRIVES Joysticks SB Discovery 16 Multimedia 499 Strip Poker 3 Ad Lib Sound MCA 65 3 2 Dinosaur World 22 SB Edutanmnt 16 579 1297 Toshiba TCH Flightsuck 37 Altech Data Disk (ea) 17 Race Thru Space 22 Ad Lib Gold 1000 179 SA CDROM Intral 369 Band in a Box 69 Dbl Speed Int 489% CH Game Card 3 31 Audio Show 369 ATI Stereo FX 139 SB Portblaster 129 149 Dbl Speed Ext 594 Cadenza Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Rahway N.J. VGA StreoFX 1MB 369 SB Video Blaster CH Mach 3 31 280 Pro 256 349 Texcel America Covox Voloe Bistr 64 CH Virtual Pilot Pro Color Plus SB Video Spigot 419° Gravis Ulva Sound 129 SB Waveblaster 234\" Cakewalk Pro CH Virtual Pilot Pro 84 169 TERMS AND CONDITIONS ProVGA TV 459 Gravis Bundle Cakewalk Window 240 3024 Dbl Spd 395 Eliminator Game Cd26 Call Roland LAPC-1 Pro PC/TV DOS 219 Master Card, Visa, American Express & Media Vision 399 Encore 379 3024 Business 769 Gravis Analog Pro 39 Pro PC TV Plus 339 Discover Accepted. No Surcharge on Audio Port 139 Roland SCC-1 GS 375 Jammer Pro 125 3024 Education 729 Gravis Joystick 32 Pro VGATV + 659 Credit Cards. By mail: P.O.Box3. CDPC 959 Sound Canvas 559 Laser Music Proces79 3024 Multimeda 959 Gravis PC GamePad21 VideoSurge Carteret, N.J. 07008. All sales Are Roland MA-12C ea 105 659 Bass Enhncmnt Master Tracks Pro 249 5021 Extemal 439 Kraft KC3 Joystick 18 VideoSurge SVHS 729 Final. NO REFUNDS! Exchange on defective COPC XL 1159 SPEAKERS MCS Stereo 5024 Dbl Spd 499 Kralt Thunderstick 28 28 TV GRX TV merchandise with the same item only. No 269 Pro Audio Spec 16 194 CS-150 Shielded Midisoft Studio 159 5024Business 899 Maxx Flight Yoke 69 exceptions. All Products are new from 35 Pro Audio Studio 2240 CS-550 SHielded Skins & Pads d Fouiller 45 5024 Education 829 Maxx Pedal w 3 band Equillzer 45 Music Bytes Vol 1 65 manufacturer. All claims and guarantees 39 Pro 16 Multimedia 79 5024 Multimed 1079 1 Quickshot Gama Cdial Dust Covers 15 are from the manufacturer. Call for Upgrade Ku! Music Mentor 955 Altec Lansing 200 219 current price and availability. GOVERMENT Pro Movie Spectrm 299 ACS 300 w/subwol 299 Music Printer Plus 419 Modem & Fax Grounded Wrist Strap Quickshot Warrior 18 15 AND SCHOOL P.O. 'S WELCOMED. For your Suncom Command19\" Keyboard Skins Logitech Audioport 134 MIDI Interface Music Time 169 US Robotic Sportster protection, we will only ship to the Soundman Static Pads Piano Works 1 79 Midiator 101 Serial 95 2400 Int. Thrustmaster Flight 69 9995 address the credit card company has on Sound Blaster Large-System Play it by Ear 85 15 FCS PTO 109 14.4 v.42bs 79 162 PC Midi Card file, therefore shipping to Ak.. Hi., SB Mid ka Quick Score Deluxe99 Game Card 29 Wrist Pads 8 W/ S/A Fax PR., 1836 P.O. Boxes, 38 MQX-32 APO/FPO extra. Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 Ahythm Ace Weapons Control 79 Stax (Dust Repellent)5 International orders call for shipping 14.4 v.42bis Ext 183 Sound Blaster Delx 132 PÇD-GM Music 195 Songwright Rudder Pedal 109 Statx Complete charges. N.J. Resident add 6 sales tax. SB Pro 16 164* The Miracle W/S/R Fax 2135 325 Trax for Windows 10 UPROM Chla 29\" Cleaning System 15 | 201 rostocking fee for all refused items. Education Cookbooks Space of Excalibur 44 31 Bane Cosmichos 16. Eve of Beholders 42 korda pole enanion 25 38\" 38 KMPE Version 99 Battlefields 4000SVGA36 bye Beholder 2 49 Tareel Atlas 35 30 1995 25 35  65 59 179 Circle Reader Service #50 "


"Taking a eelk K3=9IN1421 its only fault might be an awkward interface and mediocre graphics. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #12. HARAM A B one a glimpse of mechanized warfare during Operation Desert Storm. The player controls four tank units with a total of 16 vehicles, attempting to turn Iraqi turrets into Tiparillos. Bit-mapped VGA graphics are not state-of-the-art, but the sense of urgency, confusion and disorientation translates well throughout the game. Players can equip their M-1 Abrams, M-113 APC, M-2 Bradley or M-901 TOW launcher with four kinds of ammo in preparation for 25 different missions—all more challenging than the actual conflict. A good interface helps make the game enjoyable and interesting, but not quite a direct hir. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #10. Laura Bow In The Dagger Oi Amon RA REALMS KANI THE OLO FORTRESS LOORE WRAITH DIFOST CURREVIARMANC SVRAEV Star Graphics Corp. 1800 SW 1st Ave., Suite 545 Portland, OR 97201-9942 (800) 831-7611 A COLLECTION OF CLASSIC GAMES: Windows gamers can now lay their hands on another entertainment pack, this one from Star Graphics, which includes three Windows games, two screen savers and a collection of Windows wallpaper. Of course, the games are the main feature of this collection. Beleaguered Castle is a version of Solitaire in which the player builds castles comprised of a pile of cards topped by a king. While the cards are face up for play, moving all cards of a like suit onto the corresponding center piles, in order from ace to king, is not as easy as it appears. Morris, based on an ancient Eng. lish board game, challenges the player to strategically place tokens on a board in «mills\" of three pieces in a row. Completing a mill allows the player to remove an opponent's piece from the board. When a player is down to two pieces or is blocked from further moves, the game is over. The last game in this set is based on geometric shapes. Patterns, comprised of the two puzzles Tangrams and Plates of Wisdom, requires players to move puzzle pieces into special geometric patterns. Overall, play in these games from Star Graphics is entertaining, even though the graphics are just average. Those wanting some simple Windows diversions to delve into between times of productivity may find Classic Games a logical choice. IBM with Windows ($34.99). Circle Reader Service #13. Realms Of Arkania Delegate EMEA Sierra On-Line, Inc. PO Box 485 Coarsegold, CA 93614 (209) 683-4468 LAURA BOW IN THE DAGGER OF AMON RA: The latest of Sierra's conversions to CD-ROM has made its appearance, allowing Ms. Bow to \"speak her piece\" (in southern belle fashion), along with the rest of the roaring 20's cast. As with previous Sierra CD conversions, digitized speech has replaced the on-screen text for each character and for the narrator (puzzles remain unchanged). Ideally, adding voices should increase the difficulty of play (as clues are no longer as obvious without the text displayed on screen) and add emotion to game play that cannot be conveyed in written text alone. The emotive factor, though, is only effective when the vocal acting is sufficiently realistic and believable. This is where Sierra has been weak thus far. Overall, the quality of the vocals in The Dagger of Amon Ra are adequate. However, it does suffer from vocal talent which is inferior to the CD version of Space Quest IV, Sierra's previous CD-ROM release. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #11. FATE AIRROR A Collection Of Classic Games LLLLCCL Tiles and Tribulations Opllons EIN POJMS Sir-Tech Software PO Box 245 Ogdensburg, NY 13669 (315) 393-6633 Fans Tofi. Tiles And Tribulations REALMS OF ARKANIA: Meat and potatoes role-players might get their fill from this hearty CRPG based upon a best-selling German \"people and paper\" system. The character attribute system is rich and original, offering 12 character \"archetypes,\" over 50 skills with actual uses in the adventure and, interestingly, negative attributes, like superstition, greed and phobias. Playing Realms of Arkania in either a Novice or an Experienced mode, players will see the realm from several different perspectives: an overhead map for long-distance travel; a first person view in dungeons and towns; and a third person, 3-D isometric view in combat mode (a la Darklands). Detailed and occasionally fresh, Page 138 Technological Computer Innovations 255 North Cherrywood Dr. Lafayette, CO 80026-2726 (303) 673-9046 TILES AND TRIBULATIONS: A combination of action and strategy, TCI's Tiles and Tribulations gives the Windows gamer the chance to stack colored tiles to his or her heart's content, at least until sufficient errors make further progress impossible. The goal of this simple, yet tricky, game is to catch falling tiles with a keyboard-controlled paddle, and then drop them into the tile bin at the bottom of the screen. This bin, a 5x5 matrix that holds 25 tiles at a time, is where the player must stack the falling tiles in vertical, horizontal and diagonal patterns of same-colored tiles. When a patrern is complered, tiles in the pattern disappear, freeing up room for additional patterns. Tiles dropped into the bin in a random fashion will fill up the bin DEDEX BE EOS High Command Computer Gaming World "


"NOW AVAILABLE —ON PC|2OOK TM NINJA OF THE \"Nth\" DIMENSION V 70L ZOZ GREMLI Electronic Innovative Design 768 Two Mile Parkway Goodlettsville, Tn. 37072 Phone: 1-(615)-972-8085 Fax: 1-(615)-851-6098 Circle Reader Service #52 "


"Takunga peek and end the game. Each level, of the 50 provided, in this fun little title has a unique goal that must be solved before the player can advance to higher levels. IBM with Windows ($21.95). Circle Reader Service #14. Richael Your play. Salect a card 9365054 12.C. Thism DOOS BULID Hearts Three-Sixty Pacific 2105 South Bascom Ave., Suite 165 Campbell, CA 95008 (800) 653-1360 HIGH COMMAND: Like Three-Sixty's V For Victory series, this game feels very much like a classic boardgame on a computer, and has been compared with such all-time boardgame favorites as Avalon Hill's Third Reich. As the head of either the Axis or the Allies, players will be commanding combat forces, managing production plus research and development, doling out foreign aid, and allocating resources. Detailed and moderately complex, High Command may be less a game than a way of life. Fortunately, the game offers five tutorials of graduated complexity to get new players up to speed and on the road to victory. Originally released by Colorado Computer Creations, the game has been given an SVGA face-lift and a minor tune up by Three-Sixty. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #15. betting advice. IBM ($12.95). Circle Reader Service #17. RUCKUS ROULETTE: This little roulerte simulation from Villa Crespo Software offers the player the opportunity to \"place their bets\" in a financially nonthreatening atmosphere, one without risk to their bank accounts (save the cost of the game). Though it does not live up to the traditional marketing hype emblazoned on the outside of the box (\"Ruckus Roulette recreates all the excitement of this popular casino game\"), it nonetheless does offer the player an opportunity to learn and/or play roulette without losing face, money or a spouse. Ruckus Roulette allows the \"gambler\" to test out different betting strategies and ply his hand against up to four computer controlled players. Of course, longterm statistics are just a help key away. Supported hardware includes EGA/VGA graphic cards and Sound Blaster compatible sound boards. IBM ($12.95). Circle Reader Service #18. 29 a File a 6 Ruckus Poker 105 DET VINS THINKCROSS: A puzzle game from a classic mold, ThinkCross has players trying to eliminare various shapes from the screen by crashing like shapes into cach other. Naturally, gravity is a core element, but there are plenty of obstacles including bridges, elevators and crumbling floors to keep it from being easy. Of course, every level is progressively harder, but passwords will take players back to the last uncompleted level. IBM ($12.95). Circle Reader Service #19. in C & Villa Crespo Software 1725 McGovern St. Highland Park, IL 60035 (708) 433-0500 Ruckus Roulette ESRIODISGUST ION CRODRIZED HEARTS: Volume Twenty One in the Coffee Break Series, Hearts, is another one of Villa Crespo Software's fine, affordable programs. Offering major sound card support and graphics from CGA through SVGA, Hearts deals out some traditional family fun in a competent, though simple package. Six opponents of varying skill and strategy levels provide the player with ample challenge. The easy to use interface supports both mouse and keyboard. Rounding out this offering is an on-linc help feature and complete statisrical records. IBM ($12.95). Circle Reader Service #16. 20707OZ XELIX Thinkcross Wisdom Tree 2700 E. Imperial Hwy., Bldg. A Brea, CA 92621 (800) 772-4253 SPIRITUAL WARFARE: Those who would rather convert their enemies than kill them may wish to join the army of the Lord in a game of Spiritual Warfare, pitting the believer against the forces of evil in a modern day setting. Newly released from Wisdom Tree, this title offers the gamer a chance to test both their faith and joystick prowess in a Nintendo-esque world. Designed for players ages 8 and up, Spiritual Warfare combines action gaming (from a top-down perspective) and Bible quizzing in a single package. Familiar gospel music plays in the background as the player traverses twelve distinct territories and answers 250 Bible questions. Converting enemies to the faith and correctly answering Bible trivia questions serve to restore the player's waning health. In addition, unlike many action games, progress can be saved at any time. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #20. Cow Baclub 1917 HA Deli da 02 J2 03 RUCKUS POKER: While not quite delivering the promised toughest poker players you've ever met,\" this Coffee Break Series poker game is no slouch when it comes to knowing when to hold 'em and... well, everyone knows the rest. Five-handed games are filled with players from among the eight different artificial opponents (each with their own style of chat balloon dialogue) and the four games that can be dealt include 5 and 7 Card Stud, Hold 'em and Chicago. Typical of Villa Crespo, there are quality statistical analysis functions and an on-line tutor for Spiritual Warfare Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rated for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dares and may precede the actual release dates. Specific formats listed are those which CGWhas in its possession. Mech Brigade Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985 Many Formats MECH BRIGADE Mech Brigade built on the lessons learned in publishing the World War II tactical armored combat game, Kampfgruppe, and even corrected the most oft-cited problem in its predecessor, the stacking problem. Mech Brigade featured modern armored warfare, but never quite gained the popularity of its predecessor. Since CGW's readers consistently rated Mech Brigade highly (though not as highly as Kampfgruppe) and it had improved the system beyond Kampfgruppe's original level, CGW made it one of the original inductees into the Hall of Fame. The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many Formats Chessmaster (Software Toolworks, 1986) Many Formats Civilization (MicroProse, 1991) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) Amiga, Atari ST, C-64, IBM F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, 1988) IBM Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM Gunship (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many Formats King's Quest V (Sierra On-Line, 1990) Amiga, IBM M-1 Tank Platoon (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many Formats Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM, Macintosh M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (MicroProse, 1987) Many Formats Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many Formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Sega Their Finest Hour (LucasArts, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin, 1983) Apple, Atari ST, C-64, IBM Ultima IV (Origin, 1985) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Ultima VI (Origin, 1990) Amiga, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wasteland (Interplay, 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM Wing Commander (Origin, 1991) IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many Formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many Formats Might & Magic New World Computing, 1986 Apple, C-64, IBM, Macintosh Might & Magic caught the fancy of role-players everywhere because it offered a new look (i.e. the walls in various mazes had a distinctive threedimensional look as one explored the dungeons), a prolific amount of combat encounters, and one of the largest maps to that point in a CRPG. Designed by a gamer, Jon Van Caneghem, for gamers, the emphasis of the series has always been on tactical success to reach a strategic goal. September 1993 Page 141 "


"MONICE Reader Poll #108 COMPUTER Top Adventure Games GAME COMPANY Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's LucasArts Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts Star Control Il Accolade Quest for Glory III Sierra Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM Alone in the Dark 1-Motion Les Manly in: Lost in LA Accolade 9 King's Quest V: Heir Today.. Sierra 10 Losi Files of Sherlock Holmes Electonic Arts amanna SCORE 9.94 9.84 9.72 9.71 9.56 9.55 9.54 9.28 9.26 GAMING WORLD The Premier Computer Game Magazine Top 100 Games Type SP 000 Score 10.51 10.45 10.27 10.17 X-Wing 10.15 Underworld 10.12 10.11 9.97 0 -NOTON 0 Top Role Playing Games GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.45 Ultima Underworld I Origin 9.59 Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.51 Might & Magic III New World Computing 9.41 Ultima Vit: Part Two Serpent Isle Origin 9.41 Ultima VII Origin 9.34 7 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World 9.34 8 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 9.25 9 Eye of the Beholder SSI 9:10 10 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Sir-Tech 9.05 SP WG,ST AD WG AD WG AD ADAC ST WG AC RP SI AD,RP AD PILDID GECUTE Top Simulation Games AD WG RP SI SP WG,ST RP Game Company @ 1 Links 386 Pro Access Q2 Ultima Underworld Origin World Circuit MicroProse 4 Wing Commander II Origin LucasArts 6 Solitaire's Journey QQP 7 Front Page Sports Football Dynamix 8 Conquered Kingdoms QOP 29 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 10 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty Pacific 11 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 12 The Perfect General QQP 13 The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts 14 Star Control II Accolade 15 Dune 11 Virgin 16 V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 17 Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 18 Ultima Underworld II Origin 19 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum Holo Byte 20 Quest for Glory III Sierra 21 Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM 22 Alone in the Dark T-Motion 23 Empire Deluxe New World 24 Eye of the Beholder 11 SSI 25 Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 26 Links Access 27 Warlords SSG 28 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle Origin Might & Magic III New World Computing 30 Pacific War SSI 31 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic 32 Hardball lll Accolade 33 V For Victory: Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Ultima VII Origin 36 Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 37 High Command Three-Sixty Pacific 38 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Accolade 39 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 40 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra 41 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 42 Lemmings Psygnosis 43 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electonic Arts 44 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts 45 Second Front SSI 46 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte 47 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electonic Arts 48 The Castle of Dr. Brain Sierra 49 Eye of the Beholder Stunt Island Disney GAME COMPANY World Circuit MicroProse X-Wing LucasArts Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Stunt Island Disney Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Electronic Arts Red Storm Rising MicroProse F-15 Strike Eagle Il MicroProse SESTRE SCORE 10.27 10.15 9.58 9.48 9.39 9.19 9.10 9.06 9.04 9.03 uma ONG alababalagens de alaalaalbaar alleen been made beta AP WG SI 9.94 9.93 9.84 9.75 9.72 9.71 9.68 9.63 9.61 9.59 9.58 9.56 9.55 9.54 9.52 9.51 9.48 9.47 9.44 9.41 9.41 9.40 9.39 9.37 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.32 9.29 9.28 9.27 9.26 9.25 9.21 9.20 9.19 9.17 9.14 9.13 9.11 9.10 9.10 SP WG RP RP ST SOLITARES LOURNENE WG AD SP AD RP AC,ST AD ovo AWNTop Strategy Games GAME COMPANY Solitaire's Journey QQP Dune II Virgin Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electonic Arts The Lost Admiral QOP The Incredible Machine Dynamix Mech Warrior Activision The Island of Dr. Brain Sierra g Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 Sierra 10 Populous ! Electronic Arts SCORE 10.18 9.74 9.32 9.13 9.05 9.05 8.94 8.91 8.78 8.78 SI WG AC ST SSI "


"INGOON AD WG SI RP AD,RP ST VOU AWN Top Wargames GAME Conquered Kingdoms V for Victory: Velikiye Luki The Perfect General V for Victory: Utah Beach Empire Deluxe Warlords Pacific War 8 V For Victory: Market Garden High Command Second Front COMPANY QOP Three-Sixty QQP Three-Sixty Pacific New World SSG SCORE 9.97 9.93 9.75 9.63 9.52 9.44 9.40 9.34 9.29 9.17  SSI Rp Three-Sixty Pacific Three-Sixty Pacific SSI come SE Sierra SSI Electronic Arts Sir-Tech Sierra QQP MicroProse Legend Sierra MicroProse MicroProse Sierra Microprose Dynamix Sierra Origin QQP Sierra SSI SSG Dynamix Activision SSI MicroProse Psygnosis Sierra Dynamix Access SSI Psygnosis Electronic Arts Accolade MicroPlay Legend MicroProse ST AD RP WG,ST AD WG WG AD ST.SI 9.09 9.09 9.06 9.05 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.04 9.03 9.03 9.02 9.02 9.01 9.01 9.00 9.00 8.98 8.98 8.97 8.96 8.94 8.92 8.92 8.92 8.91 8.89 8.89 8.86 8.85 8.83 RP NOU AWNTop Action Games GAME Wing Commander II Wolfenstein 3-D Lemmings Tetris Classic Oh, No! More Lemmings Lemmings 2: The Tribes Out of this World 8. Terminator 2029 Spectre 10 Speedball 2 51 The Dagger of Amon Ra Conflict: Korea 53 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat 54 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Quest for Glory I (VGA) The Lost Admiral 57 Red Storm Rising Eric the Unready Conquests of the Longbow 60 Silent Service II F-15 Strike Eagle III 62 Quest for Glory II Gunship 2000 64 The Incredible Machine Police Quest 3 66 Ultima V Battles of Destiny 68 Space Quest IV Western Front 70 Carriers At War 71 The Adventures of Willy Beamish 72 Mech Warrior 73 Veil of Darkness F-117A Oh, No! More Lemmings 76 The Island of Dr. Brain 77 Rise of the Dragon Martian Memorandum 79 Tony LaRussa Baseball | 80 Lemmings 2: The Tribes 81 Indianapolis 500 82 Elvira 83 Command HQ Spellcasting 301: Spring Break 85 Rex Nebular 86 Gateway to the Savage Frontier Great Naval Battles 88 Populous II Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 90 Heart of China 91 Battlechess Gateway 93 Starflight 11 94 Battles of Napoleon 95 Pools of Darkness 96 Typhoon of Steel 97 Armada 2525 98 Amazon 99 Space Quest V: Mutation Strike Commander COMPANY Origin Id Software Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte Psygnosis Psygnosis Interplay Bethesda Velocity Konami ST SCORE 10.17 9.61 9.21 9.14 8.92 8.85 8.57 8.13 8.02 7.92 ST AD AD SP ACS SI 8.82 RP WG,ST AD AD RP WG,ST Top Sports Games SSI ST ST AD ST SSI Electronic Arts Sierra Dynamix Interplay Legend Electronic Arts SSI SSI GAME COMPANY Links 386 Pro Access Front Page Sports Football Dynamix Links Access Hardball 1 Accolade Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade Tony LaRussa Baseball Il SSI NFL Pro League Football Micro Sports The Games Winter Challenge Accalade PGA Tour Golf Electronic Arts Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball SSI SCORE 10.51 10.11 9.47 9.37 9.27 8.86 8.54 8.50 8.49 8.49 AD w OU 8.81 8.81 8.80 8.79 8.79 8.78 8.78 8.75 8.72 8.72 8.71 8.70 8.68 8.67 8.63 8.62 8.60 8.60 SSI RP WG RP WG ST AD AD Interstel Access Sierra Origin SI Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff. Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. = Top game of type. AD=Adventure, RP-Role Playing. Sl=Simulation, ST=Strategy. WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP=Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"What You've Been Playing Lately PC Research Hits List of Top-Selling Software May, 1993 PC Games (MS-DOS) Rank Title and Source X-Wing (LucasArts) Seventh Guest (Virgin) Strike Commander (Origin) Wolfenstein 3-D/Spear of Destiny (Formgen) AD&D Eye of the Beholder (Strategic Simulations) Ultrabots (Electronic Arts) Commanche: Maximum Overkill (Novalogia) Links Banff Springs (Access) Links 386 Pro (Access) Hardball III (Accolade) Tony Larussa Baseball II (Strategic Simulations) Alone in the Dark (Interplay) Freddy Pharkas, Frontier Pharmacist (Sierra On-Line) Wing Commander (Origin) Empire Deluxe (New World Computing) El Fish (Maxis) Star Trek 25th Anniversary (Interplay) 5-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse) Sim City (Maxis) AD&D Unlimited Adventures (Strategic Simulations) Every month our mailbox bulges with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from our most loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of releasing our latest issue we can expect to see cards pouring in with suggestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 poll. Through your efforts, we know exactly where we stand with our readers (you don't mince words!), and we are treated to well-articulated opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This column is a forum for these responses and for the results of our \"Playing Lately?\" query on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out ... keep 'em coming! Playing Lately? Results For CGW #108, July 1993 X-wing (LucasArts) Civilization (MicroProse) Strike Commander (Origin) Ultima 7.5: Serpent's Isle (Origin) Empire Deluxe (New World) World Circuit (MicroProse) Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen (New World) The 7th Guest (Virgin) V For Victory: Market Garden (Three-Sixty) Wolfenstein 3-D/Spear of Destiny (id Software) van ADP* Rank -*** Amiga Games Title and Source 688 Attack Sub (Electronic Arts) Shadow of the Beast (Psygnosis) Legend of Kyrandia (Virgin) Overlord (Virgin) AD&D Gateway to Savage Frontier (Strategic Simulations) Rank * Macintosh Games Title and Source Prince of Persia (Broderbund) King's Quest VI (Sierra On-Line) King's Quest V/Red Baron Bundle (Sierra On-Line) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) Lemmings (Psygnosis) Reader Recommendations \"For all its simplicity, Spaceward Hol is great. It doesn't bog down with large empires, and we love the multi-player capability. Gangs of fun! X-wing suffers from too much puzzle-solving and requires inhuman reflexes to proceed. It's beautiful, but frustrating. Not fun.\" D. Zimmerman, Herndon, VA \"Outstanding! Star Control II is the best balanced and allaround fun game I've played in years. Even the final credits are entertaining (a la Monty Python and the Holy Grail).\" J. Shaffer, Silver Spring, MD \"I recently had the chance to play Protostar from Tsunami. It has the poorest play quality for any game I've played in months. The graphics were good but the content was thin and poorly organized, and the documentation was the worst I've seen.\" M. Smith, Verona, MS \"Super job on Pacific War! Mr. Grigsby has outdone himself this time. By harnessing the capabilities of the computer he has taken a monster the likes of SPI's War in the Pacific and turned it into a playable dream. Although the computer opponent does strange things like raiding Raboul in 42 with only 2 CVs! A few things are missing which do distort things for instance refit/shipyard work, size of port limiting the number of ships, and the ability for heavily damaged ships to limp a long way home. Overall, job well done! E. Booth, Harker Heights, TX \"Publishers who continually raise the ante on hardware with every release are really after the high-end, well-heeled user. So I suggest marketing these games with gold fringe on the boxes. velvet disk sleeves, Biscotti Regina enclosed for munching during installation, and framable certificates of ownership.\" C. Dodge, Corona del Mar, CA \"QQP has mastered the art of creating addictive computer strategy games with unlimited re-playability. Too bad the sound support sucks rocks.' -B. Rosado, Crestwood, N.Y. ******** CD-ROM Products Rank Title and Source 7th Guest (Virgin Games) MPC Wizard (Aris Entertainment) Compton's Encyclopedia Upgrade (Compton's New Media) Key Clipmaster Pro (SoftKey) Street Atlas U.S.A. (Delorme) Cinemania (Microsoft) Lightning (Lucid) 8. Corel Art Show (Corel) Key Fonts Pro (Sofikey) CD Speedway (Bloc) This list is based on units sold by Software Etc. Babbages. Waldensoftware and Electronics Boutique. For more information, please contact PC Research ar (703) 435-1025, Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"The Patch File Komputer game programs have grown so massive and the Pacific War. 4/18/93 number of possible configurations has become so huge that ** Realms of Arkania Disk 3 Fix: The first print run of this game was incompatibilities and glitches seem to be breeding at an missing some data from disk 3. You only need this file if your BLADE exponential rate. Consumers and publishers are both frustrated ar directory has 48 files and 3,030,380 bytes in it. 6/23/93 the need for adding patches into \"buggy\" programs, but they seem Space Quest 5 Patch: Corrects the following: (1) Inability to Restore or to be an interim solution that is going to be with the hobby for a Quit after running out of time on WD-40's ship. (2) Inability to skip polwhile (presumably, until a standard platform configuration is ishing the Star Con crest in EGA mode. (3) Loss of cursor when Roger agreed upon). So, until the golden age of standardized platforms steps off the log which spans the river on Kiz Urazgubi. 2/26/93 and bug-free programs, Computer Gaming World will publish a regSumpter to Appomattox Update: Fixes the \"Build» routine and eliminates ular list of the latest updates of which we are aware. the memory crror that some gamers were having. 3/13/93 These patches can usually be downloaded from most major netThe Seventh Guest Fix: Corrects incompatibility problems with some works (e.g., Compuserve or GEnie), but can also be obtained from video cards, motherboards, and sound cards. 5/06/93 individual software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the pubTom Landry Football V. 1.03 Update (IBM & Mac): Corrects problems with high-speed modem play. 3/06/93 lisher with proof of purchase. We continue to urge publishers to Tony LaRussa II Patch: Fixes bugs in SSI's baseball simulation. 5/21/93 keep us updated on the latest versions/patches to their games. Ultima VII Version 3.4: Lord British fixes some minor leaks in the roof of (*** indicates new files) Castle Britannia. Updates from Version 3.0 to 3.4. 2/17/93 Aces of the Pacific 1946 Add-On Disk Update: Single Missions will now Ultima Underworld Il Patch: Fixes the \"strike\" problem, local bus diffibe saved correctly, and several fixes have been made to Career Pilots, culties, and a few others. 2/24/93 including the elimination of known Shell System Errors. 3/10/93. Unlimited Adventures Version 1.1 Patch: In addition to new files for the software, this file contains a supplement to the game's manual. 5/21/93 Air Bucks Version 1.2: A major overhaul of the original airline strategy Unlimited Adventures Design Guide Supplement: A Technical Manual game. 4/17/93 for Adventure Design by Scott Gries and MicroMagic, Inc. The official ** Ambush At Sorinor Version 1.02: Adds a speed control option for fast manual supplement. 5720793 machines, replaces several bad mission descriptions, and fixes the Al for Wilson Pro Staff Golf Update: Corrects mouse driver problems and errors VIPs and escorts. 6/17/93 where incorrect driving clubs were selected for certain ranges. 4/21/93 World Circuit Modem Update V1.05: Corrects problems with 2400 baud Ancient Art of War in the Skies Update: Version 02 of the game. 3/01/93 modems. 4/08/93 Battles of Destiny V1.1 Patch: Enhancements and bug fixes include: X-wing 1/0 Soundcard Patch: Allows I/O port settings of 210-260. Patrol Mode, Map Editor, and two player modem enhancements. 5/06/93 4/15/93 9/15 Buzz Aldrin Race Into Space Update: Fixes the screen blackout\" bug and X-wing Roland Sound Patch: Fixes crash bugs associated with the Roland soundcard on 486 machines. 4/15/93 adds an Undo button to the Purchase screen. 5/04/93 ** Caesar Patch: Allows players to use Impressions' game with disk compression utilities, and corrects the \"culture\" problem. 5/19/93 Darklands Version 07 Update: Latest version of Micro Prose's RPG. The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten 3/05/93 Dune Il Patch File: Fixes problems with the delivery of items from Computer Gaming World is Prodigy's on-line games expert. Look for CHAM. 4/18/93 us in their Game Center, a forum where users read articles posted onEmpire Deluxe Version 3.1: This new version makes a myriad of feature line by CGW and exchange messages on the bulletin boards (we can be reached there at EXPT 40B). The Prodigy Game Poll is run by changes and bug fixes to Version 3.0.4/30/93 Prodigy based on a list of games provided by CGW and is updated F15 Strike Eagle III Version 3 Update: Corrects minor errors in earlier weekly. Note that it is not a cumulative rating over time (like the versions. 4/25/93 CGW Top 100 Poll). Instead, the Prodigy Game Poll is a weekly Harpoon Version 1.32A Upgrade: Makes changes to the Harpoon game \"Snapshot of game popularity with gamers rating their favorites on a 1 10 scale. The highest total point carners make their Top 10. We system. 5/18/93 provide this data to our readers as another barometer of \"what's hot Indiana Jones/Atlantis Mac Patch: Corrects the desert balloon\" crash bug in computer gaming. in the Mac version. 4/15/93 Indiana Jones/Atlantis 486 Patch: Allows one to play the game on a 486 without color problems or errors. 5/26/93 Jordan in Flight SVGA Patch: Allows owners of Diamond Stealth, Diamond Stealth 24 and Orchid Fahrenheit 1280 Plus video cards to run TOP TEN RANKED GAMES the game in SVGA. 5/21/93 Week of June 25. lo July 1 ** Jump Jet Update: Corrects the joystick problems some players are RANK SCORE TITLE RANK STORE TITLE reporting and some other compatibility problems. 5/18/93 Links 386 Pro Update Version 1.09: Includes new drivers for specific 2853 Wolfenstein-31 6 1427 Link 386 Pro video cards, a new Sound Blaster Pro 16 driver, and fixes the Harbour 2262 X-Wing T 7 1926 Aces of Pacific Town Hole 14 lockup. 3/3/93 1959 Civilization 8 1385 Falcon 30 1957 king's Quest VI 1255 Lemming's 2 Magic Candle III Version 1.16: Fixes problems with Sound Blaster sup5 1723 Wing Commander 2 18 1195 Front Po Football port, mirror of honesty/candlewick problems, difficulties with tranferred characters from MC2, and other minor glitches, 2/17/93 TRY A BYTE OF Ziffnet! SAMPLE PROGRAMS FROM Mantis Update (IBM): Adds new features and improves gameplay. For disk-based version only. 3/01/93 SELECTIONS FOR PRODIGY LOOK Pacific War V1.1 Upgrade: The \"official» SSI upgrade to Gary Grigsby's Menu Xref Jump Path Copy Tools Help Exi 1 CORE! GATE POLE September 1993 Page 145 "


"THE RUMOR BAG ometimes, things can be going too perfectly. I was out near Black's Beach so I could catch a left-breaking wave, goofy foot and all. I did a rock dance at low-tide in order to paddle out, and I found myself sitting out at the lineup with nearly every other surfer in Southern California on such a beautiful day. We kept waiting for a killer wave, just like my readers who keep waiting for Hero Software's Champions to ship. Fortunately, I had some tentatively good news for car them. I had just that day booted HeroMaker. the direct sale version of their Champions character generator. People and paper roleplayers can use their computers to create and print out their characters without having to leaf through and double check all of those rules in the hardbound book. It's a good sign. Now, maybe they'll get the adventure/story into the computer game and we'll see that long-awaited jewel. At least us frustrated superhero types now have something to do with our computers. by Duke «Baggy\" Speaking of hero makers, the killer wave I Dynamix will bring their Metal Tech game to was about to catch was enough to clean up the party in the first quarter of '94, as well. everybody else, but I managed to get really As I waited, the swells provided a gentle barrelled and catch enough green room time undulation that nearly rocked me to sleep. to get a few hoots from the lineup. That is, of Before it could, though, the vibration recourse, before I stalled out just enough for the minded me that I had forgotten to write wave to crash over the top of me and hammer anything about Logitech's soon-to-be-reme like a Charles Barkley dunk. Man, did I leased Cyberman peripheral. The input device get drilled! I dare you to try to think about is almost an affordable flying mouse in that it rumors, even Accolade signing a licensing will allow the gamer to control pitch and yaw agreement with a guy like Sir Charles, when in a third dimension, as well as standard you're getting 300 pounds per square inch of directional movement. CRPGers should like water up your nose. it because it gives vibrational feedback whenWhen my head surfaced, I had so much salt ever one's on-screen character gets hit by a and sand in my eyes that the whole beach weapon or jostles against a physical barrier. looked like a planetscape from another world. The whole scene reminded me that Mallard Software, the folks that create those cool scenery disks for Microsoft's Flight Simulator 5, is working on another product. This one is called Space Clipper and it's based on the Delta Clipper being developed by McDonnell Douglas (the next generation space shuttle). Not only has Mallard developed Space Clipper to be a simulation, but they are addChipper to be a sim ing adventure game elements, as well. As I paddled back out to the lineup, I overhcard a couple of guys arguing about Wolfenstein 3D. One guy said it was proof of the computer's superiority over the Super Nintendo system. He insisted that they Logitech's CyterMan Input Device couldn't possibly put their 3-D engine on a SNES without that FX chip and, even then, it would be doubtful. I chuckled. Even NinSo, I resolved to catch the next big wave, tendo had thought Id Software would need need whether it was the one I really wanted or not. the FX chip to get their game going on the Unfortunately, I missed it worse than MicroSNES, but I didn't need it. It runs as pretty Prose is going to miss their original release as you please without it. Of course, they had date for Sid Meier's Civil War (he's concento get rid of the Nazi logos, SS men and attack trating on CPU Bach for the 3DO system and dogs (which are now giant rats), but the the civil war game won't ship until 1994). gamers are still fighting a master society and Then, on my next try, I misjudged my taketrying to break free. off and went over the falls. I did about six feet Then, a streak of bad luck hit. Even though of free-fall and got sucked back up into the rinse cycle. Talk about getting hammered I'd managed to catch the gnarliest wave of the (and I don't mean from booze), I was exday (for all too short a time), I found myself hausted when I dragged myself to the shore. paddling from peak to peak at just the wrong time. I'd leave one spot and a great wave So exhausted, in fact, that I failed to see or would crash through. I'd go back and end up feel the cuddly beach bunny tuck a note into waiting endlessly. It was sort of like waiting the sleeve of my wer suit. The note said that for the wave of monster robot games to hit. Avalon Hill might be working with an expeActivision is supposed to release follow-up rienced computer wargame design team to products to MechWarrior Il in the first quarprogram their Computer Advanced Squad ter of '94 and then unleash Mech Warrior III Leader. It also said to meet her at the usual near the second half of the year. Meanwhile, place. I guess I wasn't that exhausted. cow SELL YOUR GAMES  Top Prices Paid . Convert titles you've beaten or grown tired of to CASH or trade credit (20% more)!  IBM AMIGA C64  Call or send list Bare Bongs Software 940 4th Ave #222 Huntington WV 25701 1-800-638-1123 Circle Reader Service #37 Page 146 Computer Gaming World "


"Reality Role-Playing. Daryl F. Gates' POLICE QUEST! See your favorite retailer or call: 1-800-757-7707 SIERRA Circle Reader Service #85 "


"GE CASTER The Power to Change Metamorphosis is the Shadowcaster's Strength... And his Achilles' Heel. s the Shadowcaster, you take on many forms in the battle for survival. You're the resourceful human adventurer, the fierce, six-limbed cat, the versatile, flying dragon and others. But change comes at a price. In one form, you're quick and agile, but small and fragile. In another, you're a nearly indestructible giant, but ponderous and slow. You alter shapes at will and each form unleashes new powers and reveals new vulnerabilities. The pace never falters in Shadowcaster, the unique new point-ofview action adventure from ORIGIN. You race through corridors lined with pulsing lights, and into chambers covered with sculpted faces in this smooth-scrolling, fun-filled odyssey. You discover magic, but you won't need to mix reagents or memorize spells. You weave your way through dungeons, caverns, castles and caves, but you won't have time to linger the powerful and wicked lurk at every turn, just waiting for the chance to draw first blood. In the final battle, you challenge a being with powers that match (or surpass!) your own and the irresistable force meets the immovable object. Actual screens may vary. ORIGIN We create worlds. An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Designed by Raven TM Software Copyright 1993 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Shadowcaster is trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Raven is a trademark Raven Software. Origin and We create worlds are register trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a reg tered trademark of Electronic Arts. Circle Reader Service #78 "

